Sing sing (Parthenophil) sing, pipe, and play:
This feast is kept upon this plaine
Amongst th' Arcadian shepheard's every where
For Astrophill's byrth-day:  sweet Astrophil.
Arcadies honour, mightie Pan's cheefe pride:
Where be the Nymph's, the Nymphes all gathred bee
To sing sweet Astrophil's sweet prayse.

Eccho, recorde what feastes be kept to day
Amongst th' Arcadian shepheard swaine,
What keepe the whiles they do the muses cheare?
ECCHO.  cheare
He chear'de the muses with coelestiall skill,
All shepheard's prayse dye'd with him when he dye'd:
He left no peere, then what deserved he
At whose pypes sounde the Lambe kinne bayes?
ECCHO.  bayes

The Bullockes leape, the fawnes daunce in aray:
Kiddes skippe, the Satyres friskynes fayne,
Here standes an hearde of swaines, faire Nymphes stand there:
Swaines daunce, whiles Nymphes with flowers their baskets fill.
What was he to those Nymphes which garlands tyed?
ECCHO.  tyed
What ty'de him?  hath he to tell there bound t'ee?
ECCHO.  bountee
How?  to report his martiall dayes?
ECCHO.  all dayes.

Thrise happie man that found this happie way
His prayse all shepheard's glorie stayne:
What doth Parthenophe my purchase deare?
ECCHO.  chase deare
What saith she to her Parthenophil?
ECCHO.  afill.
Shepheardes I fill sweet wines repurified,
And to his blessed soule this health heave wee,
Singing sweete Odes, and rounde layes.

Let every man drinke round beside this bay:
Where are the Nymphes and fayrie traine?
Stella, three garlandes in her hand doth beare,
And those for his sweet sake she proffer will
Unto th' Elezian soules:  And I have spied
Parthenophe, with spoile returnes to mee
Of three great hartes sing virilayes.

Those golden dartes flye never voyde of praye
And Stella sittes (as if some chaine
Of fancies bound her) by that mottley breere:
Where with sweet Eglantine, and Daffadil
She Clapplettes makes, with gold and scarlet dye'd.
Here Colin sittes beneath that oken tree
Eliza singing in his layes.

Blest is Arcadiaes Queene, kneele swaines, and say
That she (which here cheefe Nymph doth rayne)
May blessed live, to see th' extreamest yeare.
For sacrifice (then) Lambes and kiddlinges kill:
And be by them Eliza glorified,
The flower of loves, and pure virginitie:
This Delian Nymphe doth amaise.

The fairest deares which in the forestes stay,
Those harts (which proudest heard's distaine
And raunge the forestes as with compeere)
Submissive yeelde them selves, that if she will
She them may wounde, or on their swift backes ride.
Lyons, and Beares, with bewtie tameth she:
Shepheard's, for her your voyces raise.

Eccho this favour if I purchase may
Do not herd-groomes there fayne?
ECCHO.  the're fayne.
What want they, speake, now they be blest, if eare.
ECCHO.  feare.
What be the confines?  rebell's they be still.
ECCHO.  they be still.
What is she, that so many swaines doth their guide?
ECCHO.  there guide

None but her selfe, hath that abilitie
To rule so many blessed wayes:
Her thoughtes sure grounded on divinitie,
For this sweet Nymphe, each shepheard prayes.
