Devyde my times, and rate my wretched howres,
From day to month, fro months to many yeers,
And than compare my sweetest to my sowres, 
To see which more in equall view appeeres,
And judge, if for my daies and yeeres of care ,
I have but howres of comforte to compare.

Just and not much, it were, in these extreemes,
So hard a touch, and torment of the thought,
For any minde, that any right esteems,
To yeeld so small delite, so deerely bought,
But he that lives but in his owne despite,
Is not to finde his fortune by his right.

The life that styll runs forth his weari waies,
With sowre to sawce the dainties of delite,
And care to choake the pleasure of hir daies,
And not rewarde, those many wrongs to quite; 
No blame to holde such irksome time in hate,
As but to loss, prolongs a wretched state.

And still I loath, even to beholde the light,
That shines without all pleasure to myne eies,
With greedy wish, I wait still for the night,
Yet neither this I find, that may suffice,
Not that I holde, the day for more delight,
But that alike, I loath both day and night.

The day I see, yeelds but increase to care, 
The night that should, by nature serve to rest, 
Against hir kinde denies such ease to spare,
As pitie would affoord the soule opprest,
And broken sleepes oft times present in sight,
A dreaming wish, beguild with false delight.

This sleepe, or else what so for sweete appeers,
Is unto me but pleasure in despite,
The flowre of age, the name of yonger yeeres,
Doe but usurpe the title of delite,
But carefull thought, and sorow sundry waies,
Consumes my youth, before my aged daies.

The touch, the sting, the torment of desire,
To strive beyond the compas of restraint,
Kept from the reach whereto it would aspire,
Give cause (God knowes) too just, to my complaint,
Besides the wrongs, which now with my distresse,
My meaning is, in silence to suppresse.

Oft with my selfe, I enter in device,
To reconcile these wearie thoughts to peace,
I treate for truce, I flatter and entice,
My wrangling wits, to worke for their release,
But all in vaine, I seeke the means to finde,
That might appease, the discord of my minde.

For when I force a fained mirth in shoe,
And would forget, and so beguile my greefe,
I cannot rid my self of sorow so,
Altho I feed upon a false beleefe,
For inward touche of uncontented minde,
Returns my cares, by course unto their kynde.

Wainde from my will, and thus by triall taught,
Howe for to holde, all fortune in regard,
Though heere I boast, a knowledge deerely bought,
Yet this poore gaine, I reape for my reward,
I learne hereby, to harden and prepare,
A readie minde, for all assaults of care.

Whereto, as one, even from the cradle borne,
And not to looke for better to ensue,
I yeeld my selfe, and wish these times outworne,
That but remaine, my torments to renue,
And leave to those, these daies of my despite,
Whose better hap, may live to more delite.
