Then why did Homer Laureat of his time,
Consume the sweet of his mellifluous tongue
In hony lines, and from his golden chime
Chaunt forth in musick a mellodious song
To sweeten him, that men should with delight
For ever read his praises day and night?

But twas the larges of his liberall hand,
Which makes some Poets pipe as they will daunce,
At whose devotion theyr good witts do stand,
Waiting and prest their honoures to advaunce.
But Homer thou that couldst immorall men,
Shouldst not be thought to have a flattering pen.

Non no it was thy kindnes that did give
Thy countryman the glory of thy witt:
Nor can I thinke that thou by him didst live,
But thou wert faine in him to blason it;
Had Hector been a Graecian borne I know,
Achilles name had nere been honoured so.

There had bene matter for thy heavenly verse,
A golden subject for thy Silver tounge:
His glorious acts were worthy to reherse
And had sweet Homer of brave Hector song
Unto thy selfe such honour had it be
As for Achilles to be sung of thee.

There was the true looking-glas of honour,
In which together did all vertue stay
The worlds wonder for a worthy warriour,
A man most rare accomplisht every way:
And to say truth of such exceding fame,
That none but Homer can declare the same.

O then good Spencer the only Homer living,
Deign for to write with thy fame-quickeninge quill:
And though poore Troy due thanks can not be giving,
The Gods are just and they that give them will.
Write then O Spencer in thy Muse so trim,
That he in thee and thou maiest live in him.

Although thou livest in thy Belphoebe faire,
And in thy Cynthia likely art to shine,
So long as Cynthia shineth in the ayre:
Yet live and shine in this same Sunne of mine.
O live in him that whilom was my Sun,
But now his light and so  my life is done.

With that she wepte and that so piteously,
As she had been dissolved all to teares:
Throbbing forth sighs shriking so hideously,
As one that inly endles torments beare?
But ore a while:  fro everie thing must stay,
She ceast hir plainte and gan agine thus say....
