Whilom to him (whom Morpheus God of sleepe,
Made slumbring dreames his sences al to keepe,
Lockt eares were deafe and eyes could see no light,
When men are made the lively forme of death,
Save onely that they softly draw a breath)
Did come a Ghost, a ghost most gastly crying,
Helpe me to death that have so long beene dying.
With that he wakened and with feare beholding,
Saw hir lament, her armes togither folding,
A pale-wan thing, and yet with wounds fresh bleeding
Sodden in teares, in teares that were exceeding.
He much afright began to shrinke for feare,
She bad him feare not, but my story heare,
I am Troys ghost that now appeares to thee,
And well I know that thou hast heard of me.
But now I come not what I was to tell,
For what I was (alas) each one knowes wel.
I come to thee to crave thy gentle ayde,
To further her that hath so long beene staide
From blissefull rest:  because I have not told
My woes for Hector which I must unfold,
But that (alasse) am not able ever,
To shew alone without the kind endevor
Of some good wight, that can bewaile with me,
And tell my tale while I shall weeping be.
The churlish Charon thwarts my passage over
Saying my soule shal never blisse recover,
Till I have doone this weary taske imposed,
Never my thost shal be in rest reposed.
O helpe me then to tell my doleful story,
That I at last may cease to be so sory.
First will I speake, and to the world declare
For Hectores death mine everlasting care,
So long, til teares doe stop my faltring tong,
And when I cease I pray thee tell along.
He then accorded to hir pitteous sute
Granting to speake when teares did make hir mute,
So that she would lay open to his eies
The cause and manner of hir wofull cries.
Then forthwith causde she unto him appeare
The forme of Troy, the persons that were there
Chiefest mourners for worthy Hectors death
As they then wailde when fates new stopt his breath.
He then emboldende stoutly veiwed them all,
And tels her tale, when she from speach doth fall.
Writing their words unto the world to shew them
It was her will that he might so renew them.
Yet had she rather Spencer would have told them,
For him she calde that he would helpe t' unfold them.
But when she saw he came not at hir call
She kept hir first man that doth shew them all
All that he could:  but all can no man shew,
But first she spake as after doth ensew.
