Loe heere the worke the which she did impose,
Who onely doth predominate my Muse:
The starre of wonder, which my labours chose
To guide their way in all the course I use.
Shee, whose cleere brightnes doth alone infuse
Strength to my thoughts, and makes mee what I am,
Call'd up my spirits from out their low repose,
To sing of state, and tragick notes to frame.

I, who (contented with an humble song,)
Made musique to my selfe that pleas'd mee best,
And onely told of DELIA, and her wrong,
And prais'd her eyes, and plain'd mine owne unrest:
(A text from whence my Muse had not degrest)
Madam, had not thy well grac'd Anthony,
Who all alone having remained long,)
Requir'd his Cleopatras company.

Who if shee heere doe so appeare in act,
That for his Queene and Love he scarce wil know her,
Finding how much shee of her selfe hath lackt,
And mist that glory wherein I should shew her,
In majestie debas'd, in courage lower;
Yet lightning thou by thy sweet favouring eyes,
My darke defects which from her sp'rit detract,
Hee yet may gesse it's shee; which will suffise.

And I heereafter, in another kinde,
More fitting to the nature of my vaine,
May (peradventure) better please thy minde,
And higher notes in sweeter musique straine:
Seeing that thou so graciously doost daine,
To countenaunce my song and cherish mee.
I must so worke posterity may finde
How much I did contend to honour thee.

Now when so many pennes (like Speares) are charg'd,
To chace away this tyrant of the North:
Gross Barbarism, whose powre growne far inlarg'd,
Was lately by thy valiant Brothers worth,
First found, encountred, and provoked forth:
Whose onset made the rest audacious,
Whereby they likewise have so well discharg'd,
Upon that hidious Beast incroching thus.

And now must I with that poore strength I have,
Resist so foule a foe in what I may:
And arme against oblivion and the grave,
That els in darknes carries all away,
And makes of all our honours but a pray.
So that if by my penne procure I shall
But to defend mee, and my name to save,
Then though I die, I cannot yet die all;

But still the better part of me will live,
Deckt and adorned with thy sacred name,
Although thy selfe dost farre more glory give
Unto thy selfe, then I can by the same.
Who doost with thine owne hand  a Bulwarke frame
Against these Monsters, (enemies of honour,)
Which ever-more shall so defend thy Fame,
That Time nor they, shall never pray upon her.

Those Hymnes that thou doost consecrate to heaven,
Which Israels Singer to his God did frame:
Unto thy voyce eternitie hath given,
And makes thee deere to him from whence they came.
In them must rest thy ever reverent name,
So long as Syons GOD remaineth honoured;
And till confusion hath all zeale be-reaven,
And murthered Fayth, and Temples ruined.

By this, (Great Lady,) thou must then be knowne,
When Wilton lyes low levell'd with the ground:
And this is that which thou maist call thine owne,
Which sacriligious time cannot confound;
Heere thou surviv'st thy selfe, heere thou art found
Of late succeeding ages, fresh in fame:
This Monument cannot be over throwne,
Where, in eternall Brasse remaines thy Name.

O that the Ocean did not bound our stile
Within these strict and narrow limmits so:
But that the melody of our sweet Ile,
Might now be heard to Tyber, Arne, and Po.
That they might know how far Thames doth out-go
The musique of Declyned Italie:
And listning to our songs another while,
Might learne of thee, their notes to purifie.

O why may not some after-comming hand,
Unlock these limits, open our confines:
And breake a sunder this imprisoning band,
T' inlarge our spirits, and publish our dissignes;
Planting our Roses on the Apenines?
And teach to Rhene, to Loyre, and Rhodanus,
Our accents, and the wonders of our Land,
That they might all admire and honour us.

Whereby great SYDNEY and our SPENCER might,
With those Po-singers beeing equalled,
Enchaunt the world with such a sweet delight,
That theyr eternall songs (for ever read,)
May shew what great ELIZAS raigne hath bred.
What musique in the kingdome of her peace,
Hath now beene made to her, and by her might,
Whereby her glorious fame shall never cease.

But if that Fortune doth deny us this,
Then Neptune, lock up with thy Ocean key,
This treasure to our selves, and let them misse
Of so sweet ritches:  as unworthy they
To taste the great delights that we injoy.
And let our harmony so pleasing growne,
Content our selves, whose errour ever is,
Strange notes to like, and disesteeme our owne.

But, whther doe my vowes transport me now,
Without the compasse of my course injoyned?
Alas, what honour can a voyce so low
As this of mine, expect heereby to find?
But, (Madam,) this doth animate my mind,
That favored by the Worthyes of our Land,
My lynes are lik'd; the which may make me grow,
In time to take a greater taske in hand.
