BRUTUS.
Then loyall peeres since you are all agreed,
And resolute to follow Brutus hoasts,
Favour my sonnes, favour these Orphans Lords,
And shield them from the daungers of their foes,
Locrine the columne of my familie,
And onely piller of my weakned age.
Locrine draw neare, draw neare unto thy sire,
And take thy latest blessings at his hands,
And for thou art the eldest of my sonnes,
Be thou a captaine to thy bretheren,
And imitate thy aged fathers steps,
Which will conduct thee to true honors gate,
For if thou follow sacred vertues lore,
Thou shalt be crowned with a lawrell braunch,
And weare a wreath of sempiternall fame,
Sorted amongst the glorious happie ones.

LOCRIN.
If Locrine do not follow your advise,
And beare himselfe in all things like a prince
That seekes to amplifie the great renowne
Left unto him for an inheritage
By those that were his ancestors,
Let me be flung into the Ocean,
And swallowed in the bowels of the earth.
Or let the ruddie lightning of great Jove,
Descend upon this my devolted head.

BRUTUS taking Guendoline by the hand.
But for I see you all to be in doubt,
Who shall be matched with our royall sonne,
Locrine receive this present at my hand,
A gift more rich then are the wealthie mines
Found in the bowels of America,
Thou shalt be spoused to faire Guendoline,
Love her, and take her, for she is thine owne,
If so thy unckle and her self do please.

CORIN.
And herein how your highnes honours me
It cannot be in my speech exprest,
For carefull parents glorie not so much
At their honour and promotion,
As for to see the issue of their blood
Seated in honour and promotion,
As for to see the issue of their blood
Seated in honor and prosperitie.

GUENDOLINE.
And far be it from my maydens thoughts
To contradict her aged fathers will,
Therefore since he to whom I must obey
Hath given me now unto your royall selfe,
I will not stand aloofe from off the lure,
Like craftie dames that most of all deny
That, which they most desire to possesse.

BRUTUS turning to Locrine.  Locrine kneeling.
Then now my sonne thy part is on the stage,
For thou must beare the person of a King.
