Faire and bright Cynthia, Joves great ornament,
Richly adorning nightes darke firmament,
Scoured amidst the starry Canapie
Of heavens celestiall governement, well nie
Downe to the ever over-swelling tide,
Where old Oceanus was wont t' abide,
At last began to crie, and call amaine,
Oh what is he, my love so long detaines!
Or i'st Joves pleasure Cynthia shall alone,
Obscure by night, still walke as one forlorne:
Therewith away she headlong postes along
Salt washing waves, rebellious cloudes among,
So as it seem'd minding the heavens to leave,
And them of light, thus strangely to bereave.

With that Aurora starting from her bed,
As one that standes devising, shakes his head,
Not minding either this or that to doe,
So are her thoughtes, nor quicke, nor overslow;

Phebus halfe wrothe to see the globe stand still,
The world want light, a woman have her will:
To post foorth gan another Phaeton,
And swore once more, he should the world uppon,
Or as tis thought to trie th' adventrous boy.
Yet some suppose, he meant upon this day,
A Sympathy of sorrowes to advaunce.
The boy thus proude-made, hotly gan to praunce,
And now heavens coape, Joves pallace chrystaline
Downe dingeth Atlas, and straight doth decline
In such aboundant measure, as tis said,
Since that same day the light of heavens decaide;
A metamorphosis on earth 'mongst men,
As touching constancy hath bene since then,
And this is true maidens, since that same day,
Are saide for lovers never more to pray.

But to returne, Phebe in million teares,
Moanes to her selfe, and for a time forbeares,
Aurora she her swift bright shining rayes,
On Phebus charyot tosse, and oft assayes,
With her sweete lookes, her fathers wroth t' appease,
But all she doth, he tels her, doth disease,
Like to the uncorrected headstrong childe,
That never felt his parentes strokes but milde,
Growne up to ryper yeares, disdaines a checke:
(For nature overgon comes to defect:)

So now Aurora having felt the pride
Of heaven and earth, turning her selfe a side,
Rapt with a suddaine extasie of minde,
Unto her selfe (thus saide) Goddesse divine:
How hapt that Phebus mov'd amid his chase,
Should such kinde frendship scorne for to imbrace,
I will no more (quoth she) godd it along
Such unaccustom'd wayes, ne yet among
Such as is Titan, better fittes it me,
With Vesper still to live, then such as he,
Though well I wot, honor is set on high,
Yet gentle Humilitie is best, say I.
No more she spake, but like the swelling tide,
That having passage skymes, scorning a guide,
Untill the vaste receipte of Neptunes bower,
Kils the hoat fume, even so, away she skoures,
Lawlesse as twere sans thought or any dread,
Like to banditos mong'st the mountaine heard.

And now upon her gentle lovely mother,
Bright as the morning, comes the mornings honor,
All snowy white, save purpled heere and there,
So beautifull as beauty might despaire,
And stand amaz'd, noting her wanton eie,
Which at a trice could all the world espie,
Upon her head, a coronet did stand,
Of severall flowers gathered by Titan.
A vale she wore downe trayling to her thighes,
The stuffe whereof, I gesse, of such emprize,
As Gods themselues are doubtfull of the arte,
Seeming as aire with otomie disperst,
Her handes, a meny Poets dead and gone,
Have heretofore (excelling) wrote upon.
It shall suffize Venus doth grace to her,
In that she waites before, like to a Starre,
Directing of her steps along'st the zone,
Never overtaken by the Horizon,
Ne yet in daunger put of any Lake,
The frozen Pole she warnes her to forsake:
And all Licurgus daughters Dion noates,
Base in respect of duetie, and out-coates,
Each God and Goddesse, such is beauties pride,
That Neptunes honor hath no larger tide:
One lastes but a time, till time is come againe,
The other ever over-rules too certaine.

Thus at the last, Aurora vanquishing
Heavens glory, and earthes cause of mourning:
"For now the sparckling vault of Joves high seate,
Was not so fild with over-swaying heate:
Red-hoat disdaine gave beauty place, for why?
Venus had conquered base necessitie."
Along'st she passed by Hesperides,
Laden with honor of those golden eies:
And stately bode them stoupe to honor us,
And stoupe they did, thinking twas Venus.
Then from this golden Orchard to the Tower,
Where Jove in likenes of a golden shower,
Ravisht faire Danae, she in ravishment
Of strange delightes, the day there almost spent.
Thence to th' Idalian mount, where Venus doves,
Plume on the feathers, sent by their true loves:
As Itis Pheasant feathers, Progne, and
Tereus, they the Lapwincke winges did send:
Faire Philomela from the Nightingale
Sent likewise feathers, plucked from her taile,
And many others that denying love,
Dide with despight, and here their cause did move,
Then on her swift-heeld Pegasus, amaine
Of Colchos golden Fleece a sight to gaine,
And with the swift windes Harrould Mercury,
The golden Sonne-beames of Apolloes tree:
Where valorous warlike Knightes, for feates ydone
Are registred, yclept Knightes of the Sonne:
Knightes of the Garter, auncient knightes of Rhodes,
She mainely postes, and there a time abodes,

I do not tell you all that she did see,
In honor done of this same golden tree.
Knightes did their due, and Poets had no lesse,
Then what for Triumphes every one can gesse.
Hence twas that Hermes stole from heaven the power,
To soveranize on schollers idle howres,
And had not Jove bene favourable then,
They never should have bene accounted men,
But liv'd as pesants, shaddowes, imagies,
And nere have had the princes similies.

Hence post we foorth unto an Ocean
That beats against the bankes of Helycon,
Whereon if so the ruler of the East,
But cast an eie, we are not meanely blest,
No more but so, for more were over much,
Gold is approv'd but by a slender touch.

And now bright Phebus mounted, gan display
His Orient sunne-beames, on the lively day,
Aurora made unto the Silvan shore,
Where Satyres, Goat-heardes, Shepheards kept of yore,
A sacred and most hallowed cristall spring,
Long'st which oft Cephalus yode on hunting,
And much delighted in the murmyring water,
Whose silent noates gave Eccho of their author,
And as in Rondelaies of love they sung,
It aunsweare made, yet bod them hold their toung:
No base groome durst his case here to bemoane,
But quench his thirst, and so part, and be gone.
But Cephalus, a man of some compare,
Bore hound, and horse, through depth without despaire,
And when the heate of Sommer stung him thro,
His yvorie limbes heere bath'd, and washt he to,
His Steede orecome with anger in the chase,
His dogs halfe tir'd, or put unto disgrace,
Heere, and but here, he sought for remedie,
Nor durst the Silvans shrincke, but aide him presently.
What shall I say in pride of him and his?
Man, horse, and dogs, pleasd th' inamored Procris:
But how with him Aurora was in love,
A richer braine the taske would highly move.

Upon a milke white courser swift as winde,
Betrapt with yssyckles of gold, that chim'bde;
By sweete Zephirus, and the gentle aire,
That breathed life (as twere) to kill despaire,
Rode he upright as any heisell wan,
His Steede was wrought, and now would needes be gon:
Whose over head-strong prauncing checkt the earth,
In scornefull sorte, and whose loude neighing breath
Rent throgh the clouds, like Joves swift quickning thunder,
And passage bod, or it would pash't in sunder.
So war-like Mars-like fit for Venus Court,
Hotly the gallant gentleman did sort,
Now here, now there, his Steede began to rage,
And sent foorth some to bid the cloudes a badge
Of his proud stomacke, who would not be proude,
That is well backt, and in his pride alloude?
"Heere could I tell you many a prettie storie,
Of some eterniz'd by an others glory,
Of men transfourm'd to apes, of womens evils,
Of fiendes made Angels, and of angels divels,
Of many brave knightes done to shame, and more,
How schollers favourites waxe over poore,
But oh faire Muse, let slip to treate of such,
A taske thou hast, that tyres thee too too much,
And none (Gods know) thy boldnesse will out backe,
But naked trueth, that garded coates doth lacke.
Heroicke Parramore of Fairie land,
That stately built, with thy immortall hand,
A golden, Angellike, and modest Aulter,
For all to sacrifice on, none to alter.
Where is that vertuous Muse of thine become?
It will awake, for sleepe not prooves it dumme.
And thou Arcadian knight, earthes second Sunne,
Reapt ere halfe ripe, finisht ere halfe begunne,
And you that tread the pathes, were these have gone,
Be your soules agentes in our tragicke song,
And when the daughter of dispaire is dead,
And ougly nightes blacke Aethiopian head,
Ycoucht, and woxen pale, for griefe and shame,
Then shall our quill, lift honor to your name."
O high Apollo, give thou skill to us,
That we may queintly follow Cephalus,
That now is mounted, ready to surprize,
What game so ere is seaz'd-on by his eies;
Aurora met him, in his furious chase,
As winde doth reigne, so did she him embrace,
And his fierce courage, on the harmefulle Boare,
Ere he did part, should be asswag'd she swore.
His amber-couloured tresses, never yet cut,
Into her luke-warme bussome she did put.
She wringes his handes, and hugges him twixt her armes,
(Apes die by culling) yet he tooke no harme:
Anone with smiles, she threates his chast conceites,
And (looking on his eies) him she entreates,
With kisses, sighes, and teares revying them,
As though their sexe of duetie should woe men,
He striving to be gone, she prest him downe:
She striving to kisse him, he kist the growne,
And evermore on contrarieties,
He aunsweare made, unto her Deitie,
Her garland deckt with many a prettie gemme,
And flowers sweete as May, she gave to hem:
Her feete (immodest dame) she bear'd to show him,
And askt him, yea, or no, if he did know them,
And therewithall, she whispers in his eare,
Oh, who so long, is able to forbeare!
A thousand prettie tales she tels him too,
Of Pan his Sirinx, of Joves Io,
Of Semele, the Arcadian Nimphes disport,
Their stealth in love, and him in covert sorte,
Like to th' unhappie Spider, would intangle;
He flie-like strives, and to be gone doth wrangle:
And tels, he can no more of love or beautie,
Then ruffe-beard Satyres, that nere heard of duetie,
Therefore to cut of all disquietnesse,
Rudely he throwes her from his down-soft brest:
And with his Steede cuts through the riotouse thornes,
That shipwracke make of what is not their owne:
His speare halfe bleeding, with a sharpe desire,
To taint the hot-Boare seemed to aspire:
The ruffe and hidious windes, twixt hope and feare,
Whisle amaine into his greedie eares,
His Steede upstartes, and courage freshly takes,
The Rider fiercely, after hotly makes.
Halfe droncke, with spitefull mallice gainst the Boare,
He prickt him forward, never prickt before.
The toyling dogs therewith do mainely runne,
And having found the game, their Lord to come
They yalpe couragiously, as who would say,
Come maister come, the footing serves this way.
Therewith more fierce then Aoris did hie,
In his swift chase the game for to espie,
He gets him gon, nor neede wa'st to say goe,
O cruell men, that can leave wemen so!

By this the sport grew hot on either part,
Aurora she was bitten to the hart,
A dogged part it was, she telleth oft,
To bite so deadfully a hart so soft,
Aie me, had Cupid bene a rightfull lad,
He never should have shot a dart so bad.
But what prevailes?  a meny sad laments,
And Madrigals with dolefull tunes she sent,
Unto the heavens Lampe Phebus mournefully,
All balefull, treating pittie from his eies,
She does her orizons, and tels how many
Have loved her, before nere scorn'd by any:
Her handes so white as yvorie streame,
That through the rockes makes passage unto him:
Halfe blacke with wrathfull wringing them together
She reares to heaven, and downe unto her mother,
Anon she faintly lets them fall againe,
To heaven, earth, father, mother, all in vaine,
"For love is pittilesse, rude, and impartiall,
When he intendes to laugh at others fall."

Afresh the sport of Cephalus began,
Erewhile at fault, his dogges now lively ran,
And he quicke-lifted, when he list to heare,
Ore tooke them straight, and with his venum'd speare,
Gashly did wound the Boare couragiously,
The dogs upon him likewise lively flie,
His entrals bleeding-ripe before for feare,
Now twixt their grim chaps, pel mel they do teare,
The master proude at such a stately prize,
Fils his high thoughtes, and gluts his greedie eies,
He bathes himselfe, (as twere) in Seas of blisse;
But what is victorie, where no praise is?
Pittilesse he scornes the plaintes Aurora sendeth,
For where her love beginneth, his love endeth,
And seeme she never so ore-gone with griefe,
He treble ioyes; o bare and base reliefe!
"Even like two Commets at one instant spred,
The one of good, the other shame and dread:
Pestering th' aire with vapours multiplying,
So is our Theame now quicke, and then a dying."

Once more she met him, and thus gently spake,
(If wemen had no tounges, their hartes would breake,)
Oh Cephalus for pittie love me sweete!
Or if not love, yet do me gently greete,
Tis Action shewes th' intent, but smile upon me,
Or give a kisse, a kisse hath not undone thee:
(Quoth he) these desertes have I meny a time,
In winters rage, and in the Sommers prime,
Mounted as now with horse, and houndes good store,
Chaste, and encountred with the gag tooth'd Boare,
Rousd up the fearefull Lion from his cave,
(That duld the heavens, when he began to rave)
Pursu'd the Lizard, Tyger and a crew
Of untam'd beastes; yet none tam'd me as yew.
Admit that woemen have preheminence,
To make men love; yet for so foule offence,
As for to violate the marriage bed,
Were over much to be inamored;
Her who I honor, and am tied to,
Would deeply scorne, I should another woe:
Admit the contrary, is it no sinne,
In love to end, where I did not begin?
Oh tis a fault, a sinne exceeding any!
Then pardon me, for I scorne to love many.

Twixt shame and feare scorn'd, and denied so,
Poore soule she blusht, not wotting what to do,
Her teares were issuelesse, her speech was done,
"The spring being stopt, how can the river runne,"
Her hart (poore hart) was overcharg'd with griefe,
"Tis worse then death to linger on reliefe."

At last she spake, and thus she mildly said,
Oh, who to choose, would live, and die a maide!
What heavenly joy may be accounted better,
Then for a man to have a woman debter?
Now thou art mine in love:  Love me againe.
Then I am thine, is it not heartie gaine,
Upon advantage to take double fee?
Thou shalt have double, treble, pleaseth thee:
These curled, and untewed lockes of thine,
Let me but borrow upon pawne of mine.
These (oh immortall) eies, these sacred handes,
Lend me I pray thee, on sufficient bandes:
Wilt thou not trust me?  By the sacred throne,
That Phebus in the mid day sits upon,
I will not kepe them past a day or twaine,
But Ile returne them safely home againe,

These lockes (quoth he) that curled I do weare,
Within their folding billowes they do beare,
The deere remembrance twixt my love and mee,
Therefore I cannot lend them unto thee,
These eies delight, those eies did them mainetaine,
And therefore can not lend them foorth againe,
These handes gave faith of my true faithfulnesse,
And therefore will not lend them; pardons us.
"All sad, and in her widdow-hood of sorrow,
Like to the Pilgrim longing for the morrow,
Tires on the tedious day, and tels his case
Unto the ruthelesse Eccho what he was."

So doth Aurora rioteously complaine
Of love, that hath her hart unjustly slaine,
And furiously she throwes her armes about him,
As who would say, she could not be without him;
Fast to his girted side she neately clinges,
Her haire let loose about his shoulders flinges:
Nay twere immodest to tell the affection
That she did show him, least it draw to action.

"Faire Cytherea, mistris of delight,
Heere was accompanied with foule despight,
The boy woxt proude to see the morning pale,
And hence it was Jove plucked of his vale,
That he might pittie her, and note his wrath,
But scornefully he smiles, and helpeth nothe:
Whereat revengefully to love he gave,
Perpetuall blindnes in his choice to have,
And too too true we finde it every day;
That love since then hath bene a blinded boy,
And knowes not where (unhappy wegg) to dart,
But desperately, uncounceld slayes the hart."
By this deepe chat on either part was one,
And Cephalus would now perforce be gone.
What can a woman more then to entreate?
Is it for men to practise on deceite?
Like to the toiling Sisiphus in vaine,
She roules the stone, that tumbleth backe againe,
And strive she ne're so much to conquer him,
It will not be for he hates such, so sinne:
Againe she pleades his constancie to misse,
Requitall in the lowest degree by Procris;
Inferring more to prove her argument,
That woemen cannot be with one content.

Cephalus as now unto her speech gave heede,
Againe (quoth she) attir'd in marchants weede,
Home to thy faire spouse, move her unto ruth,
Pleade tediously on love, boast of thy youth,
And if not youth, nor love, can her obtaine,
Promise rewardes for some consent for gaine:
I say no more, but if I were a man,
These cheekes for love should never look so wan.

Drown'd in a sea of overswelling hate,
As one that lies before his enimie prostrate,
Willing to live, yet scorning to beg life,
So feares he now (as twere) with his false wife;
Sometimes he cals her faire, chast, wise, and grave,
Anon with too too wrathfull tauntes he raves,
(Quoth he) shall I, where erst I might commaunde,
Goe and intreate with knee, and cap in hand,
Or shall I die, tormented thus in minde,
Just Radamanth, what torture canst thou finde,
For woemen that disloyall, counterfeite,
Love to their peeres, and yet would slay their hartes?
Hast thou no more tubs bottomelesse to fill?
Hast thou no more stones to rowle up the hill?
Hast thou no more wheeles to teare of their flesh,
That so disloyally in love transgresse?
Hast thou no torment, never yet inflicted
On woemens flesh, and all this while neglected?
If so I pray thee graunt this boone to mee,
That Procris therewith may tormented be,
Oh!  he is deafe, and damned let him live,
He will not heare, his kingdome too well thrives.
Proserpina, great goddesse of the Lake,
Some pittie sweete on the distressed take:
And when the Chaos of this worldes disdaine,
Hath sent this bodie to th' Elizium plaine,
And left this Center barren of repast,
Ile honor thee eternall with my ghost,
Which said, "as one that banisht doth remaine,
Would rather die then longing be detained,"
Desperate he goes unto his innocent wife,
What's she would wed t' abide so bad a life?
And now the tombe that closeth rotten bones,
(Deceitfull man) disguised is come home,
He asketh for himselfe, himselfe being there,
Would it not make a thousand woemen feare?
He tels her of his long indur'd laments,
By sea and land, that he for her hath spent,
And would have said more, but she straight was gone,
Is not the fault especiall in the man?
Then after makes he by her slender vale,
He holdes her fast, and tels her meny a tale,
He threw her downe upon the yeelding bed,
And swore he there would loose his maiden-head,
She (as some say, all woemen stricktly do,)
Faintly deni'd what she was willing too:
But when he saw her won to his desire,
(Discourteous man) did heape flax on the fire,
What there did want in wordes most subtilly,
By liberall giftes he did the same supply,
Having pursued so egerly his drift,
Procris unarm'd suspecting not his shifte;
What for desire of stealth in love commended,
Or gold s'aboundant dealt, she him befrended,
At least gave notice of her willing minde,
(Aesopian snakes will alwaies prove unkind,)
At first content to parley hand in hand,
After steale kisses, talke of Cupids band,
And by degrees applide the tex so well,
As (cunning counter-feite) he did excell,
And what but now gently he might obtaine,
O what but now, she wisht cald backe againe,
"The duskie vapours of the middle earth,
Drawne from contagious dewes, and noisome breathes,
Choakt the cleere day; and now from Acheron,
Blacke dismall night was come the world uppon,
Fitting true lovers, and their sweete repast,
Cinthia arose from Neptunes couch at last."
Oh!  then this scape of Cephalus was spide,
Treason may shadowed be but never hid;
Unhappy woman, she the dull night spent
In sad complaintes, and giddie merrymentes,
Sometimes intending to excuse her crime,
By vowes protesting, and an other time,
(Remotive woman) would have done worse harme,
Hymen therewith sent forth a fresh alarme,
But Chauntecleere that did the morne bewray,
With his cleere noates gave notice of the day,
Whereat she starts, and in a desperate moode,
Skipt from the bed, all wrathfull where she stoode,
Vow'd to herselfe perpetuall banishment,
Mournefull complaintes, out-cries, and languishment;
Then to the craggie vaulted caves, whose sound
Small mourning doth a treble griefe resound,
Amid the thickest of the desertes, she
Distressed woman, forlorne, sollitarie,
With many a direfull song, fits the thicke grove,
And heere and there in uncouth pathes doth rove.
Cephalus we leave unto his secrete muse.

Lamie by chaunce some sacred herbe to use,
On deere compassion of some lovers plaintes,
Among the woods and moorie fennes she hauntes,
Such evill pleasing humours, fairie elves,
Observe and keepe autenticke mong'st themselves;
And now was she of purpose travailing,
Intending quietly to be a gathering
Some unprophane, or holy thing, or other:
Good Faierie Lady, hadst thou bene loves mother,
Not halfe so meny gallants had bene slaine,
As now in common are with endlesse paine,
This Lady compassing her secret favour;
Procris espi'd wondring at her behaviour,
Amaz'd she stoode at such a heavenly sight,
To see so debonary a saint at such a hight,
Her haire downe trailing, and her robes loose worne,
Rushing through thickets, and yet never torne,
Her brest so white as ever womans was,
And yet made subiect to the Sunnes large compasse:
Each so officious, and became her so,
As Thames doth Swannes, or Swans did ever Po,

Procris in steede of tearmes her to salute,
With teares and sighes, (shewing her toung was mute)
She humbly downe unto her lovely feete,
Bow'd her straight bodie Lamie to greete:
Therewith the Lady of those pretie ones,
That in the twylight mocke the frozen zone,
And hand in hand daunce by some silver brooke,
One at an other pointing, and up looke,
(Like rurall Faunes) upon the full fa'st Moone,
Intreating Venus some heroicke boone,
Gently gan stoupe, and with her sacred haire,
Her lovely eies, and face so over faire,
She neatly covers, and her ungirt gowne,
Deafely commits unto the lowly growne,
She dandleth Procris thereon prettily,
And chaunteth soveraigne songs full merrily,
And gins to prancke her up with many a flower,
And vow'd she should be Oboron's parramore.
"Even like to one thats troubled in his sleepe,
Amazed startes of nothe scarce taking keepe,
But in a furie tels what he hath done,"
So she of Cephalus a tale begun,
Whereby the Lady quickely understood,
The cause she was so grieved and so wood,
Aie me, who can (quoth Lamie) be so cruell,
As to convert the building Oake to fuell?
Or rob the Ceder from his royall armes,
That spread so faire, or do a woman harme?
Wast not inough for Laeda's Swanly scape,
That Jupiter was author of the rape?
What can be more for Cephalus then this,
That Cephalus was author of thy misse?
The fault ydone must be to him alluded,
That in the complot hath thee so abused,
I pray thee tell me, who would not consent,
Amorously boorded, and in merriment?
Say that thou hadst not yeelded thereunto,
As one unknowne, unmaskt thou would'st it do,
Methinkes the pastime had bene over pleasing,
So sweetely stolne, and won by such false leasing,
A wonder sure that Cephalus a man,
Given to hunting, with the game not ran;
But thou wilt say, he gave thee too much law,
Whereby to course, his dogs the game not saw,
Tut twas in thee to bring the sport to passe,
Knowing his dogs, and where the huntsman was,
In soothe, if he had hunted cunningly,
He should have prickt out where the game did lie,
But peradventure I will not say so,
His dogs were tir'd:  and if new sport not kno,
For some a moneth, and meny men a weeke,
Cherrish their curs before for game they seeke,
And then no marvaile though they backe did beate,
When they were strengthlesse, and orecome with heate,
If it be royall too, I heard some say,
Till warrant had, ther's none must coorse or play,
But it is wonder, he on his owne land,
Would not strik't dead, having't so faire at stand,
A was not halfe couragious on the sport,
For who would yeeld when he hath won the fort?
An other time he vowes (perhaps) to kill,
But in meane while poore Procris wants her will,
It is but game (quoth she) doth stand betweene you,
And what but sporting doth he disallow?
To end which controversie (quoth she) againe,
Shew him an other course upon the plaine,
And if he then beate backe, or sleeping follow,
Once more give notice by a silver hollow,
It may be he will have some deep surmize,
That ther's new footing, note his greedie eies,
For thei' le be pliant, shevering in his head,
Like to a greedie Priapus in bed,
For pittie, ruthe, compassion, love, or lust,
He can not choose but yeeld perforce he must,
Perswade thy selfe, a womans wordes can wound,
Her teares oh they are able to confound:
Then Procris cease, and prey thee mourne no more,
There be that have done ten times worse before.

Carelesse of what the elvish wanton spake,
Procris begins a fresh her plaintes to make,
She kneeleth downe close by the rivers side,
And with her teares did make a second tide,
She up to heaven heaves her immortall eies,
Casting them downe againe she seem'd to die,
No shew of pleasance from her face did come,
Except the teares joyd on her cheekes to runne,
Her handes full often would have helpt each other,
But were so weake they could not meete together:
Some orizons I gesse she would have done,
But they alack were finisht ere begun.
Thus for a season livelesse she doth live,
And prayes to death, but deafe he nothing gives;
Continuing for a space thus desolate,
The new sprung flowers her sences animate,
Her head and eies then she ginnes to mainetaine,
As one halfe sorrowing that she liv'd againe,
Their former strength her handes possesse at last,
Which serve to drie the teares that she doth wast.

Thus in distressefull wise, as though she had
Bene ravisht, wounded, or at least halfe mad,
Like a Thessalian Metra, of our storie
To have no part, nor rob us of our glory,
She fiercely raves, and teares in carelesse sorte,
The lovely flowers (God wot) that hurteth not.
At length the silent Morpheus with his lute,
About her tyring braine gan to salute
Her unto rest, the Driades consent,
With downe of thissels they made her a tent,
Where softly slumbering shadowed from the Sunne,
To rest herselfe devoutly she begun.

But note the sequel, an uncivill Swaine,
That had bene wandring from the scorched plaines,
Espi'd this Amoretta where she lay,
Conceited deedes base Clownes do oft bewray,
Rude as he was in action, roughe, and harsh,
Dull, sluggish, heavie, willfull, more then rash,
He paces long'st, and round about her tent,
And which way he had gone againe he went;
His rude borne basenesse holdes him thus excus'd,
In age we do the like in youth we us'd,
Nor stood he long on tearmes, but rusheth in,
And boldly thus to boord her doth begin.

O gentle Goddesse loves owne lovely mother!
(For fairer then thy selfe, I know no other,)
What sacrilegious obsequies undone,
Art thou perfourming to thy winged Sonne?
Or are these cloistred willow walles the show,
Of thy fell hate to him that thou doest owe,
Tis mercenary toyling thus alone,
Tell me (I pray thee) wherefore doest thou moane?
Amid extreames who would not show his griefe?
The river pent seldome yeeldes reliefe:
But being devided flowes and nurseth many,
Sorrow (I gesse) did never good to any,
Thou art too peevish, faith, be rul'd by me;
Who lives content, hath not securitie,
And sooner fades the flower then the weede,
Woemen are onely made on for their deedes,
Few reape the stubble, when the corne is gon,
A Hermitage compared to a region,
Hath no exceede, but takes disgrace therein:
So woemen living sollitarie, sin,
More by the wrong they do commit thereby,
Then mong'st many acting the contrary:
This said, he bow'd his body to embrace her,
Thinking thereby, that he should greatly grace her,
And would have told her something in her eare,
But she orecome with melancholy feare,
Div'd downe amid the greene and rosey briers,
Thinking belike with teares to quench desire,
Aie me (I wot) who ever the like tried,
Knowes tis a hell to love, and be denied.
And who so is most politicke, true love
Will send his wits, or headlong, or to Jove.
The dowdy yongster had by this so well
Perswaded Procris from her solemne Cell,
That now as heeretofore through thicke and thin,
Like some pernitious hegg surpriz'd with sin,
Cutting the aire with braine-sick shreekes and cries,
Like a swift arrow with the winde she highes,
For that same Swaine yspoken of, did tell her,
Where and with what Nimphe Cephalus did err,
Still doth the morning add unto our muse,
And of Auroraes sweete some sweete to use,
Lets mount couragiously, ha done with hate,
Tis servile still on sorrow to dilate.
"The staring massacres, blood-dronken plots,
Hot riotous hell-quickeners, Italian-nots:
That tup their wits with snaky Nemesis,
Teate-sucking on the poyson of her mis,
With ougly fiendes ytasked let them bee,
A milder fury to enrich seeke wee,
If Homer did so well the feates ypaint
Of an Ulysses, then how much more quaint,
Might his sweete verse th' immortall Hector graced,
And praise deserving all, all have imbraced?
But what is more in ure, or getteth praise,
Then sweete Affection tun'd in homely layes?
Gladly would our Cephalian muse have sung
All of white love, enamored with a tounge,
That still Styll musicke sighing teares together,
Could one conceite have made beget an other,
And so have ransackt this rich age of that,
The muses wanton favourites have got
Heavens-gloryfier, with thy holy fire,
O thrise immortall quickener of desire,
That scorn'st this vast and base prodigious clime,
Smyling at such as beg in ragged rime,
Powre from above, or favour of the prince,
Distilling wordes to hight the quintessence
Of fame and honor:  such I say doest scorne,
Because thy stately verse was Lordly borne,
Through all Arcadia, and the Fayerie land,
And having smale true grace in Albion,
Thy native soyle, as thou of right deserved'st,
Rightly adornes one now, that's richly served:
O to that quick sprite of thy smooth-cut quill,
Without surmise of thinking any ill.
I offer up in duetie and in zeale,
This dull conceite of mine, and do appeale,
With reverence to thy [Affection]
On will I put that breste-plate and there on,
Rivet the standard boare in spite of such:
As thy bright name condigne or would but touch,
Affection is the whole Parenthesis,
That here I streake, which from our taske doth misse."

And now conclude we in a word or twaine,
Viragon-like, Procris the woods containe;
Where by direction from the Swaine she lay,
Shrowded with smale bowes from the scorching day,
Close by th' accustom'd harbour of her love,
Where he to sollace did him selfe approve,
It was his guize through melancholy anger,
Heere to oppose his body, as no straunger,
But well affected, and acquainted too,
With strange perfourmances, that oft did doo
Him honor, service, in respect of her,
That in the skie sits honoured as a Starre,
Soft stealing bare-foote Faieries now and then,
(That counted are as Jewels worne of men,)
Together with the scornefull mocking Eccho,
Nymphes, Driades, and Satyres many mo
Then I can tell you, would full oft most trim,
Like gliding ghoastes about his cabine swim,
As what might seeme to imitate delight,
Sweete thoughts by day, and musicke in the night,
Causing the one so to confirme the other,
As Revels, Maskes, and all that Cupids mother,
Could summon to the earth, heere was it done,
A second heaven, (aie me) there was begunne.

She waves herselfe, supposing that thereby,
Aurora to embrace he would come nie;
But he mistrusting some devouring beast,
Till he could finde some pray, himselfe did rest,
Under that thicket, eft-soone with the dart,
He of Aurora had acted a part,
Fitter for some rude martialist then one,
That should have bene the accent of her moane.
Now in her bowels bathes the dart a good,
The lively, fresh, and rosey couloured blood
Then did rebate, in steade whereof pale death,
Lay with his surquedie to draw her breath,
Her speach past sence, her sences past all speaking,
Thus for prolonged life he fals entreating.
Thou saffron God (quoth he) that knits the knot
Of marriage, do'st, heaves know, thou knowest not what,
How art thou wrath, that mak'st me of this wrong
Author and Actor, and in tragicke song,
Doest binde my temples, eke in sable cloudes,
Encampes the honor thereto is allowde,
O Hymen hast thou no remorse in love?
Then Hyems hencefoorth be till I approove
Againe the fruites, and comfort issuelesse,
Of Jealousie in marriage had a mis.

Heere was no want of hate, foule Achoron,
Styx, and Cocytus, duskie Phlegyton,
Eumenydes, and all the hell houndes then,
Spued foorth disgrace, oh what hath Cupid done!
Pherecydes, Puppius, and Philocles mourne,
Mourne with Cephalus, and your Hymni turne
To dismall nightes darke ougly stratagems,
To tragicke out-cries, wonderment of men,
And those that take delight in amorous love,
Be their Heraclian wits subject to move
An other Sunne to grace our Theater,
That sadly mournes in blacke, with heavy cheere,
Duld with a still continuing heavinesse;
O!  in extreames who comes to visite us?

LENVOY.
Betwixt extreames
Are ready pathes and faire,
On straight and narrow went
Leades passengers in dreames,
And ever as the aire,
Doth buzze them with content,
A cruelle ougly fenne;
Hated of Gods and men,

Cals out amaine,
O whether but this way:
Or now, or never bend,
Your steps this goale to gaine,
The tother tels you stray,
And never will finde ende,
Thus hath the Gods decreed,
To paine soules for their deedes.

These monsters tway,
Ycleeped are of all,
Dispaire and eke debate,
Which are (as Poets say)
Of Envies whelpes the fall,
And never come too late:
By Procris it appeeres,
Whose proofe is bought so deere.

Debate a foote,
And Jealousie abroade,
For remedie dispaire,
Comes in a yellow coate,
And actes where wysardes troade,
To shew the gazers faire,
How subtilly he can cloake,
The tale an other spoake.

O time of times,
When monster-mongers shew,
As men in painted cloathes,
For foode even like to pine,
And are in weale Gods know,
Upheld with spiced broathes,
So as the weakest seeme,
What often we not deeme.

Abandon it,
That breedes such discontent,
Foule Jealousie the sore,
That vile despight would hit,
Debate his Chorus spent,
Comes in a tragicke more,
Then Actors on this Stage,
Can plausively engage.

Oh Cephalus,
That nothe could pittie move,
To tend Auroraes plaintes,
Now sham'd to tell unto us,
How thou would'st gladly love,
So Procris might not faint,
Full oft the like doth hap,
To them that thinke to scape.

But aie me shee,
Unmercifully glad,
To spie her wedded mate,
Rest from all woemen free,
Yet amorously clad,
Thought on her bended knee,
Of him to be receav'd
But aie me was deceiv'd.

Oft hits the same,
For who the innocent,
To catch in secret snares,
(And laughes at their false shame,)
Doth covertly inuent,
Themselves not throughly ware,
Are oft beguil'd thereby,
Woemen especially.

Faire Procris fall,
The merriment of moe,
That tread in uncouth wents,
Remaine for sample shall,
And learne them where to goe,
Their eares not so attent,
To vile disloyaltie,
Nurse unto Jealousie.

Aurora shee,
Too amorous and coye,
Toyde with the hunters game,
Till loving not to see,
Spide love cloth'd like a boy;
Whereat as one asham'd,
She starts, and downe-ward creepes,
Supposing all a sleepe.

"The servitor,
That earst did bravely skoure,
Against the frontier heate,
For fame and endlesse honor,
Retir'd for want of power,
Secure himselfe would seate,"
So she but all too soone,
Her honor ere begun,

Did famish cleane:
For where she sought to gaine,
The type of her content,
By fatall powers divine,
Was suddainely so stain'd,
As made them both repent,
And thus enamoured,
The morning since look't red.

As blushing thro,
Some tinssell weav'd of lawne,
Like one whose tale halfe spent,
His coulour comes and goes,
Desirous to be gone,
In briefe shewes his intent,
Not halfe so stately done,
As what he erst begun,

Even so, and so,
Aurora pittiously,
For griefe and bitter shame,
Cries out, oh let me goe,
(For who but sluggards eie,
The morning seekes to blame?)
Let schollers only mourne,
For this same wretched tourne.

A just reward
To such as seeke the spoyle,
Of any wedded state,
But what do we regard?
So live by others toyle,
And reape what they have got,
No other reckoning wee,
Suppose but all of glee.

Aie me the Sonne,
Ere halfe our tale is quit,
His strength rebates amaine,
A clymate cold and wan,
That cannot strength a wit,
By Arte to tell the same,
Faire Cynthia shine thou bright,
Hencefoorth Ile serve the night.
