Where what I saw, and how I saw, is plainely discovered in this following discourse, the sad record of a mournful Shepheards laments, which being the chiefest part of my dreame I noted to soone as I awaked, descanting on his estate in common verse, both before and after the passionate Eclogue.  But being loth it should come abroad so naked, I have thus meanly clothed it with the addition of other accidents to make it a perfect dreame, though an imperfect matter.  But be it as it wil, I wil rather presume on the courtesie of your frendly censures, then lose time, and bestow labor in refining a toy, which I have bene occasioned to publish.  But they which have by their owne mishappes experimented the force of Love, and torturing troubles of enthrald affection, wil I hope gently censure of his Complaints, if not for the worth of his desert, yet for his passions sake.

Within a Grove encompast round with trees,
Whose close set tops cleare sight of piercing eie,
Could scarce find passage through, by just degrees
Proportioned in distance equally
As done by skilfull Artists memorie,
A pensive Shepeard stretch'd him on the ground,
Whose wonted joyes sad passions did confound.

As when a blacke thicke Meteore doth ore-goe
Heav'ns light, whose vautie roofe bright orbs embosse,
The vapours late exhaled from below
Dimme that faire place with dregs of earth-bred drosse,
Which striving winds doth rough the welkin tosse:
So this thicke shade, darke mansion of despaire,
Did scarce affoord an entrance to thinne aire.

Under an Arboret embranched wide,
This fore-lorne swaine opprest with care did lie:
Upon whose barke approching I espide,
And red engrav'd this dolefull Elegie,
As every way I glaunc'd my rouling eie,
Sad Elegie which in few lines compriz'd:
Much care:  and thus it was by him deviz'd.

If I could carve on this thy tender rind,
Such deepe characters with my feeble arme,
Arme feeble through distresse of woefull mind,
As in my heart deepe cut, thicke-set doe swarme,
While earthes kind moisture fed thy blosomes pride,
These sorrow-seasond lines should firme abide.

What ere thou be that passing by this way,
Readst this memoriall, search not curiouslie
My name, most haplesse name, but hast away,
Least heav'ns afflict thee with like miserie:
And gentle passenger let this remaine,
Long monument of unknowne shepheards paine.

Hei mihi quam tardo mors pede lenta venit?

Scarse had I read this sad record enrold,
On winding barke, when lifting up his eies
To heav'n, though he no heaven could behold,
(For over-spreading trees did that disguise)
He fild the aire with oft repeated cries,
And gan prepare in stile Heroicall,
To waile his loves losse and his fancies thrall.

Goddesse and mother of the learned nine,
Mnemosyne rich treasure of Art,
Nourse of conceit, and mysteries divine,
Infuse a powrfull influence to my heart,
That outward mones bewraying inward smart,
My mindfull penne making rehearsall true,
May register as thus they do ensue. . . .
