Vested in sable vale, exild from Joy,
I rang'd to seeke out a propitious place
Where I might sit and descant of annoy
And of faire Fortune, altered to disgrace,
At last, even in the confines of the night
I did discerne aloofe a sparkling light.

Then set I spurres unto my Melancholie,
A Jade wheron I had ridden many a mile,
Which lesse then in the twinkling of an eye,
Brought me unto that fatall lights beguile:
Where I might see an agonizing beast,
Bleeding his venym blood out at his brest.

His upper shape was faire-Angelicall,
The rest belowe, all whollie Serpentine,
Cole-blacke incroching upon his pectorall,
And rudely inrowlled in a Gorgon-twine,
His eyes like Goblins stared heer and there,
In fell disdayne of such disfigured geare.

At last he spi'd me, and staring on my face,
He rear'd his mongrel-lumpe up towards me,
Fainting and falling in his Deaths-disgrace,
And yet enforcing still more stabbes to die,
Then thus he vauntingly began to tell me
Of such his fortitude in adversitie.

Welcome deer guest (quoth he) to Catoes Ghost,
Welcome true witnesse of my fortitude,
Seest thou not how this hell-blacke shape almost
Hath quite subdu'd my upper-albitude?
It is adversitie upon my state,
Which see how I revenge it desperate.

With that, as with a new supplyed flood
The angrie streame beares quite adowne the river
All obstacle with unappeased mood:
So his enraged hand did fierce deliver
Fresh death-stabbes to his loath'd mortalitie
Even at the naming of adversitie.

And then in four-fold misconsorted voyce
Of Life and Death:  Rage and Disdaine, he added:
Whilom I was a man of Romes rejoyce
Whiles happy Fortune my estate uppropped:
But once when Caesar over-topped all,
Then (loe) this mid-night shape did me befall.

Then gan I to conceipt my Censure-ship,
My Senatorie-pomp, and libertie
All base-subjected to his Tyrant-whip:
My mind was mightie against such miserie,
And rather would I die magnanimous
Then live to see a Caesar over us.

It was ynough that the Thessalian fieldes
Suckt up the mutuall bloud-shed of our men,
That Pompey dies, and all the Empire yeeldes
To Caesars dauncing Fortune, and Omen:
Cato must die as free from servitude
As he disdaineth Ceasars altitude.

Yet for my Countrey is a part of me,
And it is all subjected to disgrace,
Loe, that's my serpentine obscuritie
For which I spight, and spit on Caesars face,
And stab me with a quaint disdaine and anger
Because I will not line in Caesars danger.

Thou therefore that doest seem a dolefull wight,
View me the president of Cares redresse,
And if that Fortune be above thy might
Yet death is in thy power and readinesse:
Disdaine Misfortune then t' insult upon thee
Seeing that to die is all so faire and easie.

Death is misfortunes monarchizing foe,
Prime Nature of Almightie fortitud,
Eternall Sanctuarie from unrest and woe,
Fames Arke, and all our frailties Period:
Our lyfes true touchstone, natures offertory,
And bridge to sweet Eliziums eternitie.

And as for base adversitie, what is it?
But Gloryes grave, a coward mindes ingalley,
The carrion of our lyfe, suppresse of spirrit,
Shadow of Joves hate:  Disdaines obloquie,
Helles ongate, an Owlish conversation,
All Joyes deprife, and sorrowes inundation.

Looke not so downe agast at what I say,
But with a generous erected front,
Number these willing woundes (my hartes defray)
To Glory sole land-ladie of this account:
They are the Tythes I pay to eternall Fame:
There is not any one of them prophane.

Be not injayld to base Adversitie,
Rather slip out thy life at gloryes windoe,
One stab will send thee to eternity,
And rid thee quite and cleane of all thy woe.
Then there lies life-lesse all Calamity,
Thy name and Spirrit fayre amountes to glory.

It is not as vulgaritie esteemes.
Sincere worth to be beblest of Fortune,
A fickle Dame that commonlie misdeemes
Those that her favours most of all importune.
Blesse thou thy selfe, and if that Fortune curse thee,
Die in despight of her, and her discourt'sie.

Oh what a base ingenerous sight it is,
To see men crooch and pewle at her vaine Altars,
Offring their presents to her peevishnesse
And therewithall, their necks unto her halters:
Be thou subsistant of thy selfe alonely,
And if thou canst not live, yet die with glorie.

Fie on those lowtish growt-head lobbernowlles
That slander Nature with their Modicums,
I tell thee Natur's like to Marygowldes,
Largely display'd to twentie thousand Sunnes,
Which if they cease to shine in Majestie,
It shuttes it selfe, and is content to die.

Thy Spirrit is a particle of Jove,
It scornes indignitie and meane suffize,
Like as a flame, or oyle, it mounts above,
And take but Glory from it, and it dies:
Yet dies it not, but to indignitie,
Mounting by Death, to Fames eternitie.

There is no hell like to declined glorie,
Nor is Prometheus Vulture halfe so fell
As the sad memorie of a happie storie
To him, that in adversitie doeth dwell:
Ah, let him die that is not as he was,
With ending blesse breake he the houre-glasse.

What booteth it to live in base contempt
In ever melancholie-adumbred mood?
A fable to the vulgar babblement,
A muddie ebbe after a Chrystall flood?
Out with thy candle, let it burne no more,
When once thou art become the worlds eye-sore.

And tell not me of dutie unto life;
Nature is as indifferent to death,
Life led in joyes abandon and deprise
Is Natures deeper grave, then earth beneath:
It is not death, that which the world calles dying,
But that is death, which is all joyes denying.

Nature disdaines all grosse encountring meat
Fore-fed with Nectar, and Ambrosian sweetes,
And Night that is the merrie dayes defeat
We see how Nature gives it drowsie greetes:
Now:  Sleep by night is but a silent signe
How sweet it is to die in Joyes decline.

And then as is the morrowe-dawning day
A fresh re-blesse to Natures next awake;
So to the wretch that dies disgrace away
Elizium is his second lifes partake:
Where he shall triumph in eternity,
And Fame the Chanteclere of such his glory.

Loe, I a president before thine eyes;
This gore imports the glorie of my Ghost,
Who but fore-weening Caesars tyrannies
Fore-doom'd my self in care-preventing post:
Then thou that art a verie wretch indeed,
Oh, why deferrest thou so long to bleed?

Out with that Jayle-bird of adversitie,
Disdaine to live at Natures joylesse leasure:
Bale crown'd in gore and magnanimitie
Is an updive to all eternall pleasure:
Thinke what a Fame-renowned thing it is
In crimson floods to warfare base de-blisse.

Deferre no longer then thy doome of death,
But Champion-like confound Calamitie,
Prosperities Satrap feares not to unsheath
His kil-care blade gainst fleshes fearful frailtie:
Flesh of it selfe will one day turne to dust,
Then doome it thou thy selfe since so it must.

Thou would'st not gladly eate an Abricocke,
Or Peache unpar'd, because their rinde is bitter,
And fear'st thou then to give thy selfe the stocke,
That so unkindely bittereth all thy better?
Oh, off with it, and yeeld thy sweetes to Jove,
And he will counter-sweete thee with his love.

He will imbosome thee in his embrace,
And Joye-embalme thee in his Heaven-delights,
Thy skarres and gashes he will faire-deface,
And sanctifie thee with alhallowed rytes:
Thou shalt be as a Meteor overshining
All mortall glory in her dust declining.

There will we meet thee in Vermilion vest,
I, Otho, Anniball, and all the rest,
Fames choisest Martyrs, who in Fates detest,
Doom'd all our selves to everlasting rest.
There will we magnifie thy happie woundes,
And high applaud the with Crownets and Crownes.

With that I drew out my emboldened blade,
Resolv'd to massacre my loathed life:
When (loe) the Ghost from out my sight did vade,
As though to tell his Jove of my arise:
But such a Sulphur stench hee left behind him
That I in dreade thereof shooke everie lim.

And therwithall my sword fell to the ground
And I misdoubted some illusion:
Such was the safetie that then I found
In drowsie dread, and deaths confusion;
Prophanely spoken:  t'was no frailties deed,
But God alonlie stood thee then in steed.

So then remounted on my Sable jade,
I rang'd ore craggy cliffes and desart dales
In way-lesse wander, and in Horrors shade,
One while conceipting Catoes death-availes,
And then anon reflecting on his stinke,
Thus strayd I most in dread and deaths instinct.

Thrise drew I out my dagger for to stab me
And then so oft I mus'd why Cato stunke so,
Me thought there should no such disglory be
In sacred Ghosts, freed from the filth of woe:
So was my moody mindes perplexed wander
Partial on lifes behalfe gainst deadly danger.

Then on I rode, and riding through a dale
Hell-like adumbred with a duskie gloome,
A suddaine fatall blast did me assaile
And drove me to a second damned doome,
Where I might see a more then hell-black finger
That pointed me, and said:  Loe yonder, yonder.

With that my Melancholy star'd round about
And like a whirle-wind posted to the place,
Where I might heare a voyce that roared out
Revenge, revenge, thy dollorous disgrace:
And then eftsoons all in a Sulphur-flame
Appear'd unto my sight a shape of shame.

Her face was skowle regarding on the ground,
Her eyes like Heclas ever-sparkling fires,
Her finger on her mouth was a dumbe bound
Of her Cyclopian frets and fell desires:
In th' other hand she bare a fierie sheafe,
And all her body was as pale as death.

Her haire was Snake-incurl'd Medusa like,
Having the power t' instone me where I stood:
So was I sencelesse all but in dislike
And deadly horror of so dread a Bug:
At last she fretted out an angry noise
And thus inspeeched it into a voice.

Feare not my wan and moody misproportion,
For (I confesse) I am no fondlings joy,
Nor am I of a wanton disposition
As is the God of Love that idle boy,
Yet am I a joy in another kind
To such as in un-joy most joy doe find.

I am Revenge, the doome of injuries:
The Misers refuge, and revive to blesse
Occasions Argus, pith of Tragedies
The summe of pollicie in all distresse:
Wrathes thunder-bolt, and triumph over those
That in their jollitie work others woes.

Th' injurious Gallant in his Commick brave
I agonize with unexpected bale,
Because he shall not thinke that in the grave
Lies nought but impotence and deaths availe;
I'le shew him that the worme hath power to move,
And none so lowe but may amount above.

There is a Phoenix of Adversitie
That faire results from her incinderment,
And dares to brave with an undaunted eie
Prosperities shine, and brightest blandishment:
It is Revenge, t'is I can stare it out,
And make it by disgrace the Misers flout

I rear'd Corelian from his exile state
To triumph over Romes ingratitude,
And Caesar I did whollie animate
To down with Pompeys scornfull altitude,
His sute deni'd him by the Senate-house,
Did cause me make him Rome-Emperious.

Of latter dayes a Bourbon in disgrace
I arm'd against his Lieges injurie,
And gave him victorie at Pania chace
Where he beheld him in captivitie:
What though he were a Traitor in so doing,
Tis statelie done to over-top a King.

To be faire Fortunes ever Carpet-darling
Is femall glorie:  But Reveng'd disgrace
That's truly Masculine, and rich triumphing:
Al peace-content is too too cheap and base:
What manhood is it still to feed on Chickins
Like infant nurse-boys in nice Fortunes kitchins?

Give me the man that with undaunted sperit
Dares give occasion of a Tragedie:
And be content for his more after-merit
To be downe beaten from felicity:
To th' end that with a fierce amount he may
Re-blesse himselfe in spight of Fortunes nay.

T'is brave to plunge adowne into the deep
And so up-bound againe above the wave,
To be continually a mountain-sheep
Is Cockrell-like, it is a dung-hill brave:
The cravin Cocke is hartlesse from his hill,
Shame to be so that hast a manly will

To be depos'd from blisse by injurie,
Is double glorie to remount to it,
Nor is thy title lost to dignitie
Unlesse suppresse of spirite forfeit it:
Misfortunes power cannot foyle thy right,
Doe thou but beare a minde in her despight.

We cannot say that man is overcome
That still beares up his arme against his foe,
Nor that he is sincerely out-run
Whom the Corrivals trip doth overthrow:
What ere is lost with fore-wits unprevention,
Win it againe with after-wits contention.

This humane fate, sometime to slip and fall,
But to ingrovell in curt is beastlie base:
To rise againe, oh that is Joviall,
Or els revenge to death the downe-disgrace:
Therefore, thou hast a spirit of despight,
As well as in good hap to take delight.

The gallant man unhorst amidst his foes
Fightes to the death his latest wrath away,
And when he can no more:  with mops and mowes
He floutes both them, and Death, and Destinie:
So if not Victor, yet unvanquished
He dies to everlasting livelihed.

Be not as is the coward Scorpion
That rounded all about with ashie embers
Dispaires and dies in selfe destruction
Renting with fierce enrage his venym members:
But if that Jove nill ayde thy fortitude
Downe to all Acharon, and the Furie brood.

Hell hordes in honor the brave minded man
That knowes the price and value of his head,
That measures not Renowne by inch or span,
But by th' eternitie of Joves Godhead,
That skornes to brooke base infelicitie,
Or pocket up degraded dignitie.

And haply Jove himselfe supplants thy state
To see how thou canst scamble up againe,
And scuffle manly with malignant fate
To a redoubled glories rich attaine:
Then cheerly man:  inhearten all thy sperrites
And dead Revenge thy miseries demerites.

Loe, I thy Advocate unto the Hagges
Will still importune thy Prosperitie,
And be at hand with poison, and with dagges
To execute each plotted tragedie:
Misfortune shall not scoffe at thy confusion,
If hell and I befriend thee in conjunction

Lay but thy hand upon thy conscience.
And faire in-vow mee in an earnest spirit,
So shalt thou compasse Tragick consequence
On all thy foes that now so frollick it.
They shall no longer feast upon thy frets
Nor register thy woes in their banquets.

Thou shalt enjowle them one against another
With hostill jealousie, and dead debate:
I tell thee (man) all friendship is unsure
Founded upon anothers downe estate:
Nor joyes he long against Revenges doome,
That wrong in-states him in anothers roome.

Heaven is the Arbiter, and wils it so,
I and the Furies are the instruments
To act that justice in all tragicke woe,
Now is it in this case our good intents
To joyne with us thy manuall act heerin
That more then pristin glory thou maist win.

But say thou winne not pristin glory by it
Yet shalt thou see thy foes in downe disgrace,
Thy selfe shalt act it, such shall be thy merit,
And such thy glorie in a higher place:
What greater glorie can betide the Vale
Then force the Mountaine-top adowne to fall?

So shall thy glorie not be lost, but left,
Yea losse to them that all so dearly buy it,
When thou shalt Phoenix-like of blisse bereft
Rise from thy ruines to a higher merit:
Degraded from a puppit Commicke-stage
To act the statelie Tragick personage.

Chang'd to a faire enfiered Salamander
Breathing Revenges bright and sacred flames,
Which high inspirits men to lofty matter
In quaint disdaine of aulicke infant games;
Games of the bodie, follies of the minde,
Oh, how t'is base to live so like a Hinde.

Nature hath given you male and female willes,
The one wherwith to covet meriments,
The other to detest all adverse ifs,
Now is almightie Joves great woonderments
More in his Thunder-boltes then in his sweetes,
To shew Revenge more woorth then Pleasures greets.

Then arme thy selfe Revenges Champion,
To bandie away thy foes, and all disgrace
With polliticke dissimulation
Of contrarie language, and contrary face:
As the Camelion changeth still his hue
With every object cullor:  so change thou.

So maist thou close Camelion-like conceale
Thy tragicke shape of Horror and Revenge,
Whiles' they misdoubting not thy false reveale
Are caught unwares like Woodcocks in a sprenge,
Such is the honour of Adversitie,
With sleightes to undermine Prosperitie.

Be to thy oath, as th' Ape is to his blocke,
Sometimes sticke to it, sometimes flit from it
As pregnant pollicy may thee provoke:
T'is foole-sincerity, and want of wit
To make a pot to breake thy head withall,
Or rather not to break it first of all.

Use Friend and Foe, and Neuter all alike,
Onlie as instrumentall implements
To thy designe; thy aymed stroke to strike:
And see them but with ayery complements:
That done, and thy affaire effected,
Destroy them all for feare thou be detected.

Dead dogges barke not, nor stands it with thy honour
To be upbrayded with a curtesie;
Much lesse to be employd in like devoir
According Quid pro Quoes servilitie:
Such is the summe of perfect pollicie
To worke securely with Vulgaritie.

Be close, and jealous in each action
For that close dealing is good Speeds assurance;
And Jealousie's the Sentinell of Caution;
And bear thou still in mind this circumstance;
If all good fortune, and advise shall faire thee
To have a starting hole for after-safetie.

T'was meger Prudence in the antique Sages
That but with Goodnes could recure an Evill:
Give me the man that with wittes pollices
Can Saint a Devill with another Devil:
That can so shift, and shuffle the cards in fist,
As turne up whatsoever Trump he list.

T'is Heavens attaine to send thy foes to Hell
With mutuall murthers in Seditions field:
The upper Buckets fall into the well
The lowers faire amount we see doth yeeld:
Such is the merit of Revenges deed,
With others wrack to work thine own good speed.

At least to die in well appeased wrath
And in survive of all thine enemies
Is stately dying:  t'is faire lie downe and laugh,
And an up-rise to Joves benignities,
Elizium and Fame in after ages,
Revenges blessed Rightes and Appennages.

Then come, imbrace me with a firme assent
And thinke no idle voyce sollicits thee;
I tell thee (man) in thy arbitrament
Lies all thy glorie, and felicitie:
I'le be thy hand-maid heer in earth belowe,
The rest above great Jove he will bestow.

So sayd, she rear'd her skowle down-looke on
And vagranlie regarding round about
In Period-pawse; At last as one bestraught
She star'd, and trembled, and began to powt
And suddenly she vanisht out of sight
Because now in the East it dawn'd day-light.

Even so (quoth I) is it Revenges guize
To be in force by Night, be gone by Day?
Such is not the instinct of Paradize,
God graunt it be no Plutonicke affray:
Oh what it is to be a mortall Man
Subject to all the guiles and sleights of Satan.

Yet for her speech was consonant to Nature,
I wisht sh' had been an Oracle of truth;
So credulous is Angers moodie vigure
When once it is in-Caesured in youth:
And hand in-handed with a quaint Disdaine
Injurious disglorie to sustaine.

Yea what is not the miser apt to doe,
What not beleeve to mittigate his evill?
Well may he faine a patient outward hue,
But not exile his inward damned devill,
The Vulture of despite that never dies
But rents and teares his heart in ravin-wise.

Now Chanteclere the vigill of the night
Crew broad day-light:  when Titan in the East
Peece-meale appearing in his pristin bright
Broad-waked every creature, man and beast,
Ech musick-bird beblessing his amount
Both in the humble vale and haughtie mount.

When (loe) my jade unsprighted, and unnighted,
Rag'd and engag'd himselfe to all adventure
Ore hedge, and ditch, and flood, so fell affrighted
He was to see the Sunne, so shone a creature:
All as the Tench in waterles despaire
Beateth himselfe to death in spight of ayre.

So on I hasted at my jades behest,
As whilom Phaeton in his skyey carte,
Weake (God he knowes) to rule so fierce a beast,
Deadly feare-frighted both in harte and arte:
But whome our Lords safe providence bespeedeth,
No humane power of heart or arte he needeth.

At last in processe of an over-tire
My moody beast stood still in palsie-wise,
Trembling and fainting in a daunted ire,
(Such is the end of Rages ryotize:)
Then had I leasure for to looke about me,
And (loe) I spide a Rock in shining glorie.

I hy'd me to it with a pleasing pace,
And yet not pleasant, for t'was all too slow:
So flight is Melancholie to darke disgrace
And deadly drowsie to a bright good morrow;
Yet on I march'd, and marveil'd at the sight,
I never in all my life saw thing so bright:

As more and more I neer'd unto the place
So by degrees my Melancholy fainted,
When (loe) anon with a religious pace
A snow-white Jennet towards me advanced:
His name was Good desire, his saddle greene
Was Reverend Solace of a godly spleen.

Whereat my jade affrighted and despighted
Sped all to naught as myst before the Sonne:
When I eftsoons internallie delighted
Was rapt by Good desire unto Devotion:
A penall place, yet parcell of the rock,
And brighter then the Noony Zodiack.

There kneel'd a reverend Sophie all in teares
With needle-pointed Discipline correcting
His Fleshes frailtie:  Oh how he besmears
The place with penall bloud, and blubbering:
His hart was wholly fixt on Christ his Passion,
So shew'd his Crucifixe-contemplation.

Before him was a Death's-head full of wormes,
The picture of a Grave, and an Hower-glasse,
A map of Doomsday, and Hell in fearfull formes,
And Heaven figur'd all in Saintlie sollace:
His pale and megre countenance areeded
His spare poor fare, and how hard he bedded.

Standing behind him, he was in a trance,
And I betooke my Eie to a steddie gaze,
My Mind to an amaze at so great suffrance,
So penall suffrance in so bright a place,
And now I see (said I) there is a blisse
Even in Adversitie what ere it is.

And thus aside I argued the case:
In place so bright what meane these drearements?
A heavie case deserves a dolefull place
Since bale and blesse are adverse Complements:
And yet the Glowe-worme in the darkest night
Though blacke it be, shines foorth a starry bright.

Cato and Revenge were blacke, and both to blame
Th' one in sulphure stenche, th' other in Lights abhorr,
And Melancholye was the Jade of shame
That darkeling brought me to that double dorr;
A better horse I hope hath brought me hether
For both the place is bright, and tis fayr weather.

Long have I rang'd to finde a place of ease
Whear I may passe away my pensive playntes,
And happly if this be now that place of peace
Heer rest I ever in my woes attayntes:
Heer in this Cave, and in this sable shrowde
Dye I a Caytiffe, under Fortunes crowd.

This aged man and I will both together
Complaine in common our calamytie;
That haply whiles we strive t' outplaine each other
Suche our ambition may swage our miserie,
Or both at once, may cracke as overstrained,
Ambitious dying is a glorie gained.

But (well I wot) thou wrong'st this holy place
By mis-constructing it to care and bale,
T'is puddle sacrilege so to disgrace
The grace of God, through errors rude misprisall:
What though the man doe seeme disconsolate,
Somewhat it is doth thee exhilarate.

For why, I felt my spirit all possest,
With a revived hope to happinesse;
It was the Grace of God in my unrest
That in-lie cheer'd me up to future blesse,
Deer gift of God, the Character of life
And heavenly make-peace of our ghostly strife.

It is the Raye, and Speech of heaven to man,
The Rainebowe-pledge of Gods benevolence,
The Limbecke of our justice, and the Fan
That winnoweth sin away from innocence:
Prime moover, and efficient cause of good
To all that are redeem'd with Christ his blood.

Whiles thus with infant-zeale I did applaud
The in-come grace of God into my heart
In full detest of fore-affected fraud,
Loe, now this penall Sage began to start
From out his trance, and with a heavenlie voyce
And armes a crosse, he bid his soule rejoyce.

Rejoyce (quoth he) at this eternall truth,
The man is blest that for Gods justice sake
Sustaines with Patience reproch and ruth,
Our Lord hath promist that he wil partake
His heaven to him:  His name be prais'd therfore,
And so he kist the Crosse, and said no more.

With that my heart exulted in my breast,
As faire presaging weale unto my woe;
For why I was not vulgarlie distrest
But, for a cause that bore an honest showe,
Yet for my frailtie was impatient
I long'd for speedy death or solagement.

Then stept I to that man of Mysteries
With carefull Complement least to offend,
When he eftsoons with reverend arise
Did recomplie me like a perfect friend:
The teares of joy that trill'd adowne his chin
Did sweare what true affection was within.

And lastly he thus embracingly bespake me,
Welcome (Elizian-man) a thousand fold
More deere and shone to Catechrysius eye
Then all the Pleasant pride of Pearle or Gold:
Rare, yea all too rare are now adayes
Elizas subjects seen to passe this wayes.

Belike yee are a Paradized people
That so contain your selves in home-delights,
As though that only under your steeple
And no wher els were all May-merry Rights:
A blessed people ye are, if it be so
And yet me thinkes thou seem'd a man of woe.

Wherto I answered all with humble thanks:
First, that I was the man he took me for
Bred and brought up on fayre Elizas bankes,
Next, did I largely shew him furthermore
How blessedly we live, as hee had heard
Under Elizas peacefull power and guard.

And as for my peculiar distresse,
I tolde him so I seem'd, and so I was
The Rag of Fortune:  Badge of base deblesse,
The Spunge of care, a broken Hower-glasse:
The Finger-man of shame, and Obloquie
Downly degraded from Felicitie.

I told him of my dreary journement
On moodie Melancholie; and how I sped
With Cato, and Revenges babblement,
And how, along the Desart as I fled
I met with Good Desire a goodly Steed
That brought me thether in my ghostly need.

I would have told him more of my arange
Even all the verie conscience of my case,
The cause of such my reprobate exchange
From blesse to bale:  and how from place to place
Bowndlesse in care, I rang'd to bownd my Fate,
Content to die:  but not die desperate.

But he eftsoones prevented me, and said:
Oh happie thou, if so thou knew'st thy hap,
I tell thee (man) thou art right faire apaid
Exild from Mammon into Jesus lap:
Come sit we downe, and I will shew thee how
In this distresse, thou mayst nor breake, nor bow.

So downe we sate:  my heart was festivall
My eare was eager-liquorish to embaite
Good Catechrysius his Cordiall:
Who then with eies to heaven elevate
And crosse-laid armes did vow syncerely
All love and truth in what he meant to shew me.

And then (quoth he) deare Englishman, suppose
Me not uncivill t' interrupt thy tale,
For in our Lord I well aread thy woes
And Charitie hies me to recure them all:
Now all is but the action of the Mind,
That rectifi'd, the rest is all but wind.

Know then, thou art no better then a man
Natur'd indifferently, to weale or woe,
Who ere he be that's borne of a woman
Is first just nothing, next an Embrio,
Then borne into the world in impotence
Poore interest to future Excellence.

Nay borne in sable sinne to Gods offence,
Nipt in the blossome by the blast of Hell,
Spur-gall'd of Adam both in soule and sence
And hodge-podged between a man and Devel,
A fardle of frailties doom'd unto damnation
So fore we have incurr'd Gods indignation.

If these be titles of felicitie,
Ah, poore felicitie, unpleasant Pride:
Rooted in hell, brancht in mortalitie
And round imbark'd with sin on everie side:
Nor are we thus disgrac'd but of our selfes
For first we eate the Apple of all these helles.

We might have chosen in Adams Libertie
Whether t' have eate that Apple yea or no,
But needs we would adventure:  And wot you why
Forsooth of Pride both good and bad to know
So slunke from us the glorie and grace of God
Leaving us quite to our selfe breaching-rod

Heerhence we covet counterfeit content,
Sublime mundanity, and our Fleshes case,
Rating the trash of earth true solagement
And every toy of price our sence to please:
Such is our frailtie, and yet we see it not
So to subject us to so servile Lot.

And such the matter of thy discontent,
Because thou over prizest Fleshes sence,
Rating the world at all too high a rent
Wheras it is but dust and Gods offence:
The Mammon of iniquitie in Scripture phrase
And but a meere Crocadyle amaze.

Conceipt thy selfe no better then thou art,
A sorie Journey man from birth to death
And all this world but matter of undesart
And a meere momentary trash-bequeath:
Death doomes all Flesh at last, and Flesh-affaires
Be it Fleshes joyes, or Fleshes servile cares.

Blesse being the perfect Counterpane of good
This world is not of worth to correspond it
It being but trash ore-flowne with Frailties flood
And deep indown'd from heavens fellowship:
Then up to heaven amount thy true ambition
And as for earth out-care it in contrition.

Not to despaire and die as Cato told thee,
For that is base Pusillanimitie
And Natures most unhallowed infamie,
Treason to God, and fell disloyaltie
So to betray his Fort and Character
To selfe-misdoome, and drearie disaster.

We ought not cancell Gods eternall doome
Un-labelling our life from his faire Charter,
For such is diffidence in his holidoome
And prowde in-officing us in his affaire:
Nor can we kill Calamitie by death
For he is just in earth, and hell beneath.

Thou canst not flit from his almightie doome
He being th' Arbiter of all, and nothing:
Who gave thee Essence out of Vacuum
Can paine thy ashes all in earth reposing:
Well maist thou shift his anger into grace
But not deprive thee from his heavenly face.

As vaine it is to thinke Revenges deed
Can counter-doome thy bale to blessednesse,
The power of Flesh being but a rotten reed
And selfely inclined unto all distresse:
Then since we are so wretched of our selfes
Add worse to yll doth but encrease our helles.

Such is Revenge:  It is a haggard yll,
A Luciferiall ranke uncharitie:
The venym, and blacke-Santus of our will
Unreasons rage; spawne of Impietie,
Breath of Despaire, Prime-brat of Envies brood,
And all good Natures Satyr-Antipode.

Revenges arme rear'd up against the Foe
Aimes to defeat God of his interest
Who clausually reserv'd that worke of woe
Unto his owne judiciall behest;
Thou art a man, and once didst sucke thy mother,
Thou canst not judge thy selfe, much lesse another.

And what know's thou whether haply for thine owne
Or for thy Predecessors sinnes thou sufferest,
God oft transfers his indignation
From the offending East to th' ending West.
Or whether it be to trie thy patience,
And flush the more thy good obedience.

If it be for thy sinnes, oh happy thou
That art so temporally corrected:
Such is Gods mercy, not his Justice-blow,
A worser doome is to thy evill indebted:
For God being good in all infinitie
Such is thy sinnes, and fuels affinitie.

And if for thy forefathers trespasses,
T'is brave to be so good a Sacrifice,
God earst to expiate thy amisses
Being a president before thine eies
Of willing death; wee are not borne only
Unto our selfes:  Suche is uncharitie.

The feeble Nature even of Flesh and Blood
Hath been so kind to die for Ancestrie,
Gentility records Eneas good
In that he bore his aged fathers frailtie
Through Troyes flames:  much more ought
Charitie Beare patiently anothers penaltie.

But shall I say that haplie in this case
Our Lord is pleas'd to trie thy patience,
Thy valure, and obedience in disgrace?
Oh, that were all too glorious a presence:
For (well ye wot) that Souldiour is a King
That choycelie is employ'd in warfaring.

T'is Scowndrell-glorie still to sit at ease
In gawdie satisfaction of thy sence:
Nay, t'is no glorie at all, but a disease
That Canker-like consumes thine Innocence.
Now God being pleas'd to cure thee thereof
Doth thus confound it all into a scoffe.

And yet confounds it so, as thou maist see
His Justice and his Mercie joind together,
Thy yll contrould to future dignitie,
So dooth the goodnesse of thy cause averre:
If God did meane thy eternall infamie,
Worse passive cause had foule befall'n thee.

Thou canst not have a more assured pawne
Of Gods benignitie then a good cause,
It being unto thy soule a sacred dawne
Of heavens day; and an especiall clause
Or Charter-warrant of Salvation
By a secure Conscience-attestation.

Not all the glorie of this world is worth
The minnim-Emphesis of a good conscience:
The verie penall teares it sendeth foorth
Are more then pearles of Indie-excellence:
Much more are they Emperiall dignities
Her inward Joyes and Jocundities.

Say that the Corpes of such a Conscience
Lie all in mange before the Misers dore,
His name as hell held in the worlds offence,
Yet is he not unfortunate therefore;
For heaven and he being still in good conjunction
All that's but vapor, and no sound confusion.

Nay t'is to thee a haughtie merit-matter
If brooks with patient valure to the end;
Which easely thou maist doe, if thou consider
That Jesus tempts thy patience as a friend,
Not in his rage above thy power and strength,
Whom he reprooves at first, he saves at length.

And sooth to say, what is Prosperitie
That so should make thee abhor Adversitie?
Even Caesars loftie pomp, and soveraigntie
Is not by ods sincere felicitie;
Subject to Care and Alteration
Through Envie, Errour, and Adulation.

How much adoe is done ere men attaine
To wealth and glorie by Ambition?
Still carke and care shares halfe the servile gaine,
The rest remaines to Deaths confusion:
T'is well if tart Synderisie and Hell
Triumver not to towlle the passing-bell.

Care in attaining, and care in attaine
Care is the lower and the upper staire:
Such carefull glorie is but glorious paine,
Yea care, or care-lesse either, all's but aire
Feast it in care, or feast it carelessly
Death is the latter Harpie of all glory.

Besides, how many Villaines are advanc'd
To such theatricall, and stagic-state
Whilst Vertue lies obliviously entranc'd,
Neglected, and disdain'd as out of date:
Besides the multiplicitie of abuse
That is in such mundanities mis-use.

Whereas the patient Satrap in distresse
Behonesteth his guiltie suffrance:
And if he suffer for Gods righteousness,
Loe, there the summe of all true valliance:
Heavens Machabe he is that so downe-dies
Guiltie of all glorie, and Gods deere dainties.

Who heares his name a thousand yeeres hence
Will give it glorie, praise, and reverence
As to a Temples ruin-Monuments
Rased in Sacrilege, and Gods offence:
He will be-villaine those that did the deed
As Scowndrell-Agents of Hells blacke areed.

We are not borne to Fortunes complements,
As soveraigne dainties; but as Vertues tooles
Wherwith to shape us perfect lineaments
Of honorable Manhood:  And not as Fooles
To dote upon the Pensill in our hand
And not depaint us like to Gods command.

Vertue's the Ladie of our humanitie,
And Fortune but the hand-maid of our merit,
Now, were it homelie done to magnifie
The meane above the maine:  T'were pettie sperit
To slip our nettes into the Sea for water
And pardon Fish, as no part of the matter.

This life is but a warfare against sinne
And either Fortune is but sinnes Coate-armour,
Be it bright or blacke, great danger lies therein
If thou resist not with a haughtie valour:
T'is witlesse yeelding to her gawdements,
And cowardize unto her drearements.

What skils it whether we fight with blacke or white
If blacke and white be both our enemies,
The one in guile, th' other in flat despight?
The Goblin-Bugs, and Faery Hiedegies
Are both the shades of hell, and night-affrayes
Encounter, nor assent quelles their dismayes.

And why are we the image of our God
The Monarches over all Elementaries?
But to controwll with Reasons righteous rod
All flesh and bloods fraile sensualities;
T'is sensualitie, and pettie power
To mal-content thee for a fading flower.

Stand thou on Reasons haughty Promontorie
Superiour and secure over all disgrace,
Rage wind, and wave, and horror round about thee
Yet all is glorie and peace in that bright place:
Nor Death, nor Hell can damnifie thy honer
So long as Reasons arme beares up thy banner.

Oh generous minded men that can esteeme
All state inferiour to their mindes degree,
And not abandon it to base misdeeme
Of any Fortunes power above her glee:
But can out-stare it with a quaint regard
In reference to merite, and Gods grand reward.

That can conceipt all Fortune as a Fog
Bee't black or bright, all but a matter of aire,
If bright, oh then it doth but flatter and cog,
If blacke, it drowns thee with a flood of care,
Unlesse thy mind be as a Sunne above it
Faire over-shining all her mist-demerit.

Faire Fortune is a Bog, a dauncing danger,
And Temperance must foot it with a modest pace;
Her frowne, a gulfe that drownes the hartlesse stranger
That cannot wend with Patience his disgrace;
Both that and it are mortuarie matter
If fed upon in Indiscretions platter.

Submit not then thy sacred Substantive
To Fortunes hestes:  but as thou art of Nature,
So still continue thy prerogative
Above her blandishing and spightfull power,
So shone a Patrimonie as thy Mind
Let never Fortune waft it out of kind.

Thou art no part of Fortune, but thine owne:
Vertue thy fore-guide, Heaven thy attaine,
Good death, not loftie life thy best Renowne,
Contented mind thy glories after-gaine:
Without content all glorie is but gall,
And with content disgrace is festivall.

Content's the Spunge of true felicitie,
The Cordiall against degraded blesse,
Corrivall to the highest Empirie,
The badge of Innocence and Righteousnesse,
Vertues enthrone, Rent of a manlie mind
To God for whatsoever state assign'd.

It is the Phaenix of fore-glories Embers:
Patience her wing, Heaven is her amount,
It is the Christopher whose manly members
Wafteth the miser-man through all affrount,
It is the true and perfect Salamander,
Breathing vitalitie in flames of fire.

Not so the Skowndrell in his greatest glorie,
For ther is no Content in guilt of evill,
A skowll down-looke, and swart synderisie
Betokening him a member of the Devill:
He cannot with a faire erected front
Be-Abba God:  nor yeeld him good accompt.

His glorie in guilt of yll is as a flower
Begnawne with an accursed Caterpiller,
Or as an Apple perisht in the coure
Though faining outwardlie a faithfull faire;
Oh fatall incense, oh accursed fume
That so choaks up the wretch doth it assume.

Wheras the others conscientiall-content
Doth feast his Fates, and civillize their rage,
Turning their gall to glee and solagement
And faire be-heavening hell with her asswage;
Hee's as a Bwoy above the bosterous wave
Dauncing to scorne the Seas ybillowy-brave.

So strong in power is his sincere incline
To Gods ordaine and holie providence,
Resting therin as in a sacred shrine
Or Sanctuarie against all hels offence:
The Devils eager-gripe cannot confound
Him whom our Lords protection doth bound.

There is no hell but in our Gods offence:
Please him, and boldlie plunge adowne the deep
Of all accurse:  his holy Providence
Being the Argus which doth never sleep,
Will on the wings of safe Protection
Still beare the just man up from all perdition.

What hap can hap amisse to Gods beblest?
That wave can surge above his providence?
The Hagges of hell are chain'd to his behest
Hell gates obey his high omnipotence:
Dive downe to Hell, if he beare up thy chin
Wel maist thou sink a while, nere drowne therein.

If once thy hope be anchored in God
No wave, no bluster can endanger thee,
Thy foot from falling is securely shod
He corresponding thy fidelitie:
If God thy Center be and thy defence
Be Hell, be Devil thy Circumference.

The Tyrants steele, the Hang-mans Axetree,
His strangles, mangles, and his fierie doomes
Cannot confound true magnanimitie
Founded on Gods true love and hollidoomes;
His life in gore, his Ghost in shades of hell
Are more at ease than anie tongue can tell.

The earthen minded man cannot conceave
So haughtie glorie in disglorie and dole:
His groveling appetite doth so bereave
His wit, impelling it to another gole;
Hee's so besotted in his Leprosie
That it alonlie he esteems true glorie.

But time will come when at a just Tribunall
The just mans miserie, and the misers glee
Will come in Coram, and bee doom'd for all:
Then mourning good shall mount to Majestie,
And sin-polluted glorie downe discend
T' irreparable dollour without end.

Then vae to guiltie glorie, glorious guilt,
Vae to suppresse of vertue, advance of vice;
The Rascalls towre on Vertues ruines built
Must then adowne, and he repent the price:
Oh, farre more happie then disgraced good,
Then Vice advanc'd to skowndrell altitud.

But thou wilt say it is Detraction,
It is thy name defam'd among the just
Thy life bely'd through misconstruction
That more then all thy glorie in the dust
Be-hels and tortureth thy manly mind,
It being a mischiefe of a woorser kind.

Bee't so (Elizian-man) I doe confesse
Detraction is indeed a monstrous evell,
Foule Hartie of honour, Night of righteousnesse
And the uncivill tongues most venym-drivell,
Much more I doe confesse it is a spight
To be of honest men a villaine hight.

But on the other side, when thou consider
The sand-blind errors even of justest men,
How much from Gods intuitie they differ
And oft when most they judge, are most mistaken;
Dispaire not at their doomes, but in thy hart
Blesse God who sees thee inly what thou art.

Oft-times the good man credits with his cares
Not with his eyes:  Therhence if injurie
Redownd to thee; the fault being whollie theirs,
Farre be it from thy hearts synderisie:
Yea rather with a bolt-up countenance
Give it the Lie, and hardie sufferance.

Much more the Villaines obloquie disdaine it
As currish cravin against thy Innocence,
His Viper-language cannot cracke thy credit
A blush-lesse conscience pleading thy defence;
His tongue against thy Soules secure estate
Fares as a reed against a brazen gate.

But if his obloquie be a true Eccho
Of thy misgovernance and guilty life,
Then well I doe areed it is a woe
Unto thy honor, and a slaughter knife;
Wheras contrarie-wise  if thou be found
It's but aryrie, and an idle sownd.

Faire then aguize thee with a trim transcent
Above al flesh and hells indignitie,
Embost with gentle Patience, and Content
Lamb-like repinelesse at adversitie,
For, sooth I say, and heaven will witnesse it
The just mans miserie is a haughtie merit.

And first please God in his commandements,
Next, with a true Satrapick-sufferance
Grace me that face of thine, those lineaments
Against Detraction and hells mis-valiance,
Shew that thou art the image of thy God
In patient portage of his penall rod.

So, nor dispaire, nor yet revenge thy woe
But with the prudent Serpent in distresse
Safe-garde thy head; let die the rest beloe:
Thy head in heaven, thy heele in heavinesse
Is merrie matter, if thou well consider
That death rejoynes them both in blesse togither.

Hast thou not noted this effect in Nature,
How chill-cold winter calefies the water
Anteperistezing her powers together
Wherby it faire resists her ycie ire?
So, in thy winter of Adversitie
Create thy selfe a sommer-Jubilie.

Give place to furie as the humble Snaile
Retreating in his hornes gainst misadventure,
In time all violence will selfelie quaile
If unprovok'd with currish misdemeanure:
The chillest winter and the darkest night
Redound at last to Sommer, and broad day-light.

See how the Marigold against the Son
Displayes and shuts it selfe at his dominion
Lessening at night her spred proportion
But nere disculloring her gold-complexion,
So to the soveraigntie of God above
With Fortunes night deminish not thy love.

But thinke misfortune is the flayle of grace,
The clarifying Fornace of thy soule
Wherewith God strips away thy chaffe-disgrace
And make thee pure mettle with such controwlle
T'is honorable manhood to obey thy God,
Bee't in his mercie, or his justice-rod.

Wilt thou submit thy mind to Fortunes Impostures?
Faithlesse of Gods benignitie and care?
Ah, rather doe disdaine her bales and bostes
As Crocadyle-deceipts, and crabbed ware:
And to thy God alonly plie thy hest
For such is pure dutie, and the pure best.

So doing, better boones then Fortunes baubles
Will Spaniell-like attend upon thy merite,
Good death, and after death th' immoovables
Of glorie, and fame, and an in-heavened spirite
In everlasting Jubilie and blesse
Far more then heart can thinke, or tongue expresse.

So shalt thou swim away in Vertues flood,
A happy burthen to a happy Maine,
Gods flowerie-eternitie garlanding thy good
And his embrace lullabying all thy paine:
Oh, happy thou when such adoption
Shall faire befall thy tribulation.

When all thy Crosses shall appeare in heaven
As ever-memorable Annalles of thy merit,
Or as bright Trophees to thy Vertue geven
The Saintes of glorie all applauding it;
When God with his serenest countenance
Shall ever bright be-boone thy sufferance.

Then wilt thou nere repent the of thy woe
But wish it had been twentie folde as much
For Jesus sake, who even in earth beloe
Can frollick thy incinder with his tutch
And faire be-heaven thy bones in drearie grave,
Above the glorie and ease that Caesars have.

And sooth to say, wherin hath Jesus err'd
Or not deserv'd such suffrance at thy hands?
Hath he not alwayes in his life preferr'd
Disgrace and dole to rid thee out of bands?
Oh, was not he the man, the Lambe that dy'd
To shew thee heaven in woe, and not in pride?

He was Almightie to have sav'd his head
If he had pleas'd; But for a president
Of passive Fortitude, and Lamblihead
He condiscended unto woe and torment,
And did erect the Crosse a capitall
Ensigne of honour, and renowne to all.

And since, what Saint did ever amount to blesse
That hath not more or lesse been crucifi'd?
Either with selfe zeale-doome, or by oppresse
Of tyrannie by villaines hands inflicted?
The seed that must to flowery growth redound
Must first lie dead, and withered in the ground.

Besides; oh what a monstrous thing it is
To live delirious under a thorney head;
Thy God to daigne to die for thy amisse
And thou repine to be dishonored
For Vertues sake; Oh fond ingratitude
So to permit thy Sence thy Soule delude.

If so the flesh, the world, the devill could doe
More spight unto thy state then God can quayle,
Or that his grace could not transcend thy woe
Be-cheering it with happie countervayle,
Then might'st thou with a just repine detest
To be by any fate of flesh opprest.

But God both can and will relieve his Plaintife
That doth with just petitions invoke him,
Selfe-lovelesse and repinelesse at the griefe
That from his soveraigne doome betides him;
The loving mothers teat is not so prone
Unto her Babe, as Christ to his deere one.

So shew'd his Pellican content to die
To give thee life, the gore adowne his breast
To wash away thy sin-impuritie:
His colour was thy everlasting rest,
His bitter wounds the ever open gates
Of grace, and glorie to thy rankest fates.

Loe, he thy paines-appease, true charter-warrant
Of glorie after gall:  The bonnie bright
Whose crimson rayes can hire propulse and daunt
The dreadest Goblin of thy darkest night:
Be thou the man of duty to thy dole,
The rest let him alone for to controle.

Inshrine thy Patience in his Passion
Thy Hope, thy Constance in his after-boones
To his entire irradiation
Submit thy night-shades and decreased Moones,
He is the Sonne of Right, and will appay
All vertues anguor with a Hollie-day.

Behold his image yonder on the Crosse,
See how he droops and dies and damnes Revenge
Yeelding his whole humanity in grosse
A pendular reproch on woodden henge .
Yea even his Deitie he doth deject
Unto a seeming shadowed defect.

Be not a beast of desperation,
A moodie torment, traitor to thy selfe,
T'is grosse conceipt and imperfection
To ground thy Barke upon thy owne shores shelfe:
Suffice it that extrinsecall aggriefe
Abound, sans that thou give it home-reliefe.

Thinke that thy sinnes are greater then thy woe,
Thy worldly griefes but Graces happy rescue
From greater helles that to thy sowle doe growe;
Or haply to enforce to manly vertue
Thy youngling hestes of grace; or to containe
Thy present good from prooving after vaine.

Time and thy grave did first salute thy Nature
Even in her infancie and cradle-Rightes
Inviting it to dustie Deaths defeature,
And therewithall thy Fortunes fierce despights:
Death is the gulfe of all:  and then I say
Thou art as good as Caesar in his clay.

Death is the drearie Dad, and dust the Dame
Of all flesh-frailtie, woe or majestie;
All sinkes to earth that surgeth from the same,
Nature and Fortune must together die:
Only faire Vertue skales eternitie
Above earths all-abating tyrannie.

Read in my front the ruine of my nature
And therwithall perpend thy miseries,
I doe confesse I were a cursed creature
Were not Gods grace above m' infirmities,
So, thou in Faith to after-retribution
Asswage thy woe and tribulation.

Die in thy Saviours wounds, and there an end,
There pricke the Period of thy moody wander,
To him thy woe, and the revenge commend
As to thy soveraigne Liege and high commander.
And thinke no errour whispereth in thine eare
For what I say is true, and that I sweare.

So said:  the teares of zeale trill'd downe his checks
Attesting truth unto his Catechisme,
When (loe) eftsoons unto the Crucifixe
Crooching adowne, he said; Oh sacred Chrisme,
Oh sweet asswage of infelicitie
Witnesse that what I say is veritie.

Say, art not thou the image of our Lord
The true Character of his sufferance?
Was he not crown'd, deluded, and abhord
Misvail'd, and scourg'd with vile mis-valiance?
Oh, was not he the holie Paschall lambe
That di'd repinelesse for the sinnes of man?

Sweet (Jesu) give me leave to kisse thy figure
With thankfull zeale to thy benignitie,
And let me pray thee by so great disfigure
T' inspire this man of woe thy passive-glorie:
That not all like a beast tree droop and die
Heart-lesse and impious in his miserie.

Defend thy image from so black a blurre
With thy in-shine; Let not temptation foyle
So much thy Passions price all like a Curre,
But as thou art a President of toyle
To after-glorie; so let thy grace fore-goe
And faire accompanie this man of woe.

Without thy grace my speech is all but aire
And barraine Marle; it batteneth not the ground
It is thy grace that foysoneth all affaire
That holie grace which floweth from thy wound;
I speak in flesh, invested in my bryer;
There is no flame at all but from thy fire.

Make it appeare how good a God thou art
And how thy woundes were not in vaine inflicted,
What Nature cannot doe, let Grace impart
To strengthen and inhearten the afflicted,
Shew that thy mercie is above the bound
Of Fortunes topsie-turvie to confound.

Let not the fancies of a loftie stile
And vaine mundanitie transport thy creature
As though alonlie Fortunes lowre or smile
Were soveraigne Glories gift and dread defeature,
As though thy power were worne out of date
And could no longer signiorize our fate.

Disperse the terrors of his moodie night
That he may see thy shone Hierusalem
And in this holie Cittie Sions light
Abide, and faithfullie beleeve this Theame
Happie they all that suffer for our Lord,
For he to such his heaven will affoord.

With that he kist the Crucifixe againe
And with a strict imbrace therof he founded;
His Ghost amounted up to heavens domaine,
His corps lay trunke-like seeming dead confounded;
Whiles I meane while internallie infiered
Did feele the woonders of Gods grace inspired.

Then gan I credit Catechrysius
And hatefullie abhor my former mood,
Base Melancholie, black and impious
That so distrayd me from eternall good:
My heart exulted, and in zeale I swore,
Now by our Lord, Ile be a beast no more.

I will no longer grudge at vertues toyle,
But gladly will be crucifi'd with Jesu;
No yron-fate shall heerafter foyle
My constancie unto the Christ-crosse rew:
I will accompt all dollour and mishap
More deere then sweetest Lullaby in Fortunes lap.

No longer will I wander up and downe
The desart of Revenge, and dread Dispaire,
But heer will stint me against mis-fortunes frowne
A land-man of this soyle and happy aire:
From hence I will revive to pristin blesse
Or els die heer with Jesu in distresse.

No sooner said I so, and gave consent
To Graces in-come, and our Lords attaint,
But (loe) eftsoons from heavens high regiment
Musicke resounded, and appeas'd my plaint.
It was so sweet above my feeble frayltie
That downe I fell as one content to die.

Dying in so sweet sollace and in-heaven
I was no more the man of earthly nature,
Gods Graces holie rellish, and sweet leaven
Had altered my flesh to a new transfigure:
Figure of zeale to be in Jesus armes,
Condition to endure ten thousand harmes.

But God who saw and wrought this alteration,
Faire interdicted Death his date-most deed,
And sent an Angell from his holie region
To cheere my frailty up to future speed:
Whome when I saw and smelt his heavenly hue,
It did eftsoons my death to life renue.

He then out-stepping from his silver-cloud
Made toward me with a reverend peacefull pace,
And as he march'd ever and anon he bow'd
Unto the Crucifixe was there in place.
Whereto at lest downe humbled, he kist it,
And gave it me in hand, and thus inspeecht it.

Hold heer (Elizian-man) thy Saviours image
The typick Trophee of thy soules redeeme,
Be it thy lifes eternall Appennage
Thy hearts deere daintie, and thy choice-esteeme,
Inconscience it within thy in-most hest
For "In hoc signo vinces" is exprest.

Be it thy Standard against all affrount,
Under her shade tire out Mis-fortunes weather,
Be true to it, and make a sure account
Heaven is thine owne as sure as God lives ever:
God lives for ever to protest and pay
His Champion with a joy-eternall day.

And hether I come, sent from his Tabernacle
To certifie so much to thy poor frailtie,
And heer have brought thee heaven-inchanted tackle
To warfare flesh and bloods calamitie:
Loe I thy Angell of protection
Against whatsoere foule and fell affection.

With that he arm'd my Head with Reasons Helme,
The Crest was Vigilance; the Plumes were twaine
Temprance against faire Fortunes overwhelme,
And Patience against her angrie vaine:
The Gorget was Content, and either Pouldron
Was humble Prayer and Meditation.

The Corslet, it was Zeale of Gods true honour,
The Back peece, Hope to after-retribution,
The Gauntlets, tackles to Charities endevour,
The Vant-braces, Faiths decke and decoration,
The Martch, he did injoyne was Penitence,
The Combate, Courage against all sinnes offence.

Then gave he me in hand a Shield of Golde
All over-graven with Christes Passion,
And round about in-amill'd I might behold
Death-heads, and latter Resurrection
To heaven or hell:  The Crosse in th' other hand
Was all my Spear against whatsoere withstand.

Thus arm'd; the Angell bright againe in-clouded
Upbounded from mine eye toward heaven away
Leaving the place with spiced sweetes suffused
And all bestrew'd with Crownes and wreathes of Bay,
Spelles and demonstrances of future glorie
To well atchived warre and victorie.

I then there all alone un-Angelled,
Began to view and glee me in mine Armes
Woondring to see me so be-Championed
Against th' assaults of sin and Fortunes harmes;
And thus I said:  Oh shone Hierusalem
What woonders are in thee to well-fare men.

I blesse the God and Spirit of thy bounds,
I blesse thy Concord and thy Monarchie,
I blesse the dreams that tril from Jesus wounds
Into thy seven-fold Cesternes; and from thee
Are vitally imparted unto all
That live within thy Rampier and thy wall.

Loe, I with Graces furniture faire arm'd
Within thy confines, humbly beseech thee
Admit my Souldiour-ship as yet un-harm'd
With any adverse warres, into thy cittie:
And daigne me there a stand against all evill,
The flesh, the world, and fierce insulting devill.

In thee I see how much I went amisse
Ranging the desart of mundanitie,
And in thy wisedom nowe I learne this
That not in Fortunes false malignitie
But in sinnes guilt, and grimme captivitie
Is only wracke, and blacke calamitie.

I see my misse in thy faire Phisnomie,
My way-lesse errours in thy unitie,
I feele the ardure of true Chivalrie
Inspired in me from thy Nobility:
Heere line I then the remnant of my age
Under thy haughty woorth and Patronage.

So said; a silver bell from high resounded
Sommoning that Region round about to sacring,
When (loe) eftsoons Catechrysius un-swounded
His soules returne did give him new reviving,
Oh sacred sommon, sweet enchanting peale
That so from heaven to earth couldst soules repeale.

His face like Phaebus in his Noony-shine
Daunted my feeble eye at prime aspect,
His soules regresse had made it so divine,
Bebrightning cleane away all fraile defect,
As had not zeale inheartened my frayltie,
I had not had the power t' abide such glorie.

He then up-rising toward me advanced
And kist the Crucifix I had in hand,
So done; he said:  Sweet Jesu be thou thanked
That hest vouchsav'd my prayer to understand;
Confirme him in thy grace for now and ever
That from thy love and laud he varie never.

With that he imbrac'd me with a frount of glee
And call'd me brother, and Coparcener
Of Christes Domaine, and therewithall he gave me
A golden ring; the poesie was Persever:
So, foorth we went unto the Temple-ward
Twas sacring time, and musick much we heard.

Along as up the Rocke we footed it
He did congratulate my shone in armor
And did expound unto me every whit
How I might use it to Gods greatest honor
And then concluded:  O Elizian
See what it is to be a Christian.

Wouldst thou have thought in thy mundanitie
That ever Fortunes heel had had the might
To spurne th'  away to such an after-glorie?
Or that thy sorie journeyment all night
Would ever have brought thee to sweet repose
As now thou feelest farre above thy woes?

The ball out-banded from the court of game,
Fals not of force into the durtie kennell,
But marke, and often shalt thou see the same
Flie in at Pallace-windowes, and there revell
Upon the royal Mattes, and rich embroader;
Such grace of God hath blowne thy frailtie hether.

Not all the flush of thy fore-frollicke state,
The worship of thy birth, thy rich revenue,
Thy countries high applaud and estimate
And all that faire Elyzium can yeeld youe,
Is of the worth to countervayle thys hap
Fallen from faire Fortune into Graces lap.

Say that Eliza is the Lords deere daintie,
The Phaenix of true Principalitie
The feast of peace and sweet saturitie
Unto the people of her Emperie;
Say that she is both Grace and Natures none-such
I bend my knee; and say and thinke as much.

For I have heard the woonders of her name
Our coasts is full of great Elizabeth,
Yea, all the world is fertill of the same;
Sweet Name that all mens pennes and tongues inableth.
Sweet Sound that all mens sences lullabieth,
Sweet Marle that all the world imbatteneth.

But such her glories are but eare-delightes
And lip-sweets only to our far awayes,
For we are no Elizium-bred wightes
Nor have we any such like merrie dayes;
Wee have our joyes in another kind
Ghostly innated in our soule and mind.

Whom angour of mishap or guilt of ill
Drives to dispaire, and selfe misdoomfull deed,
Loe, heer th' unfraught of his woe-loaden will
And reverend riches to his ghostly need;
Loe, heer his Arke against the inundation
Of Sinne and Fortunes funerall-temptation.

Heer (loe) the amitie of men and Angels
In uniforme adore of one true God,
Heer Peace and Pietie togither dwels,
Heer Scisme, and Discords cloven-foot nere trod,
Heer sacred Ceremonies are in ure
As wedlocke-rightes twixt Faith and Soules insure.

Heer chantes the Nightingale incessant praise
And prayer unto the Orient sonne of God,
Heer Grace our uncouth Adamisme allayes
Stepping her golden foot wher guilt erst trod,
Heer Sacrifice and Sacrificer both
Gods blesse and good acceptance still fore-goeth

He would have told me more to this pourport,
But that his up-hill pace out-tyr'd his speech
And now were also neer the Temple port
Where everie sight I saw was so heavenly rich
As had he uttered more mine eies delight
Had quite undone mine eares to doe him right.

Ah, now I want the Muse of Salomon
To tell you a Temple-tale, a tale of truth
All of the Architect and frame of Sion:
To tell you of her age and of her youth
And of her reverend raigne and regiment
And how Doblessa rues her high achivement.

The grownd was Faith; the meane worke Charitie
The Top, a Hopefull apprehension
Of heavens attaine:  All was of Unitie
A sollid mettle heawn out of Christ his Passion:
Yea Christ himselfe was fundamentall stone,
And all the Sowder was Devotion.

There shin'd the Rubie and the Chrysolite
The sparkling Diamond, and the Emeraud greene,
Each Saphyre in their severall delight:
There was the happie Jacent to be seene
The Topasse, Onyx, and many a faire gem,
Corrall, Amber, and Aggats were trash among them.

Which such bright rough-cast over all incrusted
T'was heaven to see what Rain-bowe rayes it yeelded
Whiles everie gem ambitiously contended
T' out-stare each others starry neighbourhed:
It was ynough t' illumine all the world
But for the mysts that false Doblessa hurld.

Roses and flowers of all cullored kindes,
The Marie-bush and pleasant Eglantine
The Honey-suckle in her twisted twines
Immixt with Yvie, and the Grape-full Vine,
Did all growe up that starrie spanglement
Spousing her splendure with their spiced sent.

Below these heaven-a mounting swavities
Grew over all the Temple-greene beside
Sweet Gilliflowers and Primroses
The Pink, and Gerisole (the Suns deer bride;)
The Molie, Violet, and the pleasant Dasie
Balme, Margerum, and sweet Coast-marie.

There grew the loftie Cedar, and the Pine,
The peacefull Oliffe, and the martiall Firre
The verdant Laurell in her shadie-shine,
The patient Palme, and penitentiall Mirrhe:
The Elme, the Poplar, and the Cipresse tree
And all trees els that pleasant are to see.

All kinds of fruits were there perpetuall
The Date, the Almond, and the sauceful Citron,
The Fig, the Orange, and Pomegranet royall,
The Quince, the Abricock, and the musk-Mellon
The Plumme, the Cherie, and the pleasant Peare
The Filberd and the Mulberie grew there.

Amid these trees, these fruits, these flowerie sweetes
Ran in a Maze-like wile a chrystall streame
Of heavenly Nectar; in whose sweet floods and fleets
Swom sholes of fishes, everie fishes gleame
Brighter than Tytan in his Southerne stage:
This streame was strong against prime guiltes enrage.

Her silent murmur was so musicall
As it dissolv'd the Rock to sand and gravell
Whereby it might more in especiall
With multiplicitie of eares incell
Her musick-sweets:  yea even the earth beloe
Did open, and eruct her bowels therto.

There sate the Mavis and the Nightingale
Carrolling their Layes unto th' eternall spring
The little Larke high hovering over all:
There every bird did either play or sing,
The Parrat for his plumes did most excell
But Phoenix bare away the triumph-bell.

There was no savage shape, no Laruall hue
No Bug, no bale, no horrid Owlerie
But all that there was, was sincere and true,
Her sweets, her spendure, and her musick-glee;
Yea even the Angels of Divinitie
Were of that league, and Confraternitie.

Whiles thus with sacred sollace I survayd
The Temples outward majestie, and heaven,
So long on that imparadize I stayd
That now the Temple clocke did strike eleven:
It was the instant time of high Oblation
We might no longer linger, but begon.

Eftsoons we did so pace-fullie advance
That to the Temple-dore we straight arriv'd,
Ore which was graven, "Una, Militans"
A stile from Unitie, and Warre deriv'd;
The gate was all of pure beaten golde,
The Portch a sunnie Zodiacke to behold.

Then in we entred, (oh, we entred in)
Please God I never may come foorth againe:
What saw I there?  Oh my eyes were dimme
My soule, my substance all was poore and vaine
To comprehend so high magnificence;
Yet what I can I will you it dispence.

I Spanield after Catechrysius foot
A happie shaddow to good a substance:
All like a flower as yet but in thee root
Tending to future growth, and shone advance:
The Temple-porter was a reverend man
And was t' admit in no Elizian.

Then ask'd he Catechrysius who I was
Who answered a Catecumen hee,
With that he greeted me, and let me passe,
Such was my entrie to felicitie:
The Temple gates were fower and this was it
Which none but Europe-spirits might admit.

There on my knees my heart was full of fire,
Fire of the grace of God (deere grace of God)
Which strong bemettled my zeales aspire
To view the glorie of that shone abod:
It was a Pigion from the Temple-top
Which all that frame, and glorie did up prop.

A Pigeon whiter then the whitest Pigion
Solie subsistant of his owne pure Esse,
His Posse was Sanctification,
And Graces bounteous liberalitie;
What Jesus erst had planted with his blood
This Pigion gave it grace-full livelihood.

The beames which issued from his brightsome brist
Were such as none but Sion ever saw
Nor ever could Doblessas dreary mist
Indarken, or resemble, or withdraw;
Love, Peace, and Magnanimity in good
Patience, and Prudence above all flesh and blood.

Justice, and Temperance, and Benignitie,
Zeale, and internall Consolation,
Pittie, and hopefull Longanimitie,
Obedience, and brotherly Correction,
Devotion, and Mortification
And firme affiance in our Lords Salvation.

Such were the Pigions rayes from Temple-top
Which like a heaven of light illumin'd all,
It being therto a more secure upprop
Then any lime and stone, or brasen wall:
Oh Sion, Sion happie Cittie thow
So holie-ghosted against all overthrow.

Then looking downe unto the residue
I might discerne a reverend ministerie
Of men and Angels chanting unto Jesu
Incessant Hymnes of praise and Jubilie;
The high Sacrificator at the Altar
Victiming with holie rites his maker.

What shall I say of all the majestie
Of all the reverend rites and ceremonies
The rich adorne, the heavenly melodie,
The luster, and the precious swavities
That there I saw, felt, heard, and understood?
Oh, they transcended farr poore flesh and blood.

For, what the goodnesse and the power of God
In their immensitie could jointlie doe
Was there in force sans bound or period,
His grace and glory both did tend therto:
The meanest object there unto my sence
Was more then all the worlds magnificence.

There saw I sacred imposition
Of hands; and grace abundantly imparted,
Chrisme, and autentique Sanctification
And Exorcisme of such as were possessed:
Their credence and their language was alike
All Babell-Biblers they did dead dislike.

There was no scambling for the Ghospels bread
But what a publike Unitie dilivred
The same a prompt Credulitie received;
Their humblenesse was so beholie-ghosted
As Pride had not the power to entice
The wisest of them all to a new device.

Casting my eye aside, I might discrie
Selected troopes of people from the rest
Dooming themselves with great austeritie
Both men and women in discullored vest;
They were the people of vowes, and high aspire
Endu'd with Graces more especiall fire.

On no hand could I cast my liquorish eie
From heavenlie miracles and mysteries;
Some school'd their Pupils fraile infirmitie
Dispencing them Gods sacramentall graces,
Some rais'd the dead, and some expulst the devill,
Yet nought could make Doblessa see her evill.

How manie Sionits of choise esteeme
Brave men of woonders have beene sent from thence
To teach Doblessa (Errors dreary Queene)
Their Temples sanctimonie and innocence?
How many worthies have dispenst their blood
To doe th' unkind Doblessa so much good.

But she, oh she accursed Sorceresse
Would never yet beleeve, nor gree their grace
But still persisteth in her wretchednesse
Warfaring with bloody broile this happy place;
Yea, had she might according to her malice
Sion had been a ruine long ere this.

She was a Witch, and Queen of all the Desert
From Babell-mount unto the pit of Hell,
She forc'd nor God, nor any good desert,
She could doe any thing save doing well:
Her law was Libertie, her lust was Pride
And all good awe and order she defi'd.

Erst ere this Temple was established
She had no being at all above the earth
But ever lay in deepest hell abyssed;
Why did not God confound her in her birth?
Oh, t'was because his Temple might attaine
Through her assaults to be more soveraigne.

Gods Lambe was now both bred and dead out-right
To ransome all the world from sinnes inthrall,
And to secure it in more happie plight
Had built this Sanctuarie sacramentall:
It shin'd so shone unto Gentilitie
That it began to see, and gree her glorie.

And as the merrie river to the Maine
Or the in-ayred stone downe to his Center
Fleets and descends as to their due domaine,
So it to Sion confluently bent her:
Yea, had this hag not been so timely bred
The world had all ere this been Sioned.

For she could quaintly maske in Sions guize
And sucke out venym from the Flower of life,
And so retayle it with her subtilties
For purest honey:  Such was her deed of drife;
Her wolvish nature in a lamblie hue
Shee could disguize, and seeme of Sions crue.

Like Ensignes she oppos'd to Sions Ensignes,
Like her presence of grace, and Gods high honor,
Like Grapes she did contend grew up her Vines,
And as good Gold as Sions seem'd her Coppor;
It was but seeming so, not so indeed,
Her seeming-flower was a very weed.

For why, the spirit which she did pretend
Was not autentique from the holy Ghost,
On no authority she did depend
Nor had she certaine being in any coast;
Her owne behest she did Idolatrize,
And Hydra-like renu'd her Fallacies.

She had no Altar, nor no Sacrament
No Ceremonie, nor Oblation,
Her school was Cavill, and truthlesse babblement
Riot her Raigne, her end damnation;
This was the haggard whoore of Babylon
Whose cup invenym'd all that drunke thereon.

And this was she which now this holie-day
Whiles all the Temple was in deep devotions
And high adore of Christs nativity
Came with her barbarous Babellonians
To bid it battell, and assault the place;
But (oh the foole) she came against Gods grace.

She came with peace-full Oliffe in her hand
Pretending mutuall honour of that feast:
And all her rabble-rout she did command
As much in outward fayning to protest,
But underneath their plausible attire
They all bare balles of venym and wild-fire.

She was more craftie then Gentilitie
Which thought of yore with massacre to quell
The propagation of Sionrie:
For well she wist that Sion was as a bell
And Persecution but as a clapper
That made her silver-sound more far to scatter.

Shee therfore to beguile with friendlie seeming
Came thus addrest; and privily intempled
Her speciall Bout-fieux to prepare her comming
With seeds and weeds of jealosie and falshed:
Meane while she stood without the Temple gate
Protesting zeale and dutie to her state.

But God whose spirit ever Argus-ey'd
The weale of Sion as th' apple of his eye,
Saw from his high enthrone, and did deride
The Harlots complot; and did by and by
Inspire his Templers pregnant jealosie
And valure against her slie hostilitie.

Efts might you heare a battle-bell peale out
Religious Larums over all the Region
And see a solempne confluence about
The high Sacrificators holie Oblation:
Each one was on his knees for Confirmation
In grace against so vile prevarication.

Amongst the rest was I a Catecumen
As yet ungrac'd with his alhallowed hand,
Until such time as Catechrysius then
Presented me, and gave him t' understand
My Name, my Nation, and Conversion
And how I crav'd to be a man of sign.

Then tooke he mee by the hand, and did applaud
Such my Primitiae toward so high resolve,
Blessing my on-gate fram Doblessas fraud
And sanctifying me with a holie salve;
He wept for joy that an Elizian
Would come to be his Metropolitan.

And for he saw me absolutely arm'd
Alreadie to the warres; he said no more
But only blest me, and with his breath becharm'd
My Constancie against the Babell-whore:
And for I was an English-Ilander
He prickt me downe under Saint Georges banner.

Then Catechrysius tooke me by the hand
And led me to my Cullors; and as we went
He briefly told me and gave me t' understand
How all Doblessas dorrs I might prevent,
And then concluded.  Oh, that Eliza were
A Sionite to day to see this geere.

By this Doblessa seeing all her guile
Detected and Alarum'd over all,
Was in a pelting chase, and gan revile
The name of Sion, and to scale the wall:
Loe, thus began the holie warres of Sion
Against the rampant Hagg and whoore of Babylon.

Then might you see whole Legions of Angels
Discend adowne in amitie of warre
To Sion, against Doblessa and her devels:
The warre was like as when proud Lucifar
Tumulting all the Court of heaven was throwne
He, and his complices to hell adowne.

Eftsoones the high Sacrificator seeing
The up-shot brunt of all Doblessas broyle
Came personally himselfe unto the bickering
To cheere his men of warre in all their toyle:
And thus bespake them from the holie Tower,
His speech and gest was full of grace and power.

Oh men of Sion, happy Machabies,
Whom Temples honor in your soules ingrafted
Highlie demeanes to Gods benignities;
Dismay not at the number of the dead
But thinking who he is for whom you fight
Redouble your prowesse, and your manly might.

You combate for the high Hierusalem
A region of Peace and Immortalitie
Fore-spell'd, and promist only unto them
That straine in her behalfe their up-shot constancie:
Nor feare yee any woundes or any dying
So good a death tends to a better reviving.

See, how confusedly Doblessa fightes
Without all discipline or good array,
Her Camp abandon'd to intestine spightes
And everie one contending to beare sway;
Their owne disorder will confound their power
The frame of Discord dures not an hower.

On then like gallants of the holy-Ghost
Fighting in Unity, and for a Crowne
Against a rascall and tumultuous Host;
Nere let the strumpet pull the Temple downe,
No, never shall the strumpet pull it downe
For God is God, and it is all his owne.

Rememorate the glorie of her Age,
And of her Raigne, and of her pristin Warres
How often hath she quell'd Doblessas rage
Attempting to assayle her holy Rampiars?
Hath she not been a Nurse unto yee all
A Shelter, and a feast most festivall?

Besides, hath God not promised of yore
That hell shall nere prevaile against her gates?
And hath not he vouchsav'd to die therfore
Establishing her glorie against all Fates
Yea, is not he her fundamentall stone
Her daylie Sacrifice and high Oblation?

What will ye more?  Oh Sionities no more,
But to your tacklings stand like men of honor
Like men of Sion, one to twentie score
Such Babell-hildings; mortifie their rancor
With constant and imperious resistance,
God and his Angels are in your assistance.

So said, he blest them, and dismist them all;
Who straight in troops unto the Rampiers ran
And happie he could get upon the wall:
There then a second skirmish fresh began,
Doblessa still persisting in th' assault
And Sion fierce supplying all default.

It was a heaven to see the good array
And unitie of Sion in this conflict,
How everie one was willing to obey
His Officers encharge though nere so strict,
The holy-Ghost was in and over all
Cheering their combate with his cordiall.

Meane while the high Sacrificator, he
Attended to the Temples Sacrifice
Offring it up for peace and victorie,
He chanted Hymnes, and Laudes, and Letanies,
And in Pontificall Procession
He and his Clergie made their intercession.

Some in their studdies commented the Text
Conferring place with place, and with traditions
Ov'ring the fraud wherwith Doblessa vext
Their Ghospels peace; some others in her stations
Boldlie adventured their lives to tell
The Babellonians of all her hell.

Some they perswaded, those were verie few
And of those few not one of ten persisted,
But still as fear and fraud their frailties drew
They started backe againe like men agasted:
Oh, what it is to be too secular,
It was self-love that all their weale did marre.

And of such brave adventurous Sionites
As Doblessa could by hooke or crooke intrap
They di'd the death, and suffred all the spights
That rage and rascall wit could jointly rap,
Subject they were to dreadfull persecution
By publick edict, and false brethrens treason.

What sacring, and what sacramenting was
In Sion all this while for Sions safetie
Was more then all the strength of stone and brasse
In her defence; God not in enmitie
But for her greater glories sake permitting
Doblessa thus to bid it bale and bickring.

Contrarie-wise, Doblessa ru'd the fate
Of her attempt; her mood began to quaile,
For God now seeing the prefixed date
Of Sions patience in her last avayle
Did on the suddaine so enlarge his grace
That th' whoore retir'd, and gave backe apace.

And then to shew her latest trumperie
(Now that our Lords permission faild her powre)
She gan with Magick-spels and sorcerie
Faire Virgin-like to falsifie her figure,
Therby to seeme as gracious as she could
To Sions eie; such was her guize of ould.

But when she saw that all her fallaces
And fierce assaults to Sion were in vaine,
And feeling now withall Gods heavie furies
Showre down upon her like a floud of raine,
Shee could no longer bide the brunt of Sion
But backe she reel'd to hell and Babylon.

And fearing least her daunted enterprize
Might haplie alien her peoples hearts
From her obeyance:  She so bewitcht their eies
With mystes of falsed glory, and high deserts,
That they besotted in their disaster
Betooke them to their heeles, and fled with her.

And as they fled, Oh, marke their vanitie,
They did so cravin-cockadoodle it
As though they had run away victorie
And left faire Sion in her dying fit,
Such hoopes, such clangor, and such symphonie
And all was but Doblessas pollicie.

She nusled them in so proud Peacockrie
To th' end they might not see their damned state,
But still persever as the Bumble-Bee
Repine-lesse in their dung, and desperate:
Oh, cursed and unkind captivitie
To be so willing drudge to Falsitie.

Yet some whome Sions more especiall beame
Had bright appaid to see her dignitie
Fled from the witch, as wak'd from out a dreame
Of Faery, and Chimericall Imagerie,
Such Sion intromitted in her gate
Applauding them with deere congratulate.

Contrarie-wise whatsoever Sionite
Doblessa could with slight or fight enthrall
She led away into eternall night
Blind-folding their eyes to make them fall
Into a thousand helles and offendickles,
Thrise fatall lapse from Grace into such pickles.

Nor was the holie Temple thus acquitted
For ever after from her hostill trouble
But still as Hydra-like she had renued
One head upon the others stump and stubble
She came againe, and made a braggard-show,
But still she bare away the Palsie-blow.

Such being the ancient league of God to Sion
Necessiting her Peace to such temptation
And yet withall protesting his protection
Therto:  against all hell and Babylon:
What greater safetie then so good assurance?
The word of God is of eternall durance.

Thus Sion triumpht over moode and tumult
Cabaging her Peace in perfect unitie
Against whatsoever future-Scismes insult:
And seeing now no more hostilitie
But all the Regions cleere:  She fell a rifling
Doblessas spoyles, the Honors of her fighting.

And in her warlike wardrop there she plast them
Amongst a world of former pillages
And spoyles of Babell:  high Hierusalem
Sisterlie applauding such her victories,
And thinking long the day to honor her
With her embrace, and everlasting cheere.

Then (to conclude) the high Sacrificator
Came foorth in place, and blest the Combatants,
Bidding them give to God th' eternall honour
Of so high hap:  And therupon he descants
A large discourse of Gods protection
How prompt he alwayes was to succour Sion.

So done:  he efts dismist the multitude
T' attend unto the buriall of their brethren
Whom signs honor had that day endu'd
With zeale to die for her like valiant men;
Their graves resented Immortalitie
Sweeter then all the sents of Arabie.

And for it was a speciall victorie
Atchiv'd even on the very walles of Sion,
There was proclaim'd a generall Jubilie
To be sollemniz'd throughout all the region
The Octave after; in feast-full reference
And thanks to God for such his high defence.

In which meane while the holie Sacrificer
Progressing the Province, visited his flocke
And with his pastorall care, and Crozier
Out-weeded and retrenched from the stocke
Whatsoever venym weed, or graft of Error
Doblessa had sowne, or set with guile, or terror.

Namelie; he did especially dispose
To carefull cure the wownded Combatantes;
And such as brunt of warre had slaine; all those
H' Incallendred to Fames rememberance:
Lastly, he did repaire and fortifie
Each ruine against all future enemie.

By this the Octave-day of victorie
Was come, when (loe) the Temples silver belles
Safely out-pealed to festivitie;
Then might you see both Sionits and Angels
Troop to the Temple-ward like swarmes of Bees
And hand in hand downe falling on their knees.

You may imagine, no; you are to fraile
To comprehend so high magnificence:
There sawe I heaven and earth in joynt-entayle
Homaging to Gods benevolence
A world of praise and Alleluyaes,
Hallowing the aire with so thankfull praise.

I saw the high Procession passe along
In intermixed rankes of men and Angels
The holie-Ghoste over-hov'ring their song:
There sounded Music-instruments and Belles;
Yea, birds consorted with their warbling lays,
T' enter-common also in this dayes praise.

Along as thus we march'd about the Temple
In rich array, in sweetes, and mellodie,
A suddaine Zephire-gale blew from the steeple
Solliciting our eyes supernally,
And what it was; Oh, there I bend my knee
It was a Virgin in bright majestie.

The skie did open, and adowne discended
Upon a silver-cloud this sollempne sight
A Mayden-Nymph most shone-satellited
With all the Angell-court of heaven out-right
She was invested in as Orient splender
As Gods omnipotence and Love could lend her.

She was the Genium of high Hierusalem
The Patronesse of Sion, and the Advocate
Of grace and mercie unto mortall men;
Her coming was for to congratulate
This triumph-day and gratefull Jubilie
Of Sion unto God for victorie.

Which such her presence stinted our Procession
Rapting us all into a sweet admire
Of so shone figure; her irradiation
Flaming our spirits with a mightie fire
Of Seraphin-affection and zeale
To die in vision of her sweet reveale.

I may not be so impious and prophane
As to compare this heavenly spectacle
To any earthlie pomp or jollie vaine
Of Caesars Bride:  whose pride is but a cackle
Or as a shadow in comparison
Of so triumphant and most virgin vision.

There on the Temple-pinacle she rested
Gracing, and doubling our sollempne feast
With her in-heaven; And all the while she attested
Both with her glee-full countenance and gest
Gods everlasting love unto the place
And eke her owne against Doblessas race.

At last she gan to wave and wend about
Our sollempne multitude with all her traine
Suspending us in a delitious doubt
Of some sweet sequell:  Our doubt was not in vaine,
For on the suddaine hovering over us
She showr'd downe Roses most odoriferous.

Roses both red and white adowne see shewred
From out her virgin-lap, so sweet resenting
As all our sences into sent adjured:
So done; she vanisht, leaving us a scambling
For such her sweets; I for my part was one
That never would give over till all had done.

And still I call'd upon Elizas name
Thinking those Roses hers, that figure hers,
Untill such time as Catechrysius came
And pointing me unto his faithfull teares
(Teares of the zeale he bare t' Elizas name)
He told me No; she was an Esterne Dame.

With that I case mine eye into the East
Where yet I might discerne the region bright,
Much like as when the Sunne downe in the West
Newly discended, leaves us of his light
Some Rubie-Rellickes after:  Oh, deer God
Why made she not with us more long abod.

Rapt with these woonders, wrapt in virgin-Roses
And faire be-Sioned against misfortune,
I suddainly was gone from these reposes
Sollicited with an especiall importune
Of home-ward zeale and of Elizas name,
Wherto I bend, and say; God blesse the same.
