Arthegal dealeth Right betwixt
Two Brethren that do strive:
Saves Terpine from the Gallow-Tree,
And doth from Death reprieve.

Whoso upon himself will take the Skill
True Justice unto People to divide,
Had need have mighty Hands, for to fulfil
That which he doth with righteous Doom decide,
And for to maister Wrong and puissant Pride.
For vain it is to deem of things aright,
And makes Wrong-doers Justice to deride,
Unless it be perform'd with dreadless Might;
For Pow'r is the right Hand of Justice truely hight.

Therefore whilom to Knights of great Emprise,
The Charge of Justice given was in Trust,
That they might execute her Judgments wise,
And with their Might beat down licentious Lust,
Which proudly did impugn her Sentence just:
Whereof no braver Precedent this day
Remains on Earth, preserv'd from iron Rust
Of rude Oblivion, and long Time's Decay,
Than this of Arthegal, which here we have to say.

Who having lately left that lovely Pair,
Enlinked fast in Wedlock's loyal Bond,
Bold Marinel with Florimel the fair,
With whom great Feast and goodly Glee he found,
Departed from the Castle of the Strond,
To follow his Adventure's first Intent,
Which long ago he taken had in hond:
Ne Wight with him for his Assistance went,
But that great iron Groom, his Guard and Government.

With whom as he did pass by the Sea-shore,
He chaunc'd to come, whereas two comely Squires,
Both Brethren, whom one Womb together bore,
But stirred up with different Desires,
Together strove, and kindled wrathful Fires:
And them beside two seemly Damsels stood,
By all means seeking to assuage their Ires,
Now with fair Words, but Words did little good;
Now with sharp Threats, but Threats the more increas'd their Mood.

And there before them stood a Coffer strong,
Fast bound on every side with iron Bands,
But seeming to have suffer'd mickle Wrong,
Either by being wreckt upon the Sands,
Or being carry'd far from foreign Lands:
Seem'd that for it these Squires at odds did fall,
And bent against themselves their cruel Hands.
But evermore those Damsels did forestal
Their furious Encounter, and their Fierceness pall.

But firmly f1x'd they were, with Dint of Sword,
And Battel's doubtful Proof, their Rights to try,
Ne other end their Fury would afford,
But what to them Fortune would justify.
So stood they both in readiness thereby,
To join the Combat with cruel Intent;
When Arthegal, arriving happily,
Did stay awhile their greedy Bickerment,
Till he had questioned the Cause of their Dissent.

To whom the elder did this Answer frame;
Then weet ye, Sir, that we two Brethren be,
To whom our Sire, Milesio by Name,
Did equally bequeath his Lands in Fee,
Two Islands, which ye there before you see
Not far in Sea; of which the one appears
But like a little Mount of small degree;
Yet was as great and wide e'er many Years,
As that same other Isle, that greater Breadth now bears.

But Tract of Time, that all things doth decay,
And this devouring Sea that nought doth spare,
The most part of my Land hath wash'd away,
And thrown it up unto my Brother's Share:
So his encreased, but mine did empair.
Before which time I lov'd, as was my Lot,
That further Maid, hight Philtera the fair,
With whom a goodly Dow'r I should have got,
And should have joined been to her in Wedlock's-Knot.

Then did my younger Brother Amidas,
Love that same other Damsel, Lucy bright,
To whom but little Dow'r allotted was:
Her Vertue was the Dow'r, that did delight;
What better Dow'r can to a Dame behight?
But now when Philtra saw my Lands decay,
And former Livel'od fail, she left me quite,
And to my Brother did elope straightway:
Who taking her from me, his own Love left astray.

She, seeing then her self forsaken so,
Through dolorous Despair, which she conceiv'd,
Into the Sea her self did headlong throw,
Thinking to have her Grief by Death bereav'd:
But see how much her Purpose was deceiv'd.
Whilst thus, amidst the Billows beating of her,
'Twixt Life and Death, long to and fro she weav'd,
She chaunc'd unwares to light upon this Coffer,
Which to her in that Danger Hope of Life did offer.

The wretched Maid, that earst desir'd to die,
When-as the Pain of Death she tasted had,
And but half seen his ugly Visnomy,
'Gan to repent that she had been so mad
For any Death to change Life, though most bad:
And catching hold of this Sea-beaten Chest,
The lucky Pilot of her Passage sad,
After long tossing in the Seas distress'd,
Her weary Bark at last upon mine Isle did rest.

Where I by chaunce then wandring on the Shore,
Did her espy, and through my good Endeavour,
From dreadful Mouth of Death, which threatned sore
Her to have swallow'd up, did help to save her.
She then in Recompence of that great Favour,
Which I on her bestow'd, bestow'd on me
The Portion of that Good which Fortune gave her,
Together with herself in Dowry free:
Both goodly Portions; but of both, the better she.

Yet in this Coffer, which she with her brought,
Great Treasure sithence we did find contain'd;
Which as our own we took, and so it thought.
But this same other Damsel since hath feign'd,
That to herself that Treasure appertain'd;
And that she did transport the same by Sea,
To bring it to her Husband new ordain'd,
But suffer'd cruel Shipwreck by the way:
But whether it be so or no, I cannot say.

But whether it indeed be so or no,
This do I say, that what so Good or Ill
Or God or Fortune unto me did throw
(Not wronging any other by my Will)
I hold mine own, and so will hold it still.
And though my Land he first did win away,
And then my Love (though now it little skill)
Yet my good Luck he shall not likewise prey;
But I will it defend, whilst ever that I may.

So having said, the younger did ensue;
Full true it is, what-so about our Land
My Brother here declared hath to you:
But not for it this Odds 'twixt us doth stand,
But for this Treasure thrown upon his Strand;
Which well I prove, as shall appear by Trial,
To be this Maid's, with whom I fastned Hand,
Known by good Marks, and perfect good Espial:
Therefore it ought be render'd her without Denial.

When they thus ended had, the Knight began;
Certes, your Strife were easy to accord,
Would ye remit it to some righteous Man.
Unto your self, said they, we give our word,
To bide what Judgment ye shall us afford.
Then for Assurance to my Doom to stand,
Under my foot let each lay down his Sword,
And then you shall my Sentence understand:
So each of them laid down his Sword out of his Hand.

Then Arthegal thus to the younger said;
Now tell me, Amidas, if that ye may,
Your Brother's Land, which the Sea hath laid
Unto your Part, and pluck'd from his away,
By what good Right do you with-hold this day?
What other Right, quoth he, should you esteem,
But that the Sea it to my Share did lay?
Your Right is good, said he, and so I deem,
That what the Sea unto you sent, your own should seem.

Then turning to the elder, thus he said;
Now, Bracidas, let this likewise be shown;
Your Brother's Treasure, which from him is stray'd,
Being the Dowry of his Wife well known,
By, what night do you claim to be your own?
What other Right, quoth he, should you esteem,
But that the Sea hath it unto me thrown?
Your Right is good, said he, and so I deem,
That what the Sea unto you sent, your own should seem.

For equal Right in equal Things doth stand;
For what the mighty Sea hath once possess'd,
And plucked quite from all Possessors Hand,
Whether by Raze of Waves, that never rest,
Or else by Wreck, that Wretches hath distress'd,
He may dispose by his imperial Might,
As Thing at random left, to whom he list.
So Amidas, the Land was yours first hight,
And so the Treasure yours is, Bracidas, by Right.

When he his Sentence thus pronounced had,
Both Amidas and Philtra were displeas'd:
But Bracidas and Lucy were right glad,
And on the Treasure by that Judgment seiz'd.
So was their Discord by this Doom appeas'd,
And each one had his Right.  Then Arthegal,
Whenas their sharp Contention he had ceas'd,
Departed on his way, as did befal,
To follow his old Quest, the which him forth did call.

So as he travelled upon the way,
He chaunc'd to come, where happily he spy'd
A Rout of many People far away;
To whom his Course he hastily apply'd,
To weet the Cause of their Assemblance wide.
To whom when he approached near in sight
(An uncouth Sight) he plainly then descry'd
To be a Troop of Women, warlike dight,
With Weapons in their Hands, as ready for to fight.

And in the midst of them he saw a Knight,
With both his Hands behind him pinion'd hard,
And round about his Neck an Halter tight,
As ready for the Gallow-tree prepar'd:
His Face was cover'd, and his Head was bar'd,
That who he was, uneath was to descry;
And with full heavy Heart with them he far'd,
Griev'd to the Soul, and groaning inwardly,
That he of Womens hands so base a Death should die.

But they like Tyrants merciless, the more
Rejoiced at his miserable Case,
And him reviled, and reproached sore
With bitter Taunts, and Terms of vile Disgrace.
Now whenas Arthegal, arriv'd in place,
Did ask what Cause brought that Man to decay,
They round about him 'gan to swarm apace,
Meaning on him their cruel Hands to lay,
And to have wrought unwares some villanous Assay.

But he was soon aware of their ill Mind,
And drawing back, deceived their Intent;
Yet though himself did shame on Woman-kind
His mighty Hand to shend, he Talus sent
To wreck on them their Folly's Hardiment:
Who with few Souses of his yron Flail,
Dispersed all their Troop incontinent,
And sent them home to tell a piteous Tale
Of their vain Prowess, turned to their proper Bale.

But that same wretched Man, ordain'd to die,
They left behind them, glad to be so quit;
Him Talus took out of Perplexity;
And Horrour of foul Death for Knight unfit,
Who more than Loss of Life ydreaded it:
And him restoring unto living Light,
So brought unto his Lord, where he did sit,
Beholding all that womanish weak Fight;
Whom soon as he beheld, he knew, and thus behight:

Sir Terpine, hapless Man, what make you here?
Or have you lost your self, and your Discretion,
That ever in this wretched Case ye were?
Or have ye yielded you to proud Oppression
Of Women's Pow'r, that boast of Men's Subjection?
Or else, what other deadly dismal Day
Is fal'n on you, by Heaven's hard Direction,
That ye were run so fondly far astray,
As for to lead your self unto your own Decay?

Much was the Man confounded in his Mind,
Partly with Shame, and partly with Dismay,
That all astonish'd he himself did find,
And little had for his Excuse to say,
But only thus; Most hapless well ye may
Me justly term, that to this Shame am brought,
And made the Scorn of Knighthood this same day:
But who can 'scape, what his own Fate hath wrought?
The Work of Heaven's Will surpasseth human Thought.

Right true:  but faulty Men use oftentimes
To attribute their folly unto Fate,
And lay on Heav'n the Guilt of their own Crimes.
But tell, Sir Terpine, ne let you amate
Your Misery, how fell ye in this State.
Then sith ye needs, quoth he, will know my Shame,
And all the Ill which chaunc'd to me of late,
I shortly will to you rehearse the same,
In hope ye will not turn Misfortune to my Blame.

Being desirous (as all Knights are wont)
Through hard Adventures Deeds of Arms to try,
And after Fame and Honour for to hunt,
I heard Report that far abroad did fly,
That a proud Amazon did late defy
All the brave Knights that hold of Maidenhead,
And unto them wrought all the Villany
That she could forge in her malicious Head,
Which some hath put to Shame, and many done be dead.

The Cause, they say, of this her cruel Hate,
Is for the sake of Bellodant the bold,
To whom she bore most fervent Love of late,
And wooed him by all the ways she could:
But when she saw at last, that he ne would
For ought or nought be won unto her Will,
She turn'd her Love to Hatred manifold,
And for his sake, vow'd to do all the Ill
Which she could do to Knights; which now she doth fulfill.

For all those Knights, the which by Force or Guile
She doth subdue, she foully doth intreat:
First, she doth them of warlike Arms despoil,
And clothe in Womens Weeds; and then with Threat
Doth them compel to work, to earn their Meat,
To spin, to card, to sew, to wash, to wring;
Ne doth she give them other thing to eat
But Bread and Water, or like feeble thing,
Them to disable from Revenge adventuring.

But if through stout Disdain of manly Mind,
Any her proud Observance will withstand,
Upon that Gibbet, which is there behind,
She causeth them be hang'd up out of hand;
In which Condition I right now did stand.
For being overcome by her in Fight,
And put to that base Service of her Band,
I rather chose to die in Life's Despight,
Than lead that shameful Life, unworthy of a Knight.

How hight that Amazon (said Arthegal)?
And where, and how far hence does she abide?
Her Name, quoth he, they Radigund do call,
A Princess of great Pow'r, and greater Pride,
And Queen of Amazons, in Arms well try'd,
And sundry Battels, which she hath atchiev'd
With great Success, that her hath glorify'd,
And made her famous, more than is believ'd:
Ne would I it have ween'd, had I not late it priev'd.

Now sure, said he, and by the Faith that I
To Maidenhead and noble Knighthood owe,
I will not rest, till I her Might do try,
And venge the Shame, that she to Knights doth show.
Therefore Sir Terpine from you lightly throw
This squalid Weed, the Pattern of Despair,
And wend with me, that ye may see and know,
How Fortune will your ruin'd Name repair,
And Knights of Maidenhead, whose Praise she would empair.

With that, like one that hopeless was repriev'd
From Deathes Door, at which he lately lay,
Those yron Fetters, wherewith he was giv'd,
The Badges of Reproach, he threw away,
And nimbly did him dight to guide the way
Unto the Dwelling of that Amazone.
Which was from thence not past a Mile or tway;
A goodly City, and a mighty one,
The which of her own Name she called Radegone.

Where they arriving, by the Watchman were
Descried straight; who all the City warn'd,
How that three warlike Persons did appear,
Of which the one him seem'd a Knight all arm'd,
And th' other two well likely to have harm'd.
Eftsoons the People all to Harness ran,
And like a sort of Bees in Clusters swarm'd:
E'er long, their Queen her self, arm'd like a Man,
Came forth into the Rout, and them t' array began.

And now the Knights, being arrived near,
Did beat upon the Gates to enter in,
And at the Porter scorning them so few,
Threw many Threats, if they the Town did win,
To tear his Flesh in pieces for his Sin.
Which whenas Radigund there coming heard,
Her Heart for Rage did grate, and Teeth did arm:
She bad that straight the Gates should be unbarr'd,
And to them way to make, with Weapons well prepar'd.

Soon as the Gates were open to them set,
They pressed forward, Entrance to have made;
But in the middle way they were ymet
With a sharp Show'r of Arrows, which them stay'd,
And better bad advise, e'er they assay'd
Unknowen Peril of bold Women's Pride.
Then all that Rout upon them rudely laid,
And heaped Strokes so fast on every side,
And Arrows hail'd so thick, that they could not abide.

But Radigund her self, when she espy'd
Sir Terpine, from her direful Doom acquit,
So cruel Dole amongst her Maids divide,
T' avenge that Shame, they did on him commit;
All suddenly enflam'd with furious Fit,
Like a fell Lioness at him she flew,
And on his Head-piece him so fiercely smit,
That to the Ground him quite she overthrew,
Dismay'd so with the Stroke, that he no Colours knew.

Soon as she saw him on the Ground to grovel,
She lightly to him leap'd; and in his Neck
Her proud Foot setting, at his Head did level,
Weening at once her Wrath on him to wreak,
And his Contempt, that did her Judgment break:
As when a Bear hath seiz'd her cruel Claws
Upon the Carcass of some Beast too weak,
Proudly stands over, and awhile doth pause,
To hear the piteous Beast pleading her Plantiff Cause.

Whom whenas Arthegal, in that Distress
By chance beheld, he left the bloody Slaughter,
In which he swam, and ran to his Redress.
There her assailing fiercely fresh, he raught her
Such an huge Stroke, that it of Sense distraught her;
And had she not it warded warily,
It had depriv'd her Mother of a Daughter:
Nath'less for all the Pow'r she did apply,
It made her stagger oft, and stare with ghastly Eye.

Like to an Eagle in his kingly Pride,
Soaring thro his wide Empire of the Air,
To weather his broad Sails, by chance hath spy'd
A Goshawk, which hath seized for her share
Upon some Fowl, that should her Feast prepare;
With dreadful Force he flies at her bylive,
That with his Souse, which none enduren dare,
Her from the Quarrey he away doth drive,
And from her griping Pounce the greedy Prey doth rive.

But soon as she her Sense recover'd had,
She fiercely towards him her self 'gan dight,
Through vengeful Wrath and 'sdainful Pride half mad;
For never had she suffer'd such Despight:
But e'er she could join hand with him to fight,
Her warlike Maids about her flock'd so fast,
That they disparted them, maugre their Might,
And with their Troops did far asunder cast:
But 'mongst the rest the Fight did until Evening last.

And every while that mighty yron Man,
With his strange Weapon, never wont in War,
Them sorely vex'd, and cours'd, and over-ran,
And broke their Bows, and did their Shooting marr,
That none of all the many once did dare
Him to assault, nor once approach him nigh;
But like a sort of Sheep dispersed far,
For Dread of their devouring Enemy,
Through all the Fields and Vallies did before him fly.

But when-as Day's fair shiny Beam, yclouded
With fearful Shadows of deformed Night,
Warn'd Man and Beast in quiet Rest be shrouded,
Bold Radigund (with Sound of Trump on hight)
Caus'd all her People to surcease from Fight;
And gathering them unto her City's Gate,
Made them all enter in before her sight,
And all the wounded, and the weak in State,
To be conveyed in, e'er she would once retreat.

When thus the Field was voided all away,
And all things quieted, the Elfin Knight
(Weary of Toil and Travel of that Day)
Caus'd his Pavilion to be richly pight
Before the City-gate, in open sight;
Where he himself did rest in Safety,
Together with Sir Terpine all that Night:
But Talus us'd in times of Jeopardy
To keep a nightly Watch for dread of Treachery.

But Radigund, full of heart-gnawing Grief,
For the Rebuke which she sustain'd that day,
Could take no Rest, ne would receive Relief;
But tossed in her troublous Mind, what way
She mote revenge that Blot, which on her lay.
There she resolv'd her self in single Fight
To try her Fortune, and his Force assay,
Rather than see her People spoiled quite,
As she had seen that day a disaventrous Sight.

She called forth to her a trusty Maid,
Whom she thought fittest for that Business,
Her Name was Clarind', and thus to her said;
Go Damsel quickly, do thy self address
To do the Message, which I shall express:
Go thou unto that Stranger Fairy Knight,
Who yesterday drove us to such Distress;
Tell, that to-morrow I with him will fight,
And try in equal Field, whether hath greater Might.

But these Conditions do to him propound,
That if I vanquish him, he should obey
My Law, and ever to my Lore be bound;
And so will I, if me he vanquish may,
Whatever he shall like to do or say:
Go straight, and take with thee, to witness it,
Six of thy Fellows of the best Array,
And bear with you both Wine and Juncates fit,
And bid him eat; henceforth he oft shall hungry sit.

The Damsel straight obey'd and putting all
In readiness, forth to the Town-gate went;
Where sounding loud a Trumpet from the Wall,
Unto those warlike Knights she warning sent.
Then Talus, forth issuing from the Tent,
Unto the Wall his way did fearless take,
To weeten what that Trumpet's Sounding meant:
Where that same Damsel loudly him bespake,
And shew'd, that with his Lord she would Emparlance make.

So he them straight conducted to his Lord;
Who, as he could, them goodly well did greet,
Till they had told their Message word by word:
Which he accepting well, as he could weet,
Them fairly entertain'd with Court'sies meet,
And gave them Gifts and things of dear Delight;
So back again they homeward turn'd their Feet.
But Arthegal himself to Rest did dight,
That he mote fresher be against the next day's Fight.

