'Pealing, from Jove, to Nature's Bar,
Bold Alteration pleads
Large Evidence:  but Nature soon
Her righteous Doom arreads.

Ah!  whither dost thou now, thou greater Muse,
Me from these Woods and pleasing Forests bring?
And my frail Spirit (that doth oft refuse
This too high Flight, unfit for her weak Wing)
Lift up aloft, to tell of Heaven's King
(Thy sovereign Sire) his fortunate Success,
And Victory in bigger Notes to sing,
Which he obtain'd against that Titaness,
That him of Heaven's Empire sought to dispossess.

Yet sith I needs must follow thy Behest,
Do thou my weaker Wit with Skill inspire,
Fit for this turn; and in my feeble Breast
Kindle fresh Sparks of that immortal Fire,
Which learned Minds inflameth with Desire
Of heavenly things:  for who but thou alone,
That art yborn of Heaven and heavenly Sire,
Can tell things doen in Heaven so long ygone;
So far past Memory of Man that may be known?

Now at the time that was before agreed,
The Gods assembled all on Arlo Hill;
As well those that are sprung of heavenly Seed,
As those that all the other World do fill,
And rule both Sea and Land unto their will:
Only th' infernal Powers might not appear;
As well for Horrour of their Count'nance ill,
As for th' unruly Fiends which they did fear;
Yet Pluto and Proserpina were present there.

And thither also come all other Creatures,
Whatever Life or Motion do retain,
According to their sundry kinds of Features;
That Arlo scarcely could them all contain;
So full they filled every Hill and Plain:
And had not Nature's Sergeant (that is, Order)
Them well disposed by his busy Pain,
And raunged far abroad in every Border,
They would have caused much Confusion and Disorder.

Then forth issu'd (great Goddess) great Dame Nature,
With goodly Port and gracious Majesty;
Being far greater and more tall of Stature
Than any of the Gods or Powers on high:
Yet certes by her Face and Phisnomy,
Whether she Man or Woman inly were,
That could not any Creature well descry:
For, with a Veil that wimpled every where,
Her Head and Face was hid, that mote to none appear.

That some do say was so by Skill deviz'd,
To hide the Terrour of her uncouth Hue
From mortal Eyes that should be sore agriz'd:
For that her Face did like a Lion shew,
That Eye of Wight could not endure to view:
But others tell that it so beauteous was,
And round about such Beams of Splendor threw
That it the Sun a thousand times did pass,
Ne could be seen, but like an Image in a Glass.

That well may seemen true:  for well I ween
That this same day, when she on Arlo sat,
Her Garment was so bright and wondrous sheen,
That my frail Wit cannot devize to what
It to compare, nor find like Stuff to that,
As those three sacred Saints, though else most wise,
Yet on Mount Thabor quite their Wits forgat,
When they their glorious Lord in strange Disguise
Transfigur'd saw; his Garments so did daze their Eyes.

In a fair Plain upon an equal Hill,
She placed was in a Pavilion;
Not such as Craftsmen by their idle Skill
Are wont for Princes States to fashion:
But th' Earth her self of her own Motion,
Out of her fruitful Bosom made to grow
Most dainty Trees; that, shooting up anon,
Did seem to bow their blooming Heads full low,
For Homage unto her, and like a Throne did show.

So hard it is for any living Wight,
All her Array and Vestiments to tell,
That old Dan Geffrey (in whose gentle Spright
The pure Well-head of Poesy did dwell)
In his Fowls Parley durst not with it mell,
But it transfer'd to Alane, who he thought
Had in his Plaint of Kinds describ'd it well:
Which who will read set forth so as it ought,
Go seek he out that Alane where he may be sought.

And all the Earth far underneath her Feet
Was dight with Flow'rs, that voluntary grew
Out of the Ground, and sent forth Odours sweet;
Ten thousand more, of sundry Scent and Hue,
That might delight the Smell, or please the View,
The which the Nymphs, from all the Brooks-thereby
Had gathered, they at her Foot-stool threw;
That richer seem'd than any Tapestry,
That Princes Bow'rs adorn with painted Imagery.

And Mole himself, to honour her the more,
Did deck himself in freshest fair Attire;
And his high Head, that seemeth always hoar
With harden'd Frosts of former Winter's Ire,
He with an oaken Girlond now did tire,
As if the Love of some new Nymph late seen,
Had in him kindled youthful fresh Desire,
And made him change his gray Attire to green:
Ah!  gentle Mole, such Joyance hath thee well beseen!

Was never so great Joyance since the day,
That all the Gods whilom assembled were
On Haemus' Hill in their divine Array,
To celebrate the solemn bridale Chear
'Twixt Peleeus, and Dame Thetis pointed there
Where Phoebus' self, that God of Poets hight,
They say did sing the spousal Hymn full clear,
That all the Gods were ravish'd with Delight
Of his celestial Song, and Musick's wondrous Might.

This Great Grandmother of all Creatures bred,
Great Nature, ever young, yet full of eld,
Still moving, yet unmoved from her Sted,
Unseen of any, yet of all beheld,
Thus sitting in her Throne, as I have teld,
Before her came Dame Mutability;
And being low before her Presence feld,
With meek Obeysance and Humility,
Thus 'gan her plantiff Plea, with Words to amplify:

To thee, O greatest Goddess!  only great,
An humble Suppliant loe!  I lowly fly,
Seeking for Right, which I of thee entreat
Who Right to all dost deal indifferently,
Damning all Wrong and tortious Injury,
Which any of thy Creatures do to other
(Oppressing them with Pow'r unequally)
Sith of them all thou art the equal Mother,
And knittest each to each, as Brother unto Brother.

To thee therefore of this same Jove I 'plain,
And of his Fellow-Gods that fain to be,
That challenge to themselves the whole World's Reign;
Of which the greatest part is due to me,
And Heaven it self by Heritage in Fee:
For Heaven and Earth I both alike do deem,
Sith Heaven and Earth are both alike to thee;
And Gods no more than Men thou dost esteem:
For even the Gods to thee, as Men to Gods do seem.

Then weigh, O sovereign Goddess, by what Right
These Gods do claim the World's whole Sovereignty;
And that is only due unto thy Might,
Arrogate to themselves ambitiously:
As for the Gods own Principality,
Which Jove usurps unjustly, that to be
My Heritage, Jove's self cannot deny,
From my great Grandsire Titan, unto me
Deriv'd by due Descent, as is well known to thee.

Yet maugre Jove, and all his Gods beside,
I do possess the World's most Regiment;
As if ye please it into Parts divide,
And every Part's Inholders to convent,
Shall to your Eyes appear incontinent.
And first, the Earth (great Mother of us all)
That only seems unmov'd and permanent,
And unto Mutability not thrall;
Yet is she chang'd in part, and eke in general.

For all that from her springs, and is ybred,
However fair it flourish for a time,
Yet see we soon decay; and, being dead,
To turn again unto their earthly Slime:
Yet out of their Decay and mortal Crime,
We daily see new Creatures to arise;
And of their Winter spring another Prime,
Unlike in Form, and chang'd by strange Disguise:
So turn they still about, and change in restless wise.

As for her Tenants, that is, Man and Beasts,
The Beasts we daily see massacred die,
As Thralls and Vassals unto Mens Beheasts:
And Men themselves do change continually,
From Youth to Eld, from Wealth to Poverty,
From Good to Bad, from Bad to Worst of all.
Ne do their Bodies only flit and fly;
But eke their Minds (which they immortal call)
Still change and vary Thoughts as new Occasions fall.

Ne is the Water in more constant case;
Whether those same on high, or these below:
For th' Ocean moveth still, from place to place;
And every River still doth ebb and flow:
Ne any Lake, that seems most still and slow,
Ne Pool so small, that can his Smoothness hold,
When any Wind doth under Heaven blow;
With which the Clouds are also toss'd and roll'd;
Now like great Hills, and straight, like Sluices, them unfold.

So likewise are all watry living Wights
Still toss'd and turned with continual Change,
Never abiding in their stedfast Plights.
The Fish, still floating, do at random range,
And never rest; but evermore exchange
Their dwelling Places, as the Streams them carry:
Ne have the watry Fowls a certain Grange
Wherein to rest, ne in one stead do tarry,
But flitting still do fly, and still their Places vary.

Next is the Air:  which who feels not by Sense
(For of all Sense it is the middle Mean)
To flit still?  and with subtle Influence
Of his thin Spirit, all Creatures to maintain
In State of Life?  O weak Life!  that does lean
On thing so tickle as th' unsteady Air;
Which every hour is chang'd, and alter'd clean
With every Blast that bloweth foul or fair:
The fair doth it prolong; the foul doth it impair.

Therein the Changes infinite behold,
Which to her Creatures even minute chaunce:
Now boiling hot; straight friezing deadly cold:
Now fair Sun-shine, that makes all skip and daunce;
Straight bitter Storms and baleful Countenaunce,
That makes them all to shiver and to shake:
Rain, Hail, and Snow to pay them sad Penaunce,
And dreadful Thunder-Claps (that make them quake)
With Flames and flashing Lights that thousand Changes make.

Last is the Fire:  which though it live for ever,
Ne can be quenched quite; yet every day
We see his Parts, so soon as they do sever,
To lose their Heat, and shortly to decay;
So makes himself his own consuming Prey.
Ne any living Creatures doth he breed:
But all, that are of others bred, doth slay;
And, with their Death, his cruel Life doth feed;
Nought leaving, but their barren Ashes, without Seed.

Thus all these four (the which the Ground-work be
Of all the World, and of all living Wights)
To thousand sorts of change we subject see:
Yet are they chang'd (by other wondrous Slights)
Into themselves, and lose their native Mights;
The Fire to Air, and th' Air to Water sheer,
And Water into Earth; yet Water fights
With Fire, and Air with Earth approaching near:
Yet all are in one Body, and as one appear.

So in them all reigns Mutability;
However these, that Gods themselves do call,
Of them do claim the Rule and Sovereignty:
As Vesta, of the Fire Ethereal;
Vulcan, of this, with us so usual;
Ops, of the Earth; and Juno, of the Air;
Neptune, of Seas; and Nymphs, of Rivers all.
For all those Rivers to me subject are:
And all the rest, which they usurp, be all my Share.

Which to approver true, as I have told,
Vouchsafe, O Goddess!  to thy Presence call
The rest which do the World in Being hold;
As Times and Seasons of the Year that fall:
Of all the which, demand in general;
Or judge thy self, by Verdict of thine Eye,
Whether to me they are not subject all.
Nature did yield thereto; and by and by
Bade Order call them all before her Majesty.

So forth issu'd the Seasons of the Year;
First, lusty Spring, all dight in Leaves of Flow'rs
That freshly budded, and new Bloosms did bear
(In which a thousand Birds had built their Bow'rs,
That sweetly sung, to call forth Paramours:)
And in his Hand a Javelin he did bear,
And on his Head (as fit for warlike Stours)
A gilt engraven Morion he did wear;
That as some did him love, so others did him fear.

Then came the jolly Summer, being dight
In a thin silken Cassock colour'd green,
That was unlined all, to be more light:
And on his Head a Girlond well beseen
He wore, from which as he had chauffed been
The Sweat did drop; and in his Hand he bore
A Bow and Shafts, as he in Forest green
Had hunted late the Libbard or the Boar,
And now would bathe his Limbs, with Labour heated sore.

Then came the Autumn all in Yellow clad,
As though he joyed in his plenteous Store,
Laden with Fruits that made him laugh, full glad
That he had banish'd Hunger, which to-fore
Had by the Belly oft him pinched sore.
Upon his Head a Wreath, that was enroll'd
With Ears of Corn of every sort, he bore:
And in his Hand a Sickle he did hold,
To reap the ripen'd Fruits, the which the Earth had yold.

Lastly, came Winter clothed all in Frize,
Chattering his Teeth for Cold that did him chill,
Whilst on his hoary Beard his Breath did freeze;
And the dull Drops, that from his purpled Bill,
As from a Limbeck did adown distill.
In his right Hand a tipped Staff he had,
With which his feeble Steps he stayed still:
For he was faint with Cold, and weak with Eld;
That scarce his loosed limbs he able was to weld.

These, marching softly, thus in order went,
And after them, the Months all riding came;
First, sturdy March, with Brows full sternly bent,
And armed strongly, rode upon a Ram,
The same which over Hellepontus swam:
Yet in his Hand a Spade he also hent,
And in a Bag all sorts of Seeds ysame,
Which on the Earth he strowed as he went,
And fill'd her Womb with fruitful Hope of Nourishment.

Next, came fresh April full of Lustyhead,
And wanton as a Kid, whose Horn new buds;
Upon a Bull be rode, the same which led
Europa floating through th' Argolick Floods:
His Horns were gilden all with golden Studs,
And garnished with Garlands, goodly dight
Of all the fairest Flow'rs and freshest Buds
Which th' Earth brings forth, and wet he seem'd in sight
With Waves, through which he waded for his Love's Delight.

Then came fair May, the fairest Maid on ground,
Deck'd all with Dainties of her Season's Pride,
And throwing Flow'rs out of her Lap around:
Upon two Brethrens Shoulders she did ride,
The Twins of Leda; which on either side
Supported her like to their sovereign Queen.
Lord!  how all Creatures laugh'd, when her they spy'd,
And leap'd and daunc'd, as they had ravish'd been!
And Cupid's self about her flutter'd all in green.

And after her, came jolly June, array'd
All in green Leaves, as he a Player were;
Yet in his time, he wrought as well as play'd,
That by his Plough-yrons mote right well appear:
Upon a Crab he rode, that him did bear
With crooked crawling Steps an uncouth Pace,
And backward yode, as Bargemen wont to fare,
Bending their Force contrary to their Face,
Like that ungracious Crew, which feigns demurest Grace.

Then came hot July boiling like to Fire,
That all his Garments he had cast away;
Upon a Lion raging yet with Ire
He boldly rode, and made him to obey:
It was the Beast that whylome did forray
Th' Nemaean Forest, till th' Amphytrionide
Him slew, and with his Hide did him array:
Behind his Back a Sithe, and by his Side
Under his Belt he bore a Sickle circling wide.

The sixth was August, being rich array'd
In Garment all of Gold down to the ground;
Yet rode he not, but led a lovely Maid
Forth by the Lilly Hand, the which was crown'd
With Ears of Corn, and full her Hand was found:
That was the righteous Virgin, which of old
Liv'd here on Earth, and plenty made abound;
But, after Wrong was lov'd, and Justice sold,
She left th' unrighteous World, and was to Heaven extol'd.

Next him, September marched eke on foot;
Yet was he heavy laden with the Spoil
Of Harvest's Riches, which he made his Boot,
And him enrich'd with Bounty of the Soil:
In his one hand, as fit for Harvest's Toil,
He held a Knife-hook; and in th' other hand
A pair of Weights, with which he did assoil
Both more and less, where it in doubt did stand,
And equal gave to each, as Justice duly scann'd.

Then came October full of merry Glee
For, yet his Noul was totty of the Must,
Which he was treading in the Wine-fats see,
And of the joyous Oil, whose gentle Gust
Made him so frolick and so full of Lust;
Upon a dreadful Scorpion he did ride,
The same which by Diana's doom unjust
Slew great Orion; and eke by his Side
He had his Ploughing-Share, and Coulter ready ty'd.

Next was November, he full gross and fat,
As fed with Lard, and that right well might seem;
For he had been a fatting Hogs of late,
That yet his Brows with Sweat did reek and steem,
And yet the Season was full sharp and breem;
In planting eke he took no small delight:
Whereon he rode, not easy was to deem;
For it a dreadful Centaur was in sight,
The Seed of Saturn and fair Nais, Chiron hight.

And after him, came next the chill December:
Yet he through merry Feasting which he made,
And great Bonfires, did not the Cold remember;
His Saviour's Birth his mind so much did glad:
Upon a shaggy-bearded Goat he rode,
The same wherewith Dan Jove in tender Years,
They say, was nourisht by th' Idaen Maid;
And in his hand a broad deep Bowl he bears;
Of which, he freely drinks an Health to all his Peers.

Then came old January, wrapped well
In many Weeds to keep the cold away:
Yet did he quake and quiver like to quell,
And blow his Nails to warm them if he may;
For, they were numb'd with holding all the day
An Hatchet keen, with which he felled Wood,
And from the Trees did lop the needless Spray;
Upon an huge great Earth-pot Stean he stood;
From whose wide Mouth, there flowed forth the Roman Flood.

And lastly, came cold February, sitting
In an old Waggon, for he could not ride;
Drawn of two Fishes for the Season fitting,
Which through the Flood before did softly slide
And swim away:  yet had he by his side
His Plough and Harness fit to till the Ground,
And Tools to prune the Trees, before the pride
Of hasting Prime did make than burgein round:
So past the twelve Months forth, and their due places found.

And after these, there came the Day and Night,
Riding together both with equal pace,
Th' one on a Palfrey black, the other white;
But Night had cover'd her uncomely Face
With a black Veil, and held in hand a Mace,
On top whereof the Moon and Stars were pight,
And Sleep and Darkness round about did trace:
But Day did bear, upon his Scepter's hight,
The goodly Sun, encompast all with Beames bright.

Then came the Hours, fair Daughters of high Jove,
And timely Night, the which were all endu'd
With wondrous Beauty fit to kindle Love;
But they were Virgins all, and Love eschew'd,
That might forslack the charge to them fore-shew'd,
By mighty Jove; who did them Porters make
Of Heaven's Gate (whence all the Gods issu'd)
Which they did daily watch, and nightly wake
By even turns, ne ever did their Charge forsake.

And after all came Life, and lastly Death:
Death with most grim and griesly Visage seen,
Yet is he nought but parting of the Breath;
Ne ought to see, but like a Shade to ween,
Unbodied, unsoul'd, unheard, unseen.
But Life was like a fair young lusty Boy,
Such as they feign Dan Cupid to have been,
Full of delightful Health and lively Joy,
Deckt all with Flowers, and Wings of Gold fit to employ.

When these were past, thus 'gan the Titaness;
Lo!  mighty Mother, now be Judg and say,
Whether in all thy Creatures more or less
CHANGE doth not reign and bear the greatest sway;
For, who sees not, that Time on all doth prey?
But Times do change and move continually;
So nothing here long standeth in one stay:
Wherefore, this lower World who can deny
But to be subject still to Mutability?

Then thus 'gan Jove; Right true it is, that these
And all things else that under Heaven dwell
Are chaung'd of Time, who doth them all disseize
Of Being:  But, who is it (to me tell)
That Time himself doth move and still compel
To keep his course?  Is not that namely we
Which pour that Vertue from our heavenly Cell,
That moves them all, and makes them changed be?
So them we Gods do rule, and in them also thee.

To whom, thus Mutability:  The things
Which we see not how they are mov'd and sway'd,
Ye may attribute to your selves as Kings,
And say they by your secret Power are made:
But what we see not, who shall us persuade?
But were they so as ye them feign to be,
Mov'd by your Might, and order'd by your Aid;
Yet what if I can prove, that even ye
Your selves are likewise chang'd, and subject unto me?

And first, concerning her that is the first;
Even you, fair Cynthia, whom so much ye make
Jove's dearest Darling, the was bred and nurst
On Cynthus' Hill, whence she her Name did take;
Then is she mortal born, how-so ye crake:
Besides, her Face and Countenance every day
We changed see, and sundry Forms partake, 
Now horn'd, now round, now bright, now brown and grey:

So that as changeful as the Moon Men use to say.
Next, Mercury, who though he less appear
To change his Hue, and always seem as one;
Yet, he his Course doth alter every Year,
And is of late far out of order gone:
So Venus eke, that goodly Paragon,
Though fair all Night, yet is she dark all Day;
And Phoebus' self, who lightsome is alone,
Yet is he oft eclipsed by the way,
And fills the darkned World with Terror and Dismay.

Now Mars, that valiant Man, is changed most:
For he some times so far runs out of square,
That he his way doth seem quite to have lost,
And clean without his usual Sphere to fare;
That even these Star-gazers stonisht are
At sight thereof, and damn their lying Books:
So likewise, grim Sir Saturn oft doth spare
His stern Aspect, and calm his crabbed Looks:
So many turning Cranks these have, so many Crooks.

But you, Dan Jove, that only constant are,
And King of all the rest, as ye do claim,
Are you not subject eke to this Misfare?
Then let me ask you this withouten blame,
Where were ye born?  some say in Crete by Name,
Others in Thebes, and others other-where;
But wheresoever they comment the same,
They all consent that ye begotten were,
And born here in this World, ne other can appear.

Then are ye mortal born, and thrall to me,
Unless the Kingdom of the Sky ye make
Immortal, and unchangeable to be;
Besides, that Power and Vertue which ye spake,
That ye here work, doth many Changes take,
And your own Natures change:  for, each of you
That Vertue have, or this or that to make,
Is checkt and changed from his Nature true,
By other's Opposition or obliquid View.

Besides, the sundry Motions of your Spheres,
So sundry ways and fashions as Clerks feign,
Some in short space, and some in longer Years;
What is the same but Alteration plain?
Only the starry Sky doth still remain:
Yet do the Stars and Signs therein still move,
And even it self is mov'd, as Wizards fain.
But all that moveth, doth Mutation love:
Therefore both you and them to me I subject prove.

Then since within this wide great Universe
Nothing doth firm and permanent appear,
But all things tost and turned by transverse:
What then should lett, but I aloft should rear
My Trophy, and from all the Triumph bear?
Now judg then (O thou greatest Goddess true!)
According as thy self dost see and bear,
And unto me addoom that is my Due;
That is the Rule of all, all being rul'd by you.

So having ended, silence long ensu'd,
Ne Nature to or fro spake for a space,
But with firm Eyes affixt, the ground still view'd.
Mean while, all Creatures, looking in her Face,
Expecting th' end of this so doubtful Case,
Did hang in long suspence what would ensue,
To whether side should fall the Sovereign Place.
At length, she looking up with cheerful view,
The Silence brake, and gave her Doom in Speeches few.

I well consider all that ye have said,
And find that all things Stedfastness do hate
And changed be:  yet being rightly weigh'd,
They are not changed from their first Estate,
But by their Change their Being do dilate;
And turning to themselves at length again,
Do work their own Perfection so by Fate;
Then over them Change doth not rule and reign;
But they reign over Change, and do their States Maintain.

Cease therefore, Daughter, further to aspire,
And thee content thus to be rul'd by me:
For thy Decay thou seekst by thy Desire;
But time shall come that all shall changed be,
And from thenceforth, none no more Change shall see.
So was the Titaness put down and whist,
And Jove confirm'd in his imperial See.
Then was that whole Assembly quite dismist,
And Nature's self did vanish, whither no Man wist.


THE EIGHTH CANTO, IMPERFECT.
When I bethink me on that Speech whylear
Of Mutability, and well it weigh;
Me seems, that though she all unworthy were
Of the Heav'ns Rule; yet very sooth to say,
In all things else she bears the greatest sway.
Which makes me loath this state of Life so tickle,
And Love of things so vain to cast away;
Whose flowring Pride, so fading and so fickle,
Short Time shall soon cut down with his consuming Sickle.

Then 'gin I think on that which Nature said,
Of that same time when no more Change shall be,
But stedfast Rest of all things firmly stay'd
Upon the Pillours of Eternity,
That is constraint to Mutability;
For, all that moveth, doth in Change delight:
But thence-forth all shall rest eternally
With Him that is the God of Sabbaoth hight:
O that great Sabbaoth God, graunt me that Sabbaoth's sight.
