Nay:  let the prouder Pines of Ida feare
The sudden fires of heaven:  and decline
Their yeelding tops, that dar'd the skies whilere:
And shake your sturdy trunks ye prouder Pines,
Whose swelling graines are like be gald alone,
With the deep furrowes of the thunder-stone.

Stand ye secure, ye safer shrubs below,
In humble dales, whom heavens do not despight:
Nor angry clouds conspire your overthrow,
Envying at your too-disdainfull hight.
Let high attemps dread Envy and ill tongues,
And cowardly shrink for fear of causelesse wrongs.

So wont big Okes feare winding Yvy-weed:
So soaring Egles feare the neighbour Sonne:
So golden Mazor wont suspicion breed,
Of deadly Hemlocks poysoned Potion.
So Adders shroud themselves in fayrest leaves:
So fouler Fate the fayrer thing bereaves.

Nor the low bush feares climbing Yvy-twine:
Nor lowly Bustard dreads the distant rayes,
Nor earthen Pot wont secret death to shrine:
Nor suttle Snake doth lurke in pathed wayes.
Nor baser deed dreads Envy and ill tongues,
Nor shrinks so soone for feare of causelesse wrongs.

Needs me then hope, or doth me need mis-dread:
Hope for that honor, dread that wrongfull spight:
Spight of the partie, honor of the deed,
Which wont alone on loftie objects light,
That Envy should accost my Muse and mee,
For this so rude, and recklesse Poesie.

Would she but shade her tender Brows with Bay,
That now lye bare in careless wilfull rage:
And trance her selfe in that sweet Extasey,
That rouzeth drouping thoughts of bashfull age.
(Tho now those Bays, and that aspired thought,
In carelesse rage, she sets at worse then nought).

Or would we loose her plumy pineon,
Manicled long with bonds of modest feare:
Soone might she have those Kestrels proud out gone,
Whose flightty wings are dew'd with weeter ayre;
And hopen now to shoulder from above
The Eagle from the stayrs of friendly Jove.

Or list she rather in late Tryumph reare
Eternall Trophees to some Conqueror,
Whose dead deserts slept in his Sepulcher,
And never saw, nor life, nor light before:
To lead sad Pluto captive with my song,
To grace the Triumphs he obscur'd so long.

Or scoure the rusted swords of Elvish knights,
Bathed in Pagan blood:  or sheath them new
In misty morall Types:  or tell their fights,
Who mighty Giants, or who Monsters slew.
And by some strange inchanted speare and shield,
Vanquisht their foe, and wan the doubtfull field.

May be she might in stately Stanzaes frame
Stories of Ladies, and adventurous knights:
To raise her silent and inglorious name,
Unto a reach-lesse pitch of Prayses hight:
And somewhat say, as more unworthy done,
Worthy of Brasse, and hoary Marble stone.

Then might vaine Envy waste her duller wing,
To trace the aery steps, she spiting sees:
And vainly faint in hopelesse following
The clouded paths her native drosse denies.
But now such lowly Satyres here I sing,
Not worth our Muse, not worth their envying.

Too good (if ill) to be expos'd to blame:
Too good, if worse, to shadow shamelesse vice.
Ill, if too good, not answering their name:
So good and ill in fickle censure lies.
Since in our Satyre lyes both good and ill,
And they and it, in varying readers will.

Witnesse ye Muses, how I wilfull song
These heddy rymes, withouten second care:
And wish't them worse, my guiltie thoughts emong:
The ruder Satyre should go rag'd and bare:
And show his rougher and his hairy hide:
Tho mine be smooth, and deckt in carelesse pride.

Would we but breath within a wax-bound quill,
Pans sevenfold Pipe, some plaintive Pastorall:
To teach each hollow grove, and shrubby hill,
Ech murmuring brooke, ech solitary vale
To sound our love, and to our song accord,
Wearying Eccho with one changeless word.

Or list us make two striving shepheards sing,
With costly wagers for the victorie,
Under Menalcas judge:  whiles one doth bring
A carven Bole well wrought of Beechen tree:
Praising it by the story, or the frame,
Or want of use, or skilfull makers name.

Another layeth a well-marked Lambe,
Or spotted Kid, or some more forward Steere;
And from the Payle doth praise their fertile dam:
So do they strive in doubt, in hope, in feare,
Awayting for their trustie Umpires doome,
Faulted as false, by him that's overcome.

Whether so me list my lovely thought to sing,
Come daunce ye nimble Dryads by my side:
Ye gentle wood-Nymphs come:  and with you bring
The willing Faunes that mought your musick guide.
Come Nimphs and Faunes, that haunt those shady groves,
Whiles I report my fortunes or my loves.

Or whether list me sing so personate,
My striving selfe to conquer with my verse:
Speake ye attentive swaynes that heard me late,
Needs me give grasse unto the Conquerers.
At Colins feete I throw my yeelding reed:
But let the rest win homage by their deed.

But now (ye Muses) sith your sacred hests
Profaned are by each presuming tongue:
In scornfull rage I now this silent rest,
That never field nor grove shall heare me song.
Only the serefuse rymes I here mispend,
To chide the world, that did my thoughts offend.
