PLUTO.
You ever-dreaded judges of black hell,
Grim Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadmanth,
Lords of Cocytus, Styx, and Phlegethon,
Princes of darkness, Pluto's ministers,
Know that the greatness of his present cause
Hath made ourselves in person sit as judge,
To hear th' arraignment of Malbecco's ghost.
Stand forth, thou ghastly pattern of despair,
That we may hear if thou canst justly say
Thou wert not author of thy own decay.

MALBECCO:
Infernal Jove, great prince of Tartary,
With humble reverence poor Malbecco speaks,
Still trembling with the fatal memory
Of his so late concluded tragedy.
I was (with thanks to your great bounty) bred
A wealthy lord, whilst that I liv'd on earth;
And so might have continv'd to this day,
Had not that plague of mankind fall'n on me:
For I (poor man) join'd woe unto my name
By choosing out a woman for my wife.
A wife!  a curse ordained for the world.
Fair Helena!  fair she was indeed,
But foully stain'd with inward wickedness.
I kept her bravely, and I lov'd her dear;
But that dear love did cost my life and all.
To reckon up a thousand of her pranks,
Her pride, her wasteful spending, her unkindness,
Her false dissembling, seeming sanctity.
Her scolding, pouting, prating, meddling,
And twenty hundred more of the same stamp,
Were but to heap an endless catalogue
Of what the world is plagu'd with every day.
But for the main of that I have to tell,
It chanced thus &mdash; Late in a rainy night,
A crew of gallants came unto my house,
And (will I, nill I) would forsooth be lodg'd.
I brought them in, and made them all good chear
(Such as I had in store), and lodg'd them soft.
Amongst them one, ycleped Paridell
(The falsest thief that ever trod on ground),
Robb'd me, and with him stole away my wife.
I (for I lov'd her dear) pursu'd the thief,
And after many days in travel spent,
Found her amongst a crew of satyrs wild,
Kissing and colling all the livelong night.
I spake her fair, and pray'd her to return;
But she in scorn commands me to be gone,
And glad I was to fly, to save my life.
But when I backward came unto my house,
I find it spoil'd, and all my treasure gone.
Desp'rate and mad, I ran I know not whither,
Calling and crying out on heaven and fate,
Till, seeing none to pity my distress,
I threw myself down headlong on a rock,
And so concluded all my ills at once.
Now judge you, justice benchers, if my wife
Were not the instrument to end my life.

PLUTO.
Can it be possible (you lords of hell)
Malbecco's tale of women should be true?
Is marriage now become so great a curse
That whilom was the comfort of the world?
