O you, who heare the accents of my smart
Diffus'd in rhyme, and sad disorder'd verse;
Gif ever flames of love have caught your heart,
I trust with sobbs and teares the same to pierce:
Yea, e'en in these rude rigours I rehearse,
Which I depaint with bloodie bloodless wounds,
I think despaired soules their plaints sal sterse,
And mak the haggard rocks resound sad sounds.
Yet, whereas ye the causes reids, and grounds
Off her immortal beautie and my paine,
Through which great greiffs and gente, in bothe abounds:
With humble speache speake this to her agayne&mdash;
"O iff his haples thought he stil sould sing,
Breid him not, Deathe!  that glore to thee does bring."

The fyres, the cordes, the girnes, the snaws, and dart,
Quherewith blind Love has me enflam'd and wound,
The maist fair face and the maist cruell hart
I werying wryte, and sighing dois resound:
And therewith all the beauties that rebound
From her, qha is of dames maist chaste and fair;
Qha is the object, subject, and the ground
Of my loth'd love, and undeserv'd despaire.
The sweit sour jarres, the joys, the toils, and caire,
My perjur'd othes, and my denied vowes;
Her eyes, her hands, her hyde, her hewe, and haire,
Her lippes, her cheikes, her hals, and her brent browes,
And things yet hidd, and to the world unseene,
To write with teares, and paint with plaintes I mean.

Sen spreits, thoughts, hart, you have from me heire taine,
Then these lamentyng and complayning lynes
May justlie to your mereits appertayne,
And dois belong to yow, in dewe propynes:
Bot sen my style and Muse, not weill defynes,
Bot rather darke your prayse, than right descryve;
Your just disdaynes of reasoun more enclynes
To cast my songs aside, and them to ryve,
Which now, half dead, I have return'd alyve.
And as the laymed birthe of my blunt brayne,
Whils your despyte dois them of spreits depryve;
I send them to your plesant hands agayne,
To die by them, to perish in your yre,
To burne by flames, as they were born by fyre.

Pride of my thought, and glorye of my eyes,
Lamp of my lyfe, and onlye hartes delyte,
Hope of my paynes, sweet causer of my cryes,
Chiefe work of heaven, and natures mould perfyte;
Glass of all bountye, and of beautye qhyte,
Deare saint on earthe, and heir of heavenly grace
Blest bright suborner of these theames I wryte,
Clere shyning sun, which darknes does displace;
Strong centryeis, and wyde storehouse of all grace,
Scharpe quick reviver of my slow ingyne,
Wha bothe my wills and witts reuls by thy face,
Receive this verse, which humblie I propyne:
And in them reid that which thy beautie bred,
Whose wonders hath me in my follye fed.

If great desyre thee move to see my harte
Mak in my breist a passage with the blode,
And there you sal your beautyes al adverte,
To have them maistres of my fredome made;
There sal you see how faintinglye I faide,
And how my lyght, lyke bellows full of wynd,
Dois blow furthe deadlye sighes, for laike of aide,
And draw deep grones out of a mournfull mynde.
Bot, dear Bellisa, cruell and unkynde,
Desist &mdash; for death dois such efforts efface.
Behold my verse, and in them ye sal fynd
My hart, my love, your favours, and your face;
My plaintes, my paynes, my langours, and unrest,
Your high disdaynes, to my disgrace exprest.

O most unhappie and accursed wight!
To praise her most, qho dois me most disgrace;
Or her extoll, that, by her pryde and slight,
Dois circumvene me by a snaring face.
And yet, in all my grieffs and careful race,
Plung'd in the poole of payne and whirl of woe,
By loving and by lothed verse, I presse
To eternise her prayse, who paynes me soe.
The object makes me objects all forgoe,
Which may displace, or yet resent disdaynes;
The subject subject met, as wylde as roe,
Or any hynde that in the woodes remaynes;
Doeth mak me of myself with shame rehearse,
That I am first in love, as last in verse.

With uncouthe flames, lyke never felt before,
I fele the powers of my life decay;
And passions strange, more stronger work the more,
I spy of death, bot yet of lyfe no way.
O fatall starrs!  fearse destine of that day
Qhilk gave me lyght and lyfe, to love and see
And prayse the face that dothe all grace display,
Qhilk gendreth love, and maketh lust to flee.
Yet, in that guise, what haps all happen me,
Which may requyte my love, or quenche my flame,
To thee belongs, sweet soule, (as lyes in thee
To heale and hurt) for to reveale the same.
For look in me, and you sall see appeare
Great fyres of hope, bot greater frosts of feare.

Through feare and hope, through fervent flames and frost,
Through certen dreid and maist uncerten caire,
I have the flour of age and youthe so lost,
As now my heade beginns to change his haire.
Nor yet do I foresee how tyme may paire,
Or yet the Heavens diminish may my griefe:
Nor can I see how to avoid the snare
Whairin I run with joy to my mischeife.
Nor spye I yet what comfort or releife
Can I pretend, or yet will shee extend;
Sen shee unto my doole is dumbe and deif,
And dois my plaints disdaynfullye perpend:
And with her eyes, which sprinkleth frost and fyre,
Maks reason's saule and sense almost expyre.

Gif mortal prayers move immortal powers,
Gif pittie (Love!)  may once with thee prevayle:
Empaire my paines, reviving at all houres,
Or mak thy flames us equallye assaile:
No glorious triumph nor trophe, by my baile,
Can come to thee, of my reconqueist corse,
Who never in my faithe did faute or fayle,
Nor, rebell lyke, resisted ones thy force.
Address thy chariot and thy swift qhyte hors
'Gainst her, who vaunts her murder'd men by love.
Display thy flags, subvert her but remorse,
That doth a mermaid and Medusa prove.
Spare me unterm'd, who at the first did yield,
And conquer her who last yet keeps the field.

O wakned thought of my incensed mynde!
Eternal Troyes of unconsum'd desyres:
O endles plaintes!  dispersed in the wynde;
O sobbes!  O sighes!  my smokye vapour'd fyres;
O eyes!  sent downe from heavenly thrones and spheares,
The movers first of my mad mournful Muse.
O but outwilled Love, who never tyres
To sakk the humbled hartes, and them abuse.
O trustles Hope!  deceaving bot excuse,
Who maks the feeblest hart exempt of feares:
O undecaying doole, through ruid refuse:
O fountaines two of ever flowing teares:
O undermining well, which works my 'noy,
Possess the harte that hath displaist my joy.

Bellisa keeps under her calmy grace
A thick tempestuous cloud of black disdayne,
Cold snow in hart, and kindled flames in face
Rewth in her browes, but rigour in her brayne.
Through her faire eyes and mind my hart is sane,
And pouring poyson, sprinkleth on all, quhaire
Qhilk hast dois suck, as thereby I lye slayne:
And cruel shee taks of my death no caire.
Her fretts the bryghtness of her browes empaire,
Her frosts doth pittye from her hart remove,
Her blushing yet decores her beauty maire,
Her hardned hart is rebell unto love:
Yet how much more in her dois hardness growe,
So love in me more high, and I more low.

Ten thousand wayes has Love enflam'd my harte,
And Nature griev'd me with far more agayne;
Yea, Fortoun in my losses plays her parte,
And with dissembled showes perturbs my payne.
Love doth in hardest knotts my harte entwayne,
And Nature discordes in my senses place,
And Fortoun crosses just deserts agayne,
And maks me clouds of toyes for joyes embrace.
So, Love, I plundge you drowned in disgrace;
And triple foes doth mak me perish thryse:
I see my wrak, and [     ] I embrace,
Unlov'd, I love them that my death devyse.
Thus wemen, [     ] and a chyld forlorne,
Conspire all three in killing me to scorne.

Shuld I not hate those harmfull hands, and blame
Which shott the shaftes of Love streight in that part,
That by the bloode that issued of the same
Is painte the fatall name within my harte.
Yet as the wound is sweit of that sweit dart,
That seeing them the more, I them adore,
And fayne wold kyss them, though they cause my smart,
That the revenge might equal loss and sore.
Faire hurting hand!  hyde not your hewe no more;
Whose qhyteness graces, and doth glad my vew,
And qhils in wounding me I tak for glore
To perish and to perrell by your hew:
How far shuld then my joyes and gladness growe,
Gif pittie anes suld from your fairnes flowe.

Unto the sun her eyes I do compaire,
Which doth resemble in every pointe the same:
The sunn his course has in a spheire maist faire,
The eyes within my harte dois roll the same.
Quhils he dois schyne, the dayes he dois proclame,
Her eyes my suns, the dayes ar of my light:
Quhils he declynes, obsceurit is this frame;
Quhils shee is gone, I nought dois see bot night.
The sunn the stars surmounts, and is more bright,
My dame in beautye doth all dames surpasse,
Thought therein lyke, yet differs here their might&mdash;
He schyning light gives to this worldlye masse,
Bot yet her eyes, the fairer they doe schyne,
They draw my dayes more near to their declyne.

New wonder of the world!  one mo than seaven,
Whose presence was my pryde, and absence payne;
Whiles this vyld pest in distance hath us driven,
I equal absence lose with death agayne:
For quhen by her we mortally lye slayne,
To the immortal thrones our soule dois flee:
Even so my hart, in this impatient payne,
Abandons this my corse, and flies to thee.
Death maks us leave the dearest things we see;
This pest depryves me of your heavinly face:
Death cruell is; so absence is to me:
Death, full of frayes; all joyes doth absence chase:
Yet death puts end to all our noysome caire,
But in this absence, myne returns the maire.

I tread the futstepps of a shorted gate,
Quhaire love me leades, and doole doth me convey
In couleras conforme to my estate,
With eyes in teares and hart surcharg'd with 'noy.
My second sunne, whose presence is my joy,
By absence now, maks deathe my way and path;
Yea, all my reason's senses dois destroy,
And all is fallen that I buildt by faith.
Quho then sall drye my teares quhairin I baithe?
Quho sall my harte deburden of his grief,
And tak from senses the empyre they hath?
Quho to my schaking feares sal give reliefe?
Quho, quho, but she, to whom the gods have given
To be the pryde of earth, and pompe of heaven.
