With Teares in Eyes, with drops of Blood from Hart,
With skalding sighs from inward grieved Soule,
A CONVERTITE, from Vaine LOVE now I part,
Whilst, for my Sinnes, fore Heaven I do condole.
I know, and knowledge I have lived wrong,
And willful sought mine owne Destruction long.

The Temple of my Heavenly GOD I have,
For earthly Goddesse, staine blasphemously,
Selling my selfe to Satan for his Slave,
Whilst I transgrest in vile Apostasie.
Banisht my selfe I have from Paradize,
Through thiftles Toyes of base-born Vanities.

O thou that on swift Cherubins dost ride,
Creator of all Creatures that do live,
Whose Love was such as thou for Man hast dide,
Though he thee hated, skorned, and did grieve:
Vouchsafe to view and rue my desprate state,
And me once more from sinne regenerate.

Ah looke upon me with milde Mercies eye,
Clense me with purest Water of thy Grace:
Remember not how I have gone awry,
Since I renounce to runne more such a Race,
Ah glorious Spouse, thy Beautie I desire,
For now to Heaven, nor Earth, my Thoughts aspire.

Grief, that was once farre off remov'd from me,
Begins (as now) for to approach me nere,
Clad in his Weedes, which Black and fearfull be,
And crownde with fatall Cypresse doth appeare,
With wringing Hands he doth bewaile my ruth,
And mournes, that I have straide so wide from Truth.

Reason tho Cochman to my wandring Thought,
As in a Christall glasse, doth shew most plaine
My gazing eyes, how I have fondly wrought,
Spending my Time in Toyes, and Fancies vaine,
He shew'th me now another Novell LOVE,
Another path, wherein my feete to move.

As One, who in his Travelle doth espie,
(By chance) a hideous Serpent or foule Snake,
That long before unseene did closely lie
Behinde some stub, where he his Nest did make,
(Shaking his three-forkt hissing tongue apace)
Quickly himselfe retireth from that place.

So I by loving wrong (unhappie Wight)
Having amisse straide long time, and awrie,
When I (at last) of Death had but a sight,
(Although farre off) yet backward, gan I hie:
Backward I came, with hastie speedie foote,
Leaving that Course, which I at first had tooke.

Thou wandring Spirit, to whom Jove doth commit
(Of this my Body fraile) the government:
Why, gadding thus from Truth so farre dost flit?
Why, are thine eyes with wilfull blindnes pent?
Why, dost not marke what Danger is at hand?
What damned Death doth at thine elbow stand?

Ah, be not flattred with this poysenous LOVE,
But call thy former Wits to thee againe:
Those wicked Thoughts roote out, and hence remove,
Whilst Life in thee to do it doth remaine,
What Mortall is, by mortall Death suppresse,
Thy Gaine shall be the more, thy Losse the lesse.

Heaven once thy Mansion was, and dwelling place,
Now Hell thou seekest by running thus affray,
Unhappie Soule to be in such a case,
So wilfully to seeke thine owne Decay:
Thou woundst thy selfe, to God a Rebell th' art,
And only striv'st to please the World in Hart.

Alas, in whom now dost thou put thy trust?
On whom dost thou relie, or hope on now?
Ah turne, and (still) live shalt thou with the Just,
Ah turne againe, and trebble blessed thou:
Thou, then shalt be, whereas the Blessed are,
Pure Souls, mongst Soules, mongst Stars, a brightsome Starre.

What is God?  The Sourse of Goodnes and the Spring,
What is that Goodnes?  Such a Goodnes found
As aye increaseth without perishing.
How is it made?  In frame and fashion Round,
Like to a Forme that in it doth containe,
His End and his Beginning in the same.

This Goodnes, (first) from whence did it precede?
Three proper Veines there be, that forth do runne
Out of one sacred Sea from Heaven decreede,
Which compasse doth, All, what so ere sees Sunne.
Cannot we see it?  This ESSENCE most Divine,
No Mortall Man hath seene at any time.

How can it then be, if it neere be seene,
That it our mindes (oft lifteth up on High),
As if in Vision we in Heaven had beene?
It makes us view such Wonders with Faiths eye,
With Faith cleere eye which shines to us so bright,
As unto Heaven is it our Guide and Light.

What is that Faith?  A Gift which if Defect
In him, that firme, beleeveth, he not found,
It blindfold leades him yet with steps direct)
Unto that place, where perfect joyes abound,
Where God the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost,
Doe raigne in Glorie great of Mightiest most.

Thou LIFE which life art calde and yet art Death,
Thou DEATH, which Death art termde, and yet art Life,
Say; which of you maintaine my vitall breath,
Within this wretched Vale of Worldly strife?
Say, which prolong my Life, most of you Twaine?
Or thou, LIFE, or thou DEATH:  say both the same.

I (more then LIFE) straight DEATH doth answer make.
Nay, I (quoth LIFE) farre more than DEATH, to me,
And for this Cause this only Name I take
Of LIFE, which by my meanes alone can be.
Because whilst I within thy Body [have?],
Death no way can thee hinder, hurt, or grive.

But I, by cutting off (DEATH straight replies)
This tender Thred, whereby Men runne their race,
Bring every Faithfull soule, in friendly wise,
Where he a better path (for aye) may trace,
Making him leade a Life eternallie,
A LIFE, that (still) doth live, and never die.

Wherefore, what ere he be, that meanes to joy
This other LIFE that is Celestiall,
He must not scorne (to scape from worlds annoy)
Nor thinke it much, to come when DEATH shall call.
For DEATH, nor LIFE, doth help us at the end,
LIFE is our Foe, but DEATH, our dearest Friend.

All haile, most happie Day in blessed wise,
A Day of Griefe, yet Honorable Day,
In which the Father did (for Sacrifise)
Offer his Sonne, to save Men from decay:
Clensing our Soules, defilde with sinfull mud,
With Innocent, with pure and pretious Blood.

Upon that Crosse (now sacred) then Prophane,
He dide for us, who could not dye indeed:
Whilst closing his fayre eyes for Mortals gaine,
He opened all the Gates of Heaven with speede:
Restoring then that Kingdome we had lost,
Which nothing, Us, but Him, too dearly cost.

Not his, but our Due, was it, for to Die;
Those Torments which he meekly did endure,
His Crowne of Thornes, his Wounds done spitefully;
That Cursed Scourge that spilt his Blood so pure;
All these, to Us, and not to him, did long,
Yet for our sakes, our Christ himselfe did wrong.

Then if for pitie, Graves to open wide,
Hils cleave, and Marble pillars rent in twaine:
If Heavens themselves, then Lights for griefe do hide,
And if the Sunne for sorrow clipst remaine:
What Mortall hart is there that doth not breake,
When he but thinks, or of this Day doth speake?

That Vertue, though whose power rulde is my soule;
(Only through Vertuous Love, from Love set free)
Takes force afresh as one that would controule:
And finding strong himselfe within to bee,
Unbridled Will he seekes to bridle now,
And tries to breake what fore he scarce could bow.

New Lords, new Lawes; New Customes breake the Olde,
And where before a dark and mistie clowde,
My minde as in a prison did infolde,
Now is it loosed from out that gloomie shrowde,
My Hart doth jump even just with his desire,
And by their Eye know both what to require.

My watchfull Soule recovered hath well nie,
The former state in which he lived in:
And being free, doth call to memorie,
What (bound) he did forget through wretched sin,
While for his life repentant he attends,
Immortally to live for his ammends.

Not any part there is of Bodie mine,
But filled is with true, not false Delight:
Yet doth it grieve still at her former Crime,
And with Remorse doth mortifie the Spright,
Whilst wronged Soule, on Others layes the blame,
Yet reprehends her selfe even for the same.

This earthly Beautie doth the Sence delight,
But Heavenly Beautie doth the minde more please:
The one World hath as an Object right,
And seekes the World to pleasure with sweet ease:
But th' other hath Jehovah for her glasse,
Nor she for any but for him doth passe.

The Sence doth burne with Loves unperfect works,
Which like a blaze in th' aire doth flit away:
The Soule thirsts after that which never hurts,
And hunts for that which never will decay:
That, which not subject is to any time,
But of it selfe most Perfect and Divine.

Thou (Lord) the Mortall and Immortall both
Created hast, marke humbly I require,
How much within my bodie they be wroth;
Marke now within me, gainst me they conspire
Within themselves they vary so and grudge,
That which of both shall win tis hard to judge.

My Bad Conceits from Adam sprung of yore,
Doo headlong runne to endles death with shame:
And lesse that Reason do them bridle sore,
Hardly my Soule can passe from whence it came.
Then pardon Lord the Course that I have runne,
And I from Sinne a new Man will become.

A tirant great, false Beautie is in Love,
When it doth triumph in a lovely face:
And who with cold Disdaine, this doth not move,
Is caught by subtill sweet assuring Grace:
Who stands at Beautie Gaze, and doth not flie,
Is soone entrapt by wilfull glancing eye.

This which of true Love is but Picture bare,
With shadowing Vale doth dimme our cleerest sight:
And if to follow it we do not spare,
It soone deceives us with a false delight,
And to perpetuall prison sends our soule,
Unles her sleights by Reason we controule.

Faire Pearle, fine gold, base excrements of th' earth;
Whats Beautie but a little White and Red?
Revived with a little lively Breath,
With Winde, or Sunne, or Sicknes altered?
All this doth Time consume and bring to nought,
And all what ere into this world is brought.

The fairest Colours drie and vanish shall;
The youngst must pack as well as doth the Olde:
All mortall things to mortall death must fall,
And therefore first were cast in earthly molde.
That which doth florish greene as grasse to day,
To morrow withereth like to dried Hay.

Swift flies our yeares as doth a running streame,
And lothed Age comes stealing on apace:
Our youth doth passe away as twere a Dreame,
And Death doth follow for to take his place:
Death comes, and our Lifes patent in his hand
For to resign, he straight doth us command.

Strength to his course, and winde unto his flight,
With feathers to his wings, Time joyneth fast:
And this sweet life which we so much do like,
Though nere so loth, yet must away at last.
The fairest Flower must wither with the weede,
What so doth live, to die was first decreede.

Thise happie man and trebble blest is he,
That never treads his steps from rightest way,
Not with the mist of World will blinded be:
But keepes right path, and never goes astray:
Contemning all these mundaine Treasures base,
In hope to joy the heavenly Wealty to Grace.

Who dyeth ill, dyes; who dieth well, never dies,
But lives a life above Eternallie:
Like good Elias, who in wondrous wise,
Was from base Earth tooke up to live in skie:
Where bide Th' elect of Christ for ever blest,
In Abrahams bosome there for aye to rest.

For thee my HART doth burne like fire (Deare Lord)
Which freesde before like Frost and chillie Ice,
For thee to leave my sinne I doe accord;
Through which thy heavenly grace I did despise.
All Follies now, as Shadowes vaine Ile leave,
And unto thee (the Substance trew) I cleave.

In thee I burne, and in my selfe I freese,
Frozen through feare, but burning through thy Love.
Reason ore Senses mine, now oversees:
And her Authoritie ore them doth prove.
Which makes me humbly call to thee for grace,
Though (proud) before I runne a selfe wild race.

Repentance right, sad Griefe, salt Teares, sure Faith,
Renue in me a sorie Contrite Hart:
My guiltie Conscience oft within me saith,
I Death deserve, yet Mercifull thou art:
Sighs from my soule I offer for my Fee,
As pretious Blood thou offredst once for mee.

My Hart now clensde (and yet not mine as now)
Sweet Christ to thee his first Home turnes againe,
From me he flies, and unto thee doth bow:
I give it thee, Accept I pray the same.
Ah Soveraigne Saviour, do not now despise
A broken Hart, for pleasing Sacrifise.

Weake is my Barke in which my Life doth rowe,
My wretched life, through grievious faults mispent,
And in the World (his Ocean) sayles but slowe,
Because he sailes into the Occident:
My sickly Minde runnes selfe same doubtfull way,
And Soule doth grieve that Fancie so doth stray.

And though a gentle calme Winde to blowe,
She findes about her, as she fresh doth sayle,
Yet under Waters doe I spie belowe,
The Foe of my poore Soule her to assayle:
And in that part wherein he doth espie
The Ship to leake, is that he close doth lie.

Ah, now it grieves me, now I doe repent
My Retchlesse Race, that I so lewde have runne,
Yet hath my God in mercie to me lent
Helpe to my Vessell weake, else I undone:
Hope at the left hand standes, that part to guide,
And constant Faith on right hand doth abide.

Earth was my flesh before, and earth againe
Ere long it shall be, but my Soule on hie,
Shall be lift up in brightest Heavens to raigne,
If I from false alluring Sinne can flie:
When at his feete, who first life to me gave,
A Glorious Seat for ever I shall have.

Full 7. times foure of yeeres my life hath runne,
Whil'st to my selfe a heavy Burthen sore,
To others I a gainelesse charge become,
Soyled with beastly Thoughts uncleanly gore:
Whilst in true Light beng blind I farther goe
From Reasons path which Judgement did me show.

Slow to good works, but too too swift to ill,
My Soule abroad with flitting wings doth flie,
And in the worlds Snares she carelesly doth lie,
Where sensuall Sense and Ignorance astray
Her doubtfull leades, quight out of her right way.

Too obstinate she headlong forward runnes,
In greatest Light she tumbleth in most darke,
Nor takes she thought what of her selfe becomes,
Be it right or wrong her course she doth not marke:
So that although Immortall she should live,
Most mortall Death she seekes her selfe to give.

But now thanks to the Soveraigne King of all,
She (no more blinde) the dangers gins to spie,
And looking backe unto her former fall,
She doth repent through faith most heartily:
Where she doth see of Heaven the narrow Gate,
Which (once) was shut, now ope for her escape.

King of all Kings which from thy sacred Throne,
Doest marke and view from forth the Heavens hie,
Thy Graces unto Adams Offspring showne,
Of thy great Love (although unworthilie)
Thou that do'st fill with true Delights the minde,
With true Delight, wherein true Joy we finde.

Behold how I, ore laid with greivious sinne,
With Soule defil'd, with Heart infected sore,
Doe flie to thee, thy Mercie for to winne,
And with Repentance doe my faultes deplore:
Lord if thy Lawes and thee I have offended,
Let mine ould Follies, with new Teares be cleansed.

My Sorrowes, to my Sinnes are sparkes but small,
So loathsome they appeare unto my sight;
On thee, I at thy Gate of Pittie call,
Thou art the Flame that canst them purge most bright.
The Bellowes is Amendements pure desire,
Which doth inflame through thy hotte loving Fire.

Let thy great Bountie me forget, forgive,
And bad Conceites that idle Fancies wrought,
Let them no more within me (working) live,
But to Confusion and Contempt be brought:
Oh let not Sinne my Soule still Satanise,
But with thy Spirit the same imparadise.
