Curio, know'st me?  Why, thou bottle-ale,
Thou barmy froth!  O stay me, lest I raile
Beyond Nil ultra, to see this Butterflie,
This windie bubble taske my balladry
With sencelesse censure.  Curio, know'st my spright?
Yet deem'st that in sad seriousness I write
Such nastie stuffe as is Pigmalion?
Such maggot-tainted lewd corruption?

Ha, now he glavers with his fawning snowte,
And swears; he thought, I meant but faintly flowte,
My fine smug ryme.  O barbarous dropsie noule!
Think'st thou that Genius that attends my soule,
And guides my fist to scourge Magnifico's
Wil daigne my mind be ranck'd in Paphian showes?
Think'st thou, that I, which was create to whip
Incarnate fiends, will once vouchsafe to trip
A Paunis traverse?  or will lispe (sweet love)
Or pule (Aye me) some female soule to move?
Think'st thou, that I in melting poesie
Will pamper itching sensualitie?
(That in the bodyes scumme all fatally
Intombes the soules most sacred faculty.)

Hence thou misjudging Censor:  know I wrot
Those idle rimes to note the odious spot
And blemish that deformes the lineaments
Of moderne Poesies habiliments.
Oh that the beauties of Invention,
For want of Judgments disposition,
Should all be soyl'd!  O that such treasurie,
Such straines of well-conceited poesie,
Should moulded be, in such a shapelesse forme,
That want of Art, should make such wit a scorne.

Here's one must invocate some lose-legg'd dame,
Some brothell drab, to helpe him stanzaes frame,
Or els (alas) his wits can have no vent,
To broch conceits industrious intent.
Another yet dares tremblingly come out;
But first he must invoke good Colyn Clout.

Yon's one hath yean'd a fearfull prodigie,
Some monstrous mishapen Balladry,
His guts are in his braines, huge Jobbernoule,
Right Gurnets-head, the rest without all soule.
Another walkes, is lazie, lyes him downe,
Thinkes, reades, at length some wonted sleep doth crowne
His new falne lids, dreames; straight, tenne pound to one,
Out steps some Fayery with quick motion,
And tells him wonders of some flowrie vale,
Awakes, straight, rubs his eyes, and prints his tale.

Yon's one whose straines have flowne so high a pitch,
That straight he flags and tumbles in a ditch.
His sprightly hote high-soring poesie
Is like that dreamed of Imagerie,
Whose head was gold, brest silver, brassie thigh,
Lead leggs, clay feete; O faire fram'd poesie.
Here's one, to get an undeserv'd repute
Of deepe deepe learning, all in fustian sute
Of ill-plac'd, farre-fetch'd words attiereth
His period, that sence forsweareth.

Another makes old Homer, Spencer cite
Like my Pigmalion, where, with rare delight
He cryes, O Ovid.  This caus'd my idle quill,
The world's dull eares with such lewd stuffe to fill,
And gull with bumbast lines the witlesse sence
Of these odde naggs; whose pates circumference
Is fild with froth!  O these same buzzing Gnats
That sting my sleeping browes, these Nilus Tats,
Halfe dung, that have their life from putrid slime,
These that do praise my loose lascivious rime:
For these same shades, I seriously protest,
I slubber'd up that Chaos indigest,
To fish for fooles, that stalke in goodly shape,
"What, though in velvet cloake, yet still an ape."
Capro reads, sweares, scrubs, and sweares againe,
Now by my soule an admirable straine,
Strokes up his haire, cryes Passing passing good,
Oh, there's a line incends his lustfull blood.

Then Muto comes, with his new glasse-set face,
And with his late kist-hand my booke dooth grace,
Straight reades, then smyles and lisps (tis prety good)
And praiseth that he never understood.
But roome for Flaccus, he'le my Satyres read.
Oh how I trembled straight with inward dread!
But when I saw him read my fustian,
And heard him swear I was a Pythian,
Yet straight recald, and sweares I did but quote
Out of Xilinum to that margents note,
I could scarce hold and keepe my selfe conceal'd,
But had well-nigh my selfe and all reveal'd.

Then straight comes Friscus, that neat gentleman,
That newe discarded Academian,
Who for he could cry (Ergo) in the schoole,
Straight-way, with his huge judgement dares controle
What soe'er he viewes, "that is prety, prety good,
That Epethite hath not that sprightly blood
Which should enforce it speake, that's Perseus vaine,
That's Juvenals, heere's Horrace crabbed straine,"
Though he nere read one line in Juvenall,
Or, in his life, his lazie eye let fall
On duskie Perseus.  O, indignitie
To my respectlesse free-bred poesie.

Hence ye big-buzzing-little-bodied Gnats,
Yee tattling Ecchoes, huge-tongu'd pigmy brats,
I mean to sleepe, wake not my slumbring braine
With your malignant weake detracting vaine.

What though the sacred issue of my soule
I heare expose to Ideots controule?
What though I bare to lewd Opinion
Lay ope to vulgar profanation
My very Genius.  Yet know my poesie
Doth scorne your utmost, rank'st indignitie.
My pate was great with child, and here tis eas'd,
Vexe all the world, so that thy selfe be pleas'd.
