Oh that mens thoughts should so degenerate,
Being free borne, t' admit a slavish state:
They disclaime Natures manumission,
Making themselves bond to opinion:
Whose gally-slaves they are, tost on the sea
Of vulgar humors, which doth rage and play,
According as the various breath of change
Calmes or perturbs her smooth brow.  Is 't not strang
That heav'n bred soules, discended from above
Should brooke such base subjection?  feare reproofe
From her cold northerne gales, or els be merry
When her Fanonian praise breathes a sweet perry?

(Rason) thou art the soules bright Genius,
Sent downe from Joves throne to safe conduct us
In this lifes intricate Daedalian maze:
How art thou buffuld?  how comes this disgrace,
That by opinion thou art bearded so,
Thy slave, thy shadow:  nay, out-bearded too?
She earth-worme doth derive her pedegree
From bodies durt, and sensualitie,
And marshald in degree fitting her birth
Is but a dwarffe, or jester to make mirth.
Thou the soules, bodies Queenes allie most neere,
The first Prince of her blood, and chiefest peere,
Nay, her protector in nonage, whilst she
Lives in this bodies weake minoritie,
Art yet kept under by that underling,
That dreame, that breath, nay that indeed Nothing,
The ale-house Ethicks, the worlds upside downe
Is verefied:  the prince now serves the clowne.
If reason bandy with opinion, 
Opinion winnes in the conclusion:
For if a man be once opinionate,
Millions of reasons nill extenuate 
His fore-ceited mallice:  conference 
Cannot asswage opinions insolence.
But let opinion once lay battery 
To reasons fort, she will turne heresie, 
Or superstition, wily politist,
But she will winne those rampires which resist.
Then sith such innate discord is maintain'd
Twixt reason and opinion; what staid-brain'd,
True resolute, and philosophick head
Would by opinion be distempered?

Opinion is as various as light change, 
Now speaking Court-like friendly, strait-wayes strange;
She's any humours perfect parasite, 
Displeas'd with her, and pleas'd with her delight, 
She is the Eccho of inconstancie, 
Soothing her no with nay, her I with yea.

Then who would weigh this feather, or respect
The fickle censure of shallow neglect?
Shall grave Lycurgus straite repeale his lawes,
Because some Cobler finds fault with this clawse,
Some Ale-konner with that?  or shall the state
Be subject to each base-groomes arbitrate?
No, let's esteeme Opinion as she is,
Fooles bawble, innovations Mistris, 
The Proteus Robin-good-fellow of change,

Smithfield of jaded fancies, and th' Exchange
Of fleeting censures, nurse of heresie,
Begot by Malice on Inconstancie:
It's but the hisse of Geese, the peoeples noyse,
The tongue of humours, and phantasticke voyce 
Of haire-brain'd Apprehension:  it respects 
With all due titles, and that due neglects 
Even in one instant.  For in these our times
Some of Opinions gulls carpe at the rimes
Of reverend Chawcer:  other-some do praise them,
And unto heav'n with wonders wings do raise them

Some say the mark is out of Gowers mouth,
Others, he's better then a trick of youth.

Some blame deep Spencer for his grandam words,
Others protest that, in them he records
His maister-peece of cunning giving praise,
And gravity to his profound-prickt layes.

Daniel (as some holds) might mount if he list,
But others say that he's a Lucanist.

Markham is censur'd for his want of plot,
Yet others thinke that no deepe stayning blot;
As Homer writ his Frogs-fray learnedly,
And Virgil his Gnats unkind Tragedy:
So though his plot be poore, his Subject's rich,
And his Muse soares a Falcons gallant pitch.

Drayton's condemn'd of some for imitation,
But others say t'was the best Poets fashion,
In spight of sicke Opinions crooked doome,
Traytor to kingdome mind, true judgments toomb,
Like to a worthy Romaine he hath wonne
A three-fold name affined to the Sunne,
When he is mounted in the glorious South,
And Drayton's justly sirnam'd Golden-mouth.

The double volum'd Satyre praised is,
And lik'd of divers for his Rods in pisse,
Yet other-some, who would his credite crack
Have clap'd Reactioes Action on his back.

Nay, even wits Caesar, Sidney, for whose death
The Fates themselves lamented Englands scath,
And Muses-wept, till of their teares did spring
Admiredly a second Castal spring,
Is not exempt for prophanation,
But censur'd for affectation.

Thus doth Opinion play the two edg'd sword,
And vulgar judgments both-hand playes afford,
Then who but fooles, and empty caske like minds,
Would be engross'd with such phantastique winds?
Let Players, Minstrels, silken Revellers,
Light minded as their parts, their aires, their fethers,
Be slaves t' Opinion, when the people shoute
At a quaintiest, crosse-poynt, or well touch'd Lute,
Let their sleight frothy minds be bubled up,
And breake againe at a hisse, or howt, or hup.
Let Caius when his horse hath wone the bell,
Conceive more joy than his dull tongue can tell:
Or let Lycanor feare a tennis set
More then his soules losse, and for it more fret.

Pollio me thinks is going into the Towne,
Boy, set your Maisters ruffe, and brush his gowne,
Least some spruce Taylor sitting on his stall,
Say, there goes a sloven, carelesse of all,
Heere comes young Pansa:  whether away so fast?
Why, going to the Barbers in all hast,
Thy haire's all short enough:  but I must crave
A little labour to be smug'd, and have 
A blessing of Rose-water, ere I goe
To see such and such Ladies, for you know 
Thei'le flowt a man behind his backe, if he
Be not trim furbish'd, and in decencie.

Oh what a slaverie's this?  shall a free mind
Sicke of a Cockneys Ague, feare the wind?
No, let's be Stoicks, resolute, and spare not
To tell the proudest Criticke that we care not
For his wooden censure, nor to mittigate
The sharp tart verivice of his snap-haunce hate
Would change a line, a word, no not a poynt
For his deepe mouthed scoffes, as soone disjoynt
His grind-jest chaps as hurt our credites, who
Are carelesse of what he can say or do.

Oh Epictetus, perfect libertine,
Who though a slave, tyr'd daily in the mine,
Yet hadst as free a soule, as free a powre
To calme content as any Emperour,
Thou wert no busie Polypragmons thrall,
No slave to censures, caring not at all
Which way the vulgar wind stood, negligent
Whether the world were angry or content.
Thy vertue-purged soule, thy Genius 
Made all thine inclinations vertuous:
Which thou didst follow, carelesse of th' event,
Or of the worlds applause, or discontent.
True patterne of a philosophick soule,
Not subject to Mechanick mates controule,
Nor puff'd up with the praises of each hind
Which gave a froathy battery to thy mind.

With such resolve, such perfect temperature
Should a Socratique mind her thoughts assure:
And as he taught young Alcibiades 
Audacity to pleade, and to despise
The popular scarcrow estimation;
For that such bodies composition
Consisted but of Brokers, Coblers, slaves,
Black-men, trap-makers, and such kind of knaves,
Whose many headed doomes he never weighd,
Nor of their giddy union was afraid:
So let all others care for vulgar breath,
Which neither can preserve, nor plague with death,
(Unlesse their sent of Garlike poyson us.)
Should I take it at hart, or for hainous,
To heare some Prentize, or some Players boy
Hath jested at my Muse, and scoff'd my joy?
Or that some Chaundler slopt a mustard pot,
Or wrap'd Sope in some leaves, her petticoate?
Or perfum'd Courtiour in a peeuish scorne,
Some pages thereof, tyrant-like hath torne,
To scavenger his backe dore from the durt?
Which if he do (though me it shall not hurt)
May my harsh stile (the Muses I beseech)
Be but as arse-smart to his tickled breech:
Or shall I thinke my selfe t' have better hap,
If that some weevil, mault-worme, barly-cap,
Hearing my lines halfe-snorting ore his kanne,
Sweares them for good, and me a proper man?
Or shall I waxe proud if some Pedant daigne
The Epethite of Pretty for my paine?
The pox I will as soone:  let others care,
Ile play the Gallant, I, the Caveleire;
Once in my dayes Ile weene, and over-weene,
And cry, a Fico for the Criticke spleene:
For let them praise them, or their praise deny,
My lines are still themselves, and so am I.
