Susanna heere, walkes forth the way to glory;
To shew her constancie and spotlesse fame,
If any fault, escape her faultlesse story,
The fault is mine; on me bestow the blame.
Which would her teach, before I could attaine,
Well tuned verse, or moralizing vaine.

Were shee or no; were Joachim her goodman;
Had Jewes juditiall law, and Sanhedrin,
To judge of life, in stately Babilon;
Were Daniell hence, first knowne a Sambethin.
Were hee a childe, when hee so well presaged;
Or termed so, compared to these aged.

Were these two segniors heere, (base slaves to sin)
Achab and Tzidkija, in Jeremie.
Fell this before, or when full thrall was in;
Or Cirus reign as some doe verefie.
Did all things passe, as they have past the pen:
Or proeme-like to better lives of men.

These things I leave, to judgement of the wise,
(Gray headded Senate of our grave divines.)
If I should judge, I should but prejudize,
And with erronious letters, fill my lines.
It me contentes, that well I may avow,
The stories subject, such as most allow.

Expect not heere, th' invention, or the vaine,
Of Lucrece rape-write:  or the curious scan,
Of Phillis friend; or famous fairy-Swaine;
Or Delias prophet, or admired man.
My chicken fethered winges, no ympes enrich,
Pens not full sum'd, mount not so high a pitch.

Let Colin reare his flight to admiration
And traine his lovely flocke, his pipe to follow.
Let Damons reach, out-reach all imitation;
And frame melodious hymnes, to please Apollo.
The swaine that pend this pastorall for Pan;
Thought once to end his worke, ere began.

For while I ment, to streigne these sorie noates,
Past Diapent, unto a Diapason;
There fell a chaunce within our seely coates,
Both great and suddaine; able to amaze one.
When mourning Mopsus cride, leave of thy play,
Shift noates a side, flinge a pipe and all away.

Cease seely man; pull downe thy wonted pride,
Enjoine thy muse to mourne, and pen to moane.
(As did Amintas, when good Phillis dide)
For thou art quite forlorne, and left aloane.
Sith Thestilis, (thy Thestilis) hath left thee.
While death of greatest jewell, hath bereft thee.

For Thestilis was shee, which joy'd thy springing;
Who eake allow'd thee breath, to blow thy pipe,
And idel time to whistle and be singing,
And bred thee up, till thou were waxen ripe.
Th' Elixer of thy life, in love was shee;
Whose coine did quintessence, thy muse and thee.

Whose knight-riv'd birth, gave blazon to thy bloud,
Whose godly end, doth endlesse heere abide.
Yet wanting her, thou wantest all thy good,
As doe more flockes; the damme, and lambes beside,
Whom joyfull Thomas hath good will to vease,
From fruitfull lawnes, unto a shorter lease.

This uncouth newes, did so my sences lame;
That though sweete Cynthius, told me by the eare:
My musicke after went in worser frame,
And as my musicke was, such was my cheere,
My looke unlusty; countenance abated,
Minde make-content; muse weake and overmated.

Yet did I singe my sorrowes to an ende,
(An ende betakes, the longest tided day.)
And to a veruous patronesse commende,
My homly verse, and rusticke roundelay.
Whose godly zeale, equivalent with Hanna;
Will not disdeigne, to countenaunce Susanna.
