PHILOCOSMUS.
Behold how every man drawne with delight
Of what he doth, flatters him in his way;
Striving to make his course seeme onely right
Doth his owne rest, and his owne thoughts betray;
Imagination bringing bravely dight
Her pleasing images in best aray,

With flattering glasses that must shew him faire
And others foule; his skill and his wit best,
Others seduc'd, deceiv'd and wrong in their;
His knowledge right, all ignorant the rest,
Not seeing how these minions in the air
Present a face of things falsely exprest,
And that the glimmering of those errors showne,
Are but a light to let him see his owne.

Alas poore Fame, in what a narrow roome
As an incaged Parrot, art thou pent
Here amongst us; where even as good be domb
As speake, and to be heard with no attent?
How can you promise of the time to come
When as the present are so negligent?

Is this the walke of all your wide renowne
This little point, this scarce discerned Ile,
Thrust from the world, with whom our speech unknown
Made never any traffike of our stile.
And is this all where all this care is showne,
T' inchant your fame to last so long a while?
And for that happier tongues have woon so much,
Think you to make your barbarous language such.

Poore narrow limits for so mightie paines,
That cannot promise any forraine vent:
And yet if here to all your wondrous vaines
Were generally knowne, it might content:
But lo how many reads not, or disdaines
The labors of the chiefe and excellent.

How many thousands never heard the name
Of Sydney, or of Spencer, or their bookes?
And yet brave fellowes, and presume of fame
And seem to beare downe all the world with lookes:
What then shall they expect of meaner frame,
On whose indevours few or none scarse looks?

Do you not see these Pamphlets, Libels, Rymes,
These strange confused tumults of the minde,
Are growne to be the sicknesse of these times,
The great disease inflicted on mankind?
Your vertues, by your follies, made your crimes,
Have issue with your indiscretion join'd.

Schooles, arts, professions, all in so great store,
Passe the proportion of the present state,
Where being as great a number as before,
And fewer roomes them to accomodate;
In cannot be but they must throng the more,
And kicke, and thrust, and shoulder with debate.

For when the greater wittes cannot attaine
Th' expected good, which they account their right,
And yet perceive others to reape that gaine
Of far inferiour vertues in their sight;
They present with the sharpe of Envie straine
To wound them with reproches and despight:
And for these, cannot have as well as they
They scorne their faith should daigne to looke that way.

Hence discontented Sects, and Schismes arise,
Hence interwounding controversies spring,
That feed the simple, and offend the wise,
Who know the consequence of cavilling:
Disgrace that these to others do devise,
Contempt and scorne on all in th' end doth bring
Like scolding wives reckning each others fault
Make standers by imagin both are naught. . . .
