O let my words be sweetned in a mouth,
(If your great highnesse can discend so low,
As daigne to view my tender-blushing youth,
That twenty twelve months yet did never know)
Right Malmsey relisht:  one which ever saith,
Good, very good, nay, excellent in faith.

Dew gracious lookes upon mine infant Muse,
Nip not my blossoms in their budding prime,
These artlesse lines at leisure do peruse,
Only to adde more wings to idle time:
My hov'ring muse could never get that spirit,
Which to peruse me might your favour merit.

I never lay upon a bed of Roses,
T'wixt Beauties lips entombing of my tong,
Smelling rose-waterd odoriferous Poses,
Pleasing my mistris with a Mermaides song.
Of amorous kissing more then love-sicke lavish,
Whose juice might make my words the Readers ravish.

The liquid waves nor did I ever plash
Of silver-channeld Isis purling river,
(Yet Nestor &mdash; old nymph &mdash; nursing Grant wil wash
Hir Nymphs:  and scorns preheminece to give hir)
Nor have I spent in Troinovant my dayes,
Where all good witts (some say) are crown'd with Bayes.

I cannot shew then in a sugred vaine,
Wit, judgement, learning, or invention:
I cannot reach up to a Delians straine,
Whose songs deserve for ever your attention:
Nor Draytons stile, whose hony words are meete
For these your mouths, far more than hony sweet.

I never durst presume take in mine hand
The nimble-tripping Faeries history,
I cannot, I protest, yet understand
The wittie, learned, Satyres mystery;
I cannot move the savage with delight,
Of what I cannot, Reader then I write.

Must I then cast in Envies teeth defiance?
Or dedicate my Poems to detraction?
Or must I scorne Castilioe's neere alliance?
Nay, I must praise this Poet-pleasing faction;
Lest in the Dresse my overthrow they threaten;
And of the Binders laugh to see me beaten.

O that I had such eloquence as might
Intreate the envious Reader bove the rest,
(For his deepe wisedome censures all aright)
That by his lippes I may be alwaies blest!
If this suffice not for the enviest,
Know then, I am an Epigrammatist.
