You Sheepheards which on hillocks sit,
Like Princes on their throanes:
And guide your flocks, which else would flit,
Your flocks of little ones:
Good Kings have not disdained it,
But Sheepheards have beene named:
A sheepe-hooke is a Scepter fit,
For people well reclaimed.
The Sheepheards life so honour'd is and praised.
That Kings lesse happy seeme, though higher raised.

The Sommer Sunne hath guilded faire,
With morning rayes the mountaines:
The birds doo caroll in the ayre,
And naked Nymphs in Fountaines.
The Silvanes in their shagged haire,
With Hamadriades trace:
The shadie Satires make a Quiere,
Which rocks with Ecchoes grace.
All breathe delight, all solace in the season:
Not now to sing, were enemie to reason.

Cosma my love, and more then so,
The life of my affections:
Nor life alone but Lady too,
And Queene of their directions.
Cosma, my Love, is faire you know,
And which you Sheepheards know not:
Is (Sophi said) thence called so,
But names her beautie showe not.
Yet hath the world no better name then she:
And then the world, no fairer thing can be.

The Sunne upon her fore-head stands,
Or (jewell Sunne-like glorious,)
Her fore-head wrought with Joves owne hands,
For heavenly white notorious.
Her golden lockes like Hermas sands,
(Or then bright Hermus brighter:)
A spangled Cavill binds in with bands,
Then silver morning lighter.
And if the Planets are the chiefe in skies:
No other starres then Planets are her eyes.

Her cheeke, her lip, fresh cheeke, more fresh,
Then selfe-blowne buds of Roses:
Rare lip, more red than those of flesh,
Which thousand sweetes encloses:
Sweet breath, which all things dooth refresh,
And words then breath farre sweeter:
Cheeke firme, lip firme, not fraile nor nesh,
As substance which is fleeter,
In praise doo not surmount; although in placing,
Her christall necke, round breast, and armes embracing.

The thorough-shining ayre I weene,
Is not so perfect cleare:
As is the skie of her faire skinne,
Wheron no spots appeare.
The parts which ought not to be seene,
For soveraigne woorth excell:
Her thighs with Azure branched beene,
And all in her are well.
Long Ivorie hands, legges straiter then the Pine:
Well shapen feete, but vertue most divine.

Nor cloathed like a Sheepheardesse,
But rather like a Queene:
Her mantle dooth the formes expresse,
Of all which may be seene.
Roabe fitter for an Empresse,
Then for a Sheepheards love:
Roabe fit alone for such a Lasse,
As Emperours doth move.
Roabe which heavens Queene, the bride of her owne brother,
Would grace herselfe with, or with such another.

Who ever (and who else but Jove)
Embroidered the same:
Hee knew the world, and what did move,
In all the mightie frame.
So well (belike his skill to prove)
The counterfeits he wrought:
Of wood-Gods, and of every groave,
And all which else was ought.
Is there a beast, a bird, a fish worth noate?
Then that he drew, and picturde in her coate.

A vaile of Lawne like vapour thin
Unto her anckle trailes:
Through which the shapes discerned bin,
As too and fro it sailes.
Shapes both of men, who never lin
To search her wonders out:
Of monsters and of Gods a kin,
Which her empale about.
A little world her flowing garment seemes:
And who but as a wonder thereof deemes?

For here and there appeare forth towers,
Among the chalkie downes:
Citties among the Country bowers,
Which smiling Sun-shine crownes.
Her metall buskins deckt with flowers,
As th' earth when frosts are gone:
Besprinkled are with Orient showers
Of hayle and pebble stone.
Her feature peerelesse, peerlesse her attire,
I can but love her love, with zeale entire.

O who can sing her beauties best,
Or that remaines unsung?
Doe thou Apollo tune the rest,
Unworthy is my tongue.
To gaze on her is to be blest,
So wondrous fayre her face is;
Her fairenes cannot be exprest,
In Goddesses nor Graces.
I love my love, the goodly worke of Nature:
Admire her face, but more admire her stature.

On thee (O Cosma) will I gaze,
And reade thy beauties ever:
Delighting in the blessed maze,
Which can be ended never.
For in the luster of thy rayes,
Appeares thy parents brightnes:
Who himselfe infinite displaies
In thee his proper greatnes.
My song must end, but never my desire:
For Cosmas face is Theorellos fire.
