EUBULUS.  ACOLASTUS.

EUBULUS.
Grase on deare Flocks, and tend your blessed feeding,
While your sad Master wofull and forlorne,
In his poore Lambes a pensive lesson reading,
With Sin-bred sorrow hayles the weeping morne;
The morne,who sampling men their sinnes to rue,
Hath washt earths motley face in weeping dewe.

Faire Queene Aurora, Beautie of the East,
What uncouth chance thy wonted cheere hath blent?
Whose blithsome up-rise makes Nights prisoners blest,
And greets their waking harts with sweet content:
What spite hath rob'd thee of thy golden rayes,
The mild forerunners of our Sommer dayes?

O may it be the Heaven-threatning deeds, 
Of Earth-bred Gyants, Adam's sinfull brood,
Thus gars thee maske in mal-contented weeds,
Drowning the daies light in a mistie moode?
What makes Heavens weep, thee lowre and earth to grone?
T'is men have sinn'd, oh let them learne to mone.

O bottomles benignitie of God,
In schooling his poor sheepe from wanton gates;
Stead of Revenge, he doth but shew the rod,
He loves our saftie while our sinnes he hates. 
See, see, (O man) thine everlasting shame,
All creatures rue the rigour of thy blame.

The brazen heavens conspire against our good,
Wreathing their watry browes in cloudes of raine.
The earth denies to nurse her wicked brood,
Wishing all flesh within her wombe againe.
All creatures crie upon us for offending,
And will not cease till we professe amending.

The servants rating should rebuke the sonne,
A wise man schools himselfe by others follie,
With the dumbe creatures Justice hath begunne;
Gods fire is fierce, yet with the flame we dallie:
Our turne is next, Wrath beareth on our shoares,
Death and destruction linger at our doores.

Our neighbour countries burne in civill fire,
And Nero-like we warme us by the flame,
Securitie that false-suggesting lier,
So maskes our eyes, we doe noe feare our game,
Till we have proved with too deare a price,
That to our chance, their Fortune casts the dice.

We of all people once that were the pelfe,
Thrust in a frozen corner of the North,
Almightie Jove hath chosen to himselfe,
And made us famous over all the earth;
Crowning our Land with Plenty and with peace,
For nothing hinders when the Lord will blesse.

Frost-bitten snakes, the Lord tooke pittie on us,
Warming our Clymat with his Sunne of grace,
And more to powre his blessings downe upon us,
Makes us triumphant in our foes disgrace:
That all our Neighbours in amazement stand,
To see heavens rayne downe graces on our Land.

But O friend-losing, base ingratitude,
Blacke lothsome ditch where all desert is drownd;
What doth Gods deepe benignitie allude,
But that we should be thankfull to the ground?
The ground, the roote, the fountaine of our blisse
For God the founder of each blessing is.

But Serpent-like, we sting his blessed name,
And staine Gods honour by the filth of sinning;
Our wicked lives are now the very same
They were when as our light was young beginning:
Our lives (said I) oh t'is my sinnes O God,
That merit beating with thine yron-rod.

In the May moneth of my blooming yeares,
Living in pleasures, ease, and hearts content,
Now am I forced to lament with teares,
Contempt of dutie and my time mispent:
O thou from whom repentant humours grow,
Raise in mine eyes an everlasting flowe.

Thou broughtest fountaines forth a stony rocke,
Manna from Heaven, Quailes came with a wind:
O teach me how to seeke, to aske, to knocke;
Let frailtie favour, sorrowes succour find:
Teach me to spend the remnant of my dayes
In sinnes rebuke, and thine eternall prayse.

Although the Aprill of my dayes be spent,
In service of the world, flesh, and devill;
And though my antick-age was freely lent
To the committing of accursed evill:
Let let, oh let an old mans sacrifize
Obtaine some favour in thy gracious eyes.

Thou callest some at morning, some at noone,
These beare the heate and burthen of the day;
And some thou call'st, when toyling time is done,
Yet givest them all an equall parted pay:
Bidding them rest contented with their lot,
Since not desert, but Mercie paies the shot.

Thou gav'st Repentance to the dying Theefe,
Pronouncing him true heire of Paradice:
His teares obtained pardon through beleefe,
Of frozen Conscience for to thawe the yce:
Thou badst him laugh at death, though it did paine him.
Abrahams sweet bosom straight should entertain him.

Upon these presidents though not presuming,
With prostrate heart, and elevated hands,
The heavie burthen of my hearts griefe tuning,
Before thy throne, where Truth and Mercy stands,
I boldly come to beg my soules release,
And reconcilement to thy blessed peace.

Forget (my God) the folly of my youth,
How I misled, have led my doting daies,
How spitefully I spurned at thy truth;
And skorn'd to set my footing in thy waies;
In this thy Mercy shall appeare much greater,
For pardoning him that was so deepe a debter.

Thou thee didst once remove so many devils
From Magdalen the penitent offender;
Roote out of me a legion of evils,
And I proportionable praise will render.
Worke in me Lord, and heare my poore request;
Then will I dare the most, and vow the best.

And for (O Lord) one right-conceived thought
Comes not in compasse of my poore election,
But that my words and workes, and all are naught,
Safe-conduct me this day by thy direction,
That for my youth-bred follies gone and past,
My Teares may make attonement now at last.

ACOLASTUS.
Come pining Cares betroth'd to Discontent,
Heart-killing griefs, sad lights come dwell with me,
Helpe with your teares my fountaines of lament,
Least ere my sorrowes cease, they dried be:
If weeping dewe be wanting to my woe,
My heart will bleede, even to supplie thier flowe.

Affections Thrall, Afflictions Slave I am,
O cursed life led captive in this sort,
Dame Fancies foole, and Fortunes chiefest game.
Which unto each assault yeeld Reasons fort.
O unadvised, Treason-working eyes,
You are the cause my life in passion dyes.

So long I warm'd my selfe by Beauties fire,
Deeming it dead, much like a painted flame,
Till secretly I burnd in hot desire,
And grew to be a Cocke of Venus game:
My martyrd minde was cast in Cupids jayle,
And none but one my prisoned thoughts can bayle.

Ut vidi, ut perii now I duly sing,
Moaning my skant foresight with wealaday:
For at mine eyes my heart did sucke the sting,
That works my ruine and my lives decay.
No marvaile men enjoy a seldome rest,
Nesting such Traytor foes within their breast.

O passing priviledge that blind men have,
In wanting sight, they want a thousand sinnes;
And never any yet was Venus Slave,
But in his eye the venome first beginnes.
Blinde are not poyson'd with the baites of Beautie,
Which Syren-like, tise men from God and dutie.

Poore foolish Blinkard, Beadsman unto Christ,
For restitution of long lacked sight,
I marvaile what they fancie so inticte,
To be desirous of this lothsome light?
Alas, what profit have we by our eyes,
Save sinnes attaint in viewing Vanitie?

Lament O Heavens, sight robbeth thee of Saints,
And mourne poore soules, sight spoyleth you of grace:
Yet sight deserveth not these hard complaints,
Lust is the theefe, Sight but his entring place.
Yet must I say Sight is not free from sin,
Since theefe he is, that theefe receiveth in.

Why rage I thus against my retchles eyes?
No sense but train'd me to my Tragedie,
And cowardly consorted to devise?
My living death, past hope or remedie:
Yea all my parts tooke part to doe me wrong,
And I alone must battaile with my tongue.

Poore helples helpe, that wronged lovers have,
When harts deep wound is veng'd with shallow words;
The Prisoner rayling, yet is made a slave,
Griefe fights with shadowes, while it feeleth swords:
So pecks the Dove, whilst Ravens pierst her brest,
So fares the Wren, when Children rob her nest.

Finding my senses foes, I made appeale
To the right-deeming censure of my hart;
Hoping that Reason would become my bayle,
And rid me from this inward pining smart:
But long ere this, the Senses insurrection
Brought Reason, Heart and all in foule subjection.

Where should a man goe seeke for silver streames,
When springs are poysned, fountaines turnd to mud?
What brightnes can arise from borowed beames,
When Phoebus fleets, the soveraigne of our good
Or wher's the soules Atturney, when the hart,
Being once corrupted, takes the worser part?

Misguided heart, made alyen from the forme,
Of thy pure Makers glorious Creation;
Coward, why didst thou yeeld to Fancies storme,
And stoupe to Lust that foule abhomination?
Hadst thou with Reasons bit, checkt raging will,
A small foresight might have forestald this ill.

O where was Prayer the Soules Ambassadour,
To muster heavenly troupes of powrefull ayde,
When Sinne and Hell first labourd to defloure
Thy bodies Temple, Gods unspotted Maide?
Christ bids thee knock for help and thou shalt have it,
Then let him helples dye that will not crave it.

Thou shouldst have sommond Hope and Charitie,
Mount-moving Faith, hot Zeale, and perfect Love,
Free-given Grace, true Courage, Constancie,
With such like gifts descending from above:
The smallest handfull of this holy band,
Had kept the divell from seazing on thy land.

Looke as the Chaffe disperst before the wind,
Or as the dewe exhaled by the Sunne,
Or as a dreame which waking none can find,
Or as a thought ended ere well begunne:
So fancies dye, so soone we stifle evill,
If we resist the motives of the devill.

O hartles hart, false slave to false delight,
Why didst thou tremble ere the Trumpet sounded,
Yeelding thy selfe to sinne before the fight,
And dastardly depart the field unwounded?
When Guides misguide themselves, the simple sort
By their ill-sample render up the Fort.

Fye foolish man, why stormst thou at the hart?
When Eyes and Sense are muffled up in blindnes,
He steppes on Stage, and this is all his part,
To welcome Beautie with a world of kindnes:
As is the sympathie twixt flaxe and fire,
Such is the heat compared to hot desire.

Poore Heart, I wrong thee with my wrong exclames,
Seeking to crosse my foe, I kill my friend,
Extremitie still urgeth such extreames,
And sorrow smiles at him that next doth stand:
Much like a Curre, who smitten with a stone,
Bites the poore peble, lets the Man alone.

Much like a Curre (said I) nay not so wise;
For why I know my griefes unhappie ground,
I see the roote from whence my passions rise,
And view the lure, that did my life confound:
O blab tongue Tantalus, why dost not eate?
Fondling, t'is I must pine in sight of meate.

Then let me learne at last to levell right,
See where Contempt sits laughing at my fall
ye hel-borne Furies helpe to frame a slight
To kill Disdaine, that holds my life in thrall;
That words with woes may some fit measure keepe,
Helpe me to rage, to curse, and then to weepe.

O faire and kind (O filthie monstrous lye)
I cry you mercie Madame for mistaking,
The blind man colours hardly can discrye,
And my poore reasons light is now but waking:
What heart once thought, now tongue bewraies in jest;
Thou foule Apostata, notorious beast.

Can I report her foule impietie,
When as my tongue did tremble once to name her?
Faine would I speake, but when I speake, I die;
My joynts appal'd with feare, refuse to shame her.
Courage my Heart, for love she left thee griefe,
Make change a robbry; and so call her thiefe.

O shallow-braind invention, course discourse,
In this high taske I doe her merits wrong,
The spring is drie it seemeth by the sourse,
When naught but Newgate tearmes can store the tongue.
I'le fetch from hel, sterne words to shake the Center
And with mine action make them fiercely rent her.

O proud, presuming, foule, abhominable,
Sinnes shop, Friends shame, hels bait, and natures mole,
Worse then the offall of Augias stable,
Ill thrive the beast that brought us such a foale,
And let fell crosses all her joyes deprive,
Through whom my faithfull heart thus dyes alive,

O woolvilsh heart wrapt in a womans hyde,
That spurnst at profferd dutie, lendest love
To Lads that seeke a Lemmon, not a Bryde,
Whom neither time hath try d, nor service proud.
In men (t'is said) their wils must stand for pay,
But Lust-breathd fury guides a womans way.

If love be hated, hate be blest with love,
If Merit merit standing next the doore,
If haile-shot winne when Cannons cannot move,
If Trueth and Promise sojourne from our shoare,
If weaker vessels weare the crest on high,
While mens best hope, is hopeles for to die.

Why are not Natures workes in generall,
Prone to like crosses and to like confusion,
The greater seeking still to hurt the small,
The mightie wrong the weake by fell intrusion?
Why shines not Phoebus in the fulsome night,
While Luna lends the day her duskie light?

Why fall not Starres as thicke as winters haile
Why is not Sommer colde, and Winter warme
Or why doth not the earths foundation faile?
Sinking in seas, that long have sought his harme?
Why doe not all things that on earth remaine,
To their rude-formed chaos turne againe?

O excrement of all exceeding ill!
How couldst thou wrong my true affection so?
I gave in pawne my heart, my hand, my will;
Yet didst thou from thy plighted promise goe;
Vowing, if all were dead save I alone,
Thou wouldst forsake me, and and be wife to none.

Were I deformed (though I am not faire)
Ill-nurturd, Naturd, churlish and unkind
Did any member Monster-like appeare,
Or did I faile in faculties of mind;
Then hadst thou some presence of reason why
Thus all askaunce thou holdst me in thine eye.

But these are false, then whence derives this hate,
Ungratfull guerdon of my zelous love?
Perchance thou seest my shallow-ebd estate,
The thought whereof thy liking doth remove:
T'is so:  I know it by too true a token;
For why, thy selfe the same hast often spoken.

O Vertues blemish and thy sexes blot,
Base dunghill bird, nere sprong of Gentle blood;
Vile is thy mind, but viler be thy lot,
That mak'st earths drosse the soveraigne of thy good;
To cause men curse thee, and to pittie me,
Thus doe I rate thy god if golde be he.

Heaven-skorned mould, base skin of barren earth,
Springing in Caves, where death and darknes dwell.
A monstrous mettall proved by thy birth,
Since men dive for thee halfe way dowe to hell.
O cursed engine of light hating evil,
Favourd of men, but found our by the devill.

O sacred thirst of golde what canst thou not,
Sinnes chiefest agent, enemy to good:
Thou, thou art sought to pay fond Pleasures shot,
Yet often found with losse of dearest blood.
Some termes thee gylt, that every soule might reede
Even in thy name, thy guilt is great indeede.

Guiltie thou art of Murther, Rape, and Theft,
Guiltie of Briberie and subornation,
Guiltie of Treason, Perjurie, and shift,
An accessarie by thy slie temptation,
To all sinnes past, and all that are to come,
From Adams downefall to the day of doome.

Mishapen mettall, smooth-fac'd Hypocrite,
Whose golden splendoure masketh mortall eyes,
Moth of the minde, false slave to false delight,
A divell lurking in a strange disguise:
What is thy lustre when it shines most bright,
But Sathan clothed in an Angels light?

The want of thee is cause I want my blisse;
For whither flye the Gnats but to the Sunne?
The Swallow still repaires where Sommer is,
And womens hearts with heapes of gifts are wonne.
So dunghill wormes must catch the finest fish,
Else man shall never traine him to his dish.

Through thee one kingdome swelleth gainst another,
The Father butcherd often by his Sonne;
The Daughter gives a pasport to the Mother,
Fearing that else her daies would nere be done.
Through thee each murthring Roscius is appointed,
To act strang scenes of death on Gods annointed.

For thee the Merchant leaves his countries shore,
Wife, Children, Parents, and what else is deare,
His heart presaging nere to see them more,
Such are the circumstances of his feare;
The waves, the winds, the rocks, the cruell foe,
Consort in one to worke his overthrow.

But all the dangers of his wils obtaining,
Fright not this fondling from the sweets of gaine,
Nor weake-built hopes perswade him to abstaining,
When golds proposd the guerdon of his paine.
Thus Syren-like thou trainst him to the deepe;
Where waves oft lull him in his latest sleepe.

T'is thou false hell-hound, right corrupting coyne,
That makst poore Souldiers, needy, bare, disgraced,
While greedy guides their stipends doe purloyne,
And martiall discipline stands quite defaced.
O manners, times, O world-declyning daies!
Where might is right, and men do what they please.

When spend-thrift John, that goodly gentleman,
Hath swallow'd Lordships downe his dainty throte,
And brought his Fathers fortunes in the wane,
By gadding Cities in a silken Coate;
Then to some friend doth Lusty-blood complaine him,
His Bank-rupt birth-right can no more maintain him.

A man he is, and Hector was no more,
Then why not Captaine too as Hector was:
Besides, it is not as in times before,
When mens deserts were viewd in Vertues glasse.
A man may compasse wonders with a gift,
Then why not this?  Distresse will have a shift.

Thus, plotts he meanes, to get a prettie traine,
Pretending honour, and his Countries cause;
And then he musters up each simple Swaine.
Himselfe not knowing Armes, not Martiall lawes.
He stalkes the streets, as who say, This is hee,
(I meane that first will teach his men to flee.)

Unto this Captaine flocke both young and old,
He buies his servant out, and he his sonne,
O monstrous times when men are bought and sold,
Who goe unransom'd thinkes himselfe undone.
For what great hope or comfort can he finde,
That maketh one where blinde do leade the blinde.

The raskall remnant of these sillie men,
Are summond speedily by sound of dromme,
And Skapt-thrift wishes every one were ten,
Of greater number, greater gaines will come:
Well on they march, and still he steales a bite,
To feede his avaritious appetite.

This tuch and goe sets all his teeth on edge,
He'le be no Tantalus amid such treasure:
A thousand lawes the Lyon call alleadge,
To pay upon poore Asses at his pleasure:
Yet pollicie perswades him to forbeare them,
Till far from home, the Wolfe may boldly teare them.

No sooner are their travailes at an end,
But fresh afflictions full as fast beginning,
Yet sillie Lambes they deeme the Foxe a friend,
They shrinke no dog untill they see him grinning:
They little thinke the end of his conduction,
Is wealth and honour bought with their destruction.

This Judas set in Councell with himselfe,
Not how to soyle his foe and win the field,
No, no, he gapes for gaine and rusting pelfe,
No palme he seekes, but that doth profit yeeld:
Saies, When the yron's hot is chiefest striking,
Tyme serves my turne and bids me doe my liking.

What long before was plotted in his head,
The Monster prosecutes to this effect,
He purseth all the pay of those are dead,
The divell needes no councell to direct:
He that could bring himselfe to beggars plight,
Knowes how to rob another of his right.

This done he monthly minceth small their paye,
Sings Nunc dimittimus to halfe his Band,
The rest must live on pillage and on praye,
Such as they seaze from Boores upon the land.
Who best bestirres him for his Princes paie,
Takes half in hand, the rest at latter daie.

O spightfull spectacle, who could behold thee
That frightst my senses in th' imagination:
While to my selfe my selfe doe thus unfold thee
How am I ravished with indignation;
Those that to mount by others fall have sought,
O might their heads mount higher then their thought.

As he that travailes in an uncouth wood,
Fraught with those Fortunes which his father left,
Is sodainly surpriz'd by Robin Hood,
And in a theeves name there receives his shrift:
So stand these sillie soldiers at a bay,
Robd of their hire and basely sent away.

Poore playning Prodigalls, now must they wend,
Backe to their countrey with remorse and shame,
But wher's the feasting Father, or a friend,
To welcome home his sonne, forgive his blame?
Alas our yron age will not afford it.
What?  help the poore?  the Devill still abhorrd it.

Yet some there be that of a holy motion,
To harbor strangers, lodge them in the Cage:
And some because that fasting helpes devotion
Denie them foode their hunger to asswage:
Some whip them for their sins and former swarving,
More of their curtesie then the Poores deserving.

Who right conceits the miseries of Job,
His children, servants, goods, and cattell lost,
His bodie botched, basest ragges his robe,
His mind with millions of temptations tost:
Can fittest deeme their griefes true qualitie,
And sympathize poore Souldiers miserie.

Hell-damning drosse, thou art the fountaine cause
Of this injustice, raven, and confusion,
No man would spurne at dutie, God, or lawes,
Had not his heart to thee a false allusion.
O wracke of soules, the divels adamant,
Devouring numbers both by wealth and want.

The Infant-childe delights to play with golde,
The young man seekes it to maintaine his pleasure.
It is the life and Gods-good of the olde,
All ages deeme it as their dearest treasure.
Who gives a Rose to gaine a worthles weed?
We fell for good in shewe our good indeede.

Witnesse my Mistris, now no Mistris mine,
Who though no queen hath made King Midas choise,
For none must plucke the Redrose of her prime,
But he that gaines her with a golden voyce.
So young and covetous, a ten daies wonder
The divell joynes and I'le not put a sunder.

Say shameles Betresse, have I made thee blush,
Rating the saint, whom thou dost rate so deare?
Or is thine impudencie growne so flush
Thou waighst no credit, or thou wilt not heare:
O if thou bear'st a part of woman kinde,
Let fame relenting pittie pierce thy minde.

The senseles marble moved with my plaining,
Wets his pale cheekes and seemes to weepe with me;
The showres which daily from mine eyes are raining,
Draw the dum creatures to a sympathie:
Poore Philomele that sings of ravishment,
Forgets her tune to listen my complaint.

If in the woods I breath abroad my woes,
Each bow doth bend to deale away my tale;
And still as I her injuries disclose,
Great trees for sorrow seeme their tops to vaile.
Let me but sigh and say, She is unkind,
Echo replies aloude, She is unkind.

The strugling flood that still for passage grones,
Pausing his course, and wrapt in admiration
Of my laments, hart-breaking sighes and mones,
Sobs out the deskant of my desolation:
And runnes no more, till rivers growing ranke,
Cause him depart or overflowe the banke.

The vallies, rockes, and hollow caves resound,
Bearing the burthen to my wofull dittie;
My plaints have power to pierce the stonie ground,
And move the savage Brutes to manly pittie.
If Rockes, and Earth, and Beasts bewaile my state.
O looke on me, and be compassionate.

The heavens as griev'd locke up the lightsome day,
And Phoebus fleeting fayles the world of light;
Starres change their course and wander all astray,
The Mayden Moone forgets to shine by night,
Sham'd, that a Maid so shameles should be found,
Fiercer then Beasts, harder then stony ground.

The heaven-died stowers, sweet ofspring of the prime,
That gilde the medowes with their sommers pride,
Fading as in the frostie winters time,
Pitying my passions hould their heads aside:
The Silvan-Satyres in their green-wood-songs,
Tell how disdain sits laughing at my songs.

O learne of these (flint hearted) how to grieve,
Dumme showes they are, yet shew to thee thy dutie,
They weepe to see thee laughing in thy sleeve,
Thou laughst to see me snared in thy Beawtie:
Thinke thy affections dull, thy trespasse deepe,
When trees, and stones must teach thee how to weepe.

If so my sorrowes cannot pierce thy hart,
Yet force a teare, and faine to make a plaster,
Breath sighes, as if thou deeply feltst my smart,
And kisse me to as Judas kist his Master:
And when I rage, seeme thou withall to tremble
It's hard when I must teach thee to dissemble.

So shall my selfe enjoy thee in conceite,
And what is Love, but a conceited pleasure;
Small fishes are content to see the baite,
While greater sucke the sweet and gaine the treasure.
Love in conceit's a cony-catching play,
While I feed thoughts, he steales the wench away.

O well beset, unhappiest man alive,
Seeking to wreake my selfe, my selfe am wounded;
Poore snared Byrd, for libertie I strive,
Yet in the trappe, still more and more confounded,
As one that wipes his wound, yet still doth bleede,
So more I speake the worse alas I speede.

He that with oyle the wilde-fire seekes to quench,
Or bound a river in with banks of sand;
He that hath lov'd a stony-harted Wench,
And now with brawling thinks to quench the brand;
Learne this of me, late proved to my paine,
It's hard to bayle imprisoned thoughts againe.

When I sate downe to ease my griefs with plaining,
I thought my chiefest remedie to rate her
Hard words seemd swords to murther love remaining,
And deep love skornd, wold make me deadly hate her:
But while I seeke to quench loves hot desire,
My wind of words hath blowne a greater fire.

My time-bred troubles are but now beginning,
I love, I loth; I hate, I wish withall,
My threed is cut, and yet the Sisters spinning,
I live, I dye, I stand, and now I fall:
I laughing weepe, I hope and yet despaire,
I say she's foule, and straight I call her Faire.

Hence idle words, servants to shallow braines,
Unfruitfull sounds, wind-wasting arbitrators,
Your endles prattle, lessens not my paines,
His suite is cold, that makes you mediators.
Since fates have made me bankrupt of my blisse,
My dying life a very torment is.

In vaine I cavill at her crueltie,
At gold, at eyes, at senses, and the hart,
In vaine I spurne against my destinie,
In vaine I seeke to ease an endles smart;
No antidote at all can doe Me good,
But the effusion of my harmeles blood.

Poore hart why tremblest thou at this decree?
Thy selfe art easd by ending of this life,
For sorrow kild, thou gained libertie,
But if I live, thou livest still in strife:
Tell life, I'le not a minuts respite give
Since that is lost for which I sought to live.

O wretched life, what is thy benefite?
Whose chiefest sportings are calamitie,
Whose daies are spent in troubles, care, and spite,
Whose pleasures, sinne, whose all is vanitie:
Whose last is short, whose strength is but a breath,
Whose dare unknown, whose end is suddaine death.

O wished death, come kill all murdring greeves,
My soule survives in never dying feares,
Which round ingirt me like as many theeves,
And load my hart with pangues, mine eyes with teares.
If on the earth there may be found a Hell,
Within my soule, her severall torments dwell.

Yet dye I will not till my Testament,
The briefe contents of discontented mind,
Writ with my blood into the world be sent,
Bearing true witnesse to my faire-unkind,
That as her love might once have made me blest,
Her skorne hath sheath'd this dagger in my breast.

My spotted soule to him I doe commend,
In whose compare the heavens are most impure,
0n whose free promises my hopes depend,
To share my joyes ever shall indure:
My bodie I bequeath unto the earth,
The common Mother that first brought it forth.

My blessing I bequeath unto the blade,
That makes the breach for grislie death to enter,
She shall not ride my patience like a jade,
If death-wrought resolution may prevent her.
O welcome engine of my cares releasing,
That killst Despaire to make my hopes increasing.

My sorrowes, cares, hart-breaking sighes, and crosses,
Woes, lamentations, pining and despaires,
My teares, complaints, foule injuries and losses,
Griefs, shame, misfortune, and my daily feares,
I give to her that now gives me this fall,
The sole efficient of my Funerall.

Let her have time to rent herAmber haire,
Let her have time to thinke on me and rave,
Let her have time of favour to despaire,
And skorn'd of all to live Affections slave;
Let her have time to beg and none relieve her,
And every day bring crosses, more to grieve her.

Let her have time to prove her friends her foes,
And see her olde acquaintance all forsake her,
Let her have time her honest name to lose,
Abhorr'd of men, and cursed of her Maker.
And every minute let her finde a time
To rue my death her unrecalling crime.

My Halcyon daies of blisse and happines,
The milde forerunners of this fearefull storme,
I give to those whom better starres doe blesse,
Which never felt the sting of womans skorne;
What ever else is mine, disbursed be
To those that live and thinke no harme of me.

Come gentle knife, why lingrest thou so long?
Come ease my sorrowes with thy fatall stroke;
My heart is resolute, my hand is strong,
My lingring life more torment doth provoke.
O King of graves, why killst thou them abhor thee,
And turnst from me that now am readie for thee?

Avaunt thou viper, I thy spite defie,
Where life is lov'd thou readie art to kill,
But never once thy weapons wilt applie,
To the redressing of a wretches ill.
Come trustie hand for thou must doe the deede.
Since other friends are fled in time of neede.

The Starre that first made entrance in mine eye,
And thence departing strooke my senses blinde,
Then led my heart in base captivitie,
Yet to her prisoner proveth most unkinde:
Witnes faire heavens she, she, t'is onely she,
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.

EUBULUS.
Stay, stay thy hand (O Natures prodigie)
If blood and death must expiate thy rage,
Pittie thy selfe (foule beast) and murther me,
My life for thine, my selfe will be thy gage.
Ten thousand deaths my soule indures to see
Gods image wrong'd in thy mortalitie.

In massak'ring thy selfe, whom dost thou kill,
But with thy bodie that immortall soule,
For whose redemption Christ vouchsaft to spill
Those purple drops to quench the living coale
Of his deere Fathers deepe-deserved hate,
And to the heavens promote thy poore estate.

Think'st thou by dying to prevent the paine,
That seemes to pinch thee in this brittle life?
Alas this death begets thee life againe,
When with thy selfe, thy selfe shall be at strife,
When thou wilt thinke all paines consort in one,
And that thy selfe sustain'st them all alone.

O Acolastus, what foule fiend of Hell,
Would glut his fury with thy harmeles blood?
Watching thy death here in some shady cell,
To pray upon thy soule, thy soveraigne good:
Looke, studie, sigh for grace, and flye from evill,
Grace and resistance drives away the devill.

ACOLASTUS.
Art thou a God, a Man, or else a Ghost?
Com'st thou from heaven where blisse and solace dwell?
Or from the ayrie could-ingendring coast?
Or from the darkesome dungeon-hole of hell?
Or from the secret chambers of the deepe
Or from the graves where breathles bodies sleepe?

Art thou a Hermite in this wildernes?
Or else some Satyre maskt in ages weeds?
Or (by the heavens I charge thee to confesse)
Art thou her shape for whom my poore hart bleeds?
I, I, t'is so, thou art that cruell she,
That wrought my death, now fainst to pittie me.

What bloody scene hath crueltie to act?
Death is the worst thy malice can inflict,
And thou hadst seene my soules poore cittie sackt,
But thy deepe policie did contradict,
Knowing by death my troubles should have end,
Which to prolong thou mainly dost intend.

O be content with robbing me of life,
Why dost thou triumph over fortunes wracke?
The death of men determinates their strife,
And warres are finisht with the Cities sacke.
The Elephant and Dragon, mortall foes,
Bury their hate in mutuall overthrowes.

By life my soule was pind in little ease,
By death I seeke my thraldome to release,
Then let my life thy brutish hart appease,
And give me leave at least to dye in peace.
O let it not be said in time to come,
A womans hate survives till day of doome.

EUBULUS.
Fondling I am no God, nor tempting friend,
Nor yet the woman that could wish thee dead; 
Know me for Eubulus thy auncient friend,
Witness this snow-white fleece upon my head:
Marke my complection, habite, tongue and yeares,
How every thing in quondam sort appeares.

I am no flint-hart female, bloody minded;
Mocking thy senses with a borrowed shape,
But one that sees thy sense through passion blinded,
And sighes, and seekes away for thine escape:
Then charme this mad infection, that doth raigne
In beldam fury of thy witles braine.

Be not as sottish as the simple sort,
That wracke their wits upon misfortunes shelfe,
Nor yeelde thy reasons, beauty-battred fort,
Crying God helpe, yet never helpe thy selfe:
Thy crazed Shipp's not so farre runne on shore,
But thou maist scape and flourish as before.

ACOLASTUS.
Et tu Brute, wilt thou stab Caesar too?
Thou err my friend and wilt not see me wrong'd
I pray thee leave me without more adoo,
For with my life my sorrowes are prolong'd
I know thou pleasurst not in my distresse,
Then rob me not of deaths true happinesse.

Yet since in sun-shine of my better daies,
Thou wast a Father to my head-strong youth;
Training my rash-braind thoughts in reasons waies,
Whose words I ever found the glasse of Truth;
My cares shall take a truce with death so long,
Till I have made thee privie to my wrong.

Loe here at hand, a circle-braunching tree,
Whose leavie bosom makes a summer seate,
Nature hath raisd this arbour purposely
To shroude our bodies from the parching heate:
Here while we sit within this gloomy shade,
I'le tell my Love, and how it did invade.

 [EUBULUS.]
Then yeeld me up this irefull instrument,
The destin'd engine of thy tragedie:
T'is wisdomes rule, occasions to prevent,
And give no ground to Sathans trecherie.
Well now begin, and give thy sorrowes vent,
I'le sit and mourne with thee till day be spent.

ACOLASTUS.
To shew the poyson of my endles pining,
The taske is long and tedious to expresse,
Bright Phoebus to the Westerne deepe declining,
And repetition never made thing lesse:
Who rippes the rancour of old-wounded flesh,
In steede of healing, makes it bleede a fresh.

Yet since the heavens are so propitious,
To make my friend eye-witnesse to my fall;
Lysten kinde Father what I shall disclose,
How Love became Disdaines unhappie thrall:
And as I story my flint-moving wrong,
Weepe thou, to beare the burthen to my song.

SIC INCIPIT STULTORUM TRAGI-COMEDIA.

Three months agoe, when Phoebus in his pride
Had scal'd hot cancers sunny-parched cell;
And Ceres cast her summers green aside;
And flowres had chang'd their colour, forme, and smel;
When daies were long'st and nights were waxen short;
And yonglings met to wanton and to sport.

About this time I singled out a day,
With merry consorts to delight my selfe;
I thought my ship might sometime rove astray,
And yet not run her selfe on every shelfe.
What Syren plaid, but I durst dance her measure?
Thinking to master Venus sonne at pleasure.

Fortune, who long had ow'd my hap a grudge,
Summond wild younglings to a sommers drinking,
To which my merry mates and I did trudge,
Of such an accident full little thinking:
Where revels raigne and dancing holds a day,
I'ts hard if Acolastus keepe away.

Well, there was I, and there was Fortune too,
Who had prepar'd a baite to worke my bane;
There did I passe a pleasant houre or two,
In dauncing for the gloves and other gaine:
There did I gaze against that glorious Sunn,
By which my heart was fir'd, my sight was done.

O give me leave to sigh a little while,
Before my hell of foule mishap breake loose
But let not Fortune see me least she smile,
And say, his mountaine thoughts end in a mouse,
Oh, t'is a burthen that will breake the backe,
To see ones foe triumphing in his wracke.

Scarce had the Sunn attain'd his noon-tide pricke,
Gracing our pastimes with a sommers daie,
A traine of Ladies trouping very thicke,
Directly towards us made their speedy way:
For want of worse our Musicke drewe them on,
Pans pype plaies sweete, Apollo being gone.

Looke how astonisht in a qualmy traunce,
The man that meets a lothsome-visag'd Beare,
Struck with amazement of this suddaine chaunce,
Falls to the ground halfe slaine with very feare,
Within his heart and sences are at strife,
Past care of death, and yet past hope of life.

So was I daunted at mine eyes first gazing,
Sweeping they came, and seemd to brush the ground,
Their tipto-tripping pace bred double mazing,
Their ratling silkes my senses did confound:
It seem'd, Dianas Nymphes had left her Queene,
To sport themselves a while upon this greene

Or love-sicke Venus in a huntresse weede,
Meaning to seeke Adonis in the wood,
Mounted upon a snow-white coloured Steede,
From Pegasus proude race vaunting his blood,
Came marching onward with a mayden-pace,
A thousand Nimphes attending on her grace.

My mates all ravished with admiration,
Stood like the men which once Joves golden sonne.
By his speares wonder-working Transformation;
Turn'd into semblance of a sencelesse stone,
Or as Acteon standing at a Bay,
Finding Diana naked in his way.

Fortune and Love chose me amongst the rest,
As sweetest linguist of perswading wit,
With modest motives kindly to request,
These sinfull Saints a little while to sit,
And see how shepheards spend the holy-day,
In youth-bred sports, and casting Care away.

Twixt hope and feare I marched on to meet them,
My rustick blush forbad me to dissemble,
Met face to face, when I was ment to greete them,
My words were done, and every joynt did tremble:
Till my poore heart rebuking much my blame,
Untide my tongue, and bad me speake for shame.

More faire and beautifull, then were those three,
That found the golden fruite on Idas plaine;
Gods, Angels, Saints, or whatsoe're you be,
Accept the proffer of a simple swaine;
Draw neere, and till the heate of day be spent
Looke on, and laugh at Shepheards meriment.

We have no thing of worth for to present,
We plead for pardon ere our sport begin,
Our boldnes springeth from a true intent,
Which makes an error oftentimes no sin:
We boast of naught, save that it shall goe hard,
But our good wils shall purchase your regard.

These words scarce past the limits of my lippes,
Sounding a parley in their modest eares;
A wanton yongling from her fellowes skippes,
Which like a Comet in my sight appeares,
Causing my silly wits and me to sunder,
Infusing me with prophesies of wonder.

For by this crosse aspect I gather'd well,
(And yet not well, because I could not shun it)
In her faire face my joyes defac'd to spell,
My battaile lost before her words begin it:
For from her eyes, a kinde looke did she dart,
Which through mine eyes div'd down into my hart.

A prettie while this prettie creature stoode,
Before the engin of her thoughts began,
Seeming to sympathize my heavie moode,
Pitying my prone lookes, and my colour wan:
Till blushing forth a pure vermilion dye,
With low-tun'd voice she made me this replie.

Shepheard we see you are disposde to flatter,
That frumpe us with a false-supposed fayre;
Mens words are Metaphors, it makes no matter,
You know poore women, sir, are made to beare:
But since you made so plausible a motion,
This day we consecrate to your devotion.

Mistris (quoth I) if any take offence,
My heart makes good the trespasse of my tongue;
Humanitie full easily can dispence,
Where love and zeale are authors of the wrong.
Good wine desires no bush to set it forth,
And I too meane to blaze you beauties worth.

But (Ladie) if a swaine may be so bold,
To crave admittance mongst your other men,
My selfe will bring you where you shall behold
Our rusicke revels at your ease, and when
In Thetis lappe the Sunne shall drowne the day,
Ile set you forward in your former way.

As fares the man convict of Heresie,
Whose Judgement doomes him death by cruell flame,
The world eye-witness to his infamie,
Bearing a fagot for his further shame,
Full faintly wending onward to the fier,
Where selfe opinion shall receive his hire:

So marched I before this mayden-trayne,
Love swore, excuses should not serve my turne,
Quoth he, Thou thinkest me by Reason slaine,
Thou holdst a false point, now recant and burne:
I cry'd retyre, and he injoynd this smart,
To beare fond fancies fagot in my hart.

Who so hath seene the tender Mary-gold,
Spreading her pride against the worlds faire eye,
But when the sunne his glorie doth infold,
This prettie Creature shuts and seemes to die:
So did I love to gaze upon my Sunne,
But when she turnd away, my life was done.

Thus while my sight was surfetting on Beautie,
We sodainely surpriz'd the bashfull Swaynes,
Who shewed their harts-joy by their homely dutie,
Kissing these lovely Ladies for their paynes;
Seeking all meanes to farther their delight,
While thus I ruminate on Fortunes spight.

Inconstant minion, mother of mischance,
True Vertues crosse, delighting still in chang,
When most thou fawn'st thy favour's but a glance,
Thy naughtie nature loveth still to range:
Great pittie is it, were there remedie,
That men are tyde to thine extremitie.

Thou art a stepdame to each honest thing
Training up vices like a loving Nurse,
Crowning the begger, pulling downe the king,
What ever Nature made thou makest worse:
Thou helpst a man a while to cast his dice,
And turnst thy wheele upon him in a trice.

Thou dost usurpe the worlds circled stage,
Acting thereon thy variable scenes,
Where oft inspired with a bedlam rage,
Thou plaguest the innocent with endles paines:
And those that seeme to day but lookers on,
Thou makst thine actors ere to morrow gone.

O hatefull Hag!  thou hast betray'd my life,
In giving weapons unto Cupids wrath;
Perceiving Love and Reason were at strife,
Thou falsly traind'st me on to Errors path;
Where taking vantage on my hard distresse,
Love forst my heart his valour to confesse.

For Love had labour'd long to worke my fall,
Battring the bulwarke of my naked brest;
But Reason gave his force no ground at all,
Bidding the blinde Boy set his heart at rest:
For more he sought to trie this fond condusion,
The more my courage shin'd in his confusion.

Till thou to spit the venome of thy spite,
Subornedst Cupid how he soone might slay me,
Abandoning his bowe and arrowes quite,
You laid this privie complot to betray me;
When Fortune first had brought me to the bay,
A Maydens eyes should steale my heart away.

Immortall heavens, and ye great powers above,
From whose faire influence all justice flowes,
Worke your revenge on Fortune and on Love,
From whom the title of my trouble growes:
That men beholding it may safely say,
No sinne can scape unpunisht past his day.

While thus I prosecute my fruitles playning,
Two Shepheards summon'd me to see their sport,
Whose suddaine sight soone mov'd me to abstaining,
Least they might heare my tragicall report:
Clearing my face from cloudes of discontent,
With these two loving swaines away I went.

Like as the soft and tender leaved flowre,
Whose drouping colour shewes his life is done,
Being lately drenched in some dismall showre,
Till he attract freshing from the sunne:
So I whose hopes but lately seem'd to die,
Was now reviv'd by beauties fresh supplie.

For now in Tropicke of false Fortunes height,
My nest was built by sweetest Beauties side,
Loves yoke was easie now I felt no waight,
My ship was carried with a gentle tide:
I sate too hot, yet still I did desire,
To live a Salamander in the fire.

Now did I wish the day would ne're be done,
So loth I was to leave this Paradise,
Or that our revels were but new begun,
But swift wing'd Pleasure passeth with a trise:
For Love had sworne when ere I did depart,
I should perchance goe home without a hart.

Now while I court the Loadstarre of my life,
And with her prettie parley feede mine eares;
O sugred words, yet sharper then a knife,
Distilling Nectar-droppes on all that heares;
The merry swaines broke of our private pleasure,
And musicke summond us to daunce a Measure.

Taking this Ladie by the lillie hand,
I taught her quickly treade the shepheards round:
Lo now blowes up the secret-smoking brand,
Which did my reason and my sense confound,
For Love is nine-liv'd kill him ne're so much,
The wanton Boy reviveth with a tutch.

Looke as a man stung by the noysome Aspe,
Whose hony-poyson tickles with delight,
Sucks in the venome of this mortall waspe,
Wholy suspectles of the serpents spight;
So I so mad, that reason could not turne me,
Bath'd in the flame, which afterward did burne me.

Oft did I strive to take her in mine armes,
And tell my harts griefe by some silent motion,
She was too young to levell at my harmes,
Or picke a meaning from my dum devotion.
Oft would my dotage make me daunce amisse
And then begin new measure with a kisse.

She bad me dance true, but I lov'd my faining,
(Hang him that loves and has no mother-wit)
I said our musick err'd in over-straining,
No mervaile then my footing could not hit;
And to prevent the jarres that came by this,
Our lips made musicke where our feete did misse.

Our countrty Round by this was almost done,
When wanton wearie suddainly she grew;
Nay then (quoth I) would we had ne're begun,
Faire Nimph cheere up thy selfe and dance a new:
For if thou droope, our hearts will fall as fast,
As Autumne leaves before the Winters blast.

Behold the sunne-beames for thy Beauties sake,
Dancing Lavoltoes on the liquid floare;
The whistling winds unwonted musicke make,
Whiles Syrens sit and sing upon the shoare:
Yea the fierce Wolfe is come to see thee play,
And for thy sake our Lambes keepe holyday.

See, see faire Flora deckt in summers pride,
Burning in emulation of thy beautie;
And Venus nestled by Adonis side,
Seeking to doe his love peculiar dutie:
Faire heavens Queene sits dallying with her Jove,
Least he should see thee, and so change his Love.

If then the treasure of thy supreme faire,
Breed jealousie in gods, wonder in men;
O doe not thus thy beauties worth impaire,
Quitting our kindnes with unkinde disdaine:
Gentilitie should beare a gentle minde,
And perfect Beautie never proves unkinde.

This said, I train'd her friendly from the rest,
Into a sweete and solitarie place,
Where Love himselfe might daigne to build his nest,
All things consorted with so great a grace:
Had Mars plaid double here with Loves faire queen.
Their double-dealing Phoebus ne're had seen.

For why such was the shadow of this grove,
All thicke beset with circle-branching trees,
It gave no passage to the sunne above,
Whose piercing light our actions oversees:
But here and there finall day-holes did appeare,
To light the ground, and let in cooling aire.

Amidst this Thicket with a silent gliding,
A Christall brooke ran in a flowrie brim,
Where labouring Swans train'd up by natures guiding
Record a thousand sweete notes as they swim:
Sweet notes they were, tun'd with a sweeter voice,
That charm'd the trees, and made the stones rejoice

Here summers Queene had made her flowry bed
Of the white Lillie, and the crimson Rose,
With thousand other kinds of white and red,
Whose heavenly hew her art did so dispose,
As bred amazement in the dazzled sight,
And cloy'd the senses with a worlds delight.

The chirping Birds to shunne the heate of June,
Fled to the shelter of this shadie ground
Where praising Nature in a silverie tune,
The hollow caves and vallies made resound:
In briefe, this plot contain'd the perfect sum
Of all the sweetes in faire Elisium.

While towards this Paradice we made our way,
We were incountred by the glorious sunne,
Who purposely to force this faire Nimph stay,
Some hotter now then when his course begunne;
That he might feede his false eye with her sight,
Whose beautie dimm'd the glorie of his light.

My Love was faint, and forste to set her downe,
Whose Angels face distilled pearly sweate;
Love bad me give her there a grass-greene gowne,
In spite of Phoebus, and his forced heate,
But while my lingring thoughts stood to devise,
I saw God Morpheus seazing on my prize.

Whereat I fell into a jealous trance,
Sleep eyes (quoth I) see not my Love prophan'd,
Of if heavens power have power to helpe mischance,
Let not the Rose of beautie thus be stain'd:
Fie, fie (quoth Reason) where's thy wits in keepe:
Disturbe her not, thy Love is but asleepe.

I laught to thinke hart-burning jealousie
Should build a stage for Puppets in my braine,
Presenting visions to my phantasie,
That nothing were, nor could returne againe:
Self-biting Curre, a bolde unbidden guest,
Whose foule disturbance marres true Lovers feast.

Methought her sleeping proved sleepe divine,
Methought the windes for pitie would not blow,
Shut were the casements of her christall eyen,
Which waking, like two silver Moones did show;
Shut were the day-bright eyes, where all might see
Faire Beautie lickt in love with Chastitie.

I'le charme the brazen doors of fearefull dreames,
And bind the sterne God Morpheus in a chaine,
Least he molest thy minde with idle theames,
Which in the fancies of the night doe raigne,
And guard thy person with as deare a price,
As if I kept the gates of Paradice.

For thy sake Acol shall perfume the winds
With coldly Myrre, and curious Ambergreece:
I'le venter more then Jason did to find
The happie fortune of a golden fleece,
Which a my selfe full safelie meane to keepe
And wrap thee in it, when thou gins to sleepe.

And you sweet birds, whose nimble-relisht notes,
Ravish the soule of man, and cheere the day,
Stay the shrill descant of your silvery throtes
Till Beautie wake and bid your musicke play:
Or if you needes will sing, some tune devise,
Whose Angel-sound may charme all Argus eyes.

Thus did I greete the Idoll of my hart,
Offring up teares before her fleeing shrine.
And was beginning to bewray my smart,
When loe, as if her spirit could devine,
Opening the closet of her lockt-up eyes,
She did prevent me in this cunning wise:

Shepheard, I glory in the happie chance,
That made me Mistris of so kinde a man,
And one so well my praises can advance;
Good Lord, how long since you the whetstone wan?
Your high-pitcht words are like the torch by night,
That wasts it selfe in giving others light.

Tell me whose person did you passionate?
Expressing motions of internate woe,
Grieving your selfe to gesse at others fate?
You were to blame, that would not let me knowe,
Nor seeke my helpe to play some tragicke part;
For I can sigh too, yet ne're rent my hart.

Belilke your Swaines intend a Comedie,
To be presented in some solemne place;
And love-sicke you these passions must descrie:
Which to adorne with action and with grace,
You daily thus make triall of your part,
With sighes and teares that never pierce the hart.

Ah would to God flint-harted wench (thought I)
Thou feltst the crosse which love hath laid upon me;
Or that my woes gave not thy words the lye,
And my poore heart had power henceforth to shunne thee.
Thy Mother (wanton) was not halfe so olde,
Yet knew she when a sutors tale was tolde.

Love brought me in to acte this wooing scene,
The argument was written in thy face.
The words were such as might expresse my paine
The end to win thee to a liking grace:
And every period had his sense made plaine,
With teares, which chorus-like mine eyes did rain.

Thou didst not sleep, yet hearing could not move thee,
(A colde presage for him that meanes to wooe)
My wanton gesture seem'd to say, I love thee,
But all was labour lost that I could doe:
My suite was sleeveles, thy regard so colde,
As if that I anothers tale had tolde.

This said my hart, but this I durst not say,
So love the regent of my hart might heare me,
The place unfit my fancie to bewray,
The time and other circumstance did feare me:
Her scene perform'd, my tongue thus acts his part,
Hiding the Love, that revel'd in my hart.

Faire Saint, if Love have forste me to offending,
With yrksome prattle, crossing thy repose;
O blame the beautie on thy face depending,
That gives a tongue of praises to thy foes,
Then graunt me leave, how ever others deeme,
To give thy Beautie excellent esteeme.

But please thee (Sweeting) finish out our walke,
(The pleasure great, the labour is but small)
And in yond Eden see how every stalke,
Brags the sweete blossomes he is blest withall,
I'le load thy lappe with Floras tender pride,
And bring thee homeward in the Even-tide

Thus said, I brought her to this shadie rest,
This green-dy'd grove, this summers Paradice,
Where Love by pleading hard might make me blest,
Where I was bent to cast my Fortunes dice,
And in a minute ease or end the strife,
Or win my Love, at else to lose my life.

Now while the Damsell wondring Natures store,
Seaz'd on the flowry treasure of the spring,
And more she gatherd, still desiring more,
(The last is best, and new fels every thing)
I madly tost betweene Despaire and Joy,
Prai'd for sucess to the blind-seeing Boy.

Great Prince of Love, to whose victorious hand
My frozen hart was forste perforce to yeeld,
And in my bosome entertaine the brand,
Gainst which weake Reason neverman could sheeld:
O be propitious to an humble Swaine,
And give my love sucesse, to quite my paine.

Thou art so little (else our Poets misse)
That thou canst hide thee in a wanton eye,
So subtile thou canst enter with a kisse,
So craftie thou canst counterfaite to dye,
Or being dead, thy qualitie is such,
To live againe by vertue of a tuch.

O lend me thy insinuating power,
Words steep'd in syrop of Ambrosia,
To force my Danae with their golden shower,
That she may blesse me with a yeelding nay:
Each sentence be a sweet inchanting charme,
Upon her hart-strings playing loves alarme.

So shall thy glorie be immortall still,
The conquest woon to set thy captives free,
And cure their wounds, whom thou mightst justly kill:
O exercise thy pittie then in me;
that finding her to ease my heavie bands,
May blesse the time I fell into thy hands.

By this her bosome stor'd, her lap was full,
And wanton weary, quickly set her downe,
No prettie flower there was, but she did pull;
No colour set in Ariadnes crowne,
Or in the compasse of faire Iris Bowe,
She did not gather to enrich her showe.

Now powrefull Love that revel'd in my hart,
Contrould my silence, hating to be mute,
Still rubs the soare that made my wound to smart,
And strongly urg'd me to commence my sute:
Till fancie growne too headstrong to retire,
Thus in a word I tolde her my desire.

Goddesse (quoth I) for lesse thou canst not be,
God lieve thou couldst, or that my birth were better,
My love, my life, both consecrate to thee,
I offer as an insufficient debter:
O stand propitious to an humble Swaine,
Thae craves but love to answer love againe.

I call to record Venus and her Sonne,
No meanes unsought, no art unwrought by me,
To quench this flame when first it was begunne,
Foreseeing still this foule extremitie;
But wisdome weake, my Reasons force was small,
To conquer love, which conquers wit and all.

I know no bastard Hauke can soare so high,
As doth the Hobbie towring high by kind;
Nor Aegle-like behold the worlds faire eye,
But with his beames their sight is stricken blind.
I know gainst Nature actions are in vaine,
And high-pitcht thoughts reape nothing but disdaine.

Yet Phoebus shining, little Gnats may play,
Small flies may pearch them by the Aegles side,
It lies in compasse of thy yea, or nay,
To be my bane, or to become my Bride:
Love strikes a match t'wixt mortall men and Gods,
Sweete love me then, can be no greater oddes.

O be remembred, was not Vulcan lame?
Yet was he Lord of lovely Venus bed;
Or if he were not, more his wife to blame,
That rul'd the raynes to make him beare the head.
Such Vulcanes now are ours, who doting olde
Marrie young Maids to keepe them from co-colde.

Divine Aurora full as faire as she,
Whose heaven-di'de face the Graces still admire,
Lov'd gray-beard Tython, as ill fac'te as he,
And in her choice so pleas'd her chast desire,
That oft she said, when Beauties dowre is spent,
Mine old mans love shall yeeld me sweet content.

I will not muffle up a meane estate,
As smoth-tongu'd sutors use to doe,
Bragging of Birth, of Friends, of this and that,
Of money, lands, yea and of Vertue too,
Breathing vaine boasts of many a golden shower,
And things (God wote) were never in their power.

A shame to boast of bloods antiquitie,
Wherin no honour nor true Vertue lies;
Each Brute may bragge hereof as well as we,
One still succeeding as another dyes:
T'is Vertue (Minion) doth nobilitate,
And makes a Monarch of a meane estate.

Let others promise Mountaines if they list,
Intrapping fooles by false insinuations,
Till womens hopes doe end in Had I wist,
And make them say, Mens words are but temptations.
I hate all shifts, plaine dealing still is blest,
I like the meane, and here set downe my rest.

My dwelling is within a countrie Farme,
My table richly furnisht with Content,
My robes are such as keepe my body warme,
My pleasures rate sits at an easie rent,
My cheere is great, my charge is very small,
My fruits, my flocks; my foes are none at all.

My life is nothing but a world of Love,
I love my God, and next I love my King,
I love my Caesars friends that sit above,
I honour Vertue above any thing:
I love my countrey and my dearest kin,
Briefly I nothing hate but mizers sin.

I spend the day time on these pleasant Plaines,
And while my Lambes grow wanton with the spring,
Upon an oaten pype I cheere my paines,
And being wearie, straight I fall to sing:
This done, I laugh againe, and make my crowne,
To see the world of late turn'd upside downe.

Our Fathers plained in their weary daies
How much the world was chang'd from that of yore:
We say of late, t'is turned many waies
Yet will not stand as Adams did before:
Each side is turn'd, and yet it standeth wrong.
And will doe still, I'le tell thee wench how long.

While Kings do thirst for Countries and for Crownes,
And Princes pray upon their Neighbour Landes,
Might treads down right, and Treason felleth Townes.
Justice lies fetterd in oppressions bandes,
So long the righteous gods will surely frowne,
And we shall find the world turn'd upside downe.

While Nobles vainely vaunting of their blood,
Doe fell themselves to sensuall appetite,
Neglecting time to doe their Countrey good,
To punish wrongs, ayde the poore mans right;
So long the righteous gods will surely frowne,
And we shall finde the world turn'd upside down.

While citties swin in Lucre, Lust and Pride,
No art but craft, no gainefull trade but sinne,
While velvet breeches is allow'd to ride,
And aged Wisdome walketh bare and thinne;
So long the righteous gods will surely frowne,
And we shall finde the world turn'd upside downe.

While Leacherie and Lucar strike a match,
Making a compound of two deadly sinnes;
And or'e th' Hesperean fruite like dragons watch,
Or as the Eden-keeping Cherubims;
So long the righteous gods will surely frowne,
And we shall finde the world turn'd upside downe.

While poore are pincht by grunting Avarice,
And Gentils forste their joyntures for to fell
To Father Gravity, whose biting vice
Will lend his soule for handsill unto hell;
So long the righteous gods will surely frowne,
And we shall finde the world turn'd upside downe.

While younglings chuse their Lovers by their coyne,
Seeking to graft upon a golden tree,
Goods make the choice, the divell he must joyne,
But ware their soules, the Priest will have his fee;
So long the righteous gods will surely frowne,
And we shall finde the world turn'd upside downe.

Briefly while Vices maske in Vertues weed,
And Reason made a Baude to each abuse;
While Beasts are fatted, good men suffer need,
And all things altered from their proper use;
So long the righteous gods will surely frowne,
And we shall finde the world turn'd upside downe.

Thus while the world in sinne is madly tost,
Some beare the purse, but Judas loves no poore
The rest in pleasures Labyrinth are lost,
And would returne, but Custome keepes the doore;
I sit aloof and laugh the world to scorne,
Happie in this, to be a Shepheard borne.

I am a King, my Conscience is my Crowne,
My Court is thoughts, enriched with Content,
My minde to me is as a walled Towne,
My Treasure, Grace which never can be spent;
The want of worldly things is very small,
To him whose heart desires them not at all.

I make my power the limits to my will,
And count weldoing summe of all my wealth,
My wishes fewe, and easie to fulfill,
My care is none but soule and bodies health;
In Heaven my happe, on God my hopes relye;
Loe thus I live, and thus I meane to dye.

Say me then (Sweeting) dost thou like mine offer,
My love, my life, and all at thy commaund?
Say, canst thou stoope unto a poore mans proffer?
Thou art my Judge, here I holde up my hand;
Now passe the speedy doome of life or death,
Or cure my bane, or kill me with a breath.

I had no sooner said, but straight began
The cloudes appeare that menaced a storme,
Her face faire skie being turned pale and wan,
What might I hope but tempest every houre?
The cursed Fates have cloud-ecclipst my Sun,
Whose light once lost, of force my life is done.

First darts her amiable brow coy frownes,
And cruell hate inserted in disdaine
Inthrones her selfe, then scorne and wrath abounds,
And where before Love-tempring lookes did raigne,
There proud Contempt arm'd with disdainfull ire,
Scornd proffer'd service of my poore desire.

Heart-slaine with lookes, I fell upon the ground,
Her meaning strooke me ere her words were done,
As weapons met before they make a sound,
Or as the deadly bullet of a gunne:
Yet all my passions had no power to move her,
But thus she rates me, that so much did love her?

Presumptuous Swaine, proud selfe-conceited groome,
Whose climing thoughts at last will breake their necke,
God lieve my hate might helpe to build thy tombe,
And I survive to triumph on thy wracke;
That when the world shall see thy love disgraced,
Men may beware of love too highly placed.

What wanton marke of loose im modestie
Could'st thou decipher in me all this while?
Dar'st thou presume to touch a deitie,
Before she grace thee with a yeelding smile?
Poore foole, what starres bewitch thy wretched thought,
To fancie her, that sets thee so at nought?

Thou seest my bodie straight as Cedar tree,
That fames the woods of rich Arabia:
My browes embost with heavens rich Heraldree,
Tables containing Beauties perfect lawe:
Mine eyes two twinckling stars, whose piercing raies;
Have power to dim the brightest summer daies.

My face the Sunne-enlightening beauties skye,
Whose charmefull spels the proudest can controule,
Loves Adament to every wandring eye,
That like a Syren can inchant the soule,
The shop where Nature sets her art to showe,
Where crimson Roses sleepe in beds of snowe.

Poore foolish flie, why plaist thou with the flame?
Looke not on beautie for it soone will burne thee:
Shun, shun the thought which may procure thy shame;
The fire once kindled, t'is too late to turne thee.
I am mild Venus mongst gentilitie,
But fierce Medusa to thy baser eye.

Thy birth too base for me to beare thy name,
Thy person nothing hath that may commend thee,
Thy living will not let thee play such game,
Thy threed-bare love full little can befriend thee;
Renounce thy suite, roote out these fancies straight,
Thou art no Atlas for so great a waight.

Or else in light of heaven, I here protest,
I love thee so, to live thy foe till death,
For could one kinde looke ever make thee blest,
First would I forced be to yeeld my breath.
The more thy love, the greater is thy paine;
I will not stay to heare thee speake againe.

With this she left the Melancholy place,
This fatall grove, the bed of mine unrest;
And backe unto her fellowes hies a pace,
Leaving me prostrate, heavily distrest:
Looke how a bright starre shooteth in the night,
So fast she fled, and vanisht from my sight.

Farewell (quoth I) sweet Saint of puritie,
Wonder of women, and the worlds admire;
More was I speaking, but it would not be,
Greife stopt my dumbe tongue with too much desire;
That I was forste to sigh insteade of speaking,
As if my swolne heart were already breaking.

Then brake th' unchannel'd issue of mine eyes,
My teares gave vent unto my tired soule,
Who breath'd hot sighes like lightning from the skye,
Such is Desire, which no man can controule;
And pining griefe still thinkes it treble wrong,
When heart is barr'd the aydance of the tongue.

Thus as a man laid speechles in a traunce,
Or one resembling deaths anatomie,
The birds in silence wondring at my chaunce,
Abruptly ceast their busie harmonie:
Till some propitious powre to ease my paine
Restor'd my sense, and thus I cri'd amain;

O quis te nostris oculis, pucherrima Virgo,
Obiecit Deus, & visam te protinus idem
Eripuit nobis, saevo ut consumere igni?
Illa meo nunquam facies de pectore abibit;
Illam vos etiam mecum discetis amare
Intonsi montes, vos umbriferae convalles.
Sive greges inter captabo frigus & auram,

Flumina seu propter salices in valle putabo,
Aut agitans instabo aliud quodcunque, tibi ante
Carmina pauca canam, & te pectore suspirabo,
Toto unam te corde; prius (dediscet amare
Gramina ovis, nemora alta ferae, vaga flumina pisces,)
Quam tua de nostris vellatur cura medullis,
O decus, atque animi nostri pergrate voluptas!

I lookt about if any would reply,
(Griefie best is pleasde with partner in his plaining)
The Damsell gone, I saw no creature nye,
Save trees and stones which could not know my meaning:
To whom shrill Eccho in pittie of my paine,
Records my woes, and tels them o're againe.

And now the night with darkenes over-spred,
Had drawne her sable curtaines ore the earth,
And from her cole-blacke melancholy bed,
Sent foggie mists and filthie vapours foorth;
When home I went poore, haples, and forlorne,
Cursing the day that ever I was borne.

O blacke Despaire, foule lot of faithfull Love,
Blasting our hopes, ere they begin to bud,
Whose dogged nature pittie cannot move,
Nor ought can pacifie but humane blood:
A thousand times thou end'st a wretched life,
Which lives again to pine in further strife.

The Nimphes and Satyrs in their ayrie bowres,
Dansed their chorus, but it would not please me,
No pastures, walkes, nor wreath of sweetest flowres,
No flocks, no friends, nor no delight could ease me;
Her doome is past intreatie could not stay it;
I owe Despaire a death, and I must pay it.

This plot, this place, this melancholy grove,
I singled out to lay my Cares to sleepe,
To end my life, and with my life my love;
Pitty not me (sweet friend) forbeare to weepe:
Death chang'd to life I never shall repent,
That life is dead, that lives in discontent.

EUBULUS.
The weary Sunne now settles in the West,
And time permits not speake what I was ment,
This night I purpose thou shalt be my guest,
I'le tell thee things perhaps to thy content;
And e're our Lambes lye downe to rest to morrow,
I'le find a salve to counterpoise thy sorrow.
