Now gentle blastes, forerunners of the day,
Had summond hatefull Darknes packe away:
And Horror, Coachman unto oughly night,
Made his blacke Steeds poast with all speed he might,
From foorth our Hemisphere, not daring bide
To looke upon Auroras gorgious pride.
And now from new spows'd wife, the fierie Sunne
Was risen, and from Ocean seas begunne,
To drive his golden Chariot, that he might
To all the world declare his glorious light.
When Thamesis, the fairest Queene on earth,
To solemnise her annuall day of birth,
Appareled in Robe of purest white,
All thicke of golden shimiring Spangles dight;
Which gainst the Sunne reflecting beames did cast,
As do the Starres, that in the heavens are plast.
Her haire bound up in knots like golden Wier,
And crownd with Garlands of sweete smelling Brier;
Unto a Meddow by, his flowing streames
Did goe:  where she from heat of Phoebus beames,
Under the coole shade of the spreading Trees,
Did meane to sport and sing sweete virolees.
With her faire Nimphes, each having in her hand,
To fill with precious flowers a little maund.

It was about the selfe same time of yeare,
When from the midst of heaven the Sunne doth beare
His scorching heate, and makes it swiftly role,
Unto the Starres of the Antartique Pole.
Then when Pomona lades her slender bowes,
To serve Autumnus her diseased spowse.
Autumnus who in presse with naked feete,
From sweete ripe Grapes, make pleasant Wines to fleete.

In Ivorie hand faire Thames a Maund did hold,
Most rarely painted, and adorned with golde,
Which precious Jewell great Ocean did
To Doris give, what time he did her wed:
Which precious rich Maund lovely Doris after,
Did give to Thames her derling and her daughter.

Upon that Maund were many Histories
Depicted in such rare and curious wise,
That seemd as Art with Nature strove t' excell
In the rare workmanshyp, for none could tell,
Save Vulcane, who some sayd, did make the same,
How like to it, an other Maund to frame.

There might y' have seene a very stately Bed,
Made like a Boat; which certaine Tritons did
With their strong scalie backes uphold and stay,
All armde with Oares, all coullard like the Seat
Bout whom, faire Sea-Nimphs sported chearfully,
Delighted with the Tritons company:
Where, on the poop, stood Neptune; who did hold
In his right hand his Trident tinde with gold.
And under his left arme a winding Shell,
Like those from whence (as ancient Poets tell)
The heades of Tiber and of Nilus ran,
Or ere their floodes unto the salt Sea came.

Joves braine-bred-daughter at the prow was placed,
Armed as then when she from heaven chaced
The hundred handed Titan to his grave,
Upon the Fish that did Orson save.
The Testerne like a Tile, all covered
With purple Velvet richly imbrodered,
With orient round Pearle was supported by;
Certaine faire Sea-Nimphes on whose head did lie,
The Arched Ribbes in very stately order,
As on so many columnes on a border
Bout which was painted the imagerie
Of many Sea-gods, very curiously;
With Curtaines suitable thereto:  whereon
The Romaine Lucrece livelesse, pale, and wan,
Lay all besmeared in her owne goare blood,
Which with a Poyniard her owne hand had shod,
As sacrifice unto her chastitie;
Which was bereav'd by Tarquine spightfully.
And there by cunning Woorkman curiously,
Was made a Land-shaft, in which one might see,
Steepe craggie Rockes, high Mountaines, shady Woodes,
Greene pleasing Fieldes, and crooked winding Floodes;
Where, in the middle of a pleasant Lawne,
There was a stately Fountaine sweetly drawne;
Whose water from a Harpies breast did fall,
Of Brasse, into a Cesterne paved all
With polisht Marble, and with Porphire stone;
In which the Painter had his cunning showne,
In neately laying of his cullours, that
It seemd a true Fount, and no counterfect:
In which was chast Diana with her Nimphes,
All naked, bathing of their tender limbes;
On whom Acteon in the changed shape
Of fearefull Deare, full greedily did gape,
Turned thereto because he should not tell,
Had seene Diana naked in a Well:
By whom were made his wearie Hound that lapped
The water which from foorth the Fountaine dripped;
Whom fearing, he did seeke to flie:  for as
His body, so his minde transformed was;
And on the hanger of a Hill hard by,
The Dogges pinching his hantches you might see;
A rewfull sight, yet could not be amended,
Since he Dianas grace had so offended.
And bout the Verges seemely to behold,
Trailes of Morisco workes were wrought in gold.

Thus lovely Isis with his comely traine
Of beauteous Nimphes, into the Meddow came;
Where, on one side a shady Forrest grew;
To Which Aurora oft her selfe withdrew,
To heare her Loves complaint, and where the Moone,
Oft stayde to looke upon the Latmian Lowne:
In which did grow the tough and hardie Ashe,
The builder Oke; Holme fit for Carters lash,
Chast lovely Daphne closed under rinde,
Incestuous Mirh, that weepeth still of kind:
Then peaceful Olive, and the holsome Pine;
The sayling Firre, and eke the drunken Vine:
Upon whose boughes, pearcht the lascivious Sparrow,
The temperate Turtle, and the wight wingd Swallow,
Who flying singes, and singing studieth where,
With more art then with cost, her nest to reare:
The which, as patterne may be looked on
By rarest Archytect and cunningst man.
The little Owsle, and the mounting Larke;
The prettie Qualie, and charitable Storke,
Whose kindnesse to olde Parents children learne;
For oft to aged Parents you are more sterne.
High flying Cranes, by whose orderly flight,
Mars first was taught in rancked squadrons fight.
And peacoks, which against the Sunne do reare
Their painted tayles with Argus eyes made faire.
With little Nightingales, who divers fly
With changed notes do make sweet melodie,
Feigning sometime a base, sometime a trebble,
Often a meane, then sweetely foorth do warble
A descant, which the mindes of standers by,
Doth ravish, hearing such sweet harmonie.

On th' other side, a secret Cave was seene,
Which for his fitnesse, often times hath beene
A refuge for those Nimphes, the which would shunne,
The scortching heate of Midday of the Sunne:
The entrance deckt with Mosse, pleasing the sight,
And alway fresh and greene for more delight,
To land-ward did there rise a Hill so high,
That wel-nie it did face the azurd skie:
From foote of which, did runne a purling Brooke
Through the Meade, with many a widning crooke:
Whose slyding streames the heavens calme seemd blew,
Whence store of pleasure to the eye-sight grew;
Yet clearer then was Aganippe Fount,
Or Acidalia, where the Charicts wount
To bath their Ivorie breastes and golden haire,
Ere they make readie Citherea's care.
About whose bankes did grow small tangled Trees,
Which made it seeme a heaven to gasers eyes:
Whose boughes the needie Wood-man neare had cut,
Nor hungrie Beaste the tender shootes had brut.
And in the middle of that Meddow grew
A stately Beech, which his large armes foorth threw
To shadow them that under her should sport,
To which with Lea, Isis did resort
With Lea; on whose bankes Ardea was turned
Into a Bitterne, cause she Glaucus scorned.
Whilst Colne, and Kenet, with the faire Chrew went
To gather flowers of most pleasing sent;
For there were Roses with Virmilion died,
Coole Dasies, and white Lillies; Summers pride:
The Marigold, that doth affect the Sunne,
Hiding her beautie when his light is gonne:
The Bee alluring Thime, the sweete Costmarie,
Gray Lavender, and strong senting Rosemarie,
And what else might be pleasing to the view,
Within this faire and princely Meddow grew:
But that which garnisht most this Paradise,
Were Isis lovely looke, and sparkling eyes.
For marke how brighter Cinthia doth appeare
Above the Starres within her motive Spheere:
So much more fairer did this lovely Dame
Exceede those comely Nimphes, that which here came.

Not shee, whom Venus gave for the rich Ball,
The cause of tenne yeares warre, and Troyes fall:
Nor that faire Dame whom Jove in shape of Swan,
Whylome did court, when he her love first wan:
Nor yet Europa, whose love made him take
A proude Bulles shape (tho then when he did make)
To looke like a faire untamed Heyfer:
Had he turnd to a Bull, it had been better;
For beautie might in any poynt compare
To Isis, tho they were exceeding faire.

You learned Muses, race of mighty Jove,
That often sport within a sacred Grove,
In pleasant Tempe, and do dayly drinke,
Of those cleare waves that flow from Pinples brinke.
O you that guide their enterprises right,
Who take in hand to grave with rarest flight,
Upon the Alter of Muemosine,
Within the Temple of Immortalitie,
Sweete pleasing beautie, which else subject were,
In shade of lasting silence still to ere,
Guide me, that with your helpe I may begin
To frame Thams beautie; whose like neare hath bin:
And graunt these Rithmes, which slenderly are done,
May shew hereafter when as I am gone.
She was the fairst and most accomplisht Dame,
Excelling 'all whom Nature ere did frame.

Her heavenly Head the miracle of Nature,
Surpassing farre the fairest earthly creature:
With yellow Tramels all of beaten gold,
Which gasers thoughts in curled knots did hold;
Seemd overspred with flowers fresh and gay,
the mirtle Forests where the loves do play.
Like to a Table was her Front to see,
Of whitest Marble, seate of Majestie:
Well polished, as on a summers daie,
Withouten waves united seemes the Sea:
Where Cupid had an Alter built to offer,
Their hartes that did refuse his lawes to suffer.
Her Eye-lids blacke, of Heben arches made,
Were like the bow that Psiches husband had;
In which so liberall was Nature to her,
That every one suspected (that did view her)
She onely 'made faire Isis to deceave them:
And both of sight and judgement to bereave them.

Of different force were her two sparckling eyes.
Disdaine in th' one, grace in the other lyes:
Two eyes?  O no, rather two heavenly Starres;
Th' one proffering Peace, the other threatning Warres:
In which Mars bastard Boy, his lodging tooke
Thence wounding them which at those starres did looke.
Her Nose did seeme (being somewhat highly raysed)
A little HIll betweene two Vallies placed.
Here round and tender Eare, white polished:
With Rubies hung her Cheekes embellished:
Cheekes which with lively Cynab're ore spred,
Seemd like the Morning, new risse from her bed.
Not all those Flowers sprung from Princes gore,
Not Amaranthus loves Flower made of Yore,
Like colour had to hers, which did amaze
Those carelesse eyes, that on her cheekes did gaze.
Full was her Mouth of thousand Odours sweete,
Where there in single ranckes did seemely meete
Bright orientall Pearles in stead of teeth:
All which, embalmd the Heavens with their breath.
From thence sweete word and pleasing smiles did come,
All made to charme, and make beholders dome:
and which hard Rockes that stand in Seas aloft,
Could by their mighty power, of hard make soft.
Round was her Chin, with in whose dimples lay
Enchaunting spels, tho seeming faire and gay.
Her Neck a stay, this little worlde to 'pholde,
Of Ivorie was, or Alabaster mould,
Plast on two hils in whitnes that did passe
Her snow-white Breasts that was Agenous lasse:
Between which hils, Love often times did lurke,
When cruell stratagems he meant to worke.
Her little but long fingered Hand, more white
Then whitest Lillies that the Spring doth dight:
Her small Feete such as some say Tehtis has:
With which she nimbly could trip ore the Lawns,
And chace swift Row-bucks, and young wanton Fawns.

But for those parts the which her Garments hid,
What should we say?  Surely dame Nature did
Keepe those things secret, least they should excell
All she had made made in heaven, in earth, in hell.
But O!  what boots it to have thinges surpasse,
Since fairest thinges do fade like Sommers grasse:
Alas nought in this worlde doth firmely stay,
But turneth still like Billowes of the Sea:
Which neare do cease to roule with great rore,
Their rushing beat and breake against the shore.

And thou the cause of this unstablenesse,
That dost delight in nought but ficklenesse;
Whose customes never to abide in one,
But useth headlong dayly throw us downe,
When we are rays'd by thy benignitie,
Unto the top of all felicitie.

While thus with their faire Nimphs this lovely Queene
Was in this pleasant Meade, by them was seene
A Sheapheard, in the pride of all his dayes:
Who whilst his tender Flocke on salts did grase,
Sate sencelesse, like an Image made of stone
Long while, at last fetching a deepe sad grone
Of inward griefe, the trewest signe of all;
They foorth his eyen perceived salt tears to fall:
So after great Joves hidious thunders past,
A cloude of raine, the heavens doth overcast:
And when his teares were spent, with heavie cheare,
Sang to his Pipe this Song; which they did heare:
And hearing, could not choose but simpathise
His heavie griefe with water in their eyes.

O whither (quoth he) whither shall I flie,
To purchase ende unto my miserie?
Within what Rocke, or to what desart place,
That never is enricht by Phoebus face?
Shall I unfold in great and greevous paine,
Which makes me wretcheder then any Swaine?
If there be any place where dayly cries
The Night-rav'n and the Owle, that by night flies,
Whereto no living wight doth ere resort:
From whence foule Winter never doth depart,
And where the Spring her verdure will not sowe,
A place of deadly horror and foule woe,
Where ougly sorrow dayly may present,
Her selfe before mine eyes me to torment:
That will I choose as best befitting mee,
In this distresse and great extremitie.

And you my little flocke, the small remaine
Of a farre greater, which once more my payne
Might with most neighbour flockes have made compare
For number or for wooll, both fine and faire:
Then when for change of pasture sillie I,
In th' Aprill of mine age left Germanie;
Where I mongst Stadian bowers had nigh been slaine,
Cause I my Princesse honour did maintaine:
Then is the precious apple of mine eie:
And hoping for I wat not what to gaine,
To Englands pleasant soyle brought you againe.
Goe wander, goe; and take your libertie,
Grasing where is best pasture, while that I
Bewaile m' Icarian flight in mounting pride,
Plumed with waxe-forg'd-wings, which thought to ride
Above the cloudy welkin of the ayre,
To view the order their Latonas heire;
Holdeth in guiding of that glorious light,
That is the nourish of each living wight;
But was deceaved for comming neare the Sunne:
My winges did melt, and I did tumble downe.

O had I kept along the humble gill,
When first I did attempt to climbe the hill.
Or had I bounded mine ambitious minde,
Which carelesse thought to builde above the winde,
Sprung from remembraunce of those deedes were done
By my great Graundsirs, long-since dead and gone:
And a desire to register my' name,
Mought them within the sacred booke of fame:
Then might I now as I have done before,
Pasture you still along this pleasant shore.

Or had not rather greete Chrusophilus,
Whose greedy humor passing covetous,
Thought all that went beside himselfe quite lost:
Mee too much wronged, and mee too much crost;
Whose soule with many filthy crimes made blacke,
Now fleetes about Avernus fearefull lake:
Then might I now as I have done before,
Pasture you still along this pleasant shore.

For which, you Lordes of the infernall Bower,
Who ore deceased soules have mighty power,
T' inflict, or to remit their punishment:
O doe you all at my request assent,
Ixion from his wheele awhile to take;
And false Chrusophilus fast there to make.
Or if great Junos wrath be not yet done,
Let Sisiphus t'hen leave his rowling stone.
Or pull from Cawcasus Prometheus,
And let the Vultures teare Chrusophilus.
Or if that may not be, Jove angrie yet,
O then drag Tantalus foorth of his pit.
And let Chrusophilus up to the chin,
Still, but in vaine, wade up an' downe therein.
Let him at that faire seeming fruite, oft snatch;
Which thereby hanges, but never any catch.
A torment well beefitting such a wight,
Who living ore his owne,  had never might;
And let his late made gentle ofspring, which
Are with stolne Plumes of others pride made rich:
Dispoyld thereof like to their Grandsirs fare,
Who unto Ceres slavish servants weare.
And for assenting to my wished boone,
Sad Hecatombes by mee shall be done,
And monthly I will  offer a blacke Ramme,
As signe that I am thankfull for the same,
For had not he lately from mee bereft
Unjustly all my Sheepe, save these few left;
To stanch his never satisfied lust
Of Golde, earths drosse, that doth sonsume with rust;
Then might I now, as I have done before,
Pasture you still alongst this pleasant shore.
But since it cannot be as twas of late,
Since Fortune now hath given me the mate,
Dispoyld me quite of all my woonted mirth,
Clad me with woes, and throwne me to the earth:
And like a Tyrant triumphe over me,
That sore her prostrate on the ground doth lie;
Neare reckning whether it be just and sound,
To trouble him, lies govelling on the ground.

O you the remnant of a greater flocke,
Goe get you gone, while to some desart rocke
I make repaire, where for my bed shall be
The cold dry ground, whereon I still will lie;
For mounting mattens, mournings full of care:
For walkes, the wretched pathes of foule dispaire:
For meate, sad discontent:  for drinke, salt teares:
For nightly sleepes, nought else but slumbring feares;
Till those last dueties I doe pay to Nature,
Which I am bound too, beeing a mortall creature:
What time my soule freed from this earthly gaile,
Where now it tyred lyes, shall to thee vaile:
Of faire Elisium fly, where voyde of paine,
Mongst blessed soules in joy it shall remaine.
And thou sweete Pipe, the which wonts oft display
My wronges unto these Woodes, these Rockes, and Sea,
And moovest them at once to rew my lot,
When lyving men seemd sencelesse, and would not;
But helde hard hartes, the which I do repent,
More harder farre, then hardest Adamant.
From that rude race, degenerating nought,
Which was of hard Stone, by Deiecalion wrought.
Here hang thou (therewith on a Beechen tree
He hung his Pipe) for now no more for thee,
Nor for thy sugred melodie I care,
(Quoth he) which done like one drowned in dispaire:
Thence heavie he departed, passing nought,
What Fortune, or foule Envie could alot.

On whom, whilst ISIS lookt, perceive she might
The Sea to swell, which did her much affright:
For she discerned on their toppes to ride
Great Neptune, poasting to the shore with speede.
Whose comming so amas'd the fearefull Thams,
(Who knew full well that he those scorching flames,
With her faire eyes within his breast had wrought,
Would seeke to quench by force, if he her caught)
As in a shadie Wood the hydeous stroke
Of ratling Thunder on the sodaine broke,
Doth scare the small Birdes, pearched on the spray:
And like how Fowle that by a River play,
Spying a Falcon towring in the skie,
Straight leave their sport, and for their safetie flie,
Withouten order crying here and there:
So ISIS and her Nimphes, being in feare
Of hated Neptune, from thence straight gan fly,
Shreeking and crying very pitteously.

Aye me, What is this world but vanitie?
Subject to change; full of unconstancie:
Now is the Welkin glorious to the eie,
Clad in a Mantle of an asurd die.
And Phoebus now his faire light doth display,
When by and by a blacke Cloud foorth the Sea
Doth rise and darke the heavens were Joviall,
Troubling both ayre and earth with waters fall.

Aye, now I see that mourning followes mirth,
That sorrow driveth pleasure from the earth;
That happinesse doth not long time remaine,
But ere it is at full begi'nes to waine:
That all in vaine man strives to keepe his state,
When dangerous stormes labour it to abate:
That vainely men doe boast of Fortunes favours,
Since like a weather-cocke shee alwayes wavers,
Threatning them most, and bringing soonest under
Those, at whose fortunes most the world did wonder.

And strange, what ere within this world is done,
Ordayned was before this world begun:
so that great JOVE, who moderateth Heav'n
As soveraigne, and commaunds ore Gods and men:
At whose becke, earth and ayre, and all else move,
Will not one enterprise the Fates to prove:
Whome neither prayers, nor ought else can resist,
Cause still th' are fixt, and still in one persist.

