Anander lets Anetor wot,
His Love, his Lady, and his Lot.

A civill Youth, whose life was led in Court,
&mdash;In Court, the place of all Civilitie;&mdash;
Who lov'd no riot, tho delighted sport,
Such sport as with such place might well agree
To give him credite, by a true report:
The only glory of his time was hee:
For (mote I sweare,) the gentry of his kind,
Was fairely match'd with gentlenes of mind.

His personage, a thing for Gods to tell,
Whose wits can reach, beyond the reach of Muse;
Divine proportion in his limmes did dwell,
Eye-wonder'd feature did his visage use:
He was (as may the wiser tell,)
For Ladies choice, (if Ladies list to chuse:)
If not, what help?  the weaker his successe,
Though his perfections be nothing lesse.

His birth was great, his bloud the nobler then,
His thoughts (no doubt) the worthier by his bloud;
And his desires, though somewhat like to men,
Yet as his thoughts (I guesse) were faire and good:
And for his loves, none knew them but him sen,
And that faire she, on whom their fortune stood:
Yet did he often plaine of ill succeed;
The hoter love, somtime the colder speed.

And in his passions, (for I must needs breake
Into some speech of him, and his mis-lot;)
He unto me, as whom he lov'd, did speake
The cleare discov'rie of his eager plot
In gracefull termes, and yet the best too weake,
To tell his thoughts sufficiently (God wot:)
That I should often stand and weepe to see,
His griefes more copious then his language bee.

First did he lay his fine unswarfed hand
Upon my shoulder, close unto my necke;
And then for twentie minutes did he stand,
As one that spar'd to speake, in feare of checke:
Then sighs, then speakes, but speakes words three times scand,
As if he durst not trust his tongues defect:
Lest in his woes, his woes might seeme to bite
Th' unfriendly dealings of his hearts delight.

Shepheard (quoth he) and giv's me one faint smile,
That signifi'de a long sustained wrong;
Suffer a Courtier to record a stile,
More zealous then the Thracian widow's song:
When he in his immortall Musicks guile
Besought the freedome of his wife so long:
With pitty marke the treatize of my ruth;
The like hereafter may befall thy youth.

Meanewhile, the childhood of thy younger wit,
That never did more then thy flocks regard,
Shall have a stronger cause to wonder it,
Then those that like my haples selfe hath car'd:
While I, ne vowes, ne circumstance omit
Of those mishaps, wherein I have bene snar'd:
Under the leave (sweet boy) of thy forbearing;
An elders griefe profits a youngers hearing.

Woo'd thou had'st had in Court but halfe that skill,
As here thou hast with thy obezant sheepe;
T' have seene the strictnes of a Ladies will,
And how unmov'd she doth hir favor keepe;
T' have knowne the hardship of a Lover's ill,
And what a wretchednes it is to weepe:
And I had kept thy pastures as mine owne;
No life too base where better is unknowne.

Then hadst thou seene faire Muridellaes eyes,
The dangerous planets of my ripening youth;
Thou shoud'st have knowne how beautifull, how wise
My Lady was:  Perhaps unto thy ruth
Thou shouldst ha' knowne, more then thou canst devise
Of that deare Girle, and yet no more then truth:
For he that mounts the high'st degree of hie,
In praising of her Beautie, cannot lie.

But he that sai's the mercy of hir minde
Is like the grace of hir admired blee;
He might doe well to bridle in that winde,
Untill his fortune were to speake with me:
Lesse it be one, to whom sh' ha's beene more kinde,
Then to my true affection she cou'd be:
And then I thanke him to commend hir hart,
For the best Love deserves the best report.

Yet shalt thou thinke, that that deare truth I beare
To that faire Sight that first subdude mine eie,
Shall say the best, although she be not here,
To see how woe, how discontent am I:
That when henceforth it comes unto hir eare,
That I speake wonders of hir Curtesie;
She may recall me with a gracious minde,
For praising of hir when she was unkinde.

And if it ever be thy hap to view
Her on this greene, where thou inhabitest,
First, for my sake, salute her to the shoo,
And tell hir with so solemne a protest,
That her poore servant, and hir only true,
Doth live that life, that she with hate disblest:
How, where, and in what sorrow, let her know:
She loves to heare, though not to helpe my woe.

Sha't know her by that bright and curious brow,
Where Love in his eternall triumph sits
Chastising with the warfarre of his bow
The rumour of desires, the force of wits;
And by her eyes, and other glories moe,
That first in me wrought these rebellious fits:
But (to be short) if thou a thousand see,
Looke which is fairest, and be sure that's shee.

Hir hand (if thou hir hand canst naked see
From those blest muffes that guard their blisfull whitenes,)
Is like that gripe that Alpheus maz'd to see,
Place Arethusa in perpetuall brightnes,
And by her foote these plaines shall blessed bee,
Unles the ground relent not at her lightnes:
Hir substance is so girt in slender finenes,
That nothing's heavy, but hir owne unkindenes.

But that thou mayst believe she is a creature
As hardly else thou mout'st conceive the same,
I tell thee shall:  when that Creatres nature
Once set a Princely webbe into her frame,
And was about to loome her sacred feature,
T'is sed, that in the while Minerva came,
Who by enquirie faine would understand,
What blessed body now she had in hand.

Nature, for then, no otherwise inclinde
In thought but to obezant curtesie,
Freely acquaints the goddes of hir minde
And humbly craves hir gracious remedie,
In such defects, as may hir wisedome finde
In this new portion of hir huswifery;
Or if at least there might no fault bee had,
Yet, that she would some more perfection adde.

For truth she said, that whensoe're she might
Once bring to good this Idoll that she wrought,
She would present it to the gracious sight
Of hir owne selfe, (for so she had bethought);
And since hir comming now fell out so right,
The larger was her hope, that she had brought
Some ornamentall grace, whose large infusing
Might make it fit the gift, and worth the chusing.

Then Pallas tooke into her owne embrace
This curious Plot that Nature was about,
Having no meanes to worke into hir face
This bloud that glorifies hir shape without,
Nor could of Venus borrow any grace,
Cause they alate had sharpely fallen out,
Therefore bids Nature for some beautie goe:
High hearts disdaine the kindenes of the foe.

Meanewhile from th' issue of that sacred vaine,
That her whole selfe with wits abundance fills,
She freely powres into this Infants braine,
By hony drops; and plentifull distills
That puissant conceit that now doth raigne
Over herselfe, her Love, her Lovers ills:
Yet by this gift hir selfe no lesse cou'd have;
She gave hir selfe what to her owne she gave.

Two silver cuppes then drew she from her brest,
The one of Spirit and hauty influence,
The other fild with maydenly Protest
Of Chastities divinest continence;
Some drops whereof she in this hart imprest,
Therein to double Natures excellence:
But chiefely in these heav'nly honours three,
Of Wisedome, Puissance, and Chastitie.

Yet hast thou leave to thinke, and so doe I,
(Unlesse my thoughts should sinne in thinking so,)
That loves wise daughter did not meane hereby
That both these gifts should be alike in show:
For if her Chastnes live perpetually,
As does hir spirit, Ananders cake were dow;
Though never gift descended from above
Of greater honesty then honest love.

Then neither is her labour vainely spent,
Nor yet her gifts in idlenes defray'd,
If Muridella with true love content
Anander, in encreasing Loves decay'd:
For why doth civill curtesie consent
The marri'd wife to goe above the mayde?
Because the Life by Love is doubly grac'de,
And to be wed is more then to be chaste.

This, while the busie dame in eager post,
Comes home to see how faire hir worke went on,
And from an Ivory boxe of wonders cost,
That friendly Venus had bestowed upon
Her, for her Infant sake, began to cast,
With greater art then was in Belus son,
That red and white:  thus, in hir beauties making,
Nature and heav'ns themselves were al pertaking.

And this is it that holdes in Love and Muse
The two blacke circles of my conquer'd sight,
What wondrous cunning Nature seem'd to use
In placing of this mingled faire so right,
And what a skill she shewed when she did chuse
So red a crimson, and so white a white:
O heav'ns (sed I) what gifts were Beauties Peeres,
If it might never beene yclad in yeares?

Thus, or as like to thus as I can say,
The youth, concluding his teare-liquored vaine,
Leaves my unletter'd thoughts to beare away
Both what he said and what he wood ha saine;
And though I want his griefe, yet sure I may
Well ground upon his passionate complaine,
His Love was faire, and blest in every lim,
With no default, but that she lov'd not him.

My youngling wit amuzed at the hearing
Of that her dayes had no conversement in,
Like a new-fielded souldier, wanting chearing,
Stands all astoni'd, two conceits betwin;
Whether I mote with small or no forbearing,
Burden some disobedience upon him,
Or shou'd in verdict of dispraises tuch
Her whom himselfe durst [not] dispraise too much.

If you (quoth I) have never yet misdone,
To their faire Lady more then I can deeme
In these your words; By heav'n, and by this Sunne,
Your Service should deserve a more esteeme.
But if (alas) your selfe y' have over-run
In things to her that mote ungratefull seeme,
Grudge not a sharpe rewardance of the same;
Men must doe well that wou'd enjoy good name.

With this, about to aske him somwhat more,
With hasty answer, and a hearty oth,
He clips my speech; and said, and vow'd, and swore,
No spot of guilt in his attaintles troth;
But as t'is now, so ever heretofore:
Quoth I, the better, for I would be loth;
Though now I aske you, as t'is fit he shu'd
Well know your ill, that must procure your good.

Yet did my soule within it selfe y-doubt
No undeservings in his noble heart,
Though I (for reasons sake,) mote go about
To shew him that I fear'd some undesart:
He mought ha thought me, else, some soothing lout,
Ylearn'd in neither judgement, nor good part,
To discommend hir thoughts, and mourne his fall,
Without examining the cause of all.

Yet speake no further of thy chaunce, said I,
A single cause wou'd have a single telling,
But griefes discourse, hopes mortall enemy,
Tat's his prevailing in his oft revealing:
O give me leave, saith he, to balme mine eie,
And let those teares that hurt it give it healing!
For since hir loves are not disposde to granting,
Poore helpes are welcome, when the best are wanting.

These teares shall witnes, (when he wept indeed,)
How neere unto my soule hir envy crept;
How much my hart doth hir owne substance bleed,
In fresh remembrance of what vowes I kept,
And in what hate that Lady did exceed,
That threw me downe to this (and still he wept);
O thing for ever to be unforgot,
Untill she loves me, as she loves me not.

My flocks this while, that saw their maisters eie
Perus'd in things untutching their estate,
Ywended to a neighbors sev'ral nie,
That for faire feed was mounded in alate:
Where lest they shou'd too much offendingly
Ore-ramp the grasse, and get the owners hate,
I crav'd his name, and leave away to go;
No shame to part, when need compelles thereto.

My name tho now it may a causer be
Of too long memory of a man forlorne;
Is called Anander of the Court (quoth he),
Though never Country-man abid more scorne:
Yet keep it as thy heardlam close to thee,
That no day heare it but that blessed morne
Wherein that angell of my good and ill
Salutes thy flocks, and thee, upon this hill.

Then tell hir, when she gives thee hir good morrow,
That thou alate didst see Anander here;
And then speake teares of my unfained sorrow,
Or speake unfained sorrow of my teares:
And when she doth some light occasion borrow
Of other reasons to employ hir eares,
Seeme thou as if thou didst not understand hir,
And mixe thy speeches with distrest Anander.

If she dispraise or praise thy wanton flocke,
Tell thou hir that Anander did so too;
If brode the field she for some mate doth looke,
Anander, (tell hir,) thus did looke for you;
And let remembrance worke some better lucke,
For sure I am more harme it cannot do;
And sometimes absence do's ingender Passion,
By giving leasure to consideration.

So hie thee to thy sheep (good Shepheard boy:)
But stay, (O) first enrich me with thy name;
Anetor of the Field, (Sir), did I say,
Though (understand yee) I am not the same
That in amendall of the woolves annoy
That mighty voyage unto Peleus, came:
Anetor he, and I Anetor am;
But he serv'd Peleus, I as good a man.

Discourses ended:  t'was now time a day
For him to ride, and for myselfe to wander;
Such causes call us both, we cannot stay;
His dear's at Court, and my deere flockes be yonder:
And all our part no more but this to say,
Farewell Anetor, and farewell Anander:
Save that in our farewelles, this wish we move,
Me to recall my Flocks, and he his Love.
