But Rochester shall Eccho forth, my praise
If Rochester remaine not most ungratefull,
A sin in fashion for these humerous daies:
To whome wee owe, to them we are most hatefull:
O that it were in fashion; I am sure
Nine daies (like wonders) fashions but endure.

I must upbraide her else, not praises giving,
How first my favours patronag'd her pride:
But in too much remembrauce of the living,
In darke oblivion dead mens praise wee hide.
A begger from the dunghill once extold, 
Forgets himselfe, whom what he was of old.

When first her gravell-purified river,
No bridge upon her bote-lod'n bosome bore,
Some high renowne I strived for to give her,
And made a bridge her swiftest currant o're.
Sir Robert Knowles was in the same an actor:
But Cobham was the chiefest benefactor.

And Walter Merton, Mertons Colledge founder,
(Why doth mischance neere charitie thus dwell,)
With lime and sand gainst tempest-beating bound her,
Who from her top by great misfortune fell,
Riding along the workemen for to see:
Fortune is alwaies vertues enemie.

Kinde Rochester it seemes hath yet respected,
His name should live in ages for to come,
In whose memoriall:  lately is erected,
An Epitaph upon a Marble tombe:
But one good turne another still doth crave:
For this; they found a goblet in his grave.

Warham th' archbishop once of Canterbery,
The Iron barres upon the bridge bestow'd:
Warner the copings did reedifie,
And many since their liberall minds have show'd,
Whose deedes in life (if deedes can heaven merit)
Made them in death all heavenly joyes inherit.

Thus Medway by this faire stone bridge adorned,
Made Thamesis enamor'd of her beauty:
All other rivers England had he scorned,
Yeelding to her kinde love-deserving duty,
In smiles, embracements, gratious lookes and greetings,
In amorous kisses, murmures, night-set meetings.

But how he courted, how himselfe hee carri'd,
And how the favour of this Nimph he wonne,
And with what pompe Thames was to Medway marri'd.
Sweete Spenser shewes (O griefe that Spenser's gone!)
With whose life heavens a while enricht us more,
That by his death wee might be ever pore.

With swifter currant Medway to this day
From Maidstone runs, in hope the bridge to kisse,
One streame another chasing fast away,
That thousands hasting of their purpose misse:
And downe the gullet all in anger glide,
Yet turne in whirle-pooles round, to vew her side.

One streame stands kissing with a naked piller,
Whose force rebutts the streame which runneth after,
And backe retires; with glauncing lookes to fill her
Long-wisht desire; and smiles, and falls to laughter,
Last (in her language) when she slides away,
She seemes to thanke mee for her marriage day.

With thanks the gods, with thankes good men are pleased,
And thankes she gives him that this bridge first founded:
Because this rest her wearie streame hath eased,
And now with oares her sides are never wounded,
But thankefull she, unthankefull all the towne,
The cause (no doubt) was once the bridge fell downe.

Joves issue borne of faire Eurynomes,
Mirth's naked mothers, snow-white Charites:
Daughters of th' Ocean, rivers Presides,
The pride of Desarts, sweete mouth'd Naides,
These Nimphs of Ashdon forrest never haunted
Medways flour'd banks; whilst this fair bridge she wated

For goddesses could not abide the sauour
Of millions overwhelmed in her brooke:
These deyties now take it for a favour,
Their beautie in her glassie streames to looke,
All do rejoyce; and are most thankefull; man
Which should be thankefull, most unthankefull than.

Let marriners which shute his arches through
Describe aright, his length, his bredth, his beautie;
Riding in's sight, they vaile their bonnet low,
And strike their top-saile in submissive dutie:
Hee'l not be brav'd; no vessell since the marriage
Will he receive, but of a lowly carriage.

Some higher ship, whose sailes are swolne with pride,
Whose bloudy flaggs like fierie streamers hing,
At Chattam lies, and from her hollow side,
With double charge sendes forth a culvering,
Which rends the shore, and makes the towne to shake,
The bridge her breath, herselfe in snuffe doth take.

The fierie smoake this Engine vomits out,
To him transported by the aire and wind,
Hee straight receives; and prisons in throughout
His hollow vaults, his crevices, and rindes,
So th' aire redoubling in his arches, slips
A mocking eccho to these prowder ships.

This bridge revives my dying memorie,
Over the which I passe into the towne,
To view the sacred church of Trinitie:
Built by Sir Robert Knowles:  and (though unknowne)
That Chauntrey joyning to the same I founded,
Where Harmonie for ever should be sounded.

Sweete Harmonie supposd of Pithagoreans,
To be the spheares and heavenly bodies motion,
Of Platonists, Amphibolites, and Jovians,
A Simmetrie within the soules sharp notion:
Heavens handmaide, one of the liberall arts
A concord, all of disagreeing parts. . . .
