Anander sicke with Loves disdaine
Doth change himselfe into a Swaine,
While dos the youthful Shepherd show him
His Muridellaes answere to him.

The Sunne that had himselfe a Courtier beene,
And for his beautie lov'd of Ladies faire,
Spread forth his yellow beames upon the greene,
And with attentive eye, and Courtly care,
Flourisht his wandring torch, till he had seene
This troup arrive the place where now they are:
Which done, he hies him thence, and takes his rest
Behinde the furthest Mountaines of the West.

Blinde drouzie night, all clad in misty ray,
Began to ride along the welkins round,
Hangs out his gazing Lanthornes by the way,
And makes the outside of the world his bound;
The Queene of starres, in envy of the daye,
Throwes the cold shadow of hir eyes to ground;
And supple grasse, opprest with heavy dew,
Doth wet the Sheepe and licke the shepheards shooe.

There as I dwelt there dwelled all my sheepe,
And home we went togither, flocks and I,
As even where I rest and take my sleepe,
There are my flocks asleepe and resting by,
And when I rise to go to field and keepe,
So will my flocks, that can no longer lie:
Thus in the Sheepe is all the Shepheards care,
And in the Shepheard is the flocks welfare.

While did the yeare let slip his tender Spring,
And merry Moones went merrily away,
I with this happy flocke alone did sing,
And pipe the oaten galliard every day,
As well content as Pan himselfe our King,
With a new Carroll or a Roundelay,
For he (as good a Minstrell as he is)
Couth never tune a better Lay then this.

When Shepheards sit upon the hills,
Nursed in their Swainish wills,
Young, and in desires unripe,
Curious of the flocke and pipe,
Then is Swaynish life the best,
And he that cares, and loves the lest,
Thinkes he fares above the rest.

Then our joyes beguile our ruthes,
Shepheards boyes be merry youthes,
Loves do dwell in Courti'rs beds,
Peace doth swell in Shepheards heads
Lusts are like our flocks ypent,
Want of age doth barre consent,
Youth doth flourish with content.

But when elder dayes shall show,
Whether Swaines be men or no,
Love shall rule in shepheards braines,
Gravitie shall guide the swaines.
Wanton thoughts shall then be checkt,
Shepheards shall no playes respect,
Age shall conquer youths defect.

Sing I then, heigh-ho for joy,
Cause I yet am but a boy,
But when Shepheards boyes be men,
Ho my hart, what sing I then?
Heigh-ho &mdash; sorrow, Joyes away,
Conqv'ring Love ha's won the Day:
This is all my Roundelay.

Whilome when I was Collins loved boy,
(Ah, Collin, for thee, Collin, weep I now,)
For thou art dead, ah, that to me didst joy,
As Coridon did to Alexis vow.
But (as I sed,) when I was Collins boy,
His deare young boy, and yet of yeares inow,
To leade his willing heard along the plaine,
I on his pipe did learne this singing vaine.

And oh, (well mote he now take rest therfore,)
How oft in pray'rs and songs he pray'd and sung,
That I (as had himselfe full long before,)
Mought live a happy shepheard and a young;
And many vowes, and many wishes more,
When he his Pipe into my bosome flung:
And said, though Collin ne're shall be surpast,
Be while thou liv'st, as like him as thou maist.

Much was my deare therefore when Collin died,
When we (alacke) were both agreed in griefe:
He for his infant swaine, that me affide,
Yet happed not to live to see my priefe.
And I that to his governance had tide
My bounden youth, in loosing such a chiefe:
Ah how wou'd he have sung, and with what grace,
Ananders love, and Muridellaes Face!

He wou'd have blazed in eternall note,
Ananders Love and worthy Manlines;
And then recorded with a wondrous throte,
His Muridellaes lovely worthines;
And by those witching tunes he had by wrote,
Cur'd his Loves griefe with his desires succes;
And by his loftie pipe, and pleasing ditty,
Molted hir hearts hardnes with her Loves pitty.

Then mought full well these hils of Shepheards feed
Beene privy to loves secret discontent,
And all these quarrels might ha beene agreed
And ended, by a Judge so reverent:
For he was letter'd well, and well couth reed,
And was a swaine profound and eloquent;
But now is left of him but bare report,
And I in fields must sing the Loves in Court.

Anander now, whose loves did waxe in age
So as they did in greatnes and in wait,
Sometimes bursts out into disbounded rage,
And cloy's his eager heart on Passions bait;
Sometimes the swelling minde begins to swage,
And slender hopes appeare, but vanish strait;
And Griefe drawes out the Anticks of his care,
Upon his face, his bosome, and his haire.

Poore gentle youth, as yet a man unwitting
With that true truth his arrand I had sed,
And with what milde respect, and hopefull pittying,
The answers of his love were answered,
Lives wide from sumptuous Court, as one more fitting
To shrowd pale sicknes in a country bed:
And somtimes (though the space was farre between)
Casts his long looks, where his long Loves had been.

At length, what forc't by Love, what by good-will,
Love that he bore to hir, good-will to me,
It pleas'd him once more to salute this hill,
And me, and these my flocks that weakned be
For want of care and shepheards wary skill,
That for this while couth never well o're-see
Their fickle state, so greatly did me stir
The woe for him, the wondering at hir.

A weeping face (at first) I durst not shew him,
Lest he should swound in weening ill successe;
Nor wou'd I smile when I at first did view him,
Lest he shou'd dreame of greatest happinesse:
But look't as I look't when first I knew him,
Withouten change of feature, more or lesse:
So that my Count'nance cou'd him not disclose,
Great cause of joyes, or greater meanes of woes.

Now while the action of his hand and foot,
Daunc't out the measures of his courtly greeting;
And I in silent bowes, and grosse salute,
Doubl'd the curteous Congees of our meeting:
His gentle heart, fed with no other fruite
But griefes sowre Plumme and Passions bitter sweeting,
Sends to the mouth the sighes that she had broken,
Where being shap't in words, they were thus spoken.

Sith is no doubt (young curteous boy) but thou
Hast seene my Love upon this gladsome plaine,
Therefore declare my doome unto me now;
Declare thou happy, or unhappy swaine;
Tell me what Muridella said, and how
Thou lik'st her speech, hir beauty, and hir traine:
Powre out hir praise to me with such a tongue
As unto hir thou didst my love and wrong.

Say, what she sed to thee, what to thy flocke,
What unto me, and what unto my Love?
Say, did she pitty me, or did she mocke,
Or challenge witnes of the heav'ns above?
At what time came she, and at what a clocke
Went she away?  for love of mighty jove
Tell me, deere youth:  and if my hopes succeed,
Ile crowne thy kindenes with a lib'rall deed.

For now my life stands on the crazie point
Of tott'ring hope, and feeble expectation:
Doubt trembles Agew-like in ev'ry joynt,
And feare assaults with threats of desolation:
And now, unless the balmes of comfort noint,
I die the luckelest man of all our nation;
Therefore discourse the fortunes of that day:
And at that word I thus began to say: &mdash;

That I this Lady faire have seene and met,
Know wel mine eyes that were my arrands guide,
Out of whose circles is not vanisht yet
The Image of that beauty that they ey'd;
And that I told your loves and passions great
Shall by the judgement of your selfe be try'd,
When lips unlearned motion shal present you
With such a luke-warme answere as she sent you.

But first if you were not so farre in dote,
As that (O starres) you cou'd not jealous be,
Wonder would make me [to] digresse, and quote
Your answer, with the praise of blessed shee:
But at more leasure will I sing that note,
When in the vallies I alone shall bee.
Meanewhile (faire Knight) I will declare togither,
Your Ladies speech and my adventure with hir.

At first, a comely Virgin groom that met me
For favour to my tale I did beseech,
Who for a rude young Shepheard did outset me,
And with an answere of short carelesse speech
Runne from my earnest plaint; and scarce wou'd let me
Take knowledge, who was Muridell, and which:
And seeing then so little vexe hir maide,
I thought that nothing might to hir be saide.

At length a youth that led them o're the plaine,
A faire yong boy, of modest age and looke,
Clad in a silken garment di'd in graine,
As greene of hiew as Neptunes tidy brooke,
And a greene velvet cap of the same staine,
Wherein a plume of curled feathers stooke,
And round about his skirt, in seemly grace,
Thirteene bright circles made of silver lace.

As it befell:  this white-cheek'd youth and I,
Instead of bearding, chin'd at one another;
He, like a hauty spirit, observingly
Wou'd needs know what I go about, and whother;
I, in pure meekenesse, and in simplicy,
Leg'd him a faire excuse (sir) and no other;
While thus we both our wordey combate breake,
She gently heard me, and she bade me speake.

And what I sed full well to you is knowne,
Whose love did lesson it to me before:
Unles your thoughts cannot containe their owne,
Or memory let fall hir chiefest store,
That is, the teares, the pray'rs, the prayse, the mone,
That your great griefe upon my lips did score;
And therefore read she halfe my message there,
And from my mouth the other halfe did beare.

She in milde termes repli'd, she wonderd much
That that faire knight shou'd bene so lovely ill,
Sith she ne're knew that his desires were such
As to complaine the stiffnes of hir will.
And to be plaine, and give the neerest tuch
Of that she utter'd here upon this hill,
She sed, some beautie had your loves ywon,
But loves to her were neither meant nor don.

Sometimes in sooth, (she couth it not deny,)
You wou'd in courtly dalliance, and in jest,
Discourse of your owne loves full amorously,
With much faire promises, and large protest;
And she hirselfe in sober contrary
Would answere as you aske, and bid you rest:
But that for hir you did so deerely pine,
She never thought it, by that Sun that shine.

Thou knowst (saith he) if youth debarre thee not,
That not in man can such dissemblance live,
As faine himselfe unsufferably hot,
Whenas his handes like melting yce forgive,
Nor can yshroud himselfe in carelesse blot,
When in his thoughts the pangs of sorrowes grieve;
And that my Loves have had time and appearing,
Be judge thy youth, that gives me gentle hearing.

When first my youth was in that ages odnesse
That lacks the three bare twelve months of a score,
Love was a suckling then in infant gladnesse
And onely liv'd on dalliance, and no more;
The eighteenth was the first yeare of his madnesse,
And greater were his randone then before;
The nineteenth yeare he silently befell
In single choyce of beauteous Muridell.

The twentith did I waste away in uttring
All that the yeare before I had fore-thought,
And this last twelvemonth is neere gone in suffring
The hard succeedings that my uttrance wrought;
If the next yield the like discomforting,
In such defects as sufferance hath brought,
The next to that is like to end in me
Loves long sixe yeares with Lifes short twenty-three.

Meane while, if thou fearst not the fellowship
Of lingring Loves infectious languishment,
In these delicious meades I will o're-slip
The wearisome discourse of discontent:
And in a shepheards humble out-side clip
My drouped Noblenesse, and live unkent
And unrespected on the loanly hilles,
Till either Love or Death conclude my illes.

My deare unkind, that in the wanton Court
This while doth live, admired and obaid,
Shall bide the blame of desperate report
From the griev'd Nemesis of a minde decaid:
There let hir live to dally and disport,
In selfe loves river, with hie beauties shade;
Until the lovely Lilly of hir looke
Become the lowly Lilly of the brooke.

And those young Lordings, that with envious eies
Tooke secret watch of my affection to hir,
Shall now have time and liberty to guise
Their bounteous thoughts and gentle lips to woe hir,
And tire out their desiers unsuffice,
As I, the first, first did, when I first knew hir:
Till some more gallants suffer with Anander
The mastry of a feminine commander.

The eares of jove shall then be sicke to heare
The miserous complaint of courtly lovers;
Old care shall clothe young love as gray as freere,
When him with eie-deceiving Anticks covers;
And men of Court shall dwell with shepheards heere,
And Pallace hawkes shall feast with Meadow plovers;
For thus none-sparing Love did vanquish me,
That thought my selfe as strong as others be.

Though once I cou'd when I was weake and young,
(Is't not a wonder worthy three dayes weeping)
Contend in any game and be too strong
For Love, that now hath all my strength in keeping:
Since in the Flower of Age I fall along,
Like unto him that whilome at a meeting
Recoil'd rash wounding Death himself upon,
When he with Sol durst throw the weighty stone.

O Hyacynth, how like thy case is mine!
Then from thy ventrous soule that flowrs didst bleed
When prowdly that presumptuous arme of thine
Attempted so unpossible a deede:
I, while with Love do in like combat joine,
My courtly wanton turnes a meadow weed:
And shepheards servants prove we both by that,
I grace his field, and thou dost decke his hat.

So shall this boie, whose eies ne're look't into
The fatall change of our Imperious state,
Be governour of those unhappy twoo,
That in their glory found their glories date:
He that into a flowre dide long agoe,
He that into a weed chang'd now alate:
He that by Phoebus dide, by him survives;
He that by Muridella liv'd, and by hir dies.

And with this speech, and those dumbe sighes beside
Wherewith his lights shut up his woes discourse,
His comely furnishments of courtly pride
He covers in a shape more homely worse;
And in a swainish Counterfet doth hide
His noble limmes, the ruines of Loves force:
And (O) it was to see a wondrous grace,
So deare a jewell in so cheape a case.

I meane, saith he, a shepheards life to leade,
So long as Gods my Life a leading give,
Or till that Lady shall salute this meade,
For whose deare hate I thus am bound to live:
This wilfull penance put I on my head,
Which none but Muridella shall forgive:
Till when, I live that life in hope to mend it,
Or else in good-assurance ne're to end it.

If she prove kinde, as she was never yet,
(Though she in [every] vertue else was blest)
Then shalbe voide the Covenants of this fit,
And joyes shall lose the knot of strict Protest:
If still she in the like contempt doth sit,
My vowe continves as it is exprest:
Thus I am bound, though she the debt must pay,
And I must forfait, though she breake the day.

Herewith the youthfull noble-seeming swaine,
Adowne and set himselfe besiden me,
All in the middest of the lightsome plaine,
Where all around wee might our heardlams see;
Withouten signe or shew of nice disdaine,
The Shep-hooke in that hand received he
That was wont to beare the warlike lance,
And leade the Ladies many a courtly dance.

Thou ensigne of poore Life, badge of content,
Staffe of my cares, yet piller of my blisse,
Cheape relique of that joie that is dispent,
And chiefe foundation of that joie that is,
True watchman of those smiles that hopes present,
Strong porter of those griefes that hatred gi's,
Witnes of woes, my hooke, my hope as much,
The Shepheards weapon, and the Lovers crutch.

I doe embrace thee, as I once imbrac't
(Saith he) that vertuous mistresse that I had,
When on the easie measure of hir waste
I in this sort desiringly fell mad.
Though unto me thou yield'st not such repast,
Nor art so faire, nor art so gayly clad,
Yet looke how much hir beauties passe thy state,
So much thy Company excels hir hate.

Thus did the spirit of Ananders eie,
(Whose brightnes care had masked in a dim,)
Pertake with me the life of shepheardie,
As I both Life and Love pertooke with him.
And untill she relents, or till we die,
No second fortunes can in us begin.
All liberties as thankles offers be,
Till Love, that tide him up, do set him free.

Till heav'ns above ordaine one pleasing day
Wherein that Angel of their jealous care,
That Muridella please to come this way,
And with hir foote steps lighter then the aire
Trip through the dwellings of hir amorous boy,
And chear'd his droup't limmes with embracings faire,
Anetor hath Ananders loves in keepe,
And faire Anander hath Anetors sheepe.

Till then, yee Gods, ordaine us both good speed,
In Loves and flocks presented to your care;
And when your grace shall stand us in such steed,
To end a Loves griefe, and do a happy chare,
Ile sacrifice the fairest lambe I feed,
And tune my pipe againe:  and then prepare
One Dittie more, wherein the world shall view
How much you favour us, wee honour you.
