PERIN, WRENOCK.

PERIN.
For when thou art not as thou wont of yore,
No cause why life should please thee any more.
Whilome I was (in course of former yeeres,
Ere freezing Eld had coolde my youthly rage)
Of mickle worth among my Shepheards Peeres.
Now for I am some-dele ystept in age,
For pleasance, strength, and beautie ginnes asswage.
Ech lisle Heard-groom laughs my wrinkled face,
Ech bonny lasse for Cuddy shunnes the place;
For all this woe none can wee justly twight,
But hatefull Eld, the foe to pleasant rest,
Which like a Theefe doth rob us of delight.

WRENOCK.
Perin, enough; few words beene alwayes best,
Needs must be borne that cannot be redrest.
Selfe am I as thou seest in thilke estate,
The griefe is eath to beare that haz a mate.
But sicker for to speake the truth indeed,
Thou seem'st to blame that blamelesse seems to me,
And hurtlesse Eld to sneb:  (ill mought he speed,
That slayes the Dog, for Wolves so wicked bee)
The faults of men thou lay'st on Age I see,
For which if Eld were in it selfe too blame,
Then I and all my Peeres should taste the fame.

PERIN.
Wreenock, I weene thou doat'st through rutty Eld,
And think'st with fained words to bleare mine eie.
Thou for thy store art ever blissefull held,
Thy heapes of gold nill let thee sorrow spie,
Thy Flocks full safe here under shade doe lie,
Thy weanlings fat, thine ews with bladders blowne.
A jollier Shepheard have we seldome knowne.

WRENOCK.
For thilke my store, great Pan yherried be;
But if for thy, mine age with joy I beare,
How falles it that thy selfe unlike to me,
Art vexed so with griefe and bootlesse feare?
Thy store will let thee sleepe on either eare:
But neither want makes Age to wisemen hard,
Nor fools by welth from grievous pains are bard.

PERIN.
Seest not how free yond Lambkin skips and plaies;
And wrigs his tayle, and buts with tender head;
All for he feeles the heate of youngthly dayes,
Which secret law of kinde hath inly bred?
Thilke Ewe from whom all joy with youth is fled,
See how it hangs the head, as it would weep,
Whilome it skips, uneathes now may it creep.

WRENOCK.
No fellowship hath state of Beasts with man,
In them is nought but strength of lim and bone,
Which endes with age as it with age began.
But man they faine (as other Creature none)
Hath uncouth fire convayd from Heav'n by one,
(His name I wist) that yeelds him inward light,
Sike fire as Welkin showes in winter night.

Which neither Age nor Time can weare away,
Which waxeth bett for use as Shepheards Crooke,
That ever shineth brighter day by day:
Al so though wrinkled seeme the aged looke,
Bright shines the fire that from the stars we tooke.
And sooth to say, thilke Ewe laments the paine,
That thilke same wanton Lamb is like sustaine.

PERIN.
Ah Thenot, be not all thy teeth on edge,
To see youngths folke to sport in pastimes gay?
To pitch the Barre, to throwe the weightie sledge
To dance with Phillis all the holli-day,
To hunt by day, the Fox, by night, the Gray;
Sike peerelesse pleasures wont us for to queme,
Now lig we laide, as drownd in heavy dreame.
