THENOT.  COLLIN.

THENOT.
Collin, thou look'st as lagging as the day,
When the Sun setting toward his westerne bed,
Shews, that like him, all glory must decay,
And frolicke life with murkie clowds o're-spred,
Shall leave all earthly beautie mongst the dead;
Such is the habite of thy new aray:
Why art thou not preparde to welcome Maie,
In whose cleere Moone thy yonglings shall be fed,
With nights sweetes dewes, and open flowers of day.

COLLIN.
I answere thee with woe and welaway,
I am in sable clad, sith she cannot be had
That me and mine did glad;
theres all I'le say.

THENOT.
Well spoken Swaine, let me thy sorrowe ken,
Rich soule, though wrong'd by idle Antike men,
And driven by falshood to a clowdy den,
Tell me thy griefe.

COLLIN.
O it is past reliefe; and which is worst of worst,
Bayards and beasts accurst, with grosest flattery nurst:
Have sung her sacred name, and praisd her to their shame,
Who was our last and first.

THENOT.
Deere Collin, doe not checke the humblest song,
The will is ever maister of the worke,
Those that can sing, have done all Shepheards wrong,
Like lozels, in their cotages to lurke:
The aires the aire, though it be thicke.and murke,
If they to whom true Pastoralls belong,
In needefull layes, use neither pipe nor tong,
Shall none the vertuous raise?

COLLIN.
Yes, those that merit Bayes,
Though teares restraine their layes,
Some weeping houres or dayes
will finde a time:
To honor Honor stil, not with a rural quil,
But with the soule of skil,
to blesse their rime.
Aye me! why should I dote
on times, on songs, or note,
Confusion can best quote,
sacred Elizaes losse,
Whose praise doth grace al verse,
that shal the same reherse,
No gold neede decke her her herse;
to her al gold is drosse.

With that, Collin in discontent, brake his pipe, and in that passion, as if his heart had beene like his Pipe, parted each piece from the other, hee fel without sense on the earth, not then insensible of his sorrow, for it yielded, wept and groaned at once with his fal, his weepings and his sighs.  Poore Thenot showted for help; at whose cal some Nymphs ful of sorrow for their Soveraigne; and no whit amazed to see him lie as dead, their hearts were so dead, with thinking of that which had astonied his.  But yet, as gathering of companies draw more  and more to wonder, so prooved it among the shepheards, that left none but their curres to attend their flockes, themselves flocking about Thenot and Collin, who now recovered from his trance, and al asking the reason of this griefe, with teares abounding in his eyes, that likewise drew more abundantly from theirs, he distractedly answered,

Illum nec enim reprehendere fas est,
Qui fleat hanc, cuius fregerunt stamina parcae,
Solus honor sequitur mortales ille misellos.

And therewithall making a signe for the Shepheardes and Nymphes to sit downe, bee tolde them, they had lost that sacred Nymph, that careful Shepheardesse ELIZA, but if it pleased them to lend attention, he would repeate something of her, worth memorie, that should live in despite of death:  whereupon a stil silence seizd them al, saving onely now and then, by sighing they exprest their hearts sorrow:  and Collin thus beganne.

Seeing Honor onely foloweth mortals, and the works of the vertuous, die not with their deaths, and yet those workes neverthelesse with the honors and rites due to the departed, might be much blemished, if there were no gratitude in their successors:  let us poore Rurals (though no other wayes able to erect Statues for our late dread Soveraigne worthy al memory) among our selves repeate part of her excellent Graces, and our benefite obtained by her Government:  for, to reckon all, were Opus infinitum, a labour without end.
She was the undoubted issue of two royall princes, Henry of Lancaster and Elizabeth of Yorke.  In whose union the quiet of us poore Swaines began:  for till that blessed mariage, England was a shambles of slaughtred men:  so violent was the blood of ambition, so potent the factions, and so implacable their heads; whose eyes were never cleard till they were washt in blood, even in the deare blood of their Objects hearts.  This King, Grandfather to our late Queene, was the first Brittish King, that many a hundred yeares before wore the Emperiall Diademe of England, France and Ireland:  in him began the name of Tewther, descended from the ancient Brittish Kings, to florish; the issue male of royal Plantagenet ending in his beginning:  his wife Grandmother to our late Elizabeth, being the last Plantagenet, whose Temples were here circled with a sphere of golde.  Which King and Queene lived and loved, and now lie intoombed in that most famous Chappell, built at his Kingly charge in the Abbey of Westminster:  King Henry dying in a good age, left England, rich, beautifull, and full of peace; and so blesst with his issue, after royally matcht to Scotland and France, besides his undoubted heire King Henry of famous memory the eight; that no Kingdome in the earth more florished.
His sonne, the Father of our Elizabeth, was to his Enemies dreadfull, to his friends gracious, under whose Ensigne the Emperour himselfe serv'd:  so potent a Prince He was:  besides, so liberal and bounteous, that he seemed like the Sunne in his Meridian, to showre downe gold round about the Horizon:  But hee dide too, and left us three Princely hopes; all which have severally succeeded other, royally maintaining the right of England, and resisted all forraine wrong.
For King Edward our late Soveraignes Brother, though he died yong in yeares, left instance hee was no Infant in vertues; his learning, towardnes and zeale, was thought fitter for the societie of Angels than men, with whome no doubt his spirit lives eternally.
Such assurance have we of the happinesse of that royall gracious and worthy Ladie Mary his eldest sister:  who in her death expresst the care of her Kingdomes, so much lamenting one Townes losse, that shee told her attendant Ladies, if they would rippe her heart when she was dead, they should finde Callice written in it.  O Thenot, with all you other Nymphs and Swaines learne by this worthie Queene, the care of Soveraignes, how heart-sicke they are for their subjects losse; and thinke what felicitie we poore wormes live in, that have such royall Patrons, who carke for our peace, that we may quietly eate the bread of our owne labor, tend our flockes in safety, asking of us nothing but feare and duety, which humanity allowes, and heaven commands.
With this Thenot interrupted Collin, telling him, there were a number of true shepheards misliked that Princes life, and joyed greatly at her death:  withall, beginning to shew some reasons, but Collin quickely interrupted him in these words.

Peace Thenot, peace, Princes are sacred things,
It fits not Swaines to thinke amisse of Kings.

For saith he, the faults of Rulers (if any be faultie) are to be reprehended by them that can amend them, as seeing none is superiour to a King but God, to him alone referre their actions.  And where thou termest them true shepheards that so envied that Ladies government, thou are deceived, they are still as they then were, prowd phanatike spirited counterfaites, expert in nothing but ignorance, such as hate all rule, for who relisheth correction more than fooles, though they deserve it most.  Beleeve me Thenot, and all you well affected Swaines, there is no greater marke for a true shepheard to be known by, than Humilitie, which God he knowes, those mad men most want:  too much experience have we of their threed-bare pride, who bite the dead, as living curres may lions:  not contented with their scandals of that Royall Lady, our late Soveraignes Sisters, but they have troubled the cleare springs of our Mistresse Elizabeths blessed government:  nay, my selfe have seene and heard with glowing eares some of them, even in the fields of Calydon, when his Excellence that is now our emperiall Shepheard, was onely Lord of their foldes, speake of his Majestie more audaciously and malapertly, than any of us would doe of the meanest officer.  For as I saide even now, if Rulers chance to slip:  it is most unsufferable, that every impudent tayler should with the breath of his mouth stirre the chaffie multitude, whose eares itch for novelties, whose mindes are as their numbers, diverse:  not able to judge themselves, much lesse their souveraignes.  But they ought, if they be true Pastors, to follow the great Pan the Father of al good shepheards Christ, who teacheth every of his Swaines to tell his brother privately of his fault, and againe, and againe:  by that glorious number, three, including numbers numberlesse, before it be told the Church.  If then thy must, being true shepheards, deale so with their brethren, how much more ought their folowers do to their Soveraigns, being Kings and Queenes?  And not in the place where sacred and morall manners should be taught, contrarily to teach the rude, to be more unmannerly, instructing every Punie to compare with the most reverend Prelate, and by that example to have every Cobler account himself a King.
Oh saide Thenot, Collin, there are some would il thinke of you, should they heare you thus talke, for they reprove all out of zeale, and must spare none.
Peace to thy thoughts Thenot, answered Collin, I know thou knowest there is a zeale, that is not with knowledge acquainted, but let them and their madde zeale passe, let us forget their railings against Princes:  And beginne with her beginning, after her Royall Sisters ending, who departing from this earthly kingdome the seaventeenth of November in the yeare of our Lord 1558. immediately thereupon, Elizabeth the hand maide to the Lord of Heaven, and Empresse of all Maides, Mothers, youth and men then living in this English Earth, was proclaimed Queene with generall applause; being much pitied, for that busie slander and respectlesse envy had not long before brought her into the disfavour of her royall sister Mary, whom we last remembred:  In the continuance of whose displeasure, stil stil made greater by some great Enemies, how she scap't, needs no repeating, being so wel knowne.  Preserved shee was from the violence of death, her blood was precious in the sight of GOD, as is the blood of al his Saints, it was too deare to be powred out like water on the greedy earth, she lived and wee have lived under her fortie and odde yeres so wonderfully blest, that all Nations have wondred at their owne afflictions careful of our peace; finishing even then the greatest wonder of all, our deserts considered by appointing the Kingdome to so just and lawfull a Ruler to succeede her:  whom all true English knew for their undoubted Lord, immediately after her death.  But lest we end ere we begin, I wil returne to her:  who being seated in the Throne of Majestie, adorned with al the vertues divine and moral, appeared to us like a goodly Pallace where the Graces kept their severall mansions.
First, faith aboundantly shone in her then yong, and lost not her brightnesse in her age, for she beleeved in her Redeemer, her trust was in the King of Kings, who preserved her as the Apple of his eye, from all treacherous attempts, as many being made against her life, as against any Princesse that ever lived:  yet she was stil confident in her Saviour, whose name she glorified in all her actions, confessing her victories; preservings, dignities to be all his, as appeared by many luculent examples, this one serving for the rest, that after the dissipation of the Spanish Armatho accounted invincible, she came in person to Paules crosse, and there, among the meanest of her people, confessed, "Non nobis Domine, non nobis; sed nomini tuo Gloria."  And as she was ever constant in cherishing that faith wherein shee was from her infancie nourisht, so was shee faithful of her word, with her infancie nourisht, so was shee faithful of her word, with her people, and with forraine nations.  And albeit I know some (too humorously affected to the Roman government) make a question in this place, whether her highnesse first brake not the truce with the King of Spaine:  to that I could answere, were it pertinent to mee in this place; or for a poore shepheard to talke of state, with unreproovable truths that her highnes suffred many wrongs before she left off the league.
O saith Thenot, in some of the wrongs resolve us, and thinke it no unfitting thing, for thou that hast heard the songs of that warlike thing, for thou that hast heard the songs of that warlike Poet Philesides good Meloebee, and smooth tongued Melicert, tell us what thou hast observed in their sawes, seene in thy owne experience, and heard of undoubted truths touching those accidents:  for that they adde, I doubt not, to the glory of our Eliza.
To this entreatie Collin condiscended, and thus spake.  It is not unknowen the Spaniard a mighty nation, abounding with treasure, being warres sinewes, torne from the bowels of Mines, fetcht from the sands of Indian Rivers, by the miserable captived natives, have purposed to be Lordes of Europe.  France they have attempted and failed in, Navarre they have greatly distrest, Lombardy the garden of the world, they are possessed of:  Naples and Sicilie, Sardinia, Corsica, are forced to obey their lawes, and that they reckned England should be theirs, with such small ease, even in a maner with threatning:  their Songs taught little infants from Andolozia to Galizia are witnesse.  The dice were cast:  her Majesties Subjects craftily put into the Inquisition upon every small colour, if they scaped, which seldome sorted out so wel, alive, could of their goods have not restitution.  Their King gave pensions to our Queenes Rebellious fugitive subjectes, and not onely unto such as had attempted to resist her in active rebellion:  and yet not staying there, out of his treasury purposed rewards for sundry to attempt the murder of her sacred person:  of which perfidious gilt she never was tainted:  let any Spaniard, or Spanish affected English, prove where she ever hired, abetted, or procured any such against their kings Majestie, and I wil yeeld to be esteemed as false as falshood itselfe:  nay, they cannot deny, but that even with the Rebels of her Realme of Ireland, stird up to barbarous and inhumane outrages by the Spanish policie, shee hath no way dealt but by faire and laudable warre.
But before I enter into her Majesties lenitie in that Irish warre, against sundry knowne Rebels, and punishing some of her subjects, that upon a zeale to her, or perchance, to get themselves a glorie, adventured their owne lives by treacherie to cut off the lives of some great Leaders of the Rebels, I wil a little digresse, lest I should be thought, after her death, to maintaine fire of hate, which I ever in heart desired might honourably be quencht, between these potent Kingdomes of England and Spaine.
I wish all that reade this, to bury old wrongs, and to pray that it would please GOD of his inestimable mercie, to roote out all malice from Christian Nations:  and as our Royall Soveraigne now raigning, hath conserved league and peace with al Princes, so, for the weale of Christendome, it may more and more increase, that the open enemies of Christ may the better be repelled from those wealthy Kingdomes in the East, where they have many hundred yeares most barbarously tyrannized:  for no man doubts, but the blood shed within these thirtie yeares, as well of English, as Scottish, Spanish, Dutch, and Portugall, in the quarrell of Religion, might, if GOD had so been pleased, in able, to have driven the heathen Monarch from his neerest holde in Hungaria, to the fal of Danubia in the Euxine sea, especially with the assistaunce of the French that have cruelly falne, either upon others swords.
But I trust God hath suffered this offence, to adde more glory to our mighty King, that hee should be the most famous of all his predecessors, as indeed he is the most mightie, and hath been raised to this Realme as a Saviour, to deliver England, and make it more abundant in blessings, when many lookt it should have had al her glory swallowed up of spoile.
The highnesse of his empirial place, greatnesse of his blood, mightinesse of his alliance, but most, his constancy in the true profession of Religion, even amid my sorrowes, Thenot, fil me with joyes:  when I consider how a number that gaped for our destruction, have their mouths shut close, yet emptie where they thought to eate the sweets of our paineful sweate:  but God be praised, as I saide before, her Highnesse that ruled us many yeeres in peace, left us, in her death, more secure, by comitting us to our lawful Prince, matcht to a royal fruitful Lady, that hath borne him such hopeful issue, that the dayes we lately feared, I trust are farre off, as this instant is, from the end of al earthly times:  who shal not onely with their royall father, maintaine these his kingdomes in happy peace, but subject more under him, and spreade the banners of Christ in the face of misbeleevers.
In this hope I here break off, and returne to our late Soverainges care of keeping Faith, even toward her Rebel subjects, which I wil manifest in some two or three examples of the Irish.
When the Oneale, in the time of that memorable Gentleman Sir Henry Sidney his Deputie ship of Ireland, was mightily strengthened in his Country, and so potent, that the Deputie had many dangerous and unadvantageable  skirmishes against him; A servant of her Majesties, one Smith, thinking to doe a worthy peece of service, by poysoning the Oneale, prepared a little bottle, parted in the middest; one side containing good wine, the other with tempered poyson of the same colour, and that he carries to the Oneale, under colour of gratification that for his armie lay farre from the Sea, or Marchantable Townes, and hee thought Wine was unto him very daintie:  which the Oneale accepted kindely, for that the saide Smith was borne in the Oneales Countrey:  and such the Irish doe especially, and before others, trust, to bring messages even from their greatest enemies, under whom they serve.  But the deceit being quickly spide, Smyth was by the Oneill sent bound to the Deputie, to whose plot hee would faine have imputed the same practise:  but contrarily, the Deputie publikely punished the said Smyth, and her Majestie refus'd him for her servant, saying, she would keepe none neare her that would deale trecherously, no though it were against traitors.
The like example was showne on an other that would have attempted the poisoning of Rory Og, a bloody and dangerous Rebell.
To which may be added, that her Highnesse among other trespasses, objected by her Atturney against a convicted Deputie:  was, that he went about by poyson to have tooke away the life of Feff Mac Hue, a Rebell more immane and barbarous than any of the other two:  the Lord chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas (yet living) opening at the same time, how just a spirit her Majestie was possessed with, that shee hated treason, even to traitors:  much more then to annointed Kings, whose honors and reputations, she so maintained, that shee not long since punished by fine and imprisonment, a wealthy railer, for unreverent words spoken against the person of king Philip, her open and professed enemie:  So faithful, so just, so gracious was she.
And to make it more plaine, that Spaine intended England the first wrong, so long time before it was muttered; but after that memorable battell of Lepanto, wherein Don John of Austria obtained the triumphant Christian victorie against the Turkes; to rewarde him, England was the kingdome set downe, being then in her Majesties possession:  but hee had it, when they could give him it that promised the same, which was at latter Lammas.  And I trust his Neece shall have as good successe, with her pretended title.  For if God strengthened her Majestie so, that against her being a woman, they could not prevaile, we trust his Almightinesse will be as carefull of our King, being alreadie Lord of three such people as have selcome bene equalled in battell, exccept they have unnaturally contended among themselves:  the sight of which day, deare shepheards, let us pray never againe to see.  Besides, to expresse her farther intent:  to preserve faith and league, notwithstanding infinite of open wrongs:  and certaine knowledge that a Navie for invasion of this Realme had bene preparing more than fifteene yeare; yet did she beare, untill against all lawe of Nations, the Ambassador liedger of Spaine, honoured with many favours, did notwithstanding plot and confeder with native traitors of this land; and the matter being apparantly proved; hee was by her milde sufferance admitted to depart the Realme, without any violence:  to his perpetuall reproach, and her never dying glorie.  Well, I will here conclude touching this vertue of faith both towarde God and man:  she was as firme in the one as mortalitie coulde bee; and in the other approved glorious among all the Princes of her time.
For Hope, the second divine vertue, she rather therin abounded, than was any way wanting:  she beleeved, and it came to passe; her enemies arise, but before their arising, shee was certain to see them fall; shee having by example of things past, nothing  doubted of things to come.  And she was not deceived till the houre of her death.  For ever her expectation was fulfilled; she kept peace within, chafed the spoyler without; and even as it is sung of Epaminondas that valiant Theban Captaine, in his last victorious battell, wherein yet death of him got victorie, he thus gloried:  Herein am I comforted, that I dye a conqueror.  For even when death laid his last siege to her yet unvanquished life, Tyrone, the long disturber of her State, besought mercie at her feete.  O Nymphs and Shepheards doubt not she was full of divine Hope, whose heart obtained ever the thing it faithfully desired; and that her desires were all of faith, I could adde  infinite examples to these alreadie alledged, but that it is needelesse to cast water in the Sea, or to make question of that all men knowe, and will confesse, except some whose heartes are straungers from Truth, and the professed Receptacles of falsehood.
Her Charitie the thirde and principall divine Grace to the eye of mortalls:  (for that Faith and Hope bend principally their service to Heaven, and Charities effects are manifested on earth) hath bene extended over all her Realmes, and stretched to the comfort of her oppressed neighbours.  The multitudes of poore daily relieved from her purse, the numbers of sicke persons yearely visited, and by her owne hand their corrupt sores toucht, the washing of poore womens feete, and releeving their  wants, was a signe that she was humble, as well as charitable:  for Humilitie is Charities sister; they are two twins borne at one time, and as they are borne together in any soule whatever, so doe they live and die together:  the humble spirit being ever charitable, and the charitable ever humble:  for it is as impossible to have a proud man charitable, as to reconcile fier and water; or to make accord betweene any contraries.  As she was in these particulars, exceeding all Ladies of her time, given to this helpful vertue, so had she general impositions through all her kingdome, for her well able subjects to follow her example:  and so much did her example pervaile, that besides the ordinary and weekely almes distributed through the Realme, there have beene more particular Almes-houses builded for the reliefe of the aged, than in any sixe Princes Raignes before.  And as all parts of England have in this imitation bene very forward:  so hath the Citie of London exceeded all; wherein divers private men have builded sundry houses for the poore, and allowed them pentions:  but the Corporations have bene most bountifull as most able:  and among all the Right worshipfull the Merchant Taylors have exceeded the rest, all having done well, that have done any thing, but they best of any other, as I will one day in a song of liberal Shepheards thankfully expresse:  though for my selfe I know him not in the least gift to whom I am in that sort bounden, but I ken not Thenot, how I may, for there is none living but may lacke.  As the Citie, so many knights, Gentlemen, honourable and devout persons have followed her example:  above the rest, an honorable, carefull, reverend and learned watchman, as full of mildnesse and pietie, as he is of yeares and greefes for his good and royall Mistres losse; within few miles of this Citie, hath builded a worthy Receptacle to the like charitable end.
As for the poore and decrepit with age, her Royall Majestie had this charitable care; so for soldiers, and suters, she was very provident.  The last being opprest in any part of her Realmes by men of much wealth and little conscience, she allowed them counsell and proceedings in Forma pauperis, and maintenance weekely in the Termes, for some part of their succour.  For souldiers, and men of service, her decrees of provision are extant:  besides, it is most cleare, no Prince in the world, to land, or Sea-men, was more bountifull or willing, than her highnesse:  out of her Coffers it went; but there is an olde Proverbe Thenot, carriage is deare:  and I have heard, but I will stand to nothing; base Ministers, and under officers, curtall the liberalities of great and potent masters.  Some have in her time beene taken with the manner, and besides bodily punishment and fines, displaced:  as I well remember, and cannot omit amid my greefe to tell, though somewhat from this subject it dissent, being of a fellow too meane, how her highnesse in one of her progresses, walking in the garden of a house where she was received, being somewhat neere the high waie, heard on a sodaine, a market woman cry:  and from an Arbour beheld one of her owne servants, a Taker up of provision, use the woman uncivilly:  whereupon the cause being examined, and the poore woman found by the same fellowe to be wrongd, as well afore as then, her highnesse causd him presently to be discharged of her service and punished:  yet the fault being but slight, the Taker was countenanced to make sure to be restored:  and some halfe yeare after, fell downe before her Majestie desiring mercie, and restoring:  her highnesse pittying his distresse, commaunded him to be provided for in some place where he could not wrong her poore subject, but in any case not to make him a Taker.  Many such false ones she hath punished with death.  I could in this as all the rest, recken multitudes of examples, but I will knit all up with her Excellence in this Act of Charitie extended to her neighbours:  whom she hath by her bountie delivered from the tyrannie of oppression, and aided the right of others against the rebellious subjects:  others assisted to recover their kingdoms, not sparing millions to sustaine the quarrell of the righteous.  The reward of which mercy and charitie she now finds, receiving infinite glories for her abounding Charitie, being done for his cause:  that leaveth no deed of mercie unrecompenced.
As she was richly stored with divine graces, so in morall vertues, no Princesse ever-living in the earth can be remembered to exceede her.  Her wisedome was without question in her life by any unequalled, she was sententious, yet gratious in speech; So expert in Languages that she answered most Embassadors in their native tongues:  her capacitie was therewith so apprehensive, and invention so quicke, that if any of them had gone beyonde their bounds, with majestie undaunted, she would have limited them within the verge of their duties, as she did royally, wisely, and learnedly, the last struting Poland messenger, that thought with stalking lookes and swelling words to daunt her undaunted Excellence.  But as he came proud, he returned not without repentance:  having no other wrong here, but the sinne of his own sausinesse.
Many such examples I could set downe, but I will satisfie you with one more.  When the Spaniards having their Armatho ready, temporisde with her highnes Commissioners in the low Countries, thinking to finde her highnesse unprovided, at last when they accounted all sure, they sent her their Kings choyce either of peace, or warre, wittily included in foure Latine verses:  portending, that if she would cease to defend the low Countries, restore the goods taken by reprisall from the Spaniards; build up the Religious houses diverted in her Fathers time, and let the Romane Religion be received through her Land; why then she might have peace:  if not, it was too late to expect any.  Which proud commaunding Embassie, with royall magnamanitie, gratious wisedome, and fluent wit, she answered instantly in one knowne proverbiall line, which she sodenly made into a Verse.

Ad Graecaes haec fiant mandata Kalendas.

O Thenot, did not assurance of our kingly Poets love to the Muses, somewhat comfort me, I should utterly despaire ever to heare Pastoricall song againe, fild with any conceit; seeing her Excellence, whose braine being the Hellicon of all our best and quaint inventions, is dried up by the inevitable heate of death.
Her justice was such, as never any could truly complaine of her; neither did shee pardon faults unpardonable, as murder, rape, Sodomy, that sin almost not to bee namde:  neither was there in her time (with her knowledge) extremities of injustice showne to other malefactors:  if any such did fall, it was either by falshood or malice of the evidence, or some other secret wherewith poore Shepheards are unacquainted:  onely this we are taught:  that God sometime punisheth the sinnes of parents on their children, to many generations.
But for her selfe, she was alwayes so enclined to equitie, that if she left Justice in any part, it was in shewing pittie:  as in one generall punishment for murder it appeared:  whereas before-time there was extraordinary torture, as hanging wilfull murderers alive in chaines; shee having compassion like a true Shepheardesse of their soules, though they were of her erring and utterly infected stocke; said their death satisfied for death:  and life for life, was all could be demaunded:  and affirming more, that much torture distracted a dying man:  in particular, she saved many, among some unworthy of her mercie, that proud fellow, who unjustly named himself Doctor Parry, and an other as I remembered called Patrick an Irish man:  the first having offended in Burglary, against a Lawier able and willing to take away his life, thereto urged by many misdemeanours:  and for that Parry doubted his attempt to kill, and act of fellony was without compasse of pardon, considering the place where it was done, and against whom; thought a lease of life safest, which of her benigne mercie he obtained for 21. yeares; but ere three of them were past, he did unnaturally attempt her death that had given him life; for which traiterous ingratitude he worthily was cut off:  the Irish man likewise being pardoned for a manslaughter, proved as unthankfull, and ended as he lived shamefully.  Besides, she was so inclinable to mercie, that her just and severe Judges tolde her, how some desperate malefactors building on friends, and hopes of pardon, carde not for offending, but even scoffed at authoritie; wherof when she heard, shee tooke speciall care, considering it was as great injustice to pittie some, as spare others, taking order to signe no pardon, except the Judges hand were at it first, which truly knew the cause why the partie was condemned:  by which meanes murderers, and presumptuous offenders were cut off from all hope.
One notable example of her justice among many I will here remember:  Certaine condemned for Piracie, having made some ende with them they wronged, lay for their lives at her mercie, and the Judge of her Admiraltie having signified favourably of the qualitie of their offence, she was moved to pittie them, and had commanded their pardon to be drawne.  In the meane time two of them, trained up in the fashion of our common Cutters, that I may tell thee Thenot swarme rather like divels than men about the countrey, that sweare as if they had license to blaspheme, and stabbe men as if they had authoritie; nay, sometime themselves for very trifles:  two such I say, were in the company of these condemned Pyrates, hourely hoping for their lives:  and braving either other of their manhood, saying, one durst more than the other:  the eldest being Maister of their late ship, wherein they had sailed to that place of sorrow, slyces his owne flesh with a knife, asking the other if he durst doo as much:  the yonker was very readie, and two or three times followed the olde foole, in that desperate wounding of himselfe.  This brutish acte being committed in the prison belonging to her Majesties owne house, came quickly to her royall eare, and some fewe days after, their pardon to be signed; who graciously gave life to all the rest; but commaunded them by expresse name to execution, saying, they were unworthy mercie, that of themselves had none:  adding, it was very likely, that such as in a prison, and in their state, would be so cruell to shed their owne bloud, would have small compassion of others whom they overcame at Sea; and so leaving them to the lawe, they were worthily executed.
Of her mercie nothing can be saide more, but that it equalled, or rather as I said before, exceeded her justice.  Among infinite numbers whom she pardoned, that one especially bieng a cleare witnesse, who shot the Gunne off against Greenwich, even into her Majesties Barge, hurt the next man to her, at broade daylight; almost impossible to be excused by negligence or ignorance; for that any man having his peece charged, would rather upon retyring home, have discharged it among the Reedes, than toward the bredth of the River, whose silver brest continually bore up a number of vessels, wherein men passed on sundrie affaires.  How ever wilfull or unwillfull the acte was, done it was, and by a Jurie he was found guiltie, and ajudged to die:  toward execution hee was ledde with such clamour and injuries of the multitude, as sildome any the like hath bene seene or heard; so hainous and odious his offence appeared unto them, that being upon the ladder readie to be cast off, the common people had no pittie of him:  when even just in that moment of dispaire and death, her Majestie sent a gracious pardon, which delivered him to all mens wonder.  I want but the Arcadian Shepheards inchaunting phrase of speaking, that was many times witnesse to her just mercies, and mercifull justice:  yet rude as I am, I have presumed to handle this excellent Theame, in regard the Funerall hastens on, of that sometime most Serene Lady, and yet I see none, or at least past one or two that have sung any thing since her departure worth the hearing; and of them, they that are best able, scarce remember her Majestie.  I cannot now forget the excellent and cunning Collin indeed; (for alas, I confesse my selfe too too rude), compaining that a liberall Mecaenas long since dying, was immediately forgotten, even by those that living most laboured to advaunce his fame; and these as I thinke close part of his songs:

Being dead no Poet seekes him to revive,
Though many Poets flattred him alive.

Somewhat like him, or at least to that purpose, of a person more excellent, though in ruder verse I speake.

Death now hath ceaz'd her in his ycie armes,
That sometime was the Sun of our delight:
And pittilesse of any after-harmes,
Hath veyld her glory in the cloud of night.
Nor doth one Poet seeke her name to raise,
That living hourely striv'd to sing her praise.

He that so well could sing the fatall strife
Between the royall Roses White and Red,
That prais'd so oft Eliza in her life,
His Muse seemes now to dye, as she is dead:
Thou sweetest song-man of all English swaines,
Awake for shame, honour ensues thy paines.

But thou alone deserv'st not to be blamde,
He that sung fortie yeares her life and birth,
And is by English Albion so much famde
For sweete mixt layes of majestie with mirth,
Doth of her losse take now but little keepe;
Or else I gesse he cannot sing, but weepe.

Neither doth Coryn full of worth and wit,
That finisht dead Musaeus gracious song,
With grace as great, and words, and verse as fit;
Chide meager death for doing vertue wrong:
He doth not seeke with songs to deck her herse,
Nor make her name live in his lively verse.

Nor does our English Horace, whose steele pen
Can draw Characters which will never die,
Tell her bright glories unto listning men,
Of her he seemes to have no memorie.
His Muse an other path desires to tread,
True Satyres scourge the living leave the dead.

Nor doth the silver tongued Melicert,
Drop from his honied Muse one sable teare
To mourne her death that graced his desert,
And to his laies opend her Royall eare.
Shepheard remember our Elizabeth,
And sing her Rape, done by that Tarquin, Death.

No lesse do thou (sweet Coridon)
The Theame exceedeth Edwards Isabel.
Forget her not in Poly-Albion;
Make some amends, I know thou lovdst her well.
Thinke twas a fault to have thy Verses seene
Praising the King, ere they had mournd the Queen.

And thou delicious sportive Musidore,
Although thou have resignd thy wreathe of Bay,
With Cypresse binde thy temples and deplore
Elizaes winter in a mournfull Lay:
I know thou canst and none can better sing
Herse songs for her, and Paens to our King.

Quicke Antihorace though I place thee heere,
Together with yong Moelibee thy frend:
And Hewres last Musaeus, all three deere,
All such whose vertues highly I commend:
Prove not ingrate to her that many a time
Hath stoopt her Majestie, to grace your rime.

And thou that scarce hast fligd thy infant Muse,
(I use thine owne word) and commend thee best,
In thy proclaiming James:  the rest misuse
The name of Poetry, with lines unblest;
Holding the Muses to be masculine:
I quote no such absurditie in thine.

Thee doe I thanke for will; thy worke let passe:
But wish some of the former had first writ
That from their Poems like reflecting glasse
Steeld with the puritie of Art and wit
Eliza might have livde in every eye,
Alwaies beheld till Time and Poems dye.

But cease you Goblins, and you under Elves;
That with rude rimes and meeters reasonless;
Fit to be sung for such as your base selves,
Presume to name the Muses Patronesse:
Keep your low Spheres, she hath an Angell spirit:
The learnedst Swaine can hardly sing her merit.

Onely her brother King, the Muses trust
(Blood of her Grandsires blood, plac'd in her Throne)
Can raise her glory from the bed of dust
To praise her worth belongs to Kings alone.
In him shall we behold her Majestie,
In him her vertue lives and cannot die.

At this Thenot and the rest desired him to proceede in his discourse of her vertues:  remembring where hee left, at Justice, and though the matter pleased them so well that they could endure the hearing many dayes, yet seeing the Sunne began to dye the West Sea with vermilion tincture, the pallace of the morning being hidden in sable clouds, and that the care of their flockes must be respected, requested him to be as breefe, as the time limited him.
To which Collin answered; Thenot, I perceive thou art as all or the most part of the world is, carefull onely of thine own:  and how ever frends fall, yet profit must be respected.  Well thou dost well; and in this I dubbly praise thee:  to carke for sheepe and lambs that cannot tend themselves , and not to mourne as without hope our great Shepheardesse; who after long life and glory on earth, hath obtained a longer and more glorious life in heaven.  But to proceede.  As she was constant in faith, stedfast in hope, cheerefull in giving, prudent in pardoning:  so for the third morall Vertue Temperance, there was in no age before, a woman so exalted to earthly honour ever read off; that so long, so gratiously, in outward and domestick affaires governed her kingdom, familie, and person, with the like moderation.
First, for her kingdome, what can be devised more neere the meane, than she hath in all things followed?  For in religion as in other things, there hath beene an extreame erring from the truth, which like all vertues, (being indeede the head of all) keepeth place in the midst; so hath she established the true Catholicke and Apostolicall Religion in this Land, neither mingled with multitudes of Idle superstitions; nor yet wanting true honor and reverence for the Ministrie, in laudable and long received ceremonies.
But here I shall be carped at, in that I call the Religion profest in her time, true Catholike and Apostolicall:  considering the Sea of Rome and such English onely as be her sworne Sonnes, thinke that seate alone to hold the Apostolicall faith:  excluding her Majestie, and all other Christian Princes with their subjects, that have not falne before that Chaire, as people worthie to be cutte of from Christes congregation:  giving them names of Protestants, Lutherans, and I know not what.  And on another side, a selected company, that would needs be counted Saints and holy ones, when there is nothing but corruption in their harts, they forsooth condemned her sacred governement for Antichristian:  when to the amazement of superstitious Romanes, and selfe-praysing Sectuaries, God approved hir faith by his love towards her.  And lest I should be taskd of ignorance, and termed a Nullifidian in defending neither of these sides:  and onely of the faith of that the Colliar profest, which was ever one with the most.  I say, I was borne and brought up in the Religion profest by that most Christian Princesse Elizabeth, who beleeved not that the spirite of God was bound or tyde to any one place, no more to Rome than Antioch, that the Candlesticke of any Church might be remoovde, for neglecting their first love, and teaching traditions of men, in steede of sacred veritie:  and no man can denie but the Church of Rome hath so taught and standeth not her first estate, but if it were in the Primitive Church perfectly and fully established:  then hath it received many traditions since, which our Elizabeth nor any of her faithfull subjects would obay, being no way by Gods word thereunto warranted:  besides, there is apparent proofes that the Church of Rome hath many hundred yeares persecuted with great crueltie:  which is no bo badge of the true Apostolicall Chruch.
For the other sort:  it is well knowne, they are for the most part, ignorant and mechanick people, leade by some fewe hot spirited fellowes, that would faine have all alike.  These tying themselves to a more strait course outwardly than other men, and though they be utterly object to the Romanistes; yet have they more hee Saints and she Saints among them than are in the Romish Kalender; where none or at least but very fewe are called Saints but holy Virgins, Martyrs, and Confessors; but all the brethren and sisters of the other side, are at the first receiving into their Communion, Sainted, if it be but Kit Cobler, and Kate his wife; and both hee and she presume they have as sufficient spirites to teach and expound the Scriptures, as either Peter, or John, or Paule, for so bluntly they terme the blessed Apostles:  but their vanities and pride Elizabeth hated, and therefore bridled their waies, and was not mooved with their hypocriticall fastes; because they fasted to strife and debate, as it is written by the Prophet Esay. 58. and to smite with the fist of wickednes.
Her highnes therefore taught all her people the undoubted truth:  that faith in Christ alone, the way the doore, and the life:  not turning either to the right hand, or to the left:  and in this being the best meane her Temperance cheefly appeered:  this rule she taught her kingdome, her familie, her selfe:  at least caused them to be taught by excellent Pastors, to whom humbly she gave publike eare.
As in this, so for apparell, manners and diet, she made Lawes, and gave example in hir owne person:  to curb the vanitie of pride in garments:  by expresse Statutes, appointed all men and women to be apparelled in their degree and calling.  To represse the excesse of drinking and hated sinne of drunkennesse, she hath commaunded no drinke in her Land to be brued above an easie price:  and to avoid gurmandize she hath yearely commanded the Lent and Fasting daies to be kept, as in times before, not for superstition sake, but common policie, to have Gods creatures received indifferently; and also to increase Mariners for the strength of the Ile, to whose numbers while fish is contemned, by neglect of fishing mightily decay:  fishers being indeed, pretty traind Marriners; by reason that they have experience in most of the Havens, Creekes, Shoales, Flats, and other other profits and daungers neere the places they usde.  But what should I say; if they that will onely make the Scripture their cloke and yet respect not this part; Obey the Magistrate for conscience:  their sinne fall upon themselves.  I trust the Prince is excusable, that would his subjects would doe well; and so I am certaine was her Excellence.
True said Thenot, but for all her Lawes, these courses were little set by, I have seene upstarts jet it gayer than Lords, numbers drinke till they have seemde dead, and multitudes eate flesh even upon good Fryday.  What remedie said Collin:  they that will breake the Kings Law, make little account of Gods:  such subjects are like false Executors, that performe not the legacies of the dead, her highnes was not the worse for that good Lawes were violated, they that dealt so with her, dealt worse with God:  offending him double by breaking his Lawes and hers.  But in her owne household and person she observed all these rules:  and though many abroad by corruption were winkt at; yet sometime they were some taken and paid home.
But her excelling Sense, though her Tables were the abundantist furnisht of any Princes in the world with all varietie:  yet fed she oftenest of one dish, and that not of the daintiest.  For quaffing as it was unfitting her Sex, so she extreamely abhord it:  hating superfluitie as hell:  and so farre was she from all nicenes, that I have heard it credibly reported, and know it by many instances to be true, that she never could abide to gaze in a mirror or looking glasse:  no  not to behold one, while her head was tyred and adornd, but simply trusted to her attendant Ladies for the comelinesse of her attyre:  and that this is true, Thenot I am the rather perswaded, for that when I was yong, almost thirtie years agoe, courting it now and than:  I have seene the Ladies make great shift to hide away their looking glasses if her Majestie had  past by their lodgings.
As in all these things she kept truly the Meane, so likewise in her gifts:  as I first noticed touching her Charitie, when was still so tempered notwithstanding her great charge in aiding her distressed neighbours:  that she was ever truely liberall, and no way prodigall:  as I trust his Royall Majestie shall by the treasurie finde.
As she was adorned with all these vertues; so was she indued with Fortitude and princely courage, so plentiously, that her displeasure shooke even her stoutest adversaries:  and those unnaturall traytors, that came armd sundry times with bloodie resolution to lay violent handes on her sacred Majestie, her verie lookes would daunt, and their instruments prepared for her death, dropt from their trembling hands with terror of their consciences, and amazement to behold her countenance; nay, when she knew they came of purpose to kill her, she hath singled divers of them alone, and let some passe from her with milde caveats a farre off:  whose lenitie, rather increasing than diminishing their malice, they have followed destruction which too timely over tooke them.
I could in this place name many particular men, as Parry, and others:  but I will content yee with one private example overpassing the generall; fortitude she showed in her youth, in her captivitie, in her glory, at all times:  for defence of her faith, and all oppressed true professors thereof:  ending with this example of her high courage and assured confidence in God.  When Appletree whom I remembred before, had hurt her waterman, being next to her in the Barge; the French Ambassador being amazd, and  all crying Treason, Treason:  yet she with an undaunted spirit, came to the open place of the Barge, and bad them never feare, for if the shot were made at her, they durst not shoote againe:  such majestie had  her presence and such boldnesse her heart, that she despised all feare; and was as all Princes are, or should be; so full of divine fulnesse, that guiltie mortalitie durst not beholde her but with dazeled eyes.
But I wonder saith Thenot, shee in so many yeares built no goodly Aedifice wherein her memorie might live.
So did she answered Collin, the goodliest building in the earth, such as like fleeting Iles commanded the seas, whose outward walles are dreadfull Engins of brasse, sending fearefull thunder among enemies.  And the inhabitants of those wooden Iles, are worthy Sea-men, such as dread no daunger, but for her would have run even into destructions mouth.  I tell thee Thenot, I have seene in a fight some like nimble spirites hanging in the aire by little cordes, some lading ordinance with deathful powder, some charging Muskets, and discharging ruine on their enemies; some at the foreship, others busie at helme, skipping here and there like Roes in lightnesse, and Lyons in courage; that it would have powred spirit into a sicke man to see their resolutions.  For such tenants made she many buildings, exceeding any Emperors Navy in the earth, whose service I doubt not will be acceptible to her most worthy Successor, our dread Soveraigne Lord and King.
Other Pallaces shee had great store of, which shee maintained and yearely repaired, at least would have done, if those that hadde care of her surveying, would have bene as carefull for hers as for their owne.
What should I say of her?  the cloudie mantle of the night covers the beautie of the heaven:  and this evening lookes like those soure dayes that preceded the morning of her death.  The beastes the night that shee ended her fate in earth, kept an unwonted bellowing, so that I assure thee Thenot, being assured of her sicknes, I was troubled (being awakened with their cries) with imagination of her death, that I pittied not my bleating flocke, who with their innocent notes kept time with my true teares, till the houre of her death was past, when immediately a heavie sleepe shut up the windowes of mine eyes:  at which time, (as I have since heard,) deathes eternall sleepe utterly benummed all her sences, whose soule (I doubt not) hath alreadie entred endlesse rest, whether God will draw her glorified body in his great day.  Sweete Virgin, shee was born on the Eve of that blessed Virgins Nativitie, holy Mary Christs mother:  shee dyed on the eve of the Anunciation of the same most holy Virgin; a blessed note of her endlesse blessednesse, and her societie in heaven with those wise Virgins, that kept Oyle ever in their Lampes, to awaite the Bridegroome.  Shee came unto the Crowne after her royall sisters death, like a fresh Spring even in the beginning of Winter, and brought us comfort, as the cleare Sunne doth to storme-dressed Marriners; shee left the Crowne likewise in the winter of her Age, and the beginning of our Spring:  as if the Ruler of heaven had ordained her coronation in our sharpest Winter to bring us happinesse, and uncrowned her in our happiest Spring, to leave us in more felicitie by her Succeeder.  O happie beginning, and more happy ende:  which notwithstanding, as naturall sonnes and subjects, let her not goe unwept for to her grave.  This evening let us be like the Evening, that drops dewy teares on the earth:  and while our hyndes shut up the sheepe in their foldes, sing a Funerall song for the losse of divine Elizabeth; invocating absent Schollers to bewaile her, whome in sundrie Schooles shee visited:  let us bid souldiers lament her, toward whom besides many apparant signs of her exceeding love, this is one most worth memorie; shee came amongst them mounted at Tilburie, beeing garthered into a royall Armie against the Spanish Invasion; promising to share with them in all fortunes, if the enemie durst but shewe his face aland.  Let Citizens likewise shead teares for her losse, especially those of London, to whom she was ever a kinde Soveraigne, and bountifull neighbour.
I neede not bid the Courtiers weepe, for they can never forget the countenance of their gracious Mistresse, till they have ingraven in their hearts the favour of their most royall Maister.  For as poore Shepheards; though we are not able to sute our selves in blackes fine inough to adorne so Royall an Enterment, yet Thenot quicken thy invention, Dryope and Chloris shall beare parte; and let us conclude our sorrowe for Eliza in a Funerall Hymne; that shall have power to drawe from the swelling Choudes waters to assist our woe.  The Springes, taught by the teares that breake from our eyes, alreadie overflowe their boundes:  The Birdes sitte mute to heare our musicke, and our harmelesse flocke harken to our mones.
To this they all as gladly as their griefe would suffer them consented.  Collin for his broken pipe tooke Cuddyes, who could neither sing nor play, he was so full of passion and sighes.

THE FUNERALL SONG BETWEEN COLLIN AND THENOT; DRYOPE AND CHLORIS, UPON THE DEATH OF THE SACRED VIRGIN ELIZABETH.
COLLIN.
Ye sacred Muses dwelling,
Where Art is ever swelling;
Your learned Fount forsake,
Helpe Funerall Songs to make:
Hang them about her Herse
That ever loved Verse.
Clio writ downe her Storie,
That was the Muses Glorie.

DRIOPE.
And ye soft-footed Howers,
Make readie Cypresse Bowers:
In stead of Roses sweete
(For pleasant Spring-time meete)
Strew all the pathes with Yeugh,
Night-shade and bitter Reugh.
Bid Flora hide her Treasures:
Say tis no time of pleasure.

THENOT.
And you divinest Graces,
Veyle all your sacred faces
With your bright shining haire,
Shew every signe of care:
The Hart that was your Phane,
The cruell Fates have slaine:
From earth no power can raise her,
Onely our Hymnes may praise her.

CHLORIS.
Muses and Howres and Graces,
Let all the hallowed places
Which the cleere Moone did view,
Looke with a sable hiew:
Let not the Sunne be seene,
But weeping for the Queene
That Grace and Muse did cherish,
O, that such worth should perish!

COLLIN.
So turne our verse, and on this lofty Pine,
Each one ingrave for her some Funerall line:
Thus I beginne.

COLLINS EPITAPH.
Eliza Maiden Mirror of this Age,
Earths true Astraea while she liv'de and raign'de,
Is throwne by Death from her triumphant Stage,
But by that fall hath endlesse glorie gain'de:
And foolish death would faine  if he could weepe,
For killing Her he had no power to keepe.

THENOTS EPITAPH.
Eliza rich and Royall, faire and just:
Gives heaven her Soule, and leaves her Flesh to dust.

DRYOPES EPITAPH.
There is no beautie but it vades,
No glory but is veyld with shades:
So is Eliza Queene of Maids
stoopt to her Fate.
Yet Death in this hath little thriv'de,
For thus her vertues have atchiv'de,
She shall, by verse, live still reviv'de
in spight of Hate.

CHLORIS EPITAPH.
Eliza that astonished her foes,
Stoopt her rebellious subjects at her feete:
Whose minde was Still the same in joy and woes,
Whose frowne was fearefull, and her favours sweete:
Swaid all this land, but most her selfe she swaide,
Liv'de a chaste Queene, and di'de a Royall Maide.

These Epitaphs ended, the Nymphs and Shepheards led by Collin and Thenot, who afore plaide heavy tunes on their oaten pipes, gotte to their severall cottages, and spent their time till midnight, mourning for Eliza:  But Sleepe, the equaller of Kings and captives, banished their sorrowes.  What humor they are in after rest, you shall in the morning heare:  for commonly, as they say is, so are our affections disposed.

THE ORDER AND PROCEEDING AT THE FUNERALL OF THE RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCESSE ELIZABETH QUEENE OF ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND IRELAND:  FROM THE PALLACE OF WESTMINSTER CALLED WHITE-HALL:  TO THE CATHEDRALL CHURCH OF WESTMINSTER:  THE 28. OF APRIL, 1603.

First, the Knight Marshals man, to make way.
Next, the 240. poore women by foure and foure.
Then, servants of Gentleman, Esquires, and Knights.

Two Porters.

Next, four Trumpetors.

After them

ROSE, PURSIVANT AT ARMES.

Two Sergeants at Armes.

The Standard of the Dragon.

Two Querries leading a horse.
Then the messengers of the Chamber, foure and foure.
Children of the Almondry.
Children of the Woodyard,
Children of the Skullery.
Children and furners of the pastry.
The Skalding house.
The Larder.

After them
Groomes.

Wheate porters.
Coopers.
Wine-porters.
Conducts in the Bakehouse.
Bel-ringer
Maker of Spice-bags.
Cart takers, chosen by the bord.
Long Cartes.
Cart takers.
Of the Almery.
Of the Stable.
Of the Woodyard.
Skullery.
Pastrie.
Skalding house.
Poultrie.
Caterie.
Boyling house.
Larder.
Kitchin.
Laundrie.
Ewry.
Confectionary.
Wafery.
Chaundry.
Pitcherhouse.
Butterie.
Seller.
Pantrie.
Bakehouse.
Countinghouse.

The Noblemens and Embassadors servants.
Grooms of the Chamber.

Four Trumpetors

BLEWMANTLE.

A Sergeant at Armes.

The Standard of the Greyhound.

Two Quirries leading a horse.
Yeomen of the Servitors in the hall, foure and foure.

Cart takers.
Porters.
Almondrie.
Herbengers.
Woodyard.
Skullery.
Pastrie.
Poultrie and skalding house.
Purveyors of the Poultrie.
Purveyors of the Acatrie.
Stable.
Boyling house.
Larder.
Kitchin.
Ewrie.
Confectionarie.
Waferie.
Purveyor of the wax.
Tallow Chandler.
Claundrie.
Pitcher house.
Brewers.
Buttrie.
Purveyors.
Seller.
Pantrie.
Garneter.
Bakehouse.
Countinghouse.
Spicery.
Chamber,
Robes,
Wardrop.

Erles and Countesses servants.

Foure Trumpetors.

PORTCULLIS.

A Sergeant at Armes.

The Standard of the Lion.

Two Quiries leading a horse trapped with velvet.

Sergeant of the vestry.
Children of the Chappell in surplesses
Gent. of the Chappel, in Copes.

Clarkes.
Deputie Clarke of the Market.
Clarkes extraordinarie.
Coferer.
Diet.
M. Cooke for the houshold.
Pastrie.
Larder.
Skullerie.
Woodyard.
Poultrie.
Bakehouse.
Acatrie.
Stable.

Sergeants.
Gent. Herbinger.
Wood-yard.
Skullery.
Pastrie.
Caterie.
Larder.
Ewry.
Seller.
Pantrie.
Bakehouse.

Master Cooke of the Kitchin.
Clarkes of the Querrie.
Second and third clarke of the Chaundrie.
Second and third clarke of the Kitchin.
Supervisors of the Dresser.
Surveyor of the dresser, for the chamber.

Musitions.
Apoticaries and Chirugions.
Sewers of the hall.
Marshall of the hall.
Sewers of the chamber.
Groome Porter.

Gentlmen ushers and waiters.
Clarke, Marshall, and Avenor.
Chiefe clarke of the wardrop.
Chiefe clarke of the Kitchin.
Two clarkes controllers.
Clarke of the Greenecloth.
Maister of the houshold.
Cofferer.

ROUGE DRAGON.

A Sergeant at Armes.

The Banner of Chester.

Clarks of the Counsel, foure and foure.
Clarkes of the privie Seale.
Clarkes of the Signet.
Clarkes of the Parliament.
Doctors of Phisicke.
The Queenes Chaplaines.
Secretaries for the Latine and French tongue.

ROUGE CROSSE.

Two Sergeants at Armes.

The Banner of Cornewall.

Aldermen of London.
Sollicter, Atturney, and Sergeant.
Maister of Revels, and M. of the Tents.
Knights Bachelors.
Lord chiefe Baron, and Lord chiefe Justice of the Common pleas.
Maister of the Jewell house.
Knights Embassadors, and Gentlemen Agents.
Sewers for the Queene.
Sewers for the Body.
Esquires of the Body.

LANCASTER AND WINDSOR.

The Banner of Wales.

The Banner of Ireland.

Maister of the Requests.
Agents for Venice, and the Estates.
Lord Maior of London.
Sir John Popham.  Sir John Fortescue.
Sir Robert Cicell principall Secretary.
Controller and Treasurer of houshold.
Barons.
Bishoppes.
Erles eldest sonnes.
Viscounts.
Dukes second sonnes.
Erles.
Marquesses.
Bishop Almoner.  Preacher.
Lord Keeper.
The French Embassador.
Archbishop of Canterburie.

Foure Sergeants of Armes.

The great embrothered Baner of England.

Somerset and Richmond.
Yorke, Helme and Creast.
Chester, Target.
Norrey King at Armes, Sword.
Clarenceaux King at Armes, Coate.

After them the Gentlemen ushers with white Rods.
The lively picture of her Highnesse whole body, crowned in her Parliament Robes, lying on the corps balmed and leaded, covered with velvet, borne in a chariot, drawne by foure horses trapt in blacke velvet.
About it sixe Banner Rolls on each side:  Gentlemen pensioners with their Axes downeward.
With them the Footemen.
A Canapy borne over the chariot by foure Noble men.
The Erle of Worcester maister of the horse, leading the Palfrie of Honour.
Two Esquires and a groome, to attend and leade him away.

Gentlemen usher, Garter K. of Armes.
Lady Marchionesse of Northamton, assisted by the Lord Treasurer and Lord Admirall.
Chiefe mourner, her traine supported by maister Vicechamberlaine:
Two Erles assistants to her.
Fourteene Countesses assistants.
Gentlewomen of the Privy chamber.
Countesses.
Viscountesses.
Erles daughters.
Baronesses.
Maids of Honour, of the Privy chamber.
Captaine of the Guard, with all the Guard following, five and five in a ranke, their holberds downeward.

TO THE READER.
I love as little as any man to come in print:  but seeing affection hath made me commit this fault, I pray you pardon it; and amend in reading the Printers errors; where being ill acquainted with Poetrie, he hath passed Herores for Heroes; what ever else seemes harsh, imagine I can write English, and make not the fault mine.
Farewell.
Hen: Chettle.
