O in what uncoth place or gloomie Cell,
Shall sad Melpomenes tragicke spirit dwell?
The chearful day torments my chearles hart,
And envy splendent star woundes like a dart.
If ever Muse had cause to mourne in deed,
Now fits the time:  and now the hart should bleed:
Now should each member joyne it selfe in one,
And make a symphacie of griefe, and mone.
Let coloured Skies be dy'd to sable blacke:
A Mourning habite fits each mourners backe.
Day change thy selfe to everlasting Night,
Sunne, Moone, and, Starres, forgoe your glitt'ring light,
Dissolve you Mountaines, and you durate Rockes,
Lament you Shepheards, and your tender Flockes:
Let Teares distill in such abundant wise,
That like the Ocean billowes they may rise.
Caos, not Cosmos let the World be cleaped,
Let woe on woe, and care on care be heaped:
For lo; the Lampe that whilome burnt so cleare,
Is quite extinct, and darknesse doth appeare.
A glorious Lampe; a goodly Light it was,
Which whilst it burnt, all other did surpasse.
No place so farre remote but day, and night
It was illuminated with this Light.
Whilome it was the chiefest light alone
Of England, Fraunce, Ireland, and Calydone.
Few Lampes like this (yea few) or none at all
Are worthy of the like memoriall.
The chast Belphoebe is of life depriv'de,
Merrour of Chastitie, when shee surviv'de:
Shee like a Rose mong'st many weedes was placed.
They grace'd by her, and shee by them disgraced.
Therefore the Fates suppos'd the earth too bace
To succour one of her immortall race:
And for a plague to men sent meager Death,
To take away her sweete Ambrosian breath.
What hart so hardie?  (if it mortall beene)
But will lament the death of such a Queene,
Which like a Goddesse, not an earthly creature,
Appeared both in haviour, and in feature
Prudence, and Constancie possest her minde;
A rare memoriall for all women kinde:
No vertuous lore, ne well beseeming graces,
But liv'd in her, each in their severall places.
The Fates had chosen her Earths Soveraigne;
And by the Fates, Earth hath her lost againe.
After long darknesse on the earth, came light,
And now againe ensewes eternall night:
Diana sister Lady of the day,
From earth to heaven hath tane her speedy way;
Second to none in Wisedome sure was shee,
The Queene she was of true feminitie.
Well could I wish if Destenies thought good,
Her habitation on Parnassus stood:
And that from Joves great Court she were were accited,
And with my sisters in pure zeale united.
Never till now did griefe my hart supresse,
And now tis cloy'd with too much heavinesse:
I must resigne my place:  I cannot chuse,
And beare no more the name of Tragicke Muse,
For I am Metamorphised with griefe:
Griefe without end, and endlesse to reliefe.
If Heaven, or Hell, do harbour any soule
Whose hart is made of such a sencelesse moule,
That Death and Hell, that God, or cruell Fate,
Cannot with true compassion annimate,
Let him possesse my place upon the Hill:
For Ile resigne it with a right goodwill.
Ile traverse through the world in Pilgrimage,
And under take Belphoebes Patronage;
Ile massecar my selfe, lament, and mone,
Whil'st there remaines no day to tell but one,
In the remotest place from any wight,
Where neither Sunne nor Moone do lend their light:
There will I make a close-light shadowing Cell,
And till Times date be out, I there will dwell,
Dreaming on horrors, gastly sightes, and feares:
Sadde thoughtes and I will live espoused Spheares.
Ile teache the Screechowle, and the hissing Snake,
To beare a burden to the mone I make:
Ile learne the Sylvaine Birdes to hang their winges,
When once my melancholie Organt singes
Sadde Canticles, of her immortall prayse,
Who lyving, blest the world with golden dayes.
Both Peace and Justice flourisht in her age;
Such was her foresight, such her counsaile sage,
If Vertue, Learning, Manners, Beautie, Witte,
Immortall fame to mortall creatures gitte.
Thrice happie shee, for these in her remainde,
As in her course of life was well explainde:
Morata should her surname be by right,
For shee with manners was most richly dight.
Her body was a Temple, where did raigne
The true tipes of a vertuous Soveraigne.
Shee utterly detested Romaine Lawes,
The Popish Relickes, and the olde Priestes Sawes:
The Trueth she honour'd with untaunted minde,
And with Trueths girdle did her Loynes combinde.
Worthy she was to live Sibillas dayes,
Her worth did equallize Siballas prayse.
Had the three Sisters which the life doth guide,
Not mans felicitie so much envi'de;
Yea, and against the Gods appoyntment toe,
Attempt the thing they wisht them not to doe:
Loe, such preheminence hath Destenies,
To do what so they list (though Jove denies.)
See how the labouring Ant begins to droope,
See how the loftie headed Stagge doth stoope,
The Grasse doth wither and the Fieldes wax baire,
The Birdes leave singing, and Detest the aire
And to the rockie clyftes with speed do flie,
And fraught with anguish do despaire, and die.
Salt teares distill from all good Subjectes faces,
Which on their cheakes make goodly milke-white traces
Sables is common, and in estimation:
He that wantes Sables is not in the fashion.
Why these are sights well fitting my sad spirit:
Now shall my hart his long wisht ease inherit,
When every creature doth conjoyne in one,
Belphoebe's parture from the world to mone.
Shee is departed, dead, and gone long since,
And hath in Heaven a place of recidence:
From Earth she came, and thither's gone againe;
In Heaven she is, and there shall still remaine.
O Virgin chast, O Phenix of thy kind,
Which being gone, leaves not thy like behind.
O Lampe of light, O Starre celestiall,
Thy matcheless beautie was Angelicall,
With thee did die the worldes felicicie:
With thee decay'd all antique dignitie.
She is captived in an endlesse Chaine,
No hope of future comfort doth remaine.
In her lay all mens hope and love:  she dead,
All hope and favour is for ever fled:
She was mens joy, in her they onely joy'd,
By her departure, they are much anoy'd:
Thus hope, and and favour, joy, (yea every blisse)
Since her miscariage ever fair'd amisse.
Let man and women breake their hartes with grones,
Let Babes and Children spend the time in mones:
Let sorrows soppes mixt with a bitter gall,
Suffice the hunger of both great and small.
Let teares distill, and strain their tender parts,
Let griefe be Nector to rejoyce their harts.
No man survive that hath no teares to spende,
He that doth weepe until his teares have ende,
Unto the lowest earth let him take way,
And borrow teares of wofull Hecuba:
Which many Pooles hath caus'd to flow with teares,
Since her last date of twice three hundred yeeres.
Awake you Feendes, whose nature is to sleepe:
Awake I say, and straine your selves to weepe:
Somnus arise, deaths messenger awake,
And to some mourneful taske your selves betake,
The time commaundes, and time must be respected:
Time cannot be recall'd that is neglected.
You that have all this while slept in a traunce,
Enwrapped in a cloude of ignorance,
Hap'ly may, thinke that causelesse I lament,
And every teare I shed is vainely spent:
But know the cause Earthes soveraigne Queene is dead.
Dead sure she is, imbalm'd, and wrapt in Lead:
For this cause sorrow, and lament with mee;
Follow you after, Ile chiefe mourner be:
My harts condolment shalt excell you all,
For it is made of Lyver, more then Gall.
Why, now you are compassionate I see,
I weepe before, you after seconde mee,
And now you sigh, your colours come and go:
A certaine figure of your inwarde woe.
Now poaste againe to Platos regiment,
Unfold to him this sodaine accident,
Go messenger of death, and Somnus Goe,
Be you the messengers of paleface'd woe:
Let teares hereafter be your choycest drinke,
With teares fill all your Rivers to the brinke.
Let Heaven and Hell for ever mourne I say,
Night be there ever, never be there day.
Continue thus untill the Fates relent,
And she from whence she came alive be sent.
Mount winged Fame, and furrow through the aire
Make Heaven resound with echoes of dispaire
Proclayme sadde tydings of this lucklesse chaunce,
And with thy Trumpe awake dull ignorance
Sound loude, for he is deafe, and nothing knowes,
He never greeves nor pines at anyes woes,
He sets, and neither stirres, nor speakes whole dayes.
He answeres none, nor mindes what any sayes.
Not farre from Lethe this aged Sire doth dwell,
This Lethe a spacious River is in Hell,
Whose nature is to dull the Memorie
Of those that drinke thereof, or dwelleth bie.
Fame spread thy winges in Heaven, in Earth, in Hell,
To every mister wite, her downefall tell
Come Sorrow come, and and helpe me to lament.
My fainting spirits now are almost spent:
My speech begins to fayle, my limbes waxe faint,
Ere I ascend the top of my complaint.
Then heere Ile stay, in this darke vale Ile rest,
And in dum shewes my greife shall be exprest.
Die hart with sorrow and eternal paine,
Unlesse Belphoebe do revive againe.
Now whilst Melpomene in a sound,
Dewing with teares melancholy ground,
His absence was deplor'd on Parnass hill,
Teares did from every Muses eyes distill.
Some in a furie rent their golden lockes,
Some hang'd the head, some stampt, the brest some knocks,
Some inly sigth, and others wrong their handes,
To shew their state wherein their sorrow standes,
At length in secret Synod they decreed,
To sende Terpsicore abroad with speed,
To search remote, and melancholy nookes:
Which his sad humour with contentment brookes,
Much ground he traverst over hill, and daile:
Twas long ere aught his travaile did availe.
Still as he went, upon his Harpe he playde,
By which Melpomene was much dismayde,
When as the sound did to his hearing flie,
For grieved mindes do Musicke quite defie.
At last directed by the powers Divine,
He saw whereas the wandring Muse did pine:
Goodly he louted, and soone him bespake,
That to Parnasus he would journey take.
To take possession of his long voyde place,
And live among'st the rest of heavenly race.
Melpomene to him made no reply,
But like a sencelesse stone upon the ground did lie,
Terpsicore with speed flew backe againe,
And told the Muses of their brothers paine,
Which he left speechless on the frigorous ground,
Either quite dead,or in a deadly sound.
With that the Muses much amazed flied
Unto the dwelling of the Destinies.
To know their brothers sodaine cause of griefe,
And whether they would send his woes reliefe.
Tlle Fates recomforted their grieved hartes,
And bade them never dread Deaths sharpe poynt dartes:
Tolde them at large, the cause of his lament,
And how to give his griefe a suddaine vent:
Soone they took leave, and to the place did flie,
Where the sadde Muse lay wrapt in miserie:
They rubde his temples, lifted up his head,
In his pale face, pale death was figured.
At length some sparkes of life in him appeard,
Which all their late dead hartes reviv'd and chear'd.
With chearefull words they chear'd him, and him prayde
No more to grive, no more to be dismayde.
The Fates (quoth they) in private so decreed,
That she for whom thou weep'st, by death should bleed,
And they which by deaths cruell hand are slaine,
Nor sigthes, nor singulfes can reduce againe:
And know, the Fates have seated in her place,
Though not a Woman, yet of heavenly race,
A goodly KING, to be earthes Soveraigne:
Which Justice, Peace, and Vertue, will maintaine.
Then joy a new, recall thy wonted rest:
The Fates were kind, that thee from death hath blest.
These wordes, his woe did somwhat mittigate,
And he assum'd againe his former state:
With winges of joy they furrowed through the skie,
And soone arived at Parnassus hie:
Where now each Muse enjoyes his hartes content,
Spending the time in wanton meriment:
Thankes be to those auspicious powers above,
That hath established  this concordant love.
