The earely Houres were readie to unlocke 
The doore of Morne, to let abroad the Day, 
When sad Ocyroe sitting on a rocke, 
Hemmd in with teares, not glassing as they say 
Shee woont, her damaske beuties (when to play 
Shee bent her looser fancie) in the streame, 
That sudding on the rocke, would closely seeme 
To imitate her whitenesse with his frothy creame.

But hanging from the stone her carefull head, 
That shewed (for griefe had made it so to shew) 
A stone it selfe, thus onely differed, 
That those without, these streames within did flow, 
Both ever ranne, yet never lesse did grow, 
And tearing from her head her amber haires, 
Whose like or none, or onely Phaebus weares, 
Shee strowd there on the flood to waite upon her teares.

About her many Nymphes sate weeping by, 
That when shee sang were woont to daunce and leape.
And all the grasse that round about did lie, 
Hung full of teares, as if that meant to weepe, 
Whilest, th' undersliding streames did softly creepe,
And clung about the rocke with winding wreath, 
To heare a Canto of Elizaes death: 
Which thus poore nymph shee sung, whilest sorrowe lent her breath.

Tell me ye blushing currols that bunch out, 
To cloath with beuteous red your ragged sire, 
So let the sea-greene mosse curle round about 
With soft embrace (as creeping vines doe wyre 
Their loved Elmes) your sides in rosie tyre, 
So let the ruddie vermeyle of your cheeke 
Make staind carnations fresher liveries seeke, 
So let your braunched armes grow crooked, smooth, and sleeke.

So from your growth late be you rent away, 
And hung with silver bels and whistles shrill, 
Unto those children be you given to play 
Where blest Eliza raignd:  so never ill 
Betide your canes nor them with breaking spill, 
Tell me if some uncivill hand should teare 
Your branches hence, and place them otherwhere; 
Could you still grow, and such fresh crimson ensignes beare?

Tell me sad Philomele that yonder sit'st 
Piping thy songs unto the dauncing twig, 
And to the waters fall thy musicke fit'st, 
So let the friendly prickle never digge 
Thy watchfull breast with wound or small or bigge, 
Whereon thou lean'st, so let the hissing snake 
Sliding with shrinking silence never take 
Th' unwarie foote, whilst thou perhaps hangst halfe awake.

So let the loathed lapwing when her nest 
Is stolne away, not as shee uses, flie, 
Cousening the searcher of his promisd feast, 
But widdowd of all hope still Itis crie, 
And nought but Itis, Itis, till shee die. 
Say sweetest querister of the airie quire 
Doth not thy Tereu, Tereu then expire, 
When winter robs thy house of all her greene attire?

Tell me ye velvet headed violets 
That fringe the crooked banke with gawdie blewe, 
So let with comely grace your prettie frets 
Be spread, so let a thousand Zephyrs sue 
To kisse your willing heads, that seeme t'eschew 
Their wanton touch with maiden modestie, 
So let the silver dewe but lightly lie 
Like little watrie worlds within your azure skie,

So when your blazing leaves are broadly spread 
Let wandring nymphes gather you in their lapps, 
And send you where Eliza lieth dead, 
To strow the sheete that her pale bodie wraps, 
Aie me in this I envie your good haps: 
Who would not die, there to be buried? 
Say if the sunne denie his beames to shedde 
Upon your living stalkes, grow you not withered?

Tell me thou wanton brooke, that slip'st away 
T'avoid the straggling bankes still flowing cling, 
So let thy waters cleanely tribute pay 
Unmixt with mudde unto the sea your king, 
So never let your streames leave murmuring 
Untill they steale by many a secret furt 
To kisse those walls that built Elizaes court, 
Drie you not when your mother springs are choakt with durt?

Yes you all say, and I say with you all, 
Naught without cause of joy can joyous bide, 
Then me unhappie nymph whome the dire fall 
Of my joyes spring, But there aye me shee cried, 
And spake no more, for sorrow speech denied. 
And downe into her watrie lodge did goe; 
The very waters when shee sunke did showe 
With many wrinckled ohs they sympathiz'd her woe.

The sunne in mourning cloudes inveloped 
Flew fast into the westearne world to tell 
News of her death.  Heaven it selfe sorrowed 
With teares that to the earthes danke bosome fell; 
But when the next Aurora gan to deale 
Handfuls of roses fore the teame of day 
A sheapheard drove his flocke by chance that way 
And made the nymph to dance that mourned yesterday.
