I joyne not handes with sorowe for a while,
To soothe the time, or please the hungrie eares:
Nor do inforce my mercinarie stile,
No feigned liverye my Invention weares.

Nor do I ground my fabulous discourse
On what before hath usually bene seene:
My greife doth flowe from a more plentious source,
From her that dy'd a virgin and a Queene.

You Cristall Nimphes that haunt the banks of Thames,
Tune your sad Timbrils in this wofull day:
And force the swift windes and the sliding streames
To stand a while and listen to your Lay.

Your fading Temples bound about with yewe,
At every step your hands devoutly wring,
Let one notes fall anothers height renewe,
And with compassion your sad Naenia sing.

Graces and Muses waite upon her Hearse:
Three are the first, the last the sacred Nine:
The sad'st of which, in a blacke tragique verse,
Shall sing the Requiem passing to her shrine.

An Ebon Charriot to support the Beere,
Drawne with the blacke steedes of the gloomy night:
Stooping their stiffe Crests, with a heavie cheere,
Stirring compassion in the peoples sight.

The Pyle prepard where on her body lyes,
In Cipresse shadowes sit you downe forlorne:
Whose bowes be dew'd with plenty of your eyes,
(For her with griefe) the Branches shall adorne.

Let fall your eye-lids like the Sunnes cleere set,
When your pale hands put to the vestall flame:
And from your brests, your sorowes freely let,
Crying one Beta and Elizas name.

Upon the Alter, place your Virgin spoyles,
And one by one with comelinesse bestowe:
Dianaes buskins and her hunting toyles,
Her empty quiver and her stringles bowe.

Let every Virgin offer up a teare,
The richest Incence nature can alowe:
And at her tombe (for ever yeare by yeare)
Pay the oblation of a mayden vowe.

And the tru'st vestall the most sacred liver,
That ever harbored an unspotted spirit,
Retaine thy vertues, and thy name for ever,
To tell the world thy beautie and thy merrit.

Wher's Collin Clout, or Rowland now become,
That wont to leade our Shepheards in a ring?
(Ah me) the first, pale death hath strooken dombe,
The latter, none incourageth to sing.

But I unskilfull, a poore Shepheards Lad,
That the hye knowledge onely doe adore:
Would offer more, if I more plenty had,
But comming short, of their aboundant store,

A willing heart that on thy fame could dwell,
Thus bids Eliza happily farewell.
