The gentle season of the joyous Spring,
That teaches all the little Birdes to sing,
In every open Field, and shadie Tree,
Their sugred notes of sweete varietie,
Awakes my sleepie Muse awhile to play,
That in the shade of silence buried lay,
As loth to interrupt their pleasant Dittie,
With broken straines of griefe, or songes of pittie.
I graunt at first I should but lowly maske,
And not begin with such a loftie maske,
I graunt at first I should but lowly maske,
And not begin with such a loftie taske,
But softly warble on a Shepheardes reede,
The while my bleating flockes securely feede,
For feare the waxen winges where with I flie,
Should melt away with mounting up too hie:
Yet pardon Griefe a greater fault then this,
And give me leave (though I have done amisse)
A while to sing my April-song by roate,
Now every Cuckoe learnes to tune a note:
Till Philomela grieving for our wrong,
Lament our sorrow in some sweeter song:
Mine infant Muse begins but now to creepe,
Yet loe, already she has learned to weepe,
To weepe for her, from whose untimely death,
(Untimely borne) she borrowes all her breath:
And early learnes her prayses to rehearse,
That with the fame of her immortall verse,
A never dying life she may obtaine,
And to her selfe a life of glory gaine.
Assist me, then (ye Heliconian Dames)
And with the breath of your divinest names,
In rich my braine, inspire my barren Quill,
And heave my Verses higher by your skill;
That I may sorrowfully sit and sing
About the bankes of your Castalian spring.
Or, rather, sing your selves, ye learned crew,
For who can sing so learnedly as you?
With Cyprisse branches let your browes be crownd,
And lifting up your voyces silver sound,
With all your learned instruments in hand,
Lament the Lady of the Faiery-land.
Or, rather, breake your instruments in twaine,
Nor ever play, nor ever sing againe,
But from your browes the velvet feathers teare,
And breake the crimson Coronets you weare,
And weepe, and wayle, and melt away to teares,
And wring your hands, and rend your yellow heares,
For silver Cynthia has eclipst her light,
And with her absence makes eternal night.
She that so gallantly your daunces led,
That could so sweetly sing, so softly tread,
And with her musicke make your Consorts even;
In scorne of earth, is gone away to heaven:
Leaving your chaster traines to march alone.
See where she site upon Apollos throne,
Within whose golden Charet she doth ride,
And of his sister is become his Bride.
Lament, lament, you Sheepeheards daughters all,
And eke you Virgins chast, lament her fall:
The Goddesse of your sports is lapt in lead,
And faire Virginia's fairest Queene is dead;
Oh, come, and do her corse with flowres embrave,
And play some solemne musicke by her grave,
Then sing her Requiem in some dolefull Verse
Or do the songs of Colin Clout rehearse.
Mourne, Phoebus, mourne, and turne the day to night,
Dim'd is the Lampe, that shone so piercing bright,
Those starry eyes have lost their glorious sight,
That lent thy Planet, and the world her light.
And you fayre golden skies that tooke such pryde,
Where ever blessed Beta did abide.
Your azur'd curtaines over her to spread,
With starres (like studs of gold) embellished:
Raine down fresh teares that they may drown your mirth,
And with your weeping water all the earth:
Maske up your browes and weare your mourning coates;
Nor let the birds, with their melodious notes,
The emptie ayre a Schoole of musicke make,
As heretofore for faire Elizas sake.
In stead of those let all the fatall Fowles,
The crooking Ravens and disastrous owles,
Fill every corner with their hellish cryes,
And with their gastly faces fright our eyes.
Weepe, Flora, weepe, and doffe thy spangled growne,
And weare no more thy flower enameld crowne:
Cast not thy Tapistry mantels at our feete,
Nor fill the fragrant ayre with odours sweete;
For loe, the Flower which was so fresh and gay,
And made November like another May,
How daintily so ere it did compose
The beautie of the white and crimson Rose,
The Flower is parcht, the silken leafe is blasted,
The Roote decay'd, and all the glory wasted.
Let Israel weepe, the house of Jacob mourne,
Syon is fallne, and Judah left forlorne,
The Hill of Hermon drops no precious oyle,
Nor fruitfull Bashan, from his fattest soile,
But Davids throne has all his beautie lost,
So farre admir'd through every forreine coast.
The Paradice and Eden of our Land
Planted and kept by GODS Almightie Hand:
Where milke and honie Canaan-like did flow,
And Flowers of peace, and fruites of plentie grow;
Where Vines and Olives, evermore were seene,
Vines ever Fresh, and Olives ever greene:
With Brambles now and Briers is over-cast,
And like a desert desolate and wast.
The royall daughter of that royall King,
To whom all nations did their presents bring,
So bright of late, and glorious to behold,
Shining in garments of embroydred gold,
Esther our Queene, whose fame (with triumph crownd)
Haman of Spaine had never force to wound,
In spight of whom although he dar'd to strive
She has preservde her people all alive:
This royall Queene the heavens bright reflexe;
This foe of pride, this pride of all her sexe,
This Phoenex of the world, the worthiest Dame
That ever acted on the Stage of Fame:
(Hers be the joy) to our eternall sorrow
Has payd to death the life that she did borrow.
Ah!  why should spightfull Nature hide away,
So rich a treasure in the lowly clay.
And burie in the bowels of the ground
The rarest Jem the world has ever found?
Or, why, respect she not her children more?
But leaves the earth so rich, and men so poore.
Spaine, clap thy hands, and laugh while we lament,
Our Staffe is broken, and our treasure spent,
The Staffe of joy, the treasure of our ease,
The Life, the Crowne, the glory of our Peace:
Righteous Astrea from the earth is banish't,
And from our sight the morning starre is vanish't
Which did to us a radiant light remaine,
But was a Comet to the eye of Spaine:
From whose chaste beames so bright a beautie shin'de,
That all their whorish eyes were stricken blinde.
Beta is dead, the glory of our pride;
Oh, who had thought that Beta could have dyde?
Beta is dead, the honour of her race,
That has so long up-held the royall Mace,
Whose Predecessours all have princes beene,
And she her selfe a Princely Mayden Queene.
Farewell (sweet Prince) where ever thou do bide,
Whether in earth, or by some angels side:
Farewell (great Queene) that art of God yblest,
Well may thy buried bones securely rest:
Beta, farewell, and let thy purest spirit
(Where ever fled) the purest place inherite.
Goe blessed soule, and up to heaven climbe,
Among the Angels seate thee there betime,
Shine like an Angell with thy starie crowne,
And milke-white Robes descending fayrely downe,
Wash't in the blood of the unspotted Lambe,
That slew the Beast, and made the Dragon tame.
There let thy sacred life (most sacred Dame)
Thy famous vertue, and thy vertuous Fame;
Whereof so many Pens have writ the Story
Receive the crowne of everlasting glory.
Feast ever there and feed on sweetest joy,
Without the tast of any sharpe anoy:
Live ever there, in that Coelestiall skie,
Where (spight of death) thou nevermore shalt die;
Raine ever there on that Elyzian greene:
Eliza, well may be Elyzivius Queene.
And give me leave now I have tuned long
The tragick accent of my dole-full Song
With Philomela to the silent darke;
Awhile to mount, and with the morning Larke
To greet that rising Sunne, which from the North
Displayes his beames, and darts his glory foorth.
Discover then your Christall shining faces,
Ye learned Muses, and you lovely Graces,
Set a full Period to your wofull cryes,
And clear your browes, and wipe your blubbered eyes,
Nor do so sadly sigh, but sweetly sing,
And crowne with tryumphs our created King,
See how the Sunne for joy of our good hap
Raines showres of gold into his Lemans lap:
See how the earth, to grace this joyfull day,
Attyres her selfe in all her best array,
And paintes her coate with party colour'd flowres,
Dewd with the drops of sweet Rose-water shoures,
That glistring gay and smelling sweete
All like a Queene she might her bridegroom meete.
Harke how the feathered Quiristers do sing
Their Ave Caesar, to our crowned King,
With so divine and delicate a sound
That through the ayre the neighbouring groves rebound
The sweete Alarums of their sugred notes,
Tun'd with their hollow bils and swelling throates.
Lift up your heads, ye Christians that survive,
To see so faire a prince preserv'd alive,
With hands and hearts to testifie your mirth,
Ring peales of gladnes thorough all the earth.
Chaunt loud Poeanas to his loftie Fame,
And songs of praise to high Jehovas Name,
Who still remaines as he hath still decreed
A God to Jacob, and to Jacobs seed,
And had not left his litle stock alone,
But kept a man to sit on Davids Throne,
That he may raze the wall of Babell downe,
And to his kingdome adde another crowne.
Laugh not (proude Spaine) nor lift up thy crest,
But hide thy horns thou seven headed beast:
The day is come thou hast so long expected,
Yet from thy rage our Land is still protected:
Till now thy bloody thoughts on hope have fed,
But now thy thoughts with all thy hopes be dead,
And still our vine does flowrish more and more.
In spight of ravening Wolfe, or raging Boare.
For though our Deborah be dead and gone,
Whose Scepter scour'd the towers of Babylon,
Yet Gideon lives, and like a man of God,
Suffers not Madian to be Israels rod:
But tramples still upon thy craven crowne,
And breakes thy hornes, and treads thy altars downe.
Long may he flowrish with his royall seed
That from his loynes so fruitfully proceed.
Long he may raigne and high advance his crest
Stretching his conquering armes from East to West,
Maulgre their beards, that have with force appointed
To lift their arme against the Lords anointed;
Who though but JAMES the first of that degree,
Yet Lyon-heart the second he shall be:
The name of Lyon-heart becomes him best,
Witnesse the Lyon on his Lordly brest:
A happy signe, that for defence of Syon
Our valiant Lord will proove a valiant Lyon.
Lo heere a sea of joy, a world of woe,
Yet, loe, the sea the world doth over-flow,
See how our Phoenix mounts above the skies,
And from the neast another Phoenix flyes,
How happily before the change did bring
A Mayden Queene, and now a manly King,
Whose Crowne and Empire does so widely stretch,
And over all the Land of Brittaine reach.
The let us all applaud this happy day,
And with united voyces strongly pray
That he may long our royall King remaine,
And peace and plentie crowne his blessed raine,
That victoryes selfe may tryumphe on his Lawnce,
And through the world his honor'd Fame advance.
So shall his Realme, so shall his Sceptre flowrish,
And that his Crowne, and this his kingdome nourish
So honour still on vertue shall be grounded,
The foole deryded, and the proude confounded.
So shall his foes abate, his friends accrew,
And GOD have prayse to whome the prayse is dewe.
