All haile great Monarch of the greatest Ile,
The Northerne worlds united lawfull King,
Pardon my rudest reede undecent stile,
Though I want skill in thy new Empires spring,
Yet doe I love and will thy prayses sing.
Me thinkes I do on Claros kingdome stand,
No marvaile, for Apollo rules the land.

On true obedience knee I pardon aske
Of thy divine heroicke Majestie,
It was thy merites great impos'd this taske
On my weake pen, badge of infirmite,
Too weake indeede to prayse thy excellency.
Each Cherrils muse doth now salute thy grace,
Shall I alone be mute and hide my face?

Maro extold Augustus peacefull daies,
The Liricke Poet sung Mecenas fame:
Ennius did Scipio Affricanus praise,
If all they liv'd and saw thy sacred name,
Each verse they made should sure containe the fame.
But if they reade thy gift, oh Princely worke!
For shame they would in untrode desarts lurke.

If Englands Load-starre pride of Poesie,
Could the firme Centers regiment transpearse:
And formalize his peerlesse ingeny,
Thy all-surpassing vertues to rehearse,
A Princely matter fitts a princely verse:
Yet were his wit too weake thy deeds to praise,
Which brought us joyes, in our most mournfull daies.

Could Lidgat passe the tower of Proserpine,
And like to Virbius live a double age,
Penning thy Trophies in a golden skrine,
Yet could he not thy merits equipage,
Admiring most would use a tapinage,
Boechas and Gowre, the Virgils of their time,
Could not unfold thy prayse in antique rime.

If these foure Poets liv'd like Lions foure,
The should thy famous Coach of glory drawe
From Vertues temple, to true honours towre,
Each should a kingdome have, thy foes should know
Thy might, and feare their finall overthrow.
But what should muses sing?  the world doth see,
And seeing, feares united Britany.

Still living, Sidney, Caesar of our land,
Whose never daunted valure princely minde,
Inbellished with Art and Conquests hand,
Did expleiten his high aspiring kinde,
(An Eagles hart in Crowes we cannot find.)
If thou couldst live and purchase Orpheus quill,
Our Monarches merits would exceed thy skill.

Albions Maeonian, Homer natures pride,
Spenser the Muses sonne and sole delight:
If thou couldst through Dianas kingdome glide,
Passing the Palace of infernall night,
(The Sentinels that keepes thee from the light)
Yet couldst thou not his retchlesse worth comprise,
Whose minde containes a thousand purities.

What fatall chance is this, and lucklesse fate,
That none can aptly sing thy glorious prayse,
And tell the happinesse of Englands state,
O barren time, and temporizing dayes,
Fowle Ignorance on sacred Learning prayes.
But now I doe a Diapazon see,
None but thy selfe (great King) can sing of thee.

That Macedonian starre, first Prince of Greece,
Sent for that wandring learned Stagirite,
To teach his Sonne knowledge of knowledges:
His sword was keene, his sense could ill indite:
Thy sworde is sharpe, and who can better write?
He had another to instruct his sonne,
What he by others did, thy selfe hath done.

Some Caesare deemde the happiest mortal wight,
That breath'd the ayre, or did ascend the skye,
For conquering Scipios force, and Pompeis might,
Some did Augustus judge more happy, why?
Because the vanquisht Aegypts Anthony,
Romes holy Prince, said Nerus did surpasse,
For leaving such a sonne as Trajan was.

If those olde Wisards which of yore did sing,
Read with impartiall eyes thy peerelesse deeds,
(Great Prince of warre, of peace thrice happie King)
Concord should reconcile their striving reeds,
And sensures joyne, which censures envy breeds.
Caesars acts, Augustus peace, good Nervas kinde,
In thee alone, in none but thee we finde.

The silver Moone plac'd in her circle round,
At her encrease, her equall distant hornes
Upwards ascends, as scorning abject ground,
So when the worlds great honour first was borne,
That fayre arising Sunne, cleere faced morne,
Her mounting thoughts did to the heavens Towre,
Scorning the earth, or any terrene Bowre.

But when that Virgins Goddesse doth decrease,
Her picked forkes their course to Terra bend:
So when our Englands Lunas light did cease,
The Artike Clime an Unicorne did send,
Whose radiant lustre, night shall never end:
Phoebus cleere light seems darke, whilst he doth shine
He borrowes perfect light of God divine.

Those that do reade the secrets of the skie,
Whose judgement is in heaven conversant:
Which portraiture the signes in heavenly die
Might assevere the Virgo was on high,
I sawe a starre of late from heaven flie:
Why cannot this starre then faire Virgo bee?
A starre more chaste I thinke we cannot see.

O now my thoughts can dive into the deepe,
Our all ships guiding starre was fixed there:
And when Eliza did with honor sleepe,
Mounted upon her praise deserving beare,
She did obtaine of him she loved so deare,
That she might have his seate, he rule the land
Which she of late as Empresse did commaund.

The Anatomizers of our learned daies,
Affirme that Virgo do the belly guide:
No wonder than that Albions wondrous praise,
That Virgin Queene which here on earth did bide
So nourisht each poore hunger-bitten side.
Now she is dead, oh who will them relive?
The present starre doth present comfort give.

I heard an aged woman often say,
That she did see a starre from heaven descend:
Which was as true me thought, as trees did bray:
For she alleg'd the same, and did commend
A certaine Crowe, whose wit she did defend.
Pardon me Age, for now mine eyes do see
A starre on earth, more bright than starre can bee.

To whom shall I this Northerne starre compare?
To Caesar which did first subdue the state:
To Horsus who no limbe of Christ did spare,
Damming his soule this land to ruinate,
Great Williams conquest and the Normanes hate.
Thus doth my Muse all wanting art begin,
To sing thy vertues, and to shewe their sin.

Caesar was twice repulst ere he could see
This little world from all the world remote:
Before we sawe thy face we sent to thee,
As to a Pilot for to guide our boate:
Which did in Seas of suddaine sorrow floate.
He lost his sword before he conquest wan,
We yeeld thee all our hearts, and all we can.

Horsus by cruell tyrant trechery,
Subdude Ambrosius that wise Prince of peace:
Witnesse the hidden knives at Salisbury,
He travaile brought, but thou does bring us ease,
Thy true descent makes greedy warres to cease.
A Wolfe possest his heart, a Lyon thine,
He worse then man, thou better more divine.

William was fierce in warre, and so art thou:
In counsell sage, thou doest him aequalize:
His sword forc't foes their trembling knees to bowe,
Thou conquerst hearts, by thy hearts winning eyes
By force he wan, by merits thou doest rise.
He brought subjection, thou doest freedome bring,
He loved warre, but thou of peace art King.

Rufus was rude, thou civill, gentle, kinde:
He was austere, thy browes hath mercies frowne:
He had a Neros hart, thou Caesars minde:
He hunting lov'd, for pleasure tumbled downe
Many a Castle fayre, and stately Towne:
Thou lov'st the chase, yet Cities doest adorne,
Thou wert for all the worlds great profit borne.

Henry was grac't with artes, thou doest excell:
Children did blesse his age but soone did dye:
Children thou hast in health and perfect well,
(God prosper them with pure prosperitie,)
Adorne their harts with loving pietie:
He was a worthy King, thou worthier farre,
Thou art our Northerne-Pole, harts-guiding starre.

Soare humble thoughts, and let my abject pen
Touch the high mounted Artike Northerne starre,
And there compare this man excelling men:
We should compare the things that equall are,
And who is like this light, this lampe, this starre?
Mine eyes distill sweete teares, the teares of joy,
To see Troyes issue raigne in new found Troy.

Let Barland cease to write of wisest Kings,
And Melliscius with his tuned voyce,
From whose sweet tong sprang learnings sweetest springs,
Sing not of Persians prayse, or Caldeans joyes,
The Grecians Emperour, Europs worthiest choyce.
These three combinde, each sought the others fall,
Britaine is joynd, and Concord guides it all.

When Alexander sawe that precious stone,
Under whose Isye wings Achilles lay,
Shedding ambitious teares, he said with mone,
Unhappy I, and ten times happy they,
Whose ensignes prayse, sweet Homer did display:
Then happy art thou King, whose raigne wee see
Homer doth sing thy prayse, for thou art hee.

The Majestie of Marius fearefull face
Did terrifie the Cymbrians craven minde:
Though he were armde with Clothos fatall mace,
And solemne oath to murther did him binde,
A wandring Bucke did feare the Eagles kinde:
So did thy Princely lookes and grace of God
Protect thy issue from a Traytors rod.

Now doth my Ship in plenties Ocean sayle,
Pusht with a pleasant gale of pleasures winde:
But stay I here an envious Momist rayle,
Thy toothless threate doth not amaze my minde,
Barke, for thou canst not bite, I scorne thy kinde.
That which I write, I reade, and both are true,
I dare not, nor I will not tell what will ensue.

My hope is good that we shall happy bee,
Hopelesse our foes, they feare, we still secure:
We peace, they warre:  Ye endlesse peace shall see,
We plenty have, they poverty endure,
Religion we sincere, but they impure.
They living seem to dye, we dying gaine
To live with Saints in Paradisus plaine.

What said the learned, those that learning love,
If causes perish, then effects decay,
Pray for the cause, yea, pray to God above
That he may long the Albion Scepter sway,
Who shinde like Sol in our Cimmerian day.
Live, and live long great King, live many dayes,
Use that fayre Theame, Be as thou art alwayes.
