DAMAETAS.  SILENUS.

DAMAETAS.
Of all the trees in heav'nly Sivan's guard,
(Wherewith the worthiest brow's were crown'd of yore)
There is but one, or few (O reverend Barde)
Amid whose vertues maze I would require
A line of any learned wiserds lore:
The Plante of Genest chiefly I admire,
Whose humble highnes makes me oft surmise,
That lowly steps be ladders to the ski's.

For well I wist though Genest doth not dwell
In proudest soile, nor tops of mountaines hye,
She shews by this, that she foreseeth well
The perils, which doe all extreames impend.
Th' aspiring pine (whose top doth threat thy sky)
Divine Revenge doth headlongs oft downe send,
When this is safe upon her humble hill,
Not thrall to any proud Superiors will.

Againe I know her gentle property
To yeeld, and bowe, as reason shall advise:
Loe here a type of true humility,
And therefore hath by kind the soveraine pow'r
Of parts of man, which onely duty tyes
To bowe the Kings, and to their Creatour.
O just respects, who can so well deserve
For to commaund, as one that knows to serve?

And that the Genest doth by nature holde
A speciall honour of aeternall green:
And that hir boughs be charg'd with flowr's of gold:
And many such like graces more I wot:
But in my minde long this conceit hath been,
That yet the greatest wonders I weet not.
And I am wont this tree oft to compare
To that, which is in all the world most rare.

Now good Silenus, as you are a man
Endew'd with passing skill, and mystick art,
Enforme me rightly, (for I know you can)
What be the other mysteries of this tree:
And by the way I pray you to impart
Both which, and what those other flowers be,
Whereof (they say) the praesident of light
Hath made a garland for his favorite.

SILENUS.
Thou hast long liv'd (Damaetas) in the woods,
And there for Woodman hast Genista served,
To prune her plants, and save her tender buds,
As seasons did the charge to thee commend:
And many of her vertues hast observed,
Which use, or common mought apprehend,
But for to deem the doubt thou stick'st upon,
Would aske some time bestow'd in Helicon.

When first I went those sacred wells to see,
My will to good was harsh, benumm'd and cold:
My head now white, was then like eben-tree
Dy'de in the sensuall fumes of youthfull will.
Loe now of each the contraries I hold,
For Time, and travaile, and those springs of skill
Of frost, and snow have made my sculls attire,
And warm'd my spirits with their holy fire.

Now of these flames I will impart to thee,
And happily perhaps thou hast refer'd
The resolution of this doubt to me:
For why this case was argued long-agone,
In Helicon, and I my selfe it heard,
Where Phoeb (amid the Muses) on his throne,
Establish'd by those sacred maides advise,
What Ghirlands should be ech acchivements price.

The question grew because Apollos suite,
Praefer'd a plant against such as praesumed
To weare a garland of his holy fruite,
Without desert of speciall grace divine.
Apollo was much mov'd, and chaf'd, and fumed,
And went anone to counsaile with the Nine.
And when he had a leafe of Laurell eat,
Thus spake, as I his speeches can repeat.

The Laurel-crowne was giv'n, and shall be still
To peereless men, to Clarks, and Emperours,
And such as in a mood of metrik skill,
Could of my favours make their vants at large.
And then that long-enduring Palme of yours,
Was due (my sisters, and my sacred charge)
To such, as worthily to gaine the price,
Had suffer'd watching, famine, fire, and Ice.

And he, which had with valiant hand preserved
A citizen, receiv'd a crowne of Oke.
But he a wreath of Olive-leaves deserved,
Who had with Arts, and plea's of peace beguiled
The bitter times, which discord had forspoke,
Or els some dangerous foe had reconciled.
And he, who long had flam'd in true loves fire,
Receiv'd a crowne of Mirtle for his hire.

I meane whose amorous flame is fed by grace,
By grace of hir, who doth his deare persever.
I meane not one forlorne, and in disgrace:
He must a wreath of bitter Willow weare:
For as that tree by buds doth promise ever,
A hope of fruite, yet fruite doth never beare,
So vaine, and fruitlesse is his, hope and love,
Who an inconstant womans love doth prove.

Of all the most authentik is of Grasse,
That crowne (before I had my Bayes) was used.
And with those words his colour alter'd was,
And fetch'd a sigh, which would have rent a rock.
So much his guilty conscience him accused,
Whose rape to scape a Maide was made a stock.
In briefe remorse did so with him prevale,
That he had much adoo to end his tale.

Yet what he could his passions he subdu'de
What could he not, who was a wight divine?
And for that he his purpose would conclude,
The Garland of the Grasse did serve (quoth he)
For some such politik, or Paladine,
Who from a seege should set a city free.
And then the hood of Cypresse-leaves was woorne
Of such, as had (as I have) cause to moorne.

For safe convoy is borne the Vervain wreath
Of foecials, and Mars his oratours.
To Tuscons race the Ivy I bequeath.
Lillis, Chardons, and sweets of Erycine,
Of severall Empires be the signall floures,
Symboles of beautie, power, and grace divine:
And now I doe employ them to adorne
The crowne, which of my Daphnis shall be worne.

The Pine is Pan's, and hee bestoweth that
Of herds, which best can skill to tune an Ote,
Or wist to make their cattell soonest fat.
But more from this, and from the rest I hast
To speake more large of ONE (as you may note)
The first in honour, though in order last:
As it befalls with gold which is refin'de,
The worst comes first, the best remaines behind.

There is an Island Leuceessa calld,
And in that Isle there growes a gentile tree,
Whose bough's hee all of carved Emerald,
And for hir flowrs my Raies I did employ.
For her abode she listeth not to be
Where either heat, or cold, can hir annoy.
Whether the Bee of homages most true
Comes oft to yeeld his sute, and service due.

Upon this tree is set my chiefest care.
Now thou faire Genest art my dearest tree.
Thy ghirlands now of all shalbe most rare.
And I pronounce, and make a solemne vow,
(Sisters accord for so it must needs bee)
None shall presume to were hereof one bough
But such as standing high in vertues grace,
Shalbe advanc'd to honours highest place.

But to put on my new composed crowne
It shall not fall to any but to ONE.
And such an one, as merit, and renowne
Shall recommend unto the supreme good.
Ev'n such a one as shall deserve alone
To weare a wreath of ech tree in the wood,
Wise valiant, just in briefe indued with all
Vertues Christian, and heroicall.

To him his neighbour potentat's shall bend,
The Polare princes shall his vassalls bee,
Afrik, and Inde, to him shall presents send,
Aesteeming those the happiest wights alone,
Which league contract with him or amitte,
Fortunes dearling, Pieties champion,
Successor and heire in all by right
To great King Artur Jesu's faithfull knight.

Thus said the King, the Prophet, and the God,
(Which I must credit as my blest beleefe)
And here he made his parting Period.
But that thou may'st the better bear away
This Oracle, I will declare in briefe
What worthies have bene grac'd unto this day,
By bearing branches of this happy tree,
As divers have, and hearken now to mee.

You see (Damaetas) that the Gods decree
Admitts but one to weare the complex ghirland.
But some, whose fame hath scal'd a high degree
May bear a branch, and some a chappelet.
Th' Empress Matilda's sonne, who conquer'd Irland:
(The greatest Britanne King, which hath been yet)
Must by good right now lead this royall band
Of the triumphant worthies of this land.

A prince form'd of the true imperiall mould,
Hee was a valorous, as politike;
Hee could well win, and what he wan could hould,
And fortune follows such men in their traine.
Westnia was his, he rul'd in Armorike:
And raignd in Albion, and in Aquitaine.
In breefe a soveraign hee did raigne, and rule
From Pyren mountaines to the frozen Thule.

With slipps of Broome he deck'd next his cap,
Whose valiant zeale, whose chivalry divine
Made in the pagan kingdomes such a gapp,
As all the Christian hosts mought enter in.
He tooke Acon, and Joppe in Palestine,
And did besides, the realme of Cyprus win.
He warr'd with men, and slew the Austriak Lyon,
And made a peace with GOD, and went to Zion.

Next rides king Jon, to whom stout Caledoun
Solemly vow'd to be loyall leege-man
To him the King, and heyrs of his Crowne.
And by his auspices the Brabant Knight
From rebell Lords their ile of refuge wan.
By him great Themses bridge so exquisite,
(Which did before in woodden modells lurke)
Became of Europe the most stately woorke.

Then comes his sonne with other architects
(Not to build Babels and Castles in the ayre)
But hee a holy house for GOD projects,
The which he doth at Westminster performe.
A temple high, magnificent, and faire,
A princely pile as well for use, as forme,
And shall remaine to all posterity,
A glorious trophee of his piety.

Now add the foremost two which bore his name,
(Who of the faint disguis'd a ring receaved)
To th' one some give a Hammer for surname,
Bycause he bruis'd Gaiothel in his wroth,
And him of Jacobs stone, and chaire bereaved.
But Jacob soone shall repossesse them both.
Th' other Edward the templars did expell.
Of whom I can no more say, to say well.

Behold him next who in a doome supreme
Pouvoir above an Estre did advance,
For he was offred Caesars diademe.
But follow'd boons forbod, and downe anon
Cuts with his mothers sword the flowrs of France,
And plants them in his fields of Albion
And puts them in his royall Lions guard,
For so (quoth he) Dieu &amp; mon droit award.

Right gentile too was that conceit of his,
When hee the Garters order did ordaine,
A noble pledge of princely grace it is:
Happy are they which therewith gird their knee.
Thrise happy hee, and ay so may remaine
Who doth protect both that, and them, and hee,
Which saith not so, ill come to him and worse,
Then Honi soit, qui mal y pense's curse.

Philipp the famous Macedonian
Had not a sonne of higher worth then hee,
For where the prince black Edward went hee wann.
This honors comete first did faire appeare
At Crecy-field, which Nanaret did see
After more bright then Manors in his sphere,
But Poitiers chiefely, where hee tooke King Jean,
For there a double victory he wann.

Two Richards more succeed, the one a Prince,
Whose goodly presence men to woonder moved,
And was as bountifull as any since.
Fame hath been sharp to th' other, yet bicause
All accusations of him are not proved:
And hee built Churches, and made good law's,
And all men held him wise, and valiant,
Who may deny him then his Genest plante?

But Henry Bolinbrook (me thinks dooth frowne,)
That Glo'ster here should next to Burdeaux come,
Bycause he from his cousin tooke the crowne.
Mistake not Henry, for by right for neither
Of yee, in these triumphall car's is toome:
But best of all ye may be match'd together.
Yet doo I grant thou wert a princely Knight,
And patrone of the bloody rose by right.

But to thy sonne the Dolphins strange repeyre
(Swimming in post up to the royall port)
Foretold that hee was born the Lillies heire.
This signe was soon by sequels verified:
Dolphin hee was by right, or swords effort.
And he in France victorious liv'd and died.
Whom Azincourt so nobly did receave,
At Vincienne parke of all he takes his leave.

Henry his sonne surnamed of Windlesore
(Who was in London and in Paris crowned)
Most worthily a Plant of Genest bore.
But not by scepters sole his praise began:
His christian vertues sole his praise began:
For he was deem'd a very holy man,
And had been made a Saint, and long since shrined,
But that the vice-saint maker was unkind.

I must omitt that proud Plantagenet,
Who in high parlament the king defi'de.
But I may not his gallant sonne forget,
Who twice did winne the royall gole by armes:
And was the father of the happiest bride,
That ever Camber compassd in his armes:
She made the losse the lighter of that sonne,
Whose raigne then ended as it was begonne.

She, and her Richmont (on'd by sacrament)
Refus'd the golden offer of Colone,
Foreseeing that the riches and the rent
Would hardly countervaile the keepers care:
And had besid's a secret reed that one,
(Who should hereafter set in Arturs chaire)
Should fetch the fleece when he occasion saw,
And hold the golden monark in his awe.

This Richmont was a very prudent prince
And therefore was surnamed Solomon.
The world hath seen great works accomplish'd since,
Which were projected by this Theodore.
This man of GOD did happily atone
The civil feud, which long had been before,
Betwixt the Rose, which first grew in the wood
And that which Venus colour'd in hir blood.

These happy Plants have overspread this Ile
By Henry, and more fruitfull Margaret.
(But Henry's branches florish'd but a while)
She is the roote of the immortall seed,
Whence James the wise a new Plantagent
Did spring, and was hir father who did breed
The great Polystephane, as shall appeere
When they are past, which come triumphing here.

That Henry with his broome attempted first
To sweep out of this land the drosse of Roome;
A worke of worth, which els no monarke durst.
And made a Bal when hee had doon this deed
In triumph of the flowers of the Broome.
Yet see how duly vertue hath hir meed,
For the Pope himselfe as (the Bishop saith)
First stiled him Defender of the faith.

His hopefull sonne brought happily to passe
What was attempted by that hardy King.
For hee abollished the Romish Masse:
Timely resolv'd to maintaine christian troth.
And as his yeeres, so did his vertues spring,
But envious fates untimely cropt them both.
Then let this serve to make complete his praise,
Whom Gods do love, he dies in tender dayes.

This is king Henries eldest daughters place,
A dame endewd with hev'nly vertues many:
Devout sans dout, a MARY full of grace,
Just of hir word as ever any Queene:
Hir liberall hand was never clos'd to any,
Whose need requir'd.  This maks her plant stil green,
For what somever piously is geven,
Is with great usury restor'd in heaven.

Hir younger sister next to hir doth set,
Who was in acts, and age the happier much?
And therefore weares the braver chappelet.
A Queene, whose state so happily did stand,
That men did say (seeing hir greatnesse such)
This Lady leadeth fortune in hir hand:
A virgin which did keep hir lamp still light
And eke for rarenes was a Phoenix hight:

For weigh hir peace established at home,
And next hir victories acheev'd abrode
As well in th' Indies as in christendome.
Then hir fate garding hir confederates,
Hir zeale to the true worshipping of GOD,
Hir wisely moderating hir three estates,
These say she was a glorious Amazone,
As ever any was:  but fates spare none.

Add more, which joyned strange scepters to their plant,
As Cornwall did the scepter of Almain,
And that of Castile royall Jon of Gant,
Progenitor by sonnes, and either daughter
Of all the kings of Britain, and of Spain:
Without sir Bolinbrook, who for the slaughter
Of a king inunct ashamed hid his eyes
Long-sithence with a hood of strange desguise.

But Bedford shall his fathers  place supply,
Who though no King, yet was a great vice-roy,
And in his place behav'd him royally.
Th' arm'd sorceresse committed to the flame,
Narbone, Alanson, and their petty roy
Vanquish'd at Vernueil witnesse well the same,
Who while he liv'd preserv'd th' inheritance
Of his drad leege, and kept in awe all France.

Some more great Genesters recount I may,
Whose fronts should with this crowne have circled been,
But they were absent at their facting day:
As Artur, heire unto the greatest King:
And she, that was of France and Scotland Queene,
Whose vertues praises all the muses sing,
And weares in sted of chappelet of Plantes
In hev'n a diademe of Amarants.

And divers other sett on fortunes knee,
Highly advanc'd for vertues rare respects
Have worne a branch of this imperiall tree.
Farther they neither did presume nor might,
For they were men, and had somelight defects:
But yet they pass'd as far ech other wight,
As he (that peerlesse hee) eclipseth them,
Who is of all the world the rarest gemm.

Defects empesche'd they were not absolute,
And fates conspir'd to keepe them in their wants:
But GOD, and fates desert and publicke brute
Have all pronounc'd him sole the worthy ONE
To weare the ghirland made of many plants.
Th' high Seneschall (I meane) of Albion,
Of whom Apollo in his holy rage,
Did as you heard such wond'rous goods presage.

And this is hee, for whom by desteny
The complet ghirland was reserv'd so long:
Of whom to say in sooth my fantasie,
It were in vaine for any man alive,
With flatering hopes to doo himselfe that wrong,
To thinke his stile mought at his praise arrive.
But true that is which erst thy Muse did sing,
Hee is the true Beau-clerc, and the best King.

This is that Olive-bearer of this Ile,
Who shall by high preordinance divine
That great intestine quarell reconcile,
Which so unnaturally so long hath been
Betwixt Brutes sonnes Albanact, and Locrine:
As Theodore did that, which was betweene
The bloody brothers Lancaster and Yorke,
And was a figure of this greater worke.

To this his reuninted Albion
Hee shall annex the crowne of Pharamound,
And fayre Hibernia's Joyning three in one.
Still Victory shall follow his ensigne.
He shall in treasure, peace, and yeeres abound.
Aequity, Clemency, and lore divine
In all causes, and of all opinions
Shall be his judges in his dominions.

And to accomplish this his happinesse
Heav'ns doo to him a princely spouse decree:
All those fraile faints, those gentile goddesses
Shall kneel to hir:  so wise, so chast, so loyall,
So faire, so good, so goodly she shalbe.
And both thrise blessed in their issue royall.
For hee, and they which from them shall descend,
Shall raigne in Britaine, till the world have end.

And Britain had no sooner faith and force
Combin'd, but hir DOLPHIN in tender age
Vowes to redeem from Gallik bands the cors
Of his grand-sire the great Plantagent,
And seize upon his Southern heritage,
And bounds, and trophees in the Pyrens sett.
Soft Muse:  but prospect GOD, and native right
This flowre of flowers, this sweet S. Georges knight.

What doost thou now (Damaetas) more command,
Lo here discuss'd the mysteries of thy tree,
Thy doubts dissolv'd, assoiled thy demand,
And ev'n thy thoughts (I thinke) descyphred are.
And if that rarest thing great DAPHNIS bee,
To whom thou didst some time those plants compare,
Then lo at length the white is striken pat,
Which thy conceits so long have aymed at.

DAMAETAS.
O blessed Prophet hallow'd bee thy art,
Which hast discharg'd in faith a friendly part:
My thoughts, and doubts are ridled every-on.
And I confesse his name thou hast divin'd,
To whose high worth the plants were paragon.
Silenus live, and so naught resteth now,
But to his service all my life to vow.

Wherefore I wish I wist to bring to passe,
To have a Penn plucked from Angels wings:
And then to bee as high as Atlas was,
Who on his shoulders did support the skies.
(O King of flours, O fairest floure of Kings)
Thus would I write in starry Paradise,
DAPHNIS a loy le chappeau roialest,
De Roses, chardone, lis, &amp; de Genest.

Triumph yee trees, which had so high a hap
To beare the flowers of this royall Hat:
Florish yee flowers lul'd in Flora's lap,
Wherof Apollo did his ghirland make,
Ghirland in honour aequall bee to that,
Which shines in hev'n for Ariadne's sake,
And may his state, for terme with starrs contend,
To whom the hev'ns this Garland recommend.

L'ENVOY AU ROY.
Lo now (great BRITON) by decree divine,
This fowre-fold Diademe devolv'd to thee,
Great Aedgar's heyre by fortunes, and by line.
But greater by thy wisdome, and thy witt,
Thy minde invict, thy bountee, pietee,
And all the vertues for a Caesar fit.
Wherefore on thee all happines attend,
Whom heav'ns to us so happily did send.
