WILLY.
Come jolly shepherd, let us pipe, and play;
Such cause of mirth we never had before;
We have escaped faire the darkest day
That ever lowr'd upon the Brittish shore.

THENOT.
Willy, what meanes this ferly speech of thine,
What might the danger be, that was so dern?
Our dearest flocks been free from death and pine;
Or hath some wicked woolf or beast more stern,
As beare or boare been spy'd in halk or hern?
But if false foxes be that would us shend,
We have true currs, that shall them well defend.

WILLY.
Nay, but our faithfull currs had small avail'd
To seely sheep or shepherd's selfs defense,
If highest Gods own watchfull ey had fail'd
Faire to foresee our cruell foes pretense.

THENOT.
What cruell foes?  thou dost but jest, I see,
For by the mind of man was ne're, I ween,
This lond from feare of every foe so free;
Nor in the reign of the late maiden Qyeen;
For, if no warrs among us then were seen,
Yet did our English blood the warrs maintain
Beyond the seas, in Flanders, France, and Spaine.

Art not avis'd what stirr was in our Town,
Tho, when the camp lay at Tilbury,
What running, what riding was up and down,
Thou wert a sory lad tho, when I
With others moe drank the wells dry,
Wee marched thitherward in such hot hast;
High God!  what sweet a thing is danger past?

The Spanyard had yweend orecome this Lond,
And with theire cruell whips our sides teare,
Theire great Armada might not be withstond;
Ah noble Drake, thou shew'd'st thy self there,
In evil hower their ships enanchor'd were
Tofore Callice, somrimes English ground,
Through thy device there little ease they found

But sooth to say, Gods power was all in all,
And not device of man, that wrought the feat,
The winds, and seas he to our help did call,
And with a frowning look from that high seat,
Whence all he sees, he quai'ld their boisterous threat.
Then did we shepherds dance and pipe and play,
And yearly still I keep it holiday.

Now thank't be God, and good King Jemys reign;
All warrs be done, I hope, for many yeares;
The Golden age, I ween, returns againe,
That shall the plowshares lay with steely speares
And smithy swords to sickles.  Who that heares
Greate Brittains mighty well renowned name
But needs mought quake and tremble at the same?

WILLY.
Thenot, well may thy hopes with mine befall,
But oft in trust is treason, warr in peace.
The danger that is seen is least of all;
But in close mischeife wisdomes self must cease.
O mercy God!  what help mought have been found
As now for us, but in thy providence?
What might mans witt withstand that fearfull stound,
What strength resist that hideous violence?
Ah!  gentle shepherds, little can ye deem
Into what perill lately all was brought;
Not half such danger (as I mought esteem)
Two Spanish Fleets, though greater farr, had wrought.

THENOT.
Now tell it out, shepherd, for Gods deare love;
Thou killst us all with feare, we know not why.
And worse it is, they say, who list to prove,
The feare of ill, then ill itself to try.

WILLY.
Then harkeneth to me, shepherds, heedfully,
And think before of most mischeivous deed,
That may be thought; my Tale shall it exceed.

In Italy (mought I tell it right)
An ancient City stands, that Rome hight.
Who hath not heard by report of Fame
Wide in the world of this Rome the name?
Seven hilled-Rome cleap't of Romulus,
A shepherd, whom (the story saith thus)
A woolf there suckled with Remus his brother,
That after was killed of that other.
About the name of this town 'gan theire strife,
Which each would give, till one lost his life.
Hence hath it ever been shedder of blood;
So was it founded, so hath it stood.
It needeth not that I make rehearsall
Of thilk City's state Imperiall,
Her might, her wealth, and her surquedry;
Her pomp, her fals'ness', and her cruelty;
He were a clerk cunning for the nonce,
That each of these could descrive at once.
Suffice, as now, she hath the destiny
To been the seat of the Worlds Tyranny.
Such was Old Babel, that came to confusion.
And so shall new Babel at conclusion.

But for to drive my matter endling,
Within this City Rome there is wonning
A wicked witch and cursed sorceresse.
Not half so cunning was, as I ghesse,
That false harlot, I forgett her name,
No matter; but I meant of that same
That could (they say) transform men to dogs,
Woolves, Foxes, Bears, Lions, Tigers, Hogs;
Ulysses mates shee served thus I trow,
And himself had she served also,
Had not a souverain weed he found, lett,
That all her charmes, and drenches to sett.
But of his men, save the mind and witt,
As of a man she left him no relict.
Soon as they drunk of her dlarmed wine,
Right anon were they changed into swine;
Tho when they ween'd complaine as they wont,
And tellen her grief, nought might they but grunt,
And grind their long tusks for some regrett,
Or chauken akorns for better meate.
But, O light hand, and weeds all to weake,
O slender skill, as to her that I speake;
Which mought no more but the shape transmue,
And left the same mind in another hue.
All otherwise this witch that I tell,
Shee is so perfect a Mistress of Spell,
So powerfull hearbs temperen her bowle;
As Alder-like piercen to the soule;
And leave the body all whole every limb.
What mouth of that cup once kisseth the brimm,
Albee he seemeth a man before,
Inly a beast he is, and no more.
A fierce Lion, or woolf ravenous,
Or Cruell tiger, or fox cautelous,
Or griesly bore, or dragon hideous,
Or other like monster outrageous.

And marketh, Sirs, what I shall you say,
Whosoever tasteth thilk cup, from that day
Unto the Sorceresse he is very page,
To done her bidding all time of his age,
And runnen, and comen whither she send,
All were it thence to the Worlds end;
And mischeiven them with all her might,
Whom ever the witch doth once despight.
They been this Haggs very Puckerills,
Whom forth shee sendeth to worken her wills,
All were it to kill King, Prince, or other,
Or carven the throat of her lief brother.
And one thing more; they spare for no swink
To make each man of that cup to drink;
Ylike to the drunklew's, that urgen still
Their fellows as much as themselves to swill:
So ly they ever in aware awaite
To bringen others to the same baite.
Meane while true shepherds themselves they boast,
That comen to seek the sheep that is lost.
They say they make them true Catholick;
I dare avow it, they leave them woolves-wick.
Unto theire deeds who that taketh keep,
Albee they cloathed in fells of sheep.
But for to tell you of thilk same whoore,
Unto a shepherd she,is Paramour;
Nay there I lied, shepherd is he none,
Yet (if we 'leive him) shepherds Prince alone,
Thirteenth Apostle to the other twelve,
Ne cannot err, as he saith himself.
All where of common right he claimeth liberty,
And wooll and lamb as Christs own vicary.
All crowns of him been holden in cheif;
He gives and takes them, lo here the preif;
For thy Kings and Keysars to him mought obey,
And kissen his Toe, if that they may;
For so they did to Peter the Fisher,
That left him the key of heaven as his heire;
And of Purgatory, he saith, and of Hell;
And soothly this later me thinketh well.

To make short tale; this witches Leman,
Upon a quarrell long ago began
For letting his walk, and his sheep course,
This Lond as black as soot did accurse;
That better since fared, and never the worse.
The cause was, the famous Henry,
With Edward and Elizabeth his progeny,
(As now our noble Jemy after these)
Bade him forbeare to feed on their lea's,
And learn to know his own libertyes.
Who can descrive aright the strange guise,
And of that curse the sad mysteryes?
And how the witch came unapparelled,
With bared breast, and haire dischevelled;
And how she sprinkled salt in streames pure,
And how them both she did first conjure,
And how the altar-stone three times she dasht,
And sith her Lemans cloaths all to washt,
And then herself; how with tapers light
The giltles day shee turned to night;
What bones they were she brought in a clout,
Whose the images that look't on about,
How the incense rose in a smoaky cloud,
And straight the Priest gan cry aloud,
And whilest he read, oft he crost his book,
And oft himself; or How they gan looke,
What time the dead ghost he cast to call,
And suddainly queint the candles all,
And shutt his book, and withall clink't his bell,
It passeth farr my cunning to tell.
Ne wish not (as by my counsell) to heare
The fearfull words, which they saiden there;
Words, wch have power, or else they missayn,
Bread into flesh and to blood humaine
The grapy liquor transform in a stound,
And highest heaven with this earth confound.
But here as now I list not to dwell,
To shew the wonders wherof they tell,
Nor of this curse any more to talk,
I have yet (God wot) a long way to walk.
Smally this cursing he saw did availe
This cursed priest as to his travaile;
Wroth wox he tho as the robbed beare;
And wroth wox the witch, that I said whilere,
And wroth wox no less these transformed cratures,
That kept not of men but the feitures.
Inflamed all with revengefull rage
They first gan arme their whole vassallage;
And gave this Lond for a common prey
To hem that might gett it; catch that catch may.
The Spaniards well hoped to winn the prize,
And well they missed, to make the rest wise;
So did they all of their lewd intent,
Which many their paines and their nedes spent
With knife, with dagger, with poyson, or all,
To bring our souverains to their last fall.
Yet all in vaine; yblest motest thou bee,
That sittest in heaven in thy majesty.
Another way they cast to be wroak
And vengen her foes all at a stroak.
A new engine shall ye heare tell,
Well mought beseem the foule fiend of Hell.
And his it was, peril o' my head;
As in records of truth shall be read,
And plainly declared another day.
But with what alarms, or with what array
Him summoned up thilk same Sorceresse,
How many more, and in what likenes,
Came up together to counsaile,
I cannot, I, tell it without faile;
Nor will I take on me to divine,
On which top of snowy Appennine,
Or in what part of the ruines old
Of heathen Rome was this meeting hold;
The threatning remnant of that huge pile
There as the longer time to beguile
Theire cruell eyes they wont feed with blood,
Or where the golden Palace once stood,
That cursed Neron built; from whose height
The flaming City could please his sight,
Or of their own old mansion
These wicked spirits tooke new possession,
The great Pantheon that hight of yore,
For (but the crosse sperred fast the doore,
And well defended the tower aloft)
There had they mett many times and oft;
Or else their dame ne putt to such paine
Them, nor herself, but the Vaticane,
There as her Leman wonns, did suffice
Upon theire busines for to devise.
All what they saiden there to and fro,
And which of them they pointed should goe
To sure effect to bring this matter,
Belial, Beelzebub, proudest Lucifer,
Satan, Abaddon, or they all yfere,
Truth wott the sooth, who that list inquire;
Asketh the Muses of Parnassus Hill,
I giveth up, it passeth my skill,
As done these Poets therunto endight,
Who but a foole tempts above his might?
Most is, the effect of each tale to know,
And that shall ye heare yet e're I goe:
But e're I come thereto ye shall weet,
A day was sett, wherin there should meet
Of shepherds in Brittain the Parliament,
Laws to devise with one assent;
Such as might be for theire flocks behoof:
Or alter the Old upon better proof;
Chiefly to make a blissfull union,
To bring our great Shepherds two folds in one,
Himself in cheif should in person there been,
And eke his faire shepherdess the Queen,
And with these our young Master Henry,
Faire blossome of noblesse vertue and bounty;
Thither they come in royal array,
To glad with their presence that feastfull day.
Yede thither of shepherds the whole Baronage,
And many shepherds swaines wise and sage,
Men of the Lay, Knights and Burgesses,
And officers more then I can expresse.
Without words moe, there should be the summe
Of great Brittain in a little roome.
This knew these misformed monsters I told,
The witch and her Leman all, be bold;
They wist also in certainty
The place where this meeting was sett to bee;
And that beastly shaped crue,
How many hundreths I note say true;
But so strong they were through sufferance,
And cheifly shepherds own variance,
There gan bold hopes in their hearts creep
To worry at once both shepherds and sheep.

Now shall I say what they did devise,
Although my faltering tongue aback flyes,
And chilling dread in myne heart I feele,
As needs it must, were it all of steele.
I quake and tremble each joint and limb,
My mouth wax dry, and mine eyes dimm,
Uneth I may any words more saine,
yet will I tell, albee with paine;

The enemy of mankind for some years by gone
A servant of that witch, as alone
Of natural magick he cast to devise
And therto proved many mysteryes,
And sundry conclusions within his cell,
As for the principal secret of hell,
To make a murtherous mixture ythought,
That millions of men hath to mischeif brought.
Now would God none other wist more nor I
Of this same powder the mystery;
Nor of the matters y' longen thereto,
Ne should not the houses been digged up so,
Of goodmen both in bowre and hall,
For saltpeter; fowle might it befall:
Such salt I ween it be y' of yore
Parcheth the ground on the barren shore
Of the dead lake, coverd all with slime,
And liquid brimstone, where stood sometime
The proud Sodom, that with fire levin
And sulphurous brimstone was destroid from heaven.
Of that same burning, I dare be bold,
This hellish pouder some ashes doth hold;
Witnes the gledes been therin precken,
Such as the flames they say outbreaken
On the hoary top of Mount Giball,
That in Sicily roareth over all;
And belleth out streames of soultry smoake,
And ragged ribbs of rocks all-to-broake,
Dischargeth like bullets in the empty aire;
The starrs have to doe to save them faire.
And like cause therto hath the thunder-dent,
That rattling in the clouds all-to-rent,
Teareth high towers, and with the blow
The proud Oakes bringeth down full low.

Lo, sirs, what a toole such workmen had found!
Lo!  how they cast us all to confound!
With this same pouder they shope in a throw
The senate of Shepherds quite up to blow.
Blesseth ye not, but hearken the rest,
That yet is behind, bad as the best.
They been conspired for this intent,
Shriven, and sworn secret with Sacrament.
Ah deare Lord!  an holy houselling
A blessed shrift, a cleare assoiling!
O Traiter Judas, I beleive it well
To sing this Masse thou returnedst from Hell.
Tho as they weend to receive their maker
Flesh, blood, and bone in a little wafer,
That reigns in heaven in his Majesty,
Satan hem enterd, as he did thee.
Chiefly that trayter, which, without thine hire
His liege Lords destruction to conspire,
Lent them his garden, (O new field of blood)
That next to the house of Parliament stood.
There gan they fast to theire work to fall,
Their mine they carry along to the wall;
And ever with timber all undersett
Still as they goe, and that none might lett
Theire holy purpose, or raise misdoubt,
One of theire number they sett to be scout.
FALSE was his name, I remember well,
And well it fitt him, they say that can tell.
A false Fox it was in man's shape ydrest,
Enclosing a falser fiend in his breast.
They did so much by theire busy paine,
(For night and day they wroughten amain)
They came to the wall itself at last,
Of wonder thickness, and deeply cast
For it was built many yeares agone;
Such building for strength this day nis there none:
All on a vault they found it to stand,
Another purpose tho tooke they in hand;
To borrow this cellar for love or hire;
And make it the shop of theire hellish fire;
They tryed and sped, for who could misdoubt
So damned practice they went about?

Now 'gan this busines fashion apace;
Theire powder they brought into this same place,
By little and little secretly,
And there disposen it thriftily,
In baggs and barrells, save that one great Tonn
Right under the chaire of state they done;
They would be sure the King should be sped,
All were but lost, but if he were dead;
So shall he, say they, without remedy,
Albe an hundred lives more had hee.
The snare is sett, none can it espy,
And strong it is to hold sikerly.
This gilty vault is with powder fraught,
Above three thousand six hundred weight;
Enough, they say, to blow up a town,
And rase with the dint half a country down.
And to be sure each aloft he throwes
Their former tooles, mattocks, barrs, and crowes;
And over all billets doe they lay;
Approacheth now apace that sad day,
That shall put fire to this cursed traine.

Mercy, Dread Lord, mercy, mought we sayn,
Rue on the Roial blood, at this stead,
And shield it faire from all danger and dread.
Ah Lord!  thou hearest us before we prayen,
And helpst us, as thou hightest, ere we complaine.
Wee find it well, never more then now;
Thy wondrous wisdome know's when and how
To save the giltlesse snarled at unaware,
And trap the guilor in his own snare:
Rather then faile himself shall bewray
The danger to such as Him would betray
As now it fell out; one among the rest
Of these same Traitors a letter addrest
Unto a shepherd, that was good and true;
Whose jeopardy he seemed to rue;
Advising from Parliament he should retire;
For God (he said) and man did conspire
To been avenged on this ages sin,
Himself saw not the danger he was in;
No more should the rest; but a terrible blow
Should they receive, and yet never know
Who hurt them.  Wherfore he red him withdraw;
Although no perill as yet he saw.
So prayed to God to give him his grace
To take faire warning while he had space.
This letter read in the fire he should cast,
His harm were at an end, and the danger past.
So sayd this letter.  I heard his name neven,
Mount it began with, to whom it was given.
Unto his groom was it took one Eve,
The messenger staid not to take his leave.
Greatly agast with the strange purport
Of this same writing, that night in no sort
He might not rest, but roll'd up and down
In carefull mind, of what intention
This letter should come, he wist not from whence;
No name subscribed, nor with what pretense.
One while it seemed no matter of nought,
But straite, my life, its a jest he thought;
Should I go tell it to folks about
I should be but a scorne without doubt;
And namely thus, if no such thing bee.
But what if it be sooth?  So mote I thee,
Be it a jest or a tale true.
Better be laught at then after rue.
So said, he sped to the Court apace,
And to the Counncil told all this whole case;
They to the King half in jest and game.
But well the wisest King said this same,
The Kings lips an oracle shall give,
Ne shall his mouth in deeming deceive.
Princes been guided with greater grace
Then we lewd folk; and so fitts theire place;
They been our head, and that is well of sense,
Seate of discretion, and of sapience;
For thy the better to guide us all
God gives them his Spirit principal;
Namely the good, the meek, the mercyable,
The chast, the vertuous, just, true, and stable,
That seek the common good, not their own.
God speakes in such, full soone may be known,
As now in ours.  Goe, search me, said hee,
The place where our meeting is sett to bee;
For gunpouder, but seardl it me well,
Not as it ought, and as good never a dell.
They answerd all on bended knee,
As he commanded (forsooth) it should bee.
The night came, and with deawy vaile
This lower worlds face did overhale;
Her shady mantle had covered all
Those bright starry eyes Celestial;
Nought could the blushing cheeks now accuse
The gilty mind.  That ciel doe they chuse
That musen mischeif; ill deeds shunn the light;
O vainest hope!  who can blind the sight
Of his own conscience, or think to fly
Gods all-where present all-seeing ey?
Men see sometimes when we least surmize;
And sooth is said, stones and trees have eyes
To spy the man that doth ought amisse;
But let me see, wherof said I this?
Ah!  well bethought; with soft silent pace
When night was come, went unto the place
Those searchers, as they had been enjoind,
That time they thought perhaps they might find
Both which they sought, the matter and man.
And so they did; for (mark ye right) than
The false Fox, that I told whilere;
Beside the doore of that vault was neer
He had but newly before been there
To make his traine, in a readines
Against his next morrow's busines.
Close in a corner stood he bolt upright,
Shrouded in darknes of place and night;
As God would have it, yet was he descried,
And taken soon, and as surely tyed.
They searched the place and the powder found,
Yet was he therat no whitt astound;
Ne nought forthought his purpose, he said,
Save that it was not accomplished.
But for the Devil, he said, it had been;
God would it well.  O wretch that wouldst ween
The Fiends will were above God Almight,
O hardened heart, that with heaven will fight;
Lo!  Shepherds, here the summe of our debt;
Lo here our danger; how neer, how great!

PERKIN.
Good God, might this be true, that here you tell?

WILLY.
As true as truth itself, beleive it well.

THENOT.
How wotest thou, Willy, if it be all sooth?
Full many leasings leud for newes there goe'th.

WILLY.
How wote I man?  'tis but the fifth morrow
That False was ta'ne; God give him sorrow.
Tho was I myself in the City,
There did I heare, and see with mine eye
The bonfires, the mirth, and the jollity,
The ringing and singing, and all the glee,
They maden therfore; and a day or twaine
I cast there to tarry, ere home againe
I turned, to hearken this matter at full;
And for the rest, trust me if you wooll.
Of many good shepherds I heard the same,
And from the sage Lobins own mouth it came,
The wise Lobin, that Fame doth resound,
As true a Shepherd as lives on ground.

PERKIN.
Loved and lawded be thy mighty power,
O souverain God, our God, our Saviour;
Which from thy heavenly throne with skilfutl hand
Weildest the reines both of the sea and land,
And of that dark infernall region,
Where Satan holds his domination.
One while thou lettst them loose with larger scope;
Straitway the furious steeds conceive proud hope,
To been at large to hurtle here and there
The chariot, as it had noe wagoner.
Thou smil'st, and letst them spend their strength in vaine;
But when eftsoon thou doest their leashes straine,
All at a beck thou stopst them in the race,
And make'st them bound, and turn in the same place.
How (do we think) had Satans cruel pride
In this device itself nigh deify'd,
In certain hope this counsell should succeed?
Oft had he miss'd, now thought he sure to speed.
And, sooth to say, he never came so nigh,
And never was deceiv'd more notably.
As when th' unwary fish with wanton bitt
Swollows the pleasing baite, and under it
The harmfull hook.  She triumphs in her prey,
And weens it wonn, and thinks to goen her way;
The watchfull fisher has his time espied,
And strikes her sure, and bids her soft, abide;
With wounded jaws, though loth, she must obey:
Such now is Satans self, and such are they
His instruments of this same villany.
Wee render thanks to thee, deservedly
Our Lord, our life, our hope, our help, our praise,
So justly bound, so oft, so many wayes.

WILLY.
More will you say soe, when as you weet
The deeper mischeif I had nigh forgeet
Of this same plott yet behind to tell.

THENOT.
What mischeife may be more in deepest hell?

WILLY.
What (trow you) meaneth the greedy woolf
The shepherd ytorne?  were his ravening gulf
(Would you beleive) filld for evermore?
Or should the poore sheep aby it sore?

PERKIN.
Right as ye say.  but what is yet behind?
For as this matter runneth in my mind,
Were our great shepherd, and his heire also,
(Which God forefend) and all the rest ygo:
yet should these cruell beasts be n'ere the narr;
There stands yet in the way full many a barr.
There had been left a many shepherds good,
Which for their flocks would spend their dearest blood;
And many a sturdy Tupp with armed head
Should give them sorrow, e're he would be dead.
So might I thrive, the whiles this hook would hold,
They should have blowes, and y' I dare be bold,
We have old lads, and tough, as with a clubb
There where it never itch't should make them rubb.
They could not have beare it all so sheer away,
I trow they must have foughten e're that day.
And had it come therto, wee are ten for one,
And sooth is said, that each true man alone
Is more nor theives twain, as in his right
A Dreury slayes a Giant in the fight.
God help the good; and of the Roial race
Been other left behind, that with his grace
Should hold the crown, and with good subjects all
Upon theire traiterous heads would make to Fall
So fearfull vengeance for such cursed crime,
As Fame had never heard before this time.

WILLY.
All thank't be God it came not to that,
Nor never may it; but hearken, Sirs, what
They had devised to make themselves strong,
And sow seeds of discord the rest among.
Our great Shepherds Daughter they thought surprize;
And next in armes all they would rise;
And doe it proclaime all where with speed
The Puritanes had done this fowle deed.
And since theire rage was so cruell and fell,
Aware, all good shepherds, and guard them well.
Some say they sett a reward for his foe
By whom a Puritane yslaine should bee.
They should the dance lead, but e're all were done
Wee had been Puritanes, each mothers sonn.
But this is certain, that in Warwick shire
They have enkindled theire second fire
Of open rebellion, which I hope shall
Be quidsly quendled with theire own fall.

PERKIN.
God say Amen himself, (no doubt he will)
And, as he has before, defend us still.
But, O deere Lord, was it with such intent
That to the 'ginning of this Parliament
They flockt so to the City round about
Which be the cheife of that unruly rowt,
That will not fold, nor feed with our sheep,
Within theire breast such monsters doe they keep.
I had yweend, and so had many more,
They had bin simple, souple, meek, and poore,
And e'ke as other sheep me thought they bleat,
Albe for sick they did forsake theire meate.
At most I would have thought they scabbed were,
Or flie-stung, so they gadded here and there.
Theire ragged pelts I pityed all to rent,
Whilest in the bushy thickets they miswent:
But well I see that to the voice and hew
There nis no trust to give, they been untrue.
But, may no medecine help, nor stronger charm,
To cure this malady, or save from harm
The flodes not yet infect?  tell us we pray.

WILLY.
Med'cines ynough, and right good, there's no nay,
Cheifly for sheep that been sound and haile;
But, which, I trow, will not least availe,
Is for to chasen these monsters away;
Or doe them dead without more delay;
They maken this mischeife; and there withall
Unto the flocks good shepherds to call,
And stint the strife is among them fall.
To make strong fense and sure, that may hold
These leapers, and keep them in pasture and fold.
For souverainst med'cine is sweet and clean feed
On vertuous hearb, without rank and fowle weed.
Such can preserve the flocks in good plight,
And heale theire diseases, and well acquite
The tender lambs from ill eyes, as I guesse,
And all the charmes of the false sorceresse.
But of this matter leave we now to devise
The great Assembly of the shepherds wise,
And cheifly theire cheife that for judgement cleer
Mongst earthly shepherds has not his peere.
Now will you heare what a roundelay
A southern shepherd but yesterday
Tun'd to his pipe, whiles his fellow-swaine
The undersong him answered againe.
Fram'd like a Ditty (they said) long a gone,
A shepherds which at Bethlehem did wonn.
Whose skilfull hand with his harp divine
Could teach the tall Cedars their tops incline,
And stay the streames, and the rocks remove
And, when him listed his skill to prove,
Could make the fierce Lions to stand astound
Till with his hooke he brought them to ground.
Well for to rest the inraged mind
Of melting words and notes couth he find.
The fiend himself of his skill afraid
Left scourging the furious King, when he plaid.
His was this ditty, if ye wooll it heare:

THENOT.
Yea, best of all, say on, we mought it leare.

PERKIN.
It may perhaps these monsters strange uncharm,
Or bind theire jaws, or shield the flocks from harme.

WILLY.
When against us did arise,
Cruell beasts in shapes of men;
And to destroy us did devise,
We had been devoured cleane;
Had not the Lord been on our side,
Now may Brittain justly say,
Had not the Lord been on our side
In that dark &amp; dismall day.

Even quide we had been swollowed all
So enflamed was theire ire,
And mangled flown in pieces small
Bullets to their hellish fire.

We had been dead, no remedy
But alas &amp; well away;
Such was theire rage &amp; cruelty
In that dark &amp; dismall day.

Blesst be the Lord, wch hath not left
Us to their bloody teeth a prey;
Our soule out of the snare is reft,
Like to the bird escap'd away.

The snare is broke, that subtle gin,
Sing we at large some joyous lay,
The fowlers self is trapt therin;
Joyfull, joyfull, happy day!

Our hope, our help alone doth stand
In the Lords most glorious name;
The God, that by his mighty hand
Both the heaven &amp; earth did frame;

Unto that God let us give praise,
Let us trust in him for ay;
Let us sing psalms t' heavenly layes,
For this joyfull, happy day.

PERKIN.
Gods blessing have his heart, who ever it be,
That made this same or roundle or ditty;
Which yearly let be sungen for his sake,
The whilst the Sunn the same his course shall take;
Till Sagittary shall his bow unbend,
To make the Romish Harlots shame be kenn'd.
And till at last that souveraine shepherd good,
That bought his sheep with his own dearest blood,
Shall come to view his flock &amp; know theire state,
And from the sheep the goates shall separate,
And those same monsters all, what e're they bee
He knowes his own himself.  Tho shall ye see
That traitour False, &amp; his proud Paramour,
Theire cursed witchcrafts shall aby full sore
And dwell with whom they serv'd, for evermore.
O when, when shall we see that happy day? 
Come quickly, sweetest Lord, O come away.

But hie we home, the Sunn begins t'availe;
Faire fall ye, gentle shepherd, for your Tale.
