EMPRESSE OF BABYLON:  HER CANOPIE SUPPORTED BY FOUR CARDINALS:  TWO PERSONS IN PONTIFICALL ROABES ON EITHER HAND, THE ONE BEARING A SWORD, THE OTHER THE KEIES:  BEFORE HER 3. KINGS CROWNED, BEHINDE HER FRIERS, &c.

EMPRESSE.
That we, in pompe, in peace, in god-like splendor,
With adoration of all dazeled eies,
Should breath thus long, and grow so full of daies,
Be fruitfull as the Vine, in sonnes and daughters,
(All Emperors, Kings, and Queenes) that (like to Cedars
Uprising from the breast of Lybanus,
Or Olives nurst up by Jerusalem)
Heightened our glories, whilst we held up them:
That this vast Globe Terrestriall should be cantled,
And almost three parts ours, and that the nations,
Who suspiration draw out of this aire,
With universall Aves, showtes, and cries,
Should us acknowledge to be head supreame
To this great body (for a world of yeares:)
Yet now, when we had made our Crowne compleat,
And clos'd it strongly with a triple arch,
And had inrich'd it with those pretious jewels
Few Princes ever see (white haires) even now
Our greatnesse hangs in ballance, and the stampe
Of our true Soveraignty, clips, and abas'd.

1. KING.
By whom dread Empresse?

EMPRESSE.
Aske those our out-cast sonnes:  a throne usurped
Our chaire is counted, all our titles stolne.

2. KING.
What blasphemy dare speake so?

EMPRESSE.
All our roabes,
Your vestments, (reverend, yet pontificall:)
This sword, these keyes, (that open kingdoms hearts
To let in sweet obedience) All, but borrowed.

3. KING.
What soule above the earth&mdash;

EMPRESSE.
Our royall signet,
With which, we, (in a mothers holy love)
Have sign'd so many pardons, is now counterfeit:
From our mouth flow risers of blasphemy
And lies; our Babylonian Sinagogues
Are counted Stewes, where Fornications
And all uncleannesse Sodomiticall,
(Whose leprosy touch'd us never) are now daily acted:
Our Image, which (like Romane Caesars) stamp'd
In gold, through the whole earth did currant passe;
Is now blanch'd copper, or but guilded brasse.

3. KING.
Can yonder roofe, thats naild so fast with starres,
Cover a head so impious, and not cracke?
That Sulphure boyling o're celestiall fires,
May drop in whizing flakes (with skalding vengeance)
On such a horrid sinne!

1. KING.
No mortall bosome
Is so unsanctified.

2. KING.
Who i'st bright Empresse,
That feeds so ulcerous, and so ranke a Spleene?

EMPRESSE.
A woman.

OMNES.
Woman!  who?

EMPRESSE.
The Fairie Queene:
Five Summers have scarce drawn their glimmering nights
Through the Moons silver bowe, since the crowed heads
Of that adored beast, on which we ride,
Were strucke and wounded, but so heal'd againe,
The very scarres were hid.  But now, a mortall,
An unrecoverable blow is taken,
And it must bleed to death.

3. KING.
Heaven cannot suffer it.

EMPRESSE.
Heaven suffers it, and sees it, and gives ayme,
Whilst even our Empires heart is cleft in sunder:
That strumpet, that inchantresse, (who, in robes
White as is innocence, and with an eye
Able to tempt stearne murther to her bed)
Calles her selfe Truth, has stolne faire Truths attire,
Her crowne, her sweet songs, counterfets her voyce,
And by prestigious tricks in sorcerie,
Ha's raiz'd a base impostor like Truths father:
This subtile Curtizan sets up againe,
Whom we but late banisht, to live in caves,
In rockes and desert mountaines.

2. KING.
Shee's but a shadow.

EMPRESSE.
O t'is a cunning Spider,
And in her nets so wraps the Fairie Queene,
That shee suckes even her breast:  Sh'as writ a booke.
Which shee calles holy Spels.

3. KING.
Weele breake those spels.

EMPRESSE.
The poles of Heaven must first in sunder breake,
For from the Fairie shores this Witch hath driven
All such as are like these (our Sooth-Saiers)
And cal'd false Seers home, that of things past,
Sing wonders, and divine of things to come:
Through whose bewitching tongues runne golden chaines,
To which ten thousand eares so fast are bound,
As spirits are by spells; that all the Tones
Of harmony, that Babylon can sound,
Are charmes to Adders, and no more regarded,
Than are by him that's deafe, the sicke mans groanes.
Shee, they, Titania, and her Fairie Lords,
Yea even her vassaile elves, in publike scorne
Defame me, call me Whore of Babylon.

OMNES.
O unheard of prophanation!

EMPRESSE.
Give out I am common:  that for lust, and hire
I prostitute this body:  that to Kings
I quaffe full bowles of strong enchanting wines,
To make them dote on me.

OMNES.
Lets heare no more.

EMPRESSE.
And that all Potentates that tread on earth,
With our abhominations should be drunke,
And be by us undone.

OMNES.
Weele heare no more.

3. KING.
You have thrust Furies whips into our hands.

1. KING.
Say but the word, and weele turne home your wrongs,
In torne and bloody collours.

2. KING.
All her bowers,
Shall like burnt offerings purge away (in fire)
Her lands pollution.

OMNES.
Let's to armes.

EMPRESSE.
Stay:  heare me:
Her kingdome weares a girdle wrought of waves,
Set thicke with pretious stones, that are so charm'd,
No rockes are of more force:  her Fairies hearts,
Lie in inchanted towers (impregnable)
No engine scales them.  Therefore goe you three,
Draw all your faces sweetly, let your browes
Be sleekd, your cheekes in dimples, give out smiles,
Your voyces string with silver, wooe (like lovers)
Sweare you have hils of pearle:  shew her the world,
And say shee shall have all, so shee will kneele
And doe us reverence:  but if shee grow nice,
Dissemble, flatter, stoope to licke the dust
Shee goes upon, and (like to serpents) creepe
Upon your bellies, in humilitie;
And beg shee would but with us joyne a league,
To wed her land to ours:  our blessing, goe.

3. KING.
When mines are to be blowne up, men dig low.

ALL THREE.
And so will wee.

EMPRESSE.
Prosper:  till this sunne set,
The beames that from us shoot, seeme counterfet.

EXEUNT.
