The statlie strife that did of late befall
Betwixt three dames of more than mortall force;
And what calamitie it bredd withall
To us poore Brittons (reft of heavens remorce)
In bleedinge layes my fainting Muse must show,
That wounded lyes, in vertues overthrow.

And yet the helpe I meane not to implore
Of sadd Melpomene to tune my verse:
Whearby to make each sorrow seeme the more,
Or humane harts more inlye to impearce:
For those [   ] plaints, that steepe our eyes in teares
May pearce the laborinths of deaffest eares.

Bellona bould great Patroness of Armes,
Minerva myld, Parnassus sacred queene;
And Juno, Empress of the glisteringe Swarmes,
Together meet on the Olympion greene,
To eye the martiall feats and manlie games
Of youthful knights for honor and for dames.

But that which chieflie drewe them to this place,
Was to behould a princlie paragon:
On whom they three conferred a severall grace,
([    ] therby him to claime alone.)
For those three guifts were each of heavenlie kinde,
The least whearof might greatest mortall binde.

Bellona said the triple plume belongd
To hir, because it was the badge of Mart:
Minerva playnde hir right therin was wrongd,
For that the quills weare instruments of art;
Juno aleaged the crowne she did bestowe,
To whom both arts and Armes theire homage owe.

Thus they contest, and from this strife arose
That hope-confounding harme, which we doe rue;
Converting our delightfull thoughts to woe:
As shalbe shewed in place where it is due.
Till when letts talke of pastimes whilst we maye,
And to th' Olympian games hast on our way.

Wheare was to see (on that Herculean plaine)
In troopes disperst choyce of activetie;
Some with the Sledge their braunye armes distraine,
Some cast the barr with lyke agillytie,
Some wrestlinge for the palme trusting their myght,
Are yet twiste upp with nymblenesse and slyght.

Some of these wrestlers from that country came
That's Cornwall height (for manrodd much renown'd)
Whose Prince of yore Sir Tristram had to name,
And Lord of Lyoness a countrye drown'd,
That Sillie and the maine lay nist betweene
Whearof records remaine though no land scene.

Others againe swift-footed as the Roe
Their sinnewes streach to overrunne the rest;
And some of these the dart right well canne throwe,
Whose longe shaggd glibbs and habits stranglie drest,
Did shew that they weare kearnes of Irish breed,
Manlie of Lymmes, and doughtie of their deed.

Next unto these a gallant troope ther stands
Of Latium Ladds, that coollered skarfes did weare
Some carying naked Rapiers in ther hands,
And others on ther shoulders long swords beare.
All these the wary fencinge art profess,
(Vallours best refuge when by strength opprest)

But leave wee these, and now behould the rancks
Of sturdie archers bearinge bowes ybent,
With sheaves of steele-shodd-shaffes girt to there flancks,
Whose feathers made a bustlinge as they went:
And when in showers ye bowmen letts them flie,
More then the bulletts farr they daunte ye eye.

For hidden harmes doe not so much affright
The mynd of man nor yet the [s  ] subdue,
As those, that are apparent in our sight;
What the eye sees not, the hart the lesse dooth rue:
The stormes of bulletts close conveyed beene,
But showers of shaftes offencyvelie are seen.

For though the aire theire singing feathers slitte,
Whose fatall noats our foes have bought full deere,
They teare the flesh, and boanes in sunder splytte
Whear [   ] they light; brave weapon without peare
Untill the Gunn crept in that hath like might,
Shott by a dastard dwarffe, or hardie knight.

Ah woe is me, this whilome conquerinnge bowe
(That hath such glorie gained to our state)
Is now forlorne, his Trophes scarce yknowe.
His force forgott:  but wee the more ungrate.
Cressye, and Poycters feilds cann yet rehearse
How deepe through France these powerful armes dispearse.

And worthie Henry worthiest of them all,
Our English Mars, our thunderbolt to foes
Thy Agincourt did so their pride apall,
As that their flower-daluce stoops to thy rose;
Though Alexander like (in manlie prime)
Amidst thy conquests shortned was thy time.

But how am I digrest into lament,
Rippinge up careless cares of long past acts?
When sorrow straines, it straines to finde some vent;
For Henries very name, my sence distracts.
Such Henries were of temper to devine
To be longe held by strength of mortall lyne.

Returne wee therfore to the manny moe
Of matches made of trials and of sporte
But it sufficeth that the world doth knowe
This place exceld for Pomp and great resorte:
And cheeflie for the brave atchyvementts gainde,
By noble bloods in feats of Armes ytrainde.

Now might wee heare at hand a clamorous noyse
Of shouts and bagg pips in confused wise
And therewith saw a skoule of dapper boyes
On horsbacke mounted with a double prise;
To golden bells:  on for the swiftest race,
To-ther for him that wynes the wildgoose chast.

Their slight-lymed Palfryes Gennets were of Spayne,
Or of the breede that Barbary doth yeld,
Fitter in full caryer to run amayne,
Then to sustaine the shock of speare and shielde.
So forth they pricke and swich to gett the starte,
Like eger Grayhounds that pursue the harte.

Not farr from this uppon a level strand,
Alongst the banckes wheare sweet Alpheus glides,
A beaten way was trodden in the sand,
Whereas againe an other troope there rides
In quainte attires with painted launces light,
Fitt for dissport, but not for martiall fight.

These seemd to bee fresh youthes of Flora's traine;
For with them they a gold bright garland bare
Contrived in flowers of pure enamel staine
So fyne, that art with nature did compare:
This as a prize to honour him they bringe
That fayrest Dooth and oftest take the ringe.

For at the end of this smooth leveld liste,
Thear stood a poste, with lively coollours painted;
Wherat did hange a ringe (that many myst)
Of silver plate, yet often tymes was taynted:
And when they runne they guide their launces head,
As yf a ladyes hand hir neeld should thread.

To this faire troope thear did him selfe addresse
(What gallant cheere) a lovely springhald knight.
A Prince they said he was, and seemd no lesse
By his brave trayne, his Turkey horse milk white
He voltes, whose furniture besets with stone
Reflected rayes as Phebus on it shone.

His owne attire was of carnation hue,
With Orient pearles embrodred like a frett;
About his necke of silke a ribbon blewe,
Whear hangs a Brorge with diamonds besett:
His spurr gold-hatcht, his buskynes Spanish-white
His best legg garbed, as St. Georges knight.

And yet all this his byrth no whist bewrayes,
But that which on his browne-curld locks he wore
Of Roses read and white two wreathed sprayes,
(Types of the crowne-competitors of yore)
And both of these he had together twynde:
Because in hym both titles were combynde.

This made him knowne great Britaines Prince to bee
A right Plantagynet of Royal race:
And by each on saluted so was hee,
Who greatlie joyed to see hym in that place.
Then they him prayed in this to lead the Daunce
At whose request hee fairely tooke his launce.

Thrice did he runne (for so with courses three
Each knight ystynted was his turne to have)
And thrise together on steel poynted tree
He takes the ringe with grace and caryage brave:
But when that he had runne his latest bout
The hatts flewe in the aire with joyus shout.

In this araye the rest by turnes did runne:
Some myst, some taynt, and some the ringe did take
But none performed at all as he had doone
Therefore (as due) they all consent to make
Him offer of their glorious garlands prize,
Which was presented thus in statlie wise.

Betwixt two gallant Ladyes he was ledd
Unto a goodlie Arbor standinge nye:
The Herraulds (as they wont) his titles read,
The Trumpets sound as they would teare the skye.
Then in a chayre of state they did him sett,
Whilst divers other dames the garland sett.

Which on a tyss'd cushen was ybore
By on of them coverd with tynssell vayle,
Two other Ladies usherd it before,
And said to him, great Prince all health, all haile.
This garland wee about your arme must place,
Which he receaves with lovely corteous grace.

This done into a larger Roome they passe,
Wheare was to see a sumptious banquett dyght;
Sweete mellodie of sundry kindes there was,
And by each dame was plast a gallant knight.
So past the tyme tyll nyght cald all away,
To fitt them selves for the next Martiall day.

The worlds faire rowling eye withdrew his beames,
And (postinge towards Thetis purple bedd)
His steedes he watters in the western streames,
And in the ocean dippes his gold-beamd head,
Then sadd nights shade lends to the worldlings rest,
And beasts and birds wear stronded in theyr nest.

Morpheus now in soft silk fillets byndes
The active humours of these martiall knights:
But Brittains Prince his bead all restles findes,
Ideas strange in dreames afflyct his spryghgts,
His squires in his Pavilyon that did lye
Did heare him often rouse, and talke full hie.

Wherewith on squire (more wakefull then the rest)
Forsakes hys bead, and bends a listeninge eare:
But all was husht, then he him selfe addrest
Into the open field, where Cinthya cleare
A rainbowe framed coullord like and blood,
Archinge the aire where this Pavilyon stood,

In then he comes till night was overpast
And towards dawne to rest the Prince enclynes;
But when the sunn his beames abroad had cast,
And glistering starres their place to him resigned,
The trumpetts, fiffes, and drumes such clamoring keepe,
That then the season serve'd not for to sleepe.

Each knight takes warninge of his taske in hand,
And so prepares to fitt him for the feild:
Wheras the Brittayne Prince with him selfe scand
What it might be, that he in dreames beheald;
And whilst he trimes him selfe in his atyres,
His dreame he tells to his attendant squires.

This night (quoth hee) me seemed in my dreame,
A grave old sire before me stood upright,
And by the hand did lead me to the streame,
(That Poets faigne so blacke) and Stixe it hyght
Where Charon in his barge us safe did guyde
Unto the bancke uppon the other side.

There tooke wee land in the Elizian fields,
Whose pleasure, beautie, and delightfull aire
Was more than Natures force or vertue yealds
So sweet, so fruytfull, and so floweringe faire.
Amidst whose pleasant groves there rominge playes
Those heros so renowned in other dayes.

But all I saw my tongue cannot reporte:
The sweet-mellodious birds in flockes that singe,
The murmuringe brookes ytunde to theyr consorte,
The bloominge greeneleave trees that alwayes springe,
The sunshine dayes never cutt of by nighte,
The blessed soules that live still in delighte.

Ravisht with sweet contentment of this place:
(Now quoth my guide) thinke you your labour lost?
Ah no, quoth I, it is the highest grace,
That ever I receaved, and likes me moste.
Why then (quoth hee) with speede prepare thy mynd;
For to this place the heavens have thee designed.

Hearwith I wakt raysing my selfe upright,
And doubtfull stood weare this a dreame or no:
But theren shall the horrours of this night,
(That toste my troubled sences to and fro)
Came to my mynd but this sweete dreame was last,
Which made amends for those vexations past.

Dread Lord (quoth on of his most loyall squyers)
Reck not of dreames, that are but fancyes vayne,
Proceedinge of those vapours that aspieres
From ill digestion, that offends the brayne,
Or from the ill affected humord meate,
Which too much dryes, or moysts our vitall heatt.

Or from those fancies which wee have conceaved
In memorye, when wee have past the tyme:
Wherof (when deepe impression is receav'd)
They flutter in our thoughts, like birds in lyme:
Stirringe upp strange Chymeras in our mynds,
Whose true existence reason never fynds.

But yet I thus in Poesie have read,
That Somnus hath two Archytecturd gates
To his dare cell, where he in heben bedd
Snorteth securlie free from care or fates:
One of the which is cleare transparent horne
To ther Ivorye such as the gasinge morne

Hath to hir cabynet, now these that passe
By the hornye entrance, to theire nightlie rest
Doe ofte behoulde (as in a lookinge glasse)
Truths true Idea with hir naked brest:
But those that by the tother enter in,
To harpe on fancyes figures never lynn.

Now all the Poets this waye have ygonn
To theyr repose, wherfore wee may conclude
The cheefest theames that they doe discant on
Are but dull dreames that sences do delude.
Wee neede not therefore creditt what they say:
Because the yvorye passage was theire way.

Hee heareinge this makes answere to his squire:
I thinke so too, and as for Poetrye
(Sith the best Poet is but the best lyer)
Their fictions I reck not, and do agree
With you, that dreaminge fancyes are no more
Then descants on our deedes the day before.

To this discourse a grave bold knight replyes:
My lord what needes in this such tyme be spent?
Synce all dreames are but types of truhes or lies
If lyes:  nought worth:  and truthes who can prevent?
Thinges present and things past, wee cann discearne
Futures are known but to the eie Etearne.

Then leave wee such to his empyringe wyll,
And ceasse to search the secreets of his hests
Fitter it is to bend our humane skill
To gayne his grace, by our devoute requests:
Wherby wee may in all, have him our guide;
And God with us, what care wee what betide.

To this the Squire his speache doth interpose,
That over night the raynebow had yseen
At which relation much dispute arose,
For some the same as Omynous did ween:
But yet the Prince thereof accompted light,
And in that sence there speakes an other knight.

I doe not make profession of arte,
Nor yet presume of things to know the cause:
My selfe and studie is bequeathed to Marte:
And yet my mynd no fancyes overawes.
For this I knowe, the Raynbowe, as a signe,
To comfort man, was gevne by grace devine.

And therfore I cann no construction make
That any Raynbowe should presage our bale,
Thats scene, when daylight dooth our world forsake
More then by day; tis but an old wives tale
As well might wee thinke straunge a starr by daye
Because by night, they must themselves display.

But from things rare constructions straunge arise
And yet those sights (that seild with us are seene)
Are frequentlie beheld with forrayne eyes,
In other clymats, wheare my self have beene.
The westerne Indyes (I cann trulie say)
By night hath Raynbowes, as wee have by day.

Hearewith a lively page (whose hart was sett
Uppon the feild, and martiall sports to come)
Came runninge in, and said you all forgett,
That warneinge twise is given, by trump and drum.
You may doe well to hast the Prince away;
Least brave exployts be hindred by delay.

Which by the Prince oreherde, he smilinge said
This boye thinks longe to see these sportes in hand
And fitt it is our standard weare disylayed;
To give our trayne thereby to understand
That they be heere against the hower of prime,
Come lett us arme and loose no longer tyme.

Then foorth they bringe all peeces for the feild:
Which he putts on with much facylitie,
Stretchinge him selfe, the paise of them to weyld
He stirres and leapes with great agillytie:
And by the tyme he was at all poynts armed,
About his tent his men and horses swarmed.

Then forth he comes (like Phebus in the morne
When gazinge from the windowes of the east)
And as his beames dooth hills and dales adorne:
So doth this Prince the eyes of gazers feast
To see his equipage, and statlie porte,
Gracinge him selfe in right heroyck sorte.

For on his Iron Armour (silver hatcht,
Shininge as though it dared the sunn beames)
Athwart his neck with golden buckle latcht
A Bawbrick hung casting foorth fiery gleames
Of pretious stones, whear of in it was store
And therein was his gold hilt faulchion bore.

A triple plume upon his head did wave,
Impalled with a glorious Princlie crowne,
Which seemed as it the winges of fame would brave
And straine hir trumpe with noates of high renowne.
His pircinge launce uppon his thigh did rest,
St. George his cross enameld on his brest.

His tissude lase of neldworke wrought, like frost
Was of a deepe incarnate Tyrian die,
Uppon whose border richlie was imbost
(With curious art) the worlds faire shininge eye:
Wheare rubies, diamonds, and pearles did strive
Whether should others lustre most deprive.

Himselfe he mounts uppon a browne-bay steede
Within whose front ablasinge comets shynde,
Of corage fierc right of the Naples breede
And of the lostye crested coursers kinde.
The ground with hoofe for prid he beats and stamps,
Whilst on his masteringe bitt he fomes and thamps

Caparysound he was, as rich as faire,
Sutinge the base, that his great maister bore:
His plumed shaffron glistred in the ayre,
And (toucht with spurr) doth bound, doth bray, and snoare.
This Prince (so armde and mounted as hee was)
The old worlds Palladynes seem'd to surpase.

He that the great Macedon cann concaipte,
Taminge with bytt his prid swolne Bucephale
Or Scipio Affrycanne, in his hoaps haight,
Flaminge in armes before Carthages wall;
Let him, that so admyres the former age,
This woorthye see, in his Marts equipage.

This Prince, that Venus fround to give to Marte:
This Prince, that Mars had mand; not tyme nor yeares:
This Prince, that forward tyme had grac'd with arte:
This Prince, in whom the quyntysence apeeres
Of arte, of Marte, of Venus, and of tyme.
For such was he and more in early prime.

But as a flourisht prologue to a sceane;
A flash of lightninge, to a thunderbolt:
A touchole moment-flame, when on doth meane
(With cannons rage) to batter downe a holt:
So his abillyments, and splendant weedes,
Weare but as ushers to his glorious deedes.

And as wee see (with show and statlie gate)
Junos prowd bird (with purple guilded breast)
Hir burnisht neck, and heade dooth elevate,
With spangled spriggs (streaminge uppon hir crest)
All soodaynelie hir Argus traine displayes,
And halo-like about hir selfe convayes

Hir glorious hemyspheare, studded like starres:
So this brave of springe, of old Brutus lyne,
(Advancinge forward to those frendly warres)
Most bright, and breeme in every eye did shine.
When soodenlie about him cyrklinge swarmes
His steele clad squyres, and glyttering men at armes.

Thus martcht he forth unto the place preparde
For publique triall of these martiall feats
Wheare mett him manny a knight, that doeing darde:
Whose manly harts both love, and glory heates.
And on of them (more gallant than the rest)
Towards the Bryttayne Prince himself addrest.

And him salutinge faire this speech begunn,
Brave Prince, afforde this honor to a knight,
Three courses for your Mistris sake to rune:
And then three Turnaments, with faulchons bright:
And he of us that best him selfe dooth quyte,
His be all favour in his ladies sight.

And his to boote the glorye of the daye.
Wheareto the Prince (haveinge that he desired)
Mildlie replied: &mdash; worthie by your araye,
I will assent to that you have required,
With this condicion, that you will agree
Unto a motion, fittinge chyvalrye.

And that is this; he of us too that shall
(By manlie prowes, or true martiall slight)
Be over commen by his corryvall,
On bended knee shall give in publyque sight
The plume that he doth weare from of his crest,
As Trophe where the victory doth rest.

To this the knight assents, and takes his ground.
The like doth Brittaynes Prince, with launce on thigh,
And both these champions (at the Trumpetts sound)
With fearce incounter doe together flye.
Who both there aymes, so right at other bendes,
That boath there launces into shiveres rendes.

At the next course the Princlie answeringe knight
(With steadie hand) dyrects his Lannces poynt
Just wheare the challenger did take his sight:
And of his bever hitts so full the Joynte,
That (with the counter boofe well nye oreborne)
Parte of his helmets was ycrusht and torne.

Yet no disasters cann true curage quayle,
He armes a new, and takes againe his launce.
But what cann strength, or velour, ought avayle
To help the man thats destynde to mischaunce.
For though this knight his utmost force aplyes
Yet (to his losse) a hotespurr match he tryes.

For when againe, at the third course they mett
In full confront, and with amayne carier
They doo each other then, right roughly greete:
Whilst the triumphant trumpett sounding cleare
Hyr latest charge, through hir Meandry throat
Sings to his challenger a dismall noate.

For our brave Brittayn had ygott a launce
(Of purpose framed of tough graind grounded ash)
Whose sharpe steele poynt would neyther yeld nor glance
Which lends the other such a boysterous dash
Full on his throot (and counter boofe with all)
That flounderynge under him his horse did fall.

And as you see a statlie battlement
(Graceinge a loftye toure of squared stone)
By on firce shott, thats from a cannon sent
Cum totteringe downe, in heapes all overthrown
So fell this knight:  whose fall cast such a sheene,
As he an other Phaeton had beene.

The Brittish vanquisher (thus haveinge doonn)
Dismounteth from his Pegas-hoofed steed.
But vaunts no whist, that he the day had woone,
Nor braves his foe, but used this modest reede.
Unsure he stands, that leaves to fortunes care
To dought and not to dread is well to dare.

But oh the vanquished stands all amorte
As haveing lost the honor and the day:
Distasted much to think, that fames reporte
To every eare will his disgrace displaye.
But that which makes him most to greeve and fume:
Is now with homage to give upp his plume.

Yet was it doone right as the herraulds bydd,
Who likewise doe demande their forfait due:
To wytt the furnisht horse whearon he rydd,
And his one gallant Armes; or ells (in lue
Of them) to give the herraulds recompence,
Wheare with a cloud of passion dymd his sence.

So must wee leave him in his vexed moode,
Disabled now to act his turnament.
And eye our Britton (as he victor stoode)
Adjudged of all for Armes the ornament,
But he retyres, and doth him selfe provide
In Turney and at Barryers to be bide.

Meene while the course of field was still maintaind
By divers others, that for honor sought
Wheare manny a on both grace and glory gaind,
And manny more theire corage sould for nought.
For whearas Mars his Tennys balls doth tosse
No man cann wynne but by an others losse.

There was to see such active chevalrye,
Which whoe so would in full fraught periods wrytt
Hee should unbowell all old soldiarye
(For proper tearmes) their stances to endytt
Wee leave them therefore to your best concaite
For now the chaunting trumpet sounds retraite.

And every on his courses three had runn.
Whearin the honor of the cheefest prise
Was to be geven to him, that best had doonn,
By Censure of the revrent Judges eyes
Who all consent this censure to sett downe
The Brittayne Prince had woone the laurell-crowne.

And these words weare with trumpetts sound proclaymd
And so aloude pronounc't by herraulds voyce;
The marke (wherat, so many worthies aymde)
Was hitt by Brittaynes Prince in armes most choise.
Wherat through out the fielde aloud they shright
Faire fall that lovely lord St. Georges Knight.

Then to the Turnament they all prepared,
And fitt them selves with there steeledged blads
Wheare manny a sharpe encounter was y sharde,
And with such force each on his foe invads:
That you would thinke deepe mallyce did them straine,
When as they sought, but love and glories gaine.

Such is the force of glory, and of love,
When they take place in valorous young hartes.
All due respects those passions doe remove:
And frendlie mynds to hatefull tearmes converts
True it is said, scepters no kyndred knowes
And lovers lawes recks frends no more than foes.

So all thus fight, and bitterlie contest
With frendlie hartes, although with armed hands.
And here the Brittayne Prince (amongst the rest)
Singles on out, who on such proud tearmes stands.
That on his breast this Mott had writ in golde;
Without Compare; my swoord shall that uphould.

This bravinge woord much daringe did envyte,
And manny did his haught disdaine deryde;
For singularity begotte dispight.
Therefore our Prince (to chastice pampred pride)
Cales to this Knight and hailes him with his sword,
And bidds him (if he dare) make good his word.

Wheare with the Knight inragd on him doth runn,
And with the like the Prince doth him requite.
Betwixt them was so hott a fraye begunn,
That from ther swoords and helmes flew sparkles bright,
As thick as if too Smiths together smott
Uppon theire anvile Iron barres redd hott.

And as you see twixt too cockes of the game
(Through like disdayne) like enmytie express:
Knowinge no other cause then to enflame,
With pearceinge spurres to wound each others brest,
And die theire plumes so deepe in others goore,
Tyll by ons death the battayle leastes no more.

So mought you see these hottspurs rive and rend
Each others glitteringe armes with balefull blowes,
But of the combat what would be the end:
All aegerlie expect, but no man knowes.
For yet the fight in equall ballance stood,
And both of them had drawne each others blood.

Untill the Prince with quick and watchfull eye
(As on that did in horsmanshipp excell)
A great advantage, offred dooth asspie
By him, that could not use his horse so well.
For he alofte dooth on his styrrope stand,
Thereby to give more vigor to his hand.

Whereat the Britton to him pressed nye,
And (with the shoulder of his ready horse)
Dooth under-myne this standinge gallants thigh
And pusheth on with so great speed and force;
That he dooth over-turne him cleane with all:
And therewith said, So prid will have a fall.

Now lyes Without Compare halfe on the ground
Whilst on foote faste doth in the styrrop sticke.
The raines lett loose his steed doth flinge and bound
Dragginge his master thorough thinn and thicket
Whearewith the whole assembly stand at gaze,
Whilst this proud Knight laye in a deadlie maze.

This accident the Turnament doth end
For evry Knight in scabbard sheathes his blade,
And to this foyled man theyre help doe lend
(Now calmd like wind that earst a blustering mad)
His eyes weare sett and sencelesse like a stone
Doubted for dead but that he fetcht a groane.

This moved ruth in all the standers by
And pittye did the Prince impassionate
Untill att last they further did descry
From wheare he was, and what was his estate.
Which knowne, all cryde, no better mought befall
Such hethownd Turkes and Mahometans all.

For such was he a native Asiann &mdash; borne
And Prince of Antioch he had to name
A prowd swolne harte, that Christians held in scorne
But private came to this Olympian game
Because he would know all and not be knowne.
Yet by this chance his name abroad was blowne.

For as him selfe and all the traine he hadd
Weare metamorphosd from there own attyres
And right like Christian soldiers armed and cladd
So too of them Baptisme with zeale desires
As convertites that long at Turcisme yearn'd
And from these too his race and name was learnd.

Thus lyes he lowe that latelie was so stout
Whom happie hand of vertue overthrew
So fortune doth these over-darers flout.
But what became of him aske them that know.
The Prince I weete (by this heroyck deed)
Gaynd publique grace, and glory for his meed.

Heere with abruptlie brake the Turnament
(As formerlie was said) and now with all
These honors Portraytures againe weare bent,
To trye to whom the Barriers pryse should fall.
Preparinge now the swoord, and pike to weird,
That is esteemed the honour of the feild.

There might you see twelve Pyramids of fame
Uppon whose silver armes the sunn-beames danct
Tavolto's as in statlie garbe they came
Unto the Barre:  wheare first with pikes they glanct
At one an other (as in halves they stood)
With lustie hand, and fame-enflamed blood.

So brake they each theire pikes at others brest
Faster than Pages could give new supplie,
Who for that very purpose weare addrest
(In watchfull rediness) to stand them by.
And having showerd all their brandling pikes
With well forg'd Bilbo's th' one the other strikes.

And as you would two sturdy clownes suppose
Threshinge the sheefe with come-out-singling flayle
Such might you see theire Vulcane-dinging blowes,
As though theire armes weare never framed to fayle
And thence you might the quicke bright sparkes descry
As thicke as graines from threshed sheaves do flye.

But mongst the rest our North-bred-starre did lend
So smart a blow to him he did assayle,
As had not one experienced martiall kend
How the disjoynted powldron gan to fayle
And thereupon did quicklie hoyse the barre
The second stroake had entred too too farre.

Now when the strife-appeasinge barre was drawne,
And nights last period closd these manlie games
Another strife (as first I said) gan dawne
Amongst the three high mynded heavenlie dames
To whom this princlie Phoenix did belonge,
That peerelesse there did stand the peeres among.

Bellona bid them eye the plumy crest,
That on his helmet mooved with the ayre
In that hie motion, and in proud unrest,
Whether he satt, or stood, or marched faire.
And bidds them knowe that plume her favor was
When he from childish playes to armes did passe.

Nay then (quoth Pallas) sister stay awhile:
He weares my favour too:  the Stemme of yours.
Whearat Majestick Juno so did smile,
As power-atractive beutyes on theire woers.
And thus she said, ladyes you both shall see
That both your favours but his followers bee.

You thought (because you gave to him the feather)
He had beene yours with outen more adoe.
And you Mynerva are come flauntinge hether
Because the quills you gave him:  but you two,
Mistake your marke:  tis not by quills nor feathers,
Whearwith this Prince his knightlie trophees gathers.

Twas I gave him that Poictiers-famed crowne,
Wherin your favours stood as ornaments:
Twas I that from my spheare did send him downe
That majestie, which in his Tournaments
Did still appeare.  Twas I that so did grace
His manly actions, with heroicke face.

Twas I that made him noted bove the rest,
When first in feild he came for exercise;
Twas I that caus'd his browes to be addrest
With rosy wreaths, and garlands of the prize:
Twas I and none but I that made him such,
Therefore presume not you my clayme to such.

Madam quoth sterne Bellona you forgett
Your selfe in wholy clayminge him your owne.
For who wast that such manly courage sett
In his undaunted brest?  Am I not knowne
To be the deitie that armes doth grace?
And did not he my stratagems embrace?

Was I not shee that taught him how to weeld
His pike, his sword, and his steel-poynted launce?
Was I not shee that traind him to the feild,
And taught him teach his head-strong couser prance?
And so conclude, was I not onely shee,
That breath'd in him the spright of chevalry?
Why doe you then (as Esops lion did,
When all the beastes in takinge of the harte
Had sweat, in strict commanding accents bidd
Them to resign to him each smallest part
So challenge to your selfe, what's myne of due
As onelie empresse of the Martiall crue?

The Queene of kingdomes would have mad replye,
But that Joves brayn-borne daughter tooke her tyme:
And in a close-coucht stile gan say:  twas I,
That did inspire him, in his teeming prime
With manny secrets of entreasur'd skill,
From whom so much cause-soundinge art did still

That all could say, that heard him but discourse,
He was true of-spring of that majesty
Whose learned profoundnes makes so sweet a sourse,
As Aganippes river, that runnes by
The muses forked cloud-surmounting hill,
And with Ambrosean streames her bankes doth fill.

And as for you, although you did cutt off
My first discourse, with your emperious chatt:
And wag'd your head with such a skornfull scoffe
That all the place did shake wheareas you satt:
Yet know you Juno (though you be my Queene)
That (had not this my disciplininge beene.)

He might have stuffed up a chayre of state
And on his head have worne a diadem,
He might have Jetted with affected gate,
And with a Scepter over-aw'd a Reame:
And so a Princes onlie out-sid be,
But for the in-sid he must have from me.

Juno hereat was heard to be so loud,
As Jove is when the puny Gods displease him:
And such a frowne her angry face did cloud,
As his when sine-sick soules cannot apease him.
Her breath was lightninge, and her words were thunder,
And swore by Stix that she would keep them under.

Why minkes (quoth she) how durst you be so bold,
To give such taunting language to your Queene?
As though my heasts by you should be contrould.
I vowe (as I am Juno ile be seene)
To be the empresse of your lesser howers
That raigne in subject homage owing bowers.

Bellona interpos'd:  It is not just
(Madam) that you require:  for if you take
On you, what doth belong to us, you must
Controll your husband Jove, that us did make
Powerfull, in that inferior power that wee
Enjoye and hold from him that all doth see.

Whilest these two stood on tearmes of such despight,
Minervor went to fetch her quilles away:
As not enduringe they should grace that wight,
That Juno claymed her owne; nor yet to stay,
And beare those feathers that Bellona gave,
So every one against each other strave.

And as she went the murtheringe destiny
(With naked wreasts distained all with gore)
She mett, yclad in robes of ruthfull die,
And in her hand the fatall knife she bore,
That newly had ycutt some vitall thread:
For the steele-blade seem'd to her that it blead.

Atrops (quoth shee) what act hast thou beene dooinge?
That thus in blood-drentch't habite thou art dight,
It seems to me, that thou hast beene undoinge
The life-entwistinge thread of some brave Knight,
That did resort to this Olympian game,
To try his valour and to purchase fame.

Tis true Mynerva (quoth that ruthlesse hagge)
This knife hath broacht the sweet-life-fordinge blood
Of that yonge Prince, of whom you so much bragge
To be your favorite, and Juno stood
So much uppon, as though no hand but hers,
The healme of this inferior center steares.

Aye me then (quoth Minerva) is it hee?
And with that word she fetcht so faint a breath,
That (if a mortall wight she had y bee)
She there had fallen dead upon the earth.
For arts grew fainte when this sweet Prince was dead,
That in his life tyme them with bountie fedd.

Is't he she said; O most unhappy strife,
That twixt us deityes did earst beginne!
Wee were the cause that thou didst end his life:
For each of us did strive him all to wynne.
And therefore Jove (with strife-appeasing power)
Did take him from us three to his high bower.

And thus in mournfull wise she back retyr'd
To Juno, and Bellona, whom she found
With hate-engendring fury so much fir'd
That their loud words did eccho from the ground.
To whom shee sayes; this strife may well be left,
For (wo is me) the cause thereof is reft.

He's reft:  ah dismall word!  that weight is gon,
That you, and I, and you so much have grac't
With our rich favours, that in him alone
The seedes of our heaven-cloystered powers were plac't
For Atrops hath ycutt that silver twyne,
Which to adorne wee three did so combyne.

But yet, O yet the faulte was in us three;
That this fell murtheresse did end his lyfe.
For when cellestiall powers so disagree,
The fates do streight take vauntage of our strife.
Nought now remaineth of us to be done;
But that wee all resume our proper boone.

Whearat the angry Goddesses did vayle
Their (earst enflamed now enpaled) looke
With sable cloud as though they vow'd to wayle
This Princes losse, whom death untymely tooke.
And forth they went their favours to retake:
Whearewith to rayse up Trophees for his sake.

And as they went, they chaunct to meete againe
The horrid hagge (still stain'd with purple gore)
Just at that place (on this Olympian plaine)
Wheare sad Minerva mett with her before.
To whom the Queene of Majesty so spake,
As would have made a mortall inly quake.

Envious malignant, foul-fac't destiny,
Deserts-destractres, wrinkle-fronted hagge
Lethe bred monster, that makest worth to die
Pluto's choise handmayd, whose to choppes doe flagg.
Like quagg-myres, blear-eyed, haire-beknotted fury,
That our best favourite in Earth doest bury.

What was the cause that thou (in spite of us)
Didst wreake thy malice on our choise delight?
And (in the midst of tryumph) reft him thus,
When he our gloryes graces should have dight?
Thou Lerna-gendred Hydra, deathes deepe grave
Envyes-disgorged brats, that poyson gave

To our Idea, natures quintessence,
The Gods Epitome, Fames Pyramis,
The all of Art, and Armes, the all of sence
The all of Glorye, and of worldlie blisse,
For blisse, and glory, arms, arts, Fame and all,
Fell, when this Pyramid did take his fall.

What was there none, but he could satisfie
Thy gulphous appetite?  were there no men
In discontent that oft desired to die?
None that by age weare infants wax't agen?
No Cowards, canker-wormes of common-weale
With whom in Justice, thus thou oughtst to deale?

Yes Madam (quoth the hagge) tis true you say:
And (mought I have my will) it shold be so
But theres a Supreme power, whom wee obey:
Besides whose sacred heastes wee dare not go.
It was ordayn'd that I shold do the deede.
Joves ordinance delayed doth vengeance breed.

Tis not for us with him to hold dispute
His doomes are lawes, his heastes without controll.
Wee dare not question whither they do sute
With reason, who all reason doth enroll
Within his breast, we are but Instruments,
That some doe please, and others discontents.

But (madam) would you lay aside your wrath,
And heare me speake with an impartiall eare:
You should perceave, that by his death he hath
Obtain'd a crowne, devoyd of jealous feare:
More rich, more firme, and farre more glorious,
Then that you gave, though that were pretious.

And though it seeme he left the earth too soone;
Yet (if unprejudiciall reason scanne
The circumstance) It will be thought a boone
Greater then your thrice-greatning favours can
Bestow on him; from hight of earthlie grace,
To be a child adopt of heavenly race.

For mortalls manny tymes are much deceaved
In that, which to them selves they doe propose:
And soonest are of those high hopes bereaved
Whearin they most assurance doo repose.
That oft dislikes that manny hold most deare:
And that turnes to content they most did feare.

The crowne he had, was but a type of care:
The crowne he hath is joyes eternall scale:
That was but fleetinge, as earths gloryes are:
This settles him in heavens aye-lasting weale:
That was but earthly subject still to fate:
This heavenlie keepes him still in stedfast state.

And like some viscous-matterd blazing starre
Which (for a tyme) with beames out braves the sunne,
And casteth out her streaming tayle as farre,
As Phebus when his day course is begunn:
But when (by whirlinge often tymes about)
Her stuffe is spent, her light is streight put out.

So that earthes crowne, which he in tyme mought weare,
(Adorned with pearles and shinynge christalites)
Mought for a tyme such streaming blazes beare
As this great meteor amongst lesser lightes
But when his dayes with kingdomes cares are spent
His pompe is yon, none knoweth wheare it went.

Now this he now enjoyes sends forth such rayes:
As that the worldes all-seeinge eye doth weare.
But with this oddes; that tyme sunne-shyne decayes,
This aye shall beame in heavens immortall spheare,
This by tenn thousand tymes doth seate him higher:
Then Alexander had he his desire.

Besides, he left the earth when he was crown'd
With youth, with strength, with world applauding love,
With all the cheefest grace, that could be found
In natures sea-walld world, that could behove
Him in his enterprises:  so that he
Left it not baselie but with majestie.

He lyved not so to have his soule possest,
With manny yeares engendred spawne of sinne
He lyv'd not as some do that are opprest
With wanton thoughts:  but liv'd as he had beene
A Barracad against Cupido's darts
That seeld are shots in vayne at youthfull harts.

He liv'd not to be tainted with disgrace
As manny worthies did in dayes of yore
That after famous conquests dyed base
Nor felt the numming frosts of aged hoare.
He liv'd not to out live his natures force
But at his best his soule I did divorce.

But had he longer liv'd and monnarch beene
Of all the world tis but fates tennis-ball
That (with tymes racket) shall in tyme be scene
By banded force to ruins hazard fall.
And all that on it any way depend,
Shall on same way be sent to fatall end.

Tis but a lymme of old Confusions spawne
That by the Eternall's power (when tyme begunne)
Was from the teeming wombe of Chaos drawne
And moulded like a bowle, thats' apt to runne
In topsie turvye motion; for to shew
There is no constancye in things below.

Tis but polluting-pitch that doth defile
The soule:  tis but a snare that doth enthrall:
Tis nought but clammy lyme, that doth beguile
The silly birds:  a nett that tangles all,
For all are tangeld, caught, enthralled, beguild;
And by this nett, snare, lyme, and pitch defiled.

Tis all what Imperfection is, and nought
That any way can give the least content
Unto the Immortall Soules aspiring thought
That from the breath of God was hither sent,
Therefore the best are soonest reft away
From out this daylesse night, to nightless day.

The best are in best tyme, by favour reft
From out this pilgrimage of teares to joy:
The worst in this worst world are longer left,
That just revenge may them at length distroye
From of the earth, as loathing any more
To beare the weight of sinne she did before.

And had I so much frinded Hanniball,
(That lyghtning flash that blasted Romane pride)
When he made Paulus and Sempronious fall
And Cannas feild with so much blood had dyed
And Italy bestrow'd with Legions scalpes
After that he had pearc't the cloud-browd Alpes.

Had I, I say, this woorthy so much frinded
As with this knife to period those his actes:
Marcellus never had at Nola dymmed
With overthrow his glory flamed factes:
Nor had he satt on ruin'd Carthage wall
Wailinge his sadd mishapp and countryes fall.

Or had I taken Scipio in his pryme
When he had brought Romes rivall on her knees
He had not then beene taxt with odious cryme,
Suggested by base envi's stinging bees.
Which made him say ungratefull country myne
The bones of Africane thou shalt not shrine.

Or had I parted Nero's twyne in twayne,
In his Quinquennium:  when the confluence
Of Prince-beseeminge vertues grac't his raigne,
And heard possession of his purer sence:
He never had a hell-hatch't monster beene
Accounted, for his nature-thwartinge sinne.

He had not liv'd to be the scorne of men,
The scourge of Rome, the worlds' enflamed brand
He had not beene the first of all the tenn
That tortor'd those that for the truth did stand
He had not had the divells imagery
Stampt in his soule, with scale of tyrannye.

Now madam had this Brittane so longe liv'd
As to be sole commander of this Ile;
Who knowes not that he soone mought be deprived
Of these his vertues, and his fame defile,
With pride with cowardice with blasphemy
With prodigale-will-edged tyranny?

Who knows not, that most kings have on eare ope
To state subverting buzze of flattery
Which (by too often clawing) maketh scope
For all her harpie-ravening company?
That playneth courts with faithlesse faction,
And mightie kingdomes with exaction.

Who knowes not, that in tyme he might infect
His virgin soule with wanton-fronted sinne,
And God and Nature carelesly neglect
To be his governours, as they had beene:
For Soveraigne power disposeth humaine blood
From good to ill, but seild from ill to good.

Therefore he was most happie, that he was
Taken in tyme (when twas best tyme to take
Him) from the sholders of this reekinge masse,
And from his tangling-bird-lyme-dawbed brake:
Happie I say he was, that was so soone,
Placed above earthes, planets changing moone.

Cease thy all ill-anticipatinge chatt
(Quoth Juno in an accent of out-rage)
Cease speake no more, thou Lerna-lept-out bratt,
Thinke'st thou if tyme had longer yeared his age
He should (as thou hast said in idle prate)
So much from former good degenerate?

Doe wee (think'st thou) chuse favorites belowe,
To be defiled with vices ouglie stayne?
The smoak-tand garments that hell doth bestow
On her attendants?  No; we still mayntayne
Our followers in vertuous lyvery,
Whose badges are Arts, armes, and majestie.

Those whom we love wee love unto the end;
And guid them allwayes in theire enterprise.
Wee doe them from infernall rage defend,
And from hell's foulnes, mask't in faire disguise
Our favourites are chang'd and altred still
From ill to good but not from good to ill.

Therefore twas thou alone that (in despite
Of our celestiall power) didst end his life
Twas thou that didst extinguish this faire light.
Twas thou that cutts't his thread with poysoned knife.
Therefore foule hagge fell fury hence avaunt,
And cease thy false Apology to chaunt.

Do thou thy worst henceforth we will prevent
The worst that thou canst do to crosse our wills.
The Hagge thus chok't to her darke harbour went;
But like a Crocadile falce teares distills.
Th' impassion'd deityes (when she was gon)
Consulted what they should resolve upon.

By this tyme fames report abroad had blowne.
The untymely death of this heroicke knight
Which was no sooner to the vulger knowne,
But strange it was to see the heavy plight
That over all the game-some feild was spred,
And nothinge heard but The brave Prince is dead.

Sorrow in playntes, in teares, in mourninge weeds,
Was Epilogue to all the royall sporte.
Now they recount, his late faire knightlie deeds,
His carriage debonair, his gracious port,
The myld aspect lodg'd in his manly brest,
His vertuous mynd, which honoured all the rest.

Alas say they, what would his fruite have beene,
Had he but liv'd to come to his ripe strength;
Since in his flower was such perfections seene,
Whose well shapt lymmes yett shott but up in length.
Oh nigard heavens!  why cald you back againe
This Planet fytt on happie men to raigne.

But that which so doth swallow up their sence,
Doth likewise plung old Bruttus ile in teares:
And forceth griefe to be at more expence
Of Sorrowes waves, to drowne her highest peares,
For when this heavye newes to Britayne came,
To name her plight my Muse did want a name.

My Muse did want her selfe my sence was nume,
My heart grew fainte, my quicker power grew slow
Myne eyes weare dimme, my tongue was taken dumbe,
My inke no longer from my penn would flowe,
For inke, tongue, eyes, power, hart, senc, muse, apawld,
Because thick, dumbe, dymme, slow faint, nume, and stald.

Contemplate but Troyes griefe when Hector fell;
And pensive Priamus and Hecuba;
Or lovelie Paris how his hart did swell;
Or the sadd teares of faire Polixena;
You may conceipt the woe of Troy novant,
Of James, Anne, Charles, Eliza for theire want.

New Troy, her Prince, James wayles his Hector heire;
Anne moanes the prime braunch of her owne selfe yon:
Charles mornes this losse, which he cannot repaire.
For what cann value deere affection
But faire Eliza (when she heard the newes)
Polixen like all comfort did refuse.

Of went her tyre with diamonds bespangl'd:
She spumes her christall mirror with her feet:
She teares those crisped lockes that sweetly dangl'd:
Her discontent beinge strengthned with regret.
She scornes those rich abillements, that dect
Her gracefull lymmes that earst gave such reflect.

As Cynthea, when she darts her silver beames
Upon the browe of Neptune in the night.
But greefe of greefes!  those passion strayned streames
(That drew a channell whenc she takes her flight)
Doth non plus me, theyre measure to discrive
In fittinge vearse, and manner to contryve.

But yet the words which dolefully she mutterd
Wringinge her hands and castinge up her eyes
In such confused characters were utterd,
As dolor doth that dieinge never dyes.
And thus she playnd (but death hath eares of stone
Else would have pitied this sweete virgins moane.)

Hensfoorth (quoth she) lett me no more behold
Pleasure on earth which is but false delight
A pill in Sugar, drosse guilt ore with gold,
Before a Tempest but a sunne-shine light,
But hony'd gall, but dead-sea-bank-bred fruite,
But Xerxes paynt, that birds for grapes repute.

No sleepe (the Harbinge of wearye weights)
Shall ceaze upon myne ey lids any more,
Nor any foode refresh my wasted sprights,
And faylinge powers to former strength restore.
For I by day will feed on heavy plight,
And spend with Philomele the long-some night.

So will I scorne my selfe whom nature made,
And in hir workmanshipp no comfort find:
For tis but fraile, and doth like shadowes fade,
So soone as on it blowes the blastinge wynde
Of spitefull death, that deemes all dates too longe;
Yet age to die is right:  but youth tis wronge.

Why fell he then amidst his floweringe race,
Whilst yet his bud was greene and fresh his rynde,
Whilst he exceld in every gifte and grace,
That is admired most in humane kinde.
Adorned with wisdom and such pieties
As made him mynion to the deities?

With whom he rests, and wheare I wish to bee:
That I might still enjoye his blessed sight.
Which said; such deadlie palenes you might see
Bedyunn that face that Princlie virgine light,
As (had not heaven be-pettied our late woes)
This passion would have quaild this Royall rose.

But plaintes and teares no white at all avayl'd.
His Genius now hath scaled eternity
For this brave blossom (that deaths frost hath quayld)
Was no fitt guest for fraile mortalitie
And these laments theire want of him exprest,
That findes no want of them wheare he doth rest.

Letts then retourne to these three deities,
Whom earst wee left in consultation,
What gracefull remedye they mought devise
To countervayle the scorne by Atrops don.
And hereupon this new dispute arose,
How they theire widdow gifts might best dispose.

Juno said, shee would have her crowne againe,
Whearewith to raise a Trophee for her knight
Then (quoth Minerva) ile likewise retayne
My learned quills his elegie to write.
Bellona said, in honor of this mann,
His plumes Ile grace, to weare them as my fanne.

This resolution beinge so sett downe:
All risinge from there seates te act the same;
Juno (that first made motion for her crowne)
Discreetlie said, my mynd misgyves some blame.
And therefore let us better yet advise:
For rash attempts disgrace an enterprise.

If I estrange this crowne from arts and armes:
And you the quills, should seperate from the feather:
The naked Crowne would be exposed to harmes:
And arts and armes would not combine together.
No lett us still our gifte entire retayne,
To grace there with a second Charlemayne.

For such a darlynge yet in store have I:
A hopefull plant of whom great store I make:
For whom with Jove my Creadit I will bye,
And him with teares implore that (for my sake)
This Hellish hagge may not with such despite,
Extinguish all my lampes of honours light.

To this they all doo willingly assent;
Extolling highlie Juno's providence.
Whear with likewise there testy fitts are spent,
And now they guard (with care and diligence)
The crowned plume, in faire Eliza's feild:
Untyll they give it him that shall it weild.

To this that Juno said Mynerva spake:
Let us then hast to heavens highest throane:
And at Joves feet our joynt petition make:
That he would take compassion of our moane:
And right this foule affront by Atrops don,
Which was approved and Juno thus begunn.

Great Monarch whence all greatness is derived,
Whose favours bless, whose frowne the world doth daunte
Voughtsafe thy sister, whom thy selfe hast wyv'd
And these two deityes, this boone to graunt
That Atrops may (by thy resistlesse law)
From crossinge our designs stand more in awe.

And that she may no more as late she did
In skorne of us, and of our gloryes grace,
Have any power to cut the vitall thread
Of our cheefe favoryts of Royall race:
Nor yet amids't there prime to short ther dayes
Whom wee have myrrors mad for virtue prayse.

But sith none doe return, whom fate hath refte,
And subjected to tyrannizinge death;
Oh graunt to Charles that here behind is lefte
A fire of life blowne with a Nestor breath:
For he alone it is (vouchsafe to know)
On whom these widdow gifts wee will bestow.

Juno (quoth Jove) although you be my wiffe,
And Sister, yet I must not so connive
To you in askinge short or longer life
For any wight:  for then I should deprive
My selfe of providence and constancye,
That tymed all from all eternitye.

I change not my unchangeable decree
For any Orisons that any make,
(Though offerd up on lowly bended knee)
I never alter aught for any's sake.
Deere Juno therefore sattisfie your mynd,
That my fore knowledge hath all fate confind.

That Prince that's latly dead, whom you do call
Your favorite; was myn:  and for that cause,
I tooke him from the earth, and from you all
By death, the Seargeant of my deathlesse lawes
I tooke him thence, to give him heere his meed,
For earthes bese pompe his vertue did exceed.

And as for Charlemayne your Minnion now,
For whom your gracefull guiftes you keepe in stoare.
I do no whit your liking disavowe.
My high decree determynd it before.
Whearat was heard a clapp of wintrs thunder,
Which old sawes say turnes to a summers woonder.
