Which of you Muses please
To shew your cunning so, as to teach me
To divide Love from Majesty,
Where they do make one body, as in these?
That, having laid aside
That greatness which must swell
Great Chronicles which that shall tell,
The lower titles, bridegroom and a bride,
May in this little volume yet reside;
And, leaving this day's triumph, I may praise
This night, for which this month doth give away two days.

Since in this happy night,
The same sheets may unite and wrap you two,
My sheets of paper think they do
Something like this if they your names unite:
Except an angel's hand
May only dare to strick
Elizabeth and Frederick
On the spheres' nine-string'd harp, which now doth stand
Tuned to their names, imposing a command
That I forbear that height:  yet I may praise
This night, for which this month doth give away two days.

O most mysterious night,
Which, by the setting of a sun and moon,
Art clearer than a day at noon:
How art thou happy by their sacred light!
Or what night is like thee?
For, though by nature thou
Art but a type of death, yet now
Th' art root of life and long posterity;
And honoured with such virginity
As that no other action so could praise
This night, which to this mouth doth recompense two days.

But though this night affords
Light enough many mysteries to see,
They must, as they which make them, be
Naked, and not apparelled in my words.
What shall my Muse do then?
Like an old echoing wall,
Some of those notes which spheres let fall
She may send back, that my imperfect pen
May give some pieces of their praise to men,
And, silence being disloyal, make them praise
This night, which to this month doth recompense two days.

Lift up thy modest head,
Great and fair bride; and as a well-taught soul
Calls not for Death, nor doth controul
Death when he comes, come you unto this bed.
Do not pursue nor fly.
Enter, for when these sheets.
Open, the book of fate thee meets.
Study't awhile alone.  But instantly
Comes he that shall reveal it sensibly,
And spend, in telling you what your fate says,
This night, which to this month supplies her two lost days,

And yon, brave Palatine,
That art the Destinies' great instrument,
For this important business sent;
Enter into possession of your mine.
Here you may fitly feign
These sheets to be a sea,
And you in it an argosy,
And she an island, whose discovery Spain
(Which seldom used to miss) hath sought in vain.
Here end thy voyage, then, and thereby praise
This night, which to this month supplies her two lost days.

This is perfection's mint,
Where the pure pliant gold and stamp must join,
And now must turn to useful coin,
And pleasure, which must take a sovereign print.
Here is no thought of shame;
This is perfection's bath,
Which all strength and all virtue hath;
This is perfection's sweet and sovereign balm,
Which can all wounds of stormy passions calm.
This being this night's force, who will not praise
This night, for which this year may spare a month of days!

Now like two half-spheres set
On a flat table, on these sheets they lie;
But grow a body perfectly,
As half-spheres make a globe by being met.
Still may you happy be,
So as you need not spend
So much as one wish to your end!
We'll wish and pray whilst you enjoy, and we
What length of life you wish shall plainly see
By your now length'ning out by sweet delays
This night, for which this year may spare a month of days.
