CUTTIE.  WILLY.

CUTTIE.
Willy well met, now whiles thy flockes do feed
So dangerlesse, and free from any feare;
Lay by thy Hooke, and take thy pleasant Reed,
And with thy melody reblesse mine eare;
Which (upon Lammas last) and on this plaine,
Thou plaidst so sweetly to thy skipping Traine.

WILLY.
I Cutty, then I plaid unto my sheepe
Notes apt for them, but farre unfit for thee:
How should my layes (alas) true measure keepe
With thy choyce eares, or make thee melodie:
For in thy straine thou do'st so farre exceede,
Thou canst not rellish such my homely Reede.

CUTTIE.
Thy nicenesse shewes thy cunning, nothing more.
Yet since thou seem'st so lowly in thy thought;
(Who in thy pastorall veine, and learned lore
Art so much prais'd; so farre and neere art sought.)
Lend me thine eares, and thou shalt heare me sing
In praise of Shepheards, and of thee their King.

My loved WILLY, if there be a Man
That never heard of a browne colour'd Swan;
Whose tender Pinions scarcely fledg'd in show
Could make his way with whitest Swans in Poe;
Or if there be among the Spawne of earth,
That thinkes so vilely of a shepheard's birth,
That though he tune his Reed in meanest key,
Yet in his braine holds not heaven, earth, and sea:
Then let him know, thou art that yong browne Swan,
That through the winding streames of Albion
Taking thy course dost seeme to make thy pace
With flockes full-plum'd equall in love and grace;
And thou art he (that though thy humble straines
Do move delight to those that love the plaines:)
Yet to thy selfe (as to thy sort) is given
A JACOBS staffe, to take the height of Heaven;
And with a naturall Cosmography,
To comprehend the earths rotunditie:
Besides the working plummet of thy braine,
Can sound the deepes and secrets of the maine:
For if the Shepheard a true figure be
Of Contemplation (as the learn'd agree)
Which in his seeming rest, doth (restlesse) move
About the center, and to Heav'n above;
And in his thought is onely bounded there,
See's Nature's chaine fastned to JOVES high Chaire,
Then thou (that art of PAN the sweetest Swaine
And farre transcending all his lowly traine)
In thy discoursive thought, do'st range as farre
Nor canst thou erre; led by thine owne faire starre.
Thought hath no prison and the minde is free
Under the greatest King and tyrannie.
Though low thou seem'st thy Genius mounts the Hill
Where heavenly Nectar doth from Jove distill;
Where Bayes still grows (by thunder not struck down)
The Victors-Garland and the Poets-Crowne,
And underneath the Horse-foote-fount doth flow,
Which gives Wit verdure, and makes learning grow.
To this faire Hill (from stormes and tempests free.)
Thou oft repair'st for Truthes discovery;
A prospect upon all times wandring mazes,
Displaying vanity; disclosing graces,
Nay in some cliffe it leades the eye beyond
The times horizon, stripping sea and land.
And farther (not obscurely) doth devine
All future times:  Heere do the Muses shine,
Heere dignity with safety do combine,
Pleasure with merite make a lovely twine.
Vitam vitatem they shall ever leade
That mount this hill and Learning's path do treade:
Beere admiration without enui's wonne,
All in the light, but in the heate sit none.
And to this Mount thou dost translate thine Essence
Although the plaines containe thy corporal presence,
Where though poore peoples misery thou shewe
That under griping Lords they undergoe,
And what content they (that doe lowest lye)
Receive from Good-men, that doe sit on hye.
And in each witty Ditty (that surpasses)
Dost (for thy love) make strife 'mongst Country-lasses
Yet in thy humble straine, Fame makes thee rise
And strikes thy mounting forehead 'gainst the skies
Renowned friend; what Trophe may I raise
To memorize thy name; would I could praise
In any meane) thy worth; strike envy dumbe,
But I dye heere; thou liv'st in time to come;
States have their Period statues lost with rust:
Soules to Elizium, Nature yields to dust,
All monuments of Armes and Power decay,
But that which lives to an Eternall day,
Letters preserve; Nay Gods, with mortall men
Do simpathize by vertue of the penne.
And so shalt thou:  sweete Willy then proceede
And in eternall merite fame thy Reede.
PAN to thy fleeced numbers give increase
And Pales to thy love-thoughts give true peace
Let faire Feronia (Goddesse of the woods)
Preserve thy yong Plants multiply thy buds.
And whiles thy Rams do Tup, thy Ewes do twyn
Do thou in peacefull shade (from men's rude dyn)
Adde Pinyons to thy Fame:  whose active wit
With Hermes winged cap doth suite most fit.
