THE PASTORAL.
In Arcadie, a place of great renowne
Famous for flowery pastures, there remaind
A youthfull shepherd, who upon the down,
Hight Idas plaine, such honour had obtained
Amongst all shepheards by his trophies gaind,
And worthie feates in everie Maygame showen
That his atchievements were so glorious growen,
As he the flower of shepheards still was nam'd
Not of that honour might he be asham'd,
For many shepheards then there were, whose grace
In active feats put Heroes out of place.

Tmolus was one of such a noble spirit
Adornd with beautie and perfection too,
That in all actions he the wreath did merit
Decking with laurell his victorious brow.
Was praisd of all, yet never would he heare it,
Nor of vaine glorie least appearance show:
Such store of graces from his minde did flow;
Of able bodie, and of pregnant wit,
That even these times have much admired it:
For manie laies would Tmolus oftimes make
In divine measures for Amyclas sake.

Next him was Thyrsus of a comely hew
A pure complexion, and a pleasant grace,
Who to his friend prov'd faithfull still and true.
With painted smile nere would he soile his face:
For he descended from a noble race,
As his admired vertues still did shew:
For fame and honour ever did revew,
The spacious mansions of this shepheards place
Walking with honour in his parents trace,
Such was this Thyrsus (Thyrsus was his name)
Nor of that title might he thinke't a shame.

Pelorus was the third, a lustie swaine
That us'd to graise his cattell by the river
Euenus hight:  where oft he would complaine,
Of his hardhearted love:  nor would he ever
Those pensive odes (in silent woes) containe
But chaunts his passions ore and ore againe:
Such brinie streams could be exempted never,
For light (which lightsome seems) his joies dissever
Making his comforts barraine:  O how faine
Would he have glad himselfe with harmonie,
But what he sought could not effected be.

O my Laerte (would this shepheard say)
Why doest exile me from thy presence deere?
Why shouldst thou with thy loure benight my day
And racke my intrals with perpetuall feare?
I pray thee (love) more cheerefully appeare,
Feede not my passions with a long delay,
But let the night at last my griefes allay,
That I some pleasant harmonie may heare,
Sounding a concord in my dolefull eare,
O be so kinde, that if no day, yet night
May yeelde me comfort and renew delight.

Thus would Pelorus iterate his woe
And make the pastures eccho with his voice,
For to what cave soere this swaine would did goe
He made it answer with an horrid noise,
For where he was no creature could rejoyce,
Sith what he did, his cattell would doe so,
Both foode and water willing to forego,
And frame their routing to their Maisters choice
A discord well concording with his voice,
His flockes were thankefull to deplore his fall
Mourning to heare their Maisters mournfull call.

Manie fine bowers this shepheard used to frame
Of mirtle braunches, and of poplar greene,
Whereine he usd to endorse his lovers name,
Whose curious workes to this day may be seene,
Which cannot chuse but aeternise his fame
And that renowmed house from whence he came,
For few such swaines on earth have ever beene
Of such respect, such vertue, such esteeme:
But he is gone, and hath depriv'd the earth
Of her chiefe beautie, portraied in his birth.

Tymallus was the next, who for his strength
Antaeus like, regaind the highest prise
Amongst all shepherds, but the fates at length
Seem'd to oppose his worthie enterprise,
Shutting the glorious splendour of his eies,
(Themselves contented in our discontents)
Changing the nature of those elements,
Which in Tymallus did so sympathise,
That I have heard, though this same shepheard dies,
Yet everie yeere the inhabitants receive,
Where hees interd sweete odors from his grave.

O thou perfumed urne that doest containe
Within thy shrine and sable monument,
The famous reliques of a noble swaine,
Mansion of honour, vertues continent,
Shine ever bright to grace that ornament,
Which thou possessest:  let no private staine
Blemish that poore remainder, whose pure name
Makes earth, no earth, but as an element
Drawen from the earth, to raise her excrement,
Rest thee Tymallus in thy house of clay,
Whilest we relate thy actions everie day.

But now must I leave these, and come to him,
Whose sacred muse pearceth the airie clouds,
And with Berillus excellence begin
Some higher straine:  leaving the silent wods,
The silent shades, the pastures and the floods,
Which cherished the swaines:  now must I trimme
With varied colours everie branch and limme
Of my discourse:  that such as understood
Of this Berillus, may with him some good,
And adde some proper actions of their owne
To those of his, and make them better knowne.

It chaunced on a time, the swaines agreed
To celebrate the festivals of Pan.
Pan was their God, by which their flocks did feede,
And their encrease on Ida first began,
Therefore each swaine with all the speed he can,
Came with sweete incense from his flourie mede,
To sacrifice to Pan of all their breed,
One with a kid, another with a lambe,
Or some young suckling wained from the damme,
Mongst whom Berillus came willing to offer,
To Pales incense, and to Pan an heifer.

Unto the Temple which erected was,
Neere to the foote of Idas sacred mount,
From whence a Nectar rivolet did passe,
Which was entitled Cythereas fount,
Came all these shepheards, who with great account,
And solemne honour offred in that place,
The firstlings of their flocks were wont to grase
Upon the neighbour plaines, or which were wont
To brouse the flourie vale, or feede upon't,
Each offred what they had, fruits of their border,
The best the first, the residue in order.

Amidst these solemne feasts, obsequious vowes,
Came in Eliza, one of beautie rare,
With other virgins, for what end heaven knowes,
Save to perplex such as religious were:
Such tempting creatures wanton women are,
Seducing us with smiles and seeming showes,
Farre worse then the furie of externall blowes:
For those shed blood, these doe torment with care
And vex us with new sorrowes, till despaire
Surprise our mindes, our solace disposesse,
Making us objects of times pensiveness.

Noe sooner had he spied (aye me too soone)
The Syren countenance of this seeming sect,
Then incense, Censor, coales, and all throwne downe,
Fixing his eyes on her, showd his intent,
Having our heart there where our eyes be bent,
To such a passion he in fine was growne,
That he could scarcely vouch himselfe his owne,
But pitching there his campe, his fort, his tent,
Confin'd himselfe within her element,
For he transported was (poore harmelesse man,)
To Elizas Altar from the shrine of Pan.

Shall I adore (quoth he) a rurall God,
A pasture Saint, a sheepish deitie,
When a more heavenly creature makes abode,
Cheering my comforts in varietie,
Promising pleasures in facietie?
No, no, her pretence farre more comforts bode
Then Pan ere had:  too long my feete have stoode,
Too long my knees have bow'd (poore Pan) to thee
I see a Saint that better pleaseth me.
This said (his incense from his shrine bereft)
Unto this goddesse goes, the Altar left.

Like to a forward wooer trained long
In lovers vowes, and solemne protestations,
He takes her by the hand:  and softlie wrong
Her tender pulse, augmenting sundrie passions
Of an unfained love (Heavens invocations)
Making his heart the subject of his tongue,
His tongue the Herald of events to come,
Calling the Gods to record his intentions,
And all those aery powers whose blest conventions
Confirme each actions both in heaven and earth,
The fatall end drawne from a fatall birth.

If that I love not (honourd queene) quoth he,
Mirror of beautie, diamond of fame,
If that I ever have not honourd thee,
And registred the annals of thy name,
And with my deerest blood confirmd the same,
Never respect these teares distild from me,
Nor of thy worth let me accepted be.
But if I have beene faithfull, thinke't no shame
To fix thy love on me that faithfull am,
For sooner shall the sunne surcease to shine,
Then I surcease to reverence thy shrine.

See in what divine rites, what sacred hests,
I was distracted, to enjoy your love,
For sincere love, delaies in love detests,
Enforc'd the fruites (which he desires) to proove,
O let me proove them, so shall greifes remoove,
Their pensive stations, and afford sweete rest
Unto my restlesse soule, by thee made blest:
I was brought up (dere sweete) in Idas grove,
Hatchd in an Aerie, sprung from bowers above,
Those bowrs, those flowrs, those showrs we did descend
From Joves pure throne, thy beauty shal defend.

Those bowers which lovely Adon did frequent,
Those flowers to which Narcissus was transformd
Thos liquid showers where Danae reapt content,
All in one symptome with one wreath adornd
To lovers unite sweete straine conformd,
(For purer straines nere had earths continent,
Then such as descant lovers complement)
Where limpe-halt Vulcan too too long sorond,
With loves contempt portraide, displaid and hornd,
But lovers cannot us abuse, nor wrong
Those faithfull vowes which they professed long.

See but this incense how it lost her smell,
See but this censor how it lost her fire,
Which intimates nought can expresse so well
The fervent passions of our mindes desire,
As beauties presence, which doth still aspire
To aerie mansions from the vaults to shell,
For perfect love all vapors can expell,
And give the lover due reward, due hire,
Scorning with coward pace to make retire,
Love is a captaine which obtaines the prise,
Scorning the worst and basest enterprise.

But like victorious cheiftaines which enclose
The strongest bullwarks with continued labour,
Despising rest, minds quiet, nights repose,
By their renoumed acts to purchase favour,
(Whose resolution knows not how to waver
Nor the pale humoure of distracted woes,
Know how to feare) even so affection goes,
Till memorie (of Heroic acts engraver)
Enobled by worths monuments shall have her,
Registring her pure vertues in their shrine,
For divine acts deserve a throne divine.

Not steepie mount can be too peering high,
Noe craggie cliffe for love too intricate,
For such is love and lovers majestie,
As its secure in every dismall state,
Passing the judgement of impartiall state,
Neerer the title of a deitie,
Being the same whiÁh she doth seeme to be,
Hating the cause of times producing hate,
Ope he her eyes (wide ope) early and late,
Discoursing where or how her comforts be,
Taking no rest to gaine eternitie.

O be not selfe conceited (dearest love)
See but thy image, how it doth desire
Another image:  ayming ever higher,
Till it enjoy what it intends to proove,
Much like the Turtle with the Turtle-dove
Or like the Phenix, who in her owne fire,
Portraies her selfe both mother, seede and sire:
Her ashie urne her tombe, her flame the grove,
To life infus'd by some effects above.
Be then the Phenix, as in beautie rare,
So be thy actions farre above compare.

What better sutes which beautie then delight?
What better with delight then loves content?
What better with content then cheerefull light?
What better sutes with light then th' element,
That best concords with her?  whats that?  th' extent
Of pure affection which expels the night,
And makes us pleasant in our lovers sight,
For honest lovers shew their mindes intent,
By outward signes:  an Incense redolent,
In sincere love, composd of sundrie links,
Thinkes what she speakes, and speaketh what she thinkes.

Then speake (deere love) let this same sacred place,
Where we be present, consecrate our love:
Let Pan himselfe confirme our Nuptiall grace,
And all the powerfull Queristers above
Sing cheerefull layes:  while our affections move
Thier true Ideas:  that illustrate race,
From whence you were derivd, quickens my chace
And bids me hope:  you cannot chuse but love,
Their worth cannot be base whose births above,
Then as thou art erected, let me tast
The fruites of love, when discontents be past.

For if a faithfull shepheard can deserve
Meede for his faith:  my faith deserves as much.
How oft have I thy name desir'd to carve
In everie tree?  and when I sought to touch
The tender barke, or rinde, it nere thought much
But willingly endurd my sculpture:  thus plants serve
Thy blest attendence:  that they may observe,
A module in thy fancie:  that is such,
That if they should doe all, yet not too much
Can be done to thy shrine:  if plants doe this,
(If I should not doe more) I did amiss.

Since time I knew thee (fairest of all faires)
I could not goe, as I was wont to doe
Unto my pastures:  for such heapes of cares
Possest my crasie braines, surprised so
With thy affections, that whereso ere I goe,
Sit, or lie downe, nought of sweete joye appeares,
But multitudes of my renewing feares,
Which make me sleeping wake, thinking of woe,
And then of joy:  thus interposd twixt two,
A double forme my single forme partakes,
Now waking sleepes, and sleeping straight awakes.

For what sweete sleep which comfort yeelds to others,
Yeeldes a distant to me:  what can be sweete
Where hope is dead?  hope is a loving mother,
Banishing sorrow with a silent sleepe,
That feedes the shepheard, and revives his sheepe,
Reducing them into one fould together,
But sheepe nor shepheard there's no health to either,
If thou my shepherdesse refuse to gather
My disperst Flocks:  and shall denie to keepe
My watching eyes that doe desire to sleepe,
But cannot sleepe, to double paines they are put,
Ope by thy presence, by thy absence shut.

No day nor night can solace yeelde to me,
Both be unwelcome guests:  and whats the cause?
To tell the truth:  thay day I see not thee
Seemes farre more darke then night:  love hath no clause,
No limit, nor no bound:  love cannot be
Confinde in bonds, it hates captivitie:
Meriting honour by divinest lawes,
As for her action it deserves applause,
O then (deere I weere) be not so soft to show,
So hard to love:  receive these vowes I owe.

Oft have I walkd within the Idalian grove,
Calling each plant, each blossome to record
The spotlesse vowes of my refined love:
And everie plant did seemingly accord
Unto my vowes:  springs did their teares afford,
And every sencelesse rocke did passions move:
Crying I love, the eccho cried I love,
For every accent, accented my word,
A lovely concord in a loves discord.
If plants, rocks, rivers so remorsefull be,
Farre more remorse I doe expect from thee.

Thy substance is more heavenly, then disdaine
Should soile a mansion of so pure delight:
Thou seest me love, and thou wilt love againe:
I know thou wilt, those vowes which I have plight
Cannot but have respect in lovers sight:
Which if thou doe, (beleeve me) Ile remaine
As I have beene a poore wellwilling swaine,
And with my pipe on every winter night
Play laies of love, to further thy delight.
Beleeve me sweete, and you may thinke it true,
My Flocks unfollowed are to follow you.

The wanto lambkins frolicke on the plaine,
Skipping and leaping in their floure of youth,
While in a secret cave, I scarce containe
My selfe from teares, and so Melampus doth,
Poore harmelesse curre, for he is very loth
To see me so dejected:  howling amaine,
Prickeard, bleare eyed, yeelds me a dolefull straine,
Of doggrell musique:  thus perplexed both,
Repine to see each creature in their grouth,
And we dismaid, with woes immured so,
As others joyes seeme to augment our woe.

Last day but one Amicla came to me,
And askd the reason why I was so sad:
Thou usd, quoth she, so full of mirth to be,
That with thy pipe thou made the pastures glad,
And was accounted still the cheerefulst lad
In all our plaine:  how coms it then quoth shee,
Such sullen suds have so perplexed thee?
Come, come away and leave this pensive shade,
For piping, not for pining thou was made,
Come, come I say, and quickly follow me,
And ore this downe lets dance it nimbly.

Alas Amicla, thus I answered her,
How can I pipe, my rede is out of tune,
How can I dance, that can but hardly stirre
My crasie joints:  O no, that time is doen,
Nor wil't hereafter (much I doubt it) come
To joy my dolefull life, or ere appeare,
To end my griefes that eccho every where,
For griefes speake loudest when the speech is dumbe
Engrossing daily still a greater summe.
Leave me Amicla, how can I recite,
My wonted measures that has broke my pipe?

Broken thy pipe?  Ile mend it (sweete) quoth she,
And make it tune with more delightfull measure
Then ere it did:  lend but thy pipe to me:
I lent it her, that I in part might please her,
But it plaid tunelesse still:  nor could it ease her,
Descanting dischords:  sadder harmonie
Nere did I heare of sage Melpomene:
It knew his Masters straine, not all the treasure
Of Tagus golden oare, no time, no leasure,
Had either I or my poore pipe to play,
For thoughts of love had tane all joyes away.

Amicla when she saw it would not be,
Threw downe my pipe, for it was soone throwne downe,
And with quicke pace away departed she,
While I despised, of my selfe lay downe
Undera shadie beech well over growne,
With broad-spred braunches where did shadow me,
But not obscure the love I bare to thee;
Calling the heavens to witnesse, and mine owne,
Mine own porre bleting flocks!  my love was shown
Not in assemblance, but so really,
That nought seem'd sweete which did not tast of thee.

Thy breath a perfume, and thy voice a tone,
Of perfect concords:  thy bright eye a starre,
Thy mouth an Hyblemount, thine armes a throne,
Thy teeth a pearly cordon, thy pure haire
Tramels of purest gould, where lodged are
Those three admired graces all in one,
As if they ment there to reside alone:
Thy browes like Beacons, where we see afarre
Adjoying places, maunagements of warre,
Breefely, noe part thou hast from top to toe,
But may be askt why nature made it so?

And straight it answers:  Nature made me thus,
To be a mirrour past all imitation,
Sith choicest colours my proportion chuse,
A beauteous frame formd of the best creation,
That aftertimes might make more full relation,
What they have seene proportioned in us
And leave records of it:  that every muse,
If preganant, may discourse to every Nation,
A perfect module made for recreation,
But for no humane creature; such as love us,
Must come from heaven, and plant their throne above us.

O tell me then (dere love) if so it be,
Humane affections cannot worthie seeme,
By their intentive minds to honour thee,
And therefore justly have condemned beene,
To gase out that which should be rarely seene,
For such as thou art, oft reserved be,
Not for Earths frame, but for aeternitie:
Tell me but this (and by this kisse) I meane
Nere to repair unto thy shrine againe,
Or ere make sure (as here I do professe)
To be thy shepherd, thou my shepherdesse.

When poore Berillus finisht had his sute,
Looking for answer at Elizas hand,
Pans Priest came in, and put Berillus out,
Onely thus much well might he understand,
That he was lov'd of her, but th' Priests command
(Ill fall such shavelings) ever went about,
Hearing their amorous stories to roote out
Their pure affections:  moving with his wand,
Or sacra virga, that they should descend,
And leave loves passions to another place,
For in Pans Temple love can have no grace.

The forelorne Shepheard went same way he came,
Sad and dejected, yet with hope releeved,
Thinking by absence to quench out the flame,
Which daily made encrease:  being deprived
Of those blest meanes, by which we are revived,
Hope the best Anchor which supports our flame,
Made this poore shepherd to pursue his game,
Hoping by such effects as he continued,
To have his joyes renewd:  but was deceaved,
For where he thought to finde contentment most
In that same place he was the greatliest crost.

For from that time nere could he see his dere,
Kept as it seem'd for Pan, or for his Priest,
For this same shaveling ever would be there,
Desiring (lustfull prelate) there to feast,
Where she remaind:  for he has oft confest,
That he has wisht himselfe transformed were
Into some slender creature, to appeare
At all times to Eliza:  who thought least
Of such a wanton votarie:  heavens detest,
Such vow infringing masse priests whose profession
Collects a reason out of each suspition.

Farewell Eliza, if thou live so long,
As to repent thee of thy breach of faith,
I doe not doubt but thou'l confesse the wrong
Which th ou hast done me, and abjure that breath,
Which thou exhal'd, adjuding me to death,
By that remorselesse heart, that Syren tongue,
Which (if thou liv'st) will sing another song:
Take heede, the sword's drawne from the irefull sheath,
And inbred horror creepeth underneath.
Whom thou affectest most, affects thee least,
Hating thy Swaine to take thee to thy Priest.

But if god Pan knew how his swaines were usd,
By such as offer to him sacrifice,
I know full well he would redresse th' abuse,
And save our honour from such Priests as these,
Who fill his Temple with impieties,
Wronging the sincere thoughts of each of us,
Which cannot merit in the heavens excuse:
Small faults with Saints be great enormities,
Shrines that are pure become pure deities,
But Ile surcease, griefes make my muse surcease:
Encrease of lines give to my woes encrease.
