Aurora's Blush (the Ensigne of the Day)
Hath wak't the god of Light, from Tythons bowre,
Who on our Bride, and Bride-groome doth display
His golden Beames, auspitious to this Howre.
Now busie Maydens, strew sweet Flowres,
Much like our Bride in Virgin state;
Now fresh, then prest, soone dying,
The death is sweet, and must be yours,
Time goes on Croutches till that date,
Birds fledg'd, must needes be flying.
Leade on whiles Phoebus Lights, and Hymens Fires,
Enflame each Heart with Zeale to Loves Desires.
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen, Paeans sing,
To Hymen, and my Muses King.

Fourth honour'd Groome; behold, not farre behind
Your willing Bride; led by two strengthlesse Boyes;
For Venus Doves, or Thred but single twin'd
May draw a Virgin, light in Marriage Joyes:
Vesta growes pale, her Flame expires
As yee come under Junos Phane,
To offer at Joves Shrine
The simpathie of Hearts desires
Knitting the Knot, that doth containe
Two soules, in Gordian Twine.
The Rites are done; and now (as 'tis the guise)
Loves Fast by Day, a Feast must solemnize.
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen, Paeans sing,
To Hymen, and my Muses King.

The Board being spread, furnish't with various Plenties;
The Brides faire Object in the Middle plac'd;
While she drinkes Nectar, eates Ambrosiall dainties,
And like a Goddesse is admir'd and grac'd:
Bacchus and Ceres fill their veines;
Each Heart begins to ope a vent;
And now the Healths goe round;
Their Bloods are warmed; chear'd are their Braines
All doe applaud their Loves Consent;
So Love with Cheare is crown'd.
Let sensuall soules joy in full Bowles, sweet Dishes;
True Hearts, and Tongues, accord in joyfull wishes.
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen, &amp;c.

Now whiles slow Howres doe feede the Times delay,
Confus'd Discourse, with Musicke mixt among,
Fills up the semy-circle of the Day;
Now drawes the date of our Lovers wish'd so long.
A bounteous Hand the Board hath spred;
Lyeus stirres so their Bloods a-new;
All Joviall full of cheare;
But Phoebus see, is gone to Bed;
Loe Hesperus appeares in view,
And twinckles in his sphere.
Now ne plus ultra; end, as you begin;
Yee waste good Howres; Time lost in Love, is sin.
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen, &amp;c.

Breake off your Compliment; Musicke, be dombe,
And pull your Cases o'er your Fiddles eares;
Cry not, a Hall, a Hall; but Chamber-roome;
Dancing is lame; Youth's old at twentie yeares.
Matrons; yee know what followes next;
Conduct the shame-fac'd Bride to Bed,
(Though to her little rest)
Yee well can comment on the Text,
And, in Loves learning deepely read,
Advise, and teach the best.
Forward's the Word; y' are all so in this Arrant;
Wives give the Word; their Husbands give the Warrant.
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen, &amp;c.

Now droopes our Bride, and in her Virgin state,
Seemes like Electra 'mongst the Pleyades;
So shrinkes a Mayde when her Herculean Mate,
Must plucke the fruit in her Hesperides.
As she's a Bride, she glorious shines,
Like Cynthea, from the Sunnes bright Sphaere,
Attracting all mens Eyes;
But as she's Virgin, waines, and pines,
As to the Man she approcheth neere;
So Mayden glory dies.
But Virgin Beames no reall brightnesse render;
If they doe shine, in darke they shew their splendour.
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen, &amp;c.

Then let the darke Foyle of the Geniall Bed
Extend her brightnesse to his inward sight,
And by his sence he will be easly led
To know her vertue, by her absent light.
Youth's; take his Poynts; your wonted right;
And Maydens, take your due, her Garters;
Take hence the Lights; be gone;
Love calls to Armes, Duell his Fight;
Then all remove out of his Quarters,
And leave them both alone.
That with substantiall heate, they may embrace,
And know Loves Essence, with his outward grace.
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen, &amp;c.

Hence Jealousie, Rivall to Loves delight;
Sowe not thy seede of strife in these two Harts;
May never cold affect, or spleenfull spight,
Confound this Musicke of agreeing parts:
But Time (that steales the virtuall heate
Where Nature keepes the vitall fire)
(My Heart speakes in my Tongue)
Supply with Fewell lifes chief seate,
Through the strong fervour of Desire;
Love, living; and live long.
And ev'n as Thunder riseth gainst the Winde;
So may yee fight with Age; and conquer Kinde
CHORUS.
Io to Hymen; Paeans sing,
To Hymen, and my Muses King.
