WILLIE.  WERNOCKE.

WERNOCKE.
WILLY, why lig'st thou (man) so wo-be-gon?
What?  been thy rather Lamkins ill-apaid?
Or, hath some drerie chance thy Pipe misdone?
Or, hast thou any sheep-cure mis-assaid?
Or, is some conteck 'twixt thy love and thee?
Or, else some love-warke arsie-varsie tane?
Or, fates lesse frolicke than they wont to be?
What gars my WILLY that he so doth wane?
If it be for thou hast mis-said, or done,
Take keepe of thine owne councell; and, thou art
As sheene and cleare fro both-twaine as the Sunne:
For all Swaines laud thine haviour, and thine Art.
Ma hap thine heart (that unneath brooke neglect,
And jealous of thy fresh fame) liggs upon
Thy rurall songs, which rarest Clarkes affect,
Dreading the descant that mote fall thereon.
Droope not for that (man) but unpleate thy browes,
And blithly, so, fold envies up in pleats:
For, fro thy Makings milke, and mellie, flowes
To feed the Songster-swains with Arts soot-meats.

WILLIE.
Now, siker (Wernocke) thou hast split the marke
Albe that I ne wot I han mis-song:
But, for I am so yong, I dread my warke
Woll he misvalued both of old and yong.

WERNOCKE.
Is thilke the cause that thou been ligge so laid,
Who whilom no encheson could fore-haile;
And caitive courage nere made misapaid,
But with chiefe yongsters songsters bar'st thy saile?
As swoot as Swans thy straines make Thames to ring
Fro Cotswould where her sourse her course doth take,
To her wide mouth which vents thy carolling
Beyond the hether and the further lake.
Than up (sad swaine) pull fro thy vailed cheeke
Hur prop, thy palme:  and let thy Virilaies,
Kill envious cunning swaines (whom all do seeke)
With envy, at thine earned gaudy praise.
Up lither lad, thou reck'st much of thy swinke,
When swinke ne swat thou should'st ne reck for fame;
At Aganip than, lay thee downe to drinke
Untill thy stomacke swell, to raise thy name.
What though time yet han not bedowld thy Chin?
Thy Dams deere wombe was Helicon to thee;
Where (like a Loach) thou drew'st thilke liquor in,
Which on thy heart-strings ran with musickes glee.
Than up betimes, and make the sullen swaines
With thy shrill Reed such jolly-jovisance
That they (entranc'd) ma wonder at thy straines;
So, leave of thee ne're ending sovenance.

WILLIE.
Ah Wernocke, Wernocke, so my sp'rits been steept
In dulnesse, through these duller times missawes
Of sik-like musicke (riming rudely cleept.)
That yer I pipe well, must be better cause.
Ah, who (with lavish draughts of Aganip)
Can swill their soule to frolick; so, their Muse,
Whan Courts and Camps, that erst the muse did clip,
Do now forlore her; nay, her most abuse?
Now, with their witlesse, causelesse surquedry
They been transpos'd fro what of yore they were,
That Swaines, who but to looser luxurie
Can shew the way, are now most cherisht there.
These times been crimefull (ah) and being so,
Bold Swaines (deft Songsters) sing them criminall;
So, make themselves oft gleefull in their woe:
For thy tho Songsters are misween'd of all.
Mecaenas woont in blonket liveries
Yclad sike chanters; but these miser times
Uncase hem quite, that all may hem despise,
As they don all their best embellisht Rimes.
And Harvest-queenes, of yore, would Chaplets make
To crowne their scalpes that couth most swootly sing,
And give hem many a gaude at Ale or Wake:
But now ne recke they of soot carrolling.
Enaunter they should be as seeme they would,
Or songen lowdly for so deere desart;
Or else be peregall to Nymphes of old,
From which their beastlihed now freely start.
Than must they latch the blowes of Fates too fell,
With their too feeble clowches as they con:
For none regards, or guards hem for their spell,
Tho they, on point-device, empt Helicon!
There nis thilke chivisance they whilome had
For piping swoote; sith, with an Heydeguies,
Pipt by Tom-piper, or a Lorrel-lad,
(So be he clawes hem) they idolatrize.
And those that should presse proper songs for sale
Bene, in their doomes, so dull; in skill, so crude;
That they had leaver printen Jacke a vale
Or Clim O Clough (alacke) they beene so rude!
And sith so few feate Songsters in an age
Bene founden, few do weigh hem as they been;
For, Swaines, that con no skill of holy-rage
Bene foe-men to faire skils enlawrel'd Queen.
Enough is mee, for thy, that I ma vent
My wits spels to my selfe, or unto thee
(Deer Wernock) which dost feel like miscontent
Sith thou, and all unheeded, singt with mee.

WERNOCKE.
Vartue it's sed (and is an old said-saw)
Is for hur selfe, to be forsought alone:
Then eftsoones fro their case thy shrill pipes draw
And make the welkin ringen with their tone.
Of world, ne worly men take thou no keepe
What the one doth, or what the other say;
For should I so, I so, should Eyne out-weepe:
Than, with mee; Willy, ay sing care-away.
It's wood to be fore-pinde with wastefull carke
In many a noyfull stoure of willing bale,
For vading toyes:  But trim wits poorest wark
The upper heav'n han hent fro nether Dale.
Thilks all our share of all the quelling heape
Of this world's good:  enough is us to tell
How rude the rest bene, caduke, and how cheape;
But, laude for well done warks, don all excell!
For thy we shoulden take keepe of our Race
That here wee rennen, and what here we doon
That whan wee wenden till an other place,
Our sovenance may here, ay-gayly wonne.
For, time will underfong us; and our voice
Woll woxon weake; and, our devising lame;
For, life is brief; and skils beene long, and choise:
Than, spend we Time, that Time may spare our Fame.
Look how breme Winter chamfers Earth's bleeke face
So, corbed Eld accoyes youths surquedry;
And, in the front, deepe furrowes doon enchase,
Inveloped with falling snow a hy.
Then nought can be atchiev'd with witty shewes,
Sith Briefe of Elde accloyen wimble wit;
Than, us behoven, yer Elde sick accrewes,
Time to forelay, with spells retarding it.
I 'not what blisse is whelm'd with heav'n's coape
So bee the pleasance of the Muse be none:
For, when thilk gleesome joyes han hallowed scope
They beene as those that heav'ns-folke warble on.
I con my good; for, now my scalpe is frost
Yeelding to snow; the crow-feete neere mine Eyne
Beene markes of mickle preefe I have, that most
Of all glees else alow, han suddaine fine.
O how it garres old Wernork swynck with glee
In that emprise that chiven featest fame!
It heats my heart above ability
To leave parduring sovenance of my name.
And whan mine Engine han heav'd hy my thought,
And that on point-device eftsoones y fell
O!  how my heart's joy-rapt, as I had cought,
A Princedome to my share, of thilk Newell.
They beene of pleasaunces the alderbest:
Than, God to forne; I wol no mo but tho:
Tho beene the summe of all I loven best:
And for hem love I life; else nold I so.
Drive on thy flocke than, to the motley plaines
Where by some prill, that 'mong the Pibbles plods,
Thou, with thyne Oaten reede, and queintest straines,
Maist rapt the senior Swaines, and minor Gods:
That as on Ida that mych-famed Mount,
A Shepheard Swaine; that sung lesse soote than thou
By light loves Goddesse, had the grace to mount
To owe the sheenest Queene that earth did owe:
So, thou maiest, with thy past'rall Minstralsy
Beating the aire, atweene resounding Hils,
Draw to thee Bonibels as smirke, as hy,
And wrap hem in thy love begrey their wils:
For (ah) had Phoebus Clarkes the meanes of some
Worse Clarkes (paravnter) so to sing at ease;
They soone would make high long-wing'd haggards come;
And vaile unto their Lures:  so, on hem seise.
For, bright Nymphes buxome Breastes do eas'ly ope
To let in thirling notes of noted laies:
For, deftly song they han a charming scope;
So, Nymphs themselves adore Brows girt with Bayes.
Than, Willy (ah for pitty of thine heart
That drouping yearnes, at misses of these times)
Take thou thy Pipe, and of glee take thy part;
Or cheere thy selfe with cordials of thy Rimes.
Before the world's sterne face, the world backe-bite
So slyly that her parts ne' it perceive:
Morall thy matter so, that, tho thou smite,
Thou maist with tickling her dull sence, deceive.
Then hy thee, Willy, to the neighhour wasts
Where thou (as in another world alone)
Maist (while thy flocke do feede) blow bitter blasts
On thy loudst Pipe, to make il's pertly knowne.
For, sith the rude-crude world doon us misplease
That well deserven, tell wee her hur owne;
And let her ken our cunning can, with ease,
Aye shend, or lend hur sempiterne renowne.

WILLIE.
Ah Wernocke, so thy sawes mine heart downe thril
With love of Muses skill in speciall,
That I ne wot, on mould what feater skill
Can bee yhugg'd in Lordings pectorall.
Ne would I it let-bee for all the store
In th' uncoth scope of both-twain hemispheres;
Ynough is mee, perdy, nor strive for more
But to be rich in hery for my leeres.
Ne would I sharen that soule-gladding glee
In th' ever gaudy Gardens of the blest
Not there to han the Muses companee,
Which, God to-fore, is of the best, the best.
Now, Wernock, shalt thou see (so mote I thee)
That I nill usen any skill so mytch
(Faire fall my swinck) as this so nice, and free,
In case I may my name to Heaven stitch.
For why; I am by kind so inly pulde
To these delices; that when I betake
My selfe to other lore I more am dul'd;
And therefro, keenely set, I fall to make.
But, well-away, thy nis the way to thriven;
And, my neer kith, for that wol sore me shend:
Who little reck how I by kind am given;
But hur wold force to swinck for thriftier end.
Hence forward then I must assay, and con
My leere in leeful lore, to pleasen them
That, sib to mee, would my promotion,
And carke for that to prancke our common Stemme:
For, now (as wends the world) no skill to that
(Or rather but that) thrives; sith Swaines are now
So full of contecke, that they wot ne what
They would; so, if they could; they all would owe.
So fares it in calme seasons with curst men;
If frennes forbeare, at home, hem to invade,
They wry their peace to noy each other then
By plees, till they decease, or fall, or fade.
So times beene keener now with common Swaynes;
Than whan as forraigne foe-men with hem fought:
For, now they swyncke, but for slye Law-mens gaines
Or seld they should possessen what they ought.
But, what for this?  to mee it little longs
To gab of sikliche notes of misery;
Ynough is mee to chaunten swoote my songs,
And blend hem with my rurall mynstrelsy.
But, O (my Wernock) how am I to thee
Obligen, for thy keene reencouragements
To skill, so mickle lov'd and sought of mee
As this of making with Arts Elements?
I not how I shall thrive therein; ne how
I shall be dempt of in these nicer times:
But how soere so thou my workes alow,
I nill bee ill-apaiden with my Rimes.

WERNOCKE.
Thou nedst not, Willy; wretch were I to laude
Thee in thy misses:  for, I so should bee
To th' adultries of thy wits-scapes, but a Baude,
Ne, as a friend, in sentence, should bee free.
Than, wend thou fairely on, with thyne emprise;
Sing cleerely, Willy, on mine encouragement,
And other Swaines, more able to devise;
And, fixe thee for it, in the firmament.
Ynough is mee so I may beare a part
Aye in the Muses Quire with those and thee;
Il'e sing (at ease) aloud, with cheerefull hart,
No base, ne meane, but Tenor of best glee.

WILLIE.
And I, with thee, woll chaunt each counter-verse
So shrilly that wee'l make thilk Quire to ring
As ever do the Angels; who rehearse
The loudest lauds of heav'ns-Lord whan they sing.
So, farewell, Wernock, mickle thankes to thee
For thy freedome, that canst so well devise:
Phoebus now goes to glade; than now goe wee,
Unto our sheddes to rest us till he rise.

WERNOCKE.
Agree'd deere, Willy, gent and debonaire,
Wee'l hence:  for, rhumaticke now fares the Aire.
