THIRSIS.  ALEXIS.

THIRSIS.
ALEXIS if thy worth do not disdaine
The humble friendship of a meaner Swaine;
Or some more needfull business of the day,
Urge thee to bee too hasty on thy way;
Come (gentle shepheard) rest thee here by me
Under the shadow of this broad-leav'd tree:
For though I seeme a stranger, yet mine eye
Observes in thee the markes of courtesie:
And if my judgment erre not, noted too
More then in those that more would seeme to doe:
Such vertues thy rare modestie doth hide
Which by their proper lustre I espy'd;
And though long mask't in silence they have beene,
I have a wisedome through that silence seene:
Yea I have learned knowledge from thy tongue,
And heard when thou hast in concealment sung:
Which me the bolder and more willing made
Thus to invite thee to this homely shade.
And though (it may be) thou could'st never spye
Such worth in me to make me knowne thereby,
In thee I doe; for here my neighbouring sheepe
Upon the border of these downes I keepe:
Where often thou at Pastorals and playes
Hast grac'd our Wakes on Summer Holy-dayes:
And many a time with thee at this cold spring
Met I, to heare your learned shepheards sing,
Saw them disporting in the shady groves,
And in chaste Sonnets wooe their chaster loves:
When I endued with the meanest skill,
Mongst others have been urg'd to tune my quill,
Where (cause but little cunning I had got)
Perhaps thou saw'st me, though thou knew'st me not.

ALEXIS.
Yes, Thirsis I doe know thee and thy name,
Nor is my knowledge grounded all on fame,
Art thou not hee, that but this other yeare,
Scared'st all the Wolves and Foxes in the sheere?
And, in a match at Foot-ball lately try'd
(Having scarce twenty Satyres on thy side)
Held'st play:  and though assailed, kept'st thy stand
Gainst all the best-try'd Ruffians in the land:
Didst thou not then in dolefull Sonnets mone,
When the beloved of great Pan was gone;
And at the wedding of fair THAME and RHYNE,
Sing of their glories to thy Valentine?
I know it, and I must confess that long
In one thing I did doe thy nature wrong:
For till I markt the aime thy Satyrs had,
I thought them overbold and Thirsis mad,
But since I did more neerely on thee looke
I soone perceiv'd that I had all mistooke;
I saw that of a Cynike thou madst show
Where since I find that thou wert nothing so,
And that of many thou much blame hadst got
When as thy Innocence deserv'd it not.
But that too good opinion thou hast seem'd
To have of mee (not so to bee esteem'd)
Prevailes not ought to stay him who doth feare
Hee rather should reproofes than praises heare
Tis true I found thee plaine and honest too
Which made mee lik, then love, as now I do
And, Thirsis though a stranger this I'll say,
Where I do love I am not coy to stay.

THIRSIS.
Thankes gentle swayne that dost so soone unfold
What I to thee as gladly would have told
And thus thy wonted courtesie exprest
In kindly entertaining this request:
Sure I should injury my owne content
Or wrong thy love to stand on compliment,
Who hast acquaintance in one word begunne
As well as I could in an age have done:
Or by an overweening slownesse marre
What thy more wisedome hath brought on so farre;
Then sit thou downe and I'le my minde declare
As freely, as if wee familiars were;
And if thou wilt but daigne to give mee eare
Something thou maist for thy more profite heare.

ALEXIS.
Willingly Thirsis I obey.

THIRSIS.
Then know Alexis from that very day
When as I saw thee at that Shepherdes Coate
Where each I thinke of other tooke first noate,
I meane that Pastor who by Tavies springs
Chaste Shepheards loves in sweetest numbers sings,
And with his Musicke (to his greater fame)
Hath late made proud the fairest Nimphes of Thame
E'ne then mee thought I did espy in thee
Some unperceiv'd and hidden worth to bee
Which in thy more apparent vertues shin'd
And, among many, I in thought divin'd,
By something my conceit had understood
That thou wert markt one of the Muses brood.
That made mee love thee:  And that love I beare
Begat a Pitty, and that Pitty Care:
Pitty I had to see good parts conceal'd,
Care I had how to have that good reveal'd,
Since 'tis a fault admitteth no excuse
To possess much and yet put nought in use:
Heereon I vow'd (if we two ever met)
The first request that I would strive to get
Should bee but this that thou would'st shew thy skill,
How thou could'st tune thy verses to thy quill:
And teach thy Muse in some well-framed song,
To show the Art thou hast supprest so long:
Which if my new acquaintance may obtaine
Thirsis will ever honour this daies gaine.

ALEXIS.
Alas!  my small experience scarce can tell
So much as where those Nymphes the Muses dwell,
Nor (though my slow conceit still travels on)
Shall I ere reach to drinke of Hellicon;
Or if I might so favour'd be to taste
What those sweet streames but over-flow in waste,
And touch Parnassus where it low'st doth lye,
I feare my skill would hardly flagge so hye.

THIRSIS.
Despaire not Man the Gods have prized nought
So deere that may not be with labour bought,
Nor need thy paine be great since Fate and Heaven
They (as a blessing) at thy birth have given.

ALEXIS.
Why, say they had?

THIRSIS.
Then use their gifts thou must,
Or be ungratefull, and so be unjust:
For if it cannot truly be deny'd,
Ingratitude mens benefites do hide,
Then more ungrateful must he be by oddes,
Who doth conceale the bounty of the Gods.

ALEXIS.
That's true indeed, but Envy hateth those
Who seeking fame their hidden skill disclose:
Where else they might (obscur'd) from her espying
Escape the blasts and danger of envying:
Critickes will censure our best straines of Wit,
And purblinde Ignorance misconster it.
All which is bad:  yet worse then this doth follow,
Most hate the Muses, and contemne APOLLO.

THIRSIS.
So let them; why should we their hate esteeme:
Is 't not enough we of ourselves can deeme?
Tis more to their disgrace that we scorne them,
Than unto us that they our Art contemne;
Can we have better pastime than to see
Their grosse heads may so much deceived bee,
As to allow those doings best, where wholly
We scoffe them to their face, and flout their folly;
Or to behold blacke Envy in her prime
Die selfe-consumed whilst we vie lives with time:
And in despite of her, more fame attaine
Than all her malice can wipe out againe.

ALEXIS.
Yea but if I apply'd me to those straines,
Who should drive forth my flockes unto the plaines,
Which whilst the Muses rest, and leisure crave,
Must watering, folding, and attendance have.
For if I leave with wonted care to cherish
Those tender herds:  both I and they should perish.

THIRSIS.
Alexis, now I see thou dost mistake,
There is no meaning thou thy charge forsake.
Nor would I wish thee so thy selfe abuse
As to neglect thy calling for thy Muse:
But let these two so each of other borrow,
That they may season mirth, and lessen sorrow.
Thy flocke will helpe thy charges to defray,
Thy Muse to passe the long and tedious day.
Or whilst thou tun'st sweet measures to thy Reed
Thy sheepe to listen, will more neere thee feed,
The wolves will shun them, birds above thee sing,
And Lambkins dance about thee in a Ring;
Nay which is more:  in this thy low estate,
Thou in contentment shalt with Monarkes mate:
For mighty Pan, and Ceres to us grants
Our fields and flockes shall helpe our outward wants.
The Muses teach us songs to put off cares,
Grac'd with as rare and sweet conceits as theirs:
And we can thinke our lasses on the greenes
As faire, or fairer than the fairest Queenes;
Or what is more than most of them shall do,
Wee'le make their juster fames last longer too,
Having our Lines by greatest Princes grac'd
When both their name and memory's defac'd.
Therefore Alexis though that some disdaine
The heavenly musicke of the rural plaine,
What is 't to us, if they (or'eseene) contemne
The dainties which were nere ordain'd for them?
And though that there be other some envy
The praises due to sacred Poesie,
Let them disdaine and fret till they are wearie,
We in ourselves have that shall make us merrie:
Which he that wants, and had the power to know it,
Would give his life that he might dye a Poet.

ALEXIS.
Thou has so well (yong Thirsis) plaid thy part
I am almost in love with that sweet Art:
And if some power will but inspire my song,
Alexis will not be obscured long.

THIRSIS.
Enough kinde Pastor:  But oh!  yonder see
Two Shepheards, walking on the lay-banke be,
Cuttie and Willie, that so dearly love,
Who are repairing unto yonder grove:
Let's follow them:  for never braver Swaines
Made musicke to their flockes upon these plaines.
They are more worthy, and can better tell
What rare contents do with a Poet dwell.
Then whiles our sheep the short sweet grasse do shere
And till the long shade of the hilles appeare,
Weele heare them sing:  for though the one be young,
Never was any that more sweetly sung.
