Thou silly Orphan of my dulled braine,
I send thee forth, in basest Country tyre:
Least falling in, to that high Courtly Straine,
Should'st be envi'd if thou wert clothed higher,
So were my cost bestow'd in vaine.

Therefore when so thou shalt be entertain'd
Give what content may best befit thy place:
And tell thy Readers forc'dly wert constrain'd,
To leave thy Syre, and seeke some vulgar graces
Which by desert may be obtain'd.

And as thou maist flye selfe-conceited wits,
Though they pretend experience:
The meanest apprehension best befits,
Thy Country-breeding wanting Eloquence.
Digest it wel, whats'ere hits.

If any taxe thee with too base a stile,
And say thy verse, is but a ragged Rime:
Intreat those Eloquences to use their stile,
To burnish thee from that suggested crime,
So shalt thou seeme A new compile.

Some will content to heare thee speake so plaine,
That long to learne, and be not superfine:
First will them read, if cause be to complaine,
If matter not the meeter please their eyne,
Be not dismaid, come home againe.

And leave this errand with the Curious,
Who seeme to covet thinges most intricate.
The weaker, willing, though lesse Coyous,
Search, and conceive, what Readings intimate,
Else reading were superfluous,

And tell the Captious thou are not ignorant,
Of higher Poems and Invention:
But that thou dred'st to be deem'd arrogant,
Exceeding measure of Intention,
Soe censur'd too extravagant.

Chawcer, Gower, the bishop of dunkell,
In ages farr remote were eloquent:
Now Sidney, Spencer, others moe excell,
And are in latter times more excellent,
To antique Lauriats parallel.

But matters of great admiration
In moderne Poesies are wordes estrang'd
Invention of hid speculation,
The scope whereof hardly conceiv'd as it is rang'd
But by a Comentation.

Who readeth Chaucer as a moderne man,
Not looking back into the time he wrote,
Will hardly his ambiguous phrases scan,
Which in that time were vulgar, well I wote,
Yet we run back where he began.

And all our praised Poems are beset,
With Chaucers wordes and Phrases ancient:
Which these our moderne ages quite forget
Yet in their Poems, far more Eloquent,
Not yet from Gowre or Chaucer fett.

Why should it not befit our Poets well,
To use the wordes and Phrases Vulgar know?
Why should they rouze them from oblivions cel
Sith their ambiguous terms from whence they flow
The learned'st Reader scant can tell.

But thinges illustrated with art and sence,
As Chaucer did his Troylus and Creside:
To amplifi't aptly with Eloquence,
Base matter by good Verse is beautifi'de,
And gaine admired Reverence.

Not using wordes and Phrases all so darke,
But so familiarly as vulgar may,
Well apprehend the Poets couched marke,
And see th' Idea which he doth display:
About the Center in his Arke.

This will excuse thee to the friendly wise,
But not perhaps unto the Captious:
Be silent yet, I know, nothing fructifies
In fattest wit, if will be scurrilous,
Wit wilfull, will wil tyrranise.

But for more hoped comfort and content,
Keepe on thy way, first to that worthy wight:
To whose protecting favour I thee sent,
He either will accept thee, basely dight,
Or send thee back incontinent.

And thus I leave thee to thy fortunes lot,
As other Orphans left depriv'd of friendes:
If he affect thee, though some other not,
Though some do rob thee, and some make amends
It is enough that thou hast got.
