Now heaven preserve mine eyesight what is here?
A man made up in Wainscot?  now I sweare,
I tooke him for some Colosse; sure I erre,
This is not he:  yes:  this's the Courtier,
Brave Pun-tevallo, for those armes he beares,
(An Asse head rampant) and that chaine he weares,
By blest Saint Martin, doe descry it's he,
Well, ile observe his carriage narrowly.
What makes him go so stiffe, has he the gout?
No, but a fire in's hams that went not out
These seven yeares to my knowledge:  then it has
Begun (it seems bout time) when th' glasse-work was;
Its true, it did so, I have heard some say,
He has a pleasant wit, he has one way
A pretty thriving wit, can make a legge,
And harken out what office he may begge.
Can looke as big and burly on such men,
(Poore Gnats) that come for to petition him,
As Giants in a Pagent, can protest,
For meere formality, laugh at a jest,
(Without conceiving out) has witte enough,
To put good close on, beare his face in's ruffe.
Like a brave sprightly Spaniard, will not let,
With some new minted oaths to pay his debt,
And can dispense with them, nor does he more,
In this, then what his Elders did before.
With truth (in complement) he seldome meetes,
For naked truth with Eve lies without sheetes,
And he endures not that, nor can incline,
To such a motion, but in progresse time.
He cannot blush (no more can women now)
Till that their pretie painter tell them how.
He ha's a kind of vaine in sonnetting,
Purchast by brocage or by pilfering,
With which he wooes his mistresse, he will set,
His face to any fashion, and will bett,
Wagers on Ladies honours:  having forgotten
What he should speake, hee's fingering his button,
Or some such trifling action, till he store
Himselfe with wit, which he had lost before:
Nor did that Morall erre, who wisely would,
Compare a Courtiers witte to th' Marigold.
It opens with the Sunne, but beeing set
The Mari-gold shuts up, so doth his witte.
The Marigold's most cheer'd by mid-day sunne,
So's he, whence i'st, he lies in bed till noone.
Occasion is his Cupid, lust his lure,
Pleasure his Pander, dalliance his whoore,
He h'as but one receipt of making love,
And being put out, he cannot speake, nor move,
But like a live-lesse image, seemes to be,
Till by good hap his speech recovered be.
He smells of Complement, in presence faire,
And uses oft to weare bracelets of haire,
Swearing they came from such, but tis not so,
For t'was some tyre-woman he tooke them fro.
The Ornaments which he admires are these,
To faune, to observe times, to court, to please,
To make strange faces, sleeke his perfum'd skin,
Starch his Mouchatoes, and forget his sinne.
To dance, to dice, to congie, to salute,
To stamp, to stalke, to finger well a lute.
To tremble at a Cannon when it shootes,
To like, dislike, and fill his head with doubts.
To be in passion, wind his carelesse armes,
To plie his Mistresse with delightfull charmes.
To be for all, yet ignorant in all,
To be disguisd, and strange fantasticall:
Briefly to be, what all his kind have beene,
Seeme what they be not, be what least they seeme.
Such is my Puntavallo, and in time
No question but hee'l proove true Pantomime,
To imitate all formes, shapes, habits, tyres
Suting the Court, and sorting his desires,
And then what th' Satyre said, shall well appeare:
The Devill is the perfects Courtier.
Having my complete Courtier thus defin'd,
I have no more that I can call to minde,
"Save what is common, and is knowne to all,
That Courtiers as the tide doe rise and fall,"
So I will end with what I have writ before,
"Till th' next tide come, and then I wil write more."
