Come Arethuse come, for nere had we,
At any time a greater need of thee.
No Lawrell now, but Nettle's best to grace
Our Laureat Poet see his uncouth face,
Unapt for poesie:  his strange disguise,
Onely addrest (in Verse) to Temporize:
Now Parasites prove Poets, and expresse
Their oyly workes:  for what is more or lesse
Dilated on, is consecrate to men,
That are the greatest:  O what need is then,
To thee (deere Arthuse) that didst frame,
A Poet to the nature of his name?
No time-observing smooth fac'd sycophant,
No strange conceited Asse whose Element
Is to insinuate under the shade
Of a great Mounseyrs elbow, thour't prov'd Jade
To thy profession, not a saffron band,
But like a roaring boye, can make thee stand
And yeeld observance to him:  silly foole,
That Artlesse idiots should bring to schoole,
The best of Muses, thou that once wast borne,
Not as our great Acteons, to the horne
Of their dishonour, (being of joy bereft)
Leaving to others what themselves have left.
(Worse by degrees then was that Phoebus Car,
Which Phaeton by rash attempts did marre:
And cleere dissolves) lasse see thy Trophies torne,
Thy statues razed:  and that Mount forlorne
Which first possest the Muses:  now no wreath
Can be hung up to memorize the death
Of any great man, why for vertues due,
Bids every Poet (in his verse) speake true
Of such as are deceased:  its true, who then
Speaking no more then truth, can praise such men,
As rather were then liv'd?  being, but not
In reall essence, las what fame is got
By such as write of these (whose onely good)
Is to averre they were of Noble bloud.
But so much disproportion'd to their name,
As what they seem'd, they seldome were the same.
The same; O noe, their garish ornament,
Their wanton guise, their Love-sicke complement,
Their strange distractions, their deformed state,
Transform'd from English to Italienate,
Expresse small comfort to a Poets penne,
Which onely should delight in shewing them
Unto the worlds eye, whose fame succeedes,
And makes them Noble by Heroicke deedes,
Drawen from the line of Honour:  but how farre
Seeme Poets in these latter times to erre?
Who write not for respect, or due esteeme,
Had to their owne profession, but to gaine
The favour of a great one, this it is,
Gives priviledge to men that doe amisse:
Such be our ranke of Poets now adayes,
As they adorne th' Immerited with praise
Above desert.  Hence is it that we bring
The Art of Poetry to Ballading.
Hence is it, that the Courtier may intend
A strange pretended project for no end,
Save to augment's expence, a suites begun,
Which makes a silly Farmer quite undone,
Without all hope of composition:  l'asse
That such transgressions should so freely passe,
Without controulement.  Many we have heere,
That can compose their Verse, but in a sphere
So different to the time, as they descry
Their want of braines to each judicious eye.
Yea some I know are Poets in this time
Who write of swains, might write as well of swine,
For th' profit of their labours is so small,
As t'were farre better not to write at all,
Then to consume such pretious time in vaine,
About a fruitlesse, and desertlesse straine:
Better indeed:  when in their Makers sight,
They must accomptants be of what they write,
Whose eyes be purer, and extension beare,
Above th' Dimension of a common sphere.
Yet ranke I not (as some men doe suppose)
These worthlesse swaines amongst the laies of those
Time-honour'd Shepheards (for they still shall be)
As well they merit) honoured of mee,
Who beare a part, like honest faithfull swaines,
On witty Wither never-withring plaines,
For these (though seeming Shepheards) have deserv'd,
To have their names in lasting Marble carv'd:
Yea this I know I may be bold to say,
Thames ner'e had swans that song more sweet than they.
It's true I may avow't, that nere was song,
Chanted in any age by swains so young,
With more delight then was perform'd by them,
Pretily shadow'd in a borrowed name.
And long may Englands Thespian springs be known
"By lovely Wither and by bonny Browne,"
Whilest solid Seldon, and their Cuddy too,
Sing what our (Swaines of old) could never doe.
Yea I do hope, sith they so well can write,
Of Shep-heards sport, and of the fields delight.
That when they come to take a view of th' Court,
(As some have done) and have bin mew'd up for't,
They'l tell her freely, (as full well they may)
That in their Judgements, after due survay,
Of th' Court and th' Cottage, they may well maintain,
Vices in the Court, but vertues in the Swaine;
And happy be those Authors which doe give
Vertue and vice their titles, they shall live
In spite of Envie, when such men as teach
That such be onely vertuous as be rich,
Shall lye inter'd, where fame shall never finde them,
For such doe seldome leave a name behind them.
Lasse they must dye and perish, so must we,
Nor can we gaine ought of eternity:
Save that we live, Oh then how blest are they
That spend their life in weighing of their daies.
But of professants, which compose their song
To a strange descant!  this Ile say they wrong
Flowrie Parnassus, where such used to be,
As in themselves made one set company.
These sung not what they knew not, but in Verse,
What time had taught them they use to rehearse,
And to reduce it to one perfect forme,
Striving by proper figures to adorne
Ech worke, ech composition:  but lasse now
How farre's that alteration?  where we know
Lest that we write, adding to our estate
(Begg'd meerely) by a great mans Dedicate.
Heere is no substance, but a simple peece
Of gaudy Rhetoricke:  Which if it please,
Yeelds th' Author dear-contentment:  thus we straine
The Muses Text for a peculiar gaine
Unto our selves:  hence is it vice abides,
(And lording-like in silken foot-cloath rides.)
Hence is it Land-lords make their tenants slaves:
Hence is it waste-goods ope their fathers graves:
Hence is it Mammonists adore their golde:
Hence is't the impious to perdition solde:
Hence Sacriledge a priviledge obtaines:
Hence th' sneking Lawyer by his Clyent gaines:
Hence th' Politician, what so ere befall,
Will to his trade and shew a Machivell.
Hence imposts rise extortions violence,
Graced by men that have most eminence.
Hence Sergeants walk unfronted (though they know it)
No friend is worse then Sergeant to a Poet.
Hence painted faces (like ill wine in caske)
Shrow'd their deform'd complexions under maske.
Hence curious Courtiers, gorgeously arrayd,
Weare more upon their backe then ere was paide:
Hence th' baudie Pandor, servile to his whore,
And hence the Baude that keeps the traders dore;
Hence base informers take their borrowed light,
Living like Owles that use to flie by night:
Hence wanton Prodigals that spend their state,
And 'gin repentance when it is too late.
Hence young and old, hence each in their degree,
Challenge to them a due Monopolie.
O how Minervas temple's now disgrac't,
By th' skum of Poetry!  she that was plac't
Once like th' Ephesian Queene in a pure shrine
Of honour and delight, now's forc't to pine
And languish in her bewty, being deprest,
By such men most, whom she suspecteth lest.
Unpiniond Muses (such as nere could flie)
Further then unplum'd birds now presse as high
As Eagles; which by the Colour you may know,
As eminent and cleere as Flaccus Crow:
These steale selected flowres from others wit,
And yet protest their nature brookes not it,
They are (for both) so invented by their art,
Making their pen the displayer of their heart.
They brooke no Brocage, yet has workes in presse,
Which they are guiltlesse of?  but this were lesse,
Worthy reproofe, if in their gleaned lines,
Like our age Criticks they would curbe these times
For petulancie:  but so vaine be they,
As they runne still in that high beaten way
Of errour, by directing men amisse,
Penning whole volumes of licentiousnesse,
Descanting on my Ladies Rosie lip,
Her Cinthian eie, her bending front, her trip,
Her bodies motion, notion of her time,
All which they weave up in a baudy Rime.
For since there's no observance, Accent neither
(Sith sence and accent seldome goe together.)
O what aspersions doe these lay on her,
Who beares the onely native character.
Of her deere issues merit, shee I meane,
Without whose nourishment we had not been,
She without whose embrace, the solid earth,
Had quite interr'd the honour of our birth:
She without whom we have no biding place,
No mansion, no repose:  she by whose grace
We are inhabitants, planted in rest,
Sucking pure milke out of her tender brest.
She whose our Guardian governing our state
Shoring our weaknesse, arming us 'gainst fate,
Guiding our path-lesse passage, brething life
Into our dulnesse:  midiating strife,
Because (a peacefull mother) chering us
With solace, when deprest, tricking our Muse,
With seemly subjects (that whil'st shepheards sing)
Of rurall pastimes, midst their sonneting,
The graver ranke might compositions make,
Not for themselves but for their countries sake:
Alasse poore countrie; where is all that store
Of divine wits that thou hast bred before?
Where is that Quint-essence of poesie,
That in (fore-times) was wont to breath on thee:
Like a coole Zephirus?  Hybles pure mount,
Renowm'd in former ages and that Fount,
Of sacred Castalie lie desolate.
For they with theirs have lost their former state
Of Greatnesse:  no proportion nor no flower
Decks, with a dasie Border, that sweet Bower
Where Cinthia us'd to revell:  but as th' port
Of house-keeping is now transport'd to Court,
"Leaving their Country-houses, which men looke
And gase at long ere they can see them smoke:"
So fruitfull Hesperie, which us'd to be
The Ren-de vou for sacred poesie
Leving to be her selfe, shuts up her dore?
Hence is the bankrout poet becom'd poore:
Hence is't hee's forc't to write not for the ease
Of his owne minde (but as his Patrons please.)
Hence ist that errors must be Vertues deem'd,
Because, poore Poet, its by Fate ordain'd,
That if he will not humour, he must sterve:
"For Great-men love not heare what they deserve."
How jealous be our times of their deserts,
When they suppresse the eminence of arts?
Making them speechlesse whereas we do see,
If persons were dispos'd as they should be;
Their sincere conscience (like a brazen wall)
Might beare them up what ever should befall.
Then might our Satyre mixe his inke with gal,
But with his mixture do no hurt at all.
Then might our scepticke give his judgement free,
Yet do small harme to mens integritie.
Then might the Lawyer pleade without offence;
Not seare his Conscience with a faire pretence
Of doing good, when his corrupted will
Under pretence of good, acts what is ill.
Then might the divels Factors live like men,
That have a god, nor for the hundred ten;
Receiving with advantage need'd they pay,
A greater summe at that same latter daie,
When due accompts are had:  O usurie
That art the Cities scourge, how much have we
Occasion to proscribe thee from our land,
Since by thy meanes have we felt heavens hand
More heavy and revenging then before,
Whose wrath has vialls ever laid in store
To punish impious men:  its thou (fowle sin)
Which hast hal'd downe the infection we have seene
Rage in this famous Ile:  its thou whose hight
Hath turn'd our day of comfort to a night
Of great affliction:  for who more can be
Afflicted in himselfe, then inwardly
Feeling the worme of Conscience gnawing him
Torment consorting with that birth of sinne
Wherein he's nurtured:  alas poore Ile!
That thou shouldst foster such as do defile
Thy once renowmed borders with the hate
Of a supernall power, making thy state
Pray to oppression, vassalling thy fame
(Which once was glorious) to thy odious name
Of miserie:  Great Albion now is growne
Poore in her selfe, because what is her owne
She cannot use but in depraved wise,
Makes her selfe subject to all forraine eyes
As vices spectacle:  O that the blisse
Which we enjoy by minds Synderysis
Th' refined part of man, should soyled be
By th' worst of ils the staine of usury?
And who'le inveigh against it, few or none,
For miser Nature hardly leaves us one,
That can securely speake against this ill
So generall is the poison of our will:
For (deere Pernassus now is so opprest)
It dare not speake for feare that interest,
Should be demaunded by the Usurer
To whom it stands engag'd:  this is the fate
That Poets have, to leave more wit then state
To their posteritie:  O impious time!
When worst of Fortune followes wits divine;
When noble actions motive in their spirit,
Can leave nought to their Issue to inherit:
Save their poore fathers papers, monuments
Scarce worth respect:  how weakes the Element
Which Poets are compos'd of, when one frowne
Sent from a great mans visage can keepe downe
Their best invention?  silly poesie,
That (though free borne, art forc't to slavery,
And undeserv'd subjection:  pittie it is,
That best of merit should shut up her wish;
And dew expectance in no other booke,
Save in a skrew'd face or a writhed looke;
Unfit to entertaine an Art divine
Which is exprest in that poore Muse of thine.
Come, come, great regent of that sacred quire,
Come in thy selfe and so our soules inspire
With Arts Elixir and with spirit toe,
That we may do with boldnes what we do:
Erect our aged fortunes make them shine
(Not like the foole in's foot-cloath) but like Time,
Adorn'd with true experiments which may
Convert our odious night to glorious day.
Let not Ambition mounted in her state
Passe uncontrol'd:  care not for getting hate:
"For honest minds are best approved still,
Let not these painted blocks of Juvenal,"
Which for their cloaths are most admir'd of al
Stand unreproov'd:  let not their dangling plume
So daunt thee, as thou dare not well presume
To blazon their defects, speake what thou seest
And care not who be pleas'd, or who displeas'd.
Let not moth-eaten Avarice appeare
In this deere Ile, without her Character:
Lash me the Symonist, who though precise
In shew, can geld his Parsons Benifice.
Gall me (our graine-engrossers) moulds of th' earth,
That in their plentie laugh at others dearth.
Rouse me the Atheist, let's security
Heare th' judgement of supernall majestie
Thundring against him:  let th' lascivious
Know their bed-broking sin, how odious
Their sensuall meetings are to his pure eyes,
Who even the secrets of our hearts espies,
Searching our reines, examining our hearts,
Discussing each intention (and all parts)
That have a working faculty:  Even he
That well approves of morall poesie,
He that confirmes the motions of our minde,
And breath's upon them if to good inclinde.
Let not sin-tempting wanton Meremaids rest
Without due censure, who with naked brest,
Attractive eye, and garish Complement
Ensnare our fond unwary Innocent:
These are those Babell publique prostitutes,
Lures to damnation, Romane Catamites,
Inventresses of pleasures, pensive still
To doe whats good, but frolike to doe ill.
O London how thy Vanity abounds,
Glorying in that which thy renowne confounds.
Traduced fashions from the Dutch to French,
From French to Spanish, and not longer since,
Then yesterday, blush at thy sinne for shame,
That Albion (by thy meanes) should lose her name,
And habit too:  see, see, how farre thou'rt gone,
Beyond thy selfe, that there's no fashion knowne,
In forraine Courts, deform'd howsoere it be,
But by transportance it doth come to thee.
Lasse how immodest art thou to expresse,
Thy selfe so much by others fashions lesse?
How strangely Metamorphis'd to partake,
For Angells forme, the most deformed shape,
That Countries can bring out:  O pittie tis
That Albions much admir'd Metropolis,
Should make those which admir'd her now to hate
Her vaine condition (introduc'd by state
Too plentifull:  Here you Hesperian wits
May you have subject more then well befits
A modest pen:  for nere was any time
More prone to ill:  no Region, countrey, clime,
Province, Isle, Regiment so truly blest
With all earths bounties, yet hath lesse exprest,
Of gratitude:  here Satirists resort,
And make an ample coment on the Court,
Where thou shalt write, som's wanton, others vaine,
Ambitious some, others doe covet gaine
By servile meanes:  some beggars, yet who dare
Write in these daies that any such there are.
Then (my sharp tooth'd Satire) frame thy ditty
In the same forme, unrip the Crimes of th' Citty
With a sterne brow:  tell the purple Magistrate,
How he has rais'd himselfe to great estate
By others ruine:  such as Mercers are,
Tell them darke shops have got away ill ware,
Such as be Gold-smiths, and are dangerous,
Call them the Silver-smith of Ephesus.
Long live Diana, but no longer then
By their Diana they doe reape a gaine.
Such as be Brokers, tell them their profession,
Is not to be a knave o' th first edition.
But as those garments which are brought to them,
Use to be worne before by other men:
Even so they broke their vices and receive
Som crimes wrapt up i' th garmets which they have,
Tell them of Wapping, bid them thankfull be,
That there is Justice had for Piracie:
For if that were not (it may well be said)
Many their shops would be unfurnished,
But in the Country now my Muse shall be,
For brooke shee'le not a Brokers Company.
Here shalt thou see th' picture of Avarice,
Thin-cheek'd, raw-bon'd, faint-breath, and hollow-eyes.
Nose-dropping, rhewme-destilling, driveling mouth
Hand-shaking, haire down-falling, th' misers cough,
Legs goutie, knees unweldy, hand on cruch,
Eies in his bosome, gasing on his pouch,
His labour torment, rest he cannot take,
When all are sleeping, he is forc't to wake:
His Eies are ever ope, for riches keepe
His eies unclosed:  The miser cannot sleepe.
He's his owne anguish, such an impious elfe,
Thats ill to all, but worst unto himselfe.
He has not bookes whereon to meditate,
Onely a debt booke and an Alminake.
The one's for forfeitures, where he will pore,
And daie by day travers them ore and ore:
Th' other's his Enterlude that yeelds him mirth,
Seeing predictions of the next yeeres dearth.
Hope of a deerer Sommer then last was
Unseasoned harvest:  O these hopes surpasse
All others, Heere the Miser sets his eie,
And when he does these strange prenotions spie,
He kisses th' booke, sweares the profession's rare,
And wishes all hee reades such subjects were.
This Cormorant engrosseth all his graine,
Makes his barnes greater by a secret traine
Brings ore his neighbours sonne to set his hand,
Unto a sale, and so joynes land to land.
This wicked ulcer that corrupts the state,
Nere thinkes of death, till that it be too late.
His gold's his God, yet use it cannot he,
But in expression of his miserie:
Which puts the poore Miser to a double paine,
By telling it and putting't up againe.
But now (my nimble Satyre) for to thee
Tends this impolisht peece of poesie:
How wilt thou taxe, or where wilt thou begin
With thy tart phrase, to stinge and nettle him?
Thou must be bitter (for in greatest grieves)
And festered wounds we use no lenitives
To mollefie, but corrasives to gall:
And of all griefes this is the great'st of all.
By it we are degenerate and live,
As such as can receive, bnt cannot give
To Nature competence:  Come my deare Mate
Ile tell thee how to cure their desperate state;
Which in few words least that thy memory faile,
Ile speake my minde unto thee in a tale.

It chaunc't upon a time (and well might be
For such like chances fall on miserie,)
A pinch-gut Miser fell extreamely sicke,
So, as at last his Conscience gan to pricke,
And tell him of's oppression, wheresoere
He turn'd his eyes, he saw damnation there.
Sleepe could he not, his sicknesse was too great,
Nor hope for ought, his conscience did so threate
And terrifie his soule:  thus lay this wretch
Poore in his spirit, though to the world rich;
Faine would he oft desire himselfe confest.
But cause he was falne out with Parish priest
About a Tith-pigge, he deferr'd the time,
And would in no case suffer this Divine
To minister due comfort to his state
All woe begone:  so great was th' Misers hate:
For though he were afflicted, yet would he
Up-braide the Parson full irreverently,
Calling him hedge priest, belly-god (nay more)
That like a Thiefe, he came not in at dore,
But in at windowe to his Benefice;
And that he knew the practice and device
Of him and's Patron:  who that th' law might by
Dispensed with in case of Symonie,
Sold him a horse (that whatsoere should fall,)
The price might pay for th' Benefice and all;
This would he say, concluding merrily,
Sir Priest you come more for my pigge then me,

Silent the Parson was, for well he knew,
The Miser spoke no more then what was true
Onely he wisht such neighbours as he had
Present to pray for him, for he was mad,
And that by all appearance it was like
That his disease had made him lunaticke:
Thus every day his sicknesse did encrease,
Bereft of comfort, conscience sweetest peace,
Without all hope of health or here or there,
(For th' worm of conscience follows every where.)
There's no evasion left:  where ere we goe
She will attend us in our weale and woe.
You heard confest he would, but as tis true,
A miser loves not him that craves his due:
So to such men this censure stands for iust,
They love their Conscience rest lesse then their rust.
What should he doe?  the Parson now is gone,
And he unto himselfe is left alone
T' expostulate with death:  his sinnes did grieve him
But now the most when all his friends do leave him;
Torment belowe, judgement he sees above,
Witnesse within him, that will duly prove
What he has done on earth (thus all in one
Make up a consort in his dying mone:
Yet as a ship ore-burdend with her freight
Sinking before, sayls bravely, being made light;
Or as the Ocean beats from shelfe to shelfe,
(Sea-sicke god-wot) till she hath purg'd herselfe.
So this sur-charged soule rowl's here and there,
And yet to comfort is no whit the neere,
Till that same lastage of corruption be
Exempted quite:  then sleepes she quietly.
Confesse he must, but to no Priest, that's vaine:
But unto one cleere of another straine;
Shall I tell Satire?  yes, thou needs must know it,
And this he was; a thrid-bare neighbouring Poet:
Who after dew confession made to him
Of every act, and each peculiar sinne,
Extortion, Violence and Injurie,
Pressing of Orphanes, biting usurie,
Forfeitures taken, forged bills, at last
He makes confession how a Poet past
His pikes:  who once was of a faire estate,
But after had no prospect but a grate:
O, quoth the Poet, that was ill in you;
O (quoth the Miser) I doe know its true:
But with remorce I now lament his fall,
Which 'mongst the rest afflicts me most of all.
Wherefore good Sir, poure out your prayers for me,
That in distast of my impiety
Languishing sore, I may be cheerd in state,
Dying in hope, that now lies desperate.
The faire conditio'nd Poet, though he had heard
How ill his owne profession got reward,
By this hard-harted Miser; yet did he
Scorne his revenge should in affliction be:
Streight he retires himselfe a pretty space,
Chusing for's Orisons a private place,
Which being done, to cheere the drooping man,
With hands heav'd up, his praiers he thus began.

Powerfull Jehovah, King of Heaven and Earth,
That giv'st to all things living life and birth.
Thou that protects each thing which thou hast made,
And so preserv's it, as it cannot fade.
Before the time prefin'd:  thou that wilt have
Mercy on such as thou dost meane to save.
Looke on this wretch (that lies all woe begon)
If so thou thinke hees worthy looking on:
Great is thy mercy, so it needs must be,
If thou wilt save such Miscreants as he.
But what thou meanes to doe, he faine would know,
Whether he must ascend, or fall below:
That he provision may according make,
And fit himselfe for th' Voyage he must take.
For if to heaven, he needs the lesse prepare,
Because he knowes all needfull things be there.
But much he fear'd, and so feare other some,
Mongst which my selfe, that there be nere shall come,
But if to hell (the likelier place o' th two)
He does desire, that thou wouldst this allow.
He may have so much respite as prepare,
The Bonds of all such Prodigalls be there:
That what he could not cancell here so well
On earth, may there be cancelled in hell.
The cause is this (as it to me appeares)
Lest that those spend-thrifts fall about his eares,
When they shall see him, which that he may stay,
He'le cancell th' Bonds, though't be long after day
Or this's the cause as he was impious here,
He meanes to prove an honest Devill there.
"That Time to Times-successors may bring forth,
Hell made him better than he was on Earth."

Much more he praide, but I doe rather chuse,
(Satyre) to make of all his praiers an use,
That when the use shall well expressed be,
Thou maist apply the Benefit to thee.
Sir [quoth the Poet] I my praiers have made,
Have you, (replyed he,) as one dismayed,
Yes sir, and by them so my zeale enforc't,
As I prevaild, though it was long time first,
For know an apparision came to me
With a shrill voice, which bad me say to thee:
If thou wile first a restitution make,
And render up what thou by Fraud didst take,
From any man, but chiefly what thou tooke
From th' Poet:  next, deliver up thy booke
Of all Accounts, great'st cause of thy despaire,
To thy Confessour, and make him thy heyre.
Thou shalt have health for this, it bad me tell,
But if thou wilt not thou art markt for hell,
For Hell, no marry I take keyes and state,
I will not buy wealth at so deere a rate.
If thou my pretty Satyre couldst reclayme,
A miser thus, I'de thanke thee for the same.
But all too long I have enforc't thee stay,
Vice calleth thee, and Time drawes me away.
