THE ARGUMENT OF THE EMBLEAME.
From whence the English anciently derived this Saints canonization, his orders, inauguration &mdash; of Sigismund, Emperour of Almaine:  and his present to Henry the fift.  The institution of this order where, the solemnizing where:  the severall games, exercises, Races, and Martiall trials auspiciously begunne with that Saint. &mdash; And the like of Honour and aduauncement. &mdash; A comparison had betweene Perseus sonne to Jupiter and Danae; who preserved Andromoda from the sea monster, and Saint George, who slew the Dragon.  The discription of Perseus, and of Saint George:  concluding with a victorious Paean to Saint George.

THE EMBLEAME
Haile to thy shrine thou Saint of Albion,
Who had thy auncient consecration
From thy religious mannagements, as farre
Disperst, as Turke or Christian planted are,
Thou art the Saint which we in war doe use,
Hoping by thee to be auspicious.
Yet void of superstition we impart,
Sole laud to him, whose noble Saint thou art.
Nor loose we th' name of th' Almaine Sigismund,
By whom thy precious Reliques first were found.
And heere presented as a royall gift
To Englands Mirrour, Henry the fift.
Since when thy order is solemnized,
At Windsor, where a part of thee is sed
To be inter'd:  thrice happy monument,
To cover part of one so eminent.
So Saintly vertuous as no honour can,
"Give thee thy due, as onley due to man."
O may thy institution honour'd be,
By true deserts, and due solemnity.
Nor whom thy order doth inaugurate,
May they by vice stand subject unto hate.
But so even weighd in all their actions here,
"As Georges Knights may after Saints appeare:"
Which they shall be, by showing fervent zeale
Unto the Church, love to the common-weale.
In all our games and pastimes severall,
Ever on George as on our Saint we call:
For by that name the auncients understood,
Their Fortune could not chuse but to be good,
As Turnaments, Justs, Barriers, and the rest,
In which his name was evermore exprest.
In Races too these present times affoord
Instances store, Saint George he gives the word.
So as it was (as common stories tell)
To say Saint George, as say God speede you well.

In Martiall trials when our armies met,
His name would spirit in our men beget,
"Heightning their courage, perills passing through.
Standing desolv'd before a Cannons mouth.
Out-bearing danger, and with violent breath
Stand at defiance gainst the threats of death."
Marching through horrour they would boldly passe,
(As for pale feare, they knew not what it was)
Which may be instanc'd in that holy war,
Where those that lost their lives canoniz'd are
In leaves of perpetuity:  I meane,
In the regayning of Jerusalem,
Where those renouned Champions enterprist,
For the due honour of their Saviour Christ.
Either to win that Cittie (maugre th' vaunts
Of all those hellish god lesse miscreants,)
Or if they could not th' Cittie so surprize,
Resolv'd they were their lives to sacrifice;
Even then I say when those that Marshall'd them,
Could not with-hold from flight their recreant men;
"Saint George appear'd in a submissive show,
Wishing them not to wrong their Countrie so:"
And though a ghost (and therefore lesse believ'd;
Yet was his moving presence so receiv'd
As none to fight it out resolved more,
Then such as readiest were to flie before.
Up went their scaling-ladders to displant
Th' abhorred of-spring of the miscreant,
And ever as some danger they espide,
God and St. George for England still they cride.
And how successive that renowned warre
Was to those Christians, which enrolled are
In an eternall register, may well appeare
"By Godfrey Bulloyne who was stiled there
King of Jerusalem, yet as its showne,
By auntient stories, would receive no crowne,
Thinking 't unfit that it should be rehearst,
Thar where his masters head with thornes was pierst,"
He that his servant was should be so bold,
As have his head girt with a crowne of gold.
What fame in forraine coasts this Hero got,
The lake Silene shewes, if we should not;
Where in the reskew of a lovely Mayde,
A fearefull Dragon he discomfited,
So as we have portraide to every viewe,
On signes of Innes-how George the Dragon slew;
Which story to expresse were too too long,
Being a subject for each fidlers song:
Yet cause there is (I cannot will nor chuse)
Comparison 'twixt him and Perseus,
Who sonne to Jove and showre stain'd Danae,
In reskew of the faire Andromade,
Encountred that sea-monster; Ile explane
Each attribute of their peculiar fame:
"And then conferring them one with the other,
Collect whose best their actions laide together."

And first for Perseus; great I must confesse,
He was in name, his birth inferres no lesse
Being Joves sonne, yet can he no way shun
The name of Bastard, though he were his sonne:
Deflowr'd his mother was &mdash; and in a showre
Of gold, to shew how gold has soveraigne power,
T' unlocke the fort of fancy, and how soone
"Women are wonne, when golden bayts are showne."
Long Jove had woo'd and yet he could not win
What he desir'd, till gold receiv'd him in,
Which seemes by easie consequence to prove,
"Gifts be the gives that bindes the hands of love."
Thus sprung the noble Perseus, who in time
"To propagate the honour of that line"
From whence he came, and that it might be sed,
That he from Jove was rightly fathered
Tooke on him strange adventures; as to right
"Injur'd Ladies by a single fight,
Encounter Giants, rescew men distrest,"
In each where of his glory was exprest:
"For valiant and more worthy they doe shew them,
That wrongs redresse, then such as use to doe them,"
But th' first and best attempt he did on Earth,
"Was, to wipe off th' blemish of his birth,"
And th' staine of his corrupted mothers honour,
Which blushes blaz'd who ever look't upon her.
"On then along imagin'd it may be"
Went he to th' reskew of Andromade;
Who now was markt for death, and brought to th' shore
Where many maids had bin devour'd before,
By a sea-monster:  here the Virgin stood,
To free her Countrey with her guiltlesse blood,
Whom Perseus (as he coasted by that way)
No sooner vew'd then he began to say.

Faire Virgin (then he wept) impart to us
What rude unhallowed hand hath us'd thee thus
And by the honour of my heavenly Sire
What ere he be he shall receive his hire,
Giant or Monster in the earth or Sea,
Reveng'd he shall &mdash; sweete Virgin tell it me.
Kind Sir (quoth she) and then she staide her breath
As one addrest to meditate of death,
Treate not with me of life, nor aske who 'tis
Giant or Monster that's the cause of this,
Onely know this (thou gentle Knight) that I
"Am doom'd to death, and I'me resolu'd to die."
To die (faire Maide quoth he)?  if't be thy fate,
Ile sympathize with thee in equall state
And die with thee:  onely give griefe a tongue,
To tell me who's the Author of thy wrong:
Know then (sayd he) I am that haplesse she,
The wretched, pittied poore Andromade,
Who here am left of friends, bereft of all
To be a prey unto a ravenous whale:
Many have suffered ere it came to me,
Now is my lot and welcome it shall be,
To expiate with my unstained blood
The Monsters wrath and doe my countrey good;
As she spake this up from the Ocean
Came that devouring vaste Leviathan,
Sweeping along the shore, which being spide;
Good sir retire the noble Damsell cride,
Yonder he comes for love of honour flie,
It's I am doom'd, then let me onely die.
But Perseus (one better tempered,
Then to behold a Virgine slaughtered,
Without assayd revenge) did streight begin
With man-like valour to encounter him,
Doubtfull the skirmish was on either side,
(While th' Maide a sad spectator did abide)
Wooing with teares which from her cheeks did flow
That Jove would give this Monster th' overthrow:
At last her prayers and teares prevail'd so well,
As under Perseus feete the Monster fell;
Whence came it (as the story doth proceede)
The Virgin and her Countrey both were freede:
Which to requite (in guerdon of her life)
She gave her selfe to Perseus as wife,
"Whom he receiv'd &mdash; O he did ill in this,
Sith by the Auncient it recorded is,"
Before that Perseus to her reskew came,
She was espoused to another man
"By name Vaxedor, (O it was a sinne"
To marrie her that was not dew to him:)
And better had 't been to sustaine her fate,
"Then by such breach of faith to violate"
Her former Spousals &mdash; which unjust offence
"Gods may winke at but never will dispence:"
Yea to a barraine Rocke though she were tyde,
Yet better 'twas then to be made a Bride
"To an usurped Bed, for that did laie,
That staine on her, time cannot wipe away."
Thus have you heard what noble Perseus was
With greatest dangers that his worth did passe,
The imminence whereof merits due praise,
"And such a Poet as deserves the Baies:"
Laurell and Myrtle &mdash; though his Nuptiall knot
"Lost him more fame then ere his valour got:"
"For so deprav'd's the Nature of our will,
"What's good we laine, what's ill we harpe on still."
Now to thy English Saint, my Muse repaire,
And lim him so, that when thou shalt compare
These two:  He Perseus may out-strip as farre,
As sunne the Moone, or th' Moone a twinkling star.
George now enstil'd the Saint of Albion,
By linage was a Capadocian;
Whose valour was exprest in all his time,
That vertue might in every action shine,
Which to induce beliefe by moving sence,
I will produce his best description thence,
Both for th' resemblance which hath ever bin,
Twixt the renowned Perseus and him:
As also to make good, that not one staine
"Eclipst that glory which his acts did gaine"
All which by instance seconded shall be
"Perseus was great yet George more great then he."

Tutching that Dragon on Sylenes shore,
I have in part related it before:
Yet but as shadowes doe resemblance make,
Unto the substance and materiall shape,
Digressively I onely seem'd to glance,
At th' act it selfe, not at the circumstance:
Know then this noble Champion hearing one,
Along his travaile making piteous mone,
In meere remorce drew neerer to the noice,
"Till he perceiv'd it was a Ladies voice,
Who in a Virgin-milky white araide.
Show'd by her habit that she was a Maide;
Carelesse her haire hung dowre, and in her looke,
Her woes were writ as in a Table booke:
Warm-trickling teres came streaming from her eies
Sighs from her heart, and from her accent cries.
Tyed was she fast unto a pitched stake,
Bounding on Sylen's Dragon-haunted lake,
All which exprest without a Character
The wofull state which did environ her:
Saint George observ'd her teares, and from his eyes
Her teares by his finde their renew'd supplies,
Both vie as for a wager, which to winne,
"The more she wept, the more she forced him:"
At last with modest haviour in reliefe,
Of her distresse, he thus allaide her griefe.
"Sorrowfull Lady if griefes lesned are,"
When those that pittie griefes receive their share,
Impart your sorrowes to me, and in lew,
"If right I cannot, I will pittie you.
Alasse (sweet youth quoth she) pittie's too late,
When my disease is growen so desperate,
Yet doe I thanke thee for thy love to me,
That never yet deserv'd so much of thee:
"Pray thee begone, such friendship Ile not trie,"
To see thy death one is enowe to die,
And I am shee, &mdash; crosse not the will of Fate,
"Better's to loose one then a double state:"
Be gone I say do not the time fore-slowe,
"Perish I must of force, so needs not thou.
Imminent horror would admit no more;
For now the Dragon from Sylenes shore
Came spitting lothsome venome all about,
Which blasted trees and dried up their roote.
St George the Dragon had no sooner vew'd,
Then fresh supplies of spirit was renew'd
In his unmatched brest:  him he assailes,
And though ore-matcht his spirit never failes
Till he subdew'd him:  and as some averre,
He tyed him fast and made him follow her
Unto her fathers pallace, where we reade
In publike triumph he cut off his head.
Here may we see that act of Perseus
Equall'd by George and made more glorious
In that he aym'd no further nor was se'd
"To put his feete into anothers bed,
His conquest it was temporate and just,"
Not stayn'd with blemish of defaming lust
For no attempt us'd he to undertake,
But for true honour and for Vertues sake.

A VICTORIOUS PAEAN TO OUR ALBIONS ST, ALLUDING TO ALL NOBLE SPIRITS, NATIVE ASSUMERS OF HIS HONOR AND ORDER.
Io Pean then must wee
Give St. George the victorie:
Whose desert
Grac't each part;
Where so ere he us'd to be,
None more grac't, or lov'd then he.

Perseus though his renowne,
Did to all the world come;
Yet one staine,
Dimm'd his fame:
But the worlds spatious roome,
Shrines St. George in honours tombe.
