Cupid departed, and to earth he goes,
To sit and heare the sorrowes, sighes and woes
Of the sad Swaines, for those whom he had slaine;
But most for Coravin they did complaine:
And ev'ry one of them exclaim'd on Death,
Not thinking Cupid had rest him of breath,
Untill the time that he was clad in clay,
Which (woe is me) was on Saint Peters day;
A day of dread.  Oh had it never bin,
T' intombe in clay the comely Coravin,
The comely Coravin (the more griefe's mine.)
In th' earth (that day) the shepheards did inshrine,
Inshrine (aye me!) they did, and I must say,
When I name that, I name a weeping day,
A weeping day.  Yea, so it was indeed:
For then heaven wept, and th' hearts of men did bleed,
Did bleed, 'tis true:  their hearts did bleed, and they
Did nought but weepe upon that wofull day,
That wofull day, the clouds of heav'n distill'd
A world of water, wherewith they were fill'd,
Were fill'd, yea fill'd, and so let fall awaie,
As if they'd meant t' have drown'd the earth that day.
That day the Sun a sable weed did weare,
And with a blacke hood hid his golden hayre;
That day the skie put on a mourning cloake,
And shew'd no vapours, but what seem'd like smoake.
That day the earth was all as blacke as Jet,
Onely with teares (wherewith 'twas over-wet.)
That day a sort of most sweet silver bells
Did nothing sound, but sad-tun'd dolefull knells.
That day there was a world of weeping eyes.
"Sorrow's no niggard of sighs, teares, and cries."
That day each Shepheard wore a Cypresse wreath
Upon his head, and all blacke Say beneath.
That day was Coravins sad funerall,
Which still's lamented, and for ever shall.
A goodly troope did on his hearse attend,
And more had done, if they his death had kend:
For Candida ne're knew that he was dead,
Untill she heard that he was buried:
And then (too soone) 'twas knowne, and she did goe,
Whil'st Cupid was there, that did breed her woe.
Lo, now my Muse is come to nought but mourning:
Her joyes are past, and hopelesse of returning.
Oh you that ever felt the force of Love,
Or know what powerfull pass'ons it doth move;
You that have wept, and sigh'd, and griev'd and gron'd,
When (but your selves) none knew for what you mon'd:
You, you (oh, you) you that know love indeed,
You whose soules melt, whose very hearts doe bleed,
At the remembrance of the sweet sweet name
Of sacred Love (the soveraigne King of flame)
'Tis you I call to, you that I implore;
If yet you have or sighes or teares in store,
Oh lend me them, or some of them at least.
"Much he hath need of makes a liberall feast."
One Muse (unlesse inspired from above)
Can ne're expresse the passions of true love.
One man's too weake in judgement and in wit,
T' explane the force and the effects of it.
Oh helpe me then, helpe both my Muse and mee,
That (by your ayd) it may described bee.
The little streams of water (small brooks give her)
Doe quickly make a full-vein'd flowing River.
So ev'ry accent, ev'ry sigh or teare,
That you lend mee, my work will help't upreare.
"Hard is the heart that will no helpe extend;
Especially (for Loves sake) to a friend."
Come then and ayd me, and (in hope you will)
In Loves deepe passion now Ile dip my quill.
Candida hearing of these heavy newes,
Doth sigh, sob, sownde, and all sad actions use.
Oh heavens (quoth she) why do I live thus long,
Or why hath Death and Time done me this wrong!
Why have they got my Coravin away?
Why have they lapp'd his comely corps in clay?
Why hath heav'n let that fowle Fiend Death have power,
To crop the blossome of that scarse-bloom'd flower?
Why have the Fates so fayre a Shepheard slaine?
Why have they robd me of so rare a Swaine?
Why have they stolne the lustre of my life?
Why got a hop'd-for husband from his wife?
Why dimd the Sun that shin'd upon me heere,
And left me neither Love, nor friend, nor pheere?
Why (unsuspected) hath time him betray'd?
Why made m' a widdow, whilst I am a Mayd?
Why hath he rest me of all joyes in one?
And why left me to wayle, now he is gone?
Oh what did move the gods to be so cruell,
As to deprive me of my dearest Jewell?
As to deprive me of my dearest Jewell,
And leave me like a fire without fuell?
Fire without fuell (soone) will fade and die:
And without Coravin even so must I:
Even so must I.  Yea, (and great reason too)
For want of his life doth my life undoe.
What els had I wherein I tooke delight?
What joy had I, but onely in his sight?
What comfort had I, but in Coravin?
What hearts content, but whereas he hath bin?
What pleasure to me did this world extend?
What other solace, but that one sweet friend?
What did I love, or what did I hold deere,
But onely him, my Love, my life, my pheere?
And is he gone?  is he untimely slaine
By Love?  or Death?  or by my owne disdaine?
Oh, which of us three hath the Murtherer bin?
Which of us was it that kil'd Coravin?
Love, was it thou?  oh (if thou did'st it) speake:
For if Love kil'd him, griefe my heart will breake:
'Twill wound my soule even to the very death,
If Love hath reft my deare-belov'd of breath.
I know he lov'd me, and that wondrous well:
And I lov'd him more deare then tongue can tell.
But (oh) 'twas long before that I could do it,
And much adoe he had to bring me to it:
He su'de, he serv'd, and often sought unto mee,
By pray'rs, plaints, teares, and all that else might woo mee:
But I relentlesse was, and flinty hard,
And his great griefes but little did regard.
I was too young to feele the force of Love:
Teares, plaints, nor pray'rs could me to pitty move,
Then would he write, and as he wrote, hee'd weep;
Blood was his inke which he in teares would steep:
The pen shew'd pure love, and the paper zeale,
Wherewith the poore Swaine did his plaints reveale:
Pitty he pleaded for with's soule and heart,
And (with much weeping) pray'd me ease his smart:
(For by the paper I might eas'ly see,
That he did weep much, when he wrot to mee.)
Love, thou art powerfull, I confesse it now,
Though of thy lawes I did not late allowe:
But if thy might to murther did extend,
Thou hast wrong'd him, and also me his friend:
For I must thinke, if he by love was slaine,
Though thy hand did it, 'twas through my disdain.
Disdaine (sayd I?) yea, yea, I did disdaine him,
Els I had pitty'd, when he first did plaine him:
And therefore, Love, I must hold thee excus'd;
For Love not me, but I have Love abus'd.
Then let me never thinke, that Love did ill him,
But rather yeeld, that my disdaine did kill him.
'Twas so indeed:  in very deed 'twas so,
'Twas my owne selfe, that wrought my selfe this woe:
For had I been kind (as I might have been)
Still had I kept my comely Coravin:
Still had I kept my comely Coravin,
Had I been kinde (as oh, would I had been)
But (wretched) I would not be wonne too't then.
Ah (foolish Females) why should we wrong men?
Why should a selfe-will'd woman work his death,
That loves her dearer then his deare-lifes breath?
Why should we prize Virginitie so hie,
That e're wee'le lose it, let our Lovers die?
When th' one's an Idoll that's but good in name,
And nothing else (how ere we prize the same)
Th' other is the rarest frame on earth,
From whose faire being first our selves took birth:
But I'm unwise (as women aye have bin)
And have both wrong'd my selfe and Coravin,
Not onely in this, but many other things,
Which now much sorrow by remembrance brings:
For had he sometimes proffer'd me a kisse,
(Why should a true friend such a favour misse?)
I'de frowne, and say he was too peremptory.
Then he (poore soule) would straight-way say I'm sorry:
If I offend you, Ile no more assay.
Yet (as one injur'd) I would fling away,
And scarce come neere him of a good while after,
To make him grieve, whilst I grew fat with laughter:
But weighing (at length) how hainously he tooke
My sharpe rebuke, I with a smiling looke
Would comfort him, and say, Come, Coravin,
Too much unkindnes for one kisse hath bin;
To make amends with, take thee two or three;
Though I seem'd coy, Ile not be so to thee:
And therefore come (sweet-heart) and take inow.
"Mayds (though th' are squeamish) lov't as well as you."
"What's hardly gotten, men most highly deeme:
But what's soone purchast, slightly they esteeme."
Then blame me not, although I seemed coy.
"Lovers (like babes) must beg for every toy,"
And in th' obtaining thinke th' are happy too,
By getting that which others cannot doe.
But whither am I carry'd with this veine
Of my conceited (counterfeit) disdaine;
Since to be coy, and something seeming nice,
Is not disdaine?  disdaine's as cold as Ice.
But my affection (like to coales of fire
In ashes wrapt up, lest they should aspire)
Was inly hot with fervency of zeale,
Though to my selfe I did the same conceale.
"Fire hid in ashes, hardly is containd,
But love invelloped, more hard restrain'd."
Then since I inwardly did hold him deare,
"And inward passions penetrate most neere,"
I must needs thinke my sorrow-tyred tongue
Hath been o're apt to doe my owne selfe wrong,
In saying, my disdaine should worke his woe,
Who was not loathed, but beloved so,
That I esteemd him dearer then my life,
And onely hoped to have been his wife:
And well I might; for he deserv'd no lesse,
But to enjoy the bravest Shepheardesse:
For oh, he had such worthy qualities,
And was so faire, well-favour'd, and so wise,
That every Shepheardesse did like and love him,
Althogh their beauties had no pow'r to move him:
Onely my selfe sweet Coravin affected;
The rest he lov'd not, nor their loves respected.
I know he lov'd mee; and for ever will
Resolve my selfe, that he doth love me still,
Loves me in death as dearely as in's life.
And oh, (me thinks) I heare him call me wife.
Wife was his word:  Wife would he ever call me.
Oh, that no other title had befall me:
For then, ah then, (I need not tell yee how)
I'de bin as happy, as I'm haplesse now:
For now I'm neither Widdow, Mayd, nor Wife;
And yet all three:  and so I'le end my life.
I'le end my life:  oh, that it now were ended:
For then by Death I should be much befriended,
And with my Coravin should quickly be,
Whose hov'ring ghost now seems t' appeare to me,
And lookes as grimly as if some were heere,
That were the meanes to make away my Deare:
Or that his passage Caron hath deni'd
To th' Eliz'an fields (for Lovers purifide)
Untill the world takes notice of his wrongs
By my complaint, (to whom it most belongs.)
If it be so, (sweet Coravin) be sure,
Thou shalt not long thy wandring course indure.
I'le doe thee all the right that I can doe:
Which being done, I will come to thee too:
But yet (ah wretched and unhappy I)
Though die I would (as yet) I cannot die.
Those that would live, Death quickly takes away:
But those that would die, them he doth delay.
Injurious Fates, why should your Factor Death
So forward be, to suffocate the breath
Of jocond Shepheards, and of Jov'all spirits,
And flie from them that wretchednesse inherits?
But (oh) I now perceive wherefore he flies me,
And why (although intreated) he denies me
To end my daies.  Oh, 'tis because that hee
Murther'd my Coravin for loving mee.
For if nor Love, nor my disdaine did slay him,
Surely 'twas Death that did from hence convay him.
Death, yea 'twas Death, and none but Death did doe it.
(Yet gods, nor men, ne're gave consent unto it)
Meager fac'd monster, most envious slave,
With Natures best gift why didst fill a grave?
Thou un-seene shaddow, gastly and most grim,
Why hast thou fild a vasty vault with him,
With him that was Earths all-admired Creature,
And did surpasse all Shepheards for sweet feature?
With him that graced th' Arcadian Plaines,
And was the glory of their goodly Swaines:
With him that was the Mirror of all men
That e're was seene, or e're shall be agen:
With him that was indued from above,
With all the gifts that gods and men doe love:
With him whose youth was vertuously inclin'd,
And (as the Sun doth lights) all Swaines out-shin'd
With him that was belov'd of all (save thee)
And therefore slaine t' extract these teares from me.
Accursed Death, most cruell and unkind,
Having slaine him, why leav'st thou me behind?
Why may not I (that am his onely Wife)
Associate him as well in death as life?
Why should I live, and draw a loathed breath,
When my deare Love lies in the jawes of Death?
Wee reade of Women throw themselves in fire,
When as their loving husbands lives expire.
Portia tooke burning Coales and swallowed,
Hating to live, her husband being dead.
Cleopatra (for Love of Anthony)
With sting of Aspicks did most stoutly die.
And shall not I (although a Shepheardesse)
Resolve like them, since in the like distresse?
Shall I bee tim'rous (and not imitate
The worthy'st women for a worthy mate?)
No:  I'le not be divorced from my Deare:
Since he is gone, I'le not sit grieving heere.
Sweet Coravin, I'le come to thee 'ere night,
And give my life, to gaine my Lovers sight.
But then (ah then) who shall thy death deplore?
These my laments doe make thy losse seeme more:
Therefore I'le live, and let the world to ken,
How much I priz'd thee more then other men,
Who although dead to others, yet (in mee)
Thou shalt live still, and still my True-love be:
For so thou art (in deed, loh so thou art)
Thou onely holdst possession of my heart,
Possession of my heart thou holdst in deed,
And shalt for ever (none shall thee succeed.)
Then why should I imagine thou art slayne?
And why inveygh 'gainst Love and Death (in vayne?)
Come, Candida, 'tis folly thus to doe:
Thou injur'st them both, and thine owne selfe too.
They did not kill sweet Coravin.  Ah, no.
Some uncouth accident hath bred this woe:
Some qualme o're's heart, or else some extasie,
Bred by conceit (begot by jelousie)
Of griefe, might kill him, seeing many seeke me,
Lest some of them (as well as he) might leeke me.
Yea sure 'twas so, so did he die (no doubt)
"No death's untimely, but time brings it out:"
"Heaven will not have a murther to be hid,
But first or last bewrayes the homicid."
But if griefe kild him, 'tis in vaine to weep:
"For 'twill kill all that doo't long company keep.
Then Candida (awhile) lay teares aside,
And tell what love-tricks did in's life betide:
Tell how hee'd sit, and pipe so prettily,
That all Swaines joy'd to heare his harmonie:
Each Nimph and Shepheardesse, that now remains
In any of these neighbouring Groves or Plains,
From Fountaines and from fieldes would flock with speed,
To heare him play upon his Oeten Reed:
And as they daily used for to doe,
So would the Satyrs and the Dreiads too.
How oft have I my milke-white flocke forsooke,
And slily stolne downe to a silent brooke,
My Coravins sweet Songs and Oads to heare,
When he (poore soule) thought little I was there?
Amongst the Reeds (oh wherefore did he hide him?)
At unawares I oftentimes have spyde him:
There would he sit, and sometimes sing and play,
And sometimes weep, and many woes bewray:
Sometimes his musicke did delight mine eare;
Sometimes I'd sigh his sad complaints to heare,
And to my selfe say (Lo) I can relieve him:
But I'le not doo't, 'cause purposely I'le grieve him.
Tut, let him languish, pule, and pine awhile.
"Who sighs for love, makes his beloved smile:"
For as the Adamant doth Diamonds drawe,
Or little Jeat extracts the longest strawe:
Even so my beauty binds him to obey,
To seeke to sue, and serve me every way.
"Faire women (alwaies) specially the witty,
Love to be lov'd, but love not to shew pitty,"
Though faire-fac'd foolish ones that do not know,
How to esteem the beauties that they owe,
May (like a Puppy that is playd withall)
As oft as touch'd, be apt to take a fall.
But we that know what pow'r our beauties have
Can at out Altars make them creepe and crave,
And thinke th' are happy too, and if they may
But get a kisse, for courting us all day:
For we doe use to trie, before we trust:
How should we else distinguish Love from lust?
"Men are deceitfull, and will sweare they love us,
(Calling to record gods, and heav'n above us)
When they intend no love at all unto us,
"But onely lust (wherewith they lay t' undoe us)
Seeking to undermine by subtill Arts,
The weake made fortresse of our feeble hearts,
For what i'st, wit, or Art, or gold can doe,
But they will use (if not abuse them too?)
Onely to gaine their wicked wils of us,
Whom they'l soone cast off, if they conquer thus.
Ah beauty, borne to multitudes of troubles,
How many wayes thy misery redoubles!
Subject thou art unto suspition still,
And art condemn'd, thogh thou commit'st no ill:
Feare and soule Jelouzie thy attendants bee,
Sickenes and age doe each howre threaten thee.
Besides all this, men (both with gold and wit)
Seeke beauties ruine, and lay siedge to it.
Nay more then thus, it doth it selfe betray,
And to our foes our weakenes doth bewray.
No marvell then though faire ones feele much woe,
When all these enemies assaile them so."
But in this case I wrong my Coravin,
Who giltlesse was of such egregious sin:
For why, his love was most immaculate,
As free from folly, as 'twas far from hate:
For when upon his pipe he did sit playing,
Or his sad passions seriously bewraying,
He did desire his Candida might heare,
Both what his pastimes and his plainings were:
His heart and tongue concurring both in one,
Made him wish audience, when he was alone:
"For Lovers that do no dissembling use,
Can make no faults, but what Love may excuse."
But flattring fellowes that come cogging to us,
"(Surely they lov's not, that with slights do wo us)
Their praise and proffers are like lime-twigs laid,
Wherewith t' ensnare an unsuspecting mayd."
But Coravin did love unfainedly;
Free were his thoughts from fraud and flattery:
For (with his tongue) his heart did speake to me,
"(Happy were mayds might all so wooed be.)"
Nothing but pure thoughts which proceeded still
From true affection and intire good will,
Which made me love him, and oft times go looke,
"(Love teacheth Lovers to search every nooke)"
Whether he were in flow'ry field, or Grove,
Or to some fonntaine had his fayre flocke drove,
Where, if I found him, (as perhaps I did)
"(For Love may lie close, but not long be hid)"
Like pretty Lambs wee'd sport and play together.
"Wooers are wags, or wantons, choose you whether.
Then though my Deare (to my great griefe) be dead,
Yet let our meetings be remembered:
Mickle good pastime had we two alone,
And (oh) most pleasing, 'cause 'twas seene to none.
"Love takes no liking where strange eies may see't:
But where most secret, there 'tis still most sweet."
Oh, how the kisses and the kind imbraces,
Which past betwixt us twaine in private places,
Now (being remembred) ravisheth my sence,
And with my sorrowes seemeth to dispence!
Bidding me leave my sad Laments awhile,
And with (then) amorous talke this time beguile,
Which (for my Loves sake) I am loth to doe.
"But weak's our sexe, and wandring-minded too.
We (like the Moone) our minds must often change,
All women us't, and therefore 'tis not strange."
Then if one passion can expell another,
Love (for a while) Deaths sad designements smother,
Whil'st I relate (in this lamenting time)
Our pretty pastimes in Love pleasant prime,
This is my lip (kinde) Coravin would say,
When on my soft lip his sweet finger lay.
This is not Thenots, nor doth Thirsis owe it:
But 'tis my lip; Love did on me bestowe it.
Then would he kisse it, and (in kissing) crie.
Heer's Heav'n on earth, and th' onely joy that I
Desire to have:  for with a tutch of this,
Mee thinkes, I feele a taste of all true blisse.
Then would he kisse, and kisse it o're agen.
("Such sweets as those ne're satiateth men.")
And then (in passion) feeling what he spoke,
From his sweet tong these sugred speeches broke:
If ever Balsamum did cure a wound,
If ever comforts did mans cares confound,
If ever excellence did breathe on earth;
Here (I protest) it first of all tooke birth:
For here I finde the Fountaine of delight,
By day to comfort, and content by night.
Here finde I Nectar and Ambrosia too,
For which the gods strive (as we mortals doe)
Heere's Hibla's honny, and Himettus dewe,
Desir'd by all, but (ah) inioy'd by fewe:
Here is the summe of all my soules desire;
Here springs the fuell that inflames loves fire;
Here sweet Aromaticks and odours flowe,
Rarer then ever did in Aegypt growe;
Here is the place surpasseth Helicon,
(Which all the Muses sport and play upon;)
Heere sits the Graces on this (sacred) lip;
Heere dance the Fayries, heere they finely trip;
The Shag-hayr'd Satyres, and the Dreiads all,
Heere (onely) keepe their solemne Festivall;
Heere is the Latmus Phebe light upon,
To kisse her deare-lov'd young Endimion;
Heere is the Crimson-colour'd Currall dore,
Wherewith Love locks up his delicious store;
Heere are inclos'd Port-cullices of Pearle,
(Given by the gods t' adorne my dainty Girle)
Whiter then Iv'ry, and of farre more worth,
Then all the pearles that Taprobane brings forth;
Heere lyes (intrench'd) the organ of her heart,
Which never moves, but musicke doth impart,
Sweeter then that which god Apollo playd,
When he to win faire Daphnes love assayd.
Oh, how my soule is ravish'd, when I heare
That most mellifluous tongue sound in mine eare!
For then (me thinks) some sacred Angell sings,
Whose voyce my sences in a slumber brings,
And all my cares and corrasives expels,
By hearing her, whose harmony excels:
For Candida can tune her sweet tongue so,
That when she speaks, her words extirps my woe.
And heere (ah heere) besides what is recited,
Is one thing more wherewith I am delighted,
And that's her dulcet and delicious breath,
Able to sweeten the sowre face of Death,
And purifie the most infectious ayre:
What it perfumes, no poyson can impaire.
Odours and Incense (offer'd to the gods)
Are not so sweet, as her sweet breath (by ods:)
For when she speakes, the Sunne seemes to exhale,
And drawe that vapour from this earthly vale,
Up to the cloudes, which (sweetned there withall)
Shall hence forth none but honny drops let fall:
Which drops distilling from fayre heav'n to earth,
Shall give her glory that first gave them birth.
Thus would my deare-lov'd lov'ly Coravin
Sit and discourse, when we alone have bin.
Then would he claspe me in his comely armes,
Whose pleasant touches were as powerful charms,
To bind me with, more fast and firmer too;
Then chaines of Ir'n or Adamant can doe:
And b'ing impris'nd in that Iv'ry Gayle,
(From whence sweet kisses onely were my bayle)
Hee'd set him down upon the green-leav'd grasse,
And (having me in's armes) would say, Sweet lasse,
Heere we may sport us on these pleasant bankes,
And use a thousand pretty wanton prancks;
Heere we may sit, and clip, and coll, and kisse,
Dally, do what we will, taste all Loves blisse:
For heer's no envious Ill-suspecting eye
Neere to this place:  we heere in covert lie:
Time proffers here from foule reproach to free us:
For why, heer's none (save heav'nly power's) can see us.
"Lo, thus the place with th' opportunity
Moves many a chaste mind to immodesty,"
And brought my Coravin (there furtherance having)
For what's unfitting thus to fall a craving.
Sweet Candida (quoth he) thou know'st I love thee,
And for Loves first fruits now I meane to move thee:
Thou see'st the all-discrying light of day
Is almost fled, and vanished away,
And sable colour'd night (which all things covers)
Spreads her black Curtain to befriend kind Lovers.
Lo, all is whist, our flocks are close in folde;
And we alone:  why should we not be bolde?
It were a shame that I so long should woo thee,
And never offer Loves delights unto thee.
Then blame me not, though now I move that sute.
"(Maids should be mar'd, if men were ever mute.)"
It is our part to make the proffer still:
But's your acceptance makes it good or ill.
Then be propitious (like the time and place)
"Th'are happy lovers have kind loves in chase."
Come, Candida, thou know'st what I desire.
"No Sea's more boundles then Loves burning fire."
Deare Sweet, delay not; but let me possesse
That which I seeke:  thou shalt have ne're the lesse.
Then yeeld to me without resisting long.
"'Tis vaine for weak ones to contend with strong."
With that I sigh'd, and wept, and struggled too,
And thus cry'd out, (oh God,) what shall I doe?
Shall I be injur'd by my onely friend,
And will he rob me, that should me defend?
What faith's in men, when friends do traitors prove
And let their lusts gaine soveraignty 'ore Love?
This sayd (quoth he) Why weep'st and wayl'st thou thus,
Since time and place seeke both to pleasure us?
My Faith and Troth (thou know'st) are plight to thee,
That true and constant I will ever be.
What though we are not (as I wish we were)
Married together?  let that be no barre:
For in the heav'ns, He that doth sit most high,
Knowes all our vow's, and knowes I doe not lie.
Wee two are linck'd (though not with Hymens band)
With heart in heart, and also hand in hand;
And whilst in me remaines a sparke of life,
I will account sweet Candida my wife;
And at the instant I resigne my breath,
I'le call thee so, and seale it with my death.
For th'art my wife, and there lives none but thee,
That any right or int'rest hath in mee.
(Sweet Candida) then why should'st thou resist me?
And having thus spoke twenty times he kist me:
"For kissing's oyle, which (cast upon loves fire)
Doth aggravate and make it more aspire."
But words, vows, kisses (though too strong all three)
All wanted power to prevaile with mee:
For though these agents did all pleade delight,
Yet still I dreaded, lest some danger might
Ensue thereof; besides the hideous shame
That might detect me, whereso're I came.
And therefore thus replide (Sweet Coravin)
Oh do not tice me for to taste that sin,
That odious sin, which (with my soule) I doe
Hate, even as hell, and all hells torments too:
I yet am cleare, my flesh is free from taint
Of filthy lust; then seeke not thou to stain't,
But rather lend me thy keene-edged knife,
Wherewith to end this my unhappy life:
For I protest, then thousand deaths Ile die,
E're lose mine honor, shipwracke chastity.
He hearing me thus resolutely bent,
First fetch'd a sigh, then pray'd me be content;
And to appease my anger, fell to kissing.
"(Loves chief'st delight, when th' other thing is missing.)"
But whil'st he kist, I striv'd and struggled so,
Wee both grew breath-lesse, then he let me go.
Yet oft we met there:  But my Coravin
Ne're (after that) intic'd me unto sin,
Nor any kindnesse would presume to crave,
More then my selfe thought good to let him have:
For since he held a glance to be a grace,
And kissing, favour in the highest place.
"Whereby we see, lew'd suites must be controld,
Or th' hand of lust will soone make loves heart cold.
Mayds must not let men have their minds of them,
Chastity's precious like a Diadem,
And hardly kept (as Crownes are kept by Kings.)
So many seeke for to subvert such things:"
But leaning that, which (oh too well) is knowne.
"(For few there are that can defend their owne)"
Let me cease talking of it, and returne
To where I left my deare Deares losse to mourne:
For ill it fits me, whom sad woe hath ceaz'd,
To speake of ought wherewith I ear'st was pleas'd.
"Joyes are no joyes that doe in sorrow end.
Misery (most commonly) doth come unkend:
And when we thinke, we are in saf'st estate,
Mischiefe stands neer'st the maine to ruinate:"
For lo, when I beheld those happy daies,
Which e'rst I spoke of, and I once might praise,
I little feared that (which now I finde,
To quench my hopes in this unhappy kinde.)
Griefe (the onely issue of unhappy creatures,
The bane of beauty, and best-formed features)
Should have brought me into th' estate I'm now,
For to sit thus, and sigh and grieve with you,
For losse of Coravin, whom you lov'd dearely:
Yet onely me his death concernes most neerely:
For he was mine, my best and chiefest part,
The onely joy and comfort of my heart:
And therefore I have the most cause to mourne,
(Though your loves will not let me weepe alone)
Yea it is I, and none but onely I,
That for his death have cause to sit and cry,
To cry, complaine, to sorrow, sigh, and mone,
Till like to wofull Niobe (now a stone)
I be transformed; from the forme I beare,
And have no sence t' afford or feele a teare:
For Coravin, when he resign'd his breath,
Gave me this gift, his death should be my death,
My death indeed:  for (oh) why should I live,
To whom my Love this Legacy did give?
Why should I live, and sit lamenting heere
Upon the earth, when heav'n doth hold my Deare?
It is unfit (since we two were as one)
That I should live, now my deare Love is gone.
Ah time, why art thou now so slowly paced,
That wont'st to flit more swift then th' hart that's chased?
Why in my sorrowes dost thou seeme to leave me,
That of all joyes so lately did'st bereave me?
For having done the worst that thou couldst doe,
In killing him, why dost not kill me too?
Why bring'st not Death (urg'd by this occasion)
On my lives kingdome to make sterne invasion?
Hast thou tooke al from me that thou couldst take,
Saving my selfe (that now is sorrowes make?)
And leav'st thou me distressed (as in scorne)
To be times abject, that did time adorne?
For I was held the onely Paragon
That e're th' Arcadian Shepheards look'd upon.
Made they not Odes and Sonnets ev'ry day,
Which to the world my beauty did bewray?
Who was't could pipe, and did not sound my praise,
(Whose name adorned all their Roundelayes.)
Was I not th' onely object of their eyes,
At whom they would (as at the Suns arise
The Salvadge people doe) stand in a maze,
Worshipping that whereon their eyes did gaze?
What argument did any of them hold
So confident, (it could not be controld)
As of my beauty, person, and rare wit,
Which oft made multitudes to muse at it?
Each Shepheardesse envi'd my ex'lent parts,
As th' onely Adamant to attract mens hearts,
And sayd, that I was honord of each Swaine,
As Cynthia is of all her starry traine.
This time I had, and thus I was reputed.
But what I was, is now (by woe) confuted,
And with my woe, the wretchednesse of time
Upbraydeth me, as guilty of a crime,
For letting slip occasions that were offer'd.
And losing time, when love (in time) was proffer'd,
Telling me now (ah that no time could tell mee)
What I forsooke, and what hath since befell mee,
Saying I had (oh that I had so still)
A time, wherein I might have wrought my will.
I had a time wherein I liv'd content,
I had a time of sport and merriment,
I had a time, wherein I tooke delight,
I had a time, when time was worth the sight,
I had a time, wherein I might have bin
More kinder then I was to Coravin,
I had a time (e're time tooke him from mee)
Which joy'd my heart that happy time to see.
But now (ah now) that time's untimely past,
And where weale was, there wretchednes is pla'st.
Aye me, most miserable of all mayds alive!
More tyranny no Tyrant can contrive,
Then time hath shew'd to take all did content me,
And now to mocke, and with much griefe torment me,
"But still it falls out (oh disasterous Fate!)
That the most fayre are most unfortunate:
For as w' are blest with beauty from above,
So w' are accurst by being crost in Love;
Which makes the meanest, and most black of all,
Despight our fayrenesse, and desire our fall,
Glorying to see the ruine of our state:
For whom men love most, them most women hate.
It grieves our Sexe to see a supreme fayre,
To live unblemish'd, breathing in the ayre,
And e're they shall unscandalized live,
(Most shamelesse) they will them shames liv'ry give."
But why against this huge-made monster, many,
Doe I inveigh, that ne're was wrong'd by any?
Ne're wrong'd by any?  yes, yes, and envide,
If not (by some) too palpably belide.
But ah, I recke not what reports they make.
I'le suffer all for my sweet Lovers sake:
For if in Coravins behalfe they speake,
They shall do well their wraths on me to wreake.
Too much blame cannot upon me be layd:
For I deserve the worst that can be sayd.
Just are the heavens in punishing me thus,
And yet I'm wrong'd.  (Oh, who can right discusse?)
None but the gods my injuries doe know:
Each mortal's ignorant how my griefes doe grow.
Would I had ne're liv'd to have felt Loves force,
Envious Death then had not made divorce
So (unexpectedly) twixt him and mee,
Thus to provoke my sorrowes (as you see.)
Aye me, it is for Coravin that I
Now sigh, and grieve, and weepe thus wofully.
Dead is my Deare.  (Oh would he were not so)
Joy, heav'n, thou hast him (he did thither goe)
On earth he could not, no, he could not stay.
Heav'n got him hence (like Ganimed) away.
None but my dearest deare-lov'd Coravin,
Coravin (onely) could Joves favour win.
Up to the heav'ns the gods have got my Love:
Royally roab'd, he there attends on Jove.
Would I were with him, and coequally
In heav'n establish'd in eternity.
No doubt I shall:  but (ah) I cannot yet.
"Angels seats are most difficult to get."
Retyre then, thoughts:  for (till my death's day) I
Cannot attaine to immortality:
And dye I would not, till the world doth know,
"(No flatt'rers tongue can true affection show)"
Directly how my Coravin was lost.
Injurious Fates, how are we wretches crost!
Death doth deprive us of our Dearest friends;
And yet conceales the causes of their ends.
Are we so much despis'd of heav'nly Pow'rs,
Not what they gave us, we may keepe as ours?
Did heav'n not (once) give Coravin to me?
Can they revoke it, I not injur'd be?
Oh no, no, no, (I know) they cannot do it?
"Rob'ry's unjust whose're ads ayd unto it."
And therefore heav'ns (I say) and gods are cruell,
Unjustly to deprive me of my Jewell.
If I doe wrong you, (heav'ns and gods) I pray,
Now, now, (oh now) oh take me now away,
Take me away; yea, yea, so let it be.
And (whose're kild him) lay the guilt on me:
Say, my unkindnes kil'd the flower of Swaines,
(The comely'st Shepheard that e're kept these Plaines)
Yet 'twas not I, my coynesse, nor unkindnesse;
But t'was this Boy-god, Love (misse-led my blindnesse:)
For (on my soule) I n'ere intended ought,
That wrong'd my Deare, in word, or deed, or thought.
But, Love, 'twas thou, 'twas thou, and none but thou.
That murther'dst him, and mak'st me mourne heere now:
'Twas thou that did'st bereave me of my joy,
And now dost drench me in this dyre annoy:
'Twas thou that did'st my youths fayre hopes delude,
And all my comforts cruelly exclude,
'Twas thou that did'st destroy my Dearest friend,
With whome my love, and dear'st delight did end:
'Twas thy hand gave my heart this cause of woe,
And made these eyes (like raging streames) or'eflow:
'Twas thou that mad'st these Shepheards fall a weeping,
And leave their fayre flocks (carelesse) without keeping:
'Twas thou didst all whereof I doe complaine:
Thy cursed Bow my best-belov'd hath slaine,
And in that act thou hast perform'd all ill,
"(For who can do a worser deed, then kill?)"
Ah, Cupid, Cupid, thou hast stain'd thy name:
Both heav'n, and earth, are full of thy defame,
And more shall be:  there staid, and sigh'd, and groan'd.
(Such wofull wights are worthy to be moan'd.)
Then turn'd her selfe, and wistly look'd about,
Till she spide mee (that still paints passions out,)
Whome shee desir'd, as e're I lov'd a Woman,
(Which pow'rfull speech can be withstood by no man)
That I would write her wrongs, and woes at large.
At whose request I undertooke this charge;
And thus reply'd:  Thou subject of my verse,
If (silly) I, thy sorrowes must rehearse,
Daine (thou Divin'st of creatures) to infuse
A fluent spirit into my feeble muse,
That unborne Issues (in my worke) may see,
What thy perfections could performe by mee.
Thou art my Subject, and my Sweet Muse too,
From whome flowes all, of all I wish to doe.
Three dayes and nights I have already spent,
Of thy sad sorrowes, for to see th' event.
And ten times three more (willingly) I'le spend,
To make thy woes unto the wide-world kend.
Thanks she return'd me, and requitall vow'd.
"True beauty (like true vertue) is not proud:"
But him that merits, still it will affect,
Though witlesse Dowdies doe all worth neglect.
Then unto Cupid turn'd her speech agen.
"(Women are more impacient then men)"
'Tis thou (quoth she) that makest me forlorne;
'Tis thou that mak'st me hold my life in scorne;
'Tis thou that hast of all contentment reft me,
And nought but woe and wretchednesse now left me.
Ah woe is me, that ever I knew Love,
Since thereby I thus miserable prove:
Since thereby I thus miserable prove,
Woe to the time that ever I knew Love.
Was it for this Dame Nature did her best,
To frame my face more fayrer then the rest?
Was it for this I did reject so many,
And (but that one) could love or like of any?
Was it for this, that I would go so trim,
To gaine his love, then be beguild of him?
Was it for this, that I did tricke my hayre,
And sought all meanes to make me supreme fayre?
Was it for this, that I so carelesly
Forsooke my flockes, to keepe him company?
Was it for this, that I tooke no delight
In any thing, but onely in his sight?
Was it for this, nor wealth, nor wit could win
My flint-hard heart to let love lodge therein,
(Though many a sweet and worthy Swaine did woo me)
Till he did come, whose death doth quite undoe mee?
Ah Love (blinde Love) how blindly dost thou lead us,
And (like a false friend) badly dost bestead us?
Is this the guerdon thou didst promise me,
To pay with death my Loves long-look'd for fee?
Is this the comfort I did hope to have,
For Bride-grom's bed?  my Bride-groome in his grave?
Oh eyes (henceforth) be you no longer eyes:
But (having seene these sad calamities)
Turne into rivolets of running teares,
And as small drops of raine the Marble weares:
So dig you channels, and indent deepe creekes
In my (now) clowdy and discolour'd cheekes,
And let your lights (which e'rst did shine as cleare,
As heav'ns bright lamps) no more to men appeare:
But be you dim, nay, darke and shaded ever:
Keepe your close Cells, and be disclosed never.
And thou my face, faire beauties late-lov'd field,
(Such as Arcadian Swaynes have seene but sil'd)
Never seeme amiable in mans eye:
But let thy Roses and thy Lillies dye.
And now let wrinckles (mixt with morphew) grow,
Where their quaint colours made a curious show.
And you, my lips, (much prais'd by many a man)
Be (as you are now) ever pale and wan,
Rivell, chicke, pill; and let my sighs consume yee:
As odorous breath wont (balme-like) to perfume yee.
And thou, my skin, (the lov'ly lawny vayle)
That keep'st my corps within an Ivory Gayle,
Turne to a yellowish or Tawny hiew,
And be unpleasing to all peoples view.
And likewise you, my Saphire-colourd veines,
In whom my lives (yet purple) blood remaines,
Wither, dry, cling together, and (henceforth)
Stop my bloods course, till it turne nothing worth.
And you my brests (two Snowy appenynes)
More priz'd by many, then th' Indian mines,
With all the rest of my admired parts,
(Wherewith I conquered a world of hearts)
Waste and consume, fade, and fall quite away:
For life I loath, and now for death I stay:
For life I loath, and now for death I stay.
And (for my Loves-sake) now wish life decay.
Which sayd, the poore wretch (with much woe confounded)
Gave a great sigh; and having sigh'd, she swounded.
Whereat the Shepheards (which did weepe before)
Now wrung their hands, and wayl'd, and wept much more,
And stood awhile amazed at this chance.
Then wrought they meanes to wake her from her trance:
One rubs her temples, and another, he
Doth clap her cheekes, till crimson red they be:
Another wrings her Nose, untill the blood
(Inrag'd) starts out, to see if hee were wood:
One wrench'd her pretty fingers in his hand:
Another whooping in her eare, doth stand.
Thus as they griev'd, to see what did befall her:
So each of them endevour'd to recall her,
And did at length:  but faint she was, and weake,
And stil she sigh'd (as sighs her heart should break)
Anon sayd thus, (but more she could not say)
Cupid kil'd Coravin:  woe's me for aye!
Cupid kil'd Coravin:  woe's me for aye!
For losse of him, thus makes my life decay;
And so sunke downe unto the earth againe.
The whilst the Shepheards did on Love complaine
And curst his Bow, his arrowes, and his quiver,
And him the Wag, that was their woes contriver.
Cupid at this, put finger in the eye,
And (whilst they chid him) wept most childishly;
Then babe-like said:  (for Babes can do no other:)
How you have us'd me, I will tell my mother.
By this, fayre Candida (whom all thought dead,
Till the kind Swaines did elevate her head)
Began to stir, and rowle her radiant eyes.
(Beauty dwells there even when the body dyes.)
And when sh'ad suckt breath from the solid ayre,
Away from thence the Shepheards did convay her.
With whom I'le leave her, till she do recover,
And learne to leave lamenting for her Lover.
Lo now, young Cupid, seeing all were gone,
(With many teares) her wofull state did mone,
And to himselfe (the silly god) did say,
Kind Coravin I cruelly did slay,
And was the Author of her woes, and cries
Not willingly, but through my want of eies:
Yea, it was I, and none but onely I,
That was the cause of her calamity:
And now it grieves me, (when it is too late,)
Love should (so lucklesly) gaine Lovers hate,
And with his folly make the gods offended,
And mortals mourne thus:  but the Sceane b'ing ended,
In which my fact was punish'd with defame,
(To the impeachment of my honor'd name,)
I'le get me gone from th' Arcadian Playnes,
And come no more amongst these mourning Swaines,
Till Candida her Coravin forget,
And love another whom she knowes not yet:
Which to effect, I'le leave expostulating,
And now go seeke where Death's negotiating,
To do the wretched and weake worldlings wrong,
With the golden arrowes that to Love belong;
Which I'le take from him, (as I'm charg'd to do;)
And give him's owne, with all that longs thereto.
Therewith departs.  But (oh) not far goes he,
"(A foe's found sooner, then a friend can be.)"
E're he met Death, who (like an envious slave)
Exclaim'd on Love, and him ill speeches gave,
Saying, he was a couz'ning cheating mate,
"(Oh cruell Death, th' art full of canker'd hate)"
To take his Ebon Darts, and stead thereof,
Leave him Loves squilkers; wherat old folks scoffe
The young make songs on, and the wise reject:
For (but with fondlings) Lov's in no respect:
And therefore (quoth he) I (in scorne) deliver
Thy bable Arrowes, and thy boyish Quiver:
Heere take them (Infant) and give me mine owne,
Wherewith to heav'n thou (like a foole) hast flowne,
And there hast done my engines so much grace,
As make show of them in that sacred place;
Whilst I have borne thine all about the world,
And at the bosomes of the basest hurld,
By which (of Death) this slight thy shafts have got;
They'l kill sometimes, though they by Love be shot,
Then shall I laugh at Lady Venus child,
To thinke how Death the Boy-god hath beguild,
Making him helpe me fill vast Graves and Toombes,
That should make fertill barren womens wombes.
This said, chang'd Quivers, and away went he,
Leaving young Cupid to complaine to me,
Of's punishment for his rash oversight,
To steale from heav'n, and stay on earth one night:
From whence the death of Coravin did spring,
Which all this woe unto the world did bring,
And shame to him; on whom fell Death did rayle;
And Shepheards likewise (thogh it nought availe)
With bitter execrations did reject,
As if his god-head were of no respect;
And thus he sayd:  I do perceive (quoth he)
Thou must the Pen-man of my Progresse be:
Fayre Candida hath chose thee, and desir'd,
Not as a mercenarie (basely hyr'd)
But as a true friend, that compassionates
All Loyall Lovers lamentable states;
That thou would'st in some sad-tunde Elegy,
Tell how her Deare-lov'd Coravin did dye
By my o'resight, or rather want of sight:
(For Love would not kil Lovers, though he might)
How she laments, and how the Shepheards weepe,
And what a sorrowing for one Swaine they keepe:
How gods (inrag'd) have punish'd my offence,
And mortals here (with too much insolence)
Exclaim'd on me, and curs'd me to my face.
 (Why should a god indure so much disgrace?)
How Death abus'd me, yet (all this while) I
Did nought but weepe, and durst not make reply;
Because the gods thought fit I should be shent,
And (for m' offence) ordain'd this punishment.
But as th' would'st have my mother be thy friend,
So let this Story sparingly be pend.
Condemne not Love much (cause thou see'st hee's blind)
As e're th' would'st favour of a female find:
But write of him as th' would'st have him to be
(In Venus Court) a friend, or foe to thee.
With that the Boy betooke him to his wings,
(Love when he list, can soare 'bove earthly things)
And up to heav'n did make his towring flight.
I then return'd these accidents to write;
Which (as you see) I have expressed heere,
Though other Pastorals it comes not neere.
Yet let the world vouchsafe me this report,
My will is good, although my wit comes short.
Sidney and Spencer, be you aye renoun'd:
No time hath pow'r your Pastorals to confound.
Drayton, and all the rest that wrote of yore,
Adorning time with your delicious store,
Be ever honor'd, and (till th' end of times)
On Fames peart tongue be praised for your Rimes.
You worthy ones, oh, do not you disdaine
My mournfull Muse, that in this humble vaine
Dares for to sing, considering these are dayes,
In which some Criticks will the best dispraise:
But pardon me, should all be silent; then
Who should praise Vertue, or check Vice in men?
I know, fayre Candida's complaint affords
Matter inough, had I but proper words,
T' expresse her griefs, whose woes, sighs, teares, and wrongs,
Might taske all pens, and almost tire all tongues.
But I (alone) doe of her sorrowes sing,
Till better wits thereof be warbling:
For (sure) the worke deserves a worthy wit,
Though I (the weak'st) doe first imblazon it.
Amintas likewise told a sad-tun'd Tale,
For losse of's Phillis, (long since set to sale)
And for Laceno, and for all the rest,
Much sorrow by the Shepheards was exprest:
But I ore'slip it all, for her sweet sake,
For whom too much paines I can never take.
And now I will conclude her mournefull song,
To whom, I'le sing a sweeter note e're long:
For whilst I live, I will tune all my Layes,
To comfort Candida, and in her prayse.
