THE ARGUMENT.
WILLY leaves his Flocke awhile,
Visits ROGET in exile;
Where though prison'd, he doth finde
Hee's still free that's free in Minde:
And in trouble no defence
Is so firme as Innocence.

ROGET.  WILLY.

ROGET.
Willy, thou now full jolly tun'st thy Reedes,
Making the Nimphs enamour'd on thy straines,
And whilst thy harmleses Flocke unscared feeds,
Hast the contentment, of Hils, Groves, and Plaines:
Trust me I joy thou and thy Muse so speedes
In such an Age, where so much mischiefe reignes:
And to my Care it some redress will be,
Fortune hath so much grace to smile on thee,

WILLY.
To smile on me?  I neer yet knew her smile,
Unless 'twere when she purpos'd to deceive me;
Many a Trayne, and many a painted Wile
She castes, in hope of Freedome to bereave me:
Yet now, because she sees I scorne her guile
To fawne on fooles, she for my Muse doth leave me,
And here of late, her wonted Spite doth tend,
To worke me Care, by frowning on my friend.

ROGET.
Why then I see her Copper-coyne's no starling,
'Twill not be currant still, for all the guilding;
A Knave, or Foole, must ever be her Darling,
For they have mindes to all occasions yeelding:
If we get anything by all our parling.
It seemes an Apple, but it proves a Weilding:
But let that passe:  sweet Shepheard, tell me this,
For what beloved Friend thy sorrow is;

WILLY.
Wrong me not Roget:  do'st thou suffer heere,
And aske me for what Friend it is I grieve?
Can I suppose thy love to me is deere,
Or this thy joy for my content believe:
When thou think'st thy cares touch not mee as neere,
Or that I pinne thy Sorrowes at my sleeve?
Roget, my fayth in thee hath had such trust,
I never thought to find thee so unjust.

ROGET.
Why Willy?

WILLY.
Prithee do not aske me why,
Doth it diminish any of thy care,
That I in freedome maken melody,
And think'st I cannot as well somewhat spare
From my delight, to mone thy miserie?
Tis time our Loves should these suspects forbeare:
Thou art that friend, which thou unnam'd should'st know,
And not have drawn my love in question so.

ROGET.
Forgive me, and I'le pardon thy mistake,
And so let this thy gentle-anger cease;
(I never of thy love will question make)
Whilst that the number of our dayes encrease,
Yet to my selfe I much might seeme to take,
And something neere unto presumption prease,
To thinke me worthy love from such a spirit,
But that I know thy kindnesse past my merit.

Besides; me thought thou spak'st now of a friend,
That seem'd more grievous discontents to beare,
Some things I finde that doe in show offend,
Which to my Patience little trouble are,
And they e're long I hope will have an end,
Or though they have not, much I doe not care:
So this it was made me that question move,
And not suspect of honest Willies love.

WILLY.
Alas, thou art exiled from thy Flocke,
And, quite beyond the Desarts here confin'd,
Hast nothing to converse with but a Rocke,
Or at least Out-laws in their Caves half pin'd,
And do'st thou at thy owne misfortune mocke,
Making thy selfe too to thy selfe unkinde?
When heretofore we talk'd we did embrace:
But now I scarce can come to see thy face.

ROGET.
Yet all that, Willy, is not worth thy sorrow,
For I have Mirth, here thou would'st not beleeve,
From deepest cares the highest joyes I borrow:
If ought chance out this day, may make me grieve,
I'le learne to mend, or scorne it by to morrow.
This barren place yeelds somewhat to relieve:
For I have found sufficient to content me,
And more true blisse than ever freedom lent me.

WILLY.
Are Prisons then growne places of delight?

ROGET.
Tis as the conscience of the Prisoner is,
The very Grates are able to affright
The guiltie Man, that knows his deedes amisse,
All outward Pleasures are exiled quite,
And it is nothing (of it selfe) but this:
Abhorred loanenesse, darknesse, sadnesse, paines,
Num'n-cold, sharp-hunger, scorching thirst and chains.

WILLY.
And these are nothing?

ROGET.
&mdash;Nothing yet to mee,
Onely my friends restraint is all my paine.
And since I truely finde my conscience free,
From that my loanenesse to, I reape some gaine.

WILLY.
But grant in this no discontentment be,
It doth thy wished libertie restraine,
And to thy soule I thinke ther's nothing nearer,
For I could never heare thee prize ought dearer.

ROGET.
True, I did ever set it at a Rate
Too deare for any Mortal's worth to buy,
Tis not our greatest Shepheard's whole estate
Shall purchase from me, my least libertie:
But I am subject to the powers of Fate,
And to obey them is no slaverie:
They may do much, but when they have done all,
Onely my body they may bring in thrall.

And 'tis not that (my Willy) 'tis my minde,
My mind's more pretious freedome I so weigh
A thousand wayes they may my body binde,
In thousand thralls, but ne'er my minde betray,
And thence it is that I contentment finde,
And beare with Patience this my loade away:
I'me still my selfe, and that Ide rather bee,
Than to be lord of all these Downes in fee.

WILLY.
Nobly resolv'd, and I doe joy to hear 't,
For 'tis the minde of man indeed that's all;
There's nought so hard but a brave heart will bear 't
And guiltlesse men count great afflictions small,
Thei'le looke on Death and Torment, yet not fear 't,
Because they know 'tis rising so to fall:
Tyrants may boast they to much power are born,
Yet he hath more than Tyrannies can scorne.

ROGET.
Tis right, but I no Tyrannies endure,
Nor have I suffered ought worth name of care.

WILLY.
What e'er thou'lt call't, thou may'st, but I am sure,
Many more pine that much lesse payned are,
Thy look me thinks doth say thy meaning's pure
And by this past I finde what thou dost dare:
But I could never yet the reason know,
Why thou art lodged in this house of wo.

ROGET.
Nor I by Pan, nor never hope to doe,
But thus it pleases some; and I doe gesse
Partly a cause that mooves them thereunto,
Which neither will availe me to expresse,
Nor thee to heare, and therefore let it goe;
We must not say, they doe so that oppresse:
Yet I shall ne'er, to sooth them or the times,
Injure my selfe by bearing others crimes.

WILLY.
Then now thou may'st speake freely, ther's none heares,
But he, whom I doe hope thou do'st not doubt.

ROGET.
True; but if doores and walles have gotten eares,
And Closet-whisperings may be spread about,
Doe not blame him that in such causes feares
What in his Passion he may blunder out:
In such a place, and such strict times as these,
Where what we speake is tooke as others please.

But yet to morrow, if thou come this way,
I'le tell thee all my story to the end,
Tis long, and now I feare thou canst not stay,
Because thy Flocke must watred be and pend,
And Night begins to muffle up the day,
Which to informe thee how alone I spend,
I'le onely sing a sorrie Prisoners Lay,
I fram'd this Morne, which though it suits not fieldes,
Is such as fits me, and sad Thraldome yeelds.

WILLY.
Well I will set my Kit another string,
And play unto it whil'st that thou do'st sing.

SONNET.

ROGET.
Now that my body dead-alive,
Bereav'd of comfort lies in thrall,
Doe thou my soule begin to thrive,
And unto Honie, turne this Gall:
So shal we both through outward wo,
The way to inward comfort know.

And as that Foode my Flesh I give,
Doth keepe in me this Mortall breath:
So Soules on Meditations live,
And shunne thereby immortall death:
Nor art thou ever neerer rest.
Than when thou find'st me most opprest.

First thinke my soule; if I have Foes
That take a pleasure in my care,
And to procure these outward woes,
Have thus entrapped me unaware:
Thou should'st by much more carefull bee.
Since greater foes lay waite for thee.

Then when Mew'd up in grates of steele,
Minding those joyes mine eyes doe misse,
Thou find'st no torment thou do'st feele,
So grievous as Privation is:
Muse how the damn'd, in flames that glow,
Pine in the losse of blisse they know.

Thou seest there's given so great might
To some that are but clay as I,
Their very anger can affright,
Which if in any thou espie,
Thus thinke, if Mortal's frownes strike feare,
How dreadfull will Gods wrath appeare?

By my late hopes that now are crost,
Consider those that firmer bee:
And make the freedome I have lost,
A meanes that may remember thee:
Had Christ not thy Redeemer bin,
What horrid thrall thou had'st beene in.

These iron chaines the bolt's of steele,
Which other poore offenders grinde,
The wants and cares which they doe feele,
May bring some greater thing to minde:
For by their griefe thou shalt doe well,
To thinke upon the paines of Hell.

Or, when through mee thou seest a Man
Condemn'd unto a mortall death,
How sad he lookes, how pale, how wan,
Drawing with feare his panting breath:
Thinke if in that such griefe thou see,
How sad will Goe yee cursed bee.

Againe, when he that fear'd to Dye
(Past hope) doth see his Pardon brought,
Reade but the joy that's in his eye,
And then convay it to thy thought:
There thinke betwixt thy heart and thee.
How sweet will, Come, ye blessed, bee.

Thus if thou doe, though closed here,
My bondage I shall deeme the lesse,
I neither shall have cause to feare,
Nor yet bewaile my sad distresse:
For whether live, or pine, or dye,
We shall have blisse eternally.

WILLY.
Trust me I see the Cage doth some Birds good,
And, if they doe not suffer too much wrong,
Will teach them sweeter descants than the wood:
Beleeve 't, I like the subject of thy Song,
It shewes thou art in no distempered mood:
But cause to heare the residue I long
My Sheepe to morrow I will neerer bring,
And spend the day to heare thee talk and sing.

Yet e're we part, Roget to me areed,
Of whom thou learnd'st to make such Songs as these,
I never yet heard any Shepheards reede
Tune in mishap, a straine that more could please;
Surely thou dost invoke at this thy need
Some power, that we neglect in other layes:
For heer's a Name, and words, that but few swains
Have mention'd at their meeting on the Plaines.

ROGET.
Indeede 'tis true; and they are sore to blame,
They doe so much neglect it in their Songs,
For, thence proceedeth such a worthy fame,
As is not subject unto Envies wrongs:
That is the most to be respected name
Of our true Pan, whose worth sits on all tongues:
And the most ancient Shepheards use to prayse
In sacred Anthemes, sung on Holy-dayes.

Hee that first taught his Musicke such a straine,
Was that sweete shepheard, who (until a King)
Kept Sheepe upon the hony milkie Plaine,
That is inrich't by Jordan's watering;
Hee in his troubles eas'd the bodyes paines,
By measures rais'd to the soules ravishing:
And his sweete numbers onely most divine,
Gave the first being to this Song of mine.

WILLY.
Let his good spirit ever with thee dwell,
That I might heare such Musicke every day,

ROGET.
Thankes; but would now it pleased thee to play
Yet sure 'tis late, thy Weather rings his Bell.
And Swaines to fold, or homeward drive away.

WILLY.
And yon goes Cuddy; therefore fare thou well:
I'll make his Sheepe for me a little stay;
And, if thou thinke it fit, I'le bring him too
Next morning hither.

ROGET.
Prethee Will, doo.
