THE ARGUMENT.
ROGET set with his three Friends,
Heere his hunting story ends;
Kind Alexis with much ruth
Wayles the banish'd Shepheards youth:
But he slighteth Fortunes stings,
And in spite of Thraldome, sings.

ROGET.  CUDDY.  ALEXIS.  WILLY.

ROGET.
So, now I see y' are Shepheards of your word,
Thus were you wont to promise, and to do.

CUDDY.
More then our promise is, we can afford,
We come our selves, and bring another to:
Alexis whom thou know'st well is no foe,
Who loves thee much; and I doe know that he
Would faine a hearer of thy Hunting bee.

ROGET.
Alexis you are welcome, for you know
You cannot be but welcome where I am,
You ever were a friend of mine in show:
And I have found you are indeed the same,
Upon my first restraint you hither came,
And proffered me more tokens of your love,
Then it were fit my smal deserts should prove.

ALEXIS.
T'is still your use to underprise your merit,
Be not so coy to take my proffered love,
T'will neither unbeseeme your worth nor spirit.
To offer court'sie doth thy friend behove:
And which are so, this is a place to prove.
Then once againe I say, if cause there be,
First make a tryall, if thou please, of me.

ROGET.
Thankes good Alexis; sit downe by me heere,
I have a taske, these Shepheards know, to doe;
A Tale already told this Morne well neere.
With which I very fayne would forward go,
And am as willing thou shouldst heare it to:
But thou canst never understand this last,
Till I have also tolde thee what is past.

WILLY.
Roget it shall not need, for I presum'd,
Your loves to each were firme, and was so bold,
That so much on my selfe I have assum'd
To make him know what is already told:
If I have done amisse then you may scolde.
But in my telling I prevised this,
He knowes not whose, nor to what end it is:

ROGET.
Well, now he may, for heere my Tale goes on,
My eager Dogges and I to Wood are gon,
Wher, beating through the Coverts, every Hound
A several Game had in a moment found:
I rated them, but they pursu'd their pray,
And as it fell (by hap) tooke all one way.
Then I began with quicker speed to follow.
And teaz'd them on with a more cheareful hallow
That soone we passed many weary miles,
Tracing the subtile game through all their wiles.
These doubled, those redoubled on the scent,
Still keeping in full chase where'er they went:
Up Hils, down Cliffes, through Bogs, and over Plaines
Stretching their Musicke to the highest straines,
That when some Thicket hid them from mine eye,
My eare was ravish'd with their melody.
Nor crost we onely Ditches, Hedges, Furrowes,
But Hamlets, Tithings, Parishes, and Borrowes:
They followed wheresoe'er the game did goe,
Through Kitchin, Parler, Hall, and Chamber too
And as they pass'd the City and the Court,
My Prince look'd out, and daign'd to view my sport
Which then (although I suffer for it now)
(If some say true) hee liking did allow;
And so much (had I had but wit to stay)
I might my selfe (perhaps) have heard him say,
But I that time, as much as any daring,
More for my pleasure than my safetie caring;
Seeing fresh game from every loope-hole rise,
Crossing by thousands still before their eyes,
After I rush'd, and following close my Hounds,
Some beasts I found lye dead, some ful of wounds;
Among the willows, scarce with strength to move
One I found here, another there, whom Love
Had grip'd to death:  and, in the selfe-same state,
Lay one devour'd by Envy, one by Hate,
Lust had bit some, but I soone passed beside them,
Their fester'd wounds so stunck, none could abide [them].
Choller hurt divers, but Revenge kilde more,
Feare frightened all, behind him and before?
Despaire drave on a huge and mightie heape,
Forcing some downe from Rocks and Hils to leap:
Some into water, some into the fire,
So on themselves he made them wreake his ire:
But I remember as I pass'd that way,
Where the great King and Prince of Shepheards lay,
About the wals were hid some once more known
That my fell Curre Ambition had o'erthrown:
Many I heard pursu'd by Pitty cry;
And oft I saw my Bloud-Hound, Crueltie,
Eating her passage even to the hart,
Whither once gotten, shee is loth to part.
All pli'd it well, and made so loude a plea,
T'was heard through Britan, an beyond the Sea;
Some rated them, some storm'd some lik'd the game,
Some thought me worthy praise, some worthy blame.
But I not fearing th' one, misteeming t' other,
Both, in shrill hallows and loud yernings smother:
Yea, the strong mettled and my long-breath'd crew,
Seeing the game increasing in their view,
Grew the more frolicke, and the courses length
Gave better breath, and added to their strength;
Which Jove perceiving, for Jove heard their cryes
Rumbling amongst the Spheares concavities:
He mark'd their course, and courages increase,
Saying, t'were pitty such a chase should cease;
And therewith swore their mouths should never wast
But hunt as long's mortalitie did last.
Soone did they feele the power of his great gift,
And I began to finde their pace more swift:
I follow'd, and I rated but in vaine
Striv'd to o'ertake, or take them up againe;
They never stay'd since, nor nights nor dayes,
But to and fro still runne a thousand wayes:
Yea often to this place where now I lye,
They'l wheel about to cheere me with their cry;
And one day in good time will vengeance take
On some offenders, for their Masters sake:
For know, my Friends, my freedome in this sort
For them I lose, and making my selfe sport.

WILLY.
Why Roget, was there any harme in this?

ROGET.
No Willy, and I hope yet none there is.

WILLY.
How comes this then?

ROGET.
Note and I'le tell thee how.
Thou know'st that Trueth and Innocencie now,
If placed with meanneses, suffers more despite
Than Villainies accompanied with [might].
But thus it fell, while that my Hounds pursu'd
Their noysome pray, and every field lay strew'd
With Monsters, hurt and slain mongst many a beast
Some viler, and more subtile then the rest,
On whom the Bitch cal'd Envy, hap't to light:
And as her wont is, did so surely bite,
That though she left behind small outward smarts
The wounds were deepe and wrankled to their harts.
This, joining to some other that of late,
Were very eagerly pursu'd by Hate,
To fit their purpose having taken leisure,
Did thus conspire to worke me a displeasure.
For imitation farre surpassing Apes,
They layd aside their Foxe and Wolfish shapes,
And shrowded in the skinnes of harmlesse sheepe
Into by-waies and open pathes did creepe,
Where they (as hardly drawing breath) did ly,
Shewing their wounds to every passer by;
To make them think that they were sheep so foil'd,
And by my dogges in their late hunting spoyl'd.
Beside some other that envy'd my game,
And for their pastime kept such Monsters tame:
As you doe know there's many for their pleasure
Keep Foxes, Beares, and Wolves, as some great treasure:
Yea, many get their living by them too,
And so did store of these, I speake of do,
Who, seeing that my Kennell had affrighted,
Or hurt some Vermine wherein they delighted,
And finding their own power by much too weake
Their Malice on my Innocence to wreake,
Swolne with the deepest rancour of despite,
Some of our greatest Shepheards folds by night
They closely entered; and there having stain'd
Their hands in villainy, of me they plain'd
Affirming, without shame or Honesty,
I and my Dogges had done it purposely:
Whereat they storm'd, and call'd me to a tryall,
Where Innocence prevails not, nor denyall:
But for that cause heere in this place I ly,
Where none so merry as my dogges and I.

CUDDY.
Beleeve it hee'rs a Tale will suten well,
For Shepheards in another Age to tell.

WILLY.
And Roget shall be thought on with delight,
For this hereafter many a Winters night,
For of this sport another Age will ring:
Yea, Nymphes unborne now of the same shall sing,
When not a Beauty on our Greenes shall play
That hath not heard of Rogets hunting day.

ROGET.
It may be so, for if that gentle Swaine,
Who wonnes by Tavy, on the Westerne plaine,
Would make the Song, such life his Verse can give,
Then I doe know my Name might ever live.

ALEXIS.
But tell me; are our Playnes and Nimphes forgot,
And canst thou frolicke in thy trouble be?

ROGET.
Can I Alexis say'st thou?  Can I not,
That am resolv'd to scorne more misery;

ALEXIS.
Oh, but thy youth's yet greene, and yong blood hot,
And libertie must needs bee sweet to thee,
But now most sweet, whil'st every bushy Vale,
And Grove and Hill, rings of the Nightingale.

Me thinks when thou remembrest those sweet laies
Which thou wol'st lead thy Shepheardesse to heare
Each Evening foorth among the Leavy spraies,
The thought of that should make thy freedom dear;
For now, whil'st every Nymph on Holydayes
Sports with some jolly Lad, and maketh cheere,
Thine sighes for thee, and mew'd up from resort
Will neither play her selfe, nor see their sport.

There's Shepheards that were many a Morning wont
Unto their Boyes to leave the tender Heard.
And beare thee company when thou didst hunt,
Cannot their songs thou hast so gladly heard,
Nor thy mist pleasure make thee think upon't
For't seems all vaine, now that was once indeard.
It cannot be, for I could make relation
How for lesse cause thou hast beene deepe in passion.

ROGET.
Tis true:  my tender heart was ever yet
Too capable of such conceits as these;
I never saw that Object but from it,
The Passions of my Love I could encrease
Those things which move not other men a whit,
I can, and doe make use of, if I please:
When I am sad, to sadnesse I apply,
Each Bird, and Rree, and Flower that I passe by.

So, when I will be merry, I aswell
Something for mirth from every thing can draw,
From Misery, from Prisons, nay, from Hell:
And as when to my minde, griefe gives a flaw,
Best comforts doe but make my woes more fell,
So when I'me bent to Mirth, from mischiefes paw
(Though seized upon me) I would something cull
That spite of care, should make my joyes more full.

I feel those wants Alexis, thou dost name,
Which spite of youth's affections I sustaine;
Or else, for what is't I have gotten Fame,
And am more known than many an elder Swaine?
If such desires I had not learn'd to tame,
Since many pipe much better on this Plaine:
But tune your Reedes, and I will in a Song
Expresse my Care, and how I take this Wrong.

SONNET.
I That ere'stwhile the worlds sweet Ayre did draw,
(Grac'd by the fairest ever Mortall saw)
Now closely pent, with walls of Ruth-lesse stone,
Consume my Dayes and Nights, and all alone.

When I was wont to sing of Shepheards loves,
My walkes were Fields, and Downes, and Hills, and Groves:
But now (alas) so strict is my hard doome,
Fields, Downes, Hils, Groves, and al's but one poore roome.

Each Morne as soone as Day-light did appeare,
With Natures Musicke Birdes would charme mine eare;
Which now (instead) of their melodious straines,
Heare ratling Shackles, Gyves, and Boults, and Chaines.

But though that all the world's delight forsake mee,
I have a Muse, and she shall Musicke make mee;
Whose ayrie Notes in spight of closest cages,
Shall give content to mee, and after ages.

Nor doe I passe for all this outward ill,
My hearts the same, and undejected still;
And, which is more then some in freedome winne,
I have true rest, and peace, and joy within.

And then my Minde that spite of prison's free,
When e're she pleases any where can bee;
Shee's in an hour in France, Rome, Turkey, Spaine,
In Earth, in Hell, in Heaven, and heere againe.

Yet there's another comfort in my woe,
My cause is spread, and all the world may know,
My fault's no more but speaking Truth and Reason,
Nor Debt, nor Theft, nor Murder, Rape, or Treason.

Nor shall my Foes with all their Might and Power,
Wipe out their shame, nor yet this fame of our:
Which when they finde, they shall my fate envy,
Till they grow leane, and sicke, and mad, and dye.

Then though my Body here in Prison rot,
And my poore Satyr's seeme a while forgot:
Yet when both Fame and Life hath left those men,
My Verse and I'le revive, and live agen.

So thus enclos'd I beare afflictions load,
But with more true content than some abroad;
For whilst their thoughts doe feel my scourges sting,
In bands Ile leape, and daunce, and laugh, and sing.

ALEXIS.
Why now I see thou droup'st not with thy care,
Neither exclaim'st thou on thy hunting day,
But dost with unchang'd resolution beare,
The heavie burthen of exile away.
All that did truely know thee, did conceave
Thy actions with thy spirit still agree'd;
Their good conceit thou dost no whit bereave,
But shewest that thou art still thy selfe indeed.
If that thy minde to baseness now descends,
Thou'lt injure Vertue, and deceive thy friends.

WILLY.
Alexis, hee will injure Vertue much,
But more his friends, and most of all himselfe,
If on that common barre his minde but touch,
It wrackes his fame upon disgraces shelfe:
Yet Roget, if thou stere but on the course,
Which in thy just adventure is begunne;
No thwarting Tide nor adverse blast shall force
Thy Bark without the Channels bounds to runne,
Thou art the same thou wert, for ought I see,
When thou didst freely on the Mountaines hunt,
In nothing changed yet, unlesse it be
More merrily dispos'd than thou wert wont.
Still keepe thee thus, so other men shall know,
Vertue can give content in midst of woe.
And he, thogh mightines with frowns doth threat,
That, to be Innocent is to be great.
Thrive and farewell.

ALEXIS.
In this thy trouble flourish.

CUDDY.
While those that wish thee il, fret, pine, and perish.
