THE ARGUMENT.
ROGET Heere Alexis moves,
To embrace the Muses loves;
Bids him never carefull seeme,
Of anothers disesteeme:
Since to them it may suffize,
They themselves can justly prize.

ROGET.  ALEXIS.

ROGET.
ALEXIS, if thy worth do not disdaine
The humble friendship of a meaner Swaine
Or some more needfull busines of the day,
Urge thee to be too hasty on thy way;
Come (gentle Shepheard) rest thee heere by mee,
Beneath the shadow of this broad-leav'd tree:
For though I seeme a stranger, yet mine eye
Observes in thee the markes of courtesie,
And if my judgement erre not, noted too
More then in those that more would seeme to do;
Such Vertues thy rare modestie doth hide,
Which by their proper lustre I espied;
And though long maskt in silence they have been,
I have a Wisedome through that silence seene:
Yea, I have learned Knowledge from thy tongue,
And heard when thou hast in concealment sung,
Which me the bolder and more willing made
Thus to invite thee to this homely shade.
And though (it may be) thou could'st never spy
Such worth in mee, I might be known thereby,
In thee I doe, for here my neighbouring Sheepe
Upon the border of these Downes I keepe:
Where often thou at Pastorals and playes,
Hast grac'd our Wakes on Summer Holy-days;
And many a time with thee at this cold spring
Met I to heare your learned shepheards sing,
Saw them disporting in the shady Groves,
And in chaste Sonnets wooe their chaster loves:
When I endued with the meanest skill,
Mongst others have been urg'd to tune my quill,
Where cause but little cunning I had got,
Perhaps thou saw'st me, though thou knew'st me not.

ALEXIS.
Yes Roget I doe know thee and thy name,
Nor is my knowledge grounded all on fame:
Art thou not hee that but this other yeere,
Scared'st all the Wolves and Foxes in the sheere?
And in a match at Foot-ball lately try'd
(Having scarce twentie Satyrs on thy side)
Held'st play:  and thogh assailed kept'st thy stand
Gainst all the best-try'd Ruffians in the land?
Didst thou not then in dolefull Sonnets mone,
When the beloved of great Pan was gone;
And at the wedding of faire Thame and Rhine,
Sing of their glories to thy Valentine?
I know it, and I must confesse that long
In one thing I did doe thy nature wrong:
For till I mark't the aim thy Satyrs had,
I thought them overbold, and Roget mad;
But since I did more nerely on thee looke
I soon perceiv'd that I had all mistooke;
I saw that of a Cynicke thou mad'st shew
Where since I finde that thou wert nothing so,
And that of many thou much blame hadst got,
When as thy Innocencie deserv'd it not.
But that too good opinion thou hast seem'd
To have of me (not so to be esteem'd)
Prevails not ought to stay him who doth feare
Hee rather should reproofes than praises heare
'Tis true, I found thee plaine and honest to,
Which made me like, then love, as now I doe.
And Roget, though a stranger, this I say,
Where I doe love, I am not coy to stay.

ROGET.
Thankes gentle Swaine that dost so soone unfold
What I to thee as gladly would have told:
And thus thy wonted courtesie exprest
In kindly entertaining this request:
Sure I should injurie my own content,
Or wrong thy love to stand on complement:
Who hast acquaintance in one word begun,
As well as I could in an age have done:
Or by an over-weening slownesse marre
What thy more wisdom hath brought on so far
Then sit thou dowe, and Ile my minde declare
As freely, as if we familiars were:
And if thou wilt but daigne to give me eare,
Something thou mayst for thy more profit heare.

ALEXIS.
Willingly Roget I obey.

ROGET.
Then know Alexis, from that very day,
When as I saw thee at that Shepheards Coate,
Where each (I think) of other tooke first noate,
I meane that Pastor who by Tavies springs
Chaste Shepheards loves in sweetest numbers sing
And with his Musicke (to his greater fame)
Hath late made proud the fairest Nimphs of Tham
E'ne then mee thought I did espie in thee,
Some unperceiv'd and hidden worth to bee:
Which in thy more apparent vertues shin'd,
And, among many I in thought divin'd,
By something my conceit had understood,
That thou wert markt one of the Muses brood.
That made mee love thee:  and that Love I bear
Begat a Pittie, and that Pittie Care:
Pittie I had to see good parts conceal'd,
Care I had how to have that good reveal'd,
Since 'tis a fault admitteth no excuse
To possesse much and yet put nought in use:
Heereon I vow'd (if we two ever met)
The first request that I would strive to get
Should be but this, that thou would'st shew thy skil
How thou couldst tune thy verses to thy quill:
And teach thy muse in some well-framed song,
To shew the Art thou hast suppresst so long:
Which if my new acquaintance may obtaine,
Roget will ever honour this dayes gaine.

ALEXIS.
Alas!  my small experience scarce can tell
So much as where those Nymphes the Muses dwel,
Nor (though my sloe conceit still travels on)
Shall I e'er reach to drinke of Helicon;
Or if I might so favour'd be to taste
What those sweet streams but over-flow in waste,
And touch Parnassus, where it low'st doth lie,
I fear my skill would hardly flag so high.

PHILARETE.
Despair not man; the Gods have prized nought
So deere, that may not be with labour bought:
Nor need thy paine be great since Fate and Heaven
That (as a blessing) at thy birth have given.

ALEXIS.
Why say they had?

ROGET.
Then use their gifts thou must,
Or be ungratefull, and so be unjust:
For if it cannot truly be deny'd,
Ingratitude mens benefits doe hide;
Then more ungrateful must he be by oddes,
Who doth conceale the bountie of the Gods.

ALEXIS.
That's true indeed, but Envie haunteth those
Who, seeking Fame, their hidden skill disclose:
Where else they might (obscured) from her espying,
Escape the blasts and danger of envying:
Criticks will censure our best straines of Wit,
And purblind Ignorance misconsture it.
All which is bad, yet worse then this doth follow
Most hate the Muses, and contemne Apollo.

ROGET.
So let them:  why should we their hate esteeme?
Is 't not enough we of our selves can deeme?
Tis more to their disgrace that we scorne them
Than unto us that they our Art contemne;
Can we have better pastime than to see
Their grosse heads may so much deceived bee
As to allow those doings best, where wholly
We scoffe them to their face and flout their folly:
Or to behold blacke Envie in her prime,
Die selfe-consum'd, whilst we vie lives with time:
And, in despite of her, more fame attaine,
Then all her malice can wipe out againe?

ALEXIS.
Yea, but if I appli'd me to those straines,
Who should drive forth my Flocks unto the plaines
Which whilst the Muses rest, and leasure crave,
Must watering, folding, and attendance have:
For if I leave with wonted care to cherish
Those tender heards, both I and they should perish.

ROGET.
Alexis, now I see thou dost mistake,
There is no meaning thou thy Charge forsak;
Nor would I wish thee so thy selfe abuse,
As to neglect thy calling for thy Muse:
But let these two so each of other borrow,
That they may season mirth and lessen sorrow.
Thy Flocke will helpe thy charges to defray,
Thy Muse to passe the long and tedious day:
Or whilst thou tun'st sweet measures to thy Reed,
Thy Sheepe to listen, will more neere thee feed;
The Wolves will shun them, birds above thee sing
And Lamkins daunce about thee in a Ring:
Nay which is more; in this thy low estate,
Thou in contentment shalt with Monarks mate:
For mighty Pan, and Ceres to us grants,
Our Fields and Flocks shall helpe our outward wants.
The Muses teach us Songs to put off cares,
Grac'd with as rare and sweet conceits as theirs:
And we can thinke our Lasses on the greenes
As faire, or fairer than the fairest Queenes:
Or what is more then most of them shall doe,
Wee'le make their juster fames last longer too,
Having our Lines by greatest Princes grac'd,
When both their name and memory's defac'd.
Therefore Alexis though that some disdaine
The heavenly Musicke of the Rurall plaine,
What is 't to us, if they (or'e seene) contemne
The dainties which were neer ordain'd for them?
And though that there be other-some envy
The praises due to sacred Poesie,
Let them disdaine and fret till they are weary,
We in ourselves have that shall make us merry:
Which he that wants, and had the power to know it,
Would give his life that he might die a Poet.

ALEXIS.
A brave perswasion.

ROGET.
Here thou seest me pent
Within the jawes of strict imprisonment;
A forlorne Shepheard, voyd of all the meanes,
Whereon Mans common hope in danger leanes:
Weake in my selfe, Exposed to the Hate
Of those whose Envies are insatiate:
Shut from my friends, banish'd from all delights;
Nay worse, excluded from the sacred Rites.
Here I do live (mongst outlaws mark't for death)
As one unfit to draw the common breath,
Where those who to be good did never know,
Are barred from the meanes should make them so.
I suffer, cause I wish'd my Country well,
And what I more must beare I cannot tell.
I'me sure they give my Body little scope,
And would allow my Minde as little Hope:
I waste my Meanes, which of it selfe is slender,
Consume my Time, perhaps my fortunes hinder,
And many Crosses have, which those that can
Conceive no wrong that hurts another man,
Will not take note of, though if halfe so much
Should light on them, or their owne person touch,
Some that themselves (I feare) most worthy think,
With all their helpes would into basenes shrinke;
But spight of Hate, and all that spight can doe,
I can be patient yet, and merrie to:
That slender Muse of mine, by which my Name,
Though scarse deserv'd, hath gaind a little fame,
Hath made me unto such a Fortune borne,
That all misfortunes I know how to scorne;
Yea, midst these bands can sleight the Great'st that be
As much as their disdaine misteemes of me.
This Cave, whose very presence some affrights,
I have oft made to Eccho foorth delights,
And hope to turne, if any Justice be,
Both shame and Care on those that wisht it me:
For while the world rancke villainies affords,
I will not spare to paint them out in words;
Because I thus into these troubles runne,
I knew what man could act, e're I begun;
And I'le fulfill what my Muse drawes me to,
Maugre all Jayles, and Purgatories to.
For whilst she sets me honest task's about,
Vertue or shee I know, will beare me out:
And if, by Fate th' abused power of some,
Must in the worlds eye, leave me overcome.
They shall find one fort yet so fenc'd I trow,
It cannot feele a mortals overthrow.
This Hope and trust that great power did infuse,
That first inspir'd into my brest a Muse,
By whom I doe, and ever will contemne
All these ill haps, my foes despite, and them.

ALEXIS.
Th' hast so well (young Roget) playd thy part,
I am almost in love with that sweet Art:
And if some power will but inspire my song,
Alexis will not be obscured long.

ROGET.
Enough kind Pastor:  but oh!  yonder see
Two honest Shepheards walking hither, bee
Cuddy and Willy, that so dearely love,
Who are repayring unto yonder Grove:
Let's follow them:  for never braver Swaines
Made musicke to their flocks upon these plaines.
They are more worthy, and can better tell
What rare contents do with a Poet dwell.
Then whiles our sheepe the short sweet grasse do sheare
And till the long shade of the hils appeare,
We'le heare them sing:  for though the one be yong
Never was any that more sweetly sung.
