THE ARGUMENT.
CUDDY telles how all the Swaines,
Pittie ROGET on the Plaines:
Who requested, doth relate
The true cause of his estate;
Which broke off, because 'twas long,
They begin a three-mans Song.

WILLY.  CUDDY.  ROGET.

WILLY.
Roget, thy old friend Cuddy here, and I,
Are come to visit thee in these thy Bands,
Whi'lst both our Flockes in an Inclosure by,
Do picke the thin grasse from the fallowed lands.
He tells me thy restraint of liberty,
Each one throughout the Country understands:
And there is not a gentle-natur'd Lad,
On all these Downes, but for thy sake is sad.

CUDDY.
Not thy acquaintance and thy friends alone
Pitty thy close restraint, as friends should doe:
But some, that have but seene thee, for thee moane:
Yea, many that did never see thee to.
Some deeme thee in a fault, and most in noone;
So divers wayes doe divers rumours goe;
And at all meetings where our Shepheards bee,
Now the maine Newes that's extant, is of thee.

ROGET.
Why, this is somewhat yet:  had I but kept
Sheepe on the Mountaines, till the day of doome,
My name should in obscuritie have slept,
In Brakes, in Briars, shrubbed Furze and Broom.
Into the Worlds wide eare it had not crept,
Nor in so many mens thoughts found a roome:
But what cause of my suffering do they know?
Good Cuddy tell me how doth rumour goe?

CUDDY.
Fayth 'tis uncertaine; some speake this, some that:
Some dare say nought, yet seeme to thinke a cause
And many a one prating he knows not what;
Comes out with Proverbes and old auncient sawes,
As if hee thought thee guiltless, and yet not:
Then doth he speake halfe Sentences, then pawse:
That what the most would say, we may suppose
But what to say, the Rumour is, none knowes.

ROGET.
Nor care I greatly, for it skills not much
What the unsteady common-people deemes,
His Conscience doth not alwayes feele least touch,
That blamelesse in the sight of others seemes:
My cause is honest, and because 'tis such,
I hold it so, and not for mens esteemes:
If they speake justly well of mee, I'me glad;
If falsely evil, it ne'er makes me sad.

WILLY.
I like that minde; but Roget you are quite
Beside the matter that I long to heare:
Remember what you promis'd yester-night,
Youl'd put us off with other talke, I feare;
Thou know'st that honest Cuddies heart's upright
And none but he, except myself, is neere:
Come therefore, and betwixt us two relate,
The true occasion of thy present state.

ROGET.
My Friends I will; You know I am a Swaine,
That keepe a poore Flocke here upon this Plaine:
Who, though it seemes, I could doe nothing lesse,
Can make a Song, and woe a Shepheardesse,
And not alone the fayrest where I live,
Have heard me sing, and favours daign'd to give:
But, though I say 't, the noblest Nimph of Thame,
Hath grac'd my Verse unto my greater fame.

Yet, being young, and not much seeking prayse,
I was not noted out for Shepheards layes:
Nor feeding Flockes, as, you know others be:
For the delight that most possessed me
Was hunting Foxes, Wolves, and Beastes of Pray:
That spoile our Foulds, and beare our Lambs away.
For this, as also for the love I beare
Unto my Country, I lay'd by all care
Of gaine, or of preferment, with desire
Onely to keepe that state I had entire,
And like a true growne Hunts-man sought to speed
My selfe with Hounds of rare and choysest breed,
Whose Names and Natures ere I further goe,
Because you are my friends I'le let you know.
My first esteemed Dogge that I did find,
Was by descent of old Actaeons kind;
A Brache, which if I doe not ayme amisse,
For all the world is just like one of his:
She's named Love, and scarce yet knowes her duty;
Her Damme's my Ladies pretty Beagle Beauty.
I bred her up my selfe with wondrous charge,
Untill she grew to be exceeding large,
And waxt so wanton, that I did abhorre it,
And put her out amongst my neighbours for it.
The next is Lust, a Hound thats kept abroad
Mongst some of mine acquaintance; but a Toad
Is not more loathsome:  'tis a Curre will range
Extreamely, and is ever full of mange.
And cause it is infectious, she's not wont
To come among the rest, but when they hunt.
Hate is the third, a Hound both deepe and long.
His Sire is True, or else supposed Wrong.
He'le have a snap at all that passe him by,
And yet pursues his game most eagerly.
With him goes Envie coupled, a lean Curre,
And she'le hold out hunt we ne'er so far:
She pineth much, and feedeth little to,
Yet stands and snarleth at the rest that doe.
Then there's Revenge, a wondrous deepe-mouthed dog,
So fleet I'me faine to hunt him with a clog,
Yet many times he'le much out-strip his bounds,
And hunts not closely with the other Hounds:
He'le venter on a Lion in his ire:
Curst Choller was his Damme, and Wrong his Sire,
This Choller is a Brache, that's very old,
And spends her mouth too much to have it hold:
She's very teasty, an unpleasing Curre,
That bites the very Stones, if they but sturre:
Or when that ought but her displeasure moves,
She'le bite and snap at any one she loves:
But my quick-scented'st Dogge is Jealousie;
The truest of this breede's in Italie:
The Damme of mine, would hardly fill a Glove,
It was a Ladies little Dogge, call'd Love:
The Sire a poore deformed Curre, nam'd Feare;
As shagged and as rough as is a Beare:
And yet the Whelpe turn'd after neither kind,
For he is very large, and ne're-hand blind.
Far off, he seemeth of a pretty culler,
But doth not seeme so, when you view him fuller.
A vile suspitious Beast, whose lookes are bad,
And I doe feare in time, he will grow mad.
To him I couple Avarice, still poore,
Yet shee devours as much as twenty more:
A thousand Horse she in her paunch can put,
Yet whine, as if she had an emptie gut:
And having gorg'd what might a land have found,
She'le catch for more, and hide it in the ground.
Ambition is a Hound as greedy full;
But hee, for all the daintiest bits doth cull:
Hee scorns to lick up Crums beneath the Table,
He'le fetch't from boards and shelves, if he be able:
Nay, he can climbe if need be; and for that,
With him I hunt the Martine and the Cat:
And yet sometimes in mounting, he's so quicke,
He fetches falles, are like to breake his necke.
Feare is wel-mouth'd, but subject to Distrust;
A Stranger cannot make him take a Crust:
A little thing will soone his courage quaile,
And 'twixt his legges, he ever claps his Taile.
With him Despaire now often coupled goes,
Which by his roring mouth each hunts-man knows.
None hath a better minde unto the game,
But he gives off, and alwayes seemeth lame.
My blood-hound Cruelty, as swift as wind,
Hunts to the death, and never comes behinde;
Who, but she's strapt, and musled to withall,
Would eate her fellowes, and the pray and all.
And yet she cares not much for any food
Unlesse it be the purest harmelesse blood.
All these are kept abroad at charge of menny;
They doe not cost me in a yeare a penny.
But there's two couple of a midling size,
That seldome passe the sight of my owne eyes.
Hope, on whose head I've laid my life to pawne.
Compassion, that on every one will fawne.
This would, when 'twas a welpe, with Rabets play
Or Lambes, and let them goe unhurt away:
Nay, now she is of growth, she'le now and then,
Catch you a Hare, and let her goe agen.
The two last, Joy and Sorrow; 'tis a wonder,
Can ne'er agree, nor ne're bide far a sunder.
Joy's ever wanton, and no order knowes,
Shel'e run at Larkes, or stand and barke at Crowes.
Sorrow goes by her, and ne'er moves his eye:
Yet both doe serve to helpe make up the cry.
Then comes behinde all these to beare the base,
Two couple more of a far larger Race,
Such wide-mouth'd Trollops that 'twould do you good,
To heare their loud loud Ecchoes teare the Wood:
There's Vanity, who by her gaudy Hide,
May far away from all the rest be spide,
Though huge, yet quick, for she's now here, now there;
Nay, looke about you, and she's everywhere:
Yet ever with the rest, and still in chase.
Right so, Inconstancie filles every place;
And yet so strange a fickle natur'd Hound,
Looke for her, and she's no where to be found.
Weaknesse is no faire Dogge unto the eye,
And yet she hath her proper qualitie:
But there's Presumption, when he heat hath got,
He drownes the Thunder, and the Cannon-shot:
And when at Start hee his full roaring makes,
The Earth doth tremble, and the Heaven shakes:
These were my Dogges, ten couple just in all,
Whom by the name of Satyres I doe call:
Mad Curs they be, and I can ne'er come nigh them,
But I'me in danger to be bitten by them.
Much paines I tooke, and spent dayes not a few,
To make them keepe togeather, and hunt true:
Which yet I doe suppose had never bin,
But that I had a Scourge to keepe them in.
Now when that I this Kennell first had got,
Out of mine own Demeanes I hunted not,
Save on these Downes, or among yonder Rockes,
After those Beasts that spoyl'd our parish Flocks
Nor during that time, was I ever wont,
With all my Kennell, in one day to hunt:
Nor had done yet, but that this other yeere,
Some beasts of Pray, that haunts the Desarts heere,
Did not alone for many Nights togeather
Devoure, sometime a Lambe, sometime a Weather:
And so disquiet many a poore mans Heard,
But that of loosing all they were afeared:
Yea, I among the rest, did fare as bad,
Or rather worse; for the best Ewes I had,
(Whose breed should be my means of life and gaine
Were in one Evening by these Monsters slaine:
Which Mischiefe I resolved to repay,
Or else grow desp'rate, and hunt all away,
For in a fury (such as you shall see
Hunts-men in missing of their sport will bee)
I vow'd a Monster should not lurke about,
In all this Province, but I'de finde him out,
And there-upon, without respect or care,
How lame, how full, or how unfit they were.
In haste unkennell'd all my roaring crew,
Who were as mad as if my minde they knew,
And e're they trail'd a flight-shot, the fierce Curs
Had rous'd a Hart, and through Brakes and Furres, 
Follow'd at gaze so close, that Love and Feare
Got in togeather, so had surely there
Quite overthrowne him, but that Hope thrust in
'Twixt both, and sav'd the pinching of his skin,
Whereby he scapt, till coursing overthwart,
Despaire came in, and grip't him to the hart:
I hallowed in the resdue to the fall,
And for an entrance, there I flesh't them all:
Which having done, I dipp'd my staffe in blood,
And onward led my Thunder to the Wood;
Where what they did, I'le tell you out anon,
My Keeper calles me, and I must be gon.
Goe if you please awhile, attend your Flocks,
And when the Sunne is over yonder Rocks,
Come to this Cave againe, where I will be,
If that my Gardian so much favour me.
Yet, if you please, let us three sing a straine,
Before you turne your Sheepe into the Plaine.

WILLY.
I am content.

CUDDY.
As well content am I.

ROGET.
Then Will, Begin, and we'le the rest supply.

SONG.
WILLY.
Shepheard, would these Gates were ope,
Thou might'st take with us thy fortune.

ROGET.
No, I'le make this narrow scope,
Since my Fate doth so importune,
Meanes unto a wider Hope.

CUDDY.
Would thy Shepheardesse were heere,
Who belov'd, loves thee so dearly?

ROGET.
Not for both your Flockes, I sweare,
And the gaine they yeeld you yearely,
Would I so much wrong my Deare.

Yet to mee, nor to this Place,
Would she now be long a stranger;
She would hold it no disgrace,
(If she fear'd not more my danger)
Where I am to shew her face.

WILLY.
Shepheard, we would wish no harmes,
But something that might content thee.

ROGET.
Wish mee then within her armes,
And that wish will ne'er repent me,
If your wishes might prove charmes.

WILLY.
Be thy Prison her embrace,
Be thy ayre her sweetest breathing,

CUDDY.
Be thy prospect her fayre Face,
For each looke a kisse bequeathing,
And appoint thy selfe the place.

ROGET.
Nay pray, hold there, for I should scantly then;
Come meete you heere this afternoone agen:
But fare you well, since wishes have no power,
Let us depart, and keepe the poynted houre.
