I faine would tell some Tales, but I'd be loth,
To have men be so wise to thinke them troth.
This is a wondrous witty age that sees
Beyond the truth of things, forty degrees.
Each Riddle now hath poyson in't; each Rime
On the blanck Almanack points at guilty time.
Aesope must make no Lyons rore, nor Eagles
Yelpe with their slavering lips after the Foxe;
Nor must he meddle with the Asse or Ox;
For feare some quirke be found, to prove he ment
Under those shapes, a private spleen to vent.
Against wise vigilant Statists, who like Janus,
Looke both waies squint, and both waies guard and fane us.
Or that he closely would great Lawyers yerke,
Who build their neasts, with ruines of the kirke:
Or that he touch't some Church-men, who to rise
One Steeples height, would tell Canonicall lies.
The Ghost of Virgils Gnat would now sting so,
That great men durst not in the City go
For feare of petty-Chapmen, with a Serjeant,
And a slie Yeoman, noted in the Margeant.
If Spencer now were living, to report
His Mother Hubberts tale, there would be sport:
To see him in a blanket tost, and mounted
Up to the starres, and yet no starre accounted.
I dare not for my life in all my tale,
Use any English Bird, Beast, Worme, or Snaile,
Or Fish that in the narrow Seas do travell,
(Although each Pyrat dares) lest some should cavell,
And finde it did belong in times of yore
To some blew steeve, (but shall do so no more)
Or that the Maker of new blood, the Marrold,
(Cleped in our Welch-Scotch and English Harrold)
Had (too too cheape) for five pounds it entailed
On some bold Britaine, and by warrant nailed,
To him and to his house, with double coucher,
Fine, and recovery; and then who dare touch her?
Not I, I love my ease too well, my mony,
My eares, my liberty; he longs for hony,
That mongst the angry Waspes thrust his bold fingers,
And from their neasts in Summer, hunts those stingers.
My valour is lesse hardy, my desire
Lesse hot.  Ile bluffe and blow, not kisse the fire.
Therefore avant all catholike Locusts, come
Into my tale nothing out this side Rome,
Nor in Virginia, though't be ours by lot,
And yet perhaps it may, perchanc't may not.
I would not, if it lay in me to chuse,
Meddle with any thing we Christians use:
But would all dealing with our owne eschew,
If other world, and elements, I knew.
But since that Nature doth some gifts disperse
Alike to all within the Universe;
And in a circular globe, tye those to these;
Mixt us in common with th' Antipodes:
I cannot choose but do as nature doth,
Mixe many names and things well knowne to both,
Thus if by chance I use Bird, Fish, or Beast,
Which is no daintie at a Mayors feast:
But oft familiar foode for every Swaine,
That in our Country, Coast, and Woods remaine.
Yet still conceive (I pray) those names I take
Not properly, but for your ignorance sake.
Or if they proper be, of all one kinde,
Yet difference in their place of birth we finde,
And in their natures.  For though man be man,
Yet sure an Indian Asse, or Daw, or Trout,
Though we have such, are none of ours no doubt:
But would be wonders here, and purses picke,
Since none but travellers ever saw the like.
Excuse me then though with such names you meete:
They are not those that travell in our streete,
But forreinners to us and to our Nation,
Except by trade, commerce, or transplantation
Made our Acquaintance.  Hence then subtile spies
Stretch not my tales to justifie your lies.
If ought beside the morall you invent,
Call it your owne, by me 'twas never ment.
My tale shall sort all Atheists well, and bee
Of their religion, heathenish and free.
It shall make lust a Gospell and a Law,
(Not for the truth) but to keepe fooles in awe,
That when or Gospell or else Law doth thwart
Our willes, we then may neither reck of a f&mdash;.
Come Ibis, Leade the way; eate one snake more
And be my fury; usher on before.
