Loe.  I the man whose Muse whilome did play
A horne-pipe both to Country and the Citty,
Am now againe enjoyn'd to sing or say,
And tune my crowde unto another ditty,
To comfort Moone-fac'd Cuckolds, that were sad,
My Muse before was all in hornes y-clad,
But now she marcheth forth and on her backe
She weares a Corslet of old Sherry Sacke.

Therefore it is not as in dayes of yore,
When bloud-shed and fierce battailes were her song
And when her Trumpets did Tantara rore
Till all her murth'ring Souldiers lay along,
A milder tune she now playes on her strings,
And Carrols to good company she sings,
To all good fellowes that are wise in Season,
Listen a while and you shall know the reason.

Long had she Chaunted for the horned Crew
And reap'd no praise nor penny from their hands,
Nor cup of drinke, which is a Fidlers due
(As every good companions understands)
And therefore unregarded being dry,
My Muse grew melancholy out-a-cry,
And angry forth she runs into the streetes,
Cursing each churlish Cuckold which she meetes.

When I beheld her in that moody vaine,
Which wont to be so blythe and full of sport,
After I ran, to call her home againe.
Least she might chaunce to meete some man of sort,
Some wealthy tradesman, that had been Cornuted,
Of whose large hornes it must not be disputed,
And in this crabbed humour fall to rayle,
And so be had to Counter, without bayle.

When I my sullen Muse had overtooke,
I gan reprove her for her wilde behaviour,
And charg'd her to returne, as she did looke
Ever to be receiv'd into my favour:
But she as mad, as in March a Hare,
Did like unto a Bedlam stampe and stare,
And for an houre her patience was so weake,
And rage so prest her, that shee could not speake.

As last when passion was a little sway'de,
And that the raynes of fury gan to slack,
A thousand curses on the head, she said.
Of every Cuckold, that cries What de'e lacke,
May all their hornes grow visible to sight,
May they prove Jealous, and their women light,
And care not who looke on, that all may geere
And laugh aloud when their Rams-heads appeare. . . .
