What blustring Noise now interrupts my Sleepe?
What echoing Shouts thus cleave my chrystal Deep?
And call mee hence from out my watrie Court?
What Melodie, what Sounds of Joy and Sport,
Bee these heere hurl'd from ev'rie neighbour Spring?
With what lowd Rumours doe the Mountaines ring?
Which in unusuall Pompe on tip-toes stand,
And (full of Wonder) over-looke the Land?
Whence come these glittring Throngs, these Meteors bright,
This golden People set unto my Sight?
Whence doth this Praise, Applause, and Love, arise?
What Load-starre east-ward draweth thus all Eyes?
And doe I awake?  or have some Dreames conspir'd
To mocke my Sense with Shadowes much desir'd?
Stare I that living Face, see I those Lookes,
Which with Delight wont to amaze my Brookes?
Doe I behold that Worth, that Man divine,
This Ages Glorie, by these Bankes of mine?
Then is it true what long I wish'd in vaine?
That my much-loving Prince is come againe?
So unto Them whose Zenith is the Pole
When sixe blacke Months are past the Sunne doth rolle:
So after Tempest to Sea-tossed Wights,
Faire Helens Brothers show their chearing Lights:
So comes Arabias Mervaile from her Woods,
And farre farre off is seene by Memphis Floods,
The feather'd Sylvans clowd-like by her flie,
And with applauding Clangors beate the Skie,
Nyle wonders, Seraps Priests entranced rave,
And in Mygdonian Stone her Shape ingrave;
In golden Leaves write downe the joyfull Time
In which Apollos Bird came to their Clime.

Let Mother Earth now deckt with Flowrs bee seene,
And sweet-breath'd Zephyres curle the Medowes greene:
Let Heavens weepe Rubies in a crimsin Showre,
Such as on Indies Shores they use to powre:
Or with that golden Storme the Fields adorne,
Which Jove rain'd, when his Blew-eyed Maide was borne.
May never Houres the Webbe of Day out-weave,
May never Night rise from her sable Cave.
Swell prowd my Billowes, faint not to declare
Your Joyes, as ample as their Causes are:
For Murmures hoarse sound like Arions Harpe,
Now delicatlie flat, now sweetlie sharpe.
And you my Nymphes, rise from your moyst Repaire,
Strow all your Springs and Grotts with Lillies faire:
Some swiftest-footted get her hence and pray
Our Floods and Lakes, come keepe this Holie-day;
What e're beneath Albanias Hills doe runne,
Which see the rising or the setting Sunne,
Which drinke, Sterne Grampius Mists, or Ochelles Snows:
Stone-rowling Taye, Tine Tortoyse-like that flows,
The pearlie Done, the Deas, the fertile Spay,
Wild Neverne which doth see our longest Day,
Nesse smoaking-Sulphure, Leave with Mountaines crown'd,
Strange Loumond for his floting Isles renown'd:
The Irish Rian, Ken, the Silver Aire,
The snakie Dun, the Ore with Rushie Haire,
The Chrystall-streaming Nid, lowd-bellowing Clyd,
Tweed which no more our Kingdomes shall devide:
Rancke-swelling Annan, Lid with curled Streames,
The Eskes, the Solway where they loose their Names,
To ev'rie one proclaime our Joyes, and Feasts,
Our Triumphes, bid all come, and bee our Guests:
And as they meet in Neptunes azure Hall,
Bid them bid Sea-Gods keepe this Festivall.
This Day shall by our Currents bee renown'd,
Our Hills about shall still this Day resound:
Nay, that our Love more to this Day appeare,
Let us with it hencefoorth begin our Yeare.

To Virgins Flowres, to Sunne-burnt Earth the Raine,
To Mariners faire Winds amidst the Maine:
Coole Shades to Pilgrimes, which hote Glances burne,
Please not so much, to us as thy Returne.
That Day (deare Prince) which reft us of thy Sight,
[Day, no, but Darknesse, and a clowdie Night]
Did fraight, our Brests with Sights, our Eyes with Teares,
Turn'd Minutes in sad Months, sad Months in Yeares:
Trees left to flowrish, Meadows to beare Flowrs,
Brookes hid their Heads within their Sedgie Bowrs,
Faire Ceres curst our Fields with barren Frost,
As if againe shee had her Daughter lost:
The Muses left our Groves, and for sweete Songs
Sate sadlie silent, or did weepe their Wrongs;
Yee know it Meads, yee murmuring Woods it know,
Hilles, Dales, and Caves, Copartners of their Woe;
And yee it know my Streames, which from their Eine
Oft on your Glasse reciev'd their pearled Brine;
O Naids deare (saide they) Napeas faire,
O Nymphes of Trees, Nymphes which on Hills repaire,
Gone are those maiden Glories, gone that State,
Which made all Eyes admire our Hap of late.
As lookes the Heaven when never Starre appeares,
But slow and wearie shroude them in their Spheares,
While Tithons wife embosom'd by Him lies,
And World doth languish in a drearie Guise:
As lookes a Garden of its Beautie spoil'd:
As Wood in Winter by rough Boreas foil'd:
As Pourtraicts raz'd of Colours use to bee:
So lookt these abject Bounds depriv'd of Thee.

While as my Rills enjoy'd thy royall Gleames,
They did not envie Tibers haughtie Streames,
Nor wealthie Tagus with his golden Ore,
Nor cleare Hydaspes which on Pearles doth roare,
Empampred Gange, that sees the Sunne new borne,
Nor Achelous with his flowrie Horne,
Nor Floods which neare Elysian Fields doe fall:
For why?  thy Sight did serve to them for all.
No Place there is so desert, so alone,
Even from the frozen to the torrid Zone,
From flaming Hecla to great Quincys Lake,
Which thine abode could not most happie make.
All those Perfections which by bounteous Heaven
To diverse Worlds in diverse Times were given,
The starrie Senate powr'd at once on Thee,
That Thou Examplare mightst to Others bee.

Thy Life was kept till the three Sisters spunne
Their Threedes of Gold, and then it was begunne.
With curled Clowds when Skies doe looke most faire,
And no disordred Blasts disturbe the Aire:
When Lillies doe them decke in azure Gownes,
And new-borne Roses blush with golden Crownes;
To bode how calme wee under Thee should live,
What Halcyonean Dayes Thy Reigne should give,
And to two flowrie Diademes Thy right,
The Heavens Thee made a Partner of the Light.
Scarce wast Thou borne, when joyn'd in friendlie Bands
Two mortall Foes with other clasped Hands,
With Vertue Fortune strove, which most should grace
Thy Place for Thee, Thee for so high a Place;
One vow'd thy sacred Brest not to forsake,
The Other on Thee not to turne her Backe,
And that Thou more her loves Effects mightst feele
For Thee shee rent her Sayle, and broke her Wheele.

When Yeeres Thee vigour gave, O then how cleare
Did smother'd Sparkles in bright Flames appeare!
Amongst the Woods to force a flying Hart,
To pearce the mountaine Wolfe with feathred Dart,
See Faulcons climbe the Clowds, the Foxe ensnare,
Out-runne the winde-out-running daedale Hare,
To loose a trampling Steede alongst a Plaine,
And in meandring Gyres him bring againe,
The Preasse Thee making place, were vulgare Things;
In Admirations Aire on Glories Wings
O!  Thou farre from the common Pitch didst rise,
With Thy designes to dazell Envies Eyes:
Thou soughtst to know, this Alls eternall Source,
Of ever-turning Heavens the restlesse Course,
Their fixed Eyes, their Lights which wandring runne,
Whence Moone her Silver hath, his Gold the Sunne;
If Destine bee or no, if Planets can
By fierce Aspects force the Free-will of Man:
The light and spyring Fire, the liquid Aire,
The flaming Dragons, Comets with red Haire,
Heavens tilting Launces, Artillerie, and Bow,
Lowd-sounding Trumpets, Darts of Haile and Snow,
The roaring Element with People dombe,
The Earth with what conceiv'd is in her Wombe,
What on her moves, were set unto thy Sight,
Till thou didst find their Causes, Essence, Might:
But unto nought Thou so Thy Mind didst straine
As to bee read in Man and learne to raigne;
To know the Weight and Atlas of a Crowne,
To spare the Humble, Prowdlings pester downe.
When from those pearcing Cares which Thrones invest,
As Thornes the Rose, Thou weari'd wouldst Thee rest,
With Lute in Hand, full of Coelestiall Fire,
To the Pierian Groves Thou didst retire:
There, garlanded with all Uranias Flowrs,
In sweeter Layes than builded Thebes Towrs,
Or them which charm'd the Dolphines in the Maine,
Or which did call Euridice againe,
Thou sungst away the Houres, till from their Spheare
Starres seem'd to shoote, Thy Melodie to heare.
The God with golden Haire, the Sister Maides,
Left, nymphall Helicon, their Tempes Shades,
To see Thine Isle, heere lost their native Tongue,
And in Thy world-divided Language sung.

Who of Thine After-age can count the Deedes,
With all that Fame in Times hudge Annales Reedes,
How by Example more than anie Law,
This People fierce Thou didst to Goodnesse draw,
How while the Neighbour Worlds (tows'd by the Fates)
So manie Phaetons had in their States,
Which turn'd in heedlesse Flames their Burnish'd Thrones,
Thou (as ensphear'd) keep'dst temperate Thy Zones;
In Africke Shores the Sands that ebbe and flow,
The speckled Flowrs in unshorne Meads that grow,
Hee sure may count, with all the Waves that meet
To wash the Mauritanian Atlas feet.
Though Thou were not a crowned King by Birth,
Thy Worth deserves the richest Crowne on Earth.
Search this Halfe Spheare and the opposite Ground,
Where is such Wit and Bountie to bee found?
As into silent Night, when neare the Beare
The Virgine Huntresse shines at full most cleare,
And strives to match her Brothers golden Light,
The Hoast of Starres doth vanish in her Sight,
Arcturus dies, cool'd is the Lyons ire,
Po burnes no more with Phaetontall Fire,
Orion faints to see his Armes grow blacke,
And that his blazing Sword hee now doth lacke:
So Europes Lights, all bright in their Degree,
Loose all their Lustre paragond with Thee.
By just Discent Thou from moe Kings dost shine,
Then manie can name Men in all their Line:
What most they toyle to find, and finding hold,
Thou scornest, orient Gemmes, and flattring Gold:
Esteeming Treasure surer in Mens Brests,
Than when immur'd with Marble, clos'd in Chests;
No stormie Passions doe disturbe Thy Mind,
No Mists of Greatnesse ever could Thee blind:
Who yet hath beene so meeke?  Thou life didst give
To them who did repine to see Thee live.
What Prince by Goodnesse hath such Kingdoms gain'd?
Who hath so long his Peoples Peace maintain'd?
Their Swords are turn'd in Sythes, in Culters Speares,
Some giant Post their anticke Armour beares:
Now, where the wounded Knight his Life did bleed,
The wanton Swaine sits piping on a Reed.
And where the Canon did Joves Thunder scorne,
The gawdie Hunts-man windes his shrill-tun'd Horne:
Her greene Lockes Ceres void of feare doth die,
The Pilgrime safelie in the Shade doth lie,
Both Pan and Pales (carelesse) keepe their Flockes,
Seas have no Dangers save the Winds and Rockes:
Thou art this Isles Palladium, neither can
[While Thou art kept] it bee o're-throwne by Man.

Let Others boast of Blood and Spoyles of Foes,
Fierce Rapines, Murders, Iliads of Woes,
Of hated Pompe, and Trophaees reared faire,
Gore-spangled Ensignes streaming in the Aire,
Count how they make the Scythian them adore,
The Gaditan the Souldier of Aurore,
Unhappie Vauntrie!  to enlarge their Bounds,
Which charge themselves with Cares, their Friends with wounds,
Which have no Law to their ambitious Will,
But (Man-plagues) borne are humane Blood to spill:
Thou a true Victor art, sent from above
What Others straine by Force to gaine by Love,
World-wandring Fame this Praise to Thee imparts,
To bee the onlie Monarch of all Hearts.
They manie feare who are of manie fear'd,
And Kingdomes got by Wrongs by Wrongs are tear'd,
Such Thrones as Blood doth raise Blood throweth downe,
No Guard so sure as Love unto a Crowne.

Eye of our westerne World, Mars-daunting King,
With whose Renowne the Earths seven Climats ring,
Thy Deedes not only claime these Diademes,
To which Thame, Liffy, Taye, subject their Streames:
But to thy Vertues rare, and Gifts, is due,
All that the Planet of the Yeare doth view;
Sure if the World above did want a Prince,
The World above to it would take thee hence.

That Murder, Rapine, Lust, are fled to Hell,
And in their Roomes with us the Graces dwell,
That Honour more than Riches Men respect,
That Worthinesse than Gold doth more effect,
That Pietie unmasked showes her Face,
That Innocencie keepes with Power her Place,
That long-exil'd Astrea leaves the Heaven,
And turneth right her Sword, her Weights holds even,
That the Saturnian World is come againe,
Are wish'd Effects of Thy most happie Raigne.
That daylie Peace, Love, Truth, Delights encrease,
And Discord, Hate, Fraude, with Incombers cease,
That Men use Strength not to shed others Blood,
But use their Strength now to doe other Good,
That Furie is enchain'd, disarmed Wrath,
That (save by Natures Hand) there is no Death,
That late grimme Foes like Brothers other love,
That Vultures prey not on the harmlesse Dove,
That Wolves with Lambs doe Friendship entertaine,
Are wish'd Effects of thy most happie Raigne.
That Towns encrease, that ruin'd Temples rise,
And their wind-moving Vanes plante in the Skies,
That Ignorance and Sloth hence runne away,
That buri'd Arts now rowse them to the Day,
That Hyperion farre beyond his Bed
Doth see our Lyons rampe, our Roses spred,
That Iber courts us, Tyber not us charmes;
That Rhein with hence-brought Beams his Bosome warmes,
That Evill us feare, and Good us doe maintaine,
Are wish'd Effects of Thy most happie Raigne.

O Vertues Patterne, Glorie of our Times,
Sent of past Dayes to expiate the Crimes,
Great King, but better farre than thou art great,
Whome State not honours, but who honours State,
By Wonder borne, by Wonder first enstall'd,
By Wonder after to new Kingdomes call'd,
Young, kept by Wonder, neare home-bred Alarmes,
Old, sav'd by Wonder, from pale Traitours Harmes,
To bee for this Thy Raigne which Wonders brings,
A King of Wonder, Wonder unto Kings.
If Pict, Dane, Norman, Thy smooth Yoke had seene,
Pict, Dane, and Norman, had thy Subjects beene:
If Brutus knew the Blisse Thy Rule doth give,
Euen Brutus joye would under Thee to live:
For Thou Thy People dost so dearlie love,
That they a Father, more than Prince, Thee prove.

O Dayes to bee desir'd!  Age happie thrice!
If yee your Heaven-sent-Good could duelie prize,
But yee (halfe-palsey-sicke) thinke never right
Of what yee hold, till it bee from your Sight,
Prize onlie Summers sweet and musked Breath,
When armed Winters threaten you with Death,
In pallid Sicknesse doe esteeme of Health,
And by sad Povertie discerne of Wealth:
I see ane Age when after manie Yeares,
And Revolutions of the slow-pac'd Spheares,
These Dayes shall bee to other farre esteem'd,
And like Augustus palmie Raigne bee deem'd.
The Names, of Arthure fabulous Palladines,
Grav'n in Times surlie Brows in wrinckled Lines,
Of Henries, Edwards, Famous for their Fights,
Their Neighbour Conquests, Orders new of Knights,
Shall by this Princes Name be past as farre
As Meteors are by the Idalian Starre.
If Gray-hair'd Proteus Songs the Truth not misse,
And Gray-hair'd Proteus oft a Prophet is,
There is a Land hence-distant manie Miles,
Out-reaching Fiction and Atlanticke Iles,
Which (Homelings) from this little World wee name,
That shall imblazon with strange Rites his Fame,
Shall, raise him Statues all of purest Gold,
Such as men gave unto the Gods of old,
Name by him Fanes, prowd Pallaces, and Towns,
With some great Flood, which most their Fields renownes.
This is that King who should make right each wrong,
Of whom the Bards and mysticke Sybilles song,
The Man long promis'd, by whose glorious Raigne,
This Isle should yet her ancient Name regaine,
And more of Fortunate deserve the Stile,
Than those where Heavens with double Summers smile.

Runne on (great Prince) Thy Course in Glories Way,
The End the Life the Evening crownes the Day,
Heape Worth on Worth, and stronglie soare above
Those Heights which made the World the first to love,
Surmount Thy Selfe, and make thine Actions past
Bee but as Gleames or Lightnings of Thy last,
Let them exceed them of Thy younger Time,
As farre as Autumne doth the flowrie Prime.
Through this Thy Empire range, like Worlds bright Eye,
That once each Yeare survayes all Earth and Skie,
Now glaunces on the slow and restie Beares,
Then turnes to drie the weeping Austers Teares,
Just unto both the Poles, and moveth even
In the infigur'd Circle of the Heaven.
O long long haunt these Bounds, which by Thy Sight
Have now regain'd their former Heate and Light.
Heere grow greene Woods, heere silver Brookes doe glide,
Heere Meadowes stretch them out with painted Pride
Embrodring all the Banks, heere Hills aspire
To crowne their Heads with the aetheriall Fire:
Hills, Bullwarks of our Freedome, giant Walls,
Which never Fremdlings Slight nor Sword made Thralls;
Each circling Flood to Thetis Tribute payes,
Men heere (in Health) out-live old Nestors Dayes:
Grimme Saturne yet amongst our Rockes remaines,
Bound in our Caves, with many Mettald Chaines:
Bulls haunt our Shades like Ledas Lover white,
Which yet might breede Pasiphae Delight,
Our Flocks faire Fleeces beare, with which for Sport
Endemion of Old the Moone did court,
High-palmed Harts amidst our Forrests runne,
And, not impall'd, the deepe-mouth'd Hounds doe shunne;
The rough-foote Hare him in our Bushes shrowds,
And long-wing'd Haulks doe pearch amidst our Clowds.
The wanton wood-Nymphes of the verdant Spring,
Blew, Golden, Purple, Flowers shall to Thee bring,
Pomonas Fruits the Paniskes, Thetis Gyrles
Thy Thulys Amber, with the Ocean Pearles;
The Tritons, Heards-men of the glassie Field,
Shall give Thee what farre-distant Shores can yeeld,
The Serean Fleeces, Erythrean Gemmes,
Vaste Platas Silver, Gold of Peru Streames,
Antarticke Parrots, Aethiopian Plumes,
Sabaean Odours, Myrrhe, and sweet Perfumes.
And I my selfe, wrapt in a watchet Gowne,
Of Reedes and Lillies on mine Head a Crowne,
Shall Incense to Thee burne, greene Altars raise,
And yearlie sing due Paeans to Thy Praise.

Ah why should Isis only see Thee shine?
Is not Thy FORTH, as well as Isis Thine?
Though Isis vaunt shee hath more Wealth in store,
Let it suffice Thy FORTH doth love Thee more:
Though Shee for Beautie may compare with Seine,
For Swannes and Sea-Nymphes with Imperiall Rhene,
Yet in the Title may bee claim'd in Thee,
Nor Shee, nor all the World, can match with mee.
Now when (by Honour drawne) Thou shalt away
To her alreadie jelous of Thy stay,
When in Her amourous Armes Shee doth thee fold,
And dries thy Dewie Haires with Hers of Gold,
Much questioning of Thy Fare, much of Thy Sport,
Much of Thine Absence, Long, how e're so short,
And chides (perhaps) Thy Comming to the North,
Loathe not to thinke on Thy much-loving FORTH.
O love these Bounds, whereof Thy royall Stemme
More then an hundreth were a Diademe.
So ever Gold and Bayes Thy Browes adorne,
So never Time may see Thy Race out-worne,
So of Thine Owne still mayst Thou bee desir'd,
Of Strangers fear'd, redoubted, and admir'd;
So MEMORIE the Praise, so pretious Houres
May character Thy Name in starrie Flowres;
So may Thy high Exployts at last make even,
With Earth thy Empire, Glorie with the Heaven.
