Who'd not at venture Write?  So many waies
A man may prove a Poet now a daies?
Does Nature writt afford to break a Jest?
This is a Poet:  and his friends protest
He is to blame he Writes not:  when (indeed,)
Th' Illiterate Gull can neither write nor read.

Let Nature faile!  Takes he but so much Paine,
To write obscurely:  adding so much Braine.
As end his crabbed sencelesse verse in Rime:
This might a Poet beene in Perseus time.
And more!  (Though Horace in his book reherses)
(Nature and Arte are both requir'd in Verses.)
There are those, of their Poetry will vaunt,
Which do (God wote) both Wit and Learning want:
I know them!  Such as they at Table sit
Each Jest you speake, will to a Metre fit.
And thus your Witt's sell for their private gaine
And bee accounted Poets for their paine.

Others there are, that Others workes survay,
And must from all thinges some thing filtch away.
Who if to weaker Braines they can unfolde
A Learned Author:  nick a Phrase or two:
Straight all'd their owne, the write, who doubts it so?
When I wood scarce beleev't, though they, in fine,
To every Verse subscribe:  By Jove 'tis mine.
Not it't inough they this in private show,
But these are Poets, all the world must know.
'Tis strange to see what stretching is of Wits,
What spare of speech this plentious Presse begets.
Some (if you keepe them company) you'l finde
As choise to breake a Jest as to breake winde.
And what's the reason thinke ye?  Onely this:
Al they can speak's too little for the Presse.
Where 'tis not losse of Friend, Life, Libertie,
Shall cause them keepe a Jest in secrecy.

Others have helpes:  when their Invention faile,
Straight they begin abusively to raile.
Then out comes Whelps of the olde Dog:  for sport:
Shall barke at Great ones:  bit the meaner sort:
When the On-setters (after all their paine:)
For feare, woo'd gladly call them in againe.
And these will Poets bee accounted too:
Because they Dare doe more then others doe.
Though they their Verse write, (a man may say:)
As Clown's get Bastards, and straight runne away.

Montanus needes will bee a Poet!  why?
Because the Muses on Mountaine hy
Inhabited.  Peto for that his Name
Denotes him Poet in the Anagrame:
And Quaint Castilio:  (since his Father dy'd!)
Who many Volumes publish't:  and beside
Divers neglected, Left unto his Son:
Which dubbes him Poet, by praescription.
True!  And Castilio will approved bee,
Or he will Print his Fathers Legacy.

And marke Crispisso, but what shifts he'l finde,
Ere he'l bee counted once to come behinde,
In every Booke he will bespeake afore:
The comming out, roome for halfe a score
Or a dozen Verses, which he'l hugely puffe
With commendations of the Authors stuffe.
And in Hyperbolyes his Name extoll
Yond Homer, Virgill, Ovide, Juvenall.
Vouching no better Volume, ere was Writ,
And that himselfe hath had a Hand in it.

Oh this vaine-Praise-Affecting Poetry
Is a bewitching-itching Leoprosie:
That makes men Rub, scrub, rouz and touz their Braine,
Pump their Pates dry for Jests:  and all to gaine
So much Report:  might serve to make them vaunt,
They are Applauded (though of Ignorant.)
They'l snatch, and scratch, and scrape (though nere so ill)
And rather smart then holde their fingers still:

Be there a Citty show:  or fight at Court:
Of Acts Heroicke:  or of Princely sport:
(Which right to write of, or in Type to tell:
Might taxe a Daniels or a Spencers quill.)
To eye!  to spy!  All for no other good
Then onely this!  poore this!  But to obtaine:
Some fodder fro their needy greedy straine.

See then how (Envy) gin's her eyes to fat
On dainties plenty, and repines thereat:
How muttering Momus (that knowes not to bite,)
Grumbles and mumbles mouthfuls out of spite.
How currish (Critticks) most severely harke:
Ready at each sound of applause to barke.
How all together, and how each a part
Stretch, retch, faine, strain, Invention, Judgement Art,
Raile, Lybell:  what not?  Rather then labour loose
Jest on your Gesture:  or be-lye your cloathes.
A subject fitter for a Beadles fist
Then the tart lines of a smart Satyrist.

Let Natures causes (which are too profound
For every blockish sottish Pate to sound.)
Produce some monster:  some rare spectacle:
Some seaven yeares Wonder:  Ages miracle:
Bee it a worke of nere so sleight a waight,
It is recorded up in Metre straight,
And counted purchase of no small renowne,
To heare the Praise sung in a Market-towne.

How many Volumes lye neglected thrust
In every Bench-hole?  every heape of dust?
Which from some Gowries practise, Powder plot,
Or Tiburne Lectur's, all their substance got:
Yet tosse out Rime-stalles youll admire the rout
Of carelesse fearelesse Pamphlets flye about.
Bookes, made of Ballades:  Workes:  of Playes,
Sightes, to be Read:  of my Lo:  Maiors day's:
Post's, lately set forth:  Bearing (their Backe at)
Letters, of all sorts:  An intollerable Packet.
Villains discovery, by Lanthorn and Candle-light:
(Strange if the author should not see it to handle right)
A Quest of Inquirie:  (Jacke a Dover's)
The Jests of Scoggin:  and divers others
(Which no man Better the Stationer knowes)
Wonderfull Writers; Poets in Prose.
What poste pin'd Poets that on each base Theame,
With Invocations vexe Apollo's name.

Springes for Woodcockes:  Doctor Merriman:
Rub and a good Cast:  Taylor the Ferriman.
Fennor, with his Unisounding Eare word:
The unreasonable Epigramatist of Hereford:
Rowland with his Knaves a murninall;
Not worth the calling for, a fire burne em all:
And number numberlesse that march (untolde)
Mongst Almanacks and Pippins, to be solde.

APOLOGIE.
These Ill which better Dare then know to wright
Makes those (I know) not dare who better might
For who ist now attempts to Print, but knowes,
He must be one or censured on, of Those!
For my part (Gallants) it was nere my hap,
On high Pernassus Top, to take a nap:
Or the Divine Nine sisters Fount to see:
Whence I might steale a sip of Poetry.
These Idle Verses (which I Idle made)
None but the Idle I request to read:
Then what Applause looke I for, all may guesse,
When none may looke for Praise from Idlenes.
