The death of her that was but newly borne:
The birth of her that longe agoe was dead:
The life of her, whome heaven and earth did scorne:
Her beawty, that wast erst debellished:
How snowy white inveild the crimson red,
And yet the lily sprange unto the rose,
Under his spiny fortresse to repose;
How sorrowe, joye, and joye againe did sorrowe close.

How night disrobed of her sad attire,
Put on the glitteringe stole of brightest day:
How dreary Acheron did once retire,
And needs would goe unto the milky way,
To quench his wild fire, and his heat allay:
How am'rous heav'n earth, earth heav'n did viewe:
How the ag'd Eagle did her life renewe,
And blacke not to be dy'd, receivd an other hue:

This bee the dity of my oaten reed,
Too meane (alas!)  such mysteries to tell:
Yet heavens mirrour daine mee this one meed!
In earthen vessels, heav'nly soules may dwell,
And sandy caskets oft invest the pearle:
Aethereall states, and high Angellique traines,
(Blest bee the time!)  have sometime tooke the paines
To visit Abells sonnes, poore, silly sheapheard-swaines.

Poore, silly sheapheard-swaines!  ev'n such am I:
(Farre bee proesumption from an humble minde!)
I will not, (oh, I dare not,) soare too highe,
Least hee, that all enlightens, strike mee blinde:
Sooth, this is all I crave, to be refind,
So to endite a laye with silver pen,
Of Mary, and of Marys sonne:  and then
Her life, his love declare, her love, and life agen.

Under th' Appendix of a hillocke small,
A stately palace in a dale was plac't,
Fairely incircled with a marble wall,
And with a court of shininge Amber grac't.
The Chrystall windowes too, were interchast
With Iacynths, Diamonds, and Sappheirs blew[e]:
Too happy treasure for so damn'd a crewe,
That newe sins hoary make, and ould sins aye renewe.

The squared greeces were of beaten gould,
(Oh might it ever thus bee trod on ground!)
Pillars of Iv'ry did the frame uphould:
Over the brasen gates stood Venus, crownd
With Myrtle chaplets, in a charret round,
Drawn by two silver doves, more innocent
Then shee her selfe:  in the same continent
Blind Cupid seem'd to shoote, and tender hearts uprent.

A turrulet tooke up each angles shade:
Two in the middle stood, just opposite:
The battelments of smoothest Jett were made:
A glorious out side, ev'ry where so bright,
The braine it dizieth, and dimmes the sight.
Doubtles Alcides leaft his pillars there,
Baccus his Elephants, and Sol his sphoere;
While each was chear'd with joye, and overjoyd with cheare.

The nimble shaddowes skippinge here a pace,
Seem'd in the Amber courts to sporte, and play,
Like wanton kidds upon some steepy place,
Or tender lambkins on a sommers day:
So doth Apollo's ever-sparkelinge raye
Daunce through the heavens spangled firmament
To solitary earth, so male-content,
And backe from heav'n to earth, in lue of love is sent.

Within this palace dwells a gentle spright
Soft, sweete, smooth, tender, Goddesse of all pleasure
Amorous, younge, faire slender Aphrodite,
To whome the Lydian wealth, the Indian treasure,
The Falern wine is brought in lavish measure;
The Thyme of Hybla, and the Libyan flore,
The gemms of Tagus and the golden shore,
With swetest odours and Assyrian Spikenard store.

About her head a veile of lawne shee wore;
Her garments were of skarlet rosy red:
A goulden bowle in her right hand shee bore,
Wherein all pleasure and delight were bred:
The nations came to her deprostrate bed:
Happy was hee, that could obtaine a kisse;
Unhappy he, that of her love did misse:
Yet, oh most happy misse, and most unhappy blisse!

Two Ladies did uphold the Damsells traine,
Plumpe, pursive Luxury, and quainter Pride;
The one streight lac'd, and boulstred in amaine;
The other in a gowne, large, loose and wide.
Both, nearer then the rest, went by her side.
Easier it is to empty out the seas,
Then her with clothes, and her with dainties please:
In flittinge vanities (God wot) so litle ease!

Her right hand, guilded Flattery supported;
Her left, did fickle Wantonesse upbeare;
Foolish dame Laughter thither too resorted,
To paint her eye lids, and her browe to cleare.
Idlenesse too, and Jealousy was there,
Inconstancie, Despaire, Proesumption,
And Envie, that would brooke no Paragon,
Put their worst garments of, and their best faces on.

A thowsand graceless Graces more be-side,
Attended on her, ready at her call:
They nowe awaited, but for winde and tide.
They launch into the deepe, hoist sayle and all.
"Come (saith th' Enchauntresse) 't is our nuptiall,
Let others sad and sullen live, while wee
Swimme in the sweets of love and jollity!"
So, tinklinge on her lute, shee made this harmony:

"Come, come, my lovers!  make no stay!
Let's take our pleasure, while wee may:
See, how the canopies all ope'
To entertaine our loves do hope:
See howe the silken beds 'gin swell,
Daringe us their pride to quell.
Gold and Amber in their places,
Bid us come, and see our faces:
The pretty pearle lends many a smile,
The sparklinge gemms our sight beguile,
While the marble pillars weepe,
'Cause wee are not yet a-sleepe.
Hearke, howe the musike doth delight,
Of that yonge slender catamite!
See, the snowy virgins white,
Hands and lipps, and heart invite.
Thousand Hellens faire, I have
And as many Trojans brave;
Richly they attired bee,
Onely to attend on mee.
What so'er the sence doth ravish,
Heere it swimes in plenty lavish:
Jove to mee hath brought his courte,
And the Naiades heere sporte:
The Dryades their groves have left,
And have stol'n to me by theft;
While the Cocheman of the Sphoere
Loves to drive his horses heere:
Neptune too, and Thetis greene,
In my palace may bee seene.
Never saile out of the land!
I can give yee Tagus sand:
Never goe to Colchos shore!
I have Golden fleeces store.
Shades, yee wander all in vaine;
Th' Elysian feilds are in my plaine.
Then come, my lovers, come away!
Let's take our pleasure, while wee may!"

This said, a thowsand prostitute delights,
Flewe up and downe the courts as bright as day:
Gluttonie, to a feast her guests invites,
And Baccus, to the wine is gone his way:
Others more eager, ceaze upon the prey:
The tables richly were adorn'd with store,
Of delicates, not known in times of yore.
Such, Cleopatra gave, unto her Paramour.

The chambers were perfum'd with odours sweet,
And strow'd with fragrant flowers ev'ry where.
The Damsells naked stood (ah, too unmeet!)
The Flute, the Lute, the Timbrell sounded cleare:
Flagons of wine were brought, to mend their cheare.
'T was hard to say, which had the most delight,
The taste, the touch, the hearinge, smell, or sight:
So joye triumph'd o'r greefe, and day dispelled night.

As, when the boundlesse, bravinge Ocean,
Imbezilinge the rivers all in pride,
Receives their waters in his ample maine;
Some backe againe retire with curled tide,
Some through the mountaines to the valleys glide,
Some struggle with the brine, and foaminge flie
Up to the pavement of the valted skie,
And downe againe, as lowe as hell, they fall, and die;

So soone this crewe dispers'd:  some to their sporte,
Some in greene arbours spent the live longe day;
Some staulked round about the amber court;
Others to gaminge fell, and such like play,
And heere and there a drunken lover lay,
Who, by his giddy, braine-sicke concubine,
Disgorg'd the venoun baite of raginge wine:
'Tis sugar in the mouth; but in the bowells, brine.

Fast by, the Lapithoe and Centaures sate,
Each largely swillinge in a full-crown'd bowle,
Til their tongues tripp'd, and spake they knewe not what,
And speakinge made them jarre; and jarringe, scoule,
And scoulinge, tumults raise, and uproares foule:
Downe goe the tables and the goblets faire;
The ruddy wine, spilt on the Iv'ry ware,
Seemes like a fiery comet in the cleared aire.

What should I tell of all might there be seen?
Some were transform'd to swine, and some to Apes,
Such was the power of the enchantinge Queen:
With Circes virge shee could commaund all shapes,
Or give rancke poyson in a bunch of grapes;
Or like Medusas snaky haire at will,
Transforme the wisest Atlas to a hill.
Her Magicke knowledge good, but Magicke practise, ill.

Amonge the wanton traines of Luxury,
That in her palaces themselves addrest,
One was more beautifull unto the eye,
More faire, more debonaire, then all the rest;
In colour and proportion so blest,
That, were shee but with softer sleepe alayd,
Of virgin waxe you would suppose her made.
O Damsell faire without, but inwardely decay'd!

Her lovely tresses of embellish'd haire,
Kist her soft necke, and shoulders iv'ry white:
The Apples of Hesperides weere there:
So Titan swifte displayes his blazinge light,
On toppe of Rhodope, with snow bedight
Her eyes, as blacke as Jett, doe finely blaze,
Rowlinge about, and they that in them gaze,
Looke for themselves in her, halfe lost, as in a maze.

What should I of her arched browe relate,
Guilded with smiles, and amorous aspects;
The port of quietnesse, loves chaire of state?
Aurora hither her bright teame directs,
And all the while her higher race neglects.
Her fluent tongue, with silver is betipt;
And from the caskets of her corall lippe,
Jove may divine Ambrosia and Nectar sippe.

Her ruby cheekes laid o'r the snowy white,
(Why may not Antiques erre?) were the rare frame
That curious Apelles brought to light:
The litle birds ynchantinge hither came,
To picke the ruddy grapelets, was their aime.
Her nose, for Venus hill, I might commend;
But to the pearle, her teeth doe beauty lend,
While her eares pretty gemmes, with lovely lookes contend.

Next her debared brests bewitch mine eyes,
And with a Lethargy my sight appall;
But by and by the selfe-wild heavy spies
Unto the centre of her navell fall,
From whence they starte, awaked at the call
Of her depurpur'd thinges, heere at a stand,
Whither to viewe the silver of her hand,
And armes as streight as pine, or subtill Circes wand,

Or rather cast a due-devoted glaunce
Upon the marble tressels under plac't:
But then her dovelike feete themselves advance:
On such, Dianas nymphes the game have chast,
And the Nereides, with nimble hast,
Trippe up and downe, forward and backe again[e,]
Amid the gentle murm'ringe of the maine,
Curlinge the flaggy lockes of the Neptunian plaine.

Wonder it is, mee thinkes, without to see
So faire a face, (aye mee, the more her smart!)
And that her soule should so deglorious bee:
A brest so white, and yet so black a heart;
Her worst the best, her best the worser parte.
Can such faire hives inclose such idle Drones?
So white a wall inmure such worthlesse stones?
So beauteous a sepulchre, such rotten bones?

A 'sepulchre,' that cave I rightly call,
Wherein her soule so longe imu'd hath been,
Bound with the fetters of a willinge thrall:
And yet that sepulchre must bury sin,
And for Astroea make a shrine within:
It cannot bee, but such a heavenly grace,
In heavens quire at length must have a place:
But first the goodly corne must winnow'd bee a space.

Amonge her rivalls jolly nowe shee sate:
Each sues for love, and love to her affordes;
But hee, that strongest was, the conquest gate:
No other arte proevailes, no sugred words,
But force of armes, and dint of steeled swords.
(Venus, the Sun still followes with her light;
If Titan favor thee, her rayes shine bright;
If hee but hide his head, Venus is out of sight.)

So may you see alonge the meadowes green,
Two sturdy bullockes, (hard it is to say,
Whither with love, or furies flames more keen,)
Both this and that infect the purple waye,
And make the sanguine rivelets to play,
Flie at each other swifter then the winde,
And with your hornes your heads together binde:
The victor, Io gaines; the conquer'd comes behind[e.]

Great valour, sure to goe into the feild,
And battell bid for Lady Aphrodite,
To whet the sworde, and beare the trusty sheild,
To win the favor of some foemale white:
'T were better for thy countries good to fight:
There, if thou conquer, thou shalt conquered be;
If conquer'd, death thou gainst, or infamy:
Heere victorie is fame, and losse of victory.

The bloody broyles thus ended and allay'd,
Faire Magdalene (for so the Damsell hight)
Her lover for his labour well appay'd,
And all aggladded with his newe delight,
Led by the hand alonge the valleys bright:
And, as they went, hee am'rous glaunces cas[t]
Upon her rosy cheekes and slender wast;
And nowe a kisse hee begg'd, and nowe his love embract.

The glory of the pole did nothinge please him,
Apollos haire could not one glaunce allure,
Nor did the fragrant-smellinge meadowes ease him,
The melody of birds could worke no cure;
So fond is love, so dotingely dimure:
The tender plants, and minerals unseen,
Conquer each sicknesse and disease unclean;
But love, by the same hand is kill'd and cur'd agen.

His sences nowe no frame but hers receive,
And in his fancy ev'ry member paint:
His minde, both sence and fancy doth bereave,
And they againe his intellect attaint,
To thinke on nothinge but his seeminge saint:
Her love is all hee sees, or heares, or knowes,
So the bewitchinge oracle that throughes
About the maidens fancy, strange Deludinge showes.

Unto the garden by, at length they hy'd:
Atlas his orchard was not halfe so rare,
Nor Heloriz in midst of Sommer pride:
Nor kinge Alcinous his cheifest care:
Heere the dead lovers sprights revived are:
Flora had empti'd heere her precious horne,
With store the beds of pleasure to adorne;
No thistle heere was seen, ne pricle-armed thorne;

The Damaske-roses heere were brought a bed,
Just opposite the Lilie of the Vale:
The Rose, to see the Lilie white, wax'd red;
To see the rose so red, the Lilie pale;
While Zephyre fann'd then with a gentler gale.
The woody Primrose and the pretty Paunce,
The Pinke, the Daffodill and Chevisance,
All in Perfumed sets, your fragrant heads advance.

Sweet Casia, and the yealowe Marigould,
That when the Sun bringes forth the Orient daye,
Her armes, in signe of love, loves to unfould,
But closes when her Paramour's awaye:
The Cullumbine and Violets there play,
With Couslips of Hierusalem so nice,
Sweet Eglantine, and cloves of Paradise,
Rare shrubs, and rarer hearbs, and beds perfum'd with spice.

Narcissus too, that heart enamouringe lad,
Grewe by a springe (a chrystiall springe was nighe),
Whose silver streames the gaudy flowers agglad,
Glidinge alonge, as if they faine would prie
Under the Velvet leaves, and by and by
Into your watry cells againe they start,
But with a gentle pace, as loath to part,
Leavinge your teares behinde, in token of your hearte.

The flower, mindefull of his former love,
Declines his head toward the neighbour springe:
His sportefull shade, affection seems to moove,
Under the fountaine water wantoninge;
Yet to the banckes his tender rootes yclinge,
The silken staulkes 'gan tremble sore affraid,
Least once againe Narcissus in his shade
Should loose himselfe for love, and in sad silence fade.

All theese delights the lovers' eyes aggrate,
But yet your appetite hath made no stay:
Into an arbour nowe at length they gate,&mdash;
This was the hopefull Period of your way;&mdash;
An arbour, pleasant, beautifull and gay,
Incompast with triumphant baye about,
And farther in, the laden vines ysprout:
If Baccus bee within, Apollo stands without.

The leavy pillastrells were neatly shorne;
The grassy seats, the eyes to slumber wed;
The vaulted roofe, on ample baulkes upborne,
With Violets and Lilies was bespread,
Like th' Azure skie with starres besilvered;
The floore with many a flower was bedeck'd.
The Gilly-flower, and Carnation speck'd,
But Lady Rose, the other with her beauty check'd.

On flowry beds the Lovers heere repose;
And nowe sweet words must guild their bad intent:
With smiles, with lookes, with lippe and hand hee woes:
Such were the Dartes, that subtill Cupid lent,
Lustes wandringe harbinger, vaine complement:
Faire ramillets and posies hee proepares,
With sonnets smooth, and garlands for her haires;
And so with gentle pace, into her brest hee fares.

What should I tell of those polluted acts
That followe wantonnesse and Luxury?
Let modesty not meddle with your facts,
Sith tongue and hart, in mischeife still agree,
And as the wordes, the actions often bee:
Their descants nowe they tooke, and restles rest,
And thought they were with joyes of heaven blest;
But night as blacke as hell, your meltinge soules possest.

The Sun peep'd in with his declininge raye,
And dy'd his paler cheekes with fiery hue;
It seems, hee blush'd, and would recall the day,
The wickednesse of Vestaes sonnes to viewe,
That rush to folly, but your folly rue:
And thou, my Muse, packe hence with nimble flight!
The shame of sinners, 't is no great delight,
For modest eare to heare, or chaster pen to write.

Thus Magdalene in Pleasures wanton courts,
Parte of her youthfull dayes did fondly waste,
Joyinge in vanity and idle sportes,
To spend the time, that soone (God wot) was past.
Proeventinge all her pleasure with her haste:
Parte of her time in idle languishement,
Parte in attire, and gaudy ornament,
And parte in frolicke feasts and banquetinge, shee spent.

Sometimes the palace walkes delight her minde;
Sometimes in silken beds shee sweltred lies;
And nowe shee's vacant to her lovers kinde,
And nowe the garden doth invite her eyes;
But by and by, her arbour greene shee spies:
Nowe in the springe shee bathes, to coole her heat,
And waves her plume, to fanne away the sweat;
And cooler nowe, shee makes a sunny bancke her seat.

So doe the fondlinges of our latter age,
In jollity their fresher yeares dispend,
Treadinge this scoene, as't were a silken stage,
But never dreaminge of a Tragicke end:
Can great Jehovah take him for his friend,
That in his youth doth nought but wantonize,
But when ould age decayes, both eares and eyes,
Then to the altar bringes his haltinge sacrifice?

Let none on Magdalens delaye proesume,
Though (sooth to say) it was not very longe:
Life's but a fadinge flower, a subtile fume,
A shadowe vaine, a shorte, though pleasant songe.
Then oyle your lampes betimes!  and in the thronge
Of Saintlie Heroes, enter heav'n amaine;
For what the Fates decree, is not in vain[e:]
Joye heere, shall sorrowe there; teares heere, joy there obtaine.

When heav'ns bright eye, farre brighter then the Sun,
Beheld th' asp[i]ringe tower of vaine delight,
And howe this harlot had her selfe undon,
Hee sent Syneide, daughter of the light,
To tell the Caytiffe of her wretched plight:
The Damsell brighter then the brightest glasse,
The Isicles in splendor did surpasse,
And in her silver hand, a poynted goad there was;

A tiffany shee wore about her head,
Hanginge submissely to her shoulders white;
From top to toe, she was immanteled
With purest Lawne; and, for her nimble sight,
Lynceus his eyes were never halfe so bright:
The Eagles quickenesse in respect is blinde,
And Argus with his hundred comes behinde,
For myriads of eyes about her body shin'd.

Thinges past were proesent to her searchinge viewe,
And future reproesented in her thought,
Where newe thinges n'er wax'd ould, but oulder newe.
Each idle word and action hither brought,
Receive your doome and censure (as they ought).
Sometimes in Paradise shee likes to dwell,
Sometimes shee dives into the deepes of Hell;
Shee sees the heart, and pries into his closest cell.

Faine of her message, nowe shee tooke her flight
Through the bright amber of the flaminge Court,
Passinge the wheeles of purest Chrysolite,
Drawn by the fiery beasts that there resort,
Where millions of Angells ever sporte,
And glorious martyrs, after all your woes,
Singe praise to him that overcame your foes,
And all the Saints, your crownes, at Glories throne depose.

Then by the Chrystall waye shee nimbly past,
Unto the radiant spangled firmament,
Where heavens ever-wakinge sheapheard fast,
His starry flockes into your fouldes had pent.
The Gnossian Crowne among the rest was sent,
The Goblet, Helen, and the Brothers twaine,
Cassiope, the Pleiads, and the Swaine
That Arctos kept in warde, with all the starry traine.

And through the wandring sphoeres shee wandringe went,
Leavinge the rasters of the starry light;
Then to the pure aethereall element
That's whirld about the hornes of Cynthia bright,
Both they and shee out-strippe the feeble sight,
So rare and subtill substances they been.
Natures so much depur'd, that (well I ween)
No mortall eye, sphoeres, fire, or conscience, e'r hath seen.

So passinge through the tripple-region'd ayre,
Where diverse mixtures and aspects appeare:
The flyinge Dragon, the resplendent Haire,
The Darte, the Candle and the burninge Speare,
The Milke, the Kidds that skipped here and there,
The poynted Beame, th' infatuating Fire,
The Northern Comoets and the painted Ire,
With many more, whereof some fall, and some aspire.

At length shee touch'd the toppe of hillockes highe,
That over-shaddowe Aphrodites towers.
And streight-way, in the twinkling of an eye,
Shee windes her selfe into the secret bowers
Of Mary Magdalenes depraved powers:
With gentle hand shee prickes her festerd hart;
The boylinge blood from ev'ry veine 'gan start,
And thus the wanton mayde assaults with mickle smart:

"Ah, fondling!  whither, whither do'st thou flie
With guilded winges of selfe opinion vaine?
Can ought escape heavens all-seeinge eye?
Or shall thy pleasure breed no after-paine?
If so, a Paradise on earth were gaine!
But when the revolution of yeares
Shall bee at hand, then joy must end in teares,
And pleasant spectacles bee chang'd to ghastely feares.

"Sion was holy to the Lord of yore;
Salem's in-habitants his cheife delight;
Each to his altar, freewill of-fringes bore,
And payd the Levite aye the Levites right;
So did the temple shine with glory bright;
Religion ruld the royall politie
With justice, temperance and aequitie:
Then let not Magdalene her native soile denie.

"Wilt thou in riot swimme, while others fast?
Wilt thou bee sporting, when as others pray?
Or canst thou still delight to bee imbrac't,
When others, drown'd in sorrowe all the day,
With sacke-cloth gird your loynes, and sad araye?
Or while the aged sire's besprinkeled
With dust and ashes on his silver head,
Canst thou thy various Junonian plumes dispread?

"Doubtlesse those haires for lust were not intended;
Those eyes for Cupids darts were never meant;
That heavnly face, by art but litle mended,
(Sith nature in it all her skill hath spent,)
Was not to bee a wanton's ornament;
Those eyes were made so bright, the heavns to see;
Those feet, to tread the paths of aequitie:
Bee not so bad to him, that is so good to thee!"

This sayd, shee brandishes her quiveringe darte,
And makes a deeper wound in Maries brest:
The silly soule amaz'd, beginnes to starte,
As one awaked from his nightly rest,
With slumber soft, and hopefull dreames possest.
For pleasure is a dreame of sweet delight,
That lastes no longer then the shortest night,
But when the day appeares, awaye it takes his flight;

Or as the nimble doe in lawny parke,
Browsinge upon the palate-pleasinge brier,
Is on a suddaine made the hunter's marke,
And wounded in her brest, perceives a fire,
So Magdalene, in midst of her desire,
Crown'd with the blisse of fooles, and pleasures vaine,
Feeles in her heart the stinge of gripinge paine;
And then to feigne sad sighes, and sorrowe, shee is faine.

But sorrowe soone in streames of pleasure's drownd,
And conscience away doth vanish quite;
So litle truth in womens teares are found.
The Crocodile can sorrowe to the sight,
And under sighes embaite his venom'd spight.
Vaine woman!  see!  the hart hath quickely found
A salving ditany, to heale his wound:
And shall thy heart unsounded, still remaine unsound?

But custome is a tyrant, and his slaves
Are forc'd within his limits to abide.
Tis easier to still the swellinge Waves,
And turne the torrent of the strongest tide,
Then to resist his course, or quell his pride:
So Mary to her lust againe returnes,
And at Ambrosian mercy, offerd, spurnes,
Till Heavens awefull power in zealous anger burnes.

Withat a dreary hagge of Acheron,
Arm'd with a gastely torch, new dipt in blood,
A sable weed, as blacke as night, put on,
And in the palaces of Pleasure stood,
Shakinge the frie of her vipereous brood:
Fury attends her, and the want of sence,
Sorrow, Despight, with the sad Influence,
Famine, and bloody Warre, and meagre Pestilence.

The pillars trembled at this ghastely sight;
The dores were tainted with a pallid hue;
The Sun, amaz'd, deny'd his wonted light,
While the poore mayd, disquieted anewe,
Strives to go forth of dores; but there a crewe
Of hideous glowinge snakes the entraunce keepe,
That all about the direfull fury creepe,
And in whole troopes from out her shaggy caverne peepe.

Some wandred up and downe her dismall brest;
Some to her pitchy armes and shoulders clunge,
With fiery eyes and hissinge tongues possest;
And one upon the wretched mayd shee slunge,
That twininge here and there, about her sprunge,
And glided on her brest with gentle hast,
And there vipereous cogitations plac't,
With pininge greife and sorrowes, that the spirites wast.

The crinkled snake about her Crystall necke,
Seem'd like a wreathed chaine of brightest gould,
And for a fillet serv'd, her haire to decke,
For through each parte the slippery pilgrim rould,
And fire within the marrowe did infould,
Taintinge the sences with his poysond gall,
That soone the Damsells riot could appall,
And Sorrowe much aggladd at Pleasures funerall.

Nowe all yee flittinge daughters of the light,
Packe hence with speed, and see, yee bee not seene!
Let never smile or laughter come in sight!
For joye and joyllity too longe have been
Within these courtes:  but Sorrowe now is queen.
Mary hath cast her lovers out of minde,
And solace in her brest no place can finde,
For carking care doth all delights together binde.

The Fury nowe (it seemes) has stood her freind,
And counsell'd her to bidd vaine sports adieu.
But ther's much difference 't-wixt freind and fiend,
And hee, that monster-headed Gorgon slewe,
Did but the ould one in younge snakes renewe:
The blood, that Perseus heere and there did spill,
Begate another brood of serpents still.
If Hell be cause of good, that good is nought but ill.

Into the hollowe of a darke-some cell,
The Messenger of Night conveigh'd her streight:
Shee thought, shee had been wafted quicke to hell,
So swift shee flewe, that now shee felt no weight,
Till downe shee squats before a balefull gate
That ever open stood, both daye and night,
To entertaine each sad, disastrous spright,
With horrid shapes, and apparitions for his sight.

So gape the gloomy courts of Pluto fell,
Exhalinge cloudy mistes of sulphur blewe,
With horrid damps, and many a noysom smell,
Ready to swallowe up the damned crewe,
That thither hast, and yet your hast they rue;
When death a punishment for life they se[e,]
And life for death a punishment to bee,
And death with life, and life with death joyne amity;

Or as the jawes of Scyllas barkinge hounds,
That aye for greedinesse of booties rave,
And swallowe all that come within your bounds:
Such was the gap of Melancholies cave,
Where many loose, but fewe your lives can save;
Onely for barkinge hounds, the grimme-fac'd cat,
The slowe pac'd asse was there, the flutteringe bat,
The croakinge raven on a slaughtred carcasse sate.

The ground, no whole-some hearbe, no flower breeds,
No fruitfull tree aray'd with sommers hue,
But cockell, darnell, thornes, and stinkinge weeds,
And wither'd trunkes, devoy'd of leaves, in liewe
Of better plants, with the favereous yewe,
Beside the fatal tree, where Phyllis faire
Hunge by the tresses of her goulden haire,
For love of him, that of her love tooke litle care.

Heere Pyramus and Thysbe murdred lie;
Heere Antony and Cleopatra been;
Heere Ajax, with his bloody speare fast by;
Heere Cato, and the Carthagenian Queen:
Sad spectacles!  no sadder ever seen!
Aegeus was heere, deluded once by fame;
Empedocles leapt hither through the flame
Of Aetna; and the Stagirite by water came.

But loe, within, dull Melancholy sits,
Proppinge with weary hand his heavy head,
And lowringe on the ground in franticke fits,
With pallid hue hee look'd, as hee were dead,
Or Death himselfe:  for many hee had sped
And sent unto the grave:  rough was his haire,
His hollowe eyes, Hyaena-like did staire,
Sparkelinge like fishes scales amid the cloudy aire.

Longe eares, blacke lippes, teeth yeallowe, meagr[e] face,
Sharpe nose, thin cheekes, chin pendant, vaulted cragge,
Lean ribbes, bare loynes, lanke belly, snale-like pace,
Lame feet, dead hands, and all his garments sag[ge:]
Heere hanges a patch, and ther a tatter'd ragge:
Such Melancholy hight; and seated so,
A thousand Gorgons doe his fancy woe,
And horrid apparitions about him throughe.

Sometimes with love his cogitation swells,
And then 'gainst churlish rivaldry hee braules,
And of his Ladies cruelty hee tells,
And makes sad plaint unto the ruthlesse walles:
In hast, for paper, pen, and inke, hee calles,
A letter to his love hee will endite,
And with a thorne on ground hee 'gins to wright;
Then up hee takes the dust, and blowes it out of sight.

Sometimes about the starres his minde doth rove,
And light Ambition in his brest beares swaye;
And then hee will contend with mighty Jove,
And have commaund o'r vassal Titan's raye:
But, by and by, hee softely steales awaye,
And slinkes from out his den, supposinge ther[e]
Some furious hagge would him in peeces teare,
So closely couch'd hee lies, all quiveringe for feare.

Nowe out hee hollowes, and full loudely yells,
As if hee chas'd before him some wilde beast:
But that devise another thought expells;
And till hee finde his goulden interest,
Hid under ground, with feare hee is possest:
Nowe hee supposes, hee's a man of glasse;
And nowe straunge colours seeme before him passe;
And now hee thinkes, hee is not, what but nowe hee was.

Hard by his side, sad Magdalene was plac't,
Within the ugly cave of this dull spright.
Kindely each other at the first embrac't,
But soone shee felt the rancor of his spight,
For all her daye was turned into night:
And shee, that was with pleasure lately crown'd,
Now hanges the head, and viewes the cursed ground,
Bearinge about her still an ever-smarting wound.

As in the splendor of a glassy sphere,
What s'ever hee that vewes it, doth assaye,
Bee sure to see it reproesented there,
The mimicke orbe each action will bewraye,
And in a nimble shaddowe soone displaye
The motion of the foot, the hand, the eye,
The lippes, the tongue, and tell what is awry,&mdash;
Whither hee sad his browe, or looke more cheerfully,&mdash;

So Magdalene is Melancholies Ape,
And, what soe'r hee does, assayes to doe:
His fancy bringes him each fantasticke shape,
And so fantasticke is her fancy too:
Hee stayes, shee stands:  hee stirres, and shee doth goe:
Hee trembles at the trembling of the winde;
Shee feares each blast:  hee beares a guilty mind;
A guilty conscience shee within her brest can finde.

There is a path adown a steepy waye,
Wrapt all in uncouth silence of the night,
Where wandringe (cursed hap!)  poore pilgrims stray[e,]
A path, that leades unto the lake Cocyte,
Where hellish torments wretched soules affright,
Where deadly scritch-owles direfull dities sing[e,]
The grisly ghostes your sorrowe ecchoinge,
And all about the aire the poyson'd vapours clinge.

A thousand gates and entraunces there bee,
To Lethes burninge waves and scaldinge fire,
But backe againe, wee no returne can see;
The Lions den lets fewe or none retire:
And though the intricate Daedalean gyre
Have many portalls, easy to attaine,
Yet hee that knowes how to returne againe.
May count the countles sands, and make the mountains plaine.

As Amphitrite in her larger wombe
Receives all other floods and Chrystall brookes,
So doth this lake all hopelesse soules in-tombe,
And still it hath more roome, for more it lookes:
So many windinges there, and wandringe nookes,
That, though all nations of the world should cease,
And fall together in a close-throng'd prease,
Yet boundlesse hell could ne'r perceive his owne encrease.

There raginge winter ever doth abide,
And yet no showre, your burninge tongues to wet:
They allwayes have the parchinge sommer tide,
And yet no sun, your frozen limmes to heat:
So doe they fryinge freeze, and freezinge sweat:
And (that which to your gripinge paine and greife
Still addes a newe supplie without releife)
Aeternity amonge your torments is the cheefe.

Hither came Nemesis, and left the skie;
(In just revenge shee tooke so much delight:)
Soone as shee entred with her majesty,
The ghostes invegled with perpetuall night,
Stood all amaz'd, and trembled at the sight:
Their eyes were dazled with her bright attire,
But, o, they quaked at her awfull ire,
Freezinge with fearefull could amid the flames of fire.

Amonge the blacker sonnes of Tartary,
Sev'n hideous fiery sprights shee evocates:
They came with speed; yet durst not come too nigh,
Least, happily adjudged by the Fates,
They should augment your chaines and heavy weights:
For Justice could not Stygian vassals brooke;
But terrified them with her angry looke,
And heav'nly majesty in hell upon her tooke.

In thunder then shee spake, great silence made,
(At ev'ry worde shee shak'd the gates of hell)
"Goe to the earth, and seeke the wanton maide
That erst in idle Pleasures courts did dwell,
But nowe remaines in Melancholies cell!
Torment and vexe her!  take away her rest!
Enter her thoughts!  fully possesse her brest!
But spare her life!  in that yee have no interest."

So havinge giv'n her charge, awaye shee flinges
From out the cavernes of aye-lastinge woe,
And postes unto the skie with nimble winges,
Where Iris by the waye salutes her lowe,
And on her weeds sweete water shee would throughe:
But the immortall power gave no consent:
For though unto the poyson'd lake shee went,
Uncapable shee was of the sulphurean sent.

The Hierarchies and Dominations bright,
Burned in fiery zeale and zealous fire,
Soone as thees tidings shee had tould arright,
And all with her in just revenge conspire:
The hellish fiends were glad at Heavens ire;
And though about them they your to[r]ments bore
Yet nowe more joyfull then they were before,
The damned spirits scund'd alonge the Stygian shore.

Through sad Cimmerian mistes as blacke as night,
At length to fresher aire they did aspire;
Though dazled with the glimmeringe of the light,
They easily found out this aged Sire:
Swift was your speed, but swifter your desire,
Had not they been with iron chaines confin'd,
By him that greeat Leviathan can binde.
Then let not silly Saints bee troubled in your minde.

Soone as into his cell they entraunce made,
(And soone they entraunce made into his cell,)
Leavinge the borders of the airy glade,
Within the Damsells brest they come to dwell,
And thither bringe they mischeefes store from hell:
Scorpions, and flames of Aetna, to affright;
Madnesse and feare, with many a ghastely sight,
And malice (what more deadly?)  like a womans spight.

But then the haplesse maide (unhappy tide!)
Incited by the monsters huge within,
Runs maddinge up and downe the citie wide,
Like to the top, that in his gyre doth spin,
When game-some lads with limber stroakes begin
To scourg it round about some larger court,
That fecches compasse, while the simple sorte
Stand wondringe at the swiftenesse of the boxen sport.

The stroakes adde heart, and drive it forward well:
No slower pace the maide is forcd to hie,
Through th' midst of cities, and of people fell;
Beside, [i]nto the woods shee seemes to flie,
Like to the Menades that "Euhoe" crie,
And in the honour of the God of wine,
Nourish your sacred haire, and doe entwine
Their tender Ivy javelins with the braunchinge vine,

That girt about with the faire spoyle of hindes,
Their merry orgialls and jollities
Aye celebrate, with mad outragious mindes,
And fill the great circumference of the skies
With hideous shouts, and vaste redoubled cries.
So doth the Damsell wander heere and there,
Trailinge along her lowe dissheveld haire,
With fearefull fire enflam'd, and could with fiery feare.

Nowe through the aire with nimble pace shee braves,
And on the top of snowy hills is plac't;
And nowe unto the dales beneath shee waves,
And yet shee knowes no reason of her hast:
Sometimes shee makes her nest in deserts waste,
And groaves become her den, with trees around;
But litle it availes to hide a wound:
A guilty conscience maye in darkest night bee found.

Nowe shee is catchinge Cynthia by the horne,
(For so the troubled fancy will suppose,)
And nowe the wandringe planoets shee doth scorne;
Unto the higher Cynosure shee goes;
But by and by a newe delusion throughes
Her pride as lowe as Phlegetonticke maine.
So litle blisse ev'n in our dreames wee gaine;
And for such momentary joye, such endlesse paine.

Heere a longe time musinge in mind shee stayes,
Conceitinge shee in Pluto's court remaines:
Heere flames shee sees:  "greater, my flames!"  shee sayes;
There ice congeald; but coulder are her veins;
And all the fictions of infernall paynes,
Shee to her selfe ascribes:  dire vulturs rent
Her bowells, Tityus-like; and shee is spent
With longing for the fount and tree neare-imminent.

And Sisyphus his stone, shee makes account,
Comes rouling, troulinge downe the hill againe,
That erst shee labour'd up the steepy mount:
And nowe shee must endure Ixions paine
On the tormentinge wheele:  then all in vaine
With Danaus his daughters shee helpes fill
The sive-like vessells, that the water spill
Out at a thousand holes, your taske renewinge still.

Thus (ah poore soule!)  shee's tossed too and fro:
The deadly feinds, your furious will obtaine:
And nowe her body headlonge downe they throughe,
Into the brinish waters of the maine;
And nowe in fiery flames shee's allmost slaine:
Sometimes shee lives in dens and hollowe caves,
Sometimes shee has her dwellinge in the graves,
And sometimes on the top of ragged rockes shee raves.

No freinds can now persuade her to abide;
No bolts of iron can her feet detaine:
The spirits drive her on with winde and tide:
(Where reason's failinge freindshippe is but vaine)
Fetters, like limber strawes, shee breakes in twaine,
And then unto the monuments shee flies,
Where, groavelinge on the ground, shee breathlesse lies:
When (poore distressed soule!)  oh when, wilt thou arrise?

Unhappy servants to such Fairy nymphes!
Unhappy younglinges, that have such a sire!
Unhappy handmaides to such cursed impes,
That, for a litle sweete of vaine desire,
Adde paine to paine, and fuell to the fire!
Unhappy Magdalene!  unhappy I!
Unhappy all under the azure skie,
Had not heav'n pity'd earth, and life been pleas'd to die.

No cruelty with Hellish, maye compare,
For, from this fount, all cruelty proceeds:
While bloody Sylla no mans blood will spare,
(The walles lament, and swellinge Tyber bleeds);
The Furies fury, fury slaughter breeds:
Eight thousand Romans, Mithridates sped
With one sad letter:  and on bodies dead,
Through Vergell, did the Punick wight his army lead.

From Hell, Perillus fetcht his bull of brasse,
Wherin him-selfe first learnt to lowe and roare;
Th' Italian Turke from hence derived was;
And army-murdringe peeces from this shore,
Were, by the Spanish frier, brought in store:
There Cain first learnt his brothers blood to spill;
Herod, his endlesse fury to fullfill,
Had a decree from thence, the tender babes to kill.

Fond worldlinges then, that make a league with Hell,
As if thees quicke sands did not all beguile;
If so it were, the Scythians sure did well
T' adore the Fiend for feare, and those of Nile
To worshippe Ibis and the Crocodile:
But pride and tyrany together rise:
Since Lucifer's debarred from the skies,
Hee in the ayre his stratagems doth exercise.

Witnesse distressed Maries sad estate,
Who erst with worldely happinnesse was blest,
And liv'd in Pleasures affluence of late:
But gnawinge Conscience, devoy'd of rest,
Her shorte-liv'd pleasure quickely dispossest,
Her former jollity, tormenting thought,
Terrour of conscience, melancholy wrought
That misery, and misery to Mercy brought.

