The Shepherd loves, yet so his love doth seek,
As he seems loth to love a painted cheeke;
His wench can blush for shame, which may be s'ed
A native blush, and not vermillion'd.
Shee makes him osier-garlands in her bowre,
And intermingles them with every flowre
Fresh fragrant Spring affords; which done, with speed
She wreathes them round about her Shepheards head.
She smiles to smooth his frowne, and can espie
No object worthy love but in his eye:
Which fixt on her, as hers is fixt on his,
Shewes what th' effect of love united is.
To th' fold they goe, when ev'ning time drawes neere,
Driving their flocks before, and pins them there:
Hastning on homeward, where the night is spent
In singing Carols, or some merriment,
To passe away long winter evens withall:
Great's their content, though their estate be small.
Now in the shades one doth another seeke,
Another even is spent at Barly-breake,
Fox to the bale, or Maidens to the greene;
For Masks, alas, they know not what they meene.
Sometimes they Gooselins in the ashes make,
To know thereby what husbands they're to take;
Or lest that one sport should their humours tire,
Each tells his tale, and rosts a crab by th' fire.
Againe, when feast dayes come, each in aray
Clad as becomes him in his shepheards gray,
Hastes to the May-pole, and the time to passe,
The Lasse takes in her Lad, the Lad his Lasse:
Which done, unto their wassall-cups they hie them,
Yet closely too, lest other Swaines should spie them;
For Shepheards love is bashfull, nor can brooke
That any eye should on their dalliance looke.
Kind honest Heardsmen, whose hearts are so pure
From any fained love or forced lure;
From least adulterate varnish which ours borrow
This day from shop, and's vanished to morrow;
From sugred smiles, or from a leering eye,
A guga tire, or art-affected dye;
From love-provoking powders, or that love
Which takes her sent from perfume of a glove;
From hatefull spells, or lust-enforcing charmes,
Which warmes the heart, but all her powers disarmes.
So pure, I say, from these, as their chiefe care
Is to be what them seeme, seeme what they are.
And hence it is, their Sleepes are void of feare,
No dreadfull visions to their sight appeare.
Their aimes are not aspiring, to possesse
By an injurious purchase more or lesse;
Their thoughts are not ambitious, but confin'd
To the proportion of an honest minde;
Their hearts are not inflam'd, but as their fate
Was to be born low, so they frame their state;
Their health's their wealth, their broad-spread Beech their Vine,
Content their Crowne, their shadie shroud their shrine.
It was indeed; but where's those Shepheards now
Which made the Downes resound and eccho too
With their eare-charming notes?  Where be those Swaines
Whose layes in beauties praise so chear'd the plaines,
And woollie heards which graz'd upon the vale
As many times they ceas'd to feed at all,
Such willing eares they to their notes did lend them,
As they would rather starve than not attend them?
Where's these?  Alas, I cannot tell you, I,
I heare some say that they long since did die;
But if not dead, I'me sure they live unknowne,
Or else lie buried in their wenches frowne.
Yes there it is:  How can a Shepheard joy
To see himselfe so kinde, and she so coy?
Who would have thought these Heardmaids could be proud,
Or thus upon their pantoffles have stood?
Or which is worse, so their affections vary,
As one they love, but they another marry?
Briefly, so weake's their fancie, and so light,
As whom they love all day, they hate at night:
So as me thinkes I heare these Swaines complaine,
And tune their sorrowes to this heavy straine:
"Too true poore Shepheards doe this proverbe finde,
No sooner out a sight than out a minde."
This was not so, when in each flowrie grove
The Shepheard toy'd and dallied with his love;
And plighting troths, confirm'd their promise so
With some meane bracelet, or a ring of stroe.
And this they did, and deem't sufficient blisse
To seale the bargaine with a shamefast kisse;
Which done, and this was all poore Swaines they did,
They left the rest till th' marriage night did bid.
But see the fate of every state, God wot,
(For who knowes any thing and knowes it not)
How it is chang'd; which but a while forebeare,
And in these Shepheards stories you shall heare:
Where each Swaine tells his tale, and doth expresse
The fickle faith of his false Shepheardesse.
