THE ARGUMENT.
Dymnus Palmira
Woes to be his Wife,
But she had vow'd
To live a single life.

THE SECOND ARGUMENT.
Dymnus with long looking dim,
Loves the wench that lotheth him;
Price nor praier may not perswade
To infringe the vow she made:
Having meant to live and die
Vesta's virgin votarie.
Yet at last she seemes to yeeld
To her love-sick Swaine the field,
So that he will undertake
Three yeares silence for her sake:
Which hard Pennance he receives,
And performes the taske she craves.
But while he restraines his tongue,
Shee pretends the time's too long:
Wherefore she doth entertaine
In her breast another Swaine.
Dymnus having heard of this,
Hies to th' place where th' marriage is,
Purposing to make a breach
By dumbe signes, though want of speech:
But alas they all command him
Silence, cause none understand him.
Thus he suffers double wrong,
Losse of wench, and losse of tongue,
For till three yeares were expir'd,
He nere spoke what he desir'd,
All which time consum'd in dolour,
He displayes her in her colour;
And concluding, wisheth no man
Lose his tongue to gaine a woman:
And to cheere his pensive heart,
With a Song they end this part.


Upon a time while I did live on Teese
I made love to a wench my friends to please,
But (as my fate was still) it would not be,
For wooe I knew not how, no more than she:
Yet I can well remember this she said,
For ought he knew, she meant to die a Maid,
A Vestall Virgin, or a Votaresse,
A cloyster'd Nun, or holy Prioresse;
To which I answer'd, if't were her desire
To be a Nun, I meant to turne a Frier,
So might it chance that we againe should meet,
Where th' Nun and Frier might play at Barly-breake.

CORYDON.
Where liv'd thy love?

DYMNUS.
Neere th' bottome of the hill,
Betweene Pancarpus temple and the mill,
Where liv'd my faire Palmira, who I say,
Mongst all our wenches bore th' Palme away:
And her I lov'd and lik'd, and su'd and sought,
But all my love and labour turn'd to nought;
For she had vow'd which vow should nere be broke,
Shee'd die a Maid, but meant not as she spoke.

DORYCLES.
No Dymnus, no, the nicest sure I am,
Would live a Maid if't were not for a man;
But there is none of them can brooke so well,
To be a Beareward and leade Apes in Hell.

DYMNUS.
True Dorycles, for in processe of time,
I found her maiden humour to decline:
For she did grant the boone which I did aske,
Upon condition of a greater taske.

LINUS.
What heavie censure might this taske afford?

DYMNUS.
That for three yeeres I should not speake a word.

CORYDON.
Alas poore Swaine, this taske which she prepar'd,
In all my time the like was never heard.

DORYCLES.
But this same silent taske had harder bin,
If she had prov'd what she enjoyned him:
For none can doe a woman greater wrong,
Than barre her from a priviledge of tongue.

SAPPHUS.
A womans tongue's a clapper in the winde,
Which once a foot, can never be confinde;
But to thy taske, good Dymnus.

DYMNUS.
To proceed,
What she enjoyn'd I did performe indeed:
For I appear'd as one depriv'd of speech,
Yet nere my friends unto my aimes could reach,
But much lamented that a Swaine so young,
And promising, should lose his use of tongue.

TECHNIS.
I wonder how thou could expresse thy minde!

DYMNUS.
Onely by dumbe signes, so as I did finde
Within short time, a great facilitie
In that hard taske which she imposed me.

LINUS.
Hardest adventures oft the easiest seeme,
Only for love of such injoyned them.

DYMNUS.
And such were mine; when others talk'd with ease
Of this and that, I ever held my peace;
Others sung Carols of their fairest faire,
But I in silent measures had a share;
Others discours'd of pleasures of the time,
And I approv'd them with a secret signe.
Others could court, as Shepheards use to doe,
Which I could doe as well, but durst not show:
For all my aymes and purposes did tend
To gaine my Love, and for no other end.

CORYDON.
Did not performance of this taske obtaine
That prize of love which thou desir'd to gaine?

DYMNUS.
No Corydon; for though I did obey,
Shee thought three yeares too long a time to stay,
So as her dumbe knight she did straight disclaime,
And tooke herselfe unto another Swaine.

SAPPHUS.
Disloyall wench!

DYMNUS.
Yet 'las what remedie;
A mariage is intended solemnlie:
Which that it might more privatly be caried,
In a retyred Cell they must be maried.

TECHNIS.
Unhappy Swaine!

DYMNUS.
So did I then appeare:
For when the mariage came unto my eare,
I straight repair'd to th' Cell right speedily,
Where these sad rites solemniz'd were to be.
Straite was the Gate kept by a Porter grim,
Who guards the doore that none should enter in:
But I, as time requir'd, resolv'd to venter,
I did boldly knock, and knocking freely enter;
Where entring in, each casts his eye about,
Some full of feare, as others were of doubt,
What my approach should meane; but to be briefe,
(Short tales seeme long that doe renue our griefe)
The Priest pronouncing, justly as I came,
Who gives her to be maried to this man?
I rush'd into the croud, their hands to breake,
And gladly would have spoke but durst not speake:
At which attempt, some strange constructions had,
And verily imagin'd I was mad;
Others suspecting what I did intend,
Thought that my aymes were to no other end,
Than to prevent the Mariage for that time,
And afterwards perswade her to be mine.
Nor were their judgements erring, for I thought
By my device to have this Project wrought
Only by dumbe signes:  sometimes would I show
With eyes heav'd up to Heaven her breach of vow;
Sometimes in violent manner would I seeme
As if through love I had distracted beene,
Pulling my deare Palmira from his hand,
Who to receive her for his Spouse did stand.
Sometimes, as Men in sorrowes plunged deepe
And could not utter them, I 'gan to weepe,
And wash the Temple with a brinie flood,
Yet all this while I was not understood:
For in despite of all that I could doe
I was restrain'd, and she was married too.

CORYDON.
What discontent might equall this of thine?

DYMNUS.
Yet though I bore it sharply for the time,
I afterwards, and have done ever since,
Borne this disgrace with greater patience.

LINUS.
Yet Dymnus thou wast dumbe till three yeeres end!

DYMNUS.
Yes Linus, and as truly did intend
What she enjoyned me, as I desir'd
To marrie her, when those three yeeres expir'd:
Which come and past, I then exprest my griefe,
Finding apt words to tender me reliefe;
For woes doe labour of too great a birth,
That want the helpe of words to set them forth.

TECHNIS.
But didst thou nere display her hatefull shame?

DYMNUS.
In generall I did, but not by name,
Nor ever will:  my purpose is to live
And laugh at love, and no occasion give
Of just offence to her or any one,
Or silently consume my time in mone,
Frequenting shadie Lawnes in discontent,
Or to the Ayre my fruitlesse clamors vent.
Though I resolve, if ere I make my choice,
In better sort and measure to rejoyce
Than I have done;

DORYCLES.
Or else I'me sure thy share
Though it decrease in joy, will grow in care.

DYMNUS.
I know it will:  Now as my wrong was great,
And greater farre than I could well repeat,
This shall be my Conclusion; There is no Man
Wise that will lose his tongue for any Woman:
For sure I am that they will be more prone
(Such is their guize) to triumph over one
When they have drawne him headlong to their traine,
Than such as on more firmer grounds remaine.
"Fly Women, they will follow (still say I)
But if ye follow women, they will fly."

TECHNIS.
Rightly opiniond Dymnus; but t' allay
Thy grounded griefe, and to conclude the day,
Let's have a Song.

DORYCLES.
Technis with all my heart.

DYMNUS.
Though I've smal mind to sing, I'le beare a part.

CORYDON.
And you too Sapphus.

SAPPHUS.
Yes, and Linus too,

LINUS.
Yes, I my Art amongst the rest will show.

DORYCLES.
To it then freely:  safely sing may we,
Who have beene slaves to Love, but now are free.

TECHNIS.  Tell me Love what thou canst doe?
DORYCLES.  Triumph ore a simple Swaine;
DYMNUS.  Binding him to such a vow;
CORYDON.  As to make his griefe thy gaine.
SAPPHUS.  Doe thy worst thou canst doe now;
LINUS.  Thou hast shot at us in vaine.
ALL.  For we are free, though we did once complain.

DORYCLES.  Free we are as is the ayre;
TECHNIS.  Or the Silver-murm'ring spring.
DYMNUS.  Free from thought or reach of care;
CORYDON.  Which doe haplesse Lovers wring.
SAPPHUS.  Now we may with joy repaire;
LINUS.  To our gladsome Plaines and sing;
ALL.  And laugh at Love, and call't an idle thing.

DYMNUS.  Sport we may and feede our Sheepe,
DORYCLES.  And our Lamkins on this Downe;
TECHNIS.  Eat and drinke, and soundly sleepe,
CORYDON.  Since these stormes are over-blowne;
SAPPHUS.  Whilst afflicted wretches weepe,
LINUS.  That by love are overthrowne:
ALL.  For now we laugh at follies we have knowne.

CORYDON.  Here we rest upon these rocks;
DYMNUS.  Round with shadie Ivy wreath'd;
DORYCLES.  Joying in our woolly flocks;
TECHNIS.  On these Mountaines freely breath'd;
SAPPHUS.  Where though clad in russet frocks,
LINUS.  Here we sport where we are heath'd;
ALL.  Our only care to see our Pastures freath'd.

SAPPHUS.  Thus we may retire in peace;
CORYDON.  And though low, yet more secure,
DYMNUS.  Then those Men which higher preafe;
DORYCLES.  Shrubs than Cedars are more sure:
TECHNIS.  And they live at farre more ease,
LINUS.  Finding for each care a cure.
ALL.  Their love as deare and liker to endure.

LINUS.  For wherein consists earths blisse,
SAPPHUS.  But in having what is fit?
CORYDON.  Which though greater men doe misse;
DYMNUS.  Homely Swaines oft light of it.
DORYCLES.  For who's he that living is,
TECHNIS.  That in higher place doth fit,
ALL.  Whose fly Ambition would not higher git.

TECHNIS.  Let us then contented be,
DORYCLES.  In the portion we enjoy;
CORYDON.  And while we doe others see,
SAPPHUS.  Toss'd with gusts of all annoy;
DYMNUS.  Let us say this feele not we:
LINUS.  Be our wenches kinde or coy,
ALL.  We count their frownes and favours but a toy.

DORYCLES.
Let's now retire, it drawes to Evening time,
Next Tale my Corydon, it must be thine.

TECHNIS.
Which may be done next day we hither come,
Meane time, let's fold our flocks and hye us home.
