MY SERIOUS CARES AND CONSIDERATIONS.
'Tis said the age of man is seventy yeares,
If eighty, it is full of griefe and Cares,
And if we of our time account should keepe,
How halfe our lives we doe consume in sleepe,
And for the waking halfe, account that too,
How little service to our God we doe:
For till seven yeares be past and gone away,
We are uncapable to doe or pray.
Our Adolescency till our manly growth,
We wast in vanitie and tricks of youth,
And as we travell to our jorneyes end,
The more we live the more we doe offend.
In sixty yeares three thousand Sabbaths be,
Which are some eight yeares in account we see,
But of those Sundayes let us thinke agen,
How little service God hath had of men,
And to the holiest man it will appeare,
About one hundred houres in a yeare.
And so in threescore yeares God hath not one,
Wherein his service we attend upon.
And if that (lesse then one) t' account were brought,
How many a nap, and many a wavering thought,
And wandring fancies doe us round beset,
(That many times the text we doe forget?)
Thinke but of this, and then the yeare before
Must be abated halfe, or somewhat more.
Thus many a Christian sixty yeares hath trod
The earth, and not sixe months hath serv'd his God.
When we our lives unequally thus share,
In thinking of it, I am full of care.

I care in all my actions so to live,
That no occasion of offence I give
To any man, with either pen or tongue,
In name, or fame, or goods, to doe them wrong.
For he's the greatest murderer alive,
That doth a man of his good name deprive
With base columnious slanders and false lies,
Tis the worst villainy of villanes:
To blast a good mans name with scandals breath,
Makes his dishonor long survive his death:
For Infamie's a colour dyde in graine,
Which scarce oblivion can wash out againe.
As nothing's dearer then a mans good name,
So nothing wounds more deeper then defame.
Nature gave man a paire of eares and eyes,
And but one tongue which certainly implies,
That though our sight and hearing still is free,
Yet must we not speake all we heare or see,
Then he's a Viper that doth lyes invent,
To worke thereby anothers detriment,
'Tis sinne to slander a notorious Knave,
But sinne and shame a good man to deprave:
Thus good or bad, or whatsoe're they are,
To doe to neither of them wrong I care.

I care to get good Bookes, and I take heed,
And care what I doe either write or read:
Though some through ignorance, and some through spite
Have said that I can neither reader nor write.
But though my lines no scholership proclaime,
Yet I at learning have a kind of ayme.
And I have gatherd much good observations,
From many humane and divine translations.
I was well entred (forty Winters since)
As farre as "possum" in my Accidence;
And reading but from "possum" to "posset,"
There I was mir'de, and could no further get,
Which when I thinke upon (with mind dejected)
I care to thinke how learning I neglected.

The Poet "Quid," (or Ovid if you will)
Being in English, much hath helpt my skill:
And Homer too, and Virgil I have seene,
And reading them I have much better'd beene:
Godfrey of Bulloyne, well by Fairfax done,
Du Bartas, that much love hath rightly wonne:
Old Chaucer, Sidney, Spencer, Daniel, Nash,
I dipt my finger where they us'd to wash.
As I have read these Poets, I have noted
Much good, which which in my memory is quoted.

Of Histories I have perusde some store,
As no man of my function hath done more.
The Golden legend, I did over tosse,
And found the Gold mixt with a deale of drosse.
I have read Plutarchs Morals and his Lives,
And like a Bee, suckt Hony form those Hives.
Josephus of the Jewes, Knowles of the Turks,
Marcus Aurelius, and Guevara's works:
Lloyd, Grimstone, Montaigne, and Suetonius,
Agrippa, (whom some call Cornelius,)
Grave Seneca, and Camden, Purchas, Speed,
Old Monumental Fox, and Hollinshead:
And that sole Booke of Bookes which God hath given
(The best eternall Testaments of heaven)
That I have read, and I with care confesse,
My selfe unworthy of such happinesse.
And many more good Bookes I have with care
Lookt on their goods, and never stole their ware,
For no booke to my hands could ever come,
If it were but the treatise of Tom Thumb,
Or Scoggins Jests, or any simple play,
Or monstrous newes came Trundling in my way.
All these, and ten times more, some good, some bad
I have from them much observation had.
And so with care and study I have writ
These bookes, the issue of a barren wit.
The most of them are verse, but I suppose
It is much ease to name them here in prose.

THE NAMES OF MANY OF THE BOOKES THAT I HAVE WRITTEN.
First, the Sculler.
Upon Coriat three merry bookes, called,
Odcombs complaint,
Coriats resurrection, and
Laugh and be fat.
The nipping or snipping of Abuses.
Two mad things against Fenor.
Taylors Urania.
The marriage of the Princesse.
An Elegy on Prince Henry.
Two bookes of all the Kings of England.
Three weekes, three dayes, and three houres observations in Germany.
Travels to Scotland.
Travels to Prague in Bohemia.
An Englishmans love to Bohemia.
The Bible in verse.
The Booke of Martyrs in verse.
The praise of Hempseed.
A kicksy winsy.
The great O Toole.
Jack a Lent.
The praise of Beggery.
Taylors Goose.
Faire and foule weather.
The life and death of the Virgin Mary.
The Whip of Pride.
And lastly (since the reigne of th' Emperor OTTO)
Was never seene the like of TAYLORS MOTTO.

All these, and some which I have quite forgot,
With care (as is aforesaid) I have wrote.

I care how to conclude this carefull straine:
In care I care how to get out againe:
I care for food and lodging, fire and rayment,
And (what I owe) I care to make good payment.
But most of all, I care, and will endever
To live so carefull that I may live ever.

Thus without wronging any man a jot,
I shew I have what every man hath not:
My wants are such, that I forgive them free,
That would but steale the most of them from me.
My cares are many, as I here expresse,
Poore cousin Germans unto carelessnesse.
I have a knowledge how their liking is.
I care in all that I herein have pend,
To please the good, and shew the bad to mend.
And those that will not thus be satisfide,
I have a spirit that doth them deride.
I flattry want mens likings to obtaine,
I care to love those that love me againe.
Thus be mens judgements steady or unsteady
To like my Booke, the care is tane already.
The Proverb sayes, that hast makes (often) wast,
Then what is wast, impute it to my hast:
This Booke was written (not that here I boast)
Put houres together, in three dayes at most:
And give me but my breakfast, Ile maintaine,
To write another e're I eate againe,
But well or ill, or howsoe're tis pen'd,
Lik't as you list, so I made an END.
