It shall not grieve me (friend) though what I write
Be held no wit at Court.  If I delight
So farre my sullen Genius, as to raise
It pleasure; I have money, wine, and bayes
Enough to crowne me Poet.  Let those witts,
Who teach theyr Muse the art of Parasits
To win on easie greatnesse; or the youngue
Spruce Lawyer who's all impudence and tongue
Sweat to divulge their fames:  thereby the one
Gets fees; the other hyre, I'me best unknowne:
Sweet silence I embrace thee, and thee Fate
Which didst my birth so wisely moderate;
That I by want am neither vilified,
Nor yet by riches flatter'd into pride.
Resolve me friend (for it must folly be
Or else revenge 'gainst niggard Destinie,
That make some Poets raile?)  Why are their rimes
So steept in gall?  Why so obrayde the times?
As if ne sin call'd downe heav'ns vengeance more
The cause the World leaves some few writers poore?
'Tis true, that Chapmans reverend ashes must
Lye rudely mingled with the vulgar dust,
Cause carefull heyers the wealthy onely have,
To build a glorious trouble o're the grave.
Yet doe I not despaire, some one may be
So seriously devout to Poesie
As to translate his reliques, and finde roome
In the warme Church, to build him up a tombe.
Since Spencer hath a Stone; and Draytons browes
Stand petrefied ith' Wall, with Laurell bowes
Yet girt about; and nigh wise Henries herse,
Old Chaucer got a Marble for his verse.
So courteous is Death; Death Poets brings
So high a pompe, to lodge them with their Kings:
Yet still they mutiny.  If this man please
His silly Patron with Hyperboles.
Or most mysterious non-sence, give his braine.
But the strapado in some wanto straine;
Hee'le sweare the State lookes not on men of parts
And, if but men con'd, slight all other Arts.
Vaine ostentation!  Let us set so just
A rate on knowledge, that the World may rust
The Poets Sentence, and not still aver
Each art is to it selfe a flatterer.
I write to you Sir on this theame, because
Your soule is cleare, and you observe the lawes,
Of Poesie so justly, that I chuse
Yours onely the example of my Muse.
And till my browner hayre be mixt with gray
Without a blush, I'le tread the sportive way
My Muse directs; a Poet youth may be,
But age doth dote without Philosophie.
