'Twas fate, not want of duty, did me wrong;
Or, with the rest, my hymenaeal song
Had been presented, when the knot was tied
That made the bridegroom and the virgin bride
A happy pair.  I curs'd my absence then
That hinder'd it, and bit my star-cross'd pen,
Too busy in stage-blanks, and trifling rhyme,
When such a cause call'd, and so apt a time
To pay a general debt; mine being more
Than they could owe, who since, or heretofore,
Have labour'd with exalted lines to raise
Brave piles, or rather pyramids of praise
To Pembroke and his family:  and dare I,
Being silent then, aim at an elegy?
Or hope my weak Muse can bring forth one verse
Deserving to wait on the sable hearse
Of your late hopeful Charles?  his obsequies
Exact the mourning of all hearts and eyes
That knew him, or loved virtue.  He that would
Write what he was, to all posterity, should
Have ample credit in himself, to borrow,
Nay, make his own, the saddest accents sorrow
Ever express'd, and a more moving quill,
Than Spenser used when he gave Astrophil
A living epicedium.  For poor me,
By truth I vow it is no flattery,
I from my soul wish, (if it might remove
Grief's burthen, which too feelingly you prove,)
Though I have been ambitious of fame,
As poets are, and would preserve a name,
That, my toys burnt, I had lived unknown to men,
And ne'er had writ, nor ne'er to write again.
Vain wish, and to be scorn'd!  can my foul dross,
With such pure gold be valued?  or the loss
Of thousand lives like mine, merit to be
The same age thought on, when his destiny
Is only mentioned?  no, my lord, his fate,
Is to be prized at a higher rate;
Nor are the groans of common men to be
Blended with those, which the nobility
Vent hourly for him.  That great ladies mourn
His sudden death, and lords vie at his urn
Drops of compassion; that true sorrow, fed
With showers of tears, still bathes the widow'd bed
Of his dear spouse; that our great king and queen
(To grace your grief) disdain'd not to be seen
Your royal comforters; these well become
The loss of such a hope, and on his tomb
Deserve to live:  but, since no more could be
Presented, to set off his tragedy,
And with a general sadness, why should you
(Pardon my boldness!)  pay more than his due
Be the debt ne'er so great?  No stoic can,
As you were a loving father, and a man,
Forbid a moderate sorrow; but to take
Too much of it, for his or your own sake,
If we may trust divines, will rather be
Censured repining, than true piety.
I still presume too far, and more than fear
My duty may offend, pressing too near
Your private passions.  I thus conclude,
If now you shew your passive fortitude,
In bearing this action, and prove
You take it as a trial of heaven's love
And favour to you, you ere long shall see
Your second care. return'd from Italy,
To bless his native England, each rare part,
That in his brother lived, and joy'd your heart,
Transferr'd to him; and to the world make known
He takes possession of what's now his own.

Your honour's
most humble
and faithful servant,
PHILIP MASSINGER.
