COLLEN, THENOT.

What Clod-pates Thenot are our Brittish swaines?
How lubber-like they loll upon the Plaines,
No life, no spirit in um!  Every Clowne,
Soone as hee layes his Hooke and Tarbox downe,
That ought to take his Reed, and chant his Layes,
Or nimblie run the windings of the Maze,
Now gets a Bush to roame himselfe, and sheepe:
And yet me-thinks our English pastures, bee
As flowery as the Lawnes of Arcadye,
Our Virgins blithe, as theirs, nor can proud Greece
Boast purer Aire, nor sheare a finer fleece.

THENOT.
Yet view their out-side Collen, you would say,
They have as much brawne in their necks, as they;
Faire Tempe braggs of lustie Armes, that swell
With able sinews, and might hurle as well
The weightie Sledge; their Leggs, and Thighs of bone,
Great as Colossus, yet their strengths are gone;
They looke like yonder man of wood that stands
To bound the limits of the Parish lands:
Dost thou ken Collen, what the cause might bee
Of such a dull, and generall Lethargie?

COLLEN.
Swaine!  with their sports, their soules were tane away,
Till then they all were active; every day
They were exercis'd to weild their limbes, that now
Are numb'd to every thing, but flaile, and Plowe.
Early in May up got the Jolly route,
Cal'd by the Larke, and spread the fields aboute
One, for to breathe himselfe, would coursing bee
From this same Beech, to yonder Mulberie;
A second leapt, his supple nerves to trie,
A third, was practicing his Melodie;
This, a new Jigg was footing; Others, were
Busied at wrastling, or to throw the Barre;
Ambitious which should beare the bell away,
And kisse the Nut-browne-Lady of the Maie:
This stirr'd 'um up, a Jolly Swaine was hee,
Whom Pegg and Susan, after victory,
Crow'nd with a Garland they had made, beset
With Dazies, Pincks, and many a Violet,
Cow-slipp, and Gilliflowre; Rewards, though small,
Encourage vertue:  But if none at all
Meete her, shee languisheth, and dies, as now,
Where worth's denied the honour of a bough;
And, Thenot, This the cause I read to bee,
Of such a dull, and generall Lethargie:

THENOT.
Ill thrive the Lowt, that did their mirth gaine-say,
Wolves haunt his flocks, that tooke those sports away.

COLLEN.
Some melancholly Swaines, about have gone,
To teach all Zeale, their owne Complection,
Choler, they will admit, sometimes, I see;
But Pleagme, and Sanguine, to Religions bee;
These teach that Dauncing is a Jezabell,
And Barley-breake, the ready way to Hell,
The Morrice, Idolls; Whitson-ales can bee
But profane Reliques, of a Jubilee:
These in a Zeale, t' expresse how much they doe
The Organs hate, have silenc'd Bagg-pipes too,
And harmlesse May-poles, all are rail'd upon,
As if they were the Towers of Babilon:
Some think not fit, there should be any sport
I' the Citie, Tis a dish proper to the Court;
Mirth not becomes 'um, let the sawcie swaine
Eate Beefe, and Bacon, and goe sweate againe,
Besides, what sport, can in their pastimes bee
When all, is but rediculous fopperie.

THENOT.
Collen!  I once the famous Spaine did see,
A Nation glorious for her Gravitie,
Yet there an hundred Knights, on warlike Steedes
Did skirmish out a fight, arm'd but with Reeds,
At which a Thousand Ladies Eies did gaze:
Yet was no better, then our Prison base.
What is the Barriers, but a Courtly way
Of our more downe right sport, the Cudgell-play?
Foote-ball with us, may bee with them, Baloone;
As they at Tilt, so wee att Quintain runne,
And those old-pastimes relish best with mee,
That have least Art, and most Simplicitye.
Collen!  They say, at Court there is an Art,
To dance a Ladies honor from her hart;
Such wiles, poore Sheephards know not, all their sence
Is dull to any thing, but Innocence:
The Country Lasse, although her Dance bee good,
Stirs not an others Galliard in the Blood;
And yet their sports by some contrould have bin,
Who thinke there is no mirth, but what is Sin,
O might I but their harmlesse Gambolls see!
Restor'd unto an ancient Libertye,
Where spottlesse daliance traces ore the Playnes,
And harmlesse Nimphes, jet it with harmlesse Swaynes.
To see an age againe of Innocent Loves,
Twine close as Vines, yet kisse, as chast as Doves.
Me thinkes I could the Thracian Lyre have strung,
Or tun'd my Whistle, to the Mantuan song.

COLLEN.
Then tune thy Whistle Boy, and string thy Lyre,
That age is come againe, thy brave desire
Pan hath approv'd; Dauncing shall bee this yeare
Holy, as is the motion of a Spheare.

THENOT.
Collen!  With sweeter breath Fame never blewe
Her sacred Trump, if this good newes bee true?

COLLEN.
Know'st thou not Cotswold-hils.

THENOT.
Through all the land,
No finer wooll runnes through the Spinsters hand.
But silly Collen, ill thou do'st devine,
Can'st thou mistake a Bramble, for a Pine?
Or thinke this Bush a Cedar?  or suppose
Yon Hamlet where to sleepe; each Shepheard goes?
In circuit, buildings, people, power, and name
Equalls the Bow-string'd by the silver Thame?
Aswell thou maiest, their Sports, with ours compare,
As the soft wooll of Lambes, with the Goats haire.

COLLEN.
Last Evening Lad, I met a noble Swayne,
That spurr'd his spright-full Palfrey ore the playne:
His head with Ribbands crown'd, and deck'd as gay,
As any Lasse, upon her Bridall day.
I thought (what easie faiths we Sheepheards prove?)
This, not the Bull, had beene Europaes love.
I ask't the cause, they tould mee this was hee,
Whom this dayes Tryumph, crown'd with victory.
Many brave Steeds there were, some you should finde
So fleete, as they had bin sonnes of the winde.
Others with hoofes so swifte, beat ore the race,
As if some Engine shot 'um to the place.
So many, and so well wing'd Steeds there were,
As all the broode of Pegasus had bin there,
Rider and horse could not distinguish'd bee,
Both seem'd conjoyn'd, a Centaures Progeny.
A numerous troupe they were, yet all so light,
Earth never groon'd, nor felt 'um in their flight.

Such Royall pastimes Cotswold mountaines fill,
When Gentle-swaines visit her glorious Hill:
Where with such packs of Hounds, they hunting go,
As Cyrus never woo'nd his Bugle too;
Whose noise is musicall, and with full cries,
Beat's ore the Field's, and ecchoes through the skies.
Orion hearing, wish'd to leave his Spheare;
And call his Dogge from heaven, to sport it there.
Watt though  he fled for life, yet joy'd withall,
So brave a Dirge, sung forth his Funerall.
Not Syrens sweetlier rill, Hares, as they flie
Looke backe, as glad to listen, loth to die.

THENOT.
No doubt, but from this brave Heroicke fire,
In the more noble hearts, sparkes of desire
May warme the colder Boores, and emulous strife,
Give the old mirth, and Innocence a new life;
When thoughts of Fame, their quickned soules shall fill,
At ev'ry glaunce that shewes um Cotswold Hill.

COLLEN.
There Shepheard, there the solem-games be plaide,
Such as great Theseus or Alcides made.
Such as Apollo wishes hee had seene,
And Jove desires, had his inventions beene.
The Nemaean and the Isthmian pastimes still,
Though dead in Greece, survive on Cotswold Hill.

THENOT.
Happy oh hill!  The gentle graces nowe
Shall tripp ore Thine, and leave Citherons browe,
Pernassus Clift, shall sinke below his spring,
And every Muse, shall on thy front'let sing;
The Goddesses againe, in strife shall bee,
And from mount Ida, make appeale to thee:
Olympus pay the homage; and in dread,
The aged Alpes, shall bow his snowie head:
Flora with all her store, thy Temples Crowne,
Whose height shall reach the starres; gods looking downe,
Shall blesse the Incence, that thy flowers exhale,
And make thee both a Mountaine, and a Vale.
How many Ladies on thy Topp shall meete,
And presse thy Tresses with their Od'rous feete,
Whose Eyes, when wondering men see from afarre,
They'le thinke the heaven and earth of them a starre.

But gentle Collen say, what god or man
Fame wee for this great worke, Daphnis or Pan?

COLLEN.
Daphnis is dead, and Pan hath broke his Reed,
Tell all your Flocks 'tis Joviall DOVER'S deede.
Behold the Shepheards in their Ribbands goe;
And shortly, all the Nimphes shall weare 'um too;
Amaz'd to see such Glorie met together,
Blesse DOVER'S Pipe, whose musicke call'd 'um hether.
Sport you, my Rams, at sound of DOVERS name;
For DOVERS fould; Goe maides, and Lillies get,
To make him up a glorious Coronet.

Swaines keepe his Holy-day; and each man sweare
To Saint him in the Shepheards Kalender.
