In sweetest prime and blooming of his age,
Dear Alcon ravish'd from this mortal stage,
The shepherds mourn'd as they him lov'd before:
Among the rout him Idmon did deplore,
Idmon, who, whether sun in east did rise
Or dive in west, pour'd torrents from his eyes
Of liquid crystal, under hawthorn shade;
At last to trees and rocks this plaint he made:
Alcon, delight of heaven, desire of earth,
Offspring of Phoebus, and the Muses' birth,
The Graces' darling, Adon of our plains,
Flame of the fairest nymphs the earth sustains,
Wlhat power of thee hath us bereft?  what fate
By thy untimely fall would ruinate
Our hopes?  O Death!  what treasure in one hour
Hast thou dispersed!  how dost thou devour
What we on earth hold dearest!  All things good,
Too envious heavens, how blast ye in the bud!
The corn the greedy reapers cut not down
Before the fields with golden ears it crown,
Nor doth the verdant fruits the gardener pull,
But thou art cropt before thy years were full.

With thee, sweet youth, the glories of our fields
Vanish away, and what contentments yields;
The lakes their silver look, the woods their shades,
The springs their crystal want, their verdure meads,
The years their early seasons, cheerful days;
Hills gloomy stand now desolate of rays;
Their amorous whispers zephyrs not us bring,
Nor do air's quiristers salute the spring;
The freezing winds our gardens do deflow'r.
Ah, Destinies!  and you whom skies empow'r,
To his fair spoils his spright again yet give,
And like another phoenix make him live.
The herbs, though cut, sprout fragrant from their stems,
And make with crimson blush our anadems;
The sun, when in the west he doth decline,
Heaven's brightest tapers at his funerals shine;
His face, when wash'd in the Atlantic seas,
Revives, and cheers the welkin with new rays:
Why should not he, since of more pure a frame,
Return to us again, and be the same?
But wretch, what wish I?  To the winds I send
These plaints and prayers.  Destines cannot lend
Thee more of time, nor heavens consent will thus
Thou leave their starry world to dwell with us;
Yet shall they not thee keep amidst their spheres
Without these lamentations and tears.

Thou wast all virtue, courtesy, and worth,
And as sun's light is in the moon set forth,
World's supreme excellence in thee did shine;
Nor, though eclipsed now, shalt thou decline,
But in our memories live, while dolphins streams
Shall haunt, whilst eaglets stare on Titan's beams,
Whilst swans upon their crystal tombs shall sing,
Whilst violets with purple paint the spring.
A gentler shepherd flocks did never feed
On Albion's hills, nor sung to oaten reed:
While what she found in thee my muse would blaze,
Grief doth distract her, and cut short thy praise.

How oft have we, environ'd by the throng
Of tedious swains, the cooler shades among,
Contemn'd earth's glow-worm greatness, and the chase
Of fortune scorned, deeming it disgrace
To court inconstancy!  How oft have we
Some Chloris' name grav'n in each virgin tree,
And, finding favours fading, the next day
What we had carv'd we did deface away!
Woful remembrance!  Nor time nor place
Of thy abodement shadows any trace,
But there to me thou shin'st:  late glad desires,
And ye once roses, how are ye turned briers!
Contentments passed, and of pleasures chief,
Now are ye frightful horrors, hells of grief.

When from thy native soil love had thee driven,
Thy safe return prefigurating, a heaven
Of flattering hopes did in my fancy move,
Then little dreaming it should atoms prove.
These groves preserve will I, these loved woods,
These orchards rich with fruits, with fish these floods;
My Alcon will return, and once again
His chosen exiles he will entertain;
The populous city holds him, amongst harms
Of some fierce Cyclops, Circe's stronger charms.
These banks, said I, he visit will, and streams,
These silent shades ne'er kiss'd by courting beams;
Far, far off I will meet him, and I first
Shall him approaching know, and first be blest
With his aspect; I first shall hear his voice,
Him find the same he parted, and rejoice
To learn his passed perils, know the sports
Of foreign shepherds, fauns, and fairy courts.
No pleasure to the fields; an happy state
The swains enjoy, secure from what they hate:
Free of proud cares they innocently spend
The day, nor do black thoughts their ease offend;
Wise nature's darlings they live in the world,
Perplexing not themselves how it is hurl'd.
These hillocks Phoebus loves, Ceres these plains,
These shades the Sylvans, and here Pales strains
Milk in the pails, the maids which haunt the springs
Dance on these pastures, here Amintas sings;
Hesperian gardens, Tempe's shades are here,
Or what the eastern Ind and west hold dear.
Come then, dear youth, the wood-nymphs twine thee boughs
With rose and lily, to impale thy brows.
Thus ignorant, I mus'd, not conscious yet
Of what by death was done, and ruthless fate:
Amidst these trances, Fame thy loss doth sound,
And through my ears gives to my heart a wound;
With stretch'd-out arms I sought thee to embrace,
But clasp'd, amaz'd, a coffin in thy place;
A coffin!  of our joys which had the trust,
Which told that thou wast come, but chang'd in dust.
Scarce, even when felt, could I believe this wrack,
Nor that thy time and glory Heavens would break.
Now since I cannot see my Alcon's face,
And find nor vows nor prayers to have place
With guilty stars, this mountain shall become
To me a sacred altar, and a tomb
To famous Alcon; here, as days, months, years
Do circling glide, I sacrifice will tears,
Here spend my remnant time, exil'd from mirth,
Till death in end turn monarch of my earth.

Shepherds on Forth, and ye by Doven rocks
Which use to sing and sport, and keep your flocks,
Pay tribute here of tears; ye never had
To aggravate your moans a cause more sad;
And to their sorrows hither bring your maunds
Charged with sweetest flowers, and with pure hands,
Fair nymphs, the blushing hyacinth and rose
Spread on the place his relics doth enclose;
Weave garlands to his memory, and put
Over his hearse a verse in cypress cut:
"Virtue did die, goodness but harm did give
After the noble Alcon left to live;
Friendship an earthquake suffer'd; losing him,
Love's brightest constellation turned dim."
