THE FIRST SECTION.
Psyche this while wandred the world about
With various errors to find Cupid out,
Hoping, although no matrimoniall way,
Or Beauties force his anger might allay;
Yet Prayers, and duty somewhat might abate,
And humble Service him propitiate.
She travell'd forth, untill at length she found
A pleasant plaine, with a faire Temple crown'd.
Then to her selfe she said, ah who can tell,
Whether or no, my husband there doe dwell?
And with this thought she goes directly on,
Led with blind hope, and with Devotion:
Then entred in, she to the Altar bended,
And there perform'd her Orizons:  which ended,
Casting her eyes about, she did espy,
A world of instruments for husbandry:
As Forkes, and Hookes, and Rakes, Sickles, and Sithes,
Garlands, and Sheares, and Corne for Sacrifice.
Those eares, that were confused, she did sever,
And those, that scatter'd lay, she put together;
Thinking, she ought no worship to decline
Of any thing, that seem'd to be Divine.
Ceres farre oft did Psyche over looke,
When this laborious taske she undertooke,
And as she is a Goddesse, that does love
Industrious people, spake to her from above;
Alas poore Psyche, Venus is thy foe,
And strives to find thee out with more a doe,
Then I my Proserpine; the Earth, the Sea,
And the hid confines of the Night and Day,
Have all beene ransackt; she has sought thee forth,
Through both the Poles, and Mantions of the North,
Not the Riphean snow, nor all the drougth,
That parches the vast desarts of the south,
Have stay'd her steps.  She has made Tethis sweepe,
To find thee out, the bottome of the deepe,
And vowes that Heaven it selfe shall thee resigne,
Though Jove had fixt thee, there his concubine.
She never rests, for since she went to bed,
The Rosie Crowne is wither'd from her head:
Thou carelesse wretch.  Thus Venus all enrag'd,
Seekes for thy life, whilst thou art heere ingag'd
'Bout my affaires, and thinkst of nothing lesse,
Then thine owne safety, and lost happinesse.
Psyche fell prostrate on her face, before
Faire Ceres throne, and did her helpe implore,
Moystning the Earth with teares, and with her haire
Brushing the ground; she sent up many a Prayer,
By thy fruit-scattering hand, I thee entreate,
And the Sicilian Feilds, that are the seat
Of thy fertility, and by the glad,
And happy ends, the harvest ever had;
And by thy coach, with winged Dragons drawne,
And by the darkesome hell, that gan to dawne
At the bright marriage of faire Proserpine:
And by the silent rites of Elusine,
Impart some pitty, and vouchsafe to grant
This small request, to your poore supplyant.
I may lye hid among these sheaves of Corne,
Untill great Venus fury be out-worne;
Or that my strength, and faculties subdu'd
By weary toyle, a little be renew'd.
But as the worlds accustom'd, when they see,
Any orewhelm'd with a deepe misery,
Afford small comfort to their wretched state;
But onely are in words compassionate.
So Ceres told her, she did greatly grieve
At her distresse, but durst her not releive;
For Venus was a good, and gratious Queene,
And she her favour highly did esteeme.
Nor would she succour a contrary side,
Being by love, and kin to her ally'd.
Poore Psyche thus repuls'd, soone as she saw
Her hopes quite frustrate, did her selfe withdraw,
And journied on, unto a neighbouring wood,
Where likewise a rich Fane, and Temple stood,
Of goodly structure, and before the house,
Hung many gifts, and garments pretious,
That by the name engrav'd, and dedication,
Exprest without, to whom they had relation.
Here Psyche enterd, her low knees did bend,
And both her selfe, and fortunes recommend
To mighty Juno, and thus spake to her.
Thou wife, and sister to the thunderer,
Whether thou dost in ancient Samos lye,
The place of thy first birth, and nursery.
Or by the bankes of Inacus abide,
Or thy lov'd Carthage, or round Heaven dost ride
Upon a Lyons backe; that art i'th East
Call'd Zigia, and Lucina in the west;
Looke on my griefes extremity, and deigne
To ease me, of my labour, and my paine.
Thus having prayed, straight Juno from on high,
Presents her selfe in all her Majesty,
And said, Psyche I wish you had your ends,
And that my Daughter, and your selfe were friends:
For Venus I have ever held most deare,
In as high place, as she my daughter were:
Nor can that, which one Goddesse has begun,
By any other Deity b' undone,
Besides the Stigian lawes allow no leave,
That we anothers Servant should receive;
Nor can we by the league of friendship, give
Reliefe to one, that is a fugitive.
Faire Psyche shipwrackt in her hopes againe,
And finding no wayes, how she might obtaine
Her winged husband, cast the worst of all;
And thus her thoughts did into question call:
What meanes can be attempted, or apply'd
To this my strange calamity, beside
What is already us'd?  for though they wood,
The Gods themselves, can render me no good,
Why then should I proceed, and unawares
Tender my foot unto so many snares?
What darknesse can protect me?  what disguise
Hide me from her inevitable eyes?
Some women, from their crimes, can courage gather,
Then why not I from misery?  and rather,
What I cannot deferre, nor long withstand,
Yeeld up my selfe a prisoner to her hand.
For timely modesty may mitigate
That rage, which absence does exasperate.
And to confirme this, who knows, whether he,
Whom my soule longs for, with his Mother be?
Venus now sicke of earthly businesse,
Commands her Coach be put in readinesse:
Whose subtile structure was all wrought upon,
With gold, with purple, and Vermilion.
Vulcan compos'd the fabrick, 'twas the same
He gave his wife, when he a woing came.
Then of those many hundred Doves, that soare
About her palace, she selected foure,
Whose checkred necks to the small traces ty'd,
With nimble gyres they up to Heaven did glide:
A world of sparrows did by Venus fly,
And Nightingales, that sung melodiously.
And other birds accompany'd her Coach,
With pleasant noise, proclaiming her approach:
For neither hardy Eagle, Hawke, nor Kite,
Durst her sweet sounding family affright.
The clouds gave way, and Heaven was open made,
Whilst Venus, Joves high Turrets did invade.
Then having silenc'd her obstreperous quire,
She boldly calls for Mercury the cryer,
Joves messenger, who but a while before
Return'd with a loose arrant, which he bore
To a new Mistresse, and was now t' advise
Upon some tricke, to hide from Juno's eyes
Joves bawderie, for he such feats can doe,
Which are his vertues, and his office to.
When Venus saw him, she much joy did show,
And said, kind brother Mercury, you know,
How I esteeme your love, at no small rate,
With whom my minde I still communicate:
Without whose counsell I have nothing done,
But still preferr'd your admonition.
And now you must assist me; ther's a mayd
Lyes hid, whom I have long time fought, and layd
Close waite to apprehend, but cannot take;
Therefore I'de have you proclamation make,
With a reward propounded, to requite,
Who e're shall bring, and set her in my sight.
Make knowne her markes, and age, lest any chance,
Or after dare to pretend ignorance.
Thus having said, she gave to him a note,
And libell, wherein Psyches name was wrote.
Hermes the powerfull, and all charming god
Taking in hand his soule constraining rod,
With which he carries, and brings backe from hell,
With Venus went, for he lov'd Venus well;
Cause he in former time her love had wonne,
And in his dalliance, had of her sonne
Begot, call'd the Hermaphrodite, which is
The Boy, that was belov'd by Salmacis.
Thus both from Heaven descended, open cry
In expresse words, was made by Mercury,

O yes, if any can true tidings bring
Of Venus hand-maid, daughter to a King,
Psyche the fugitive, of stature tall,
Of tender age, and forme celestiall:
To whom, for dowry, Art, and Nature gave
All grace, and all the comlinesse they have.
This I was bid to say, and be it spoken
Without all envy, each smile is a token
Sufficient to betray her.  In her gate
She Phoebus sister does most imitate.
Nor does her voyce sound mortall; if you spy
Her face, you may discerne her by the eye,
That like a starre, dazels the Optick sense,
Cupid has oft his Torch brought lighted thence.
If any finde her out, let him repaire
Straight wayes to Mercury, and the newes declare;
And for his recompence, he shall have leave,
Even from Venus owne lips, to receive
Seven fragrant kisses, and the rest among,
One honey-kisse, and one touch from her tongue.

Which being published, the great desire
Of this reward, set all mens hearts on fire.
So that poore Psyche durst no more forbeare
To offer up her selfe:  then drawing neare
To Venus house, a Maid of hers, by name
Call'd Custome, when she saw her, did exclaime,
O Madam Psyche, Jove your honour save:
What doe you feele now, you a Mistresse have?
Or does your rashnesse, or your ignorant worth
Not know, the paines we tooke to find you forth?
Sweet, you shall for your stubbornesse be taught:
With that, rude hold upon her locks she caught,
And drag'd her in, and before Venus brought.

THE SECOND SECTION.
So soone as Venus saw her, she like one,
That looks 'twixt scorne, and indignation,
Rais'd a loud laughter, such as does proceed
From one, that is vext furiously indeed.
Then shaking of her head, biting her thumb,
She sayd, what my good daughter are you come
Your Mother to salute?  But I beleeve,
You would your husband visite, who does grieve
For the late burne, with which you did inure
His tender shoulder, but yet rest secure;
I shall provide for you, nor will I swerve
From any needfull office you deserve.
Thus winking Venus did on Psyche leere,
And with such cruell kindnesse did her jeere.
Then for her entertainment, cryes, Where are
My two rough hand-maids, Solitude, and Care?
They enter'd; she commands her hands to tye,
And take the poore mayd to their custody.
Which done accordingly, with whips they beate,
And her with torments miserably intreate.
Thus us'd, and in this shamefull manner dight,
They her, with scorne, reduce to Venus sight:
Who smiling said, 'tis more then time, that I
Should set my Nymphs all to worke sempstery,
And make your Baby-clouts:  why this is brave,
And you shall Juno for your Mid-wife have.
Where will you lye in?  how farre are you gone?
That's a great motive to compassion.
And I my stile must rather boast, than smother,
That in my youth shall be call'd Grandmother.
But by your leave, I doubt these Marriages,
That are solemniz'd without witnesses:
Without consent of friends, the parties state
Unequall to, are scarse legitimate,
And so this child, they shall a bastard call:
If yet thou bringst forth any child at all.
Then to begin with some revenge, she rose;
And all her ornaments did discompose,
And her discolour'd Gowne in peices pull,
And what soever made her beautifull.
But least her sufferings should all passive be,
She turnes her punishment to industry,
And takes of severall Seedes, a certaine measure;
Wheat, Barley, Oates, and a confused treasure
Of Pease, and Lentiles, then all mixt, did poure
Into one heape; with a prefixed houre,
That ere her selfe should on our Hemispheare,
That might, as the bright evening Starre appeare.
Psyche each Graine should rightly segregate,
A tasque for twenty to elaborate.
This worke assign'd, Venus from thence did passe,
To a Marriage Feast, where she invited was.
Poore Psyche all alone amaz'd did stand,
Nor to this labour would once set her hand:
In her owne thoughts judging her selfe unable,
To vanquish that, was so inextricable;
When loe, a numerous multitude of Ants,
Her neighbours, the next feilds inhabitants,
Came thronging in, sent thether by some power,
That pitty tooke on Cupids Paramour.
Nor would that wrong should be without defence,
And hated Venus for her insolence.
All these by an instinct together met,
Themselves in a tumultuous method set
On worke, and each graine Arithmetically
Substract, devide, and after multiply.
And when that this was done, away they fled:
Each graine being by its kind distinguished.

Venus now from the Nuptiall feast was come,
Her breath perfum'd with wine, and Balsamum,
Her body was with twines of Mirtles bound,
Her head with Garlands of sweet Roses crown'd.
And seeing this accomplisht taske, she said
Huswife, twas not your handy worke convay'd
These seedes in order thus; but his, that still
Persists in love; to thine, and his owne ill.
Then on the ground she threw a crust of bread,
For Psyches supper, and so went to bed.
Cupid the while, in a backe roome was put
Under the same roofe, and in prison shut:
A punishment for his old luxury,
Least he with Psyche should accompany:
And so by too much strayning of his side,
Might hurt his wound, before twas scarrify'd:
But when the Rosie morning drew away,
The sable curtaine, which let in the day,
Venus to Psyche calls, and bids awake,
Who standing up, she shewes to her a Lake;
Environ'd with a rock, beyond whose steepe
And craggy bottome, graz'd a flock of sheepe:
They had no shepheard, them to feede, or fold,
And yet their well growne fleeces were of gold.
Pallas sometimes, the pretious lockes would cull,
To make great Juno vestures of the wooll:
Fetch me, sayes Venus, some of that rich haire,
But how you'll doe it, I nor know, nor care.
Psyche obayes, not out of hope to win,
So great a prize, but meaning to leape in,
That in the marish she might end her life,
And so be free'd from Venus, and her strife:
When drawing neere, the wind inspired reed,
Spake with a tunefull voice.  Psyche take heed,
Let not despaire, thee of thy soule beguile,
Nor these my waters with thy death defile:
But rest thee heere, under this Willow tree,
That growing drinkes of the same streame with me;
Keepe from those sheepe, that heated with the sun,
Rage like the Lyon, or the Scorpion;
None can their stony browes, nor hornes abide,
Till the dayes fire be somewhat qualifi'd.
But when the vapour, and their thirst is quencht,
And Phebus horses in the Ocean drencht,
Then you may fetch, what Venus does desire,
And find their fleecy gold on every bryer:
Th' oraculous Reed full of humanity,
Thus from her hollow wombe did Prophesie:
And she observing strictly what was taught,
Her apron full of the soft mettle brought,
And gave to Venus; yet her gift, and labour,
Gayn'd no acceptance, nor found any favour.
I know the author of this fact, sayes she,
How 'twas the price of his adultery.
But now I will a serious tryall make,
Whether you doe these dangers undertake
With courage, and that wisedome you pretend.
For see that lofty Mountaine, whence descend
Black-colour'd waters, from earths horrid dennes,
And with their boylings wash the Stygian fennes.
From thence augment Cocytus foaming rage,
And swell his channell with their surplussage.
Goe now, and some of that dead liquor skim,
And fill this Christall Pitcher to the brim:
Bring it me straight, and so her browes did knit,
Threatning great matters, if she fail'd of it.
With this injunction Psyche went her wayes,
Hoping even there to end her wretched dayes.
But comming neere to the prefixed place,
Whose height did court the clouds, and lowest base,
Gave those black streames their first originall,
That wearing the hard rocks, did headlong fall
Into the Stygian vallies, underneath
She saw a fatall thing, and full of death.
Two watchfull Dragons the straight passage kept,
Whose eyes were never seal'd, nor ever slept.
The waters too said something, Psyche, flye;
What doe you here?  depart, or you shall dye.
Psyche with terrour of the voyce dejected,
And thought of that might never be effected,
Like Niobe, was chang'd into a stone,
In body present, but her minde was gone.
And in the midst of her great griefe, and feares,
Could not enjoy the comfort of her teares.
When Jove, whose still protecting providence
Is ever ready to helpe innocence:
Sent the Saturnian Eagle, who once led
By Loves impulsion, snatcht up Ganimed
To be Joves Cup-bearer, from Ida hill,
And ever since bore Cupid a good-will:
And what he could not to his person show,
Resolv'd upon his Mistresse to bestow.
Then with Angelick speed, when he had left
The Ayres high tracts, and the three Regions cleft,
Before her face he on the meadow sate,
And said, alasse, thou inconsiderate,
And foolish Maid, returne back, goe not nigh
Those sacred streames, so full of majesty.
What hope hast thou those waters to procure,
Which Jove himselfe does tremble to abjure?
No mortall hand may be allowd to touch,
Much lesse to steale a drop, their power is such.
Give me the Pitcher, she it gave; he went
To Styx, and fain'd that Venus had him sent.
Psyche the Urne did to his tallons tye,
Then with his plumed oares poiz'd equally,
He lets it sinke betwixt the very jawes
Of those fierce Dragons, and then up it drawes,
And gives it Psyche; she the same convay'd
To Venus, yet her paines were ill apayd.
Nothing her rage might expiate, but still
The end of one, begins another ill.
For ought, sayes Venus, that I gather can,
You are a Witch, or some Magitian.
What else can be concluded out of these
Experienc'd impossibilities?
If your commerce be such then, you may venter
Boldly to Hell, and when you there shall enter,
Me to my cousen Proserpine commend,
And in my name intreat her, she would send
Some of her Boxe of beauty to me; say,
So much as may suffice me for a day:
Excuse me to her, that my owne is spent,
I know not how, by an ill accident.
I am asham'd to speake it, but 'tis gone,
And wasted all in curing of my sonne.
But be not slack in your returne; for I
Must with the gods feast of necessity.
Nor can I thither goe, without disgrace,
Till I have us'd some art unto my face.
Psyche conceiv'd now, that her life, and fate,
And fortunes all were at their utmost date,
Being by Venus cruelty thrust on,
Towards a manifest destruction:
Which she collects by argument, that thus
With her owne feete, must march to Taenarus.

In this delusive agony she rose,
And by degrees, up to a Turret goes,
Whose top orelook't the hills, it was so high,
Resolv'd to tumble headlong from the skie:
Conceiting as her fancy did her feed,
That was the way to goe to Hell indeed.
But then a suddaine voice to her did call,
Which brake out of the cavernes of the wall,
That said, Ah coward wretch, why dost thou yeeld
To this last labour, and forsake the field?
Whilst Victory her Banner does display,
And with a profer'd Crowne, tempts thee to stay.
The way to Hell is easie, and the gate
Stands ope; but if the soule be separate
Once from the body, true, she goes to Hell:
Not to returne, but there for ever dwell.
Vertue knows no such stop, nor they, whom Jove
Either begot, or equally does love.
Now list to me, there is a fatall ground
In Greece, beyond Achaia's farthest bound,
Neare Lacedemon, famous for the rape
Paris on Hellen made, and their escape.
Tis quickly found; for with its steemy breath
It blasts the fields, and is the port of death.
The path, like Ariadnes clue does guide
To the darke Court, where Pluto does abide:
And if you must those dismall regions see,
Then carry in your hand a double fee.
For Charon will doe nothing without money;
And you must have sops made of meale, and honey.
It is a doubtfull passage, for there are
Many Decrees, and Lawes peculiar
Must strictly be observ'd, and if once broke,
No ransome, nor entreaty can revoke.
Nor is there prosecution of more strife,
But all are penall statutes on your life.
The first that you shall meete with, as you passe,
Is an old man come driving of an asse,
Decrepid as himselfe, they both shall sweat
With their hard labour, and he shall intreat,
That you would helpe his burthen to unty;
But give no eare, nor stay when you goe by.
And next you shall arrive without delay
To slow Avernus Lake, where you must pay
Charon his waftage, as before I said,
For avarice does live among the dead:
And a poore man, though tyde serve, and the wind,
If he no stipend bring, must stay behind.
Here as you sayle along, you shall see one
Of squalid hue, they call Oblivion,
Heave up his hands, and on the waters floate,
Praying, you would receive him in your Boate:
But know, all those that will in safety be,
Must learne to disaffect such piety.
When you are landed, and a little past
The Stygian Ferry, you your eyes shall cast,
And spy some busie at their wheele, and these
Are three old women, call'd the Destinies;
They will desire you, to sit downe, and spin,
And shew your owne lifes thread upon the pin.
Yet are they all but snares, and doe proceed
From Venus malice, to corrupt your creed.
For should you lend your helpe to spin, or card,
Or meddle with their distaffe, your reward
Might perhaps slip out of your hand, and then
You must hope never to come back againe.
Next, a huge Mastiffe shall you see, before
The Palace-gate, and Adamantine dore
That leads to Dis, who when he opens wide
His triple throate, the ghosts are terrifi'd
With his loud barkins, which so farre rebound,
They make all Hell to Eccho with their sound:
Him with a morsell you must first asswage,
And then deliver Venus Embassage.
For Proserpine shall kindly you intreat,
And will provide a banquet, and a seat.
But if you sit, sit on the ground, and taste
None of her dainties, but declare in haste
What you desire, which she will straight deliver:
Then with those former rules, passe backe the river.
Give the three-headed dogge his other share,
And to the greedy Marriner his fare.
Keepe fast these precepts whatsoere they be,
And thinke on Orpheus, and Euridice.
But above all things, this observe to doe,
Take heed, you open not, nor pry into
The beauties Boxe, else shall you there remaine;
Nor see this Heaven, nor these Starres againe.
The stone inclosed voyce, did friendly thus
Psyche forewarne, with signes propitious.

THE LAST SECTION.
So soone as Psyche got all things together,
That might be usefull for her going thither,
And her returne, to Tanarus she went,
And the Infernall passage did attempt:
Where all those strange, and fatall prophesies
Accomplisht were in their occurrences.
For first she passes by with carelesse speed,
The old man, and his Asse, and gave no heed
Either unto his person, or desire.
And next she payes the Ferry-man his hire;
And though Oblivion, and the Fates did woe her,
With many strong temptations, to undoe her,
Ulisses like, she did their prayers decline,
And came now to the house of Proserpine.
Before the Palace was a stately Court,
Where forty Marble-pillars did support
The roofe, and frontis-piece, that bore on high
Pluto's owne statue, grav'd in Ebony.
His face, though full of majesty, was dim'd
With a sad cloud, and his rude throne untrim'd:
His golden Scepter was eate in with rust,
And that againe quite overlayd with dust.
Ceres was wrought him by, with weeping eyne,
Lamenting for the losse of Proserpine.
Her daughters rape was there set downe at full,
Who while that she too studiously did pull
The purple Violet, and sanguine Rose,
Lillies, and low growne Pansies; to compose
Wreathes for the Nymphes, regardles of her health
'Twas soone surpriz'd, and snacht away by stealth.
Forc'd by the King of the infernall powers,
And seem'd to cry, and looke after her flowers.
Enceladus was strecht upon his backe,
While Plutoes Horse hoofes, and coach did wracke
His bruised body.  Pallas did extend
The Gorgons head.  Delia her bow did bend;
And Virgins both, their Uncle did defy
Like Champions, to defend virginity.
The Sun, and Stars were wrapt in sable weedes,
Dampt with the breath, of his Taenarian Steedes.
All these, and more were portray'd round about,
Which filth defac'd, or time had eaten out.
Three headed Cerberus the gate did keepe,
Whom Psyche with a sop first layd to sleepe;
And then went safely by, where first she saw
Hells Judges sit, and urging of the law:
The place was parted in two severall wayes,
The right hand to Elysium convayes;
But on the left, were malefactors sent,
The seate of tortures, and strange punishment.
There Tantalus stands thirsty to the chin,
In water, but can take no liquor in.
Ixion too, and Sisiphus; the one
A wheele, the other turnes a restlesse stone.
A Vulture there on Titius does wreake
The Gods just wrath, and pounding with his beake,
On his immortall liver still does feed,
For what the day does wast, the night does breed:
And other soules are forced to reveale,
What unjust pleasures they on Earth did steale;
Whom fiery Phlegeton does round inclose,
And Stix his waves does nine times interpose.
The noyse of whipps, and Furies, did so fright
Poore Psyches eares, she hasted to the right.
That path way straight, for on each side there grew
A Grove of mournefull Cypresse, and of Yew:
It is the place of such as happy dye.
There, as she walked on, did Infants cry,
Whom cruell death snacht from their teats away,
And rob'd of sweet life, in an evill day.
There Lovers live, who living here, were wise;
And had their Ladies, to close up their eyes.
There Mighty Heroes walke, that spent their bloud,
In a just cause, and for their Countries good.
All these beholding through the glimering ayre,
A mortall; and so exquisitely faire,
Thicke as the motes, in the Sun beames came running
To gaze, and know the cause too of her comming;
Which she dissembled; onely askt to know,
Where Pluto dwelt, for thither she must goe:
A guide was straight assign'd, who did attend,
And Psyche brought safe to her journies end,
Who being entred, prostrate on her knee,
She humbly tenders Venus Embassy.
Great Plutoes Queene presented to her guest,
A Princely Throne to sit on, and a feast,
Wishing her tast, and her tyr'd limbes refresse,
After her journey, and her wearinesse.
Psyche excus'd it, that she could not stay,
And if she had her arrant would away.

But Proserpine reply'd, you doe not know
Faire Mayd, the joyes and pleasures are below,
Stay and possesse, what ever I call mine,
For other Lights, and other Starres doe shine
Within our-territories, the day's not lost,
As you imagine, in the Elysian coast.
The Golden Age, and Progeny is heere,
And that Fam'd Tree, that does in Autumne beare
Clusters of Gold, whose Apples thou shalt hoard,
Or each meale, if thou please, set on the board.
The Matrons of Elysium at thy becke,
Shall come and goe; and buried Queenes shall deck
Thy body, in more stately ornaments,
Then all Earths fayned Majesty presents:
The pale and squalid region shall rejoyce,
Silence shall breake forth a pleasant voice:
Sterne Pluto shall himselfe to mirth betake,
And crowned Ghosts shall banquet for thy sake;
New Lampes shall burne, if thou wilt here abide,
And nights thicke darkenesse shall be rarifi'd,
What ere the winds upon the Earth doe sweepe
Rivers, or Fennes embrace, or the vast deepe,
Shall be thy tribute; and I will deliver
Up for thy Servant, the Lethean River:
Besides the Parcae shall thy Hand-maides be,
And what thou speak'st, stand for a destiny.

Psyche gave thankes; but did her plainely tell,
She would not be a Courtier unto hell:
When wondring that such honours did not please,
She offerd gifts, farre richer, then all these.
For as a Dowry, at her feet she laid
The mighty engines, which the world upwaigh'd,
And vow'd to give her immortality,
And all the pleasures, and the royalty
Of the Elysian Fields; which wisely she
Refus'd, for Hell, with all their power, and skill,
Though they allure, they cannot force the will:

This vext faire Proserpine, any should know
Their horrid secrets, and have power to show,
Unto the upper world, what she had seene
Of Hell, and Styx, of Pluto, and his Queene,
Yet since she might not her owne lawes withstand,
She gave the boxe of beauty in her hand.
And Psyche, with those precepts us'd before,
The Sunnes bright beames did once againe adore
Then, as she thought, being out of all controule,
A curious rashnesse did possesse her soule,
That slighting of her charge, and promis'd duty,
She greatly itcht, to adde to her owne beauty;
Saying, Ah foole, to beare so rich a prize,
And yet through feare, dost envy thine owne eyes
The happy object, whose reflexion might,
Gaine thee some favour, in young Cupids sight:
The voyce forbad me, but I now am free,
From Venus vision, and Hells custody.
And so without all scruple, she unlocks,
And lets forth the whole treasure of the boxe,
Which was not any-thing to make one faire,
But a meere Stygian, and infernall ayre;
Whose subtle breathings through her pores did creepe,
And stuft her body with a cloud of sleepe,

But Cupid now, not able to endure
Her longer absence, having gain'd his cure,
And prun'd his ruffled wings, flew through the gate
Of his close prison, to seeke out his Mate:
Where finding her in this dull Lethargy,
He drew the foggy vapour from her eye,
And that her stupid spirits might awake,
Did all the drowsie exhalation shake
From off her sence; she shut it up, and seal'd
The Boxe so fast, it ne're might be reveal'd.
Next, with his harmlesse Dart, small as a pin,
He prick't the superficies of her skin:
Saying, What wondrous frailty does possesse
This female kind, or rather wilfulnesse?
For loe, thy foolish curiosity,
Has tempted thee againe to perjury.
What proud exploit was this?  what horrid fact?
Be sure, my mother Venus will exact
A strict accompt, of all that has beene done,
Both of thy selfe, and thy commission.
But yet for all this trespasse, be of cheere,
And in a humble duty persevere,
Detaine from Venus nought, that is her owne,
And for what else remaines, let me alone.
Thus Psyche by her Lover being sent,
And waxing strong, through his encouragement,
The Boxe of beauty unto Venus brings,
Whilst Cupid did betake him to his wings:
For when he saw his Mother so austere,
Forc'd by the violence of love, and feare,
He pierced the Marble concave of the sky,
To Heaven appeal'd, and did for Justice cry;
Pleading his cause, and in the sacred presence
Of Jove himselfe, did his Love-suit commence.

Jove at his sight, threw by his rayes, so pure,
That no eyes but his owne might them endure:
Whom Cupid thus bespake:  Great Jove, if I
Am borne your true, and lawfull progeny:
If I have playd betweene your armes, and sate
Next to your selfe, but since growne to a state
Of riper yeeres, have beene thought fit to beare
An equall sway, and move in the same speare
Of honour with you, by whose meanes, both men,
And gods have trembled at my Bow, as when
Your selfe have darted thunder-bolts, and slaine
The earth bred Gyants, in the Phlegrian Plaine.
And when in severall scales my shafts were layd
With your owne Trident, neither has out-waigh'd.
I come not now, that you should either give,
Confirme, or adde to my prerogative.
But setting all command, and power aside,
Desire by law, and justice to be try'd.
For whither else should I appeale?  or bring
My cause, but to your selfe, that are a King,
And father to us all, and can dispence
What right you please, in Court, and Conscience?
I have beene wrong'd, and must, with griefe indite
My Mother of much cruelty, and spight
To me, and my poore Psyche:  there's but one,
In the whole world, that my affection,
And fancy likes, where others doe enjoy
So many; the diversity does cloy
Their very appetite:  yet who but owes
All his delight to me?  and Venus knows,
By her owne thoughts, the uncontrouled fire
That reignes in youth, when love does him inspire.
Yet she without all pitty, or remorse,
Me, and my Mistresse, labours to divorce.
I covet no ones spouse, nor have I taken
Anothers Love; there's not a man forsaken,
Or god, for my sake, that bewayles his deare,
Or bathes his spoyled bosome with a teare:
Then why should any, me, and my Love sever?
That joyne all other hearts, and loves together?
Jove heard him out, and did applaud his speach,
And both his hand, and Scepter to him reach.
Then calling Cupid, his smooth fingers layd
On his Ambrosiack cheeke, and kissing sayd,
My little youngster, and my sonne, 'tis true;
That I have never yet receiv'd from you
Any due reverence, or respective meed,
Which all the other gods to me decreed.
For this my heart, whose high preheminence
Gives Edicts to the Starres, and does dispence
The like to Nature, your fine hand the while,
With earthly lusts still labours to defile;
And contrary to publick discipline,
And 'gainst all lawes, both Morall, and Divine,
Chiefly the Julian, thou dost fill mine eyes
With many foule, and close adulteries.
For how ofttimes, have I through vaine desire
Beene chang'd to beasts, birds, serpents, and to fire:
Which has procur'd ill censures, and much blame,
And hurt my estimation, and my fame:
Yet being pleas'd with this thy foolish sport,
I'me loath to leave it, though I'me sorry for't;
And on condition thou wilt use thy wit,
In my behalfe, and minde the benefit,
I will performe all thy demands:  if when
Thou seest faire Damsells on the earth agen,
Remembring thou wast brought up on my knee,
That every such Mayd thou wilt bring to mee.

Cupid assents, then Jove bids Maya's sonne,
Publish a royall Proclamation,
Through the Precincts of Heaven, and call at once
A generall councell, and a Sessions,
That the whole bench, and race of Deities,
Should in their severall rankes, and pedegrees,
Repaire straight to his Court, this to be done,
In paine of Joves displeasure, and a summe
Of money to be laid upon his head,
And from his lands, and goods belevied,
If any god should dare himselfe absent,
For any cause, from this great Parliament:
And that whoever had his name i' th' booke,
His fyne, but his excuse should not be tooke.
This being nois'd abroad, from every where,
The lesser gods came thronging out of feare,
And the Celestiall Theater did thwack,
That Atlas seem'd to groane under his pack.
Then Jove out of his Ivory throne did rise,
And thus bespake them:  Conscript Deities,
For so the Muses with their whitest stone,
Have writ your Names, and Titles, every one.
You know my Nephew Cupid; for the most
Of us, I'me sure, have felt him to our cost:
Whose youthfull heat I have still sought in vaine,
And his licentious ryot to restraine.
But that his lewd life be no farther spread,
His lusts, nor his corruptions published.
I hold it fit, that we the cause remove,
And bind him in the fetters of chast love:
And since that he has made so good a choice,
Of his owne wife, let each god give his voice,
That he enjoy her, and for ever tye
Unto himselfe, in bands of Matrimony.
Then unto Venus turning his bright face,
Daughter, he sayes, conceive it no disgrace,
That Psyche marries with your sonne; for I,
That where I please, give immortality,
Will alter her condition, and her state,
And make all equall, and legitimate.
With that, command to Mercury was given,
That he should fetch faire Psyche unto Heaven:
And when that she into their presence came,
Her wondrous beauty did each god inflame.

Then Jove reacht forth a cup with Nectar fraught,
And bad her be immortall with the draught:
So joyn'd them hand in hand, and vow'd beside,
That she with her deare Cupid should abide;
Ne're to be separate; and more t' enlarge
His bounty, made a Feast at his owne charge,
Where he plac'd Cupid at the upper end,
And amorous Psyche on his bosome lean'd.
Next sate himselfe, and Juno, then each guest,
And this great Dinner was by Vulcan drest.
The Graces strewd the roome, and made it smile
With blushing Roses, and sweet flowers; the while
The spheares danc'd harmony.  Apollo ran
Division on his Harpe, Satyr, and Pan
Play'd on their Pipes:  the Quire of Muses sang,
And the vast concave of Olimpus rang,
With pious acclamations to the Bride;
And joy'd that Psyche was thus deify'd.
Hermes, and Venus mov'd their gracefull Feet,
And did in artificiall measures meet;
The Phrygian boy fill'd wine at this great feast,
Only to Jove, and Bacchus to the rest.

Thus Cupid had his love, and not long after,
Her wombe by Juno's helpe, brought forth a daughter.
A child, by nature different from all,
That laught when she was borne, and men did call
Her Pleasure; one, that does exhilarate
Both Gods, and men, and does her selfe dilate
Through all societies, chiefly the best,
Where there is any tryumph, or a feast.
Shee was the Authour, that did first invent
All kinds of sport, conceits, and meriment:
And since to all mens humours does incline,
Whether, that they be sensuall, or Divine.
Is of a modest, and a loose behaviour,
And of a setled, and a wanton favour:
Most dangerous, when she appeares most kind,
For then shee'll part, and leave a sting behind:
But happy they, that can her still detaine,
For where she is most fixt, she is least vaine.
