ORPIN, CLORUS.

ORPIN.
How sad and lonely (Clorus) doest thou stand!
Beware such vaine not melancholly bring.
Come, either take thy charmefull reed in hand,
Some wakefull note in Eccho's eares to ring;
Or with shrill bosome entertaine the spring,
If thou thy breast canst more then fingers use;
Or, be thy Muse not bent to pipe nor sing,
(Pitie so bent should ever be thy Muse)
Say (gentle Swayne) how thou the time hast spent,
The tedious time, since Poemenarcha went.

CLORUS.
Yon Bush our nymphes with Summers wreaths adornes,
As thick as he in native bloomes is blowne,
How fares he that sad time, wherein forlorne
He standes of their fine dressings and his owne?
This streame that hath by our greene meaddows flowne
Before our ancestour of us did dreame,
Suppose his chrystall head some course unknowne
Should chance to take, how then would fare this streame?
How fare the sheepe by shepheard left alone?
So Shep-heard fares since Poeminarcha's gone.

Since Poeminarcha's paces plaines forsooke,
And playnes forsooke their pleasance with her paces,
And under Decks (not for their owne faire looke
So call'd, but for so deckt within with graces)
Caus'd emulation in the proud embraces
Of amorous Pine and odoriferous Firre:
While they with fame of farre discover'd places
And perfumes, like Sea-courtiers, honour her;
And our owne winde the swelling canvas stores,
Longing to shew such prize to forrayne shores.

When this fayre Iland, fond of her, was seene
Cast chalky cheekes from her relinquis'd shore
And wish'd her selfe in gray or (since in greene)
Wish'd all th' apparrell willow that she wore;
And Ocean proud, imagining he bore
His Governesse upon his curled crest,
(And blame not much his over-joy therefore
For in this fare was all that Ladyes best)
With Dolphins yoak'd, and songes of Syrens sweet,
From followeing eyes steales on the less'ning Fleet.

Rough Saylers now leade Shep-heards lives at Sea,
Shep-heards at land now Saylours fortune beare;
We plung'd in greifes, in calme delightes are they;
Ships there as sheepe, and sheepe as ships are here.
Wee now keepe flocks with more then wonted feare,
Since from our sight our Shep-heards star doth slip:
And they without their Card or needle steare,
All while they have their Load-starre in their Ship.
So cross'd are wee:  They bless'd.  Thou think'st me long:
But what means't thou, to thrall me in this song?

ORPIN.
That thou mayst tell thy greife:  it is the way
The danger of it from thy heart to draw.

CLORUS.
The Belgique boates enamour'd, as they say,
Then ventur'd drowning when her sayle they saw.
Slow-paced Seyne besought her for a law,
That he might eb and flow like Thames, and shine
Bright as his brothers brow:  and famous Spaw,
That lineally from stock of precious mines
Derives him-selfe, yet more advanc'd his streames,
To flow from earthly into heavenly gemmes.

When in our treasure strangers rich became,
When forraine Shepheards thrive and wee decay,
Hast thou forgotten (Orpin) what I am,
That thou demand'st how I passe time away?
Why what is Time?  the eldest and most gray
Of all the starres, and therefore drawne by howers
In forme of fleetest stags; and what are they
That draw his coach, if Sun with-drew his powers?
Hide he his face, will Diall shaddow show?
Or Cynthia hers, how shall we Midnight know?

ORPIN.
Well, Clorus, well:  I finde thou doat'st on much,
Though dost but little good:  and I confesse
Such passions may attend on causes such.
Some great felicities make mindes the lesse.
But what!  doth vow thy solemne thoughts possesse?

Clorus
He parts the wed that vowes and thoughts doth sever.

ORPIN.
Plac'd in one place, is thy hearts happiness?

CLORUS.
Hearts 'till so plac'd, (thou know'st), are happy never.

ORPIN.
Containes thy minde but one delight in all?
Then great is that delight or minde is small.
But that some one mans great delight I note
Is in his eye, some others in his breast;
And some doe joy to thinke on joyes remote,
More then to bee of present joyes posses'd.
Art so unbles't, or should I say so bles't,
Thou canst not love?  so dull thou canst not dance?
Nymphes never were more worthy thy request;
Nor did in any age more Bridalls chance.
Who sorrow can so out of sweetnes borrow,
Me thinks might steale some sweetnes out of sorrow.

When civill streame, diseas'd with storme, denyes
The patient hooke his silver hopes by day;
Perhaps with plumed pris'ners smiling skyes
By night the Sprindge or lime-twig prosper may.
Our youngest lads, when lillyes fade away,
With Lady-gloves can deck their hoods againe;
And simple Shep-heardesse, that walkes in gray,
More then one suiter hath, if not then twaine.
If what I say thou thinks't is true to finde,
But will to joy, what joy then wantes thy minde?

CLORUS.
Say (simple Swaine) The sayling Pilots eye
Should loose the sight of the Arcadian Beare,
Could he as well by fickle Mercury,
As by his fixed starre, his vessell steere?
Should wee forget in thriveing Moone to sheare
Will fleeces thrive as well in her decay?
So may we fowle with danger, fish with feare,
In languour love, and dance in dumpes we may;
But when nor mindes nor meanes are present to
Our deeds, wee doe but undoe what we doe.

As mans owne garment ever suites him best,
So suites him best that humour is his owne,
Be'it white or black or myrth or mone:  The rest
Are borrow'd vizars, and behaviours stol'ne.
Like as yon lambe, that (motherles and lone)
In a false skin now suckes a lambeles mother,
Is not to us, (though to his nurse), unknowne
By his loose robe from his dead foster-brother;
Delightes disguize so loose on sorrow showes
Fain'd joyes are much lesse gracious then true woes.

And though my pipe I had no minde to use
Since shee went hence, yet, to give these content,
Shalt heare a little of my slender Muse
In song that I devised since shee went;
Though some-thing sad, (for sadly was I bent,
When first I fram'd it, I must needs confesse).

ORPIN.
O sing it (though):  'Twill help the woe to vent
That doeth thy gentle heart too much possesse.

CLORUS.
Silly Swaine, sit downe and weepe
Weepe that she from hence is gone;
She, of all that follow'd sheepe
By her matchles beauty knowne.

All the playne by her bright eyes
Shin'd, while she did here remaine:
Now her eye her light denyes,
Darkenes seemes to hide the playne.

Phoebus now seemes lesser light
To th' unhappy vale to send,
Having lost more by her flight
Then he doth his sister lend.

Cynthia yeilds Night fewer rayes,
Since the Sun her fewer yeildes;
He has wanted for the Dayes,
Since her wanted have the feildes.

Mountaines never knowne to rue,
Rockes that strangers were to woes,
Since her absence cleave in two,
And their ruin'd hearts disclose.

Feildes are left to winters wrack;
Sheepe that share the Shep-heard's woe
Change their hue to mourning black,
Once as white as mornings snow.

Earth in withring weeds doth mourne,
Flowers droop their heads dismay'd,
Trees let fall their leaves, that borne
Were, her beautious browes to shade.

All the yeare, while she was here,
Spring and Summer seem'd to last:
Since shee left us, all the yeare
Autumne seemes and Winters blast.

While she grac'd us and these plaines,
Forraine Swaynes of her did heare;
Now she graces forraine Swaines
Wee envy their Fortunes there;
Fame where-ever she remaines
Soundes her wonder every-where.

It should be more but that my voyce is faint:
The rest by thus much may bee understood.

ORPIN.
It is enough; Exceed not in complaint
To hurt thy selfe and doe thy freind no good.
Make use of vertuous Temperance, that shou'd
The Mistresse bee of all our wordes and deeds.
And now the Sun in Tritons fomeing flood
Cooles the hot fet-locks of his yellow steeds,
Leade home thy Lambes with so much more good speed,
And sleepe, which thou a little seemes to need.

CLORUS.
Well fare thy heart, that mindes me Temperance,
Whose onely name mine eare doth so enchant
I wish that it may never be thy chance
The freindly counsell thou dost give to want;
For thou (I know) canst not be ignorant
It is two vertues well to doe and teach.
But now, before the black Inhabitant
Of Cimeris shall this Horizon reach,
With thy faire Heardlem hye thee home apace.
Embrace my Counsell, I will thine embrace.

Orpins Emblem.
Temperance tout asseure,
Violence nulle dure:

Clorus his Emblem.
Amour loyal et ferme
N'a jamais fin, ne terme.
