But she who Love long since had swallowed downe,
Melts with hid fire; her wound doth inward weep:
The Mans much worth, his Nations much Renowne
Runs in her minde:  His Lookes and words are deepe
Fixt in her breast:  Care weanes her Eies from sleepe;
The Morne with Phoebus lampe the Earth survayd,
And drew Heav'ns veyle through which moist Starrs did creep;
When thus to her deare sister (sicke) she said,
Anna what frightfull Dreames my wavering soule invade!

Who is this Man that visits our Aboads?
How wise!  How valiant!  What a Face he has!
Well may tree be descended from the Gods.
Feare shewes ignoble minds:  But hee (alas)
Tost with what Fates!  through what warres did he passe!
Were I not well resolv'd never to wed
Since my first Love by death bereft me was:
Did I not loath the Nuptiall Torch and Bed,
To this one fault perchance, perchance I might be led.

For since my poore Sicheus's fatall howre
(Our houshold Gods besmear'd by brothers steele)
This only Man (I must confesse) had powre
To shake my constant Faith, and make it reele:
The footsteps of that ancient flame I feele.
But first Earth swallow me, or (Thunder-slaine)
Jove naile me to the shades, pale shades of Hell,
And everlasting Night, before I staine
Thee (holy Chastitie) or thy faire Rites profane.

Hee tooke my love with him (and let him keep't
Cold in his Grave) to whom I first was tyde.
This said, her bosom full of Teares she wept.
O dearer than my life!  (Anna replyde)
Wilt thou forever live a dead mans Bride?
Nor prety Babes (Rewards of Venus) know?
Are Ghosts apeas'd, or Ashes satisfide
With this think'st thou?  What if before (thy woe
Yet greene and fresh) no husbands downe with thee would goe?

Not Lybia's King (Iarbas) skornd in Tyre
Before, with other Chiefs whom Affrick high
In Mettle, breeds?  Wilt thou quench Loves sweet fire?
Nor yet consider whom thou'rt planted nigh?
Here (a fierce People) the Getulians lye,
Bitlesse Numidian Horse, and Quicksands dire,
There mad Barceans block thee up, and drye
Deserts.  What speake I of the bloodier ire
A Wolfe turn'd Brother breaths, and gathering Clouds from Tyre?

Auspicious Heav'ns, and Juno's care of thee,
The Trojan Navie hither (doubtlesse) led.
O (sister) what a Citie will this be!
How shalt thou see thy Scepter flourish!  wed
To Troy, how will the Punick Glory spread!

Aske but Heav'ns leave, thy Guest then (feasting) keepe,
Pretending 'tis unsafe to saile in winter.
When Ships are tost, and Pleiades doe weepe,
And ominous Skyes forbid, On Seas to venter.
These words, blew Love t' a flame; for doubts hope lent her,
And stauncht her blushes.  First in solemne wise
To Phoebus, Bacchus, Ceres (Lawes-Inventer)
Selected Lambs 'ith' Fane they Sacrifize,
But Juno most atone who favours Nuptiall tyes.

The Queene her selfe (more beautious in those Rites)
Betweene the Crescent of a milke white Cow
The liquor powres:  Or passing in their sights,
Unto the Gods with rev'rend grace doth bow,
Consults the panting lites, and payes her vow.
Alas, vayne Mysteries!  Blind Priests aread,
Which is the sacrifize is offer'd now?
Soft flames upon the Off'rers marrow feed,
And her concealed wound doth freshly inward bleed.

Poore Dido burnes, and stung with restlesse Love
Runs raveing to and fro through every street
Runs like a Hinde, which in some covert grove
Where she securely graz'd in fruitfull Creet,
A woodman shooting at farre distance hit;
Drunke in her veynes the feather'd Iron lyes,
Nor he who made the wound doth know of it;
She through Dictean woods and pastures highs,
But carries in her side the Arrow which she flyes.

Shee takes Aeneas with her up and downe,
And shews him the vast wealth she brought from Tyre,
The goodly streets and Bulwarkes of her Towne.
No lesse a thousand times did she desire
To shew unto him too her am'rous fire;
And oft began, but shame represt her tongue.
At night unto their banquets they retyre;
And Troy's sad fall againe she must have sung,
And at his charming Lips againe shee fondly hung.

When every one was parted to his rest,
And the dimme Moone trod on the heeles of day,
And setting Starres shew'd it high time to rest,
She in the empty house languisht away,
And on the Couch, which he had pressed, lay:
Absent she sees him whom her thoughts admire,
Him absent heares, or on her lappe doth stay
Ascanius the true picture of his sire,
As if she so could cheat her impotent desire.

All workes are at a stand; The youth for warre
Provide no Forts, nor trayning exercise;
Huge beames, and arches, which halfe finisht are,
Hang doubtfull in the Ayre, to fall, or rise,
And Tow'rs doe threat at once both Earth and Skyes.
Whom when as Joves deare wife perceiv'd so drown'd
In witchcrafts, and that Fame, with lowdest cryes,
Could not awake her from the pleasing swound,
She thus accosted Venus, and her minde did sound.

Great glory sure, and goodly spoyles yee gaine,
You and your Boy:  A doughty enterprize
Yee have atchiev'd, and worthy to remaine
In lasting Marble, if two Deityes
By subtlety one woman doe surprize.
Nor am I ignorant that, to defend
Your Race from feare of future Enemies,
Y' are jealous of my walls.  But to what end
Should so neare friends as wee eternally contend?

Nay rather let us knit eternall Love,
And bind the Peace more strong with Hymens cord.
Yee have the thing for which so much ye strove,
Eliza with Loves fi'ry shaft is gor'd.
Then rule we this joynt Towne with one accord,
And who shall ayd it most be now our strife.
Once let a Queen obey a Trojan Lord,
And Tyrians (to preserve a Lovers life)
Call thee their Patronesse, as Dowry of his wife.

Venus (who saw her drift was to translate
To Carthaginians those Imperiall dues
Which were reserv'd for Italy by Fate)
Made this Reply.  Who madly would refuse
So advantagious match, and rather choose
To war with you?  If but the faire Event
According to your wise forecast ensues.
But Fates, I feare me, nor Jove will consent
That Tyrians and Trojans in one Towne be pent.

And yet perchance you, lying in his breast,
With a wives Rhet'rick may his Councells sway;
Then breake the Ice; I'l second the Request.
Leave that to me (said shee) and for a way
T' effect our wishes, marke my plot I pray.
To morrow, when the Sun shall be discryde
To guild the Mountaines with his early'st ray,
Aeneas and the Love-sick Queene provide
To have a solemne hunting in the Forrest wide.

Now I, when here they beat the Coppice, there
The Horsemen flutter, on their heads will powre
A pitchy cloud, and Heav'n with Thunder teare.
Their followers for shelter from the showre
By severall  paths along the plaine shall skowre;
Maskt in darke night, unto one Cave they two
Shall come.  I here I will be; and (adde your pow'r,)
Tye such a knot as only Fates undoe,
I'l seale her his.  Good Hymen shall be present too.

Venus seemes, nodding, to consent; and smiles
To see Dame Juno's craft.  Meane while the Morne
Arose:  And the choice youth, with subtle toyles,
Sharpe hunting-speares, fleet steeds in Barbr'y borne,
And sure-nos'd hounds tun'd to the Bugle-home,
Are gone before.  The Lords at doore expect
Whilst the Queene staies within her selfe t'adorne.
Her Palfrey stands with Gold and Skarlet deckt,
And champs the foaming Bit, as skorning to be checkt.

At length she comes, with a huge troope:  Her Gowne
Of Tyrian dye, bordred with Flow'rs of Gold:
A Quiver by her comely side hung downe;
Gold Ribining her brighter haire enrolld,
Gold Buttons did her purple vesture hold.
The Trojans too, and blithe Iulus went
Above the rest, farre goodlyest to behold,
Aeneas selfe his gladding presence lent,
And with his darkned trayne did Dido's trayne augment.

As when Apollo leaves his winter seates
Of Lycia and Zanthus floods, to see
His Country Delos, and his feast repeats;
About his Altars hum confusedly
Creets, Dryopes, and ruddy Nymphs:  But hee
On Cynthus rides, and pleating doth enlace
His flowing haire with Gold, and his lov'd tree:
His shafts shogge at his backe.  With no lesse grace
Aeneas marcht.  Such rayes displayd his Lovely face.

When in the Mountaines now engag'd they were
And pathlesse Woods, loe Goats from summits cast
Runne tumbling through the bushes:  Heardes of Deere
Another way come hurrying downe as fast,
And raise a cloud as through the dust they hast.
Hot-spurre Iulus on his mettl'd horse
Out-cracking all, now these, now those men past,
And wisht, 'mongst those faint Beasts, and without force,
Some Lyon, or tusk's Bore, would crosse him in his course.

Meane while loud Thunder Heav'ns Pavilion teares,
Making a passage for th' ensuing raine:
The Trojan youth, and Tyrian followers,
And Venus Dardan-Grandchild through the Plaine
Seeke sev'rall shelters:  Rivers, like a Mayne,
Rush from the Mountaines round.  One Cave that Lord
Of Troy, and she who did in Carthage raigne,
Lighted upon.  Earth gives the signall word,
And Juno, Queene of Marriage, doth their hands accord.

The guilty Heav'ns, as blushing to have been
An instrument this meeting to fulfill,
With flashing lightning shone:  The Nymphs were seen
To weepe with all their streames, and from each hill
Were heard to murmur the presaged Ill.
That day did usher Death, and Didos shame:
For now shees arm'd, let men say what they will,
Nor seekes, as erst, to hide her am'rous flame:
She calls it Wedlock, gives her fault an honest name.

Fame straight through Lybias goodly towns doth post,
Fame a fleet evill, which none can outflye;
Most strong she is when she hath travaild most,
First small through feare, but growne so instantly,
That standing on the ground shee'l reach the Skye.
She was the last birth Mother Earth did bring
When her proud anger did the Gods defie,
The Gyants sister, swift of foot and wing;
A huger never was, nor a more monstrous thing.

Most strange!  Theres not a Plume her body beares
But under it a watching Eye doth peepe,
As many tatling tongues, and listning Eares.
By night 'tween Earth and Heaven shee doth sweepe
Skreeching, nor shuts her Lids with balmy sleepe.
And all the day time upon Castle-gates
Or steeple-tops she doth strict watches keepe,
And frights great Cyties with her sudden Bates,
And with one confidence both truths and lyes relates.

She, glad of such a Prey whereon to plume,
Through peoples mindes truths mixt with falshood sent:
How one Aeneas came from Troy, with whom
Fayre Dido deign'd to wed; And now they spent
In Revells the long winter, wholly bent
On brutish Love, drowning affaires of State:
These things she sow'd in mens rank mouths:  then went
To King Iarbas, and did irritate
His minde with tales, and his old wrath exasperate.

A hundred Temples built to Jove had hee,
(Whome unto Hammon forct Gramantis bore)
A hundred Altars burning constantly
(The Gods aeternall Centinells) each floore
Painted with bloud of beasts, with flow'rs each dove,
Who mad with Love, and with the bitter newes,
Before the Altars, and the Gods before,
Kneeling, with hands upheav'd to Jove, doth use
Great supplications and in this manner sues.

Jove, to whom Moores rich wine on Carpets drinke,
Seest this?  Or when thy arme doth lightning shake,
Giv'st thou false fire t' a cloud to make fooles winke?
And, when it thunders, dost thou only make
A rumbling ore our heads at which wee quake?
A stray, to whom our selfe (being hither fled)
Hir'd a small barren plot, for pity sake,
With some restraints, refusd with us to wed,
And Don Aeneas takes unto her Crowne and bed.

And now this Paris, with a quoife to stay
His Beard and powderd Locks, and's beaten trayne
Of shee-men, gluts himselfe upon the prey;
Whilst we with guifts on guifts enrich thy Fane,
And make our person glorious in vaine.
Th' al-pow'rfull heard these pray'rs; And cast his Eye,
On the new walls where th' am'rous paire remaine
Carelesse how desp'rate sicke their fame doth lye,
Then spake, and gave this charge to winged Mercury.

Goe Sonne, as swift as windes, in Carthage light.
Tell Venus sonne, whom loytring there thou'lt see
Unworthy of that Fate which he doth slight,
That his faire Mother painted him to mee
Another man; And therefore twice did free
From Graecian swords; One, who with steady rayn
Should mannage proud and warlike Italie,
And prove himselfe of Teucers haughty strayne,
And the tryumphed World under his Lawes maintaine.

If not at all this him with glory fires,
Nor care of his owne greatnesse he doth show,
Why should he grudge his sonne the Roman spires?
What makes he here?  What seekes he from a Foe?
Latium, and them who there expect to grow
From him, let him regard.  Let him away.
This is th' effect, from me this let him know.
At once Jove ended, and the sonne of Maye
His greater sires commands prepar'd himselfe t' obey.

First Golden Wings unto his feete he binds,
Which over Lands and over Seas that swell
Beare him aloft, as speedy as the Winds.
Then takes his rod.  With this he calls from hell
Pale Ghosts, sends others in sad shades to dwell,
Gives sleepe and takes it from the drowzie brayne,
And scales up eyes with death.  He doth repell
By pow'r of this the Heav'ns which part in twaine,
And through the watry Clouds he sayls as through a Main.

He soaring the lanke sides and Crowne disclos'd
Of craggy Atlas, whose necke props the Sky,
Atlas, whose Piney head to stormes expos'd
Is bound about with Clouds continually.
Thick on his aged backe the snow doth lye,
And down his dravell'd chinne powre plenteous springs,
His beard in Icycles growes horridly.
Here lights the god poysd on his hov'ring wings,
Towards the Sea from hence his body headlong flings.

Like to a Bird, which round the Shores doth glide
And Fishy Rocks, skimming along the Bay;
So flyes 'tweene Earth and Heav'n, and doth divide
The Winde and Sandy Coast of Lybia,
Leaving his Mothers sire, the sonne of May.
Who Landing where the Sheep-coates lately were,
Sees how Aeneas doth the workes survey,
Here building Tow'rs, and altring Turrets there,
He by his side a sword all Stard with Gemmes did weare.

Upon his shoulder to the Ayre displayd
A Robe of Tyrian Purple seem'd to flame,
Which Dido with her owne faire hands had made
And edgd the seams with gold.  Here you doe frame,
(Said Hermes) hindring your owne Crowne and Fame,
High Tow'rs of Carthage, and, uxorious, rayse
Faire Walls whereof another beares the name:
Marke now what Jove himselfe, whom Heav'n obaies,
And Earth, by his wing'd messenger unto you saies.

What make you here loytring in Lybia?
If glory of great actions fire not you,
Nor your owne Interest nor Fame you weigh;
Seeke your Heires good, Iulus hopes pursue,
To whom the Latian Crowne and Rome is due.
This having said Cyllenius vanisht quite
From mortall eyes, and back to Heaven flew.
Aeneas at the vision shakes with fright,
His tongue cleaves to his jawes, his hair stands bolt-upright.

Hee is on fire to goe, and flye that Land
Of sweet inchantments, being skar'd away
By no lesse warning shall the Gods command.
But (ah?) what shall he doe?  How dare t' assay
With words the am'rous Queene?  What should hee say
For introduction?  His swift-beating thought
In doubtfull  ballance thousand things did lay,
And this way cast them, and then that way wrought,
At last this seemd the best when all wayes he had sought.

He cald Sergestus, Mnesteus, and the stout
Cloanthus, bids them fit immediatly
The Fleet, and draw their Companies about
The Port, their armes prepar'd, not telling why;
Meane while himselfe (when no least jealousie
To the good Queene should thought of breach betray
In so great Loves) an entrance would espye,
The season of soft speech, and dextrous way.
With readinesse and joy they doe him all obey.

But Dido found their plot.  (whats hid from Lovers?)
Herselfe, who doubts ev'n safe things, first doth see't:
And the same tatling Fame to her discovers
That Trojans are departing with their Fleete.
Shees mad, stark mad, and runs through ev'ry street
Like Bacchus She-Priests, when the god is in,
And they to doe him furious homage meete,
Citheron yelling with their mid-night dynne.
Then thus t' Aeneas speakes, nor stayes till he beginne.

Didst thou hope too by stealth to leave my land,
And that such treason could be unbetray'd?
Nor should my Love, nor thy late plighted hand,
Nor Dido, who would dye, thy flight have staid?
Must too this Voyage be in Winter made?
Through stormes?  O, cruell to thy selfe, and mee!
Didst thou not hunt strange Lands, and Scepters swayd
By others, if old Troy reviv'd should be,
Should Troy it selfe be sought through a tempest'ous Sea?

Mee fly'st thou?  By these teares, and thy right hand,
(Since this is all's now left to wretched me)
By marriages New joyes, and sacred Band,
If ought I did could meritorious be,
If ever ought of mine were sweet to thee;
Pity our house, which must with my decay
Give early period to its sovereignty;
And put, I doe beseech thee, farre away
This quell minde, If cruell mindes heare them that pray.

For thee the Lybian Nations me defie,
The Kings of Scythia hate me, and my Tyre:
For thee I lost my shame, and that, whereby
Alone I might unto the Starres aspire,
The chaster fame which I did once acquire.
To whom, my Guest (for Husband's out of date),
Dost thou commit me ready to expire?
Why stay I?  Till Pigmaleon waste my state?
Or on Iarbas wheeles, a captive Queene, to wayte?

Yet if before thou fled'st out of this place
Some childe at least I unto thee had borne,
If in my Court, resembling but thy face,
Some young Aeneas playd; I should not mourne
As one so quite deluded, or forelorne.
Here ceased shee.  But hee, whom Jove had ty'd
With strict commands, his Eyes did no way turne,
But stoutly did his griefe suppresse, and hide
Under his secret heart.  Then thus in short replyde,

For me, O Queene, I never will deny
But that I owe you more than you can say,
Nor shall I sticke to beare in memory
Eliza's name, whilst memorie doth stay
In this frayle seate, whilst breath these limbs doth sway.
But to the point.  I never did intend
(Pray charge me not with that) to steale away:
And much lesse did I Wedlock-bands pretend,
Neither to such a treaty ever condescend.

Would Fates permit me mine owne way to take,
And please my selfe in choosing of a Land,
Ilium out of her ashes I would rake,
And gleane my Earths sweet Reliques,
Troy should stand, (The vanquisht
Troops replanted, by my hand)
And Priam's Tow'rs againe to Heav'n aspire.
But now have I the Oracles command
To seeke great Italy; the same require
The Destinies.  My Country's this; This my desire.

If you of Tyre with Carthage Tow'rs are tooke,
Why should our seeking Latian fields offend?
May not the Trojans too new mansions looke?
As oft as night moyst shadowes doth extend
Over the Earth, and golden Stars ascend,
My Fathers chyding ghost affrights my sleepe:
My sonne, on whom that Realme is to descend,
And those deare Eyes doe freshly seeme to weepe;
Complaining that from him his destin'd Crowne I keepe.

And now Joves Sonne (by both their heads I sweare
Was sent to me, my selfe the God did see
In open day, and with these Eares did heare:
Then vexe not with complaints your selfe and mee,
I goe against my will to Italy.
Whilst thus he spake, shee looks at him askew,
Rowling her lightning Eyes continually,
And him from head to foot did silent view,
When, being throughly heat, these thundring words ensue.

Nor Goddesse was thy Mother, nor the source
Of thy high blood renowned Dardanus,
But some Hyrcanian Tigresse was thy Nource,
Out of the stony Loynes of Caucasus
Descended, cruell and perfidious.
For with what hopes should I thy faults yet cover,
Did my teares make thee sigh  Or bend, but thus,
Thine Eyes?  Or sadnesse for my griefe discover?
Or if thou couldst not Love, to pity yet a Lover?

Whom first accuse I since these Loves began?
Jove is unjust, Juno her charge gives or'e,
Whom may a Woman trust?  I tooke this man
Homelesse, a desp'rate wrack upon my shoare,
And fondly gave him halfe the Crowne I wore:
His Ships rebuilt, t' his men new lives I lent.
And now the Fates, the Oracles, what more?
(It makes me mad) Joves sonne on purpose sent
Brings him forsooth a menace through the Firmament.

As if the Gods their blissefull rest did breake
With thinking on thy Voyages.  But I
Nor stop you, nor confute the words you speake.
Goe, chase on Rowling billowes Realmes that fly,
With ficle waves uncertaine Italy.
Some courteous Rock (if Heav'n just curses heare)
Will be Revenger of my injury:
When thou perceiving the sad Fate draw neere,
Shalt Dido, Dido, call; who surely will be there.

For when cold death shall part with dreary swoone
My Soule and Flesh; my ghost, where ere thou bee,
Shall haunt thee with dim Torch, and light thee downe
To thy darke conscience:  I'l be Hell to thee,
And this glad newes will make Hell Heav'n to mee.

Here, falling as farre from him as she might,
She fainted ere her speech were finished:
Leaving him tossing in his tender spright
What he should say to her, or leave unsed,
Her Maides conveigh her to her Iv'ry Bed.
But good Aeneas, though he faine would prove
To swage her griefe, and leave her comforted,
Peirc't to the soul with her so ardent Love,
Yet goes to view his Fleet, obedient unto Jove.

I, now the Trojans fall to worke for good,
And hale their Vessells downe from all the shoares;
The calkt Ships are on floate, and from the wood
They bring whole Oakes unwrought, and leavy Oares,
For hast to fly away.
Through ev'ry gate they pack and trudge amayne:
As when the Emmets sally through Earths pores
To sack, for hoard, some barne full stuff with graine,
Remembring barren Winter must returne againe,

The black Troops march, and through the Meadows I beare
The booty by a narrow path, some hale
The heavy Cornes; others bring up the Reere,
And prick them forwards that begin to fayle,
The busie Labourers ev'ry path engrayle.
What sighs gav'st thou now Dido, looking out
From thy high Tow'r?  How did thy senses quayle,
Seeing the shoares so swarm'd, and round about
Hearing confused shoutings of the Nautick Rout?

O Tyrant Love, how absolute thou art
In humane breasts?  Againe shee's forc't to fly
To teares and pray'rs, and bow her prostrate heart
To the subduing passion, glad to trye
All cures before the last, which is to dye.
Sister, said shee, thou seest they all repaire
To th' Port:  And only for a winde doe lye,
Inviting it with streamers wav'd i' th'ayre:
Had I but fear'd this blow, I should not now despaire.

Yet try for me this once; For only thee
That perjur'd soule adores, to thee will shew
His secret thoughts:  Thou, when his seasons bee,
And where the Man's accessible dost know.
Goe sister, meekly speake to the proud Foe.
I was not with the Greeks at Aulis sworne
To raze the Trojan name, nor did I goe
'Gainst Ilium with my Fleet, neither have torne,
Anchises ashes up from his profaned urne.

Why is he deafe to my intreaties?  Whether
So fast?  It is a Lovers last desire
That he would but forsake me in faire weather,
And a safe time.  I doe not now aspire
To his broake Wedlock-vow, neither require
He should faire Latium, and a Scepter leave:
Poore time I begge, my passions to retyre,
Truce to my woe; Nor pardon, but Reprieve,
Til griefs, familiar growne, have taught me how to grieve.

For sisterhood, for sence of my distresse,
Let me this last boone, ere I dye, obtayne.
This Dido spake.  The sad Ambassadresse
Carries her teares, and brings them back againe,
(As brackish tydes post from and to the Maine)
But not an Ocean of bitter teares
Can alter him, nor will he entertaine
The flatt'ring force of words:  He only heares
The Fates, and Joves command, which dams up his mild ears.

As an old Oake (but yet not weake with Eld)
Which showres and blasts to overthrow contend,
It cracks, and (the trunck shooke) leaves strong the field;
That sticks in Rocks; whose Roots tow'rds Hell descend
As farre as towards Heav'n the boughs ascend:
So stands the Heros, beat with winde and rayne,
His stout heart groanes, and his affections bend,
Shooke with their sighs; But his resolves remaine
As unremov'd as Rocks, teares rowle their waves in vaine.

Then doth unhappy Dido, given ore
By her last hope, desire to dye.  The light
Is irkesome to her eyes.  To confirme more
Her purpose to imbrace eternall  night,
Placing on th' Incence-burning Altars bright
Her guifts, the holy water she beheld
Converted to black Inke (Portentous sight!)
And the powr'd Wine to roaping blood congeal'd.
This thing to none, not to her sister, she reveal'd.

A Marble Fane too in the house she had,
Where lay her first Lords ashes, kept among
Her most adored Reliques, 'twas with sad
Darke Yew-tree, and the whitest fleeces hung.
Hence in the night she heard her husbands toung
Call her, she thought.  And oft the boading Owle
Alone on the house top harsh dirges sung,
And with long noates quavr'd a dolefull  howle,
Besides old Prophesies, which terrifie her soule.

Cruell Aeneas ev'n her sleepes torments:
And still shee dreames shees wandring all alone
Through a long way with steep and darke descents,
Calling her Tyrians in a Land, where none
But some pain'd Ghost Eccho's her with a groane.
As when mad Pentheus troops of Furies fright,
Who sees a twofold Thebes, and double Sunne:
Or when Orestes flyes his Mothers sight,
Hunting his bloody track with Hel-hounds by torch-light.

Sunke then with griefe, possest with furyes, bent
On death, she plots the meanes, and in her Eye
A feign'd hope springing, hiding her intent,
Accosts sad Anne.  Partake thy sisters Joy,
I've found a way to make him burne as I,
Or turne me cold like him.  Neere Phoebus set
At the lands end doth Aethiopia lye,
Where on great Atlas necke, the Heav'n thick set
With glorious Diamond-starres hangs like a Carkanet.

Of a great Sorceresse I have been told
There borne, who did th' Hesperian Temple keepe,
The Dragon fed, and sacred fruit of Gold
Watcht on the tree which she for dew did steepe
In Honey, and moyst Poppy causing sleepe.
Shee undertakes to cure the Love-sicke breast,
And whom shee list to plunge in Love as deepe,
The waters course in Rivers to arrest,
And call down stars from Heav'n, and cal up ghosts from rest.

Under her tread thou shalt perceive Earth groane,
And Oakes skip from the hills.  I swear to thee
(Calling the Gods to Record, and thine owne
Sweet head) that forc't to these blacke Arts I flee.
Thou on some Tow'r a stack build secretly;
Lay on it the mans cloathes, and sword which lyes
Within, and that which prov'd a grave to me,
My Wedding Bed.  So doth the Witch advise,
Ev'n that I blot out all the traytors memories.

This said, grew pale.  Yet thinkes not Anne that shee
With these new Rites her funerall doth shade,
Nor feares such Monsters, or worse extasie
Then at Sycheus death; Therefore obay'd.
But Dido, a great Pile of wood being made,
The place with flow'rs and fatall Cypresse crown'd,
Thereon his cloaths and sword bequeathed layd,
His Picture on the Bed, the mistick ground
Knowne only to her selfe.  Altars are placed round.

With haire dispread like a black falling storme,
Th' Inchantresse thunders out three hundred names,
Orchus, and Chaos, Hecate-triforme,
Which Virgin Dian's triple-pow'r enseames,
She sprinkled too Avernus fabulous streames;
And hearbs were sought for, sprouting forth ripe Bane,
With brazen siccles, cropt in the Moones beames:
And puld from new born Colt, that lumpe, which, ta'ne
From the Dammes mouth, no love t' her issue doth remaine.

Her selfe in a loose vest, one foot unshod,
With meale in pious hands neer th' Altar drew.
Witnesse yee guilty starres and every God
(Saith she) I'm forc't to dye.  Invokes them too
Who care of Lovers take (if any doe)
Unequally.  'Twas night, and conqu'ring sleepe
With weari'd bodies the whole earth did strew;
When woods are quiet, and the cruell deep,
When stars are half way down, when fields stil silence keep.

And beasts and painted Birds, which liquid Springs
Inhabit, or which bushy Lands containe,
Nuzling their cares beneath sleepes downy wings,
Doe bury the past dayes forgotten paine;
All but the haplesse Queen, she doth refraine
From rest, nor takes it at her eyes or heart.
After long seeming dead, Love rose againe
And fought with wrath, as when two Tydes do thwart,
Whilst thus her big thoughts role and wallow to each part.

What shall I doe?  shall I a suiter be
To my old suitors, scorned by the new,
And wooe those Kings so oft despis'd by me?
What then?  shall I the Ilian Fleet pursue,
And share all this mans fates?  Yes, he doth shew
Such sence of my first aydes:  Or say I would,
Whom he hath mockt, will not his proud ships too
Reject?  Ah foole, by whom the perjur'd brood
Of false Laomedon is not yet understood.

Grant they'd admit me, shall I flye alone
With Mariners?  Or chace him with the power
O' th' emptyed Towne, and servants of mine owne,
And whom I scarce from Tyre by the roots up tore,
Compell to plough the horrid Seas once more?
No, dye as thou deserv'st, cure woes with woe.
Thou sister, first, when I my teares did showre
To quench these rising flames, thou didst them blow,
And out of cruell pity soldst me to the Foe.

Why might not I (alas) have mourn'd away
My widdow'd youth as well as Turtles doe?
Nor twice have made my selfe misfortunes prey,
Or to Sicheus ashes prov'd untrue?
These words with sighs out of her bosome flew.
Aeneas slept aboord, all things prepard.
To whom againe Joves sonne with the same hiew
Divine, so silver-voyc'd, so golden hayr'd,
So straight and lovely shap't, thus rowsing him appear'd.

O Goddesse-borne, now dost thou sleepe?  nor know
How many dangers watch to compasse thee?
Nor heare this good wind whispering thee to goe?
Purpos'd to dye, great plots and dire broods she,
Who boyles with rage like a high going Sea.
Fly whilst thou mayst flye.  If the morning finde
Thee napping here, the Sea will cover'd be
With Ships, the shoare with flames:  Fly with the wind,
Trust that, but doe not trust a womans fickle mind.

This said, he mixt himselfe with night:  But then
Aeneas at these visions sore agast,
Starts out of sleepe, and cryes, up, up, O men,
Hoyse up your Sayles, flye to your Oares, row fast;
Behold a God from Heav'n again bids haste,
Cutting the wreath'd Cable.  O, who ere,
We follow thee, obey'd as late thou west
Most gladly.  Ayde what thou commandst, and steere
With prosp'rous stars bespoke as thou fly'st through their sphere.

This said, whips out his Lightning Sword, and strooke
The fastning ropes.  Like zeale his patterne bred
In all.  They snatcht, they ran, the shoares forsook,
Their Sayles like wings over the waves were spread;
They comb'd with Oares gray Neptunes curled head.
And now Aurora scattred rosie light
Upon the Earth from Tythons purple bed,
Whom Dido, having scouted all the night,
Discover'd from the Watch-Tow'r by her Ensignes white.

Seeing the Fleet sayle smoothly on, she knocks
Three or foure times her breast of Ivorie,
And tearing piteously her amber Locks,
O Jove, but shall he then be gone, said she,
And shall a stranger mock my Realme and me?
Shall not my pow'rs pursue him from the shoare,
And my tall Galleys man'd out instantly?
Arme, Arme, ye men of Tyre, bring fire-balls store,
Hoyse in a trice the sayles, tug stoutly at the Oare.

What talk I?  or where am I?  Doe I rave?
Poore Dido, now you see his heart; before
Could you not see it, when your Crowne you gave
To his dispose?  Behold the faith he swore,
Who sav'd his gods, and his old Father bore?
I'l strow him on the waves, his men first kill'd,
And spitted upon swords, and sawc't in gore,
Ascanius to him his last meale shall yeeld,
The Fathers yearning bowels with his bowels fill'd.

But this would be a doubtfull  battaile.  Bee't.
What should she feare whose wishes are to dye!
I will blow up the hatches, burne the Fleet,
Sonne, Syre, and Nation in one Bon-fire frye,
And my selfe last to crowne the Tragedy.
O Sol, the Index of whose purging light
Doth all the works of skilfull Nature try;
And Juno, cause of this my wofull plight,
And Proserpine, cry'd through the Towns in dead of night;

And you revenging pow'rs, Gods which pertaine
To dying Dido; All of you incline
Your Deities to this my prayer; both deigne
Gently to heare, and lend me your divine
Assistance, due to such high wrongs as mine.
If one so clog'd with perjuries as he,
Must needs attaine the Port he doth designe,
And swim to shoare, because his Destiny
So wills, and such is Joves immutable Decree;

Yet vext b'a warlike people, forc't to flye,
Torne and divorc't from his deare sonnes imbrace,
Let him beg forraigne ayde, see his men dye
For crimes not theirs:  And let him, when a peace
Shall be concluded by him with disgrace,
Enjoy nor Crown, nor life (then seeming good),
But be cut off in middle of his race,
And uninterr'd float on the restlesse Flood:
Thus pray I, these last words I powre out with my blood.

Then you, O Tyrians, breed your children in
Successive hate, so shall my wrong'd ghost rest;
Let Peace or Faith with these be held a sinne,
Some one of ours with fire and sword infest
The proud Aeneiades where ere they nest,
And through the world once more the straglers drive;
Now or hereafter, when your strength serves best;
Be shoares oppos'd to shoares, let our tydes strive 
With theirs, and our late sons keep endlesse war alive.

This said, she cast to flye dayes loathed beames,
And calls Sichaeus Nurse (her owne was dead.)
Good Nurse, goe bid my sister, dasht with streames,
Come straight, and bring the beasts I ordered
For Sacrifice:  Doe thou too bind thy head
With holy Fillet, I will consummate
Rites well begun, to Dis, and fire the Bed
Where the mans Portraict's laid, t' annihilate
All care; so she did gallop at an old wives rate.

But Dido, fearing what she wisht, sad doome,
Rowling her blood-shot eyes, and in her face,
The palenesse of the death which was to come,
With trembling spots, rusht to that secret place,
And climbing the high Pile with furious pace,
The Dardan Sword, not therefore given, unsheath'd.
Spying the clothes and well-known bed, a space
She paws'd, till some few teares she had bequeath'd,
And leaning on that bed her latest speech she breath'd.

Sweet pledges, whilst the Fates and Jove so will'd,
Receive this soule, and free me from this woe;
I liv'd, and my good Fortunes circle filld:
And now my great Ghost to Elizium goe.
I built a famous City, saw it grow
To the perfection which it boasts this day;
Reveng'd my Husband on his brother-foe:
My too much happinesse had lacks allay,
If Iliums wandring Fleet had never past this way.

Then groveling on the bed, but shall I dye,
And not reveng'd?  Yes, dye; what, so present
My selfe to Dis?  Even so.  Drink with thine eye
Fierce Trojan this flames Comet-like portent,
And let my death bode thee a dire event.
Here her Maids saw her with spread hands fall downe
Upon the reeking blade; A shrill cry went
To the high roofes, and through th' astonisht towne,
Swift as a Thunder-bolt the raging newes was blown.

With sighs, laments, shriekes, and a female yell
Earth sounds, and Heavens high battlements resound,
As if, the foe let in, all Carthage fell,
Or mother walls of Tyre were brought to ground,
And Fanes and Houses one flame did confound.
Her frighted sister heares the baleful noyse,
She thumps her bosome, and with nayles doth wound
Her face, distracted through the prease she flyes,
And Dido, Dido, O my sister Dido, cryes.

Was this the businesse?  wouldst thou cozen me?
Those fires, piles, Altars, hid they this beneath?
Skorndst thou in Fate thy sisters company?
I might have been invited to thy death;
One Sword, and one houre, should have reft our breath.
Must I too build the Pile, and Heaven invoke
For this?  Thy cruell hand extinguisheth
Thy selfe, and me, Senate and common folke,
And thy new-raised town, with one all-murth'ring stroke.

Teares bathe her wounds, suck her last breath my lips,
If any about hers yet hov'ring stayes.
This said, she passes the high stayres, and clips
Her halfe-dead sister, whom she fostring layes
To her warme breasts, and as the breath decayes,
Sighs new, the gore-blood with her garment dry'd.
Shee, striving her eyes heavy lids to raise,
Fainted againe, her wounds mouth gaping wide,
Vents by a neerer way her hearts groans through her side.

Thrice on her arme she did her body stay,
Thrice tumbled backward, and with rowling eyes
Groapt for, and sigh'd to finde, the glaring day.
Then Juno pitying her long Agonies,
And pangs of death, sent Iris from the skyes,
Her wrestling soule from twisting limbs t' untwine.
For since of age nor malady she dyes,
But by despaire nipt early, Proserpine
Had not yet cut her haire, and said, This head is mine.

So Iris her great Mistris will obeyes,
Descending to the Earth immediately
On curious wings, which the Suns oblique rayes
With water colours painted variously:
And standing right over her head (said she)
As I am bid, these vowed locks I beare
To Hells black Prince, and doe pronounce thee free
From bodies bonds.  This said, cut off her hayre,
Heat left her, and th' uncaged Soule flew through the Ayre.
