NANDO, JEFFREY, PERIGOT.

NANDO.
Good day to Jeffrey, (if I not mistake).

JEFFREY.
Like (if mistake not I) for Nando's sake.

NANDO.
How leades thou life and lambes, and whereaway?
I scarcely twice have seene thee, since the day
That thy Maecenas, that renowned Lord,
The Lady wed who by the chrystall fourd
Was Mistresse of that Castle, white and strong
Neare Chilterne hilles, where we led flocks along.
T'was at this Ilands most renowned Towne,
(Place fittest for a match of such renowne),
Where, at that wedding, thou a speech didst make
Whereof I once from thee did coppy take,
Since beg'd or stolne from me, (the common lot
Of novelties):  if thou hast not forgot,
Pitie thou should'st!  vouch-safe it to rehearse:
It was a plaine, but honest, peice of verse.

JEFFREY.
How think'st thou (Nando) things so long fore-past,
In that so plaine and simple age, may last
To these more dainty dayes?  or who but thou
Fancyes so olde esteeme or relish now?

PERIGOT.
Yes:  That doe I:  and that's one more then he:
And so doe all that truely honest bee,
If truely honest be the verse, though plaine;
And I have heard thou hast no greater straine.
Though fame allowes no life to vicious ryme,
No vertuous verse is subject unto tyme.
All things, though old, to those that never knew
Nor never heard of them before, are new.
Age does not worth diminish but prolong:
True Muse is (like Apollo) alwayes young.
What's vile is old or dead as soone as borne;
What evers good more dayes doe more adorne.

JEFFREY.
As I have seene a Shepheardesse contrive
A way to keepe a gather'd rose alive,
So this my withering fancy, by the merit
Of your desires, doth thus it selfe inherit.

I that n'ere gaz'd on Cheap-sides glistring rowe,
Nor went to bed by the deep sound of Bowe,
But lent my dayes to silver-couler'd sheepe,
And from strawne cotes borrow'd my golden sleep,
(On deare occasion you may thinke to draw
To Citie him that never Citie saw)
Arriv'd these walles and towers of sumptuous pride
To seeke my deare Lord, whose faire flock I guide,
And for whose absent worth my tender feares
Have far'd a little Tems of mine owne teares.
And as (which I, poore Swaine, with blushes say:
Though wherefore should I so?) I lost my way
Some hundred times in these amazefull streets,
The wing'd and quiver'd Love at last me meets;
Him had I known so well in our green Downe,
That he forgot not mee in this gay Towne;
And leades me to this place, which he though blinde
Better then I with my best eyes could finde:
And, while conducted betwixt him and care,
I did, as captive led by keeper, fare.
But at this hallow'd threshold now receiv'd
By him that weares the robe of saffron weav'd,
The smileing Hymen, I such sweetnes found
As hearts redeem'd may feele that have been bound;
And by his sacred counsell wish'd to frame
These rites to you (Fayre and illustrious Dame),
To whose rare graces here I can make no
Compare, since I no gemmes nor jewells know,
But in your modest smiles (me thinks) I view
Our Starre by day, and Summers rose anew.
More then I mourn'd his absence, I rejoyce
Now in my rare Commanders rarer choice.
And as his sweet and richly founded Place
Your stately and well-shaded Towers embrace,
My Muse shall sing of your united name
In shades of Sherborne and by streames of Thame,
Songes that beyond these suddain straynes aspire
Shall in their just desart and true desire,
That longs till all my Mates in joviall sort
Dance to my pipe and this more sweet report.
Such was the speech that Hymens high occasion
Gave first life to; this second, your perswasion.

PERIGOT.
No sure:  If of it selfe thy Muse could dye,
It might have endles life from cause so hye.

NANDO.
But what occurrents there befell thee more?
So noble eares could not so give thee ore.

JEFFREY.
Tis true, but I my part have much forgot
But theirs (which was their Noblenes) cannot.
Amongst the rest a Lady faire, (to try
My wits, it seem'd; or else I know not why),
Was pleas'd to me a question to propose
Which either shee, or I, did out of prose
Transforme into a slender dresse of ryme,
Wherein it lives, though poorely, to this time.

Betwixt two Suiters sat a Lady fayre:
Upon her head a garland did she weare;
And of th' enamour'd two the first alone
A garland wore (like her), the other none.
From her owne head she tooke the wreath she wore
And on his plac'd it who had none before:
And then (marke this) their browes were both about
Beset with garlands, and she sat without.
Beholding these Cor-rivals on each side
Of her, thus plac'd and deck'd in equall pride,
She from the first mans head the wreath he had
Tooke off, and therewith her owne browes she clad:
And then (marke this) she and the second were
In garlands deck'd, and the first man sate bare.
Now which did she love best, of him to whom
She gave the wreath, or him she tooke it from?

NANDO.
In my conceit she him would rather have
From whom she tooke, then him to whom she gave.
For, to bestow, many respectes may move:
But, to receive, none can perswade but Love.
She grac'd him much on whom her wreath she placed,
But him whose wreath she wore she much more graced:
For where she gives she there a Servant makes,
But makes her selfe a servant where shee takes.
Then where she takes she honors most, and where
She doth most honor she most love doth beare.

PERIGOT.
In my conceit she lov'd the man the more
To whom she gave the garland that she wore.
An action such (me thinkes) seemes to expresse
That he, who that posses'd, should her possesse.
Where she the garland took and left him bare,
Might be his brows for Willow to prepare.
Receiving does not always service prove,
But giving is alwayes true signe of Love.
On him whose wreath she weares she much confers;
But bindes him to more honor that weares hers:
And then if she, is fayre, be truely kinde,
Most love she beares where she most lookes to finde.

NANDO.
Now (Jeff) what was the answer that you gave?

JEFFREY.
That I (with little greife) forgotten have;
Though likely tis I sayd like one of you.
All is but guesse where none can tell what's true.
The depth of Ladyes minde no other knowes
(She knowes) and tis no answer to suppose.
He may him-selfe thinke in her greatest grace,
Upon whose head she did her garland place,
And he whose wreath she wore may thinke the same,
(Love all things doth to his owne vantage frame):
But he, in one or both, must needs be blinde;
And what himselfe sees not he hopes to finde.
Two Lovers may be equall in desart;
The diffr'ence is in the Beloveds heart.
Wise Ladyes thoughts are to them selves alone;
And better pleas'd to be admir'd then knowne.
Tis like she lov'd one best:  but is more blest
If him she have she loves, and loves her best.

NANDO.
How may we now requite thy love and paine?

JEFFREY.
My paines with pitie, love with love againe.

NANDO.
Nay (gentle Jefferey) from thy repast
We have (I feare) caus'd thee too long to fast.
Walke with my freind and me unto my Bower,
And helpe to entertaine one pleasant hower,
That in th' enjoyance of so kinde a freind
Will but too swiftly hasten to his end.
My Dame to night a cheese-cake me allowes,
Whose borders are as browne as are her browes;
But curds within as candid as her favour,
Sprinkled with cynamonds delightfull savour.
We have Queene-apples, some within to see
As beauteous as without:  (as nymphes should bee):
And Russettings that, like true Shepheards, hide
Wilde disposition in a rough out-side:
Poore fare; yet so much richer for thy sake
As hearty wish and welcome may it make.

JEFFREY.
Thy lookes and tongue both so performe their part
As shewes they have Commission from thy heart.
These dayes of ours (Nando) no kinder qualitie
Produce, in great or small, then Hospitalitie.
It seemes thou canst remember I have been
In noble houses, and I there have seene
And tasted too their bountious entertaine
(Which may it everlastingly remaine).
Continuance is the life of all well doeing,
And thereunto all blessings come a wooing.
And I have far'd with Shepheards such as you;
And loveing ever to my power to doe
The good that I in others see and praise,
Have had my fellow Shep-heards in my dayes;
Not to requite, for so I was not able,
But t' imitate heart free and hospitable.
As the rich farmers favour do's refine
His plenteous fare, and turnes his ale to wine;
The Shepheards love so makes his poore repast
A banquet, and his whey like ale to tast:
And, at the greatest table and the least,
Love and free welcome makes them both a feast.

PERIGOT.
I that am idle and have least to doe
All our three flocks the while may looke unto.

NANDO.
No Perigot; wee cannot spare such freind,
Whose worth is not invited to attend.
As wee, so let our flocks, together feed:
Sheep will agree where shep-heards are agreed:
And as for fitchet, fox, or such as those,
Inward agreement feares no outward foes.
Sheep learne the voyce of Shep-heards that them keep;
And mutuall love shepheards may learne of sheep.

Nando's Emblem.
Grex humilis vocem discit Pastoris amantis

Perigot's Emblem.
Pastor ad exemplum discat amare gregis

Jeffrey's Emblem.
Foelix is Pastor qui ovis est Pastoris Olympi,
Cujus sunt gregibus cognita vox et amor.
