THIRSIS.
As lately I on Silver Thames did ride,
Sad Galatea, on the banck I spy'd:
Such was her looke as sorrow taught to shine,
And thus she grac't me with a voice divine.

GALATEA.
You that can tune your sounding strings so well
Of Ladies beauties, and of love to tell;
Once change your note, and let your Lute report
The justest griefe that ever touch't the Court.

THIRSIS.
Fair Nymph, I have in your delights no share,
Nor ought to be concerned in your care:
Yet would I sing if I your sorrows knew,
And to my aid invoke no Muse but you.

GALATEA.
Hear then, and let your song augment our grief,
Which is so great as not to wish reliefe:
She that had all which nature gives or chance,
Whom fortune joyn'd with vertue to advance,
To all the joyes this Island could afford
The greatest Mistris, and the kindest Lord:
Who with the Royall mixt her Noble bloud,
And in high grace with Gloriana stood.
Her bounty, sweetnes, beauty, goodnes, such.
That none ere thought her happines too much:
So well inclin'd her favours to confer,
And kinde to all, as Heaven had bin to her;
The virgins part, the mother, and the wife,
So well she acted in this span of life;
That though few years (too few alas) she told,
She seem'd in all things but in beauty old.
As unripe fruit, whose verdant stalks doe cleave
Close to the tree, which grieves no lesse to leave
The smiling pendant which adornes her so,
And untill Autumne, on the bough should grow:
So seem'd her youthfull soul not easily forc't,
Or from so fair, so sweet a seat divorc't:
Her fate at once did hasty seem and slow,
At once too cruell and unwilling too.

THIRSIS.
Under how hard a law are mortalls born,
Whom now we engage, we anon must mourn:
What Heaven sets highest, and seems not to prize,
Is soon removed from our wondring eyes:
But since the sisters did so soon untwine
So fair a thread, Ile strive to peece the line.
Vouchsafe sad Nymph to let me know the Dame,
And to the Muses Ile commend her name:
Make the wide Country eccho to your moan,
The listning trees and savage mountains groan:
What rocks not moved when death is sung
Of one so good, so lovely, and so young.

GALATEA.
'Twas Hamilton whom I had nam'd before,
But naming her; griefe lets me say no more.
