Faire Albion, of the world thou fairest Ile!
And thou Deare Yorkshire, thou my native Soyle,
My Nurse, my Mother; oh, how can I pay
My Gratitude?  Muse!  teach me what to Say;
How shall I praise thee most?  let me looke backe
To former Ages, and I heare 'em Speake
With almost wonder; what prodigious name
Can boast he Saw, he went, and overcame,
Further then some of ours?  Third Edward's Son,
Son of brave Sire!  how did he overrun
The face of France?  and Victorie Create
In his owne fortune; pardon, if I say't,
Hee was not Second to those names wee heare
Pronounc'd with Admiration and Feare;
Not that Great Alexander, nor the name
Of Punicke Hannibal, nor Caesar's Fame,
Outshine his Glories; had he seene a Day
As large in Time, he'd beene as great as they;
Him Shall I praise?  or his brave father most?
Or his great Grandsire?  or of Richard boast?
That Richard Lion's-heart; and from that Stemme
Bring downe the Glorie, to fifth Harrie's name,
Or the fowerth Edward; these and many more
(Though not in Fame) in Blood-inferior,
Might I repeat; but better let them goe
To swell huge Chronicle in Folio.
How shall I praise thee most?  in thy full peace!
Thy nat'rall Bounties, and the large increase
Which everie yeare forth brings; thy inborne wealth,
Thy selfe-existence, where wee need noe Stealth
Of Marchants to enrich us; but might rest
Safe in our Selves, with native bounties blest;
Shall I praise one, or All?  for All are thine.
Noe more will I admire the Southerne Shine,
Nor Easterne perfumes, nor the wealth o' th' west;
But thinke thee fairest, Sweetest, richest, Best;
Forgetting Chaucer, and Dan Lidgate's Rhime;
Loe here, the Glorie of our modern time,
A learned Age; Since great Elizae's reigne
And peace came in; the proud Italian
And justly proud in Poesie, will allow
The English (though not Equall) next him now.
The noble Sidney, crown'd with liveing Bayes;
And Spencer, chief, (if a peculiar praise
May pass, and from the rest not derogate)
The learned Jonson, whose Dramaticke State
Shall stand admir'd Example, to reduce
Things proper, to the light, or buskind Muse.
Many the present Age afford, of which
Heare Falkland, Digbie, Beaumond, Carew, Rich,
In their Composures Severall; with whom
Maye, Allein, Randolph, Shirley, Rutter come;
Sons of thy wombe all these; with whom may I
(Though in a weake and humble Poesie)
Thy glories Celebrate, and quitt the Score
Nature obligeth me; I aske noe more.
Not that I covet fame; let those high names
Inherite all the Glorie of their Thames,
And live to many ages, though I fall,
In scorned Dust, and have noe name at all:
Suffice it I may sing upon thy flood,
Neglected Humber; or my Muse (lesse proud)
Sport in the Sedges of my neighbouring Streame,
Poore as my verse, neither deserving name.
And may the village where I had my birth
Enclose as Due, my Bodie in her Earth.
