Thy Poems on a Pillory makes me stand
With both my ears fast nail'd, and fixed hand
Upon thy Book, which took me when I see't
(As flies are taken) fetter'd by the feet
Of thy smooth verse.  Thou, whose smooth chin doth write
Thy date of years the houres of day and night,
That abler wits admire to see thee climbe
To so great height in such short space of time.
Poetrie's now grown Staple-Merchandize
Free from Old Custome or the New Excise.
Silvester, Spenser, Johnson, Draiton, Donn,
May see Verse measured by the Last and Tunn,
While Dutch, French, Spanish, English liquours use
T' adorn thy house, their learnings grace thy Muse;
Thy frolique Nimble Genius like thy Star
That twinckling brings the Magi from afar
Into these Northern parts to come to Lynne
To see two Rarities, thy Works, thy Inne,
Which with thy Star and Stable represent
A second Bethlem.  Next comes sweet Content:
When men were wise and happy, then this Theam
Was welcome news, that now seems but a dream.
The ancient Bards reserv'd this dish of meat
For Kings to taste on:  then were Crowns compleat.
But since their learned days Content and Kings
Are from us fled with their high-towring wings
Not seen, felt, heard, or understood, Unlesse
That in a Gallie, this a game at Chesse.
Thy Muse hath made thee Momus-free, each word
Mur'd with a Wall, and Moted with a Ford,
Thus garrison'd, in this the Nectar flows,
In that the Lawrel springs to binde thy Brows.
Let the poor Scoundrel praise the poor-patcht words
Of ebrious Poets sheets, sung on two bords
Upon a pair of Trussels in a Fair,
Or Market, where the Clowns and Girles repair;
And let the Romancer his stories gild
With Ladies lovers, Knights conqu'ring, Giants kild.
Let the bold weeks-man write his wrong-set news,
That may be Parent all the world abuse,
With six days works of new-created lies
To binde up Gally-pots and bottome pies.
Let them seek praises where they will for mee,
All that I have or can, belong to thee,
And to thy Star that calculates thy fate
To be divine Apollo's right-hand mate,
And make me wish my self a Star, to bee
A pointer in the Guoards to say that's Hee.
And for thy Book, let never greasie thunb,
Nor shallow-brain upon thy pages come,
Nor doults that must be forc'd to read it twice,
Nor ignorance attempt to ask the price,
Nor stammering fools, that hack and mar the fence,
The sellers power's repeal'd to take their pence;
Thy worthy Works shall make thy Pen so fam'd,
And get thee glory that thy Book's Nick-nam'd.
Then march on MURFORD never be afraid,
The Muses love t' have young beginners trade;
And I short to express thy worth, thy rime,
Crave leave to end and mend another time.
