CLIO:
Hither direct thy steps, descend this Cave
Castalia call'd here, thou a place shalt have
To heare our Harmonie, here Homer sate,
When he his high immortal Illiads wrote,
Here Orpheus penn'd his Hymns, here Maro sung
Aeneas Travells with a golden tongue:
Here Pindar, and Anacreon did devise
Their Odes, which since none e're could equalize:
Here Flaccus, Naso, Spencer, hath been seen,
I help'd the last to frame his Faerie Queene:
Here make thy selfe Immortall, taste this spring,
Which will informe thee like some God to sing,
And though (perhaps) thou taste of some affliction,
It shall be sweetned by our Benediction.

POVERTIE.
If to her charmes thou listen, then with me
Thou must expect torne Raggs, and Penurie,
For to converse with want in some darke Den,
Shunning, and shunned of all other men,
Thy whole life one continued Scene of carke,
Leaving the world despised, and in the darke.

POET.
Twixt Scilla and Charbydis, thus I stand,
Not knowing which to take on either hand,
This way my Genius wills me for to goe,
But wise foreseeing caution answers, no.

IGNORANCE.
Looke this way, erring mortall, learn to know
What gratitude to me the World doth owe,
Tis I that graspe both Poles, and unto me,
Both Love and Honour Vassalized be,
He that hath me to friend, can never want,
"Hee's onely happy that is ignorant.":
Knowledge confoundeth knowledge, what got he,
So much renowned for his Poesie.
But blindnesse, nakednesse, and hunger sharpe,
Yea sometimes forced for to pawne his Harpe:
And he that wrote The Art of Love, the Rapes
Of Jupiter, and of transformed shapes,
Found banishment the guerdon of his wit,
He curst his Veine, and wilt thou Father it:
Combine with me, and my endowments trie,
Thou liberally shalt live, and wealthy die.

MAMMON.
If credence to her words thoul't not afford,
Unstable man, take thou God Mammons word,
Pluto hath made me Master of his Treasure,
I have whole Hills of Ophyr, Gold at pleasure,
For to dispose to them, I list t' advance,
Who blow the knee to God-like Ignorance;
Hee's mad, that literature or Science chuses,
Hee's trebly plagu'd, that's loved of the Muses:
Turne or'e blind Homers workes, consume thy time,
Till thou grow'st hoarse, in reading Maro's Rhime,
Or take thou Platos Prose his Schollar too,
And con or'e him, who Natures secrets knew,
Yet with the First thou't die a wretched man,
Or with the last, perish ith' Ocean.

CLIO.
Behold this wreath, pluck't from that Damsell bright,
Turn'd into Lawrell by the God of Light.

MAMMON.
View this refulgent Oare, these heapes of Pearle.

IGNORANCE.
Be Ignorant, and be a Lord or Earle.

CLIO.
Converse with us, and famous shalt thou bee,
Canoniz'd unto all Posteritie.

POET.
Thrice sacred Virgin, unto thee I come,
Thou onely lead'st unto Elizium.
Though Folly glorious seem, thou art more faire,

POVERTIE.
Here I adopt thee then, my lawfull Heyre.

POET.
And welcome Poverty, thou art my choyce,
Oh that I could but beg with Homers voyce.
