THE AUTHOR TO HIS MUSE.
Make hast my Muse, lay off thy brighter plume,
The sable wings of darkest Night assume,
Cover thy head with blackness, do not faile
Thy brow with mournful shadow now to vaile;
Thine eyes now cloud, which may pour down apace,
A showre of brinish tears upon thy face.

Fill up thy breast with sighs, and saddest grief,
With Rachels sorrows, that refus'd relief;
Now let a living Spring thy sorrow feed,
That may supply, with running streams, thy need:
The depth in silence pass, noyse not the same
Lest Nature hear, and do dissolve her frame;

Attire thy self in saddest mourning weed,
Put on thy tragick Buskins, haste with speed
Unto the place where griesly Death doth dwel,
Within the ground in lowest darkest cel;
Pale kerchcer'd sickness lyeth at the door,
To him the Porter openeth every hour.

THE HOUSE OF DEATH.
About, above, the Monuments remaine,
Of old and young whom direfull death hath slaine:
There the worlds Victor vanquish'd doth lye,
There Caesar, Croesus, and grave Cato by;
There David, Jedidiah, Daniel,
And there with these our true Nathaniel.

Of doleful Ebony the Portal's made,
The roof of fatal dismal Ewe is laid,
The pillars of black pollisht Marble be,
That may endure til time you ended see;
The wals intire of Adamantine rock,
The two-leav'd gates of Steel, so key and lock.

The chambers there with Coffins plancherd sure,
Corruptions sap will not let long indure;
These worn and torn, in time renew'd again,
The cost of future Funerals maintain:
The lower floor's of earth, most rooms be ful,
Loe here the dead mens bones, and there the skul.

The trophies of triumphant Death are there,
The rooms all hung with whited linnen are;
The corps intomb'd with juyce of Poppy smear'd,
There rest and sleep in dust, no danger fear'd,
Till that these bodies, putrifactions prey,
Be rais'd up to the life at the last Day.

A DESCRIPTION OF DEATH.
The way is beaten to this house of Death,
The fatal enemie of Mortals breath,
A raw-bon'd carcase, of his Head the haire
And flesh is falne, and left the skul all bare;
His eyes no eyes, cannot be seen nor see,
Worm-eaten nose, one jaw, no teeth hath he:

Yet heaps of men he daily doth devour,
And hundreds fall before him in an hour.
Within his cruel breast he hath no heart,
Yet full of courage, and with deadly dart
He kils, yet neither arm he hath, nor hand,
He hath no feet, yet walks o're sea and land.

Nor arteries, flesh, nor sinews (wonder)
Hath he, all his joynts they are asunder;
His bones, there one, and here another lyes,
He smites, there one, and here another dyes;
Haste thither, knock, call, know the cause, who thus
This leane starv'd Heluo snatcht out our joy from us.

THE MUSES MESSAGE AND
COMPLAINT TO DEATH,
LAMENTING THE DEATH
OF THIS WORTHY.
Could sacred Piety, that adorn'd his mind,
The grace of heart and life, no pitty find?
Wilt thou thus wrong (oh death) the Publick weale?
And justice slay, extinguish fervent zeal!
Pull down the Temples pillar, quench the fire
That Heaven's sent, and did to Heaven aspire?

Could neither faith nor faithfulness find grace?
Nor friendly love keep off thy Serjeants Mace?
Could not integrity and truth him save
(With Hezekiah) from the greedy grave?
O Sun return, yet shine on Sions hil,
On Ahaz Dial keep the shadow stil.

Why fel he not upon Elisha's herse,
That could the dead againe to life reverse?
Where is He now that Lazarus did raise?
Where is the widow of Sarepta's praise,
That might in flaming Chariot let him ride
With him to heaven?  Then he had not dy'd.

Shal I not once within this vale of tears?
(Or shal I hold my peace, not speak my fears?)
Shal I not once again on earth behold
That countenance so grave, so brave, so bold,
Which with a look could daunt the face of sin,
And make offence to hide it selfe within?

Shal I not see his presence?  Blesse the wals,
Wherein did found his frequent sacred cals,
Of wife and children, and of all the rest,
To waite on God; who is for ever blest,
And beams of blessing from this Sun t' expect
That blest these blessings, might on him reflect.

And as the Rivers to the Ocean pay
Their tribute streams, that in their channel play;
So daily Prayer answerers re-ascend
In praises might to God, and never end:
O never end your prayers and praises due,
To him that gave such sweet returns to you.

That you should pray, and yet stil praise his name,
And walk in night before him without blame;
So did he walk, and so attended went
With all his traine:  and in the Temple spent
Both hours and dayes, and of all dayes the best,
Wherein both Christ did rise, and God did rest.

The time though divers, yet the precept's one,
Write and ingrav'd by Gods own hand in stone,
In midst of that his everlasting Law,
Which might at all time keep in dreadful awe
All hearts, and all induce, his voyce with feare,
And faithful care, and conscience to heare.

Oh!  Shal I never more observe that eye,
Intently lifted up unto the skie?
And hands stretcht out unto the throne of grace,
And bended knees to fall before the place,
Where shadowing Cherub  cover'd with its wing,
The Mercy-seat of heavens mighty King?

From Golden Altar did the incense fly
In clouds of smoke, and mounted up on high:
God smelt the savour, in his heart he said,
Behold, it's done according as thou pray'd.
And now O death, can thee no prayer melt,
Wherein the highest God such sweetness smelt?

Release thy Prisoner, and set o'pe thy gate,
Breake off those fetters, free thy selfe from hate,
And let him rise from off that fatall bed
Whereon thou forc'd him to lay down his head:
Unto the votes of high and low restore
Their joy, to be enjoyed as before.

DEATHS ANSWER TO THE MUSE.
What aylest thou, of Muse, bereft of mind?
What mean these words, these empty puffes of wind?
Wil't change the Fates, and burn the sacred rowl
Of Gods Decree, and make thy selfe a scroul;
There to designe each one to death or life,
And heaven and earth to set at dismal strife?

Shal brazen mountains with a blast remove?
Or shal the Sun run retrograde above?
Shal morning o'pe her purple door t' th' West?
And Moon and Stars to rule the day be prest?
And night shine forth with Phoebus orient beams?
And at thy will all rivers change their streams?

Then my Commission I to thee Wil give,
The living shal not dye, the dead shal live;
And mortals all, immortal shal become,
And wither'd branch, with winter blast shal bloome;
And Adam shal with Eve to Eden go,
No fruit shal kil, no friend shal be a foe.

But if that Adam must not more return,
Why should I break up Barnardistons urn?
His faith?  So Abraham dy'd, yet did beleeve;
But Truth did Hezekiah once reprive,
And Lazarus did life againe inspire,
And to his body did the soul retire:

But know'st thou not these of death did taste?
And back again unto my Palace haste?
Nor Abrams faith, nor Isaacks, Jacobs feare
Could shield them from deaths deadly piercing speare;
So Joseph, Joshua, and Josiah all,
By sooner, later stroakes of death did fall.

And Job was patient under death's sad blow,
And mighty Sampson unto death did bow;
And David with his Worthies all did yeeld
To death, against his stroke they found no shield;
And John, Christs bosome friend, did hither hye,
And Christ himselfe, the Son of God, did dye;

Eliah left his Mantle him behind,
The sought him, but in no place could him find,
His change like death; and Enoch he is not,
Nor Rachels children, Death became their Lot.
And thou (O Muse) shal be as one of these,
When Atropos thy thread to cut shal please.

THE MUSES REPLY TO DEATH.
O cruel Death!  Can nothing then asswage
Thy savage fury, and thy direful rage?
Must all (O Charon) thee thy ferriage pay?
And all take Boat, and all have over-lay?
Then come, and to our Lazarus let us go,
And as he dy'd, with him, let us do so.

As Joseph went unto old Jacobs grave,
So shal this Saint, of us attendance have.
What mean'st (O Muse) and whither dost thou wend?
When of thy passion wilt thou make an end?
Wilt thou presume on Sion Mount to stand,
And Heavens scepter sway in thy right hand?

THE ANGELS MESSAGE TO THE MUSE.
The Lord by power and providence divine,
Did all unto their place and end assigne:
The Earth to Plants, in Seas the Fishes swim,
The Birds in air do wave their feathers trim;
Shal not the fixed Stars in heaven shine?
What God doth own, wilt thou detain as thine?

A DESCRIPTION OF HEAVEN.
And why among the dead dost thou enquire
For these that live?  Lift up thy eye, look higher,
There is a place beyond that mount most bright,
Whence Phoebus chariot shines, with flaming light;
The stately City new Jerusalem,
Wherein doth dwel Jehovah, God of Shem.

Her glory doth as Jasper stone appear,
Her light like to transparent Chrystal clear;
Her battlements are high, her streets are gold,
Her gates twelve glittering Pearls, their price untold,
Twelve holy Angels at the gate attend,
Whereon twelve names of Israels tribes are pend.

The gates, all nightless day, stand open wide,
That Saints in golden chariots in may ride.
Three where the Sun doth shed his orient beam,
Three ope where he doth loose his fiery team,
Three from the North receive Christs holy train,
Three from the South that Saints do entertain.

The twelve foundations, each a precious stone,
The Jasper, Saphir, and the Chalcedon,
The Sardonix of colour red, and white,
The Sardius next, and golden Chrysolite,
The sea-green Berel, and the Topaz rare,
Chrysoprasus as gold with green most faire;

The Jacynth then, and next to that is set
The Amethyst like purple violet.
In those the names of Christs Apostles are,
That through the world the Gospel spread so farre.
On those an hundred fourty culs in height
And four the wal so broad, of Jasper bright.

Four square the City, and the measur'd ground
With golden reeds, a thousand furlongs found;
The Angel so the length and breadth did take,
The height the same, no Cannon great can shake
The wall, that doth this City compasse in,
Where none can enter, nor abide within.

THE SAINTS GLORY AND
HAPPINESS, AND THIS
SAINT AMONG THEM.
No need of Temple, Sun, or Moon there is,
Where dwels that Trine in one, in endless bliss,
The Lamb his everlasting light doth give
Unto it, there the Saints in glory live;
Upon their heads, they Crowns of glory wear,
Their faces like the radiant Sun appear.

They cloathed are in Linnen fine and rare,
No Fuller ever made the like, 'tis sure:
And Palme of Victory in their hands they have,
Triumphant Trophies, on the wal most brave
Do hang the Monuments of conquer'd Hel,
With all the Fiends and Furies, there that dwel;

Their Crowns and Palms before the Lamb they cast,
By whom the danger of the war they past;
They all bedight with glory, round about
The Lambe doe follow, going in and out,
Unto the tree of lasting life they haste,
In midst of Eden, and the fruit they taste.

Thence to the Wel of Life they take their way,
Whence living streams do never cease to play;
With Mannah eke, and sweetest Nectar fed,
They, by the Lamb, into the Palace led;
The Song of Moses and the Lamb do sing,
With sweetest harmony to heavens King.

In close hereof came Barnardiston in,
Who late the field from vertues foe did win:
A troop of Angels blest had been his guard,
Into the Palace, to a place prepar'd:

Wherein the Emerauld of vivid hue,
For beauties honour strives with Saphir blew:
And Topaz seeks to have away the same
From Carbuncle, that shines with fiery flame.

There he arrayed in robes of glory,
Had to the presence Chamber, tels the story,
How he in fight with Sin and Death had stood,
And overcame them by the Lamb, Christ's blood:
The Lamb my Captain was, I won the field,
Lo there his Word my Sword, his faith my shield.

The Angels then did all their Trumpets blow,
The Victor's blessed welcome there to show;
The Lord commands a crown of golden Bayes,
Upon his head are set the Victors praise.
The Saints afresh renew their happy joy,
Them neither sin nor sorrow doth annoy.

Moses and Aaron, sang the same that was
By Israel sung, when they the Sea did passe;
And Miriam did on sounding Timbrel play,
And David tuned to his Harp a Lay:
The rest took hands, and danc'd a sacred round,
The vaults of glory echoing did sound,

There did I leave him, there in bliss he lives,
With him, to Saints that grace and glory gives.
Go haste, and tell all those that did him love,
How he sits on a golden Throne above;
On earth he in his hand a sword did bear,
His hand in heaven doth a scepter rear:

There shal he always live, and never dye,
And there shal waite on highest Majesty;
And waite to see his Wife and Children dear
Increase his joy, in this his glories sphear.
The Lord we pray, there grant to them a place,
With their allyes, and to their budding race.

In eundem carmen funebre, comprehensum
In Dialogo inter Musam &amp; Vitam.

Tene quid abripiet nobis?  (mors improba!) mortem
Tuq; premes, victam tu perimesq; necem.
Vit fugis mortem?  Meditaris morte fugamne?
Vivas, ut mortem morte fugare queas.

Dum vixi, vitam vivebam, ut perdere possem:
Dum morior mihimet, reddita vita mihi.
