AMINTOR, MARTAGON.

MARTAGON.
Now Titans heat the mountaines Snow dissolves,
All pleasing Ver in her smooth arme involves
Meadowes, and Woods, and like some gawdy Queen
Weares various colours, but delights in green,
Here let us sit, and descant on our Fate,
This Poplar to Alcides dedicate.

AMINTOR.
Rather beneath yon branched balefull Yew,
That Pitch tree, or black Yvie in our view,
Lets throw our selves, and with alternate cries,
Force audience from the deafned Deities,
Who seem to flie from our complaints and us,
As once from Typhon, and great Iapetus.
Here we hunt Bores with a loopt Spanish Dart,
Take Cranes in springes by the Phrygian Art,
Farre from our Native, &c. &mdash; Ol &mdash; Yle,
On which when thou Olympick Jove didst smile,
Nor fertile Aegypt, nor rich Lydia more,
Nor Medes, nor Parthians, did their &mdash; adore,
Divine Amintor change thy oaten Pipe,
For the shrill Trumpet, and the solemne Fife,
To Panopea, Glaucus, Inoes boy,
Whole heards of Beeves, and sheep, we will destroy,
When thou imbarkst with thy Iberian traine,
To win thy own Ruina back againe,
Faire Opis, Deiopeia, Cydippe,
Legea, Spio, and Cymodoce,
Ar'thusa, Clio, and Lucothoe,
By Amphitrites side, shall waft thee ore,
Dauncing before thee to Ruinas Shore.

AMINTOR.
Farewell then Pales, and thou god whose Syre,
By a wrong'd Goat did in the waves expire,
Tysiphone assume thy knotted snakes,
Which with the surfeit of Aechidna makes
Earth tremble, and the pines of Ossa nod,
Piercing the Pallace of the Stygian god,
Thou Patronesse of Rhamnus help thy Priest,
My wrongs thou knowst, my innocence thou see'st.

MARTAGON.
But on what soil, in what illustrious Coast,
Shall we discourse with thy great Fathers Ghost?
As once the wittie fam'd Dulichian guide
Did with Tyresias shade, when terrifi'd
With feare of future woes, the hand of Fate
Crushing him (under Aerycinas hate.)

AMINTOR.
If Orpheus had the power Hells gates to see,
Entring in search of his Euridice,
(Caught by Avernian Juno's wile) if he
Who conquered Latium, peopled Brittanie,
(As once Amphitrios Son) by Sybill led,
Viewd Plutos Pallace, and with armes out-spread
Courted his Fathers shade, why may not I,
With (Atlas Grandchild) wingd-foot Mercury
Hyperion ayding, passe black Erebus,
Still burning Phlegeton, and Tartarus,
Not ceasing till with happy speed I come,
And kisse my Syre in blest Elizium.
