To whom should I these fancies dedicate,
When I made truce with thoughts of vanity,
But to your Noble selfe, and Princely Mate,
Whose soules are so espouz'd to Piety?
Now, in such verdant yeers, when most apply
Themselves to gaudy garbs, and worlds delight,
Lo, your brave mindes do soare a pitch more high,
To seek your Maker and Celestial light;
And few there are who make that way a loftier flight.

My Lord,
I could produce (could it augment your fame,)
A Noble Counsellour in former dayes,
That was of your own Lignage, Blood and Name,
Whoby the light of Heavens clear cristal rayes
His Prince did guide (to his eternal praise.)
The King was glad to hear what he propounded,
Whereby he shunn'd those rockie dangerous wayes,
Which all the Christian world might have confounded,
No Musick sweeter then good counsel ever sounded.

He was another Joseph to this land,
Who by his Prudence did his Lord advise
To passe that Charter under seal and hand,
Which props the Priest and peoples liberties;
(The peoples hearts are Kings best treasuries,)
The marks and bounds to terminate each Section,
From all encroachment which that Grant denies,
For where I pay my tribute and subjection,
I challenge may my life's and livelihoods protection.

I spare, Illustrious Lord, the application;
Do but the forename change, the storie's thine,
Who art the brightest glory of this Nation
In search of knowledge Humane and Divine,
Be pleas'd as Sol, when he begins to shine,
All foggs and mists from hills and valleys chaseth,
To countenance these gentle Songs of mine,
Sweet Israels Singer sate among the Graces,
The wiseman after all his travels Hymen paceth.

A Vote.

With outward store God grant you inward peace,
In mutual love to spend long lasting dayes;
It is the course both Heaven and Earth to please,
Who will you blesse in all your works and wayes,
(Good wives their Husbands House and Honor raise,)
Provide true Jonathans to be their friend.
And now your Votary most humbly prayes,
That God may children like the Parents send,
And to the utmost point of time your noble line extend.

So prayeth the Humblest of your Servants,
ROBERT AYLET.
