They now went sayling in the OCEAN vast,
Parting the snarling Waves with crooked Bills:
The whispring Zephyre breath'd a gentle Blast,
Which stealingly she spreading Canvas fills:
With a white foam the Seas were overcast,
The dancing Vessels cutting with their Keels
The Waters of the Consecrated DEEP,
Where PROTHEUS'S Flocks their Rendezvouses keep.

When in the HEAV'N OF HEAV'NS the Deities,
That have of humane things the Government,
Convene in glorious Councel, to advise
On future matters of the ORIENT.
Treading in Clusters the Diaphane skyes
Thorough the Milky way their course they bent,
Assembled at the THUNDERER'S command
By Him That bears the Caduceian Wand.

They leave the patronage of the Seav'n spheres
Which by the HIGHEST POW'R to them was giv'n:
The HIGHEST POW'R, who with an eye-brow steers
The Earth, the raging Ocean, and the Heav'n.
There, in a moment, every one appears;
Those, where BOOTES'S waine is slowly driv'n,
Those, who inhabit South, and where the Sun
Is born, and where his golden Race is don.

With an austere and high Majestick grace
Upon a Christal Throne, with stars imbost,
Sublime THE FATHER sate (worthy that place)
By whom the Bolts, dire VULCAN forg'd, are tost.
An Oderiferous Ayre blew from his face,
Able to breathe new life in a pale Ghost:
A Scepter in his Hand, and his Head crown'd
With one stone, brighter then a Diamownd.

On glitt'ring chairs (imbroyd'red richly o're
With infinite of Pearles and finest Gould)
The other Deities were placed low'r,
As Reason and the Herald Order would:
The Seniours first, to honor them the more,
And after them those who were not so ould:
When thus the most high JOVE the silence brake,
With such a voice as made OLYMPUS shake.

Eternal dwellers of the Tow'r divine,
And Impirean-Hall with starred Vault;
If the much Vertue of the valiant Line,
Of LUTUS be not worn out of your Thought;
You needs must know what the great FATES design
To crown the former Wonders Those have wrought,
That they shall darken with their evening-Glory
Th' Assyrian, Persian, Greek, and Roman story.

Your selves were witnesses, with what a poor
And naked Army it was giv'n to Them
To take from the well-fix't, and num'rous MOOR
All that sweet TAGUS waters with his stream.
Then 'gainst the stout Castilian-Warriour
Heav'n still beheld them with a fav'ring beam:
And still in fine with glory and Renown
The hanging Trophies did their Churches crown.

I speak not (Gods) of that more ancient name
Which with the Queen of Nations they did get
When (led by VIRIATUS) so great fame
They wan, whilst They and hostile ROME were met.
I pass their other Clash with that proud Dame
(Which 'tis impossible you should forget)
When a Bandito did their Truncheon bear,
Who feign'd himself inspir'd by a tame Deare:

See now, how trusting to uncertain Waves
In a fraile Barke, through ways untrod before
(Fearless of horrid Boreas, and the Braves
Of the fierce Southern wind) they throw at more!
How (having yoak't before that Sea which laves
AFFRICK'S North-side, and yoakt her Southern-shore)
They bend their purpose and their forces turn
To win the Cradle of the budding MORN.

To Them is promis'd by eternal FATE
(Whose high decrees no Power can ere revoke)
To be perpetual Porters of that Gate
Through which the Sun first guides his silver spoke.
They've spent at Sea the bitter Winter's date;
The men are harast, and with Travaile broke.
'Tis now high time (as it appears to me)
To shew them that new Land where they would be.
