CORIDON.
Why Strephon, art thou melancholy grown
And wilt not use thine oaten pipe?  hast known
Any ill news of late hath dul'd thy wit,
Made us unhappy, and thy self unfit?

STREPHON.
'Tis no Report, kinde Coridon, hath made
Me cloud my brow with sorrow and be sad;
It is a cause more high, a cause that can
Destroy the joy of the most fortunate man.

CORIDON.
And may I know it Strephon?  Dare you trust
Me with a Secret, and conceive me just,
Believe I will be silent?  If you dare,
I should desire this Novelty to hear.

STREPHON.
Ah, Coridon!  I am in love with one,
The fairest Shepherdess was ever knowne;
Her Face is beauties abstract, wherein we
May (at perfection) every beauty see.

CORIDON.
And art thou sad because thou art in love?
So Jove should grieve because he reigns above;
There is no fate so high befalls a Swain,
As to love where he is belov'd again.
Tell me (my Strephon) therefore why art sad?
Is it because thy Dear will not be had?

STREPHON.
She cannot (Coridon) for she is wed,
And fine young Perigot hath her maiden-head,
As blithe a Shepherd as did ever sing
Neat Roundelayes unto our Goat-foot King;
He is an happy man, and doth enjoy
That beauty which I languish for, and dy.

CORIDON.
Strephon, I grieve thou art enthralled so;
Desist betimes, and forward do not go;
Thy flames extinguish whilst they do begin,
For such a Love is against Pan a Sin.
And while yong Perigot lives what hope have you,
If she unto him do not prove untrue?

STREPHON.
I do confess I have none; neither would
Commit so great an evil, if I could;
I am enamour'd neither more nor less
Then Thenot, on the faithful Shepherdess:
I love her vertues, and if she should fall,
My love to her would be no love at all.

CORIDON.
Thou art an honest Swain, and our Feild-God
Will bless thee in thy Cottage and abroad.

STREPHON.
As I have faithfully to you replide,
So let none of my questions be denide.

CORIDON.
They shall not (Strephon;) I should be unjust
Unto your merits, if I did distrust
Your secresie in any thing I speak;
He that doth doubt his friend, doth friendship break.

STREPHON.
Is there no lass whom Coridon doth like?
You, did the Paphian Archer never strike?
Or are you such a man as never car'd
Whether a womans heart were soft or hard?

CORIDON.
Strephon, I love, but I do fear in vain,
Because rich Melibe intends to gain
A wealthier Shepherd for his daughter, one
Whose fortune must prevent thy Coridon.

STREPHON.
And would he merchandize his daughter?  may
He long expect and never see that day.
Steal her young Shepherd; never let her be
(Whom thou affects) subject to salarie.

CORIDON.
But ere I saw my Mira, or did know
What beauties made her perfect, I did owe
My love to Galatea; but I lost
My labour, which good old Palaemon crost,
Because he did believe that I would prove
A careless Shepherd, and the Downs not love:
Judge (Strephon) that know'st me above report,
If I be justly censur'd by him fort';
Do I not love the fields, and use to play
On Oaten reedes many a Roundelay?

STREPHON.
He that says otherwise, he doth not know
Thy Nature truly, but becomes thy foe;
Because (being Ignorant) he doth undertake
So bold a Character of thee to make;
Were he acquainted with thy wayes, to thee
Palaemon would give Galatea free;
And think his age more happy then his youth,
That made a Shepherd his of so much truth.

CORIDON.
Flatter not (Strephon) I do want those parts
That make a man be lov'd for his deserts;
Could I but sing such neat fine Lays, as you,
I might believe these praises were my due.

STREPHON.
And so you can if Tityrus says right,
Who told me Dities you did well endite.

CORIDON.
Now you do mention Tityrus, I must
Be to his merits, and our friendship just;
He is a Shepherd (would he please to sing)
Might lengthen with his voice the speedy Spring:
Did he but know how much the downs he wrongs,
The woods and dales would eccho with his songs;
He knows when Notes are over-sharp, or flat,
And is the ablest Boy that ever sat
Upon an Hillock, would he use his Reed,
And joy his wanton flock while it doth feed.

STREPHON.
He is an able Lad indeed, and likes
Arcadian Pastorals, and (willing) strikes
A Plaudite to th' Epilogues of those
Happy Inventions Shaksphere did compose;
Beaumont and Fletcher he will listen to,
And allow Johnsons method high and true.
He prais'd you to me, and I do believe
He his own Judgement would not wrong to give
Feign'd Commendations; Do not (therefore) fear
Sith he approves your pipe, who doth it hear.

CORIDON.
Strephon, I thank both you, and him, and will
Be proud hereafter to make known my skill:
If I but please the few I mean it for,
To seek for vulgar praise I shall abhor.

STREPHON.
Coridon it is late:  Farewel untill
We meet again upon this flowry Hill;
My Master will make wonder at my stay,
I otherwise would not so soon away.

CORIDON.
Thy Master's happy in thy care, Adieu:
As I will be in absence, be thou true.
