To Troynovant, now called London, ride,
By new fair buildings daily beautifide,
And great resort of people; There thou maist
See how the Thames under a Bridge doth hast
Of nineteen Arches; That so fair an other,
And strangely built, is scarce all Europe over.
There thou maist see the famous Monuments
Of our Heroes, fram'd with large expence:
There thou upon the Sepulchre maist look
Of Chaucer, our true Ennius, whose old book
Hath taught our Nation so to Poetize,
That English rythmes now any equalize;
That we no more need envy at the straine
Of Tiber, Tagus, or our neighbour Seine.
There Spencers Tomb thou likewise maist behold,
Which he deserved, were it made of gold:
If, honour'd Colin, thou hadst liv'd so long,
As to have finished thy Faery Song,
Not onely mine, but all tongues would confess,
Thou hadst exceeded old Maeonides. . . .

Trinity Colledge (unto which I do
For my own education my self owe)
Invites thee to behold a spacious Court
And what it is, afterwards to report:
That Royal Fabrick rais'd by him that died
By Crook-backs hands, and is so magnified,
For that strange roof, will doubtless thee invite
(Within the walls) of it to take a sight.
For Colins sake (who hath so well exprest
The vertues of our Faery Elves, and drest
Our Poesie in suth a gallant guise)
On happy Pembroke-Hall employ thine eyes.
Oxford our other Academy, you
Full worthy must acknowledge of your view:
Here smooth-tongu'd Drayton was inspired by
Mnemosynes's manifold progenie;
And Sydney (honour'd by all English men)
In Castalie here dip'd his numerous pen. . . .

Beware of reading Love; take heed of those
That either pourtract him in verse or prose:
For amorous lines will many mischiefs raise,
And make the Cinders of affection blaze.
Though the Arcadia be a book approv'd,
Arcadia must not be by thee belov'd.
The Lady Wrothes Urania is repleat
With elegancies, but too full of heat.
Spencers and Daniels Sonets do not view,
Though they are good, they are not so for you.
From feigned Histories refrain thy sight,
Scarce one is there but is an amorous Knight.
Musaeus English'd by two Poets shun;
It may undo you though it be well done.
Harrington's Ariosto do not touch,
For wanton lines scarce any book hath such.
And my old friend Drayton's Epistles you
(Being too soft and languishing) eschew.
