Passions would swell, but that their pride
Cannot embogue the Muses tide:
The mind must be asswag'd, and then
Her surges be run o'er agen,
That so their rudeness may abate
And veile, when we must mourn in state.

But should we mourn it by her worth,
Her beauty, bounty, or her birth,
The Kingdomes wealth would not suffice
To pay unto her obsequies:
Nor fancy could supply it here,
To set out her that had no peere.

For if her beauties did disclose
Th' imbellishments of either rose,
And on each temple at one glance,
You might survey the flower of France.
The rest ashamed once to vie
Their meaner colours shrink, and die
As if they were benighted quite,
Or hid in envy of the light.

But if the flowers you devest
And yet (too short) would seek the rest,
A set of gemmes, by fancy set,
Outbids Saint Mark his Cabinet;
Choose for Her statue; but with Art,
So many due to every part:
You'll find, that in the spoyles of Greece
You'ld want for this Mosaique peece.

Or should you blaze he by the Stars
Youl'd set the Heav'n and earth at jars
For when she smil'd, what was't to say,
That it was like the break of day?
The breake of day doth break our rest,
But when she smil'd it was to please
Each smile imported our hearts ease.
She smiled more then once a day,
And then the Stars in th' Milky way
Did not so lighten, or delight
The gazers wonder, or his sight.

But when those eyes did play their part
They did awaken every heart,
Those eyes, set in the loftiest sphere
(Far above Pride, or Lucifer)
Did pierce all spirits, and disperse
Love and desire through th' Universe.

Who saw, was glad, though like the Fly,
He courted in the flame to dy.
For sweetness dwelled no more there,
Then quick resumption of the aire,
As ready to chastise, and so
The chastned melted like the Snow,
As ready to revive, and then
The quickned lov'd to melt agen.

Her light Eclips'd, when Charles was dead,
And when the other Charles was fled
From Worster, she baptiz'd anew
The Maes in her own teares, and drew
Fresh springs unto the Hague, where they
By fate cannot be dri'd away.
The rest of our poets may reherse
(I am but a Reformade in verse)
But sure, had she erst lived, she had been
Our SIDNEY's Stella, or our Spencers Queen.
