When civil Dudgeon first grew high,
And men fell out they knew not why;
When hard words, Jealousies and Fears,
Set Folks together by the ears,
And made them fight, like mad or drunk,
For Dame Religion as for Punk,
Whose honesty they all durst swear for,
Though not a man of them knew wherefore:
When Gospel-trumpeter, surrounded
With long-ear'd rout, to Battel sounded,
And Pulpit, Drum Ecclesiastick,
Was beat with fist, instead of a stick:
Then did Sir Knight abandon dwelling,
And out he rode Colonelling.

A wight he was, whose very sight wou'd
Entitle him Mirrour of Knighthood;
That never bow'd his stubborn knee
To any thing but Chivalry,
Nor put up blow, but that which laid
Right Worshipfull on shoulder-blade:
Chief of Domestick Knights and Errant,
Either for Chastel or for Warrant:
Great on the Bench, Great in the Saddle,
That could as well bind o'er, as swaddle:
Mighty he was at both of these,
And styl'd of War as well as Peace.
(So some Rats of amphibious nature,
Are either for the Land or Water.)
But here our Authors make a doubt,
Whether he were more wise, or stout.
Some hold the one, and some the other:
But howsoe'er they make a pother,
The difference was so small, his Brain
Outweigh'd his Rage but half a grain:
Which made some take him for a tool
That Knaves do work with, call'd a Fool.
For't has been held by many, that
As Mountaigne, playing with his Cat,
Complaines she thought him but an Ass,
Much more she would Sir Hudibras.
But they're mistaken very much,
'Tis plain enough he was no such.
We grant, although he had much wit,
H' was very shie of using it,
As being loath to wear it out,
And therefore bore it not about,
Unless on Holy-dayes, or so,
As men their best Apparel do.
Beside 'tis known he could speak Greek,
As naturally as Pigs squeek:
That Latin was no more difficile,
Then to a Blackbird 'tis to whistle.
Being rich in both he never scanted
His Bounty unto such as wanted;
But much of either would afford
To many that had not one word.
For Hebrew Roots, although th' are found
To flourish most in barren ground,
He had such plenty, as suffic'd
To make some think him circumcis'd:
And truly so he was perhaps,
Not as a Proselyte, but for Claps.

He was in Logick a great Critick,
Profoundly skill'd in Analytick.
He could distinguish, and divide
A hair 'twixt South and South-west side:
On either which he would dispute,
Confute, change hands, and still confute.
He'd undertake to prove by force
Of Argument, a Man's no Horse.
He'd prove a Buzzard is no Fowl,
And that a Lord may be an Owl;
A Calf an Alderman, a Goose a Justice,
And Rooks Committee-men and Trustees.
He'd run in Debt by Disposition,
And pay with Ratiocination.
All this by Syllogism, true
In mood and figure, he would doe.

For Rhetorick, he could not ope
His mouth, but out there flew a Trope:
And when he hapned to break off
I' th' middle of his speech, or cough,
H' had hard words ready, to shew why,
And tell what Rules he did it by.
Else when with greatest Art he spoke,
You'd think he talk'd like other foke.
But when he pleas'd to shew't, his speech
In loftiness of sound was rich,
A Babylonish dialect,
Which learned Pedants much affect.
It was a particolour'd dress
Of patch'd and pyball'd Languages:
'Twas English cut on Greek and Latin,
Like Fustian heretofore on Sattin.
It had an odde promiscuous Tone,
As if h' had talk'd three parts in one.
Which made some think, when he did gabble,
Th' had heard three Labourers of Babel;
Or Cerberus himself pronounce
A Leash of Languages at once.
This he as volubly would vent,
As if his stock would ne'er be spent.
And truly to support that charge
He had supplies as vast and large.
For he could coyn or counterfeit
New words, with little or no wit:
Words so debas'd and hard, no stone
Was hard enough to touch them on.
And when with hasty noise he spoke 'em,
The Ignorant for currant took 'em.

In Mathematicks he was greater
Then Tycho Brahe or Erra Pater:
For he by Geometrick scale
Could take the size of Pots of Ale;
Resolve by Sines and Tangents straight,
If Bread or Butter wanted weight;
And wisely tell what hour o' th' day
The Clock does strike, by Algebra.

Beside he was a shrewd Philosopher,
And had read every Text and gloss over:
What ever Sceptick could inquire for;
For every why he had a wherefore:
Knew more then forty of them do,
As far as words and termes could goe.
All which he understood by Rote,
And as occasion serv'd, would quote;
No matter whether right or wrong:
They might be either said or sung.
His Notions fitted things so well,
That which was which he could not tell;
But oftentimes mistook the one
For th' other, as Great Clerks have done.
He'd tell where Entity and Quiddity,
The Ghosts of defunct Bodies, flie;
Where Truth in Person does appear,
Like words congeal'd in Northern Air.
He knew what's what, and that's as high
As Metaphysick wit can flie.
In School-Divinity as able
As he that hight Irrefrangable;
A second Thomas, or, at once
To name them all, another Dunce.
For he a Rope of sand could twist,
As tough as learned Sorbonist;
And weave fine Cobwebs, fit for skull
That's empty when the Moon is full;
Such as take lodgings in a Head
That's to be let unfurnished.
He could raise Scruples dark and nice,
And after solve 'em in a trice:
As if Divinity had catch'd
The Itch, of purpose to be scratch'd;
Or, like a Mountebank, did wound
And stab her self with doubts profound,
Onely to shew with how small pain
The sores of faith are cur'd again;
Although by woful proof we find,
They alwayes leave a Scar behind.
He knew the seat of Paradise,
Could tell in what degree it lies:
What Adam dreamt of when his Bride
Came from her Closet in his side:
Whether the Devil tempted her
By a high Dutch Interpreter:
If either of them had a Navel;
Who first made Musick malleable:
Whether the Serpent at the Fall
Had cloven Feet, or none at all.
All this, without a Gloss or Comment,
He would unriddle in a moment
In proper terms, such as men smatter
When they throw out and miss the matter.

For his Religion it was fit
To match his Learning and his Wit:
'Twas Presbyterian true blew,
For he was of that stubborn Crew
Of Errant Saints, whom all men grant
To be the true Church Militant:
Such as do build their Faith upon
The holy Text of Pike and Gun;
Decide all Controversies by
Infallible Artillery;
And prove their Doctrine Orthodox
By Apostolick Blows and Knocks;
Call Fire and Sword and Desolation,
A godly-thorough-Reformation,
Which alwayes must be carry'd on,
And still be doing, never done:
As if Religion were intended
For nothing else but to be mended.
A Sect, whose chief Devotion lies
In odde perverse Antipathies;
In falling out with that or this,
And finding somewhat still amiss:
More peevish, cross, and spleenatick,
Then Dog distract, or Monky sick:
That with more care keep holy-day
The wrong, then others the right way:
Still so perverse and opposite,
As if they worshipp'd God for spight.
The self-same thing they will abhor
One way, and long another for.
Free-will they one way disavow,
Another, nothing else alow.
All Piety consists therein
In them, in other men all Sin.
Rather than faile, they will defie
That which they love most tenderly,
Quarrel with minc'd Pies, and disparage
Their best and dearest friend, Plum-porredge;
Fat Pig and Goose it self oppose,
And blaspheme Custard through the nose.
Th' Apostles of this fierce Religion,
Like Mahomet's, were Ass and Widgeon,
To whom our Knight by fast instinct
Of wit and temper was so linkt,
As if Hypocrisie and non-sense
Had got th' Advousion of his Conscience.

Thus was he gifted and accouter'd,
We mean on th' inside, not the outward:
That next of all we shall discuss;
Then listen, Sirs, It followeth thus....
