THE MORNING QUATRAINS.
The Cock has crow'd an hour ago,
'Tis time we now dull sleep forgo;
Tir'd Nature is by sleep redress'd,
And Labour's overcome by Rest.

We have out-done the work of Night,
'Tis time we rise t' attend the Light,
And e'er he shall his Beams display,
To plot new bus'ness for the day.

None but the slothfull, or unsound,
Are by the Sun in Feathers found,
Nor, without rising with the Sun,
Can the World's bus'ness e'er be done.

Hark!  Hark!  the watchfull Chanticler,
Tells us the day's bright Harbinger
Peeps o'er the Eastern Hills, to awe
And warn night's sov'reign to withdraw.

The Morning Curtains now are drawn,
And now appears the blushing dawn;
Aurora has her Roses shed,
To strew the way Sol's steeds must tread.

Xanthus and Aethon harness'd are,
To roll away the burning Carr,
And, snorting flame, impatient bear
The dressing of the Chariotier.

The sable Cheeks of sullen Night
Are streak'd with Rosie streams of light,
Whilst she retires away in fear,
To shade the other Hemisphere.

The merry Lark now takes her wings,
And long'd-for days loud wellcome sings,
Mounting her body out of sight,
As if she meant to meet the light.

Now doors and windows are unbar'd,
Each-where are chearfull voices heard,
And round about Good-morrows fly,
As if Day taught Humanity.

The Chimnies now to smoke begin,
And the old Wife sits down to spin,
Whilst Kate, taking her Pail, does trip
Mulls swoln and stradl'ing Paps to strip.

Vulcan now makes his Anvil ring,
Dick whistles loud, and Maud doth sing,
And Silvio with his Bugle Horn
Winds an Imprime unto the Morn.

Now through the morning doors behold
Phoebus array'd in burning Gold,
Lashing his fiery Steeds, displays
His warm and all enlight'ning Rays.

Now each one to his work prepares,
All that have hands are Labourers,
And Manufactures of each trade
By op'ning Shops are open laid.

Hob yokes his Oxen to the Team,
The Angler goes unto the stream,
The Wood-man to the Purlews highs,
And lab'ring Bees to load their thighs.

Fair Amarillis drives her Flocks,
All night safe folded from the Fox,
To flow'ry Downs, where Collin stays,
To court her with his Roundelays.

The Traveller now leaves his Inn
A new days Journey to begin,
As he would post it with the day,
And early rising makes good way.

The slick-fac'd School-boy Sachel takes,
And with slow pace small riddance makes;
For why, the haste we make, you know,
To Knowledge and to Vertue's slow.

The Fore-horse gingles on the Road,
The Waggoner lugs on his Load,
The Field with busie People snies,
And City rings with various cries.

The World is now a busie swarm,
All doing good, or doing harm;
But let's take heed our Acts be true,
For Heaven's eye sees all we doe.

None can that piercing sight evade,
It penetrates the darkest shade,
And sin, though it could scape the eye,
Would be discover'd by the Cry.

NOON QUATRAINS.
The day grows hot, and darts his Rays
From such a sure and killing place,
That this half World are fain to fly
The danger of his burning eye.

His early Glories were benign,
Warm to be felt, bright to be seen,
And all was comfort, but who can
Endure him when Meridian?

Of him we as of Kings complain,
Who mildly do begin to reign,
But to the Zenith got of pow'r,
Those whom they should protect devour.

Has not another Phaeton
Mounted the Chariot of the Sun,
And, wanting Art to guide his Horse,
Is hurri'd from the Sun's due course.

If this hold on, our fertile Lands
Will soon be turn'd to parched Sands,
And not an Onion that will grow
Without a Nile to overflow.

The grazing Herds now droop and pant,
Een without labour fit to faint,
And willingly forsook their Meat
To seek out cover from the heat.

The lagging Ox is now unbound,
From larding the new turn'd up ground,
Whilst Hobbinal alike o'er-laid,
Takes his course dinner to the shade.

Cellars and Grottos now are best
To eat and drink in, or to rest,
And not a Soul above is found
Can find a refuge under ground.

When Pagan Tyranny grew hot,
Thus persecuted Christians got
Into the dark but friendly Womb
Of unknown Subterranean Rome.

And as that heat did cool at last,
So a few scorching hours o'er pass'd,
In a more mild and temp'rate Ray
We may again enjoy the day.

EVENING.  QUATRAINS.
The Day's grown old, the fainting Sun
Has but a little way to run,
And yet his Steeds, with all his skill,
Scarce lug the Chariot down the Hill.

With Labour spent, and Thirst opprest,
Whilst they strain hard to gain the West,
From Fetlocks hot drops melted light,
Which turn to Meteors in the Night.

The Shadows now so long do grow,
That Brambles like tall Cedars show,
Mole-hills seem Mountains, and the Ant
Appears a monstrous Elephant.

A very little little Flock
Shades thrice the ground that it would stock;
Whilst the small Stripling following them,
Appears a mighty Polypheme.

These being brought into the Fold,
And by the thrifty Master told,
He thinks his Wages are well paid,
Since none are either lost, or stray'd.

Now lowing Herds are each-where heard,
Chains rattle in the Villains Yard,
The Cart's on Tayl set down to rest,
Bearing on high the Cuckolds Crest.

The hedg is stript, the Clothes brought in,
Nought's left without should be within,
The Bees are hiv'd, and hum their Charm,
Whilst every House does seem a Swarm.

The Cock now to the Roost is prest:
For he must call up all the rest;
The Sow's fast pegg'd within the Sty,
To still her squeaking Progeny.

Each one has had his Supping Mess,
The Cheese is put into the Press,
The Pans and Bowls clean scalded all,
Rear'd up against the Milk-house Wall.

And now on Benches all are sat
In the cool Air to sit and chat,
Till Phoebus, dipping in the West,
Shall lead the World the way to Rest.

NIGHT.  QUATRAINS.
The Sun is set, and gone to sleep
With the fair Princess of the Deep,
Whose Bosom is his cool Retreat,
When fainting with his proper Heat:

His Steeds their flaming Nostrils cool
In Spume of the Cerulean Pool;
Whilst the Wheels dip their hissing Naves
Deep in Columbus's Western Waves.

From whence great rowls of Smoke arise
To overshade the Beauteous Skies;
Who bid the World's bright Eye adieu
In gelid tears of falling Dew.

And now from the Iberian Vales
Nights sable Steeds her Chariot hales,
Where double Cypress Curtains skreen
The gloomy Melancholick Queen.

These, as they higher mount the Sky,
Ravish all Colour from the Eye,
And leave it but an useless glass,
Which few, or no Reflections grace.

The Crystal Arch o're Pindus's Crown
Is on a sudden dusky grown,
And all's with Fun'ral Black o'respread,
As if the Day, which sleeps, were dead.

No Ray of Light the Heart to chear,
But little twinkling Stars appear;
Which like faint dying embers ly,
Fit nor to work, nor travel by.

Perhaps to him they Torches are,
Who guide Night's Sovereign's drowsy Car,
And him they may befriend so near,
But us they neither light, nor chear.

Or else those little sparks of Light
Are Nayls that tyre the Wheels of Night,
Which to new stations still are brought,
As they rowl o'r the gloomy Vault.

Or Nayls that arm the Horses hoof,
Which trampling o're the marble Roof,
And striking Fire in the Air,
We Mortals call a shooting Star.

That's all the Light we now receive,
Unless what belching Vulcans give,
And those yield such a kind of Light
As adds more horror to the Night.

Nyctimine now freed from day,
From sullen Bush flies out to prey,
And does with Feret note proclaim
Th' arrival of th' usurping Dame.

The Rail now cracks in Fields and Meads,
Toads now forsake the Nettle-beds,
The tim'rous Hare goes to relief,
And wary Men bolt out the Theef.

The Fire's new rak't, and Hearth swept clean
By Madg, the dirty Kitchin Quean,
The Safe is lock't, the Mouse-trap set,
The Leaven laid, and Bucking wet.

Now in false Floors and Roofs above,
The lustful Cats make ill tun'd Love,
The Ban dog on the Dunghil lies,
And watchful Nurse sings Lullabies.

Philomel chants it whilst she bleeds,
The Bittern booms it in the Reeds,
And Reynard entring the back Yard,
The Capitolian Cry is heard.

The Goblin now the Fool alarms,
Haggs meet to mumble o're their Charms;
The Night mare rides the dreaming Ass,
And Fairies trip it on the grass.

The Drunkard now supinely snores,
His load of Ale sweats through his Pores,
Yet when he wakes the Swine shall find
A Cropala remains behind.

The Sober now and Chast are blest
With sweet, and with refreshing rest,
And to sound sleeps they've best pretence,
Have greatest share of Innocence.

We should so live then that we may
Fearless put off our Clotts and Clay,
And travel through Death's shades to Light;
For every Day must have its Night.
