Much discontent sate on each others brow,
Their food was thin; however none knew how
To shew their ill resentments, but as Men
Well pacifi'd, agreed to come agen.
But ere that happy day was fully grown,
A dreadful Fire consumes the Kitchen down:
Which Fire began not in His Graces House,
But thither came, and burnt both Rat and Mouse.
On which the Duke, to shun a scorching doom,
Perambulated to Ben Johnson's Tomb,
Where Shakespear, Spencer, Cambden, and the rest,
Once rising Suns, are now setting in the West:
But still their lustres do so brightly shine,
That they invite our Worthies there to Dine,
Where their moist Marbles seem for grief to weep,
That they, but Stone, should sacred Relicks keep:
And some have fancied that they've heard them sing,
Within this place is Aganippe's Spring.
There our ingenious Train have thought it fit
To change their Diet, and to dine on Wit.
First with a free consent they all combine
To pay their visits unto Cataline,
By whom a Damsel stil'd The Silent Woman,
Stands in her rich attire, the like by no Man
Was ever yet beheld; and 'tis her due
To stand near him, b'ing fair, and silent too:
For if some Ladies stood but in her stead,
Their Clappers would go nigh to wake the dead.
Hard by this famous Dame, with well-grown Locks,
Behold an ancient well experienc'd Fox,
Plac'd as a grave adviser, who with care
Cryes out, O rare Ben Johnson lieth there.
Next day His Grace, and all his Guests so trim,
Do Shakespear find, and then they feast on him.
For two such Dishes at one single meal;
Would like two Thieves into the Senses steal;
And such a Surfeit cause, that by their pain,
They'd judg'd unsafe to feed on Wit again.
Our Duke by this time spies a Fairy Queen,
And as a Man surpriz'd with Fits o' th' Spleen,
Such strange infusions did his Passions move,
That he must live to dote, or die in love.
Her to behold, is to be blind, or frantick;
To speak her Fame, would seem as if Romantick.
Her eyes shoot Darts, which at the heart you'd feel,
Who like Achilles Lance, both hurt and heal.
By which, the World may judge His Grace had skill
In Beauties, finding out those eyes that kill.
The great Apelles was for Painting rare,
Yet never drew a Beauty half so fair.
Art may contrive a curious Golden Fleece,
But this Fair Queen is Natures Master-piece.
If Beauties may be made with Painting o'er,
What may Art make of what was fair before?
Have you not in the Morning first of May,
Observ'd the Countrey Lasses fresh and gay:
Or a fair Shepherdess with Garlands crown'd,
With other Numphs to dance the Maypole round?
As Phillis, Amarillis bright, and Chloris,
Excelling Beauties; and there many more is.
Or have you heard of the Arcadian Dame,
The fair Parthenia, whose immortal Fame
'Bove all that we have nam'd, may bear the sway?
But this our Queen is Lady of the May.
To gain acquaintance with this Lady bright,
He thinks it meet some Doxies to invite.
Next day came tripping in a light-heel'd Girl,
Adorn'd with Ribbons, Paints, and Bastard-Pearl.
We need not speak of either Feet or Legs,
Her face seem'd 'nointed with the yolk of Eggs.
Slily into the company she slid,
A colour having got for what she did.
Some blam'd her, saying Sinners us'd to Paint:
Others reply, But she's a seeming Saint.
Nor was there want of Pocket-Pickers there,
Nor Lifters of the careful Tradesmans Ware.
Old Chaucer, who though sickly, full of ails,
From hence collects a Book as full of Tales.
His Neighbor Drayton, who was his Amoris,
Studying to write Encomiums on Authoris.
The Learned Camden's Gravity appear'd,
At which they starting, seem'd as if they fear'd.
One that was grown more crafty than the rest,
Beclouds their fear with this inverted Jest;
"Hither we come, and in the end perhaps
Our entertainment shall be nought but scraps:
Then let us take a taste of these Remains,
And so depart; the Duke a slighting feigns."
Mean time His Grace, whose Passion still grew high
With pangs of Pensiveness, was standing by;
Musing, not minding either Guests, or Meat,
His Busie-brain allow'd no time to eat:
With starv'ling Body, and with ghastly look,
He seem'd more like a Devil, than a Duke.
His Eyes grew gogled, Cheeks were pale and wan;
Sometimes he sighs, anon doth curse and ban.
Presently afterwards is heard to cry,
O that I had not lov'd, or now could die!
Finding no answer to each kind address,
And that she would not love for love express;
He with himself resolves when stronger grown,
To move from thence with thoughts to see the Town. . . .
