CORYDON, THYRSIS, TITYRUS.

CORYDON.
Look, Thyrsis, See the Sun withdraw his Light,
Muffled in darkness and the Shades of Night,
The drooping Birds hang down their flagging Wing,
Nor more the Woods will with their Sonnets ring,
All the inspir'd Musicians of the Sky
Husht in deep Silence and in Sorrow lye,
For Colin's dead who Sung Soft Strains of Love,
In ev'ry flow'ry Vale and ev'ry blooming Grove.

THYRSIS.
Careless of food the Sheep their Lambs forsake,
And o'er the Hills unwonted paths do take,
Thro' all the fields they unrecorded Stray,
No more their Master on his Pipe can play,
No more can handle his Sweet oaten Reed,
Whilst all around his Flocks were wont to feed,
Dear Colin's dead!  the Wonder of the Plain,
Belov'd by Pan, and ev'ry jolly Swain.

CORYDON.
When Colin Sung pleas'd Eccho would repeat
His melting Strains, beyond Expression sweet,
Soft Philomel her Self attentive Stood,
And awful Silence dwelt in ev'ry Wood,
The list'ning Beasts forgot to eat their food.
The River Nymphs forsook their watry Beds,
Above the Streams they Shew'd their Radiant heads.
Each Fawn and Satyr left his private Shade,
To hear the Musick which the Shepherds made.
The haughty Maid who Scorn'd to hear of Love,
His softning Tunes could to Complyance move,
Her tender Breast Soon felt an Am'rous Fire,
And Strait She languished in a kind Desire.
But, ah!  this dear-lov'd Shepherd now is dead,
Gastly and Pale, he in the Grave is laid.

THYRSIS.
The faded flow'rs have all their glory lost,
Roses no more can of Vermilion boast.
The wither'd Lillyes hang their drooping heads,
Ready to fall into their Native Beds.
No Daisies now do paint th' enamell'd Green,
Mildews and Blasts in all the Meads are Seen;
The murm'ring Winds as thro' the Groves they fly,
Tell all their Woes in an unwonted Sigh;
Each aged Tree bows down its Rev'rent head,
The fields and flow'rs do mourn the Shepherd dead,
And Grief and Sorrow all around do Spread.

CORYDON.
Well may we mourn for Colin dead and gone,
For Dear-lov'd Colin all the Muses moan,
The Glory of the Woods, the Shepherds Crown.
The Nymphs Delight, the Love of ev'ry Swain,
The Grief and Wonder of th' Astonisht Plain.
With Sweetest Garlands we'll adorn his Hearse,
And Sing his Triumphs in immortal Verse;
In Such Soft Sadness as he himself did frame,
We'll yearly celebrate his deathless Name,
And mourning Shepherdesses to his Tomb
With richest Spices and perfumes Shall come.

TITYRUS.
But See, the Sun is hasting to the Deep,
In briny Waves his golden Locks to Steep;
Soft Dews are now descending from the Skies,
And Smoke from tops of Villages does rise,
Which mind us that We homeward Should return,
And there abide till the Approach of Morn.
