CORIDON.
Thyrsis, since here we be together laid,
Where these kind Trees embraces weave a Shade,
Sing gentle Youth, and with some tuneful Lay,
Beguile our Labour, and deceive the day;
Thelgon will feed our Flocks; and when they're fed,
Thelgon our Flocks will to the River lead.

THYRSIS.
O Coridon!  Who shall presume to sing?
Who to these Groves shall foreign Numbers bring?
Where once great Spencer did triumphant reign,
The best, the sweetest, of the inspir'd train;
Scarce from the God of Wit such Verse did flow,
When he vouchsaf'd to follow Sheep below:
Here sigh'd the love-sick Swain, here fed his Sheep
Near Mullas Stream, whose Waves he taught to weep:
While hungry'st Herds forgot the flowry Meads,
And the unshorn Hills inclin'd their list'ning Shades;
Oft as I've heard the Muses hither came,
The Muses slighted the inspiring Stream,
Charm'd with the merit of their Colin's fame:
While hoarser Goatherds in some wretched strain
Invok'd the absent Deities in vain.
Ah!  liv'd he now, what Subjects might he chuse,
The deathless Theams of his immortal Muse,
O God-like Ossory his Song would tell,
How much belov'd he liv'd, how much bewail'd he fell.
In War unconquer'd, but betray'd in Peace
By fraud of Death, and snare of a Disease.

Then he'd to late Posterity declare,
How well Great Arran did the loss repair;
That when Good Ormond would his Age release
In no mean Pleasures, no inglorious Ease,
He with like Vertue rul'd, with like success:
So when old Atlas eas'd  his stooping Years,
Alcides only could support the Spheares.

Well hast thou chose, Great Monarch!  well design'd
So vast a Burthen for so vast a Mind!
He all the worth of his long line does show,
As Rivers largest when the furthest flow;
No false Cabal his Vertue could engage,
Flowing unmix'd through a Rebellious Age,
Unmix'd and pure, as the swift Rhonedos take
His liquid way, through dull Geneva's Lake.
But whither am I brought by unknown ways,
Forc'd by the mighty Current of his Praise?

Say happy Bard!  immortal Spencer say!
What numbers would'st thou choose, what Praise display,
When of Armagh thy mighty Song should be,
Of Armagh's Justice and his Piety?
Armagh!  who Innocence secures from wrong,
In whom the poor are rich, the weak are strong,
The Widows Plenty, and the Orphans Song.
Amagh!  the good, whom Men and Angels love,
Chief Priest of Themis, and Chief Priest of Jove:
'Tis he, my much-lov'd Coridon!  'tis he,
Through whom my Flocks thus wander as you see.
He too permits my Verse, nor does disdain
The humble Tribute of a grateful Swain.
O could I!  could I my low measures raise,
Worthy his Name, and worthy of his Praise!
While weary Flocks rejoyc'd in Shades, while Showers
Of silent dew reviv'd expiring Flowers,
While breathing Winds should flow through yonder Grove,
And Shepherdesses should submit to Love;
Armagh should be the Universal Theam;
Our Mountains of themselves should speak his Name,
And all the ecchoing Plains, th' attentive Woods
Of Armagh sing, of Armagh all the Floods.

CORIDON.
Thrice happy Youth, they Gratitude exceeds
The humble measures of our rural Reeds.
O may he oft vouchsafe thy Verse to hear,
When noble Pleasures shall unbend his Care;
But see, the Day Night silently invades,
And the departing Sun doubles the encreasing Shades.
