Ill-natur'd Censurer desist for shame
With thy malicious Tongue to stab my Fame
How durst thou think I live dissolv'd in ease
Or call brave Verse the effects of Idleness?
Or why dost thou object with feeble hate,
I from my my Ancestours degenerate?
That I, (unlike them arm'd with warlike rage)
Whilst in full strength and flower of my age,
Do not in blood and dust my foes engage?
Or that I plead not at the wrangling Bar,
And out-bawl W&mdash;ton at Westminster?
And to gain Gold, damnation, and renown,
Turn a meer Prostitute to all the Town;
With Mercenary breath cant out the Laws,
And take mens Money to betray their Cause?
But all these servile things must with us dye,
The Fame, I seek, shall know Eternity:
My Wit a lasting Monument shall raise,
And all the world shall loudly sing my Praise.
Chaucer shall live, whilst this our Brittish Land,
Or the vast Cornwall-Mount in it shall stand:
Or whilst (almost a sea itself) the Thames
To th' Ocean rowls his tributary Streams.
Sidney's great name shall last, whilst there are Swains,
That feed their Flocks on the Arcadian Plains;
Each Nymph shall tune his Praises on her Reed,
Whilst Beasts, to hear their Songs, forget to feed:
Ecchoing Groves aloud their joys shall tell,
And praise that Swain that sung their Praise so well.
The Majesty of mighty Cowleys name,
Shall travel thro' the farthest Coasts of Fame;
His noble works for ever shall impart,
The height of judgement, Nature, Wit, and Art.
Dryden, great King of Verse, shall ever live,
Judicious Dryden shall himself survive:
Whilst in this Town there's a procuring Bawd,
Or a smooth flatt'ring Whore, that plyes the trade,
A wily Servant, cruel Father known,
The Lawrel shall the matchless Johnson Crown.
Shake'spear, tho rude, yet his immortal Wit
Shall never to the stroke of time submit,
And the loud thund'ring flights of lofty Lee;
Shall strike the Ears of all Posteritiy.
Creeches Sublimest Verse in God-like State,
Shall soar above the reach of humble Fate;
Nor shall he dye 'till the World's mighty Ball
Shall be dissolv'd, and to a Chaos fall.
Spencer's Heroick Lines no death shall fear,
His Fairy Queen, and Shepherd's Kalendar,
Shall be admired, whilst to our Room
The Vassal Isle to pay their Tribute come.
As long as Flames last, Torches, Bows, and Darts,
(Love's great Artillery to conquer Hearts)
Shall witty Strephon's wanton Verse be read
By many a melting Youth, and yielding Maid.
From East to West Sucklings soft Muse shall run,
Swift as the Light, and glorious to the Sun;
Each Pole shall eccho his Eternal Fame,
And the bright Mistress, he vouchsafes to name.
When solid Ir'n shall be eat up with rust,
And Marble Statues crumbl'd into dust,
To Deathless Verse times spight shall do no wrong,
For that must ever last, be ever young.
Kings, and their Triumphs, all the Pomp the boast,
In dark Oblivion would be quickly lost,
Did no blest Poet the vast loss repair,
Making them Deathless, as his Numbers are.
Tagus to Verse must yield altho' it roll'd
In Floods of Treasure, and a Tide of Gold.
Let the ignoble Rout vile things admire,
Let Love and Poetry my Breast inspire,
Let me Apollo, and the Muses quaff,
In full-charg'd Bowls, Castalian Rivers off:
The sacred Heliconian Streams shall be
A Tagus, and a Ganges both to me:
Our life feeds all the envy we shall have,
With us it sleeps in quiet in the Grave:
When dead, the Honours we from Verse receive
Shall guard us, and that Fame our Merits give.
So that when Nature shall dissolve this Frame,
And turn me to that Dust, from whence I came;
Ev'n then o'er Death I shall a Triumph gain,
And the best part of me shall still remain.
