A Worthy Knight was Riding on the Plain,
In Armour Clad, which richly did Contain
The Gallant Marks of many Battels fought,
Tho' he before no Martial Habit sought;
How Warlike ere his Person seem'd to Sit
On a Bold Steed, that scarce obey'd the Bit:
Upon his Breast a Bloody Cross display'd,
The Precious drops for him his Saviour paid;
And on his Mighty Shield the same did bear,
To shew his Faith was made his Valours Care.
Yet with his Comely Looks appeared sad,
Without the sign of Fear or being bad;
Whom now a high Adventure did Command,
Which Great Gloriana, Queen of Fairy Land,
To Honour him, by her especial Grace,
Did on his Worth and trusty Merit place.
Like which his Soul no Earthly Glory deem'd,
If by her Virtuous might he esteem'd:
Wishing, each step his Courser made, to Try
His Prowess with the Stoutest Enemy.
Near to his side an Ass more white than Snow,
A Lovely Lady's weight did undergo;
Whose Form far whiter then the Beast she rid,
Under a Mournful Vail was fully hid,
Which shew'd the Secret Care in Heart she had;
And in a Line a Milk white Lamb she led.
Behind her did a Dwarfe at distance lad,
That wearied seem'd with bearing of her Bag:
Whilst in this Posture as they forward past,
The Day with Clouds was suddenly o'recast;
And pouring forth a horrid Storm of Rain,
To shelter did this Beauteous pair Constrain.
A shady Grove not far from them they spy'd,
Whose lofty Trees adorn'd with Summers Pride,
So broad did spread, that no Coelestial Light
Was there perceivable to Human Sight:
And all within were Paths and Alleys strange,
With Footing worn, and inward far did Range.
The Covert lik'd, with Pleasure they past on,
Joying to hear the Birds Harmonious Song;
Which, therein shelter'd, gratefully declare
By Songs their safety from Tempestuous Air;
Or seem'd in Notes to praise Trees straight and high,
The sayling Pine, or Cedar tall as Sky,
The Building Oak, and Elme the Love of Vines,
The Poplar least for want of Moisture Pines.
Whilst here in unknown Tracts their Persons stray,
Allur'd by pleasing steps till lost their way;
And when the blustring Storm was over blown,
Wandred to find the Path which first was known:
So many Intricacies and turnings seen,
As which to take or leave their doubt was then:
At last advanc'd, they forward did descrye
A Track that seem'd most beaten to the Eye;
Which tho' amidst this Labyrinth 'twas found,
They hop'd might lead to safe and open Ground:
Untill arriv'd unto a Caves deep sight,
When from his Steed this Hero did alight:
And fearless to his Dwarf commits the Care
Both of his Courser and his shining Spear.
Whose fair Companion soon him Caution gave,
As boldly he was moving toward this Cave;
Fearing that peril vainly he provok'd,
Or might find hidden fire before it smoak'd:
Adding whithal how her Soul boded then,
That wandring steps led them to Error's Den.
A Monster God and Man presum's to hate,
From which 'tis wisest timely to retreat:
Your worth preserv'd, as you Attempts restrain,
Where Men the Authors rashness may arraign.
These words thus say'd, her fearful Dwarf apace,
With Timorous looks sand voice bemon'd their Case:
Begging that Instant they'd for safety fly,
Since his Soul, tho' in his small Bulk, cou'd spy
Vast Mischiefs did within that Cave abscond,
And must, if fought, best Human Strength confound.
Whilst with a resolute Brow and hardy Flame,
The Youthful Knight unto this Dungeon came;
And looking in, his glistring Armour made
Some streaks of light within the dismal Shade;
By which he saw the ugly Monster lay'd,
Half way a Serpent horribly displayd:
Whose other Moyety did shape retain
Of Woman loathed, or fit for worst disdain:
And as she in her filthy Den did lye,
Prodigious Knots, with strange Deformity,
Her Monstrous form did variously surround;
Whilst for her Tail and deadly Sting the Ground
Too narrow seem'd, whose spurious Body bred
A thousand Monsters by her Dugs were fed.
And when that unquoth Light she had espy'd,
She Gap'd, that down her Throat her Brood might glide
Which done, this Monster leaves her Den, afraid,
And round her cursed Head her Tail displayd;
Tho' when she had perceiv'd this Champion bold,
She wou'd have turn'd unto her safer Hold:
Declining Light, as her most foul disgrace,
Whose False-hood fear'd Truth's plain and open Face
Which as this Hero saw, he forward went;
Fierce as a Lyon on his Prey is Bent:
And with his Brandish'd Sword the Monster stay'd,
At which enrag'd she yaun'd and lowdly bray'd:
Her deadly Sting and Tail 'gainst him advanc'd,
Whilst from her Head his strong blow downward glanc'd,
And passing thus her hardy sence amaz'd,
Till rage recruited, she more dreadful rais'd
Her ugly Bulk, and Circling it around
With her vast Stern, prodigiously from Ground,
A leap she took, and on his Shield did light,
When more his steady Temper to affright,
Her weight and various Form she round him cast,
That to stir Limb  his mighty Strength seem'd past.
Whose pittying Lady, as she did behold
This ugly Fiend like mighty Thongs enfold
The Comely Person of her Famous chief;
From Heaven she begg'd with Tears his soon relief:
Next urg'd him, howe'er suffring sad Constraint,
That in no force or vigour he should faint;
But choak the Fiend, ere she his Life should seize,
And from his Flesh his Soul with Torment squeeze.
Which Heroin speech his Heart to Fury wrought;
Who striving one Arm free'd, and with that caught
The Monster's Throat, by which enforc'd she spew'd
Prodigious Poison horribly Embru'd
With blackest Blood, and lumps of Gobbets raw;
Besides, Books, Paper, from her Cursed Maw
She then disgorg'd, with Frogs, Toads wanting Eyes,
Numerous as Spawns of Monsters that arise
From Slimy Nile, and with their stench much more
Afflicted him then all her Bodies power.
So nauceously by it his sence annoy'd,
As his fierce Courage seem'd more weak employ'd,
Which when the Serpent saw, her inward Sink
Discharged sholes of Creatures black as Ink
That round his Legs deform'dly soon did crawll,
Tho' in that Plight he felt no hurt at all.
Like to some Man whom sworms of Flyes infest,
And with their Buzzing noisy disturb his Rest;
Until his Hands do interrupt their Course,
Or they with weary'd Wings remove their Force.
Whilst thus enrag'd and conscious of worse shame,
With renew'd Fury to his Foe he came,
And striking her with more than human strength,
Her Head he sever'd from her Body's length:
Whence her Infernal Life flow'd from her Veins,
In Blood that fill'd the Ground with foulest stains.
Her scatter'd Brood, soon as their Parent fell,
Like Imps that nourish'd were by Food from Hell,
Deeply Lamenting did her Corps Surround,
Hoping they wonted entrance to have found.
But unattain'd, they in the Sanguine Flood
Wallowing, drank up their Mother's loathsom blood.
Which sight this gallant Person much amaz'd,
As he with horror on these Monsters gaz'd;
Whose glutted bodies swoll'n, asunder burst,
Kill'd by her Blood which them had kindly nurst
His Foes subdu'd, and by themselves thus slain,
T'wards him in haste his Lady mov'd again;
Saying, Lov'd Man, what Stars admir'd support
Cou'd human Prowess aid with such effort
As your Atchieves, whilst dead before you lies
The Fiend, with all her Brood of Enemies?
Worthy you are the Arms you wear to wield,
And prove 'em further in Some glorious Field;
Since in your first Adventures you compleat
Deeds that assure your future highly great.
Who mounted with his Lady back again,
Follow'd a Path which seem'd to them most plain,
And like a Line that straitest do's extend,
Led them unto this vast Wood's wish'd-for end!
Which pass'd, for new Adventures he prepar'd,
So great in Soul as nought but Heav'n he fear'd.
Far had he travell'd ere he did discern
The face of Man, or worldly Tidings learn;
When he an aged person met by chance,
That clad in black unto him did advance;
Whose Feet were bare, his Beard turn'd hoary gray,
Like Grass by Frost is chang'd on Winters day:
Lowly his Eyes unto the ground he bent,
And knock'd his Breast like Sinners that repent.
Who, when beheld this Chief, with comely Grace
And Looks, that suited well his aged Face,
Gravely salutes him; which no sooner done:
But this brave Champion ask'd, if to him known
Atchievements were, that farthest spread their fame
Or might, if sought, live great on Hero's name.
To whom the aged person thus reply'd,
What you require in course of Life's deny'd
To my observance, whilst most hours I tell
Within the Confines of an obscure Cell;
Where Beads I count, and whither loudest sound
Of warlike deeds, has yet least passage found.
But if of dangers you vouchsafe to hear,
That nearest home imploy the heedful ear:
Know that a mighty Man, of Fury strange,
Wasting this Country far and near doth range.
Vast distance hence in Wilderness most wilde
His Being is, where Beasts of prey more milde
Then him inhabit, whose Confines none pass,
But life must hazard, or their worse distress.
Of such a one I chiefly would enquire,
Reply'd this Knight, inflam'd with Martial Fire;
Judging that he the shame of Honour lives,
That unto Man unjust Oppression gives.
Which brave Resolve, when by his Heroin heard:
She said, Kind Sir, be yet a while deterr'd
Your forward Prowes, since your latest Fight
Requires your Toils should cease at least one Night:
When from untroubl'd Thought, and timely Rest,
You'll manage your ensuing Conduct best.
Thus Phoebus and his eager Steeds, some say,
Bait and refresh before next burning day.
Soon on these words the aged man took hold:
Saying, What Cavalier, of Deeds most bold,
Wou'd not to such a Beauteous Prudence yield,
That has espoused your Perils long in Field?
Wherefore take respite, as she does advice,
That with more force your Glory may arise.
Till when, with hers, let my perswasion joyn,
And rest with me in the small home is mine.
Which courteous offer did on them prevail,
And next he guides them to a pleasant Vale,
Where stood his Dwelling, far removed from Road,
Befitting well strict Hermits sole Abode.
A Chappel too there stood, near which did run
Streams that had from a sacred Fountain sprung.
Pleas'd they arriv'd, tho no Repast found here,
But Rest, more welcome than delicious fare.
Whilst with smooth words this seeming Hermit past
From Tale to Tale, so long as day did last:
Most touching Saints and Popes admir'd of old,
And kiss'd his Beads when of their deeds he told.
Soon had the Night their drowsy pow'rs inclin'd
To welcome Sleep, the Bodys ease and Mind:
Which seen, this old Deceiver gravely leads
Them unto Rooms, where they, instead of Beds,
On rushy Floors their weary Limbs repos'd,
And with fast Sleep their heavy Eye-lids clos'd.
Which when this man of cursed Arts did find,
He to a Cell retires, in which all kind
Of Magick Books and Spells he often us'd,
And cou'd raise Fiends that other Charms refus'd.
Where next, he hellish Poesy repeats,
That Heaven blasphem'd, and prais'd infernal States.
Proceeding thus, until the Stygian Frame
Shook, and awak'd black Pluto's Swarthy Dame:
From whom he summon'd Sprights in number more
Than Flies that swarm by Summers heatful power;
And these, like such, about his head did hum,
Waiting commands from his curs'd lips might come.
Of which two he two approv'd most swift cou'd fly
Through Airy Regions, and Invent worst Ly:
Whilst for his purpose he bids one to stay,
As t' other shou'd his far Commands obey:
Injoyning him with utmost speed to find
The Seat of Morpheus, where, with drouzy Mind,
He near unto smooth Thetis Bed doth rest
Clad in Night's blackest Mantle round his Breast.
Soon having past Oceans wide and deep,
This nimble Spirit found the God of Sleep,
Tho low repos'd in bosome of the Earth,
As seat of winds, or Zephirus moistest Birth;
Where trickling Streams from Rocks their passing find
And joyn their murmurs with the softest Wind.
Rudely he there the sleepy God had pusht,
And next from side to side his Body thrust;
Yet cou'd not so his heavy Sense awake,
Till noise he louder in his Ear did make,
Then sounds of Boreas on the Northern shore,
Where waves to clouds he lifts his rough power
At which the God, raising his lumpish head,
Frowning demanded, by whose Errant sped
He durst the sacred Residence molest
Of him allow'd the Deity of Rest?
To whom the Fiend reply'd, that him had sent
Contending Archimago, whose intent
Must be obey'd, before again he close
His drowzy eye lids, or his Soul repose.
And did require, that from his slumbring Sence,
The falsest Dream he shou'd by him dispence.
The easie God, unwilling to contend
With Magick Pow'r, delivers to this Fiend
A Dream that various Falthoods did contain,
And in his Cave till then had darkest layn:
Like which no Hellish Charms before obtain'd,
Or Poet with remotest Raptures feign'd.
Which done, the slumbring Morpheus void of care
Again repos'd, when mounting high in Air,
The Fiend arriv'd to his enchanting Lord,
Whose wicked Brain did variously afford
Deep Magick Arts, and, e're return'd this Spright,
Of th' other form'd a Beauty to the sight:
Her tender parts compos'd of liquid Air,
And for more wonder seem'd like Una fair.
In Dress and comely Meen resembl'd so,
As Twin to twin did ne're such likeness show.
The Spright that with the evil Dream arriv'd,
With this Fictitious Beauty soon contriv'd
How the bold Cavalier, that sleeping lay,
They might to her alluring Form betray.
To perfect which, with well instructed haste,
Next to his slumbring head the Fiend was plac'd
The Dream had brought, and by its Charms instilld
Thoughts that the Hero's sleep with Lust had fill'd;
Whose resolute heart began to melt away,
As he conceiv'd his Lady by him lay;
And with her loosest Grace did him invite
To foul Desire, and wanton Love's delight:
And tho the Daughter of a mighty King,
Stain'd with the blackest guilt that Lust could bring.
Whom he before allow'd the chastest Flower,
That e're was beautify'd by Natures Power:
Whilst these sad Passions did his Soul affright;
Songs, soft as Hymen's, gave his Ear delight:
To which to Goddess Flora seem'd to dance
With gayest Nymphs, that welcom Springs advance,
Then up he starts, when with amazed Eye
He saw the beauteous Tempter next him lye,
Offr'ing to kiss him with a blushing Grace,
To liken more fair Una's modest Face.
Wounded in Soul at this distastful Shame,
He thought to kill her Body's lustful Frame.
And as he thus resolv'd, with softest Grief
And Tears constrain'd, she courts her Love's relief;
Saying, What Woman's Breast can quench that fire,
Which Stars and Love resistless do conspire?
Who I acknowledge, from my wretched State,
Death due to me, or what is worse, your Hate:
Yet pity well my youthful Love's Effort,
And how for you I left my Father's Court,
To wander far as Fortune you should call;
At which she stopt, whilst Tears did from her fall.
Then speaks and sighs, and weeps as much again,
So like to Grief, as none she seem'd to feign:
To which her Lover with Resentment said,
What makes your Virtue, Madam, now dismay'd,
That lately me incourag'd not to fear
When worst of Monsters did my Foes appear?
Love of your self, said she, and dear Constraint,
Forc'd my Address, to you, and sad Complaint;
Who cou'd this tedious Night find no Repose,
Longing in your embrace my Eyes to close;
Whilst you imploy in careless sleep your Time,
That least should nourish Lovers slothful Crime.
What fascination e're like this did move
The Soul of youthful Man inflam'd by Love?
Yet since in her no actual Ill he knew,
He wou'd not rashly censure her untrue;
But with advis'd deliberation saies.
If Love to me your softer Passion sways,
'Tis Una still in your bright Form I fee,
To whom no Genius bad can liken'd be.
Let not then vain Distrust procure your smart
But to your Rest this gloomy Night depart.
At which, with Grief conceal'd, the Fiend declin'd
Further Attempts against his stedfast mind;
Seeming to yield her false Desires appeas'd,
Since 'twas his will by words she should be pleas'd:
And moving from him with a feigned Grace,
Withdrew, as if she'd find her resting Place.
Long had he ponder'd the uneasie thought
Of her Address, resembling Woman nought;
For whose defence his life he wou'd expose:
Lying thus perplexed till sleep his Eyes did close.
Prone unto ease, o're-toil'd with former Fight,
Yet cou'd not rest for Dreams of frail Delight:
That seem'd to tantalize his drowzy Powers,
With sights of Beauties lying in Beds and Bowers:
And when all these had vanish'd from his Brain,
He thought the former Fiend he found again,
