On a steep Bank, by native Reeds Supply'd,
Where Thames the Med-way weds, his willing Bride,
Thirsis had sat him down his Pipe to mend
Which he in Rage had broke&mdash;
Damon, the Friend whom he most dearly priz'd,
(From Sea Return'd) the pensive Swain surpriz'd,
And Thus accosts him&mdash;

DAMON.
&mdash;Thus 'twas false and vain
The Rumour that Alarm'd Us on the Main,
How You my Friend, with Grief become forlorn,
Had broke you Pipe, and had your Muse forsworn.

THIRSIS.
For Service past at last opprest with Wrong,
What had thy Friend to do with chearful Song?
The late repenting Muse, from Town withdrawn,
To Me return'd, and this forsaken Lawn,
Where on my broken Reed She deeply swore,
Henceforth to tempt me from my Flock no more;
And bid, to thankless Courts and Verse Adieu.

DAMON.
Then wherefore Swain that Pipe fixt up Anew?

THIRSIS.
A Mournful Dirge must now employ my Breath,
Joy I renounce &mdash; but still may sing of Death.
Concern and Zeal will give the Numbers Heat,
And Ormond's mighty Name will make 'em Great.

DAMON.
Should Phoebus and the tuneful Nine retire,
Sound but the Name of Ormond, 'twill Inspire
With more than Poet's or Promethean Fire.

THIRSIS.
Thy Thirsis once to Phoebus did belong,
Nor wholly Unispir'd presumes this Song;
The Muses brought it nightly to my Ear;
Freely I'll Sing, do you as freely Hear;
Nor only Hear, but sometimes bear a Part,
For Damon Thou art Own'd a Son of Art;
Though I the Field and Thou the Sea dost chuse,
One Friendship ever rul'd our Breasts, One Muse:
And as my Lays were wont to Tune the Woods,
The Tritons Thine cou'd raise, and charm the Floods.

DAMON.
Strike, Shrike the Note, begin the noble Strein,
While Earth and Skie the Consort shall maintain,
While Ebbing Thames and Med-way gently creep;
'Tis many Hours to Flood &mdash; till then the Winds will sleep.

THIRSIS.
O Sacred Isis, by whose shady Streams
Oxonian Bards lie rapt in golden Dreams,
Just Tribute pay to thy Great ORMOND's Hearse,

DAMON.
And give Immortal Worth Immortal Verse.

THIRSIS.
When ORMOND Dy'd, ye Floods and Groves confess
(You and your weeping Nymphs were Witnesses.)
If any Care the heartless Heardsman took,
To drive his Heiffers to the Chrystal Brook;
If in that heavy Day, the gen'rous Steed
Would tast the Stream, or in the Pasture feed!
In silent Hive the sickly Bee lay still,
No wanton Kidd would sport, nor am'rous Turtle Bill.

DAMON.
As Nature had for ORMOND's sake Alone
Employ'd her Powr's, and, her lov'd ORMOND gone
Her Care did cease, and all her Task were done.

THIRSIS.
So Eden starv'd when of her Lord beguild,
And Paradise forthwith became a Wild.

DAMON.
When such transcendent Sorrow is the Theam
Fair Cam must Eccho to our Isis Stream:
Nor must the Liffee be deny'd her Share.

THIRSIS.
To Visit his fam'd Court and Palace there
From Cestrian Plains my Muse did Young repair,
And having ORMOND in his State beheld,
(Whose Pomp her faint Ideas far excell'd)
Return'd transported back to her Abode,
And told the Village She had seen a God.

DAMON.
My Fancy, early with Ambition fir'd,
Of ORMOND and his Princely Deeds enquir'd;
What Benefits the Patron had bestow'd,
How much our Europe to his Conduct ow'd
In Peace and War &mdash; Then to the Indian Shore
Remov'd, my Muse her full Instructions bore,
Where in the Plantan Shade She Sung his Name,
Till from their Hills the Savage Natives came,
And, list'ning to the Charming Ayres, grew Tame.

THIRSIS.
Through what surprizing Mazes did he lead
His vast Designs, what secret Passes tread?
Alpheus thus the Ocean do's beguile,
And diving deep with Undiscover'd Toil,
Rises to bless the fair Sicanian Isle.

DAMON.
Long did opprest Brittania hopeless Mourn
For Exil'd Charles and Ormond's wish'd Return,
At last the Bliss, which we so oft Implor'd,
And no kind Pow'r durst promise, was Restor'd;
Then was the Tuneful Shepherd's Song allow'd,
In Peace our Heiffers fed and Oxen Plow'd.
With Honey Drops the British Oak distill'd,
And burden'd Thames Augusta's Market fill'd.

DAMON.
So far the fatal Plenty did Increase,
We Surfeited at last on Wealth and Peace,
Whose Warmth our feebler Warriours did disarm,
Nor could they bear the Sun who bore the Storm;
While Ormond's Constancy, in prosp'rous State,
Maintain'd her Regency as firm as Fate;
Her gen'rous Stream through Seas of Pleasure led,
Clear and untainted as the Fountain's Head.

THIRSIS.
Virtue so feebly now exerts her Pow'rs
We Stalk faint Shaddows of our Ancestors.
If Nature once in these degen'rate Days,
Do's by some vast Effort an Ormond raise.
He's gaz'd at while he Shines, and when he quits the Stage,
In Darkness leaves our Sphear, and quite undoes the Age.

DAMON.
Why wert thou rais'd so high and form'd so bright
To lie with vulgar Mortals wrapt in Night!
Too rigid now, O Fate, thy Law appears,
A Patriarch's Piety should have a Patriarch's Years.

THIRSIS.
So have I seen the Oak, that long had stood
A friendly Shelter to the Underwood,
Green in his Age, till inbred Death destroy'd
The Plant which Storms and Thunder ne'er annoyd.

DAMON.
The Noble Tree is perish'd, while below
The Shrubs survive, and useless Brambles grow.

THIRSIS.
Behold my Friend behold yon Shady Dale,
Now Consecrate and make a Sacred Vale,
An Altar There I've rais'd in scanty Room
The little Emblem of Great Ormond's Tomb.
Whose Front by me with Lawrels shall be Crown'd,
Oft as the circling Year compleats his Round;
Ev'n now, against the Solemn Day's Return,
(Which I must ever Honour ever Mourn)
My Muse has form'd her Tributary Verse,
That faintly her great Patron may Rehearse;
No rural Lay can reach his Character,
But Shepherds Songs are always most sincere.

DAMON.
Nor have my Thoughts been Idle on the Main;
The Muses love Alternates, gentle Swain
Admit in Course a Sailer's artless Strein.

THIRSIS.
What equal Rites ye Pow'rs can be Assign'd
His God-like Person, and more God-like Mind?
So much of Royalty his Presence bore,
That scarce a Sceptre cou'd had added more.
Nature for Sov'reignty his Frame design'd,
Consenting Heav'n inspir'd a Monarch's Mind,
Yet o'er Himself he was content to Sway,
And Thought it Empire Caesar to Obey.
Rest to his Sacred Ashes may it bring
That He was Virtues and the Muses King,
Hast pious Swains to Celebrate his Tomb,
So you may see a joyful Harvest home.

DAMON.
No Greatness e'er more Goodness did impart,
From Heights of State he stoop'd to raise Desert;
To Him the bright Records of Fame were known,
Whose best Examples still became his own.
All Traverses of Fortune he sustain'd,
In All great Ormond's Character maintain'd:
Success ne'er made him swell, nor suff'rings faint,
The first the Hero prov'd, the last the Saint.
Come pious Sailers drench with Tears his Urn,
So may your fraighted Vessel safe Return.

THIRSIS.
In Ormond's stead what can the Stars restore,
What private Grief the Publick Loss deplore?
Those Elogies our scanty Pow'rs deny
Succeeding Times and Poets shall supply.
In Ossory Fate's Triumph was compleat,
Fate to that Hero gave the first Defeat.
Now Destiny ursurps too large a Share,
An Ormond too is more than Earth can spare.

DAMON.
For Ossory our Sorrows still are seen
Fresh as his Fame, and as his Laurels green.

THIRSIS.
Like widdow'd Turtles we refuse Relief,
Renew our Dirges and Indulge our Grief.

DAMON.
The News surpriz'd us, on the distant Shore.
That Noble Ossory was not more!
The Tritons started from their Coral Beds,
The Sea-Nymphs tore the Tresses from their Heads.

THIRSIS.
On Land the Satyrs to their Dens retir'd,
As when of Old the mighty Pan expir'd.

DAMON.
I wonder'd much what sundry Omens meant,
The thrice Advancing Flood thrice backward went;
Forthwith through all th' ashtonisht Coast 'twas spred
The Guardian of the Floods great Ossory was Dead.

THIRSIS.
For her lost Admiral the Ocean groand
The harrass'd Flandrian Plains his Fate bemoand,
Sea-vanquish'd Belgians then were Reconcil'd,
And only Africk's Savage Genius smil'd.

DAMON.
With Pangs my Thoughts that heavy Day recall,
The Wind blew hard, my Vessel craz'd and small,
The Samphire-Man his des'prate Trade gave o'er
The Fisher drew his Netts and Boat a Shore,
Then Thirsis then the Muses watcht their time,
And forc't me Thus to sooth my Grief with Rhyme.
Oh where are now your Charms ye Briny Deeps,
Ye winding Coasts, smooth Sands and craggy Steeps,
What's Traffique now?  What reason can you give
To make forlorn desponding Damon Live.
Or can it e'er account for half my pain,
To stretch on Shells, and view the rolling Main,
Or breath my Griefs to these cold Rocks in vain.
For OSS'RY's sake a Sailer I became,
And OSS'RY now is nothing but a Name?
To Us no more &mdash; but to the Skies a Star&mdash;
When next the raging Elements are at War
When safe on Shore my fellow-Sailers sleep,
That desp'rate Hour I'll take to launch into the Deep
Farewell all Lands, the tempting Syrges swell,
Ev'n Thou that holdst my OSS'RY's Dust, Farewell.

THIRSIS.
How Charming-sad O Damon is thy Verse!
Not Halcyons such or dying Swans rehearse.

DAMON.
When from these Regions first he took his flight,
The Impious Age fear'd an Eternal Night:
Yet ev'n that vast Eclipse not quite our Sphear depriv'd,
Our Ossory was gone, but Ormond still surviv'd.
Whence can we now expect another Dawn,
Our Sun and Phospher both eternally withdrawn?

CLOTIN.
It Thunders on the Left, auspicious Sign,
And Lambent flames surround my Heroes Shrine:
Fresh Odors breathing thence, the Air perfume,
The Neighb'ring Groves their wonted Songs resume;
My Lambs begin to sport, my Ewes to Feed:
Whence can this Vital Influence proceed?
Behold a Second Ormond bright as Day,
Breaks forth the chase our sullen Fears away!
Heav'n early did for our Relief contrive,
That Ossory and Ormond should survive
In One great Heir that do's from Both derive.

Ye Guardian-Pow'rs that have receiv'd in Trust
Great Britains Honor, and add th' Arrears
Of Ossory's shorten'd date, to his Successors years;
That in his finish'd Circle may be seen
What Ossory's compleated Course had been.
No Heights of Glory are too hard to trace,
For Ormond's Heir, Ally'd to Beaufort's Race.
In this ye Pow'rs your Care you have express'd,
To Fame and his great Genius leave the Rest.
