And next revolving in his Anxious mind,
If letter'd Man could Explanation find
Of thoughts abstrusely on his sense prevail'd,
And must by deepest Science be unvail'd.
None like the famous Polyaster He
Deem'd sit to Salve this seeming Mystery;
By Emblem might the Kings concern unfold,
And what of Dornland was to be foretold.
Polyaster who might weighty Story Fill,
With all that could illustrate humane skill;
Having to wonder Arts and Science shown,
And was then Poet more Prophetick known.
Whose then aboad near Oxfords confines stood,
Adorn'd with shades and the adjoyning flood.
Like Mansions by the wiser Ancients chose,
When they'd from Worldly cares themselves repose.
Or had on purpose thoughtfull leisure took
T' unfold the secrets of Great Nature's Book.
Him Dornland visits when most Mortall eyes
Were clos'd by sleep, and only restless skies
To Usher night their sparkling Tapers lent,
Till the Worlds eye survey'd the days extent.
Coelestiall Motions, with their Sublimer Powers,
Observ'd by him in many useful hours
Which carefull life was in this Visage seen,
Where in his comely Age did intervene
Wrinckles, which shew'd his Soul enough opprest,
Tho' in that Warfull Time no sword depress't
The Peacefull Contemplation of his mind
Who did like the great Syracusean find
Esteem that spread with largest wings of Fame,
And with his Accurate knowledge blaz'd his Name.
His Lifes Strict Method did example raise,
The Reg'lar Ancients most approved praise,
With Contemplation so dispos'd that he
To Heaven and Time might still least debter be.
Whose precious Hours his richest thoughts employ'd,
When he, as life's best Steward, them enjoy'd.
Admiring how the Prodigalls of Time
Durst, that debauch'd, Annex unto their Crime.
As if the Worlds swift eye did beams bestow
For slothfull Mans Excentrick use below:
Or Stars, that ow'd the Sun vast sums of Light,
Did shine to aid the wicked deeds of Night.
With Prayer he first began, that aid divine
Might to his Sublime thoughts assistance joyn;
Nor did he close his Eyes at Night to rest,
Till kneeling he had own'd days founder blest.
Wondring that Mortalls largely cou'd receive,
And Heaven, the Author, Thanks so sparing give.
Nor more his outward form of life compos'd,
Then fitting what his inward Gifts propos'd.
His Food with best prov'd Temperance did agree,
When healthfull Life had long Antiquity:
And Simple meats the bodies Strength refin'd
More suitably Assistant to the Mind.
This wisely Antient Contemplation rais'd,
When Temp'rate life and Science were most prais'd.
Nor pains or Conduct did he then remit,
That more divine might raise his sublime Wit.
And when his Studies Intervall requir'd,
By that diversion too his Soul aspir'd.
His Room of Contemplation duely grac'd
With niches, where Compendiously were plac'd
Statues of such whose Learning did impart
Truths Maxims, Crown'd by Mathematick Art.
That like the Queen of Science does convey
Proofs too Divine for Men to disobey.
Of these he most Intensively beheld
Such as to Brittains Glory most excell'd.
And whom of all had most admired been,
The Matchless Napier, here was likened seen.
Who seem'd by Figure in his hand to bear
His Logorithim-Tables which his fame declare.
Above what former demonstration wrought,
Or Problems by men held inspir'd were Taught.
Of whom another Euclide well might learn,
Or Ptolomy his works outdone discern.
Whilst this fam'd Scots Arithmetick does teach,
What Power of Numbers ne're before could reach.
And easier farr did Archimedes find
Sea-Sands outsum'd then Napiers profound mind.
Whose Numbers added Multiplication serve,
Subtracted nothing from Division swerve.
Which Art did to Astronomy Convey
High Computation his most facile way.
And taught Geometry to lay aside
Old Sines and Tangents long a tedious Guide.
Wonder of Man that gave such knowledge Birth
As did at once oblige both Heaven and Earth.
Next him Polyaster did with Reverence view
The Famous Briggs, whose Admir'd products shew
The Science in his Orb he did extend,
And, unto Former, improv'd Talents lend.
The Artfull Staturist so his form exprest,
That his fled looks seem'd warm in Stone to rest.
Beholding Strictly as with lively sight,
The Trig'nometrick skill he brought to light;
Which lines did represent in Bodies Cutt,
Before him on a neat Supporter put.
Beside the Reg'lar Solids, and the Art
His shadows on them did to hours impart.
Next whom renowned Outred's Figure stood,
No less approv'd the Carvers Art in wood.
Whereon a Girdle round his Loyns was wrought
Deep Analytick questions by him Taught.
At which, as emblem'd, hung that wondrous key,
His Mathematick Clavis did Convey.
These Fam'd, with many other Learned were
Preserv'd in Image by Polyaster's Care.
His Mind, Invited, by their Figures seen,
To be in Science great as they had been.
By which Impulse he oft computed things,
Remotest Art to humane Knowleg brings.
Revolving if the Circles long sought Square,
Past Computations do aright declare.
And how the Wonder of the doubled Cube
Had been attempted, or a Clearer Tube
Then Galileus skill had brought to pass
By Optick Doctrine, or his wondrous Glass.
Leaving Men doubtfull whether Orbs above
Did Worlds within their rapid Circles Move.
Or how the Earth did to his Tube appear
To rowl, instead of Sun, her Annuall Sphear.
Like which high Theorems did Polyaster find
Results of his no Less Stupendous mind.
Who by his Mighty knowledge did Compleat
Productions worthy all Precedent great.
Next these the mighty Hobs he well beheld,
Whose Modern Soul with Gyant reason fill'd,
O're-match'd past Phylosophick strength of Thought,
By Science in his Nat'rall Method Taught.
Discharg'd of Terms, the Schools Imposed Dress,
Where Art Fram'd words, the proper sense few guess;
And in their Letter'd Ocean undescry'd
The Chart that more refin'd cou'd knowledge guide.
Whilst this vast man oppos'd the Worlds mistake,
And did his Learning Nature's Patron Make.
To Honour whom Polyaster did allow
His Form in Cedar Curious Carv'd shou'd show.
And as that Substance does in Trees exceed
The height of all in Forrests Tallest Breed,
So the Transcendent Genius of his Mind
Was, in his Likeness, thus to Fame design'd.
Nor less was his peculiar value shown
To Persons whom the Muses did renown,
Their outward Forms with such high Life design'd,
As nought seem'd miss'd but their Aetherial Minde:
Above Apelle'es Pencill to express,
Or what from stroke of Sculpturists Men guess.
No Imag'd Looks or Artfull Features tell
How the Souls Venus does with Mortalls dwell.
Which Sublime Thought by Polyaster weigh'd,
And with this Islands Glory far display'd,
Through Powerfull Sons of Phebus by whose sense
The Mighty Nine best raptures did dispense.
With these around their brows were Lawrells plac'd,
Large next to those Apollo's Temples Grac'd:
Of which, he Chaucer, Spencer, much beheld,
And where their Learned Poems most excell'd.
Tho' words now obsolete express their Flame,
Like Gemms that out of Fashion value Claim.
Near these in Statue witty Shakspeare stood,
Whose early Plays were soonest next to Good.
And Like a vast Dramatick Founder show'd
Bounties of Wit from his large Genius flow'd.
Whose worth was by this Learned duely weigh'd,
As in Effigie there he stood display'd.
But more stupendous to his Soul appear'd
Proportions which great Johnsons Form declar'd,
Whose deep Effigies he wish'd longer date
Then Polish'd art in stone cou'd Celebrate.
Admiring next the wit that Crown'd his Bays,
Whose Scenes were works, when most fell short of Plays.
So aptly by his Characters exprest,
That shew'd his artfull hand and Learning blest.
Whilst other Dramaticks like Planets were,
Rambling to find their Center near his Sphere.
A Province Phebus did on him bestow,
When made his Wits Lieutenancy below.
As duly he did Fletchers Soul explore,
The Stages most Luxurian witty Store:
With worthy Beamount to his Figure Joyn'd,
Adapted most the Muses Twins in mind:
Whose Genius so conspir'd that Beamount Might
Divide with wit by equall right.
Nor less then past some present he admir'd,
Whose work for Envys darts too high Aspir'd:
Or black detraction or abusive Pen,
Fowl'd oft to Stain the worth of living Men.
Thus did Polyaster usefully transmit
These wondrous Authors best of Art and wit
To Future Age, wishing their Souls renown,
Might long survive their Forms in wood and Stone.
Admiring Dornland had beheld a space
This Learned Worthys Comely years and Grace,
Before his wonder gave expression way
By words to utter what he meant to say.
Who thus with grave humility began,
Father of Science more then Soul of Man
Has yet Imbellish'd, or by Heaven allow'd
To look through Vails which inmost Nature shrowd;
Or Starry Providence, that to Vulgar sight
Appears like Spangles, which Vain Souls delight.
As if that Heaven profusely did bestow
Such eyes above as saw not things below.
O, tell me then, if to thy search 'tis shown,
What Future issue may be sadly known
Of this outrageous War, or thence shall be
The King and Publicks future Destiny. . . .
