Parent of Day!  whose beauteous Beams of Light
Spring from the darksom Womb of Night:
And midst their Native horrours show,
Like Gems adorning of the Negro's Brow.
Not Heaven's fair Bow can equal thee,
In all its gaudy Drapery:
Thou first Essay of Light, and pledge of Day!
That usher'd in the Sun, and still prepar'd his way.

Rival of Shade, Eternal Spring of Light!
Thou art the Genuine Source of it:
From thy bright unexhausted Womb,
The beauteous Race of Days and Seasons come.
Thy Beauty Ages cannot wrong,
But spight of Time thou'rt ever young:
Thou art alone Heavens modest Virgin light,
Whose Face a Veil of blushes hides from human sight.

Like some fair Bride thou risest from thy Bed,
And dost around thy Lustre spread:
Around the Universe dispense
New life to all, and quick'ning influence.
With gloomy Smiles thy Rival Night
Beholds thy glorious dawn of Light:
Not all the Wealth she views in Mines below,
Can match thy brighter Beams, or equal Lustre show.

At thy approach Nature erects her head,
The smiling Universe is glad:
The drowsie Earth and Seas awake,
And, from thy Beams, new life and vigour take.
When thy more chearful Rays appear,
Even Guilt and Women cease to fear:
Horrour, Despair, and all the Sons of Night,
Retire before thy Beams, and take their hasty flight.

To Thee, the grateful East their Altars raise,
And sing with early Hymns thy praise:
Thou dost their happy Soil bestow,
Inrich the Heav'ns above, and Earth below.
Thou risest in the fragrant East,
Like the fair Phoenix from her balmy Nest:
No Altar of the Gods can equal Thine,
The Air is richest Incense, the whole Land thy Shrine.

But yet thy fading Glories soon decay,
Thine's but a momentary stay:
Too soon thou'rt ravisht from our sight,
Bore down the stream of day, and overwhelm'd with light.
Thy Beams to their own ruin haste,
They're fram'd too exquisite to last:
Thine is a glorious, but a short-liv'd State,
Pity so fair a Birth should yield to Fate.

Before the Almighty Artist fram'd the Skie,
Or gave the Earth its Harmony:
His first Command was for thy Light,
He view'd the lovely Birth, and blessed it.
In purple Swadling-bands it struggling lay,
Not yet maturely bright for Day:
Old Chaos then a chearful Smile put on,
And from thy beauteous Form, did first presage its own.

Let there be Light, the Great Creator said,
His Word the active Child obey'd:
Night did her teeming Womb disclose,
And then the blushing Morn, its brightest Off-spring rose.
A while the Almighty wond'ring view'd,
And then himself pronounc'd it good:
With Night, said He, divide the Imperial Sway,
Thou my first Labour art, and thou shalt bless the Day.
