What Charms you have, from what high Race you sprung,
Have been the Subject of our Daring Song;
But when you pleas'd to show the lab'ring Muse,
What greater Theams your Musick could produce;
Our Babling Praises we repeat no more,
But hear, rejoyce, stand silent, and adore.

The Persians thus, first gazing on the Sun,
Admir'd how high 'twas plac'd, how bright it shone:
But, as his Pow'r was known, their Thoughts were rais'd;
And soon they worship'd, what at first they prais'd.

Eliza's Glory lives in Spencer's Song;
And Cowley's Verse keeps Fair Orinda young:
That you in Beauty, and in Birth excell,
The Muse might dictate, and the Poet tell;
Your Art, no other Art can speak, and You,
To shew how well you play, must play anew:
Your Musick's pow'r your Musick must disclose;
For what Light is, 'tis only Light that shows.
Strange Force of Harmony that thus Controuls
Our inmost Thoughts, and sanctifies our Souls:
While with its utmost Art Your Sex could move
Our Wonder only, or at best our Love.
You far beyond both these your God did place,
That your high power might worldly thoughts destroy;
That with your Numbers you our Zeal might raise,
And, like himself, Communicate your Joy.

When to your Native Heaven you shall repair,
And with your Presence Crown the Blessings there
Your Lute may wind its strings but little higher,
To tune their Notes to that Immortal Quire.
Your Art is perfect here, your Numbers do,
More than our Books, make the rude Atheist know,
That there's a Heaven, by what he hears below.

As in some Piece, while Luke his Skill exprest,
A Cunning Angel came and drew the rest:
So, whilst you play, some Godhead does impart
Harmonious Aid, Divinity helps Art;
Some Cherub finishes what you begun,
And to a Miracle improves a Tune.

To burning Rome when frantick Nero play'd,
Viewing that Face, no more he had survey'd
The raging flames; but struck with strange surprize,
Confest 'em less than those of Anna's Eyes.
But, had he heard thy Lute, he soon had found
His Rage eluded, and his Crime atton'd;
Thine, like Amphion's Hand had rais'd the Stone,
And from Destruction call'd a Fairer Town:
Malice to Musick had been forc'd to yield,
Nor could he Burn so fast, as thou couldst Build.
