A comely Dame, in Sorrowe's garments drest,
Where Thames's crystal waters gently creep,
With her soft palme did beat her ivorie breast,
And rent her yellow locks; her rosy cheeke
She in a flood of brackish teares did steep:
RACHEL she seem'd, old ISRAEL'S beauteous wife,
Mourning her Sonnes, whose silver cord of life
Was cut by murderous HEROD'S fell and bloody knife.

Betwixt her lillie hands, the Virgin held
Two TESTAMENTS; the one defac'd with rust,
Vanquish'd with time, and overgrown with eld,
All spoil'd with careless spots, all soyl'd with dust;
It seem'd the same, the which JEHOVAH just
With his celestial finger did engrave;
And on, the top of smoaking Sinai, gave
To Him, whom PHAROAH'S Daughter found in watry cave.

The Other seeming fresh and fayre, yclad
In velvet covers, filleted with gold;
White bullions, and crimson ties it had;
The pumish'd leaves were seemly to behold.
That spotlesse Lambe, which trayterous JUDAS sold
For price of blood, which streamed from his side,
Them guilt, when in Jerusalem he dy'd,
For to redeeme his Love, his Dove, his Deare, his Bride.

THEOLOGY, for so men call'd the maid,
Upon these Volumes cast her moysten'd eyes,
And who shall now (quoth she) since POCOCK'S dead,
Find out the Treasure, that within you lies
Shadow'd in high and heavenly mysteries?
And who shall now (quoth she) to others tell,
When as, the World's great Grandsire ADAM fell,
Banish'd from flowery Eden, where he first did dwell.

What meanes that monstrous man, which Babel's King
Did in a troubl'd slumber, once behold,
Like huge GOLIAH, slayne by DAVID'S sling,
With dreadful head, and curled locks of gold,
With breasts, and mighty arms, of silver mould?
With his swoln belly, and large sides of brasse,
With iron legs, with feet of mingled masse?
One part compos'd of clay, the other iron was.

What meanes the Lion, and the Eagles wings?
The savage Bear, that in his horrid jaw
Three ribs of some devoured carcase brings?
The Leopard, which wise BELTESHAZZER saw
With direful mouth, and mighty-murdering paw?
What means that fearful, hideous, hellish Beast,
With iron teeth, and with his horned crest?
All these, and thousands more, by POCOCKE were exprest.

'Twas He, that branch'd MESSIAH'S sacred stem
In curious knots, and chain'd his glorious race
From princely ADAM to the noble SEM;
So down to Him, that had CHONIAH'S place,
And from his Sonnes, to MARY full of grace,
A pregnant Maid, a blessed virgin Wife,
The Daughter of her Sonne, Which gave him Life,
Which did redeem the World, from Sin and Satan's strife.

'Twas He, that grav'd the names of JACOB'S Sonnes
In the two Beryls, upon AARON'S breast;
In Sardius RUBEN, which as water runs;
SIMEON in Topaz, baser than the rest;
LEVI in Emerauld, for Doctrine best:
JUDAH in Carbuncle, like Heav'ns eye;
In Saphir ISSACHAR, like th' azure skie,
In Turkis ZEBULON, which near the sea doth lie.

Dan in the flowery Hyacinth cut;
In Agate NEPTHALI; and warlike GAD
In bloody Amethyst; ASHER is put
In Chrysolite; the Beryl JOSEPH had;
Young BENJAMIN, old JACOB'S own sweet lad,
In Onyx; each within his several stone
Our great BEZALEEL carv'd; who now is gone
To praise the Lambe, and Him that sits upon the Throne.

Nor did He only turn the sacred Page
At home, like Pedant pale, in musing mood;
But with the feeble steps of hoary age
All holy Ground, a Pilgrim wise and good
Patient he pac'd, and saw where dropping blood
Hoar Calvary his dismal summit rears,
Where, Angel meek, pure PIETY appears
Chain'd to the naked rock, wasted and wet with tears.

Ye sacred MUSES, that in Shiloah swim,
And in celestial deawe do dippe your quill,
The which, your PHAEBUS, mighti ELOHIM,
In silver-streaming channels doth distill
From top of Hermon, and of Sion Hill;
As you, your great CREATOR'S praise rehearse,
Ah!  lend one broken sigh, one broken verse,
One doleful Ode, or Hymne, to deck his sable herse.

And You, poor JEWES, the issue of old SEM,
Which did in honie-flowing Canaan dwell,
And sway'd the scepter of Jerusalem;
Until some snake-hair'd Furie, sent from Hell,
Did you inflame with rage, and malice fell,
To put your Lite to death; ah!  now repent
For murdering your Lord!  ah!  now lament
His Death, that would have brought you into Japhet's Tent.

And ye sage Men, who covet ADAM'S tongue,
Which did remain in HEBER'S holy line,
When the aspiring heaven-scaling throng
Above the big-swoln clouds did seek to climb;
(And is there then such pride in earthly slime?)
Do You lament this silver pinion'd swan,
As white as Salmon-snow, a happy man,
That spake like ADAM'S selfe, the speech of Canaan.

Besides the Greeke, plenteous in words and sense,
The Chaldee wise, th' Arabian profound;
The Latine, pleasing with his eloquence;
The braving Spanishe, with her lofty sound;
The Tuscane grave, with many a laurel crown;
The lisping French, which fits a Lady vain;
The Germane, like the people good and plain,
The Englishe, pure and rich, his native countrie's strain.

Ah scoffing ISMAELS, do not offer wrong
Unto his quiet Urne; do not defame
The silver touch of that harmonious tongue;
Peace dirty mouths, ah!  hold your peace for shame,
Void not your gall upon a dead man's name!
But wake, O West-wind, come O South, and blow
With your myrhe-breathing mouth, sweet odors throw
Into the empty aire, from POCOCKE'S tombe below.

This said, the Virgin vanished away,
And Heav'n did put his mourning mantle on:
HYPERION'S Childe the Father of the Day,
That, with his blazing lad, full brightly shone,
Cloathed in Sable his star-glistering Throne:
The clouds from their swolne eyes shed cristal show'rs,
And all for him who lives in silver bowers,
An Hallelujah sings, with Thrones, and glorious Pow'rs.
