In happy Ages past, when Justice reign'd,
The Muses too their Dignity maintain'd;
Were only then in Shrines and Temples found,
With Innocence instead of Lawrel crown'd;
Anthems and Hallelujahs did resound.
In these Seraphick Tasks their hours they pass'd,
Pious as Sybil's, and as Vestals, chast
They justly then were stil'd the Sacred Nine,
Nor were the Heav'n-born Graces more Divine.
Like them with Heav'n they did Alliance claim,
And wisest Kings their Votaries became:
Who, though by Art and Nature form'd to Reign,
Their Homage paid amongst the Muses Train:
They thought Extent of Empire less Renown,
And priz'd their Poet's Wreath above their Prince's Crown.
Heav'ns Praise was then the only Theme of Verse,
Which Kings of Earth were honour'd to rehearse.
Their Songs did then fair Salem's Temple fill,
And Sion was the Muses Sacred Hill.

At length, transplanted from the Holy Land,
To Pagan Regions pass'd the Sacred Band;
In Greece they settled, but with lessen'd Grace,
And chang'd their Manners as they chang'd their Place.
Here Poetry, beginning to decline,
First mingled Humane Praises with Divine.
Yet still they sung alone some Worthy's Name,
And only gave restoring Hero's Fame.
But grew at last a mercenary Trade,
The gift of heav'n the price of Gold was made.
Brib'd Poets with Encomiums did pursue
The worst of Men, and prais'd their Vices too.
They gave destroying Tyrants most Applause,
Who shed most Blood, regardless of their Cause.
If meerly to Destroy can merit Fame;
Famines and Plagues the larger Trophies claim.

But this and worse, with our licentious Times
Compar'd, in Poets were but Venial Crimes.
That Poetry which did at first inspire
Coelestial Rapture, and Seraphick Fire,
Her Talent in Hell's Service now employs,
The Prostitute and Bawd of Sensual Joys.
On Mischief's side engages all her Charms,
Against Religion her Offensive Arms:
Whilst Lust, Extortion, Sacrilege pass free,
She points her Satyr, Virtue, against Thee,
And turns on Heav'n its own Artillery.

But Wit's fair Stream when from its genuine Course
Constrain'd, runs muddy and with lessen'd Force.
Our Poets, when Deserters they became
To Virtue's Cause, declin'd as much in Fame.
That Curse was on the lewd Apostates sent,
Who, as they grew Debauch'd, grew Impotent.
Wits short-liv'd Off-springs in our later Times
Confess too plain their vicious Parents Crimes.
No Spencer's Strength, or Davies, who sustain'd
Wit's Empire when Divine Eliza reign'd.

But sure, when Foreign Toils will time allow
Our Age's Hydra-Vices to subdue,
Victorious William's Piety will chase
From these infected Realms th' Infernal Race;
And, when Alarms of War are heard no more,
With Europe's Peace the Muse's State restore.
