On a soft Bank of Camomel I sate,
Or shaded by two mournful Yews;
(Doubtless, it was the will of Fate
I this retreat shou'd choose)
Where on delicious Poetry I fed
Amazing Thoughts chil'd all my blood,
And almost stops the vital Floud;
As Dryden's sacred Verse I read.
Whilst Killing Raptures seiz'd my head,
I shook, as if I had foreknown
What All-Commanding Fate had don;
What for our Sov'reign Dryden had design'd,
Till Sleep o'rwhelm'd my Brain as Sorrow had my mind;
To think that All the great, ev'n He must dy,
And Here, in Fame alone, have Immortality.
When, in my dream The Fatal Muse
With Hair dishevell'd and in tears,
Melpomene appears
Upon my Throbbing heart her hand she lay'd,
Her hand as Cold as Death; and thus she said,
Least of my Care, be calm'd!  No more Just Heav'n accuse!

Eternal Fate has said: &mdash; He must Remove;
The Bards Triumphant wait for him Above.
To Everlasting Day and Blest Abodes
(The seats of Poets and of Gods)
He's gon, to fill the Throne
Which None cou'd fill but He Alone;
The Glorious Throne for Him prepar'd;
Of Glorious Acts The Glorious, Just Reward.
See, see, As He Ascends on high,
The sacred Bards attending in the Sky!
So low do they Descend
To meet Their Now Immortal Friend!
Immortal There Above and Here Below,
As long as Men shall Wit and English know
Th' unequal'd Dryden must be so,
Immortal in his Verse, in Verse unequal'd too.
She said, &mdash; Then disappear'd; when I
Cou'd plainly see all that was don on High.

I saw Above an universal Joy,
Perfect, without alloy;
(So Great as ne'r till then had been,
Since the sweet Waller Enter'd in)
When all that sacred Company,
Brought the triumphant Bard from Ours to Heaven's great Jubile.
That was the occasion of his Happiness,
And of our sorrows (surely, that the Cause,
Call'd hence Heav'ns Monarchs praise to help t' express
And to receive for that his Own deserv'd applause.
There wanted still one in the Heav'nly Quire,
Dryden Alone was their Desire,
Whom for the sacred song th' Almighty did Inspire.
'Twas Pitty to Us that so long delay'd
His Blest Translation to Eternal Light;
Or, otherwise may we not be Afraid
'Twas for the sins of som who durst presume to Write?
Who durst in Verse, in Sacred Poetry,
Ev'n Heav'n's own design bely,
And damn themselves with utmost Industry!
For this  may we not dread
The mighty Prophet's taken from our head,
And tho the fate of these I fear,
I in Respect must venture here.
A Long and Recking War was sent,
Of Common Sins, a Common Punishment;
To the unthinking Crowd the only Curse;
Who feel no Loss but in their Purse:
But (Ah!)  what Loss can now be worse?
The Mighty Pan has left our mournful shoar;
The Mighty Pan is Gon, Dryden is Here no more.

When to the Blest, Bright Region he was com,
The Vulgar Angels Gaz'd, and made him room:
Each Laureat Monarch welcom's him on high,
And to Embrace him all together fly:
Then strait the Happy Guest is show'n
To his Bright and Lofty Throne
Inferiour there to None.
A Crown beset with litle Suns, whose Rays
Shoot forth in foliages resembling Bays,
Now on his Head they place:
The round him all the Sacred Band
Lowdly Congratulating stand:
When, after Silence made,
Thus the Sweetest Waller said
Well hast Thou merited, Triumphant Bard!
For, once I knew Thee Militant Below,
When I my self was so;
Dang'rous thy Post, the Combat Fierce and Hard,
Ignorance and Rebellion still Thy Foe
But for those litle pains see now the Great Reward!
Mack-Fleeknoe and Achitophel
Can now no more disturb thy peace,
Thy Labours past, thy Endless joys encrease,
The more thou hast endur'd the more Thou dost Excel.
And for the Laurels snatch' from Thee Below
Thou wear'st an Everlasting Crown upon thy Hallow'd Brow.

The Bard who next the New-born saint Addrest
Was Milton, for his Wonderous Poem Blest;
Who strangely found, in his Lost Paradise, Rest.
Great Bard ( said he) 'twas Verse alone
Did for my Hideous Crime attone,
Defending once the worst Rebellion.
A Double share of Bliss belongs to Thee,
For thy Rich Verse and thy firm Loyalty,
Som of my Harsh, and Uncouth Points do ow
To Thee a Tuneful Cadance still Below.
Thine was, Indeed, The State of Innocence, Mine of offence,
With study'd Treason and self-intrest staind;
Till Par'dise Lost wrought Paradise Regain'd.
He said: &mdash; When thus our English Abraham,
(In Heaven the second of that Name,
Cowley as Glorious there as Sacred here in Fame,)
Welcom, Aleides, to this Hapy Place!
Our Wish, and our Long Expectation here,
Makes thee to us more Dear;
Thou great destroyer of that Monstrous Race,
Which our sad, former seat did Harrass and Disgrace,
Be Blest and Welcom'd with our Praise,
Thy Great, Herculean Labours don,
And all the Courses of thy Zodiac run;
Shine here to us a more Illustrious Sun!
But see!  Thy Brethren Gods in Poetry,
The whole Great Race Divine,
Ready in thy Applause to joyn,
Who will Supply what is Defect in me.

Rochester once on Earth a Prodigy,
A happy Convert now on High,
Here begins his Wond'rous Laies,
In the Sainted Poets Praise.
Fathomless Buckingham, smooth Orrery,
The Witty D'Avenant, Denham, Suckling too,
Shakespear, Natures Kneller, who
Natures Picture likest drew,
Each in their turn his Praise pursue.
His Song Elab'rate Johnson do's try,
On Earth unus'd to Elogy
Beaumont and Fletcher Sing together still,
And with their Tuneful Notes the Arched Palace fill
The Noble Patron Poet now do's try,
His Wondrous Spenser to outvy:
Drayton did next our Sacred Bard Address,
And Sung Above with wonderful success.
Our English Ennius, He who gave,
To The great Bard kind welcom to his Grave,
Chaucer, the Mighty'st Bard of yore,
Whole Verse cou'd Mirth, to saddest Souls restore,
Caress'd him next whil'st his delighted Eye,
Express'd his Love, and thus his Tongue his Joy,
Was I, when erst Below (said he)
In hopes so Great a Bard to see:
As Thou my Son, Adopted into me,
And all this Godlike Race, some equal ev'n to Thee!
O!  tis enough &mdash; Here soft Orinda came,
And Spritely Afra, Mules Both on Earth;
Both Burn'd here with a Bright Poetic flame,
Which to their happiness above gave birth;
Their Charming Songs, his entertainment close,
The mighty Bard then smiling, Bow'd and 'rose.

Strait from his head, each takes his Laurel'd Crown,
And on the Golden Pavement casts it down:
All prostrate fall, before Heavens High Imperial Throne;
When the New Saint begins his song Alone
Won'drous even there, It was Confest,
Scarce to be Equal'd by the Rest:
Herbert nor Crashaw, tho on earth divine,
So sweetly cou'd their Numbers Joyn!
When (Lo!)  the Light of twenty thousands Suns,
All in one Body, shining all at once,
Darts from Th' Imperial to this Lower Court;
A Light which They but hardly cou'd support!
Then the Great Anthem was begun,
Which all the Hallowd Bards together sing;
And by no Choir of angels is out done,
But by The Great Seraphic choir Alone,
That day and night surround The Awful Throne
Of Heavens Eternal King:
Even they Themselves did the Great Chorus fill,
And brought the Grateful sounds to Heav'n's High Holy'st Hill.

My Soul shook with the Sacred Harmony,
Which soon alarm'd my heart;
I fancy'd I was falling from on High
And waken'd with a start;
Wak'd (said I?) surely no; I did not sleep;
Can they be Dreams which such Impressions make?
My soul do's still the Blest Idea's keep;
And still (methinks,) I see 'em tho awake!
The other thrones too, which, tho vacant, shone
With greater Glory then the sun,
Come fresh into my mind;
Which once will lose their lustre by their Bards outdon,
When fill'd with those for whom they are design'd,
Upon their fronts I saw the Glitt'ring names,
All written in Coelestial flames.
For Dorset what a Pallace did I see!
For Montague!  And what for Normanby!
What Glory's wait for Wycherly!
For Congreve, Southern, Tate, Garth, Addison?
For Stepney, Prior and for Dennis too;
What Thrones are void, what Joys prepar'd and due?
The Pleasant Dear Companion Cheek
(Whom all the Great altho at Midnight, seek)
His Glorious wreath must wear and endless Joys pursue;
And for Motteux, my Gallic Friend,
The like Triumphant Laurels wait;
Tho Heav'n, I hope, will send it  very late,
E'r they or He to their Blest Seats ascend.
Tis in Their Verse, next His, that He must Live;
Next His, Their Lines Eternal Fame can give,
Then all the Happiness on Earth I know
Is, that such Godlike Men as they are with us still below.
