I.
O Love!  my drooping Genius raise
Beyond these Organs Sight;
So high from Earth now let me soar,
That this dull World may be discern'd no more,
But lost in Streams of Light.
O mighty Love!  my Genius raise;
New Tune my Lyre, refine my Lays;
Teach me thy wondrous Works to praise,
And to adore thy Might.
With lofty Thoughts, with heav'nly Fire,
Do thou my humble Muse inspire,
That she an Hymn may sing,
Unto the God of Love, unto th' Almighty King!

II.
Before this Universe was made,
Or Planets twinckling Beams display'd;
Before swift Time his Race begun,
And measur'd out the Year;
Before that beauteous Light the Sun
Adorn'd the central Sphear;
Ev'n then th Almighty Pow'r, which now doth move
In all these wond'rous Works, mov'd in it self by Love.
Himself he lov'd because all Good and Fair,
And of himself begot th' Eternal Heir
In his own Likeness&mdash;.
With whom, and with the Paraclete
(Who did from both proceed)
He reign'd in boundless Realms of Might,
With Pow'r immense, and Glory infinite
Oh Holy Spirit!  Pledge of Love,
Eternal Spring of Grace;
Look down upon me from above,
And guide me in thy Ways.
Teach me the Wonders by thy Mercy wrought;
And give me Language to reveal my Thought.

III.
Almighty Love!
Still pregnant with prolifick Grace,
Created an inferiour Race,
His second Sons, tho' not so great,
Yet th' Ambassadors of Fate,
Numberless Hosts of Angels, fair and bright,
Refulgent in their Maker's Light,
Who round th' Eternal-Throne
In seraphick Lays,
Warble sacred Hymns of Praise
To the great Three-One.
Thus they joyfully attend,
And on their Maker's Will depend:
Lucid Beams around them play,
Night does never there appear,
But Time is one continual Day
All serene and clear.
Thus they worship, thus attend,
And their Perpetual-Now in endless Pleasure spend.

IV.
Thrice happy Spirits, if Free-will
Had never been abus'd,
In Glory you'd have triumph'd still,
Had ye not employ'd so ill
What for your Proof was us'd.
But fatal Pride!
Then first began to shew it's Face,
Impatient of a second Place,
And by the Prince of Angels did surprize
Num'rous heav'nly Deities;
Who big with Envy, and primeval Pride,
(O dire Ingratitude!  till then unknown,)
Blasphemously their Maker's Pow'r defi'd
And strove to seize his everlasting Throne.
Thus they impious Battle wage,
And in their dreadful Sin persist,
The faithful Spirits vig'rously resist,
And in a deathless War engage.

V.
Incens'd at this their bold Essay,
God sent out his consuming Fire;
Discomfited they fly away
And from his Wrath retire,
'Till, as preordain'd, they fell
From those glorious Realms of Light,
To the deep Abyss of Hell,
And Everlasting Night.
In Flames of Sulphur Fiery-chains,
With unutterable Pains,
Doom'd for Evermore to dwell;
Full of Impotence and Spight,
Despair and Rage improve their Hell,
And magnifie the beatifick Sight
From whence they lately fell,
But if these Spirits, who were blest
With greater Strength than Mortal e'er possest,
Could not their Innocence secure,
While Good and Bad was in their Pow'r;
With how strict a Care ought we
To watch, and fear our own Sincerity;
Who tho' but frail and brittle Clay,
Yet have a Will elective, and as free as they.

VI.
But lo!  Almighty Love,
boundless in Mercy as in Might
To greater Condescensions yet doth move,
And in a mortal Progeny delight:
Which by Eternal Prescience he decrees
To fill th' angelick Vacancies.
'Twas then this Universe he form'd,
With World's, with Sun's, with Atmospheres adorn'd.
No sooner was th' All-potent-Fiat spoke,
But beauteous Light, from dismal Chaos broke,
'The feather'd Choire inhabit Liquid air,
The Seas with Various Fish replenish'd were,
And num'rous Animals on Earth appear.
Thus having fitted all for his new Creatures Use,
Which Earth might yield, or Seas and Air produce
The great Creator did, of humble Clay,
Erect a Structure nobler far than they.
Gave him a beauteous Body, Godlike Soul
Form'd by the Archetype Divine;
A sov'reign Pow'r to rule this Sphear,
And all of mortal Line,
But ah, forgetful of his Maker's Grace!
Too soon, alas!  he forfeited his Place;
Incurr'd that Penalty was justly due,
And all his Race in endless Bondage threw.
Vast were the Miseries they must sustain,
And Sin, and Death, at once began to reign:
No Glympse of Comfort then could Adam see,
No Hopes of Ransom left to set him free,
Mortals could ne're the mighty Debt repay,
Nor pityting Angels, greater far than they.

VII.
When Lo!  the same unbounded Love,
That did this Wretch create,
Descends from his bright throne above,
And takes upon himself his abject Creature's Fate;
Clad in an humble human Form,
Tho' perfect God, yet perfect Man,
Was of a spotless Virgin born,
And the all saving Work began.
He bore our Sins, his Father's Wrath,
The heavy pressing Load of both:
And that strict Justice might be satisfied,
He freely offer'd up himself, and for Man's Sake he died.

VIII.
Oh boundless Love!  Oh Mercy Infinite!
What poignant Grief and Pain,
Did'st thou bright King of Glory, Lord of Might!
For us thy Slaves sustain!
What Pangs!  what Terrors didst thou undergo!
What Floods of Mercy!  from thy Side did flow!
Each Drop of Blood thou freely for us gave,
And yet each Drop could Worlds of Sinners save,
O beauteous Image of thy Father's Face!
Eternal God of Love, and Grace!
How can we this thy wond'rous Act require,
Or how sufficiently adore thy Might,
Nor Lives, nor Holocausts dost thou demand,
From those thy Blood redeem'd,
Nor rigid Penances command,
As some have fondly dream'd,
Love!  grateful Love, is all thou do'st require,
Oh then with grateful Love our Souls inspire!
First to thy self, as is most justly due,
Next unto all who bear thy Image too,
UNFINISHED.
