Shall Britain and Applauding Nations round
The Fame of Kentish Loyalty resound,
And Britain's Poets, who should loudest raise
Their Voice, and give the first Alarm to Praise,
Shall they be Mute?  They who in Glory's Cause
Should fire th' Admiring World into Applause!
No &mdash; Spencer first from Faiery-Land shall rise,
And Milton from his Bow'r of Paradise,
Waller return from blissful Fields of Light,
E'er such Desert shall want Poetick Right
And sink, Unsung, to deep Oblivion's Night.

Rest sacred Shades; enjoy your Blissfull Dream,
(Gay as the Banks of your Elysian Stream)
And trust our Bards with This Inspiring Theme,
A Theme can raise Ebb'd Poesie's low Veins
To the Spring Tide of your high-flowing Streins;
And will the Current of our Song supply,
'Till Thames and Medway's honour'd Streams are Dry.

Fame sound thy Trump; so loud a Summons send
May make the starting Universe attend,
'Till to remotest Lands the News arrive,
That England's Ancient Worth is still Alive.
That still in Kent are Kentish Spirits found;
Illustrious Heirs of Ancestors Renown'd:
A Province still Deserving, as of Old,
To stand in Honour's Register Enroll'd,
Invincible by Foreign Steel or Gold.
This more than Roman Virtue Caesar found,
This to the Norman Torrent set the Bound,
And forc'd the haughty Conqu'ror to Compound.

Go &mdash; tell th' amazing Danger that o'er-spread
And gasping Europe struck with Pannick Dread,
Surpriz'd and Stunn'd; yet not with bold Alarms
Of gen'rous Warr, but with Infernal Charms;
By undermining Frauds, the dire Intrigues
Of perjur'd Faith, and Violated Leagues:
And when her Only Prospect of Defence
Hung dismally Eclips'd in dark Suspense;
When hasty Ruin did his Passage force,
And Succour mov'd with Interrupted Course,
How Glorious was the Zeal, that, e'er too Late,
Call'd for Redress against the Gen'ral Fate!
The Zeal, that, for expiring Nations sake,
Did then the Gen'rous Resolution take,
Great Britain's slumbring Genius to awake.

When to the listning World Loud Fame shall this have told,
As Loud shall That Reply, &mdash; 'Twas Great and Justly Bold.

But what exalted Streins of Loyal Verse
Can, Gen'rous Souls, Your Loyal Sense rehearse?
What Language, what Encomiums can requite
Your's, that have done the Royal Hero Right?
As our Restorer's Merits You Confess,
Immortal Songs of Praise shall Your's express:
Whose just Asserting matchless William's Fame,
Has cancell'd an Ingrateful Age's Shame.

See, see!  how all th' Officious Muses strive,
Which Earliest with her Garland shall arrive,
To greet and Welcome Home th' Illustrious FIVE.
Who with no common Sense of Glory Fir'd,
But such as their Advent'rous Cause requir'd,
The Noblest Test of Dignity have stood,
By Glorious Daring for the Publick Good;
And to the Stock of Lustre which they drew
From ancient Pedigrees, have added New.

An Enterprize of Honour that shall give
A Theme for Fame, while Fame and Honour live:
Brave in Acceptance, in Performance Brave,
Of that Important Charge their Countrey gave.
Undauntedly for timely Aid to call,
When the black Tempest was prepar'd to fall;
And Fate's high Sea came on to swallow ALL.

What Muse can so such Envoys prove Unjust,
Who have so well discharg'd their Country's Trust?
Sculpture already has perform'd her Part;
But &mdash; far beyond Her's, or the Muse's Art,
Indelibly their Figures are exprest,
And livelier Drawn in ev'ry Gratefull Breast.
