Say, learned Garth, around whose Favourite Head
Thy own Apollo's Wreaths are doubly spread!
In whom alone his darling Arts are joyn'd,
To heal the Body, and exalt the Mind.
At this Approach discolour'd Sickness flyes,
And at thy Song detested Folly dyes;
Prescribe, we live; or sing, and we are wise.
Say, for thou knowest, what different Structures have
The Wise, the Fool, the Sordid, and the Brave?
You Nature thro' her hidden Windings trace,
To you she stands confess'd, and shews her secret Face,
Her various Workings, and her various Springs,
How these she moves, how those her End she brings.
The humane Fabric perfectly you know,
Its wondrous Order none so plainly show,
Unlock the various Chambers of the Brain,
That do of things the Images retain.
Or else peruse with all thy Skill and Art,
Observe with narrow Scrutiny the Heart.
The Passions Seat, the Rendezvous of Blood,
The purple Court, where every crimson Flood
Frequent, and swift her refluent Duty pays;
Then thro' ten thousand wandring Channels strays,
Till her hot rolling Streams she back again conveys.
A brisker Motion there is surely found,
When generous Passions in the Heart abound.
Than when upon the Throne of Life preside
Cold Avarice, dull Envy, and false Pride;
For sure the Winter of their Icy Reign
Must all the Currents of the Blood constrain;
But if Existence force them just to roll,
Scarce moves the Heart, scarce waggs the sluggish Pool.

But shou'd the Structures, as the Forms, agree,
So vast a Difference in the Minds we see,
That both their various Springs of Being prove,
The bad infernal Guile, the Good the Pow'rs above.
These stamp'd by Heav'n, disclose the bright Impress:
Those manifest of Hell, their gloomy Lire confess.
Yes , yes, O Garth!  from different Seeds we rise,
Too long have been conceal'd the Honours of our Race.
Knaves now no more shall boast permitted Fame,
Nor with the Sons of Heav'n one common source shall claim;
The Muse unfolds their Infamy, and vindicates our Name.

Hear!  hear!  and listen to my wondrous Song,
Hear Truths reveal'd, that have been hid too long!
And thou, oh Muse!  from whom the Vision came
Inspire thy Prophet with no vulgar Flame.
Like Garth's, give Force and Numbers thus they'l be
Worthy my awful Theam, and worthy thee.
Thou saw'st the dark Prometheus form his Clay,
And with pernicious Skill the Work of Heav'n Essay.

On Cambria's pleasing Coast there is a Place
The favorite Seat of Happiness and Peace.
From Courts by Faction driv'n, from Fields by War,
From Towns by Business, and the wrangling Bar;
From many by the Common Ills of Life;
From more, by that domestic Plague, a Wife;
From most by Envy, Pride, and a vain Lust of Strife:
Hither, sweet Happiness and Peace remove,
Attended by the Muses and by Love.
A Range of lofty Hills, like Nature's Pale,
Surround the Margin of the flowry Dale:
In which a thousand bubling Springs arise,
And to the Vale a thousand Rills suffice
With wandring Streams diffusing all around
Joy to the Eyes, and Fatness to the Ground.
Frequent, tho' small, the shady Woods appear,
To Herds from schorching Suns the Noon-tide Lare.
At equal distance from the ambient Hills,
Above the Plain an easie Hill there swells,
Whose Navel dimpl'd with a hollow Round,
Of Five Luxuriant Fountains rich is found,
Whose infant Currents soon united, flow
In a just Stream, into the Grove below,
Where deeper yet a suddain Valley falls,
Thro' which o'er broken Rocks, the tumbling Water brawls.
Each verdant Bank a Range of Trees o're-spreads,
That shuts the Sun out with contiguous Shades:
Insidious Reptiles ne're this Place infest,
No vexing Insects your Retreat molest,
But all is peaceful here, and consecrate to Rest.
Beneath the Covert of this lovely Grove,
Distress'd by Fortune much, but more by Love,
Extended on the Mossy Couch I lay,
And lost in unavailing Thoughts the Day.
In Thoughts on Fate and various Man intent,
Whose Inclinations, of so different Bent
Wou'd fain perswade, as different a Descent.
Here they are prone, and tending all to Earth,
Aspiring there they own their Heav'nly Birth;
Here generous, brave for publick Good design'd;
Degenerate there, and to themselves confin'd,
Form'd for the Scourge and Ruin of Mankind.
Till tir'd, at length, with the perplexing Theam,
And lull'd to Slumbers by the tumbling Stream,
Her journeying Thoughts to ease the weary'd Mind
Her self in Sleeps renewing Arm reclin'd.

No sooner downy Sleep my Eye's had clos'd
And all these Tumults of my Thoughts compos'd;
But Fancy, lightned by some Ray divine,
Open'd this glorious Visionary Scene.
The darken'd Skies, with suddain Light o'erspread,
On all the Grove its beamy Honours shed;
Then, from the wide dividing Heavens, there came
A Tide of Glory and a Burst of Flame.
Thence, on the Wings of the obsequious Winds,
Urania swiftly to the Grove descends;
A thousand Graces in her Train appear,
With all the various Hours, and Seasons of the Year.
In shining Azure was the Muse array'd,
And both her Dress, and Mien confess'd the Maid
O'er heav'nly Songs presiding; in one Hand,
Her Lyre she held, the other bore a Wand,
Which (with those heav'nly Terrors almost dead)
She gently wav'd around my drooping Head,
Thence Vigour flow'd, and Force to see, and hear
What else cou'd not be born by humane Sight or Ear.
No mortal Bard can e'er recite her Song,
Or tell what wondrous Sounds flow'd from her heavenly Tongue.
Free sung the Muse from Arts of barbarous Rhime,
No whorish Charms she sought from that false jingling Chime.

Hear!  hear!  my Son; and give attentive Ear!
(For thus the Muse smil'd gracious, and begun:)
What thy revolving Thoughts in vain Pursue,
And in uncertain Ballance weigh, I sing;
To Humane-kind the Cause and Rise of Woe!

When the foredoom'd and pointed Period came,
Love, Power and Wisdom, form'd this various Globe
Hills, Groves, and Fountains from the Earth up sprung
At the dread Summons of th' Omnifick Word,
And Myriads then of living Creatures rose.
Of Fish, of fowl, of Reptiles, and of Beasts
That swim the Flood, and wing the Air sublime,
That creep, or walk the Surface of the Ground.
But Earth, Heav'ns Image, wanted yet a Lord,
Capacious of her Glory, unknowing that
To Food confin'd the mute Creation lay.

In God's own likeness form'd, Imperial MAN,
By Heav'nly Mission sent, is own'd her Lord:
Earth leaps for joy, laughs Nature all around,
Fountains and Floods, Aerial Hills, low Dales,
With flowry Meads, and shady Groves, exult;
Fish, Fowl, and Beast, and every living Thing,
As in one common Jubilee rejoicing,
In solemn Pomp, receive their welcom Lord;
Their Lord by Kindred Earth to them ally'd,
To Heav'n ally'd too by th' Etherial Fire,
That animates, and moves his Earthy Form;
Pure was his Soul, breath'd from the Mouth of God,
With Good dilated, and inform'd by Love,
Love, Wisdom, Power, in Minature design'd
From the Eternal Architype above,
The Maker's Image wondrously express'd.
It boots not long to dwell on things well known,
Or tell how Sathan from his dark abode,
The gloomy Mansions of eternal Woe
To heav'nly Light, with black intent, aspir'd;
How he to Eden wing'd his horrid Flight,
And how polluted, with his unblest Feet,
The secred Soil; nor with what hellish Arts,
He cou'd deboch, and win the Heart of Man
Pure, innocent as yet, and with the Love
Of God repleat, to break his sole Command,
The finale Sanction and the easie Chain
That bound him close to Happiness, and Life!
Hells boasted Conquest, and permitted Wreaths,
(Success to Hells Confusion only gain'd)
As known, with speedy Course I will decline:
Suffice it us to sing of things conceal'd
Till now from all of mortal Race, and show
That Sathan soon his disapointment found
Short of his promis'd End, with maim'd Success,
The Rage of Triumph o'er, his Conquest views
Th' infernal Chief, views, and remits his joy;
No more exults in Trophies won from Man:
Who from this Foil to greater Glories rose
Thro' Goodness, Infinite, and boundless Love.
For Maker-Love with one Offence untam'd,
Exerting more its Energy, decreed
That the offended for the Offence shou'd dye,
And to Repentance promis'd Heav'n set wide.

This heard the hellish Pow'rs, with dire Amaze,
Scarce more confounded, when by Michaels Sword
Driv'n headlong down from the celestial Plains
Into the gloomy Depths of Hell profound.
This Sathan long, within his inmost Mind,
With envious Pain revolving cou'd not bear.
But to release these Cares a Council call'd
To Pandemonium there to find out ways
To keep, if not encrease, their Empire got
O'er Man, that now uncertain seem'd, and small.

To Council came the haughty Peers of Hell,
Of empty Titles proud and vain of Name,
And for pernicious Skill in Mischief rais'd
To Dignities and Place, and black Renown.
And now in dark debate their Chief surround,
Old Mammon, Belial lew'd, and Belzebub
Projector boasted of the Fall of Man,
With Moloch homicide most closely join'd,
Cunning with Violence in cursed League,
A Friendship most destructive to Mankind!
Dagon and Peor, with a Thousand more,
Frequent and full th' infernal Senate sate.

When Sathan from his burning Throne arose,
And thence, with Sorrow ill conceal'd, thus spoke.

O my Compeers!  O!  Brothers of the War,
We wage, by common Vote, with Rival Man.
Confed'rate Pow'rs!  for what?  For what Avail
Are our unweary'd Stratagems and Toyls!
Our Force, or Counsel?  what have we obtain'd
Through the long Tract of seventeen hundred Years
But a precarious perishable Pow'r,
If here we stop, and not to be maintain'd?
New to Success, we boasted once Mans Fall
As promise sure of Empire, and command
Entire, over all this favorite Race
Of partial Heav'n.  Like us offending, we
Hop'd them, like us, the certain Lot of Hell.
Scarce were our Triumphs o're for that Success;
The formidable Anger just pronounc'd,
And Man, with All things, for his Sin, Accurs'd
By Heav'n, but Heav'n relenting, swift to Love,
Attones it self, and takes him to new Grace!
And as that Favour were too small, allots,
Allots Repentance for his future Crimes!
Retrenchment strong!  Impregnable Redoubt!
To which, who in the latest Hour escapes,
Renders our Arms, our Force, our Wiles all vain;
Tis guarded round with the tremendous Hand
Of Heav'ns high Pow'r, and all its Hostile Troops.

And still in Man of Goodness there are found
No small Remains; extinguish'd not by Sin,
Tho pale, and dim, and of a sickly Hue,
Not yet of Hell recover'd; brave Desires,
Friendly to Humane-kind, and ancient Love;
A thirsty Wish of an Immortal Name,
Earnest of Being immortal after Death.
These hated Seeds of Good in time may spread;
Th' Etherial Fire, from whence they all proceed,
Active within, may purge the drossie Mass,
That cloggs and cumbers now its rising Flames,
And climb, with pointed Spires to Heav'n upright,
Unmingl'd with our smouldring Sulphur, pure.
This Ill to shun, and to destroy this Fort,
Or Man far from his Succour to divide,
Is now the Cause and Aim of your Debate
Mature, and Wise.  Ye Senators of Hell,
Free be your Votes, be all your Reasons free,
The common Cause demands a free Consult.

He said, and on his Throne again reclin'd.
The whole Divan applaud their Monarch's Care
Of publick Good, and with obsequious Bows
Prostrate their Zeal avow.  Forthwith they all
Into Committees manifold divide.
Much time, on Ways and Means in vain is spent;
An each Projector of th' Infernal Realm,
Is duly heard, but with no kind Result,
Desertive all they were, or so were thought.

Then Belial, Fiend of most pernicious Wit,
To the attentive Audience thus begun.

Time waste me now no more in vain Consult,
On Projects dubious and uncertain hopes;
From Mans own Nature must we draw the Means
O'er Man a lasting Empire to maintain.
If we look backward, with a wise Survey,
On the experienc'd Weaknesses of Man,
Woman we find is their Luxuriant Source.
For Man, alone impregnable remains
With Good demonstrative, and Reason arm'd.
But fortify'd to us, the goodly Fort
To Woman naked, and unguarded lies,
Fearless of Danger from that trusted Friend;
But through that trusted Friend the Fort we gain!
By Reason ill defended, Woman yields
An easie Conquest, half by Passion won;
Brib'd by her Eyes, and blinded by her Charms,
To us himself, deluded Man, betrays.
To all who've labour'd in this common Cause,
And any Wreaths of Victory can boast,
I now appeal, if you from Female Pride,
From Female Lusts, and Rage derive not most?
A ready Proof of this from Eve I draw,
His Help design'd, she prov'd to Man his Bane!
Tho' new to Life, the recent Work of Heav'n.

If Woman made by Heav'ns indulging Hand,
And by Heav'ns animating Fires inform'd,
Where yet the latent Seeds of Good remain,
And into Action frequently emerge
In spight of Passion, thus assist our Cause,
What may we not from kindred Woman hope,
Entirely made by amicable Pow'rs
Of Hell combin'd?  If short of beauteous Eve
In native Charms, with Art, and Cunning rais'd
To equal Force, and Pow'r to damn Mankind?
With pompous Shows, and ceremonious Rites
By her may Man be won from God to Us;
Exalted on our Altars then we'll stand,
And Hell more Worshipers obtain, than Heav'n
Thus to Repentance intercept the way
And Man must be entirely then our own.

He said &mdash; and all around Applauses loud
Confirm the Project and to Mischief swift,
Strait to the bold Essay they all adjourn.

An hundred Years Experiments they trye,
And with enquiring Art they Man explore;
His Organs study, with their Form and Use.
Till Perfect in the intricate Machine,
Hells dark Anatomists their Work begin.
The Year was now in its decrepit Age,
And far remov'd, shot sable Rays the Sun;
The Winds contending glomerate a Storm,
And Iron Clouds deform the Face of Heav'n:
The naked Trees beneath the Tempest bend,
And Ocean rous'd his furious Surges rolls
Tumultuous, and begets whole floating Isles
Of slimy Foam, the Manufacture Foam
Sathan, and all his gloomy Train, collect,
And of this Spongy Mass their Woman form.

This is the Venus fabled by old Greece,
Sprung from the Froath of the revolving Tide,
A Goddess infamous of lawless Love.

With heedful Art the beauteous Frame they mold,
Shape all her Limbs with Symmetry exact,
Her Feet her Legs, her Thighs, her Arms, her Hands;
Her Fingers taper; round her rising Breasts;
All o'er her Body delicate was seen
Proportion charming; Harmony of Parts.
Oval her Face, and Ebony her Hair,
Her Eyes were shining Jet, the glittering Balls
Enclos'd with pearly white, for Motion turn'd
Voluble and piercing, and with Snares repleat.
A fertile Source of never-failing Tears,
Near these were plac'd, obsequious to her Will
To ebb and flow just her Arts require.
Her Acquiline Nose, a cruel Pride denotes,
A Thirst of boundless Sway, and Lust untam'd.
Her swelling Lips ambrosial Dews distil,
And, when with artful Grace dividing, show
Teeth equal, small, than orient Pearls more bright.

Th' infernal Artists view'd with glad surprize
The wonderful Result of all their Pains;
With Joy the gloomy Sire surveys the Maid
Yet Lifeless Image, yet unripe her Charms;
Pygmalion like her unripe Charms he view'd,
With Joy ally'd too near to fond Desire,
She like Pygmalion's Ivory Maid disclos'd
Beauties enough to ruine half Mankind.
Helen, for whom contending Nations fought,
Whose Eyes since set the Trojan Tow'rs on fire,
Tho sprung from this, was never half so fair.

Vain of their Work, with impious Boasts they all
Pronounce her Beauteous as the Heav'n-born Eve,
With imitative Art too well indeed
They drew the Body's Form, of Earthly Birth,
The Mind, of Heav'nly Seed, long banish'd Heav'n,
They cou'd not form, nor so to form desir'd.
Wisdom, and Virtue, and Seraphick Love,
The Heat that makes the Humane Soul aspire
To Heav'n, and Heav'nly Deeds; is what they'd shun,
From Hell they seek the animating Fire,
And breath the blew Eruption in her Breast.
This Motion gives, and imitated Life;
Of Thoughts a narrow Circle, and confin'd
To what is Ill, but most averse to Good.
Her Soul (if I may call the curs'd Compound
By that Celestial Name of Heav'nly make)
Hells various Qualities obscene compose.
His cruel Nature Moloch first threw in,
Sathan false Pride; Voracious Avarice
Mamon supplies; and Belial raging Lust,
Belzebub Cunning, and disguising Arts,
And with united Bounty all bestow
Hypocrisie, false Tears, Embraces false,
Desires still prone, and of a downward Bent,
And tending all to primogenial Hell;
In Harlot-Arts, and Snares for heedless Men,
Knowledge profound; as Languishments, and Smiles,
Oaths false as numerous, and Perjuries
As numerous too as her false Oaths and Vows.

Thus form'd, and thus endow'd, Hell adds fresh Arts,
To please the Eye, and Man's fond Heart betray,
New and bewitching Modes of Dress devis'd.
She was the foremost, who, to look more fair,
And to recruit the Fire of dying Love,
In Foreign Colours oft the Face disguis'd,
She render'd new with Spots, familiar Charms,
With Spots of Jett, that Stars and Moons exprest:
She crisp'd, with vexing Irons, her flowing Hair,
And, rang'd in Form, the Artful Curls compos'd;
To several Stories built aloft her Head
Of Cornets, Pinners, Passes, and Commodes,
With waving Plumes, Ribbons of various Hue,
That with, the radiant Iris may contend.

In Asia (Parent Clime of Nations own'd)
There is a Plain of infamous Renown,
Where Men, with foolish, as aspiring Pride,
Design'd their Babel, once, to mate the Skies,
Above the Reach of any second Flood,
(Still Mother of Confusion to Mankind
Division curs'd of Minds, as well as Tongues,
Of Hate, and Slaughter, and the Wast of War)
Shinar 'twas call'd, a Desart vast and wild,
By Man forsaken, now the Haunt of Beasts:
Here Nimrod hunted oft with savage joy,
(That mighty Hunter stil'd before the Lord)
The foremost Prince, that ever wore a Crown,
He first disdaining just paternal Sway,
Usurpt despotic and invidious Pow'r.
King was before an unoffending Name,
A Fathers Right, and built on Need, and Love.
Nimrod was Proud, and Cunning, Rough, and Bold,
Of Action eager, and averse to Ease,
Inur'd to Blood and practic'd to destroy.
At Prime of Day still to the Chace he came,
And all his Morning Hours were spent in Blood
In Blood of Beasts of Prey he yet delights,
Too soon to wanton in the Blood of Men.

Beneath the Brow of the Enormous Tow'r
(Tow'r now no more but Hill of Ruins vast),
Surounded with a forrest large and rude,
There is a Grove, of melancholy Shade,
That from the Mourner Eugh and Cypress falls.
There only Birds of evil Omen Nest,
Reptiles of noxious Kind, and Beasts resort
Of fiercest Nature, and by Rapine fed,
Whose Center op'ning in a spacious Round
A Theatre appears of dusky Green.
The Grass, that scarce the barren Surface hides,
A drye and tawny Colour ever wears.

This Hieroglyphic Place prepares the Fiend,
For Nimrod's Spousals, and detested Joys.
By Magic Force the dismal Scenes withdraw,
And with a suddain Paradise surprize;
A vernal Face the horrid Grove assumes,
And all around the imitated Notes
Of warbling Birds transport the list'ning Ear;
The middle Space, its rusty Liv'ry cast,
In Springs dissembled Glories gayly shines
Herbs, Fruits, and Flowers, in beauteous Order set
(Such as the artful London wou'd design)
The Smell, the Tast, the Eye abuse with Joys
Imaginary, and fictitious Sweets.

Here Mazes serpentine delude the Sight;
There wide Parterres; here shady Walks arise;
There creeping Brooks through winding Channels stray
With fancy'd purlings, raising murmuring Sounds,
Fantastick all, and unsubstantial prove,
Like her frail joys, that since have fool'd the World!

His Eden, immitative of the first,
Of airy Particles condens'd thus made;
He there beneath a seeming Myrtle plac'd
Upon a flowry Bed the fated Maid,
Fast by the tumbling of a lucid Stream
That gentle Slumbers to perswade appear'd,
Her Head with fragrant Wreaths of Flourets crown'd
Supinely on her charming Hand reclind,
Bare was her Bosom, and one Thigh was bare,
As by the Winds, and Chance unrob'd, to show
The lovely turn'd Proportion of her Limbs.
Rich Bracelets twine her snowy Arms about,
Sandals her Feet, Buskins adorn her Leggs,
With Rubies Pearls and Diamonds powder'd o'er.
In this Array with native Beauties arm'd,
And all the strong Auxiliaries of Art,
Fully instructed in th' infernal Lore,
She Nimrod, in imagin'd Sleep, attends.
The looser Graces round her darken'd Eyes
Play wanton, mixt with frequent fleeting Smiles,
Insidious Love lay ambush'd in her Smiles,
And sped, with an unerring Hand, his Darts.

Brought by the Chace, and Errors of the Wood,
His Train now lost, his devious Steps arrive
This visionary Seat of Mischief real.

Amaz'd at what he saw, and heard, and smelt,
His forward steps with Awe he soon represt,
The spicy Odours, that of Eden breath'd,
Surprize his Smell with aromatic Scents;
The Sounds that warble from the vocal Grove
Transport with intellectual Harmony
Of the revolving Spheres, his ravish'd Ear;
The Mazes intricate of Greens, and Flowrs,
The mossy Beds, and Walks, and winding Streams,
Greedy of View, his Eye enlarg'd o'refill,
O'erfill, and with Variety confound,
While each the Business of the Sight demands.
Distracted with the equal Pow'r of All,
To All, with rapid Looks, he wanders round,
He in repeated Circles wanders round,
Till travell'd to the fated point he saw
The destin'd Maid's inevitable Charms,
And manifest of Love, there fixt his Eyes.
Love fixt his Eyes, but wonder fixt his Feet,
Till by Desire set free, they Wings assum'd
That bore him swiftly to his lovely Prey.
Awe and Respect, that purer Love inspires,
That looser Wishes and Attempts restrain;
Her Beauties cast not venerably round,
But raging Lust, and Impudence of Hope,
And Violence, the grateful Refuge since
Of the abandon'd Vices of the Fair.
Not Fire in Stubble driving with the Wind
Destruction spreads more swiftly through the Field,
Than through his Blood the dire Infection ran.
Fast by her side upon the flowry Bed
He threw himself, and with a furious Spring
His Arms her Body seiz'd, his Lips her Lips,
Her Lips, Eyes, Cheeks, her Neck, and snowy Breast,
With eager wandring Kisses he run o'er,
But starting suddain from dissembled Sleep
A haughty Frown usurpt her pleasing Face,
And from her Eyes, she shot a fierce Disdain,
And Rage intollerable; false her Rage,
And Counterfeit, for Honour, her Disdain!
Virtue and Honour were her loud Pretence,
Ill acted Threats, and intermixt with Smiles;
For viewing now his Eyes and manly Grace,
Smiles reassume her Face, and Rage subsides.
His Looks the silent Love of Eyes conveying,
Promise the pleasing Bus'ness of his Tongue,
The pleasing Bus'ness of his Tongue he tells
To the yet captiv'd, and yet strugling Maid,
And for his Truth he vouch'd her conscious Charms
Attesting all the shining Host of Heav'n.

A languishing Regard at length she cast,
And with consenting Eyes confest her Flame.
With wanton Looks they blow the glowing Fire,
In both Desire in wanton Looks was own'd;
In strict Embraces he the Nymph constrain'd,
A Storm of Kisses wreck her doubtful Words,
Denials faint and unavailing Rage.
Quick heav'd her Breast; in Pleasure roll'd her Eyes,
Yet do her Hands a false Resistance make;
Her Hands resist him, but her Eyes invite;
In murmuring Sounds (not to be heard design'd)
In dubious Pray'rs sh' adjures him to give o'er;
The less she strives, the more he presses on,
Till he dissolving in her twining Arms,
Artful Disguise by Pleasure thrown aside,
She to her panting Bosom prest him close,
And own'd the Justice of the obliging Force.
A grateful Pause they make while both respire,
The Flame with pleasing Fewel to renew,
And with fresh Vigour to recruit Desire,
Youth and Desire, with Force suffice their Joys,
Their joys, by frequent Intervals encreas'd.

Their Wedding thus profanely was perform'd,
No holy Priest to bless the Nuptial bed,
No holy Rites to consecrate their Love,
With Heav'n averse was ty'd the nuptial Band,
And Hell exulting gave the fatal Bride.
Nature's agast at their detested Bliss,
Retir'd the Sun, with Thunder roll'd the Skies,
Herbs, Flow'rs and Trees their Horror too confess,
And droop the various Honours of their Heads.
With artificial Day was he supply'd,
And lost in Pleasure felt not Natures Pangs.

The Fury of their Transports now allay'd,
Thus with a soft preluding Sigh she spoke,
And Eyes that quivering dwelt upon his Face.

Be not too vain of what you here have won,
I gave you joys, but gave 'em you constrain'd!
Constrain'd by Love, and your superiour Force,
(Tho' Love perhaps was stronger than your Arms)
Yet to attone that Force but constant prove,
And you no day discolour'd with Annoy
Shall see, but each with glad Success be crown'd.
But my self-conscious Worth assures me this,
For in my Arms are ever new the Joys,
And Joys untasted yet by any Man, but you.
Nor think a Dowrless Love to thee I give,
I bring the Royal Craft to raise thy Name.

You haunt the Groves, and hunt the Woodland Green,
And waste your Youth the Spoils of Beasts among;
I'll crown your Head with Wreaths of nobler Name,
Of Man the Hunter, from the goodly Chace
The Spoils of Nations, on thy graceful Brow,
In Triumph thou shalt bring into my Arms.
A private Lord unhonour'd yet thou art,
I'll raise thee to Dominion unexplor'd,
Bold, independent, free from all Controul,
Thy Will its Standard, and thy Will its Bounds;
All as their Source shall view thee and their End.
And Kings till now a dull precarious Pow'r,
In thee shall with unwonted Glory shine.

With Words like these, and Arts till then unknown
Of Smiles and Tears alternate, she betrays
Th' aspiring Nimrod to inglorious Thrall,
To others Tyrant, but to her a Slave.
Unbred to Spinning, and the Houshold Lore,
Women, since her, invade sublimer Cares,
The Arts of Government, and Toils of War,
And over Man usurp unequal Sway.
Woman by Heav'n for humble Aims design'd,
At most to sooth the ruffl'd Soul of Man
With all the tender Office's of Love,
When he from awful Cares to Toys descends.

By her false Charms, and Lust of Empire won,
His Father's God he left, to Idols bow'd,
With Ceremonious Pomps, and Rites profane,
Surpris'd the thoughtless People into Guilt
Of wild Idolatry, by that means sure
Of a Tyrannick, Arbitrary Sway;
For well they might submit with slavish Fear,
To him, from whom Religion they derive.

The Arts proud Nimrod learnt from his new Bride,
Were Arts since well in Courts, and Cities known.
False Promises, and Friendship false profess'd,
And undermining Cunning, Lies, and Vows
Of Services ne're meant, for selfish Ends:
Oppression, Bribery, and useful Vice;
The Masque of Virtue to secure a Crime,
Else not to be attempted with Success;
Neglect of Merit, and all Tyes of Blood;
All Sense of Honour and Ingratitude;
A Love of Fools, and yet more useful Knaves;
Murders, and Poysons, variously contriv'd,
Some with the Face of Law, and private some
An inward Bent in all things to himself.

By these vile Arts Despotic Sway he gain'd,
And Paradise, and Liberty, and Heav'n,
By Woman's Malice thus or Frailty lost.

Soon false to Nimrod was th' infernal Dame,
More to corrupt, and few her Snares escape,
That can be won by Lust, or flatt'ring Hope.

From hence sprung All, that in false Arts delight,
In Murders, Rapine, Lies, and Perjuries,
In Treasons, Cheats, the Labarinths obscure
Of hateful Cunning, and sinister Wiles,
Extortion, and Oppression of the Poor.
Hence too sprung Sharpers, Usurers, and Bawds,
Informers, Pettyfoggers, Knights o'th' Post,
Rakes, Gamesters, Bulleys, Pimps, and Venal Whores,
Jilts, and Coquets, Fops, Ignorants, and Fools,
Knaves of all Kinds, religious, and profane;
The Hypocrite, as well as Rogue profess'd:
Those, that their Trust betray, unfaithful Friends,
Th' abstemious Miser and Glutton prodigal,
With false Devotes, and Atheists reasonless;
Lords without Virtue, Knowledge, or Deserts;
Swell'd with the Pride of Titles, and of Blood,
To Honour sloathful, negligent of Arts,
And infamously pleas'd to be unknown;
To Wine, or Whores, or Gold, or Game confin'd;
The Burden of the State, and People's Shame:
Lawyers that plead, Divines that Preach for Gold
In Cause unjust; the judge that's brib'd by Gold;
Defamers, Libellers, and Flatterers;
Tyrants, and all their Engines to destroy;
With all the Dusky Train of Foes to Truth:
The Gracchi, Catiline, and Caesar too,
Sylla, and Cromwel, and that horrid Band
Of late Assassines, and what more may come;
All the Embroilers of their Country's Peace;
All that it's ancient Rights by Force destroy,
Or else for Gold betray, or sell, or buy;
Be it to Foreign, or Domestick Foe;
That rob the Publick with unhallow'd Hands,
All these from her Infernal Womb descend,
And in our Heav'nly Form belye their Hell.
Yet will their Deeds their Origin confess,
Self-Love, and Lust of Gold their Source betray.
They at Immortal Fame, as Folly laugh,
At just Ambition of Heroick Deeds,
At Heav'n, and Honour, as the idle Dreams
Of feigning Poets, and designing Priests:
Nor ever will they deviate into Good,
But to effect some more enormous Ill.

Her cursed Race increase and mingling with
The Sons of God beget a Motly Kind,
In whom some Particles of Heav'n remain,
But much debas'd with the Alloy of Hell,
A Medley here of Vice and Virtue's foun'd,
Yet still superiour Vice maintains the Sway;
To Good they struggle upward, and with Pain,
But with Alacrity sink down to Ill.

But from the true and genuine Race of Heav'n,
Spring Heroes; and benificent to Man
Patriots and Poets, extensive Souls,
Founders of Cities, and their wholsom Laws,
Of Arts Inventors, and of moral Rules
The Teachers awful, Poets all of yore,
Who taught the infant World in heav'nly Song.
Who for their Country fight, and for her dye;
Protectors and Encouragers of Arts,
The Muses Patrons; Judges just and wise,
Kings who their Country's Fathers are allow'd;
Codrus, Lycurgus, Cocles and Camillus,
The Decii, Curtius, Scipio, and Timoleon,
Demosthenes, and Socrates divine.
Tully, and Cato, Brutus first and last.
Maecenas, Richelieu, and those large of Soul,
Who Merit know, and Merit dare reward.
Euripides, and Virgil, Dryden, Garth,
Athenian Sophocles, the British Bard,
Whose song above the Aonian Mountain soars:
Homer, and Horace, Tasso, and Racine,
Shakespear, and Otway, Spencer, Denham, Donn,
And various more, not nam'd, to Fame ally'd
Of Ancient Bards, and Poets et unknown
Their Countries Honour, and their Countries Freinds.
Long is the Train of the immortal Fair
That fill, or soon will fill the Rolls of Fame,
Where British Ladies hold the foremost Rank.

Thus sung the Muse, and took her sudden Flight
Aloft, incumbent on bright Clouds of Light;
I wak'd, and vanish'd the transporting Sight.
