Tears must succumb, where sullen Grief abounds
What need of those, when Loss of the Land surrounds,
Loss, did I say, yes, such a Loss that time
Wants to make up the Loss of Britains Clime,
Clime, did I say?  yes, and what more?
Orangia, and Belgia may deplore,
Their Fortunes too, Hybernia never had
Till now occasion to be throughly sad,
For that our Glory, and her King is dead.
Dead, did I say?  O!  most impious Thing
To under-rate so low, so high a King
Go now Engrave with Steel in Marble Stone,
To bear Record, when Centuries are gone:
Death had no Sting, nor Grave for such an One.
His winged Soul to Heaven soar'd from hence,
Which He purchas'd through Zeal and Violence,
Changing for Toil, and Trouble of His Days
Long Happiness, and sweet imperial Bays
And a Rich Crown subject to no Decays.

Of all those Kings so Numerous and Great,
That ever sway'd at Scotland's Helm of State,
And now Entomb'd; their Falls have not design'd
So sharp a blast, and such a headstrong Wind,
Which hath remov'd by a tempestuous hand,
The Mighty and the Beauty of the Land,
And bravest King that ever sat upon
The hoary seat of Antient Albion,
Whose Hand became her Scepter, and whose Brow
Was to her Diadem adapted too:
He glori'd with a Spirit brave and bold,
To dignifie a Crown that was so old
And wisely studi'd also to maintain
It's Priviledges (being Soveraign)

O Warlike Prince against thy Foes once bent
Thy Valour made them flee, or else consent;
Not on a Squade, nor on some petty Thing
Sought'st Thou the means to cause Thy Trophies ring;
Nor upon feeble, bruised broken Bones
Soughtst Thou for Garlands set with Saphire stones:
But Thou dispatches Armies off at once.

Thou fear'd no Threats, nor Multitudes, nor Darts
Nor Vengefull Cannons damping others Hearts;
Thou stem'd the showers of Bullets smoke and Fire,
Knew'st how to face; but never to retire:
Like Heavenly Moses and GOD's Man of War
Thou stood'st, thou fought'st, thou becam'st Conquerour
Thou sought'st no Shield nor Armour to put on;
Such Vanities like David, Thou didst shun.
GOD's my Defence Thou saidst, by Me HE stands,
HE gives Me Courage, and makes strong mine Hands,
Enlivens all my Nerves, I fear no fall,
And by His strength I'll overleap a Wall.
When to prevent the Ruine of his Land,
And Laws which were a perishing at hand:
When Liberties were crusht, and had no way
To make escape, and Church seem'd to decay;
Then from the Belgicks, He His passage took,
Then Ireland trembled, and all Britain shook,
When that He did His Banner fair display
The itching headed lour'd and slipt away,
Still to such People a most fatal day.
So shrunk the great Philistine Camp, who had
Defi'd the Armies of the living GOD,
At the appearance of a Shepherd Lad.

Let others of thy Mighty Actions tell,
A Joshua, or Godly Samuel,
Who wrote the Feats of Warring Israel;
And let the King of Poets hither bring,
His sacred Lire, and thine Encomiums sing,
And with his Pen write into lasting Verse,
Thy prudent Conduct on thy sable Herse,
How!  Thou didst fly through Clouds of Fire to fight,
The Airy winged Giant Namurite,
And well Thy Sword, like Jonathan cou'd wield;
Which never yet came empty off the field;
And who upon Thy fair Victorious Day
On it did bring the Golden spoils away.

No Caesar yet, for all his famous Deeds
Thy Nobler Conquests, and thy Fame exceeds;
Shou'd I recount them over, shou'd I Sing:
But the one half, I wou'd presume a Thing
As hard almost, as in the British Seas
To count the Waves, and Sands in Euphrates;
And of so much shou'd I but little say,
Wou'd wrong my Subject and my King betray
Wherefore that high attempt I will Suspend,
And on thy weeping Mourners will attend.

BRITAIN'S LAMENT.
Ah now for Thee, what dismall howlings fill
Our Alpish Mountains, and each Dale and Hill?
Hear how the Rivers frame a dolefull song,
And murmur sadly as they glide along;
Are not both Forth and Thames got hand in hand,
And leave their Channels, and their ousie Land?

And see the flowers upon the humble bed
As Tulips, Dazies, how they're withered
The Gilli-flower Lillie and Marygold
Do shake as if they were distrest with cold,
Silver Narcissus faints upon her seat
As she were Frosted wanting Summers heat,
The Primrose and the various died Pink
Back to their Mother go, and mourning, shrink.
What ails the Rose and Noble Thistle now,
Are they surpriz'd with the sad News that go?
Thy 'mongst the rest did beautifie the field:
But now opprest with Grief no beauty yield,
Their Aspect, and that warm Sun-shine's gone
On which their Lives and Vertues lay upon.

Our Cities, Towns, and Villages display,
And show their sorrows also on this Day;
Thy Loyal Subjects, and each faithfull Dame,
With all their mirth bury their sprightfull Flame,
And languishing 'mongst hated ashes cry,
We'll not forget thy Glorious Memory,
While their sweet Babes weep William's Threnody.

THE SOULDIERS LAMENTATION.
O see the Souldiers damped, who before
Never till now knew ought thy cou'd deplore,
And say, where is our Leader?  Where's our Prince?
Our Shield; and Buckler?  And our best Defence?
Where is our Glorie?  Where's our Martial Saint,
That made us fight, and made our Foes to faint
By Heaven, we miss our Conduct and our Crown,
Who made us smile, and fam'd us with Renown;
While that our Enemies did tumble down.

IRELAND'S LAMENT.
We Irishes bewail the Day, and weep,
Our Wolves likewise with us deploring keep,
We knew no Grief, now we have learn'd to know,
What sorrow is, and what's the deeps of wo,
And we repent we were King William's Foe.
In savage Woods we do bemoan the Hour
Wherein we lost so brave a Conqueror,
No Sword but His, cou'd ever make us Tame,
He taught us sense to write his lasting Name,
While 'mongst the Groves, and shady Fens we sing
In weeping Notes, our Patrick and our King.

THE LAMENTATION OF FRANCE.
It's Victorie to hear my Hero Foe
Is now at Peace; yet wish it were not so;
I'll Proclaim through my Regions I have lost
More Glory then I ever yet could boast,
Whom to have overcome was greater far
Then all the Conquests, I cou'd gain by War,
Thy matchless Exploits, Sir, I'll tell with dread,
Thou struckst my Souldiers, and their Leaders dead,
And publish will Thy Conduct was so brave
I never cou'd of thee advantage have;
When Thou in Ireland 'gainst my Camp thou fought'st,
Then Victorie through Dangers great Thou sought'st;
And Thou swam'st the deep menancing Stream,
Thou fought'st, and did'st thy Conquest then Proclaim
Prudence and Courage sought then Thy Renown,
And Success did Thy wond'rous Valour Crown,
Thou still was swift as Eagles to take hold,
And Thou encounter'd like a Lion bold.
And thy Centurions fought in burnishst Gold,
A Thousand Trophies and a Thousand Charms
Still wait about on thine undaunted Arms.

THE LAMENTATION OF HOLLAND.
Did ever State so gloriously shine,
As lately shone, that pleasant One of mine?
I stand now fixt as a created Rock,
Or Beasts in Field, that are with Thunder struck;
No Common-wealth had ever reason more
Then we o'er clouded Belgians to deplore
So brave a Prince, so Kind, so Good, so Great
Our Bulwark and invincible by Fate;
Thy sharp Eye sighted Conduct was our Prop,
And like a Pillar still kept Holland up;
Bodgrave can Witness, how thou didst defeat
With a small Number Twice an Armie great;
Likewise at Utricht, and at Worden too
The French (inveterate Foes) Thou didst subdue;
Those with the English both by Sea and Land,
Thou beat them down with thy Victorious hand.
No Prince so much ingenuously strove
To gain a Peoples Duty, Heart, and Love;
Neither did People ever show to Prince,
More Faith, more Love, and more Obedience,
Who now bewail, the sad and blust'ring Day,
That ruines Us, and blows our Hopes away;
For may decrease our Trade that is so brave,
Which through the Corners of the World we have,
And all our Glory we have conquered,
Because our Champion and our Hero's Dead.

THE LAMENTATION OF ORANGE.
Orangia, What's this doth Thee confound?
What's this doth blast thy fair and fertile ground?
What's this amazes all thy Plains about?
Is Winter come to turn thy Summer out?
Why do thy Nobles droop and hang their Heads,
And Dames of Honour weep in Gloomy Shades?
Why are the cheering Vines dri'd at the roots,
And Figtrees languish and deny their Fruits?
The Palmtree too and high born Pomegranate,
Seem both surpiz'd, and very desolate,
And Apletrees, lo, their sweet moisture stanch,
And there's no issue to adorn the Branch:
All Comelyness, and every Glory's flown,
For that the ORANGE and the TREE is gone;
For which the Woods and Groves put Mourning on.
8 March, 1702
