The British Muse in Chaucer first began,
All Nature list'ning to the wond'rous Man;
Our rugged Youth upon his Accents hung,
And Melted at the Musick of his Song:
Strong was his voice, and sprightly were his Lays,
Which warm'd, but wanted still the Pow'r to raise;
'Till the Muse taught the following Bards to soar
Thro' beauteous Worlds of Wit unknown before.
The Tree he planted took a gen'rous Root,
Shot into Boughs, and bent with golden Fruit;
Under whose fair auspicious Shade were seen
An Eden lost and won, a Fairy Queen,
A Moor to Doubts betray'd, and lofty Cataline.

Wit then all-lovely and Gigantick stood,
Like the large Sons of Men before the Flood;
The well-pleas'd Muse confess'd a strong Embrace,
And teem'd an Off-spring of a Manly Grace;
Whose vast Athletick Limbs, and wondrous Fire,
Still own'd the brawny Vigour of the Sire.

But how unlike our Modern Race does prove!
The hasty Product of unfinish'd Love;
The puling Brat scarce lifts its foolish Eyes,
But sickning at the Light sinks down and dies.

Long have our Witlings shewn our wond'ring Time,
An Ebb of Judgment, and a Flux of Rhime,
Mob'd poor Apollo in an antick Dress,
And with unhallow'd Ballads choak'd the Press;
Created Heroes to the World unknown,
And dawb'd a Sign-Post Warriour of their own.
A Churchill they to Withrington debase,
And sink beneath the Lays of Chivy-Chase:
Departed Chiefs, who were in Battel slain,
Are rais'd from Death to be destroy'd again;
Who cursing Pen and Ink, less fearful stand,
Of their brave Foes, than of the Writer's Hand.

A knighted Bard Poetick Rules has shewn,
And wittily advis'd the scribling Town
T' applaud his Follies, but to damn their own;
Deafned with sturdy Verse the list'ning Crowd,
(Oh that his Muse was delicate as loud!)
Whilst all his labour'd Volum but affords
A swoln and windy timpany of Words;
When upwards his unusual Flight he wings,
How like a Fiend his rhiming Cherub sings;
Rumbling he mounts, and talks of mortal Wars,
Describes his Journey, and lampoons the Stars;
'Till hiss'd with Scorn from the Etherial Plain,
Down drops the heavy Wight to Earth again;
And whilst he stands reveal'd to mortal View,
Murthers his Patients, and his Readers too.

See at your Feet the suppliant Milton lies,
Started by Witchcraft from the nether Skies;
An Oxford Muse invok'd his trembling Spright,
And conjur'd his unwilling Ghost to light:
Affrighted Nature sick'ned at the Shew,
As if she fear'd to be enchanted too.
See how the Furies cleave the yielding Ground,
Whilst the young Wizard walks his magick Round,
Such is the pow'r of Verse, and such the force of Sound.

Sonorous Bard, what happy Accents throng
Around thy Lips, and thunder from thy Tongue!
What racking Throws afflict thy lab'ring Brain,
We see with Wonder, and we read with Pain.
O, would you e'er deserve eternal Praise,
And justly Imitate our Milton's Lays;
Would you excel the deathless Song of Greece,
Make Satan then the Hero of your Piece:
Relate what Wits, like Thee, attend his Throne,
And sing his sooty Empire not unknown;
No other Chief, no other Theme can be
Worthy a Muse possess'd, and worthy Thee.

A Douty Piece came pricking o'er the Plain,
In ancient Guise I weet, and Spencer's Strain,
Of Fancy nice disdain'd our modern Mode,
Stept out a Ballad, tho' yclipt an Ode;
Like Durfey's Dame of Honour tun'd its Lays,
To good Queen Besse's Reign, and golden Days,
In comely farthingal the Muse was drest,
Thus whilom Fate ordain'd, and Jove's Behest:
No modish Pinch of all-defiling Snuff
Profan'd the well-quill'd Beauty of her Ruff.
From Sternhold all her shining Phrase she drew,
Thus ancient Rithm I wist corrects the new:
To frisk in fairy Ground I ween to prone,
Speaks others English, but forgets her own.

Thus all our Arts our lesser Poets use,
To force a Genius, and provoke a Muse,
Whilst from their Arms the airy Beauty flies,
Looks frowning back, and chides them with her Eyes:
Tho' on a Cloud their jilted hopes are lost,
The vain Ixions still a Conquest boast,
And still are Witty &mdash; at the Reader's Cost.

Not so, My Lord, your Manlier Siege could fail,
Nature and Art have made your Suit prevail;
A thousand Graces, and a thousand Charms
Assert your Title to the Muse's Arms:
Modest at first, as bashful Virgins woo'd,
She feign'd to run &mdash; but 'twas to be pursu'd;
To ev'ry Science she for Shelter flew,
You follow'd still, and kept the Nymph in view;
Tir'd with the Chase, what Wiles cou'd she employ!
No more reserv'd, She own'd the amorous Boy;
Proud to be won, and courts you to enjoy.

When Daphne o'er the Plain out-stript the Wind,
With flying Steps, and left the God behind;
In vain was all the Mighty Paean's Art,
With softest Sounds to move the Virgin's Heart:
Not so your sweeter Muse in vain had pray'd,
But new-born Love had seiz'd the yielding Maid;
Each melting Note had pierc'd her list'ning Ear,
Had stop'd her Course, and won the flying Fair.

Kind Heav'n to ev'ry Favourite we find
Has some one darling Excellence assign'd.
Which graceful sits aloft, and triumphs in the Mind.
Thus Wreaths immortal for our Churchill grow,
'Tis his to vanquish, and repel the Foe.
'Tis Wise Godolphin's Business to debate,
To curb a Faction, and to save the State;
Whilst Beauties to a different Genius due
Blend their United Beams, and shine in you:
Cool in the Closet, eager in the Flight,
'Tis yours to Conquer, and 'tis yours to Write;
Sweetly to mix the Lawrel with the Bays,
And sing the Triumphs which you help'd to raise:
Whilst both our Admiration must Command,
The Hero's Actions, and the Poet's Hand.

As Master-Pencils take the strictest Care,
To draw a Goddess, and adorn the Fair,
With labour'd Stroaks of Art to court the Sight,
And place their Beauties in the finest Light;
A bright Monthermer claims Titians Hand,
And Angelo should paint a Sunderland.

Thus glorious Monarchs ask the loftiest Scenes,
And mightiest Heroes claim the nicest Pens;
Virgil alone should an Aeneas draw,
Spencer, Elizabeth, and Garth Nassaw;
Stepney's rich dress is Great Eugenio's due,
But greater MARLBRO' claims a Muse in You.

"When fam'd Augustus rul'd th' Imperial State,
And fixt the tott'ring World's uncertain Fate,
Beneath his gentle and successful Sway,
Dissolv'd in Ease the wanton Nations lay,
And ev'ry Sun brought forth an Holiday;
And when as oft as rowling Years restor'd
That happy Day which gave the World a Lord,"
The grateful Muse her sweetest Tribute pay'd,
And sung the Hero whom the Earth obey'd,
Whilst the attentive Tiber flow'd along,
And to old Oceans Waves convey'd the Poet's Song.

See Britons, see, the mighty Aera come,
Which shades the Glories of Imperial Rome,
Let her no more her mighty Caesars boast,
Whose Conquests are in nobler Triumphs lost:
No more their dazling Pomp shall charm the Sight,
For ever lost, they sink in endless Night;
As in a Wane of Glory fade away,
In Anna's fiercer Blaze, and brighter Day:
On Pow'r usurpt their mighty Empire stood,
And all its vast Foundation laid in Blood;
Their daring Chiefs Tyrannically brave
Fought to subdue, and make the World a Slave;
Whilst Anna's Breast a nobler Motive warms,
And bids her strike where Justice calls to Arms:
No Lust of Pow'r which happy Conquests yield,
E'er drew her Temp'rate Hero to the Field;
In pity to Mankind his Sword he draws,
And bravely fights both Heav'ns, and Anna's Cause:
For Right he strikes, Religion, Liberty,
To raise th' Opprest, and set the Injur'd Free.
For which, O Rome, your Warriour's Pride shall cease,
And Time forget who Great Augustus was;
A mightier Churchill fills the Voice of Fame,
And ev'ry Muse shall sing of Anna's Name;
Tiber no more shall boast his golden Streams,
But yield in Glory to his Sister Thames.

Hail Pow'r of Verse, Times richest History,
Thou bright Reward of Manly Chivalry;
In Maro's Lines the warring Chief we view'd;
Troy's latest Hope, in glitt'ring Arms renew'd:
And here thro' Flames the Hero cuts his way,
And here in Safety bears the pious Prey;
Here vanquish'd Squadrons to the Victor yield,
And with a purple Stream distain the Latian Field.

Hail Albion's Muse, thou bright Caelestial Dame,
Thou first, and fairest in the round of Fame;
In Thee Brittania's Hero shall be found,
With God-like Acts, and fresher Lawrels Crown'd:
And lo, behold upon the adverse side,
Fir'd with Ambition, and elated Pride;
With settled Anger, and collected Might,
The hot Bavarian leads his Troops to fight,
He meets his mighty Foe upon the Plain,
And stands the Thunder of his Arm again.

As like an Oak the fierce Mezentius stood,
And towr'd aloft o'er all the ignobler Wood,
Proudly distracted the dull inferior Band,
And bravely dar'd the mighty Trojan's Hand;
"Is this their Chief, he cry'd, who comes from fair,
To Conquer Kingdoms with invasive War,
Troy's only Relique, whom the Gods could spare,
If Gods there are, who make the World their Care;
O that his Friends were treble on the Plain,
And Greater Hector was reviv'd again!
This Sword alone, shou'd stop the Invader's Course,
I boldly own no other Gods but Force:"
Aloud he Spoke, avenging Heav'n stood by,
Heard the audacious Boast, and saw the Tyrant fly.

Amaz'd he fled, a mournful Sound from far
Flew swiftly on to wound the Father's Ear;
(Too early Bloom of rising Glory slain)
That his unhappy Lausus press'd the Plain;
Struck with the mortal Wound he backward flies,
Rage in his Breast, and Light'ning in his Eyes;
Push'd by his Fate he blindly rushes on,
But sinks beneath a Force superior to his own.

Thus sullen the Bavarian Hero far,
And frowning grumbled o'er his adverse Fate;
He scarce believ'd that he could poorly fly,
And not in fighting Fields more bravely dye:
But oh!  too sure, too fatal Marks remain,
The glittering Pride of vanquish'd Gallia slain,
Like Winters Leafs strew'd all the Victor's Way,
Nor left, we fancy'd, room for such another Day.
Yet when with heaving Wings the Spring returns,
With a new Fire his glowing Bosom burns:
"And now, he cries, Their boasted Chief shall yield,
A bloody Int'rest due for Blenheim's Field;
Would he was Greater still, my Sword should try
Who Merits most from Glory, He or I:
Fortune, dull Goddess, to my Interest blind,
Shall yet be mine, I'll force her to be kind:
Lost, as I am, I scorn a poor Retreat,
The Brave, tho' vanquish'd, are a Match for Fate:
Thus thund'ring Arm" &mdash; Deluded Prince!  what Pow'r
Could shield Injustice from th' avenging Hour?
Scatter'd by Winds your empty Threats were vain,
That Hand which vanquish'd once, cou'd conquer thee again.

Methinks I hear the Briton's fierce Alarms;
O Energy Divine!  O glorious clank of Arms;
A Manly Vigour, and a sprightly Grace
Dart from his Limbs, and lighten in his Face:
The adverse Hosts stand ready to engage,
And fir'd with Glory menace distant Rage;
Death hov'ring o'er his Sword expecting stands
Its promis'd Harvest from the Hero's Hands,
Fierce as a Winters Storm he drove along,
And one their flying Rear in Terrour hung,
Whilst by his conqu'ring Arm such Heaps are slain,
As Crimson dy'd the Field, and grac'd Ramillia's Plain.

The gazing Sun struck with Attention stood,
And look'd with Joy upon the Field of Blood;
Shine out, fair Planet, with unusual Light,
Nor ever hope to see a brave Sight:
As by divine Command you smiling rose,
And fought Heavens Quarrel against Israel's Foes;
Check'd your bright Coursers in the fiery Way,
And stop'd your Chariot to prolong the Day;
Great was the Miracle of the Heav'nly Will:
Shine out, fair Planet, from your Native Skies,
And Wond'ring see a second Joshua rise.

Darling of Heav'n, and Nature's lovely'st Child;
Amazing Liberty leapt up, and smil'd;
Joy in her Eyes, and all serene her Look,
And Marlb'rough's Form the shining Vision took;
How welcome must the lovely Stranger be,
Brabantta, clog'd with Slavery, to Thee?
Think on the Bondage you so long have mourn'd;
And think by whom that Liberty return'd;
For Liberty return'd, the Victor meet,
And grateful pay your Thanks at your Restorer's Feet.

As lesser Lights their radiant Circles run
Around his Orb, and seem to court the Sun;
Who kindly does their fading Beams supply,
Himself a Flood of Light, great Nature's watchful Eye;
To distant Worlds his smiling Beams appear,
To paint the Spring, and crown the lusty Year.

Go on, auspicious Chief, proceed in Fight,
And round you lend to lesser Orbs your Light;
Inflame their Motion by your quick'ning Ray,
Dispel the Gloom, and bless the World with Day:
To Climes remote your vig'rous Warmth impart,
To fire the Poet's Brain, and raise the Warriour's Heart.

As when th' Almighty look's on Chaos' Face,
And quickned by his Word the lumpish Mass,
From her old Throne depos'd tyrannick Night,
And cheer'd the Infant World with chearful Light,
Nature beheld her Charms serene and Mild,
In blooming Beauty, and Creation smil'd.

Thus Mighty Anna at your dread Command,
Fair Union shall arise to bless the Land;
Wild Anarchy shall hide its hated Face,
And Party-Storms be hush'd into a Peace:
The healing Work so happily begun,
Shall in a Golden Series smoothly run;
Whilst Story will commit to future Scenes
The Wisest Senate, And the best of Queens.

O gen'rous Muse!  a Theme like this might warm
The noblest Breast, and all your Fancy charm:
Thee, only Thee Apollo has in Sight,
To Match his Fires, and do the Hero right;
To fix his Fame your tuneful Tribute bring,
Boldly the Briton Fought, do you as sweetly sing.

As Great Achilles once a Homer charm'd,
And with resistless Fires the Writer warm'd;
Still he survives, and will for ever stand,
As made Immortal by the Poet's Hand:
Of nobler Vertues, and of brighter Fame,
Ages to come shall learn your Churchill's Name,
Whilst distant Times shall in your Numbers view
The first of Heroes, and of Poets too.

One Master-Work remains to crown the Scene,
Whilst ANNA claims the Beauties of your Pen;
Rich Fancy with unerring Judgment join,
And add their Coul'ring to some just Design;
So shall She long to distant Times appear
The brightest Glory of the smiling Year;
Her lasting Fame shall bear Eternal Sway,
Untouch'd by Time, unknowing of Decay,
Fix'd as the Triumphs of Ramillia's Day.

Admiring Worlds before the Piece shall stand,
And wond'ring, own the Justice of your Hand;
With annual Fruits bend down before her Shrine,
And grateful pay their Second Vows to Thine.
