Ye Bards, let all the noble Scheme be wrought
With Art, and Care, and deep deliberate Thought.
Before the Basis of the Frame you lay,
The famous Plans of Greece and Rome survey.
The Iliad, and the Aeneid, well inspect,
All that is Just, and Bright, and Great select:
You know their Errors, those you will correct.
With due Connexion let the Parts cohere,
Lean on each other, and each other bear.
Let Order, Rule, and Symetry proclaim
The Artful Wonders of the happy Frame.
Believe no Cost too great, but every where
Let Plenty, Wealth, Magnificence appear.
A Plan so firm, so beautiful contrive,
As may the Critick move, and Time survive.
A nobler Subject will your Care employ,
Than Latian Conquests, or the Wars of Troy.
Let the stupendous, everlasting Pile,
Worthy of Albion's Arms, of Marlbro's Toil,
The Glory of Ramillia's Field sustain,
Longer than Woodstock's Tow'rs can that of Blenheim's Plain.

Let those appointed to adorn the Song,
Be bold with Care, with Delicacy strong.
Let Mantuan Judgment, and Horatian Words,
And all the noble Fire which Greece affords,
With all the Beauties which in Spencer shine,
To form their Diction's Dignity combine:
Let all the Charms of Verse, and Strength of Sense,
Let all the Pride and Force of Eloquence,
Let all the bold and beauteous Images,
Which by their Master-Strokes amaze, and Please,
The fairest Forms of all the airy Train,
With which the brightest Fancy fills the Brain.
Let Gilding, and Poetic Painting, grace
The Roofs and Rooms of all the stately Case.
Let Episodes, contriv'd with Art, surprize,
Which from the Subject unconstrain'd arise:
Like Walks and Gardens, charming to the Sight,
And Pleasure-Houses, let 'em give Delight.
In your Machines you will no Gods employ,
Who by the Poet lifted fought at Troy.
The Pagan Gods might grace a Pagan Scheme,
But will they too adorn a Christian Theme?
Can you Concern, or Admiration move,
By introducing Pallas, Mars, or Jove?
No more than Indian Pa-Gods, Jove we fear,
And Mars no more than Mahomet revere.
Yet should you these employ to grace your Plan,
You may the Indian please, or Musselman,
The Christian, who reflects, you never can....
