Oh!  thou Pretender stop thy swift Career,
A while the Fleet, a while the Poet spare.
What Muse can follow with an equal Pace,
Thro' the Green Stages of thy rapid Race?
Thou like the Orbs of Light, that roll above,
Dost in thy glorious Course so swiftly move;
Thy Flight so sudden, passage so compleat,
Thou couldst not have done more, hadst thou been Beat.
The Muse exhausted pants, and hangs the Wing,
Has no more Strength to rise, and no more Breath to sing.
You Danger seek, Fourbin advises Flight,
And then sails faster, than our Bards can Write.
So thick the Winds and Billows on them throng,
That half thy Journals must be left unsung.

A Tyrant Proud, no Innocents would save,
But scourge each British Man as if his Slave,
And to this End, Loviso did Command,
The Knight St. George to leave Dunquerquias Land.
He shone in Arms, and to the Great Campaign,
The radiant Tempest flew across the Main.
But did not Land:  At the Pretenders Sight,
The Scots maintain'd their Liberty and Right.
The Hero lay on Board:  The Frithian Tyde
Did change the Balance to Britannia's side,
And terribly chastis'd the Gaul's aspiring Pride.
No vital Purple now the Stream distains,
Or from Bavarian, or from Gallic Veins.
For to say truth they having shed no Blood,
There was no Sense in collouring of that Flood.
Wher's now thy Trophies?  let my rolling Tyde
Flow on, Britannia's Triumphs to convey
To Northern Empires, and the Frozen Sea.
The Lapland Coast, and proud Moscovia's Tow'rs
Shook with the Thunder of the British Pow'rs.
The numerous Nations of the spacious North
Were with Amazement struck, when issuing forth
At Night they saw Sir George Bings Lanthorn rise,
The most illustrious Planet of their Skies.

But now ye Bards, whose Laurels spring and thrive
By Francia, should to Francia Tribute give:
To Realms remote dispatch your Envoy Fame
That may your Heroes Greater speed proclaim.
To Bern and Basil once he gave Alarms,
And showd Venetias Gondalos his Arms;
'Tis therefore just to tell 'em he did miss,
For where there's Point d' Argent, there's Point des Swisse.
And let the Ardriatick Skullers know,
What to Dunkirkias Armament they owe.
What tho' he left the Briny Field, 'tis fit
You should assert the Empire of your Wit,
What tho' he slept:  Yet still ye Bards, awake,
Jews-Harps and Tongs let none but Masters take.

Beat up for Volunteers who Rime for Bread,
Whose unfledg'd Muses, no high Subject dread.
All the inferior Race that can indite,
A sorry Prologue, or a Poem write;
All that can raise a Shed, let them presume,
To Frame a Palace and erect a Dome.
Once more let Arthurs Ballad-singer dare,
Torture our Language to oblige our Ear,
With Numbers soft, express the din of War.
Turner of Verse, and finisher of Rime,
Frequent Pretender to the Song sublime;
Who thinks with Fame immortal he is Crown'd,
By flowing Numbers, and harmonious Sound,
Who without Fire and mindless of Design,
Plys hard the Pump, and labours every Line
To make, like empty Clouds, his Diction shine.
Who to complete Poetic Eloquence,
Has nothing wanting but Design and Sense;
Oh let him now his thoughtless Muse employ,
In lulling Strains pure Passion to destroy,
Neither creating Pain nor giving Joy:
But let him with his usual Raptures say,
And when Aurora plush'd, it then was Day,
And when the Wind was fair, poor Perkin sail'd away.
The Poets like his Followers in this Theme,
Must have their Hero's Fire their Hero's Flegm.
Their Treasures, if they once had any, drain,
Lavish their Genius and exhaust their Vein;
Let 'em this generous Resolution own,
That they are pleas'd and proud to be undone.
With Judgment and with speed they steer their Flight,
Ever look out, and ever out of Sight.
Calm they must be, and yet, with equal Grace,
Enthusiastick in a proper Place.
Always the same, when merry very glad,
And when at Weeping-cross extreamly sad.

Ye Bards, let all the noble Scheme be wrought
Without Art, Care or deep deliberate Thought.
Before the Basis of the Frame you lay,
The Plain of the round Table first survey:
The Arthuri'd the Elizei'd inspect,
All that is Just, and Bright, and Great select:
You know their Errors, those you will correct.
And if there's any Beauty does appear,
'Tis more than Perkins Character will bear.
Let no Rule, Order Symetry proclaim
The Artless Wonders of the hapless Frame.
A Plan so odd and so Bizarre contrive,
As may the Critick mock, and may no Time survive.

Let those appointed to adorn the Song,
Be bold with Care, with Delicacy strong;
Tender, most soft, and Tedious tho' not long.
Let my own Judgment and Tom D'urfey's Words,
And all the Fire which Grubbias Street affords,
With all the Beauties which in Flecknoe shine,
To form their Diction's Dignity, combine:
Let sound that pleasing is with Sense,
Let all the emptiness of Eloquence,
Let all the bold unnatural Images,
Which may amaze, charm, terrifie and please,
The fairest Butterflies of all the Train,
With which the brightest Maggots fill the Brain:
Lacker your Poem, Fretwork too will Grace
The Roofs and Rooms of all the stately Case;
Let Episodes, contriv'd with Art, surprize,
Which foreign from the Subject do arise:
Like Gillian Burnt-Tail, charming to the Sight,
And Wills in Wisps, so let them give Delight.
Can Pagan Gods adorn a Christian Theme?
The Pagan Gods might grace a Pagan Scheme;
Therefore in your Machines no Gods employ,
Who by the Poet listed fought at Troy.
For fear our Soldiers grown too fond of Pay,
Make the War last Ten Years as well as they.
But now.  The Gauls, unable to sustain
Unequal War, forsake the fatal Main;
And to Dunquerquia Steer their Course again.

Tell the Distraction, tell the dreadful Cry
Of Gallia's Troops, while from the Foe they fly.
Describe their slender Leader's Mein and Air,
By Fourbin forc'd away, and in Despair
Born with th' impetuous Tyde of refluent War.
But first, to form this Image strong and true,
In some Dutch comick Piece his Figure view,
Mighty Sea-sick, and going just to sp&mdash;w.

Describe him ent'ring high Dunquerquias Gate,
'Midst no Applauses, no triumphant State.
Express his meagre unelated Air;
Who would be conquer'd so?  or Conquest so can bear?
The Vertues, which upon his Visage shone,
As once the Glory that did Moses Crown.
Were to the Crowd around, and to himself unknown.
Let all the eager Frenchmen throng to see
The Mighty Chief, would set a Nation free,
And Cancel all their Rights, to Prop their Liberty.
Let Jesuits, Lords, and Counsellors of State,
Augment the Farce, and on the Actor wait.
Let him deliver up to Loviso's Hand
His borrow'd Pomp, and Ensigns of Command.

Shew all the Ways of fair Dunquerquias Soil
With Trav'llers throng'd, and smoaking with their toil.
Great Prelates, Princes, Magistrates supream,
High Soveraign States, and Lords of greatest Fame;
And others with, others without a Name.
Let some from high Namuria's Tow'rs, and some
Pour'd from the Gates of fam'd Calisia come.
These from Malosa, those from Lilia went,
Some of their own accord, and some were sent,
From every Region let a num'rous Train
Fill ev'ry Road, and cover ev'ry Plain.
Panting in Clouds of Dust, and Bath'd in Sweat,
Let 'em advance to fair Omerias Gate;
To the Pretender there let them submit,
And throw their foisty Persons at his Feet.

Let them his Favour and his Aid implore,
And to be safe, resign to France their Pow'r.
There with short Pipes, and strong Mundungus sunk,
Then part, when they sufficiently have stunk.
Thus Perkins Arms excel ev'n Caesar's Fame,
Conqu'ring before he saw, before he came.
For Scotland is subdu'd as now we hear,
By never seeing it, or coming there.
You in your Plan will leave capacious Room
For promis'd Triumphs, and great Deeds to come.
And likewise leave some Room, where we may see,
Great Things that may, or else may never be.
What a luxuriant Harvest of Renown,
What full ripe Glory will the Autumn Crown?
For if the Spring such Pease and Cherries gave,
What Pippins may we in the Autumn have.

While I so near, so long the Hero view,
And Hints suggest to be improv'd by you,
My fading Flame does in my Veins renew,
An inward Impulse does me almost choak,
Urging your Muse, I do my own provoke,
Untill my Fires all terminate in Smoak.

Oh!  did a Portion of the noble Fire,
With which the Hero fled, my Breast inspire,
I'de raise my Voice, and with a lofty Strain
Would to Etherial Fields uplift a Plain,
And fight the Gyants Battles o'er again.
The Laurel I from Maro's Brow would pull,
And when compar'd to me shew Homer is a Fool.

'Tis done.  I've compass'd my ambitious Aim,
And Brandy burnt, restores the Poet's Flame.
The Bellows blow, now, now my Bosom glows,
I strive with stong Enthusiastic Throws.
Put in more Brandy, &mdash; more, till all on Fire,
I sing young Pirkins praises to my Lyre.
How can a Muse, that Slavery loves, forbear
To sing the Wonders of th' inglorious War?
And then grow Mad, Rave, Fulminate and Stare.
I rise, O whither am I caught away?
I mount, I must the tow'ring Muse obey.
I cut the Space immense, and reach the Realms of Day.
Who'd think the Muse would serve me such a Trick,
To mount me on a Broom conjoyn'd to stick.
Where will the Flight, where will the Labour end?
Diving in Gulphs, I to the Stars ascend.
I'm now pursuing Stars, and having caught 'em,
Find them to be much bigger then I thought 'em.
Stars, which I now behold vast Orbs of Light,
Only by Distance little to the Sight.
Though Globes immense, and wandering Worlds I run,
Revolving Moons and glorious Centre shun;
And find that every Star is now a Sun.
These Suns are big and brighter much than Brass,
And more resplendent than a Looking-Glass.
Good Heavens! &mdash; but mark ye now how I am hurl'd,
From Sphere to Sphere, and then from World to World.
Here I am burnt, in th' other I am Drown'd,
Here all is still, there is an echoing Sound,
And beauteous Moons hang dangling all around.
And then I cry; Helas Monsieur Begar,
Here's Suns and Moons enough, but ne'er a Star.
You may have fancied, Suns indeed, but then,
You'd rather have your Royal Sun agen.
The Noise augments; attend, it seems to rise
From Flandrias Land; hark, how it fills the Skies?
This mighty Noise is't Triumph, it't Applause?
Is't loud Rejoycing for some Victors Cause?
Is't known?  I hear, I hear these Accents plain,
James, Scotland, Back, Dunkirk, return'd again.
But see, with feather'd Wings, see yonder flies
A large Daemoniack Envoy of the Skies;
From the Terrestial World he seems to rise.
How fierce, how strong, how swift he wings his Way?
And circling Whirlpools does around display.
Swifter then Post-Boy, that on Coursers Ride,
Or Packet driv'n, both by Wind and Tide.
Important News his cloudy Looks possess,
I follow, I attend the Fleet Express.
With him I climb the steep Empyreal Height,
Swift as a Demons is the Muse's Flight.
We now arrive at that Eternal Gate,
Where Jesuits Souls do on Ignatius wait.
Thronging about this Courier, they demand
What happy Tydings come from Scotia's Land.
Of little Jemmy Guardian Daemon say,
What great Events, what Triumphs tell us pray.
The sullen Daemon cries, the News I bring,
Is safer told to you, then Gallias King.
Whilst on our Topmasts, we our Flags advance,
To raise the Pride, and Tyranny of France.
We make our Signal to the Scots, but they
Make no returns, and so we go our way:
Speed to our Ships is added by our Fear,
Like Torrents in the Hills, or Tempests in the Air.
Our Cake is Dough, and the Pretenders Claim,
Is nothing but a Huff, an empty Name.
The Cause is by all sorts of Folks forsaken,
And which is more, the Salisbury is taken.
