WILLIAM AND COLIN.

All wet and weary William home return'd
From distant fairs, and o'erstock'd markets mourn'd.
Slowly lag on his weather-beaten fold,
The greater part as yet remain'd unsold.
Him Colin spied, who, from the open plain,
Had driven his flock to shelter from the rain.
Beneath a hollow hill the shepherd sate;
And joys to welcome his long absent mate.
To him he hies; the friendly cavern shews,
And to the covert bears his fainting ewes:
A leathern bottle, stor'd with humming beer,
He brings; large draughts the drooping drover chear.
And now the sun shot forth a gladsome ray;
The tempest ceas'd; again the fields look'd gay.
William, insensibly, forgets his care,
And cheary thus bespeaks his kind compeer.

WILLIAM.
Sure I set out on some unlucky day!
But, coming fairs my pains may better pay.
'Twere vain to grieve; what must be will befall;
Good and ill hap, by turn, still wait on all.
Now, say the news, e'er since I saw thee last,
And how the Whitsun holidays were past;
Who won the wrestling prizes at the wake;
Whose head was broke, and for what lass's sake;
Hath lovesome Lobin wedded buxom Kate?
And how doth Roger bear his high estate?
Roger turn'd farmer!  Plow-boys, prick your ears!
What lubber now to make his fortune fears?

COLIN.
Full of himself still Roger prides to be
The Merry-andrew of the company.
Our mirth he moves all as a gamesome calf;
We laugh, indeed, but 'tis at him we laugh.

WILLIAM.
Lo!  where he comes:  O strange!  he turns aside!
And see, a plaister doth his temples hide.
You seem to smile; I pry'thee, Colin, tell
If aught worth counting hath the man befell.

COLIN.
Some four or five days past, as on the brink,
(Where morn and evening all the cattle drink)
Simon and I, and Steven, in debate,
With Kitty, and her lover Dicky, sate,
Roger came up, though an unbidden guest,
And marr'd our chatting with an ill-tim'd jest.
A thousand monkey tricks the wag play'd o'er;
Then drew a naughty figure on the shore:
Strait, sparkish Steven, who had seen the town,
To shew his knowledge, called it "a great gun;"
Simon, because it something seem'd to spout,
Said "Nay; an engine 'tis, the flames to d'out!"
"Right!  Roger cried; what longing lass desires
A fitter engine to assuage Love's fires?"
And here the lout his sides ungracious shakes;
And mighty mock at simple Simon makes:
While modest blushes Kitty's cheeks o'erspread;
No rose in June glows with so bright a red.
But Dicky eyed him with a stern regard.
"Such artists should not want a due reward,"
Said he; then stamp'd the wicked picture out;
And, with his sheephook, bravely laid about.
This marr'd the lubber's laugh:  away he fled.
So may all vicious Wou'd-be-wits be sped.

WILLIAM.
Since when did Dicky so much courage gain?
Dicky!  the meerest milksop of the plain.

COLIN.
Fair Kitty 's presence made the stripling bold:
His love ill-treated, who his hands could hold?
Dicky behav'd as suits a lover swain:
A worm, when trodden on, will turn again.

WILLIAM.
So did not Roger.  What a brag is he!
Boldness and Sheepishness but ill agree.
Could such a blusterer tamely take a blow?
In words so high, in manhood all so low!

COLIN.
Empty and noisy, yet unlike a drum;
Spare him, he rattles, but, well drubb'd, is dumb.

WILLIAM.
Yet this is he, who, in his own conceit
Most wise, as fools doth all his fellows treat.

COLIN.
Not in his own conceit alone, or how
From driving, should he come to own the plow?

WILLIAM.
His tongue hath serv'd him well at time of need:
He that will spare to speak may spare to speed.
I envy not; however wealth may charm,
Yet, who would Roger be, to gain his farm?

COLIN.
Alas!  we all our different failings share:
The best have faults, and each with each should bear.
Now hie and glad thy mess-mates with thy sight:
Thy harrass'd ewes shall be my care to-night.
For lo!  the setting sun.  The flocks once penn'd,
Home hasting I'll thy news from far attend.
