CORIDON.
Now the keen Rigour of the Winter's o'er,
No Hail descends, and Frosts can pinch no more,
Whilst other Girls confess the genial Spring,
And laugh aloud, or am'rous Ditties sing,
Secure from Cold their lovely Necks display,
And throw each useless Chafing-dish away,
Why sits my Phillis discontented here,
Nor feels the Turn of the revolving Year?
Why on that Brow dwells Sorrow and Dismay,
Where Loves were wont to sport, and Smiles to Play?

PHILLIS.
Ah Corydon!  Survey the 'Change around,
Thro' all the 'Change no Wretch like me is found:
Alas!  the Day, when I, poor heedless Maid,
Was to your Rooms in Lincoln's-Inn betray'd,
Then how you swore, how many Vows you made?
Ye list'ning Zephyrs, that o'erheard his Love,
Waft the soft Accents to the Gods above.
Alas!  The Day; for Oh eternal Shame!
I sold you Handkerchiefs, and lost my Fame.

CORYDON.
When I forget the Favour you bestow'd,
Red Herrings shall be spawn'd in Tyburn Road,
Fleet-street transform'd become a flowry Green,
And Mass be sung where Opera's are seen.
The wealthy Cit, and the St. James's Beau,
Shall change their Quarters, and their Joys forego;
Stock-jobbing This to Jonathan's shall come,
At the Groom Porter's That play off his Plumb.

PHILLIS.
But what to me does all that Love avail,
If whilst I doze at Home o'er Porter's Ale,
Each Night with Wine and Wenches you regale?
My live-long Hours in anxious Cares are past,
And raging Hours in anxious Cares are past,
And raging Hunger lays my Beauty waste.
On Templers spruce in vain I Glances throw,
And with shrill Voice invite them as they go.
Expos'd in vain my glossy Ribands shine,
And unregarded wave upon the Twine.
The Week flies round, and when my Profit's known,
I hardly clear enough to change a Crown.

CORYDON.
Hard Fate of Virtue thus to be distrest,
Thou fairest of thy Trade, and far the best!
As Fruitmen's Stalls the Summer Market grace,
And ruddy Peaches Them; as first in Place
Plum Cake is seen o'er smaller Pastry Ware,
And Ice on That; so Phillis does appear
In Play-house and in Park, above the rest
Of Belles Mechanick, elegantly drest.

PHILLIS.
And yet Crepundia, that conceited Fair,
Amidst her Toys, affects a sawcy Air,
And views me hourly with a scornful Eye.

CORYDON.
She might as well with bright Cleora vie.

PHILLIS.
With this large Petticoat I strive in vain
To hide my Folly past, and coming Pain;
'Tis now no Secret; she, and Fifty more,
Observe the Symptoms I had once before.
A Second Babe at Wapping must be plac'd,
When I scarce bear the Charges of the last.

CORYDON.
What I could raise I sent; a Pound of Plumbs,
Five Shillings, and a Coral for his Gums:
To Morrow I intend him something more.

PHILLIS.
I sent a Frock and Pair of Shoes before.

CORYDON.
However, you shall home with me to Night,
Forget your Cares, and revel in Delight.
I have in Store a Pint or Two of Wine,
Some Cracknels, and the Remnant of a Chine.
And now on either Side, and all around,
The weighty Shop-Boards fall, and Bars resound;
Each ready Sempstress slips her Pattins on,
And ties her Hood, preparing to be gone.
