Ye Bards!  of shallow Sence, but specious Sound;
Ye Critics too, preposterously profound;
Hither, with Me, direct your needful Sight,
And much insulted Nature, learn to right:
Nature!  whose sacred Laws ye disallow,
And to vain Idols of your Fancy bow:
View each discreet, and glorious antient Bard,
Some Moderns too with proper Care regard;
Thus with submission due, receive your Law:
And Rules to frame your future Conduct, draw.

Immortal Homer pass, and Virgil by;
Nor lett's in vain aspiring, aim so high:
Their Beauty, State, Variety, and Fire,
With utmost Aim, We can &mdash; alone admire!

Judicious Horace, claims our earnest View,
A worthy Bard!  descerning Critic too!
Hail glorious Pattern!  stor'd with manly Sence,
Master of true poetic Excellence!
You fitly mingle Profit with Delight,
And nobly Act the Precepts that you Write,
Possessing all, seem wholy void of Care,
The Sage's Depth, and solid Weight you bear,
Mixt with the lively Courtiers Ease and Ayr:
Happy succeeding Bards, cou'st Thou impart
Thy native Genius, with thy useful Art;
Thy Art!  whose Rules with clearest Reason joyn'd,
Yield such Directions to th' enquiring Mind,
Whoever wou'd excel, must first prepare
To trace it's Precepts with the strictest Care:
But most too feeble, or neglectful still,
Our Ears alone impertinently fill
With slight and frothy Phrase, for Genius and for Skill.

Sprightly Anacreon equal Heed requires;
Patron of Mirth, and Joy, and gay Desires:
Who can Sweet Bard!  thy tempting Wiles refuse
Such is the Manner of thy lovely Muse;
And in such free and lively Ways express'd,
It might subdue the Stoic's rigid Breast:
Oh!  wou'd the whining Bard, (whose Fancy shines
In flashy Flights) regard thy beautious Lines,
Convinc'd of his mistake he'd quickly find
Nothing like easy Nature sways the Mind,
All nauseous Affectation he'd remove,
And be more just to Sence, Himself, and Love.

Who hear's with Wonder, antient Tales relate
Of Dioclesian's voluntary Fate;
Who chang'd for Privacy imperial State!
The Cause (by Thee reveal'd) oh!  Hesiod!  too,
With equal Wonder, shall delighted view:
Thy rival Muse (with Natures self at strife)
Th' inviting Pleasures of a rural Life
Does with such Truth, and beautious Ease express;
In such a proper, tho' an humble Dress,
As might induce the loftiest Mind to bow,
And leave e'en Crowns and Scepters for the Plough.

Naso's inviting Grace attract's our Eyes,
Ever imparting Pleasure, and Surprise:
What tho' (as doating on Himself) He seems
Sometimes too far to lengthen out his Theams;
The sweet Delight e'en this afford's is such,
How can we think He ever says too much?
Proceed delicious Bard!  like thy Narcissus view
Thy own fair Form, be so transported too;
If Beauty in excess is lawful Plea,
A most peculiar Right belongs to Thee!
For who a more prevailing Way cou'd find
To strike Impressions on the yielding Mind;
Thus o'er each Sex an Influence he gains,
And in each ravish'd Breast in Triumph reigns.

Gentle Tibullus view with equal Care,
With what a tender Art he moves the Fair!
Far more prevailing than the gaudy Show,
And Airs and Gestures of the modern Beau;
That now successfully assail the Heart,
Secure against the Poet's vainer Art.

Nature is two peculiar Ways inclin'd
To claim Dominion o'er the human Mind;
In these two various Ways alike excells,
By Love she courts Us, and by Fear compells:
These pow'rful Passions, when portray'd right,
To vast Concern the yielding Mind incite;
And what is most of our Concern the Cause,
Still from the Soul a pleas'd Attention draws:
What most can raise Astonishment and Fear,
Does in the Grecian tragic Scenes appear!
Wou'd you both find and feel them well?  peruse
The Terrors of the Sophoclean Muse!

These and the like, make your Examples still,
Try, as Ye can, to gain their wond'rous Skill;
Like them have due Regard to Nature's Laws;
See!  see!  their Worth just Approbation draws
From ev'ry Age, and this the truest Cause:
The surest Way wou'd ye to Fame advance?
Let all Contrivance seem th' Effect of Chance!
What's most approv'd, and ever holds to please,
Is labour'd Negligence, and studied Ease:
Yet scorn all meaness when Ye wou'd be plain;
And when ye wou'd ascend, your Force restrain,
And empty Greatness equally disdain:
Affected Strains, where Phrase it's Pomp display's,
Glitt'ring appears, like Sol's refulgent Raies;
Or with mean Sence (that humbly creep's the while)
Rise, rage, and roar, in a tremendous Style;
May light mistaken Minds a while surprize,
But soon the vain and empty Glory fly:
Whilst true Desert prevailing at the last,
Conquers the Soul, when Prejudice is pass'd,
And in eternal Fetters hold's it fast.

From Bards, in distant Lands and Ages born,
Lets turn to worthies that our Isle adorn;
Some of the chief of the reputed Throng
Lets cull, and place in our instructive Song.

Oh!  cou'd We now like daring Milton sing,
Prodigeous, mighty and amazing Theams!
In strains so solid, nervous, and sublime,
Use such Invention, such prevailing Force
As He, when He surprizingly relates,
The bold Adventures of th' infernal Chief,
Who pass'd (tho' thrice three-fold) Hell's horrid Gates,
Held by dread Forms, and by Sulphurious Flames
Enclosed; thro' Chaos, (seat of endless Feaud!
Distraction!  Desolation!  wild Uproar!)
Enrag'd, ariv'd in blissful Paradice;
And in Man's Ruin sought revengeful Sway.

Coud'd we indeed, this mighty Bard pursue,
Attempt so nobly, and so nobly do;
But yet our purpose more concisely hold,
And be correct, and regular as bold;
The British Muse, thro' her victorious Strain,
From all Contenders shou'd the Prize obtain;
Behold with Joy her Glory's vast Increase
And vye with antient Italy, and Greece.

Whilst ev'ry Voice do's his Desert proclaim,
And place Him foremost in Britannia's Fame;
Improving Spencer, (our more early Grace)
By Merit's justest Claim enjoy's a Place:
What Monuments of an eternal Praise
To Thee!  oh gen'rous Bard!  shou'd Britons raise?
Had Art in thee!  compleat Assistance joyn'd
To perfect what so nobly is design'd!
With a peculiar, and engaging Air,
He does the Mind for worthi'st Acts prepare;
And tho' by Fate oppress'd, serenely sings
Whilst from his Muse Delight with Profit springs;
In all Attempts successfully assails,
With choice Instruction couch'd in pleasing Tales:
He first of all, the simple doric strains
With proper Grace transfer'd to Britain's Plains,
And with his Prize unrivall'd still remains.

Behold great Shakespear like the Morning Star,
In unextinguish'd Glory from afar!
The Pride and Grace of the preceding Age,
And still chief Lustre of the British Stage:
Yet this triumphant, this transcendent He;
Is not from many Imperfections free;
Thus richest Gems in sordid Earth are found,
And Weeds on most luxurious Soils abound:
Such ills, that in the most embellish'd Mind
Sometimes unsuiting Habitation find,
A Cause for friendly fit Reproof produce,
And speak the worthy Critic's needful Use.

From Nature, Wit deriv'd it's early Birth,
Like Trees proceeding from the gen'rous Earth;
As they, however:  bountiful and fair,
Still need the Gard'ners beneficial Care;
Wit need's the skillful Critic's, to displace
Injurious Stains, and higthen ev'ry Grace;
With Judgment and industrious Care, to find
Each secret Good; and be severely kind;
Such antient Critics were; beneath their View,
And just Regard, a while it choicely grew;
But oh!  in Time, a strange and Savage Race
Encroaching, did the noble Plant debase;
With Arrogance, and with a stubborn Will,
Watch'd o'er it's Groath, only to use it ill,
And proudly shew their false malicious Skill:
By these assaulted many barb'rous Ways
It droops, and in it's worthiest Parts decays;
Like Frosts they nip, like Locusts they defile,
And have no Care but destroy and spoil.

Oh!  might I see that golden Time renew
(More blest than Albion, yet was known to view)
When Prejudice and Arrogance remov'd,
Wit shall be rightly cherish'd and belov'd;
When Critics give to Merit due Regard,
And Patrons fit Protection and Reward!

Observe the soothing Waller's courtly Lays;
To Love and Beauty his Devoirs He pays,
And sound's the Victor's, and the Monarch's Praise:
He prun'd our Language, and refin'd our Thought;
But not improving to Perfection brought,
Something still in his Verse uncouth appears
To minds most curious, and the nicest Ears;
His Turns too, bearing frequent influence,
Lessen the bold majestic Force of Sence.

Regard the solitary Cowley claims;
Who often, nor successless, nobly aims:
But, as the Greyhound's free and active Force
Gives mod'rate Pastime in the speedy Course;
And what in little Time and Space is done,
Is finish'd allmost when and where begun,
Whereas the Beagle (that in slower Pace
With Scent and Cry pursues the distant Chace)
By much-extending both the Time and Bounds,
Thro' various pleasing Scenes, with chearful Sounds,
O'er Mountains and thro' echoing Vales and Fields
Conveying &mdash; choicer Recreation yields;

So Cowley do's too hasty Vigour use,
And Fancy's,  Game too rapidly pursues:
His eager Starts baffle the Mind's Desire,
And the more settled Expectation tire:
Nay, to be just, tho' seemingly severe,
Sometimes Propriety is wanting &mdash; here;
And whilst his roving Thoughts in Mazes fly;
Now too remote, now as obscurely high,
Low and ill-manag'd his Expressions lye:

With Him, most Poets of the former Age,
Highly indulgent to their Fancies Rage,
In Words, and Numbers too remiss appear;
And whilst they sooth the Mind, disgust the Ear;
Most now, to sinking softness are inclin'd,
And to delight our Ears, offend the Mind;
Slight polish'd Terms they plentiously afford,
But with substantial Sence are meanly stor'd:
Of all that have attempted yet, how Few
(To Sence, Sound, Substance, and Appearance true)
Have Fate and their united Aims decreed,
Each Way, endeav'ring rightly, to succeed?

Wou'd Ye in decent, sly, and artful Rage,
With rival Wits adventrously engage?
Remark the celebrated Dryden well,
Who do's in this triumphantly excel;
The sharpness of a Satire's scornful smile
Is fully seen in his ironic Style;
This in Mac Fleckno is compleatly shown,
The skilfull'st Pattern Britain yet has known:

Often this Bard, and various Ways prevails,
But too regardless in Translations, fails;
No Mortal's Skill a Just Translation makes;
But who th' Impression of his Author's takes,
We must with Care his Disposition find,
Conform to his, the Temper of our Mind;
We must explore his utmost Aim and End,
Into th' abstrusest of his Thoughts descend,
And know him, as a Man his dearest Friend:
He must be seiz'd like Proteus, not escape
Our firm Embrace in any vary'd Shape;
Each way He leads, we punctually must trace,
Preserve his Spirit, and peculiar Grace;
For tho' wee need not servily pursue
His words; his Meaning must be still in View,
Be never alter'd; this we must express
With constant Zeal; and only change his Dress;
In all things at a real Likeness aim,
A full, yet unconstrain'd Resemblance frame;
Be (more than his Interpreter) the same.

Observe what sweet Amusement, Prior brings;
When eas'd of State-affairs, the Poet sings!
Mark, how his Muse do's variously prevail,
And force Concern!  or form a pleasing Tale!
Him most, for Laies facetiously polite,
Britons shall with deserv'd Applause requite;
Nor shall the constant Nut-brown Maid, as told
(As gracefully reviv'd) by Him, grow old;
Tho' since her Birth so many Years have roul'd.

Wilmot observe, who once so blithly sung;
Wilmot!  the noble, lowly, gay, and young;
Not most industrious the Precise to please,
His Words and Numbers flow with careless Ease;
His Fancy beautious, not to Rule confin'd;
Wild as the Season was his sportive Mind;
Void of Restraint, he with a careless Air
Rally's the Foppish, and attack's the Fair;
For Victory ordain'd, He still pursues
Th' inviting Sex, and bravely still subdues;
Oh!  was He but from nauseous Error free,
He Mirth's and Love's auspicious Guide shou'd be:
Thus much has Justice in his Cause express'd;
In modest silence let's conceal the rest.

Oldham regard, of equal Fame, and Years;
In whom sweet Wilmot more improv'd appears:
Solid, acute; soft, strong; sublime, and gay;
Fruitful as August, fresh as blooming May:
Oh!  had He liv'd his Language to refine,
And duly polish ev'ry manly Line;
He Love and Praise shou'd plentifully share;
Cou'd He his vain presumtious Rants forbear,
Check his too furious Spleen, and helpless Woman spare.

Thus have I strove to shew the Road to Fame,
And from false Paths, by Patterns, to reclaim;
Errors in Wit to vast Excess are grown,
But Natures Pow'r let the Discreeter own;
Her just Directions still with Care obey,
And humbly follow, as she leads the Way;
For oh!  how must the Mean (neglecting Her)
Mistaken wander?  When then the Noblest err!
And whilst They ill-concerted Measurers take,
True Reason too regardlessly forsake.
