At Woodstock Park, in Ancient Time there stood
A goodly, aged Oak, itself a Wood,
Who to the Skies his stately Arms display'd,
Fam'd for his Airy Height, and Reverend Shade.
But now Old Age, (what will not Age consume!)
Blasted the Glory of his Youthful Bloom;
And He, who once reign'd Monarch of the Field,
Conquer'd by none but Time, is forc'd to yield.
He, who of late look'd o'er the Spacious Plain,
And view'd the Subject Shrubs with just Disdain,
Beneath whose Boughs the Cattle safely stood,
Furnish'd at once with Shelter, and with Food.
Who to the Farmer paid an annual Due,
As Tribute for the Ground on which he grew.
Now sees each rude, malicious blight Deface
His former Honours, and departing Grace.
Now the Grey Moss has marr'd his withering Rind,
And his bald Top's the Sport of every Wind.
Now pointed Blasts his batter'd Branches gore,
Which not the loudest Storm could shake before.

An upstart Briar rose too near his Side,
Full of his Earth-born Self, and Swoln with Pride;
Which thrust his prickly Head, in vaunting wise,
Aloft in Air, and seem'd to threat the Skies.
Whose armed Leaves sweet Smelling Flowers adorn,
And opening Roses blossom on his Thorn.
Hither the Nymphs accustom'd to repair,
And gather Garlands for their Golden Hair.
Hither the little Birds would oft retreat,
And Warbling Tunes of Love or Grief repeat.
Linnets and Nightingales would hither fly,
With every Feather'd Poet of the Sky.
At this the foolish Briar conceited grew,
Pleas'd with the Birds who to his Bushes flew,
And proud of Flowers, which for the Ladies blew.
This puff'd him so, that he began to scold
At the Good Oak, because the Oak was old.

What dost thou mean (quoth he) thou brutish Block,
The Ground to cumber with thy barren Stock,
No Shadow now thy Leafless Head bestows,
Nor the least Acorn on thy Branches grows.
See how my Flowers are with fresh Beauty spread,
Or dy'd in Lilly-white, or Rosy-red.
My lively Leaves are cloath'd in lusty Green,
A Colour worthy of a Maiden Queen.
While thy Waste, Bulky Body, (which so long
The Earth has bore, and groan'd beneath the Wrong)
Almost a Carcass, and scarce half alive,
Would me of all my springing Bloom deprive.
Hid are my Blossoms, and beclouded now,
By such a Useless, Worthless Thing as Thou.
The fragrant Odours which my Flourets threw,
Sweeter than Spicy Forests ever knew,
Are poison'd by your mouldy Moss, and you.
If then you would not my Displeasure prove,
Be gone, Old Trunk, and from this Green remove.

Thus in contemptuous Strain the Bramble spoke,
Little reply'd the generous, suffering Oak.
But his vile Taunts with as much Courage bore,
As when he fought with Winds and Storms before.
Yet inwardly his Mighty Heart did bleed,
Thus to be snubb'd for every glorious Deed,
By a poor Shrub, a despicable Weed.

It happen'd once upon a certain Day,
So Fate ordain'd, the Landlord came that Way,
As was his Custom, to Survey his Ground,
And mark his stately Trees in Compass round;
Which, fit for lopping, would most Gain produce,
And furnish Rafters for the Builder's Use:
Soon as the Briar kenn'd him from afar,
His Spight awaken'd, and reviv'd the War.
His Ancient Quarrel he remember'd still,
(For Malice has a Memory for Ill.)
To gain the Patron was his only Aim,
And rouze the dying Embers to a Flame.
For this the sturdy Oak he thus arraign'd,
And causlessly in formal Speech complain'd.
O my Liege Lord, on whom my Life depends,
(And then his suppliant, sneaking Head he bends,)
Ponder, I pray you, my complaining Moan
Of Wrongs, enough to move a very Stone:
Which your poor Vassal daily must endure,
Unless your Goodness brings a speedy Cure.
Grief will dispatch me, if this Oak proceed
To grow successful, and none curb his Speed.
If in Felonious Force he thus go on,
I, wretched I, am utterly undone.

The Good Man, wounded with this piteous Plea,
Against an Ancient, Serviceable Tree,
Stood mute, and wonder'd what the Plaintiff meant;
But griev'd, and found his easie Heart relent,
For Pity's credulous, and the Distrest
Soon gain th' Ascendant on an honest Breast.
Go on, he cry'd, and in thy Tale proceed:
Then thus began this proud insulting Weed;
(As is the Custom of Ambitious Folk,)
His colour'd Crime with painted Words to cloke.

Ah, my Dear Sovereign Lord, whose Favours fall
On every Plant, the Humble and the Tall,
Do not poor I, thy own Plantation, stand
As well as Oaks, the Monsters of thy Land?
I furnish Blossoms in the Vernal Prime,
And Scarlet Berries for the Summer Time;
How comes it then that this declining Oak,
Whose Trunk is sapless, and whose Arms are broke,
Whose naked Branches stretching to the Sky,
Should haughtily the flow'ring Briar defy?
Who darkens with his Shade my lovely Light,
And robs me of the Sun's refreshing Sight.
Oft from my Wounds the Blood is seen to slide,
His wither'd Boughs so beat my tender Side.
His hoary Locks on my fresh Flourets cast,
Before their Time, my Honours have defac'd.
For cruel Wrongs, and Outrages like these,
I only beg your Goodness would appease
The ranc'rous Rigour of his potent Spight,
Refrain his Rage, and do your Vassal Right.
To whom, unless your Patronage is just,
His Beauties soon will moulder in the Dust.
At this with worthy Indignation struck,
Th' undaunted Oak his lofty Branches shook,
Prepar'd an Answer, and to clear at large
His Honour from his Advesary's Charge.
But his foul Tongue us'd poorly to inform,
Had in the Landlord rais'd so high a Storm;
So much this Worm had wriggled in his Ear,
The Landlord could not, or He would not, hear,
But Home he hasted in a furious Heat,
Did Vows of Vengeance to himself repeat.
He bent the harmful Hatchet in his Hand,
(Ah, that the Hatchet should so ready stand!)
Impatient, to the Park alone he speeds,
(For little is the Help which Mischief needs.)
His silent Malice on the Tree to wreak,
For very Anger would not let him speak.
Then to the Root he bent his sturdy Stroak,
And gash'd with many a Wound the injur'd Oak.
The Ax recoil'd, as if th' unwilling Steel,
Relented at each Blow which made him reel.
Whether the conscious Iron was afraid,
And to his good Old Age just Reverence paid;
For it had been a very ancient Tree,
Sacred of Old, with many a Mystery.
Crost was it often by the Priestly Crew,
And hallow'd oft with Holy-water Dew.
But Priests in vain their Holy-water spent,
In vain to Heav'n their Prayers and Blessings sent.
Old Age will come, and with it sure Decay;
And what can drive the Dart of Fate away?
The Good Man labour'd at each hearty Blow:
The wounded Oak sigh'd at his Overthrow.
The Steel had pierc'd his Pith, and Truth to tell,
He gave a piteous Groan, and down he fell;
His wond'rous Weight made all the Park to quake,
The Ground shrunk under him, and seem'd to shake;
Prostrate he lyes upon his Native Earth,
Pitied by none but those who knew his Worth.

Now Reigns the Bramble, like a Lord, alone,
Puff'd up with Pride, and like a Bladder blown.
Pert as a Pye, and as a Peacock gay,
And pleasant as the merry Month of May.
But Grief succeeding, sudden Mirth destroys,
And treads upon the Heels of hasty Joys.
Now Winter draws her stormy Legions forth,
And Blustering Boreas rages from the North.
By these the solitary Briar is torn,
Naked, abandon'd, helpless and forlorn.
In vain he seeks for some protecting Shade,
Dead is that Tree, to whom he flew for Aid.
Now he repents his foolish Pride too late,
And pities the good Oak's unworthy Fate:
The biting Frost nips all his Branches dead,
And showry Rains weigh down his feeble Head.
The heaped Snow now burdens him so sore,
His Strength is lost, and he can rise no more.
But prostrate laid, is trampled in the Dirt
By brouzing Cattle, and severely hurt.
For scorning reverend Age, this Fall he found,
Unpitied, spurn'd, and grov'ling on the Ground.

So fare the Man, who fed with vain Desires,
By others Ruin, to be Great aspires,
And such the Fate of all Ambitious Briars!
