HOBNELIA.
Hobnelia seated in a dreary Vale,
In pensive Mood rehears'd her piteous Tale,
Her piteous Tale the Winds in Sighs bemoan,
And pining Eccho answers Groan for Groan.

I rue the Day, a rueful Day, I trow,
The woful Day, a Day indeed of Woe!
When Lubberkin to Town his Cattle drove,
A Maiden fine bedight he hapt to love;
The Maiden fine bedight his Love retains,
And for the Village he forsakes the Plains.
Return, my Lubberkin, these Ditties hear;
Spells will I try, and Spells shall ease my Care.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

When first the Year, I heard the Cuckow sing,
And call with welcome Note the budding Spring,
I straitway set a running with such Haste,
Deb'rah that won the Smock scarce ran so fast.
'Till spent for lack of Breath, quite weary grown,
Upon a rising Bank I sat adown,
Then doff'd my Shoe, and by my Troth, I swear,
Therein I spy'd this yellow frizled Hair,
As like to Lubberkin's in Curl and Hue,
As if upon his comely Pate it grew.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

At Eve last Midsummer no Sleep I sought,
But to the Field a Bag of Hemp-seed brought,
I scatter'd round the Seed on ev'ry side,
And three times in a trembling Accent cry'd,
This Hempseed with my Virgin Hand I sow,
Who shall my True-love be, the Crop shall mow.
I strait look'd back, and if my Eyes speak Truth,
With his keen Scythe behind me came the Youth.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

Last Valentine, the Day when Birds of Kind
Their Paramours with mutual Chirpings find;
I rearly rose, just at the break of Day,
Before the Sun had chas'd the Stars away;
A-field I went, amid the Morning Dew
To milk my Kine (for so should Huswives do)
Thee first I spy'd, and the first Swain we see,
In spite of Fortune shall our True-love be;
See, Lubberkin, each Bird his Partner take,
And canst thou then thy Sweatheart dear forsake?
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

Last May-day fair I search'd to find a Snail
That might my secret Lover's Name reveal;
Upon a Gooseberry Bush a Snail I found,
For always Snails near sweetest Fruit abound.
I seiz'd the Vermine, home I quickly sped,
And on the Hearth the milk-white Embers spread.
Slow crawl'd the Snail, and if I right can spell,
In the soft Ashes mark'd a curious L:
Oh, may this wondrous Omen lucky prove!
For L is found in Lubberkin and Love.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

Two Hazel-Nuts I threw into the Flame,
And to each Nut I gave a Sweet-heart's Name.
This with the loudest Bounce me sore amaz'd,
That in a Flame of brightest Colour blaz'd.
As blaz'd the Nut so may thy Passion grow,
For 'twas thy Nut that did so brightly glow.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

As Peascods once I pluck'd, I chanc'd to see
One that was closely fill'd with three times three,
Which when I cropp'd I safely home convey'd,
And o'er my Door the Spell in secret laid.
My Wheel I turn'd, and sung a Ballad new,
While from the Spindle I the Fleeces drew
The Latch mov'd up, when who should first come in,
But in his proper Person, &mdash; Lubberkin.
I broke my Yarn surpriz'd the Sight to see,
Sure Sign that he would break his Word with me.
Eftsoons I join'd it with my wonted Slight,
So may again his Love with mine unite!
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

This Lady-fly I take from off the Grass,
Whose spotted Back might scarlet Red surpass.
Fly, Lady-Bird, North, South, or East or West,
Fly where the Man is found that I love best.
He leaves my Hand, see, to the West he's flown,
To call my True-love from the faithless Town.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

This mellow Pippin, which I pare around,
My Shepherd's Name shall flourish on the Ground.
I fling th' unbroken Paring o'er my Head,
Upon the Grass a perfect L is read;
Yet on my Heart a fairer L is seen
Than what the Paring marks upon the Green.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

This Pippin shall another Tryal make,
See from the Core two Kernels brown I take;
This on my Cheek for Lubberkin is worn,
And Boobyclod on t' other side is born.
But Boobyclod soon drops upon the Ground,
A certain Token that his Love's unsound,
While Lubberkin sticks firmly to the last;
Oh were his Lips to mine but join'd so fast!
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

As Lubberkin once slept beneath a Tree,
I twitch'd his dangling Garter from his Knee;
He wist not when the hempen String I drew,
Now mine I quickly doff of inkle Blue;
Together fast I tye the Garters twain,
And while I knit the Knot repeat this Strain.
Three times a True-love's Knot I tye secure,
Firm be the Knot, firm may his Love endure.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

As I was wont, I trudg'd last Market-Day
To Town, with New-laid Eggs preserv'd in Hay.
I made my Market long before 'twas Night,
My Purse grew Heavy and my Basket light.
Strait to the Pothecary's Shop I went,
And in Love-Powder all my Mony spent;
Behap what will, next Sunday after Prayers,
When to the Ale-house Lubberkin repairs,
These Golden Flies into his Mug I'll throw,
And soon the Swain with fervent Love shall glow.
With my sharp Heel I three times mark the Ground,
And turn me thrice around, around, around.

But hold &mdash; our Light-Foot barks, and cocks his Ears,
O'er yonder Stile see Lubberkin appears.
He comes, he comes, Hobnelia's not bewray'd,
Nor shall she crown'd with Willow die a maid.
He vows, he swears, he'll give me a green Gown,
Oh dear!  I fall adown, adown, adown!
