In Days of Old, when Beasts in Regal State
Their Courts maintain'd, and wisely cou'd debate;
The Wily Fox, the Mimic Ape address'd,
With Want and Infamy alike oppress'd.

Neighbour and Gossip!  We are so ally'd
No sep'rate Views our Friendship can divide.
With equal Sorrow we each other view,
And vainly we this Course of Life persue.
Thus many Years we now have spent and worn
In mean Regard, and basest Fortunes scorn.
Let us no more this wretched State endure,
But with united Counsels seek a Cure.

This solemn Lecture th' Ape maturely weigh'd,
And swore the Fox's Rules shou'd be obey'd.
They then reflected how they shou'd proceed,
That Gold wou'd end their Cares they soon agreed;
That haughty Man for gold his God's betray'd,
And Gods themselves more mighty Gold cou'd aid.

Long had the jarring World of War complain'd,
And purple Streams the Verdant Fields distain'd.
A Peace was late Proclaim'd; but thro' the Crowd
Fell Envy ran, and hiss'd and bray'd aloud.
A Factious herd the spreading Venom seiz'd,
And Peace and Quiet, Health and Trade displeas'd.
Weak Reasons utter'd in schismatic Schools,
Dispers'd by Knaves, were credited by Fools.

From hence the Fox resolv'd, a Soldier's Name
At once wou'd shield them, and their Wants proclaim.
The Ape he judg'd was fittest for the Cheat,
While he wou'd wait, to forward the Deceit.
The Ape in military Gard array'd,
Seem'd Maim'd and Scarr'd, with loss of Blood decay'd.
Shame light on him!  that thro' such false Pretence
Converts the Name of Soldier to Offence&mdash;;
And that which is the Noblest Mistery,
Turns to Reproach and common Infamy.

Long time they wasted in this vagrant State,
And rambled far, and met with various Fate.
Sometimes in Luxury their Lives they led,
And soon with Hunger, and with Cold half Dead;
Their Wiles at length, no longer cou'd be born,
Expos'd to all they grew the publick Scorn.

The honour'd Soldier's Garb aside he threw,
And to a Farmer privately withdrew.
He, easy Man, deceiv'd with formal Prayer,
His Fleecy Flocks committed to their Care.
With Blood insatiate on his Flocks they flew,
Nor tender Lamb escap'd, nor teeming Ewe.
The Year expir'd, Accounts were to be clear'd:
But conscious of their Guilt, e're Day appear'd
They stole away, and took their hasty Flight,
Cover'd with Clouds of all concealing Night.

Next they assum'd the Clergy's sacred Name,
And made Religion serve their wicked Aim:
But soon by Vice distinguish'd from the rest,
They fled a Calling painful to the Best.

Detected thus, and grown the Vulgar Sport,
The Fox advis'd they shou'd repair to Court.
For from sagacious Beasts he oft had heard,
Few were advanc'd for Vertue's bare Regard.

All Things prepar'd, to court their Course they steer'd;
The Ape as Lord, the Fox as Man appear'd.
'Twere tedious to recount, hard to believe
The various Slights they practis'd to deceive.
The Ape with low inglorious Minds prevail'd,
At vertuous Names, and nobler Deeds he rail'd.
While the brave Courtier, in whose beauteous Thought
Regard of Honour harbours more than ought;
Such Practice loath'd, nor wou'd their Bloods disgrace,
But walk'd upright with comely stedfast Pace.
Deep in their Hearts their Loyalty engrav'd,
Nor wou'd by Foreign Boobies be enslav'd.

Such he avoided, and fit Objects chose,
On whom his witless Pleasance might impose,.
Sometimes he wou'd fine loving Verses frame,
And play the Poet oft, but ah for shame!
Let not sweet Poets praise (whose only Pride
Is Vertue to advance,  and Vice deride)
Be with the Work of Scriblers Wit defam'd,
Nor let such Verses, Poetry be nam'd.
Yet he the Name on him wou'd rashly take,
Maugre the sacred Muses, and  oft make
Them aid his Vice, and with their Charms allure
Chaste Ladies Ears to Fantasies impure.
If Arms or Honours e're their Breasts inflam'd,
Their Toils he mock'd, and their great Deeds defam'd.
Their gentle Wits, and kindle with Desire,
Then would he scoff at Learning, and disgrace
The Sectaries thereof, as People Base.
And simple Men, who in dark Corners mew'd,
Mutter'd of Matters as their Books them shew'd.
Nor other Knowledge ever did attain,
But with their Gowns their Gravity maintain.
From them, he wou'd his impudent lewd Speech
Against God's Holy Ministers oft reach,
So mock high God himself whom they profess;
But what car'd he for God or Godliness.
All his Desire was sordid Wealth to gain,
And in luxurious Ease his Life maintain.

But chiefly Renard's Arts his Coffer's fill'd;
For he in cleanly Knavery was skill'd.
Demure in Looks, and formal in his Speech,
Daily expos'd, yet daily cou'd o're-reach.
With Hums and Haws from Fools, Applause cou'd win,
And wisely prove great Sinfulness in Sin.
Bloody and stern, and insolent in Place,
But meanly crouch'd and fawn'd when in Disgrace.
In Sacriledge his rude Religion lay,
And his Obedience Treason did display.
All but his crafty Kind unclean he held,
And most in vile Hypocrisy excell'd.
Accomplish'd thus, a thousand Tricks he play'd,
And swore and ly'd, was trusted and betray'd.
He flatter'd Fools, but shun'd the Good and Wise,
And simple Suitors gravely wou'd advise
To buy his Master's frivolous good Will,
Who had not Pow'r to do them Good or Ill.

So pitiful a thing is Suiter's State!
Most miserable Man!  Whom wicked Fate
Hath brought to Court, to seek uncertain Gain,
Which rarely satisfies, and few obtain.
Full little knowest thou, who has not try'd,
What Hell it is in suing long to bide.
To lose good Days, which might be better spent,
To waste long Nights in pensive discontent.
To speed to Day, to be put back to morrow,
To have thy Prince's Grace, yet want his Peers,
To have thy asking, yet wait many Years.
To fret thy Soul with Crosses and with Care,
To eat thy Heart thro' comfortless Despair.
To fawn, to crowch, to wait, to ride, to run,
To spend, to give, to want, to be undone.
Unhapy Wretch!  Born to disastrous End,
Who does his Life in long Attendance spend.
Whoever leaves sweet Home, where mean Estate
In Safeties held, and free of Strife or Hate,
Finds all Things needful, Nature to sustain,
And will to Court to seek for Shadows vain,
Will find himself an Idiot in the End.
May that dire Curse my Enemy attend!

At length the Fox cou'd not so closely hide
His crafty Feats, but they were all descry'd.
Brought to the Bar, the Jury soon agreed,
And Banishment perpetual was decreed.

Th' untoward Ape his Counsellor soon miss'd,
Nor cou'd without the Knavish Fox subsist:
Expos'd and scorn'd by all, he fled dismay'd,
And sought again his dear Companion's Aid.

Long time they wander'd in sad Banishment,
And grievous Want and Hardships underwent.
They curs't the Folly that thus made them roam,
And leave the Sweetness of contented Home.
But ne'er repented of one wicked Deed,
For irreclaimable is all their Breed.

Thus as they griev'd and mourn'd their hard Estate,
And retchless, thro' the Forrest sought their Fate.
Lo!  Where they spy'd, how in a Gloomy Glade,
The Lyon sleeping lay in secret Shade,
The Crown and Sceptre lying by his Side,
And having doft for heat his dreadful Hide;
The Ape was seiz'd with Terror at the Sight,
And judg'd his Safety lay in sudden Flight:
But him the Fox with hardy Words did stay,
And bad him put the Cowardice away.
Fortune, said he, presents this lucky Hour,
To rise from mean Degree to sov'reign Pow'r.
His Crown and Sceptre seiz'd, if we think good,
And his fam'd skin, the Terror of the Wood;
What hinders then, if we these Engines wear,
But we our selves the Regal Pow'r may share?

These Reasons with th' Ambitious Ape prevail'd
But Death objected if their Treason fail'd.

Fond Ape, said Renard, to whose dastard Mind
Never did thought of Honour passage find.
Who for a Crown will not his Life disdain?
And rather chuse in sov'reign State to reign,
Than dwell in Dust inglorious and base,
Where none shall name the Number of his Place?
Consider Man:  And who does not oft swear,
And oft unswear, a Diadem to wear?
Kings by their Subjects daily are betray'd,
And their own Off-spring will their Rights invade.
The Crown obtain'd, the Perjur'd Nations croud,
And sing the vile Usurpers Praise aloud.
In awkward Pomp their Homage she receives,
And prostituted Vows the Dolt believes.
Whatever flagrant Crimes we perpetuate,
Remember, it is Man we imitate.
A Crown's the Object, boldly then proceed,
Success will consecrate the blackest Deed.

But first the Fox convey'd beneath his Head
A baneful Herb, which wondrous Influence shed;
It's drowsy Fumes the Lyon did invest,
And Loyalty throughout his Realms supprest.

Embolden'd thus, the Ape in thieving skill'd,
His trusty Councellor's Advice fulfill'd.
The Royal Ensigns now convey'd away,
A Strife arose who shou'd possess the Prey.
But 'twas agreed, the Ape in Shew shou'd reign,
While all the Pow'r shou'd with the Fox remain.

The Ape adorn'd with Marks of Sov'reign Sway,
Strait to the Royal Palace took his Way.
The Sheep and Ass upon the Road they found,
Who trembling bow'd, and the Usurper own'd.
They ne'er consider'd who the Scepter sway'd,
Whoever rul'd they passively obey'd.
They not presum'd Kings to unmake or to make,
But solemn Oaths to all alike wou'd take.

And then for Conscience against Conscience fight,
And starve the Heir, yet know and own his Right.
They held that Kings and Crowns by Right Divine enjoy'd,
But that Possession too that Right Divine destroy'd.

These first the Ape's Authority did own,
And fawn'd and cring'd, and crowded nest the Throne,
But soon dismiss'd, and treated with Disgrace,
More proper Instruments supply'd their Place.

The Fox was made prime Minister of State:
And now display'd his fell invet'rate hate.
The harmless Herd with Rancour he persu'd,
Rich with their Spoils, and with their Blood embru'd.
His Kin alone all Offices must share,
The Lybian Tyger and the German Bear.
A Wolfish Guard he plac'd about the Court,
And made Alliances for his support
With Foreign Beasts; not in the Forrest bred,
But part by Land, and part by Water fed.
He fed his Cubs with Fat of all the Soil,
And with the sweet of others sweating Toil.
The Land he tax'd, the Subject he oppress'd,
For Bribes alone the Injur'd he redress'd.
Titles and Offices he meanly sold,
And Pastors wou'd elect for sordid Gold.
The real Nobles forc'd in Caves to dwell,
While all their ancient Mansions mould'ring fell.
But his proud Palaces were rais'd so high,
That they began to threat the Neighbour Sky.

Now when high Jove, in whose Almighty Hand
The Care of Kings and Pow'r of Empire stand,
Sitting one Day above the Azure Sky,
From whence he views with his Black-lidded Eye
Whate'er the Heav'n in his wide Vault contains,
And all that in the deepest Earth remains:
The troubled Kingdom of the Beasts survey'd,
Which, shameless, not their kindly Lord obey'd,
But an Usurping Ape, who, cloath'd with Guile,
Had all subverst and did the Throne defile.
He 'sdeignful frowning, hardly cou'd refrain,
But that with Thunderbolts he had him slain,
And driven down to Hell; a Sentence due
To all Usurpers, and their wicked Crew.
But pawsing in his Wrath, he rather chose
To the whole World th' Impostors to expose.
And solemnly decreed, that vile Disgrace
Shou'd cling forever to their Brutish Race.
To Mercury the God declar'd his Will,
And bad him haste, and his Decree fulfil.
To brand with Infamy th' Usurping Race,
And on his Throne the Lawful Sov'reign place.

The Son of Maia took his steep Descent,
The Liquid Clouds and Lucid Firmament,
With his bright Azure Wings he clove, nor staid
Till the wrong'd Lyon sleeping he survey'd.
The wicked Weed he first remov'd, whose Charms
Gave Sleep, and fill'd the Wood with false Alarms.
Then thus the God; arise thou injur'd King!
From mighty Jove himself Commands I bring.
This dull Distemper from thy Spirits shake,
Assert thy Right, these lonely Woods forsake.
An Idiot Ape and Fox of Traytor kind,
To rob thee of thy Birth-right have combin'd.
In scorn to Law, thy Kingdom they possess,
With foreign Yoke thy subjects they oppress.
Arise!  Assert thy Right!  For naked as thou art,
Depend on sure Success, Great Jove will take thy part.

At this the Lyon rows'd, his Den survey'd,
And quickly found, he basely was betray'd.
His own, his subjects Wrongs when he beheld,
His noble Heart with Indignation swell'd.
He roar'd aloud and sternly look'd around,
And all the forrest trembled with the Sound.
Thus wrong'd, encourag'd thus by Jove's Command,
He vow'd from foreign Sway to free the Land.
A Cause so Just admitted no delay,
But swiftly to his court he took his way.

The joyful News was soon dispers'd by Fame,
The Native King return'd his Right to claim!
Repenting Subjects crowded as he pass'd,
And own'd their Follies, and his Feet embrac'd.
His generous Soul ev'n to upbraid forbore,
He pardon'd all, but bad them sin no more.

Th' Acclamations reach'd th' Usurper's Ears,
Trembling they heard, and vanquish'd by their Fears,
By all deserted, with their Guilt half dead,
In haste, from their impending Ruin fled.

The Lyon, in whose Temper Mercy reign'd,
Smil'd at their Terror, and Persuit disdain'd.

The Ape was hiss'd, and grew the rabble's Sport,
The Fox forever banish'd from the Court.

The Lyon sought their Mischiefs to repair,
His Subjects Good was now his only Care.
