I.
The Sun now posted to his watry Bed,
The Evening was with gloomy Clouds o'erspread,
When from a solitary Grove I home retir'd,
But found my self (alas) not now inspir'd
With any Genius for Poetry,
Such as on nice Occasions us'd to be;
But ominous Melancholy prest
My Spirits, and with strange infection fill'd my Breast:
The Faculties and Orders of my Soul,
Thoughts sad as Death did now controul.
I hastned to repose, but could not rest.
'Till with long watching tir'd, a troubled Slumber eas'd
My wearied Sense, or rather fatall Numbness seiz'd
My vital Parts all o'er, whilst to my Eye,
In visionary Scenes, was shewn this Prodigy.

II.
A Royal Banquet in a spacious Place
Hung round with Arras, figuring the Race
Of Gods, of Heroes, and of Kings;
And wond'rous Stories of most wond'rous things
Methought I saw prepar'd; at which in State
The gracious Gloriana sate:
Around her all the Nobles of the Land,
Those that bore Office and Command,
Place, or Dependence from the Crown;
With others also that had none,
In order were; grave Heads that Mitres wore,
Grandees that held white Rods, Judges in Robes with Fur;
And round the Hall on large Degrees rais'd high
Another august Company,
The great Supporters of the Diadem,
And of the Nation's Glory and Esteem,
The English Commons sate
Like the Disposers of resolving Fate;
Who from the prying Croud did Rev'rence draw,
By Looks, with Signs of Knowledge grac'd, and legislative Awe.
Next these were mixt a Number more
Promiscuously that Office bore,
And each in's happy Station did reveal
The secret Joy his Heart did feel,
Down from the Pages that attend, up to the potent Seal,
A grand Affair there was to do,
Form'd to promote the national Interest,
As well as make the City blest;
And in a Charter newly wrote, presented to her View.
And here, methought, the Praetor of the Town,
With all his Brethren, Traders of Renown,
Wrapt up in Fur, with each a Chain embellishing his Gown,
Made the demure Petition on their Knees,
And never seem'd so well at Ease;
All with a Look sincere, in humble View,
Tho' perhaps perfect at the Heart but few;
(What cannot Citizens for Profit do?)
Whilst to their fam'd Recorder, grave and wise,
Th' attentive Sovereign, with a Smile,
Short Answer made, but in so kind a Style,
That now they thought their Feast well given;
Praising their Royal Saint,
In Expectation of her Grant,
Beyond the brightest Cherubin in Heaven.
And nothing now was heard and seen
But joyful Hums, and Grins, and Looks, half comick, half serene,
All closing with, Oh, happy we and long, long live the Queen.

III.
But whilst this general Joy
In every Face appear'd,
All blest with Gloriana's gracious Eye;
Who pleas'd with what she saw and heard,
With Freedom gave her Satisfaction vent,
And full of easy Goodness shew'd her Liking and Content.
From the swol'n Bosom of a gloomy Cloud
A thunder Clap was heard so loud,
With such a frightful Sound
As when the mighty Saviour dy'd,
The sacred Temple did divide;
And divine Vengeance rent the trembling Ground.
Amazing Horror straight surpriz'd each Face,
Nor now could that Majestick Grace
That late in Gloriana shone, appear,
For even she grew chang'd with Fear:
Her chearful Face, with deadly Pale o'er-cast,
Lookt like a fragrant Flower struck with a withering Blast.
Then straight, methought, the Roof was seen to cleave,
Rafters torn out, the tott'ring Building leave,
Whilst Eastward from the Sky
A Radiant Form descending charm'd each Eye.
With Glories of immense Divinity:
Four Cherubs that on th' Angel came to wait,
Whose Looks a Pow'r display'd superior to Fate,
Went up where England's Guardian Regent sate;
Her seiz'd, then with their precious Load withdrew,
And thro' the wide expanding Air to their third Heaven flew;
Whilst Uriel, for now might each one see,
By his bright glittering Form, and lucid Front, 'twas he,
One of the glorious Seven that always stand
In sight of God's high Throne, on his right Hand,
And to the lower World first bears his dread Command:
With sacred Voice thus spoke, whilst every Stander by
On the blest Orator fixt a heedful Eye,
All charm'd with the Embassador, and thirsting all to hear his Embassy.

IV.
Not yet, oh sinful People, are your Crimes
Blotted from the Eternal's Memory;
The Faults of past and present Times,
In the Omnipotent's All-seeing Eye,
Bear yet too fresh and deep a Dye
To let his Justice grant ye true Felicity:
Instead of that your vile Offences are
Writ in so large a Roll, he do's prepare
Severest Vengeance, greater still, and more
Then e'er yet scourg'd your stubborn Land, or Egypt heretofore.
The Plague of Frogs, of Locusts, and of Lice,
Or chrystal Currents turn'd to Blood;
When all the fetter'd Fish in vain devis'd
With finny Wings to 'scape the gory Mud,
Equals not half the Curse, not half the Punishment.
Your Queen, your earthly Goddess here below,
To whose excelling Virtue you your Blessings owe,
Whose Smiles, like the bright Ruler of the Day,
Made all things flourish, all things gay:
Your Gloriana, whom you so adore,
Ah!  wretched beyond Thought, shall bless your Eyes no more.
Thus has the angry Maker doom'd, and his Decree
Is thus pronounc'd by me,
The dear lov'd Genius of your Land shall die,
And pass thro' Nature to Eternity;
From mortal Cares immortal Blessings prove,
And leave a fading Glory here for lasting Joys above.
This spoke, the glittering Angel disappear'd,
And now, methought was heard
A confus'd horrid Noise
Of Shrieks, and Groans, and Cries,
The glorious Scene too chang'd, and in its stead
Infernal Night her blackest Fogs had spread
Over the baleful Place, dark as the Regions of the Dead.

V.
'Till by some Flashes of aetherial Fire,
And fatal Fulgor, glimmering Light was lent;
Which shew'd a Cavern where the Fates retire,
And where in dreadful Shades their horrid Hours are spent.
Around the Place where ugly Shapes of Death,
Bare Skelitons, and all the Floor beneath
With Heaps of Skulls and Bones were scatter'd o'er,
Of Men that had been Mighty heretofore,
Mingled with Scrolls of human Names spotted and stain'd with Gore,
Brought thither by a grizly Train,
Which for that Work the Sisters entertain
DISEASES call'd, a foul mishapen Crew,
That thousands daily to Destruction drew.
And first, with numerous Scrolls, came FEVER, wither'd, lean,
His Heart and Intrails scorcht within
With unseen Fire, that long had flaming been;
Next him remorseless PLAGUE his Charge he sign'd;
Swol'n DROPSY then with slow CONSUMPTION join'd,
Their deadly Labels brought, more loiter'd too behind,
Down from the lowly Country Girl up to the Sovereign Queen.
But amongst all that on this Office came,
Death's Friends and Agents, Gouty, Blind, and Lame,
Methought I saw one bring a Scroll
That with new Terror fill'd my Soul;
A Scroll where in large Characters was Gloriana's Name.
Trembling at this I found, as near I prest,
His Title wrote in Blood upon his Breast,
Dead-doing APPOPLEX, whom when pleas'd Clotho saw,
She straight a slender Twine was seen to draw;
Which envious Lachesis soon on the Distaff put,
And Atropos, as soon prepar'd, with bloody Shears to cut.
Then each with dismal yelling Voice,
And hellish Grin, seem'd to rejoice
To know the World should lose such an inestimable Prize.

VI.
'Twas here the Vision left my fetter'd Sense,
Here Fears anew 'gan to commence,
And Grief straight follow'd close; for scarce my Eyes
Had made their Opticks free from Sleep's Surprize,
But to my Ears the Horror enter'd in
Of dreadful News, the Sickness of the QUEEN.
Too true 'twas found, for now each Hour accurst
Flew with more fatal Tidings than the first;
From bad to worse, 'till the third dismal Day
We heard the Life of our Britannia lay,
The Prize of Death, just languishing away;
That darling Life, more precious than the Store
Of India's Jems, or universal Ore.
Oh Heaven!  maugre all our Tears,
Our fervent Wishes, and our Prayers;
The Skill which all the skilful Sons of Art
With nicest Judgment could impart,
One suddain curst Disease had Power
In a few Moments to devour,
And by Commission from eternal Will
Mock the Divine's, and the Physician's Skill.
Thus when Omnipotence do's Blessings give
He thus asserts his high Prerogative,
When serv'd bestows the Gifts we all partake,
And when his Grace we lose he calls 'em back;
Wisely demonstrating superior Right,
The Creature's Merit, the Creator's Might.
But now, oh Muse!  how can thy Influence
So far inspire my Sense?
How shall my ill-performing Pen and Hand
Describe the gushing Sorrows of the Land,
Shew the attending Mourners that stood by;
Who each with frighted Look and flowing Eye,
Made the vast Deluge swell so universally,
That all around Grief so immense appears
As if the World, a modern Way, were to be drown'd in Tears?
Our hapless Land a Woe particular,
Beyond the rest of Nations did prefer;
And whilst new Seas of Brine surround our chalky Shore
Albion was ne'er so true an Isle before.

VII.
Oh, Albion, in thy Loss more curst by far
Than in all Ruins of thy Civil War:
Thy florent Soil's a barren Desert now,
Sad as thy Natives Weeds, and clouded as each Brow.
Bend thy aspiring Head, for Ashes crown
Thy haughty Front, and for past Crimes atone;
That like offending Nineveh of old,
Dire Desolation by this Blow foretold,
May by the humble Sackcloth be delay'd,
And Heaven's consuming Vengeance by Repentance stay'd.
And now my drooping Muse again is at a stand,
My Pen shakes in my trembling Hand
At my bold daring thus my Thoughts to raise,
On Gloriana's Theme or Praise:
Virtue that scarce has equall'd been, or will in future Days.
That Royal Virgin that so long maintain'd
The English Cross, and with such Judgment reign'd,
That forty Years the Joys and Toils of glorious Empire knew,
Ne'er such Applause or Adoration drew
As matchless Gloriana in her few:
That happy Princess govern'd when
Obedience was a Gift in Men;
When mild Allegiance bow'd to sovereign Awe,
And Duty was contiguous with Law.
But Gloriana fated to put on
The weighty Trouble of a Crown,
In a hot Ferment found the State,
Perplext with factious Jarring and Debate.
Yet still encourag'd by coelestial Aid,
The Royal Shepherdess divinely sway'd;
Held out her Crook, and the rude Herd obey'd.
And as the famous Thracian Poet once
Drew to his Lyre Birds, Beasts, and Trees and Stone,
So th' savage Inmates by mild Arts the mind;
Some curs'd the Cause, but not the Conduct blam'd,
Her Foes her charming Grace so much had won,
The worst but faintly envy'd her the Throne.

VIII.
So Esther, who her Nation's Rights restor'd,
For Piety and Wisdom was ador'd;
And so will Gloriana's Name eterniz'd be
Thro' future Years to all Posterity;
The last of Female Sovereigns, and the best.
But ah!  the Saint is gone &mdash; and Miracles are ceas'd,
And well might she the Name of Saint deserve,
Who the Almighty did so truly serve:
Her regular Devotion every Day
Might even teach Piety it self to pray;
None could be wicked in her Service blest,
Her holy Flame divinely warm'd the Breast,
Example first the Good began, and Shame perform'd the rest.
Nor was her Wife-like Virtue less admir'd,
But every Breast where Honour was inspir'd,
So much, that even our sensual Nation
Began their brutal Crimes to see,
And honest Wedlock, Amity,
Began again to be in Fashion,
Thus all her Hours did strict Goodness sway,
Angelically thus she spent each Day;
Thoughtless of Ill, unless 'twere to prevent;
Her mirthful Minutes too so innocent,
As if a Life Divine she meant to try
Before she came to die,
And th' great Disposer of her Soul was always standing by.

IX.
For Pity too, for heavenly Clemency,
None ever more renown'd than she;
Who Justice Scales so mildly did command,
And held the Sword in such guiltless Hand,
That even the Malefactors in the Land
In Murders train'd, and Traitors made for hire;
Nay tho' thy durst against her precious Life conspire,
And thereby Punishment more justly drew
Than th' rest of the incorrigible Crew;
Yet was she never found the more severe,
Nor even Death's black Warrant sign'd but wet it with a Tear.
Oh!  were that great Apostle here to see,
That preach'd Salvation gain'd by Works of Charity,
Her wond'rous Mercies in that kind,
And the unwearied Bounties of her Mind
Far above all the rest,
He'd still pronounce her blest;
And fix for her a heavenly Seat next the most high Degree.
She needed but a small Translation there,
Half of Perfection had the Angel here.
Poor Protestants, by foreign Vileness, driven
From their Abodes, for the dear sake of Heaven;
Forlorn and starving in the Fields,
Her Pitying Bosom sacred Manna yields,
Thus Numbers from the giving Saint receiv'd;
Thus Numbers daily her blest Hand reliev'd.
Oh!  sacred Virtue there is still in thee
So sweet a Charm, such true Divinity,
That when thou wilt unfold thy beauteous Face,
And with thy Beams fair human Nature grace,
How pall'd to thee the World's vain Pleasures are,
How sickly do they waste, how wretched they appear?
Thou, divine Essence, always did inspire
Blest Gloriana with thy hallow'd Fire,
The Royal Saint was full a Type of thee,
As thou art of angelick Piety.

X.
Mighty in Power, yet mild still as a Dove,
A Temper form'd of Piety and Love;
Devout as Deborah at a Sacrifice;
Chaste like Susanna, and like Sheba Wise;
Like Michal, kind and dutious to her Lord,
And like a Saviour lost, lamented and ador'd.

More Attributes, much more might be exprest,
But Sorrow stops my Pen, and hinders all the rest;
My Muse grows weary with this glut of Woe,
And now no more can do.
Onely methinks I see from high
A radiant Cherub, soaring thro' the Sky,
Saying, Let Women be no more defam'd,
Nor ever henceforth for past Frailty blam'd,
Th' unbounded Virtues of this One
Do amply for their Faults atone,
With the eternal Compensation make,
And all the rest of Female Kind are pardon'd for her sake.
