Mourn, Albion, mourn; Astraea's now no more:
She's gone, and in her Death made Nature poor.
Astraea's now no more! &mdash; the Vales around,
Complain, and Eccho spreads the Tort'ring Sound.
Sick of a Guilty Realm, no longer now
She bears to sit Jove's Substitute below:
Of Fraud, of Faction, and of Discord tir'd,
Too soon, alas!  She to lost Peace aspir'd:
Disdain'd Three Kingdoms Discontented Sway,
Sigh'd for Repose, and Bliss without Allay;
Knew These were fix'd Above, and thither wing'd her Way.

But oh!  fond Bard, restrain thy tow'ring Flight;
Nor trace Her Glories thro' such Floods of Light:
Least, lost in Splendour and by Day o'er come,
Thou meet the rash Bewilder'd Phaeton's Doom.
With safe and easie Pinions downwards glide,
Nor, in th' Immortal Glare, confess thy Pride:
To sad Britannia's Isle thy Views address;
Mark her just Groans, and dwell on her Distress!

What Bounds can be proscrib'd to Mighty Grief,
Where the sad Cause admits of no Relief?
Where Wisdom does our Debt of Tears allow,
And Loyalty commands Immod'rate Woe?

Thou of the Sacred Nine, whom Jove ordains
To sooth the melting Soul with Mournful Strains,
Assist; my Melancholy Song inspire;
If Sorrow have not quite unstrung thy Lyre.
In Notes of Weeping Harmony declare
Astraea's Virtues, and Her Land's Despair.

Does an Eternal Slumber on Her lye?
Has Envious Death for ever clos'd Her Eye?
For ever quench'd that Light, that, like the Sun,
Without Reserve, on ev'ry Briton shone;
Where Love with Pow'r in sweet Confusion met,
And Majesty with Mercy blended sat.
An Union so compleat in Her was seen;
She Reign'd a Mother, and She Liv'd a Queen!
Where now shall Truth or Faith her Equal find?
Where Justice rule so strict, yet unconfin'd?
Virtues, like Parts, met there, to form in One
The Pride of Sex, and Lustre of a Throne.

But Virtue's self in vain with Death contends:
Heav'n, in his Time, resumes the Breath he lends.
His Grim commission'd Slave, made strong with Pow'r,
Strict in his Rage, observes the pointed Hour:
No Tears can bribe, no Piety persuade,
The Terrors of his Office to evade:
No Purple Grandeur awe his Licens'd Hand;
Or boasted Merit his Arrest withstand:
All Mortal things must feel his Equal Pow'r;
The Rural Cottage, and the Regal Tow'r!

Then Albion, mourn; Astraea's Loss deplore,
Whom Fate has snatch'd, and Never must restore.
O!  May not Grief of hasty Fate complain,
That robs us of such Blessings, such a Reign?
Alas!  the happy flitting Years are gone;
The Golden Hours have slipt away too soon!
Ye Muses, aid my Grief, and swell my Verse;
Ye Woods, shed all your Honours on her Herse!
Ye Purple Flow'rs, your Summer Glories hide;
Drop your faint Heads, and shrowd your gaudy Pride!
Fade all ye Myrtles, nor Her Fate survive;
But baleful Yews alone, and Cypress thrive!
Ye Birds, to Sorrow tune your warbling Throats;
And practise mourning Philomela's Notes!
Ye list'ning Ecchoes, the soft Dirge re-sing;
And, Poets, only touch the Elegiack String!

Divine Astraea's fled, and left behind
Nought but the Mem'ry of her Sacred Mind.
A Mind so Great, so fraught with Heav'nly Fire,
As Heroes might affect, and Saints admire!
Had I a Verse as sweet, a Voice as strong
As Orpheus, to attract the list'ning Throng,
And Charm them to the Musick of my Song;
Its Theme should be Her Virtues to proclaim,
And so transmit my living Lines to Fame.

But tasks like these an Abler Hand require,
The Tongue of Hermes, and Apollo's Lyre;
An Art like His, who could lost Worth retrieve;
And Cato to the wondring World revive!
And Art like His, who, by the Gods inspir'd,
Could make Lodona flow, and be admir'd!
O!  would their Ever-living Numbers chuse
In Her bright Name t' invoke the willing Muse:
The wishing Albion might her Queen survey,
In all her Lov'd Attire of Virtues, gay.
There, read the Wonders of Her Reign, and find
The strong Reflexion of her Godlike Mind:
Perhaps too, in a sweet Delusion caught,
And flatter'd by the animated Draught,
Finding the Pencil had so rarely done,
Might think her once again upon the Throne:
With Majesty adorn'd, with Conquest blest!
Immortal Blenheim in her Smiles exprest!
Redressing Wrongs, and Succ'ring the Distrest!
The Arbitress of War, of Peace become;
Peace, forc'd abroad, but gently Urg'd, at Home!

Bold Muse, forbear; thy proud Description end;
From that bright Image to thy Griefs descend.
So gazing on the Sun's resplendent Ray,
(Rashness of Pride, our Weakness to betray!)
We're punish'd in our Crime, and weep our Eyes away.
Employ'd with Silent, but with Solemn Woe,
Let it content thy Struggling Soul, to shew
Tho' not the Poet's, yet the Subject's Part:
Build Her a Mausoleum, in thy Heart!

Snatch me, ye Pow'rs, to some unhallow'd Grove;
The Seat of Sorrow, and unprosp'rous Love;
Where Solitude in sullen Pomp presides;
Where none resort, but whom Despair misguides;
Where Pan ne'er Revell'd, nor the Nymphs e'er play'd;
Where no Enquiring Rays the Gloom invade;
Nor Gaiety presumes t' infect the Rev'rend Shade.
Where Russet Leaves still blast, as they renew:
And low'ring Clouds descend in constant Dew.
Where Birds, and whisp'ring Zephyrs are unknown;
But Paddocks croak, and Winds ungentle Groan,
There on th' Unwholesome Grass my Limbs I'll spread,
And on a Riv'let's Bank support my Head.
To ev'ry murm'ring Wave in Tears complain,
And to the Hollow Blasts sigh out my Pain;
And if my Anguish can still higher grow,
Let Horror and the Place th' Encrease bestow;
From Horror and the Place, I'll cherish rising Woe.

O strong Delusion of the working Soul!
How pow'rful Fancy, that can Truth controul!
Methinks, my Wish is crown'd, and I am laid
Beneath the Distant Unfrequented Shade;
Thou Sacred Silence, who art Mistress here!
Who reign'st Unrivall'd, Awful, and Severe!
Great Nurse of Contemplation, Queen of Thought!
Hear him, who has thy Gloomy Mansions sought;
Drive from thy still Retreats Malicious Fame;
That I secure may breath Astraea's Name.
From Rumour, and from Babbling Ecchoes free,
And safe in an Uncensur'd Privacy.
O!  May the trembling Sound alone survive
To such as pleas'd can Smile; unpleas'd, Forgive.

Or Thou, Astraea, whom these Empires mourn,
Thou, who th' Angelick Councils dost adorn;
Who dost o'er States thy Saving Care extend,
Or the slow Months with a New Star befriend;
Begin to be Invok'd; and thy Assistance lend.
Supply the wanting Muse; Inspire my Lays:
Thou Subject of my Sorrow, of my Praise!
What tho' no Verse can make Thee grow in Fame,
Or add Fresh Glories to thy Lasting Name:
Yet Jove himself, transported to the Sky,
Like Thee, in Honour and in Virtue high,
Was pleas'd, to hear the Bards his Deeds rehearse;
And proud, to stand the Argument of Verse!

She comes! &mdash; The Goddess from her Heav'n descends;
Permits thy Task, thy Piety commends:
Urania, haste; Erect the labour'd Tomb;
Strong let it rise, for Ages yet to come:
Time, exercise thy Rage on temper'd Brass;
With mould'ring Rust subdue the harden'd Mass:
Thy crushing Hand on Marble Structures lay,
The polish'd Rock must melt in slow Decay.
But what Astraea claims, in Pity spare;
Nor let Corroding Hours the Fabrick wear:
Nor canker'd Envy blast, or impious Scorn impair.

The Bidden Pile ascends; its Sides adorn
Millions of Gems from Fancy's Quarry torn;
That sparkling in their fluid Fires proclaim
Astraea's Virtues, and Astraea's Fame.
(So Urim on the Prophet's Breast, of Old,
In blazing Light did Mystick Fate unfold.
So, when Astraea sat upon the Throne,
Her Actions to the World amazing shone.)
On Steps beneath, the pensive Graces wait,
With Hair dishevell'd, and oppress'd with Fate;
Higher, the Queen of Loves bright in her Tears,
But pale, as for Adonis' Death, appears;
Wild as affrighted Monarchs, when thy hear
Invasions are on Foot, and Ruin near.
Shorn of their Silver Locks the Cupids sit,
And languish at their Drooping Mother's Feet;
Stung with the pangs of Sympathetick Woe,
This breaks his Shafts, and t' Other spurns his Bow.
Fronting the Goddess, does poor Hymen stand;
His Nuptial Torch extinguish'd in his Hand:
No Saffron Robe his Sacred Limbs adorns;
But, dead to Joy, the Sable Deity mourns.
His Wreaths, that should some happy Head have crown'd,
Neglected, on the Floor are strew'd around.

High, o'er the Tomb, a Pompous Arch ascends;
Beneath whose seeming Weight the Column bends:
Four Regal Forms aloft the Tablet grace,
And, rang'd by Time, maintain their certain Place.
High on the Right, on Pedestal of Gold
A purple Monarch stands, August, but Old:
He, who when Albion mourn'd Eliza's Fate,
Taught her to hope, and rais'd her drooping State;
Who to her Realms the Caledonian Land
Link'd in a friendly, but not lasting, Band.
Beneath, the Second; not unlike his Sire;
But milder Features quench'd the Martial Fire:
Nature his Soul did in his Visage paint;
Proud to lay down the Monarch, for the Saint!
Stript of his Crown, his hoary Temples bare;
But hov'ring Angels the stoln Pomp repair:
And a Celestial Wreath, tho' Thorny, bear.
But rest Thee there, rash Muse; nor dare to pry
On Horrors that will blast th' Enquiring Eye;
Horrors, whose Mem'ry makes a Nation groan;
And dread the Judgments must her Guilt attone;
For Truth, to Eternize the dire Disgrace,
A Block below, and bleeding Ax does place.
O'er the left Columns, high, a Third does stand,
And wields the peaceful Sceptre in his Hand;
A Sceptre struggling Loyalty restor'd
To bless its Rightful, but its Exil'd Lord!
Pleasure and Ease the Regal Cares controul;
Glow on his Cheek, and mark the sprightly Soul.
Not so, beneath, his Successour appears;
But on his Brow a Gloom of Sorrow wears.
Irresolute Debate dwells in his Eyes,
Haste rules his Feet, and Fear of rude Surprize.
With Outstretch'd wishing Arms he seems to fold
The Abdicated Realms, he must not hold.
Unhappy Prince! &mdash; by Zeal too strongly Sway'd;
Had'st thou thy Reason's better Light obey'd,
Thou hadst been more a King, and less betray'd.
Peace on thy Sacred Urn!  All Errors sleep
In the dark Vault, that does thy Ashes keep.
Let later Times thy Triumphs only sing,
And in the Glorious Duke, forgive the King.
So, from a short Eclipse, the God of Day
Shines out, and reasserts his Darken'd Ray;
Thy Light renew'd, Albion with Joy must own;
That saw Astraea gild the dazzling Throne.

But soft my Muse!  and upward turn thy Eyes,
Prepar'd as well for Sorrow, as Surprize.
What Young Augustus, with Distinguish'd Grace,
Claims the Mid Arch, and fills th' Ennobled Space;
What Great Descendant of the Royal Line?
But Night and Shadows his Check'd Beams confine.
The Fates did this Short Wonder barely lend,
And to encrease our Hopes, our Grief suspend.
Too lavish Blessings had enrich'd the Throne,
If Heav'n had pleas'd to make this Gift our Own.
No Prince shall greater Expectations raise;
Or Britain e'er a Nobler Offspring praise.
What Wonders might He in the Field have done!
What Foes encounter'd!  and what Trophies won!
O much Lamented Youth!  could'st thou have broke
The Force of Fate, and shook the galling Yoke;
Then ripen'd Glo'ster had more pow'rful shone,
The brightest Jewel in the British Crown!

Ye Nymphs, with Flow'rs your fragrant Baskets fill;
Crop the soft Lilly, and the fertil Dill;
Pale Violets, and the blushing Poppy bring,
And all the Treasur'd Odours of the Spring:
The Vegetable Sweets, unsparing, strew;
And this Vain Office on his Grave bestow.
Tears too a Tribute to his Mem'ry bring;
But could ye make your Eyes a weeping Spring,
Its Streams are owing to Astraea Dead;
Astraea claims more Tears than you can shed!

Here, Mighty Princess, rest; Imperial Shade!
Accept the humble Honours I have paid;
Gods oft have their Ambrosial Domes exchang'd
For meaner Roofs, and with the Peasant rang'd.
Here if thou wilt reside, a Grove shall rise;
And Elms and Oaks invade the nearer Skies:
The Palm and Olive shall unplanted grow;
The Woodbine shoot, and frequent Throngs resort,
And make a grateful, but a Sable, Court.
The Bards in solemn Choirs their Voices raise,
Shall charm the Wood with their Inchanting Lays:
And tune their sounding Lyres to Monumental Praise.

Let all be hush'd!  and Midnight Silence reign;
My ravish'd Ear drinks in th' harmonious Strain:
Some artful Hand has strook the trembling String,
And thro' the Grove Astraea's Honours ring.

Muse, catch the graceful Numbers as they fly;
Or force Officious Eccho to reply,
To soar, and intercept the mounting Harmony!
The Muse obeys; the breathing Notes rebound;
And sweet, as Zephyrs charg'd with Odours, sound.
Soft, as the Down of Cytherea's Doves,
The Soft and Sweet become Astraea's Loves!
Her Nuptial Faith, her Tenderness, and Joy,
And all her pleasing Cares the Theme employ.
Intrude not, anxious Pomp; the soft'ned Strain
Does thy Imperial Pageantry disdain.
Domestick Transports swell the private Song;
And warbling Lutes the blissful Notes prolong.
Heav'ns!  How she shines, divested of her State;
And only, in Connubial Virtues, Great.
To her Lord's Will how fondly She resign'd,
Whene'er he would disclose his Princely Mind!
How Diligent, his young Desires to trace,
And read th' expressive Passion in his Face!
Listen, ye Matrons, and her Arts essay;
Content, like her, to Love; like her, Obey.
Recall her to your Souls; regard her Life;
And view her as a Mother, as a Wife!
But, hark!  the Winds convey a sprightlier Sound;
The Lute is in the louder Trumpet drown'd.
The Martial Notes proclaim her on the Throne;
And distant Realms her rightful Empire own:
In vain disputing France her Claim denies,
And a rejected Heir does Idolize.
Whene'er she fights, Bellona lends her Car,
And Mars deals out his Magazines of War.
Her Terrors spread; their unresisted Sway
The Gallick Pow'rs confess, and yield the Day.
Just to her Triumphs, the Impartial Verse
Does Bourbon's now retracted Boasts rehearse.
Surpris'd by Conquests, He her Title owns;
And hails her, Mistress of the British Thrones!
Sues for her Friendship; makes the Battle cease;
And servilely demands the Terms of Peace.
The Warlike Strains are chang'd; the warbling Flute
Does from the Grove the gladd'ned Ear salute.
Soft Io Paean's, wafted thro' the Air,
Charm the still Orbs, and balmy Peace declare!
The smiling Goddess Tyrant War inchains,
Takes her firm Seat, and with Astraea reigns!
Diffusive Blessings from their Union flow;
And chearful Plenty clears each Anxious Brow.
But, oh!  what alter'd Passions does prophane
The pleasing Notes, and Breaths a mournful Strain?
Frail are our human Joys, and unsincere;
With ev'ry State Misfortunes interfere!
Scarce does the Peace her rip'ning Fruits disclose,
But Albion must a greater Blessing lose.
Her Darling Queen in haste is snatch'd away;
A brighter Throne expects her Courted Sway.

But must Astraea, like the Vulgar, dye?
Has Death no Golden Dart for Majesty?
Here Slumbers ought to do the work of Fate,
Anguish and Agonies at Distance wait,
Sleep steal the Breath, and Ease the Soul translate.
But the Grim King of Terrors does disdain
The soft Distinction, and presides in Pain.

A rude Disease invades with raging Force,
And to the Nobler Parts directs his Course;
Seizes her Sacred Head; and seated there,
Does on her Heart, unable to withstand
The shock of War, yields to the Foe's Command.
Enter'd, he labours to maintain his Ground:
And spreads his baleful Influence around.
Contending Art in vain her Med'cines tries,
Retreating Life before the Victor flies.
Th' Officious Care that would some Succour give,
Serves to Encrease her Tortures, not Relieve.
Th' Event is plain; all hopes of Rescue cease;
Death must compleat the Rage of the Disease.

The Mournful Train, that round her Bed attend,
To the Deaf Skies their Ardent Wishes send.
Invoke the God of Health, but all in vain;
Sigh, Weep, and Pray, Despair, Address, Complain.
Confusion on each Charming Visage hung,
And tender Fears their slack'ning Nerves unstrung.
As when a midnight Fire with sudden Blaze
Bursts forth, and thro' the Gloom its Flames displays;
Th' alarmed Croud its Rage with Horror eye;
And Shrieks and Lamentations pierce the Sky:
Lost in Surprize, unable to prevent,
Each sees his House the spreading Fire augment;
With helpless Grief o'er his lost Treasure stands;
And shakes his Head, and wrings his lifted Hands.
So, round Astraea's Couch a weeping Ring
Of Beauties press, and vain Condolements bring.
With wild Amaze their Sov'reign's Anguish view,
And see the fierce Disease her Strength subdue!
Lethargick Sleeps her vital Pow'rs oppress!
And strong Convulsions her rack'd Nerves possess!
Find, she must dye!  And with unaiding Moan,
Lament the Nation's Treasure and their Own.

She, tho' o'erwhelm'd with Agonizing Pains,
Pity, her great Prerogative, maintains;
Touch'd with Compassion does their Sorrows share,
And with Her Hand, conjures Them to forbear.
With feeble Voice, &mdash; "Weep not for Me," she cries;
"Nor heave your Breasts with unavailing Sighs:
This fierce Encounter its own Rage shall spend,
And a short Struggle your sick Mistress end.
A Prince Succeeds, who will with just Regard
Approve your Service, and your Love reward.
All will be well!" &mdash; She said, but could no more:
Prevailing Weakness does her Speech o'erpow'r.
In Murmurs the Unfinish'd Accents dye,
And the tir'd Organs their lost Tone deny.
The drooping Train perceive the New Decay,
And Ebbing Life by gradual Steps give way.
Again they tremble, and fresh Tears they shed;
And her approaching Dissolution dread.

Not long they dread, ere Heav'n's resolv'd Decree
Takes Place, and sets the Royal Suff'rer free.
No lab'ring Pangs her parting Soul molest;
But, as fatigued with Life, She turns to Rest.
Calmly her Breath, in easie Sighs, foregoes;
As ripen'd Fruits cleave from the yielding Boughs:
Gently, as Thame's Silver Currents run;
Or Summer Winds fall with the Setting Sun.
The mighty Work is o'er! &mdash; Her Labours end;
And Death's admitted, like a welcome Friend.
Her disincumber'd Soul with Ardour flies;
Quits the Vile World, and seeks its Native Skies.

Nature, Great Goddess!  on whose Working wait
All the dark Embryo's of unfinish'd Fate;
Why did not Prodigies the World alarm,
And Albion for the threat'ned Horror arm?
Why did not Sanguin Comets baleful glare,
And with long Fires the signal Change declare?
Earth should have shook; the lab'ring Sun, o'erspread
With full Eclipse, have hid his conscious Head.
Why did not Winds with unknown Fury roar?
And the hoarse Waters lash the foaming Shoar?
Unwieldy Whales should from the Deep have come;
And Porcipises been Heralds of her Doom.
The Fate foreseen had combated Despair;
Had taught us how to grieve, and how to bear.

But all was quiet, as Astraea's Breast;
Nature, and the calm Season were at Rest.
The unsuspected Shock prevents the Fear;
So Thunders break, when no black Clouds are near.
So nimble Lightnings dart along the Green;
Blast and Consume, ere scarce their Fires are seen.
No busie Terrors their Presage intrude,
Or Pomp of Prodigies her Death prelude.
Let Earthquakes, Storms, and Monstrous Omens wait
To signalize the Tyrant's Savage Fate.
But rightful Monarchs in their Death maintain
An Emblem of their Just, Harmonious Reign.

O!  She was All a Nation could require
To satisfie its Hope, or large Desire.
Sure as her Birth, the Gods in Council sate;
Resolv'd, a finish'd Virtue to create:
Imparted all their Pow'rs, and Aid Divine;
To give the World Assurance of a Queen!
With Piety the Regal Soul they drest;
Compassion, Mercy, and soft Love imprest;
And ev'ry Charm that might the forming Gods attest.
So once (as Poets dream'd) Pandora rose,
And to the World did ev'ry Grace disclose.
Transcendent Beauty did the Maid adorn;
Bright as the Sun, and lovely as the Morn!
But Charming as she was, and dear to Sense,
Th' Exterior Grace made all her Excellence.
Th' Olympian Pow'rs her outward Parts refin'd,
But with uncomely Frauds disguis'd her Mind.
Not so Astraea &mdash; Heav'n inform'd her Soul;
And with diffusive Virtues blest the Whole.
Her Mind to her fair Body was a-kin;
Without a Goddess, and a Saint within!

Ye Pow'rs!  why was your Bounty thus restrain'd,
Why gave so much, and then withdrew its Hand?
Why was she form'd so Exquisitely Bright?
So soon to fade, and yield to Death and Night?
O!  had her Glories been but less confin'd,
She nearer had approach'd th' Immortal Mind!
But now more Glorious, She, in Bliss, above
Reigns in the Presence of Eternal Love;
With Angels mix'd, she tunes her Heav'nly Voice;
Adores the Throne; and her Chast Sp'rit employs
In Hallelujah's and Undying Joys!
There as thou sit'st in unexhausted Light,
(If any mortal Care ascend that Height,)
Auspicious from thy dazzling Sphere look down,
And thy Lov'd Realms with future Blessings crown:
With pitying Eye thy suff'ring Isles survey;
Regard them, and their grateful Tears repay.
See, how thy Britain rends her Hair in Grief,
Bent on Despair, and dead to all Relief.
Hark, how she sighs!  What Groans her Bosom heave,
As Life, in the strong Wreck, its Seat would leave.
Her lost Astraea to Excess she Mourns;
And to the Ground her downward Eyes she turns:
With Sorrow quench'd, her Looks to Earth are bent;
And all her Thoughts in drooping Anguish spent.
But when, renew'd to Hope, their Balls she rears;
And with new Fires their Languid Beams repairs:
Then, Brunswick, she shall bend their Light on Thee,
And distant Comforts in thy Reign survey.

Thou promis'd Monarch, come; Thy Land invites
Thee, to assume thy Pow'r and Sceptred Rights.
Be, what our Hopes have form'd; Be Britain's Law;
With Wisdom rule; with Resolution awe.
On Thee, she all her Glory does repose;
To Thee her Faith and vow'd Allegiance owes.
Auspicious, come; her Drooping Offspring chear;
And be thy Albion's Shield, thy Albion's Spear!
