Bright Sons of Bacchus, and Apollo,
Why don't you hang out Nuptial Garlands?
What, are you chagreen'd by the Willow,
From the disdaining Dame of Courland?
Sure one might think, in such a crisis,
And turn of Fortune for your King,
Poets shou'd rise, like Reeds from Isis,
And dump, as Botely Bitterns, sing.

What, can't Nine Hundred Thousand Florins
Display you Jove's bright golden Show'r?
Not furnish you, with all the Shearings
Of Jason's Fleece, t' increase your Store:
For such a Sum, can you give less
In Dow'r, than all Northumberland?
Where you may Hunt in Chivey-Chase,
On your bright Fairy-Queen's own Land.

Methinks, as when the Doge of Venice
Espouses Thetis, with a Ring,
Blew Tritons gather round from Tunis,
To see th' Imaginary Thing;
Shou'd you not, Jacks, your Lord when Marry'd
(As Jove was Wedded once to Juno)
On Pegasus be volant carry'd,
T' exalt the Nuptials at Urbino?

Greek Poets, sing, how Memnon's Stone
Exerted sweet, harmonious Sounds,
When animated by the Sun,
The repercussive Ray rebounds;
Will you, than Marble, he more stupid;
That Mars can't rouse you with his Arms;
Nor ev'n Venus joyn'd with Cupid,
Inspire you with Ten Thousand Charms?

Bright Athens, once the Muse's Seat!
Where are the Sons of high Parnassus?
Who spreading Fictions when they write,
Can stride across the fam'd Colossus;
What are they fled from Helicon,
And gone into another Clime?
Or, are they drown'd in Acheron,
That now thy Poets cease to Rhyme?

O strange!  what dismal Times now hinder?
What Fears of Danger now embarras?
That not a Bard can soar, like Pindar,
Nor write in flowing Verse, like Horace.
Why don't your Planets sine with Glory,
Your Stars put on their best Array?
D'ye think, the Whiggs will do it for ye,
To Write, when now it is your Day?

Sure had your Poets any Spirit,
(And 'tis allow'd to Poets, Painters,
From Fictions, to derive their Merit)
Why don't you match a Hinde, and Panther?
Or joyn an Ostridge, with a Dove?
So as to couple them in Wedlock;
This may be done by Force of Love,
Or, sure, by an Italian Padlock.

To hear so many Tales run over,
About your Polish royal Virgin,
Like Gypsie, turn'd a wand'ring Rover,
By Passion, for a Husband urging:
Why don't you, in a Ray'd Sedan,
Convey her from the northern Pole?
Or ruckle her in Charles's Wain,
Above the Mountains of Tyrol.

Well, one may Wonder, after all,
Not like a Goddess she shou'd travel;
How came the Nun disguis'd in Veil?
Will not this raise in Whiggs some Cavil?
Sure, they may laugh, and can't but doubt her,
Thus metamorphos'd, to be carry'd,
How can She have Nun's Flesh about her,
Who flyes, so hasty, to be Marry'd?

Too oft the Sacerdotal Vests,
Are us'd as Masquerades for Vices;
Concealing hot, lascivious Priests,
And Nuns too, under such Disguises:
This give an Air of pious Zeal,
To those that see not all their Crankums,
What Incest Fryars act in Cells,
With Nuns they first Absolve, then Saint 'em.

Yet Mattins, Vespers, they attend,
With Tapers lighted round the Quire,
Where Love Intrigues are close assign'd,
From Flames, which their Devotion fire:
Then through the gloomy Cloysters, Ogling,
Each Fryar singling out his Nun,
Behind the Columns falls to Smuggling,
In Darkness, vaulted from the Sun.

Sly Mercury, imploy'd to watch her,
No doubt, a Ha&mdash;n Spy,
Lying perdue, was like to catch her,
But Iris lucky slipt her by;
Hence can't you fancy her a Juno,
From Ixion, vanish'd, in a Cloud,
Convey'd, by Peacocks, to Urbino?
Won't such a Scene deserve an Ode?

It is no matter, how the Nun
Was shav'd by Mother Abbess bare;
A British Bard can shade her Crown,
With a fresh Lock of Maiden Hair;
Rather than she shou'd Tresses want,
To curl above so find a Shape,
Believe me, in poetick Rant,
He'll get it, nay, by Force of Rape.

Poets, for compassing their Will,
Prove often arch, and waggish Thieves,
As they claim Privilege to Steal,
And run no Hazard of their Lives:
From Cupid, they have learn'd those Tricks,
And Bacchus putting them on Rackets,
They value not in such wild Franks,
To rifle Venus of her Pac&mdash;t.

We've heard the Mother plaid her Part,
And past thro Mestra's various Forms,
To out-wit Mercury in her Art,
By Ceres taught to practise Charms:
Instead of Nectar, for escaping,
She palm'd upon him, Poppey-Water,
So slily left the Urchin napping,
And crost th' Horizon with her Daughter.

Secure from Danger, with Dispatch,
Both past on, rapid, to'ards the Hero,
Love and Ambition fir'd the Match,
In both to joyn the Cavalliero;
But he, so sluggish, show'd his Mettle,
That he scarce stir'd a Mile from Rome,
To meet his Bride, as going to Battle,
He rather wou'd have staid at home.

Was that done like a Man of Honour,
To treat his royal Mistress so?
Shou'd he not, sure, have waited on her,
At least, some Miles beyond the Po:
But, after all, to send old Mar,
Upon a Complement, or a Message,
Was the same thing, as sending her
A Present of Bolognea Sausage.

Enough of that, thou know'st Friend P&mdash;r,
('Tis no hard matter to be done)
That a stern Warriour may turn Fryar,
To qualify him for a Nun:
Who doubts the Lady's Inclination,
For carrying on a Love-Intrigue,
Who pilgrimag'd with Love's hot Passion,
So many Hundred Polish Leagues?

As Jove put on Amphitryo's Form,
To court Alcmena, like a Lover;
So Mar, did with the Monarch's Charms,
Address his Mistress for the Favour:
At first, she blusht, and seem'd surpriz'd,
But vigorous, as he did accost her,
Impatient of delay, well pleas'd,
She hugg'd the Proxy for his Master.

Enliven'd by the Dame, like Aeson,
New Blood reviv'd a budding Spring,
Throughout his Juvenile Veins, t' increase on
His Love and Passion for his King:
He acted so his Part, like Sofia,
That as she clasp'd him in her Arms,
He gave her Nectar and Ambrosia,
In retribution for her Charms.

For such a Conquest, sure, thy Worth
(Oh Mar!)  is greater than thy Fame,
Than all thy Lawrels won at Perth,
Or Trophies run off at Dumblain.
Thou, who hadst Power to contradict,
To joyn the Dame with Wedding-Ring,
How can we doubt, thou didst act
Th' exalted Transports of the King?

As yet, the Curtain must be drawn,
To hid the Scene from Argo's Eyes,
Lest he should blab to Gossip Fame,
Who carries Truths, as well as Lyes.
Time will display thy Honour, Mar,
Above old Mortimer is Story,
In Love Affairs, no less than War,
For Rome's chief Hope, Britannia's Glory.

Oh T&mdash;d!  whose sad Muse did raise,
From Grief, thy pompous Mausoleum,
Reviving, with surprizing Joys!
Shoud'st thou not, loudly, sing Te Deum?
To Venus bright, erect a Fane,
High, as St. Peter's, or St. Pauls;
And let the Virgin, for the Dean,
Light Tapers round the sacred Stalls.

There consecrate exalted Altars,
Inflam'd with Oyl, and Tuscan Wine,
If now thy Muse, in Lyrick faulters,
Will not Folks say, Thou'rt dead to Rhime?
That, like poor Niobe, thou art turn'd
To a fix'd Monument, of Stone,
By having for Astrea mourn'd
Too long, who dy'd for you too soon.

But wert thou dead, methinks, new Life
Shou'd animate thy Parts again,
With Nuptial Joys, to turn thy Grief
To sweet, harmonious Lyrick Strain;
Convince the World, Oh mighty Bard!
By writing Lines, to shine like Gold,
That yet thy Muse is not interr'd,
Tho' thy Astrea's dead, and cold.

Were Dryden, still, amongst the Living,
Who sung your Bride Groom's Genial Day,
His tow'ring Muse wou'd now be striving
To celebrate his Nuptial Joy;
No doubt, the Laureat, by his bidding,
Wou'd bring down Jove, and all the Gods,
And Goddesses, to grace the Wedding,
Descending, awful, thro' the Clouds.

He'd fetch in Ceres, and her Nymphs,
With Roses deckt, and Jessamine,
And Ganymede, Jove's highest Pimp,
Drest like a Beau, and wond'rous Fine:
Hymen, in bright Machines, he'd bring,
To solemnize the Marriage Rites,
And Cupids flutt'ring on the Wing,
The Graces smiling in their Flights.

Tom Brown lamented by the Town,
Apollo's Fav'rite Son, and Glory,
Alas!  poor Tom is dead, and gone,
His Fame immortal still in Story;
Had he surviv'd but to this Time,
He had not hung his Harp on Willows.
But wou'd have been most Crank in Rhyme,
For merry Carols, and Trangdilloes.

Then shou'd you have him introduce
Pan, and his Satyrs all about him,
Bacchus with Bumpers to carouse,
Cybele, with her Damsels, routing;
Neptune and his whole Band of Tritons,
Thetis, the Nereids, in Grand Chorus,
In Honour of us native Britons,
Who beat, and drive the World before us.

For Mirth, and comical Surprize,
He'd summon Juno in, with Hymen,
Make Argus stare, with's hundred Eyes,
For stirring up some jealous Damon;
But what wou'd Tom, pray care for that?
He'd do it to promote the Gambols,
And laugh, t' extinguish with his Hat,
Bright Vesta's Torches, and Wax-Candles.

Cou'd Gr&mdash;l softly touch his Lyre,
Revive his Almahide again.
Her Charms might soon the Bard inspire,
T' adorn th' imaginary Queen;
As then the Bloom of Almahide
Is faded so, he can't restore
Her Beauty to the blooming Bride,
For Almahide She is no more.

Since his Muse fails, you seek in vain,
From S&mdash;l Aid, or D&mdash;l F&mdash;e;
Poor Scribblers, they must write in Pain,
For Flow'rs, where only Thistles grow:
Yet if One calls the Convocation,
And T' other summon in the Dyet,
Might you not then conclude the Nation
Involv'd in one tumultuous Riot?

Yet Dan&mdash; might, sure, inscribe one Hymn,
And chirp his Robin red-Breast Muse,
If whilst Augustus lives to Reign,
Alas, the unlucky Bird refuse,
Old Mahomet he must then move
To spare his Pigeon, she'll inspire
The Bard with cooling Tales of Love,
If she but whispers in the Ear.

Suppose you're all at last mistaken,
To think Emelia some Madona,
And she shou'd prove a northern Mawkin,
Staring like Gorgon, or Bellona;
Can't Pet&mdash;s summon all the Graces,
To her diff'rent Airs of Beauty,
Enamel'd for your Lord's Embraces,
Pray mind this Matter, 'tis your Duty.

Yet greater Things thou might'st do,
If thou wou'dst more consult old Gallen,
From the prolifick Force of Lettyce,
To fructify the blooming Helen.
Coud'st thou but raise her to Mount Ida,
We then might hope thou'dst fetch at once
From her, as other Bards from Leda,
Have midwif'd out a Brace of Sons.

Advanc'd above all mortal Ladies,
Might Ol&mdash;th make his Queen to shine &mdash; oh,
And place his new-transfigur'd Goddess,
To take the Upper hand of Juno.
What can't a Poet, if Transported,
Do, if he's minded to be Airy;
T'ave Odes and Epodes so inverted,
For gracing Carmen Seculare.

For this, as we may well suppose &mdash; Sir,
Thou need'st not borrow from the Plan,
One of the Brother's vampt on Chaucer's
Old Model, for his House of Fame;
From having so transpos'd thy Queen,
Thou hast a Temple of thy own,
Where with thy Goddess thou may'st shine
On Tripus fixt, with Gnosia's Crown.

But then wou'd Den&mdash;s draw her smooth,
If he shou'd Critically view
The Damsel, with a Dragon's Mouth,
Distended to'ards St. George askew.
Perhaps, tho' low'ring, looking down,
Shou'd he survey her girt and Arms,
He may prefer the Amazon
To Venus deckt in all her Charms.

Tom D&mdash;y was a merry Fellow,
A Songster, and besides a Crouder,
Inspir'd directly by Apollo,
To write the Song of Owen Tudor.
For this he will be ever Fam'd,
As Owen was, in Brittish Story,
Tho' now as D&mdash;y never shamm'd,
Poor Tom must own, he's Old, and Hoary.

Yet still if call'd on for a Hoyden,
For Scaramouch, or airey Prank-o,
Tom never wants his Jill of Croyden,
Nor Ass to mount his Sancho Pancha:
Give him a Cup of Sack, his Parrot
Shall prattle, and his Jacob sing
Such Strains as never other Laureate
Did chirp before to any King.

Will you then have him at Urbino,
In comick Humour, and Grimace,
For shame, give Tom some Ready Rhino,
He'll then come mounted on his Ass.
He'l for you steal the Richmond Heiress,
So clever, from the Boarding School,
Invisibly, as done by Fairies;
For shewing, Tom he is no Fool.

Will none of all the tender Sex,
Renew Dorinda's moving Lays?
Won't Mas&mdash;m, Sing&mdash;r, Lowry Pyx,
Nor Aste&mdash;l, fam'd for her bright Essays.
What, can't she make the Negro Cat,
By Help of Succubus Familiar,
To raise the Nun's Mons Veneris pat,
For Labady, or Mother-Celier.

But now I mind it, where is Gay?
Why does he not he invoke his Flora?
Won't Phoebus lend him one kind Ray,
To grace the Blushes of Aurora?
Soon as the Nuptial Curtain's drawn,
To shew the Glory of the Bride,
In all her Virgin Blushes Dawn,
With Lilly White, and Rosy Red.

Can't he Ten Thousand Cupids bring,
With Bows, and Darts, to arm Adonis,
Embellish his Heroick King,
With all th' Artillery of Venus?
Will neither P&mdash;pe, nor Mattey Pr&mdash;r,
In Lyrick, or Heroick Verse,
Bestow one Flash of blazing Fire,
For light'ning Pallas round, or Mars?

Don't you, Urbino see in Dreams,
And fancy you are there already,
How quick the Monarch's youthful Beams,
With Glory, dart the blooming Lady?
By strong implicit Faith, no doubt,
You may perceive, the crimson Flamen,
Most solemn tye the Gordian Knot,
Attended by the Rites of Hymen.

You staid too long, a little sooner,
You might have view'd the Nun unfrock,
And Lady of Loretto honour
The Virgin with the Wedding Smock;
This by a shining Angel brought,
In Band-Box of pellucid Amber,
Display'd, how fine the Lawn was wrought
In Peter's Apostolick Chamber.

Oh Papa!  so sublime a Theme,
Methinks, shou'd serve to brighten Homer,
And make (dear Matt) thy genial Rhyme
To overflow, from native Rummer;
Unless it be, you can't recover
The adverse Fate of curst Dumblain;
And Bacon's Brazen-Head gives over
To Prophesy for you again.
