As Denham Sings, Mysterious 'twas, the same
Should be the Prophet's and the Poet's Name;
But while the Sons of Genius join to Praise,
What Thine presaging dictates to their Lays.
The things, they sweetly sing, and You forshew,
Open the Sampson-Riddle to our View;
Strong are thy Prophecies, their Numbers sweet,
And with the Lion, Combs of Honey meet.

Late on Fantastic Cabalistic Schemes,
Of waking Whimsies, or of Fev'rish Dreams,
New Cobweb Threads of Poetry were spun,
In gaudy Snares, like Flies, were Witlings won,
Their Brains entangled, and our Arts undone.

Pope first descended from a Monkish Race,
Cheapens the Charms of Art, and daubs her Face;
From Gabalis, his Mushroom Fictions rise,
Lop off his Sylphs &mdash; and his Belinda dies;
Th' attending Insects hover in the Air,
No longer, than they're present, is She Fair;
Some dart those Eye-beams, which the Youths beguile,
And some sit Conquering in a dimpling Smile.
Some pinch the Tucker, and some smooth the Smock,
Some guard an Upper, some a Lower Lock;
But if these truant Body-Guards escape,
In whip the Gnomes and strait commit a Rape;
The curling Honours of her Head they seize,
Hairs less in Sight, or any Hairs they please;
But if to angry Frowns, her Brow she bends,
Upon her Front some sullen Gnome descends;
Whisks thro' the Furrows, with its Airy Form,
Bristles her Eye-brows, and directs the Storm.

As wide from these, are Addisonian Themes,
As Angels Thoughts are from distemper'd Dreams;
Spenser and He, to Image Nature, knew,
Like living Persons, Vice and Virtue drew:
At once instructed and well-pleased we read,
While in sweet Morals these two Poets laid,
No less to Wisdom, than to Wit, pretence,
They led by Music, but they led to Sense.

But Pope scarce ever Force to Fancy joins,
With Dancing-Master's Feet equips his Lines,
Plumes empty Fancy, and in Tinsel shines,
Or, if by chance his Judgment seems to lead,
Where one poor Moral faintly shews its Head;
'Tis like a Judge, that reverendly drest,
Peeps thro' the Pageants, at a Lord May'rs Feast;
By Starts he reasons, and seems Wise by Fits,
Such Wit's call'd Wisdom, that has lost its Wits.

Un-nam'd by me this witling Bard had been,
Had not the Writer's caus'd the Reader's Sin;
But less by Comedies and lewd Romances,
Are ruin'd, less by French lascivious Dances,
Than by such Rhimer's Masqueraded Fancies.

From such, the Root of Superstition grew,
Whose Old Charms fertile, daily branch'd in New;
From such Chimeras first inspir'd, the Fair,
The Conj'rers Ring approach'd and Jesuits Chair;
Throng'd to the Doors, where Magic Rogues Divin'd,
And sold out Ignes-fatui to the Mind.

Wizards and Jesuits differ but in Name,
Both Daemon's Envoys, and their Trade the same;
Weak Wills they lead, and vapour'd Minds command,
And play the Game into each others Hand;
Like Spiritual Juglers at the Cup and Ball,
Rising by foolish Maids, that long to Fall.
Some into Love they Damn, and some they Pray,
For Green-sick Minds are caught a different way;
To the same End, tho' several Paths, they run,
Priests to Undo, and Maids to be Undone;
Some blacker Charms, some whiter Spells cajol,
As some lick Wall, and some devour a Coal.
Here Ladies, strong in Vapours, see Men's Faces
Imprinted in the Conjurers dazling Glasses,
There, when in Spring Time, the too praying Priest,
Toasts, and does something better &mdash; to the Best
A Spouse is promis'd on next Baptist's Feast.
First some young Contrite Rake's enjoin'd to Marry
Lest Madam's force to squeak for't &mdash; or &mdash; Miscarry:
In June, the Lass does to the Fields repair,
Where Good Sir Domine just took the Air.
When, O strange Wonder! &mdash; near a Plantane-Root,
She finds a Coal &mdash; and so a Spouse to boot,
She longs to Dream &mdash; and to secure the Sport
That very Day the Youth design'd &mdash; must Court,
He does &mdash; She struck with rapture and delight,
Bespeaks her Fancy &mdash; strongly &mdash; Dreams at Night.
The yielding Fair, the ravish'd Youth obtains,
A Maid she passes &mdash; so his Child's free gains,
He has the Pleasure, yet is sav'd the Pains.
Thus when Priest's Wench &mdash; to cure the growing Evil
Poor St. John Baptist must forerun the Devil.

But if the Ladies fall, at fall of Leaf,
Or in the Winter &mdash; still there's fresh relief;
Let her Lace close four Months, and if she can
St. Agnes heals the Breach, and brings the Man.
Thus a lewd Priest to Vapour'd Virgins cants
And into Pimps reverts his Vestal-Saints.

O!  dire Effects of Masqu'd Impiety!
And shall they (Christian Muse!)  have Aids from Thee;
Wilt Thou, like witty Heathens, lewdly given,
To a Gehenna Metamorphose Heaven?
Wilt Thou, &mdash; O no &mdash; forbid th' unhallow'd Song?
Such Prophanations to Rome's Bard belong.
Let ONE, who Gods and Goddesses adores
Paint them like Rakes and Bullies, Bawds, and Whores.

Our Genii, CAMPBELL, shall be all Divine,
Shall high o'er Theirs as much distinguish'd shine,
As o'er such Priest or Chiromancers, Thine.
Thine, which does future Time's events Command
To leap to Sight, and in thy Presence stand,
Thine, whose Eyes glowing with a gifted Ray,
New Roads of Life o'er Wisdom's Alps survey,
And guide benighted Travellers to Day.
Let Me, for once, a daring Prophet be
Mark from this Hour &mdash; and Poetry thou'lt see
Date a new Aera from thy Book and Thee;
Thy Book, where, thro' the Stories, thou hast laid,
All Moral Wisdom's to the Mind convey'd;
And thus far Prophecy's each Page, that all
Must rise by Virtues, or by Vices fall.

Poets shall blush to see their Wit outdone,
Resume their Reason, and assert it's Throne,
Shall Fable still for Virtues sake Commend
And Wit the means, shall Wisdom make its End.

Who hopes to Please, shall strive to Please by Pains,
Shall gaining Fame, earn hard whate'er he gains,
And DENHAM'S Morals join, to DENHAM'S Strains.
Here Paint the Thames "When running to the Sea
Like Mortal Life to meet Eternity."
There show both Kings and Subjects "one excess,
Makes both, by striving to be Greater, Less."
Shall climb, and sweat, and falling, climb up still,
Before he gains the height of Cooper's Hill.

In Windsor-Forest, if some trifling Grace
Gives, at first Blush, the whole a pleasing Face,
'Tis Wit, 'tis true; but then 'tis Common Place.
The Landscape-Writer, branches out a Wood,
Then digging hard for't, finds a Silver Flood.
Here paints the Woodcock quiv'ring in the Air,
And there, the bounding Stag and quaking Hare.
Describes the Pheasant's Scarlet-circled Eye,
And next the slaught'ring-Gun, that makes him Die.
From common Epithets that Fame derives,
By which his most uncommon Merit lives.
'Tis true!  If finest Notes alone could show,
(Tun'd justly high, or regularly low,)
That we should Fame to these mere Vocals give,
POPE more, than we can offer, should receive.
For, when some gliding River is his Theme,
His Lines run smoother, than the smoothest Stream;
Not so, when thro' the Trees fierce Boreas blows,
The Period blustring with the Tempest grows.
But what Fools Periods read, for Period's sake?
Such Chimes improve not Heads, but make 'em Ach;
Tho' strict in Cadence on the Numbers rub,
Their frothy Substance is Whip-Syllabub;
With most Seraphic Emptiness they roll,
Sound without Sense, and Body without Soul.

Not such the Bards, that give you just Applause,
Each, from intrinsick Worth, Thy Praises draws,
Morals, in ev'ry Page, where-e'er they look,
They find divinely scatter'd thro' thy Book:
They find Thee studious, with Praise-worthy strife,
To smooth the future Roads of Human Life,
To help the Weak, and to confirm the Strong,
Make our Griefs vanish, and our Bliss prolong,
With Phineus' equal find thy large Desert
And in Thy Praise would equal Milton's Art.

Some Fools, we know, in spite of Nature born,
Would make thee Theirs, as they are Mankind's Scorn,
For still 'tis one of Truth's unerring Rules
No Sage can rise without a Host of Fools.
Coxcombs, (by whose Eternal Din o'ercome,
The Wise, in just revenge, might with them Dumb,)
Say, on the World Your Dumbness you impose,
And give You Organs they deserve to lose.
Impose, indeed, on all the World you would,
'Tis hard to say, if keeping Silence still,
In one, who, could he speak, would speak with Skill,
Is worse, or Talk in These, who Talk so ill.
Why on that Tongue, should purposed Silence dwell
Whence every Word would drop an Oracle?
More Fools of thy known Foresight make a Jest,
For all hate greatest Gifts, who share the least
(As Pope calls Dryden often to the Test.)
Such from thy Pen, should Irwin's Sentence wait
And at the Gallows, own the Judge of Fate,
Or, while with feeble Impotence they rail
Write Wonders on, and with the Wise prevail.

Sooner shall Denham cease to be renown'd,
Or Pope for Denham's Sense quit empty Sound,
To Addison's Immortal heights shall rise,
Or the Dwarf reach him in his native Skies.
Sooner shall real Gypsies grow most fair,
Or false ones, mighty Truths, like thine, declare,
Than these poor Scandal-Mongers hit their Aim,
And blemish Thine, or CURLL'S acknowledg'd Fame.

Great Nostradamus thus, his Age advis'd,
The Mob his Counsels jeer'd, some Bards, despis'd
Him still, neglecting these, his Genius fir'd,
A King encourag'd, and the World admir'd;
Greater (as Times great Tide increas'd) He grew,
When distant Ages prov'd what Truths he knew;
Thy nobler Book, a greater KING receiv'd,
Whence I predict, and Claim to be believ'd,
That by Posterity, less Fame shall be,
To Nostradamus granted, than to Thee;
Thee!  whom the best of KINGS does so defend
And (My self Barring) the best Bards commend.
