See Learning's Ruin in the southern Isle,
Where Death exults in more than common Spoil;
Where Spanheim sleeps, for medal'd Story known,
And Cambden Searcher from the buried Stone;
There gay St. Evremont a Fav'rite Name,
And Causabon of no indiff'rent Fame:
Near Barrow, England's Euclid, rests, and there
Busby, once dreadful, sleeps, and South severe;
South, learn'd and good, Religion's stedfast Friend,
Strict to observe her Rules, and earnest to defend.
And Briton's Bards, the once inspir'd Throng,
Silent in Death, their tuneful Lyres unstrung.
Ye sacred Train!  in peaceful quiet sleep,
Round whom the tuneful Nine their Vigils keep.

To Chaucer's Name eternal Trophies raise.
And load the antique Stone with wreaths of Bays.
Father of Verse!  who in immortal Song,
First taught the Muse to speak the English Tongue:
In early time he rear'd his rev'rend Head,
When Learning was with thick'ning Mists o'erspread:
When rhyming Monks in barb'rous Numbers try
The Lives of Saints, and Feats of Errantry:
Above such trifling idle Tales as these,
His Muse disdain'd by Vulgar Ways to please:
On the fam'd Graecian Bard he fix'd his Sight,
And saw his Beauties through a Cloud of Night.
With Flight advent'rous dar'd the darksom way,
And gave the Promise of a following Day:
And that he might his Meaning better meet,
He made the Mantuan Verse a Lanthorn to his Feet;
Justly design'd, and with a steddy View,
And piercing Eye, he look'd all Nature thro'
Not thro' the gaudy Prism and painted Glass,
But saw her plain, and drew her as she was
His rough bold Strokes with rude unpolish'd Pride,
Art's curious Touch and nicest Care deride:
The Warriour Tale, and Arcite's Love survey,
And let the Greek and Roman Bards give way.

With Ivy crown immortal Spencer's Shrine,
And grace his Shade with Rites almost Divine;
Whose Heav'nly Muse describ'd in deathless Lays,
Eliza's Reign, and Albion's golden Days.

There Drayton rests, who sang the Barons Wars,
The civil Discords, and intestine Jars:
Nor unsuccessful in the am'rous Page,
Esteem'd the Ovid of a former Age.
Here Dav'nant, Shadwell, Rowe, of Lawrel'd Name.
There lofty Denham of superior Fame.
And He first rank'd among th' inspir'd Men,
The Muses Darling Son, Immortal Ben;
Who justly view'd the Vices of the Age,
And brought 'em boldly on the publick Stage;
No mean Designs and threadbare Plots were laid,
The Fop, and the intrigu'ing Chamber-Maid;
Poor weak Performances, which only show
The Conversation of the Pit below;
When to his Legs he purple Buskins ty'd,
And trod the Theater with tragick Pride?
Deep was his Language, Just the great Design,
To draw the Crimes of Artful Cataline.
What ancient Greece, or later Rome has shown.
He fix'd in English Soil and made his own.
On Cowley's Grave eternal Myrtles bloom,
And all the Muses wait around his Tomb.
Cowley th' inspir'd Nine's peculiar care;
Cowley the Fav'rite of the British Fair;
Whether he sports in gay Anacreon's Vein,
Or boldly soars in Pindar's lofty Strain,
And justly shews the Theban Bard improv'd,
Or drew the Picture of that Life he lov'd.
If here and there the Numbers harsh appear,
And the rough Language grates the nicer Ear,
Think that the Bard, tho' warm'd with noble Rage,
Rose in a hurry'd and distracted Age;
Study'd in Arms, no wonder then by Chance
We find the Musick of the Pyrrhick Dance.
The Field is Pallas' not the Muse's Care,
They shun the Camp, and fly the Seat of War.
On Isis' quiet Banks the Sisters stray,
Or where the Cam thro' Willows winds its way.
From busy Towns the tuneful Train retire,
And Country Fields and silent Shades admire.

Nor pass my Muse, the tuneful Prelate's [Sprat] Praise,
Who round the sacred Mitre wreath'd the Bays;
His Bosom warm'd with morethan common Fire
Array'd in holy Lawn, he boldly struck the Lyre.
Such Vida was, Vida of Deathless Fame,
Who reconcil'd the Priests and Poets Name.
Philip's great Name!  a due regard commands,
And Tablets rear'd by Harcourt's gen'rous Hand,
While Herefordian Tow'rs his Relicks hide,
And o'er the Earth his Fame is wafted wide.
Thy early Youth express'd such God-like Rage,
Such daring Flights we justly might presage
The growing Wonders of a riper Age.
But early Death did all our Hopes defeat,
And rob'd thy Country of a Prize too great.

With awful Eye I view great Dryden's Bust,
At distance bow, nor press too near his Dust;
With Pleasure see the letter'd Stone declare
In stately Pride, what noble Guest lies there;
No Epitaph thy Character displays,
'Tis high Presumption to attempt thy Praise.
A needless Task, for can that Creature be
Who has not heard of Homer and of thee?
This Sheffeld knew, nor trifled with thy Fame,
But only bad the Marble bear thy Name.

Let Travellers th' Italian Coast explore,
Of pleasing Baja and the winding Shore,
By Virgil's sacred Tomb immortal made,
Round which th' unbidden Lawrel forms a Shade.
These Walls a Poet not inferior claim,
And boast the Honour of as great a Name.

Poets themselves like common Mortals die,
Such are the Laws of hard Necessity;
Not the sweet Musick of the pleasing Tongue,
The heav'nly Numbers nor harmonious Song,
Can plead suspension to the fleeting Breath,
Or Charm th' inexorable Ears of Death,
Who interrupts him even while he Sings,
And with rude Fingers breaks the sounding Strings.

Homer, who brought the Warriours deeds to light,
And boldly snatch'd the Hero's Name from Sight,
Fell undistinguish'd like a common Name,
Nor claim'd a Privilege, but empty Fame.
Like him his Sons must view th' oblivious State,
And Prior, Pope, and Congreve yield at length to Fate.
