O Pleading, pleasing Shades of Night,
Darkness with luckiest Omens crown'd;
Darkness (more clear to me than Light)
Which overspreads the World around:
Conduct of that bright Fair for whom I burn,
With whom my Life, my Soul, and all its Joys return.

Come, beauteous CLOE, to my arms,
Come, pretty Turtle, softest Dove;
Rush to my Soul, with all thy Charms:
I'll gratify the Queen of Love.
Long have I stay'd, but crown'd with glad Success,
I'll grasp, with twining Arms, the wish'd-for coming Bliss.

Ah!  cruel and relentless Fair!
Can you sit thus my Love disdaining?
Whilst here I languish in Despair,
Of your unkind Delays complaining?
Come, let me from your Lips that Honey taste,
And from your Mouth draw in, that purest, sweetest Blast.

Why can't we join such balmy Kisses,
Whose Pleasure will not soon expire?
Can you thus mock my fond Addresses,
Bright Flame!  that sett'st my Soul on Fire?
Why can't that Boon at my Request be given,
Which you in private beg from all the Powers of Heaven.

But tho' Love's Flames within you lie,
Tho' He reigns Monarch of your Heart;
With artful Coyness you deny
That Prize, with which you'd gladly part;
And seem (if Man to Woman's Looks may trust) 
To shun the soft Delight, and spurn at wanton Lust.

I beg, by all your Native Charms,
That sparkling, wanton, shining Eye,
Which ev'ry Pow'r of Man alarms;
Those Cheeks of purest Crimson-Dye;
Those Locks which waving fan that beauteous Face, 
Dispensing, as they flow, more than an artful Grace.

That Bosom, which so Fair excels;
Those Breasts, than Snow more soft and white;
Whose new-born Roundness heaves and swells,
And captives Mortals with the Sight
By those Twin-Jewels bright I Thee implore,
Extinguish all my Flames, my Dying Powers restore.

Ah!  faithless Charmer!  must I lie
Scorching in these uncommon Flames,
Unless one Look from that bright Eye,
My Soul, and all its Powers reclaims?
Come, Cupid; come, auspicious Queen of Love,
Appease the rigid Fair, and there my Cares remove. 

Deep from my Soul I sent these Sighs,
And Prayers to the greet Powers above;
I pierc'd the Clouds with mournful Cries,
Which reach'd at fall the Throne of Jove:
Lo!  Cloe yields; the raging Tempests cease,
Which labour'd in her Breast, and all her Soul is Peace.

Her Looks grow quiet and serene,
Her Virgin-Modesty appears 
In her fair Face; hail, brightest Scene!
Hence fly my vain deluding Fears!
Now pearly Drops steal gently down her Cheeks,
From Chastity they flow, and thus her Silence breaks.

Cloe to your Embraces flies,
With mutual Fire she burns for you;
With your Addresses she complies,
And will by Turns the Bliss renew:
Modesty bold she comes with every Power,
The Prize I sweetly grasp'd, and bless'd the smiling Hour.

Whilst now in Bed compos'd she lies,
My Fires with Force redoubled creep
To that dear Flame that gave 'em Rise,
Like Rivers to their Parent Deep.
Prostrate I traverse, o'er her Form Divine,
Embracing ev'ry Part where nameless Graces shine.

Our Legs in Cupid's Fetters lock'd,
Our Lips, like Birdlime, sticking fast,
Our Limbs by grateful Venus yoak'd,
Round her white Neck my Arms I cast;
Fix'd on her panting Breasts, like Glew, I dwell,
And closely, gently press, the Part I like so well.

Now to those Groves, I wing my way,
Where sports the Golden Cyprian Queen;
To Cupid's Gardens thence I stray, 
Gardens with Spring eternal Green:
Where, pleas'd, I crop the Purple-blushing Rose,
And 'midst a thousand Sweets my drooping Head repose.

Kisses too fragrant I enjoy,
O that the Pleasure would but last!
Fruits, too delicious, soonest cloy,
I envy when I lose my Taste.
Whilst thus we knit in Cupid's closest Ties,
Soul intermixing Soul in pleas'd Confusion dies.

Witness the Sports of mutual Love,
Thou Bed of Gold whereon we lie;
Thou Watch light, which dost faithful prove,
How much the Night can Day outvie:
Whilst we close join'd in these sweet binding Chains,
The Heat of fervent Love diffuse through all our Veins.

Thus while the genial Liquor flowing,
Bedews our inward languid Limbs;
Our Lips, with mutual Kisses glowing,
To its full height each Pleasure climbs:
Our Tongues, to taste each other's Sweetness meet;
Each winking, sparkling Eye, declares each gen'rous Heat.

Now, ye superiour Powers, bless'd,
From Envy free enjoy your State;
Jove, of thy Thunder live possess'd,
Since I'm as Happy, and as Great:
Let me this little Empire long retain,
Ye Gods!  your Heavens keep; Monarchs!  unenvy'd reign.

Thus sporting in Love's pleasing Motion,
My Cloe's dewy Lips I press,
Which flow with Nectar; Divine Potion!
Height'ning the Gust of ev'ry Kiss.
Now in her tender Arms I die away,
And swim in her bright Eyes, Rivals of clearest Day.

Now, with the Bracelets of her Hair
I play, where Curls delightful flow;
I kiss her Breasts, divinely fair!
Which, heaving in her Bosom, glow;
Whiter than which, the Queen of soft Desires
Boasts not; they feed my Soul, and nourish all its Fires.

Sometimes I kiss her snowy Neck,
In Raptures rove from Grace to Grace;
Then gently mark her Rosy Cheek,
At last her Thighs I freely trace;
Thighs smooth as Marble, white as Snows that fall,
Where Cupid Sentry stands, to guard his Mother's All.

With thousand wanton Kisses sporting,
Like pretty Turtles in the Groves
Paring their Mates; while Joy transporting
Their Souls, they coo their little Loves;
Each drives with generous Passion to outvie:
Each strives to mark our Love, till mutually we die.

Then with the Breath of purest Air,
From Mouths half-open, we transfuse
Our wand'ring Souls, till, tir'd with war,
A gentle Sweat our Limbs bedews:
Panting, we long engag'd; but, at the last,
Love flags, our Spirits droop, the happy Moment's past.

Thus, Pleasure's Fountain once exhausted,
From which the vital Marrow flow'd;
That Heart, whose Courage oft I boasted,
Now trembling sinks beneath its Load.
And Sleep, that Death-like Form, kind Refuge brings;
But on those Breasts I Die, from whence new Vigour springs.

Scarce had one short-liv'd Hour revolv'd,
She wanton jogs me, War revoking,
Tickles me, on her Point resolv'd,
Tempts me with Kisses all provoking;
My Lips she presses with a gentle Bite,
Fawning with Female Arts, which sure to Arms invite.

My Dear, says she, can you lie dead,
Idle, and lost in Mists of Sleep?
At which I raise my drowsy Head,
And quick to Cupid's Arms I leap:
But finding the chief Spring of Nature dry,
The Arts of War I search, new Vigour to supply.

At first I Hand in Hand engag'd;
Then at a Distance threw a Dart;
Last a full Push I made, enrag'd,
Which pleasing, pierc'd her vital Part,
Each answers ev'ry Stroke, their Part each play,
We boldly act, and all Love's Duties bravely pay.

Our Souls their former Joys renew,
We raise new Sport and wanton Jesting;
Our Eyes each other's Charms review,
In ev'ry Form of Love contesting:
At last our Bodies, warm'd with mutual Fire,
To prove each other's Aid, to join in One conspire.

Now ye propitious Shades of Night,
To you ten thousand times Adieu!
Attendants on that great Delight,
Which Gods would envy if they knew.
A Night so pleasant Juno can't bestow,
Nor could the Queen of Love, with Mars, a better know.

Once more adieu, ye pleasing Hours,
Which I, with thousand Charms surrounded,
With Cloe spent; whilst all Love's Powers
With thousand wanton Tricks abounded:
Whilst we, by Turns, each other's Beauty prais'd,
And from each View, new Wonder, and Amazement rais'd.

We greeted, murmur'd, whisper'd, sigh'd,
Check'd, to provoke again to Pleasure:
We warr'd, with tickling Laughter, Dy'd,
But we could Live again at leisure.
We bill'd, like cooing Doves, sweet Wounds we gave,
By Turns we Liv'd, we Dy'd, each other's Life to Save.
