Fast by the Banks of Cam was Colin bred:
Ye Nymphs, for ever guard That sacred Stream,
To Wimpole's woody Shade his Way he sped:
Flourish those Woods, the Muses endless Theme!
As whilom Colin ancient Books had read,
Lays Greek and Roman wou'd he oft rehearse;
And much he lov'd, and much by heart he said
What Father Spenser sung in British Verse.
Who reads that Bard desires like Him to write,
Still fearful of Success, still tempted by Delight.

Soon as Aurora had unbarr'd the Morn,
And Light discover'd Nature's chearful Face;
The sounding Clarion, and the sprightly Horn
Call'd the blyth Huntsmen to the distant Chace.
Eftsoons They issue forth, a goodly Band;
The deep-mouth'd Hounds with Thunder rend the Air;
The fiery Coursers strike the rising Sand;
Far thro' the Thicket flies the frighted Deer;
Harley the Honor of the Day supports;
His Presence glads the Wood; His Orders guide the Sports.

On a fair Palfrey well equip't did sit
An Amazonian Dame; a scarlet Vest
For active Horsemanship adaptly fit
Enclos'd her dainty Limbs; a plumed Crest
Wav'd o'er her Head; obedient by her Side
Her Friends and Servants rode; with artful Hand
Full well knew She the Steed to turn and guide:
The willing Steed receiv'd her soft Command:
Courage and Sweetness in her Face were seated;
On Her all Eyes were bent, and all good Wishes waited.

This seeing, Colin thus his Muse bespake:
For alltydes was the Muse to Colin nigh,
Ah me too nigh!  Or, Clio, I mistake;
Or that bright Form that pleaseth so mine Eye,
Is Jove's fair Daughter Pallas, gracious Queen
Of liberal Arts; with Wonder and Delight
In Homer's Verse we read Her; well I ween,
That emu'lous of his Grecian Master's Flight,
Dan Spenser makes the fav'rite Goddess known;
When in her graceful Look fair Britomart is shown.

At Noon as Colin to the Castle came,
Ope'd were the Gates, and right prepar'd the Feast:
Apppears at Table rich yclad a Dame,
The Lord's Delight, and Wonder of the Guest.
With Pearl and Jewels was she sumptuous deckt,
As well became her Dignity and Place;
But the Beholders mought her Gems neglect,
To fix their Eyes on her more lovely Face,
Serene with Glory, and with Softness bright:
O Beauty sent from Heav'n, to cheer the mortal Sight!

Liberal Munificence behind her stood;
And decent State obey'd her high Command;
And Charity diffuse of native Good
At once portrayes her Mind, and guides her Hand.
As to each Guest some Fruits She deign'd to lift,
And Silence with obliging Parley broke;
How gracious seem'd to each th' imparted Gift?
But how more gracious what the Giver spoke?
Such Ease, such Freedom did her Deed attend,
That every Guest rejoic'd, exalted to a Friend.

Quoth Colin; Clio, if my feeble Sense
Can well distinguish Yon illustrious Dame,
Who nobly doth such gentle Gifts dispense;
In Latian Numbers Juno is her Name,
Great Goddess who with Peace and Plenty crown'd,
To all that under Sky breathe vital Air
Diffuseth Bliss, and thro' the World around
Pours wealthy Ease, and scatters joyous Chear;
Certes of Her in semblant Guise I read;
Where Spenser decks his Lays with Gloriana's Deed.

As Colin mus'd at Evening near the Wood;
A Nymph undress'd, beseemeth, by Him past:
Down to her Feet her silken Garment flow'd:
A Ribbon bound and shap'd her slender Waste:
A Veil dependent from her comely Head,
And beauteous Plenty of ambrosial Hair,
O'er her fair Breast and lovely Shoulders spread,
Behind fell loose, and wanton'd with the Air.
The smiling Zephyrs call'd their am'rous Brothers:
They kiss'd the waving Lawn, and wafted it to Others.

Daisies and Violets rose, where She had trod;
As Flora kind her Roots and Buds had sorted:
And led by Hymen, Wedlock's mystic God,
Ten thousand Loves around the Nymph disported.
Quoth Colin; now I ken the Goddess bright,
Whom Poets sing:  All human Hearts enthrall'd
Obey her Pow'r; her Kindness the Delight
Of Gods and Men; great Venus She is call'd,
When Mantuan Virgil doth her Charms rehearse;
Belphebe is her Name, in gentle Edmund's Verse.

Heard this the Muse, and with a Smile reply'd,
Which show'd soft Anger mixt with friendly Love:
Twin Sisters still were Ignorance and Pride;
Can we know Right, 'till Error we remove?
But Colin, well I wist, will never learn:
Who slights his Guide shall deviate from his Way.
Me to have ask'd what Thou coud'st not discern,
To Thee pertain'd; to Me, the Thing to say.
What Heavenly Will from human Eye conceals,
How can the Bard aread, unless the Muse reveals?

Nor Pallas thou, nor Britomart hast seen;
When soon at Morn the flying Deer was chac't:
No Jove's great Wife, nor Spenser's Fairy-Queen
At Noon-tyde dealt the Honors of the Feast:
Nor Venus, nor Belphebe did'st Thou spy,
The Evening's Glory, and the Grove's Delight.
Henceforth, if ask'd, instructed right, reply,
That all the Day to knowing Mortals Sight
Bright Ca'ndish-Holles-Harley stood confest,
As various Hour advis'd, in various Habit drest.
