BUXOMA, HOBNELIA.

Close by the Entrance of the woodland Plain,
Stood the low Cottage of a jolly Swain:
The rotting Thatch had lain for many a Year,
And on its Eves green Turfs of Grass appear.
Before his Hut, a little Spot of Ground
The Shepherd had with Hurdles fenc'd around;
A five-bar'd Gate upon a Stake he hung,
On which Buxoma oft with Pleasure swung:
Within th' Enclosure of the Wicker Fence
He kept his Ducks and Geese, his Cocks and Hens.
These young Buxoma fed, for 'twas to her
Of all the Poultry Colin left the Care.
As from the Plain one Day Hobnelia hied,
Buxoma thro' the Gate the Damsel spied:
Straightway she beckoned to the willing Lass,
Who ne'er without a Game at Chat could pass.
Across the Road the tidy Maiden trip'd,
And to Buxoma o'er the Stile she skip'd.
The Lasses sate adown beneath the Shade
A spreading Elm's thick bending Branches made;
For Colin a green Bank of Sod had rear'd
Round a tall Elm, that grew within his Yard.
The blithesome Damsels took this pleasing Seat,
And of their Sweethearts sang in Sonnets neat.

BUXOMA.
Thou know'st, Hobnelia, who's my Fav'rite Lout;
Thou'st seen me often speed, I make no doubt,
Into yon Nook, where Lobbin's nibbling Sheep
Within the Compass of his Eye must keep.
As to the Swain I trip'd the other Day,
I pluckt a Bush of Fern that grew i' th' way.
When with my Knife aslaunt I cut the Root,
Eftsoons I spied great L and C to boot:
And well thou weenest, Lass, that Schollards spell
The Name of Lobbin Clout with C and L.

HOBNELIA.
Ay well I wot a happy Maid art thou,
For sure a trimmer Lad ne'er follow'd Plough:
But poor Hobnelia still was born to prove
The cruel Torments of neglected Love.
I'll tell thee, Lass, when Prittilis was wed,
And we had seen the Swain and her to Bed,
When all the Lads and Damsels slung the Hose,
I only had the Luck to miss his Nose.
Yet home I sped, and for my Slouchy's sake
Beneath my Pillow laid the plummy Cake:
But I, instead of dreaming of the Wight,
Did nought but sleep and snore the live-long Night.

BUXOMA.
Thou think'st so much of Slouchy, thou'st forgot,
That I was there, Hobnelia, hast thou not?
Dost thou not ween, that when the Joint grew bare,
The Mutton Blade-bone fell to Father's Share?
I beg'd it of him when he'd pickt it clean,
And slily hid it in my Lap unseen.
That Night you mind we all on's lay from home,
Because 'twas late, and we had far to come.
So I with Roselinda went to Bed,
And slipt the Bone beneath the Maiden's Head.
Pleas'd went to sleep; but when the Morning came,
Soon as we up'd, I told the Lass my Dream.
Straightway she gan of Colinet to tell,
And how she thought he kiss'd her passing well.
I bid her go and see on what she'd lain,
And so we laugh'd till almost burst in twain.

HOBNELIA.
As the blue Sky with twinkling Stars was fill'd,
One shooting cross the Welkin I beheld:
Straight in the Corner of my Apron blue
I knit a Knot, and Slouchy thought of you.
But yet to prove the Falseness of my Swain,
Before 'twas firm the Star was fix'd again.

BUXOMA.
I'll tell thee, Wench, a pretty Prank to play,
I try'd it too my self the other Day.
Three Handfuls of our whitest Meal I took,
And with it blended Water from the Brook;
Then with clean Hands I kneaded it to Dough,
And made the Letters of the Criss-cross-row.
Eftsoons I put 'em in a Bason fair,
And fill'd it to the Top with Water clear.
Beneath my Bolster this I safely laid,
And slept upon it when I went to Bed;
But in the Morning, which was strange to see,
Upon the Top there swam an L and C;
And these, they say, the Name of him point out
Who'eer to you shall prove a loving Lout,
Now L and C are found in Lobbin Clout.

HOBNELIA.
I'll do't to Night; yet in good sooth I fear
That after all I shall be ne'er the near,
Because I ne'er had Luck in all my Life;
For t' other Day when Goodman Clody's Wife,
Who lives at upper End of all the Town,
With her first lusty Bairn was fall'n adown,
Straightway the Nurse, in Sarcenet Hood so nice,
Cut from the groaning Cheese each Lass a Slice:
With Pleasure then I to my Cottage sped,
And plac'd the Cheese with Care beneath my Head.
But this prov'd worse than did the bridal Cake;
For all the Night I toss'd and lay awake.

BUXOMA.
Last Night I dreamt a charming Dream, I trow,
Which if you'll tell me yours I'll let you know.

HOBNELIA.
Come on then Lass; but first you yours shall tell,
For I too dreamt what pleas'd me passing well.

BUXOMA.
I ween'd, Hobnelia, that I saw a Wight,
The featest of the Plain with Flowers bedight,
I in my Sunday Gown was drest so gay,
And with the Shepherd deftly trip'd away.
Methought he from our Cottage led me straight
Athwart the Plain to Kirk-house Meadow Gate;
Thence into Kirk we sped, and there we stand,
Until the Parson came and join'd our Hand.
Straight after him the jovial Shepherd said,
I Lobbin with this Ring Buxoma wed;
But when it came to my Turn next to speak,
I found myself in Bed and broad awake:
Now then, Hobnelia, I your Promise claim,
That you rehearse to me your last Night's Dream.

HOBNELIA.
Since you so fairly hast proposed thine,
I'll keep my Word, and likewise tell you mine:
Methought one Morn the Lasses and the Swains
Met altogether on the grassy Plains,
They join their Hands so soon as e'er they can,
Resolv'd to play at Thread-my-Needle-Nan;
Each Shepherd took the Lass he lik'd the best,
When Slouchy pickt out me from all the rest,
Tho' Doudilis, foul Quean!  had Hopes her Smile
Wou'd sure the Lubbar of his Heart beguile.
But, oh!  Buxoma, canst thou guess my Glee,
When spite of her he gave his Hand to me?
Such Joy's too great to last, you well may deem,
Eftsoons I wak'd, and found 'twas all a Dream.

BUXOMA.
Then fear not, Lass, to die all crown'd with Willow,
I hid a Bunch of Savine in your Pillow,
And Gammer Dreamwell always said, you ween,
That then your Sweetheart true is ever seen.
Now then I'll tell you cheery News beside,
I shall before next Year be made a Bride:
I heard the Nightingale this Morning sing,
Nor have I heard the Cuckow all the Spring;
And Good-wives say, she ne'er to wed shall fail,
That 'fore the Cuckow hears the Nightingale.

More had she said, but that the Hens and Cocks
By their loud Cackling made her ken a Fox.
Sly Reynard throws a Gosling o'er his Back,
And scuds away toward the Barly Stack;
Buxoma ran in Haste to snatch the Broom,
But in the Hurry took a Prong i' th' Room.
Just at that Time the Shepherd Cuddy past,
And wonder'd where the Damsel hied so fast;
Adown Buxoma falling from the Stile,
What Cuddy saw would make a Parson smile.
At length he spies the Fox, and quick persues,
And from his Jaws redeem'd the wounded Goose.
The Swain return'd expecting of his Bliss,
How from each Damsel he should gain a Kiss;
But as they both stood leaning on the Yate,
Sadly as they spied it in the Shepherd's Hand,
Their Ground no longer cou'd the Lasses stand;
But blushing still at what he'd seen before,
Fled from the Yate, and clapt the Cottage Door.
