Muse!  to my Noble Friend an Off'ring bring;
And his fair Garden, in soft Numbers sing.
Sweet let thy Verse, from unforc'd Nature flow,
Yet strongly mark'd let the full Figures glow:
As when drawn Clouds unveil the blushing Sky,
And Heav'n burns broad, with a Vermillion Dye,
While thro' the grovy Tracks, cool Zephirs pass,
To fan the silver Streams, and sweep the Grass.

Deep, in surrounding Woods, there shines a Seat,
Nature's blest Favourite!  and Love's Retreat!
Green, amid stony Wilds, rise op'ning Bow'rs!
Arch'd with a wreathy Heav'n of pendant Flow'rs!
Cool, in the burning Dog-star's sultry Sway:
Yet in the Ice of Winter, Warm and Gay!

O!  Shades, well temper'd, like your Owner's Mind,
Where soft, and solid, are by Nature join'd:
Sublimely Wise, and to Perfection Blest!
You know to judge, and dare to chuse the best!

Beauty and Wit, in your lov'd Consort meet,
Where all that's noble, lives with all that's sweet!
At once your Wife, your Partner, and your Friend!
She curbs your Cares, and does your Joys extend.
You are the Point which all her Hopes pursue,
And if she sings, she sweetly sings of You!
In her alone, you ev'ry Blessing find:
Charm to your Eye!  and Cordial to your Mind.
Ever thus bless'd, may Life wear slow away;
And some new Joy mark ev'n its latest Day!
May no Noise reach you, but thro' rustling Trees,
When their broad Boughs bend from the murm'ring Breeze.
Lift me, some God!  from this tumultuous Town!
And near that heav'nly Umbrage set me down;
In some small Cottage, that delightful stands;
Some clean thatch'd Tenement within your Lands;
Hemm'd with high rosy Banks, and shadowy Bow'rs,
"A snow of Blossoms!  and a Wild of Flow'rs!"
Where the low Vine does the tall Elm beseech,
And the sweet Lime tree woos the useful Beech!
'Till the mix'd Boughs compose a roofy Shade,
And no bold Sun-beam can my Rest invade.
Here out of hated Scandal's noisy Sound,
Stretch'd in sweet Leisure on the silent Ground,
Deathless Companions of my Shade I'd chuse
The few fix'd Fav'rites of our English Muse:
High soaring Milton!  Waller sweet of Strain!
Undying Shakespear! and wild Spencer's Vein!
Sometimes familiar Johnson in low Flight,
Shall place the vulgar World before my Sight.
But Dryden's Numbers most my Heart shall move,
For the prevailing Passion there, is Love!
But naming Love, hark!  Clio tunes the Strings!
And the Soul melts before Her, as she sings!

What prouder Ornaments of Life remain,
I leave, for Fools to seek &mdash; and Knaves to gain.
