Joy of my Life, whose Wit my Soul inspires
With Rapture, as with Love thy Beauty fires!
In whom my All of Pains or Pleasures dwell;
Lod'g in thy Smiles or Frowns; my Heav'n, or Hell!
Accept these Numbers of an humble Swain:
Happy if you approve their artless Strain.
Numbers, were they an Honour, you might claim;
Thine are these Numbers, for from thee they came.
The Poet thine.  Ah!  would not thou disown,
Then blest indeed, the Poet for thine own!
At least the Numbers for thine own refuse!
But thou, that art my Venus, be my Muse!

I boast not to have seen the tuneful Train,
As Hesiod saw them on th' Ascraean Plain.
Nor to have slept the Charge of fabled Doves,
As Horace slept beside th' Apulian Groves.
Then what the Pow'r my beating Breast alarms,
With Transports swelling like Poetick Charms?
Thy God Anacreon does these Transports move;
Love my Apollo is, my Song is Love.

In ancient Days (those Days full happy were)
When Life was void of Art, as void of Care;
When Swains for Truth of Passion were approv'd;
And Maids for Merit, not for Lucre lov'd.
Among th' Iernian Nymphs for Beauty fam'd,
There dwelt a beauteous Nais, Livia nam'd.
Form'd for all Tongues to praise, all Eyes admire.
Her Mother Lamia, Neptune was her Sire.
For once as Phoebus shone with equal Ray,
Betwixt the rising and the falling Day.
This Island-Nymph, to shun the sultry Heat,
Sought in her mossy Cave a cool Retreat.
There, o'er the Billows mounting as he rode,
The sleeping Beauty touch'd the wat'ry God.
Expert of Hand he check'd the flowing Rein;
And from his Chariot lighting on the Main,
Sudden with his circumfluous Waves betray'd,
Thoughtless of such Mischance, th' affrighted Maid.
Hence Livia sprung, to bless the God's Embrace;
Doubly to bless, she sprung with ev'ry Grace;
With sweetest Innocence the Mind to move,
And Beauty to confirm the Heart to Love.
Yet Love, as from the worst of Foes, she fled,
And fear'd, she knew not why, the Nuptial Bed.
Oft Neptune chid her with a Father's Smile;
Oft as the God review'd Ierne's Isle;
Whose Presence, scarce more frequent on her Coast,
Albion, of Isles the fairest Isle, cou'd boast;
With safer Hand to guide her lab'ring Oars,
Or speed her swelling Sails to foreign Shores.
"How long, fair Daughter," (thus the Monarch cry'd)
"Wilt thou defer the pleasing Name of Bride?
If Mortals you reject; caught with those Charms,
Know many a God of Rivers seeks thy Arms.
For Love of thee my Fav'rite Shannon burns,
Swoln with the Tribute of a thousand Urns.
The sandy Slane; the Silver-streaming Shure;
Full-flowing Barrow; rapid-winding Newre;
Wide-spreading Boyn, the Scene of future Fame;
And Numbers more whom I omit to name."

But still, as he advis'd, the Virgin said,
"Give me, 'tis all I ask, to live a Maid.
Nor do you give, nor do I ask for more,
Than has of Gods been ask'd and giv'n before.
Dian to Jove for this her Pray'rs addrest,
And Jove to Dian granted this Request."

O'er the fond Father the fair Child prevails,
"Persuasion deck'd with Beauty seldom fails."

But Dian, proud so bright a Nymph to gain,
With Joy admits her to her Virgin-Train.
Together to the Forests they repair,
The Mountain-Forests high in ambient Air;
To chase the shaggy Wolves, or tim'rous Harts;
Both arm'd with Quivers, both supply'd with Darts:
In Hunting-Garbs both negligently drest:
And both with naked Feet, and naked Breast.
Bare was the Goddess' Head, the Nymph's was bare:
Loose was the Nymph's, and loose the Goddess' Hair.
Such Charms the Mistress, such the Maid adorn:
But for their Bows of Silver and of Horn,
None well the Mistress from the Maid could know.
And wou'd the Maid but take the Silver Bow,
Or that of humbler Horn the Mistress take,
The Mistress might the Maid, the Maid the Mistress make.

This Venus saw, and saw with jealous Eyes;
For Jealousy can reach the very Skies.
A Nymph so form'd to grace her sprightly Court,
"Lost" (thus the Goddess griev'd) "to idle Sport!
A fit Companion thou with Bruits to rove!
Thy fit Companion, Nymph, is youthful Love.
Thy very Charms oppose thy own Desires,
And thy Face questions what thy Heart requires.
How canst thou think that lovely-rising Breast
Was made for other Use than to be prest?
At least (tho' fixt thy Rudeness to maintain)
Made to be sought, tho' to be sought in vain?"

Thus wrathful, to herself the Goddess cry'd,
And beckon'd wanton Cupid to her Side.

To whom.  "Prepare, my Boy, thy keenest Dart,
Thou never-slow to take thy Mother's Part!
Subject yon Rebel-Nymph my Pow'r that slights,
And quits for stupid Sports my pleasing Rites.
On whom dull Coyness aukardly intrudes.
Ill suits it with the Charming to be Prudes!
Deformity stiff Virtue recommends,
But Beauty was ordain'd for better Ends."

To rouze the Boy there needed little Art,
"Cupid all know loves Mischief in his Heart."
Down shoots the nimble Archer from the Skies,
(The well-stor'd Quiver rattles as he flies)
The Nymph in View:  Bent was his deadly Bow,
And fixt his Shaft in Readiness to throw.
When now approaching, twangs the slacken'd String,
The feather'd Weapon whizzes on the Wing,
True to it's Aim, thy Breast, devoted Fair!
But thy own Goddess took thee to her Care:
She, from thy Bosom turn'd the slanting Dart,
The Virgin-Hand preserv'd the Virgin-Heart.

Robb'd of his Prey, Love to superior Pow'r,
Stiffly submits; and waits a luckier Hour.

So when the Hawk comes sousing from the Skies,
And well-nigh fastens on his Subject-Prize;
The tender Eagle newly gone astray,
Pleas'd with her Ramble thro' the aerial Way.
If chance at Hand the royal Bird appears,
Drawn to her Rescue by maternal Fears:
He, yields reluctant to his own Desires,
And slow-receding sullenly retires.

Now down the Hill, (Hill, not unknown to Fame,
Which owes to filial Love it's ancient Name)
The sportive Virgins chas'd the flying Prey;
When Livia hapless miss'd the common Way.
Here as she err'd, rous'd by the passing Hound
The Mountain-God appear'd with Osier crown'd;
A shaggy Skin upon his Back he wore,
And in his Hand a piny Jav'lin bore.
"Say, gentle Swain (whatever be your Name)
If God (whatever Deity you claim)
Hast thou this Way the Virgin-Goddess spy'd?"
To him the Nymph; to her the God reply'd;
With wild Commotions suddenly possest,
(His Heart began to beat within his Breast,
His Tongue at Variance with his Mind to rove)
Reply'd, not of the Goddess, but of Love.
At Sound of Love she leaves him to Despair;
And shoots into the Wood she knows not where.

For Cupid who had found the Task too hard,
To reach the Virgin thro' her watchful Guard.
But, like a prudent Gen'ral, seem'd to yield,
To make the surer of a doubtful Field.
Now for the Fight with double Fury burns:
"So oft to Malice Disappointment turns."
In his first Shot mild was the God's Intent,
No Harm but Love, if Love's a Harm, he meant.
His next was sped with a severer View,
Was sped, not now to conquer, but undo.

Two Darts he draws (as ancient Bards have told)
One tipt with Lead; and one was tipt with Gold;
With Gold, Excess of Passion to inspire;
With Lead, base Metal, to repel Desire.
Deep in the God he fix'd the golden Dart,
Deep as the Leaden pierc'd the Virgin's Heart.

Flush'd with Disdain away the Virgin flies;
With Hope the God pursues the charming Prize,
Swift from the Hound as flies the tim'rous Deer,
The Virgin fled upon the Wings of Fear.
Swift as the eager Hawk pursues the Dove,
The God pursued upon the Wings of Love.
"Ah!  stay" (at length he cry'd) "fair Nais stay!
Thus tender Lambs remove from Beasts of Prey;
From Beasts of Prey thus well may they remove,
Death their Pursuit; but my Pursuit is Love.
You do not know what Lover you disdain;
Nor Mountain-herd am I, nor Forest-swain.
But me a God, far as thy Eyes survey,
These Mountains vast, and Forests wide obey.
Nor with Olympus need we blush to vie;
We too have Heights that might the Heav'ns supply.
Nor mighty Atlas who the Skies up-bears;
We too have Shoulders that might prop the Spheres.
Not Latmos better seated for Delight,
Where young Endymion meets the Queen of Night.
Not Pindus suited for melodious Lays,
Where on his golden Lyre Apollo plays.
For Lays not more the forked Hill renown'd;
Our Summits too the tuneful Maids have crown'd.
Where oft, sweet Harmony, by turns they sing,
The Voice attemper'd to the melting String.
Ah!  stay" (for still she fled) "fair Nais, stay!
Thou dost not know the Dangers of the Way;
What Roughs, at Random flying, thou may'st meet,
What Rocks, injurious to the tender Feet.
Tho' warn'd by me some little Caution take;
How cou'd I see thee suffer for my Sake!
Ah!  stay!  my Speed I'll quit, quit you your Speed;
Trust me you fly much faster than you need."

While thus soft-soothing he reveals his Mind;
She trembles at his loud'ning Voice behind;
And thick'ning Breath; which with a sultry Air
Glows on her Neck, and spreads her flowing Hair.
Struck at the nigh Approach she turn'd aside,
And all her Wiles, her last vain Efforts, tried.
Close at her Heels the eager Lover bore,
And trod in ev'ry Step she trod before.
And now he seem'd to hold her; now by Force
She seem'd to quit him, in the doubtful Course;
So near the Strife!  The Virgin you'd have thought
Lost ev'ry Moment, ev'ry Moment caught!
At length all faint and breathless in the Chase,
(Her Heart the Blood, the Colour left her Face)
On her old Sire she casts her streaming Eyes,
And thus, upon the Verge of Ruin, cries.
"Confirm thy Grant!  thy Daughter, Neptune, aid!
O!  give me to die, if not to live a Maid!"
When, as she spoke, her Limbs more plyant grew;
Her waving Locks fall off in liquid Dew;
Her panting Breasts in circling Waves subside;
Her out-stretch'd Arms in length'ning Currents glide;
Her Blood in Water trickles from her Veins;
Nor ought to bless the God the Nymph retains.
He, as he hop'd, possest of all her Charms,
Dives in the Spring his vain deluded Arms.
While she, not wholly freed from the Surprise,
Flies in her Course, and circles as she flies.
So oft her Streams their destin'd Journey shun;
So oft in-isle the Banks by which they run;
Not thine, Meander, with such Circuits flow!
As yet, perhaps, her Change she did not know;
As yet, elusive kept her winding Pace;
Yet fled disdainful of the God's Embrace.

Still does the Quickness of her ancient Course,
That once enforc'd her Feet, her Streams enforce.
Which tumbling from the Mountain to Plain
Thro' thee, belov'd Eblana, seek the Main.

You, on those Streams, Pride of those Streams that dwell,
Yet tread the dang'rous Paths by which they fell;
Whether in Triumph you the Phoenix chuse,
(Phoenix not happier in her Site than Muse)
Or Strand, to view the Conquests you have won;
(Where oft those Eyes supply the absent Sun)
Cruel as fair!  attend th' allusive Tale,
Nor let Examples, if Intreaties fail!
Learn from dire Scorn what sad Disasters flow,
And make a proper Use of other's Woe.
Think not for Fondness to return Disdain,
Nor made for Pleasure to delight in Pain.
Better the Joys of mingling Souls to prove,
"Love is the true Equivalent of Love."
At least beware how Venus you provoke,
And urge of Cupid the revengeful Stroke.
