While others pay their tribute due,
In foreign verse, and tongues unknown,
My humbler Muse resorts to you,
And strives to pay it in her own.
Unskill'd in each poetic grace,
Unknowing of the tuneful art,
She gives the little all she has,
A simple English verse, an honest English heart.

Oh!  when thou read'st it, let thine eyes
Awhile with tears forget to flow;
Thy beauteous bosom cease to rise,
And labour with its weight of woe.
Why should'st thou thus the monarch's death
With unavailing grief deplore?
Canst thou recall the fleeting breath?
No &mdash; thou must lose thy own, but canst not his restore.

Then dry thy tears &mdash; the God of day,
Though flowers now hide him from our sight,
Soon through the darkness works his way,
And moves in all the pomp of light.
Like him, O lift thy radiant eyes,
Like him with gracious influence shine;
Think from thy joys that ours arise,
Consider England's happiness depends on thine.

Hear then thy people's, husband's prayers;
He bids thee too dismiss thy grief:
What, shall he only meet with care,
Where he expects to find relief?
Beneath the weight of crowns oppresst,
He to thy love for ease does flee;
When he has given his kingdoms rest,
Retreats into thy arms, and finds his own in thee.

O Caroline, our sweetest grace,
Delight and pleasure of our eyes,
Thou fruitful mother of our peace,
Thou source whence all our joys arise;
Blest in thy numerous offspring, lo!
A rising age of gold we see;
The people shall not only owe
Their present bliss, but all their future too, to thee.

Britannia, leave thy mournful bed,
Raise up thy prostrate limbs from earth,
Exalt aloft thy towery head,
And see what joys are taking birth;
See how the smiling years succeed,
Behold the blessings laid in store:
What though thou mourn'st thy monarch dead,
Look on the branches he has left, and thou wilt weep no more.

With rapture view the lovely race,
See future kings and queens arise,
Thy throne hereafter born to grace,
And bless th' admiring people's eyes:
Sons &mdash; that already pant for fame,
Fir'd with their father's love of arms;
Bright daughters &mdash; form'd in beauty's frame,
And lavishly adorn'd with all their mother's charms.

Oh!  with what pleasure now we may
To latest times extend our sight!
The nation's rising bliss survey,
And see new glories spring to light!
Succeeding years of joy and peace
T' our children boldly we presage;
Ev'n now we taste their happiness,
And, in this instant moment, live the future age.

Thus, when the great Aeneas view'd
The destin'd heroes of his race,
Fix'd in astonishment, he stood,
To see the bright succession pass.
The thoughts of vast events to come
Within his labouring fancy roll;
The triumphs of immortal Rome,
And all her shining glories, kindle in his soul.

Pleas'd, he enjoys the beauteous scene,
Proudly exulting in his mind,
Counts o'er the forms of godlike men,
For empire, and for life, design'd:
Then, wrapp'd in ecstasy, he stands,
To see in them his Troy revive;
Their birth, with eagerness, demands,
And wishes ev'n to die, that they may sooner live.
