BEAUFORT, great Heir of that distinguish'd Blood,
Which from Gaunt's Veins derives its purple Flood:
On whose young Brow the Ducal Leaves are fixt,
With Sprigs of Attic Olive intermixt:
If not unpleas'd thy Eyes have e'er survey'd
Rome's hoary Piles, and Tibur's Sacred Shade,
If Grecian Treasures anxious thou hast sought,
And follow'd Arundel's great track in Thought;
O give this humble Muse to creep beneath
That sumptuous Roof where marble Caesars breathe,
Where Guido's Oils, and Michel's Groupes are seen,
Nor scorn the Labours of the blue-ey'd Queen.

Where Po divides the fruitful Lombard Vale,
(Imperial Po, renown'd in antient Tale)
Mature of Years, an Amazonian Form
Lean'd on a Turf with scalding Tears grown warm;
Her yellow Hair abandon'd to the Wind,
(Unjust Neglect!)  betray'd her tortur'd Mind;
Beside her lay a Morion stain'd with Gore,
Whose plumy Honours graceful wav'd no more,
(Remainder sad of a disputed Field!)
With half-a Spear and what was once a Shield.

All coopt in Steel, along th' enamel'd Mead
A Martial Youth pricks on his fiery Steed;
His God-like Eyes shone awfully serene,
And Sway was stampt on his majestick Mien;
An hundred Toils atchiev'd in Ages past:
(Flame-temper'd Work!)  his Target's Circle grac'd:
Crown'd was his Helm, his Streamer snowy white
Display'd the Cross which Britons wave in Fight
Lions with Fleurdelis alternate rais'd
In Gold, upon his Kingly Amour blaz'd:
A Scarf he wore with am'rous Emblem wrought,
And look'd as one who fair Adventure sought.
Was never sung in Ariosto's Lays,
A Knight so form'd to deck his Brows with Bays.

It chanc'd, as bounding o'er the Plain he past,
Full on the Dame his Eagle's View he cast;
He stopp'd, he 'lit; and with submissive Air
Advanc'd to learn the Spring of her Despair;
Then thus &mdash; O more than mortal Nymph, he said,
Plunged in deep Sorrows on the Earth's cold Bed;
Since Beauty wrong'd from Knights demands Relief,
Into my Ear pour out thy hidden Grief;
For by this Sacred Mystick Badge, and Star
That shines conspicuous on my Breast, I swear
Against thy Peace tho' all Cocytus Arm,
And ev'ry Stygian Hag conspire a Charm;
So to my Soul may Heav'n its Mercy show,
As I'll thy Champion prove, and right thee from thy Foe.

As when to Southern Blasts the Zephyr's Breeze
Instant succeeds, and calms the ruffled Seas;
So sudden on the Fair-one's anxious Thought
The unknown Paladin's soft Accents wrought;
Wak'd from her Lethargy of Care, she rais'd
Her awful Brow, her throbbing Heart appeas'd;
Silent awhile admir'd the Stranger's Worth,
And, smiling heav'nly, thus at last broke forth.

Know, courteous Knight, by Poets not unsung,
Minerva stil'd, from Jove himself I sprung;
Child of his Brain, as Citherea fair,
Learning and Arms I made my Virgin Care.
By me on Fame's recording Page enroll'd
Phidias and Zeuxis stand in deathless Gold:
Mine are the sumptuous Fane, th' aereal Dome,
The sprightly Canvas, and the glowing Loom;
The martial Attitude, th' alluring Form,
Nerves strung for Fight, end Graces made to warm.
I measure Time and Space (Chaldean Lore!)
And guide the Pilot by the Magnet's Pow'r;
I gave Columbus latent Worlds to know,
And taught my Tully's Silver Tongue to flow.

First, where the Nile, and where Euphrates run,
The early Structure of my Fame begun;
Grave Zoroaster here my Laws explain'd,
There swarthy Isis  my Vicegerent reign'd;
By her, fair Sculpture dawn'd, and Building rose,
And Pencils learn'd their Graces to disclose.
By him was trac'd how Planetary Spheres
Round unseen Axles roll in Months and Years;
How Orbs of Light run o'er th' allotted Race,
And shed their mystick Pow'r on Nature's Face.
Their various Labours at one Center met,
Knowledge to raise, and make their Parent great;
The Spark of Learning kindled into Flame,
And Envy sicken'd at Minerva's Name.

When Gods forsook their old Olympian Seats,
And Groves and Cities gave them new Retreats,
Juno to Argos came, and Mars to Thrace,
His Delian Realms Apollo chose to grace:
I fix'd in Athens; and on Greece bestow'd
Each Art and Science from that lov'd Abode;
Thence by Degrees my dawning Empire stretch'd
Far as young Ammon or Alcides reach'd.

But the rough Roman, arm'd in Glory's Cause,
Within his Embrio State despis'd my Laws;
His Martial Soul, fir'd with Renown alone,
Of Sway impatient, grasp'd at Worlds unknown;
Stretch'd out its Views beyond the Polar Star,
And scorn'd as Luxury, what was not War.
Beneath his narrow parsimonious Shed,
The rude Patrician's frugal Board was spread;
The Circus was a Bank, the rustick Scene
Amus'd the gaping Many on the Green:
Altars of Turf in wooden Temples stood,
And Spoils of Nations hung from Walls of Mud:
In Cottages Dictators took their Birth,
And dead, unnoted slept in Urns of Earth.

At length, behold, Emilius  comes; O Name
To Art for ever Sacred, as to Fame!
His parting Steeds scarce pass Rome's crowded Gate,
While scepter'd Captives on his Triumph wait.
An hundred Chariots fill'd with Pella's  Spoils
Of Grecian Lore display the noblest Toils:
The Wealth of Macedon's and Asia's Shores;
Persean Treasures, and Attalic Stores.

Old Tiber then, with unknown Warmth inspir'd,
Saw my bright Form, and as he saw, was fir'd:
From that great Hour my Heighth of Pride began,
From that the Years in fairer Order ran,
I rais'd his Palaces, and call'd his Gods
To Parian Thresholds from their thatch'd Abodes;
Bad Arts in one firm Bond unite with Arms,
And temper'd Roman Fire with Attic Charms.

Thus while my Olive's envy'd Wreath I wore,
A thousand Suns their annual Race went o'er;
A thousand Worthies in that Age of Light
Rose up Supporters of Minerva's Right:
I showr'd my Blessings on the Julian Line,
Brought up my Trajan, and my Antonine;
And built within my Thought, (oh Prospect vain!)
The flatt'ring Fabrick of an endless Reign:
But Fate had there my Empire's Period set,
And ev'n Immortals must to Fate submit.

Thicker than wafted by the vernal Breeze
Extend o'er Hybla's Top the clustring Bees,
The Polar Bear from Her abundant Womb
Pour'd forth the Bane of Learning, and of Rome,
The Alps in vain their vast Barrier oppose,
Swarms rise on Swarms, and Foes succeed to Foes:
I saw their armed Wains, and harness'd Steeds
O'erspread the Sabine Fields, and Tuscan Meads;
I heard their savage Horns provoke the War,
While human Victims bled to horrid Thor.
As weeping Rome the Rout accurs'd receiv'd,
Old Tiber sigh'd, and all Olympus griev'd;
Great Mars bemoan'd his City's Funeral,
And Jove indignant saw his  Temples fall:
What Nero's Madness spar'd, the raging Goth
Destroys, and Ignorance adds Force to Wrath.

Oh!  matchless Palatine; Imperial Frame!
Can I unmov'd thy setting Glories name;
Or say what Flames round that proud Mansion curl'd,
Whence the long Line of Caesars aw'd the world?
Lo!  where the Coward Eagles wing their Way,
And Stilico  (false Traitor!)  shuns the Fray;
No new Camillus dares abide the Shock,
No Saviour Manius guards the sacred Rock.

As some huge Lion, (Monarch of the Wild,)
His Fangs impair'd by Age, his Vigour foil'd;
Helpless within his Den is seen to mourn
Beneath the dastard Wolf's insulting Spurn:
So Rome, late Queen of Asia's utmost Shores,
Trampled by Alaric, her Fate deplores;
Of Heros past invokes th' Elysian Bands,
And to Tarpeian Jove extends her Hands;
Deaf to her Cry is Jove; are deaf the Manes;
And one dire Waste along her Tiber reigns.

Forc'd from my known Abode, despis'd, forlorn,
I rang'd the Ball, my savage Victor's Scorn;
A second Shelter sought from East to West,
But Goths or Monks the spacious Round possess'd.
Here Ignorance in Steel was arm'd, and there,
Cloath'd in a Cowl, dissembled Fast and Pray'r;
Against my Sway her pious Hand stretch'd out,
And fenc'd with double Fogs her Idiot Rout.

Near th' Euxine's sable Wave at length I sate
Where Pontick Caesars held their Eastern State,
Again a Goddess and a Queen was own'd,
In a new Athens by new Greeks enthron'd:
Thence too (from Mecca's Skylong-threaten'd Pest)
Me and my Sons th' Impostor Prophet chac'd.

But lo!  on fair Ausonia's Soil once more
New Stars their Influence shed, new Blessings pour!
The Cloud of Ages broke, for Light makes Way,
And darkling Knowledge greets Return of Day;
Two of an House  my long-forgotten Name
Raise up unhop'd; and blot away my Shame;

Hail, Queen of Cities, learned Florence, hail;
I see thee, beauteous on thy Tuscan Vale,
Of thy great Medici the Worth unfold,
And rise what Rome and Athens were of old?
Where lofty Apennine exalts his Head,
And lost in Clouds o'erlooks the Arno's Bed;
In a dark-Grove untrod by human Feet,
I built for Arts and Me a last Retreat.
Corinthian Work, with rich Mosaic bright
The Dome upon the Shade reflected Light;
The Walls with high Relievos were emboss'd,
And in the various Fresques the Eye was lost:
Bold were the Touches, as the Colours warm,
At once contriv'd to please and to inform.

Here might be seen how Painting's Dawn was found,
And Forms by Crooks were sketch'd upon the Ground;
How Infant Sculpture cut out Gods of Oak,
And Oracles from Beach and Maple spoke;
There plastick Art on Stone ap'd Nature's Face,
Or call'd out Animals from fulfil Brass:
Egypt's rich Veins their Porphyrys disclos'd,
Granites were wrought, and Stuccos were compos'd;
Huge Fabricks rear'd their Adamantine Frames,
And Fame immortaliz'd the Builder's Names.
The Carian Queen, to Love and Virtue just,
Lavish'd whole Quarries o'er her Husband's Dust:
Babel was opposite, (aereal Pile!)
And the tall Pyramids o'erlook'd their Nile:
Here in mid Air the Giant Belus shone,
There, (Wonder of Mankind!)  the Rhodian Sun.
Labours of Artists, fam'd in Ages past,
In Oils were painted, or in Metals cast:
Here all unveil'd, to form one Venus, stood,
Each fairer Model of the Grecian Blood:
Campaspe drew the ravish'd Master's Eyes,
And first his Subject, now became his Prize.
Young Florence there a second Athens grew,
Painting reviv'd, and blest her Cimabue,
Vinci, and Perugine, (my elder Care)
And matchless Raphael's youthful Form, were near.

Distant from these five beauteous Orders rose,
The Rich the Greek, the Plain the Tuscan chose;
Their various Plans an hundred Sages wrought,
Whose Names, torn out by Envy, are forgot:
But high above the rest, of Mien divine,
Stood the great Architect of Jesse's Line,
With upward Eyes, tow'rds Heav'n's exalted Vault,
Intent he look'd, and seem'd as wrap'd in Thought.

Full in the Midst, of burnish'd Gold my Throne
With storied Groups, and mystick Emblems shone;
There were display'd to Sight, my wondrous Birth,
The Giant's War, and all my Toils on Earth;
Her rival Loom ill starr'd Arachne wove,
And own'd too late the Progeny of Jove;
My beauteous Form the Race of Cecrops warms,
And burning Troy repents my slighted Charms.
The Builder's Compasses and Tools were there,
And Chisels exquisite, and Pencils rare,
All that belongs to Art, and is Minerva's Care:
Patrons of Sciences, with Olive crown'd,
On sumptuous Pedestals were plac'd around;
Here Cyrus stood, another Solomon,
And Egypt's Ptolomy, and Philip's Son;
Augustus great in Empire as in Soul,
And Francis, not the least in Learning's Roll.

In this Recess, to Eyes profane unknown,
I brav'd pale Envy on her Stygian Throne;
My Vot'ries, by a secret Path convey'd,
O'ercame the Eminence, and pierc'd the Shade;
Nought human else broke in upon my Rest,
Durst climb the Mountain, or the Grove infest.

But ah!  of long Repose, how vain the Hope!
Against my Pow'r new hell-born Foes  rise up;
Discord and Anarchy lead up their Bands,
And Uproar stretches out his thousand Hands.
Why should I tell how Civil Fury rag'd,
And Cosmo's Race successless Battles wag'd?
How impious Flames upon my Temple fed,
And Tuscan Treasures choak'd the Arno's Bed.
Single I try'd the Field against their Odds,
And summon'd to my Aid my Kindred Gods:
What could the Gods, when Fate's oppos'd Decree
Was past immutable on Arts and me?
Or what avail'd my Snake-displaying Shield,
To wave the aweful Crest, or pointed Lance to weild?

Thou seest, O Prince, the Marks of my Distress,
This broken Weapon, and neglected Dress;
These Eyes thro' which my gushing Sorrows show'r,
And languid Cheek, whose Roses blush no more.
Uncertain where my wayward Steps to bend,
I seek in vain a Patron and a Friend;
And joyless, backward my Remembrance cast
On Ages of Delight, and Glories past.
Now by thy Knighthood, and the sacred Round,
With which the Brows of Majesty are bound;
By that fair Mark of Dignity, the Star,
The Champion Saint, and winged Serpents War;
From whence thou art, and by what wondrous Fate,
Led to this solitary Glade, relate;
Then make Minerva Part'ner of thy Throne,
And fix her Empire, where Thou hold'st thy own.

CANTO II.
She paus'd, and lowly seated by her Side,
With graceful Accent thus the Knight reply'd;
If haply Albion's Fame has reach'd thy Ear,
(For Albion sure is worth Minerva's Care)
Know I derive from thence my Princely Birth,
And that rich Blood which flows the first on Earth.
High as Deucalion's Days my Sires ascend,
All born for Empire, and untaught to bend:
In me two mighty Stems their Branches join,
And  Woden's Race unites with Priam's Line.
Far as great Thetis' watry Realms are stretch'd,
Inspiring Dread, their mighty Names have reach'd:
These stemm'd the Fury of insulting Danes,
Or sought Renown in Syria's  Torrid Plains:
Of proud  Iberians, those the Legions broke,
Or taught vain Gallia to receive their Yoke.
Where-e'er our Crosses wanton in the Wind,
Success, Attendant sure, is still behind;
And Conquest, partial to her Albion's Kings,
O'er their plum'd Bevers spreads her scarlet Wings.

He said; and strait to the Celestial Maid,
The wond'rous Cov'ring of his Left display'd;
A nobler Orb than what, in Days of old,
Aeneas bore, and Maro did unfold.
By Merlin's Art, with many a secret Charm,
Contriv'd at first:  for mighty Arthur's Arm;
(That Night fair Igren, by the Sage deceiv'd,
The future Worthy in her Womb conceiv'd;)
From Him the Gift to Tudor's Race came down,
Sure Pledge of Sway, and Earnest of a Crown.
Severe of Sway Mercian Ossa stood,
And impious Quenda stain'd with Infant Blood:
The Darling next, of Fortune and of Fame,
With Acclamations grac'd, young Egbert came;
The long-divided States his Empire own;
And Lord of all confest, he fills the Throne.
Strong Edmund there I saw, and stern Canute;
(The Severn trembling at their fierce Dispute)
The equal Chiefs the doubtful Strife compose,
And Dane and Saxon are no longer Foes.
But lo!   a Norman Progeny appears!
And Albion's Crown from slaughter'd Harold tears;
Of Anjou's Loins Plantegent succeeds,
New Saxons reign, and Coeur de Lion bleeds.
Henries and Edwards, on the Shield were wrought,
Barons were quell'd, and adverse Roses fought:
The scatter'd Lillies were the Britons Sport,
Nor wanted Cressy there, nor Agincourt.

All these with curious Eye the Nymph beheld,
But inward rag'd, to see her Lore excell'd;
Wonder'd how Magick could improve on Art,
And Stygian Spells supply Minerva's Part.

The Monarch then, Thou seest, O Heav'n-born Fair,
What the long Successors of Brutus were,
How great they soar'd to their Paternal Skies,
In War how dreadful, and in Peace how wise.
But what avail a thousand Trophies won,
And all our long Career of Glory run;
If, sold to Rome in an ill-fated Hour,
We bow to Superstition's blinding Pow'r;
Bend to the servile Yoke we justly hate,
And waste our Sinews to support her State?

Supine on Down mean while Her Vot'ries lie,
And from their Cells my scepter'd Hand defy;
Law, Reason, Right, their ill-got Power braves;
Monarchs their Tools, the People are their Slaves:
For them our curling Vines their Tendrils shoot;
For them the Peasant's ripen'd Glebe is cut;
Possess'd of half our Wealth, at more they grasp,
And the Bee's Labour feeds the Sluggard Wasp.

But while beneath their lazy Sway we stoop,
Learning and Arts, thy beauteous Daughters, droop;
Still o'er our Heads the Gothic Mist impends,
And Life, begun in Night, in Darkness ends.
So when from th' Arab Sands, are wafted o'er
Black Locust Clouds to some ill-fated Shore;
Their noxious Myriads intercept the Sun,
And Men, at once, are blinded, and undone.

In Youth's first Blossom of a Crown possest,
I heard thy Fame, and sought thee for my Guest;
I sought; but, ah!  the anxious Search was vain;
For Ignorance proclaim'd thy ended Reign.
Whose beauteous Shores an hundred Cities grace,
With curious Eye the mighty Rhine I trace;
Roving from thence along the Danube's Flood,
In ev'ry verdant Field, and hoary Wood,
Thy Pow'r rever'd I call, and Altars raise,
Make Victims bleed, and fragrant Incense blaze.

A Nymph, at last, with Wonder struck, I see;
Something that imitates, but is not thee;
Approach'd with Awe, her Vandal Size I knew,
And round dull Eye, that ap'd thy heav'nly Blue.
Her jovial Cheeks affect a Virgin Bloom,
Leipsick her Athens, Leyden is her Rome:
False Taste, I heard her nam'd, in Northern Climes,
Renown'd for Arts, and sung in Runick Rhimes.
Dispute is near her Throne, and Clamour loud,
And Argument that deafens all the Crowd:
Here Pedants, skill'd in metaphysick Rules,
Mistake for Sense the barbarous Cant of Schools,
Fat Criticks Flaws in Virgil's Muse decry,
And poring Fools teach clock-work Birds to fly.

I quit the foggy Soil, and seek the Shore
Where Tagus' Wave the golden Sand glides o'er;
Where his fam'd Pillars great Alcides fix'd,
And mighty Madness with some Sense is mix'd;
Here Chivalry (strange Goddess) holds the Sway
Whom Errant Knights and love-sick Nymphs obey:
An hectick Form, with meagre shallow Face,
Grasping a Spear she rules the crazy Race;
Her plumy Crest a Moon at Full sustains,
To shew the Planet's Influ'ence on her Brains:
In a fair Palace built by magick Lore,
(The Work, Fame says, of some Enchanter Moor)
On visionary Books she sits reclin'd,
Revolving past Exploits within her Mind;
Around stand Giant Forms, and all the Monster Kind.
Among her Vot'ries, nice Punctilio reigns,
And empty Praise rewards the Hero's Pains:
So strange a Sky the Sons of Tubal  share,
Scarce fewer Lunaticks than Men are there.

These to dissolve some virgin-binding Charm,
Against imaginary Dragons arm:
Those war with Bulls, (oh, Force of frantick Love!)
And half expire to gain a Lady's Glove:
Mad as the People are the Muse's Themes,
Orlando's Battles, and Urganda's Dreams,
And Damsels woo'd by Knights near gently-purling Streams.

Still busy'd in her Search, my active Mind
To Gallia now my wayward Steps inclin'd:
I strive t' o'ertake thee on the Rhone's proud Bed,
Where old Lugdunum rears her tow'r-crown'd Head;
Pursue the fierce Garonne's impetuous Flood,
And length'ning Loire imbru'd in Moorish Blood:
Foremost in Fame, at last th' imperial Seine
Invites my Eye to look for Learning's Queen:
The Tempter Luxury there holds her State,
And for th' Unwary lays the Syren Bait;
Eternal Banquets on her Board appear,
Eternal Musick sooths the ravish'd Ear;
On fair Lutetia still her View is cast,
Who binds her Slaves in gilded Fetters fast:
Unzon'd she sits, and to entice her Guests,
(Artful Enchantress!)  spreads her naked Breasts,
Whose wanton Globes in borrow'd Iv'ry clad,
Run all her Crowd of purblind Suitors mad.
Around her careless thrown, a loose Simarr,
(Tyre's richest Dye) provokes the am'rous War;
Nor wants Vermilion to increase Desire,
Nor sparkling Gems that glow with Indian Fire.

There Lust reigns absolute, and knows no Bound,
And guilty Joys pursue their lawless Round;
Leud Tales are heard, and Reputations torn,
And Mothers their deluded Virgins mourn:
A thousand Snares for Innocence are laid,
The Ball, the Feast, the Masque, and Serenade;
The Philtre lurking in the golden Bowl,
And th' am'rous Glance that steals away the Soul.

Falsehood is here, and Coquetry, and Pride;
And Prud'ry fly, that turns the Head aside;
The laughing Many no Disturbance know,
Nor anxious Moment of intruding Woe;
Far off sits Sorrow with distracting Pain,
Nor Spleen the Nymph, nor Care molests the Swain.

Now almost from my Soul's great Purpose mov'd,
I saw, I heard, I revel'd, and I lov'd;
So tempting sweet the pois'nous Draught went down,
I half forgot my Albion and my Crown;
For baleful Pleasure is like Lethe's Wave,
And buries Thought in dark Oblivion's Grave.

But lo!  as leaden Sleep's nocturnal Pow'r
Had lull'd my Senses one distinguish'd Hour,
All in the spotless Ermin's Pomp array'd,
Stood by my silent Couch a Royal Shade;
I knew the Saxon Alfred's awful Form,
And Eyes with Wisdom's sacred Sparkles warm;
A pearly Wreath shone round his Snow-white Head;
He wav'd his Silver Wand, and thus he said;
O born of Anjou's, and of Tudor's Line,
In whom the Glories of both Roses shine;
If Honour, Wealth, and Fame be worth thy Care,
To my sage Precepts lend a filial Ear;
Fly hence, ere yet the Ill, too strong for Cure,
Gives up thy Virtue to the Circe's Lure;
Nor meanly quench that noble Spark of Praise
Which in thy gen'rous Breast begun to blaze:
Spread for th' inglorious Throng, the silken Toil
Licks up the Dross and Scum of ev'ry Soil;
And shall those Heads which Nations have in Trust,
Herd with the Populace, and mix with Dust?
From these soft Realms, lo!  where the bold Valois
Thro' Alpine Snows (ambitious Monarch) flies;
Pursues Renown on red  Insubrian Plains,
Nor stoops to wear his own Lutetia's Chains.
Thy mighty Sire in Arms as Wisdom great
Built his high Name on Tyranny's Defeat,
Appeas'd the Manes of  Kings at Bosworth's Field,
And gave new Lustre to the Tudor-Shield.
In Doom's eternal Page a noble Toil
Is thine (O Saviour of thy Albion's Isle!)
To drive out Monkish Sloth, fair Learning's Bane,
Pest of the Soil, and Scandal of thy Reign.
Patron of Arts, on Isis' Silver Bed
In vain I rais'd my Rhedicina's  Head;
In vain with Wealth endow'd her meagre Bands;
And to give Gown's-men Learning, gave them Lands:
Mitres and Cowls the glorious Scheme controul,
And Springs of Sciences with Mud run foul.

Behold Minerva, yet in Beauty's Bloom,
(Whom Athens once ador'd, and mightier Rome;)
Where fam'd Eridanus cuts out his Way,
Forlorn, abandon'd, shuns the Face of Day;
Thy Knightly Aid to the fair Mourner give,
And in thy own Augusta bid her live:
Star'd by her radiant Form, and Gorgon Shield,
I see the bald-pate Legions quit the Field:
Again her Stygian Cell pale Envy seeks,
And Superstition her vain Crosier breaks:
This War for Henry was reserv'd by Fate,
And Henry's Work Eliza shall compleat.
He ceas'd, and vanish'd: &mdash; joyful I obey,
Have sought, have found; and call thee forth to Sway:
Scorn not the Sword for sacred Learning drawn,
And give our Albion to salute thy Dawn.

But now a Vapour gliding thro' the Air,
From Henry's Eye conceal'd the shrowded Fair;
So swift it glanc'd, that scarce with speedier Pace,
Jove's forked Light'ning cleaves th' aethereal Space.
As one by Necromantick Chains held fast,
Fix'd to the Ground, a while he stood aghast,
'Till soon again disclos'd, her liquid Veil
The Goddess broke, and shone in burnish'd Mail.
Snaky Medusa on her Shield was feign'd,
Her Ostrich Plume the mystick Sphinx  sustain'd
The golden Aegid her fair Bosom grac'd,
Her buskin'd Leg a Round of Gems embrac'd.
So look'd she on the Day, when, struck with Dread,
Thro' Heav'n's wide Waste, the routed Titans fled;
Or when on Xanthus' Shore, (as sings the Bard),
In thy great Cause, victorious Greece, she warr'd.
Snatch'd by a Pow'r unseen, the wond'ring Knight
Soars by her Side into the Realms of Light;
Born on a purple Cloud they cut the Sky,
And Jove auspicious thunders from on high.

CANTO III.
Near cold Moeotis' weed-engend'ring Wave,
Eternal Fogs hang noisome o'er a Cave
Where Night-born Ignorance, wide-swaying Queen,
And Bat-wing'd Sloth, Her unambitious Twin,
Stretch'd on Stymphatian Feathers, doze and dream,
And banish from their Eyes the Solar Beam;
Near them stands grinning Folly, vain Conceit,
And powder'd Levity with nimble Feet;
Brazen Assurance in Ierne bred,
And Pedantry on endless Volumes fed.
Crowds fill the various Chambers of the Grott,
Whose Names, as soon as mention'd, are forgot;
Indians who take mere Nature for their Guide,
Russians to Bears, and French to Apes ally'd;
Gamesters and Fops, and Friars black and white;
These play, those dance; some sleep, and others write.

There cank'ring Rust, or envious Flames consume
Athenian Wisdom, and the Wit of Rome;
These pluck the Laurel from old Homer's Head,
And, Murd'rers of his Sense, translate him dead;
Those aim the Pick-ax at some noble Bust,
Or turn admired Statues into Dust;
A Venus here, there a Laocoon falls;
And Apellean Strokes are torn from Walls:
Fortune's first Cruelty Augustus tries,
And more than one Maecenas mangled lies.
But eminently plac'd, mad Nero smiles,
Joyful as when he saw Rome's blazing Piles.
Lewd Thais the destructive Flambeau throws,
Vain of her Charms, and her great Captive shews.
His heavy Brow illit'rate Mummius rears,
And Midas grave pricks up his Ass's Ears;
The Tyrant Savage, and the Fool unread,
All Foes to Arts, are there in dusky Lead.
Bavius is prais'd, Longinus is reprov'd;
And Foes to Raphael are by Hemskirk mov'd;
B&mdash;rd leads the captive Angelo along,
And Vandal Bently mends th' Horatian Song.

Sleek Superstition hither now repairs,
Mumbling between her Teeth eternal Pray'rs,
In Purple cloath'd, the bowing Throng she scorns,
A three-pil'd Crown her sullen Brow adorns.

To Her the Monster-breeding Nile gave Birth,
And Memphis was her first Abode on Earth;
By her white Robe, and holy Fillets known,
She taught the Virtues there of Wood and Stone;
Impress'd an Awe on Forms of Dogs and Apes,
And gave a thousand Gods a thousand Shapes:
Thence, by Degrees, extending East and West,
Spread o'er the ample Ball th' infectious Pest;
Assign'd each doubtful Oracle a Name,
And fed in Vesta's Dome th' eternal Flame.
By her inspir'd the hoary Druid spoke,
Rever'd by Nations from his Moss-grown Oak;
And with presaging Eye, the laurel'd Seer
Read Fates of Empires in the bleeding Steer.
Th' Enthusiast Scot her noisy Impulse feels;
She hangs the half-choak'd Brachman  by the Heels;
Girds bare-foot Knaves with inoffensive Ropes,
And governs Worlds by Muftis and by Popes.

Great is the Cause, O kindred Pow'rs, she said,
From which, alarm'd, I leave my downy Bed;
When you are threaten'd, shall your old Ally
Sunk on soft Plumes the Calm of Peace enjoy?
See our Recovering Foe invade your Throne,
And on your ruin'd State rebuild her own?
Behold!  the Goddess, who so late our Scorn,
On Padus' Banks sate helpless and forlorn;
In radiant Steel, offensive to my Eye,
With Henry for her Guide ascends the Sky;
Tow'rds Britain's Isle I saw them wing their Way,
(Britain, our old Hereditary Sway;)
Where Monks, firm Enemies to Truth and Light,
For twice five Ages have maintain'd our Right.
If still our Destinies move Hand in Hand,
And by alternate Fates we fall or stand:
If never yet disjoin'd, our Social Crowns
Baleful to Arts, have brav'd Minerva's Frowns;
Rise, arm, let each her thick-skull'd Host prepare,
And wave her dusky Banner in the Air;
The ready Vatican its Aid will lend,
And ev'ry Polar Power is our Friend:
The Van be mine and my fat Clergy's Care,
Be you with blind Lay-Troops the Seconds of the War.

 She paus'd; a Murmur of Applause went round,
And Caucasus re-eccho'd back the Sound;
So loud, so shrill the Noise; so far it spread,
Owls op'd their Eyes, and frighted Batts fell dead.
At last dread Ignorance, with awful Nod,
Rose up as lab'ring with some inward God;
Silenc'd the Multitude, and thus broke forth,
Conscious of Empire, and superior Worth.

O sure Supporter of our gloomy Throne,
Whose Hate to Arts, and Zeal for Us is known;
Great by myself, by Thee o'er all I reign,
Nor knows my Sway a Limit but the Main;
By thee Minerva was at length thrown out,
Where solemn Pontiffs awe the Latian Rout;
My Western Islands, and my Gaul were won,
And Spain, proud Neighbour of the Setting Sun.

If real Fears, within thy anxious Breast,
No vain imaginary Ills suggest;
And with recruited Strength the Nymph invades
The Realms we screen with patrimonial Shades;
Against her Charms let all our Force unite,
And ev'ry muster'd Idiot try the Fight.
What tho' the beauteous Daughter of the Sky
Darts killing Day from each Coelestial Eye;
What tho' her dreaded Gorgon she expands,
And calls forth all her lean and hungry Bands?
So thick clings round us Night's Cimmerian Veil,
Secure we trust th' impenetrable Mail.
Myself behind this ample Shield of Lead,
Will to the Field my daring Squadrons head;
And with Maternal Panoply arm'd o'er,
Add to my former Wreaths one Poppy more.
By me Persepolis  and Rome  were fir'd,
And Learning's Pharian  Stores in Flames expir'd;
On Dido's Tow'rs I toss'd the fatal Brand,
And bury'd Babylon's proud Walls in Sand;
To the stern Ottoman Byzantium gave,
And fair Palmyra  made the Arabs' Slave.
I fir'd with Rage and Lust Eadosia's Breast,
When o'er the Main she call'd her barb'rous Guest;
Led on the pop'lous North's destructive Sons,
And modern Monks supply'd to antient Huns.

She said; and marshal'd streight in wide Array
The Ranks were seen impatient of the Fray;
Captains and Soldiers to their Posts repair'd,
Flags were display'd, and Minstrelsy was heard:
When sudden, lo!  before the motley Troop
A toothless Sybil's haggard Form rose up;
Dreadful her Eyes with Pythian Sparkles shone,
And cast a Glare that froze the Looker-on.
As Hinds unarm'd who meet the lurking Snake
Bound from the deadly Spot, and shun the Brake;
Or shrieking Nymphs flit from the haunted Glade,
Where the pale Moon-light shews the glimmering Shade,
Wing'd with like Fear each Warrior from the Crone
Shudd'ring recoil'd, and felt a Dread unknown;
Scarce could the Queens themselves, (of Valour try'd)
Th' Avernian Beldam's blood-shot Balls abide
Yet in their mighty Minds collected stood,
And strove to animate the dastard Crowd.
The Panick soon dispell'd with one Assent,
All turn, and press to see the great Event:
Then she &mdash; Attend, ye Foes to sacred Light,
Of Shades Inhabitants, and Spawn of Night:

Give o'er the rash advent'rous Scheme of War,
Vain Force you raise, and Armies vain prepare:
The great, the destin'd Hour, at length is come,
When Britain must revolt from You and Rome;
Behold, the ready Arts are on the Wing,
And each glad Science hails her Patron  King;
Presaging Steeples backward ring their Bells,
And fat Conventuals tremble in their Cells;
Nor soothing Eloquence, nor Threat avails;
Ev'n Wolsey's Tongue, and Clement's Thunder fails.
And will you then expose this valiant Troop
To save one Limb, which Fate decrees to lop?
Lead forth your Numbers, and provoke the Fight
Against the Odds of Learning, Truth, and Light?
Not so, ye Pow'rs! &mdash; but still on Down supine,
Of your vast State that sever'd Spot resign:
Secure of Continents so large, so fair!
One petty Island is not worth your Care.

Lo; where the Sophy and Mogul are own'd,
These but as your Vicegerents sit enthron'd:
Your dread Commands (near Kinsman to the Gods)
The Turk in his Seraglio hears, and nods;
Ev'n whence Confucius  banish'd once your Sway,
Extended China shuts out Learning's Ray.
See where the Tanais, and Volga roll,
And false Auroras glimmer near the Pole;
Where frozen Seas ne'er felt a genial Thaw,
Scythia's  bleak Shores obey your boundless Law;
Your firm Helvetian Friends what need I name;
And Ister's Banks, your everlasting Claim?
Where'er the Alcoran its Opiat spreads,
Or radiant Miters blaze on cloudy Heads,
From North to South the out-strerch'd Ball's your own,
The Robe, the Cowl; the Pulpit, and the Throne.

But, ah!  methinks in dark Futurity
A new emerging British Isle I see!
In Cloaks and Bands up springs a Mushroom Race,
Vassals of Ignorance and Babes of Grace:
Before them bleeding Royalty lies low,
And Learning hides her venerable Brow;
Seraphick Nonsense in the Temples roars,
And Calvin bellows from his Leman's Shores.
Committees grave, and Synods rule the Land,
Altars are stripp'd, and Gore imbrues the Sand.
How'rds antient Marbles (Asia's noble Spoils)
Great Michel's Images, and Urbin's Oils,
(Pride of thy Charles's Domes, Imperial Thames,)
Or fall by Hammers, or consume in Flames.
Ah!  that the dear, destructive Scene might last!
But o'er my Eyes a sudden Veil is cast;
More is forbid; my Sand prefix'd is run,
And Plato calls me back to Acheron.
She spoke, and mix'd with Air; &mdash; the Troops disband,
And each glad Warrior takes his former Stand
The Queens their interrupted Sleep renew,
The Chiefs around their wonted Sports pursue:
The Cave re-ecchoes with the Sybil's praise,
And jarring Chords mix inharmonious Lays.
So when the Spirits war in human Veins,
And scarce its fev'rish Tide the Heart contains
With friendly Draughts if some Galenick Sage
Allays th' intestine Vulcan's spreading Rage,
The vital Juices own his wond'rous Pow'r
And run thro' Life's Maenders as before.

CANTO IV.
But Superstition, fill'd with anxious Thought,
Soars on the Wing, and leaves the darksome Vault;
Speeds to unfold the dire Decrees of Fate,
And since she cannot save, console her State.
Soon wafted thro' the wide Expanse of Air
To the known Land, her first, her fav'rite Care;
On equal Pinions pois'd, she curbs her Flight,
And with old Scenes of Glory feasts her Sight:

First, she survey'd the memorable Spot
(In Rome's red Annals ne'er to be forgot)
Where Richard's Successor, but Peter's Slave
The Realms of Brute to haughty Pontiffs gave;
(Laugh'd pamper'd Prelates, laugh'd the bald-pate Crowd,
And shirtless Legions sang their Joy aloud,)
She saw the Ground which  holy Dunstan trod,
She saw where Emma walk'd o'er Flames unshod:
Here to the penal Scourge great Henry stoop'd,
There burning Heresy with Wickliff droop'd!
From thence she turn'd her Eye to where on Thrones
Kings sate but Deputies to miter'd Drones;
If these ordain'd, retir'd to peaceful Shades,
Wore Palmer's Weeds, or undertook Croisades.
To other Sights she pass'd, and now beheld
Where scarce Lud's Walls the long Processions held;
The shining Flamens stalk on two by two;
And Wolsey (upstart Pageant!)  crowns the Shew.
Lo!  where the Purple Meteor moves along,
And from his Princely Steed surveys the Throng!
Near his proud Stirrup menial Knights attend,
Peers watch his Nod,  and as he looks they bend:
Scarce with more Pomp, thro' Lanes of prostrate Knees,
His Lateran Rome's new-made Sov'reign sees.
Or their vain Heads elated Muftis shew
While servile Turbants hide the Ground below.

With Scenes like these the Matron sooth'd her Pain,
Careless of Fate, and her expiring Reign;
A while she sooth'd; but soon new Sorrows rose,
Thro' either Eye the gushing Torrent flows;
And Pleasures past add Weight to sure impending Woes.

Nigh where shone Glaston's venerable Pile,
And bare-foot Pilgrims kiss'd the Sacred Soil;
Within the secret Covert of a Wood,
The Work of Gothic Hands, her Palace stood.

Here in rude Oils, with barb'rous Art exprest,
Were all her Labours seen from East to West;
Each Tale she introduc'd, each God she made,
The Lybian Ammon, and Dodona's Shade;
Ill-Starr'd Osiris  aw'd his Pharian Crowd,
The Realms of Cyrus to their Mithras bow'd;
Each mystick Form which Asia's Sons rever'd,
With its peculiar Attribute appear'd;
The fishy Dagon, and Astarte horn'd;
And Syrian Dames their lov'd Adonis mourn'd;
Great Berecynthia's Priests, in Gore imbru'd,
For Atys lost their cruel Rites pursu'd;
Her Numa here th' Egerian Nymph inspir'd,
And Mecca's Prophet by his Dove was fir'd;
Hali was near; the Tyanean Sage;
And Woden, fear'd where Northern Tempests rage;
And grisly Daemons whom the Ganges dreads,
In Siam's Pagods rear'd their thousand Heads.

But on the adverse Wall's extended Line
Of Western Bigotry the Triumphs shine;
Grave Papal Heads their high Tiaras rear,
And rubrick Saints adorn the Roman Near.
Religious Flames the holy Champions warm,
Great Godfrey leads, the  Hermit sounds th' Alarm.
Indies are lavish'd at Loreto's Shrine,
And bare-foot Monarchs trudge to Palestine.
The Goddess thence  her hungry Millions feeds,
And stocks Mankind with Agnus's and Beads;
Of Relicks there the venal Stores does keep,
And waking still herself, lulls all to sleep.

This Labour ended, here she lit at length,
Assum'd her Throne, and rally'd all her Strength:
Vain Effort!  a superior Power she feels,
And through her Heart presaging Terror steals.
Hither forthwith her summon'd Sons repair,
Who bask in Ease, and know the Sweets of Pray'r,
In Silk, in Serge, in Rochets, and in Cowls,
Who feast like Epicures, or doze like Owls.
To them the Queen &mdash; O Race I long have fed,
And bless'd with double Portion of my Lead;
True to my Cause, to Arts  and Learning blind;
Fate has your Doom irrevocable sign'd!
Your Shrines and Roods must now forsaken stand,
Or fall beneath some sacrilegious Hand.
No more shall Pilgrims press to Becket's Head,
Or creep to wonder-working  Winifred;
Farewell to Edmund's and to Edward's Bones,
That call'd their Princely Worshippers from Thrones,
To Relicks fabulous, to Legends old,
And Tales that drain'd the dim Believer's Gold.
But late for Safety to these Realms I ran,
Attack'd by Charles within my Vatican;
Henry my greater Foe now drives me hence,
Erasmus writes me out, and Priests talk Sense.

Farther and farther yet my View I stretch
To Scenes of Woe beyond your human Reach:
Methinks I see in Fate's inverted Urn,
To Stores of Arts your Refectories turn,
And Newton's Systems in those Schools embrac'd,
From which dull Scotists Truth and Reason chac'd.
Long promis'd to Mankind, of Tudor's Race
Behold!  the first in Fame, the last in Place,
Eliza, Terror of the Roman See,
(Name ever curs'd by Ignorance and me!)
Her Maiden Throne what Crowds of Worthies guard,
What Wisdom shines, what Eloquence is heard!
Sidney her Soldier, Spencer is her Bard!
Vandike and Rubens, Glories of the North,
(Thro' Belgian Fogs like Beams of Light shot forth)
To fait Augusta Graces new impart,
And sage Inigo joins Vitruvian Art.

Rising and rising still in Time's long Maze,
I see th' Usurper Learning spread her Rays:
How'rd with a Soul extensive as his Stores,
Far Eastward roves beyond th' Ionian Shores;
(Studious expiring Sciences to save,)
And antient Greece revives on Isis' Wave.
Lo!  where fam'd Wilton Sarum's Plain o'erlooks,
And cloister'd Dames now dream by murm'ring Brooks,
Herbert, great Offspring of a Race renown'd,
Shall spread all Latium on the Classic Ground.
More yet I see, who sung in future Lays
Shall grace a Stuart's, or a Nassau's Days;
Dorset and Hallifax, (Apollo's Care)
And Lansdown skill'd to sooth the ravish'd Ear:
And Cav'ndish glorious in Minerva's Fane
Reflects new Lustre on a Brunswick's Reign.

But ah!  the Vision shifts; and now behold
Our Iron Age, succeeded by the Gold;
From Tagus' Shores a dawning Light I spy,
And great Ignatius gilds th' Hesperian  Sky!
To him ev'n Dominic and Francis bend,
Kings are his Slaves, the Fisherman's his Friend,
Hail well-tim'd Saint!  I see thy growing Sway
Shut in the rising and the setting Day:
Peking and Nanking blinder than before,
Receive new Idols from thy boundless Store;
Not distant Cusco from thy Chain is free,
And Cortez conquers new-found worlds for thee.

More Comfort yet!  lo, from the glacial Zone
Christina comes!  and leaves her Arctick Throne:
Religious Zeal inflames her convert Breast,
And Rome receives one welcome Vandal Guest!
An hundred charming Scenes my ravish'd Eye
Unfolds, but soon as born the Phantoms dye.
I see Maria's Fires, and Philip's Fleet,
A Nassau slain, a Palatine's Defeat,
Ravilliac's Dagger plung'd in Bourbon's Gore,
And Fawks employs the Nitre's Stygian Pow'r
Oh!  may Success upon each Labour wait;
Success, from these dim Eyes conceal'd by Fate.

Now haste, my Sons, lead off your num'rous Bands
To the kind Shelter of our Social Lands,
Ere the proud Laity your Realms invades,
And hostile Feet prophane your Sacred Shades.
Far hence to where the Tiber rolls I fly,
(The great Metropolis of Bigotry)
Already on your Domes the Ruin falls,
My Empire ceases, and the Conclave calls.

She said, and vanish'd; for to Sight display'd
Now hover'd in Mid-air the blue-ey'd Maid,
Her Gorgon Shield no adverse Eye can stand;
She grasps Paternal Thunder in her Hand.
Beside her Henry shakes his dreaded Lance;
And the fair Arts, a joyous Throng, advance.
Despair below works various on the Crowd,
In some 'tis silent Grief, in some 'tis loud;
Here shrill Anathemas the Heavens rend,
There deep-mouth'd Groans from lab'ring Lungs ascend:
These their lost Acres, those their Loves deplore,
For Chapels many grieve, for Cellars more:
They dread to fly, yet dare not wait the Foe,
To stay is Ruin, and 'tis Death to go.
As when the Flame, which midnight Shrieks unfold,
On some rich Miser's sumptuous Roof takes hold;
Nor this, nor that Way dares the Caitiff turn,
Here he is sure to lose, and there to burn;
Between his Gold divided, and his Life,
Doubtful he stands, 'till Death decides the Strife.

Mean while the Fabrick's pond'rous Mass gives way,
And bursting Walls let in unusual Day:
The tott'ring Dome Minerva's Arm confess'd,
The many fall beneath its Weight oppress'd;
Earth gapes, black smoth'ring Clouds of Smoak arise,
And Bolts hiss dreadful thro' the red'ning Skies;
Palace and Men all sink within the Cleft,
A noisom, foul, Avernian Stench is left.

But lo!  a sudden Sun, with forcive Beam,
Dispels the Night, and shews the Heav'n-born Dame;
With vary'd Form she now on Earth is seen,
And stripp'd of all her Terror, smiles serene;
As once in Athens or in Rome, her Throne
Beauteous she fill'd, and in Byzance was known.

Beneath her Seat, obedient to the Hand
A Snow-white Arab spurns the yellow Sand;
And conscious of the Weight his Back sustains,
Bounding like Aethon, champs the golden Reins.
Such Rubens his divine Maria drew,
Her Part as noble, and as fair her Hue.

The Dryads now that haunt Britannia's Woods,
And hoary Pow'rs that guide Her thousand Floods,
Isis, (the chief) renown'd for pleasing Strains,
With Silver Cam that laves Icenian Plains,
All greet the Victor Queen with Olive crown'd;
Augusta joyous ecchoes back the Sound.
Where Henry rules, Jove's Daughter joyntly sways,
And Arts and Learning see new Halcyon Days.
