Some Time is past, since sprightly Passion charm'd,
And Life's gay Scenes my panting Bosom warm'd;
But now kind Stars on faithful Lovers shine,
And kindred Souls in happy Wedlock join;
Now early Virtue meets a just Reward,
And virtuous Love demands the tuneful Bard.
My Soul's awaken'd by so bright a View,
And its admiring Eyes are fix'd on you;
While Friendship's social Joys enlarge my Breast,
I feel, with Gladness, how my Friend is blest;
The artless Muse, ambition to repeat
So lov'd a Tale, must her own Joy relate;
To humble Lays attunes her lowly Song,
And Pleasure wings the easy Notes along.

Mysterious Love has chosen but a few,
To whom he grants his Joys, as now to you;
For Love, the Soul of this harmonious Frame,
Brings Ills more various, than our Tongue can name;
'Tis healing Balm, which gives our Cares relief,
And  mortal Bane, which kills the Joys of Life;
In some ill-fated Passion Men engage,
And feel the Wound, from Youth to latest Age.

TIMON, it seems, has lost his proper Mate,
To feed his Grief, and make his Woes compleat,
In pensive Solitude, he does complain,
That Life's a Cheat, and all its Friendships vain;
Fatigu'd with Scenes of Vanity, he chose
EMILIA'S Bosom, for a soft Repose;
His Thoughts, his Heart, were fix'd on her alone,
The World's Variety has found in one.
But luckless Stars, against his Love combin'd,
And TIMON is to other Beauties blind;
The Moon beholds him as a wand'ring Ghost
That roams disturb'd, and mourns a Treasure lost.

CELIA, by Love, and Vows was DAMON'S own,
But treach'rous Hopes, and flatt'ring Joys are flown,
Her cruel Friends, a wealthy Marriage find,
And her forc'd Hands in golden Fetters bind;
They jeer'd the Love-sick Tale, and Gold prevail'd,
While weeping Love, the sad Divorce bewail'd.

&mdash;Wealth, like a proper Lady, may worth reveal,
But Want, like Shades, will Excellence conceal:
STREPHON is poor, and must his Love suppress;
Had his Estate been more, or her's been less,
In melting Vows, he would his Heart explain,
Nor could CLARISSA hear with cold disdain;
His passion burns, conceal'd from human Eyes,
In secret Flames, consum'd, he daily dies;
His Mind is lost, his Senses all decay,
And, stung with inward Woe, he pines away.

&mdash;So a young Plant, secur'd from outward Harms,
May flourish in the midst of Blasts and Storms;
But, when a Worm within its Heart is bred,
As if with Age, it droops its wither'd Head,
The Root is dying, and the Leaves are shed.

&mdash;Beside, those Crowds of dull, and vulgar Mold,
Unblest by Love, who court full Baggs of Gold;
Fond, am'rous Fools, with human Freedom born,
Ignobly, doat on Pride, and meet with Scorn;
Or thoughtless Youths, to hasty Marriage run,
And by some beauteous Ideot are undone.

&mdash;Some love like thee, but not like thee are blest,
Thy Heart's at Ease, but they can find no Rest;
How blest art thou?  Love, crown'd with Plenty smiles,
And chaste Delight, each flowing Hour beguiles;
The chosen Maid thy favour'd Vow approves,
And shews superiour Reason, while she loves:
No sordid Views debas'd thy noble Mind,
No Heaps of Gold could make thy Judgment blind;
Careless, you saw bright Circles of the Fair,
'Till, fix'd by wond'rous Sympathy on her;
Resistless Love admits of no controul,
But strikes the Eye, and charms the willing Soul.
Blest Union!  when two Friends, with Vice unstain'd,
And form'd for Love, yield to its kind Command.

&mdash;So was the Match, in Eden's Garden made,
When guiltless Souls soft Sympathy obey'd.
While ADAM liv'd in solitary Bliss,
He scarce enjoy'd himself in Paradice;
His Maker then produc'd a Creature fair
As Morning Light, and mild as Eden's Air;
His conscious Heart sprung forth to meet her Charms,
And more than Eden, found within her Arms;
The nuptial Hymn to heav'nly Harps was sung,
And the glad Earth, with tuneful Echoes rung.

&mdash;A wav'ring Passion for a while may blaze;
On CHLOE'S Bloom the wond'ring Eye may gaze;
The ravish'd Ear may listen to her Voice,
And short-liv'd Transports make the Heart rejoice;
But, each fond Youth, by growing Years, shall find
There's no immortal Bloom, but in the Mind;
When, on external Form, our Hearts we place,
Time kills the Passion, when he spoils the Face;
But inward Beauty can defy its Rage,
Grows still more Fair, and flourishes in Age:
Friendship refin'd, will then more brightly burn,
Ev'n when our Ashes rest within their Urn;
For blessful Seats will perfect Souls receive,
And virtuous Friendship triumph o'er the Grave.

May promis'd Blessings crown the happy Pair!
And Angels deem you their peculiar Care!
May circling Years long tread their joyful Round,
And hail your Lives, with ev'ry Pleasure crown'd!
May future Pledges of your mutual Love,
Blest by their Parents, full as happy prove!
May Goodness, in the Offspring, ne'er decline,
But, in Succession, with new Lustre shine!
To Children's Children, may your Names be dear,
Lasting as Time, and as your Virtue fair!
When Poets strive to beautify their Verse,
And future Times shall Tales of Love rehearse,
May your bright Names be always read and heard,
And all auspicious Loves to yours compar'd!
May it be said, of the most happy Pair,
He loves like thee, and she rewards like her.
