Queen of sweet numbers and resistless sound,
Which can the soul with pleasing force enthrall,
And hold the thoughts in deep attention bound,
And bid th' obedient passions rise and fall,
All pow'rful HARMONY!  on thee I call:
From dark oblivion I thy deeds would raise;
O tune my lyre, and help my feeble lays!

As yet this world no being-place had found:
Wild Chaos rul'd, and sable-vested Night,
Whilst jarring Atoms, through the vast profound,
By Chance and Discord led to doubtful fight,
Strove with tumultuous rage and restless might;
Till HARMONY and LOVE compos'd the fray
And chas'd the shades of ancient Night away.

Love, whose approach the darkness dares not bide,
Shot from his starry eyes ten thousand rays:
She to the chords her softest touch apply'd,
Then louder gan the swelling notes to raise,
And sung fair Peace, and beauteous Order's praise.
Her voice sweet sounded through the boundless deep,
And all was calm, and all did silence keep.

The list'ning Atoms straight forgot their hate,
And pleas'd, yet wond'ring at their change, they stood;
Strange force of sounds such fury to abate!
Then each with fond embrace the other woo'd,
And each eternal peace and union vow'd.
Love bound them nothing loath in lasting chains,
And o'er them all his willing subjects reigns.

Then yon bright orb began to roll askance,
His course essaying through th' Ecliptic way;
And wand'ring stars to move in mystic dance,
And skies their azure volumes to display;
Then gan the earth to smile in fair array,
And new-born man with wonder and delight
Gaz'd all around him on the beauteous sight.

This work perform'd, the Goddess took her flight,
Winging the wide-expanded fields of air,
To her own native place, the realms of light,
Where dwell the Gods devoid of grief and care.
Around her golden throne they all repair,
Enwrapp'd in silent transport, while she sings
Sweet lays responsive to the trembling strings.

Yet thence, though rarely, the celestial guest
Deigns to descend, unseen of mortal eyn,
And gently glides into the poet's breast:
She comes; and lo!  he feels the pow'r divine;
New Images begin to rise and shine,
Keeping due measure, wooing hand in hand,
And sober Judgment leads the sprightly band.

Such was Calliope's unhappy son,
Whose tuneful harp could soothe the savage kind,
And bid descending streams forget to run.
Poor youth!  no charms in music could he find,
His bride twice lost, to ease his lovesick mind,
When hid beneath the hoary cliffs he lay
On Strymon's banks, and mourn'd his life away.

Such was the eyeless Greek, great sacred name!
Who snatch'd the son of Thetis from the grave:
And hung his arms high in the house of Fame,
Victorious still, Time's envious power to brave,
While suns arise and seek the western wave.
Such he, who in Sicilia's flowery plains
Tun'd to the oaten reed his Doric strains.

And he who sung the frantic rule of Chance,
Leaving no room for Wisdom and for Choice,
And built the world with atoms drove askance,
Theme all unworthy of a skilful voice:
And Mantua's Swan, whose clearer notes rejoice
Th' enravish'd ear, so graceful he relates
Flocks, fields, and swains, and fierce contending states.

And, like the Greek in fate and in renown,
Britannia's poet, born in latter days,
Whose brow new wreaths and flow'rs celestial crown;
And sung man's hapless fall, and Angel's frays;
And, bold to venture through untrodden ways,
Explor'd the secrets of the frowning Night,
And soar'd above the stars with daring flight.

Nor shall my partial song leave thee unsaid,
Worthy to mix with this harmonious band,
Thee, gentle Spenser, whom the Muses led
Through Fancy's painted realms and Fairy land,
Where Vice and Virtue all embody'd stand,
Where useful truths in fair disguise appear,
And more is understood than meets the ear.

Come, condescending Goddess, and impart
A mild assistance to an aking breast;
Exert the force of thy propitious art;
If thou be present, who can be distrest?
Pain seems to smile, and Sorrow is at rest;
The thoughts in mad disorder cease to roll,
And still serenity o'erspreads the soul.

By thee, the youth encourag'd nought to fear
'Sdeigning ignoble ease and mean repose,
Meets the swift fury of the threat'ning spear,
And follows Glory through a host of foes.
Nor canst thou not the din of arms compose:
Thou mak'st the God of war forsake the field,
And drop his lance, and lay aside his shield.

Thou know'st, in pleasing, how to wound the mind,
Surpris'd, unguarded, and to Love betray'd.
Alas!  why art thou to that Impe so kind,
That pow'rful Impe in heav'n and earth obey'd?
His shafts strike deep, and want no other aid.
Deep strike his shafts, unerring in their aim,
And his torch burns with unextinguish'd flame.

These are thy triumphs, Goddess, this thy might,
Faintly describ'd in far unequal lays.
Me all unmeet fond hopes did still incite,
Ambitious by thy name my verse to raise,
And find thy favour while I sung thy praise.
O smile on these endeavours, heav'nly Maid!
Sweet is the toil, if with thy smile repay'd.
