Almightie Jove, he Saturne sage did sende,
Commanding Mars, and Mercury to meet,
Apollo passing prudent did attend:
And Neptune left the seas, and all his fleet,
The God of gods, these Goodly Gods did greete:
Then thus he saide, let it be knowen by you,
Whom I on earth most worthie doe avowe.

Forespent with speede, consumde well neere with haste,
Pallas, shee there did piteously complaine,
Both I, and all the worlde is quite disgrast,
My deare sister, Minerva mine, in vaine
I live alas, for now there doth remaine,
No no, not one Minerva done away,
Which in Her place meete to beare the sway.

The Muses mourne, and mourne they may for mee
Sith goddesse shee of greatest grace is gone,
Poore Pallas I perplext with miserie,
Am left alone, (alas) and all alone:
To you, you gods my state I doe bemone,
And if you will have Pallas still remaine,
Then you a newe Minerva must ordaine.

Apollo sate with Saturne by his side,
Hence Mercury, goe get thee hence hee saide,
Doe seeke and searche through all the worlde so wide
For her who may bee newe Minerva made,
Whose due deserved fame shall never fade.
The winged God went thence as swift as winde:
And Saturne sage did thus declare his minde.

All savage then like tearing Tigers fell,
more bruite then beastes, there lust most lewd was law:
Men livde when I a man with men did dwell,
Then men by men were rent and eaten rawe:
From wicked wilde even I these men did drawe
To civile life, by my good government:
They were inclinde to knowe what reason ment.

Then lawes I made, and right at last did raigne,
All men with one consent put to their hande:
From hilles and woods in the most pleasant plaine
men met like friendes, and as they there did stand,
Both how, and who should rule, and till the land
I did ordaine, cities and townes they then
did builde, of beastes, they were by mee made men.

Then none did eate the sweete of others sweat,
For thine, by right, and merie mine I made,
Therefore a God of all the gods most great
They me ordainde, my fame can never fade
Till heaven end all the earth be quite decaide:
For Saturne sits aloft in seemely sphere,
Even so doth Mars (said Mars) as you shall heare.

Thy mine and thine did breede such bitter strife,
From out the worlde when thou wert once away,
As everie man did seeke eche others life,
That witlesse will might have the power of may
To rule unruld, to beare the chiefest sway:
Then king with king, the weakest went to wracke,
And mightie mine made feeble thine his lacke.

Then might was right, for all thy lawes were lame,
The goodly ground with blood was then imbrude,
Then warres and warlike weapons I did frame,
And force perforce, I right againe renude,
Most quiet peace my bloodie warres insude:.
My trayned troupes of souldiers kept in awe,
All such whose lewdnesse made their luste a lawe

You greatest gods doe graunt and give me grace,
Silenus sage (all Satier like) did say:
To tell a truth here in this presse and place.
Mars halfe amazde, his story there did stay:
They gave him leave, then he without delay.
men may bee gods, even gods of great degree,
Such gods must die like like men, and so did wee.

Why, howe, and who, by God and men bee made,
Of mortall men immortall gods give eare,
when due deserved fame can never fade:
Report by right above the earth shall reare
All such, and set their names in seemely sphere,
Such live on earth more happie then the rest:
Such have in heaven a blisse of al the best.

Bacchus did plant, and Ceres sowde the grounde,
Neptune devisde the swelling Seas to saile,
Apollo for his learning was renownde:
For worldly wit dame Pallas did prevaile,
Even shee who heere Minervas want doth waile,
These all were gods by due desart, and shee
A goddesse, next Minerva by degree.

For heavenly wisdome shee exceld eche one,
Her knowledge was, the soule from sinne to save,
Which knowledge nowe is knowne alas to none,
For all the worlde it is so bounsing brave
As none, no one doth thinke upon his grave:
If Sapiens divine wisdome bee dead,
Then Pallas may with teares consume her bred.

Divinitie is made a masking coate,
To compasse what the divelishe doe devise,
Deceite and craft hath set their force aflote,
All men have wit, and no man nowe is wise:
Like Proteus proude they do themselves disguise,
No Gods but Divels, no men but beastes they bee:
Practising craft and deepe hypocrisie.

As men before Saturnus time were rude,
Nowe much more brute and savage they will bee,
If care of conscience doth not sinne detrude:
You must therefore erect divinitie,
And one ordaine of greet and good degree,
Who must possesse Minervas former place,
So all the worlde true knowledge will imbrace.

Then hee and they all silent sodenlie,
Their musing mindes did mourne end marvaile much,
That this the last and latter age shoulde bee
Forlorne, the greeved Gods heere at did grutch.
Then Mercurie his quicke returne was suche,
Like hagarde hauke from haughtie heaven bee tell,
And thus hee did to them his travell tell.

Where Troy once stood no citie nowe doth stande,
A rude unlearned rowte in Thebs remayne,
In Athens nowe there be a beastly bande,
And Rome is rude her vaunting is in vayne:
Even so is France, all Italy, and Spayn,
No Livye lives, no Tully can bee found,
There is not one good Poet on the ground.

That haughtie hill Parnassus heavenly hie
For learning where the lovly Laurell grewe,
The bramble brier hath got the victorie:
The bankes once brave with flowres of goodly hewe,
All Helecon is blacke with moulded blewe:
Pernassus springes be drie, the Nymphes be dead,
The gorgious garlands gone, the Muses flead.

The warres hath wipt what worthie was away.
And Barbarye doth Christendom devoure,
The Turke, the Moore, the prince of Persia,
They dayly do increase in strength and power,
They learning lothe, they build like beastes their bower
In ignoraunce, they feare nor God nor divell,
They hate the good, they honour what is evill.

Yet I am sent that Phoenix rare to finde
Whom all in vaine I seeke and can not see,
And yet shee lives, and is of Saturns kinde,
Begot by Mars, preservd by Jove, and shee
Remaynes alive, in place not knowne to mee,
The firme of all the worlde my selfe have sought,
Yet her to finde the Oracle hath taught.

Where Articke poole with Guardes doth stand
L. and two degrees from lande Minerva doth remaine.
Where want of warre and quiet peace
Hath cloid the country with increase
of gold and goodly graine,
Where Troynovaunt, where Athens newe,
where noble Nymphes do dwell,
Where manie modest Muses be,
even such as do excell.

This greatest goddesse there in throne
Of highest dignitie alone
doth sit, and beare the sway:
Olympus there, Pernassus hie,
Pernassus springes be never drie,
the ground is greene and gay:
The Palme and Laurell there doth growe,
even there her biding is,
Out from the worlde, yet on the grounde,
even in a place of blisse.

There comes quoth noble Neptune to my mind
That same of yore which sober Sybill saide,
When Mercurie in vaine shall seeke to finde
When all the worlde with warres shall be dismaide:
When learninges light shall seeme to be decayde.
Let Neptune then rejoyce with triple mace,
Let all the gods depart and give him place.

Where at the gods greatly greeved did frowne,
And saide, the sea could not the lande excead;
But suddainely there was a goodly crowne
With garlandes gay on noble Neptunes head,
Imbroderd brave in romane letters redde
All percell gilt, and burnished with blewe,
The truth was set, and thus it did insewe,

The tearing tract of time hath wasted and worn out the worthie,
The mightie maine now may mourne such losse, sith the sea hath her glory.

The greeved gods did marvell all amazde,
Such unknowne sightes upon this crowne were seene,
About the toppe a swelling sea was raysde:
In which a chalkie cliffe with medowes greene,
Therein on stately throne a royall queene,
A pransing Pegasus stood by the dame,
And on his backe sat everlasting fame.

On hiest toppe a heavenly angell stood,
Harde by his side a Harraulde had his place,
From raging seas, even from the Ocean stood
Appearde a prince, bolde Brutus by his grace,
To Harraulde he declared his royall race:
The king at armes his petigree he pende,
The Angel markte and did his misle amende,

The Queene to noble Brutus brood was found
By long desent alied linially,
Aeneas he who was so much renownde
From him did Brute descende successively:
The wandering prince had his nativitie
For him who was the eldest sonne, in seat
His grandsier sat, of all the gods most great.

The seat wherein this courtly Queene did sit
was Rubie rare, none seene forfice so great
a golden globe was under both her feete,
a comely cloude did compasse all the seate,
the sea in vayne the cloude and globe did beate
with foming froth, about her heavenly heade
Pallas persuade a posie, which shee reade.

Not such a godesse againe in Asia, Europ, or Affricke,
for vertue, great degree, for her magnanimitie,
Now let Apollo give place, let Neptune sit in the chiefe seat,
sith in his sea she doth dwel ruling a world at her wil,
Blissed and blissed againe, three times thrise happie minerva,
with thee and thine estate no mortal ma may compare.

Then Pan (when Neptune had Apollos place)
that rurall god and clownishe rustikes king,
with shepheardes three attending on his grace,
he plide his pipe, the one of them did sing,
the second sighth, the third his handes did wring,
when pastor Pan persuade their pitious plight,
his pipe laide down he made his men resight
their cause of care.

From walled towne I Bembus wonted was
a mightie masse of money once a yeere
full xl. crownes I did returne, alas
nowe xx. grootes I can not compasse cleere,
my stocke, my store, my houshold stuffe most deere,
I spend, and spoyle, and all to none avayle,
lawgh he that list, Bembus shall weepe and wayle. 

On pleasant pipe to play did please me much,
I did delight sweete ditties to indight:
But nowe the woes of wretched warres be such
As nothing els but howe in fielde to fight,
And howe to keepe the flocke from souldiers sight:
That ravening woolfe, whose never filled mawe
With rage doth make His wicked will a lawe.

Poore Colon I, and careful Comma shee
My weded wife, once happie, nowe forlorne,
Let us complayne of Fortunes crueltie,
The countries grace, and nowe the countries scorne,
X. men, v. flockes, v. plowes, to sowe my corne
I keept, but nowe the greater is my care
My stockes be stolne, my fruitfull fieldes be bare.

The people for the princes pride are plagde,
It falleth to the faultlesse subjectes lot,
To double drinke in cruel cuppe of care,
When perverse princes madding minde doth dote:
Bellona then doth sounde a dolefull note,
Then blooddie men of warre the sweete doth eate
Without regard of us the shepheardes sweate.

My Bembus deare thou  knowest this Sommer last,
Whose armie laide all levell with the grounde
Our come halfe ripe, our vines were spoild as fast,
Our townes be burnt, our woods worth many a pound
Be quite destroyde, and where may nowe be founde
One hedge, or ditch, not torne nor troden downe,
This cursed crop we  reape from hie renowne.

In winter nowe when Boreas bitter blast
Forbiddes in field that armed men shoulde meete,
A greater griefe we countrey men do tast,
Wee cessed are, the souldier eates the sweete
Of all our toile, a thing nor just nor meete,
Such is my state:  yet this my hireling
when Pan doth pipe what doth he then but sing.

And sing thy servaunt must good Colon, he
Doth hope to have (as he before hath had)
A place of rest exempt from miserie,
You both (I thinke) do sinne to be so sadde,
Take mine advise and be you ever glad,
Do followe mee, forsake these fieldes though knowne,
My selfe can give the like they be mine owne.

For I Epizenes a pastor am,
Though nowe thy man yet I my selfe keepe men,
With in my fieldes skipes many a lustie lambe,
I dwell where beef and bacon meate for men,
where milke and honie floweth like the fenne:
I dwell where want of warre and quiet rest
Doth plainely prove Brittaine to be the best.

Epizenes thou seemst to have no sence,
Bembus shall prove thee mad or ignorant,
If so it be, why didst thou runne from from thence,
wherefore?  because all thinges they be so scant
where thou doest dwell, that naked neede and want
did drive thee thence, my neighbour Colon can
Report thy state when first thou wert his man,

Bembus, do heare the storie of my state,
Cloyd with the blisse which nowe I doe desire,
I knowe not what the frowarde force of fate
I being well, did make mee to aspire,
By travell I did thinke to clime up hier,
Thus not content in paradize to dwell,
seeking for heaven, I founde out hatefull hell,

By sea and lande my selfe with restlesse toyle
The circle rounde of all the worlde have sought,
Since first I left my lovely native soyle
with deere expense my knoweledge I have brought,
The spice of Spayne, Canary wine is nought,
The grapes of Fraunce, the fruite of Italye,
Nor pleasant fieldes in Flanders pleaseth mee,

What taxe, what tolle, what tribute do they pay?
with dayly warres, what wretched lives they leade?
Kinges they do cause continuall decay,
Their subjectes live in daily doubt and dread.
They wofull wightes, do hate their hurtfull had,
They curse their kings, like slaves which make them serve,
They till and toile, and yet for food they starve.

Oppression rules with cruell tyrannie.
In Spayne is spitefull superstition spread;
Harde roughnes doth remaine in Germany.
Fidelite from faithlesse Fraunce was flead:
In Italie fancie is suprime head:
Blinde ignoraunce in Barbary remaine,
The Turke doth love the Divell, and God disdaine.

But none of these in Britayne brave abide,
Where godesse great Elizabeth doth raine.
For God almightie with his grace doth gyde
Her highnesse  heart, and all her courtly trayne,
That happie he who may with her remaine:
Both poore and rich doth quietly possesse
Their owne, the haven of heavenly happinesse.

When lust most leude made justice leave the lawe:
And vice destroy dame vertues stately stile:
Divinitie esteemde not worth a strawe
These three disdaind were banisht to exile,
They left the lande, on seas they saild a while,
And at the last on Brittayne brave they fell,
Where queene Eliza made these Ladies dwel.

Religion first a certaine signe of grace,
Not next, but in her highnes heavenly heart
Amidst her minde vertue did take her place:
Shee did commaund Justice not to depart
From her right hande, nor from her side to start
Then thus shee spake, during my doubtfull date
I will bee Queene, you three shall rule my state.

Epizenes (quoth) Pan if Bembus bee,
If Colon with his Comma be content,
Wee will depart to place unknowen with thee,
And sell or let the sheepe courses for rent:
Some god perhappes thy selfe hath hither sent,
Us to conduct to place whereas wee may,
Live like the men in rich Eutopia.

And better much for libertie and gaine,
if so you will, then let us hence away.
The windes bee good, doe never thinke it payne
to sayle the Seas, within a month wee may
have happie haven, and bee in blessed bay;
my selfe will take that stately charge in hande,
to guide your course, and winne the wished land.

With this crosse staffe, wherewith I wonted was,
height, length, and breadth of everything to tell,
with that, and with an Astrolob of brasse,
Globe, Compasse, a Nocturnall will doe well,
with these, and with my Carde which doth excell,
I so will saile, as you shall understande:
that Palinurus hate the Helme in hande.

When Titan sittes in middayes circle seate,
when goodly Guardes doth Artike Pole displaie,
then shall you see a shephearde doe the feate,
and perfectly direct you on your way:
over the place where as I meane to stay,
The North starre stands at fiftie two degree,
That height founde out, wee finde felicitie.

They were content, and as they did depart,
The greatest god of all this goodly traine,
I see (hee saide) thou hast the Sea mans Art:
My Mercurie hath ceaselesse sought in vaine,
Minerva there, Minerva doth remaine:
Goe foorth my sonne and travaile to newe Troy:
Hee went, and came, and brought encrease of joy.

For as you see the swiftest Swallowes wing,
Doth cut the skie, and leaves her haunt behind;
So Mercurie the post of Gods did bring
His message backe, whome Homer hath assignde.
A messenger to them of heavenly kinde.
To whome he did with speede his speeche adresse,
And thus what hee had seene he did expresse.

My travaile proves the Oracle most true,
The workmanship on Neptunes noble crown,
Doth represent halfe the deserved due,
Of her the greatest goddesse of renowne:
Minerva lives, let Pallas cease to frowne,
She is alive, my selfe her grace have seene,
In majestie, of Britayne brave the Queene.

To whom when first I made my message knowne,
And saide, O Queene the gods doe thee salute,
Saturne himselfe whose fame about is blowne:
Mars Neptune, and Apollo great by brute,
Pallas thy younger sister hath a sute
unto thy grace, they all, but chiefly she,
Sent mee to know thy state and great degree.

The Queene replide, I knowe no God but one
And hee of heaven, who guides mee by his grace:
The Heathen had their Gods which nowe bee gone
Whose Idols I by Gods spell did deface:
There is one God and him I doe imbrace,
No sister I, yet what they doe intende
declare, for I all goodnes will defend.

Most mightie prince Saturne doth signifie
good government:  Neptune and Mars of might
By Sea and land in warre haught valiancie,
Apollo how divinely to indight,
Pallas wisdome to rule and raigne aright:
Such vertues great from these men did descende,
They are and shal be gods unto the end.

Yet banisht nowe they live in darknesse,
For where is valure or good governmente?
Learning hath left her former stately stile,
From prudence craft her right with rage hath rent:
The cause why these distressed Gods have sent
me to this Ile, from that most mightie maine
is this, they heare thy highnesse here doth raigne

By right, ruling this Realme with equitie,
Heavenlie wisdome and godly zeale doth rest
with thee, pitie and perfect pietie:
God with his grace aboundantly hath blest
thy grace, and thee inritcht above the rest,
They, (other) Princes of another kinde
Doe banishe such as thou doest seeke to finde.

Hopelesse of helpe which when these gods did heare,
They sent in post on message Mercury:
I am not fame which flyeth here and there
For Mercurie deare dame, doth signifie
a messenger, and for the gods am I
Sent with this sute, if it may please thy grace,
Both they and I will serve thee in this place.

And then the Queene, my servants?  no, my saints,
Copertiners of my crowne and dignitie:
Let them leave off their heeretofore complaints:
Bid them come rule this mightie Realme with mee,
And let them knowe my state and great degree:
Tell them that nothing can delight mee more,
Then they whose names I chiefly doe adore.

Then might you see the prudent Pallas glade,
And all her mourning garments done away,
All her assistants sighde and sobd ful sad:
Rejoyced nowe, and Solemnizde that day
With songes, and making garlandes gorgeous gay:
Then thus shee spake, good Mercury at large,
Report the thinges committed to thy charge.

Her heavenly hewe, her more then mortall grace,
(For vertue may mortall immortall make,)
Her stately steppes, her princelie royall race,
Her Majestie makes mortall men to quake,
Her dignitie doth make the gods to shake:
When earthly eyes her highnesse doe behold,
They doe affirme her forme not from the moulde.

Over her head, angels with swordes in hande,
Betwixt Her eyes doth right remorse remaine,
Before her face the feare of God doth stande,
Salomons blisse abideth in her braine,
Her eares bee stopt to matters vilde and vaine:
From goodlie lips her learned tongue doth tell
The way to heaven, where, where shee no doubt doth dwell.

Contented life within her minde doth rest,
Upon her breast doth perfect blisse abide,
And charitie doth sit upon her chest:
A certaine sure state that cannot slide
Is fixt as best beseemes fast to her side,
Most worthie prayse for her virginitie
Diana never halfe so chaste as she.

Her arme doth rule a mightie Realme by right,
Her hand doth give eche one his due desart,
To walke in righteous wayes is her delight,
From perfect path her feete doe not depart,
Her steppes most straight doe shew her heavenly heart,
Under her feete raging revenge doth couch,
At her commaunde her valure to avouche.

When treasons spightful, hid conspiracies,
They woulde untwine her worthie warped twist:
These heavenly Angels then with Argus eies,
Doe force the blooddie blade from traytours fist
Whose gotten gaine is heavie had I wist;
When forraigne foes would reave her princely crown,
Then blacke revenge doth beate their boastings down.

This true report whilst Maias sonne hath made,
And brought the gods from marvaile to a maze,
Withouten shape all substantlesse a shade
Appearde in sight; on which they all did gaze,
Whose bended browes an inwarde griefe did blaze:
This shadowe seemde with all her might in vaine,
To turne the wheele where mankinde doth remaine.

On toppe whereof Minerva hath her place,
A glorious seat by which but one did sit,
and hee not knowne, princes of royal race
about the sides in place for them most fit,
A godly youth and of a worthie wit
Was plast with them, whose mothers due desart
Quite from the wheele had laid her downe apart.

Alecto then, the breaker of debate
Though pale, and wane yet blewe with ruthfull rage,
Fie fortune fie (quoth she) fie on thy state,
A goddesse?  no, thou wart in elder age,
Contemned nowe of plowman, prince and page,
No homage done, honour, nor sacrifice,
Come take revenge of this contempt, arise,

By nature I all happinesse doe hate,
The giftes I give are bitter griefes like gall,
Hate, spight, malice, and madnesse, state my state,
With these I dayly doe devise to thrall
All such as sit aloft in stately stal:
My pleasure is the fortunate to foyle,
All my delight is in their speedie spoyle.

With mightie arme to turne this wheele make haste
Let them belowe above in blisse remaine,
My gorgeous Galathea is disgrast,
Whom to advance I toyle as yet in vaine,
Of thee, and to thy grace shee doth complaine:
Heare her at last and let her not for aye
By due desart be drowned in decay.

But fortunes force was now of none availe,
When vices vilde to cave of cruell care
Doe cast, her power then can not prevaile:
When godly life, and vertues very rare,
When they advaunce, what fickle fortune dare
molest such one, whom God in highest place
hath set, whose steps be guided by his grace,

Alecto lewd the hater of good hap
when she perceivde dame fortunes feeble force,
Shee made about and spide a second gap
wherein shee leapt, O Pluto take remorse
on us she said, with voice hollow and hoarce:
She sits thou sest in highest dignitie,
which doth destroy thy mightie monarchie.

The worlde thou knowest, I all the worlde was thine,
Thy caves were cramd, when heaven all emptie was,
Blinde ignorance that mighty mother mine
shee ruld, shee rainde, she brought it so to passe
That al I was thine, even shee maintaind the masse,
And shee it was which gave the triple crowne
To him of Rome, of more then muche renowme.

But now, (not from Apollos learned braine)
Out from the stocke of Mars is sprong:  a maide;
Who doth both him, and thee, and mee disdaine,
Thou sest by her thy kingdome is decayd,
Thou sest her force, her fame can never fade,
True knowledge shortly so shall stuffe the heaven,
That all thy state shall stand at sixe and seven.

Quoth Pluto tell my Metropolitan,
To no such end he hath his princely place,
Hee keepes the keyes, his might may blisse or ban,
Yet dothe hee see and suffer this disgrace,
Tell him from mee I him and all his race
will quite destroy except he doth pluck down,
All suche as bee rebellers to my crowne.

Thus did the Divell with patience replie,
But when the Pope had heard this princes minde,
His heavie hearte in raging wrath did frie,
In hast, post hast a counsaile hee assignde:
Bals, balling Priestes (not only bald but blinde,)
From every coast in flockes like Coutes they came.
Thus spake the woolfe clad like a simple lambe.

My ghostly care with mercie mixt too muche,
Hath brought contempt, cursing shall nowe prevaile:
This stubborne wretched wicked worlde is such.
Nowe punishment and whippes of bitter bayle:
They must and shall refourme, I will not faile,
To plucke them downe with vengeance ruthfull reade,
Which doe denie mee to bee supreme head.

Have I the power to curse, to blisse to binde,
To lose, to send to heaven or els to hel,
Or is this key and triple crowne assignde
To me, to suffer them thus to rebell?
No no, I will subdue them very well:
To Fraunce, to mightie Spaine, to Italie
I Britane give, Scotlande, and Germanie.

Whose princes proud are fled from former faith,
And doe devise to rob mee of the rest,
When as my state was at the hiest haigth
Then happie he who with my toe was blest,
Then all was mine from the'st unto the west,
Then on thee backes of Emperours I trode,
Then who but I, there was none other God.

But nowe alas I live in lowe degree,
A woman doth mee and my might defie,
The Gospel nowe my mortall enemie
By meanes of her is preacht both farre and nie:
As it revives, so I your pope doe die:
As I do droupe, so you your selves must mourne,
Looke well heereto before you be forlorne.

This carefull court in haste it did devise,
It sent forth sectes, it traytors did retaine,
Those rebels fled for feare which faine woulde rise,
It made them practise matters vilde and vaine,
Alectos Galathia did complayne
Whome to advaunce they have they do, and will,
On feeble sort  such show their slender skill,

For as the seas do roare against the rocke
In vaine, and windes no mountaines maie remoove,
So there at Rome these forcelesse priestes did flock
None of their popish practizes would prove,
Which did so much that mightie monster move,
As straight he did a holie league conclude,
Meaning by might the Gospel to detrude.

Then Galathea presently was blest,
If he may blesse who coulde not can not curse,
Hee made a shorte and yet the marke he mist,
Hee stretcht the stringes of his plentifull purse
In vaine, and all in vaine hee did disburse
His Peterpence all thinges had such successe,
As well deservde his worships worthinesse.

Which made him clap a loose hooke to his saile,
Peter put on his considering cappe,
A fruitlesse flower passing poore and pale:
Without or smell, or tast, or sence, or sappe,
A hidden hooke, a traine, a secrete trappe,
Away the witch, the windes were not to scant,
The fleete was rigde, and yet there was a want.

Then from that borde he cast his sayles about,
He did and doth an other drift devise,
Alecto with her stobourne servauntes shoute
Doth further forth his divelishe enterprise,
With false report to every coaste she flies
And filles the eares of of everie king with ire
Against her grace to make them all conspire.

The present gods seeing this great turmoile,
Made haste with speede her person to defende,
Saide Saturne let us keepe her from the foile.
This wicked world shee all her force doth bend
To sinke such as by vertue woulde ascend.
This is (said Mars) a valiant troupe I trowe:
which dare attempt one woman to overthrowe.

And doth the divell and he his depute there?
Doe kinges consult, and furies fierce of hell,
My daughter from her hie estate to bare
Dare they against both Jove and us rebell,
O hie devise, their courage doth excell:
They faine woulde frame the overthrowe of one
which must and shal remaine when they are gone,

Whose pride, but first their rage will resist,
Menacing Mars with eyes like flaming fire,
His face showde what was shrowded in his brest:
He made all that were present to admire
At his revenge, and dare they thus conspire?
They will (quoth hee) and and I will doe the deede
which shall prevaile, when shee shall stande in neede.

Pallas with secrete suddaine joy revivde,
Forgetting quite her griefes forerunne shee saide,
Attende and heare the song I have contrivde,
Give eare you gods, lende me your loving ayde:
Apollo thou the best that ever plaide
Take Lute in hand, tune to the waters fall,
Minerva lives whom Pallas honor shall.

Farewell you kinges of all the continent
both farre end neare,
Against both gods, and goodnes you be bent
with sworde and speare,
Therefore with you the furies fierce of hell,
We with the vertuous English Queene will dwell,
she can not slide
for we will side
Her steppes, and make her fame excel.

For true report with golden trumpe doth sounde
her worthie prayse:
But your reproch by rumour doth rebounde
in the hie wayes
Of all the worlde, so you in infamie
Must live, and shee in royall dignitie:
howe can she fade whom vertue made
The greatest goddesse by degree.

Rejoyce you gods to sing we will not cease,
nowe we have founde
The chiefest place of rest and quiet peace
upon the grounde.
For we shall sit even by her seemely side,
Whose mightie mase the golden world doth gide,
so worthie a Queene
was never seene,
Whose heavenly state shall never slide.

From striking of his stringes Apollo stayde,
Which brought this suddaine ende to Pallas song,
His Lute laide downe hee thus unto them saide,
As wee be godes, so let us do no wrong,
you knowe the charge which doth to us belong,
Howe mightie Jove the onely god above
Would us on earth showe whom he best doth love..

If Pallas and the tried trueth doth prove
The English Queene of all most worthie prayse,
Then may wee boldely boast that God doth love
Her best, if most shee walketh in his wayes,
Which if to prove make we no more delays
But let us hence, for we with her will dwell
If such shee be, if so shee doth excell.

Then her we may and will immortall make,
A goddesse great Minerva be her name,
My Mercury hee shall him selfe betake
To all the worlde, and there he shall proclame
Both farre and neare her due deserved fame.
All men that live her grace they shall adore
Both at this present time, and evermore.

Quoth Pallas let it be as you have saide,
wee will depart, yet doubt not of the dame
Shee is by proofe and oracle displayde,
Most certainlie I know shee is the same:
And I before I hence depart, will frame
A comely Coronet of goodly greene,
which shall right well become a maiden Queene.

And wee saide they will breake downe Floras bower
Yeelding thereto the floweres of the fielde.
Sylvanus then stept from his stately bowre,
And I there such branches brave will yeelde
(Saide hee,) as hath been seene but verie fielde,
Of woodes, of groves, of goodly greene the god
I am, you knowe they bowe if I but nod.

Though hatefull Hyems wasting winters rage,
With bitter blastes my tender bowes doth bite:
yet friendly Ver her rigor doth aswage,
And all my groves with goodly greene doth dight:
The modest Muses flocke for their delight
Amidst my greene, they daily march for meede,
They sing, they daunce they there, their fancies feede.

Within my groves such sacred trees doe growe
As never will their lovely greene forgoe,
Them on your goddesse I'le bestowe,
Not onely them, but many flowres moe,
Hearbes of all sortes if you will have it so.
Quoth Neptune, pearles and precious stones great store
I will supplie, what woulde Pallas have more.

Then forth they went and gathered all was good,
Great mightie bowes and branches home they brought,
they did disgrace eche forrest, fielde, and wood.
Neptune returnd who had his Indies sought,
From thence he Jewels which were never bought
For prince, nor pay, they were so passing rare:
To order all Pallas had all the care.

Dame Flora with her nimble Nymphes came in,
even there they did their lovely lappes unlade,
And in her hande the prettie fairie Queene
Shee helde a glasse, these flowres shall not fade,
Them to preserve this water I have made:
They shall not die, nor droup, but florish faire,
Nor feele the force of Sommers swelting aire.

The Muses ix. ix. colours did present
Of sowing silke untwined yet in twist,
To sowe, to weave, to binde was their intent
where need requirde, then with her faire fist
A Morian maide when shee the place had blist,
Chrystall, Currall, Amber, Bugle shee
Laide downe, and saide these for your gerland be.

The Graces called Charites came in,
Two bagges, the third shee did a bottel beare,
In which full twentie several roomes there bin
All filde with water delicate and deare,
Distilled all; and in the bagges there were
Muske, Mirre, Sivit, and Ambergreece the best
That hath bin seene, from the'st unto the west,

They all as one imploide their second care
More busie then the birde which buildes her nest,
To take the choice whose vertues were most rare,
They litle slippes and branches of the best
Did bring, they left and laide away the rest:
Pallas her selfe did worke this worthie wreath
most passing brave above, and brave beneath.

Ix. noble worthies mightie Mars they prayde
To passe with him to please their chiefe delight:
Vii. sages then they thus to Saturne saide
wee will with thee to see this worthie wight:
Three Marriners indude with deepe insight
Of seamans skill, worthie to frame a course
where Neptune was in spight of Eols force:

A learned troupe unto Apollo prest,
Of which were two inseparable seemde,
Silenus, tho like mouners, yet the best
Theologi by deedes and doctrine deemd,
to him they went, of him they were esteemed:
To garnishe Pallas worke with greater grace,
By them eche branch and flower had her place.

The Firre tree first her branch they did forbid,
For it doth speares and warlike weapons make,
The Olive branch (whose vertue lieth hid)
It hates, his rootes doe growe from Limbo lake,
The mourning Cyprus bowe they did forsake:
The first with redde, but that with black they bounde
For them (from this) an other use was founde

The Flower deluce though lovely to beholde
In question these the wisest did it call,
And to refuse the same the gods were bolde:
It representes trouble and cruell thrall,
The leaves like swoords do grow both tough and tall,
The roote though pleasant, poison is to such
As doe it drinke, which made the Muses grutch.

These thence for secret cause they cast away,
As too too bad to have their teeing there,
This comely crewe did solemnize that day,
And Pallas made her perfite skill appeare,
The Nymphes, and Ladies of the fountaines cleare
More busie then a swarme of bees, they brought
In laden armes such thinges as they had sought.

A Pantarbe strange of great and goodly sise;
with workmanship as rare as was the stone,
shee there the first foundation did devise,
Grene grasse shee strowde a handfull thereupon,
Trefoiles, Cincquefoiles, and caterfoiles among,
The chosen slips of the Pomegranet tree,
These bound with blacke, with white those did agree,
whose secrete sence Libethrides did sing,
whilst Dryades did other flowers bring .

Within the Salamanders head a precious stone is founde,
Of value rich, of vertue rare,
none such upon the grounde:
Who doth possesse the same,
may stande unhurt in flame
of fiers force with fame.
Nor Cupids might
Can hurt such one with spight,
Thrice happie wight
Who hath the Pantarbe found.

Grasse is greene common like corne,
yet doth it farre surmount,
For only grasse maintaineth man,
and is of chiefe account,
The Romane Captaines wore
garlandes thereof of yore,
because they did restore
the quiet peace,
and made the warres surcease.
A great increase
it plainely doth present,

The Primerose or Caterfoile
first in the prime doth spring,
It is the messenger to May
of wilde flowers the king:
Who first it findes must note
his mistres by her coat,
It growes like true love knot,
and doth present
shee never will repent
her voude intent,
happie who first it findes.

The Cincquefoiles sanctitie is such,
the Gentiles did applie
It chiefly in their sacrifice
when they did purifie,
In it nine colours bin,
but chiefly white and greene
the colours of a Queene,
it doth declare
The wearer hath great care
with vertue rare
to keepe her soule from sinne.

The Trefoile hath his secrete sense,
the unitie of three
It doth declare, and is in league
with the Pomegranet tree:
Cupid that braunch did beare,
Whose hand with cruel speare
Eche lovers heart doth teare,
it doth present
All flesh to love is bent,
and must repent
their losse of libertie.

Thus though eche Ladie needes must love
and seeke for unitie,
Yet shee who doth the Pantarbe finde
shall live at libertie:
With her reason shall rest,
Fancie shall bilde no nest
Within  her blessed brest,
the great increase
of perfit love, and peace,
shall never cease,
Where these flowers be worne.

You happie Hamadryades
nowe presse you out a pace,
Bring foorth what best may beautifie
the seconde ranke or race:
This worke is well begunne,
For wee our parts have done,
Now you must thither runne,
in Pallas lap
you must your flowers wrap,
Minervas cap
Shee will therewith adorne.

Two branches then of everlasting wood,
which never will corrupt nor waste away,
But ever greene, their savour passing good,
They doe declare her fame cannot decay
Which doth them weare, by due desart I say
Pallas them plast, and gave the next degree
Unto the Cedar and Geniper tree

A thousand orient pearles shee hangde thereon,
For white with greene will ever well agree,
Sweete Williams then shee placed them among,
And Lavinder for liberalitie:
For her good workes, a braunche of Savourie,
Al these the worthie woodbind did imbrace:
The Honisuckle gave a greater grace Unto them all,
whose braunch with chrystall dight,
Did muche increase the beholders delight.

The Double Dill for her humilitie,
Laus tibi (health) the Assodill doth shewe,
the Oking braunche her diuturnitie,
And thereuppon did golden Acornes growe
In comely knopps, hanging in seemely rowe:
To furnishe these shee set a slip of sage
For sustinance, all anger to aswage
Next this shee gentle Gozemen did place,
And thrifte she tide within our Ladies lace,

Pallas a comely Carbuncle did take,
whose royall rayse were bright like Phoebus beames,
A triple towred toppe shee ment to make
Thereon, for well she wist the glittering gleames
Thereof did shine with goodly stately streams,
And leand unto the lookers on such light,
That they might judge of every thing aright.

And when shee had the hearbe Alimon founde,
Alaluya by and by shee spide,
The larksfoote fast with white to Burnet bounde,
Dictamum she to Peneryall tyde,
with goodly greene shee made them all abide:
And beare the branche whose tender twigges did bend,
with golden fruite as though their rine would rende:
About the Lillies stalke Hearts ease was wrapt,
And love within our Ladies smock shee lapt .

the pretie Pincke, the goodly Marie golde,
Muske Roses mixt with seemely Sops in wine,
Sweete Violets, of colours manifolde,
The gentle Gyllyflower florisht fine,
Rosemary tide Unto a little Time,
with Basell, Balme, Isope, sweete Margerie,
These were intrayld with branche of Rasper tree .

Even then shee did the double Daseye downe
with blewe shee bounde it to the Laurell tree:
The little Pauncie greatest of renowme,
Cornations came with great humilitie,
Doing unto sweete Eglintine dutie:
And then a branch of Palme with goodly grace,
Her spreading spraise did beautifie the place.

From hiest top out of one stately stemme
Two royall Roses white and redde did growe,
the Olive tree most bravely grew by them,
And by their rootes were set in seemely rowe
Flowers and hearbes whose names I doe not knowe:
Pallas her comely Casket did unlocke,
Before her face the Muses all did flocke.

The Red rose first with precious pearles they dight,
The white rose they inritch with rubies rare,
Their stalke with Azure Saphires garnisht bright
A secrete hidden vertue did declare,
The Olives goodly branches were not bare,
For all her twigges with Emeraulds did bende,
The Smarage did the Olives greene emend.

Of Topazes two sortes there have bin founde,
One sort like golde this garnisht Eglintine,
Not on but by the Pauncie most renowmde,
The other much more greene then grasse did shine,
(By due desart the Ardonix is thine)
Thou doutie double Dayseie for thy tree
The Daintie Diamon doth well agree.

The other hearbes with Margarites were mixt,
And here and there did hang an Amatest,
And everie where a Iasynth betwixt
Them both, and comely Chrystall to the rest,
With guled Currall, Bugle of the best
Spangles of golde and silver there were seene,
All these set foorth dame Chloris goodly greene.

The Fayrie Queene did season this with sweet,
And when she had consarvde it in such wise,
As neither Brumas blastes, nor Atumns heate
Coulde hurte, shee did with all her wit devise,
From every branche a sweete perfume did rise,
The flowers did retaine their proper smell,
Quoth Pallas stay, this worke is passing well.

Diana and her daintie damsels did
Their friendly fingers undefiled frame,
When sacred solemne rites were finished,
To beare being without or blot or blame
Unto her grace who was of greatest fame
This rare devise, with double dignitie
Meaning to crowne, Minervas majestie.

The Poets Prince, and Harauldes chiefest king
Mightie Palaphilos you might persave
To place ech one appointing everie thing
As it shoulde bee; the gods were bounsing brave
No godddesse there, no muse nor Nymphe was grave,
All did with joyfull Jubilie rejoyce
Shouting Minerva lives with often voyce.

Then might you see the rurall dames come in,
the youth like frie, olde folke like foules did flocke:
With bags and baskits filde up to the brimme,
For Fauni did the Forrest gates unlocke:
And simple Cate clad in a russet frocke
Brought branches thence, and flowers aporne full,
The waies were woods made by the gadding scull,

Apollo tooke in hand his pleasant Lute,
And tree his Harp who said Euridicen,
Thales did force with lovely lippes her Flute,
Calliope on Sitarne did begin,
Melpomene on Viall prayse did winne,
the Napea with the Nayades
They did devise and singe thes sweete ditties.

The Nymphes and Ladies of the lake,
Perfourme this great solemnitie
All for their new Minervas sake
noble Naiades.

And where renowmed Napea
Is shee who doth deserve such fame?
In England now Naiades,
Elizabeth her name.

With slant a slant this slanting flocke,
The greatest goddesse by degree,
They meane that maiden Queene to make
with royall dignitie.

Thither goe all this faire flocke
with such so great solemnitie,
All for their newe Minervas sake
noble Naiades.

Thus they at last were come where Lud had laid
Though not the first, foundations long before,
Where then this courtly maiden Queene she staide
With all her traine, and manie straingers more
For then there were Ambassadors great store:
Whom to delight, the people did prepare
Triumphs, perfourmde with courage passing rare.

The court it selfe none such my selfe have seene
In Fraunce, in Spayne, nor curious Italie,
The courtiers, first the beautie of the Queene,
Her goodly grace, her garments what they bee,
No Empresse can make such showe as shee,
For gold, for pearle, for precious stones of price,
No one like her for robes of rare devise,

Then from the prince unto the porest page,
The worste in silke, the best in cloth of golde
Richly inricht, the nobleman so sage,
The gentleman so civell to beholde,
The courteous servingman the boy though bolde,
Yet he and they eche one in his degree,
Did plainely prove him selfe civilitie.

When Titans beames had banisht Lunas light
And duskish dim which dide the day with darke,
Sent foorth from fame report that worthie wight,
With trompet shrille made heaven and earth to harke,
Immorrall gods and mortall men did marke
The message which with great solemnitie,
was thus declarde to all of each degree.

The shevered staves will well declare the minde
Of them who heere this day will showe their might,
An Earle by birth and of an noble kinde
His chalenge will perfourme even in despight
Of him or them which dare withstande in fight,
Therefore you Brutes which would inrich your name
Cast armour one and trie the Tilte for fame.

The Mertials and the Judges had their place,
The Harraldes prest to pen eche due desart,
The Queene was come, there waited on her grace
A hundred Ladies beautifull and brave,
The forraine princes and her counsaile grave,
When all the showe and every thing was seene
No colours cold compare with white and greene.

The challenger proudly presumde to say
That white and greene had not the bravest hewe,
But that his Maistris bore the bell away:
Her courtly colours were most worthie vewe
Hee saide and swore, wherewith the trumpets blewe,
The splents of speares which climde the cloudes above
Did well declare the force of mightie love.

A Fierce defendant with a counter busse
Of this proud chalenger did chaunge the cheere,
Spight of his force and all his cootes of proffe
He made him leave the fielde for feeble fare,
Assistantes three forth with there did appeare,
The first did well, the second in his place,
So did the thirde but for this one disgrace.

In Helmet for the honour of his deare
The Ladie whom they all did most commend,
Her gallant plume and colours he did weare,
Which for her sake like life he did defende:
Yet force perforce, them to the ground did fence:
And then the people cride God save the Queene,
No colours can compare with white and green.

Therewith the cloud which did the gods inclose
That they might walke, and see, and nor be seene,
Was quit with drawne, the people did suppose
Heaven was broke loose, so might the royall Queene,
So did the court, so all the worlde might deeme,
The armed knightes the people in a traunce
Did muse, and makt the order of this chaunce.

First Saturne and vii. sages past before,
Then mightie Mars with him ix. worthies went,
Neptune he had three saylers and no more
Apollo two for a learned intent,
Silenus v. all v. from heaven were sent,
Then Mercury the ruler of report,
Thus the vi. gods entred into the court.

Next these dame Floras noble Nymphes came in,
The Fayerie Queene, and Ladies of of the lake,
Diana and her Damsels then were seene,
A troupe which did to chastitie betake
Themselves, come thither for Minervas sake.
There Pallas and the learned Muses staid,
And Pallas thus unto Minerva sayd.

Most mightie prince almightie Jove the just
Would us on earth showe whom he best doth love,
We have inquirde, and nowe it is discust
It is thy selfe, whom he who sittes above
Hath so inricht that thou canst not remove,
From that which with his will doth well agree,
Being of all the best; felicitie.

Nowe sith we see thy goodly government,
And finde howe passing straight thy steps do stand,
We all be come, all wee for this intent
To live with thee, to bee at thy commande,
And for that cause Pallas and all her bande,
doth heere resigne unto thy worthie will
Their worldly wit, and all their learned skill,

Thy due desert hath thee Minerva made
A goddesse great, with whom none can compare,
For hee of heaven hath set it downe and said,
The Brittain Queene shalbe that Phoenix rare,
Whom death to touch with dart shall never dare:
Thou shalt on earth eternally remaine
As I have done, though greater be thy gaine.,

Beholde these gods gods all readie to resigne
The giftes for which they were eternized,
Receive thou them because they be all thine,
Receive also unto thy heavenly head
This Corroner, this garlande garnished
Not like thy minde with gifts of greatest price,
But as we coulde inricht with rare devise,

Shee thus adored with double dignitie
They did of mortall her immortall make,
As thus shee sat amidst such majestie
The lookers on with loving feare did shake,
Her goodly grace did make the gods to quake:
The Muses then and all the people said
thy due desert hath thee Minerva made.

And then the Queene with more then mortall grace,
The life (quoth shee) of every lining thing
Must perish quite, for death will it deface:
But death to death by due desert to bring
Such death on earth is life everlasting,
I knowe right well such immortalitie
you have obtainde, and such remaines for me.

And then forth from the slender suttel skies
All Angellike there did a shape appeare,
Even as it is of ghosts devine the gise
A heavenly humane forme shee did on there:
And yet shee was as Tytans beames so cleare,
Immaculate not having spot of sinne,
All clad in white thus did her grace begin.

Within this worlde at last is one
who hath inricht her name
with everlasting fame,
This Ladie only shee alone
shee shall injoy the same:
the goddesses divine,
and all the Muses ix.
to her they shall resigne:

Because the due desartes which them immortal made
This Ladie hath obtaind, her fame shall never fade.

Proceed my Muse  assist thy servaunt nowe,
Able his penne to publishe forth her praise
Whole life is like dame Sinthias silver rayse.

That mightie God of heaven Jova great,
He doth permit, his highnes doth alowe
Unto her grace all earthly blesse shall bowe,

And bide, and bee at her commaundement,
With perfit blesse to beautifie her seate,
Even for that cause Euthumia is sent.

With her this goddesse evermore shall stay,
Then thus bespake blessed Euthumia.

Goddesse of great accompt
whose due desert doth farre surmount
the peoples prayse,
in no such wayse
did ever woman walke:
Faire Ladie sweet with thee, with thee I meane to talke,
Talke and resigne to thee, even to thy selfe my state,
of all the world most fortunate,
whose happines with perfit blesse
is furnished, nowe I must dwell
with thee because thou doest excell.

Thy vertues rare
Do well declare
To what thou art inclinde,
The worthines of woman kinde,
Thou dost approve that sexe is such
As doth mankind exceed, exceedeth man by much,
By muche and moste of all, of all the royall reste, 
Thy perfite greate estate is beste,
Thy birth right great, greater thy fame,
Euthumias noble name
I yeelde to thee
my dignitie.

Thy due deserved right, in deede thy right rewarde
Rewarded by the gods, for when the gods had harde
In what a perfit path you tread,
And howe your life you lade,
They did ordaine
Mee to remaine
With her whose state
Was fortunate,
So sent from them to you,
to you, onely to you I bowe,
And bende, and bind myself, my selfe unto your will,
Your will that is my worke, my worke that to fulfill.

Sweet Eglintine shall have the place,
And notice of thy name,
Which flowre so defend, even to defende the same,
Of passing pusiant power
In hiest throne
Hee which doth sit, he shall defende
thee from thy fone,
and so preserve the seate, the seat where thou dost sit,
as neither hatreds heate
nor wicked wit,
shall bloot thy goodnes with disgrace,
amongst the gods thou shalt remaine
for evermore.

Aglaia most like the morning starre
that godesse next Euthumia did appeare,
none of the muses might with her compare,
muche like her selfe shee found Minerva there:
Suche beutie, bountie, personage and grace,
Greatlie amazde she pausde a prettie space:
Apollo then did downe his mightie mace,
He thus describd the favour of her face.

Like newe refined golde Queene Hellens haire;
Shee hath the browes of blissed Brissis brave,
Egerias eie, shee hath Egestas eare,
Chionis cheeke, and Chloris goodly grace,
Neeras nose on fayre Venus face,
The tongue of Telesilla, Tethis teeth,
And Ledas lippes to lende lovely reliefe.

Of modest Myrta milde the smiling cheere,
Dame Floras breth so sweet as violet,
Clitias chin, like Collitina cleare,
The necke of Nemesis, Doris, or Eudora,
Her brests be brave like Diopeia,
Shee is of all the worlde the brightest starre,
Begot by Mars the mightie god of warre.

Apollo staide, Aglaia did proceede
Though much amazde to see ast' were her self,
Aglaias eyes they on her face did feede,
And coulde not satisfie themselves with sight,
There was containd in in so great delight:
Yet at the last her wordes did well display
Her inwarde thought, thus did the Ladie try.

Lady of all delight
Delight of Ladies all,
All the most worthie wight
Most worthie wight they shall,
Shall they?  They shall in deed
Indeed, adore thy name,
Thy name with everlasting fame.
Fame flie thou foorth with speede,
With speede let it be knowne to all under the Sunne,
The Sun hath shinde upon none such since first the world begun. To whom Aglaia doth resigne,
For new Minervas prayse doth shine
More bright then heretofore did mine:
With all a flaunt a flaunt,
Thou as thou shouldst dost vaunt,
The Gods of heaven doe graunt
Thee evermore their heavenly grace,
To prosper thee in everie place.

That goodly goddesse great renowmed Clytia
she prest into the presse, then thus the dame divine did say,
Brave Besse how are delights
Of beauties bravest bright
Plast in thy passing, perfect personage,
Send foorth you worthie wights
Beholde you heere in sight,
The chiefest glorie of this present age.
Unto this gallant gay
Doth worthie Clytia
her name and fame resigne,
All glory hath beene mine,
All glory nowe is thine,
With glory thou dost shine, so like the seemly Sunne,
Brave Besse shal be thy name when al the world is done.

Next her appeard a muse of great degree,
And thus bespake comelie Calliope,

A Ladie like my selfe at last,
at last my selfe have founde,
that shee may be renowmde
Fame telles her name with busie blast
To all upon the ground:
The sweetnesse of her voice
Doth make the gods rejoyce,
Therefore Calliope
To little Englands worthie Queene
Doth give her great degree.

And then the Graces called Charytes
With these speeches did all the people please:

Amidst a gallant gardine greene,
Where natures worthie worke is seene,
Impald with perfect blisse,
Wherein one forme our selves have founde
All the good graces on the grounde,
Even there our biding is,
With mery mindes wee there remaine,
the place doth please us so,
It never shall bee seene nor saide,
That wee from thence will goe:
As foode feedes mortall fleshe,
Even so our mindes doe eate
the perfect pleasures there doe grow,
Most sweete for Angels meate:

Dido that courtly Carthage Queene,
Of Troyes decay that fine Helen
And gallant Venus gay,
Juno nor Pallas never dare,
Diana chaste may not compare,
With mightie Minerva.
For shee hath that which all they had,
In much more perfect plight
Then minde of man imagine may,
Or Dittie can indight:
We vaunt not then in vaine,
For only wee are blest
Who doe injoy of all the worlde
the very worthiest:

Injoy?  wee only doe possesse
The highest haight of happinesse,
Therefore wee will rejoyce,
For where all vertue doth remaine
even shee who all the rest doth staine
is made our only choyce.
And this to you of heaven we vowe,
whilst you her life do lend
Only with her we will remaine,
our faith shall her defend,
her becke wee will obey,
I shee shall have our heart,
and we with her wil runne and ride
wee never will depart.

On earth heavenly felicitie
even heere on earth not one but wee,
and wee have found the place,
Where every prefect sweete delight
doth rest, and doth remaine by right:
wee doe the branche imbrace,
whose buds the blossomes bee of blisse,
whose fruite  Ambrosia,
God keepe Minerva from mishap,
God keepe her from decay,
For with that goddesse greate
wee doe possesse our place,
And wee will dwell for evermore
in her most faire face.

Then Clio sister to Calliope,
That modest mery Muse of great degree,
Found out this Queene who had her goodly grace,
shee all her giftes and goodnes did imbrace,
Whome longe she did with marvell muche beholde,
Thus shee at last her fancies did unfolde.

Macthlesse for musick once I was,
none could my note come neere,
nowe thou dost passe,
thy voyce most cleere
From healtfull lights and lounges belowe doth send,
Such sweete and pleasant harmonie,
the gods their eares doe bende,
And after thee
we see
The rest of all the Muses run,
to gaze upon thy grace,
Which as they do behold they finde,
thy mothers faire face,
to thee
I Clio heere
Doe give eternitie,
Thou noble Nymphe that hast no peere,
Thy name and fame shall live and never fade,
the onely peece of worke that ever nature made

Thus shee who once was but a mortall Queene,
And subject fate on fortunes turning wheele,
the greatest godesse nowe on earth is seene:
Whose hie estate can neither roule nor reele,
Nor fortunes force shall never hurt her heele:
For vertue did and due desart advaunce
Her grace, and not the force of changing chance,

Shee is not nowe as other princes bee,
Who live on earth to every tempest thrall,
Desert hath crownde her with eternitie,
Her godly zeale in seate sempiternal
Hath set her nowe, from thence shee can not fall:
But lively live on earth eternally:
And have in heaven heavenly felicitie.

Therewith this curious court brake up, and I in ragged rime
Was made the trumpet to their talk, the touchstone of the time,
Amongst the gods there is none like thee O Lorde,
There is none can do as thou doest.  Psal. Lxxxvi.

The Pilgrimes post scrip.

Evermore my Muse shall magnifie thy name
Most gracious, most right renowmed dame
Nowe that I knowe thy due deserved fame:
most mightie prince the meanes thou hast made
that all the world doth knowe
how vertue like a sea doth flowe
in thee, and howe thou doest forsake
the bitter bent of cruell Cupides bowe,
free fro the force of fancies flashing flame,
most gratious, most right renowned dame
Nowe that I knowe thy due deserved fame,
Evermore my Muse shall magnifie thy name:
first with thy wit who can compare,
thy vertuous inclination
is knowne to every nation,
thy learning and thy gifts most rare
make perfite declaration
nature thy equall never yet did frame.
Nowe that I knowe thy due deserved fame
Evermore my Muse shall magnifie thy name,
Most gracious, most right renowned dame.

Your Majesties poore pilgrime,
Thomas Blener Hasset.
