Why how now, Friend Richard?  Because a man's dead;
Will you break off acquaintance? d'y' think he can't read?
Had you sent a small packet by Charon, Post-paid,
It had safely arriv'd &mdash; he's a trusty old Blade.
However, I hate to be churlish and crusty,
Or stand upon forms &mdash; so resolve to write first t' you.

Know then, that my Will was first finish'd&mdash; that done
I had nothing to do, but to die, and be gone.
Well &mdash; in due form of law then I fairly departed,
And quickly, and safely, was hither departed.
As I know you are curious in search of things strange,
I'll relate, what I found by my whimsical change.

The Poets, both Grecian and Roman of old,
Of whom we so many fine things have been told,
Live here in great state, are Grandees of the Court,
To whom all the Moderns most humbly resort;
Yet few find admittance, or favour with those,
So poor their appearance, so shabby their cloaths:
Some, indeed, a small pittance, or place, may obtain;
But the rest are a sad ragged crew in the main:
In short, the whole tribe are at best, but so so,
As you'll find by their state and employment below.

Old Chaucer and Drayton I found in good plight,
And Shakespear and Spencer appear pretty tight.
They've each a small freehold, tho' troth bounded in sore,
And live not not unlike to our poor Knights of Windsor.
Ben Johnson sells ale on the side o' the hill,
And Beaumont and Fletcher go halves in a mill;
But Denham enjoys a small post in the state,
And Dorset with Juvenal's grown very great;
Whilst poor John Suckling is but a knife-grinder,
And Cowley, poor Cowley's a laquey to Pindar.

Friend Wilmot's a mountebank, Villers his Droll,
Charles Sedley their toad-eater, Howards their Fool;
Old Milton's still blind, but much in request
With Homer and Virgil, and most of the best;
And Addison, lately assign'd for his Guide,
Enjoys a small place, and a pension beside:
Old Naso and Waller most hugely agree,
But Ar'stotle t' other day cudgell'd poor Lee.

But Butler of all looks the best, let me tell you,
Has money, good cloaths, and can now fill his belly,
Is lately prefer'd as his Highness's Jester,
For which he per diem has two and a tester.
In troth I was glad to see Butler so mended,
Who had suffer'd so greatly, before he descended.

Old Dryden sells Nectar, an excellent dram,
And Shadwell is kept by a wealthy old Dame;
He was always a lover, you know, of that fame.

Rough Wycherley sells penknives, razors, and scissars,
And Otway fine pincushions, essence, and tweezers.
Tom Brown's a black shoe-boy, and carries a link,
A sad dirty whore's-bird, and lies in a sink;
Joe Haines and Dick Estcourt are poor, but yet merry,
And Philips for's Highness makes Cyder and Perry;
But Plautus and Terence, both wealthy and able,
Have taken friend Congreve to wait at their table.

Behn, Manly, Centlivre, I found in the stocks,
It seems they had purloin'd the Muses foul smocks;
By washing and scowring, they are now forc'd to live,
No wonder poor Devils, they fought thus to thrive.

Johnny Crown keeps a raree-show, Farqu'har's a sutler,
And Horace has made Matthew Prior his butler.
Natt Rowe waits on Sophocles, has a good place on't,
But Hughes still is poor, tho' he puts the best face on't.
Tom Durfey sings ballads and cobbles old shoes,
And honest Dick Steel runs about with the news.

Here are more, but so ragged, so poor, and so sad,
'Twere a shame you should know, their condition's so bad.
As for me, I am just advertis'd to be lett;
So what will become of me, cannot tell yet.
I can rhime, comb a wig, shave, pick up a whore,
And few of the moderns I think can do more.
When once I am settled, I'll write t' y' again,
'Till when your old friend, honest Dick, I remain.
Parnassus, Sept. 7, 1730.
