Since my weak Voice in Congreve's Praise preferr'd,
Will, thro' a Virgil, be by Pollio heard;
Low Rhimes made sacred, to his Name I join,
Fix'd to such Fame they'll make great Glories mine;
Such humblest Swains deserve for saying Hymns divine.

Far from these Lines, all low-Lamentings be!
His Soul sprung, glad, to Immortality!
That, first from Heav'n commission'd, for our sake,
Men happier, wiser, better, came to make.
This Task long try'd, in each divinest Strain,
Call'd Home, It Heav'nwards took its flight again;
But first his Dirge he makes, and Fun'ral Rites,
And, just at Death, as all thro' Life, Delights:
To Dust gives Dust, his Corps, pale Ashy-Pile!
Then upwards flies the Phoenix of our Isle.

Now what vain Poet, what poor Rhiming Elf,
Shall mend what Congreve sung upon himself;
Sung in sweet Notes, o'er dying Swans, admir'd,
Which he, like them, just ended, and expir'd?
When they can drop such Tears upon the Dead
As Amaryllis for Amintas shed,
Or with Alexis' mourning Muse can vye,
Then, not till then, let vainest Voices try,
To tune in Verse, a Congreve's Elegy&mdash;

No, let us rather decent Feasts prepare,
And Off'rings on his annual Day, now near,
Sing round his Shrine his Songs, and mend the British Ear:
Nor mend their Ear alone, but, thro' that part,
Sound, in good Sense, each Soul, and honest make each Heart.

Might, 'mong these sweet Memorials so prepar'd
By Nymphs and Heroes, my mean Voice be heard;
While Nymphs to sing his fair Cecilia chuse,
Heroes the Birth immortal of his Muse;
To whom were my Memorial justly due,
But you alone, O Cobham, only you?

Thee early, and thee last his tuneful Breath,
Addrest with grateful Notes &mdash; till stopt by Death.

Your Art of Pleasing, in his earlier days
He writ and gain'd, as you gain'd, all Men's Praise:
That hardest Art he paints with greatest ease,
In Lines so proper, that they'll ever please.

By Friendship more, tho' vastly much by Wit,
That Art of pleasing, oft I've thought was writ;
From Him it's Master, to it's Master You,
By Sympathy the charming Poem grew.

Your Ways were One; Wits of congenial Parts!
That sure had Consanguinity of Hearts;
Both, of Delighting all Mankind, could boast,
But, knowing best that Art, each other most.

'Twas fit it should be so &mdash; what other Two
Could be by Nature match'd more near than you?
A Bard that Sieges, Battles, Conquests writes,
And a young Hero fam'd at fifty Fights,
That of his Marlbro's Toils had Sharer been,
And War's whole Art as much as Julius seen.

Thus Horace lov'd Augustus, thus was lov'd,
Wit rais'd War's Glory, Glory Wit improv'd.
In all Heroic Times 'tis Wit's Reward,
That War's chief Champions love the noblest Bard.
That this was, and will nay must be so,
Witness the Bard your Friend, and your Friend Marlborough.

Fir'd by that Name, my Muse is borne away,
From low familiar Numbers longs to stray,
And break thro' her Epistolary Way:
Would raise her Voice sublime with Epic Force,
Beyond her usual Rhimes, that border on Discourse.
For he, whose Fame would, sure, for all suffice,
If branch'd into a hundred Families,
From a fair Ancestor of mine, my Name,
Third in Descent, He, He, this Hero came.
This must inflame the Man, tho' not the Muse,
And, his Will raising, must h is Pow'r excuse.

Then, tho' I cannot sing in such a Strain,
Hear COBHAM, hear me talk of a Campaign.
Such Wonders, weakly told, themselves commend,
The Theme shall please so much, my Numbers shan't offend.
Congreve at length I'll call to give me Aid,
He shall my Injuries to Fame see paid,
And my Defects beneath his Laurels shade.

Say, when your Mind researching, Cobham, say,
You Sences of past triumphant Joys survey,
When Britain's Battle drawn in dread Array
Each Troop, a Troop of Champions, did advance,
Fearless to drive the Front of fearing France;
Say at the Hautboy's Spirit-stirring Sound,
How paw'd your prancing Steeds the trembling Ground,
When "march," your Drums beat, "march," your Trumpets blew,
When gay with Sun-beams your gold Banners flew,
Knowing their Victor-Riders with delight
March'd they not proudly forward?  fond of Fight?
Strange Strength of Music, that not only can
Like leading Heroes lift each common Man;
But it's prevailing Magic's pow'rful Force
Can, as with martial Souls, inform the Horse!
'Gainst seeming Fate they blow their flaming Breath,
See they dance forwards tow'rds the Face of Death!
Well may (more sure) their Riders, dauntless, go,
True Fate, sure Death to turn upon the Foe.
Their Marlbro' knows their Strength; and at the Nod
Of him, as of some guiding Guardian God,
They force the faint French Horse &mdash; that yielding Croud
By Squadrons fall, and fill the swelling Floud.

Be without end his Praise, who thus could end
Wars with a Word, where num'rous States depend.
A Congreve's Verse alone such Prowess pays,
And such a Deed alone deserves his Praise;
Show Muse with Time could boast coeval Birth,
And Works shall last till Time shall end, and Earth.
If more the Claim, than Peleus' Son of yore
From Homer claim'd, His Muse can pay him more.
Cobham, ev'n I, a Bard of mean degree,
Who wrote low Lines, more Prose than Poetry,
Bold Truths at least can tell, to which You must agree.
Pelides, here, must own himself o'ercome,
And Greek Antiquity excell'd be dumb.
Pelides was, by Neptune's Waves, set free,
When praying Venus made him raise the Sea
For his Defence; but Marlbro', as if Jove
Sent him full Pow'rs below, like his above;
Bids Danube's all-obedient Billows rise,
And sweep whole Armies to the nether Skies.
Fate, on his Helm that perch'd, flew at his Word,
And little Labour left the Soldier's Sword.
Thus greater Ammon (not the lesser) cou'd
Lay Lightnings by, and bid his brother God
Of Waters, whelm whate'er his Will withstood.
Caesar, (had Caesar from Elysium's Plain,
That Chief of Heroes, rais'd on Earth again,
For Wonder's sake, at Blenheim's Battle been)
Each Briton seeing had a Hero seen.
Seen at their Head, his Rival-Friend sedate
Bear Fortune cool; full-conscious that his Fate
Would still attend him with assur'd Success,
Till future Feats might make the first seem less:
Till some bright Day should shine, to which must yield
Caesar's grand Fight in fam'd Pharsalia's Field.
For then, to rival Rome our Chief resolv'd,
Had in his mighty Mind the Means resolv'd;
Had there, as present, Deeds to come survey'd,
Had that long Plan of rising Triumphs laid,
In which You, Cobham, bore so brave a part,
Oft near his Person, nearer still his Heart;
And, which when wond'ring Worlds stood struck to see,
All own'd Him equal to these other Three.

But this Brave Man!  how mild, how calm he rode!
If he's no more than Man, he's nearest like a God.
Cool in warm Fights!  after Fights gain'd, serene!
As no such Battle had, or Conquest been;
But think you, Cobham, all was so within?

If high move Spirits 'mong War's meanest kind,
What Raptures in a Conqu'ring Gen'ral's Mind,
Say, You've oft try'd, oft felt them, must we find?
Then, on that dread, that all-decisive Day,
When, full at stake, the Fate of Europe lay,
What Ardors thro' your British Breast did roll?
How stirr'd each busy Corner of your Soul?
But, when you'ad play'd the Patriot-Hero's part,
What March beat Conquest then within your Heart?
How mov'd your Eyes? &mdash; O tell us if you can,
Or was in God-like Raptures lost the Man?
Give us, by such near Sympathies, to know
How bright War's Genius blaz'd in Marlborough?
That Part to Britain's Poet, to your Friend,
To Congreve's Pen to paint, we must commend;
Whose Muse did long with good Impatience burn,
To hail our Hero, at that wish'd Return,
When all his Victories should shine compleat,
And friendly force to Peace the Foes he beat.
'Tis come, the great Important Day is come,
See Churchill brings his Ten Years Trophies home.
That Space of Time such crouded Acts employ,
They will be less believ'd than those of Troy.
More Battles he, more Provinces has won,
Fill'd with more Cities, Each, his Toils to crown,
Than the Greek Chiefs spent Years to take the Trojan Town.
See the gilt Barge that brings him does appear,
Big'ning to sight comes near, and still more near,
With full-stretch'd saily Wings it seems to fly
O'er friendly Tides, and thro' a friendly Sky.
Methinks with Gratitude the willing Land,
Which to this Hero owes the World's command,
Seems one vast Promontory, jutting forth
To meet the Barque that brings such treasur'd Worth.
Numbers, so past all counting, croud the Shore,
Nought but the Sands, they cover'd, could be more,
And with their Shouts of Joy made the Sea seem to roar.
So loud, so loud, just while he lands, these Joys!
That they want Breath, to end their welcome Voice.
Thence as he pass'd, Throngs marking Roads he meets,
More than might Armies make, line long Augusta's Streets:
They his brave Soldiers Europe's Savers call,
But Him the Life, and Him the Soul of all;
Him, this victorious Army's Gen'ral Soul,
That Heav'n infus'd, and that inform'd the whole;
The num'rous Body's Universal Mind,
Which gave it Spirits to preserve Mankind:
The Council, Court, the grave grey Guides of State,
Young Lords, bright glitt'ring Belles, his Triumphs wait;
These Pomps he pass'd &mdash; War's Genius had prepar'd,
At his own Palace, Fame's last best Reward.

He that would know his Joys, must see him home,
Happily plac'd within his private Room;
Where, free from Eyes profane, and publick Noise,
He may, like Majesty, indulge his Joys.
Here he may shew his Soul thro' ev'ry Sense,
And let Fame's  noble Passions please the Prince:
Here o'er his Motions he can have no Spy,
But or a Hero's or a Poet's Eye:
They, by strange Sympathy, see ev'ry Part
Of his touch'd Soul, and his transported Heart.&mdash;
For look; War's Genius crown'd before him stands,
Fame's Rolls and Wreath's of Laurel fill his Hands:
There left the Laurel, there the Poem lies,
"By these you'll follow me," then seeks the Skies;
"Would it were now," the raptur'd Warrior cries.
What diff'rent Genii diff'rent Heroes wait,
How far a Marlbro's from a Brutus' Fate!
Who the Spright seeing in his Tent, alone,
Cry'd Brave, "I'll meet thee," but disguis'd a Groan.
Yet all may guess, who that sad Story know,
The Briton's Pleasure by the Roman's Woe.
What various conscious Spirits move their Blood,
Who act for real, or mistaken Good!
Wide open now our ODE from Congreve lies,
Which fond he gaz'd on, fix'd, and fed his Eyes:
There finds our Bard, to sing his Battles born,
And past tumultuous Triumphs gives to scorn,
Slights the short Breath of popular Applause,
That dies before the next new Breath it draws;
But here the Hero's Thought as well as Eye,
Dwells, dazled with bright Hopes of Immortality.

Say, Cobham, now, where's now thy Hero's Soul?
Can he his Passions for true Fame controul?
Does he not read, rise raptur'd, sit again,
Then read, till fir'd afresh by some new Strain,
He makes, with well-pleas'd Mind, each past Campaign?
So, when his Harp divine Timotheus strung,
And play'd, by Dryden's Mouth, what Phoebus sung,
Warm'd into Flights of War young Ammon flew,
And fought, in Thought, his Battles o'er a-new.

He read; new Life felt rising, while he read
His Deeds compar'd, with those most mighty Dead,
Whose Names, in Fame's immortal List, enroll'd,
Their Glories date from Years, by thousands told.
And found in Congreve's like Prophetic Song,
His soar'd as high, and sure to last as long.
But when to those warm well-judg'd Lines he came,
That Churchill's justly fix'd o'er Caesar's Fame;
Able no longer to contain, he said,
"I own my Toils and Hazards all repaid.
How short the Verse, and so great Truths displays!
They, like collected Beams thro' Crystals blaze!
He, with the Lustre, gives the Fire of Praise!
Matchless as Pindar's is my Congreve's Rage,
That can contract an Iliad to a Page;
Yet so judicious, while he sings with Flame,
That where he heightens most, he most secures my Fame,
Caesar's Pharsalia (true!)  made Salves, but I
Fought at Ramillia's Plain for precious Liberty.
Perish that mean-born Pride, that Bastard State,
Which aims to grow, by Men's Misfortune's, Great.
Sooner might I bear, &mdash; myself made Slave,
Than subdue Realms, to ruin, not to save.
More Curses on such Chiefs than Blessings wait,
Those that their Triumphs love, the Traytors hate.
The Laurels Congreve brings me, I approve,
Sprung from, and nourish'd by my Country's Love.
My End, Man's Freedom gain'd; to crown the Scene
The Muse applauds me, and the World's best Queen.
I'll go Content &mdash; and who would seek for more,
Let him high Heaven with vain-lost Prayers implore,
To have what Hero never had before.
If, to new Worlds removing from this old,
We, that new Worthies act below, behold;
Perhaps, inflam'd thro' me, some Patriot may,
COBHAM or BLANDFORD, gain some future Day,
Great as Ramillia's and as Blenheim's were,
And with like Triumphs Britain's Glory rear;
Give, give yet Heavens, if such a Day should be,
Give your old Soldier's Spirit Pow'r to see:
Should I see this, though honour'd with the Skies,
Sure it would add, in part, to Paradise.
Conscience of doing well, if lost, were hard;
That alone Virtue makes its own Reward:
That remains with us, nor with Bodies dies,
Blessing and blest, it seeks, with Souls, the Skies.
Since thus 'tis noble to desire true Fame,
Odours celestial scenting Virtue's Name;
Since Pindar's Spirit my blest Bard endues,
Join'd with the Mantuan and Maeonian Muse;
On Homer's Wings still may Pelides fly,
On Maro's Julius &mdash; on my Congreve's I.
These Lines are mine," said he, "and these I'll keep,
Brave Thoughts they'll wake by Day, they'll lull me when I sleep."

Here ceas'd the Chief; and (for Night call'd to rest)
Bore off the Praises in his panting Breast.
So by like Genius a like Hero fir'd,
Did the like Acts, and like Renown acquir'd:
Duly, each Night, as Ammon sought his Bed,
His Sword and Homer lay beneath his Head;
Those ever should to him, he did declare,
Be one his Law, and one his Plan of War:
The Plans of War he form'd from Homer's Word,
And gave the Law to Nations with his Sword.

Thus, if a Modern's fam'd Records be true,
First fir'd to Fame from Homer's Models grew
The second Hero that the World e'er knew.
In Time &mdash; for Time Achilles first does name,
But Churchill, They, and Caesar, all the same,
Allow no first, all Principals, in Fame.

Here charm'd (tho' Kings and Chiefs so Glorious be)
From Kings and Chiefs turn we our Eyes to see,
What Wonders from the Works of Wit arise,
That thus warm Mortals to deserve the Skies;
Make them Immortals, fit for these Abodes,
And change Earth's Chiefs to Heav'nly Demy-Gods.
Subjects, that soar so high!  They mock my Toil
And seem but mock'd themselves in my mean Style.
Cobham, too long, I creep on Lines too low,
Else they should still of Epic Poets show
As great the Glory, as themselves bestow.
Them high, as they their Chiefs, my Pen may raise,
Oft simplest Words supply sublimest Praise:
Since urg'd by Bards, you Patriot-Heroes, Act,
Plain Truth speaks high &mdash; They're Partners in each Fact.
Of all learn'd Men, what Man so partial is,
To flatter Grandeur and deny me This?
For, Sir, learn'd Men have, now, mean vulgar ways
In our self-ended and degen'rate days:
Proud Kings they flatter, and rich Gen'rals prize,
But poorer Bards, tho' Fame's best Props, despise.
They'll Kings and Conquerors, that flourish now,
Above old Greece or Rome, with ease allow:
But now with Poets will they deal the fame,
To Ancient sacrificing Modern fame,
They'll Praise old Faults, and  new Perfections blame.
Horace of this complains in Caesar's Times,
When Latian Lines were blam'd, like British Rhimes:
Nought, then, was Good, had Wisdom, Musick, Wit,
Morals, or Learning, but what Greeks had writ.
Rome's Pedants cry'd, of Attick Reading full,
Bad Rome's best Writers were, nay Horace dull;
His brightest Beauties in each boasted Piece
Were petty Larcenies from learned Greece:
Till boldly rising up in Truth's Defence,
He banish'd Railers that bore Spite to Sense,
Carry'd the Court, got Patrons, gain'd his Prince.
Thus Learning had, with Greece, been doom'd to die,
But he points out, in Rome, its true Posterity.
Else Tully's Eloquence had fail'd to please,
Sunk down by Fools to raise Demosthenes.
Great Maro's sacred Page had pass'd for poor;
That made (thought Dunces!)  Homer's Merit more:
Livy's and Sallust's Histories had been
Bury'd in Dust, unheard of, and unseen:
Thucydides, Herodotus, must pass,
With them, the only Writers of that Class.
As for poor Horace, him they doom'd to die,
To add to Pindar's Immortality.
But Horace lash'd these Pedants of the Schools,
And, from affected Wits, he prov'd them Fools.
Now, Sir, as Romans shar'd with Greeks their Fame,
So should with Romans Britons share the same.
Homer and Virgil would not scorn to be
Of Milton's and of Spencer's Company;
Nor Tully nor Demosthenes aspire,
To be than Cowper, King, or Somers higher.
Thucydides, Herodotus, would own,
(With Livy, Sallust) well-writ Wonders shown,
As theirs, in Raleigh and in Clarendon.
Here, our vex'd Pedants, vainly to abuse
Themes, they want Honour or else Sense to chuse,
May call mine Thefts from the Horatian Muse.
I own it; nay should boast, be proud on't too,
Would it make Britons know, as Romans knew,
'Tis mean to honour Heroes for their State,
And scorn poor Poets, who their Pomp create.
I know well what, know well to whom I plead;
Know the Cause good, Judge just, and dare proceed.
Long after Homer begg'd; the Roman Plow
Felt the Sweat falling from the Laurell'd Brow;
Then Consul-Chiefs were poor, yet great as any now.
'Tis Worth, not Wealth, 'tis Service, and not State,
That makes, like Heroes, Poets truly great.

My Lord; I, here, your pow'rful Judgment claim,
Who best can Give, as most you merit Fame;
Say, if their Verse the Minds of Kings excite,
Bravely to die, or do their Nation Right;
Stand they not first of all learn'd Lists on Earth,
Best Public Blessings to their Place of Birth?
Sure proud Philosophers must, here, make way,
Here, to superior Poets yield the Day.
This Plato, Foe of Poets, knew was right,
And copy'd Homer's Beauties, Day and Night.
This Alexander's Tutor prov'd he knew;
Presenting Homer to his Prince's View,
Take, Prince, said he, and read &mdash; then Worlds subdue.
The Prince, with reading not content, would write
Works, that join'd Fame and Profit, to delight.
Hence that Right Hand, which held the Sword ev'n then
Judge o'er the World, for Homer held the Pen.
Not let weak Wits think this below a King,
Thus to Transcribe, what Bards inspir'd sing.
No cause had he to blush, or think it shame,
To write what rais'd the highest Hero's Fame,
Or share in Works where he was sure to see
Ev'n Gods, that, there would keep him Company.
There the three Graces, there the Tuneful Nine,
Pan and Minerva and Apollo join.
Thus, hon'ring Poets, HE reap'd high Renown,
Who twice sav'd Pindar's House, when twice he sack'd a Town.
Solon, for Wisdom, o'er the wisest fam'd,
That Homer be in Publick read, proclaim'd.
Horace, sure witness!  who himself alone
Stands for a hundred Witnesses in one,
Tells us we learn, what's great, wise, good, wrong, right,
From Homer better, than the best that write.
Be Judge Lycurgus &mdash; who wrote Nation's Laws&mdash;
Himself wrote Homer out &mdash; let That decide the Cause.
Law givers, see, Philosophers, and Kings,
Bend when the Father of the Poets sings.
Yet this Maeonian, and the Mantuan Flame,
And Congreve's Modern Fire all the same;
All from one Source, in diff'rent Ages came.
'Twas hard, indeed, thus coming last, to climb,
Against their advantageous Hill of Time;
Yet still we find Priority of Days
No Birth-right to Priority of Praise.
Change but each Age, when these three Poets shone,
Their Persons, to impartial Eyes, are ONE.
Congreve had Homer been, in Homer's Time;
Homer been Congreve, now, and wrote such British Rhime.
Both could, with Magic Arts of Verse, alike,
Rouze Souls to Arms, and warlike Passions strike.

Cobham, if Poesy's persuasive Parts,
Thus move (best Martial Musick!) Heroes Hearts;
'Tis hard to say, we, rather of the two,
To You owe Poets, or to Poets You.
If your brave Acts make their bright Numbers shine,
They fire you to those Acts by Verse divine.
Pleas'd with both Song and Subject, Thus we know,
Arms and the man (like Virgil's sung) we owe,
Alike to Congreve and to Marlborough.

When his brave Stilico bright Claudian sung,
Rome with the Poet's Praise and Hero's, rung:
Senate and Emperors, by Statutes wise,
Bad to their Claudian Bay-crown'd Statues rise.
Greater our Chief, sublimer was our Bard;
And shall more Merit meet with less Reward?
Shall it in Britain be the Poet's Doom,
To fall neglected for excelling Rome?
Forbid That Monarchs, Senates, Heroes, all,
Whom we can Brave, Great, Wise, and Noble call:
All, whose Deeds claim that Verse, which never dies,
Those Deeds, their Glories to immortalize;
Else, may those Poems cease, they cease to prize!

That Pen, O Chief, which a Chief's Mind uprears,
Is to a Nation worth a Grove of Spears.
That Pen's the Spring, which makes War's Movement whole,
The Captain moves his Troops; the Bard their Captain's Soul.

Think not, Thou Hero, this is strain'd too high,
In praise of Everlasting Poetry.
Fight all your Days, fresh Fame get ev'ry Day;
Not sung by such as Congreve 'twould decay.
Else, near Achilles' Tomb, why?  tell me, why?
Why was great Alexander heard to sigh?
He griev'd no Homer grac'd his glorious days,
That equal Prowess might have equal Praise:
Pity!  an Age, whence Deeds Heroic spring,
Should barren prove of Bards those Deeds to sing.
E'er Agamemnon's Reign, liv'd Kings of Men,
Great as himself was, or Achilles, then;
Whose Acts, dead since like them, their Age rever'd,
So must all Ages, had some Bard appear'd,
Divine like Congreve, to deliver down
In deathless Lines their (now deceas'd) Renown.
Short-liv'd as theirs had been Achilles' Deed,
But Homer wrote what Worlds will ever read.
Thus, see, the Muse alone has Pow'r to save
Your Glorys going to your gloomy Grave.

Nor do Bards save, alone, your Fame, but make,
Great Souls to War their Works of Art awake.
Witness a great (and greatly surnam'd) King,
Who, from Experience, vows the very thing.
"My Soul more struck," says he, "reads Caesar's Deeds,
Than mov'd by Magick Sounds are martial Steeds."

My Lord, the Truth of this Soul-moving Thought,
Practice must you, like that brave Prince, have taught.
Pray you!  read on, then let your Mind be known,
This Thought is new, or will be then, your own.

Pardon this forward Ardour in my Muse,
What for Heroic Bards she says, excuse:
In you the Poet and the Hero live,
And what the one excuses, both forgive.
Example pleads my Cause, since Horace too
Wrote to Augustus what I write to you;
Tho', true!  he did what I but wish to do.
Virgil's he rais'd, as I would Congreve's Name,
And, where he hit the Mark, I'm proud to aim,
His Skill's superior, but our Task's the same.
Else should I, growing too familiar, fear
My tedious way of Talk might tire your Ear:
My Lord, they're Congreve's Lines you're next to hear,
Them you'll read pleas'd; and tell us, in your Breast,
What Thoughts this Speech from your dear Friend imprest.

"Sincerest Critick of my Prose, or Rhime,
Tell how thy pleasing STOWE employs thy Time;
Say, Cobham, what amuses thy Retreat,
Or Stratagems of War, or Schemes of State?
Doest thou recall to Mind with Joy or Grief
Great Marlbro's Actions?  That immortal Chief,
Whose slightest Trophies rais'd in each Campaign,
More than suffic'd to signalize a Reign?
Or doest thou grieve indignant now to see
The fruitless End of all thy Victory;
To see th' audacious Foe, so late subdu'd,
Dispute so long those Terms for which they su'd?
As if Britannia now were sunk so low,
To be that Peace she wonted to bestow.
Be far that Guilt, be never known that Shame,
That England should retract her rightful Claim,
Or ceasing to be dreaded and ador'd,
Stain with her Pen the Lustre of her Sword?"

These were thy Friend's warm Words to thee, at Death,
His Will, in Poetry's last parting Breath;
Best Legacy, that could be well bequeath'd by Wit,
Or could his Friend's Heroic Soul befit!
And don't these Lines?  They do, they strike you so,
As those I late describ'd did mighty Marlborough:
They rouze your Soul to Arms, all warm for War,
Which much you feel within, too modest to declare.

May I, my Lord, in my most humble Phrase,
Name some few Thoughts such Lines as these must raise?
One hidden Wish may my poor Hints suggest,
And shew the Patriot burning in your Breast?
This, like your Answer, I presume, would be,
Which solves his Question, tho' low-penn'd for thee.

O Congreve!  Marlbro' plac'd before these Eyes,
How can thy Soldier's Spirit chuse but rise?
If, farther much, this Foreign Pride pretends,
And makes us Foes, it courted to be friends;
Might I, once more, be bid in Arms to shine,
I'd share his Glories, make your Poems mine:
Still Britain should be dreaded and ador'd,
As your Pen rais'd the Lustre of my Sword.

Such should I guess your Thought, because no more
Than but to do, what you have done before.
Come to Spain's Coasts, when last you cross'd the Main,
You saw, conquer'd, &mdash; for you humbled Spain,
See, what I say of Poet's Pow'rs, how true!
And what by warming Heroes they can do!
For, lo!  Since Congreve did this Poem write,
They grow deliberate, too cool for Fight!
They've learnt brave Britons loudest Threats declare
Both of a Naval and a Landing War;
Ev'n now they think they hear our Lion roar,
Frighten their Golden Fleece, and shake their Shoar;
Then recollect our Chiefs that bore Command,
Names carrying Terror thro' their conquer'd Land:
But then, Thee nam'd! &mdash; late Thunder-claps they hear
Wishful cry Truce &mdash; and condescend to fear.
Hence, should they e'er from such wise Measure cease,
And wildly War prefer to proffer'd Peace:
I, if I liv'd to see so strange a Time,
Would strive to shine in Prose, that can't in Rhime.
From Tully (Bard like me!)  would try to draw
A Piece like his, on the Manilean Law;
Would shew that Spain should humbled be by you,
As he prov'd Pompey best would Pontus' King subdue.
So like each Theme, it my Success secures;
Change but the Name, and Pompey's Praise is yours.
Thus, free to use great Tully's Words divine,
I, just apply'd, might justly make them mine.
I'd shew such Prowess, Influence, and Success,
Our Briton's Arms, must, as his Roman's, bless.
Shew how you, Cobham, in the Art of War,
Your Skill with his Great Pompey can compare;
That, like him, formidable grown by Fame,
You carry Conquest in your very Name.

But Congreve gone, what Bard in equal Lays,
Of such fresh Battles should form proper Praise?
Yourself, best Critic of his Verse and Prose,
Who, but Yourself, would best such Works compose?
Doubly, like Caesar, Act; first gain each Fight,
Then, what you greatly Gain, as wisely Write.

Your Talent recollecting, I rejoice,
I chose, to end my Letter, Congreve's Voice.
For Phoebus whispers; "Thy Epistle's long,
Be wise, and crown it with my Laureat's Song;
So shall thy humble Ivy creep around
Their Lawrels, which triumphant Temples bound,
Cobham's and Congreve's &mdash; that's enough &mdash; now cease
Learn this hard Lesson, when to hold thy peace.
Many, whose Genius led them to excel,
Lost Fame, not leaving off, when all was well."
