ERASTO'S COMPLAINT.

Beneath a solitary silent Shade,
By pendant Boughs of mournful Willows made,
Down in a dreary Vale's tremendous Gloom,
Where live no Fruits, no fragrant Flowrets bloom;
Where no Bird warbles his melodious Lay,
No gentle Zephyrs cheer the lazy Day,
Opprest with melancholy Thoughts Erasto lay.
Condemn'd to, yet impatient of, Disdain,
He fair Eliza lov'd, but lov'd in vain.
Whilst round his Breast tumultuous Passions rove,
He lays on Fortune all the Faults of Love
Doom'd to Obscurity, admiring State,
Wealth his Ambition, Poverty his Fate.
His heaving Bosom swell'd with plaintive Sighs,
In Sighs the corresponding Wind replies.
Forth from his Eyes in gently-streaming Showers,
Adown his Cheeks the trickling Moisture pours;
The trickling Moisture, as adown It flow'd,
Increas'd the Waters of the subject Flood:
The sweetly sympathizing Streams below
In musically mournful Murmurs flow.
Thus He began his melancholy Theme,
His Head half-hanging o'er the gurgling Stream.

ODE.
Doom'd to an ignominious clean Retreat,
Debas'd by Fortune, and contemn'd by Pride,
Scorn'd by the Fair, and slighted by the Great,
No Friend t' assist Me, and no Friend to guide,
By no Muse aided, to no Patron known,
How shall I bear the Ills that flow from Poverty alone?

Oh!  how it pains the nobly tender Mind
To grieve with the Distrest, and only grieve,
Vainly to pity, where They wou'd be kind,
And wish that Comfort which They cannot give!
O Poverty!
Of all thy Mis'ries This is not the least;
Why flows Compassion strongly in my Breast,
Whilst Providence denies me Pow'r to succour the Distrest?

The spurns, the contumely, the wane, the fear,
The taunts, and insults, which pursue the Poor,
The insolence of Pride, the Miser's sneer,
What gen'rous Spirit tamely can endure?
The meagre Visage, and the Garment rent,
Furnish out Subjects for their sawcy cruel Merriment.

Money procure, and Merit must succeed,
But Want a veil o'er ev'ry Virtue throws;
S&mdash;, if poor, can't preach, nor R&mdash; plead;
Nor P&mdash; one just harmonious Line compose;
Phoebus is deaf, false Jilts the Muses prove,
And Pimps to Fortune soon forget their often plighted Love.

How wretched is the starvling Scribler's State !
His Lot a Garret, and his Fear a Jail,
His Dream Ambrosia, Hunger is his Fate,
He talks of Nectar, but He thirsts for Ale.
Of Gods, and Heroes, and the tuneful Choir
Madly He raves:  Did Water ever  any Bard inspire?

But in the Front behold his Lordship's name!
The Wit is sterling, and will surely pass,
That signs his Passport to the realms of Fame;
Thus the King's Image dignifies the Brass.
Gold the most drossy Substance can refine,
And with imparted Lustre make the dullest Metal shine.

Money has pow'r to dignify Disgrace;
This to the Cobler's blood can Splendor give,
Thro' long descent the Sources of his Race
Auflys from Brute and Arthur shall derive ;
The Flow'r de Luce and Lion shall combine,
And Heroes, Kings, or Patriarchs prove the Authors of his Line.

Born to a Title and a great Estate
That thoughtless Thing, that gilded Lump of Lead,
Whose Learning scarce extends to th' alphabet,
Shall understand what He cou'd never read,
With Meanness great, and without Courage brave;
The Men of Money in their Chests ten thousand Virtues have.

See!  Flatt'ry sticks like Birdlime to his Grace,
Obsequious Dedicators wait around,
Praises They give, but they expect a Place;
Gods are debas'd, and Heroes are dethron'd;
The ass-ear'd Midas an Apollo prove,
And make their drivling Patron take the upper hand of Jove.

Love, Honour, Merit, all Things now are sold,
Vice, if well-gilded, is no longer Vice;
The Man has ev'ry Virtue who has Gold,
Learn'd without Science, without Wisdom wise;
A Wit without one grain of common Sense,
An able Statesman by the Aid of frontless Impudence.

Behold the great and honorable Knave,
Who to his Villany his Grandeur owes,
Enjoy his Treason, and the Laws out-brave,
Guarded by Wealth that from Oppression flows!
Whilst puny Rogues, unfriended, yield to Fate,
He triumphs in his Country's Spoils, and safely robs in State.

See!  unrelenting the stiff Judge appears,
Severely rig'rous He condemns the Poor,
By no Pray'rs mov'd, and conquer'd by no Tears.
Themis, descending in a silver Show'r,
Alone can melt That stubborn Breast; behold
His Heart yields to the soft persuasive Rhetorick of Gold!

The Court-Divine, who ne'er molests his Head
With Learning, but Preferment makes his care,
Better in Machiavel than Scripture read,
Above the irksome Drudgery of Pray'r,
Lies sunk in Down, in Ignorance, and Ease,
Is by the Great caress'd, and loaded with Pluralities.

But the poor Curate in his tatter'd Gown,
The Page's Jest, the Sport of ev'ry Fool,
Each Sunday hackney'd out for half a Crown,
Is indigent, and therefore must be dull.
Shall Beggars their Superiors dare to teach?
With what effect can He, who's starving all the Week, Sundays preach?

&mdash;O worst of Evils, O too hard to bear!
Th' unhappy Poor the Female world despise,
For Fortune is the Goddess of the Fair;
Virtue in Rags is Virtue in Disguise.
A Want of Money is a Want of Sense,
Wit join'd with Poverty's Presumption, Love is Insolence.

For the gilt Chariot pants the Virgin 's Breast,
The Lover's Merits with his Bags increase
With little Brains, and plenteous Acres blest,
An Ape, a Beau, a homebred Squire can please.
Th' insidious God of Love each winged Dart
Must tip with Gold, to find a Passage to the Female Heart.

The God of Money is the God of Love,
Ten thousand Guineas have ten thousand Charms,
If rich a Fury shall a Venus prove,
And Damon take Duessa to his arms:
But unless Fortune points the Virgin's Eye,
Her Beauty is deform'd, her Glances ineffectual fly

He, doubtless, has no God who has no Gold,
He both his Sov'reign and his Saviour mocks,
No Sect will own him, and no Laws can hold;
Were e'er the weaker Side the orthodox
But the rich Man can never be profane,
For Gain is Godliness, and Gold the Deity of Man.

What is the Magick of almighty Gold!
This to its Vot'ries can this World secure,
This Conscience buys, for this ev'n Heav'n sold,
But there is no Salvation for the Poor.
The only mortal Sin is Poverty,
St. Peter none admits without a Fee,
The Wretch who has no Pence is damn'd of mere Necessity.

ERASTO'S RECANTATION.
Here ceas'd the Youth, and starting from the Plain
With sighs and wishes to be greatly Vain,
(His secret Vows to ruling Fortune paid)
With hasty steps forsook the lonesome Shade.
The Youth in ev'ry Shape coy Fortune woo'd,
Sought in the City, and at Court pursu'd.
Fortune was kind; behold his Wish compleat!
She made him rich, and Riches made him great.
See!  at his Levee cringing Slaves attend,
And Courtiers at his Nod obsequious bend.
Now with the Fair He uses ev'ry Art,
To move the Passions, and to melt the Heart;
The yielding Fair became with Fortune kind,
For Wealth and Grandeur rule the Female Mind.
Now with young Lords He fashionably gay
Shines in the Park, or glitters at the Play.
New on th' Exchange converses with the Cit,
Where Cheating's Sense, and Stock-jobbing is Wit.

Soon weary of the solemn Farce of State,
Th' illustrious Cares and Follies of the Great;
Sick of th' Anxiety that Riches give,
And the gay Slav'ry wherein Courtiers live;
Amusing Toys, where He cou'd nothing find
To fill the Void of the capacious Mind;
By sage Experience wise He sought again
The happy quiet Life, and humble Plain,
Since Riches a Vexation prov'd, and Grandeur was but vain.

PALINODA.
Welcome (He thus began) Ye lonely Seats,
Welcome my homely Fare, and humble Cell,
Welcome once more, ye lovely safe Retreats,
Where downy Peace, and sweet Contentment dwell.
Thee, poverty, from whence my Blessings spring,
Faithful Companion to the Muse, the grateful Muse shall sing.

Friendly Inventress of each useful Art,
Parent of Science hail!  thy friendly Aid
Does Vigour to the Student's breast impart,
And fill with Schemes the wise Projector's head;
The Poet's bosom with celestial Fire
You more than Helicon, and all the tuneful Nine inspire.

Prompted by Thee the Sailor tempts the Sea;
The Ploughman cultivates the fruitful Soil,
Plenty itself derives its Source from Thee;
By Thee the Souldier bears his martial Toil,
You Courage to the meanest Soul infuse;
The Man can Nothing have to fear who Nothing has to lose.

See!  by heroick Poverty inspir'd
O'er the sunk Nations Rome triumphant rise,
Panting for Virtue, and to Glory fir'd,
Whilst Conquest follows where her Eagle flies!
Her rough, but brave, Dictators from the Plough
Beneath the Yoke their Oxen bore make stubborn Monarchs bow.

Rome then was virtuous, for Rome then was poor,
She to her Meanness all her Greatness ow'd;
But her Magnificence is soon no more;
&mdash;Her Ruin only from her Grandeur flow'd.
The mighty Mistress of the World Behold
Sunk, fallen, lost, subdu'd by Pride and Luxury, and Gold.

Thou Nurse of Virtue, and Thou Source of Peace,
Wisdom and Temperance with Thee reside,
To heav'nly Musing, and to studious Ease
The calm Philosopher You sweetly guide,
While gentle Slumber seals the poor Man's Eyes,
He from the restless Monarch, and suspicious Miser flies.

Care climbs the highest Pinacles of State,
Does in the Coffers of the Miserly,
And on the Monarch in the Palace wait;
From Care in vain the Horseman strives to fly,
Swift as the Beast of Prey, or raging Wind,
Grim Care upon the Crupper mounts, and gallops close behind.

How wretched is the honorable Knave,
Who to his Villany his Grandeur owes!
In vain his Wealth and Pow'r the Laws outbrave,
True Happiness from Virtue only flows.
Legions within the Villain's bosom dwell,
The wicked is already damn'd, his Conscience is his Hell.

But to the pious and contented Mind
The filthiest Dungeon shall a Palace be,
The Virtuous ev'ry where their Heav'n may find,
Blest on a Dunghil, in a Prison free.
How often Miseries a Mercy prove,
And Rags below exalt Us to eternal Thrones above!

Far from Ourselves We vainly seek Repose
Where the rich ladies radiant Mines unfold,
Where shines Potosi, or Pactolus flows;
Content is wealth, end Wisdom more than Gold.
Nature and Virtue small Expence require,
All things with Nothing They possess who Nothing more desire.

Happy the Man!  who gloriously obscure,
Far from the miserable Pomp of State,
Good without Noise, and with Contentment Poor.
Rich without Treasure, without Title Great,
Remov'd from Avarice, Ambition, Strife,
Tastes the calm Silence of a peaceful inoffensive Life.

Happy the Man!  whom no false Splendor fires,
Who studies in Himself Himself to find,
Whose humble Cottage limits his Desires,
Who with his little Plot improves his Mind,
Benevolence to All, a Slave to None;
Happy the Man, who builds his Happiness on GOD alone!

Unmov'd by Cares that Wealth and Grandeur bring
He envies None the Burden of a Crown;
The Monarch of Himself is more than King,
His Cell his Palace, and his Breast his Throne.
Wisely ambitious We each hour may find
Ten thousand new and undiscover'd Empires in the. Mind.

He wisely keeps his Fortune in his Breast,
Fresh Nectar sips from ev'ry chrystal Flood,
In ev'ry cooling Shade reclines to Rest,
The Flocks his Raiment yield, the Fields his Food.
To pleasing Labours He all thy attends,
And sweetly all the peaceful Night in downy Slumber spends.

Let Philip's Son be call'd the Son of Jove,
And ruin half Mankind to purchase Fame,
Ravage the Universe, and madly prove
A Plunderer, to gain a Heroe's Name:
In vain He boasts his Conquests o'er Mankind,
Slave to the tyrant Passions in his own tumultuous Mind.

Let the learn'd Coxcomb beyond Nature soar,
On Systems raise his philosophick Throne,
And fairy Realms in lunar Lands explore,
Boasting the wide Utopia all his own:
Mistaken Fool!  resume thy Search again,
Unless Thou learn to know Thyself thy Learning is but vain.

O Let Me here a safe Retirement find,
Invite the Muses to the silent Shade,
Explore the Maze of my delusive Mind,
And call triumphant Virtue to my Aid!
O welcome sweet, tho' humble, Liberty!
He that has Courage to be Poor has Licence to be Free.

Whilst Wisdom proves my Counsellor and Guide;
Here let me Rule the littleWorld within,
Refrain my Anger, and controll my Pride,
And rally all my Forces against Sin,
My wild Affections tame, and conquer Vice:
Our Lusts, Ourselves, our Passions, are our greatest Enemies.

But if new Pleasure to the smiling Plain
Lovely Eliza gives, in Want sincere,
Blessing with kind Return her faithful Swain,
Here Happiness, and Paradise is here:
Blest in my Love, and in my Conscience free,
I will turn Epicure in Want, and swear 'tis Luxury.
