Unhappy State of All Things here below,
For Moments Joys, o'erspread with Years of Woe.
Short is the Time that Life is to endure,
For that short Time uncertain, insecure.
The gayest, best-compacted Piece of Earth,
A fair Delusion, and an ill-starr'd Birth.
Propitious Winds, with their bewitching Gales,
Blow on the Poop, and fill the Canvas Sails:
The kindly Sun engenders high Desires,
Young Hopes, brisk Joys, Ambition's raging Fires.
Nor long the gloomy Ruin lags behind;
Low'ring the Sky, tempestuous grows the Wind.
And split on Rocks, or by the Surges tost,
The pompous Vision to the Sight is lost.

But grant our Day of Life should see no Night,
But ev'ry Hour be mark'd with Streaks of White;
What can a seventy Years Duration give,
To bribe a prudent Man's Consent to live?
Not so our Father's Life, a Giant's Span,
Thro' the long Course of thousand Winters ran.
An Eastern sage to make the Thesis clear,
An Eastern sage does the same Thing aver.
Plain is my Song, but wond'rous Truth affords;
And Truth is ever blest in plainest Words.

Thro' a deep Vale an headlong Torrent roars,
Winding its Course, and eats its oozy Shores,
A thousand Eddies curl its ancient Head,
By many Tributary Fountains fed.
The Vale far-stretch'd, a dreary Waste appears,
Where Misery resides and baleful Cares,
And bounds the Tides of ever rowling Years.
On either End oppose the spreading Sight,
Impervious Clouds, and ever-during Night:
The Middle void, betwixt each Cloud displays
The Calculations of accomplish'd Days,
And long successive Dates, that yet unknown,
Shall Wing the Hours as they come hasty on.
'Till Father Saturn, with Creating cloy'd,
His own unhappy Issue has destroy'd.
High midst the Flood, and founded on the Sands,
The Bridge of Life, an antient Fabrick stands;
Now ruinous, yet do its Ruins well
The wondrous Skill of the Contriver tell.
Of old Tradition says, the Structure stood,
Rais'd on a thousand Arches in the Flood,
Long, by th' insinuating Current worn,
Beat on by Rains, and by rude Tempests torn.
Till fed by copious Streams the Deluge grew,
And Stocks and gath'ring Rubbish with it drew,
And in its rapid Course the Fabrick overthrew.
Yet Part surviv'd the Stream's destructive Ire,
An hundred Arches, seventy left entire.
Above the Bridge unequal Sky is seen,
Cloudy and clear, tempestuous and serene.
Here swift Infection strikes, here killing Airs
Freeze the young Blood, and nourish gloomy Cares.
Low in the Floor insiduous Ruin lies,
Pit-falls, and Doors conceal'd from human Eyes.
The Wretch unwary trusts the treach'rous Way,
Plum'd with big Hopes, and sporting in the Day.
Pursues the wanton Chace of vain Delight
Treads in the Gin, and plunges into Night.
Easy to Fall, but up again to climb
He strives in vain, sunk in the Flood of Time.
At either End the Traps are thickest strow'd,
Above them sleeps supine a gloomy Cloud.
Crowds of all Ages thro' the Passage throng,
The full-grown Man, the Feeble, Old, and Young.
Each keeps his Path, led on by different Views,
Forms Shadows to himself, and form'd pursues,
One to prolong the Way, and sooth his Care,
Gapes at a Flight of Bubbles in the Air:
But in the midst, and fix'd upon the Sport,
A Trap-door falls, and cuts his Travels short.
In this (a common Error) all agree
Their Journey's final end to dread and flee.
The hoary Dotard, whom his icy Veins
Pinch'd with new Aches, and continu'd Pains,
Yet under Darkness, Penury, and Chains
Puts forth his Feet, not strong enough to go,
Beyond all Sense of Joy, yet hugs his Woe;
And shuns the Door that would at once convey
To lasting Bliss, and never-ending Day.

Mix'd in the Crowd mishapen Monsters rove,
Here open Hate, there well-dissembled Love,
Arm'd against Life, commission'd to Destroy,
Horrid to Sight, and all their Arts employ.
Here catching Plague, there meager Famine stares,
And bloody War with all its Train appears,
Of Fury, fell Design and winged Fears:
From these no State nor Sex Exemption have,
All fall alike, the Coward and the Brave,
Nor Wealth, nor Power, nor Piety can save.
Flocks of ill-omen'd Fowls their Fancies fright,
Crows, Harpies, Vultures, and the Bird of Night,
And numerous other Forms their Passions hide,
Revenge, Ambition, Avarice, and Pride.
Love too, that Fiend!  an Angel once, his Darts
Employs, and sheds his Poison on their Hearts;
And bound in silken Chains, his Pris'ners drives
On horrid Rapes, on Halters, Swords and Knives.
Ev'n Infancy, that Cherub's not secure,
But suffers most, least able to endure.
Most apt for Wrongs, when most unapt for Arms,
Most harmless it, yet most expos'd to Harms.
Here smiling Innocence departed lies;
Here the young Hope of a whole City dies.
Haply had better Stars their Influence shed,
Or shone auspicious on thy Infant Head;
Thou might'st have liv'd to bless thy Parents Pray'rs,
And recompence their long paternal Cares.
Vain now their Pray'rs, in vain with weeping Eyes
They bid thee live, stern Destiny denies.
