How wretched is the State of foolish Man!
We seek in Trifles Happiness to find,
Vain are out Hopes, our Thoughts are idly vain,
We grasp a Shadow, and we chase the Wind.
O Vanity, thy Name is Man:  How Few
Know wherein Happiness consists, or knowing it pursue?

With our Possessions our Desires encrease,
Anxious for future Joys, and fond of past,
With Discontent the Present we possess,
Yet ev'n the Present but a Moment last.
All human Joy, all sublunary Bliss,
Is but one Scene of varied Miseries;
O when will Man be happy!  when will blinded Man be wise!

Distant our Prospects beautiful appear,
Beheld thro' Fancy's magnifying Glass,
But th' unsubstantial Phantoms, brought too near,
Like airy Ghosts elude our fond Embrace:
The Prospect's vanish'd, and the Pleasure's past,
And all th' enchanting Scene becomes one lamentable Waste.

The vent'rous Merchant visits foreign Shores,
He courts the Traytor-winds, he plows the Seas;
And brings from ev'ry Realm It's choicest Stores;
Among his choicest Stores he finds not Peace:
Can Happiness a sure Foundation have
Upon th' uncertain Trepidation of a faithless Wave?

The poreing Pedant racks his muddy Brain,
In musty Folio's Happiness to find;
Philosopher!  thy learned To[me?] is vain,
For Happiness dwells only in the Mind.
Thy Wisdom's Madness, Glory is thy Aim;
Vain Science!  Thou a Phantom art, and Folly is thy Name.

The youthful Lover to his Mistress flies,
Doats fondly on a little White and Red,
Confines his Happiness to Chloe's Eyes,
His Heav'n expecting from the lovely Maid,
But Love oft proves another Name for Lust,
Chloe's a perjur'd Jilt, and female Beauty is but Dust.

Blindly obsequious to Ambition's Call
The Courtier climbs the Pinnacles of State,
The more He climbs, the higher is his Fall;
At best He must be Wretched to be Great.
Let Princes and unhappy Monarchs own
The Train of splendid Miseries that hover round a Throne.

Licentious Heirs, and flutt'ring Men of Mode,
Who elegantly run all Vices o'er,
Scorning to go to Hell the common road;
Think Claret Bliss, and Happiness a Whore,
But Misery and Vice are near a-kin,
And Happiness can be no Pimp, no Prostitute to Sin.

With ever-devious Steps the Wretches tread
The Paths of Pleasure, &mdash; not the Paths of Peace;
To fleeting Pleasures lasting Woes succeed,
They court a Goddess, but a Cloud embrace;
Worn out and hackney'd in the Ways of Vice,
They fall to Luxury and Lust an early Sacrifice.

With his Dominions to extend his Name,
Th' heroick Butcher offers in an Hour
Ten thousand Victims to his Idol-Fame;
One World subdu'd the Madman weeps for more.
He sets no Bounds to his aspiring Mind,
Too closely in the narrow Limits of this Globe confin'd.

But lo!  the Conq'ror must resign his Breath,
He, who had trembling Crowds at his Commend,
Must yield a Captive to the Tyrant Death,
All his Realms dwindled to his Length of Land.
Death sets the Monarch equal with the Slave;
He who rul'd Kingdoms with a Nod, can hardly claim a Grave.

For real Goods false Shadows we pursue,
Pleasure is purchas'd by, or ends in Pain;
All we enjoy, or wish, or think, or do,
Down from the Cradle to the Grave is vain.
Cares following Cares proclaim from Day to Day,
There is no Happiness within this Tenement of Clay.

O what a busy Trifler then is Man?
What the learn'd Lumber of the Pedant's Brain,
Th' ambitious Hero's Life, the labour'd Span,
The regal Purple, and the splendid Tram:
The Virgin's Beauty, and the Lover's Sigh
All, all Delusion is, Vexation all and Vanity.

Life is an idle Tale, a Burden Pow'r,
A Sigh but Wind, and Love a senseless Name,
Gold is but Dust, and Beauty but a Flow'r,
Learning a Shadow, and a Bubble Fame,
An Insect Man, the Creature of a Day,
A Worm, a Dream, a little little Heap of breathing Clay.

The Dust is scatter'd and the Wind is gone,
The Burden wearies, and the Shadow flies,
The Dream is vanish'd, and the Tale is done,
The Bubble bursts, the shortliv'd Insect dies,
The Flowret blooms, but in its Bloom decays,
Soon fade the Lillies and the Roses on the Virgin's Face.

Then to vain Greatness idly stoop no more,
No more on vulgar Breath suspend thy Bliss,
No more insensate Idol-Gold adore,
No more admire a faithless Female's Eyes;
Expect not Happiness from Woman-kind;
Can the fierce Pantings of the restless Mind
In all created Excellence compleat Contentment find?

Down to the Bosom of thy Parent-Earth
Descend, where Saphyrs make Their secret Beds,
Where Nature gives to rip'ning Metals birth,
Its shining Veins where Silver round dispreads;
Can Silver buy Content, can shining Ore,
With all its Charms, bribe the gorg'd Appetite to wish no more.

Search the vast Treasures of the oozy Deep,
Where the finn'd Race thro' Groves of Coral stray,
In Silence calm where embryo Tempests sleep,
Add Pearls are scatter'd thro' the watry Way;
Can the vast Treasures of all Ocean fill
Th' immense insatiable Desires of thy capacious Will?

Harness the furious Winds, and swiftly born
Thro' wide-extended Aether wing thy way
On balmy Pinions of the breezy Morn
To the bright Regions of unclouded Day,
High in th' Expanse of Heav'n from Pole to Pole,
Where Worlds in regular Confusion roll;
Can Worlds on Worlds content the active ever-longing Soul?

Search out some secret Path, and silent Shore,
Where never Bird his trembling Wing display'd,
Where range no Monsters, and no Tempests roar,
Which ne'er the Sun's commanding Eye survey'd;
Yet Here expect not Happiness to find,
Thou canst not leave thy Cares,
Thou canst not leave Thy self behind.

Are then our Wishes, and our Searches vain?
And is the Blessing no where to be found?
Art thou an idle Creature of the Brain,
And only, Eccho-like, an empty Sound,
O Happiness, ideal Fugitive?
If not, say, in what undiscover'd Region dost Thou live?

Above this little dirty Globe of Clay,
Above the Moon, and Star-bespangled Sky,
Above the Sun, Source of material Day,
Above created Beauty raise thy Eye,
To Him who form'd this Globe with Art divine,
Who taught the Sun and Moon, and ev'ry twinkling Star to shine.

Felicity is found in Him alone,
Who is supremely good, supremely fair,
Who only truly is, and is but One,
In whom We live, and move, and think, and are;
Here Happiness immortal does reside
With full Contentment, perfect Love, and Wisdom by her side.

Here without Night is everlasting Day,
Here is a Treasure which no Thieves invade,
Here is a Love which never shall decay,
Here is a Beauty which shall never fade;
The perfect Charms of the all-glorious King
Flourish with never-ceasing Bloom, and an eternal Spring.

No Disappointment taints our spotless Love,
No Frailty satiates, and no Cares molest,
No Doubts to Jealousy our Passions move;
A little Heav'n appears in ev'ry Breast;
Sorrow, and Shame, and Anguish are no more,
Grim Death has lost his Sting, and Sin and Misery their Pow'r.

Here is no Fear, for Fear is sunk in Peace,
No Hope, for Hope is swallow'd up in Joy,
No Faith, for Faith in Certainty shall cease,
No Weariness, for God can never cloy;
Ambition none, but to tee wise and good;
Fix here, my Soul, for ever fix thy blest Abode;
There can no Happiness be found but in the Lord thy God.
