What Europe owes to Marlborough's Martial Flame,
His matchless Victories, and immortal Name,
First of the sacred Maids is Thine to tell:
How Albion, led by Him, the Times reviv'd,
When her third Edward, and fifth Henry liv'd,
And oh!  by what Reverse her Glory fell.

Say, Goddess, whence th' amazing Turn proceeds,
And how to so much Light such Gloom succeeds,
As hides the former Blaze, and shocks the Sight:
"What but a rooted Hate of Britain's Cause,
And Party-Schemes, destructive of her Laws,
Could work a Change, like that of Day to Night?

"And yet amidst this Dusk that wraps the Skys
In gross, thick Shades, a Gleam salutes my Eyes
Auspicious, glad Presage of coming Day:
Thus when a Cloud conceals the Sun from Sight,
Athwart he darts a feeble Point of Light,
And gives th' Expectance of a brighter Ray."

Here paus'd the Muse, unwilling to retrace
A Scene, where Albion, stunn'd with her Disgrace,
Foregoes her Conquests, and forgets her Fame:
To wave the Task awhile, she wings her Flight
Where thousand Charms attract the ravish'd Sight,
And form a Palace worthy of its Name.

Triumphant ANNA bad the Structure rise
For Him, who rais'd her Glory to the Skies,
Was it a Gift, or Debt to Valour due?
Where modern Hands so well our Eyes beguile,
We fancy 'tis throughout some Roman Pile,
Or that the British Jones the Model drew.

Hail Blenheim!  once fair Rosamond's Retreat
From Courts, where Beauty walks with slippery Feet,
Too oft th' unhappy Cause of mortal Strife:
And ah!  what Mischiefs tell-tale Annals trace
From thence, when panting with a King's Embrace,
The Mistress sunk a Victim to the Wife!

Where the fam'd Bower to Sight impervious grew,
Delightful Gardens rise, and court the View,
Such as with Bridgeman's proudest Plans may vye:
Where Nature blended with such Art is found,
The Muse transported thinks 'tis Fairy Ground,
Or that another Stow deludes her Eye.

Thy Park how spacious, where the Fallow Race
As if in hallow'd Bounds securely graze,
Nor dread the Huntsman's Cry, or Buckhound's Smell!
How sweetly mix thy Lawns, Woods, Waters, Glades,
Thy rural Prospects, and thy vernal Shades,
Where Quires of warbling Philomela's dwell.

Tho' such the outward View, what Art can trace
Th' unnumber'd Charms that fill the inward Space,
Where Painting seems to breath, and Sculpture move!
Where Forms scarce mute from Looms the Eye deceive,
Such as Minerva deign'd her self to weave,
When bold Arachne with the Goddess strove.

Nor means the Muse each Emblem to unfold,
The Task would endless prove, should all be told,
A Heap so vast what Volumes would contain?
Unbounded, like the humorous Bee, she roves,
That skims thro' flow'ry Meads, and scented Groves,
And culls, as Fancy leads, nor culls in vain.

Beside, to trace the whole more Flegm requires
Than suits the Warmth of quick Pierian Fires,
Whose Heat relaxes in a labour'd Strain:
What they omit, strict History may supply,
Or Blenheim's Pillar, tow'ring to the Sky,
In Prose, not unally'd to Verse, explain.

If Thou, the Mother of the Hero's Race,
On whose fresh Autumn with Delight we gaze,
Indulge her Flight, aloft the Muse shall soar:
And should the eldest of the Warrior's Line,
In whom the Virtues and the Graces join,
Accept her Zeal, what asks the Goddess more?

Then stately Montague shall deign to hear,
And each fair Daughter lend a willing Ear,
With good Newcastle, ample Theme for Praise:
Parental Love shall charming Bedford bring
The Voice to favour that attempts to sing
Of Marlborough's Triumphs in alternate Lays.

Each Spencer then shall grace the Muse's Flame,
The fourfold Offspring of a matchless Dame,
Whose Form was beauteous, as her Soul refin'd:
Britannia wept her Loss, and still would moan,
Did not her Sons in sweet Diana own
A Frame as lovely with as bright a Mind.

And lo!  Maria's self, in whom we trace
Her Father's Mildness, with her Mother's Grace,
Hastes to the shining Board her Seat to claim:
Hail, Heaven's late Gift!  if ought the Muse presage,
Thy growing Charms shall warm the coming Age,
And every Virtue guard thy envied Fame.

Now many a Clime, and many a Danger past,
The long expected Heir appears at last
To close the Scene, but ah, how short awhile!
By Nature curious, and with Talents fraught,
He travels longer than at first he thought,
To deck with foreign Lights his native Isle.

The Gauls he visits, gay amidst their Chains,
Nor shuns the rougher Swiss, where Freedom reigns,
Or Latium's subtler Sons, in Wiles profound:
Impartial he their Strength and Weakness tells,
On wide Germania's jarring Councils dwells,
And Belgia's little State with Union crown'd.

Here Cupid stops his Course, and with a Dart
So pointed Wounds his long-resisting Heart,
That Hymen lights him to his Nuptial Bed:
Where Love, by Merit rais'd, the Contract seals,
Joys ever new the constant Couple feels,
If there be Bliss on Earth, 'tis so to wed.

Britain, that miss'd thee long, well hop'd to see
Thy matchless Sires, great Youth, reviv'd in thee,
Godolphin's Wisdom join'd to Churchill's Flame:
Sprung from such Loins could'st thou have fail'd to prove,
Like them, the darling Object of her Love,
And share with them in their immortal Fame?

But ah, how soon thou dost our Hopes deceive!
Like some untimely Birth thy Loss we grieve,
Doom'd only to be seen, and snatch'd from hence:
Where's Friendship now, and soft Compassion fled,
Th' untainted Honour of the Marriage-Bed,
The Soul of Musick, and of Arts the Fence?

Vain Fence, alas!  low lies the high-born Youth,
The Spring of Bounty, and the Shield of Truth,
The last, ah Grief!  of great Godolphin's Line:
Who now shall Merit in Distress defend,
Or Worth neglected, tho' approv'd, befriend?
A Task so rare, lamented Shade, was thine.

Now, heav'nly Guest, thou shun'st thy Friend's Embrace,
Nor deign'st, as heretofore, his Board to grace,
No more thy flowing Wit his Wonder claims:
Yet shall the Muse thou honour'd'st  when alive,
Attempt at least to make thy Fame survive,
And to her Blandford's Praise devote her Flames.

But soft, fond Maid, here cease your plaintive Stile,
And with sublimer Strains your Grief beguile,
'Tis just the Offspring to the Parent yield:
The Hero shall your sinking spirits raise,
And sudden change your Cypress into Bays,
With which so oft you crown'd him in the Field.

With Shellenberg begins th' adventurous Song,
Since War's first Fruits to Shellenberg belong,
Where Lines impervious hide th' embattel'd Foe:
But what avails the Covert, or the Mound,
The pointed Canon, or the Trench profound,
When Marlborough bids go on, and Britons strike the Blow?

Hail glorious Sequel of a bold Design,
In which deep Thought and steady Courage join,
Thou Source of mighty Victories, yet to come!
Reviv'd by thee desponding Nations raise
Their drooping Heads, and chaunt to Heav'n thy Praise,
Gaul from thy Period dates her coming Doom.

Thou, Hochflet, follow'st close, whose louder Fame
Bears to remotest Ages Churchill's Name,
Which soars at once to Heights, scarce reach'd before:
Here join'd with Gaul the tough Bavarian tries
To turn the Scale, till thrice repuls'd he flies,
Dragg'd by the former's Fate, to Belgia's distant Shore.

Henceforth, auspicious Day, on thy Return
What Pyramids shall rise, what Incense burn!
What peals from Brazen Tubes thy Glory spread!
Who saw'st the routed Gauls or Bite the Field,
Or struck with mortal Terror tamely yield,
With boasting Tallard Captive at their Head.

What Verse, immortal Addison, could trace
Like thine, th' impetuous Ardours of the Chase,
When his unnumber'd Foes the Hero press'd?
How seiz'd with wild Amaze, and panick Dread,
When to the Danube's Arm for help thy fled,
Th' inhospitable Flood o'erwhelm'd each sinking Guest!

From this decisive, providential Stroke
Europe fears no more the threaten'd Yoke,
By just Reprisals now she spurns her Foes:
Britannia's valliant Sons, inur'd to Arms,
Th' enormous Pow'r of Gaul no more alarms,
Henceforth she tumbles faster than she rose.

Behold where th' Austrian Eagle soars amain,
She who erewhile lay panting on the Plain,
Pierc'd by the Celtick Cock, now cleaves the Skies:
Tow'ring she mounts, and mends her steady Flight,
Till be Degrees she gains her native Height,
Resumes the Thunder, and to Vengeance flies.

Here view Eugenius, Savoy's Boast, whose Name
Still echos thro' the hundred Mouths of Fame,
Unquestion'd Hero, Calm, Intrepid, Wise:
Quick to contrive, in Execution bold,
He seizes Villeroy in his strongest Hold,
And scarce Cremona fails to be his Prize.

In fam'd Hungaria's Plains his Course began,
Where his first Arms bespoke the future Man,
Thro' Floods of Turkish Gore, there taught to wade:
Thrice did old Ister's conscious Banks survey
The fearless Victor trampling on his Prey,
E'er yet he crown'd his Labours at Belgrade.

Germania's Bounds secur'd, he quits the Chase
Of impious Mahomet's deluded Race,
To free th' Ausonian States by Gauls oppress'd:
O'er steep, impervious Heights unseen he springs,
Saves gasping Turin, Seat of kindred Kings,
And clears Insubria round of every hostile Guest.

Amilcar's valiant Son, of Rome the Dread,
At Cannae's fatal Rout, less Terror spread,
Tho' Rome expiring at his Mercy lay:
Sated with Slaughter, and oppress'd with Spoils,
The Cantabrigian ceas'd his Martial Toils,
And lost the Fruits of that decisive Day.

Not so Eugenius quits the Lombard Plains,
Again the tow'ring, Snow-clad Alps he gains,
Down to the Rhines last Surge pursues the Foe:
Eager to end his Work, so well begun,
Like mighty Julius, deems that nothing's done,
While ought in Europe's Cause remains to do.

Nor less, brave Amadeus, is thy Claim,
Who spread'st throughout the War thy glorious Name,
For which successive Crowns thy Temples grace:
To Kingdoms rais'd, O Victor, had'st thou known
Or how to keep, or to resign thy Throne,
Would Heart-consuming Grief anticipate thy Days?

See Marlborough there, in War of equal Name,
His Skill proportion'd to his Martial Flame,
Of Soul unmov'd in Conquest or Distress:
Thro' all the countless Toils of ten Campaigns
Nor Force, nor Fraud, his steady Course restrains,
Whom greater boasts old Rome, or older Greece?

What Hand, like his, could quell th' unbounded Pride
Of tow'ring Gaul, that Europe's self defy'd,
Or frighted Austria's tottering Throne sustain?
Not Edward's Son, or Henry so renown'd
In British Rolls, with more Success were crown'd,
On Agincourt's, or Cressy's fatal Plain.

Even William's self the Perseus chose by Fate
To rescue fair Britannia's sinking State,
Ne'er soar'd to such a Pitch, tho' high he flew:
Nassau, 'tis true, the glorious Chase begun,
But Marlborough finish'd what he left undone,
One rouz'd the Lion, which the other threw.

When Chiefs, like these, concert some bold Design,
As when at fam'd Malplaquet once they join,
Where Woods, in Ambush form'd, withhold their Prey:
Tho' thousand deaths th' impervious Fence surround,
Thro' thousand Deaths they climb th' aspiring Mound,
And like a rushing Storm they force their Way.

Here Villars stands, disdaining to retreat,
Gaul's sole remaining Chief unconquer'd yet,
In Words triumphant, e'er in Action bold:
Tho' the high Barrier and deep Trench are join'd,
And thick embattel'd Squadrons move behind,
Scar'd with his Wound the Gascon quits his Hold.

Not so the Youth of Godlike Nassau's Race,
When mortal Fears his flying Bands disgrace,
In utmost Peril leaves the dreadful Fray:
His Standard fix'd in Earth, to me, he cries,
Your once lov'd Leader on your Aid relies,
Reviving at his Voice, they turn and win the Day.

But ah, brave Prince, how short's thy Valour's Date,
How soon alas!  the World laments the Fate,
Thou rising Hero, Friseland's Joy and Boast!
Tho' snatch'd by Neptune's mad, relentless Rage,
Which Prayers nor Tears of Nations could asswage,
Thou liv'st in Story, tho' in Maesland lost.

Confounded at Events so strange, so new,
Nor able to account from whence they grew,
Thus to a trusty Dame the Monarch said:
What, are we then become the daily Sport
Of changeful Fortune, late her favourite Court,
And counting on her wonted Smiles, betray'd?

Are all our boasted Arms, and Numbers vain,
By which so oft we triumph'd on the Plain,
And mock'd a Foe our Interest was to shun?
Whom to amuse with Skill, not join in Fight,
At Distance brave, and threaten out of Sight,
Was long the measur'd Course our Armies run?

A Foe, that like a knotted, well-lopt Oak,
Receives new Life from each repeated Stroke,
The very Ax that wounds fresh Strength supplies:
Of Hydra scarce such Prodigies are told,
Not the fam'd Serpent's Teeth produc'd of old
A growth so quick, or of so vast a Size.

Their vaunted Orange at Senef gave Way,
And Conde shar'd at least the doubtful Day,
At Steenkirk, Landen too, their Hero fled:
Yet when repuls'd by our superior Fire,
With so assur'd an Air his Troops retire,
As if the Vanquish'd had in Battle  sped.

Long like a Comet's Blaze, that Threats fell Woe
To Nations, or their Chiefs that rule below,
With Glare amazing I the World affright:
Till Fortune, jealous of my dreadful Name,
In one short Hour destroys a Life of Fame,
And Blenheim's Sun supplants the Meteor's Light.

And now when strict Confession, many a Tear,
A Midnight's Mass, and Penance most severe,
And every chaunted Bead, its Succour joins:
Bold Marlborough, like some Planetary Hour
That strikes unlook'd for, with resistless Power,
And Rage impetuous, storms my boasted Lines.

His hardy Britons, by their Leader fir'd,
As if with more than mortal Force inspir'd,
The vast, impenetrable Fence surmount:
In vain Alegre's doughty self I chose
Their Wild, Romantick Fury to oppose,
Himself made Captive, swells the black Account.

Nor stops the fierce, unsated Warrior there,
But sworn at once to finish my Despair,
Swift, as the Bird of Jove, he wings his Way:
In proud Ramilia's Plain, O hated Name!
A second Hochstet crowns the Victor's Fame,
And Gaul receives her Doom on that important Day.

Rift with the ponderous Stroke, a well-link'd Chain
Of Forts, which Armies might assault in vain,
Unguarded now their useless Strength betrays:
Whole Provinces the driving Tempest share,
While Gaul itself lies open to the War,
And dreads at Home the Flame, she meant abroad to raise.

As an old Lion, worn with Age and Toil,
Of Teeth and Claws bereft in many a Broil,
Still when attack'd th' unequal Combat tries:
He foams with Rage, unus'd to be controll'd,
To find his wonted Arms forego their Hold,
And mad with Anguish, thro' the Desarts flies.

So I, tho' bent with Years, and sunk with Woes,
At Oudenard press'd Disdain to shun my Foes,
My Strength exhausted I again retire:
Here young Augustus, Albion's Hope, displays
His native Worth, and reaps unborrow'd Praise,
While my own Race, at Distance view the Fire.

What Numbers can the Fate of Lisle rehearse,
Whose Siege to tell might ask a Boileau's Verse,
Where Gaul's collected Force her Bulwark shields:
Tho' springing Mines, and Flames unceasing join
With Floods let loose, to thwart the rash Design,
Tho' Vendome's self approach, my darling Fortress yields.

A Foe so daring, and an Act so bold,
What Age to come will credit, when 'tis told
By what Herculean Toils the Fort was won:
How Temple, British Chief, whom every  Grace
Adorn'd, the Boast, the Pillar of his Race,
Oft mounting to th' Attack a thousand Dangers run.

The conscious Scheld to aftertimes shall tell
How Brussels was reliev'd, and Tournay fell,
At Winendal how shameful my Defeat:
Where gallant Web, to Gaul's eternal Stain,
When proud La Motte despis'd his little Train,
With scarce a Handfull did an Army beat.

Where's now of universal Sway thy Plan,
Deluded Monarch, once th' immortal Man,
Whom nought but Europe's Empire would content?
Caught in the fatal Snare, for others laid,
Thou by thy own Devices art betray'd,
Thy Foes exulting at the just Event.

So Agrigentum's fraudful Tyrant far'd,
He, who with Flames unseen by Art prepar'd
A Brazen Bull, in which his Foes he pent:
Till rouz'd to Vengeance at the Wrongs they bore,
Mankind uniting made the Monster roar
In the same Fires, which he for others meant.

To me each Scoffer now the Frog applies,
Who envying once the Heifer's bulky Size,
Swell'd hourly, till he burst his puny Frame:
Thus had not curs'd Ambition fir'd my Breast,
Nor Dreams of boundless Rule disturb'd my Rest,
I still might be a King in more than Name.

The Statesman now, with many a Secret fraught,
Henceforward sets his Machiavel at nought,
Where each Success on force or Fraud depends:
The Warrior too, whom stable Maxims sway'd
Before, renounces his uncertain Trade,
And crys, 'tis Chance, not Art, the Sword befriends.

The Levee-Dangler, of Camelion Race,
Who liv'd on th' airy Prospect of a Place,
To starving Patience, worst of Ills, is left:
No more to Circles with erected Mein
He hastes, e'erwhile so pressing to be seen,
But lags behind, of Hope it self bereft.

The buskin'd Troop in Opera's wont to raise
From stain'd, romantick Flights, my high flown Praise,
Or soften rugged Truths with soothing Sound:
No more the Scene with graceful Measures tread,
Inchanting Musick hangs her drooping Head,
And mimick Action shuns th' abandon'd Ground.

The cautious Stranger, who with vast Surprize
Feeds on my painted Roofs his ravish'd Eyes,
Where Jove triumphant, in my form is plac'd:
Bursts out, indignant, when the borrow'd Sire
Of Men and Gods assumes the Thunderer's Fire,
And swoln with Anger, lays whole Nations waste.

No more aloft the Pageant Hero springs,
He crys, nor tramples on the Necks of Kings,
His latter Fate, Le Brun, the Plan defames:
Unless some juster Hand, thy Jove deface,
And draw mad Phaeton in th' Olympian's Place,
Th' aspiring Fool, that set the World in Flames.

How am I fal'n indeed, like that rash Boy,
Whose burning Thirst of Rule was all his Joy,
Like him, from Glory's Summit headlong thrown!
Still more unhappy, as no Friend appears
To share my Sufferings, or beguile my Fears,
But Friends abandon whom their Stars disown.

When young, to what amazing Height I rose,
Boast of my Race, and Terror of my Foes,
By every Muse uplifted to the Sky:
Despreaux then sung, the Flaccus of his Age,
Corneille rais'd Admiration in each Page,
And soft Racine drew Tears from every Eye.

In Age how shifts the Scene!  my Court thin spread
With pale, dumb Shades, as if Carthusians bred,
The gloomy Cloister's sullen Aspect bears:
My Councils, mute with Grief, no Help afford,
My Soldiers sheath an unavailing Sword,
And every Face a moving Sorrow wears.

Had Bussy liv'd, whose bold, satyrick Flame
Dar'd to his Cost, my looser Hours proclaim,
When Love and War alternate shar'd my Throne:
He, whose repenting Muse, in Sorrow drown'd,
Firm to the last my just Resentment found,
To sooth my Anguish, would have check'd his own.

Yet thou art silent, whose Advice ne'er fail'd
To bring sweet Comfort, when ill Stars prevail'd,
Whose Arts were wont to prop and deck my Throne:
More than its Partner thou, my bosom Friend,
Able alike to charm, and to defend,
By wond'rous Gifts of Mind, excell'd by none.

Speak, if as heretofore I always found
Thou hast a Balsam still for every Wound,
Ah, quickly to my tortur'd soul give Ease:
If haply there be Cure for Ills, like mine,
What Mouth for Council is so skill'd as thine,
Which when it lists, breathes War, or dictates Peace?

Too late I see to what surprising Height
Th' intrepid Hero wings his daring Flight,
Whom Justice governs, and when Wisdom guides:
Earth's bounds alone his Progress shall controul,
Nor Toils nor Dangers shake th' undaunted Soul,
Where Thirst of Freedom and of Fame resides.

He said:  the gifted Matron thus return'd.
How I your Fortune's stranger Reverse have mourn'd,
These Streams still flowing from my Eyes, confess:
But tho' vain Grief may suit our tender Frame,
In your superior Sex it turns to Shame,
Man sinks to Woman, in so soft a Dress.

Then rouze, nor let it thro' the World be spread,
That once unmanly Tears a Monarch shed,
What Arms have lost, by Art we may retrieve:
And tho' the Lion's Claws be par'd and torn,
The Semblance of the Fox, if timely worn,
Tho' stale the Slight, may yet the Foe deceive.

Hear then, if Soul in Bliss can ought foresee,
How vast a Change th' unerring Fates decree,
To me 'tis given their inmost Folds to trace:
Your generous Confidence, and matchless Flame
For one, whose Story must debase your Fame,
Inforce the grateful Sense your Bounties raise.

From my Example learn the Turns of Fate,
Which doom'd me once an abject Cripple's Mate,
In whose facetious Muse was all our Store:
Thus low at first, to such a Height I grew,
No Comet e'er such Admiration drew,
Nor could your once swift Conquests challenge  more.

Scarce unpossess'd of Royalty I shine,
And all its Honours by your Grace are mine,
No Boons you grant but what my hand bestows:
In this exalted State Self-Love alone
Would prompt my Courage to support your Throne,
Hear then with Wonder what the Fates disclose.

The Saint, whose hallow'd Shrine and mystick Fire
Suppress the raging Flames of loose Desire,
And forms of worldly Nymphs a heavenly Train:
As in the dead of Night I wakeful lay,
Shot thro' my Curtains, like a Solar Ray,
And thus pronounc'd a more than mortal Strain.

Thus, who presid'st o'er all my sacred Rites,
In whom thy Saint confides, thy King delights,
Whom wondring Nations almost Queen behold:
Attend, nor is for nought this Vision sent,
Know 'tis a Sign the Powers above relent,
And Gaul's Deliverance by my Mouth unfold.

The Time's at Hand, when her insulting Foe
Shall cease to conquer, and his Spoils forego,
The trembling Prey within his Gripe release:
Discord and Faction shall his Laurels tear,
And fierce Britannia, Mistress of the War,
Shall to the Vanquish'd yield, and sue for Peace.

O unexampled Turn of winding Fate,
Unheard of Fortune of a falling State,
The Dream of Fools, and Fable of the Wise!
Tho' Gaul wax faint with many a bleeding Wound,
Tho' Albion's Triumphs to the Stars resound,
The Dying conquers, and the Victor flies.

One more Campaign had Gaul's last Frontier broke,
And stately Paris felt the British Yoke,
Arras, or Cambray won, the Labour ends:
At such a Crisis to disarm the Foe,
And turn upon himself the threatned Blow,
For the whole War's Mistakes makes large amends.

Now what avail his vast, united Powers,
And ten Years Triumphs, since the Prize is Ours?
Vain Conquests raise but ill the Conqueror's Fame:
Exhausted Treasures, and fell Party-Rage,
Which Time can scarce repair, or Laws asswage,
Are all the Trophies his own Annals claim.

With Temple first began this turn of State,
What Tongue can Temple's solid Worth relate,
The Camp's Example, and the Court's Delight?
Firm to his Cause, in Senate or in Field
He to his Country's  Foes disdains to yield,
And like the Sun he sets to rise more bright.

To Townsend soon the whirling Change proceeds,
Who the same Path with equal Glory treads,
Scorning for private Ends a publick Place:
In early Youth for Skill and Caution fam'd,
He to the Belgian Embassy was nam'd,
Where his own Barrier-Treaty speaks his Praise.

A Day shall come, when Worth, like his, shall blaze
Anew, and shine with more distinguish'd Rays,
Unshaken Truth again his Breast inspire:
Till worn with Toil, at his own Suit displac'd,
His Zeal unlessen'd, and his Name unrais'd,
Wisely he shall from Courts again retire.

Somers, superior Genius, next withdraws,
An abler Lawyer never pleaded Cause,
Did ever Chancellor more grace his Trust?
What Subject e'er was fitter to preside
In Councils, or the Helm of State to guide,
True to his Prince, and to the Publick just?

Whene'er he spoke what Energy was found
In every Word, what Musick in the Sound,
The Senate's Oracle, and Council's Guide?
Such his unquestion'd Worth, his Skill so rare,
To settle Crowns was trusted to his Care,
And future Monarchs on his Zeal relied.

The great Godolphin follows, whom to name
Alone implies the most exalted Fame,
Consummate Statesman, steady, faithful, wise:
While he directed, scarce a Day pass'd o'er,
But Peals of joyful Canon shook the Shore,
And Albion's Triumphs reach'd the vaulted Skies.

What Fleets, what Armies were by him sustain'd,
What Towns abroad, what Laws at Home were gain'd,
To what a wondrous Height did Anna rise?
Tho' Guardian of the publick Wealth he stood
For nine whole Years, unblemish'd, unpursu'd,
With empty Hands and upright Heart he dies.

I see the Man, who twice five Years maintain'd
His Country's Cause, and many a Battle gain'd,
To blind, domestick Rage, a Victim fall:
In height of Conquest stript of his Command,
The willing Exile quits his native Land,
Till Time and Fate the injur'd Chief recall.

Abroad Victorious, and ador'd at Home,
The Scourge of Carthage, and the Shield of Rome,
Thus Godlike Scipio fell, by Fraud oppress'd:
Accus'd like him, undaunted, and sedate,
Like him too Marlborough bears his adverse Fate,
Nor hides the least Resentment in his Breast.

Erect he stands amidst his clamorous Foes,
And scorns th' unseemly Dirt their Malice throws,
Then to their noisy Taunts he thus replies:
"Should Albion once again my Aid demand,
She ne'er shall want a faithful Patriot's Hand,
That loves his Country, but her Foes defies."

Then round th' Assembly with his wonted Mein,
A conscious Merit in each Motion seen,
He throws a parting Look with matchless Grace:
Now turning where his Friends in Grief appear,
The Hero melts to see them touch'd so near,
And gushing Tears bedew his manly Face.

What Scene was e'er so moving to the View?
Even Envy's self, that ne'er Compassion knew
Before, laments the Man whom most she dreads:
Withdrawn, he leaves his better part behind,
His deathless Fame, to no Retreat confin'd,
Supplies his Absence, and his Laurels shades.

Yet see those Britons, who in many a Fight
Had stood the Brunt of Gaul's superior Might,
Foremost in Dangers, and to Victory bred:
Soon as new Plans their darling Chief disgrace,
How do they hail the Man that fills his Place,
By open Threats, or secret Wiles misled!

No more with Hopes of wonted Battles fir'd,
Their Spirits flag, as if with Conquest tir'd,
And prove an easy Prey to Party-Broils:
Tho' startled at the War's inverted Scheme,
They move reluctant with the changing Stream,
And quit the brave Companions of their Toils.

Thus headlong Faction in a destin'd Hour
Dissolves the Bands of strong, confederate Power,
That Gaul subsists to Discord's Flame we owe:
In this one Act her single Force unties
A Knot, which else all human Strength defies,
The vanquish'd Triumphs now without a Blow.

Gaul, like the Palm, by Dint of Pressure spreads,
No more her Lilies bend to Earth their Heads,
But rise aloft, and shade the Climes around:
In Arts unconquer'd she the Secret knows
To stop the rapid Progress of her Foes,
And reach again the Skies, tho' levell'd with the Ground.

Men's Passions, mounting quick, as soon subside,
Like Seas revuls'd with each alternate Tide,
Now ebb, now flow, increase and sink by Turns:
Thus many a Lover, rais'd to sudden Flame,
Warmly at first pursues the fancy'd Dame,
Then lightly quits the Fair, for whom e'erwhile he burns.

So when two rival Kings with equal Force
Contend for Conquest at th' Iberian Course,
Hard proves the Tugg, e'er one his Claim foregoes:
But when the long-contested Prize is won,
The Victor grieves that e'er the Race was run,
And slights the Palm, for which the Strife arose.

Fairest of Isles, for Liberty renown'd,
But changeful as the Waves that gird thee round,
Whom Deeps unfathom'd from the World divide:
What Frenzy prompts thee to transfer thy Trust
From him, whose Valour laid thy Foes in Dust,
To one devoted to the vanquish'd Side?

And thou, succeeding Chief, whose ancient Flame
In Albion's Cause adorns thy noble Name,
What sudden Cloud o'ercasts thy brighter Days?
In Landen's hapless Field thy Courage shines,
The Patriot there with the young Hero joins,
And Vigo's Trophies since increase thy Praise.

Thus glorious had'st thou fix'd thy Period here,
Nor sought new Triumphs in a borrow'd Sphere,
Would'st thou in foreign Climes an Exile stray?
But when a long Disgust with Party joins,
And Change of Hands give rise to new Designs,
Ambition bids go on, and Vengeance leads the Way.

For ten successive Years a Royal Dame
On Great Eliza's Model builds her Fame,
Boast of her Sex, and Wonder of her Time:
Could she unshifting to the End pursue
The steady Measures, whence her Glory grew,
Beyond Eliza's Height would Anna climb.

While Marlborough o'er her conquering Arms presides,
And wise Godolphin all her Councils guides,
No Queen in Story was like Anna bright:
Those Sons once set, an universal Gloom
O'erspreads the Globe, as if 'twere Nature's Doom,
And all her former Day is chang'd to Night.

With loud Pretence, but with unequal Force
New Racers undertake the dangerous Course,
Who measure for a Time the bounded Space:
Till spent with Toil, and conscious of the Speed
Of rival Coursers, whose Approach they dread,
They leave the beaten Track, and lead a Wild-Goose Chase.

Say you, whose Arts could wiser Heads controul,
What Bait allures you to o'erlook the Goal,
When all to nothing for the Prize you run:
Had you but once the circling Ground survey'd,
And call'd your boasted Cunning to your Aid,
Your selves had born the Palm, which others won.

What Craft or Skill could such a Scheme contrive?
What Zeal of Party make a Project thrive,
Where private Pique sways more than publick Praise?
Say why, when Fate propitious to your Vows
A lucky Peace on your own Terms allows,
Your Coutnry's Friends you drop, her Foes to save.

Again, who knows not that the loosest Times
Of old, tho' winking at domestick Crimes,
The common Rights of Nations still maintain'd?
That those, how Great so'er, who dar'd defy
The publick Faith, that universal Tye,
Were strictly censur'd, tho' a Nero reign'd?

Yet when the Helm you guide, less Vigour's seen,
Witness the mangled Agent of your Queen,
Whom hireling Gauls on Alpin Heights surprise.
Tho' trusting to his sacred Charge he bleed,
And Laws of God and Man for Vengeance plead,
Th' Assassins 'scape, and Remembrance dies.

If such Rewards on publick Service wait,
Thrice happy they, who in a private State
Far from a thankless Court's Allurements dwell:
Where Independence reigns, and Virtue smiles,
And well-plac'd Love Life's tedious Hours beguiles,
There breathes Content, tho' in an humble Cell.

But see, their new-rais'd Structure to maintain,
How the rash Builders all their Sinews strain
Immortal William's Fabrick to o'erthrow:
Thy Genius, Albion, thwarts the mad Design,
The half-bred Workmen fear to spring the Mine,
Tho' four long Winters had prepar'd the Blow.

Tis now too late, their chymick Hopes are past,
Th' unblest Projection mocks their Toils at last,
In vain they'd cover what begins to glare:
But lucky Jarrs among themselves prevent
Its further Growth, some push, and some repent,
And all their fine-spun Schemes are built in Air.

By Feuds, like these, Gaul rears again her Head,
She who e'erwhile so low, appear'd as dead,
Revives at once with Aspect undismay'd:
Routs her unguarded Foes, at Denain caught,
Wins back by Art, what they by Valour got,
And triumphs in her Turn by Albion's Aid.

Surprizing Change!  now Spain returns apace
To her old Yoke, and crouching sues for Grace,
Not so her bravest Sons for Mercy plead:
Their terms rejected, and their Rites deny'd,
Undaunted they the last Extreams abide,
And loss of Freedom more than Tortures dread.

Blush, Albion, who not only saw'st their Woes
Unmov'd, but did'st assist their mortal Foes,
And yet not thou, but they who rul'd thy State:
Say, what Excuse could thy Conductors Frame
For leaving those, who their known Laws reclaim,
And letting brutal Force decide their Fate?

Base, and unworthy of the British Name,
Who dar'd the sacred, publick Faith disclaim,
Can rash Engagements be for Crimes a Plea?
Your injur'd Country the foul Act detests,
Such rank Injustice stains not British Breasts,
Such as past Times ne'er view'd, nor shall the future see.

Brave Catalans, seduc'd by Freedom's Charms,
In Treaties faithful, and renown'd in Arms,
How undeserv'd and dreadful is your Lot!
The noble Stand you made in Europe's Cause,
For trampled Rights, and for expiring Laws,
For which, hard Fate!  you sunk, shall never be forgot.

Now shall the blended Crowns, tho' Clouds arise
That blacken for a Time their kindred Shores,
Henceforth unite, while Blood and Interest hold:
How do the vast, contiguous Empires reach
From Britain's Channel down to Calpe's Beach,
Where great Alcides fix'd his Bounds of old.

What hinders then, but the late darling Scheme,
Tho' failing in your Days, no sick Man's Dream,
Some luckier Juncture may in Time renew?
In Gaul alone could Europe's Powers abide,
And stem for half an Age so strong a Tide,
With Spain to friend, how boundless is her View!

One Bar still lies across, for lo!  the Time
Draws nigh that shall protect a neighbouring Clime,
Sophia's son to Anna's Throne succeeds:
War threats again, but all Efforts are vain,
Pacifick George begins a Halcyon Reign,
And Europe long enjoys the rest she needs.

From Anne's Demise a noted Aera springs,
That gives to Britain a new Race of Kings,
Celestial Aid, for her Deliverance sent:
Her late despairing sons now cease to mourn,
Their Fears are vanquish'd, and their Joys return
With George, and Fortune crowns the great Event.

What Nation in Effect, or Age e'er view'd
A Prince by Nature more inclin'd to Good,
Humane, Beneficent, Wise, Steady, Mild?
Thro' his whole Reign what Instance can be shewn
Where Justice fail'd, or Mercy shun'd the Throne,
When Guilt repented, or Occasion smil'd?

Restor'd to his Command now Marlborough waves
Again the Truncheon, and his Country saves
Once more, thro' absent he directs the Fight:
The Clans subdu'd, their Leaders scow'r away,
For ever doom'd in foreign Lands to stray
With him, who hopes to gain a Crown by Flight.

Who but a Party can their Fortune grieve,
What Mortal can excuse, or Prince forgive
Whom wisest Laws, nor sacred'st Oaths could bind?
Whom fraught with Treason, impotent, and vain,
No Favour could oblige, nor Loss restrain,
E'er Preston harbour'd whom Rebellion join'd?

Forth issuing from the North the frantick Crew
In sporting Semblance the Mock-Chase pursue,
With serious Aim three Kingdoms to inslave:
But when a martial Force their Banners spread,
With gallant Wills advancing at their Head,
Seiz'd with a sudden Fright they Mercy crave.

That Fire extinguish'd, tho' new Heats arise,
Check'd in its Birth the bubling Ferment dies,
In vain the miter'd Agent fans the Flame:
Tho' Spider like the treacherous Loom he spread,
So thin's the Texture, and so fine the Thread,
That the least Touch dissolves the well-spun Frame.

Thou bold Fomenter of thy Country's Broils,
Tho' bitter be the Fruit of all thy Toils,
To die in Exile is thy gentler Fate:
How should Example or Relgion thrive,
When Priests, that should be Guides, like Jehu drive,
Resolv'd to govern, or o'erturn the State?

Now Jarrs abroad, and home-bred Quarrels cease,
And Gaul exhausted seeks a lasting Peace,
Deep rooted Hate to foederal Friendship yields:
The wise Example gains the Nations round,
Peace, and her thriving Arts maintain their Ground,
While George's steady Hand the Scepter wields.

But ah!  what Rose with Thorns uncircled grows,
Or where abides the Bliss, unmix'd with Woes?
How transient too the first, while these remain!
Amidst her short-liv'd Joys Britannia weeps,
Robb'd of her darling Sons no Bounds she keeps,
Like Hecuba she howls, distracted with her Pain.

Thou, Halifax, lead'st up this Dance of Death,
Now mute, yet how sonorous once thy Breath,
When strong Persuasion dwelt upon thy Tongue!
Oft has thy piercing Speech in Britain's Cause
Struck noisy Faction dumb, and forc'd Applause,
While listning Senates on each Accent hung.

Nor was within those Walls thy Worth confin'd,
The Gifts that flow'd from thy capacious Mind
In three successive Reigns recorded stand:
To Honours rais'd, and fraught with Learning's Stores,
Thee every Science, every Muse adores,
Fed or encourag'd by thy bounteous Hand.

Not all the Blessings, of which Courtiers dream,
The Highest Stations, and a King's Esteem,
Could save thee, Stanhope, from an early Fate:
Tho' strictest Honour, Learning, Friendship, Fame
In War and Peace, conspire to raise thy Name,
Such Aids avail not to prolong thy Date.

Yet still thy Memory's to thy Country dear,
Thy Virtues live in every Bosom there,
Transcendent Worth, like thine, thy Name shall save:
Th' untainted Statesman, and th' unchanging Friend,
So rare in Nature, not with Nature end,
But rescu'd by the Muse surmount the Grave.

See Churchill too, whose bold, successful Flame
Made Armies, wont to conquer, dread his Name,
Falls of himself to Time a destin'd Prey:
Cease, Albion, then to mourn, since Ammon's Son,
Caesar, and Nassau the same Course have run,
And yet their Fate still lives, unconscious of Decay.

Tho' small on Earth the Spot, which now contains
The once victorious Marlborough's last Remains,
His nobler Part to upper Skies withdraws:
There rais'd on Thrones his old, try'd Friends he meets,
The great Godolphin, Somers, Stanhope greets,
His Fellow-Champions in their Country's Cause.

Then mounting thro' the vast Expanse of Light,
Swift, as a Falcon shoots, he wings his Flight,
To reach the Sphere, which ancient Patriots grace:
Timoleon, Scipio, Cato there he joins,
Himself, like Phoebus, in the Center shines,
And every Orb resounds with his superior Praise.

Still, mighty Spirit, tho' remov'd by Fate,
Thy ruling Influence guards thy Native State
From home-bred Faction, and the foreign Foe:
Secur'd by thee, th' illustrious Brunswick Line
On Albion's Throne shall unmolested shine,
While Liberty and Virtue breath below.

The Toils of Empire but increase their Care
Of Albion's Safety, whether Peace or War
Turn out at last, in Europe's Balance weigh'd:
Th' unbiass'd Mind, which sound Reflection guides,
Smiles at the Lot, which Art or Chance decides,
While Brunswick reigns, and Britain lends her Aid.

If War but threat, a hundred Vessels spread
Their swelling Sheets o'er Ocean's foamy Bed,
And scour the Southern Seas, and Northern Coast:
The Swede protected saves a shatter'd Throne;
Th' invading Russ now trembles for his own,
And scarce the Spaniard of his Mines can boast.

What tho' Gibraltar, Europe's utmost Bound,
For its known Strength and spacious Port Renown'd,
From jealous Foes, a double Siege sustain:
In vain, tho' unprovok'd, they rashly wage
Insulting War, to sooth a Woman's Rage,
Still shall the British Fort controul the Midland Main.

Tho' late forgetful of his past Alarms,
Charles wisely now respects Britannia's Arms,
Those Arms, to which his rescued Crowns he owes:
Those Arms, by which Sicilia's fruitful Isle
Renouncing Victor, swells th' Imperial Style,
And gives new Umbrage to aspiring Foes.

George now he owns for Europe's Safety nurs'd,
The Second, Brave, and Steady, like the First,
As strict Assertor of his People's Right:
And yet so mild, all gentle Arts he tries
To close a Breach, whence fierce Contentions rise,
E'er arming flow he meditate the Fight.

See now th' Effect of knowing to forbear,
Spain drops at once the long-impending War,
Old Leagues revive, and strong Resentments cease:
A Turn so quick amazes Friends and Foes,
The well-concerted Act who dares oppose?
Charles weighs the great Event, then signs the Peace.

The Sanction settled now full Vigour gains,
And screens from future Wars the German Plains,
While Austrian Rights to Female Heirs descend:
Young Carlos enters on mature Debate
Fair Parma's Dutchy, and the Tuscan State,
Thus long Disputes in lasting Union end.

Hail, happy Period!  Now each Panick's o'er,
And Fleets and Armies fright the World no more,
What Tongue can all the Charms of Peace relate?
Thy Work, good Harrington, be thine all Praise,
For this the Royal Voice thy Name shall raise,
And trust with thee the Secrets of the State.

Britannia, hail!  whom, free from War's Alarms,
Augustus rules, and Carolina charms,
Alike deserving of thy People's Trust:
Which of thy best-lov'd Kings, by Rapin shewn
In strong, resembling Lights, e'er grac'd the Throne,
Like him, whose least Desert is to be Just?

To Empire call'd, he makes the Laws he found,
And long-establish'd Rights, his utmost Bound,
Squares by this Golden Rule his Regal Sway:
Thus equal to his Trust, thus truly Great,
He reigns th' indulgent Father of the State
O'er Subjects striving who shall best obey.

His matchless Consort, by strict Conscience led,
Prefers her Brunswick's to th' Imperial Bed,
Who doubts the Match was pre-ordain'd above?
Great Patroness of Arts, of sweetest Frame,
What distant Region has not heard thy Fame,
Thy Rare Endowments, and Connubial Love?

To shew 'tis less to Reign, than to be Wise,
And that deep Science is the Nobler Prize,
An humble, silent Grot's her lov'd Retreat:
Escap'd from Grandeur, and divorc'd from Care,
She hastes to visit Guests she harbours there,
Whose marble Busts adorn the sylvan Seat.

And now revolving what their Works contain,
Earth, Seas, and Heavens she measures o'er again,
Descries new Lights, which ancient Plans controul:
She fathoms every Depth they try'd before,
Extracts from each rich Mine the solid Ore,
Which answering to the Touch transports her ravish'd Soul.

Th' unalter'd Laws of Nature here she sees,
And how each moral Duty springs from these,
Whence, and how varied, Good and Evil grow:
Unwearied in her Search she finds at last
That Happiness in strictest Truth is plac'd,
The sacred Source, whence endless Blessings flow.

Hence too she learns the most successful Way
To govern Realms is by a gentle Sway
Vice to discourage, and Desert to raise:
No Wonder then, when glad Germania shares
Her Lord's lov'd Presence, and Paternal Cares,
She Rules at Home with universal Praise.

So when the Sun, whose Golden Beams produce
On Earth whatever is to Life of Use,
To bless the nether Regions takes his Flight:
Resplendent Luma mounts the upper Skies,
His radiant Seat till his Return supplies,
And chears th' Horizon with her Silver Light.

Inchanting Richmond!  of whose awfull Cell
Apollo's chosen Sons such Wonders tell,
Without all simple, but within divine:
Tho' wasting Time thy lofty Heights shall raze,
And hide in Ruins thy delightful Face,
Not the Cumaean Cave more lasting proves than Thine.

From so August a Stock a sevenfold Race
Springs forth, adorn'd with every Princely Grace,
Rejoice each Briton at a Sight so Rare:
Their eldest Frederick, in Succession first,
For Worth and Honour shews a noble Thirst,
And strives to merit Crowns he late shall wear.

When his great Parents left their native Soil
To bless and to protect the British Isle,
How was this Pledge ador'd they left behind!
To Albion call'd, with what a winning Grace,
His Father's Image stampt upon his Face,
He captivated soon each Subject's Mind!

Sweet-natur'd, Liberal, Courteous, and Sincere,
No Wonder if the Wallian Prince appear
The Hope of Kingdoms, and of Courts the Pride:
At his throng'd Circle, Joy dilates each Breast,
To see him treat each Subject as a Guest,
And throw engaging Smiles on every Side.

Next William shoots in a well-season'd Bloom,
A sure Presage of Golden Fruits to come,
Such as by Pointz ingrafted ripen fast:
Best Nature in the lovely Youth is found,
His Genius sprightly, and his Judgment sound,
And Learning spreads by his Example grac'd.

Of Port Majestick, but of Aspect sweet,
Then Anna comes, with every Charm replete,
Imperial Juno moves with such an Air:
Amelia next appears to gild the Scene,
In Brightness vying with the Cyprian Queen,
When Jove pronounc'd her Fairest of the Fair.

Now Caroline succeeds, by all allow'd
Mild, gracious, prudent, eager to do Good,
Another Pallas in her Form descends:
Mary, Louisa follow, sweetest Pair,
If in their Morning Dawn they rise so Fair,
What dazling Light their Noon-tide Fires attends!

These precious Gifts, from whence her Safety grows,
To thee, Heroick William, Britain owes,
To thee, her great Deliverer, when oppress'd:
Such Blessing to secure, the Royal Pair
Commits them, Walpole, to thy watchful Care,
Thou First of Statesmen, and of Friends the Best.

Thy firm Attachment to thy Country's Cause
In Times of Trial, claims her just Applause,
Nor less in happier Days resounds thy Fame:
Tho' grac'd by two successive Kings Thou soar
To Heights no Commoner e'er reach'd before,
What Voice but Envy's can thy Conduct blame?

And if sour Spleen, or headstrong Party tries
To stain that Worth thy very Rivals prize,
How doth Thy Tullian Tongue their Wiles confound!
And tho' in twice five Years one Point they gain
Beyond their Hopes, they launce their Darts in vain,
Short is Their Triumph, whilst Thou keep'st thy Ground.

Whither, mistaken Britons, would you tend?
And whence proceed your Clamours without End?
What frightful, wild Chimera's haunt your Doors?
Truth's ever calm, and like deep Rivers glides
Serenely smooth, unruffled by the Tides,
While Falshood, like a shallow Torrent, roars.

Be this your Touchstone, and 'twill soon disclose
Who are your Real Friends, and who your Foes,
Which Party to embrace, and which to shun:
Dispel vain Fears, and tho' to Change too prone,
You'll find no Nation Happy like your Own,
You ne'er can be but by yourselves undone.

A Peace with such Allies, observ'd with Care,
Shall more avail than all the Views of War,
Make Gaul reflourish, tho' reduc'd so low:
Disputes in Church and State ferment in vain,
The stubborn Senate drags an Exile's Chain,
And dexterous Fleury wards th' unguarded Blow.

But should War's Arts o'er those of Peace prevail
At last, what Chance can save us, if we fail?
What Power, like Anna once, will Gaul befriend?
Can the most heated Roman Faith presume
Upon a second Miracle to come,
Or that another War would like the Former end?

Nor think, tho' Marlborough, late of Gaul the Dread,
Be number'd now among the peaceful Dead,
That Hope revives, or Danger threats no more:
Still many a British Chief, of deathless Name,
Still Cobham, Wade, Argyle maintain their Fame,
And under Martial George would conquer as before.

Here clos'd the circled Form, confest to Sight,
Then darted upwards in a Stream of Light,
As when some Meteor shoots along the Skies:
Then rouze, my Prince, and bid farewell to Care,
With costly Offerings to the Shrine repair,
Where the Protector-Saint in balmy Odour lies.
