Not ev'ry temper rural scenes delight;
Begin, my Muse, a low suburbian flight.
Love, who invades the rural nymphs and swains,
No less a tyrant in the suburbs reigns;
All, more or less, his pains or pleasures know,
"For what's too high for love?  or what's too low?"
Begin, my Muse, WARBLETTA's woe rehearse,
Who oft' in cadence clear has sung thy verse.

WARBLETTA &mdash; sweetest of the throng that squalls
Melodious ballads &mdash; at the end of Paul's;
She, whose love-sonnets with persuasive strain,
Cou'd maids, 'tis said, and 'prentice-boys detain;
Who on EXCISE, the ever-famous song,
Cou'd sing so loudly &mdash; and yet sing so long;
Alluring a wide-gaping motley band,
Whilst in their pockets div'd some nimble hand:
No more her vocal pow'r in publick tries,
But weeping to a neighb'ring gin-shop flies;
There pensive on a runlet sits alone,
And, blending gin with tears, thus makes her moan.

GALLOWAY TOM, inveigling renegade,
The bane of ev'ry fond believing maid!
Curs'd be the hour, when first I saw his face,
So smartly impudent, and void of grace.
Well I remember it amidst the throng,
How, at first sight, I faulter'd in my song;
Gaz'd &mdash; sigh'd, and gaz'd, and ev'ry sweeter tone
Practis'd, and levell'd at his ear alone.

Quick he perceiv'd, and gain'd my blinder side;
Kiss'd me, swore roundly, and as roundly ly'd.
How my heart leap'd his flatt'ring words to meet,
When the knave vow'd he'd wed me at the Fleet!
Persuaded &mdash; and I bought a copper ring,
When he, false wretch!  intended no such thing.

Like a brass shilling neatly silver'd o'er,
His vows have pass'd &mdash; but they shall pass no more;
The silver's worn away, and now, alas!
His perfidy appears more plain than brass.
Wicked o'erseers defraud the wretched poor;
The justice squeezes the starv'd padding whore;
Yet overseers and justices I see,
O TOM!  are much &mdash; much honester than thee.

Think, varlet, think, to raise thee half-a-crown,
How readily I pawn'd my sunday-gown!
To thee in Bridewell, for no goodness, pent,
What victuals brought I!   and what money lent!
Yet all that money &mdash; which I earn'd so hard,
I've known thee lose upon a single card.
Releas'd I saw thee fly to Brick-dust MOLL;
Yet now return &mdash; and I'll forgive thee all:
I could, I fear, be once again deceiv'd;
Again believe thee &mdash; as I once believ'd.

O TOM, return, forget to throw a main;
And burn thy cards which a lord's purse might drain.
Lords may be wicked at their virtue's cost,
Since titles guard 'em, when their virtue's lost.
Great rogues may plunder a whole common-weal;
But thou'dst be hang'd in hemp, if thou shou'dst steal.
To great ones then thy lewdness quite resign,
And be thou honest, TOM, and only mine.
Come, quickly come, upon my once-lov'd breast,
Repose thee &mdash; sink within my arms to rest.
If cares oppress thee, I'll divert my love
With Patient GRIZEL &mdash; and a GRIZEL prove.
For thee all day with open throat I'll toil;
With thee at night, well-pleas'd, divide the spoil;
For thee a spicy hot-pot I'll prepare;
For thee a nice sheeps-head I'll dress with care.
Will not these win thee? &mdash; Add to those the joy,
Which nightly shall our waking hours employ.

Hard-hearted wretch!  in vain, in vain I sue,
Rougher than winds to a well-powder'd cue.
The habit of thy temper now appears;
Oh! &mdash; thou wast nourish'd sure by Hockley-bears.
Like burning brandy my warm bosom glows,
Whilst thine is like a wint'ry puddle froze.
What, tho' in ballad so much skill I boast!
So long have reign'd St. Giles fav'rite toast!
By pur-blind fiddlers have been often ply'd,
As often all their hated suits deny'd!
Nor voice, nor person for my TOM has charms;
And whilst ungrateful he thus shuns my arms,
Frantic I make some airy bulk my bed,
Where chilling winds fly whistling round my head;
Whilst lazy muddy channels bubling creep,
Inviting (tho' in vain) my eyes to sleep
My chearless eyes are ever waking found,
When dismal watch-men walk their mid-night round;
Or at their peaceful stands securely snore,
While robbers, at their elbows, force a door.

Yet, TOM, return:  or quickly tell me where
I may, with open arms, approach my dear.
Tell me, ye brighter nymphs of Drury &mdash; say:
Saw you my perjur'd varlet go this way?
Imbrowned bunters of fam'd Wapping &mdash; tell,
Does he amidst your winding alleys dwell?
Ye maids, where'er he strays, his courtship shun:
Hear &mdash; you'll believe &mdash; believing &mdash; be undone.

Cruelly thus of ev'ry joy bereft,
Lost in my quiet, and my bosom cleft;
Such are the ling'ring sorrows of my mind,
E'en in Geneva no repose I find.
No more shall love-sick ditties swell my throat;
SMUT shall no more obtain a warbling note;
Against EXCISE I'll raise my voice no more.

She said &mdash; and dozing sunk upon the floor.
The maudlin matrons cry'd &mdash; Pray mark her fall!
The pow'r of gin from love defend us all.
