The Sun began his beamy Light to spread,
And the dark Dhadows of the Night were fled;
When busy Industry forsook her Down,
Plenty to raise for the luxurious Town:
The thoughtless Maid who trips along the Fields,
Whose Breast contented no grim Sorrow yields,
Chants merrily, as she supports her Pail,
In faulty Rhime an ill-corrected Tale.
The Countryman who heavy Hobnails wears;
Whose Countenance displays no preying Cares;
To his Day-Labour with glad Heart retires;
Nor knows he ought his thankful Soul requires.
Whilst Hazelnut, forsaken and forlorn
With languid Eyes beholds the rosy Morn.
Amidst a spacious Field, with Banks enclos'd,
Beneath a shady Tree the Swain repos'd:
Long had he lov'd a Maiden, Mary hight,
Whose perjur'd Oaths the Shepherd did recite,
In Notes more sweet, than is the Linnet's Song,
Or Melody of all the feather'd Throng.
Unhappy Hazlenut, Oh!  wretched Lad,
Who could with deftest Joaks thy Fellows glad;
And when I chaunted Tunes, each buxom Maid
Trip'd to the Sound along the cooling Shade;
When'er I spoke, each list'ning Damsel sigh'd,
And in the kindest Method all reply'd.
My Woes, ye Shepherds, when ye shall repeat,
Think how all earthly Happinesses fleet.

Ah!  now no more, ill-fated Boy, I please,
No more I sing beneath the branching Trees;
But sadly pining thro' the Meadows go,
In ech'ing Sighs the Air returns my Woe.
Since Vows my Mary's Passion could not bind,
Tranquility is banish'd from my Mind.
My Woes, ye Shepherds, when ye shall repeat,
Think how all earthly Happinesses fleet.

Farewel!  ye Fields, where I my Sheep have kept;
Adieu!  ye Banks, on whom I've often slept;
Here first I Mary saw, farewel!  curst Ground,
Where my poor Heart receiv'd the bleeding Wound.
And thou, my Sheephook, hence from me remove,
For thou wert mine when Mary chang'd her Love:
On you I lean'd, and view'd her arched Brows,
When she came here to fetch the brindled Cows;
'Twas you supported me those Eyes to see,
Which now so rigidly my Death decree.
My Woes, ye Shepherds, when ye shall repeat,
Think how all earthly Happinesses fleet.

Farewel, O Pouch, that bear'st in studded Brass,
The name of Mary, cruel-hearted Lass;
Lest when I look on thee my Pains renew,
And I remember that she was untrue.
Come, darksome Night, thy gloomy Terrors spread,
From Hazelnut the perjur'd Mary's fled.
My Woes, ye Shepherds, when ye shall repeat,
Think how all earthly Happinesses fleet.

These Scars were by my Cudgelling first brought,
When I to gain the love of Mary fought;
But ah!  the Prize my hardy Deeds obtain'd,
Are from me by the treach'rous Mary gain'd,
Which she, regardless of her faithful Slave,
Eftsoons has to her more lov'd Cuddy gave.
Shall drunken Cuddy then with me compare?
Sooner let Beasts of human Honours share;
Sonner shall Roaches glide along the Green,
And Peacocks in the watry Streams be seen;
Sooner shall Hedgehogs fly amidst the Wood,
And men subsist without their daily Food:
But why do I thus reason with the Wind,
Since all our Swains agree that love is blind?
My Woes, ye Shepherds, when ye shall repeat,
Think how all earthly Happinesses fleet.

No more will I of idle Love complain,
(As ev'ry cure without my Mary's vain)
But strive with all my utmost Force, and Art,
To banish her and sorrow from my Heart:
Reflection too must absent from my Soul,
For whilst that's there, all Joy it will controul.
No; &mdash; I'm resolv'd to wander all my Days,
A dull, unthinking Swain, devoid of Praise;
Lest all my fatal Passions should return,
And I, as now, my fruitless Speeches mourn.
My Woes, ye Shepherds, when ye shall repeat,
Remember female Vows, like Wind, will fleet.

The Sun, by this, his highest Summer reach'd;
And on the Swain his hottest Beams he stretch'd.
Poor Hazelnut with Warmth o'erpower'd lies,
And Sleep encloses his wet weeping Eyes;
But in his Sleep he feels unusual Joys,
Which all his former waking Grief destroys;
His Mary comes, and seems no more unkind,
Whilst Pleasure reassumes her Seat within his Mind.
