OYSTERIA.
Ho!  Nan, whose Fish are those that look so dry?

WELFLETA.
Young Polly Melton gave 'em me to cry.

OYSTERIA.
Unhappy Polly, who thy Stand can leave,
And with vain Hopes of Love thyself deceive!
While you Jack Tar will court, but court in vain,
Fearing that I your Sailor shall obtain,
Here, Poll, another will thy Gains devour,
Nor turn a lucky Penny in an Hour;
Thy Tubs unwash'd, thy Mackarel forsook,
And Two-pence sunk in ev'ry Groat that's took.

WELFLETA.
No Scandal, Madam, if you come to that,
Some may be told of you. &mdash; We know what's what.&mdash;
When Billy's Boat came floating down the Tide
You with him at the Bottom was espy'd
To kiss and toy, and something else beside;
Till the neglected Boat ran close to Shore,
And to some laughing Maids discover'd your Amour.

OYSTERIA.
'Twas at that Time, since Follies you rehearse,
When you, in Heighth of kissing, stole a Purse.

WELFLETA.
No; when beneath a Tree in Greenwich Park,
You was with Jenny's Husband, in the Dark,
Tore her lac'd Coif, then raving, stampt and cryd:&mdash;
But for the Mischief you for Spight had dy'd.

OYSTERIA.
What Lies your Mistress, Impudence, wou'd prate,
When you can tell 'em at so round a Rate?
Did not I see you, Madam, watchful stand
To steal a Ring from sleeping Peggy's Hand,
Stroaking her Finger with your utmost Care&mdash;
But I came in, and rous'd the sleeping Fair?
Thieves, Thieves, I cry'd; defeated of your Prey,
Like Dog that's burnt his Tail, you stole away.

WELFLETA.
Where're we find it, we may take our own;
The Ring was mine, by singing fairly won;
But she would never give me up the Prize,
Nor yet the Truth of what I say denies.

OYSTERIA:
You sing with her!  who are at best but fit
To squawl a wretched Ballad thro' the Street:
With me you dare not sing:  A Match I'll make
And boldly back my Wager with a Stake;
These golden Beads with which myself I deck,
Which in three Rounds hang pendant on my Neck:
Do you stake aught of equal Value down,
The Necklace win and wear it as your own.

WELFLETA.
Of equal Value I can nothing boast,
At home a cunning Step-dame rules the Roast,
Who tells each Morn my Fish into my Tray,
And to a Farthing counts the Profits of the Day:
Yet this I pledge, to me of more Esteem,
Than any polish'd Gold, or sparkling Gem,
This silver Thimble, this my will shall prove
The latest Token of my parting Love,
Which Johnny gave me 'fore he last Voyage made,
And which as yet was ne'er to Needle laid.

OYSTERIA.
To match your Pledge, this silver Seal I stake,
Which much I value for my Tommy's Sake,
Who parting gave it, sighing on my Breast,
And which as yet was ne'er on Letter prest.
&mdash;But haste, begin, nor thus the Time prolong;
Let Maccarella judge of either's Song.

MACCARELLA.
Sing then, my Fair Ones, for the Coast is clear,
And all is Peace, as much as can be here;
The Market's o'er, then let your Songs begin,
And I'll decide with Justice who shall win;
By turns let each some tuneful Ditty chime,
You'll please the more, the more ye change your Rhime.

WELFLETA.
From Cupid, ruler of the Gods above,
My Song begins, for all are rul'd by Love;
To him the care of Maids and Swains belongs,
He hears their Pray'ers, and he applauds their Songs.

OYSTERIA.
I seek no God, my Tommy me inspires
With as much Love, and with as happy Fires;
To him, sweet Youth, as ever cross'd the Sea,
To him, as due, my Songs shall ever be.

WELFLETA.
My Johnny taps my Neck in wanton Play,
Then wishing to be seen, he trips away.

OYSTERIA.
My Tommy flies not, but upon my Knee,
Swears he ne'r saw a Maid so fair as me.

WELFLETA.
This crooked Groat, I'll send my Swain to prove
My Heart is bent like this to him and love.

OYSTERIA.
But for my Sweetheart I this Ring design'd,
The truest Emblem of a faithful Mind:
This Circle has no Ending, this I send
To tell my love my Passion ne'er shall end.

WELFLETA.
How oft has mine in fondest Rapture swore,
He never chang'd his Mistress with his Shore:
Gods, hear the Sound, and bless the constant Man:
Shew such another Sailor, if you can.

OYSTERIA.
But mine with more Inconstancy will court,
And gain new Mistresses at ev'ry Port;
Fond tho' inconstant, pleasing tho' he's free;
Yet none can keep the Rover's Heart but me.

WELFLETA.
I keep me Birth-day, from the Coast of France
Sweet William come, and grace it with a Dance.

OYSTERIA.
I'm with sweet William more in Grace than you,
To me he swore at Wapping to be true:
Hoisting the Sails, when he on Deck did stand,
To me Adieu he cry'd, and wav'd his Lilly Hand.

WELFLETA.
If you can tell, say in what Foreign Land,
The Golden Oar lies sparking in the Sand;
Where, as one River flows with with comely Pride,
It bears the Wealth of Europe in its Tide.

OYSTERIA.
Nay, tell me first, on what rich Coasts are found
Spices that breathe their fragrant Odours round;
Where Nutmegs will their fragrant Scents dispense,
And in their balmy Gales can ravish ev'ry Sense.

MACCARELLA.
Hold, Maidens, hold; for I shall never tell
Who sings the best, when both can sing so well
Both ever happy be, and all who prove
By Turns the various Sweets and Pains of Love.
