If right I read Dan Ovid's gentle strain,
A golden age the book of fate began;
The next was silver, and as that decay'd,
A brazen leaf the hand of time display'd:
The fourth in iron characters was spread,
And ours, the last, and worst, succeeds in lead.
Hence dulness herds with vice, and both conspire
To damp the patriot's, and the poet's fire;
Hence mourns the muse, hence rev'rend learning weeps,
Hence virtue languishes, and valour sleeps.
Awake ye Britons!  break the sluggish band
Of sloth and ease!  and purge the guilty land.
Hear your own Spencer strike the speaking strings!
And think he weeps in fondness as he sings!
Think you behold his venerable shade,
And that for you he raises from the dead!
The tale is his, and brutes the humble theme,
But 'tis to polish you he copies them;
Be wise at last!  nor let the bard complain
He strove to please you, but he strove in vain!
Of old the Fox and Ape, ambitious grown
Of place and titles, riches and renown,
Resolv'd, in close cabal, to quit the shade,
And, among courtiers, learn the courtier's trade.
By nature prompted, both believ'd their skill
Was fraud and lyes, and all the arts of ill.
At court they heard, to many a wretch's cost
These talents flourish'd, were esteem'd the most.
To court they hie, and to deceive the way,
Contrive their plots, and meditate their prey.
&mdash;They meet the Mule; who, with preferment proud,
Scarce deign'd to know a pilgrim on the road:
With birth-day trappings he was gaily drest,
And gold and purple beautify'd his chest.
Lowly they bow'd; but he, with lordly pride,
O'er look'd their homage, all return deny'd.
For titled baseness with imperious eye
Regards distress, or stalks unheeding by.
The subtle Fox, dissembling well his pain,
With artful softness thus his lore began:
Hail to the day, sir Mule, in which I view
The child of virtue honour'd thus in you!
My friend!  my patron!  whom I long foretold
To be in grandeur's brightest page inroll'd;
The pride and joy of courts! &mdash; vouchsafe to tell
By what bless'd chance your merit thriv'd so well;
We wretches glady would the goal survey,
And where the nearest road to greatness lay.
You best can mark the mazes you have try'd;
And we shall best succeed with such a guide.
He bow'd and ceas'd.  The Mule, by flatt'ry won,
Rebuk'd his haughty heart, and thus begun:
&mdash;At court, 'tis true, I made an early claim
Of place and pow'r, to gild my humble name,
But long I vainly struggled for the prize,
And oft in clouds it vanish'd from my eyes:
Preferment seldom proves an easy prey,
And oft, in reach, deceitful slips away.
'Tis gained with labour, but with ease 'tis lost,
And they, who hold it longest, grieve the most;
Like boys on ice with winged heels they slide,
And know their pain is equal to their pride;
Loth to retreat, and to proceed afraid,
Urg'd by hopes, and by their fears betray'd.
&mdash;But, if this picture of so frail a state
In vain would warn you, and would be great,
To those in pow'r exert your utmost art,
And give the praise that's foreign to your heart;
Address, apply, importunately hold,
And tell his grace for what you're to be sold.
If flattering, fawning, lying won't avail,
And, spite of noisy impudence, you fail;
Oppose the man, you had carest before,
Distrest his measures, and defy his pow'r;
Cancel your vows, forego your former mind,
And, when you prais'd him, swear your judgment blind;
Provoke the people to to resent his deeds,
And feign your heart for your dear country bleeds!
Perhaps he'll feel your rage, and own 'twas wrong
That worth, like yours, should want regard so long;
Perhaps he'll raise you then to high estate,
And, when you least deserve it, make you great.
&mdash;Two maxims only are preferment's laws,
And these support the sinking statesman's cause.
Whoe'er can aid to save him from disgrace
Demands a star, a title, or a place.
Whoe'er has pow'r to throw him from on high,
Like a huge meteor flaming down the sky,
Is brib'd to spare him. &mdash;  These the state divide,
And shares of pow'r are dealt to either side.
&mdash;No more remains but that you both appear
As richer, wiser, nobler than you are.
Deceit is virtue in the courtier's eye,
And fashion gives a sanction to the lye:
The masque of merit is the most you need,
And who dissembles best will best succeed.
&mdash;Adieu!  my state admits no more delay;
So proudly neighing, he pursu'd his way.
