Illustrious Queen!  The loyal Zeal excuse,
The fond Ambition, of a British Muse,
Who wou'd, in Merlin's Praise, attempt to soar;
And in his Cave, Your Patronage implore:
Protection seek, beneath Your Royal Name;
And borrow Strength to rise, from Merlin's Fame.

When Sol to distant Climes had giv'n the Day,
And shone on ours, with pale reflected Ray;
When Night with solemn pace, advanc'd her Head,
And o'er the Hemisphere her Mantle spread;
Yet thro' the sable Gloom, those Orbs reveal'd,
Which in a Flood of Light, the Day conceal'd:
I, to a Summit, mus'd along, to see
Unnumber'd Suns, which croud the Galaxy.
But Merlin's Cave, had such Impressions made,
And Royal Honours, to his Mem'ry pay'd;
Pleas'd with Reflection, and involv'd in Thought;
Creative Fancy, soon this Vision wrought.

Then, lo!  beneath a venerable Oak,
Which oft repell'd the Tempest's furious stroke;
Whose spreading Arms, a wide Circumf'rence show,
And from whose Trunk, springs sacred Misseltoe:
Methought, I saw an awful Shade arise;
(Fit object only, for Poetick Eyes.)
The Form Majestick, and the Front serene;
Angles, and Circles, on his Robe were seen.
The Northern Crown, around his Temples shone,
And the Celestial Signs adorn'd his Zone.
The British Harp, seem'd to support one Hand;
While t' other, gently wav'd the sacred Wand.
The Manes of great Merlin stood confess'd;
And my enraptur'd Fancy, thus address'd:

"Why will Melissa, Merlin's praise decline,
Distinguish'd now, by Royal CAROLINE?
Believe not such, as wou'd asperse my Name;
But trust those Authors, who defend my Name;
You, to the Royal Grotto, touch'd the Lyre,
And durst in God-like Newton's Praise aspire.
Why shou'd not British Merlin, grace thy Page,
In Mathematicks, once esteem'd a Sage?
A well-try'd Genius, cou'd transmit to Fame
My honour'd Modern Cave, and Ancient Name:
Might, to my ROYAL GUEST, re-touch the String,
And as he sung the Saint, the Prophet sing.
But since the Cambrian Bards, neglect the Muse;
Melissa's humbler Strains, I'll not refuse.

"Six Centuries, twice told, are now compleat,
Since Merlin liv'd on this terrestrial Seat.
Knowledge appear'd, but dawning to my Sight;
She blaz'd on Newton with Meridian Light.
Yet the faint Glimm'rings, which my Genius taught,
Beyond the ken, of human Art, were thought.
What I by meer mechanick Pow'rs atchiev'd,
Th' Effects of Magick, then, by most believ'd.
To Stone-henge, let the Sons of Art, repair,
And View the Wonders, I, erected There.
Try, if their Skill improv'd, Mine, e'er can foil;
Restore the Giants-Dance t' Hibernian Soil.
Nor in Geometry, excell'd alone;
But other Sciences to me were known.
I study'd Nature, through her various Ways;
And chaunted to this Harp, prophetick Lays.
To Cader Ydris oft, I took my Way;
Rose with the Sun, toil'd up th' Ascent all Day;
But scarce could reach, the Mountains tow'ring height,
E'er Radiant Vesper, usher'd in the Night.
The Summit gain'd, I sought with naked Eye,
To penetrate, the Wonders of the Sky.
No Telescopic Glass known in that Age,
To assist the Optics of the curious Sage.
Though lov'd Astronomy oft charm'd my Mind,
I now erroneous, all my Notions find.
I thought bright Sol, around our Globe had run;
Nor knew Earth's Motion, nor the central Sun.
And had I known; cou'd I Belief have gain'd,
When Ignorance, and Superstition reign'd?

"Unseen by me, Attraction's mighty Force,
And how fierce Comets, run their stated Course;
Surprizing Scenes!  by Heav'n reserv'd in store,
For its own Fav'rite Newton, to explore.
With Faculties enlarg'd, He's gone to prove
The Laws, and Motions of yon Worlds above;
And the vast Circuits of th' Expanse survey,
View Solar Systems in the Milky Way.
My Spirit too through Ether wings its Flight,
Discov'ring Truths, deny'd my mortal Sight.
Transported hovers, o'er my native Isle,
Where Arts improve, and Peace and Plenty smile.

"But lo!  Bootes drives his radiant Car,
High on its Course, around the Polar Star,
And fiery Draco, drops his starry Crest;
'Tis time, thou should'st indulge thy needful Rest.
Yet stay, Melissa! &mdash; try this fav'rite Lyre;
And Merlin will the grateful Song inspire.
To Learning's Patroness, my Thanks convey;
And humbly at her Feet, present thy Lay.
Conscious, how mean, and how unskill'd thy Hand,
I see the tremble, at my kind Command.
Let my Persuasion, once, thy Fears beguile;
The gracious QUEEN, will condescend to smile.
For Merlin's sake, will give Melissa leave,
To touch the Strings, in my much-honour'd Cave.

"And Wallia's gen'rous Prince, will not disdain
What I foretell; &mdash; tho' low, thy Lyrick Strain."

TO THE QUEEN.
Hail!  Guardian of Britannia's fate,
Whose Worth transcends the Regal State!
Thee!  whom propitious Heav'n design'd,
The Guard, and Glory, of thy Kind.
E'en Justice, wou'd her Pow'r Divine,
Consummate QUEEN!  to Thee resign;
Give up her Sword to thy Command,
And trust her Balance in thy Hand.
Let happy Britons learn to know,
The Queen of Virtues, reigns below!

The Sciences, O Royal Fair!
Improve thro' your auspicious Care,
Your Favour can restore to Fame,
From dark Oblivion, Merlin's Name.
The Muses all, to you resort,
As to their own Apollo's Court.
Thrice happy Britons!  Wisdom's seen
Presiding in our matchless QUEEN!
Astrea, and Minerva, joyn
To form one finish'd CAROLINE.

MERLIN'S PROPHECY.
Humbly inscrib'd to his R.H. the PRINCE OF WALES.

Royal FREDERICK!  Britain's Pride!
Prince, for future Safety giv'n;
For Thee's decree'd a Virtuous Bride,
Choicest Gift of bounteous Heav'n.
To reward thy filial Duty,
To perpetual Brunswick's Race,
Wit, and Learning, Youth, and Beauty,
Heav'n prepares for thy Embrace.

No blust'ring Storms, affright the Fair,
No raging Billows, dare to rise;
Safe by Heav'n's, and George's Care,
May She bless our longing Eyes!
Neptune, sooth old Father Ocean,
Mild Favonius, waft thy Gales;
May One repell each threat'ning Motion,
For Albion, t' other swell the Sails!

Behold!  She comes, enrich'd with Charms,
Indulgent to thy plighted Love!
Receive the Blessing to thy Arms,
And Hymen's hallow'd Rites approve.
Illustrious Pair!  wou'd You in Story,
Thro' succeeding Ages shine?
Wou'd You to tread the Paths to Glory?
Follow George, and Caroline.

And lo!  I see a glorious Race,
Successive rising to Renown!
Decree's Britannia's Throne to grace;
And give new Lustre to a Crown.
Ordain'd, to wield the Sceptre Royal,
With righteous Pow'r, and gentle Sway;
And rule o'er Britons, Brave, and Loyal,
'Till Heav'n, and Earth, shall melt away.

ON THE BUSTOES IN THE ROYAL HERMITAGE.
While to our QUEEN each duteous Bard conveys
The faithful Tribute of exalted Praise;
While Genius, Learning, all their Force combine,
To make the Numbers, as the Theme, divine;
How shall a Cambrian Muse, obscure, and mean,
The lowest, latest, of the tuneful Train;
Too weak for Wings, too tardy in her Flight:
Amongst the Sterling Coin, dare to present her Mite,

O Queen!  more learn'd, than e'er Britannia saw,
Since our fam'd Tudor, to the Realm gave Law.
Of Wife!  more happy in thy Lord alone,
Than in the Pow'r, and Splendor, of his Throne.
O Mother!  blest in your Illustrious Race,
The Guardian Angels, of our future Peace.
O Patroness of Science!  wilt thou deign,
T' accept from thy own Sex, this artless Strain?
Around the Throne, too dazling Glories dwell;
May I, most gracious Queen!  approach thy Cell?

Hail happy Grotto!  to thy blest Retreat,
Greatness retires, to be more truly Great.
Here, by the Sculptor's Art, are well design'd,
The Busts of Those, who dignify'd their Kind.
Locke, Boyle, and Newton, Woolaston, and Clarke,
Brighten those Paths which Ignorance made dark;
Reason, and Arts, Truth moral, and Divine;
In their immortal Works, unclouded shine.
Resemblance, the well-judging Eye delights,
And th' active Soul, to semblant Thought excites:
Intent, Sh' exerts her Faculties, and Powers,
Rises in Thought, in Contemplation towers.

Reason, that Emanation of the Mind,
Breaks forth in Locke; diffusive, and refin'd.

Wisdom, and Piety, their Beams unite,
To shine in Boyle, with strong, convictive Light;
Which thro' the various Works of Nature, shows
God, the sole Source, whence all Perfection flows.

Newton, th' Allwise Creator's Works explores,
Sublimely, on the Wings of Knowledge, soars;
Th' establish'd Order, of each Orb, unfolds,
And th' omni-present God, in all, beholds:
If to the dark Abyss, or bright Abode,
He points; the View still terminates in God.

The moral duties Woolaston displays;
On Nature's Laws, the firm Foundation lays.

In Clarke, the Christian Purity appears
Reveal'd Religion, he divinely clears
From Mists of Error, Vapours of blind Zeal,
Which oft her Heav'n-born Beauties, wou'd conceal;
From Sanguin Marks, which her pure Whiteness stain'd;
And all her sacred Truths, polluted, and profan'd.
Her Reason, Learning, Primogeneal Law,
Submit to Faith, with Reverence and Awe.
'Tis She, Celestial Grace!  must those refine;
'Tis her Impression stamps them all divine.

These, are the Worthies, which our glorious Queen
Delights to honour in this solemn Scene;
She consecrates their Memory to Fame;
Affixing theirs, to her own deathless Name.

While plenteous Thames, flows from its Crystal Urn,
While ebbing Tides, to Ocean's Bed return;
While circling Waves, around Britannia move;
While Liberty, and Honour, Britons love;
While the fair Moon, reflects the Solar Ray,
And guides the Motions of the swelling Sea;
While the bright Sun, the golden Day shall give,
With Royal Caroline's, these Sages' Fame will live.
MELISSA.
