'Twas worthy Thee, great GEORGE, and Britain's Lord,
When jarring Europe thunder'd from afar,
When Pow'r to Pow'r oppos'd the hostile Sword,
And doubtful hung the Ballance of the War,
Secure Thyself, pacific Plans to frame,
Prevent the wast of Blood, and satiate Honour's Claim.

High on the wings of Fame the Message flies,
Embattled Hosts th' auspicious Voice attend,
France on proud Conquest bent, foregoes the Prize;
And jealous Austria greets a Bourbon Friend.
Confed'rate Nations drop the lifted Spear,
Nor doubt to trust their Cause, when GEORGE forbids their Fear.

'Tis thus Britannia seeks Renown in Arms:
Rais'd is her Helmet, to command a Peace.
For this her WILLIAM sounded loud Alarms:
On broken Launces to recline at ease.
For this her watchful Navy rides the Main,
Safety to threaten'd Realms, the Dread of haughty Spain.

What more, great Sir, Europe's Heat asswag'd?
Can Thy own Britain still one Boon receive?
On FRED'RIC are our Eyes, our Hopes engag'd,
In His bright Line to see Thy Glory live?
Just to our Thought glad Nuptials You declare,
Bid Hymen's sacred Rites attone the Guilt of War.

Loud as the Clarion waken'd to the Fight,
Be now the Lyre to softer Action strung.
Muses, ye bridal Handmaids take your flight,
And where Bellona storm'd, begin the Song.
From Cades to Poland's Shore the Tale convey,
Warriors obey the Word, 'tis Marriage crowns the Day.

Sacred to FRED'RIC stands the genial Feast,
FRED'RIC to Rule and Sov'reignty ordain'd;
FRED'RIC in Wedlock's spreading Flame encreas'd
To grow a mighty Father of our Land:
To stamp the Image of a princely Soul
Britons unborn to glad, and future Worlds controul.

To this great Work what lovely She conspires?
What blooming Flow'r shall British Wreaths enfold?
In vain the Lilly on the Seyne expires;
His Purple Po reflects, or Tague his Gold.
Thence no proud House to BRUNSWIC shall by ty'd
Nor Rome a Daughter send to reign a FRED'RIC'S Bride.

From Gotha's Court the fav'rite Maid is led.
Nor Wealth, nor Diadems prefer Her Pray'r.
From Virtue's Base She mounts the Royal Bed.
'Tis all Her Glory to be Good and Fair.
Thus CAROLINA won a GEORGE'S Crown,
And the rich Present deck'd with Jewels all her own.

Enough to Britain's Fame, and Bliss is giv'n.
Strong in herself she scorns a borrow'd Force;
Prudent to use the bounteous Gifts of Heav'n,
In purest Channels she directs their Course.
Supreme in State her Scepter'd Monarchs stand;
Adopted Virtues rise beneath their guardian Hand.

Thus tow'rs the lordly Oak on Albion's Brow,
Hangs o'er the Vale, and crowns the rising Grove.
With gen'rous Care he views the Vine below;
Admires her Worth, and courts her to his Love:
The teeming Mate with social Strength supplies,
Her branching Honours guides, and lifts 'em to the Skies.
