Fast by the banks of Isis silver-stream'd
In those sweet Vales (who knows not those sweet Vales?
From whence are kenn'd Oxonia's Towrs farfam'd?)
Whileom I walk'd to catch the Noontide gales:
The Murm'ring stream so gently gliding on,
And awful Solitude did thought inspire;
Verseless myself, I conn'd not blithsom Song;
Ne Lute had I, nor Harp, nor tuneful Lyre:
Thoughtful, adown I laid me by the Stream;
That thought brought with it Sleep, Sleep brought with it a Dream.

The Scene, erst fair, to fairer still did yeild;
Such Scenes did never waking Eye behold:
Nor Enna was so fair, nor Tempe's feild,
Nor yet Elysium's fabled meads of old.
In admiration lost, I raptur'd gaz'd;
When, to the sound of dulcet symphonies,
A Dome, by heav'nly workmanship uprais'd,
Forth, like a vapour, from the Earth did rise.
Ne brick, nor marble did compose the Wall;
Transparent 'twas throughout, for it was chrystal all.

Forthwith two folding-doors disclosing wide,
Discover'd to the eye a gorgeous throne:
A venerable pers'nage on each side,
Majestic this, that soft and beauteous shone:
Upheld by Turtles sat this happy pair,
Eternal Peace and Loves did sport around;
Fluttring above did Hymen joyous bear
The Links, in which their mutual hearts were bound:
Betok'ning long they'd worn this easy chain;
Betok'ning thus they'd long, O!  very long remain.

On either side the throne a glorious band
Of Pers'nages were rang'd.  In the first place,
And nearest to the King, did Wisdom stand;
And Honour, unacquainted to the Base:
Next, Justice, never known to err, tho' blind;
Vengeance and Clemency on either side:
And Pow'r, his eyes on Justice still inclin'd;
And Peace, spurning Ambition, Death, and Pride.
Well is I weet the King, who's thus upheld;
Well is the Land, whose sceptre such a king doth weild.

Nor did there on the other side, I ween,
Forms tho' more soft, less heav'nly appear:
Conjugal Love and Concord still were seen,
Becoming Meekness and Submission, near.
Next Truth, a window in her naked breast;
Modest' and Prudence ever judging right:
Piety, adding lustre to the rest,
And Heav'n-born Charity appear'd in sight.
Blest is the Maid, whose paths these Virtues guide;
Happy, thrice happy He, possest of such a Bride.

While on this venerable pair I gaz'd,
Enter'd a Band of Youth, joyous and gay;
One 'bove the rest, most worthy to be prais'd,
Who follow'd still where Virtue led the way.
Oftimes, he tow'rd the waters cast his eye,
Which big with hope and expectation seem'd;
Nor long ere he a Vessel did descry,
Which fraught with all his wishes tow'rd him stemm'd;
An Heav'nly Virgin on the deck was plac'd,
With ev'ry Virtue blest, with ev'ry beauty grac'd.

White were her robes, which so divinely shin'd
As snow and gold together had been wove;
Expressive emblem of the purest mind,
Expressive emblem of the chastest love.
Alternate on the Damsel and the Youth,
A Band of Loves pour'd most propitious darts,
Which, tipt with pleasure, constancy and truth,
Found free admission to their inmost hearts.
Swift flew the Youth:  with eager haste convey'd
To his own happy shore, the much-lov'd, loving Maid.

And now advance in hospitable guise
The Royal Pair; with welcome salutation
They greet the Maid; Joy sparkles in her eyes
Promise of future blessings on the Nation.
Nor now did Hymen unemploy'd appear,
Their hearts in chains of adamant he bound;
Loud shouts of mirth and joy invade the ear;
Each eccho pleas'd repeats the blithsom sound:
I, sleeping as I lay, in rapture cry'd,
Long live the happy Prince, long live the beauteous Bride.

In flowing robes and squared caps advance,
Pallas their guide, her ever-favour'd band;
As they approach they join in mystic dance,
Large scrolls of paper waving in their hand.
Nearer they come, I heard em sweetly sing&mdash;
But louder now approach the peals of joy;
The gladsom sounds which from each quarter ring,
Dispel my slumbers, and my trance destroy.
Waking, I heard the shouts on ev'ry side
Proclaim, AUGUSTA fair the happy FREDERICK'S Bride.
