Let others tell the joys which Conquest brings,
And sing the Glories of triumphant Kings;
In pomp and words, each godlike deed rehearse,
And call forth all the Majesty of Verse;
A nobler Theme my willing Muse employs,
From such a Theme far greater Triumphs rise;
The softer Hours of Peace demand my Strains;
Peace, our Inheritance, whilst BRUNSWICK reigns.

And Thou great Prince, the Friend of every Art,
Accept this tribute of a grateful Heart;
Fam'd for thy Father's Virtues, and thy own,
Those Royal Virtues which adorn a Throne;
Who, tho' in War renown'd, to Peace inclin'd,
Still seek'st, like Heav'n, the Welfare of Mankind.

When since contending Nations rush'd to arms;
And troubled Europe's Peace with dire alarms:
Mars, stern destroyer, with delight beheld
The slaughter'd Heroes spread th' ensanguin'd field:
Our Monarch interpos'd, His powerful Nod
Calm'd the fierce rage of the relentless God;
Quiet restor'd; and gave the lab'ring Swains
In peace to feed their Flocks, to till their fertile Plains.

Thus, e'er the infant World from Chaos rose,
The jarring Elements which it's frame compose;
Call'd forth their Armies 'gainst each adverse Side,
And great dissentions fill'd the mighty Void;
Th' Almighty bid the civil Discord cease:
He spoke the powerful Word; and all was Peace.

Yet still o'er all, superiour to the rest,
His Country's Love burns bright within his breast;
Anxious for England's Honour and Renown,
He seeks our Quiet, but neglects His own.
Thro' His Protection safe our Merchant's roam
To foreign Lands, and bring both Indies home;
The Heav'ns indulgent on our labours smile,
And Peace and Plenty crown our happy Isle.

But, that our growing Joys may know no end,
The Monarch's Cares to future Times extend;
Blest in His Royal Progeny divine,
We view with wonder the illustrious Line:
Whilst He the mighty Blessing to ensure,
By new Alliance does our Bliss secure.
Thrice happy Prince!  for whom his Cares provide,
So fair a Consort, so divine a Bride,
Adorn'd with every Grace, with every Art
To warm with potent Love a Monarch's Heart:
When we survey thy Godlike form, we see
Great Prince, another GEORGE in Thee.

Thy Subjects grown impatient of delay,
With ardent wishes meet th' approaching day;
Big with the mighty Expectation wait,
And long to see their Happiness compleat.

Thou Neptune, whom the watry Stores obey,
Smooth the rough surface of the troubled Sea;
Calm it's fierce rage, let every wave subside,
Waft the rich Burden gently o'er the Tide;
Th' illustrious Princess to our Realm restore,
And land Her safely on the British Shore.

But see, She comes!  Augusta comes, rejoice
Ye Sons of England, raise Your grateful Voice!
With loud Acclame the Royal Dame receive,
The greatest Blessing which the Gods can give.
Let the shrill Trumpets make a joyful sound;
Whilst ecchoing Rocks the joyful notes rebound.

Loe, from this happy Marriage we presage
Innum'rous Blessings to the coming Age,
Pleas'd with the prospect, we before our Eyes
Behold an awful Train of Kings arise,
In mystic Visions the great Line survey,
Ordain'd in future times the British Realm to sway.

Thus when Aeneas saw with vast delight
His great Descendants, pass before his sight;
That godlike Race design'd in time to come
To bear the Scepter of Imperial Rome;
In admiration lost He view'd the Scene;
And call'd those People blest, o'er whom such Kings shou'd reign.
