The Mighty Master of the sounding Lyre
Did list'ning Trees and Rocks with Musick move,
Did Savages with Thoughts Humane inspire,
And taught them Justice, Clemency, and Love:
But say, Great Orpheus, how shall I
Unskill'd in Magic Harmony
Accost the knowing Ear?
How shall I in unequal Verse
The Greatest of Mankind rehearse,
And Princes not offended hear?

Did not indulgent Greatness smile,
Did not They censure least who most excell,
Spencer had never grac'd our Isle,
Nor dar'd Great Gloriana's Virtues tell:
Yet Music swell'd his grateful Throast,
Those Virtues height'ning ev'ry Note;
In Verse Immortal may they shine,
As they adorn the Royal Line!
Improv'd in Brightness as they rise,
And add new Glories to the Skies;
So may the Muse impatient soar
High in the pathless Way untry'd before:
The Happy Theme exalts each humble Voice,
At Royal Nuptials We rejoice;
We sing new Honours issuing from the Throne,
And Joys to Gloriana never known.

O bear Me, Spencer, on thy Wings!
But ev'n thy lofty Voice too rudely sings!
Nor can the Muse's nicest Art
Express the Raptures of the Heart,
How FREDERICK with noble Ardour burns,
How Fair AUGUSTA modest Love returns;
Nor the blissful Congress draw
When They first each other saw,
And in silent Transport own'd
Description injur'd what they found;
How by no vulgar Passion mov'd
At once They saw, admir'd, and lov'd:
Congenial Souls the Magnet's Virtue know,
A strong attractive Force employ,
At once a sympathizing Likeness show;
Each feels and Each reflects the social Joy.

O Britain think, think whence these Glories came,
Review the Brunswick and the Saxon race;
Say, can the Flatt'ry of a Royal Name
Allure the Worthy Offspring to Disgrace?
Wou'd not Great GEORGE'S Son disdain
O'er a corrupted Land to Reign?
Wou'd great Augusta with degen'rate Pride
Receive an impious Pow'r, Her Ancestors defy'd?
But see what sacred Virtues shed
Divine Resemblance on the happy Pair!
Abasht Corruption stands, and in Despair
In lower Darkness hides Her hateful Head.
Britain shall ne'er again polluted scorn
Her pure Religion and her wholesome Laws,
Nor shall the Lawrels from her Brow be torn,
But Honour triumph in a virtuous Cause.

And when new Princely Consorts shall arise
Like These in Love and Glory blest,
Yet the transported Lover's eyes
Shall speak less Rapture than the Parents Breast:
And if kind Heav'n prolongs the Muse's Days,
Her Voice untun'd for Hymeneal Lays,
More precious may Her pious Breath
Avert the threat'ning Arms of Death;
May She, more grateful to the Royal Pair,
And not in vain, renew this earnest Pray'r,
Late may they see with Pleasure from the Throne
Their People's Transports emulate their own!
