In t' other hundred, o'er yon swarthy moor,
Deep in the mire with tawny rush beset;
Where bleak sea-breezes echo from the shore,
And foggy damps infect the noontide heat,
There lies a Country Curate's dismal seat:
View well those barren heaths with sober eye,
And wonder how a man can live so wretchedly.

See, to the farmer's yard, where close allied
A ragged church th' adjacent dikes commands;
On bell the steeple fills, (the tinker's pride!)
The beams are wreath'd about with hempen bands,
Wove, as the roof decay'd, by pious hands:
Drops from the thatch still keep the whitewash wet,
God bless the holy man that dares to preach in it!

The house stands near, this church's softer brother;
On crutches both advanc'd in hoary eld:
A double rail runs from the one to t' other,
And saves the Curate from the dirty field,
Where muck of various kind and hue is mell'd:
O'er this each Sunday to the church he climbs,
And to preserve his cassock risques his limbs.

Him liveth near in dirty neighbourhood,
His clerk, a blacksmith tho', of sallow hue;
Whose empty cellar long hath open stood,
A certain sign of penury and rue:
Him would the Curate fain persuade to brew.
Still happy man, if I should leave untold
The shrew, who of his life shrill government doth hold.

The well known power of an English wife
Nor day nor night she ceases to explain;
Her wit unrein'd promotes eternal strife,
Her beauty makes her arrogant and vain,
And both conspire to sharpen her disdain;
While rank ill-nature poisons all his joys,
Confus'd in endless squabble and unceasing noise.

Eight years hath heaven plagu'd 'em with a boy,
Who hates a sister younger by a year,
Whose hungry meagre looks sans life or joy
They view, and frown upon ye wrangling pair,
(Who like two rav'nous locusts do appear
On one small flower) repent that e'er they sped,
Since Cupid's golden shafts they find are tip'd with lead.

Each sun arises in a noisome fog,
Tir'd of their beds they rise as soon as light;
With like disgust their summers on they jog,
And o'er a few stray chips their winter night:
Such is the married Essex Curate's plight!
Tho' seasons change, no sense of change they know,
But with a discontented eye view all things here below.

When meagre Lent her famish'd look uprears,
Her eyes indent with penury and pine;
Forth go the hungry family to prayers,
And pious sermon, while the farmers dine;
In vain the children for their meals repine:
The blooming fields administer no cheer,
Joyless they view the purple promise of the year.

Summer attends him with fresh troubles ply'd,
His breeches hung aloft for winter's wear:
He spies the flocks fly the returning tide,
And every tenth he wishes to his share;
Now to the hay-field trudge the hapless pair;
And if they kindly treat the country folk,
They compliment his Rector with ye biggest cock.

When Autumn fretful fills the teeming mead,
And plenty frees the farmer's heart from care:
Mean time the thought of surplice fees delay'd,
And th' hollow gulphing of the tilted beer,
Unpay'd for yet!  distract his mind with fear;
No hopes another vessel to procure,
Unless with learned scraps he suns th' admiring brewer.

When Icy bands the stiffen'd wave enfold,
At grudging neighbour's is he often seen,
Chafing with borrow'd heat the outward cold,
But ah!  no beer to thaw the cold within;
And then his wife pursues with hideous din;
Thence in the barn he muses what to say,
To mend, yet not offend her on next sabbath-day.

Still worse and worse her lashing tongue he feels,
The spurns of fortune and the weight of years:
The post-horse thus, an ancient racer, reels,
No longer now a steddy course he steers,
His knees now tremble and he hangs his ears;
He sweats, he totters, cover'd o'er with gore,
And falls unpity'd, as he liv'd before.
