COLIN.
Here, Blowszybee, here at the stile,
You've pent your sheep, let's rest a while.
What happen'd at the busy town,
That makes blyth William look so down?

BLOWSZYBEE.
H&mdash;s he loves, the brightest maid&mdash;

COLIN.
I wonder'd why his oxen stray'd,
His sheep and heifers pine'd unfed:
In love!  the riddle's clear; you know
When first fair Rose I woo'd, 'twas so.

BLOWSZYBEE.
Ay, William, late the blythest swain,
That trode the lawn, or flowery plain,
To list'ning nymphs, cou'd best rehearse,
Love-tale, or cartch, in easy verse;
Who like him, Chevy-chase cou'd sing?
Who nimbler jig of all the ring?
Tho' Scottish bards may boast their play,
His flute wou'd swell with sweetest lay:
The jolly hunt how oft hae's led,
O'er hill and dale with winged speed,
Eager to foil the bounding deer,
The wiley fox, and shifting hare?
Nor winged flight, nor shifting wiles,
Cou'd save 'em from his deadly toils.
All, all superior powers obey&mdash;
Our William's self is Cupid's prey.
At Bristol which to London's fame,
Submits as Severn to great Thame;
Yet other towns as much exceeds,
As the tall alder whispering reeds;
Where ships that tides of wealth convey,
Like a thick forest crowd the key,
There stands on Avon's buzzing side,
An ancient pile of reverend pride:
Where pious dames in garments neat,
To hear the tuneful organs meet.
Adjoining lyes a spacious green,
Around are stately fabricks seen,
Where cloister'd maids (with unmov'd heart
Who long had seen their lovers smart)
Too late, alas!  now kinder grown,
Reluctant pass their nights alone.
Ye blooming maids from them beware&mdash;
Since nor coming looks, nor daily pray'r,
Nought can avail; but heaven we find,
Denial thus repays in kind.
I'th midst a cross with tow'ring head
Glistens like guilded ginger-bread;
Around it throng at evening tide
Exulting in embroider'd pride,
Avona's nymphs, with beaux so bright,
In guilded coat, and stockings white:
Among the rest comes William too,
With ruffled hand, and coat of blue,
His lolling head was void of care,
His hat aside with careless air,
His nose with smutty snuff was tann'd,
A slender wan wav'd in his hand&mdash;
&mdash;But see Harissa trips along,
Encircled by th' admiring throng;
Her rising breast and falling waste,
By bright flame colour'd tunic's grac'd;
Sad emblem of the lambent pain,
She lights in every gazing swain!
Her shining myrtle-colour'd hair,
Shadows her face, like lilly fair;
Her lips with soft persuasion move,
Her eyes like Cupid's arrows rove;
Nor are her eyes less fatal found,
Alike they dart, alike they wound.
Admiring fops her beauties tell,
And envious nymphs with vapours swell.
'Twas now now, that with a side-long look
Poor William thro' the heart was struck,
In thro' his eyes the mischief pass'd,
Like frightened boor he stands a ghast;
Harissa with triumphant smile,
Observ'd him taken in her toil:
With cruel haste, and scornful air,
Then left him sinking in despair.
In lonely shades he seek for ease,
His once dear sports forget to please,
No more he wakes the grey-ey'd morn,
With clear Hey-rogues or cheerful horn,
No more great Piercy's fate he sings,
No more delights in sportive rings,
Thoughtful and mute the live-long day
He sits, or pipes in mournful lay.
The gather in swains desire to know,
The dread occasion of his woe;
When William rais'd his pensive head,
And to the pitying Shepherds said:
For fair Harissa, friends, I sigh,
Relent Harissa, or I dye.

COLIN.
Ha!  luckless youth!  come take thy crook,
'Tis late, twice four the clock has struck,&mdash;
The nymphs with equal passion move,
Or, lord, defend us swains from love.
