ACT I.  SCENE I.
Scene a forest near the source of a river.

THYRSIS.
The dreaded, pow'rful, impious Demi-god,
Comaspes, Circe's and great Bacchus' son,
Who now infests our isle, and terror strikes
In ev'ry shepherd, and in ev'ry swain,
With a tumultuous train is here return'd,
And horror thro' the ample forest spreads;
This day my lord does, with his darling spouse,
Pass thro' the mazes of its gloomy paths:
Ye sportful Naiades, Sabrina, kind,
Goddess whose greater pow'r's o'er the banks
Of this christalline flood, exert yourself,
And for his safety wake; Ah!  may you thus,
As it becomes the aweful pow'r divine,
The impious punish, and the just protect.

SABRINA.
Devout humility, and honest zeal,
Which pour forth pray'rs so ardent and so just,
Incline both heav'n and me to lend an ear;
But 'tis not lawful that we shou'd break thro'
That course of things which is already fix'd;
Be satisfied to hope no adverse fate
Shall on thy lord attend.  Thyrsis, do thou,
To meet him, to the eastward guide thy steps.

THYRSIS.
Who, in those gloomy horrors, Goddess, will
Guide from the dangers which attend the way.
Trust to the deity thou dost adore.
Whene'er in dangers mortals are,
The Deity then most is seen;
Whose counsels or assisting care,
Do from those perils screen.
Justice and mercy they defend,
They're these they always do protect;
This law of theirs does all transcend,
And this the Gods will ne'er neglect.
[Exit.]

SABRINA.
The whiten'd sands which albion's coasts surround,
To father Ocean (who does life infuse
In all which in th' extended bosome rise
Of th' antient mother) as his regal seat,
Most grateful are; to me this day he gave
The care, this isle by him and Jove belov'd,
To free from terrors of the monster fell,
Love, honour, beauty, liberty,
Shall ever then conjointly reign;
These on the happy shores shall be
As lasting as the sandy grain.
With these each joy that's most sublime,
And fame which ever shall survive,
With glorious triumph, over time,
Shall here in emulation strive.
