In evrich Mart that stands on British Ground,
In evrich Village less y-known to Fame,
Dwells there, in Cot uncouth, a far renown'd,
A Matron old, whom we School-Mistress name;
Who wont unruly Brats with Birch to tame:
They grieven sore in Durance vile y-pent,
Aw'd by the Pow'r of uncontrouled Dame;
And oft-times on Vagaries idly bent
For Task unconn'd, or unkempt Hair are sore y-shent.

Nar to this Dome is found a Patch so green,
On which the Tribe their Gambols do display:
Als at the Door impris'ning Board is seen;
Lest weakly Wights of smaller size shou'd stray:
Eager, perdie, to bask in sun-shine Day:
The Noises intermix'd, which thence resound,
Do Learning's little Tenement betray:
Where sits the Dame, disguis'd in Look profound,
And eyes her fairy Throng, and turns her Wheel around.

Right well knew She each Temper to descry,
To thwart the proud, and the submiss to raise:
Some with vile copper Prize exalt on high,
And some entice with Pittance small of Praise:
And other Sorts with baleful Spriggs affrays:
Eke in her Absence She command doth hold,
While with quaint Arts the thoughtless Croud she sways;
Fore-warn'd if little Bird their Tricks behold,
'Twill whisper in her Ear, and all the Scene unfold.

Lo!  now, with State, she utters the command.
Eftsoons the Urchins to their Tasks repair;
Their Books of stature small take they in Hand,
Which with pellucid Horn secured are,
To save from Finger wet, the Letters fair:
The Work so quaint, that on their Backs is seen,
St. George's high Atchievements does declare;
On which thilk Wight that has y-gazing been
Kens the forth-coming Rod, unpleasing Sight, I ween!

But ah!  what Pen his woful Plight can trace,
Or what Device his loud Laments explain,
The Form uncouth of his disguised Face,
The pallid Hue that dyes his Looks amain,
The plenteous Show'r that does his Check distain,
When he in abject wise implores the Dame;
Ne hopeth ought of sweet Reprieve to gain:
Or when from high she levels well her Aim,
And thro' the Thatch his Cries each falling Stroke proclaim.

The other Tribe aghast, with sore dismay
Attend, and conn their Tasks with mickle Care:
By turns astony'd evrich Twigg survey,
And from their Fellows furrow'd Bum beware;
Knowing, I wist, how each the same may share:
Till Fear has taught 'em a performance meet,
And to the well-known Chest the Dame repair;
Whence oft with sugar'd Cates she doth 'em greet,
And Ginger-bread y-rare, now, certes, doubly sweet.

Now to their Seats they hie with merry glee,
And in beseemly order sitten there;
All but the Wight of Bum y-galled, he
Abhors both Bench, and Stool, and Form, and Chair;
(This Hand in Mouth y-fix'd, that rends his Hair)
And eke with Snubs profound, and heaving Breast,
Convulsions intermitting!  does declare
His grievous Wrongs, his Dame's unjust Behest,
And scorns her proffer'd Love, and shuns to be caress't.

Behind some Door, in melancholy Thought,
Mindless of Food, he, dreary Caitiff!  pines,
Ne for his Fellows joyance careth ought,
But to the Winds all Merriment resigns.
His Face besprent with liquid Chrystal shines;
And many a sullen Look askaunce is sent,
Which for his Dame's Annoyance he designs;
Nathless the more to pleasure him she's bent,
The more doth he perverse her 'Haviour past resent.

Algates the rest from silk Misfortune free,
Stir'n but as Nature doth abroad them call;
Then squatten down with Hand beneath each Knee,
Ne seeken out or secret Nook or Wall,
But cack in open Street &mdash; no Shame doth them appall.
And may no Carl their Innocence deride,
While they p &mdash; ss boldly, in the face of all;
Turning unaw'd their Vestments small aside,
Ne covet Hedge, ne Barn their privy Parts to hide.

But when the Hour of Pleasaunce draweth near,
They usher forth all debonair and gay;
And standing on the Green, with jocund Leer,
Salute the Stranger passing on his Way.
Some builden fragile tenements of Clay;
Some to the standing Lake their Courses bend,
With Pebbles smooth at Duck and Drake to play:
Thilk to the Huxter's sav'ry Cot y-tend,
In pastry Kings and Queens th' allotted Mite to spend.

Here, as each Season yields a diffrent store,
Each Season's Stores in order ranged been;
Apples with Cabbage-net y-cover'd o'er,
Galling full sore th' unmoney'd Wight are seen,
And Goose-b'rie clad in Liv'ry red, or green:
And here of lovely Dye the Cath'rine Pear,
Fine Pear!  as lovely for thy Juice, I ween.
O!  may no Wight e'er pennyless come there,
Lest led by thee astray, he shameful Theft prepare.

See!  Cherries here, e'er Cherries yet abound,
With Thread so white in lusheous Bundles ty'd,
Scatter, like blooming Maid, their Glances round;
And draw with pamper'd Look our Eyes aside:
These must be bought tho' Penury betide;
The Plum of purple Hue, the Nut so brown,
Tempting the passing Swain:  thilk Cakes beside,
Whose much-lov'd Names th' Inventress City own,
Rend'ring thro' Britain's Isle Salopia's Praises known.
