Ethereal Daughter of the lusty Spring,
And sweet Favonius; ever-gentle MAY!
Shall I, unblam'd presume of Thee to sing,
And with thy living colours gild my lay?
Thy genial spirit mantles in my brain;
My numbers languish in a softer vein:
I pant, too emulous, to flow in Spenser's strain.

Say, mild Aurora of the blooming year,
With storms when winter blackens nature's face;
When whirling winds the howling forest tear,
And shake the solid mountains from their base:
Say, what refulgent chambers of the sky
Veil thy beloved glories from the eye,
For which the nations pine, and earth's fair children die?

Where Leda's twins, forth from their diamond-tow'r,
Alternate, o'er the night their beams divide;
In light embosom'd, happy, and secure
From winter-rage, thou chusest to abide.
Blest residence!  For, there, as Poets tell,
 The pow'rs of Poetry and Wisdom dwell;
Apollo, wakes the Arts; the Muses, strike the shell.

Certes o'er Rhedicyna's laurel'd mead,
(For ever spread, ye lawrels, green and new!)
The brother-stars their gracious nurture shed,
And secret blessings of poetic-dew.
They bathe their horses in the learned flood,
With flame recruited for th' aethereal road;
And deem fair Isis' swans fair as their Father-god.

No sooner April, trim'd with Girlands gay,
Rains fragrance o'er the world, and kindly showrs;
But, in the Eastern-pride of beauty, May,
To gladden earth, forsakes her heav'nly bow'rs,
Restoring Nature from her palsy'd state.
April, retire; ne longer, Nature, wait:
Soon may she issue from the morning's golden gate.

Come, bounteous May!  in Fulness of thy might,
Lead, briskly, on the mirth-infusing hours,
All-recent from the bosom of delight,
With nectar, nurtur'd; and involv'd in flow'rs:
By Spring's sweet blush, by nature's teeming womb;
By Hebe's dimply smile, by Flora's bloom;
By Venus'-self (for Venus'-self demands thee) come!

By the warm sighs, in dewy even-tide,
Of melting maidens, in the wood-bin-groves,
To pity loosen'd, soften'd down from pride;
By billing Turtles, and by cooing Doves;
By the youth's plainings stealing on the Air,
(For youths will plain, tho' yielding be the fair)
Hither, to bless the maidens and the youths, repair.

With dew bespangled, by the Hawthorn-buds,
With freshness breathing, by the daisy'd plains,
By the mix'd music of the warbling woods,
And jovial roundelays of nymphs and swains;
In thy full energy, and rich array,
Delight of earth and heav'n!  O blessed May!
From heav'n descend to earth:  on earth vouchsafe to stay.

She comes! &mdash; A silken Camus, emral'd-green,
Gracefully loose, adown her shoulder's flows,
(Fit to enfold the Limbs of Paphos' Queen)
And with the labours of the needle glows,
Purfled by Nature's Hand!  The amorous air
And musky-western breezes, fast, repair,
Her mantle proud to swell, and wanton with her hair.

Her hair (but rather threads of light it seems)
With the gay honours of the spring intwind,
Copious, unbound, in nectar'd ringlets streams,
Floats glitt'ring on the sun, and scents the wind,
Love-sick with odours! &mdash; Now to order roll'd,
It melts upon her bosom's dainty mould,
Or, curling round her waist, disparts its wavy gold.

Young-circling roses, blushing, round them throw
The sweet abundance of their purple rays,
And lillies, dip'd in fragrance, freshly blow,
With blended beauties, in her angel-face.
The humid radiance beaming from her eyes
The air and seas illumes, the earth and skies;
And open, where she smiles, the sweets of Paradise.

On Zephyr's wing the laughing goddess view,
Distilling balm.  She cleaves the buxom air,
Attended by the silver-footed dew,
The ravages of winter to repair.
She gives her naked bosom to the gales,
Her naked bosom down the Aether sails;
Her bosom breaths delight; her breath the spring exhales.

All as the Phenix, in Arabian Skies,
New-burnish'd from his spicy funeral Pyres,
At large, in roseal undulation, flies;
His plumage dazzles and the gazer tires:
Around their King the plumy nations wait,
Attend his triumph, and augment his state:
He tow'ring, claps his wings, and wins th' Aethereal height.

So round this Phenix of the gawdy year
A thousand, nay ten thousand sports and smiles,
Fluttering in gold, along the Hemisphere,
Her praises chaunt; her praises glad the isles.
Conscious of her approach (to deck her bow'rs)
Earth, from her fruitful lap and bosom, pours
A waste of springing sweets, and voluntary flow'rs.

Narcissus fair, in snowy velvet gown'd;
Ah foolish!  still to love the fountain-brim:
Sweet Hyacinth, by Phaebus erst bemoan'd;
And tulip, flaring in her powder'd trim.
Whate're, Armida, in thy gardens blew;
Whate're the sun inhales, or sips the dew;
Whate're compose the chaplet on Ianthes' brow.

He who undaz'd can wander o'er her face,
May gain upon the solar-blaze at noon!&mdash;
What more than female sweetness, and a grace
Peculiar!  save, Ianthe, thine alone,
Ineffable effusion of the day!
So very much the same, that Lovers say,
May is Ianthe; or the dear Ianthe, May.

So far as doth the harbinger of day
The lesser lamps of night in sheen excell;
So far in sweetness and in beauty May
Above all other months doth bear the bell.
So far as May doth other months exceed
So far in virtue and in goodlihead
Above all other nymphs Ianthe bears the meed.

Welcome!  as to a youthful poet, wine,
To fire his fancy, and enlarge his soul:
He weaves the lawrel-chaplet with the vine,
And grows immortal as he drains the bowl.
Welcome!  as beauty to the lovesick swain,
For which he long had sigh'd, but sigh'd in vain;
He darts into her arms, and rushes from his pain.

The drowzy Elements, arouz'd by thee,
Roll to harmonious measures, active all!
Earth, water, air, and fire, with feeling glee,
Exult to celebrate thy festival.
Fire glows intenser; softer, blows the air;
More smooth the waters flow; earth smiles more fair:
Earth, water, air and fire, thy gladning impulse share.

What boundless tides of splendor o'er the skies,
O'erflowing brightness stream their golden rays!
Heav'ns azure kindles with the varying dies,
Reflects the glory, and returns the blaze.
Air whitens; wide the Tracts of Aether been
With colours damask'd rich, and goodly sheen,
And all above, is blue; and all below is green.

At thy approach, the wild waves' loud uproar,
And foamy surges of the mad'ning main,
Forget to heave their mountains to the shore;
Diffus'd into the level of the plain.
For thee, the Halcyon builds her summer's-nest;
For thee, the Ocean smooths her troubled breast,
Gay from thy placid smiles, in thy own purple drest.

Have ye not seen, in gentle even-tide,
When Jupiter the earth hath richly showr'd,
Striding the clouds, a bow dispredden-wide
As if with light inwove, and gayly flowr'd
With bright variety of blending dies?
White, purple, yellow melt along the skies,
Alternate colours sink, alternate colours rise.

The earths embroidery then have ye ey'd,
And smile of blossoms, yellow, purple, white;
Their vernal-tinctur'd leaves, luxurious, died
In Flora's liv'ry, painted by the light.
Lights' painted children in the breezes play,
Lay out their dewy bosoms to the ray,
Their soft enamel spread, and beautify the day.

From the wide altar of the foodful earth
The flowrs, the herbs, the plants, their incense roll;
The Orchards swell the ruby-tinctur'd Birth;
The Vermil-gardens breath the spicy soul.
Grateful to May, the Nectar-spirit flies,
The wafted Clouds of lavish'd Odours rise,
The Zephyr's balmy load, ambitious of the skies.

The Bee, the golden daughter of the spring,
From mead to mead, in wanton labour, roves,
And loads its little thigh, or gilds its wing
With all the essence of the flushing groves:
Extracts the aromatick soul of flow'rs,
And, humming in delight, its waxen Bow'rs
Fills with the luscious spoil, and lives ambrosial hours.

Touch'd by thee, May, the flocks and lusty droves
That low in pastures, or on mountains bleat,
Revive their frolicks and renew their loves,
Stung to the marrow with a generous heat.
The stately courser, bounding o'er the plain,
Shakes to the winds the honours of his mane,
(High-arch'd his neck) and, snuffing, hopes the dappled train.

The aereal songsters sooth the list'ning groves:
The mellow thrush; the ouzle sweetly shrill,
And little linnet celebrate their loves
In hawthorn valley, or on tufted hill;
The soaring lark, the lowly nightingale,
A thorn her pillow, trills her doleful tale,
And melancholy musick dies along the dale.

This gay exuberance of gorgeous spring,
The gilded mountain, and the herbag'd vale;
The woods that blossom, and the birds that sing,
The murmuring fountain and the breathing dale.
The dale, the fountain, birds and woods delight,
The vales, the mountains and the spring invite,
Yet unadorn'd by May, no longer charm the sight.

When nature laughs around, shall man alone,
Thy image, hang (ah me!)  the sickly head?
When nature sings, shall nature's glory groan,
And languish for the pittance poor of bread?
O may the man that shall his image scorn,
Alive, be ground with hunger, most forlorn,
Die unanell'd, and dead, by dogs and kites be torn.

Curs'd may he be (as if he were not so.)
Nay doubly curs'd be such a breast of steel,
Which never melted at another's woe,
Nor tenderness of bowels knew to feel.
His heart is black as hell, in flowing store
Who hears the needy crying at his door,
Who hears them cry, ne recks; but suffers them be poor.

But blest, O more than doubly blest be he!
Let honour crown him and eternal rest,
Whose bosom, the sweet fount of charity,
Flows out to noursle Innocence distrest.
His ear is open to the widows cries,
His hand the orphan's cheek of sorrow drys;
Like mercy's self he looks on want with pity's eyes.

In this blest season, pregnant with delight,
Ne may the boading owl with screeches wound
The solemn silence of the quiet night,
Ne croaking raven, with unhallow'd sound,
Ne damned ghost affray with deadly yell
The waking lover, rais'd by mighty spell,
To pale the stars, till Hesper shine it back to hell.

Ne witches rifle gibbets, by the moon,
(With horror winking, trembling all with with fear)
Of many a clinking chain, and canker'd bone:
Nor Imp in visionary shape appear,
To blast the thriving verdure of the plain;
Ne let Hobgoblin, ne the Ponk, profane
With shadowy glare the light, and mad the bursting brain.

Yet fairy-elves (so ancient custom's will)
The green-gown'd fairy elves, by starry sheen,
May gambol or in valley or on hill,
And leave their footsteps on the circled green.
Full lightly trip it, dapper Mab, around;
Full featly, Ob'ron, Thou, o'er grass-turf bound:
Mab brushes off no dew-drops, Ob'ron prints no ground.

Ne bloody rumours violate the ear,
Of city's sack'd, and kingdoms desolate,
With plague or sword, with pestilence or war;
Ne rueful murder stain thy aera-date;
Ne shameless calumny, for fell despight,
The foulest fiend that e'er blasphem'd the light,
At lovely lady rail, nor grin at courteous knight.

Ne wailing in our streets nor fields be heard,
Ne voice of misery assault the heart;
Ne fatherless from table be debar'd;
Ne piteous tear from eye of sorrow start;
But plenty, pour thy self into the bowl
Of bounty-head; may never want controul
That good, good honest man, who feeds the famish'd soul.

Now let the trumpet's martial thunders sleep;
The viol wake alone, and tender flute:
The Phrygian Lyre with sprightly fingers sweep,
And, Erato, dissolve the Lydian lute.
Yet Clio frets, and burns, with honest pain,
To rouze and animate the martial strain,
Since William charg'd the Foe at well-fought Culloden.

The Trumpet sleeps, but soon for Thee shall wake,
Illustrious CHIEF!  to sound thy mighty name,
(Snatch'd from the malice of Lethean lake)
Triumphant-swelling from the mouth of Fame.
Mean while, disdain not (so the Virgins pray)
This rosy crown, with Myrtle wove and Bay;
(Too humble crown I ween:)  the offering of May.

And while the Virgins hail thee with their voice,
Heaping thy crowded way with greens and flow'rs,
And in the fondness of their heart rejoice
To sooth, with dance and song, thy gentler hours:
Indulge the season, and with sweet repair
Embay thy limbs, the vernal blessing share:
Then blaze in arms again, renew'd for foreign war.

Through kind Infusion of celestial pow'r,
The dullard-earth May quick'neth with delight:
Full suddenly the seeds of joy recure
Elastick spring, and force within empight.
If senseless elements invigorate prove
By genial May; and heavy matter move,
Shall shepherdesses cease, shall shepherds fail to love?

Ye shepherdesses, in a goodly round,
Purpled with health, as in the greenwood-shade,
Incontinent ye thump the echoing ground
And defftly lead the dance along the glade;
(O may no showres your merry-makes affray!)
Hail at the op'ning, at the closing day,
All hail, ye Bonnibels, to your own Season, May.

Nor ye absent yourselves, ye shepherd swains,
But lend to dance and song the liberal May,
And while in jocund ranks you beat the plains,
Your flocks shall nibble and your lambkins play,
Frisking in glee.  To May your girlands bring,
And ever and anon her praises sing:
The woods shall echo May, with May the vallies ring.

Your May-pole deck with flow'ry Coronal;
Sprinkle the flow'ry Coronal with wine;
And in the nimble-footed Galliard, all,
Shepherds and Shepherdesses, lively, join.
Hither from village sweet and hamlet fair,
From bordering cot and distant glenne repair:
Let youth indulge its sport, to Eld bequeath its care.

Ye wanton Dryads and light-tripping Fawns,
Ye jolly Satyrs, full of lustyhead,
And ye that haunt the hills, the brooks, the lawns;
O come with rural Chaplets gay dispread:
With heel so nimble wear the springing grass,
To shrilling bagpipe, or to tingling brass;
Or foot it to the reed:  Pan pipes himself apace.

In this soft season, when creation smil'd,
A quivering splendor on the ocean hung,
And from the fruitful froth, his fairest child,
The Queen of bliss and beauty, Venus sprung.
The Dolphins gambol o'er the wat'ry way,
Carrol the Naids, while the Triton's play,
And all the sea-green sisters bless the holy-day.

In Honour of her natal-month the Queen
Of bliss and beauty, consecrates her hours,
Fresh as her cheek, and as her brow serene,
To buxom Ladies, and their Paramours.
Love tips with golden alchimy his dart;
With rapt'rous anguish, with an honey'd smart
Eye languishes on eye, and heart dissolves on heart.

A softly-swelling hill, with Myrtles crown'd,
(Myrtles to Venus algates sacred been)
Hight Acidale, the fairest spot on ground,
For ever fragrant and for ever green,
O'erlooks the windings of a shady vale,
By beauty form'd for amorous regale.
Was ever hill so sweet, as sweetest Acidale?

All down the sides, the sides profuse of flow'rs,
An hundred rills, in shining mazes, flow
Through mossy grotto's Amaranthine bow'rs,
And form a laughing flood in Vale below:
Where oft their limbs the Loves and Graces bay
(When Summer sheds insufferable day)
And sport, and dive, and flounce in wantonness of play.

No Noise o'ercomes the silence of the shades,
Save short-breath'd vows, the dear excess of joy;
Or harmless giggle of the youths and maids,
Who yield obeysance to the Cyprian Boy:
Or lute, soft-sighing in the passing gale;
Or fountain, gurgling down the sacred vale,
Or hymn to Beauty's Queen, or Lover's tender tale.

Here Venus revels, here maintains her Court
In light festivity and gladsome game:
The young and gay, in frolick troops resort,
Withouten censure and withouten blame.
In pleasure steep'd, and dancing in delight,
Night steals upon the day; the day, on night:
Each Knight, his Lady loves; each Lady loves her Knight.

Where lives the man (if such a man there be)
In idle wilderness or desart drear,
To Beauty's sacred pow'r an enemy?
Let foul fiends harrow him; I'll drop no tear.
I deem that Carl, by beauty's pow'r unmov'd,
Hated of heav'n, of none but hell approv'd.
O may he never love, O never be belov'd!

Hard is his heart, unmelted by thee, May!
Unconscious of love's nectar-tickling sting,
And, unrelenting, cold to Beauty's ray;
Beauty the mother and the child of spring!
Beauty and Wit declare the sexes even;
Beauty, to Woman, Wit to Man is given;
Neither the slime of earth, but each the fire of Heav'n.

Alliance sweet!  let Beauty, Wit approve,
As Flow'rs to Sunshine ope the ready breast:
Wit Beauty loves, and nothing else can love:
The best alone is grateful to the best.
Perfection has no other parallel!
Can Light, with Darkness; Doves with Ravens dwell?
As soon, perdie, shall Heav'n Communion hold with Hell.

I sing to you, who love alone for love:
For gold the beauteous fools (O fools before!)
Can win; tho' brighter wit shall never move:
But folly is to wit the certain Cure.
Curs'd be the men, (or be they young or old)
Curs'd be the women, who themselves have sold
To the detested bed for lucre base of Gold.

Not Julia such:  she higher honour deem'd
To languish in the Sulmo-Poet's arms,
Than by the potentates of earth esteem'd,
To give to scepters and to crowns her charms.
Not Laura such:  in sweet Vauclusa's Vale
She list'ned to her Petrarch's amorous tale.
But did poor Colin Clout o'er Rosalind prevail?

Howe'er that be; in Acidalian shade,
Embracing Julia, Ovid melts the day:
No dreams of banishment his loves invade;
Encircled in eternity of May.
Here Petrarch with his Laura, soft reclin'd
On Violets, gives sorrow to the Wind:
And Colin Clout pipes to the yielding Rosalind.

Pipe on, thou sweetest of the th' Arcadian-train,
That e'er with tuneful breath inform'd the quill:
Pipe on of Lovers the most loving Swain!
Of bliss and melody O take thy fill.
Ne envy I, if dear Ianthe smile,
Tho' low my numbers, and tho' rude my stile;
Ne quit for Acidale, fair Albion's happy isle.

Come then, Ianthe!  milder than the Spring,
And grateful as the rosy mouth of May,
O come; the birds the Hymn of Nature sing,
Inchanting-wild, from every bush and spray:
Th' odrous Gemms swell teeming from the Vine,
A lucious promise of the future Wine,
The spirits to exalt, the genius to refine!

Let us our steps direct where Father-Thames.
In silver windings draws his humid train,
And pours, where'er he rolls his naval-stream,
Pomp on the city, plenty o'er the plain.
Or by the banks of Isis shall we stray,
(Ah why so long from Isis banks away!)
Where thousand damsels dance, and thousand shepherds play.

Or chuse you rather Theron's calm Retreat,
Embosom'd, Surry, in thy verdant vale,
At once the Muses and the Graces seat!
There gently listen to my faithful tale.
Along the dew-bright parterres let us rove,
Or taste the Odours of the Mazy Grove:
Hark how the Turtles coo:  I languish too with love.

Amid the pleasaunce of Arcadian scenes,
Love steals his silent arrows on my breast;
Nor falls of water, nor enamel'd greens,
Can sooth my Anguish, or invite to rest.
You, dear Ianthe, you alone impart
Balm to my wounds, and cordial to my smart:
The Apple of my Eye, the life-blood of my Heart.

With line of silk, with hook of barbed steel,
Beneath this Oaken umbrage let us lay,
And from the water's crystal-bosom steal
Upon the grassy bank the finny prey:
The Perch, with purple speckled manifold;
The Eel, in silver labyrinth self-roll'd,
And Carp, all-burnish'd o'er with drops of scaly gold.

Or shall the meads invite, with Iris-hues
And nature's pencil gay-diversify'd,
(For now the sun has lick'd away the dews)
Fair-flushing and bedeck'd like virgin-bride?
Thither, (for they invite us) we'll repair,
Collect and weave (whate'er is sweet and fair)
A posy for thy breast, a garland for thy hair.

Fair is the lilly, clad in balmy snow;
Sweet is the rose, of spring the smiling eye;
Nipt by the winds, their heads the lillies bow;
Cropt by the hand, the roses fade and dye.
Tho' now in pride of youth and beauty drest,
O think, Ianthe, cruel Time lays waste
The roses of the cheek, the lillies of the breast.

Weep not; but, rather taught by this, improve
The present freshness of thy springing prime:
Bestow thy graces on the god of love,
Too precious for the wither'd arms of Time.
In chaste endearments, innocently gay,
Ianthe!  now, now love thy spring away;
Ere cold October-blasts despoil the bloom of May.

Now up the Chalky mazes of yon Hill,
With grateful diligence, we wind our way;
What op'ning scenes our ravish'd senses fill,
And, wide, their rural luxury display!
Woods, dales, and flocks, and herds, and Cots and spires,
Villa's of learned Clerks, and gentle Squires;
The Villa of a Friend the Eye-sight never tires.

If er'e to thee and Venus, May, I strung
The gladsome lyre, when livelood swell'd my veins,
And Eden's nymphs and Isis damsels sung
In tender elegy, and pastoral strains;
Collect and shed thyself on Theron's bowr's,
O green his gardens, O perfume his flow'rs,
O bless his morning-walks and sooth his ev'ning-hours.

Long, Theron, with thy Annabell enjoy
The Walks of Nature, still to virtue kind,
For sacred Solitude can never cloy;
The Wisdom of an uncorrupted mind!
O very long may Hymen's golden chain
To earth confine you and the rural-reign;
Then soar, at length, to heav'n!  nor pray, O muse, in vain.

Wherer'e the Muses haunt, or Poets muse,
In solitary silence sweetly tir'd,
Unloose thy bosom, May!  thy stores effuse,
Thy vernal stores, by Poets most desir'd,
Of living fountain, of the wood-bin shade,
Of Philomel, thick warbling from the glade.
Thy bounty, in his verse, shall Certes be repay'd.

On Twit'nam-bow'rs (who knows not Twit'nam bow'rs)
Thy thickest plenitude of beauties shed,
Thick as the winter-stars, or summer-flow'rs;
Albe the tuneful Master (ah!)  be dead.
To Colin next he taught my youth to sing,
My reed to warble, to resound my string:
The king of Shepherd's He, of Poet's He the king.

Hail, happy scenes, where Joy wou'd chuse to dwell;
Hail, golden days, which Saturn deems his own;
Hail musick, which the Muses scant excell;
Hail Flowrets, not unworthy Venus' crown.
Ye Linnets, Larks; ye Thrushes, Nightingales;
Ye hills, ye plains, ye groves, ye streams, ye gales,
Ye ever-happy scenes!  all you, your Poet hails.

All-hail to thee, O MAY!  the Crown of all!
The Recompence and glory of my song:
Ne small the recompence, ne glory small,
If gentle ladies, and the Tuneful Throng,
With lovers myrtle, and with Poet's Bay
Fairly bedight, approve the simple lay,
And think on Thomalin whene'er they hail thee, MAY!
