Illustrious POLLIO!  were thy Friend adorn'd
With Eloquence like thine, his humble Muse,
Equal to th' arduous Task, wou'd soon attempt,
As erst for his CADENUS, to resound
Thy Praise, that awful Dignity of Virtue,
Which crowns thy Youth, and do's thy Country Honour;
Full of the God, and by the Friend inspir'd.

Oh!  were our Nations Rights as sacred held,
As dear esteem'd by all our Popular Tribunes,
And Princes of the Senate, as by thee!
Ye Heav'ns!  if my fond Wishes might prevail,
And bright ASTRAEA would the Reins transfer
Of Pow'r to her FABRICIUS!  Virtue, Faith
And, A&mdash;A's Golden Age should be restor'd
B&mdash;N no more from her fond Mother torn,
Should mourn th' unnat'ral Stepdame's rigid Yoke,
Nor, her Son's Sons th' insulting Tyrant dread.
Yet what can'st thou, what th' uncorrupted Few
Of our Egregious Senate!  what such Nobles,
As still are justly Honourable styl'd?
Not with mere gawdy Tinsel lacquer'd o'er
With Strings for PALLAS mark'd, of various Dye,
Like tawdry Flow'rs upon a Dunghill strew'd.
What can the steady Virtues now avail
Of CATO or of BRUTUS?  tho' the Voice
And Energy of CICERO be thine,
What Profit can thy dearest Country hope
From thy Divine PHILIPPICK?  Thou alas!
Might'st with more Resolution share his Fate.
PALLAS, again, his cursed Tribes prepares,
Spreads the same Lure, both for the Venal Cit,
And Nobler Scoundrel; what each Wretch demands
He scruples not to promise; soon enthrall'd
Are all whom wanton Luxury engross,
Or sordid Avarice:  A rank Coward here
Steps forth a Col'nel; See!  like MIDAS, this
Glitters in Gold all o'er; this Tool in Honours:
With Mitre grac'd, behold yon hoary Head,
Observe it totters, as it conscious seem'd,
Of its unworthy Situation there;
Whate'er Almighty PALLAS wills, is right.
What is not Venal grown?  ev'n Peace and War,
Our Country, with its sacred Laws and Honours;
Our Tutelar Deities, the Monuments
Of our Heroick Ancestors, our Sons,
Theirs and their Children's Children &mdash; all are sold.

Does Liberty, by Arms and Blood obtain'd,
And long preserv'd, disdain her ancient Seat,
Worm'd out by such known Arts, such wretched Statesmen?
By her own Wealth o'erturn'd?  Wond'rous to tell!
That these, who erst in ev'ry War victorious,
Spread Terrour round, whose Dictates all obey'd,
These, can I call them B&mdash;NS?  now imbibe
Dastardly Maxims from their servile Neighbours,
And, ripe for the Yoke, lye cringing to be spurn'd.
Pay, Sirs, 'tis CAESAR's!  quick, 'tis Heav'n's Command !
True; but if all be CAESAR's, what remains
For thee, for me, and CAESAR's num'rous Subjects?
Say, by what Claim can CAESAR challenge all?
Must Thousands then to One such Homage pay,
Such uncontroul'd Submission?  is this CAESAR
Descended from the Gods?  His matchless Fame
Extensive, o'er the Universe diffus'd?
Blest with NARCISSUS' Form, ALCIDES' Strength,
ULYSSES' Wisdom, SCIPIO's Chastity,
And ARISTIDES' clear untainted Mind?
O you, from Heav'n-built TROY who claim Descent,
If you must stoop to arbitrary Sway,
And grand high-sounding Names attract your Hearts,
Petition JOVE, your Ancestors Protector,
To send a Godling of his num'rous Race;
At least, let proper Marks direct your Choice:
By such the prudent Bees elect their Sov'reign;
The Prince of these sagacious Animals,
Is Godlike in his Form, in Bulk Majestick,
His Subjects far surpassing, arm'd compleat
With glitt'ring Scales, by Nature's curious Hand;
His sacred Mind, still as his Person blameless,
Each Spark of Pride disdains; entire his Vigour,
Nor droops th' Imperial Wing, by Lust impair'd,
Nor sordid Av'rice shocks his Breast serene.
Oppression never swells the Royal Hoard;
Their Call to each assign'd, their Store secur'd,
No Contest 'mongst the Subjects can arise,
But who shall most in Industry excel:
King, Parent, judge, intent upon their Welfare,
He forms their Manners, and directs their Toil.

The Sov'reign I should chuse, by whatsoe'er
Or low, or lofty Name distinguish'd, first,
Should with consummate Prudence rule himself;
Be Temp'rate, Just, free from Excess of Passion;
Should all his Pow'r and Policy employ
T' advance the Publick Good, not uninform'd
In aught that might conduce to its Improvement;
Humane, Pacifick:  But should insolent Neighbours
Unjustly dare t' invade his Peoples Rights,
Courageous, Resolute, Implacable,
Till prostrate at his Feet, the proud Encroachers
Feel his Resentment, and implore his Mercy.

Has thy Invention fertile aught commodious
For Humane Use explor'd?  Thy Merits much,
In Heav'n's impartial Eye, that far-fam'd General's
Surpass, whom, late on ISTER's Shore triumphant,
The vanquish'd TURK With splendid Trophies grac'd.
In Yours, in VARUS' just unerring Judgment,
He who first turn'd the Bowl, or Basket form'd,
(What will not British Industry achieve?)
The Assyrian, Persian, Macedonian Kings
Excels, and all the proud Caesarean Race.

Can Conquest, by his Fellow-Creature's Blood.
Dear-bought, and hard attain'd, the Victor please,
With Breast humane indu'd?  And can we think
The Gods are with such Butchery delighted?
The Fates themselves by Pow'r and Art unbounded,
Scarce in a Course of Years could TROY translate
Arms and the Man to LATIUM's destin'd Shore;
By Sea, by land such Hurricanes were rais'd,
By Gods to Gods, and Fates to Fates oppos'd:
At length AENEAS, o'er his Foes triumphant,
The Kingdom with the beauteous Bride enjoy'd:
Not that in Arms the matchless shone, or darted
The Lance far-beaming with superior Strength,
Nor for his graceful Person, or Descent,
From JOVE's Majestick Queen; such poor Distinctions
The Gods' with transient View survey:  The Cause
Worthy Coelestial Notice, was deriv'd
From Justice try'd, and Piety supreme;
Awful, Serene, Majestick and Humane,
The Prince and Father shar'd his gen'rous Breast.

Much we fam'd CHINA's Policy admire,
Whose Maxims promise everlasting Empire;
While ROME, that, erst the Worlds Metropolis,
View'd with Disdain inferior States obscure,
To humbler Bounds contracts her tow'ring Views,
And of  JOVE's solemn Vow at length despairing,
Of nought but her enormous Ruins boasts.
Say then, what God intent on CHINA's Happiness,
Has on this sold Basis fix'd her State?
Hear, and adore CONFUCIUS' sacred Name;
Be this your Law, Religion, solid Glory,
Of all your Kings th' eternal sacred Maxim,
'Bove all things to consult the People's Good.
This in the Civil, in the Royal Court,
This Law in all their Councils first obtains,
Their Arms direct, their Ministers prefer,
Nor Gods dare this oppose:  To this obedient,
The King, his People's Father, stands confess'd:
Yet, that the Regal Pomp be still supported,
His Slaves and Guards the Throne surround, with Gold
And Gems refulgent, Chariots, Prancing Steeds,
And num'rous Wives his Majesty attend,
Useless, for State preserv'd, lest aught be wanting,
By other Monarchs necessary deem'd;
Yet are not there expensive Trifles purchas'd
At his lov'd People's Cost, or Vict'ry's Prize;
The Sage HOANGTI, in Confucius' Lore
Instructed, scorns Ambition's narrow Views;
Content, no Cause of War he seeks, nor deems
His Fellow-Creature's Slaughter can augment
His, or his Subject's Fame; No Enemies
He knows, but Foes confess'd to Human Kind,
Who swell by Rapine, and are gorg'd with Blood.
Should PHILIP, by Ambassadors, beneath
The Weight of opulent Presents crouching low,
Th' August Chinese Alliance ask submissive,
Conscious of his defective Birth, compar'd
With Great HOANGTI's Origin Divine,
That gen'rous Prince this Answer would return;

By all-wise Nature far we stand divided,
So may we still remain:  Friendship and Presents
You bring, but meditate perfidious War;
Your Cruelty and Rapine shock Mankind;
The Earth, the Seas resound with your Injustice
Could not the World afford your Monarch Room
Sufficient for his impious Tyranny?
What were PERU and MEXICO to him?
Could not his Shame to EUROPE stand confin'd?
What Crimes does Gold inspire!  which unmolested,
Might in its native Bed sleep inoffensive;
But since a SPANISH God enroll'd, how swoln
With vast Destruction!  Dreadful Deity!
His barb'rous Pow'r lay distant Regions waste,
And Gods and Men, innoxious both, destroys;
More Mischief, Hate, Impiety occasions,
Than fell Erynnis, arm'd with created Serpents.

That Wretch Variety of Fortune merits,
Prometheus' Vultur, and Ixion's Wheel,
Who boundless Avarice exalts to Power,
Or Ways and Means contrives to fleece Mankind.
If mean Fusidius, Claudius should commend.
For Riches hoarded by inglorious Thrift,
Or Graeculus enum'rate PALLAS' Virtues,
His ample Honours, and Exploits renown'd;
Let your old Fav'rite SPENSER in return,
Good Mother HUBBERD's artful Tale relate,
Which whether by a rural Matron told,
Or dictated by the politer Muse,
A most instructive Moral still retains.
While the keen Satyrist, the King describes
Beneath the Monkey's Semblance, all amaz'd,
The Beasts, their Prince a real Monkey view,
Who, having late the Lion's Skin purloin'd,
His Arms, his Scepter, ask'd imperial Crown,
Acted with Mimick Majesty the Monarch:
The wicked Minister he next describes,
Lurking beneath the crafty Fox's Guise;
His various Frauds detects, and endless Rapine,
Nor seems incredible his Tale:  The Monkey
And Fox mischievous, whether they assume
The Royal Character, or Ministerial,
Still are, still were, in Ages far remote,
And ever will rapacious Brutes be deem'd
Yet flourish long, from Punishment exempt,
Proportion'd to their Crimes, unless some God
Vindictive, calls the imperial Lion Home,
To guard the Subject from oppressive Power.

Alas!  what Royal Breast is undisturb'd
By clatt'ring Arms, by notional Renown,
And sanguine Hopes unjust of distant Empire?
Could Kings the World subdue, soon would they covet
Another in the Moon, were that possess'd,
Their fond Ambition next, would Heav'n ascend,
Salmoneus-like, affect to terrify
Mankind with Thunder, and from thence, exact
The Adoration due t' Olympic JOVE.

Tho' hail'd AUGUSTUS, by the Senate styl'd
Germanic, Dacic Emp'ror, vain DOMITIAN,
Th' high-sounding Titles claims of Lord and God.
Honours Divine, thou justly mightst assume,
Intrepid Prince!  who could'st with dext'rous Might
And glitt'ring Steel, transfix such monstrous &mdash; Flies.

The Gods all-wise, in justest Balance weigh
The Merits of Mankind, too clearly viewing
Those Imperfections which the Lustre clouds
Of Princes, e're t' exalt them to the Stars;
Henceforth, no longer Moeris shall behold
The Julian Constellation bright; no more
Shall Cupids Lamps be kindled in the Skies,
Nor shall the Royal Tresses, tho' devote
To Venus, nor ev'n Ariadne's Crown
(Whate'er high Honours her Imperial Consort
Ordain'd) be with Celestial Glories grac'd;
Ev'n Aesop's fulsom Panegyrick fails,
And frowning PUPPIUS' Elegiac Lay.
Fond Youth!  with woful Countenance in vain,
And piteous Sighs, around the Court he stalks;
In vain his Work by Plastick Care was smooth'd
Of Two far-fam'd Grammarians, if the Muse
Should turn the pompous Dirge to Ridicule.
But, let the Muse of Ridicule beware,
'Tis dangerous.  Well, for Safety then, suppose
The sacred Nine in Sable Robes array'd,
Beating their mournful Breasts, and much bewailing
Their Fav'rite Sister's sad untimely Fate;
Suppose them summoning the Mountain Tops
And lowly Shrubs to join their Tears, suppose
Their tears to Aromatick Gums congeal'd,
Or sweeter Verse t' embalm the dear Deceas'd;
Ev'n this, alas!  will deviate to a Crime:
So ignorant the Muses late are grown,
They scarce can now a proper Subject chuse,
Scarce now an inoffensive Strain inspire;
If B&mdash;ns they upbraid, or dare refine
Our muddy Thames with sweet Castalia's Spring,
Whate'er they dictate in the Comick Vein,
Or solemn Buskin; whether they describe
The Prince Pacifick, whom in Mercy JOVE
Form'd for the Frogs of Dodonaean Oak,
Th' old Dotard, prating Youth, or speaking Dog,
Or feign Old Womens Tales, or Old Mens Dreams,
All these (to PALLAS if you Credit give)
The disaffected Nine in Names Fictitious
Apply to CAESAR:  If they still proceed,
And by the Moral apt the Tale illustrate,
Great PALLAS wounding in the tend'rest Part,
With pungent Truths, or injudicious Wit.
Our Venal Senate if they dare lament,
Thy Prince how rich!  and oh!  how poor the Subject!
Our proud Nobility how fall'n!  no more,
Regarded than our Merchants Vain Complaints,
The City, Country, by those Laws oppress'd,
Which erst for their Security were form'd;
Manners corrupt, Arms terrible in War,
Fell CAPRIUS, hoarse with num'rous Accusations,
Sets forth the Charge, with Comment strain'd improv'd;
To Sense entirely new the Words he warps,
By FUSCUS, partial judge, yet more distorted,
Far as the urgent Cause requires, he knows
For universal Penetration fam'd,
The Muse Malignant, and her deep Designs;
The bare intent, or aught that to th' Intent
Resemblance bears, suffices for Conviction;
PALLAS' inhuman Slaves, well pleas'd, obey
Their Master's harsh Commands, an impious Rabble
Of Race accurs'd, by Gods and Men abhorred;
They force their Entrance rude, lay all things wast,
The tender Muses doom to servile Durance,
Nor aught can Sacred Oracles avail.

And can this warlike Nation bear unmov'd,
Her Civil and Religious Rights profan'd,
Blind to the Fate which on such Crimes attend?
Does no Regard, no Rev'rence yet remain
For that most Sacred CHARTER, which we all
From Heav'n deriv'd believe!  For Heav'n alone
That Boon inestimable could bestow.
Will you, descended from the Trojan Heroes,
Slothful, desert your dear Palladium's Guard,
On which your own, your Children's Weal depends?
Yet, if you're senseless to the pious Care
Of late Posterity; if your Country's Safety,
And Reputation, such degen'rate Souls
T' alarm to Honour fails; at least, my Friends,
Fix in your wav'ring Minds this faithful Verse,
Fair Liberty the slothful Wretch disdains.

Hence let me close, lest this Epistle Blame
Incur, or hurt our Master's tender Ears;
CAPRIUS in ev'ry Tongue can find a Meaning;
Enough to all true BRITONS has been said:
Yet, 'tis no more than CAL&mdash; vers'd in Politicks
And Princes, from his Cave has oft foretold;
No more than, with Prophetick Genius blest,
The Satirist, who FLACCUS' sprightly Vein
So justly imitates, full oft has sung,
Inspir'd by Pindus, anxious to revenge
His Country's Wrongs and violated Altars.
