THYRSIS, MENALCAS.

Fast by a shady Brere, as did befall,
Where Philomele with sad attuned Song,
Whilome who wont the raptur'd Sense entrall,
O'rewent with Woe now plain'd her captive Young,
High on a grassy Hillock sat the Swaine,
THYRSIS, the soothest Shepherd of the Plaine.

His fav'rite Crooke, which equal Snubs divide,
(For Shepherds meetest Ornament I ween)
And leathern Scrip beseem'd his gracefull Side,
When flow'r'd the Yeare, and Pansies dight the Greene:
His nibbling Flock, the Shepheard's greatest Lure,
Withouten Dreede of Wolves yrov'd secure.

Sike dapper Ditties would it please him sing,
As earst the Swaine of Rural Pan did lere,
When Winter's stormy Blast was spent, and Spring
Reviv'd the Trees yclad with Branches sear:
None better seen to quest the rapid Flood,
Ne charm the feather'd Songsters of the Wood.

By that 'gan Phoebus Welk with milder Ray,
Each closing Shoot drink up the moist'ning Dew,
Each Head declin'd ywept the Sick'ning Day
Of Cowslip pale, and glowing Violet blew.
Tho bleating Flocks 'gan leave the russet Plaine,
What Time MENALCAS thus areed the Swaine.

MENALCAS.
THYRSIS, I weene nar yonder dimple Stream,
Where Dryades on the verdant Carpet play,
Sike Notes I caught thy tunefull Theme,
Sike Notes as Songs of Jovisance bewray:
None but thyself couth frame sike Poesy,
Ne fitts for meaner Breast aspire to high.

Forthy say frankly wherefore, lovely Boy,
Sike jocund Sounds thy leisure Moments claim?
Why craggy Mountains echoe Songs of Joy,
Eke gentle Zephyrs whisper DAPHNE's Name?
Me listeth know why sounds with sweetest Lay
Thine oaten Pipe, while far thy Lamkins stray.

THYRSIS.
Musick, Shepheard, sure I con no Skill,
Ne strive to charm, with peerless Roundelay;
Enough is me to tune my homely Quill,
While shady Braunches shroud from sunny Ray:
Ne doth my liefest DAPHNE e'er despise
The lowly Ditties that I wont devise.

MENALCAS.
THYRSIS, to weet thy Rhymes I more delight
(Albe thou carest nought thine Art to show)
Than honied Bee with Wings of Velvet dight,
Or Streams, that weet in gentle Murmurs flow.
So mought it please thee DAPHNE's Praise rehearse,
That lives on yonder Beach, in soothest Verse.

THYRSIS.
Sithence my Sonnet thus bedeign to hear,
Ne wouldest once the Shepheard's Muse deride,
What fitter Subject tho to please thine Ear,
Than Rhymes that tell of DAPHNE, Beauty's Pride?
Tho listen Shepheard to my rural Song,
The whiles our Flocks do feed these Shrubs emong.

When blooming DAPHNE treads the verdant Greene,
The drooping Pink ne wails the stormy Stour,
Or wanders nar the silent wat'ry Scene,
The scaly Tritons croud the glist'ning Shore.
Ybent to Love doth ev'ry Shepheard glow,
And sweetest Girlonds dight for DAPHNE's Brow.

At sight of DAPHNE whistling Winds been hush,
Ne drearie Clouds obscure the vaulted Sky;
But Notes melodious fill each bramble Bush,
Ne Thunders threaten whiles the Nymph is nigh.
If DAPHNE smile, Sol sheds a milder Ray,
And Aura's musky Breezes cool the Day.

Ye Shepheards, all that been with Love ytake,
Hie there apace, where jocund Rebecks sound;
Ne scorn with Rustick Pipe most sootely make,
While blithsome Damsels deftly beat the Ground.
There sitten DAPHNE, Queen of Shepheards hight,
With scarlet Roses deckt, most seemly Sight!

Dark Poplar Boughs of him been loved best,
Who durst with all in derring Do compare;
Of Phoebus bitter Lawrel, while the rest
Small Valewe have, ne deign he count them fair.
But neither this one nor that be fair, I trow,
Sith charming DAPHNE loves the Filbeard Row.

Whilome I chauncst to meet that beardless Boy,
Bright Venus' Son, yclep'd the God of Love;
Begirt with gawdy Greene, the Shepheards Joy,
Culling soft Flow'rs in thilk same Myrtle Grove.
Thrice DAPHNE past, ah me!  how wond'rous Fair!
And thrice he deem'd his Darling Psyche near.

Sweet been the Flocks that Brouze the tender Vine,
Or wanton Goats that scale the Mountain high;
Or chaunt of Lark through twisted Eglantine,
Whose early Song declares the Morning nigh;
Or gentle Winds that warbling work Delight.
When blooming DAPHNE glads my pleased Sight.

But neither Flocks that brouze the tender Vine,
Ne wanton Goats that scale the Mountain high;
Ne chaunt of Lark through twisted Eglantine,
Whose early Song declares the Morning nigh,
Ne warbling Winds may quell my raging Paine,
When loved DAPHNE leaves the grassy Plaine.

Oft as I wont to range thilk pleasant Dale,
Where fruitful Fields been every where to see;
Where winding Mincius laves the fragrant Vale,
And leafie Braunches clothe the spreading Tree;
A cup ywrought I found, whose curious Frame
Well witness Hobbinol the Maker's Name.

There Orpheus sitten, that harmonious Bard!
Whose skilled Fingers touch the warbling Lyre;
While tender Lambs ne dreede the furious Pard,
Ne growling Tygers boast their wonted Fire.
To gain this peerless Cup hath Delia strove,
But DAPHNE claims this Token of my Love.

Pomona's Hand mine Orchard well has stor'd,
The herding Boughs present the juicy Pear;
Ne downy Peaches doth she Scorn afford,
And these shall DAPHNE, beauteous Damsel, share.
Ah!  carefull Colin, sure thy Gifts been vaine,
Ne weigheth DAPHNE ought thy lowly Straine.

MENALCAS.
Shepherd, thy gladsome Words more Pleasauance yeild,
Then balmy Sleep that seals the Mower's Eyes;
Or Western Gales that fan the scorched Field,
When sultrie Phoebus holds the top-most Skies.
More soote thy Notes to charm the list'ning Sheep,
Than his that of our Lambkins taketh Keep.

Never did Pipe like that the Sense enthrall,
With which sage Tit'rus earst my Skill apay'd;
Sage Tityrus, ywept of Shepheards all,
That sootely make, whose Love as Life I way'd,
But now to Thyrsis' Hand I reede it due,
Sith he con best its former Straines renew.

But twinkling Vesper gilds the gloomy Night,
Come Thyrsis rise, and let us homeward hie;
And see, the silent Moon with Silver Light
Peeps o'er yon Cloud that veils the Starry Sky.
Now sure it is time to fold our tender Sheep.
Tho rise, my little Lambs, that lulled been asleep.
