Where peopled Scythia's verdant Plain extend,
East in that Sea, in whose unfathom'd Flood,
Long-winding Volga's rapid Streams descend,
On Oxus' Bank an ancient City stood;
Then Sarra, but to later Ages known,
By rising Samarcand's imperial Name;
There, held a potent Prince his honour'd Throne,
And distant Nations own'd Cambuscan's Fame:
So was the Sultan call'd, whose lengthen'd Sway,
Surrounding Realms revere, and pleas'd his own obey.

When nervous Youth had brac'd his valiant Breast,
Oft had the Russian felt his dreadful Arm;
The Persian oft his martial Pow'r carress'd,
And the wild Cossack shrunk at his Alarm;
Strict to the Law th' Arabian Prophet taught,
Compassionately just, and greatly kind,
His Virtue scarce was shaded with a Fault,
True was his League and constant as his Mind:
Great Wealth he had, but well that Wealth enjoy'd,
And Pow'r, Heavens' noblest Gift, as nobly he employ'd.

To raise the Honours of his spotless State,
(A Joy too seldom known in regal Life!)
Fortune had bless'd him with an equal Mate,
And given the fair Eltheta to his Wife;
The graceful Queen, majestick to the View,
Whose blooming Youth had bless'd the Hero's Arms;
Her high Descent from great Arfaces drew,
And native Dignity adorn'd her Charms;
Two manly Sons their faithful Union bound,
And one unblemish'd Maid with ev'ry Virtue crown'd.

Algarsife first who grac'd his youthful Bed,
Breath'd all the Victor's irresistless Flame;
In Camps beneath his Father's Conduct bred,
His Warrior Bosom swell'd for endless Fame,
Well practis'd he the daring Troops to head,
Bold to attack or strike the steady Blow,
Or skill'd with Art the patient March to lead
O'er the long Desart &mdash; and surprize the Foe!
With missive Death to guard the wheeling Rear,
As darts the Bolt of Jove, &mdash; and shines to disappear.

But young Camballo's more reflective Mind
From his great Sire's immediate Temper drew
A softer Turn, and studiously inclin'd
To judge of Fame in a superior View;
To mend the Genius of the barren Soil,
With prudent Laws the social Ties to bind,
To cherish Commerce, and encourage Toil,
With Health the Youth to form, with Truth the Mind,
Arts, whence the publick Welfare takes its Rise,
And Empire lifts her Head, exalted to the Skies!

Beneath some rooted Oak's projected Shade,
Where twine the Lawrel and the Olive bloom;
In mildest Grace amidst the shelter'd Bed,
The nascent Rose displays its soft Perfume:
Such Canace with all becoming State,
While Love inthron'd from her enchanting Brow,
Dispers'd a thousand Arrows wing'd with Fate,
And smil'd to rule th' admiring World below!
Her Form was Harmony, &mdash; all Grace her Air,
As if Perfection, pleas'd, had plac'd its Centre there!

No Affectation sully'd Beauty's Pride;
No Vanity bespoke a wanton Fire;
In all her Action Virtue seem'd to guide,
Nor knew her chaster Breast a loose Desire:
As thro' the lucid Diamonds polish'd Face,
Refulgent pierce the treasur'd Rays of Light;
No Spot the native Lustre can deface,
Which view'd in every Shape is always bright:
So thro' fair Beauty's Mirror undefil'd,
With still-attractive Charms internal Wisdom smil'd.

Now twice ten Years had good Cambuscan reign'd,
By early Wars secur'd in honour'd Ease,
And Peace at home, and Fame abroad maintain'd,
Mark'd the meridian Glory of his Days
In those blest Times, no labour'd Structures rose,
Where Grandeur from the publick Ruin springs,
The splendid Trophies of a People's Woes!
The dearly purchas'd Palaces of Kings!
Far other State his Dignity supports,
Beyond the borrow'd Blaze of Europe's gilded Courts.

Yet Goodness still a nobler Show supply'd,
Then glittering Guards to awe the subject Eye,
The hospitable Gates were ever wide,
And safe the Wretched to their Prince drew nigh.
As the warm Sun diffuses golden Day,
So smil'd the common Father of the Land.
As spreads o'er Earth the all-enlivening Ray,
So felt the Meanest his extensive Hand.
Happy, where thus the Sovereign's Bounty warms,
And Goodness lends to Pow'r, a Plenitude of Charms.

From Aries now approach'd the Solar Flame,
While wakeful Spring the wint'ry Chain unbinds.
Nature re-kindles to the amorous Beam,
And swells luxuriant in the Western Winds;
At Flora's Call a thousand Beauties rise,
To dress with Sweets the fair enamell'd Ground,
And to the happy Sense and ravish'd Eyes,
Waft new Delight and fragrant Pleasure round.
Each Bird proclaims his Joy, and thro' the Grove
Resounds the heavenly Song of Harmony and Love!

The Season this, when (so their Prophet taught)
The joyful City kept the holy Feast,
Which the wild Saracen with secret Thought,
Reveres, the Bairam of the turban'd East:
On whose preceding Eve, with wonted State,
Thro' ev'ry Street the royal Herald's Sound
Proclaims Cambuscan's Feast to Crouds who wait,
With fond acclaiming Joy their Passage round;
Peace smiles on ev'ry Brow, and Sarra glad,
Prepares to keep the Day, in all her Pomp array'd.

Now rose Aurora, robed in pleasing grey,
Her sober Mantle edg'd with beamy Gold!
The early Clarion hails the dawning Ray,
The Gates their Iron Portals wide unfold;
High on a Rock, encircled by the Flood,
Where silver Mazes oft deceiv'd the Eyes,
The Palace rose: &mdash; below the City stood,
In Circuit fair, and glitter'd to the Skies!
A gentle Rising fill'd the Space between,
With Sylvan Pride adorn'd, and Banks of native Green.

Here, so the Sultan's honour'd Mandate bore,
Soon as the Sun disclos'd his orient Pride;
Thro' the glad Multitude, that throng'd before,
The Tartar Lords conven'd on ev'ry Side:
Along the fair Ascent, in shining Train,
Towards the Palace march the noble Band;
Pleas'd to renew their annual Vows again,
To see their King, and hail his just Command;
And wish to the past Years by Fate decreed,
In fair continued Course &mdash; the future may succeed.

But wise Cambuscan, who observant knew,
The Pow'r supreme from whom all Greatness flows,
On this peculiar Day with Homage due
To Heaven returns the Service Grandeur owes.
No vain Idolatry his Heart deceiv'd,
No flattering Names of Mighty, High or Great;
Grateful he offers ev'ry Praise received
From a glad People and a happy State:
And chiefly on this Morn his Heart prepares
To pay his humble Thanks in Sacrifice and Pray'rs.

The Pomp begins, the yielding Croud give Way;
A thousand Horse the bright Procession lead;
A chosen Troop, with Bows end Quivers gay,
And bold Algasife glitters at their Head!
Toil mark'd each Limb, and on their hardy Brow,
Sate dreadless Valour, mix'd with Awe severe;
Yet each seem'd pleas'd to grace the Triumph now,
And Peace had soften'd half the Victor's Air:
While as they pass, redoubled Shouts arise,
And Oxus' hilly Banks the Eccho long supplies!

The Pontiffs next, Administers of Law,
The hoary Molla, and the Cadi sage,
Whose venerable Looks impress'd an Awe;
For Wisdom gives new Dignity to Age.
Not the sour Aspect, nor the formal Beard,
Nor Saint-like Visage, nor dejected Air;
But Virtue dress'd in Cheerfulness appear'd,
And Health and Temperance were pictur'd there.
The joy'd Spectators much their Sight approve,
Whose Goodness careful gain'd the People's honest Love.

All in the midst, with precious Care inroll'd
In tissued Bands bedrop'd with many a Gem;
A Camel proud, bedeck'd with Silk and Gold,
The Koran bore, which Mussulmen esteem!
Around the Emirs, whose illustrious Race
From the great Prophet claims its high Descent,
All robed in Green advanced, with gentle Pace
Bestowing numerous Blessings as they went:
A Silence deep ensues, &mdash; and ev'ry Look,
With conscious Awe salutes the heaven descended Book.

Then came the Merchants, an un-number'd Band,
With more familiar Mein, the Sons of Peace!
For Commerce now establish'd thro' the Land,
Had shed its Sweets, and dwelt in ev'ry Face;
Plain was their Garb, and free from gaudy Pride;
For yet no baneful Luxury was known;
But Wealth domestick well that Show supplied,
And frugal Manners kept their Wealth their own,
Fond of the Arts he rais'd, with gentle Air,
Camballo graceful rode a Polish Courser fair.

Amidst the Guardian Sages of the Throne,
Where prudent Counsels prop'd his settled State,
Distinguish'd far, the much-lov'd Monarch shone,
Less in Magnificence then virtue great;
Not the rich Crimson which his Person drest,
Nor Indian Diamond his Tiara crown'd;
Not the Siberian Fur nor Persian Vest,
Nor Syrian Sabre which his Vesture bound;
Such wide Respect produc'd, or fond Acclaim,
As join'd in friendly Bands the King's and Father's Name.

Here the enfeebled Sight its Force excell'd,
Eager its great Protector to survey;
As fond the Eye of Infancy beheld,
Striving to bear some Feature fond away,
That Age the grateful Image might renew,
That Youth might strong imprint Cambuscan's Name,
While to the worthy Monarch's smiling View,
His People's Bliss in present Prospect came!
A Pleasure this which Virtue only finds,
The Wreath which Truth confers, and Fame eternal binds!

The Rites perform'd, &mdash; and every Prayer addrest,
Which Faith exacts, or Piety can pay;
The Day's fair Interval the People past,
In manly Exercise, and floral Play:
Algarsife pleas'd the active Youth regards,
Excites the Modest, and commends the Brave;
Assigns proportioned Merit its Rewards,
And teaches all with Vigour to behave:
In mimic Squadrons forms the flying Horse,
And animates the Rage, and Order of the Course,

Mean while Cambuscan, with the elder Chiefs,
And young Camballo held the cool Debate;
With Care consult to ease the Peoples Griefs,
The Means to strengthen and improve the State,
From neighb'ring Tribes commission'd Envoys press,
To court his Friendship, or his League renew;
From subject Provinces with glad Address,
New Deputies salute their Monarch's View;
Who all with condescending grace receives,
And tenderly to each his just Instructions gives.

Now from the Zenith flam'd the Orb of Day,
When to the Royal Square, selected Place,
The warlike Trumpet warns the Guests away,
Where the King's Banquet spreads its gladsome Face,
Decent around the pleas'd Attendants smile,
Appointed to fulfil their lord's Commands:
The meanest they salute with courteous Stile,
And not a Stranger unregarded stands.
Well from their Prince they learn the gentle Art
With fair Humanity to charm the honest Heart.

Near hand, allotted to the princely Train,
A spacious Hall receiv'd each nobler Guest;
Where to the dazzled Eye a brighter Scene
Display'd the Treasures of the downy East;
The Walls dispread with Persia's Tap'stry, shine;
The azure Roof emboss'd with figur'd Gold,
Of Casbin's richest Loom the Carpets twine,
Where many a flow'ry Maze appear'd enroll'd;
And Golden Censers, plac'd in proper Room,
With all Arabia's Sweets embalm'd the fragrant Dome.

Silent, around the Slaves attendant wait,
Silent, the watchful Grooms dispose the Feast;
Silence and Order mark the Asian State,
The Sign imperial, and submissive Breast:
With China's largest Bowls they spread the Board,
From ev'ry Element the Spoils they take
The richest Dainties Sarra can afford,
Fish from the Stream, and Fowls that haunt the Lake.
The Fawn and Stag the specious Forests yield,
And Herbs and various Fruits the cultivated Field.

Their Drinks, Sherbets attemper'd to the Taste,
A thousand diff'rent Ways with Eastern Art;
Where mingling Spices give a racy Zest,
And warm, like cordial Wine, the gladden'd Heart.
Mean time, the Commons, with inferior Fare,
Harsh seeming to our nicer Eye, regale;
The Forest-Fruits, the curdled Milk of Mare,
Or Grain, the Product of the fertile Vale:
With purest Water from the chrystal Stream,
That feeds with cool Supplies Life's quick consuming Flame!

Concludes the Feast, with ev'ry Service paid,
When from the publick Square's capacious Bound,
Appear full fifty Youths in White array'd,
Of comely Form, with rich Tiaras crown'd;
Each at his Side, with Care attendant leads
A shapely Courser of Tartarian Breed;
Who neighing, seems to spurn the Ground he treads,
As conscious of his Servitude decreed:
Marks of that Duty Sarra loyal owes,
For all the peaceful Sweets Cambuscan's Reign bestows!

An hundred Virgins, each of fairest Hue,
In flowing Robes of brightest Azure drest,
Succeed in soft Procession, two by two:
Their beauteous Brows with flow'ry Chaplets grac'd,
Their lovely Hands a shining Treasure bore,
Which new-establish'd Commerce brought from far;
The Indian Gem, the Pearl from Ormus Shore,
The Tyrian Purple, and the painted Jar;
Or the domestick Spoils of Sarra's Field,
The costly-ermin'd Furs her ample Forests yield.

These Presents offer'd with respectful Care,
Rewarded by the gracious Monarch's Smile,
Amidst the Dome, a second Train appear
Of foreign Beauties from Circassia's Soil:
From native Sweets the Infant-Captives brought
With mating Charms barbaric Hearts to move,
Early in ev'ry Art of Pleasing taught
To sing, to smile, to languish, and to love!
Magnificently gay, the Band advance,
And with harmonious Air begin the wanton Dance!

At this &mdash; a Sight too loose for Wisdom's Awe,
Whose Strictness views such Mirth with Eye severe;
Prepare the King and Sages to withdraw,
That Youth its more appropriate Joys may share;
When unforeseen, as wak'ning Tempests rise,
When troubl'd Ocean heaves with conscious Fear;
Such, and so strange the gath'ring Murmur flies,
Increasing, till it gains the Royal Ear:
Sudden the Music stops, &mdash; the Dancers cease,
And new-born Wonder sits confess'd in ev'ry Face!

Soon shines the Cause &mdash; for now the Crowd divides,
When nobly mounted, of distinguish'd Mien,
Entring, a graceful Stranger boldly rides;
His Helm unbrac'd, and in his Visage seen
Valour, by long Experience made sedate:&mdash;
His Courser form'd of Brass, whose burnish'd Light
Reflected beamy Rays of mimic Heat;
A moving Meteor to the dazzled Sight!
Proud of his Charge, he fiercely glanc'd Disdain,
And bent his shapely Neck beneath the potent Rein!

The Knight's Right Hand the flaming Steed compell'd,
With gentle Awe, and half his Rage repress'd;
His Left to View a polish'd Mirror held,
Of oval Form, in figur'd Gold enchas'd:
His Finger glitter'd with the radiant Pride,
An oriental Saphyr wide display'd:
A naked Scymitar adorn'd his Side;
With Torquoise-Hilt of damask'd Steel the Blade:
His comely Personage, and strange Attire,
Cambuscan studious Eyes, and much the Court admire.

Then mild advancing, where th' Imperial Throne
Erected, to the distant Sight ascends;
Quick from his wondrous Steed alighting down,
Before the King the gentle Envoy bends!
Then to the throng'd Assembly turns his Eyes,
With due Obedience paid to all around;
While general Silence marks a pleas'd Surprize,
And not a Whisper steals along the Ground:
Each Aspect earnest on the Issue hung,
When thus the Knight began, with no ungraceful Tongue!

"To Thee, for Virtue as for Arms renown'd,
Whose Name to distant Lands extends its Rays;
Whose Youth with Fame, whose Age with Honours crown'd,
Asia repeats! &mdash; too narrow for thy Praise!
Our holy Califf, whose all-righteous Sway,
Thro' happy Nations spreads one common Smile;
Northward from Ormus to the Euxine Sea,
And West from Indus to the Banks of Nile;
To thee, Al-raschid, round whose renown'd Head
May Heav'n its balmy Dew of constant Blessings shed!

"To Thee, whose Piety, his Zeal befriends,
Whose Arms have triumph'd in the Prophet's Cause;
These marks of Amity our Califf sends,
Proofs of his Estimation and Applause!
Nor slight the Presents, tho' no Form they wear,
That seems attractive to a Monarch's Eye;
More secret Worth they boast, and Virtues rare,
Than all the Treasures hid beneath the Sky,
Which Heav'n-taught Science only can bestow,
And mystic Talismans, that rule the World below.

"This Steed, which, mighty Prince, you now behold
As motionless, &mdash; tho' recent from the Reins,
Form'd, tho' in semblance of metallic Mold,
Yet in himself the Springs of Life retains;
Less fleet the feather'd Arrow wings its Way,
Borne on the Pinions of the breezy Wind,
Less swift the canvass'd Vessel skims the Sea,
Then leave his Steps the less'ning Space behind,
Brave the surrounding Deep, where Oceans flow,
Or mount the steep broad Rock, and lose the Plain below!

"Or, would'st thou from the Sphere terrestrial rise,
And learn the boundless Regions of the Air?
Th' aerial Guide shall waft thee thro' the Skies
To the remotest Star that glitters there!
Firm shall he bear thy trusted Weight impress'd
Thro' Floods that threaten, or thro' Fires that glow!
Or guard thee with impenetrable Breast,
Thro' pointed Javelins o'er the prostrate Foe:
For the sage Author form'd his just Design
With Planetary Skill, and Artifice Divine!

"Yet rooted shall the beauteous Image stand,
A lifeless Monument shall press the Place;
Void of all Sense, and deaf to all Command,
Nor human Force disturb it from its Base;
Unless thy Thought the mystic Words retain,
That wake to Motion the insensate Mass;
That give Direction to the rapid Rein,
Or stop the Springs of animated Brass".
He paus'd: &mdash; diffusive as the Murmur ran,
When thus resuming soon &mdash; th' Embassador began.

"This Mirror &mdash; so our Empress fair commands,
As Pledge of mutual Faith and Friendship meant;
To thy Imperial Consort's beauteous Hands,
With grateful Joy, commission'd, I present!
No specious Forms from hence reflected glare,
No shadowy Objects of material kind;
But mental Truths within disclos'd appear,
Fate's future Births Enquiry here shall find;
And in the optic Plane thy Thought shall trace
The various Fortunes wait thy long descending Race.

"Does War or Faction threat thy promis'd Reign?
Here shalt thou see the Perils, and avert;
Does Plague or Famine hover near thy Plain"
A timely Caution shall arise from Art:
If Falshood lurks in Flatt'ry's fair Disguise?
Here Truth's fair Face shall point the Syren's Face!
If Vice, by Virtue's Ruin, aims to rise?
Here shall it meet thy knowledge and Disgrace:
And thy observant Thought with Ease shall find
The variegated Shapes that veil the human Mind.

"Here pleas'd, thy gentle Sultaness shall prove,
A thousand Ways the sportive Mirror's Skill;
Survey the Crafts of Jealousy and Love,
The Stratagems that wait a Female Will:
Thro' ev'ry Maze the shifting Heart pursue,
From Fancy's Start, to Reason's close Retreat;
Observe Imagination's subtile Clue,
And mark Ideas, how they rise and set.
Gain'd but the Key &mdash; which to the Queen I bear,
Long may her Virtues prove the Guardian Mirror's Care!"

So said, &mdash; the Present with complacent Air
To an Attendant near, the Envoy gave;
When thus proceeding &mdash; "Further speaks my Care,
If Thou, all gracious Monarch, grant the Leave!
For thus our Sov'reign Lady bade me say;
Pleas'd, has she heard a Northern Princess Fame:
One Faith we keep, one Prophet we obey;
Let closer Bands unite our Sister's Name!
The Rose of Tigris, Sarra's Violet woos,
And with this mystic Ring her valu'd Friendship sues!

"When from the Earth the King of Wisdom fled,
Whose Science pierc'd thro' Matter's boundless Field;
When mourn'd the East that Salomon was dead,
To whom the Realms of Spirit stood reveal'd;
The potent Seal incircling, grac'd his Hand,
Whence all its Pow'r this Gem's Impression takes.
Obedient Nature feels its wide Command,
And at its Call a new Creation breaks.
Each vegetable Birth its Power reveals,
The noxious weed that kills, or Plant that wholesome heals!

"Or, would the Princess, while with cheerful Eyes
She views the Beauties of the op'ning Spring,
Curious enquire the Language of the Skies,
Or learn the Notes the feather'd Nations sing?
Hence shall the vocal Natives of the Groves,
With well-known Hymns salute her early Walk;
Hence shall their Laws their Manners, and their Loves
Become familiar Subjects of her Talk:
And while the Sylvan World her Thoughts command,
Her grateful Mind shall own a Princess' gen'rous Hand.

He said, and bow'd, and Speech resum'd once more,
While from his Side he drew the shining Blade,
"And last this Gift the Califf's Order bore,
Be to your princely Sons with Honour paid,
Such is the Temper of the deadly Steel,
Nor the firm Marble, nor the rooted Oak,
Not Arms of Adamant its Touch can feel
Unmov'd, or bear the Fury of its Stroke:
No Earthly Wight its Contest may endure,
No Skill of Pharmacy its lest Erasure cure.

"Yet strange, tho' true, its double Charms prevail,
With friendly Care to raise the vanquish'd Foe;
The fatal Wound the Hilt alone can heal,
And with immediate Ease relieve the Blow;
From the deep Gash, tho' stream'd the vital Flood
And the wing'd Soul sate ready to depart;
Restrain'd, at once shall stop the issuing Blood,
With cordial Life again to warm the Heart!
Its Sov'reign Touch the Balm of Health restore,
As Mercy's gentle Hand allays the Rage of Pow'r.

"Nor judge, great Prince, the Gifts as ill assign'd,
Directed by our Califf's holy Views;
Safe is the Steed, in thy disposing Mind,
Whose Virtue never can his Pow'r abuse,
The Mirror well thy Consort may behold,
Reflecting all her Innocence sincere;
Well may the Ring the Daughter's Hand enfold,
Whose Soul is like the spotless Person, fair:
And aided by the Sword thy future Race,
Shall to the Toils of War, unite the arts of Peace!

Submiss he ceas'd: &mdash; when rising from his Throne
The Monarch mild descending stretch'd his Hand,
Well pleas'd the grateful Embassy to own,
Borne by the Service of so wise a Hand.
When thus: &mdash; "Kind Stranger!  not the Voice of Fame,
That spreads its Sound diffus'd to either Poll;
Can raise the Lustre of our Califf's Name,
Or more endear his Virtues to my Soul:
In whom the Prophet's Viceroy I revere,
And, with continued Joy, his daily Praises hear!

"His noble Gifts with Pleasure I receive,
Which secret Worth, and mystic Value boast
But more esteem the Faith he yields to give,
His Friendship ever wish'd and honour'd most:
Yet rare thy Presents and exceeding far,
The various Gems our eastern World brings forth.
The Ruby rich, the Diamond's mimick Star,
Or the unblemish'd Pearl of orient Worth,
Greatly beyond what Sarra's Regions lend,
Or all the Sylvan Spoils her ample Forests send!

"Welcome thy Presence on this festal Day,
To grace the Honours of our Royal Feast,
When Pleasure sits on ev'ry Aspect gay,
And in my People's Joy is mine confess'd:
Tho' us'd to better Cheer, which Heav'n bestows,
On Lands in happier Climes their Lot assign'd;
Where Bagdad rises, or where Tygris flows,
And Earth untaught is still benignly kind.
Where the mild Sun declines in Beauty gay,
Or Beams, with orient Charms to dress the Face of Day.

"Yet here till thy Return, the Greeting find,
Our barren Country yields the Toiler's Use;
Where Nature won, and by Compulsion kind,
Consents but coy to aid the slow Produce;
Yet such the Pow'r of the industrious Hand
That Year by Year the Soil more kindly grows,
Art pours new Beauties o'er the changing Land,
And by Degrees increasing Plenty flows,
Our Forests shrink, as new Plantations rise,
And Culture spreads new Fields to the delighted Skies.

"Mean time, associate at our Royal Board,
Accept the Cares our Gratitude would pay;
Freely command what Sarra can afford,
To ease the Labours of the tedious Way."
He ceas'd, &mdash; and smiling with a gracious Hand
He plac'd the honour'd Stranger by his Side,
While round the noblest Chiefs, a shining Band,
Approach to Welcome him with decent Pride.
His courteous Speech and Manner all admire,
And of the Syrian Court, the News they much enquire.

Now plenteous had the gentle Envoy din'd,
Pleas'd with the Treatment which the Monarch gave,
When from the Zenith now the Sun declin'd,
To cool his Ardors in the Caspian Wave;
When thus the king &mdash; "Not here we boast
To give thy Character the Honours due;
One easy Step to crown thy Toil remains,
Eastward our regal Castle stands in View,
There take thy Rest most welcome, and receive
That Friendship and Respect our amity shall give.

The Monarch rose, &mdash; th' officious Guard attend;
The Knight with graceful Air his Courser leads,
On Horseback, with the Tartar Prince ascends,
And to the Palace all the Pomp proceeds:
But most his Steed from the admiring Croud
New Wonder drew, and much Enquiry rais'd:
So stately was his Port, so firm he trod,
That all his Gesture and Proportion prais'd;
And own'd, of foreign and domestick Breed,
Eye never yet had seen, a more majestick Steed.

Of due Dimensions was his mediate Size,
While, loosly floating from his Swan-like Crest,
Bright wav'd his Mane! &mdash; deep piercing were his Eyes,
Strong were his Limbs, and broad his burnish'd Breast;
Thick from his Nostrils breath'd the fiery Steam;
His Tail behind a Length of Splendor flew;
He seem'd to move within an Orb of Flame!
So much appear'd the wondrous Object new,
That all intent, pursue th' amazing Sight,
So much does vulgar Minds all Novelty delight!

Now to the Palace reach'd the Cavalcade,
Where the strange Warrior and the King alight,
And with his usual Grace, Cambuscan paid,
Repeated Welcome to the Syrian Knight;
Strict o'er his Horse's Neck the passive Reins
With artificial Care the Envoy drew,
When lo!  all motionless the Form remains,
Nor Life discover'd nor Sensation knew:
Fix'd as the Basis of the rocky Stone;
The dead inactive Brass return'd a hollow Groan.

They bear the Califf's Sword before the King,
While to the Hall of State the Knight attends;
Inward the Mirror and the mystick Ring
To the Imperial Fair the Sultan sends;
Kindly requiring to the present Feast
The beauteous Queen and Princess may repair,
With Royal Kindness to regale their Guest,
And all the Rites of hospitable Care:
That Syrian Dames, from his Report may know,
That Gentleness can live amidst a Land of Snow!

Mean time without, around the famous Horse
In Crowds the Usbeck City seems to spread;
Much they survey his Make and much discourse,
As varied Notions fill the vulgar Head:
To Magic some the strange Effects impute,
Each to his Fancy forms a diff'rent Cause;
Little they reason, greatly they dispute,
And still the loudest most Attention draws:
As Ignorance to Knowledge pores its Route,
Never proceeds direct &mdash; but wanders still about!

Like as a Swarm of Bees new-gath'ring play,
Issuing advent'rous from their native Home;
They spread thick murm'ring to the Evening-Ray,
And yet of Habitation dubious roam;
Till the wise Husbandman with tuneful Sound,
Beneath the Shade the vagrant Tumult draws;
They wandring, stop, and view the Dome around,
And fix their Colony with loud Applause;
So circling round the Horse, the Tartars croud,
And speak their vast Surprize, with Acclamations loud!

Return we now, invited to the Hall,
Where fairer Objects our Attendance claim;
Such as are envy'd and admir'd by all,
The graceful Courtier, and the beauteous Dame;
What, tho' no Dances fir'd the Virgin chaste,
Less charming did the mild Engagers seem?
What, tho, no Smiles the Courtier's Brow defac'd,
Less worthy was his Honour of Esteem?
To us, indeed, such Manners wild may show,
Where Dress creates a Belle, and Vanity a Beau!

Yet as Restraint but fans the am'rous Fire,
And Nature's Laws can never be suppress'd;
So the soft Bosom heav'd with young Desire,
And the fond Eye the tender Heart confess'd:
Venus who then in Pisces held her Court,
With friendly Rays beheld th' enamour'd Pair,
Approv'd the Intercourse, and bless'd the Sport,
Beyond my faint Description to declare:
Her Arts the Roman Muse can better tell,
For none should sing of Love, but those his Influence feel.

Nor wanted cordial Drinks, or Viands rare
To cheer the Soul and grace the Royal Feast;
The gentle Empress made that Task her Care,
With  choicest Fare to treat the grateful Guest;
But more than all her matchless Converse charm'd,
Where Wisdom flow'd from the instructed Heart:
Where beam'd kind Gentleness, and beaming warm'd
With cunning Softness the attracted Heart.
Scarce could the ravish'd Knight his Looks refrain;
Or if she ceas'd, not wish the Joy commence again.

Oft to King unseen he turn'd his Eyes,
Or in the Sons remark'd their Father's Air,
Oft he beheld the Queen with new Surprize,
But most the Princess amiably fair!
The more he look'd he saw on each imprest
The Marks of Majesty that awe the Sight,
An Air of Greatness not to be express'd,
Which calls for Homage, while it gives Delight;
Something that more of Dignity confers,
Then all the glittering Toys the ermin'd Monarch wears.

Hard to describe, whence springs this Air assign'd
In Man and Brute to Excellence of Race,
This outward Mark of a superior Mind,
That seems to calm Precedency of Place;
But that Experience shows by constant Course
The noblest Animals their like create;
From the selected Sire, the generous Horse,
Derives his Fire, and springs from Earth elate!
Hears the glad Trumpet calling from afar,
And rapid pours his Flight amidst the Rage of War!

In Man's imperial Race th' Effect's the same,
Whatever Cause the like Distinction breeds;
Whether from mutual Passion springs the Flame,
Or Minds congenial stamp the vital Seeds?
Else on extended Guinea's torrid Coast,
Where the broad Mouth and Nose deprest prevail,
In those who regal Blood and Lineage boast
Why do the gen'ral Features rarely fail?
Why shows the Austrian Lip the Austrian Line?
And in some semblant Mark, the Hero loves to shine!

Now the shrill Trumpet warn'd the Flight of Day
The loud Muezin call'd to Ev'ning Pray'r;
When rose Cambuscan, such his usual Way,
With all his Court to Worship to repair.
That Duty paid, &mdash; returning as they pass,
Along the spacious Castle's outer Square
The Sultan stop'd to view the Steed of Brass
Incompass'd as he stood by Numbers there,
And begs the Knight the Secret would disclose,
To which the beauteous Form the Pow'rs of Motion owes.

To whom the Knight, &mdash; "O King!  whose just Concern
Still nourishes Devotion's purest Flame;
Nor need I tell, &mdash; nor need thy Wisdom learn,
The Wonders wrought by the Almighty Name.
By this inspir'd our holy Prophet wrought,
Performances exceeding Reason's Line;
High Miracles beyond the Reach of Thought,
That Infidels might own the Faith Divine,
Whose Call the Earth and Air and Fire obey,
And the relentless Grave, and the unfathom'd Sea!

When taught by this, the slumb'ring Steed you wake;
Firm seize the Reins, and with this Pin secure;
Undaunted then the destin'd Journey take,
Thro' ev'ry Element the Course is sure.
Wouldst thou thy March continue or be still,
Touch but the Pin and whisper but the Word,
The Steed obedient shall observe thy Will,
Shall vanish at thy Call or stand restor'd,
Only the Bridle and the Pin retain,
Else lost is ev'ry Care, and every Project vain.

So said, &mdash; he to the King's attentive Ear,
With Rev'rence due the mystick Word unfolds;
The Monarch bow'd, and wish concealing Care
The Word repeats, and fast the Bridle holds;
Quick as Life's Current glides along the Veins,
The warm Sensation so his Touch perceiv'd,
That thaw'd the Stiffness of the brazen Reins,
While the firm Chest with new Vibration heav'd:
His Eyes their Fire resum'd, he rais'd his Head,
And stately walk'd along, as pleas'd the Sultan led!

Cambuscan much the gentle Steed caress'd,
Thus grown familiar to his leading Hand,
The gentle Steed an equal Joy confess'd,
To serve the generous Monarch's just Command:
Much to the num'rous Court assembled round
The King his Shape and his Behaviour prais'd,
The Court applauding still return'd the Sound,
And all the Voice of Admiration rais'd:
Till from his Neck the Reins at once he drew,
And vanish'd quick the Steed from ev'ry Mortal's View!

The Sword and Bridle with peculiar Care,
Deputed Nobles by the King's Command,
Safe to the Castle's strongest Fortress bear,
Where all the Monarch's ample Treasures stand;
The Royal Company direct return,
In social Mirth to crown the happy Night;
While round perfum'd a thousand Tapers burn
And the whole Palace seems illumin'd bright,
The Feast renews, the Converse sprightly grows,
And Chearfulness around her balmy Influence throws.

The worthy King, whose long experienced Years
Had made him judge of Manners and of Minds,
Pleas'd with the Syrian's Converse much appears,
For Virtue soon its own Resemblance finds:
Some secret Sympathy of Nature draws,
With its coercive Bands the noble Soul;
As Unisons accord harmonious Cause,
Or the fondle Needle trembles to its Pole!
Tis thus each other know the truly Great,
Without the tedious Forms inferior Friendships wait.

Mean time between the Princes rose Debate
About the wond'rous Steed the Envoy brought,
Algarsife urging, with his usual Heat,
The Motion some informing Genie wrought:
But cool Camballo with a sceptic Air,
Seem'd to believe the Secret lay within,
That hid remain'd the Springs of Action there,
And mov'd or ceas'd directed by the Pin:
Each brings new Proofs the other to confute,
Till to the Monarch's Ear arriv'd the warm Dispute.

Silent a while the King Reflection made
And saw the Point not easy to decide;
Till kind Remembrance usher'd to his Aid,
A hoary Sage, whose Skill he oft had try'd:
By Birth a Mede, but whose enquiring Sight
Each Region of the travell'd East had known,
Wisdom the Object sole of his Delight,
And the whole Sphere of Knowledge seem'd his own.
Nor read in Books alone, his generous Mind,
Embrac'd with cordial Zeal the Welfare of Mankind.

The various Faiths the peopled World divide
Justly impartial had his Thought survey'd;
Reason his Standard still, and Truth his Guide,
Nor Interest, Prejudice or Passion weigh'd:
The Magi's Books he knew, the Brachmin's Lore,
Th' Egyptian Figure, the Jewish Rite,
The Christian Law, intended to restore,
But now defac'd by Superstition quite:
With the mix'd Plan th' Arabian Prophet drew,
O'er Asia now which spread, as new Religions do.

He saw, that Nature thro' her wide Command,
O'er all her Works diffus'd one equal Smile;
Nor kept the Bounties of her lavish Hand,
Confin'd to this or that peculiar Soil:
He knew, that vain was ev'ry Art, design'd
To check the Freedom of the humane Will;
That no Restraints could shackle up the Mind,
Which, self-determin'd, kept her Empire still:
And in th' extended Scene oft humane Race,
As varied were the Thoughts, as various was the Face!

Hence Cosroes (so the Median Sage's Name)
This healing Principle reflective drew;
Others Opinions candid not to blame,
But calm the Paths of Wisdom to pursue!
Pleas'd with the little Nature's Hand requires,
Wealth, Honour, Pleasures, Titles he disdain'd;
Few were his Wants, as mod'rate his Desires,
The happy Master of himself he reign'd!
A Joy, to all but Minds serene, unknown,
Beyond the Wreaths of Fame, or Splendors of a Throne.

On a fair Bank, by Oxus winding Shore,
Inclos'd with Wood, a little Spot he found;
There had he fix'd his Rest &mdash;  and greatly poor,
Liv'd on the Fruits of his domestic ground:
Oft had Cambuscan, tir'd with Cares of State,
Sought the Refreshment of his little Cave;
There philosophic held the cool Debate,
Nor scorn'd the Counsels which his Wisdom gave.
Whose Life reveal'd the Value of his Art,
And to the learned Head was join'd the honest Heart.

For him immediate then the  Sultan sends,
His seasonable Presence to require;
The worthy Sage the Messenger attends,
And comes obedient to the King's Desire.
His Head with Age's Frost was silver'd o'er,
But on his Cheek still blush'd the temp'rate Rose.
Decent, tho' plain, a flowing Robe he wore,
And manly Dignity his Person shows.
For such his Carriage seem'd, and gentle Port,
As if his Life had been no Stranger to a Court.

The Syrian Knight (for so requests the King)
The Nature of the Califf's Gifts explains;
The Horse, the Sword, the Mirror, and the Ring,
And points the Qualities which each retains:
When thus Cambuscan &mdash; "Cosroes!  O declare,
For best the Truth thy Wisdom can Impart,
Whence boast these Presents such Perfection rare?
From Nature springs the Secret, or from Art?
Or animates the Steed some Pow'r divine?
Or do mechanic Wheels direct the bold Design?"

To whom the Sage &mdash; "Not, mighty Prince, we boast,
Of such mysterious Gifts to judge the Cause:
Least knows the Wisest, when he knows the most,
Of Matter's Properties, and Motion's Laws:
Form'd of two Principles distinguish'd quite,
We find distinctly our corporeal Frame:
Spirit, we know, with Matter can unite;
Yet search in vain from whence the Union came,
Or, where subsists invisible the Tye,
Which fastens Life it self, and losing which we die.

"What gives Commission to the Wintry War,
When the loud Storm enchafes the troubled Deep,
Or sooths to Peace the Elemental Jar,
And hushes the relenting Winds to sleep!
What causes the pale Moon's alternate Light,
By turns replenish, and by turns decay,
Fair as she glides along the Face of Night!
And shapes thro' mazy Clouds her pathless Way,
Or from what Origin those Clouds ascend,
In vain our feeble Sense would strive to comprehend.

"All the Phenomena of boundless Air,
Which strike with Wonder the unsettl'd Eye,
The Meteors flash, the Comets ruddy Glare,
Or the loud Thunder bursting from the Sky!
The dark Eclipse, when o'er the Orb of Day
Its gloomy Stain prevailing Darkness sheds;
The shining Bow, whose variegated Ray
O'er the pale Cloud its painted Circlet spreads!
In vain our low Researches would pursue,
With weak defective Schemes of Science still untrue.

"Yet Science sees direct &mdash; far as it may,
While Ignorance in endless Darkness pores;
Safe treads the Sage, where Reason points the Way
One sov'reign Cause discovers and adores!
The further that in Nature's Road he treads,
He sees eternal Wisdom guide the Whole!
The more the glitt'ring Page of Heav'n he reads,
He feels that Wisdom penetrate the Soul!
And what the Vulgar view with careless Eyes,
Silent contemplates He with Pleasure and Surprize.

"Matter he sees, as struggling to a Birth,
Thro' all its elemental Forms aspire;
Earth rise from Water, Air refine from Earth,
To mount, and purify it self in Fire!
Fire!  the first Principle, whose vital Ray,
Heat, Motion, Sense, and Life producing breeds,
That circling from th' exhaustless Source of Day,
Wakens from Death the dull material Seeds,
That to it self attractive, all invites,
Till in the Parent-Cause Creation fond unites!

"This, sure, we know, &mdash; that Matter has its Laws,
By which impell'd, the stubborn Mass obeys;
That secret Sympathy some Objects draws,
And by its Pow'r can seeming Wonders raise!
Hence, would it seem, that this mysterious Horse,
Tho' form'd to Semblance of material Mold,
Is taught to move by sympathetic Force,
And to perform at Will the Actions told;
As the Greek Pegasus was fam'd to bear,
The bold Bellerophon through Tracts of boundless Air.

"Hence taught, the Sage to Matter can infuse
New Qualities to to suit his just Design;
Can shape the Mass subservient to his Views,
And give the Workmanship a Stamp divine!
Thus, in the honour'd Califf's precious Sword
Opposing Virtues may their Influence shed;
The Hilt, may salutary Balm afford,
To close the Wound the Edge relentless made.
As fam'd Achilles' Spear confess'd the Art;
To cure th' inflicted Stroke, and ease the deadly Smart.

"Thus may the Mirror, and the mystic Ring
The gentle Knight's Description well maintain;
From planetary Skill their Virtues spring,
Which only deep-read Science can attain:
As o'er affrighted Misraim's fertile Land,
The Wand of Moses Desolation spread,
Or grac'd the Signet Salomon's right Hand,
Whose Pow'r could wake the Slumbers of the Dead:
Could from the Eye remove the Veil of Night,
And place the Realms of Spirit to th' astonish'd Sight!

"But while, Cambuscan!  thou exalt thy Head,
In peaceful Sway and foreign Friendships blest,
Remember Heav'n, that all thy Greatness made,
Nor let weak Pride pollute thy Royal Beast!
All that we see in Life deceitful Dream,
Like us, the vain Spectators, glides away!
Only great Orosmanes shines the same,
Unwasted Fountain of eternal Day!
Who in himself all Nature comprehends,
From whom all Beings spring, in whom all Being ends."

He ceas'd &mdash; attentive as the Syrian Knight
Heard the sweet Accents flowing from his Tongue,
And felt within such exquisite Delight,
He had not thought a Summer's Audience long.
The Monarch Thanks return'd &mdash; th' applauding Croud
With common Voice repeat the Sage's Praise:
Night now began to spread her heavy Shroud,
And call the weary'd Limbs to needful Ease:
Cambuscan rose &mdash; the Court retire to Rest,
And on her midnight Throne deep Silence reigns confest.

O gentle Sleep!  thou Cherisher of Health!
From Temp'rance bred, the Nurse of sweet Repose!
In whom the Peasant finds a Mine of Wealth!
To whom his Happiness the Lover owes!
Thou Balm of Life!  whose kindly Warmth restores
Light to the Eyes, and Vigour to the Heart!
Whose Presence Luxury in vain implores,
Kind while thou fly'st to take Afflictions part!
Say, by what magic Fetters dost thou bind
In thy delightful Thrall the agitated Mind?

Inthron'd on mazy Oxus' verdant Shore,
We left thee, Goddess, of thy Sway possest;
Cambuscan's Palace felt thy peaceful Pow'r,
And thro' the Gloom thy Influence sate confest:
Fair Dreams, thy beauteous Handmaids, all around
To ev'ry Guest thy busy Mandates spred;
Each, by their Ministry, contented found,
The sep'rate Joy to which their Wishes led:
Soft am'rous Vows th' unblushing Virgin hears,
And to the Warriors View the glitt'ring Camp appears!

Thee, placid Queen of Night &mdash; the Sultan own'd,
In shining Visions of recover'd Arms!
Thou, to the Syrian lengthen'd Wisdom's Sound,
And Cosroes still his fix'd Attention charms:
But most the Tartar Princess claim'd thy Care;
To sooth the soft Impatience of her Breast;
Her curious Thoughts the Ring's Impression bear,
And new Ideas interrupt her Rest,
In Fancy she surveys the Sylvan Scenes,
And hears the feather'd Choirs &mdash; and learns their tuneful Strains!

Calm were her usual Slumbers wont to be:
Calm as the Current of her temp'rate Blood;
Calm as her blameless Soul, from Passions free,
That knew no Evil, and that wish'd all Good!
Yet something &mdash; whence she knew not, what or how,
Invasive now infected her Repose:
She felt soft Quiet vanish from her Brow,
And e're the Morning dawn'd, the Princess rose!
She calls her Virgin-Train, who near remain'd,
And instant at her Call her Virgin-Train attend,

Great was their Fright, and obvious their Concern,
What Cause so soon their gentle Mistress rais'd;
Till from her self inform'd, her Health they learn,
And by heir Smiles they find their Pears appeas'd;
But chief Olinda &mdash; more a Friend than Slave,
Whom from Podolia lawless Rapine drew;
Whom to his Daughter great Cambuscan gave,
By Purchase his, e're yet her self she knew:
Whose modest Worth had gain'd the Princess' Ear,
By long experienc'd Tyes of faithful Duty dear!

Now rosy Morn, the Harbinger of Day,
Beam'd o'er the azure Hills with Radiance bright!
Awak'ning Nature felt the gladsome Ray,
And smil'd as conscious of approaching Light;
When the fair Princess issu'd to the Plain,
Attended by a Band of lovely Maids;
Such Cynthia, when amidst her sportive Train,
Her early Horn resounds in Latmos' Shades:
Cloth'd in a lightsome Dress, thus bends her Way,
To grace the flow'ry Field, this charming Queen of May!

By Oxus' Side, engirt with Wood-brow'd Hills,
A spacious Compass lay the Sylvan Scene!
Thro' which clear-streaming ran two mazy Rills,
That fed the Soil with ever-living Green;
But as the Ground unequal check'd the View,
So by degrees its varied Beauties rose;
Dales, Rocks or Groves form Landskips ever new,
And blending Prospects new Delights disclose.
Nature unrival'd here maintain'd her Part,
Too sweetly wild for Chance, too greatly bold for Art.

From teeming Earth the Vapour now exhal'd;
That courts the Presence of the orient Sun;
But thro' the Mist the ruddy Orb prevail'd,
All warm with Joy, his daily Course to run!
By the clear River stretch'd the winding Vale,
Where, as it often chanc'd, the Princess stray'd,
A thousand Sweets embalm'd the spicy Gale,
A thousand Flow'rs luxuriant bless'd the Mead,
Which, as her Virgins sport, they pull with Care
The Morning-Wreath to form, for Canace to wear!

There safe the Elk, the Antilope, and Deer
The harmless Shelter of the Place enjoy'd;
Crop'd the sweet Herb, or drank the Fountain clear;
No Fears alarm'd them; for no Foes annoy'd:
With vocal Musick now the Forests ring,
As artless Love inspires the melting Voice:
And Nature kindling at the Smile of Spring,
Teaches her happy Children to rejoice!
Fair Canace the soft Sensation feels,
And with the whisp'ring Breeze the virtuous Pleasure steals!

As from the native Blind's unconscious Eyes.
The skilful Leech th' assailing Speck withdraws,
Sudden he sees a World unknown arise,
Where Objects multiply'd Confusion cause:
With such Emotion did the Princess' Ear
Receive the Language of the Woods around:
So, by her mystic Ring instructed, hear,
That not devoid of Reason was the Sound:
While with responsive Note the Nations sing,
Hail to the Rose of May!  Hail, lovely Queen of Spring!

But stop we here, e're too prolix we be;
The wanton Error, That of many a Muse,
Who lur'd by ev'ry Flow'r, and ev'ry Tree,
Too far the too inviting path pursues.
Lest the tir'd Ear reject the tedious Strain,
Judgment should still the Flights of Fancy guide.
The Point propos'd should Reason firm retain,
That Fame may o'er the lasting Work preside,
Mind we, th' unerring Law of sacred Song,
That the delightful Tale should never be too long.

But as she nearer to the Forest drew,
A diff'rent Object claim'd her gentle Care
Of Foliage stript, alone, an Alder grew,
Whose naked Branches trembled to the Air!
From hence shrill Cries a beauteous Falcon sent,
Which well her Bitterness of Woe express'd;
While ever as she shriek'd, with cruel Bent,
She fix'd her Beak impressive in her Breast;
So that the Tide of Life, fast flowing round,
Distain'd the wither'd Bark, and trinkled to the Ground.

Fair seem'd her Form, and fair her Aspect seem'd.
As ever Eye beheld, or Falcon wore;
Like the pure Snow, her Silver Plumage beam'd,
With mingling ruddy Streaks empurpled o'er!
Such was her Look, that not the Tyger fell,
Who lawless foams the Desart wild for Prey;
Nor Eagle fierce, that from her airy Cell,
Wings with destructive Aim her rapid Way;
But would have soften'd been to hear her Lay,
And by Compassion taught, have felt their Rage decay.

Mov'd with the plaintive Anguish of her Tongue,
Her mournful Gesture, and her bleeding Wound;
The neighb'ring Birds from ev'ry Thicket throng,
And silent hear, and droop the Wing around!
Soon the mild Princess, thro' her tender Soul,
Felt the prevailing Force of Pity glide;
The Voice of Sorrow all her Senses stole,
As from the Tree, distinct the Falcon cry'd;
"O gentle Stranger, some Compassion show!
O heavenly Beauty deign to ease my matchless Woe."

Quick to the Tree, the gentle Princess flew
Where still her sad Laments the Mourner made;
And in the Falcon's Tongue (which then she knew)
With Accent mild, and tender Look she said:
"Much suffering Bird!  the fairest of thy Kind!
Whate'er Misfortunes thus thy Anguish move;
In me, the Daughter of a Monarch, find
A Friend, with me a sure Protection prove:
My Hands thy Wounds shall heal with precious Balm,
And on my Breast reclin'd, thy Woes shall know a Calm.

"But why thy Breast this boundless Sorrow fills,
Which sighing Eccho wafts the Woods around?
Why from thy Breast the crimson Drop distills
That mars the Verdure of the blasted Ground?
If Death has robb'd thee of thy slaughter'd Mate,
For whom despairing, comfortless you show;
Or if some envious Shaft with cruel Fate
Has pierc'd thy Bosom with a deadly Blow?
Oh quick the Cause reveal! &mdash; for never yet,
On one of feather'd Kind, so was my Fancy set!

Scarce had she spoke, &mdash; when from the lifeless Spray,
Where perch'd the Falcon did her Griefs repeat
The fluttering Mourner fell, and panting lay,
As pleas'd to die beneath the Princess' Feet!
Soon from the Earth the Bird her Pity rais'd,
And in her Lap with fond Indulgence plac'd;
Then call'd her Maids, who on the Action gaz'd,
And bound its Wounds and tenderly embrac'd:
Till by her Hands reviv'd the Falcon woke,
Grateful beheld the Fair and faintly thus bespoke.

"O blest Compassion!  Heav'n descended Child!
Whose Power is best perceiv'd in noblest Hearts
Who dress'd in Smiles of Patience, meekly mild,
To Want, Relief; to Mis'ry, Ease imparts;
By thee inspir'd, &mdash; this heavenly Maid has felt
A Pain for Sorrows to herself unknown;
With kind Humility has Comfort dealt,
To me, amidst the Wilds of Nature thrown!
For which may Guardian Heav'n her virtues shield
From all the poison'd Arts, that drove me to the Field.

"Yet tho' Reflection should convey a Dart
With every Word to wing my fleeting Life,
The Story of my Woe shall I impart
At thy Command, and bear the cruel Strife:
So may the sad Relation be believ'd,
Which from Experience deeply wounded flows,
That thy superior Virtue undeceiv'd,
May scorn the Semblance faithless Manhood shows,
Their Vows, their Sighs, and all the flatt'ring Arts
By which (they skill'd) betray deluded Virgin-Hearts!"

She ceas'd &mdash; as if oppress'd, &mdash; nor longer spoke
With sad Remembrance inward so she pain'd;
She droop'd her Head, &mdash; a Flood of Anguish broke
And scarce her Form the Signs of Life retain'd;
While Canace bestow'd a tender Tear,
To see the wretched falcon's halpless State;
With Kisses oft she sought her Griefs to cheer,
Caress'd her gently, and bewail'd her Fate!
Till Kindness does reviving Warmth infuse,
And thus the pensive Bird the Song of Woe renews.

"Where rapid Niester rolls his noisy Wave,
High in a Marble Cliff that brow'd the Flood;
My peaceful Birth indulgent Nature gave,
Securely there our Nest paternal stood:
I liv'd my honour'd Parents dear delight,
Cherish'd with Sylvan Fruits and choicest Grain;
My Youth they form'd, and taught my early Flight
To skim the Wood, or circle o'er the Plain!
Of all the numerous Natives of the Sky,
None, (so bethought me) seem'd so blest and glad as I.

By Fortune favour'd, and by Nature free,
Artless I flew where Health and Pleasure call'd;
No Fears alarm'd, no Dangers threatned me;
No Sickness griev'd, nor Servitude inthrall'd:
Form'd to Sincerity my honest Thought
No Guile imagin'd, as no Guile it knew;
Too fond Belief! &mdash; which future Mischiefs wrought,
And into Woe my heedless Footsteps drew:
For such the Fate of the most candid Mind,
True Honour needs no Vows, &mdash; no Vows can Falsehood bind.

"Not distant far, by the descending Stream,
A Tercelet held his wood-enshelter'd Nest;
Much of his Manners spoke propitious Fame,
As ev'ry Virtue had adorn'd his Breast;
Thus prepossess'd, &mdash; delighted I beheld
So full of gentle Courtesy he seem'd,
All former Observation stood excell'd,
I saw, &mdash; admir'd; &mdash; reflected, &mdash; and esteem'd:
Nor judg'd such Carriage with destructive Show,
Conceal'd a darksome Well of Treason hid below!

"As where gay Flowers in wild Profusion rise,
Th' embosom'd Serpent glides his wiley Head!
Replete with Malice till the Time he spies,
When unperceiv'd he may his Venom shed:
So with fair Semblance of unfelt Delight,
This sly Deceiver constant Duty paid;
Early or late he faithful watch'd my Flight,
With Zeal conducted, and with Care obey'd:
So us'd each Artifice my Heart to move
This Monster of his Kind! &mdash; this Hypocrite in Love.

"Yet, while his Tenderness my Mind surveys,
I wonder not that foolish, I believ'd!
Yet, when I think on his engaging Ways,
I scarce know how to call my self deceiv'd!
So upright to Appearance his Intent,
So far his Conduct seem'd from selfish View,
Dishonour might have wonder'd what it meant,
And blush'd to wear a Livery so true!
So fair to Light the stately Tomb remains,
That in its loathsome Vault the Spoils of Death contains.

"Thus for successive Years with humble Air,
This Wretch disloyal holy Love profan'd;
With constant Vows still won my open Ear,
'Till by Degrees my yielding Mind he gain'd:
To hear his plaintive Tale beneath the Shade,
Pleas'd have I oft consum'd the Summer's Day!
Still the fond Tale a fresh Impression made
And more enamour'd still I went away!
With female Pride prevailing Pity strove,
And what was Friendship first, now soften'd into Love.

"Yet in my Weakness, &mdash; Virtue still I ey'd!
Nor lost its native Purity my Heart!
Love, tho' he fetter'd, &mdash; led me not aside,
And Virgin Charity maintain'd its Part;
Tho' Choice inthron'd him in my conscious Breast.
The best, &mdash; the dearest of his noble Kind,
Lord of my Wishes, tho' he reign'd confest
His Empire still was bounded by the Mind
In me, unblemish'd Honour lent the Fire
The mutual Flame to feed, &mdash; I thought should ne'er expire.

Thus won by seeming Love!  and vain Desert,
My Mind deluded grasp'd its fatal Chain!
I fear'd no Treachery, void of ev'ry Art,
Lov'd as I was, I joy'd to love again!
So, in the Sight of Heav'n and conscious Day,
We mutual, one unalter'd Passion swore;
Ne'er did till then the Traitor seem so gay,
Ne'er felt my harmless Breast such Joy before:
As when I yielded all my Heart as free,
As simple I believ'd, he his had given to me!

"But well this Truth prophetic Love has read,
'A Thief and faithful Lover think not one.'
For soon as he beheld his Conquest made,
Increasing Show of Transport he put on;
Before my Feet in seeming Trance he lay,
And tho' deep Silence all his Speech suppress'd,
With false Delight I saw his Pinions play,
And his fond Eye his Happiness confess'd.
Convinc'd, to Demonstration, I remain'd,
No mortal Lover yet so well the Passion feign'd!

"Not Paris, who th' Idalian Nymph betray'd;
Nor Troilus, who inconstant Cresside won;
Not Jason, who deceiv'd the Colchian Maid;
Nor Lamech, first who chose two Wives for one;
Not Adam, who for one his Eden lost,
With all the Sons of his degen'rate Race,
Could equal Art with this Impostor boast,
Or act the Counterfeit with such a Grace.
Such was his specious Shadowing of Disguise,
No Woman had escap'd, had she been e'er so wise!

"No wonder then, if I, all unadvis'd,
Whom no Experience caution'd to beware;
If unsuspecting, I was soon surpriz'd,
And heedless caught in the delusive Snare:
If simple, charm'd with Love's attractive Show,
Its new-born Pleasure, and deceitful Sweet,
My Heart unguarded, open'd to the Foe,
And cherish'd in itself the fatal Heat;
Our Thoughts, our Pains, our Wishes seem'd the same;
New Love appear'd to raise a more enduring Flame!

"Thus twice the Sun renew'd the smiling Year,
And saw our mutual soft Endearments crown'd.
His Sight, my Bliss!  his Safety, all my Fear!
In him was ev'ry other Object drown'd!
Had I a Sight he seem'd not to divide?
Had he a Pain, I made not all my own?
I held him more than all the World beside;
I liv'd &mdash; I wish'd to live for him alone!
Dearer he was to me in ev'ry Part,
Than was the vital Stream that circled round my Heart!

"Near the lone Ruins of a wasted Tow'r,
Encompass'd by the River's murm'ring Fall,
Oft were we wont to pass the Ev'ning-Hour,
Safe in the Shelter of the Ivy'd Wall;
There was our Meeting fix'd, that hapless Day,
Happy, whose Light these Eyes had never seen,
Slow pass'd to me the tedious Time away,
Till the deep Shadows darken'd half the Green;
Impatient, I observ'd the Night's Increase,
And e're th' appointed Time I wing'd me to the Place.

"There I the Traytor found, &mdash; who pensive stood,
Perch'd on a Turret, as to mark my Flight;
Sad seem'd his Aspect! &mdash; drooping was his Mood;
Ne'er had I seen him in such heavy Plight.
Trembling, I ask'd the Cause; but ask'd in vain,
Foreboding; Silence gave me nought to know.
I press him to reply, Whence rose his Pain?
His Eye responsive only told his Woe:
Till with a forc'd Constraint, and piercing Look;
His feeble Voice is rais'd; and thus prepar'd, he spoke.

"'Hard is the Lot, the bolder Male attends,
Where Dangers threat, by Honor forc'd to go,
While Nature kind your softer Sex defends,
And Guardian Beauty shields from ev'ry Blow.
Love, weeping Love, can tell with what Regret
Reluctant I obey the Tyrant-Guide;
How much I wail the Rigour of my Fate,
That tears me, gentle Charmer!  from thy Side.
Judge thou the Strife, and with impartial Aim,
Save (if thou canst) my Peace, or vindicate my Fame.'

"He ceas'd &mdash; unusual Horror seiz'd my Breast,
A mix'd Confusion, never felt before!
Scarce my dim Eye the rising Grief repress'd,
I lov'd his Safety, &mdash; but his Honor more!
When Death prevailing rends the tortur'd Heart,
And hovers o'er the Sight his dreadful Shade
Such at that Instant was my speechless Smart!
Such, was the Anguish on my Senses prey'd!
Firm, as I could, I yet witheld a Cry,
And thoughtful thus I made, determin'd, my Reply.

"Tho' Love can ill this sudden Shock sustain,
And never Love as yet exceeded mine!
Yet since thy Glory calls thee from the Plain,
Content I sacrifice my Will to thine!
Complaints are vain! &mdash; where Fame invites thee, go,
Yet for my Sake, amidst the Warrior-Strife,
Heav'n from my Head avert each pointed Blow,
And with thy Safety bring me more than Life!
For this, each Morning-Orison shall rise,
For this, each Ev'ning-Hymn invoke the Guardian Skies.

"Yet tho' harsh Fate for Years prolong'd thy Stay,
Love constant shall supply my faithful Flame.
Then, as if lost but the preceding Day,
Still wilt thou find my Tenderness the same.
When the pure Soul a chaste Affection binds,
Nor Time, nor Death the Union can impair!
Heav'n pleas'd surveys the Sympathy of Minds,
That, like itself, enkindles brightly fair!
Fly then to Conquest &mdash; Fortune be thy Guide!
Of this assur'd, no Pow'r our Faith shall e'er divide.

"What need I, Princess fair!  describe his Shows,
His varied Action, and his fond Discourse?
His Vows repeated, and dissembled Woes?
Who cou'd speak better?  Who cou'd practise worse?
Such was his Agony &mdash; so deep his Cries;
Such all the Shapes of his experienc'd Art!
That more instructed Thought, and wiser Eyes,
Perhaps had seen, he over-did his Part.
But Innocence my weaker Judgment bound,
None Treason well can know, but who has Treason found!

"Doleful we parted on the Gloom of Night,
With weary Wing my wind-rock'd Nest I sought;
He vig'rous, southward urg'd his rapid Flight,
With new Direction, and inconstant Thought!
Well had he learn'd this Maxim of Mankind,
That no Restraint the Appetite cou'd cool;
That the soft Passion languishes confin'd;
But when directed, free by Beauty's Rule,
(As Fancy leads) exerts a nobler Aim;
With Novelty supplies the still reviving Flame!

"Like as the foolish Bird, who wild in-cag'd,
(Tho' kind you tend him, and tho' fond you feed)
Yet bears his Loss of Liberty enrag'd,
Nor all your gentle Usage deigns to heed:
Were you to line his Prison-Bars with Silk,
Disdainful shall he tear the Trophies up;
Were you to mix his Mess of honey'd Milk,
He loaths the Dainties, and he spurns the Cup.
But give him Leave, &mdash; the Libertine shall rove,
To feed on vilest Worms, a Vagrant in the Grove.

"Twas so this Tercelet, whom I once esteem'd,
A Miracle of Constancy and Truth,
(Such as in Virtue counterfeit he seem'd
With all the Splendor of unblemish'd Youth!)
Fir'd by no Prospect of superior Fame,
But led by vain Desire of wanton Change,
He shun'd my Sight, forgot his ancient Fame,
In search of lawless Pleasure, wild to range.
A wretched Kyte had struck his fickle Eye;
A Kyte!  the coarsest Bird that wings the midway Sky!

"So spoke Report &mdash; nor I the Tale believ'd,
So much my Heart was wedded to its Foe;
Till by my own Enquiry undeceiv'd,
My Error late I found, I found, I found it so!
Then first I knew, not Love the Passion bred,
Whose Semlance fair this Hypocrite express'd;
But Phantasy the idle Vapour fed,
A Meteor vain of Gallantry at best.
A real Tenderness can ne'er decline;
Of genuine Virtue still is Constancy the Sign.

"Thus now this Kyte my Wanderer enjoys,
Forgetful of his violated Vows;
More artful she, perhaps, her Pow'r employs,
To seize the kind Occasions Love allows!
To try if real be the Wooer's Pain,
By Wiles that ev'n his Artifice may blind;
To practise Coyness, and to act Disdain,
Arts never suited to my plainer Mind;
Whose Innocence alone supports its Grief,
Till Heav'n shall end my Woe, or timely send Relief!"

More had she spoke, &mdash; but as she thus bewail'd,
Prevailing Anguish gain'd the dubious Sway;
Short grew her Breath!  her little Spirits fail'd,
And in the Princess' Lap she dy'd away!
Mov'd, at the Sight, the Nymphs with busy Care,
To give the Mourner and their Mistress Ease;
Who safe conveys her from the dang'rous Air,
And homeward with a gentle Pace conveys;
Where in her own Apartment safely plac'd,
The wounded Bird she leaves, its just Repose to taste!

Next Canace humane her Thought bestows,
From ev'ry potent Herb and Root to chuse
Ingredients bland, the Med'cine to compose,
And in the Sores the Balm of Health infuse;
Recov'ring soon, beneath her watchful Eye
The gentle Bird a fairer Face assumes,
Her Wounds reclose &mdash; she shows external Joy,
And with new Life her varied Plumage blooms.
Grateful, her fair Deliv'rer is confess'd,
She sips her rosy Lip, and flutters round her Breast!

Yet but imperfect Pleasure she reveal'd,
A Cloud of Anguish darken'd still her Mien;
In vain with fond Endeavour she conceal'd
The melancholy Grief that reign'd within:
With friendly Zeal the gen'rous Princess strove
To cure this deeper Wound which Sorrow made,
To cool the Fever of consuming Love,
Which slowly-wasting on her Quiet prey'd:
And sought, by Reason calm, and mild Discourse,
To mitigate the deep Disease's rooted Force.

Close by her fair Alcove's projected Side,
She for the fav'rite Bird, a Mew prepares;
Adorn'd with all the Elegance of Pride;
Of Gold the Wires, of Gold the fretted Bars:
In Gold the crystal Ewer she encas'd,
A figur'd Vase of Gold contain'd her Food;
Her Cage around with golden Foliage grac'd,
Of Gold the polish'd Perch on which she stood;
Hung o'er a Canopy of Velvet-Blue,
The Emblem sweet of Hope, and Perseverance true!

Full in a rich Entablature oppos'd,
Depicted was there many a faithless Fowl;
There in their proper Colours stood disclos'd
The fickle Tercelet, and the treach'rous Owl.
The Caitiff Cuckoo flew attended there,
Whom all the feather'd Tribes avoid with Scorn;
Nor fail'd the tell-tale Daw, or prattling Stare
The Enigmatick Portrait to adorn:
High in the Centre was the Jeay espy'd,
Who ap'd their sev'ral Airs &mdash; well practis'd to deride,

Here shall we leave, how by Camballo's Care,
Return'd the Falcon with repentant Wing;
Nor yet the Mirror's wond'rous Pow'rs declare;
Nor the Sword's Virtues, to restore the King;
Nor of  Cambuscan's Conquests  yet discourse;
Whence gain'd Algarsife, Theodora to wife;
Great Peril 'scaping, thro' the Brazen Horse:
These we defer &mdash; to tell Camballo's Strife,
And how three mighty Brethren he surpass'd;
Then where we first began, shall we conclude at last.
