Wide spred the Fame of Canace the Fair,
Held of her Sex most learned in her Days;
Her Ring disclosing ev'ry Science rare,
And ev'ry secret Work of Nature's Ways.
The Voice of Beasts and Birds, or wild, or tame,
The Pow'r of Herbs and Plants she fully knew;
But What augmented more her other Fame,
(Tho' dark Events lay open to her View,)
She modest was, in all her Deeds and Words;
And wondrous chaste of Life, tho' lov'd of Knights and Lords.

Her many a Lord, and many a Knight Her lov'd;
But She to None of Them her Liking lent;
Nor ever was with fond Affection mov'd;
No single Look once out of Order went;
So well her Thoughts all lawless Passions rul'd,
For Love of Honor, or for Dread of Blame;
And, or extinguish'd quite, or duly cool'd,
She smother'd, or She never felt the Flame;
Her Eyes like wary Centinels well stay'd,
Still watch'd on ev'ry Side, of secret Foes afraid.

So much the rather, as She shun'd to love,
So much the rather, She to love was sought;
What fail'd not much unquiet Strife to move,
And 'midst her Suitors frequent Contests wrought.
That oft for Her in bloody Arms They fight,
Encountring Danger for the thankless Maid;
Whom, when Camballo (wise and valiant Knight!)
Perceiv'd, He nor could temper, nor dissuade;
From Ills, He could not help, He cast to raise,
And turn both Him and Her to Honor and to Praise.

One Day, that met this Troop of warlike Merit,
Amongst Them All He made this fix'd Decree;
(All Men of Passion, and all Men of Spirit!
The harder so to make Them well agree!)
"Be this the Hour to fix my Sister's Choice,
Be, of the Croud, that to her Bed pretend,
Three chose, the Stoutest call'd by common Voice,
The Stoutest of the Three the Strife shall end.
Then Each with Me shall combat for her Sake;
The Victor of Them all our Canace shall take."

Bold was the Challenge, as Himself was bold,
With Courage full of Daring and Emprize,
Approv'd in Acts too num'rous to be told,
Whence lasting Honors to his Mem'ry rise.
But what secur'd Him of the wish'd Event,
Whence, tho' full brave, some Confidence might spring.
Was the sure Aid his Royal Sister lent,
The Influence of her rarely-gifted Ring;
That 'mongst the many Virtues (which We read)
Had Pow'r to staunch all Wounds that mortaly did bleed.

So was that Ring's great Virtue known to All;
That Dread of This, and his redoubted Might,
Did all that youthly Rout so much appall,
That None of Them durst undertake the Fight.
More wise They ween'd to make of Love a Play,
Than Life to hazard for fair Lady's Grace;
While yet uncertain (should They gain the Day)
They in her Sight might hope the foremost Place.
Tho' for her Sake, They all that Peril ran,
Who could be sure of Her, or think Himself the Man?

Among the Lovers, were three Brethren bold
Three bolder Brethren never yet were born!
Born of one Mother, in one happy Mold!
Born at one Burthen, in one happy Morn!
Thrice happy Morn, thrice happy Mother, hail!
That brought Three such, Three such not to be found;
Three Males united as one single Male!
The First was Priamondo, far renown'd
Nor less the Second, Diamondo nam'd;
With Triamondo last, yet, equally as fam'd.

Stout Priamondo, not so strong to strike!
Strong Diamondo, not so stout a Knight!
But Priamondo, stout and strong alike!
On Horse wou'd Triamondo chuse to fight
Felt Priamondo best on Foot his Force,
And so delighted to maintain his Ground;
To Diamondo, equal Foot or Horse.
With Curtax deep wou'd Diamondo wound;
And Triamondo handled Spear and Shield;
But Curtax, Shield and Spear would Priamondo wield.

These Brothers lov'd Each Other wond'rous well,
And by such firm Affection were ally'd,
As if one Soul might in three Bosoms dwell,
And in three equal Parts her Pow'rs divide.
Like three fair Arms, uniting as They spread,
That, from one Root, their vital Sap derive,
They crown their Mother with one tow'ring Head;
And, like the Root that bids Them bloom and thrive,
Such was their Mother!  At one happy Birth,
Three Sons producing, Three, the noblest Sons of Earth!

Of secret Things their Mother had the Skill,
Knew Nature's Laws; A Nymph of Fairy Kind!
Hence by her Art cou'd model to her Will,
And to her Use each living Creature bind.
There-to, She was right Fair to Mortal Eye,
List She, to Mortal Eye, to show how Fair!
Tempting to touch, and charming to descry;
Her Stature, goodly; delicate, her Air.
But She, as wont the Nymphs of Sylvan Race,
In Forests spent her Days, and lov'd in Wilds to chase.

There, on a Day, a noble youthly Knight,
Adventures seeking in the savage Wood,
By great good Fortune got of Her the Sight,
As She sat careless by a Crystal Flood.
And on Her, unawares, He lay'd his Hand,
Combing her Locks, her Head to new-array;
In vain She strove his Ardor to withstand,
The too intemp'rate Youth wou'd have his Way.
Oppressing Her by force (as Bards have told)
The lovely Sons He got, that prov'd three Champions bold!

These, long She foster'd in the lonely Wood,
Till to the Ripeness of Man's State They grew,
Then showing forth Signs of their Father's Blood;
Arms first They love, Adventures then pursue.
Adventures, where They knew to seek, They sought,
Which, for their Safety, pain'd their Mother's Mind;
For tho' their Pow'rs They prov'd, and Wonders wrought,
Yet He that that seeks Mischance, Mischance may find.
For He that Danger rather courts than shuns,
The greater is his Heart, the greater Hazard runs.

For This, She wish'd, the Number of their Days
To know, and to inlarge with long Extent;
By wond'rous Skill, thro' subterraneous Ways,
Down to the Mansion of the Fates she went.
Down to the bottom of the deep Abyss,
Far under Ground She went to Realms of Night,
Where Demogorgon sits in gloomy Bliss,
Far from the Eye of Heav'n, or View of Light,
And rules the hideous Chaos; There she hies,
The Fates to try where hid, their dreadful Dwelling lies.

She found Them there, all seated in a Round,
Full in the Midst the direful Distaff stands;
Where drawing out the Lines of Life, She found
The Fatal Sisters, with unweary'd Hands.
Sad Clotho held the Rock; the vital Twine
With Pain by griesly Lachesis was spun;
But ah!  how soon was all their fair Design,
How soon!  by cruel Atropos undone!
With Steel accurst She cut the Twist in twain:
Most wretched Man, whose Days depend on Threads so vain!

Ent'ring She bow'd, and bending sate to Rest;
Their Labor, then, survey'd with anxious Grace:
And comprehending soon, the Fates address'd,
Trembling in Heart, and looking pale in Face.
To tell her Cause of Coming She began&mdash;
To Whom, fierce Atropos; "Intruder hold!
That search the Secrets of the Life of Man!
That dare, from Mortal what is hid, behold!
Well worthy Thou to be of Jove accurst,
And shorten'd of their Twine, thy Sons in Secret nurst."

Where-at She, sore afraid, the Fates besought
Pardon to grant, and Rigor to abate,
And pray'd to see how strong their Twine was wrought,
And know the utmost Measure of their Date.
This Clotho grants; so Destiny ordain'd!
And gives Her to inspect the fated Line;
The Mother to the Soul was inly pain'd,
Nor cou'd forbear to murmur and repine;
Spun were their Threads, She thought, as Spiders spin,
As thin as Webs They seem'd, and yet as short as thin.

For longer Measure, and for stronger Thread,
She strait began the Sisters to ingage;
That so their Lives might be prolong'd (She said)
But Lachesis as soon began to rage.
"Deem You alike, fond Dame (the Goddess cry'd,)
"Alike!  of Human Things, and Things Divine?
That alter'd they may be?  (oh mortal Pride!)
And chang'd, at Pleasure, for those Sons of Thine?
Not so; for, what the Destinies decree,
Not all the Gods can force, not Jove himself can free.

"If then the Term of Life," (the Nymph rejoin'd)
"Can neither be, or lessen'd, or enlarg'd;
Grant This (this Grant will ease a Mother's Mind)
With Either's Soul be Either's Body charg'd.
So when You doom the Eldest of the Three,
(Whose Life, I see, is shortest) pass his Soul;
Transfer it to the Second in Degree:
And let the Third and Last possess the Whole.
Thus Each, in Other, shall his Life prolong,
In Life of Other, Each shall thus be trebly strong.

The careful Sisters granted her Request;
With full-contented Mind the Nymph departs.
Return'd, She meets Her Sons in Armor drest,
Not to her Wish nor knew They of her Arts.
From Them conceal'd She what the Fates design'd,
And how their Lives were lengthen'd, fear'd to tell;
Yet oft as fair Occasion She cou'd find,
She bids Son trust to Son, whate'er befell.
"Let Brother on his Brother's Safety wait,
Give Love for Love, my Boys, whate'er your future Fate.

And firm in Friendship liv'd They all their Days,
Rash Discord never ent'ring either Mind!
Which added much to all their other Praise,
And now in Love of Canace They join'd.
As by Affection natural 'twas agreed,
Each cou'd not but approve what Each approv'd;
And tho' same likings sure Aversions breed;
Here lov'd They more, because alike They lov'd.
Hence the dire Conflict grew including All,
(As oft) great Matter growing from Beginning small.

O!  why do wretched Men so much desire
To draw their Days to the remotest Date?
Why do not rather with Them to expire,
Knowing the certain Mis'ry of their State?
Tost like the Vessel on the surging Wave,
What Ills await Them, threat'ning to devour
One Danger, from the Cradle to the Grave,
Attends; for Death attends Them ev'ry Hour!
And Who most happy seems, and least complains,
Is yet, as near his End, as He that suffers Pains!

For This, I hold the Nymph more fond, than sage,
Her Children's Life thus seeking to prolong;
To lengthen Mis'ry, She wou'd lengthen Age:
But She that means the Right, can act no Wrong.
And happy, Each in Other, breath'd the Three,
Of Other Each, approving, and approv'd;
So courteous Each with Other to agree,
It made them more esteem'd of Friends They lov'd;
And Each with Other so for Valor priz'd,
It made Them dreaded more of Foes whom They despis'd.

These Three that hardy Challenge took in Hand,
With great Camballo to maintain the Fight;
The Day was set, that All might understand,
And Pledges pawn'd, as claim'd the Martial Rite.
That Day (and ne'er was Day, of equal Dread,
Known, or to Those, before, or Those, since Born!)
Soon as the Face of Heav'n was streak'd with Red,
These warlike Champions hail the rising Morn;
And, glorious as the Sun, in Armor shine,
Assembling in the Field, the Challenge to define.

The Field with Lists was all around inclos'd,
To bar the Press of People far away;
And at one Side six Judges were dispos'd,
To view and deem the Deeds of Arms that Day.
Fresh in Array, and beautiful to Sight,
Fair Canace adorn'd a stately Stage,
Rais'd opposite; the Fortune of the Fight
Enag'd to see:  Her Beauty was the Gage
There to be seen, as his most worthy Wife
Who purchas'd her full fair, at Venture of his Life.

Camballo enter'd first the Listed Space,
With stately Step, that scorn'd the Pow'r of Chance;
As sure of Conquest, fearless was his Face:
As fearless, tho' less sure, the Three advance.
Their 'Scutcheons, richly gilt; and, streaming high,
Their Banners, that on Day reflected Day.
Thrice marching round the List, They charm'd the Eye,
Such was their manly Port, and brave Array.
Thrice bow'd they lowly to the noble Maid,
The while the Trumpets shrill, and loud the Clarions play'd.

Advanc'd the Challenger with hardy Stride,
All arm'd to Point, his Challenge to maintain;
Him Priamondo met with equal Pride,
To Point all arm'd, to take it in Disdain.
A Trumpet blew.  Strait closing, Hand to Hand,
With furious Force and fell Intent They met,
Careless of Peril in the furious Stand;
Life they expos'd, as Life had been a Debt:
A Debt so deeply 'gag'd, that They esteem'd
Twas Folly now to spare, what cou'd not be redeem'd.

Well practis'd Priamondo was in Fight,
And great his Skill in Use of Spear and Shield.
Nor less approv'd Camballo's Martial Might,
Nor less his Skill or Shield or Spear to wield,
'Twas hard to guess which was the hardier Foe;
For equal ev'ry Blow on either Side,
And either Side sent Death at ev'ry Blow,
It seem'd, that Chance, not Merit, must decide.
Each eyes the Other with such watchful Care,
That short falls ev'ry Blow, or vainly glides in Air.

Yet One of Many with unlucky Glance,
(Of Many One by Priamondo sent)
Took Place, directed less by Aim than Chance,
And passing thro' Camballo's Shoulder went.
It went; his Shield it forc'd him to forego,
Much was he griev'd, and rag'd with high Disdain;
Yet from the Wound no Blood He felt to flow,
But wond'rous Pain; his Courage rose with Pain
That urg'd his haughty Soul to Vengeance fell.
Smart daunts not mighty Hearts, but makes them more to swell.

With That, He bade his poignant Jav'lin fly,
Full at his Foe, and close beneath his Shield;
It enter'd thro' his Mail, and pierc'd his Thigh,
The Blood gush'd forth and stain'd the grassy Field.
With double Fores it flew, and reach'd the Knight;
Much was the Knight incumber'd with the Wound;
To stand unable, or erect his Hight,
For, here and there, He reel'd along the Ground.
So as the sapless Oak, thro' Age declin'd,
Submits to ev'ry Blast, and bends to ev'ry Wind.

Soon as Camballo his Condition spy'd,
Full at the Spear He caught with all his Might,
Meaning to draw, or thrust from Side to Side,
And so at one Attempt conclude the Fight.
Deep was the Point infix'd, and hard He drew,
Hard tho' He drew, still back the Foe reclin'd:
Freed from the Weapon on the Knight He flew,
(Broke was the Staff, the Head was left behind.)
At which the Hero, more inrag'd then tam'd,
Re-charging him afresh, thus scornfully exclaim'd.

"Here, take the Meed of thy Mischallenge, take!
Thus long have I permitted Thee to live;
Not for thine own, but for thy Sister's Sake:
A Debt I might forbear, but not forgive."
The wicked Weapon heard the wrathful Vow,
And pass'd to second his vindictive Ire,
His Beaver pierc'd, and shiver'd on his Brow,
That with the Force it forc'd him to retire,
Then broke; Half, quiv'ring in his Head-piece stood,
And Half the Owner held, and curs'd the treach'rous Wood.

The sudden Shock with Rage Camballo bore;
And, where it stuck, from forth his Beaver drew
The shorten'd Spear, that pain'd Him as he tore:
He drew, and back at Priamondo threw.
The faithless Weapon found a ready Way
To pierce his Gorget where his Neck was bare;
Where lies the Pipe, commission'd to convey,
Fresh to the lab'ring Bread, the vital Air.
Thence Streams of purple Blood, the Last of Life,
Dismiss his weary Soul, and end the doubtful Strife.

His weary Soul, from earthly Bondage freed,
Nor fled to Heav'n, where Some say Spirits fly,
Nor vanish'd into Air, as Others plead;
Nor chang'd into a Star adorn'd the Sky;
Nor sought direct (a solitary Shade!)
in Pluto's gloomy Realm, Eternal Rest:
But thro' Traduction, (as his Mother pray'd)
Pass'd instantaneous to his Brother's Breast.
His Brother, next in Order, that surviv'd,
In Whom He liv'd anew, of former Life depriv'd.

He, when He spy'd Him breathless on the Field,
Was touch'd with Sorrow for his Brother's Fate
Way to his Sorrow yet He scorn'd to yield,
But rather rous'd to Vengeance and to Hate.
Nor this the Time to wail, or to condole;&mdash;
But fierce He rushes to renew the Fight;
Thro' secret Impulse of his gen'rous Soul;
As in Reversion of his Brother's Right.
And, challenging the Virgin as his Due;
The Foe was soon addrest:  the Trumpets freshly blew.

With That, together Both so fiercely clos'd,
As Limb from Limb, Each, Other meant to rend;
Foot fix'd to Foot, and Hand to Hand oppos'd,
Nor Plate nor Mail the hideous Show'r defend.
So deadily They dealt their Axes round,
Riv'd was the Plate, and shatter'd was the Mail;
Pain felt the One, the Other dy'd the Ground,
Fire flash'd from ev'ry Blow, Trail after Trail;
As fast as Light'ning after Thunder flies:
That fill'd the crouded List with Terror and Surprize.

As when two Tigers prick'd with hungry Rage,
Chance in the Chace to meet the wish'd-for Spoil,
On which they hope their Famine to asswage,
And gain a fearful Harvest of their Toil.
To make the just Partition Both refuse,
And Both contest the Fortune of the Day;
Hence strife-full Broil, and cruel Fight insues,
While Neither lets the Other touch the Prey;
And Either scorns with Other to partake:
So, strove these warlike Knights, for this fair Lady's Sake.

Full many a Blow, and mortally design'd,
Was interchang'd; yet short fell ev'ry Blow!
For They were all forwarded or declin'd,
That Life in Each flood fearless of her Foe,
Till Diamondo, scorning long Delay
Of wav'ring Fortune, fix'd to neither Side;
Resolv'd to end the Doubt at one Essay,
And at one Aim the Battle to decide;
"Take This for Priamondo!"  (fierce He spoke)
And heav'd his murd'rous Axe, and gave a vengeful Stroke.

The vengeful Stroke had finish'd soon the Strife,
Sped, as was meant, so deadly was it meant!
Soon had it from the Body forc'd the Life;
But This, Camballo's better Fates prevent.
He mark'd him as He rais'd and lowr'd his Hand,
And judg'd the Blow would fall with mighty Sway,
So swerv'd, as it arriv'd, and slip'd his Stand,
And sudden to it's fell Intent gave way.
Missing the Mark, to which his Eye was bound,
Nigh fell'd Him his right Arm, his right Foot plow'd the Ground.

As when a Vulture, greedy of his Prey,
By Hunger prest, sad Hunger Heart can lend!
Strikes at a Heron, in th' etherial Way,
On whom his feather'd Forces downward bend;
Nought seems that can defend Her from her Foe:
Herself the Fowl descends with wary Care;
She spies Him, as He stoops, eludes the Blow,
And makes Him spend his Wings in empty Air.
That with his proper Weight, deceiv'd in Sight,
Nigh to the Ground He falls, and scarce recovers Plight.

The fair Occasion, when Camballo spy'd,
Full at the Knight He drove with all his Pow'r;
E'er, for Assault or Ward He could provide:
And smote Him with his Axe, in luckless Hour
With dire Dexterity the Stroke was sped,
Then as recover'd, from his Stoop, the Foe;
And from his Shoulders off it bore his Head:
The headless Trunk stood heedless of the Blow!
A while it stood, as still respiring Breath,
Till feeling Life to fail, it fell; and slept in Death.

Amaz'd were the Spectators of the Field,
So long erect an headless Trunk to see;
With Arms, that void of Life, vain Weapons wield,
Unknowing of the Fates divine Decree!
For tho' one Soul from out his Body fled,
'Twas that which from his Brother He deriv'd;
And, but that thus dismember'd of the Head,
His Body would have liv'd, and had reviv'd.
Where, as his Soul no fitting Mansion found,
The Lifeless Corse is left to fall and spread the Ground.

Yet left not either Soul the doubtful Strife,
Nor yet retir'd to Seat of Heav'nly Rest;
But fill'd with double Grief and double Life,
Their last lov'd Mansion, Triamondo's Breast?
Inly He felt a more than Mortal Smart,
And strait He leap'd into the empty Field,
With more than common Strength, or common Heart;
And menac'd with his Spear, and shook his Shield.
Thus brave Camballo bravely He address'd,
Who fac'd the Foe, and soon the Fight was closely prest.

Well might You wonder how that noble Knight,
Was able to sustain Wound after Wound,
And what impower'd him to renew the Fight;
And how on Foot He cou'd maintain his Ground,
Yet had You then Him forth advancing seen,
As fierce He seem'd, as fresh the Field to take,
As had He been new-form'd, new-soul'd had been;
The Semblance of the new-recruited Snake,
That, soon as Spring dispels the Wintry Cold,
Throws off his ragged Skin, and shines in Scales of Gold.

'Twas all thro' Virtue of the Ring He wore,
Whence wounded not a single Drop He bled;
His weakened Strength her working Pow'rs restore,
The Stone, therein incas'd, such Influence shed.
Else how cou'd One of equal Might with Most,
With Most of equal Might, yet still but One!
Before so Many no less Mighty boast;
And go the Road to Honor He had gone?
Or think to match Three such in equal Fight?
Three such!  as match'd an Host!  an Host in either Knight!

Yet Thus in Triamondo rais'd no Dread,
Nor yet of glorious Vict'ry He despair'd;
But closing Him, well arm'd from Foot to Head,
What Man cou'd do, He did; cou'd dare, He dar'd.
Thick pour'd his Blows, as Hail-stones from the Sky,
On ev'ry Side He struck, hew'd, urg'd, and press'd;
All doubt or cou'd He stand, or wou'd He fly:
So fast the Foe his Iron Axe address'd,
That Sparks of Fire from ev'ry Stroke insue;
As fast, as from the Rock, the Sprays of Briny Dew.

Much was Camballo daunted with the Blows,
So thick They fell, so forcibly were sent,
Constrain'd (to such a Hight his Fury rose)
Back to retire, and some-what to relent.
Safer, He judg'd, to ward than to withstand,
The Rage of Passion, rising in its Course;
He waits his shorter Breath, and lighter Hand,
Then fresh assails Him with superior Force:
That caus'd the Foe, abated of his Heat,
Fast, forward as He press'd, now backward to retreat.

As when the Tide, from Ocean newly sped,
Flows up the Shenan with contrary Course;
O'er-rules the Stream, in his own Watry Bed,
And makes Him seem to have an adverse Sourse:
Back towards his Spring the Current re-ascends,
And Borders, lately pass'd, again surveys;
But when again the Flood its Vigor spends,
Then back his borrow'd Waters He repays.
And sends the Sea his own with double Gain,
And Tribute, with his own, as Sov'reign of the Main.

Various as these, the Tides of Battle flow,
With diverse Fortune doubtful to be deem'd;
Now This the Better had, now had his Foe;
Then One half-vanquish'd, then the Other seem'd.
Yet Victor Each Himself in Valor thought,
And held his Rival dying, if not dead;
Felt, many a Pang, Camballo, while They fought,
And Blood abundant Triamondo shed.
That with the Wasting of his Vital Flood,
Faintly He breath'd at Heart, on Foot He feebly stood.

Camballo stronger still, and greater grew,
Nor felt his Blood to waste, nor Pow'rs to fail;
From Wound new made He gather'd Vigor new,
So much the Virtues of the Ring prevail.
Like as the Tree, by Blights or Years,
Tho', wither'd, to the Trunk it droops the Head,
Reviv'd, when prun'd with careful Skill, appears,
And joys again to flourish and to spread;
New Fruit producing, from the Husband's Toil,
As fresh as when it first was planted in the Soil.

Thro' like Advantage in his Strength He rose,
And smote with wond'rous Force the adverse Knight;
There, where the Seams the jointed Hauberk close,
That down He fell, as dead to Human Sight.
Dead yet He was not!  Yet He suffer'd Death!
Death sure as suffers Ought of Mortal State!
Felt the last Struggle of expiring Breath!
And pay'd a Life at the Demand of Fate!
For strait One Soul from out his Body flies,
From human Mis'ry freed, and seeks its native Skies.

Meantime, while All that spy'd Him deem'd Him Dead,
For visible to All He seem'd to die!
As rising from a Dream He rear'd his Head,
And sudden on his Foe began to fly.
At so uncouth a Sight the Foe amaz'd,
Lost Pow'r of Speech, not Utt'rance cou'd afford;
Unmov'd, as had He seen a Ghost, He gaz'd,
And slow of Action held his idle Sword.
Till struck full oft by his impetuous Arm,
To strike He was constrain'd, to save Himself from Harm.

Yet from that Hour more warily He fought,
In Fear the Stygian Gods to un-befriend;
As One, to save Himself, that rather fought,
Than fast persue'd Another to offend;
Nor Life, nor Labor chose to spend in vain.
When Triamondo found his cooler Play,
He judg'd it follow'd, or from Fear or Pain,
Ill able to support the closing Fray,
Or that the Knight cou'd ill on Foot indure,
A Sign that must to Him the Vict'ry soon assure.

Joy'd to the Soul, on high He rais'd his Hand,
In Mind to give the last decisive Blow;
The Foe to end, or fear'd He to withstand,
Or dar'd He to withstand, to end the Foe.
Camballo mark'd Him, not inclin'd to yield,
And nothing slow to save his threaten'd Head;
Sword He drew, and pass'd his op'ning Shield,
Slight was the Op'ning, Slight the Pass was sped:
He struck Him, as to strike his Hand He rear'd;
Beneath his Arm it went, and at his Back appear'd.

Yet Triamondo's Axe pursued its Way,
And fell full heavy on Camballo's Crest.
The Hero in a swooning Absence lay;
An hideous Wound was on his Head imprest.
His Shield with Brims of Brass was round
And there it found a Rest, nor farther sped;
Wise had the Knight been cleav'd, and spred the Ground,
Down to the Breast dissever'd from the Head.
So Both at once fell breathless on the Field,
And Each to other seem'd the Vict'ry there to yield.

The Croud conclude the Fight was at an End!
The Marshals of the Field, and Judges rose!
Wail'd Canace her Brother as her Friend!
They rend the Trophies, and the Lists They close!
Nought rested but to speak their Fun'ral Praise!
Ascertain'd now, by Death, the Doubtful Strife!
When Lo!  at once their Living Forms They raise,
One, from his Ring; One, from his Treble Life;
And Both together rising (wond'rous Sight!)
Fresh, Other Each assail'd, and fierce renew'd the Fight.

Each claiming then the Other as his Prize,
Begun, as had the Fight but then begun;
Alike, Strokes, Wounds, Shields, Weapons They despise,
And Danger rather try to find than shun.
Death fear'd They not, nor yet for Life They car'd,
Life to let out, alike or Death let in.
For Death They valu'd not, nor Life They spar'd,
Or Who was to be wan, or Who to win.
More to be kill'd desirous, than to kill;
To Both Life seem'd a Load and safety seem'd an Ill.

While thus the Battle hung, a doubtful Scale!
Unsure to Whom the Balance wou'd decline,
Sad ev'ry Heart, and ev'ry Face grew pale
The Close of All unwilling to divine;
All suddenly a clamorous Noise They heard;
That seem'd some perilous Tumult to portend,
As Something strange at near Approach appear'd,
And caus'd the Croud the Vault of Heav'n to rend.
With Cries of Women, and Alarms of Boys,
Such as the troubled Theatre full oft annoyes.

Each Champion heard the Clamor from afar,
But what it brought not sudden cou'd devise;
When lo!  They spy'd, fair seated on a Car,
A Maid that cou'd not fail to touch their Eyes.
Fast as a Whirlwind drives, She drives along,
And lovely was the Virgin to behold!
Yet faster Way She made amidst the Throng,
For that her Car was all adorn'd with Gold,
It seem'd as for some Persian Monarch plan'd,
With various Gems enrich'd, and show'd a master Hand.

Drawn was her Car (What wond'rous is to tell)
By two grim Lyons, subject to Command;
And tho' They look'd in Fierceness to excell
Their savage Kind, yet tame They bore her Hand.
Erect on Foot, high rais'd, the Damsel stood.
And more than Human seem'd to Human Sight.
Bright as the Dame that bore Her in the Wood!
She shone (and Either shone as Angel bright)
But, with her Beauty, Bounty might compare,
Which of the Two in Her might claim the greater Share.

The Fair was Daughter to th' enamour'd Knight,
Who once again oppress'd the Sylvan Maid;
Long had He watch'd to gain the pleasing Sight,
Till unawares He caught Her in the Shade.
In Magick Lore th' Mother deeply skill'd,
Her Child in all her subtle Arts improv'd;
And now She came with kind Affection fill'd,
To aid her Brother, whom She dearly lov'd.
In Haste She came to pacify the Strife,
For Bad the Loss or Gain, where Gain or Loss is Life.

Her, as the Croud press'd nearer to behold,
Less tractable her ireful Leaders grew;
Numbers They drove before, as Sheep to Fold,
And Numbers roll'd in Dust for Haste o'erthrew;
That in the mix'd Confusion of the Throng,
For Fear of Danger, Some to Distance fly!
For Curiosity, Some rac'd along!
Some for Themselves, and Some for Others cry!
Some laugh for Fancy, Some for Wonder shout!
And Some, that wou'd seem Wise, their Wonder turn to Doubt!

In her Right Hand a Rod of Peace She bore,
Around, two Serpents mutually were wound;
Bound firmly by the Tail in Lovely Lore,
And Both were with one Olive Garland crown'd.
Like to the Wand that wields the Son of May,
Seals He in Sleep the Eye, or opes in Light;
Draws He from Hell the Shade, or drives away
The Soul from Earth; Day ministring or Night,
And in her other Hand She held a Vase,
With choice Nepenthe fill'd; a Juice of sov'reign Grace!

Nepenthe!  Drink prepar'd by Heav'nly Art!
By Gods devis'd, all Sorrow to asswage!
To chace the Grief of Soul, and Gall of Heart,
Whence spring sore Anguish, and contentious Rage!
To Age, it gives sweet Peace and quiet Rest!
Firm Friendship and unalter'd Love, to Youth!
The Mind established, and chears the Breast!
Reserv'd for Such as Wisdom court and Truth!
Few by the Gods to taste it are assign'd!
But All, assign'd to taste it, Bliss Eternal find!

Such Men of Worth, deriv'd of Mortal Birth,
As mighty Jove advances to the Sky;
Gods for their Merit made from Sons of Earth!
Partake of This, e'er yet to Heav'n They fly.
Secure of Joys, that will for ever last,
All Mem'ry here They Drown of Human Care;
All Hope, or Fear, of Future, or of Past,
Then, unremembring, to the Blest repair.
Heroes of old of This were giv'n to taste,
E'er yet among the Gods Immortal They were plac'd.

Much more of Price, and of more gracious Pow'r,
This than the Fountain in Ardenna found;
Of which Renaldo drank in happy Hour,
As sings the Tuscan Poet, far renown'd.
For had that Pow'r to change the Bent of Mind,
From Love to Hate, a Change of evil Choice!
But This reverse, from Hate to Love inclin'd,
Who wou'd not to this Virtue yield his Voice?
Hate is of Brutes, and What the Gods detest;
But Love the Gift of Heav'n, and glads the Human Breast.

Now close beside the List her Leaders stand,
(And strong-inclosing Bars the List surround!)
She strikes the Bars, that open to her Hand,
Then enter'd, quits her Car, and takes the Ground.
"Friendship and Peace to All!"  (The Virgin cry'd;)
"Friendship and Peace!  The greatest Good in Life!
First to Her Brother was the Wish apply'd,
Whom, sorely griev'd, She found in Bloody Strife;
Last, to the Foe, whose warlike Air and Grace,
Then secret, touch'd her Soul, and dy'd her conscious Face.

Both slightly bow'd; (for small was their Delight,
As then, to entertain the Lovely Maid)
Then turn'd Them to the Battle:  At the Sight,
Between them on the Field, Herself She laid.
With double Hopes disturb'd, and double Fears,
Nought that cou'd move the Reconciler spares,
With Sighs now intermixing soft'ning Tears,
And pow'rful Reasons adding now to Pray'rs,
For cordial Peace, from horrid War, She fought,
By All, They held most dear!  By Her, for whom They fought!

But when She found, She cou'd not so prevail,
She touch'd Them lightly with her pow'rful Wand;
Then sudden as the Hearts of Cowards fail,
Down fall their wrathful Swords, and motionless They stand;
They stand, as Men possest with Panick Fright,
Struck with They know not What of dread Surprize;
Thus e'er their scatter'd Pow'rs They cou'd unite,
Or free their mighty Souls from mightier Ties;
Her Golden Bowl, with sweet Oblivion fraught,
She reach'd; and, glad for Thirst, Each drank an haughty Draught!

Soon as They tasted once the Juice Divine,
Wonder it was the sudden Change to see,
From deafly Stroke in kind Embrace They join,
And Hands They plight, no more to disagree;
In Amity, such Enmity to close,
And Foe with Foe, as Friend with Friend to yield,
And Faithful Friends to rise from Mortal Foes,
This Turn of Things amaz'd the crouded Field;
The crouded Field with Joy and Wonder rise,
One loud Applause ensues, re-echoing thro' the Skies!

When gentle Canace This sees and hears,
In Haste She from her lofty Seat descends;
And soon amidst the Combatants appears,
To know if so the cruel Conflict ends:
When certain found; all due Respect She pay'd,
In Manner easy, and in Speech polite;
And, for her Conduct, praising much the Maid,
At Sarra begs Her to dispose the Night;
And add this other Favor to the rest,
The Friendship to accept, that firmly She profest.

Agreed with true Sincerity of Heart;
The Trumpets sounded, and the Judges rose;
With Glee and gladsome Cheer the Croud depart:
To march together Both the Champions chose,
And Both together chose the Maids to ride;
Cambina, Prudent Umpire of the Day;
With sweet Affection taking to her Side
Fair Canace, as fresh as Rose in May.
Thence to Cambuscan's Palace They retir'd,
By All applauded Each, and Each by All admir'd.

In perfect Love there many a Day They spend;
Camballo with Cambina led his Life;
And who, but Triamondo, cou'd pretend
A rightful Claim to Canace as Wife?
I pass the joyous Feasts, the solemn Rites,
Things well to be conceiv'd, tho' not exprest;
The Days of Dalliance, and of Bliss the Nights;
Suffice, that Each in Each was fully Blest.
So join'd by Love, and so by Friendship bound,
That never since their Days, were Four so Happy found.

It rises oft in Life (as here it rose)
That mortal Foes to faithful Friends may turn;
And so may faithful Friends to mortal Foes:
As Reasons temper, or as Passions burn.
For oft some dire Mistake misleads the Will,
As well in Hate of Foes, as Love of Friends;
Hence Enmity, that not proceeds of Ill,
But of Occasion, with th' Occasion ends;
And Friendship, which a faint Affection breeds
Without Regard of Good, dies like ill-grounded Seeds.

Meantime the Sun his due Meridian Hight
Had gain'd, when Neither lost, yet either won;
While great Cambuscan, who declin'd the Sight,
Resign'd to Fate the Daughter, and the Son.
The Monarch thought, Fate order'd for the Best.
But hold &mdash; 'tis Time to check the forward Steed!&mdash;
Nor shou'd our Tale too long delay the Rest;
What yet remains, in Order may succeed,
When next our Turn; Intemperance of Tongue,
Mine Host will well excuse, his Orator is young.
