SCENE, a Forest.  TIME, the EVENING.

In Georgia's Land, where Tefflis' Tow'rs are seen,
In distant View along the level Green,
While Ev'ning Dews enrich the glitt'ring Glade,
And the tall Forests cast a longer Shade,
Amidst the Maids of Zagen's peaceful Grove,
Emyra sung the pleasing Cares of Love.

Of Abra first began the tender Strain,
Who led her Youth with Flocks upon the Plain:
At Morn she came those willing Flocks to lead,
Where Lillies rear them in the wat'ry Mead;
From early Dawn the live-long Hours she told,
'Till late at silent Eve she penn'd the Fold.
Deep in the Grove beneath the secret Shade,
A various Wreath of od'rous Flow'rs she made:
Gay-motley'd Pinks and sweet Junquils she chose,
The Violet-blue that on the Moss-bank grows;
All-sweet to Sense, the flaunting Rose was there;
The finish'd Chaplet well-adorn'd her Hair.

Great Abbas chanc'd that fated Morn to stray,
By Love conducted from the Chace away;
Among the vocal Vales he heard her Song,
And sought the Vales and echoing Groves among:
At length he found, and woo'd the rural Maid;
She knew the Monarch, and with Fear obey'd.
Be ev'ry Youth like Royal Abbas mov'd,
And ev'ry Georgian Maid like Abra lov'd.

The Royal Lover bore her from the Plain,
Yet still her Crook and bleating Flock remain:
Oft as she went, she backward turn'd her View,
And bad that Crook and bleating Flock Adieu.
Fair happy Maid!  to other Scenes remove,
To richer Scenes of golden Pow'r and Love!
Go leave the simple Pipe, and Shepherd's Strain;
With Love delight thee, and with Abbas reign.
Be ev'ry Youth, &c.

Yet midst the Blaze of Courts she fix'd her Love,
On the cool Fountain, or the shady Grove;
Still with the Shepherd's Innocence her Mind
To the sweet Vale, and flow'ry Mead inclin'd;
And oft as Spring renew'd the Plains with Flow'rs,
Breath'd his soft Gales, and led the fragrant Hours,
With sure Return she sought the sylvan Scene,
The breezy Mountains, and the Forests green.
Her Maids around her mov'd, a duteous Band!
Each bore a Crook all-rural in her Hand:
Some simple Lay, of Flocks and Herds they sung,
With Joy the Mountain, and the Forest rung.
Be ev'ry Youth, &c.

And oft the Royal Lover left the Care,
And Thorns of State, attendant on the Fair:
Oft to the Shades and low-roof'd Cots retir'd,
Or sought the Vale where first his Heart was fir'd;
A Russet Mantle, like a Swain, he wore,
And thought of Crowns and busy Courts no more.
Be ev'ry Youth, &c.

Blest was the Life, that Royal Abbas led:
Sweet was his Love, and innocent his Bed.
What if in Wealth the noble Maid excel;
The simple Shepherd Girl can love as well.
Let those who rule on Persia's jewell'd Throne,
Be fam'd for Love, and gentlest Love alone:
Or wreath, like Abbas, full of fair Renown,
The Lover's Myrtle, with the Warrior's Crown.

Oh happy Days!  the Maids around her say;
Oh haste, profuse of Blessings, haste away!
Be ev'ry youth, like Royal Abbas, mov'd;
And ev'ry Georgian Maid, like Abra, lov'd!
