This flame-expecting taper hath at length
Received fire, and now begins to burn;
Scarce any vigour yet it hath, or strength;
Apt to be puft and quench'd at ev'ry turn:
It was a gracious hand that first endow'd
This snuff with flame; but mark, this hand doth shroud
Itself from mortal eye, conceal'd behind a cloud.

Thus Man begins to live; an unknown flame
Quickens his finish'd organs; now possest
With motion; and with motion doth proclaim
An active soul, tho' in a feeble breast.
But how, or when infus'd?  ask not my pen;
Here flies a cloud before the eyes of men;
I cannot tell thee how; nor can'st thou tell me when.

Was it a parcel of coelestial fire
Infus'd by heaven into this fleshly mould?
Or was it (think you) made a soul entire?
Or was it now created?  or of old?
Or is't a propagated spark, rak'd out
From nature's embers? &mdash; while we go about
By reason to resolve, we still increase the doubt.

If it be part of that coelestial flame,
It must be e'en as pure and free from spot,
As that eternal fountain whence it came:
If pure and spotless, then whence came the blot?
Itself being pure, could not itself defile:
Nor hath unactive matter power to soil
Her pure and active form; as jars corrupt their oil.

Or, if it was created, tell me when?
If in the first six days, where kept till now?
Or, if the soul was new created, then
Heaven did not all at first it had to do.
Six days expir'd, then all creation ceas'd:
All kinds, e'en from the greatest, to the least,
Were finish'd, and compleat, before the day of rest.

But why should Man, the lord of creatures want
That privilege which beasts and plants obtain?
Beast brings forth beast; and plant a perfect plant;
And ev'ry like brings forth its like again.
Shall fowls and fishes, beasts and plants convey
Life to their issue; and man, less than they?
Shall these get living souls, and man dead lumps of clay?

Must human souls be generated then?
Beware that rock!  that dark suggestion fly!
If nature's work produce the souls of men,
Man's soul is mortal; all that's born must die.
&mdash;What shall we then conclude?  what sunshine will
Dispel this gloomy cloud? &mdash; till then, be still,
My vain-aspiring thoughts! &mdash; lie down my puzzled quill.
