Now had the Son of JOVE, mature, attain'd
The joyful prime, when youth elate and gay
Steps into life, and follows unrestrain'd
Where passion drives, or prudence points the way.
In the pure mind, at those unsteady years,
Or vice, rank weed, strikes deep her pois'nous root;
Or, haply, virtue's op'ning bud appears,
By just degrees, fair bloom of fairest fruit:
For if on Youth's untainted thought imprest,
The generous purpose still shall warm the manly breast.

As on a day, reflecting on his age
For highest deeds now ripe, Alcides sought
Retirement, nurse of contemplation sage;
Step following step, and thought succeeding thought;
Musing with steady pace, the Youth pursu'd
His walk, and, lost in meditation, stray'd,
Far in a lonely vale, with solitude
Conversing; while intent his mind survey'd
The dubious path of life; before him lay
Here Virtue's rough ascent, there Pleasure's slipp'ry way.

Much did the thought his wav'ring mind divide;
Ambition now enflam'd his gen'rous breast;
Now indolence persuasion soft apply'd,
Gently to lull his throbbing heart to rest:
When lo!  far off two female forms he spies;
Direct to him their steps they seem to bear;
Both large and tall, exceeding human size;
Both far exceeding human beauty fair.
Graceful, yet each with different grace, they move;
This, striking sacred awe; That, softer winning love.

The first in native dignity excell'd;
Artless and unadorn'd she pleas'd the more:
With comely state, th' imperial sword she held;
A vest more white than new-fall'n snow she wore:
August she trode, yet modest was her air;
Beauty and terror mingled in her eye;
Still she drew near, and nearer seem'd more fair,
Fair as the morn unfolds the cloudless sky;
Awfully gay, as glitt'ring hosts appear,
Majestically sweet, and amiably severe.

The other dame seem'd even of fairer hue;
But with bold gaze, she fixt her wanton eye;
And her flush'd cheeks confess'd, at nearer view,
The borrow'd blushes of the vermeil dye:
Pamper'd and soft she danc'd with airy swim,
Lightly along:  her artful robe display'd
Thro' the clear texture ev'ry tender limb,
Height'ning the charms it only seem'd to shade;
And as it flow'd adown so loose and thin,
Her stature seem'd more tall, more snowy white her skin.

Oft with a smile she view'd herself askance;
Oft on her shade a conscious look she threw,
Then all around her cast a careless glance,
To mark what gazing eyes her beauty drew.
As they came near, before that other dame
Approaching decent, eagerly she prest,
Not of repulse afraid, and void of shame,
Ran to the Youth, and with a kiss address'd:
With winning fondness on his neck she hung,
Sweet as the honey-dew flow'd her enchanting tongue.

My Hercules, whence this unkind delay,
Dear Youth, what doubts can thus distract thy mind?
Securely follow, where I lead the way,
And range thro' wilds of pleasure unconfin'd.
With me retire from noise, and pain, and care,
Embath'd in bliss, and rapt in endless ease:
Rough is the road to Fame, thro' blood and war;
Smooth is my way, and all my paths are peace.
With me retire, from toils and perils free:
Leave honour to the wretch.  Pleasures were made for thee.

Then will I grant thee all thy soul's desire;
All that may charm thine ear, and please thy sight;
All that thy thought can frame, or wish require,
To steep thy ravish'd senses in delight.
The sumptuous feast, enhanc'd with music's sound;
Fittest to tune the melting soul to love;
Rich odors breathing choicest sweets around;
The fragrant bow'r, cool fountain, shady grove,
Flow'rs to bedeck thy couch, and crown thy head;
Joy shall attend thy steps, and ease shall smooth thy bed.

My hands shall wipe all sorrow from thine eye;
Thy breast no more shall heave with rising woe;
Far from thy rest repining want shall fly,
Nor labour bath in sweat thy careful brow:
Mature the copious harvest shall be thine,
Let the laborious hind subdue the soil;
Leave the rash soldier spoils of war to win;
Won by the soldier thou shalt share the spoil.
These softer cares my blest allies employ,
New pleasures to invent, to wish, and to enjoy.

Her winning voice the Youth attentive caught;
He gaz'd impatient on the smiling maid;
Still gaz'd and listen'd, then her name besought:
My name, fair Youth, is Happiness, she said;
Well can my friends this envy'd truth maintain,
They share my bliss; they best can speak my praise:
Tho' slander calls me sloth.  Detraction vain!
Heed not what slander, vain detractor, says:
Slander for ever studious to defame
And blot the brightest worth, and blast the fairest name.

When now arriv'd the fair majestick maid;
(She all the while with the same modest pace
Compos'd advanc'd)  Know, Hercules, she said
With manly tone, Thy birth of heav'nly race;
Thy tender age that lov'd instruction's voice
Promis'd thee gen'rous, patient, brave and wise;
When manhood should confirm thy glorious choice;
Now expectation waits to see thee rise,
And climb aloft to Fame:  Rise, Youth, approve
Thine high descent, and dare be worthy JOVE.

But what truth prompts, my tongue shall not disguise;
The steep ascent with sweat must be subdu'd:
Labor and cares must win the lofty prize,
Propos'd by Heav'n, true bliss and real good.
Honor rewards the brave and bold alone,
She spurns the tim'rous, indolent, and base:
Danger and toil stand stern before her throne,
And guard, so JOVE commands, the blissful place.
Who seeks her must the mighty cost sustain,
And pay the price of Fame; labour, and care, and pain.

Wou'dst thou engage the God's peculiar care
O Hercules!  th' IMMORTAL POW'RS adore
With a pure heart, with sacrifice and pray'r
Attend their altars; and their aid implore.
Or wou'dst thou gain thy country's loud applause,
Lov'd as her Father, as her God ador'd;
Be thou the bold asserter of her cause,
Her voice in council, in the fight her sword.
In peace, in war, pursue thy country's good;
For her bare thy bold breast, and pour thy generous blood.

Would'st thou, to quell the proud and lift th' oppress'd,
In arts of war and matchless strength excell;
First conquer thou thyself; to ease, to rest,
To ev'ry thought of pleasure bid farewell.
The night alternate, due to sweet repose,
In watches waste, in painful march the day;
Congeal'd amidst the rig'rous winter's snows;
Fainting beneath the summer's burning ray.
Harden'd by toil, thy limbs shall boast new might;
Vigor shall brace thy arm, resistless to the fight.

Hear'st thou what monsters, then, thou must engage?
What dangers, gentle Youth, she bids thee prove?
(Abrupt says Sloth) Ill fit thy tender age
Tumults and wars; fit age for joy and love.
Turn, gentle Youth, to me, to love and joy;
To these I lead:  no monsters here shall stay
Thine easy course; no cares thy peace annoy;
I lead to bliss a nearer, smoother way;
Short is my way; fair, easy, smooth, and plain:
Turn, gentle Youth, with me eternal pleasures reign.

What pleasures, vain mistaken wretch, are thine!
(Virtue with scorn reply'd) who sleep'st in ease
Insensate; whose soft limbs the toil decline
That seasons bliss, and makes enjoyment please?
Draining the copious bowl e're thirst require;
Feasting e're hunger to the Feast invite;
Whose tasteless joys anticipate desire;
Whom luxury supplies with appetite:
Yet Nature loaths; and you employ in vain
Variety and art to conquer her disdain.

The sparkling Nectar cool'd with summer snows;
The dainty board with choicest viands spread,
To thee are tasteless all:  sincere repose
Flies from thy flow'ry couch and downy bed;
For thou art only tir'd with indolence;
Nor is thy sleep with toil and labor bought,
Th' imperfect sleep, that lulls thy languid sense
In dull oblivious interval of thought;
That kindly steals th' inactive hours away,
From the long-ling'ring space, that lengthens out the day.

From bounteous Nature's inexhausted stores,
Flows the pure fountain of sincere delights;
Averse to her you waste the joyless hours;
Sleep drowns thy days, and riot rules thy nights.
Tho' born a partner of the blest abodes,
Yet deem'd unworthy thy celestial birth,
Jove hurl'd thee from the mansions of the Gods,
Cast out to dwell among the sons of earth;
Fitter abode, on earth alone disgrac'd,
By wisdom always scorn'd, and by the fool embrac'd.

Fond wretch, that vainly weenest all delight
To gratify the sense, reserv'd for thee!
Yet the most pleasing object to the sight
Thine own fair action, never didst thou see.
Tho' lull'd with softest sounds thou liest along,
Soft musick, warbling voices, melting lays;
Ne'er did'st thou hear, more sweet than sweetest song
Charming the soul, thou ne'er didst hear thy praise;
No.  To thy revels let the Fool repair;
To such go sooth thy speech, and spread thy tempting snare.

Vast happiness enjoy thy gay allies!
A youth of follies, an old age of cares;
Young, yet enervate; old, yet never wise;
Sloth wastes their vigor, and their mind impairs;
Vain, idle, delicate, in thoughtless ease,
Reserving woes for age, their prime they spend;
All wretched, hopeless in the evil days,
With labor to the verge of life they tend.
Griev'd of the present, of the past asham'd,
They live and are despis'd; they die, no more are nam'd.

But with the Gods and Godlike men I dwell:
Me, his supreme delight, th' Almighty Sire
Regards well pleas'd; whatever works excell,
All, or divine, or human, I inspire:
Council with strength, and industry with art,
In union meet conjoin'd, with me reside;
My dictates arm, instruct, and mend the heart;
The wisest policy, the surest guide.
With me true friendship dwells; she deigns to bind
Those gen'rous souls alone, whom I before have join'd.

Nor need my friends the various costly feast;
Hunger to them th' effect of art supplies;
Labor prepares their weary limbs to rest;
Sweet is their sleep; light, chearful, strong, they rise:
Thro' health, thro' joy, thro' pleasure and renown
They tread my paths, and by a soft descent
At length to age all gently sinking down,
Look back with transport on a life well-spent;
In which, no hour flew unimprov'd away;
In which, some gen'rous deed distinguish'd ev'ry day.

And when, the destin'd term at length complete,
Their ashes rest in peace, eternal fame,
Sounds wide their praise; triumphant over Fate
In sacred song for ever lives their name.
This, Hercules, is happiness; obey
My voice; let thy celestial birth
Lift and enlarge thy thoughts; behold the way
That leads to Fame, and raises thee from earth,
Immortal; Lo!  I guide thy steps; arise,
Pursue the glorious path, and claim thy native skies.

Her words breath fire celestial, and impart
New vigor to his soul, that sudden caught
The gen'rous flame; with great intent his heart
Swells full, and labours with exalted thought.
Purg'd from the mists of error, which before
Obscur'd his view, his eye, in clearest light,
Discerns the vail, which specious falshood wore;
And Sloth stands now confess'd before his sight.
False Siren!  all her vaunted charms that shone
So fresh e're-while, and fair, now wither'd, pale and gone.

No more the rosy bloom, in sweet disguise
Masks her dissembled looks, each borrow'd grace
Leaves her wan cheek, pale sickness clouds her eyes
Livid and sunk; and passions dim her face.
As when fair Iris has awhile display'd
Her wat'ry arch, with gaudy painture gay;
While yet we gaze, the glorious colours fade
And from our wonder gently steal away;
Where shone the gay delusion, erst so bright,
Now lowrs the low-hung cloud, all gloomy to the sight.

But virtue more engaging, all the while
Disclos'd new charms, more lovely, more serene
Beaming sweet influence; a milder smile
Softn'd the terrors of her lofty mien.
Lead, Goddess!  I am thine (transported cry'd
Alcides)  O propitious pow'r, thy way
Teach me, possess my soul, be thou my guide,
From thee, O never, never let me stray!
While ardent thus the Youth his vows address'd,
With all the Goddess fill'd, already glow'd his breast.

The heav'nly maid with strength divine endu'd
His daring soul; there all her pow'rs combin'd,
Firm constancy, undaunted fortitude,
Enduring patience arm'd his mighty mind
Unmov'd in toils, in dangers undismay'd.
By many a hardy deed and bold emprize,
From fiercest monsters, by her pow'rful aid,
He free'd the earth; thro' her he gain'd the skies.
'Twas Virtue plac'd him in the blest abode,
Crown'd with eternal youth, among the Gods a God.
