The fair, the bright, the great, alas!  are fall'n;
Nipt in the bloom of beauty, wit, and youth;
Death's undistinguish'd prey.  Shall I complain
(When such th' establish'd ordinance of heav'n)
If SICKNESS at my bosom lay the siege;
A worm to them!  and to their light a shade,
Ungilded with one beam, which melted down
The tear soft-trickling o'er the orphan'd cheek:
We all must dye!  Our every pulse that beats,
Beats toward eternity, and tolls our doom.

Fate reigns in all the portions of the year.
The fruits of Autumn feed us for disease:
The Winter's raw inclemencies bestow
Disease on death.  While Spring, to strew our herse,
Kindly unbosoms weeping in their dews,
Her flowry race!  and Summer (kinder still)
With the green turf and brambles binds our grave.

We not alone have end.  In measur'd time
(So heav'n will'd) together with their snows,
The everlasting hills shall melt away:
This solid globe dissolve, as ductile wax
Before the breath of Vulcan; like a scroll
Shrivel th' unfolded curtains of the sky;
Thy planets, Newton, tumble from their spheres;
The moon be perisht from her bloody orb;
The sun himself, in liquid ruin, rush
And deluge with destroying flames the globe&mdash;
Peace then, my soul, nor grieve that Pope is dead.

If 'ere the tuneful spirit, sweetly strong,
Spontaneous numbers, teeming in my breast,
Enkindle; O, at that exalting name,
Be favourable, he propitious now,
While in the gratitude of praise, I sing
The works and wonders of this man divine.

I tremble while I write. &mdash; His lisping muse
Surmounts the loftiest efforts of my age.
What wonder?  when an infant, he apply'd
The loud Papinian trumpet to his lips,
Fir'd by a sacred fury, and inspir'd
With all the God, in founding numbers sung
"Fraternal rage, and guilty Thebes' alarms."

Sure at his birth (things not unknown of old)
The Graces round his cradle wove the dance,
And led the maze of harmony:  the Nine,
Prophetick of his future honours, pour'd
Plenteous, upon his lips, Castalian dews;
And Attic bees their golden store distill'd.
The soul of Homer, sliding from its star,
Where, radiant, over the poetic world
It rules and sheds its influence, for joy
Shouted, and bless'd the birth:  the sacred choir
Of poets, born in elder, better times,
Enraptur'd, catch'd the elevating sound,
And roll'd the glad'ning news from sphere to sphere.

Imperial Windsor!  on thy brow august,
Superbly gay, exalt thy tow'ry head
And bid thy forests dance, and nodding wave
A verdant testimony of thy joy:
A native Orpheus warbling in thy shades.

O listen to Alexis' tender plaint!
How gently rural!  without coarseness, plain;
How simple in his elegance of grief!
A shepherd, but no clown.  His every lay
Sweet as the early pipe along the dale,
When hawthorns bud, or on the thymy brow
When all the mountains bleat and vallies sing.
Soft as the nightingale's harmonious woe,
In dewy even-tide, when cowslips drop
Their sleepy heads, and languish in the breeze.

Next in the critic-chair survey him thron'd,
Imperial in his art, prescribing laws
Clear from the knitted brow, and squinted sneer;
Learn'd, without pedantry; correctly bold,
And regularly easy.  Gentle, now,
As rising incense, or descending dews,
The variegated echo of his theme:
Now, animated flame commands the soul
To glow with sacred wonder.  Pointed wit
And keen discernment form the certain page.
Just, as the Stagyrite; as Horace, free;
As Fabian, clear; and as Petronius gay.

But whence those peals of laughter shake the sides
Of decent mirth?  Am I in fairy-land?
Young, evanescent forms before my eyes,
Or skim, or seem to skim; thin essences
Of fluid fight; Zilphs, Zilphids, Elves and Gnomes;
Genij of Rosicruce, and Ladies' Gods!&mdash;
And, lo, in shining trails Belinda's hair,
Bespangling with dishevel'd beams the skies,
Flames o'er the night.  Behind, a satyr grins
And, jocund, holds a glass, reflecting, fair,
Hoops, crosses, mattadores; beaux, shocks, and belles,
Promiscuously whimsical and gay.
Tassoni, hiding his diminish'd head,
Droops o'er the laughing page:  while Boileau
With blushes cover'd, low beneath the desk.

More mournful scenes invite.  The milky vein
Of amorous grief devolves its placid wave
Soft-streaming o'er the soul, in weeping woe
And tenderness of anguish.  While we read
Th' infectuous page, we sicken into love,
And languish with involuntary fires.
The zephyr, panting on the silken buds
Of breathing violets; the virgin's sigh,
Rosy with youth, are turbulent and rude,
To Sappho's plaint, and Eloisa's moan.

Heav'ns!  what a flood of empyreal day
My aking eyes involves!  A Temple soars,
Rising like exhalations, on a mount,
And wide its adamantine valves expands.
Three monumental columns, bright in air,
Of figur'd gold, the center of the quire
With lustre fill, Pope on the mldmost shines
Betwixt his Homer and his Horace plac'd,
Superior by the hand of justice.  Fame,
With all her mouths th' eternal trumpet swells,
Exulting at his name; and, grateful, pours
The lofty notes of never-dying praise,
Triumphant, floating on the wings of wind,
Sweet o'er the world th' ambrosial spirit flies
Diffusive, in its progress wid'ning still,
"Dear to the earth, and grateful to the sky."
Fame owes him more than e'er she can repay:
She owes her very Temple to his hands;
Like Ilium built; by hands no less divine!

Attention, rouze thyself!  the master's hand,
(The master of our souls!)  has chang'd the key,
And bids the thunder of the battle roar
Tumultuous.  Homer, Homer is our own!
And Grecian heroes flame in British lines.
What pomp of words!  what nameless energy
Kindles the verse; invigours every line;
Astonishes, and overwhelms the soul
In transport tost!  When fierce Achilles raves,
And flashes, like a comet, o'er the field,
To wither armies with his martial frown.
I see the battle rage; I hear the wheels
Careering with their brazen orbs!  The shout
Of nations rolls (the labour of the winds)
Full on my ear, and shakes my inmost soul.
Description never cou'd so well deceive:
'Tis real!  Troy is here, or I at Troy
Enjoy the war.  My spirits all on fire,
With unextinguish'd violence, are born
Above the world, and mingle with the Gods.
Olympus rings with arms!  the firmament
Beneath the light'ning of Minerva's shield,
Burns to the center:  rock the tow'rs of heav'n.
All nature trembles save the throne of Jove.

To root excesses from the human-breast;
Behold a beauteous pile of ethicks rise;
Sense, the foundation; harmony, the walls;
(The Dorique grave, and gay Corinthian join'd)
Where Socrates and Horace jointly reign.
Best of Philosophers!  of Poets too
The best!  He teaches thee thyself to know:
That virtue is the noblest gift of heav'n:
"And vindicates the ways of GOD to Man."
O hearken to the Moralist polite!
Enter his school of truth; where Plato's self
Might preach; and Tully deign to lend an ear.

Last see him waging with the fools of rhyme
A wanton, harmless war.  Dunce after Dunce
Beaux, Doctors, Templars, Courtiers; Sophs and Cits,
Condemn'd to suffer life.  The motley crew,
Emerging from oblivion's muddy pool,
Give the round face to view; and shameless front
Proudly expose; till laughter have her fill.

Born to improve the age, and cheat mankind
Into the road of honour! &mdash; Vice again
The gilded chariot drives: &mdash; for He is dead!

I saw the sable barge, along his Thames,
In slow solemnity beating the tide,
Convey his sacred dust! &mdash; Its swans expir'd:
Wither'd, in Twit'nam bow'rs, the laurel-bough;
Silent, the Muses broke their idle lyres:
Th' attendant Graces check'd the sprightly dance,
Their arms unlock'd, and catch'd the starting tear;
And Virtue for her lost defender mourn'd!

Each volume a Bodleian! &mdash; Yet this man,
This mortal man (which leads me to my theme)
With pain embarass'd, all his tedious days,
And head-achs rack'd, the boundless sea of wit
Spread o'er the world.  Thus (his own poet tells)
Minerva from the labouring brow of Jove,
Sprung radiant:  hurl'd the pointed spear of sense
Against the breast of ignorance and vice:
Athens inspir'd, and taught her bards to sing.

But am I 'wake?  or in Ovidian realms,
And Circe holds the glass?  What odious change,
What metamorphose strikes the dubious eye?
Ah, whither is retir'd the scarlet wave,
Mantling with health which floated through the Cheek,
From the strong summer-beam imbib'd?  And where
The vernal lilly's softly-blended bloom?
The forehead roughens to the wond'ring hand.
Wide o'er the human-field, the body, spreads
Contagious war, and lays its beauties waste.
As once thy breathing harvest, Cadmus, sprung,
Sudden, a serpent-brood!  an armed crop
Of growing chiefs; and fought themselves to death.
One black-incrusted bark of gory boils
One undistinguish'd blister, from the soal
Of the sore foot, to the head's sorer crown.
JOB'S punishment!  With patience like his own,
O may I exercise my wounded soul;
And cast myself upon his healing hand,
Who bruiseth at his will, and maketh whole.

Ah, too, the lustre of the eyes is fled!
Heavy and dull, their orbs neglect to roll,
In motionless distortion stiff and fix'd:
Till by the trembling hand of watchful age
(A weeping matron, timorous to affright,
And piously fallacious in her care,
Pretending light offensive, and the sun)
Clos'd; and, perhaps, forever!  ne'er again
To open on the sphere, to drink the day,
Or (worse!)  behold Ianthe's face divine,
And wonder o'er her charms. &mdash; But yet forebear,
O dare not murmur:  'tis heav'n's high behest.
Tho' darkness through the chambers of the grave
This dust pursue, and death's sad shade involve;
E'er long, the filial-light himself shall shine;
(The stars are dust to him, the sun a shade)
These very eyes, these tunicles of flesh,
Ev'n tho' by worms destroy'd, shall see my GOD,
And, seeing, ne'er remember darkness more,
Environ'd with eternity of day.

Tho', at their visual entrance, quite shut out
External forms, forbidden, mount the winds,
Retire to Chaos, or with night commix:
Yet, fancy's mimick work!  ten thousand shapes
Antick and wild, rush sweeping o'er my dreams,
Irregular and new:  as pain or ease
The spirits teach to flow, and in the brain
Direction diverse hold.  Gentle and bright
As hermits, sleeping in their mossy cells,
Lull by the fall of waters!  by the rills
From Heliconian cliffs devolv'd:  or where,
Thy antient river, Kishon, sacred stream!
Soft-murmurs on their slumbers:  peace within,
And conscience, ev'n to ecstasy sublim'd
And beatific vision.  Sudden, black,
And horrible as murderers; or haggs,
Their lease of years spun out, and signed bond
Full-flashing on their eyes; the gulf, beneath,
Mad'ning with gloomy fires; and heav'n, behind
With all her golden valves for ever clos'd.

Now in Elysium lap'd, and lovely scenes,
Where honeysuckles rove, and eglantines,
Narcissus, jess'min, pinks, profusely wild,
In every scented gale Arabia breathe:
As blissful Eden fair; the morning-work
Of heav'n, and Milton's theme!  where innocence
Smil'd, and improv'd the prospect. &mdash; Now, anon,
By Isis' favourite flood supinely laid,
In tuneful indolence, behold the bards
(Harps in each hand, and laurel on each brow)
A band of demy-gods, august to sight,
In venerable order sweetly rise,
Encircled by the muses, who have trod
In measur'd pace its banks, forever green,
Enamel'd from their feet!  Harmonious notes,
Warbled to Dorique reeds, to Lesbian lyres,
Or Phrygian minstrelsie, steal on the ear
Enamour'd with variety:  and loud
The trumpets shrilling clangours fill the sky
With silver melody &mdash; Now, happier still!
Round thy Italic cloisters, musing slow,
Or in sweet converse with thy letter'd sons,
Philosophers, and Poets, and Divines,
Enjoy the sacred walk, delighted; QUEEN'S!
Where Addison and Tickle lay inspir'd,
Inebriated from the classic springs,
And tun'd to various-sounding harps the song,
Sublime, or tender; humorous, or grave
Quaffing the Muses' nectar to their fill.

Momental happiness! &mdash; I know not how,
I know not where, the midnight howl of wolves,
The dragon's yell, the lion's roar, astound
My trembling ear.  Ha!  down a burning mount
I plunge deep, deep:  sure Vulcan's shop is here&mdash;
Hark, how the anvils thunder round the dens
Flammivomous!  What?  are those chains to bind
This skeleton?  the Cyclops must be mad:
Those bolts of steel, those adamantine links
Demand Typhaeus' strength to burst. &mdash; Away&mdash;
Venus and Mars &mdash; beware. &mdash; In giddy whirls
I ride the blast and tow'ring through the storm
Enjoy the palace of the morn.  The sun
Resigns the reins of Phlegon to my hands:
His mane waves fire:  he scorches me to dust:
Avaunt, thou fiend! &mdash; I'll hurl thee down the deep
Of heav'n, with bolted thunder, and enwrapt
With forky light'ning. &mdash; Now staggering I reel,
By murderers pursu'd:  my faithless feet
Scarce shift their pace or down rushing amain,
I cease to recollect my steps, and roll
Passive on earth. &mdash; Sure, 'twas Astolpho's horn
Pour'd on my ear th' annoying blast:  Or else
That rapid giddiness o'erturns my brain,
Which, whilom, plagu'd the sons of Calydon,
When cruel, fair Callirhoe enrag'd
Coresus, priest of Bacchus!  and his vows,
With impious scorn, neglected.  Old the tale,
Yet worthy to be told in modern song.

High in Achaia, splendid from afar,
A city flourish'd; Calydon its name,
Wash'd by Evenus' chalky flood; the seat
Of Meleager, from the slaughter'd boar
Glorious.  A virgin here, amazing, shone,
Callirhoe the fair:  her father's boast!
For, ah, she never knew a mother's smile;
Nor learn'd what happiness from marriage springs.
In flow'r of youth, and purer than the snow
Which, with a silver circle, crown'd the head
Of the steep neighbour mountain; but averse
To Hymen's rites, the lovely foe of man,
O why will beauty, cruel to itself
No less than others, violate the laws
Which nature dictates, and itself inspires!

A thousand lovers, from th' Olenian hill,
From rough Pylene, and from Pleuron's towr's,
Their passion pleaded.  But Coresus, chief,
The Calydonian priest of Bacchus, form'd
By Venus' self for love; in beauty's pride;
Young, bounteous affable.  What tender arts,
What winning carriage, and respectful suit,
Almost to zealous adoration swell'd,
Did he not practise?  But in vain.  And now
Drew near the Orgial festival, and rites
Lyaean.  Poor Coresus, to approve
The wonders of his love and dear regard,
By scorn unquench'd, unabated by neglect
(In hopes to soften her, at least adorn)
Presented to this murdress of his peace
The ritual ornaments) by virgins worn
Upon the solemn feast.  The ivy-spear,
With winding green and viny foliage gay,
Curl'd by his hand:  a mitre for the head,
Curious aumail'd with imitated grapes,
Of blushing rubies form'd:  the pall of lawn,
Flow'r'd with the conquests of the purple God:
The cista, silver; and the cymbals, gold:
And piny torch (O were it Hymen's!)  ting'd
With spicy gums, to feed the ready flame.

Open'd the festival &mdash; Loose to the winds,
Dishevel'd, bare, the virgins give their necks
And wanton hair.  Evoe!  they, mad'ning, cry,
And shake their torches.  Evoe!  Io!  rends
The air, and beats the echoing vault of heav'n.
The hills, the vales with Io!  Evoe!  ring.

The temple opens to the sacred throng;
When foremost enters, as in dress and charms,
Callirhoe, so in speed.  Their lovers wait,
With burning expectation, to enfold
His beauteous mistress each.  High on a throne
Coresus blaz'd in jewels and in gold,
More charming in himself.  Quick with his eye
He catch'd Callirhoe; and, descending, clasp'd
With eager transport her reluctant waist.
A thousand vows he breath'd, and melting things
He spoke and look'd; but to the rocks and wind.
What cou'd he more?  Yes more he did:  for what,
What can't a lover, like Coresus, do?
Neglectful of his dignity, he sunk
(Still love disdains what dignity demands,
O'er Jupiter himself supreme) he sunk,
And trembled at her feet, with prostrate zeal,
As to his God.  He dy'd upon her hand
With sighing languishment:  He gaz'd his soul
At every ardent glance into her eyes
Most eloquently silent!  O'er his cheek
The gushing tears in big, round drops, diffus'd
The dews of passion, and the brain's soft show'r,
Potent to warm the most obdurate breast,
Tho' cold as marble.  Idle were his tears,
His glances, languishment and prostrate zeal.

Disdainful &mdash; frowning:  "Hence, (she cry'd) not
To interrupt my progress in the rites
With thy capricious rudeness.  Shall the priest
The mysteries of Bacchus thus profane,
In his own temple too?  And rather pay
To Venus his devotion, than his God?"
Then haughty as away the turn'd; he grasp'd
Her knees; upon her garments flowing train
Shivering he hung:  and with beseeching eyes,
Thus, from th' abundance of his heart, complain'd.

"If pity be no stranger to thy breast,
(As sure it should not to a breast like thine,
Soft as the swanny down!)  relenting, hear
In feelingness of spirit, mildly lend
Attention to the language of my heart,
Sick with o'er-flowing tenderness and love.
I love thee with that innocence of truth,
That purity of passion, and desire
Unutterable, of bequeathing up
My heart, my life, my all into thy hands,
Into thy gentle custody; &mdash; that all,
My heart, my life, are bitterness and weight
Of agony without thee.  Since I first,
(By Bacchus' self I swear,) beheld that face,
And nameless magick of those radiant eyes,
All the foundation of my peace gave way:
While hopes and fears rose up in bosom-war
To desolate the quiet of my days.
Thy dear idea was my fancy's dream;
It mingled with my blood; and in my veins
Throb'd, undulating, as my life were stung.
I live but on the thought of thee; my breast
Bleeds in me, with distress to see thee frown.
O smile; by thy dead mother's reverend dust,
By all thy bowels are most fond of, smile,
And chase these heavy clouds of grief away.
I beg by Bacchus; for his sake be kind."

Here, interrupted by the swelling storm
Of passion labouring in his breast, his words
Gave way to sighs and tears, to speak the rest.
She in contempt'ous derision, smil'd,
To which her frowns were innocent:  and thus:
"Thy staggering pow'r, and thee I scorn alike:
Him I despise, for chusing thee his priest;
Thee, for thy arrogance, and courtship vile."

Indignant he, in wrathful mood (alarm'd
More at his God revil'd, than scorn for him)
First casting on the ground his mitred-crown,
With hands and eyes uplifted, ardent, pray'd.

"Offspring of Jove, Evoe Lyaeus, hear!
If e'er these hands with ivy wreaths thy brow
Circled, and twining tendrils of the vine:
If e're my grateful tongue, big with thy praise,
Evoe Lyaeus!  Io Bacchus!  sung:
If e'er thy servant on thy altars pour'd,
Copious, the purple wave of offer'd wine;
And, busy, fed the consecrated fire
With fat of ass, or hog, or mountain-goat;
Devoutly lavish in the sacrifice:
Avenge thy priest; this cursed race destroy:
Thy honours violated thus, avow;
Till they confess this staggering pow'r a God."

He pray'd. &mdash; Loud peals of thunder shook the fane:
The image, nodding, his petition seal'd;
And Bacchus gave the Calydonian race
To madness, and unutterable woes.

The frantick crowd, as if with wine opprest,
And the strong spirit of the flaming grape,
To and fro' reel, and stagger to and fro',
In dithyrambic measures, wild, convolv'd.
They toss their cymbals, and their torches shake,
Shrieking; and tear their hair, and gash their flesh,
And howl, and foam, and wheel the rapid dance
In giddy maze:  with fury then o'erborn,
Enthusiastick whirling in despair,
Flat, drop down dead; and heaps on heaps expire.

Amaz'd, confounded at the raging pest,
The venerable fathers, in debate,
To speed enquiring deputies, resolv'd,
To high Dodona's grove; with vocal oaks
Umbrageous, aged, vast, the struggling day
Excluding:  the prime oracle of Greece!

Obsequious, they haste:  enquire:  return:
And thus the counsels of the God disclose.

"The rage of Bacchus for his injur'd priest,
Coresus, by Callirhoe's scorn repuls'd,
Your city wastes:  and with funereal fires
Your streets shall redden, formidably bright,
Till by Coresus' hand the cruel maid
A sacrifice be offer'd up:  or one,
Free, uncompell'd, embrace the destin'd steel,
Devoted in her stead; and bleed for her.
So you'll appease the God; the plague be stay'd."

They said.  Staring affright, and dumb amaze
The fathers seize:  but chief, Aeneus, thee,
Callirhoe's old miserable sire!
Tenfold affliction to the grave weighs down
Thy silver'd hairs.  But fate and heav'n require.

Soon through the city spred the news, and soon
Wounded Callirhoe's ear.  Her spindle drops
Neglected from her hand.  Prone on the floor,
She falls, she faints; her breath, her colour fled:
Pale, cold and pale.  Till, by assisting care,
The fragrant spirit hovers o'er her lips,
And life returning streams in rosy gales;
Rekindled only to despair.  She knew
The virgins envy'd; and the injur'd youth
Stung with her scorn wou'd wanton in her wounds,
Nor one one offer up the willing breast
A victim for her Life.  And now the crowd,
Impatient of their miseries, besiege
The marble portal; burst the bolted gates;
Demand Callirhoe; furious to obey
The oracle, and pacify the God.

What pangs, unhappy maid, thy bosom tear,
Sleepless, and sad?  relenting now too late,
Thy stubborn cruelty.  Coresus' charms
Blaze on thy mind; his unexampled love
His every virtue rising to thy thought.
Just in his fury, see the pointed steel
Waves, circling, o'er thy throbbing breast:  He strikes,
He riots in thy blood with dire delight;
Insatiate!  He gluts his heart of rage
With thy warm, gushing life, and death enjoys,
Redoubling wound on wound, and blow on blow.

Thus pass'd her hours.  And now the dewy morn
The mountains tip'd with gold, and threatned day.
Without the city gates, a fountain wells
Its living waters, clear as shining glass:
Haunt of the nymphs!  A cypress' aged arms
Threw round a venerable gloom, and seem'd
Itself a grove.  An altar on the brink
Convenient rose:  for holy custom wills
Each victim to be sprinkled with its streams,
New from pollution, worthier of the God.
Fierce for the sacrifice, Coresus here
Waited; and, stimulated with revenge,
He curs'd and chid the lazy-circling hours
Too slow, as if injurious to his hate.

But soon the gath'ring crowd and shouts proclaim 
Callirhoe near.  Her weeping damsels lead
The destin'd offering, lovely in distress,
And sparkling through her tears.  A myrtle crown
With roses glowing, and selected green,
Th' ambrosial plenty of her golden hair
Entwine:  in looks, a Venus; and a Grace in motion.
Scarce the flow'rs of sixteen springs 
The fields had painted, since Aeneus first
Fondled his babe, and blest her on his knee.
Ev'n mountain-clowns, who never pity knew,
Relented, and the hardest heart wept blood,
Subdu'd by beauty, tho' the fatal source
Of all their misery.  What tumults then
Roll in thy breast, Coresus!  while thy hands
The purifying waters on her head
Pour'd trembling; and the sacred knife unsheath'd!

Wiping the silver-streaming tears away,
She with a look nor chearful, nor dismay'd,
But languishingly sweet, her ruby lips
Soft-op'ning, thus began:  "Father and friends.
Wound me not doubly with your tender grief:
I was not born alone for you.  My life
I gladly offer for my country's weal:
'Tis glory thus to die.  Receive my blood,
Dear native soil!  O may it health restore
And peace; and Bacchus' wrath be now appeas'd.
And thou Coresus whom I most have wrong'd,
Look not so fiercely on me, while the steel
My once-lov'd bosom launces; drop a tear;
One sigh in mercy heave, and drop one tear,
And I will thank thee for thy blow.  For, oh
I never hated thee:  but female pride,
Our sex's curse!  forbade me to comply,
Too easy won! &mdash; Then pity me, Coresus,
O pity; and if possible, forgive,"

He answer'd not.  But ardent, snatch'd the knife,
And running o'er her beauties, strangely wild,
With eyes which witness'd huge dismay and love;
"Thus, thus I satisfy the Gods!"  he cry'd,
And bury'd in his heart, in his own heart,
The guilty blade.  Then, reeling to her arms
He sunk, and groaning, "O Callirhoe." &mdash; dy'd.

Heav'n rings with shouts, "Was ever love like this?"
Callirhoe shriek'd; and from the gaping wound,
Quick as the lightning's wing, the reeking knife
Wrench'd:  in an agony of grief and love,
Her bosom piercing, on her lover fell
And sigh'd upon his lips her life away.
Their blood uniting in a friendly stream,
With bubbling purple stain'd the silver flood;
Which to the fountain gave Callirhoe's name.
Thus fell Callirhoe; lovelier in her death,
Than cruelty of life; and stay'd the plague.

Now starting from this wilderness of dreams,
I wake from fancy'd into real woe.
Pain emptys all her vials on my head,
And steeps me o'er and o'er.  Th' envenom'd shirt
Of Hercules enwraps my burning limbs
With dragon's blood:  I rave and roar like him,
Writhing in agony.  Devouring fires
Eat up the marrow, frying in my bones.
O whither, whither shall I turn for aid?&mdash;
Methinks a Seraph whispers in my ears,
Pouring ambrosia on them, "Turn to God;
So peace shall be thy pillow, ease thy bed,
And night of sorrow brighten into noon.
Let the young cherub PATIENCE, bright-ey'd
And rosy-finger'd PRAY'R, combining hold
A sure dominion in thy purpos'd mind,
Unconquer'd by affection." &mdash; I receive
The mandate as from heav'n itself. &mdash; Expand
Thyself, my soul, and let them enter in.

Come, smiling angel, PATIENCE, from thy seat;
Whether the widow's cot, or hermit's cell.
By fasting strong, and potent from distress;
Or midnight-student's taper-glimmering roof,
Unwearied with revolving tedious tomes.
O come, thou Panacaea of the mind!
The manna of the soul!  to every taste
Grateful alike:  the universal balm
To sickness, pain, and misery below.
She comes!  she comes!  she dissipates the gloom;
My eyes the opens, and new scenes unfolds
(Like Moses' bush; tho' burning, not consum'd)
Scenes full of splendour, miracle, and God.
Behold, my soul, the martyr-army, who
With holy blood the violence of fire
Quench'd, and with lingring constancy fatigu'd
The persecuting flame:  or nobly stop'd
The lion's mouth, and triumph'd in his jaws.
Hark, how the virgin white-rob'd confessors
Chaunt Hallelujahs to the rack; as dear
And pleasing to the ear of God, as hymns
Of angels on the resurrection-morn,
When all the host of heaven Hosanna sing!
Yet further; lift thy eyes upon the cross,
A bleeding Saviour view, a dying God!
Earth trembles; rend the rocks, creation groans:
The sun, asham'd, extinguishes the day
All nature suffers with her suffering Lord.
Amidst this war of elements, serene,
And as the sun-shine brow of patience, calm,
He dies without a groan, and smiles in death.
Shall martyrs, virgins, nay, thy Saviour bleed
To teach thee Patience?  and yet bleed in vain?
Forbid it, reason; and forbid it, heav'n.
No; suffer:  and in suffering, rejoice.
Patience endureth all, and hopeth all.

HOPE is her daughter then.  Let Hope distill
Her cordial-spirit, as Hybla-honey sweet,
And healing as the drops of Gilead-balm.
Cease to repine, as those who have no Hope;
Nor let Despair approach thy darkest hour.
Despair!  that triple-death!  th' imperial plague!
Th' exterminating angel of th' accust,
And sole disease of which the damn'd are sick,
Kindling a fever hotter than their hell&mdash;
O pluck me from Despair, white-handed Hope!
O interpose thy spear and seven-fold shield
Betwixt my bosom and the fiend!  detrude
This impious monster to primaeval hell;
To its own dark domain.  But light my soul,
Imp'd with thy glittering wings, to scenes of joy,
To health and life, for health and life are thine:
And fire imagination with the skies.

But whence this confidence of Hope?  In thee,
And in thy blood, my Jesus!  (Bow, O earth!
Heav'n bends beneath the name, and all its sons,
The hierarchy!  drop low the prostrate knee,
And sink, in humble wise, upon the stars)
Yes, on thy blood and name my hope depends,
My hope?  nay, worlds on worlds depend on thee;
Live in thy death, from thy sepulchre rise.
Thy influential vigour reinspires
This feeble frame:  dispells the shade of death;
And bids me throw myself on God in prayer.

A christian soul is God's beloved house:
And Pray'r the incense which perfumes the soul:
Let armies then of supplications rise,
Besiege the golden gates of heav'n, and force,
With holy violence, a blessing down
In living streams.  If Hezekiah's pray'r
The sun arrested in his prone career,
And bade the shadow ten degrees return
On Ahaz-dial, whirling back the day:
Pour out thyself, my soul!  with fervent zeal,
With over-flowing ardour, and with faith
Unwavering.  To assist me, and to swell
My fainting spirits to sublime desires,
Wou'd Taylor from his starry throne descend,
Fear wou'd have end:  for by his sacred aid,
To live were happiness, and gain to die.&mdash;
No:  let him still adorn his starry throne,
Well-merited by labours so divine:
For, lo!  the man of God, and friend of man,
Theron, the purest breast, and warmest heart,
Flys on the wings of charity and love
To join me in the saving-Task, and raise
My weaker powers with his abundant zeal:
Pure, sweet, and glowing as the incens'd fires,
Of, Solomon, thy golden-altar, fann'd
By wings of Cherubins into a flame:
Till on the skies the aromatick gale
In pyramids of fragrance softly stole,
A grateful offering to the throne of grace.

Still, tho' I feel these succours from the skies
In operation mighty!  still remain
Inferior aids behind:  terrestrial stores
Medicinal:  the instruments of God.
For God created the PHYSICIAN!  God
Himself on earth our great Physician!  spread
O'er Sick and Weak shadowing, his healing wings,
Each miracle a cure! &mdash; Before disease,
Offspring of sin, infested human-kind,
In Paradise, the vegetable seeds
Sprung from their maker's hand, invigorate-strong
With Med'cin.  He foresaw our future ills;
Foreseeing, he provided ample cure;
Fossils, and simples:  Solomon, thy theme,
Nature's historian:  wisest of the wise!
Tho' Paradise be lost; the tree of life
In med'cin blooms:  then pluck its healing fruits,
And with thanksgiving eat; and, eating, live.

Ev'n pagan wisdom bade her sons adore,
As one, the God of physick and the day,
Fountain of vegetation and of life,
Apollo, ever blooming, ever young.
And from his art immortal!  Thus, of yore,
The prime of human race from heav'n deduc'd
The bright original of physick's pow'r:
And, nor unjustly, deem'd that he who sav'd
Millions from death, himself shou'd never die.

An instrument of various pipes and tubes,
Veins, arteries, and sinews, organiz'd,
Man, when in healthy-tune, harmonious wakes
The breath of melody, in vocal-praise,
Delighting earth and heav'n!  discordant oft
As accident, or time, or fate prevail,
This human-organ scarce the bellows heaves
Of vital-respiration; or in pain,
With pauses sad.  What art divine shall tune
To order and refit this shatter'd frame?
What fingers touch into a voice again?
Or musick re-inspire?  Who, but the race
Of Paean?  who but Physick's saving sons?&mdash;
But something yet beyond the kindly skill
Of Paean's sons, disease, like mine, demands:
Nepenthe to the soul, as well as life.

O for a mother's watchful tenderness,
And father's venerable care! &mdash; But they
In life immortal, gather endless joys,
Reward of charity, of innocence,
Of pleasing manners, and a life unblam'd!
The tears of poverty and friendship oft
Their modest tombs bedew; where Eden's stood
(Ituna 'clep'd by bards of old renown,
Purpled with Saxon and with British blood)
Laves the sweet vale that first my pratling Muse
Provok'd to numbers, broken as the ruins
Of Roman towers which deck its lofty banks,
And shine more beauteous by decay,&mdash;
But hark!  What musick glads my ear?  'Tis Theron's voice.
Theron a father, mother:  both, a friend!&mdash;
Pain flies before his animating touch:
The gentle pressure of his cordial hand,
A burning mountain from my bosom heaves!
What wonders, sacred friendship, flow from thee!
One period from a friend enlivens more,
Than all Hippocrates and Galen's tomes,
Than all the med'cines they unfold.  I feel
Myself renew'd!  not only health, but youth,
Rolls the brisk tide, and sparkles at my heart.
As the live-atoms of Campanian wines
Dance in the virgin crystal, and o'erlook
With glorifying foam, the nectar'd brim;
Smiling and lending smiles to social wit,
The jocund hearth, and hospitable board.

Friendship is a religion, from the first
The second-best:  it points, like that, to heav'n.
And almost antidates, on earth its bliss.
But Vice and Folly never friendship knew:
Whilst Wisdom grows by friendship still more
Her fetters, are a strong defence; her chains,
A robe of glory; Ophir gold, her bands;
And he who wears them wears a crown of joy.

Friendship's the steel, which struck emits the sparks
Of candour, peace, benevolence, and zeal;
Spreading their glowing seeds &mdash; A holy fire
Where honour beams on honour, truth on truth;
Bright as the eyes of angels and as pure.
An altar whence two gentle-loving hearts
Mount to the skies in one conspiring blaze
And spotless union.  'Tis the nectar-stream
Which feeds and elevates seraphic love&mdash;
Health is disease, life death, without a friend.

