Of days with pain acquainted, and of nights
Unconscious of the healing balms of sleep,
That burn in restless agonies away;
Of SICKNESS, and its family of woes,
The fellest enemies of life, I sing,
Horizon'd close in darkness.  While I touch
The ebon-instrument, of solemn tone,
Pluckt from the Cypress' melancholy boughs,
Which, deepning, shade the house of mourning,
And hollow wailings, through the damps  of night,
Responsive wound the ear.  The sprightly pow'rs
Of musical inchantment wave their wings,
And seek the fragrant groves and purple fields,
Where pleasure rolls her honey-trickling streams,
Of blooming health and laughter-dimpled joy.

Me other scenes than laughing joy, and health
High-blooming, purple-living fields and groves,
Fragrant with spring, invite.  Too long the Muse,
Ah, much too long, a libertine, diffus'd
On pleasure's rosy lap, has, idly, breath'd
Love-sighing elegies, and pastoral-strains,
The soft seducers of our youthful hours,
Soothing away the vigour of the mind,
And energy of virtue.  But, farewel,
Ye myrtle walks, ye lilly-mantled meads
Of Paphos, and the fount of Acidale,
Where, oft, in summer, Grecian fables tell,
The daughters of Eurynome and Jove,
Thalia and her sister-graces cool
Their glowing features, at the noontide hour,
Farewel! &mdash; But come, Urania, from thy bow'rs
Of everlasting day; O condescend
To lead thy votary (with rapt'rous zeal
Adoring nature's God the great THREE-ONE!)
To Salem; where the Shepherd-Monarch wak'd
The sacred breath of melody, and swell'd
His harp, to angels kindred notes attun'd,
With music worthy heav'n!  O bath my breast,
With praises burning, in the morning-dews,
Which sparkle, Sion, on thy holy hill.

The Prophets, eagle-ey'd, celestial maid,
Those Poets of the sky!  were taught to chaunt
The glories of Messiah's reign by thee:
Kindled by thee, the Eastern-pages flame
With light'ning, and with thunder shake the soul;
While from the whirlwind, God's all-glorious voice
Bursts on the tingling ears of Job:  the writ
Of Moses, meek in spirit, but his thoughts
Lofty as heav'n's blue arch.  My humble hopes
Aspire but to the alpha of his song;
Where, roll'd in ashes; digging for a grave,
More earnest than the covetous for gold
Or hidden treasures; crusted o'er with boils;
And roaring in the bitterness of soul,
And heart-sick pain, the man of Uz complains.
Themes correspondent to thy servant's theme.

I sing to you, ye sons of men!  of dust,
Say rather:  What is man, who proudly lifts
His brow audacious, as confronting heav'n,
And tramples, with disdain, his mother-earth,
But moulded clay?  an animated heap
Of dust that shortly shall to dust return?

We dream of shadows, when we talk of life,
Of Pelops' shoulder, of Pythagoras' thigh,
Of Surius's saints, and Ovid's gods;
Meer tales to cheat our children with to rest;
And, when the tale is told, they sink to sleep,
Death's image!  so inane is mortal man!
Man's but a vapour, toss'd by every wind,
The child of smoak, which in a moment flies,
And, sinking into nothing, disappears.
Man's a brisk bubble, floating  on the waves
Of wide eternity:  He dances now
Gay-guilded by the sun (tho' empty, proud;)
Phantastically fine!  and now he drops
In a broad sheet of waters deep involv'd,
And gives his place to others.  O, ye sons
Of vanity, remember, and be wise!
Man is a flow'r which in the morning, fair
As day-spring, swelling from its slender stem,
In virgin-modesty, and sweet reserve,
Lays out its blushing beauties to the day,
As Gideon's fleece, full with the dews of heav'n.
But if some ruder gale, or nipping wind,
Disastrous, blow too hard, it soon puts on
The robes of darkness; it reclines its head
In languid softness; withers every grace,
And, ere the ev'ning-star the West inflames,
It falls into the portion of those weeds
Which, With a careless hand, we cast away&mdash;
Ye thoughtless fair ones, moralize my song!

Thy pulse beats music; thou art high in health;
The rather tremble.  When the least we fear,
When folly lulls us on her couch of down,
And wine and lutes and odours fill the sense
With their soft affluence of bewitching joys;
When fortune smiles, exulting, looking on,
And years of rapture in thy fancy glow
To entertain thy youth; a sudden burst
Of thunder from the smallest cloud of fate,
Small as the Prophet's hand, destroys, confounds,
And lays thy visionary hopes in dust.
By my example taught, examples teach
Much more than precepts, learn to know thy end.

The day was Valentine's:  when lovers wounds
Afresh begin to bleed, and sighs to warm
The chilly rigour of relenting skies:
Sacred the day to innocence and mirth,
The festival of youth!  in seeming health
(As custom bids) I hail'd the year's fair morn,
And with its earliest purple braid my brows,
The violet, or primrose, breathing sweets
New to the sense.  Ianthe by my side,
More lovely than the season!  rais'd her voice,
Observant of his rites, in festal lays,
And thus addrest the patron of the spring.

"Hail, Valentine!  at thy approach benign,
Profuse of gems, the bosom of the earth
Her fragrant stores unfolds:  the fields rejoice,
And, in the infancy of plenty, smile:
The vallies laugh and sing:  the woods, alive,
Sprout into floating verdure, to embow'r
Those happy lovers, who record thy praise.

"Hail, Valentine!  at thy approach benign,
Inhaling genial raptures from the sun,
The plumy nations swell the song of joy,
Thy soaring choiristers!  The lark, the thrush,
And all th' aerial people, from the wren
And linnet to the eagle, feel the stings
Of amorous delight, and sing thy praise.

"Hail Valentine!  at thy approach benign,
Quick o'er the soft'ning soul the gentle gales
Of spring, awaking bliss, instinctive, move
The ardent youth to breath the sighs of faith
Into the virgin's heart; who, sick of love,
With equal fires, and purity of truth
Consenting, blushes while she chaunts thy praise.

So sung Ianthe:  to my heart I prest
Her spotless sweetness:  when, (with wonder, hear!)
Tho' she shone smiling by, the torpid pow'rs
Of heaviness weigh'd down my beamless eyes,
And press'd them into night.  The dews of death
Hung, clammy, on my forehead, like the damps
Of midnight sepulchres; which, silent, op'd
By weeping widows, or by friendship's hand,
Yawn, hideous on the moon, and blast the stars
With pestilential reek.  My head is torn
With pangs insufferable, pulsive starts,
And pungent aches, griding thro' the brain,
To madness hurrying the tormented sense,
And hate of being &mdash; Poor Ianthe wept
In bitterness, and took me by the hand
Compassionately kind:  "Alas!  she cry'd,
What sudden change is this?  (Again she wept.)
Say, can Ianthe prove the source of pain
To Musidorus?  O forbid it, heav'n!"
No, beauteous innocence!  As soon the rose
Shall poison with its balm; as soon the dove
Become a white dissembler, and the stream
With lulling murmurs, creeping thro' the grove,
Offend the shepherd's slumber &mdash; Scarce my tongue
These faultering accents stammer'd; down I sink,
And a lethargick stupor steeps my sense
In dull oblivion:  till returning Pain,
Too faithful monitor!  and dire Disease
Bid me remember, pleasure is a dream,
That Health has eagles wings, nor tarries long.

New horrors rise.  For in my pricking veins
I feel a forky flame:  the rapid flood
Of throbbing life, excursive from the laws
Of sober nature, mid harmonious health,
Boils in tumultuary eddies round
Its bursting channels.  Parching thirst anon
Drinks up the vital maze, as Simois dry,
Or Zanthus, by the arm ignipotent,
With a red torrent of involving flames,
Exhausted; when Achilles with their floods
Wag'd more than mortal war:  the god of fire
Wide o'er the waters pour'd th' inundant blaze,
The shrinking waters to the bottom boil
And hiss in ruin.  O!  ye rivers, roll
Your cooling crystal o'er my burning breast,
For Aetna rages here!  Ye snows, descend;
Bind me in icy chains, ye northern winds,
And mitigate the furies of the fire!

Good heaven!  what hoards of unrepented guilt
Have drawn this vengeance down, have rais'd this fiend
To lash me with his flames?  But O forgive
My rashness, that dares blame thy just decrees.
It is thy rod:  I kiss it with my heart,
As well as lips:  like Aaron's may it bloom
With fruits of goodness:  not, like Moses' turn
A serpent; or, to tempt me to accuse
The kind oppression of thy righteous hand,
Or, sting me to despair. &mdash; Affliction, hail!
Thou school of Virtue!  glad, I enter in
Thy gates of ebony.  Yet, O, correct
Thy servant not with judgment, not in wrath,
But with thy mercy, Lord!  thy stripes will heal.
Thus without heresy, Afflictions prove
A purgatory; save us as by fire:
And purifying off the dross of sin,
Like old Elijah's chariot, rap the soul,
On wings of meditation, to the skies.

In health we have no time to visit truth:
Health's the disease of morals:  few in health
Turn o'er the volumes which will make us wise.
What are ye, now, ye tuneful triflers!  once
The eager solace of my easy hours,
Ye dear deluders or of Greece or Rome,
Anacreon, Horace, Virgil, Homer, what?
The gay, the bright; the sober, the sublime?
And ye of softer strain, ye amorous fools,
Correctly indolent, and sweetly vain,
Tibullus, Ovid; and the female-verse
Of her, who, plunging from Leucadia's heights,
Extinguish'd, with her life, her hopeless fires,
Or rose a swan, as love-struck fancy deem'd.
Who wou'd not, in these hours of wisdom, give
A Vatican of wits for one saint PAUL?
Dare Tully with the golden mouth of Greece,
With Chrysostom in rhet'rick-thunder join,
Advent'rous, now?  as soon the feeble sound,
Salmoneus, of thy brazen bridge contends
With Jove's aethereal peal, and bursting roar
Fulminous, rending earth, o'rerturning air,
And shaking heav'n.  Or shall the pointed pen
Of Corduba, with hostile labour bend
Its sentences obscure against the force
Of Hierom's noble fire?  as soon the moons
Dull-blunted horn dares pour her pallid beam
Against the boundless majesty of day,
The sun's refulgent throne; when, high, in noon
He kindles up the earth to light and joy.
My best instructor, Sickness, shuts the eye
From vanity; she draws the curtains round
The couch, nor gives admittance to the world:
But to Harpocrates consigns the door,
And, silent, whispers me, that "life is vain."

If life be vain, on what shall man depend?
Depend on Virtue.  Virtue is a rock
Which stands for ever; braves the frowning flood,
And rears its awful brow direct, to heaven.
Tho' virtue save not from the grave, she gives
Her votaries to the stars; she plucks the sting
From the grim king of terrors; smooths the bed
Of anguish, and bids death, tho' dreadful, smile.
Death smiles on virtue:  And his visage, black,
Yet comely seems.  A christian scorns the bounds
Where limited creation said to time,
"Here I have end."  Rapt'rous, he looks beyond 
Or time or space; he triumphs o'er decay;
And fills Eternity:  the next to GOD!

Death was not man's inheritance; but life,
Immortal, but a paradise of bliss,
Unfading beauty, and eternal spring,
The gifts of God's right-hand!  till monstrous Sin.
The motly child of satan and of hell,
Invited dire disease into the world,
And her distorted brood of ugly shapes,
Abominable!  and fix'd their residence
On earth, invisible to human sight,
The portion and the scourge of mortal man.
Yet tho' to human sight invisible,
If she whom I implore, Urania, deign,
With Euphrasy to purge away the mists
Which, humid, dim the mirror of the mind,
(As Venus gave Aeneas to behold
The angry gods with flame o'erwhelming Troy,
Neptune and Pallas,) not in vain, I'll sing
The mystick terrors of this gloomy reign:
And led by her, with dangerous courage press
Through dreary paths, and haunts, by mortal foot
Rare visited:  unless by thee, I ween,
Father of fancy, of descriptive verse,
And shadowy beings, gentle Edmund, hight
Spenser!  the sweetest of the tuneful throng,
Or recent, or of eld.  Creative bard,
Thy springs unlock, expand thy fairy scenes,
Thy unexhausted stores of fancy spread,
And with thy images inrich my song.

Deep in a desert-vale, a Palace stands
Sublimely mournful:  to the eye it seems
The mansion of Despair, or ancient Night.
The graces of the Seasons never knew
To shed their bounty here, or smiling, bless,
With hospitable foot, its bleak domain,
Uncultivated.  Nor the various robe
Of flushing Spring, with purple gay, invests
Its blighted plains; nor Summer's radiant hand
Profusive, scatters o'er its baleful fields
The rich abundance of her glorious days:
And golden Autumn here forgets to reign.

Here only hemlock, and whatever weeds
Medea gather'd or Canidia brew'd,
Wet with Avernus' waves or Pontus yields,
Or Colchos, or Thessalia; taint the winds,
And choak the ground unhallow'd.  But the soil
Refuses to embrace the kindly seeds
Of healing vegetation, sage, and rue,
Dittany, and Amello, blooming still
In Virgil's rural page.  The bitter yew,
The church-yard's shade!  and cypress' wither'd arms
In formidable ranks surround its courts
With umbrage dun; administering a roof
To birds of ominous portent; the bat,
The raven boding death, the screaming owl
Of heavy wing, while serpents, rustling, hiss,
And croaking toads the odious concert aid.

The peevish east, the rheumy south, the north
Pregnant with storms, are all the winds that blow:
While, distant far, the pure Etesian-gales,
And western-breezes fan the spicy beds
Of Araby the blest, or shake their balm
O'er fair Britannia's plains, and wake her flow'rs.
Eternal damps, and deadly humours, drawn
In pois'nous exhalations from the deep,
Conglomerated into solid night,
And darkness, almost to be felt, forbid
The sun, with chearful beams, to purge the air,
But roll their suffocating horrors round
Incessant, banishing the blooming train,
Of health, and joy, for ever, from the Dome.

In sad magnificence the palace rears
Its mouldering columns; from thy quarries, Nile,
Of sable marble, and Egyptian mines
Embowl'd.  Nor Corinthian pillars, gay
With foliag'd capitals and figur'd frize,
Nor feminine Ionique, nor, tho' grave,
The fluted Dorique, and the Tuscan plain,
In just proportions rise:  but Gothic, rude,
Irreconcil'd in ruinous design:
Save in the center, in relievo high,
And swelling emblematically bold,
In gold the apple rose, "whose mortal taste
Brought death into the world, and all our woe."
Malignantly delighted, dire Disease
Surveys the glittering pest, and grimly smiles
With hellish glee.  Beneath, totters her throne
Of jarring elements; earth, water, fire;
Where hot, and cold; and moist, and dry maintain
Unnatural war.  Shapeless her frightful form,
(A chaos of distemper'd limbs in one.)
Huge as Megaera; cruel as the grave;
Her eyes, two comets; and her breath, a storm.
High in her arms, if arms they be, she wields
Her scepter, half a skeleton; and points
To the dead walls, besmear'd with cursed tales
Of Plagues red-spotted, of blue Pestilence
Walking in darkness; Havock at their heels
Lean Famine, gnawing in despight her arm:
Whatever Egypt, Athens, or Messina,
Constantinople, Troynovant, Marseils,
Or Cairo felt, or Spagnolet cou'd paint.
A sickly taper, glimmering feeble rays
Across the gloom, makes horror visible,
And punishes, while it informs, the eye.
A thousand and ten thousand monstrous shapes
Compose the group; the execrable crew
Which Michael, in vision strange, disclos'd
To Adam, in the Lazar-house of woe;
A colony from hell.  The knotted Gout;
The bloated Dropsy; and the racking Stone
Rolling her eyes in anguish; Lepra foul;
Strangling Angina; Ephialtick starts;
Unnerv'd Paralysis; with moist Catarrhs;
Pleuritis bending o'er its side, in pain;
Vertigo;  murderous Apoplexy, proud
With the late spoils of Clayton's honour'd life:
Clayton, the good, the courteous, the humane;
Tenacious of his purpose, and his word
Firm as the fabled throne of Grecian Jove.
Be just, O memory!  again recall
Those looks illumin'd by his honest heart,
That open freedom, and that chearful ease,
The bounteous emanations of his soul:
His British honour; christian charity;
And mild benevolence for human-kind.

From every quarter, lamentations loud,
And sighs resound, and rueful peals of groans
Roll echoing round the vaulted dens, and screams
Dolorous, wrested from the heart of Pain,
And brain-sick Agony.  Around her throne
Six favourite furies, next herself accurst,
Their dismal mansions keep; in order each,
As most destructive.  In the foremost rank,
Of polish'd steel, with armour blood-distain'd,
Helmets and spears, and shields, and coats of mail
With iron stiff, or tin, or brass, or gold,
Swells a triumphal arch; beneath grim War
Shakes her red arm:  for War is a disease
The fellest of the fell!  Why will mankind,
Why will they, when so many plagues involve
This habitable globe, (the curse of sin,)
Invent new desolations to cut off
The Christian race?  at least in Christian climes
Let Olives shade your mountains; and let Peace
Stream her white banner o'er us blest from war,
And lawrels only deck your Poet's brows.
Or, if the fiery metal in your blood,
And thirst of human-life your bosom sting,
Too savage!  let the fury loose of war,
And bid the battle rage against the breasts
Of Asian Infidels:  redeem the tow'rs
Where DAVID sung, the son of DAVID bled;
And warm new Tasso's with the Epic-flame.

Right opposite to War a gorgeous throne
With jewels flaming, and emboss'd with gold
And various sculpture, strike the wond'ring eye
With jovial scenes (amid destruction gay,)
Of instruments of mirth, the harp, the lute,
Of costly viands, of delicious wines,
And flow'ry wreaths to bind the careless brow
Of youth, or age; as youth or age demand
The pleasing ruin from the enchantress, vile
Intemperance:  than Circe subtler far,
Only subdu'd by wisdom; fairer far,
Than young Armida, whose bewitching charms
Rinaldo fetter'd in her rosy chains:
Till, by Ubaldo held, his diamond shield
Blaz'd on his mind the virtues of his race,
And, quick, dissolv'd her wanton mists away.
See, from her throne, slow-moving, the extends
A poison'd gobblet!  fly the beauteous bane:
The adder's tooth, the tiger's hungry fang
Are harmless to her smiles; her smiles are death.
Beneath the foamy lustre of the bowl
Which sparkles men to madness, lurks a snake
Of mortal sting:  fly:  if you taste the wine,
Machaon swears that Moly cannot cure.
Tho' innocent and fair her looks, she holds
A lawless commerce with her sister Pests,
And doubly whets their darts:  away &mdash; and live.

Next, in a low-brow'd cave a little hell
A pensive hag, moping in darkness, sits
Dolefully-sad:  her eyes (so deadly-dull!)
Stare from their stonied sockets, widely wild
For ever bent on rusty knives, and ropes;
On poignards, bowls of poison, daggers red
With clotted gore.  A raven by her side
Eternal croaks; her only mate Despair:
Who scowling in a night of clouds, presents
A thousand burning hells, and damned souls,
And lakes of stormy fire, to mad the brain
Moon-strucken.  Melancholy is her name;
Britannia's bitter bane.  Thou gracious pow'r,
(Whose judgments and whose mercies who can tell?)
With bars of steel, with hills of adamant
Crush down the sooty fiend; nor let her blast
The sacred light of heav'n's all-cheering face,
Nor fright, from Albion's isle, the angel HOPE,

Fever the fourth:  adust as Afric wilds,
Chain'd to a bed of burning brass:  her eyes
Like roving meteors blaze, nor ever close
Their wakeful lids:  she turns, but turns in vain,
Through nights of misery.  Attendant Thirst
Grasps hard an empty bowl, and shrivel'd strives
To drench her parched throat.  Not louder groans
From Phalaris's bull, as fame reports,
Tormented with distressful din the air,
And drew the tender tear from pity's eye.

Consumption near; a joyless, meagre wight,
Panting for breath, and shrinking into shade
Eludes the grasp:  thin as th' embodied air
Which, erst, deceiv'd Ixion's void embrace.
Ambitious of a goddess!  scarce her legs
Feebly she drags, with wheezing labour, on,
And motion slow:  a willow wand directs
Her tottering steps, and marks her for the grave.

The last, so turpid to the view, affrights
Her neighbour hags.  Happy herself is blind,
Or madness wou'd ensue; so bloated-black,
So loathsome to each sense, the sight or smell,
Such foul corruption on this side the grave.
Variola yclep'd; ragged, and rough,
Her couch perplex'd with thorns. &mdash; what heavy
Hang o'er my heart to feel the theme is mine!
But providence commands; his will be done!
She rushes through my blood; she burns alone,
And riots on my life. &mdash; Have mercy, heav'n!&mdash;
Variola, what art thou?  whence proceeds
This virulence, which all, but we, escape;
Thou nauseous enemy to human-kind:
In man, and man alone, thy mystick seeds,
Quiet, and in their secret windings hid,
Lie unprolifick; till infection rouze
Her pois'nous particles, of proper size,
Figure, and measure, to exert their pow'r
Of impregnation; atoms subtle, barb'd,
Infrangible, indented; by the laws
Mechanick, or by Geometrick rules
Yet undiscover'd:  quick the ruin runs
Destructive of the solids, spirits, blood
Of mortal man, and agitates the whole
In general conflagration and misrule.
As when the flinty seeds of fire embrace
Some fit materials, stubble, furze, or straw,
The crackling blaze ascends; the rapid flood
Of ruddy flames, impetuous o'er its prey,
Rolls its broad course; and half the field devours.

As adders deaf to beauty, wit, and youth,
How many living lyres, by thee unstrung,
E'er half their tunes are ended, cease to charm
Th' admiring world?  so ceas'd the matchless name,
By Cowley honour'd, by Roscommon lov'd,
Orinda:  blooming Killigrew's soft lay:
And manly Oldham's pointed vigour, curs'd
By the gor'd sons of Loyola and Rome.
And he who Phedra sung, in buskin'd pomp,
Mad with incestuous fires, ingenious Smith:
Oxonia's sons.  And, O our recent grief!
Shall BEAUCHAMP die, forgotten by the muse,
Or are the muses with their HARTFORD dumb?
Where are ye?  weeping o'er thy learned Rhine,
Bononia, fatal to our hopes!  or else
By Kennet's chalky wave, with tresses torn,
Or rude, and wildly floating to the winds,
Mute on the hoary willows hang the lyre,
Neglected?  or in rural Percy-lodge,
Where innocence and he walk'd hand in hand,
The cypress crop, or weave the laurel-bough
To grace his honour'd grave?  Ye lillies, rise
Immaculate; ye roses, sweet as morn;
Less sweet and less immaculate than he.

His op'ning flow'r of beauty softly smil'd,
And, sparkling in the liquid dews of youth,
Adorn'd the blessed light!  with blossoms fair,
Untainted; in the rank Italian soil
From blemish pure.  The virgins stole a sigh,
The matrons lifted up their wond'ring eyes,
And blest the English-angel as he pass'd,
Rejoicing in his rays!  why did we trust
A plant so lovely to their envious skies,
Unmercifully bright with savage beams?
His were the arts of Italy before,
Courting, and courted by the classic Muse.
He travel'd not to learn, but to reform,
And with his fair example mend mankind.

Why need I name (for distant nations know,
Hesperia knows; O would Hesperia sing
As Maro, erst, and, late, Marino rais'd
The blooming Beauchamps of the former times,
Marcellus; and Adonis to the stars,
On wings of soaring fire!  so wou'd she sing!)
His uncorrupted heart; his honour clear
As summer-suns, effulging forth his soul
In every word and look:  his reason's ray
By folly, vanity, or vice unstain'd,
Shining at once with purity and strength,
With English honesty, and Attick fire:
His tenderness of spirit, high-inform'd
With wide benevolence, and candid zeal
For learning, liberty, religion, truth:
The patriot-glories burning in his breast,
His king's and country's undivided friend!
Each publick virtue, and each private grace;
The SEYMOUR dignity, the PERCY-flame;
All, all! &mdash; E're twenty autumns roll'd away
Their golden plenty.  Further still!  behold
His animated bloom; his flush of health;
The blood exulting with the balmy tide
Of vernal life!  so fresh for pleasure form'd
By nature and the graces:  yet his youth
So temperately warm, so chastly cool,
Ev'n seraphims might look into his mind,
Might look, nor turn away their holy eyes!

Th' unutterable essence of good heav'n,
That breath of God, that energy divine
Which gives us to be wise, and just, and pure,
Full on his bosom pour'd the living stream,
Illum'd, inspir'd and sanctify'd his soul!

And are these wonders vanish'd?  are those eyes
Where ardent truth, and melting mildness shone,
Clos'd in a foreign land?  no more to bless
A father, mother, friend!  no more to charm
A longing people?  O, lamented youth!
Since fate and gloomy night thy beauties veil'd
With shade mysterious, and eclips'd thy beams,
How many SOMERSETS are lost in Thee!

Yet only lost to earth! &mdash; For trust the muse,
(His virtues rather trust) She saw him rise,
She saw him smile along the tissu'd clouds,
In colours rich-embroider'd by the sun,
Engirt with cherub-wings, and kindred-forms.
Children of light, the spotless Youth of heav'n!
They hail their blest companion, gain'd so soon
A partner of their joys; and crown with stars,
Almost as fair, the radiance of his brows.
Ev'n where the angel host, with tongues of fire,
Chaunt to their glittering harps th' Almighty's praise,
And, and in a burning circle, shout around
The jasper-throne, he mingles flames with them;
He springs into the center of the choir,
And drinking in the spirit-most-divine,
He sings as sweet, and glows as bright as they.

