MYCON, PHILANTHES.

MYCON.
Welcome, Philanthes, to thy native fields;
Thrice three revolving moons are gone and past,
Since first you parted from your father's cott,
To drive to pastures far remote your flock.
Since that, alas, how oft has savage war
Disturb'd our dwellings, and defac'd our fields!

PHILANTHES.
MYCON, each object that I view around,
Speaks ruin and destruction.  See, my friend,
The ancient wood, whose venerable shades
So oft have shelter'd us from noon-day suns;
So oft have echo'd to the Iowing herds
That fed wide-wandering in the neighb'ring vales,
The soldier's ax has levell'd with the ground,
And to the sun expos'd its darksome bow'rs:
The distant villages, and blue-topt hills,
The far-stretch'd meads appear, and meet mine eyes,
That erst were intercepted by the grove.

MYCON.
How is the wonted face of all things chang'd!
Those trees, by whose aspiring tops we knew
The sun's ascent at noon, unerring mark,
No more are seen to tell the coming hour.
How naked does the winding rill appear,
Whose banks its pendant umbrage deep-imbrown'd,
And far-invested with its arborous roof,
As by its side it roll'd its secret streams;
How oft, alas!  those shadowy banks along
(Close solitude!)  my ROSALIND and I
Have walk'd in converse sweet, and link'd in love!
But tell me, dear PHILANTHES, are the fields,
Which late you left, like ours by war opprest,
Alike in tumult and confusion wrapt?

PHILANTHES.
MYCON, I'll tell thee wonders past belief.
It hap'd one morn, when first the dawning sun
Began to chear the light-enliven'd earth,
Caught with so bright a scene, I sought the fields
Before my wonted hour, and roving wide
Among the vales, the villages and woods,
Where'er my fancy led, or pleasure call'd,
I chanc'd upon a neighb'ring hill to stray,
To view the glitt'ring prospect from its top
Of the broad Rhine, that roll'd his waves beneath,
Amid the level of extended meads;
When lo!  e'er yet I gain'd its lofty brow,
The sound of dashing floods, and dashing arms,
And neighing steeds, confusive struck mine ear.
Studious to know what tumult was at hand,
With step adven'trous I advanc'd, and gain'd
With tim'rous care and cautious ken its top.
Sudden a burst of brightness smote my sight,
From arms, and all th' imblazonrie of war
Reflected far, while steeds, and men, and arms
Seem'd floating wide, and stretch'd in vast array
O'er the broad bosom of the big-swoln flood,
That dashing roll'd its beamy waves between.
The banks promiscuous swarm'd with thronging troops,
These on the flood embarking, those appear'd
Crowding the adverse shore, already past.
All was confusion, all tumultuous din.
I trembled as I look'd, tho' far above,
And in one blaze their arms were blended bright
With the broad stream, while all the glist'ring scene
The morn illum'd, and in one splendor clad.
Struck at the sight, I left with headlong haste
The steep-brow'd hill, and o'er th' extended vales,
The wood-girt lawns I ran, nor slack'd my pace,
Till at my flock thick-panting I arriv'd,
And drove far off, beneath a deep-arch'd cave.
But come, my friend, inform me in return,
Since this my absence what has here fell out.

MYCON.
Dost thou remember at the river's side
That solitary convent, all behind
Hid by the covert of a mantling wood?&mdash;
One night, when all was wrapt in darkness deep,
An armed troop on rage and rapine bent,
Pour'd o'er the fields and ravag'd all they met;
Nor did that sacred pile escape their arms,
Whose walls the murderous band to ruin swept,
And fill'd its caverns deep with armed throngs
Greedy of spoil, and snatch'd their treasures old
From their dark seats:  the shrieking sisters fled
Dispers'd and naked thro' the fields and woods,
While sable night conceal'd their wand'ring steps.
Part in my moss-grown cottage shelter sought,
Which haply scap'd their rage, in secret glade
Immersed deep. &mdash; I rose at early morn,
With fearful heart to view the ruin'd dome,
Where all was desolation, all appear'd
The seat of horror, and devouring war.
The deep recesses, and the gloomy nooks,
The vaulted isles, and shrines of imag'd saints,
The caverns worn by holy knees appear'd,
And to the sun were op'd. &mdash; In musing thought
I said, as on the pile I bent my brow&mdash;
"This seat to future ages will appear,
Like that which stands fast by the piny rock;
These silent walls with ivy shall be hung,
And distant times shall view the sacred pile,
Unknowing how it fell, with pious awe!
The pilgrim here shall visit, and the swain
Returning from the field at twilight grey,
Shall shun to pass this way, subdued by fear,
And slant his course across the adverse vale!"

PHILANTHES.
MYCON, thou see'st that cow, which stands in cool
Amid yon rushy lake, beneath the shade
Of willow green, and ruminates at ease,
The watry herbage that around her floats.
That way my business leads.  I go to greet
My father, and my wonted cottage dear.

MYCON.
Come, let us go:  my path is that way too.
Come, my PHILANTHES, and may piteous heav'n
Indulge more happy days, and calm our griefs!
Alas!  I thought some trouble was at hand,
And long before presag'd the coming storm,
Ev'n when the light'ning one disastrous night
Blasted the hoary oak, whose ample boughs
Imbow'r my cottage; and as on the grass
At noon I slept, a serpent's sudden hiss
Broke my sweet rest! &mdash; But come, let us be gone,
The sun begins to welk in ruddy west.
