LYCAS, ALPHON.

ALPHON.
Arise, my Lycas:  in yon' woody wilds
From a rough rock in deep enclosure hid
Of thickest oaks, a gushing fountain falls,
And pours it's airy stream with torrent pure:
Which late returning from the field at eve
I found, invited by it's dashing sound,
As thro' the gloom it struck my passing ear.
Thither I mean to drive our languid flocks;
Fit place to cool their thirst in mid-day hour.
Due west it rises from that blasted beech;
The way but short: &mdash; come, Lycas, rouze thy dog;
Let us be gone.

LYCAS.
Alas, my friend, of flock,
Of spring, or shepherd's lore, to me is vain
To tell:  my fav'rite lamb, the solace dear
Of these grey locks, my sweet and sole delight,
Is snatch'd by cruel fate!  an armed band
On neighing steeds elate, in wide array
Trampled the youngling, as the vale along
At eve they pass'd, beneath their whelming march.

ALPHON.
Such throng I heard, as in the neighb'ring wood
I wander'd to reduce a straggling ewe
Escap'd the fold:  what time the griesly owl
Her shrieks began, and at the wonted elm
The cows awaiting stood Lucilla's hand.
When strait with sudden fear alarm'd I start,
And list'ning to the distant-echoing steps
Of unseen horsemen with attentive ear,
I stand aloof.  But why this deep-felt grief?
Merits such loss these tears and black despair?

LYCAS.
Alphon, no more to Lycas now remains,
Since he my last and latest care is lost!
Thou know'st my little flock; three tender ewes
Were all my mean ambition wish'd or sought.
Ev'n now nine days, and nine revolving nights
Are past, since these the Moldaw's raging flood
Swept with their wattled cotes, as o'er it's banks
It rose redundant, swoln with beating rains,
And deep immers'd beneath it's whirling wave.
I wak'd at early dawn, and to the field
I issus'd to pursue my wonted toil,
When lo!  nor flocks, nor wattled cotes I saw;
But all that met my wond'ring eyes around,
Was desolation sad.  Here stateliest oaks
Torn from their roots, with broken branches lay
In hideous ruin:  there the fields, that laugh'd
With rip'ning corn, of all their charms despoil'd,
With oozy fragments scatter'd waste and wild
Were seen.  I curst the wicked spirit drear,
That in the ruin'd abbey's darkest cell,
(That stands immur'd amid yon' lonesome pines)
I bound with triple chains:  his magic pow'r
Oft'times with howling storms, and thunder loud
Deforms the night, and blackens nature's face.
His tempests swell'd the Moldaw's rising streams,
And thus o'erwhelm'd my flock. &mdash; But this my heart
Had learn'd to bear, at length to comfort's voice
It had obey'd, and all it's woes forgot;
When ah!  too soon returning woes invade
My breast, just rising from its former stroke.
When this, the sole survivor, of my flock,
Follows his lost companions; while a wretch
I here remain, deserted and forlorn!
He too had dy'd beneath the whelming surge,
Had not the shelter of my low-rooft cott
That fatal night preserv'd him; where at eve
I hap'ly plac'd him with providing care,
Lest the fell storm, which yet from southern clouds
Threaten'd destruction, and to low'r began,
Might violate his tender-blooming age.

ALPHON.
With piteous eye, and sympathizing heart,
Thy tears I view. &mdash;  These scenes of war and blood,
The calm repose of every field invade!
Myself had fall'n a victim to their rage,
As in deep dead of night my cave beneath
I lay dissolv'd in sleep, with warning voice
Had not my dog alarm'd with wond'ring ear.
When strait approach'd the cave a savage throng
With barb'rous arms, and habit fierce and wild,
With stern demeanour and defying look
Terrify; which the moon's pale-glimm'ring rays
Presented to my sight, as in the boughs,
Close shrouded, of a neighb'ring pine I sat
(Where sudden fear had driv'n me to evade
Impending fate, unconscious and amaz'd)
Secure, but trembling, and in chilly damps
My limbs bedew'd. &mdash; The monsters as they past,
With dire confusion all the cavern fill'd;
Hurl'd to the ground my scrip, and beechen cup,
Dispers'd the shaggy skins that form my bed,
And o'er the trampled floor had scatter'd wide
A hoard of choicest chesnuts, which I cull'd
With nice-discerning care, and had design'd
A present to my beauteous ROSALINDE.
Alas!  with them her love had been obtain'd,
And me to MYRON she had then preferr'd!

LYCAS.
Shepherd, on thee has fortune kindly smil'd;
'Tis mine to feel her grief-inflicting hand!
Alas!  each object that I view around
Recalls my perish'd darling to my sight,
And mocks me with his loss!  see there the spring
Where oft he wont to slake his eager thirst!
And there the beech, beneath whose breezy shade
He lov'd to lie, close covert from the sun!
See yet the bark smooth-worn and bare remains,
Where oft the youngling rubb'd his tender side!
Ah!  what avail'd my care, and foresight vain?
That day he fell oppress'd by whelming steeds.
This hand had built a bow'r of thickest boughs
Compos'd, and wove with intermingling leaves,
Impervious to the sun; and strew'd the floor
With choicest hay, that in the secret shade
He might repose, nor feel the dog-star's beam!
But why this sad, repeated track of woe
I still pursue?  Farewel, my ALPHRON dear,
To distant fields, and pastures will I go,
Where impious war, and discord, nurse of blood,
Shall ne'er profane the silence of the groves.
