ACIS, ALCYON.

ACIS.
While in the bosom of this deep recess
The voice of war has lost its madding shouts,
Let us improve the transient hour of peace,
And calm our troubled minds with mutual songs;
While this recess conspiring with the muse
Invites to peaceful thoughts; this cavern deep,
And these tall pines that nodding from the rock
Wave o'er its mouth their umbrage black, and cast
A venerable gloom, with this clear fount
That cleaves the riven stone and fills the cave
With hollow-tinkling sounds.  Repeat the song
Which late, ALCYON, from thy mouth I heard,
As to the spring we drove our thirsting flocks;
It tells the charms of grateful evening mild:
Begin, ALCYON:  ACIS in return
Shall sing the praises of the dawning morn.

ALCYON.
Behind the hills when sinks the western sun,
And falling dews breath fragrance thro' the air,
Refreshing every field with coolness mild;
Then let me walk the twilight meadows green,
Or breezy up-lands, near thick-branching elms,
While the still landschape sooths my soul to rest,
And every care subsides to calmest peace:
The mists slow-rising from the rivers dank,
The woods scarce stirring at the whisp'ring wind,
The streaky clouds, that tinge their darken'd tops
With russet hues, and fainter gleams of light,
The solitude that all around becalms
The peaceful air, conspire to wrap my soul
In musings mild, and nought the solemn scene
And the still silence breaks; but distant sounds
Of bleating flocks, that to their destin'd fold
The shepherd drives; mean-time the shrill-tun'd bell
Of some lone ewe that wander's from the rest,
Tinkles far-off, with solitary sound;
The lowing cows that wait the milker's hand,
The cottage-mastiff's bark, the joyous shouts
Of swains that meet to wrestle on the green,
Are heard around.  But ah!  since ruthless war
Has ravag'd in these fields, so tranquil once,
Too oft' alas the din of clashing arms
And discord fell disturbs the softer scene!
Thy sweet approach delights the wearied ox,
While in loose traces from the furrow'd field
He comes; thy dawn the weary reaper loves,
Who long had fainted in the mid-day sun,
Pleas'd with the cooler hour, along the vale
Whistling he home returns to kiss his babes,
With joyful heart, his labour's sweet reward!
But ah!  what sudden fears amaze his soul
When near approaching, all before he sees
His lowly cottage and the village 'round
Swept into ruin by the hand of war,
Dispers'd his children, and his much-lov'd wife,
No more to glad his breast with home felt-joys!
I too, when in my watled cotes are laid
My supping flock, rejoice to meet my dear,
My fair LAURETTA, at the wonted oak;
Or haply as her milking-pail she bears
Returning from the field, to ease her arm,
(Sweet office!)  and impart my aiding hand!
Thy charms (O beauteous Evening!)  shall be sung,
As long as these tall pines shall wave their heads,
Or this clear fountain cleave the riven stone!

ACIS.
Sweet are the dews of Eve; her fragrance sweet;
Sweet are the pine-topt hills at sultry noon;
Sweet is the shelter of the friendly grott
To sheep, and shepherd, at impending storms;
But ah!  less sweet the fragrant dews of eve;
Less sweet the pine-topt hills at sultry noon;
Less sweet the shelter of the friendly grott,
Than when the rising sun with rosy beam
Peeps o'er the village-top, and o'er the fields,
The woods, the hills, the streams, and level meads,
Scatters bright splendors and diffusive joy!
As to his flock the shepherd issues forth,
Printing new footsteps in the dewy vale,
Each object of the joyous scene around
Vernal delight inspires, and glads his heart
Unknowing of the cause, with new-felt glee!
The chaunt of early birds on every bush,
The steaming odours of the fresh-blown flow'rs&mdash;

ALCYON.
Cease, ACIS, cease thy song: &mdash; from yonder hill,
Whose lofty sides inclose this secret seat,
Our flocks, that graze along its verd'rous brow,
Tumultuous rush, as struck with sudden fright:
And hark, methinks I hear the deathful sounds
Of war approaching, and its thunders roar!

ACIS.
Kind heav'n preserve my wife and children dear,
Alas!  I fear the sound, that louder now
Swells in the wind, and comes with fuller din,
Is near my cottage; which, thou know'st, my friend,
Stands at the spring, that issues from beneath
That rising hill, fast by the branching elm!

ALCYON.
See, see, my friend, what darksome spires arise
Of wreathing smoak, and blacken all the sky!&mdash;
Nearer and nearer comes the threat'ning voice,
And more distinguish'd strikes our trembling ear!
But lo!  the foes advance above the hill;
I see their glitt'ring arms begin to gleam!
Come, let us flie, and in the deepest nook,
The inmost cavern of this winding grott,
Close-shroud ourselves, lest in the gen'ral stream
Of thousands thronging down, we fall opprest.
