When sable midnight on the fields and woods
Had spread her mantle dark, then wander'd forth
The pensive ALCON, and the bosom deep
Of a wild wood with solitary steps,
There to lament his wretched fate, he sought.
Him, late as o'er the vale at coming eve
Joyful he walk'd with his LUCILLA dear,
A soldier stern-advancing on his steed,
Robb'd of his love, and tore the beauteous maid
With brutal hand from his contending arms,
Weeping in vain, and shrieking for his aid,
And frowning bore the precious prize away.
The wood, whose shades the plaintive shepherd sought,
Was dark and pathless, and by neighb'ring feet
Long time untrod:  for there in ancient days
Two knights of bold emprise, and high renown,
Met in fierce combat, to dispute the prize
Of beauty bright, whose valiant arm shou'd win
A virgin fair, whose far-emblazon'd charms
With equal love had smote their rival breasts,
The knight who fell beneath the victor's sword,
Unhears'd and restless, from that fatal day
Wanders the hated shades, a spectre pale;
And each revolving night, are heard to sound
Far from the inmost bow'r of the deep wood,
Loud shrieks, and hollow groans, and rattling chains.
When the dark secrets of the grove he gain'd,
Beneath an ancient oak his weary limbs
He laid adown, and thus to plain began.

This midnight deep to plaintive love accords;
This lonesone silence, and these hideous shades,
That in this darksome hour I dare to tread,
And all the horrors of this fearful place,
Will suit a wretch abandon'd to despair!&mdash;
But hah! &mdash; what means this sudden fear, that creeps
In chilly sweats o'er all my trembling limbs?&mdash;
What hollow-whisp'ring sounds are those I hear,
From yonder glade? &mdash; do not I hear his voice?
Does not the knight, that in these shades was slain,
Call me to come, and beckon with his hand?
Do not I see his visionary sword
Wav'd in bright circles thro' the murky air?&mdash;
Does not he point his wounds? &mdash; be still, my fears:
'Tis vain illusion all, and phantasie.
These fears my love &mdash; distemper'd brain suggests;
Alas, they will not bring me back my love!&mdash;
Who now, perhaps, amid the thronged camp
On earth's cold breast reclines her weary head,
A helpless virgin, subject to the will
Of each rude ravisher, and distant far
From her dear ALCON, and her native fields&mdash;
Ill will the hardships of inclement skies
Suit with her tender limbs; the various toils
Of painful marches; her unwonted ears,
How bear the trumpet, and the sounds of war?
This task is hard indeed &mdash; but soon, alas!
At will her savage lord may cast her off,
And leave her to succeeding scenes of woe!
I see my dear LUCILLA, once my own,
Naked and hungry, tread the pensive steps
Of desolation, doom'd to wander o'er,
Helpless and vagabond, the friendless earth!
I hear her sigh for ALCON and her home;
And ask for bread at some proud palace gate
With unavailing voice!  This toilsome scene,
Alas, how diff'rent from the smoother paths
Of rural life, my dear was wont to tread!
Forth to the field to bear the milking-pail
Was all her wont; to tread the tedded grass,
To tend her father's flock; beneath the oak
To snatch her dinner sweet, and on the green
With the companions of her age to sport!
In vain I now expect the coming on
Of dew-bath'd eve, to meet my wonted love;
No more I hear the wood-girt vallies ring
With her blythe voice, that oft has blest mine ear,
As in the distant shade I sate unseen;
No more I meet her at the wonted spring,
Where each revolving noon she daily went
To fill her pitcher with the crystal flood!&mdash;
If in her native fields the hand of death
Had snatch'd her from my arms, I cou'd have born
The fatal shock with less-repining heart;
For then I could have had one parting kiss;
I cou'd have strewn her hearse with fairest flow'rs,
And paid the last sad office to my dear!&mdash;
Return, my sweet LUCILLA, to my arms;
At thy return, all nature will rejoice.
Together will we walk the verdant vales,
And mingle sweet discourse with kisses sweet.
Come, I will climb for thee the knotted oak,
To rob the stock-dove of his feathery young;
I'll shew thee where the softest cowslips spring,
And clust'ring nuts their laden branches bend;
Together will we taste the dews of morn;
Together seek the grotts at sultry noon;
Together from the field at eve return&mdash;
What have I said?  what painted scenes of bliss
My vain imagination has display'd!
Alas, she's gone, ah, never to return!
Farewell my past'ral pipe, and my dear flock;
Farewell my faithful dog; my once-lov'd haunts
Farewell, or cave, or fountain, or fresh shade,
Farewell; and thou, my low-rooft cott, farewell!&mdash;
Here will I lie, and fellest wolves, that roam
This savage forest, shall devour my limbs,
Unwept, unburied, in a place unknown!
