Swift too, thy, tale is told:  a sound, a name,
No more than Lucian.  At the conquest, Death
Grinn'd, grimly glad; renewing Holben's dance.
Fantastic Humour drop'd the feeling sense,
Her empire less'ning by his fall.  The shades
Of frolick Rabelais, and HE of Spain,
Madrid's facetious  glory, join his ghost;
Triumvirate of Laughter! &mdash; Mirth is mad;
The loudest languishing into a sigh:
And Laughter shakes itself into decay.

"Lord!  what is Man?"  the Prophet well might ask.
We all may ask; "Lord!  what is mortal Man?"
So changeable his being with himself
Dissimilar:  the rainbow of an hour
A change of colours, transient through his life,
Brightens or languishes; &mdash; then fades to air.
Ev'n e're an unskrew'd spider spin a line
Of Metaphysick texture.  Man's thin thread
Of life is broken:  how analogous
Their parallel of lines!  slight, subtle, vain.

Man in a little hour's contracted round
Perplexes Reason.  Now to triumph swell'd,
To Joyous exultations, to a blaze
Of ecstasy:  and now depress'd, again,
And drooping into scenes of Death and Woe.

That sudden flow of spirits, bright and strong,
Which play'd in sprightly sallies round my heart;
Was it a gleam, fore-warning me from heav'n,
Of quick-approaching Fate?  As tapers mount
Expiring into wide-diffusive flame,
Give one broad glare, into the socket sink,
And sinking disappear. &mdash; It must be so!&mdash;
The soul, prophetick of it's voy'ge, descry'd
The blissful shore, exulting on the wing,
In a glad flutter:  then, o'erwhelm'd with joy,
She warn'd her old companion of her flight,
(The feeble tenement of mould'ring clay)
Who sadden'd at their parting. &mdash; Yes, &mdash; I feel
Thy leaden hand, O Death!  it presses hard,
It weighs the faculties of motion down,
Inactive as the foot of a dull rock;
And drags me to thy dusty chains:  the wheels
Of Life are fastned to the Grave; nor whirl,
Longer, the fiery chariot on.  The war,
The struggle for Eternity begins.
Eternity!  illimitable, vast,
Incomprehensible!  For Heav'n and Hell,
Within her universal womb, profound,
Are center'd. &mdash; Sleep or Death are on my heart:
Swims heavily my brain: &mdash; My senses reel.

What scenes disclose themselves!  What fields of joy!
What rivers of delight!  What golden bow'rs!
Sweetly oppress'd with beatifick views,
I hear angeilck-instruments, I see
Primaeval ardours, and essential forms;
The sons of light, but of created light,
All energy, the diligence of GOD!
Might I but join them!  Lend your glitt'ring wings,
Waft me, O quickly waft me to yon crown,
Bright with the flaming roses of the zone
Sidereal.  O!  gracious, they, beck'ning, smile,
They smile to the skies!  Hope leads the way:
I fly; I spring; I mount! &mdash; What fury shakes
Her fiery sword, and intercepts the stars?
Ha!  Amartia?  Conscience, Conscience sends
Her griesly form, to blast me at my end.
Behold!  she points to burning rocks, to waves
Sulphureous, molten lead, and boiling gulphs,
Tempestuous with everlasting fire.&mdash;
'Tis horrible! &mdash; O save me from myself!&mdash;
O save me JESU! &mdash; Ha!  a burst of light
Blends with the Empyreum's azure tide,
While Faith, triumphant swells the trump of GOD,
And shouting, "Where's thy Victory, O Grave?
And where, O Death, thy Sting?"  I see her spread
Her saving banner o'er my Soul (the Cross!)
And call it to its peers.  Thick crowds of day,
Immaculate, involve me in their streams,
And bath my spirit; whiten'd for the sky.

While on this isthmus of my fate I lye,
Jutting into Eternity's wide sea,
And leaning on this habitable globe,
The verge of either world dubious of Life.
Dubious, alike, of Death:  To Mercy thus,
Inspirited with supplicating zeal,
My guardian-angel rais'd his potent pray'r.
(For Angels minister to Man, intent
On offices of gentleness and love.)

"Hear, MERCY!  sweetest daughter of the skies,
Thou loveliest image of thy Fathers face,
Thou blessed fount, whence grace and goodness
Auspicious, hear!  extend thy helping arm,
With pitying readiness, with willing aid,
O lift thy servant from the vale of Death,
Now groveling in the dust, into the fields
Of Comfort, and the pastures green of health.
Hear MERCY, sweetest daughter of the skies!
If e're thy servant to the Poor his soul
Drew out, and taught the Fatherless to sing;
If e're by pity warm'd, and not by pride,
He cloath'd the Naked and the Hungry fed;
If e're distress, and misery, forelorn,
Deceiv'd his cheek, and stole his untaught tear,
An humble drop of thy celestial dew!
Hear MERCY, sweetest daughter of the skies.

"Sprung from the bosom of eternal bliss,
Thy goodness reaches farther than the Grave;
And near the gates of Hell extends thy sway,
Omnipotent!  All, save the cursed crew
Infernal, and the black-rebellious host
Of Lucifer, within thy sweet domain
Feed on ambrosia, and may hope the stars.
Hear, MERCY, sweetest daughter of the skies.
By thee, the great Physician from the bed
Of darkness call'd the sick, the blind, the lame;
He burst the grave's relentless bars by thee,
And spoke the dead to life and bloom again.
His miracles thy work; their glory, thine:
Then, O thou dearest attribute of GOD!
Thy saving health to this thy servant lend!
Hear, MERCY, sweetest daughter of the skies!"

Inclin'd upon a dewy-skirted cloud
Fleecy with gold, and dropping fatness down,
Plenty and bliss on Man, with looks as mild
As ev'ning suns (when flowry-footed May
Leads on the jocund hours, when Love himself
Flutters in green) effusing heart-felt joy
Abundant, MERCY shone with sober grace,
And majesty at once with sweetness mix'd
Ineffable.  A rainbow o'er her head,
The covenant of GOD, betok'ning peace
'Twixt Heav'n and Earth, its florid arch display'd,
High-bended by th' Almighty's glorious hand;
The languish of the dove upon her eyes
In placid radiance melted, from the throne
Of Grace infus'd and fed with light:  her smiles
Expansive cheer'd the undetermin'd tracks
Of all Creation, from th' aethereal cope
August with moving fires down to the shades
Infernal, and the reign of darkness drear.
Ev'n Men refine to Angels from her gaze,
Gracious, invigorating, full of Heav'n!
When Justice eyes her, from th' uplifted arm
Idle the thunder falls:  the clouds dissolve,
(With frowning wrath and smouldring food
In nutrimental balm and nectar-show'rs.

This daughter of the Lamb, to fervent pray'rs
And intercession, opes her ready ear
Compassionate; and to Hygeia thus:
"Hygeia, hie thee to the well of Life;
There dip thy fingers; touch his head and breast;
Three drops into his mouth infuse, unseen,
Save by the eve of Faith:  he yonder lies&mdash;
Descend and take the ev'ning's western wing."

She said.  Hygeia bow'd; and bowing, fill'd
The circumambient air with od'rous streams,
Pure essence of ambrosia!  Not the breath
Of Lebanon, from cedar allies blown,
Of Lebanon, with aromatick gales
Luxuriant, spikenard, aloes, myrrh and balm;
Nor the wise eastern Monarch's garden vy'd
In fragrance, when his fair Circassian spouse,
Enamour'd, call'd upon the South to fan
It's beds of spices; and her bosom cool,
Panting with languishment and love-sick fires.

Forth from th' eternal throne the Well of Life,
Pouring its crystal, laves the streets of GOD,
(Where Sickness never comes, nor Age, nor Pain)
Fast-trickling o'er the pebble-gems.  Beneath
Unfading amarant and asphodel,
A mirrour spreads its many-colour'd round,
Mosaick-work, inlaid by hands divine
In glittering rows, illuminating each,
Each shading:  beryl, topaz, chalcedon,
Em'rald and amethyst.  Whatever hues
The light reflects, celestial quarries yield,
Or melt into the vernant-showry bow,
Profussive, vary here in mingling beams.
Collected thus the waters, dimpling, end
Their soft-progressive lapse.  The cherubs hence
Immortal vigour quaff and bliss unblam'd.
Nor only flow for you, ye sons of light,
The streams of comfort and of life; but flow
To heal the nations.  Wonderful to tell,
The aged they renew, the dead revive
And more, the festers of the wounded soul,
Corrupted, black, to pristine white relume
And saint-like innocence.  The mystic dove
Broods, purifying o'er them, with his wings.
The Angel, who Bethesda's troubled pool
Stirr'd, first his his pinions with these vital drops
Sprinkled; then pour'd himself into the flood,
Instilling health and nutriment divine,
Its waves to quicken, and exalt its pow'rs.

Here lights Hygeia, ardent to fulfil
MERCY'S behest.  The bloom of Paradise
Liv'd on her youthful cheek, and glow'd the Spring.
The deep carnations in the eastern skies,
When ruddy Morning walks along the hills,
Illustriously red, in purple dews,
Are languid to her blushes; for she blush'd
As through the op'ning File of winged Flames,
Bounding, she lightned, and her sapphire eyes
With modest lustre bright, improving Heav'n,
Cast, sweetly, round, and bow'd to her compeers,
An Angel amid Angels.  Light she sprung
Along th' empyreal road:  her locks distill'd
Salubrious spirit on the stars.  Full soon
She pass'd the gate of pearl, and down the sky,
Praecipitant, upon the ev'ning wing
Cleaves the live aether, and with healthy balm
Impregnates, and foecundity of sweets.

Conscious of her approach, the wanton birds,
Instinctive, carol forth, in livelier lays,
And merrier melody, their grateful hymn,
Brisk-flutt'ring to the breeze.  Eftsoons the hills,
Beneath the gambols of the lamb and kid,
Of petulant delight, the circling maze
(Brush'd off its dews) betray.  All nature smiles,
With double day delighted.  Chief, on Man
The Goddess ray'd herself:  He, wond'ring, feels
His heart in driving tumults, vig'rous, leap
And gushing ecstasy:  bursts out his tongue
In laud, and unpremeditated song,
Obedient to the Musick in his veins.
Thus, when at first, the instantaneous light
Sprung from the voice of GOD, and, vivid, threw
Its golden mantle round the rising ball,
The cumb'rous mass, shot through with vital warmth
And plastick energy, to motion rowl'd
The drowzy elements, and active rule:
Sudden the morning stars, together sang,
And shouted all the sons of GOD for joy.

Enters Hygeia, and her task performs,
With healing fingers touch'd my breast and head;
Three drops into my mouth infus'd, unseen,
Save by the eye of Faith:  Then reascends.

As snow in Salmon, at the tepid touch
Of southern gales, by soft degrees, dissolves
Trickling, yet flow away; and loosned frosts
The genial impress feel of vernal suns,
Relenting to the ray:  my torpid limbs
The healing virtue of Hygeia's hand
And salutary influence perceives,
Instant to wander through the whole.  My heart
Begins to melt, o'er-running into joy,
Late froze with agony.  Kind tumults seize
My spirits, conscious of returning ease,
And dire Disease abating from the cells
And mazy haunts of Life.  The judging leech
Approves the symptoms, and my hope allows.

The hostile humours cease to bubble o'er
Their big-distended channels; quiet now
And sinking into peace.  The organs heave
Kindlier with life:  And Nature's fabrick near
To dissolution shatter'd, and its mould
To dust dissolv'd, tho' not its pristine strength
(The lusty vigour of its healthy prime)
Yet gentle force recovers; to maintain,
Against the tyrant Death's bartering assaults,
The fort of Life. &mdash; But darkness, present still,
And absent sweet repose, best med'cine Sleep,
Forbid my heart the full carouse of  joy.

Soft pow'r of slumbers; dewy-feather'd Sleep;
Kind nurse of Nature!  whither art thou fled,
A stranger to my senses, weary'd out
With pain, and aking for thy presence?
Come, O come!  embrace me in thy liquid arms;
Exert thy drowzy virtue, wrap my limbs
In downy indolence, and bathe in balm,
Fast-flowing from th' abundance of thy horn
With nourishment replete, and richer stor'd
Than Amalthea's; who (so Poets feign)
With honey and with milk supply'd a GOD,
And fed the Thunderer.  Indulgent quit
Thy couch of poppies!  steal thyself on me,
(In rosy mists suffus'd and clouds of gold)
On me, thou mildest cordial of the world!

The shield his pillow, in the tented field,
By Thee, the Soldier, bred in iron-war,
Forgets the mimick thunders of the day,
Nor envies Luxury her bed of down.
Rock'd by the blast, and cabbin'd in the storm,
The Sailor huggs Thee to the doddering mast
Of shipwreck negligent, while Thou art kind.
The Captive's freedom, Thou!  the Labourer's hire;
The Beggar's store; the Miser's better gold;
The health of Sickness; and the youth of Age!
At thy approach the wrinked front of Care
Subsides into the smooth expanse of smiles.
And, stranger far!  the Monarch, crown'd by Thee,
Beneath his weight of glory gains repose.

What guilt mine, that I alone am wake,
Ev'n tho' my eyes are seal'd, am wake alone?
Ah seal'd, but not by Thee!  The world is dumb,
Exhal'd by air an awful silence rules
Still as thy brother's reign, or foot of Time.
Ev'n nightingales are mute, and lovers rest,
Steep'd in thy influence, and cease to sigh,
Or only sigh in slumbers.  Fifteen nights
The Moon has walk'd in glory o'er the sky
As oft the Sun has shone her from the sphere,
Since, gentle Sleep, I felt thy cordial dews.
Then listen to my moaning; nor delay
To sooth me with thy softness; to o'ershade
Thy suppliant with thy pinions:  or at least,
Lightly to touch my temples with thy wand.
So, full and frequent, may the crimson fields
With poppies blush, nor feel a Tarquin's hand.
So may the West-winds sigh, th' murm'ring brook,
The melody of birds, Ianthe's lute,
And musick of the spheres, be all the sounds
That dare intrude on thy devoted hour.
Nor Boreas bluster, nor the thundler roar,
Nor screech-owl flap his wing, nor spirit yell,
As 'neath the trembling of the moon he walks,
Within the circle of thy still domain.
He comes!  he comes!  the reconciling pow'r
Of Pain, Vexation, Care, and Anguish comes!
He hovers in the lazy air: &mdash; He melts,
With honey-heaviness, my senses down.&mdash;

&mdash;I thank thee Sleep! &mdash; Heav'ns!  is the day restor'd
To my desiring eyes?  their lids unglew'd,
Admit the long-lost light, now streaming in
Painfully clear! &mdash; O check the rapid gleam
With shading silk, 'till the weak visual orb,
Stronger and stronger, dares imbibe the sun,
Nor, wat'ring, twinkle at unfolded day.
As, where, in Lapland, Night collects her reign,
Oppressive, over half the rounded year
Uninterrupted with one struggling beam;
Young Orra-moor, in furry spoils inroll'd,
Shagged and warm, first spies th' imperfect blush
Of op'ning Light, exulting; scarce her eyes
The lustre bear tho' faint; but wid'ning fast
Th' unbounded tide of splendor covers, fair,
Th' expanded Hemisphere; and fills her sight
With gladness, while her heart, warm-leaping, burns.

Sight, all-expressive!  Tho' the feeling sense
Thrills from Ianthe's hand; at Handel's lyre
Tingles the ear; tho' smell from blossom'd beans
Arabian spirit gathers; and the draught,
Sparkling from Burgundy's exalted vine,
Streams nectar on the palate:  Yet, O Sight!
Weak their sensations, when compar'd with Thee.
Without Thee, nature lies unmeaning gloom.
Whatever smiles on Earth, or shines in Heav'n,
From star of Venus to Adonis flow'r;
Whatever Spring can promise; Summer warm
To rich maturity; gay Autumn roll
Into the lap of Plenty, or her horn;
Winter's majestic horrors; &mdash; all are Thine.
All varying in order's pleasing round,
In regular confusion grateful All!

And now progressive Health, with kind repair,
My fever-weakened joints and languid limbs
New-brace.  Live vigour and auxillar'd nerves
Sinew the freshned frame in bands of steel.
As in the trial of the furnace Ore,
From baser dregs refin'd, and drossy scum,
Flames more refulgent, and admits the stamp
Of Majesty to dignify the gold,
CAESAR or GEORGE!  the human body, thus,
EnameI'd, not deform'd, from Sickness' rage
More manly features borrows, and a grace
Severe, yet worthier of its Sovereign form.
The Patriarch of Uz, Son of the Morn,
Envy'd of Lucifer, by sores and blanes
Sharply improv'd, to fairer honours rose;
Less his beginning blest than latter end.
How late a tortur'd lump of baleful pain,
The soul immerg'd one inactive mass
Of breathing blanes; each elegance of sense,
Each intellectual spark and fiery seed
Of Reason, Mem'ry, Judgment, Taste and Wit,
Extinct and smother'd in unwieldy Clay
Scarce animated.  And (O Blessing!)  now
I seem to tread the winds; to overtake
The empty Eagle in her early chase,
Or nimble-trembling Dove from preyful beak,
In many a rapid, many a cautious round,
Wheeling praecipitant:  I leave behind,
Exulting o'er its aromatic hills,
The bounding Bether-Roe.  The Poet's mind,
(Effluence essential of heat and light!)
Not mounts a loftier wing; when fancy leads
The glitt'ring track, and points him to the skies,
Excursive:  He empyreal air inhales,
Earth fading from his flight!  triumphant soars
Amid the pomp of planetary worlds,
Ranging infinitude, beyond the stretch
Of Newton's ken, Reformer of the spheres,
And, gaining on the Heav'ns, enjoys his home!

The Winter of Disease all pass'd away,
The Spring of Health, in bloomy pride, calls forth
Embosom'd bliss, of rosy-winged praise
The rising incense, the impassion'd glance
Of gratitude, the pant of honour, quick
With emulating zeal; the florid wish
For sacred happiness, and cordial glow
From conscious Virtue felt.  All the sweet train
Of Vernal Solitude's refining walks.
Best gift of Heav'n, and source of nameless joys!

Come, Contemplation!  therefore, from thy haunts,
From Spenser's tomb, (who knows not Spenser's tomb?
Oft-visited by me; certes, by all,
Touch'd by the Muse:  from Richmond's-green retreats,
Where Nature's Bard the Seasons on his page
Steals from the year's rich hand:  or Welwyn groves,
Where Young, the friend of Virtue and of Man,
Sows with poetick stars the Nightly song,
To Phoebus dear as his own day!  and drowns
The nightingale's complaint in sadder strains
And sweeter elegance of woe.  O come!
Now ev'ning mildly-still and softer suns
(While every breeze is flowing balm) invite
To taste the spirit of the fragrant Spring
Salubrious; from mead or hawthorn-hedge
Aromatiz'd, and pregnant with delight
No less than Health.  And what a prospect round
Swells greenly-grateful on the cherish'd eye!
A universal blush!  a waste of sweets!
How live the flow'rs, and, as the zephyrs blow,
Wave a soft lustre on their parent-sun,
And thank him with their odours for his beams;
Mild image of himself!  reflected fair,
By faintness fair, and amiably mild!

Hark!  how the airy echoes talk along
With undulating answer, soft or loud,
The mocking semblance of the imag'd voice,
Babling itinerant from wood to hill,
From hill to dale, and wake their sisters round,
To multiply delight upon the ear.

As float the clouds, romantic fancy pours
The magazines of Proteus forth, and builds
Huge castles in the air; while vessels sail
Spacious, along the fluid element;
And dragons burn in gold, with azure stains
Speckled:  Ten thousand inconsistent shapes
Shift on the eye, and through the welkin roll.

Here tufted hills!  there shining villas rise,
Circling; and temples, solemn, fill the mind
With beauty, splendor, and religious awe!
Peace o'er the plains expands her snowy wing,
Dove-ey'd; and buxom Plenty laughs around!

Far different objects mortify the eye
Along thy borders Scheld:  (with William's tears
Ennobled, tears from brave Humanity
And Royal Pity drawn!  nor of his blood
Less prodigal!)  Instead of herbag'd plains,
Of fields with olden plenty waving wide,
Of lowing vallies, and of fleecy hills:
What magazines of Death!  what flaming swords
Destruction brandish; what a burnish'd glare
Of horror wander's round; what carnage vile
Of dubitable limbs; what groaning piles
Of dying warriors on th' ensanguin'd earth
(Ev'n sons of Britain, chiefs of high renown)
Grov'ling in dust, and with unmartial fires
Sheer blasted!  O 'tis pitiful to sight!
It smites the honest brain and heart!  The cloud,
Belch'd from the brazen throat of War, wou'd hide,
Industrious, the ruin which it spreads,
As if asham'd of Massacre &mdash; But hark&mdash;
What dire explosion tears th' embowel'd sky,
And rumbles from th' infernal caves?  The roar
Of Aetna's troubled caverns, when she heaves
Trinacria from her marble pillars, fix'd
On the foundations of the solid earth,
And Thetis' bellows from her distant dens,
O'erwhelm the ear! &mdash; A mine with deadly stores
Infuriate, burst; and a whole squadron'd host
Whirl'd through the riven air.  A human show'r
With smouldry smoak enroll'd and wrapt in fire,
To cover earth with Desolation drear!&mdash;

Curst be the Man, the Monk, the son of Hell,
The triple Moloch!  whose mechanic brain,
Maliciously inventive, from its forge,
Of cruel steel, the sulphur seeds of Wrath
Flash'd on the world, and taught us how to kill;
To hurl the blazing ruin, to disgorge
From smoaking brass the ragged instruments
Of Fate, in thunder on the mangled files
Of gallant foes: &mdash; the cowardice of Hell!
And what the barb'rous nations never knew,
(Tho' nourish'd by the Tigers, and their tongues
Red with the gore of Lions) to involve
The holy Temples, the religious Fanes,
To Hallelujahs sacred and to Peace,
With dreadless fires.  Shudd'ring the Angels weep
At Man's impiety, and seek the skies:
They weep!  while Man, couragious in his guilt,
Smiles at the infant writhing on his spear;
The hoary head pollutes the flinty streets
With scanty blood; and Virgins pray in vain.
Blush, blush!  or own Deucalion for thy sire.

Yet should Rebellion, bursting from the caves
Of Erebus, uprear her Hydra form,
To poison Liberty, thy light divine;
If she, audacious, stalk in open day,
And hiss against the Throne by Heav'n's own hand
Establish'd, and Religion Heav'n-Reform'd,
BRITANNIA!  rescue Earth from such a bane:
Exert thy ancient spirit; urge thyself
Into the bowels of the glowing war,
Sweep her from day to multiply the Fiends,
And scare the Damn'd &mdash; and Thou!  the GOD of Hosts,
Supreme!  the Lord of Lords and King Of Kings!
Thy People, thy Anointed with thy shield
Cover and shade; unbare thy righteous arm,
And save us in the hollow of thy Hand!
Michael send, as erst against the host
Of Lucifer, and let his sword be drunk
With Rebel-blood.  The battle is thy own;
When Virtue, Liberty, Religion call:
Thine is the Victory:  the glory thine!

Turn, Contemplation, from this savage scene
Of Violence and Waste:  my swimming eyes
Have lost the beauties of the vernal view!

Sweet are the beauties of the vernal view!
And yet Devotion wafts to nobler Themes,
And lifts the soul to Heav'n!  For who, untouch'd,
With mental adoration, feeling laud,
Beholds this living-vegetable whole,
This universal witness of a GOD!
Tho' silent, yet convincing, uncontroul'd,
Which meets the sense, and triumphs in the soul?
Let me, by Isaac's wise example fir'd, 
When Meditation led him through the fields,
Sweetly in pious musings lost, adore
My GOD!  for Meditation is too, poor,
Below the sacrifice of Christian hearts:
Plato cou'd meditate; a Christian, more:
Christians, from Meditation soar to Pray'r.

Methinks I hear, reprov'd by modern wit,
Or rather Pagan:  "Tho' ideal sounds
Soft-wafted on the Zephyr's fancy'd wing,
Steal tuneful Nothings on the idle ear,
Pure from Ilissus' gilded mists exhal'd;
Tho' gently o'er the academic groves
The magic echoes of unbodied Sense,
Roll their light billows, unperceiv'd along,
In mildest undulations!  yet a Priest,
Tasteless and peevish, with his jargon thrill,
Scorns Academus:  tho' its flow'rs bestow
On Hybla nectar, purer than her own,
From Plato's honey-dropping tongue distill'd
In copious streams, devolving o'er the sense
Its sweet regalement!"  Philodemus yes:
(Tho' learn'd Lycaeum's cloisters lead the mind
Attentive on, as far as nature leads:
And Plato, for a Heathen, nobler dreams
Than dream some modern Poets.  Yes, a Priest,
A Priest dares tell Salem's hallow'd walks,
And that illumin'd mountain, where a GOD,
The GOD of my salvation, (and I hope
Of thine) unutterable beauty beam'd,
(Tho' shaded from excess of Deity,
Too fierce for mortal-aking eyes to prove
The rush of glory) me, desirous, draw
From Athen's Owls, to Jordan's mystic Dove.
Thou sing of nature, and the moral charms
Gild with thy painted Muse:  My fingers lift
The lyre to GOD!  Jehova!  Eloim!
Truth is my leader; only Fancy, thine
(Sweet Farinelli of enervate song!)
I quit the myrtle, for a starry crown.
And know, if Sickness shed her bluish plagues
From fog, or fen, or town-infected damps,
(And, sure I'd pity thee) among thy veins
Then, then no Platonist!  thy inmost soul
Will thank me for this Preaching; nor disdain
To breath itself in pray'r, as low as mine;
From GOD begin, with GOD conclude the song;
Thus glorifying with a Christian's zeal.

Father of Heav'n and Earth!  Coaeval Son!
And co-existing Spirit!  Trinal-One!
Mysterious Deity; Invisible;
Indefinite, and omnipresent GOD,
Inhabiting Eternity!  Shall dust,
Shall ashes, dare presume to sing of Thee?
O for a David's heart and tongue of fire
To rival Angels in my praise and zeal!
Yet love immense, and gratitude, with awe
Religious mix'd, shall elevate the hymn,
My heart enkindle, and inspire my tongue.

Father-Creator!  who beholds Thy works,
But catches Inspiration!  Thou the earth
On Nothing hung, and balanc'd in the void
With a magnetic force, and central poise.
Ocean of brightness Thou!  Thy grand behest
Flung on thy orb, the sun, a sparkling drop,
To light the stars, and feed their silver urns
With unexhausted flame; to bid them shine
Eternal in their courses, o'er the blue
Which mantles night, and woo us to repose
With roscid radiance.  They, harmonious roll,
In Majesty of motion, solemn, loud,
The universal Hallelujah: Sphere,
In lucid order, quiring sweet to sphere,
Deep-felt and loftier than a seraph's song;
The symphony of well-according worlds!
But Man, thy beam, thy breath, thy image, shines
The crown, the glory, and the lord of all;
Of all below the stars!  a Plant, from Heav'n
Traduc'd, to spread the riches of its bloom
O'er Earth, and water'd with aetherial dews;
Incorruptible aliment!  The birds
Warble among his boughs; the cattle, safe,
Pasture within his shade; and earth beneath
Th' imperial umbrage of his branches smiles.
The smiling Earth the spangled Spheres, and Man
Their great Creator praise!  but praise how long,
Unless by thy Almighty Arm upheld,
Preserver infinite?  By Thee unless
Upheld, the Earth wou'd from her basis reel;
The Spheres forego their courses, (off their orbs
The silver softness melted into shade)
Obscurely dissonant; and mortal Man
(Void of thy tottering fires) his stately form
To dust be moulder'd:  Chaos wou'd resume
Her ancient anarchy; Confusion rule;
And Darkness swallow ALL.  In Thee we live,
In Thee we move:  Our Beings in Thy chain
Linkt to Eternity, fasten on Thee;
The pillar of our Souls!  For me, (how late
A neighbour of the worm!) when I forget
The wonders of thy Goodness ray'd on me,
And cease to celebrate, with matin-harp
Or vesper-song, thy plenitude of Love,
And healing Mercy; may the nightly pow'r,
Which whispers on my slumbers, cease to breathe
Her modulating impulse through my soul;
Untun'd, unhallow'd!  Discord, firing my lyre,
Idly, my finger, press the fretted gold,
Rebellious to the dictates of my hand,
When indolent, to swell the, notes for Thee,
Father of Heav'n and Earth! &mdash; Coaeval Son!
(His Word) his Essence, his Effulgence pure!)
Not less thy Filial likeness I adore
Nor from thy Father's glory aught disjoin,
Redeemer!  Mediator from the birth
Of uncreated Time, thy Father's wrath
(Sprung from Omniscience!  to appease, for Man,
Upright as yet, to mediate, Mercy wak'd
Unbounded Love in Thee; unbounded Love
Contracted to the measure of a span
Immensity of GODHEAD, and thy Crown
Reft from thy faded brow.  Listen, O Earth!
And wonder, O ye Heav'ns!  shall He, whose Feet
Are cloath'd with Stars, (the Glory of his Head
For who can tell?)  whose Looks divine illume
The dazzl'd eyes of Cherubs, and the youth
Of Saints with everlasting bloom renew:
Shall He, whose vital smiles with splendor fill
The circuits of Creation, and sustain
Th' abodes of all Existence, from the depths
Of Hell beneath, above Heav'n's highest orb,
With Life, and Health, and Joy!  shall He, to GOD
Dear as his eye and heart, engraven there
Deep from Eternity; alone Belov'd,
Alone Begotten!  say, shall He become
A Man of grief &mdash; for Man?  nay more, his Foe,
Rebellious next the Fiends? &mdash; Astonishment
Had chain'd my tongue to silence, if the powers
Of tenderest pity and of warmest love
Provok'd not pensive measures, sadder strains
Of elegiack-sorrow, with the theme
Mournfully varying.  Take my Soul redeem'd!
O take the moaning Dove's dew-dropping wing,
Fly, fly to Solyma!  and melt thy woe
To Cedron's murmurs.  Thence, extend thy flight
To Golgatha's accursed tree.  Behold!
Clouds roll'd on clouds of wrath (the blackest wrath
Of an offended GOD!)  His Beauties shade;
But shade not long:  it soon in drops dissolves,
Sweet to the soul as manna to the taste,
As Pride of summer-flow'r to smell or sight!
Behind this shadowing cloud this mystic gloom,
The Sharon rose, dy'd in the blood of Heav'n,
The lilly of the vally, white from stain,
Bows the fair head in loveliness declines,
And, sweetly languishing, it droops and dies.
But darkness veils the Sun:  a curtain draw
Before the passion; beyond wonder great,
Great beyond silence! &mdash; (awe struck pause awhile&mdash;)
And heavy as the Burthen of our Sins!&mdash;
'Tis finish'd! &mdash; Change the lyre, the numbers change;
Let holy Anthem airs inspire the hymn.
Glory in Heav'n!  Redemption to Mankind,
And Peace on Earth!  Dominion!  Blessing!  Praise!
Thanksgiving!  Pow'r!  Salvation to our God!
Salvation to our GOD, and to the Lamb!
And co-existing Spirit!  thou whose breath
My voice informs, shall it be mute to Thee,
Eternal Paraclete?  in Order, last,
Equal in Glory to Omnipotence
The first, as to the second; and from both
Proceeding; (O inexplicable NAME!)
Mystical Link of the unnumber'd Three
To Learning, Night; to Faith, the noon-tide Day.
Soul of the Universe!  thy Wisdom, first,
Yon all-surrounding Heav'ns with crystal orbs
Garnish'd, and living gems, in goodly ranks
And disciplin'd array; dividing Night
From Day, their ordinances stablish'd sure.
Moving the Waters saw Thee o'er their Face,
O GOD, the Waters saw Thee, and affraid,
Into their channels sunk, (capacious bed
Of liquid Element!  and own'd their bounds
Impassable, as that eternal gulph
'Twixt Bliss and Woe. &mdash; The Prince of Peace thy beams
Largely imbib'd when, Dovelike, o'er his Head,
Fast by the banks of Jordan's sacred stream,
Thy mantling wings diffus'd their heav'nly hues;
And Abba glorify'd his Only Son,
Well-pleased. &mdash; From thy Tongues of cloven Fire
Kindled, the nations burn'd in flaming zeal,
And unextinguish'd charity, dispers'd
And glowing as the Summer blaze at noon.
The rushing winds on all their wings convey'd
Thy Doctrine, strong to shake the guilty soul;
As erst the Dome, low-stooping to its base
Before thy mighty Presence learn'd to bend.
Thou, from the Morning-womb, upon our Souls,
Barren and dry, thy Sanctifying Dews,
Abroad, in silent softness sheds the Dews
Of Love unspotted, uncorrupted Joy;
Obedient Goodness, Temperance subdu'd;
Unshaken Faith, and Meekness without Guile.
Hence flow the Odours out, our Pray'rs perfume,
Like Incense, rising fragrant on the Throne
From golden vials pour'd, by Elder hands!
Extinct thy influential radiance, Sin,
Incumbent on the Soul, as black as Hell,
Holds godless anarchy:  by Thee refin'd,
Incens'd, sublim'd, and sanctify'd, the Soul
Invites the Holiest (O abyss of Love!)
To chuse a Temple, purer than the Sun,
Incorruptible, formed not by hands,
Where best He loves to dwell. &mdash; Thou all my bed,
Most holy Comforter!  in Sickness smooth'd,
And violet-buds, and roses, without thorn,
Showr'd round the couch.  From darkness and the vale
Of shadowy Death, to pastures fair, and streams
Of comfort thy refreshing right-hand led
My wearied soul, and bath'd in Health and joy!

To Light restor'd, and the sweet breath of Heav'n,
Beneath thy olive-boughs, in plenteous flow,
The golden oil effusing on my head
Of Gladness let me ever sit and sing,
Gratefully bursting into melody:
Thyself instilling numbers by thy ear
Not unapprov'd!  For Wisdom's  steady ray,
Th' enlight'ning gift of tongues, the sacred fires
Of Poesy are Thine; United Three!
Father of Heav'n and Earth!  Coaeval Son!
And co-existing Spirit!  TRINAL-ONE!
