CORIN and CALISTAN.

CORIN.
Which way, CALISTAN, whither dost thou lead
That lamb, whom yet his mother scarce has wean'd?

CALISTAN.
His mother, CORIN, as she wand'ring fed,
With this tender youngling by her side,
Fell by a shot which from the battle came,
That in the neighb'ring fields so lately rag'd.

CORIN.
Alas!  what woes that fatal day involv'd
Our suff'ring village, and the fields around!
But come, CALISTAN, on this rising bank
Come, let us sit, and on the danger past
Converse secure, and number all our griefs.
See how the flaunting woodbine shades the bank,
And weaves a mantling canopy above!

CALISTAN.
CORIN, that day I chanc'd at earlier hour
To rise, and drove far-off my flock unpent;
To wash them in a spring that late I mark'd.
There the first motions of the deathful day
I heard, as listening to the trickling wave
I stood attentive:  when like rising storms,
Hoarse, hollow murmurs from afar I heard,
And undistinguish'd sounds of distant din.
Alarm'd I stood, unknowing whence it came;
And from the fount my flock unwash'd I drove
Suspecting danger:  when as nearer yet,
I came advancing, all was tumult loud,
All was tempestuous din on ev'ry side,
And all around the roar of war was up,
From rock to rock retost, from wood to wood.
Not half so loud the tumbling cataract
Is heard to roar, that from the pine-clad cliff
Praecipitates its waves; whose distant sounds
I oft have listen'd, as at twilight grey
I pent my flocks within their watled cotes.

CORIN.
For three revolving days, nor voice of bird
Melodious chaunting, or the bleat of sheep,
Or lowing oxen, near the fatal place
Were heard to sound; but all was silence sad!
The ancient grove of elms deserted stood,
Where long had dwelt an aged race of rooks,
That with their nests had crowded every branch.
We oft' have heard them at the dusk of eve
In troops returning to their well-known home,
In mingled clamors sounding from on high!

CALISTAN.
CORIN, thou know'st the fir-invested cave,
Where late we shelter'd from a gath'ring storm,
Our flocks together driv'n:  beneath its shade
I had appointed at sweet even-tide
To meet my DELIA homeward as she pass'd,
Bearing her milking-pail:  Alas!  the thoughts
Of that sweet congress, the preceding night
Soften'd my dreams, and all my senses lull'd,
And with more joyful heart at morn I rose.
But ah!  that tumult cropt my blooming hopes,
And in confusion wrapt my love and me.

CORIN.
That day, nor in the fold my flock I pent,
Or walk'd at eve the vales, or on the turf
Beneath the wonted oak my dinner took,
Or slept at noon amid my languid sheep,
Repos'd at ease on the green meadow's bed.
When sable night came on, for not ev'n yet
The tumult had subsided into peace,
Ev'n then low sounds, and interrupted bursts
Of war we heard, and cries of dying men,
And a confus'd hum of the ceasing storm.
All night close-shrouded in a forest thick,
Wakeful I sate, my flock around me laid;
And of neglected boughs I kindled up
A scanty flame, whose darkly-gleaming blaze
Among th' enlighten'd trees form'd hideous shapes,
And spectres pale, to my distemper'd mind.
How oft I look'd behind with cautious fear,
And trembled at each motion of the wind!&mdash;
But where did you, CALISTAN, shelter seek?
What dark retreat conceal'd your wand'ring steps?

CALISTAN.
CORIN, thou know'st the fur-clad hermit's cell
Deep-arch'd beneath a rock among the wilds,
Thither I bent my flight, a welcome guest,
And not unknown; for when my flock I fed
Of late beneath the neighb'ring pastures green,
I oft was wont, invited at his call,
At noon beneath his cavern to retire
From the sun's heat, where all the passing hours
The good old man improv'd with converse high,
And in my breast enkindled virtue's love;
Nor seldom would his hospitable hand
Afford a short repast of berries cool,
Which o'er the wilds (his scanty food) he pluck'd:
Here was my refuge. &mdash; All the live-long night
Pensive by one, pale, lonesome lamp we sate,
And listen'd to the bleak winds whistling loud,
And the shrill crash of forests from without.
Soon as the morning dawn'd, the craggy height
Of the steep rock I climb'd, on whose wild top
His rustic temple stood, and moss-grown cross
(The sacred object of his pious pray'rs)
Form'd of a tall fir's thunder-blasted trunk:
Where all beneath th' expansive plains I saw
With white pavilions hid, in deep array.
There too my little fold, which late I left
Standing at eve, amid the warlike scene
With tearful eyes affrighted, I beheld.
Alas, how chang'd the scene!  when there I pitch'd
Those hurdled cotes, the night was calm and mild,
And all was peaceful.  I remember well,
While there within that fold my flock I pent,
How blythe I heard my beauteous Delia sing
Her distant-echoing voice how sweetly rung,
And all my ravish'd senses wrapt in bliss!

CORIN.
Hast thou not seen the fatal plain of death
Where rag'd the conflict?  there, they say, at eve
Grim ghosts are seen of men that there were slain,
Pointing their wounds and shrieking to their mates,
Still doom'd to haunt the fields on which they fell.

CALISTAN.
CORIN, no more.  This lamb demands my speed.
See how the youngling hangs his sickly head,
Tender, and fainting for his wonted food!
I haste to place him in my shelt'ring cott,
Fed from my hand, and cherish'd by my care.&mdash;
And see, my friend, far off in darken'd west
A cloud comes on, and threatens sudden rains.
CORIN, farewell, the storm begins to low'r.
