'Twas when the Sun had bid our Fields Adieu,
And thirsty Flowers sip the rising Dew;
That ruddy Joan (a sprightly Dame, I ween)
Walk'd forth to visit Cicely o' th' Green.
All sadly dight the hapless Maid she found
In sable Night-cap, and in Sorrows drown'd,
With Eyes cast downward, and dishevel'd Hair;
Till thus her Neighbour greets the mourning Fair.

JOAN.
Why how now, Cicely? &mdash; What's the Matter now?
What a cold Sweat hangs dropping on thy Brow!
Thy Eyes brim-full &mdash; Why how thou look'st To-day!
Like Verjuice sowre, and as pale as Whey!

CICELY.
For what I weep, Ah!  Joan, didst thou but know,
Thou'dst pity (sure) not wonder at my Woe.
Ah wretched Maid!  thus ever let me cry,
From Morn till Night; then lay me down, and die.

JOAN.
Ah!  tell me, Cicely &mdash; tho' to ask I dread;
Yet, pr'ythee, tell me; Is old Brindle dead?
(Since yester Morn I have not heard her lowe)
If so &mdash; who would not weep for such a Cow?

CICELY.
'Tis not for her I shed this scalding Tear:
Ah!  not &mdash; old Brindle is not half so dear!
I've lost &mdash; But who &mdash; for Sobs I cannot tell;
And his last Word was &mdash; Cicely farewel.

JOAN.
O how I tremble! &mdash; pr'ythee, tell me who?

CICELY.
Young Colin Clumsey &mdash; He was known to you.
For ever curs'd be that same Market-day,
When a vile Serjeant led my Youth astray!
Far from his Home my Colin's doom'd to die,
My lovely Colin with the rolling Eye.

JOAN.
Yet bear thy Sorrow with a patient Mind:
They say the DUKE is to his Soldiers kind.
So may he thrive, and all Rebellions quell,
As he shall use thy much-lov'd Colin well!

CICELY.
Ah!  sooth me not &mdash; There's nothing left for me,
But the clear Fountain, and the Willow Tree.
Since Colin's fled, no more I turn the Wheel:
There lies the Spindle, and the useless Reel.

JOAN.
Be patient Girl; and stop that falling Tear:
For here comes Deb'rah with a Quart of Beer.
So, Neighbour, so; we've special News To-day,
Or else Dame Deb'rah wou'd not look so gay.

DEBORAH.
We've kill'd two thousand of the Rogues (d' ye mind?)
Egad, their Gen'ral durst not look behind;
Tho' Gaffer Doubt-man (with the blinking Eye)
Says, 'tis but Fifty &mdash; and that's pretty nigh.

JOAN.
Then let us Drink &mdash; Come, Cicely, to thy Dear!
We'll have no Whining nor no Sniv'ling here.
Health to the DUKE, and all that do him Aid!
How Cicely drinks! &mdash; but Cicely is a Maid.

DEBORAH.
'Tis a brave Man, and has a lucky Hand,
This DUKE of what d' ye call it &mdash; Cumberland.
Heav'n bless this DUKE, and all his Train!  say I.
Let's pledge thee, Cicely; for I'm deadly dry.

JOAN.
My Husband lost his Purse at Cheatham Fair.
Last Night a Beam broke down, and kill'd the Mare.
These Things are hard to such as thee and I:
But yet we'll drink, because the Rebels fly.

DEBORAH.
This Beer is good &mdash; Say, how d' ye like it?  ho!
And shall I fetch the other Pot, or no?
Hark, the Men shout, and Bonfires light the Plain:
Then shall we sit, and lick our Lips in vain?

JOAN.
Troth, Goody Deb'rah, troth, it is a Crime
To drink so much &mdash; but only for the Time.
Bring t' other Quart, although there is no need:
But one Draught more, and I have done indeed.
