DAMON.  THIRSIS.

DAMON.
For shame, my Thirsis!  raise thy drooping head;
Say!  why does grief thy pensive face o'erspread?
Let's think how we shall throw our time away,
And how consume the slowly-wasting day.
There was a time when on your tuneful reed,
Sweet pleasing strains of pow'rful love you play'd;
When hills and vales proclaim'd th' enchanting sound,
And ev'ry Shepherdess confess'd a wound.
Where then are these engaging raptures fled?
Lost are their charms, and all their influence dead.

THIRSIS.
Ah, dearest friend, I've pip'd with pain too long,
And earn'd no good, or profit by my song:
Rewards for learned arts are now no more,
My jaded muse long since has spent her store,
Yet, like the grashopper, she sings, tho' poor.
But why should I disturb my mind's repose,
And jingling strains of fetter'd sense compose?
Why prostitute my honest muse for praise,
And youth's vain fancies and their passions please?
What profit thence to Thirsis can arise?
Mine is the labour, others reap the prize.

DAMON.
But praise, dear Thirsis!  is a pleasing pain,
The weighty glory far exceeds the gain:
O!  what a pleasure 'tis, by rules of art,
To please, engage, and int'rest ev'ry heart;
To form the tender minds of pliant youth,
And teach the paths of virtue, and of truth.
Whenever thou begin'st the tuneful song,
The rural nymphs and swains around thee throng,
Flocks cease to graze, the stormy winds to blow,
Trees bend their list'ning heads, and streams forget to flow.

THIRSIS.
So boys admire the gaudy peacock's train
Of Argus' eyes, magnificently vain;
But still, nor beauteous plumes, nor Argus' eyes,
Procure the pageant, grains of larger size.
True, Damon!  praise promotes the poet's art,
Strings ev'ry nerve, and animates the heart;
Yet praise, like smoke, diffuses in the sky,
Words are but air, their accents break and die.

DAMON.
Raise then thy voice!  discard the vulgar clown!
And force thy way to honour and renown:
Go, write of warlike Mars and bloody fields!
The theme a larger scope for action yields:
There may the youth display her infant wing,
Of George's reign, and crush'd rebellion sing:
There stretch thy lab'ring flight from east to west;
So shall the bard and patriot stand confest.
Then Thirsis' fame shall mount the starry skie,
And such heroic actions never die.

THIRSIS.
True, Friend!  I've heard how Virgil left his reed,
Whereon he taught his tender flocks to feed;
When good Maecenas patroniz'd the bard,
And gave to real worth its due reward:
Then sung the poet in a nobler strain,
The fate of Troy, and Troy's great monarch slain.
But ah!  Maecenas now in dust is laid,
And great Augustus long ago is dead;
Encouragement, support of ev'ry art,
No longer now inspires the poet's heart:
Bards!  boast no more your energy divine,
Nor the long glories of your antient line;
Well may we fear the charms of verse are fled,
Since patrons, and our best of bards are dead.

DAMON.
Unhappy poesy, of birth divine!
Are these the products of thy sacred shrine?
Are now the laurels without honour worn,
And all thy sons become the gen'ral scorn?
Then make thee wings of thy aspiring fame,
And fly to heav'n indignant whence you came.

THIRSIS.
Ah friend!  Parnassus is unfruitful ground,
Our greatest hopes with no rewards are crown'd.
Farewell, ye muses!  henceforth I intend
To leave your bow'rs, and seek some better friend;
If any love me, and intend to give,
I wish to taste their bounty while I live;
For what care I, when fate my thread has spun,
Tho' brakes and thorns my sepulchre o'er-run,
Or that posterity shou'd read my fame,
While here I starve to gain an empty name.

DAMON.
Well hast thou sung, my greatest thanks are due,
Just are thy words, and thy complaint is true;
But see!  Sol hastens down the western skies,
Nocturnal dews, and chilly damps arise,
'Tis time our flocks were pent within the fold,
And lambkins shelter'd from the piercing cold.
