THE ARGUMENT.
From Ill to Ill, through various Scenes,
Led is the Fairy Knight:
Him Arthur Heav'n directed saves,
From Archimago's Spite.

Unhappy Man!  whose ever-changing Mind
Shifts with each flitting Tenet to and fro;
Whose Sea-beat Bark no anchoring Bay can find,
Sport of the Waves, and blust'ring Blasts that blow.
Now SUPERSTITION, with her Harpy Claws,
Tears his distracted Soul in doleful Plight;
Now ATHEISM wide opes his graceless Jaws,
To swallow him absorpt in endless Night.
Unhappy Man!  Unless some heavenly Ray
Illume his gloomy Mind, and point the rightful Way.

This found Sir PARIDEL:  a goodlier Knight
Spur'd not his foaming Steed in Fairy Land,
None brighter shone in Justs or hardy Fight,
None his imperial Votresse's Command
More cheerfully obey'd:  but weakly vain,
With itching Ears he hung on every Tongue;
Now VIRTUE'S Voice, now VICES Siren Strain,
Led him a gadding each new Path along:
His Passions proud nought reck'd he to restrain,
And 'sdein'd the Curb of Laws, ne heard he Reason's Rein.

Him proudly pricking on the spatious Plain
The wicked Wizard ARCHIMAGE gan spy,
And straight his magic Spells with might and main
He hurls into the Air, their Force to try:
When, lo!  an old Woman's Weeds He wears
Numb'ring her Beads; and with uncouth Grimace,
And melancholy Mien mumbling her Pray'rs.
O God!  that e'er Religion's fairest Face
Should mask in dismal Dress!  that this bright Ray
Heav'n-born, should still more dark and dreadful make our Day!

"Hither," quoth he, with humble, hollow Tone
And louting Gait, "Sir Knight, thy Palfrey stay;
Stay, nor a Woman desert and forlorne
Deign not to visit; for now Evening gray
Invests all Nature in her Livery sad,
And muttering Thunder speaks the Tempest near."
Thus ARCHIMAGE in Woman's Weeds yclad.
And Words, where less was meant than met the Ear,
He mix'd; as "Righteousness," and "Lord," and "Grace,"
Thus foul Mouths with fair Words their Speech oft interlace.

The Knight with unsuspecting honest Heart,
(For oft Suspicion sleeps at Wisdom's Door)
Approach'd the lonesome Cot; where guileful Art
Strove thro' the Soul all Gloominess to pour.
For never did the Sun's all-chearing Ray
Pierce thro' the Shades of melancholy Yew;
No warbling Birds awak'd the dawning Day,
Nor tun'd their Songs to Love and th' Evening due.
It seem'd one Scene of Horror all amort,
Of Fowl obscene, and dreary Ghosts the fit Resort.

Here  you might see, with Darkness compass'd round
An idiot Coward, SUPERSTITION hight,
Shackled for Servitude, and Fetter-bound:
With Her, diffusing palpable, broad Night,
Comes IGNORANCE, all-swallowing, all-amaz'd:
Behind walks ZEAL, with Saint-like Face, demure,
But in His Hand the Torch uplifted blaz'd,
And the drawn Dagger drop'd with Gore impure.
Here grew each monstrous Form, that Fear e'er feign'd,
GORGONS and HARPYS foul, and FURYS mad unchain'd.

Here Heart-consuming CARE with hagard Mien;
And dire DESPAIR, beating her baleful Breast;
Here gloomy GRIEF with ever-weeping Eyne,
Their Dwellings kept; Aliens of Hope and Rest:
And ever and anon the sheeted Dead
Did squeak and  gibber thro' the myrksome Air.
How stood our Knight amaz'd, astonied,
At all these Scenes of Horror and Despair?
His troubled Soul now seem'd the proper Seat
For ARCHIMAGE to try his Spells, and work Deceit.

Eftsoons He calls a Vision of the Night,
Which stood obedient to his wicked Will;
"Fly hence, false Phantom, fly; and lead that Knight
Through all the Scenes of visionary Ill."
The Phantom flew, and hovering round his Head,
With Thoughts distemper'd, and Illusions vain,
The Organs of his Fancy over-spread,
And form'd fantastic Creatures of the Brain.
Such airy Pensioners on MORPHEUS wait,
And bear his dark Behests thro' the false ivory Gate.

Sir PARIDEL, attended with his Guide,
Seem'd en'tring the tremendous Mouth of Hell,
And view'd a Region doleful, dreary, wide:
"See there th' abhorred Deep, the Dungeon fell,"
The Phantom cries, "Where th' all revengeful Ire
Of God, departed Souls has sternly doom'd
To never-ending Woe, where Floods of Fire
Are fed with burning Sulphur unconsum'd.
God's absolute Decrees their Ruin wrought,
And Fate, and high Fore-knowledge influenc'd their Fault."

The Knight with shudd'ring Horror hears the Tale,
(The Tale, as false as God is good and just,)
Starts from his Couch with Eyes aged and pale,
And sees the Losel lowly laid in Dust;
Who thus accosts him, "Oh, dear Son!" he says,
"What boots this vain Persuit of flying Fame,
Thy sleepless Nights, and ever-toiling Days?
All for a Shadow, a false flitting Name!
A Name, a Bubble, that born up on high
Soon bursts, quite lost and swallow'd in Eternity!

"But vainer still thy Thoughts, if ought in Thee
That meritorious seems, or just and good,
Servant to Fate, and strong Necessity,
Presumes t' avert high Heaven's angry Mood.
Thou art ordain'd the Vassal of his Ire,
Sport of his Power, and his matchless Might,
Destin'd to Woe, and Hell's perpetual Fire.
Can thy short Plummet sound the Depths of Right?
Man's Will and Reason, useless both and vain,
Lie over-rul'd and bound in Fate's eternal Chain.

"Behold yon Villain wanton with Success,
Diffusing Seas of Wretchedness and Woes,
Curs'd by Mankind; yet Fates propitious bless.
Gan careless Heav'n look on, ne interpose?
Mean while the candid and ingenuous Breast,
Replete with Science fair, and Innocence,
Feels the proud Scorner's Spurns, and lies opprest.
How rankly smells Nature's Malevolence!
O Good!  how little art thou Heav'ns high Care,
Sith Ill predominates, and Foul o'er-powers the Fair!"

Thus gloz'd the wily Wizard, while our Knight
Perplexed, now gan Answer fit to frame,
Now half unsheath'd his Sword to end out-right
His wretched Life; now Hopes, and Fears, and Shame,
Toss him alternately from Wave to Wave.
Then resolutely bold he breaks away:
To fly's the readied Way himself to save:
He flew the hateful Cot, and gains the Day;
The open Day he gains; when thro' his Soul
A glimmering Ray of Light, and joyous Reason stole.

So when with Darkness Heav'n is overspread,
His fair Face vizor'd in a sable Shroud;
Nature her Doom appointed seems to dread:
But if this World's broad  Eye bursts thro' the Cloud,
Nature revives:  and all th' aetherial Crew,
The Nightingale, trilling her Ditties sweet,
The Ouzel black, the Finch of golden Hue,
And mounting Lark, the Light returning greet:
All clap their Wings for Joy, for Joy they sing,
While Mother EARTH smiles pleas'd, and Hills and Valleys ring.

But not so baffled ARCHIMAGO vile,
Hardned and hackney'd in the Ways of Vice,
Turns him anew to his old wonted Wile,
How best the Elfin Knight he may entice:
And first he casts to change his Form; and now
He looks a stripling Courtier, fair and gent;
With many studied Airs, and cringing Bow,
Eftsoons Sir PARIDEL he overhent;
Saluted, him the Knight salutes again
Ne dreamt He 'twas his Foe, that did his Fall darrain.

Alas!  how frail is form'd the human Mind,
Eager each dangerous Extreme to meet!
How seldom, to the golden Mean inclin'd,
She seeks her proper Poise, her settled Seat!
This knew the Paynim well:  forthy no more
Frames He his Purpose of religious Dread;
But graceless was his Talk, of Plesaunce Store
Much prattled He, and Nature's bountihed.
Such Talk as apt to lead raw Minds astray,
From the straight thorny Path, to the broad Primrose Way.

Thus talking, on the Neighbour Beach they find
A Bark, all in her gaudy Trim displaid;
The silken Sails sung in the whistling Wind,
Courting the Knight on Board, who nought afraid
Springs deftly on the Deck; when ARCHIMAGE
A wondrous Pin takes in his cunning Hand,
That mov'd, as if instinct with Spirit sage,
The bounding Bark, which made the adverse Land:
Where a bright Bevy flood of Females fair,
All ready to receive them, blith and debonnair.

O for an OVID'S Pen to paint the Wiles
Of Females, in their little Arts ydrest;
Their quaint Conceits, their practis'd simp'ring Smiles
The heaving Marble of their snowy Breast,
Hid to be seen, and seen to be admir'd;
And how they troul the Tongue, and roll the Eye,
Languishing soft, or with Disdain half fir'd:
And all their Skill in CUPID'S Archery.
If glaunce withoutin Wound these Arrows can,
Certes, Sir Knight, thou'rt less, or greater far than Man.

And Sooth it is, the Heart, that's fair and good,
Feels  rathest every tender, soft Desire,
Which, by the Carle and Fool not understood,
Strikes not the callous Breast:  for LOVE'S bright Fire
Kindled in Heav'n, to his native Sky
Mounts in his winged Car the generous Elf:
Hence spring the famous Deeds of Chivalry,
Sans mercenary Views, but for itself.
Nathless the Soul, from her true heavenly Way,
Caught by some Semblance fair, too weetless wends astray.

What shines to paragon, beneath the Sky,
The female Face divine, where sits confest
BEAUTY, and visible to mortal Eye
Embodied dwells, substantially exprest?
Dwells, or does seem to dwell:  the Lover's Brains
Frame, as they list, the Object of Desire;
Till this his Happiness and End he gains,
He burns impatient with unquenched Fire;
Ne dares strong-plum'd to Virtue's Height to soar,
But Hagard-like he checks, and learns low Falsehood's Lore.

So whilom HERCULES forgot the Man,
And weakly don'd a haughty Woman's Weeds.
So to a Stripling whom he far out-ran
In Prowess chivalrous, and warlike Deeds,
Left ANTONY the triple World; one Smile
Of AEGYPT, sunk the Hero in the Slave.
And lives there then such Power in Female Guile
T' appal the Mighty, and enthral the Brave?
There lives such Power; and such a female Chain
Did from his first Intent Sir PARIDEL retain.

No more the neighing Steed, or Trumpet's Sound,
No more the ported Spear delights the Knight;
But murmuring Rills, that cut th' enamell'd Ground,
And Bowers, that exclude the troublous Light:
These with his AMORET now charm alone,
'Tis AMORET he breaths, he looks, he lives;
Without his AMORET he's left forlorne;
'Tis she alone that Solitude far drives.
Sighs answering Sighs the yielding Fair returns,
And LOVE'S high-flaming Torch with mutual Ardor burns.

As the wrack'd Merchant, now secure, from Shore
Looks back with Dread on all his Perils past,
Nathless with Pleasure mixt; and vows no more
He'll trust the Billows, or the Wind's false Blast,
Not unlike Passions strike the fluttering Soul
Of PARIDEL, while in his mental View
The various Scenes of past and present roll,
Past Horrors, present Joys; how seeming true!
Yet as there Foundress false, tho' round her Head
CUPIDS and mirthful JESTS their purple Pinions spread.

Mean while th' Enchaunter of his traitrous Train
Sat not unmindful, but at Seasons due
Poisons the Infant with Discourse profane;
And under seeming Rules of Right and True
Taught him th' enormous Monster VICE to bind,
And deck foul FALSHOOD'S Face with VIRTUE's Hue.
O Mankind Effort!  ever vain and blind,
To change the Course, (known to the Good and Few)
The stubborn Course of NATURE, still the same,
That keeps one destin'd End, nor misses she her aim!

Arise thou Recreant, Woman Knight, arise,
Assert the native Freedom of thy Mind.
But, oh!  what Mists surround thy dark'ned Eyes!
And REASON, in Thee now effac'd and blind,
Her sov'reign Sway fordone, the sceptred Hand
To viler APPETITE submissive falls;
And upstart Passions in her room command;
Now This, now That aloud for Service calls.
O mental Kingdom, how distract and tost,
To ev'ry home-bred Joy, and inward Freedom lost!

The sprightly Passion LOVE is fled away,
And in his room reigns LUST, a Monster fell;
With him a Troop, in battailous Array,
Advance of Phantoms vile, true Imps of Hell:
MISTRUST, with Eyes askaunce and jealous Leer,
ANGER, and hagard HATE, unquiet Guest,
Guileful DISSIMULATION, and pale FEAR,
And DISCORD wood, in tatter'd Garment drest.
While o'er his Head a Bird obscene ypight
Resounds her doleful Dirge, the sad CELAENO hight.

O what a Fall was here!  Is this the Knight,
The  Paragon of glorious Chevisaunce,
That shone the public Care and chief Delight,
Of matchless Prowess and fair Amenaunce?
O God of Hosts, look from thy Tower on high,
And send thy sacred Unction to his Soul;
Avert not now thy ever-cheering Eye.
Our Pray'rs are heard:  and from each trembling Pole,
(Sign of descending Majesty divine)
The wreathed Thunder rolls, and lambent Lightnings shine.

It chaunc'd that ARTHUR on some high Behest
Of GLORIANA, Fairy Queen, was bent:
He rode, revolving in his royal Breast,
How to atchieve his chivalrous Intent:
When, lo!  a Cloud, with Sylver Skirts ybound,
Disclosing, flash'd intolerable Day:
The Hero rapt falls prostrate on the Ground,
And tranc'd in visionary Glory lay:
A Voice him calls, or seems to call, "Arise,
Thy Fellow Servant speaks, and bids thee ope thine Eyes."

His Eyes he opes, and saw a Seraph fair,
That lighten'd forth a Smile of Love and Grace;
Adown his Back flow'd his ambrosial Hair,
And circling Rays beam'd Glories round his Face;
A sylver Wand grac'd his extended Hand,
And pointing to the Skies, he thus began,
"From yon celestial Bowers, a God's Command,
ARTHUR, I bring thee. &mdash; Save a ruin'd Man:
Ruin'd, unless with Heav'n thou unite,
To save his lapsed Pow'rs from Hell and magic Spite.

"Sir PARIDEL (who knows not PARIDEL?)
Sometime the Glory, now of Knights the Shame,
Maugre th' Enchaunter's Spells, and Trains of Hell,
Fir'd by thy  Read shall catch the gen'rous Flame;
New from his casted Slough he shall arise,
And hurl Destruction on the Paynim Fone;
Spurn this dull humid Clay, and mount the Skies,
Where Virtue points the Way and high Renowne.
Thus heav'nly Love shall hellish Hate outgoe;
And Grace prevenient still her healing Pow'r will shew.

"But mark what Heav'n-commission'd I relate.
A War intestine threatens Fairy Land,
Which waits from Thee and PARIDEL her Fate.
Go then, ye mightiest, under Heav'n's high Hand,
Call'd forth to dart His Thunder on the Foe.
Ne deem the Danger despicably base;
Tho', where the Sun scarce warms, nor Arts dare grow,
A frozen Clime drives forth her motley Race:
Yet abler Heads conduct the dire Machine,
And false DUESSA leagu'd attacks the Fairy Queen.

"I see the hellish Pest, tho' hid from Thee:
From her seven Hills she comes; and now elate
With proud Parade, and swoll'n with Surquedry,
Of Realms and Kesars preordains the Fate.
High on the scarlet Beast the rides, that rears
Against the starry Orbs her forked Tail:
A golden Chalice in her Hand she bears,
A poison'd Potion, Source of bitter Bale:
The deadly Drugs, thus mix'd with magic Art,
All manlike Reason quell, whilst lives the brutal Part.

"But thou proceed; and Heav'n will find the Way:
Add to thy Patience Faith, and Strength of Mind.
That Panoply divine; ne let Dismay
In thy thrice-steel'd Heart once Entrance find.
Strengthen'd thyself, go strengthen PARIDEL;
In yonder Isle he lies, neglected, lost,
Lost in the cursed Spells and Trains of Hell.
This narrow Frith shall yield thee Way; this crost,
The Path directs thee to his dread Abode.
Go, in thy Virtue arm'd, and guarded by thy God."

The Seraph spoke:  and with his high-stretch'd Wand
The rolling Billows struck; they straight with Awe
Retiring backward press at his Command.
Th' obedient Prince, soon as his Road he saw,
Pricks boldly forward thro' the open'd Main:
Two crystal Mountains, rais'd on either Hand,
Keep back the crowding Waves; that clos'd again,
Soon as the Infant gain'd the adverse Strand.
So march'd the sacred Host, by MOSES led;
The wond'ring Waves beheld, and back abash'd they fled.

This ARCHIMAGO saw; he saw with Dread
(The Prince approaching) his approaching Fate:
Vain were his Arts he knew; forthy he fled
Murm'ring, and with him fled his hellish Hate,
Trinkets and Trump'ry, Women, Spells and Spite,
All fled away dissolv'd in sightless Air;
And left forlorn our solitary Knight,
To gloomy Thoughts abandon'd and Despair;
Toss'd like the ill-man'd Frigate on the Main,
Till NEPTUNE mounts his Car, and smooths the liquid Plain.

ARTHUR to find the Knight now bends his Way;
Him soon he finds under a Platan laid,
Plung'd in a Sea of Discord and Dismay.
The Prince perceiv'd his Plight; and nought he said,
But bar'd his Buckler broad, one Diamond sheen,
And flash'd the beamy Mirrour in his Face.
Himself he saw, himself he hated seen,
And loath'd his sickly State; sure Sign of Grace.
O Coquetry of VICE, to keep the Mind
At Distance from itself, to its true Int'rest blind!

To know, and knowing hate his vicious Self;
To know his real Self, and knowing love:
This was the Lore first learnt the knightly Elf.
Then by Degrees he mounts to Thoughts above.
But first the Prince conducts him to a Sire,
A hoary Hermit, CONTEMPLATION hight,
Who, on a Mountain's Heav'n-kissing Spire,
Dwelt in pure Meditations Day and Night.
From Truth to Truth, from Good to Fair he rang'd;
Then fix'd on the first Fair, immortal and unchang'd.

Here PIETY, in Milk-white Amice drest,
And her bright Brows with sacred Fillets bound,
Breath'd forth her Orisons from blameless Breast:
Here pure-ey'd FAITH, with starry Circlets crown'd,
And cheerful HOPE, walk'd with their God on Earth.
Yet not the less or MUSE, or GRACES gay
In naked Beauty deck'd, or decent MIRTH,
Haunted each bubbling Fount, and verdant Lay.
Thy manly Bosom, PARIDEL, now fire
Far other Joys than Pride, or lawless Lusts inspire.

Thrice had the Sun new trim'd his orient Ray,
And Giant-like march'd forth to chace the Night:
Since ARTHUR here first bent his happy Way,
And with him brought calm Thoughts, and Peace, and Light.
Now rose the Knight, fresh as the Morning Star,
His lucid Orb wash'd in the Ocean Wave,
That glitters fairer from his radiant Car:
Or as Jove's Bird, call'd from the rocky Cave,
The faithful Minister to wreak His Ire,
New plum'd and bath'd high towers, and darts his Master's Fire.

Mean while the Hermit to the Hero brought
His Arms and massy Shield; who fed his Eyes
With Stories then unknown, divinely wrought.
Skill'd in the Rolls of Fate, a Wizard wise
Had fram'd the future Actions of his Line.
Here swell'd the ample Orb, and stood confest,
Heroes and Patriots, only not divine:
The EDWARDS, HENRYS, RICHARD'S Lion Breast,
WILLIAM of Tyrants and of FRANCE the Dread,
And BRUNSWICK'S numerous Race here lift the regal Head.

There Castles floated on the silver Tide,
Teeming with Thunder and their Nation's Ire;
High on the Deck stood forth DEVONIA'S Pride,
And bookish BLAKE seem'd lost in Smoke and Fire.
Not distant far the sanguine Plains appear
Of CRESSY, AGINCOURT; and ISTER'S Wave
Roll'd to the Sea Arms, Steeds, and Men; while Fear
Sat on the GAUL persu'd by BRITONS brave.
The Knight views pleas'd his Progeny's great Name,
And on his high rais'd Arm he bears their Fates and Fame.

Straight sally forth the Knights, prepar'd for Fight,
And vowing Vengeance on the Paynim Fone.&mdash;
But, MUSE, awhile restrain thy vent'rous Flight:
Soon shall their Justs and hardy Deeds be shewn,
Oppression crush'd, fair Liberty restor'd:
And thou, great Queen, shalt moralize my Song,
For as thou bid'st, they draw or sheath the Sword.&mdash;
Now furl the Sails, and bear the Land along;
To morrow haply we may tempt again
(New rig'd our labour'd Bark) the Bosom of the Main.
