A well known vase of soveraign use I sing,
Pleasing to young and old, and JORDAN hight.
The lovely queen, and eke the haughty king
Snatch up this vessel in the murky night:
Ne lives there poor, ne lives there wealthy wight,
But uses it in mantle brown or green;
Sometimes it stands array'd in glossy white;
And oft in mighty dortours may be seen
Of China's fragile earth, with azure flowrets sheen.

The virgin, comely as the dewy rose,
Here gently sheds the softly-whisp'ring rill;
The frannion, who ne shame ne blushing knows,
At once the potter's glossy vase does fill;
It whizzes like the waters from a mill.
Here frouzy housewives clear their loaded reigns;
The beef-fed justice, who fat ale doth swill,
Grasps the round-handled jar, and tries, and strains,
While slowly dribbling down the scanty water drains.

The dame of Fraunce shall without shame convey
This ready needment to its proper place;
Yet shall the daughters of of the lond of Fay
Learn better amenaunce and decent grace;
Warm blushes lend a beauty to their face,
For virtue's comely tints their cheeks adorn;
Thus o'er the distant hillocks you may trace
The purple beamings of the infant morn:
Sweet are our blooming maids &mdash; the sweetest creatures born.

None but their husbands or their lovers true
They trust with management of their affairs;
Nor even these their privacy may view,
When the soft beavys seek the bow'r by pairs:
Then from the sight accoy'd, like tim'rous hares,
From mate or bellamour alike they fly;
Think not, good swain, that these are scornful airs,
Think not for hate they shun thine am'rous eye,
Soon shall the fair return, nor done thee, youth, to dye.

While Belgic frows across a charcoal stove
(Replenish'd like the Vestal's lasting fire)
Bren for whole years, and scorch the parts of love,
No longer parts that can delight inspire,
Erst cave of bliss, now monumental pyre;
O British maid, for ever clean and neat,
For whom I aye will wake my simple lyre,
With double care preserve that dun retreat,
Fair Venus' mystic bow'r, Dan Cupid's feather'd seat.

So may your hours soft-sliding steal away,
Unknown to gnarring slander and to bale,
O'er seas of bliss Peace guide her gondelay,
Ne bitter dole imprest the passing gale.
O!  sweeter than the lillies of the dale,
In your soft breasts the fruit of joyance grow.
Ne fell Despair be here with visage pale,
Brave be the youth from whom your bosoms glow,
Ne other joy but you the faithful striplings know.
