The weary Sun had ta'en his Leave of Day,
And Hens and Cocks to roost had wing'd their way;
Each Lass had hung her milking Pails to dry,
And Cuddy with his Tits went whistling by:

When Marian neat, with secret Steps stole out,
To th' broomy Field to meet her Colin Clout.
The Swain was there, impatient for the Bliss,
And met his Damsel with an eager Kiss.

COLIN.
Ah peerless Wench!  this Kiss does more than pay,
For all the Suff'rings of the tedious Day;
Each slow-pac'd Minute linger'd in its Flight,
And tardy seem'd to bring on dusky Night.
I thought the Sun i'th Welkin sheen stood still,
And ne'er wou'd sink behind yon western Hill;
But when I heard the Bell from 'cross the Plain,
Unusual Glee eftsoons allay'd my Pain.

I joy'd to think the wish'd for Hour was come,
And with a merry Heart went blithsome home.
My Team ungear'd, I wash'd my Hands and Face,
And panting hast'ned to th' appointed Place.
Most Swains their Labour by their Hunger prove,
But I no Stomach had for ought but Love:
Believe me, Lass, I doat to that degree,
I left my Pottage for to come to thee.

MARIAN.
O Colin!  cou'd I credit what you say,
I then shou'd sing as blith as Birds in May;
But I (Oh luckless Wench!)  can't taste of Joy,
Whilst Fears and Doubts do ev'ry Hope destroy,
Was I convinc'd that thou wer't only mine,
I shou'd no more in Holes and Corners pine:
But Friday last I saw a doleful Sight,
Which put my silly Heart in piteous Plight.
As I ath' Window sat a winding Yarn,
I saw you stand at Farmer Hobson's Barn,
There Cic'ly's Dog came by, I'll swear 'tis Truth,
You patted him o' th' Head, and spit in's Mouth.
But Colin say!  thy Love shall Cic'ly gain,
Cic'ly the clumsiest Dowdy of the Plain:
Her stinking Cheese, her Housewifer'y has shewn,
Her sluttish Tricks by ev'ry Swain are known:
Nor th' 'Squire, nor Parson will her Butter eat,
But say 't looks not like Marian's, &mdash; clean and neat:
Mine bears the Mark of curious flourish'd Moulds,
And boasts the Hue of brightest Marygolds;
At Fair or Market it was always found,
I out-sold Cic'ly Two-pence in a Pound,
Oh Colin!  think when thou art sick in Bed,
Will she sit up and hold thy aching Head?
Can she the healing Treacle-Posset make?
Did she e'er bring thee Ging'bread from the Wake?
Sooner the Moon shall take the Place o' th' Sun,
Than she shall do for thee what I have done.

COLIN.
Pr'ithee no more, but banish all thy Woes,
Nor let such Thoughts thy Bosom discompose;
Assure thyself I hate the Dowdy's Name,
Nor can her pois'nous Breath my Heart inflame;
Stronger than Onions is the odious Smell,
Nay, Goody Cragg's herself wou'd kiss as well.
Oh, Marian!  I have smelt the Breath of Morn,
When she does first yon eastern Hills adorn;
I've smelt the with'ring Hay when newly mown,
I've smelt the Damask Rose when newly blown;
I've smelt the fragrant Breath of grazing Cows,
And that which from the Lambkin's Nostril flows;
But neither Breath of Morn, when first awake,
Nor with'ring Hay, first open'd by the Rake
Not Damask Rose, nor balmy breathing Cows,
Nor that which from the Lambkin's Nostril flows,
Nay, let 'em all their breathing Odours join,
They'r not so sweet, nor half so sweet as thine.
Then think, dear Wench, to Reason I refer,
Can I e'er Cic'ly's filthy Lips prefer;
Sooner shall well-fed Fowls the Barn forsake,
And scratch for Grain in yonder fuzzy Brake;
Sooner shall Rooks in Corn-fields cease to feed,
And fly for Food to yonder watry Mead;
Sooner shall Sheep from fav'rite Turnips stray,
And seek for Grass in yonder beaten Way;
Sooner shall my Dog Tray abandon me,
Than I love Cic'ly and be false to thee.

MARIAN.
Should'st thou untrue to me, and faithless prove
Then surely Colin I shou'd die for Love.
Just like poor Lucy in the doleful Song,
Thou wou'dst behold me breathless stretch'd along.
No Swain beside can please poor Marian's Eyes,
'Tis thee alone can give substantial Joys;
Not even Cynthio, tho' with Lace bedight,
Whose flatt'ring Tongue does ev'ry Nymph delight:
Tho' in yon Wood as I from milking came,
He met me and avow'd his ardent Flame;
To kiss, and something else the Youth made bold,
And squeez'd, and swore, and tempted me with Gold;
Yet I his profer'd Kindness did reject,
Nor shew'd his powder'd Locks the least Respect.
I hate your Gentry, and your Whey-fac'd Beaux,
With Shirts like Cobwebs, and with silken Hose:
Give me my Collin Clout in's Sunday Dress,
With Home-spun Grey, and undeceiving Face.
No Help he wants to put his Garments on,
But in a Minute's Time can doff and don;
And tho' his Shirt's but hempen, still 'tis white,
And he looks spruce altho' in homely Plight.

COLLIN.
I ween that thee and I are of a Mind,
And surely for each other were design'd;
I hate your Gew-gaws and your silken Stuff,
Give me what's tight and clean, and that's enough;
I love the Thing that's plain, that's strong and stout,
'Tis Linsey-wolsey pleases Colin Clout.
What tho' th' Squire's Daughters dress themselves so fine,
And in their Gold and Silver Trappings shine;
I think my Marian in her tucker'd Smock
With Hosen blue and curious whiten'd Clock,
Looks blither far, and tho' no Trinckets glitter,
Her rosy Lips, I'm sure, are ten times sweeter.
No Maid has given me or Pain or Joy,
Since first at thee I cast a Lover's Eye;
'Twas at the Wake when Nymphs and Swains are seen,
Gamesome as Lambs on yonder flow'ry Green;
I pick'd thee out from'mongst the Female Band,
And thou with Blushes gav'st thy trembling Hand.
We danc'd and revell'd all the live-long Day,
And ev'ry Lad and Lass were blith and gay:
But this I'm sure, that 'mongst the rustick Rout,
No one so happy was as Colin Clout.
Then I my witless Love did first impart,
I gave my Hand, and with it gave my Heart.
Each Swain that saw was envious of my Bliss,
And Lubberkin wou'd fain have stol'n a Kiss;
I made a Blow at the presuming Clown,
And with my gripen'd Fist I knock'd him down.
Next Day with heavy Heart I went to plow,
And 'stead of Wheat, alas!  did Barley sow.
Nothing but Marian run in Colin's Head,
Not only when at work, but when in Bed.
One Day I went to our tall Pear-tree Top,
That I might some unfruitful Branches lop;
But so my Thoughts upon thy Image run,
I cut the very Bough I stood upon.
But Love, where e'er he comes, such Blunders makes,
And Lovers must submit to such Mistakes.

MARIAN.
Ah Colin Clout!  full well thou know'st the way,
Poor Marian's silly Bosom to betray;
Like any courtly Swain thy Flatt'ry flows,
But Thorns are oft conceal'd beneath the Rose.
Perhaps all this is only to deceive me,
But yet, my much-lov'd Lad, I must believe thee;
If thou art false, then where can Truth be found,
But don't be rude, &mdash; here's Dew upon the Ground;
Nay, Colin Clout, &mdash; you squeeze me just to Death,
Oh bless me! &mdash; Why, I swear I'm out of Breath;
Oh!  now I go, &mdash; adown, adown, adown,
Oh!  dont, &mdash; Oh dear!  Oh Lud!  you'll &mdash; spoil my Gown.
Hark,  Clodpole's Voice, the Lout does this way come,
Lie still 'till he's gone by, then we'll go Home.
