As late I mus'd on FORTUNE'S Ebb and Flow,
Life's airy Pleasures, and substantial Woe,
The thoughtless Mirth that laughs in Pleasure's Eye,
The Boast of VICE, and Pride of VANITY,
O'er nodding REASON downy Slumbers stole,
And FANCY'S Visions open'd on my Soul.
Aloft, on proud Ionick Columns rear'd,
A sumptuous Dome in ruin'd Pomp appear'd;
A baseless Pillar here, with Moss o'ergrown,
Press'd Earth's green Bosom with a length of Stone;
There, a tall Portal, sculptur'd once so gay,
Records no Story but its own Decay.

I enter'd &mdash; Crowds, who blush to be descry'd,
With famish'd Looks, thro' mould'ring Arches glide.
I paus'd, and curious as I gaz'd around,
Saw a lean Hag lie stretch'd along the Ground:
Round either Arm a tatter'd Rug she drew,
Her Shame conceal'd with Rags of various Hue;
A Cloth her Forehead bound, her Legs were bare,
And foul and clotted was her grizzled Hair.

"Whence and what art thou, Wretch," surpriz'd I cry'd;
"WANT is my Name, well known," the Wretch replied.
"The Work of LUXURY, this lofty Dome,
So righteous Jove ordains, is now my Home.
Time was, this Roof return'd the Dulcet Voice
Of Musick, blended with a Critick's Choice.
Dependent thence a thousand Tapers glow'd,
The Vine's rich Juice from Silver Fountains flow'd;
An hundred Dainties o'er the Board were spread,
And all Arabia spicy Fragrance shed.
The Velvet Couches, and the cushion'd Chair,
Swell'd high with Down, as soft as Summer's Air;
And Female Beauty, smiling o'er the Scene,
Spread Joy around, of ev'ry Joy the Queen!

"Then at these Doors, by Hunger and by Grief
Oppress'd, with suppliant Voice I sought Relief:
Relief I sought, alas!  but sought in vain,
With poignant Taunt rebuk'd, and sour Disdain.
The batt'ning Priest with supercilious Face,
Inferr'd from Indigence the Want of Grace.
The Lawier, in quaint Terms, with Look demure,
Gave Hints of Statutes against Vagrant Poor.
Unmov'd and cool the garter'd Statesman cry'd,
For me fit Refuge Colonies supply'd.
I sigh'd in secret, and to Heav'n my Heart
Ascending, Heav'n in Pity took my Part.
Loud Thunder roll'd &mdash; the Fabrick from its Base
Shook; and proud LUX'RY vanish'd from the Place.
Th' astonish'd Crowd their Patron's Pall deplore,
And pale and trembling issue from the Door.
I enter'd, prompted by a Voice divine,
Which thrice repeated, 'WANT!  this Pile is thine;
For know by Jove and Fate it stands decreed,
Where LUX'RY riots thou shalt still succeed.'
Here unmolested from that Hour I reign,
And all the Court of LUX'RY forms my Train;
Here still receiv'd by me, as hither driv'n,
By keen NECESSITY, the Scourge of HEAV'N;
These are the Wretches which around me throng
To me the Lawier, Statesman, Priest belong."

She ceas'd; her Words such strong Emotions bred,
They wak'd me trembling, and the Vision fled.
Save me from LUX'RY, gracious Heav'n, I pray'd,
That WANT'S drear Haunts my Steps may ne'er invade.
