PART I.  A MORNING PIECE:  OR, HYMN FOR THE HAY-MAKERS.
Brisk chanticleer his mattins had begun,
And broke the silence of the night,
And thrice he call'd aloud the tardy sun,
And thrice he hail'd the dawn's ambiguous light;
Back to their graves the fear-begotten fantoms run.
Strong Labour got up with his pipe in his mouth,
And stoutly strode over the dale,
And lent new perfumes to the breath of the south;
On his back hung his wallet and flail.
Behind him came health from her cottage of thatch,
Where never physician had lifted the latch.
First of the village Strephon did awake,
And thus he sung, and leant upon his rake:
Now the rural graces three
Dance beneath yon maple-tree;
First the vestal virtue, known
By her adamantine zone:
Next to her in rosy pride,
Sweet society the bride;
Last honesty, full neatly dress'd,
In her cleanly homespun vest.
The college bell, in solemn sounds,
The warning notes has given;
And pious gratitude resounds
Her morning hymn to heaven.
All nature wakes &mdash; the birds unlock their throats,
And mock the shepherd's rustick notes;
All alive o'er the lawn,
Full glad of the dawn,
The little lambkins play,
Celia and sol arise &mdash; and all is day.
Come, my mates, let us work,
Let us handle the fork,
And in social duties partake;
So glorious is the day,
And so fragrant's the hay,
The meadows are fine as the wake.
Our voices let's raise,
To Phoebus's praise;
Inspired by so noble a theme;
Our musical words,
Shall be join'd by the birds,
And we'll dance to the tune of the stream.

PART II.  NOON PIECE:  OR, THE MOWERS AT DINNER.
The sun is now too radiant to behold,
And vehement he sheds his rays of liquid gold.
No cloud appears thro' all the wide expance,
And short, but yet distinct and clear,
To the wanton whistling air,
The mimick shadows dance.
Fat mirth, and gallantry the gay,
And romping ecstacy 'gin play;
Now myriads of young Cupids rise,
And open all their joy-bright eyes,
Filling with infant prate the grove,
And lisp in sweetly  faltring love,
In the middle of the ring
Mad with May, and wild of wing,
Fire-eyed wantonness does sing.
By the riv'let on the rushes,
Beneath a canopy of bushes,
Where the ever faithful Tray
Guards the dumplings  and the whey,
Colin Clout, and Yorkshire Will,
From the leathern flasket  swill.
Their scythes upon the adverse bank,
Glitter midst th' entangled trees,
Where the hazels form a rank,
And curtsey to the courting breeze.
Ah!  Delia, mighty mistress of my heart,
Cou'd I thee to these meads decoy,
New grace to each fair object thou'd impart,
And heighten ev'ry scene to perfect joy.
On a bank of fragrant tanzy,
Let us entertain our fancy,
And with the well disguised hook,
Cheat the tenants of the brook.
Or where coy Daphne's thickest shade
Drives ardent Phoebus from the glade.
There read Sidney's amorous stories
Of lady-charms and hero-glories;
Thence fir'd, the sweet narration act,
And kiss the fiction into fact.
Or satiate with nature's random scenes,
Let's to the garden's regulated scenes,
Where taste and elegance command
Art to lend her Daedal hand;
Where Flora's stock, by nature wild,
To discipline are reconcil'd;
And laws and order cultivate,
Quite civiliz'd into a state.
From the sun and from the show'r,
Haste we to yon boxen bow'r,
Secluded from the teazing pry
Of Argus curiosity;
There while Phoebus golden mean
The gay Meridian is seen,
E'er decays the lamp of light,
And lengthening shades stretch out the night,
Seize, seize the hint, each hour improve,
This is morality in love.
Lend, lend thy hand &mdash; oh let me view
Thy parting breast's sweet avenue;
Then, then thy lips, the coral cell
Where all th' ambrosial kisses dwell,
Let's every sultry noon employ
In day-dreams of ecstatick joy.

PART III.  NIGHT PIECE:  OR, THE PHILOSOPHER.
'Twas when bright Cynthia with her silver carr,
Soft stealing from Endymion's bed,
Had call'd forth every glimmering star,
And girt the skies with horizontal red,
Night, with all her negro train,
Took possession of the plain.
In a hearse she rode reclin'd,
Drawn by scritch-owls, slow and blind;
Close to her, with printless feet,
Walked stillness, in a winding-sheet;
Next to her deaf silence was seen,
Treading on tip-toes over the green;
Swiftly, softly, gently she trips,
Still holding her fingers close in her lips.
Then came sleep, serene and bland,
With a death-watch in his hand:
A tribe grotesque of mimick dreams,
In fluid air around him swims.
You cou'd not see a sight,
You cou'd not hear a sound,
But all confess'd the night,
And horror deepen'd round.
Beneath a plantane's melancholy shade,
Sophron the wise was laid,
And to the answering woods those sounds convey'd.
While others toil within the town,
And to fortune smile or frown;
Fond of trifles, fond of toys,
And married to that woman, noise;
Sacred wisdom be my care,
And fairest virtue, wisdom's heir.
His speculations thus the sage begun,
When lo!  the neigh'bring hell,
In solemn sounds, struck one;
He starts &mdash; and recollects he was engag'd to Nell:
The up he sprung, nimble and light,
And rapt at fair Eleanor's door;
He laid aside virtue that night,
And next morn por'd in Plato for more.
