By zealous EDWARD built, for length of Years
Rever'd, its Tow'rs the stately Fabrick rears:
To Heav'n devoted, solemn Altars rise,
Whence Vows are wafted to th' Aempereal Skies.
'Till, sapp'd by Time, its mould'ring Walls around
With cumbrous Ruin threat the substrate Ground.
Three Centuries elaps'd, fam'd on Record
For virtuous Deeds, tenacious of his Word;
Religious HENRY, of that Name the Third,
This Fane rebuilt, where EDWARD lies interr'd.
The Fire-caught Roof, in four revolving Years,
Vesuvius-like, a burning Mount appears.
Ascending Flames in wreathy Volumes rise,
And, wrapp'd in Smoak, infest the torrid Skies:
The liquid Lead its hissing Torrent pours,
And cracking Timbers threat th' adjacent Shoars.
So, when the Dog-Star rules, in Summer's Heats,
Oft' the quick Pulse with rapid Fervour beats:
Thro' turgid Veins inflam'd, th' impetuous Blood
Precipitate drives on its crimson Flood:
Malignant Febris, with her sickly Train,
Convulsive Starts!  cold Dews!  nocturnal Pain!
Death-boding waste wan Nymph, or languid Swain:
The forky sulph'rous Lightning's pointed Stroak
Some lofty Cedar rives, or knotted Oak:
Or Cloud-topp'd Tow'rs involves in spreading Flames;
Proud Palaces of Kings, or Princely Dames.
In the First EDWARD'S, and the Second's Reigns,
The Pile restor'd, superior Splendor gains:
Mating the Clouds, its vaulted Roof aspires,
A Phoenix rising from the fruitful Fires.

Within, the sculptur'd Tombs, of Marble fair,
Trumpets, and Shields, th' Emblazonry of War,
And Trophies won by ancient Chiefs appear.
Victorious Monarchs, here inurn'd, are laid,
Who far-extended Realms with Justice sway'd:
Under whose Banner dauntless Captains fought,
And high Renown in dubious Battle sought.
Prelates unshaken, who their God ador'd,
Firm to their Faith, confiding in the LORD;
Nor from their Duty swerv'd, in Thought, or Word.
Fam'd Bards; and peerless Youths, in Life's full Bloom,
Snatch'd hence, rest sweetly in the silent Tomb.

Thou Pow'r supreme!  who dwell'st enthron'd on high,
Above the Regions of the lucid Sky:
Whose wise Disposal all Events await,
Author of Being!  Arbiter of Fate!
Assist the Muse indulgent, whilst she sings
The last Retreat of Heroes, Poets, Kings.
Hence ye soft Pleasures of th' Idalian Grove,
Th' alluring Charm!  the Blandishments of Love!
Far nobler Theme demands the serious Strain;
The Mighty fall'n!  and the plum'd Warrior slain!
The Chap'let wither'd on the lawrel'd Brow!
The Scepter snatch'd!  and the crown'd Head laid low!

Lo!  th' humble Monument inscrib'd, contains
The Prince of POETS, CHAUCER'S great Remains.
Mean Sepulchre!  yet his immortal Shrine
In Fame's fair Records shall distinguish'd shine.

What vent'rous Muse shall equal Honours raise
To DRAYTON'S Verse?  or reach sweet SPENCER'S Praise?
Or sing immortal COWLEY'S deathless Lays?
Fam'd Bards!  enamour'd with th' Aonian Seats,
Castalian Streams, the Muses' soft Retreats.
The fair Orinda's Charms, by COWLEY sung,
Will bloom to future Ages, ever young.

See PHILLIPS!  in whose elevated Lines,
Rich Ariconium vies with Champaign Vines.
The Muses at his Birth propitious smil'd,
And pleas'd Apollo crown'd his darling Child.
Fam'd Winton's School his early Genius rear'd
To Learning's Heights, and boasts her fav'rite Bard.
How short are human Views!  their Hopes how vain!
Whilst his fledg'd Muse attempts, in th' Epic Strain,
On soaring Pinions borne, War's rude Alarms,
Embattled Squadrons, and the Clank of Arms:
Th' embodied Phalanx, rang'd in dread Array;
Death intervenes, and marrs th' unfinish'd Lay.
His golden Harp, shrill vibrating, pervades
Hell's vaulted Roof, and sooths th' Elysian Shades.
Or, if departed Spirits can relate
Prophetic, the Decrees of brooding Fate;
Perhaps he sounds Great GEORGE his mighty Fame,
And peaceful Lewis trembling at his Name.
Whilst Albion's Squadrons thund'ring plow the Main,
Victorious o'er the Fleets of France, and Spain.
Neptune, emerging from his ouzy Seat,
Nods his Applause, and ratifies the Feat.
The wat'ry Monarch smiles, with fond Amaze,
While gentle Breezes fan his azure Face;
Hail!  BRITAIN, cries, dread Sov'reign of the Seas.
To the my three-prong'd Trident I resign,
The Flood's Expanse, and liquid Word be thine.

Behold!  undignify'd, rare JOHNSON'S Bust!
No Panegyric celebrates his Dust:
Whose hum'rous Vein display'd, on th' English Stage,
The Wish, vain Cares, and Follies of the Age.
Let then the Comic Drama speak his Praise,
And due Applause the Silent Woman raise:
His Alchymist unrivall'd Taste can boast,
And crafty Volpone please, 'till Humour's lost.

See BUTLER!  Champion bold 'gainst umbrag'd Vice,
Who pluck'd the Mask from Saintship in Disguise.
With Sneer satyric claim'd the wreathing Bays,
Yet wanted ev'ry Thing, save barren Praise:
Pin'd in penurious State, unhappy Bard!
Starv'd with Applause, and wrote without Reward.
'Till LONDON'S gen'rous Mayor thro' grateful Sense
Of Worth neglected, unpriz'd Excellence;
Lest dark Oblivion shou'd eclipse his Fame,
This Tomb erected, sacred to his Name.

Lo!  learned DRYDEN'S Bust attracts the View;
Encircling Bays adorn the Laureat's Brow.
To Phoebus dear, his Works, ye Muses, sing,
To DRYDEN'S Lyre attune the trembling String,
Who quaff'd large Draughts of your Pierian Spring:
Majestic Virgil, thro' his studious Toil
Transplanted, blooms in fair Britannia's Isle.
Under some leafy Oak's embow'ring Shade
Reclin'd, our Shepherds trill the tuneful Reed.
In England's fertile Vales, the rustic Swain,
Dictator-like, manures the furrow'd Plain:
Whistling, sans Thought, leans on the slow-pac'd Plow,
While grazing Herds in verdant Meadows lowe.
In the Aeneid Albion's MARO shines,
Whilst the fierce Battle swells his pompous Lines.
Lo!  Mars indignant guides his thund'ring Car,
Urges the Tumult, and directs the War.
Keen Juvenal in British Language rules,
And brands enormous Vice in Knaves, or Fools.
Intricate Persius, erst in Mists conceal'd,
Clear'd by our Bard's, Translation, shines reveal'd.
Long Time in learn'd Obscurity, and Night
Enwrapp'd, the Satyrist springs forth to Light.
From Chaos thus, pierc'd by the enliv'ning Ray,
Light beam'd, and pour'd a streaming Flood of Day.
How bright his Genius in the Drama shone,
The Times he grac'd, and later Aeras own.
When the Bard soars in Shakespear's lofty Strain,
Unclogg'd with tuneful Rhyme's depressing Chain:
How Antony!  how Cleopatra moves
Each Breast!  Ventidius honest Friendship proves,
His Fame's stern Guardian!  thwarts the Gen'ral's Loves.
See fond Excess prevail at Glory's Cost,
Beauty triumphant, and a World well lost.
If, 'mid such brilliant Gems, some Flaws remain,
The Ermin'd Robe is seldom free from Stain;
Let th' hasty Labours of his teeming Brain,
The num'rous Offspring of his pregnant Muse,
And strong Necessity, plead some Excuse.
Renown'd, tho' poor!  he left this earthly Stage,
Crush'd with the Weight of Indigence and Age.

Here sleeps a gentle Bard!  whose early Muse
Display'd, in Fable, Life's resemblant Views.
Knowledge beams forth thro' his instructive Lay;
Well-blended Shadows real Truths convey;
And Trifles rise to Elegance in GAY.
Courteous in Manners, a facetious Friend,
He liv'd, belov'd; let Tears his Corse attend.

Lo!  pensive SHAKESPEAR breathes in Parian Stone,
Fam'd Bard!  when lov'd Eliza grac'd the Throne.
Who pictur'd Nature in her real Dress,
And trac'd the Goddess in her close Recess;
Portray'd the Passions in their diff'rent Views;
Great Master of the buskin'd Tragic Muse!
View the grim Moor!  by Love, to Fury wrought;
Plung'd in the Whirlpool of perplexing Thought.
Meteorous, his fiery Eye-balls roll!
While Passions shake the Basis of his Soul.
Fond Love, wild Jealousy, with Rage conjoin'd,
Rend his stretch'd Heart-strings, and distract his Mind.
In the soft Lap of Pleasure, most accurs'd,
And in the cluster'd Vineyard pines with Thirst.
His Fame will live, 'till Time itself's no more;
And Nature sinks, with all her beauteous Store.
'Till Form, and Matter's lost, to Fate consign'd;
'Till Worlds are crush'd! &mdash; Nor leave a Wreck behind.

Here PRIOR rests entomb'd!  whose fruitful Vein,
And nat'ral Genius, grac'd the Muses' Train!
His deathless Fame survives the crumbling Dust;
Embalms his Worth, and dignifies the Bust.
Approv'd Fidelity, to Candour join'd,
With Beams resplendent in his Actions shin'd;
And all the Graces which exalt the Mind.
Legate, when William, when great Anna reign'd,
That arduous Task successful he sustain'd.
Courteous to All; in Life's each shifting Scene,
He play'd his Part, collected, and serene:
Dear to his Friends, and held in high Esteem.
Wit flow'd redundant in his free Discourse,
Like Mountain-waters pouring from their Source.
While, wrapp'd in studious Thought, he means to draw
Th' Historic Annals of the Times he saw;
A ling'ring Fever cuts Life's slender Thread,
And dooms the Victim to th' Immortal Dead.
Thy mortal Part, inurn'd, returns to Clay;
The Soul to th' Heav'nly Mansions wings her Way.
Illustrious Pattern to succeeding Youth!
Strict Honour's Standard, and the Test of Truth.

Ye tuneful Nine!  your sacred Pow'rs infuse;
Assist the Song, and plume th' aspiring Muse.
While borne aloft on strong Pegasean Wings,
Immortal MILTON'S Verse she tow'ring sings.
MILTON!  whose genius Nature's kindling breath
Up-rais'd, beyond this sublunary Earth.
High-soaring Thought, the Bard, like Homer, blind,
Illumin'd his irradiated Mind.
Whose Heav'n-born Muse display'd, in lofty Strain,
Seraphs embattled on the Aetherial Plain;
And writhing Fiends, transfix'd with agonizing Pain.
The Pow'rs of Darkness, rank'd in proud Array,
In Upper Air, the lucid Fields of Day:
By th' Arm Omnipotent, with sore Dismay,
Hurl'd flaming from the glorious Realms of Light,
To Hell's black Regions, and substantial Night.
Adam's Transgression!  the nefarious Taste
Of th' interdicted Fruit, fatal Request!
Wretched Inheritance!  unhappy Cost!
Man's fallen State!  and blissful Eden lost!

Thy lov'd Remains, and wide-expanding Fame,
Thrice honour'd ROWE!  the Muses' Tribute claim.
Good-nature, upright Heart, an easy Mien,
Grac'd all thy Actions, in thy Life were seen;
And great thy Genius in the Tragic Scene.
Victorious Tamerlane, 'mid Conquest mild,
Indulgent treats the Prince, his Prowess foil'd:
The brave Tartarian Hero can forgive
His vaulting Slave, and bids the vanquish'd live.
The turban'd Turk his gen'rous Terms disdains,
Indignant smiles in Gyves, and storms in Chains.
Lo!  fair Calista's soft Distress will prove
The dire Effects of fond, but guilty Love:
Remorse unfeign'd, and Penitence sincere,
On Pity's Cheek imprint the pearly Tear.
See filial Grief in Sorrow's Veil appears,
Rob'd in the silent Eloquence of Tears.

Near SHOVELL'S Tomb interr'd, (lov'd Anna's Cost;)
On barking Scylla's Rocks, untimely lost!
CHURCHILL'S Remains immortal Honours claim:
Heroic MARLBRO'S Brother!  Kin in Fame!
The Gallic Fleet, off Normandy's fair Shore,
While CHURCHILL bids the British Cannon roar,
Is ta'en, burnt, sunk, destroy'd, by our brave Commodore.
War's rude Alarms, and wat'ry Dangers past,
The great Commander gains his Port at last.

Whoe'er thou art, that view'st this Tomb reclin'd,
Contemplate BARROW'S Works!  his heav'nly Mind!
Weigh well the State of human Life!  how frail!
Since Learning, Truth, consummate Knowledge fail
To ward the Blow, when Fate's sure Shafts assail.

Ye Muses weep o'er honour'd BALCHEN'S Grave!
Always unfortunate!  yet always brave!
Inur'd to Storms!  a Victim to the Wave!
On each Occurrence resolutely good!
Heav'n claims his Soul, his Corse the briny Flood.
Night veils the Main in Darkness sable Robe,
While bois'trous Winds embroil the wat'ry Globe.
With swift Career, o'er the tumultuous Sea,
The furious Tempest wings her gloomy Way.
Now fruitless mounts the pow'rful Voice of Pray'r,
And fervent Vows pour'd forth, are lost in Air.
In vain the Signal of Distress is giv'n,
No Help from Earth arrives, no Aid from Heav'n.
In wild Uproar conflicting Gusts engage;
The Ship, long buffeted by Neptune's Rage,
Sinks found'ring, down the Ocean's gulphy Steep,
Absorb'd, with her whole Crew, in th' op'ning Deep.
