Ye Heav'n-born Choir, whose powerful Influence aids
The feeble Strength of human Judgment, deign
Propitious to advance this daring Strain,
And to the lofty Theme exalt my Lays.
Ye hallowed Groves, whose Verdure never fades,
Nor bears the Touch of impious Hand, prophane;
Whose tearless Boughs, wrought in nice Texture, raise
Eternal Trophies round bright Virtue's Fane;
To ye, alas!  blest Amaranthine Shades,
Bitter Constraint!  must I reluctant come
With rueful Tidings of Parthenia's Doom.

Parthenia, heav'nly Nymph, is now no more,
She with whose Praises once our Vallies rung,
She, the glad Burden of each rural Song;
But now what trembling Pipe can warble o'er
Such lively Strains, or in what echoing Grove?
Ah!  me, I wildly rove!
Can we the undetermin'd Charge of Fate
Repel, or strive unweeting to prolong
This vital Spark, which warms our earthly Frame!
'Tis all a subtle Dream.
Then since she's gone, let's seek the plaintive Muse,
With pensive Strains, her tributary Dues.

Begin, ye Sisters, of the sacred Spring,
In high harmonious Notes to sweep your Lyres,
She well the breathing Organ could inspire,
And wake sweet Musick from the sounding String.
Then in soft solemn Strains, with Cadence grave,
And Rev'rence meet, behave.
In endless Symphonies support her Name
To everlasting Fame,
Till the wide World with her Applause shall ring;
How courteous, prudent, pious, modest, mild,
Sage as the Ancient, harmless as the Child.

Oh!  where shall Art a Monument erect,
To stand the Tempest of succeeding Time,
Great as her Worth, and as her Soul sublime,
That future Ages may with Awe respect
Her sacred Name, and Emulation strive
At such a Pitch t' arrive,
Whilst pale fac'd Envy, with contemptuous Frown,
Her Merits shall disown.
But where the Good, the Virtuous, and the Fair
Abide, her Worth shall be established there.

Parthenia!  sacred be that charming Name,
Tho' Death exulted o'er her vernal Bloom,
He'll ne'er the Progress of her Fame consume,
Which to Futurity shall be the same,
And as a peerless Pattern to Mankind,
Her Virtue, Wit, and Wisdom shall remain,
Alas!  Encomium mean!
To celebrate that heavenly Form of Mind,
Where glow'd so bright a Flame,
And Nature's Largess in such Affluence came;
Where white-rob'd Innocence, supremely great,
And Sov'reign Justice, held its awful Seat.

Arise ye Virgins of these hapless Plains,
In deep Concern express your grateful Love:
If fever'd Friendship can that Pity move,
Reason here calls each melting Passion forth,
Due to her ample Worth;
Where Grief in sable Weeds unfeigned reigns,
There let your Tears without Cessation flow,
Nor Sighs e'er Respite know,
Till Nature wav'ring in a wild Suspense,
Adds heav'nly Raptures to the Joys of Sense.

Yet, let not Passion too immod'rate seize,
With lengthen'd Anguish your afflicted Minds,
The Soul, distraught with constant Grief unbinds
The nat'ral Cement of all Quietude,
And with Encroachments rude,
Baffles the Purpose of inviting Ease.
But let her peaceful Shade exist in Thought,
And that your Lives be by her Standard wrought,
Let her fair Semblance image to your Breast,
Virtues by human Voice too mean express'd.

But let this Solace palliate our Woe,
We all are mortal, to one Exit tend;
Nor great nor small will baleful Death befriend,
The Monarch and the Slave together go,
Alike his Power they know.
The pious Soul on Cherub's lofty Wing
Sublimely soaring seeks his own Abodes,
Bright Regions of the Gods,
There joins the Choirs who Hallelujahs sing,
In ceaseless Transports, to th' Almighty King.
