Struck with the News of ANDREWS' sudden Fate,
(So falls a Tree, with Fruits ambrosial crown'd,
Torn by the Tempest, from its tow'ring Height,
And lays its Honours prostrate on the Ground)
URANIA pour'd the Anguish of her Breast,
Till Slumber clos'd her Eyes, and solemn Visions drest.

Methought, triumphant from his recent Blow,
Before me DEATH'S terrific Spectre stood;
With This Hand grasping his strong Ebon Bow,
With That his Shafts that drop'd with human Blood;
When thus my Lips the awful Silence broke,
Pale Fear bedew'd my Limbs, and chill'd me as I spoke.

"Say why, tremendous POW'R, should ANDREWS feel
In blooming Youth thine Arrow's fatal Force?
ANDREWS, who, kindled with seraphic Zeal,
With heav'nly Blessings mark'd his rising Course;
Skill'd to instruct and charm the list'ning Throng,
And from his Life enforce the Counsels of his Tongue.

Thou could'st, while ANDREWS still had grac'd the Stage,
Have pity'd hoary Nature's hourly Groans;
Or kindly finish'd the despairing Rage
Of weeping Ulcers, or of racking Stones;
Or from his Seat some impious Wretch have hurl'd,
His Nation's Plague accurs'd, and Terror of the World.

In this vast Stroke what clust'ring Woes are found?
Widows and Orphans mix their piercing Cries,
And Friendship bleeding with a ghastly Wound
Unlocks the gushing Fountains of her Eyes,
While his Church pours th' inconsolable Moan,
And Tear fast flows on Tear, and Groan resounds to Groan."

I spoke; the gloomy TERROR mild replies:
"Know I'm the Servant of th' Eternal King;
And, fraught with sov'reign Orders from the Skies,
I point my Shafts, and stretch the fatal String:
Then urge not this opprobrious Charge on me,
On me compell'd by Heav'n t' accomplish its Decree.

"A Pris'ner Thou of this terrestrial Ball,
And Clouds and Mazes will perplex thy Sight,
Till I, obeying the celestial Call,
Unbind thy Chains, and bid Thee spring to Light,
To Light empyreal, where thy ravish'd Eyes
Shall see from clashing Scenes harmonious Wisdom rise.

"Mean Time be active, while thy Sunbeams last;
Be patient in Affliction's gloomy Hour:
Think not I creep too slow or fly too fast,
All are immortal till their Work is o'er.
T' inflame these heav'nly Dictates I impart,
From ANDREWS' Life transcribe, and wear him at thine Heart."
