O Baskerville!  in whom, tho' rare, unite
The spirit of industry, and eke the ray
Of bright inventive genius; while I write
Do thou with candor listen to the lay,
Which to fair Birmingham the muse shall pay;
Masking beneath a fable's thin disguise
The virtues its inhabitants display;
Those virtues whence their fame, their riches rise,
Their nice mechanick arts, their various merchandize.

On Avon's winding bank, with flowers besprent,
Whilome y dwelt a thrifty sober swaine;
On care and labour aye was he intent,
And lowing herds, and flocks upon the plain,
And plenteous crops, rewarded well his pain.
Cheap his attire, and frugal were his meals,
His baggs were swell'd with no dishonest gain;
A hard rough hand his source of wealth reveals,
Ne idle hours he knows, ne weariness he feels.

Hight Industry was he, of parents poor;
But soon by labour he removen had
Their poverty, and from his well-got store,
Their aged limbs with decency y clad.
Yet now, alas!  their bosoms waxen sad,
That he, their only child, ne wise essays,
Ne little grandlings brought, their hearts to glad
With idle parlance, and with childish plays
To cheer, and lengthen out the evening of their days.

But near at hand, in bower of jessemy
And roses, nature's beauties mixt with art,
A maiden dwelt, so fair that only she
Was theme of every tongue, and every heart:
Yet few to gain her love mought boast desert,
Sith, to her beauty join'd, was clearly seen
A wit so bright, a mind with every part
Of science so illum'd, that well I ween,
Her meed in auncient Greece had bin the muses queen.

All in the clear conception of her mind
The fairest forms of things depainted were;
And the least shade of difference she would find
'Twixt every object brought into compare.
Grace still distinguish'd her productions rare
From those of common artists.  Her nice hand
Obedient was to execute, with care
And elegance, her fancy's least command:
Genie y clep't she was, admir'd by all the land.

It chanc'd, as on a day the careful wight,
On hill and dale, in field and meadow, sought
A wandering ewe, stray'd from his flock by night,
That fortune to her bower his footsteps brought:
He gaz'd, admir'd, and soon her beauty wrought
His heart to love; he woo'd the peerless maid,
And long with humble zeal her smile besought.
The blush of yielding beauty modesty betray'd
At length her vanquish'd heart, and mutual love display'd.

This happy union soon produc'd a race
Of docile sons, in whom the mother's mind,
Inventive wit, and all-adorning grace,
Shone with the father's perseverance join'd.
And now, to social amity inclin'd,
A tradeful town they build, hight Birmingham,
Where still their busy offspring dwell combin'd,
Whose useful thewes, and matchless arts proclaim,
To all th' admiring world, from what rare stock they came.
