Ah-well-a-day!  what will become of me?
None comes to wooe; must I a maiden die?
I flouted Hobbinol; my flouts I moan:
As pettish babies, when the pap is gone,
Cry for't again; but all their cries are vain;
The lulling mothers trow not what they mean.
O, come my love, ah me, why did I scorn?
Deaf as a fish!  I sorrow in my turn.
One winter's eve thy love appeared plain,
When thou albee the cold, the wind, and rain,
O'er yon high rocky mountain came to wooe;
Ah, what cou'd love 'gainst every danger do!
Plain was thy love, and hence might well be known:
Thy love I plainly saw, but little wist my own.
Mad giddy girl, I lewdly held the door,
And call'd, get home, he went, but comes no more.
His love is chang'd, I fear:  It cannot be:
Did I not see him stand behind a tree
At me to peep, attending of my ewes?
He saw me look; and sculk'd among the boughs.
Thou surely loves me still; did I not find
An emm, new-carved on yon beech's rind?
This was thy work; what other cou'd it mean?
No Mally else, but me, lives on our green.
By this, it seems, I am not quite forgot;
He, sure enough, this emm, for Mally wrote.
And, pray, what lass is liker him, than me?
Birds of like feather will together be.
His sheep with crabs, and him with plums I'll beat;
Crabs been too hard:  he does not hear me say't.
He'll chace, and take me; if he let's me go,
That he may take again, again I'll throw.
He may love Nan o' th' dale; but she's not fair;
Nor kon she rightly tend a shepherd's care;
Nor heal their ills, with simples well prepar'd:
Nor shear the corn; nor milk the brindley herd:
She little knows the dairy maiden's care;
Or cheese to press, or butter to prepare;
All which I do.  I have full twenty ewes;
Besides their lambs; and tway right fair-fleck'd cows:
A milking pail, a skimming dish, a churn,
A sheep-hook rarely carv'd, but somewhat worn;
A cypress cheese-vat, spinning-wheel, tho' old;
A chaff-bed, and green rug, to keep from cold.
What wou'd one more?  and yet my mother said,
She'd give me th' elbow chair when I was wed.
My garter's loose, and that's a certain show,
That my sweetheart is thinking of me now:
It must mean Mopsy; Hobbinol is gone;
Poor Hobbinol, why on thee did I frown?
Mopsy cou'd love me well; tho' Hob disdains,
Or else no truth abides in shepherd swains.
He told our Roger I was passing fair,
Besides he sends me many a cath'rin' pear.

I met two tawny gypsies on a day,
And gypsies been right knowing folk they say.
They took my hand and wistful looking said
That I was then woo'd by a lovely lad.
Who shou'd be mine:  He wore a cap of green;
This must be Hob, but Hob comes not again.

I dreamt of bulls; and now for sure I know,
That dreams of bulls forebode some deal of woe:
Oh, henceforth may I dream of bulls no more!
Come Hobbinol, nor shun to dark my door.
Why scorned I?  ah me, why did I scorn?
And not thy love with equal love return?
Ah, why?  but 'tis too late, 'tis all in vain,
My dear is gone, and cometh not again.
O come again; why thus impair my charms?
My door stands open; open are my arms.
