Three things in all her other works around,
The obvious powers of general Nature bound;
Time, Place, and Substance: &mdash; these include alone
Whatever is; &mdash; or being, can be known.
Fate has admitted in th' extensive plan,
But one exception, &mdash; and that one is Man:
Motion and life inferior forms assume,
To be; and be for ever, is his doom!

What wonder therefore, if his nobler part
Beyond mere visible existence start;
And thro' the mists, that cloud his present day,
Some Sparks of heavenly Radiance force their way!
Which, as with happier energy they shine,
Confess the Almighty Lord; whose care benign
Breath'd his own Spirit, thro' the embodied clod,
And bade it live &mdash;  immortal with it's God.

Howe'er those Sparks on various objects fall,
One simple term will comprehend them all,
GENIUS! &mdash; that effort of the vigorous mind,
That leaves Time, Place, and Substance still behind:&mdash;
GENIUS! &mdash; whose excellence my Muse and I
(With your good leave) will by this standard try.

O'er Time it triumphs, winged with native force;
Nor Past, nor Future, circumscribe it's course.
Mark how it leads a MILTON'S mental eye,
Thro' the vast glories of primaeval sky;&mdash;
When Time itself was yet without a name;
And Present, and Eternal, were the same!
Remember by what generous toils exprest,
It fill'd the purpose of an ALFRED'S breast;
Taught him the first firm base of power to frame;
Then look thro' Ages, for his BRITAIN'S fame:
And scorn a shorter period to foresee,
Than everlasting rule, and endless liberty!

Genius, with equal strength and equal grace,
Surmounts the limits of surrounding Place:
Thro' Fiction's fairy-land with SPENCER goes;
While at each step some new Creation glows;
When all at large Imagination runs,
And fancied splendors beam from fancied suns.&mdash;
&mdash;Or aids a NEWTON'S patient search to trace
Athwart concentring Orbs, the Comet's race;
Where, (hid by distance from each other's sight,)
Worlds beyond Worlds have lost it's devious light;
And, haply, like ourselves, their NEWTONS trust,
'Till the returning Blaze proves computation just.

Myriads of Forms has passive Substance caught:
But what are they to SHAKESPEAR'S boundless Thought!
Thought! &mdash; that could local habitation feign,
For airy Nothing's animated train!
And Elves of phantom potency create,
To sport with Elements, and fashion Fate!
&mdash;Past all Substantial scope Idea stray'd,
When POPE his glittering Host of Sylphs array'd;
Fix'd a new Guard round female beauty's throne;
And peopled air with Nations of his own:&mdash;
Rosy Decorum hail'd the friendly Throng;
And every laughing Grace enjoy'd the song.

Thus GENIUS, Substance, Time, and Place, disdains:
And my position in full force remains.

Censure, perhaps, with critic frown, will deem,
This scale of mine too scanty for my theme:
&mdash;"Genius," 'twill say, "excels a thousand ways;
Time, Place, and Substance, speak not half her praise;
Her range of flight is infinite:" &mdash; Agreed!
But infinite range of flight suits not my speed.

Perhaps, my list of Heroes is too short:&mdash;
But they are Heroes of Gigantic sort.&mdash;
And sure 'tis just, as well as patriot pride,
To boast &mdash; my Country all that list supply'd!

If still I stand condemn'd, there's one sure card,
I'll plead my Head!  and own myself no Bard!
My faults, of course, their own excuse will bring:
&mdash;For Genius only, should of Genius sing.
