Haply I strayed, where mids't the cavern'd cells
Of vocal cliffs, fantastic Echo dwells.
My way through serpent windings I pursu'd
While deep within the hollow'd rocks were hew'd.
The walls, inclining with an inward slope,
End in a narrow groove and join at top.
From side to side reverberate, they bear
The quick vibrations of the trembling air;
Hence weakest sound the vaulted cavern shake,
And whispers deaf'ning on the senses break.
The cave of Rumour.  O'er a specious vent
With head reclin'd, her list'ning priestess bent.
(The Pythian thus imbib'd th' inspiring stream;
Thus gave Trophonius the prophetic dream.)
Swift from her seat, at my approach, she sprung,
And thus she spake with more than mortal tongue.
"Thrice welcome, wand'rer, to this happy land,
The work and glory of its sov'reign's hand.
Our queen, with kind compassion, all receives,
But the first honours to the stranger gives:
Herself a stranger once, tho' here she reigns:
A distant exile from her native plains.
Northward as far beyond the torrid zone,
Her husband held an indisputed throne.
Till restless faction, big with murd'rous strife,
Depriv'd th' unguarded monarch of his life,
Dread and despair the drooping queen affright:
Grief wastes the day, and ghastly dreams the night.
Before her eyes her husband stood confest;
Rear'd his pale face, and bar'd his bleeding breast.
At length advis'd her flight, but first reveal'd
Where all his choicest treasures lay conceal'd.
A chosen band the sacred stores convey
O'er the rude waves; a woman leads the way.
This isle she chose, her growing empire's seat;
Here she enjoys an undisturb'd retreat:
Here, where no ptichy keels pollute the sea,
Nor restless commerce ploughs the wat'ry way.
The priestess thus my longing bosom fir'd&mdash;
I left the tale unfinish'd and retir'd.
Soon I descry'd where, near a cypress wood,
A dome, upheld by stately columns, stood:
Where brass and variegated marbles join
Their mingled beams to grace the splendid shrine.
Here glitt'ring ores their native charms unfold;
Three yellow mundic shrines like burnish'd gold.
Sulphurs and marcasites their beams display,
And lucid crystals rival Titan's ray.
Rang'd as a cornice, various fossils stand,
The mimic sport of Nature's wanton hand.
Mitre and turban-forms the work adorn,
Triton's huge trump, and Ammon's boasted horn.
Here fibrous plants with many a branching vein,
And there the curious texture of the brain.
But how, O!  how shall fancy's pow'r recall
The forms that breath'd along the pictur'd wall!
Where, in mosaic wrought, the shells surpass
The pencil'd canvass or the sculptur'd brass.
Dearest to Nature first are seen a race
Who bear the marks of her peculiar grace.
Here griffons, harpies, dragons mix in flight,
Here wild Chimera rears her triple height.
In glowing colours mighty Griffon stands,
And bold Briareus wields his hundred hands. . . .
