My lovely Girl, I write for you;
And pray believe my Visions true:
They'll form your Mind to every Grace;
They'll add new beauties to your Face:
And when old Age impairs your Prime,
You'll triumph o'er the Spoils of Time.

Childhood and Youth engage my Pen,
'Tis Labour lost to talk to Men.
Youth may, perhaps, reform, when wrong,
Age will not listen to my Song.
He who at fifty is a Fool,
Is far too stubborn grown for School.

What is that Vice which still prevails,
When almost every Passion fails:
Which with our very Dawn begun,
Nor ends, but with our setting Sun;
Which, like a noxious Weed, can spoil
The fairest Flow'rs, and choak the Soil?
'Tis SLANDER. &mdash; And, with Shame I own,
The Vice of human-kind alone.

Be SLANDER then my leading Dream,
Tho' you're a Stranger to the Theme:
Thy softer Breast, and honest Heart,
Scorns the defamatory Dart;
Thy Soul asserts her native Skies,
Nor asks Detraction's Wings to rise:
In foreign Spoils let others shine,
Intrinsic Excellence is thine.
The Bird, in Peacock's Plumes who shone,
Cou'd plead no Merit of her own:
The silly Theft betray'd her Pride,
And spoke her Poverty beside.

As I was nodding in my Chair,
I saw a rueful Wild appear:
No Verdure met my aching Sight,
But Hemlock, and cold Aconite;
Two very pois'nous Plants, 'tis true,
But not so bad as Vice to you.

The dreary Prospect spread around!
Deep Snow hid all the whiten'd ground;
A black and barren Mountain nigh,
Expos'd to ev'ry friendless Sky!
Here foul-mouth'd SLANDER lay reclin'd,
Her snaky Tresses hiss'd behind:
"A bloated Toad-stool rais'd her Head,
The Plumes of Ravens were her Bed:"
She fed upon the Viper's Brood,
And slak'd her impious Thirst with Blood.

The Hag smil'd horribly, to view
How wide her daily Conquests grew:
Around the crouded Levees wait,
Like Oriental Slaves of State:
Of either Sex whole Armies press'd,
But chiefly of the Sex that's best.

Is it a Breach of Friendship's Law,
To say what female Friends I saw?
SLANDER assumes the Idol's Part,
And claims the Tribute of the Heart.
The best, in some unguarded Hour,
Have bow'd the Knee, and own'd her Pow'r.
Then let the Poet not reveal
What Candour wishes to conceal.

If I beheld some faulty Fair,
Much worse Delinquents crowded there:
Prelates in sacred Lawn I saw,
Grave Physic, and loquacious Law;
Courtiers, like Summer Flies, abound;
And hungry Poets swarm around.
But now my partial Story ends,
And makes my Females full amends.

If ALBION'S Isle such Dreams fulfils,
'Tis ALBION'S Isle which cures these Ills;
Fertile of every Worth and Grace,
Which warm the Heart, and flush the Face.

Fancy disclos'd a smiling Train
Of British Nymphs, that trip'd the Plain:
GOOD-NATURE first, a Sylvan Queen,
Attir'd in Robes of chearful Green:
A fair and smiling Virgin she!
With ev'ry Charm that shines in Thee:
PRUDENCE assum'd the chief Command,
And bore a Mirrour in her Hand;
Grey was the Matron's Head by Age,
Her Mind by long Experience sage;
Of every distant Ill afraid,
And anxious for the simp'ring Maid.
The GRACES danc'd before the Fair;
And white-rob'd INNOCENCE was there.
The Trees with golden Fruits were crown'd,
And rising Flow'rs adorn'd the Ground;
The Sun display'd each brighter Ray;
And shone in all the Pride of Day.

When SLANDER sicken'd at the Sight,
And skulk'd away to shun the Light.
