Sunk was the solemn taper's sickly glare,
Serene the night and silent all the air,
The sullen drum, the cannon's pausing roar,
And the funereal knell were heard no more;
When I repair'd with a religious dread
To the dim mansions of the Royal Dead,
And trod the vaulted ground by Cynthia's light
Thro' story'd windows glimm'ring on the sight.
There as in Henry's awful dome I stray'd,
With Fancy's eye I saw each sacred shade
Start from the shrowd, shake off th' incumb'ring dust,
And animate each venerable bust.
Saw sable Edward's Genius, still ador'd
By Britons, hover o'er his pond'rous sword;
And Henry terror-plum'd his falchion wield
Stern as in Agincourt's immortal field.
But soon from thence with trembling steps I turn
To vent my grief o'r that lamented urn;
Which moist with Britain's sorrow, now contains
The Parent's, Husband's, FREDERIC's lov'd remains.

"Ah Prince," I cry'd, while pity fill'd my eye,
FREDERIC, endear'd by ev'ry social tye,
When late I saw Thee drop a tender tear
Of feeling sympathy on Juliet's bier,
And heard thy youthful train with sighs confess
Humane Compassion at her feign'd distress;
How little thought I what a fatal blow
Would soon give cause for undissembled woe;
That we in sad procession soon should join,
And the next fun'ral obsequies be thine.
No longer now in Kew's or Cliveden's grove
That pratt'ling Train shall with Thee sportive rove,
No more their stories shall thy walks beguile,
Nor Thou repay those stories with a smile,
Nor view their eyes, and with a kiss declare
Thou see'st their Mother, thy AUGUSTA, there.

"And oh!  thou Partner of his happiest hour,
Thou widow'd Fair, a Partner now no more,
AUGUSTA, late what transports fill'd thy breast,
Bless'd in thy Consort, in thy Children blest!
On downy feet each golden moment flew,
Rich with such love as earliest Ages knew;
Thy envy'd Palace with such bliss was crown'd
As is in Palaces but rarely found;
Such bliss as ev'n the nymphs of rural plains
Experience rarely with their cottage swains.
But now"&mdash;

While thus I mourn'd, an undulating light
Swift-darting thro' the fane dispers'd the night;
Each pillar bow'd, each sculptur'd statue shook,
And from the hollow vault these accents broke.

"Grieve not for me, but yield to Heav'n's behest;
I feel the sigh that heaves my Consort's breast;
But know such virtue never can despair,
Bless'd with my Childrens love and Father's care:
A Husband's loss that Father shall supply,
Those Children train'd beneath her forming eye,
Shall well their Grandsire's tenderness repay,
The fav'rite theme of ev'ry British lay.

"Nor think that thou shalt see the deathless Name
Of Britain, blotted from the rolls of Fame;
Ev'n when the last sad duties shall be paid
In these arch'd isles to GEORGE's honour'd Shade;
Another GEORGE shall then, ev'n then impart
Rekindling transports to each loyal heart;
Thro' dark Futurity my ravish'd eyes
View other Edwards, Henries, Williams rise:
I see, I see the blooming Train advance,
The pride of Britain, and the dread of France.
Bards yet unborn their praises shall resound,
Alike in Senates and in Fields renown'd,
Fair Freedom's throne they dauntless shall maintain,
And rule with sov'reign Nod the subject Main.

"Then Britain shall with grateful joy embrace,
The darling Youths, and view her FREDERIC's race
To all their great Forefather's fame aspire,
Nor, when she views the Sons, forget the Sire."
