In secret Shades fond Passion vents her moans:&mdash;
Then, whilst each Eye scarce checks the gushing tear,
Each struggling breast heaves big with heart-felt groans,
And on each louring brow sits wan Despair;
Led by lorn Grief oh!  heedless let me stray,
Where musing Melancholy marks the silent way.

This gloomy deep Recess from Clamour free,
(Where dreary Horror holds his iron reign)
Ah!  how it winds my Thoughts to extasy,
The rapt Soul rais'd to Fancy's magic Strain!
Now, now she works, &mdash; and to my wond'ring Eyes
By her strong Power compell'd th' embodied forms arise.

Mark!  by yond murm'ring brook the stately Queen
With flowing stole majestic sweeps the ground:
Hail, Isis, hail! &mdash; I know thee by thy mein,
Thy radiant front with rising Turrets crown'd;
All like to her in Phrygia's blest abodes,
That auncient Cybele, hight Mother of the Gods.

Fast by her side Religion, pure-ey'd Maid,
Steps with slow pace, demure, and heav'nward looks;
Whilst hoary Learning stoops his reverend head,
Bending beneath a cumbrous load of books;
Nor far sweet Liberty bounds uncontroul'd,
And upright Loyalty stands firm, yet calmly bold.

Hark, how with Plaints, soft stealing o'er the sense,
The mourning Goddess charms my ravish'd ear!
"Ah dire, mishap (she cries) which tore him hence!
Haste then, my Sons, and crown his honour'd bier:
Let every Muse that drinks my hallow'd stream,
From Time's devouring tooth preserve his deathless fame.

"Rais'd by his softer care each generous art
Assum'd new vigour, with new lustre shone;
Hence Poesy with Music warm'd the heart;
Hence Sculpture form'd the animated stone;
With glowing tints hence Painting deck'd her plan.&mdash;
Whilst others mourn the Prince, let me lament the Man.

"In him a father long I proudly hail'd:
In him I fondly hop'd to boast a Son:
Ah!  flattering Hopes, how little ye avail'd!&mdash;
Yet GEORGE may do, what FREDERIC would have done:
Then from your faith, my Sons, oh!  never swerve;&mdash;
His favour to enjoy, ye need but to deserve.

"Still as to Liberty, to GEORGE be true;
Your every step while Loyalty attends,
Dauntless where Learning points the path pursue,
But chief Religion" &mdash; Hark &mdash; th' illusion ends;
And less'ning to the sight the forms decay.
FREDERIC, thy Name I love; thee, Isis, I obey.
