If e'er the Muse could paint excess of woe,
Now must the darkest shade of sorrow hide
Britannia's smile; &mdash; for FRED'RIC is no more.

Nigh, where Thames steals along the grateful soil,
In sable weeds, Grief's mournful liv'ry, clad,
Britannia sat; scarce cou'd her arm uphold
Her drooping head; oft heav'd the heart felt sigh,
And drop'd the frequent tear; Despair's dark veil
Spread o'er her face a melancholy gloom:
Around her PEACE and sister PLENTY stood,
Part of the rural choir, with early SPRING;
And close-lip'd SILENCE lent attention's ear;
While PEACE thus testify'd a kind concern:
"Whence this sad change, whence springs this flood of tears?
No more the trump of war, death-threat'ning sound,
Disturbs thy rest; no more the mother's dread
Attends her absent son, to Death expos'd.
When grim Rebellion shook her snaky locks,
And grasp'd at empire; Desolation join'd
Her troop; before pale Fear prepar'd the way;
Behind, was left, nought but a wild of waste,
And smoke of city's ras'd.  The poor peasant
Sigh'd o'er the plain, where but of late he sang
In cheerful industry.  I felt thy pain,
Drove back the monster, and restor'd the smile
Of universal joy.  Does ought remain
That Peace can grant, which known she can refuse?"
Thus spoke the Nymph, whose ev'ry air serene
Breath'd grace diffusive; on her lip was hung
Perswasive Rhet'rick; on her brow, Concern.
Oft did Britannia strive, but all in vain,
To pay the tribute just of gratitude.
Then PLENTY will'd to cheer the grief-sick Maid,
She show'd her fruitful horn, and promis'd fair
To swell the golden Wheat; "With Thee" she said,
"Amid a thousand other diff'rent soils,
Free Choice has fix'd my seat; with Thee, the blast
Of Famine is unknown; the savage herd,
That roam the tyrants of the Lybian sand,
Are held as prodigies.  When did the sun
Rage scorching o'er thy land; or absent far
Make thine the realm of a perpetual night?
When was the time, youth's pride no more cou'd boast,
The sinewy arm?  when on the virgin's cheek
Faded the roses bloom?  say then, fair maid,
O say, why heaves so oft thy lab'ring breast."
SPRING brought a flow'ry crown to deck her brow,
The early snow-drop, and the daffodil,
The tender hyacinth with violet sweet.
For yet the rose in diffidence secure
Fear's to expose her short-liv'd gaiety.
And silver lilies hid within their buds,
Await the courtship of the warmer sun.
The offer pleas'd the Nymph, but not the gift.
At length she rais'd her head with grief deprest,
And melting Sorrow loos'd her fetter'd tongue.
When thus she spoke:  "He's dead, alas!  He's dead!
No more expect, ye once so courted train,
To meet Britannia's smile.  Hail, Sorrow, Hail:
With thee, for ever be my sad abode;
Beneath the covert of some lonely cell,
With ivy clad; where haunts the dusky bat,
Where shrieks the bird of night; and fancy paints
Grim horror in a thousand ghastly forms.
There will I joining in the doleful throng
With thee give tear for tear, and sigh for sigh.
O Death, cou'd nought the spotless Mind avail,
Cou'd nought the royal Consort's earnest pray'r,
Nor youthful innocence retard the stroke?
Cou'dst Thou dry-ey'd behold the tragic scene
Of so much Virtue in so much Distress?
He fell indeed, thy spoil, great FRED'RIC fell;
The People's darling, and Britannia's Prince;
Great as his Father, as his Father lov'd."
Thus spoke Britannia; and again she wept.
When lo!  a Form, unseen before, approach'd,
In vestment white, like very Sanctity;
At distance seem'd a frown upon her brow;
An iron sceptre, and a rigid law
Seem'd in her hands; but as she nearer came
In majesty of gait, she fairer grew:
More pleasing smil'd her visage; Length of Days
Was in her right hand; in her left she held
Riches and Honour; onward such she drew
Yclept RELIGION; all the rural choir
Bow'd due obeysance.  She, in Counsel wise,
Began:  "Forbear, Britannia, lawless grief;
Thy fate is mine; if thou, alas, should'st fall,
Where could Religion find a safe retreat,
Which Persecution e'er wou'd cease to haunt?
Still GEORGE survives, to guide the peaceful State;
Still blooms the fruitful Branch, and long shall bloom
In Youth successive.  True, great FREDERIC fell:
'Twas Heaven's will, and Heaven's will be done.
Thy triumph, Death, is short; He fell to rise;
On Earth He lost, in Heaven He gain'd a Crown."
