O yet a Moment from the Heav'n-born Muse
Invited turn the ravish'd Ear away,
To weaker Numbers listen, nor refuse
Indulgence to an humbler Poet's Lay:
A Youth, who never from the Delian Grove
Has dar'd to pluck the Laurel's sacred Wreaths,
Whose Breast no Rapture feels, but what the Love
Of Virtue to the grateful Bosom breaths;
Who can assert no other Plea for Fame,
But that his Verse is mark'd with gentle FRED'RICK'S Name.

Yet ye fair Virgins of the tuneful Quire,
Who chaunt the Shades of Helicon among,
I call not you to lend your needless Fire;
The Theme itself shall animate the Song.
'TIS FRED'RICK'S Praise, and where's the Breast so cold,
But such a Subject can to Transports heat?
And so much Goodness who can e'er behold,
Nor feel his Heart with Admiration beat?
So the bright Sun amid the Sky serene,
Affords the glorious Light by which itself is seen.

But should each Sister bring, with plenteous Hand,
Her sweetest Flow'rs and strew them o'er his Tomb,
Such mournful Honours well may He demand,
Nurs'd with whose Care those Flow'rs began to bloom.
Chill'd with Neglect, they long had droop'd beneath
The cheerless Winter of a thankless Age,
He bad the genial Breeze of Favour breath,
And still'd the Storm of Envy's furious Rage:
Fair Science rais'd awhile her Head reclin'd,
And, not deceiv'd, in Him a Lover hop'd to find.

With Tales of spotless Love to swell the Verse,
No more let Bards to wanton Fiction rove;
But when they would the golden Age rehearse,
Seek here, and what before was Fiction, prove.
Th' applauding World beheld, with strange Delight,
A Prince the Wonder of Paternal Care:
The Bridal Torch was seen to burn so bright
That squinting Envy shunn'd the dazzling Glare.
He liv'd, like Nature's earliest Sons, sincere,
And held the guiltless Joys of social Pleasure dear.

A Bosom, that such tender Passions felt,
To glorious Freedom must be found a Friend;
Freedom and Love together still have dwelt,
Their Aid to Liberty the Virtues lend.
And not within the royal Walls confin'd,
He wider bad his Eye benignant rove,
With gen'rous Friendship to survey Mankind,
But look on Britain with a Father's Love.
O'er Virtue's modest Sons the Shield he threw,
But on her haughty Foes the Sword of Justice drew.

Yet ev'n for These he ne'er refus'd to feel
The Voice of Mercy whisp'ring in his Ear:
Nor would have wish'd to draw the pointed Steel
Regardless of the bended Suppliant's Tear.
Not drunk with Pow'r, he view'd the giddy Height
Of dazzling Greatness with a single Eye,
Nor thought the wretched were below his Sight,
Nor for Humility himself too high&mdash;
Yet vast Ambition fill'd his ardent Soul,
Not Arms, but Happiness, to spread from Pole to Pole.

Quick to his Name the grateful Column rear,
Let on its Top the royal Figure stand;
A Guardian Angel let the Prince appear,
O'er Britain spreading wide his bounteous Hand.
Beneath his Wings let Merit sit secure,
And feast upon his Smiles serene and sweet;
From her full Lap let golden Commerce pour
The Wealth of ev'ry Climate at his Feet:
While Isis by the Hand of Freedom led,
Fixes the Meed of Worth, her Chaplet on his Head.

Bright Partner of his Virtues and his Heart,
Hither thine Eyes, illustrious Mourner, bend;
In all thy Suff'rings Isis bears a Part,
A Friend to Britain must be Oxford's Friend.
This Store of Grief O think not to engross,
Nor judge that Fate has wounded Thee alone,
We'll share thy Sorrows as we feel the Loss.
Believe Him only hasten'd to a Throne,
Remov'd from Danger and secur'd from Care,
Which Thou with Him again art sometime sure to share.

But Thou, young Prince, Britannia's Hope, on whom
For Years of future Blessings she relies,
O, (as thou canst) elude the fatal Doom,
And give again thy Parent to our Eyes!
As Time thy growing Virtues shall mature
He shall again in Thee begin to live;
Then think not what a Loss we now endure,
But what a Treasure Thou thyself canst give.
So make Us hope, that not for our Offence,
But to reward his Worth just Heav'n has call'd him hence.
