Stay gentle Isis, stay thy silver tide,
While I my Lay to doleful tenor turn;
With murm'ring pleasance now forbear to glide,
And let me teach thy wanton wave to mourn.
Forbear sweet breeze to curl adown the stream,
While the sad muse pursues her plaintive theme.

Ye feather'd messengers of grateful spring,
Let awful silence sit on ev'ry bough,
With warbling melody forbear to sing,
For joyous note wou'd ill behove ye now.
Let gloomy sadness veil the blooming pride
Of vari'd mead, and ev'ry flow'ret hide!

Whilom the Muses in beseeming verse
On Isis banks pip'd their sweet Roundelays,
And Swains were wont their numbers to rehearse,
And distant hills return'd their favourite's praise;
But now forsaken River now no more
The heav'nly Sisters shall frequent your shore.

Where, mournful Maidens, shall the Poet find
Sweet images to charm the list'ning throng?
Where are the qualities of noble mind
That erst gave matter to the grateful song?
The Patriot's zeal &mdash; the Parent's tender care
And Husband's fondness no distinction wear.

Ah me!  how fleeting are a mortal's joys?
E'er the full blossom of our comfort's blown,
Too-hasty fate with secret hand destroys,
And FREDERICK and all our hopes are gone.
Help, tragick muse, assist me to devise
Notes sad enough to wail our miseries.

Who shall direct you now, ye chearless swains,
Himself the foremost to lead on the way?
Or rules of sapience teach in tempting strains?
Himself the great example of his lay?
Who now shall nurse with care the worthy scheme
Of liberty, fair Albion's darling theme?

Ye Nymphs, who now shall teach the roving spouse
Firm truth, and sweetest durancy of love?
Or in whose name shall lovers tell their vows,
And swear, like his their plighted faith shall prove?
Like his, whose hapless and untimely fate
Forlorn AUGUSTA mourns in widow'd state?

Ill wou'd it thee betide unhappy Isle,
And greater still wou'd be the cause to moan
Shou'd heav'n again withhold her gracious smile,
And Royal GEORGE forsake the peaceful throne;
Then saddest plaint wou'd reach the farthest shore
And gladsome carol ne'er be chanted more.

But tho' our hopes are fled, nor joy of aught
To the distemper'd Soul sweet solace brings,
Yet let the muse indulge the pleasing thought,
That FREDERICK shall yield a race of Kings!
Himself tho' dead &mdash; his worth may still survive,
The Sire remembred in the Son may live.
