Of every joy bereft I catch the reed,
And sing of LYCAEUS dead!
LYCAEUS!  pride of shepherd's praise;
LYCAEUS!  to life's dawn but newly come:
The sweetest blossom of the genial spring;
Far passing all the shepherds of his days;
Sunk unexpected to the Tomb:
Of him I fain would sing.

And who denies to sing LYCAEUS gone?
Gone e'er he'd climb'd the summit of life's hill;
Before the world his passing worth had known,
Or he alas!  had shewn his matchless skill!
Struck, as the blight destroys an opening flow'r,
Untimely struck, in an ill-fated hour.

Ah me!  to whom shall I complain?
To whom disclose my inward pain?
No friends are left; &mdash; no friends, but share
The sad affliction which I bear.
All, all complain,
All, all with brows by grief o'erspread
Bewail the swain,
And weep LYCAEUS gone, LYCAEUS dead!

And ah!  what hope of joy is left to me,
Bereft at once of all my soul held dear,
Bereft of him who hath not left his peer?
Of him, whose gentle manner, and demeanor mild
Could charm the fiercest rage, and lull to rest
The troubled tempests in the breast,
Like pity's tenderest child.

Can I forget, when we together sat,
And turn'd the letter'd page
Of every former age?
Can I forget?  (it may not be)
When on the summit of some mountain's brow,
Beneath some shadowing tree;
Or underneath some arbour's shade,
By mingling branches made;
Sequester'd from the noisy croud,
From all the busy toils of life,
The starts of passion, and of strife;
In harmless chat, and inoffensive joy,
We saw the sun rowl down the sky,
Or vanish in a cloud.

But now woods, hills, and groves are desolate,
Deprived of him their once high-vaunted grace;
And all the fields bewail their widowed state,
Since death did late their fairest flower deface.

Oh!  cruel fate!  that would not pitying spare
My bosom-joy &mdash; why would ye wound my heart
With sorrow's keenest dart,
And with a loss beyond repair?
To him, my dearest, kindest friend,
My soul did, as it's centre, tend.
In him I ever hoped to find
A balm for every pain of mind;
In him for every pining grief
A sure infallible relief.

But ah!  how vain!  LYCAEUS now is gone,
And with him every bliss is flown.
No more the sweets of life I can enjoy;
His dear remembrance harrows up my breast;
His image still in fancy stands confest,
Swells my fond heart, and fills my weeping eye.
