Give me, Sicilian maids, sublimer strains,
All love not lowly shrubs and rural plains:
Or if ye chuse to sing the shady grove,
Make your theme worthy a great consul's love.

The years approach, by Sybils sage foretold,
Again by circling time in order roll'd!
Astrea comes, old Saturn's holy reign,
Peace, virtue, justice, now return again!
See a new progeny from heav'n descend!
Lucina hear!  th' important birth befriend!
The golden age this infant shall restore,
Thy Phoebus reigns &mdash; and vice shall be no more.
The months begin, the babe's auspicious face,
Pollio, thy glorious consulship shall grace;
What footsteps of our ancient crimes remain
For ever shall be banish'd in thy reign.
He shall enjoy the life divine, and see
The gods, and heroes of eternity;
The jarring world in lasting peace shall bind,
And with his father's virtues rule mankind.

For thee, O child, spontaneous earth shall pour
Green ivy, mix'd with ev'ry choicest flow'r:
Each field shall breathe Assyria's rich perfume,
And sweets ambrosial round thy cradle bloom:
With milk o'ercharg'd the goats shall homeward speed,
And herds secure from mighty lions feed.
The baleful asp and speckled snake shall die,
Nor pois'nous herb 'mid flow'rs conceal'd shall lie.
But when his matchless father's deeds divine,
And how in virtue's arduous paths to shine,
Warm'd with old heroes' fame, the youth shall know,
Then clustering grapes on forest-thorns shall glow;
Swains without culture golden harvests reap,
And knotted oaks shall showers of honey weep.
Yet of old crimes some footsteps shall remain,
The glebe be plough'd, ships tempt the dang'rous main;
'Round cities bulwarks rise, and massy tow'rs,
And other Argo's bear the chosen pow'rs;
New wars the bleeding nations shall destroy,
And great Achilles find a second Troy.

But when he reaches manhood's prime complete,
The sailor shall forsake the useless fleet;
No freighted ship shall wander ocean 'round,
With ev'ry fruit shall every clime be crown'd:
No lands shall feel the rake, nor vine the hook,
The swain from toil his bullocks shall unyoke:
No wool shall glow with alien colours gay,
The ram himself rich fleeces shall display
Of native purple and unborrow'd gold,
And sandyx clothe with red the crowded fold.
The sisters to their spindles said &mdash; "Succeed
Ye happy years, for thus hath fate decreed!"
Assume thy state!  thy destin'd honours prove,
Dear to the gods!  O progeny of Jove!
Behold how tottering nature nods around,
Earth, air, the wat'ry waste, and heav'n profound!
At once they change &mdash; they wear a smiling face,
And all with joy th' approaching age embrace!
O that my life, my vigour may remain
To tell thy actions in heroic strain;
Not Orpheus' self, not Linus should exceed
My lofty lays, or gain the poet's meed,
Tho' Phoebus, tho' Calliope inspire,
And one the mother aid, and one the sire.
Should Pan contend, Arcadia's self should own
That I from Pan himself had gain'd the crown.
Begin, begin, O loveliest babe below!
Thy mother by her tender smile to know!
(Ten tedious months that mother bore for thee
The sickness and the pains of pregnancy)
For if thy parents smile not, 'tis decreed,
No god shall grace thy board, no goddess bless thy bed.
