My Muse first sported in Sicilian strains,
Nor blush'd to dwell amid' the woods and plains;
When chiefs and fields of fight to sing I try'd,
Apollo whisp'ring check'd my youthful pride;
Go, Tit'rus, go, thy flocks and fatlings feed,
To humbler subjects suit thy rustic reed;
Thus warn'd, O Varus, in heroic lays,
While bards sublime resound thy martial praise,
I meditate the rural minstrelsy;
Apollo bids, and I will sing of thee.
Pleas'd with the subject, with indulgent eyes
If any read, and this, ev'n this should prize,
Thy name shall eccho thro' each hill and grove,
And Phoebus' self the votive strains approve;
No page so much delights the god of verse,
As where the lines great Varus' praise rehearse.

Stretch'd in a cavern on the mossy ground,
Two sportive youths Silenus sleeping found,
With copious wine o'ercome; his flowery wreath
Just from his temples fall'n, lay strewn beneath;
His massy goblet drain'd of potent juice
Was hanging by, worn thin with age and use;
They bind him fast (tho' cautious and afraid)
With manacles of his own garlands made;
For oft the senior had deceiv'd the swains
With hopes (for well he sung) of pleasing strains:
Young Aegle too to join the frolic came,
The loveliest Naid of the neighb'ring stream;
Who, as the god uplifts his drowzy eyes,
With berries' purple juice his temples dies.
Pleas'd with the fraud &mdash; "Unloose me, boys, he cry'd,
Enough, that by surprize I've been espy'd.
Attend, ye youths, and hear the promis'd lay,
But Aegle shall be paid a better way."

Soon as he rais'd his voice, the list'ning fauns,
And wondering beasts came dancing down the lawns;
The hills exulted, and each rigid oak,
High-seated on their tops, in transport shook;
Parnassus' cliffs did ne'er so much rejoice,
At the sweet echoes of Apollo's voice;
Nor Rhodope nor Ismarus that heard
The magic warblings of the Thracian bard.
He sung, at universal nature's birth,
How seeds of water, fire, and air, and earth,
Fell thro' the void; whence order rose, and all
The beauties of this congregated ball:
How the moist soil grew stiffen'd by degrees,
And drove to destin'd bounds the narrow'd seas;
How Earth was seiz'd with wonder and affright,
Struck with the new-born sun's refulgent light.
How clouds condens'd, in liquid showers distill'd,
Dropt fatness and refreshment on the field;
How first up-springs sublime each branching grove,
While scatter'd beasts o'er pathless mountains rove.
Next to the world's renewal turns the strain,
To Pyrrha's fruitful stones, and Saturn's reign;
And bold Prometheus' theft and punishment,
His mangled heart by hungry vultures rent.

To these he adds, how blooming Hylas fell,
Snatch'd by the Naids of the neighb'ring well,
Whom pierc'd with love, Alcides loudly mourn'd,
And Hylas, Hylas lost, each echoing shore return'd.
Then, he bewail'd the love-sick Cretan queen;
Happy for her if herds had never been;
Enamour'd of a bull's unspotted pride,
Forsaking shame, for him she pin'd and sigh'd.
The Proetian maids whose lowings fill'd the plain,
Ne'er knew the guilt of thy unnat'ral pain;
Tho' fearful oft their necks should bear the plough,
They felt in vain for horns their polish'd brow.
Ah!  wretched queen!  while you o'er mountains rove,
Near some dark oak regardless of your love,
He, on soft hyacinths his side reclines,
Or for some happier heifer fondly pines.

"Dictean nymphs!  with toils your woods surround,
Search where my favourite's footsteps may be found,
Haply the herds my wanderer may lead,
To fresher grass on rich Gortyna's mead,
Or far away, while I such pains endure,
The wanton heifers may my love allure!"

Next told, the nimble-footed, cruel maid,
By the false apple's glittering shew betray'd;
The nymphs who their ambitious brother mourn'd,
He next inclos'd in bark, and to tall poplars turn'd.
How tuneful Gallus wandering, next he sings,
Indulging raptures, near poetic springs,
A muse conducted to th' Aonian seat,
Whose whole assembly rose the guest to greet;

While hoary Linus, crown'd with parsly, spake,&mdash;
"This pipe, the Muses' gift, O Gallus, take,
Which erst the sweet Ascrean sage they gave,
Who bad the wondering oaks their mountains leave;
Go, sing on this thy fam'd Grynaean grove,
So shall Apollo chief that forest love."
Why should I tell, the maid with monsters arm'd,
Whose barkings fierce the wand'ring Greeks alarm'd,
Whose hungry dogs the shrieking sailors tore,
And round her dungeon ting'd the sea with gore.

Or why the Thracian tyrant's altered shape,
And dire revenge of Philomela's rape,
Who murder'd Itys' mangled body drest,
And to his father serv'd the direful feast.
What Phoebus sung, Eurota's banks along,
And bade the listening laurels learn the song,
All these Silenus chaunts; the vales reply,
And bear their echoes to the distant sky;
Till Hesper glimmering o'er the twilight plains,
To fold their counted sheep had warn'd the swains;
The heav'ns delighted with the matchless lay,
To Hesper's beams unwillingly gave way.
