Young Robin of the plain erst blithest blade
That e're with sickle keen the fields disray'd,
Who whistling drove the smoking team along,
Or trimm'd the thorny fence, with rustic song,
Thro' ev'ry season busy, still, and gay,
He plough'd, he sow'd; he made, and stack'd the hay,
Not dreary winter reach'd to Robin's breast,
He thrash'd, he winnow'd, and he crack'd his jest.
But now not spring's return with joy he sees,
Nor flow'ry plain he heeds, nor budding trees,
Nor linnet warbling from the dewey brakes,
Nor early lark who tow'ring circles takes,
Nor tuneful thrushes from the hedge that sing,
Nor the shrill blackbird's welcome to the spring.
Against a gate he leans in rueful plight,
And eyes the plain that late was Snaith Marsh hight.

Ah!  wae the time, when ever I was born,
But far more waeful still that luckless day,
Which with the commons gave Snaith Marsh away,
Snaith Marsh our whole town's pride, the poor man's bread,
Where, tho' no rent he paid, his cattle fed,
Fed on the sweetest grass which here rife grew,
Common to all, nor fence, nor landmark knew,
Whose flow'ry turf no crooked share had raz'd,
Nor wide destroying scythe its green effac'd.
But now, ah!  now, it stoops, sad seet I ween,
In mony a row, with rails suspended 'tween,
Wae warth the day, when tic'd sure by old Nick,
All to grow rich at once, like neighbour Dick,
To town I high'd, and on a luckless fair,
For cattle here to graze, war'd all my gear,
And boldly ventur'd at one cast to buy,
A deft fine breeding mear, and newted whye,
Ten ewes, a tup, and more a flock of geese,
All which I thought would here to fast increase,
That tho' they'd cost me all my worldly store,
I rekenn'd soon to gain as mickle more,
But now Snaith Marsh's taid and all my gain blown o'er.
My goodly stock e'er yet they tasted food,
By cross-grain'd hinds were driv'n from their abode,
Tho' lest bad neighbours might have ow'd me spight.
I fore-hand taid a house to give me right,
With bonny Susan where I hop'd to dwell,
But now I prove the proverb on my sell,
Which says, that one grief brings another on,
Too sure alass, and mine will ne'er have done,
For Susan whom I thought my sweetheart true,
When as my crosses came 'gan look askue;
And what than all beside my heart most pains,
For landed Roger, now my love disdains,
Roger not to be nam'd with me, I trow,
More than muckmidden vile, with barley mow;
But Roger has a house in yonder lane,
And my sad loss proves ev'ry way his gain;
Yet wilt thou, Susan?  wilt thou, selfish lass?
For sake of sordid wealth, thy love debase,
No, do not think content is in mich store,
But be to Robin kind, as heretofore,
And we'll in love be bless'd, tho' Snaith Marsh be no more.
Alas, will Roger now his sheep forgo?
Afore larks sing, or early cock 'gin crow,
As I've for thee, ungrateful maiden, done,
To help thee milking, e'er day wark begun,
And when thy well stript kye would yield no more,
Still on my head the reeking kit I bore.
And, oh!  bethink thee, then, what lovesome talk,
We've held together ganging down the balk,
Maund'ring at time which wou'd na for us stay,
But now, I ween, mais no such hast away.
Yet O!  return eftsoon and ease my woe,
And there again them leetsome days restore,
Where unassail'd by meety folk in pow'r,
Our cattle yet may feed, tho' Snaith Marsh be no more.

But wae is me, I wot, I fand am grown,
Forgetting Susan is already gone,
And Roger aims e'er Lady Day to wed,
The banns last Sunday in the church were bid,
But let me, let me, first i' th' churchyard lig,
For soon I there must gang, my grief's so big.
All others in their loss some comfort find,
Tho' Ned's like me reduc'd, yet Jenny's kind,
And tho' his fleece no more our parson takes,
And roast goose dainty food, his table lacks,
Yet he for tythes ill paid, gets better land,
While I am ev'ry way o' th' losing hand,
My adlings ware'd, and yet my rent to pay,
My geese, like Susan's faith, flown far away,
My cattle like their master lank and poor,
My heart with hopeless love to pieces tore,
And all these sorrows came, syne Snaith Marsh was no more.
