Where Burlington in some consummate piece
Revives and rivals ancient Rome and Greece;
Here bids the gay Palladian Villa rise
And there all Egypt's pomp enchant our eyes,
Should some dull lump of animated clay
With critick eye the parts alone survey,
Observe how nicely every stone was lay'd,
And cry, the workmen understood their trade:
Tho' dull mechanicks thought him wondrous wise,
What man of taste but would the wretch despise?

Such is the grovelling tribe of plodding fools,
Who study only by grammatick rules,
Who for mere language quite neglect the sense,
And dreaming drudge thro' number, mood, and tense.
See Codrus in one drawling doleful tone
Read Prior, Dennis, Quarles, and Addison;
All seem alike to such a jaundic'd soul,
Homer for ever nods, and Shakespear is all dull.
Some few there are, whose more than vulgar light
Shines inward, to themselves alone is bright,
Who tho' their breast confess a different flame,
Their look, their voice, and gesture's still the same,
A man would think, so different is their state
Their soul, and body scarce communicate;
Thus Pollio's clog'd with sense debasing clay,
Tho' Phoebus kindle bright his intellectual ray.

But you, Cleander, whose extensive soul
Glows in each part and animates the whole;
Be yours to take possession of each thought
With the same spirit that the poet wrote.

When Ajax scouling at the Phrygian main,
From his red glaring eye-balls lours disdain,
Starts from his seat with pride and rage opprest,
And passions burst indignant from his breast;
With pride and fury let thy bosom glow,
And indignation frown upon thy brow.

Not so his rival, he with modest eyes
Must own Ulysses scarce deserves the prize,
With tears must wish it that Achilles still
Enjoy'd that armour he alone could fill.
The raging passions now must all be lay'd,
In gentler words the gentler thoughts array'd,
And in each look the orator display'd.

But when Achilles thunders in the war,
And blood and death attend the rattling car,
Rush with the hero thro' th' ensanguin'd plain,
Inexorably rage, and riot o'er the slain,
Far different passions must thy soul possess
At poor Andromache's extreme distress;
See from her eye-lids streams a scalding flood,
Ev'n now her Hector welters in his blood;
With tender pity ev'ry accent hear,
Sigh at each sigh, and weep each falling tear.

Thus, nature guiding, never shall you stray,
'Tis nature leads the sure unerring way;
To her conforming, eyes, voice, hands, each part,
Must speak the genuine language of the heart.

And next be affectation laid aside,
Strictly pursue but ne'er o'erun thy guide;
A watch may be too fast as well as slow,
And overstretching often breaks the bow.
Tho' both extremes the man of sense disgrace,
Or English heaviness, or French grimace,
Yet most avoid the skipping mimick fool,
And rather than ridiculous, be dull.

But chief be cautious in thy books, nor long
Wheel in the circle of the modern song;
Where the tir'd ear with irksome labour tells
Th' eternal chime of five unvaried bells,
Where line by line the placid numbers flow,
This pause still echo'd by the pause below;
"Note answers note, each period has its brother,
And half the poem just reflects the other,"
(Exotick lays!  of Britain's youth the bane
Exports of France to Charles's Gallick reign,
Charles the gay ruin of whate'er was chaste,
Debaucher of our morals, wives, and taste.)
Thus slav'd, defil'd by one continued chant,
The voice is bastardiz'd, and pompous cant
Stiff, formal, loud, is its base progeny,
Or that dull drowsy drone, monotony.
'Gainst such vile foes what weapons wouldst thou wield?
No less than Milton's adamantine shield
And heavenly panoply; or to the fight
Call the great Spenser's allegorick knight,
Or Shakespear's muse of fire:  Then with disdain
Soon thou'lt reject the jingling packhorse train
Of modern rhimers, and sublime and free
Range all the labyrinth of harmony.
And if to please is great in them who write,
'Tis the next merit to be pleas'd aright.
