Still was the eve, scarce wak'd the zephyrs breeze,
I walk'd where Camus winds his mingled streams,
While Cynthia's light, shot trembling thro' the trees,
And, o'er the current, danc'd her silver beams.

While o'er these haunts, the muses, once I stray'd,
(Once, for here now the muses rarely rest)
Full many irksome thoughts my mind invade,
And grief stole sudden o'er my pensive breast.

For rarely now, e'er steps the poet forth,
Or, in the ev'ning seeks the secret shade;
But checks his fancy in its infant birth,
Those arts he loves, to cultivate afraid.

Deny'd the pittance ev'n of empty praise,
Th' unwilling bard (sad change of wayward fate!)
Quits all pretension to the sacred bays;
The way to honour lies thro' dulness' gate.

There was a time (ah that there only was!)
When thou, O Camus, might'st the laurel claim,
Not Isis' self cou'd rival thy applause,
And e'en Ilyssus was a meaner name.

Oft thy enamour'd waves, thy waves more kind
Than her he wept, have heard thy Spenser play;
All as he breath'd his sorrows to the wind,
Fram'd to the musick of the Doric lay.

Oft hast thou stopt thy current's ling'ring stream,
When daring bold he tun'd the raptur'd lays,
And in the fairie lond's allusive theme,
Pourtray'd thy own, the great Eliza's praise.

Tell Camus tell, how oft with conscious pride
Thyself has heard majestic Milton sing,
Oft as he mus'd thy margin fast beside,
And soar'd full-plum'd on fancy's eagle wing.

In vain thou boast'st the darlings of the nine,
A Cowley's warmth of wit, a Prior's ease,
A Dryden's sense and energy divine,
Those arts they follow'd have forgot to please.

Rarely thy margin other visit knows,
Than from the sage of philosophic race,
Who measures step by step the way he goes,
And thoughtless stalks along in pensive pace.

Duly each day, he seeks thy peaceful shore,
Or if bleak whistlings warn him thence retreat,
Yon cloister's spacious isle he wanders o'er,
Attentive to the echo of his feet.

Thus mus'd I, grieving, when from forth the waves,
The hoary Camus rais'd his azure head,
There where the dome of *** he laves:
Attend my son the river genius said.

Thou who inhabit'st yonder spacious dome,
Know that the muses deign'd in antient days,
Within those walls to fix their dearest home,
Nor Phoebus' altars then forgot to blaze.

'Till cold neglect which like the killing frost,
Nips the fair blossom ere it fully blows
Forc'd them to wander to some gentler coast,
And Isis margin was the seat they chose,

Had Maro's muse no kind Maecenas found,
No early patron to his verse had known,
The crested snakes had dropt upon the ground,
And the loud trump scarce trill'd a feeble tone.

The muses ever fly oppressive foes,
And genius cramp'd is nature's gift in vain:
Ah!  what avails tho' earth produce the rose,
If 'tis not nourish'd by the kindly rain.

Tho' the vile million Phoebus' rites betray;
Tho' dulness' harvest thickens all around;
There still remain who quit the thorny way,
And with due culture till the classic ground.

Yet still some few their sacred tribute pay,
And bring their off'rings to the muses' shrine,
Th' inventive Smart, the pensive moral Grey,
And thou, O Mason!  lov'd of all the nine.

Nor be thy worth forgot, thy studious cares,
Who don the buskin of th' Athenian sage,
Whose genius nobly bold, sublimely dares
Transplant the Grecian to the British stage.

Thee too blest youth, of mickle worth I deem,
Who bring'st thy gifts to Isis silver shrine,
And descant'st sweetly on a sister stream:
The base and groveling only dare malign.

Thou too, my son, the classic path pursue,
Nor quit the muses for their hostile train.
Be it thy aim to please the chosen few,
Nor heed the pedant, ignorant as vain.

The pedant judging but by partial eye,
Who reads to puzzle not inform the mind,
Who grasps at shadows, slips the substance by,
Hated by all, and hating all mankind.

O on my sick'ning sight what prospects rise!
See where old dullness takes her hated stand,
Neglected genius unlamented dies,
While folly waves her soporific wand.

O wou'd my fears, my anxious cares were vain,
Wou'd that the Gods might hear old Camus' prayer!
But see &mdash; he said, and cut the liquid plain,
Whilst his last sighs came bubbling up in air.
