As Nile was known, though secret was its source,
So Greece was fam'd, tho' much obscure its rise:
Not common pains could trace its winding course,
Nor common art remove the thick disguise:
For back in time it lay encumber'd long,
In close recess avoiding vulgar ken;
Confus'd mythology and fabling song,
In gloomy clouds involv'd their gods and men;
But Stanyan's beams those gods and men explore,
The gloomy clouds disperse, and fable is no more.

In him the Grecian heroes all we trace,
Each city's interest, policy, and laws;
The diff'rent genius of their godlike race;
Some, great in arms, assert their country's cause;
Others, more fam'd, for peace their tongues employ;
Their tongues resistless sway their hearers will,
Rouse them to fury, or inspire with joy;
And now the people rage, and now are still:
So Neptune speaks, and tempests swell the main;
He bids the tempests cease, and all is calm again.

See Sparta's hardy sons, serenely brave,
Inur'd to war, and disciplin'd to toil,
Eurota's banks in chosen phalanx leave,
Greece to protect they quit their native soil:
At fam'd Thermopylae the wedge they form,
In their free breaths revolving freedom's charms,
There wait the battle, and defy the storm,
And undismay'd withstand the world in arms;
Round great Leonidas they meet their fate,
The song of future bards, and model of the great.

See Athens next, a softer theme appear,
The seat of learning and of fairest arts;
Not that she wants her ministers of war;
With wisest heads are join'd the bravest hearts:
But factious feuds deform the lovely scene,
(Britons, observe what factions feuds produce!)
Hence merit stands a giddy people's aim,
And Socrates takes off the pois'nous juice.
Themistocles, his country's great support,
Condemn'd by those he sav'd, flies to an hostile court.

Ambitious muse!  what tho' thou fain would'st soar,
And match thy noble subject with thy flight;
Weak and unequal, trust thy wings no more,
Great is the theme, and dang'rous is the height.
Would not low verse debase fair Corinth's praise?
Messene, great in woe, canst thou rehearse?
Thebes, and her champion, suit not vulgar lays,
Yet vulgar are thy lays, and low thy verse:
The Grecian states should Grecian bards employ,
Scarce to be sung by him who sang the siege of Troy.

But to thy pray'er should fav'ring Phoebus bow,
And give thee Pindus' sacred shade to gain,
There choicest laurels weave for Burton's brow,
And grateful own his favours in thy strain;
Beneath his hand my feeble genius grew,
To him the heav'n-born sciences I owe;
What shall I offer where so much is due?
The humblest thanks are all I can bestow.
O let me thus my gratitude rehearse!
Since gratitude demands, it must excuse my verse.

Nor must thou Trevor's honour'd name forget,
When learning is the subject of thy song;
Learning, which fix'd in this its amplest seat,
The Grecian rivals &mdash; rival may it long!
Thro' him the influence of this place I feel,
Where Smith, where Phillips strung the sounding shell,
Whence Locke arose, whence Smaldridge, Boyle and Steele,
Where flourish'd Aldridge, Atterbury, Fell;
Names that shall live, like those of antient Greece,
Bright on the list of fame, till time itself shall cease.
