I.
In those bright mansions, to the Gods above
Where Hebe's hands the nectar'd bowl dispense,
Conspicuous near th' eternal throne of Jove
Sits his fair Daughter meek Benevolence:
She while the Thund'rer on a destin'd Land
The bolt of Vengeance meditates to throw,
With anxious mercy checks his wrathful hand
Uprear'd to strike, and intercepts the blow:
But when some happier Nation claims from Heav'n
Like thee, O Albion, its peculiar Care,
To Her the great, th' important Charge is giv'n
The blessings of the Aetherial King to bear;
Swifter than flies the rapid-pinion'd Light
Downwards on earth the Goddess wings her Airy flight.

II.
Thou Gentle Goddess of the smiling brow,
On Mortal men oft pour'd thy Genial fire,
Who not unconscious whence their riches flow,
Thank whilst They emulate th' All-bounteous Sire;
Tis Their's on Mis'ry bending to the Earth
The chearing beam of pity still to shed,
Still with kind aid to prop desponding worth,
And bid fair Science lift her laurell'd head:
Sacred to Phoebus rear'd at their command
The pillar'd Temple shines in stately pride;
Tis their's, That o'er a plenty-smiling Land
Branch in full many a channel far and wide
The streams of Bounty, rich as whilom roll'd
The Lydian River fam'd for sands of native Gold.

III.
Whoe'er They be, that thus, like Gods rever'd,
Show'r on Mankind their precious blessing down,
Thro' Life's long toilsome journey still are chear'd
With the blithe Melody of sweet Renown:
But when at length in no unwelcome hour
Th' Aetherial Spirit shall scape its earthly fold,
And thick-invelop'd mid Elysian bow'r
With shades of mightiest note high converse hold,
With the choice fragrance of sweet-odour'd praise
The Muse embalms their uncorrupted Name;
For their admittance widely She displays
The Golden portals of immortal Fame:
Hence, long as Camus on his wat'ry glass
Shall see yon proud reflected turrets shine,
The Sons of Science ever as they pass
Shall offer each his Gift on Henry's Shrine:
Hence in Spenser's deathless lays
The Good Eliza's virgin praise
To latest Ages still shall bloom;
The Muse, her pious handmaid still
With Flow'rets pluck'd from Pindus' Hill
Shall deck her hallow'd Tomb:
Hence on the wing of Glory borne sublime,
Thy Name, O GEORGE, shall reach th' extreamest bounds of Time:

I.
Hence shall the Poet frame the votive lay
To Pelham's praise in Ages yet to come;
"Yes (shall the raptur'd Bard be heard to say)
'Twas Pelham's hand that rear'd yon beauteous Dome.
Then, Granta, then what joys thy bosom fed!
Thro' all thy Sons what thrilling transports ran!
O!  How did All importune Heav'n to shed
It's choicest blessing on the Godlike Man!
The Hoary Cam, admiring as he view'd
The rising fabrick grace his flow'ry brim,
In homage due then cleft his argent flood,
With all his daughter train, the Naids trim,
Proud as Scamander, when Jove's Offspring said,
'Rise, Ilion, rise' &mdash; He spake, and Ilion rear'd its head"

II.
The Grateful Sons of Science yet unborn
Thee, Pelham, Thee their Genius shall adore,
All, whose illustrious Virtues shall adorn
With influence sweet Old Camus' parent Shore;
Whether like Smith or Newton they shall trace
Mysterious Nature to her secret source,
Range ther starr'd Poles, and thro' unbounded Space
O'ertake the Comet in it's rapid course;
Or whether They (for unto All are giv'n
Peculiar Arts in Fame's fair lists to vye)
Nought less the favourites of auspicious Heav'n
Glow with the rapturous fire of Poesy:
Aetherial Spark!  from heav'n at birth it came;
And ill betide the Churl, who scorns the God-like Flame.

III.
Sweet Poesy!  how passing blest is He
Of earthly Mortals, who is ever seen
In careless mood reclining Fancy-free
Beside thy fountains edg'd with laurels green,
What time blith Morning from her Orient bed
Blushing the rosy-pinion'd Zephyrs lead,
Till Evening meek comes on in silent tread,
With moist foot stepping o'er the daisied Mead:
O say, fair Goddess, if Thou yet dost hold
Thy Seat with Men of these degen'rate days,
If still it may delight thee, as of old,
On Granta's bank to nurse thy blooming bays,
Who now shall duly call thee?  Say, to whom
Wilt Thou in sweetest Dignity advance,
Thy graceful Mantle wove in Attic loom
By the neat-finger'd Virgin, Elegance?
While Bounty bids with beauteous pride
Yon Structure crown thy Camus' side
The votive Tribute who shall bring?
With thy rapture-kindling fire
What favour'd Bard wilt Thou inspire?
Whom give to soar with lofty wing,
And climb undazzled with the mighty blaze
The brightest Heav'n of PELHAM's high-exalted Praise?
