I.
Early in infant Learning's rising Day
This Isle beheld her feeble Ray;
The Beams of Attic Suns, the Lights of Rome,
All overcast, and sunk, in low'ring Northern Gloom:

II.
So, by our great Forefathers pious Hand,
These publick Structures, rudely plann'd,
From slow Degrees (thus private Bounty flows)
Sacred to Manners, Arts, and opening Science rose.

III.
No Doric Pillars form'd the Base;
No gay Corinthian there had Place;
No Order, known in Greece, or Rome,
The Column rear'd, or swell'd the Dome:
Nor Architrave, nor Frieze we find;
But all was simply Great, and like the Founder's Mind.

IV.
Nor wonder at their tardy Stage;
Th' Improvements few from Age to Age;
When Scholars rais'd the Walls in which they read:
For Time alone to human Things
Beareth Perfection on its Wings:
Let but the Race of Years be told;
Count but the secret Streams which roll'd,
What nameless Urns were pour'd to fill the Tiber's Bed!

V.
Tho' nor Apollo's Train,
Nor Graces did disdain
In such rude Cells to dwell,
And tune the Poet's Shell:
Tho' here the newborn Muses Chaucer taught;
And tripping Fairies Spencer led;
Tho' Milton dar'd the Skies to tread;
And Newton's Seraph-Mind the heav'nly Spririt caught:

VI.
Yet still these Structures long to Favours shar'd.
Tho' all her Efforts Genius made;
Tho' oft she triumph'd in the Shade;
No Prince's Hand a Palatine had rear'd:
Still the fair Seats which Science lov'd,
Her Mansions languish'd unimprov'd;
Her sacred Volumes Desolation fear'd.
Minerva's just Complaint no Minister had heard.

VII.
For thus the Goddess bad the Fates ordain:
"Reserve imperial Works for Brunswick's Reign.
Be all the Arts of Peace his own,
Receiving Culture from the Throne."
To You these publick Cares they now assign'd;
A gen'rous Province form'd for PELHAM's gen'rous Mind.

VIII.
In long descended Lineage back we trace
Your Ancestors in Armour steel'd,
First, when their Country call'd, in Danger's Face,
And reaping Honours from the Field.
See!  in his Mansion-Hall what Banners wave,
Streaming on high in burnish'd Gold:
This speaks an haughty King of France their Slave,
That Scottish David, Archer bold!
Dragging the captive Chain, confin'd in Prison-Hold.

IX.  Such were the Paths those Heroes knew;
The Arts, from which their Fame they drew;
Your's is the Peaceful Gown:
Like them you guard your Country's Weal;
Claim for your King an equal Zeal;
Superiour your Renown.
Let this the Cabinet, the Senate tell;
Let this the Rage of secret Envy quell;
And growling Faction drown.

X.
But chief your Love of Arts the Bard should praise,
Patron of Science!  Guardian of the Bays!
What Tyes this Wreath demand?
Your Bounty to the Muses Seats;
Revisiting their dear Retreats;
Care of the Learned Band.
A Monument of these yon stately Pile shall stand.
