(THE GENIUS OF POETRY DESCENDS AND SPEAKS.)
From boundless oceans of ethereal day,
Beyond th' empyreal orb's extremest height;
Where thought of mortals ne'er presum'd to stray,
Nor soaring fancy ever wing'd her flight,
Lo!  I descend; there, thron'd in splendor, sit
Spirits of high renown, the demy-gods of wit.

Spirits, who erst to life's low vale confin'd,
Brook'd not mortality's inferior sphere;
Burst the dull bonds, display'd the mighty mind,
And had it blaze in genuine lustre clear:
Hence, fraught with wisdom's lore, their sacred page
Smiles at the waste of time, and death's devouring rage.

Hence each fair science spreads attractive grace,
Hence art, high tow'ring, daunts th' admiring eye;
Transported vot'ries tremble while they gaze,
Burn to possess, yet fear to soar so high:
All hail, congenial souls!  high Heav'n looks down,
And sheds propitious smiles; each science is your own.

For you, in dread sublimity array'd,
'Midst gods embattled on Scamander's plains,
See Homer stalks majestic, undismay'd,
And is himself the Jupiter he feigns;
Whilst warring hosts with adverse fury join,
Groans, shouts, shrieks, clashing arms in dreadful din combine.

With reverential awe the Trojan view,
In arms, in piety, in suff'rings great;
By hate, hell, Juno unappall'd, pursue
The high behests of Troy's imperial fate:
Earth feels, Heav'n owns, th' irrevocable nod,
Troy reigns restor'd in Rome; Augustus is a god.

See Tragedy advance with buskin'd tread;
Queens, Heroes, Gods compose her gorgeous train:
Horror aghast by Aeschylus is led;
The loves around Euripides complain;
Whilst Sophocles bids sorrow, soft and slow,
March with the stately step, and conscious pomp of woe.

'Midst yon bright orbs, when Comedy was seen,
From Nature's form in clearest view, display'd,
To snatch expression, manner, feature, mein;
Th' immortal airs myself to earth convey'd;
The sacred charge to Terence I consign'd;
With purity of phrase and elegance refin'd.

That elegance refin'd shall now appear.
Room for the jocund throng!  lo, she descends!
Blithe Comedy!  cries shed your influence here;
And ev'ry muse and ev'ry grace attends;
With joy they execute their Queen's command,
Smile on my youthful troop, and court the blooming band.

Prais'd by the learned, fav'rites of the fair,
Proceed my charge:  Each genius of the skies,
By me, proclaim you his distinguish'd care,
Bids your attempts to height of learning rise;
That gain'd in wisdom, honour, virtue try'd,
Stand forth your parents joy and shine your country's pride.
