HOBBINOL.  COLINET.

Beneath a cavern'd rock, whole hideous brows
Frown indignation on the roaring tide,
Two shepherds, gentlest of the sylvan train,
Ere yet they tell their mutual cares, behold
The wonders of the soul-amazing main,
From a proud promontory's glorious head;
Whence terror oft, 'midst night of storms enthron'd,
Darkning the deep, on wings of harness'd winds
Rides the resounding waves; or form a cliff
Leans bellowing o'er the fire-convolving war
Of billows, breaking on the foamy shore.

Loud tho' majestic Nature pours from all
The vast-extended regions of the globe
Her fame-ennobled rivers to the deep.
Deigns not unbounded ocean to receive
The tributary fountain's humble rill,
That peaceful glides along the lowly vale?
Shall &mdash; too not scorn this dew-drop, shed
Amid the mighty torrents of renown,
Which from earth's wide-resounding nations roll
To swell his tide of glory?  Shall the bold
Patriot, whose thunder shook surrounding worlds,
Descend to dignify the rural shade,
And deign his heav'n-effulging virtues veil?
Like some propitious cherub, who, from height
Of glory sped, enshrouds the solar blaze
Of his sky-radiant robes in homely guise,
To chear congenial Innocence, escap'd
From cities to the shepherd's tranquil bow'r.
Struck with religious awe mine humble roof,
Trembling, receives her great, her godlike-guest,
The tow'ring Atlas of a falling world;
At echoes of whose loud immortal fame,
Ev'n great ELIZA, 'midst her bright compeers,
Her star-encircled forehead bends from heav'n,
In wonder to behold her orient beams
Lost in meridian glories of his soul.
How mean an offering, then, this artless verse,
Which sings the youthful swains, hight Hobbinol
And Colinet, who in the green recess
Of ivy-woven grotto thus unfold
Each simple purpose of the ingenuous heart!
While rainbow, guardian of the threshold, sits,
And upward looks with wonder, to behold
On forehead of the steep an aged goat,
Bearded, like Time; yet gamesome as a kid,
Stand upright, and with horned head oblique,
And eye lascivious, gambol, as in yore,
When pleasure wanton'd in his youthful veins.

COLINET.
Say, Hobbinol, why thus thy youthful cheek
Fades, like the drooping lilly's languid hue?
Have envious elves with pebbles smote thine herd?
Hath wily fox, unmov'd by piteous cries,
Torn a fair lambkin from his wailing dam?
Have thy kids fall'n from yonder bending rocks?
Or, haply, thou hast seen a sheeted ghost
Rise from his dreary mansion of the tomb?

HOBBINOL.
Late in the brooding silence of the night,
Soon as mine humble cottage I approach'd,
And the bright taper glimmer'd on mine eyes,
All wan and breathless, to the ground I fell.
The trembling matrons sprinkled on my brows
Reviving waters of the limpid spring,
And spread beneath my feet the rushes green.
For oh!  such strange, such hideous forms appear'd
Unto these eyes, as thou in winter-ev'n
Hast never heard beside the jocund fire;
Tho' oft as shepherds vow they have beheld
The discontented goblin, dark as night,
Stalk, like a giant, o'er the foaming waves,
Which now tumultuous from this mountain's head
We see afar break o'er the whitening shelves.

COLINET.
So may I live to hail the rising year,
So gentle Marian crown my smiling joys,
So teem my flocks with young in happy hour,
As now thy tale with wonder fills mine ear.

HOBBINOL.
Hear, Colinet.  By wayward fancy led,
Forth by yon river's flow'r-embroider'd brink
I wander'd to behold the boundless sea:
What time the moon, in all her glory ris'n,
Streaming thro' amber clouds with snowy light,
Gilds the smooth, azure deep, enrich'd, like heav'n,
With vivid lustre of reflected stars.
From new-mown meadows what delicious gales
Whisper the willows of the winding stream,
Bright on whose bosom dance the trembling rays;
While dash'd in thunder, down the rocks remote
Tumbles th' indignant torrent thro' the woods,
And deep along the hoarse-resounding vales
Swells with his roar the solemn-murm'ring winds.

COLINET.
Say, from that castle, which across the stream
Blackens with broad-projected night of shade,
And leans, the hoary monument of time,
'Midst awful gloom of venerable trees,
Did goblin, on a fiery whirlwind borne,
Across thee shoot, and blast thee in thy course?

HOBBINOL.
Thus all in grandeur of her glory, shone
Heav'n's cloudless canopy, and from the moon,
How peerless 'midst unnumber'd stars enthron'd!
Rivers of light thro' yonder broken cliffs
Wav'd o'er the dewy verdure of the vales.
In extasy of wonder, to behold
The majesty of Nature from the top
Of yonder lofty cape, whence wide I view'd
The heav'n-smooth ocean, on my crook I lean'd.
How blue the star-bespangled arch of heav'n!
How awful the majestic mountains wild
With rocks and woods in solemn silence lean
O'er wide-illumin'd bosom of the deeps,
And, far as eye beholds, all silver'd o'er
With sidelong-streaming glories of the moon,
Swell into boundless prospect, as they sweep
In bold magnificence along the shore.
But as if bearded witch had rode thro' air
Upon her wand, to winged palfrey chang'd,
Which bears her hated carcase on the winds,
Nipt was my vernal bloom of guiltless joy.
For sudden darkness overcast the skies;
Loud from the forest-waving mountains howl'd,
Sullen and hoarse, the deep-deforming winds.
The fatal raven, from his slumbers scar'd,
Croaking, outspread his sounding pinions broad,
As when he follows thro' the blasted air
The strides of ghastly death unto the couch,
Where pining sickness, pale with languor, lies.
The night-owls screech'd, and all in flames appear'd
The haunted tow'r, whose ivy-crowned brows
In sorrow o'er the heap of ruins bend.
Soon did mine heart forebode some age-worn witch,
Or angry fairies, or shrill-shrieking ghost,
Or evil spirit wander'd now abroad,
And with frowns darkning the fair face of things,
Had rouz'd the gloomy winds, as at th' approach
Of him, who sweeps away in storms of fire,
From grasp of struggling death, the guilt-torn soul,
Which, hal'd along by black and ugly fiends,
Screams loud with horror thro' the howling air.

COLINET.
Thy words with terror rive my beating heart.

HOBBINOL.
Suppliant upon the ground in pray'r I fell;
When in my pathway burn'd a glimmering fire.
Swift as the winds I flew; the wand'ring torch
Preceding, thro' the quagmires drear I dragg'd
My labouring limbs; 'till, oh!  mine evil stars
Led me, in hapless hour, along the tombs
Of yonder abbey, whose majestic oaks,
Like melancholy mourners of the dead,
Weep o'er the mould'ring pile; as Time himself
(Such truths our heav'n-taught pastor hath reveal'd)
Adown his venerable-flowing beard
Sheds the last drops o'er nature's fun'ral pomp,
When mountains fall, and ocean is no more.

COLINET.
Preserve us, gracious heav'n!  henceforth beyond
The threshold of his cottage strays no more
Thy Colinet in darkness of the night.

HOBBINOL.
Methought, as with my sounding footsteps shook
The rotten church-yard, from each yawning grave
Pale, deadly pale, the trooping spectres rose,
And pierc'd mine ear with shrieks; besure amaze
And horror in my rolling eye-balls glar'd.
With cries of murder groan'd the sobbing air,
With clank of chains, and yell of tortur'd ghosts,
Suff'ring the vengeance of eternal fire.
Broke from the rolling ground a sudden flame,
And, like the hideous star with blazing tail,
Trail'd blueish light along.  The dismal howl
Of dogs, as when they bay the paly moon,
Mine ear receiv'd, like death's last mournful knell,
That opes the shepherd's grave.  Nay, village-cocks,
Whose shrill alarms at midnight, to the jaws
Of his cold mansion in some lonely tomb,
Scare the poor wand'ring spirit, warn'd my soul
With some approaching ill, while icy fear
Seiz'd deep the freezing current of my blood.

COLINET.
And liv'st thou to behold this noontide sun?

HOBBINOL.
While, like the weeping marble, which deplores
The dead, in everlasting darkness stretch'd,
Beneath a nodding arch I stood aghast,
Harrow'd by fears, which thrill'd thro' every vein,
A roaring whirlwind the rough turrets rock'd,
And larger drops stream'd cold along my limbs,
When slowly stalking, like pale-visag'd death,
Solemn and sad along the dreary isles
Mov'd a tall ghost in majesty of woe.
He stopp'd, he turn'd, and to his shiv'ring train,
Arising into dignity sublime,
Wav'd, awful signal to abide aloof.

COLINET.
Some angel shield us with his starry wings!

HOBBINOL.
Mantled with wooff of night he did approach.
Sunk were his languid eyes, each hollow cheek,
Like wasted Famine, wan; his chatt'ring teeth,
Beyond each trembling lip projected, stood,
Or loose, or broken in his sapless gums.
A wand he bore, and, sick'ning on his brows,
Sat dark despair.  The beating of mine heart
With earthquake shook my frame; alive mine hairs
Bristling arose, and, thunderstruck with awe,
Pale, trembling, ghastly, like a ghost I stood.
But soon as he approach'd me, like a tow'r
Sudden his stature rose, and at the sight,
Blasted by terror, to the ground I fell.

COLINET.
Hence &mdash; Let us pen beneath this vaulted rock
Our bearded goats; for see the billows foam
Before the black'ning horrors of the storm.
Haste, haste, ere thunder shake the guilty world;
For the blue lightnings, look!  with angry glare
Blaze thro' the fleeced darkness of the clouds.
