THYRSIS AND STREPHON.

Too long the British Muse vouchsafed to fly
Her native clime, where heav'n-born freedom smiles,
To sing the peasant on Hesperian plains.
Shall Thames, imperial flood, to Tyber yield
The rural honours?  Thames!  whose lucid maze,
Fan'd by ambrosial gales, majestic glides,
Like golden Hermus?  thro' the laughing vales
Of Windsor's blooming paradise, retreat
Of bards, of heroes, kings, immortal names!
Thou self-ennobled youth, ev'n from the bright
Auspicious aera of whose natal hour
Heav'ns radiant Graces, Honour, Goodness, Truth,
Treasur'd the crowd of virtues in thy soul,
Which wonder saw in Scipio and in Wolfe,
Wolfe, Nature's finish'd archetype of thee,
Turn not away those bliss diffusing eyes,
Which beam with honesty's celestial fires.
Ah!  turn not from the muse, that scorns, like thee,
The venal paean of th' apostate bard,
Tho' inspiration tunes his raptur'd lyre,
And genius, like a star-crown'd seraph, leans
From heav'n to hear the wonders of his lore.
The bard!  who, by Circean fortune chang'd,
Like an archangel from his glory fall'n,
Bends from his native dignity to herd
With slaves, that haunt the threshold of the great.
Stamp'd by thy name then sacred be the song
To friendship; which, tho' bright her vestal flame
Burns with Promethean ardour in my breast,
To immolate the blooming victim, truth,
Ev'n at love's life-endearing shrine disdains.
By slaves alone, vile sycophants of pow'r,
Who blast with bold impiety of praise,
Let Truth, heav'n's guiltless Iphigenia, bleed.
Beneath a snowy-blossom'd hawthorn's shade,
Thenot and Strephon, 'midst their peaceful flocks,
On mossy couch reclin'd in bliss serene,
While at their feet a chrystal river glides,
Alternate thus reveal their simple loves,
The willows waving to the western winds.

THYRSIS.
Yes, yes, the sweets, which flow in ev'ry gale
From richness of these flow'r-vermilion'd meads,
And surface of this gold-bespangled stream,
And yonder setting sun in purple clouds,
Again delight; for Sylvia bids me live,
Whom, innocent as this my witless lamb,
And breathing all of fragrance on my soul,
I deem more lovely than the rosebud's bloom,
Warm'd into blushes on her beating breast.

STREPHON.
Say, Thyrsis, swept I not the rolling ball
From ev'ry youthful swain, while Lucy smil'd?
But when, alas, upon the level green
To grace the lively dance I led her forth,
And turn'd the bashful shepherdess around
To snatch a kiss, she chid me with a frown.
Lobbin, coarse lubbard, grinn'd malignant joy,
In mock'ry grinn'd; nor would these limbs obey
The deep, hoarse discord of his jarring pipe.

THYRSIS.
Believe it, my lov'd Strephon, not the breath
Of dewy honeysuckles, nor the sweets
Of new-born primrose, not the spicy gales,
Which opening blossoms breathe, such fragrance yield,
As melting softness of my Sylvia's lip.

STREPHON.
Alas the luckless day!  As forth I stray'd,
An hare, all white with years, my pathway cross'd.

THYRSIS.
Some witch besure in that ill-omen'd form.

STREPHON.
At All-saints' eve, when elves their revels hold
By wildly-winding brook, thro' haunted tow'rs,
And mossy forts, where all at large reclin'd
Beneath a wither'd fern his polish'd pipe
The love-lorn fairy tunes &mdash; in that dread night,
Ere goblins to the gloomy grave retire
To people the pale regions of the dead,
Smooth on the level hearth I strew'd the heap
Of glowing embers &mdash; Mark me, youthful swain,
When morn arose, a footstep tow'rd the door
Thrill'd me with horror, sure portent of death!
And now I die by Lucy's cold disdain.

THYRSIS.
Believing shepherd!  was thy snow-white vest
Turn'd by the stalking phantoms of the night?
Did not thy constant nuts together burn,
Pledge of thy joys in Lucy's love unchang'd?

STREPHON.
True; when the tawny prophetess beheld
This callous palm, and trac'd the mazy lines,
She shook her pensive head; fear chill'd my blood:
She paus'd, and look'd; she paus'd, and look'd again,
'Till her reward, by timely stealth convey'd,
Each furrow smooth'd upon her jaundic'd brows.
Then did she smile, and whisper in mine ear
My fickle Lucy would at length be kind.

THYRSIS.
To-morrow, when the frisking heifers seek
The crystal-flowing stream, and Chanticleer,
Amidst his feather'd wives, at hour of noon
Gives grateful signal of repast, and grateful rest,
My Sylvia, gentle as the western breeze,
And bright as beams of morn, receives my vows.
Already, where the curling smoak aspires,
Around her hamlet throng harmonious bards,
Crown'd with fresh chaplets of immortal bays,
And summer's new-born flow'rs, to tune the lyre,
With dance and song resounds the smiling vale.
There shall thy Lucy grace our nuptial joys.
Haply with awful words the hallow'd sire
May give the lovely virgin to thine arms.
That gentle lamb, which heedless sports along
The flow'ry margin of the glassy stream,
Shall thy relenting shepherdess reward.

STREPHON.
And yonder pregnant mother of the herd,
Whose teeming udder fills the copious pail,
Shall henceforth low before thine humble gate.

THYRSIS.
Hark, how amidst yon green imbow'ring trees
The saffron-billed blackbird, lightly perch'd
High on a lonely spray, melodious charms
To deepest silence all the listning plains,
Which wave with yellow light; yet not his song
Of sweetest wildness, nor dissolving notes
Of love-sick cuckoo, nor the breeze, that breathes
Thro' sighing reeds along the lonely shore,
Nor melting murmurs of a warbling brook,
Held shepherd's ear with joy, as Sylvia's voice
Steals on the silence of the wondring winds,
When, like the tuneful nightingale, at ev'n
With snowy hand reclining on her crook,
Amidst the gazing flocks, with blissful lay
The rapture-trembling echo she inspires.

STREPHON.
Our lambkins, hear, with tender, plaintive cries
Of innocence the milky teat require.
Haste, Harefoot, haste, and with thy barking warn,
Where'er thou find'st a wand'rer of the flock,
Thou, Thyrsis, range amidst the virgin blooms
Of crimson wildrose, and the flowing sweets
Of honey-drooping woodbine there along
Delicious verdure of the winding woods.
Here by the river's smooth, transparent maze,
Where fairies deftly trip, I gather all
My bleating ewes; beneath the shade we meet
Of yonder lofty oak, thence homeward tend,
And pipe our rural song.  Hence, shepherd, hence,
For see, where fainter blush the western skies,
Already the fair star of dewy ev'n
Pours living lustre from his beauteous lamp
To chear the silent-falling shades of night.
While from yon clouded east the solemn moon,
Slow-rising, streams along the silver-trembling sea.
