HOBBINOL.  COLINET.

Alone to heav'n-born Merit, or retir'd
To sylvan shades, or beaming from a throne,
For ever sacred be the Muse's song,
Yes, yes, heroic T&mdash;d from the full
Unclouded glories of thy patriot soul,
Hither to this obscure retreat of slaves,
Dart solar beams, and kindle in my breast
Immortal Liberty's congenial fires.
Off, off the vile contagion of the herd!
Buoyant my spirits mount!  See, see,
Angel of freedom, at thy potent touch
Fall not the chains of bondage from mine hands?
By thee thro' gloomy depths of durance led,
Burst I not into day, to quaff at large
Immortal bliss in each salubrious gale
Of liberty; whose vivifying sweets,
Lib'ral of joy, ev'n o'er these wint'ry vales,
Whose want-worn peasants wound mine aching sense,
Such roseate beauty breathe, as genial heav'n
Wide o'er the land of liberty awakes,
Britannia, with Hesperian verdure crown'd?
Yes, nor on faction's angry torrent borne,
Nor by accurs'd idolatry prophan'd
Of fortune, Baal of a venal world,
With purpose uncontaminate the Muse
Mingles amid a nation's peal of praise
This simple tribute of her rural song.

COLINET.
How bright the golden glories of the sun
Stream from the broad-impurpled clouds of ev'n
O'er surface of the smooth, transparent main,
Which waves with light, like heav'n's unbounded field,
When summer bursts from all the blazing skies!
How pleasing, in th' unwrinkled crystal flood,
From this majestic mountain, to behold
Yon headlong precipice, these wond'ring woods,
And flocks of snowy fleece, and climbing goats,
And swelling harvests ripening into gold,
Mingle, inverted, in the downward sky!
What gale of sweets these clust'ring woodbines breathe,
Which, knit in nuptial union with the rose,
'Midst lofty sycamore's broad verdure weave
Our blooming bow'r, and lavish all around
Their incense on the bliss-inspiring breeze!
The sturdy oaks, whose venerable shades
Frown o'er the flood from yonder lofty cliffs,
When dews impearl the crimson-mantled morn,
Backwards their length'ning shadows cast afar,
And brighten into gladness.  See, enrich'd
By yellow-waving lustre of the sun,
The mountains laugh with joy, tho' yester-noon
They shook with horror, when the roaring winds
Dash'd the resounding shore with war of waves;
While hoarse thro' heav'n the tumbling thunder roll'd,
And lightnings kindled all the gloomy deep.
Why then thy youthful visage sickly'd o'er,
Like meagre melancholy in a shroud,
When all around reviving nature smiles?

HOBBINOL.
O Colinet, no more the shepherd's pipe,
No more the lark, sweet herald of the morn,
That wakes the warbling woodlands into praise;
No more the mingled melody of hounds,
Whose deep-mouth'd music, trembling on their tongues,
Swells in a glorious peal along the winds,
Shall chace life's sullen vapours from my mind.
No more the murmur of the toiling waves,
Nor whisp'ring willows, which along the shore,
When woo'd by sighing of the love-sick breeze,
Tremble with virgin fears; nor distant sound
Of waters, dashing down a roaring rock;
Nor bubbling of a brook; nor hoarser bees,
Which sweep along the blooming wild of flowers,
Shall lull my golden slumbers, as they wont,
When stretch'd at ease I press'd the moss-swoln couch,
Amid the waste of fragrance, or beneath
The dark-green shade of broad-embow'ring limes,
Or by clear fountain's flowr-embroider'd side.
Again the dreadful apparition walk'd,
And deep with terror shook my shrieking soul.

COLINET.
Again?  Some harden'd miser's ghost besure,
That stalks his nightly rounds 'midst hoary heap
Of ruins to behold his bury'd hoard,
And scares the sullen raven from his rest.
Or his, the cruel guardian, whose fell heart,
By cries of weeping Innocence unmov'd,
Gaping with drought of avarice, expos'd
A prey to famine in the howling woods,
A dying brother's pledge, his tender babes:
Smit with whose angel-beauties, in the sleep
Of peaceful death, the pious Redbreasts strew'd
With flow'rs and verdant leaves each lamb-like-corse,
As in the cold embrace with snowy arms
Breathless the little younglings lay entwin'd.
Or haply wanders thus the guilty ghost
Of some adulterer, who wont in life
Stray from lewd city's poison-steaming haunts
To prowl thro' trembling villages for prey,
And, like a demon, fierce from darkness broke,
Blasted the lowly cottage, where in peace
Connubial bliss, with innocence from heav'n,
Once held sweet dalliance in the shepherd's breast:
For when dread crimes in this our breathing hour,
As sabbath-truths unfold, strike broad and deep
Th' infection thro' the dark discolour'd soul,
For ever with the same unhallow'd fires
Th' immortal spirit burns.  Hence church yards yawn,
And empty into night their peopled graves,
With life's affections, rooted ev'n in death.
Accosted thee the spectre?  Or in peace,
Or anger seem'd he?  Hath he aught reveal'd?
Where, when, mine Hobbinol, did he appear?

HOBBINOL
When not a chirping cricket from the hearth
Woke the still hour of sleep; what-time the moon,
As at the world's great period, her fair lamp
Shrouded in midnight horrors; while around,
All under heav'n, in starless terror lost,
Bury'd beneath the waste of darkness lay,
And deeper, death-like, awful silence hush'd
Ev'n winds and waves to rest &mdash; In that dread hour,
Shook by the quaking of my groaning couch,
I started, trembled, glar'd, astonish'd saw,
By paly glimmer of the mould'ring fire,
The ghost all gloomy stalk before mine eyes.
Froz'n at the sight, a clay-cold corse I sat,
Stiff'ning with horror.  Black the Phantom stood,
Dreadful as death, and silent as the grave;
Then from the deep-surrounding darkness thrust
An arm's dread semblance; like the mighty hand,
Which forth from clouds of heav'n, our pastors say,
Shall hold th' all-waking trumpet to alarm
The dead, as if by peal of thunder rouz'd.
He beckon'd me to parley; on my couch
I sunk, and in a sudden storm aloud
He vanish'd thro' the shrieking shades of night.

COLINET.
Cease, shepherd, to rehearse, 'till morrow's dawn,
Thy tale of wonder:  for our fellow-swains
On level of the pearl-pav'd beach prepare,
Now at the custom'd hour, to wind their way
In life-refreshing luxury along
The heav'n-smooth mirrour of the yielding flood.
Let us associate with the jocund train,
And, bath'd in bliss, the summer's sultry heats
Temper in cooly crystal of the sea.
