HOBBINOL.  COLINET.

Smit with the grandeur of the gorgeous sun,
The shepherd-train, as forth they drive to feed
Their nibbling flocks amid fresh dews and flow'rs,
Rooted in wonder on their crooks recline,
From summit of the mountains to behold
The summer-flaming orb majestic rise,
Broad from beyond the sea's heav'n-bounded surge,
And burn along the gold-vermilion'd main,
In Nature's whole magnificence display'd,&mdash;
Glorious and vast as all-surrounding heav'n.
Nor azure vapours rest o'er fountain's brim,
Nor ample winding river, nor on tops
Of highest mountains, tho' they rear to heav'n
Their waving woods; but, sailing slow along
The sea of air, dissolve, and open all
Nature's unbounded theatre to view.
Woke by the winds, that fan the breezy morn,
The broad, smooth-swelling surges glow with gold
Throughout the whole horizon, and reflect
A waving brightness of unnumber'd suns.
Then, while the mountain-tops, and verdant vales
Whiten with fleeces of the spreading flocks,
That dash the pearly dews; and ev'ry swain,
By nature's secret harmony inspir'd,
Or moves in uncouth measures with the fair,
Fresh on whose cheek health's ruddy beauties bloom,
Or mingles songs with warbling of the woods,
Which swell the raptur'd symphony of praise,
Or wakes sweet Echo with his rural pipe:
Retire the youthful shepherds, Hobbinol
And Colinet to wear the social hour
Beneath a lofty, broad-imbow'ring oak,
Deep from whose twisted roots perennial springs
A copious fountain, and in many a maze
Hoarse-murm'ring down the mountain's mighty side
Trembles pellucid to the morning ray
Thro' ever-living verdure of the lawn.
If unbewilder'd by the meaner glare
Of fortune's earth-born meteor, which misleads
Flatt'ry's base herd, an honest Muse with bold
Ambition of the tow'ring eagle soars
To wheel at large amid the blazing noon
Of cloudless virtues, which unbounded flame
From PERCY'S and his CONSORT'S souls sublime,
Will they the shepherd's rural tribute deign
Ennoble with acceptance?  Will they bend
Like Condescension leaping from a throne,
To numbers, humble as o'er Echo heard
Inspire the past'ral reed?  Yet Merit pleads
This bold emprize to spurn the Gothic yoke
Of Rhyme, rude demon; which, when papal night
Eclips'd the sun-bright radiance of the soul,
Ruthless untun'd each weeping Muse's lyre,
And sunk ev'n godlike Britons into slaves;
Tho' Nature su'd, and Harmony in chains
The showy beauties of her bosom stain'd
With copious show'r of pearly-trickling tears.
Yes, Liberty, great Nature's charter thou,
Gild this late ev'n time, as erst thy smile
Benignant beam'd o'er Greek and Roman climes
Thine orient splendours, ere the glorious sun
Of science his refulgent forehead plung'd
Deep into chaos of Barbaric glooms,
Which, like autumnal exhalations, rose
From cloisters, where Lethean Dulness slept
Thro' ages, scarce into a yawn awak'd;
'Till truth-enlighten'd Britain, from the cloud
Emerging, heav'n's triumphant beacon flam'd
Thro' polar darkness of surrounding worlds,
And from her shores, fair Freedom's sacred pale,
Scar'd Superstition with her motley crew
Vanish'd, like spectres from the rays of morn.
But hark, the Rural Genius to his bow'r
Recalls the devious footsteps of the Muse,
Who thus, howe'er by bold ambition fir'd
To grasp the loud, war-kindling clarion, deigns
To tune awhile the shepherd's humble reed.

COLINET.
Why in th' all-pow'rful name of holy heav'n,
When first to thee appear'd the grizzly ghost,
Did'st thou not question him, mine Hobbinol?
Aught did he in the dreary abbey speak?
Or wert thou in his anger dragg'd along
The whiten'd heap of bones and chapless sculls,
As shepherds oft beneath the wither'd oak
By the fell, bloody-finger'd goblin, wont
From pile of stones to rise, beneath whose weight,
Vile as a dog, the murderer was cast
In mold unhallow'd on the public way?

HOBBINOL.
When in the lonely abbey I beheld
The death-pale spectre, shield us, gracious heav'n!
In grief he seem'd, and o'er his ghastly cheek
Glanc'd the big drops, as April clouds dissolve
In silent-flowing tears.  At length he spoke&mdash;
What wondrous words!  Scarce half could I discern
His awful form, and ample-waving shroud
Swoln in the winds; tho' sudden thro' a breach
Glimmer'd the moon's pale glimpse upon his brows.

COLINET.
Shapes, strange to nature, oft have I beheld.
In haunted castle, ere a shepherd die,
Ghosts have I seen with blazing torches run
Thro' all the dreary dwelling to prepare
Their dreadful session; soon as from his tow'r
The raven, hollow-croaking herald, wakes
Night's sullen-silent horrors to announce
Their grizzly king's approach.  But well I ween
Nought ever have I heard, save shrieks, which pierc'd
My trembling soul, and would have woke the dead.
With what amaze then would mine eager ear
Hear language of that foreign world, the grave!

HOBBINOL.
Tho' horror creeps o'er all my freezing form,
To thee will I unfold what ever shall
In records of my memory remain.
Tho' faintly o'er my dark, untutor'd mind
Glimmer'd the purpose of such lore sublime.
The hallow'd seer alone, whose soul is all,
Tho' penury his lot, heav'n's richer mine
Of knowledge, as of virtue, will dispell
Blind error's mist from my benighted mind.
Thus then the spirit, while upon the ground
Outstretch'd I lay, with voice majestic spoke,
While the bleak winds in deep attention heard.
"Here in the durance of these doleful glooms
Six hundred years, since first Britannia bless'd
With freedom this fair isle, as, rising o'er
The misty south, th' all-chearing sun displays
His glorious orb, I dwell, ill-fated ghost,
Permitted ne'er to view, when Nature hails
Light's orient ray, the gold-impurpled morn,
Nor breathe heav'n's fragrant life-inspiring breeze.
Here once, when ev'n her solemn twilight shed
Along this ample, awful-dark'ning dome,
With rapture at the pealing anthem shook
These deep-resounding tow'rs.  And now, when truth
Breaks with meridian radiance thro' the night
Of superstition o'er the illumin'd isle,
How long shall heav'n's own holier seraph weep,
Religion?  Ah!  how long shall anguish beat
In ev'ry bleeding fibre of her soul?
How long, alas, alas, shall she deplore
Her sanctuaries, the haunt of birds obscene,
Which, hoarse and hollow, croak death's dismal knell,
And sweep, with sound of ample-waving wings
Along the grass-grown desart of the tombs?
When, when shall mandate of her mitred sires
Reanimate these ruins into form,
Like man in perfect renovation rouz'd
By heav'n's all-waking trumpet from the grave,
And thus, while all the blooming isle around
With alleluia fills the joy-resounding skies,
With copious dew of blessings fertilize
This happier Canaan of propitious heav'n?
Here oft in midnight's solemn-silent reign,
Beneath unclouded glories of the moon,
Fancy, the youthful cherub, have I ken'd
Hang o'er the margin of th' unbounded deeps
From yonder mountain's heav'n-aspiring head.
How at her touch the loud, majestic lyre,
Trembling with extasy, my soul attun'd
Like symphonies of heav'n, which oft have bless'd
My noontide visions, as intranced I lay
In green-roof'd bow'r, or gloomy grotto stretch'd
By crystal spring, or river's murm'ring maze!
How sweet heav'n harmoniz'd her peerless voice,
Which warbled wild such bliss-inspiring strains,
Attemp'ring the bold lyre, that Ocean, swell'd
With heav'n's reflected glories, in amaze
Smooth'd his wide world of waters, and beneath
An aged oak night's hoary Genius lean'd,
List'ning the tuneful virgin's lofty hymn
To the great Spirit of nature!  At her lore,
Un-gnaw'd by care, and innocent of wealth,
Flam'd high my youthful heart, enrich'd with bliss,
Fair meed of virtue; and this wither'd hand,
Trembling and pale, which Death oft deems his own,
Woke to immortal themes the sacred lyre.
Till crush'd by tyrants, whom mine honest soul
To hymn with adulation vile disdain'd,
Oblivion wrap'd me in her sable shroud,
Deep in pale Penury's untrodden vale,
And the cold ling'ring hand of Languor clos'd
These eyes, unchear'd by fortunes golden ray.
But better, chains, and poverty, and death,
Nay ev'n contempt, than spoils by truth unearn'd.
Warn'd by mine adverse star to wisdom wake.
Hence, youthful shepherd, with thy slender pipe;
Hence from the groupe of tyrants and of slaves,
Ungenial to the Muse, fly, swiftly fly,
While yet around thee smiles life's vernal morn.
Hence, if thy free-born soul with glories burn
Of blooming Albion, to th' immortal land
Of liberty, which bore thine happier sires.
There high-thron'd Magnanimity unfolds
Her temple's mighty portals in the breast
Of godlike PERCY; there at large o'er all,
Th' unclouded heav'n of his majestic soul
Munificence in noontide glory bursts,
Like summer, blazing from th' equator sun!
There haply from his heav'n-illumin'd eye
May beam Benignity's propitious rays
O'er the pale winter of thy fading youth,
And brighten life around thee into day.
Yes there, by ev'ry regal virtue grac'd
Of fam'd Northumberland's heroic chiefs,
Who, frowning, shook each tyrant's pillar'd throne,
Or who, in milder majesty retir'd
Of social life, beam'd happiness around,
The Fair, whose heav'n-ennobled heart beats high
With native glories of her race renown'd,
Shall raise with pious hand the drooping flow'r
To blush with beauty to the genial sun.
When heav'n lours horror on the wintry wooff
Of night, and not a star the shepherd guides,
Pavilion'd deep in darkness in mid air
'Midst storms and clouds, our solemn-sable throne,
Hold we our annual congress of the dead.
How at the terrors of our potent call
Trembles the globe, and pours her millions forth
From all the pale dominions of the grave,
Desart, and sea, and ev'ry teeming tomb!
Caitiff, who, at our dread behest unaw'd,
Withholds allegiance, howls in penal fire.
Cease at our bidding the wild winds to roar,
And thro' the universal host of death,
Hush'd into silent horror, we forbid
Spirit of air, of earth, of water, fire,
To haunt the hallow'd mansion of the Fair;
And oft as we some angel's radiant form
Far off espy along the glooms of night
Trailing a length of glory, as he glides,
Like the moon streaming thro' autumnal clouds;
Ev'n from the lowly hermitage of peace,
In bliss of rural innocence retir'd,
Turn we not heav'n's bright native at our word,
Tho' from the City rank corruption steams,
To shield the Heroine with starry wings,
To whisper conscious peace, and in each dream
Pour heav'n's congenial glories thro' her soul.
But hark, ere trembling twilight of the morn
Silvers the grey mist o'er yon mountain's head,
The cock's shrill clarion warns me." &mdash; At th' alarm
He scream'd such signal to his train of ghosts,
Which peopled all the darkness, that mine hair,
Like bristles, rose, and horror chill'd my veins.
Pour'd thro' the mould'ring altar's ivy'd breach
Glar'd frightful-lin'gring lightnings all around,
Glimm'ring pale light along the lonely walls,
And scar'd the howling spectres.  With his tribe
Sudden on pinions of heav'n's rapid fire
He vanish'd thro' the lofty roof aloud,
And shook the gloomy temple:  as they pass'd
The turrets shriek'd with terror.  From the ground
I sprung aghast, and vanish'd into flight;
Tho' ever and anon methought I heard
Sound of pursuing footsteps, and such yell,
As Hubert, sage in wisdom, as in years,
Hath told he heard full many a time and oft
At eventide from off the howling main,
When rouz'd by roar of tempest's dread approach
Shrill spirits shriek, as to the wave-wash'd shore
All black with storms the foaming billows roll.

COLINET.
See, from contagion of the world escap'd,
Solemn along the lonely-winding shore
Wanders our pious pastor, as he wont,
With every meek-eyed Virtue in his train,
To hold high converse with his native heav'n,
And mount on early Adoration's wing.
Let us descend, and, at his hallow'd feet
In filial piety's obeysance bow'd,
Unfold thy wond'rous story.  He alone,
Who in these wilds of nature day by day,
As in the holy temples dread recess,
Hath taught us the great Shepherd from on high,
Eternity, and radiant worlds of bliss,
Will thro' the cloud of mystery obscure
Pour the clear day of knowledge on our minds,
Copious as bursts along the shady vales
From yonder east this golden light of heav'n.
