Two sickly dames of sad complexion,
(Their names are Envy and Detraction)
Left ev'ry year their native hell,
To sip the stream of Tunbridge well;
Where oft they met their sister Satire,
Who likewise came to drink the water.
They saunter'd up and down the walks,
And scandal talk'd like other folks;
This nymph too short, and that's too tall,
And t' other painted like a doll;
This has an idle wanton eye,
And that's most horribly awry.&mdash;
In such loose talk they pass'd their time,
And Satire put it into rhyme.
The dames had now a world of matter,
To furnish out their good friend Satire,
Who by appointment was to meet them,
And with poetic humour treat them.
But Satire no where could be found,
Tho' sought thro' ev'ry lodging round;
Nor on the Walks, at Vaughan's, or Deard's,
Nor at the concert, ball, or cards.
At length they found her at the Rocks,
Toothless she sat, loose flow'd her locks;
Sad and indignant was her air,
Her head reclin'd, her look severe.
Above her on the moss grown wall,
Stuck her black pen deep dipt in gall;
Strew'd was the sand beneath her feet,
With many a torn neglected sheet.
At once the long-tongued hags begin,
(Through ev'ry rock resounds the din)
Leave, sister, leave this lonely shade!
Detraction calls thee to her aid,
And pale-fac'd Envy pines to grace
With all her stores thy sprightly verse.
Hie to the wells, thy verse renew,
And draw the haughty maids to view.&mdash;
Silence!  ye shrill-voic'd dames, she said,
(And speaking, droop'd her languid head)
Though ev'ry room, the nymphs along,
In vain, alas!  I've labour'd long:
To find fit subjects I have tried;
The goddess TRUTH walk'd by my side;
A sponge her lilly fingers grac'd,
Which many a pointed verse effac'd;
Nor did a single line remain
But what I'm sure would give you pain.
Abash'd the furies stood, and sigh'd;
Envy was dumb; Detraction cried,
Cease not, dear Satire, yet to try on
The mounts of Ephraim and of Sion.
Try all the nymphs you've try'd before,
And all their secret souls explore;
A thousand faults I'm sure you'll find,
In person, fortune, or in mind.

Vain is the toil, she said, to rove,
Or through the walks, or mount, or grove;
'Twould grieve your very souls to hear
What nymphs I've seen, how good, how fair;
Where'er I turn, whate'er the place is,
I meet the virtues, and the graces.
