Hence, dull-brow'd Melancholy!  creep away
To weeping caverns, exil'd from the day.
Thy temples bathe with nightly dew,
That drops from yonder baneful yew;
Or go where endless Horror dwells,
To Bedlam walls, to Newgate cells,
Else while thy front distills a sweating show'r,
Go watch the murder'd corps at midnight's frightful hour.

But come, thou parent of poetic song,
Pride of my verse, sweet MUSICK, haste along,
Descend from thine aethereal bow'rs,
And with thee bring the sportive Hours.
She comes &mdash; the clouds her voice obey,
And brighten into purer day.
A harp adorns her hand; and on her face
Sits laughing Mirth with Harmony's attracting grace.

No more the swelling North is heard to rave,
Yon foaming flood has calm'd his angry wave,
Hush'd is the jay's discordant note,
Silent the raven's croaking throat,
Throughout the woods, throughout the plains,
Stillness, an awful stillness reigns.
Gay smile the blue-girt skies.  All nature round
Seems pausing, and prepar'd to hear the magic sound.

And hark!  how gentle she salutes the ear!
The touch how soft!  the melody how clear!
To Love she slightly sweeps the strings,
Smooth fly the notes on silken wings.
These are the strains that sooth my care,
Alarm, and terrify Despair.
The low'ring daemon startles at the sound,
Stalks off in sullen mood, and treads unhallow'd ground.

Now, now the note she swells and sings of arms,
Heav'ns!  how the noble air my spirit warms!
I feel, I feel my courage glow,
And rush in thought to meet the foe.
Methinks I see the martial plain
Ensanguin'd o'er with heeps of slain:
Heroes and steeds in wild confusion roll,
And terrors seize on all, but Fred'rick's daring soul.

See!  while the Goddess plays, around her throng
The joy-struck quadrupeds to hear the song.
Delighted neighs the conscious steed,
The hungry bull forgets to feed,
Yon stag is tame.  The dappl'd fawns
Exult, and bound along the lawns.
Enamour'd Echo in the distant vale,
Answers her sister's voice in ev'ry soften'd gale.

No more the fierce-ey'd tyger threatens  harm,
But lays him down, and listens to the charm:
Nor less the lion 'bates his rage;
(Such pow'r has Musick to assuage)
The rav'nous wolves let loose their prey;
Her impulse furious pards obey.
The crawling adder too, at her command
Puts forth his harmless tongue to lick her tuneful hand.

&mdash;But ah!  she stops her soul-enchanting strain,
And soars to her coelestial throne again.
Oh!  all ye flatt'ring Sounds, adieu!
The change is felt all nature through.
Surcharg'd with rain the clouds appear
To stain the products of the year;
And now they burst &mdash; Loud thunder tears the sky,
And naught, but gloom oppressive strikes the weeping eye.
