Since then, bold artist!  with approved skill
You've undertaken this so great design,
May all the fair  your manly bosom fill,
Give to your hand an excellence divine,
Inspire your colours with a radiant glow,
A marble smoothness to the canvas give,
In noble touches make your pencil flow,
And R*** confess'd in all the picture live;
Fancy away!  to make love's queen complete,
Let but the fair alone your gen'rous bosom heat.

But lest your dazzled eye in beauty's maze
Should wander, heedless of each single charm;
Lest that the brightness of the heav'nly blaze
Should blast thy sight and all thy skill disarm:
Let my instructions sink into thy soul,
Read careful o'er the soft advice I give;
Let these the trembling of your hand controul,
Your wand'ring eyes recall, your heart revive;
The heav'nly features of her face define,
And show each lovely charm that makes the whole divine.

But Oh!  observe with what an easy air
The lovely charmer moves, with finish'd grace!
Quick use thy skill, thy utmost art prepare,
Catch ev'ry turn, each gentle movement trace;
But how, Ah how!  can all thy colours show
The soften'd rising of those hills of love?
Whiter than flakes of pure unsully'd snow,
Softer than downy plumage of the dove.
Yet bold go on!  play thou thy noble part,
And let our thoughts supply what's wanting in thy art.

Her eyes &mdash; but how shall all thy skill express
The heav'nly rays that melt my ravish'd heart!
What daring boldness does thy soul possess,
To think to ape them with thy puny art?
Mistaken fool!  thinkst thou thy aking sight
Can view their lustre with a steady eye?
Shall not their glory with too strong a light
Confound thy sense, and all thy skill defy?
Then cease, nor rashly tempt thy certain fate,
Paint but the bluey orbs, or curse thy fault too late.

Now tell me, painter, didst thou ever view
The sun in all his new-born glory rise,
Dispel the mists, and sip the morning dew,
And strew with blushes all the orient skies?
So shall the grand idea in your mind
Strike home your fancy when you view the fair;
The rosy blush that gilds the morn, you'll find
Not only equall'd, but excelled there;
Then with a tincture of Carminian dye
(Her cheeks you never can, but) imitate the sky.

As two plump cherries on the yielding bough
Hang dangling, moist with an ambrosial sweet;
A breathing zephyr gently blows, and now
The branches tremble and they fondly meet;
Or as the coral on the lonely rock
With reddy hue uprears its painted head;
Two sister firstlings from the parent stock
Together grow, and sprout up side by side;
So smile her roseat lips, with bless replete,
Soft as the pulpy fruit, as balmy odours sweet.

Her shining hair ambrosial fragrance breathes,
Around her neck the wanton ringlets stray;
Adown her breast they flow in silken wreaths,
And in her bosom innocently play.
Not so, O love!  if once thy piercing dart
Within her bosom shall admission find;
Not so shall't revel in her captive heart
When fond desire with melting love is join'd;
But Oh!  if e'er the lovely maid you wound,
Let all her tender thoughts be in her P****** crown'd.

But shall I, in all the pomp of verse,
Each heav'nly beauty to thy mind display,
In flowing numbers all her charms rehearse,
And paint the fair that steals my heart away?
Let these alone your skilful hand assist,
Your flowing pencil with a smoothness guide;
So shall your fame to endless ages last,
Like her's, to long eternity abide;
Whilst hapless C*****'s, shall, as his verses, rot,
Be with his mould'ring dust, by after-times forgot.
