THE FIRST PASTORAL.
BEING THE LAMENTATION OF THE POOR AND FORSAKEN LYCIDAS.

Young Lycidas, the sweetest Shepherd Swain,
When Winter's wasteful Rage was almost spent;
All in a sunshine Day, the Season's boast,
So fair it was, led forth his folded Flock:
Weary they seem'd and faint, that scarce their feet
Upheld their Fleeces heavy and wet:
And as the Sheep, such was the Shepherd's Look,
For pale he was with Care, and sad with Love;
Yet sweetly he cou'd sing, and sweetly play.
Up to an Hill he led his drooping Flock,
Drooping himself; and thus the Shepherd plain'd,
The while his Flock upon the brown Heath fed.

LYCIDAS.
Ye Deities that pity Lovers Woe,
If any Gods do pity Lovers Woe!
Look from on high, where you in Joy remain
And listen unto my heart-breaking Grief:
And thou the God of Shepherds and their Sheep,
Oh Pan; if e'er the Pangs of Love you felt,
Pity an hopeless Lover's Misery.
Thou desolated Earth, which Winter's waste
Hath desert made, thou art a Miror now
Of wither'd Dreariness, that doth reflect
The Image of my melancholy Plight.
Whilom the fresh Spring flower'd; and after-haste
Came the hot Summer cloath'd in Asphodel!
But now the stormy Winter's time is come,
Thy Beauty marr'd, and all thy Pomp defil'd.

Rage, such as Winter's, reigneth in my Breast;
My Life-blood freezeth with the cruel Cold;
Such Tempests wreck my weak and feeble Frame:
And as my Years were waste, I see the waste
Of th' desert Year; And yet, poor Lycidas,
Alas, thy Spring of Life began but now;
Alas, thy Spring of Life is past but now.

Ye naked Trees whose shady Leaves are lost,
Wherein the tuneful Birds did wont to build
Their vernal Bow'rs; but now are spread with Moss,
And covered with frozen Rifts of Snow,
Instead of gaudiest Blossoms, which before
Flow'r'd on your Buds; ah me!  I see the Tears
That from your Boughs incessant fall to Earth;
Or else in dreary Icicles remain.
My lusty Leaf is fall'n into the Sear;
My timely Buds are wasted with my Wail:
And all those Blossoms which my Branch of Youth
Bore flow'ry, promising maturest Fruit,
Are blown away, and blasted with my Tears
And heavy Sighs, for I incessant mourn.

Thou feeble Flock, whose Fleece is rough and rent,
Whose Knees are weak, thro' Fast and evil Fare,
May'st witness well how great a Slave I am,
How much o'ercome with Woe; how very a Wretch,
By the small Care I take of you my Flock!
Thou weak and poor, and I am weak and poor.

With many Sighs I curse the fatal Time
That lur'd my luckless Steps to see the Town;
Yet I have blest it with a thousand Prayers.
There I the cruel ANNA first beheld;
Yet all for nought, 'twas that undid me quite.
Alas, that Love should cause both Joy and Pain.

It is not Mopsus that my Rival is,
Altho' he seeks my Fair with daily Suit;
His clownish Gifts and clownish Courtesies,
I cannot fear, they are as vain as mine.
Too foolish Mopsus, keep thy silly Kids,
And early Fruit; or to another give.

Fair ANNA is my Love:  Ah, why my Love?
For she disdains the Love of Lycidas:
I am despis'd by her, and set at nought,
My rural Melody she holds in Scorn,
My Pastorals she hears with Carelessness,
And laughs at all the Lays that I indite.

Wherefore my Pipe, although you please rude Pan,
Yet since not her, whom I alone adore;
And thou unlucky Muse, shall never more be woo'd
By me unlucky Swain.

Thus Lycid spoke,
And broke his Pipe, and on the Ground lay down,
The wet-cold Ground.  What Time, the Sun had drove
His slow Steeds headlong in th' Ocean's Wave,
Taking but a small Circuit of the Sky:
And the frosty Night had spread her Mantle blue
Over the Heaven &mdash; which seen, the pensive Boy
Half in despite arose, and homeward drove
His sullen Sheep, whose hanging Heads did seem
To droop, because their pining Keeper droop'd.

THE SECOND PASTORAL.
DAPHNIS AND MENALCAS DISCOURSE ABOUT THE SEVERITY OF THE SEASON.

DAPHNIS.
Alas, for pity, will the Winter's Rage
And all these bitter Winds be never o'er;
The keen Cold pierces me thro' ev'ry Joint,
My ragged Oxen shiver with the Cold,
And yonder Turrets to the driving Blasts
Rock dreadful, bending all their Battlements
Before the Storm, as doth the slender Ash.

MENALCAS.
Lewdly complainest thou of Winter's Wreck
Making thee sad; the rapid Years run down
By certain Laws, and Bad succeeds to Good,
And worst  to worse; when past the former Year,
The same Vicissitude returns again.

The Man who can't endure the stormy Time
And all the Waste of Winter; where; ah!  where
Forlorn can he wait, till the mild Spring
Returning brings the Sweets of vernal Hours:
For me, thrice thirty Years I have beheld,
Some spent in Joy, the greater parts in Tears,
And never did my vig'rous Limbs complain
Of Summer Heat, or Winter's piercing cold,
Or the fierce Threat of Tempests blowing wild,
But gently took that which ungently came.
My Flock hath ever been my chiefest Care,
And well in ev'ry Season do they look.

DAPHNIS.
No Marvel rough Menalcas, that you can
Cheerfully undergo the Winter's Weight:
Old Age and Winter do accord full nigh;
Hoary with Years and Snow; and, as the Time,
Sullen with Tempests, saddens all the Air,
Your cloudy Brow doth cast a gloomy Frown:
Morose and stormy is your time of Life.

But flow'ring Youth, like mine, is Foe to Frost,
My Ship unus'd to bear the Winter's Wind.

MENALCAS.
In vain the silly shipwreck'd Mariner,
Who will to sea again, doth Neptune blame.
So foolish shepherd Boys do idly live
Keeping their bleating Flocks on budded Broom.
But if the shiny Sun with brighten'd Ray
Smiles forth, they think the Spring already o'er,
And all the ruin of the Winter past.
Witless ye are, and like to foolish Flies
Ye 'gin to scorn the Cold and the shrill Sleet,
And whistle merry on your oaten Pipes.

Again breme Winter comes, with ruffled Brows,
And full of frosty Furrows in his Front,
Drearily shooteth with his stormy Dart,
Your careless resolution is dismay'd,
Your feeble Flocks are ruin'd by the Cold,
And dearly for your idle Songs ye pay.

DAPHNIS.
Foolish old Man, this silly old Advice
I lightly hold, since you wou'd have me waste,
Expos'd to Winter's Rage, my spring of Youth,
Thy Brain is worn out as is thy Strength;
And rusty Age hath rotted thee, poor Swain!
When with thy Youth, all youthful Joys are gone,
Me, in my Youth, you'd rob of youthful Joys:
But were thy Years green now, as mine are Green,
To Pleasures different, and diff'rent Thoughts
You wou'd incline, and learn to carrol too
Sweet Songs of Love, and thou would'st also pipe
Of ANNA'S Praise, with Dulcet Melody.
Fair ANNA; unto her and gentle Love,
For ever I, devoted have, my Life!
Such Happiness if you cou'd now enjoy,
Menalcas it wou'd make thee Young again.

MENALCAS.
Silly thou art to mention empty Love;
All that you give to Love you give the Wind.

DAPHNIS.
Behold, oh foolish Swain, the curled Front
Of yonder Bull, that traverses the Field:
His mooned Horns are bended o'er his Brow:
See how he venteth to the fuming Winds:
Do you not think he meditates of Love?
This Love hath made him wildly beautiful.

Then look upon thy Flock; seems they have ta'en
Thy Counsel; for they are so weak and wan;
Hoary with Frost and Snow, and cloath'd with Cold;
The Father of the Flock is impotent,
Therefore their Bodies droop, and their Hearts faint;
The wintry Horror shall destroy the Lambs.

MENALCAS.
Daphnis, I ween, thou little know'st of Good,
Thus heedlessly to boast thy silly Youth;
Which is a Bubble only made by Wind,
Whose Wit is Weakness, and its way Wildness.

DAPHNIS.
If you were young as I, you'd think as I;
When I am old, perhaps I'll think as you.
So long I have stood list'ning to thy Talk
The Winter's Blast hath chill'd me to the Heart;
And I have learn'd but little from thy Tale.
Hie thee, poor Shepherd!  home:  The Sun is set.

THE THIRD PASTORAL.
THYRSIS TELLS DAMON, HOW HE WAS WOUNDED BY CUPID FROM A BUSH.

DAMON.
Why, Thyrsis, do we sit so mournfully,
So Woe begon?  Up for the Morn is fair,
And the glad Hours hasten, on rosy Wings,
To come unto our Prayers; quickly they shall
Assuage the fury of the bitter Time.

THYRSIS.
Thou warnest well, oh gentle Shepherd Swain;
Winter hath call'd away his bitter Winds,
The pleasant Spring appeareth blithe and mild,
The Grass begins to be refresh'd and green;
While smoothly o'er the Pool and dimpl'd Stream
Shoots the light Swallow with unwaving Wings.

DAMON.
See yonder Hawthorn Spray begins to bud,
And uttereth its tender Head in Air;
Flora, hath called ev'ry Flower forth;
And bad them to prepare the gentle Bow'r
Of May, that hath arisen from her Bed,
Now we shall pass away our Time with Joy,
Sporting among the Virgins in the Vale,
And Love himself shall come to lead the Dance.

THYRSIS.
Already Love is out abroad at Game.

DAMON.
But how doth Thyrsis know he is abroad?
Ah luckless Lad, if thou hast Cupid seen!

THYRSIS.
Lately I saw him, hiding in a Bush,
His Wings bedrop'd with Purple and with Gold:
And were I not afraid, my silly Flock
Wou'd go astray, I'd tell you how it hapt.

DAMON.
I'll have an Eye unto thy Flock myself;
And well I have been taught to watch a Flock;
Because I have an hen-peck'd Sire at home,
That's govern'd by an unjust Step-mother;
Three Times in ev'ry Day they count the Sheep,
And woe is me, if any they do miss.

THYRSIS.
Nay, but thine eying of them will not do,
For they may chance to fall into some Ill,
I chanc'd to drop asleep three Days ago,
The while, that very same unhappy Ewe,
Who bears that Bandage on her limping Foot,
Fell headlong in a Pit, and hurt herself;
I thought sometime she would have broke her Neck;
She was so wanton, that she very oft
Drew me o'er all the Valley following her:
But now, I think, she sober is enough.

DAMON.
Well, let that rest, and do you tell the Tale.

THYRSIS.
'Twas on an holy-day, when Shepherd-Grooms
Have leave to sport; I took, my trusty Bow,
And Quiver full of long and feather'd Shafts,
Peeping for Birds in ev'ry Bush, or Brake:
At length, perch'd on a silver Ivy Tree,
I saw him; and a busy rustling heard:
Straitway against the Place I bent my Bow:
For were it Spirit, Fairy, Elf, or Snake,
Right manfully resolv'd I was to shoot.
With that a little naked Boy sprang forth,
His Wings were spotted like a Peacock's Tail,
And smiling at me, leaped on a Tree:
He had a golden Quiver full of Shafts,
But lightly now he bent:  Him to avoid,
Drawn to an Arch, I bent the sounding Bow,
And shot my Arrows at him, thick as Hail:
So long I shot, that all my Shafts were spent:
Then Pumice-Stones I cast as hastily:
But all in vain, he was so nimbly made,
And leaped still from Bough to Bough so light:
At last I grew afraid, and ran away.

But he, that seem'd before in Merriment
Only to sport; a  Shaft in earnest took
And hit me, frighted as I ran, in th' Heel;
'Twas but a little smart I felt at first,
But soon the Pain increas'd, and rankl'd sore,
Nor wot I how to ease the fest'ring Wound.

DAMON.
Alas, poor Thyrsis!  I lament thy Plight,
And know the little Urchin well enough,
And I have often heard my Father say,
When he was Young, like us, full blithsome Swain,
How he entangled Cupid in a Net,
By chance, which he had plac'd to catch the Crows:
He said, indeed, he was a winged Boy,
Else he had never dar'd to take him so.

But lo!  the Welkin thickens with the Night,
And Phoebus stooping, down the Steep of Heaven,
Rushes into the Sea:  Let's hasten Home.


THE FOURTH PASTORAL.
THE SHEPHERD ALSUS CHIDES DAMAETUS FOR HIS MELANCHOLY DISPOSITION.

ALSUS.
Is not the Season now the Month of May,
When jolly Swains and Virgins gayly sport;
How happens it that we no merrier are,
Nor like to others, girt in gaudy Green:
Our blanket Liveries are all too sad
For this sweet Season, when the Year is cloath'd
With Smiles, the Ground with Grass, and all the Groves
With green Leaves, and the Bushes with sweet Buds:
The Village Youth do gather ev'ry where
To pull the sweet Briar and the Flowers of May;
Then home to dress their Door-posts do they haste,
With Hawthorn buds, and fragrant Eglantine,
And Garlands gaudy in the Roses' Bloom:
Such Merriment o'er all the Village is,
While we sit here, as drowned in a Dream.

DAMAETAS.
Such Sports the youthful Shepherds well befit,
But ill beseem our more advanced Age.

ALSUS.
This very Morn, no longer 'twas ago,
I saw a Croud of lusty Villagers,
With singing, shouting, and right jolly Cheer:
A Shepherd play'd before them as they went,
Whereto right merrily they danc'd about;
With each his blooming Doxy in his Hand:
To see these Shepherds all so blithe and gay,
Did make my Heart to dance after their Pipe;
Then did they speed unto the green-wood Shade,
To fetch a May-bush from the pleasant Grove;
And crowned as King, they brought it home;
With gaudy Flow'rs, and Troops of Nymphs and Fays
Did carrol round. &mdash; Oh, that I had been Young
To help the Virgins their May-bush to bear!

DAMAETUS,.
So far am I from envying their Mirth,
That inly I lament their Carelessness;
Little regardful of their Flocks and Herds,
They suffer them to run at large, and stray,
Spending their Youth in glee and lustihed!
Well it is seen their Sheep be not their own;
Who for their Sheep do little care as they,
Or they would not intrust them to such Loons:
Nor care they what becometh of the Flocks
So they obtain the Fleece.

ALSUS.
Full well I see
Thou speakest out of spite, uncourteous Swain!
For thou are not invited to their Glee.
I, as I am, had rather be envy'd
Than fondly pity'd, yet would be pity'd
Rather than scorn'd:  For pity is for Faults
And for Misfortunes that we cannot help;
But Scorn is for a Deed of Foolishness.

Why should we not enjoy the Goods of Life,
And taste the Pleasures God in Mercy gave
To sweeten the Misfortunes of this World;
For when we die the Goods of Life are gone:
But what we leave behind us cannot please:
Good is not good, unless it be enjoy'd;
God never gave it us for other end.

DAMAETAS.
Your Folly, Alsus, fitly I compare
Unto the foolish Fondness of the Ape;
Who's so enamour'd of her ugly Cub;
And God wot, she a Cause of Love hath not;
That with her hugging it she kills the Cub.
So you, by over Fondness to enjoy,
The very Pleasures that you doat on, mar;
Wasting their Use, and spoiling their Intent.

ALSUS.
There are three Things in th' World hard to be born,
And there's a Fourth that never can be born:
Women that of Love's longing once do taste
Can very hardly from their Wish refrain:
And when a Shepherd Swain is used ill
He very hardly can be kept from Rage;
The other is, when we are parch'd with Thirst,
'Tis very difficult to keep from Drink.
But of all Burthens that we can't endure,
The greatest is to bear the Prate of Fools.
Nay, fond Damaetas, I assure thee well,
While I can laugh and sing I will not cry.

DAMAETAS.
Thy Levity and Folly I despise,
For I find much of sweet in Melancholy,.

ALSUS.
Then keep these Sweets, if any such there be
In Melancholy, pr'ythee to thyself:
Few Shepherds will thy Company desire!


THE FIFTH PASTORAL.
THE SHEPHERD MALIBAEUS SINGS IN PRAISE OF A COUNTRY LIFE.

Now had the Horses of the fiery Sun
Ascended to Heav'ns Tow'rs, and cast each where
From their broad Wings the Splendors of the Day;
And fair Aurora with her dewy Locks
Had chac'd the hateful Darkness from the Sky:
Warn'd by the coming Light, young Maelibee
Gan drive his Flock of Goats from out their Stalls
To feed abroad, where they might pasture best:
To an high Mountain's Top he with them went,
Where thickest Grass did cloath the open Hills:
And now among the Woods and Groves they spread,
And wander o'er the Vallies as they please!
Mean time the Shepherd piped to himself
In sort like this.

MALIBAEUS.
Oh, the great Happiness
Of Shepherd Swains!  and some there by, who love
That low Estate, by ill use not deprav'd;
Who do not measure Things by outward shew.
For here are no such Cares as oft disturb
And rend the rich Man's Mind:  They ne'er intrude
Into the humble Swain's contented Hut:
Nor Cares he if the Fleece, that him arrays,
Be not in Purple dy'd, or daz'ling Gold.

With innocent Breast, from Care and Sorrow free,
Upon the green Grass doth he lay his Limbs,
In the Spring-time, the various Flow'rs among;
Whose sundry Colours paint the sprinkled Fields.
There lying all at Ease, and free from Guile,
He doth delight him with his oaten Pipe.
There he, lord of himself, in Wreaths of Vine
Binding his loosen'd Locks, delights himself
In his Milk-droping Goats, and Pales fair,
The green Wood, pleasant Vale; and darksome Cave,
Where a continual Shade is to be seen;
And where sweet Springs all Wells, as Chrystal clear,
Do always flow, to quench the Shepherd's Thirst.

Oh!  who can lead then a more pleasant Life
Than he, that with pure Mind and sincere Heart,
Nor greedy Riches knows, nor dire Debate;
Or Perils of a War, by Land or Sea.
The holy Pan he worships with his Hook,
Not polished by Skill:  He joys in Groves,
And makes himself full blithe; in the wide Field
Gathering sundry Flow'rs:  and sweet Content,
And Health, that precious Jewel drop'd from Heav'n,
With quiet, harbour in his peaceful Breast;
And perfect Pleasure builds with him her Bow'r.

This all his Care, all his Endeavour this,
And all his Wish; how he may live in Peace!
And how he may repose himself to sleep
In some cool Shade sheltered from the Sun;
The while his Flock securely feeds around.

Oh Flocks, oh Fawns, and, oh the pleasant Vale
Of Tempe, where the Naides resort;
By you th' enamour'd Shepherd sings; as sweet
As the Aseraean Poet, so renown'd
Thro' all the World, from ev'ry Trouble free,
And Care, in which fond Men consume their Days.

In such Delights, and leaning on his Crook,
Young Malibaeus past away his Time;
Upon shrill Reeds warbling his rural Lays:
Hypaerion now attain'd his sultry Noon,
And the exceeding Heat compell'd the boy
To seek for Shelter in a neighb'ring Wood.


THE SIXTH PASTORAL.
STREPHON AND CLAIUS, LAMENT THEIR HOPELESS STATE THRO' LOVE.

By this the Night, out of the darksome Reign
Of Erebus, had call'd her teemed Steeds;
And lazy Vesper, in his timely Hour,
From Golden Aetna, had ascended Heav'n;
When Strephon, an undone forsaken Swain,
And hap'less Pastor Claius, Woe begon,
Thus in a dreary Forest mourn'd their Plight.

STREPHON.
Ye Goat-herd Gods, that love the grassy Hills,
Ye rural Nymphs that haunt the Vallies green,
Ye Satyrs that in quiet Woods delight;
Vouchsafe your silent Ears to my Love Song;
Which to my Sorrows gives an early Day,
And to the Night my Misery prolongs.

CLAIUS.
Oh, Mercury forerunner of the Night!
Dian!  sweet Huntress of the savage Wilds!
Oh, lovely Star, the Morning's Harbinger!
Vouchsafe your silent Ears unto my Plaint,
Which oft hath tired Echo in her Cave.

STREPHON.
I, that was once a free and jolly Swain,
And rul'd the Noon-tide Shade and Ev'ning Sport;
I, that was once esteemed for my Song,
Am banish'd now among the desert Hills
Of huge Despair:  Affliction is my Life,
And my sweet Voice is like an hooting Owl's.

CLAIUS.
I lov'd the grateful Fragrance of the Morn,
Hunting the wild Inhabitants of Woods;
I once was all the Musick of the Plain;
Now I am dark!  my Day is turn'd to Night;
Heart-broken so, that all I see I fear,
And fill the Plain with Cries instead of Songs.

STREPHON.
Long since, alas!  like to a dying Swan
I usher in the Morning with Complaint:
Now, on the Mountain Tops, I sit and wail.
Long since the Ev'ning of my Joys is come,
And all my Honours troden in the dust.

CLAIUS.
Long since the happy Dwellers of these Vales
Have prayed me to cease my strange Laments;
Which interrupt their Works and marr their Joys:
Long since I hate the Night, but more the Day;
Long since my Thoughts pursue me like wild Beasts,
That oft I wish the Hills to cover me.

STREPHON.
Meseems the stately Mountains are no more,
They are transformed to dejected Vales;
Meseems, in these ill changed Woods, I hear
The Nightingales to learn the Owlet's Note;
Meseems I feel the Comfort of the Day,
Turn'd to the deadly Silence of the Night.

CLAIUS.
Meseems that I behold a filthy Cloud,
Soon as the Sun ascends the eastern Hills;
Meseems I do perceive a noisome Smell,
When I do pluck the sweetly springing Flow'rs;
Meseems I hear, when Musick I do hear,
The deadly Cries of Men murdered in Woods.

STREPHON.
I wish to set the Forest in a Blaze,
And give a last Farewell unto the Sun;
I curse the Shepherd who invented Songs;
And, out of Envy, hate the pleasant Mounts;
And, with despite, the humble Fields contemn:
I do detest Night, Ev'ning, Day and Morn.

CLAIUS.
Dire Imprecations are my daily Prayer,
My Flames are more than wou'd the Trees consume,
My State is baser than the basest Thing,
I never wish to see another Hour;
I hate myself in the Excess of Shame,
And stop my Ears till I grow made with Grief.

STREPHON.
ANNA the sweetest Virgin of the Plain,
Whose Beauty doth out-shine the Morning Sun;
Who doth in Stateliness surpass all Trees,
Hath cast me forth, unhappy, from her Love.

CLAIUS.
Phillis, the far most cruel of her Sex,
At whose Approach the Sun with Pleasure rose;
Is gone for ever, hath forsook me quite,
And to a Desert turn'd our pleasant Fields.

STREPHON.
With these Complaints I'll fill the Woods and Plains.

CLAIUS.
Ev'ning and Morning, this shall be my Song.


THE SEVENTH PASTORAL.
DICUS CHIDES DORUS FOR NOT SINGING THE PRAISE OF HIS MISTRESS, AND AFTERWARDS FINDS FAULT WITH HIS LOVE.

DICUS.
Dorus, these Woods once echo'd with thy Songs!
Or, is thy Mistress, or, thy Love no more?
For he who loves, makes ev'ry Echo spake
The Worthiness of her that he admires.

DORUS.
Ah, Dicus, why do you suspect my Faith?
Who doubts another's Love is false himself.
Were I as changeable as Moon or Wind,
Yet ANNA'S Charms wou'd fix me ever her's.

DICUS.
The honest Heart will never hide its Love,
If noble be thy Passion, speak it out.
Who glories in Love makes Love glorious.
Say, how you lov'd, what wond'rous Beauty won you?

DORUS.
When three-leav'd Grass is tasteless to the Sheep,
Then may I hope to sing sweet ANNA'S Praise,
And not disgrace her Beauty with my Verse.

DICUS.
Yet, tell me, gentle Dorus, what is Love,
And how it comes and captivates the Heart?

DORUS.
He comes by seeing, and he lives by Thought:
His Youth is Joy, his Age the Soul's Grief:
Doubt is his Sleep, Invention his Waking,
Fancy his Food, Carefulness his Cloathing,
Beauty his Book, his Sports are tender Fears;
Despair doth clip his Pennons of Desire;
He squanders and is never satisfy'd;
But how he conquers, and his captive Chains,
I cannot tell, tho' in my Heart I feel.

DICUS.
So Dorus may thy Sheep supply thy Wants,
And thy fair Mistress with thy Wish comply:
If thou again will tell what Beauty is,
That captivates the Heart of wand'ring Love.

DORUS.
Oh, blessed be the Name of her I love,
Excess of Virtue is her only Fault:
Venus, to make her up, spent all herself:
Yet oft she deigns to hear me talk, with Truth
And Innocence, and her own Heart, my Friend;
Her Love's my Life, her Anger is my Death.

DICUS.
Thy Safety then is surely little worth.
A Man to fear a Woman's moody Eye,
Makes Reason be a Slave to servile Sense;
So is Remorse in Folly dearly bought.

DORUS.
Uncourteous Swain!  take heed ye silly Herds,
For I have found a Wolf:  Oh, Shepherd Boys,
Eschew this venom'd Tongue, that hurts the Soul:
Such Snakes it is our best Defence to fly.

DICUS.
Dorus, you by your Anger are misled,
So Love encroaches on your charm'd Reason,
But it is time to end our idle Song,
Since it brings Anger:  As for me, I take
Compassion on the Frenzy of your Mind,
Rather than Rage for Rage; and much I wish
That you may have some help unto your Love:
May Fortune give thee Store, and Nature Health,
And Tenderness the Arts of Eloquence;
But you alone can give thyself Content
And a quiet Mind; thus parting I commend
Unto thee, Dorus, all my former Love.

DORUS.
Well do I prove that Error lies in Zeal,
Yet it is Zeal from Error of true Heart:
Nothing but this cou'd have enraged me,
To hear that Words did lightly prize those Charms
That I esteem, in ev'ry virtue rich?
So fare thee well, good Shepherd!  for a while!

THE EIGHTH PASTORAL.
GERON BLAMES LYCIDAS FOR THE VIOLENCE OF HIS PASSION.

GERON.
Arise, poor Lycidas, let Sorrow go,
Who yields to Grief doth but increase his Smart:
Come let us sing, sweet Verse doth soften Pain;
Thy ancient Friend would fain relieve thy Love.

LYCIDAS.
Seek not to please a Mind with Sorrow drown'd,
No outward Joys can ease my Grief within;
As well with Oil thou mayest cool the Fire,
As seek to render Comfort to a Man
Who takes a Pleasure in his Misery.

GERON.
Yet Time to ev'ry thing doth give an End,
Tho' now they live, at last thy Woes must die;
They perish immature:  Up then, and seek
If Virtue can effect the same as Time;
And bring to constant Temper thy weak Heart.

LYCIDAS.
Who ever taught a Fool, unwitting Swain,
Sweet Virtue's Law allows me to lament,
When I have such a Cause as now I have!
Time shall together end my Life and Woe,
Till then my Misery can know no Cure.

GERON.
Can Physick cure us if it be refus'd,
Wit is not Wit that Counsel doth contemn;
Yet, for my Sake, discover why you mourn,
Relief oft comes when we do most despair,
And Fortune still may change, and you be blest!

LYCIDAS.
Tho' I did live in Fortune's flow'ry Lap,
And all the Stars unto my good combin'd,
Yet still, my wretched Plight would be the same;
Ruin's Relique, Care's Web, Sorrow's Food:
Since she, fair Fierce, despises me, and hates.

GERON.
Alas!  In what Condition art thou fallen,
You love the very Thing that mars your Peace:
What Counsel can, rejected thus, prevail;
What Danger see, when blinded so by Love;
This Tyrant Love in golden Fetters bind;
Or rather those rebell'ous Thoughts suppress;
Let not a glittering Name thy Sense deceive,
Or win thy Fancy to believe it Love.
Begin resolv'd, and half the Work is done;
He ploughs the Wave, and soweth in the Sand,
And strives to take the Tempest in a Net;
Whose Hope dependeth on a Woman's Will;
What Man is he that hath his Freedom sold?
To Man o'er woman was dominion given:
A fickle Sex, soon proud if they be coy'd:
And to conclude, a Woman is your Love.

LYCIDAS.
Oh Gods, how long this old Fool hath disturb'd
My weary'd Ears; oh Gods, grant me but this,
That I may soon be rid of his false Tongue;
Oh noble Age of Dotards, that delight
In being heard until the Hearer die:
He who will bear such Cant, and Patience hath;
Let him go learn of thee, what Virtues were
Abounding in the Times when thou wert young;
Old Houses are thrown down to build up new,
The oldest Rams are culled from the Flock;
But he who once hath got a long white Beard,
Tho' Cradle-witted, he must be esteem'd:
Oh, when will Men leave off to judge by Hairs;
And only think those old whose Minds are old,
Fraught with Experience and for Virtue fam'd.

GERON.
If that thy Face were hid, or mine were blind,
Yet I shou'd know that now a young Man speaks;
Thy Words, tho' full of malapert Offence,
I weigh them not; but still Advise thee how
To conquer Love, and thy fond Mind subdue!
And turn thy Fancy to the Country's Sports.
In hunting fearful Beasts divert thy Thoughts;
Or try to angle in the crisped Brooks;
Go graft again thy Plants, and sweet Fruit-trees:
Cherish th' industrious Bee, and lend her Hives;
And take a special Care of all thy Flocks:
If you do this, you will forget to love.

LYCIDAS.
Hath any Man heard what this Dotard said?
Truly not I; my Thoughts were all on her,
Who with a Look can all my Pains repay!
To her I'll go, and lay me at her Feet;
And paint so very movingly my Pain;
As shall her tender Breast to Pity melt,
And Pity the Forerunner is of Love.


THE NINTH PASTORAL.
DAPHNIS, AT THE REQUEST OF TYTIRUS, SINGS ONE OF THE SONGS OF LYCIDAS ON HIS MISTRESS.

TITIRUS.
Why, Daphnis, gentle Shepherd, art thou sad?
Hath any Wolf destroy'd thy tender Lambs,
Or thy Pipe broke which sounded once so sweet;
Or art thou of thy loved Lass forelorn:
Or are thy Eyes suited unto the Year,
That quenches the parch'd Furrows Thirst, with Rain;
Like to an April Show'r, thy Sorrows flow
Adown thy Cheeks, to ease thy inward Grief.

DAPHNIS.
Nor this, nor that, so much doth make me weep,
As for a young unhappy Swain I love,
Who loves a Lass that doth despise his Flame;
And now he doth all Shepherd Joys forsake,
His pleasant Pipe, so merry once and sweet;
He wilfully hath broke; and doth forbear
His wonted Songs, wherein he all excell'd.
Young Lycidas his Name, the Shepherd Swain;
Sweet Lycidas, the Joy of all the Fields;
Whom once I lov'd, and ev'ry Person lov'd,
Striving to win his Heart most courtesy:
But now he hath forsaken all his Friends;
And loves the Daughter of old Moelibee,
The peerless Pastoral.

TITYRUS.
I pray thee Swain;
If that his Ditties be so excellent;
If thou rememberest, record some one;
The while our Flocks do graze about in sight;
And we, beneath this gloomy Shade can sit.

DAPHNIS.
I am content, and will recite the Song
He made of ANNA, all the Shepherds Love;
As by a gentle Fountain he reclin'd,
And tuned it unto the Water's fall.

Ye rural Nymphs that in this chrystal Stream
Do bathe your Locks; at my Request forsake
Your watry Bow'rs; and you, ye Virgins nine,
That on Parnassus dwell, around the Font
Of sacred Helicon!  Help me to sing
Her Praises who doth all her Sex excel.
Of ANNA, charming ANNA be your Song;
The Flow'r of Virgins she, the sweetest Maid!
Oh may she flourish long; the Country's boast.

See where she sits upon the level Green;
Oh, seemly Sight:  array'd in Ermine Robes
Most like a Maiden true!  Upon her Head
A crimson Coronet, with Flowers sweet,
The damask Rose and paly Daffadill!
Bay Leaves, and Primroses, and Violets,
Oh, have ye seen her Angel Face,
Like Dian lovely, amiable and chaste;
The red Rose with the white is mingled there,
Her modest Smiles, her easy Majesty;
Where, but in her, can so much Charms be found.
Shew thyself Cynthia, with thy silver Rays;
I will not match her with Latona's Race,
Remembering well the Fate of Niobe;
But I will offer up my Heart to her,
Spotless and innocent as is a Lamb's;
She is my Goddess, and her Shepherd I.

Caliope, with all her Sisters, comes
To play for her; so sweetly do they sing,
That 'tis an Heav'n to hear their Melody:
The Graces also to their Musick dance;
Nor want they a fourth Grace when she is by;
ANNA, shall with the others reign in Heav'n.
Advance ye silver-slipper'd Naiades;
Ye Daughters of the falling Rivulets;
And bear a Crown to her of Olive Boughs;
Olives, the Emblems are of Peace and Love!
Ye Shepherd Nymphs that dwell upon the Green,
Hither resort, and let none come with you,
But those who Virgins are; and when you come,
See that your Rudeness do not you disgrace;
Bring the sweet Pink and purple Columbine,
With Gilliflowers and Carnations Fair;
Ye Virgins strew the Ground with Asphodel;
Cowslips, Kingcups and loved Lillies;
That done, arise, my Love, my charming Fair;
And you, ye Nymphs, depart, each one her Way:
I fear I've weary'd you with idle Songs,
But ANNA, she shall thank your courtesy.

TITYRUS.
And did young Lycidas compose this Song?
Ah, foolish Boy, to be undone with Love;
Ah, cruel Pastorel to ruin him:

But let us rise; for Darkness draweth on,
And the twinkling Stars have chaced Day away.


THE TENTH PASTORAL.
COLIN TELLS THE UNHAPPY SITUATION OF HIS LOVE TO THE SHEPHERD EGON.

EGON.
Lo!  Colin, here the Grot and cooling Cave,
Which lulls my soften'd Soul to Melancholy;
Tell me, what wants there here to cause Content;
The simple Air, the gentle warbling Gale,
So calm, so cool, so sweet, from Beds of Flow'rs;
The grassy Meadow all with Daisies dight,
The Hawthorn Spray, where Beds of Flow'rs;
The grassy Meadow all with Daisies dight,
The Hawthorn Spray, where Birds of ev'ry kind
Attune their Musick to the sounding Rills.

COLIN.
Oh, happy Egon, how I bless thy State,
The Paradise which Adam lost you find;
Here may the Flock wander at Noon, or Eve,
Nor dread the Hunger of the prowling Wolf:
Thy lovely Songs, here may'st thou meditate,
And strike the lulling Harp.  But I forlorn,
Unhappy Man, whom all the Gods pursue,
And Destiny, with unrelenting Hate;
Can find no Place to shelter me, or please.

EGON.
Then, if thou'lt be advised by a Friend;
Forsake a Place that hath enchanted thee;
Leave me these Hills, and to the Plains retire;
There wealthy Shepherds tend their num'rous Flocks;
There lodge no Night-ravens, with hideous scream,
Or elvish Ghosts, or ghastly Owls do fly;
But friendly Fairies with the Graces met,
And light-foot Nymphs do chace the Night away;
The Sisters nine, that on Parnassus dwelt,
Do make them Musick with their iv'ry Harps;
And Pan himself, to kiss the silvan Train,
Will pipe and dance, and sing by the Moon's Light;
Such peerless Pleasures have they in the Vales.

COLIN.
And I, while young, unpractised in Woe,
Did let me freely walk, unchain'd by Love,
In such Delights; and 'mong my Equals joy'd;
But riper Age such Pleasures have deny'd;
And Time, in passing, like a Garment wears.
Once I cou'd sing of Love, and tune my Pipe
Unto my mournful Pleas, in Verses made:
Once I cou'd climb the Boughs to gather Fruit,
To give my Rosalind; and, beneath a Hedge,
Compose of various Flow'rs a Garland rare,
To crown her golden Locks; but now, alas!
The Loss of her whose Love, as Life, I held,
And riper Years have changed Colin quite.

EGON.
Colin, to hear thy Rhimes and  Roundelays,
Which thou wert wont to sing on wasteful Hills,
I more delight, than does the soaring Lark
In Summer's Morn:  The Echo of thy Songs
Taught Musick to the Birds, or made them cease
Their carolling, for shame of thy sweet Notes:
Soon as thy oaten Pipe began to sound,
Laid by their iv'ry Flutes, and shrilling Harps,
And, from the chrystal Fountain, where they sat,
Ran hastily unto thy Melody;
They were abash'd to hear a Shepherd Swain
So much exceed them in their Poesie.

COLIN.
Egon, I little of the Muses know,
They be the Daughters of the thund'ring Jove,
For since I heard how Pan with Phoebus strove,
I never dare to seek sweet Helicon,
But piping lowly in the cooling Shade,
I sing, tho' haply ill, to please myself:
Nor care I who my Verses praise or blame,
Or strive, excelling others, for renown;
It fits not humble Shepherd Fame to get;
But in the pleasant Fields to feed his Flock;
I know my Rhimes are very rudely made,
And fitter therefore for a Country rude;
Enough it is, if I can paint my Woe,
And hopeless State in Words that don't offend.
Young Lycidas is dead, the Shepherd Swain;
Who taught me all the Verses that I know:
Fly to the cruel Nymph, ye gentle Gales,
That she the truest Shepherd hath undone
That liv'd on Earth, who loved her full dear.

EGON.
Unhappy Colin, I lament thy Fate;
Thy Tears do make the hardest Flint to weep;
Ah, cruel Rosalind; uncourteous Fair!
But now 'tis time that we shou'd home return;
Then rise ye Flocks and hasten home apace;
Lest Night bewilder you and wet the Lambs.


THE ELEVENTH PASTORAL.
ALEXIS, AT THE REQUEST OF HYLAS, LAMENTS THE DEATH OF PASTORA.

HYLUS.
When will Alexis sing, as he was wont,
Sweet Songs of Joy and Love; the Muse too long
Hath slept in Sorrow, let her now awake;
Whether of beauteous Pastorel you sing,
Or honour Pan with Hymns the Shepherds God.

ALEXIS.
Alas, young Shepherd, 'tis no time for Mirth,
No time for Pan to hear, or Love to smile!
May is the merry Month, not Winter sad
When Phoebus weary of his yearly Toil,
Doth haste to rest his Horses in the Sea;
This sullen Season is a Time for Woe,
And loatheth such Delights as thou dost chuse;
The mournful Muse rejecteth Songs of Joy,
As she was wont in Summer Days to sing;
But if thou wilt have Musick, who so fit
To sing as Hylas, sweetest of the Swains.

HYLAS.
The Nightingale is Sovereign of Song,
Before her even the Woodlark silent is;
And I unfit to carrol before thee:
Alexis at the Muses Well hath drank.
But if sad Winter's Wrath, and Seasons chill,
Accord not with the Muses Merriment;
To sadder Times thou may'st attune thy Lute;
And sing of Sorrow and the Waste of Death:
Dead is Pastora, lovely Shepherdess!
The fairest May that ever rose she was,
Her like she hath not left upon the Green;
Arise, oh Shepherd Swain, and sing of her.

ALEXIS.
Full willingly I will lament her Death,
Whom living I have lov'd and mourn'd when dead:
But, ah!  too weak my humble Poesy
Ought but my Sorrow, not her Worth, to tell.

Arise, Melpomene, thou mournfullest Muse;
Thou never hadst before such Cause of Woe:
Arise ye Ghosts, and Spectres deadly pale;
And thou my rueful Rhime; Matter of Mirth
Thou never shalt have more:  for she is dead
That made thee Mirth, pour out abundant Tears.

Shepherds that by your num'rous Flocks abide,
Upon the distant Downs, wail ye this Waste
Of Nature's Pride; lament the Loss of her
Whose Presence was our Joy; the Sun of all
Our Bliss is set, an heavy Night of Woe!
Oh break your Pipes and pour abundant Tears.

Why do we longer live, unhappy Swains,
Whose better Days Death hath shut up in Woe;
The fairest Flow'r, that our Garland grac'd,
Sing now, ye Shepherds Daughters, sing no more
The Songs Alexis on Pastora made;
But into weeping turn your wanton Lays.
'Tis Time to die!  oh, pour abundant Tears.

Why do the Flow'rs of the Valley fade?
And bury'd lie in Winter's Womb so long!
Yet when the Spring hath spread her flow'ry Lap,
They bloom afresh, as they would never fail!
But that which is the dearest on the Earth,
Beauty's fair Bud, and Virtue's golden Bough,
Reviveth not; Oh, pour abundant Tears.

Pastora, while she lived on the Plain,
For Beauty and for Sweetness had no Peer;
Nor wou'd she scorn the simple Shepherd's Songs;
She lov'd the Fields:  Oh, pour abundant Tears.

Now all our Happiness is chang'd to Woe,
All Music sleeps, nor will we play for Death,
Our gaudy Garlands on her Grave we throw;
Now mourn my Muse and pour abundant Tears.

One bitter Blast blew all our Joy way:
Ah me, that Death should Nature so subdue!
The faded Leaves drop from the lofty Oak,
The Rivers fail, for dried is the their Source;
The mantled Meadows mourn their Flow'rs dead;
The Heavens do weep, the feeble Flocks refuse
Their Food, and hand their Heads, as they wou'd learn
To weep Pastora's Loss; the Forest Beasts
Lament; except the rav'nous Wolves, that chace
The helpless Sheep:  Pastora is no more,
The Joy, the Comfort, Safety of the Plains:
Weep Philomel.  Oh, pour Abundant Tears.

The Water Nymphs that wont with her to sing,
And for her Garland Olive Branches weave;
Now Boughs of baleful Cypress only weave;
The Muses carry bitter Elder Leaves
Instead of Bay:  The fatal Three repent
They broke her Thread, and pour abundant Tears.

How trustless is the State of earthly Things,
How Slippery the State of mortal Men!
Now have I learn'd a Lesson dearly bought,
That nothing on the Earth is durable!
But wherefore weep; in spite of Death and  Hell,
Pastora breaks the Bonds of endless Night,
And dead on Earth she is alive in Heav'n.
Cease then, my Muse, nor pour abundant Tears.

Why shou'd we weary Heav'n with Complaint,
As if some Evil to Pastora fell;
She reigns a Goddess now among the Gods;
Might I once come to her; Oh, that I might!
Unwitting Men to know, or Good, or Ill,
We deem of Death as an unhappy  Lot,
But knew we Fools, to what a State it leads,
Die wou'd we daily to be blest in Death.
Make haste, ye Shepherds, now and end your Plaint,
And cease, my Muse, to pour abundant Tears.

HYLAS,.
Enough, Alexis, thou hast mourn'd enough,
It 'gins to mizzle, let us hasten home.


THE TWELFTH PASTORAL.
THE SHEPHERD MENALCAS REFLECTS ON THE VARIOUS MISFORTUNES OF HIS LIFE.

A Gentle Shepherd sat beside a Spring,
Beneath the Shadow of a spreading Beach;
Menalcas was his Name, a tuneful Swain!
For he had learn'd his Songs of Lycidas:
There, as he sat in secret Shade alone,
Thus he began to make his Plaint of Love.

MENALCAS.
Oh, mighty Pan!  the God of Shepherd Swains,
Who of our tender Lambkins taketh keep;
And doth the Shepherds watch as well as Flocks!
Thee I invoke (if that thou deign'st to hear
Rude Ditties tun'd to Shepherd's oaten Reed,)
If e'er I sung a Sonnet that might please;
Harken a-while when poor Menalcas sings.

Whilom in Youth, while flow'r'd my joyful Spring,
Like Swallow swift I wander'd here and there;
Nor had I Fear to dread, or Wit to shun
The many Dangers that we meet in Life!
I went thro' wasteful Plains, and Forests wide,
Nor did I ever think upon the Wolf,
Or Nuts I gather'd from the Hazel Boughs,
Or joy'd to urge thee tim'rous Deer in Chace,
Or heartless Hare; nor ever thought of Age,
But fancy'd that my Youth wou'd always last.
How often have I climb'd the knotted Oak,
All to dislodge the Raven from her Nest;
For Liberty was dear to me as Life!

Oft too I sung, by Colin taught to sing,
Who has not heard of British Colin's Lay;
And if that Lycidas aright did judge,
To Pan himself I need not yield my Pipe!
The Virgins followed him, the Muses me.
But such a Pride as mine was ill repaid,
The Shepherds God, my Happiness hath marr'd,
My Freedom torn, and left my Life to moan:
LOVE they him call; a cruel Deity.

Then did my Spring of Years bid me farewell;
And Summer came, and I with Heat consum'd:
Then forth I went, not happy as before,
The Bush my Bed, the Bramble was my Bow'r,
My Wretchedness the Woods can witness well.
Where I was us'd to find the busy Bee
Working her sweet Cells in the odorous Hive;
The griesly Toadstool, and loath'd Paddocks crawl;
And where before the Woodlark us'd to sing,
The moaping Owl doth dismally complain.

To make me Cages for the Nightingale,
And Baskets of Bullrushes was my wont,
None better skill'd to take the silly Fish,
None better seen to hunt the savage Beasts,
And guard from any nightly harm, my Fold:
But greater Things  I learn'd in length of Time;
The sudden rising of the raging Sea,
The Pow'r of Herbs, and ev'ry Shepherd Art.
But, ah!  unwise Menalcas, witless Swain,
Thou never found'st the Art to cure thy Love.

Thus is my Summer worn away, and waste,
And all the flatt'ring Fruit of idle Hope
Rotted, alas, before they half were ripe!
The fragrant Flow'rs that in my Garden grew,
Are wither'd, as they had been gather'd long,
Their Roots for want of Rain are dried up!
Ah, who hath done such Hurt to Rosalind,
To blast the Flow'rs that shou'd her Garland make.

And I, that whilom, us'd to frame my Pipe
Unto the shifting of the Shepherds Feet,
No longer seek to please the Silvan Girls,
One, if I please, Menalcas were content.
And thus of all my harvest Hope, I have
Nought reaped but a Crop of cloudy Care;
My Life declines with Swiftness to its End,
And Winter sternly claims his rigorous Right:
The piercing Cold hath nip'd my rugged Rind,
And Age hath left deep Furrows in my Face;
Delight is laid asleep, and Pleasure past,
No Sun appears, but  all are Clouds and Storms.
Then quit, ye Shepherd Boys, your merry Sports,
My Muse is hoarse, and can now longer sing:
Here will I hang my Pipe upon the Bough,
Was never Pipe or Reed did sweeter play;
Winter is come, Death after Winter comes.

Gather together ye my little Flock,
Let me, ah!  let me fold you for the last,
E're cruel Winter doth destroy your Fleece;
Winter is come, and after Winter Death.

Adieu ye gentle Pleasures, pensive Sweet;
Adieu my Fair, whose Love I dearly bought:
Adieu my little Lambs, and loved Sheep;
Adieu, poor Lycidas, that was so true;
Tell Rosalind, that I bid her adieu.
