Farewell those gentler seasons of the year,
Young Spring, who fill'd with flow'rs the willing soil;
Summer, whose sunbeams nurs'd the foodful ear;
With Autumn, grateful to the reaper's toil.

For lo, sad change!  from yonder gathering cloud
Stern Winter wildly drives his dark array:
From the keen North the winds are piping loud,
As through the yielding woods they sweep their way

High on a storm, with visage fierce and pale,
The barren Eurus rides:  the rain descends
Far, far resounding through the floated vale,
Its hoarse rough Howls the dashing torrent sends.

Where are those rural charms that fed my eyes,
The cowslip'd meadow, and the hedge-row green?
In one wide waste the snow-clad Landscape lies;
And Frost with withering hand deforms the scene.

I sought the copse, the joyous thrum's haunt; 
For much I wish'd her melody to hear:
In vain I woo' her to begin her chaunt,
Nor joyous thrush, nor melody was there.

In social troops the silent larks are found,
Picking with busy bill their scanty food:
Ah me, I hear the gun's destructive sound,
And the snow blushes with their harmless blood!

Sweet bird!  are these the sports of reas'ning man?
Thus doth his savage hand thy songs repay,
Which bade his joys awake when spring began?
Which cheer'd in summer's heat the toilsome day?

The red-breast, wisely confident, presumes
To screen his weakness in the peopled cot;
And sweetly thankful for the scatter'd crumbs,
Pays the cheap bounty with his warbled note.

Now dull and dreary wakes the tardy morn;
The sickly Sun resigns his noon-tide pow'r:
Night comes; and Fear, of Melancholy born,
Adds a new horror to the darkling hour.

At ev'ry bush, at ev'ry sudden breeze,
Starts the lone Trav'ler on his wilder'd way;
In his own shade a thousand deaths he sees,
And stops, and pants, and listens in dismay.

The night-bird's thrice-flapp'd wing, and shriekings fell
Denounce the pining sick-man's hopeless doom;
In the hush air imperfect whispers dwell
Of Daemons prowling through the midnight gloom.

Stone-hearted Murder bathes his sword in blood;
Rapine, foul fiend, leads forth his lawless band;
Insatiate Hunger calls amain for food;
While pale-ey'd Famine howls along the land.

Where are thy haunts, O Chearfulness?  the bow'r
Of spring no more invites thee; nor the walk
At summer's eye, beneath thy guardian pow'r
Where late I listen'd to my Laura's talk.

Nor art thou seen within the courts of pride;
Ambition drivels thy peaceful image thence:
Tho' Feast, and Sport, and Laughter there abide,
Excess and Riot pall thy nicer sense.

At length thy coy retirement have I found,
Where smokes the cottage in the shelter'd vale;
Where, whilst his rustic friends the hearth surround,
The simple swain recounts his frolic tale.

His heart is humble as the garb he wears,
Like his coarse daily food, his manners plain;
Contentment's blessing the dull season cheers,
And the storm beats upon his roof in vain.

The smiles of innocence his temper guard,
And from his threshold banish home-bred strife;
Fresh health, and honest gain his toils reward;
And one continu'd summer rules his life.

Learn hence, ye vain, ye idle, and ye proud,
When the dark storms of bleak misfortune low'r,
'Tis Virtue only can dispel the cloud,
And bless with Chearfulness the wintry hour.
