I. 1.
PEACE, heaven-descended maid!  Whose powerful voice
From ancient Darkness call'd the morn;
Of jarring elements compos'd the noise,
When Chaos, from his old dominion torn,
With all his bellowing throng,
Far far was hurl'd the void abyss along;
And all the bright angelic choir
To loftiest raptures tun'd the heavenly lyre;
Pour'd in loud symphony th' impetuous strain;
And every fiery orb and planet sing;
And through the dark Night's desolate domain
Rebounding, long and deep the lays triumphal rung.

I. 2.
Oh!  whither art thou fled, Saturnian reign!
Roll round again, majestic years!
To break fell Tyranny's corroding chain,
From Wo's wan cheek to wipe the bitter tears,
Ye years again roll round!&mdash;
Hark!  from afar what loud tumultuous sound,
While echoes sweep the winding vales,
Swells full along the plains, and loads the gales!
Murder deep-rous'd, with the wild whirlwind's haste,
And roar of tempest, from her cavern springs,
Her tangled serpents girds around her waste,
Smiles ghastly stern, and shakes her gore distilling wings.

1. 3.
Fierce up the yielding skies
The shouts redoubling rise;
Earth shudders at the dreadful sound,
And all is listening, trembling, round.
Torrents, that from yon promontory's head
Roar'd furious down in desperate cascade,
Heard from afar amid the lonely night,
That oft have led the wanderer right,
Seem hearkening to the noise;
The mighty Ocean's more majestic voice
Drown'd in superior din is heard no more;
The surge in silence sweeps along the foamy shore.

II. 1.
The bloody banner streaming in the air,
Seen on yon sky-maz'd mountain's brow,
The mingling multitudes, the madding car,
Pouring impetuous on the plain below,
War's dreadful lord proclaim:
Bursts out by frequent fits th' expansive flame:
Whirl'd in tempestuous eddies flies
The surging smoke along the darken'd skies:
The chearful face of heaven no more is seen,
Fades the morn's vivid blush to deadly pale,
The twilight bat flits transient o'er the green,
And sullen through the gloom Night's bird begins to sail.

II. 2.
Involved in fire-streak'd gloom the car comes on;
The mangled steeds grim Terror guides.
His forehead writh'd to a relentless frown,
Aloft the angry power of battles rides.
Grasp'd in his mighty hand,
A mace tremendous desolates the land;
Thunders the turret down the steep,
The mountain shrinks before its wasteful sweep.
Chill Horror the dissolving limbs invades,
Smit by the blasting lightening of his eyes;
A bloated paleness Beauty's bloom o'erspreads,
Fades every flowery field, and every verdure dies.

II. 3.
How startled Phrenzy stares,
Bristling her ragged hairs!
Revenge the gory fragment gnaws;
See, with her griping harpy-claws
Imprinted deep, she rends the widening wound!
Discord her torch blue-streaming tosses round;
The shrieks of agony, the clang of arms,
Re-echo to the fierce alarms
Her trump terrific blows.
Disparting from behind, the clouds disclose
Of kingly gesture a gigantic form,
That with his scourge sublime directs the whirling storm.

III. 1.
Ambition!  outside fair!  within more foul
Than fellest fiend from Tart'ris sprung
In caverns hatch'd, where the fierce torrents rowl
Of Phlegethon, the burning banks along,
Yon naked waste survey!
Where late was heard the flute's mellifluous lay;
Where late the rosy-bosom'd Hours,
In loose array, danc'd lightly o'er the flowers;
Where late the shepherd told his tender tale;
And, rous'd by the soft-murm'ring breeze of morn,
The voice of chearful Labour fill'd the dale;
And dove-ey'd Plenty smil'd, and wav'd her liberal horn.

III. 2.
Yon ruins, sable from the wasting flame,
But mark the once-resplendent dome:
The frequent corse obstructs the sullen stream;
And ghosts glare horrid from the sylvan gloom:
How sadly silent all!
Save where outstretch'd beneath yon hanging wall
Pale Famine moans with feeble breath,
And Torture yells, and grinds her bloody teeth:&mdash;
&mdash;Though vain the muse, though vain the melting lay,
To touch thy heart, unconscious of remorse,
Know, monster, know, thy hour is on the way;
I see, I see the years begin their mighty course.

III. 3.
What scenes of glory rise
Before my dazzled eyes!
Young zephyrs wave their wanton wings,
And melody celestial rings.
Along the lily'd lawn the nymphs advance,
Flush'd with Love's bloom, and range the sprightly dance;
The gladsome shepherds on the mountain's side,
Array'd in all their rural pride,
Exalt the festive note,
Inviting Echo from her inmost grot.&mdash;
But, ah!  the landscape glows with fainter light;
It darkens, swims, and flies for ever from my sight.

IV. 1.
Illusions vain!  can sacred PEACE reside
Where sordid gold the breast alarms,
Where cruelty inflames the eye of Pride,
And Grandeur wantons in soft Pleasure's arms!
Ambition!  these are thine.
These from the soul erase the form divine;
These quench the animating fire,
That warms the bosom with sublime desire:
Thence the relentless heart forgets to feel,
Thence low'rs the threatening brow with gloomy hate,
And midnight Rancour grasps the ruthless steel,
Blaze the funereal flames, and sound the shrieks of fate.

IV. 2.
From Albion fled, thy once-belov'd retreat,
What region brightens in thy smile,
Creative PEACE!  and underneath thy feet
Sees sudden flowers adorn the rugged soil?
In bleak Siberia blows,
Wak'd by thy genial breath, the blushing rose?
Wav'd over by thy magic wand,
Does life inform fell Libya's burning sand?
Or does some isle thy parting sight detain,
Where roves the Indian through primaeval shades,
Haunts the pure pleasures of the woodland reign,
And, led by Reasons' ray, the path of Nature treads?

IV. 3.
On Cuba's utmost steep,
Far-leaning o'er the deep,
The goddess' pensive form was seen:
Her robe of Nature's vary'd green
Wav'd on the gale:  grief dimm'd her radiant eyes,
Her swelling bosom heav'd with boding sighs:
She ey'd the main; where, gaining on the view
Emerging from th' etherial blue,
Midst the dread pomp of war,
Gleam'd the Iberian streamer from afar&mdash;
She saw; and, on refulgent pinions born,
Slow-wing'd her way sublime, and mingled with the morn.
