Let courtly bards in polish'd phrase endite
Soft madrigals, to celebrate the fair,
Or paint the splendor of a birth-day night,
Where Peers and Dames in shining robes appear:
The task be mine neglected worth to praise,
Alas!  too often found in these degen'rate days.

O gentle Shenstone!  could the self-taught Muse,
Who joys, like thine, in rural shades to stray,
Could she, like thine, while she her theme pursues,
With native beauties deck the pleasing lay;
Then should the humble Clerk of Barton-Dean,
An equal meed of praise with thy School-mistress gain.

Ent'ring the village in a deep-worn way,
Hard by an aged-oak, his dwelling stands;
The lowly roof is thatch, the walls are clay:
All rudely rais'd by his forefathers' hands:
Observe the homely hut as you pass by,
And pity the Good Man that lives so wretchedly.

Vulcanian artist, here with oily brow
And naked arm, he at his anvil plies,
What time Aurora in the east does glow,
And eke when Vesper gilds the western skies;
The bellows roar, the hammers loud resound,
And from the tortur'd mass the sparkles fly around.

Hither the truant school-boy frequent wends,
And slyly peeping o'er the hatch is seen
To note the bick'ring workman, while he bends
The steed's strong shoe, or forms the sickle keen.
Unthinking, little elf, what ills betide,
Of breech begalled sore, and cruel task beside.

A deep historian, well I wot, is he,
And many tomes of ancient lore has read,
Of England's George, the flow'r of chivalry,
Of Merlin's Mirror, and the Brazen Head;
With hundred legends more, which to recite
Would tire the wisest nurse, and spend the longest night.

To Nature's Book he studiously applies,
And oft, consulted by the anxious swain,
With wistful gaze reviews the vaulted skies,
And shews the signs of sure impending rain,
Or thunder gathered in the fervid air,
Or if the harvest-month will be serene and fair.

The various phases of the moon he knows,
And whence her orb derives it's silver sheen,
From what strange cause the madding Heygre flows,
By which the peasants oft endanger'd been,
As in their freighted barks they careless glide,
And view th' inverted trees in Severn's chrystal tide.

Returning late at eve from wake or fair,
Among a sort of poor unletter'd swains,
He teaches them to name each brighter star,
And of the northern Lights the cause explains:
Recounts what comets have appear'd of old,
Portending death and war, and mis'ries manifold.

Around his bending shoulders graceful flow
His curling silver locks, the growth of years;
Supported by a staff he walketh slow,
And simple neatness in his mien appears:
And every neighbour that perchance be meets,
Or young or old be they, with courtesy he greets.

A goodly sight, I wot, it were to view
The decent Parish Clerk on Sabbath-day,
Seated, beneath the Curate, in his pew,
Or, kneeling down with lifted hands to pray,
And ever and anon, with close of prayer,
He answereth, Amen!  with sober solemn air.

Such times an ancient suit of black he wears,
Which from the Curate's wardrobe did descend;
Love to his Clerk the pious Curate bears,
Pities his wants and wisheth to befriend:
But what, alas!  can slender sal'ry do,
Encumber'd by a wife, and children not a few?

Thro' ev'ry season of the changing year,
His strict regard for Christian rites is seen,
The holy church he decks with garlands fair,
Or birchen boughs, or yew for ever green;
On ev'ry pew a formal sprig is plac'd,
And with a spacious branch the pulpit's top is grac'd.

At Christmas tide, when ev'ry yeoman's hall
With ancient hospitality is blest,
Kind invitations he accepts from all,
To share the plenteous, mirth-abounding feast;
The Christmas feast imperfect would appear,
Except their good old guest the Parish Clerk was there.

Then, when the mellow beer goes gaily round,
And curls of smoke from lighted pipes aspire,
When chearful carols thro' the room resound,
And crackling logs augment the blazing fire,
His honest heart with social joy o'erflows,
And many a merry tale he on his friends bestows.

When, smit with mutual love, the youth and maid
To weave the sacred nuptial knot agree,
Pleas'd he attends, to lend his useful aid;
And see the rites perform'd with decency:
He gives the bride, and joins their trembling hands,
While with the Service-book the Curate gravely stands.

Then, while the merry bells the steeple shake
Ringing in honour of the happy pair,
To notes of gladness while the minstrels wake,
And lads and lasses the rich bride-cake share;
O may the youthful bard a portion gain,
To whom the rural sage its virtues did explain.

When from the church returns the blythsome train,
A spicy cake two gentle maidens bring;
Which, holding o'er the bride, they break in twain,
And all conjoin'd this nuptial ditty sing:
"Joy to the wedded pair!  health, length of days,
And may they, blest by heav'n, a goodly household raise."

At eve the lovely condescending bride,
Will take the ring which on her finger shines,
And thro' the sacred circlet nine times slide
The fragrant gift, repeating mystic lines,
(The mystic lines we may not here make known,
Them shall the Muse reveal to virgins chaste alone.)

The stocking thrown, as ancient rules require,
Leave the glad lovers to complete their joy,
And to thy pillow silently retire,
Where close beneath thy head the charm must lie;
Rais'd by the pow'r of Love, in vision gay,
Thy future spouse shall come in holiday array.

And soft, approaching, with the mildest air,
Thy yielding lips shall modestly embrace,
O, sweet illusion!  wilt thou disappear?
Alas, it flies!  the morning springs apace!
The blushing lover sees the light with pain,
And longs to recompose, and woo his dream again.

O, time relentless!  foe to every joy!
How all declines beneath thy iron reign!
Once could our Clerk to sweetest melody
Attune the harp, and charm the list'ning plain:
Or with his mellow voice the Psalm could raise,
And fill the echoing choir with notes of sacred praise.

But now, alas!  his every power decays,
His voice grows hoarse, long toil has cramp'd his hands,
No more he fills the echoing choir with praise,
No more to melody the harp commands;
Sadly he mourns the dulness of his ear,
And when a master plays he presses close to hear.

Late o'er the plain, by chance or fancy led,
The pensive swain who does his annals write,
Him in his humble cottage visited,
And learn'd his story with sincere delight;
For chiefly of himself his converse ran,
As mem'ry well supply'd the narrative old man.

His youthful feats with guiltless pride he told,
In rural games what honours erst he won;
How on the Green he threw the wrestlers bold;
How light he leap'd, and O!  how swift he run.
Then, with a sigh, he fondly turn'd his praise
To rivals now no more, and friends of former days;

At length concluding with reflections deep,
"Alas, of life few comforts now remain!
Of what I was I but the vestige keep,
Impair'd by grief, by penury, and pain.
Yet let me not arraign just Heav'n's decree:
The lot of human-kind, as man, belongs to me.

"Beneath yon aged yew-tree's solemn shade,
Whose twisted roots above the green-sward creep;
There, freed from toils, my pious father laid,
Enjoys a silent unmolested sleep:
And there my only son, &mdash; with HIM, I gave
All comfort of my age untimely to the grave.

"In that sweet earth, when nature's debt is paid,
And leaving life, I leave its load of woes;
My neighbours kind, I trust, will see me laid,
In humble hope of mercy, to repose:
Evil and few, the patriarch mourn'd his days,
Nor shall a man presume to vindicate his ways."
