Yet one more ye lov'd poplars, and once more
My silver yare, your hallow'd haunts I tread,
The bough-inwoven bank, the damaskt mead,
And seek the sweet shade of the woodbine bow'r,
If haply here the British muse abide:
For not on Isis' academic side,
Nor where proud Thamis rolls his royal waves
Thro' forest brown or sunny meadow fair,
Her rapture-breathing voice enchants the ear:
Nor in those fields that honour'd Camus laves;
He, rev'rend sire, the sacred groves beneath
Oft' deckt with laureat wreath,
Thro' the still valleys winds his pensive way
Without the sweet note of one warbled song:
Save ever and anon some plaintive lay
Pours its soft airs, the rustic tombs among,
To the low winds that thro' his osiers breath,
And murmur to the rustling reeds beneath.

Does she o'er Cambria's rugged mountains stray,
Snowdon's rude cliffs, or huge Plinlimmon's height?
Or in rough Conway's foaming floods delight,
That down the steep rocks urge their headlong way?
There chaunts the raptur'd bard in solemn strain
Malgo's strong lance, Cadwallin's puissant reign,
High deeds recorded yet in druid songs:
Or swells his woe-wild notes, of pow'r to spread
Chill horror round the ruthless tyrant's head,
For Urien's fate, for bleeding Modred's wrongs,
And smites the harp in dreadful harmony.
Or does she love to lie
In the mild shade of Hulla's softer groves,
And twine the vermeil wreath to grace the youth,
Whose rapt breast glows, as o'er the beach he roves,
Touch'd with the sacred flame of star-bright truth;
Whilst to her lore his manly measure flows, 
"And wakes old Humber from his deep repose."

Yet deign, if not to dwell, thy presence deign
Here, heav'nly visitant; and with thee bring
The loftiest note that swell'd the sounding string,
When stern Tyrtaeus rais'd th' heroic strain;
To arms the warrior poet smote his lyre;
And all Laconia caught the martial fire.
Thee too, harmonious maid, the strings obey;
Strike them, and bid th' inspiring numbers flow,
Bid Britain's sons with Sparta's spirit glow,
And rouze old Albion with thy aweful lay.
Thy lay shall well-born Wodehouse deign to hear,
As now with gen'rous care
From honour's fount th' enliv'ning streams he brings
To visit, as they flow, that silver bow'r,
Where the fair plant of public virtue springs, 
And breaths pure fragrance from each glowing flow'r:
Like heav'n's own amarant th' immortal tree 
Shoots, blooms, and bears; the growth of Kimberley.

Hast thou no verse then, heav'nly virgin say,
By truth attun'd on fancy's fairy plain;
No solemn air, no hymn of higher vein,
To hail the blessed morn's auspicious ray,
When, these tall tow'rs rejoicing to behold,
Forth walk'd the orient sun, array'd in gold,
First on their glitt'ring tops t' impress his beams;
Thence, glancing downwards, sparkled on the tide
That bends along yon hoar grove's moss-grown side,
And scatter'd crimson o'er its azure streams?
The naids, hasting from their coral caves
Beneath the crystal waves,
(In pearled braids their amber tresses bound)
Thrice wav'd their hands, and hail'd the rising tow'rs:
The wood-nymphs too, with florisht chaplets crown'd,
Forsook their groves, forsook their broider'd bow'rs;
And thrice their hands they wav'd, and thrice they said,
"Raise, ye fair structures, raise your tow'ry head!"

Next Kymber came, slow winding o'er the lea,
His beard and sedge-crown'd locks all silver'd o'er
With rev'rend eld, as winter breathing frore
Hangs on the bare boughs of the spangled tree:
His urn was silver fretted round with gold,
With runic rimes imbost, and figures old,
Th' illustrious moniments of British fame:
Here stout Tenantius draws his righteous sword
To crush the curs'd rule of a foreign lord,
And spreads unconquer'd freedoms sacred flame:
There war-worn Kymbeline, by victor's pow'r
Forth-driv'n from princely bow'r,
To the thick shelter of these shades retir'd
Feeding high thoughts and flames of vengeful war,
(Like a chac'd lion with fell fury fir'd)
Writhes on the lurking traitor's close-couch'd spear,
And bids the conscious grove, and bids the plain,
And kindred stream his honour'd name retain.

High on her warlike car Bonduca stands,
The plumed helmet glitt'ring on her brow,
Whilst loose in streams of gold her tresses flow,
The bow and pointed javelin grace her hands;
Deliberate courage lightens in her eye,
And conscious worth, and inborn majesty:
Heroic empress!  as thy virtues spread,
Rome's rav'ning eagle cow'rs his quiv'ring wings,
Hope smiles, fair Liberty her blessings brings,
And heav'n-born Glory rays thy sacred head.
Grac'd with these sculptur'd scenes of antient fame
With stately step he came;
Nor wanted in his way melodious sound
From pipe or past'ral reed, or dulcet voice
Of nymph or Naid him enringing round,
Or quiring birds that in his shade rejoice,
Or gently warbling wind, or water's fall
Soft-trickling from his urn in murmurs musical.

Then on the stately structure's tow'ry height
With conscious pride he fix'd his raptur'd eyes;
And as past scenes of ancient glory rise
Arrang'd on fancy's field in order bright,
He paus'd; then graceful bow'd his rev'rend head,
And thus in lofty strain due homage paid.
"Ye strong-bas'd battlements, ye gorgeous walls,
Ye princely structures, that with splendor crown'd
Shine o'er your wide dominion stretching round,
To you with friendly voice your.  Kymber calls,
And bids you  hail!  thereto he adds your name;
Renown'd in antient fame,
Hail Wodehouse-tow'r!  to tell you with what pride,
What triumph he your glitt'ring state surveys,
That dignifies his lily-silver'd side,
And wakes sweet mem'ry of those glorious days,
When full-plum'd Vict'ry wav'd her golden wing,
And deckt with trophies proud his honour'd spring.

"Yes, Kymber!  now thou may'st with joy retrace
The long succession of thy patriot line;
With joy behold th' unclouded lustre shine
Which virtue beams around her favor'd race.
Canst thou forget the lord of Wodehouse-tow'r,
Whose strong-built bastions scorn'd the Norman's pow'r?
From Deva's banks (whose mystic waters glide
By holy Whitchurch, thro' those pastur'd plains
Long since the warlike Talbot's rich domains,
When from Blackmere he brought his lovely bride,
The fair L'Estrange) thou sawst the stout knight lead
To Silfield's happier mead
His Saxon train.  There Beauclerk's royal ray
Shin'd on his battailous bold offspring, try'd
In many a hard and chevalrous assay,
When Neustria's fields with crimson gore he dy'd,
Spread vengeful flames revolted Bayeux round,
And dash'd the rampir'd pride of Caen to the ground,

"Oft as Britannia's royal ensign wav'd,
And the stern clarion call'd in field to fight,
The warlike Wodehouse march'd, with prowest might,
And the rough front of deathful danger brav'd.
Let Bara tell, and let Bodotria tell,
Fort, lough, and river, mountain, wood, and dell,
All that from southern Eiden's flow'ry lea
Reaches to bleak Strathnavern's northern strand,
Was his sword sheath'd, when Edward's iron hand
Spread desolation wide from sea to sea?
Or when the warrior's lifted lance
Glar'd in the eyes of France,
Was Wodehouse wanting to the hero's fame?
Let Crecy tell, and Poictier's purple plain,
And captive Valois' hallow'd oriflame.
His dreadless hardiment let Glequin's chain
Record, and brave Dandrehen's froward fate,
And poor Castilia's tyrant-wielded state.

"Who has not heard of Somme's affrighted flood,
How mournfully his cumber'd streams he roll'd
O'er shining hauberks, shields, and helms of gold,
His crystal current stain'd with prince's blood,
When daring Delabreth in wanton pride
The warlike Henry's way-worn troop defied?
But all this gallant trim and rich array
Lay soil'd in dust, when Bedford's burnisht spear
Flam'd in their front, and thunder'd in their rear,
And York's bright blade hew'd out his dreadful way.
Rouze, royal England, rouze thy matchless might,
And with a dragon's flight
Sweep o'er th' ensanguin'd plains of Agincourt:
And see, thy Wodehouse, whose strong arm subdued
The ruin'd bulwarks of yon' aged fort,
His golden chev'ron charg'd with drops of blood,
Rests on the woodmen wild that bear his shield,
And hails thee victor of the well-fought field!

"Can I forget how blythe my eddies roll'd
And kiss'd their crisp'd banks, when to Tewksbury's plain
My gallant son led his heroic train,
Stout earls, and princely dukes, and barons bold?
Yet, ah for pity!  these fierce hostings cease,
That maiden blossom wears the badge of peace,
And will you dye her white leaves red in blood?
But if your flaming courage pricks you forth,
See where the growling pilferers of the north
With inroad foul o'er Tine's forbidden flood
Rush from their bleak hills, lur'd with scent of prey:
Brook they your firm array?
Far humbler thoughts on Eske's embattail'd banks
They learn'd, as Somerset's victorious spear
With foul disorder broke their bleeding ranks;
Whilst vengeful Wodehouse taught their proud hearts fear,
And bade his thunders tell them, as they fled,
The brother triumphs where the brother bled.

"But not on camps and fighting fields alone
My glory rests; when turtle-pennon'd peace
Hush'd war's harsh roar, and bade his fury cease,
In these lov'd shades her softest lustre shone.
Here heav'n-rapt Piety delights to dwell,
Train'd in monastic Flitcham's holy cell;
Here plants her palm, whose hallow'd branches spread
O'er towr'd Richmond's consecrated shrine,
And form'd the only wreath e'er taught to twine
Round desolate Caernarvon's hapless head.
E'en that strong arm, which stretching from a cloud
Crests the atchievement proud
Imprest with Agincourt's emblazon'd name,
Among his laurels wove this sacred bough,
Ennobling valour with devotion's flame,
And taught the warbled orison to flow,
As 'midst the taper'd choir the solemn priest
Chaunts to the victor saint high heav'n's eternal rest.

"Here the firm guardians of the public weal,
Inspir'd with freedom's heav'n descended flame,
Rose nobly faithful to their country's fame,
In frequent senates pour'd their ardent zeal,
Dash'd the base bribe from curs'd Corruption's hand,
And sav'd from scepter'd Pride the sinking land.
Or, prompt to answer bleeding Europe's call,
To distant realms bore Britain's high behest,
Bade the sword sleep, gave gasping nations rest,
And taught the doubtful balance where to fall.
But in the softer hour of social joy,
When ceas'd the high employ,
These woodland walks, these tufted dales among
The silver-sounding Muses built their bow'r,
Made vocal with the lute-attempred song;
Whilst blooming courtesy's gold-spangled flow'r,
Cull'd by the Graces, spread its brightest glow
To deck unswerving Honour's manly brow.

"And you, age-honour'd oaks!  whose solemn shades
Inviron this fair mansion, proudly stand
The sacred nourslings of Eliza's hand,
When she with sov'reign glory grac'd your glades,
And pleas'd beheld her Boleyn's kindred line
Ennobled with your trophied honours shine.
Spring crestless cravens from such roots as these?
Ask the pale Groyne, ask Tayo's trembling tide,
Ask Cadiz weeping o'er her ruin'd pride,
And Austria scourg'd o'er all the subject seas.
From this deep root my blooming branches spread,
And rais'd their florisht head,
Chear'd with the princely Henry's orient ray;
Till, rising on the morn, importune night
Spreads her black veil, and blots his golden day:
Darkness ensues, dark deeds, and impious might;
Whilst Discord, mounted on his iron car,
'Cries havoc, and lets slip the dogs of war.'

"What then cou'd virtue, 'fall'n on evil days,
On evil days thus fall'n, and evil tongues,
With dangers compast,' and opprest with wrongs,
Save to the wild woods breath her plaintive lays,
And charm the shades, and teach the streams to flow
With all the melting melody of woe?
But what avail'd or voice, or tuneful hand, 
When hell-bred faction, rear'd on baleful wings
Stain'd with the blood of nobles and of kings,
Spread total desolation o'er the land?
Ah Kymber!  where was then thy princely state?
Sunk in the gen'ral fate:
Thy rich roofs sunk, o'er golden pendents spread;
Fastolft's white croslet from the wall,
And Hamo's lion dropt his gold-crown'd head;
The sacred chapel sunk the festive hall;
E'en thy tall tow'rs, majestic in decay,
Like thy lost monarch, low in ruins lay.

"Thus Britain sunk, and thus sunk Wodehouse-tow'r;
So sinks the sun, as o'er the turbid skies
Sudden the storm-engend'ring clouds arise
And vex with uproar wild night's fearful hour;
That past, his bright beams resalute the day,
And heighten'd splendors crown his orient ray:
So Britain rose, so rose my princely state.
But not the swelling column massy proof,
The moulded pediment, the fretted roof,
Not this fair fabric proudly elevate,
Tho' fix'd by Prowse's just palladian hand
Its towred honours stand;
Not this clear lake, whose waving crystal spreads
Round yon' hoar isle with aweful shades imbrown'd;
Not these pure streams that vein th' envermeil'd meads:
Nor those age-honour'd oaks wide waving round;
Exterior glories these, of humbler fame,
Beam not that splendent ray which dignifies may name.

"The spark of honour kindling glorious thought,
The soul by warm benevolence refin'd,
Th' aetherial glow that melts th' empassion'd mind,
And virtue's work to fair perfection brought,
Be these my glories.  And thou, pow'r benign!
Whose living splendors round the patriot shine,
Immortal genius of this far-fam'd land,
This scepter'd isle thron'd midst the circling sea,
Seat of the brave, and fortress of the free,
Oft hast thou deign'd to take thy hallow'd stand
These shades among; at virtue's radiant shrine
Oft caught the flame divine,
When dark corruption dim'd thy sov'reign light;
Thence beam'd thy solemn soul-ennobling ray,
To gild these groves with all thy lustre bright,
Where nobly thoughtful Mordaunt loves to stray,
And manly Prowse, with ev'ry science crown'd,
In freedom's rustic seat the polish'd graces thron'd.

"And thou to whom thy Kymber tunes this strain,
If strain like his may reach thy nicer ear,
O deign in mine thy country's voice to hear,
Which never to a Wodehouse call'd in vain!
By the proud honours of thy martial crest,
The trophied tombs where thy fam'd fathers rest,
By Lacy's, Clervaux', Hunsdon's, Armine's name,
By manhood's, glory's, freedom's, virtue's praise,
Wake the high thought, the lofty spirit raise,
And blazon thy hereditary fame.
That fame shall live, whilst pride's unrighteous pow'r,
The pageant of an hour,
Fades from the guilty scene, and sinks in night:
That fame shall live, and spread its constant rays,
Warm like the blessed sun with genial light;
Whilst vice and folly spend their baleful blaze,
As meteors, glaring o'er a troubled sky,
Shoot their pernicious fires, amaze, and die."

He ceas'd his gratulation:  the high strain
Pierc'd the thick gloom where Britain's genius lay
Cover'd with charmed Cloud from view of day:
He heard, and bursting thro' the falsed train
In all the majesty of empire rose,
And issued stern to quell his vaunting foes.
The Naids saw, and swell'd their surging floods;
Old Kymber saw, and smil'd; the burnisht glades
Rejoic'd; the groves wav'd their exulting shades;
And lofty Feorhou bow'd with all his woods.
The lordly lion ramping by his side
He march'd in martial pride,
And pour'd his flaming spirit o'er the land:
The kindling hamlets, rouz'd with war's alarms,
Snatch the bright faulchion from the hireling hand,
And bravely train their free-born youth to arms;
Whilst Liberty her glitt'ring ensign waves,
And bids each gen'rous son disdain an host of slaves.

Then royally on th' ocean wave enthron'd
With all his terrors arm'd, he rode sublime,
And roll'd his thunders o'er each hostile clime:
Seine's silken vassals trembled at the sound;
The cloud-wrapt promontory shook, and all
Its rock-bas'd rampires nodded to their fall.
Reign ever thus, unconquer'd Britain, reign;
Whist thy free sons in firm battalions stand,
And guard with lion-ramp their native land,
Thus fix thy throne, thus rule the subject main!
So shall bright Vict'ry o'er thy laurel'd head
Her eagle-pennons spread;
Whilst soft-ey'd Peace, quitting at thy command
Her radiant orb in yon' empyreal plain,
Waves o'er the willing world her myrtle wand:
So shall the Muse her doric oat disdain,
And, touch'd with sphere-born rapture's hallow'd fire,
Swell her triumphal notes, and sweep the golden lyre.
