Go forward Muse, tho' friendless, tho' unknown
In that bright Sisterhood whose magic power
Could break the spells of cold oblivion,
And give to noble deeds the high reward
Of deathless praise.  Dar'st thou in numbers rude
Traverse the scenes of War, or thy base verse
Enoble with His name, whose youthful sword
Dealt forth destruction to th' aspiring Gaul?
Or can thy fond imagination reach
The springs of that sage wisdom, whose full tide
Flow'd in his breast?  go then, and let me guide
My frequent step to that fair cloister'd dome
Rear'd by his hand, where science sits enthron'd,
And sheds her beams around.  Oft let my stray
Along the willow-fringed banks of Cam:
And as I view yon ivy-mantled tower,
The haughty remnant of a Tyrant's rule;
E'en from the drear neglected ruins there
Pluck a fresh wreath to bind his honour'd brow:
There at his voice Captivity oft dropt
Her iron sceptre, and her squallid sons
Let loose, to Liberty and life restor'd.

What then, alas!  can Man's vain wit devise
To be the record of his Memory?
Whose good deeds by the hand of Truth are fil'd
On Heaven's eternal bead-roll, and on Earth
Survive to bless his Seed; "And be they blest,"
Cry'd out exulting, as before my sight
Burst forth the Guardian of the British Isle:
I knew he by the precious badge he bore,
The sanguine Cross drawn on his silver shield;
"And be they blest," again he cry'd,
"If Truth and Honour e'er can guide
The unsteady bark of human life,
Safe from the shoals of stately strife.
I speak not with the false disguise
Which Flatt'ry draws o'er mortal eyes:
For I can pierce the heart's close cell,
Where thought, desire, and conscience dwell;
Where hope and pleasure, fear and pain,
By turns their restless rule maintain.

"Hid from the World's observant eye
In Cliefden's bower, I still was by:
Yes, I beheld with transport there,
The Princely Parent's pious care;
Mark'd the glad moment, in the Son
When all the Sire expressive shone.
E'en then, at Reason's dawning day,
Each eager Virtue wing'd her way,
To pour her radiance in his breast:
With joy He hail'd each heav'nly guest;
And bade her frame his yielding mind
In ev'ry act to bless mankind;
At others' woe to drop the tear,
And win by love, not awe by fear.

"Fair stem of Honour, may thy Name,
Stand foremost on the rolls of fame.
May no vain fears, no doubts annoy
The fulness of thy heartfelt joy.
So may thy blest example shine
Through ages in thy Royal line;
Till round these realms the Sea shall cease to run,
And this firm Isle to front the falling Sun."
