Blest pow'r whom heav'nly wisdom chose,
Guardian of Britain's favour'd shore,
When first above the flood she rose
Amidst applauding ocean's roar,
Say, hast thou, thro' the length of days,
In antient fame, or recent praise;
Hast thou a dawn of glory known,
Like that whose lustre gilds thy George's throne?

Yet ne'er estrang'd from virtue's lore
Was Albion's gen'rous offspring found;
For deeds they wrought, for toils they bore,
Her sons were honour'd, fear'd, renown'd;
Then, when beneath each hallow'd oak,
Some hoary Druid sat and spoke;
Or all inspir'd, in uncouth song,
Urg'd the rough truth that charm'd the manly throng.

Improv'd, as age succeeding age,
In varied excellence they shone;
While holy faith subdu'd their rage,
And added virtues all its own:
Repuls'd the bold invader fled;
The vaunting Gaul in triumph led,
Still serv'd a mightier arm to show,
And grace the conquests of a stronger foe.

Nor stood they last in learning's train,
In works of skill and arts of peace;
Far spread their fleets o'er all the main,
Fraught with the circling world's increase.
They turn'd to things on earth, on high,
Nor turn'd in vain the curious eye;
They felt the genuine heav'n-born ray
That fires the soul, and prompts the living lay.

Yet never could the British race,
The summits of their glory gain;
Tho' Cressy's field their annals grace;
Tho' loud they boast Eliza's reign:
Now, now to wreaths before unsought,
Intent they stretch the glowing thought;
And, while they hail the Prince's name,
Prophetic trace the fulness of their fame.

O!  bid, lov'd Prince!  their purpose live,
Their purpose honest zeal inspires;
Cherish the hopes thy virtues give,
'Till each improves as he admires;
'Till all thy fair example own,
And catch new spirit from the throne;
To more exalted rapture rise,
And meet bright glory's blaze with hardier eyes.

The nobler heart, the bolder hand,
Shall then to thee new trophies raise,
And ev'ry palm that decks thy land,
Conspire to sanctify thy praise:
Each happier art, each great design,
With ardor emulous of thine,
Beyond the former bounds shall stray,
And follow as thy virtues lead the way.
