Where thick-embow'ring shades, and clust'ring trees,
Form soft recess, and shed poetic ease;
In arching boughs embrown the silent way,
Fan breezy cool, and half-exclude the day:
A moss-clad rock here spread it's bulky base,
Where the lith ivy winds it's close embrace;
Beneath it's slope &mdash; grey parent of the wood,
A mould'ring oak, grotesque and naked, stood,
From it's chast root, a gurgling riv'let strays,
And thro' the forest worms it's sparkling maze:
Here his sluic'd eyes, the pensive POLLIO led,
And lo his anguish utter'd, "GEORGE IS DEAD."
The swift-wing'd breeze, excursive, wafts the sound,
The cloud-top'd forest nodded to the ground;
The bellying clouds, with sable skirts advance,
And a dun horror shrouds the blue expanse;
Slow swells the blast, the transient gusts arise,
And grumbling thunders roll along the skies;
The storm collects, in dusky clouds array'd,
And brooding tempest frowns the deeper shade.
Involv'd in glooms, reclin'd upon the oak,
In fault'ring accents, POLLIO sob'd and spoke.

"Lour on ye sables, shed a tenfold gloom!
GEORGE is deceas'd, and earth is but his tomb;
The heav'ns were deaf, when Albion pour'd her cries,
Ah fruitless anguish!  ah relentless skies!
War on ye elements, ye tempests sweep
The heaving bosom of the hoary deep;
Ye trembling forests hide your faded green,
May darksome horrors wrap the sad'ning scene;
Ye verdant walks a sicklier face shall wear,
No flow'rs, to breath soft incense thro the air;
Their savoury banquets shall the flocks refrain,
Nor crop the velvet of the pasturing plain;
No fost'ring show'rs from hence refresh the lawn,
No pearly blessings chear the parching dawn;
The widow'd groves lost foliage shall deplore,
And balmy zephyrs gather sweets no more:
Thy GEORGE, O Albion!  Heav'n declines to spare,
Bestow'd too long to prevalence of prayer;
ALBION!  thy PARENT dies! &mdash; as blest a mind,
As heav'n could furnish to exalt mankind;
Religion, mercy, peace, his steps attend,
And num'rous virtues all their lustres lend;
His guide was truth, benevolence his road,
His life, one effort of redundant good;
No sword of violence protects a crime,
Stains the clear page, or dims the golden time;
No vice illustrious stalk'd behind the king,
No shelt'red folly fledg'd beneath his wing;
No rav'nous grasp, no lawless lust of pow'r,
Sullies his life, or stains a single hour;
So kindly just, the Parent-Monarch sighs,
And greatly pities, while the laws chastise:
When ALBION's safety would, how swift to save;
(A deed for Gods) he pitied and forgave:
Large as his heart, the blessings he design'd;
His godlike bounty, delug'd all mankind:
Here he restrain'd the Indian's thirst of gore,
And bid the murd'rous tomax drink no more;
Crush'd faithless Gallia, with her savage train,
Who foster factions, to disturb his reign;
Stretch'd thro' these haunts the blessings of his sway,
And pour'd on pagan darkness, beamy day;
'Tis from his hand this tide of plenty flows,
Thence learning buds, the infant of repose;
'Tis he, whose wisdom crown'd the happiest reign,
When patriots only, equal honours gain;
Where all distinction was to vice deny'd,
And patriot-virtue spread it's influence wide:
No sons but virtue's, shone among the great,
Nor less than PITT, the pilot of the state.
Nor civil virtues were his only claim,
His early prowess won a martial fame;
The victor-wreath in dreadful fields he twin'd,
And valour thron'd him Monarch of mankind;
Germania's realms his matchless courage boast,
And clust'ring glories in his name are lost.
Long was the blessing spar'd to Albion's cries,
Lov'd by his realms, and ripn'ing for the skies;
In his full orb of majesty compleat,
He quits his earthly for a heav'nly seat:
Death, and death only, to such kings imparts,
A kingdom equal to their great deserts."

Here the full tide of grief his song supprest,
And sighs and tears instructive, spoke the rest.
Amid the instant wreck, the lab'ring sigh,
What glorious form commands the weeping eye?
Pierc'd with a kingdom's woes, she leads the tear,
Th' infectious drop our lids are proud to wear;

'Tis ALBION'S GUARDIAN!  see!  her glossy plume
Darts a keen radiance thro the with'ring gloom!
Not Cynthia's beams with such effulgence flow,
When her full disk gives all it's broad below:
High o'er the silver-skirted main she rose,
And o'er a world in anguish smil'd repose:
She waves her hand, and points to Britain's throne.
"GEORGE still survives, O ALBION!  all thy own.
From deep despair, redemption he commands,
And guides the sceptre with instructed hands."

New flush'd with life, the blooming forests rise,
Shine with fresh green, and climb to taller skies;
The warbling wantons thro' the dusky grove,
Sweetly conspiring pour a waste of love;
Perfumes from ev'ry breathing flow'r exhale,
And balmy incense loads the fragrant gale;
Their savoury banquet lowing herds regain,
Rang'd on the velvet of the pasturing plain:
On the blest theme the bard indulg'd him long,
Then thus his raptures he attun'd to song:
"Thrice blest Britannia!  heav'ns peculiar care!
Oft rescu'd in the moment of despair;
Pangs but arrive e'er blessings swift pursue,
We scarcely tremble, e'er we triumph too.
How scourg'd!  how lost!  let Albion's groans inform;
This western Empire scarce surviv'd the storm:
Our ague fears, and enervating woe,
Edg'd the keen vengeance of th' insulting foe:
But snatch'd from fate, when to it's stroke resign'd&mdash;
Who dares despair?  for HEAV'N and GEORGE were kind.
Then, whilst with Albion we our joys contest,
And pour our raptures in the monarch's breast;
The distant blessing honour and approve;
With secret av'rice dwell upon his love;
To list'ning skies our lab'ring breasts unload,
And wrest new blessings from his conscious GOD;
HE DIES. &mdash; At this our bursting bosoms rave,
And pain'd remembrance envy'd GEORGE his grave.

"What kindly God presides?  the tumults cease,
This hour all tempest, and the next all peace:
We smile, blest Heav'n!  a GEORGE upon the throne,
ANOTHER GEORGE, O Albion!  all thy own:
From deep despair a nation to redeem,
And check our sorrows in their mid-way stream:
He sways the sceptre, takes the glorious charge;
Unbounded goodness now shall lord at large:
His virtues blazon'd wide as fame can wing,
And proud Britannia glories in her King.
Blush, grandeur!  blush, in all thy purple pride,
True greatness is to goodness close allied;
The worthy heart will ever claim esteem;
O PRINCE, thy virtue is thy brightest gem:
Food for applause to distant realms dispense,
Beyond the reach of poor magnificence:
Blessings are tongue'd and ever on the wing&mdash;
A wond'ring world's a circle for a king.
Joy to the realms where slav'ry was design'd,
A BRUNSWICK reigns, the guardian of mankind.
While gay-ey'd conquest rears his banners high,
A  flaming meteor in the gallic sky,
He bids his bolted thunders cease their roar;
And offers peace to Gallia's faithless shore.
Blest Prince!  whose unexampled goodness charms,
Thy people's blessings be thy brightest arms:
The base of empire is the king's desert,
And merit is the monarch of the heart:
Nor hostile worlds shall fav'rite GEORGE dethrone;
Each Briton's breast's a barrier to his own.
May one clear calm attend thee to thy close,
One length'ned sunshine of compleat repose:
Correct our crimes, and beam that christian mind
O'er the wide wreck of dissolute mankind;
To calm-brow'd peace, the mad'ning world restore,
Or lash the demon thirsting still for gore;
Till nature's utmost bound thy arms restrain,
And prostrate tyrants bite the British chain.
