Of all the knights accustom'd to resort,
From Cambria's wide domains to Arthur's court
The hardy Lonval was excell'd by none,
For still in danger's van, his valour shone,
Thro' twice six fields where drench'd with Saxon blood,
In war's grim front, victorious Arthur stood;
The dauntless champion conquer'd by side,
And, whether with his lance, he turn'd the battle's tide;
Or the keen falchion husted from its sheath,
Thick dealt his wounds, and every wound was death.
When peace return'd, his manners were as mild,
As if with blood, his arms were undefil'd,
From rivals, not himself, his praise began,
And foes who fear'd the hero, lov'd the man.

But monarchs have, alas!  to much to mind,
And Lonval, this sad truth was taught to find;
The king forgot the prowess of his sword,
Nor what in war he spent, in peace restor'd:
For glory, not for hire, his blade he drew,
And scorn'd, like; others; to demand his due.
His scanty fortune by degrees grew less,
Nor did his comrades lighten his distress:
But rather view'd him with disdainful eyes,
For poverty both rich and poor despise.
This Lonval felt; nor would the soldier's pride
Submit to sue for what might be deny'd.

Boiling with indignation and disgust,
In royal faith determin'd ne'er to trust,
Our knight, one morning, mounted on his horse,
And o'er the fields pursu'd his solitary course.
He meant some distant region to explore,
And serve his proud ungrateful prince no more.
To Arthur his design he dar'd not tell,
Nor bade one sordid sunshine friend farewell;
Content to live, nor yet afraid to die,
He left his native land without a sigh.
He knew no fondness for that spot of earth,
Where nature thrust him naked into birth;
And why should he forbear the world to range,
Who forfeits nothing by the hardest change?

On the third noon, while passing through a wood,
Before his eyes a large pavilion stood.
Two lovely damsels dress'd in rich array,
Approaching with a smile bade Lonval stay.
They caught his bridle with a courteous air,
Told him to leave his courser to their care;
And said their princess who his worth admir'd,
His much lov'd presence in her tent requir'd.
The knight amaz'd at what he heard and saw,
Alighting, enter'd with respectful awe.
The lady rose to meet him, and her face
From every feature beam'd celestial grace.
With accents sweeter than the Syren's song
She wonder'd he delay'd his route so long;
Then pressing by the hand the blushing knight,
(No lily as her own was e'en so white)
Into a spacious hall she Lonval led,
Luxurious plenty on the board was spread.
She warm'd his courage with a bowl of wine,
He sought no second call to rest and dine.
His brain with such oppressive pleasure swims;
The fairy's graceful height, her finely moulded limbs,
Each look, each motion, sets his soul on fire,
And every vein is raging with desire.

Few words are wanted here to intervene;
You all foresee the sequel of the scene;
And only this remains for me to tell,
That gallant Lonval play'd his part so well,
That in a trance of joy his Dido swore,
She ne'er had known felicity before.
"My glorious veteran," the fairy said;
"Long have thy matchless feats been ill repaid,
And did not destiny my heart oppose,
This day would pour my vengeance on thy foes;
Thy thankless chief would tremble in his blood,
And she-wolves litter, where his halls had stood.
What scorn and misery his meal attend,
Who pines upon the bounty of a friend?
Again to Arthur's castle thou must fly,
This purse in plenty shall thy wants supply.
To wealth, like thine, each suitor shall give place,
And sordid beauty wear a welcome face;
And when thy breast with generous passions warms,
When love, or glory, vindicate their charms,
When fond desire is flashing in thine eye,
Or thy brow darkens, and the valiant die,
This ring, thrice press'd, that instant shalt thou see,
Thy guardian, visible to none but thee;
I only charge thee to conceal my flame,
Nor dream I shall endure a rival dame.
A faithful spy thy bosom I'll explore,
Then dread the fairy much, the female more."

The amorous queen embrac'd him and withdrew;
The splendid vision vanish'd from his view.
Mounting his steed, he saw with glad surprise
Arthur's tall battlements in prospect rise;
And by the fairy's aid so quick return'd, 
To prove his grateful heart, with ardour burn'd.

At court arriv'd, the splendor of his gold, 
Ten thousand tongues with spiteful wonder told;
Nor need we say how fast his friends increas'd
How kindly he was call'd to every feast,
What deep attention every virtuous maid
And wailing widow to his wishes paid.
But Lonval met their proffers with disdain,
And love and friendship sped their shafts in vain.
For 'twas his daily care on some pretence,
To lavish more than double their expence.
Himself, his consort chose it should be known,
That Lonval had abundance of his own. 
Yet no brave comrade, honest, old and poor,
Retir'd without his bounty from his door.

Now, what a fatal farce is human joy;
How seldom fortune smiles but to destroy.
For Arthur's Queen, Geneura was her name,
Had heard, long since, of Lonval's martial fame;
His manly form excited fond desire,
And all her bosom glow'd with wanton fire.
But when she sought her passion to reveal,
The haughty soldier scorn'd to hear her tale;
Nay, rashly vow'd that far superior charms
Were at his will, devoted to his arms.

To jealous rage Geneura's fondness turn'd,
And all her breast for bloody vengeance burn'd:
Now in the monarch's presence she appears,
Her locks dishevell'd, and her eyes in tears.
"And is it thus," she cries, "In Arthur's court,
That Arthur's queen becomes a traitor's sport?
A wretch of yesterday, on pity fed,
Who madly dreams to stain his sovereign's bed."
And then she turn'd a melancholy tale,
Of lust outrageous, and resistance frail;
With what stern virtue she oppos'd the cheat,
How quick her screams compell'd him to retreat;
Last, and most insolent, to crown the whole,
What far more lovely mistress sway'd his soul.

Uxorious Arthur, prone to be deceiv'd,
The mournful clamours of his dame believ'd,
And had the laws allow'd to vent his wrath,
Our hapless knight had met immediate death.
But this deny'd, he chose the sole resort,
To call his barons to a general court.
Lonval himself was summon'd to attend;
Next morn, an hundred chiefs the lofty hall ascend,
And though a party in the suit confest,
The prince, in person, ranks above the rest.
A knight appears, who to the queen belongs,
Begins her cause, announces all her wrongs,
And then, to close the lecture, claims aloud
The just atonement of a traitor's blood.

Lonval, too late, discover'd to his cost,
The double ruin of his amorous boast.
Nor would the fairy now attend his ring,
Nor could he hope to soothe his furious king.
Death he despis'd, but then to leave a name
Of guilt behind him, blasted all his fame.
For with less agony his honour mourn'd
The fairy's generous love ungratefully return'd.
"I stand not here your pity to implore
For one," he said, "who values life no more.
Nor shall I with harangues harass the court,
The plea of innocence is plain and short:
Geneura knows on what a vile pretence
She at my conduct chus'd to take offence.
But having now, by fatal rashness lost
A love more godlike than the world can boast,
All lesser evils I must blush to dread,
Pour, then the royal vengeance on my head:
That grateful Arthur may with triumph tell
His fate, by whom so many Saxons fell."

No doubt, the reader must expect to hear
That Lonval's doom was instant and severe;
That every orator has sold his vote,
And every venal placeman strain'd his throat;
That all obsequious to the monarch's nod
Were vain, like modern peers, to kiss the rod;
That this fam'd maxim sway'd the patriot throng,
A king of Britain never can do wrong.
With what a tone of sense the precept sounds!
On this our happy constitution founds;
And all agree who ruminate the case,
The superstructure's worthy such a base.
No premier with excise oppress'd us then,
Our ancestors, 'twas well, were wiser men.
No baron kept the key of Arthur's stole,
Or for a paltry garter pawn'd his soul.
No jockey statesman to Newmarket ran,
Or hir'd, at Westminster, a bludgeon clan.
No senate sang the virtues of a whore,
Or tax'd tame Albion for a gambler's score.
No courtly judge, or perjur'd jury dar'd
A strumpet's name from infamy to guard.
No vicar of a tithe-suit chose to prate;
No pettifogger suck'd the vitals of the state.
What strange reverse to all we suffer now,
When every curate can arrest your plow;
When judges tell us truth's a mortal crime,
And prostitution virtue's true sublime;
When seats in parliament, what precious ware!
Are bought like stalls for cattle at a fair;
When still the more extortion grinds us down
With louder notes of joy, our wrongs we drown.
A tax on burials who would dare dispute,
When 'tis to pay a bankrupt's birth-day suit.
Behold the last remains of common sense,
By hell-born superstition hooted hence;
How is that bubble, human reason, shamm'd,
While every saint believes his brother damn'd,
For points of faith too shocking to be nam'd,
Which nothing short of bedlam could have fram'd;
Now Shakespeare's sacred page is fritter'd down
To please that motley mass we call the town;
While sing-song operas our ears have tir'd,
And Foote, and all his farces, are admir'd.

The candid court met Lonval at his word,
Inquir'd what matchless dame he thus ador'd,
And profess'd a respite of twenty days,
For time to prove the justice of his praise.
And should his mistress, by the senate seen,
Eclipse, in their account, the Cambrian queen,
They frankly would dismiss the whole affair,
If otherwise, for death, he must prepare;
Mean time confinement was the culprit's doom,
In the lone anguish of a dungeon's gloom.

The term elaps'd, no rival dame appear'd,
And every feeling heart for Lonval fear'd;
A dark suspicion fill'd the public breast,
Geneura's motives were not deem'd the best.
Though still a punk of far inferior rate
To fifty queens of very modern date;
'Twas thought she often held her husband cheap,
And ventur'd, bye the bye, the lover's leap.

The chieftains were conven'd, and Lonval brought
Before them, but in vain an answer sought;
The court protested he was much to blame, 
Who still refus'd to tell the lady's name.
Their verdict, now, was ready to be past,
And this unlucky day had been his last,
When lo!  a blaze of lightening burst around,
And subterranean thunder rock'd the ground; 
While suddenly, on their astonish'd sight,
Advanc'd a beauty more than mortal bright.
Her form, her mein, unrivall'd all attest;
Tumultuous rapture throbs in every breast.
"I come, my lords, an injur'd knight to aid,"
(With modest dignity the fairy said)
"Though, since he rashly vaunted of my love,
'Twas needful his fidelity to prove.
A wanton woman is below my wrath,
But ere her generous victim suffers death,
Since nothing else can save my husband's life,
Till once you judge the person of his wife,
Say &mdash; might my fond embrace an hour employ,
Or soothe a warrior's bosom into joy!"
She spoke:  The council in one voice declar'd
No earth-born daughter could be here compar'd.
Arthur himself acknowledg'd that th' knight,
By such a choice, was nobly in the right.
Beyond the stairs which to the castle lead,
The stranger queen had left her snow-white steed.
She mounted:  Lonval, smiling, vaults behind,
And off they fly, more rapid than the wind,
For those far distant but delightful plains,
Where, on her native throne, the fairy monarch reigns.
