In blooming Majesty, and graceful State,
The Royal Youth Britannia's Throne ascends:
Around, in solemn Pomp, the Virtues wait;
And every Art, and every Muse, attends.
The Heav'n-born Maids with Warmth divine inspire
His glowing Breast, and fan the generous Fire;
The humbler Arts His kind Protection claim:
The vocal Choir in many a tuneful Lay
Loud Paeans sing, and hail th' auspicious Day;
Applaud his rising Worth, and promise future Fame.

When lo!  with stately Step, and awful Mien,
Hist'ry advances to the regal Seat:
Compos'd her Motion, and her Look serene,
Her Vesture nobly plain, and simply great,
Truth leads her on:  while loose and unconfin'd
Floats her full Robe; and, waving in the Wind,
In ample Folds descends her sweeping Train.
In her right Hand a mighty Roll she bears,
Inscrib'd with everlasting Characters;
Which Fire, and Sword, and Storm, and Time assaults in vain.

Then thus, unfolding wide th' eternal Page:
"Behold, Young Prince, the mystic Roll that brings
Back ancient Time, presenting each past Age:
That warns, instructs, nor deigns to flatter Kings.
Of Patriots, Tyrants, here the Names remain:
The good, and great; the wicked, weak, and vain;
Recorded here, to Glory, or to Shame.
Esteem'd, belov'd admir'd, rever'd, ador'd;
Or fear'd, despis'd, detested, and abhorr'd:
With Awe behold!  for here shall stand enroll'd Thy Name.

"But chief the Fortunes of thine antient Race,
Thy first Regard thy Country's Annals claim:
Impartial here their various Actions trace;
Here fix thy Choice, and hence select thy Fame.
Say, would'st thou stand the mark of Scorn and Hate,
Swoln with vain Pride, with lawless Pow'r elate,
A People's Tyrant, and a Minion's Slave;
Or prais'd in Story, and renown'd in Song,
The boast of every Age, and every Tongue,
Be number'd with the good, the wise, the just, the brave?

"Alfred behold, in either Fortune great!
In Peace, in War; great in his Country's Cause:
Who first fixt Britain's well-proportion'd State
On the firm Base of Freedom and of Laws.
Mild, pious, just:  ev'n then the scepter'd Sage
Wak'd the rude Muse, and charm'd a barbarous Age:
Science regards him still with filial Eyes.
My Records boast no brighter, fairer Name;
None e'er hath risen to such unsullied Fame:
And wilt Thou fail my hopes?   shall none for ever rise?

"Let each immortal Edward's high Renown,
Let Maud's and Bolingbroke's illustrious Heir,
Prompt thee with regal Worth to grace thy Crown;
But their Ambition deem beneath thy Care.
'Tis Thine to reign (and greater canst thou be?)
O'er willing Hearts, in just Obedience free.
Their Liberty gives lustre to thy Throne:
'Tis Thine to guard thy People, and to bless;
In thine Eliza's glorious Reign express:
Her Virtues all transcribe; all her high Deeds, but one.

"Nor, less intent ignoble Paths to flee,
See John usurp, and then disgrace the Throne:
Britain's reluctant Neck compell'd to free,
To Rome's base Yoke he tamely bends his own.
See peerless Edward's weak degenerate Son,
By lavish Pride, and lawless Pow'r, undone.
His haughty Head see the last Henry raise;
Stern, willful, fierce:  his ruffian Hands imbru'd
In Nobles, Patriots Queens, and Martyrs, blood;
Staining the Sacred Cause, that makes his only Praise. 

"Mark well, how, dazzled with th' alluring Guise
Of boundless Sway, Stuart's deluded Race,
The Phantom vain still glaring in their eyes,
Plunge in th' Abyss of Ruin and Disgrace.
Not so Nassau:  where Glory points the Way,
His Eagle-Eye fix'd on her genuine Ray,
Right on He soars, nor veers from Freedom's Cause:
His Country rescu'd from her deep Distress,
The Hero flies to Britain's high Redress;
Supports her tottering Shrines, and guards her injur'd Laws.

"He, the great Pledge of vindicated Right,
Religion, Laws, to Brunswic's chosen Line
Transmits; secur'd from Faction's fell Despite,
The Bigot's Rage, the Tyrant's Claim Divine.
Well have thy fill'd their Charge:  nor Thou disclaim
This fair Succession of domestic Fame.
Will all thy Grandsire's Wreaths thy Brows adorn:
So shall my Sons record thy deathless Praise,
And stretch the bright Example's fostering Rays
To Patriots, Heroes, Kings, through Ages yet unborn."
