Far from the Ken of those sad dreary Plains,
The Realms of Night and Erebus &mdash; where Styx,
Nine Times circumfluous winds his dusky Streams;
High on the Right, a Path obliquely leads
To the calm Mansions of the blissful Dead.

The Objects, which on Earth or scant, or rare
Diffuse their short-liv'd Beauties, there blaze out
In full Assemblage, and in deathless Bloom.

There lenient Zephyrs, in low Whispers, fan
Th' unruffl'd Ocean's Lap &mdash; There choicest Flow'rs,
Th' immortal Amaranth and Eglantine,
Supply th' eternal fresh-exhaling Wreath:
And cloud-ascending Trees for ever sprout
With fair Hesperian Fruits that blush in Gold.

Thro' many a winding Scene an either Side
Open extended Lawns, and Theatres
By Nature fittest form'd &mdash; Where Bards of old
Ev'n still retain their Love of sacred Song.
There Homer's Trumpet fills the Mouth of Fame,
And, Maro, thine &mdash; majestically sweet:
And Milton's Clarion emulous of both.
Here blooms a fairer Academe &mdash; and there
Ilissus stops his silver-footed Wave
To hear thy Heart-felt Strains, Euripides,
In after-time by greater Shakespeare join'd,
Whose woodland Notes disclaim thy Attic Art.
Here too of Flight inimitable soars
The Theban Swan, with whose are often heard
The trimmer Airs of the Venusian Lyre!
While from the Glade Bards still of lower Note
Harmonious chaunt their Songs not unesteem'd!
Plaintive Guarini tells his Love-sick Tale,
Spencer enchants with silver-chorded Lute,
And Tasso strikes approv'd his tinkling Strings.

Yet farther northward &mdash; Lo!  a Scene disclos'd,
O'er whose enamel'd Turf majestic wave
Th' aspiring Elm and Sea-commanding Oak!
Such, Windsor, would I dare to call thy Lawns
By purest Skies and brightest Suns refin'd.
Here Britain's scepter'd Chiefs for Arms renown'd
Or Arts, conducive to the public Weal,
Enjoy a long, and ever-bless'd Repose!
Here thro' the Glade appear, but dimly seen,
The Time-wrapp'd Race of Troy-descended Brute.
Yet some peculiar Traits bespoke the Form
Of Tow'r-crown'd Lud; and sorrow-furrow'd Lear,
In Myrtle Shades consoling all his Woes
With the fair Faith of his Cordelia.
A clearer Light display'd Caractacus;
Caractacus, who stemm'd the Roman Arms,
Awhile superior; and the Victor's Frown
Defy'd, illustrious in Captivity!
Here Lucius waves the purple-banner'd Cross
Over a Sin-sunk Land &mdash; There Arthur boasts
His Feats of Chivalry &mdash; Of Daemons, Spells,
Of Sorc'ries vile, and Necromantic Arts
Yielding to his divinely-temper'd Blade!
There Edwin good, and just, apart retir'd,
Revolv'd the peaceful Glories of his Reign
With Alfred, by the Muse he rais'd belov'd.
Why shou'd I mention the illustrious Names
Of Egbert, Harold, Etheldred, and Knute,
Or Edward's saintlike Shade, whose bounteous Hand
On Worth the still-subsisting Largess pour'd,
And to th' inaugurating Rites of Kings
Added the Staff and consecrated Chair.
William, behight the Conqu'ror, here claim'd Place
Intrusive, and enforc'd his Plan of Laws,
Of Legislation wise, tho' harsh of Rule.
There sat, in long Arrange, the warriour House
Of high Plantaganet, and Tudor's Line;
The last fair Stem of which, of female Port,
But more than manly Soul, did haply then
Harangue in Council the assembled Chiefs.

She told of Deeds full wond'rous to relate;
Of vanquish'd Tyrants, murd'rous Hosts and Fleets
(How arrogantly stil'd invincible)
Sunk, or destroy'd, or scatter'd o'er the Deep:
Of ruthless Superstition driv'n to Hell.
Of rescu'd States she told, poor distress'd States
(How faithless since) groaning beneath the Weight
Of Spanish Bondage; and Fell D'Alva's Rage
Of Blood insatiate:  while on canvass Wings
Fair Commerce wafted o'er from either Pole
Her richest Stores&mdash;a Woman's high Emprize!

'Twas then Britannia sweeping o'er the Lawn,
Conducting in her Hand the Godlike Form
Of GEORGE, majestic Shade, arriv'd &mdash; and thus
With high exulting Voice bespoke the Throng.

"Princes, behold my Darling and my Pride,
The first of Kings, and best belov'd of Men,
That e'er my Scepter sway'd, in martial Deeds,
In equal Rule, in Counsels, as in Years,
Surpassing all:  A Continent, unknown
To former Ages undivided, stretch'd
From whence the Northern Blasts in endless Ice
Bind up the sluggish Main, and where the South
Wrapps the extremest Globe in Mists and Night,
Hails him it's sov'reign undisputed Lord.
The distant Ganges at his Cannon's Roar
Roll'd back it's refluent Wave &mdash; And Afric's Sons
Dreading his Fleets triumphant, fled dismay'd.
Yet hear &mdash; and blush!  No arbitrary Sway
Or Lust of Rule e'er stain'd his righteous Sword.

"Hail Him, his Country's Father, surest Friend
To Liberty, to Virtue, to Mankind&mdash;
Still lives his mild uninterrupted Sway
O'er British Hearts unites &mdash; there enthron'd
He reigns secure&mdash;and will for ever reign!"

She spoke &mdash; the Audience heard in high Amaze;
Eliza hung with Raptures on the Tale,
Beneath his Helmet the stern Conqu'ror scowl'd,
Great Edward rose, and Henry bow'd Applause.
