I. 1.
Ye Dryads blythe, ye sylvan Powers,
Ye Nymphs that haunt the ozier bowers,
And all ye sedge-crown'd Naiad throng,
That sportive rove the broider'd meads,
Where fair-meandering Isis leads
The silver current of her tide along;
Deck'd in your robes of purest green advance,
And to my rustic strains in deftest measures dance.

I. 2.
Refuse not now, ye fairy train,
To shake with nimble feet the plain,
And listen to my lays, though rude:
No trivial theme, I ween, demands
That thus your simple shepherd's hands
Should frame this homely pipe of Dorian mood:
Hymen commands that you the dance should lead,
And I, in Hymen's cause, attune mine oaten reed.

I. 3.
Ye Shepherds haste from hill or grove,
If e'er ye bless'd Pan's gentle sway;
Warm'd with the zeal of duteous love,
Here all your votive offerings pay.
Awake! &mdash; the genial morn appears
In all Aurora's radiance drest;
Dun night moves gradual from the west,
And faintly gleams the fading stars.&mdash;
Awake, ye swains, from steep impatient spring,
To greet the nuptial feast, and hail your Shepherd-King.

II. 1.
A lovelier Nymph than ever crost
Arcadian lawn, or e'er did boast
Her origin from race divine;
Destin'd to share a nobler fate,
By virtue  form'd to rule a state,
And deal out blessings endless as her line;&mdash;
This happy morn, a Nymph of peerless charms
Has righteous Heaven decreed, to bless our Monarch's arms.

II. 2.
She comes; she leads a virgin choir,
Each in her hand sustains a lyre:
And now they rouse th' ecstatic strains:
The symphony approaches near,
Prophetic warblings meet mine ear;
While "Bounteous Heaven, they raptur'd sing, ordains
Joys to descend on ages yet unborn,
And dove-ey'd Peace to smile, and Plenty pour her horn.

II. 3.
"And when, the task of virtue done,
The Royal Pair their earthly sway
Shall leave, to share another throne
High rear'd beyond th' ethereal way;
These vales may weep, but not despair:
How will they glory, when they trace
The Parent's semblance in their race,
Great as the Sire; and, as the Mother, fair;&mdash;
Born to defend our fanes, our rights, our laws,
To ward each hostile stroke, and act in Freedom's cause!"
