Ah!  gentle Pipe, thee erst I wont to fill
With other sounds, with Sounds of Joyaunce sweet,
The while our shepherd Lads yon rugged Hill
Beside, the Greensward shook with shifted Feet,
In jocund Daunce; or Phyllis (she I ween
The loveliest Lass alive) was sporting on the Green.

But now the shepherd Lads no more are seen
Dauncing with merry Glee yon Hill beside;
Phyllis no more disporteth on the Green,
Her tressed Locks ytorn, her Garland's Pride
All faded; e'en my silly Sheep forgo
Their wonted Food, so been they overwent with Woe.

For he, that hight of Shepherds all, the King,
He now is dead; weep, Valleys, weep for aye,
Weep, Groves, with Sighs let all your Echoes ring.
Ah me!  full well I thought that Summer's Day,
When by the light'ning Bolt, of all the Wood
The goodliest Oak was scath'd, it bode us mought no good.

N'athless we may not, must not yet despair,
Sith' after Winter, Winter's dreary Blast,
Ever with more Delight returneth fair
The pleasaunt Spring; sith' nought on Earth can last
For long; ne Joy, ne Sorrow sure, I trow,
But like this hasty Stream for ever changing flow.

Damaetas, (deeply skill'd in wise Foresight,
And much of all admir'd for learned Fame)
Shew'd me but now a Youth of comely Height,
As hither thro' the hazle Copse we came:
A Youth he seem'd to sight of peerless Praise,
And modest Mien, that ever gen'rous Mind bewrays.

Colin, quoth he, thilk lovely Lad goes yon,
Master is now of all this Forest wide,
(Si' that great Tityrus his Life hath done)
And well shall keep:  Ne hence with sturdy stride
Shall derring Wolf our nightly Folds annoy,
Ne subtle Fox, what Time the Lambs for Dam 'gin cry.

Soon then perhaps, if right Damaetas read,
This Pipe shall charmed be to deftest Lay,
When that the Shepherds shall betrick his Head
With gilded Coronals, and Girlands gay.
That Time shall Pan himself, and Delia sing
With all her Oread Train, to hail our shepherd King.

Thus Colin sang; when now the low'ring Sky
And mizling Clouds gan warn him homeward hie.
