As when diffus'd in solemn trance
Her dear delight the Latmian shepherd lay,
Fond Cynthia came with lightning-glance,
And o'er his bosom stream'd her virgin ray
So come, O gentle Muse, if e'er aright
I pay'd my vows, if e'er implor'd
One scanty beam of thy celestial light;
Proof to the muckworm miser's golden hoard,
Nor envious of the statesman's fair renown,
The warrior's deathbought wreath, and monarch's thorny crown.

Come, Guardian of my natal hour,
That bad'st me chuse the still sequester'd grove,
The pathless mead, and woodbine bow'r,
Where placid Cares, and pensive Pleasures rove;
Where oft by moon-light's silent, solemn glade,
Pale Passion musing loves to stray,
And hand in hand, by Melancholy led,
In thoughtful loneness wear herself away;
O come, in all thy radiant charms confest,
And fire with glowing zeal my fond, devoted breast!

I ask not flourets fresh and gay,
From Pindus cull'd to please the vainly great;
No silken drain, no tinsel lay,
To cloke some public Knave from public hate:
No, Virgin, no. &mdash; Fair Freedom's vestal Flame
Pervades my soul; for Her I twine
The votive wreath, for Her thy hallow'd Name
Invoke, O make thy choicest treasures mine;
Breathe Inspiration thro' each gen'rous line,
Thy genuine form impress, and stamp the work divine!

Then Hast thou, GEORGE, the song approve,
O British-born!  O Freedom's sacred heir!
O thou whom all the Graces love,
Religion's boast, and Virtue's darling care!
Fain would the Muse attempt thy various praise,
But ah in vain! &mdash; thro' Ida's bow'rs
With dubious foot th' astonisht woodman strays
Where shall his work begin? &mdash; Ye sylvan Pow'rs
Direct the blow; here oaks aspiring rise,
There, Monarchs of the grove, tall cedars prop the skies.

Say shall the Muse thy patriot-Sire
Recall to view?  Tell how with conscious state
She saw the god-like Prince retire
To glorious exile, like Timoleon great?
Glad heard the voice, "Avaunt, ye wretched Train,
Shall I my Country's cause betray?
Betray my Soul, my God, for sordid gain?
Perish the thought! &mdash; Ye Slaves of gold away!&mdash;
In venal courts tho' base corruption reigns,
Know Liberty shall breathe thro' Kew's indignant plains."

He spoke, and lo the reptile crew
Struck dumb with wonder fled! &mdash; Hail sacred source,
Whence GEORGE his patriot morals drew:
Prosper, ye heav'nly Pow'rs, their genial course!
O bid them branch into a thousand rills,
A thousand streams! &mdash; Whene'er they flow,
Whether all glist'ring down the loftier hills,
Or thro' the still, and humbler vales below,
Let health pursue, no noxious weeds be found,
But flow'rs immortal rise fresh-breathing sweets around!

Prophetic wish! &mdash; See Discord flies,
With all her rebel rout, her hell-born train!
See Faction falls, and Party dies,
They die fell serpents, in his dawning reign:
Thus sure presage of many a glorious deed,
Blest Omen of immortal fame,
The Son of Jove, when near his infant head
Devouring snakes in pois'nous volumes came,
Graspt in his Brawny arms the scaly foes,
Smil'd on the danger past, and sunk to soft repose.

And now again, with careful hand,
Her goodly plants fair Science joys to rear;
And now again all blooming stand
The beauteous Progeny of Art; they fear
No killing frosts, no thick unkindly dews,
Such as from Belgian plains arise;
The genial clouds their pearly drops diffuse,
And show'r increase of sweetness from the skies;
The youthful Sun, in his meridian throne,
Beams with indulgent ray his fost'ring influence down,

Hail favour'd Isle!  blest Seat of Fame!
For conqu'ring arms, and peerless arts renown'd,
Hail mighty GEORGE, thy darling name
Oft shall the Muse with honest joy resound:
Not that abstemious, prudent, just, and wise,
Thy ev'ry deed fair Virtue guides;
Nor that thy thoughts with holy ardour rise
From Earth's low base, where Vice and Passion bides,
To Heaven's bright mansions, there their sweets dispense,
Grateful as hallow'd fumes from breathing frankincense.

Ay me so great, so bold a Flight
Beseems not shepherd-swain, in lowly Mead
Far from Preferment's giddy height
Condemn'd alas an hireling flock to feed!
Yet will I sing how thy discerning Eye
The boistrous see of life surveys,
Where toiling sore the Sons of Merit lie,
Till call'd by thee their weary heads they raise:
What minute Drop, but cherisht by thy care
A costly Pearl becomes of matchless Beauty rare?

Charm thine your pipes, ye shepherd swains,
And bid the hills, and dales the Song repeat,
Your Patron, your Augustus reigns!&mdash;
But hark with undulation soft, and sweet,
When melting music steals upon the ear!
Am I deceiv'd, or doth a Choir
Of winged Cupids fan the buxom air
'Till Silence smiles:  while from their silver Lyre
Harmonious numbers flow, whose dulcet breath
Would recreate a soul beneath the pangs of death?

I did not err, a Choir of Loves
Sublime in Air attune th' enchanting lay;
They leave Idalia's blooming groves,
And Cypria's myrtle shades, where jocund stray
The Graces, Smiles, and Hours, where Nature's care
Profusely kind allures the sight,
And wraps the sense in bliss:  ye Virgins fair
Of Britain's Isle, sweet daughters of delight,
Receive the cherub throng, to you they fly
With welcome tidings fraught, blest harbingers of Joy.

Lo lo she comes from th' Albine Shore
Your maiden Queen, adorn'd with peerless charms:
Like Phoebe, when by Taurus hoar
Enamour'd Alpheus strove with eager arms
To grasp the Fair:  ah fond, and hapless boy!
Ah cruel wayward Dame! &mdash; in vain
He breath'd his am'rous soul, for all too coy
Swift as the Roe she sought the distant plain;
Left him to pour in tears his plaintive theme,
Till chang'd by love, and grief he melted to a stream.

See where from Ocean's pearly bed,
Whose huddling waters pass unwilling by,
She comes with easy modest tread,
'Midst echoing crouds, and rapt'rous shouts of joy:
Twas thus, the life-resembling tablet shews,
In youth and beauty fresh and gay
The Paphian Goddess from the waves arose,
While dolphins gambold thro' the watry way,
Old Neptune smil'd, the sea-green sisters sung,
And all the rocks around with Io Triumph rung.

But ah what Daedal hand can trace
The glowing beauties of her air and mien;
The lively sweetness of her face,
And eyes where wisdom's azure beams are seen?
Her bosom fraught with honour's maiden treasure,
Unblemisht faith, mild modesty,
Eternal love, unsoil'd by baser pleasure,
And constant truth, and spotless chastity,
Where thoughts, that Angels might admire, are bred,
And flames of holy zeal, by pure Religion fed?

Hail Virgin hail divinely blest,
By heav'n endow'd with all that's good and great!
O Flow'r of Virtue, in whose breast,
Imperial Reason dwells in royal state!
There, there she sits as Queen on iv'ry throne,
The vassal Passion round her stand,
In suppliant Guise her rightful Pow'r they own,
And hear her still small voice, her soft command:
Far from the pure, and unpolluted shrine
Each base Affection flies, each haggard nurse of sin.

Leave then, ye Sisters, leave the Spring
Whose hallow'd waters flow thro' Minyas' land;
Conduct to Britain's blooming King
This all-accomplisht work of Nature's hand:
'Tis yours, imperial Nymphs, whate'er is sweet,
And fair and splendid to bestow;
On you attend Wealth, Wisdom, Beauty, Wit;
Nor seated on Olympus' laughing brow
Will choirs celestial move till you advance,
Nor share th' ambrosial feast, nor lead the sprightly dance.

And thou, O Queen of soft desires,
Whose radiant smiles dispel the gloom of care,
And kindling friendship's purest fires,
Chase from the foul Suspicion, Doubt, and Fear,
Those griesly forms; O come, bewitching Pow'r,
Come gently, o'er the bridal bed
In genial dews thy choicest pleasures show'r;
Such as in Arcady's voluptuous shade
Lycaeus felt, when stretcht on Maia's breast
An image of himself th' enraptur'd God imprest.

Nor thou, Lucina chaste and fair,
Nor thou, sweet Genius of the nuptial bow'r,
Be absent; on the royal Pair
Profuse of joy your kindly blessings pour!
O haste, ye Guardians of the sacred rites,
Whose aid prolific pow'r supplies,
So shall Britannia bless their pure delights,
When future GEORGES, future CHARLOTTES rise;
By whom reflected distant times shall find
The Mother's matchless Charms, the Father's virtuous Mind.
