Now Winter's blasts far to the North are gone,
Each hedge and shrub puts Spring's gay liv'ry on,
The verdant meads all daisied o'er appear,
While num'rous blossoms speak a fruitful year.
The blazing hearths now left, the rural Swain
Strays thro' the grove, or pipes upon the plain.
Beneath a hawthorn bush, young Colin sat;
And, by his side, the ruddy Bomkinet.
Their scrips and crooks upon the branches hung,
While thus, in artless strains, the hind begun.

COLLIN.
My Myra's cheeks out-bloom the crimson rose,
Her neck, the beauteous white of lillies shows,
Her auburn locks, in curling ringlets play,
And eyes out shine bright Phoebus' sparkling ray.
Last eve, when Sol had stole into the West,
I met her in the lane, her hand I prest,
And stole a kiss; believe me when I say,
Her breath smelt sweeter than the new shorn hay.

BOMKINET.
In Aura's face, the fair carnation blows,
Her eyes are jetty black, like ripen'd sloes,
Strait as a pine, she trips it on the lea,
And oft times calls a side-long glance at me.
Her lamkin stray'd, I found, and did restore,
She gave this ribbon, which at wake she wore.
As these gay colours are infix'd by art,
So is her image, in my faithful heart.

COLLIN.
Boast not thy silken string; this chaplet view,
Made of the sweet jonquil, and vi'let blue,
With this, my Myra did my brows adorn,
As late we danc'd upon yon upland lawn,
As round the elm the suckling doth intwine,
So clings her charms, unto the breast of mine.

BOMKINET.
As through the hollow way, my team I drove,
Slow went my beasts, while all my thoughts were love.
From out the thicket, a loud laugh I hear,
I stopt old Dobbin, and drew softly near,
Myra I spy'd there, with my lovely maid,
Grasping at boughs, which did their reach evade,
With my long whip, I pulled the branches down,
And fill'd their aprons with the nuts so brown.

COLLIN.
At harvest, when our reapers jocund were,
I fled from field, and slily stole to her.
My leather bottle fill'd, I told my smart,
While flutt'ring like a bird, beat quick my heart;
She smiling blush'd, and said she would be mine,
Speak, Bomkinet, is Aura half so kind.

BOMKINET.
As long as linnet sings amid the thorn,
Or crested cock hails the return of morn,
So long my tongue could Aura's praise display,
But see our flocks too great a distance stray,
Let's pen them fast, and to the alehouse hie,
For trust me, Collin, singing makes us dry.
