From the dim Shade of osier-woven Bow'r
CHERWELL arose.  Around her darkening Edge
Pale Eve began the steamy Mist to pour,
And Breezes fann'd by fits the rustling Sedge:
She rose, and thus she cried in drear Despair,
And tore the rushy Wreath that bound her streaming Hair.

Ah!  why, she cried, should ISIS share alone
The tributary Gifts of tuneful Fame!
Shall every Song her happier Influence own,
And stamp with partial Praise her favorite Name?
While I, alike to those proud Domes allied,
Nor hear the Muse's call, nor boast a classic Tide.

In Isis' Vase if Fancy's Eye discern
Aerial Tow'rs emboss'd in Sculpture high;
Lo!  milder Glories mark this modest Urn,
The simpler Scenes of rural Imagery.
What though she proudly pace an awful Queen?
Mine is the gentler Grace, the meek retiring Mien.

Vain Bards!   can Isis' Scenes transport the Soul,
Where Art each wilder wat'ry Charm invades;
Whose Wave in measur'd Volumes taught to roll,
Boil in close Lakes, or rush in white Cascades:
Whose Banks with echoing Industry resound,
Fenc'd by the foam-beat Pier, and torrent-braving Mound?

Lo, here no Commerce wakes the servant Toil,
To pour Pollution o'er my virgin Tide;
The Freshness of my Pastures to defile,
Or bruise the matted Groves that fringe my Side
But Solitude on this sequester'd Bank
Mid the moist Lillies sits, attir'd in Mantle dank.

Nor ruder Sounds my tripping Quires affright,
Nor break the Lowings of my grazing Throng;
The sapphire Halcyon wings her secret Flight,
And glows unseen my reedy Ranks among;
All unalarm'd, save when ambrosial May
Bids wake my peopled Shores, and rears the ripen'd Hay.

The hither haste, ye Youths, whose Duty brings
To GEORGE's Memory the votive Dirge;
To pensive Peace shall tune your solemn Strings
To saddest Airs along my lonely Verge:
Here Grief with holy Musing may converse
In Sounds that best shall greet the glorious Hero's Herse.

Or, if auspicious Themes you Harps would own,
In airy Vision here shall meet your Eye
Fair Scenes of Bliss:  A blooming Monarch's Throne
Hung with the Wreaths of righteous Victory;
The decent Trophies of domestic Ease,
A People's filial Love, and all the Palms of Peace.
