One silent evening, when I gave the rein
To fancy's busy wonder-working train,
A thousand forms fantastic glided by,
And shapeless phantoms danc'd before my eye;
Each, still as it approach'd, made room for more,
And left no traces of the form it bore,
Till fancy kindly wav'd her magic wand,
And bad the groupe of wild ideas stand.

Instant I saw on baseless columns rise
A dome, whose summit seem'd to touch the skies,
To SCANDAL sacred rose the lofty fane,
And reputations there the victims slain.
At top stood CALUMNY, with open mouth,
To echo falshoods from the North to South.
Vast folding doors appear'd on either side,
Whence issued Harpies, flutt'ring far and wide,
A desperate throng of loath'd ambiguous race,
With nothing female but the turn of face,
ILL-NATURE'S servants, by DETRACTION paid
To spread th' invective lyes herself had made.

Curious to see the temple and its shrine,
I hasten'd in, the mimic rites to join.
'Twas all a buzz within, no accents clear,
But sounds confus'd came whizzing in my ear;
The shrine a while my whole attention drew,
Where SCANDAL'S image was display'd to view,
Her looser dress, hung on with awkward air,
Bespoke a mind too light for houshold care;
Her vacant eyes no meaning beam dispense,
And all her features scorn'd the power of sense.
So many ears she had, she seem'd all ear,
Till on approaching to inspect more near,
As many tongues within her mouth appear'd,
Ready to utter every word she heard.
Beside her stood a huge enormous pile
Of flaming firebrands, which, with careless smile,
She scatter'd wanton, heedless where they fell,
Firing alike the palace, or the cell.
In antic weed stood FOLLY at her side,
And drew a veil before her eyes, to hide
The dire effects her wanton hand had wrought,
And new supplies of ready firebrands brought.

Her servants now the sacred rites begin,
And pay their homage to the darling SIN.
First on the shrine (the priests were women there)
They place industrious, with the nicest care,
Small painted vessels, beauteous to behold,
Glowing with various colours, rich with gold;
All moulded out of a peculiar earth,
And China call'd, from whence deriv'd their birth;
Next certain herbs of Indian growth they bring,
And steep in water from the limpid spring,
But first fermented o'er the sacred fire,
Then pour'd in vases, as the rites require.
A composition next, from western canes
Extracted, twice refin'd, with wond'rous pains,
Each vase receives; and last with mixture nice,
The flow'r of milk they add, and stir it thrice.

Whilst this libation at the shrine they make,
A scroll of names they from DETRACTION take;
And as before the God they prostrate fall,
Instead of ink they mark each name with gall.
So the vile crew who ride thro' foul and fair,
And on their broomsticks take the midnight air,
To their dark meetings bring the waxen boy,
Image of him their malice would destroy;
With pins and needles stick it round and round,
While distant infants groan in ev'ry wound.

To DEFAMATION now the scroll they bear,
Who sends it posting on the viewless air;
While lungs of brass, to earth's remotest bound,
Like the loud trumpet, multiplies the sound.

Whilst they proceeded thus the troubled air
Was pierc'd with cries of anguish and despair;
Fathers their sons, husbands their wives distrust,
And bosom friends each other think unjust.
Whilst with concern I ran these mischiefs o'er,
The priests, the shrine, the temple were no more.
Shrill shepherds dogs the evening silence broke,
And cawing rooks their homeward flight bespoke.
