"How is thy spirit, hapless Gallia, fled!
Where is that prowess thou wert wont to boast?
Is then thy antient thirst of glory dead?
Are all thy pleasing hopes of freedom lost,
Which thy brave sons so roughly strove to gain,
When daring Edward, by divine command,
Plough'd with his hardy troops the billowy main,
And wreak'd heaven's anger on this guilty land?
Tho' heav'n decreed the blow which Edward gave,
Yet was Alanson, yet was Lorraine brave.

"Have ye not heard, how Henry claim'd the throne,
When Charles asserted his paternal right?
By dint of valour he regain'd his own,
And thrice ten years maintain'd the doubtful fight.
Is then your freedom thus preserv'd in vain,
By the dear blood of your forefathers sav'd,
That thus ye crouch beneath the galling chain,
In worse than British bondage now enslav'd!
Edward was generous, and had Henry reign'd,
France might have yet a milder fate obtain'd.

"Has heav'n indignant to our mis'ries join'd,
That greatest curse, a base degenerate soul?
Else why this tumult?  why these sounds design'd
To rend with ill-tim'd joys the conscious pole?"
Thus sang a Gallic Muse, whose daring wing
Far distant left her groveling weak compeers;
Whilst the throng'd nobles hail'd their future king,
And bards prophetic, aw'd by servile fears,
Anticipating times of long renown,
Foretold the glories of the dauphin's crown.

Then to thee, Freedom, pay'd their votive lays
Those hireling bards, who, ere they dar'd to sing,
And to thy deity mock altars raise,
Must bow obeisance to an haughty king.
They, whom thy happy lessons never taught,
On whom from thee ne'er glanc'd one transient ray,
One liberal sentiment, or manly thought
That dar'd to bid them hate tyrannic sway,
Tender'd their abject incense at thy shrine,
Whilst slav'ry breath'd in each enervate line.

Let bards thus nurs'd beneath a tyrant's rod
Pay forc'd devotion to an empty name,
As Athens once ador'd an unknown god,
Nor deem'd for whom they rais'd the holy flame:
Let them with art suppress the starting tears,
And smile deceitful, whilst inur'd to pain,
Ev'n bless the means, that shall to latest years
Of all their ills protract the tedious chain.
Heav'n hath not so taught Britons; &mdash; yet their lay
With joy unfeign'd shall crown each happier day.

In strains more honest shall the British muse,
In strains more jocund greet the royal ear;
Mov'd by no servile dread, no sordid views,
Alike asham'd of flattery and of fear,
Their grateful wreath shall science' sons entwine;
And ev'ry muse shall bless th' auspicious morn
That said, "Hail Albion, for from Brunswick's line
Another guardian of thy laws is born."
Thro' the glad isle their joyful hymns shall ring,
Britain thro every clime shall hail her future king.
