PENGROUZE, a lad in many a science blest,
Outshone his toning brothers of the West;
Of smugling, hurling, wrestling much he knew,
And much of tin, and much of pilchards too.
Fam'd at each village, town, and country-house,
Menachen, Helstone, Polkinborne and Grouze;
Trespissen, Buddock, Cony-yerle, Treverry,
Polbastard, Hallabazzack, Eglesderry,
Pencob, and Restijeg, Treviskey, Breague,
Irewinnick, Buskenwyn, Busveal, Roscreague:
But what avail'd his fame and various art,
Since he, by love, was smitten to the heart?
The shaft a beam of Bet Polglaze's eyes,
And now he dumplin loaths, and pilchard pies,
Young was the lass, a servant at St. Tizzy,
Born at Polpiss, and bred at Mevagizzy.
Calm o'er the mountain blush'd the rising day,
And ting'd the summit with a purple ray,
When sleepless from his hutch the lover stole,
And met, by chance, the mistress of his soul.
And "Whither go'st," he scratch'd his skull and cry'd?
"Arrear, God bless us," well the nymph reply'd,
"To Yealston sure, to buy a pound o' backy,
That us and measter wonderfully lacky:
God bless us ale, this fortnight 'pon my word
We nothing smoaks but oak leaves and cue-terd."

PENGROUZE.
Arrear then Bessy let aloane the backy,
Sty here a tiny bit and let us talky.
Bessy I loves thee wot a ha me, zay,
Wot ha Pengrouze, why wot a, Bessy, hae?

BET POLGLAZE.
Ah hunkin, hunkin, mind at Moushole faire
What did you at the Choughs, the alehouse there?
When you stows eighteen pence in cakes and beer
To treat that dirty trollup, Mall Rosevear;
Ye stuffs it in her gills, and makes such pucker,
Arrear the people thoft you wid have choack her.

PENGROUZE.
Curse Mall Rosevear, I says, a great jack wh-re,
I ne'er sees such a dirty drab before:
I stuffs her gills with cakes and beer, the hunk
She stuffs herself, she meslin and got drunk.
Best drink sure for her jaws wan't good enow,
So Lecker makes her drunk as David's sow,
Her feace is like a bull's, and 'tis a fooel,
Her legs are like the legs o' cobler's stooel,
Her eyes be grean's a lick, as yaffers big,
Noase flat's my hond, and neck so black's a pig.

BET POLGLAZE.
Ay, but I've more to say; this isn't ale,
You deanc'd wy Mall Rosevear's a fartin bale;
She toald me so, and lefts me with a sneare,
Ay!  you, Pengrouze, did deance wy Mall Rosevear.

PENGROUSE.
Now Bessy hire me, Bessy, vath and soale,
Hire me, I says, and thou shat hire the whoale;
One night, a Wensday night, I vows to Goade,
Alaone a hossback to Tresouze I roade,
Sure Bessy vath, dist hire me, 'tis no lies,
Ad-mnder bale was never seed wy eyes.
I hires sum mizzick at an oald bearne doore,
And hires a wond'rous rousing on the floore;
So in I pops my head; says I, arreare!
Why, what a devil's neame is doing here?
Why deancing, cries the crowder by the wale,
Why deancing, deancing, measter, 'tis a bale.
Deancing, says I, by Gam I hires sum preancers,
But tell us where the devil be the deancers;
For fy the dust and strawze so fleed about,
I could not, Bessy, spy the hoppers out.
At laste I spies Rosevear, I wish her dead,
Who meakes me deance all nite, the stinking jade.
Says I, I have no shoose to kick a foote,
Why kick, says Mall Rosevear, then kick thy boot.
And Bet dist hire, for to leert us ale,
A furthing candle wink'd again the wale.

BET POLGLAZE.
Ah hunkin, hunkin, I am huge afraid
That you is laughing at a simple maid.

PENGROUZE.
Deare dearest Bet, let's hug thee to my hearte,
And may us never never pearte!
No, if I lies then Bessy, then I wishes
The Shackleheads may never close the fishes;
That picky dogs may eat the sceane when fule,
Eat'n to rags and let go ale the schule.

BET POLGLAZE.
Then here's my hond, and wy it teake my hearte.

PENGROUZE.
Goade bless us too, and here is mines, ods hearte
One buss, and then to Pilcharding I'll packy.

BET POLGLAZE.
And I to Yealstone for my master's backy.
