Those votive strains, O Isis, that but now
Along thy haunted verge melodious breath'd
To the sweet stop of quill, or chorded shell,
Or pastoral reed by many a muse inspir'd,
Were not in vain.  O now again from grot
Or leafy glade, wheree'er they use, thy train
Summon aloud, an hundred virgin forms
That tend thy beck, to hail in mystic dance,
And high-enraptur'd song, th' auspicious day,
That glad occasion gives, and crowns their hope.
And O may such blest magic hang upon
The puissant sound, as, after that rude rout
Subdued of Earth's proud sons presumptuous, when
Unshorn Apollo touch'd the golden wire
Amidst enthroned gods, and instant peace
Renew'd thro' out the courts of Jove; that e'en
Stern Mars was ta'en, and from his nerveless arm
Down dropt the fated lance. &mdash; And now enough
Hath rag'd, among th' affrighted seats of men
Dealing fell havoc; from the frozen North,
Where inbred tumults shake the throne, to where
Beneath solstitial heat in torrent climes,
Britain's intrepid sons for GEORGE'S brow
Win glorious laurels; such as never yet
The gazed temples bound of hero fam'd
Or demi-god, thro' shouting multitudes
In triumph drawn.  Fond minds, that sought true praise
By conquests and tyrannic sway t' attain,
And feats of war, all insufficient found:
Witness those woman drops, that stain'd the cheeks
Of Philip's flatter'd son, when nought remain'd
To conquer still.  But as yon royal towr's
Thou passest, long the seat of mightiest kings,
O Isis, stay thy lucent wave, and mark
Our greater Hero.  He, with other thoughts
Than to oppress mankind, from the loud din
Of popular breath with his resounded name
Rending the clamor'd air, alone retir'd,
The last dear pledge of heaven's high favour shewn
Still smiling in his fond embrace bespeaks:
"What mean those smiles expressive, as from thoughts
Well-pleas'd, and conscious happiness?  Is it
That nature premature thro' thy young sense
Hath let in reason's dawn, and shewn thee what
Thou art, the gaudy picture all display'd,
Riches, and realms, and gallant trophies won,
Hereditary thine?  Yet sure not so;
For then thy scatter'd spirits would again
Dissolve for pity of those precious drops
That smear these laurels.  No, my little one,
Should heav'n with fost'ring care thy tender age
Confirm, and deign to bless my fixt resolve,
I'll peaceful trophies raise, far more renown'd
Than aught that poets sing, or story feigns,
By hero or advent'rous knight atchiev'd
In brunt of battle'; and milder victories
Transmit at length to thy well-tutor'd hand.
So shalt thou sway for many a happy year
This fairest isle, the seat of liberty,
In undisturbed peace, thyself at once
The praise, the love, the wonder of mankind."
