Sacred to grief, be this once happy grove;
Mourn all ye Driads, spread a deeper shade,
Whilst I, forlorn, lament the tenderest love,
That e'er inspir'd the breast of youthful maid:
Encrease the gloom, and thou once pleasing stream,
Glide slowly murmuring to my mournful lay,
No thought of joy, henceforth, shall hither gleam,
In sighs, and tears, I'll spend each hated day;
Keep hence, ye nymphs and swains, drive not your flocks this way.

Ah!  strange reverse!  e'er while who was so bless'd,
In merry note, I pip'd on oaten reeds,
'Mongst all our blooming nymphs, who so caress'd,
Now, who so sad, my heart with anguish bleeds:
No more my pipe, upon the green is heard,
No more I sing the love-inspir'd lay;
How blithe was I!  whene'er my fair appear'd,
Love's sweetest melody to her I'd play;
But now all joy is fled, I throw my pipe away.

How shall I tell the charms of her I lov'd?
How paint the graces which in Delia shone?
Her matchless form, e'en envy had approv'd;
Detraction knew her not; but, ah!  she's gone!
Her lovely eye cou'd drop the pitying tear,
At others praise, her breast wou'd freely swell,
E'en vice wou'd blush, shou'd Delia but appear;
Slander and lust, abash'd before her fell;
Virtue, and faint-ey'd truth, with Delia lov'd to dwell.

Ah!  happy grove, where first I urg'd my vows;
Here first I sigh'd, here felt more anxious fears,
Than he, unskill'd, who first the green wave ploughs;
Late witness of my bliss, behold my tears:
Here first my Delia, blushing, heard my flame,
No feign'd resentment on her cheek cou'd glow,
No cold reserve, for she lov'd not to pain,
To gentle love, my Delia's heart cou'd bow;
'Twas death, most fatal stroke, when Delia felt the blow.

In her sweet Bow'r, by yond primrosy vale,
With am'rous woodbines, pliant tendrils wound,
Where mingled sweets, impregnate e'ery gale,
And dasie buds, and vi'lets paint the ground:
Oft in sweet talk, with her I've pass'd the day,
Whilst all I said, with kisses she'd approve;
No restless passions e'er approach'd that way,
Our flame was pure, and constant like the dove,
Our thoughts, our sense the same, for all our talk was love.

Oft by the margin of yond winding stream,
Walking with her, repeating the sweet song
Of some old bard, where chaste love was the theme,
Th' enamour'd theme, our way wou'd e'er prolong:
Each happy thought wou'd then receive new fire,
Each pleasing beauty then wou'd brighter glow,
A scene like this, wou'd any bard inspire,
In Delia's praise, my numbers oft wou'd flow;
In earliest age, with love, sweet poesie did grow.

Oft too we stray'd, by moon-light thro' the grove,
Sweet Philomela's plaintive song to hear,
Whilst pitying her, we'd bless our happier love,
Her hapless fate from Delia drew a tear:
But now with her, my lost love I deplore,
Like her, unceasing, must I mournful sing,
Soft dawning hope, beams on my soul no more,
Death, to my mind, alone relief can bring;
Alas!  what cruel griefs, from sweetest causes spring.

Then go my faithful dog, go leave my side,
E'erwhile, how happy in my Delia's care,
No more in her caresses shalt thou pride,
No more, Alas!  wilt thou her favours share:
Then go my Taffel, seek some happier swain,
Who all thy faithful service may reward,
Leave me to anguish, and heart-rending pain,
Let no my griefs thy better fate retard;
He who has lost himself can nought besides regard.

What then remains for me?  why do I stay?
Since she is gone, no other joy I know;
Come bidden guest, death hither bend thy way,
With Delia fled all worth my care below:
Oh!  dear-lov'd maid, still constant will I prove,
Can thy lov'd image from my bosom part,
Since thou art gone, what else is worth my love,
Then haste thee death, relieve me with thy dart;
His latest pang alone can tear thee from my heart.
