STROPHE.
O Thou who mid' the world-involving gloom,
Sit'st on yon solitary spire!
Or slowly shak'st the sounding dome,
Or hear'st the wildly-warbling lyre;
Say when thy musing soul
Bids distant times unroll,
And marks the flight of each revolving year,
That saw the race of Glory run,
That mark'd Ambition's setting sun,
That shook old Empire's tow'ring pride,
That swept them down the floating tide,
Say when these long-unfolding scenes appear,
Streams down thy hoary cheek the pity-darting tear?

1.2.
Cast o'er yon trackless waste thy wand'ring eye:
Yon Hill whose gold-illumin'd brow
Just trembling thro' the bending sky,
O'erlooks the boundless wild below;
Once bore the branching wood
That o'er yon murm'ring flood
Hung wildly-waving to the rustling gale;
The naked heath with moss o'ergrown,
That hears the 'lone owl's nightly moan,
Once bloom'd with Summer's copious store,
Once rais'd the lawn-bespangling flow'r,
Or heard some Lover's plaintive lay,
When by pale Cynthia's silver ray,
All wild he wander'd o'er the lonely dale,
And taught the list'ning moon the melancholy tale.

1.3.
Ye wilds where heav'n-rapt Fancy roves,
Ye sky-crown'd hills, and solemn groves!
Ye low-brow'd vaults, ye gloomy cells!
Ye caves where night-bred Silence dwells!
Ghosts that in yon lonely hall,
Lightly glance along the wall;
Or beneath yon ivy'd tow'r,
At the silent mid-night hour,
Stand array'd in spotless white,
And stain the dusky robe of Night;
Or with now solemn pauses, roam
O'er the long, sounding, hollow dome!
Say mid yon desert' solitary round,
When Darkness wraps the boundless spheres,
Does ne'er some dismal dying sound
On Night's dull serious ear rebound,
That mourns the ceaseless lapse of life-consuming years?

2.1.
O call th' inspiring glorious hour to view,
When Caledonia's martial train,
From yon steep rock's high-arching brow
Pour'd on the heart-struck flying Dane!
When War's blood-tinctur'd spear
Hung o'er the trembling rear;
When light-heel'd Terror wing'd their headlong flight:
Yon Tow'rs then rung with wild alarms!
Yon Desert gleam'd with shining arms!
While on the bleak hill's brightning spire,
Bold Vict'ry flam'd, with eyes of fire;
Her limbs celestial robes infold,
Her wings were ting'd with spangling gold,
She spoke: &mdash; her words infus'd resistless might,
And warm'd the bounding heart, and rous'd the soul of fight.

2.2.
But ah, what hand the smiling prospect brings!
What voice recalls th' expiring day!
See darting swift on eagle-wings,
The glancing Moment bursts away!
So from some mountain's head,
In mantling gold array'd,
While bright-ey'd Fancy stands in sweet surprize:
The vale where musing Quiet treads,
The flow'r-clad lawns, and bloomy meads,
Or streams where Zephyr' loves to stray
Beneath the pale Eve's twinkling ray;
Or waving woods detain the sight:&mdash;
&mdash;When from the gloomy cave of Night
Some cloud sweeps shadowy o'er the dusky skies,
And wraps the flying scene that fades, and swims, and dies.

2.3.
Lo!  rising from yon dreary tomb,
What spectres stalk across the gloom!
With haggard eyes, and visage pale,
And voice that moans with feeble wail!
O'er yon long resounding plain
Slowly moves the solemn train;
Wailing-wild with shrieks of woe
O'er the bones that rest below!
While the dull Night's startled ear
Shrinks, aghast with thrilling fear!
Or stand with thin robes wasting soon,
And eyes that blast the sick'ning moon!
Yet these, ere Time had roll'd their years away,
Ere death's fell arm had mark'd its aim;
Rul'd yon proud tow'rs with ample sway,
Beheld the trembling swains obey;
And wrought the glorious deed that swell'd the trump of Fame.

3.1.
But why o'er these indulge the bursting sigh?
Feels not each shrub the Tempest's pow'r?
Rocks not the dome when whirl-winds fly?
Nor shakes the hill when thunders roar?
Lo!  mould'ring, wild, unknown,
What Fanes, what Tow'rs o'erthrown,
What tumbling chaos marks the waste of Time!
I see Palmyra's temples fall!
Old Ruin shakes the hanging wall!
Yon waste where roaming lions howl,
Yon aisle where moans the grey-ey'd Owl,
Shows the proud Persian's great abode:
Where scepter'd once, an earthly God!
His pow'r-clad arm controul'd each happier clime,
Where sports the warbling Muse, and Fancy soars sublime.

3.2.
Hark! &mdash; what dire sound rolls murm'ring on the gale?
Ah!  what soul-thrilling scene appears!
I see the column'd arches fail!
And structures hoar, the boast of years!
What mould'ring piles decay'd
Glean, thro' the moon-streak'd shade,
Where Rome's proud Genius rear'd her awful brow!
Sad monument! &mdash; Ambition near,
Rolls on the dust and pours a tear;
Pale Honour drops the flutt'ring plume,
And Conquest weeps o'er Caesar's tomb,
Slow Patience sits with eye deprest,
And Courage beats his sobbing breast;
Ev'n War's red check the gushing streams o'erflow,
And Fancy's list'ning ear attends the plaint of Woe.

3.3.
Lo on yon Pyramid's sublime,
Whence lies Old Egypt's desert clime,
Bleak, naked, wild!  where Ruin low'rs,
Mid' Fanes, and Wrecks, and tumbling tow'rs:
On the steep height waste and bare,
Stands the Pow'r with hoary hair!
O'er His scythe He bends; &mdash; His hand
Slowly shakes the flowing sand,
While the Hours, an airy ring
Lightly flit with downy wing;
And sap the works of man; &mdash; and shade
With silver'd locks his furrow'd head;
Thence rolls the mighty Pow'r His broad survey,
And seals the Nations awful doom;
He sees proud Grandeur's meteor-ray,
He yields to Joy the festive day;
Then sweeps the length'ning shade, and marks them for the tomb.
