In that mild season of the peaceful night
E'er yet the solemn gloom had sunk away;
Or the gray morn with streaks of orient light
Foretold the rising of the God of day:

With ruddy beams encircl'd e'er the star
Had faded in it's golden orb on high,
Or the pale moon from her descending car
Shot fainter lustre thro' the ambient sky:

Still were the fields of air; unheard as yet
The warbling muse of the feather'd train:
When lo!  Britannia's form, with tresses wet,
Arose resplendent from the briny main.

And thrice she pointed to the favourite seat
Of her much-honour'd Son; and thrice her soul
With all the fondness of a Parent beat;
Whilst from her lips these words prophetic stole:

"Hush'd be the clamorous brazen throat of war!
And ye, dread rulers of the main, awhile
Cease your loud din:  the thund'ring cannon spare;
Nor drown the softer music of my Isle.

"Of martial laurels and the victor's meed
Enough the hardy, war-worn Briton knows:
To the loud Clarion let the Flute succeed;
And crested Mars recline in soft repose.

"To joyful themes pacific strains belong:
Lead then your jocund train, ye Graces fair;
And thou, blest choir of Bards, begin the song,
And spread sweet music thro' the listening air.

"For lo!  (nor deem these welcome accents vain)
Soon as the sun his blushing head shall rear,
Another Sun shall rise to gild the plain;
Another Glory to the world appear.

"E'en now, whilst yet in embryon charms He lies,
And sleeps unconscious of his future worth;
Behold a thousand gathering crouds arise,
With eager haste to hail th' auspicious Birth.

"And know, great Sovereign, when to fate consign'd
Nought but thy Virtues shall be left to fame,
In Him shall Britain every virtue find;
In Him each glory of his Father's name.

"Thrice happy Britain!  from thy sounding shores
What shouts of loyalty assail the skies!
As time's dark scenes my aching sight explores,
What future conquests croud upon my eyes!

"Rul'd by a generous race of heav'n-born Kings,
What realms shall bow to Thy superior state!
See loaded Commerce spreads her floating wings,
Whilst Peace sits smiling o'er the golden freight!"

Thus spake the Nymph; and bad the silver tide
Dispart it's waves on either side display'd;
The silver waves their willing ranks divide,
And the deep flood receiv'd the azure Maid.
