Imperial Dome of Edward wise and brave!
Where warlike honour's brightest banners wave;
At whose proud Tilts, unmatch'd for hardy deeds,
Heroic kings have frown'd on barbed steeds:
Though now no more thy crested chiefs advance
In arm'd array, nor grasp the glittering lance;
Though knighthood boasts the martial pomp no more
That grac'd it's gorgeous festivals of yore;
Say, conscious Dome, if e'er thy marshal'd knights
So nobly deck'd their old majestic rites,
As when, high-thron'd amid thy trophied Shrine,
GEORGE shone the leader of the garter'd line?

Yet future triumphs, Windsor, still remain;
Still may thy bowers receive as brave a train:
For lo, to Britain and her Favour'd Pair,
Heaven's high command has sent a sacred Heir!
Him the bold pattern of his patriot sire
Shall fill with early fame's immortal fire:
In life's fresh spring, e'er buds the promis'd prime,
His thoughts shall mount to virtue's meed sublime:
The patriot fire shall catch, with sure presage,
Each liberal omen of his opening age;
Then to thy courts shall lead, with conscious joy,
In stripling beauty's bloom the princely boy;
There firmly wreathe the Braid of heavenly die,
True valour's badge, around his tender thigh.
Meantime, thy royal piles that rise elate
With many an antique tower, in massy state,
In the young champion's musing mind shall raise
Vast images of Albion's elder days.
While, as around his eager glance explores
Thy chambers rough with war's constructed stores,
Rude helms, and bruised shields; barbaric spoils
Of ancient chivalry's undaunted toils;
Amid the dusky trappings, hung on high
Young Edward's sable-mail shall strike his eye:
Shall fire the youth, to crown his riper years
With rival Cressys, and a new Poitiers;
On the same wall, the same triumphal base,
His own victorious monuments to place.

Nor can a fairer kindred title move
His emulative age to glory's love
Than Edward, laureate prince.  In letter'd truth,
Oxford, sage mother, school'd his studious youth
Her simple institutes and rigid lore,
The royal nursling unreluctant bore;
Nor shunn'd, at pensive eve, with lonesome pace
The moonlight cloyster's checquer'd floor to trace;
Nor scorn'd to mark the sun, at mattins due,
Stream through the storied window's holy hue.
And O, Young Prince, be thine his moral praise;
Nor seek in fields of blood his warriour bays.
War has it's charms terrific.  Far and wide
When stands th' embattled host in banner'd pride;
O'er the vext plain when the shrill clangours run,
And the long phalanx flashes in the sun;
When now no dangers of the deathful day
Mar the bright scene, nor break the firm array;
Full oft, too rashly glows with fond delight
The youthful breast, and asks the future fight;
Nor knows that Horror's form, a spectre wan,
Stalks, yet unseen, along the gleamy van.
May no such rage be thine:  No dazzling ray
Of specious fame thy stedfast feet betray.
Be thine domestic glory's radiant Calm,
Be thine the scepter wreath'd with many a palm;
Be thine the throne with peaceful emblems hung,
The silver lyre to milder conquest strung!
Instead of glorious feats atchiev'd in arms,
Bid rising Arts display their mimic charms:
Just to thy country's fame, in tranquil days
Record the past, and rouze to future praise:
Before the public eye, in breathing brass,
Bid thy fam'd father's mighty triumphs pass:
Swell the broad arch with haughty Cuba's fall,
And cloath with Minden's plain th' historic hall.

Then mourn not, Edward's Dome, thine ancient boast,
Thy turnaments, and listed combats lost!
From Arthur's Board, no more, proud castle, mourn
Adventurous valour's gothic trophies torn!
Those elfin charmes, that held in magic night
It's elder fame, and dimm'd it's genuine light,
At length dissolve in truth's meridian ray,
And the bright Order bursts to perfect day:
The mystic round, begirt with bolder peers,
On virtue's base it's rescued glory rears;
Sees civil prowess mightier acts atchieve,
Sees meek humanity distress relieve;
Adopts the Worth that bids the conflict cease,
And claims it's honours from the Chiefs of Peace.
