In that bright season, when all nature's gay,
And little warblers chorus in the May,
A roseate blush the east had overspread,
Phoebus just rising was from Thetis' bed,
When Lobbin Clout, with Damon trudg'd along,
With each his oaken staff, and rustic song.
Few swains, like Damon tun'd the Doric reed,
At wrestling Lobbin did them all exceed;
No cares perplex, but such as love does bring,
For beauty wounds alike the clown and king.
Brisk Marian's form all Lobbin's soul possest,
And Flora reign'd supreme in Damon's breast;
Each tufted tree bore witness of their flames,
The hills and vales re-eccho'd back their names;
With eager steps the daisied lawns they stray,
Nor can the bramble-hedge obstruct their way.
With annual glee the village they explore,
To deck the May-pole, as in days of yore.
Here sprightly nymphs, in russet clad are seen,
With charms that far surpass the Cyprian queen;
The rural dance, the laugh and joke went round,
While every lad his lass with chaplets crown'd.
Thus Sylvan deities, in Latian lands,
Were worship'd by their priests in flowing bands;
And thus the firstlings of their flocks they led
In rosy wreaths, which at the altar bled.
But British swains such cruel acts detest,
While love and freedom humanize the breast.
On curds and whey at eve they sleep supine,
Nor envy, Italy, thy mantling wine.
Recall, O!  wandering muse, thy humble strain,
To sing the mirth of happy Devon's plain;
Where now the radiant chariot of the sun
Had gain'd his noon-tide height, and westward run.
Tir'd by the dance, each nymph by shepherd led,
Was gently plac'd beneath a beechen shade;
High, on the fragrant boughs their garlands hung,
As proper emblems for the fair and young;
That youth, like blossoms cropt, will soon decay,
Nor will all-conqu'ring time one moment stay.
The ruddy apple that their grandsires prest,
With joy exhilarates each artless breast:
Then cottage wit incessant flies around
In ceaseless clamours, not unlike the sound
Of rushing waters, which a hasty rain
Drives down the cliffs, and floods the distant plain:
Or such shrill clarion, Rome's preservers make
When wiley Reynard issues thro' the brake.
This day their herds are left at large to stray,
The churn stands useless, and the new-shorn hay
No more their thoughts employ, while every tongue
With direful tales of country terrors rung;
Recounts how wrinkled hag, in yonder shade,
With crooked pins infects the parson's maid;
How headless horses, simple swains affright,
And horrid spectres haunt the church at night;
When, lo!  a marching regiment's martial sound
With sudden fancies every heart surround.
Home strait they speed, renew their yearly toil,
Till May's sweet verdure bless again our isle.
