Lost in the mournful wood at eve,
While round the awful torrents roll,
Why fiercely does thy bosom heave,
Why weary sinks thy sad'ning soul;
Or what along the dark'ning waste
Impels thy steps with eager haste;
What voice seems rushing on the wind,
Why stop?  why dart a glance behind?
Alas!  thy looks so wild, thy thoughts so drear,
Confess th' alarming strength, th' unbounded pow'r of fear.

What direful scenes of woe, as fancy deems,
Chill the bold heart, and strike th' astonish'd eye;
The visionary spectre frequent gleams,
And forms terrific float in horror by;
The heavy clouds are settled in the air,
Loud sighs the gale, the lonely mountain o'er
Deep caverns frowning gloom, and monsters glare,
While starting Fear exhausts her frantic store;
By chains unseen th' imagination guides,
And with a magic force o'er ev'ry thought presides.

Away with all thy rueful train,
Nor cast thy cold pale glance at me,
Least Reason quit my tortur'd brain,
And each mad thought be full of thee;
Nor ever meet my startl'd view,
Array'd in robe of sanguine hue;
Nor near my silent couch be found,
When night is wrapt in darkness round:
Away, and haunt the murderer's care-fraught bed,
And probe his guilty soul 'till ev'ry bliss be fled.

In vain on him the genial god of sleep
Pours his sweet slumbers once so soft and mild;
In vain they on his fallen eye-lids creep,
Still broke by visions savage all, and wild:
Unnerv'd, and all appall'd, he seems to tread
With toilsome steps the dread funereal way,
Where howling phantoms throng athwart the shade,
While the wan moon scarce beams her joyless ray;
On high on hanging cliffs he seems to go,
And views the deep black stream that sleeps so still below.

Yet lead him on and let him feel
The stings of conscience and remorse,
Their penetrating points reveal,
And wound him with their keenest force:
No respite let the monster find,
With ev'ry fury rack his mind,
And still each sad, each ling'ring night,
Before him stalk a haggard sight,
'Till wak'd to misery he raves and mourns,
While ev'ry flame of Hell within his bosom burns.

See at the regal banquet curst Macbeth
Secure of empire secretly rejoice;
The fiend seems smiling at the work of death,
And hears, with pleasure hears, the murderer's voice:
When lo!  at once Fear's dreadful pow'r is felt,
As injur'd Banquo points the livid wound,
Cold chilling dews upon his forehead melt,
Fades the gay scene of splendor all around,
Drops from his nerveless hand the rosy bowl,
While sluggish through his veins life's purple torrents roll.

And mark where Richard near his tent,
Tastes the cool fragrance of the air,
Remorse within his bosom pent,
And deadly hate, and black despair;
Yet once again behold, he sleeps,
Hark!  on his ear the low groan creeps;
He shudd'ring starts, convulsive shakes,
He heaves, he turns, he leaps, he wakes;
Each feature seems with wild amazement hung,
The sudden pray'r to Heav'n drops fault'ring from his tongue.

Shakespeare alone thy ghastly charms enjoy'd,
Thy savage haunts he travers'd undismay'd,
In hearing thy awak'ning tales employ'd,
Where the wood darkens to a deeper shade;
And if I read the magic page aright,
Loud thunders roll'd around th' enchanted spot,
While fire-ey'd daemons growl'd the long lone night,
And ev'ry tree with flashing flame was smote;
And cries uncouth, and sounds of woe were heard,
And tall gigantic shapes their horrid forms uprear'd.

But not alone to guilt confin'd,
Thy furies dart their secret stings,
They point them at the virtuous mind,
Which each ideal fancy wings;
The pensive melancholy Dane
Deep mourns his royal father slain;
Th' unnatural murderer must bleed,
The ghost appears and prompts the deed;
Even valiant Brutus, sinking to repose,
Thy awful presence felt as his stern genius rose.

Ye Angels sent as guardians of the good,
Swift chase th' enthusiastic pow'r away,
Clear the low cloud, each grief-charg'd thought exclude,
Drive hence the fiend that shuns the eye of day;
Ah!  calm and gentle sink us down to rest,
Let chearfulness the lonely void adorn,
Let her mild radiance gild the fear-struck breast,
While we with air-form'd terrors cease to mourn;
And in such raptur'd dreams the fancy steep,
As render more endear'd the deity of sleep.
