High on a cliff, whose solitary brow
Frown'd o'er the deep tempestuous gulph below,
Britannia sat; full frequent heav'd the sigh,
And grief's dull languish floated in her eye;
With wild emotion ev'ry feature wrought,
Her air was sorrow, and her look was thought.
What?  tho' the palm her cinctur'd temples bound,
And vict'ry's clarion breath'd her fame around;
Twines not the thorn thro' glory's laureate wreath,
Or swells not conquest's sound the blast of death?
Pensive she saw her People's streaming gore
Tinge ev'ry sea, and float on ev'ry shore.
Nor War alone destroy'd th' embattled train;
The clime pour'd wrath, and ev'ry breeze was bane.
But lo!  fair Peace in radiant pride descends,
And meek-ey'd Virtue at her side attends;
While Union's angel-form aloft in air
Waves his white ensign o'er th' immortal pair.
Onward they bear the olive's golden bough,
And braid its foliage round Britannia's brow;
Sooth'd by the boon her sorrows sink to rest,
And joy relumes the sun-shine of her breast.

So when the dove, from nature's wild uproar,
Her spoil fair-blooming to the Patriarch bore,
His lifted eye the branch of Peace ador'd,
And hail'd the omen of a World restor'd.

Come then, blest Concord!  come, ye Halcyon hours!
No trumpet clangs, no wrathful thunder roars:
On Wezer's banks no more destruction raves,
The vineyard purples and the harvest waves;
Where arms loud clash'd, and foes encounter'd foes,
The flow'rets blossom and the flocks repose:
Plenty and Pleasure lead their choral band,
And ev'ry blessing spreads o'er ev'ry land.

Let scepter'd Tyrants mount the trophied car,
And scatter havock from the wheels of War;
Curst by mankind, they lance the lightning's flame,
And sink in virtue as they rise in fame.
Far nobler He, who sheaths the murderous blade,
And cloaths his mountains with the olive's shade;
Whose patriot wisdom civil life refines,
Whose radiance warms and blesses as it shines.
Such Britain's Prince; whose dawning beam displays
The milder glories of unsully'd praise:
'Tis His to break Oppression's galling chain,
And fix o'er India Freedom's gentler reign.
See!  where on Canada's untutor'd youth
Already beam the rays of heav'n-born truth!&mdash;
See!  plume-crown'd Chiefs each social blessing taste,
And rising towers adorn th' illumin'd waste!
See!  cultur'd meads their golden fruits display,
Where rang'd the hunter, savage as his prey!
No more the Sachem views Kiwasa's form
Frown in the cloud, or mutter in the storm;
Religion's beams the darksome mists dispell,
Which Ign'rance broods in Superstition's cell.
E'en there shall Science spread her hallow'd store,
And Art's fair empire grace Ontario's shore;
Some future Locke with Reason's keenest ray
Pierce the rich fount of intellectual Day,
The subtle ties of complex thought unbind,
And fix each movement of the varying mind;
Some second Newton trace Creation's laws
Thro' each dependence to the sovereign cause;
Some Milton plan his bold impassion'd theme,
Stretch'd on the banks of Orellana's stream;
Another Shakespear shall Ohio claim,
And boast its flood ally'd to Avon's fame.
There too shall Sculpture warm the featur'd stone,
And Canvas glow with beauties not its own;
With BRUNSWIC's Name shall each Savannah sound,
And Attic Muses sport on Indian ground.

So when Augustus bade his conquests cease,
Again he triumph'd in the works of Peace;
With Honor's wreath the civic palm entwin'd,
Polish'd with arts, with laws reform'd mankind;
Supreme he rose, the Father of his State,
Good without Pride, and amiably great.
