Let happier Bards, whose labouring breasts have known
Th' inspiring Muse, and transports not their own,
Whose rapid thoughts, like tow'ring Eagles, soar,
And eyes creation's ample bounds explore,
Awake, arise:  why are they mute so long,
When themes of glory claim the grateful song?
O'er every clime, where springs the fount of day,
Or western oceans quench the parting ray;
Where nearer suns the ductile ore mature,
Or hills the load of summer-snows endure;
Hath Britain's Genius stretcht his wide domain,
And faithless Gallia mourn'd her legions slain.
Who but hath seen the Trophies cheaply bought,
When Hawke hath conquer'd, and when Granby fought?
Who but hath heard how Wolfe untimely dy'd,
While Victory stood weeping at his side?
Haste, haste, ye Bards, and rapt to generous praise
Embalm the Heroe in immortal lays,
That distant times the wondrous tale may read,
And feel their souls inspir'd by every deed,
When valour faints may catch the patriot flame,
And burn for glory at his godlike name:
Thus to some tomb the pious Pilgrim flies
Where in cold earth the saint or martyr lies;
Where Fancy paints the Virtues weeping round,
And Inspiration guards the hallow'd ground;
There all entranc'd adores the sacred shrine,
Till his rapt bosom burns with flames divine.

But ah such themes so wondrous high demand
A Pindar's fire, a Pindar's voice, and hand:
Enough for me, thro' whose inglorious veins
The cold blood slowly creeps, in gentler strains
To sing returning Peace; nor Thou refuse,
O BUTE, this tribute of an humble Muse!
Thou, whose example sway'd the Royal Youth
To tread the paths of Virtue, and of Truth;
Whose early care destroy'd each noxious weed,
That lust for glory, and ambition breed;
But fed the plants, deriv'd from Heav'n above,
Whose milder fruits are Peace, and Joy, and Love.
Driv'n from her loathsome cave in blackest hell,
Where torturing tortur'd fiends she loves to dwell,
Up Discord rose, and wrapt in shades of night
Wing'd to this western world her baleful flight.
Her fiery eyeballs glar'd a ghastly blue,
And snaky locks dropt venom as she flew;
Her face was filthy foul, and stain'd with gore
Her garments hung in rags; a brand she bore
By Furies kindled, whence incessant fell 
Infernal sparks of fire unquenchable.
Thus long she rag'd, and sow'd thro' every state
The seeds of faction, jealousy, and hate;
With madding storms of passion racks the mind,
And let loose wild Ambition on mankind.
But Thee, Germania, Thee she chiefly chose
Forlorn in dust to sit, and weep thy woes;
Thy comely visage markt with many a scar,
And blasted with the lightning brand of war;
Thy cities sackt, thy holy shrines defil'd,
Thy heroes butcher'd, and thy virgins spoil'd!
Where are thy charms, O poor forsaken Maid,
Harass'd by foes, by lawless friends betray'd?
Thy dowry where?  Lo, lo, the fruitful place
Is grown a barren, wasteful wilderness!
No more her fields, with golden harvests crown'd,
Or fill'd with lowing herds, rejoice around;
Her hills no more their purple vines display,
Whose swelling clusters drink the ripening ray,
War, horrid War, extends his iron reign,
And dreary Desolation sweeps the plain!

Hail, Britain, hail, fair seat of arts, and arms,
Secur'd by Heav'n from Mars's fierce alarms!
No foreign foes can shake thy stedfast Isle,
Impell'd by hatred, or allur'd by spoil;
While floating bulwarks guard thy trench, the main,
How vain their envy, and their rage how vain?
Hail Queen of Ocean, in whose placid eye
Smiles sweet Content, and heav'n-born Liberty!
'Tis thine to hear, far distant from thy shore,
The smould'ring thunders of the battle roar,
And bless'd in Peace with Heav'n's best gifts abound,
While war's fierce tempests rend the nations round:
Thus on the Andes, that stupendous chain
Of hills, whence tumbling torrents pour amain,
The hardy traveller sees, from Rica's brow,
The mad storm gathering all its rage below,
And charg'd with nitre, down the mountain's side,
Impetuous thunder' roll, and whirlwinds ride;
Dreadful they break, while he aloft enjoys
The calm serene of summer's evening-skies.

But not unmov'd Britannia's Monarch view'd
The storm descend in streams of christian blood;
Tho' Justice smil'd, and o'er his fav'rite head
Her purple wings exulting Conquest spread,
His soul abhorr'd the sight, and griev'd to buy
Fantastic glory at a price so high.
Curst be the man, who first a slave to fame,
And the vain transports of a sounding name,
Graspt at imperial pow'r, unsheath'd the blade,
Made war an art, and murd'rous death a trade;
But doubly curst, who lur'd by selfish views
The baleful art, and murd'rous trade pursues!

Far different schemes great GEORGE's care engage,
Rejoic'd to calm each faction's brutal rage,
In friendship's chain contending Kings to bind,
And pour the balm of concord on mankind.

To Britain's isle what blessings Peace may bring 
In homespun strains full many a bard shall sing:
My Muse on fancy's eagle-pinion flies
To distant climes, where other suns arise;
Where groves of cedar wave, and trees unfold
Their dulcet stores of vegetable gold;
Where hills aspire, beneath whose lofty heads
Her humble glories sunborn Iris spreads;
And cataracts, rushing down the rocky steep,
Diffus'd in streams thro' vast savannahs sweep.
There unappall'd the tawny Indian roves
Thro' fragrant myrtle walks, and citron groves;
No poison'd arrow from the brake he fears,
No savage howl of war distracts his ears;
Secure he strays, and 'midst the conscious shade
Sings amorous descants to his sable maid.

O fair Laurentia, o'er whose fertile plains
No scourge of Heav'n, no purple Tyrant reigns!
Blest clime, on whom propitious fortune smil'd,
When Britain chose thee for her darling child!
Thy sons no more shall darkling grope their way,
Or blindly follow reason's glow-worm ray;
With healing wings the Sun of truth shall rise,
And light celestial beam from eastern skies;
The glorious Day-spring shall from high appear,
While Errour's ghastly phantoms shrink with fear.
Ev'n now methinks thy painted chiefs despise
Their pagan rites, and brutal sorceries;
Nor prone on earth the thunder's voice adore,
Nor bow to Ketan's monstrous idol more:
By pure Religion taught the sacred road,
That leads thro' Nature's path to Nature's God,
The One Supreme with holy love they fear,
And all the Gospel's wondrous truths revere;
On Faith's mysterious scale triumphant rise
Like sons of light, and claim their kindred skies:
Thus, Spenser sings, when Una, hapless maid,
Found a kind refuge in the green-wood shade,
A shaggy troop of Fauns, and Satyres came,
And gaz'd astonied on the beauteous dame:
When lo!  her wit such gentle force applies
To win them o'er from vain Idolatries;
From her blest lips such holy doctrines flow,
The savage race with pure devotion glow;
Receive in transport her celestial lore,
And burn with heav'nly flames unfelt before.
