Daughters of Jove, no more! &mdash; Adieu, ye Maids,
Whose visionary forms have met my eye;
Whether I mus'd by Anio's headlong steep,
Or by the fabled haunts of Castaly,
Or where Cephisus joins the billowy deep;
Or where thro' groves, and olive-woven shades;
Ilissus rolls his stream;
For now a loftier theme
Demands my song, REDEMPTION'S wondrous plan,
And thy sad sufferings, O my God, for Man!

But come, O Virgin-muse of Sion, come,
Come gently, and my breast inspire
With some faint sparks of that seraphic fire,
Whose beams refulgent glow'd,
When bursting thro' the womb
Of dark Futurity, "A God, a God,"
Proclaim'd aloud the heav'n-enlighten'd Seer,
"From Bosrah lo he comes mighty to save,
"Mighty to triumph o'er the grave!"&mdash;
And all the oaks of Bashan stoopt to hear,
And Lebanon's attentive cedars bow'd.

But turn, O turn thine eyes
To where with groves of Palm, and Olive crown'd,
On the fair bosom of the mountain lies
The Garden's holy ground!
For there my Saviour's bitter agonies
Began; there from th' Abyss profound
Of blackest Hell, a Stream of horrour flow'd,
And overwhelm'd his pure and innocent soul;
Or ere his sacred blood
Had washt, had cleans'd us from pollutions foul,
And seal'd anew the League 'twixt Man and God.

Dark rose the dreadful Night,
And not one sprightly note, or pleasing sound,
Was heard to breathe around:
The Shepherds sat with silent horrour mute,
And charm'd no more their pipe or jocund flute;
And Philomel her wonted strain forbore:
How could she sing, while from the blasted oak
The hoarse night-ravens croak,
And Screech-owls moan aloud in dire affright,
And screaming from the pool with hideous cry
Aloof the Bitterns fly;
While clouds impetuous burst with horrid roar,
And Spectres shriek, and Ghosts unholy yell,
And mutt'ring in the black and turbid air
Daemons and fiends of hell,
Array'd in livid flames, terrific glare?

Earth to the centre shook,
And universal Nature quakt for fear,
As if her end was near;
While ev'ry pale star, with distemper'd look,
Shot from the sky: &mdash; and well, O well they might,
When He was doom'd to agonizing pain,
Who bade them flame on high,
The fairest gems in heav'n's fair canopy,
And fill'd their orbs with everlasting light.
But now see where he lies
On the cold ground, expos'd to thick dank air,
And all the fury of the madding skies!
See how each nerve and vein
Trembles and throbs with torture; how his eyes
Start from their seat with anguish and despair!
What drops of sanguine sweat roll down amain
From His fair limbs!  "O Father, O remove
If possible this cup; yet not my will,
But thine be done!"  O agonizing Love!
O grace beyond compare!
Swift thro' the yielding air
The words upflew to heav'n, and all the Quire
Of blessed Angels stood in speechless trance:
Aside they flung their harps of golden wire,
And in their bow'rs of amaranthine shade
For one short moment stay'd
Their ardent songs of rapture and of praise,
While wonder-struck they gaze,
O King of Suff'rings, on thy conflicts dire!

But soft!  Am I deceiv'd, or doth a ray
Of light ethereal burst thro' yonder cloud,
And gild the mountain top with its fair beam?
Lo, down the lucid stream
An Angel glides!  he leaves his crystal sphere,
And cuts with nimble wing his liquid way
Thro' the rank vapours of this murky air;
Sent, O my Saviour, from thy lab'ring breast
To drive away the horrours of despair,
And give thy sorrow-sick'ning soul to rest.

And hark, while swiftly from th' ethereal height
This harbinger of light
Descends, what awful silence reigns around!
No more their rustling heads the cedars wave,
And each aerial Sound
Creeps softly to its cave:
The dark Clouds slumber on the mountain's brow,
And Nature stands absorb'd in dread suspense;
While thus the Angel cheers his drooping sense,
And bids full streams of heav'nly music flow.

THE HYMN.
Hail Sun of Righteousness, whose healing ray
Can pierce the darkness of Egyptian night;
Tho' now some earth-born clouds obstruct thy way,
Soon shalt thou blaze in thy meridian height;
And beaming with celestial love,
Destroy the covering, and the veil remove,
And guide the nations with thy friendly light,
To the blest regions of eternal day.
Then, O ye Hosts on high,
Cherubs and Seraphs, that excel in might,
Ye that encircling guard the sapphire throne,
And sing Hosannas to the great THREEONE,
O praise him, praise him everlastingly!

When Man rebell'd, and from th' abyss profound
Those miscreated monsters, Sin and Death,
A way to Eden found,
There blasting, with their pestilential breath,
Each herb, and fruit, and flow'r,
Of Eve's delicious bow'r;
Thou saw'st the havoc, saw'st with melting eye
The sad Earth labour under the horrid doom
Of guilt, and misery;
Saw'st all her beauty, all her vernal bloom
Like flow'rs frost-smitten die;
While heaving with convulsive pangs, and groans,
She op'd her jaws, and yawn'd the general tomb
Of her once happy, once immortal sons!
At that dread hour, when statue-struck with woe
Stood the primaeval Pair,
And wept, and loaded with their sighs the air,
We  lookt around &mdash; but lo
Not one to pity them, not one to know!
No Son of light, no Angel dar'd to plead,
No Seraph intercede:
'Till Thou, the high priest, heard'st the wretches moan,
And off'ring up their incense-breathing pray'r
In golden censer at th' eternal throne,
"On me their Shepherd, me thy wrath employ,
But spare these hapless sheep, O Father, spare,
Let me with agonies their grief atone,
And all their sins, and all their sorrows bear."
Then sang the morning Stars their hymns of joy,
When thou, the Father's uncreated Son,
The promis'd Shilo, quitting thy abode,
That heaven of heav'ns the bosom of thy God,
And stript of all thy bliss, and all thy glory,
Began'st, O wondrous story,
The task of Love, and voluntary Woe.
Hail Word Eternal!  Hail creating Mind!
Then did the Hills, then did the Vales resound;
The Vale of Arnon, and the purple brow
Of beauteous Amana, and Shenir rang,
And all the forests of thy Carmel sang,
When Thou, in fleshly Tabernacle shrin'd,
'Ganst your the stream of blessings all around,
And brooding over teach thy helpless care,
As the fond Eagle doth her young, to try
Their scarce-fledg'd plumes, and thro' the baser air
Assert the mansions in their native sky.

O goodly Vine, beneath whose clustring boughs
The weary flocks repose!
O Rose of Sharon!  O Enclosure sweet
Of chief perfumes, of spices fresh and rare!
Wake, wake ye winds, and o'er the Garden blow,
That all the soul-delighting scents may flow;
And ye, O Spirits of air,
Catch the rich odours, and to heav'n repair,
That Angels may dissolve in raptures meet!
O Phosphor!  O effulgent Son of Morn!
But ah how fallen, faln!  how chang'd from Him,
Who led to war th' embattled Seraphim,
And all the Youth of Heav'n; whose flaming hand,
With thunders arm'd, hurl'd from th' ethereal sky
The arch apostate and his rebel band,
Hurl'd them with ruin, and combustion dire,
To bottomless perdition, there to lie
Weltring in lakes of everliving fire!
Yet, spotless Lamb, tho' now with wrath divine
Thou feel'st thy adamantine soul opprest;
Tho' Adam's sins are by adoption thine,
And crush with heavy load thy lab'ring breast;
Yet quickly shall the mortal coil be o'er,
And grief; and pain, and anguish be no more;
Soon shall the brightness of thy Godhead shine:
Ev'n now methinks thy robes with sanguine red
Are stain'd, like those that in the winefat tread;
I see, I see thee rise,
How bright, how glorious, o'er the starry skies,
And Sin, and Death are led
Chain'd to thy Chariot wheels!  Hark, hark the Song
Begins, the Song of triumph and delight,
Which erst we sung, when from the dreadful fight
Returning Victor all the rapturous throng
Of Saints and Angels hail'd thee, wond'rous King,
Almighty Lord, Heav'n's sole eternal Heir:
Lift up your heads, ye Gates, and O prepare,
Ye living Orbs, your everlasting doors,
The King of Glory comes!
What King of Glory? &mdash; He, whose puissant might
Subdu'd Abaddon, and th' infernal pow'rs
Of Darkness bound in adamantine chains:
Who wrapt in glory with the Father reigns
Omnipotent, immortal, infinite!

The Angel ceas'd, and from his flinty bed
The God-redeemer rose:
Lull'd was his care in heav'n-inspir'd repose,
And his sick soul with airs ethereal fed:
Content he rose, O Father, to fulfil
Thy fixt eternal will.
And now the madding crew their Saviour led
Mild as a Lamb to slaughter, like a sheep
Before her shearers dumb &mdash; But, O my Muse,
Forbear! &mdash; Ev'n guarded Oaks for grief would weep,
And the rough rocks their briny tears diffuse,
Should'st thou to Calvary's cleft summit rise,
And there, in colours suited to thy woe,
The torments and stupendous sorrows paint
Of the great suff'ring Saint.&mdash;
Oh stop, and from the humble base below
Cast up thy tearful eyes
To where thy Lord, and Love was crucify'd;
So shall the World and all its vanities
Appear like dross &mdash; Ambition, Lust, and Pride
Shall far, far off their baleful pow'rs remove,
And in the pure unspotted mind
Nothing remain behind,
But Adoration, Ecstacy, and Love.
