I.
Cease, imperious Lord of war,
Cease to sound thy harsh alarms,
"Yield to fate thy crimson car,
Nor still wake the world to arms:
Peace to yonder clarion's sound
That madly breaths its wild destruction round:
Of clashing swords and battle's baleful woes
Enough the hardy warrior knows."&mdash;
Such were the sounds that stuck th' affrighted ear
Of Mars, loud thund'ring 'midst th' embattled plain:
Trembling he hears, and in his wild career,
At fate's command, he drops the glowing rein;
In speechless trance the grisly Monarch stands,
Sudden the dart uplifted quits his nerveless hands.

II.
Fraught with rage and sullen ire,
See the God forsakes the fight!
With him too the Furies dire
Wing their drear, reluctant flight.
Grim-ey'd Slaughter and Despair,
With Death and Devastation in the rear,
Pale Panick too, with her disfigur'd train,
Haste to their native Thracian plain.
But hark!  to yonder clarion's brazen throat,
That fate with tumults swell'd the echoing air;
How weak the cadence of each sinking note!
How slowly strike its murmurs on the ear!
Faint and more faint the less'ning numbers rise,
Till on the peaceful gale responsive Echo dies.

III.
All is peace, &mdash; the grateful sound
Thro' the ambient ether floats.
"Echo waft the music round,
Give to rapture all its notes."
On a rock, whose lofty brow
Far-stretch'd o'erlooks the British waves below,
With garb of snow adorn'd, and olive-wand,
The dove-ey'd goddess took her stand:
O'er her fair face a beauteous smile was seen
That far illuming chear'd the distant tide;
In pleasing act she wav'd her hand benign&mdash;
At her behest the stormy waves subside,
No longer Eurus shakes the sounding shore,
But genial gales around soft-breathing Zephyrs pour.

IV.
Rising from the oozy flood
Neptune first beheld the Maid;
Wond'ring stood the hoary God,
And obsequious bow'd his head.
Round their king in gambols leap
The shaggy monsters of the foaming deep;
And ev'ry blue-ey'd Nereid of the wave
Forsakes her sea-beat coral cave.
In festive dance they greet thee, gentle Peace;
To thee their tributary songs they bear;
Since, Goddess, at thy blest approach, must cease
The raging cannon and the din of war;
No more loud thunders brave the silent night,
Or rouse them from their wavy beds in wild affright.

V.
Next o'er yonder happy land,
Smiling at thy blest return,
Plenty pours, with copious hand,
Blessings from her fruitful urn:
Culture spreads her mantle green,
Whilst bright-ey'd Flora decks the vary'd scene,
And golden Ceres, with her laughing train,
O'er spreads with yellow vest the plain.
Amidst the deep recesses of that shade,
Whose leafy summit rushes on the skies,
No longer gleams the spear or bickering blade;
In peaceful ease each sacred Druid lies,
Nor dreads the tumult rising from afar,
The cannon's roar deep-sounding or the noise of war.

VI.
Such thy blessings to bestow!
Such thy pow'r, celestial Peace,
O'er the ravag'd world to throw,
Balmy sweets of heart-felt ease!
Such on Britain's happy shore
May thy propitious hands incessant pour,
Each gale still wafting on its frolick wing
The girt of Traffick's golden spring,
With joy and ever-smiling plenty crown'd:
So shall Britannia at thy sacred shrine,
With loud acclaim th glorious praise resound,
And shew the treasures of th' enriching mine;
So shall fair Liberty protect her fame,
And nations far remote revere the British name.
