I.
Thou!  who didst beam upon the mighty soul
Of Pindar, Majesty of song,
Whose numbers like the mountain's torrent roll,
That shakes the rocks around, and loudly roars along;
Deignst thou to aid a youth of little praise?
Deignst thou to aid my unexalted lays?
Thyself my yet untutor'd verses sing;
Assist me, radiant native of the sky,
A bolder song let Fancy try,
A bolder flight, O!  teach my feeble wing.

II.
Say, hast thou seen the hallow'd shrine before?
When princes trembled, and a nation pray'd,
When spoke great PHOEBUS by the Delphic maid,
Keen from her eyes the livid lightning flew,
While all her bosom with the godhead burn'd,
In broken throbs her labouring breath she drew;
The God!  the God!  nor could she utter more,
The God!  the God!  in loud response the vaulted fane return'd.

III.
So heav'd the bosom of the Theban bard,
Swell'd with the thought inspir'd by thee,
Hark!  the sound sublime is heard!
So flash'd his eye, so shook his frame,
When thy big spirit like a whirlwind came
Upon the fiery wing of boundless ecstasy.

IV.
Who's he, with blooming chaplet crown'd,
Cull'd from the bed of every gayest flower?
While the jocund harp around
The swelling grapes their rich nectar pour:
Hear the all-delightful measure,
Breathing joy, and breathing pleasure;
Love, with rosy-blushing wing,
Nimbly strikes the dancing string,
And lists with dimpled smile to every joyous sound.

V.
Yet looks he not with mournful eye
To where pale Sappho's spectre glides along.
What tho' her lyre the willow-cover'd maid
Taught the sweet note of plaintive philomel?
In vain her lyre, in vain her song;
On Phaon's scorn no plaintive notes prevail.&mdash;
The snowy swans with all their music die,
And leave the languid strains to Echo's murmuring shade.

VI.
See the Latian poet rise,
Nor less with Attic fire to raise
The lofty verse, nor less to chear
With pleasure bland the social hour,
Whether he sung a Caesar's praise,
Or Lalage's sweet-smiling eyes,
Or, Bacchus, thine enlivening power,
To poets and to lovers ever dear,&mdash;
The Arts' great master pour'd the artless lay,
Or bade his Art sublime no meaner art betray.

VII.
Didst thou not visit ALBION, maid divine,
In ancient song of Druid or of Bard,
When in the deep recess or gloomy grove,
From hallow'd oaks prophetic sounds were heard?
Or if to Woden when the dance they wove
Did the rude chorus in rude music join?
Yet sure on Cowley, heaven-born muse,
Did thine gathered beams diffuse,
Thou mark'dst him from the meaner throng;
Cowley, who bade the conscious heart rehearse
The bolder thought in less harmonious verse,
In all the soaring power of eagle genius strong.

VIII.
Hadst thou not smil'd on SCOTTISH plains,
Where flows sweet Yarrow, or the winding Tweed?
The shepherds boast not of thy loftiest strains,
Yet whilom tun'd the careless reed,
In praise of rural nymphs, the rural swains;
Or sung their native scenes, the limpid rill,
The sunny bank, the broom-embroidered hill,
Where stock-doves courted in the tenderest coo:
Such artless song thou gav'st the shepherd's pipe to woo.

IX.
If e'er to modern days
Descend thy genuine lays,
Thee Collins, hapless Collins did possess:
Curdles my blood in every vein,
Fear, with all his ghastly train,
Danger with his giant-stride,
Murder fell, and Ruin wide,
On my thick-beating heart tumultuous press&mdash;
That Pity, with her dewy lighted eyes,
Curs'd be the wretch his memory who denies,
Which erst he bade in numbers soft to flow,
And pluck'd the cypress wreath for yet another's woe.

X.
Thou too didst aid the pensive Gray,
And bad'st the solemn verse that sung
His requiem to the village-hind,
Rise to thy sublimer lay.
See where the bard on Fate's dread summit hung,
And loose his gray locks wav'd upon the hollow wind.
Nor less the palms that crown thy Mason's brow,
Nor less the palms for Ogilvy that grow.

XI.
Say, wilt thou bid one fainter ray
To light my humble genius stray?
I ask no tow'ring fame,
No high emblazon'd name;
Thine be the care to gild the vacant hour,
And bid the sluggish moments smoother roll;
Thine be the blissful power,
In dangerous pleasure, or in grief severe,
To prompt the moral smile, the moral tear,
To aid my song, nor less to aid my soul.
