DAMON.
'Tis done &mdash; your patient ear we greet no more,
With varied strains of academic lore.
Prepare we now to frame some joyous lay,
In rapturous mood, to close this festal day.

THYRSIS.
Damon, begin, &mdash; Let thy mellifluous tongue,
In mazy melting numbers lead the song.
Long have these walls presented to our view,
The weeping cyprus, and the baleful yew:
Long have the Muses mourn'd our heroes slain,
But now we bring the myrtle and the bay,
And all the bloomy pride of blithsome May,
To deck the Muses seat. &mdash; Strike bold the lyre,
And let returning Peace the strain inspire.

DAMON.
Not more delightful is the bubbling fount
To shepherd panting o'er the parched mount,
Than is the theme my Thyrsis would impart,
To swell with rapture Damon's glowing heart.
Can we forget how thro' the trackless wood
With phalanx firm, and sword unstain'd in blood,
Our brave commander urg'd his glorious way,
And bent the fierce barbarians to his sway;
Taught them our power and mercy both to own,
And shook the haughty chieftains on their throne?
The mournful captives, hopeless and forlorn,
From gospel-light, from friends, from freedom torn,
Restor'd by him, again behold their home,
Rejoic'd, in savage wilds no more to roam!
Yon Heav'ns the deed approve. &mdash; Strike bold the lyre,
And let returning Peace the strain inspire.

AIR.
Peace, thou white rob'd child of light,
Thine is every softer scene!
Young ey'd Pleasure, gay Delight,
Still attend thy sylvan reign.
Where-e'er thou deign'st to be a guest,
Corroding Care forsakes the breast.

THYRSIS.
When Peace descending from celestial day,
To seats of mortals wings her radiant way,
Thus happy swains their rural reeds employ,
And all the Muses join the general joy.
Yet other subjects claim the votive lay,
In gratulations sacred to this day
To cheer these walls, behold, a god-like band,
All-hail, ye sons of Science! &mdash; Wake the lyre,
And let their names the joyous strains inspire!

DAMON.
Yes!  we will sing. &mdash; When grateful raptures move,
Can nurtur'd child forget a parent's love!
Then might we cease to warble from our tongue,
The heav'n-illumin'd patriotic throng,
Who by the generous love of Science fir'd,
To bless this academic seat conspir'd!
Illustrious is the roll! &mdash; The sacred name
Of gracious GEORGE first dignifies the theme.
Then, mitered SECKER, Learning's mildest son,
Whom pure Religion joys to call her own,
We next behold!  And PENN, who oft before
Dispers'd his bounty &mdash; and a thousand more&mdash;
But who can count the dew-drops of the morn;
Or spangling stars which yonder skies adorn?
All-hail, ye sons of Science! &mdash; Wake the song;
And let these vaulted roofs the echoing notes prolong!

CHORUS.
I.
Sons of Science, loudly sing;
Let these vaulted roofs resound:
Learning's friend is Britain's King;
Tell it to the world around!

II.
Infant Science call'd for aid,
Mournful, in a distant wild;
Bands of worthies by him led,
Joyous, nurs'd the drooping child!
Learning's friend is Britain's King;
Ever, ever, live the King!
