My native place, the house where I was born,
My parent's dwelling, where my youth was spent!
And is it here I, pensive and forlorn,
Sit silent, or just utter a complaint?
The nearer sadder, why should this be so?
And former pleasures fullest sources now of wo!

Friends, loving friends, the former scenes of mirth,
Comrades late thronging in the youthful ring,
Old views and ideas larger than the worth,
These charm the fancy, and provoke to sing;&mdash;
But mine they lead &mdash; my Margarita, why,
What does express the deep involuntary sigh?

The Spring appears, and Nature knows the change,
Looks gay and smiling, from the storms reliev'd
Of frowning Winter:  but my state is strange;
My sorrows spring; my friends, the house aggriev'd,
Should we along keep variance with the year,
Diffusing joys?  and why let fall the frequent tear?

Ah!  Margarita, pale, consuming, dead,
Interr'd; &mdash; nor was I present, or to hear
Her latest words, to treasure what she said;
Or to solace, with accents falt'ring, dear
Fraternal soothings &mdash; Margarita gone,
Pursue my thoughts: &mdash; alive, alas!  in them alone.

Ah!  Margarita, youngest, &mdash; why does Death
Forget his period? &mdash; only sister! &mdash; why
Destroy the care of all, forget his path,
Forget the havock in his erring way?
Deceitful form!  most promising of all,
Health, strength, and charms &mdash; in vain &mdash; did Margarita fall!

Friends do console; but when I mark the place
That she possess'd, or in the duller room,
Or in the talk, or read in likest face
Her better looks, then think upon the tomb,
How can they blame me, Margarita gone!
If I unconscious stare, or lifeless sigh and groan?

Say, say the whole; I chuse to hear the tale,
The every circumstance; it pleases Grief;
Give it more food. &mdash; Lo!  with a prosp'rous gale,
A husband homeward with me, vain belief
Of happiness in her. &mdash; No interview,&mdash;
From various deaths he came, and his approach she knew.

She would have been, had future days been given,&mdash;
Death interpos'd, &mdash; she was, &mdash; but Death did end
Prospects and pleasures.  O!  all-ruling Heaven,
The daughter, sister, wife, companion, friend,
Thou givest comforts, and thou tak'st away.&mdash;
Delusive views!  all's vain, all's subject to decay.

The aged father, more afflicted mother,
How do they show, or how can they conceal,
Their sorrows!  much too either loving brother
(And must not I?)  have suffer'd, and must feel;
Who knew her suffer'd. &mdash; A&mdash;, you have lost
A loving spouse, alas!  and A&mdash; suffers most.

I wander musing o'er th' enamel'd green;
I view the various beauties of the spring;
Contemplative now the seas, now heaven serene:
Yet all are full of Margarita, bring
The sad remembrance of the young, the dear,
Departed Margarita! &mdash; sudden and severe!

Why do you shew your beauties, tempting flowers?
Stronger you seem than her you bring to mind:
Alas!  her period too was like to yours;
Frail as the fading grass are human kind;
Frosts, storms, unfriendly soils their glory end:
From Death poor Margarita nothing could defend.

Thus M&mdash; melancholy, and renew'd,
From every face or object that he view'd,
His Margarita, and seem'd pleas'd to borrow,
From all around, new fewel to his sorrow.
Till thoughts mature, religion, time did bring
Subject more calm, and bade him thus to sing.
