His second coming, who at first appeared
To save the world, but now to judge mankind
According to their works; &mdash; the trumpet's sound,&mdash;
The dead arising, &mdash; the wide world in flames,&mdash;
The mansions of the blest, and the dire pit
Of Satan and of woe, &mdash; O Muse!  unfold.

O Thou!  Whose eye the future and the past
In one broad view beholdest &mdash; from the first
Of days, when o'er this rude unformed mass
Light, first-born of existence, smiling rose,
Down to that latest moment when thy voice
Shall bid the sun be darkness, when thy hand
Shall blot creation out, &mdash; assist my song!
Thou only know'st, who gav'st these orbs to roll.
Their destin'd circles, when their course shall set;
When ruin and destruction fierce shall ride
In triumph o'er creation.  This is hid,
In kindness unto man.  Thou giv'st to know
The event certain:  angels know not when.

'Twas on an autumn's eve, serene and calm,
I walked, attendant on the funeral
Of an old swain:  around, the village crowd
Loquacious chatted, till we reached the place
Where, shrouded up, the sons of other years
Lie silent in the grave.  The sexton there
Had digg'd the bed of death, the narrow house
For all that live, appointed.  To the dust
We gave the dead.  Then moralizing home
The swains return'd, to drown in copious bowls
The labours of the day, and thoughts of death.

The sun now trembled at the western gate;
His yellow rays stream'd in the fleecy clouds.
I sat me down upon a broad flat stone;
And much I mused on the changeful state
Of sublunary things.  The joys of life,
How frail, how short, how passing!  As the sea,
Now flowing, thunders on the rocky shore
Now lowly ebbing leaves a tract of sand,
Waste, wide, and dreary:  so, in this vain world,
Through every varying state of life, we toss
In endless fluctuation; till, tir'd out
With sad variety of bad and worse,
We reach life's period, reach the blissful port,
Where change affects not, and the weary rest.

Then sure the sun which lights us to our shroud,
Than that which gave us first to see the light,
Is happier far.  As he who, hopeless, long
Hath rode th' Atlantic billow, from the mast,
Skirting the blue horizon, sees the land,
His native land approach; joy fills his heart,
And swells each throbbing vein:  so, here confin'd,
We weary tread life's long long toilsome maze;
Still hoping, vainly hoping, for relief,
And rest from labour.  Ah!  mistaken thought:
To seek in life what only death can give.
But what is death?  Is it an endless sleep,
Unconscious of the present and the past,
And never to be waken'd?  Sleeps the soul;
Nor wakes ev'n in a dream?  If it is so,
Happy the sons of pleasure; they have liv'd
And made the most of life:  and foolish he,
The sage, who, dreaming of hereafter, grudg'd
Himself the tasting of the sweets of life,
And call'd it temperance; and hop'd for joys
More durable and sweet, beyond the grave.
Vain is the poet's song, the soldier's toil!
Vain is the sculptur'd marble and the bust!
How vain to hope for never-dying fame,
If souls can die!  But that they never die,
This thirst of glory whispers.  Wherefore gave
The great Creator such a strong desire
He never meant to satisfy?  These stones,
Memorials of the dead, with rustic art
And rude inscription cut, declare the soul
Immortal.  Man, form'd for eternity,
Abhors annihilation, and the thought
Of dark oblivion.  Hence, with ardent wish
And vigorous effort, each would fondly raise
Some lasting monument, to save his name
Safe from the waste of years.  Hence Caesar fought;
Hence Raphael painted; and hence Milton sung.

Thus musing, sleep oppress'd my drowsy sense,
And wrapt me into rest.  Before mine eyes,
Fair as the morn, when up the flaming seat
The sun ascends, a radiant seraph stood,
Crown'd with a wreath of palm:  his golden hair
Wav'd on his shoulders, girt with shining plumes
From which, down to the ground, loose-floating trail'd,
In graceful negligence, his heavenly robe:
Upon his face, flush'd with immortal youth,
Unfading beauty bloom'd; and thus he spake:

"Well hast thou judged; the soul must be immortal!
And that it is, this awful day declares;
This day, the last that e'er the sun shall gild:
Arrested by Omnipotence, no more
Shall he describe the year:  the moon no more
Shall shed her borrow'd light.  This is the day
Seal'd in the rolls of Fate, when o'er the dead
Almighty Power shall wake and raise to life
The sleeping myriads.  Now shall be approv'd
The ways of God to man, and all the clouds
Of Providence be clear'd:  now shall be disclos'd
Why vice in purple oft upon a throne
Exalted sat, and shook her iron scourge
O'er virtue, lowly seated on the ground:
Now deeds committed in the sable shade
Of eyeless darkness, shall be brought to light;
And every act shall meet its just reward."

As thus he spake, the mom arose; and sure
Methought ne'er rose a fairer.  Not a cloud
Spotted the blue expanse; and not a gale
Breath'd o'er the surface of the dewy earth.
Twinkling with yellow lustre, the gay birds
On every blooming spray sung their sweet lays,
And prais'd their great Creator; through the fields
The lowing cattle graz'd; and all around
Was beauty, happiness, and mirth, and love.&mdash;
"All these thou seest" (resum'd the angelic power)
"No more shall give thee pleasure.  Thou must leave
This world; of which now come and see the end."

This said, he touch'd me, and such strength infus'd,
That as he soared up the pathless air,
I lightly followed.  On the awful peak
Of an eternal rock, against whose base
The sounding billows beat, he set me down.
I heard a noise, loud as a rushing stream,
When o'er the rugged precipice it roars,
And foaming, thunders, on the rocks below.
Astonished, I gaz'd around; when lo!
I saw an angel down from Heaven descend.
His face was as the sun; his dreadful height
Such as the statue, by the Grecian plan'd,
Of Philip's son, Athos, with all his rocks,
Moulded into a man:  One foot on earth,
And one upon the rolling sea, he fix'd.
As when, at setting sun, the rainbow shines
Refulgent, meting out the half of Heav'n&mdash;
So stood he; and, in act to speak he rais'd
His shining hand.  His voice was as the sound
Of many waters, or the deep-mouth'd roar
Of thunder, when it bursts the riven cloud,
And bellows through the ether.  Nature stood
Silent, in all her works:  while thus he spake:
"Hear, thou that roll'st above, thou radiant sun
Ye heavens and earth, attend!  while I declare
The will of the Eternal.  By his name
Who lives, and shall for ever live, I swear
That time shall be no longer."'

He disappear'd.  Fix'd in deep thought I stood,
At what would follow.  Straight another sound
To which the Nile, o'er Ethiopia's rocks
Rushing in one broad cataract, were naught.
It seem'd as if the pillars that upheld
The universe, had fall'n; and all its worlds,
Unhing'd, had strove together for the way,
In cumbrous crashing ruin.  Such the roar!
A sound that might be felt; it pierc'd beyond
The limits of creation.  Chaos roar'd;
And heav'n and earth return'd the mighty noise.&mdash;
"Thou hear'st," said then my heav'nly guide, "the sound
Of the last trumpet.  See, where from the clouds
Th' archangel Michael, one of the seven
That minister before the throne of God,
Leans forward; and the sonorous tube inspires
With breath immortal.  By his side the sword
Which, like a meteor, o'er the vanquish'd head
Of Satan hung, when he rebellious rais'd
War, and embroil'd the happy fields above."

A pause ensued.  The fainting sun grew pale,
And seem'd to struggle through a sky of blood;
While dim eclipse impair'd his beam:  the earth
Shook to her deepest centre; Ocean rag'd,
And dash'd his billows on the frighted shore.
All was confusion.  Heartless, helpless, wild,
As flocks of timid sheep, or driven deer,
Wand'ring, th' inhabitants of earth appear'd:
Terror in every look, and pale affright
Sat in each eye; amazed at the past,
And for the future trembling.  All call'd great,
Or deem'd illustrious, by erring man,
Was now no more.  The hero and the prince,
Their grandeur lost, now mingled with the crowd
And all distinctions, those except from faith
And virtue flowing:  these upheld the soul,
As ribb'd with triple steel.  All else were lost!
Now, vain is greatness as the morning clouds,
That, rising, promise rain condens'd they stand,
Till, touch'd by winds, they vanish into air.
The farmer mourns:  so mourns the helpless wretch,
Who, cast by fortune from some envied height,
Finds nought within him to support his fall.
High as his hopes had rais'd him, low he sinks
Below his fate, in comfortless despair.&mdash;
Who would not laugh at an attempt to build
A lasting structure on the rapid stream
Of foaming Tigris, the foundations laid
Upon the glassy surface?  Such the hopes
Of him whose views are bounded to this world:
Immers'd in his own labour'd work, he dreams
Himself secure; when, on a sudden down,
Torn from its sandy ground, the fabric falls!
He starts, and, waking, finds himself undone.

Not so the man who on religion's base
His hope and virtue founds.  Firm on the Rock
Of ages his foundation laid, remains,
Above the frowns of fortune or her smiles
In every varying state of life, the same.
Nought fears he from the world, and nothing hopes.
With unassuming courage, inward strength
Endu'd, resign'd to Heaven, he leads a life
Superior to the common herd of men,
Whose joys, connected with the changeful flood
Of fickle fortune, ebb and flow with it.
Nor is religion a chimera:  Sure
'Tis something real.  Virtue cannot live,
Divided from it.  As a sever'd branch
It withers, pines, and dies.  Who loves not God,
That made him, and preserv'd, nay more &mdash; redeem'd,
Is dangerous.  Can ever gratitude
Bind him who spurns at these most sacred ties?
Say, can he, in the silent scenes of life,
Be sociable?  Can he be a friend?
At best, he must but feign.  The worst of brutes
An atheist is; for beasts acknowledge God.
The lion, with the terrors of his mouth,
Pays homage to his Maker; the grim wolf,
At midnight, howling, seeks his meat from God.

Again th' archangel raised his dreadful voice.
Earth trembled at the sound.  "Awake, ye dead!
And come to judgment."  At the mighty call,
As armies issue at the trumpet's sound,
So rose the dead.  A shaking first I heard.
And bone together came unto his bone,
Though sever'd by wide seas and distant lands.
A spirit liv'd within them.  He who made,
Wound up, and set in motion, the machine,
To run unhurt the length of fourscore years,
Who knows the structure of each secret spring;
Can He not join again the sever'd parts,
And join them with advantage?  This to man
Hard and impossible may seem; to God
Is easy.  Now, through all the darken'd air,
The living atoms flew, each to his place,
And nought was missing in the great account,
Down from the dust of him whom Cain first slew,
To him who yesterday was laid in earth,
And scarce had seen corruption; whether in
The bladed grass they cloth'd the verdant plain,
Or smil'd in opening flowers; or, in the sea,
Became the food of monsters of the Deep,
Or pass'd in transmigrations infinite
Through ev'ry kind of being.  None mistakes
His kindred matter; but, by sympathy
Combining, rather by Almighty Pow'r
Led on, they closely mingle and unite
But chang'd:  for, subject to decay no more,
Or dissolution, deathless as the soul,
The body is; and fitted to enjoy
Eternal bliss, or bear eternal pain.

As when in Spring the sun's prolific beams
Have wak'd to life the insect tribes, that sport
And wanton in his rays at ev'ning mild,
Proud of their new existence, up the air,
In devious circles wheeling, they ascend,
Innumerable; the whole air is dark:
So, by the trumpet rous'd, the sons of men,
In countless numbers, cover'd all the ground,
From frozen Greenland to the southern pole;
All who e'er liv'd on earth.  See Lapland's sons,
Whose zenith is the pole; a barb'rous race!
Rough as their storms, and savage as their clime,
Unpolished as their bears, and but in shape
Distinguish'd from them:  Reason's dying lamp
Scarce brighter burns than instinct in their breast.
With wand'ring Russians, and all those who dwelt
In Scandinavia, by the Baltic Sea;
The rugged Pole, with Prussia's warlike race:
Germania pours her numbers, where the Rhine
And mighty Danube pour their flowing urns.

Behold thy children, Britain!  hail the light:
A manly race, whose business was arms,
And long uncivilised; yet, train'd to deeds
Of virtue, they withstood the Roman power,
And made their eagles droop.  On Morven's coast,
A race of heroes and of bards arise;
The mighty Fingal, and his mighty son,
Who launch'd the spear, and touch'd the tuneful harp;
With Scotia's chiefs, the sons of later years,
Her Kenneths and her Malcolms, warriors fam'd;
Her generous Wallace, and her gallant Bruce.
See, in her pathless wilds, where the grey stones
Are raised in memory of the mighty dead.
Armies arise of English, Scots, and Picts;
And giant Danes, who, from bleak Norway's coast,
Ambitious, came to conquer her fair fields,
And chain her sons:  But Scotia gave them graves!
Behold the kings that fill'd the English throne!
Edwards and Henries, names of deathless fame,
Start from the tomb.  Immortal William!  see,
Surrounding angels point him from the rest,
Who saved the State from tyranny and Rome.
Behold her poets!  Shakespeare, fancy's child;
Spenser, who, through his smooth and moral tale,
Y-points fair virtue out; with him who sung
Of man's first disobedience.  Young lifts up
His awful head, and joys to see the day,
The great, th' important day, of which he sung.
See where imperial Rome exalts her height!
Her senators and gowned fathers rise;
Her consuls, who, as ants without a king,
Went forth to conquer kings; and at their wheels
In triumph led the chiefs of distant lands.
Behold, in Cannae's field, what hostile swarms
Burst from th' ensanguin'd ground, where Hannibal
Shook Rome through all her legions:  Italy
Trembled unto the Capitol.  If fate
Had not withstood th' attempt, she now had bow'd
Her head to Carthage.  See, Pharsalia pours
Her murder'd thousands!  who, in the last strife
Of Rome for dying liberty, were slain,
To make a man the master of the world.

All Europe's sons throng forward; numbers vast!
Imagination fails beneath the weight.
What numbers yet remain!  Th' enervate race
Of Asia, from where Tanais rolls
O'er rocks and dreary wastes his foaming stream,
To where the Eastern Ocean thunders round
The spicy Java; with the tawny race
That dwelt in Afric, from the Red Sea, north,
To the Cape, south, where the rude Hottentot
Sinks into brute; with those, who long unknown
Till by Columbus found, a naked race!
And only skill'd to urge the sylvan war,
That peopled the wide continent that spreads
From rocky Zembla, whiten'd with the snow
Of twice three thousand years, south to the Straits
Nam'd from Magellan, where the ocean roars
Round earth's remotest bounds.  Now, had not He
The great Creator of the universe,
Enlarg'd the wide foundations of the world,
Room had been wanting to the mighty crowds
That pour'd from every quarter.  At his word,
Obedient angels stretch'd an ample plain,
Where dwelt his people in the Holy Land,
Fit to contain the whole of human race&mdash;
As when the autumn, yellow on the fields,
Invites the sickle, forth the farmer sends
His servants to cut down and gather in
The bearded grain:  so, by Jehovah sent,
His angels, from all comers of the world,
Led on the living and awaken'd dead
To judgment; as, in th' Apocalypse,
John, gather'd, saw the people of the earth,
And kings, to Armageddon &mdash; Now look round
Thou whose ambitious heart for glory beats!
See all the wretched things on earth call'd great,
And lifted up to Gods!  How little now
Seems all their grandeur!  See the conqueror,
Mad Alexander, who his victor arms
Bore o'er the then known globe, then sat him down
And wept, because he had no other world
To give to desolation; how he droops!
He knew not, hapless wretch!  he never learn'd
The harder conquest &mdash; to subdue himself.
Now is the Christian's triumph, now he lifts
His head on high; while down the dying hearts
Of sinners helpless sink:  black guilt distracts
And wrings their tortur'd souls; while every thought
Is big with keen remorse, or dark despair.

But now a nobler subject claims the song.
My mind recoils at the amazing theme:
For how shall finite think of infinite?
How shall a stripling, by the muse untaught,
Sing Heaven's Almighty, prostrate at whose feet
Archangels fall?  Unequal to the task,
I dare the bold attempt:  assist me Heaven!
From Thee begun, with Thee shall end my song!

Now, down from th' opening firmament,
Seated upon a sapphire throne, high rais'd
Upon an azure ground, upheld by wheels
Of emblematic structure, as a wheel
Had been within a wheel, studded with eyes
Of flaming fire, and by four cherubs led;
I saw the Judge descend.  Around Him came,
By thousands and by millions, heaven's bright host.
About Him blaz'd insufferable light,
Invisible as darkness to the eye.
His car above the mount of Olives stay'd
Mere last with his disciples He convers'd,
And left them gazing as He soar'd aloft.
He darkness as a curtain drew around;
On which the colour of the rainbow shone,
Various and bright; and from within was heard
A voice, as deep-mouth'd thunder, speaking thus:
"Go, Raphael, and from these reprobate
Divide my chosen saints; go separate
My people from among them, as the wheat
Is in the harvest sever'd from the tares:
Set them upon the right, and on the left
Leave these ungodly.  Thou, Michael, choose,
From forth th' angelic host, a chosen band,
And Satan with his legions hither bring
To judgment, from hell's caverns; whither fled,
They think to hide from my awaken'd wrath,
Which chas'd them out of Heaven, and which they dread
More than the horrors of the pit, which now
Shall be redoubled sevenfold on their heads."

Swift as conception, at his bidding flew
His ministers, obedient to his word.
And, as a shepherd, who all day hath fed
His sheep and goats promiscuous, but at eve
Dividing, shuts them up in different folds:
So now the good were parted from the bad;
For ever parted; never more to join
And mingle as on earth, where often past
For other each; ev'n close Hypocrisy
Escapes not, but, unask'd, alike the scorn
Of vice and virtue stands.  Now separate,
Upon the right appear'd a dauntless, firm,
Composed number:  joyful at the thought
Of immortality, they forward look'd
With hope unto the future; conscience, pleas'd,
Smiling, reflects upon a well-spent life;
Heaven dawns within their breasts.  The other crew,
Pale and dejected, scarcely lift their heads
To view the hated light:  his trembling hand
Each lays upon his guilty face; and now,
In gnawings of the never-dying worm,
Begins a hell that never shall be quench'd.

But now the enemy of God and man,
Cursing his fate, comes forward, led in chains,
Infrangible, of burning adamant,
Hewn from the rocks of Hell; now too the bands
Of rebel angels, who long time had walk'd
The world, and by their oracles deceiv'd
The blinded nations, or by secret guile
Wrought men to vice, came on, raging in vain,
And struggling with their fetters, which, as fate,
Compell'd them fast.  They wait their dreadful doom.

Now from his lofty throne, with eyes that blaz'd
Intolerable day, th' Almighty judge
Look'd down awhile upon the subject crowd.
As when a caravan of merchants, led
By thirst of gain to travel the parch'd sands
Of waste Arabia, hears a lion roar,
The wicked trembled at his view; upon
The ground they roll'd, in pangs of wild despair,
To hide their faces, which not blushes mark'd
But livid horror.  Conscience, who asleep
Long time had lain, now lifts her snaky head,
And frights them into madness; while the list
Of all their sins she offers to their view:
For she had power to hurt them, and her sting
Was as a scorpion's.  He who never knew
Its wound is happy, though a fetter'd slave,
Chain'd to the oar, or to the dark damp mine
Confin'd; while he who sits upon a throne,
Under her frown, is wretched.  But the damn'd
Alone can tell what 'tis to feel her scourge
In all its horrors, with her poison'd sting
Fix'd in their hearts.  This is the Second Death.

Upon the Book of Life He laid his hand,
Clos'd with the seal of Heaven; which op'd, He read
The names of the Elect.  God knows his own.
"Come" (looking on the right, He mildly said),
"Ye of my Father blessed, ere the world
Was moulded out of chaos &mdash; ere the sons
Of God exulting, sung at Nature's birth
For you I left my throne, my glory left,
And, shrouded up in clay, I weary walk'd
Your world, and many miseries endur'd:
Death was the last.  For you I died, that you
Might live with me for ever, and in Heav'n sit
On thrones, and as the sun in brightness, shine
For ever in my kingdom.  Faithfully
Have ye approv'd yourselves.  I hungry was,
And thirsty, and ye gave me meat and drink;
Ye clothed me, naked; when I fainting lay
In all the sad variety of pain,
Ye cheer'd me with the tenderness of friends;
In sickness and in prison, me reliev'd.
Nay, marvel not that thus I speak:  whene'er,
Led by the dictates of fair charity,
Ye help'd the man on whom keen poverty
And wretchedness had laid their meagre hands,
And for my sake, ye did it unto me."

They heard with joy, and, shouting, rais'd their voice
In praise of their Redeemer!  loos'd from earth,
They soar'd triumphant, and at the right hand
Of the great judge sat down; who on the left
Now looking stem, with fury in His eyes,
Blasted their spirits, while His arrows fix'd
Deep in their hearts, in agonizing pain
Scorched their vitals, thus their dreadful doom
(More dreadful from those lips which us'd to bless)
He awfully pronounc'd.  Earth at His frown
Convulsive trembled; while the raging deep
Hush'd in a horrid calm his waves.  "Depart"
(These, for I heard them, were his awful words!)
"Depart from me, ye cursed!  Oft have I strove,
In tenderness and pity to subdue
Your rebel hearts; as a fond parent bird,
When danger threatens, flutters round her young,
Nature's strong impulse beating in her breast.
Thus ardent did I strive:  But all in vain.
Now will I laugh at your calamity,
And mock your fears:  as oft, in stupid mirth,
Harden'd in wickedness, ye pointed out
The man who labour'd up the steep ascent
Of virtue, to reproach.  Depart to fire
Kindled in Tophet for th' arch enemy,
For Satan and his angels, who, by pride,
Fell into condemnation; blown up now
To sevenfold fury by th' Almighty breath.
There, in that dreary mansion, where the light
Is solid gloom, darkness that may he felt,
Where hope, the lenient of the ills of life,
For ever dies; there shall ye seek for death,
And shall not find it:  for your greatest curse
Is immortality.  Omnipotence
Eternally shall punish and preserve."

So said He; and, His hand high lifting, hurl'd
The flashing lightning, and the flaming bolt,
Full on the wicked:  kindling in a blaze
The scorched earth.  Behind, before, around,
The trembling wretches, burst the quiv'ring flames.
They turn'd to fly; but wrath divine pursu'd
To where, beyond creation's utmost bound,
Where never glimpse of cheerful light arriv'd,
Where scarce e'en thought can travel, but absorb'd,
Falls headlong down th' immeasurable gulf
Of Chaos &mdash; wide and wild, their prison stood&mdash;
Of utter darkness, as the horrid shade
That clouds the brow of death.  Its op'ned mouth
Belch'd sheets of livid flame and pitchy smoke.
Infernal thunders, with explosion dire,
Roar'd through the fiery concave; while the waves
Of liquid sulphur beat the burning shore,
In endless ferment.  O'er the dizzy steep
Suspended, wrapt in suffocating gloom,
The sons of black damnation shrieking hung.
Curses unutterable filled their mouths,
Hideous to hear; their eyes rain'd bitter tears
Of agonizing madness, for their day
Was past, and from their eye repentance hid
For ever!  Round their heads their hissing brands
The Furies wav'd, and o'er the whelming brink
Impetuous urg'd them.  In the boiling surge
They headlong fell.  The flashing billows roar'd;
And hell from all her caves return'd the sound.
The gates of flint, and tenfold adamant,
With bars of steel, impenetrably firm,
Were shut for ever:  the decree of fate,
Immutable, made fast the pond'rous door.

"Now turn thine eyes," my bright conductor said:
Behold the world in flames!  so sore the bolts
Of thunder, launch'd by the Almighty arm,
Hath smote upon it.  Up the blacken'd air
Ascend the curling flames, and billowy smoke
And hideous crackling, blot the face of day
With foul eruption.  From their inmost beds
The hissing waters rise.  Whatever drew
The vital air, or, in the spacious deep
Wanton'd at large, expires.  Heard'st thou that crash?
There fell the tow'ring Alps, and, dashing down,
Lay bare their centre.  See, the flaming mines
Expand their treasures!  no rapacious hand
To seize the precious bane.  Now look around:
Say, Canst thou tell where stood imperial Rome,
The wonder of the world; or where, the boast
Of Europe, fair Britannia, stretch'd her plain,
Encircled by the ocean?  All is wrapt
In darkness:  as (if great may be compar'd
With small) when, on Gomorrah's fated field,
The flaming sulphur, by Jehovah rain'd,
Sent up a pitchy cloud, killing to life,
And tainting all the air.  Another groan!
'Twas Nature's last:  and see!  th' extinguish'd sun
Falls devious through the void; and the fair face
Of Nature is no more!  With sullen joy
Old Chaos views the havoc, and expects
To stretch his sable sceptre o'er the blank
Where once Creation smil'd:  o'er which, perhaps
Creative energy again shall wake,
And into being call a brighter sun,
And fairer worlds; which, for delightful change,
The saints, descending from the happy seats
Of bliss, shall visit.  And, behold!  they rise,
And seek their native land:  around them move,
In radiant files, Heaven's host.  Immortal wreaths
Of amaranth and roses crown their heads;
And each a branch of ever-blooming palm
Triumphant holds.  In robes of dazzling white,
Fairer than that by wintry tempests shed
Upon the frozen ground, array'd, they shine,
Fair as the sun, when up the steep of Heav'n
He rides in all the majesty of light.

But who can tell, or if an angel could,
Thou couldst not hear, the glories of the place
For their abode prepar'd?  Though oft on earth
They struggled hard against the stormy tide
Of adverse fortune, and the bitter scorn
Of harden'd villany &mdash; their life a course
Of warfare upon earth; these toils, when view'd
With the reward, seem nought.  The Lord shall guide
Their steps to living fountains, and shall wipe
All tears from ev'ry eye.  The wintry clouds
That frown'd on life, rack up.  A glorious sun,
That ne'er shall set, arises in a sky
Unclouded and serene.  Their joy is full:
And sickness, pain, and death, shall be no more.

Dost thou desire to follow?  does thy heart
Beat ardent for the prize?  Then tread the path
Religion points to man.  What thou hast seen,
Fix'd in thy heart retain:  For, be assur'd,
In that last moment &mdash; in the closing act
Of Nature's drama, ere the hand of fate
Drop the black curtain, thou must bear thy part,
And stand in thine own lot.

This said, he stretch'd
His wings, and in a moment left my sight.
