LUN. &mdash; LATH.

Winter in all his sullen horrors reign'd,
The wandering streams with torrents foul were stain'd,
The sun was hardly seen on any day,
To shoot through mists an ineffectual ray,
Deep politicians mourn'd the want of mails,
And bit in coffee-house their pensive nails,
Each day insurers heard tall ships were lost,
And vilely plunder'd on the Cornish coast,
Huge aldermen bemoan'd the want of fish,
For cruel storms with-held the much-lov'd dish:
When the great Harlequins of either stage,
Th' egregious wonders of the present age,
In house of patriot Ashley chanced to meet,
Ashley the wise, the prudent, the discreet,
Who to reduce the price of punch began,
While thirsty nations praised the generous man.
Now bade the Harlequins a mighty bowl,
Quick to appear and raise the sinking soul,
Quick it appear'd, and o'er the pleasant rack,
They thus began each other to attack:
The Covent-garden warrior led the way,
And dared old Drury's hero to the fray.

LUN.
With all that's most absurd the scene to deck,
At once each thing that's natural to reject,
To give great Nonsense her unbounded sway,
Whatever's wild and monstrous to display,
No other stage beneath the spacious sky,
With Covent-garden can pretend to vie.

LATH.
Cease, cease your vaunt, and know at Drury-lane,
That Nonsense holds as absolute a reign,
As sudden transformations we can boast,
As great the sums which our atchievements cost.
To nobler heights of folly oft we fly,
And glad with stranger sights the publick eye:
Then wisely yield to us the foremost fame,
And modestly the second honours claim.

LUN.
Oh impious speech, to think at any time,
That we would yield the palm of Pantomime.
Garrick I grant can please the feeling ear,
And just in every character appear,
He, as he wills, can all applause engross,
While every audience sleeps with sleepy Ross.
Cibber, 'tis true, can each affection move,
Melt into pity, or awake to love.
No eye from shedding tears can be debarr'd,
Whilst none can weep, but all can laugh at Ward.
In these more trivial arts I freely tell,
By us unenvied you may still excel,
But we your feeble impotence deride,
When you indulge in Pantomimick pride.

LATH.
These slight concessions never will prevail,
To make us strike the flag, or lower the sail,
And barely yield to you the favourable gale.
All must confess Eurydice a drab,
Impartially compared with our Queen Mab.

LUN.
Conceit and arrogance are both my scorn,
I sing the glories which our stage adorn.
His flexile tail behold the serpent wreathes,
Death stalks before him flashing flames he breathes,
Horror attends, with desolation vast,
Trembles the Pit, the Gallery stands aghast.
Beneath the low'ring rocks see Orpheus lies,
His music floats, and shadowy trees arise,
How sweetly wild his grains melodious flow,
While the first gales through the young branches blow.

LATH.
Now view the Palace of the Fairy Queen,
High-rais'd on pillars of the mildest green,
Green-robed the little Fays in troops advance,
Quick shift their limbs light leaping in the dance.
Arabia's King with melancholy pines,
In martial fields no more the warrior shines,
When lo the Genii show the pictured fair,
Love revels in his veins, the Monarch's heart is air.

LUN.
Night falls around, how awful is the gloom,
Dread witches fly, I ride upon the broom.
Old blasted trees with sudden lightnings burn.
Mountains with heaving earthquakes overturn,
In the black air long-howling tempests roar,
The dark wave thunders on th' affrighted shore;
I wave my wand &mdash; fair smiles the rising day,
Soft breathe the breezes through the fields of May,
The morning sun sheds purple on the plain,
And gleams of purple glance along the main.

LATH.
My Columbine is bright as opening flow'rs,
When the warm ray succeeds to genial show'rs,
Neat trips the nymph along in seemly sort,
Her stays are low, her petticoats are short.

LUN.
My Columbine is sweet as Nonpareilles,
Which near the Playhouse door the Fruiterer fells,
Her limbs are form'd by Nature's kindest care,
Her panting bosom falls and rises bare.

LATH.
To some rude clown my Columbine's betroth'd,
I'm fondly lov'd, while he is vilely loath'd,
Her father hastens on the wedding day,
And in the bridal hour with me she steals away.

LUN.
Alike my case, pursued each art I try,
Darkly disguised to shun the searching eye,
A shepherd now I seem to gain my fair,
A baker next, and next an elbow chair.

LATH.
Like a fishmonger sometimes I appear,
Or in a huntsman's dress my hounds I cheer,
Each varying shape I can assume with ease,
A monkey, wheel-barrow, or Cheshire cheese.

LUN.
But ah!  what visions swim before my sight,
What beauteous chimeras rise to light,
Smooth minuets are danced by mighty whales,
See o'er the deep how York Cathedral sails,
The House of Commons turns a common shore,
Where the gold-finders nightly grope for ore.

LATH.
My head is giddy, and my eye-balls dance,
Whole armies of embattled rats advance,
And is the mansion-house a tough beef-steak?
And my Lord Mayor a lump of sweet twelfth cake?
Seas of corruption from the Treasury flow,
Dashing the waves, strong limbs our Patriots flow,
Some struggling keep above, but most are sunk below.

Our heroes thus wrapt up in visions wild,
Till one o'clock the winter hours beguil'd,
Then as the bowl was done they paid the bill,
And arm in arm forsook old Ludgate-hill.
