Far in the depth of Ida's inmost grove,
That faintly murmur'd to the vernal wind;
Where flowery woodbines wild by Nature wove
Form'd the lone bower, THE ROYAL SWAIN reclin'd.

Up the broad cliffs, that tower'd immense to heaven,
Green wav'd the lofty pines, on every side;
Save where, fair-opening to the beam of even,
A dale sloped gradual to the valley wide.

Echoed the vale with many a chearful note;
The various lowe of herds resounding long,
The shrilling pipe, the mellow horn remote,
And social clamours of the festive throng.

For now, low-hovering o'er the western main,
Where amber clouds begirt his dazzling throne,
The sun with ruddier verdure deck'd the plain;
And lakes, and streams, and spires triumphal shone;

And many a band of ardent youths were seen:
Some, into rapture fired by glory's charms,
Or hurl'd the thundering car along the green,
Or march'd embattled on in glittering arms.

Others more mild, in happy leisure gay,
The winding forest's lonely gloom explore;
Or by Scamander's flowery margin stray,
Or the blue Hellespont's resounding shore.

But chief the eye to Ilion's glories turn'd,
That gleam'd along th' extended champaign far;
And bulwarks, in terrific pomp adorn'd,
Where Peace sat smiling at the frowns of War.

Rich in the spoils of many a subject-clime
In pride luxurious blazed th' imperial dome;
Tower'd mid th' encircling grove the fane sublime;
And dread memorials mark'd the hallow'd tomb

Of Him, who from the gore-stain'd cavern led
The savage stern, and sooth'd his boisterous breast;
Who spoke, and Science rear'd her radiant head,
And brighten'd o'er the long-benighted waste;

Or, greatly daring in his country's cause,
Whose heaven-taught soul the aweful plan design'd,
Whence Power stood trembling at the voice of Laws,
Whence soar'd on Freedom's wing th' ethereal mind.

But not the pomp that Royalty displays,
Not all th' imperial pride of lofty Troy,
Nor Virtue's triumph of immortal praise
Could rouse the languor of the lingering BOY.

Abandon'd all to soft OENONE'S charms,
He to oblivion doom'd the listless day;
Inglorious lull'd in Love's dissolving arms,
While flutes lascivious breathed th' enfeebling lay.

To trim the ringlets of his scented hair,
To aim, insidious, Love's bewitching glance,
To cull fresh garlands for the gaudy Fair,
Or wanton loose in the voluptuous dance;

These were his arts; these won OENONE'S love,
Nor sought his fetter'd soul a nobler aim&mdash;
Ah why should Beauty's smile the arts approve,
Which taint with infamy the lover's flame!

Now laid at large beside a murmuring spring
Melting he listen'd to the woodland song;
And Echo listening waved her aery wing,
While the deep-winding dales the lays prolong.

When lo, slow-floating down the azure skies,
A crimson cloud flash'd on his startled sight,
Whose skirts gay-sparkling with unnumber'd dies
Lanch'd the long billowy trails of flickering light.

That instant, hush'd was all the vocal grove,
Hush'd was the gale, and every ruder sound;
And lays aereal warbling far above
Rung in the ear a magic peal profound.

Near and more near the swimming radiance roll'd;
Along the mountains stream'd the lingering fires;
Sublime the groves of Ida blazed with gold,
And heaven resounded wide with louder lyres.

Upsprung the trump's shrill clang; and all in air
The glories vanish'd from the dazzled eye;
And three ethereal forms, divinely fair,
Down the steep glade were seen advancing nigh.

The flowering glade fell level where they mov'd,
O'er-arching high the clustering roses hung,
And gales from heaven on balmy pinions rov'd,
And hill and dale with gratulation rung.

The FIRST with slow and stately step drew near;
Fix'd was her lofty eye, erect her mien;
Sublime in grace, in majesty severe,
She look'd a goddess, and she mov'd a queen.

Her robe along the gale profusely stream'd,
Light lean'd the sceptre on her bending arm;
And round her brow a starry circlet gleam'd,
Heightening the pride of each commanding charm.

Milder the NEXT came on with artless grace,
And on a javelin's quivering length reclin'd;
T' exalt her mien she bade no splendor blaze,
Nor pomp of vesture fluctuate on the wind.

Serene, though awful, on her lofty brows,
Celestial Wisdom shone; nor rov'd her eye,
Save where Ide's darkening cliffs majestic rose,
Or the blue concave of th' involving sky.

Keen were her eyes, t' explore the inmost soul;
Yet Virtue triumph'd in their beams benign;
And impious Pride oft felt their dread controul,
When in fierce lightning flash'd the wrath divine.

With awe-struck wonder gazed th' adoring SWAIN;
His kindling cheek great Virtue's power confess'd;
But soon 'twas o'er, for Virtue prompts in vain,
When Pleasure's influence numbs the nerveless breast.

And now advanced the QUEEN OF MELTING JOY,
Smiling supreme in unresisted charms.
Ah then, what transports fired the trembling BOY!
How throb'd his sickening frame with fierce alarms!

Her sparkling eyes, all moistening as they swim
Luxurious, look'd unutterable love.
Heaven's warm bloom glows along each brightening limb,
Where fluttering bland the veil's thin mantlings rove.

Quick, blushing as abash'd, she half withdrew;
One hand a bough of flowering myrtle wav'd,
One graceful spread, where, scarce conceal'd from view,
Soft through the parting robe her bosom heav'd.

"Offspring of JOVE supreme!  belov'd of heaven!
Attend."  Thus spoke the Empress of the skies.
"For, lo, to thee, high-fated Prince, 'tis given
Through the bright realms of Fame sublime to rise,

"Beyond man's loftiest hope; if nor the wiles
Of PALLAS quell each bold ennobling thought;
Nor PLEASURE lure thee, with her witching smiles,
To quaff the poison of her luscious draught.

"When JUNO'S charms the prize of beauty claim,
Shall ought on earth, shall ought in heaven contend?
Whom JUNO calls to high triumphant fame,
Shall he to meaner sway inglorious bend?

"Yet lingering comfortless in lonesome wild,
Where Echo sleeps mid cavern'd vales profound,
The pride of Troy, Dominion's darling child
Pines, while the slow hour stalks its sullen round.

"Hear, Thou, of heaven unconscious!  From the blaze
Of glory stream'd from JOVE'S eternal throne,
Thy soul, O Mortal, caught th' inspiring rays,
That to a God exalt Earth's raptur'd son.

"Hence the bold wish, on boundless pinion born,
That whirls through fields of ecstacy the soul;
The hero's eye, hence, kindling into scorn,
Blasts the proud menace, and defies controul.

"But, unimprov'd, heaven's noblest boons are vain.
No sun with plenty crowns th' uncultur'd vale;
Where green lakes languish on the silent plain,
Death rides the billowings of the western gale.

"Deep in yon mountain's womb, where the dark cave
Howls to the torrent's everlasting roar,
Does the rich gem its liquid radiance wave,
Or flames with steady ray th' imperial ore?

"Toil deck'd with glittering domes yon champaign wide;
And wakes yon grove-embosom'd lawns to joy;
Th' imprison'd ore rends from the mountain's side,
Spangling with starry pomp the thrones of Troy.

"Fly these soft scenes.  Even now, with playful art,
Love wreathes thy flowery ways with fatal snare;
And nurse th' ethereal fire that warms thy heart,
That fire ethereal lives but by thy care.

"Lo, hovering near, on dark and dampy wing,
Sloth with stern patience waits the hour assign'd,
From her chill plume the deadly dews to fling,
That quench heaven's beam, and freeze the chearless mind.

"Vain, then, th' enlivening sound of Fame's alarms,
For Hope's exulting impulse prompts no more;
Vain the false joys that lure to Pleasure's arms,
The throb of transport is for ever o'er.

"Ah, who shall then to Fancy's darkening eyes
Recal th' elysian dreams of joy and light?
Dim through the gloom the formless visions rise,
Snatch'd instantaneous down the gulph of night.

"Thou, who securely lull'd in youth's warm ray,
Hearst not the tottering wrecks o'erthrown by Time,
Be rous'd, or perish.  Ardent for its prey
Speeds the fell hour, that desolates thy prime.

"And, midst the horrors shrin'd of midnight storm,
The fiend Oblivion eyes thee from afar,
Black with intolerable frowns her form,
Beckoning th' embattled whirlwinds into war.

"Fanes, bulwarks, mountains, worlds, their tempest whelms;
Yet Glory braves unmov'd th' impetuous sweep.
Fly then, ere, hurl'd from life's delightful realms,
Thou sink t' Oblivion's dark and boundless deep.

"Fly then, where Glory points the path sublime:
See her crown dazzling with eternal light!
'Tis JUNO prompts thy daring steps to climb,
And girds thy bounding heart with matchless might.

"Warm in the raptures of divine desire,
Burst the soft chain that curbs th' aspiring mind;
And fly, where Victory, born on wings of fire,
Waves her red banner to the rattling wind.

"Ascend the car.  Indulge the pride of arms,
Where clarions roll their kindling strains on high,
Where the eye maddens to the dread alarms,
And the long shout tumultuous rends the sky.

"Plung'd in the uproar of the thundering field
I see thy lofty arm the tempest guide;
Fate scatters lightning from thy meteor-shield,
And Ruin spreads around the sanguine tide.

"Go, urge the terrors of thy headlong car
On prostrate Pride, and Grandeur's spoils o'erthrown;
While, all amaz'd, even heroes shrink afar,
And hosts embattled vanish at thy frown.

"When Glory crowns thy godlike toils; and all
The triumph's lengthening pomp exalts thy soul;
When lowly at thy feet the Mighty fall,
And tyrants tremble at thy stern controul;

"When conquering millions hail thy sovereign might,
And tribes unknown dread acclamation join;
How wilt thou spurn the forms of low delight!
For all the ecstasies of heaven are thine;

"For thine the joys, that fear no length of days,
Whose wide effulgence scorns all mortal bound:
Fame's trump in thunder shall announce thy praise,
Not wrecking worlds her clarion's blast confound."

The Goddess ceas'd, not dubious of the prize:
Elate she mark'd his wild and rolling eye,
Mark'd his lip quiver, and his bosom rise,
And his warm cheek suffus'd with crimson die.

But PALLAS now drew near.  Sublime, serene
In conscious dignity she view'd the swain;
Then, love and pity softening all her mien,
Thus breathed with accents mild the solemn strain.

"Let those, whose arts to fatal paths betray,
The soul with Passion's gloom tempestuous blind;
And snatch from Reason's ken th' auspicious ray
Truth darts from heaven to guide th' exploring mind.

"But WISDOM loves the calm and serious hour,
When Heaven's pure emanation beams confess'd;
Rage, ecstasy, alike, disclaim her power;
She wooes each gentler impulse of the breast.

"Sincere th' unalter'd bliss her charms impart,
Sedate th' enlivening ardors they inspire;
She bids no transient rapture thrill the heart,
She wakes no feverish gust of fierce desire.

"Unwise, who, tossing on the watery way,
All to the storm th' unfetter'd sail devolve;
Man more unwise resigns the mental sway,
Born headlong on by Passion's keen resolve.

"While storms remote but murmur on thine ear,
Nor waves in ruinous uproar round thee roll,
Yet yet a moment check thy prone career,
And curb the keen resolve that prompts thy soul.

"Explore thy heart, that, rous'd by Glory's name,
Pants all enraptur'd with the mighty charm;&mdash;
And does Ambition quench each milder flame?
And is it Conquest, that alone can warm?

"T' indulge fell Rapine's desolating lust,
To drench the balmy lawn in steaming gore,
To spurn the hero's cold and silent dust;&mdash;
Are these thy joys?  nor throbs thy heart for more?

"Pleas'd canst thou listen to the patriot's groan,
And the wild wail of Innocence forlorn?
And hear th' abandon'd maid's last frantic moan,
Her Love for ever from her bosom torn?

"Nor wilt thou shrink, when Virtue's fainting breath
Pours the dread curse of vengeance on thy head?
Nor when the pale ghost bursts the cave of death,
To glare distraction on thy midnight bed?

"Was it for this, though born to regal power,
Kind heaven to thee did nobler gifts consign;
Bade Fancy's influence gild thy natal hour,
And bade Philanthropy's applause be thine?

"Theirs be the dreadful glory to destroy,
And theirs the pride of pomp, and praise suborn'd,
Whose eye ne'er lighten'd at the smile of Joy,
Whose cheek the tear of Pity ne'er adorn'd;

"Whose soul, each finer sense instinctive quell'd,
The Lyre's mellifluous ravishment defies,
Nor marks where Beauty roves the flowering field,
Or Grandeur's pinion sweeps th' unbounded skies.

"Hail to sweet Fancy's unexpressive charm!
Hail to the pure delights of social love!
Hail, pleasures mild, that fire not while ye warm,
Nor rack th' exulting frame, but gently move!

"But Fancy soothes no more, if stern Remorse
With iron grasp the tortur'd bosom wring:
Ah then, even Fancy speeds the venom's course,
Even Fancy points with rage the maddening sting.

"Her wrath a thousand gnashing fiends attend,
And roll the snakes, and toss the brands of hell:
The beam of Beauty blasts, dark heavens impend
Tottering, and Music thrills with startling yell.

"What then avails, that, with exhaustless store,
Obsequious Luxury loads thy glittering shrine?
What then avails, that prostrate slaves adore,
And Fame proclaims thee matchless and divine?

"What, though bland Flattery all her arts apply?&mdash;
Will these avail to calm th' infuriate brain?
Or will the roaring surge, when heav'd on high,
Headlong hang, hush'd to hear the piping swain?

"In health how fair, how ghastly in decay
Man's lofty form!  how heavenly fair the mind
Sublim'd by Virtue's sweet enlivening sway!
But ah!  to Guilt's outrageous rule resign'd,

"How hideous and forlorn!  where ruthless Care
With cankering tooth corrodes the seeds of life;
And, deaf with Passion's storms, where pines Despair;
And howling furies rouse th' eternal strife.

"O, by thy hopes of joy, that restless glow,
Pledges of heaven!  be taught by Wisdom's lore;
With anxious haste each doubtful path forego,
And life's wild ways with cautious fear explore.

"Straight be thy course; nor tempt the maze that leads
Where fell Remorse his shapeless strength conceals:
And oft Ambition's dizzy cliff he treads,
And slumbers oft in Pleasure's flowery vales.

"Nor linger unresolv'd; heaven prompts the choice,
Save when presumption shuts the ear of Pride:
With grateful awe attend to Nature's voice,
The voice of Nature heaven ordain'd thy guide.

"Warn'd by her voice the arduous path pursue,
That leads to Virtue's fane a scanty band.
What, though no gaudy scenes decoy their view,
Nor clouds of fragrance roll along the land?

"What, though rude mountains heave the flinty way?
Yet there the soul drinks light and life divine;
And pure aereal gales of gladness play,
Brace every nerve, and every sense refine.

"Go, Prince, be virtuous, and be blest.  The throne
Rears not its state to swell the couch of Lust;
Nor dignify Corruption's daring son,
T' o'erwhelm his humbler brethren of the dust;

"But yield an ampler scene to Bounty's eye;
An ampler range to Mercy's ear expand;
And, midst admiring nations, set on high
Virtue's fair model framed by Wisdom's hand.

"Go then; the voice of Woe demands thine aid;
Pride's licens'd outrage claims thy slumbering ire;
Pale Genius roams the chill neglected shade,
And torpid Avarice mocks his tuneless lyre.

"Even Nature pines, by vilest chains oppress'd;
Th' astonish'd kingdoms crouch to Fashion's nod.
O ye pure inmates of the gentle breast,
Truth, Freedom, Love, O where is your abode?

"O yet once more shall Peace from heaven return,
And young Simplicity with mortals dwell!
Nor lnnocence th' august pavilion scorn,
Nor meek Contentment fly the humble cell!

"Wilt thou, my Prince, the beauteous train implore
Midst earth's forsaken scenes once more to bide?
Then Solitude shall sing in every bower,
And Love with garlands wreathe the domes of Pride.

"The tears bright-starting in th' impassion'd eyes
Of silent Gratitude; the smiling gaze
Of Gratulation, faultering, while he tries
With voice of rapturous joy to tell thy praise;

"Th' ethereal glow, that stimulates thy frame,
When all th' according powers harmonious move,
And wake to energy each social aim,
Attuned spontaneous to the will of Jove:

"Be these, O Man, the triumphs of thy soul;
And all the Conqueror's dazzling glories slight,
That, meteor-like, o'er trembling nations roll,
To sink at once in deep and dreadful night.

"Like thine, yon Orb's stupendous glories burn
With genial beam; nor, at th' approach of even,
In shades of horror leave the world to mourn,  
But gild with lingering light th' empurpled heaven."

Thus while She spoke, her eye sedately meek
Look'd the pure fervor of maternal love;
No rival Zeal intemperate flush'd her cheek&mdash;
Can Beauty's boast the soul of Wisdom move?

Worth's noble pride can Envy's leer appal,
Or staring Folly's vain applauses soothe?
Can jealous fear Truth's dauntless heart enthral?
Suspicion lurks not in the heart of Truth.

And now the SHEPHERD rais'd his pensive head.
Yet unresolv'd and fearful rov'd his eyes,
Nor dared the glances of the AWEFUL MAID;
For young unpractis'd Guilt distrusts the guise

Of shameless arrogance.  His wavering breast,
Though warm'd by Wisdom, own'd no constant  fire;
While lawless fancy roam'd afar, unblest,
Save in the oblivious lap of soft desire.

When thus the QUEEN of soul-dissolving smiles:
"Let gentler fates my darling Prince attend.
Joyless and cruel are the warrior's spoils,
Dreary the path stern Virtue's sons ascend.

"Of mortal joy full narrow is the space,
And the dread verge still gains upon the sight;
While, far beyond his sphere, man's empty gaze
Scans the faint dream of unapproach'd delight;

"Till every sprightly hour, and blooming scene
Of life's gay morn, unheeded, glides away,
Clouds fraught with tempest mount the blue serene,
And storm and ruin close the troublous day.

"Thou still exult to hail the present joy;
Thine be the boon that comes unearn'd by toil;
No froward vain desire thy bliss annoy,
No flattering hope thy longing hours beguile!

"Ah!  why should man pursue the charms of Fame,
For ever luring, yet for ever coy?
Light as the gaudy rainbow's pillar'd gleam,
That melts elusive from the wondering boy!

"What, though her throne irradiate many a clime,
If hung loose-tottering o'er th' unfathom'd tomb?
What, though her mighty clarion, rear'd sublime,
Display th' imperial wreathe, and glittering plume?

"Can glittering plume, or can th' imperial wreathe
Redeem, from unrelenting Fate, the brave?
What note of triumph can her clarion breathe,
T' alarm th' eternal midnight of the grave?

"That night draws on; nor will the vacant hour
Of expectation linger as it flies,
Nor fate one moment unenjoy'd restore;
Each moment's flight how precious to the wise!

"O shun th' annoyance of the bustling throng,
That haunt with zealous turbulence the Great.
There coward Office boasts th' unpunish'd wrong,
And sneaks secure in insolence of state:

"O'er fancy'd injury Suspicion pines,
And in grim silence gnaws the festering wound;
Deceit the rage-embitter'd smile refines,
And Censure spreads the viperous hiss around.

"Hope not, fond Prince, though Wisdom guard thy throne,
Though Truth and Bounty prompt each generous aim,
Though thine the palm of peace, the victor's crown,
The muse's rapture, and the patriot's flame;

"Hope not, though all that captivates the wise,
All that endears the good exalt thy praise,
Hope not to taste repose; for Envy's eyes
At fairest worth still point their deadly rays.

"Envy, stern tyrant of the flinty heart,
Can ought of virtue, truth, or beauty charm?
Can soft Compassion thrill with pleasing smart,
Repentance melt, or Gratitude disarm?

"Ah no.  Where Winter Scythia's waste enchains,
And monstrous shapes growl to the ruthless storm,
Not PHAEBUS' smile can chear the dreadful plains,
Or soil accurs'd with balmy life inform.

"Then, Envy, then is thy triumphant hour,
When mourns Benevolence his baffled scheme;
When Insult mocks the clemency of Power,
And loud Dissention's livid firebrands gleam;

"When squint-eyed Slander plies th' unhallow'd tongue,
From poison'd maw when Treason weaves his line,
And muse apostate (infamy to song!)
Grovels, low-muttering at Sedition's shrine.

"Let not my Prince forego the tranquil shade,
The whispering grove, the fountain, and the plain:
Power, with the oppressive weight of pomp array'd,
Pants for simplicity and ease &mdash; in vain.

"The yell of frantic Mirth may stun his ear;
But frantic Mirth soon leaves the heart forlorn;
And PLEASURE flies that high tempestuous sphere,
Far different scenes her lucid paths adorn.

"She loves to wander on th' untrodden lawn,
Or the green bosom of reclining hill,
Sooth'd by the careless warbler of the dawn,
Or the lone plaint of ever-murmuring rill.

"Or, from the mountain-glade's aereal brow,
While to her song a thousand echoes call,
Marks the wild woodland wave remote below,
Where shepherds pipe unseen, and waters fall.

"Her influence oft the festive hamlet proves,
Where the high carol chears th' exulting ring;
And oft she roams the maze of wildering groves,
Listening the unnumber'd melodies of spring:

"Or to the long and lonely shore retires;
What time, loose-glimmering to the lunar beam,
Faint heaves the slumberous wave, and starry fires
Gild the blue deep with many a lengthening gleam:

"Then, to the balmy bower of rapture born,
While strings, self-warbling, breathe elysian rest,
Melts in delicious vision, till the Morn
Spangle with twinkling dew the flowery waste.

"The frolic Moments, purple-pinion'd, dance
Around, and scatter roses as they play;
And the blithe Graces, hand in hand, advance,
Where, with her lov'd Compeers, she deigns to stray:

"Mild Solitude, in veil of russet die,
Her sylvan spear with moss-grown ivy bound;
And Indolence, with sweetly-languid eye,
And zoneless robe that trails along the ground.

"But chiefly Love &mdash; O Thou, whose gentle mind
Each soft indulgence Nature framed to share;
Pomp, wealth, renown, dominion, all resign'd,
O haste to Pleasure's bower; for Love is there.

"Love, the desire of Gods!  the feast of heaven!
Yet to earth's favour'd offspring not deny'd! 
Ah, let not thankless man the blessing given
Enslave to fame, or sacrifice to pride.

"Nor I from Virtue's call decoy thine ear;
Friendly to Pleasure are her sacred laws.
Let Temperance' smile the cup of gladness chear,
That cup is death, if he with-hold applause.

"Far from thy haunt be Envy's baneful sway,
And Hate that works the harass'd soul to storm;
But woo Content to breathe her soothing lay,
And charm from Fancy's view each angry form.

"No savage joy th' harmonious hours profane!
Whom love refines can barbarous tumult please?
Shall rage of blood pollute the sylvan reign?
Shall Leisure wanton in the spoils of Peace?

"Free let the feathery race indulge the song,
Inhale the liberal beam, and melt in love;
Free let the fleet hind bound her hills along,
And in pure streams the watery nations rove.

"To joy in Nature's universal smile,
Well suits, O man, thy pleasurable sphere;
But why should Virtue doom thy years to toil!
Ah, why should Virtue's law be deem'd severe!

"What meed, Beneficence, thy care repays?
What, Sympathy, thy still-returning pang?
And why his generous arm should Justice raise,
To dare the vengeance of a tyrant's fang?

"From thankless Spite no bounty can secure;
Or froward wish of Discontent fulfil,
That knows not to regret thy bounded power,
But blames with keen reproach thy partial will.

"To check th' impetuous all-involving tide
Of human woes, how impotent thy strife!
High o'er thy mounds devouring surges ride,
Nor reck thy baffled toils, or lavish'd life.

"The bower of bliss, the smile of love be thine,
Unlabour'd ease, and leisure's careless dream.
Such be their joys, who bend at VENUS' shrine,
And own her charms beyond compare supreme!"

Warm'd, as she spoke, all panting with delight,
Her kindling beauties breathed triumphant bloom,
And Cupids flutter'd round in circlets bright,
And Flora pour'd from all her stores perfume.

"Thine be the prize;" exclaim'd th' enraptur'd YOUTH,
"Queen of unrival'd charms, and matchless joy!"&mdash;
O blind to fate, felicity, and truth!&mdash;
But such are they, whom Pleasure's snares decoy.

The sun was sunk, the vision was no more.
Night downward rush'd tempestuous, at the frown
Of JOVE'S awaken'd wrath; deep thunders roar,
The forests howl afar, and mountains groan.

Fierce-whirling meteors glare athwart the plain;
With horror's scream the Ilian towers resound;
Raves the hoarse storm along the bellowing main,
And the strong earthquake rends the shuddering ground.
