JACK. &mdash; JOHN.

Augusta's Hangman sought for soothing rest,
With business wearied with fatigue oppress'd;
For solitude's pure joys he left the town,
With careless step to Greenwich wandering down.
Mild breath'd the west wind all that happy day,
The orchards redden'd with the bloom of May;
And now the sun threw forth his parting gleams,
His last rays lingering on the breast of Thames;
The clouds in wild romantick shapes were roll'd,
And from afar the forest wav'd in gold.
Pleas'd with the glowing beauties of the scene,
Our HERO felt his bosom all serene;
Each care was hush'd, each stormy passion still,
As soft he travers'd o'er the famous hill;
While thus he rov'd in contemplation lost,
Him a young stranger ventured to accost:
Let the lay flow in melody along,
Sweet be the cadence of the melting song.

JACK.
Hail mighty Sir, if wooden plates are true,
The first of mortal Hangmens in my view;
In me a loving brother you behold,
Though few the hangings which my youth has told:
Remote I live, where thieves are wondrous shy,
Where justice seldom can the rope supply;
Lured by the sound of your extended fame,
Quick from afar to Visit thee I came.

JOHN.
Youth, let me fold thee in a close embrace,
And view the opening glories of your face:
By all th' important honours which I own,
Through a long line of hangmen handed down,
Till this blest hour I never yet could see,
Such bold ambition as now flames in thee.
Caesar long drench'd in blood his slaughtering sword,
Full many a breast the Prussian King has gored;
Their vast exploits your courage ne'er shall stop,
Oh!  emulate their swords with your tough rope;
While mortals fear no more of fate the thread,
Your Scandinavian cord alone shall be their dread.

JACK.
Your words reanimate my drooping frame,
And my soul kindles in the bursting flame.

JOHN.
Sure if in transmigration truth there be,
The great Caligula revives in thee.

JACK.
I feel my breast with thankfulness o'erflow,
And as I'm young, your kind advice bestow;
Oh!  teach me how to fix with due respect,
The running noose around the felon's neck;
Oh!  bounteously your attitude impart,
When you appear within the glorious cart.
For the gilt coach let silly women strive,
Let Bucks their phaetons delight to drive.
Let the Duke's chariot six bay horses draw,
And give the Mayor's fat wife the vast landau;
At their more happy lot I'll ne'er repine,
Long as th' unornamented cart is mine.

JOHN.
Vainly you hope to learn from rules of art,
The noose to fix, th' appearance in the cart;
Nature alone must these instructions give,
From nature you'll the proper hints receive:
Oh!  gentle youth, my knowledge nobly scorn,
The hangman and the poet such are born;
The same kind Power that bids the verse to flow,
Gives to the hangman all he ought to know.

JACK.
Lawyer's, 'tis said, rejoice in ample fees,
Young harlots love a cully's purse to squeeze;
Physicians gladden in a sickly year,
The farmers flourish most when corn is dear;
The British sailor likes the French to bang,
And every daring hangman loves to hang;
Declare then all the transports which you feel,
When Newgate's fill'd with those that rob and steal,
When the Old Bailey gives the wish'd for doom,
And the dead warrant throws a saddening gloom.

JOHN.
Happy am I indeed when rogue's are ta'en,
Though transportation sometimes proves my bane;
Yet thanks to Fielding who adorns his place,
I seldom feel the pangs of such disgrace.
The day rolls round devoted to the tree,
Sacred to justice, hanging, and to me:
See, on his car, the highwayman appears,
The mob look pale, even butchers are in tears;
He unappall'd the fatal noose surveys,
The clamorous multitude resound his praise;
Each downcast eye with gentle pity weeps,
Each gentle fair in gin her sorrow steeps.
He bears a blooming nosegay in his hand,
The sweet flow'rs ranged in beauteous order stand,
All that in lonely fields are known to smile,
Or rise with cultured care in happier soil.
Here flames the red rose, the carnation breathes,
And round the whole the fragrant woodbine wreathes,
The drooping lillies all their odours shed,
And hang (as soon he will) the pensive head.
The car drives off, the rabble shrink and Rare,
Aloft he swings and quivering shakes in air.

JACK.
But see how fast the shades of evening close,
Night soon will wrap the world in still repose;
Bright in the sky the stars begin to burn,
To their dim groves the feather'd tribes return;
The moon now rises in her borrow'd flames,
Her first rays tremble on the glimmering Thames:
To some snug alehouse let us then retire,
And taste the drink which porters most admire;
Oh!  how I long to quaff a chearful cup,
With one so much renown'd for tucking up.
To-morrow I the sacred spot will view,
Where crowds of heroes bid the world adieu,
Raptured I'll hail the place where fast they choak,
And gaze upon the venerable oak.
