SABLE &mdash; CRAPE.

Where Westminster's fam'd Abbey rears its head,
And darksome vaults breathe noxious with the dead,
Where the dim windows cast a reverend gloom,
And gentle pity saddens o'er each tomb,
Where Poets, Aldermen and Admirals lie,
And Gallic standards cheer each Briton's eye;
Where he, whom curiosity attacks,
Sees Kings and Queens, and Generals of wax:
Two undertakers walk'd, indulging chat,
While each with decency pull'd off his hat;
Old wily Sable the discourse began,
Thus between Crape and him the conversation ran.

SABLE
This awful scene, this venerable pile,
These monuments of marble make me smile:
My heart o'erflows with joy when tombs I see,
The death of others is new life to me.

CRAPE.  
The rueful ghastly look, and dying groan,
Are what we Undertakers feed upon;
To us the hungry yawning grave supplies,
The fish that swim the seas, the fowls that wing the skies.

SABLE
The smile of gladness brightens in my eye,
When Dukes are so obliging as to die.
By custom immemorial, the great
Must lie at least a week, and rot in state.
The room array'd in black is seen to mourn,
Dimly around my waxen tapers burn,
The raving widow sheds whole floods of tears,
And all the mockery of grief appears.

CRAPE.
Last year a worthy Knight Lord Mayor they chose,
Mighty his paunch, and flaming red his nose,
At feasts of venison he swallow'd more.
Than any Mayor could ever do before.
A glorious present  from the Indies came,
A huge Shell-fish and Turtle was its name:
He sent to all the friends he lov'd the best,
And told what day would see his Turtle drest.
The day arriv'd, his eyes survey'd with glee,
The beauteous Callipash and Callipee.
He eat whole plates of green delicious fat,
When lo a surfeit nail'd him as he sat.
I then was call'd, his coffin soon was made,
And in the grave the pure green fat was laid.
May blessings crown the man for evermore,
Who first brought Turtle to the British shore.

SABLE
A Maid of Honour lately left the light,
Her brilliant eyes were closed in dreary might.
To me 'twas given to see the lovely fair,
Interr'd in mother-earth with decent care.
Feathers of rabbit tails her hearse adorn'd,
While linen wrapt each staff of those who mourn'd,
For white's the emblem of a spotless maid,
And shows she never was by man betray'd;
Yet if the virgin was not much belied,
Full oft, the joys of lawless love the tried.

CRAPE.
A Cheapside hosier lately left this life,
Thus spoke to me his sad lamenting wife;
The man I fondly lov'd is fled from hence,
Let him be buried with magnificence.
What must my feelings be to have it said,
That meanly in the grave his bones were laid,
Before his hearse let fifty torches blaze,
And flame along the streets with brightest rays.

SABLE.
A set of mourners I in pay retain,
Thin as the ghosts which haunt the murderer's brain.
Austere they seem, as of the Spanish race,
And ludicrous with solemn length of face,
So bare their bones with poverty are worn,
They look more lank than sheep when newly shorn.
Yet some begin to lose the look of grief,
Acquainted grown with porter and with beef,
And though I give the highest price for woe,
Th' ungrateful varlets smile and chearful grow.

CRAPE.
In every street I have a trusty spy,
To bring me early news of those who die.
Chiefly where venerable asses crowd,
And galloping consumptions cough aloud,
Or where fell fevers rage through every vein,
Or in the stomach gouts a place obtain.
With weary care they watch the fleeting breath,
And bear rejoiced the tidings of a death;
For every death I see them with a crown;
For each relapse I lay a shilling down,
But crowns and shillings vainly are implor'd,
When vigorous health is to the sick restor'd.

SABLE.
Thanks to the Quacks whose skill is so profound,
When sickness comes new health is seldom found:
This drug for certain cures your every Ill,
And death must fly before this sovereign pill.
With exultation, this is still their cry,
But most are obstinate and chuse to die.

CRAPE.
Faith even our honest friends in Warwick-lane,
Free now and then a patient from his pain,
Yet consolation it must sure impart,
That if he dies, he dies by rules of art.

SABLE.
What obligations to the French are due,
Who taught the fricassee, the soup, the stew.
The feast's prepar'd, with flame the kitchen glows,
With baneful mixture every sauce o'eflows,
Death grimly hovers o'er the well-dress'd dish,
Informs the Ortolan, or lurks in fish.

CRAPE.
Sure coals of fire are heap'd upon his head,
Who seeks the Thames with pockets full of lead,
The monster sinks beneath the roaring tides,
And every rite of sepulture derides.

Lo now the falling hour of night drew near,
The Abbey gloom'd, their hearts were sunk with fear.
Their talking ends, in haste they stride along,
Regain the streets, and mingle with the throng.
