DAPHNE &mdash; AMARYLLIS.

Nigh where St. Clement's church contracts the Strand,
Two females took their solitary stand,
Their painted cheeks afar diffus'd a glare,
Then eyes possess'd the meretricious stare,
Their flaunting garments show'd in tatter'd trim,
While many a splash of dirt adorn'd each limb.
Three hours the theatres had empty been,
Harldly a mortal on the streets was seen,
Thieves now began their trade of picking locks,
And drowsy watchmen snored in every box.
Our females look'd around in mournful guise,
In sad succession rose their heaving sighs;
And first the pensive Daphne found her tongue,
Slowly she thus to Amaryllis sung;
The music almost melted in her throat,
In feeble murmurs breath'd each broken note.

DAPHNE.
In vain I've travers'd all the streets around,
In vain, since not a cully's to be found;
Six times through Covent Garden I have walk'd,
And seldom there the courtesan is baulk'd.

AMARYLLIS.
This night I've frequent stroll'd through Drury Lane,
Flush'd with gay hopes, but all my hopes were vain;
Fruitless was every effort to engage,
Within my toils or youth, or withering age,
No cunning wiles of mine had power to draw,
Within my haunts the army, church, or law;
No arts could urge the men to pour their cash,
And in th' o'erflowing bowl their sorrows wash.

DAPHNE.
If thus neglected I'm to lose my trade,
'Twere better far I had been still a maid;
I might have kept a creditable shop,
Or, at the worst, have twirled the cleansing mop;
Nay, easily I might have gain'd my bread,
Skill'd with the needle how to guide the thread.

AMARYLLIS.
Ah!  quick dispel such gloomy thoughts  as these,
Trade will return to set your mind at ease;
Think on the bliss which our profession brings,
When wanton joy each flying moment wings,
When gay around the splendid Taverns shine,
And each illumin'd feature glows with wine;
When every youth is wild with raging fires,
And feels the swelling tide of strong desires.

DAPHNE.
Your ardent words convey the truth so clear,
That all my grief subsides when you are near:
And sure my friend it is a glorious plight,
To melt in bagnios all the live-long night;
Or in the play-house all our finery show,
And view the pallid Duchess pine below;
Or, happy chance, some batter'd rake allure,
With downcast look still deem'd a virgin pure.

AMARYLLIS.
Tell, gentle Daphne, since the season's apt,
How first by faithless man you was entrapp'd;
For none like you in sentiment can shine,
And softest sensibility is thine.

DAPHNE.
Where Kent's green hills in natural beauty rise,
And Medway verdure to the vales supplies;
My infant years I pass'd and flourish'd fair,
A farmer's only child, and only care.
With innocence I spent my smiling hours,
Roved the gay fields, and pluck'd the varying flow'rs,
Which still upon my rising breast were born,
Or as a chaplet in my hair were worn.
My father had a lad to guide the plough,
Ah!  lovely youth, methinks I see thee now;
No comelier boy I'm sure was ever seen,
No tougher wrestler ever trod the green:
If he at cudgels play'd, so sweet his look,
That all the heads even courted to be broke:
At foot-ball none could ever kick so well,
In cricket-matches none could him excel:
His various charms began my heart to move,
He led me to the wild, and talk'd of love.
The maid who seeks with man the lonely wild,
Perhaps may chance to find herself with child.
Round and more round my waist was seen to swell,
My father's mighty rage I need not tell;
And how I left my native home with shame,
And in the waggon up to London came.
Come Amaryllis, say, Was you betray'd?
Tell how seduced, you ceas'd to be a maid.
The warm blush kindles on your glowing cheek.
As evening suns the clouds with crimson streak.

AMARYLLIS.
A Yorkshire Village was my natal place,
My sire was parson, rosy was his face;
Nature had made me delicately fair,
And given my heart of pride no common share;
Besides, with malice I was well endued,
And all the talents which befit a prude;
Scandal was never whisper'd over tea,
But all the neighbours reckon'd it was me.
At last a Captain, gorgeous as the day,
Led to the town his troop to eat our hay.
Of dreadful fights the gallant hero told,
Which melted down my heart though hard and cold.
To love with ardour quickly I began,
For who could e'er resist a warlike man.
By all his deeds in arms the Captain swore,
He ne'er had seen so fair a form before;
If I was coy, he vow'd his naked sword,
Should instant through his love-sick breast be bored.
With that in haste the murdering blade he drew,
I yielded, and we off to London flew.
The midwife soon deliver'd me of twins,
While he the more to aggravate his sins,
Before I was a fortnight brought to bed,
With a rich greasy Wapping-widow wed.

Their former loves drew tears from either eye,
When, lo!  a drunken buck came reeling by;
He seiz'd them by the arm, and nothing loath,
In a luxurious tavern hous'd them both.
