No more of youthful joys or love's fond dreams,
No more of morning fair, or ev'ning mild,
While DAPHNIS lies among the silent dead
Unsung; tho' long ago he trod the path,
The dreary road of death&mdash;
Which soon or late each human foot must tread.
He trod the dark uncomfortable wild
By Faith's pure light, by Hope's heav'n-op'ning beams,
By Love whose image gladdens mortal eyes,
And keeps the golden key that opens all the skies.

Assist, ye Muses! &mdash; and ye will assist;
For DAPHNIS, whom I sing, to you was dear:
Ye lov'd the boy, and on his youthful head
Your kindest influence shed.&mdash;
So may I match his lays, who to the lyre
Wail'd his lost LYCIDAS by wood and rill:
So may the Muse my groveling mind inspire
To sing a farewell to thy ashes blest;
To bid fair peace be to thy gentle shade;
To scatter flow'rets, cropt by Fancy's hand,
In sad assemblage round thy tomb,
If water'd by the Muse, to latest time to bloom.

Oft by the side of LEVEN'S crystal lake,
Trembling beneath the closing lids of light,
With slow, short-measured steps we took our walk:
Then he would talk
Of argument far, far above his years;
Then he would reason high,
Till from the east the silver Queen of night
Her journey up heav'n's steep began to make,
And Silence reign'd attentive in the sky.

O happy days!  for ever, ever gone!
When o'er the flowery green we ran, we play'd
With blooms bedropt by youthful Summer's hand;
Or, in the willow-shade,
We mimic castles built among the sand,
Soon by the sounding surge to be beat down,
Or sweeping winds; when, by the sedgy marsh,
We heard the heron, and the wild duck harsh,
And sweeter lark tune his melodious lay,
At highest noon of day.
Among the antic moss-grown stones we'd roam,
With ancient hieroglyphic figures grac'd,
Winged hour-glasses, bones, and skulls, and spades,
And obsolete inscriptions by the hands
Of other ages.  Ah!  I little thought
That we then play'd o'er his untimely tomb!

Where were ye, Muses!  when the leaden hand
Of Death, remorseless, closed your DAPHNIS' eyes?
For sure ye heard the weeping mother's cries;
But the dread power of Fate what can withstand?
Young DAPHNIS smiled at Death; the tyrant's darts
As stubble counted.  What was his support?
His conscience, and firm trust in him whose ways
Are truth; in him who sways
His potent sceptre o'er the dark domains
Of death and hell; who holds in straiten'd reins
Their banded legions:  "Thro' the darksome vale
He'll guide my trembling steps with heavenly ray;
I see the dawning of immortal day,"
He smiling said, and died!&mdash;

Hail, and farewell, blest youth!  soon hast thou left
This evil world.  Fair was thy thread of life,
But quickly by the envious Sisters shorn:
Thus have I seen a rose with rising morn
Unfold its glowing bloom, sweet to the smell,
And lovely to the eye; when a keen wind
Hath tore its blushing leaves, and laid it low,
Stripp'd of its sweets. &mdash; Ah!  so,
So DAPHNIS fell!  long ere his prime he fell!
Nor left he on these plains his peer behind;
These plains, that mourn their loss, of him bereft,
No more look gay, but desert and forlorn.

Now cease your lamentations, shepherds!  cease:
Though DAPHNIS died below, he lives above;
A better life, and in a fairer clime,
He lives:  No sorrow enters that bless'd place,
But ceaseless songs of love and joy resound;
And fragrance floats around,
By fanning zephyrs from the spicy groves,
And flow'rs immortal, wafted; Asphodel
And Amaranth, unfading, deck the ground,
With fairer colours than, ere ADAM fell,
In EDEN bloom'd.  There haply he may hear
This artless song.  Ye powers of verse!  improve,
And make it worthy of your darling's ear,
And make it equal to the shepherd's love.

Thus, in the shadow of a frowning rock,
Beneath a mountain's side, shaggy and hoar,
A homely swain, tending his little flock,
Rude, yet a lover of the Muse's lore,
Chanted his Doric strain till close of day,
Then rose, and homeward slowly bent his way.
