Some power there is above the vulgar reach,
Which art may tutor, but can never teach;
Some subtler essence of the thinking mind,
That leave the lagging pace of sense behind;
That taught a Shakespeare all his magic fire;
With Otway melted o'er the melting lyre;
With Dryden wandered thro' the Aonian bowers,
And called the fragrance of their sweetest flowers;
That gave the pointed line of Pope to glow;
That frets and kicks at straws with poor Rousseau;
That taught a Collins' raptur'd eye to gaze
Full on her fires, and drink their fiercest blaze;
Pours from a Mason's harp the flowing lay;
With Shenstone piped, and roves with pensive Gray;
To mirth, to sorrow, or to madness free;
Laughs with a Sterne, and sometimes yawns with me.

Struck by her wand, as late entranced I lay,
And thought, or seemed to think, the hour away,
Lo!  to my view a beauteous form appeared;
A female form her soft enchantment reared,
On quivering gossamer her steps were placed,
A shining baldric girt her slender waist,
Where light embroidery's glittering texture shewed,
What on her favourite sons her smile bestowed;
The patriot's coronet, the courtier's rod,
And mitres for the humbler men of God.
Redundant flowed her purple robe behind,
And, loosely waving, wooed the wanton wind;
O'er her soft cheeks the dimples held their reign,
And speaking pulses throbbed in every vein;
Fantastic trinkets decked her plaited hair,
The heaving whiteness of her bosom, bare!
She stroked her eye-brows, and she tossed her head,
And smoothed her lips to wear a brighter red;
Then, with a conscious smile, she threw askance
The self-complaisance of a meaning glance.

"Mortal!" she said, "at Folly's gilded shrine,
If e'er a shaft from Satire's bow was thine,
Behold the Power, who gave her strength to rise,
And point her lazy pinions to the skies.
In darkling chaos and primeval shade,
Unmoved, unprincipled, was Folly laid,
Till thwart the gloom I beamed a pitying ray,
And bade her flaunt it in the face of day;
Grin where she gaped, in self-opinion strong,
And ever confident of right in wrong.

"Look o'er the deeds, which Truth or Fancy give,
In verse, in statue, or in paint, to live:
Reared by my hand, the storied actions spring,
And, but for me, what wretch would be a king?
For me the hero wheels his smoking car,
Amidst the purple ranks of fiery war,
Then struts a god!  and mouths my better name,
Ambition, or the sacred thirst of fame.
For me, the coward death itself defies,
And conscious &mdash; like a Cato dies.

"But these are draughts in nature seldom shewn;
They paint 'em oftenest, who have never known.
Search common life, and search it where you will,
'Tis Vanity impels the action still.
Still some gay nothings some gay nothings meet,
To feed the airy form of self-conceit.

"I gave my lord, &mdash; the solace of his life,&mdash;
His handsome snuff-box, and his handsome wife.
Alike the reason, they adorn the great,
For both were purchased at a monstrous rate.

"For me Papilio calls his insect breeds,
Ranges his butterflies, his maggots feeds;
Now points his tube to Venus' radiant height;
Now ogles through his microscope &mdash; a mite.

"Go thou, to life in larger views inclined,
And mark the buzzing insects of mankind;
See sweet Sir Lappet, with the busiest face,
Perform in papillots his morning race,
From scented toilet to a china sale;
To swallow half, and half regorge a tale.
Deep in the secrets of the state-machine;
And as important on "an Indian screen;"
The things, like thoughts, that jostle in his brain,
Rise into scraps, and then dissolve again.

"Why harkee, Frank; last night &mdash; but mum for that&mdash;
You cou'd not keep it." &mdash; and he smooths his hat.&mdash;
"My letters say, Sir John, that there's a talk"&mdash;
(And shews a brilliant on a hand of chalk.)
"The queen of Denmark &mdash; there's a figured bowl&mdash;
The Marquis writes me, that the Tuesday's poll&mdash;
What gegaw things &mdash; your glass, my lord &mdash; are these?
O execrably vulgar!  not Chinese!"

"Shut with a cautious hand Pisanio's door,
And, trembling, venture on his polished floor;
Touch but his bells, so tremulously hung,
A cricket presses and his bells are rung.
Reflective tables tables shew again;
And muffled lacqueys lift the shining plain.
Pale in his face his friend that terror views;
His friend had almost failed &mdash; to wipe his shoes.

"I tempted Labeo, who of old could tell
But just how much brocade was worth the ell,
His had-earned riches in his age to waste,&mdash;
Delusive chance!  to hunt the Proteus &mdash; Taste.
O'er the broad lawn behind a Dian reign,
To meet yon visto from the neighbouring plain;
Here crawls a puddle from its scanty fount;
Here nods a ruin on a new-raised mount;
There stinking shrubs, from Indian plains conveyed,
To pine and wither in the torpid shade;
While Labeo's gardener plants him into fame,
Proud of the beauties which he cannot name.
Him all the wondering cits, who range at will
On sunny Sabbath-days from Ludgate Hill,
Mimic in little through their spruce abodes,
And rifle Hyde-Park-Corner of its gods.

"Even the dull wretch, with girdle-fettered paunch,
Who sweats at turtle, or who pants at haunch,
Of feelings frugal, just content with one,
The grossest pleasure of the brute called Man,
Inspired by me, surveys the table round,
And boasts of beating Helluo by a pound.

"O'er the soft sex acknowledged power I boast;
They feel it oftenest, and enjoy it most.
By partial art at least to man belong
The reason-fathomed deeps of right and wrong;
By me the cob-web principles are wrought,
That float and waver in a woman's thought.
Robed in my tints the fleeting objects viewed,
But half they reason, and but half conclude;
From this to that the fond ideas range,
Warm to enjoy, but only blest in change.
Untasted banquets pall on their desire,
And rising wishes bid resolve expire;
But still, where'er the wanderer's steps incline,
In various shapes the sovereign rule is mine;
I weave the texture of her gaudiest dream,
Herself the motive, and herself the theme.
True to that shrine she bends the suppliant knee,
And sometimes kneels to God &mdash; to worship me!

"In Phryne's mirror Phryne's self is fair,
Tricked in the charms my pencil pictures there;
And Sylvia thinks, while you in blushes sit,
The lovely ideot is a perfect wit.

"Nor yet, by all the graces formed in vain,
Nor yet Monimia 'scaped my powerful reign.
With all that nature gives, refined by art,
With all the feelings of the generous heart,
The gay to ravish, and the grave to please;
By wisdom tutored in the school of ease.
Of parts possessed, by, heaven assigned to few,
She pitied follies which she never knew;
Slow to condemn, condemned without a frown,
And censure taught a language not its own.

"A youth who loved, (of such himself possessed,)
The kindred virtues of Monimia's breast,
His honest passion told the beauteous maid,
By the soft feelings of her soul betrayed;
A conscious blush with virgin coyness strove,
And colder reason urged the cause of love.
In vain she urged; indignant I arose,
(For I and merit commonly are foes,)
Odious, I whispered, plain Eugenio's wife!&mdash;
She sighed, and took a titled fool for life.

"For me, Blondella talks the live-long night,
Of moral fitness, and the rule of right;
Then all for Plato's philosophic mind,
The pure idea, and the loved refined!
The delicate, the sympathy of soul!
And nameless nothings, that on nothing roll!
With what a dying dying fall she speaks,
And leans on two plump arms two purple cheeks.
For not o'er nature Plato's rules prevail,
To teach Blondella Plato's pensive pale;
Nay some there are, as o'er their favourite tea
They sacrifice to scandal and to me,
Who say, Blondella feels the common flames,
And loves as solidly as other dames.
And yet (for Pope informed me long ago,
What can we reason but from what we know,)
Perhaps they err; for them no sacred fire
Did ere the breath of sapient Greece inspire;
And from plain nature, plainly understood,
They cannot think so ill of flesh and blood.

"Not quite of Epicure's or Plato's school,
Not quite a wit, and just not quite a fool;
With pause, and point, and epithet to aid,
Daphne for me invokes the tuneful maid.
With rhyme from Byshe, and sentiment from Behn,
In deepest pathos Daphne dips her pen;
To weeping rills her sighing shepherds wail,
And sighs are wafted on the sighing gale;
Smooth flows her stream, and soft her zephyr blows,
With ah's how tender, and how solemn oh's!
Then toils a novelist in virtue's cause,
And joins example to the moral laws;
Virtue and vice their proper meed assigns,
And awful justice speaks her closing lines.
The maze of sentiment and sorrow past,
Each honest girl a husband finds at last;
And vice, her long career of mischief run,
Is doomed to penance in a sober nun.
Yet, ah!  the while, insidious powers of love!
Was Daphne tangled in the web she wove:
She feels and paints the soft desire by turns,
And midst the flame her fancy kindled burns;
More blessed than Waller, reaped both love and bays,
And lost her virtue &mdash; while she wrote in praise.

Nor yet where all thy boasted reason runs,
Thy boasted reason shields her thinking sons.
I guide the stoic through the moral page;
I give the clue that leads the poring sage;
His book the scholar, or his studies faint;
And, strange!  humility itself the saint:
Mine swells the period from a Johnson's hand;
And famished poets at my altars stand.

"Even thou by me inspired, without the nine,
To try at verse, and pour the feeble line,
Thou own'st my power; amid the smiling train,
Of wealth, of person, or of title vain,
I mark thy bosom swell with secret pride,
To scorn their weakness, to thy scorn allied.

"Though yet thou darest not wide expand thy sail,
Nor trust the public for a partial gale;
Though ne'er, by earnest friends or me impelled,
Thy flippant verse a miscellany held;
Nor scrawled a-top by some unwilling lord,
To court subscription, hangs thy begging board;
There are whose praise indulgent swells thy heart,
And speeds the poison from my rankling dart:
Lo!  she, of whom are all the virtues vain,
Too dangerous Goodness!  she approves thy strain,
And drawn half smiling, bids thee write again."&mdash;

She spoke; my bosom felt the magic sound,
My active spirits danced a nimbler round.
Propitious power! &mdash; I prayed, or meant a prayer;
Her light form faded in the empty air.
Yet these she left, and bade to you belong:
I own her power, if you approve the song.
