Come from the climes of light, celestial Maid!
Thou whose gay visions bless my nightly dream:
Lo!  what bright scenes fair opening claim thine aid,
How Fancy glows o'er each transporting theme!

Not now to sing of God's eternal ways,
I sweep the  swelling lyre's melodious strings:
More sweetly varying flow th' inspiring lays:
Grant melting notes, and strong yet temperate wings.

To tell what bards have bless'd Britannia's clime,
Each beaming mild like Eve's refulgent star,
The Muse attempts; to paint her race sublime
In song unequall'd, as unmatch'd in war.

What time the Queen of Silence, and of Night,
Steals meekly pensive from Endymion's bower,
Illumes the broider'd lawn with silver light,
Or hears the lone owl on some blasted tower,

Musing I roved, and mark'd the solemn scene.
No cloud obscured th' unbounded arch above;
Hush'd was each murmur o'er the still serene,
And calm the warblers of the vocal grove

All but the wakeful Philomel. &mdash; Alone
She sat; and wailing from th' aereal bough
Mellifluous, pour'd her deeply plaintive moan,
The moan that thrills the dying ear of Woe.

Far in a dark wood's solitary maze,
Where the pine trembled o'er the murmuring rill,
Led soft, my rapt eye mark'd the streamy rays,
That glimmering tinged the wild o'er-arching hill.

At last, where Nature form'd a mossy seat
I stay'd, and eager drunk th' inchanting sound:
Calm Silence, hovering o'er the deep retreat,
Lull'd to the plaint the solemn waste around.

Then trilling ceased the dying note. &mdash; Awhile
The strain still languish'd on the listening ear;
Till Fancy kindling, with benignant smile
Waked her wild harp, and call'd the woods to hear.

"O YE, whom Nature's genial charms inspire,
(Thus spoke the Goddess of the thought sublime)
Who nobly ardent feel diviner fire,
Whose hope o'ershoots the lingering flight of Time!

"Ye noble Few!  whom not the splendid pride
Of wealth allures, nor Grandeur's tinsell'd plume;
Whose hearts to bleeding sympathy allied,
Can melt o'er Virtue's unlamented tomb:

"Ye, who thro' Modesty's involving veil
Can mark the features of a godlike mind,
Snatch Genius pining from the cottaged dale,
Or feeling wake to transports all refined:

"O come!  escaped from Folly's bustling train:
Not these have eyed bright Fancy's genial ray,
Nor felt sweet transport in each throbbing vein,
Nor died deep-pierced to Love's dissolving lay.

"Th' ingenuous blush that speaks the soul sincere,
The living ardour of the mind's keen eye,
On Pity's cheek the slow-descending tear,
And stealing from the heart the tender sigh,

"'Tis mine to give.  Though from the starry throne,
Whence Power high-raised the rolling world surveys,
Stoops not her ear to Woe's unheeded moan,
Nor Genius balks in her enlivening rays;

"Yet, where wild Solitude's resounding dome
Lies deep and silent in the woodland shade,
Sweet Peace with devious step delights to roam,
And soft-reclining rests her gentle head.

"And Thou, whose feet to this deserted bower
Have stray'd; if mild Benevolence is thine,
(To me thus smiling spoke the heavenly power)
If warm thou bow'st at Virtue's sacred shrine;

"If thy thrill'd heart with sympathetic woe
Hath bled (for man is destined to endure;)
If others anguish bade thine eyes o'erflow,
If prone to feel the grief thou can'st not cure;

"With me retire.  Lo!  to the clime remote
I lead, where yet to human step unknown,
The power who lifts to God th' aspiring thought,
Rapt Solitude hath rear'd her solemn throne.

"What scenes shall then thy wondering sight behold!
Yet know that toils, that perils go before:
The firm of mind, the resolute, the bold,
Brave the rude storm, and reach th' appointed shore."

She spoke.  Her airy wings expanded wide,
The wan ray trembling on the silver plume,
Shot where a hollow rock's high-arching side
Stood lone and silent as the desert tomb.

There sullen Darkness fix'd her dire abode:
Black clouds involving wrapt her gloomy cell:
While as her slow hand waved a Stygian rod,
Wail'd thro' th' impervious gulph the fiends of hell.

There pined pale Envy in the cavern dun,
There Time deep-furrowing plough'd the front of Care;
Despair with curses eyed the winking moon,
And Frenzy howling tore her tangled hair.

These, as the radiant Goddess flash'd along,
Shrunk from the ray that lighten'd o'er her frame:
Such rapid fate dissolves the insect throng,
When the black whirlwind rides the wings of Flame.

At last emerging from th' abyss of night,
Again pale Cynthia pour'd her silver beam,
Where bloom'd a lawn fair as the early light,
That first weak-glimmering tinged the glassy stream.

O'er its loose robe, all balmy as the dew
That bathes Aurora's dropping locks, were seen
The tribes profuse of each resplendent hue,
That glowing paints the rich enamell'd green.

There hung the violet its dejected head,
The lily languish'd to the sighing gale;
While daisies sprinkled o'er their velvet bed,
And painted cowslips smiled along the dale.

Sweet haunt of Quiet!  When thy search in vain
Hath roam'd the city vast, or distant hill,
Lull'd by lone Philomel's desponding strain,
Thought finds her sleeping near the purling rill.

Dim as the fleeting visions of the night,
A dark tower tottering closed th' extended view;
While round its spires, illumed with feeble light,
The flitting bat and boding raven flew.

Rent was the hanging arch, the domes o'erthrown;
Nor tread was heard along the desert pile,
Save when the troubled ghost with hollow moan
Strode slowly o'er the long-resounding isle.

One only cell withstood the waste of Time:
'Twas where a turret rear'd its moss-clad brow:
Gloomy it stood, in fading pomp sublime,
And shew'd the mouldering wrecks that frown'd below.

Here, on her hand her drooping head reclined,
Wrapt in deep musing sat the lonely Power;
Pensive she sat, and heard the howling wind
Die faintly murmuring round her ivy'd bower.

In graceful ringlets fell her amber hair;
Black as the raven's plumes her mantle flow'd;
No Cupids round her fann'd the sullen air,
Nor festive Echo chear'd her lone abode.

But the wild harp that to the blast complains,
Soothed with melodious plaint her raptured ear:
Deep, solemn, awful roll'd the varying strains,
Such strains as Seraphim with transport hear.

For these descending oft, a radiant throng,
The rapt Power bending from her ebon throne,
Sublime in glorious vision sail along
And talk of themes to mortal man unknown.

Her serious eye, as Fancy's form was seen,
A Placid smile illumed.  Serene she said,
"Why from the bowers of bliss, inchanting Queen,
Strays thy loved step to this sequester'd shade?

"And whence thy Follower? &mdash; To my haunt repair
Few, yet elate in Life's delightful prime,
But those who pale with grief, or whelm'd with care,
Have felt the cankering tooth of wasteful Time."

"Thine, (thus the Queen of every grace replied),
Thine is the tribe that wakes the warbling lyre;
Thy charms the Muse's sweetest song supplied,
Thy thought exalts her, and thy groves inspire.

"By me convey'd this inexperienced Guest
Attends: &mdash; To guide his future hours, display
The scenes where now with ease, with freedom blest,
Thy happy offspring share the climes of day.

"Shew where reclined beneath embowering shades
Thy sons, BRITANNIA!  strike the trembling string;
Safe where no storm the peaceful haunt invades,
The boundless forests echoing as they sing.

"I to the cliff that overhangs the main
Retire:  my hands a sylvan maze have wove,
Where Shakespear, pouring his unlabour'd strain,
Sees Nature listening with a parent's love."

She said, and vanish'd.  But her voice divine
Smiling serene the thoughtful Power obey'd;
Silent the left her solitary shrine,
And o'er the waste, a pathless journey, led.

Deep was the gloom, as thro' surrounding woods,
Thro' walks impervious to the noon-day blaze,
O'er rocks that tottering felt the torrent floods,
O'er lawns illumed by Cynthia's silver rays,

O'er wilds we trod, where Winter's freezing hand
Chills the bleak mountains with eternal show,
O'er climes where Famine wastes the barren land,
O'er caves that shake while Earthquakes rowl below.

To Night's remotest verge at last we came
When lo!  rejoicing as her veil withdrew,
Another region, yet unknown to fame,
A new horizon dazzling rush'd to view.

From the tall summit of an arching hill,
Wondering I saw the glorious scenes unfold;
Thro' groves of citron crept the amber rill,
Where flamed the yellow boughs with downy gold.

A garden here, in vernal beauty bright,
Shook musky fragrance on the scented gale:
There waved the brown wood on the darkening sight,
Or Zephyr fluttering skimm'd the lilied vale.

Now lost in wildness was the wandering eye,
Now pierced the shady bower's incumbent gloom;
Soothed as the joyous Spring stood blushing nigh,
Or rapt as Summer breathed her deepening bloom.

Each shade a Bard, with wreathing laurel crown'd,
Possess'd; and near the seats of Pleasure rose:
Luxuriant Beauty shower'd her growth around,
What copious growth Elysian lawns disclose.

Just where the hill (these happy mansions shown)
O'erlook'd the pendent trees that waved between;
On the fair borders of that temperate zone,
Tho' rude, yet graceful, smiled a rustic scene.

Rich, yet confused, the intermingling sprays,
Uncouthly gay, their simple flowers display'd
Nor here had Fashion plann'd the wildering maze,
Nor Art's soft touch th' entangling shrubs obey'd.

But o'er the whole majestic Nature strode,
Her form disdainful of the mimic hand:
The brightening Wilderness before her glow'd,
Behind gay Plenty clothed the broider'd land.

A little hamlet in the midst appear'd,
Where antique figures stood exposed to view;
Of rough materials was the structure rear'd,
And round its walls the clasping ivy grew.

Not far a laurel's spreading boughs were seen,
Beneath whose umbrage sat a careless Swain:
The Dryads tripping o'er the daisied green,
And bleating flocks confess'd his powerful strain.

Much sung the Swain of love, and much of care,
Much of th' imperious Wife, the Man forsworn;
Much of the Dotard tame, th' insidious Fair,
The plan projected, and the gilded horn:

How oft the Nymph her ancient mate beguiles;
Soothes when he storms, or chuckles as he leers;
When roused eludes him with superior wiles,
Or jealous, &mdash; bursts in thunder on his ears.

Thus pass'd his laughing hours in ease away,
Where still new hopes the restless mind employ;
Nor clouds dark-lowering quench the beams of day,
Nor Sorrow skulks beneath the smile of Joy.

"Lo!  there the Father of the British lyre,
Old Chaucer lives, (thus spoke the Power divine)
Awful, tho' rude.  The venerable Sire
Transported marks his long-descending line."

She ceased: &mdash; For near I mark'd a Fairy train,
Like clouds gay-gleaming mid th' aereal blue;
In floating radiance o'er th' illumined plain,
A glittering tribe, the light Assembly flew.

The mingling hues that tinge the flowery bow,
The dew that trembles to the spangling ray;
The tints that o'er the spreading tulip glow,
The topaz flaming to the orient ray;

Such blended dies their silky wings unfold:
Young Zephyr wanton'd o're the gilded plume;
Bright was the scene with azure, green, and gold,
And round the varied landskip breathed perfume.

Where Art with Nature's rich luxuriance strove,
Half-pruned, half-rambling rose the leafy sprays;
A Shepherd Swain, amid the gloomy grove,
Play'd wildly-sweet his simple roundelays.

Of hardy Knight he told, of Fairy Queen,
Of Lover wan by weeping brook reclined,
Of Wizard old that spread his nets unseen,
Of Damsel fair to wicked wight resign'd;

Of Una meek, by causeless woes oppress'd,
As o'er the howling waste she roam'd forlorn;
Yet Guilt no tenant of her gentle breast,
But her's the tear of tender Pity born.

Ah woe the while! &mdash; To Losel loose betray'd,
Not the torn tresses of her raven hair,
No pray'r avail'd the dear unhappy Maid,
Nor the deep groans of Anguish and Despair.

Meanwhile around him hung the shining throng,
So sweetly-various flow'd th' inchanting strain;
The Fay that bore his laurel wreath along
Was rapt, and stretch'd her eager arm in vain.

Not till the Swain's melodious plaint was o'er,
Ceased the soft, silent, sympathetic tear;
The Syrens warbling from the vocal shore,
Thrill'd with such melting notes th' enraptured ear.

But now a Garden, like that Eden fair,
Where first weak Eve the wily Foe beguiled,
Unbounded, floating to the balmy air,
In all the pride of glowing Beauty smiled.

On loaded trees the clustering fruitage hung,
Ambrosia dropping from the mellow bough;
The plumy race harmonious anthems sung,
Or sip'd the nectar'd rill that stream'd below.

What Summer views in all her gay domain,
What Fable's airy pencil ere bestow'd,
Whate'er Elysium's happy fields contain,
In rich profusion crown'd this blest abode.

Nor yet wild-scattering spread th' exhaustless store,
But Taste to range the copious growth combined;
Wild Fancy stoop'd to Reason's gentle lore,
And Nature's boon informing Art refined.

One tree o'er all sublime in grandeur flood
So towers on Lebanon's exalted brow
A Cedar old, and sees the rising wood
Around its venerable Parent grow.

Beneath its shade, where sigh'd the dying Gale,
Reposed an Inmate of th' ethereal skies;
With wavy radiance flamed his feather'd mail,
And flash'd keen lightning from his dazzling eyes.

His hand an apple held, delicious sight!
Not like the fruit that youthful Paris gave;
Smooth was the glossy rind, with vermeil bright,
Like Venus blushing from the silver wave;

Of power to cleanse the tainted heart from sin,
O'er the pure frame to bid corruption cease,
Tune the calm thoughts to harmony within,
And soothe the boiling passions into peace.

A Bard was near; and glittering by his side
The Child of magic song, the melting Lyre;
Whose frame with Music's sweetest breath supplied,
Wakes o'er the kindling soul celestial fire.

Awhile in converse high the Angel Guest
Held him; &mdash; then sweeping o're the sounding strings,
Such strains he pour'd, as mid the climes of rest
Thrill the high Audience when Urania sings.

As when an Hermit, whose sequester'd cave
Deep in the shade of pathless wilds is thrown,
Sees the dim Spectre from the gloomy grave
Arroused, and hears the more than mortal tone;

Or ardent marks some bright ethereal band,
That tell the wonders of the worlds above;
Now Earth obedient to the great Command
Arose; How Angels hymn the Source of love!

Awe, Hope, and Transport seize him as he hears,
Such Passions rose when first the Bard began,
Sung how th' Eternal form'd the rolling spheres,
Or stamp'd the breathing dust, and call'd it Man.

To Heav'n high-soaring burst th' exalted song.
Of impious deeds I heard, and dire alarms;
Two mighty hosts I saw, tremendous throng!
Tower in refulgent mail, and azure arms.

Radiant they trod in panoply divine:
Their Chiefs, dark-frowning in the van, afar
Like promontories moved: &mdash; the dreadful sign
Was given, and rush'd th' angelic tribes to war.

'Twas Thou, Omnipotent!  whose parent care
Then held each link of Nature's beauteous chain;
Else had yon worlds amid the fields of air
Been whirl'd, and Night resumed her dark domain.

How swell'd the soul, as with its shaggy store
Torn was the fix'd hill from the rocks below;
As each strong arm th' inverted mountain bore,
And hurl'd th' o'erwhelming ruin on the Foe!

Not long I gazed, when down the rending skies
The rushing chariot of Jehovah came:
I saw the wheels, instinct with living eyes,
Wrapt in the Lightning's broad and sheeted flame.

Black thunder roar'd around th' avenging God;
While on the Whirlwind's wing before Him driven,
The rebel crew beheld their dark abode,
Then roll'd wild-howling o'er the verge of Heaven.

Thus sung the Bard; and still to sight display'd,
Rose with his strain each vivid scene to view;
To thought so just was Fancy's powerful aid,
Her light so piercing, and her shades so true.

But sweeter lays now charm'd the wishing mind.
I turn'd; &mdash; and eager, as they pour'd along&mdash;
What Powers, I cried, what heavenly Powers combined,
Wind yon deep stream of soul-dissolving song?

Nought spoke the Goddess; but her arm upheld
Shew'd where a beetling cliff o'erlook'd the plain:
Bloom'd from its top each flower-enamell'd field,
And rowl'd behind the far-resounding main.

Th' aereal forest clothed its ragged side:
Here spread the myrtle bower's harmonious maze;
The torrent's voice in lulling murmurs died,
And Beauty's boundless waste o'erpower'd the gaze.

Of toil no trace th' untrodden wild retain'd;
But Fancy's hand the sheltering arch had wove,
Fairer than Poet eyed, or Lover feign'd
Of clime Hesperian, or Idalian grove.

For there, obsequious to her varying call,
The Fairy region at the magic sound,
Girt with the hanging wood, or mouldering wall,
Now bloom'd a Villa, or a Desart frown'd.

And airy tenants o're the dimpling stream
Hung loose; or high in aim, in effort bold,
Suck'd hues ethereal from the dazzling beam,
To tinge the violet's velvet coat with gold;

Or spoil'd the citron of its rich perfume,
Or caught the light drop in the liquid air;
Or from the wren's breast pick'd the little plume,
To braid the tresses of the Naiads hair.

O'er all bright Ariel shone.  His devious wing
Now, swept soft fragrance in the spicy gale;
Or fluttering from the dewy lip of Spring
Brush'd nectar'd balm, and shower'd it o'er the dale.

O'er the dim top a gloomy arbour bow'd,
The boughs dark-shadowing veil'd the vaulted blue;
But opening fair beneath, the vistoed wood
Gave the gay climes that radiant burst to view.

Here Shakespear sat in regal glory bright,
And mark'd spontaneous flowers around him blow,
With scenes still shifting soothed his raptured sight,
Or drunk the music of the lawns below.

Graceful he moved, and scann'd the waste of air,
As his strong arm th' avenging bolt could wield,
Or catch the Tempest by the ragged hair,
Or bid an Earthquake whelm the blasted field.

Young Fancy near her highest influence shed,
Her keen eye kindling flash'd the blaze of noon:
The peacock thus in glittering plumes array'd,
Sails, while each orient hue reflects a Sun.

Not distant far another Bard was seen,
(The place was varied, but their height the same)
Where heaved the wide deep's placid wave serene,
Oft slow, with melancholy step he came.

The Power of musing to his thoughtful mind
Had lent her eagle pinions.  O'er the main
He hung: &mdash; the Spirit of the hollow wind
Waked on his harp the long-lamenting strain.

Loose fell his hoary locks; the fanning air
Sigh'd thro' the venerable hairs; &mdash; his head
A crown adorn'd; &mdash; his swelling chest was bare;
His limbs the Warrior's rougher vesture clad.

No film o'ershadowing dimm'd his piercing sight,
Nor felt his vigorous form the waste of Time;
But tall and ardent as the sons of light,
O'er the rude beech he look'd, he trod sublime.

The Muse was near, who points beyond the sky;
Whose notes divine each meaner care controul,
Sail on the wings of Harmony, and high
To scenes all-glorious lift th' expanded soul.

O Goddess of the solemn mantle, hail!
Queen of the heart, who movest its thrilling strings,
Waft'st rapt attention on thy wondrous tale
Beyond the little range of mortal things!

As Ossian once, ah!  let thy genial ray
Me too illumine while to thought display'd
Flit the dim shapes that shun the eye of day,
And forms that swim thro' pale Oblivion's shade.

A Maid, yet fair in Beauty's vernal bloom,
Sat on the beech with listening ardour near;
Her eye, like dew-drops spangling thro' the gloom,
Dropt, as he sung, th' involuntary tear.

Yet then no grief had touch'd the throbbing breast:
Pure from its influence was that scene refined:
But joy's strong beam the kindling soul confess'd,
Such as alone inspires th' exalted mind.

Each Bard melodious pour'd th' alternate strain:
Rush'd the full tide of Shakespear's magic song,
From desert isles that hear the roaring main,
To climes where lightly dance th' aereal throng.

Now howl'd with shrieks of woe th' unbounded waste,
Or waved the brown wood's long-bewildering maze;
Or lower'd the blackening noon by spells o'ercast,
Or bloom'd the lawn, where sportful Fancy strays;

Or Ghosts indignant burst the marble tomb,
Or pined in silent woe the drooping Maid;
Or wail'd the Lover mid the blackening gloom
With trembling lips, and call'd on death for aid.

To thrill the Murderer's shuddering nerves, unveil'd
Thro' Night's stain'd shade the ghastly Phantom stood;
Mutter'd his livid lips, to sight reveal'd,
And on his rent throat hung the clotted blood.

Back starts the Tyrant at the threatening nod:
His loose teeth chatter, and his broad eyes glare:
The Furies o'er him shake their scorpion rod,
And Horror's grey band lifts his icy hair.

I saw where England's awful Sovereigns rose.
Gloomy they strode along the darken'd field;
This roll'd the battle o'er his prostrate foes,
That shook the burnish'd helm and gleaming shield.

Yet vain their boast, when at th' appointed hour
Fate wing'd the dart that lays the mighty low;
Vain was the downy couch, the roseate bower,
To seal in rest the weeping lids of Woe.

Nor themes sublime alone employ'd his thought,
But oft gay scenes th' unbended mind beguiled
Exulting Nature claim'd the finish'd draught,
And Care's grim front, and canker'd Envy smiled.

But deeper plain'd the Caledonian lyre:
Slow, wild, and solemn, wail'd the melting lays:
Of dying groans it sung, of combats dire,
And told the mournful tales of ancient days!

Of Ghosts dim-gliding on the Moon's wan beam,
Of feeble sounds that tell the Hero's doom,
Of Chiefs once famed, that o're his midnight dream
Lower dark, and point him to the lonely tomb.

He sung the narrow house with grass o'ergrown,
Where oft, as Night involves the dusky sphere,
The Spirit hovering o'er the moss-clad stone
Shrieks to the Hunter's pierced and startled ear.

I saw Balclutha's towers &mdash; No festive strain
Of Mirth loud-echoing shook the vaulted hall;
But there, vain hope!  to feed his clamorous train
The fearless fox o'erlook'd the hanging wall.

Around was Ruin, Silence, and Despair,
Bleak wastes, and hills with rifted pines o'erspread,
Th' enormous rock whose ragged front was bare,
And trees, that nodded o'er the mighty dead.

So bursts the blaze of human pride away:
Fame, Power, and Beauty sport one fleeting hour:
Each warm and bustling spends the busy day,
At night lies down, and slumbering wakes no more.

Such were his themes; &mdash; while on his cloud enshrined
Bold Fingal sat, in majesty serene;
High o'er his airy sword in state reclined,
Each thrilling note he felt and varying scene.

Oft seem'd the tear to dim his radiant eye,
His arm upraised oft shook a meteor shield;
From his rent heart now burst the pitying sigh,
Now flamed his look indignant o'er the field.

Led by the Goddess of the still retreat,
From the rude cliff I scann'd the region o'er;
Then mark'd, where temperate gales repress'd the heat,
One waving Villa stretch'd along the shore.

Crown'd with fair banks and intermingling flowers,
On painted beds, a variegated show,
The Graces lay; while round their citron bowers
Each blooming Season bade her offspring blow.

Three lovely Nymphs in sportive train combined
I saw.  The first in flowing robes was dress'd;
Her raven tresses floated on the wind,
And primrose wreaths adorn'd her swelling breast.

Warm was her cheek with Youth's inchanting bloom,
And shaped by Elegance her slender frame;
Her eyes young Beauty's sweetest smiles illume,
And from her lips celestial accents came.

The crocus clothed in gold, the scented thyme,
The daisy chequering o'er th' impearled ground,
Waked by the influence of that blissful clime,
Breathed as she moved their softening balm around.

In life's full prime was seen another Fair:
Light on a flowery couch her limbs were laid
Her bosom, loosen'd to the fanning air
Heaved soft, protected by the cooling shade.

The lawn that floating screen'd its charms from view,
Slow from each orb the sighing Gales remove;
And o'er a space, pure as th' ethereal blue,
Contending Cupids waft the breath of love.

Gay Nature near her richest garment wore,
Robed, as when first in fair embroidery clad
She moved, supplied from Heaven's exhaustless store,
And radiant shook her nectar-dropping head.

Then sung the morning stars; th' angelic Quire
Around exulting pour'd extatic lays;
Burst the full hymn melodious from the lyre,
And hosts rejoicing join'd the voice of praise.

Last came a Nymph of more commanding mien:
Her dimpled check with deep vermilion glow'd;
High was her front, exalted, yet serene,
And waved the ripen'd fields where'er she trod.

Young Cupids o'er her play'd on purple wing;
The Breeze obsequious wanton'd in her train,
As with each Consort knit in airy ring
She danced, and shower'd her treasures o'er the plain.

No Winter here deform'd the smiling year,
Nor blackening cloud obscured the genial ray;
But lays celestial warbled on the ear,
And the bright region felt eternal day.

A Castle's towering height o'erlook'd the whole,
And near, a Poet pour'd his mazy song;
The flame of Genius touch'd his kindling soul:
He sung the Seasons, as they swimm'd along.

Supine in easy indolence reclined,
His limbs lay listless by a purling stream;
The Muse unprompted warm'd his gentle mind,
Or wrapt his senses in transforming dream.

"Mark (thus he spoke, nor from his couch arose)
O Man!  how Nature paints the blushing flower;
How tinged by her the rich carnation blows,
For thee how kind she weaves the woodbine bower.

"Think'st thou the rolling year's harmonious round,
Yon worlds revolving on the boundless air,
Thy hills with woods, thy lawns with herbage crown'd,
That these proclaim no Power's superior care?

"Hark from the woodland yon, mellifluous strains!
The busy people of the vocal grove,
Soon as the grey dawn gilds th' ethereal plains,
Hail the great Source of Beauty, Light, and Love.

"Of thee reproachful swells th' enlivening note:
Shall He whose look sublime beholds the skies,
Shall He be mute? &mdash; Forbid it, Virtue, Thought!
'Tis Nature's general voice, Arise!  arise!

"Does stern Adversity's corroding hand
Thy warmth repress? &mdash; Its rage Eugenio knew:
His, rich in pasture, was the smiling land;
The harvest his, wide-waving on the view.

"But Wealth avail'd not in the darkening hour
On airy wings away the Vagrant fled:
The Breeze thus rifling spoils the wither'd flower,
And spreads its honours o'er their simple bed.

"His blameless Wife, the young Dione nigh,
Pined, the slow prey of life-consuming care;
Dim was the beam that sparkled in her eye,
And pale the cheek that bloom'd divinely fair.

"Two little infants prattling by her side,
From her soft bosom call'd the bursting groan;
Now pleased with food, and now the boon denied,
They kiss'd her gushing tears, or pour'd their own.

"Grief wrung the Father's heart. &mdash; Along the vale
All desolate he roam'd, by man unseen:
Oft to the waste he told his piteous tale,
Or wail'd dejected o're the pathless green.

"Yet still to Heaven resign'd, no voice severe
Accused the God who tames the stormy wave;
Who high enthroned o're man's inferior sphere,
At will resumes th' unmeasured gifts he gave.

His prayer at last th' Eternal Father heard,
Pitying He heard, and lent a guiding ray:
His clouded brow returning pleasure chear'd,
An Angel led him where a treasure lay.

"With joy elate, he eyed the shining ore;
To Heaven then ardent gave the hymn of praise,
Just, when its wrath dispers'd his little store,
Yet kind to chasten whom it meant to raise."

Thus sung the Friend of Man.  The feather'd Quire,
Still as the grove to Philomela's song,
Soon as low-murmuring ceased the vocal lyre,
Pour'd the full stream of swelling sounds along.

Still had I listen'd; &mdash; but the Power supreme
Check'd the rapt thought. &mdash; "Lo!  where yon woods are spread,
Where yon cool grot o'erlooks the floating stream,
Mark'st thou the Bard that haunts yon leafy shade?"

I looked: &mdash; but ah!  what transport thrill'd the soul,
When (his fair margin lined with hanging wood)
I saw proud Thames, his mazy current roll,
And on his banks another Windsor stood?

Yet not the stream which sees Augusta rise,
Her spires high-towering o'er thr sweeping tide;
A fairer prospect caught my wondering eyes,
And gentler scenes that balmy clime supplied.

Not here, where bloom'd whate'er the mind desires,
Throbb'd the pale Miser's sickening heart for gain;
Not thro' these groves, where every Muse inspires,
The Fleet rode thundering to the stormy main.

But near the grotto's deep and thoughtful gloom,
Reclined at ease the Bard of Windsor lay;
Behind, a smiling garden breathed perfume;
Rich was its robe, and sacred from decay.

The spiry Obelisk's monumental base
Still told the sighing heart Editha's name;
The Mount's dark summit crown'd with clustering sprays
Still bade his oaks preserve the Poet's fame.

An elm's high boughs that wanton'd in the wind
Screen'd him: &mdash; the wood with acclamation rung;
While o'er the stream on sapphire cars reclined,
The blue-eyed Nymphs lay listening as he sung.

Of Shepherds piping o'er th' enamell'd mead,
Th' unpractised Fair yet innocently coy;
Of poplars bending to the tuneful reed,
Of the steep torrent, and despairing boy;

Of Swains he told, untutor'd yet to guile,
Whole spotless minds scarce knew the taint of sin;
To joy alive, to Love's bewitching smile:
Around was peace, and pleasure all within.

But ah!  on earth can Pleasure e'er endure?
O Ye, who ardent search her secret cell,
Ere yet roll on the dark desponding hour,
How vain your boast let Eloisa tell!

Lo!  her wild step, abandon'd and alone,
Roams the pale cloister's desolated round;
Her tears, vain torrent!  waste the flinty stone,
And the long isles with Abelard resound.

Led by the taper's dim and flitting beam,
While fond Remembrance points the venom'd dart,
Swims the past hour in visionary dream;
It fades!  and Anguish stings the bleeding heart.

Nor yet to wake meek Pity's tender sigh,
To paint stern Rage, or inly-wasting Woe,
His only themes: &mdash; the philosophic eye
Serene explored the sources whence they flow.

Of Man he sung, as in th' ascending scale
Of being placed he seeks a dubious road,
With impious hand would draw the sacred veil,
That from the Creature screens th' informing God.

Himself unknown, his towering hope aspires,
Vain wish!  to know what Heaven's great Sire design'd;
Nor sees His Power in yon ethereal fires,
Nor marks His Wisdom, beaming in the mind.

Rough Passion tamed to Reason's strong controul,
The temperate calm of cool deciding thought;
These shew the God whose light illumes the soul,
These point the deep-laid plan by Wisdom wrought.

Let judgment then with steddy, hand preside;
'Tis hers to tame rude Ire's unlicensed groan:
Check each fell impulse of presumptuous Pride,
Nor, form'd by others, call their search thine own.

Look round: &mdash; 'Twas Instinct form'd the social chain:
Th' industrious ant, the mining mole behold:
This taught thee first to hoard the copious grain,
And that to dig the harrow'd earth for gold.

To join thy force in firm compacted band,
Where each assists, one power protecting all,
The Bees first taught by Nature's great command,
And round the close hive stretch'd the circling wall.

Deem'st thou, proud worm!  the fix'd decrees of Fate
For thee bid Joy awake, or Beauty shine?
The linnet sporting with his tuneful mate
Shares sweeter hope, and purer loves than thine.

Art thou the Lord of Nature's wide domains?
On nought beneath depends thy boasted crown?
Ere truth confirm the plea thy pride maintains,
&mdash;Go give the Goose her feather and her down.

Know Heaven's great system marks a general end:
Each gains of pleasure his proportion'd share;
These in the scale advance, and those descend,
Each boon still balanced by its weight of care.

All speak th' Eternal's wisdom, bounty, power;
Great in the means, impartial in the doom!
Theirs is the present inoffensive hour,
And thine the hope that points beyond the tomb.

Such was the moral lay; though bold, refined:
Clear, full, melodious was each swelling note:
Calm Reason's force, with plastic Fancy join'd,
Gave the ripe growth of strong and manly thought.

Still glow'd new prospects on my wondering gaze,
But distant now the glimmering scenes were view'd;
The tower scarce trembled thro' the noon-day blaze,
And the tall Forest touch'd the flaming cloud.

Yet still insatiate, the delighted eye
O'er each soft shade with pleasing wonder ran:
The Power whose rapt soul scans the boundless sky,
Indulged my hope, and gentle thus began.

"Amid yon woodland's deep and still retreat,
Yon haunts that breathe of solitude and love,
Bards yet unseen their tender tales repeat,
And melting music steals along the grove.

"Yon lawn thou seest, with rich inclosures crown'd;
Not rude, but rear'd in haste its fruits appear:
See, noxious weeds o'er-run the fertile ground,
And blight the promise of the smiling year.

"Yet far the worth that little fault o'erpays:
Spring robes the mead, and fragrance scents the air,
With golden fruitage gleam the bending sprays,
And blooms the verdant dale profusely fair.

"'Tis Dryden there, that sweeps the trembling strings.
Dim by yon spreading pine thou see'st him stand:
Hark!  the wild woods loud echoing as he sings!
The lyre resounding owns a Master's hand.

"From song to song, from theme to theme convey'd,
He thrills, exalts, transports, o'erwhelms the soul;
His lays with such persuasive ardour plead,
Such rapid lightning whirls him to the goal.

"Nor blush, great Bard, that in thy glorious flight
Thine eye o'erlook'd what meaner minds survey:
A Fly can mark what 'scapes an Eagles sight,
When shrined sublime amid the blaze of day.

"Light as the steed that bounds along the plain,
The heav'n-bred Genius darts to reach its aim:
Behind, the leaden, dull, dejected train
Creep on, and fearful start, but miss the game.

"Beyond him far, scarce thro' the opening wood
Thou mark'st yon mount that speaks the Master's skill;
Half-seen, it mixes with the azure flood
There reigns the sweet-tongued Bard of Cooper's Hill.

"So like yon stream, smooth, easy, clear, serene,
Strong, yet harmonious, swell th' instructive lays;
The tree that shades, the flower that paints the scene,
Each to the mind some moral truth conveys.

"In each young bud that decks the shaded vale,
Presumptuous Man!  thy fleeting life behold:
See it unfolding to the vernal gale!
Lo Summer tips its glittering leaves with gold!

"Like thine its florid prime, its early doom,
Its velvet robe, its gay resplendent dies;
But frosts untimely nip the withering bloom,
It droops; declines, and all its beauty flies.

"So flies thy youth, a vain deluding dream;
Vain, but when Virtue points to joy refined,
Pours thro' the gloom her bold enlivening beam,
And warms with future hope th' exulting mind.

"Such is his strain; while near a bubbling spring,
Screen'd by the mournful yew's projected shade,
Rapt Cowley listening hears the Poet sing,
And sighing lifts his melancholy head.

"Sweet Bard!  But form'd for solitude and ease,
Why toil'd thy step where storms and tempests rave?
Thine were the arts that soften, while they please;
Let others ride the black tumultuous wave.

"See, thro' the depth of yonder winding maze,
Where Waller, blest with Saccharissa's charms,
Now eyes her kindling with delighted gaze,
Or clasps the smiling Beauty in his arms.

"Let these awake thy feeling heart to love:
See o'er her neck the glossy locks descend:
Serene she moves, the Goddess of the grove,
Or sinks reclined on her protecting Friend.

"O blest!  whom Fancy from the bustling crew
Selects, and grants to raise th' inspiring song:
To these great Nature points each happier view,
To these her first, her highest cares belong.

"To touch the string that vibrates to the heart,
To mark each line more exquisitely fair,
To feel each nicer stroke of mimic Art,
The justest site, the most enlivening air,

"She gives &mdash; The favour'd charge to Me consign'd,
Then scans his Parent's work minutely o'er:
What joy then opens on the wondering mind!
How rapt, when Science spreads her treasured store!

"I rear the Stranger with a Parent's skill;
I give with warmth the conscious check to glow,
Curb each strong effort of the headlong will,
And thrill the breast with sympathetic woe.

"Oft at the still and silent hour of eve,
I meet him poring by the darksome cell,
Beneath whose arch, unknowing to deceive
Meek Hope, and dove-eyed Peace delight to dwell.

"There to his mind I point the paths of Truth;
There shew the faults of each uncertain plan,
Raze the light follies of presumptuous youth,
And in his bosom plant the love of man.

"For know, where'er the Muses deign to smile,
Their softest balm the milder Passions shower;
Warm is th' ingenuous wish, untouch'd by guile,
The soul all gentle, feeling, tender, pure.

"Thus form'd to Virtue, as inspired to sing,
When from the courts of bright and boundless day
They come, &mdash; these lawns that breathe perpetual Spring,
These bowers of Pleasure wake th' unprompted lay."

Here ceased the Power: &mdash; but to th' enraptured ear.
Such notes her soft persuasive voice convey'd,
As to the Saint some whispering Angels bear.&mdash;
I paused, and thus in fainter accents said:

"Ah!  grant me, Goddess, in this calm retreat,
Far from the haunt of busy man, to roam:
Ah!  grant to Life's weak bark, by tempests beat,
So blest a refuge, so secure an home.

"To search, to mark, to seize the glittering spoil,
Let these the Miser's low-born thought employ:
But say, what prize rewards the Muse's toil?
Yields her superior aim th' expected joy?

"Ah no!  Pale Envy's green and baleful eye
Blights the rich wreath around her temples twined;
Or Want forbids her moulted wings to fly,
Or Care's bleak mildews damp th' aspiring mind.

"Unfit to soothe mean Pride's presumptuous scheme,
Untaught soft Flattery's smooth and guileful art;
On Guilt's dark shrine to pour the Muse's beam,
Or mimic Gladness with a bursting heart;

"To check th' indignant glance, when wanton Power,
Throned on the mouldering wrecks she joys to raise,
Rifles desponding Virtues little store,
Or pines when Truth confers th' impartial praise:

"These arts unknown, ah!  in the peaceful grot,
Where sleeps meek Innocence, a blameless guest,
Calm let me sit, from life's vain scenes remote,
And weary press the downy couch of Rest."

With pity trembling o'er her placid mien,
With looks that bade each meaner care subside,
Indulgent near me smiled the lonely Queen,
And lenient thus with soothing voice replied.

"Then would'st thou quit the post assign'd by Heaven,
To spend thy years in listless ease away?
Marks not thy thought, by lawless frenzy driven,
Truth's form divine, and judgment's guiding ray?

"Not thus the train who haunt these blissful bowers:
Like thee on Life's tumultuous ocean cast,
They broke the billows with collected powers,
Look'd to the future, nor deplored the past.

"Was Virtue's prize an unsubstantial name,
Not then had Hope impatient eyed the goal;
Nor Heaven with strength had steel'd the manly frame,
Nor placed the lamp of Reason in the soul.

"'Tis Man's, ere yet th' important end is gain'd,
His post to guard, to strengthen, to defend:
Wretch, deem'd by Wisdom for thyself ordain'd,
Know'st thou the ties of Brother or of Friend?

"Though born to bear, 'tis, not thy task alone:
See, even thy Foe participates the care:
Pale in thy lowering fate he marks his own.
Thus all combine to soothe, and one to share.

"As thus thy sorrow claims another's aid,
Thy daring deed another's smile repays;
Tell, when th' embattled legion stands display'd,
Will he who storms the ranks disdain the praise?

"Whence is Ambition's bold and noble aim?
Why leaps th' impassion'd breast at Glory's call?
Why fluttering pants the beating heart for fame,
If joy, to one confined, regards not all?

"Thus All connected form the social band:
With Nature's birth th' important league began:
Who breaks its law disclaims th' Almighty hand,
That world to world conjoin'd, and Man to Man.

"Yet rush not headlong to the worse extreme;
Nor form'd for life, be Solitude unsought:
Mine is the gentle, yet the piercing beam,
That opes the buds of slow progressive thought.

"When Passion shoots her lightning from the eye,
I curb the Fury in her wild career;
Or, as the thrill'd heart heaves the pitying sigh,
Bid Reason whisper to the listening ear.

"She, meek-eyed Queen, to calm th' internal war,
Serenely mild, assumes her awful throne:
O'erawed, th' inferior Powers attend her bar;
Even Rage reluctant checks his bursting groan.

"Chain'd at her foot impetuous Frenzy lies,
Fell Envy gnaws her rankling lips in vain;
Hate from her grasp unlocks th' arrested prize,
And Rancour muttering churns the galling rein.

"When Night o'ershadowing lulls the world to rest,
Oft to my cell her graceful steps are borne;
There, like the orient star that gilds the east,
She pours the soft effusive rays of morn.

"Her step pursue thro' Life's perplexing road,
Cool'd, when the calls each murmuring plaint to cease:
Her voice exalts th' illumined soul to God;
She walks with Nature, and her paths are peace.

"Thus taught, when Earth reclaims its kindred clay,
When Death's long sleep dissolves thy mortal frame;
Here may'st thou rest, while some melodious lay
In tuneful notes consigns thy praise to fame:

"That not by Envy stain'd, nor duped by Pride,
That not o'erpower'd by Fancy's dazzling beam;
Still prone to soften where thou could'st not hide,
Calm thought o'erlook'd, as Nature sketch'd thy theme."

She said, and gradual from the sight withdrew:
Weak as the murmur of the dying gale,
Stole her last breath, while on th' unbended view
Rush'd the dark wood, and solitary dale.
