Queen of the starry train!  whose silver ray
Glads the dark bosom of the murky night!
Of if thou lov'st, remote from realms of day,
In gloomy Tartarus to quench thy light,
Ycleped Proserpina!  where Pluto reigns
O'er damned ghosts, by sister-furies shent;
Or rather, Goddess of the woodland plains,
That chear'st thy hounds with bow for ever bent!
Assist my verse:  the virgin theme is thine;
Certes to virgin theme thou deignst to incline.

And thou, O Goddess!  whom, in days of yore,
Pledge of the monarch's unresisted love,
To hell's grim king the babbling echo bore,
Deep in the centre of her darkest grove,
Come, Scandal!  come!  with nod, with wink, or smile,
With half-heard whisper in the listening ear;
Come, round-encircled with thy cobweb-guile
Of friendly-seeming doubt, or seeming fear:
Lo!  Hyson's talk-inspiring fume ascends!
Lo!  to the grateful fume the well-pleas'd Goddess bends!

Assist me thou!  for certes thou hast seen,
When all excluded was the eye profane,
In gaping circle ranged when maidens been,
And each alternate tongue proclaim'd thy reign.
Of her I sing, who, next the sacred vase,
Poured to her friends the warm libation round;
And, &mdash; tell it, Scandal, to one maiden's praise,&mdash;
Her bard devoid of flattery was found:
No glozing tale, I ween, my verse bestows,
To glozing tale, I ween, tho' maids are seldom foes.

Tho' envious Time had drawn his lines of grey
Thro' the brown locks that o'er her forehead rose,
Yet moot it were, I wis, for me to say,
If miss or mistress were the stile she chose.
Ah me!  how lose we days in Fancy's dream!
Besure in dulcet guise her years had past;
Scarce fifty seem'd they in the maiden's deem,
Yet sickerly the sixtieth was her last:
Nathless in secret wou'd she sigh and say,
Time been a subtle thief that steals our youth away!

No gorgeous dress, I ween, she loved to wear,
Tho' whilom was her youth to shew inclin'd;
With former trappings, now her humbler care,
Her windows curtain'd, or her sofas lin'd
And boastful oft she shew'd the pattern rare,
Which erst her pencil for her needle drew,
Then glanc'd a censure on the modern fair,
Whose ill-spent moments no such labour knew,
Who pass'd the night at revel, rout, or play,
And doz'd the precious hours of chearful dawn away.

And oft, disdainful of the tinsel geer,
She mark'd, as well beseem'd, with honest rage,
What time her sister-censors sate to hear,
The gawdy trappings of the thoughtless age:
And much she blam'd the carriage vain and light,
The tete that towers aloft with borrow'd hair,
And O!  profane!  to catch the wanton sight,
The cross that dangles on the bosom bare:
Then told of better days, when kerchiefs clean,
And modest ruffs conceal'd what never man had seen.

Nor less the moral pravity she wail'd,
That spread infectious, o'er the yielding times:
Where slept the law, where blinded justice fail'd,
And fashion sanctify'd her fav'rite crimes!
Alas to see!  Religion's power was fled,
Vice walked in triumph o'er a guilty land!
Unblushing matrons stain'd the nuptial bed,
And frequent murther bar'd his purple hand!
And cooth was she, with fearful note I ween,
To mark the judging power that worketh all unseen.

This is the cause, if right aredes the maid,
Why lags the spring from Winters chilly rear,
And damp-winged Eurus, in his fogs arrayed,
Taints the young verdure of the genial year;
Nor now, as she was wont, the morn of May
Leads the soft zephyr o'er the dewy plain;
But summer suns emit a feebler ray,
And withering fogs usurp the Lion's reign.
Far other days her youthful sports had seen!
Far other yellow fields!  far other meadows green!

And oft, as meeting flints engender flame,
Wisdom she sought in Reason's listed field;
Warm in her favourite cause, the fearless dame
Maintained the post of doubt, and scorned to yield.
Dian!  by thee (if maiden powers above
Suggest resolve to maiden minds below)
Alike inspired in argument and love,
Her tongue pronounced the never-yielding No.
Nor would she grant, till Reason well should scan,
By woman aught opin'd, or aught opin'd by man.

Not like the wight, in Dido's festive hall,
Clepy'd Aeneas, when the tale of woe
Rehearsing direful deeds, and Troia's fall,
Perforce constrained the briny tear to flow;
This patient maid, as certes seemeth meet,
From pains agone a present pleasure drew;
And oft right quaintly would the tale repeat
To other wights, who ne'er that pleasure knew,
Of stitch, or cramp, or tooth-ache's burning pain,
Of night-mare murdering sleep, or corns foreboding rain.

Yet much the while I laud her honest skill,
She shew'd the poison, and the cure she gave;
So, have I heard, the venomed serpents kill,
Whose heads afford the precious stone to save.
For much of healing herbs the maiden knew,
And culled her simples for their balmy juice,
From plains, where all unnoticed else they grew,
And pined unconscious of a nobler use.
Her books of cookery taught the healing lore
To cure the countless ills their sauces caused before.

Ne yet to her the herald's art unknown,
Tho' all unconn'd the shield-emblazoned page;
Ne better traced their own sepulchral stone,
The ancestry of many a former age;
And soothly would she mark the rightful line
That held of ancient names the chiefest place,
And where the branches part, and where they join,
With felice art, I ween, the dame would trace;
And oft her proper kindred would explore,
And many a cousin hailed, that knew his tribe no more.

Tho' ne'er from her embrace had children sprung,
Yet alien imps with kindness would she greet,
And oft with pleasure heard the lisping tongue,
And gave the promised meed of candied sweet;
And oft the tale of wonderment she told,
Of Fayes, that gamboled o'er the circly ground,
And birds, that taught the moral lore of old,
Then strewed the snowy comfits all around;
Thilk would she see them glean with looks of grace,
And stroked the flaxen pole, and blessed the smiling face!

A favourite parrot was she wont to tend,
More blessed than aught created male beside;
And oft he perched upon her lily hand,
And kissed the lips, to man, alas!  denied;
And oft his prattle would she teach the bird,
He sloped his glossy neck, and seemed to hear;
But ah!  the while from passing boys he heard
The phrase unseemly for a maiden's ear:
Shame on the filthy rogue!  the maiden cried;
Shame on the filthy rogue!  the mimic bird replied.

Woe to the maid!  a maid, alas!  no more,
Who passed the line untainted virtue draws.
Thee, sacred Virtue!  did the dame adore,
The watchful guardian of thy strictest laws!
Certes no pity thrilled her bosom pure,
(Or justice bade that pity to forego,)
For her whom Pleasure's syren strains allure
To drink the poisoned cup of shame and woe.
And all too light she held that woe and shame,
And called her many a wretch, and many a worser name.

And well I ween, right critique was the dame,
To note defect in beauty's purest grace,
Nor could the age produce a boasted name
That 'scaped remark on person or on face:
Yet, sooth to say, her praise with better will
Foreran the harsh decree her justice gave;
What pity 'twere one little word should kill,
When half her sentence meant before to save!
Close in the rear the environs but appeared,
And blasted all the sweets her milder breath had reared.

And fondly oft the tale of youth recalled
(Nor much of past delights her memory lost,)
Of hearts that whilom had her eyes enthralled;&mdash;
Relentless she, of cruelty to boast!
And shew'd on gilded leaves impassioned rhymes,
(To love I wis the Muse was ever kind,)
Thilk would the love-sick youths of former times
Sigh to the sighing of the summer's wind!
And all, forsooth, they told, the piteous gale
Ceased at the sound to blow, and Echo learnt the tale.

Then would their fancies o'er the garden stray,
And mark the tints of every flower that blows,
Compared with her, if soothly marked the lay,
The lily lost its white, its blush the rose.
Then would they tell of Cupid's killing dart,
That glanced, O treacherous softness!  from her eyes,
And paint the pang that tears the bleeding heart,
When Chloe frowns, alas!  and Damon dies.
But now of Chloe's frowns no bards complain;
Certes from known repulse they ceased the bootless strain!

Ah!  glossing bards, ye paint the rose's hue,
The blooming lily with the rose ye twine;&mdash;
Ne'er did your smooth-set sonnets warble too
That lilies wither, and that roses pine!
My honest verse, (ye gentle virgins hear,
O'er your smooth cheeks when Hebe's dimples play,)
Though fearful, whispers in the youthful ear,
That kingdoms, states, and &mdash; dimples &mdash; must decay!
Ah!  thoughtless youth the harsher truth denies,
Nor beauty mortal thinks, alas!  till beauty dies.
