In Phoebus' region while some bards there be
That sing of battles, and the trumpets roar;
Yet these, I ween, more pow'rful bards than me,
Above my ken, on eagle pinions soar!
Haply a scene of meaner view to scan,
Beneath their laurel'd praise my verse may give;
To trace the features of unnotic'd man,
Deeds else forgotten in the verse may live!
Her lore, mayhap, instructive sense may teach
From deeds of humbler growth within my lowly reach.

A wight there was, who single and alone
Had crept from vigorous youth to waning age,
Nor e'er was worth, no e'er was beauty known,
His heart to captive, or this thought engage:
Some feeble joyaunce, tho' his conscious mind
Might female worth or beauty give to wear,
Yet to the nobler sex he held confin'd
The genuine graces of the soul sincere;
And well cou'd shew with saw or proverb quaint,
All semblance woman's soul, and all her beauty paint.

In plain attire this wight apparel'd was,
(For much he conn'd of frugal lore and knew)
Nor till some day of larger note might cause,
From iron-bound chest his better garb he drew:
But when the Sabbath-day might challenge more,
Or feast, or birth-day, shou'd it chance to be,
A glossy suit devoid of stain he wore,
And gold his buttons glanc'd so fair to see;
Gold clasp'd his shone, by maiden brush'd so sheen,
And his rough beard he shav'd, and donn'd his linen clean.

But in his common garb a coat he wore,
A faithful coat that long its lord had known,
That once was black, but now was black no more,
Atting'd by various colours not its own:
All from his nostrils was the front imbrown'd,
And down the back ran many a greasy line;
While, here and there, his social moments own'd
The generous signet of the purple wine.
Brown o'er the bent of eld his wig appear'd,
Like fox's trailing tail by hunters sore affeir'd.

Only one maid he had, like turtle true,
But not like turtle gentle, soft, and kind;
For many a time her tongue bewray'd the shrew,
And in meet words unpack'd her peevish mind:
Ne form'd was she to raise the soft desire
That stirs the tingling blood in youthful vein,
Ne form'd was she to light the tender fire,
By many a bard is sung in many a strain!
Hook'd was her nose, and countless wrinkles told
What no man durst, I ween, that she was old.

When the clock told the wonted hour was come
When from his nightly cups the wight withdrew,
Right patient wou'd she watch his wending home,
His feet she heard, and soon the bolt she drew.
If long his time was past, and leaden sleep
O'er her tir'd eye-lids gan his reign to stretch,
Oft would she curse that men such hours shou'd keep,
And many a saw 'gainst drunkenness wou'd preach;
Haply if potent gin had arm'd her tongue,
All on the reeling wight a thund'ring peal she wrung.

For tho' the blooming queen of Cyprus' isle
O'er her cold bosom long had ceas'd to reign;
On that cold bosom still cou'd Bacchus smile,
Such beverage to won if Bacchus deign;
For wine she priz'd not much, for stronger drink
Its med'cine oft a cholic-pain will call,
And for the med'cine's sake, might envy think,
Oft wou'd a cholic-pain her bowls enthrall;
Yet much the proffer did she loath, and say
No dram might maiden taste, and often answer'd nay.

So as in single animals he joy'd,
One cat, and eke one dog, his bounty fed,
The first the late-devouring mice destroy'd,
Thieves heard the last, and from his threshold fled;
All in the sun-beam bask'd the lazy cat,
Her motled length in couchant posture laid;
One, one accustom'd chair while Pompey sat,
And loud he bark'd shou'd Puss his right invade.
The human pair oft mark'd them as they lay,
And haply sometimes thought like cat and dog were they.

A room he had that fac'd the southern ray,
Where oft he walk'd to set his thoughts in tune;
Pensive he pac'd its length an hour or tway
All to the music of his creeking shoon:
And at the end a darkling closet stood,
Where books he kept of old research and new,
In seemly order rang'd on shelves of wood,
And rusty nails and phials not a few:
Thilk place a wooden box beseemeth well,
And papers squar'd and trimm'd for use unmeet to tell.

For still in form he plac'd his chief delight,
Nor lightly broke his old accustom'd rule,
And much uncourteous wou'd he hold the wight
That e'er displac'd a table, chair, or stool:
And oft in meet array their ranks he plac'd,
And oft with careful eye their ranks review'd;
For novel forms, tho' much these forms had grac'd,
Himself and maiden-minister eschew'd:
One path he trod, nor ever wou'd decline
A hair's unmeasur'd breadth from off the even line.

A club select there was, where various talk
On various chapters pass'd the ling'ring hour,
And thither oft he bent his evening walk,
And warm'd to mirth by wine's enlivening pow'r.
And oft on politics the preachments ran
If a pipe lent its thought-begetting fume,
And oft important matters wou'd they scan,
And deep in council fix a nation's doom!
And oft they chuckl'd loud at jest or jeer,
Or bawdy tale the most, thilk much they lov'd to hear.

For men like him they were, of like comfort,
Thilk men the honest muse must needs condemn,
Who made of women's wiles their wanton sport,
And bless'd their stars that kept the curse from them:
No honest love they knew, no melting smile
That shoots the transports to the throbbing heart!
Thilk knew they not but in a harlot's guile
Lascivious smiling thro' the mask of art:
And so of women deem'd they as they knew,
And from a demon's traits an angel's picture drew.

But most abhorr'd they Hymenial rites,
And boasted oft the freedom of their fate;
Nor veil'd, as they opin'd, its best delyte;
Those ills to balance that on wedlock wait:
And often wou'd they tell of hen-peck'd fool
Snubb'd by the hard behest of four-ey'd dame,
And vow'd no tongue-arm'd woman's freakish rule
Their mirth should quail, or damp their generous flame:
Then pledg'd their hands, and toss'd their bumpers o'er,
And lo!  Bacchus!  sung, and own'd no other pow'r.

If e'er a doubt of softer kind arose
Within some breast of less obdurate frame,
Lo!  where its hideous form a phantom shows
Full in his view, and cuckold is its name.
Him scorn attend'd with a glance askew,
And scorpion-shame for delicts not his own,
Her painted bubbles with suspicion blew,
And vex'd the region round the Cupid's throne:
"Far be from us, they cry'd, the treach'rous bane,
Far be the dimply guile, and far the flow'ry chain."
