Ere yet the dawn its earliest glimpses shed,
Or darkness yielded up her gloomy reign,
The Fiend withdrew, and strait the Vision fled.
It fled, but left its traces on the brain;
The Fiend withdrew but to return again:
Strait he returns, and led the Mystick bands
With frantick noise, a wild disorder'd train;
Some tost in air aloft their flaming brands,
Some howl'd, some clang'd aloud the cymbals in their hands.

In gorgeous robes the Heirophant before
Precedes the secrets of the Mystic Chest,
And in his hand a wreath of roses bore:
A Novice follow'd in a linen vest,
Staring with terror:  in a crowd the rest
Confus'dly brought up the tumultuous rear.
Females like males, and males like females drest
Promiscuous mix'd; their aspects scowl'd severe,
And not a smile throughout the joyless scene to chear.

As the procession took its ready way
To where two fountains fed the running stream,
They pass'd the place where sad Elfenor lay;
His mind still labouring with the dreadful dream.
Their haggard looks, the torches' smoaky gleam,
Their howlings, mingled with the bellowing sounds
Of metals, made, or This illusion seem,
Or all before as truth.  Him on the ground
The Hierophant beheld, and thus accosts him sound:

"What wretch art thou, forsaken and forlorn,
Groveling in dust, and sunk in depths of woe?"
"A wretch (he answers) ever doom'd to mourn,
And seek for peace, which he must never know:
Not e'en Melampus can the balsam show
To heal my griefs; some hope indeed was given.
Too weak a cordial does his art bestow!
E'en now the Thunderer aims his vengeful levin:
O hide me, snatch me, save me from the wrath of Heaven!"

"Well art thou met, and happy be the event
(Eumolpus cried!); Thee Venus self invites.
In vain you sought Melampus' leafy tent,
His simple, plain, and ineffectual rites:
Thou must be born again, to all delights
Dead, in Trophonius' secret deep abyss;
There Ilithyia thy new-birth excites;
Then, perfect rais'd, the Goddess with a kiss
Shall clasp her new-born Son, and crown with endless bliss."

The Elf returns, "For Love no Object I,
Deform'd with crimes, and foul with many a stain!"
"There ground thy hopes:  (Eumolpus made reply.)
To claim by merit were presumption vain.
Love makes the charms it doats on.  View this train;
Adulterers, Robbers, Murderers once were These:
Venus restores their innocence again;
If still they err, their very Errors please.
As Justice sees no worth, no blemish Fondness sees.

"Long had this Youth Thessalia's Mountains rang'd,
Indulging every vice, a brute complete;
Into an ass that crops the thistle chang'd.
He sought our rites, the sacred roses eat;
Oft dropp'd his tail, dispart his horny feet,
Lucius appear'd from his vile form releas'd.
Injoin'd ten days of abstinence to wait,
He drank the Oblivious Spring, whose magick taste
The black-mark'd register of his past life effac'd.

"Then to Trophonius' den we led the Youth.
What there he saw, himself alone can tell.
But to revive the images of truth,
And call to mind whate'er him there befel,
He now returns to drink of Memory's well,
Fast by the fountain of Oblivion."
The Elf attends to hear the wondrous spell.
When Lucius drank, they placed him on a stone,
On which whoever sate, to laugh was never known.

Mute stood the bands, when he prepar'd to speak:
His heaving bosom swells, sighs following sighs
Prelude his words, which frequent pauses break;
Tremble his lips, round roll his full-orb'd eyes,
Till loud the accents burst in extasies.
So on the sounding beach the curling breeze
Wave after wave impells, which swelling rise,
And gathering into mountains by degrees
Break foaming o'er the rocks, and thunder through the seas.

"Hence, ye Profane! &mdash; The rest in silence hear,
While I disclose the Secrets of the night:
If that be night, which brighter planets chear,
Which other Suns adorn with purer light;
While all Elysium's splendors rush to sight.
Still rap'd to other worlds I seem to be;
Still lost amidst ineffable delight.
Happy!  above his fellows happy he,
Vouchsaf'd those oracles to hear, those visions see!

"But hard to flesh to pass the dreadful bound
That separates frailty from the perfect state:
I sunk, whirl'd dizzy down a dark profound;
This upper world's insufferable weight
Crush'd my distracted brain; a pain too great
For sense to bear:  foul vapours round me flow,
And hissing serpents threaten instant fate.
A gulph still deeper op'd its jaws below,
With tortur'd Souls in flames, and scenes of nameless woe.

"Then shook the caverns round, the darkness fled;
Through the cleft vault unusual day broke in:
Venus, in brightness clad, appear'd, and said,
'Here end thy woes, new scenes of life begin,
To me espous'd, the many-titled Queen.
By various names in various regions known,
Ceres, and Hecate, and Proserpin;
The Memphians, Isis, Cyprians, Venus own;
Though various, yet the same; The Universal One.

"'My genial warmth and vital influence
Heat, Life and Joy to worlds on worlds convey,
Parent of Nature, Queen of Elements!
While other reptiles sink in mire and clay,
Thou art reserv'd for Me, distinguish'd Fay!
My Heaven, my glories, and myself are Thine.
Here then, diffus'd in bliss, thyself embey;
Thy centre with the Eternal Centre join,
In Venus all engulph'd, and plung'd in Love Divine.

"'How worthless Learning!  Birth how vain!  and Gold!
These once were Thine, and Thou wert once a beast.
Give all thy future days to me enroll'd
Among the Votaries of the sacred chest.'&mdash;
But hark!  I hear the sound of feet unblest!
And the last lingering damps of night appear:
The purple dawn begins to break the East.
I must not open to the unhallow'd ear
Truths not permitted Me to tell, or Thou to hear."

They saw, and startled at Melampus' sight;
Who early sought to bring Elfenor aid.
With stern regards he cried, "Hence, Sons of Night!
Dare you these consecrated oaks invade?
Of open day, and public eyes afraid
You steal a shelter here, and prowl for prey.
But see the Morning on the Mountains spread!
To dens and caverns, Reptiles, creep away,
Nor with your shameless Orgies stain the face of day."

"Ask, and let yon approaching Sun declare
(The Mystick Chief replied) the impious toil
His beaming eye beholds in peace and war;
Proud Power's oppression, abject Slavery's guile,
Might's iron gripe, and Art's insidious smile.
Then boast of light; then boast that Virtue weeps,
And Vice triumphant wantons in the Spoil.
When guilty Care, fatigued with mischief, sleeps,
Then fearless Innocence her quiet vigil keeps."

"The day for useful labors Heaven design'd,
(Melampus answer'd) and the night for rest:
Alternate blessings to the Elfin kind.
He, each glad morn, and weary eve, be blest,
Who gave the day for use, the night for rest!
But Elves corrupt these blessings; some the light
Abuse with wrongs:  a more pernicious pest
Waste all the useless day, and tire the night
With impious zeal inflam'd, and many a wanton rite."

"The charge implied by thy calumnious tongue
(Eumolpus cries) calm patience shall refell:
You answer as you may this willful wrong.
I know my duty and the place too well
Licentious words with violence to repell.
Anger and Arms must not invade the Grove:
No Warriour here presumes his foe to quell:
None in these shades but peaceful Votaries move;
Or Youths and Maidens meet, and all their talk is Love.

"But wherefore idly waste I time with Thee,
By Heaven rejected, made of vulgar dust,
The rubbish of the World?  by fate's decree
Doom'd here to err, and erring to be curst:
Whose virtues are offences, and disgust
Heaven's alienated mind.  My bands, retire
From speech profane, nor his false glosses trust:
These cannot err; for These the Gods inspire.
Come, thou distress'd Youth, and join our sacred choir."

"Think not (Melampus cries) by flight to elude
The charge I meant:  disclose that secret chest;
If Good be there, communicate the Good;
If shameful symbols, be the shame confest,
And Thou and Thine alike that shame detest.
Be not asham'd to mend; 'tis wisdom true.
In this pure stream be purer life profest;
Yon Altar let the victim's blood imbrue,
Acknowledging thy life for thy offences due."

"Why doest thou censure what thou hast not seen,
(Returns the Chief) or seeing doest not know,
The mystic lessons which those Symbols mean?
'Tis ignorance only is to truth a foe."
"To thy foul chest and fouler conscience go,
(Melampus cries), to them I make appeal:
What do they hide, but what you blush to show?
The key can soon my charge, if false, revele:
The heart proclaims the guilt it labours to conceal.

"These thy Associates next, by thee misled,
The conscious sharers of thy foul offence,
I summon to attest the truth I've said:
If haply Heaven will quicken their dead sense
To feel the weight of guilt, and tremble thence
At wrath omnipotent. &mdash; If such there be,
Haste, seize the profer'd Mercy; here commence
Well grounded hopes; plunge in this stream with me,
And rise renew'd to life, from guilt and vengeance free."

Eumolpus waves his signal for retreat.
In wild obedience strait the bands begin
With jarring noise their instruments to beat,
While groans and howlings fill the horrid din.
Three staid behind; each wore an heifer's skin,
Whose long tails sweeping from their helmets wave.
Tears bursting spake the deep remorse within.
Then falling at Melampus' feet, they crave
His timely aid to help, and from destruction save.

Their leathern breasts they strike, their hands they wring,
And cry, "We're Sinners of uncommon size:
Females you see, and daughters to a King;
Seduced by yon base guide in this disguise
To serve the filthy purposes of vice.
Yet, spite of crimes too black to utter forth,
We mated with the Empress of the skies:
Taught to believe ourselves of highest worth.
O impious pride in worms!  to vile to crawl on earth."

Thus, weeping, fair Iphianassa spoke:
Lysippe adds, "In idless all the day,
Averse from toil, disdainful of the yoke,
Our useless lives inactive roll'd away."
"Inactive!  (said Ipponoe) Happy They
Whose lives, though idly, yet are guiltless spent!
But, wanton as in fields the heifers play,
Twixt holy fervors, and loose languishment,
We low'd to every Youth, with lewdness foul besprent."

From an adjoining thicket, where the flood
Veil'd its chaste spring, with lustral hyssop crown'd,
Nais, who in a grotto there abode,
Forth issued with her Nymphs attending round.
They sung the Elfin race by waters drown'd,
At once the world's lustration, and its grave.
Then pour'd their copious offering on the ground
From their full urns, and, shouting, honor gave
To Heaven, dreadful in wrath, yet merciful to save.

How from the fluid mass, Archiroe taught,
This beauteous frame of things first rose to sight;
When through the emerging air meteorous shot
The rude faint glimpses of the new-born Light:
How Ocean fled, shook with unusual fright,
When the huge hills heav'd up their island-heads
Above his waves:  while, wondering at their flight,
Birds sport in air; the scaly herd o'erspreads
The Seas; beasts spring to life, and gambol o'er the meads.

Next, weeping Mytoessa 'gan to sing
The guilt of thankless Elves in mournful strain:
How from their inmost depths Heaven's angry King
To vengeance led the imprison'd waves again,
And from above sluic'd down the sheets of rain.
High o'er the mountain tops the billows rise,
Till neither Elves, nor works of Elves, remain.
Wild Seas obey the Monarch of the skies;
Elf, puisney Elf alone, disdains his will, and dies.

Then Hagno, with a vial in her hand,
(Pure as the fountain-stream she in it bore)
Sings just Deucalion, by Divine command
Sav'd from the wreck, and destin'd to restore
The Elfin race, with promise that no more
The waters should destroy them.  On spread wings
Iris proclaims it.  "Guilt's envenom'd sore
The fountain heals (she cried); then seek the springs:
Few drops shall cleanse."  And round the sprinkled drops she flings.

Anthracia last:  "Yet tremble, stubborn guilt!
Nor think Heaven's power restrain'd from punishment.
Think not, because his oceans all are spilt,
His wrath exhausted too:  his fixt intent
Is to abolish guilt:  they who relent
Here bury it in the waves; against a world
Untaught by Mercy, in avengement
Shall heavenly and infernal fires be hurl'd."
Then sternly o'er her head her flaming torch she whirl'd.

"Hail, Nais!  and ye Nymphs her chaste Compeers!
(Melampus cries) These Sisters I commend
To your lustrations; whose free gushing tears
Have half absolv'd your labor.  We'll attend,
Your office done, and toward the Altar bend
For sacrifice:  next at yon hallow'd Trees
Perform the Oath; and then the Hill ascend.
Clean hands prepare, and hearts as pure; for these
Are offerings we must make:  such offerings always please."

"Alas!  (Elfenor cried) can water cleanse
The deep-dyed stains of an ethereal Soul?
Or can the drops this scanty fountain spends
Wash it, with filth for years collected, foul?
Go, bid the vast Assyrian flood to roll
Its torrents through my bosom; or prepare
The Aegyptian river, when his streams are full.
In vain; no Seas wash white the Aethiop.  Far
More black my crimes, I ween, than blackest Aethiop rare."

The Sage return'd:  "Tho' vast the Assyrian flood,
And Aegypt's river, yet defil'd they run,
With slime discolour'd, and distain'd with mud.
No mother seeks to wash her new-born Son
Upon their oozy banks:  the virgins shun
Waves so impure for offering, and chuse
The unsullied stream fresh gushing from the shore.
Yet not as means, but signs, such streams we use:
The Purity we vow Heaven only can infuse."

Now came in view the Nymphs beneath the Mount,
And Praetus' daughters with majestick pace
In stoles of white:  the Genius of the fount
Renews each faded teint, each beauteous trace,
And adds unusual charms to every face:
From every eye celestial splendors beam;
In every movement, every look was grace.
Elfenor starts, as waking from dream,
Admires the wondrous change, and strait demands the stream.

Melampus first his prayer to Heaven address'd:
"Thee, Source of light and virtue, we implore
Discharge the load with which his mind's imprest;
Its wonted vigor to his Soul restore,
Inspire new strength, awaken every power;
Dispel the mist that blinds him, let him learn
Essential Good to covet and adore:
To lively hopes his killing terrors turn,
And let his heart for Thee with ceaseless ardor burn."

Then from the bank a Sprig of hyssop crops
And fords the brook; next dips the hyssop thrice,
And sprinkled thrice Elfenor with the drops.
His colors brighten, more enlarg'd his size,
Hope swells his breast, and sparkles from his eyes:
To Heaven he turns them, and, discharg'd of fear,
New prospects open, new affections rise:
Guilt blunts its sting; not on the throne appear
The Judge's stern regards, he sees a Father there.

"Eternal Source of Purity, (he cries)
Whence springs this hope to guilty minds unknown?
Whence can these longings after virtue rise?
Past crimes wash'd out, from whence but Thee alone,
So wash'd that they appear no more my own?
Oh, Virtue give!  to Her my Will incline,
And Power vouchsafe by which she may be shown:
In her support both Power and Will must join.
O, Father, Virtue give!  for Power and Will are thine."

They met the Nymphs, and tow'rds the Sacred Hearth,
Beneath the Mountain's brow, together drew:
Rude was the humble Altar, rear'd of Earth,
Near where the instructive Fir and Olive grew;
Nor distant from the Temple's Avenue.
Advancing tow'rd the Altar and the Hill
A band of Sacrificing Youths they view,
Fresh wash'd and pure from the adjoining rill,
With instruments prepar'd the victim lamb to kill.

Some bid the Impious and the Unclean remove.
Melampus then advanc'd, and 'gan to throw
Upon the Eternal fire that lights the Grove
The snapping salt and barly.  "These we strow
To Thee, All-bounteous Heaven, who doest bestow
Our daily food, for leaves the season'd flour;
Accept these Gifts, the tribute that we owe:
This Cup to Thee, Great Giver, too we pour."
The heaven-enkindled coals the grateful gifts devour.

One, at the Altar holds the victim crown'd;
This, from betwixt his horns that 'gan to bud,
Shears the soft wool, and gives to all around.
Thus in the victim each hath part allow'd:
Each throws his part upon the burning wood.
In solemn rite his hand Melampus laid
On the lamb's head, as tow'rd the East he bow'd:
Then, suppliant, bends his Olive-branch, and pray'd,
And in the name of All, addressing Heaven he said:

"Hear, Thou, the World's great Law-giver, and King!
Thy rebel Subjects bow before thy throne;
Gracious accept the randsom that we bring.
Our lives we to thy Justice forfeit own,
For all the past offences we have done.
Thy righteous wrath, to such offences due,
Convert upon This head:  let This atone.
Accept this life for our's, when we imbue
Thy Altar with its blood."  They then the victim slew.

Upon the rising of the Hill appeared
An Oak deep rooted, braving storm and wind;
Thick was his trunk, nor high his head was rear'd,
Close-grain'd, his roots among the rocks intwined:
Emblem of firmness and of strength design'd.
Fronting the priest this Sacred Symbol stood,
While some the victim slew, with head reclined;
And others, from the wound as streams the blood,
In separate vessels wait to catch the purple flood.

Witness of death they merit day by day,
Part, sacred to the God, the Altar stains,
Where the flay'd lamb in decent order lay.
Melampus next the sacred Trees explanes
And holy Laws:  then in what blood remains
His Olive-branch he dips, and sprinkling both
The Votaries and the Trees, the vessel drains.
Then turning to the Oak, a mighty growth,
Lifting his hand on high performs the solemn Oath.

"Hear, and attest, ye everlasting Hills!
Ye Rocks, the strong foundations of the Earth!
And yon firm Oak, which half the Mountain fills,
Hear, and attest!  'Tis not the bloody hearth,
'Tis not the costly victim that hath worth
To atone for guilt:  these Heaven bestows to assure,
And shadow his decrees of Mercy forth.
Firm as the Oak, and as the Hill secure,
Unchanging as the Rocks, his Promise shall endure.

"Confirm to Us this word:  the victim burn
With fire celestial issuing from the skies.
And here our Hearts we offer in return;
The Heart's an Offering Thou wilt ne'er despise.
Witness this blood which every forehead dyes,
To keep thy Laws, in presence of this Oak,
We vow our lives a willing Sacrifice!
O, Thou enthron'd with strength!  the avenging stroke
Inflict, and shed our blood when we renounce thy Yoke!"

Strait, wrap'd in flames the blazing Altar shone.
All shouting cry, with mingled dread and joy,
"Thine is the Strength and Power!  Thy arm we own
Mighty to save, and potent to destroy."
Attending minstrels their loud horns employ,
While distant beasts retreating more and more
The sacred purlieus flee with wild accoy:
Sacred at the noise and fires they join their roar;
And Hills and Rocks resound, "Thine is the Strength and Power!"

The Bards, in bands of Youths and Elders placed,
To martial strains their morning Hymns prepare;
The Laurel These, and Those the Poplar graced;
With crescent-buckler arm'd and pointed spear:
Some the deep horn and Dorian pipe severe
Blow slow and solemn; while from silver lyres
These nimbly strike the livelier Tyrian air.
In strains alternate the responding choirs
Perform their varied Song; and thus began the Sires:

CHORUS SENUM.
STROPHE I.
"Offspring of Heaven, whate'er thy name!  whom earth
Hereafter shall behold, and call her own!
In Heaven Thou wert, before thy mortal birth,
The great Assertor of thy Father's throne
Against the rebel-powers, victorious Son!
Yet Thou wilt deign with worthless Elves to dwell:
Thou for their great exemplar shalt be known;
Engag'd the Monsters of the Earth to quell!
Thy sufferings, thy Reproach, thy Labors who shall tell?"

ANTISTROPHE I.
"Thy Mother's part thou shalt return to Earth;
Thy Heavenly nature shall assert its own,
And claim the honors of its heavenly birth;
Among the Gods a God distinguish'd known!
Ye Heavens, receive your King's undoubted Son!
Tremble, ye powers, in Tartarus that dwell,
For he shall shake your adamantine throne;
Your bands unloose, Death's blunted shafts repell,
And from their horrid chains release the slaves of hell."

CHORUS JUVENUM.
STROPHE II.
"Haste to the birth, long promis'd from the skies!
(The youthful Chorus thus began their lay.)
Physitian!  Pastor!  Saviour!  haste, arise!
Health shall o'er Earth her balmy wings display,
And Death give back her half-devour'd prey:
Your arms the deadly Serpent shall subdue,
Long us'd to fill the Nations with affray:
The nations rescued and preserv'd by You
Loud Io Paeans sing, and eccho Eleleu!

ANTISTROPHE II.
"Spring the glad Morn!  celestial Light, arise!
(The Youths continued with responsive lay.)
Auspicious roll the Seasons through the skies,
At God's right hand enthron'd, and cloath'd with day!
Thou, Pure, the pure shalt aid; thy happy sway
Shall bless the World:  Oracular and True,
Thy Counsels guide the nations in the way:
The nations guided give thee praises due.
Loud Io Paeans sing, and eccho Eleleu!"

EPODE.
CH. JUV.  "Haste, to our Youth truth's arduous path disclose,
And lead them safe up Virtue's steep ascent!"
CH. SEN.  "Haste, give the hoary head secure repose,
With sweet reflections on a life well spent!"
CH. JUV.  "Peace shall with Thee to dwell on earth consent,
And banish'd Justice make her glad return."
CH. SEN.  "Soft airs shall breathe with Panacea sprent,
And smiling Plenty pour her bounteous horn."
CHORUS UTERQUE.
Haste, Saviour, spring to life!  haste, rise the glorious morn!"

Thus they the ancient Prophecies rehearse,
Which hoar tradition through a length of years
Deliver'd down in memorable verse.
The story of their Song describ'd appears
Upon their crescent shields; which each uprears
With steady grasp, and firm determined eye,
Clanging the din of war with ratling spears
On the brass verge, as in disdain to fly;
Fixt to hold fast their shields, or in maintaining die.

Of wattled fallows was the frame compos'd,
With tough bull-hides distended, cover'd o'er;
A circling rim of brass the field inclos'd:
Four had the rim, the field compartments four;
A different lesson each compartment bore:
Here Virtue triumphs, Pleasure scorn'd retires;
There monsters conquer'd dye the ground with gore;
The Serpent there corrupts with solar fires;
And here in torturing pangs the suffering God expires.

A heaven of brass with glowing splendors red
Adorn'd the whole circumference around.
There Love's bright Son, his golden plumage spread,
Pour'd forth the seas, and fix'd the solid ground;
Here rebel Hosts to Hell's abrupt profound
He drives victorious; whose dark paths he trod,
Its prison burst, its worst of terrors bound,
And gave the dead to life; the blest abode
Receives the Victor last, among the Gods a God.

Elfenor stood attentive to the Hymn,
The guide of Youth, and sovereign hope of Age;
Explores the painted field, the sculptur'd rim:
Then eager thus addrest the blameless Sage.
"Who is this God, who gracious deigns to engage
In mortal toils to save a reptile line?
When goes he forth this mighty war to wage?
What wonders his approach proclaim, what sing?
What mother gave him birth, half Mortal, half Divine?"

The Seer returns:  "What Heaven in darkness throws
Seek not to know, nor curious pry too far.
He WAS before this world to order rose,
Heaven's eldest birth, by whom all creatures are.
But who his generation shall declare?
When, or from what descent he assumes our dust,
Imports not thee to know; the search forebear.
Enough for thee, the Science to be just!
Permit the rest to Heaven, and his sure Promise trust.

"Than towers more safe the tutelary God
Shall make this Altar thy protection rise:
When riven stones before the tempest nod,
This fortress stands, and all assaults defies:
For succor here the wretch securely flies."
Then to the Oak the Sage his pupils led,
Climbing the steepy Hill; beneath it lies
A victim's fleece o'er its tough root outspread,
With curl'd and butting horns, the rash assailant's dread.

To Praetus' daughters then he turns, whose tears
Brighten'd their charms, as flowers the spangled dew.
"Behold, where Praetus' piety appears!
Which yester morn the monarch hither drew:
This victim-ram the afflicted Father slew;
And cried, 'These spoils, my Strength, I vow to Thee!'
(And here the horned fleece devoutly threw.)
'Grant these dim eyes my daughters lost to see,
And fold them in my arms restor'd to Heaven and Me!'"

"Then half is prayer is heard.  It is our parts
(Iphianassa cries) to yield the rest,
Haste to his arms, and pour our grateful hearts
To soothe the sorrows of his aged breast,
Long by our follies and our crimes opprest.
This done, to pay our vows we here return
To Him who hears the prayer of the distrest.
The ram shall bleed, his Altars oak adorn,
Our Everlasting Strength!  and our protecting Horn!"

This said, they sought the King.  When thus the Seer:
"Thrice happy These!  In Folly's sea once tost,
Already wreckt, when now no hopes appear,
But driving o'er the Surge, and almost lost,
A hand unknown conducts them to the coast.
No hearts like Theirs the grateful tribute pour;
The most assur'd, as once endanger'd most:
No flattering calm can tempt them from the shore;
They call the Storm to mind, and tremble and adore."

Elfenor catch'd the Omen:  "Happy Sounds!
Be this my lot!  Auspicious prophet, hail!
But oh!  I dread the ocean that surrounds,
When Anteros strides the storm; when nature frail
For Circe's island courts the softening gale;
When the World's mart allures with glitterand bait:
I know their Strength, how able to prevale;
I know myself how weak:  Distressful state!
For while the flight is vain, the encounter is too great."

"Just are thy fears; to them thy safety owe,
(Melampus cries;) these forecast all events:
The mad presumption that contemns a foe,
Contemns the prudent measures of defence.
Presume not then; but with a modest sense
Of thy own weakness, seek from Heaven thy aid.
His power controuls the embattled elements;
Nature lies vanquish'd, Elfin glories fade,
When he makes bare his arms; and Anteros flies afraid.

"For this the Oak beside his Altar grows,
Emblem of Strength and Truth:  the storm it bears,
Firmness unconquer'd and unshaken shows;
By time unchang'd, unchanging Truth declares:
The Wretch for Succour here prefers his prayers,
And trusts in Power sufficient to relieve:
The Offender here vicarious blood prepares,
And claims of Truth its promise to forgive;
Here covenanting Elves their mutual faith receive.

"Hence, as Protectors of their people, Kings
And Leaders take their Scepters of command:
Ensign of Power Supreme from Heaven that springs,
The Legislator borrows hence his Wand:
Hence Rods work wonders in the Prophet's hand:
Image of truth, the Judge hence plucks his Mace:
Who swear, before the uplifted Truncheon stand:
The sacred Staffs the faithful Heralds grace:
The Oak each Symbol yields, and every doubt gives place.

"If yet thy wavering faith instruction need,
On every tree that beautifies the steep,
The monument of strange protection read:
Those Olive-boughs the votive vestments keep
Of Shipwreck'd Sailors rescued from the deep;
Those Holms, those Oaks, with many a garland crown'd,
Those Trunks, o'er which close bands of Ivy creep,
Witness unlook'd-for help in danger found,
With Victors spoils, and chains of captives 'scap'd around.

"This golden Ram the grateful Phryxus speaks,
(Pattern of that which gilds the Phrygian Grove;)
Him, lovely Youth, (health blooming in his cheeks)
His stepdame Ino courts to lawless love;
But the chaste Youth no fond endearments move.
Her hireling priests, obedient to her hate,
Claim him an offering to the Gods above:
The victim's crown'd, the obdurate votaries wait;
And only Helle mourns her injur'd brother's fate.

"Strait from the pile incessant volumes broke,
(The pile which hasty rage collected green,)
Of slowly-rising undulating smoke:
The Youth from view the thickening vapors screen,
Who fled with Helle in the cloud unseen:
They fled, till Asia's hills appear'd in sight
Across the narrow sea that roll'd between;
A bark they climb:  new horrors now affright;
The mirksome welkin scowls, and shrouds the sun in night.

"As on the prow the trembling Helle stood,
While the storm howls, and flashing billows flame,
A huge swell bursts, and sweeps her to the flood;
She sinks, and sinking gave the flood a name.
The laboring vessel through its loosen'd frame
Admits the sea; astride the broken prow
Safe to the shore the wondring Phryxus came.
The golden ram, that grac'd it, on a bough
In Phrygia's Grove he hung, and paid his grateful Vow.

"Yon Robe, that bellies from the wind and roars,
Preserves the fame of Daedelus' tale.
Minos pursues him, whose unnumber'd oars
Hiss in his ears, just ready to prevale:
When, taught by Heaven to catch the fresh'ning gale,
He rears his oar, then hoists into the skies
His ample robe, the first-invented sail;
O'er the white foam the winged vessel flies,
And Minos' angry threats, and laboring oars defies.

"Of Elves restor'd to health this range of trees
Preserves the just Memorials:  here you'll find
The wound, the fracture, the acute disease,
And means of cure inscrib'd upon the rind.
Heaven's power to save in teen of every kind
Recorded stands, the Medicine for despair:
From foes, diseases, raging seas, and wind,
From war, chains, death, his tutelary care
The pious Votary guards, and hears the wretch's prayer."

"I know his Power to save:  but where's the worth
To win his Love to Me, (Elfenor cried,)
Stranger to virtue, reptile son of earth?"
"HIS worth not THINE (the blameless Seer replied)
Assures thy mind, and bids it to confide.
He asks no merit, but returns of praise;
His might shall lead thee, and his truth shall guide.
Transplant into thy heart his righteous ways,
And on the Sacred Hill sweet clouds of Incense raise."

Then reaching from the Oak a shield, he said,
"Take this, yet worn by none but Chiefs of fame.
Bear it and live; or let it bear Thee dead.
The Heaven-descended gift to Aegypt came;
There Hermes wore it, great, illustrious Name!
Asclepius next to Samothracia bore
The potent virtue; and from thence the same
Pelasgus brought to our Cecropian shore,
And left it here.  Now wear it Thou, and fear no more."

Thus from despair Melampus freed his Soul;
Doubt after doubt recedes, his fears give way,
From his clear'd mind the gloomy horrors roll,
Lost in the splendors of surrounding day.
So from the mountain's top where darkness lay,
Brooding the tempest, and o'ercast the Scene;
When Heaven removes the clouds with chearful ray,
The rocks and groves rise smiling with the sheen,
And growing light diffus'd spreads through the vast Serene.

