Refresh'd in Thetis' lap, his wont career,
Uprising slow to climb morn's steep ascent,
Assays the Sun; again the lusty steer,
Past toils in sweet forgetful slumbers drent,
Submissive to the yoke his neck has bent:
Thou too again, adventurous harp, awake!
Nor sounds refuse to my great argument,
Which mightiest deeds in miniature would take;
As heaven's high arch is read reflected in the lake.

Psyche thus fall'n tho' of celestial birth,
Ashamed, and hopeless, and averse from good,
With appetite corrupt inclines to earth;
And wedded Elf, composed of slimy mud,
And different parts deriv'd from Beastlihood.
From them the Elfin race and Fairy strenes;
A numerous offspring, like their Sire ill-thew'd;
And (as the Mother's discomposed brains
Deform the child) besprent with Psyche's noyous stains.

Like little hairs the pointed prickles show,
The marks of thorns that cover'd Psyche's breast:
And many a Scar they got, which they did owe
To willful darings, mutually distrest,
As they of food or pleasure went in quest.
So in the Theban line the Theban lance
From Son to Son by nature was imprest;
Who still expos'd themselves to worse mischance
By angry quarrels rais'd and daring amenance.

Their malefices and their baneful stour
Too long would weave the arras of the Muse:
Ne mistereth it to tell.  At various hour
A thousand various means LOVE'S Son would use
To guard frail Elves from Anteros' abuse:
But they, by that arch-felon's sophistry
Deceiv'd, were drawn his counsels to refuse.
They, blind or stubborn, chusing Ill; while He
Transmuted Good to Ill by wicked Alchymy.

The most a wretch among these wretches was
Elfenor, led through all the wilds of Lust
By Eros, whom close follow'd Anteros,
With fell Disease attended, pale Distrust,
Rack'd Jealousie, and nauseating Disgust.
Nor less with foul Intemperance accloy'd,
And all her Bacchanalian ribalds curst;
Rude-laughing Riot, Drunk'ness ferret-eyed,
And Quarrel smear'd with blood of friends who causeless died.

With one so useless, and so hurtful too
To all around him plac'd, Celestial LOVE
(Intent on general Good) offended grew;
And issu'd from the glitterand hosts above
The minister of wrath:  who 'gan to move
With prompt obedience to inflict the curse.
One only wing he had, with which he drove
Against the ethereal tide, with feeble force
Struggling to work his way, and urge his tardy course

From world to world.  The arch-felon him from far
Beyond the belt of Saturn saw:  (indeed
He seem'd, so slow his motion, a dim star
Fix'd in the utmost orb;) pleas'd to arede,
By weening sage, Elfenor's death decreed:
Yet fear'd of heavenly vengeance the event,
So distant, and so lingering:  to succeede
In spite of mercy, to the Elf he went
Guis'd like an old compeer, thus uttering his intent:

"Why dost thou live, Elfenor?  what joy next
Has Hope to cheat thee with, and keep in view?
Always deluded in the chase and vext,
None now can tempt, not e'en by being new;
For none untried are left thee to pursue.
Give to the Gods their bauble, life, again;
If Gods there be, nought more can be their due:
If Good, they will approve thy 'scape from pain,
If not, curst life's their vengeance; make that vengeance vain."

And pointed to a flood that roll'd fast by.
Health, friends, peace, hope, and every blessing gone,
Rather as loathing life than pleas'd to die,
Sullen assents the Elf to his Foredone.
Then forward prick'd to where a craggy stone
Hung o'er the stream, that foaming lash'd it's side.
From thence he leap'd; but strait LOVE's gentle son
Sent Zephyr to command the swelling tide
To cast him back on shore:  Who to him tranced applied.

"Come, faint and weary wretch, on me repose;
Come to my arms, and I will give thee rest.
Deserted by thy friends, who shun thy woes,
Here find a friend, who seeks for the distrest.
Tho' this world's peace forsake thy troubled breast,
Peace shall be Thine; not such the world can give
From all its shores, the blessing of the blest.
Now carnal hopes thy cheated fancy leave,
Cast here thy last sheet-anchor, which shall ne'er deceive.

"To yonder toft of trees with haste repair,
Where good Melampus makes his peaceful won;
Lessons of wonder he shall teach thee there,
And in his Sylvan School conduct thee on
From strength to strength, (as from its early dawn
The day still brightens to its full encrease;)
Till thou hast raught my Hill.  Thy terrors gone,
Hope shall be thine, and every pang shall cease:
His ways are pleasant ways, and all his paths are peace.

Elfenor, from his painless trance awake,
Felt a dispassion'd pleasure fill his mind,
Smooth as the unruffled bosom of the lake.
He look'd around, but no one could he find:
While wily Anteros, who soon him join'd,
Laugh'd at the brain-sick dream:  but Zephyr calls,
And leads with hand unseen.  The Elf behind
Reluctant, recreant lags; oft turning drawls
Along, and to the holt with listless crapples crawls.

Bland Zephyr urg'd him on, till to his view
Op'd the green glade, where rose in order mete
Trees on each side, the Temple's avenue.
Soft lay the mossy verdure at his feet;
The leafy arch spreads o'er him.  Here his seat
Plain, neat, and low, the humble Druid fix'd:
The gentle gales waft round it odors sweet;
The blue hills crown'd with turrets peep betwixt,
And distant fade away with clouds and ether mixt.

"Blameless Melampus, (said the doubtful wight,)
Warn'd by a vision to seek help from Thee,
Sick of this world, and weary of it's light,
The wretch Elfenor at your gate you see.
O give me balm, if any balm there be
For one so lost as I.  Haply false dreams
Have rais'd a hope, Heaven never meant for me:
And sooth to say, it very error seems
To build a real hope on visionary schemes."

Melampus thus:  "Thou, Wanderer, hast not trod
These sacred walks, nor read the instructive Grove;
The first Great Temple Nature rear'd to God,
And School for Elves:  else would not thy thoughts rove
So wild.  See yonder Oak, whose boughs above
Leafless and wither'd seem; while round all gay
The forest smiles; does this him hopeless prove?
Soon shall he find Heaven's kind inviting ray
Call forth his strength, and spread his beauties to the day.

"Thou art that oak, Elfenor; dry and dead
Thy barren branches seem, devoid of fruit.
Let not Despair its fatal influence shed,
And damp thy vigour when it wants recruit.
By day, Heaven's streams shall feed thy thirsty root;
By night, thy boughs shall drink celestial dew:
Now, now's thy season, now thy leaves shall shoot,
Ethereal virtue shall thy strength renew:
Yield to the kindly heat; 'tis all thou hast to do."

"Take me, (Elfenor cries) a wearied hind
You see me here, long hunted o'er the wild,
Listless to fly, and to his fate resign'd.
Couldst thou raise hope (and smooth thy words are fil'd)
&mdash;But Hope is my disease, so oft beguil'd:&mdash;
I'd follow willing without rude respond
Thy gentle counsels; as the weanied child
Led by its mother's eye, obsequious, fond,
Rests in her love secure, nor forms a wish beyond."

The Sire return'd:  "He's stranger to true hope,
Who never yet has truly learn'd to fear.
Thou doest not know thy nature's end and scope,
What port to sail for, from what rocks to steer:
But, driving with the billows here and there,
Art sport for every wind.  Born for the sky,
Thither aspire!  for that great change prepare!
Objects, too mighty for thy reptile eye,
This Grove, as polish'd brass, reflects, and draws them nigh.

"See, at the entrance of the sacred shade,
Stand emblems of the duty which we owe:
The Olive here lifts up its peaceful head,
Rejoicing in the beams of heaven that flow,
And chearful vigour through the year bestow:
A cleansing power its healing oil displays,
That fresh with health the scaly lepers grow.
Such debt to heaven the pious votary pays,
Peace, pleasure, purity, and ever-chearful praise.

"On the other side the spiry tree ascends,
Where social Storks their airy city build.
The parent's care the callow young defends,
Finds food convenient, teaches them unskill'd
To stretch their trembling pinions o'er the field;
Trains them by short excursions from the nest
To more laborious flights:  the young ones yield
To their gray sires with load of years opprest
Grateful returns of care, and lull their age to rest.

"In peace and safety each enjoys his share:
With faith domestick after long recess
To their old nests the families repair;
No wanton dalliance there provokes excess,
Nor force plucks tasteless joys; blest, as they bless:
Learn mercy hence and justice to approve.
Though many are the trees of righteousness,
Which plan these ways, and teach where e'er you move,
Upon these two hang all, Divine and Social Love.

"Do this and live."  "Alas!  is this my debt,"
Replies the Elf?  "Small comfort hast thou wrought.
A life of folly, which I would forget,
Flashes upon my mind.  Long since I've thought
It was a state with various cares distraught,
Obtruded on me like a worthless dole:
I view it now one universal blot,
By me distain'd.  Light breaks upon my soul,
And guilt, and shame, and horror, overspread the whole.

"Born for society, poor sordid elf,
I never felt another's joy or woe:
But, turning all my views upon myself,
Bid currents back to their own fountains flow,
Nor bless the flowers that on their borders grow.
I envied others good, or strove to seize,
The plague and ruin of the world below.
As blood, uncirculated, breeds disease,
I found unsocial joys were very miseries.

"And recompence impossible appears!
The good I've wasted can I now restore?
Discharge of debts to come pays no arrears.
&mdash;Die then! &mdash; but what is death? &mdash; at most no more
Than bare restraint from ill.  All wrongs before
Stand unredress'd.  For me 'twere payment cheap
(Escap'd from present and from future stour)
Safe to my mother Earth again to creep,
And shrinking into nothing with corruption sleep."

"Thus thinking (said the sage) avoid the Hill,
Yon turf-built altar leave, and fountain-head,
Which through the forest pours its winding rill:
Here to the left decline; myself will lead
Where Heaven's pavilion, all with darkness spread,
Excludes the noon-tide beam; the solemn gloom
Shall bring thee to the chambers of the Dead;
Where trees sepulchral overshade each tomb,
And bear instructive marks to warn the age to come.

"There honours or disgrace to latest times
Deliver down the lov'd or hated name:
Death not obliterates even here their crimes,
Nor the grave buries their immortal fame.
If to their shells we give such praise or blame,
What must their separated spirits find;
Existing still, but in a stranger frame,
For due reward or punishment design'd
By Heaven's impartial, wise, all-comprehending mind!"

And now the thicket's depth, with darkness chill'd,
Blots from the mind life's vanities away.
A  horror from Elfenor's bosom trill'd,
Irresolute, or to return or stay.
Whom Anteros whisper'd:  "Haste, without delay,
Thy backward steps.  Such joys Melampus gives!
What horrid rites these that shun the day?
A ruffian leads thee to his den of thieves.
The wise distrust in time:  the head-long fool believes."

"Why linger'st thou behind (Melampus cries?)
Is this thy promis'd confidence, my Son?
The weak, who know not where their danger lies,
Afraid of safety haste to be undone:
To speed to Anteros' snares your friend you shun.
As from the alarming birds the frighted deer
Into the hunter's toyls deluded run:
From fancied foes they fly with idle fear,
Till the wide-hovering nets enclose them every where."

Thus anxious for his charge the Druid spoke,
And to his wavering mind this answer made.
Strait from the mountain's brow loud thunder broke:
The glitterand lightnings flash'd along the shade,
And the blue sulphur round innoxious play'd.
Awed stood the Elf, and trembled at the sight:
While, with the omen pleas'd, Melampus said,
"These harmless terrors serve but to invite;
Heaven kindly calls thee on, and marks thy path with light."

"For ME these signs, (he cried) a worm most vile!
Looks Heaven on One where he no worth can see?
O let him stop his dreadful hand awhile;
Or rather blot me from his memory!
He wakes to vengeance if he wakes for ME!
His purer eyes cannot such filth abide.
So terribly array'd in Majesty,
Where shall I fly when he begins to chide?
Fall on me, hills; cleave rocks, and in your caverns hide!"

"Observe the lightning's shine, (the Seer returns;)
"How innocently streams the lambent fire,
Which only guilds the forest, and not burns.
Not such the signals of celestial Ire,
When rous'd to vengeance Heaven's indignant Sire
Scatters the shafts of death:  the frighted lakes
Start back; Elves scorch'd in livid flames expire;
With the fierce flash the riven forest shakes,
Trembles the earth around, the smoaking mountain quakes.

"This aweful scene his judgment shadows forth
In dreadful state.  Behold this circling mead,
Embosom'd in the wood, save where the North
Pours its cold stream; from yon cliff's towering head,
(Where e'en the mountain goat trembles to tread)
The poysonous Styx its baneful drops distills;
Then filtering through the stones, enlarg'd and freed
Rolls tumbling down the rocks:  there charg'd with rills
Forms Acheron's black pool, and its broad bason fills.

"The sceptered judges with the early morn
Hither repair, and strict enquiry make
Into the lives of those whose course is run:
Whom from yon coast on the other side the lake
The squalid Charon on his float does take,
And here conveys.  The judges weigh the cause:
Bound by an oath, which they are curs'd who break,
To form their sentence by those righteous laws,
E'en now to thee declar'd, for censure or applause.

"The judges sate, and either party heard,
From banks of asphodel the doom's decreed.
The GOOD with funeral honors are interr'd;
Along the winding shore as they proceed,
Beyond those depths of woods, the wind-shook reed
Whistles melodious sorrow; loud acclaim
Follows the corse; the Bards their Choirists lead,
And round the tomb incessant sing his fame,
And spread to latest times the memorable name.

"This region to the WICKED they appoint.
Unburied some hang quivering to the breeze,
Whom the rains wash, and Summer suns annoint:
Others are buried; but the luckless trees
Mark out the spot with infamy; as these
Which neither fruit or seed are known to bear;
Tall barren elms, alders that dare the seas:
Or whose black fruits as black a fate declare;
The portent-burning thorn, black fig, or sylvan pear.

"In either tract the cenotaphs you'll find
Of some who died the growth of other soils:
Either whose virtues bless'd the Fairy-kind,
(Whose borrow'd names we raise like foreign spoils
To animate our youth to glorious toils:)
Or those whose memorable crimes, of use
At length, serve now as warnings, and as foils.
Examples both of what to shun, or chuse;
Proofs both, that, after death, Judgment from Heaven ensues.

"Here near the hill begin:  from whence is learn'd
What indignation waits on Impious pride.
See trees with thunder scath'd, and lightnings burn'd
Uprooted lie, and scatter'd far and wide,
Beneath the rocky mountain's threat'ning side.
Here fierce Typhoeus, stern Porphyrion,
And bold Enceladus who Heaven defied,
Are grav'd, with this inscription on their stone;
Learn this prime Justice, Elves, nor dare Heaven's King dethrone.

"There see the name of Tantalus inscrib'd
Beneath this rock, which threat'ning seems to nod;
Who fancied, from mistaken zeal imbib'd,
By most inhuman rites to honour God,
Floating the altars with his Son's warm blood:
But Heaven loves mercy more than sacrifice.
There Those, who falsely Heaven adjur'd, unaw'd;
Falsely adjur'd, that Heaven in wrath denies
Offspring to mourn those sires, or reap their perjuries.

"Among these thorns lie heap'd a race accurst;
No expiation their atonement pays:
Arch-robbers, in their debts to Heaven unjust;
Who no distinction make of time or days,
But to Themselves their every moment seize.
Pleasure and gain alternately succeede;
No time they find Time's ancestor to praise:
Nor works of mercy, piety, or need,
Excuse the rapine:  selfish, thankless lives they lead.

"Here next in place, as guilt, an impious growth
Blackening on boughs, or overwhelm'd with thorn,
Hated by earth and heaven, as hating both,
Are These, who Nature's General Parent scorn,
By scorning those of whom themselves were born.
Heaven's genuine images; to whom they owe
Life and its gifts, to nourish or adorn.
Nor less absurd the Civil Parents foe,
Disturbing god-like rule, whence publick blessings flow.

"This horrid clump, where intermingled stand
The Fir, with shade malign; the deadly Yew;
The Ash, that arms with spear the foe-man's hand;
And Junipers, contain the murdering crew.
Those, who their hands in social blood imbrue;
Or, who refuse the succour they could lend;
Or, who themselves in peevish frenzy flew;
Or Lords, who spill the lives they should defend
In wanton cruelty; these limits comprehend.

"Midst broomy Tamarisks, obscene with mud,
And Sallows scattering fruit, the plashy shore
Of Acheron they reach, of whose foul flood
Insatiate Alders drink and thirst for more:
With many others needless to count o'er.
A Poplar to the wanton gale they saw
Curling its silvery leaves:  its white rind bore
Inscrib'd a playful Lyoness, whose forepaw
Toy'd with (but held) a ram, sure destin'd for her maw.

"Here Lais lies, perdition eminent!
(Melampus cries) while round Lust's victims lie
In one promiscuous filthy carnage blent,
She's noted with distinguish'd infamy,
To warn blind youth the Wanton's lure to fly.
Antea next, who faithless to her Lord
Burnt for her guest, too virtuous to comply:
That guest was long devoted to the sword,
Falsely accus'd by her of crimes his soul abhorr'd.

"But neither Lust, nor Subtlety, nor Rage,
Subdued the virtue of Bellerophon.
Sublimer flights his ardent hopes engage;
He spurns at Earth, intent on Heaven alone,
And thither soaring easy conquests won.
None unrewarded seek the Powers above:
The King, who sought his life, now calls him Son;
Crown'd with the chaste Philonoe's nuptial love,
While half the Lycian realms his righteous rule approve.

"But haste we back from Acheron accurst,
To seek the Happier regions of the Dead.
Another portion of this gloomy Hurst
In our return is left us still to tread.
The tempest-shaken trees with moss o'erspread
Crash with the wind.  Here hang the Elves that steal:
Half-eaten some less ravenous vultures fed;
Some smear'd with pitch which resinous pines distill:
Stench, noise, and ghastly sights the horrid district fill.

"This large and crouded tract behind the mount
The great majority that die inhumes.
Useless, unknown to fame, of no account;
Pathless, as birds through ether, from the wombs
Through life's dull void they travell'd to their tombs.
As in the desert unfrequented field
In vain the flouret drops, in vain it blooms;
So dead or living, These no profit yield;
No crests their helmets grace, and no device their shield."

"Envied obscurity!  (Elfenor cried:)
My whole ambition is to share your lot.
The empire of the world I would despise,
To be like These, accountless and forgot."
To whom Melampus answer'd thus:  "Think not
That any can escape Heaven's keen survey:
Who here unnoticed, undistinguish'd rot,
In other forms their pristine wont betray,
Bask in celestial light, or hate its glorious ray."

"To what extremest darkness must I fly
To suit my gloomy mind?  (the Elf replied.)
I dread the light, and Heaven's all-piercing eye:
But vain are flight and darkness.  Woe betide,
Whom flight betrays, and darkness cannot hide!
These shades and ghastly sights affect not me:
A deeper grove of horror is descried
Planted within me; where, on every tree,
For just avengement multiplied, myself I see.

"I seek complacence in enjoyments pass'd;
These witness Guilt, and I the view abhor:
On hopes of future Good my thoughts I cast;
These Justice intercepts.  O wretch forlore,
Guilt all behind, and Vengeance all before!
Leave, leave me, Druid, lest mishap ensue;
Lest I infect thee with my leperous sore:
Hopeless myself I would not sink Thee too.
When Justice claims, e'en Goodness yields to Vengeance due."

To whom the sage:  "Yet follow me, and hope!"
"Hope (said Elfenor) doest thou recommend?
Bidst thou a reptile with the Almighty cope,
And from the Thunderer's hand the leven rend?
In air the falling cataract suspend;
Go, bid the wax not melt before the heat.
Then crimes shall cease Heaven's goodness to offend;
Or what offends him shall his love create:
And Sinners hope, the objects of immortal hate!"

"This Pear-tree (said Melampus) rough, and wild,
Harsh to the taste, fit only for the flame,
The ingrafted Apple bears; whose juices mild
Insinuate kindly through the knotty frame,
And by degrees its stubborn nature tame.
The tree beholds its offspring with surprise,
And sees itself another, yet the same.
Sees pleas'd new leaves and stranger fruit arise,
And rescued lifts its arms with rapture to the skies.

"Such Thou mayst be:  and Heaven itself shall find
Means that its rigid justice shall atone.
Follow this way the Happy regions wind,
All on the right.  See, the descending Sun
Shoots its long shades, which intermingled run
With openings guilded by its milder beam,
As its broad disk, benignly bright, goes down:
Peeping betwixt the hills and groves, the stream
That gently glides along, returns the golden gleam.

"Or mast, or fruit, the useful trees produce,
That overshade, or mark the Hero's tomb:
The white Fig's rich, the Vine's refreshing juice;
Here knit the Pears, and there the Apples bloom:
Here scarlet-threaded Nuts, and there the Plum;
The Oak &mdash; but break we off; the tuneful throng
Of Bards, preparing their Encomium,
Procede with joyful harmony along."
He paus'd; and thus the Choir began their Evening Song.

"Who shall ascend the consecrated Hill,
Who find admittance to the Holy Place?
The Pure and Perfect heart, which thinks no ill;
Whose hands no murder stains, no thefts disgrace;
Who bled, or triumph'd, to preserve their race;
Who, chaste to Heaven, life's vanities resign'd,
Or Pious Poets tuning heavenly lays;
Who Arts invented to improve their kind;
Who sooth the aching heart, or mend the faulty mind.

"Such once were These; whose memories shall live
Fresh as the blossoms which their graves surround.
Whom first shall we record, whose honours give
To the shrill reed, for virtuous deeds renown'd,
While playful echo pleas'd repeats the sound?
Thee, Jove, or Ammon, best and greatest King,
With radiant horns in spiral circles crown'd,
The world's Great Lord the grateful Muse shall sing:
Strew leaves of nuts around, and oaken garlands bring.

"Thee, Bacchus, next, whom Aegypt's realms adore,
As Nysa nourish'd, and of Ammon born;
Or, if Osyris' name delight thee more,
Fill with Osyris' name the sounding horn:
Who for our acorns gave the strengthening corn,
And taught the hind his water-draughts to leave,
And press the generous grape, whose leaves adorn
Thy beauteous brows; these little gifts receive:
Stew the Vine's tendrils here, and wreaths of Ivy weave!

"We next, refulgent Isis, give to Thee
(How variously soever nam'd) the strain;
Ceres, or Venus, Juno, Cybele,
The illustrious partner of Osyris' reign:
Thy plough-share taught to load the barren plain;
Thou rear'st to Heaven the consecrated shrine;
Thy Laws, blest gift, the Savages restrain;
The various Medicines of the herbs are thine:
Strew here the myrtle boughs, bring forth the crested Pine!

"While good Osyris triumphs o'er the East,
Round his bright car instructive artists throng;
The rude world yields submitting to be blest:
Apollo comes, and Hermes comes along;
One letters taught, and one the varied song.
Ye fierce Barbarians celebrate their praise;
Strike the soft lute, and tune th' harmonious tongue!
Catch, ye half brutes, the civilizing lays!
Strew Figs and Citrons round, and bend the circling Bays!

"Such once were These!  but what avails their worth,
Insensible, and lost in common clay?
Heaven's favourites once, now mingled with the earth;
Their autumn came, like leaves they drop'd away,
Nor could their virtues save them from decay.
But as in Spring the leaves again will grow,
These shall awake to an eternal day;
No storms shall fear, and no corruption know:
Haste, Laurels ever green, and deathless Cypress strew!"

They ceas'd; and thus Melampus to the Elf:
"To soft repose the setting Sun invites
Beneath the shades:  I leave thee to thyself.
The weary birds now homewards bend their flights;
I must attend to finish Evening rites
Which thou art not permitted yet to view:
But when the Dawn shall pour its purple lights,
And birds and beasts their wonted task renew,
I'll meet thee near yon fount.  Rest, troubled Elf; Adieu!"

He said, and join'd the Choir.  Now left alone
Elfenor's passions tear him unconfin'd:
His tearless eyes were fixt with fear like stone;
He views himself with horror, and his mind
The dreadful sentence, which condemns him, sign'd.
Some glimpse of hope unknown, like Cynthia's beam,
With a pale light and feeble lustre shined:
But when his thoughts reflect the Heroes fame,
These thoughts but braid the lash, and point the stings of shame.

Confusion and disorder fill his breast:
As when from Thrace the whirling tempest sweeps,
Charg'd with the ruffian blasts of North and West;
From their foundations shake th' uprooted deeps,
Dash'd to the skies, and tumbled heaps on heaps:
O'er the tumultuous Scene and wild profound
The clouded Moon from Ida's Mountain peeps;
Trembling and scatter'd o'er the billows bound
Fragments of broken light, that gild the horrors round.

Beneath an aged Elm he seeks repose;
And strives to sleep, but sleep affrighted flies:
Darkness in vain its sable mantle throws,
And snatches every prospect from his eyes:
Lively to fancy still the scenes arise.
Him Anteros observed, and cried, "True fear,
Seeing the danger, teaches to be wise:
The mind distracted with such pressing care
Works itself into peace; as tempests clear the air.

"Could I ingraft false fears upon the true,
He still might to his ruin be deceiv'd;
The maze of error is discern'd by few:
Nay should the falsehood be at length perceiv'd,
Truth also with it would be disbeliev'd.
Thou seekest sleep &mdash; I'll give thee sleep, poor worm!
But sleep by which thou shalt not be reliev'd.
Like boisterous winds which troubled seas deform,
A moment hush'd &mdash; then wake with ten-fold rage the storm."

He said, and sought with flapping wings the Elm,
Guis'd like the bird of night.  A weight like lead
Elfenor's harrass'd mind and eyes o'erwhelm:
He sinks to sleep.  When hovering o'er his head
The wily Fiend the illusive vision shed.
The leaves he touch'd confess his touch and die;
Profusely scatter'd round the grassy bed,
Thick as they wont on Autumn's wings to fly:
So many dropp'd the leaves, and every leaf a lye.

Around the spreading Elm he lay beneath,
Care, Sickness, Fear, Old Age, and Discord dwell,
Famine and Want, Fatigue, and War, and Death;
With monstrous Forms, Harpyes and Gorgons fell,
Which hurry thoughtless Mortals into Hell.
Him Hydra snatch'd at; foulest of the gang:
In vain he strove her fury to repell;
In vain her head he shore; still others sprung
New from the wound.  And now with mortal fang

She seized and dragg'd him to the Infernal tide
Of woeful Acheron; the boat was there,
And Mead of judgment on the other side:
The awefull Council, and stern judge appear,
And crowds of conscious ghosts grow pale with fear.
Call'd, judg'd, and sentenc'd, now he seems to go
Unpitied, abject, scorn'd, through realms of drear,
Eternal glooms, and groans of ghosts in woe;
Chains rattle, Serpents hiss, and burning rivers flow,

Whose bursting flames enlightened Tartarus.
Crush'd under mountains there the Giants groan,
Embattl'd once 'gainst Heaven.  Here Tantalus
(Inviting Gods to eat his butcher'd Son)
For ever dreads the ever-falling stone.
The Sophister disguis'd their vices still:
For Lust, Vain-glory, and Ambition,
Knaws Tityos' Vulture, rolls Ixion's Wheel,
And the huge Rock half-heav'd whirls tumbling down the hill.

The Happier Seats, at such a distance seen,
On his sick mind but dimly were imprest;
The enfoulder'd smoke and livid flames between
Reflect malignant light on regions blest,
And ghastly paint the ghosts in shades of rest.
On every face a melancholy spread,
And every look a deep regret confess'd:
Each seem'd to wish life's roughest paths to tread,
Rather than there to reign the Monarch of the Dead.

Aloft each highly honor'd Hero climbs
To wrest from heaven's just King the realms above;
Their virtues cover'd with the rankest crimes.
In amorous dalliance sinks glandiferous Jove;
In Myrtle bowers desports the Queen of Love;
Indecent Bacchus shows his vine-bound face,
While half-brute Satyrs round in gambols move;
A thousand thefts the light-wing'd Hermes plays;
And e'en Apollo finds a Daphne in his Bays.

Through half the night the busy Fiend confus'd
The traces graven on Elfenor's mind,
And the good Druid's kind intent abus'd.
His fears he heighten'd, some false cause assign'd,
While the true cause the Sophist strove to blind:
At vice unknown the Furies shake their rods;
But vices known Celestial patrons find.
So dreams the illuded Elf, while judgment nods,
Of Earth transform'd to Hell, and Heroes chang'd to Gods.

