So odious were the fumes of Incense found
To that malicious Spirit, who could not bear
The smoke, to him heart-piercing; while around
The jocund choir their grateful praise declare,
Hymning their great Preserver:  nought was there
But Love unmingled, and harmonious Song.
Then freed from guilt, and resting in the care
Of long experienc'd Goodness, the mixt throng
To their respective tasks benignant mov'd along.

When to Melampus thus the reverend King:
"This general duty paid, where all agreed
For general blessings their due lauds to sing;
Attend us, Seer, to the descent with speed;
Where wait our Eucharistical kids to bleed,
For blessings more than health, or life, or food;
My Daughters lost restor'd, from folly freed,
From error rescued, and to truth renew'd:
Peculiar be our Thanks for our peculiar Good!

"The Youths already at the Altar stand,
Prepar'd the chosen hecatomb to slay:
The shining blade uplifted in their hand,
While in loose cords the skipping victims play.
On the warm coals the thighs and entrails lay,
And pour the blood, Heaven's portion in the feast:
These sacred emblems Life and Strength pourtray:
And Life and Strength are Heaven's!  This done, the rest
Shall furnish the repast.  Be Thou our chiefest guest.

"With joy unbounded will we spread our hearts,
Convivials in this Festival divine.
While, rank'd in order, all assume their parts,
The Banquet's double honours shall be Thine;
Unmeasur'd goblets of unmingled wine.
The festal Hymns my royal band employ;
Let all thy Bards the chearful chorus join.
Our raptur'd hearts this day know no alloy;
Praise without end to Heaven!  and without measure, Joy!"

"Such pleasures (cried Iphianassa) flow
From social virtues, where no guilt upbraids!
Such pleasure round the Throne Celestials know,
Tune their glad harps, and raise their smiling heads.
Triumphing each his golden plumage spreads,
When he beholds a mortal wretch forlore
Half-dropping to his fate, if back he treads
His steps recover'd, wak'd by Wisdom's lore:
Their raptures then are great, as were their fears before.

"But oh!  remembrance!  By the same degree
These raptures rise, we gage our Father's grief;
That grief points out our foul impieties.
This sad reflection, like a secret thief,
Robs us, Melampus, of thy kind relief.
As in the danger, so the joy, our share
Might justly claim to be consider'd chief:
But we have nought to vow save future care;
And all our joys are damp'd with thoughts of what we were."

"No more, Iphianassa!  (said the Seer)
Vain were the joy, your safety not complete;
Complete your safety, whence the swelling tear?
Not to rejoice, were now to doubt your state:
And now to doubt it would be most ingrate,
And chase the Love so seasonably shown.
More insecure is innocence elate,
And vaunting in its strength.  The fractur'd bone,
At length more firmly knit, acquires a stronger tone."

To him Iphianassa made reply:
"From sense of danger scap'd our transport grows:
When on that danger I revert my eye,
That horrid view distracts me; as the rose
Though fair and sweet, upon the prickle blows."
"Its guard, as well as parent; (cries the Sage,)
And let that thought thy harrass'd mind compose.
Resent not thou, when Heaven has dropp'd its rage:
Be happy, as he wills; and all thy griefs asswage."

"So deep the sense of what I am, and was,
(Returns the Fair) fills my astonish'd thought;
Not to be thankful, were a crime more base
Than all my past offences.  Mercy brought
When wanted most!  unmerited, unsought!
What can I offer for such wondrous Love;
What but this heart! &mdash; Take, Heaven, what thou hast wrought!
Here, to my joy indulging, let me rove,
Devoted all to Thee, sequester'd in the Grove!"

"Daughter of Praetus, (the good Seer rejoins)
Thy wish is incorrect; Heaven never meant
Unsocial life:  his boundless goodness shines
On countless worlds:  and such his kind intent,
Our time, though justly due to Him, is lent
To serve our fellow-creatures.  Good enjoy'd
Points to do good to others; the cement
Uniting all!  then solitude avoid.
Wouldst thou be good, do good:  be busied and employ'd."

"Melampus, (thus the Argive Monarch said)
While hecatombs and feasts to Heaven we give,
No equal recompense to Thee is paid;
Such as a King may offer, Thou receive.
Canst thou be drawn th' Arcadian Grove to leave?
My lov'd Iphianassa shall be thine,
And Argos shall Arcadia's loss retrieve.
A third of all my empire I resign,
And thou to priestly cares shalt royal counsels join."

"Rich in herself I take the great reward
(Melampus cries) her ample dowry's light
With her inestimable worth compar'd.
With this good hand unchanging Faith I plight,
Raiment and Food, and each Connubial right.
Has ought Iphianassa to object?
Not force, but mutual wills, can hearts unite:
There languid nature cools not to neglect;
But age, that ripens merit, heightens the respect."

"It ill becomes a daughter to dispute
Her Father's pleasure, (said the Royal Fair.)
Obedience and compliance better suit
Her weakness, shelter'd by paternal care:
But, oh my Royal Father, here forbear
To urge your power.  I know the debt immense
I owe to good Melampus; shall I dare
His virtues with my crimes to recompense?
In penance let me live, and weep my foul offence."

"Her crimes (returns Melampus) who shall blame
Who from the lustral wave renew'd ascends?
Not that I'd lessen or their guilt, or shame.
So much on female chastity depends,
With justice infamy its breach attends.
But where we see a charge sincere obtain,
There strengthen'd virtue every pass defends:
While those of one poor virtue blindly vain,
See not a thousand faults, and wear a careless rein."

The Damsel then:  "My Father, must I lose
Your sheltering care, your mild and honour'd sway?
With this hand goes my heart:  if you refuse,
And give it from you, with it you convey
The chief affections of my heart away.&mdash;
'Tis Praetus' gift, Melampus, though but small;
At once the pledge and proof that I obey.
If Heaven and You receive me from my fall,
Share both this thankful heart, till Heaven shall claim it All."

"A moment we the Sacrifice postpone
(The Monarch cried) till we consult the Grove,
Yon close recess, the God's immediate Throne.
Where, as the Laurel's leafy tongues shall move,
We read if Heaven our last resolve approve.
Melampus, call the interpreters around,
From Pelias sprung, the Dodonian Dove,
To watch each nodding branch and mystick sound,
And from the rustling boughs your future fates expound.

"If Heaven auspicious to our wish assent,
This day shall be a day of joy indeed.
Soon shall th' Espousals gain the purpose meant,
And Marriage Rites to Marriage Vows succeed.
Cleans'd from their gall new hecatombs shall bleed,
To lengthen out the Eucharistical feast.
The Nuptial Crown do thou, Ipponoe, braid
With Myrtle and Amaracus embrac'd:
Lysippe, mix the flour, and knead the bridal paste.

"With lighted torch the boys the Bride shall bring,
To Thetis' lap when Phoebus is declin'd;
While round the Bards the Hymeneals sing,
By fife and lute in grateful concert join'd:
The active youth the circling dance shall wind;
Now act the fight, now imitate the chase,
Stoop, bound, and fly, and turn; the Maids behind
With twinkling feet shall step the measur'd pace;
And shew how sweet the accord of Fortitude and Grace."

"Elfenor, (said Melampus) thou shalt be
The Bridegroom's Friend, the wedding-ring to bear,
Neat, without ornament:  firm constancy
The Iron shall engage; its form declare
Truth that shall know no end.  Thou too prepare
The Myrtle wreaths to deck the Bridegroom's bowers.
My Mother dead, take Thou a Mother's care
To weave my Garland mixt with various flowers:
And witness for us both, if Love sincere be ours."

To him Elfenor:  "The vast debt I owe,
O more than Father!  cannot be express'd,
For this chang'd heart, where peace and pleasure grow,
Joy without tumult, without langour rest.
Mercy triumphant reigns, and in my breast
An infant Conscience smiles:  no guilt to annoy,
No craving selfish passions to molest;
No envious grudges my own peace destroy,
And every happy object round me, gives me joy.

"What happy prospects open to my view
From this day's Nuptials, if I right forecast!
Not more sincere delight my Mother knew
When first she saw thee, and embrac'd thee fast,
And thank'd the Gods for all her travail past.
In thee, Melampus, we with joy discern
That Virtue meets a full reward at last:
In Thee, fair Nymph, more joyful truth we learn;
Heaven's arms are open'd wide to Sinners who return.

"HE seeks the wandering sheep, the wounded hart,
Knows with his crook to drive, or pipe to allure,
To heal the sick, or draw the bearded dart:
SHE hears the Shepherd's voice, near fountains pure,
Nor shuns the cleansing stream, nor slights her cure.
Your Names shall mark some young recording tree:
Like Them your Loves increase, like Them endure;
And give the world a generous progeny,
Like fair Iphianassa good, and wise like Thee."

At the East end, upon a gentle rise,
Thick intertangled Laurels form'd a screen;
The Secret Place conceal'd from public eyes,
By none but Kings and chosen Prophets seen,
And those Interpreters who dwelt within,
To read the mystick signs, and thence translate
The Visions, Motions, Sounds, or sacred Sheen,
In arduous matters, or nice points of state;
Their Counsels to direct, or open future fate.

"While I and Praetus are admitted there,
You wait the answer here," (Melampus cried.)
To pass the leafy veil they now prepare:
When strait a sudden lustre from the skies
Shot through the gloom; the wind began to rise,
And, gliding through the trees on easy wings,
A Form celestial skims before their eyes:
In the strong gale his fluttering mantle sings,
And wheeling round the court he forms his lessening rings.

Then drops, and to Elfenor wav'd his hand:
Wings fledg'd his feet, and wings embrac'd his head;
His fingers lightly held a feather'd wand.
Then to Elfenor thus the Herald said:
"Beloved of Heaven, all hail!  from thence I'm sped
The Messenger of wrath; thy doom was fix'd,
The irrevocable sentence spake thee dead.
How interesting the interval betwixt!
Despair griev'd all our hosts, and not a hope was mixt.

"Despair without a hope fill'd all our host,
All but Celestial LOVE'S Eternal Son.
He knew that I but little speed could boast:
Wing'd though I was to see the sentence done,
Indulgent LOVE vouchsaf'd me only one.
He shot before me like a trailing star,
Whose course seems finish'd soon as 'tis begun.
Intent to save thee, on his winged car
He rush'd impetuous down:  I mark'd him from afar.

"This Grove he sought, and Zephyr sent to thee
To lead thee hither.  What employ'd the eve,
And what the night, thou need'st not learn from me;
What arts he us'd thy losses to retrieve,
And baffle Anteros labouring to deceive,
Making Melampus his free instrument:
But hard the task, and arduous to atchieve,
To bring a heart so harden'd to relent,
And vengeance, on a sinner doom'd to die, prevent.

"This morning, when the disappointed foe,
Scar'd at the fumes of Incense, fled away;
Despairing of success by wiles below,
He boldly ventur'd to the realms of day,
And claim'd Thee as his due and forfeit prey.
LOVE hung on high his equal scales in air;
Thy Duty that, this thy Discharge to weigh;
Thy merits here, and they Transgressions there:
Our Hosts were griev'd, the Fiend shouted at the Compare.

"When upward sprang LOVE'S Son with rapid sail,
Endeavouring to weigh up the cumbrous lett.
He threw with care into the opposing scale
(As balance to the long neglected debt;)
Thy copious tears, and deep unfeign'd regret:
(Against thy crimes;) thy conquest in the Grove,
Thy filial Trust, new resolutions set;
And last, which made the trembling balance move,
Thy Prayers, thy raptur'd Praise, and Universal Love.

"The Fiend objected both to weight and kind;
Tears were not virtue, but its want proclaim'd:
Not e'en though future reformation join'd;
For partial virtue was but virtue maim'd:
Nay e'en that partial virtue he defam'd
By calumnies and lies:  these in he threw
Pressing the adverse beam.  Thy Patron claim'd
Thy full discharge on fixt conditions due.
This sunk thy weightier scale, and up the Traytor's flew.

"Thy full discharge obtain'd, to me he sped,
And bade me haste my errand:  then he stuck
Wings on my feet, and feathers to my head:
From my right hand, with vengeance arm'd, he took
My Harpe, dreadful with its swinging crook:
And as he gave benign his mild command,
From my sharp dart the bearded point he strook;
Which fell upon Eumolpus; in my hand
A pointless shaft he left, this wing'd, but powerful wand.

"Haste to Elfenor, said the FILIAL LOVE;
His trial past, his exercises done,
His prize adjudg'd, how cruel wouldst thou prove,
Shouldst thou delay his amaranthine Crown,
And keep him from the palm so hardly won!
Thy rod shall gently steal his life away,
(For Death's wide gate can be escap'd by none.)
Then (cast his pristine form) in bright array
Thy rod shall call him forth to an eternal day.

"Should doubts arise, if such a change can be,
And inexperience tempt thee to diffide;
Thyself the wonders of this rod shalt see,
An earnest of the change that shall betide."
A snake then chanc'd athwart the green to glide,
In playful volumes innocently roll'd:
The Herald to his crested head applied
The magic wand; which, wondrous to behold!
Induc'd a sudden age, and dimm'd his scales of gold.

He languishes and dies;  the muscles tough
(Wound round his rod) like wire in spirals hung:
Strait from the colourless and lifeless slough
The snake renew'd, in golden verdure young,
Shot forth, and to the rod entwisted clung.
Elfenor view'd with pleasure and surprise
How quick with life the active muscles sprung;
What brighter hues the magick touch supplies,
What lustre paints his form, what lightnings in his eyes.

"This may assure thy faith (the Herald said:)
Thine eyes this sleep-inducing Wand must seal;
Thy form grown rigid, and thy colours shed,
A soft deliquium on thy sense shall steal,
And no disease or agony shall feel.
Then soon this life-inspiring wand will smite
Death's iron grasp, shake off this cumbrous veil;
And lead thee forth array'd in glory bright
Up to yon realms of day among the suns of light."

"Gracious thy message, kind thy care has been,
Celestial Herald! (pleas'd Elfenor cried;)
For weak's the evidence of things not seen,
And our frail frame shrinks at a change untried:
But Truth and Goodness bid me to confide.
These every doubt and every fear restrain;
The heart that feels them needs no proof beside:
Nay, Nature's self a change will ascertain;
Where all things die to rise in other states again.

"We see the day decline, and die in night,
Then rises waken'd to a beauteous morn:
Dead winter springs, and darkness puts on light.
From what small seeds, or little grain of corn,
The stately stalk, or spreading tree, are born!
Dropp'd in the mould and perish'd, they spring forth
In other forms, which flowers and fruits adorn.
Why may not worms, as we are, leave in earth
An empty film to rot, and know a nobler birth?

"Wheree'er Heaven calls, or wheresoe'er he leads,
I follow ready, to his will resign'd:
Whatever world or scene of things succeeds,
He reigns through all, and I can nothing find
That I should dread, while he continues kind."
This said, the Herald gave the gentle stroke;
Elfenor faints; upon the bank reclin'd
Melampus stretch'd him:  when in part he woke,
And lift his dying eyes, and thus prophetick spoke:

"Darkness creeps o'er the present and the past,
While Time draws back the veil from all before.
The opening prospect lengthens wild and vast,
A Sea immense, whose boisterous billows roar
The sport of winds, and hide the distant shore.
The crouded scene, Melampus, moves from Thee
And thy illustrious Bride; an age, or more,
On Argos throne thy Royal race I see,
Fill'd with the inspiring God, and heavenly Augury.

"Ah!  what avails, Amphiaraus, thy skill,
To know the end, unweeting of the mean?
Thou fall'st at Thebes:  in vain th' impending ill
In fate's reflected mirror was foreseen.
Thou fall'st thy people's Saviour; while thy Queen
Smiles on her bracelet!  nor conclude it hard:
For Heaven in mercy shuts thy mortal scene
In flower of life and virtue, for reward:
The guilty shall awhile for ripening wrath be spar'd.

"Thy sons thy death revenge; who exil'd mourn
The vengeance unbecoming pious hands,
From their own country, and from empire torn:
Too faithful to a Father's last commands!
I see thy offspring cast on other lands;
O'er the wide North to Western seas they rove,
And as they spread, Religion's light expands:
Priests, Prophets, Bards, to instruct the nations move,
And plant in distant climes their Hyperesian Grove.

"Meanwhile, Lust, Rapine, and Revenge through Greece
Shake every state, and trouble every shore:
War flings her iron lance, and frightens Peace.
Here the Cadmean Lyon's heard to roar;
There whets his tusk the Caledonian Boar;
Now Lydia flees before the Median Mule;
There Persia's Ram shall dip his horn in gore:
Graecia's rough Goat shall break the Persian rule;
The Goat an Eagle tear, and stretch her wings to Thule.

"Religion takes it's colour from the age,
A minister to Lust, or stern debate;
Warriors grow Gods, those Gods in factions rage,
While oracles are made the tools of state.
Pale Superstition, busy to create
Phantoms for fear, those phantoms to appease
With bloody victims bribe infernal Hate:
Idolatry, intent on what it sees,
Turns Symbols into Gods, and deifies her Trees.

"Thy Druids, in their Western clime secure,
Tread not the walks of War, or Error's maze:
Chief on yon spot, which whitening seas immure,
Whose stones are tin, shall Truth's enlight'ning rays
Distinguish'd shine, and gild her lengthen'd days.
Safe from incursions and from hostile camps,
Their manners know no mixtures or decays:
While realms around, as time their lustre damps,
Here light their torch at Truth, and trim their faded lamps.

"Untainted with the vices of the times,
Here Virtue long her peaceful reign shall hold;
Fenc'd less by Laws than ignorance of crimes.
Some the choice Medicines of the fields unfold;
Some deal out Justice undeceiv'd by gold:
When danger threats, or languid nature pants,
They smile at death, in future prospects bold:
Their God no Walls confine, no Image scants,
But in their Groves devout they trace him through the plants.

"But spite of care, or fierce surrounding seas,
Elfin corruption shews at length its stain;
Till conscious guilt, the wrath she dreads, to appease,
Shall float with blood of Elfin victims slain
The horrid Altars, and the Grove prophane.
Their crimes the Eagle from afar shall call,
Scenting its prey, to hover o'er their plain:
Then shall thy Druids bleed, their Oaks shall fall,
Error, and Vice, and War, and Vengeance harrass All.

"What total darkness overspreads the Earth,
In every clime extinguish'd every ray!
O wake!  and give the promis'd Blessing birth,
And light the nations with returning day!
I see a sceptre rise which wide shall sway:
See yonder star a stream of glory pour!
Bow down, ye Potentates!  with joy obey
The expected King!  the Star foretold of yore,
Ye Wise, with rapture know, and wonder, and adore!

"The Branch Divine!  the Rod of heavenly root!
The Sovereign Balm, whose fragrance fills the skies.
From sea to sea the encreasing Plant shall shoot.
Intent on Him, ye Nations, fix your eyes,
Who food and medicine to your tribes supplies:
Heals Superstition with celestial Love;
Nor longer bids the bloody Altars rise:
Idols and Symbol worship to remove,
Plants in the heart renew'd his Intellectual Grove.

"Anteros, his threaten'd empire to maintain,
Rouses the powers of Earth and all their arts
To oppose Religion, and prevents it's reign.
Vice trembles through her states; Imposture starts,
And lurking Malice shoots her poyson'd darts.
Fierce Interest and blind Prejudice unite;
Kings and Philosophers espouse their parts.
Through fiery storms, and all the rage of spight,
She moves victorious on, and trails her robe of white.

"Soon to her staff shall regal sceptres bow,
And Kings in dowry their domains bestow.
Then Anteros shall put on a solemn brow
In sanctity assum'd.  Hence springs new woe!
Hence Pride, Ambition, fierce Contention flow;
Scholastick webs, the raging lust of power,
Imperious Zeal, vain Pomp, and Tinsel Show.
Foes, guis'd like friends, suppress Religion's lore,
Dawb her fair face with paint, and stain her robe with gore.

"Once more thy sons, what of thy sons remain,
In yonder spot the Cassiterian Isle,
Shall blotted Truth and Purity again
In youthful grace and beauty make to smile.
To Them she flies from Rome's tyrannick soil,
And from her feet shakes off the attesting dust:
Thy Kings protect her from assault and guile.
Learning wipes off Tradition's sordid rust,
And Freedom's hands the chains of forc'd compulsion burst.

"But lo!  the prospect deepens!  sails unfurl'd
Whiten the seas, and journey with the sun!
No longer Thule bounds the Western World;
New shores are open'd, and new realms are won.
From port to port see restless Commerce run,
And high in air her rigid balance hold!
By thirst of gain Religion now's undone;
In open market every virtue sold,
And God himself exchang'd for late-discover'd Gold.

"This shrinking mischief, with confusion big,
Swallows whole empires in her ravenous maw,
While mutual graves their mutual falchions dig.
Intent on this the rival nations draw
With endless rage War's ever-changing saw.
Deceit, and Fraud, and Luxury, and Pride,
Corruption's teint, and wrong-defending Law,
With every artifice of vice beside,
Debauch a selfish world, and spread Disorder wide.

"O blind to every Good!  to Evil prone!
O thoughtless, creeping reptiles of a day!
Heaven wakes to vengeance.  Hark, the nations groan!
Kings and their armies flee to dread dismay.
The thunders roar, the forky lightnings play;
In horrid shower the burning sulphurs fall,
The Oceans hiss, the mountains melt away;
Fierce fires and flames enwrap the blazing ball,
And Desolation draws her dreadful sweep o'er all.

"Happy, thrice happy those distinguish'd Few,
Who, listening early to Religion's lore,
From earthly objects their affections drew!
Their eyes and wishes fixt on yonder shore,
Where want, and pain, and death shall be no more.
Incessant glories beam upon my sight!
On new-sprung wings my Spirit pants to soar,
And reach the regions of celestial light.
Adieu!  Earth's bubble breaks, and sinks in endless night."

Thus spake the Prophet, and then clos'd his eyes,
Stretch'd at his length, and number'd with the dead.
Again his wand the Herald then applies,
And from his clay-cold stiff'ning carcase fled
The inward form, on stranger-pinions sped.
Once a vile worm, and reptile son of clay,
He mounts on wings of radiant colours spread,
Chang'd in his powers, and clad in bright array,
Dear to the Son of LOVE, amidst the realms of Day.
