As now the Summit of the Hill they reach,
A new world opens to the ravish'd Eye:
All on the right Arcadia's valleys stretch,
Where fallow, tilth, and pasture mingled lie,
Champian, and wood, in sweet variety;
Unnumber'd streams in silver currents stray
Through the rich glebe; the Sun in the Eastern sky
(Stepp'd from his chamber like a bridegroom gay)
O'er the fair landscape smiles with soft enamour'd ray.

Behind them, Elis' ample plain extends,
Which Adria's stormy Sea at length receives:
Just o'er the flood diminish'd Zant ascends,
Part hid in clouds, part buried in the waves.
Upon the left, Nonacria high upheaves
His rocky ridge, that shine with spangled snows:
But discontinuous, in the middle leaves
An opening, which the distant city shews:
Broad at its foot the lake of shady Acheron flows.

Before, up rose in majesty the Grove,
With goodly trees adorn'd, stately and fair.
The leaves with various verdure interwove,
To the soft Spirit ever breathing there
Wave changeable; the blossoms thick appear
Wak'd by the Sun, who through the leafy veil
With tinkling beams had pierc'd; the dewy tear
Impearls the flowers which all the turf aumail,
And incense sweet to heaven in rich perfumes exhale.

Soaring aloft, but warping from the right,
Across the Hill to her aerial nest
Among the rocks of Nonacris, in sight
A snow-white Eagle flew; her talons press'd
A wreathing serpent, which still gor'd her breast
With tooth infixt; the pain new strength supplies:
Closer she grasps the monster, till its crest
Drops lifeless:  to her young she bears the prize,
An huge unfolded length, triumphant through the skies.

"Elfenor, (said Melampus,) high in air
View yonder combat, and approve the Sign.
New dangers threaten, for the fight prepare,
And boldly meet what thou canst not decline.
Be willing to o'ercome, and Victory's thine."
"O spare the trial, for I dread the foe,
(Elfenor cried,) be blameless safety mine,
And all the pride of triumph I forego:
So well his wily arts, so well myself I know."

Strait to his fears the Druid made return;
"Presume not, nor despond.  How vain the first,
How weak thy powers from past experience learn.
As causeless is the latter; for distrust
To Heaven's imparted Succour is unjust.
Be cautious never self-deceiv'd to yield,
And thou shalt conquer:  render'd more august
By aid celestial, every dart repell'd,
Back on the foe; Heaven's arm thy Strength, his Love thy Shield.

"Myself I shall distrust, myself alone,
(Rejoins Elfenor;) but if Heaven sees fit,
Who shall oppose his Will?  His Will be done!
Extinguish'd Worlds his Power infinite
Shall glorify. &mdash; I tremble and submit."
"But Heaven is not more Powerful than Good
(Melampus answer'd;) if thou art not yet
Convinc'd of that, enter this sacred wood:
From emblems fair his worth more fair be understood."

Soon as the ample Portal's shade he treads,
The shapely shafted trees his eyes salute
On every side; whose tall aspiring heads
High up to Heaven their branching honors shoot:
Their foliage wide o'er-arching glow'd with fruit,
And intermingled blooms of various hue:
Beneath, the Moly's deeply buried root
Resisting charms, and deathless Amaranth grew;
With that joy-giving plant, which sooths the hearts that rue.

"These lofty Cedars, that the Portal form,
Strong and majestick," (reassumes the Sage)
"Laugh at the tempest and deride the storm:
The leaves' eternal green mocks winter's rage,
Unhurt by insects, unconsum'd by age.
Fit entrance to the Deity's abode!
Strong to protect, or mighty to engage
The fiercest foe; a staff to help, or rod
To scourge; the Allmighty King!  the Everlasting God!

"On every side in beauteous order rise
The graceful-column'd Palms, white, black, and red,
Of various colors, and of various size,
Whose branches shine like rays of glory spread.
No trees so fair the fruitful earth has fed.
The Larch, the Fir, the Pine their charms unite
To grace these walks.  O bow with them the head;
And learn, low-stooping from Ambition's height,
To worship the Most high array'd in glory bright!

"The laurel and the Myrtle close entwin'd,
Thick walls with their entangled arms have made:
In the broad cove umbrageous Planes are join'd
To shield the Sun's fierce beam, and cool the glade;
With Mountain-Ash, whose lengthen'd morning shade
Serpents abhorrent fly.  Thy fears how vain
With such defence!  who seeks celestial aid
Beneath his shadow shall secure remain,
A cover from the heat, and shelter from the rain.

"View there the Pines, the Citrons, and the Palms,
Where beasts and birds and Elves promiscuous feed,
Loaded with food and medicinal balms:
Nor other seasons, other suns they need,
But fruits to fruits eternally succeede:
This hour, in which the infant blossom blows,
Here knits the bud, and there matures the seed.
Heaven, kind to all, his ready Good bestows,
Daily it comes unask'd, and unupbraiding flows."

Mean time the Spices of the sented grove
Flung out their rich perfumes;  which to the Soul
Breath'd soft delight, and gratitude, and love.
Elfenor's eyes through every quarter roll,
While down his cheek the tear of rapture stole.
"How beautiful thy dwellings!  I could stay
For ever here, contemplating the whole,
And THEE in All.  Hence, vain delights, away!
Be THOU my rest by night, be THOU my joy by day!"

As when the headstrong Youth forsaking home,
His Father's counsels and his care disdains,
Through the wide world in quest of joys to roam;
Through riot, quarrels, want, disease, and chains,
To dream of pleasure, and experience pains:
If his fond Sire with open arms restore
His freedom, plenty, peace, and fair domains,
How does he bless the Love he scorn'd before,
Taste each exalted joy, resolv'd to part no more!

Then thus the Sage:  "Some interval is given
For contemplation; that, dischar'd from care
Of grosser things, thy Soul may rise to Heaven
With Smoke of Incense on the wings of Prayer.
While I the aromatick woods prepare
And odiferous plants, here Thou at rest
Indulge to thought.  Return'd, with thee we share
The Hymn of Praise:  a Sacrifice the least
That grateful hearts would pay, yet Heaven accepts it best."

He went to cull from herbs and sented trees
The subtle essence of their high perfume;
Sweet Thyme, the treasure of Cecropian bees;
The Bay-leaf snapping in the flame; the bloom
Of Rose-marine; the Savin's jointed plume;
Wild Cypress; leaves of Figs; and resinous Fir;
The Cedar, sweating odoriferous gum;
The fragrant Myrtle; Mastick, like the Myrrh:
Fumes grateful to the Gods, which hell's foul hosts deter.

Meantime, sequester'd in the shade, apart
Elfenor wander'd, shunning publick eyes;
Health strings his nerves, and joy dilates his heart.
Busied in thought him Anteros meets, in guise
A Priestess of the Grove, and blandly cries,
"Belov'd of Heaven, all hail!  Say, whither rove
Thy lonely steps?"  The modest Elf replies,
"Long blind to Heaven, I now explore the Grove,
To read his wondrous works, and trace his boundless love."

"Well are thy thoughts employ'd, Belov'd of Heaven!
(Returns the foul impostor:)  Nor ill chose
This pleasing shade, for contemplation given.
Beneath yon Oak, round which the woodbine grows
With fond embrace, and the Milesian Rose
With modest blushes gives her every sweet,
A victim's hide invites to soft repose.
At ease, and undisturb'd, in that retreat,
Contemplate the First Good, First Fair, and Only Great.

"His Love deserves thy wonder, and return
Of Love from thee, which he directs to extend
To all his works:  from all his works discern
How All on others mutually depend:
This Palm-tree smiles not, separate from its friend.
Should sleep o'ertake thee, e'en thy sleep shall prove
Instructive here. &mdash; Thy shield a while suspend.&mdash;
The gentle inspiration from above
Shall smooth each rougher thought, and tune thy Soul to Love."

He weeted not the felon's lewd intrigue
Beneath the guise of piety exprest:
And Nature, weary with the night's fatigue
Of troubled dreams and broken sleep, address'd
Itself (reclin'd upon the skin) to rest.
Yet quits he not his shield, till the opiate smell
Induc'd a slumber, and his sense oppress'd.
From his slack grasp the unguarded target fell,
And Anteros to his brain applied the envenom'd spell.

Where skins of rams the drowzy votaries strow,
Indulging sloth, and spread the shaggy bed,
Anteros was wont the illusive scenes to show,
And fill with idle oracles their head.
Here, off his guard, by indolence misled,
Elfenor lay entangled in the toyls:
While Anteros, ever prompt at mischief, shed
The dream around, artificer of wiles;
And thus with aery forms his phantasy beguiles:

At first he seem'd faln prostrate at a shrine;
The Priestess thron'd beside him in a veil:
Who, not with frantick noise, but voice benign,
Accosts him thus:  "Beloved of Heaven, all hail!
The Virtuous never of reward shall fail.
Thou art decreed to give the afflicted earth
A race of heroes, destined to prevale:
Ipponoe's charms await to crown thy worth;
Haste, light the bridal lamp!  haste, give the heroes birth!"

The Spousals o'er, in a secluded bower
He dream'd he chid the bride's too long delay;
While round the roses shed their fragrant shower.
Then wearied sunk in sleep:  but as he lay,
A thrilling voice in whispers seem'd to say,
"Awake!  why sleeps my Love, when Heaven's behest
Continues unfulfill'd?  ere long the day
And other rites will call."  His lips she press'd,
And threw her arms around, and panted on his breast.

Elfenor wak'd, and started when he found
The fair Ipponoe panting on his breast,
Pressing him soft with snowy arms around.
The Fiend with fair Ipponoe's form impress'd
His lying semblance, like Ipponoe drest.
The wondering Elf surveys her glowing charms,
And gaz'd half lost upon the smiling pest.
His eyes drink poison which his bosom warms,
And half his heart subdues, and half his rage disarms.

"Are these, Ipponoe, (said he) thy returns
For Heaven's great love, and good Melampus' care?"&mdash;
"Unkindly question'd!  when my bosom burns
With undissembled love for Thee:  but spare
The unjust rebuke, (replied the guileful Fair.)
'Tis Heaven that plants in nature these desires,
Time's waste, and nature's ruins to repair:
To him obedient light at mine thy fires;
Tho' good Melampus chide, 'tis Heaven who love inspires."

Thus spoke the Form, and smil'd inchanting love,
With melting looks and studied perfidy:
Then with her left hand wandering gently strove
To steal his shield that lay neglected by.
As on the watled orb he casts his eye,
He starts surpris'd, nor left his shield behind.
Then rising made the Fiend this stern reply:
"Callst thou this Love?  O Scandal to thy kind!
A fever in the blood, an ulcer in the mind!

"The Love that nature prompts hath other views,
Hath nobler ends than loose promiscuous lust;
To extend creation, happiness diffuse
To future ages, heal with mutual trust
The various ills with which frail life is curst.
Tho' instinct spur, wisdom must guide the rein,
And Age must bless to make the nuptials just.
There Love to cast her Cestus kindly deigns,
Utility the end, the pleasure but the means.

"Look round the Grove, the feather'd tribes among,
With mutual faith the blameless pairs behave:
With mutual care thy rear their helpless Young,
And ag'd receive the succour which they gave.
For fruitless pleasures thy wild passions rave;
No father's smiles thy wandering nuptials grace;
But his age sinks with sorrow to his grave.
If offspring issue from the lewd embrace,
Thankless they issue forth, a curst deserted race.

"Such is the idle gossamer, that flits
With every breath, no useful end pursued,
But weft at random clings to all it meets.
If Pleasure sways thee, in this shield be view'd
The example of abstemious Fortitude:
Pleasure in vain with meretricious smiles
The Hero's heart attacks; her charms withstood,
He chose severer Virtue's glorious toils,
Scorn'd the soft wanton's baits, and 'scap'd her dangerous wiles."

He said, and turn'd the scutcheon to her eye:
Soon as the powerful virtue was addrest,
The assum'd Ipponoe's mimick beauties fly,
And all the foul impostor stands confest.
A loathsome hag the wither'd form express'd,
And Anteros through the mask to sight appears.
Defeated, not abash'd, the common pest
The Virtue which he could not conquer, sneers,
And scoffing flaunts away with lewd illiberal jeers.

Elfenor left the covert, now aware
No safety could be found in solitude
From subtle Spirits, and their hidden snare:
In vain are barr'd the gates of sense to exclude;
Through fancy's pass the treachor will intrude,
Impressing with involuntary thought
The passive mind, averting it from Good.
Elfenor, by his late experience taught,
Shun'd the retired path, and tracts more social sought.

He hasted back to where the towering Larch
And spiry Fir cast forth a chearful shade
Spangled with light; where Palms with pointed arch
Compose the vaunted Isle.  The glimmering glade
Was fill'd with Votaries:  one enraptur'd pray'd
Beneath a Palm, her hair a fillet bound
Made of the leaf, in vesture white array'd:
Devotion's self she seem'd to all around,
Now with uplifted eye, now prostrate on the ground.

Next to the Suppliant as Elfenor drew,
He heard these words with fervor utter'd forth:
"My Soul is struck with wonder when I view
Thy form more fair than all produc'd on earth.
Eternal fruits with unremitted birth
Fill the glad year by Thee with plenty stor'd;
In vain my tongue would tell thy passing worth:
Thou food, wine, shelter, dost to all afford;
For shelter, wine, and food, by Thou by all ador'd!

"Here in Thy presence let me bend the knee;
When absent let this branch thy place supply,
Pluckt from thy sacred venerable Tree.
A boon thou wilt not to my wish deny,
Whom an immortal youth forbids to die."
She rose, and from the stock a scyon took;
Then bow'd before it, and then wav'd it high.
Elfenor wondering, from his silence broke,
And to the wily fiend disguis'd, enquiring spoke.

"Excuse me, Stranger, whomso'er thou art:
I came attracted by thy fervent zeal
To join the homage of a grateful heart:
But let me not my great surprise conceal;
His tribute due thou seem'st from Heaven to steal,
And give it to a stock.  If cause there be
From reason, or Heaven's will, that cause revele.
To senseless wood why bends the reasoner's knee;
Why bows thy nobler self before the ignobler tree?"

"Impious!  (returns the Votary) dost thou ask
A reason why to pay thy worship here?
Look round what crowds consenting in the task
Prostrate before their Deities appear.
And art THOU ONLY wise? &mdash; What Beauty's there!
Shall Beauty not win love?  What arms project
To wing us round?  What fruits throughout the year?
Great, Good, and Fair, to nourish, please, protect!
Great, Good, and Fair, our trust, our love, and praise expect."

"Great, Good, and Fair, trust, love, and praise demand,
'Tis true:  but shall the unmeaning work compare
With that designing Mind, and mighty hand
Whose all these creature, and their uses, are;
The Source of All that's great, and good, and fair?
To Him alone our gratitude we owe:
He bids these trees for Us their honors wear,
Curves their broad arch, and bids their blossoms blow,
Their ample shade to spread, and ripen'd fruit to glow."

"Perverse!  to interpret thus a blameless word!
(Rejoins the Fiend) as if I had address'd
And made the Tree my God!  a charge absurd!
Who for the body could mistake the vest?
I mean those sacred influences that rest
Indwelling here, and give the eternal green:
Which not forsake the branch that Votaries wrest
From the live trunk; but there remain unseen.
I worship not the Tree, but God that dwells within."

"Again thou err'st, or I again mistake,
(Replied Elfenor) wouldst thou comprehend
Thy puisny God within this Stock or Stake?
The Eternal Virtue knows no bounds or end:
Nor does he only on the Grove attend;
He tunes the lark, gives honey to the bee,
Scents the gay flowers when genial rains descend,
He lives in All:  not only in the Tree,
But lives for mercy or for judgment even in Thee."

"This mediate worship (said the Fiend) is done
To the Prime Cause through these.  Let this refute
Thy fond mistake:  Yon glorious Sun,
With his attending fires, whose virtues shoot
Throughout this frame, to animate the brute,
Paint the rich mead, melodious notes excite,
Exalt the scents, sublime the juicy fruit,
Dispense disease, and health, and day, and night,
And life, and death.  Great God of All, Celestial Light!"

"Thy words (Elfenor cried) with horror chill
My blood:  in such invented shifts is shown
Not Judgment's error, but a stubborn Will,
Determin'd Heaven's just Monarch to disown,
And boldly place a creature in his throne.
Turn thy mind's eye to Him, who lights up there
That fire, and guides it through the burning Zone,
To scatter life, or death; to wound, or chear;
And whom thou wilt not love, yet learn at least to fear."

"Learn Thou to fear (retorts the Fiend again)
Contemner of that God who gave the Grove,
And worship to the Grove did first ordain!
Go, ask thy Fathers, and their deeds approve;
Some in the Oak majestick worship Jove;
Apollo's votaries to the Laurel run;
The Myrtle's sacred to the Queen of Love;
The Vine to Bacchus:  These are all but One,
The source of every good, yon all-propitious SUN!

"If yet thou dar'st the God's command despise;
If yet thy folly wisdom's love disdains;
Yet shun the vengeance open to thine eyes.
See'st thou this stone, which grumous blood distains,
Smear'd with the plash of gore and mingled brains
Of elder Atheists?  Let this rock persuade,
Though wisdom lose her ineffectual pains."
Then on the phantom of a rock she laid
Her branch, and frown'd.  Elfenor answer'd, undismay'd.

"Whoe'er thou art, a foe to Elfin kind
I know thee now:  this painted shield behold.
See here, Heaven's conquering Son in battle join'd
Against his Father's enemies of old,
Who vanquish'd fall before him.  Here is told
How the fell monsters of the earth were kill'd;
The Serpent last his hideous length unroll'd.
Speedy returns, and due allegiance yield,
Or perish with his foes."  He said, and struck his shield.

Vanish'd the stone, the Fiend to sight reveal'd
Drop'd his disguise, and sullen strode away.
Pleas'd with the wondrous virtue of his shield
Elfenor prostrate thus began to pray:
"O, King of Heaven!  accept the thanks I pay:
As Thine the Strength, so all the Praise be Thine!
Whether I mix in crowds, or musing stray
In secret paths, still lend thy aid Divine:
Thy strength in every place I need, so weak is mine."

Now through the Portal, numerous as the sands,
Crowd in the morning votaries:  Old and Young,
And Rich and Poor, with branches in their hands,
Pour in perpetual, a promiscuous throng,
Ere the day's toil begin, to join the Song
Of daily homage, praise, and gratitude.
With these, return'd Melampus mov'd along;
The burning Censor, and the Spicy Wood
In either hand; the Choir around in order stood.

The Royal Praetus, whom his daughters met
Hasting to weary Heaven with ardent prayers
For their return, now came to pay his debt:
(A debt from All, but greater far than Theirs
Was his to Heaven and good Melampus' cares.)
The eldest leads her Sire with decent grace;
His golden Sandals next Lysippe bears;
Ipponoe last, with due attending pace;
A chaste and holy Love reign'd aweful in her face.

Elfenor saw, nor could refrain at first
(So deep the impressions of the dream were grown)
To view the unconscious Fair with some disgust:
But when he mark'd how steady virtue shone
From her firm eye, on pious acts alone
Intent; that now, not studious how to please,
She pleas'd the more, and unsought honor won:
The Fiend's illusions vanish by degrees,
Each prejudice subsides, each vain suspicion flees.

Strait through the vocal Grove, where Echo mocks,
The hoarse horn roars, the winding shell more clear
Peals forth the Symphony:  Nonacria's rocks
Rebellow to the sound.  The distant hear,
And hearing know the hour of homage near.
All hasting to the common temple ran;
Those whom disease or age forbid to appear,
Know when to join in heart &mdash; that all thy can!
The Universal Choir.  Then thus the Bards began:

"Prepare to meet your God, ye Sons of Earth,
High thron'd in Heaven, who deigns to visit here!
Thousands of Spirits, with their wings stretch'd forth,
The Monarch in his Royal Chariot bear,
And rapid whirl him through the fields of air.
O'er their steep heights majestic as he rode
The wondering mountains shrink, and melt for fear;
And waving forests at his Presence nod:
So bow, and tremble Ye!  Prepare to meet your God!

"He comes!  See every leaf observant stirs,
Proclaiming his Approach!  the darkness flies.
He comes!  Lift up your lofty heads, ye Firs!
And Ye, ye everlasting Cedars, rise!
Receive your Lord, the Monarch of the Skies!
Great as ye are, yet time your glory sheds,
While He, Most High, Eternal, time defies.
Too low your gates, too strait your Portal spreads:
Rise, rise, ye loftiest Pines!  Ye Cedars, lift your heads!

"Ye Trees of goodly sight and fragrant smells,
Your every beauty, every glory show,
To deck the Palace where your Monarch dwells!
He moulds your shafts, he spreads your hues that glow,
From Him your verdure, form, and fragrance flow:
Himself how wondrous Fair!  In vain you paint
His glories forth, to whom yourselves you owe;
Though dipt in ether shines each lively teint,
Too gross the pencil'd lines, the colours are too faint.

"Learn hence, ye reptiles, on the earth that crawl,
(His aweful courts with so much splendour crown'd)
WHOSE Wisdom plan'd, WHOSE Power effected All
In infinite variety!  Around,
The smiling Grove, the gay enamel'd ground,
Burst into bloom, and speak in flowers their joy.
O worship Ye with reverence profound;
And to his Honour all your powers employ,
Whose Kingdom knows no end, whose Glory no alloy!

"Ye Mountains, shout!  Ye laughing vallies, sing!
Ye murmuring Fountains that for every stray,
And all the Grove, rejoice before your King!
His Sceptre rule!  Heaven's Hosts confess his sway:
Shall reptiles only dare to disobey?
Shout, all ye Earth!  Ye Heavens, attest your joy!
Wake every String, chaunt forth the raptur'd Lay,
And to his Honour all your powers employ,
Whose Kingdom knows no end, whose Glory no alloy!

"Ye branching Palms, where date succeeds to date,
The elder dropping as the young protrude;
Citrons and Pines, whose undiminish'd freight
Supplies the various seasons, while the fruit
To-day consum'd, to-morrow is renew'd,
Proclaim his Goodness!  Hark, the feather'd throng
Feast and rejoice!  Eternal Source of Good,
From thy full urn still pour thy streams along:
Vouchsafe our daily food, accept our daily song!

"Ye stately Oaks, whose boughs exclude the Sun,
Ye broad-leav'd Planes, ye widely-spreading Beech,
Ye Laurels, that the burning Sirius shun,
Ye Ash, whose shades half o'er the forest reach,
And chase the Serpent-tribe, his Goodness teach!
The weary traveller here secure is laid,
While round, your arms their kind protection stretch:
In vain fierce Suns, or driving Storms invade,
In vain the aspick burns, such safety's in the shade.

"Amidst the terrors guilty mortals dread,
When thy red bolts the ethereal concave rend,
Almighty God, thy powerful shelter spread!
O'er us thy everlasting arms extend,
Hide, hide our guilt, thy vengeful shafts suspend,
And in thy shadow give us safe repose!
Though fortune shine, or all her storms descend,
Guard us from both!  And when our eyes we close,
The lurking Serpent drive, drive far our unseen foes.

"Pure from the stream, by sacrifice aton'd,
Bold we presume to approach thy Holy Seat,
And seek thy Presence in the Grove enthron'd.
With offerings worthie Thee, these Odours sweet,
Pure essence, for thy purer nature meet:
These on thy sacred embers laid shall blaze,
And grateful fumes exhale from temper'd heat:
Thence on their subtle wings aloft shall raise
To Thee the reptile's Prayer, to Thee the reptile's Praise."

Then on the smoking coals the sprigs he threw
Of every kind; short snapp'd the crackling wood,
Till high to Heaven the pillar'd Incense grew.
The branches wave, the Bards proclaim aloud
MOST HIGH!  ETERNAL!  POWERFUL!  and GOOD!
The Mountains eccho to the vaulted skies
The loud acclaim.  Elfenor raptur'd stood;
A Joy Divine approving Heaven supplies;
While by the Incense chas'd the Fiend indignant flies.

