Fly, Envy fly, to Hell's detested gloom,
Nor more t' asperse th' immortal Muse presume;
Th' immortal Muse on Fame's proud pinion flies,
Above the Croud, and claims her native skies.

Wealth's dazling Beams, the Statesman's subtle Scheme,
The Pomp of Princes, and the Warrior's flame;
Arts that now flourish, Sciences that strain
The vent'rous Wing, to yon aetherial Plain,
And calm Philosophy, whose Eye explores,
Nature's deep Womb, and opes her secret stores;
All these must feel the general decay,
Melt in the stream of Years and glide away.
The Nine alone can deathless Fame bestow,
From these pure Founts immortal honours flow.

See Milton's Muse, th' unfathom'd depths explore,
Of sable vested Night, and Chaos hoar;
Thence bursting glorious, bend her rapid way
Thro' the bright Regions of eternal Day;
Set Heaven's rebellious Sons in impious Arms,
And fill the Firmament with loud alarms:
While red in wrath Messiah's arm appears,
And treble Thunders rock the tott'ring Spheres;
'Till hurl'd at once from Heavens stupendous brow,
Fall the crushed Legions to the depths below;
Blest that those Caves and Lakes of liquid Fire,
Shield from the Fury of th' Almighty Sire.

Sweet Spencer next, the Captive fancy leads,
To 'chanted Castles and enamel'd Meads;
Where courteous Knights in magic Fetters lie,
And wail their Woes to long Eternity.

Next daring Shakespeare strikes the ravished Soul,
And whirls us in a thrice from Pole to Pole;
Unmasks the Traitor, bids the Hero rise,
And pluck bright Virtue from the distant Skies,
Or soft descending, opes the human Heart,
While living Nature speaks in ev'ry Part;
What peals of Laughter shake the applauding Pit,
At Pistol's Phrase, and Falstaff's peerless Wit:
What bursting Sighs, what mighty Sorrows flow,
At great Othello's more than mortal Woe;
Who can the soft, the pleasing Anguish quell,
When tender Juliet breaths her last Farewel?

Enchanting Damsels and enchanted Swains,
With Raptures catch soft Waller's silky Strains;
Smooth as the Murmurs of descending Rills,
Thro' every Nerve the languid Joy distills;
'Till the coy Virgin chaf'd to keen desire,
Transported sinks in Love's consuming Fire.

While Truth, Morality and Wisdom rove,
With Pensive Cowley thro' the silent Grove;
His skilful Hand spreads every Plant to View,
Whose tender Pores imbibe the Morning Dew;
Or thron'd aloft in Pindar's fiery Car,
Rides thro' the Aether like a Morning Star;
Whose sweeping Fires o'er Heaven's wide Concave glow,
And strike Amazement in the Croud below.

While genuine Wit the World's attention draws,
Or justest satire challenges Applause;
Dorset's bright Muse maintains the foremost Place,
Reflecting Lustre on his noble Race.
Nor less severely Wilmot's Numbers sting,
These early Numbers, nipt in Youth's fair Spring;
O lost too soon!  had Fate prolong'd thy Round
The Stars alone, thy deathless Fame cou'd bound;
A stronger genius never warmed the Breast,
A fairer, none of human Race possest;
Wit saw in thee her last great Champion fled,
And selfish Dullness rear'd th' exulting Head:
Saw to your Tomb the weeping Loves descend,
And each sad Muse the useless Lyre suspend.

Engaging Grace and Majesty divine,
Sparkle in Buckingham's melodious line.

But see where all begirt with ruffian bands,
In conscious Pride, majestic Dryden stands;
As erst Britannia's martyr'd Monarch stood,
Th' outrageous Insults of a sordid Brood;
Oh fly my Muse, thy swift Assistance bring,
Rescue the Bard who first inspired to sing.
But lo!  th' invidious Rabble disappears,
Like Summer Wasps, and all the Prospect clears,
His manly Muse asserts her kindred Skies,
While Trapp and candid Brown, encrease th' Excise.

When Roman Sidney fills the slender Reeds,
We dream of soft Arcadia's flow'ry Meads;
But when great Denham sings in bolder strains,
We think their Beauties moved to British plains.

Pierian Maids whose sacred Fires controul
My raptured Breast, and ravish all my Soul,
Inspire my Sense, your radiant Beams diffuse,
Whilst low I bend to Pope's imperial Muse;
Oh heavenly Bard, endowed with ev'ry Art,
To melt the Soul and captivate the Heart;
On thy blest Lays the Loves and Graces hung,
Breath'd on thy Lips, and dwelt upon thy tongue:
Amazed we fancy, thy Caecilia sings,
Inspires the Harp and strikes the Silver strings;
While in soft Measures thy mellifluous Song,
Harmonious rolls, and steals the Sense along:
If loftier Themes thy swelling Numbers roar,
Loud as the Waves that lash the sounding shore,
Or soft reclin'd, along the silver Thame,
Flocks, Groves, and Shepherds consecrate to Fame.

Who doats on Art and Nature's choicest Gift,
May see the mighty Treasure, join'd in Swift.

Landsown has Art and Nature reconcil'd;
And Gay tho' manly, pleases ev'ry Child.

Who can my Congreve's polish'd Scenes forget
While purest Dialogue charms; or pointed Wit.

Fletcher's quick Fire, and Beaumont's calmer Sense,
With gentle Suckling's milder Influence;
For these alas long lost, we now may grieve,
Did not their various Graces still survive.
While doric Eloquence from Mason flows,
And Juvenal's bright Flame in Whitehead glows;
Tibullus, Gallus, Ovid all display
Their softer Beauties in immortal Gray.
