GODE COUNSAILE OF CHAUCER
Flie fro the prese, and dwell with sothfastness;
Suffice unto thy Gode, though it be small,
For horde hath hate, and climbyng tikilnesse;
Prece hath envy, and wele it brent ore all,
Savour ne more then the behovin shall:
Rede well thyself, that other folke canst rede,
And trouthe the shall delivir, it is no drede.

Paine the not eche crokid to redresse,
In trust of her that tournith as a balle;
Grete rest standith in litil businesse,
Beware also to spurre again a nalle.
Strive not as doth a crocke with a walle.
Demith thy self that demist othirs dede,
And trouthe the shall delivir, it is no drede.

That the is sent receve in buxomenesse;
The wrastlying of this worlde askith a falle;
Here is no home, here is but wildirnesse,
For the pilgrim for the o best out of thy stalle,
Loke upon high, and thanke thy God of all;
Weivith thy luste, and let thy ghost the lede,
And trouthe the shall delivir, it is no drede.

ATTEMPTED IN MODERN ENGLISH.
THE POET'S LAST ADVICE.
Fly from the croud, and be to virtue true,
Content with what thou hast, tho' it be small;
To hoard things hate; nor lofty thoughts pursue;
He who climbs high endangers many a fall.
Envy's a shade that ever waits on fame,
And oft the sun that raises it will hide:
Trace not in life a vast expansive scheme,
But be thy wishes to thy state ally'd.
Be mild to others, to thyself severe;
So truth shall shield thee or from hurt or fear.

Think not of binding all things to thy will,
Nor vainly hope that Fortune shall befriend;
Inconstant she, but be thou constant still,
Whate'er betide, unto an honest end.
Yet needless dangers never madly brave;
Kick not thy naked foot against a nail;
Or from experience the solution crave,
If wall and pitcher strive which shall prevail?
Be in thy cause as in thy neighbour's clear,
So truth shall shield thee or from hurt or fear.

Whatever happens, happy in thy mind
Be thou, nor at thy lot in life repine;
He 'scapes all ill whose bosom is resign'd;
Nor way nor weather will be always fine.
Beside, thy home's not here, a journey this,
A pilgrim thou, then hie thee on thy way;
Look up to God, intent on heav'nly bliss,
Take what the road affords, and praises pay:
Shun brutal lusts, and seek thy soul's high sphere;
So truth shall shield thee or from hurt or fear.
