THYRSIS.
Sweet are the whispers of yon vocal pine,
Whose boughs, projecting o'er the springs, recline;
Sweet is thy warbled reed's melodious lay;
Thou, next to Pan, shalt bear the prize away:
If to the God a horn'd he-goat belong,
The gentler female shall reward thy song;
If he the female claim, a kid's thy share,
And, till you milk them, kids are dainty fare.

GOATHERD.
Sweeter thy song, O shepherd, than the rill
That rolls its music down the rocky hill:
If one white ewe content the tuneful Nine,
A stall-fed lamb, meet recompence, is thine;
And if the Muses claim the lamb their due,
My gentle Thyrsis shall obtain the ewe.

THYRSIS.
Wilt thou on this declivity repose,
Where the rough tamarisk luxuriant grows,
And gratify the Nymphs with sprightly strain?
I'll feed thy goats, and tend the browsing train.

GOATHERD.
I dare not, dare not, shepherd, grant your boon,
Pan's rage I fear, who always rests at noon,
When tir'd with hunting, stretch'd in sleep along,
His bitter rage will burst upon my song:
But well you know Love's pains, which Daphnis rues,
You the great Master of the rural muse;
Let us beneath yon shady elm retreat,
Where Nature forms a lovely pastoral seat,
Where sculptur'd Naiads and Priapus stand,
And groves of oaks extending o'er the land;
There if you sing as sweetly as of yore,
When you the prize from Lybian Chromis bore,
This goat with twins I'll give, that never fails
Two kids to suckle, and to fill two pails:
To these I'll add, with scented wax o'er-laid,
Of curious workmanship, and newly made,
A deep two-handled Cup, whose brim is crown'd
With ivy join'd with helichryse around;
Small tendrils with close-clasping arms uphold
The fruit rich speckled with the seeds of gold.
Within, a woman's well-wrought image shines,
A vest her limbs, her locks a caul confines;
And near, two neat-curl'd youths in amorous strains
With fruitless strife communicate their pains:
Smiling, by turns, she views the rival pair;
Grief swells their eyes, their heavy hearts despair.
Hard by, a fisherman advanc'd in years,
On the rough margin of a rock appears;
Intent he stands t' enclose the fish below,
Lifts a large net, and labours at the throw:
Such strong expression rises on the sight,
You'd swear the man exerted all his might;
For his round neck with turgid veins appears&mdash;
'In years he seems, yet not impair'd by years.'
A vineyard next, with intersected lines,
And red ripe clusters load the bending vines:
To guard the fruit a boy sits idly by,
In ambush near, two sculking foxes lie;
This plots the branches of ripe grapes to strip,
But that, more daring, meditates the scrip;
Resolv'd ere long to seize the savoury prey,
And send the youngster dinnerless away:
Meanwhile on rushes all his art he plies,
In framing traps for grasshoppers and flies;
And earnest only on his own designs,
Forgets his satchel, and neglects his vines:
All round the soft acanthus spreads its train&mdash;
This Cup, admir'd by each Aeolian swain,
From far a Calydonian sailor brought,
For a she-goat and new-made cheese I bought;
No lip has touch'd it, still unus'd it stood;
To you I give this masterpiece of wood,
If you those Himeraean strains rehearse
Of Daphnis' woes &mdash; I envy not your verse&mdash;
Dread Fate, alas!  may soon demand your breath,
And close your music in oblivious death.

THYRSIS.
Begin, ye Nine, that sweetly wont to play,
Begin, ye Muses, the bucolic lay.
"Thyrsis my name, to Aetna I belong,
Sicilian Swain, and this is Thyrsis' song:"

Where were ye, Nymphs, in what sequester'd grove?
Where were ye, Nymphs, when Daphnis pin'd with love?
Did ye on Pindus' steepy top reside?
Or where through Tempe Peneus rolls his tide?
For where the waters of Anapus flow,
Fam'd streams!  ye play'd not, nor on Aetna's brow;
Nor where chaste Acis laves Sicilian plains&mdash;

Begin, ye Muses, sweet bucolic strains.
Him savage panthers in wild woods bemoan'd,
For him fierce wolves in hideous howlings groan'd;
His fate fell lions mourn'd the live-long day&mdash;

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic lay.
Meek heifers, patient cows, and gentle steers,
Moan'd at his feet, and melted into tears;
Ev'n bulls loud bellowing wail'd the shepherd swain&mdash;

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic strain.
First from the mountain winged Hermes came;
"Ah!  whence, he cried, proceeds this fatal flame?
What nymph, O Daphnis, steals thine heart away?"

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic lay.
Goatherds and hinds approach'd; the youth they hail'd,
And shepherds kindly ask'd him what he ail'd.
Priapus came, soft pity in his eye,
'And why this grief, he said, ah!  Daphnis, why?'
Meanwhile the nymph disconsolately roves,
With naked feet thro' fountains, woods, and groves,
And thus of faithless Daphnis she complains;

(Begin, ye Muses, sweet bucolic strains)
'Ah youth!  defective both in head and heart,
A cowherd stil'd, a goatherd sure thou art,
Who when askance with leering eye he notes
The amorous gambols of his frisking goats,
He longs to emulate their wanton play:

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic lay.
'So when you see the virgin train advance
With nimble feet, light-bounding in the dance;
Or when they softly speak, or sweetly smile,
You pine with grief, and envy all the while.'
Unmov'd he sat, and no reply return'd,
But still with unavailing passion burn'd;
To death he nourish'd Love's consuming pain&mdash;

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic strain.
Venus insulting came, the youth addrest,
Forc'd a faint smile, with torture at her breast;
"Daphnis, you boasted you could Love subdue,
But tell me, has not Love defeated you?
Alas!  you sink beneath his mighty sway."

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic lay.
'Ah, cruel Venus!  Daphnis thus began,
Abhorr'd and curs'd by all the race of man,
My day's decline, my setting sun I know,
I pass a victim to the shades below,
Where riots Love with insolent disdain&mdash;

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic strain.
'To Ida, Venus, fly, expose your charms,
Rush to Anchises', your old cowherd's arms;
There bowering oaks will compass you around,
Here low cyperus scarcely shades the ground,
Here bees with hollow hums disturb the day.

Begin ye Nine, the sweet bucolic lay.
'Adonis feeds his flocks, tho' passing fair,
With his keen darts he wounds the flying hare,
And hunts the beasts of prey along the plain.

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic strain.
'Say, if again arm'd Diomed you see,
I conquer'd Daphnis, and will challenge thee;
"Dar'st thou, bold chief, with me renew the fray?"

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic lay.
'Farewell, ye wolves, and bears and lynxes dire;
My steps no more the tedious chace shall tire:
The herdsman, Daphnis, now no longer roves,
Thro' flowery shrubs, thick woods, or shady groves.
Fair Arethusa, and ye streams that swell
In gentle tides near Thymbrian towers, farewell,
Your cooling waves slow-winding o'er the plains.

Begin, ye Muses, sweet bucolic strains.
'I Daphnis here my lowing oxen fed,
And here my heifers to their watering led,
With bulls and steers no longer now I stray,'

Begin, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic lay.
'Pan, whether now on Maenalus you rove,
Or loiter careless in Lycaeus' grove,
Leave yon aerial promontory's height
Of Helice, projecting to the sight,
Where fam'd Lycaon's stately tomb is rear'd,
Lost in the skies, and by the Gods rever'd;
Haste, and revisit fair Sicilia's plains.

Cease, Muses, cease the sweet bucolic strains.
'Pan, take this pipe, to me for ever mute,
Sweet-ton'd, and bent your rosy lip to suit,
Compacted close with wax, and join'd with art,
For Love, alas!  commands me to depart;
Dread Love and Death have summon'd me away&mdash;

Cease, Muses, cease the sweet bucolic lay.
'Let violets deck the bramble-bush and thorn,
And fair narcissus junipers adorn.
Let all things Nature's contradiction wear,
And lofty pines produce the luscious pear;
Since Daphnis dies, let all things change around,
Let timorous deer pursue the flying hound;
Let screech-owls soft as nightingales complain'&mdash;

Cease, cease, ye Nine, the sweet bucolic strain.
He died &mdash; and Venus strove to raise his head,
But Fate had cut the last remaining thread&mdash;
The Lake he past, the whelming wave he prov'd,
Friend to the Muses, by the Nymphs belov'd.

Cease, sacred Nine, that sweetly wont to play,
Cease, cease, ye Muses, the bucolic lay.
Now, friend, the Cup and Goat are fairly mine,
Her milk's a sweet libation to the Nine:
Ye Muses, hail!  all praise to you belongs,
And future days shall furnish better songs.

GOATHERD.
O, be thy mouth with figs Aegilean fill'd,
And drops of honey on thy lips distill'd!
Thine is the Cup (for sweeter far thy voice
Than when in spring the grashoppers rejoice)
Sweet is the smell, and scented as the bowers
Wash'd by the fountains of the blissful HOURS.

Come, Ciss!  let Thyrsis milk thee &mdash; Kids, forbear
Your gambols, lo!  the wanton goat is near.
