Daphnis, begin!  for merrily you play,
Daphnis, begin the sweet bucolic lay;
Menalcas next shall sing; while pasturing near
Calves mix with cows, the heifer with the steer;
The bulls together with the herd may browze,
Rove round the copse, and crop the tender boughs;
Daphnis, begin the sweet bucolic strain;
Menalcas next shall charm the shepherd-swain.

DAPHNIS.
Sweet low the herds along the pastur'd ground,
Sweet is the vocal reed's melodious sound;
Sweet pipes the jocund herdsman, sweet I sing,
And lodge securely by yon cooling spring,
Where the soft skins of milk-white heifers, spread
In order fair, compose my decent bed:
Ah luckless!  browsing on the mountain's side
The south-wind dash'd them headlong, and they died.
There I regard no more bright summer's fires
Than youthful lovers their upbraiding sires.

Thus Daphnis chanted his bucolic strain;
And thus Menalcas charm'd the shepherd-swain.

MENALCAS.
Aetna's my parent; there I love to dwell,
Where the rock-mountains form an ample cell:
And there, with affluence blest, as great I live,
As swains can wish, or golden slumbers give;
By me large flocks of goats and sheep are fed,
Their wool my pillow, and their skins my bed:
In caldrons boil'd their flesh sustains me well;
Dry beechen faggots wintry frosts expell.
Thus I regard no more the cold severe
Than toothless men hard nuts when pulse is near.

Here ceas'd the youths; I prais'd their pastoral strains,
And gave to each a present for his pains:
A well-form'd club became young Daphnis' due,
Which in my own paternal woodlands grew,
So exquisitely shap'd from end to end,
An artist might admire, but could not mend.
A pearly conch, wreath'd beautifully round,
Late on th' Icarian rocky beach I found,
The shell I gave Menalcas for his share;
Large was the conch, its flesh was rich and rare,
(This in five equal portions I divide)
And to five friends a plenteous meal supply'd.
Pleas'd he receiv'd, and lik'd his present well,
And thus he sweetly blew the shining shell:

Hail, rural Muses!  teach your bard those strains
Which once I sung, and charm'd the listening swains:
Then would my tongue repeat the pleasing lore,
And painful blisters never gall it more.
To grashoppers the grashoppers are friends,
And ant on ant for mutual aid depends;
The ravenous kite protects his brother kite;
But me the Muse and gentle song delight.
O, may my cave with frequent song be blest!
For neither roseat spring, nor downy rest
So sweet the labourer soothe; nor to the bee
Are flowers so grateful, as the Muse to me:
For Circe's strongest magic ne'er can harm
Those whom the Muses with soft rapture charm.
