Damoetus and young Daphnis, tuneful swains,
Late fed their herds, Aratus, on the plains;
The first was ruddy with a golden beard;
On Daphnis' cheek scarce doubtful down appear'd.
Fast by the margin of a murmuring spring,
'Midst noon-tide heat, they thus essay'd to sing.
And, while their cattle sought the cooling wave,
First Daphnis sung, for he the challenge gave.

DAPHNIS.
O Polyphemus, while your flocks you keep,
With apples Galatea pelts your sheep,
And calls you goatherd, and ungrateful swain;
Meanwhile you pipe in sweetly warbled strain,
Nor see the wild nymph, senseless as a log;
And lo!  again she pelts your faithful dog:
List!  list!  he barks, and in a strange amaze
His dancing shadow in the sea surveys:
Ah!  call him back, lest on the maid he leap,
And tear her limbs emerging from the deep.
Lo!  where she wantons, frolic, light and fair,
As down of bearsfoot in soft summer air;
And, still impell'd by strange, capricious Fate,
Flies those that love, and follows those that hate.
In vain the blandishments of love she plies,
For faults are beauties in a lover's eyes.
Thus Daphnis sung, Damoetas thus reply'd:

DAMOETAS.
By mighty Pan, the wily nymph I spy'd
Pelting my flock, I saw with this one eye&mdash;
May heaven preserve its lustre till I die:
Though Telemus presages ills to come;
Let him reserve them for his sons at home.
To teaze, I seem regardless of her game,
And drop some items of another flame:
Soon to her ears the spreading rumour flies,
For envy then and jealousy she dies;
And furious, rising from her azure waves,
She searches all my folds, and all my caves:
And then my dog, obedient to command,
Barks as she walks, and bays her off the strand:
For when I lov'd, he wagg'd his tail with glee,
Fawn'd, whin'd, and loll'd his head upon her knee.
This practice shortly will successful prove,
She'll surely send me tidings of her love.
But I'll exclude this sea-jilt, till she swears
To press with me the bed herself prepares.
Nor am I so deform'd, for late I stood,
And view'd my face in ocean's tranquil flood;
My beard seem'd fair, and comely to the sight;
My eye, though single, sparkling, full and bright:
My teeth array'd in beauteous order shone,
Well-match'd, and whiter than the Parian stone.
And lest inchantment should my limbs infest,
I three times dropt my spittle on my breast;
This charm I learnt from an old sorceress' tongue,
Who harvest-home at Hipocoon's sung.

Damoetas ended, and with eager joy
Daphnis embrac'd, and kiss'd the blooming boy;
Then gave, as best his sprightly taste might suit,
A pipe melodious, and receiv'd a flute.
Damoetas deftly on the flute could play,
And Daphnis sweetly pip'd, and caroll'd to his lay:
Their heifers gambol'd on the grass-green fields;
In singing neither conquers, neither yields.
