When Sparta's monarch, Menelaus, led
The beauteous Helen to his bridal bed,
Twelve noble virgins, blooming, young and fair,
With hyacinthine wreaths adorn'd their hair,
And, pleas'd the vocal benison to shower,
To the soft cithern danc'd before the bower;
As bounding light in circling steps they move,
Their feet beat time, and every heart beat love:
This was the nuptial song &mdash; 'Why, happy groom,
Steal you thus early to the genial room?
Has sleep or wine your manly limbs opprest,
That thus, thus soon you seek the bed of rest?
If drowzy slumbers lull you to a drone,
Go take refreshing sleep, but sleep alone;
Leave Helen with her maiden mates, to play
At harmless pastimes till the dawn of day:
This night, we claim, then yield her yours for life,
From morn to night, from year to year, your wife.
Hail happy prince!  whom Venus wafted o'er,
With prosperous omens, to the Spartan shore;
To bless her bed, from all the princely crowd,
Fair Helen chose you &mdash; Cupid sneez'd aloud.
Of all our demigods 'tis you aspire,
Alone, to call Saturnian Jove your fire:
Jove's daughter now your warm embraces meets,
The pride of Greece, between two lily sheets.
Sure will the offspring, from that soft caress,
The mother's charms in miniature express.
Thrice eighty virgins of the Spartan race,
Her equals we in years, but not in face,
Our limbs diffusing with ambrosial oil,
Were wont on smooth Eurota's banks to toil
In manly sports; and though each nymph was fair,
None could with her in beauty's charms compare:
When Winter thus in night no longer lours,
And Spring is usher'd by the blooming Hours,
The rising morning, with her radiant eyes,
Salutes the world, and brightens all the skies.
So shines fair Helen, by the Graces drest,
In face, shape, size superior to the rest:
As corn the fields, as pines the garden grace,
As steeds of Thessaly the chariot-race;
So Helen's beauties bright encomiums claim,
And beam forth honour on the Spartan name.
What nymph can rival Helen at the loom,
And make fair art, like living nature bloom?
The blended tints, in sweet proportion join'd,
Express the soft ideas of her mind.
What nymph, like her, of all the tuneful quire,
Can raise the voice, or animate the lyre?
Whether of Pallas, great in arms, she sings,
Or Dian bathing in the silver springs.
A thousand little Loves in ambush lie,
And shoot their arrows from her beaming eye.
O lovely Helen, whom all hearts adore,
A matron now you rise, a maid no more!
Yet ere another sun shall gild the morn,
We'll gather flowers, your temples to adorn,
Ambrosial flowers, as o'er the meads we stray,
And frequent sigh that Helen is away;
Mindful of Helen still, as unwean'd lambs
Rove round the pastures, bleating for their dams;
Fair flowers of lote we'll cull, that sweetly breathe,
And on yon spreading plane suspend the wreath.
But first from silver shells shall unguents flow,
Bedew the spreading plane, and all the flowers below:
And on the rind we'll write, that all may see,
"Here pay your honours, I am Helen's tree."
Joy to the bride, and to the bridegroom joy,
And may Latona bless you with a boy!
May Venus furnish both with equal love!
And lasting riches be the gift of Jove!
May these descend, and by possession grow,
From sire to son, augmenting as they flow!

Now sweetly slumber, mutual love inspire,
And gratify the fulness of desire:
Rise with the blushing morning, nor forget
The due of Venus, and discharge the debt:
And, ere the day's loud herald has begun
To speak his early prologue to the sun,
Again we'll greet your joys with cheerful voice,
O Hymen, Hymen, at this match rejoice!
