When lately I offer'd Eunica to kiss,
She fleer'd, and she flouted, and took it amiss;
"Begone, you great booby," she cry'd with a frown,
"Do you think that I long to be kiss'd by a clown?
The sparks of the city my kisses esteem;
You never shall kiss me, no, not in a dream.
How pleasing your look!  and how gently you play!
How soft is your voice!  and what fine things you say!
So neat is your beard, and so comely your hair!
Your hands are so white, and your lips, a sweet pair!
But on your dear person I never shall doat;
So pray keep your distance &mdash; you smell like a goat."
Thus spake the pert hussy, and view'd me all round
With an eye of disdain, and thrice spit on the ground,
Look'd proud of her charms, with an insolent sneer,
And sent me away with a flea in my ear.
My blood quickly boil'd in a violent pique,
And, red as a rose, passion glow'd in my cheek;
For it vex'd me, that thus in derision she jeer'd
My looks, and my voice, and my hair, and my beard.

But, am I not handsome, ye shepherds, say true?
Or has any God alter'd my person anew?
For lately, on oaks like the ivy, with grace
My hair and my beard added charms to my face:
My eye-brows were sable, my forehead milk-white,
And my eyes, like Minerva's, were azure and bright;
My lips, sweet as cream, were with music replete,
For from them flow'd sounds as the honey-comb sweet:
My songs are enchanting; nor ought can exceed
The tunes of my pipe, or the notes of my reed,
The girls of the country, if they had their wills,
Wou'd kiss me, and press me to stay on the hills;
For they say, that I'm fair:  but this flirt of the town
Refus'd my sweet kisses, and call'd me a clown.
Alas!  she forgot, or perhaps did not know,
That Bacchus fed herds in the valley below;
That Venus a swain lov'd with with hearty good will,
And help'd him his cattle to tend on the hill;
Adonis, while living, in groves she ador'd,
And dead in the groves and on mountains deplor'd.
If right my conjecture, Endymion, I ween,
Like me too once tended his steers on the green;
Yet the Moon in this neatherd took such a delight,
That she met him at Latmos, and kiss'd him all night.
Ev'n Cybele mourn'd for a herdsman; and Jove
Snatch'd a boy from his herd to be waiter above.

But Eunica disdains me, nor lists to my vow;
Is she better than Cynthia, or Cybele, trow?
Does she think that in bloom, and the beauty of face
She is equal to Venus?  if that be the case;
May she never behold sweet Adonis again
On the hill, in the vale, in the city or plain;
And may the proud minx, for her crime to atone,
If she can, sleep contented &mdash; but always alone!
