AESCHINES.  THYONICHUS.

AESCHINES.
All health to good Thyonichus, my friend.

THYONICHUS.  May the same blessing Aeschines attend.

AESCHINES.
I see you seldom. &mdash;

THYONICHUS.
Well, what ails you now?

AESCHINES.
All is not well with me.&mdash;

THYONICHUS.
You therefore grow
So much a sloven, so exceeding thin,
Your hair untrimm'd, your beard deforms your chin.
A poor Pythag'rist late I chanc'd to meet,
Pale-fac'd, like you, and naked were his feet;
He came from learned Athens, as he said,
And was in love too &mdash; with a loaf of bread.

AESCHINES.
You jest; but proud Cynisca makes me sad;
Nay, I'm within a hair-breadth raving mad.

THYONICHUS.
Such is your temper, so perverse you grow,
You hope all smooth:  but what affects you now?

AESCHINES.
I and Cleunicus and the Greek agreed,
With Apis, skill'd Thessalian colts to breed,
In my green court, with wine to chear our souls:
A sucking pig I dress'd, and brace of fowls:
And fragrant wine produc'd, four summers old,
Phoenicia's generous wine that makes us bold:
Onions and shell-fish last the table crown'd,
And gayly went the cheering cup around;
Then healths were drank, and each oblig'd to name
The lovely mistress that inspir'd his flame.
Cynisca (she was by) then charm'd my soul,
And to her health I drain'd the foaming bowl:
She pledg'd me not, nor deign'd a kind reply:
Think how my rage, inflam'd with wine, ran high.
'What are you mute?'  I said &mdash; a waggish guest,
"Perhaps she's seen a Wolf," rejoin'd in jest:
At this her cheeks to scarlet turn'd apace;
Sure you might light a candle at her face.
Now Wolf is Laba's son, whom most men call
A comely spark, is handsome, young and tall.
For him she sigh'd; and this by chance I heard;
Yet took no note, and vainly nurst my beard.
We four, now warm, and mellow with the wine,
Arch Apis, with a mischievous design,
Nam'd Wolf, and sung encomiums of the boy,
Which made Cynisca fairly weep for joy,
Like a fond girl, whom love maternal warms,
That longs to wanton in her mother's arms.
I swell'd with rage, and, in revengeful pique,
My hand discharg'd my passion on her cheek:
"Since thee, I cry'd, my love no more endears,
Go court some other with those tender tears.'"
She rose, and, gathering in a knot her vest,
Flew swiftly; as the swallow from her nest,
Beneath the tiling skims in quest of food,
To still the clamours of her craving brood.
Thus from her downy couch in eager hast,
Through the first door, and through the gate she past,
Where-e'er her feet, where-e'er her fancy led;
The proverb says, 'The bull to wood is fled.'
Now twenty days are past, ten, nine, and eight,
Two and eleven add-two months compleat,
Since last we met, and like the boors of Thrace,
In all that time I never trimm'd my face.
Wolf now enjoys her, is her sole delight;
She, when he calls, unbars the door at night:
While I, alas!  on no occasion priz'd,
Like the forlorn Megareans am despis'd.
Oh could I from these wild desires refrain,
And love her less, all would be well again!
Now like a mouse insnar'd on pitch I move;
Nor know I any remedy for Love.
Yet in Love's flames our neighbour Simus burn'd,
Sought ease by travel, and when cur'd return'd;
I'll sail, turn soldier, and though not the first
In fighting fields, I would not prove the worst.

THYONICHUS.
May all that's good, whate'er you wish, attend
On Aeschines, my favourite and friend.
If you're resolved, and sailing is your plan,
Serve Ptolemy, he loves a worthy man.

AESCHINES.
What is his character?

THYONICHUS.
a royal spirit,
To point out genius, and encourage merit:
The poet's friend, humane, and good, and kind;
Of manners gentle, and of generous mind.
He marks his friend, but more he marks his foe;
His hand is ever ready to bestow:
Request with reason, and he'll grant the thing,
And what he gives, he gives it like a king.
Go then, and buckle to your manly breast
The brazen corslet, and the warrior vest;
Go brave and bold, to friendly Aegypt go,
Meet in the tented field the rushing foe.
Age soon will come, with envious hand to shed
The snow of winter on the hoary head,
Will sap the man, and all his vigor drain&mdash;
'Tis ours to act while youth and strength remain.
