Wash'd with pure water, and with milk well fed,
To pleasing rest her sons Alcmena led,
Alcides, ten months old, yet arm'd with might,
And twin Iphiclus, younger by a night:
On a broad shield of fine brass metal made,
The careful queen her royal offspring laid;
(The shield from Pterilus Amphitryon won
In fight, a noble cradle for his son!)
Fondly the babes she view'd, and on each head
She plac'd her tender hands, and thus she said:
"Sleep, gentle babes, and sweetly take your rest,
Sleep, dearest twins, with softest slumbers blest;
Securely pass the tedious night away,
And rise refresh'd with the fair-rising day."

She spoke, and gently rock'd the mighty shield;
Obsequious slumbers soon their eye-lids seal'd.
But when at midnight sunk the bright-ey'd Bear,
And broad Orion's shoulder 'gan appear;
Stern Juno, urg'd by unrelenting hate,
Sent two fell serpents to Amphitryon's gate,
Charg'd with severe commission to destroy
The young Alcides, Jove-begotten boy:
Horrid and huge, with many an azure fold,
Fierce through the portal's opening valves they roll'd;
Then on their bellies prone, high swoln with gore,
They glided smooth along the marble floor:
Their fiery eye-balls darted sanguine flame,
And from their jaws destructive poison came.
Alcmena's sons, when near the serpents prest
Darting their forked tongues, awoke from rest;
All o'er the chamber shone a sudden light,
For all is clear to Jove's discerning sight.
When on the shield his foes Iphiclus saw,
And their dire fangs that arm'd each horrid jaw,
Aghast he rais'd his voice with bitter cry,
Threw off the covering, and prepar'd to fly:
But Hercules stretch'd out his arms to clasp
The scaly monsters in his iron grasp;
Fast in each hand the venom'd jaws he prest
Of the curst serpents, which ev'n gods detest.
Their circling spires, in many a dreadful fold,
Around the slow-begotten babe they roll'd,
The babe unwean'd, yet ignorant of fear,
Who never utter'd cry, nor shed a tear.
At length their curls they loos'd, for rack'd with pain
They strove to 'scape the deathful gripe in vain.
Alcmena first o'er-heard the mournful cries,
And to her husband thus:  "Amphitryon, rise;
Distressful fears my boding soul dismay;
This instant rise, nor for thy sandals stay:
Hark, how for help the young Iphiclus calls!
A sudden splendor, lo!  illumes the walls!
Though yet the shades of night obscure the skies;
Some dire disaster threats; Amphitryon, rise."

She spoke; the prince obedient to her word,
Rose from the bed, and seiz'd his rich-wrought sword,
Which, on a glittering nail above his head,
Hung by the baldrick to the cedar bed.
Then from the radiant sheath of lotos made,
With ready hand he drew the shining blade;
Instant the light withdrew, and sudden gloom
Involv'd again the wide-extended room:
Amphitryon call'd his train that slumbering lay,
And slept secure the careless hours away.
"Rise, rise, my servants, from your couches strait,
Bring lights this instant, and unbar the gate."
He spoke; the train obedient to command,
Appear'd with each a flambeau in his hand;
Rapt with amaze, young Hercules they saw
Grasp two fell serpents close beneath the jaw:
The mighty infant show'd them to his sire,
And smil'd to see the wreathing snakes expire;
He leap'd for joy that thus his foes he slew,
And at his father's feet the scaly monsters threw.
With tender care Alcmena fondly prest,
Half-dead with fear, Iphiclus to her breast,
While o'er his mighty son Amphitryon spread
The lamb's soft fleece, and sought again his bed.

When thrice the cock pronounc'd the morning near,
Alcmena call'd the truth-proclaiming seer,
Divine Tiresias; and to him she told
This strange event, and urg'd him to unfold
Whate'er the adverse deities ordain;
'Fear not, she cried, but Fate's whole will explain;
For well thou know'st, O!  venerable seer,
Those ills which Fate determines, man must bear.'
She spoke; the holy augur thus reply'd;
"Hail, mighty queen, to Perseus near ally'd;
Parent of godlike chiefs:  by these dear eyes,
Which never more shall view the morning rise,
Full many Grecian maids, for charms renown'd,
While merrily they twirl the spindle round,
Till day's decline thy praises shall proclaim,
And Grecian matrons celebrate thy fame.
So great, so noble will thy offspring prove,
The most gigantic of the gods above,
Whose arm, endow'd with more than mortal sway,
Shall many men, and many monsters slay:
Twelve labours past, he shall to heav'n aspire,
His mortal part first purified by fire,
And son-in-law be nam'd of that dread Power
Who sent these deadly serpents to devour
The slumbering child:  then wolves shall rove the lawns,
And strike no terror in the pasturing fawns.
But, O great queen!  be this thy instant care,
On the broad hearth dry fagots to prepare,
Aspalathus, or prickly brambles bind,
Or the tall thorn that trembles in the wind,
And at dark midnight burn (what time they came
To slay thy son) the serpents in the flame.
Next morn, collected by thy faithful maid,
Be all the ashes to the flood convey'd,
And blown on rough rocks by the favouring wind,
Thence let her fly, but cast no look behind.
Next with pure sulphur purge the house, and bring
The purest water from the freshest spring,
This, mix'd with salt, and with green olive crown'd,
Will cleanse the late contaminated ground.
Last let a boar on Jove's high altar bleed,
That ye in all achievements may succeed."

Thus spoke Tiresias, bending low with age,
And to his ivory carr retir'd the reverend sage.
Alcides grew beneath his mother's care,
Like some young plant, luxuriant, fresh and fair,
That screen'd from storms defies the baleful blast,
And for Amphitryon's valiant son he past.
Linus, who claim'd Apollo for his sire,
With love of letters did his youth inspire,
And strove his great ideas to enlarge,
A friendly tutor, faithful to his charge.
From Eurytus his skill in shooting came,
To send the shaft unerring of its aim.
Eumolpus tun'd his manly voice to sing,
And call sweet music from the speaking string.
In listed fields to wrestle with his foe,
With iron arm to deal the deathful blow,
And each achievement where fair fame is sought,
Harpalycus, the son of Hermes, taught,
Whose look so grim and terrible in fight,
No man could bear the formidable sight.
But fond Amphitryon, with a father's care,
To drive the chariot taught his godlike heir,
At the sharp turn with rapid wheels to roll,
Nor break the grazing axle on the goal;
On Argive plains, for generous steeds renown'd,
Oft was the chief with race-won honours crown'd;
And still unbroke his antient chariot lay,
Though cankering time had eat the reins away.
To lanch the spear, to rush upon the foe,
Beneath the shield to shun the falchion's blow,
To marshal hosts, opposing force to force,
To lay close ambush, and lead on the horse,
These Castor taught him, of equestrian fame,
What time to Argos exil'd Tydeus came,
Where from Adrastus he high favour gain'd,
And o'er a kingdom, rich in vineyards, reign'd.
No chief like Castor, till consuming time
Unnerv'd his youth, and crop'd the golden prime.

Thus Hercules, his mother's joy and pride,
Was train'd up like a warrior:  by the side
Of his great father's his rough couch was spread,
A lion's spoils compos'd his grateful bed.
Roast-meat he lov'd at supper to partake,
The bread he fancied was the Doric cake,
Enough to satisfy the labouring hind;
But still at noon full sparingly he din'd.
His dress, contriv'd for use, was neat and plain,
His skirts were scanty, for he wore no train.
