The sons of Leda, and of Jove I sing,
Immortal Jove, the aegis-bearing king,
Castor and Pollux, with the caestus grac'd,
Which round his wrist thick thongs of bull-hide brac'd:
In strains repeated shall my muse resound
The Spartan Twins, with manly virtues crown'd:
Safeguards of men distrest, and generous steeds,
When in the fields of death the battle bleeds;
Safeguards of sailors, who the Twins implore,
When on the deep the thundering tempests roar.
These in the hollow vessel from the side,
Or head or helm, pour the high-swelling tide;
Burst are the planks, the tackling torn, the mast
Snapt, the sails rent before the furious blast:
Suspended showers obscure the cheerful light,
Fades the pale day before approaching night,
Rise the rough winds, resounding storms prevail,
And the vext ocean roars beneath the scourging hail.
Still you the wreck can save, the storm dispel,
And snatch the sailors from the jaws of hell.
The winds disperse, the roaring waves subside,
And smooth'd to stillness sleeps the lenient tide.
When shine the Bears, and 'twixt the Asses seen,
Though faint, their manger, ocean proves serene.
O, friends of human kind in utmost need,
Fam'd for the song, the lyre, the gauntlet, and the steed!
Whose praises first shall my rapt muse rehearse?
Both claim my praise, but Pollux first my verse.

When Argo reach'd (Cyane's islands past)
Cold Pontus harrass'd by the northern blast,
Soon to Bebrycia, with the sons of fame,
A freight of chiefs and demigods, she came.
Forth from her sides, the country to explore,
The crew descended to the breezy shore:
On the dry beach they raised the leafy bed,
The fires they kindled, and the tables spread.

Meanwhile the royal Brothers devious stray'd
Far from the shore, and sought the cooling shade.
Hard by, a hill with waving forests crown'd
Their eyes attracted; in the dale they found
A spring perennial in a rocky cave,
Full to the margin flow'd the lucid wave:
Below small fountains gush'd, and, murmuring near,
Sparkled like silver, and as crystal clear:
Above tall pines and poplars quivering play'd,
And planes and cypress in dark green array'd:
Around balm-breathing flowers of every hue,
The bee's ambrosia, in the meadows grew.
There sat a chief, tremendous to the eye,
His couch the rock, his canopy the sky;
The gauntlet's strokes, his cheeks and ears around,
Had mark'd his face with many a desperate wound.
Round as a globe and prominent his chest,
Broad was his back, but broader was his breast:
Firm was his flesh, with iron sinews fraught,
Like some Colossus on an anvil wrought.
As rocks, that in the rapid streams abound,
Are wash'd by rolling torrents smooth and round,
The ridges rise, in crystal streams beheld:
So on his brawny arms the rising muscles swell'd.
A lion's spoils around his loins he draws,
Beneath his chin suspended by the paws:
Victorious Pollux, with attentive look,
View'd, and complacent, thus the chief bespoke:

POLLUX.
Peace, gentle friend!  to wandering strangers tell
What tribes, what nations in these regions dwell?

AMYCUS.
What peace to me, while on my native shore,
I see strange guests I never saw before?

POLLUX.
Fear not; no foes, nor mean of birth are here.

AMYCUS.
Thou hast no cause to bid me not to fear.

POLLUX.
Rude are your words, and wrongfully apply'd,
Your manners fierce, your bosom swoln with pride.

AMYCUS.
Thou see'st me as I am:  these lands are mine;
I never yet have troubled thee on thine.

POLLUX.
Whene'er you come, you will a welcome find,
And presents, as befits a liberal mind.

AMYCUS.
Nor I thy welcome, nor thy gifts partake;
I give no welcome, and no presents make.

POLLUX.
May I not taste the stream that murmurs by?

AMYCUS.
I'll solve that question when thy throat is dry.

POLLUX.
Will gold, or other bribe the purchase gain?

AMYCUS.
Nought but to prove thy prowess on the plain;
Stand forth; let man oppos'd to man provoke,
With gaunlet-guarded arm, th' impending stroke;
Eye meeting eye, exert thy utmost might,
By feint or force to triumph in the fight.

POLLUX.
Whom must I fight?  mine adversary who?

AMYCUS.
Thou see'st thy match, no despicable foe.

POLLUX.
But what reward shall the stout victor have?

AMYCUS.
The conquer'd man shall be the conqueror's slave.

POLLUX.
This is cock's play, and such the terms severe
In fight of scarlet-crested chanticleer.

AMYCUS.
Or be it cock's, or be it lion's play,
These are the fix'd conditions of the fray.

This said, his hollow conch he instant blew,
Quick through the coast the sounds alarming flew;
The signal rouz'd the stout Bebrycian train,
Who join'd their chief beneath the shady plane.
Illustrious Castor from the neighbouring strand,
Call'd to the conflict Argo's chosen band.
Meanwhile the combatants, of mind elate,
Drew on their hands the dreadful gloves of fate;
The leathern thongs, that brac'd their shoulders round,
Firm to their arms the ponderous gauntlets bound.
Amid the circle now the champions stood,
Breathing revenge, and vehement for blood.
Studious each strove the piercing light to shun,
And on his shoulders catch the gleaming sun:
You call'd, O Pollux, Prudence to your aid;
In Amycus his eyes the solar splendors play'd.
This did th' enormous chieftain's rage provoke
To strike at once some death-denouncing stroke;
But watchful Pollux dealt a weighty blow
Full on the cheek of his advancing foe:
Incens'd more ardent to the fight he came,
And forward bent to take the surer aim.
Through the Bebrycian band loud clamours run;
Nor less the Greeks encourag'd Leda's son.
Yet rising fears their generous breasts appal,
Lest on their friend the bulk of Amycus should fall:
Vain fears!  for with both hands brave Pollux ply'd
His furious blows, and storm'd on every side;
The quick repeated strokes his rival stun,
And curb the force of Neptune's lawless son.
Giddy with blows the tottering hero stood,
And from his mouth discharg'd the purple blood.
Loud shouted the Greek warriors when they saw
Bebrycia's champion's batter'd cheeks and jaw.
His eyes, within their sockets deep impell'd,
Seem'd lessen'd, and his bruised visage swell'd.
Still the prince ply'd his mighty rival hard,
And feintful soon surpriz'd him off his guard;
And as he stagger'd, full upon his brow
With all his force he drove the furious blow,
And mash'd his front; the giant with the wound
Fell flat, and stretch'd his bulk unwieldy on the ground.
But soon his vigour and his strength return'd,
He rose, and then again the battle burn'd:
With iron hands their hollow sides they pound,
And deal vindictive many a desperate wound.
Fierce on his foe Bebrycia's monarch prest,
And made rude onsets on his neck and breast;
But Jove's unconquer'd son far better sped,
Who aim'd his thunder at his rival's head.
Fast down their limbs the sweat began to flow,
And quickly lay the lofty champion low;
Yet Pollux firmer stood, with nobler grace,
And fresher was the colour of his face.

How Amycus, before Jove's offspring fell,
Sing heaven-descended muse; for you can tell:
Your mandates I implicitly obey,
And gladly follow where you lead the way.

Resolv'd by one bold stroke to win renown,
He seiz'd on Pollux' left hand with his own;
Then bent oblique to guard against a blow,
And sped his right with vengeance on the foe;
In hopes to strike his royal rival dead,
Who scap'd the blow, declining back his head;
Then Pollux aim'd his weighty stroke so well,
Full on the crest of Amycus it fell,
And gor'd his temples with an iron wound;
The black blood issuing flow'd and trickled to the ground.
Still with his left he maul'd his faltering foe,
Whose mash'd teeth crackled with each boisterous blow;
With strokes redoubled he deform'd his face;
Bruis'd cheeks and jaws proclaim'd his foul disgrace.
All on the ground he measur'd out his length,
Stunn'd with hard thwacks, and destitute of strength,
And, hands uprais'd, with death presaging mind,
At once the fight and victory declin'd.
Brave son of Jove, though you the conquest gain'd,
With no base deed the glorious day you stain'd:
The vanquish'd by his father Neptune swore,
That he would never, never injure strangers more.

PART THE SECOND.

Pollux, thy name has dignify'd my song:
To Castor now the lofty lays belong;
Fam'd for bright armour on th' embattled plain,
And forming steeds obedient to the rein.

The bold twin-sons of Jove by stealth had led
Leucippus' daughters to their lawless bed.
Lynceus and Idas, much for strength renown'd,
Long since by promise to the damsels bound,
Aphareus' sons, the foul dishonour view'd,
And fir'd with wrath the ravishers pursued.
But when they reach'd deceas'd Aphareus' tomb,
Encompass'd round with venerable gloom,
Each heroe leap'd impetuous from his car,
All arm'd, and well appointed for the war.
Lynceus aloud beneath his helmet spoke:

'Why will ye frantic thus the fight provoke?
Of others wives why make unjust demands?
Why gleam the naked falchions in your hands?
To us Leucippus has betroth'd them both
Long since, and seal'd the contract with an oath:
'Tis base to make of others wives your prey,
And bear their riches, mules and lowing herds away,
To threat the sire with force, or bribe with wealth,
And seize on others properties by stealth.
Oft, though ungrac'd with eloquence and art,
Thus have I spoke the language of my heart:'
"Princes, my friends, should not on any score
Solicit maids that are espous'd before:
Sparta for virgins, Elis for swift steeds
Are fam'd, large flocks and herds Arcadia breeds;
Messene, Argos numerous natives boast,
And fair looks Corinth on the sea-beat coast:
There nymphs unnumber'd bloom, a lovely race,
Acknowledg'd beauties both of mind and face:
There ye may gain the dames your fancies chuse;
No parents will the rich and brave refuse.
For you the love of noble deeds inspires;
Ye are the sons of honourable sires.
Let us our nuptials undisturb'd pursue,
And we'll unite to find fit brides for you."
'My words ne'er mov'd your unrelenting minds,
The waves receiv'd them from the driving winds.
Yet now, ev'n now your deeds let justice guide;
We both are cousins by the father's side.
But if mad rage impels you not to yield,
And arms must fix the fortune of the field;
Let Idas and brave Pollux both refrain
From the fell combat on the listed plain:
And only I and Castor prove our might,
By birth the youngest, in decisive fight.
Why should we give our parents cause to grieve,
And their fond arms of all their sons bereave?
Let some survive our drooping friends to cheer,
And mate the virgins whom they hold so dear.
The wise with prudence their dissentions state,
And lesser ills conclude the great debate.'

Thus he, nor thus in vain; for on the ground
Pollux and Idas plac'd their arms around.
Lynceus first march'd undaunted to the field,
And shook his spear beneath his ample shield.
Castor to war his brandish'd lance addrest;
And on each helmet wav'd the nodding crest.
First with their spears began the dreadful strife,
Each chief explor'd the avenues of life.
But thus unhurt the battle they maintain'd,
Broke in their shields the spears sharp points remain'd:
Then from their sheaths their shining swords they drew,
And fierce to fight the raging heroes flew:
On Lynceus' buckler Castor boldly prest,
And his bright helmet with the treple crest;
Lynceus, sharp-sighted, kept his foe at bay,
And struck his helmet's purple plume away;
Who quick retreating all his art display'd,
And lopt the hand that held the glittering blade:
Down dropt the sword; to his sire's tomb he flew,
Where Idas sat the fatal fight to view;
Close follow'd Castor, all his force apply'd,
And furious drove the falchion in his side,
Out gush'd his bowels through the gaping wound,
And vanquish'd Lynceus prest the gory ground;
In dim, dark mists the shades of death arise,
And in eternal slumber seal his eyes.
Nor was brave Idas by his mother led,
Laocoossa, to the nuptial bed:
For he, vindictive of fall'n Lynceus' doom,
Tore up a column from Aphareus' tomb,
Aiming at Castor, dreadfully he stood,
The bold avenger of his brother's blood;
Jove interpos'd, and with the forked brand
Quick struck the polish'd marble from his hand;
He wreath'd convulsive, scorch'd on every side,
And in a peal of rattling thunder dy'd.

Thus shall the Brothers be with conquest crown'd,
Brave of themselves, and sprung from chiefs renown'd.
Hail, Leda's valiant sons!  my muse inspire,
And still preserve the honour of my lyre.
Ye, and fair Helen, to all bards are dear,
With joy the names of those bold chiefs they hear,
Who in the cause of Menelaus drew
Their conquering swords, proud Ilium to subdue.
Your praise, O kings, the Chian muse recites,
Troy's famous city, and the Phrygian fights,
He sings the Grecian fleet renown'd afar,
And great Achilles, bulwark of the war.
I bring the tribute of a feebler lyre,
Sweet warbling what the rapturous Nine inspire,
The best I may; verse to the gods belongs;
The gods delight in honorary songs.
