CANTO I.
The mirthfull Bowres and flowry Dales
Of Pleasures Faerie Land,
Where Vertues Budds are blighted as
By foul Enchanters Wand.

Awake, ye West Windes, through the lonely Dale,
And, Fancy, to thy Faerie Bowre betake:
Even now, with balmy Freshnesse, breathes the Gale,
Dimpling with downy Wing the stilly Lake;
Through the pale Willows faultering Whispers wake,
And Evening comes with Locks bedropt with Dew;
On Desmonds mouldering Turretts slowly shake
The trembling Rie-grass and the Hare-bell blue,
And ever and anon faire Mullas plaints renew.

O for that namelesse Powre to strike mine Eare,
That Powre of Charme thy Naiads once possest,
Melodious Mulla!  when, full oft whyleare,
Thy gliding Murmurs soothd the gentle Brest
Of haplesse SPENSER; long with Woes opprest,
Long with the drowsie Patrons Smyles decoyd,
Till in thy Shades, no more with Cares distrest,
No more with painful anxious Hopes accloyd,
The Sabbath of his Life the milde good Man enjoyd:

Enjoyd each Wish, while rapt in Visions blest
The Muses wooed him, when each Evening grey
Luxurious Fancy, from her Wardrobe drest,
Brought forth her Faerie Knights in sheen Array
By Forrest edge or welling Fount, where lay,
Farre from the Crowd, the carelesse Bard supine:
Oh happy Man!  how innocent and gay,
How mildly peacefull past these Houres of thine!
Ah!  could a Sigh avail, such sweete calme Peace were mine!

Yet oft, as pensive through these Lawns I stray,
Unbidden Transports through my Bosome swell;
With pleasing Reverence awd mine Eyes survey
The hallowed Shades where SPENSER strung his Shell.
The Brooke still murmurs through the bushy Dell,
Still through the Woodlands wild and beauteous rise
The Hills green Tops; still from her moss-white Cell
Complayning Echoe to the Stockdove sighs,
And Fancy, wandering here, still feels new Extacies.

Then come, ye Genii of the place!  O come,
Ye wilde-wood Muses of the native Lay!
Ye who these Bancks did whilom constant roam,
And round your SPENSER ever gladsome play!
Oh, come once more!  and with your magick Ray
These Lawns transforming, raise the mystick Scene:
The Lawns already own your vertual Sway,
Proud Citys rise, with Seas and Wildes atweene,
In one enchanted View the various Walks of Men.

Towrd to the Skye, with Cliff on Cliff ypild,
Fronting the Sunne, a Rock fantastick rose;
From every Rift the Pink and Primrose smild,
And redd with Blossoms hung the Wildings Boughs;
On middle Cliff each flowry Shrub that blows
On Mayes sweete Morne a fragrant Grove displayd,
Beauteous and wilde as ever Druid chose;
From whence a reverend Wizard through the Shade
Advaunst to meet my Steps, for here me seemd I strayd.

White as the Snowdrop round his Temples flowd
A few thin Hairs; bright in his eagle Eye,
Meint with Heavens Lightning, social Mildnesse glowd;
Yet when him list queynt was his Leer and slie,
Yet wondrous distant from Malignitie;
For still his Smyle did forcibly disclose
The Soul of Worth and warm Hart-Honestie:
Such winning Grace as Age but rare bestows
Dwelt on his Cheeks and Lips, now like the withering Rose.

Of skyen Blue a mantling Robe he wore,
A purple Girdle loosely tyd his Waist
Enwove with many a Flowre from many a Shore,
And halfe conceald and halfe reveald his Vest,
His Vest of Silk, the Faerie Queenes Bequest
What time she wooed him ere his Head was grey;
A Lawrell Bough he held, and now addrest
To Speech, he points it to the mazy Way
That wide and farre around in wildest Prospect lay.

Younkling, quoth he, lo, where at thy desire
The Wildernesse of Life extensive lies,
The Path of blustering Fame and warlike Ire,
Of scowling Powre and lean-bond Covetise,
Of thoughtlesse Mirth and Follys giddy Joys;
And whither all those Paths illusive end;
All these at my Command didactick rise,
And shift obedient as mine Arm I bend.
He said, and to the Fielde did strait his Arm extend.

Strait as he willd an Arch triumphant rose,
Where stern Ambition in his Charet rode,
Supreme Contempt lowrd on his heavie Brows,
And grasping at the Starres he apd the God:
But while through prostrate Crowds his Horses trod
The Wizard wavd his Hand &mdash; down in the Clay
Tumbled his Car; begrimd with Mire and Blood
Sprawling beneath his Horses Hoofs he lay,
And, thondring in his Eares, the rabble Herd huzza.

Well worthy Meed, quoth I, that Paynim found;
But certes, lever would I see and hear,
How, oft, the gentle Plant of generous Ground
And fairest Bloom no ripend Fruit will bear:
Oft have I shed, perdie, the bitter Tear
To see the Shoots of Vertue shrink and dy,
Untimely blasted in the soft greene Ear:
What evil Blight thus workes such Villainy,
To tell, O reverend Seer, thy prompt Enchantment try.

Ah me!  how little doe unthinking Youth
Foresee the Sorrowes of their Elder Age!
Full oft, quoth he, my Bosome melts with Ruth
To note the Follies of their early Stage,
Where Dissipations Cup full deepe they pledge;
Ne can the Wizards Saws disperse to flight
The Ills that soon will Warre against them wage,
Ne may the Spells that lay the Church-yarde Spright
Free from his Concubine the lucklesse ill-starrd Wight.

This Truth to tell, see yonder Lawnskepe rise,
An ample Fielde of British Clime I ween,
A Fielde which never by Poetick Eyes
Was vewd from hence.  Thus, though the rural Scene
Has by a thousand Artists pencild beene,
Some other may, from other Point, explore
A vew full different, yet as faire beseene:
So shall these Lawns present one Lawnskepe more;
For certes where we stand stood never Wight before.

In yonder Dale does wonne a gentle Knight&mdash;
Fleet as he spake still rose the Imagerie
Of all he told depeinten to the Sight;
It was, I weet, a goodlie Baronie:
Beneath a greene-clad Hill, right faire to see,
The Castle in the sunny Vale ystood;
All round the East grew many a sheltering Tree,
And on the West a dimpling silver Flood
Ran through the Gardins trim, then crept into the Wood.

How sweetly here, quoth he, might one employ
And fill with worthy Deed the fleeting Houres!
What Pleasaunce mote a learned Wight enjoy
Emong the Hills and Vales and shadie Bowres,
To mark how buxom Ceres round him poures
The hoary-headed Wheat, the freckled Corne,
The bearded Barlie, and the Hopp that towres
So high, and with his Bloom salews the Morne,
And with the Orchard vies the Lawnskepe to adorn;

The fragrant Orchard, where her golden Store
Pomona lashes on everie Tree,
The velvet-coated Peach, the Plumb so hore,
The Nectrines redd, and Pippins, sheene to see,
That nod in everie Gale with wanton Glee.
How happy here with Woodstocks laughing Swain
And Avons Swan of peerlesse memorie,
To saunter through the Dasie-spangled Plain;
When Fancys sweetest Impe Dan Spenser joins the Train.

Ne to Syr MARTYN hight were these unknown;
Oft by the Brooke his infant Steps they led,
And oft the Fays, with many a warbling Tone
And laughing Shape, stood round his morning Bed:
Such Happiness bloomd fair around his Hed,
Yet though his Mind was formd each Joy to taste,
From him, alas!  dear homefelt Joyaunce fled,
And sweete Content still from his Walks did haste,
For, ah!  his Concubine was his continual Pest.

Just when he had his eighteenth Summer seen,
Lured by the Fragrance of the new-mown Hay,
As carelesse sauntering through the Elm-fenced Green
He with his Book beguild the closing Day,
The Dairy Maide hight KATHRIN friskd that Way;
A roguish twinkling Look the Gypsie cast,
For much she knew the Lemmans Art to play;
Nathlesse unheeding on his Way he past,
Ne enterd in his Hart or Wish or Thought unchast.

Right plump she was, and ruddie glowd her Cheek,
Her easie Waiste in Milchwhite Boddice dight,
Her golden Locks curld down her Shoulders sleek,
And halfe her Bosome heaving mett the Sight:
And gayly she accosts the sober Wight,
Freedom and Glee blythe sparkling in her Eye;
With wanton Merrimake she trips the Knight,
And round the Younkling makes the Clover flye:
But soon he starten up, more gamesome by and bye.

I ween, quoth she, you think to win a Kiss,
But certes you shall woo and strive in vain.
Fast in his Armes he caught her then ywis;
Yfere they fell; but loud and angrie then
Gan she of shame and haviour vild complain,
While bashfully the weetlesse Boy did look:
With cunning Smyles she vewd his awkward Pain;
The Smyle he caught, and eke new Corage took,
And Kathrin then a Kiss, perdie, did gentlie brook.

Fleet passd the Months ere yet the giddy Boy
One Thought bestowd on what would surely be;
But well his Aunt perceivd his dangerous Toy,
And sore she feard her auncient Familie
Should now be staind with Blood of base Degree:
For, sooth to tell, her liefest Harts Delight
Was still to count her princely Pedigree
Through Barons bold up to Cadwallin hight,
Thence up to Trojan Brute ysprong of Venus bright.

But, zealous to forefend her gentle Race
From baselie matching with Plebeian Bloud,
She cast and schemd to shonne thilk foull Disgrace,
And Kathrins Bale in wondrous Wrath she vowd:
Yet could she not with cunning Portaunce shroud,
So as might best succede, her good Intent,
But clept her Lemman and vild Slutt aloud;
That soon she should her gracelesse Thewes repent,
And stand in long white Sheet before the Parson shent.

So spake the Wizard, and his Hand he wavd,
And prompt the Scenerie rose, where listless lay
The Knight in shady Bowre by Streamlet lavd,
While Philomela soothd the parting Day:
Here Kathrin him approachd with Features gay,
And all her Store of Blandishments and Wiles;
The Knight was touchd &mdash; but she with soft Delay
And gentle Teares yblends her languid Smiles,
And of base Crueltie th' enamourd Boy reviles.

Amazd the Boy beheld her readie Teares,
And, faultring oft, exclaims with wondring Stare,
What mean these Sighs?  dispell thine ydle Feares;
And, confident in me, thy Griefes declare.
And need, quoth she, need I my Hart to bare,
And tellen what untold well knowne mote be?
Lost is my Friends Good-will, my Mothers Care&mdash;
By you deserted &mdash; ah!  unhappy Me!
Left to your Aunts fell Spight and wreakfull Crueltie.

My Aunt!  quoth he, forsooth, shall she command!
No; sooner shall yond Hill forsake his Place,
He laughing said, and would have caught her Hand;
Her Hand she shifted to her blubberd Face
With prudish Modestie, and sobd, Alas!
Grant me your Bond, or els on yonder Tree
These silkin Garters, Pledge of thy Embrace,
Ah, welladay!  shall hang my Babe and me,
And everie Night our Ghostes shall bring all Hell to Thee.

Ythrilld with Horrour gapd the wareless Wight,
As when, aloft on well-stord Cherrie-Tree,
The thievish Elfe beholds with pale Affright
The Gardner near, and weets not where to flee:
And will my Bond forefend thilk Miserie?
That shalt thou have; and for thy Peace beside,
What mote I more?  Housekeeper shalt thou be.
An awfull Oathe forthwith his Promise tied,
And Kathrin was as blythe as ever blythesome Bride.

Ah!  says the Wizard, what may now availe
His manlie Sense that fairest Blossoms bore,
His Temper gentle as the whispering Gale,
His native Goodnesse, and his vertuous Lore?
Now through his Veins, all uninflamd before,
Th' enchanted Cup of Dissipation hight
Has shedd, with subtil Stealth, through everie Pore,
Its giddy Poison, brewd with magicke Might,
Each Budd of gentle Worth and better Thought to blight.

So the Canadian, traind in drery Wastes
To chace the foming Bore and fallow Deer,
At first the Traders Beverage shylie tastes;
But soon with headlong Rage, unfelt whyleare,
Inflamd, he lusts for the delirious Cheer:
So bursts the Boy disdeinfull of Restrent
Headlong attonce into the wylde Career
Of Jollitie, with feverish Thirste ybrent,
And dull and yrksome hangs the Day in Sportes unspent.

Now fly the wassal Seasons wingd with Glee,
Each Day affords a Floode of roring Joy;
The Springs green Months ycharmd with Cocking flee,
The jolly Horse-race Summers grand Employ,
His Harvest Sports the Foxe and Hare destroy;
But the substantial Comforts of the Bowl
Are thine, O Winter!  thine to fire the Boy
With Englands Cause, and swell his mightie Soul,
Till dizzy through the Roome He and his Cronies rowl.

Now round his Dores ynaild on Cloggs of Wood
Hang many a Badgers snout and Foxes Tail,
The which had he through many a Hedge persewd,
Through Marsh, through Meer, Dyke, Ditch, and Delve and Dale;
To hear his hair-breadth Scapes would make you pale;
Which well the Groome hight Patrick can relate,
Whileas on Holidays he quaffs his Ale;
And not one Circumstance will he forgett,
So keen the braggard Chorle is on his Hunting sett.

Now on the Turf the Knight with sparkling Eyes
Beholds the springing Racers sweep the Ground;
Now lightlie by the Post the Foremost flies,
And thondring on, the rattling Hoofs rebound;
Now keener still the cracking Whips resound:
Daemon of the Game!  now bless thy rapturous Houre!
See, see thy Prophets furious stare around;
Now to the Goal they fly &mdash; in franticke Stowre
The Knights fird Eyes confesse the Crisis of they Powre.

Soft as the Gossamer in Summer Shades
Extends its twinkling Line from Spray to Spray,
Gently as Sleep the wearie Lids invades,
So soft, so gently Pleasure mines her Way:
But whither will the smiling Fiend betray,
Ah, let the Knights approching Dayes declare!
Though everie Bloome and Flowre of buxom MAY
Bestrew her Path, to Desarts colde and bare
The mazy Path betrays the giddy Wight unware.

While thus the Knight persewd the Shaddow Joy,
As youthful Spirits thoughtlesse led the Way,
Her gilden Baits, ah, gilded to decoy!
Kathrin did Eve and Morn before him lay,
Watchfull to please and ever kindlie gay;
Till, like a Thing bewitchd, the carelesse Wight
Resigns himselfe to her capricious Sway:
Then soon, perdie, was never charme-bound Spright
In Necromancers Thrall in halfe such pitteous Plight.

Her End accomplishd, and her Hopes at stay,
What need her now, she recks, one Smyle bestow;
Each Care to please were Trouble thrown away,
And thriftlesse Waste, with many Maxims moe,
As, What were she the better did she so,
She conns, and freely sues her native Bent;
Yet still can She to guard his Thralldom know,
Though grimd with Snuff in tawdrie Gown she went,
Though peevish were her Spleen and rude her Jolliment.

As when the Linnett hails the balmie Morne,
And roving through the Trees his Mattins sings,
Lively with Joy, till on a lucklesse Thorne
It lights, where to its Feet the Birdlime clings;
Then all in vain it flapps his gaudie Wings;
The more he flutters still the more foredone:
So fares it with the Knight:  each Morning brings
His deeper Thrall; ne can he Brawling shun,
For Kathrin was his Thorne and Birdlime both in one.

Or, when atop the hoary western Hill
The ruddie Sunne appears to rest his Chin,
When not a Breeze disturbs the murmuring Rill,
And mildlie warm the falling Dewes begin,
The gamesome Trout then shews her silverie Skin
As wantonly beneath the Wave she glides,
Watching the buzzing Flies, that never blin,
Then, dropt with Pearle and Golde, displays her Sides,
While she with frequent Leape the ruffled Streame divides.

On the greene Banck a truant Schoolboy stands;
Well has the Urchin markt her mery Play,
An Ashen Rod obeys his guilefull Hands,
And leads the mimicke Fly across her Way;
Askaunce, with wistly Look and coy Delay,
The hungrie Trout the glitteraund Treachor eyes,
Semblaunt of Life with speckled Wings full gay,
Then slylie nibbling, prudish from it flies,
Till with a bouncing Start she bites the truthless Prize.

Ah, then the Younker gives the ruthlesse Twitch;
The Hook she feels deepe in her Gils ypight,
Deepe stung she feels, and, plonging where the Beech
Shaddows the Poole, she runs in dred Affright;
In vain the deepest Rocke her late Delight,
In vain the sedgy Nook for Help she tries;
The laughing Elfe now curbs, now aids her Flight,
The more entangled still the more she flies,
And soon amid the Grass the panting Captive lies.

Where now, ah Pity!  where that sprightly Play,
That wanton Bounding, and exulting Joy,
That lately welcomd the retourning Ray,
When by the Rivletts Bancks, with Blushes coy,
APRIL walkd forth &mdash; ah!  never more to toy
In purling Streame, she pants, she gasps and dies!
Aye me!  how like the Fortune of the Boy!
His Days of Revel and his Nights of Noise
Have left him now involvd, his Lemmans hapless Prize.

His aunt long pined with very Dole to see
Cadwallins blood debasd in Kathrins Brood;
With very Dole she died; and Kathrin, free
From Dred of her, now lords it unwithstood.
See, quoth the Wizard, how disgraste and rude
Now lies the Park, so sweetly wylde afore,
Each Bowery Walke and Grove by her transmewd;
The Bowling Greene stript of its velvet Flore,
With grass-grown Pebbles blanck now yawns forby the Dore.

All round the Borders where the Pansie blue,
Crocus, and Polyanthus powderd fine,
And Daffodils in fayre Confusion grew
Emong the Rose-bush Roots and Eglantine;
These now their Place to Cabbages resign,
And tawdrie Pease supply the Lillys Stead,
Rough Artichokes now bristle where the Vine
Its purple Clusters round the Windows spread,
And laisie Cucumbers on Dung recline the Head.

The fragrant Orchard, once the Summers Pride,
Where oft, by Moonshine, on the daisied Greene,
In jovial Daunce, or tripping Side by Side,
Pomona and her buxom Nymphs were seene,
Or where the clear Canal stretchd out atweene,
Deffly their Locks with Blossomes would they brede,
Or, resting by the Primrose Hillocks sheene,
Beneath the Apple Boughs and Walnut Shade,
Their Holidays they kept, and bade the Fruitage spred;

The fragrant Orchard at her dire Command
In all the pride of Blossome strewd the Plain;
The Hillocks gently rising through the Land
Must now no trace of Natures Steps retain;
The clear Canal, the Mirrhour of the Swain,
And bluish Lake no more adorn the Greene,
Two durty watering Ponds alone remain;
And what ygoe the Place of Herbs had bene,
Is now a Turnip Fielde and Cow Yarde nothing cleane.

An auncient Crone, yclepd by Housewives THRIFT,
All this devisd for trim Oeconomie;
But certes, ever from her Birth bereft
Of Elegance, ill fitts her Title high.
Coarse were her Looks, yet smooth her Courtesie,
Hoyden her Shapes, but grave was her Attyre,
And ever fixt on Trifles was her Eye;
And still she plodden round the Kitchen Fyre,
To save the smallest Cromb her Pleasure and Desyre.

Bow-bent with Eld, her Steps were soft and slow,
Fast at her Side a Bounch of Keyes yhong,
Dulness and care satt on her wrinckled Brow,
And Proverbs teaching Thrift dropt from her Tongue:
Yet sparing though She beene her Guestes emong,
Ought by Herself that she mote gormandise,
The foull Curmudgeon would have That ere long,
And hardly could her Witt her Gust suffice;
Albee in varied Stream still was it Covetise.

Full many Hall this crooked Ronion haunts,
And eke in many Deed her Hand is kend:
Of her sage Counsells Kathrin ever vaunts;
In sooth she was her Genius rightlie wend;
With her she cast and schemd withouten End,
Still how the more to swell her private Hoard,
And how from suddein Fall her best forefend:
In thoughtlesse Mirth and Debt to plonge her Lord
The Beldame whisperd still would Safety best afford.

His Tenants whilom beene of thriftie kind,
Did like to sing and worken all the Day,
At Seedtime never were they left behind,
And at the Harvest Feast still first did play;
And ever at the Terme their Rents did pay,
For well they knew to guide their Rural Geer:
All in a Row, yclad in homespun Gray,
They marchd to Church each Sunday of the Year,
Their Imps yode on afore, the Carles brought up the Rear.

Ah happy Days!  but now no longer found:
No more with sociall hospitable Glee
The Village Hearths at Christmas Tide resound,
No more the Whitsun Gambolls may you see,
Nor Morrice Daunce, nor May Daye Jollitie,
When the blythe Maydens foot the deawy Green;
But now, in place, hart-sinking Penurie
And hopelesse Care on every Face is seen,
As these the drery Times of curfeu Bell had been.

For everie while, with thief-like lounging Pace
And dark of Look, a tawdrie Villain came,
Muttering some Words with serious-meaning Face,
And on the Church Dore he would fix their Name;
Then, nolens volens, they must heed the same,
And quight those Fieldes their Yeomen Grandsyres plowd
Eer since Black Edwards Dayes, when, crownd with Fame,
From Cressie field the Knights old Grandsyre prowd
Led home his Yeomandrie, and each his Glebe allowd.

But now the Orphan sees his Harvest Fielde
Beneath the Gripe of Legal Rapine fall,
The friendlesse Widow, from her Hearth expelld,
Withdraws to some poor Hutt, with earthen Wall:
And these, perdie, were Kathrins Projects all;
For, sooth to tell, grievd was the Knight full sore
Such sinful Deeds to see:  yet such his Thrall,
Though he had pledgd his Troth, yet nathemore
It mote he keep, except she willd the same before.

Oh wondrous Powre of Womans wily art!
What for thy Witchcraft too secure may be?
Certes, it never was Syr Martyn's Hart:
Himselfe how dupd Himselfe right plain did see,
His Word a Bubble, and his Will, perdie,
A transient Puff, that in Exertion dies;
For present Peace and Ease still yeildeth he,
And looks, while thus he yields, most wondrous wise,
As from himselfe he hopd his Griefe and Shame disguise.

His Lawyer now assumes the Guardians Place;
Learnd was thilk Clerk in Deeds, and passing slie;
Slow was his Speeche, and solemn was his Face
As that grave Birds which Athens rankt so high;
Pleasd Dullness basking in his glossie Eye,
The Smyle would oft steal through his native Phlegm;
And well he guards Syr Martyns Propertie,
Till not one Peasant dares invade the Game:
But certes, seven Yeares Rent was soon his own just Claim.

Now Mortgage follows Mortgage:  Cold Delay
Still yawns on everie long-depending Case.
Thus quickly slid the Knights gay Bloome away;
Kathrin the while brought bantling Imps apace;
While everie Day renews his vile Disgrace,
And straitens still the more his galling Thrall:
See now what Scenes his Houshold Hours debase,
And rise successive in his cheerlesse Hall.
So spake the Seer, and prompt the Scene obeyd his Call.

See, quoth the Wizard, how with foltering Mien,
And discomposd yon Stranger he receives;
Lo, how with sulkie Look, and moapt with Spleen
His frowning Mistresse to his Friend behaves;
In vain he nods, in vain his Hand he waves,
Ne will she heed, ne will she sign obay;
Nor Corner dark his awkward Blushes saves,
Ne may the hearty Laugh, ne Features gay:
The hearty Laugh, perdie, does but his Pain betray.

A worthy Wight his Friend was ever known,
Some generous Cause did still his Lips inspire;
He begs the Knight by Friendships long agone
To shelter from his Lawyers cruel Ire
An auncient Hinde, around whose cheerlesse Fire
Sat Grief and pale Disease.  The poor Mans Wrong
Affects the Knight:  his inmost Hearts Desire
Gleams through his Eyes; yet all confusd, and stung
With inward Pain, he looks, and Silence guards his Tongue.

See, while his Friend entreats and urges still,
See, how with sidelong Glaunce and Haviour shy
He steals the Look to read his Lemmans Will,
Watchfull the Dawn of an Assent to spy.
Look as he will, yet will she not comply.
His Friend with Scorne beholds his awkward Pain;
From him even Pity turns her tear-dewd Eye,
And hardlie can the bursting Laugh restrain,
While manlie Honour frowns on his unmanlie Stain.

Let other Scenes now rise, the Wizard said:
He wavd his Hand, and other Scenes arose.
See there, quoth he, the Knight supinely laid
Invokes the Household Houres of learnd Repose,
An Auncient Song its manly Joys bestows.
The melting Passion of the Nott-brown Mayde
Glides through his Breast; his wandering Fancy glows,
Till into wildest Eeveries betrayd,
He hears th' imagind Faire, and wooes the lovely Shade.

Transported he repeats her constant Vow,
How to the Green Wode Shade, betide whateer,
She with her banishd Love would fearlesse goe,
And sweet would be with him the hardest Cheer.
O heaven!  he sighs, what Blessings dwell sincere
In Love like this! &mdash; But instant as he sighd,
Bursting into the Room, loud in his Ear
His Lemman thonders, Ah!  fell Dole betide
The Girl that trusts in Man before she bees his Bride!

Ah, simple me!  that litle knew to shun
Thy hatefull Presence!  she disdainful cries;
When straight her Imps all brawling round her run,
And, bleard with Teares, each for Revenge applies:
Him chiefe in Spleene the Father means chastise,
But from his kindlie Hand she saves him still;
Yet for no Fault, see, in furious wise
Yon yellow Elfe she little spares to kill;
And then, next Breath, does all to coax its stubborn Will.

Pale as the Ghoste that by the gleaming Moon
Withdraws the Curtain of the Murderers Bed,
So pale and cold at Hart, as halfe aswoon,
The Knight stares round; yet good nor bad he sed,
Though trembling anguish in each feeling bled
And rent with cruell Pangs his best of Man.
Such now the sole domestick Life he led,
Such Scenes still shifting still anew began:
Small wonder now, parfay, that he to Pastimes ran.

Woe to the Wight whose hated Home no more
The hallowd Temple of Content may be!
While now his Days abroad with Groomes he wore,
His Mistresse with her liefest Companie
A rude unletterd Herd!  with dearest Glee
Enjoys each Whisper of her Neighbours Shame;
And still anon the Flask of Ratafie
Improves their Tales, till certes not a Name
Escapes their blasting Tongue, or Goody, Wench, or Dame.

One Evening Tide as with her Crones she sate,
Making sweete Solace of some Scandall new,
A boistrous Noise came thondring at the Gate,
And soon a sturdie Boy approachd in View;
With Golde far glitteraund were his Vestments blue
And pye-shapd Hat, and of the Silver sheen
An huge broad Buckle glaunst in either Shoe,
And round his Necke an India Kerchiefe clean,
And in his Hand a Switch:  a jolly Wight I ween.

Farre had he saild, and roamd the foamy Deepe,
Where ruddie Phoebus slacks his firie Team;
(With burning Golde then flames th' ethereal Steepe,
And Oceans Waves like molten Silver seem)
Eke had he seen, with dimond glittering Beam,
The Starre of Morne awake the roseate Day,
While yet beneath the Moone old Nilus Stream
Pale through the Land reflects the gleamy Ray,
As through the Midnight Skyes appeares the Milky Way.

Through the Columbian World, and verdant Isles
Unknown to Carthage, had he frequent sped:
Eke had he beene where flowry Sommer smiles
At Christmas Tide, where other Heavens are spred,
Besprent with Starres that Newton never red,
Where in the North the sun of Noone is seene:
Wherever Hannos bold ambition led,
Wherever Gama saild, there had he beene,
Gama, the dearling Care of Beautys Heavenly Queene.

Eke had he plied the Rivers and the Coast
Where bold Nearch young Ammons Fleete did guide;
A Task so dred the world-subduing Host
Could not another for such Featts provide:
And often had he seen that Ocean wide
Which to his wearie Bands thilke Youth did say
None but th' immortal Gods had ever spyd;
Which Sight, quoth he, will all your Toils repay:
That none mote see it more als he the Gods did pray.

Through these outlandish Shores and Oceans dire
For ten long Seasons did the Younkling toil,
Through Stormes, through Tempests, and the Battels Fire,
Through Cold, through Heat, cheerd by the Hope the while
Of yet revisiting his natal Soil:
And oft, when flying in the Monsoon Gale,
By Aethiopias coast or Javas Ile,
When glauncing over Oceans Bosom pale,
The Ship hung on the Winds with broad and steadie Sail:

Hung on the Winds as from his ayrie Flight,
With wide-spred Wing unmovd, the Eagle bends,
When, on old Snowdons Brow prepard to light,
Sailing the liquid Skye he sheer descends:
Thus oft, when roving farre as Wave extends,
The Scenes of promist Bliss would warm the Boy;
To meet his Brother with each Wish yblends,
And Friendships glowing Hopes each Thought employ;
And now at Home arrivd his Heart dilates with Joy.

Around the Meadows and the Park he looks,
To spy the Streamlett or the Elm-tree Shade,
Where oft at Eve, beneath the cawing Rooks,
He with his Feres in mery Childhoode playd:
But all was changd! &mdash; Unweetingly dismayd
A cold foreboding Impulse thrills his Breast;
And who but Kathrin now is dearnly frayd
When entering in she kens the Stranger Guest:
Then with sad Mien she rose, and kindlie him embrast.

Great Marvell at her solemn Cheer he made;
Then, sobbing deepe, Glad will Syr Martyn be,
Faire Syr, of your retourne, she gently said;
But what Mishap!  our Infant Familee,
The dearest Babes, though they were nought to mee,
That ever breathd, are laid in deadly Plight:
What shall we do! &mdash; great were your Courtesie
To lodge in yonder Tenants House To-night;
The skilfull Leache forbids that Noise my babes should fright.

Blunt was the Boy, and to the Farme-house nigh
To wait his Brother, at her Bidding fares,
Conducted by a Gossip pert and sly:
Kathrin the while her Malengines prepares.
Now gan the Duske suspend the Plowmans Cares,
When from his rural Sportes arrives the Knight;
Soon with his Mates the jovial Bowl he shares,
His Hall resounds! &mdash; amazd the Stranger Wight
Arreads it all as done to him in fell Despight.

Late was the Houre when as the Knight was tould
Of Stranger Guest:  Go, bid him welcome here;
What seeks he there?  quoth he.  Perdie, what would
You seek?  says to the Boy the Messenger.
To see the Knight, quoth he, I but requere.
Syr Knight, he scornes to come; the Servant said.
Go, bid him still, quoth he, to welcome Cheer:
But all contrarywise the Faytor made,
Till Rage enflamd the Boy; and still his Rage they fed:

Your brother, quoth the Hostesse, soon will waste
His faire Estate; and certes, well I read,
He weens to hold your Patrimonie fast.
Next Morne a Lawyer beene ybrought with Speed,
And wise he lookt, and wisely shook his Head.
Him now impowrd, the Youth with Rage yblent
Vows never to retourne; then mounts his Steed,
And leaves the Place in Fancy hugely shent:
All which to Kathrins Mind gave wondrous great Content.

CANTO II.
In museful Stownd Syr Martyn rews
His Youthhedes thoughtlesse Stage;
But Dissipation haunts him to
The Blossomes of Old Age.

With gracefull Pause awhile the Wizard stood,
Then thus resumd,  As he whose homeward Way
Lies through the Windings of some verdant Wood;
Through many a mazy Turn and Arbour gay
He sues the flowery Steps of jollie MAY,
While through the Openings many a Lawnskepe new
Bursts on his Sight; yet, never once astray,
Still Home he wends:  so we our Theme pursue,
Through many a Bank and Bowre close following still our Cue.

Soothd by the Murmurs of a plaintive Streame,
A wyld romantick Dell its Fragrance shed;
Safe from the Thonder Showre and scorching Beame
Their faerie Charmes the Summer Bowres displaid;
Wyld by the Bancks the bashfull Cowslips spread,
And from the Rock above each ivied Seat
The spotted Foxgloves hung the purple Head,
And lowlie Vilets kist the Wanderers Feet:
Sure never Hyblas Bees roovd through a Wilde so sweet.

As winds the Streamlett surpentine along,
So leads a solemn Walk its bowry Way,
The pale-leaved Palms and darker Limes among,
To where a Grotto lone and secret lay;
The yellow Broome, where chirp the Linnets gay,
Waves round the Cave; and to the blue-streakd Skyes
A shatterd Rock towres up in Fragments gray:
The She-Goat from its Height the Lawnskepe eyes,
And calls her wanderd Young, the Call each Banck replies.

Here oft the Knight had past the Summers Morne
What time the wondering Boy to Manhoode rose,
When Fancy first her Lawnskepes gan adorne,
And Reasons folded Buddes their Flowres disclose,
What time young Transport through the Spirits flows,
When Nature smyles with Charmes unseen before,
When with the unwonted Hopes the Bosome glows,
While wingd with whirlwind Speed the Thoughts explore
The endlesse Wylde of Joys that Youth beholds in store.

The Dryads of the place, that nurst the Flowres,
And hung the Dewdrop in the Hyacinths Bell,
For him employd their Virtue-breathing Powres,
And Cambrias Genius bade his Worth excell.
His youthful Breast confest the wondrous Spell;
His generous Temper warmd with fayre Design,
The Friend and Patriot now his Bosome swell,
The Lover and the Father now combine,
And smyling Visions form, where Bliss and Honour join.

Of these lovd Reveries this the lovd Retreat
Must now no more with Dreams of Bliss decoy,
Yet here he liken still himself to meet,
Though Woes, a gloomy Train, his Thoughts employ:
Oh Lost to Peace, he sighs, unhappy Boy!
Oh Lost to every Worth that Life adorns!&mdash;
Oh lost to Peace, to Elegance and Joy!
Th' aerial genius of the Cave returns,
Whiles in the bubbling Rill the plaintive Naiade mourns.

Thus as He spake the magicke Lawnskepe rose,
The Dell, the Grotto, and the Broome-clad Hill;
See, quoth the Wizard, where the Knight bestows
An Houre to Thought and Reasons Whispers still;
Whilest, as a nightly Vision boding ill,
Seen with pale Glymps by lonely wandering Swayne,
TRUTH, gleaming through the Fogs of biast Will,
Frowns on him sterne, and honest SHAME gins fayne
In her reflective Glass his Lifes ignoble Straine.

His earlie Hopes she shews and shews againe:
How oft hast Thou, she cries, indignant vewd
The titled Cypher and his solemn Traine,
The busie Face and dull Solicitude
That, ever plodding in important Mood,
Has not a Soul to reach one noble Aim,
Nor Soul, nor Wish &mdash; whose vacant Mind endewd
With not one Talent, yet would lewdly claim
For his vile leaden Bust the sacred Wreath of Fame:

Who to the Patrons Lawrells would aspire,
By labouring in the British Clime to rear
Those Arts that quencht prowd Romes Patrician Fire,
And bowd her prone beneath the Gothick Spear;
Illustrious Cares!  befitting Patriot Peer!
Italian Sing-song and the Eunuchs squall;
Such Arts as soothd the base unmanly Ear
Of Greece and Persia bending to their Fall;
When Freedome bled unwept, and scornd was Glorys Call.

While these thy Breast with Scorn indignant fird,
What other Views before thee would disclose!
As Fancy painted and thy Wish inspird
What glorious Scenes beneath thy Shades arose!
Britannias Guardians here dispell her Woes,
Forming her Laws, her Artes, with godlike Toil;
There Albion, smyling on their learnd Repose,
Sees Manly Genius in their Influence smile,
And spread the hallowd Streames of Virtue round the Ile.

How blest, ah Heaven!  such selfe-approving Houres,
Such Views still opening, still extending higher,
Cares whence the State derives its firmest Powres,
And Scenes where Friendship sheds her purest Fire;
And did, ah Shame!  these Hopes in vain expire
A morning Dreame! &mdash; As the lorn Spendthrift stands,
Who sees the Fieldes bequeathd him by his Sire,
His own no more, reapt by the Strangers Hands;
So languid must I view faire Honours fertile Lands.

Silence would then ensue; perhaps reclind
On the greene Margin of the Streame he lay,
While softlie stealing on his languid Mind
Th' Ideal Scene would hold a Moments Sway,
And the Domesticke Houre all Smyles display,
Where fixt Esteeme the fond Discourse inspires:
Now through his Hart would glide the sprightlie Ray
Where Married Love bids light his purest Fires,
Where Elegance presides, and wakes the Young Desires.

Strait to his brawling Lemman turns his Mind;
Shockd he beholds the odious Colours rise,
Where Selfishnesse, low Pride and Spleen combind,
Form the Companion whom he must despise,
Incapable of sweete Affections Ties,
Grovling, indelicate &mdash; Stung to the Hart
His Indignation heaves in stifled Sighs;
But soon his Passion bursts with suddein Start:
His Children strike his Thoughts with lively piersant Smart.

The Mothers Basenesse in their Deeds he sees,
And all the wounded Father swells his Breast:
Suddein he leaves the Cave and mantling Trees,
And up the furzie Hill his Footsteps Haste,
While sullenly he Soothes his Soul to rest:
Meantime the opening Prospect wide he gains,
Where, crownd with Oake, with Meadow Flowres ydrest,
His British Chaplet, buxom Summer reigns,
And waves his Mantle greene farre round the smyling Plains.

Still as he slow ascends, the bounteous Farms,
And old grey Towres of rural Churches rise,
The Fieldes still lengthening shew their crowded Charms
In fayre Perspective and in richest Guise:
His sweeping Scythe the white-sleevd Mower plies,
The Plowman through the Fallow guides his Teame,
Acrosse the Wheaten Fielde the Milkmayde hies,
To where the Kine, foreby the reedy Streame,
With frequent Lowe to Plaine of their ful Udders seeme.

See, now the Knight arrives where erst an Oak
Dan Aeols blustering Stormes did long repell,
Till witchd it was, when by an headlong Shock,
As the hoar Fathers of the Village tell,
With horrid Crash on All Saints Eve it fell:
But from its Trunk soon sprouting Saplings rose,
And round the Parent Stock did shadowy swell;
Now, aged Trees, they bend their twisted Boughs,
And by their moss-greene Toots invite the Swains repose.

Here on a bending Knare he pensive leans,
And round the various Lawnskepe raunge his Eyes.
There stretch the Corny Fieldes in various Greens,
Farre as the Sight.  There, to the peaceful Skyes
The darkning Firs and dewy Poplars rise.
Behind the Wood a dark and heathy Lea,
With Sheep faire spotted, farre extended lies,
With here and there a lonlie blasted Tree;
And from between two Hills appears the duskie Sea.

Bright through the fleeting Clouds the Sunny Ray
Shifts oer the Fieldes, now gilds the woody Dale,
The Flockes now whiten, now the Ocean bay
Beneath the Radiance glistens clear and pale,
And white from farre appeares the frequent Sail
By Traffick spread.  Moord where the Land divides,
The British Red-Cross waving in the Gale,
Hulky and black, a gallant Warre Ship rides,
And over the greene Wave with lordlie Port presides.

Fixt on the Bulwark of the British Powre
Long gazd the Knight, with fretfull languid Air;
Then thus, indulging the reflective Houre,
Pours fourth his Soul,  Oh, glorious happy Care!
To bid Britannias Navies greatly dare,
And through the vassal Seas triumphant reign,
To either India waft victorious Warre,
To join the Poles in Trades unbounded Chain,
And bid the British Throne the mighty Whole sustain.

With what superior Lustre and Command
May stedfast Zeal in Albions Senate shine!
What glorious Laurells court the Patriots Hand!
How base the Hand that can such Meed decline!
And was, kind Fate!  to snatch these Honours mine?
Yes!  greene they spred, and fayre they bloomd for me;
Thy Birth and Duty bade the chiefe be thine;
Oh lost, vain Trifler, lost in each Degree!
Thy Country never turnd her hopeful Eyes on Thee.

Yet, how the Fielde of Worth luxurious smiles!
Nor Africk yeilds, nor Chilys Earth contains
Such Funds of Wealth as crown the Plowmans Toils,
And tinge with waving Gold Britannias Plains;
Even on her Mountains cheerful Plenty reigns,
And wildlie grand her fleecy Wardrobe spreads.
What noble Meed the honest Statesman gains,
Who through these Publique nerves new Vigour sheds,
And bids the Useful Artes exalt their drooping Heads:

Who, founding on the Plough and humble Loome,
His countrys Greatnesse, sees, on every Tide,
Her Fleets the Umpire of the World assume,
And spread her Justice as her Glories wide&mdash;
Oh Wonder of the World, and fairest Pride,
Britannias Fleet!  how long shall Pity mourn
And stain thy Honours?  from his weeping Bride
And starving Babes, how long inhuman torn
Shall the bold Sailor mount thy Decks with Hart forlorn!

Sad on the Shroud the wretched Father sighs,
(Keen-eyd Humanity his Anguish sees)
And fixing on the Land his earnest Eyes,
Down sinks his Hart and faint his manly knees.
Ah!  hither turn, ye Sonnes of courtlie Ease,
And let the brave Mans Wrongs, let Interest plead:
Say, while his Arme his Countrys Fate decrees,
Say, shall his Hart for his lorn Familie bleed?
His Wrongs unnerve his Soul, and blight each mighty Deed.

Whatever Party boasts thy glorious Name,
O THOU reservd by Heavens benign Decree
To blast those Artes that quench the British Flame,
And bid the meanest of the Land be free;
Oh, much Humanity shall owe to Thee!
And shall that Palm unenvied still remain!
Yet, hear, ye Lordlings, each Severitie,
And every Woe the Labouring Class sustain,
Upbraids the man of Powre, and blasts his Honours vain.

While thus the Knights long smotherd Fires broke forth,
The rousing Musicke of the Horne he hears
Shrill echoing through the Wold; and by the North
Where bends the Hill the sounding Chace appears;
The Hounds with glorious peal salute his Ears,
And Wood and Dale rebound the swelling Lay;
The Youths on Coursers fleet as Fallow Deers
Pour through the Downs, while, foremost of the Fray;
Away!  the jolly Huntsman cries; and Echoe sounds, Away!

Now han the Beagles scourd the bushy Ground,
Till where a Brooke strays hollow through the Bent,
When all confusd, and snuffing wyldlie round,
In vain their fretfull Haste explord the Sent:
But Reynards Cunning all in vain was spent,
The Huntsman from his Stand his Arts had spyd,
Had markt his Doublings and his shrewd Intent,
How both the Bancks he traced, then backward plyd
His Track some twentie Roods, then bounding sprong aside.

Eke had he markt where to the Broome he crept,
Where, hearkening everie Sound, an Hare was laid;
Then from the thickest Bush he slylie lept,
And wary Scuds along the Hawthorne Shade,
Till by the Hills slant Foot he earths his Head
Amid a briarie Thickett:  Emblem meet
Of wylie Statesman of his Foes adred;
He oft misguides the Peoples Rage, I weet,
On Others, whilst Himselfe winds off with slie Deceit.

The cunning Huntsman now cheers on his Pack,
The lurking Hare is in an instant slain:
Then opening loud the Beagles scent the Track
Right to the Hill, while thondring through the Plain
With blythe huzzas advaunce the jovial Train,
And now the Groomes and Squires, Cowherds and Boys
Beat round and round the Brake; but all in vain
Their Poles they ply, and vain their Oathes and Noise,
Till plonging in his Den the Terrier fiercely joys.

Expelld his Hole, upstarts to open Sky
The Villain bold, and wildly glares around;
Now here, now there, he bends his Knees to fly,
As oft recoils to guard from backward Wound;
His frothie Jaws he grinds &mdash; with horrid Sound
The Pack attonce rush on him:  foming Ire,
Fierce at his Throte and Sides hang many a Hound;
His burning Eyes flash wylde red sparlking Fire,
Whiles weltering on the Swaird his Breath and Strength expire.

Straight to Syr Martyns Hall the Hunters bend,
The Knight perceives it from his Oake-crownd Hill,
Down the steep furzie Height he slow gan wend,
With troublous Thoughts keen ruminating still;
While Grief and Shame by turns his Bosom fill.
And now, perchd prowdlie on the topmast Spray,
The sootie Blackbird chaunts his Vespers shrill;
While Twilight spreads his Robe of sober Grey,
And to their Bowres the Rooks loud cawing Wing their way:

And bright behind the Cambrian Mountains hore
Flames the red Beam; while on the distant East
The horned Moone, led by her Starre, looks o'er
The bending Forrest, and with Rays increast
Ascends; while trembling on the dappled West
The purple Radiance shifts, and dies away;
The Willows with a deeper Green imprest
Nod o'er the Brooks; the Brooks with gleamy Ray
Glide on, and holy Peace assumes her woodland Sway.

All was Repose, all but Syr Martyns Brest;
There, Passions tearing Gusts tempestuous rise.
Are these, he murmurs, these my Friends!  the best
That croud my Hall!  the Sonnes of madning Noise,
Whose warmest Friendship with the Revel dies;
Whose Glee it were my dearest Peace destroy,
Who with my Woes could sport, my Wrongs despise;
Could round my Coffin pledge the Cup of Joy,
And on my Crimes even then their base-tongued Witt employ.

Whose Converse, oft as fulsom Bawdrie fails,
Takes up the Barkings of Impiety,
The Scepticks wild disjointed Dreams retails,
These modern Ravings of Philosophy
Made drunk; the Cavil, the detected Ly,
The Witt of Ignorance, and Gloss unfair,
Which honest Dullness would with Shame deny;
The Hope of Baseness vaumpt in Candours Air:
Good Heaven!  are such the Friends that to my Hearth repair.

The Man of Worth shuns thy reputelesse Dore,
Even the old Peasant shakes his silverd Head,
Old Saws and Stories babling evermore,
And adding still, Alas, those Dayes be fled!
Here Indignation pausd, when, up the Glade,
Pale through the Trees his household Smoke ascends;
Wakd at the Sight, his Brothers Wrongs upbraid
His melting Hart, and Griefe his Bosome rends:
And now the keene Resolve its gleaming Comfort lends.

Perdie, now were I bent on Legends fine
My Knight should rise the Flowre of Chivalrie,
Brave as Syr Arthegal or Valentine,
Another Saint George England then should see,
Britannias Genius should his Sabra bee,
Chaind to the Rock by Dragon to be slain,
But he the Virgin Princesse soon should free,
And stretch the Monster breathless on the Plain;
Bribery, the Dragon huge, should never rise again.

Eke should he, freed from foul Enchaunters Spell,
Escape his false Duessas magicke Charms,
And Folly quaid, yclepd an Hydra fell,
Receive a beauteous Lady to his Arms;
While Bardes and Minstrales chaunt the soft Alarms
Of gentle Love, unlike his former Thrall.
Eke should I sing, in courtly cunning Terms,
The gallant Feast, servd up by Seneshall,
To Knights and Ladies gent in painted Bowre and Hall.

But certes, while my Tongue fayre Truth indites,
And does of human Frailtie soothly tell,
Unmeet it were indulge the daintie Flights
Of Phantasie, that never yet befell:
Uneath it is long Habits to expell,
Ne may the best good Hart its Bliss secure,
Ne may the livelie Powre of judging well
In arduous worthy Deed long Time endure,
Where DISSIPATION once has fixt her Footing sure.

Such was the Powre that angrie JOVE bestowd
On this faire Nymph:  the Historie thus is told.
To Dians care her Life her Mother owd;
Faire Dian found her naked on the Wold,
Some Peasants Babe, exposed to deadlie Cold,
And gave her to a Satyrs Care to rear;
Then, when the Nymph was fifteen Springtimes old,
Equipt her with the Bow and Huntresse Spear,
And of her Woodland Traine her made a welcome Fere.

But ill her Mind received chast Phoebes Lore,
Fain would she at the Chace still lag behind:
One sultry Noone, as Phoebe sped afore,
Beneath a leafy Vine the Nymph reclind,
And, Fan my Breast, she cried, Oh Western Wind!
Soon at the wishd-for word Favonius came,
From that Day forth the conscious Nymph declind
The near Inspection of the sovereign Dame;
Till mid the Chace, one Morne, her Throes betrayd her Shame.

Her Throes with Scorne the taunting Dryads eyd,
The Nymph changd Colours, and hung down her Head;
Still change thy blushing Hue, the Goddess cryd:
Forthwith a freezing Languor gan invade
Her Limbs; and now, with suddein Leaves arrayd,
A Russian Poppey she transmewd remains:
The various Colours ever rise and fade,
The Tints still shifting mock the Painters Pains;
And still her drowsie Mood the beauteous Nymph retains.

Meanwhile his new-born Elfe Favonius bore,
Soft lapt, on balmy Pinions farre away;
And with the Fawns, by Peneus flowry Shore,
From earliest Youth the laughing Imp did play,
For ever fluttering, debonair and gay,
And restlesse, as the Dove Deucalion sent
To spy if peering Oake did yet bewray
Its braunching Head above the flooded Bent,
But ydlie beating round the Day in vain was spent.

When now the Nymph to riper Yeares gan rise,
To fayre PARNASSUS Groves she took her Flight;
There, culling Flowretts of a thousand Dyes,
Still did her Head with tawdry Girlonds dight;
As soon the Wreath ill sorted would she quight:
Ne ever did she climb the twyforkt Hill,
Ne could her Eyen explore its lofty Height,
Ne did she ever taste the sacred Rill
From Inspirations Fount that ever doth distill.

Her sprightly Levitie was from her Syre,
He drowsy Dulness from her Mother sprong;
This never would allow her Mind aspyre,
That never would allow her Patience long.
Thus as she slightly rovd the Lawns among,
High JOVE beheld her from his Starry Seat,
And calld her DISSIPATION:  Wylde and young
Still shalt Thou be, he said; and this thy Fate,
On Man thy Sleights employ, on Man that prowd Ingrate.

All Happinesse he claims his Virtues due,
And holds him injurd when my Care denies
The fondling Wish, whence Sorrow would ensue;
And idle still his Prayers invade my Skies:
But bold and arduous must that Virtue rise
Which I accept, no vague inconstant Blaze.
Then be it Thine to spred before his Eyes
Thy changing Colours, and thy wyld-fire Rays,
And fruitlesse still shall be that Virtue thou canst daze.

So swore the God, by gloomy Styx he swore;
The Fates assented, and the Daemon flew
Right to the Seats of Men.  The Robe she wore
Was starrd with Dewdrops, and of palest Blue;
Faire round her Head playd many a beauteous Hue,
As when the Rainbow through the Bean Flowres plays;
The fleeting Tints the Swaynes with Wonder view,
And ween to snatch a Prize beneath the rays;
But through the Meadows dank the beauteous Meteor strays.

So shone the nymph, and prankt in Pleasures Guize
With wylie Traines the Sonnes of Earth besett;
Goodnesse of Hart before her yawns and dies,
And Friendship ever feels the drowsie Fitt
Just when its Powre to serve could serve a Whitt.
And still behind her march REMORSE and SHAME,
That never will their yron Scourge remitt,
Whenso the Fiend resigns her Thralls to them:
Sad Case, I weet, where still Oneselfe Oneselfe must blame.

Long had the Knight to her his Powres resignd;
In wanton Dalliance first her Nett she spred,
And soon in mirthfull Tumult on his Mind
She softlie stole:  yet, while at times he sped
To Contemplations Bowre, his sight she fled;
Ne on the Mountainett with him durst bide;
Yet homewards still she mett him in the Glade,
And in the social Cup did slily glide,
And still his best Resolves eftsoons she scatterd wide.

And now, as slowly sauntering up the Dale
He homeward wends, in heavie musefull Stowre,
The smooth Deceiver gan his Hart assail;
His Hart soon felt the fascinating Powre:
Old Cambrias Genius markt the fatal Houre,
And tore the Girlond from her Sea-greene Hair;
The conscious Oakes above him rustling lowre,
And through the Braunches sighs the gloomy Air,
As when indignant JOVE rejects the Flamens Prayer.

The Dryads of the Grove that oft had fird
His opening Mind with many a heavenlie Dream,
That oft his Evening Wanderings had inspird,
All by the silent Hill or murmuring Stream,
Forsake him now; for all as lost they deem.
So home he wends; where, wrapt in Jollitie,
His Hall to keepen Holiday mote seem,
And with the Hunters soon full blythe was he,
The blythest Wight of all that blythesome Companie.

As when th' Autumnal Morne with ruddy Hue
Looks through the Glen besprent with Silver hore,
Across the Stubble, brushing off the Dew,
The younkling Fowler gins the Fieldes explore,
And, wheeling oft, his Pointer veres afore,
And oft, sagacious of the tainted Gale,
The fluttering Bird betrays; with thondring Rore
The Shott resounds, loud echoing through the Dale;
But still the Younkling kills nor Partridge, Snipe, nor Quail.

Yet still the queint Excuse is at Command;
The dog was rash, a Swallow twitterd by,
The Gun hung Fire, and Keenness shook his Hand,
And there the Wind or Bushes hurt his Eye.
So can the Knight his Mind still satisfye:
A lazie Fiend, SELF IMPOSITION hight,
Still whispers some Excuse, some gilden Lye,
Himselfe did gild to cheat himselfe outright:
God help the Man bewitchd in such ungracious plight.

On DISSIPATION still this Treachor waits,
Obsequiously behind at Distance due;
And still to DISCONTENTS accursed Gates,
The House of Sorrow, these ungodly Two,
Conduct their fainty Thralls &mdash; Great Things to do
The Knight resolvd, but never yet could find
The proper Time, while still his Miseries grew:
And now these Daemons of the captive Mind
Him to the drery Cave of DISCONTENT resignd.

Deep in the Wyldes of Faerie Lond it lay;
Wide was the Mouth, the Roofe all rudely rent;
Some parts receive, and some exclude the Day,
For deepe beneath the Hill its Caverns went:
The ragged Walls with Lightning seemd ybrent,
And loathlie Vermin ever crept the Flore:
Yet all in Sight, with Towres and Castles gent,
A beauteous Lawnskepe rose afore the Dore,
The which to vew so fayre the Captives grieved sore.

All by the Gate, beneath a Pine Shade bare,
An Owl-frequented Bowre, some Tents were spred;
Here sat a Preasse, with eager furious Stare
Rattling the Dice; and there, with Eyes halfe dead,
Some drowsie Dronkards, looking black and red,
Dozd out their Days:  and by the Path-way green
A sprightlie Troupe still onward heedlesse sped,
In Chace of Butterflies alert and keen;
Honours, and Wealth, and Powre, their Butterflies I ween.

And oft, disgustfull of their various Cares,
Into the Cave they wend with sullen Pace;
Each to his meet Apartment dernly fares:
Here, all in Raggs, in piteous Plight most bace,
The Dronkard sitts.  There, shent with foul Disgrace,
The thriftlesse Heir; and o'er his reeking Blade
Red with his Friends Hart gore, in woefull Cace
The Duellist raves:  and there, on Vetchie Bed,
Crazd with his vaine Pursuits, the Maniack bends his Head.

Yet round his gloomy Cell, with Chalk he scrawls
Ships, Coches, Crownes, and eke the Gallow Tree;
All that he wishd or feard his ghastlie Walls
Present him still, and mock his Miserie.
And there, self-doomd, his cursed Selfe to flee,
The Gamester hangs in Corner murk and dread;
Nigh to the Ground bends his ungratious Knee;
His drooping Armes and white-reclining Head
Dim seen, cold Horror gleams athwart th' unhallowd Shade.

Near the dreare Gate, beneath the rifted Rock,
The Keeper of the Cave all haggard satt,
His pining Corse a restlesse Ague shook,
And blistering Sores did all his Carkas frett:
All with himselfe he seemd in keen Debate;
For still the Muscles of his Mouthe he drew,
Ghastly and fell; and still with deepe Regrate
He lookd him round, as if his heart did rew
His former Deeds, and mournd full sore his Sores to vew.

Yet not Himselfe, but Heavens great King he blamd,
And dard his Wisdom and his Will arraign;
For boldly he the Ways of God blasphemd,
And of blinde Governaunce did loudlie plain,
While vild Selfe-pity would his Eyes distain;
As when an Wolfe, entrapt in Village Ground,
In Dred of Death ygnaws his Limb in twain,
And views with scalding Teares his bleeding Wound:
Such fierce Selfe-pity still this Wights dire Portaunce crownd.

Near by there stood an Hamlett in the Dale,
Where, in the Silver Age, CONTENT had wonne;
This now was His:  yet all mote nought avail,
His loathing Eyes that Place did ever shun;
But ever through his Neighbours Lawns would run,
Where every goodlie Fielde thrice goodlie seemd.
Such was this weary Wight all woe-begone;
Such was his Life; and thus of Things he deemd;
And suchlike was his Cave, that all with Sorrowes teemd.

To this fell Carle gay DISSIPATION led,
And in his Purlieus left the hapless Knight.
From the dire Cave fain would the Knight have fled,
And fain recalld the treachrous Nymphe from flight:
But now the late Obtruder shuns his Sight,
And dearly must be wooed:  hard by the Den,
Where social Bacchus had his Tents ypight,
A transient Visit sometimes would he gain,
While Wine and merry Song beguild his inward Pain.

Yet, ever as he raisd his slombering Head,
The ghastly Tyrant at his Couch stood near;
And ay with ruthless Clamour gan upbraid,
And Wordes that would his very Hartstrings tear.
See now, he sayes, where setts thy vain Career:
Approching Eld now wings its cheerlesse Way,
Thy fruitlesse Autumn gins to blanch thy Heare,
And aged Winter asks from Youth its stay;
But thine comes poore of Joy, comes with unhonourd Gray.

Thou hast no Friend! &mdash; Still on the worthlesse Traine
Thy Kindnesse flowd, and still with Scorne repaid:
Even She on whom thy Favours heapt remain,
Even she regards Thee with a Bosome dead
To kindly Passion, and by Motives led
Such as the Planter of his Negroe deems;
What Profit still can of the Wretch be made
Is all his Care, of more he never dreams:
So, farre remote from her, thy Troubles she esteems.

Thy Children too!  heavens!  what a hopeless Sight!
Ah, wretched Syre! &mdash; but ever from this Scene
The wretched Syre precipitates his Flight,
And in the Bowls wylde Fever shuns his Teene.
So pass his Dayes, while What he might have beene
Its beauteous Views does every Morne present:
So pass his Dayes, while still the Raven SPLEEN
Croaks in his Eares, The brightest Sense mispent
Beget an hoarie Age of Griefe and Discontent.

But boast not of superiour shrewd Addresse,
Ye who can calmly spurn the ruind Mayd,
Ye who unmovd can view the deepe Distresse
That crushes to the Dust the Parents Head,
And rends that easie Heart by You betrayd,
Boast not that Ye his numerous Woes eskew;
Ye who unawd the Nuptial Couch invade,
Boast not his Weaknesse with Contempt to vew;
For worthy is He still compard, perdie, to YOU.
