Be gone, Delusions vain!&mdash;
Leave me, ye smiling meretricious Joys,
That false as Delilah the Soul enchain,
While hostile Cares, and rancorous Passions rise,
And quench the mental Sight!
Be gone! &mdash; and while the still, funereal Night
Her awful Pall, compact with thickest Clouds,
Spreads o'er the World, and all its Glories shrouds,
Give me to muse on sublunary Bliss,
How frail, how transient!  like a vernal Flow'r,
That the rude Breath of Boreas means to kiss,
And kills:  or like an air-blown Bubble, born
To dance and glitter for a short short Hour
While all is calm, but soon the Sport and Scorn
Of envious Winds, it bursts, and is no more!

Ah me how gay, how beautiful, how sweet
Is Life's fair Prospect to th' enchanted Eye
Of unexperienc'd Youth! &mdash; Not ARNO'S Vale,
Where all the mingled Charms of Nature meet,
Is more profuse of Joy:
There wing'd with Fragrance ev'ry whisp'ring Gale
Delights the Soul; Flow'rs of a thousand Dyes,
The Muskrose, Hyacinth, and Asphodel,
Purple the Ground; fresh-breathing Myrtles rise;
And in the frequent Grove, the feather'd Choir
Trill their soft Notes of amorous Desire.
With ling'ring Feet the raptur'd Stranger strays,
And, O sweet Vale, dear Region of Delight,
He cries, where Eden's Beauties charm the Sight,
Here let me live, here end my blissful Days!
Fond Wretch, revoke the Pray'r!&mdash;
For swift as Light'ning thro' the desart Air
A noontide, pestilential Vapour flies,
And blasts the fairy Scene:
Each Herb, Plant, Flow'r, shrinks up its Leaves, and dies!

Ye Sons of Fortune, ye who madly doat
On this vile World, and hug her to your Arms;
Who now luxuriate in her golden Charms,
And ever vacant fondly hope she'll prove,
Amiable ever; &mdash; learn, O timely learn
To wean your Hearts from such destructive Love,
And fly to Wisdom's School!&mdash;
Not to that Wisdom, crabbed, harsh, and dull,
That Stoics preach'd along the murm'ring Stream
Of fam'd ILLISUS; nor to that less stern,
Which Plato taught in studious ACADEME:
Such Wisdom is rank Folly in Disguise!
Go, fly to that sepulchral Gloom,
Where the pale Corps of gentle RUSSEL lies;
There Wisdom, bending o'er her Fav'rite's Tomb,
Unwearied Vigils keeps;
And ever and anon the Goddess weeps,
While thus she mocks all human Vanities:

"Wealth, Grandeur, Pow'r, and Fame, &mdash; ye Idol-Train,
At whose throng'd Altars prostrate Millions bow,
Where is your Boasting now?
Where your Pre-eminence so proud, and vain?
Go, great Magicians, on the hollow Base
Of empty Hope, bid dazzling Fabrics rise
Of sublunary Joys:
But ah!  how soon shall Death the Structures rase,
Burst your vain Spells, and disenchant the Scene!
Thou breathless Corse, that There in Manhood green
Art sepulcher'd, to crawling Worms a Prey,
Oh what a Change was wrought in one short Day!
At morn, with Riches crown'd, in Virtues great;
Dear to his Friends, and to his Country dear;
The blooming Hope, and 'Rose of the fair State;'
Whose opening Leaves with Pride Britannia saw,
And thought, how vainly, rich Perfumes to draw
From Flow'r so sweet, and fair!
At Night &mdash; ah me I fondly err,&mdash;
Or ere the Sun with hot meridian Ray
Had pierc'd the Earth &mdash; he fainted, sicken'd, died!&mdash;
No more his Friends' Delight, his Country's Pride,
But oh a poor pale Piece of lifeless Clay!&mdash;

"Ye hapless few, whom nearer Converse gave
His various Worth to know, and hourly trace
Each nicer, softer, more domestic Grace,
That, like the Touches exquisitely fine
Of Titian's Hand, are at a Distance lost,
Weep, weep no more &mdash; no more, fond Souls, repine
That all your Wishes, all your Hopes are crost.
Tho' There with livid Cheeks, and ghastly Eyes,
Your dear departed Friend, your RUSSEL lies,
'Tis but his Semblance, but his Shade;
A frail and perishable Casket, made
To hold a Jewel of stupendous Price;
A Jewel, that is now exalted high,
And flames and sparkles in Heav'n's Treasury!"

Thus Wisdom speaks &mdash; Yet O thou matchless Youth,
That dost immortal, boundless Joys inherit,
Still will we weep, and melt with Ruth,
Though not for Thee, thou happy, happy Spirit,
Yet for ourselves! &mdash; Oh that remorseless Death
Had spar'd Thee, RUSSEL, and with ranc'rous Tooth
Devour'd the Scum of Britain's Bastard Brood,
Who, lost to all that's noble, all that's good,
Enlist in Faction's Cause;
And when Ambition calls, or Av'rice draws,
Grow fat, and wanton in their Country's Blood!
Vile Parricides! &mdash; Why leave the righteous Gods
Such Wretches to consume the Fruits of Earth,
And snatch Thee, RUSSEL, to their blest Abodes?
Thou Flow'r of true Nobility, whose Worth
Promis'd so fair, and might in future Age
Have prov'd a burning, shining Light, to guide
Our young Patricians from the fatal Rage
Of lurking Rocks, that in Life's boist'rous Tide
Have shipwreck'd many a great and noble Name,
And spread the Ruins of an honest Fame!

Yes we will weep &mdash; weep for our Country's Loss,
That, in these Dregs of Britain, ill could spare
Thy Virtues great, and rare;
Thy public Spirit, that contemn'd as Dross
The golden Baits, which Mammon throws to lure
Our wand'ring Feet from Virtue's distant Goal;
Thy Moderation, that the Stream impure
Of Party never could controul;
Thy Mildness, Greatness, Gentleness of Soul;
Thy Bounty, ne'er implor'd in vain,
That on the meagre Sons of Want and Toil
In Show'rs spontaneous flow'd,
And like the Morning Dew, or gracious Rain,
Distilling gently from a vernal Cloud,
Bad the bleak Desart smile!&mdash;
Excellent Youth, whose Bosom was the Soil
Where ev'ry Grace, and ev'ry Virtue throve;
But chiefly those, the gentlest, sweetest, best,
That humanize and dignify the Breast,
The filial, conjugal, paternal Love!

Yes we will weep &mdash; and why, thou widow'd Muse,
That wander'st, all-disconsolate and pale,
Thro' GRANTA'S fav'rite Vale,
Ah why the tributary Tear refuse?
Hence with thy choicest Streams of Music flow,
In all the artless Negligence of Woe,
To grace the Tomb where TAVISTOCK is laid!
Canst thou forget, how in thy learned Shade
The dear ingenuous Youth
Model'd his Soul to Honour, Virtue, Truth?
Oh, if thy torpid Spirits still require
Some nearer Force to strike the latent Fire,
Think, how in future Time
He would have smooth'd Preferment's arduous Way,
And taught thy best-deserving Sons to climb
Those Heights, where Wealth and Honours bloom, which now
Like Fruits, that on rough Precipices grow,
Are only to be pluck'd by Birds of Prey.

Think, &mdash; but ah!  whither do I fondly stray,
And why recount his matchless Virtues o'er?
O &mdash; you who wear, "in your Heart's Core,"
His Image deep engrav'd, accept this Lay,
That rich in Zeal, in Wit and Learning poor,
A rural Muse presents at RUSSEL'S Shrine:
Worthless I own the Gift, &mdash; yet Shepherds bring
The frail and short-liv'd Beauties of the Spring,
To deck the Altars of their Pow'rs divine.
