Beside a Rock by dashing Waves o'erthrown,
The Muse of Britain lay, in Sorrow drown'd:
Sunk are those Eyes, that once, in Lustre shown,
Could raise a Paradise of Flow'rs around!

Once she was fair &mdash; O she was passing fair!
Nor Geraldine e'er gleam'd with gayer Light!
Not Saccharissa could with her compare!
Not Gloriana's self more glorious bright!

But now, the Flow'rs are faded from her Brow:
Pale, on her Rainbow-Vest the Streaks divine:
No wond'ring Nations at her Footstool bow,
Nor Princes make their Offerings at her Shrine.

Beneath her lay full many a Trophy spread,
The sad remains of many a faded Clime:
And many a Garland pluck'd to deck her Head&mdash;
So Britain gathers all the Spoils of Time.

The Emblems of her Art were laid beside,
The Lyre, the Pipe, the Shell by Poets prais'd:
And many a druid shadow dim descry'd
From Folla's Isle, the Song of sorrow rais'd.

If Britain laughs, fond Erin learns to smile:
If Britain mourns, can she refuse to weep?
So link'd, the Genius of each sister Isle:
So Fates divide the Empire o'er the deep.

When Arts revive, when Glory crowns the Muse
Of Albion, Erin joins in rapturous Airs;
As her own Wreath, her Sister's Crown she views;
As her own Grief, her Sifter's Woe she shares.

Dark was the dreary Night, and loud the Storm,
When I beheld the melancholy Maid;
And wild Despair, and Death, and every Form
Of Fear, the solitary Haunt invade.

And oft she look'd upon a canker'd Roll,
Wherein were register'd the Days of old:
And e'er she yet had open'd half the Scroll,
Down her wan Cheek the briny Torrent roll'd!

Slowly she rose, and sadly wav'd her Hand&mdash;
'And is there left (she cry'd) no Hope for me?
No Hope for me, in my lov'd native Land,
Lov'd native Land, the Land of Liberty?

Should I alone, of all the Sister-Arts,
Be forc'd my antient Honours to resign?
A painful Exile, driv'n to foreign Parts,
With savage Tribes, in savage Wastes to pine!

Yet me the Picture hails her Guide; my Page
The Sculptor's Hand directs, my Strains inspire;
I form the Prince, the Warrior, and the Sage,
And tune to lofty Themes the sacred Lyre.

What is Caecilia's boasted Art to mine?
Her senseless Sounds, to my coelestial Lays?
To Reason's Rule I frame her Touches fine,
And higher still her Diapason raise.

Amphion built by Sounds the Theban Wall;
But did th' harmonic Wall so long remain,
In Homer's Verse, as Ilium's Turrets tall?
Or Thebes, immortal in Papinian Strain?

If fair Caecilia yet should boast her Skill,
And wake  her hundred stops to lofty Rage;
Great Dryden to her Name applies his Quill,
And ev'n Caecilia brightens in his Page.

How all our Passions Music's Pow'r obey,
In Persia's Conqu'ror when the Poet shews,
Timotheus learns new Music from his Lay;
To him her boasted Influence Music owes.

Why should I to my Sister Picture bend?
Have Milton's Michael Julio's God's outshone?
Can Angelo's Last Day with Young contend?
Vies Paolo's Cato with my Addison?

The trembling Arts long fear'd the Thund'rer's Nod,
His awful Brows lay unattempted long;
Till deathless Homer dar'd describe the God,
And Sculpture caught Expression from the Song.

Thus by my Pow'r the kindred Arts in fair
Alliance grew, where Grace with Grace contends;
The varying Words enliven'd Music's Air,
And bold Relief to Tints the Sculptor lends.

Who but the Muse has Pow'r o'er Time and Fates?
What Architect keeps Cities from their Falls?
Who but the Muse preserves their hundred Gates?
Their sacred Domes records, and lofty Walls?

Of old, in fair Creation's youthful Day,
Ere Man to venal Arts had form'd his Tongue,
What vigorous Sense and Fancy bade him say,
Assisted by my pow'rful Aid, he sung.

But, since the Race are dwindled, since their Hours
Are few and guilty on the darken'd Earth,
Corrupted Hearts, false Tongues, and weaken'd Pow'rs,
To cold and artificial Prose gave Birth.

In those first Days I reign'd in gorgeous Pride,
And tow'red Memphis heard my Lyre resound;
The Picture join'd, and Sculpture by her Side,
To grace, with emblem'd Pomp, the Rites profound.

Where now are those deep Things, the Sons of Seth
Inscrib'd in Figures dark on Columns high?
When leaves the Breast of Man his mortal Breath,
How all his Thoughts and bold Inventions die!

Nor fell they yet, till Memnon caught the sound,
And on his Feet the Hieroglyphics grav'd
Explain'd to all the wond'ring Nations round;&mdash;
The Samian hence his Lessons sage receiv'd,

Hence Plato with a Berkeley's Soul arose;
And He, unvext amid domestic Strife;
And He, whose Lore misconstru'd many Foes
Uprais'd, but none to match his blameless Life!

Blest Man!  whose Life could tempt a lofty Bard
Ev'n his mistaken Tenets to defend!
Blest Man!  who now enjoys that high Reward
Of Joy, he knew on Earth to recommend!

But who is sage?  And who is counted wise?
And who is learned in all mystic Lore?
See from the Wave Gamaliel's Pupil rise&mdash;
So stands a Rock against the Ocean's Roar!

How great the truly Wise!  How soar the Good
Above the base of high or low Degree!
How Virtue for her Friends hath oft withstood
Wounds, Death, and Torments, glorying to be free!

Hail, antient Freedom!  antient Glory, hail!
And hail, ye Suns, that blest my brighter Days,
When Athens saw me cloath her Chiefs in Mail,
And bear them dauntless to the Lists of Praise!

The Graces met me by Ilyssus' Wave.
Old Tyber next presents his stately Views;
Till last, where Albion's Rocks the Tempest brave,
I rose, and since am call'd The BRITISH Muse.

And from that Time (O Time, O happy Time!)
When Albion's snowy Cliffs first met mine Eyes,
Than Mincius more, or Arno's od'rous Clime
My Camus now, and Isis' Bank I prize.

Yet there, ev'n there, ev'n in those sacred Seats,
Rais'd to preserve the sacred Muse's Lore,
My Trees neglected yield but sickly Sweets;
The British Muse pines on the British Shore.

Well may my Trees be wither'd, fail my Fruits,
And pallid Moss my sickly Boughs o'erspread:
Since He, my GRAY, who knew to tend the Shoots,
And twine the Tendrils into Bow'rs, is dead.

What Pomps funereal glimmer on mine Eye?
O whither does that long Procession tend?
From Learning's Seat to Glory's Mansion high,
Behold the last of British Bards ascend.

Why groans yon Gate upon its Hinge of Steel?
Old Camus grieves to let his Poet go&mdash;
What Shock is that which Eton's Turrets feel?
Her's too he was; she also shares the Blow.

Ah wherefore yawns that Cavern?  whither lies
Yon radiant Road? &mdash; He told, the Bard who knew
And trod that Path &mdash; Ye Great, ye Brave, ye Wise,
Hear it, ye Fair!  yon Cavern opes for You!

Where are the Honours thrown into the Grave?
Th' attendant Bards?  The Friend's pathetic Call?
Who now repays the gen'rous Tear He gave
To pale Affliction? &mdash; 'Tis sad Silence all.

Save that from yonder cloister'd Way there breaks
Something of awful Import on mine Ear;
Something that means far more than Echo speaks!
Or Voices breath!  or mournful Breezes bear!

How sacred is the Bard!  Mycene's Prince
Departing from his Lady, Legends say,
Left Bards who might of awful Truth convince
Her Mind, and charm by Songs all Ill away.

How sacred is the Bard!  how great his soul!
How wide his Pow'r!  how excellent that Art
Which every frantic Passion can controul,
And to each goodly Purpose form the Heart!

To sooth the poor Afflicted, to subdue
Th' Oppressor's Wrong, with haughty Vice to strive,
To wean weak Mortals from each selfish View,
And in their Breast keep all the God alive,

From Motives such as these, in ev'ry Land
Among the first, high Bards have honour'd been;
Sage Counsellors, who useful Projects plann'd;
And holy Priests, whose Brows are wreath'd in green.

In ev'ry Clime they had their Lands assign'd
Of Old, that Wealth in them might Virtue meet
On Earth, and Rank display the gen'rous Mind:
Such the Reward of Arts and Accents sweet!

How sacred is the Bard!  How from his Roof,
When Macedon's bold youth had Thebes alarm'd,
The Ministers of Vengeance kept aloof!
And holy Awe most savage Bosoms warm'd!

Who now assumes his golden Chair?  Who now
Affects the haughty Prize which he obtain'd?
Who scales like him Parnassus' lofty Brow,
And dares to snatch a Wreath so hardly gain'd?

Mine were the Honours to the Poet paid!
Mine were the Songs he rais'd!  the Wreaths he won!
For me his Tints Apelles' Hand display'd,
For me the Bust, the Parian Statue shone!

How sacred is the Bard!  Behold where dwelt
Electra's Poet, when the hostile Glare
Threaten'd his Walls, such Pow'r have Strains to melt,
The Poet's Verse averted Ruin bare!

How sacred is the Bard!  Arion, sav'd
By Dolphins from the Seamen's cruel Rage,
With grateful Toil the Sculptor's Hand engrav'd,
His Mem'ry to preserve thro' ev'ry Age!

How sacred is the Bard!  When Orpheus old
Down Haemus Hills the Stream of Music wound,
Obsequious Forests follow'd where it roll'd,
And Ice in vain th' exulting Torrents bound!

How sacred is the Bard!  Bright Truth his last,
His first, his sole, and ever new Desire!
Who hopes the future, who enjoys the past,
And carols what extatic Thoughts inspire!

Where dwells this genuine Bard?  Who now reveres
The venerable Truth?  Who dares engage
With Error's venom Blood confirm'd by Years,
To shine like Bacon, thro' a twilight Age?

Of spheric Chains, and Laws beyond the Moon
That Comets bind, while one bold Master raves,
Let Gauls dance nimbly to the servile Tune,
Mean Comments on weak Laws!  a Race of Slaves!

Let Britain still be free!  free as the Wind!
Free as the Wave that thunders o'er their Sands!
Whom no week Chains, no tyrant Terrors bind!
And one invited Race alone commands!

Theirs is the vast immeasurable Line
Of Science deep from Erin old declar'd,
Theirs is the Druid Sage, the blest Divine,
And theirs the Rapture of the sacred Bard!

O lead me to the Bard, beside thy Plains,
Sweet Isis!  or by Camus' hoary Tow'rs!
Where sits he wrapt in high immortal Strains,
'Till all his Sense some sacred Trance o'erpow'rs!

'Twas from these Mansions up to God arose
The Temple's Glory, Herbert; such the End
Of those who all their Lives with God repose;
All Heav'n, and Me the heav'nly Muse, their Friend!

Who loves high Lore, yet slights thee, modest Mede?
Liv'd a Divine, who Light-foot e'er disdain'd?
'Till ev'ry Virtue's Legend none shall read,
Still Spenser keep thy Crown so justly gain'd!

Alas, the mournful Change!  From Learning's Seat,
Who now attend me?  where my chosen Train?
Save when I seek my Warton's calm Retreat,
All mournful, unattended I remain.

Where are my Arthurs now, my Alfreds where?
Are all my Rites forgot, my Shrines effac'd?
Can I be ever, ever banish'd there
Where Freedom has her bright Pavilion plac'd?

Since that sad Hour when from Plinlimmon's Height
I saw by barb'rous Hands, my Offspring slain,
What Hope remain'd for me?  what Joy?  what Light?
Save distant Gleams of Guelfo's glorious Reign?

And when from Liffey's beauteous Banks, the Bards
Proud Amrac's Son could cruelly displace,
A Settlement serene, and fair Regards
They found from Rodoric's illustrious Race,

Hence Ullin's Glory brighten'd in their Lays,
When dark Oblivion's Shade o'ertook their Foes:
To Ullin's high Renown, and Rodoric's Praise,
From I's wild Hills the Voice of Dallan rose.

Yet he would sometime sing &mdash; 'Fam'd Amrac's Son
Was gen'rous once.  The Di'mand of his Vest
He gave the Bard &mdash; Since all his Deeds are done,
Peace to the Monarch of the narrow Breast!'

Then could I in twelve hundred Sons rejoice,
But Time awhile to Fame its Period brought;
Ceas'd holy Angus!  mute was Dallan's Voice!
The Poet and the Muse alike forgot!

So thick a Darkness over Albion grew,
A Monkish Cloud of Ignorance and Sloth,
Wherein each goodly Blossom, fair to view,
Grew pale, and ev'ry Branch forgot its Growth!

It was a Night of Horror and Dismay!
A Night, unfriendly to each gentle Art!
Dead was each Virtue, cold the Poet's Lay,
And Superstition froze up ev'ry Heart.

From hence I date the Period of my Woes.
Chaucer in vain reprov'd the drowsy Race,
Wav'd Wings unwieldy, heavy Altars rose
To me the Finisher of ev'ry Grace!

But why should I with Monkish Foes engage?
Since yet a sadder Tale I can rehearse;
Ev'n courtly Athens in a darken'd Age,
Saw Plumes expand, and Altars rise in Verse!

Then Britain's fav'rite Bow'r, of Force, I left,
Where dead was ev'ry Art and ev'ry Song,
Of ev'ry Joy, of ev'ry Hope bereft;
Since ev'n my Chaucer felt th' Oppressor's Wrong!

For her dead Kings and Bards a calm Retreat
Augusta saw, when Peter's Dome arose.
But ah, what Tombs encircle Voices sweet?
What Domes the tuneful Spirit can enclose?

What Joy to me, though to their blest Remains
Barbarian Eyes with Zeal tormenting croud?
If those who never relish'd courtly Strains,
The mean Inscription learn to spell aloud?

Long had I linger'd in the savage Shade,
But for those fav'rite Names, to whom I lent
My Skill, to whom my Visions I convey'd,
And led them forth, the Nation's Ornament!

But Chief, for that fam'd Race from Azzo sprung,
(Whom long may Heav'n to Britain's Pray'rs allow!)
I oft appear'd Germania's States among,
And, all unknown, in Britain wander now.

And shall I leave that Race, for whom I chose
To twine the Chaplet of immortal Fame,
For whom I cropt whatever Pindus shows,
Or Peneus' Bowers, or Pisa's honour'd Stream?

And must I Britain leave?  can I forget,
While round her Breast the Guardian-Oceans roll,
Her Virtues, for the World's great Pattern set?
Her honest Eye, transparent to the Soul?

No &mdash; I can ne'er forget, forget to tell
In Selma, when the feast of Shells was high,
Where for the flaming Hearth whole Forests fell,
How honour'd!  how caress'd!  how bless'd was I!

There many a Nymph, array'd in Beauty's Smile,
And Striping trim my Gambols joy'd to lead;
Aerial Harps were sweetly heard the while,
And frolic Pleasures wanton'd o'er the Mead.

'Twas in these hallow'd Days of grey Renown
My Minstrel grew, by visionary Springs
He slept; from some stupendous Mountain's Crown,
His Eye quick-darting caught magnific Things.

Then would he take the Harp, and boldly glance
His frantic Fingers o'er th' extatic Chords,
Till Heav'n, all vanquish'd, to the Poet's Trance
Inspir'd, by strange Infusion, magic Words!

Thus grew the Song, all rapturous as the Sounds,
Such was the Theme!  high Nature heard her Praise,
With Transport trembling through her distant Bounds,
And to herself assum'd those first of Lays.

The Tempests, under Heaven that madly rave,
The storm-shot Hail, the hoarse-resounding Shore,
The Bark just whelm'd beneath the dashing Wave,
The Lightning's Glare, the Thunder's rushing Roar,

The Misletoe with wond'rous Spell indu'd,
The Oak whence sacred Misletoe is rear'd,
The Stone renown'd of Adder's poisonous Brood,
From Druid's awful Cave the Rites rever'd,

The rev'rend Wood for Beasts a sullen Shade,
The shatter'd Vale, the Mountain's gloomy Side,
The Hamlet from its peaceful Joys dismay'd,
The antique Abbey through the Trees descry'd,

The Echo mournful from yon mould'ring Wall,
The clamorous Hound, the Sportsman's early Horn,
The Lark's enraptur'd Throat, the Fountain's Fall,
The Sheepcote Bell, the Melodies of Morn:

Such are the Scenes that o'er his Soul arise,
His Soul, by Nature's awful Hand impress'd,
Wherein enshrin'd above each low Disguise,
Her fav'rite Throne has seraph Fancy dress'd.

Where now are gone my Wreaths off ev'ry Bough?
My Druids bending with the Weight of Time,
My holy Minstrels where?  sage Beatty now
Alone has Skill to dictate Songs sublime!

O if to Erin's Shore my Fancy turn, 
What laurel now can hapless Erin claim?
Tho' but one Breast with Minstrel Genius burns,
The niggard Race will scarce allow it Fame!

Erin alas how chang'd!  to Virtue fair
How lost!  how fall'n from each ingenious Art
For sacred Lore and unpolluted Air
Once fam'd, where ev'ry Science held her Mart!

If ev'ry Art to her its Scyon sent
To blow secure in her parental Shade,
To her the Scyons not in vain were lent,
With tenfold Bearing she the Fruit repaid!

There Virtue reign'd with Temperance his Bride,
Fairer than Poets dream, or Fancy paints!
From Owen's Isle to Slaney's  silv'r'd Tide,
The Druid Songs proclaim'd the Land of Saints.

Her sought from ev'ry Clime the learned Train,
The Danans came from Scandia's wizzard Shore,
Her Arts, her Celtic Liberty, how vain!
The Seat of Arts and Virtue, now no more!

All, all are gone!  Yet once my Fame arose,
Tho' now the Muse's Glory is o'ercast:
Then had I Sons to sing me to repose,
Ah Songs and tuneful Voices, whither past?

Next Tityrus me woo'd, a rev'rend Name,
Who tun'd his Reed to many a courtly Tale:
And Hawthornden's sweet-piping Shepherd came
Whose Loves enchanted Ora's beauteous Vale,

Then liberal Nature all she could impart
To Shakespeare gave, to grace her fav'rite Son.
His was each Key that opes the Human Heart,
Himself a Muse, for he and I were One.

Breathe soft, ye Gales, ye Torrents, gently flow,
Ye Rocks, be molded to a softer Size!
Shine forth, ye Gems!  ye Flow'rs spontaneous blow!
Behold for me a new Arcadia rise!

Who, who,  performs such Wonders?  He who sings
So deftly, Albion's wonder, Astrophel!
Hark, he invites each Bird of airy Wings
To vie in Notes, but none can sing so well!

What cannot Song Each Passion's Pow'r it tames
Each venomous Nature it to Love restores:
Its Pow'r Earth, Ocean, boundless Air proclaims!
And Heav'n re-echoes from her beryl Floors!

The Moon forgets her Shining, by the rude
Force stricken!  or displays a double Orb!
The Planets swim in magic Seas of Blood
That blaze o'er Earth, and dying Suns absorb!

The Comets wind through desolated Space
Their boding Tails!  th' affrighted Stars descend
From their bright Houses!  Earth forgets her Place!
Such strange Effects on wond'rous Song attend.

The Force of Words by Zerdoastres caught
What but the Force of Song, and mystic Sense?
Song did, whate'er the Talisman hath wrought,
And all my new Arcadia grew from thence.

'Twas there the Faithful Shepherdess was seen
In Courts so rarely found; blush, Ladies, blush!
There the Sad Shepherd, of despairing Mein,
Still seeks his Love beneath each scented Bush!

When Swift appear'd to praise my sister Muse,
His Stella's Birth-day o'er the World to spread,
How all Castalia shed for him her Dews,
And Myrtles breath'd their Odours round his Head!

O Swift!  how dreadful to thy Country's foes,
How careless, yet how forceful was thy Lay!
Thy Soul undaunted, Statesmen to expose,
And blend the Patriot's with the Poet's Bay!

'Twas I to Berkeley every Virtue gave,
And Parnel's Soul confess'd my holy Pow'r;
Twas I inspir'd the Visions of his Cave,
Ere Pope to Heav'n return'd from Twit'nam Bow'r!

How is my sacred Season all decay'd,
That late o'er Thompson breath'd a golden Gale!
Since Shenstone perish'd from the past'ral Shade,
How pines each Grace in Hagley's kindred Vale.

O Leasowes, by the tuneful Planter rais'd,
Ye awful Grots!  ye Fanes!  ye sculptur'd Urns!
Ye Graces in this Attic Page so prais'd,
What Hand Barbarian now your Grace o'erturns?

Ye Leasowes, ev'ry Muse's Haunt so late,
What Gothic Hand this Ruin dire has dar'd?
Alas!  'tis plain; O this World's changeful State!
He, he is dead, your Planter and my Bard!

He, he is dead, the sweetest, gentlest Breast
That ever knew to tune a Pipe so well;
He, he is dead!  O softly may he rest,
And Palms for ever flourish round his Cell!

And can I pass thee, Doyne, unnotic'd by,
While soft Italia Words and Airs shall lend?
For whom what Muse can ever cease to sigh?
The sweetest Poet!  the sincerest Friend!

How dear to me the Present Collins brought!
He heard my Voice, my songs he made his own,
My Lyre he strang, my magic Fire he caught!
Yet ah, how soon the tuneful Spirit's flown!

And many more me lov'd, and all admir'd
From earliest Time, to Glory's latest Stage.
The Songs I sung, the Themes that I inspir'd,
The Praise of Gods, could Gods and Men engage.

Shall they, my Sisters, born on me to wait,
My younger Sisters, Hand-maids of the Nine,
Shall they usurp my Throne, affect my State,
My stately Port, and Majesty divine?

Should I, who sung to Gods and Heroes old
To Freedom's gen'rous Sons e'er sue in vain:
I fir'd with gallant Thoughts the Chieftain bold
Who pour'd his Life on Calgrave's fatal Plain.

When the third Edward, borne on Virtue's Car,
Scal'd the steep Road to Glory's radiant Dome,
At Cressy, I maintain'd th' unequal War,
And brought the Warrior, crown'd by Conquest, home.

The Great of ev'ry Age my Pow'r adore.
Freedom's fam'd Champion, on Philippi's Field,
The lonely Night my Odes repeating o'er,
His Breast, to Deeds of noble daring, steel'd.

Who would not bend his Eye, when Collin pays
The fun'ral Tear to prostrate Sydney's Herse?
Who will not look, where Cowley frames the Lays,
And Hervey shines all glorious, in the Verse!

Still Akenside his gentle Hastings sings.
And Mason finds a Friend in D'Arcy still.
Forbid it Virtue, that the best of Kings
Alone should slight the Muse's heav'nly Skill!

Forbid it gracious Heav'n, forbid it Truth,
Forbid it Piety, forbid it Fame,
Forbid it Fate, that Guelso's royal Youth
Should change for mimic Fires my living Flame!

Yet ev'n the savage Tribes my Influence own&mdash;
Beneath th' impetuous Sun, o'er Realms of Snow,
From Zembla's Sky, to Delli's blazing Throne,
Ev'n on the Tenglio Bank my Roses blow!

My rapt'rous Song the chill Siberian chears!
The Arab harks, and turns his flying Steed!
Me in his Forest Chili's Native hears;
For me, the gen'rous Sons of Bastia bleed!

For me, gay Light assumes it varying Dyes,
And Nature opes her Bosom of Perfume:
I sooth the Virgin's Care, the Matron's Sighs,
And wake, to wond'rous Life, the silent Tomb!

Who ever mourn'd, and I deny'd to hear?
To Virtue dead, could I the Lay refuse?
That Henry's Pangs yet draw the British Tear
Fame owes to Britain's Elegiac Muse.

'Twas I gave Milton intellectual Eyes
When dark his mortal Ken, o'er Heav'n to stretch:
To me obedient glitt'ring Seraphs rise,
Since Haywood brought all Pow'rs within my Reach.

Fays that guarded Gloriana's Reign,
That oft their Spenser met at Midnight Hour,
Those horrid Hags that haunted Cawdor's Thane,
All crouch to me &mdash; All Nature owns my Pow'r.

And is no Place for me in Britain's Isle
Where once the festal Night I could prolong?
And Joy, and Glory, grew beneath my Smile,
And Soft-ey'd Peace, and Freedom's matchless Song!

Is there no Hope for me? &mdash; She said no more,
But Tears, and Sighs, suppress'd her Notes divine.
All pale, she fell upon the blighted Shore&mdash;
To heal her Woes, O mighty GEORGE, be thine!
