Bold was the man, as Horace somewhere sings,
Who first in fragile bark, adven'trous, try'd
T' explore old Ocean's undiscover'd springs,
And view, unmov'd, the monsters of the tides.
See the trim vessel o'er the billows ride!
To distant climates cut her liquid way;
And safe return with orient's richest pride,
The pearl sea-latent, and the gem, whose ray
Would emulate in small the glorious lamp of day.

Thus Argo, fraught with demi-gods of old,
With shouts of victory to Colchis bore
In triumph thro' the seas, the fleecy gold,
Thus too fair Tyre (to credit antient lore)
Erst Carthage  hight &mdash; new regions to explore,
Sent from her breast th' amphibious progeny
Which reach'd e'en Thule's unfrequented shore,
And taught the naked savage to supply
The cassiterid grains of glossy, silver'd dye.

He too the subject of Portia's theme
Should shine, whom distant ages must approve,
'Yclept Columbus &mdash; near ally'd in name,
In actions nearer &mdash; to the peaceful dove,
By Noah sent in quest of land to rove.
Hispania glad the wandering patriot view'd,
Return'd with olive crown'd in peace and love;
Oh!  had her sons his lenient plans pursu'd,
Guiltless alike of fraud, and shedding human blood!

Gladly would I th' unwilling tale refrain,
And, not approving, spare, at least, to blame;
But honest ardour prompts th' indignant strain,
And meek Religion's much perverted name.
Ah!  cease, blind zeal, thy persecuting flame,
Has sated ignorance no cause to plead?
Thy God, tho' pontiffs may dispense, will claim
That blood, which thou so causeless hast shed,
And lay, with heavier weight, on thy devoted head.

But God is just &mdash; behold, by force acquir'd,
Peruvia's gem, and rich Potosi's ore.
Say where's thy fancy'd happiness retir'd?
Dost thou not languish 'midst the shining store?
And have not countless millions made thee poor?
While, thro' thy sieve, the liquid treasures flow,
T' enrich Hollandia's more propitious shore,
To teach 'midst Belgic boys the flax to grow,
And shew what art, push'd on by industry, can do.

Not so did Albion, Freedom's genuine child,
She sent her sons to cut the western wave,
Humane, not weak; tho' resolute, yet mild;
Not sparing those who milder means might save,
Nor pocketing th' affront she never gave.
She hop'd, nor vain, I trust, that hope will be,
To see the savage, by her precepts brave,
Fostering young science in th' Hesperian sea,
Assert his birthright claim, and nobly dare be free.
