Bless'd be the fields renown'd in ancient days,
Where thousand bards have own'd the Muses smile,
Who once with glory sung their simple lays,
Tho' now they add to dark Oblivion's spoil.

Bless'd be the isle where OSSIAN rais'd the song!
As nature taught him in fair Fancy's grove;
Whose Muse could thunder with the warlike throng,
Or melt the soul with softest tales of love.

Bless'd be the plains where DOUGLAS sought the Muse,
And courted fame in MARO'S sacred guise;
Who painted May of every bliss profuse,
When o'er the hills the morning beams arise!

Bless'd shades!  where RAMSAY with his shepherd's reed,
Bid Peggy's love from Echo's hills resound,
Where gentle HAMILTON travers'd the mead,
And charm'd each scene with just harmonic sound!

Bless'd be the plains where THOMSON first essay'd
To court the Muse, in native splendour dress'd,
Where first he su'd for Fancy's powerful aid,
And pour'd the song with ardour from his breast!

Bless'd be the groves where MALLET'S polish'd lay,
First burst delightful on th' astonished ear;
Where first he sung the Birks of Invermay,
Or first attended Margaret's mournful bier!

Hail, native SCOTIA!  ever glorious  coast!
These Bards are thine, and thine their growing fame,
For 'mid thy rocks, in airy visions lost,
Sweet Inspiration oft has nurs'd their flame.

Sooth'd by the gales that fragrant blew around,
Their thoughts were gentle as the vernal day,
While from their breasts the numbers burst profound,
Mature and powerful as the summer ray.

Ye mighty names!  to you I'll rear a shrine,
Sacred to Science, and her peaceful train,
There for your brows my humble wreaths I'll twine,
There for your glory raise my feeble strain.

Should Fancy warm me with her genial rays,
Then should my raptur'd numbers soar sublime,
Then should I give your names a worthy praise,
To mock the power of all-subduing Time.

Still of thy beauties, SCOTIA, should I sing,
Thy rural haunts, thy sweetly flowing streams,
Thy fertile fields, where Plenty spreads her wings,
And Health and Fragrance dance  in sunny beams.

Nor should my verse forget thy sons of fame,
Who now with rapture warble on the dale,
Whose feeling breasts confess the Muse's flame,
And pour profuse the sweetly varying tale.

I'd praise thy BLACKLOCK, hid in endless night,
Yet greatly eminent in virtuous song;
Thy ARMSTRONG sage, thy BEATTIE flaming bright,
Thy HOME, thy WILKIE &mdash; all thy tuneful throng.

Come then, ye Muses, lead me by the hand,
While I attempt your THOMSON'S worth to tell,
Attune my lyre, give me the magic wand,
Which can dark Error's gath'ring clouds dispel.

Tutor my numbers, fire my youthful mind,
Exalt my soul on Fancy's airy wing,
Then shall my accents flow in strains refin'd,
And not unworthy of the theme I sing.

Ye sons of SCOTIA, venerate your Bards,
And give them glory, give them high renown;
To ev'ry name devote the just rewards,
For ev'ry brow prepare the sacred crown.

Thus shall the blissful genius of the isle,
Applauding view the glories of her shore;
Thus bounteous SCIENCE on the land shall smile,
And give with lib'ral hand, profuse, her boundless store.
