DEDICATION.
SONS OF BRITANNIA, to your kind regard,
I DEDICATE these numbers, rudely pen'd;
If you approve, I gain my best reward;
If you despise, my fairest prospects end.&mdash;
To FREEDOM'S call with grateful hearts attend;
In sooth, my friends, ye feel her mild command,
Ye taste the joys which from her throne descend,
Scatter'd profusely by that ROYAL hand,
Which spreads her noblest gifts unbounded o'er the land.

CANTO I.
All hail!  ye beings, bountiful and fair,
Who watch our rights and guard our deeds below,
Who leave your thrones, borne thro' the fields of air,
To visit these sad scenes of care and woe;
To human kind life's varying course ye show;
Ye teach frail mortals whence their joys arise,
Ye reach whence all our cares and sorrows flow,
Ye sprinkle knowledge on our feeble eyes,
And open Reason's stores to make us truly wise.

O ye celestial messengers of peace,
Unnerve our haughty and unmeaning pride,
Whence spring dire Discord, and her friend, Disease,
And all the ills that variously betide;
Which throw pure Virtue's calmer schemes aside,
And taint our deeds with stains of darkest hue,
And for Dissension instruments provide,
Which Faction brandishes in open view,
Whence hot commotions rise and civil broils ensue.

Let all these fiends hide their unhallow'd heads,
And far retire from this our happy land,
While simple Reason, Wisdom's friend, succeeds,
And kindly guides us with her mild command;
Then Science too shall lead us by the hand,
And fondly shew us all her hidden store,
And Truth's bright beams shall every sense expand,
While we THE LAND OF LIBERTY explore,
And waft our little bark to that delightful shore.

And thou, dear LIBERTY!  thou pow'r divine,
Thou blissful parent of supreme delight,
Let us approach, with sacred awe, thy shrine,
And from thy altars, ever burning bright,
Receive that pure and all-sufficient light,
Which warms the soul with ever-pow'rful blaze,
Which shines propitious on the pensive wight,
To highest fame his useful toil to raise,
Protective dart around they all-inspiring rays.

Far in the distant verge of Eastern climes,
Where balmy breezes fan'd the constant spring,
Where Virtue triumph'd, free from base-born crimes,
And calm Contentment spread her silent wing;
The PAS'TRAL joys, which poets often sing,
Led on by Freedom, smil'd on every plain,
Whilst the soft muse attun'd the silver string,
And sooth'd the bosoms of the listening train
With Nature's pleasing tales, with Fancy's sweetest strain.

Here the old shepherds in a seemly a sort,
Beneath the shade of some far-spreading tree
Assembled, held the law-unfetter'd court,
And gave, as Reason bade, the prompt decree:
The sentence this of nat'ral equity,
Just, fair, and candid, free from artful guile,
Such as the righteous Gods applauding see,
Such as the man victorious praises, while
The party punish'd gives the calm approving smile.

Certes you'd think a land so highly blest,
With all these happy harbingers of joy,
Would nurse no imps of noyance or unrest,
No baneful fiends that might its peace annoy,
Or the gay, tranquil, fairy scenes destroy.
But ah!  no earthly pleasure long can last,
If still the same, however sweet, they cloy,
Without a change their beauties go to waste,
And fly, with rapid wing, swift as the Northern blast.

So in this fair Arcadian land 'twas found,
For private quarrels soon began to rise,
Dissension's hated voice was heard around,
And active Slander vented many lies:
Then hostile neighbours grasp'd the wealthy prize,
The flocks and fields, and claim'd them as their own;
They seiz'd the virgins, scorn'd their piteous cries,
Bore from the land the rural monarch's crown,
And pull'd, with ruthless rage, the sylvan temples down.

Indignant then rose ALBERNAD the just,
Whose valiant breast no vulgar passions fir'd,
Unstain'd with guile, uncheck'd by grov'ling lust,
To highest fame his godlike soul aspir'd,
By Virtue's blaze, and Freedom's flame inspir'd,
He shone confess'd the guardian of the state,
The public glory he alone desir'd,
To shield his country from each hostile threat,
And to divert the arm of an impending fate.

On him shepherds, with consenting voice,
Devolv'd the honour of the regal power;
The weeping virgins too confirm'd the choice,
As they reclin'd within the ravag'd bow'r,
Their beauties blasted, like the faded flow'r,
While their sad minds revolv'd the various toil,
The painful bodings of the doubtful hour,
When mortals hope for Concord's chearing smile,
Or dread to gild the pomp and grace the victor's spoil.

Amid the horrors of the bloody field,
Brave ALBERNAD, with vengeance, rais'd his arm,
While pleas'd Success sat smiling on his shield,
And kept him safe from each impending harm;
At last bright Conquest quell'd each loud alarm,
And gave the hero the victorious palm,
That peaceful branch which boasts this magic charm,
To spread abroad fair Concord's healing balm,
Diffuse domestic joy, and make all nature calm.

When glorious Conquest, with her laughing train,
Had rov'd at random o'er the rescu'd land,
When Peace returning bless'd the fertile plain
With scenes of transport, and with prospects bland,
Then baneful Lux'ry stretch'd out her hand,
And lull'd each sense to indolent repose;
The warrior's once victorious nerves unmann'd,
Smother'd each generous passion as it rose,
And check'd th' aspiring soul with soporific dose.

Then Pleasure reign'd, then reign'd each polish'd vice;
But ALBERNAD was virtuous, wise, and good,
He sought to check these curses as they rise,
To curb the passions of the noisy crowd;
To set a bound to gilded Pleasure's flood,
To save the nation from a threatening fall,
But ah!  in vain the godlike hero stood,
The mob was pow'rful, and his strength but small,
Nor was there any aid or help at hand to call.

By gentlest arts, at first, he kindly strove
To rouse the mind from lazy lethargy;
And, that his precepts might his subjects move,
He pourtray'd active Virtue to the eye, 
Where blaz'd the beams of bright felicity;
But as these labours left no lasting mark,
He did, at last, harsh punishments apply,
Us'd chains, imprisonment, and dungeons dark,
And for a distant land forc'd many a slave t' embark.

At last, tho' heedless they ere while beheld,
On him his subjects all their vengeance turn'd,
Against the prince, against the laws rebell'd,
And regal power with scornful fury spurn'd;
Vanquish'd, forlorn, unpitied, and unmourn'd,
Far from his throne they sent the royal slave,
To a lone isle whence mortal ne'er return'd,
For there each pris'ner finds a ready grave,
In the pestiferous fens, or the tempestuous wave.

Can black INGRATITUDE, with curs'd intent,
Find an asylum in the shepherd's breast?
And can she thus her ruthless fury vent
In these blest scenes, design'd for ease and rest,
With peace, with freedom, and with plenty blest?
Alas she can!  when Luxury begins
To lull the soul, with indolence opprest,
The soft contagion every moment wins,
And leads the thoughtless crowd to most outrageous sins.

In little bark the hero gain'd the isle,
O'er crystal fields, o'er billows foaming high;
Now storms arose, now fair the prospects smile,
And now the waves all calm and placid lye,
Beneath the infl'ence of a milder sky.
Such is the state of human life below,
And thus the various fickle tide we ply,
As Fortune deigns her bounties to bestow,
We swiftly glide along, or wander sad and slow.

When ALBERNAD had reach'd the isle of Peace,
Where worthless men ne'er trod the public way,
He smil'd, and bade the strains of murmur cease;
He banish'd Sorrow and her friend, Dismay,
With each bad thought that might their pow'r display;
And then, to Solitude a prayer addrest,
Resolv'd with her to spend each after-day
In calm delight, and thus supremely blest,
He laid him gently down, and sunk in balmy rest.

But scarce his eyes in grateful sleep were clos'd,
When, mildly-pleasing, stood reveal'd to view
A maid, whose aspect, chearful yet compos'd
A lovely picture to his fancy drew,
Fair as the rose, amid the morning dew;
And thus she spoke:  "Lend, ALBERNAD, thine ear.
To thee I'll soon some pleasing objects shew;
Then be nor deaf to what thou now shalt hear,
For various is the course which thou hast yet to steer.

"I am the guardian angel of thy frame;
I knew thy hardships long ere they befell;
From me thy joys and past misfortunes came,
And I o'er all thy future conduct dwell;
And of thy life could every action tell,
But this were tedious, and would rack thy mind;
The active joys of virtue 'twould expell,
'Twould make thy deeds to indolence inclin'd,
Nor could thy fancy form such scenes as thou shalt find.

"Tho' now an hermit, by the world forgot,
Tho' far remov'd from man's deceitful race,
Tho' Grief and Sorrow seem to mark thy lot,
Tho' Fortune hides thee in this lonely place;
Where nought of joy thy roving eye can trace,
Yet shalt thou various scenes of life behold,
Shall bear a part in Honour's grateful chace,
And many objects Truth shall yet unfold,
Not by historic sage, or raptur'd poet told.

"At yonder beach, to-morrow thou shalt find
A little bark, which thou mayst safely take,
For gentle Pleasure's voyages design'd,
Such as fair Freedom's sons are wont to make:
Ascend this vessel when the fawns awake,
Where Fate commands thee, thither shalt thou tend,
Nor lose thy courage, tho' all nature shake,
For I to thee will my protection lend,
And angels to thy aid shall from high heaven descend."

When morning came the doubtful prince arose,
Warn'd by the dictates of the heav'nly maid,
Inspir'd by Hope, yet dreading future woes,
He mutter'd, careless, what the Virgin said,
To trust her words in sooth he was afraid;
But soon the vessel solv'd each rising doubt;
So when th' emotions of his breast were laid,
He left the island, with a joyful shout,
And on the faithless main again he wander'd out.

Swift sail'd the bark o'er many a swelling wave,
O'er many dreary scenes of watry way,
Till ALBERNAD an island did perceive,
Where Nature seem'd to lavish bounty gay,
And of police the various charms display;
Huge barren rocks, with verdant vales between,
The coast was habited in best array,
Embrown'd with trees and prank'd with lively green,
And crystal fountains deck'd each scene with silver sheen.

On this fair isle the hero could espy
Little at first but ease and pure delight,
With envied joy he saw the natives lye
By bickering streams and fountains ever bright,
Which pleas'd the ear and gratify'd the sight;
But o'er the fields two wicked demons sped,
Sprung from one sire, who MONARCHY was hight,
At their approach the chearful prospects fled,
And for th' enlivening light appear'd a total shade.

Without restraint one demon walk'd along,
His will a law, he knew no higher pow'r,
And when he look'd the pleasing scenes among,
Ah!  hard to tell, he blasted ev'ry flow'r:
With fell intent his brow I saw him lour,
His hapless subjects heav'd the heart-felt groan,
While sadly-plaintive from the sylvan bow'r
The warbling choristers, with piteous moan,
Bewail'd their native rights and dearest Freedom gone.

Proud walk'd AMBITION by the Monarch's side,
Who feign'd herself of origin divine,
She seem'd upon the aether clouds to ride,
And oft desir'd among the stars to shine,
And mix herself with Jove's immortal line;
But when beheld, by wise discerning men,
They few her over-rack'd, with inward pine,
And greatly scorn'd her flattering converse, when
She would have drawn them into her deceitful den.

In various guise she still addrest the ear
With boastful schemes, with deeds of high import;
In strains so sweet she drew the heedless near,
To share the pleasures of her splendid court;
But ah!  how sad this harmless-seeming sport,
For when indulg'd, new sorrows rise around,
The joys of grandeur still are wond'rous short,
Nor can the cause, th' accursed cause be found,
Till mortals feel, too late, Ambition's festering wound.

Full in the train this demon drag'd along,
Worse than herself, ten thousand fiends appear,
Dark, blood-stain'd VIOLENCE led on the throng,
With frowning brow and aspect still severe.
Poor wretch!  no joy, alas!  he e'er could share,
Him RAPINE follow'd, with his iron paw,
And grim OPPRESSION, who no pray'rs will hear,
But ruthless seizes, in his gory maw,
The very poison'd flesh of wolves and tygers raw.

Here dwelt a monster, full of venom'd sores,
Of wieldless torpid form, of vomit foul,
Each ray of light the loathsome fiend abhors,
And lurks in darkness, like the hooting owl,
While, all around her hideous children prowl
In stagnate gore, in streams of human blood;
She LUST is called, and in the poison'd bowl
With RIOT still she mixes up her food,
And o'er their nightly cups these two together brood.

Where these are seen, the children of REMORSE,
A dreadful band, must near them still attend;
These baneful imps which paint each act of force
So strong, so fearful, and such tortures send,
That sweet Repose her aid no more can lend,
Ev'n should the mind to diff'rent deeds incline,
Thus men too oft from vice to vice descend,
And various habitudes of ill combine,
Until at last they groan at HORROR's dismal shrine.

Here too was INFAMY, whose murd'ring voice
Thro' broken tubes of jarring discord past,
Which made, in sooth, a most unpleasant noise,
When on the ear its grating accents brast,
For still the harsh, the same consuming blast,
Loudly proclaim'd the worst of human ills,
And to dark-minded IGNOMINY cast
The mad results of men's licentious wills,
Who spread them all abroad on Echo's many hills.

In dread procession o'er the tortur'd land
Oft roam'd these fiends, with many a one beside,
Who proudly scorn'd kind pity's mild command,
And rag'd more dreadful, than the swelling tide:
Nature they aw'd with arrogating pride,
And o'er the fields their slave DESTRUCTION kest,
Whose naked servants revell'd far and wide,
And where they came sweet Plenty never blest,
For all their study was, that man might be opprest.

By them was licenc'd each outrageous vice,
They wink'd consent to each unlawful deed;
They nourish'd mischief as it did uprise,
And kindly cherish'd every hellish weed,
Which in this hapless land essay'd to breed;
But woe to those who in their works delight,
High-strain'd OPPRESSION is their only mead,
And many fiends, the imps of darkest night,
Plant tortures in their breast, which gnaw with ceaseless spite.

The brother-monster, in a different course,
Travers'd the land, in action more confin'd,
He could not thus, with an unbounded force,
Fulfil each dreadful purpose of his mind,
Nor could he thus the stores of nature bind;
His hands were fastened with the chord of law,
Which to unloose no means he e'er could find;
Thus justice kept him constantly in awe,
And prompted him to walk where'er she pleas'd to draw.

'Mong his attendants milder faces shone
Than those which ALBERNAD of late survey'd,
For chiefly AVARICE usurp'd the throne,
By whom a tribe of servient fiends were led,
For various ends, for various uses bred,
The little minions of her hated pow'r;
Yet all these imps the public bounty fed:
Thus men oft cherish in their breasts a flow'r,
And never once suspect it breathes a mortal stow'r.

A harden'd wretch, in sooth, dame Avarice seem'd,
Who smiled at grief, who scorn'd misfortune's tear,
And ev'ry great and gen'rous action deem'd
Th' effect of madness, or of foolish care,
To furnish joys which we ourselves ne'er share;
And oft as Avarice taints the abject mind
She throws a cloud o'er all that's good and fair;
Tears from the bosom virtue's joys refin'd,
Nor leaves one gentle thought, one social sense behind.

Here FOLLY too was oft times wont to tread
In various pace, now swift, now sad and slow;
Tho' oft she plan'd, her plans could not succeed,
Because they shifted as the breezes blow;
Yet cruel Fate, her pow'r sometimes to show,
Would bring to pass what Folly had in view;
Then soon appear'd the brothers, CARE and WOE,
Who all around did fell misfortunes strew,
Of grief they sow'd the feeds, and nurs'd it as it grew.

Here ENVY dwelt, a child of rankest vice,
Whom genr'ous breasts can treat with decent scorn,
Yet base-born wretches in her arts rejoice,
And bend devoutly at her shrine each morn;
From her, by Fate, calm inward peace was torn,
She ne'er could bear to see another thrive,
For oft as one by Fortune was upborne,
She would by some sinister means contrive
To blast his spotless fame, and murder him alive.

But luckless still was this insidious elf,
Tho' she with caution seem'd to throw her dart,
For oft the poison'd weapon pierc'd herself,
And deep descended in her gally heart,
At last, indeed, she scarcely felt a smart;
Her breast grew callous to her selfish woes,
Then came grim GUILT, deform'd in every part,
Who active Vice for his assistant chose,
While ghastly pale-lip'd FEAR the surly train did close.

Swift to the shore th' unhappy hero flew,
Resolv'd to prosecute the dream's request,
When lo!  he saw a phantom rise to view,
In tatter'd raiments, all uncomely drest,
And inward joyless thro' the want of rest:
For she, poor wretch, her eyes did never close,
A bloody poignard in her hand she prest,
And oft her arm in threat'ning posture rose,
Her name was wild DESPAIR, the child of rankling woes.

Her eloquence was of a wond'rous kind,
Her words were few, but of persuasive sound,
Much, much unlike what we are wont to find,
Where empty noise and bustling pomp abound,
And labour'd periods reason oft confound;
For her few arguments beseem'd so clear,
That certes ALBERNAD himself had drown'd,
Had he not seen his guardian sp'rit appear,
Who prompted him to sail to a fair country near.

The port he gain'd, an uncommodious place,
Batter'd and broken by the raging sea,
Where, by some ornaments, he soon could trace
The boastful marks of vaunting surquedry;
He wonder'd much who could the ruler be,
Till by some ancient monuments he found,
It was the Land of ARISTOCRACY,
Where, long ago, she fixen had her round,
But little more he knew, 'twas darkness all around.

When morning dawn'd, the hero saw, amaz'd,
A crowd of nobles o'er the country wend,
Above the vulgar route they proudly gaz'd,
With haughty sneer, the country to defend,
Which to the scene a solemn look did lend,
And struck the hero with an inward dread;
The public safety seem'd their only end,
Which to effect, each gave his wise areed,
But underneath this mask oft lurk'd ungenerous greed.

Here oft, I wote, dame IGNORANCE was seen,
On whom pure Wisdom ne'er propitious shone,
A foolish maid, who stalk'd with stately mein
And lofty crest, pretending to a throne;
But Knowledge scorn'd her, tho' her pow'r was known,
(For she in pow'r oft bore a mighty part)
When thus despis'd, with many a piteous groan,
She well express'd what anguish fill'd her heart,
'Twas Pride, and conscious Fear, and Apprehension's smart.

Sometimes bright GENIUS would his fancy rear,
And mount his chariot of living fire, 
Thro' the high heaven's would wing his grand career,
Urg'd on by hope, by truth, and great desire
To seek these joys which learning's seeds inspire;
And thus, impell'd by an all-powerful flame,
He oft with rapture struck the sounding lyre,
Or from philosophy acquir'd a name,
Which fix'd him on the base of adamantine fame.

But rob'd like justice, ever sacred guize,
Walk'd harsh SEVERITY, behind the crew,
Who oft from Genius snatch'd the well-earn'd prize,
While jealous Fear her eyes around her threw,
And watch'd aspiring merit as it grew;
Which, to Severity, she handed o'er,
Who, void of pity, from her bosom drew
A bloody poignard, dip'd in poison'd gore,
With this the genius pierc'd, who never mounted more.

Besides Severity, here liv'd a maid,
Less ting'd with pride, of less presumptuous mein,
Her drowsy head upon her arm she staid,
And lay inglorious on the flow'ry green;
Few marks of life were in her aspect seen,
Yet men oft drop'd into her hidden snare;
This demon was call'd INDOLENCE, I ween,
And much she lik'd to shun all bustling care,
Yet little real rest her votaries could share.

For nought but active virtue e'er can fill
The human mind with any real joy;
And thence the man, who flies from fancy'd ill,
And leaves the world, which he could ne'er enjoy
In lonely scenes his moments to employ,
Tho' far remov'd from every earthly care.
Still finds some wish, some thoughts, that must annoy
The schemes of bliss, which he design'd to share,
And make him own, with sighs, true pleasure dwells not there.&mdash;

Near this curs'd isle another rose to view,
Almost the same, I ween, in shape and size;
Its distant aspect promis'd little new,
But yet to gain its coast the hero tries,
The fates too favour'd, for the winds arise,
And drove him, rapid, on a barren shore:
But, gods!  how vast was ALBERNAD's surprize,
When he began the country to explore,
To find a race of men he ne'er had seen before.

All here seem'd kings, in rule each claim'd a part,
And sway'd the state with dignity profound,
Yet oft it happen'd that some knave alert,
The public peace, the public joy, would wound,
And in dark Error's maze the whole confound;
At which fell DISCORD, with her bloody Brain,
All furious toss'd their fiery brands around;
Then instantaneous Murder, Guilt, and Pain,
Did ev'ry scene of joy with melancholy stain.

At other times the hell-bred monster
With his lov'd brother, call'd Disemblance dire,
And baneful Falsehood, curse of every state,
With red Revenge and fiery-footed Ire,
A wretched train, would to this land retire,
And stir dissension up, 'tween man and man;
Which, when once rais'd, no fewel did require,
For tho' the flame was small when it began,
Soon, soon it would itself to dreadful blaze upfan.

Then fatal feuds, then civil broils arose,
And mischief-minded ENVY rais'd the fray,
With low-born Malice, worst of inward foes,
The sov'reign lord, whom little souls obey;
Tho' these durst scarcely bear the light of day,
Yet, by their schemes, so much the state was tost,
That soon its rotten pillars sunk away,
The balance of DEMOCRACY was lost,
And haughty ANARCHY reign'd savage o'er the coast.

From this detested land the hero sail'd,
Repining much he left his lonely isle,
Where boisterous passions never yet assail'd,
Where worthless men ne'er labour'd to beguile,
Where active vice ne'er rear'd the fatal pile,
Where no rude cares disturb'd the peaceful scene,
Where ev'ry object wore a pleasing smile,
And nature dwelt, in solitude serene;
And much he wish'd to reach this happy spot again.

"Fool, that I was, to the false dream to list,
To trust myself abandon'd to the waves,
And vainly hope to find internal rest,
In scenes, like these, where mad Dissension raves;
Where every scene of promis'd joy deceives;
Where virtue never did her beams extend,
But blust'ring vice each purpose far out-braves;
Come then, let me this cruel fortune end,
And, while I yet have thought, to the calm grave descend."

Involv'd in danger, this the hero said,
Weary'd of life's vain, giddy, idle dance;
His dreadful purposes were scarcely staid,
(So rapid run he to his deem'd mischance)
Till of this world he took a final glance,
When lo!  an isle burst on his wond'ring sight,
Possess'd, I wote, of every amenance,
Such scenes of plenty, pleasure, and delight,
As to a nearer view all flatt'ringly invite.

He look'd again, with more attentive eye,
And thought he ne'er so sweet a land did see,
Nor e'er such objects of delight espy,
And, certes, never felt such inward gree,
And loud exclaim'd "Great God!  what can this be?
What pleasant land is this at last reveal'd?
O guide me thither, and thenceforth to thee
My humble thanks with grateful heart I'll yield,
For such a lovely scene was ne'er by man beheld."


CANTO II.
The gods propitious never will reject 
Man's anxious pray'rs, when they from truth proceed,
They hold Sincerity in such respect,
And on her lavish such a bounteous meed,
That what she favours ever must succeed;
This ALBERNAD in highest measure knew,
For they vouchsaf'd what he erewhile did plead,
To guide him safely to the land in view,
Whose scenes, when distant seen, so much attention drew.

This isle, which seem'd so pleasant from afar,
Was still more charming as 'twas nearer seen,
For slavish art had ne'er presum'd to mar
The native beauties of the rural scene,
But all was clad in gay delightful green,
With stately trees and flowers at random spread,
And many a river roll'd with sparkling sheen,
While fountains, gushing from the mountain's head,
Resounding thro' the plains a pleasing murmur made.

Between two mountains, in a lowly dell,
The prince beheld a river rolling bright,
From whence it sprung 'twere hard indeed to tell,
It was, I ween, the FOUNT OF LEARNING hight:
In several courses flow'd this flood of light,
Which fertiliz'd the channels where they ran,
And by its streams oft had the pensive wight,
Convers'd with beings, wiser far than man,
And by this converse sweet, great merit always wan.

In thoughtful posture sat upon the bank
PHILOSOPHY, that truth-exploring maid,
And tho' in largest quantities she drank,
Yet could her thirsting never be allay'd;
The human breast her piercing tubes display'd,
Travers'd the regions where the planets roll,
Beheld the sun, for nought her searches staid,
Survey'd the firmament; from pole to pole,
And from each little world a flame of knowledge stole.

Near her was seen, inwrapt in pensive mood,
HISTORIC Truth, who mutter'd deeds of yore,
What hap'd the bad, and what befell the good,
And told, with tears, what states had fall'n before
She gain'd admission to this pleasing shore;
How Vice had perish'd, and how Virtue shone;
She touch'd the judgment with her classic lore,
Her words were spoken to the heart alone,
And man will sorely rue, if e'er her tales are done.

Light o'er the plains the wanton MUSES trip'd,
Led on by Fancy's ever genial ray,
Whose varying garb, in airy colours dip'd,
Fair Nature's charms did witchingly display;
Here too the Graces oft direct their way,
And show perfection to the heav'nly Nine;
And here the Virtues beam in bright array,
Whose sweetest charms the Muses oft combine,
And with their fairy-strains the human breast refine.

Altho' these virgins from one parent spring,
Far diff'rent were the strains in which they taught;
In notes sublime the lofty Epic sung,
And with her head the very stars arraught;
Keen vice-pursuing Satire always laught,
And sought refinement in a comic guise;
Hard Tragic virtue drunk the poison'd draught,
Soft Past'ral sweetness claim'd the rural prize,
And Allegory feign'd &mdash; but all to make us wise.

Oft the flowery banks was seen to walk
A virgin fair, of most enchanting face,
And such the strains in which the us'd to talk,
They lent new sweetness to the Muses' race.
'Twas MUSIC'S self, and with unequal'd grace
She to a harp her snowy hands apply'd;
Ye gods!  what sounds, what numbers fill'd the place!
High heav'n itself could scarce with them have vy'd,
And still the list'ning crowd the varying strain obey'd.

With martial spirit burst the raptur'd note,
Rousing the soul with ev'ry pow'rful sound;
In sweetest strains the sprightly measures float,
While Loves and Pleasures dance transported round;
And now the notes, all solemn and profound,
In plaintive accents breathe the tales of woe,
From ev'ry firing the mournful strains resound,
With lonely cadence, melancholy, slow,
And bid the gentle streams of kind compassion flow.

Another dame, of like accomplish'd make,
Did often trip this matchless valley by,
She from each field did such ideas take,
And so intently on each object pry,
With such a reach of skill so clear an eye,
And in her mind such pleasing scenes uplaid,
That when her pencil she vouchsaf'd to try,
Such excellence of art her hand display'd,
That Nature's fairest charms were scarce so well array'd.

She too pourtray'd the just historic scene,
Where all the passions in their turns appear'd,
Where stormy Rage, indigent Wrath were seen,
And ruthless Vengeance high her banners rear'd;
Then, with a master-stroke, the sense she chear'd,
Show'd smiling Peace, and all her happy band,
Where mirth and love, and social bliss endear'd,
With Concord sweet, of aspect ever bland,
And now the human form rose fair beneath her hand.

"Ye blissful forms that sport upon the plain,
Be mine your joys," the raptur'd hero cry'd;
"Show me your charms, admit me of your train,
For heav'n well knows I ask no boon beside,
While Truth's bright beams do Learning's children guide,
With them I'll fondly pass the chearful day;
But if from Virtue's paths they turn aside,
Chide not, ye pow'rs, if I forsake the way,
Where Error's grov'ling sons in Doubt's dark mazes stray."

He spoke no more, but turn'd him to a grove,
Where artless songsters pour'd their varying strain,
As bounteous nature did their fancies move,
Impell'd by love and joy, by grief or pain:
Here, ever active, dwelt an ancient swain
Call'd MEMORY, who on a polish'd stone
Engrav'd the deeds of that unrivall'd train,
On whom propitious Learning's beams had shone,
Whom Genius hail'd with smiles, and number'd as his own.

And when their matchless deeds were thus engrav'd
In sacred characters, which ne'er can die,
With joyous smile his hand the wizard wav'd,
And beckon'd Glory from her throne on high;
Led on by Fame, the hero saw her fly
To Memory's grove, and with ambitious haste
Snatch up the stone thus carv'd so curiously,
While Fame's loud trump, with an applauding blast,
Proclaim'd what Memory wrote, and bade it ever last.

On rugged cliffs, amid high tow'ring pine,
Here CONTEMPLATION frequently reclin'd,
Where Fancy show'd things, human and divine,
With wond'rous art, for nought her pow'r confin'd!
Here you might view whate'r you had a mind,
In air or earth, or ev'n in pits of hell:
Here ALBERAND, his light by truth refin'd,
Uplifted saw what bard can scarcely tell,
The many heavenly forms which in this island dwell.

Was naught around but plenty to be seen,
And yellow Ceres bursting on the sight,
Sprung from a fire of rustic, uncouth mein,
Yet of a tow'ring genius, heav'nly bright,
This ancient sage was AGRICULTURE hight,
And oft preserves the balance of the state;
Altho' he is not in rich weeds bedight,
Yet ne'er let mortals his due praise forget,
Who can, tho' rude himself, such grateful offspring get.

Of ancient manners and of homely fare,
Here TEMP'RANCE liv'd, knight of extensive fame,
Of rich repast luxurious dill aware,
By which robust to hoary age he came,
Plain simple Nature was his constant theme,
And what great blessings from her usage flow;
He told of morbid ills, without a name,
Which now infect the human race below,
Since they plain Nature's sweets most madly did forego.

Of sweet deport fair INNOCENCE was here,
Yrob'd in white, and crown'd with laurel true;
No frowns, no wrinkles, on her face appear,
No wayward thought her bosom ever knew:
Blest land, indeed where she vouchsafes to sue
For residence; amid the rural vales,
Yet here she treads with freedom o'er the dew,
Or joins the natives in their joyous tales,
Where no affected art, no selfish view prevails.

Sprung from this pair, in sooth their only child,
Was blooming HEALTH, whose form portended well,
His face was fair, his manners wond'rous mild,
His chearful aspect did all their's excell,
Who love, poor youths!  with Luxury to dwell,
And keenly strive her gilded joys to share,
What pains they feel 'twere hard indeed to tell,
For let who lists, to Pleasure's dome repair,
He'll always find Disease a close attendant there.

Where Health appeared, enliven'd by his smile,
Was always seen his sweet companion, LOVE,
Unus'd to labour, and unus'd to toil,
Yet rich in pow'r in ev'ry vocal grove;
Oft cruel men to quell this infant strove,
When his sweet pangs their manly bosom tore,
But ne'er could they the cunning imp remove,
The more they check'd him, he triumph'd the more,
For fixen in their breast his harrows still they bore.

Mild blushing MODESTY the meadows trod,
Pure as the flow'rs that were beneath her feet;
And CHASTITY here fix'd her blest abode,
A guest and guide for Modesty most meet:
This lovely pair Sir HONOUR oft did greet,
And oft desir'd he might their steps attend, 
To keep them safe from ev'ry specious cheat,
Who might contrive their deeds with vice to blend,
Or from the angel Truth to bear behests pretend.

Here was BENEVOLENCE, of noble soul,
Who greatly scorn'd the abject partial views
Of these base wretches, who can meanly prowl,
For selfish ends, ev'n in the noisome stews:
What diff'rent arts does his great spirit use?
For others' good alone he asks to live,
He sprinkles favours like the morning dews,
And where they fall they pow'rfully revive.
Misfortune's drooping heart, and mutual raptures give.

Before him GRATITUDE for ever bow'd,
And told, with tears, what actions he had done,
And to requite these gen'rous actions vow'd,
If fate propitious ever on her shone:
She spoke her words with such an honest tone,
That for her woes Benevolence would weep,
Because his pow'r of giving joy was gone,
And he had nought deserv'd his care to keep,
Much less to give to one whose thanks impress'd so deep.

Endear'd by this disinterested pair
Was FRIENDSHIP, brighten'd to her noblest fire,
So firm her bonds no pow'r can them impair,
No ruffian fury make the flame expire,
For, come what will, the bonds are still entire;
In such a manner, linking heart and hand,
That in their union they can never tire,
But Time, and Fate, and Fortune's frowns withstand,
Binding the soul, in death, in blest Elysium's land.

With these were CANDOUR and endearing TRUTH,
Who firmly bound th' indisoluble tye,
These were the guardians of reflecting youth,
Who us'd on Nature's fickle state to pry,
And at Misfortune's many mischiefs sigh;
To which, however, as they could not shun,
Nor from the fast-pursuing torrent fly,
To live with Truth was all that could be done;
Therefore with her, betimes, their converse they begun.

Here too was JUSTICE, with her sword of law,
To punish those who play'd a vicious part,
And to keep each unruly knave in awe,
Who sought by force, or laid design by art,
The mind from Virtue's precepts to divert,
To break the bonds of her inherent peace,
To bring destruction on the human heart,
To put an end to scenes of wish'd-for ease.
And to establish Vice, the parent of Disease.

The guardian of the whole was CONCORD bright,
The dearest image of the parent God,
Who shone refulgent in a native light,
And on a car from heav'n triumphant rode;
Fit guest, indeed, for that sublime abode,
For still her soul retain'd the heav'nly fire,
By which impelled o'er Faction's sons the bode,
And while her bosom glow'd with great desire,
Black Discord's gloomy train felt her avenging ire.

Here oft, too oft, the sons of RIOTISE,
With lustful fury and a vicious rage,
By many a dark and dreadful scheme devise
To blast those joys, which honest hearts engage;
Oft they consult a Faytour false, tho' sage,
Benempt DISSENSION, who with fatal skill,
And by th' experience of many an age,
Has gain'd the art his precepts to instill,
And make his laws most dear to each licentious will.

Ye gods!  how horrid was Dissension's shape,
A child detestable of darkest night,
Yet did he harmony of members ape,
All self-sufficient in dame Nature's spite;
But sooth he had a most voracious bite,
Which all his artifice could never hide:
However, his vot'ries glanc'd it o'er outright,
Nor did they heed his jaws, tho' open'd wide,
Nor yet the poison'd tongue which lay his jaws beside.

This hell-bred monster knew no real joy
To raise up murmurs ever pleas'd him best,
It warm'd his soul, it was his chief employ,
To which, from youth, his care had been addrest,
So that he now was a most skillful pest:
Yet he a mistress harsh indeed did serve,
Whose stern commands forbade th' approach of rest,
And still requir'd him Honour to unnerve,
And force unguarded men from Wisdom's paths to swerve.

This ancient dame, to fair perfection blind,
Display'd a form disgusting from afar,
Around her head unnumber'd snakes were twin'd,
With forked tongues and vomit black as tar;
With these she still fomented inward jar,
And nurs'd the seeds of sleepless Discontent;
She was high-mounted on a broken car,
Drawn by a tyger, all in tatters rent,
Which to dame DISCORD'S form no great advantage lent.

Whom she, base wretch, her prey had drawen in,
Subdu'd their pride and made their fortunes sure,
Deep she imprinted on each caitif's skin
A glaring mark, that always might endure,
And to perpetual hell their souls ensure;
Which done, to FACTION she resign'd them o'er,
Whose cautious art, trac'd if they were impure,
And if they were not, she chastis'd them sore,
Till, on their bended knees, submissive faith they swore.

This grisly monster, Faction call'd, I ween,
Was the most hideous ever yet appear'd,
Of various colours, red, black, yellow, green,
Her fallow skin with clotted blood besmear'd,
Her eyes with rheum of various hue were blear'd,
Her mouth distorted, and her visage pale,
A lump deform'd upon her back was rear'd,
Her stinking breath tainted the passing gale,
And as she op'd her mouth forth issu'd mortal bale.

She had a dwelling of a dreadful shew,
With headlong pits which reach'd to hell below,
Where these poor wretches were expos'd to view,
Who, for her sake, all earthly bliss forego;
Rueful, indeed, these dismal lodgings show,
The walls around with carcasses were hung,
And heaps on heaps the hearts lay all a-row,
While moulder'd bodies in the gallows swung,
Until they fell from thence, and were applied as dung.

For, ah, woe's me!  the monster will nor spare
The abject wretch who falls within her pow'r,
But loads him first with ev'ry rankling care,
And makes him toil, with pain, the ling'ring hour;
And if perchance the wretch's brow should lour;
As if repining at his sorrows past,
She cuts him off like some poor weakly flow'r,
Which grows all lonely in the dreary waste,
And falls a sudden prey to bleak November's blast.

The porter of this dome was watchful ay,
That he might man inveigle to his board,
His snares were spread across each public way,
With kestrel knaves and worthless wretches stor'd,
By God, by man, and by themselves abhorr'd;
So for the porter ERROR, bid good-luck,
For when they heedlessly their fates deplor'd,
They on a sudden in his nets fast stuck,
Nor could, with all their might, themselves from thence out pluck.

The demon Faction set herself on high,
Upon the tow'r of ARROGANT DISDAIN,
From whence she rais'd a most unsoothing cry,
Which shook the valleys and adjoining plain;
It roar'd, delightless, o'er the turbid main,
Obscur'd the beauties of th' enliv'ning sun,
While gloomy damps his cheering rays restrain,
Around the castle scatt'ring shades so dun,
That one would almost think perpetual night begun.

When silence was through all the dome proclaim'd,
By this same urchin Error, factious slave,
Her whole attendants, wrinkl'd, lame, and maim'd,
Were silent as the honourable grave;
Then she her hand of lustfulness did wave,
And, full of pride, she shook her haggard head,
And such importance to herself she gave,
It fill'd the hero with an inward dread,
While thus, with blust'ring air, the monster did proceed.

"Come, mortal men, who fear the lash of law,
And dread the troubles of her endless toil,
Who never walk where she attempts to draw,
Save when she seizes you her conquer'd spoil,
And heaps upon you punishments and moil;
Ye who despise her harshly-form'd command,
Who if you could, her projects would beguile,
And all her pow'r and furiousness withstand,
If this is your desire, come here I'll take your hand.

"For I myself have known the wicked dame,
Like you I've strove her castle to o'erturn;
I've greatly scorn'd her awful-sounding name,
With which the breasts of many mortals burn,
Whom I was wont with spiteful sneer to spurn,
As varlets vile, for human life unfit,
Nor have I certes any cause to mourn,
For now triumphant I at leisure sit,
And 'courage those who ne'er to justice will submit.

"Behold her minions bow beneath my feet,
And see how sadly they their courses steer,
Their greatest bliss is bitter mix'd with sweet;
And when this ruler does her head uprear,
They quake and tremble with a conscious fear,
Lest she their actions should esteem as wrong,
When, well they know, she would their bodies tear,
Or lash them ruthless with a galling throng.
Or send them to the stocks to curse their lives too long.

"But with my vot'ries I far diff'rent deal,
With me harsh Justice never squints a frown.
Nor e'er is heard the voice of public weal,
Or ought that may the private entrance drown,
These humble guests my wiser sons disown,
And for themselves alone desire to live;
They threat the statesman, they controul the crown,
And such deep schemes, such projects oft contrive,
That they to wealth, and fame, and gloryment arrive.

"Come then, O mortals, if ye wish to know
What more of worth my palaces contain,
What streams of glory in my currents flow,
And round my throne what honours still remain,
Come enter here you'll know them all amain"&mdash;
Here Faction stop'd her false alluring tongue,
When lo approach'd a filthy haggard train
Of base-born mortals, old as well as young,
Who echo'd ev'ry word the worthless wretch had sung.

Her Justice view'd, at first with aspect mild,
But when she saw her on destruction bent,
And that so many wretches were beguil'd,
Who all vain glorious laugh'd at punishment,
When she benign her brazen forehead lent,
Justice enrag'd, her castle sore beset,
And tho' vile Faction with her rablement,
Bid bold defiance, and secur'd the gate,
Dame Justice all her forts with victor force o'erset.

Gods!  what confusion then o'erspread these men,
Who did erewhile the public peace assail,
They now must 'habit horror's dismal den,
Or languish lifeless in a darksome jail,
And Faction's pow'r, so fatal felt, bewail;
There Justice wav'd her sword with threat'ning awe,
And gave them up, if that would not prevail,
To her harsh menial slave, RIGOUR OF LAW,
Who in ten thousand pieces did their bodies draw.

To soften Justice, and restrain her force,
To cheer the penitent, rend sooth his soul;
To point fair Equity's unerring course,
And bid new hours of happy freedom roll,
Here MERCY oft with silent footstep stole,
Whose feeling heart for others us'd to bleed
She chang'd the scene and brighten'd up the whole,
Wip'd off the stigma of the slight misdeed,
Nor gave the caitiff wretch his just demerits' meed.&mdash;

Lost in amazement ALBERNAD beheld
The various forms which pass'd so swift along;
Concord he lov'd; and sought the flow'ry field,
Where unrestrain'd she rais'd her artless song,
And cull'd the wreaths for Freedom's fav'rite throng;
From peerless plains where deathless laurel grew,
He found the goddess, handsome, fair, and young,
Eath to be courted by the thinking few,
Who sought no selfish ends, and Freedom's blessings knew.

Not distant far a temple rose view,
By Truth benempt THE DOME OF LIBERTY,
Where, with assiduous care, sage Judgment drew
Portraits that ever pleas'd the roving eye;
His steady hand sketch'd out a MONARCHY,
ARISTOCRACY'S charms he quickly form'd,
And soon pourtray'd a fair DEMOCRACY,
Which quash'd dire Faction often as she storm'd,
Or with domestic broils sweet Nature's face deform'd.&mdash;

Around this dome an old and learned leach
Was always seen, in serious thoughtful mood;
By his good aid each part supported each, 
And strengthen'd in itself the fabric stood:
This, being wise, was called PUBLIC GOOD,
And in his train a comely group he led,
COMMERCE brought on the joyful laughing crowd,
Who all around him wealth and honour spread,
And on his right-hand walk'd a genius called TRADE.

In sweetest union all together liv'd,
Without one little, jarring selfish thought,
When one was injur'd all the others griev'd,
And how to heal the wound some measure sought;
Yet here sometimes an ugly monster wrought,
Who silly-groveling ends, alas!  pursu'd,
By him fair Freedom ev'ry day was bought,
And for his imps he draughts of poison brew'd,
Which upon public zeal to slavish fear transmew'd.

This baneful monster BRIBERY was hight;
He seem'd in wealth and riches to abound,
Yet, sooth, he was a most unhappy wight,
And ne'er could crawl above the dirty ground,
Where Justice oft the venom'd caitiff found,
And with her iron hands in vengeance tore;
Sometimes in darkest pits the wretch she bound,
Or sent him shackl'd to a distant shore,
Whence he could ne'er behold the Land of Freedom more.

From out the dome a voice in accents shrill,
Did on the winds these soothing words let fall:
"Come here, ye wanderers, who waver still,
Who run, obedient, at dame Fortune's call,
Who oft have tasted anguish (bitter gall),
And all the draughts which damp fair Virtue's fire,
These which the rising thought do oft enthrall,
And from its basis tost each great desire,
Come here, ye shall receive another sort of hire.

"Around behold what chearful figures rise,
Behold the valleys clad in lasting green,
Behold rich Commerce with her golden prize,
And Emulation with her fancy keen,
And ev'ry Muse and Grace with courteous mien,
Which fill my courts or trip along the dales;
Behold my rivers glide in sparkling sheen,
With balmy fragrance blow the scented gales,
Where wanton fairies sport, and tell their useful tales.

"See white-rob'd Innocence and artless Love!
And genial Honour, ever sparkling star,
Each bright'ning object which the mind can move,
Behold the Virtues in their shining car,
And friendly Concord, foe to civil war;
See boundless Learning pensive in her cell,
And Justice who no gen'rous wish will bar,
All these, with me, in strictest union dwell,
With many a happy wight whom time would fail to tell.

"Here Valour lives, lord of the martial field,
The sole director of the noble mind;
He spreads the banner, he displays the shield,
Which thro' the battle speaks the dauntless kind;
Whilst pow'rful navies sweep before the wind,
Whose great commanders bear no cow'rdly stain:
These roll my thunders, these my laurels bind,
These curb the foes who treat me with disdain,
And prove my noblest claim, THE EMPIRE OF THE MAIN.

"Here black Detraction never opes his mouth,
To rail at merit, which he cannot claim;
Here never dwelt that faytour false, Untruth,
Whose parents dire from hell's dark mansions came:
Nor need we Justice our desires to tame,
Tho' here she lives, she lives a faithful friend;
With conscious pride we boast her sacred name,
Whose just decrees our honest deeds defend;
And but to Faction's sons her threat'ning arm extend.

"I never smil'd to nourish fell Deceit,
I use no art your favour to insure,
I set no slavish flatt'rer at my gate,
To spread his snares and thoughtless men allure,
As Faction often does, that wretch impure,
Whole tott'ring towers on specious vice ypight
The frowns of Justice never can endure,
For so destructive is th' impending weight,
Her castles just arise &mdash; then rush to ruin straight.

"The sons of Faction, sooth, are wond'rous mean,
A desp'rate tribe, a most untoward race,
Whose treach'rous breasts, all vicious and unclean,
On human nature throw a vile disgrace:
How much unlike the inmates of this place,
Their thoughts are pure, their aspect always gay:
Come then, O man!  my various beauties trace,
Fame's dubious path to thee I will display,
And lead thee fairly on the oft-precarious way.

"With Freedom live, do what beseemeth her,
Be just, be happy, and youth always find,
Tho' I'm no friend to dull, inactive rest,
Yet to contentment I am always kind:
If Justice rules, if Virtue fills your mind,
On you I'll lavish Virtue's best reward;
But if to Vice your actions are inclin'd,
If with sweet Concord thou hast ever warr'd,
Seek not to enter here, 'gainst you my gates are barr'd."

Thus spoke the lovely Genius of the dome,
In strains so sweet, of such enchanting sound,
They prompted Fancy o'er these scenes to roam,
Which, rob'd in verdure, lay so bright around;
Where rural plenty ev'ry object crown'd,
And all was peace, and all was full of joy;
The warbling notes from Concord's harp resound,
Touch'd by the hand of Truth, that darling boy,
Who had the wond'rous art all discord to destroy.

The sound suspended, o'er the awful scene
A joyous group of mortal men appear'd,
Whose aspects mild, calm, peaceful, and serene,
A more than human bountihed had shar'd;
Among them no discordance e'er was heard,
For hand in hand they sought the public peace;
Was that obtain'd, for nought beside they car'd;
Their greatest riches were the nation's ease:
With joy the hero saw, and join'd himself with these.&mdash;

The Bard was present, saw this happy land,
Ransack'd each field, and travers'd ev'ry plain
To him Apollo lent the magic wand,
Which can the darkest mysteries explain;
But there this pow'rful rod was us'd in vain,
So bright was Truth, so charming and so fair,
So free from blemish, and so free from stain,
That all description would her force impair,
For Fancy's fairest scenes were far transcended there.

Grant then, ye pow'rs who rule with boundless sway,
That these delightful scenes may never fade;
Revive them still with Freedom's genial ray,
And let her choicest blessing long be spread,
By that LIEGE LORD from whom her gifts proceed;
While we submissively, with fervent zeal,
Entwine the wreath of glory for his head,
And, bending low, with grateful hearts reveal,
What bliss his bounty gives, what gratitude we feel.
