Sweet sandy Slane, beside whose Springs
My Fancy wand'ring wildly free
In Vision quaint to Mem'ry brings
High Themes of runic Minstrelsie!
O sweetest sandy Slane let me,
Along thy flow'ry Margin laid,
Some Strain harmonious raise to thee
As Spenser charm'd Armulla's shade!

Slany, I praise thee not, of old
That Chiefs, ambitious of thy Name,
Imperial Lords and Barons bold,
With mighty Deeds adorn'd the same!
Nor for that ancient Druid's Fame,
Who by thy Waters cur'd the Ills
From Britain's poison'd Shafts that came!
Nor for a thousand Poets' Skills!

Nor, that thy beauteous Borders show
All Colours of the springing Year;
Nor, that thy sapphire sources glow
With sunny Sands and Runnels clear;
'Tis not for this I hold thee dear,
But for thy Doyne, our Valley's Pride;
For whom ev'n yet thy crystal Tear
Is pour'd, and pale thy flow'ry Side!

O were my Life, sweet sandy Slane,
Sedate as o'er Menapian Dales
Thy stately Course, and smooth my Strain,
As pensive Colin's mystic Tales;
Not all the Wealth of Ormus' Vales,
The Pride that Zender's Domes display,
Nor all Panchaias' spicy Gales,
Could charm me from thee, sandy Slay!

What golden Harp's coelestial Sound
Descends from Toscar's broken Height?
And who is He, with Roses crown'd,
Who fairest shines in Shepherd's Sight,
Shooting with Songs his gentle Sprite,
While o'er his Head the Coronall
Gay waves, with Impulse of Delight,
It's Bells and Myrtle-berries small?

I know thee, Doyne!  The Shepherd best
That ever pip'd on past'ral Reed!
I know that clear transparent Breast,
Wherein no thought of Ill could breed,
Nothing but gentlest Word and Deed!
I know thee by that Garland trim,
With Myrtles twin'd, thy beauteous Meed
For Songs compos'd by Slany's Stream!

But wherefore are the Berries dry?&mdash;
And is it thus thou doom'st to fade,
Ah cruel Slane!  those Spirits high,
Who thee so gorgeously array'd,
In Leaves of everlasting Braid?
Should he, whose Verse thy Borders deck'd,
'Mong'st forlorn Shades, a forlorn Shade
Go to the House of cold Neglect?

Now where is Ussine?  Where are they,
Blest Bards, from heav'n who Raptures stole
To animate th' immortal Lay?
And where is Doyne, sweet Music's Soul?
What Pow'r can Iron Fate controll?
The Monarch of extensive Reign,
The Bard whose Eyes in Frenzy roll,
One narrow Vault shall soon contain.

But see!  the Genius old ascends
From where abroad his lucid Tide
Through Scenes of various Hue, he sends,
The Upland gray, the Forest wide,
The rugged Rock, the Garden's Pride:
"What Stranger calls from coral Cave,
Where thro' long Ages I reside,
The Genius old of Slany's Wave?

"Think'st thou, my Bards are lost in Death,
Whose Fame is o'er yon starry Sky?
How rich the Purchase, dying Breath
Resign'd, on boundless Wings to fly!
Thou follow them, and never die.
Or if thou can'st araise thy Reed
To Strains of sacred Liberty,
Then, Stranger, thou shalt live indeed!"

Now thanks to thee, sweet sandy Slane!
But deign to tell me, where, O where,
Is He the Joy of every Swain,
And each Menapian Maiden's Care?
Soars he in Heav'n, and heralds there
The Glories of the heav'nly King?
Or hears he, from our darken'd Air,
What Praises meaner Mortals sing?

Ah stop thy too, too hasty Flight&mdash;
Blest Genius, why away so fast?
Why leaves thy Horns the golden Light?
Why is thy silvery Urn o'ercast?
Wherefore so quickly wilt thou haste
Back to thy coral Bow'rs again?
An happier Shepherd meet thou may'st,
But none sincerer, sandy Slane!

I mark old Toscar's gleaming Cloud,
A beck'ning Form is on the Ray:
I hear a calling Voice aloud&mdash;
And shall I raise great Spenser's Lay?
And gives he me his Pipe to play?
And does he join his Pen to mine?&mdash;
Ah!  where will thee thy Love betray?
It was not Colin, 'twas thy Doyne!

And mildly thou, O Vision dear,
Blest Bard, best Critic, friendliest Guide!
Accept, what not without a Tear,
For thee thy Follower mean hath try'd!
Now farewel to this burnish'd Tide!
And farewel to the broider'd Plain!
And never be thy Channel dry'd,
But flow for ever, sandy Slane!
