See Spring once more erects each purple plume,
Shedding its genial blessing o'er the plain;
The infant blossoms yield their rich perfume,
And Philomel again renews her strain:
The vivid freshness of the green
Bedeck'd with odorous flowers is seen;
Along the mead the nymphs and shepherds sing,
Give homage to the day, and hail returning Spring.

Creation's ample space resounds with mirth,
The feather'd choir extend their "wood-notes wild;"
The festive season crowns the smiling earth,
And ev'ry sorrow is with joy beguil'd,
The trees &mdash; the glory of the year,
Again array'd with leaves appear;
Reviving  nature shews her beauteous face,
Unveiling ev'ry charm with soul-enchanting grace.

The verdant foliage of the shady grove
Attracts th' enraptur'd mind with new delight;
The thousand beauties of yon sweet alcove,
Where gentle zephyrs wing their airy flight;
The mossy bank's luxuriant hue,
The teeming prospect ever new,
All, all conspire to charm our roving eyes,
And fill the wond'ring soul with pleasure and surprize.

In native splendor see the blushing rose,
Spontaneous shoot, array'd in genuine red;
The bell and cowslip various charms disclose,
And the proud tulip lifts its tow'ring head;
In pallid beauty may be seen
The lilly, fairest of the green;
The pink and violet too their homage bring,
And with refreshing sweets pay tribute to the Spring.

The riv'lets now pursue their wonted course,
Which in meanders seek the lowly dale;
The hard'ned glebe yields to the plowman's force,
And the weak osiers bend before the gale;
The blossom'd brake &mdash; the dappled mead,
In new delight our senses lead;
Which way so e'er we turn our wand'ring feet,
The mighty whole appears magnificently great.

Come Clio!  nymph divine; inspire my song,
While rapt in pleasure's maze I onward go;
Description's mystic powers to thee belong,
Without thy aid my numbers cease to flow;
Olympus' heights my verse would gain,
Wou'd'st thou illuminate the strain;
Each gaudy scene, each fancy-pleasing view
Shall own thy plastic power with admiration new.

Fair Science, lovely offspring of the mind,
Whose many wonders captivate the heart;
To speak thy praise what language can I find?
Words are too weak thy merits to impart:
Whether we view thy lofty dome
Aspiring seek celestial room;
Or else in Gothic grandeur proudly shine,
The fabric, tho' decay'd, acknowledges thee divine.

Sweet LIBERTY, thou goddess of the soul,
Dearer than life, more precious far than fame,
Smoothly with thee the circling seasons roll,
Till thou each heart and ev'ry breast inflame:
The poorest wretch inspir'd by thee
Enjoys innate felicity;
Contented sleeps away the dreary night,
No haggard cares disturb, or horrid dreams affright.

With thee content &mdash; thou every pleasing theme!
The rustic swain pursues his arduous toil;
Beneath the sultry ray he drives his teem,
Cuts down the grass, or breaks the stubborn soil;
Ascends the steepy hill with mirth,
Or plows the rugged, barren earth,
Whate'er his labour he'll contented sing,
While nature shouts aloud &mdash; "Hail Liberty and Spring!"
