Beside a rock by dashing waves o'erthrown
The Muse of Britain lay, in sorrow drown'd;
Sunk are those Eyes, that once, where'er they shone,
Could raise a Paradise of flow'rs around!

But now the flow'rs are faded on her brow;
Pale on her rainbow-vest the streaks divine:
No wondering nations at her footstool bow;
Or Princes make their offerings at her shrine.

Dark was the dreary night and loud the storm,
When I beheld the melancholy Maid;
And wild Despair, and Death, and every Form
Of Fear the solitary haunt invade.

Slowly she rose, and sadly wav'd her hand&mdash;
"And is there left (she cry'd) no hope for me,
No hope for me, in my lov'd native land,
Lov'd native land &mdash; The land of Liberty?

"Should I alone of all the Sister-Arts
Be forc'd my antient honours to resign?
A painful exile driv'n to foreign parts,
With savage tribes, in savage haunts to pine?

"Yet me the Picture hails her guide; my page
The Sculptor's hands directs, my strains inspire:
I form the Prince, the Patriot, and the Sage;
And tune to lofty Hymns the sacred lyre.

"What is Caecilia's boasted Art to mine?
Her senseless sounds, to my Caelestial lays?
To Reason's rule I frame her touches fine,
And higher still her Diapason raise.

Why should I to my sister Picture bend?
Have Milton's Michael Julio's Gods outshone?
Can Angelo's Last Day with Young contend?
Vies Paolo's Cato with my Addison?

The trembling Arts long fear'd the Thunderer's nod,
His awful brows lay unattempted long;
Till deathless Homer dar'd describe the God,
And Sculpture caught expression from the Song!

Of old, in fair Creation's youthful day,
Ere man to venal arts had form'd his tongue,
What vigorous Sense and Fancy bad him say,
Assisted by my powerful aid he sung.

But since the race are dwindled, since their hours
Are few and guilty on the darken'd earth,
Corrupted hearts, false tongues, and weaken'd pow'rs
To cold and artificial Prose gave birth.

In those first days I reign'd in gorgeous pride,
And tow'red Memphis heard my lyre resound&mdash;
The Picture joyn'd, and Sculpture by her side,
To grace with emblem'd pomp the rites profound.

Hail, antient Freedom, antient Glory, hail!
And hail, ye Suns, that bless'd my brighter days,
When Athens saw me claoth her chiefs in mail
And bear them dauntless to the lists of Praise!

The Graces met me by Ilyssus' wave,
Old Tyber next presents his stately views,
Till last, where Albion's rocks the tempest brave,
I came, and since am call'd the British Muse.

And from that time, that time, that happy Time
When Albion's snowy cliffs first met mine eyes,
Than Mincius more or Arno's od'rous clime,
My Camus now, and Isis' bank I prize.

Yet there, ev'n there, ev'n in those sacred seats
Rais'd to preserve the sacred Muse's lore,
My trees neglected yield but sickly sweets!
The British Muse pines on the British shore!

Where are my Alfreds now?  my Arthurs, where?
Are all my rites forgot, my shrines effac'd?
Can I be ever banish'd, there
Where Freedom has her bright Pavilion plac'd?

At that sad hour, when from old Snowdon's height
I saw by barb'rous hands my offspring slain,
What joy remain'd for me?  What hope?  What light?
Save distant gleams of Guelfo's glorious reign.

Long had I lain beneath the gloomy shade,
But for those favourite Names, to whom I lent
My skill, to whom my visions I convey'd,
And led them forth, the nation's ornament!

But chief, for that fam'd Line from Azzo sprung
(Whom long may Heav'n to Britain's pray'rs allow,)
I oft appear'd, Germania's states among,
And all unknown in Britain wander now!

And must I leave that race, for whom I chose
To twine the Chaplet of immortal Fame?
For whom I cropt whatever Pindus shows,
Or Peneus' bow'rs, or Pisa's honour'd stream?

And must I Britain leave? &mdash; Can I forget,
While round her breast the guardian oceans roll,
Her virtues, for the world's great pattern set?
Her honest eye transparent to the soul?

No &mdash; I can ne'er forget &mdash; forget to tell
In Selma, when the feast of shells was high,
Where for the flaming hearth whole forests fell,
How honour'd, how caress'd, how bless'd was I!

There many a nymph array'd in Beauty's smile,
And stripling trim my gambols joy'd to lead;
Aerial harps were sweetly heard the while,
And wanton Pleasures frolick'd o'er the mead.

Next Tityrus me woo'd (a reverend name)
Who tun'd his reed to many a courtly tale&mdash;
And Hawthornden's sweet-piping Shepherd came,
Whose loves enchanted Ora's beauteous vale!

Them liberal Nature did to One impart
All she could give to grace her fav'rite son.
His was each key that opes the human heart;
Himself a Muse &mdash; For he and I were one!

In later days, my presence Collins sought,
He heard my voice, my Songs he made his own;
My lyre he strung, my magic fire he caught,
Yet ah &mdash; how quick the tuneful Spirit's flown!

And many more me lov'd, and all admir'd
From earliest time to Glory's latest stage&mdash;
The Songs I sung, the Themes that I inspir'd,
The praise of Gods could Gods and men engage.

Shall those, my sisters, born on me to wait,
My younger sisters, handmaids of the Nine,
Shall they usurp my throne, affect my state,
My stately port, and majesty divine?

Should I, who sung to Gods and Heroes old,
To Freedom's gen'rous sons e'er sue in vain?
I fir'd with gallant thoughts the chieftain bold,
Who pour'd his life on Chalgrove's fatal plain!

When the third Edward, borne on Virtue's car,
Scal'd the steep road to Glory's radiant dome,
At Cressy I maintain'd th' unequal war,
And brought the warriour crown'd by Conquest home.

The Great of every age my pow'r adore,
Freedom's fam'd champion on Philippi's field,
The lonely night my Odes repeating o'er,
His breast to deeds of noble daring steel'd!

Who will not turn his eye, where Colin pays
His funeral tear to generous Sydney's herse?
Who can but look, when Cowley frames the lays,
And Hervey shines all-glorious in the verse?

Still Akenside the gentle Hastings sings,
And Mason finds a friend in D'Arcy still.
Forbid it, Virtue, that the best of kings
Alone should slight the Muse's heavenly skill!

Forbid it, gracious Heav'n, forbid it Truth,
Forbid it, Piety, forbid it Fame,
Forbid it, Fate, that Guelfo's royal Youth
Should change for mimic fires my living flame!

Yet, ev'n the savage tribes my influence own,
Beneath th' impetuous Sun, o'er realms of snow,
From Zembla's sky to Delli's blazing throne&mdash;
Ev'n on the Tenglio-bank my roses blow!

My rapturous strain the chill Siberian chears;
The Arab harks, and turns his flying steed.
Me, in his forest, Chili's native hears,
For me, the generous sons of Bastia bleed!

For me, gay Light assumes its varying dyes,
And Nature opes her bosom of perfume.
I sooth the Virgin's care, the Matron's sighs;
And wake, to wond'rous life, the silent tomb.

The hags, that guarded Gloriana's reign,
That oft their Spenser met at midnight hour,
Those horrid hags that haunted Cawdor's thane,
All crouch to me &mdash; All Nature feels my power!

And is no place for me in Britain's isle?
Where once the festal night I could prolong,
And joy and glory grew beneath my smile,
And soft-ey'd Peace, and Freedom's matchless song!

Is there no hope for me &mdash; She said no more&mdash;
But tears and sighs suppress'd the notes divine.
All pale she fell upon the blighted shore,
To heal her woes, O mighty George, be thine!
