Press'd with a weight of woe, which death had wrought,
And lash'd by persecution's rod severe,
The injur'd Penseroso issued forth,
And in the height of sorrow made complaint,
Frequenter of the shades.  Ne'er lived a Sage
In heart so pure, in life so much oppress'd.
No thin disguise e'er cloth'd his naked soul,
His act unblam'd, and kind his feeling heart
Yearn'd at the moan of sorrow.  In the realm
Of Albion liv'd and mourn'd this Western Job;
Albion, the dark domain of sable clouds,
Region of fancied, more than real woe,
Where oft' in mimic night the solar beam
Is lost, and all the joyous face of Heav'n
Is muffled in a humid veil of air
With sad embarrassment; hence sinks oppress'd
The human heart, and the bright beam of joy
Fails for awhile to gild the mental gloom.
On death he fondly mus'd, for that he saw
Destructive of his friends; the night he sought
To ponder on his woe, and converse shunn'd,
But sought the still by-paths of Hermit life.
Delighted, nature's noble works rever'd,
Nor less rever'd the monuments of art
In ruins pleasing; nor the tales of Greece
And Rome; nor Chivalry's enchantments drear,
Where morals lay conceal'd, his search escap'd.
But chiefly would he moralize on man
And human life, to prove it vain intent
And full of woe.  Oft' his companions were
The solemn birds of night, and deep in thought
His nightly round he shapes, 'till th' early cock,
Thron'd on the homestead tree, or shelt'ring stall,
Shrill-clarion'd wakes the morn, and loud the swain
Whistles well-pleas'd, forth issuing from his cot
To play his morning task.  Thus nobly blest
In all his still retreats he pities Kings,
The insolence of pow'r, the strut of wealth,
And all the idle trappings of the great.

Heav'n, teach me what he sung, when to the glade
Whilom he bent his way.  Twas in the night
Serene when Phebe rose;  the air was calm,
And nought was heard but Philomela's note,
The distant tinkle of the drowsy fold,
The howl of village-curs foreboding woe,
The curfew's sound, and sage Minerva's bird
Venting nocturnal prophecy to swains.
Twas then the mournful Penseroso stood
Beneath the umbrage of an upland oak,
Rapt into heav'nly thought:  The moon advanc'd
Gleam'd through the boughs, and shed a trembling light.
Fair to his view rose many a neighbouring grove,
And hills and rocks, with vallies interspers'd,
Gilt by the lunar beam; whilst at the foot
Of a sweet-winding vale, the neighbouring sea
Murmur'd complacence to his list'ning ear.
The sage his meditations thus began.

That man is born to grieve, as upward mount
The flying sparks, the page divine declares. . . .
