I.
Twas in the silent Hour of Eve,
When gently pensive Visions roll,
When Joys, which Thought alone can give,
Spread their Dominion o'er the Soul,
A Youth, who oft was wont to rove,
And woo the Dryads of the Grove,
Aloft, from Richmond's wood-crown'd Height,
Beheld the Day's descending Light,
Beheld the Verdure of the Vale,
The tufted Bank where Thamis glides,
The green-rob'd Grove, the opening Dale,
Where every gentler Grace presides;
Where, o'er the Face of all the varied Ground,
The Power of Beauty reigns, and pours her Blessings round.

"And O!  (he cry d) thou lovely Maid,
Fair Fancy, grant thy genial Fire,
If e'er by native Hill, or Shade,
I wak'd in Youth the rural Lyre!
If e'er, along the lonely Shore,
Where loud the Atlantic Surges roar,
Or where Leana's Waters spread,
And Turk  erects his fir-clad Head,
Thus oft invok'd at early Day,
Thou hast listen'd to thy Suppliant's Prayer,
Thou hast deign'd to raise his lowly Lay,
Or deign'd his vacant Hours to share,
Now on this Summit take thy silent Stand,
And throw thine Eyes around BRITANNIA'S happy Land!

"In yonder Wood, where darkening Gloom
Bids Horror every Form assume,
Bids awe-struck Contemplation soar,
Lo!  Altars rise disdain'd with Gore
The Victim bleeds! &mdash; Thence o'er his Soul
The Druid feels the sacred Phrenzy roll:
"Hence &mdash; to your Arms! &mdash; your Gods maintain!&mdash;
Lo!  riding o'er the billowy Main,
A mighty Hero, from afar,
Provokes you to the Rage of War!&mdash;
Andate, hear! &mdash; May Julius feel
Cassibelan's avengeful Steel!
And may thy suppliant Cumri still maintain
Their Fathers' hallow'd Faith, their ancient freeborn Reign!"

II.
"In vain the Prayer &mdash; Behold the Gleam
Of Arms shines terrible from far!
Behold, thick plunging in the Stream,
The Romans sound the Din of War!
They yield &mdash; the painted Squadrons yield&mdash;
The Eagle fans the conquer'd Field;
And Rome, exulting from her Throne,
Beholds another World her own:
Vain is each Hero's bold Essay,
And vain the female Warrior's Arms;
Still Time confirms the Victor's Sway,
Though FREEDOM rouse to loud Alarms
And vain, Caractacus, thy patriot Flame,
Theme of a future Bard who well shall raise thy Fame.

"Say, who is he, aloft in Air,
Sublime upon his iron Car,
Who bids the trembling World prepare
For Hardihood, and Deeds of War?&mdash;
Stern Odin: &mdash; At his bold Command,
O'er Albion's wave-encircled Land,
From snow-clad Scarsfield issuing forth,
Flies the dread Spirit of the North.
Again a Pause &mdash; Behold, along
Where o'er yon widely-spreading Plain
The Raven  leads her hardy Throng,
Fierce Plunderers of the freighted Main!
They meet; the Battle bleeds; and all around
Echo the Shrieks of Woe, the Victors' Shouts resound.

"Thou seest beneath these Clouds above,
Avenging, fly the Bird of Jove,
Thence, swift-descending on his Foe,
He strikes the lordly Falcon low;
So Rollo's Son &mdash; What Woes succeed!
Again shall Tyrants rule, and Britons bleed!
O!  if, in Arthur's earliest Times,
From lilly'd Vales, and gentler Clime,
Fair LIBERTY to Albion's Shore
Her unsubmitting Standard bore,
Arouze again!  &mdash; They hear!  they hear!
Again' behold the uplifted Spear!
In yonder Mead the Sons of Glory rise;
And FREEDOM'S Banner waves amid BRITANNIA'S Skies!

III.
"From Hour to Hour, from Age to Age,
Again shall Desolation spread,
Shall deadly Feuds, and civil Rage,
Pile Thames's Shores with Heaps of Dead?
Shall tame Submission still remain?
Shall Britons hug the servile Chain
And o'er a free-born Native's Head
Shall foreign mitred Tyrants tread?
Forbid it, Heaven!  &mdash; A BRIGHTER RAY
Now strikes athwart the dusky Gloom,
And, glancing o'er the Verge of Day,
Dispells the illusive Charms of Rome:
Far nobler Prospects gild the opening Skies,
RELIGION, ARTS, and LAWS, COMMERCE, and GLORY rise.

"Now, FREEDOM, bid thy vestal Flame
To Spires of purer Radiance blaze;
Bid patriot Souls afire to Fame,
To happier Deeds, and happier Days;
Bid o'er the white Rocks of thine Isle
Each open Grace, each Virtue smile;
And bid on Milton's honour'd Brow
Fair Wreaths of every Laurel blow:
O bid each Hero, in thy Cause,
Exert each active Power of Soul,
To guard thy Rights, assert thy Laws,
To raise thy Friends, thy Foes controul!
And, when Oppression lifts her iron Hand,
O bid thy Hambden rise, and rouze the sinking Land.

"One Effort more: &mdash; In other Skies
What Sons of virtuous Glory rise,
Who to fair Albion's frighted Shore
Her Laws, her sacred Laws restore!&mdash;
Fled is the Tyrant! &mdash; Turn thine Eyes
To where Augusta's lessening Turrets rise:
Succeeding Years now give Command
To Kings, the Fathers of the Land;
To Kings, whose delegated Throne
Establish'd FREEDOM calls her own;
Whose Thoughts, whose throbbing Wishes feel
That Godlike End, the general Weal;
Whose patriot Souls adopt the liberal Plan
Of Nature's hallow'd Gift, the FREEBORN STATE OF MAN.

IV.
"Yet may, at length, the lowly Muse
Indulge one Wish, nor with in vain!&mdash;
Far hence, O far be partial Views,
Mistaken Wisdom's selfish Train!
Wide as extends Britannia's Sway,
Where yonder Sun now slopes his Way,
O'er every Land, o'er every Isle,
May rising Arts and Commerce smile!
May Laws in equal Tenor flow!
May FREEDOM gild each sea-beat Shore!
No longer heard the Voice of Woe!
And dread Oppression seen no more!
And may Ierne praise a GEORGE'S Name,
For COMMERCE, ARTS, and LAWS, and FREEDOM's sacred Flame!

"Then, Albion, o'er the subject Main
Thy Fleets with bolder Wing shall fly;
Nor Gallia's Threats thy Course restrain;
Nor Gallia's Arms thy Sons defy:
Around, o'er many a distant Shore,
Where, yet, no Raleighs dare explore,
Where, yet, no human Footsteps tread,
Thy strengthen'd Industry shall spread;
Thy Arts of cultur'd Peace shall rise;
Thy Trade extend her boundless Sway;
In Western Wilds, and Southern Skies,
Each British Muse shall tune her Lay;
And, o'er each Tenant of thy wide Domain,
When FREEDOM waves her Wand, fair HAPPINESS shall reign."

Thus, on thy Brow, delightful Shene,
At Eve the stripling Swain was seen,
To breathe his patriot Sighs along,
His Heart according to the Song;&mdash;
Now o'er the darkly glimmering View
The gradual Night her fleecy Mantle threw;
The Stream, the Lawn, the lofty Spire,
The Groves, the Palaces, retire;
In every Shade is heard around
The nightly Warbler's solemn Sound,
Which, mild as Zephyr's whispering Gale,
Soft steals through Ham's Arcadian Vale;
Well pleas'd, he listens to the plaintive Lay;
Then homeward, calm and slow, he hies his lonely Way.
