I. 1.
Queen of the Lyre!  who first, when Albion sprang to day,
From forth the bosom of her mother sea,
With sounds seraphic hail'dst the rising isle,
And mark'dst the seat, where future arts should smile;
'Midst northern skies who taught'st thy sons a flight,
Above th' Aonian Pindus' fabled height;
Hail, British Muse!  to thee belong
A Briton's praise, a Briton's son;
Behold, an artless wreath I twine;
A wreath for thee, and for thy sons divine.

I. 2.
Hast thou then heard my call, sweet tyrant of the breast?
Thou hast &mdash; for lo!  through mystic clouds confest,
Bursts on my view the visionary maid,
In sky-enwoven robes of blue array'd!
Mark'd ye the beamy lustre of her eye?
Mark'd ye the magic rod she waves on high?
'Tis Fancy comes, and in her hand
Smiling she leads the elfin band;
Whilst at her side, he lov'd so well,
The gentle Spenser tunes his airy shell.

I. 3.
Methinks through fairy land I stray,
And groves unknown to garish day;
I seem to view some castle's height,
With antique trophies richly dight;
While round, beneath the rocky brow,
O'er its rough bed the torrent murmurs low.
I see its giant lord!
Around his gloomy eyes he throws,
And proudly frowns upon his foes;
In vain &mdash; with speed the elfin knights advance,
Nor can the paynim club resist their lance;
Lo!  the fell tyrant falls, with many a wound deep-gor'd.

II. 1.
Within yon ghastly cave, thick-fring'd with horrid gloom,
Despair has fix'd his solitary home;
Around the naked cliffs, with ceaseless wail,
Through the dun air the flitting spirits sail.
Ah!  come not, hero!  near this scene of woe;
Vain is thy prowess against such a foe:
Miscreant!  stop thy artful tale,
His dauntless soul begins to fail;
With upright hair, and haggard eye,
Trembling he lifts the rusty blade on high.

II. 2.
Thus sung th' inventive bard; he sung, and Sidney heard,
And crown'd his poet with a due reward;
Bad him aspire to great Eliza's praise,
And granted friendship for such matchless lays.
Too soon did fate resume the bliss it gave,
And Spenser wept upon his Sidney's grave.
Then did'st thou quit thy Mulla's shore,
Sweet Mulla!  vocal now no more;
From Arlo's hill the sighing swain
Curs'd the sad bark, that bore thee o'er the main.

II. 3.
Did ever fancy pour along
Such sweet variety of song?
While allegory's mystic veil
Dimly conceals the moral tale;
Thus, o'er the wide ensanguin'd field,
Beams his own Arthur's adamantine shield,
Half shrouded from the sight;
Yet oft the prince display'd in air
The magic splendor that he bare;
Abash'd, confounded, fell the rebel crew,
That dar'd oppose their rash tumultuous view,
Whilst the bright meteor flam'd, and scar'd the realms of light.

III. 1.
On Avon's willow'd banks the mighty master stands;
Around, the passions wait his dread commands,
To rend the heart with terror's Gorgon frown,
Or melt the stubborn breast with pity down:
Love's rosy blush, and anger's kindling eye,
And the dark gloom of lowering jealousy:
Here, madness, smiling in her pain,
With light fantastic gesture vain;
There, tearing up his hoary hair,
Bends to the earth in wildness of despair.

III. 2.
The great magician calls &mdash; he gives the potent word;
And see!  Macbeth clutches the hanging sword;
See!  Glo'ster, starting from his haunted bed,
In fancied terror rears his impious head;
The murder'd band still glares before his sight,
And the pale tyrant roars with mad affright.
But soft &mdash; I hear wild music breathe,
"Above, about, or underneath;"
Lo!  Ariel's sprites their vigils keep,
Ride the curl'd clouds, and tread the oozy deep.

III. 3.
Thee, various bard, beneath the shade,
(A quivering alder o'er thee laid,
Which Nature twin'd with flow'rets rude,)
The rival Muses whilom woo'd.
Thalia clasp'd the smiling boy,
And tun'd his artless tongue to tales of joy;
But soon the gushing tear,
Confest, Melpomene, thy lore;
He melts with woes unknown before;
By turns the dubious poet smil'd and sigh'd,
Each was too eloquent to be denied,
Both won the glorious cause, and Falstaff vied with Lear.

IV. 1.
Through yon star-sprinkled plain, and azure realms of light,
What mighty Spirit holds his steady flight?
Now sailing onward through the spacious round,
Dives in th' abyss, and skims the dark profound?
What earthly guest dares draw celestial air,
And view th' effulgence, angels cannot bear?
Great Milton dar'd &mdash; he strung his lyre,
And struck it with a prophet's fire;
Anew creation seems to bloom,
And resuced Eden all her charms resume.

IV. 2.
What were the bitter pangs, the lost archangel knew,
When through the Stygian gloom his eyes he threw,
And saw his rebel peers, in dumb dismay,
Wide stretch'd upon the same sulphurous sea!
Thought he not then on Heav'n's divine abodes,
And curs'd ambition that could ruin Gods?
Yet more, he felt the sing of shame,
And the lost honours of his name,
When, conscious of th' ignoble plan,
In mean disguise he sought the fall of man.

IV. 3.
Above the bards of Grecian fame,
Homer exalts his lofty name;
From him the tragic muse, of yore,
Drew her sweet pathetic store:
Amid the starry domes on high,
Where British bards taste immortality,
Great Milton reigns supreme:
E'en Shakespeare yields his native fire,
Nor blushing Spenser dares aspire:
"Hail, Lord of verse," they sing, "to thee belong
The meed of poesy, majestic, strong,
Above the bards of Greece, in genius as in theme."
