Twas when Hyperion, rushing o'er the Sky,
With loosen'd Reins, had pass'd the Ram and Steer,
And, clad in Fire, approach'd, where, blazing high
In Heaven, the Twins' blue Palaces appear;
Pranking in flowery Robes the Meadows clear:
While bland Aurora, gorgeously bedight,
In th' azure Mantle of the vernal Year,
Dropping with Pearls, and fring'd with Silver bright,
Led forth, in radiant Lines, the splendid Hosts of Light:

It chanced me, beside the verdant Shore,
Of chrystal streaming Thamesis to stand,
Where ancient Windsor rear'd his Turrets hoar,
Majestic Dome!  the Boast of Britain's Land,
Seat of her Kings, and Station of Command.
Nor haughty Rome, nor greater Babylon,
Nor that proud City on Phoenician Strand,
In Majesty, or Grandeur this outshone;
Nor Cusco, erst where flam'd the great Incayan Throne.

Sacred to Jove the lordly Oaks were seen
Wide o'er the Plains to fling their awful Shade,
Crowning the Hills with Dodonean Green,
The Castle's Walls were gloriously array'd
With ancient Trophies, from on high display'd,
And hostile Banners gain'd in former Times
By Edward's Arms, or Henry's, when they made
The Gaul weep Blood for haughty Valois' Crimes;
Heroic Theme, I deem, of many a Poet's Rhimes.

Beside the River's Bank, a stately Frame
For some imperial Triumph seem'd prepar'd,
With hundred Pillars fronting fair the same;
The magic Roof of Chrystal strange was rear'd,
High blazing in the Clouds the Dome appear'd;
The Gate by laboring Winds was open thrown.
Loud issuing thence a Trumpet's Voice was heard,
That call'd the Kings of Earth before a Throne,
Where GLORY, martial Form, in Robes magnific shone.

Stretch'd at her Feet, the Crowns of Monarchs lay,
And silken Standards bright in figur'd Gold,
The Spoils of conquer'd Realms, in proud Array
And Instruments of War, in Heaps uproll'd,
Proclaim'd the Deeds of many a Baron bold;
Justice before the Throne her Balance held;
Recording Truth appear'd, and Chronos old;
There Wisdom, resting on her Gorgon Shield,
Fame with her brazen Voice the lofty Palace fill'd.

Ye Kings (she cry'd) ye Chiefs of Earth appear,
Who nobly sought Renown, and toil'd for Praise;
Who punish'd Tyrants by the Sword of War,
Or pass'd in peaceful Arts your happier Days,
Cherish'd fair Science, or the Muses' Lays;
Approach &mdash; the Crown from GLORY'S Hand receive,
Shadowing your Temples with immortal Bays;
The Crown that Virtue offers to the Brave,
The Wise, the Good, the Just that blooms beyond the Grave.

The Goddess spake:  Two mighty Kings advance;
The one, tremendous like the Warrior God,
With bruised Helm, and gore-discolour'd Launce;
Tremendous, to the lofty Dome he strode,
And, blazing, 'midst the sculptur'd Portal stood;
Fierce was his Gait, and sullen was his Frown;
Their Hero's Steps an hardy Band pursu'd,
All Sons of Mavors, ne'er in Arms o'erthrown,
Unshaken, who preserv'd their furious Monarch's Throne.

Him knew the Goddess for Borusia's Lord,
To Walpurg's haughty Race a fatal Foe;
Oft had her Armies sunk beneath his Sword,
Which laid Germania's proud Electors low;
Heaven's Instrument of Vengeance here below:
Still unimpair'd his dread Puissance stood,
Though thousand Thunders pointed at his Brow;
Still, through his Camps relentless Millions flow'd,
Boasting his stern Command, and thirsting after Blood.

Beside his King the hoary Schwerin press'd,
The bloody Standard in his Hand he wav'd;
As when, at Prague, in martial Terrors dress'd, 
The Austrian Thunder this stern Chieftain brav'd,
And, crown'd with Fame, a Warrior's Death receiv'd,
Next, Winterfield, to every Muse a Friend
Zethen, and Sedlitz, yet from Slaughter sav'd
Anhalt, and Keith, heroic Pair!  attend,
Alike in Life renown'd, and glorious in their End.

But, far the noblest of the martial Band,
Of gentle Manners, dauntless, and sedate,
Obedient to his Brother's fierce Command,
The Prussian Henry stood; in Battle great,
Oft had his Wisdom sav'd their falling State;
When Frederick, at his wasted Realms enrag'd,
Rush'd on to War, and gave th' Event to Fate,
His shatter'd Host the Hero disengag'd,
And, dreadful in Delay, the dubious Battle wag'd.

Now had the warlike Monarch reach'd the Throne;
Before him, Conquest, horrid Conquest, went:
Like fierce Bellona, Queen of Arms, she shone;
Beneath her ponderous Steps the Temple bent;
An Iron Mace, with gorey Hand, she hent,
Roll'd back, like broken Waves, the noisy Crowd;
Through the vast Court her thundering Voice she sent,
And told, in lofty Terms, with Gesture proud,
Of Cities wrapt in Flames, and Countries drown'd in Blood.

With her, tremendous, in the sacred Dome
The Prussian Hero sat, near Philip's Son,
Near Annibal, relentless Foe of Rome!
Dark Attila, who all the West o'er-run,
And him who first the Rock Tarpaean won
Proud Alarick:  But, chief distinguish'd there,
Zingis, and Timur, savage Tartars, shone;
Their horrid Conquests o'er the Walls appear,
When groaning Asia pass'd beneath the Edge of War.

Them Frederick join'd, nor yet his Battles ceas'd,
Curst with the dreadful Fame for which he fought;
When lo, a YOUTH, with nobler Triumphs grac'd,
In equal Pomp, the Throne of GLORY sought,
Him Peace,  and Commerce, to the Goddess brought;
Britannia's victor Chiefs uphold his Train,
Whom LIBERTY, heroic Virtue, taught,
Whose Arms controll'd aspiring Bourbon's Reign.
The Arbiters of Earth, the Sovereigns of the Main.

There, Clive, from India's Conquer'd Thrones return'd,
Whose sceptred Vassals own'd his stern Commands;
There, Amherst, with an hundred Wreaths adorn'd
Of savage Chiefs, who rul'd those swarthy Bands,
That haunt, like midnight Fiends, Canada's Lands;
Boscawen, there, with naval Honours crown'd,
And Trophies gain'd near Lagos' burning Sands
Victorious Hawke, from Constans' Fall renown'd
In Triumph Pocock stood; and martial Saunders frown'd.

Urg'd on to Battle, by his Country's Love,
And the fair Fame by martial Deeds acquir'd,
A youthful Briton shone the Rest above;
'Twas Wolfe; by Freedom's holy Ardour fir'd,
Like Rome's Marcellus mourn'd, the Chief expir'd
Pleas'd in the Arms of Victory to bleed,
Nor higher Guerdon his great Soul desir'd
Than that which Albion grants heroic Deed,
Her Senate's just Applause, his Virtue's noblest Meed.

Nor Heroes, only, on their Monarch wait,
To swell his Glories with a Conqueror's Name;
But hoary Patriots, old in Cares of State,
Superior Rank to martial Leaders claim,
A nobler Triumph, and a juster Fame:
There many a Bard of PITT, and FREEDOM sings
While grateful Nations their Applause proclaim;
To BRUNSWICK'S Throne his Subjects' Hearts he brings,
An Offering seldom paid to Heroes, or to Kings.

Thus when in GLORY'S Temple, radiant, stood
BRITANNIA'S KING, and gave the Nations Peace,
Her favourite Son, with Smiles, the Goddess view'd,
And next the Roman Scipio gave him Place,
With Titus, the Delight of human Race;
Far from those Tyrants of the Earth remov'd,
Whose Victories their martial Fame disgrace;
For Kings alone, who sacred Justice lov'd,
Benevolent to Man, the Power Divine approv'd.

'Twas then, a fair majestic Form drew nigh,
Amidst a Circle of Britannia's Peers;
The sacred Genius of bright LIBERTY,
Clad like a Nymph, that Wings of Silver bears,
And plum'd, as Hermes shooting from the Stars;
Diamonds, and Gold, amidst her Tresses glow'd,
The British Cross upon her Breast appears;
Like Una fair, amidst the Dome she stood;
A Lion, dreadful fierce, behind the Maid I view'd.

In Form like Ocean's awful Deities
The British Sailors spread the noisy Shore;
Inur'd to Storms, stern Natives of the Seas,
To Realms remote their victor Flags they bore,
And bade, in every Clime, their Thunders roar;
Marshall'd they stood, a generous, fearless Train,
From Ormus South, and Strands of rich Aurore,
From every Stream that fills the Atlantic Main,
Along whose desert Coasts the savage Indians reign.

Those dusky Tyrants of their native Climes,
That bow'd, reluctant, to the British Name,
Alone of untam'd Nature boast the Crimes;
No polish'd Enmity their Souls enflame,
Nor Murder, sanctify'd by GLORY'S Name;
Desire's fierce Frenzy, in their Souls, is Love,
Ambition, but a wild and barbarous Claim;
While fierce in Arms the ardent Rivals strove,
Sullen the Female stood amidst the neighbouring Grove.

Such was the State of old heroic Greece,
Ere Helena the Phrygian Shepherd charm'd;
Such Times gave Birth to many an Hercules;
Against the Chiefs of wandering Tribes they arm'd,
Whose Inroads oft their fenceless Towns alarm'd;
For captive Flocks they fought, and lovely Dames.
Beauty, and Hate, the lawless Spoiler warm'd;
Of ancient Songs the memorable Themes;
Now, in Oblivion lost their long forgotten Names.

When thus the Goddess, from her lofty Throne,
The sacred Form of LIBERTY address'd&mdash;
"O thou that reign'st in British Hearts alone,
Queen of this glorious Isle!  by Neptune grac'd
With Ocean Empire, on whose Shores are plac'd
The World's great Mart; hence let the Nations know,
And distant Crowns by Albion's Friendship blest,
That BRITAIN'S KING hath spar'd the prostrate Foe:
That Heaven is pleas'd above, and Earth is safe below.

"Proclaim aloud the conquering Britons' Might,
To whom, in Arms, and Arts, the World must yield,
To rival States just Arbiters of Right,
Oft found superior in the bloody Field,
When their strong war the Thrones of Kings upheld;
The meaner Thirst of Conquest far above,
In Justice, Virtue, who the World excell'd,
While Albion's Nymphs each Hero's Truth approve,
And they, who march to War for Empire, sigh for Love.

"Proclaim his Worth who Albion's Sceptre sways,
Strong in his Armies, stronger in his Fleet;
Whose wise Behests the British World obeys,
Great in her Treasures, in her Freedom great;
How sure his Bliss!  how permanent his State!
His spreading Map each Year shall larger grow,
New Crowns, new Empires his Acceptance wait;
While Oceans in his circling Kingdoms flow,
And undiscover'd Lands to him Obedience owe.

"Proclaim his Power, the Injur'd to redress;
By tyrant Foes his Justice uncontroll'd,
His Love of Mercy, and Delight in Peace,
How his brave Chiefs chastis'd the Vain, and Bold.&mdash;
Where, King of Gaul!  thine haughty Vaunts of old,
Thy regal Fortune, oft in Danger try'd,
Thy Conquests, Triumphs, by thy Poets told?
How hast thou bow'd in Dust thy stubborn Pride!
And laid the Warrior's Wreath, inglorious Prince, aside!

"What grateful Thanks to him should Europe pay,
For Half her States from Desolation freed?
Who, for her Welfare, gave new Worlds away,
And bade the distant Combat cease to bleed.
Behold!  Germania rears her drooping Head,
And smiles; her Sons triumphant Arches raise,
Rich with his Wars, by rescued States decreed,
To teach their wondering Sons a Monarch's Praise,
And furnish all their Bards with Themes for lofty Lays."

The Goddess thus great BRUNSWICK'S Fame display'd,
New Shouts of Triumph through the Temple rise;
The glittering Throngs with Wonder I survey'd,
Whose vast Applauses shook the vaulted Skies;
The Powers of Air, and Ocean's Deities:
At length the radiant Vision fades away,
Like a thin Cloud that from the Horizon flies,
On whole white skirts, the Sun with golden Ray,
Flings the resplendent Blaze of swift departing Day.

Hail, Windsor!  Hail, ye venerable Shades!
New Triumphs for your mighty King prepare,
Spread, ye vast Woods, and smile, ye opening Glades,
Hither, shall BRITAIN'S MONARCH oft repair,
Amidst the Circle of the Brave, and Fair,
Far from the Toils of State, the Pride of Power;
As the fierce Eagle, Ruler of the Air,
Resigns the Thunder, when Heaven's Wars are o'er,
Dwells in the vernal Grove, or haunts the peaceful Shore.
