Far in a desart wild, where, loud, and strong,
A full-swoln torrent roll'd it's tide along,
With anxious doubts his labouring bosom fraught,
Step following step, and thought succeeding thought,
The young ALCIDES stray'd: &mdash; before him lay
Virtue's steep height, and Pleasure's flowery way:
Ardent he gaz'd, when issuing from a glade,
Two angel forms his ravish'd eyes survey'd:
The one, serenely bright, with modest pace,
And looks, where mingled dignity and grace,
Decent advanc'd; the other younger fair,
With roving eye, flush'd cheek, and bosom bare,
Danc'd lightly on; around his neck she clung;
And thus, with practis'd blandishment, she sung.

Dearest Youth, what doubts distress thee?
Lo!  I come, to guide, to bless thee!
Happiness unfolds her treasures,
Slight not thou the offer'd pleasures.

Seek not yonder height to gain;
The steps are peril, care, and pain:&mdash;
Haste with me, for bliss prepare,
Fly from peril, pain, and care!

Smooth is my way: &mdash; In yonder bowers
Pleasure leads the dancing hours:
Haste, then, haste, thy prime employ;
Each moment lost, you lose a joy.

Dissolv'd in rapture, blest, and blessing,
Fancy's utmost wish possessing,
Tell the sons of care and strife,
Pleasure is the life of life.

Transported gaz'd the Youth, while thus she sung,
Rapt in the soft enchantment of her tongue:
When, lo!  in robe of purest white array'd,
Now near advanc'd the bright majestic maid;
Each charm improving as she drew more nigh;
Heaven's mild effulgence streaming from her eye,
Grace in her step; gently his hand she press'd,
And thus, in strain sublime, the awe-struck Youth address'd.

Offspring of JOVE, my voice attend,
Nor heed yon syren's artful wiles:&mdash;
The joys she brings in anguish end;
And ruin lurks beneath her smiles.

Wouldst thou assert thy birth divine?&mdash;
To yonder summit turn thine eyes!
There Virtue's hands the wreath entwine,
That lifts the hero to the skies.

Rough though and steep the mountain's brow,
Beset with perils, toil, and care,
There Fame's eternal laurels grow,
And Joy's sweet blossoms flourish there,

Hark!  Virtue calls thee &mdash; Truth proclaims,
That pleasure, rightly understood,
Whate'er Vice feigns, or Folly dreams,
Dwells only with the wise, and good.

She ended smiling, and her heavenly eyes
Shot forth a brighter radiance; to the view
Now, easier seem'd the ascent; and from the top
Flowers of unfading bloom their fragrance threw;
Meantime, the Youth beheld, with deep surprize,
In that smooth way, erewhile so gaily dress'd
The deadly night-shade creep; the thorn start up;
And the dark adder rear his spotted crest:
Th' illusion vanish'd; and, to sight confess'd,
Sloth stood, in native horror: &mdash; from her grasp
(As one who in his path had spy'd an asp)
ALCIDES sprung, and thus his high resolve express'd.

The victory is thine!&mdash;
Though toils, though cares my steps oppose,
On peril, still, though peril grows,
Celestial visitant, be Glory mine!
Do thou, sweet maid, my young feet guide
To yonder bright abode,
Yon star-crown'd hill, where Virtue's sons reside;
Where the Renown'd of antient days,
Heirs of universal praise,
Heroes and Patriots trod!

Hear, Parent JOVE, the wish sublime
That fires my expanding soul,
Crown of my toils be this!  be this my goal!
To live, through undecaying time,
In Fame's eternal roll!

Thus while the hero sings, each cavern'd rock
Echoes the strain, delighted:  all around
The unseen deities of wood, and stream,
Dryads, and Naiads, the sweet nymphs who love
The hill's blue summit, and the powers who rule
The trackless realms of air, in concert full,
The Paean swell; and nature's general voice
Bursts forth in choral song.&mdash;
Mortals, who, benighted, stray,
Wandering through Passion's mists, by Reason's feeble ray,
Hear, and obey!
Hear unerring Truth proclaim,
That VIRTUE is the guide to FAME!
See, she moves, in radiant state!
Mark what blessings round her wait!
Soft content that bosom-treasure,
Rose-lipp'd health, and smiling pleasure!
Join her triumph &mdash; Mortals, rise,
Mount from earth, and claim the skies!
