Yet once more, O ye Laurels, and once more,
Ye roscid bowers of Larch's ample braid,
And the black Holm, that loves the wat'ry vale,
And Cypress, sign of bale,
And Cembran Pines, that scent the neighbouring glade,
Come; and let Ivy with the Poplar shade
(To catch my plaintive, melancholy strain,
For LYCIDAS is dead) her boughs enfold,
And paint with pallid green her buds of gold.
Who would not sing for LYCIDAS?  He lov'd
And woo'd each sweetly-amiable Muse;
He must not lie upon his sable bier
Unwept, and moulder in the silent dust
Without the meed of some melodious tear.

II.
Begin, ye Sisters of the sacred well,
That pours at Sion's foot its living streams,
Begin, nor fear swart Envy's baleful beams.
If your pure essence can distil no tear,
Burn in your sighs at least, and bear
This honest Spirit from his lowly bed:
So my PHILANDER tread
With pleasing anguish o'er his flowering grave;
For they were destin'd near the self-same hill,
Fed their own flock, by fountain, shade, and rill.

III.
Together Both, as air and earth appear'd
Gilt with the genial blushes of the Dawn,
With healthy paces brush'd the dews, and heard
The birds and rustics whistle through the lawn.
How joyous did they pass the laughing fields!
Freshen'd with every sweet that Nature yields,
Till sultry Phoebus pour'd the liquid Noon;
Then from their hearts they bless'd the social board
With simple viands stor'd;
Where, clad in Reason's sober garb, how soon
The charms of Fancy led the hours along!
And sage DAMOETAS lov'd to hear the song.

IV.
But O the heavy change!  now thou art gone,
Gone to the vast, irremeable bourne!
Hark, how each oak, and dell, and mossy cave,
O'er-canopied with many a flaunting bough,
In all their echoes mourn!
For thee their leafy arms they wave,
Their amber gushes flow,
Forgotten of thy foot, ungaz'd by thee.
As deadly as the bitter blast, that spoils
The chymic labours of the vernal bee,
Which kisses every bloom,
Sucking a sweet perfume,
Till ruffian Eurus wets its busy wing;
Or, when the trees their fruitful blossoms bear,
The frost, that withers all the master's toils;
Or beauty dying by an adder's sting;
Such, LYCIDAS!  thy loss to Shepherd's ear.

V.
Where we ye, Swains!  when the remorseless Fire
Rag'd in his head, and heart, and every vein?
For neither were ye bending o'er the lyre,
Nor deep with studious eye in maxims sage,
Nor rapt in holy Wisdom's hallow'd page,
Nor yet by Isis' willow-fringed stream.
Ah me!  I fondly dream,
Had ye been there; for what would that have done?
What could the Muse, which AKENSIDE had bore,
The Muse herself, for her enchanting Son,
Whom HEBERDEN all aidless did lament,
When by stern Death, whose arrows all deplore,
The lov'd Physician to the tomb was sent,
Down the dark chambers to the viewless shore?

VI,.
Alas!  what boots it, with incessant care
To tend the homely Shepherd's slighted trade,
And gently wear an envied, thankless power?
Were it not best to follow those who shower
Their incense on the courtly, honour'd Maid,
And leave to tatter'd Crape the sick, the dead, and prayer?
Inly he scorn'd the wandering wits, that troop'd
Under the sooty flag of Acheron;
Great in simplicity, he never stoop'd
When Innovation mad begirt the throne,
And burning Zeal without her eyes; nor droop'd
Till the dread Fury with abhorred shears
Slit his lamented life &mdash; But not the praise,
Raphael replied, that lives above the spheres.
"Can'st thou forego the pure, ethereal Soul,
In each fine sense so exquisitely keen,
On the dull couch of Luxury to roll,
Stung with Disease, and stupefied with Spleen;
Fain to implore the aid of Flattery's screen,
Even from thyself thy loathsome heart to hide,
The mansion then no more of Joy serene,
Where Fear, Distrust, Malevolence abide,
And impotent Desire, and disappointed Pride?"

VII.
O favour'd Stevenage!  and thy honour'd Wood,
And Fane, and Flock beneath his Pastoral care,
How were ye fall'n, when to his generous blood,
Walking the tainted air,
The Pestilence had found its way,
And Sickness at noon-day!
They ask'd the Floods, and ask'd the felon Winds,
What sudden fall had doom'd the gentle Swain,
And question'd every form of rugged Grief
That foils the finest gloss of human glory&mdash;
They knew not of his story:
Acute Disease and hoary Time declare,
That not a dying pang from them was sped;
Guiltless the Scythe and Glass; and Minutes fine
And many in the Sands might then be read:
It was that fierce, unmed'cinable Fire,
Boiling the secret veins with venom dire,
Which sunk so low that sacred head of thine.

VIII.
DAMOETAS, reverend Sire, came footing slow,
In painful pleasure turn'd to pleasing pain,
Calm in compassion, to behold how vain
The wish of Friendship to secure from woe.
"Is there a knowing heart, that cannot melt
For LYCID?  Rugged is that heart forlorn.
Is there who ne'er the mystic transport felt,
Of Charity and Melancholy born?
He needs not woo the Muse; he is her scorn.
The Sophist's rope of cobweb let him twine,
Mope o'er the Schoolman's peevish page, or mourn
And delve, for life, in Mammon's dirty mine;
Sneak with the wily Fox, or glutton with the Swine:
For that same goodly hue of white and red,
With which the Cheeks are sprinkled, shall decay;
And those sweet rosy leaves, so fairly spread
Upon the Lips, shall fade and fall away;
That golden Wire, and sparkling Eyes so bright
Shall turn to dust, and lose their goodly light:
But the fair Lamp, from whose celestial ray
That light proceeds which kindles fire divine,
Shall never be extinguish'd, nor decay;
But, when the vital spirits shall decline,
Then reigns the Mind, the standard of the pole;
The Christian there is measur'd by his soul."

IX.
Return, ye Shepherds!  the dread voice is past
That sunk your minds; return, ye sorrowing Swains!
Call Flora here, and bid her hither cast
Each decking flow'ret of the painted plains.
Ye vales of Hertford!  in whose green domains
The whispering winds, and pearly, pebbled brooks
Sing as they flow, and Pan with rapture looks,
Bring hither all your quaint enamel'd eyes,
That catch the influence of the honied showers,
And spangle all the turf with dainty flowers:
Bring the blue Iris, and the Daisy trim;
The Crow-toe, and the luscious Woodbine sweet;
The Rose, vermilion-tictur'd, richly blowing;
The Violet, in purple glowing;
And from the pensive Cowslip and the Lily
Let snow and gold their mingling beauties join;
The Snow-drop weeping with the Daffodilly,
To strew his herse with bloomy Grideline:
For so, to interpose a little ease,
Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise.
He that hath seen a great Oak dry and dead,
Yet clad with reliques of some trophies old,
Lifting to heav'n her lightning-blasted head,
Whose foot on earth has left but feeble hold,
But half disbowel'd lies above the ground,
Shewing her wreathed roots and naked arms,
And on her trunk all juiceless and unsound
Only supports herself for meat of worms;
And, though she owes her fall to the first wind,
Yet of the grateful people is ador'd
For many a sapling springing from the rind&mdash;
Who such an Oak has seen, let him record,
That such this Shepherd's honour was of yore;
Nor tree in truer glory flourish'd more.

X.
Weep no more, Shepherds, in your vain endeavour;
For LYCIDAS, your sorrow, is not dead:
His Works and Alms not in the grave are trod,
But, as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
Follow'd him up to joy and bliss for ever:
Love led him on; and Faith, who knew them best
His handmaids, clad them o'er with purple beams
And azure wings, that up they flew so drest,
And spake the truth on him in glorious themes
Before the Judge, who thenceforth bid him rest,
And drink his fill of pure, immortal streams.

XI.
Thus sang the uncouth Swain to th' oaks and rills,
Till westering clouds, fretted with golden fire,
Turn'd their gay linings o'er the fading hills,
And Nature's murmurs on the ear expire.
Breasting the thorn now Philomela trills
Her magic song awaking fond desire;
And now the flocks were couch'd in evening dew;
To-morrow to fresh woods and pastures new.
