APOLLO.
Mourn, sisters, mourn! &mdash; No more to songs of joy
Your golden harps attune. &mdash; Sad be the notes
Our mutual loss inspires. &mdash; The tyrant Death,
Again, as thro' the plains of earth he rang'd,
From learning's few remaining fav'rite sons
With rage insatiate has singled out
The Bard we most esteem'd.  E'en GOLDSMITH yields
To his despotic pow'r. &mdash; A dire disease
(The harbinger of fate) with sudden speed
Relentless snatch'd him from the world's embrace,
Leaving mankind to mourn the early fall
Of Virtue's advocate and Learning's friend.
Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

MELPOMENE.
Another gone!  O thou tyrannic king!
No longer boast that with impartial hand
Thy visits reach the palace and the cot;
But rather own, that with injustice great
Thy vengeance falls on such as should be spar'd;
From out the motley race selecting those
Whose virtues add a lustre to their lives.&mdash;
Heroes and statesmen, warriors and kings,
With patriots firm, have in their country's cause
Untimely yielded to thy cruel hand;
Whilst many an hapless wretch, in prison bound,
Whose galling fetters chafe his wasted limbs,
Pines in remembrance of his long-lost friends,
And groans in agonizing pains for thee,
To close a wretched life; &mdash; but groans in vain.
How frequent have we mourn'd th' fatal choice
Of thine unerring shafts, by whose dread force
Our fav'rites fell! &mdash; Thy unrelenting hand
With envious haste snatch'd CHAUCER from our arms;
And as succeeding bards rose up to view,
Those arrows pierc'd them &mdash; SPENCER, DRYDEN, GAY,
ROWE, SHAKESPEARE, OTWAY, and the matchless POPE:
THOMSON, with SHENSTONE, and unnumber'd throngs
Of gentle bards, thy early victims fell.
And whilst our tear-swoln eyes are streaming yet
For HAWKESWORTH'S death, we feel another wound,
And in the pride of manhood GOLDSMITH falls;
GOLDSMITH, our dearest friend, the chief  support
Of all our hopes, &mdash; without distinction &mdash; dies.
Wherefore those hireling scribblers, slaves to pow'r,
Who prostitute their venal pens for gold?
Or where those enemies to virtue's cause,
Who from the mind wean modesty and truth?
Be these the objects of thy savage thirst,
Whose deaths would be of service to mankind:
But such thy vengeance spurns, 'till grey in vice
Reluctantly they yield, &mdash; while Virtue's sons
By thy destructive darts fall early. &mdash; Cruel King!
Genius in vain her drooping head may rear,
And soon, alas!  dost thou destroy her hopes,
And early blast her best-beloved sons,
E'er they have reach'd the manhood of their years.
Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

EUTERPE.
Well may we weep. &mdash; Amidst the general mourn
See BURKE and GARRICK leaning o'er his urn;
BURKE, dumb through grief, more eloquent appears,
As down his cheeks distill the trickling tears;
He mourns the social, the convivial friend,
In whom good-nature, wit, sense, humour blend.
Whilst GARRICK, long absorb'd by mimic woe,
Now feels the source from whence true sorrows flow;
Grief rends his heart to find a poet dead,
With whom he fears the comic muse is fled.
Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

CLIO.
To what sad movement shall my numbers flow,
For loss of him my best beloved friend?
Struck by the chilling influence of woe,
Vainly my soul its power would extend.

Ah!  where shall I begin the mighty theme?
When each perfection crouds upon my mind,
Nor know I which deserves my most esteem,
His tow'ring genius, &mdash; bounty unconfin'd.

Freely he gave of all that little store,
Which niggard Fortune yielded to his share;
And wept to find that little was no more,
To ease the brow of misery and care.

That social love and friendship warm'd his breast;
To aid each scheme that promis'd public weal,
Let COGAN answer, who could scarce request,
E'er he receiv'd his countenance and zeal.

Nor only in his actions shall he stand
Fair in the letter'd page of deathless Fame;
His writings would alone our praise command,
Both join'd will yield him an immortal name.

In them unsullied wit and humour shine,
Devoid of malice of bombastic shew;
See grace and regularity combine,
To make his numbers musically flow.

If worth so great can reverence command,
Then my prophetic soul doth well presage;
On future records GOLDSMITH'S name shall stand
The first of poets in the present age.

Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

THALIA
Since he is gone, then once again,
The nodding Goddess and her train
Will rear the head,
And, in my stead,
Hold their inactive reign.
Well may I the loss deplore,
My fav'rite son is now no more;
To whose active mind,
In flight unconfin'd,
I owe the short calm,
Since CONGREVE gay,
In loose array,
Caught my smiles and won the palm.
Death view'd my joy with envious eyes,
And sudden snatch'd the darling prize.
Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

POLYHYMNIA.
Wakefield, farewell!  where oft thy fields among,
I've sat attentive to my poet's song;
When warm'd by thee,
Kind Charity,
He sweetly sang domestic woe;.
Whilst list'ning crouds around him stand,
Vainly striving to command
The rising sigh, or tears that flow.
The plaintive notes, in nervous diction drest,
Sunk deep engraven on the hearer's breast.
Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

URANIA.
How oft together Thames's banks we've trod;
Whilst Contemplation rov'd thro' nature's plain,
Nor rov'd in vain,
Whilst in the rein,
Fancy bow'd at Judgment's nod,
"To vindicate the ways of God to man."
Well pleas'd I found his bosom glow'd
In Virtue's noble cause,
Whilst from his life such music flow'd,
As gain'd the world's applause.
The list'ning world with pleasure caught the sound,
Whilst through the vaulted sky redoubled joys rebound.
Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

CALLIOPE.
With generous ardour, noble rage,
In Virtue's cause he would engage;
Vice felt the lash
Beneath his hand,
And fell abash'd,
Unable to withstand
So keen, so calm, so powerful a foe.
He needed only Virtue paint,
Each profligate became a saint,
So sweetly forcible his numbers flow.
Mourn, sisters, mourn!  the general loss deplore,
GOLDSMITH, our fav'rite poet, is no more.

APOLLO.
Enough of grief!  Let sorrow have an end!
We've mourn'd the Poet, Patron, Christian, Friend.
But see his soul sublimely rise,
And dart into its native skies,
Among the blest to dwell
Whilst, fixt on earth,
So great his worth,
Can find no parallel.
GOLDSMITH, of fame secure, can never die,
But live enroll'd to vast Eternity.
