Rejoice, ye Guardian Powers, with joyful note;
Chaunt to the murmurs of the echoing gale;
Swell with triumphant strains the jocund throat;
The long expected hour of vengeance hail!
Rejoice, ye Guardian Powers, where'er ye rove,
Whether ye tread Arcadia's frost-bound glade,
Or on Potosi's heights the fragrant grove
Spread o'er your throbbing heads its trembling shade,
Court on Laurentius' brink the thawing beam,
Or lave your glowing limbs in Plata's sea-broad stream.

Tho' fell oppression o'er the ravag'd plain
A while may proudly lift th' exulting brow;
Th' unchanging justice of th' eternal reign
Shall lay in time the boasting tyrant low;
E'en from his crimes his punishment shall spring,
Where-ever Rapine gluts her harpy eyes,
Shall bloated Lux'ry stretch her tainting wing,
And Faction foam, and fierce Dissention rise;
Teach Europe's bloody sons remorse to feel,
Revenge Pizarro's flames, and Cortez' murd'rous steel.

Iberia, first who o'er yon eastern wave,
By plunder lur'd, to these fair regions flew,
In golden fetters bound, a willing slave,
Has learn'd the conquests of her fleets to rue;
Her sails no more triumphant sweep the main,
No more her armies dare the tented field,
Wave no rich harvests o'er her weedy plain,
No bleating flocks her joyless vallies yield:
Long since destructive gold, with Syren charm,
Has chill'd the warrior's heart, and numb'd the peasant's arm.

And lo!  the northern swains, who hither croud,
With hardy sinews from a rougher sky,
Of rights tenacious, and of freedom proud,
The boasted sons of heav'n-born Liberty;
Soon shall they feel that vengeance waits on those
Who try to bend th' unconquerable mind;
Who, from their specious voice, while freedom flows,
Enslave the nations, and betray mankind.
Soon shall they see, confounded and dismay'd,
The arm of Heaven engage in peace and virtue's aid.

E'en now the vengeance works!  by heaven's decree,
Amidst them Discord sheds her baleful power,
Shaking her scorpion scourge; Dissention see,
While fell Oppression hastes the fated hour.
No more against the free born Indian's head,
Britannia's sons the battle's rage prepare;
With civil arms yon cultur'd fields are spread,
While on herself she pours the weight of war:
The force, which erst subdu'd the faithless Gaul,
Hangs o'er her people's heads, and threats her cities fall.

And shall the enthusiast sons of rapine dare,
They who with more than tyrant power have torn
From the poor native all his little share
Of bliss, and left him exil'd and forlorn:
Shall they presume with manly voice to pour
The hallow'd sounds of sacred liberty?
First sieze our dearest rights, then join the roar
Of faction's crew, and boast they will be free;
Enjoy our claims to ruffian force resign'd,
Then rush with patriot zeal, the guardians of mankind.

Enthusiasts mourn!  from Britain's distant shore
I see, I see, the avenging legions swarm!
Swells with each eastern breeze the hostile roar,
While in our cause her hardy vet'rans arm:
Against her warrior sons, to battle train'd,
Ye march by frenzy, not by virtue, led;
I see your rebel chief inglorious chain'd,
And shameful death attend each vanquish'd head;
While down the astonish'd victor throws his sword,
And finds his frantic arm has his own bosom gor'd.

Exult, my sons!  the expected hour is nigh!
The tears of misery ne'er shall flow in vain;
From Afric's sable sons, the mournful cry
Joins with our pray'rs, and swells our suppliant strain.
'Tis heard!  e'en now fell slaughter o'er the field
With crimson footsteps marks her destin'd way,
Beats every ruthless breast, by fury steel'd,
And desolation spreads her horrid sway;
Fell Europe ends in blood her savage reign,
And independence chears the western world again.
