Faint is the plume, and nerveless is the wing,
Of that weak bird, who first attempts to fly;
Who on the tow'ring cedar's height would sing,
Or trace its fellow-inmates thro' the sky;
It's downy pinions scarce aloft can float,
And artless sounds the yet untuneful note.

So is it with the Poet's daring flight,
Who first begins to trace the bright abodes,
Who first attempts to tread Parnassus' height,
Where young Apollo charms the list'ning Gods;
Who from their azure battlements admire
The Nine fair Nymphs which form the tuneful choir.

Here Phoebus sings, here wakes the golden lyre,
Here the fair Nine bid sweetest accents flow;
Ah!  happy, would they lend their native fire,
To grace the labours of their sons below:
To swell, with softer notes, each tuneful theme,
And let them taste the Heliconian stream.

They first instructed POPE and GAY to sing,
Did ADDISON and DRYDEN's passions warm,
Led MILTON to their own Pierian spring,
And gave his pen superior pow'r to charm.
Inspir'd by them, each tuneful son of fame
Pants for the wish'd-for meed &mdash; a deathless name.

MELPOMENE, the Muse of Tragic woe,
Her SHAKESPEARE with her fav'rite beauties grac'd;
Bade SOUTHERNE'S verse with gentlest passions glow,
And in her OTWAY perfect nature trac'd;
Did ROWE with all her harmony inspire,
And gave to LEE her own poetic fire.

To celebrate each memorable shade,
Fain would I call th' Aonian choir to view;
Yet would I not invoke their tuneful aid,
If I could Nature's juster paths pursue:
For sure the verse in brightest lustre shines
Which Nature dictates, and which Art refines.

Thus, when our CHAUCER first awoke the string,
All rude and harsh the lays &mdash; tho' bold the flight,
'Till Nature bade her fav'rite SPENSER sing,
And his soft verse with ev'ry charm bedight:
Eftsoons, sweet notes fell deftly from his tongue,
Thilk as ne other bard hath whilom sung.

But, ah!  how vain the poet's boasted praise,
Tho' every Muse should smile upon his art,
Unless fair Truth directs his moral lays&mdash;
Unless fair Virtue glows around his heart:
Tho' smooth the verse, with ev'ry charm complete,
How false the flashes of a W&mdash;T'S wit!

Ye sons of Verse!  Ye votaries of Fame!
Who sigh for praises from the futue age,
Say, would ye raise a never-dying name?
With moral truths immortalise your page;
Inroll your names those deathless bards among,
"Who stoop'd to truth, and moralis'd their song."

But if, all uninform'd by Wisdom's lore,
Untaught, unwarm'd by Virtue's sacred rays,
If still ye pant for fame, the wish give o'er,
Nor wander in delusion's wilder'd maze:
Truth, Nature, Wisdom, Virtue, only can
Compleat the Poet, as they form the Man.
