O'er the pale embers of a dying fire,
His little lampe fed with but little oile,
The curate sate (for scantie was his hire)
And ruminated sad the morrowe's toil.

'Twas Sunday eve, meet season to prepare
The stated lectures of the coming tyde;
No day of reste to him, &mdash; but day of care,
At manie a church to preach with tedious ride.

Before him sprede, his various sermons lay,
Of explanation deepe, and sage advice;
The harvest gained from manie a thoughtful daye,
The fruit of learninge, bought with heavy price.

On these he cast a fond but tearful eye,
Awhile he paused, for sorrow stopped his throte,
Aroused at lengthe, he heaved a bitter sighe,
And thus complainde, as well indeed he mote:

"Hard is the scholars lot, condemned to sail
Unpatronized o're life's tempestuous wave;
Clouds blind his sight; nor blows a friendly gale,
To waft him to one port &mdash; except the grave.

"Big with presumptive hope, I launch'd my keele,
With youthful ardour, and bright science fraughte;
Unanxious of the pains, long doom'd to feel,
Unthinking that the voyage might end in noughte.

"Pleased on the summer-sea I daunced a-while,
With gay companions, and with views as fair;
Outstripp'd by these, I'm left to humble toil,
My fondest hope abandon'd in despair.&mdash;

"Had my ambitious mind been led to rise
To highest flights, to Crosier and to Pall,
Scarce could I mourn the missing of the prize,
For soaringe wishes well deserve their fall.

"No tow'ring thoughts like these engag'd my breast,
I hoped (nor blame, ye proud, the lowly plan)
Some little cove, some parsonage of rest,
The scheme of duty suited to the man;

"Where, in my narrow sphere, secure at ease,
From vile dependence free, I might remain,
The guide to good, the counsellor of peace,
The friend, the shepherd of the village swain.

"Yet cruel fate denied the small request,
And bound me fast, in one ill-omened hour,
Beyond the chance of remedie, to reste
The slave of wealthie pride and priestlie pow'r.

"Oft as in russet weeds I scour along,
In distant chappels hastilie to pray,
By nod scarce noticed of the passing thronge,
'Tis but the Curate, every childe will say.

"Nor circumscrib'd in dignitie alone
Do I my rich superior's vassal ride;
Sad penurie, as was in cottage known,
With all its frowns, does o'er my roof preside.

"Ah!  not for me the harvest yields its store,
The bough-crown'd shock in vain attracts mine eye;
To labour doom'd, and destin'd to be poor,
I pass the field, I hope not envious, by.

"When at the altar surplice-clad I stand,
The Bridegroom's joy draws forth the golden fee;
The gift I take, but dare not close my hand;
The splended present centres not in me."
