Daughter of Heav'n, bright ray of Worth Supreme,
Essence sincere of Uncreated Mind,
Of seraph's voice and harp incessant theme,
Blest with affection soft, and aspect kind,
Thee I invoke!  If on thy votary's head
Thou deign with liberal hand thy influence mild to shed.

By thee impell'd, with yearnings oft I rue
The ghastly form on dying couch reclin'd;
Prompted by thee, with visit sad I view
The wretch diseas'd, in nauseous dome confin'd,
Stript of parental aid, and friendships dear;
And sooth the orphan's plaint, and dry the widow's tear.

Mark, mark with tottering limbs, a prey to care,
The hungry cottager in silence mourn;
His pittance scant he takes of homely fare,
By all unseen, unpitied and forlorn:
All, but your keener search:  your piercing eye
Pervades his dark recess, O godlike Charity.

Close by his side, sole partner of his grief,
Ghost of existence, sits his meagre spouse,
Round them, dismay'd, and strangers to relief,
Their squalid offspring frames its fruitless vows.
Soon as you touch the threshold, heav'nly queen,
Quick with refulgent day you gild the gloomy scene.

And first, with secret hand, diffusive wide,
You pour the blessings of your genial reign;
Next, to the dome where Med'cine's sons preside,
With speed conduct the grateful wandering train.
You give &mdash; and giving taste the bless refin'd,
Patron of want obscure, and friend of human kind.

Nor less the youthful uninstructed heart
Claims the rich tribute of your sympathy;
With willing tongue and lesson you impart,
And point to Faith, and Hope, and realms on high:
Then to the sisters twain consign your charge,
And bid them to his sight the prospect clear enlarge.

Struck with thy form, thy inward worth I trace,
In kind regards, and social converse sweet:
At thy approach, pale Envy speeds her pace,
Hatred, and foul Surmise, and dark Deceit.
See &mdash; by thy presence aw'd, thy step they shun,
Like vapours dank dispers'd, as beams the orient sun.

Charm'd I behold, while in thy train proceed
With awful majesty the Graces fair;
Forbearance kind, and Peace, the chorus lead;
And mild Humility, with modest air;
Compassion soft; and Temperance, whose best food,
Dainty repast of mind, is universal good.

And hark!  methinks I hear thy solemn voice;
"Vain man, pursue thy Maker's first intent,
His best resemblance be thy earliest choice,"
Who, like the orb in yonder firmament,
To all alike his beams enlivening pours,
Alike on all, unask'd, distills his balmy showers.
