Scorch'd by the mid-day sun I sought the shade,
To catch the freshness of the passing breeze:
Upon a flowery bank my limbs I laid
To woo the soft winds whispering in the trees.
Come, gentle air, I cry'd, and give me ease!
With sickening heat no more let nature glow!
'Tis done, &mdash; and now the raging fervors cease,
As the gales rise from yonder lake below,
And thro' the tall woods sing, and o'er the valley blow.

Thus as I lay, soft slumbers clos'd mine eyes,
While Fancy o'er my senses wav'd her wand;
And soon the fairy visions 'gan to rise
In livery gay, as she doth well command:
And strait, methought, a stately hall did stand
Before my sight, with many a portal fair,
Such as belong to dome in Grecian land,
Of cost so great, and workmanship so rare,
That 'tis beyond my feeble rhymings to declare.

Around the gates, a thick, impatient croud,
Eager to enter, pass'd within my view:
And when the herald blew with blast so loud
The clarion shrill, the portals open flew.
The busy throng the hurrying way pursue.
I follow'd; and before the lofty throne
Of Truth I came:  for instantly I knew
The beauteous goddess who did sit thereon,
So bright her awful front with native lustre shone.

In her right hand a laurel wreath she bore
To crown his brows who best deserv'd the prize;
Such as of old the bravest heroes wore,
Right emblems of that fame which never dies.
Two claimants strait appear'd, of different guise,
The one, though young, possess'd a noble grace;
The vivid lightning darted from his eyes,
Nor e'er did frowns his polish'd brow disgrace,
But chearful smiles did play upon his manly face.

The other, more advanc'd in years, did bear
Upon his jolly cheek the rose hue
Of Bacchus, foe to every pallid care:
And as he talk'd, he laugh'd! &mdash; for well he knew
With noisy joy his story to pursue.
The one was Wit, the other Humour nam'd;
From different mothers, but one sire, they grew.
They both with equal hope the laurel claim'd;
They both at high renown with generous ardor aim'd.

Full in the sight of all, the judge did place
(Whereon the claimants might their powers display)
The hated passions of the human race.
Pale Avarice, &mdash; Ambition never gay,
Stern Cruelty that with blood doth mark her way,
With Scandal whose foul tongue is poison'd o'er,
And Jealousy to watchful hours a prey:
And well my muse could name a thousand more;
But ah! &mdash; such thorny paths she trembles to explore.

And soon, when Wit beheld this mingled croud,
Impetuous flashes darted from his eye:
Nor in soft whispers, nor in accents loud,
Or to deceive or frighten did he try;
Nor quite forget the arts of courtesy;
But with apt tauntings, and in manly tone,
He drew such pictures of their misery;
That every passion he did make to groan,
Which done, &mdash; he boldly claim'd the laurel for his own.

But Humour now, with laughter on his cheek,
Began his tale, for many a tale had he;
Which made involuntary raptures break
Forth from the throng, at his so merry glee.
The passions too, at his loud jollity,
Did seem to smile amid their sore dismay.
Laughing I wak'd, and ending none did see
Of all this fairy scene so bright and gay:
For Fancy spread her wings, and swiftly fled away.
