O'er hill, o'er dale, o'er mountains wide extent,
In quest of Liberty I fondly stray'd;
Still wander'd on, unknowing where I went;
Charm'd by report alone I lov'd the maid.
For oft in senates had I heard her name;
In pop'lous meetings oft applauded high;
And sometimes, speaking through the trump of fame,
Patriots had claim'd her for their near ally.
O tell me where's this wonder to be found?
Or lives she in the air?  or dwells on fairy ground?

As late I sought her in a verdant grove,
A nymph approach'd and whisper'd in my ear,
"Give o'er thy search; see Liberty in love;
Give o'er thy search; the ready nymph is here!
By these distinguish'd names I'm far ador'd;
And all the gay, and all the young, are mine;
No rude restraint my spacious courts afford;
No peevish laws the loosen'd will confine.
Yet some, or dull of taste, or over-nice,
Spurn all these proffer'd goods, and madly call me vice."

She spoke; and now, presenting (as in play)
A fillet, fain she would have bound my eyes;
But I, impatient of secluded day,
Resisted warmly, for I scorn'd surprize.
When lo!  three galling chains, before conceal'd,
Drop'd from her side, and, rattling, fell to ground:
Lust, Death, and Misery, on the fetters seal'd;
And each had fretted deep a ghastly wound.
And art thou Liberty?  I, smiling said:
The sorc'ress, sore dismay'd, with conscious horror fled.

At court I ask'd, if Liberty were there?
The courtiers laugh'd, and ridicul'd her name:
Yet some had lov'd the visionary fair;
But solid gold had wak'd them from their dream,
In vain I sought her in the soldier's tent;
The slave of glory knew not where she dwelt:
Under her banners to the wars he went;
But ne'er her sacred influence had felt.
In cities much she's talk'd of, never found:
For av'rice drove her thence, and still maintains her ground.

In rural sports I pass'd a weary day;
Each jocund youth pretended she was there:
But cruelty, and noise, and wild despair,
Could ne'er prevail, if Liberty were near.
But oft Licentiousness her name assumes;
Her easy gesture, and her light attire:
And, mingling with the riotous, presumes
Lawless to sanctify her baleful fire.
Oft blazing forth amidst the giddy croud,
Treason she lead in hand, and ruin threatens loud.

A school-master I met, of brow severe,
Who held an ancient book he call'd the law:
Aloud he read with accent full and clear;
Prostrate I bow'd with reverential awe.
"All this, says he, you strictly must obey;
Nor dream of Liberty this side the grave.
Then, sternly viewing me, he went his way;
And left me, doom'd an everlasting slave.
How should I dare to disobey his will?
Or how should I, alas!  such strict commands fulfil?

Bound by this law, I labour'd, wept, and pray'd
And tedious thought the day, and long the night:
Works left undone my conscience did upbraid;
And all was ill perform'd, and nothing right.
All weary and athirst I press'd the ground;
And almost wish'd life's fretful fever o'er:
When, to my ears, a more than mortal sound,
Soft, still, and sweet, this heav'nly message bore.
"Here lab'rer, here for ever quench thy thirst;
No second draught you need; sufficient is the first."

Erect I stood, and strait a rock I view'd,
From whence a stream translucid seem'd to leap:
Already were my spirits half renew'd;
And deep I drank, for oh!  my thirst was deep.
What joy!  what bliss, the potent draught convey'd!
No tongue can utter, and no heart conceive:
Light felt my bosom, and, as man new-made,
From this bless'd hour I but began to live.
All former years I wish'd to be forgot,
For all my former acts were one continu'd blot.

Now, from a neighb'ring mount, descending down,
Of angel form, I saw a smiling maid:
One hand a spunge, the other held a crown:
"And now behold true Liberty," she said.
"All your transgressions thus are wip'd away;
And this your growing faith shall well reward;
The genius of this rock thus bade me say,
The Saviour of my life, my mighty lord.
He gave me free to rove along the plains:
When death, and hell, my foes, he bound in lasting chains."

Then to my task, with giant strength, I flew;
And liberty my sweet companion went;
Care fled my breast, and toil a pleasure grew;
Light was the burden, and the yoke unbent.
From liberty I learnt due songs of praise;
From her each blissful moment to employ:
Loud to the west, my voice she bade me raise;
And wretches call to quaff immortal joy.
"Here, lab'rer, here for ever quench your thirst;
No second draught you need; sufficient is the first."
