Wide o'er the desolate, deserted plain,
Now dismal Winter bears despotic sway,
And round his throne attend a gloomy train,
Storms, hail, and beating rains, in dread array:
The fetter'd floods no longer smoothly flow,
Bright virgin snow the naked field o'erspreads,
Loud trumpets howling from the mountain's brow,
Rend tow'ring oaks, and shake their leafless heads:
While forests wild the dreadful yell resound,
An universal devastation reigns around.

Thro' wheeling clouds which vail the darken'd skies,
The sickly sun emits a feeble ray,
And soon descending to the ocean hies,
Faintly distinguishing the doubtful day.
The fleecy flocks beneath the shade secur'd,
And lowing herds, the ruthless storm defy,
While happy peasants in their huts immur'd,
Round blazing hearths, contentment blest enjoy:
Pleas'd with the rural joke, and uncouth lay,
The tedious gloomy night glides chearfully away.

At morn's approach, Sol faintly glimmering shows;
O'er dreary wastes, where-e'er we turn our eyes,
Inverted pillars hung from leafless boughs,
And crystal battlements which round arise;
While the gay youths (whose labouring threshers toil
And industry, their loaded granaries fill).
Rear'd on the temper'd steel, the day beguile,
Skimming the pavement of the glassy rill,
Or urge the feather'd game o'er lawn and heath,
With patient dog, and thund'ring instruments of death.

Ye friends of Fortune!  crown'd with Harvest's store!
While thus in sport ye spread the drooping day,
Deign to assist, with lib'ral hand, the poor,
And wipe the tears of poverty away!
Let sad despondency your solace share,
To aid distress with pious bounty deign,
Merit, by charity, the widow's pray'r,
And th' orphan's gratitude by goodness gain:
Ah!  think how many pine in want &mdash; and know,
With lib'ral hand 'tis great, 'tis godlike to bestow!

Again the tempest roars, waves tow'ring rise,
Thro' tatter'd sails rude winds imperious howl,
Tremendous thunder rends the gloomy skies,
And forky lightening glares from pole to pole.
By love led forth, ELIZA seeks the shore,
'Twixt hope and fear distracted; while she views
The shatter'd ship, and hears the billows roar.
The tear unfeign'd her blooming cheek bedews;
She long her love's arrival patient waits,
Nor recks the rattling hail that round incessant beats.

Alas!  poor nymph!  how vain thy fruitless stay!
Ah!  how prophetic are thy doubts and fear!
Your lovely sailor, erst so blithe and gay,
Lies yonder floating on his watry bier.
From craggy cliffs the frantic maid descries
Her lifeless lover o'er the billows ride,
Till wheeling eddies snatch'd him from her eyes
And deep inurn'd him in the roaring tide;
His spectre pale, which floated in her sight,
She frantic flew t' embrace, and sunk in endless night.

Ye sons of folly!   dissipate and vain!
Hence learn to judge more candid of the fair,
Nor from Debauch'ry's lewd, abandon'd train,
Conclude the sex all false and insincere!
In vain the harlot, with her Siren tongue,
Would strive to please, displaying all her charms,
In vain allure you with her artful song,
Or smiling bid you to her circling arms,
Did ye but know the lasting, blest delight
The wedded pair enjoy, when hearts with hands unite.

MYRA!  sweet nymph!  behold how chang'd the scene,
How sad the fields we blithesome wont to tread!
When genial Spring, and all her smiling train,
Erewhile with roses deck'd th' enamell'd mead:
No dappled flow'rs now paint the desart field,
Nor rural dainties fill the leafless grove,
The naked bow'rs no fragrant odours yield,
No jocund shepherds tune their pipes to love!
Their shiv'ring younglings seek the welcome folds,
While Winter over all his frigid empire holds.

Amid the horrors of the varied year,
Round blazing hearths, angelic fair!  with thee,
Beneath my humble roof, devoid of care,
I'd happy dwell with social mirth and glee.
What tho' mild Spring her blooming tinge denies,
And Summer cheers us not beneath the shade,
Tho' Autumn's stores no more attract our eyes,
Tho' Nature's charms are wither'd and decay'd?
Such pleasure do thy wit and beauty bring,
With thee 'tis alway Summer, 'tis perpetual Spring.

Let howling tempests thro' the forest growl,
Thro' bursting clouds let forky lightning glare,
And dreadful thunder roar from pole to pole,
By Virtue guarded, what hast thou to fear?
While round our couch the Sylphs their vigils keep,
In fond embrace I'd press thee to my breast,
And when calm slumbers should invite to sleep,
In others' arms secure we'd sink to rest!
These joys be ours, to Virtue only known,
Hymen descend, and all our fondest wishes crown!
