Two youthful swains with gentle love inspir'd,
To shun the sultry heat, at noon retir'd;
Beneath an arching grove reclin'd they laid,
Whose closing boughs afford a grateful shade.
The fragrant breezes from the flow'ry plains,
Wasting their sweets, refresh the weary swains.
The feather'd choirs now swell their warbling throats;
Thro' all the grove th' aerial music floats.
Hard by a limpid brook meand'ring play'd,
While o'er the meads their flocks around them stray'd.
Now while they rest within this peaceful grove,
Which seem'd a seat for tranquil joys and love,
Each to his mistress tunes his rural lays,
And makes the woods melodious with her praise.
Near them, attentive, old Palemon stood,
Oppress'd with heat, he'd sought the shady wood:
Tho' all the village swains the sage revere,
He ne'er disdains their youthful tales to hear;
And now, O muse!  rehearse th' alternate strains,
Palemon heard from these contending swains.

STREPHON.
Inspire, O Phoebus!  and ye sacred nine!
As is my subject, be my lays divine:
Then shall two lambs, that crop the flow'ry mead,
And kids unspotted at your altars bleed.

DAMON.
Clarinda's charms inspire her faithful swain,
The loveliest nymph that treads the verdant plain.
No lambs I offer; but my vows and sighs,
And heart sincere's a daily sacrifice.

STREPHON.
My Delia's bloom excels the blushing rose,
Her heaving breasts the whitest driven snows;
Whilst shading these, or flowing down behind,
Her auburn ringlets wanton in the wind.

DAMON.
Clarinda's mind alone her form excels,
In whose calm breast each gentler virtue dwells:
Yet her &mdash; 'midst all the nymphs on Cambria's plain,
Superior charms distinguish from the train.

STREPHON.
While summer now its gay profusion pours
O'er all the plains, and Flora decks her bow'rs;
While nature smiles &mdash; if Delia absent be,
'Midst all these charms, stern winter frowns on me.

DAMON.
When frosts and snow with gloomy winter reign,
And howling tempests sweep the dusky plain:
While nature frowns &mdash; if my Clarinda's near
To me, eternal summer rules the year.

STREPHON.
If all the flocks that yonder vallies fill,
Or Ceres' gifts, that gild each distant hill;
Nay &mdash; if the regal diadem were mine,
Kingdoms and states, my Delia, then were thine.

DAMON.
With these few flocks, were may Clarinda kind,
More joy than in the greatest wealth I'd find.
In yon low cot, blest with my lovely fair,
Scepters were toys, and empires fleeting air.

PALEMON.
Cease now, fond swains, your gen'rous strife forbear;
For see, your wand'ring flocks demand you care.
Each in his nymph thinks all perfections lie,
Yet shou'd excuse the other's partial eye.
Soon as the sun shall seek his wat'ry bed,
And tinge yon western clouds with blushing red;
Soon as the lab'ring swain shall leave the vale,
And Philomel begins her love-sick tale;
Where yonder woodbines scent the fanning breeze,
And weave their tendrils round the shady trees,
Again we'll meet, and chearful end the day
With all the nymphs and swains, in rural play:
Where, 'midst the rest, your blooming nymphs are seen,
Nor shine two lovelier fair on all the green.
