As Evening slowly spreads his mantle hoar,
No ruder sounds the bounded valley fill,
Than the faint din, from yonder sedgy shore,
Of rushing waters, and the murmuring mill.

How sunk the scene, where cloyster'd Leisure mus'd!
Where war-worn Edward paid his aweful vow;
And, lavish of magnificence, diffus'd
His crouded spires o'er the broad mountain's brow!

The golden fans, that o'er the turrets strown,
Quick-glancing to the sun, wild music made,
Are reft, and every battlement o'ergrown
With knotted thorns, and the tall sapling's shade.

The prickly thistle sheds its plumy crest,
And matted nettles shade the crumbling mass,
Where shone the pavement's surface smooth, imprest
With rich reflection of the storied glass.

Here hardy chieftains slept in proud repose,
Sublimely shrin'd in gorgeous imagery;
And through the lessening iles, in radiant rows,
Their consecrated banners hung on high.

There oxen browze, and there the sable yew
Through the dun void displays its baleful glooms;
And sheds in lingering drops ungenial dew,
O'er the forgotten graves, and scatter'd tombs.

By the slow clock, in duly-measur'd chime,
That from the airy spire full deeply toll'd,
No more the plowman counts the tedious time,
Nor distant shepherd pens his twilight fold.

High o'er the trackless heath at midnight seen,
No more the windows, rang'd in long array,
Where the tall shaft and fretted nook between
Thick ivy twines, the taper'd rites betray.

Ev'n now, amid the wavering ivy-wreaths,
(While kindred thoughts the pensive sounds inspire)
When the weak breeze in many a whisper breaths,
I seem to listen to the chanting quire.&mdash;

As o'er these shatter'd towers intent I muse,
Though rear'd by Charity's capricious zeal,
Yet can my breast soft pity's sigh refuse,
Or conscious Candour's modest plea conceal?

For though the sorceress, Superstition blind,
Amid the pomp of dreadful sacrifice,
O'er the din roofs, to cheat the tranced mind,
Oft bade her visionary gleams arise:

Though the vain hours unsocial Sloth beguil'd,
While the still cloister's gate Oblivion lock'd;
And through the chambers pale, to slumbers mild
Wan Indolence her drowsy cradle rock'd:

Yet hence, enthron'd in venerable state,
Proud Hospitality dispens'd her store:
Ah!  see, beneath yon tower's unvaulted gate,
Forlorn she sits upon the brambled floor.

Her ponderous vase, with gothic pourtraiture
Emboss'd, no more with balmy moisture flows:
Mid the mix'd shards, o'erwhelm'd in dust obscure,
No more, as erst, the golden goblet glows.

Sore beat by storms in Glory's arduous way,
Here might Ambition muse, a pilgrim sage;
Here raptur'd see, Religion's evening ray
Gild the calm walks of his reposing age.

Here antient Art her dedal fancies play'd
In the quaint mazes of the crisped roof;
In mellow glooms the speaking pane array'd,
And rang'd the cluster'd column, massy-proof.

Here Learning, guarded from a barbarous age,
Hover'd awhile, nor dar'd attempt the day;
But patient trac'd upon the pictur'd page
The holy legend, or heroic lay.

Hither the solitary minstrel came
An honour'd guest, while the grim evening sky
Hung lowering, and around the social flame
Tun'd his bold harp to tales of chivalry.

Thus sings the Muse, all pensive and alone;
Nor scorns, within the deep fane's inmost cell,
To pluck the grey moss from the mantled stone,
Some holy founder's mouldering name to spell.

Thus sings the Muse: &mdash; yet partial as she sings,
With fond regret  surveys these ruin'd piles:
And with fair images of antient things
The captive bard's obsequious mind beguiles.

But much we pardon to th' ingenuous Muse;
Her fairy shapes are trick'd by Fancy's pen:
Severer Reason forms far other views,
And scans the scene with philosophic ken.

From these deserted domes, new glories rise;
More useful institutes, adorning man,
Manners enlarg'd, and new civilities,
Or fresh  foundations build the social plan.

Science, on ampler plume, a bolder flight
Essays, escap'd from Superstition's shrine:
While freed Religion, like primeval light
Bursting from chaos, spreads her warmth  divine.
