GODDESS!   o'er me diffuse thy influence,
The world their merit owe to thee,
Their brilliant wit, their solid sense,
THOU PARENT OF ABILITY!
Or shall I say, to dare the Critic's blame
Ability, and thou, oh MEMORY!  are the same.

Whence in the Senate doth a TULLY shine!
Whence &mdash; but from thy inspiring ray!
With gems collected from thy MINE,
Where long in dark repose they lay,
Himself he decks, and with thy borrow'd light,
Transforms to lively day, th' unmeaning blank of night!

In vain may SCIENCE with her pupil stray,
Thro' ev'ry path in Learning's land;
SCIENCE may teach him to survey,
'Tis THINE to make him understand!
To stamp each image on his infant mind,
And polish fair the draught his fancy had design'd.

Bright emanation of the SOLAR VAST!
'Tis thine to range in order true
The phalanx of ideas past,
Fit to encounter, and subdue.
And into present act &mdash; then wanted most,
Bring out in close array, the formidable host.

Depriv'd of thee, how useless are the schools!
Thou active source of all that's great!
Reft of thy aid, the wise are fools,
For LOGIC cools without thy heat,
But glowing by thy flame in depth of thought,
She feels her mind expand, and finds the truth be-wrought.

Ah!  what was SWIFT! &mdash; heroic MARLBOROUGH what!
When, MEMORY!  thou withdrew thy light?
The god-like mind was all a blot,
And Nature fainted at the sight!
O thought!  to check the mad career of pride!
From which the startl'd muse with sorrow shrinks aside!

But GODDESS!  independent of the fame,
That animates the hero's soul,
That screens from death the Statesman's name,
And ranks the Bard within thy roll,
In humbler suit I woo thee to be kind,
No idle vaunter I of large, capacious mind.

Descend!  and place before my fancy's eye
The play-things of my boyish days,
(Tho' those sometimes have cost a sigh,)
My little works, my little plays,
When freed at even from my master's chain,
With MIRTH, and with my mates, I revell'd o'er the plain.

Bring each delightful, each enchanting scene,
To raise my ardent wishes high,
All that thy careful hand can glean,
And wing my spirit to the sky,
Gay RAPTURE'S long lost images renew,
And hold the landscape full, &mdash; yet fuller to my view!

But in the back-ground shouldst thou place a train
Of forms ill-featur'd, &mdash; even one,
One o'er the whole will cast a stain,
Where most I wish to meet with none.
Oh!  take the blemish'd picture far away,
Leave me, &mdash; for ever leave, &mdash; or with good humour stay!

Leave me, &mdash; ah!  no, &mdash; so soon we must not part!
That word alarms, &mdash; creates despair,
And plants a dagger in my heart,
To drink life's ebbing current there!
Stay!  for with thee, as Heav'n ordains below,
I'll quaff the bowl of joy, or drain the cup of woe!
