SCENE, A HEATH:
SEASON, SPRING; TIME, MORNING.

Fair Spring o'er Nature held her gentlest sway;
Fair Morn diffus'd around her brightest ray;
Thin mists hung hovering on the distant trees,
Or roll'd from off the fields before the breeze.
The Shepherd THERON watch'd his fleecy train,
Beneath a broad oak, on the grassy plain.
A heath's green wild lay pleasant to his view,
With shrubs and field-flowers deck'd of varied hue:
There the tall thorn its silver bloom disclos'd,
Here flexile broom's bright yellow interpos'd;
There purple orchis, here pale daisies spread,
And sweet May-lilies richest odour shed.
From many a copse and blossom'd orchard near,
The voice of birds melodious charm'd the ear;
There shrill the lark and soft the linnet sung,
And loud through air the throstle's musick rung.
The gentle Swain the chearful scene admir'd;
The chearful scene the song of Joy inspir'd.
"Chant on," he cry'd, "ye warblers on the spray!
Bleat on, ye flocks, that in the pastures play!
Low on, ye herds, that range the dewy vales!
Murmur, ye rills!  and whisper soft, ye gales!
How blest my lot, in these sweet fields assign'd,
Where Peace and Leisure sooth the tuneful mind;
Where yet some pleasing vestiges remain
Of unperverted Nature's golden reign,
When Love and Virtue rang'd Arcadian shades,
With undesigning youths and artless maids!
For us, though destin'd to a later time,
A less luxuriant soil, less genial clime,
For us the country boasts enough to charm,
In the wild woodland or the cultur'd farm.
Come, CYNTHIO, come!  in town no longer stay;
From crouds, and noise, and folly, haste away!
The fields, the meads, the trees, are all in bloom,
The vernal show'rs awake a rich perfume.
Where DAMON'S mansion, by the glassy stream,
Rears its white walls that thro' green willows gleam,
Annual the neighbours hold their shearing-day;
And blithe youths come, and nymphs in neat array:
Those shear their sheep, upon the smooth turf laid,
In the broad plane's or trembling poplar's shade;
These for their friends th' expected feast provide,
Beneath cool bowers along th' inclosure's side.
To view the toil, the glad repast to share,
Thy DELIA, my MELANIA, shall be there;
Each, kind and faithful to her faithful swain,
Loves the calm pleasures of the pastoral plain.
Come, CYNTHIO, come!  If towns and crouds invite,
And noise and folly promise high delight;
Soon the tir'd soul disgusted turns from these&mdash;
The rural prospect, only, long can please!'
