The Chapel Bell with hollow mournful sound,
Awakes the Fellows slumb'ring o'er their fires,
Rous'd by the custom'd note, each stares around,
And sullen from th' unfinish'd pipe retires.

Now from the Common-Hall's restriction free,
The sot's full bottles in quick order move,
While gayer coxcombs sip their am'rous tea,
And Barber's daughters soothe with tales of love.

Through the still courts a solemn silence reigns,
Save where the broken battlements among,
The East wind murmurs through the shatter'd panes,
And hoarser ravens croak their ev'ning song.

Where groan the shelves beneath their cum'brous weight,
Heaps pil'd on heaps, and row succeeding rowss,
In peaceful pomp, and dignified retreat,
The labors of our ancestors repose.

With them no more engaged in ceaseless toil,
The watchful student on their leaves shall pore;
For them no more shall blaze the midnight oil,
Their sun is set, and sinks to rise no more.

For them no more shall Booksellers contend,
And on the rubric posts their worth proclaim,
Beneath their weight no more the press shall bend,
While common-sense stands wond'ring at their fame.

Oft did the classics mourn their critic rage,
While still they found each meaning but the true;
Oft did they heap with notes poor Ovid's page,
And give to Virgil words he never knew.

Yet e're the partial voice of Critic scorn
With harsh severity their fate decide,
Say!  have we not like them had cause to mourn
A waste of words, and Learning ill applied?

Can none remember &mdash; yes I know all can&mdash;
When diff'rent readings against readings jarr'd,
While Bentley led the stern scholastic van,
And new editions with the old ones warr'd.

Nor ye who lightly o'er each work proceed,
Unmindful of the grave Historian's part,
Contemn these works; if as you run and read;
You find no trophies of th' engraver's art.

Can Bartolozzi's all-enchanting pow'r
To heavy works the stamp of merit give?
Can Grignion's art protract Oblivion's hour,
Or bid the Epic rage of Blackmore live?

In this lone nook with learned dust bestrew'd,
Where frequent cobwebs kindly form a shade,
Some wond'rous legend, fill'd with death, and blood;
Some Monkish history perhaps is laid.

With Store of barb'rous latin at command,
Though arm'd with puns, and jingling quibble's might;
Yet could not these sooth time's remorseless hand,
Or save their labours from eternal night.

Full many an Elegy has mourn'd its fate,
Beneath some pasty cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd;
Full many an Ode has soar'd in lofty state,
Fixed to a Kite and quiver'd in the wind.

A prey to moths, neglected here may lie
The rude memorial of some antient song,
Whose martial strains, and rugged minstrelsy;
Once with delight inspir'd each list'ning throng.

The untrod paths of learning to explore
With new ideas to enlarge the mind,
With useful lessons drawn from Classic Lore,
At once to polish and instruct mankind.

Their times forbade:  nor yet with partial hand
Their fancy only, but their faults represt;
Forbade to scatter treason o'er the land,
Or with sedition taint the youthful breast.

To gild with similies Rebellion's cause,
Like &mdash; with trope and figure at command,
Or win with &mdash; the stupid cits' applause,
With air-built projects for Utopian Land.

Their humble science never soar'd so far,
In studious trifles pleas'd to waste their time,
Or wage with common sense eternal war,
In ceaseless jingle, and perpetual rhime.

Yet were they not averse to noisy fame,
Or shrank reluctant from her ruder blast,
But still aspir'd to raise their sinking name,
And fondly hope that name might ever last.

Hence blazon'd margins greet the wond'ring eye,
And tawdry bindings glare like Tyrrel's urn,
Where Ships, Wigs, Fame, and Neptune, blended lie,
And weeping cherubs for their bodies mourn.

For who with rhimes e'er rack'd his weary brain,
Or spent in search of epithets his days,
But from his lengthen'd labours hop'd to gain
Some present profit, or some future praise.

For thee who in harsh strains and uncouth rhime
Dost in these lines neglected worth bewail,
If chance (unknowing how to kill the time)
Some kindred idler should enquire thy tale,

Haply some ancient fellow may reply,
"Oft have I seen him, from the dawn of day,
E'en till the western sun went down the sky,
Lounging his lazy listless hours away.

"Each morn he sought the cloister's cool retreat;
At noon at Tom's he caught the daily lie,
Or from his window looking o'er the street,
Would gaze upon the travellers passing by.

"At night united with a kindred band,
In smoke and ale roll'd their dull lives away;
True as the college-clock's unvarying hand,
Each morrow was the echo of to-day.

"Thus past his hours, remote from care, or strife,
Till by his relentless fate's severe command,
A lethargy assail'd his harmless life,
And check'd his course, and shook his loit'ring sand.

"Where Merton's tow'rs in Gothic grandeur rise,
And shoot around each soph a deeper gloom,
Beneath the center aisle interr'd he lies,
With these few lines engraved upon his tomb."

THE EPITAPH.
Of vice or virtue void, here rests a man
By prudence taught each rude excess to shun;
Nor love nor pity marr'd his sober plan,
And Dulness claim'd him for her fav'rite son.

By no eccentric passion led astray,
Not rash to blame, not eager to commend;
Calmly thro' life he steer'd his quiet way,
Nor made an enemy, nor gain'd a friend.

Seek not his faults &mdash; his merits &mdash; to explore,
But quickly drop the uninstructive tale;
His works &mdash; his faults &mdash; his merits &mdash; are no more&mdash;
Sunk in the gloom of dark oblivion's veil.
