I.
Oh!  for the living Lyre, that COWLEY bore
Entranc'd these rushy-fringed Banks along;
Or DENHAM!  thine, what Time the Mountain hoar
Re-echo'd to the Pleasings of thy Song;
Or POPE'S majestic Verse, which all the Nine
With all their Fire inform, and all their Art refine.

II.
'Twas here they thought, here they built th' immortal Rhyme,
Heroic WINDSOR heard their sacred Rage;
And, would they deign revisit mortal Clime,
Her old, patrician Groves must still engage:
Come then, illustrious Bards!  resume the Lay,
And consecrate to Fame AUGUSTA'S natal Day.

III.
Hark!  hark!  they come; &mdash; or does Delusion bland
Steal on my ravish'd Soul?  Yes, now I seem
To hear alternate Strains; and lo!  their Hand
Sings to their dulcet Voice.  On such a Theme,
More than Olympic Candidates for Praise,
Each to his golden Lyre warbles his willing Lays.

IV.
DENHAM.
Parody.
"Waked to new Glories by the best of Kings,
WINDSOR!  all hail!" &mdash; the lofty Denham sings&mdash;
"Mars with Astraea now inhabits here,
Valour with Justice; the romantic Spear
Is raised no more to make the guiltless bleed:
So GEORGE and genuine Honor have decreed.

"On this auspicious Day, at least, content
To be at once joyful and innocent,
I resalute thee from the Elysian Bowers,
And see more bright aspire thy Domes and Towers,
The mighty Master's Emblem, in whose Face,
Sits Meekness heightened with majestic Grace.

"Oh!  could I rise like Them, in Wit supreme,
Their great Example I, as they my Theme,
Tho' lofty, clear, tho' bold, yet accurate,
Strong, but not coarse, without exceeding, great:
Then all their Echoes, bursting into Song,
Should gratulate, at once, the festive Throng.

"But ah!  it may not be. &mdash; Yet hear my Vow,&mdash;
A Wish, a Prayer is all my Powers allow&mdash;
May, ROYAL GENTLENESS!  Improvement wait,
And sacred Science, Handmaids of THY State:
And when Perfection shall her Work survey,
And with another CHARLOTTE bless the Day;
Then may THY Praise &mdash; I prophecy it will&mdash;
Outlive THY Windsor and my Cooper's Hill."

V.
COWLEY.
Anacreontic.
"Haunts!  which all the Muses love,
What new Diana trips the Grove?&mdash;
Innocent and chaste as she,
That graced the Plains of Thessaly,
Whom of old Latona bore
On Delos' sea-encircled Shore.
This Isle, that gave HER Beauty Birth,
O'er every Isle shall raise its Worth,
Till Worlds remote revere and love
The Progeny of GEORGE and Jove.

"Boon September!  thou shalt be
Henceforth the first of Months to me;
To you I strike the loudest String,
You pay the Promise of the Spring,
Load with burnish'd Gold the Bough,
Realising every Vow&mdash;
Gave to Royal CHARLOTTE'S Throes
Pandora, but without her Woes&mdash;
Gave this welcome Holiday,
And gave the Grape to make it gay.

2.
"Bring me a Goblet deep and wide,
Capacious of the nectar'd Tide,
Go, the liquid Ruby seek,
That emulates HER Lip and Cheek;
O'er the gold Brim bid it rise,
Smiling, sparkling as HER Eyes,
Pure as flows HER Breath the Draught&mdash;
Wine that warms the Bosom thro',
As HER opening Virtues do:
Pour Libations to HER Birth,
And kiss the consecrated Earth.

"Blest, and blessing, may the Fair
All HER Mother's Graces share,
With all the Virtues of her Sire!"
He said and smote the sounding Lyre.

VI.
POPE.
Cento.
"In these deep Solitudes and awful Bowers,
Where heaven-aspiring WINDSOR lifts her Towers,
And melancholy Silence reign'd so long,
What mean this Triumph and the Voice of Song?
Hark!  how the Domes rejoice, and paean'd Air,
Is Salisbury reviv'd?  or CHARLOTTE there?

"Happy the Man, whom this bright Court approves,
His Sovereign favours, and his Country loves;
Such had I been, had Fate my Birth delay'd
Till GEORGE THE GOOD Britannia's Sceptre sway'd.
Faction, be dumb; the Patriot's Name shall hide
No more thy Envy, Avarice, and Pride;
See, round his Throne the winged Virtues spread,
Fair as the numerous Offspring of his Bed,
Ye sacred Nine, that all my Soul possess'd,
Whose Raptures fir'd me, and whose Visions bless'd,
Once more (the hallow'd Hour demands your Aid)
Be present while I greet THE ROYAL MAID:
Oh!  to this Theme your softest Numbers bring,
What Muse for CHARLOTTE can refuse to sing?

"Breathe on her Frame each Venus that inspires
The Painter's Pencil, and the Poet's Fires,
Bid her be all, that may the Soul distend,
The duteous Daughter, Sister, Patron, Friend;
Bid her be all that makes Mankind adore,
Rise to Example, shew her Mother more;
New Graces yearly let her Form display,
Soft, without Weakness, without glaring, gay;
Till each fresh Birth-day, vying with the past,
Imprint that Character no Time shall blast;
Then, oh ye Muses!  shall my Numbers roll,
Strong as her Charms and gentle as her Soul:
Fair!  Wise and Good!  resound thro' all my Lays&mdash;
Praise less than This were Mockery of Praise.

"Then to the female Saint shall Pilgrims come,
And captive Kings Here wait again their Doom,
The silver Star less honour'd than HER Charms,
And Windsor glory more in Love than Arms."

VII.
And more they sung; but how should simple Swain,
For ever studious of his pastoral Care,
Have Memory their Raptures to retain?
Or how repeat their Vows, and not impair?
Enough for him, should this weak Verse reveal
The Depth of his Respect, and Height of honest Zeal.
