Come, gentle Muse!  in pleasing strains rehearse,
Th' enchanting magic of immortal verse!
Tell how the passions, when subdu'd by thee,
Glide smooth and placid like th' untroubl'd sea.
From pen'ry's gripe, thy genuine sons preserve,
And give them all the honours they deserve;
Who merits more, the muse demands to know,
Than he whose art can mitigate your woe?
To you, ye fair!  I make my first appeal,
(Your bosoms surely wo'nt the truth conceal)
What makes your breasts with tender pity heave,
When on the stage you MONIMIA grieve?
Or when you view the penetential fair,
Her woes participate, and drop the tear;
Can ought amuse amid the dire distress?
E'en gay LOTHARIO does not please you less.
The muse's pow'r can chastest hearts alarm,
And even lend to perfidy a charm.

When you, ye fair, at intervals peruse,
The tender sentiments of SAPPHO'S Muse;
Or with attentive eye, the page survey,
Where sweet ELOISA pours the plaintive lay;
Ye must confess, that merit does belong
To equal numbers, and to lofty song.
Thus self-convicted, can the cruel fair
Consign the bard to pen'ry and despair?
Must he, whose art can sooth the virgin's woe,
Be less regarded than the empty beau?
Can barren expletives deserve your care,
And empty chit-chat entertain the fair?
Must the dark stair-case be the poet's doom,
Whilst worthless coxcombs flutter round the room?
Forbid it ladies &mdash; drive the fopling hence,
And let respect be shewn to men of sense.

Ye British youths, who sport in PINDUS' shades,
And hold soft dalliance with th' AONIAN maids;
Say, is there ought that can amuse the mind,
Or fire the soul, like sentiment refin'd?
Can you with languor SPENCER'S strains rehearse,
Or be unmov'd with MILTON'S lofty verse?
What heart-felt pity does the muse excite,
When that sweet bard bewails his loss of sight?
The laureal wreath to MILTON must belong,
No poet since has equal'd him in song.

Thou too, who sprung'st from AVON'S gentle stream,
Hast strokes of nature blended in each theme;
But horrid scenes will virtuous minds alarm,
Whilst milder images are sure to charm.
Hence THOMPSON'S lays will never fail to please,
While Spring's gay beauties blossom on the trees.
Each tender tale must every heart engage,
And young LAVINIA charm each future age.
What ease and dignity thy lines convey,
Thou friend to truth, thou much lamented GAY.
But thou O YOUNG!  whom virtue must admire,
What heav'n born seraph gave thy muse its fire?
Thy powerful muse can each illusion chace,
While dissipation hides her pallid face;
Thy magic lays, the kindred passions draw,
And even profligates are struck with awe.

Now since the muse has such a power to charm,
To cure the spleen, or frantic rage disarm;
Can you, in gratitude, your aid refuse,
To patronise the vot'ries of the muse?
Is nothing due to him whose magic power,
Conspires to recreate the lonely hour?
Must knavish jugglers too, your favours share,
Whilst bards (camelion-like) subsist on air?
Must idle vagrants gain the highest prize,
Whose only merit is, "to cheat your eyes?"
Are those neglected, who, with ardent care,
Have caught the landscape of the changeful year?
Who, with inspection keen, trace nature through,
And, grateful, hold the portrait to your view.
When youthful spring, no longer charms the eye,
And summer months, no genial warmth supply;
When nature's vest no more the flowers adorn,
Nor thrush nor lark, conspire to chear the morn,
When nipping frost, the purling rill congeals,
And the starv'd nymph, but half her face reveals;
No chilling blasts can the soul's current freeze,
The muse has still her genuine charms to please.
Small are the joys that cribbage can dispense,
And love of cards betrays the want of sense;
Delicious banquets leave a sting behind,
But mental feasts, invigorate the mind;
True sterling wit can every care controul,
And touch the finer movements of the soul:
Attend the lays &mdash; you'l in idea, find
Spring's lovely aspect pictur'd on the mind.
Or shou'd your curious eye the page explore,
Where rocking whirlwinds drive the ships on shore;
When ocean's azure god, with awful brow,
Bids all the wat'ry pow'rs beneath him bow;
Tho' earthquakes dire shou'd nature's face deform,
In tuneful ease you'll view the ideal storm.
Thus can the muse the coldest breast enflame,
And on the frigid soul engrave her deathless name!
