But while the bounds of Hist'ry you explore, 
And bring new Treasures from her farthest shore, 
Thro' all her various fields, tho' large and wide, 
Still make Simplicity thy constant guide: 
And most, my Friend, a Syren's wiles beware, 
Ah!  shun insidious Allegory's snare! 
Her Flattery offers an alluring wreath, 
Fair to the eye, but poisons lurk beneath, 
By which, too lightly tempted from his guard, 
Full many a Painter dies, and many a Bard. 
How sweet her voice, how dangerous her spell, 
Let SPENCER'S Knights, and RUBENS' Tritons tell; 
Judgment at colour'd riddles shakes his head, 
And fairy Songs are prais'd, but little read; 
Where, in the Maze of her unbounded Sphere, 
Unbridled Fancy runs her wild Career.

In Realms where Superstition's Tyrant sway 
"Takes half the vigour of the soul away,"
Let Art for subjects the dark Legend search,
Where Saints unnumber'd people every Church;
Let Painters run the wilds of OVID o'er,
To hunt for monsters which we heed no more.
But here, my ROMNEY, where, on Freedom's wings,
The towering Spirit to Perfection springs,
Where Genius, proud to act as Heav'n inspires,
On Taste's pure Altars lights his sacred Fires;
Oh!  here let Painting, as of old in GREECE,
With patriot passions warm the finish'd piece,
Let BRITAIN, happy in a gen'rous Race,
Of manly Spirit, and of female Grace,
Let this frank Parent with fond eyes explore,
Some just memorials of the line she bore,
In tints immortal to her view recall
Her dearest Offspring on the storied Wall.

But some there are, who, with pedantic scorn,
Despise the Hero, if in BRITAIN born:
For them Perfection has herself no charms,
Without a Roman Robe, or Graecian arms:
Our slighted Country, for whose Fame they feel
No generous Interest, no manly Zeal,
Sees public Judgment their false Taste arraign,
And treat their cold contempt with due disdain;
To the fair Annals of our Isle we trust,
To prove this patriot indignation just,
And nobly partial to our native earth,
Bid English Pencils honour English Worth.

Forgive the Muse, if haply she commend
A Theme ill-chosen to her skilful Friend;
She, tho' its pow'r commands her willing heart,
Knows not the limits of thy lovely Art,
Yet boldly owns an eager wish to see,
Her darling Images adorn'd by thee.

Shall BAYARD, glorious in his dying hour,
Of Gallic Chivalry the fairest Flow'r,
Shall his pure Blood in British colours flow,
And BRITAIN, on her canvas, fail to shew
Her wounded SIDNEY, BAYARD'S perfect peer,
SIDNEY, her Knight, without Reproach or Fear,
O'er whose pale corse heroic Worth should bend,
And mild Humanity embalm her Friend!
Oh!  ROMNEY, in his hour of Death we find
A Subject worthy of thy feeling Mind;
Methinks I see thy rapid Hand display
The field of ZUTPHEN on that fatal day,
When arm'd for Freedom, 'gainst the guilt of SPAIN,
The Hero bled upon the Belgic plain!
In that great moment thou hast caught the Chief,
When pitying Friends supply the wish'd relief,
While Sickness, Pain, and Thirst his pow'r subdue,
I feel the draught he pants for in his view:
Near him the Soldier that expiring lies,
This precious Water views with ghastly eyes,
With eyes that from their sockets seem to burst,
With eager, frantic, agonizing Thirst:
I see the Hero give, oh!  generous Care!
The Cup untasted to this silent Pray'r;
I hear him say, with Tenderness  divine,
"Thy strong Necessity surpasses mine."

Shall Roman charity for ever share
Thro' every various School each Painter's Care?
And BRITAIN still her bright examples hide
Of female Glory, and of filial Pride?
Instruct our eyes, my ROMNEY, to adore
Th' heroic Daughter of the virtuous MORE,
Resolv'd to save, or in th' attempt expire,
The precious relicts of her martyr'd Sire:
Before the cruel Council let her stand,
Press the dear ghastly Head with pitying Hand,
And plead, while Bigotry itself grows mild,
The sacred duties of a grateful Child.

Oh!  let the Sisters, who, with friendly aid,
The Grecian Lyre, and Grecian Pencil sway'd,
Who join'd their rival Powers with fond delight,
To grace each other with reflected Light,
Let them in BRITAIN thus united reign,
And double lustre from that union gain!
Not that my Verse, adventurous, would pretend
To point each varied subject to my Friend;
Far nobler guides their better aid supply:
When mighty SHAKESPEAR to thy judging eye
Presents that magic Glass, whose ample Round
Reflects each Figure in Creation's bound,
And pours in floods of supernatural light
Fancy's bright Beings on the charmed sight.
This chief Inchanter of the willing breast,
Will each thee all the magic he possest.
Plac'd in his Circle, mark in colours true
Each brilliant Being that he calls to view:
Wrapt in the gloomy storm, or rob'd in light,
His weird Sister, or his fairy Sprite,
Boldly o'erleaping, in the great design,
The bounds of Nature, with a Guide divine.

Let MILTON'S self, conductor of thy way,
Lead thy congenial spirit to portray
In Colours, like his Verse, sublimely strong,
The scenes that blaze in his immortal song.

Behold his MICHAEL drawn divinely bright,
In all the Splendor of angelic Might!
But oh!  how poor the prostrate SATAN lies,
With bestial form debas'd and goatish eyes!
How chang'd from him who leads the dire debate,
Fearless tho' fall'n, and in Ruin great!
Let thy bold Pencil more sublimely true,
Present is Arch Apostate to our view,
In worthier Semblance of infernal Pow'r,
And proudly standing like a stately tow'r,
While his infernal mandate bids awake
His Legions, slumbering on the burning Lake.

Or paint him falling from the Realms of Bliss,
Hurl'd in Combustion to the deep Abyss!
In light terrific let the Flash display
His Pride, still proof against almighty Sway:
Tho' vanquis'd, yet immortal, let his Eye
The Lightning's flame, the Thunder's bolt defy,
And still, with Looks of Execration, dare
To face the Horrors of the last Despair.

To these great Lords of Fancy's wide domain,
That o'er the human Soul unquestion'd reign,
To their superior Guidance be consign'd
Thy rival Pencil and congenial Mind.
Yet O!  let Friendship, ere the Verse she close,
Which in just Tribute to thy Merit flows,
The sanguine wishes of her heart express,
With fond presages of thy full Success.
