Now rag'd the sultry Dog-Star in the Sky,
And the hot Sun darted his fiercest Ray,
The Apple now was stain'd with ruddier Dye,
And melting Pears bent down the leafy Spray;
The painted Goldfinch sung the live-long Day;
'Twas now the Pride, the Manhood of the Year,
What time the Farmer's Hopes his ripening Harvests chear.

The Sun was gleaming in the midst of Day,
Dead, still the Air, and still the Welkin Blue,
When from the Sea arose, in drear Array,
Thick Clouds, full fraught, of sullen Hue,
Which hastily towards the Woodland drew,
O'ershadowing sudden the Sun's chearful Face,
And the dark Tempest gather'd round apace.

Beneath an Elm, fast by a Pathway side,
Which to Saint Godwin's Holy Convent led,
For Shelter from the storm a Pilgrim hied;
Forlorn in Look, and clad in tatter'd Weed,
As one long pincht and near worn-out with Need.&mdash;
Where from the pelting Storm shall Mis'ry flee
To real Want few Doors will opened be.

Look at his faded Cheek!  his Count'nance wan!
How woe-begone, how wither'd, and downcast!
"Hasten to thy warm Home, afflicted Man!"
To the Grave rather, thy sole Refuge haste!
For cold, and dark, as that sad Place of Rest,
Is Charity. &mdash; The Rich and Mighty bear
No Bowels for thy Woes, nor ought for others Suff'rings care.

Now the full Storm is ripe, the big Drops fall;
The thirsty Meadows smoke with drenching Rain:
Lightnings, quick-flashing, Flocks and Herds appal:
The whistling Winds are up &mdash; to and again
The tall Trees rock &mdash; and hark!  wide o'er the Plain
Roars the deep Thunder &mdash; now with hollow roll,
Now with re-echoing Rattle tost from Pole to Pole.

Spurring his Palfry o'er the watry Plain,
The Abbot of St. Godwin's Convent came;
His Chapournet was drenched by the Rain,
His glistering Girdle met with mickle Shame;
Backward he told the Beads, vexed at the same.
The Storm encreases, and he turns aside,
There, where the Pilgrim from its Fury sought to hide.

His Cope was all of Lincoln Cloth so fine,
With a gold Button fasten'd to his Chin;
His upper cloak was edged with gold Twine,
His peaked Shoes a Lover's might have been;
Full well they shew'd that he thought Cost was no Sin.
His plump Steed shar'd both in his Pride and Plight,
With Ribbons and quaint Knots his Head was dight.

"An Alms, Sir Priest," the dripping Pilgrim said;
"Oh!  let me wait within your Convent Door,
Till the Sun shines again above our Head,
And the loud Tempest of the Air is o'er.
Helpless and old am I, alas!  and poor,
No house, no Friend, no Money in my Pouch,
All I can call my own, this simple Ebon Crouch."

"Varlet!" replied the Abbot, "cease your Din!
This is no Season Alms and Prayer to give!
My Abbey-Porter lets no Vagrants in,
None grace my Board who not in Honour live."
And now the Sun with the black Clouds did strive,
And on the Ground casting his chearful Ray,
Sir Abbot spurr'd his Steed and eftsoons rode away.

Again the Sky grew black, The thunder roll'd;
Fast running o'er the Plain a Priest was seen;
Nor dight full proud, nor buttoned in Gold;
His Cope and Cloak were grey, and coarse, tho' clean;
A Village Priest he was, of income mean.
Forth from the Pathway-Side quick turned he,
With the poor Pilgrim glad to share the Shelter of the Tree.

"An alms, Sir Priest!"  the dripping Pilgrim cry'd,
"For sweet Saint Mary, and for Pity's sake!"
Strait the good Priest his leathern Pouch unty'd,
And thereout did a Groat of Silver take,
While he his sad Companion thus bespake:
"Here!  take this Silver!  it may Ease thy Woe,
We are God's Stewards all, and help to Mis'ry owe.

"But ah, thou wretched Man!  few wilt thou find,
Who for their dread Account in Time prepare!
Here!  take my Semi-cope! &mdash; the searching Wind
Aggrieves thine aged Limbs shiv'ring and bare."
So saying forth he on his Way doth fare.&mdash;
Virgin!  and all ye Saints in Heav'n's high Bow'r,
Or give the mighty Will, or give the good Man Pow'r!
