O Thou!  that on the sapphire throne
Of glory seated, look'st on human race
With eyes of tenderest love!  still deign to own,
Tho' much their madness slight thy proffer'd grace,
The sons of thoughtless ALBION!  Write thy law
Fresh in their Hearts!  that now, on blood intent,
With complicated vengeance, strive to draw
The thunders down of Heaven's keen punishment!
Plac'd at the dread right-hand of POWER-SUPREME,
Extend thy mercy still!  still mighty to redeem!

Black with no crimes of common dye,
No common woes involve a guilty land:
Revengeful War's loud clangours rend the sky,
Terror and frantic Rage around her stand.
Afflicted Commerce flies to happier shores,
With Peace retiring, courts the prosperous gale;
The sad secession Industry deplores,
And mutual confidence and plenty fail.
Pale Want and dark Distrust and deadly Fear
A gloomier hour portend and evils more severe!

See War stalk forth with giant stride!
Far o'er the western wave she bends her course;
In brother's bloom her gory garments dy'd!
While Britons Britons meet with hostile force.
Ah what avail, to stem the rising flame
That civil Discord's baleful torch supplies,
Or Reason's voice, or Nature's feeble claim,
Or ancient amity, or Kindred ties!
Vain, useless all!  the raging daemon reigns
From cold Canadia's hills to Georgia's distant plains.

Ah!  better far, in ocean's breast
If undiscover'd still those regions lay!
If still no pilot, turning to the west,
Pursued the star of eve's retiring ray!
In evil hour, alas, ill-fated land!
The bold Ligurian first thy coast explor'd,
With prow adventurous sought thy unknown strand,
And midst thy wondering sons his navy moor'd.
Soon as the prosperous bark in triumph rode,
With more than mortal hopes his bosom glow'd.

What varied wonder fill'd his mind,
All EDEN rising to his raptur'd view!
Here dwelt, he deems, the first of human kind,
And here the trees of life and knowledge grew.
THE ISLES OF BLISS now bloom to Fancy's eye:
But that no dragon guards their fruits of gold;
'Tis here, he thinks, those blissful islands lie,
Nor doubts the dream that fabling bards have told.
The bright illusion on his Mind imprest,
Hesperian Groves he sees, the Mansions of the blest!

A splendid vision, soon to fade!
Ah might he now the sad reverse behold!
In vain those groves extend their blissful shade,
In vain they glow with vegetable gold!
In vain hath Industry, with noble strife,
O'er peeping Nature wav'd his potent wand;
And, as her features softened into life,
Smiled o'er the works of his creative hand.
In vain the rising Arts unfold their plan,
Whate'er or life adorns, or dignifies the man.

What, tho' Religion's morning-ray
Chace from the western world the shades of night?
In vain, from darkness bursting into day,
Astonish'd tribes adore the wond'rous light.
Must then no more that morning-ray, so pure,
To blinded Ignorance its light supply ?
Alas!  that Britons should that Light obscure!
And quench in blood the Day-spring from on high!
From Nature's simple path mislead the blind,
And prompt to deeds of Hell the unenlighten'd mind!

Lo!  now, arous'd to savage war,
Their horrid rites begin; the chiefs advance:
Hark!  their wild orgies echo from afar!
Their songs of death, that time the warriour-dance!
Their orgies ended, forth with silent tread
They steal along beneath the veil of night,
In coward murder bent, alike they dread
The glare of day or foe prepar'd to fight.
Now with light leaves they  strew the trackless way;
Now couching creep along to spring upon their prey.

Perchance, in that unguarded hour
When wearied Nature sinks in sweet repose,
Some parent, bound by sleep's subduing power,
Awhile forgets his own and country's woes:
Kind Fancy paints to his deluded sight
His infants sporting where no foes molest;
Their looks contemplating with fond delight,
He clasps the smiling mother to his breast.
His lighten'd heart the flattering dream beguiles,
And golden harvests wave, and Peace returning smiles.

Ah dream delusive!  soon to end!
The human fiends now spread destruction wide:
Hither their desolating course they bend,
With Death that walks in darkness at their side!
The yell, that rends th' affrighted air,
Proclaims with savage sound their purpose done.
With rage of hell the mangled limbs they tear!
With rage of hell, from blood to blood they run
Carnage and conflagration mark their way;
Youth, age, and beauty fall, an unresisting prey.

Yet infants hold no forfeit life&mdash;
They, sinless Beings!  surely 'scape the foe!
Their little hands provoke no hostile strife;
Save smiling innocence, no arms they know!
With tears, that more than speak, they surely move
The murderer's breast, recalling nature's law;
Or melt to mercy with their looks of love,
The heart, now milder than the milk they draw!
In vain &mdash; their little tears shall not avail!
Nor Innocence &mdash; their coat of mail!

And see, where feeble age extends
His nerveless arm!  to ward th' impending blow;
He vainly tries!  th' impending blow descends!
Subdu'd he falls beneath th' insulting foe!
Alas!  life's evening hop'd a brighter close!
Not these the promises that nature gave!
He fondly thought, with glory to repose
Belov'd and honour'd in the peaceful grave.
His grave, alas, the vulture shall supply!
Bleach'd by the parching winds his bones unbury'd lie!

Yet Beauty meets a milder doom&mdash;
Yet female weakness bends the stubborn soul&mdash;
In vain, or sex shall plead, or beauty bloom:
Their furious passions feel no soft controul.
Perchance e'en now, in yon sequester'd bower
Some maid shall listen to her lover's voice,
In thought anticipate the golden hour,
When holy rites shall sanctify her choice.
Vows of long love she breathes, with fondest breath!
Ah!  soon to cancel all those vows in death!

E'en now she hears the ambush'd foe:
What sound, she starting cries, pervades my ear?
In yonder moonlight glade it lingers slow&mdash;
No foe insidious surely lurking near!
Suspect, the youth replies, no base design;
Our safe retreat what prying foe shall find?
'Twas but the whisper of the murmuring pine,
Or distant waters sounding in the wind.
Her fears remov'd, he thinks no danger nigh,
And reads fresh transports in her smiling eye.

Alas!  that eye shall smile no more!
No more that lovely cheek with beauty glow!
In graceful negligence no more shall flow
Those waving ringlets stiff with clotted gore!
The wolves of war now rend that flowing hair!
Impending o'er their agonizing prize,
With gnashing unrelenting fangs they tear
The horrid trophy of their victories!
This sees the youth expiring as he lies,
With aggravated horror sees and dies!

O BRITONS, fam'd for gentle Hearts!
On guilty cheeks let conscious blushes rise!
At deeds like these revolting nature starts,
And mild Humanity recoils and dies.
In crimes of deepest dye no longer share:
Ungenerous BRITONS, spare your country's shame!
Your injur'd country's faded glory spare,
Nor thus to infamy consign her name!
Be her's the praise, than Valour's greater far,
With Clemency's kind hand to sooth the woes of war.

Vain hope!  e'en now new horrors rise!
New modes of brutal warfare unexplor'd!
In English hands the scourge of fury flies,
And flames devour the remnant of the sword.
In English hearts disgraceful triumph reigns,
As wide the streams of desolation spread.
Not such the chief, that on Germania's plains
His country's valiant sons to victory led!
To conquer less ambitious than to save,
He wash'd with pitying tears th' unwilling wounds he gave.

Ah!  surely dead to human woe
Their iron hearts, that deeds like these approve!
All future Hope they surely must forego,
Nor fear a vindicating Power above!
And yet &mdash; to Heaven they bow the suppliant knee,
And breathe the formal prayer with lips defiled;
And yet &mdash; they lift their blood-stain'd hands to Thee,
To Thee, meek Saviour, merciful and mild!
And yet &mdash; to Thee those hands they DARE to shew!
To Thee, who did'st COMMAND affection to the foe!

Man's guardian friend!  at Pity's call
Once more thy spirit in their hearts renew!
And, O may Heaven, whose mercy stoops to all,
Their crimes forgive! &mdash; they know not what they do!
In rival breasts awake thy law of Love!
From Thee all human hope, all comfort springs!
The mutual wound's keen anguish to remove,
Arise once more with healing on thy wings!
So may each doubt dissolve, all Discord cease,
And kindred nations bow before THE PRINCE OF PEACE!
