'Twas Night &mdash; when Chaos spreads her sooty veil,
And solemn horrors stalk with pensive gloom,
When yawning vaults disgorge their spectres pale,
And sweating yews fret o'er the clay-cold tomb:

No crescent moon shred round a silver ray,
Or glist'ning stars shot forth a twinkling gleam;
No distant glimm'ring of a mimic day
Danc'd thro' the windows in an airy beam.

Hush'd was the world &mdash; in solemn silence laid,
Save where the surly deep-mouth's watchdog growl'd;
Or bellowing savages roar'd thro' the glade,
Or prowling wolves with meagre hunger howl'd.

'Twas when short slumbers Reason's pow'rs restrain,
And frantic dreams the frozen blood congeal;
When airy visions skim before the brain,
And shadowy objects o'er the senses steal!

Methought, that cries tumultuous pierc'd my ears;
The din increas'd that first broke from afar;
My hair erected stood with chilling fears,
And thunder loud spoke elemental war.

I look'd, and lo!  a heap of helmets pil'd,
And rattling hauberks stain'd with clotted gore!
Whilst racks and tortures spread a desert wild,
And mould'ring sculls return'd a horrid roar.

Whilst thus I mus'd, a diabolic knell
Spread wild dismay and terror all around:
The Furies left their bloody caves in Hell,
And sprang terrific from the yawning ground.

A dreadful structure rose upon this base,
That lowr'd with dangling chains, and dead men's bones;
Tremendous threats fill'd up the mediate space,
The ghastly palace rang with hallow'd groans.

On high Queen Madness sat, in grisly pride,
Her redden'd eye-balls roll'd in livid blood,
With writhing serpents knitted round her side,
By frantic Rage and Pride supported stood.

Fast by her throne, with bloody baleful axe,
Roar'd envious Spite, and ever-throbbing Pain;
And black Despair, that ever &mdash; ever racks
In endless woe the hot-distracted brain.

Gasping with spleen and rage, was Faction there
Presum'd the palm of Liberty to hold;
Pale Envy gnaw'd her with dismay and fear,
And pois'nous snakes wreath'd round her ghastly fold!

The gloomy Queen wrung her red fetter'd hands,
And breath'd keen vengeance with a ghastly writhe;
She clank'd her steely chains, her brazen hands,
And gnash'd the manacles with grinding teeth.

Full oft' the pois'nous film of snakes she chew'd,
And suck's the vitals of her human foes;
Her yawning mouth with blackest gore imbru'd,
And she condemn'd to hideous inward throes.

Round the black scaffold, where she sat enthron'd,
(Engender'd by her sulph'rous noisome breath)
Craz'd Grief, wan Care, and Frenzy ever groan'd,
And gnaw'd her throne &mdash; the charnel house of Death.

Methought the Queen, whilst thus I pensive stood,
With hollow voice and broken accent said,
"Ye sullen pow'rs that prey on human blood,
In ghastly bands yon envy'd Isle invade.

"Thou Faction, thou shalt lift thy mortal head,
Whilst Spite, Rage, Envy, swell thy num'rous band;
And Pride to Pain, Despair and Vengeance lead,
Whilst Grief, Care, Frenzy, Death's attendants, stand."

So spoke the Queen. &mdash; I heard a horrid noise
Of Evils hast'ning &mdash; ghastly in their stalk;
Each to his office call'd by Faction's voice,
And with a horrid shudd'ring I awoke.
