Why art thou fled, O blest poetic time,
When Fancy wrought the miracles of Rhyme;
When, darting from her star-encircled throne,
Her Poet's eye commanded worlds unknown;
When, by her fiat made a mimic God,
He saw Existence waiting on his nod,
And at his pleasure into being brought
New shadowy hosts, the vassals of his thought,
In Joy's gay garb, in Terror's dread array,
Darker than night, and brighter than the day;
Who, at his bidding, thro' the wilds of air,
Rais'd willing mortals far from earthly care,
And led them wondering thro' his wide domain,
Beyond the bounds of Nature's narrow reign;
While their rapt spirits, in the various flight,
Shook with sucessive thrills of new delight?
Return, sweet season, grac'd with Fiction's flowers,
Let not cold System cramp thy genial powers!
Shall mild Morality, in garb uncouth,
The housewife garb of plain and homely Truth,
Robb'd by stern Method of her rosy crown,
Chill her faint votaries by a wintry frown?
No; thou sweet friend of Man, as suits thee best,
Shine forth in Fable's rich-embroider'd vest!
O make my Verse thy vehicle, thy arms,
To spread o'er social life thy potent charms!
And thou, SOPHROSYNE, mysterious Sprite!
If haply I may trace thy steps aright,
Roving thro' paths untrod by mortal feet,
To paint for human eyes thy heavenly seat,
Shed on my soul some portion of that power,
Which sav'd SERENA in the trying hour,
To bear those trials, which, however hard,
As Bards all tell us, may befall the Bard;
The fop's pert jest, the Critic's frown severe,
Learning's proud cant, with Envy's artful sneer,
And, the vext Poet's last and worst disgrace,
His cold blank Bookseller's rhyme-freezing face.
Hence!   ye dark omens, that to Spleen belong,
Ye shall not check the current of my song,
While Beauty's lovely race, for whom I sing,
Fire my warm hand to strike the ready string.

As Quiet now her lightest mantle laid
O'er the still senses of the sleeping Maid,
Her nightly Visitant, her faithful Guide,
Descends in all her Empyrean pride;
That Fairy shape no more she deigns to wear,
Whose light foot smooths the furrow plough'd by care
In mortal faces, while her tiny spear
Gives a kind tingle to the caution'd ear.
Now, in her nobler shape, of heavenly size,
She strikes her votary's soul with new surprise.
Jove's favourite daughter, arm'd in all his powers,
Appear'd less brilliant to th' attending Hours,
When, on the golden car of Juno rais'd,
In heavenly pomp the Queen of Battles blaz'd:
With all her lustre, but without the dread
Which from her arm the frowning Gorgon shed,
SOPHROSYNE descends, with guardian love,
To waft her gentle Ward to worlds above.
From her fair brow a radiant diadem
Rose in twelve stars, and every separate gem
Shot magic rays, of virtue to controul
Some passion hostile to the human soul.
Round her sweet form a robe of aether flow'd,
And in a wonderous car the smiling Spirit rode;
Firm as pure ivory, it charm'd the sight
With finer polish and a softer white.
The hand of Beauty, with an easy swell,
Scoop'd the free concave like a bending shell;
And on its rich exterior, Art display'd
The triumphs of the Power the car convey'd.
Here, in celestial tints, surpassing life,
Sate lovely Gentleness, disarming Strife;
There, young Affection, born of tender Thought,
In rosy chains the fiercer Passions caught;
Ambition, with his sceptre snapt in twain,
And Avarice, scorning what his chests contain.
Round the tame Vulture flies the fearless Dove;
Soft Innocence embraces playful Love;
And laughing Sport, the frolic Child of Air,
Buries in flowers the sinking form of Care.

These figures, pencil'd with a touch so light,
That every image seem'd an heavenly Sprite,
Breathe on the car; whose sight-enchanting frame
Four wheels sustain, of pale and purple flame;
For no fleet animals, to earth unknown,
Bear thro' aetherial fields this flying throne.
As by the subtle electrician's skill,
Globes seem to fly, obedient to his will;
So these four circles of instinctive fire
Move by the impulse of their Queen's desire.
Mount or descend by her directing care,
Or rest, supported by the buoyant air.

Now, springing from her car, that hovering staid
High in the chamber of the sleeping Maid,
The Goddess, with a voice divinely clear,
Breath'd these kind accents in her Votary's ear:&mdash;
"Come, my fair Champion, who so well haft fought
The useful battles of contentious Thought;
To aid thy gentle spirit to sustain
The final conflict of thy destin'd pain,
View the rewards that, in my realms of bliss,
Wait the sweet Victor in such war as this!
So haply may thy mind, with strength renew'd,
The dark devices of the Fiend elude;
By one blest effort seal thy triumphs past,
And gain thy promis'd guerdon in the last."

As thus she spake, her heavenly arms embrac'd,
And in the car the conscious Maiden plac'd.
Quick at her wish the flaming wheels ascend,
No clouds impede them, wheresoe'er they bend.
As thro' the empire of the winds they rush'd,
The winds were all in mute submission hush'd:
And now SERENA, from th' exalted car,
Look'd down, astonish'd, on each sinking star;
Flying o'er lucid orbs, whose distant light
Yet has not reach'd the scope of human sight;
And now, not distant from the bounds of Space,
The guardian Sprite suspends their rapid race;
And, while in deep amaze the Nymph admires
The circling meteors' inoffensive fires,
Pleas'd at her wonder, the mild Power addrest,
With kind intelligence, her earthly guest:&mdash;
"Of those three Orbs, that in yon crystal sphere
A separate system in themselves appear,
The last, whose luminous and steady form
Shines softly bright, and moderately warm,
Contains my palace, and the gentle train
Whom I have wasted to this pure domain.
At equal distance my dominions lie
From these two larger worlds, more near thine eye:
Observe their difference as our wheels advance,
And passing, take of each a transient glance."

So speaking, to the grosser globe she sprung,
Her car suspended o'er its surface hung,
In heavy air; for round this orb was roll'd
A circling vapour, dull, and damp, and cold.
"Here," says SOPHROSYNE, "those Beings dwell,
Who wanted soul to act or ill or well;
Who saunter'd thoughtless thro' their mortal time,
Without a Care, a Virtue, or a Crime;
Here still they saunter, in this languid scene:
But pass the dozing crowd, and mark their Queen."
And now, slow riding on a Tortoise' back,
Her features lifeless, and each fibre slack,
Full in their view the Nymph Indifference came;
The quick SERENA soon perceiv'd her name;
For, as in solemn creeping state she rode,
In her lax hand she held fair GREVILLE'S ode.
Ne'er did the muse from her sweet treasure cull
Incense so precious for a Power so dull.
Still as she mov'd along her even way,
The heavy Goddess try'd to read the lay;
But at each pause her inattentive eye
Stray'd from the paper, which she held awry;
Nor could her lips a single line repeat,
Tho' the soft Verse, most ravishingly sweet,
Thro' Time's just ear will lasting pleasure spread,
And charm the poppy from Oblivion's head.
Thus, like a City Mayor, whose heavy barge
Steers its dull progress at the public charge,
This Power, so cumber'd by her empire's weight,
Makes her slow circuit round her sluggish state.
Around her, tribes of rambling Sceptics crawl,
Tho' moving, dubious if they move at all.
Before her, languid Pomp, her Marshal, creeps,
Whose hand her banner half unfolded keeps:
Its quaint device her dull dominion spoke&mdash;
An Eagle, numb'd by the Torpedo's stroke.

"Enough of scenes so foreign to thy soul,"
SOPHROSYNE exclaim'd; "from this dark goal
Pass we to regions opposite to this."
She spoke; and, darting o'er the wide abyss,
Her car, like lightning in soft flashes hurl'd,
Shot to the confines of a clearer world.
Now lovelier views the Virgin's mind absorb;
For now they hover'd o'er a lucid orb.
Here the soft air, luxuriantly warm,
Imparts new lustre to SERENA'S form:
Her eyes with more expressive radiance speak,
And richer roses open on her cheek.
Here, as she gaz'd, she felt in every vein
A blended thrill of pleasure and of pain;
Yet every object glittering in her view,
Her quick regard with soft attraction drew.
SOPHROSYNE, who saw the gentle Fair
Lean o'er these confines with peculiar care,
Smil'd at the tender interest she display'd,
And spoke regardful of the pensive Maid;
"Well may'st thou bend o'er this congenial sphere;
For Sensibility is Sovereign here.
Thou seest her train of sprightly damsels sport,
Where the soft Spirit holds her rural court;
But fix thine eye attentive to the plain,
And mark the varying wonders of her reign."
As thus she spoke, she pois'd her airy seat
High o'er a plain exhaling every sweet;
For round its precincts all the flowers that bloom
Fill'd the delicious air with rich perfume;
And in the midst a verdant throne appear'd,
In simplest form by graceful Fancy rear'd,
And deck'd with flowers; not such whose flaunting dyes
Strike with the strongest tint our dazzled eyes;
But those wild herbs that tenderest fibres bear,
And shun th' approaches of a damper air.
Here stood the lovely Ruler of the scene,
And Beauty, more than Pomp, announc'd the Queen.
The bending Snow-drop, and the Briar-rose,
The simple circle of her crown compose;
Roses of every hue her robe adorn,
Except th' insipid Rose without a thorn.
Thro' her thin vest her heighten'd beauties shine;
For earthly gauze was never half so sine.
Of that enchanting age her figure seems,
When smiling Nature with the vital beams
Of vivid Youth, and Pleasure's purple flame,
Gilds her accomplish'd work, the Female frame,
With rich luxuriance tender, sweetly wild,
And just between the Woman and the Child.
Her fair left arm around a vase she flings,
From which the tender plant Mimosa springs:
Towards its leaves, o'er which she fondly bends,
The youthful Fair her vacant hand extends
With gentle motion, anxious to survey
How far the feeling fibres own her sway:
The leaves, as conscious of their Queen's command,
Successive fall at her approaching hand;
While her soft breast with pity seems to pant,
And shrinks at every shrinking of the plant.

Around their Sovereign, on the verdant ground,
Sweet airy Forms in mystic measures bound.
The mighty master of the revel, Love,
In notes more soothing than his mother's Dove,
Prompts the soft strain that melting virgins sing,
Or sportive trips around the frolic ring,
Coupling, with radiant wreaths of lambent fire,
Fair fluttering Hope and rapturous Desire.
Unnumber'd damsels different charms display,
Pensive with bliss, or in their pleasures gay;
And the wide prospect yields one touching sight
Of tender, yet diversified delight.
But, the bright triumphs of their joy to check,
In the clear air there hangs a dusky speck;
It swells &mdash; it spreads &mdash; and rapid, as it grows,
O'er the gay scene a chilling shadow throws.
The soft SERENA, who beheld its flight,
Suspects no evil from a cloud so light;
For harmless round her the thin vapours wreath,
Not hiding from her view the scene beneath;
But ah!  too soon, with Pity's tender pain,
She saw its dire effect o'er all the plain:
Sudden from thence the sounds of Anguish flow,
And Joy's sweet carols end in shrieks of woe:
The wither'd flowers are fall'n, that bloom'd so fair,
And poison all the pestilential air.
From the rent earth dark Demons force their way,
And make the sportive revellers their prey.
Here gloomy Terror, with a shadowy rope,
Seems, like a Turkish Mute, to strangle Hope;
There jealous Fury drowns in blood the fire
That sparkled in the eye of young Desire;
And lifeless Love lets merciless Despair
From his crush'd frame his bleeding pinions tear.
But pangs more cruel, more intensely keen,
Wound and distract their sympathetic Queen:
With fruitless tears she o'er their misery bends;
From her sweet brow the thorny Rose she rends,
And, bow'd by Grief's insufferable weight,
Frantic she curses her immortal state:
The soft SERENA, as this curse she hears,
Feels her bright eye suffus'd with kindred tears;
And her kind breast, where quick compassion swell'd,
Shar'd in each bitter suffering she beheld.

The guardian Power survey'd her lovely grief,
And spoke in gentle terms of mild relief:
"For this soft tribe thy heaviest fear dismiss,
And know their pains are transient as their bliss:
Rapture and Agony, in Nature's loom,
Have form'd the changing tissue of their doom;
Both interwoven with so nice an art,
No power can tear the twisted threads apart:
Yet happier these, to Nature's heart more dear,
Than the dull offspring in the torpid sphere,
Where her warm wishes, and affections kind,
Lose their bright current in the stagnant mind.
Here grief and joy so suddenly unite,
That anguish serves to sublimate delight."

She spoke; and, ere SERENA could reply,
The vapour vanish'd from the lucid sky;
The Nymphs revive, the shadowy Fiends are fled,
The new-born flowers a richer fragrance shed;
The gentle Ruler of the changeful land,
Smiling, resum'd her symbol of command;
Replac'd the roses of her regal wreath,
Still trembling at the thorns that lurk beneath:
But, to her wounded subjects quick to pay
The tender duties of imperial sway,
Their wants she succour'd, they her wish obey'd,
And all recover'd, by alternate aid;
While, on the lovely Queen's enchanting face,
Departed Sorrow's faint and fainter trace,
Gave to each touching charm a more attractive grace.
Now, laughing Sport, from the enlighten'd plain,
Clear'd with quick foot the vestiges of Pain;
The gay scene grows more beautifully bright,
Than when it first allur'd SERENA'S sight,
Still her fond eyes o'er all the prospect range,
Flashing sweet pleasure at the blissful change:
Her curious thoughts with fond attachment burn,
Yet more of this engaging land to learn.
She finds the chief attendants of the Queen,
Sweet Females, wasted from our human scene;
But, as it chanc'd, while all the realm reviv'd,
A Spirit masculine from earth arriv'd:
Two airy guides conduct the gentle Shade;
Genius, in robes of braided flames array'd,
And a fantastic Nymph, in manners nice,
Profusely deck'd with many an odd device;
Sister of him, whose luminous attire
Flashes with unextinguishable fire;
Like him in features, in her look as wild,
And Singularity by mortals styl'd.
The eager Queen, and all her smiling Court,
Surround the welcome Shade in gentle sport;
For in their new associate all rejoice,
All pant to hear the accents of his voice.
Tho' o'er his frame th' Armenian robe was flung,
The pleasing Stranger spoke the Gallic tongue;
But in that language his enchanting art
Inspir'd new energy, that seiz'd the heart;
In terms so eloquent, so sweetly bold,
A story of disastrous love he told,
Convuls'd with sympathy, the list'ning train,
At every pause, with dear delicious pain,
Intreat him to renew the fascinating strain.
And now SERENA, with suspended breath,
Listen'd, and caught the tale of JULIA'S death;
And quick she cries, ere tears had time to flow,
"Blest be this hour!  for now I see ROUSSEAU."
Fondly she gaz'd, till the enchanting sound
In such a potent spell her spirit bound,
That, lost in sweet illusion, she forgot
The promis'd scenes of the sublimer spot;
Till now her mild Remembrancer, whose care
Stray'd not a moment from the mortal fair,
Rous'd her rapt mind, preparing her to meet
The brighter wonders of her blissful seat;
While her instinctive car's obedient frame
Now upward rose, like undulating flame.

As when some victor on the watery world,
Bright honour gilding all his sails unfurl'd,
Steers into port, while to the laughing sky
His streamers tell his triumph as they fly;
Expecting thousands line the crowded strand,
Swell the glad voice, or wave the joyous hand,
Pressing to view the sight their vows implor'd,
And hail their glory and their strength restor'd:
So the blest beings of this smiling scene
Flock'd round the car of their returning Queen.
The radiant car, from which they now alight,
Careful she gives to a selected sprite,
A Nymph of snowy vest and lovely frame,
Fidelity her fair and spotless name;
Then, happy to review her hallow'd home,
Leads her sweet Guest to her celestial dome.

Gentlest of powers!  for every purpose fit,
To strengthen Wisdom, and embellish Wit;&mdash;
Thou, whose soft arts, possess'd by thee alone,
Can give to Virtue's voice a sweeter tone;
Allay the frost of Age, or fire of Youth,
And lend attraction to severest Truth;
Improve e'en Beauty by thy graceful ease,
Or teach Deformity herself to please;&mdash;
Inspire the Bard, whose just ambition pants
To guide weak mortals to thy heavenly haunts!
Grant him, in notes that, like thy soft controul,
Allure attention, and possess the soul;
Grant him to show, in luminous display,
The mystic wonders of thy secret sway!

Now, at the sight of the presiding Power,
Wide spread the gates of a stupendous tower,
On whose firm height, commanding Nature's bound,
The faithful warder of the fort they found,
Wakeful Intelligence, a trusty Sprite,
Whose eyes are piercing as the solar light,
And ever on the watch to sound alarm,
If aught of dusky hue, portending harm,
Should, in defiance of her mandate, dare
Approach the palace of th' imperial Fair.
Within his ward, magnificently great,
Lies the rich armoury that guards her state.
Here stands Conviction's strong and lucid spear,
Whose touch annihilates suspense and fear;
Here, Truth's unsullied adamantine shield,
Which, save SOPHROSYNE, no Power can wield;
And Reason's trenchant blade of blazing steel,
Its edge and polish form'd by friendly Zeal;
And, not less sure their destin'd mark to hit,
Pointed by Virtue's hand, the shafts of Wit;
And Ridicule's strong bolt, whose stunning blow
Lays towering Vice and fearless Folly low.
Here too the Goddess kept, in mystic state,
Those sweet rewards that on her champions wait,
Guerdons more precious than triumphant palms:&mdash;
The glance of Gratitude for mental alms,
Peace's soft kiss, and Reconcilement's tear,
And smiles of Sympathy, are treasur'd here.

These precincts past, now hand in hand they came
To the rich fabric of majestic frame;
Instant with joy their Sovereign to behold,
The gates of massive adamant unfold;
And, as the gently-moving valves unclose,
Mysterious music from their motion flows;
The airy notes thro' all the palace roam,
And dulcet echoes fill the festive dome:
A gorgeous hall amaz'd SERENA'S eyes,
Compar'd to which, in splendor, strength, and size,
The noblest works of which Tradition sings,
Judaic shrine, or seat of Memphian kings,
Would seem more humble than the waxen cell
In which the skilful Bee is proud to dwell.
Here sits a Power, in whose angelic face
Beauty is sweeten'd by maternal grace;
Her radiant seat, surpassing mortal art,
Supports an emblem of her liberal heart,
A Pelican, who rears her callow brood,
And from her vitals seems to draw their food.
Around this Spirit flock a filial host,
Who bless her empire, and her guidance boast.
Here every Science, all the Arts attend,
In her they hail their parent and their friend;
Each to her presence brings the happy few,
Whose dearest glory from her favour grew.
Here, in her simple charms, with youthful fire,
Proud to display the magic of her lyre,
Soul-soothing Harmony presents her band:
Beside her Orpheus and Amphion stand.
Here, mild Philosophy, whose thoughtful frown
Is sweetly shaded by her olive crown,
(In all her Attic elegance array'd,
Strong to convince, and gentle to persuade)
To her, whose breath inspir'd his every rule,
Leads the blest sire of the Socratic school.
Each animating Bard and moral Sage,
The heaven-taught minds of every clime and age,
Who soften'd manners, and refin'd the soul,
Flock to this presence, as to Glory's goal;
And, as the mother's heart, that yearns to bless
The rival innocents that round her press,
Delights to see them, as her love they share,
Sport in her sight, and flourish by her care;
Fondly responsive to their every call,
Tender of each, and provident for all:
So this sweet image of Celestial Grace,
Who sits encircled by her lovely race,
To every Science vital strength imparts,
And rears the circle of the Social Arts;
With such solicitude she gives to each,
Pow'rs of sublimer aim and wider reach.
And now SOPHROSYNE, who near her prest,
Thus spoke her title to her earthly guest:&mdash;
"Behold the honour'd Form, without whose aid
My strength must vanish, and my glory fade!
Source of my being, and my life's support!
EUNOIA call'd in this celestial Court,
BENEVOLENCE the name she bears on earth,
The guard of Weakness, and the friend of Worth."

She ended:  and the mild maternal Form
Embrac'd SERENA with a smile as warm
As the gay spirit Vegetation wears,
When she to crown her favourite Nymph prepares,
When, pleas'd her flowery treasures to display,
She pours them in the lap of youthful May.

But how, SERENA!  how may human speech
Thy heavenly raptures in this moment reach?
If aught of earthly sentiment may vie
With the pure joy these happy scenes supply,
'Tis when, unmixt with trouble and with pain,
Love glides in secret thro' the glowing vein;
When some fond Youth, unconscious of its fire,
Free from chill Fear and turbulent Desire,
With every thought absorb'd in soft delight,
Sees all creation in his Fair one's sight,
And feels a blissful state without a name,
Repose of soul with harmony of frame.
So, plung'd in pleasure of the purest kind,
SERENA gaz'd on the maternal mind;
Gaz'd till SOPHROSYNE'S directing aid
Thus summon'd to new sights th' obedient Maid:&mdash;
"Haste, my fair Charge, for of this ample state,
Tracts yet unseen thy visitation wait.
The pressing hours forbid me to unfold
Each separate province which these confines hold;
But I will lead thee to that blissful crew,
Whose kindred spirits best deserve thy view."

So speaking, her attentive Guest she led
Thro' scenes, that still increasing wonder bred.
Where'er she trod, thro' all her gorgeous seat,
Soft music echoed from beneath her feet:
Passing a portal, on whose lucid stone
Emblems of Innocence and Beauty shone,
They reach a lawn with verdant lustre bright,
And view the bowers of permanent delight.
No fiery Sun here forms a scorching noon,
No baleful Meteor gleams, no chilling Moon:
But, from a latent source, on soothing light,
Whose constant rays repel the mist of night,
Tho' tender, chearful, and tho' warm, serene,
Gives lasting beauty to the lovely scene.
No sensual thought this paradise profanes;
For here tried Excellence in triumph reigns,
Benignant cares eternal joy supply,
And bliss angelic beams in every eye.

"In yonder groups," the leading Spirit cried,
"My fav'rite Females see, my fairest pride.
The first in rank is that distinguish'd train,
Whose strength of soul was tried by Hymen's chain:
Tho' Beauty blest their form, and Love, their guide,
Their nuptial band with happiest omens tied,
Beauty and Love, they felt, may lose the art
To fix inconstant Man's eccentric heart;
Yet, conscious of their Lord's neglected vow,
No Virtue frown'd outrageous on their brow,
To keep returning Tenderness aloof,
By coarse upbraiding, and despis'd reproof:
With Sorrow smother'd in Attraction's smile,
They strove the sense of misery to beguile;
And, from wild Passion's perilous abyss,
Lure the lost wanderer back to faithful bliss.
See mild OCTAVIA o'er this band preside,
Voluptuous ANTONY'S neglected bride,
Whose feeling heart, with all a Mother's care,
Rear'd the young offspring of a rival Fair.
Far other trials rais'd yon lovely crew,
Tho' in connubial scenes their merit grew:
It was their chance, ere judgment was mature,
When glittering toys the infant mind allure,
Following their parents' avaricious rule,
To wed, with hopes of bliss, a wealthy fool.
When time remov'd delusion's veil by stealth,
And show'd the drear vacuity of wealth;
When sad Experience prov'd the bitter fate
Of Beauty coupled to a senseless Mate,
These gentle Wives still gloried to submit;
These, tho' invited by alluring Wit,
Refus'd in paths of lawless joy to range,
Nor murmur'd at the lot they could not change:
But, with a lively sweetness, unopprest
By a dull Husband's lamentable jest,
Their constant rays of gay good-humour spread
A guardian glory round their idiot's head.
The next in order are those lovely Forms,
Whose patience weather'd all paternal storms;
By filial cares, the mind's unfailing test,
Well have they earn'd these seats of blissful rest:
They, unrepining at severe restraint,
Peevish commands, and undeserv'd complaint;
Bent with unwearied kindness to appease
Each fancied want of querulous Disease;
Gave up those joys which youthful hearts engage,
To watch the weakness of parental age.

Such are these gentle tribes, the happy few
Who share the triumph to their victory due:
Angelic aims their spotless minds employ,
And fill their measure of unchequer'd joy.
Behold!  where some with generous ardour wait
Around yon Seer, who holds the book of Fate;
Those awful leaves with eager glance they turn,
Thence with celestial zeal they fondly learn
What dangers threaten, thro' the vale of earth,
Their kindred pilgrims, ere they rise to birth:
To earth they still invisibly descend,
In that dark scene congenial minds defend,
From Pleasure's bud drive Spleen's corroding worm,
And in my votaries' heart my power confirm.

Delights more calm yon listening band employ,
Who deeply drink of intellectual joy.
See them around that speaking Nymph rejoice,
Their pleasures varying with her varied voice!
What graces in the sweet enthusiast glow!
Repeating here whate'er she learns below.
Memory her name, her charge o'er earth to flit,
And cull the fairest flowers of human wit.
Whatever Genius, in his happiest hour,
Has penn'd, of moral grace and comic power,
To warm the heart, the spells of Spleen unbind,
And pour gay sunshine o'er the misty mind;
Teach men to cherish their fraternal tie,
And view kind Nature with a filial eye;
This active Spirit catches in her flight,
Skill'd to retain, and happy to recite.
Here she delivers each bright work, and each
Derives new beauty from her graceful speech.
Warpt by no envy, by no love misled,
Equal she holds the living and the dead;
Alike rehearsing, as they claim their turn,
The song of ANSTEY, and the tale of STERNE.

But morning calls thee hence. &mdash; Yet one scene more,
My fostering love shall lead thee to explore.
This, thy last sight, with careful eyes survey,
And mark th' extensive nature of my sway."

Thus with fond zeal the guardian Spirit said,
And to new precincts of her palace led;
The scene she enter'd of her richest state,
Where on her voice the subject Passions wait:
Here rose a throne of living gems, so bright
No breath could sully their benignant light;
This, her immortal seat, the gracious Guide
Assum'd:  her Ward stood wondering at her side.
Swift as they felt their ruling Power inthron'd,
Aetherial beings, who her empire own'd,
Crowded in glittering pomp the gorgeous scene,
To pay their homage to their heavenly Queen.

First came chaste Love, whose sweet harmonious form
Ne'er felt Suspicion's soul-convulsing storm;
No baleful arrow in his quiver lies,
No blinding veil inwraps his sparkling eyes;
There all the rays of varied joy unite,
And jointly shed unspeakable delight.
With him was Friendship, like a virgin drest,
The soft Asbestos form'd her simple vest,
Whose wond'rous folds, in fiercest flames entire,
Mock the vain ravage of consuming fire:
Around this robe, a mystic chain she wore,
Each golden link a star of diamonds bore;
Force could not tear the finish'd work apart,
Nor int'rest loose it by his subtlest art:
But, strange to tell, if the presiding Power,
Who to her Favourite gave this precious dower,
If kind SOPHROSYNE could fail to breathe
Her vital virtue on this magic wreath,
The parts must sever, faithless to their trust,
The gold grow dross, and every diamond dust.
These Valour follow'd, deck'd with verdant palm,
Gracefully bold, majestically calm.
A mingled troop succeed, with festive sound,
Wisdom with olive, Wit with feathers crown'd;
Here, hand in hand they move, no longer foes,
Their charms increasing as their union grows;
Pure spirits all, who hating mental strife,
Exalt creation, and embellish life;
All here attend, and, in their Sovereign's praise,
Their circling forms the song of glory raise.

The blest SERENA drinks, with ravish'd ear,
The melting music of the tuneful sphere.
Now in its close the soothing echoes roll
O'er her rapt fancy, and intrance her soul;
Her senses sink in soft Oblivion's bands,
Till faithful Jenny at her pillow stands,
Recalls each mental and corporeal power,
While she proclaims aloud the passing hour;
And, in a voice expressive of surprise,
Too shrill to seem the music of the skies,
Informs the startled Fair 'tis time to rise.

