I.
On Itchin's fringed bank as Warton stray'd
And, pensive, sought his lov'd Aonian maid,
Who whilom strung bold Pindar's lyre,
And bade the youth to heav'nly strains aspire;
'Twas she who, from the sacred fount
That cools the blest Pierian bowers,
Chac'd the profane, and on the mount
Of Hybla, crown'd with ever-blooming flowers,
Wove frequent, at the blush of morn,
New wreaths, the brow of Horace to adorn;
'Twas she who, weeping over Maro's tomb,
Gave Tibur's yellow stream a long adieu!
To Britain's favour'd isle she flew,
And taught its sons to rival Greece and Rome!

II.
Oft did he call upon the wanderer's name,
The Conscious herds return'd a plaintive sound;
For she, the constant guardian of his fame,
With fault'ring steps forsook the faithless ground!
Too well she knew, endued with powres divine,
What dangers did her chosen bard await,
Who rescued from oblivion's darksome state
The early offspring of the tuneful Nine!
Whose learned labour now restores
Imprison'd verse from Gothic shores,
And from the castles of the ruthless Dane
The hoary Minstrel calls again!

III.
Plunging beneath the silver flood
She sought old Inchin's dark abode,
And told her sorrows there;
How Envy, mutt'ring o'er the page,
Had tutor'd Dulness into rage
Against a life so dear!
Soon as the rush-crown'd god had heard the tale,
His vocal shell resounded thro' the vale.
Borne on the breeze the Naiads all,
And nymphs obey the potent call;
Be yours the pleasing task, he said,
To shield the poet's laurel'd head
From each insidious foe;
Lest, rapt above all meaner things,
He soar on Fancy's magic wings,
Nor heed the gulph below.

IV.
Thrice croak'd the raven on the neighb'ring dome,
And thrice the owl untimely skimm'd the meads;
A deeper murmur rustled thro' the reeds,
Portentous all of dire events to come!
Now, traitor to the worth it bore,
The bank repell'd the stream no more,
But sunk beneath his feet;
He fell!  and all Parnassus sigh'd
As erst when Tracian Orpheus died,
And Cath'rine's classic Hill did ev'ry sigh repeat?

V.
But see, where, springing from the guiltless wave,
His nervous arms the yielding waters cleave;
And see, the busy throng
Of sprits waft him safe along
Where Chaucer's reverend shade yclad in bayes
His chaplet vails, meet guerdon on his layes;
Where peerless Spenser, pride of Faery Londe,
In glitterand stole, Elisa's guifte bedighte,
Bends all unpatient o'er the pebly stronde,
Viewing with eyne of joyance and delighte
The unhop'd saftie of the lerned wighte;
Moche lever they'd recall each pleasaunt straine,
Moche lever lose their fame in mirkie nighte,
With nameless carls forgotten aye remaine,
Than see him done to die by whom they live againe!

VI.
Songs of triumphs round him rise,
Lo Paeans rend the skies!
He lives again!  he lives!  they cry,
He lives, the echoing woods reply,
And lift their verdant heads;
Instead of sighs that swell'd the gale,
Joy revels through the winding vale,
And laughs along the meads!
Now to yon venerable piles he hies
Were Wykeham bade neglected Science rise;
There folded in a brother's honour'd arms
He smiles at dangers past and rude alarms!
Genius of Learning, would'st thou be ador'd,
To men like these thy patronage afford;
Bid Nobles haste to call their merit forth,
Nor gild with empty praise such sterling worth!
