DRAMATIC PERSONAE.
CELADON, Lover of Pastora
PASTORA, a young Shepherdess
MELIBAEA, Grandmother to Pastora
ATHENAIS, Sister to Pastora.

SCENE &mdash; A VESTIBULE BEFORE AN ELEGANT COTTAGE, WITH A PICTURESQUE VIEW OF THE COUNTRY ON EACH SIDE.
PASTORA COMING FROM THE VESTIBULE IS MET BY CELADON.

CELADON.
How fares the lovely maid, Arcadia's pride,
To Celadon by kindred, ties allied?

PASTORA.
My gentle kinsman, hail!

CELADON.
In friendship's sign
Will fair Pastora, join her hand to mine,
Though, such the custom now and maiden pride,
Its sweeter symbol, lip to lip's denied?

PASTORA.
Ah, Celadon!  too oft the guileless maid
To such unseemly weakness is betray'd.
But be it never mine in that respect
Of decency the precepts to neglect.
Sooner than grant to the most lovely swain,
That roams by Ladon's banks or Tempe's plain,
Such a salute, to this cold hand of mine,
In pride I speak not, I'd those lips confine.

CELADON.
Fond as I am, and easy to believe,
Not thus Pastora can her swain deceive.
 [Salutes her.]

PASTORA.
Forbear, rude swain!  ill fortune and disgrace
Pursue thy steps!  forbear the rude embrace!
Ah cruel!  thus my tortur'd neck to strain,
Thus grasp my arms, and pierce my breast with pain!
Yet tell me, Celadon, &mdash; ah me!  with friends
How soon forgiveness on offence attends!
Tell, if thy absent days in joy have past,
For many a day is fled since I beheld thee last?

CELADON.
In truth, Pastora, not exempt from pain
These limbs have prov'd since on Ladona's plain
With angry Lycidas I strove; but know,
Full little cause for triumph had my foe.
But, by yon azure heaven, the blows I dealt
Were oft repeated, and were sorely felt,
Oft shall the moon increase, and oft decay,
Ere he forget his humbled pride that day.

PASTORA.
Ah!  little deem'd Pastora that, in rage,
Her gentle kinsman could rough contest wage.

CELADON.
For thee that rage arose &mdash; could I unmoved
Hear the maid slander'd whom my soul approved?

PASTORA.
For me!  good heaven, what charge unjust and vain
Could he produce Pastora's fame to stain?

CELADON.
Nay, let it pass &mdash; it was not mine to hear
Thy conduct censur'd and revenge forbear;
Ye powers!  could I sit impotent and tame
Whilst malice dared Pastora's acts defame!

PASTORA.
What!  ill betide the wretch whom I despise
As the base tenants of the wattled sties,
What could he say, what urge?

CELADON.
The words unkind,
Unjust, remembrance brings not to my mind;
But 'tis enough, my fair, for thee to know
I soon aveng'd thee on thy worthless foe.
Now here, now there, as in my strength I rose,
He felt the fury of repeated blows.
Yet stay, whence first began our fierce debate,
Since, such Pastora's pleasure, I'll relate.
"A pretty tale, and pretty youth," I cried.
He thus, "to cheek by force o'erweening pride
Is mine; a pretty youth then style not me,
In manly strength superior far to thee."
"Ah no," I tauntingly replied, "in truth,
To make thee, Lycidas, a pretty youth
Transcends all human power."  And now his breast
With fury swell'd, as he these words addrest.
"Shall we the contest then of manhood try?"
"If such thy wish, this instant!" I reply.
Swift he advanc'd, impatient to engage;
I swift opposed him, fired with equal rage.
Beneath my ear he first a blow applied,
Then struck with fury my unguarded side;
And now I summon'd all my might, and prest
Upon my foe:  I grasp'd the fleecy vest,
In snowy folds, that wrapt his neck around,
And now my fierce tempestuous blows resound;
From side to side his locks dishevell'd flew,
Whilst his head dizzy with their fury grew.

PASTORA.
Thus to defend an injur'd maid was kind,
Accept the thanks of no ungrateful mind
But much I fear he'll of thy blows complain
To those, whose office 'tis to guard the plain
From lawless contests; and for this offence
They drag thee to our high tribunal hence;
And thou be bound in penalty severe
No more with angry words to wound the shepherd's ear.
'Tis better far to bid contention cease,
Together meet, and, as a pledge of peace,
The sweet libation to Lyaeus pour,
Then drain the goblet, and be foes no more.

CELADON.
Sayst thou!  why let him, if he will, complain,
Soon shall he find that his complaint was vain.
Attesting Heaven to mark what he shall say,
Dorus can prove that he began the fray.
How, Lycidas complain!  trust me, my cause
Will stand the test of our severest laws.
Mutual be then the suit! &mdash; mine to defend,
In Alea Lacon dwells, my father's friend,
Above his peers for legal skill renown'd;
And still success his learned toils has crown'd.
In recompense of which for him were slain
Full oft the choicest of our fleecy train.
If legal contest be his aim, my powers
Are great as his, as great my fleecy stores;
But wherefore waste I words on one so base,
Evil pursue him, and deserv'd disgrace.
A lovelier theme would Celadon pursue;
A lovelier object offers to his view.

PASTORA.
Why in thy arms is thus Pastora prest?
Why rudely clasp'st thou my reluctant breast?
I charge thee from such insult to refrain
Away, and quit my sight, licentious swain!

CELADON.
Ye powers!  what strange caprice is this, and why
Is fair Pastora now so wond'rous shy?
Not so reserved was she when in the hour
Of festive joy, in Musidora's bower,
Joy for her new-born son, young Strephon prest
The yielding maiden to his throbbing breast;
His warm embrace she strove not to restrain,
Nor for his freedom chid the happy swain.

PASTORA.
Surely the demon of detraction reigns
In the vile bosom of Arcadian swains!

CELADON.
And will Pastora then the truth deny?
Th' embrace was noted by the general eye.

PASTORA.
What truth directs that only I'll advance;
'Twas mine with him to lead the mazy dance.
When lo, the harp's sweet string, too tightly wound,
Burst</p>
</div>
