Beneath a rock, in rugged fissures torn,
The Bard of Morven lay at noon reclin'd;
Where, o'er his head, an old fantastic thorn
Diffus'd its fragrance to the passing wind:
His harp, in melancholy mood resign'd,
Near, on a blasted branch in silence hung;
While slow he ponder'd in his pensive mind,
The deeds of fame that fir'd his bosom young,
When dauntless Fingal fought, and grey-hair'd Ullin sung.

As thus he lay, enrapt in sacred trance,
And from his dim eyes stole the silent tear,
An aged Hero leaning on his lance,
With wav'ring steps along the heath drew near;
'Twas Murno, weeping for his Uran dear,
His gallant son, in fight untimely slain:
Exulting forth he went to stain his spear
In hostile blood, on Lena's woody plain;
And there, in earth's cold womb, his lifeless bones remain.

Rais'd by the old man's woe, the heav'nly fire
Thro' the mild soul of Ossian rushing flew;
Quick in his raptur'd hands he took the lyre,
And struck a tender strain in measures new:
Not softer ever was the breeze that blew
Through Selma's groves, or Cona's streamy vale,
When to the moon-beams glanc'd the nightly dew,
And ghosts of heroes, clad in misty mail,
With airy maids came hov'ring o'er the mountains pale.

By Luva's streams (the sightless Bard thus sung)
In his grey tow'r did noble FORLOTH dwell,
For deeds of glory fam'd the chiefs among;
Many a dark foe beneath his valour fell.
Nor did his heart in kindness least excel;
Still in his plenteous hall the feast was spread,
And still went round in joy the sounding shell:
Well knew the stranger where at noon to tread,
And well at night the wand'rer where to rest his head.

One maid of beauty blest his life's decline,
MINVELA, of the dark and glossy hair,
Form'd by kind Nature in her best design,
And fairest made of Morven's maiden's fair.
Many young chiefs had fought with ardent care,
Matchless Minvela's secret heart to gain,
No spark of love she felt; but, free as air,
On the green hills, among her virgin train,
Rejoic'd with flying shafts o'er the brown deer to reign.

'Twas then by winding Carron's stream appear'd
Warriors unknown, and loud our chiefs defy'd.
Fingal's broad shield was struck, his banner rear'd,
And Forloth's steps of age were by his side.
They met; they fought; the banks in gore were dy'd.
Heroes unnumber'd pale and bleeding lay;
And scarce could night the doubtful strife divide,
But Forloth sure had sunk in death that day,
Had not young FINAN turn'd th' impending stroke away.

To Luva's halls the grateful chief convey'd
The blue-ey'd Finan, in his shining car.
Come forth, he cried, Minvela, brightest maid,
And hail thy father victor from the war!
See, on this youth's white breast the bloody scar,
That sav'd me from the valiant stranger's sword:
Go, range the vale, the piney cliffs afar,
And wat'ry caves, that herbs of health afford,
Till to his wonted strength my hero be restor'd.

Soon did the youth his wonted strength regain,
And soon Minvela breathe the secret sigh;
As from her harp she call'd its tend'rest strain,
In notes scarce heard, that instant fall and die;
Her bosom heav'd, and from each swimming eye,
Adown her glowing cheek the big tears stole.
Gray Forloth smil'd.  And Finan, list'ning by,
Felt nameless transports darting thro' his soul,
At ev'ry rising swell, and pause of fainting dole.

The maid, this pining grief to drive away,
Resolv'd her woodland pastimes to renew:
Then on the hill she stood at down of day,
Her dogs, with feet of wind, swept o'er the dew;
And sure as death her feather'd arrows flew.
Sudden was heard the boding eagle's cry,
And from the howling desart wild winds blew;
Black clouds came rolling round the mountains high;
While deep and dreadful thunder rattled o'er the sky.

On a white rock hung o'er the crashing wood,
Sat fair Minvela, leaning on her bow;
Raging, and all in foam, swift Luva's flood
Boil'd thro' the rocks and broken dens below.
How o'er it, lovely Huntress, can'st thou go?
For on that rock thou may'st not long remain
Dishevell'd in the blast, thy dark locks blow;
Cold round thy trembling bosom beats the rain;
And starless night will soon thy fearful steps restrain.

Across the deep dark chasms, where roar'd the stream,
Its moss-grown arm an aged oak had hung,
And met the rock beyond.  There, while the gleam
Of lightning flash'd, and hills with thunder rung,
The shiv'ring hunter oft of old had clung,
And o'er the torrent work'd his per'lous way.
Far, far below, wild caves and shelves among,
The waters roll; and mists, ascending grey,
To bats, and dismal owls, afford a doubtful day.

The pass young Finan knew, and now had seen
Minvela wand'ring on the bleak hill's side:
Thro' brakes he rush'd, and tangled copses green,
Till, standing high above the foaming tide,
Give me thy hand, fair maid, he joyful cried,
And joyful she her white hand smiling gave.
Trembling along the shaking branch they hied.
It cracks, it breaks, it falls &mdash; no strength could save.&mdash;
Down the dark void they plunge, amid the flashing wave.

Forloth sat in his hall.  The beam blaz'd bright:
He fann'd its flame, and wish'd Minvela there.
A sharp scream struck his ear.  In wild affright
He rush'd, and saw his young, his lovely pair,
Wreath'd round the oak together in despair,
And swiftly shouting down the foamy flood.
With fruitless cries he filled the troubled air,
And all the gloomy night, in frantic mood,
Roamed o'er the wa'try shore, and thro' the groaning wood.

Wretched old man!  I know thy grief too well;
Too well my harp has learn'd this dreary strain:
In pride of youth my blooming Oscar fell;
And last of all my race I now remain.
Once, like a tow'ring tree, I grac'd the plain;
Shoots round me grew, and flow'rs in fragrant rows;
But soon the winter's wind, and freezing rain,
Nipt each fair bud, blasted each smiling rose,
"And left me naked, bare to ev'ry storm that blows!"

Long by the fatal stream he wander'd slow;
Long the wild mountain heard his bursting sighs:
His empty hall no more he seem'd to know;
Dark was to him the earth, and black the skies.
At length the distant shouts of war arise,
By Luva's bank sad Forloth hears the sound;
Reckless of life, to arms once more he flies.
His dark ships, launching on the lake profound,
Spread their white sails, and fly to Malta's rocky mound.

On green Ferarma, in their course, they land,
Where the dun roes sport on the woody shore;
High on the rock two beams of beauty stand,
Young benders of the bow, with shafts in store.
Such was the garb my lov'd Minvela wore,
Cried Forloth, while swift tears bedimm'd his  sight,
And such the crested helm young Finan bore,
When down the stream, on that disast'rous night,
Wrapt in fierce storms, they sank for ever from the light.

His well-known voice they heard, on this green isle,
Where by the winged stream they had been borne:
Quick to his arms they spring; and, for a while,
Their mingled raptures all expressions scorn.
The old man's heart, by gnawing grief long worn,
Again in purest joy began to bound:
To Luva's steams in triumph they return;
Once more, with dance and song the hills resound;
And in the hall, once more, the festive shell goes round.

'Twas thus, O Murno!  thy lamented son,
Like Forloth's children, left thee in his prime:
But for a season is thy hero gone,
On his own stream borne to a happier clime.
And quick, O Murno, hastens on the time,
When thou shalt meet the gallant youth again;
His course now on the white clouds, that climb
The moon's clear face, when winds their force restrain,
And free the light ghosts wander o'er the starry plain.

'Tis there contending warriors meet in peace,
And on the tempest's wing together ride:
There in the mutual feast all discords cease;
Lochlin and Morven sitting side by side.
For what can now their harmony divide,
When round them fly so thick the airy deer,
When the blue fields of Heav'n extend so wide?
No, happy shades, ye have no foes to fear;
And on your battles past ye drop a pitying tear.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
