As rolling years all smoothly glide along,
We wist not what they slily steal away;
Nor see how to th' abyss of Time they throng,
Nor count the hours of life's short busy day:
Till rise the shades, and evil birds of night
Give token of the gloom that clouds our fairest light.

These things full deep revolving in my mind,
When to the yellow meads and groves retir'd,
To Contemplation's pow'r I sat resign'd;
A sudden rapture all my soul inspir'd,
As present to my view arose the scene,
By Fancy painted wild, with airy forms between.

INFANCY.
While the soft west winds whisper'd o'er the lawn,
With pearly drops all thick and glitt'ring sow'd;
While purple streaks on high proclaim'd the dawn,
Ere in the golden east the day-star glow'd;
While the blythe lark his early matins sang,
And with his carols sweet the azure welkin rang:

Soft, on a verdant mossy bed repos'd,
Whose canopy was twin'd of flow'ry braid,
(Such as the Cyprian dame of old dispos'd
For young Julus in th' Idalian shade)
Lay a sweet form, whose birth the Graces claim;
Nature his meetest nurse, and INFANCY his name.

The gentlest gale mild Zephyr could dispense,
That woo'd fair Flora in her early bloom,
Too roughly seem'd to wake his tender sense,
Which still withdrew him from the rich perfume,
Nor on the glowing landscape turn'd his sight;
Unneath might he endure the solar radiance bright.

Around the pansy'd couch, in wanton dance
And vernal revels grateful, I espy'd
A train of white-rob'd fays, to whose advance
Scarce bent the grass, so featly did they glide;
But as they tripp'd successive in the round,
Of the past flitting forms no farther trace was found.

And each of these did some gay present bring,
Which they all offer'd with obeisance low
And Nature (as she nurs'd creation's king)
On ev'ry gift did richer tints bestow;
Which, with a smile, the angel form would greet,
While still the last they gave appear'd most fair and sweet.

Thus did the virgin hours, unceasing, play,
Happy and free, all undebauch'd by Care;
For Innocence, their guardian, yet bore sway,
Whose power forbade the carle to enter there;
Tho', Janus like, as with a double face,
At once the past he eyes, and Time's predestin'd race.

For, lo!  the busy Phantom nigh at hand
Devouring still his offspring did I view;
(E'en like some wizard, whose enchanting wand
Shapes magic-form'd can perish and renew:)
Jut now his wings were hid; nor yet was rear'd
Aloft his dreaded scythe, nor waning glass appear'd.

Nathless, the stealing moments tow'rds their goal,
Like waves, succeeding waves, incessant press;
Each sand that drops successive as they roll,
Making life's little sum, unheeded, less.
Tho' now each object grown more passing, bright,
Plays in the various stream of many-colour'd light.

YOUTH.
While thus the golden prospect smil'd around,
The warbling birds in fuller concert sang;
And the majestic mountains forest-crown'd,
With Spring's own sweetest voice melodious rang;
More copious while each river drew his train,
Swift gliding on, to pay full tribute to the main.

The cradled Infancy his bed had left,
The flitting fays were vanish'd from the bow'rs;
Dame Nature of her nursling all bereft,
No longer spread the ground with early flow'rs;
But bolder scenes her pencil wide display'd,
Where high aspiring woods outspread their mighty shade.

Forth of these haunts issu'd a form more bright
Than the fair star the morning host that leads;
YOUTH, lusty Youth, Creation's fond delight,
Full of himself, and bent on highest deeds;
Ready, alike, to yield to Pleasure's claim,
Or soar on eagle's wings, pursuing laurell'd Fame.

Sweetness and Ease on all his steps attend;
With winning Grace, that seldom sues in vain:
For him e'en Wisdom can his brow unbend,
And rough Philosophy relax his strain;
Envy herself admir'd his meet address,
Each charming power she own'd, tho' wishing each were less.

Sometimes erect, with ardent, swelling breast,
Urg'd on by honour, and with vigour crown'd,
Hope in his eye, pride tow'ring on his crest,
He spurs his courser at the trumpet's sound:
In Beauty's cause, a bold and hardy knight;
Or meets his country's foes, in fields of bloody fight.

War, horrid war!  for him can boast of charms,
Pourtray'd at will by Fancy's varying hand;
His soul rejoicing in the loud alarms,
Tho' at his tide Destruction takes her stand;
Death shakes his darts in vain, while Glory shews,
In borrow'd colours bright, the scene of human woes.

Sometimes the Cyprian queen, with gentle smiles,
Conducts his steps to ever blooming groves;
And silken softness all his hours beguiles,
As o'er the magic scenes he careless roves:
The spicy gales around him breathe perfume,
From ev'ry fragrant flow'r while stealing each perfume.

Love, gentlest soother of the human heart,
Now bids his train the votive chaplets bring;
For blythsome youth he draws his golden dart,
And thousand pleasures load his purple wing:
What forms enchanting follow in his train!
What joys on joys press on, to deck his early reign!

Yet did I see the green-ey'd monster there,
With many a fiend lie lurking close in wait;
Those scoul'd averse; while to the prospect fair
Hymen still points, shaking his torch elate:
Each scoul'd averse. Youth eagerly press'd on,
For ever to be bless'd &mdash; or finally undone.

So yon trim vessel spreads her wanton sails;
So, proudly o'er the calmer water glides,
Courting the fanning air, the fav'ring gales,
That waft her gently o'er the swelling tides;
Yet verging tow'rds the main, ere long to find
Far diff'rent scenes, I ween &mdash; the sport of ev'ry wind.

Love, Friendship, Joy, thus all their charms display,
Or seem to offer in Youth's vig'rous course;
Cloath his fleet hours, and brighten up his day,
While Nature yet imparts her genial force:
Till to maturer year hastes apace,
For Manhood's ripen'd strength, exchanging Youthful grace.

MANHOOD.
To early spring the summer's reign succeeds,
And fading flow'rets strew the russet plain;
Aloft while Phoebus drives his fiery steeds,
Till Autumn, rising, claims the wide domain.
But sith all these to joys will yet invite,
Mortals will not awake from visions of delight.

Lo!  MANHOOD comes, sedate; his glancing eye
Turn'd tow'rds yon azure vault &mdash; with steady pace
He bends his sight where lofty scenes arise;
Tho' looking backwards on Youth's eager race,
Less ardent now, but more determin'd bold,
He holds his onward path, and scorns to be controul'd.

The ripen'd fruits to meet his touch that bend,
E'en as they bend give token of decay;
The grateful shades to shelter him extend,
Yet do they mark the hours that glide away;
Tho' still the prospect rises all serene,
Maugre the stealth of Time, which soon shall mar the scene.

Far on a hill, bedeck'd with golden rays,
Of glowing Titan in his mid career;
Whose summit high did with false lustre blaze,
At distance sunny bright, tho' clouded near;
An idol sat, enthron'd in pomp divine,
And thousand goodly shapes ay worshipp'd at his shrine.

What seem'd his head a rich tiara grac'd;
His vestments with the Tyrian purple shone;
While gold-and precious gems, in order plac'd
Full bright and gorgeous, strew'd Ambition's throne:
But when or Truth or Wisdom darts her ray,
All loathsome looks the sprite, confess'd in open day.

Howe'er to him the mortal wight address'd
His steps; tho' oft int'rest turn'd askaunce
And Care, by Innocence no more repress'd,
Athwart him would his rueful front advance;
Which ever and anon prevents his course,
Retards his utmost speed, and enervates his force.

Love, too, that late his pow'r so full display'd,
His captive thrall enchain'd by soft desires;
Calling the flame-rob'd Hymen to his aid,
Brooks not to see so soon extinct his fires:
In varied shapes again puts in his claim,
Revives forgotten flames, or stamps a Parent's name.

The scene now thickn'ning; from each dell's brake
Start diff'rent forms &mdash; A busy crowd they seem!
Some urging on, while others press him back;
As winds, with waves contending, drive the stream:
By turns each meets repulse, and each prevails;
Reason scarce guides the helm, while such a gale assails.

But ere at last he fix'd his doubtful choice,
By Prudence dictated, to change no more,
Time gives the silent passing hours a voice,
Forceful, and points him to another shore:
Thither he verges fast; meanwhile, arise
Autumnal darkling mists, that curtain o'er the skies.

OLD AGE.
No more I view'd of verdant meads and groves,
Nor fost'ring suns that cherish'd fragrant flow'rs;
Ay vanish'd were the purple-winged Loves,
And bleak and naked their forsaken bowers;
Gloomy the scene below, and sad on high;
Barren the mourning earth, and comfortless the sky.

Far distant Titan shoots his paley ray
Thro' frigid skies, untaught with heat to glow;
While the cold aether scarce reflects his blaze,
Save when be gazes on a waste of snow.
On ev'ry side the wint'ry prospect scouls,
As thro' the leafless woods the boist'rous tempest howls.

Now in the midst I saw a form advance,
Far other than that wight who, vigour crown'd,
Rush'd to the chace; or, mingling in the dance,
With wanton measures beat the tufted ground:
Far other than that crested son of Fame
Who sought in fighting fields to gain a glorious name.

Sith on his cloudy brow and count'nance wan,
Where deep revolving Thought had made his place,
Small trace remain'd there of the former man;
For years had plow'd deep furrows in his face.
With slow and uncouth gait along he pass'd,
As ev'ry fault'ring step had led him to his last,

Care, ever watchful, and his ruffian band,
Athwart each path that seem'd to lead to peace,
In various haggard forms still took their stand,
And the wing'd hours yet saw their power increase;
Whilst ev'ry envious wind he strove to shun,
Shook Time's low-ebbing sands, and bade them faster run.

Yet not to scenes like these the hoary form
Confin'd his view; for oft times I espy'd
Celestial shapes (whose power controul'd the storm)
Support his weakness, and his footsteps guide
Reason assisted with her potent arms
And Contemplation woo'd &mdash; all flush'd with heaving charms.

There, too, I saw, as in a zodiac bright,
Star-crown'd Religion beaming from afar;
That oft would shoot from opening skies her light,
And aid him haply in his mortal war;
While o'er the dreary desart waste he trod,
Tracing, with weary feet, th' irremeable road.

Meanwhile, the sun, with west'ring beam askaunce,
Hover'd upon the margin of the flood;
When, with long strides, I view'd a sprite advance,
Fools scathe, nought dreaded by the wise and good;
With brandish'd dart the mighty Shadow waits,
And near at hand their shears extend the threat'ning Fates.

Now e'en hoar Winter fading on the sight,
The elemental scene must soon decay;
And bending AGE give place to lasting night;
Time calls, Death beckons, and he must away!
By Nature's self, in vain their force withstood;
The prospect on him clos'd, no more to be renew'd.

Thrice happy they, who on this moral stage
Life's chequer'd road with well-tim'd caution tread;
Ever, from early youth to hoary age,
By Virtue's precepts and by Wisdom led:
Sith them no change of Time can ever shake
Nor Death himself their peace or steady purpose break.

For them the Spring her choicest sweets will breathe,
And Summer's suns for ever rise serene;
To them will Autumn her rich fruits bequeath,
Nor Winter's storms disturb the tranquil scene;
Nor Fate so doom their fall, but that they rise
To realms of endless bliss, and claim their kindred skies.
