O'er hill, o'er dale, o'er mountain's wide extent,
In quest of Liberty I fondly stray'd;
Still wander'd on, unknowing where I went:
Charm'd by report alone, I lov'd the maid.
For oft in senates had I heard her name,
In populous meetings oft applauded high;
And sometimes, speaking through the trump of fame,
Patriots had claim'd her for their near ally.
O tell me where this wonder's to be found?
Or lives she in the air, or dwells on fairy ground?

As late I sought her in a verdant grove,
A nymph approach'd, and whisper'd in my ear&mdash;
Give o'er thy search, see Liberty in Love!
Give o'er thy search, the ready nymph is here!
By these distinguish'd names I'm far ador'd,
And all the gay, and all the young are mine;
My spacious courts no rude restraint afford,
No peevish laws the loosen'd will confine;
Yet some, or dull of taste, or over nice,
Spurn all this proffer'd good, and madly call me Vice!

She spoke, and now, presenting (as in play)
A fillet, fain she would have bound my eyes;
But I, impatient of secluded day,
Resisted warmly, for I scorn'd surprize:
When lo!  three galling chains, before conceal'd,
Dropp'd from her side, and rattling fell to ground!
Lust, Misery, Death, were on the fetters seal'd;
And each had fretted deep a ghastly wound.&mdash;
And art thou Liberty! &mdash; I smiling said:
The sorceress, sore dismay'd, with conscious horror fled.

At court, I ask'd if Liberty were there;
The courtiers laugh'd, and ridicul'd her name:
Yet some had lov'd the visionary fair;
But solid gold had wak'd them from their dream.
In vain I sought her in the soldier's tent,
The slave of glory knew not where she dwelt:
Under her banners to the war he went,
But ne'er her sacred influence had felt.
In cities, much she's talk'd of, never found;
For Avarice drove her thence, and still maintains his ground.

In rural sports I pass'd a weary day,
Each jocund youth pretended she was there;
But cruelty, and noise, and wild dismay,
Could ne'er prevail, if Liberty were near:
But oft Licentiousness her name assumes,
Her easy gesture, and her light attire;
And, mingling with the riotous, presumes,
Lawless, to sanctify her baleful fire:
Oft, blazing forth, amidst the giddy crowds,
Treason she leads in hand, and ruin the realms loads.

As through a flowery vale I fondly stray'd,
(To seek fair Liberty in every place)
A heavenly form approach'd, in white array'd,
And thus she spoke, with unaffected grace&mdash;
Let Virtue's dictates o'er thy heart prevail,
And curb the passions of thy youthful mind;
Nor turn thine ear to Folly's flattering tale,
And Liberty thou everywhere shalt find:
Return, O wanderer!  happy, since you know,
That, save in Virtue's paths, no Liberty's below.
