Far from the savage banditt's fierce alarms,
Or distant din of horrid despots arms,
Tho' Pennsylvania boasts her petty tyrants reign,
Yet there in blood her petty tyrants reign.

With waving pines tho' vocal woods be crown'd,
And streamfed vales with living wealth abound,
To golden fields tho' rip'ning rays descend,
With blushing fruit the loaded branches bend;
To those, who ne'er must freedom's blessings taste,
'Tis barren all, 'tis all a worthless waste.&mdash;

While hoarse the cataract murmur'd on the gale,
And chilling dews swept thro' the murky dale;
Along the hills the dismal tempest howl'd,
And light'nings flash'd, and deep the thunder roll'd;
Beneath a leafless tree, ere morn arose,
The slave ADALA thus laments his woes:

"Ye grisly spectres, gather round my seat,
From caves unblest, that wretches groans repeat!
Terrific forms from misty lakes arise!
And bloody meteors threaten through the skies!
Oh!  curs'd destroyers of our hapless race,
Of human-kind the terror and disgrace!
Lo!  hosts of dusky captives, to my view,
Demand a deep revenge!  Demand their due!
And frowning chiefs now dart athwart the gloom,
And o'er the salt-sea wave pronounce your doom&mdash;
But Gods are just, and oft the stroke forbear,
To plunge the guilty in tenfold despair.
Lift high the scourge, my soul the rack disdains,
I pant for freedom and my native plains!"

"With limbs benumb'd my poor companions lie;
Oppress'd by pain and want the aged sigh:
Thro' reedy huts the driving tempest pours;
Their festering wounds receive the sickly show'rs:
In madd'ning draughts our lords their senses sleep,
And doom their slaves to stripes and death in sleep;
Now, while the bitter blast surrounds my head,
To times long past my restless soul is led,
Far, far beyond the azure hills, to groves
Of ruddy fruit, where beauty fearless roves&mdash;
O Blissful seats!  O self-approving joys!
Nature's plain dictates!  Ignorance of vice!
O guiltless hours!  Our cares and wants were few,
No arts of luxury, or deceit, we knew;
Our labour sport &mdash; to tend our cottage care,
Or from the palm the luscious juice prepare;
To sit, indulging love's delusive dream,
And snare the silver tenants of the stream;
Or (nobler toil) to arm the deadly blow,
With dextrous art, against the spotted foe;
O days, with youthful daring mark'd! &mdash; 'twas then
I dragg'd the shaggy monster from his den;
And boldly down the rocky mountain's side
Hurl'd the grim panther in the foaming tide;
Our healthful sports a daily feast afford,
And ev'n still found us at the social board."

"Can I forget?  Ah me!  the fatal day,
When half the vale of peace was swept away!
Th' affrighted maids in vain the Gods implore,
The frantic dames impatient ruffians seize,
And infants shriek, and clasp their mothers' knees;
With galling fetters soon their limbs are bound,
And groans throughout the noisome bark resound.
Why was I bound?  Why did not WHYDALE see
ADALA gain or death or victory?
No storms arise, no waves revengeful rear,
To dash the monsters on our injur'd shore.
Long o'er the foaming deep to worlds unknown
By envious winds the bulky vessel's blown,
While by disease and chains the weak expire,
Or, parch'd, endure the slow consuming fire.
Who in this land of many griefs would live,
Where death's the only comfort tyrants give?
Tyrants unblest!  Each proud or strict command,
Nor age nor sickness holds the iron hand;
Whose hearts, in adamant involv'd, despise
The drooping females tears, the infants cries;
From whose stern brows no grateful look e'er beams,
Whose blushless front nor rape nor murder shames."

"&mdash; Nor all I blame, for NARHAL, friend to peace,
Thro' his wide pastures bids oppression cease;
No drivers goad, no galling fetters bind,
Nor stern compulsion damps th' exalted mind.
There strong ARCONA'S fated to enjoy
Domestic sweets, and rear his progeny;
To till his glebe employs ARCONA'S care,
To NARHAL'S God he nightly makes his prayer;
His mind at ease of Christian truths he'll boast&mdash;
He has no wife, no lovely offspring, lost.
Gay his SAVANNAH blooms, while mine appears
Scorch'd up with heat, or moist with blood and tears.
Cheerful his hearth in chilling winter burns,
While to the storm the sad ADALA mourns."

"Lift high the scourge, my soul the rack disdains;
I pant for freedom and my native plains!"

"Shall I his holy prophet's aid implore,
And wait for justice on another shore?
Or, rushing down yon mountain's craggy steep,
End all my sorrows in the sullen deep?
A cliff there hangs in yon grey morning cloud,
The dashing wave beneath roars harsh and loud&mdash;
But doubts and fears involve my anxious mind:
The gulph of death once pass'd, what shore we find?
Dubious, if, sent beyond th' expanded main,
This soul shall seek its native realms again;
Or if in gloomy mists condemn'd to lie,
Beyond the limits of yon arching sky,
A better prospect oft my spirit cheers,
And in my dreams the vale of peace appears,
And fleeting visions of my former life,
My hoary sire I clasp, my long-lost wife,
And oft I kiss my gentle babes in sleep,
'Till with the sounding whip I'm wak'd to weep."

"Lift high the scourge, my soul the rack disdains;
I pant for freedom and my native plains!"

"Chiefs of the earth, and monarchs of the sea,
Who vaunt your hardy ancestors were free;
Whose teachers plead th' oppress'd and injur'd's cause,
And prove the wisdom of your prophet's laws;
To force and fraud if justice must give place,
You're dragg'd to slavery by some rougher race,
Some rougher race your flocks shall force away,
Like Afric's sons your children must obey,
The very Gods that view our constant toil,
Shall see your offspring till a ruder soil;
The pain of thirst and pinching hunger know,
And all the torments that from bondage flow.
When, far remov'd from Christian worlds, we prove
The sweets of peace, the lasting joys of love."

"But hark!  the whip's harsh echo thro' the trees!
On every trembling limb fresh horrors seize&mdash;
Alas!  'tis morn, and here I sit alone&mdash;
Be strong my soul, and part without a groan!
Ruffians proceed!  ADALA ne'er shall swerve!
Prepare the rack, and strain each aching nerve!"

"Lift high the scourge, my soul the rack disdains;
I pant for freedom and my native plains!"

"Thou God, who gild'st with light the rising day!
Who life dispensest by thy genial ray!
Will thy slow vengeance never, never all,
But undistinguish'd favour shine on all?
O hear a suppliant wretch's last, sad prayer!
Dart fiercest rage!  infect the ambient air!
This pallid race, whose hearts are bound in steel,
By dint of suffering teach them how to feel."

"Or, to some despot's lawless will betray'd,
Give them to know, what wretches they have made!
Beneath the lash let them resign their breath,
Or court, in chains, the clay-cold hand of death.
Or, worst of ills!  within each callous breast,
Cherish, uncurb'd, the dark infernal pest,
Bid av'rice swell with undiminish'd rage,
While no new worlds th' accursed thirst asswage;
Then bid the monsters on each other turn,
The fury passions in disorder burn;
Bid discord flourish, civil crimes increase,
Nor one fond wish arise that pleads for peace&mdash;
'Till with their crimes, in wild confusion hurl'd,
They wake t' eternal anguish in a future world."
