MOMBAZE.
"Say whither, wanderer, points thy chearless way,
When lengthening shades announce the close of day?
In yon wild waste no friendly roof thou'lt find,
The haunt of serpents and the savage kind.&mdash;
And, sure, remembrance mocks me, or I trace
In thine the semblance of Zamboia's face!
Yet scarce thyself!  for in thy alter'd eye
I read the records of hard destiny.
From thy rack'd bosom sighs that ceaseless flow,
A man bespeak thee exercis'd in woe.
Say then, what chance has burst thy rigid chains,
Has led thee frantic o'er these distant plains?
What potent sorrows can thy peace infest?
What crimes conceal'd corrode thy anxious breast?"

ZAMBOIA.
"No crimes this heart corrode, this hand defile,
Or frantic drive me o'er a foreign soil.
A murder'd wife, and wrongs unmatch'd, I mourn,
And hurried joys, that never shall return!
If then thou'rt tempted by the traitor's meed,
Take this poor life, and prosper by the deed!"

MOMBAZE.
"Not the rich produce of Angola's shore,
Not all the miser's heap'd and glittering store,
Not all that pride would grasp, or pomp display,
Should tempt this hand the wretched to betray.
No traitors dwell within this blest domain,
The friends of peace we live, a guileless train.
Grief dims thy eyes, or gladly would'st thou see
Thy lov'd MOMBAZE yet survive in me.
Canst thou forget?  One common lot we drew;
With thee enchain'd, a captive's fate I knew.
Distrust me not, but unreserv'd disclose
The anxious tale that in thy bosom glows.
To part our griefs is oft to mitigate,
And social sorrows blunt the darts of fate."

ZAMBOIA.
"Dear to my sight that form, and doubly dear
Thy well-known accents meet Zamboia's ear.
Oh!  had I died, and left the name of slave,
Deep, deep entomb'd within an early grave!
With thee enthrall'd, to cross the Western main!
Oh!  to have met a glorious death in arms,
And ne'er beheld Melinda's fatal charms!
Time would be short, and memory would fail,
To dwell distinctly on the various tale.&mdash;
Tedious to tell, what treach'rous arts were tried
To sooth oblivion, and to vanquish pride.&mdash;
No joy but one to cheer a life of pain.
Yet witness bear, thou dear departed ghost,
That lonely rov'st thy Gambia's sacred coast!
How sweet the toil, that met the morning's ray,
How light the labour that o'er-lasted day!
The reed-built hovel and the scanty fare
Imperial bliss could give, Melinda there!
Soft was my pillow on thy gentle breast,
When o'er-press'd nature droop'd in want of rest!
And if a rebel tear disgrac'd my eye,
Thine was the tear, and thine the bursting sigh!
Bliss I could boast, unenvy'd had it pass'd,
But bliss too great for hapless slaves to last."

A wretch who banish'd from his native clime,
Defil'd with many a black and monstrous crime,
Presided o'er us, and with iron hand
Held savage sway o'er all the servile band.
In him each hellish passion rudely glow'd,
And cruelty in him most cruel show'd.
Him lust infernal, one sad evening, led
T' invade the chasteness of my marriage bed.
I chanc'd t' approach:  the caitiff I surpris'd,
My wife preserv'd, and had his guilt chastis'd,
While full with vengeance boil'd my wounded heart,
But chance reserv'd him for a baser part.
Meanwhile, o'erjoy'd that vice ev'n once had fail'd,
I bless'd the Gods that innocence prevail'd."

"The baffled villain, now a foe profess'd,
Rolls scenes of blood within his poison'd breast.
With cowardness he forg'd a crafty tale,
And hands unrighteous poise the partial scale.
Imputed crimes to crush the weak suffice,
Hearsay is guilt, and damning fact surmise.
Where uncurb'd will usurpt the place of laws,
No friendly pleader takes the wretch's cause.
Our tyrant's fears each want of proof supplies,
We stand condemn'd, unquestion'd, on surmise."

"Oh!  had the grief and shame been all my own,
And the black vengeance punish'd me alone!
But harsher fates a harsher curse decreed;
These eyes were doom'd to see Melinda bleed.
I saw her by relentless ruffians bound,
The brandish'd scourge inflict the mortal wound;
Her tender frame abus'd, and mangled o'er,
I saw her welt'ring in a flood of gore.
The murd'rous scene had soon a dreadful close&mdash;
And do I live?  and can I speak my woes?
Her pregnant womb no longer could sustain
The public shame and agony of pain;
A birth abortive robb'd her of her breath,
And pangs convulsive seal'd her eyes in death.
One only pledge my weary soul detains,
This hapless infant, all that now remains,
The mournful image of my once-lov'd wife,
And ties me down awhile to hated life;&mdash;
Else this bold hand should liberty restore,
And my rapt spirit seek a happier shore.
Thro' devious paths with timid haste we fly,
Where yon blue mountains meet the bending sky,&mdash;
Nor serpents haunts I dread, nor deserts drear,
The master-savage man alone I fear."

MOMBAZE.
"Since from our native realms compell'd to part,
Such pointed sorrows have not touch'd my heart.
Insatiate plunderers!  could it not suffice
To rend, inhuman, all the social ties?
From guiltless joys, that bless'd our native soil,
Dragg'd on to a life of misery and toil,
Would you yet take the little God has given,
And intercept the gracious dews of heaven!
Your rage for blood, wild as your thirst for gain,
Shall no respects, nor laws divine, restrain?
Eternal truths can differing climes undo?
Is rape or murder sanctify'd in you?
And us what laws, as impious as severe,
Forbid the common rights of man to share?
Didst thou, Creative Power!  thy views confine?
For one proud race the spacious earth design?
For them alone does plenty deck the vale,
Blush in the fruit, and tinge the scented gale?
For them the seasons all their gifts unfold?
Blooms the fresh rose, or shines the waving gold?
O, no!  all-bounteous is thy equal hand,
And thy fix'd laws irrevocable stand!&mdash;
Hapless Zamboia, had it been thy fate
With me to share my more propitious state,
Thy soul had breath'd no impious wish to die,
Nor the big tear had trembled in thine eye.
Disjoin'd from thee, I too to slavery went;
But Heaven a father, not a master, lent.
He seems as virtue's self in mortal guise,
Tho' wealthy simple, and tho' modest wise.
Blest be the hand that life and freedom gave!
That power can boast, exerted but to save!
Blest the sage tongue, that stor'd the vacant mind,
The manners soften'd, and the heart refin'd!
That, still to Heaven's unerring dictates true,
Eternal truth unfolded to our view!
But come!  thy faint and weary limbs repose,
Forgetful of thy fears, thy griefs compose;
By morning's dawn with earnest foot I speed,
Nor sleep these eyes till I behold thee freed.
Some wealth I have, and, did I prize it more,
Well spar'd for this I deem the sacred store."

&mdash;So talk'd these friends, and to the cottage haste;
While sad Zamboia his pursuers trac'd.
The ruffian band arrest the hapless swain,
And prayers, and tears, and promises, are vain;
Their vengeful fervour, no, not gifts abate:
But, bound in chains, they drag him to his fate.
