In fair Italian fields and regions bright,
Where Adice rolls swift her swelling stream,
Soft scenes of harmony and dear delight
Inspiring still the gentle poet's theme;
Whilom reclin'd at ease, in blooming bowers,
At height of noon I pass'd the languid, fervent hours!

There oft I mus'd upon historic lore,
And oft I turn'd me to Campania's vale,
Where Freedom once her brightest ensigns bore,
Mourning the change that caus'd her sway to fail,
Till Slumber clos'd, at last, my wearied eyes,
And to my mental sight bade varied visions rise.

Methought I wander'd though a forest wild,
Where over-arching trees their boughs display'd,
And mazy paths the traveller beguil'd;
While gloom primaeval cast a night of shade;
Als beasts with uncouth noises fill'd the air;
And men as rough as beasts &mdash; for all was salvage there.

But onward as I fared, less rude appear'd
The russet path, e'erwhile with thorns o'er-grown,
Their heads the lofty trees more seemly rear'd,
And brightest landscapes at due distance shone;
Till, by degrees, the day's blest beams made way,
Thro' the deft screen of leaves shooting a checquer'd ray.

Now, near at hand, 'all on a rock reclin'd,'
That sternly frown'd upon a rapid stream,
Kiss'd by the sportive-passing wanton wind,
While insects flutter'd in the solar beams
All-bearing Nature nurs'd her offspring gay,
Of infant forms, that bloom'd, like flowers, to fade away.

Fast by her side, of bold and open mien,
A form I spied, and hail'd her goddess-born;
Whose presence with new beauties deck'd the scene,
Whose eye shone as the star that wakes the morn;
Clad like the blue-ey'd maid, fair Athens' boast,
That hurl'd the vengeful brand against the giant host:

FREEDOM her name!  for dignity and worth,
The brightest form that glads these low abodes;
With Time coeval, at his earliest birth;
Daughter of Heaven, the joy of men and gods.
Health, vigour, glory wait upon her reign,
Toils lessen in her view, and dangers threat in vain.

This nymph, wild-roving thro' her native shade,
By chance or Fate directed, found a bower,
Aye, with the pride of blushing Spring array'd,
Who there had nurtur'd every fragrant flower;
Which all in meetest ranks by Art were plac'd,
Whose well-appointed touch the tints of nature grac'd.

Here dwelt a maid of features passing fair,
Of mildest look, tho' featly fram'd for sway,
Truth, Concord, Justice, claim'd her chiefest care,
Fit to command, yet practis'd to obey:
On Virtue's base she rais'd her lasting fame,
Peace was her dear delight, and Order was her name.

Eftsoons both virgins through the forest pass'd;
And as they hied them hand in hand along,
The choicest flowers the verdant carpet grac'd,
The throstle sweeter warbled forth his song;
Till chang'd the prospects, swift as fleeting thought,
Another vision bright my wandering fancy wrought.

The salvage scene was vanish'd all and gone,
While swift the pleached bowers and shades decay;
But where the summer's sun serenely shone,
And distant spires rose glittering on the day,
Beneath the influence of a favouring clime;
High on a rough rock's base, rose Freedom's fane sublime,

Aye on the steepy cliff did thousands wait,
Prepar'd to worship at her hallow'd shrine,
Als myriads, late escap'd from cruel Fate,
Stood all-impassion'd by her voice divine.
Yet numbers did their time and strength misspend;
And, caught by lures of guile, to Faction's dwelling tend.

For, full in view, a lofty pile was found
On pillars of the bloody jasper rais'd,
The front with many a boasted portrait crown'd,
Whereon these luckless wights all eager gaz'd,
Forsook the path direct, left Truth behind,
Swift-pacing as they rode upon the winged wind.

O Heaven!  how sore it grieved me to see
Frail mortals rush, to ruin thus betray'd!
E'en as the garden's pride; the golden bee,
Her little thigh with fragrant thyme o'er-laid,
Chances where sly Arachne doth prepare
Her fell envenom'd loom, and meets her ruin there.

Far to the left this unblest mansion spread
Her dim domains &mdash; There heart-felt  sorrows flow;
Where sad Repentance hangs his drooping head,
And deep Reflection points to scenes of woe;
Condemn'd in pangs of anguish to deplore,
In courts where Discord stalks, all stain'd with human gore.

Not so the path direct. &mdash; The leading star,
Reason, there points to fame and fair renown,
Alike in peace preserv'd as gain'd in war,
Whilst Order waits her favourite sons to crown,
Who (maugre tyrant Force, or Faction's rage)
For Liberty stood forth, in every clime and age.

The gates now open'd wide unto the sound
Of notes harmonious, breath'd from flute and lyre;
So did the high and vaulted roofs rebound
With trumpets loud, enkindling martial fire;
There roofs algates no gaudy sculpture grac'd,
But rose on massy piles in comely order plac'd.

Nathless with radiance did the temple shine,
As Truth imparted there her steady light;
And Virtue, darting forth her beams divine,
Clad every object in her garb of light;
Whilst, as a mirrour clear, the walls return'd
The forms of mighty chiefs that once for glory burn'd.

There Patriot Zeal, groaning beneath proud Power,
With speaking eye turn'd tow'rds high Heav'n, I view'd,
Till hap'ly in some white, auspicious hour,
Firm and collected in his force he stood;
Gave man his birthright, broke the galling chain,
And rais'd his well-earn'd fame for ages to remain.

Around the glorious fane, all meetly plac'd
In radiant cyphers, shone each honour'd name
That once on earth historic pages grac'd,
Climbing with gain the steepy path to fame;
Still prais'd for deeds to selfish views unknown;
Who toil'd for Virtue's sake, and honour'd her alone.

There Conon, Thrasybulus there was known,
And Aristides still by virtue fir'd,
The chief who tore a tyrant from his throne,
And him who at Thermopylae expir'd.
There Rome's first heroes urg'd their honour'd claim,
Cato, and Brutus too, their country's boast and shame.

Nor were the British chieftains wanting there,
Still prompt to stand for liberty and laws,
From Albion's earliest days her joy and care,
Who triumph'd or who bled in Honour's cause;
With heroes yet unborn, in every age,
Whose honour'd names shall grace fair History's future page.

High on her throne the beauteous goddess sate,
In radiant arms, by hands coelestial dight,
Supported aye by Heaven and certain Fate,
Tho' oft attack'd by foes in cruel fight;
For when she seem'd to fall, she rose again,
With double glory clad, and re-assum'd her reign.

Thus as I gaz'd wild winds began to rear,
And with rude force the sacred fane assail;
Als rock'd the ground that seem'd so firm before,
And distant shouts came swelling on the gale;
While shook the roof, as from it's pillars borne,
And from it's solid base the pile with fury torn.

Then rose to view a spacious tented plain,
And armies marching forth, in meet array,
With all their well-appointed, banner'd train,
And radiant files that glitter'd on the day;
For War, that horrid pest, each bosom steel'd,
And, wrapp'd in fiery clouds, o'erlook'd the bloody field.

Remorseless Rage, whose ire no limit knows;
Stern Vengeance, rising from her dark abode;
With Cruelty, that smiles at human woes;
United here, to mar the works of God:
While mad Ambition, idol-thron'd, on high,
Blaz'd like some meteor in a troubled sky.

All these against fair Freedom's reign combin'd,
With many more the Muse forbears to name:
To Lethe best their memory consign'd,
On brutal force who sought to rise to fame;
Or to a pageant power all slavish bow'd,
Whose short-liv'd lustre caught a giddy, senseless crowd.

Far other powers in Freedom's cause were seen:
There Honour, with his train of heroes stood;
And Fortitude appear'd, with brow serene,
Firm as the rock whose base resists the flood,
What time the giant surges proudly rise,
And war in rebel mood against the distant skies.

And Justice, that in equal balance weigh'd
The deeds of men, and bore th' avenging sword,
With equal eye the faithful band survey'd;
While Perseverance, aye unknown to fear,
 [Line missing in the original]
And scorning toil and pain, brought up the steady rear.

Fierce was the charge:  each breast for glory burn'd,
Each still athirst for fame, the hero's boast,
Now here, now there, the tide of conquest turn'd,
As Victory hover'd yet o'er either host;
While the vex'd air scarce the rude clamours bore,
Shouts piercing distant heaven while blood distain'd the shore.

Rushing on Freedom's line, the tyrant train
Made cruel inroad with their dread career:
Firm stood her chiefs; but quickly fled amain
Full many a wight her badge that seem'd to bear&mdash;
Nor only fled, but oft against her rose;
Who turn'd, amaz'd to meet such unexpected foes.

Yet the brave train, collected in their force,
By Hope coelestial warm'd, the fight renew'd;
Till strength was wither'd where the bent their course,
And still the fainting foe with warmth pursued;
While Victory, smiling in the golden sky,
Seem'd with her laurel wreath just dropping from on high.

But now advancing swift with forceful sway,
While fast before them the proud hands retir'd,
Caught unawares in many a winding way,
With toil forespent, and e'en with conquest tir'd,
Sudden, on every side they were assail'd,
By foes who scarce were seen before their arms prevail'd.

Als did the angry welkin seem to lour,
Blue-forked lightnings darting from the skies,
Deceit exerting there his magic power,
Raising false forms to cheat deluded eyes:
Foul was the fiend; but wore a semblance bright,
That veil'd his hateful form from every mortal wight.

A scroll he bore, with magic spells all wrought,
Which as he por'd upon, in solemn mood,
Men felt each sense by fancied forms distraught,
While fell to earth e'en those that firmest stood:
Nor serv'd it now to urge disast'rous fight;
Where foes like these appear, safety is but in flight.

Long o'er this perilous ground the harrass'd band
Of Freedom, sore afflicted, made their way:
Till hap'ly freed from that ill-omen'd land,
Again they marshall'd fair, in open day;
Yet still perplex'd they stood, as art essay'd,
(Where strength and courage fail'd) to give their foemen aid.

Full in their front Ambition's ensign wav'd,
Where Tyranny eternal rule maintains:
While in their rear far other danger brav'd,
Where Anarchy his crouding vassals trains;
Who, blind to Wisdom, to themselves unknown,
Threat with eternal brawls fair Freedom's sacred throne.

Nathless, the glorious few, by Heaven inspir'd,
Escap'd the toils by the foul sorcerer laid;
By Virtue aided, and by Honour fir'd,
By Fortitude and Perseverance sway'd,
Resolv'd on final battle, scorn'd to yield,
And, maugre Hell's own arts, maintain'd the well-fought field.

Ambition now, all dreadful in his might,
Hurl'd vast destruction from his arms around;
And valiant hearts, erst thunderbolts of fight,
Strew'd by his giant strength the hostile ground;
While Cruelty, that press'd behind him hard,
Ruthless destroy'd the few his pride or pity spar'd.

Now, on his car, high-rising o'er the field,
Where Freedom nobly fir'd her glorious train,
He whirl'd his flaming brand against her shield,
With force that seem'd to make resistance vain;
While, bending from the shock, she veil'd her head,
Another direful stroke his furious partner sped.

In dust that hallow'd head they low had laid!
But Fortitude her succour timely lent,
O'er the bright maid her buckler firm display'd,
As at the foe her dreadful shafts she bent;
While Justice slow, but sure, with steady pace,
Advancing, rais'd her sword against the impious race.

Then the mad Tyrant, tracing back his ground,
With gloomy look withdrew him from the war&mdash;
In vain!  for now &mdash; the mart of many a wound&mdash;
Justice demands him from his lofty car;
With bloody wreath from his proud temples hurl'd,
He fell, and by his fall reliev'd a groaning world.

No longer now the Tyrant's forces stood;
They fled on every side, with fury driven;
Till Nature all her goodly scenes renew'd,
Where erst were blotted the fair works of Heaven;
Whilst Anarchy his ensigns spread in vain,
By Order soon reduc'd to own bright Freedom's reign.

The mortal strife thus ended &mdash; from on high
Fair Virtue's rays direct on Freedom shone;
And Inspiration, from her sapphire sky,
Pronounc'd to ages fix'd her certain throne:
While the loud notes of harmony that spread,
Broke the soft bands of sleep, and all the vision fled.
