Mild evening, not unwish'd, returns;
Her soft return will DAPHNE hail?
The fever'd air no longer burns,
But freshness breathes in ev'ry gale
Nature puts on her softest form,
Zephyr just dimples the calm silver flood;
While plaintive Philomel's sweet note forlorn,
Fills with mild melody the neighbouring wood.
Oh, come, dear maid!  my flower-wove arbour grace,
With me invoke the sacred Genius of the place.

Come, gentle Peace!  daughter of Heaven, descend!
Thy suppliant's ardent wishes deign to crown;
Thou who art Virtue's ever-smiling friend,
Tho' round her dire misfortunes sternly frown;
Oh, Power benign!  thy footsteps let us trace
O'er wooded upland, or by rivulet's side;
Oh!  condescend our favourite haunts to grace.
And in our social cottage deign to 'bide:
For well we know, where Virtue dwells with thee,
Celestial Happiness must love to be.

Be sweet retirement still our virtuous choice,
Unlur'd by Folly's false, but dazzling blaze;
Where Passion listens to calm Reason's voice,
And bright Reflection beams her sacred rays;
Where Charity appears with open hands,
And soft Compassion drops the tender tear;
Where faithful Love the generous soul expands,
And Friendship blazes, open and sincere;
Where Honour strict the steady bosom warms,
And Virtue smiles serene, in all her native charms.

Oh!  ye, by giddy Passion led astray,
Hearken awhile to her persuasive tongue;
No thorn she strews in Pleasure's flow'ry way,
But Peace attends her steps, and Music tunes her song,
With thy own shield, bright goddess, arm my breast,
Give me to chant thy praise the woods among;
Be friendship mine, and philosophic rest,
Far from the crouded city's busy throng
For far from crouded haunts does Wisdom dwell;
She flies the busy throng, and seeks the silent cell.

How little knows the dissipated breast
The pure and peaceful joys which thou canst give!
Little they know the sweets of rural rest
Who in perpetual noise and guilty cities live;
Where Avarice burns t' increase his sordid store,
 Where Riot wastes what Penury should share;
Where midnight broils oft bathe the sword in gore,
And foul Disease infects the wholesome air;
Where every crime and folly find a place,
And modest Virtue hides her deeply blushing face.

There dwell the sons of Softness and Excess,
Strangers to thee, and strangers to Delight;
Who never knew th' angelic power to bless:
Languor consumes their morn, and Riot wastes their night.
There too the fair and thoughtless waste their bloom,
Unsocially polite, unpleas'dly gay;
Fantastic joys their ill-priz'd hours consume,
And steal their useless lives all unenjoy'd away:
Strangers to Worth and dignity of mind,
Slaves of those little charms, to fate and form confin'd.

Little they know the inexpressive joy
The friend sincere, the tender mother, feels;
The heart-felt sweets of Nature's magic tye,
And the bright tear that from soft Pity steals,
They never felt; they never knew the bliss
That waits alone on happy social life,
Never receiv'd the kind paternal kiss,
Ne'er bless'd the name of daughter or of wife:
Ah!  how unlike what Nature meant to form,
With every virtue grac'd, complete in every charm!

Vainly, ye sons of Folly, ye pretend
That Pleasure dwells in softness and excess;
To her fair 'bodes your steps shall never tend,
Shall never reach the seat of heaven-born Happiness.
Not true delight that joyless wretch shall know,
In whose cold breast the social virtues pine;
His heart shall shrink with solitary woe,
Tho' on his face eternal pleasures shine:
For never joy shall warm the frigid breast,
Which, dead to social love, is by itself possess'd.

Be ours far other wishes, other joys,
Far other scenes be painted to our view;
Pleas'd will we 'scape from folly, glare, and noise,
While reason bright, and fancy, ever new,
Our steps attend:  we'll court the tuneful Muse;
The Muse shall deign our fancy to inspire,
The sweetest strains her influence shall infuse,
And fill our souls with her own sacred fire;
To distant worlds transported shall they wing,
For what the Muse inspires, th' enraptur'd bard must sing.

And thou, fair Peace, who lov'st the guiltless breast,
Oh, come!  and with thee bring thy radiant train,
Bright Confidence, Security, and Rest,
Exempt from Fear, Anxiety, and Pain;
Oh, come!  our constant soft companion be,
Bring us Content and philosophic Ease;
Humble Content, for, oh!  if bless'd with thee,
The humblest lot shall satisfy and please:
For well we know, where Virtue dwells with thee,
Celestial Happiness must love to be.
