Come lovely May, with charms benignly bright,
Lead briskly on the mirth-infusing hours,
All recent from the bosom of delight,
In sweetness smiling, and adorn'd with flow'rs;
In thy full energy and rich array,
Delight of nymphs and swains, O charming May,
From heav'n descend to earth, on earth vouchsafe to stay.

She comes!  on Zephyr's wings the goddess view,
Distilling balm she cleaves the fragrant air,
Attended by the silver-footed dew,
The ravages of winter to repair;
Conscious of her approach (to deck her bow'rs),
Earth from her fruitful lap and bosom pours
A waste of springing sweets and voluntary flow'rs.

Welcome!  as to a youthful poet wine,
To fire his fancy and enlarge his soul,
He weaves the laurel chaplet with the vine,
And grows immortal as he drains the bowl;
Welcome, as Phillis to her faithful swain,
For whom he long had sigh'd, but sigh'd in vain,
He darts into her arms, she smiles away his pain.

The bee, the golden daughter of the spring,
From mead to mead in wanton labour roves,
And loads its little thigh, or gilds its wing,
With all the essence of the fragrant groves;
Extracts the aromatic soul of flow'rs,
And humming in delight, its waxen bow'rs
Fills with the luscious spoil, and lives ambrosial hours.

The feather'd warblers chear the listening groves,
The mellow thrush, the blackbird sweetly shrill,
And little linnets celebrate their loves,
In hawthorn valley, or on tufted hill;
The soaring lark, the lowly nightingale,
A thorn her pillow, trills her doleful tale,
And melancholy muse dies along the dale.

No noise o'ercomes the silence of the shades,
Save short-breath'd vows, the dear excess of joy,
Or harmless giggle of the youths and maids,
Who yield obeisance to the Cypress boy;
Or flute soft sighing in the passing gale,
Or fountain gurgling down the rural dale,
Or song to beauty's queen, or lover's tender tale.

Ye nymphs and swains, as in a goodly round,
Glowing with health, all in the greenwood shade,
Unsparingly, ye thump the echoing ground,
Or lightly lead the dance along the glade;
O may no envious show'rs your passtime spoil,
While you in rural mirth the time beguile,
But may the sky be clear, and Phoebus deign to smile.

Come, Shyrugemah, milder than the spring,
And grateful as the rosy month of May,
O come, the birds the hymn of nature sing,
Enchanting wild from ev'ry bush and spray;
The fields invite us, thither let's repair,
Collect and weave whate'er is sweet and fair,
A posy for thy breast, a garland for thy hair.

Or up the steep ascent of Richmond Hill,
With pleasing diligence we'll wind our way,
What op'ning scenes the ravish'd senses fill,
And wide their rural luxury display;
Woods, dales, and flocks and herds, and colts and spires,
Villas of noblemen and country squires,
Such scenes as these the eye-sight never tires.

Hail!  charming scenes where joy would chuse to dwell;
Hail!  happy hours, which wisdom deems her own;
Hail!  music, which no instruments excell,
Hail!  flow'rets, not unworthy Flora's crown:
Ye linnets, larks, ye thrushes, nightingales;
Ye hills, ye plains, ye groves, ye streams, ye dales;
Ye ever-charming scenes, all you your poet hails.
