Retire in time!  And disengage your wings,
Ye careless crew, that sink in Cupid&rsquo;s toils!
For bondage, lunacy, and death he brings,
And of his nobler self the lover spoils;
Not all, like ROLAND'S mind, the God embroils;
Yet, less or more, the unresisted spell
Of reason's aid the wretched youth beguiles,
And whips, and straining cords, and darken'd cell,
The Maniac best become, his moody rage to quell.

Full many a path divides the maze of love,
Where wanders many a youth in varied pain,
Pregnant with fate, the labyrinthine grove
In shameful bondage holds the smitten train.
One sees his fellow struggling with the chain,
And laughs aloud, nor feels the latent pest
That thrids the nerve, and maddens in the brain;
While on his friend with equal woes oppress'd,
The poor Demoniac flings many a dead-born jest.

Once more, digressive Muse!  to ROLAND turn,
Where, all disarm'd and bare, the Maniac hies;
While rooted groves his wild incursion mourn,
And echoing caves rebellow to his cries:
Far, far the breeze convey'd the crashing noise
Of falling woods, that mark'd the madman's way,
The startled peasants ran, with pale surprise,
Led by their sins, or fate's resistless sway,
To that ill-omen'd spot, to view the sylvan fray.

They saw, and instant fled, unknowing where,
With terror blind, but ROLAND fast pursu'd,
And seiz'd a wretch, the laggard of the war,
And writh'd his neck around, in ireful mood:
Down drops the head; &mdash; as from Pomona's wood,
The strippling plucks the fruit with ready hand.
The heavy trunk he seiz'd, distain'd with blood,
And fell'd two champions on the bloody strand,
The most distinguish'd pair of all the rustic band.

The wiser few escap'd, aware of fate
Or chance, or fav'ring Heav'n secur'd their flight,
For now their num'rous droves the Maniac met,
And vents on them at large his wolfish spite.
The cautious hinds escap'd his searching sight,
In roofs conceal'd, for trees deny'd their aid,
Their mattocks, spades, and shares, with culture bright,
They left, around the fields, at random laid,
And some the rock ascend, and some the lowly shed.

Anon, the massacre commenc'd below,
Where his defenceless prey ORLANDO tore!
Down fell the Ox with solitary blow,
And butcher'd stocks distain'd the field with gore.
Fleet was the bounding steed that fled before
The moon-struck man, who dealt perdition round,
While now the woods, and now the plaintive shore
Rebellowing wide, return'd a mingled sound,
And bows and slings in vain dismiss'd the distant wound.

AFTER A SECOND ENGAGEMENT WITH THE SHEPHERDS, THE POET PROCEEDS TO DESCRIBE THE ROUT OF ORLANDO.

In wild despair the broken remnant fled,
And ROLAND ran impetuous on the spoil;
Where the poor hinds in many an humble shed
Their rustic stores conceal'd with annual toil;
There, weary with his chace of many a mile,
Their simple cates reviv'd the famish'd Knight:
Acorns, the native produce of the soil,
And bread, unconscious yet of Vulcan's might,
He found, and strait devour'd with ravenous delight.

Hence o'er the plains, inspir'd with vigour new,
The love-lorn swain his horrid Hunt began;
And flocks, and swains, and wolves, a mingled crew,
Before the frantic Lord tumultuous ran.
Nor mountain goat escap'd, nor tim'rous fawn,
And bristled boars reluctant learn'd to yield:
And oft', on sunny hill, or level lawn
He spread his banquet on the bloody field,
And want's importune call with life-warm blood repell'd.

Thus, up and down he wander'd many a day,
And thro' the Gallic bounds incessant stray'd.
At length a river stopp'd the Hero's way.
With lofty bridge across the current laid;
A cloud-capt tow'r the subject plain survey'd&mdash;
&mdash;But ZERBIN'S fate recalls the wand'ring song,
Who rode with ISABELL, his faithful maid,
For many a league the dreary waste along,
When, lo!  a Knight they saw, the dismal shades among.

Three days entire had ROLAND sworn t' attend,
Deep in the gloomy grove his Pagan foe:
While, tracing every step, his gallant friend,
Thro' hill above, and winding vale below,
Explor'd the wood, his destiny to know;
And o'er the green his flying courser trac'd.
At length the warrior spy'd the scene of woe;
Where, like a hurricane, ORLANDO pass'd,
And check'd the limpid stream, and laid the arbour waste.

Somewhat he saw that glimmer'd thro' the glade,
And, hast'ning to the spot, a cuirass found,
And near, the crested honours of his head,
By ALMONT worn of old, a Chief renown'd.
Fleet BRIGLIADORO from the woods profound
Was heard to neigh; and soon the steed was seen,
His splendid bridle trailing on the ground.
The tatter'd surcoat strow'd the velvet green,
Or in loose fragments hung the bending boughs between.

Afar, unsheath'd, his Durindana lay:
Bewilder'd in his guess, the warrior stood;
No sign of gore the wand'rer's steps betray,
Nor mark of slaughter stain'd the conscious wood.
Fair Isabel her face with tears bedew'd,
The reliques of the matchless man to see;
But now a trembling swain, who lately view'd
From a safe rock the scene of misery,
Across the lawn was seen, with haggard looks to flee.

He saw the maniac fling his arms away,
He saw him storm the cots and chase the swains,
And waste the flocks with unresisted sway,
Pil'd in expiring heaps along the plains,
The Caledonian check'd his flowing reins,
The sad disastrous tale at large to hear,
And scarce belief th' affrighted hind obtains,
So like a dream it touch'd the trembling ear,
'Till certain signs he saw, the shepherd's faith to clear.

Then from his steed the weeping Knight descends,
The trophies of his friend to bear away;
Fair Isabel her gen'rous Lord attends,
Where all around his arms at random lay, &amp;c.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Then gathering in a heap the shining spoil,
Zerbino on a pine the trophy hung;
And, to secure the venerable pile,
This verse he grav'd the polish'd rind along:
"These dazzling arms to Almont's son belong,
Observe, and pass, nor touch the dreadful mail!"
This rite perform'd, to horse the Hero sprung;
But mounted scarce, when, from the winding vale,
Fierce Mandricand was seen the sunny hill to scale.

The trophy soon the Tartar Lord beheld,
And ask'd the meaning of the mystic show;
But when the Prince Orlando's name reveal'd,
To Durindana sprung the pagan foe,
And reach'd the falchion where it hung below.
And "Thus I dare to seize my own, (he cry'd;)
To Hector's gift my bold forefather's owe
The matchless boon that grac'd my father's side!
Till Roland's ruffian hand the shining belt unty'd.

"But fearing now his plunder to maintain
By arms, he left the long-contested prize,
And flies, a seeming maniac, o'er the plain:
There let him ban his stars, and threat the skies;
But me, like him, the world might think unwise,
If now my property I left behind."
"Withhold thy hand, (the Caledonian cries)
Nor think so easy thus the prize to find."
Both draw, and both advance, and soon the battle join'd.

Orlando's bick'ring blade the Tartar drew,
And Zerbin nimbly shun'd the mortal blow;
Around their heads the flaming falchions flew,
And rocks and woods resounded blow for blow;
Orlando's blade dismiss'd to shade below
A soul, where'er its edge descended right;
And well the Caledonian seem'd to know
Keen Durindana's fell decisive might,
For still he shunn'd the stroke, and wheel'd to left and right.

Fleet as a mountain roe, his steed obey'd
His Master's will, swift bounding here and there;
Or, like an hound, sagacious thro' the glade,
That bays the bristled boar, with horrent hair,
The churning boar provokes the fight afar,
And aims with sharpen'd tusks a sidelong wound.
Thus young Zerbino shuns the storm of war,
Evading oft the blow with nimble bound,
And wards and strikes at once, and shifts his dang'rous ground.

Like tempests, eddying on the distant plain,
Between two bosom'd hills with whirlwind sway,
When gusty march upturns the bellowing main,
And bending woods the furious blast obey:
Rebellious now, they dare the windy fray,
And now their straining boughs salute the soil:
Thus Zerbin hardly kept his foe at bay:
His gen'rous steed, o'erspent with constant toil,
Could scarce with wonted speed the raging Tartar foil.

As last, a downright blow his shoulder smote,
And plate and mail defend their Lord no more.
Thro' saddle-bow, and trappings richly wrought,
ORLANDO'S fated blade resistless shore:
But ZERBIN saw the coming stroke before,
Else thro' his mangled side the steel had pass'd;
It raz'd the skin, and sluic'd the purple gore:
The ruddy stain his polish'd arms defac'd,
Adown his manly limbs descending from his waist.

As I have seen the hand that chains my heart
With purple grain the silv'ry warp divide,
And beautify the web with matchless art:
Thus stain'd the trickling gore his ivory side;
The trickling gore alarm'd his beauteous bride,
Who shriek'd aloud the purple stream to see.
The Prince, with rage inspir'd, and martial pride,
And inborn worth, and hope of victory,
Return'd the blow, and struck the Tartar to his knee.

But oh!  the Pagan far his foe excell'd
In manly strength, and heav'nly temper'd mail;
Tho' stunn'd, his haughty head he soon upheld;
And "See, he cry'd, whose arms can best repel
The biting steel!" &mdash; Then aim'd a blow so well,
That helm and corslet both it seem'd to mow.
ZERBINO rais'd his buckler to repel
The mortal stroke; &mdash; his shield receiv'd the blow,
Down came the horrid blade, and cleft his buckler through.

He dropp'd the targe, and rais'd his vengeful blade,
And rain'd on Hector's mail a storm of blows:
The Phrygian mail, which ne'er its Lord betray'd,
Nor dint of arms, nor sign of battle shews,
But where MANDRICARD strikes, the joints unclose,
And shield and corslet strew the bloody ground.
Yet, as his vigour fails, his courage grows,
And still unconscious of his streaming wound
He stood, erect and bold, nor yet his weakness own'd.

Fair ISABELLA saw impending fate;
She saw &mdash; and terror froze the vital blood:
Then shrieking ran, where DORALICE sat,
And clung around her knees, with fear subdu'd:
And, while her eyes distill'd a briny flood,
"Oh!  part!  she cry'd, in mercy part the fray!"
Thy nymph obey'd, and calm'd the angry mood
Of the stern King, exulting o'er his prey,
And Caledonia's Lord resign'd the doubtful day.

With inborn grief consum'd, the gen'rous youth
The loss of DURINDIN for ever wail'd,
Nor time nor place his rankling mind could soothe.
O'er ebbing rage the tide of woe prevail'd,
And now his inward pangs, but ill conceal'd,
Aided his wounds the warrior's strength to waste,
And ev'ry hour his native vigour fail'd;
'Till life itself began to ebb at last,
And down beside a spring his languid limbs he cast.

Down by his side the melancholy maid
Lamenting sunk, to hope and comfort lost,
Unknowing where to find a Leech's aid.
Nor city near, nor habitable post
She knew, o'er all the desolated coast;
And oft' of Heav'n and fortune she complain'd.
And "Why!  oh!  why, she cry'd, ye heav'nly host,
Could not the swallowing storm my sorrows end,
Why thus to tenfold woe my weary life extend?"

The dying lover rais'd his languid look,
Deeply concern'd her piercing plaint to hear:
He mark'd her woe, with keener torture struck
Than e'er he felt from hostile sword or spear.
"So let my mem'ry live for ever dear
In that lov'd breast," the dying youth  reply'd,
"As deep it wounds my heart to leave you here
In this lone wilderness, without a guide,
In solitary woe to trace the desert wide.

"Had cruel fate allow'd me to expire
Where christian hand the fun'ral rite could pay;
Thus, thus to die were ZERBIN'S last desire,
And on your bosom breathe his soul away!
&mdash;Must I then leave my ISABEL to stray
Where savage wolves, and men more savage roam?
Whose looks, those eyes, that send a dewy ray,
Those lips I last attest, your doubtful doom,
Shall vex my wand'ring soul beyond the peaceful tomb."

Her lips to his the lovely maid declin'd,
And wash'd his clay-cold cheek with bursting woe,
Like some sweet dropping flowret left behind,
The cruel rigours of the north to know.
"Was this your love, to seek the shades below,
And leave me here?"  Return'd the weeping maid:
"Then hear your ISABELLA'S latest vow
Never to leave your side, alive or dead,
But follow to the grave, or Hell's profounder shade.

"Our souls shall take an undivided flight,
For grief, or mortal steel, shall end my days;
Together shall we seek the realms of light,
And yon' empyrean plains together trace:
Some honest swain, that finds the mortal place,
Shall give our mould'ring bones a common grave."
And now the fatal moment came apace,
Her quiv'ring lips his latest breath receive,
While thus her last farewell the dying Hero gave.

"Now by our common vows, my love, forbear!
By that strong love that led you o'er the main;
Yet for a while consent your woes to bear,
And for my sake the load of life sustain.
Shall no faint trace of ZERBIN'S love remain?
Forbid it, Heav'n! &mdash; and think!  desponding maid,
How from the stormy sea, and savage train,
You lately 'scap'd by mighty ROLAND'S aid,
By Heav'ns protecting hand thro' various dangers led."

The rest was lost, for o'er his languid eyes
The hand of Fate her sable curtain flung.
A last, faint gleam, the lamp of life supplies;
While o'er him ISABEL in anguish hung.
But when she saw her lover stretch'd along
Lifeless and cold, she gave her sorrows way,
And scream'd so loud, that dale and thicket rung,
And rocks and woods return'd the doleful lay,
And oft' her golden locks she rent in rage away.

At last, the lover's sword she chanc'd to spy,
And drew, with dire intent the fatal blade;&mdash;
But now, returning from a fountain nigh,
A Hermit old the frantic deed survey'd,
And instant ran, and seiz'd the furious maid,
And strove with healing words to sooth her pain!
And much the holy man devoutly pray'd
That gracious Heav'n would calm her madding brain,
And curb her swelling woe with Reason's gentle rein.

And many an holy text the sage apply'd,
And talk'd of trials sad in days of old,
The world's delusive scenes, the fall of pride,
And Heav'n's unfailing faith the Hermit told.
His words at length her madding mind control'd,
And rais'd to Heav'n her disencumber'd thought:
Yet the lov'd image kept its secret hold
In her warm breast, by art celestial wrought,
Nor would she leave his corse on that deserted spot.

Then with the Hermit's aid her Lord's remains
On his own steed she plac'd, a mournful weight,
And journey'd o'er the desolated plains,
To the fair confines of Marsilea's state:
Ere, the sweet maid that mourn'd her lifeless mate,
He meant to settle in a Convent near,
Then, better to convey the mortal freight,
The friendly Sage procur'd a fun'ral bier,
And coffin, smear'd with pitch, to hold his reliques dear, &amp;c.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

THE POET THEN PROCEEDS TO TELL HOW THE PRINCESS DORALICE, WHO HAD BEEN BETROTHED TO RHODOMONT, PRINCE OF SARZA, WAS CARRIED OFF BY MANDRICARD, KING OF TARTARY:  HOW RHODOMONT ATTEMPTED TO RECOVER THE LADY:  WHEN AFTER A LONG AND FRUITLESS CONTENTION, THEY RESOLVED TO ABIDE BY THE ELECTION OF THE PRINCESS, WHO, TO THE ASTONISHMENT OF HER FIRST LOVER, CHOSE THE SECOND. &mdash; THE DISAPPOINTED HERO, LIKE ACHILLES, LEAVES THE CAMP IN A RAGE, AND FIXES HIS HABITATION IN A SOLITARY SPOT NEAR MARSEILLES.

Here pensive as he stood, at close of day,
And all his anguish rose afresh to mind,
He saw a pair along the public way,
A maid before, a rev'rend man behind;
Lovely she seem'd, tho' all to grief resign'd:
And on a sumpter steed an herse they bore,
In sable clad, which slowly seem'd to wind
In fun'ral pomp the verdant champaign o'er
ZERBINO'S mournful bier, who fell on SENNA'S shore.

Taught by the hoary Sage, his weeping mate
To Heav'n resolv'd her future life to vow;
And now her lover brought in fun'ral state
The hallow'd rites of burial to bestow:
Her fine dishevell'd hair, and looks of woe,
Her eyes suffus'd with tears and heaving breast,
Caus'd the proud heart of Rhodomont to blow,
And rais'd new motions in the Pagan's breast,
For in her lovely form the Graces shone confest.

But vengeance soon assuag'd the rising flame,
And mem'ry of the wrongs from woman borne;
Wrongs, which he vow'd to pay with double shame,
On all the sex of Doralisa's scorn,
A proper object seem'd the maid forlorn,
With fresh pursuit his former flame to quell.
Inly he glow'd, to see the Damsel mourn,
And hasten'd down to meet her in the vale,
Then soon with soothing words began his am'rous tale.

A look of smooth deceit his heart conceal'd,
And much he pray'd the Damsel's fate to hear:
A train of varied woes the maid reveal'd;
How, torn by fate from all she held most dear,
She meant, in some sequester'd abbey near,
In piety and peace her days to end:
Theme of derision to the godless Peer!
Who ne'er was known his stubborn knees to bend,
Or to the heav'nly throne an orison to send.

And much he blam'd the profanation vile,
Soon beauty in a Nunn'ry to entomb!
Like Miser old, that hides his shining spoil
From human use in some sequester'd gloom.
"The savage race to manacles we doom,
Not lambs, whose gentle kind encrease our fold."
Thus be began the Tutor to assume:
But the grey Saint, in aid of virtue bold,
With godly reprimand his rising flame controll'd.

The Hermit lavish'd all his sacred store,
And spread the banquet of the soul in vain;
Perverse of taste, he scorn'd his temp'rate lore,
Like some proud steed, rebellious to the rein:
Yet still the Preacher ply'd the word amain;
'Till Rhodomont at last, with fury stung,
Th' Apostle took, and dash'd him on the plain.&mdash;
But now 'tis time to end my tedious song,
For Hesper lights his lamp, and leads the stars along.

CANTO XXIX.
Nor blows nor threats the holy man could move,
Nor soothing pray'rs, to leave his Ward behind:
No more with words the haughty Pagan strove;
But in his rev'rend beard his hand entwin'd,
Nor left a lock of all he seiz'd behind!
Nor yet content, the trembling caitiff caught,
And swung him round and round, with fury blind;
Then launch'd in air the man without a fault,
Whose breathless corse, they tell, the neigh'bring ocean sought!

And dash'd against a rock, distain'd the flood
With batter'd brains and consecrated gore!
But others say, an heav'nly angel stood
To break his fall, and thence the victim bore.
A third reports, he sought the distant shore,
With oary arms; but sunk, by labour spent!&mdash;
The wand'ring Muse pursues his flight no more,
But turns to sing the Pagan's fell intent,
Who thro' the whistling air his teasing Tutor sent.

Then turning to the Maid with mild regard,
(The Maid who sate in monumental woe!)
Nor pray'rs nor blandishments the Lover spar'd,
To teach her icy heart like his to glow:&mdash;
"My Life!  my Soul!  a pitying glance bestow
On him, whose life on ev'ry look depends:
From you his hopes, from you his comforts flow,
Swift thro' his soul the gliding dart descends!"
Thus ev'ry common-place of love the Pagan blends.

No sign of violence the Lover show'd;
For love had taught by gentleness to gain
The Maid's consent, in gen'rous gift bestow'd,
Not by brute force compell'd, or won with pain:
And, tho' he long'd the lovely fruit to gain,
Yet much he fear'd the tender tree to wound;
But thought by slow degrees her mind to train.
While she, who fear'd her virgin fame to wound,
To ev'ry quarter turn'd her anxious thoughts around.

With mortal steel her purity to save
She first resolv'd; and thus to keep her faith,
And sink unspotted to her silent grave.
True to her murther'd Lord, in life and death,
Who in her snowy arms resign'd his breath,
And heard her vows of everlasting truth.
And now she spy'd the Pagan's rising wrath,
Who saw his arts how vain her soul to soothe,
Fir'd with her virgin charms her rosy blooming youth.

At last her anxious thought a project form'd,
To turn his violating rage away.
And now the Knight, to am'rous frenzy warm'd,
Forgot to soothe, and press'd to seize his prey.&mdash;
She interpos'd, with tim'rous sweet delay.
"Hear!  if your hold your life and honour dear!
A noble gift your continence shall pay
(If to my pray'r you lend a patient ear)
Above the fleeting joys of female beauty dear!

"A thousand willing Dames may crown your love,
And soothe your soul with transitory joy;
But mine are joys the fleeting bliss above,
Which few besides can give, and none destroy:
An herb I know, in yonder forest nigh,
Which, boil'd in bitter rue and ivy-juice,
Then o'er the flame of cypress left to fry,
And press'd by maids, a liquor shall produce,
O'er all the Sylvan kind of most distinguish'd use.

"It saves, from biting steel and burning flame,
The man that thrice anoints his body round,
For one revolving moon in fields of fame:
Then deadly steel regains its pow'r to wound
'Till once again the sov'reign bath is found,
And once again the magic juice apply'd.
For this I pledge myself, in promise bound
This day the wondrous liquor to provide,
A gift beyond the sway of Europe's kingdoms wide.

"I ask your plighted faith, the sole return,
Neither by word nor deed to wound my fame."
Th' impatient Saracen began to burn
The charm to know, and satisfy'd the Dame
With solemn oaths, by ev'ry dreadful name.
Nor longer meant the sacrament to keep,
Than, proof to biting steel and burning flame,
He found the magic bath his members steep,
But in his mind conceal'd his cruel purpose deep.

For angel, saint, or God, he valu'd not!
For lies renown'd beyond the Punic race!
And with repeated oaths the Virgin brought
On him her seeming confidence to place:
Then ISABEL explor'd the lonely maze,
The plant of steel-defying pow'r to find;
Nor fail'd the Algerine her steps to trace,
In mute attendance following close behind;
And many an herb beheld, from Mother Earth disjoin'd.

Of some the root, of some the stem she brought,
And to the Pagan's cell return'd in haste:
Then this unequal'd maid of stainless thought,
High o'er the Cypress flame her cauldron plac'd,
And all the live-long night the liquor prest
With virgin hands, 'till Phosphor woke the day.
The wakeful Prince, observant of his Guest,
Her ev'ry motion watch'd with keen survey,
'Till now the stars began to shine with blunted ray.

But, long compell'd to watch the raging flame,
A burning thirst seiz'd the Pagan Knight:
He call'd his menial crew &mdash; the servants came
And soon began the Bacchanalian rite!
He sat, and quaff'd with ever new delight,
Scorning the sober laws of Lybia's shore.
Two casks of gen'rous Rhodes, the prize of fight,
The Algerine exhausted of their store,
Nor priz'd the cup beyond that blooming HEBE bore.

And larger cups he call'd, and larger still,
 [Letter-press drop-out] his slaves the mantling bowl.
The slaves exhaust the bowl, and instant fill
'Till cell and table seem'd around to roll.
The maid, observant of his madd'ning soul,
Her cauldron cool'd, and thus bespoke the Peer:
"My Lord!  the spell is fix'd, entire and whole,
And soon the full effect my faith shall clear,
For I myself propose the trial first to bear.

"Your eyes shall witness to the daring deed,
Your strong decisive hand shall judge the truth;
The sov'reign juice of this decocted weed
Shall smear my yielding ncek, and bosom smooth:
Then let no female touch of pity soothe
Your manly breast, but draw your vengeful blade,
And try its edge on me!  devoid of ruth.
Thus be the virtue of the spell essay'd,
If yet its power can save a pure unspotted maid."

She bath'd her lovely neck, and bent it low;
The thoughtless Saracen his faulchion drew,
Heady with wine, and aim'd a mortal blow;
From her fair neck the head asunder flew,
Dashing the walls around with purple dew;
And thrice aloft the gory visage sprung,
And thrice distinctly call'd her lover true,
The partner of her soul, with trembling tongue;
And on her dying lips the name of ZERBIN hung.

Peace to her soul!  that found a way so rare
To save from taint her pure unsullied name;
That kept her chastity with cautious care,
An Hermit virtue now, of slender fame:
So may the favour'd Tuscan Muse proclaim
The bright example down from age to age;
As here I vow to sing the peerless dame,
And deck with ev'ry charm the glowing page,
For centuries to come her sisters to engage.

Go, take thy seat, the heav'nly choirs among,
But leave thy virtues to the world below.
Already!  Hark!  begins the choral song,
And love celestial wears a warmer glow;
"A brighter wreath on ISRAEL bestow!"
A voice proclaim'd, "than Roman Lucrece wore.
And future ISABELS a rank shall know
Above their sex from Gaul to India's shore,
A breed of matchless minds on earth unknown before.

"Immortal Paeans on thy name shall wait
From Calpe's western cliffs to Indus bar,
And future Bards prolong thy deathless date
Beyond the limits of a mortal fair;
The maids of Helicon their lutes prepare,
And Echo propagates the name around,
Thro' Pindus  wasted on the trembling air,
And steep Parnassian cliffs return the sound,
While Phoebus joins the theme, and sings the glorious wound."

Such music charm'd the air, and balanc'd main,
Which, calm as death, the heav'nly summons heard:
The op'ning sky reviv'd the pomp again,
And ISABEL before her love appear'd,
And Angel now, from gross contagion clear'd
Of this sad soil, where now the Pagan lay
New from his wine, in virgin slaughter smear'd,
And found his dire mistake, and curs'd the day
That to his horrid hands seduc'd the lovely prey.

At last he swore to make her mem'ry live,
And purge his crime with off'rings to her shade:
Then on a tomb he bade her fame survive,
And to her name a dedication made
Of those sad walls that saw the reeking blade:
Numbers the Knight employ'd to raise the frame,
And some for love, for terror some obey'd,
And soon the quarry'd cliffs together came,
And built the wondrous mass, a work of deathless name.

Twice fifty feet in front the marble mound
Enclos'd the solemn tomb, and chapel fair,
Like ARIAN'S mole on Tiber's stream renown'd,
And near, a turret rais'd its head in air,
Across the stream he built a bridge with care,
Where two encount'ring steeds could hardly pass,
Narrow and steep, it seem'd to menace war,
And strode the surge with formidable grace,
Nor wall, nor palisade, enclos'd the dang'rous space.

On this portentous bridge he meant to meet
Whatever champion dar'd the pass to try,
And send the warrior and his steed to fleet
Down the deep flood that swept his castle by:
Their shining arms he swore to hang on high
A thousand shields at least, to soothe her ghost.
Now ten revolving suns had walk'd the sky,
And now the bridge complete the river cross'd,
And the high-station'd watch survey'd the ample coast.

The solemn tomb had hardly reach'd its height,
Yet overlook'd at large the prospect near.
A sounding bugle told, if any Knight
Approach'd the dang'rous pass to break a spear,
Then from the castle came the raging Peer,
With lance in rest, to dare the doubtful fray:
The stumbling courser cost his rider dear,
For one untoward step would turn the day,
And send them down the stream together swept away.

If to the western shore a stranger came,
The eastern side the Pagan warrior held:
Still on the bridge to close the bloody game,
Nor ever deign'd to give an ampler field:
His falling foe the Algerine compell'd,
To quaff at large the cool and temper'd flood,
Or that Circaen draught, that late impell'd
His cruel hand to shed a virgin's blood,
As that baptismal rite could ease his inward load.

Fool!  To suppose the surge could wash away
The bloody orgies of the venom'd bowl!
Yet many a Knight who fought the dubious fray
By turns were sent adown the flood to roll,
For there the way from Italy to Gaul
Directly led the Cavaliers along;
And more, impell'd by native worth of soul
Met on the bloody pass the son of wrong,
From that disastrous bridge by turns at distance flung.

Their name and arms behind the Lybians left,
Suspended high o'er ISABELLA'S grave;
But liberty and life, a dearer gift,
The gallant Pagan to his brethren gave.
His christian foes he sent across the wave
To fam'd ARZILIS' strand, a captive train:
But fortune sent a bolder foe to brave
The haughty Lord, that rul'd the wide domain;
ROLAND, the moon-struck man the scower'd the ample plain.

By chance or fate the noble Maniac led,
Beheld the unfinish'd walls and rising tow'rs;
Just then, in horrid steel completely clad
The Pagan stood, and mark'd the madman's course,
Who leapt the stony fence with matchless force;
Yet ere the bridge he gain'd, the warder cry'd,
"Hence on thy life!  for no such mountain boors
The pass was meant, but knights in danger try'd
Who know with deadly steel the quarrel to decide."

The love-lorn wretch by moody madness stung,
Regardless of his threat, secur'd the pass,
Fir'd at the bold attempt, the son of wrong
Resolv'd at once to check the foul disgrace,
And push the Maniac from the narrow space,
In the deep stream his arrogance to cool;
Nor dream'd, a naked groom would dare to face
His val'rous arm, renown'd from pole to pole,
Which many a Knight had sent adown the flood to roll.

Just then the Pagan saw a Damsel fair,
Who to the bloody bridge her palfrey press'd;
Sweet Hordelese, that sought, in sad despair,
Her gallant Brandimart from east to west;
Nor knew that now he lay, by siege oppress'd,
In Paris' walls, with Gallia's sons of fame!
She saw the struggling warriors breast to breast,
Full well she knew Orlando's giant frame,
And stood with anxious eye to mark the manly game.

At once his naked majesty she knew,
But wonder'd much to see his moon-struck rage.
The grappling warriors now the fight renew,
And bend alternate o'er the fearful edge;
The Pagan storm'd to find an Ideot wage
Such equal war, and foil a practis'd Knight:
And now he tries at vantage to engage
His foe, by open force, or secret sleight;
And twists him to the left, and bends him to the right.

Again, he thought Orlando's weight to heave
With manly might, and o'er the ramparts throw;
Or with supplanting foot to foil the chief.
Like a chaft boar that feels his fury glow,
Against the tree from which he fell below,
And strives with fruitless rage to rend the bole,
Thus Rod'mont strove to foil his moon-struck foe,
While Roland, strong of hand, but weak of soul,
The panting Pagan held beneath his stern control.

Bereft of sense, but terrible in might,
Backward he leapt, and drew his foe along;
The flashing waves receiv'd their double weight,
And round the plaintive shores the rumour rung;
Fast to the shore the naked madman sprung,
For well his oary arms he knew to ply;
But Rhod'mont toil'd the dashing waves among,
Close-arm'd, and hardly gain'd the harbour nigh;
While Roland sped away, and scorn'd his victory.

Careless alike of obloquy or fame,
He hurried on, nor cast a look behind;
While prying round, to spy her lover's name,
Or broider'd mantle waving in the wind,
Sweet Hordelisa search'd in vain to find
Her husband's arms on Isabella's tomb;
Nor, tho' in vain, the anxious search declin'd,
And doubtful still of Brandemarte's doom,
Her gallant husband sought from Normandy to Rome.

'Twere madness like his own the slights to tell
Of that fantastic Knight, in order due,
And with his countless freaks my song to swell;
But some I'll thence select, a simple few,
That bear the genuine mark, authentic, true:
And first I'll give Pyrene's pass to fame;
But first, an horrid line of death he drew,
From clime to clime, till to the bounds he came,
Which Arragon divide from Gallia's nobler name.

Still tow'rd the setting sun he bent his flight,
'Till to a lofty rock he came at last,
That o'er the valley frown'd, as black as night,
In ruin pendent o'er the dreary waste;
Just then, a rustic pair the valley past,
And slowly urg'd a loaded ass along:
The lunatic they saw; and called in haste,
"Ideot!  be gone, or dread the smarting thong,
How dar'st thou cross our way, those rugged rocks among?"

He answer'd not, but rais'd his foot in air,
And instant spurn'd away the burden'd beast.
Devious he flew, till, on a hill afar,
He perch'd, like tim'rous dove by falcon press'd.
Then on the youths he ran, a pair unblest,
With luck beyond his hope, the foremost fell
Ten fathoms down, and scap'd the raging pest!
Tho' torn with briars that lin'd the rocky dell,
Yet much he prais'd the saints that sped his flight so well!

The youngest strove a pointed rock to climb,
And scrambled to the top with all his might;
But, ere his hands could touch the top sublime,
His heels were seiz'd behind by Almont's knight!
Who rais'd the wretch aloft, with stern delight,
And rent, with gloomy joy, his trunk in twain;
As for a falcon, tir'd with lengthen'd flight,
His Lord divides a pullet, or a crane,
Its entrails, for the bird, a sav'ry treat to gain.

Himself the wondrous tale to Turpin told,
Turpin the Sage, who gave the deed to fame.
Now down the hill the lucky brother roll'd;
And now aloft he seiz'd the panting Game!
Then to Hesperia's bounds the Rover came,
Down from Pyrene, like a sweeping storm,
Sending from realm to realm his dreaded name;
To distant Calpe ran the long alarm,
And Arragon beheld her shore with slaughter warm!

There, as at eve, he meant his limbs to lay,
And rest awhile beneath the cooling shade;
Disastrous chance! &mdash; along the fatal way,
Angelica, with young Medora led,
His blooming rival, and the faithless Maid,
Who from the Gallic bounds their way pursu'd,
Th' unconscious Fair approach'd the secret shade,
And, stretch'd along the sand her Lover view'd!
In sight, a Savage Man!  who roam'd the neighb'ring wood.

For still beneath the burning eye of Noon
Naked he ran, since first his frenzy grew,
Led by the mazes of the wand'ring moon!
And now his skin had chang'd its native hue,
For dusky brown, that marks the sunny crew
In Mauritania's shores, or Niger's strand;
Or where Ammonian Jove commands the view
Of unprolific plains and barren sands,
Or where proud Nilus sweeps across the smiling lands.

Gaunt were his looks, his eyes with hollow stare,
Deep, deep within the burning sockets roll'd:
Like Gorgon's crest, or stern Alecto's hair,
His tempest-beaten locks erect, and bold,
With horrid shade his temples seem'd to fold;
His beard the rest conceal'd, a black disguise:
Cathaia's Princess shudder'd to behold
His looks, and sprung away with wild surprize,
Shrieking for instant aid with agonizing cries.

The Maniac started from his humble bed,
And sprung to seize the lovely panting prey;
Tho' ev'ry trace of love had left his head
By long oblivious madness raz'd away;
She, like a fawn, that fears the quiv'ring spray,
He, with a tyger's speed, pursu'd behind.
MEDORO mark'd the chace, with mild dismay,
And with his falchion bare, the madman join'd,
Aiming to lop his head, as down the wretch declin'd.

The blow rebounded from his charmed hide,
His charmed hide, by fate secur'd from wound.
ORLANDO felt the shock, and turn'd aside,
Then rais'd a fist, which ne'er an equal own'd,
And struck his steed, and fell'd him to the ground;
The gen'rous courser spurn'd and groan'd his last.
Medoro left his steed with nimble bound;
But that wild Maniac, heedless in his haste,
O'erstept the vanquish'd Knight, and the fair Asian chas'd.

The shrieking Lady urg'd her steed along
By the smooth margin of the level shore.
Vain was the bloody spur, the smarting throng,
The Savage Man had quaff'd her streaming gore!
But now her ring, an aid unthought before,
She call'd to mind, and to her lips apply'd:&mdash;
The Lunatic beheld her face no more!
So well the Ring preserv'd its pow'r to hide;
But, as she rais'd her hand, she slipt her foot aside.

Whether by fear or haste, her feet she lost,
Just as she disappear'd and backward fell!
Perhaps her stumbling steed his legs had cross'd,
Or this, or that, I'll not presume to tell!
A moment later had she try'd the spell,
The Savage Man had seiz'd his panting prey!&mdash;
Now let her try again a steed to steal,
By quick conveyance from his Lord away,
For Roland her's pursues along the sandy bay.

But first let us leave the Princess to her fate,
An happier fate than Roland doom'd to find,
And follow by the shore her moon-struck Mate;
Who matchless in his speed, outwent the wind!
Now foot to foot, he follow'd close behind;
Now side by side, he reach'd the steed at last;
Then round his hand the flowing bridle twin'd,
And on the saddle sprung with furious haste,
And ply'd the whip and spur along the barren waste.

With gloomy joy he strode the willing steed,
His mistress had not giv'n him more delight;
Yet stop'd he not his famish'd horse to feed,
Nor gave an hour to breathe, at morn or night:
At last a chasm appear'd, an awful sight
To sober men, but ROLAND try'd the leap,
And tumbled down a pit, as dark as night,
His steed and him together down the steep,
But brave ORLANDO roll'd uninjur'd to the deep.

Not so his steed, his shoulder felt the shock,
And up the hero dragg'd her weight with pain:
Then on his ample back the burden took,
And bore her seventy furlongs o'er the plain;
Then set her gently down, and pull'd the rein,
And urg'd to toilsome march, the weary beast,
That slowly limp'd along, like one in pain;
"Come on," he cry'd, and still the victim prest,
While still with hobbling gait the courser mock'd his haste.

But had he vy'd with angels in their speed,
He had not match'd a frantic man's desire;
At length he took the bridle from his head,
And bound it to his foot with frantic ire,
And still he chear'd him when he seem'd to tire,
And still along the mangled victim drew;
Nor minded, when he saw the steed expire,
But tugg'd her on thro' rocks and sands anew,
'Till nought but rattling bones the madman's course pursue.

He drew his lumber on, and ravag'd all
Hamlet or town, where'er he chanc'd to come:
The plunder'd village felt his hunger's call,
And gave their hoards to fill his giant womb,
Their sheep, their oxen found a living tomb:
The shepherds kill'd, or maim'd, his fury wail'd;
Oh!  had his mistress met an equal doom!&mdash;
But that curs'd Ring the sorc'ress conceal'd,
And for a thousand lives the vengeance due withheld.

Curs'd be the hand that gave the magic ring!
And he that taught our senses to abuse!
Else now the task were mine her fall to sing
An awful lesson, meant for public use:
ROLAND, return!  and let thy fury loose
Among the faithless jilts of modern times!
But now the moon-struck man invites the Muse
To his unequal'd rage to suit her rhymes,
And now the circling sun descends to other climes.
