From the light strains of idly pleasing joy,
Ye muses, tune the soft melodious string
To solemn notes of melancholy woe,
Fannessa is no more&mdash;
Ah!  what avails it on the smiling banks,
Where the smooth waves of gentle Liffy flow
In sportive measures, or to dance or sing;
Well might such pastimes, underneath her eye,
Befit the hearts of elegance and ease,
By her inform'd with ev'ry pow'r to please.
For say (ye best can tell), who e'er beheld
That form, where shone superior ev'ry charm
Of softest beauty, by her mind excell'd,
Nor found elate his conscious heart grow warm
Refin'd by chaste and elegant desire,
Begin, my muse, and touch the mournful lyre.
'Twas at the sacred shrine, where peaceful lay
The poor remains of dear Fannessa's form,
Amanda, nymph with gentlest manners grac'd,
Came, at the close of pensive eve, to weep
Her bitter sorrows o'er the silent tomb;
For long in mutual bonds of perfect love,
Of friendship pure, and undissembl'd truth,
They happy liv'd; and, like two sister streams
That dimpling run along th' enamel'd mead,
Till haply mixing in a fond embrace,
They roll commix'd their gentle tides in one.
Such were the happy pair; one heart, one soul,
The same desire and wish inform'd them both.
Silent a while she stood, and dumb with grief;
At length she wip'd the tear from either cheek,
And sighing sad, thus rais'd her voice to speak:
"Too fatal morn!  when sad Amanda lost!
More than the pride of empty worlds can boast!
That morn, which us'd with songs of festive mirth
Proclaim the day, which gave Fannessa birth,
Must now its melancholy lights bestow,
Sacred to grief and sorrow's deepest woe.

"Can I forget, when on the bed of death,
When nature struggl'd in thy latest breath,
The fond indulgence of thy gentle breast,
Thy fondest love and tenderness exprest?&mdash;
Ah!  no; too well my memory retains
Thy fondest love, and my severest pains.

"Yet tho' thus torn untimely from my sight,
Thou blest inhabitant of purest light!
Ne'er shall thy image from my bosom part,
Thy bright example cease to fire my heart&mdash;
That bright example still before mine eye,
Shall teach, like thee to live, like thee to die.
Accept, dear honour'd shade!  this mournful lay,
Which love, which gratitude and friendship pay!
Perhaps, tho' now to realms of bliss remov'd,
Thou still may'st hear Amanda, once belov'd.
Soon this sad corse beside thy breathless clay,
('Tis all my wish) some friendly hand shall lay,
My spirits seek thee in the realms above,
Confirm'd in friendship and immortal love."

Next came, with silent steps and sorrowing sad,
Damon, a youth, who erst the happiest swain
That jocund pip'd beneath the sylvan shade,
Or led his sportive flocks along the plain.
Long had his heart maintain'd the gen'rous flame
Of purest love for dear Fannessa, lost;
And Hope (false cherub) smil'd, ill-fated youth!
Delusive on the fondness of his breast&mdash;
As he approach'd, a sudden horror chill'd
His mantling blood, cold damps bedew'd his brow,
And sighs suppress'd the efforts of his tongue,
Till tears, the lab'ring wretch's best relief,
Eas'd his swoln heart, and thus he pour'd his grief:

"Relentless Fate!  could nought appal thy rage,
Or stay thy hand, rapacious for the grave!
Say, could not Virtue, Tenderness engage,
Or Innocence demand thy pow'r to save?

"In vain, too proud thy triumph thou may'st boast,
Since neither Virtue, Innocence, or Truth,
Could bribe the region of thy vengeful ghost,
Insensible to beauty, or to youth.

"Why wert thou born, alas!  untimely shade,
With ev'ry charm and elegance divine,
And yet so short those heav'nly charms display'd,
And just mature, at once forbad to shine.

"Ah!  where are now the golden dreams of joy,
Which Hope too fondly cherish'd in my breast?
Ah! more than dreams; for say, could aught destroy
My surest happiness, of thee possest?

"Depriv'd of thee, what now remains behind,
But bitter grief and slow consuming pain?
O!  that the same sad moment had resign'd
That life, which now, reluctant, I sustain.

"Ah!  why incautious on a distant shore
Could I secure in indolence remain,
While the fell poison, unrelenting tore,
With rage resistless, every tender vein.

"Still constant had I watch'd thy sickly bed,
Explor'd with tender care thy feeble eye,
With arm reclin'd beneath thy drooping head,
Had strove to keep one angel from the sky.

"But vain, alas!  had been my constant care
To stay thy passage to the realms of light,
Heav'n claim'd his favourite, and Heav'n is e'er
Supreme in justice, merciful, and right.

"Celestial shade!  incessant will I pay
The pious tribute on thy mournful bier,
For thee will I consecrate the living lay,
For thee pour out the melancholy tear.

"Still shall my heart retain the sacred fire
Of purest passion and ingenuous love,
Till Heav'n, indulgent to my fond desire,
Unites us in the realms of bliss above."

Here ceas'd the swain; while sighs abortive rush'd
Tumultuous on his soul, and big distress
With-held expression from his labouring heart.
And now had night her sable mantle spread,
When homeward to his cot to swain withdrew,
With morning, at the shrine his sorrows to renew.
