Blest be the power, by Heaven's own flame inspir'd
That first thro' shades monastic pour'd the light;
Where, with unsocial Indolence retir'd,
Fell Superstition reign'd in tenfold night:
Where, long sequester'd from the vulgar sight,
Religion fetter'd lay, her form unknown,
Mid direful gloom and many a secret rite;
Till now releas'd she claims her native throne,
And guilds th' awakening world with radiance all her own.

O sacred source of sweet celestial peace!
From age to age in darksome cells confin'd!
Blest be the voice that bade thy bondage cease,
And sent thee forth t' illuminate the blind,
Support the weak, and raise the sinking mind.
By thee the soul its native strength explores,
Pursues the plan by fav'ring heav'n assign'd,
Through truth's fair path th' enlighten'd spirit soars,
And the Great Cause of All with purer rites adores.

How oft confin'd within this narrow grate,
With souls aspiring to a world's applause,
Have free-born spirits mourn'd their hapless fate!
Some hero ardent in his country's cause,
Some patriot form'd to give a nation laws,
Or in life's milder scenes with honour shine;
When each bright hope a father's hand withdraws,
And dooms his child, from ev'ry prospect fair,
To long unvarying years of lonely deep despair.

When darkness now with silence reigns around,
As the faint sun withdraws his glimm'ring beams,
(Save when, to render darkness more profound,
On the rough grate the pale moon quiv'ring gleams,
And thro' the lengthening isle the owlet screams&mdash;)
Then, lull'd by Fancy's visionary train,
His long-lost friends frequent his blissful dreams,
He spends his days of child-hood o'er again,
Till sounds the midnight bell, and proves the vision vain.

Yet let the hand of desolating Time
These sinking towers and mould'ring walls revere;
For not with useless pride thy rose sublime,
Fair Learning, stor'd her choicest treasure here,
When Rapine whirl'd aloft her threatening spear,
When Murder reign'd, by Gothic ignorance crown'd,
On every plain the barbarous bands appear,
Fierce Discord bids her hostile trumpet sound,
And war, in crimson'd robe, tremendous stalks around.

Though now in ruin'd majesty they lie,
The fading reliques of departed days,
Yet shall their change no useless theme supply,
No trivial subject for the Poet's lays:
For as the thoughtful mind these scenes surveys,
Whose solemn shades Reflection's pow'rs invite,
Their falling pomp that awful Hand displays,
Which can from transient ill and mental night
Educe eternal good and intellectual light.
