Lo, how the fiery sparks do upward rise!
So cares and labour to our portion fell;&mdash;
Ah, dearest God!  the way thou didst devise,
To save from worser vice and pangs of hell;
And sure, frail man, thou art escaped well,
If so those greater ills thou maist eschew.
But some there be of whom I mean to tell,
That night and day their irksome task pursue,
Ne in the cup of joy their lips will once imbue.

O foolish man, to work thine own despite!
O base neglect of him whose bounteous hand,
All piteous of thy woes and mournful plight,
With sweet delights and plenty stor'd this land,&mdash;
But me my tale and other strains demand.
Where Wiley's streams the western shires pervade,
A town all drench'd in dirt and mire doth stand,
Well known and hated by each cleanly maid:
There dwelt this busy carle, with many of his trade.

His name was Care, a plodding meagre elf,
That neither day nor night from working spar'd;
For all this thoughts were bent on glittering pelf.
Once in a week he poll'd his grisly beard,
Ne oftener cared he to have it shear'd:
No cleanly robe he had, nor raiment gay,
Ne yet for cleanly raiment greatly cared:
His hands, his hose, his shirt, his whole array,
The colour of his trade to all men did betray.

His ancient house all rudely thatcht without,
Nor better were, I wis, adorn'd within;
Fit tenement for that labourious rout
Who evermore do ply their tasks therein.
But how shall I describe the horrid din
That there is heard?  Some drive the cumbrous shear;
Some tug the press, and on the cloth so thin
With thundering strokes so rudely some do bear,
That makes me much afraid eftsoons they will it tear.

But now the doors wide open might be seen
Whence noises strange and hollow thumps resound:
Seek not to enter; nothing pure nor clean
Within that dirty threshold may be found:
To me an ancient dame did once expound
This wondrous coil; there forms uncouth I saw,
Who in their wiry cards the wool did pound,
Which still a little imp would strait withdraw,
And into pieces small did tear it with his claw.

Here female forms are seen:  seek not to know
In vain their heavy dole, nor vainly grieve
For him who, choak'd with dust, must grind below:
Who marks their labours, well might these believe
Danais' daughters round their wiry sieve,
And him Ixion fastened to a mill.
Sad at his desk a clerk without reprieve
Like Theseus ever sits, and ever will,
For still his business grows, ne can he it fulfil.

The good man's self, more wretched than them all,
All day from room to room impatient ran,
And ever and anon would loudly call,
If they perchance their work neglected han;
And then, good Lord!  how would he scold and ban,
If he those little imps might idle see,
Or aught amiss, so sorely would he damn,
Had ye but heard, ye would have thought pardie,
Sathanas there was come, and would a clothier be.

Had I an hundred tongues your ears to rend,
Each tongue an iron voice, I might not shew,
Ne make my gentle reader comprehend,
The various labours of this House of Woe.
O void of reason, wherefore toil ye so?
For sure great pain ye have, and small reward:
Observe the beauteous lillies how they grow,
And yet they spin not, neither do they card:
O man of little faith, why dost thou work so hard!
