'Twas night; and sleep had o'er my eyelids shed
His lulling poppies and oblivious dews;
Methought, by two Elysian Genii led
O'er dreary wilds, I met the welcome Muse.
An emerald wand she wav'd, and all around
A blooming landscape rose, supremely fair;
Imbowering trees, with golden fruitage crown'd,
Luxuriant flowers, whose sweets imbalm the air:
Birds, jasper fountains, grottoes, crystal hills,
Bath'd with the murmuring fall of silver-sparkling rills.

Charm'd with the beauties of the fairy scene,
I now was entering a perfum'd alcove,
Where myrtles tall their blossom'd arches green
With blushing braids of eglantine inwove:
When lo!  descending from an orient cloud,
A gliding Form advanc'd with gait sublime;
While voices sweet and choral harpings loud
My fancy sooth'd with their melodious chime.
O'er her majestic lineaments serene
Heaven breath'd its softest smiles, and shone in all her mien!

More spotless far her forehead's dazzling white
Than new-blown jassamine or falling snows;
While o'er her cheek flush'd Beauty's blooming light
In rich expansion ravishingly flows.
Sweet the blue mildness of her winning eyes,
More gentle than the meekness of the dove
Which fearless in her downy bosom lies;
Her charming aspect beams transcendent love.
With purple amarant and lilies wreath'd,
Her length of auburn hair celestial fragrance breath'd.

The zephyr on the trembling violet's breast,
As she approach'd, in softer cadence sigh'd;
The conscious lawns more brilliant verdure dress'd,
The warbling streams more musically glide,
Blithe by her side two snowy lambkins stray,
Bleating their inoffensive welcome meek;
The glowing flowers superior charms display,
And emulate her heaven-impurpled cheek.
Th' exulting groves distill'd ambrosial dew,
The sky more brightly smil'd, illum'd with lovelier blue.

Her nectar'd lips two living rubies seem'd,
Whence, melting slow on my delighted ear,
A bland, inchanting voice mellifluous stream'd,
Whose sound the languishments of death might chear!
Above yon sun I triumph, heavenly-born,
Nurs'd in the skies, and PITY is my name;
I mingle with th' enraptur'd Sons of morn,
My bosom glowing with congenial flame:
My Halleluiahs harmonize with theirs
When from their pealing harps they pour their noblest airs.

When aim'd at guilty man the brandish'd fire
Of the Almighty's threatening sword appears,
I deprecate the thunder of his ire,
And quench its lightning with my falling tears.
I on his sov'reign justice dare intrude:
With aspect amiably benign and mild
He views me kneeling, owns himself subdu'd
By the soft pleadings of his darling child;
And while my lute with glad Hosannas rings
Ev'n listens with delight to its seraphic strings!

Commission'd by my great propitious Sire,
Whose sun, faint emblem of Himself, on all
Impartial darts its life-diffusing fire;
Whose freshening showers without distinction fall;
The vesting blaze of majesty divine
Aside I threw, and left the realms above,
by meek persuasive words and deeds benign
To shew mankind the image of his love.
In HANWAY's favour'd form I dwelt inshrin'd,
And triumph'd uncontroul'd in his congenial mind.

High heaven's assiduous delegate below,
I taught his heart ev'n for the worm to feel,
To bleed at misery in a fallen foe,
And sooth his sufferings, if it could not heal.
Sweeter, far sweeter to th' ETERNAL's ear
Than hymns of angels is the generous sigh;
More pleasing far one sympathizing tear
Than all heaven's glories, to his sacred eye!
Her HANWAY's loss PHILANTHROPY shall mourn,
And strow, till time expires, her roses o'er his urn.

A kind asylum ever prompt to lend
Ere starving misery could his aid implore,
He sought the title of the poor man's friend,
(Divine ambition!)  and he sought no more.
No echoing trump to peal his praises forth,
No mausoleum, rear'd with matchless art,
His virtues need; the memory of his worth
Shall live forever in his Country's heart.
She ceas'd.  With soaring wing she sail'd away
To her own native clime, to brighter, happier day.

Instant with thrilling sound a trumpet blew,
And at my side a flaming car appears:
I mount it straight; it in a moment flew,
By two swift eagles drawn, above the spheres.
And now my senses drink the balmier ray
Of fairer suns in a more blissful clime,
Where groves ascend, with brighter fountains gay,
And meadows flourish in superior prime;
Where life's aspiring tree o'er amarant bow'rs
Its brilliant foliage waves, and blooms immortal flow'rs!

O'er the delicious landscape as I stray'd,
New vistas open, lovelier scenes arise;
Till the whole Paradise of God display'd
In boundless prospect all around me lies!
Sudden a mountain, like a gorgeous throne
Of costliest pearl and flaming rubies, towr'd;
Smooth round its basis, like a silver zone,
A river pure its liquid crystal pour'd:
Unseen the summit; its stupendous height
Was veil'd in blazing clouds, in ambient floods of light.

To celebrate th' unutterable things
I there beheld, o'erpowers a mortal tongue!
Some rapturous Seraph, lend thy hymning strings,
And teach the language by Archangels sung!
Not visions more sublime the Bard amaz'd
In the proud plains of CHEBAR lave;
Not the young Seer on holier mysteries gaz'd,
Where beauteous ULAI winds her amber wave;
Not He in PATMOS' isle, whose spirit soar'd
Upon seraphic wing, and inmost heaven explor'd!

Triumphant strains burst on my wondering ear,
As from soft dulcimer and deep-ton'd lyre;
Then myriads of angelic forms appear,
Celestial extasies my breast inspire.
Some strike the cymbal, some the mellower lute;
Others their golden clarions loudly blow;
And solemn from the silver-sounding flute,
Strong but more sweet, the torrent raptures flow;
While all, dissolv'd in hymns of burning zeal,
Around th' imperial mount in glittering order kneel.

But who is he, by two bright Cherubs led,
Clad in white robes, too glorious to behold?
A smiling Seraph places on his head
A coronet of palm adorn'd with gold.
'Tis HANWAY's self!  his aspect more benign
Than when on earth he silenc'd misery's cry!
Illumin'd are his eyes with joy divine,
He greets his radiant kindred of the sky.
His feet as in a burning furnace glow,
Grand o'er the sapphire road his starry vestments flow.

Waving their azure wings, th' immortal pow'rs
With kind complacence the new guest survey;
Around the crystal domes and emerald tow'rs
Fresh streams of splendour beautifully play.
And now heaven's organ breathes a loftier strain,
From angel harps new Halleluiahs rise;
While vocal warblings from each bower and plain
Sublimely swell the music of the skies!
The mystic song his lyre adoring learns,
On its responsive strings seraphic transport burns!

These words soft-streaming from th' empyreal hill,
Float on the wings of an ambrosial gale,
Hail, faithful follower of th' eternal will,
Thou votary of heaven-born Pity, hail.
Blest servant of th' ALL-HIGH, to thee 'tis given
To quaff delights that never, never cloy,
To mingle with th' inhabitants of heav'n,
And lose Eternity in boundless joy!
Among thy brother angels now 'tis thine
On thrones sublime as theirs with rival beams to shine!

How was that wealth which Folly's sons profane
Ennobled, hallow'd by thy liberal hand,
While with each feeling pious and humane
Thy zealous heart still gloried to expand!
Thine was th' exalted, angel-like employ,
With comfort's lenient balm to soften care,
To make the mourner's bosom throb with joy,
And hush the frantic groan of wild despair.
The wretch, long us'd his scanty food to steep
In sorrow, saw thy face, and quickly ceas'd to weep.

The silent language of the orphan's tears,
That spoke resistless to thy heart on earth,
In sacred union with thy spotless pray'rs,
Thy welcome wins from all of heavenly birth.
Thy rapt devotions fail'd not to ascend
In pure memorial to the realms divine,
And with the holy clouds of incense blend
Which seraphs burn before th' Almighty's shrine.
Wafted by Faith upon her towering wings,
Such charities as thine delight the KING of Kings.

Here ceas'd the voice.  I trembling then advance
And thus address him, sainted spirit bend
From heaven's cerulean arch thy frequent glance,
And hear what blessings round thy urn ascend!
Hear the deserted child, thy piteous eye
Watch'd with a father's care, a father's love,
Lisp thy dear name with many a duteous sigh,
And fondly call thee from the joys above.
See the sad penitent with awe profound
Bend o'er her patron's grave, and kiss the sacred ground.

Hear how she breathes her warm resolve to tread
In tempting ruin's flowery maze no more;
Hear how the aged who their daily bread
Owe to thy bounty, with the young deplore.
For, though imparadis'd with angel choirs,
Though the blest Kingdom, to the virtuous giv'n,
Shall still be thine when Nature's self expires,
Yet must it swell thy bliss, improve thy heav'n,
To know, thy tomb is hail'd with grief sincere,
Thy memory imbalm'd with many a grateful tear.

I said:  and straight a warriour angel came
From a surrounding cloud; his rich attire
Was living purple mix'd with lambent flame;
A sun, his shield; his falchion, solid fire.
Wide o'er him in triumphal grandeur spread,
A rainbow waves its roseate streamers high;
An adamantine helmet grac'd his head,
Stupendous glories lighten'd from his eye!
Though terror nodded in his crimson plume,
Yet mildness temper'd sweet his aspect's orient bloom.

Majestic o'er the star-bespangled way
He moves, and as with voice of thunder cries,
Mortal, profane no more the realms of day,
Those glorious seats, with thy unhallow'd eyes.
Hence to thy kindred element depart,
Thy native earth.  And must yon sordid sphere,
Sad I reply'd, still claim me?  but my heart
Shall dwell for ever, heaven-enamour'd, here.
Straight the bright phantom vanish'd from my sight,
Sleep with the vision fled, and left me veil'd in night.
