Fair nymph, who in the shady cave,
With coral bright and gems beset,
Thy amber-dropping locks dost lave,
And pressest, often, dank and wet:
While round thy wide-resplendent seat
The agat shines, and emerald green,
Thy gentle stream, or slow or fleet,
Flows in obedience to its queen.
Listen and save! &mdash; If e'er the prayer
Of gentle virgin touch'd thine ear;
If e'er to prostrate Beauty's grief
Thou deign'st administer relief;
If e'er thou didst thy gifts dispense
To be fair Virtue's recompense;
If e'er to youth a smile you gave&mdash;
Listen, gentle nymph, and save!
By the God whose sov'reign power
Makes the troubled ocean roar;
By venerable Tethys' name;
By Pontus' high and antient fame;
By Nereus, fam'd of old for truth;
By Amphitrite's blooming youth;
By Carpathus' varied king;
By the Naiad's joyous ring;
By all these names, we thee adjure
To exercise thy healing pow'r:
If e'er to them you rev'rence gave,&mdash;
Listen, gentle nymph, and save!
By wise Apollo's healing art,
Which to thee he did impart;
By Aesculapius' look serene,
Or serpent form to Romans seen;
By Hygeia's antient fane,
Where none their vows address'd in vain;
By all these sacred names, we crave&mdash;
Listen, gentle nymph, and save!
Hold up thy pearled wrist, and pour
The bounties of thy flowing stream;
Thy aid her wonted strength restore,
Her beauty from the grave redeem!
The votive tablet, in thy cave,
Thy kind assistance shall rehearse;
And all who in thy waters lave,
Shall read with joy the grateful verse,
The swains shall crown thy rising shrine
With votive wreaths, of varied dye,
Where pansie, rose, and eglantine,
With ev'ry other sweet, shall vie.
And may thy crystal stream ne'er know
The horrors of the summer drought,
Or winter storms; but ever flow
In gentle, soft murmurs wrought!
The grateful seat with ore shall shine,
The beryl and the onyx glow,
The riches of the Indian mine
A perfect radiance shall bestow.
Around thy fount sweet groves shall rise,
With ev'ry flow'r which charms thine eyes,
If for these joys a wish you have,
Listen, gentle nymph, and save!
