As on a verdant bank I slumb'ring lay,
Retir'd to shun the fervid solar ray,
A vision, charg'd with many a form that glows
With Fancy's richest tints, before me rose.

Methought I view'd a wide-extended plain,
Whose pleasing site confess'd bright summer's golden reign:
And soon, in various guise, a motley throng
Came tripping on, with frolic, dance, and song.
From east, from west, from south they came,
As all were youthful candidates for fame:
Though here not all youths lively liv'ry wore;
The locks of some by age were silver'd o'er,
But all alike with eagerness press'd on,
Whilst in their looks fond expectation shone.
And now in view a pleasant path was seen,
With blushing roses drest, and myrtles green:
Here as they pass'd, each plucks some fav'rite flower,
While glow the skies, and smiles the vernal hour.
Before them, on a gently swelling height,
Fantastic domes and turrets rose in sight;
Nor rugged rocks obstruct the smooth ascent,
Nor clouds obscure, nor watchful guards prevent,
But gaudy scenes on ev'ry side are found,
And birds of various plumage flutter round;
Each warbler of the year perpetual sings,
And painted butterflies expand their wings.

Unknown, unknowing through the croud I pass'd,
And gain'd the portal of the fane at last.
Within, their heads an hundred columns rear,
High rose the roof, the walls as mirrors clear;
Where various shapes each magic glass displays,
Illum'd and gilt by Fancy's flatt'ring rays;
Where each, by turns, some fav'rite beauty takes,
Caught and enchanted by the form it makes.

High on a seat, adorn'd with jewels bright,
Which, while they drink, reflect the glowing light,
A goddess shone. &mdash; Her form what pen can trace,
What tongue describe each true or fancy'd grace?
Superior and unrivall'd there she sate,
Yet on eternal changes built her state.
Glitters her veil sometimes with gems and gold,
And sometimes sable robes her limbs enfold;
Her form uncertain as her garb still prov'd,
Fashion by thousands in all shapes belov'd;
For whatsoe'er the dictates of her reign,
Still will her arts perpetual sway maintain.
Low at her shrine each age, each sex we find,
But most the young, the gay, and woman kind.
For these a thousand golden nets are spread,
In flow'ry bonds we see them captives led.
Though not to all alike she gives her aid,
Yet still to all is Fancy's glass display'd;
Still draws them on, till some their footsteps bend
To Folly's banners, and her call attend.
Then the prevailing pow'r her influence sheds,
Her wand unseen, high waving o'er their heads;
While they press on, regardless of their fame,
Lost in the maze of ridicule or shame.

I look'd, and saw a fair and order'd band,
Who in the temple wait the pow'r's command,
With watchful eyes attendant on her shrine,
Who still her gifts with those of Taste combin'd.
Those who with elegance join'd graceful ease,
And learn with native excellence to please;
There saw I D&mdash;re, that led the throng,
The patroness of all the fair and young;
With G&mdash;ns, 'mong more in Pleasure's band,
That could, resistless, ev'ry heart command.

Nor were there wanting of our sex select,
Those who could ev'ry meaner thought neglect,
Fashion with judgment and true taste pursu'd,
And drew examples from the wise and good;
Who left the noisy sons of Comus' court,
To other scenes and pleasure to resort:
Such as in fighting fields had gain'd a name,
Yet here put in an unresisted claim,
A happy change:  another throne appear'd,
The base of gold, on iv'ry columns rear'd.
Three sister Graces here were seen divine,
Whose radiant brows fresh blooming laurels twine;
Hither the well-directed train repair,
And here prefer their just-accepted pray'r;
While from the altar grateful fumes arise,
In curling spires ascending to the skies.
A thousand tow'ring pow'rs their influence lend,
A thousand Cupids on the fair attend,
While guardian sylphs conduct the beauteous train,
And Harmony exerts her potent strain.

Here did I pause &mdash; nor Fashion could invite,
Nor all her gaudy trappings give delight;
But where the Graces all display their charms,
What bosom but such pow'rful influence warms!
I felt their force &mdash; when lo!  a blooming maid
Stood at my side, and, smiling, thus she said:
"And can such charms their influence impart,
(To other thoughts devote) to touch thy heart!
If those thou woo'st to thy fond suit give place,
Science is beauty, ev'ry muse a grace;
Failing in that, what can these pow'rs dispense,
To soothe the mind, or captivate the sense?"
"'Tis true, (I said) yet where such charms inspire
I bow at distance, pleas'd whilst I admire&mdash;
This and no more" &mdash; I ceas'd, while from the train
The voice of melody high-swell'd the strain;
And as my ear drank deep the grateful sound,
The shrine enlarg'd, the temple brighten'd round,
And all the vot'ries shone with flowrets crown'd.

But turning strait where I first fix'd my view,
No scenes my admiration could renew;
For none but those who sought the Graces' fane,
Appear'd within the structure to remain.
As fair Simplicity, enchanting maid,
Truth's mirror o'er the wond'ring croud display'd,
The temple shook, the motley idol throne,
Seem'd, "like a baseless fabric," chang'd and gone;
No more the object of their toil and care;
Vanish'd the gaudy aisles; the roof was lost in air.

The maid advancing with a chosen band,
Straight near the Graces took her modest stand;
Nor these the vanish'd beauties did deplore,
Nor sigh'd for gaudy scenes now view'd no more.
The sisters smil'd &mdash; smil'd all the train of love,
And heav'n itself seem'd ready to approve,
While the loud pealing notes so frequent rose,
As broke the silken bonds of sweet repose;
Sudden I wak'd, while fading to decay,
All the resplendent vision dy'd away.
