To please our rough illiterate Sires
Rude minstrels tun'd their native lyres;
Tho' stern the temper of the times,
They felt the power of homely rhimes;
Tho' sever'd by the surly main,
Sweet Poesy here rais'd her strain.
Our home-inspir'd Bards of old
Amus'd our Knights and Barons bold;
So could pathetic ballads move
To arms, to pity, or to love.
No fabled streams, nor Grecian glades
They knew, nor Heliconian maids;
Yet Nature taught them glorious themes,
They sung of woods and azure streams,
In war what dangers Heroes prove,
And what the woes of faithful Love.
Alfred by song his Saxons train'd,
And savage manners were restrain'd;
By song did Chaucer, antient Sage,
Instruct his rough, heroic age.

But when at length bright Learning's day
Had chac'd the morning clouds away,
True Taste illumin'd all the isle,
And classic Genius deign'd to smile:
The destin'd aera now was come,
When we should rival Greece and Rome.
Harmonious Spenser, at the head,
Through fairy wilds the Muses led.
Then Shakespear rose, of boundless mind,
And held a mirror to mankind.
Milton, divine enthusiast, shone
In themes to antient Bards unknown:
He on aspiring pinions soar'd,
And Heaven's glorious realms explor'd;
He view'd the Earth in all its show,
And rang'd the awful worlds below:
While utter darkness veil'd his eyes,
Each night a Spirit from the skies
With hymns consol'd his lonely hours,
Befriended by the harmonious powers.
Then Dryden charm'd the wondering times,
Nor felt the shackles of his rhimes;
His breast with native spirit glow'd,
From him the verse instinctive flow'd,
And to this Poet England owes
The chastest graces of her prose:
Penury and Superstition blind
Could not depress his vigorous mind;
But yet the morals of his age
Too often stain his glowing page.
Our favourite Pope, with nicer care,
The powers propitious deigned to rear:
Sound learning, thought and taste refin'd,
To form his genius were combin'd,
And Virtue tip'd his arrows keen,
Tho' wounded knaves might term it spleen.
Nor here can I forget that Northern Bard,
Whose honest fame has far been heard;
Thomson, whose manly, natural lays,
Amus'd my early, sauntering days.
O wanderer of Richmond's Vale,
Thy generous spirit let me hail!
The Doric melody, the Muse
Did not to thy grave songs refuse;
Fond Fancy o'er they visions smil'd,
And Nature show'd her beauties wild!
But long the task to tell each name
Mark'd in the kalendar of Fame;
Nor ought we thankless to disdain
Whate'er the Muse, of chaster vein,
Has in our later age inspir'd;
Our Druid Mason is admir'd,
And more his nobler brother Gray;
Nor scorn we Beattie's minstrel lay.

But, ah, the change!  nor pastoral strains
From green-corn pipe the British Swains
Delight; nor dares the sounding lyre
With Freedom's airs the mind inspire.
Why sleeps the spirit of the song?
Why mute the Poet's sacred tongue?
Does Fate to stated times restrain
Poetic Inspiration's reign?
Does coming Slavery damp the mind,
Or Luxury debase mankind?
I fear our weak, unmanly rhimes
Too well bespeak degenerate times.
Where shall some happy Genius rise,
On whom the Chauntress of the Skies
Serene with natal omens smil'd?
If such there be, O hide the child
From envious eyes and blasting air;
Remove him far from vulgar care;
And let not Penury forlorn,
Or Sorrow chill his opening morn:
Ye Powers that love the Poet's strain,
Avert th' ungenerous Slaves of Gain!
Those monsters vile corrupt the soul,
And think that Genius is a Fool.
But let our Youth sweet converse hold
With spirits generous and bold,
Who love each ever-glowing page
Of Homer, and the Mantuan Sage.
Those wonders let him oft survey,
Which Nature's ample scenes display:
Along the promontory's brow,
While Ocean foams and roars below,
Let him each awful rock explore,
When tempests wrap their summits hoar:
But never, never may he miss
Those hours of chaste, extatic bliss,
When all the purpled welkin streams
With blushing morn or evening's beams;
Or, o'er the oaks and hillocks green,
The full-orb'd Moon is rising seen:
In tranquil vallies let him rove,
And hear the carol of the grove,
Where whispering leaves, of various green,
And brawling brooks, divert the scene.
Mid rural innocence and truth,
With spotless Nymph, or artless Youth,
His Summer-hours let him enjoy,
Estrang'd to all unhallow'd joy:
Let generous love of human kind,
And hopes of fame, exalt his mind.
If such there be, he yet our praise
May gain, and claim the antient bays;
He yet new fountains may explore,
And regions never trod before.
Should such a prodigy arise,
And tempt with eagle's wings the skies,
O grant that I may hear his lay,
Before I join my kindred clay!
Let glowing Pleasure rule my heart,
Subdu'd by his victorious art;
While he shall in inspired verse
Heroic thoughts and deeds rehearse.
Disdaining plain historic life,
Each mean event and trivial strife,
Such high ideas he will find
As reach the grandeur of the mind.
