FIRST DIALOGUE.
THE TIME:  MORNING.
COLLY AND MENELLO.

Just o'er the eastern hills the blushing morn
Had spread her wings, and chas'd away the dawn;
The wakeful Lark, from dewy meadows spring
Pois'd in mid-air, his joy'ous mattins sung.
Two youthful swains in friendship firmly join'd,
Beneath the shadow of a beech reclin'd;
Whose spreading boughs a grateful Arbour made,
'Gainst piercing sun-beams that around them play'd:
A proper place the muses to invoke,
When to his Part'ner thus MENELLO spoke:

MENELLO.
Why sit we mute and pensive on the ground,
Each Landskip's gay and spangled beauty crown'd;
Our flocks and herds on luscious herbage feed,
And gaudy Flow'rs o'erspread the verdant mead:
See yellow Cowslips rear their sprightly heads,
And Vi'lets glitter on their leafy beds;
Melodious birds salute the welcome Spring,
All nature smiles, shall not the Shepherds sing?

COLLY.
My voice is weak, you know, and yesterday
Some pilf'ring vagrant stole my flute away:
Begin you first, dear swain, your pipe is clear,
And I'll thy song with due attention hear.

MENELLO.
Oh!  COLLY, cease, no more reject my choice,
Or plead thy stolen flute, or feeble voice;
Let other youths stake wagers on their strains;
True lover alone shall recompense our pains.

COLLY.
Then sing by turns, we'll both alternate hear,
You bright Letitia, I of Sylvia dear;
And Dobinal, if you approve the swain,
(The featest lad of all the neigh'bring plain
For piping well, well-skill'd in sonnet-verse,)
Let him be judge, while we our songs rehearse.

MENELLO.
Agreed, kind swain, thy choice I well approve,
Then I'll begin, inspir'd by her I love.
The warbling birds their artless songs repeat,
The smiling trees are cloath'd with blossoms sweet,
The field with grass, the banks with cowslips gay,
And Hawthorns whiten at th' approach of May,
But what are those with Letty to compare?
More sweet than cowslips, than the hawthorn fair;
Soon as fierce Winter drives his northern blasts
Their Verdure's gone, their beauties all decay;
But with Letitia 'tis for ever May.

COLLY.
My giddy heifers frisk it o'er the ground,
My skipping goats o'er craggy Hillocks bound,
My snowy lambs at wanton gambols play,
And chirping sparrows hop from spray to spray.
But what are those with Silvia to compare,
Not sparrows, lambkins, goats, or heifers bound,
With half the lightness Silvia's feet go round.
Those for a season brisk and gay appear,
But my fair Silvia's sprightly all the year.

MENELLO.
Not scorching sun-beams to the farmer's eye,
When grass new-mown is scattered round to dry;
Nor chrystal streams to trav'llers faint with heat,
Yield half such pleasure as Letitia sweet.

COLLY.
Not April showers to the thristy ground,
Nor a fledg'd birds-nest by the school-boy found,
Nor holidays to youth more pleasing are,
Than to my sight the charming Silvia fair.

MENELLO.
The ruddy nect'rin, and the downy peach,
Oft grace the plenteous tables of the rich;
But my Letitia the green wilding loves,
Its acid juice before the peach approves.
Since she loves wildings, peaches I'll dispraise,
And for Letitia rows of wildings raise.

COLLY.
Without strong ale, or rich canary-wine,
Our dainty landlord never cares to dine;
But my fair Silvia loves the native juice,
Which pippins bruis'd, with water mixt produce;
Since she loves cyder, I'll despise their wine,
And drink with Silvia Cyder when we dine.

MENELLO.
Two turtle doves I caught in yonder shade,
Which I a present to Letitia made;
She took the Off'ring, and my pleasing toil
Amply rewarded with a grateful smile.

COLLY.
I was yesterday in yonder winding meads,
Where nature all her various beauties spreads,
With sweetest flowers I a garland wrought,
And to fair Silvia as a present brought;
With gentle hand she took the gaudy store,
And gave a pleasing smile, I sought no more.

DOBINAL TO MENELLO.
May thy Letitia, from each cooing dove,
Learn what true pleasure flows from constant love:
Constant and chaste as these may she remain,
And ever smiling, bless her faithful swain.

TO COLLY.
And may thy Silvia (though her garland fades,
Which late you gather'd in yon fragrant meads)
For ever bloom, still kind and constant prove,

SECOND DIALOGUE.
THE TIME:  NOON.
THE LOITERERS.

The Sun now mounting to the noon of day,
Shot o'er the verdant plains his scorching ray,
When with their flocks the shepherds sought the shade
Where spreading oaks a friendly arbour made:
There, while they sat to pass the loit'ring time,
As fancy led, each form'd his tale in rhime.
Some tell the joys, and some the pains of love,
And some the cause why spirits walk, would prove;
How Will-i'-th'-wisp misleads belated clowns,
O'er hills and dales, and pathless boggy grounds:
Last Buskin speaks, none Buskin can excel
In artful guise love's sweet effects to tell.

BUSKIN.
When Shepherds flourish'd in Eliza's reign,
In great esteem there liv'd a jolly swain,
Young Collonet, who well could pipe and sing,
And by his notes invite the lagging spring;
Whene'er he play'd the swains around him throng,
And birds attentive flock'd to hear his song.
Plac'd on a bank where Thames' clear waters stray,
Retir'd from noise, he pour'd th' enchanting lay.
Perch'd on a tree, within a neighb'ring grove,
Sweet Philomela warbled out her love;
Struck with unusual notes, she quits her shed,
And in a moment perches o'er his head:
She tun'd her note, and emulate with pride,
Like eccho, to the shepherd's pipe reply'd.
This odd vagary pleas'd th' admiring swain,
Who meant to try her with his varying strain.
From hole to hole his nimble fingers fly,
To ev'ry touch the ready notes comply;
As nimbly she resolves the vary'd song,
In evolutions from her warbling tongue:
To all his vary'd strains she shapes her throat,
And adds peculiar grace to ev'ry note.
He draws his breath, his rising blast to fill;
Thro' all the Grove his pipe was heard to thrill.
Deep in her throat the length'ning sounds arise,
And swift and slow they change with sweet surprise.

The wond'ring swain, tho' not a little vext,
(Both by his rival and himself perplex'd,)
Admires the harmony, and where it flows,
From whence such numerous modulations rose.
In loftier flights again attempts to rise,
And bolder now, the warbling flute he plies;
From key to key the bounding ecchoes fly,
And in the sweetest raptures reach the sky;
Take a vast scope, and fill the spacious round,
And proudly triumph in unequal sound.
She, who already wonders had perform'd,
Her glowing breast still with ambition warm'd,
Makes a last effort all her strength to try,
Intent to conquer, or resolv'd to die;
In vain the combat she again renews,
In vain the complicated Song pursues;
Puzzled and lost in labyrinths of sound,
As in a whirl of rapt'rous music drown'd:
Unequal to the mighty task, she fails,
Tho' great her courage, Collin's pipe prevails:
Reluctant yields a triumph hardly won,
And gives one deep melodious dying groan.
Drops from the bough, resigns her fleeting breath,
And by her vigor gains a glorious death.

Thus ended Collin, while the glowing sun
Had scarce two thirds his radiant circuit run.

THIRD DIALOGUE.
THE DITTY.
HOBBIN AND CUDDY.

Two swains beneath the covert of a rock,
While o'er their Heads securely graz'd their flock,
In homely strains resolv'd their voice to raise,
And sing alternately in sylvan lays.

HOBBIN.
I love in secret an endearing maid,
And have my love in secret all repaid;
This coming night she does reserve for me,
Tell me the name and thou the victor be.

CUDDY.
Mild as the lamb, and harmless as the dove,
True as the turtle is the maid I love;
How we in secret court I shall not say,
Tell me her name, and I'll give up the day.

HOBBIN.
Soft on a violet-bank, my love and I
Together sat, a Brook ran murm'ring by;
A thousand tender things to me she said,
And I thousand tender things repaid.

CUDDY.
In summer-shade, beneath the cocking hay,
What soft endearing words did she not say?
With apron blue her lap she kindly spread,
And stroak'd my cheeks, and lull'd my leaning head.

HOBBIN.
Breath soft, ye winds, ye waters gently flow;
Shield her, ye trees, ye flow'rs around her grow;
Ye swains, I beg you, pass in silence by;
My love in yonder vale asleep does lie.

CUDDY.
Once Delia slept, on easy moss reclin'd,
Her lovely limbs half bare, and rude the wind;
I smooth'd her coats, and stole a silent kiss:
Condemn me, Shepherd, if I did amiss.

HOBBIN.
As Marian bath'd, by chance I passed by;
She blush'd, and at me cast a side-long eye:
Then swift beneath the crystal wave she try'd
Her beauteous form, but all in vain, to hide.

CUDDY.
As I to cool me bath'd one sultry day,
Behind the hedge fond Lydia lurking lay;
The wanton laugh'd, and seem'd in haste to fly,
Yet often stopp'd, and often turn'd her eye.

HOBBIN.
When first I saw, would I had never seen,
Young Lysen lead the dance on yonder green,
Intent upon her beauty, as she mov'd,
Poor heedless Wretch, at unawares I lov'd.

CUDDY.
When Lucy decks with flow'rs her swelling breast,
And on her elbow leans, dissembling rest;
Unable to refrain my giddy mind,
Nor sheep, nor pasture, worth my care I find.

HOBBIN.
Come Rosalinda, come!  for without thee
What pleasure can the country have for me?
Come Rosalinda, come!  my brindled kine,
My snowy lambs, my farm, and all is thine.

CUDDY.
Come Rosalinda, beneath these shady bowers,
Here are cool fountains, and sweet springing flowers:
Come lovely maid, here ever let us stay,
And sweetly waste our live-long time away.

HOBBIN.
O that like Collin I had skill in rhimes,
To purchase credit with succeeding times!
Then I like him who never yet had peer,
Would sing through all the seasons of the year.


FOURTH DIALOGUE.
COLLY AND DAMON.

COLLY.
As Damon, happiest of the Sylvan train,
Led forth his flock along the smiling plain,
Upon a bank where beachen boughs display
Their friendly shade, despairing Colly lay:
His crook and pipe flung careless on the ground,
His bleating flocks were scattered all around;
As tho' in pity to his sad despair
The clouds mov'd heavy thro' the ambient air:
A sudden gloom was o'er the welkin spread,
And blushing Phoebus veil'd his radiant head
The birds sat silent on each blooming spray,
While wanton Zephyrs bore his sighs away.

Damon with gentle steps approach'd the tree,
In deep surprize this sudden change to see;
With pity mov'd, he view'd his heaving breast,
And to the swain these soothing words express'd:

DAMON.
What change is this, alas!  dear Shepherd say,
O'erclouds thy face, which late appear'd so gay?
What woful cause disturbs thy throbbing breast?
Thou best companion, and of friends the best:
Say, has some greedy fox devour'd thy lambs?
Or some fierce mastiff kill'd their fleecy dams?
Or is the fair, the charming Silvia dead?
Oh!  what's the cause so many tears you shed?
He rais'd his head, and, with a faultering tongue,
Deep sighing, thus the mournful shepherd sung.

COLLY.
Right has thou nam'd, nor needest longer pause,
Thy last spoke words contain the fatal cause;
Silvia, of all the plain the fairest she,
Alas!  she's dead, for ever dead to me;
While absence drew me from her longing arms,
She to another swain resign'd her charms.

DAMON.
Come rise, dear shepherd, cease thy mournful strains,
See gath'ring clouds foreshew ensuing rains:
Hark, from afar, yon sooty raven's cry
Betokens rain, our flocks for shelter fly.
Let us from hence to closer shades retreat,
And when 'tis fair, th' unfinish'd tale repeat.

Scarce had he spoke ere the descending Rain,
With rapid fury, smoak'd along the plain;
Down each descent increasing Torrents flow'd,
And empty bubbles o'er its surface rode.
The clouds disperse, soft Zephyrs glide along,
And joyous birds renew the warbling song;
The shelter'd swains from dropping trees return,
And Colly thus rehears'd his piteous moan:

COLLY.
As down the lane this morn I cast an eye,
Across the path a hare came skipping by;
This scarce was past, when with ill-boding croak,
A sooty crow sat perch'd on yonder oak;
Such idle omens I but little mind,
Much less I thought of Silvia's b'ing unkind.

DAMON.
Ah!  silly youth!  Since she rejects thy flame,
Scorn the proud scorner, and forget the name.

COLLY.
I can't forget, when Silvia once was kind,
What pleasing fancies revell'd in my mind;
While on the plain I watch'd my fleecy care,
And tun'd my flute with sweet melodious air,
My gazing sheep would list'ning round me throng,
And warbling linnets imitate the song:
All nature smil'd, the fields look'd fresh and gay,
And Silvia too then smil'd as well as they.

DAMON.
Ah!  silly shepherd!  what avails those charms,
Now circled in another lover's arms?

COLLY.
Those are the comforts lately I possess'd,
When I with Silvia's constantly was bless'd,
But since she's false, those charms I late approv'd
Shall be as hateful now, as once belov'd.

But see, dear shepherd, yonder ruddy skies,
Damp vapours fall, unwholesome fogs arise;
Back to their fold our bleating flock retreats,
And Philomel alone her song repeats:
Each silent bird enjoys her humble nest,
And golden Phoebus gently sinks to rest.

Let us retire:  Farewel, ye flow'ry plains;
Farewel, ye nymphs; farewel, ye shepherd swains.
