The Man, on whom the genial Muse
Has at his birth propitious smil'd,
And nurtur'd with her fost'ring dews
The heav'nly-favour'd child,
That happy Man shall ne'er be seen
Amid the ruthless din of war,
Where horror stalks in wildest mien,
To guide the rattling car,
His humble brow no olive wreath shall crown,
That to the skies exalts a mortal in renown.

His mind no sordid Thirst of Gain,
No dread of Penury possess,
He ne'er shall tempt the fickle main,
In search of Happiness;
Not false Unkindness' changeful hue
Shall his indignant cheek deform,
Nor sallow Envy e'er embrew
The bosom's inward storm;
But Peace and Calmness bless the tranquil soul,
While each wild Passion hears the Muse's soft control.

As a clear stream, that slowly glides
Through many a winding vale, and nodding grove,
While where'er it's waters rove,
Brighter verdure decks it's sides,
Laughing flow'rs more fragrant blow,
And the fair harvest richer seems to glow;
Thus through the peaceful vale of Life,
Shall he steal on unconscious of decay,
Unruffled by the storms of strife,
Pure as the beam, that gilds the golden day,
While Poesy and Nature fondly strew
His simple way, with sweets of Pleasure's vivid hue.

Methinks I hear some Sage reply,
Deep-vers'd in Science rigid lore;
"What then shall Man, but born to die,
Thus waste Life's little store,
In vain delusion's empty dreams;
While levell'd at his native land,
The sword of dire Destruction gleams,
And calls a patriot hand?
Shall he exempted from it's cares and strife,
Be free to taste alone the peaceful sweets of life?

Cease, nor the sacred Muse prophane;
Each has his lot by Jove decreed.
Though one on Honor's warlike plain,
Be nobly doom'd to bleed,
Unless some raptur'd Bard rehearse
The triumphs won on Honor's field,
In songs of never-fading verse,
No meed his labors yeild,
Whelm'd in the tide of blank oblivion's stream,
While Time's relentless hand quenches each vital gleam.

On the broad Heaven's etherial plain,
What wondrous fires, what various signs appear,
Crowning bright the circling year!
Say what tongue shall dare arraign,
The supreme omniscient Soul,
At whose command the appointed Planets roll?
For though the grosser mortal eye,
In the revolving orbs no order find,
Yet as in mystic dance the sky
They round, each has his several part assign'd;
Though the Sun shine with more resplendent light,
Yet the pale Moon and Stars illume the vault of night.
