Come from thy hill, Malvina, lovely beam,
Where oft, beside its gurgling streamlet laid,
Thou see'st, all glittering to the Moon's pale gleam,
On his dim cloud thy valiant Oscar's shade:
Come in thy beauty to this haunted glade,
While thy hands wander o'er the quivering strings;
For thou canst take the soul, my lovely maid,
And lifting it on Music's downy wings,
Bear it to those sweet scenes where endless rapture springs.

What wondrous phantoms o'er my fancy fly,
As thy lyre trembles to that solemn strain!
They come, as Moon-beams leave the cloud on high,
And dim and feeble glimmer on the main.
Enough, Malvina.  O'er my wither'd brain
Poetic tides resistless pour along.
Give me the harp that bends across the plain,
The deeds of old shall animate my strain
When thy young lover shone the valiant chiefs among.

Wide o'er Brabala's hills and verdant vales
Long his dominion aged Mornan spread:
His generous deeds inspired the Poets tales:
Ne'er to his caves the captive wretch was led,
Nor helpless wanderer in his dungeons bled.
Here, with his daughter, fair Calthona, blest,
The circling years flew lightly o'er his head.
No troubles e'er disturb'd his days of rest,
Nor did the woes of war the peaceful chief molest.

With Heroes long inured to bloody deeds,
From Erin's mountains fierce Colranno came;
Weak as the breeze that plays mid Lego's reeds,
Were Mornan's warriors to this chief of fame.
In vain brave Narthon, rous'd by glory's flame,
For fair Calthona threw his glittering spear;
Slavery's fell chains soon bound the gentle dame,
She, with her father, pent in prisons drear,
Was left in hopeless sighs to waste the mournful year.

"Son of my son!"  said Fingal, mildest chief,
"Let Morven's warriors on the billows ride.
To aged Mornan haste to bring relief,
And humble dark Colranno's heart of pride.
Let Ossian's arm of strength be by thy side,
Mid dangers dire thy headlong youth to aid,
Narthon thy path thro' dangerous seas shall guide;
And, when at last the storms of war are laid,
Give to the valiant youth Brabala's beauteous maid."

To meet their foes Colranno's heroes flew,
And the dire battle bled along the shore;
Wild, as if warring tempests fiercely blew,
And, swept by storms, the waves of ocean roar.
Their valiant chief soon Erin's sons deplore,
For who could match thy hero, maid, in sight?
Beneath his sword, pale, faint, and steept in gore,
Colranno, quiv'ring, sunk in endless night,
While far across the heath his squadrons bent their flight.

Mornan, from bands of cruel slav'ry free,
Sees to his sway once more his chiefs resign'd.
Soon did my generous Oscar swiftly flee,
To the deep cave where fair Calthona pin'd.
On her white arm her lovely head reclin'd.
And plung'd in tears the beauteous maid he found.
With quickest speed he did the chains unbind,
By fierce Colranno wrapt her frame around;
And thus the virgin, sooth'd with words of softest sound:

"Come from that cavern's dreary gloom," he said,
"Nor weep forlorn and sad, in endless night.
See from yon tow'r the beam of joy display'd,
And boys the useless javelins tossing light,
Far o'er the mountain high, with keen delight.
Grey Mornan hastes to clasp thee in arms.
For thee brave Narthon, mid the furious fight
Resistless flew, and hush'd wild war's alarms:
Then hear his sighs of love, and bless him with thy charms."

Thro' Narthen's breast what tides of transport flew,
When fair as breaks o'er Morven's steeps, the morn,
Once more his maid of beauty met his view!
Shall smiles of joy thy raptur'd looks adorn,
When with love's pangs her gentle bosom torn,
Of thee regardless, flies thy favourite maid?
Her glance no more shall soothe thy heart forlorn,
As when the notes of peace fill'd every glade,
And yet o'er Morven's rocks the sons of Morven stray'd.

On ocean's strand, where rear'd the strife of spears.
Beneath a cliff at dead of night I lay.
To my dim eye the chiefs of other years
Rose mildly floating on their airy way.
My Evirallin, from her cavern grey,
Came sighing sad the rustling breeze along.
His thin harp waving to the Moon's pale ray,
Half viewless Ullin pour'd his ardent song.
The strains harmonious rov'd the low-hung clouds among.

A sweeter strain now came along the shore,
And quick the vision melted from my sight.
Who wanders wild along that mountain hoar?
Brabala's maid, beneath the trembling light,
Pours, slow her sorrows to the gale of night.
Not softer founds the ravish'd hunter hears,
When o'er her sleeping lover bending bright,
The maiden's spirit whispers in his ears
The tender tales of love, the joys of former years.

"Chief of the sons of Morven's land," she cried,
"How have thy beauties charm'd my soul away!
O that, ere I thy fatal form descry'd,
Wide o'er the turf, where slept my hapless clay,
The sportive wild deer held their airy way!
Then o'er my tomb, his heart with sorrow worn,
My faithful Narthon &mdash; far, ye horrors, stray.
That name with anguish fills my heart forlorn;
Turn from these thoughts of woe, my shuddering spirit, turn.

"Bear me where Morven's rocks of gloom arise,
And rapture in ray heart shall glow again.
When from her cliff the early eagle flies,
What joy to mark thee mid thy hunter train,
Sweeping with feet of wind along the plain!
When in the shade of eve thou sink'st to rest,
From my sweet harp shall waken such a strain,
As from thy foul each care, each grief shall wrest,
And soothe to quiet rest thy wo-worn weary breast."

When o'er the trembling waves pale morn was spread,
With speed brave Narthon rush'd along the shore:
The helm of battle glittered on his head,
And in his hand a forward spear he bore.
Late as the lonely cliff he wandered o'er,
He heard his lov'd Calthona's song of night.
And, "Oscar, grasp," he cried, "thy sword once more,
And let thy valour try this arm in fight.
Ghost of my fathers, hear, O aid me with your might!"

From Morven's ranks to meet this warrior brave,
A youthful chieftain came with steps of speed.
"O'er thee great Oscar ne'er his sword shall wave,
Beneath this arm," he said " thou'rt doom'd to bleed."
Hence to the peaceful hall, or grassy mead.
"Son of the feeble!"  Narthon scornful cried,
"There where the airy dance the virgins lead,
Hung with gay flowers in mazy circles glide, 
Fly hence, let low in dust be laid thy beauty's pride."

With lightning's haste the youth an arrow threw,
Thro' empty air it held its erring way.
Quick to the combat fierce the warriors flew,
And soon a corse the blooming Hero lay,
The tresses dark that down her shoulders stray,
The looks that languish in her closing eyes,
And breast of snow, Brabala's maid betray;
A warrior's form her lovely form disguise,
Prepar'd thro' seas to fly where Selma's turrets rise.

What pangs of sorrow dart thro' Narthon's soul
When to her cloud Calthona's spirit flew!
Wild o'er the bleeding corse his eye-balls roll,
Then on the ground his trembling frame he threw.
Frantic with rage his sword grey Mornan drew,
While down his cheeks the streams of sorrow stray'd;
And as dire phrenzy in his bosom grew,
The hapless mourner would in death have laid,
But Oscar o'er the youth his shield of safety spread.

"Warrior of woes," he said, "thy wrath restrain,
Nor drench with desperate hand thy sword in gore.
Wouldst thou avenge thy hapless daughter slain,
Let Narthon still the bloody deed deplore.
Oft shall he, sitting on the sea-beat shore,
Far on the foaming wave, Calthona spy,
While anguish dire his soul shall tremble o'er.
Thy age shall rest in Fingal's turrets high,
Till to thy darling's cave thy fleeting spirit fly."

Such were thy lover's deeds, thou maid of bloom,
For mercy dwelt within his generous breast.
Now mid the grass that whistles o'er his tomb,
The screaming curlew builds her lowly nest.
Near the young warrior, soon my head shall rest,
And soon in bowers of bless my soul he laid:
From thence, when night fails slowly from the West,
Oft shall we come, the vanquish'd chief to aid,
To charm th' expiring youth, and soothe the love-sick maid.
