Hail, LIBERTY!  celestial maid,
To ev'ry free-born Briton dear,
In beauteous robes of light array'd,
With all thy radiant train appear:
To thee, on this auspicious day,
We raise the votive, solemn lay;
Smit with thy charms &mdash; thy energy divine,
The wond'ring nations round in one vast chorus join.

Enamour'd of thy lovely form,
Thy smile our fathers fondly sought;
Thro' fields of slain, thro' ev'ry storm,
For thee with noble ardour fought:
With Glory's fire their bosoms burn'd,
The Despot's awful threats they scorn'd;
Not thro' wild ages was the contest vain&mdash;
Heav'n heard their fervent prayer, and broke their galling chain.

Nurs'd in their fens by Belgia's sons,
'Twas there thy youth to vigour rose;
'Twas there thou check'dst the tyrant's frowns,
And triumph'd o'er th' embattled foes:
With blooming wreaths of olive crown'd,
'Twas there thou spreadst thy gifts around;
Till rous'd by Britain's tears, by Britain's cries,
Thou left thy low-sunk shores for far more genial skies.

On that blest day, when WILLIAM sail'd
Advent'rous o'er the azure main,
When warring winds no more prevail'd,
And storms of faction rag'd in vain;
'Twas then, with beaming lustre bright,
Thy form amaz'd th' enraptur'd sight;
'Twas then you calmly sat and steer'd the helm,
To save a sinking state, and raise this happy realm.

And when, on Albion's billow'd shore,
Thine awful ensigns were unfurl'd,
Oppression's voice was heard no more,
And Glory gave thee to the world;
'Twas then you plac'd on Britain's throne,
Thy fav'rite's standard, and thine own;
With all thy gifts to bless this sea-girt isle,
And charm each distant age with thy reviving smile.

Twice fifty suns have seen thy reign,
With arts of peace and honours bless'd;
With all the Graces in thy train,
In all their fairest vestments dress'd:
By thee the Muses tune the lay,
Enraptur'd with thy gentle sway;
By thee the pencil bids the canvas swell,
And music strikes the lyre, or wakes the vocal shell.

'Tis thine to cheer the peasant's toil,
In summer's drought, in winter's storms;
To guard his cultur'd fields the while,
From Danger's frowns, and War's alarms:
'Tis thine to bid our harvest rise
Wide waving to th' autumnal skies;
'Tis thine to send, with white-spread sails unfurl'd,
Our commerce and our trade around the world.

But chief, RELIGION!  at thy shrine,
With grateful hearts we lowly bend;
To thee we owe our joys divine,
On thee our sweetest hopes depend:
No Romish zeal, with impious hand,
Shakes uncontroul'd her fiery brand,
Nor Persecution, in his madd'ning rage,
With savage slaughter, stains the annals of the age.

But rising fair at Freedom's sway,
Here heav'nly Peace in beauty blooms;
And sacred Truth, with purest ray,
The dark, benighted mind illumes;
While far beyond the bounds of time,
Exults the soul with views sublime,
With rapture eyes her future bright abode,
Where shines her Father's face, and her redeeming God.

BRITAIN!  from all thy shores around
Let the glad voice of praise arise;
Thy verdant vales repeat the sound,
Thy cities waft it to the skies:
May sons unborn prolong the lay,
And oft proclaim this glorious day;
And, bless'd with LIBERTY'S endearing train,
May latest ages hail RELIGION'S peaceful reign!
