Happy the youth, on whom dame fortune smiles,
And gives him wealth, his wishes to pursue;
The jocund hours he easily beguiles,
Still steering on to pleasures ever new.
And if fair Science can attract his view,
Enamour'd of the worthy Bards of old,
He knows not the distresses of the crew,
On whom the beldam ne'er her favours roll'd,
Or him whose hapless fate I purpose to unfold.

O thou, who from the pleasant banks of Ayr
Thy merit summon'd to Edina's walls,
Whose songs delight her sons and daughters fair,
And loudly echo through her splendid balls.
On thee a simple Poet humbly calls,
A simple Poet who obscur'd the while,
The fear of scornful critic sore appals,
On whom, if COILA'S BARD vouchsafe to smile,
His name shall spread abroad thro' Albion's sea-girt Isle.

There whilom ligd, ypent in garret high,
A tuneful Bard, who well could touch the lyre,
Who often sung so soot, and witchingly
As made the crowds, in silent gaze, admire,
Ymolten with the wild seraphic fire
Which his sweet sonnets eathly could impart,
They list'ning stood, ne never did they tire,
So steal'd his soft persuasion on the heart,
So smooth his numbers flow'd, all unrestrain'd by art.

Sometimes, as fancy prompt him, he would sing
The charms of nature at the morning's dawn,
Or paint the beauties of the blooming spring,
The shady forest, and the flow'ry lawn,
The whitened thorn and roses newly blawn,
Or mazy rills, that wildly devious flow,
Or pensive shepherd, from the crowd withdrawn,
Sore pin'd with luckless love and mochel wo,
Design'd from tow'ring cliff his wretched self to throw.

Eftsoons he changed quite the veering strain,
To winter shrouded in her mantle hoar,
The boreal blast, the bitter driving rain,
The swelling torrent's loud resounding roar,
Which down the steep, the groaning forest bore,
And delug'd all the swimming plains below;
Then sung the lake with ice ycover'd o'er,
The nimble youngsters, hurling to and fro,
And mountain's heaving head yclad in virgin snow.

"Now shut the pond'rous gate, and rouse the fire,
Produce the flask, and fill the massy bowl;
To gloomy haunt let wrinkl'd care retire,
Let joy abound possessing ev'ry soul,
Let Boreas bluster, and the tempest howl;
'Tis ours to snatch the pleasures, as they fly,
Now up the lofty Diapason rowl,
'Tis music gives the purest extacy,
And lifts the soul from earth exalted to the sky.

"See where the miser, brooding o'er his gear,
Sits sad and sullen, in his dreary cell,
No glowing fire, the sable walls to cheer,
With him pale want and timid fancy dwell.
O!  tell us true, ye wretched miscreants tell,
Why all this caution to secure your gold,
Will it appease the ruthless King of hell,
Or help to make the burning climate cold,
Ah!  vain your hope, for there no joy is bought or sold.

"Let the dull Cynic preach his musty rules,
No son of Bacchus will attend his lore;
Let him hold forth to children and to fools,
And turn, and turn his lifeless lectures o'er;
And cite old Plato, and ilk sage of yore,
And beat his breast, and grin and look awry,
Down with the pedant, let us sing and roar:
Behold the festive moments dancing by,
'Tis ours in joy to live, and catch them as they fly."

Thus flow'd his numbers, to the jolly train,
While buoyant spirits kept his soul above,
Then grief would interfere, and damp his strain,
And gloomy thoughts and sad ideas move;
Then like a weary wight enthrall'd in love,
Of flames and chains, and arrows would he tell,
And, sadly sighing, seek the gloomy grove,
Or ruin, seated in a dreary dell,
Whence oft, at dead of night, grim ghosts terrific yell.

Whate'er he sung, or pleasing or sublime,
The placid verses always run the same;
Did love or friendship e'er demand his rhyme,
Or wight grotesque his meditation claim,
With equal force and energy they came,
And pity or loud laughter could ymove,
So eath he trode the arduous path of fame,
And so engross'd the tuneful sisters' love,
None rival could his lays, so far less reach above.

Now Fame, with brazen tromp, proclaimed loud
His name, which through all Caledonia rung,
The busy murmur spread along the crowd,
In ev'ry place, his roundelays are sung,
Improven much, by ev'ry female tongue,
To whom the songs of love are ever dear,
The grave, the gay, the am'rous and the young,
All crowd around the wondrous Bard to hear,
For ne'er did Scottish Bard so much enchant the ear.

But, will the sweet delusion ever last?
Will ay his reputation firm remain?
Ah me!  I fear misfortune's ruthless blast,
That still o'ertakes the Muses' gentle train,
Expos'd to poverty, and cold disdain
Of witless louts, who see them passen by,
And eke the beau, of gaudy trappings vain,
Who on their tatter'd vestments cast an eye,
Gods!  what a silly soul, the witless creatures cry.

She next display'd, before his wondring eyes,
A laurel crown, and thus her speech begun,
"The youth who hopes to gain the mighty prize,
The busy ways of avarice must shun,
And from the haunts of low ambition run,
Accurs'd is he who sings for worthless ore,
Such of Apollo never favour won;
The most illustrious of the Bards of yore,
Pale poverty, and want, and mighty sorrows bore."

Admonish'd thus, he never crept abroad,
Nor long'd to mingle in the busy coil,
Though others idoliz'd the aureat God,
He never longs to share the filthy spoil,
Ne fit for hurry, and disdaining toil,
Assiduously, he turns the classic page,
Which treats of war and many a bloody broil,
How rival Gods in Ilium's cause engage,
And seem's inspir'd with all Dan Homer's Epic rage.

How good Aeneas from the fatal shore,
Convey'd his household Gods and aged Sire,
The mournful fate of murder'd Polydore,
Poor Dido flaming on the funeral pire,
When she beheld the Trojan fleet retire;
The Cumaean oracle, the branch of gold,
The reign of Pluto, and his mansion dire,
What wondrous things Anchises did unfold,
And all that e'er the charming Bard of Mantua told.

Sometimes the past'ral numbers he would read,
Where is depainted many a simple swain,
Supinely piping on the flow'ry mead,
Sicilian valley or Arcadian plain,
Where pass their golden days withouten pain:
Or trace the am'rous Ovid's witching lay,
Or smooth Tibullus' soft pathetic strain,
Sharp Juvenal, and Horace ever gay,
Bards who the utmost pow'r of human wit display.

On wooden shelves were fav'rite authors plac'd,
Gilt on the backs, and rang'd in seemly row;
The Bard and Sage, his ample study grac'd,
Historians wise, and many authors moe;
There painted maps enhanc'd the learned show,
Where all the world in miniature was seen,
The landscape did with gaudy colours glow;
The airy mountain, and the forest green,
Which all yblent produc'd a goodly scene I ween.

The floor with scrolls of paper was besprent,
And musty pamphlets, which disorder'd lay,
An Epic Poem, here in pieces rent,
And there appear'd the fragments of a Play,
Which was to be revis'd some other day,
And gain a crowded Theatre's applause;
And here an Ode a mouse had stolen away,
A mouse as learn'd as Shenstone's rottan was,
But thoughtlessly enthrall'd in fell grimalkin's claws.

Now would he quickly take a volume down,
And read, with face demure, a page or twain,
Catch at a hint, and mark it for his own,
And place his benefactor right again,
Then, with the thought, the marble paper stain,
And gaze upon it, with enraptur'd look,
Ay walking to and fro, nae little vain;
Encourag'd thus, he reassumes the book,
To seek for more from whence the other hint he took.

Thus spent he many a long and dreary day,
With lean repast, not over merrily,
For all unkempt he never lov'd to stray,
Save when the gleaming moon illum'd the sky,
When none his tatter'd liv'ry mote espy;
Then would he stolen softly from his dome,
And to some haunted stream's meanders hy,
And sullen, stalking through the solemn gloom,
Some sadly plaintive strain or Elegy resume.

But O!  what pen his terror can describe,
When to his lofty mansion slow ascends,
A caitiff, dreadful to the tuneful tribe,
Yclep'd a dun, a catchpoll him attends,
And in his fist a magic wand extends,
Thund'ring they bawl, he trembles at the roar,
His breath he stifles, and his voice suspends,
And lies entranc'd, like Mahomet of yore,
Ne offers he to stir till all the siege is o'er.

So crafty Reynard, that nocturnal pest,
Descends, in silence, from the cloudy hill;
When all the village curs and mastiffs rest,
The roost to pillage, and the geese to kill,
Which having done, and eat and drunk his fill,
Prepar'd for flight, the trap blockades the way,
The farmer comes, and finds him lying still,
Stretch'd on the ground, a lump of breathless clay
But soon as he is gone, the villain sneaks away.
