Time ever lapsing, tho' on silent wings,
The annual Revolution of our sphere,
Once more unto its stated period brings,
And hails the entrance of a new-born year:
But ah!  what varied aspects does it wear
To mortals, journeying life's uncertain road;
To some presenting hope, to others fear;
On some see wealth with lavish hand bestow'd,
Whilst want and pain assail bleak poverty's abode.

The muse beholds with moralizing eye,
What various changes since the last have been;
How some on fortune's pinions wafted high,
With rapture contemplate th' bright'ning scene:
With glowing heart and extended mien,
The golden hours of pleasure now employ,
Deeming the smile of fate an evergreen;
And in the triumph of unbounded joy,
Look forward still to years of bliss without alloy.

Perhaps, exalted by the voice of fame,
Latent ambition rears her haughty crest!
Perhaps the heir who mourns a father's name;
In secret triumphs in his wealth possest:
Perhaps the lover more supremely blest,
Reaps boundless rapture from his fair one's smile;
The wit exults, unrivall'd in his jest,
And e'en the poet's labours to beguile,
Fame in perspective, drowns the sense of present toil.

But ah!  how many view revers'd the scene!
How many sink beneath misfortune's frown!
And pierc'd with anguish exquisitely keen,
In torpid apathy their woes would drown.
Vain the attempt &mdash; their paths with sorrow strown,
That open still the wound her pow'r would heal;
Can calm indiff'rence dwell where peace has flown?
Alas!  the heart by nature form'd to feel,
With cold and icy hand, death only can congeal.

A prey to unavailing sorrow left,
Behold the widow's tears incessant flow;
Of fame, of fortune, or of friends bereft,
What num'rous victims drink the cup of woe?
Nor peace nor future joy expect to know,
By adverse winds and boist'rous billows tost,
By some unseen, inevitable blow,
Their fairest prospects dash'd, their projects crost,
And hope's last glimmering ray in sable darkness lost.

Rous'd by the hollow groans of wild despair,
See madness issue from her dreary cell!
With staring eye-balls and with frantic air,
Her force in vain weak reason would repel,
The passions 'gainst her feeble powers rebel;
The soul's o'erwhelm'd with dire distraction's flood,
And oh!  its devastations who can tell?
Oft suicide with her infernal brood,
Pursues the track, and marks her steps in human blood.

Nor can we plead, heav'n's justice to arraign,
Those ills exist in humble life alone;
Oft restless on the thorny bed of pain,
The rich, the gay, and elevated groan:
Alas!  they now invade e'en Britain's throne!
Propitious heav'n avert the fatal blow,
Which long an anxious nation must bemoan!
For which involuntary tears must flow,
And even private grief be drown'd in public woe.

If virtue's pow'r her votaries can save,
Our amiable Monarch sure may claim,
A long and blest exemption from the grave,
And still increase the honours of his name:
But virtue can bestow immortal fame,
Beyond this narrow sublunary shore;
The voice of popular applause, or blame,
Indiff'rent objects, then shall be no more,
But all the chequer'd, transient scenes of life be o'er.

Here rest my Muse, &mdash; the endless theme resign,
Mortal vicissitudes alternate rise;
But from the view, O!  let this moral shine,
Patience and faith alone can claim the prize:
The gifts of fortune and of fame despise,
Revolving fate may snatch them unpossest;
Another year may call thee to the skies,
Or here may send thee succour if distrest:
May chear the wretch, or cloud the prospects of the blest.
