BOOK SECOND.
With reverence struck, Ebuda's ruler views
His aweful guest, who thus his speech renews:
"Time-honor'd chief, and you, ye generous band,
Who, lost in wonder at my presence stand:
Tho' silence chains your voice, each look enquires
Who, and from whence I am &mdash; to your desires
My will accords.  No wretch in magic lore
Deep vers'd, who summons from th' infernal shore
Malignant fiends, to whelm mankind in woes,
And nature's laws, and heaven's decrees oppose,
Am I &mdash; tho' never known to martial fame,
You may perchance have heard of Merlin's name.
In peaceful ease, for ne'er my bosom felt
Ambition's pangs, in Uther's court I dwelt
For many a year, with a lov'd consort blest,
Whose soul each female excellence possest.
To calm content I gave my youthful prime,
Unnoticed past the silent lapse of time:
The light-wing'd hours dispensing pleasure flew:
No varied fortune stain'd their radiant hue.

At length to transport grew my full delight,
An unexpected offspring blest my sight,
Child of my failing years. &mdash; But such our state,
When man is most assur'd of bliss, elate
With air-form'd visions, sudden intervene
Sorrow's black clouds, and blast the flatt'ring scene;
And the rapt mind, so busily employ'd,
Becomes a dreary blank &mdash; a hideous void.
That sun, which rising in the eastern skies
Beheld a lovely daughter bless my eyes;
Ere in the west was sunk his glimmering ray,
Beheld the mother turn'd to breathless clay:
And I &mdash; but how ungrateful to repine!
No common joys for many a year were mine!

By slow degrees I felt th' impetuous tide
Of turbid grief, and dark despair subside.
When to the font, as Christian rites ordain,
To free her soul from sin's polluting stain,
The child was brought; before the hallow'd shrine,
The white-rob'd priest implor'd the power divine
His guardian wings of mercy to extend,
With joys to crown her, and from ills defend.
No sooner was perform'd the mystic rite,
Than on the babe he fix'd his eager sight,
And cried; "Sweet child!  a wondrous fate is thine.
Doom'd in severest woe thro' life to pine,
Unless thou fliest from him thy soul approves,
And he rejects thee who most dearly loves:
Yet whosoe'er in wedlock takes thy hand,
Reigns from that hour supreme in Britain's land:
Beneath his matchless force his foes shall bend,
And to remotest realms his fame extend."

As thus the seer the dark decrees of fate
Unfolded, in each brow amazement sate.
On all who heard strict silence I impos'd,
Nor they th' ambiguous oracle disclos'd.
While hope and dread possest my anxious mind,
To make her worthy of the state design'd
By heav'n, was long my sole employ; the maid
My wishes blest, and every care repaid.
As time advanc'd, with secret joy I found
Her form, her mind with each perfection crown'd.
Forgive those praises on a darling child,
Whose smiles so oft affliction's pangs beguil'd&mdash;
Tired of mankind, and grandeur's irksome weight,
With her I sojourn'd in a lone retreat
By Deva's stream, 'mid vales and mountains rude,
Sweet to the pensive mind is solitude.
Most sweet to study nature's secret laws,
And trace her wonders to the primal cause.

What deep instruction the reflecting mind,
Benignant nature, in thy works can find!
The leaf that quivers in th' autumnal gale,
The flower of spring that in the lonely vale
Blooms unregarded, casually proclaim,
With yonder orbs that deck th' ethereal frame,
Their great Creator's wisdom. &mdash; Thus retir'd
To live and die was all my soul desir'd.
But not to me was heaven's high will unknown,
That man was made not for himself alone.
Shall I, my Inogen, in beauty's bloom,
Thus keep sequester'd in the forest-gloom?
And shall the fairest flower that decks the spring,
Lavish its sweets on zephyr's idle wing,
That fans the desart? &mdash; Soon again would fade
Hope's flattering scenes in doubt's distressful shade
Dark were the prophet's words; but to resign
Submissive to the will of heaven was mine.

At length resolv'd, but with reluctant heart,
From my sequester'd bower I slow depart.
Bid to each scene, by time endear'd, adieu;
And often turn, and take a lingering view.
Nor so the maid, her sparkling eyes confest
The secret pleasure that inspir'd her breast.

How sweet the world's delights at distance eyed!
How bright to fancy's view each joy untried!
Alas!  when nearer pieced, and duly weigh'd,
They prove an idle dream, &mdash; a vacant shade.
Experienc'd age alone, sad privilege, knows
Our joys are fleeting, permanent our woes.
But, to this mournful truth the youthful mind
Still, as it wont, let sweet delusion blind!
For all the pleasures cruel fate denies,
Hope can prevent, and fancy realize.

To Caerlile's towers we came; with joy possest,
Old Uther clasp'd me to his friendly breast;
And grateful praises on the maid bestow'd,
While her warm checks with bashful pleasure glow'd.

"And is my friend, he cried, at length return'd,
Whose cruel absence I so long have mourn'd?
Never, O Merlin I shall I cease to pay
My thanks to heaven for this auspicious day,
With double blessings crown'd; my gallant son,
Who glory's course for six long years has run,
(Whom the great chief who sways Byzantium's throne,
E'en in his dawn of youth was pleas'd to own
His favor'd knight; while rage and wonder
His peers' indignant breasts, as they beheld
A beardless boy, till then unknown, exceed
Their martial acts, and win fame's brightest meed)
My much-lov'd Arthur comes, who late unfurl'd
Britannia's standard to the eastern world.
Then the red-cross thro' air triumphant flew,
And the pale crescent faded at the view.
Then sunk in deep dismay the Paynim race;
Whilst, whirl'd by giant arms the iron mace,
And beam-like spear oppos'd his might in vain&mdash;
Sad Asia mourn's her bravest champions slain.
And, hark!  those joyful shouts that rend the sky,
Mix'd with the clarion's voice, proclaim him night."

To hail the valiant youth he bends his way:
We, from the walls, his glad approach survey.
His martial mien with pleasure strikes our view;
The sculptur'd helm, the plume of snowy hue;
The splendid mail, the purple-tinctur'd vest,
And star-deck'd baldrick flaming on his breast.
As nearer he advanc'd, we mark'd his face
Crown'd with each charm, and soft attractive grace.
Smiles cloth'd his roseate cheeks; but in his eyes
Dwelt valour's flame; not like the beams that rise
To gild the storm, but lovely as the ray
Whose purple tints proclaim the dawning day.

Full fifty gallant knights the prince surround,
Their fiery coursers o'er the champain bound.
All sprung of noble race, their country's pride,
Who scorning courtly ease, by Arthur's side,
Had oft in fields of blood approv'd their might;
His friends in peace, his brothers in the fight.

Then many a groaning wain, and lofty car
Roll onward, glittering with the spoils of war.
The squires succeed; and last th' attendant train
With spears erected, sweep along the plain.

Day following day still tended to increase
Old Uther's heart-felt bliss; the hours of peace
Beheld his son for sternest acts renown'd,
With every grace and milder virtue crown'd.

Nor less perchance my joy:  the prince resign'd
To me his conduct:  form'd his willing mind
By my instructive lore. &mdash; How soon engage
Youth's kind attentions the regard of age!

Yet was I not, O chief!  so weak, so vain,
To deem my merits could alone obtain
The wond'rous favour; no, I plain beheld
The lofty soul that danger never quell'd
E'en in its direst form, oft shrink afraid
From the meek glances of my timid maid:
Who soon to me her mutual love confest;
For falshood dwelt not in her gentle breast.

Memorial of the day, when crown'd with fame,
The prince triumphant to his country came,
A tournament the king prepar'd; afar
The joyful tidings reach'd the sons of war,
Who cross'd innumerous the swelling main
To prove their valour on the listed plain.
As judges of the field in royal state,
Old Uther and his son exalted sate:
The peers, and age-worn knights were rang'd around,
And high-born dames, with wondrous beauty crown'd.
But all confest, in loveliness array'd,
None shone superior to my darling maid;
Who, such the monarch's will, each prize bestow'd:
The prosperous champions breast with transport glow'd:
And her applause more genuine joy inspir'd,
Than the rich meed by martial feats acquir'd.

The knights of British race for many a day
Successful, bear the prize of fame away.
Not long they triumph  &mdash; Valdemar appears;
His ponderous lance the gloomy Hengist rears.
From mighty Odin both their lineage trace,
And claim a god, the father of their race.
As thundering thro' the lists they urge their course,
The boldest Britons sink beneath their force.
The Saxon sceptre far-fam'd Hengist sway'd,
And Valdemar, the Dacian realm obey'd.
Oft had the fiery chiefs, oppos'd in arms,
The North's bleak regions shook with loud alarms;
Till Thora, sister of the Saxon lord,
Controul'd the ravage of the wasteful sword.
By Valdemar belov'd, she smiled to peace
The storm of wrath, and bade contention cease.
United now by blood, and friendship's tye,
The fearless chiefs the world in arms defy.
At length the marshals of the field proclaim
The Saxon monarch first in knightly fame,
From Inogen's fair hand the victor's prize
Low bending he receives; then proudly cries:

"'Tis beauty's beam the warrior's soul inspires:
Hengist thro' thee the meed of fame acquires;
'Twere rash presumption ere my might was prov'd,
To claim the beauteous maid so dearly lov'd;
But since to boast unrivall'd charms is thine,
And ours unequal'd in the field to shine"&mdash;
Loud-interrupting, Arthur thus replies:
Wrath flush'd his cheek, and sparkled in his eyes.

"Vaunt not unequal'd force, vain-glorious knight!
Crown'd with the honours of a mimic fight.
Had I contended! &mdash; but I scorn the boast&mdash;
Unsheath thy falchion: &mdash; prove, who merits most
The peerless maid &mdash; thus arm'd alone, I trust
Pride's towering crest to humble in the dust."

He leapt into the list, and wav'd his sword
Loud-theatning:  forward rush'd the Saxon lord.
The marshals of the field, and knightly train
Between them sudden close, and render vain
Wrath's heedless efforts:  with indignant eyes,
Grasping their spears, the friends of Hengist rise,
And menace fierce: &mdash; with mutual fury burns
Each British youth, and threat for threat returns.

The hoary king arising, thus controuls
The fury kindled in their swelling souls:
"Warriors!  I call'd you to the feast of joy;
It is not ours the stranger to annoy,
Or wrong th' invited guest.  That act of shame,
I trust, shall never stain a Briton's fame.
Who dares against you lift the threatning steel,
Provokes my anger, and its weight shall feel.
Arthur, if aught avails thy sire's behest,
If filial duty dwells within thy breast,
I charge thee from our peaceful court retire,
Nor dare provoke a king, and father's ire.
Did valorous acts in love ensure success,
The smiles of Inogen, brave chief!  must bless
Thy generous suit; but if she prove unkind,
It is not ours to force th' unwilling mind.
Meantime partake each hospitable right,
With festive pleasures crown each circling night,
With sports the day; till comes th' appointed time,
When graced with favors, to his native clime
Each knight returns."  His words the martial train
Applaud, and discord lights her torch in vain.

The prince, meanwhile, his breast with anguish torn,
Directs his way thro' lonely woods, forlorn.
Now on the triumph of the Saxon knight,
His suit presumptuous, and forbidden fight,
Enrag'd he muses:  soon, that rage resign'd,
His father's anger rises on his mind.

Alas!  the seeming wrath from kindness sprung,
Affection only from his bosom wrung
The stern rebuke; Hengist's unequal'd might
He wondering mark'd, and trembled at the sight.
And now in secret joy exulting, thought
His prudence had his son's protection wrought.

How vain, alas!  the schemes by mortals plan'd,
Unless directed by th' eternal hand.
Our weak devices to destruction tend,
And counteract themselves their destin'd end.
Unhappy king!  exil'd by thy decree
Is that brave son whom thou no more shalt see;
Who only could, if heaven so will'd, oppose
The dark designs of thy perfidious foes.

For now when Hengist saw the constant maid
His vows of love with cold neglect repaid;
His chang'd demeanor we with grief espied:
His eyes beam'd fury, and his brows of pride
Were cloath'd in frowns, each circling day resort
New bands of warriors to our peaceful court,
Friends to the Saxon monarch. &mdash; Britain's lord,
With sorrow's shafts his care-worn bosom gor'd,
In secret issues his commands, and calls
His son, his absent knights to Carlile's walls.
If unavailing prov'd his mild request,
That force might free him from his lordly guest.

As sadly-pensive in my bower I sate,
Deep-musing on the dark decrees of fate;
('Twas at the close of eve, when twilight grey
Mark'd the last glimmering hour of parting day)
A youth, by virtue's bonds and blood allied
To Britain's prince, approach'd and mournful cried:
"Dire is the tale that Cador must disclose,
And dark the prospect of impending woes.
When Arthur, by his father's stern behest
Forsook our court, my rapid steed I prest,
With friendship's voice his drooping soul to cheer;
But vainly sought him through the forest drear,
Directed by some swains I still pursued
My course:  on Humber's beach the prince I view'd
Reining his fiery steed:  in martial pride
Ten youthful knights race graceful by his side;
Each knight for martial acts a mighty name,
Whose praise had often swell'd the trump of fame.

He mark'd my swift approach, and o'er the strand
His courser urg'd, then kindly grasp'd my hand,
And cried, "To Cador I with joy impart
The thoughts that long have labour'd in my heart.
Well may'st thou judge what rage my bosom stung
At Hengist's vaunt; my soul what anguish wrung
At Uther's speech severe &mdash; Thro' terrors vain
Meant he to screen me from the listed plain?
Or, direr thought!  give her whose form ador'd
Reigns in my bosom, to the Saxon lord?&mdash;

While thus distracting thoughts my bosom rend,
A bold defiance to the knight I send.
"If still he dar'd his idle vaunt maintain,
With ten, the bravest of his martial train,
On Ligon's desart isle, in equal fight,
'Gainst equal numbers to approve his might,
My challenge he accepts, as suits the brave;
And with the dawn we stem the foaming wave.
Nor long I trust shall we the foe expect;
The valiant dare not honour's call neglect.
Haste then, my friend!  to aged Uther haste:
Tell him, my soul laments its frenzy past,
When fierce resentment kindling in my breast,
I dar'd to mortal strife his haughty guest;
But he, a guest no more, I justly claim
A warrior's right to vindicate my fame,
Bid Lancelot, who in th' embattled plain
Ne'er shrunk from Arthur's side, his grief restrain,
That thus without his aid we wage the fight:
His faith's unquestion'd, and confest his might.
But Uther, in the vale of years declin'd,
May need his prowess and experienc'd mind.
Sooth my lov'd maid; assure her that his breast
No doubt injurious to her faith possest:
But ill he merits her who suffers wrongs,
And just revenge to hostile vaunts belongs.
May no vain fears her tender bosom tear;
Her winning smiles let Inogen prepare,
And words of joy my glad return to bless&mdash;
The cause, if weak my arm, must give success."

"Much long'd my soul to join the gallant train,
But well I knew th' aspiring wish was vain.
Joy sate on every brow, their hearts beat high;
And dauntless valour beam'd in every eye.

"At morn, their vessel fades before my view
Again to Uther's court I sad pursue
My toilsome course; while rumour to my ears,
As on I pass, the tale of sorrow bears;
That the rude North had pour'd her iron swarm.
On Britain's coast: &mdash; Here flam'd the Saxon arms,
There rag'd the Dane:  here Norway's ruthless band
Spread death and havock o'er this hapless land.
In Hengist's aid advance the savage race,
That stain to honor, knighthood's foul disgrace,
Regardless of his fame, th' appointed fight,
Neglecting, by these walls he met my sight)
Surrounded by his chiefs; and as I past,
The cloud of wrath his theatning brow o'ercast,
E'en now I learnt, a few short moments o'er,
That Britain's age-worn king will feel no more
The woes of life.  To Lancelot alone,
These mournful tidings, and thyself are known.
He wills thee to escape by secret flight
With Inogen; against the Saxon's might
To guard these walls is ours &mdash; Tho' distant far
Our bravest heroes; not unskill'd in war
Are we; resolv'd its dire extreme to try,
(The want of numbers shall despair supply)
If not to conquer, yet we know to die."

To the bold youth my grateful thanks I pay;
Nor long his counsel in my bosom weigh.
Of no avail in war's conflicting rage,
Is timorous beauty, and enfeebled age.
As now the silent shades of night descend,
With Inogen my secret flight I bend,
From Carlile's walls; while thro' the black expanse
No glimmering stars appear, nor meteors glance.
Our faithful steeds with cautious steps and slow
Pass by the tents where slept th' unheeding foe.
Their out-posts gain'd, more swift we onward prest,
And terror a weight hung lighter on our breast.

Thro' various toils our calm retreat we found,
Still, as of old, with nature's blessings crown'd.
The gurgling rill as softly urg'd its way;
The birds as blithly warbled on the spray;
As sweet the blushing flowers perfum'd the air;
The hills as verdant, and the meads as fair.

But, ah!  our minds were chang'd &mdash; to them no more
These scenes appear'd as in the tranquil hour.
In murmurs harsh the rill was heard to flow;
The feather'd songsters seem'd to mock our woe:
Each object rose unlovely to the view,
For all was ting'd with sorrow's sable hue.

It chanc'd, one morn in deep reflection lost,
I many a hill, and silent valley crost.
At length the sun gain'd his meridian height,
And scarce my feeble limbs sustain'd their weight.
Before my view a gloomy forest rose:
To quench my thirst, and in its shades repose,
I thither bent my way; for thence the sound
Of waters struck my ear:  th' untrodden bound
I slowly pierce, and now their view obtain,
As from th' impending cliff they pour'd amain.
The cooling wave the pangs of thirst allays,
And round my head the breeze refreshing plays.
An aged oak beside the torrent stood,
Of size immense &mdash; the monarch of the wood.
O'er the green dell its boughs were widely thrown,
And seem'd to make a forest all their own.
The trees, that round their leafy honors rear'd,
Like lowly shrubs on barren heaths appear'd
When mated with its height &mdash; in the cool shade
I lay reclin'd; a mossy stone my head
Supported, for around in order placed,
The lonely spot a rocky circle graced.

As wearied nature yielded to repose,
A wondrous vision to my mind arose.
The oak's vast trunk divided, and array'd
In martial vest, a stately form display'd:
With radiance ting'd his azure mantle flow'd,
And in his eyes celestial splendor glow'd.
On his left arm appear'd a mighty shield,
Mysterious symbols graced the storied field.
RELIGION here arose in robes of light,
There cloud-born ERROR shrunk abash'd in night,
Here FREEDOM smiled, dispensing blessings round,
O'er prostrate tyrants there indignant frown'd.
Whilst at her feet the main's stern RULER laid
His trident, and submissive homage paid.
On the bright helmet, framed by art divine,
FAITH, HONOUR, VIRTUE'S sculptur'd figures shine;
And darkly-shadowing, intermix'd beneath,
The oak and laurel twine their circling wreath.

Forward he came with slow majestic tread,
And my soul sunk with reverential dread.
"Favour'd of heaven, he cried, dismiss thy fears,
Behold the GENIUS of thy ISLE appears:
Nor deem, O sage, with chance thy guide alone,
My lov'd retreat to thee had e'er been known.
'Twas thine, directed by the powers above,
To pierce the precincts of my hallow'd grove.
Where from the branch, at consecrated hour,
Sage Druids pluck'd the plant of mystic power;
And claim'd kind influence from the host of night,
While the pale crescent, tipt with borrow'd light,
Sail'd thro' heaven's azure vault &mdash; their temples crown'd
With garlands, oft they traced this rocky round,
And on their altar rude, yon central stone,
The milk-white steer expir'd with hollow moan.
And man himself, a sacrifice abhorr'd,
Beneath the axe life's sanguine current pour'd.
While ruthless priests, in robes of snowy hue,
From gushing blood, and limbs convulsive, drew
Presages wild and vain: &mdash; but now no more
These savage rites prevail on Britain's shore;
And that thy country's fame may brighter shine,
Heaven calls on thee to aid its great design:
To guard the generous prince, ordain'd by fate
To raise the honours of thy sinking state.
Far to diffuse religion's sacred light;
And whelm the Pagan gods in endless night.
For this the Weird sisters, foes to man,
Who dimly fate's mysterious volumes scan,
Have weav'd, with artful malice to impede
What heaven's eternal wisdom has decreed,
Round Inogen and Arthur's natal hour
Spells of dark import, and pernicious power.
But know, since more than mortal are their foes,
With more than mortal power shalt thou oppose
Their arts.  Fierce Hengist claims their watchful care;
To him they destine Britain's matchless fair:
But be it thine to keep her from his view,
Or ills on ills, a dreadful train ensue.
This sacred wand receive; exert thy power!
And at thy will shall rise a lovely bower
To screen the maid, command her there to stay
Till war's tempestuous cloud is roll'd away:
Till from thy lips she hear, and thine alone,
Fate calls her to partake the British throne.
Then cleave the air to Ligon's desart strand:
The elements to thy commanding wand
Shall yield subjection; and to Britain's heir,
Still waiting for a faithless foe, declare
The greatness of his danger:  let him haste
From shore to shore along the watry waste,
And rouze the martial realms to his allied,
And knights of other lands by friendship tied.
But charge him till Menevia's bay receive
Their freighted vessels, ne'er those friends to leave.
How to instruct, or give, when wanted, aid
To Britain's prince, shall be to thee convey'd
In visions of the night. &mdash; High heaven his friend,
With man and daemons shall the youth contend:
Thro' danger's see his bark triumphant guide,
And scorn the terrors of th' assailing tide.
But since 'tis man's with liberty of will
Heaven's kind intents to frustrate or fulfill;
With dauntless valour he must prudence join,
To make him worthy of the great design,
Or all his promis'd glory fades away,
And clouds and darkness veil his opening day!"

He ceas'd; and sudden as the flame of night,
The radiant image vanish'd from my sight.

I wake, and wildly gaze around; my mind
In wonder lost &mdash; the lately-rifted rind
Was closed, and at my feet the mystic wand
I view'd &mdash; I grasp'd it in my trembling hand.
What strong emotions swell'd my lab'ring breast!
Awe, gratitude, and joy my soul possest.
Prostrate on earth my thanks to heaven I paid,
Then sought my Inogen.  The gentle maid
In rapture heard; th' eternal will ador'd,
Breath'd forth his praise, and future aid implor'd.
Sweet are the prayers of virtue, and arise
Like purest incense grateful to the skies.
And surely her deserts, not mine, could move
The watchful care of him who rules above.

Ere yet the guardian shades around her clos'd,
Eager she sued, nor I her suit oppos'd;
That Ellena, a maid of noble strain,
Whose heart fair friendship in its golden chain
To hers had link'd, &mdash; who like ourselves in dread,
To shun the foe from Carlile's walls had fled
To Cambria's wilds, within the secret bower
Might dwell, to sooth the solitary hour.

Now to the lonely isle my rapid flight
I steer; the prince and warriors meet my sight.
To Uther's fate the filial tear he gave,
Then stem'd with prosperous gales the yielding wave.
From different coasts auxiliar troops he gains;
Th' Armoric warriors quit their fertile plains,
By Hoel led; and from the Neustrian land
Redoubted Clodion leads his archer band.
Now by our southern coasts their way they steer,
Till huge Bellerium's rugged cliffs appear,
Our realm's remotest verge; then distant keep
From the dark isles emit the western deep:
For there, the billow's whitening surge beneath
Lurks the dire quicksand, and the rock of death.
Like a dim cloud amid th' aerial blue,
Ierne's Isle now rises to their view.
Thro' various regions spread the war's alarms;
The friendly chieftains rouze their tribes to arms
In Arthur's cause; and soon the generous train
With shouts resounding plough the watry plain.

Here must I cease; the dire event you know&mdash;
The gallant youth whom force could ne'er o'er-throw,
Submits to fraud.  Yet hope, faint hope remains&mdash;
But ah!  too long the tedious tale detains
Your listning ears.  Behold, more faintly shines
Heaven's glittering host, and night's pale lamp declines.
Here let us part; and ere the morning rise,
Ye chiefs, may grateful visions meet our eyes!"

They heard assenting; sleep's soft blessings crown'd
The tranquil hour, and silence resign'd around.

