BOOK FIRST.
Praise be the warrior's meed, who seeks to rise
By virtuous acts, by deeds of bold emprize,
O'er dark oblivion; and in time's despight,
Beneath whose wasteful course, in endless night,
Successive ages sink, and pass unknown,
Aspires to make futurity his own.

Such Arthur was:  the song preserv'd his fame;
And oft our fathers kindled at the name:
When wand'ring minstrels to the feeling heart,
The strains of nature, undeprav'd by art,
Addrest; and crouded halls were taught to ring
With the bold acts of Britain's matchless king.

Those days are past:  the vocal strain no more
Is heard, that charm'd our fathers' hearts of yore.
Now, sole memorial of their echoing halls,
Clasp'd by rude ivy, nod the mould'ring walls:
In cumb'rous heaps are stretch'd the stately towers,
While noxious weeds usurp the roseate bow'rs;
And, long enfolded in death's cold embrace,
Silent have slept the minstrels' gentle race.

Yet still his name survives; nor deem it vain,
That one, the meanest of the tuneful train,
Caught by the lofty theme, with feebler lays
Presumes t' unfold a tale of other days.
Such, as of old to Fancy's ear addrest,
Perchance had struck the sympathising breast;
When lovely were our maids, and brave our youth,
When virtue valour crown'd, and beauty truth.

The day's bright ruler, from his airy steep
Descending, plung'd beneath the western deep;
When, o'er the rocks that gird Ebuda's side,
Brave the wild winds, and surging waves deride,
The full-orb'd moon her radiant brow display'd,
And the blue sky in soften'd light array'd;
With quivering lustre deck'd the purple flood,
And edg'd with silver gleams the dusky wood.
Ivar, who trac'd his birth from sires renown'd,
A generous youth, beside the vast profound,
In meditation wrapt, pursues his course
Along the beach; while, with diminish'd force,
Fainter and fainter, from the shelving shore
The murmuring waves retreat with hollow roar.
Soon on th' horizon's utmost verge descry'd,
A fleet, dim-gliding on the distant tide,
Appears:  at times the snow-white sails in light
Are cloath'd, at times they vanish from his sight.
While o'er the main he bends his anxious eyes,
From high Conagra dreadful sounds arise,
Where darkly-frowning its projected steep
In wide-stretch'd shade involves the roaring deep;
That king of mountains, whose proud height to gain,
The feeble race of man would toil in vain.
On his astonish'd ear with hideous yell
Thus burst the strain that awed the powers of hell:

"Shall hated light still clothe these azure skies,
Daemons of dire revenge? &mdash; awake, arise!
Forego your dreary cells where horror reigns;
In gloom congenial wrap yon spangled plains!
The vault of heaven with winds conflicting rend,
And with the clouds the surging billows blend!&mdash;
Say, must we vainly thus your aid invoke?
For this does blood upon your altars smoke?
Do we for this the souls of mortals fire
With rage unpitying, and vindictive ire?
The race abhorr'd with causeless ills annoy,
And aid your hate?  awake, arise, destroy!"

As upward now he turn'd his wond'ring eyes,
Of fearful mien, and, more than mortal size,
Three female forms appear'd; in mystic rite
Engag'd, they traced the mountain's dizzy height
In circling course; whilst wide behind them flew
Their sable locks, and robes of russet hue,
As with demeanor wild, and outstretch'd arms
They rouz'd th' infernal powers: &mdash; their direful charms
At length prevail.  Th' increasing shades of night
Close dark around, and veil them from his sight.

Now, by the potency of magic sound,
Th' aspiring mountain to its base profound
Convulsive shook:  the birds that used to sweep
In crouded flight around the dizzy steep,
(As gray-robed vapors, driven before the storm,
Float on the winds in many a varied form),
Rous'd from their secret clefts, with piercing cry,
Thro' the dun air in countless myriads fly,
From ev'ry point of heav'n red meteors glide
In streaming radiance to the mountain's side,
Thick and more thick; then to its height aspire,
And form a rampart of encircling fire.

But tho' in splendor rose the mountain's head,
The robe of darkness o'er the sky was spread;
Portentous darkness &mdash; "Powers of earth and air!
Ebuda's youth thus rais'd the suppliant prayer,
Ye, who o'er nature's wide domains preside!
Ye, who thro' boundless space benignly guide
Heaven's cheering orbs!  who thro' th' ethereal plain
Roll the deep thunder, or its rage restrain!
Whose pow'r can check the lightning's darted ray,
And bid the storm in whispers die away,
Assist the race of man! &mdash; behold, unbound,
The Powers of evil urge their wasteful round!
The Daemon of destruction is abroad,&mdash;
And his yon dreadful scene! &mdash; Beneath his load
Conagra trembles &mdash; bind, oh bind again
This fury in your adamantine chain!&mdash;"

He ceas'd; for echoing from the mountain's head,
Again the sounds that struck his soul with dread,
More direful rose. &mdash; "Seize, seize, the-fated hour:
On yonder fleet, the storm of vengeance pour!
Descend ye clouds of death!  ye fiends arise!
Burst forth ye storms, and mingle seas and skies!"

And now the splendor that enclos'd the steep,
In sparks of fire flew diverse o'er the deep,
Kindling the nitrous clouds:  with livid glare
The lightning stream'd along the troubled air;
Tremendous thunder thro' the vast profound
In peals redoubled roll'd its awful sound:
In darkness failing thro' th' affrighted skies
The daemons pour'd their death-denouncing cries.
At times, their forms of dread the lurid light
Disclos'd, and swell'd the horrors of the night.

Awhile the youth lay prostrate on the ground,
When rous'd in terror by a mightier sound
Of long-continu'd thunder; thro' the sky
He mark'd with keener blaze the lightning fly:
Saw, as it flash'd against Conagra's height,
Out-jutting crags, and rocks of ponderous weight,
Precipitate descend with hideous roar,
And dash the wild waves o'er the trembling shore.

A mountain-billow burst before his view,
And on the strand a hapless warrior threw.
Sudden the raging winds their fury cease:
The storm-vex'd waves subside, and sink to peace.
Thro' scattering clouds, their fleecy robes in light
Array'd, majestic towers the queen of night:
Thick-gleaming stars the vault of heaven adorn,
Like dew-drops glist'ning to the beam of morn.
Tho' soft compassion in the gentle breast
Of Ivar swell'd, yet fear awhile represt
His doubtful steps; he saw the stranger rise,
And wildly roll around his wond'ring eyes.

Stately his form; and mingled in his face
The charms of youth, and manhood's riper grace
Vied for preeminence:  a ponderous spear
He held, that not the raging waves could tear
From his strong grasp:  his bosom oft he struck,
And, upwards gazing, cast to heaven a look,
In which indignant rage, with grief combin'd,
Exprest the mix'd emotions of his mind.

The youth approach'd, and cried:  "O chief unknown!
On our rough rocks by angry billows thrown,
Accept my willing aid; thy mien, thy face,
Proclaim thee sprung from no ignoble race.
But whosoe'er thou art, 'tis ours to share,
And sooth the woes that we alike may bear.
O'er all those Isles, far as thy eye can strain,
Emerging darkly from the hoary main,
My sire presides:  to give affliction rest,
And pour in sorrow's agonising breast
Compassion's balm, is his; and be it mine;
Nor thou the wishes of my soul decline,
To guide thee to his friendly halls."  He said:
The stranger sigh'd, and silent bow'd his head
Assenting. &mdash; Soon the dome arose to sight,
Crown'd with the silver moon's reflected light.
Melaschlen there the splendid feast prepar'd,
And there the soul-delighting sound was heard
Of harps symphonious to the vocal lay,
That gave the tale of times long past away;
Of conflicts fierce, of heroes far renown'd,
And lovely maids whose smiles their prowess crown'd.
Or tears their tombs bedew'd, while borne on high
Their spirits roam'd exulting thro' the sky.
"All hail ye warriors!  Thus the strain arose,
Releas'd from mortal toils, from mortal woes:
'Tis yours aloft on billowy clouds to ride,
Point the red lightning, and the thunder guide;
Or placid mid the blue expanse to stray,
And sport along the liquid blaze of day!"

The king with joy his unknown guest receives;
His willing hand in pledge of friendship gives.
But not the plenteous feast, the flowing bowl,
Or lofty lay the stranger's woes controul.
The silent tear descends; repeated sighs
His bosom swell; when thus Melaschlen cries:

"The secret anguish that thy soul devours,
Unfold; to succour, not betray, is ours.
Thy state compassion claims, not hostile rage;
Ebuda's sons no war with misery wage,
Know, tho' thou com'st from Scandinavia's coast,
The daring leader of a barbarous host,
That coast again unransom'd thou shalt view,
And teach a ruthless race the stranger's due.
But, if from Britain thou deriv'st thy birth,
Britain, whose glory fills the spacious earth&mdash;
And sure, unless the mist of age my sight
Deludes, thy garb bespeaks a British knight:
If such, thrice welcome to Ebuda's land:
The highest honour Arthur's friends demand.
For oh!  what kingdom has not heard your praise,
The darling theme, the wonder of our days!
Who, like your prince, with ardent souls inspir'd,
Taught by his rules, by his example fir'd,
As stars your radiant course of fame pursue,
Round the bright orb, from whence your beams ye drew."

The stranger rose; Melaschlen's hand he prest;
And eager thus his generous host addrest:
"Has fame too partial told in distant lands
The deeds of Arthur?  here that Arthur stands,
A hapless wretch:  if he has aught to claim,
'Tis grief superior, not superior fame.
Behold a monument of wrath divine,
To wreck whose fall the fiends of hell combine
With mortal foes; who, whelm'd beneath the main,
A fate abhorr'd, beheld his gallant train.
He, on the best of friends destruction draws;
Alas!  their only crime was Arthur's cause.
And is it just, immortal ruler!  say,
That those should perish who thy will obey?
Whilst on an impious race thy blessings shower,
Who mock thy sacred laws, and brave thy power?"

No more he said; &mdash; for lo!  in sudden gloom
A rushing cloud involves the spacious room;
And, quick-dispersing, by his side is seen
A reverend sage of awe-commanding mien.
Robes, whose pure whiteness match'd the new-fall'n snow,
Invest his form, and on the pavement flow:
The purple girdle, that around his waist,
Studded with sparkling gems the vesture braced,
Shot mingled beams of light:  his head was bare;
His brow imprinted with the tracks of care:
A few grey locks his temples crown'd; the wreath
Of honour'd age:  his ample chest beneath,
White as the thistle's silv'ry down, that plays
On zephyr's wing amid the summer rays,
His flowing beard descended:  in his hand
Appear'd, with mystic figures graved, a wand
Of wond'rous power. &mdash; Whilst in his breast the sighs
Of pity rose, wrath sparkled in his eyes:
Full on the prince he turn'd their piercing light,
Who shrunk abash'd, astonish'd at the sight.
Sternly he thus began:  "Th' eternal will
It is not ours to question, but fulfil.
High haven permits those evils men create,
Whilst they, what folly caus'd, impute to fate.
'Twas known to thee thy ruin would be sought
By hell and hell-born powers with malice fraught;
No less, than that thro' me, indulgent heaven
Sufficient strength t' oppose their rage had given.
I warn'd thee never to forsake the host
Collected to redeem thy native coast.
Who shar'd thy dangers, well deserv'd thy care;
'Twas thine the fortunes of thy friends to share."

"Forgive me, father!"  thus the prince replied,
"Forgive thy erring son, too harshly tried;
How could I act?  I saw my vessels tost
By raging billows; some on quicksands lost;
Some dash'd on pointed rocks:  loud roar'd the sound
Of elements conflicting:  wide around
Fell daemons shriek'd, and in the boldest heart
Fix'd deep dismay, and terror's scorpion dart.
Yet then, be witness thou celestial power,
E'en at that dread, that soul-distracting hour,
When death impended, and confusion reign'd,
My heart, resolv'd, unmanly fear disdain'd,
The trembling seamen I adjur'd in vain
To work their vessels thro' the boiling main.
While pale, desponding, in the hold they lay,
I faced night's horrors, tho' the blasting ray
Flash'd round my temples:  when each mast and shroud
Was wrapt in flames; when, like a vaulted cloud,
Impended o'er my head the hollow wave,
And its dark womb appear'd a watry grave
To die as suits a warrior all my care,
Beside the trembling mast the threat'ning spear
I shook; the powers of darkness loud defied.&mdash;
Before me Gawaine stood, and eager cried,
With friendly voice:  "Behold, enclos'd between
Yon wide-projecting rocks, a fairer scene
Unfolds; no billows there tumultuous roar
Smooth flow the waters o'er the level shore;
And t'ward our ship, thanks to propitious heav'n!
Before the storm a slender bark is driven.
Haste, let us seek the coast:  no more delay&mdash;
The shatter'd vessel sinks &mdash; 'tis death to stay!"

Nor vain were Gawaine's words:  I plain beheld
The shelter'd bay, where, wave on wave impell'd,
Screen'd from the tempest, with diminish'd force
In slow succession urg'd their peaceful course;
And sudden, by my friend's example taught,
I leapt into the bark: &mdash; that instant, thought
And memory possest my soul no more.&mdash;
Faint and exhausted on Ebuda's shore
I wak'd to life; and to these chiefs I owe
Such acts of friendship, as the sons of woe
Receive from virtue's hand."  The sage rejoin'd,
Frowning severe:  "Oh, impotent of mind,
By fraud misled, to thwart what heav'n decreed,
And meanly quit the host 'twas thine to lead:
In Britain's cause &mdash; No Gawaine met thine eyes,
But hell-born Urda in the youth's disguise:
No friendly bark approach'd thy vessel's side;
Thy rashness plung'd thee in the roaring tide.
No beach was there, to fancy's view display'd
So smooth, but pointed rocks beneath the shade
Of dark Conagra; from whose frowning height
Huge fragments felt; and crush'd beneath their weight
Then hadst thou perish'd; but high heav'n, whose will
'Tis mine, its humble agent, to fulfil,
Endu'd thy friend with more than mortal power
To save thee in that dread, disast'rous hour.
I turn'd the loud descending rocks aside,
And calm'd the fury of th' indignant tide.
Hadst thou my counsel in thy heart engrav'd,
And, trusting heav'n, the powers of magic brav'd,
Those envious fiends had mourn'd their malice vain,
And fled, defeated, from the troubled main.
Then prosperous breezes to Menevia's coast
Had wafted Arthur, and his valiant host;
Where many a friend now bends his anxious eyes
O'er the dark wave to view thy sails arise.
Yet never let distrust, nor mean despair,
Usurp thy bosom.  Heaven's peculiar care
Still watches o'er thee; to the power divine
Submissive bow &mdash; 'tis impious to repine.
'Twas given the Weird Sisters to annoy
With raging storms thy fleet, but not destroy.
Illusions vain, the phantoms of the night,
Beguil'd thy reason, and deceiv'd thy sight.
When heav'nly goodness wills, 'tis his to quell
Fraud's black designs, and blast the arts of hell;
Or fierce Destruction, loosen'd from her chain,
Would waste the world, and ceaseless horrors reign.
May that reflection sooth thy soul to peace,
And idle murmurs, vain upbraidings cease."

"I feel, I own my fault, cried Uther's heir,
And heaven's decrees are righteous, tho' severe.
Yet grant me this request:  have I betray'd
To danger, or distress, my lovely maid?
Ills heap'd on ills with patience I'll endure,
And brave their rage, if Inogen's secure."

"She dwells in safety," thus the sage replied;
"In my protection, and her faith confide.
But oh!  let different thoughts thy soul employ;
Dream not of beauty's charms, or peaceful joy,
When glory calls. &mdash; To my prophetic eyes
Perils and toils t' obstruct thy course arise.
If Arthur fails in aught that suits the brave,
He sinks disgrac'd to an timely grave.
Now, since thy harrass'd frame demands repose,
Is slumber seek oblivion of the woes
That still disturb thy mind."  The prince obey'd,
His kind submissive on his bosom laid,
And as he sought the downy bower of rest,
Check'd the soft sigh that struggled in his breast.

