BOOK THIRD.
Faint streaks of light the purpled east illume,
And westward rolls the now decreasing gloom.
With various streams around Conagra's height
The birds of ocean urge their eddying flight.
Some o'er th' unruffled main disporting sweep
On outstretch'd wings, some mid the briny deep
With pinions clos'd fall headlong; and convey
Exulting to their young the scaly prey.
Soon brighter beams, as o'er the hills is borne
The vapor dim, its curling sides adorn
With golden tints:  mean while th' enlivening gale
With shadowy waves o'ercasts the grassy vale:
And the rill bursting from the rocky height
Winds thro' the narrow dell in floating light.

Besides its bank, where droops the willow green,
The stately form of Uther's son is seen.
Oftimes he plunges mid the liquid stream
His pointed lance; the parted waters gleam
On either side.  But, ah!  tho' there his eyes
Are fix'd, his mind to different objects flies,
His mind, with various scenes of sorrow fraught,
By memory rack'd, and heart-corroding thought.

His aged friends drew nigh; and by their side
The blooming Ivar strode in martial pride.
The weighty shield, and pointed lance he rear'd,
And eager valor in his look appear'd.

The prince, while mingled o'er his visage fly
Hope's glowing tints, and terror's pallid dye,
On Merlin gazes.  Thus the sage:  "Thro' me
Hear, nor repine at fate's severe decree.
In ease inglorious long may Arthur live,
And share those joys a homely state can give.
But if to nobler views he dare aspire;
If his soul glows with valour's quenchless fire;
Since idly he forsook his valiant host,
Alone must he explore his native coast:
No friend to aid, no menial to attend,
With man, with daemons &mdash; force and fraud contend."

"O say not thus, replied Melaschlen's heir,
A hundred youths shall Arthur's fortune share,
Eager like me to prove, that Britain boasts
No braver spirits then Ebuda's coasts.
Fatigue, thirst, hunger, it is ours to bear;
Nor unexpert in rudiments of war.
'Tis ours to urge the race, to bend the bow,
Launch the strong spear, the wrestler's art to know;
To climb the rugged rock's tall head; to bound
From crag to crag, nor heed the sea profound
That roars below; &mdash; in slender barks to brave
The threatning storm that swells the wintry wave;
And pierce the whale, when tempesting the main,
The' enormous monster spends her rage in vain.

Shall we, who every  form of hazard court,
To whom toils pleasure yield, and dangers sport,
Oh!  say, my sire, shall we refuse the call
That sounds to battle?  can I nobler fall,
If so fate wills, than on th' ensanguin'd plain
With mighty Arthur, and his gallant train?
Or can the skies a greater bliss afford,
Than thus to share renown with Britain's lord?
Ere thou hadst number'd Ivar's years, in fight
Had many a warrior sunk beneath thy might;
Ere thou hadst number'd Ivar's years, to fame
Well-known, the living lay preserv'd thy name.
No fame has Ivar gain'd; but wears away
To valour's sons unknown, life's rapid day.
Shall my existence, like the viewless wind,
Unheeded pass, nor leave a trace behind?
And thou, a warrior, father, friend, restrain
The son who, like thyself, would glory gain?"

He ceas'd, and on Melaschlen bent his eyes
Imploring:  nought the hoary king replies.
To hear of Ivar's fall were more than death;
And more than transport if fame's echoing breath
Should fill her swelling clarion with his praise&mdash;
But, ah!  to comfort his declining days,
Ivar alone remain'd!  whilst in his soul,
Conflicting thoughts and adverse passions roll,
With gratitude the breast of Arthur glows;
His friendly arms the generous youth enclose;
And thus he cries:  "Oh, worthy to obtain,
With Britain's champions in th' embattled plain,
Eternal praise!  But no, it can not be,
Arthur must perish, or his country free.
To him alone the noble choice is given;
And humbly thus I pay my thanks to heaven!
Let force with fraud, be fiends with mortals join'd,
Like roaring streams by feeble mounds confin'd,
The fearless soul that in my bosom dwells,
Amid opposing dangers greater swells!"

His perils to partake, his fate to share,
With fervent prayers Melaschlen's gallant heir
The prince assail'd in vain.  Now interpos'd
Sage Merlin, and the generous contest clos'd.
"To thee, brave youth, all gratitude is due
From Uther's son &mdash; no longer vainly sue!
Britain must groan beneath a foreign power,
Or these impending ills that round us lower,
By his strong arm, and valour be supprest&mdash;
So heaven decrees; then thwart not heaven's behest.
And lo!  where distant with th' aerial blue
The billows mingle, faintly to your view
Gleams a white speck &mdash; behold again, and mark
Light bounding o'er the waves, a slender bark,
With power instinct:  swift as the winged wind
It bends its course!  the kindling waves behind
A radiant track display; against yon strand
It strikes, and calls us from your friendly land."

With kindest wishes, and with fervent prayer,
Melaschlen bids adieu to Britain's heir.
Not Ivar thus permits him to depart,
With strong emotions swells his lab'ring hart.
Speechless he holds him in a strict embrace,
The tears fast trickling down his blooming face.
Denial, ah!  what generous youth can bear,
Who sues the dangers of a friend to share?
While from his view the wish'd occasion flies,
That just before to his enraptur'd eyes
Display'd the glittering trophies of renown,
Bright victory, and fame's unfading crown!

He marks the prince, with Merlin by his side,
Ascend the vessel:  o'er the surging tide
Again it bounds instinctive; swift as flies
Night's gleaming meteor thro' the sable skies.

And now it fades before his anxious view:
The waste of waters with heaven's concave blue
Skirted, alone appears &mdash; He clasps his hands
In agony &mdash; in mute dejection stands;
And his fix'd eyes, whence flow the frequent tears,
Are bent to earth:  reluctantly he hears
The soft condolence of Ebuda's chief&mdash;
No words can med'cine to his mind relief.

But now the Muse awakes the vocal shell
To themes  sublimer &mdash; generous youth, farewell!
Farewell ye lonely Isles!  where to the skies
Enwrapt in tempest towering rocks arise:
Where low-hung vapours chill the barren plain,
And round you raves th' inhospitable main.
Yet soon shall climes, whom suns more genial crown
With purer lustre, envy your renown.
The desart coast, now scarcely known to fame,
Shall bear to future times Columba's name.

The sainted sage!  within its hallow'd shore,
Life's checquer'd dream, its toils, its pleasures o'er
The sad recluse his wearied eyes shall close,
And scepter'd monarchs in its dust repose.
Where now the wild weed creeps shall roses bloom,
The dark-brown dell a verdant tint assume:
And the rough rock, whose ribs of marble brave
The loud-resounding storm, the dashing wave
Shall then submit to man's successful toil,
And rise a taper spire, or massy pile.
Whilst nature thus laborious art subdues,
A task more arduous still the Saint pursues.
He tames the savage mind; he bids the fire
Of pure religion pagan breasts inspire:
And Sion's sacred songs burst from the Celtic lyre.

The rapid vessel urg'd its destin'd way,
And opening rocks disclos'd Ituna's bay.
Sudden, as Arthur touch'd the shore, from view,
In darkness wrapt, the bark and sage withdrew.

Silence and solitude the land o'ercast;
Save when at times arose the lonely blast
With hollow murmur, and unequal sound;
While deepning shade on shade, night clos'd around.
Where, bounteous nature's couch, the green sward spread,
Beneath a towering beech, he rests his head.
Sleep o'er his eyelids pours the balmy dew,
And scenes of glory rise before his view&mdash;
Bright, rapturous scenes of Britain's future fame.
Amid contending realms the fairest name
That decks th' historic page &mdash; by Merlin's skill
The vision rose, and heaven's assenting will.

At morn he wakes, and gazing round espied
A white-plum'd helmet beaming by his side.
Its crest, a dragon, dreadful to behold&mdash;
His verdant scales were streak'd with gleams of gold,
His teeth he seem'd to grind in threatning ire,
And his red eyes to glow with living fire.
The vant-brass, cuishes, greaves betrew'd the field,
The keen-edg'd sword, the adamantine shield,
And argent breast-plate, that, with golden nails 
Compacted, glitter'd like the Dolphin's scales,
When from the wave he bounds in wanton pride,
And scatters radiance from his dewy side.
Such arms he wore but of inferior frame,
When distant India trembled at his name.

Nor long he gazes on the gift divine:
His mighty limbs encas'd in armour shine.
Prepar'd, resolv'd on highest acts, he hears
The neighing courser:  suddenly appears
The steed, that oft his lord triumphant bore
Thro' steel-clad ranks, and fields embath'd in gore.
With dumb, expressive joy behold him stand;
And while the hero, grasping in his hand
The flowing mane, his wonted seat ascends,
In conscious pride the deep-arch'd neck he bends.
The prince, for so his guardian sage decreed,
T'ward Cambria's heights directs the rapid steed.
O'er hill, o'er dale, and solitary wild,
Where late the cultur'd scenes of nature smil'd,
Now ravag'd by the Saxon race, pursues
His mournful way:  with eyes indignant views
His native realm by truthless foes opprest,
And keen reflection stings his tortur'd breast.

A wood now stretch'd before his view, array'd
In leafy pomp, and cast a twilight shade
O'er the chill plain:  nor finds the warrior room
To urge his courser thro' the forest-gloom.
Rude brambles crept the stately trees beneath,
And hung their trunks with many a shapeless wreath.

A marble pillar, as he onward drew,
Appear'd, of height immense and sable hue;
And near its base, the prince amaz'd survey'd
These words in golden characters display'd:
"If mindless of th' advice by Merlin given,
Or doubtful of the wise decrees of heaven;
If any fear checks valour's mounting fire,
While time can safety grant, in peace retire:
For not tho' prudence guide, tho' conquest crown
Thy arms, art thou secure from fortune's frown.
The choice maturely in thy bosom weigh.
If conscious worth inspires thy soul, obey
Its high behest; and on thy breast engrave
This last advice &mdash; Be circumspect, be brave!"

Th' inscription thrice the fearless hero read,
Then mark'd, where to the right a pathway led
Athwart the dusky grove:  thro' that pursu'd
His course; at length an opening lawn he view'd,
Where tending on his flock a shepherd swain
Was pacing slowly o'er the grassy plain.
At distance, on a lofty mountain crown'd
With spires, with battlements, and turrets round,
A stately dome arose before his view,
And o'er the vale its wide-stretch'd shadow threw.

The prince of Britain urg'd his course amain,
Not unobserv'd:  with trembling haste the swain
Approach'd to meet him; and with visage wan,
In fault'ring accents wildly thus began:
"Oh thou!  whose radiant arms, whose martial mien,
Proclaim thee fam'd in many a deathful scene;
Perchance, and sure my simple guess is right,
A friend to Arthur's cause &mdash; a British knight.
Stay, I adjure thee, stay!  whilst I declare
A tale, that will with horror strike thine ear.
On this green valley long my flocks I've fed;
In yonder forest is my lonely shed.
There liv'd in careless ease, for never yet
The din of war had pierc'd my still retreat.
Three moons are past since, rising with the dawn,
Such is my constant wont, athwart the lawn
I drove my flock besprent with morning dew&mdash;
When, as from yonder height the mist withdrew,
Erewhile a craggy mountain bleak and bare,
Yon stately towers began to swell in air.
Amid the thunder's voice, and daemon's yells
They rose &mdash; such wondrous force have magic spells!
Strange characters, and seals of mystic power,
Are hung on every gate, and beetling tower,
That all attempts of force, or art defy:
Who dares approach, advances but to die.
Full many gallant knights I've warn'd before;
They went &mdash; but met these anxious eye no more!
Then urge not thou a trial rash and vain&mdash;
Fame calls the valiant to the listed plain.
Beyond this dell behold a mountain towers
Far-distant to the right.  The British powers,
Those who erewhile from Saxon fury fled,
Are there &mdash; by Lancelot and Cador led.
No braver knights, the prince except, are known,
Whose fame wide-blazon'd thro' the world is blown:
Their foremost wish to meet that hero's sight;
Their next, to labour in the bloody fight.
Haste, and partake their victory and fame!
Yon path to glory leads, but this to death and shame.

"Peasant, I never fly!"  he stern returns,
"This breast, when terror chills the dastard, burns
With double fire."  Then deeply mused awhile,
And fiercer thus began:  "Some secret guile
Lurks in thy words &mdash; no peasant would aspire
The nature of yon magic dome t' enquire.
No British swain, those hostile ramparts near,
Would thus presumptuous tend his fleecy care.
No friend would warn me from a glorious deed,
As righteous vengeance prompts, let falsehood bleed!"

He said, and whirl'd aloft the gleaming blade,
Swiftly it winds thro' unresisting shade.
Smote by the fervent ray, as morning dew
Dissolves, the peasant vanish'd from his view;
And backward leapt the steed in wild affright,
As Urda stood confest:  like sable night
Her bent brows lower'd; in wrath she roll'd heir eyes
That shot pernicious beams:  terrific cries
(Like famish'd wolves contending o'er the slain,
Or wintry blasts that howl along the main,)
Burst from her venom'd mouth:  "Weak man,
As well may'st thou inflict on empty air
The threatned wound:  thy prowess I deride,
And Merlin's art defy &mdash; with Death thy guide,
To yon enchanted dome, vain reptile, go&mdash;
A mortal hand shall lay thy glory low,
A mortal like thyself &mdash; We too have charms
To shield our champions mid the shock of arms.
My Hengist ne'er, the thunderbolt of war,
Shall from a British arm receive a scar.
'Tis fix'd as fate!  I caught his favouring hour,
And stamp'd him free from thine and Merlin's power!"

She ceas'd, and sudden vanish'd from his eyes;
The roaring whirlwind snatch'd her thro' the skies.
And now the smiling vale, the level way,
That late so tempting in the prospect lay,
Resum'd its native horrors; and display'd
A hideous chasm beneath the gloomy shade
Of rocks o'er-arching; headlong from their height
Had Arthur fall'n, the shades of endless night
His eyes had clos'd:  to heaven he first addrest
A grateful prayer, then t'ward the castle prest
His rapid steed; the summit gain'd, he found
A spacious moat the rugged walls surround;
Save, where a bridge to the huge portal led,
On which inscrib'd those characters he read.
"Long as this dome shall o'er the mountain tower,
Must Britain bow beneath the Saxon power."

"Sink then ye gloomy turrets," Arthur cries,
"And Britain's glory on your ruins rise!"

A horn that hung beneath he seiz'd, and blew
A dreadful note:  then o'er the bridge withdrew,
To meet whatever foe should tempt his might,
Before the walls in bold and open fight.

Dread silence reigns awhile; then backward bound
The brazen gates with harsh and jarring sound,
And wide-unfolded to his view display'd
Hengist's dread form in sable mail array'd.
A raven sculptur'd on his helmet stood,
With fiery eyes, and beak distain'd with blood.
Omen of death and havock:  his huge shield
Was black, but studs of gold emblaz'd the field.
(Heaven's pendant spangles thus with mingled light
Adorn th' expanded canopy of night.)
And the bright boar appear'd a splendid sun;
The proud device &mdash; "unequall'd and alone."
Vast as the pine on Norway's storm-beat shore,
By lightning blasted, was the lance he bore.
High mounted on a coal-black steed he rode,
And the bridge shook beneath the mighty load.

Athwart the field, confiding in their force,
The champions urge their loud-resounding course.
Thus clouds dark-gathering o'er the blue serene,
The thunder lurking in their womb unseen,
Meet with dire crash, and shake th' ethereal plain.
The dreadful shock unable to sustain,
In dust the coursers roll &mdash; the knights arise;
Rage swells their souls, and sparkles in their eyes.
They quit their spears; and whirl'd with sudden sway,
Their swords a ring of dazzling light display;
While from the mail at every mighty stroke
Flash'd radiance.  Thus at length indignant spoke
The British hero:  "Thank thy guardian fiends!
Thy safety on their tender care depends:
Or sunk beneath that blow thy crest of pride
Had swept the dust!" &mdash; "Vain boaster!"  he replied,
"Thy feeble arm, thy threatnings I despise;
And thus thy boyish arrogance chastise!"

Again in vain the contest they renew,
While from their toilworn limbs the briny dew
In streams descends &mdash; at length the British knight,
On Hengist's shield, collecting all his might,
So fiercely smote, that with a sudden bound
His falchion backward flew, and prest the ground.
Hengist unhurt sustain'd the mighty shock:&mdash;
A feebler blow had riv'd a marble rock.
Yet his numb'd arm its wondrous power confest;
The buckler fell loud-echoing; as his breast
With fiercest vengeance burnt, on every side
With strokes redoubled swift his foe he plied:
Who vainly strove, whilst the loud storm his shield
Repell'd, to snatch his falchion from the field.
But ah!  not aught could sword or spear avail
'Gainst Hengist girded in impassive mail.
Then firmly grasp'd in either hand he held
The moon-like targe; and swinging round, impell'd;
Its ponderous weight against the Saxon's head:
Senseless on earth his dreadful foe was laid;
Vanquish'd, not slain.  Tho' mighty was the blow,
Another's arm must lay the hero low,
To rise no more!  for when the British lord
With dire intent resum'd his flaming sword,
Thick vapours roll'd around of sable hue,
While Urda snatch'd the warrior from his view.

"Is this the vaunted knight," enraged he cries,
"Who Merlin's skill, and Arthur's force defies?
Thus basely rescued from my conquering sword
By hell's unhallow'd agents!  race abhorr'd;
A mightier champion for your cause prepare,
Or soon yon lofty towers dissolve in air!"
"Long Arthur, long these towers shall brave the sky!"
Ten thousand voices suddenly reply,
Loud screaming from the rampart's height, amaz'd,
Not terrified, the hero upwards gaz'd;
And saw th' extended walls, the turrets crown'd
With hideous objects:  wheeling wide around,
The screeching owl, the raven of the night,
With notes ill-omen'd urge their crowded flight.
Harpies obscene their direful forms unfold;
And Dragons, arm'd in scales of burnish'd gold,
Beat the resounding air with out-stretch'd wings,
Like rushing storms, and shake their pointed stings.
Sulphureous torrents roll the moat around
In liquid flame; the boiling waves resound,
And lash the rugged walls:  before his eyes
The bridge, the portal fades:  black vapours rise,
And fiery flakes shoot thro' the dusky skies.

Infernal spirits on the walls appear,
Here the sword blazes, there the threatning spear;
Here, like a meteor, levell'd at his heart,
Gleams on the bending string the flame tip'd dart.
From each red eye-ball glanc'd the sparks of ire;
Each dismal front seem'd scath'd with livid fire:
With wrath o'ercast, and horror's blackest hue;
While wreathing on the winds their snaky tresses flew.

Unmov'd, what mortal could sustain the sight
Of spectres swarming from the realms of night!
Yet no dismay the hero's looks exprest,
As thus in secret he his soul addrest:

"Say, I by flight should shameful life secure,
Can Britain's heir a life with shame endure?
Dread power!  if vainly I implore thine aid,
Extend protection to my lovely maid.
My fate to thee submissive I resign;
If not to live, to fall with fame be mine!"

He said; his weighty lance resum'd, and held
Outstretch'd before his front the concave shield;
Then, hurling bold defiance, with a bound
O'er-leapt the moat, and touch'd unharm'd the ground&mdash;
A glad surprize!  black clouds involv'd the sky:
Repeated peals of thunder roll'd on high:
The magic vision, all th' embattled powers
Of fiends, the burning lake, the frowning towers,
Are vanish'd, as the troublous dreams of night
Disperse before the morning's roseate light.

Destructive time with unresisted sway,
Mankind, and all their labours, sweeps away;
Exalts the valley, sinks the mountain low,
And bids the rapid torrent cease to flow:
Thro' him where once enchanted structures grac'd
The cloud-top'd hill, now glooms a lonely waste.
Yet still, memorial of their scite, remain
The circling stones that rise on Sarum's plain.
The wondrous rocks by power of magic laid
To form its deep foundation, undecay'd
By him who all consumes, are known to fame,
And still retain the mighty Hengist's name.

Beneath a rock an iron gate appears;
Within faint sounds of deep distress he hears.
He shakes the massy bars; the bars give way,
And thro' the dungeon streams unwonted day.
Forward the dauntless knight advanc'd, and found
Two hapless warriors fasten'd to the ground
By massy chains; with weak and struggling breath
They cried:  "To freedom, or a welcome death
Consign your wretched thralls!  a noble foe
Would scorn to aggravate the captive's woe."

Their voices well the British hero knew,
And in his eyes swell'd pity's pearly dew.
Their chains unbound, he led them t'ward the light.
But ah!  what horrid objects met his sight!
Their hair, like elf-locks, round their shoulders clung:
Each limb was weaken'd, every nerve unstrung.
Pale, meagre famine sate in either face&mdash;
Extinct the manly form, and martial grace.
In hollow sockets dimly roll'd their eyes;
Their lab'ring bosoms heav'd with frequent sighs.
With staggering steps they totter o'er the ground,
And gain at length their prison's utmost bound;
Then dropping on the verdant turf, inhale
The long-lost sweetness of the freshning gale.

The prince, sage Merlin's gift, a viol bore
Of juice heaven-temper'd, potent to restore
Th' exhausted frame, and drooping soul to cheer,
Opprest by famine's rage, or toils severe.
A grateful boon! &mdash; as quickly he applied
To each the friendly draught, life's ruddy tide
Again flow'd swiftly in its wonted course.
Reviving spirits, and returning force,
Each hero felt; and as with glad surprize
On their lov'd prince they bent their eager eyes;
From the green turf with sudden bound they sprung,
Now clasp'd his knees, now to his bosom clung.
"And is it given us thus to meet our lord,
Restor'd to freedom &mdash; by his arm restor'd!"&mdash;

While Lionel and Cradoc thus exprest
The strong emotions of th' enraptur'd breast;
The kind embrace their royal friend returns,
And mutual transport in his bosom burns.

Subsided now the tumult of delight,
Thus Lionel to Britain's princely knight
Recounts his fortunes:  "Ere thy sire resign'd
To fate's resistless doom, my active mind,
Tired of the tasteless joys that fortune showers
On courtly knights in halls and festive bower,
Impell'd me, distant from my native home,
In quest of fame thro' foreign lands to roam.
My usual arms forsaken, I assum'd
Mail ting'd with verdant dye, the helmet plum'd
With laurel wreaths; depictur'd on the shield,
Spring's early flowers that deck the grassy field,
Round her bright form in opening bloom appear.
"Earnest of joys to crown the coming year"&mdash;
The words imprest.  In honour of thy love,
Fair Guendolen!  I vow'd my might to prove:
And the decreed in lone sequester'd bowers
To wear away the solitary hours,
Till crown'd with fame, and worthy of her charms,
Revolving time should give me to her arms.

Bootless to tell, what toils and dangers past,
I reach'd Brigantia's stately walls at last.
Galicia's king, to please the dame who shar'd
The regal power, a tournament prepar'd;
And many a gallant knight his valour prov'd
In honour of the darling fair he lov'd.

An unknown champion every prize obtain'd;
And o'er the rest superior honour gain'd.
In lively colours on his shield pourtray'd,
The stately image of the martial maid
A Cupid held in chains:  and on the field
Was sculptur'd:  "Beauty must to glory yield."

With envy swell'd my breast; th' ensuing morn
The lists I enter'd:  soon the clanging horn
A welcome signal gave.  Our staves in rest,
Firm grasp'd, and levell'd at the adverse breast,
We met:  our shields the well-aim'd blow receiv'd,
And at unwonted fortune sore we griev'd,
Again our utmost vigour we applied;
And vainly every art of combat tried.
Rage fir'd the bosom of my gallant foe:
"Ere this, he cried, my arm had stretch'd thee low
In real warfare.  If to seeming might
Thy spirit's equal, draw thy sword:  in fight
Approve thy prowess"! &mdash; At the well-known sound
I felt my swelling heart with transport bound.
Th' uplifted falchion from my hand I threw,
And suddenly to his embraces flew.
"'Tis ours in acts of friendship to contest,"
I cried, "let others try who combats best."

Cradoc, who to Brigantia's turrets came,
By martial feats to win the palm of fame,
Felt equal joy.  Galicia's king who spied
Our kindling rage thus suddenly subside,
Bade us approach, and when he found the cause
Was sacred friendship, crown'd us with applause;
And by his side, with highest honours graced,
Thy knights, as judges of the Tourney, placed.

On the last morn we to the king applied,
Nor our request the generous king denied,
To meet, in honour of our native land,
Whatever champions dared our force withstand.
Success our challenge crown'd; rewards and praise
The monarch gave:  the minstrels lofty lays
Proclaim'd our fame:  nor long in joy we past
The circling hours &mdash; a sudden gloom o'ercast
The pleasing scene.  We heard of Britain's woes,
And rage, and pity in our bosom rose.
The king our grief partakes; and Arthur's cause
A crowd of heroes to our standard draws.
Trisanton's bay receives our gallant host;
Nor deem we there to find a hostile coast.
But soon a Saxon band, by Ulfin led,
Our march oppose:  and now our warriors bled,
And now the foe:  when, by the trump of Fame
Resounded, to our ears these tidings came;
That hell-born daemons leagued with Britain's foes,
And by their charms a magic castle rose,
Where Hengist dwelt in solitary state,
Mock'd human force, and braved the power of fate:
Convinc'd, that while it stood, so ran the tale,
His fame would flourish, and his arms prevail.

T' atchieve a noble act my soul aspires,
And Cradoc's bosom glows with kindred fires.
We meet the champion, but we strive in vain.
In such a contest thou alone could'st gain
Success. &mdash; Our mighty, but ungenerous foe,
Within yon gloomy cavern plung'd us low.
Dank was the floor; our limbs strong fetters bound;
And toads and loathsome reptiles crawl'd around.

"Here meet your doom!  the furious Hengist cried&mdash;
Here pay the forfeit of presumptuous pride!"
When the gate clos'd, and the last struggling ray
Of light was vanish'd; when we heard the key
Turn on the grating ward, what wild despair
Possest our souls?  we wildly rave, our hair,
Our flesh we strive to rend; our chains deny
Th' attempt:  then still in silent grief we lie;
Wishing that fate our heavy eyes would close,
And weight of sorrows sink us to repose.
Repose, not such alas!  our souls desir'd,
We find, with strong conflicting passions tir'd,
Sleep seals our eyes:  but ah!  tho' seal'd our eyes,
Terrific objects to our sight arise:
Th' unquiet mind's perturbed brood:  a train
Of nameless horror, and chimaeras vain!

We wake, and rage again our bosom rends,
And frenzy reigns; but soon the tear descends
In silent anguish.  Tho' our wish was death,
Yet nature taught us to prolong our breath,
E'en in our own despite:  but nought t' assuage
Thirst's burning pangs we found, and hunger's rage,
Save noisome weeds, nurs'd by a scanty tide,
Out-welling from the cavern's rocky side,
That lav'd the muddy soil &mdash; thus, many a day,
Tho' time we mark'd not, in despair we lay;
And surely, but for thy protecting might,
A few short hours in everlasting night
Had clos'd our eyes.  May ne'er my deadliest foe
Such horrors feel &mdash; such bitterness of woe!

But quit we now, O prince!  this hated place,
Dire witness of our sorrow and disgrace.
Not distant far, encircled by a wood,
From a steep hill its secret scite I view'd,
A castle stands:  if there a Briton dwells,
His friendship grants, if not, our force compells
Needful reception &mdash; soon we'll lead again,
If such thy will, our warriors to the plain:
On the proud foe redeem our honour lost,
And take due vengeance on the Saxon host."

The prince assents:  on Hengist's fiery steed
The warriors mount, and to the castle lead.
Onward they prest, and with the closing light,
Embower'd in shades, it dimly rose to sight.

The castle's lord was Ebrank; once renown'd
For martial acts; and ever-faithful found
To Arthur's sire:  but now, his vigour fled,
A peaceful life in solitude he led;
And on the realm his arm could serve no more,
His daily prayers perpetual bliss implore.
There, Guendolen, his daughter, constant maid,
No less by plighted vows than duty sway'd,
Sequester'd dwelt:  till to the lonely dome
With well-earn'd glory crown'd her hero come,
To claim her promise:  of his fame the hears,
And nigh approach &mdash; no Lionel appears,
Tho' she had sent his glad return to greet,
And Ebrank call'd him to their still retreat.
Yet meanly of her knight she nought surmiz'd,
Himself she lov'd, but more his honour priz'd:
And blest the youth who check'd love's pleasing flame,
When foes defied him to the field of fame.
Alas!  imprison'd in the cavern drear,
No tidings of the maid e'er reach'd his ear.

As with her father on the turret's height
She stands, th' approaching warriors meet their sight
Thro' rising mists as shoot heaven's struggling beams,
Thro' eve's dun shades the mail of Arthur gleams.
The Warder rings th' alarm:  the hoary chief
His bosom smote, and thus exprest his grief.

"The long-expected hour of fate is near,
And death awaits us from the Saxon spear.
Were that the worst, I'd gladly meet my doom:
Too long I've liv'd &mdash; too long the greedy tomb
Defrauded! &mdash; but alas!  to ruffian's rage
To yield my child &mdash; the comfort of my age&mdash;
That thought embitters death!  yet still I trust,
This arm, that many a foe has stretch'd in dust,
Some portion of its former strength retains;
And valor's stream, that whilom swell'd my veins,
Forgets not yet to flow &mdash; my arms prepare;
The rust-worn shield, the long forsaken spear,
'Tis ours at least the fate of war to try,
And shew than how a Briton dares to die!"

"Vanish that thought!  replied the blooming maid,
Tho' to these eyes unknown, the chief array'd
In gorgeous arms; yet sure the foremost knight,
On yonder sable steed that meets our sight,
Is Lionel.  In haste, my sire, descend,
And hail with words of joy our gallant friend!"

Thro' the wide portal hoary Ebrank prest,
And courteous welcom'd either valiant guest.
Soon with redoubled joy his bosom swell'd,
When, the bright helm unloosen'd, he beheld
His much lov'd prince &mdash; low bending on his knees,
His trembling hands the willing hero's seize,
And mixing sobs with words, he cries; "Kind heaven,
To me enough of worldly bliss has given;
The valiant youth predestin'd to renew
His country's fame beneath my roof to view!"

But ah, how weak are words these joys to tell
That in the lovers breast to rapture swell,
When those by unexpected chance appear,
For whom they live, who only life endear?
Such sweet affection, whose pure flames inspire
Mutual delight, unmix'd with wild desire,
The faithful knight, and blooming maiden own,
By perils past, and absence stronger grown.
Whilst hoary Ebrank at the plenteous feast
Questions the fortunes of his princely guest,
Their meeting looks, true heralds of the heart,
The soft emotions of the mind impart.
For love, thy language want of words supplies,
Speaks to the soul, and reasons to the eyes.

The generous prince with sympathetic breast
Partook their joy:  yet still himself unblest
He deem'd, unconscious of his fair one's state,
And dubious of the dark decrees of fate.
The coming day fore-wearied thro' the fight
Sustain'd so lately, to renew his might
With Ebrank he abode:  but when the ray
Of morn again dispers'd the vapors grey;
To the fair maiden, and his aged friend,
He bids adieu &mdash; the knights his course attend.
Yet grief foreboding swell'd the virgin's breast,
And Lionel the secret sigh represt.
But honour call'd, and Arthur gave command
To join with Cradoc the Galician band.
The prince his solitary way pursues,
To heaven's decrees obedient; soon he views
The Cambrian mountains that ascending high,
Enwrapt in clouds seem'd mingled with the sky.

