BOOK SEVENTH.
Arthur who found pursuit was vain (the muse
Again her king forsaken tale renews)
Resolv'd, when morn, her lucid brow unveil'd,
To pierce the forest that his foe conceal'd:
For now repose, with toil incessant tir'd,
Alike the knight, and panting steed requir'd.

Deep in a vale, adjacent to the wood,
A humble dome, a straw-roof'd cottage stood;
There dwelt a peasant and his gentle wife&mdash;
Unknown to sorrow flow'd their peaceful life:
In rural cares their fleeting hours were spent;
Their labour pleasure, and their wealth content.

While sitting at their frugal eve's repast,
And by their side their prattling children placed,
Sudden, the trampling steed, the clash, of arms,
With anxious fears their trembling hearts alarms.
These fears, the warrior's gentle words dispel;
"Ye peaceful natives of the lowly dell,
On whom I call, no act of fury dread:
The storm of danger o'er the peasant's shed
Innocuous rolls &mdash; nor I a Saxon chief:
A Briton from a Briton claims relief;
A friendly shelter, till the shades of night
Disperse before the morning's cheerful light."

The door unbarr'd, in martial pomp array'd,
Before their view the warrior stood display'd.
What reverential awe their souls possest!
Their eyes fix'd stedfast on their god-like guest.

Not mighty Thor, in Runic rhymes renown'd,
From realms of frost returning conquest-crown'd,
When self-instinctive flew his dreadful mace,
And crush'd beneath its weight the giant race,
In greater majesty, amid the gods
Applauding, rose in Odin's bright abodes.

His helm unbrac'd, how mild his features shone:
Soft as the radiance of the setting sun.
The children, frightned at the armour's blase,
Cling round the mother, and in terror gaze.

While smiles benignant brightned o'er his face,
He clasp'd their tender hands with gentle grace,
And thus addrest them:  "Every fear remove,
Ye lovely objects of connubial love!
Curst be the wretch who wrongs your tender years,
And fills the harmless shepherd's eye with tears."
Then paused &mdash; "Oh, thus may I be blest," he cried,
And deeply mus'd on Inogen, and sigh'd.

A tender sigh from sweet affection sprung,
Not from th' impassion'd breast in anguish  wrung,
For soon he deem'd, the fair, his labours o'er,
Would crown with smiles of joy the peaceful hour.
But ah!  how oft, when bright the morning shines,
Loud roars the tempest ere the sun declines.

What ills unseen the mortal race annoy?
How frequent falls th' untasted cup of joy,
Dash'd from our lip?  Alas, to thee we owe,
By contrast dire, the bitterest pangs of woe:
Vain, vain Security!  as down thy tide,
In stately pomp the barks triumphant glide
And the wish'd shore arises full to view,
In colours trick'd that mock the rainbow's hue:
Already Fancy treads the promis'd coast,
Doubt flies, and Hope in certainty seems lost;
But Disappointment's clouded form behind
Malignant scowls, and bids the adverse wind
In all its fury rage.  Death's dreadful form
Rides on the wave, and Terror swells the storm!

Embolden'd by the hero's words, advance
The infant pair; oftimes his weighty lance
They vainly strive to lift, and half-afraid
Touch the steen edge of his destructive blade.
Now mid the helm's white plumes their fingers stray,
And with its sculptur'd forms delighted play.
The mother frowns and chides; whilst in her eyes
Joy conscious springs, and her feign'd wrath belies.

And now the cheerful sire is rais'd; the board
With choicer viands spread:  while Britain's lord,
To each fond child beside him placed, imparts
The grateful cates, and wins their little hearts.
With added joy the parents' bosoms glow,
And blessings on their noble guest bellow:
And form the wish they never felt before,
That fate had granted them an ampler store
Of fortune's favours &mdash; but the wish how vain!
Souls fraught with honour idle pomp disdain.
They mark the efforts of the heart alone;
And willing minds all other wants atone.

Oh Hospitality, thou power benign!
Tho' others bow not at thy sacred shrine,
Yet may'st thou never from this realm depart,
But find a temple in each British heart!

The prince retires, and tastes the sweet repose,
That nature on the sons of toil bestows.
And now the crystal gates of heaven unfold;
The purple clouds are edg'd with gleams of gold.
With sparkling dew the web thin-woven shines,
That o'er the grass the busy insect twines:
Or on the buoyant air sublimely borne,
Floats tremulous before the breeze of morn.
The lark ascending pours the lengthned strain,
The lapwing screams along the distant plain.
The falcon towers aloft on level wings,
And the gay linnet on the hawthorn rings.
Their carols echoed from the distant groves,
The thrush and blackbird hail their feather'd loves.
The jay, the pie, their notes discordant strain,
And the lorn stock-doves on their elms complain.

Arthur, arising from the bower of rest,
Disdaining peaceful ease, his courser prest.
To heaven the parents' secret prayers arise:
And the tear trembling in the children's eyes,
As sad they view their royal guest depart,
More strongly speaks the feelings of the heart,
Than studied eloquence can ever reach
With all the labour'd pomp, and grace of speech.

The hero mark'd, and softned at the view,
With accent mild thus kindly bade adieu:
"Kind cottagers, may never danger rude
Invade these blissful bowers of solitude!
But as thro' life's extended path you stray,
Peace guide your steps, and pleasure smooth your way!
Such joys as suit your gentle spirits prove,
Content unenvied, and unchanging love."

And now the dusky forest he pervades,
Bewilder'd in its labyrinth of shades.
Oftimes aloud on Valdemar he cries;
To mortal combat Valdemar defies.
Then list'ning, stops his course:  no voice replied,
Nor sound was heard &mdash; save when the breezes sigh'd
Thro' quivering leaves; or as they died away,
The distant stream's low murmurs &mdash; No delay
His keen impatience brooks:  in wrathful mood
He shakes the reins, and threads the mazy wood.

At length approach'd a knight of martial mien:
Mix'd with the laurel's victor wreath, was seen
The cypress branch dark-waving o'er his heed;
While bars of sable iron thick bespread
His splendid armour.  Cradoc thus design'd
T' express the mix'd emotions of his mind.

The youth began:  "Tho' envious fate denied
To share thy matchless fame by Deva's side,
Yet of thy friend's renown can Avon tell,
Beside whose banks the strength of Ulfin fell.
Galicia's sons, and many a British knight,
We found entrench'd; but kindling at our sight,
They call'd aloud to arms; nor we supprest
The growing ardour that inflam'd their breast,
By Avon's stream, the foes embattled pride
Appears: &mdash; the foes our slender band deride.
But soon they find, when in his country's cause,
His vengeful blade the generous Briton draws,
Nor numbers terrify, nor threats affright,
But swell his fury, and augment his might.

"As Lionel our bands to conquest led,
In arms unmatch'd, and strew'd the field with dead,
A random arrow pierc'd his courser's brain,
And crush'd beneath its weight he prest the plain.
The Saxon chief exulting at the view,
Wav'd his keen sword, and t'ward the hero flew
With lightning speed &mdash; The meditated blow
To ward, and screen him from his ruthless foe,
A gentle youth spurr'd swiftly o'er the field,
And smote, but vainly smote, th' impassive shield
Of gloomy Ulfin; who in fury cried:
Rash boy!  full dearly shalt thou rue the pride
That urg'd thee, mid the strife of spears, to wage
Unequal war, and brave a champion's rage.
Ah!  cruel was the threat, and dire the blow,
That laid our weak, yet kind associate low:
But soon, releas'd from his incumbent steed,
Brave Lionel aveng'd the ruthless deed,
Stern Ulfin fell beneath his force subdued,
The Saxons fled, and death their flight pursu'd.

"My friend, whose gentle breast is pity's throne,
But not to thee is Lionel unknown,
T' unloose his kind preserver's helmet, flew,
But ah, whet horror seiz'd his soul to view
(As bath'd in summer showers, her languid head
The lily droops) his ever-constant maid
Pale, sinking on the plain! &mdash; in evil hour
Beneath the storm thus sunk the fairest flower
That deck'd the field of glory &mdash; was it thine
Amid the shock of clashing arms to shine?
Ah no, sweet maid!  a father claim'd thy care,
Now sunk with grief, too weighty long to bear:
A lover too, with anguish wild distraught&mdash;
Can he endure a life so dearly bought?

"I mark'd where lost in speechless woe he stood.
And hast'ned to his aid:  the gushing blood
I strove to staunch; and o'er the fatal wound,
My folded scarf with trembling haste I bound.

"As now, wild-gazing on the hapless maid,
With dire intent he grasp'd the reeking blade,
Her eye-lids she unclos'd, his hand she prest
With trembling hand, and thus the youth addrest:

"If, as I trust, thy Guendolen was dear,
I charge thee from the murtherous thought forbear.
Let me not die in vain, nor thou despise
That life, which dearer than my own I prize:
Then we shall meet in happier realms, and prove
The joys that virtue crown, and faithful love!"
To sooth her parting soul the knight complied,
Cheer'd with the thought, she faintly smiled and died.

Thus Arthur:  "Say, what yet I dread to know,
Lives still our friend beneath the weight of woe?"

"If that may life be call'd, the knight replies,
In silent anguish, tears, and broken sighs,
To shun the sight of man, the face of day,
And wear in lonely shades the hours away.
He lives &mdash; But ah!  with me his fate deplore,
He lives to friendship, and to fame no more.
To roam the wild, to stem the surging main,
And mix with warriors in th' embattled plain,
Be henceforth mine alone:  the rage of fight,
And shouts of heroes give severe delight.
Then, tho' they fall, they fall as suits the brave
And sweet the sorrow that bedews their grave.
Of them we think wish joy &mdash; their acts of fame
Rise grateful on the soul that glows with kindred flame.
But may I ne'er again the witness prove
To the deep sorrows of despairing love;
To beauty blasted in its opening bloom,
And valour pining o'er the silent tomb."

"Full well, the prince return'd, thy heart I know,
That feels severely thus another's woe.
But wish not these emotions e'er supprest,
That sadly-soothing harmonize the breast.
Haste, haste, ye hours!  when Inogen's sweet smiles
Shall more than recompence her Arthur's toils:
Who ne'er unpitying saw another grieve,
Nor mark'd distress she strove not to relieve,
Then, the sad victim of disastrous love
Shall tender friendship's soft attentions prove.
His oft-repeated tale of woe we'll hear,
And frequent drop the sympathetic tear.
His Guendolen shall be our constant theme:&mdash;
For weak the thought to check th' impetuous stream
Of high-swoll'n sorrow:  give the torrent way,
The turbid billows of themselves decay,
Our care, and time's soft hand, may from his breast
The characters, by anguish deep imprest,
Erase; tumultuous passions cease to flow,
And calm regret succeed the storms of woe."

And now emerging from the shades, they spied
On the wild heath, a mossy rock beside,
In pensive sorrow lost, a female stand,
Her drooping head supported on her hand.
Swift they approach'd, she started at the view,
For well the prince th' afflicted virgin knew.

"How happy thus to meet," he raptur'd said,
"The dear companion of my lovely maid!
Ten thousand tender questions I would ask,
And sure to Ellena no cruel task,
Of her my soul adores." &mdash; With streaming eyes,
Silent awhile she stands, and thus replies.

"Unhappy prince!  whom I in grief behold,
A dreadful tale must Ellena unfold:
With patience steel thy breast; and learn to bear
Those ills that must thy soul with anguish tear.
A sweet abode, by Merlin's art design'd
Long time thy Inogen and me confin'd:
There, pleas'd I dwelt, convinc'd no mortal power,
Without his aid, could pierce the secret bower.
And there, thy praise, O Arthur!  was our theme,
E'en from the rising to the setting beam.
And oft the fair, as she thy actions nam'd,
My faint applause, and cold indifference blam'd:
And sure her heart is thine &mdash; each word &mdash; each look,
The tender feelings of her heart bespoke.
But yester-morn &mdash; Oh never to return,
That fatal day for which I vainly mourn!
She left the dome, and lost in thought profound,
Urg'd her lone course towards th' encircling bound.
Such was her frequent wont.  At length the sun
Had more than half his destin'd journey run:
With boding heart, and trembling haste, the plain
I cross; and loudly call, but call in vain;
The mound I scale; the fair at length I view,&mdash;
Tho' distant, well thy Inogen I knew,
Borne on the courser of a stately knight&mdash;
What grief, what horror, seiz'd me at the sight!
Nor long could I indulge my heart-felt woes,
Black in the North a threatning cloud arose,
And wrapt in gloom the sky:  the lightning's glare,
Dire spectres gliding thro' the troubled air,
Disclos'd; and while my heart beat thick with fear,
Sounds more than mortal burst my listning ear.
"Daemons rejoice!  success our cause has crown'd.
Let transport in your glowing bosoms bound;
Heaven's purpos'd will, and Merlin's power despise;
For Inogen's the daring Saxon's prize!"

"Nor long could I sustain those scenes of dread;
I sunk to earth &mdash; my wavering senses fled.
A hoary swain, who on this champain drear,
By day and night attends his fleecy care,
Here found me speechless, pale &mdash; to him I owe
My life, devoted to consuming woe."

The prince, attentive while the virgin speaks,
(Nor word nor sigh his awful silence breaks)
Now upward gazes; lost in thought profound,
His eyes unmov'd, now fixes on the ground.
To deadly paleness fades youth's blooming hue;
Cold on his forehead starts the briny dew.
Now, bending on the maid his flaming eyes,
In trembling, broken accents thus he cries.

"Thou once wert true, by Inogen approv'd;
Lov'd by the fair, my soul most dearly lov'd.
But if thy subtle tale the virgin wrongs,
Unpitying vengeance to this arm belongs.
Thy seeming innocence, thy beauteous form,
Shall save thee not from wrath's impending storm.
Oh, yet unsay thy words!  unsay, and live,
Crown'd with my favour &mdash; I thy fraud forgive.
And wilt thou not?  Oh misery extreme!
What now is glory but a vacant dream?&mdash;
Yet still I hope &mdash; perchance the faithful maid,
By violence compell'd, or art betray'd,
Forsook the bower &mdash; on that, my soul repose
Thy trust; that thought alone can sooth my woes."
Thus Ellena:  "Alas, I mourn thy fate;
For yonder swain has tidings to relate,
That much I fear with deeper wounds will gore
Thy breast, and add fresh weight to sorrow's store."
"Hail, prince!"  the peasant cried, "whose high renown
Has reach'd the shepherd of the lonely down.
But yesternight, in semblance like the dead,
Stretch'd on the earth I found this gentle maid,
Nor savage is my breast, tho' long estrang'd
From peopled towns, these dreary wilds I've rang'd.
Her tale my care repaid; I know thy grief.
And wish 'twere mine to give thy soul relief.
Last eve, while streaks of slow-decreasing light
Broider'd the purple clouds, on yonder height
Impending o'er the glade, I pensive lay,
And mark'd the varied tints of closing day.
Sudden, a knight and damsel met my view,
Full swift their courser o'er the valley flew:
I gazed intent:  and lo, athwart their course
Another warrior came, and brief discourse
In seeming friendship held; but soon the ground
Receiv'd his weight:  I heard loud shrieks resound.
Soon to my view, the dame and ruthless knight
Were lost:  that wood conceal'd them from my sight,
And, as this morn I guided to the dell
Yon maid, to note the hapless youth who fell;
Sorely she wept, and cried:  'To Britain's lord,
What added sorrow will thy fate afford?'"&mdash;

"Lead to the fatal scene," the prince return'd,
Whilst his rack'd mind with fierce impatience burn'd; 
"Shepherd, lead on!"  They went, and in their
Instarr'd with gems, a golden bracelet lay;
Nor lay unnotic'd to his piercing eyes:
Dismounting swift, he seiz'd the radiant prize,
His former gift, which round her arm, the fair,
Memorial of his love, had vow'd to wear.
He prest it to his lips; with sadden start
Then backward sprung, as if a scorpion's dart
His hand had pierc'd.  "Alas!  too sure a sign,
He cried, that Inogen's no longer mine.
Detested emblem (once how highly priz'd)
Of love estrang'd, and constancy despis'd,
Hence from my sight!" &mdash; Now Cador's corse he view'd,
With hoary moss, and faded leaves betrew'd.

In days of old, not yet did we invade
The harmless tenants of the woodland shade,
The crimson-breasted warbler o'er the slain,
While frequent rose his melancholy strain,
With pious care, 'twas all he could, supplied
The funeral rites, by ruthless man denied.

While from his eyes the gushing tears descend,
The hero knelt beside his hapless friend:
His clay-cold hand, within his own, he prest,
And thus pour'd forth the sorrows of his breast.

"Oh, doom'd too soon fate's dire decrees to prove!
Cador, I lov'd thee with a brother's love!
Could not thy beauteous form, thy tender age,
Protect thee from destruction's wasteful rage?
But vengeance shall be mine!"  he rising said,
Whilst his hand trembled on the thirsty blade.
"Yet thou, alas!  no more wilt glad those eyes&mdash;
E'en hope, affliction's last sad refuge, flies
My cheerless breast; for thee, deceitful fair!
Alone, I wish'd to breathe the vital air.
Thee, to my soul, I ever dearer held
Than fame, or conquest, in th' embattled field:
Dearer than empire! &mdash; Oh, the thought how vain!
Unless with thee partaking, I disdain
The pomp of state:  the glories of a throne
To me were irksome, if possest alone.
Joyless, as summer suns that heaven illume,
When eastern blasts have nipt spring's opening bloom.
Why aggravate my woes?  thy causeless hate
Had soon consign'd me to the arms of fate.
Alas!  I needed not a second wound&mdash;
The youth, who here lies bleeding on the ground,
Should not have fall'n thro' thee, ungrateful maid!
Is thus his friendship, thus my love repaid?
Alas!  how blind is erring man to fate?
Thy doom, O Lionel!  I mourn'd so late,
Excites but envy now &mdash; let Arthur share
Thy pity, and exchange the tender tear
He gave to thee &mdash; thy happier fortune prize!
Pure is thy love, an inmate of the skies
Shall sooth thy soul, and fan the sacred flame,
While mine is darken'd with despair and shame."

This said, while agony his bosom wrung,
Prostrate on earth, his trembling limbs he flung,
Cradoc, who mark'd his fierce conflicting throes,
As in his melting heart compassion rose,
Approach'd; his hand he grasp'd, and while the tear
Swell'd in his eyes, thus urg'd his speech severe.

"Is this the Saxon's dread, and Britain's boast,
This knight, in mean despair, ignobly lost,
Shall thus a gallant youth's untimely fall,
Who meets the common fate ordain'd to all,
Like a soft virgin's, shake th' heroic mind,
For glorious acts, for empire's toils design'd?
How weak, how poor!  or shall a luckless maid,
Thy love betraying, or herself betray'd,
Still may'st thou doubt, excite these storms of woe
That lay the honours of the mighty low?
Awake!  fame calls thee, vengeance bids thee rise;
Yon bleeding corse aloud for vengeance cries.
If thou its sacred voice refuse to hear,
By him who rules the vaulted skies I swear,
Thy Cador's foe this instant to pursue,
And claim the fight, the fame to Arthur due!"

As starts the fever'd wretch in wild affright,
Waked from the troubled visions of the night,
The prince arose; his eyes on Cradoc turn'd,
Thro' sorrow's tear, the flames of anger burn'd,

"Harsh are thy words, he cried, and rude thy zeal;
'Tis thine to reason, but 'tis mine to feel.
Thou seek the foe?  full bold is the design&mdash;
But, Cradoc, death or fame, or both are mine!"

Frowning, he speaks; the barbed steed bestrides,
And gores with needless steel his panting sides.
The maid, the shepherd wept, and Cradoc mourn'd,
To see his purport kind, so ill return'd:
But far more deeply felt, than words unkind,
The woes that rack'd his much-lov'd hero's mind.
Then, trusting to the swain th' afflicted fair,
With ample promise to reward his care,
He onward urg'd his steed; and thro' the wood
With friendly haste the warrior's course pursu'd.

But now to Inogen the strains belong:
Bright maid, deserving of a nobler song.
Sprinkled with hoary dew, and wrapt in night,
Beneath th' embowering shades she bends her flight;
And, terror-struck, in every gale that blows,
Hears the swift footsteps of pursuing foes.
The branches seize her lightly-waving hair;
Her robes, rude thorns and pointed brambles tear:
The brake she pierces, and o'er crags she bounds,
Swift as the timid roe, nor heeds her painful wounds.

Here fain the muse her mournful tale would close,
But fears on fears increas'd, and woes on woes.
The forest now was pass'd, night roll'd away
Her sable vapors, and the morning ray
Chequer'd the east of heaven with dubious light,
As o'er the champain drear she urg'd her flight.

At length her feeble limbs their aid deny;
She faints, she staggers; and beholding nigh
A pine-clad height in dusky robes array'd,
She seeks repose beneath the grateful shade.

Beside the place where lay th' afflicted dame,
Stern Hacon, and his warrior minstrels came,
Oswald and Eric; in their arms they bore
The youth who sunk amid the battle's roar,
Ill-fated Sweno.  "Here," the monarch cries,
"Let us the last funereal obsequies
Grant to my hapless son:  and be the light
Of morn a witness to our solemn rite.
Place his strong lance, and buckler in the grave;
Such honours suit the spirits of the brave:
Then o'er the cell let stones memorial rise:
And ere to Odin's hall thy spirit flies,
On thy sad sire with pitying eye look down,
Till keen revenge his soul with rapture crown!
Together then, for now the light of day,
Man's friendly converse, nature's rich array,
Is hateful all, we'll seek the bright abode,
Where sit the chiefs of old around their warrior god."

The bards obey:  their keen-edg'd falchions wound
Earth's yielding bosom, and the stubborn ground,
By toil subdu'd, a gloomy depth disclos'd;
And there in night the hapless youth repos'd.

The sire, while down his furrow'd cheek the tear
Of anguish trickled, bade his minstrels rear
The strain funereal &mdash; when a rustling sound
Rose in th' adjacent brake:  he gazed around,
And mark'd, advancing slow, the British fair,
With trembling footsteps and dejected air.
"Say, who art thou, with fury-gleaming eyes,
And frowning brow, the haughty monarch cries;
Who thus hall dar'd from covert shades to view
The rites sepulchral to the mighty due?
Hast mark'd these tears a warrior should disdain,
Wrung from th' indignant heart, that flow in vain?"

As sounds the lyre suspended, when the wings
Of zephyr lightly sweep its trembling strings,
She thus replied in accents sweet and low,
"I came not here to mark thy secret woe,
Alas, another's grief I need no share&mdash;
Too great my own, too weighty long to bear!
Oh!  when thou know'st my fate thro' him I lov'd
What various ills lost Inogen has prov'd"&mdash;

"Ha, Inogen!  exulting, he replies,
Malignant transport gleaming in his eyes,
Fate, thou hast done enough!  revenge is mine&mdash;
My soul desponding shall no more repine
At unrequited wrongs.  Thro' thee my friends
Are fall'n; and Sweno to the grave descends
In manhood's bloom.  Seize, Eric, seize the maid!
Strict retribution shall be amply paid:
Thy blood, my much-lov'd Sweno's shall atone,
And Arthur mid the pride of triumph groan."

The bard, obedient to his ruthless lord,
Approach'd the maid, and wav'd th' unpitying sword.
With look dejected, and with folded hands,
Affliction's sculptur'd form, the virgin stands;
Then meekly lifts her pious glance on high;
Her hope, her trust, in him who rules the sky,
Is placed alone &mdash; When lo!  with loosen'd rein
A youthful knight came thund'ring o'er the plain.
High tower'd his helm, his arms illum'd the field,
But no device adorn'd his argent shield.

"Stay your rash hands!"  impatient thus he spoke,
"Can beauty's charms relentless wrath provoke?"
"Away, vain youth!"  stern Hacon cried, "away,
Nor rashly tempt thy fate &mdash; 'tis death to stay.
Eric, perform my will!"  As o'er the maid
In act to strike, the minstrel rear'd his blade,
Like lightning darted thro' the stormy skies
Onward the knight with spear protended flies.
Thro' Eric's plaited mail, and breast it broke:
Breathless he sunk beneath the furious stroke.

Oswald, and Norway's lord in wrath advance:
This shook the sword, and that the flaming lance.
The falchion's weight the deep-trench'd shield confest,
But that alone:  while thro' the courser's breast
Its fatal way the monarch's weapon tore,
And from the wound forth gush'd the vital gore.

While floundering sinks thy steed, O generous knight!
How dire thy peril in th' unequal fight?
Swift o'er the drooping neck with active bound
Forward he sprung, and lightly touch'd the ground.
Nor could he reassume the spear &mdash; his foes
Press on; and loudly with repeated blows
His buckler rings:  but soon he waved his blade,
And blow for blow, and wound for wound repaid.

On Oswald's crest a dreadful stroke descends,
The black plume severs, and the helmet rends;
The bone it cleaves, and, piercing to the brain,
Th' informing spirit frees:  As on the plain
He breathless sunk, what Hacon, then thy ire?
What rage redoubled did thy soul inspire?
Reckless of danger on the knight he flies;
And bursting blood their mail with crimson dies.

But ah!  not long could age the conflict bear,
Whose guide was fury, and whose strength despair.
Deep in his breast he feels the deadly wound,
And gnaws in bootless rage th' unconscious ground.

Where now are all thy glories, haughty king!
Thy stately towers, thy halls that wont to ring
With festive joy, or music's lofty strain,
Thy stern-brow'd warriors, and thy wide domain?
Thy days are with the past &mdash; the fleeting scene
Shall change, and be as thou hadst never been!
Thro' thy lone halls shall sigh the breeze of night,
And rust consume the trophies of thy might:
Thy friends shall sink beneath the ruthless sword;
Or yield reluctant to a foreign lord:
On Norway's coast thy deeds be heard no more,
And thy fame wither on a distant shore!

As now the half expiring maiden view'd
The knight triumphant, and her foes subdu'd:
"Bless bounteous heaven!"  thus, as to earth she bends
Her suppliant knee, the fervent prayer ascends,
"Oh bless, for sure to thee the cause belongs,
This brave avenger of a virgin's wrongs.
In war, be his the trophies of renown!
His hours of peace with joys perpetual crown!"

"To save thee, fair one, from a ruthless foe,
Is the sole transport I shall ever know"&mdash;
Thus sinking on the ground, he faint replied,
While from his wounds fast flow'd the sanguine tide.

With panting heart, and sorrow-streaming eyes,
The gentle maid to his assistance flies:
The riven breast-plate she unbound, and tore
Her beauteous locks to staunch the rushing gore.
As o'er her darling child the matron bends,
When fell disease his tender fabric rends,
Thus o'er the youth th' afflicted fair inclin'd,
Nor heard the trampling steed, that now behind,
Bath'd in hot foam, came panting; nor espied
The British hero standing by her side.

"Ha, Inogen!" &mdash; with wonder struck she turns.
Now terror pales her check, now anger burns,
"And is it thou!" &mdash; with trembling voice he cries,
Th' imperfect accents mix'd with broken sighs,
"That o'er a stranger knight &mdash; Oh lost to fame!
Oh dire disgrace to Britain's peerless dame!
Had I but thus descended to the tomb;
Had Inogen thus mourn'd her Arthur's doom,
My beating breast with joy in death should swell,
Tho' thro' thy causeless hate my Cador fell!"

Rouz'd at the name, rekindling wrath supplied
The words that grief and terror had denied.
"Canst thou, O prince!  of Inogen complain,
In whose dark breast deceit and malice reign?
Speak'st thou of Cador with dissembled tears?
Thro' falshood's mist thy guilt more widely glares.
But now I fear thee not &mdash; Of this possest"&mdash;
A sword she seiz'd, and held it to her breast.
"I lov'd thee, cruel man!  my soul was thine&mdash;
That idle love I to the winds consign.
Dare not approach, unless to glut thine ire,
Thou long'st to view me at thy feet expire."

In speechless agony the hero stood;
His hair uplifted rose, his curdled blood
Forgot to flow:  not such had been his form
In war's fierce shock, in danger's direst storm:
Not such, thro' yawning earth in horror's hue,
Had hell's black regions open'd to his view.

"Oh Inogen!  long pausing, he replies,
Lo!  from thy sight the hapless Arthur flies;
And bears the barbed shaft, that, deep imprest
By causeless hatred, rankles in his breast,
To secret shades; and tho', his fate unknown,
Unpitied, there he pours the dying groan,
Be thine life's brightest joys &mdash; nor ever dread
The just reproaches of his injur'd shade!"

He ceas'd:  on high the thunder's voice was heard,
While robed in light, heaven's azure vault appear'd;
Propitious omen &mdash; thro' the sky serene,
Rapid as thought, a sable cloud was seen
Smooth-gliding onward; which approaching near
In liquid air dissolv'd.  The hoary seer
Of Britain stood before their view confest,
And thus th' astonish'd prince, and maid addrest.

"For all the blessings that to heaven ye owe,
With grateful rapture let your bosoms glow.
The scene of fate undrawn, no more displays
Visions of dread to shade your future days.
When Inogen, my weak, deluded child,
By fraudful vows, and semblant love beguil'd&mdash;
Nay, weep not, let no fears thy breast alarm;
Thy troubles past a father's wrath disarm,&mdash;
When she forsook her solitary bower,
Her fame, her virtue to the Saxon's power
She gave &mdash; no Arthur to the dreary wood
Convey'd thee; guiltless he of Cador's blood.
The Dacian king from Hengist's brutal lust
Preserv'd thee, and unconscious stretch'd in dust
His bold ally:  by mutual wounds they fell;
And baffled thus, the deep-laid schemes of hell.
The foes whom Arthur's force could ne'er subdue,
By magic guarded, magic art o'erthrew.
Thus oft the secret snare when falshood spreads,
Herself she fetters in the subtle threads:
And when dark malice aims the deadly wound,
Th' envenom'd shafts against herself rebound.
And had not thus delusion warp'd your mind,
She scorn'd thy passion, thou thy suit resign'd;
Th' unhallow'd sisters, conscious of the fame,
The well-earn'd honours that would crown thy name,
With such dire skill the web of fate had wove,
That not thy prowess, nor her constant love
Had saved you from their power:  but now is lost
That power &mdash; where, cinctur'd with eternal frost,
On Thule's distant shore, amid the clouds,
Its glittering head aspiring Hecla shrouds;
In whose dark cells internal thunders roar,
While down its sides the flaming torrents pour,
And, urg'd by throes convulsive, to the skies
Loud-hissing streams, and glowing rocks arise;
There, groaning in its central cave profound,
Tortur'd they lie, with chains of darkness bound.
There let them, mid the echoing vault, complain,
And gnash their teeth, and foam, and rage in vain.
For soon, thro' thee, religion's purer beam
Shall, wide-diffusive, o'er those regions stream,
Late subject to their will:  before its ray
Their fear-form'd gods shall fade in night away.
Does Inogen still feel some pangs of woe
At her brave champion's fate; would Arthur know,
What generous youth in fight successful prov'd,
And sav'd from barbarous men the fair he lov'd?
Say, while I thus his steely casque unbind,
Brings not remembrance to thy grateful mind
Young Ivar's features, who to Britain came
In their defence, to win the meed of fame?
Nor mortal are his wounds, tho', deep imprest,
The hostile weapons gor'd his generous breast.
May ne'er mischance annoy the knight who draws
His righteous sword in helpless virtue's cause!
Arise brave youth!"  he wav'd his wand on high,
"Arise, and thank the power who rules the sky!"

With strength restor'd from earth he sprung; amazed,
On Merlin, Arthur, Inogen, he gaz'd:
While silent joy the virgin's soul possest,
The British hero to his glowing breast
Clasps her bold champion, and in rapture cries:
"A life that dearer than my own I prize,
To thee I owe; and, ever, best of friends!
That deed of honour which all praise transcends,
Within this grateful breast shall dwell enshrine,
While memory keeps possession of my mind.
And sure, since Truth's bright beams have now reveal'd,
What fraud too long in error's mist conceal'd,
My fair will from her gentle breast remove
Injurious doubts of my unchanging love:
Her plighted vow, her kind consent, at last
'Tis mine to claim:  the storm of danger past,
Deign to partake the throne thou'rt born to grace.
And, blessing Arthur, bless a generous race!"

Doubtful, irresolute, she nought replies,
But bends on Merlin her enquiring eyes.
With fond paternal smiles he view'd the maid,
Then grasp'd her hand, and thus to Arthur said.
"Accept this earnest of a heart that's thine;
The fair to thee with pleasure I resign."

The prince, while extacy his soul possest,
To his warm lips, the hand soft yielding prest.
Consenting smiles her soul accordant speak,
And as the crimson glow distains her cheek,
Joy's sweet sensations in her breast arise,
And dart their radiance thro' her tearful eyes.

At break of morn, thus blend with summer showers,
Heaven's roseate beams, and wake the drooping flowers;
Its brightest tints, each opening blossom shows,
And robes in liquid light more richly glows.

The sage proceeds:  "From this auspicious day,
Th' impending clouds of danger roll'd away,
May never fell distrust your peace annoy,
But your past woes enhance your future joy!
Hail, king of Britain!  may thy worth adorn
Th' exalted state; on fame's strong pinions borne,
May to remotest realms thy acts extend,
And to thy power each foe submissive bend!
But oh, too far urge not the thirst of fame!
Bright, but destructive, is Ambition's flame.
Her cloud-aspiring temple shines afar,
Adorn'd with trophies, and the spoils of war,
Attractive to the view &mdash; but mark beneath!
The baseless fabric o'er the vault of death
Hangs loosely-tottering &mdash; Thence incessant rise
The orphan's shrieks, th' afflicted widows cries,
And rive the conqueror's breast, tho' thron'd in state,
He sits mid shouting crowds in painful pomp elate.

"Not thus in glory's annals be it thine,
A meteor with malignant glare to shine.
Crush stern oppression, and the wrong'd redress;
Fight to protest, and conquer but to bless.
Let laws maintain, let arts adorn thy sway;
And blend the olive with the victor bay!
By acts like these, the first of names acquire;
The friend of human-kind, thy country's sire."
