BOOK SIXTH.
To bleak Biarmia's coast, on Fancy's plumes
Upborne, th' adventrous Muse her flight assumes:
Where, half the circling year grim darkness reigns:&mdash;
Save, when thick-glimmering mid th' ethereal plains,
Heaven's sparkling fires, or meteor's wide-strech'd blaze,
The scene in horror visible arrays.

The summer, now scarce felt his genial smile,
Had fled indignant from th' ungrateful soil;
When rushing from his polar cavern, borne
On lowering clouds, aloft his clanging horn
Fierce Winter blew:  the denizens of air,
A friendly flock, to milder climes repair;
Or chirping plaintive on the leafless spray,
No more with cheerful notes salute the day;
But swoll'n in ruffled plumage, hunger's rage,
On the red haw, or purpled whort assuage.

The forest bends beneath the weight of snow;
And, as at intervals the cold winds blow,
The glittering shower in wild confusion flies,
With brightness clothes the plains, while gloom invests the skies.
No longer bursting o'er their rugged mound
The torrents foam:  in crystal fetters bound,
They stand erect; like pillars cloth'd with light
And seem to prop the rock's projecting height.

The shivering herds to distant vales repair;
And the gaunt wolf, while thro' the depth of air
Glides the pale moon, her beams in hatred views,
And her still course with howlings wild pursues:
Or famine-pinch'd, and sunk his glaring eye.
In hollow sockets, faintly growls, and dies.

The Weird sisters to a coast so dire,
Congenial to their souls, at times retire;
And view, their only pleasure to destroy,
The wreck of nature with malignant joy.

There, a vast cave, unknown to mortal eyes,
Deep-buried in a pathless forest lies:
Huge icicles, impending from the height
Of beetling cliffs, ting'd with transparent light,
Like polish'd spears revers'd, its jaws surround,
And shoot their many-colour'd rays around.
But darkness reign'd within; save when retir'd,
With quenchless hatred to mankind inspir'd,
The sisters meet; then mix'd with vap'rous gloom 
Flames bursting thro' the central point, illume
The dismal cavern; while from realms profound
Spirits unblest arise, and wheel around
In mystic dance.  There now in orgies dire,
'Gainst Britain's prince to break their ruthless ire,
Valdandi, Skulda join &mdash; can man proclaim
Th' unhallow'd rite &mdash; "the deed without a name."
The deed, which startles e'en the fiends of night,
At which, if acted in day's sacred light,
The sun, with horror struck, had backward fled,
Or veil'd in dark'ning clouds his blazing head.

Still from the Daemons, by their potent spell
Controll'd, dark words of doubtful import fell,
Unpleasing to their ears:  in wild despair
They beat their breasts, and rend their snaky hair;
Draw from their mangled sides the gushing blood,
And sprinkle o'er the flame the purple flood;
And whilst they brave the power who rules the skies,
Invoke their kindred fiends with fiercer cries,
Earth shakes &mdash; more black the circling vapour flows,
And the red flame with keener radiance glows.

"Sleeps vengeance then, ye sons of baleful night,
Exclaims fierce Urda, by the lurid light
Dimly descried; &mdash; Oh shame, oh dire disgrace!
Shall we be baffled by man's puny race?
Say, have I weav'd in fate's mysterious loom
The web of Hengist's life, and stamp'd his doom
In vain?  No, yet again our knight renown'd
Shall rise, shall triumph, and his foes confound.
Spirits of night!  reception due prepare;
Take him, my sisters, to your guardian care.
His former strength renew; and thro' his soul
Bid the swoll'n tides of rage, and vengeance roll.
Whate'er the impulse of his mind inspires,
Regard, nor counteract his wild desires;
But, whilst his breast with high-wrought fury glows,
Hurl him, like heaven's red bolt, to blast our foes.
I breathe the scent of carnage!  death pursues
His course, and royal blood his steel embrues!
Visions of keen delight!  why interpose
These hated clouds, and on the prospect close?
Sisters rejoice!  behold, enough is known
Fate aids our will &mdash; destruction is our own!"
"Receive your charge." &mdash; This said, she swift enshrouds
Her form of terror mid encircling clouds,
And rushing forward on the howling blast;
The groaning forest trembled as she past.

Stretch'd on his couch the Saxon monarch lies;
The shades of darkness swim before his eyes.
His feeble pulse, his quick, disorder'd breath,
Appear the omens of approaching death.
But ah!  not yet must Hengist fall &mdash; the power
Of magic charms prolongs life's transient hour.
Again with vital heat his bosom glows,
And thro' his veins the genial current flows.

Awaking from his death-like swoon, his eyes
He wildly casts around him; whilst arise
Far different scenes before his wond'ring view,
From those the Muse so late in terror drew.
The hags abhorr'd, and all the forms of dread,
The livid flames, and dusky smoke was fled.
The dismal cave a lovelier form assum'd;&mdash;
A stately hall with pendant lamps illum'd.
From every side reflected lustre shines,
That mocks the splendor of Golconda's mines.
The sapphire's blue, and topaz' golden gleams,
The ruby's glow, the crystal's liquid beams,
Mix'd with the diamond's varied rays, unite
In glittering wreaths to captivate the sight.

A marble pillar huge, of snow-white hue,
The centre graced, and o'er the ceiling threw
Its branches wide:  the pictur'd forms between,
Of vanquish'd chiefs, and conq'ring knights were seen:
And by them flood fair maids, their valour's prize,
With plausive smiles, and love-illumin'd eyes.

Around his couch, to sight a beauteous band
Of gentle youths, attending spirits stand.
With notes harmonious now they sooth his ear;
And now his soul with air-form'd visions cheer.

But tho', whate'er could give to trouble ease;
Whate'er the wish could form, or fancy please,
Was there; &mdash; no joy can gloomy Hengist find;
His late disgrace weighs heavy on his mind.
Nor visionary scenes, nor lofty strain,
Nor splendid banquet, nor obsequious train,
Can pleasure yield; but as his might returns,
His soul with doubled indignation burns:
And the bright forms of hero's conquest-crown'd,
Whom captiv'd kings, and lovely maids surround,
As will'd the fraudful sisters, in his heart
Implant more deeply envy's venom'd dart.

"Immortal Goddesses!  whose guardian power,"
In wrath he cries, "o'er-watch'd my natal hour,
Inspir'd my soul, my arm with vigour strung,
When echoing fields with shouts discordant rung,
And havoc reign'd, is this your guardian aid?
The fairest kingdom, and the brightest maid
Does Hengist thus obtain?  what boots the mail
Impassive, if in arms, and love I fail?
Thro' you, on Ligon's Isle the proffer'd fight
I shunn'd; thro' you am deem'd a recreant knight.
Perish the thought!  a life preserv'd with shame
My soul disdains &mdash; Be Hengist's death, or fame!"

Before his view, earth trembling wide around,
Valdandi, Skulda, thro' the rifted ground
Arising sudden, thus the knight addrest:
"Unfold the secret wishes of thy breast,
Nor dread refusal."  With collected mind
Firm and undaunted thus the king rejoin'd.
"Ye awful powers, to whom I bend my knee,
Aught but the wretch he is, would Hengist be.
Would be as Arthur is, renown'd to fame,
And lov'd like him by Britain's fairest dame&mdash;
But ah, how vain the thought!"  "The thought enjoy!
We grant thy daring wish!" &mdash; they swift reply
"In semblance of his radiant arms to shine;
T' assume his mien, his look, his voice, be thine.
To guide thy course to those enchanted bowers
That hold conceal'd the beauteous maid, is ours;
But that alone &mdash; If thou successful prove,
She quit her dwelling, and repay thy love,
Then Odin's race shall sway the British throne&mdash;
But know, the danger's great, th' event unknown.
Futurity's dark vapours intervene,
Elude our sight, and blot the coming scene."
"Tho' Danger in her direst form arise,
I mock her terrors, and her frowns despise,"
He swift return'd:  "let Inogen be mine,
And to the winds I every doubt resign."

Around his head their ebon wands on high
The sisters wave, and loudly thus reply.
"Such radiant arms, redoubled chief!  behold,
As Britain's champion wears, thy form enfold,
Thy voice, thy features his &mdash; nor shall the charm
Be broke, till Hengist's will its power disarm."

His alter'd mien, as now the Saxon knight
Perceives, his bosom glows with fierce delight.
The maid complacent to his suit he views,
And Arthur's blood his vengeful blade embrues.

A cloud-form'd car, impatient of delay,
He mounts:  Valdandi steers its rapid way.
O'er gloomy woods and snow-clad plains they soar,
Whilst loud around the winds tempestuous roar.
Beneath their feet conflicting clouds they spy,
Whence thunder bursts, and forked lightnings fly.
Now in a sea of billowy vapours tost,
They urge their course, in tenfold darkness lost:
Again they rush amid the blaze of light,
Woods, vales, and mountains burls upon their sight.
No time is theirs to mark each lovely view,
Still varying, as the chariot onward flew:
Wild, indistinct, as in the dreams of rest,
When wayward Fancy's power usurps the breast.
Now o'er the foaming main their way they steer;
The billows ting'd with trembling light appear.
And now the rocks of Albion meet their eyes,
As on th' horizon's verge grey mists arise.
To Rawran's summit they their course pursue;
Thence, faint-descried, the distant bower they view.
Valdandi there the gloomy warrior leaves;
Her last commands impatient he receives;
A milk-white steed, by magic fram'd, bestrides;
And t'ward the lone abode its foot-steps guides.

Seat of delight, in nature's charms array'd,
And thou, far lovelier, Britain's peerless maid!
Ah, wherefore has the Muse denied so long
To you, in horrors lost, the votive song?

A wide-extended mound the beauteous scene
Incircles, smiling with perpetual green;
O'er which, in close array on either side,
Huge, moss-crown'd oaks, towering in leafy pride,
Their intermingled branches weave on high,
And their thick gloom excludes day's garish eye.

Oft as beneath their shade deep-musing stray'd,
At night, or dewy eve, the British maid,
When the bright moon adorn'd Heaven's spangled plain,
Before her sight arose the fairy train,
In white plum'd helms, and vests of splendid hue,
Cloud-form'd, and deck'd with quivering gems of dew.
And while, to crown the revels of the night,
Obedient glow-worms lend their living light,
Their sweet-toned lyres the little minstrels sweep,
And the charm'd winds in placid silence deep.
A sprightly band, accordant to the sound,
With measur'd steps in circles print the ground.
At blush of morn they vanish from the view,
And night's pale empress wrapt in shades pursue.

E'en in these latter days, by forest green,
The swain benighted oft their sports has seen.
Thus potent fancy can the sense enchain,
Form, and embody forth her airy train
In simplest minds, and give to vacant eyes,
What sterner Wisdom to her sons denies,
Impressions sweet and strange!  alike her sway
Th' inventive bard, and humble swain obey.
Yet we in one, their lot so different, find
The daring efforts of the glowing mind,
That "scales invention's heaven."  While censure vain
And keen derision mock th' unletter'd swain,
Tho' to his view ideal forms arise:
And Fancy gilds them with her brightest dyes!

Nature within her various charms combin'd
To please the sight and soothe th' enraptur'd mind.
Eternal spring in all its beauty reigns,
And the sun smiles amid his sapphire plains;
Or gleams thro' fleeting clouds less fiercely bright,
And decks their curling skirts with softened light.
No hail, no snow descends; no storms arise:
Nor thunder shakes, nor lightning fires the skies.
Sweet sing the birds inspir'd with joy and love,
And harmony resounds from every grove.
The groves themselves the richest livery wear,
Grac'd with the product of the circling year.
With ceaseless verdure, fragrant blossoms crown'd,
And charg'd with fruitage bending to the ground.
Ambrosial flowers, beneath, unnumber'd spring,
And load with rich perfume the zephyr's wing.
O'er marble rocks here gushing torrents flow,
Array'd in light, and foam and roar below:
There softly murmur thro' the valley green,
Or thine remote the scatter'd groves between.
'Twas beauteous all!  with such perfection
Design seem'd nature &mdash; nature's happiest thought.

Here dwelt the British maid, in whom combin'd
The loveliest features, and the purest mind.
White were her robes &mdash; but whiter than the vest,
Her ivory neck, and veil-enshrouded breast.
Skirted with light in summer's sultry day,
As waving vapors round the mountain play,
Her glittering tresses wanton'd on the wind.
Around her brow a golden braid entwin'd:
And, intermix'd the glittering threads between,
Rubies, and orient pearl, and emerald green,
By mimic art the lily pale exprest,
And rose-bud bursting thro' its verdant vest.
Her lovely cheeks disclos'd the blush of morn;
Like stars that heaven's unclouded brow adorn,
Her eyes appear'd:  get mild and soft their beam,
As light reflected in the crystal stream.

The Artist's skill, the Bard's unequal lay,
In vain to paint perfection's form essay.
In vain her charms the feeble Muse would trace,
Whose look was beauty, and whose gesture grace.

Where round an aged oak's indented rind
Its verdant wreath the creeping ivy twin'd;
Amid whose boughs the vine dependent hung
Her purple clusters, and the woodbine flung
Her fragrant foliage, waving in the air,
Sate on a moss-clad couch the pensive fair.
Thither she oft retir'd; thence lov'd to spy
Streams, forests, vales; and fading to the eye
The mountain's distant summits &mdash; When confin'd,
How sweetly longs to rove th' excursive mind!

Oh liberty!  thy precious smiles can cheer
The barren heath, and howling wild endear.
The wretch, on whom thy beam no longer shines,
'Mid pleasure sickens, and in plenty pines.
No joys luxurious the wild Arabs need;
Their wealth, the missive lance and bounding steed.
Fearless they scour along the dreary waste,
Nor heed the whirling fends, and sultry blast.
Would they, who mid the scenes of danger sport,
Prefer the tasteless pleasures of a court?
Exchange the hide-form'd couch for beds of down,
And own the terrors of a monarch's frown,
To share his grandeur?  No, they higher prize
Those heart-felt blessings Liberty supplies.
To think, speak, act, by no harsh laws confin'd,
Is theirs &mdash; the charter of the free-born mind!
Thirst gives a flavour to the crystal spring,
More sweet than crowns the nectar of a king:
And toil adds relish to the frugal meal,
A relish, pamper'd pomp can never feel.

As deeply-musing thus, while grief devours
Her heart, she wears away the mournful hours:
And now her eyes the fleeting clouds pursue,
Seeming to mark their course, and varying hue;
Or bend intent upon the sylvan scene,
The dusky forest, and the valley green:
Not there alas, her thoughts!  the mental light
Unfolds far different objects to her sight.
She sighs, as memory the past displays;
But soon sweet Hope in glowing tints arrays
The coming scene; then doubt her bosom rends,
And from her eyes the pearly shower descends.
The air-form'd fabric Fear's chill hand destroys,
And sudden Fade her visionary joys.

But hark!  the clang of arms assails her ears&mdash;
A champion on the distant glade appeals.
What transport seiz'd her as he nearer drew,
And Arthur's much-lov'd form approach'd her view.

"Lord of my heart!"  th' unconscious virgin cries,
"Whose presence fills my foul with glad surprize;
Oh say, has heaven my prayer propitious heard?
The daily prayer for Britain's weal prefer'd&mdash;
Does fell Contention cease her angry roar,
And Peace returning bless my native shore?"

"Hail maid ador'd!"  the fraudful knight rejoin'd,
"Long has my troubled soul in absence pin'd.
But now each anxious doubt and sorrow flies;
Love's ardent suit no more thy sire denies.
By his commands I come, to guide thy way,
Where Britain's sons in battailous array
Expect their prince; and in his fair one's sight
Have vow'd to prove the greatness of their might.
Thus Beauty's beam shall kindle valor's flame;
Her smiles give conquest, and her praise be fame!"

"No farther urge the suit," she mild replies,
"Which Inogen reluctantly denies.
My soul with joy would all thy troubles bear.
Partake thy toils, and every danger share;
Alas, how vain the thought!  it cannot be,
Till Merlin's voice permits me to be free."

"Her Arthur's words can Inogen mistrust?"
He swift rejoins; "Oh cruel and unjust!
Tho' forc'd thy filial duty to approve,
Th' unkind suspicion of my constant love,
And yet unquestion'd Faith, too deeply wounds
My tortur'd breast, and every sense confounds.
Thy father calls thee hence &mdash; 'tis his behest&mdash;
But ah!  I urge in vain my fond request:&mdash;
Arthur is lov'd no more!"  With streaming eyes
He spoke; his voice seem'd choak'd with bursting sighs.

In doubt and terror lost, the fair one hears;
While in her radiant eyes the starting tears
Stand trembling; so before the breeze of morn
The dew-drop quivers on the pointed thorn.

As some pellucid current that divides
The flower-embroider'd valley, while it glides
By the pale lily, or the blushing rose,
Now shines in whiteness, now with crimson glows:
Thus varying colours clothe the virgin's cheek,
And the strong conflict of her soul bespeak.
Can she to Arthur's suit regardless prove?
Can she suspect the tender voice of love?
But then, the promise to her aweful sire&mdash;
No, death's less dreadful than a father's ire!

The knight, while thus conflicting passions tear
Her soul, attentive marks the wavering fair,
And eager thus.  "Ah why this coldness shown
To him, whose heart is fix'd on thee alone?
Time was, when Inogen held Arthur dear;
And deem'd his passion pure, his soul sincere.
'Tis past!  and since thy heart's no longer mine,
Soon shall this beating bosom cease to pine.
By Merlin warn'd, I know that danger's nigh;
Be safety thine, and I with pleasure die.
Alas!  they come &mdash; behold thy ruthless foes!
Hence, on this faithful steed, whilst I oppose
Their rage; and when my death shall reach thy ear,
Let kind remembrance drop one tender tear.
Pity may grant the boon, though love denies;
And Britain's ill-starr'd prince contented dies!"

The trembling virgin gazing wild around,
With steel-clad squadrons views the mountains crown'd;
Hears, indistinct, the din of arms ascend,
As t'ward the vale their rapid course they bend;
And at their near approach, beholds on high,
The Saxon banners waving in the sky.

Her seeming danger, her suspected love,
Her dread of Arthur's fall, too weighty prove
For Reason's weak controul.  "Alas!"  she said,
"Why wrongs my lord, his ever-constant maid
With doubts injurious?  I am only thine&mdash;
To thee, my friend, my father, I resign
My future fate:  with thee resolv'd to share
All perils, trusting to thy guardian care."

She said, and left the bower:  the knight in haste
Th' incautious virgin on his courser plac'd:
And, where he deem'd the Saxon forces lay,
O'er the green champain prest his eager way.

Ye beauteous maids, who Britain's coast adorn,
Warn'd by the luckless fair, reject with scorn
The fraudful vow, th' insidious plea, addrest
To counteract a father's wise behest:
Tho' seemingly severe, 'tis yours to know,
From love parental it alone could flow.
Whoe'er by specious shews, and kind pretence,
Would warp your pliant minds from duty's sense,
Disdain &mdash; what falshood plans, in ruin ends;
No foes more dangerous than pretended friends.

As on they journey, converse sweet beguiles
The fleeting hours, while conscious joy with smiles
Illumes the features of the gentle maid;
No foe mistrusting, of no ills afraid.

Now the bright clouds, that to the setting ray,
Their gorgeous robes in varied tints display,
By slow degrees assume a darker hue;
And o'er the valley pours the silent dew.

Before them, lo!  a youthful knight appears;
At first his lance in bold defiance rears;
But, as the well-known armour he descries,
His spear he drops, and thus in transport cries.
"Hail, my lov'd lord!  long may you live to fame 
Renown'd, and blest with Britain's fairest dame.
But late I heard on Gwineth's farthest coast,
That, led by Lancelot, our valiant host
Prepar'd to meet the foe.  With eager speed
To join the chief, I spurr'd my rapid steed,
For ne'er, I trust, thy Cador shall disgrace
The lineal honours of a noble race.
This morn, a Saxon knight, with words of pride,
On yonder heath my force in arms defied.
Nor feeble was his arm, but fortune crown'd
My cause:  the warrior, breathless, prest the ground."

"What knight, what warrior!" while his bosom burns
With fury ill-conceal'd, the king returns.

"Behold this buckler!"  Grief and wild surprise,
As on the well-known shield he fix'd his eyes,
Possest the gloomy Saxon:  oft of yore
In scenes of death the splendid targe he bore.
Its boss was polish'd steel, the field of gold,
And round its merge a golden serpent roll'd.
To Ella this, a brother dearly lov'd,
When first the youth his might in battle prov'd,
He gave:  and while he led his martial band
To Britain, left him in his native land
The substitute of power:  but he disdain'd
A peaceful life, when glory could be gain'd
By deeds of bold emprize.  He came, he fought,
He bravely fell; and met the death he sought.

Thus fleets the warrior's transient life away,
A troubled dream; &mdash; bleak winter's stormy day.
Through scowling clouds awhile dim radiance gleams;
Then sudden darkness veils the struggling beams.

In Hengist's breast while flames of vengeance rise,
As lightning kindles in the stormy skies,
"Receive thy valor's meed!"  he furious said,
And to the hilt ensheath'd his deadly blade
In Cador's generous breast. &mdash; Unhappy fair!
What then thy thoughts, thy grief, thy wild despair?
To view the gentle youth, thy soul approv'd,
Slain by the fury of thy best belov'd!
To fly, she strives, by heartfelt fear impell'd;
The furious knight her fond attempt with-held:
And forward, as he shook the loosen'd rein,
Bounded th' impetuous steed; and backward roll'd the plain.

Soon deeper terrors agonise her breast:
Night gathers round; ascending mists invest
The lowly dell in robes of pallid hue:
But darkness o'er the sky her mantle threw.

If aught could more her tortur'd mind dismay,
Thro' dismal woods they now pursu'd their way,
Where prowling wolves alone the silence broke,
And night-owls screeching from the blasted oak;
Or, at long intervals, the bloated toad
Harsh-croaking from the root, its dank abode.

Nor long could she these various scenes of dread
Sustain:  her dim eyes closed, her senses fled,
E'en the stern knight, revolving in his mind
The barbarous act, his soul to grief resign'd.
But ah!  not such as from contrition springs,
When conscious guilt the heart repentant wrings;
Or, as when meek Affliction, self-supprest,
Checks the sad sigh that swells her troubled breast.
But such, as feels the tyrant of the wood,
Compell'd to quit th' untasted feast of blood
By daring huntsmen:  from the prostrate prey,
He bends reluctant to the cave his way.
His teeth he grinds; flames sparkle from his eyes,
And the wide forest to his roar replies.

Her death-cold hand he feels; her voice supprest,
He marks; and mingled passions swell his breast.
While from his lips, as rage or grief inspire,
Burst loud laments, and execrations dire.

High o'er the trees the moon began to tower,
And to his view disclos'd a shady bower,
By which, a gurgling rill, as crystal bright,
Shone like a mirror to the eye of night.
Dismounting there, with careful haste he laid
On the green turf the scarcely-breathing maid,
And quick unclasp'd the polish'd helm, to bring
The cooling water from the limpid spring;
Which, o'er her face that sham'd the lily's hue,
With trembling hand he lightly sprinkling threw.

At length the fair reviv'd, and darting round
Her wildly-glancing eyes; with sudden bound
Up-sprung from earth, the knight her hand detain'd,
And thus in seeming agony complain'd.

"Loveliest, and best-belov'd, what means this ire?
Can Arthur's presence causeless dread inspire?
Or falls the tender tear for Cador?  know,
Not erring wrath, but justice dealt the blow.
The golden buckler to a friend most true
Belong'd:  that friend th' insidious traitor slew.
Soon as the tale I heard, my soul decreed,
To take due vengeance for the ruthless deed.
But ah!  far worse:  with Britain's foes combin'd,
To seize my fair th' aspiring youth design'd;
Then yield her charms the hated Saxon's prey,
And hold the land in tributary sway."

"Cease," she return'd, "and strive no more to blind
With error's thin-wove veil my easy mind.
Thy specious tale too fondly I believ'd;
But Inogen can be no more deceiv'd.
I deem'd thy words could flow from truth alone;
That Arthur's breast was virtue's hallow'd throne.
Ah!  wherefore swerve thy steps from honor's road,
To slaughter's blood-stain'd path, and tangled maze of fraud?"

He calls attesting heaven; he weeps, he sighs,
And every art of soft persuasion tries,
But, as he marks his fraudful efforts vain,
His vows with horror, love with fix'd disdain
Repaid; his black intent no more supprest,
In all its hateful colours glar'd confest
The fiend-like mind.  Her trembling hand he grasps,
In strict embrace the maid reluctant clasps;
And, as th' habergeon, from his breast unbound,
Helm, shield, and ponderous buckler press the ground.
"Ill suit those arms, the blissful hour," he cries,
"When beauty yields, the warrior's dearest prize!"

Aloud, her voice, the hapless virgin rears,
On heaven she calls, and heaven in pity hears.
Not distant far, and sunk in soft repose,
The toil-worn Dane found refuge from his woes.
At length awaken'd by the shrieking fair,
(Affliction ever claim'd his generous care)
His faithful sword, disdaining cold delay,
He grasp'd, and t'ward them bent his cager way,

The moon, that still in chequer'd light array'd
The dusky forest, to his view display'd
The gleam of arms, and gave him power to trace
The well-known lineaments of Arthur's face.
Faint and exhausted, as the fair implor'd
The tender pity of her ruthless lord,
So rashly deem'd, forth from the covert broke
Stern Valdemar, and thus indignant spoke:

"Oh stain to knighthood, and thy country's shame,
May black oblivion henceforth veil thy name!"
Thro' night's dim shadows gleam'd the lifted sword,
And swift his weighty blade the Saxon lord
Unsheath'd &mdash; thick darkness overcast the sky;
The thunder roll'd in rattling peals on high.
Flash'd on each chief the lightning's vivid hue,
Athwart, around, night's sable spectres flew.
Their shrieks re-echoed thro' the murky air:
"Sons of the North, your causeless rage forbear!
Oh!  let not Odin's race their swords distain
In kindred blood, and fate forewarn in vain!"

Thro' error blinded, and impetuous ire,
The crash of elements, presages dire,
They hear regardless; parley they despise;
Nor life, nor victory, but vengeance prize.
Could buckler, helm of proof, or triple mail
'Gainst skill, and matchless force like theirs, avail!
How then can they such blows defenceless bear,
Whose weight had crush'd th' embattled ranks of war?

The combat's o'er &mdash; the shrieks of death resound;
The tempest rolls away; and on the ground
Brave Valdemar lies breathless:  by his side
Stern Hengist sinking, thus in fury cried.

"Such agonising pangs as these I feel,
Keen as the searchings of this deadly steel,
Ye hags of darkness, be it yours to know
In Nifleim's gloomy depth, the abode of woe!&mdash;
Ha!  it is thou, whose erring hand destroys
My life, and blasts my hope of promis'd joys?"
(For now the moon her splendid course resum'd,
And her bright train th' ethereal arch illum'd,)
"But 'tis enough!  thy death's, thy folly's meed:
Not meanly foil'd, nor unreveng'd, I bleed.
High be my seat in Odin's lofty hall!
No warrior lives, to boast of Hengist's fall."
On Valdemar's deep wounds he bends his eyes
With joy malignant &mdash; grimly smiles and dies.

When Inogen the Danish monarch view'd
Advance, loud-threatning, from the dusky wood,
That instant, from th' embrace of Hengist freed,
She burst away, and terror wing'd her speed.

Thus, in the falcon's ruthless talons borne,
The gentle lark, sweet minstrel of the morn,
Beholds the eagle, from his airy height,
With sounding wings precipitate his flight:
As upwards bends her foe his wondring eyes,
Freed from his grasp, uncertain where she flies,
She bounds away: &mdash; thus thro' the forest prest
The fair with trembling heart and panting breast.
But leave we there the luckless maid to stray:
Britain's brave prince demands the devious lay,

