BOOK FIFTH.
When first Ambition, ill betide the day!
From hell arose, and mark'd mankind her prey;
Her fatal spells thro' air insidious hurl'd,
And waked to deeds of death a peaceful world:
Since that sad hour no more the human breast,
Meek amity and mutual faith, possest.
In wrath she came, with Terror by her side,
And Danger's giant form: &mdash; o'erweening Pride,
With crest erect, her glittering standard bore,
And fell Contention bath'd her steps in gore.
With specious words she dignified disgrace:
Slaughter's dire course was Glory's arduous race.
Prevailing Might gain'd Virtue's hallow'd name,
And lust of sway was sacred thirst of fame.

To nobler thoughts, ye rulers of mankind,
Awake, nor let delusion warp your mind!
Nor pomp, pride, conquest, sooth the troubled breast,
Like acts humane &mdash; but blessing, man is blest.

By slow degrees, night's sable veil withdrawn,
Dim o'er the mountains rose the chequer'd dawn.
And now th' auxiliar kings and knights renown'd,
In arms array'd, the British chief surround.
He, forward leaping on his beam-like spear,
Addrest them thus:  "Ye generous heroes hear!
Since, such your will, and may the power divine
The choice approve!  to guide the war is mine;
Last night, these watchful eyes forbad to close,
Secret, I mark'd th' encampment of our foes,
Where to the left loud clamours rend the sky,
A numerous host, the fierce Norwegians lie.
'Gainst them, while Clodion lends his willing aid,
Ierne's bands let bold Fiacha lead.
More distant to the right, beside the stream,
(Faint through the fading mist its waters gleam)
Are rang'd with Denmark's sons the Saxon powers:
By Hoel join'd, to prove their force, is ours.
With transport I behold my gallant friends,
Whose zeal in Britain's cause all praise transcends,
Approve my words.  Haste then, the time demands,
Haste, and to glory lead your martial bands.
Her willing victims let us fall renown'd;
Or meet, exulting meet, with conquest crown'd!"

He said, applauding voices rend the air;
The dauntless leaders to their posts repair.
Th' appointed signal's given, the black array
Of war divides:  beneath Fiacha's sway,
His fearless bands their sounding course pursue
'Gainst Hacon's powers, who kindled at the view.

On his barb'd steed that proudly paw'd the ground,
There, clad in steel, the stern Norwegian frown'd
In loose array, wide scatter'd o'er the plain,
Rush'd Thule's bands, and Gotia's archer train.
Not e'en Laponia's storm-wrapt coast could screen
Her harmless offspring from the deathful scene.
Compell'd by Norway's gloomy lord they rear
The targe fur-cinctur'd, ant the bone-tip'd spear.
By fish, roots, herbs, the gentle race were fed;
The sunless cave their dwelling, earth their bed.
On roaring seas in slight canoes to fail,
With well-aim'd darts to pierce th' unwieldy whale;
Their destin'd course to make the rein-deer know,
Steer the smooth sledge o'er trackless wastes of snow;
T' entrap the wily fox, the bird ensnare;
On floating ice surprise the sluggish bear;
These were their arts alone &mdash; unfit to wield
The arms of heroes in th' embattled field.
Their soothing hope that soon these toils would cease,
And Genii guide them to the bowers of peace:
Where, in the land of souls, a blissful shore,
No ruthless tyrants should molest them more.
No tempests rage, no hail, nor snow descend,
No fearful lightning glare, nor thunder rend
Heaven's azure vault, but cloudless radiance gild
The sky, and ceaseless verdure deck the field.

Foremost the king advanc'd, and bade the sound,
That calls to battles, rise:  his bards renown'd,
Oswald and Eric thus his will obey:
The plain re-echoes to the lofty lay.

"Dark on his cloud, unseen by mortal eye,
The ruler of the battle sits on high,
Dread Odin, first of heavenly powers ador'd,
With shafts of death ten thousand quivers stor'd
Stand by his side:  The fatal bow he bends;
And wide around the rapid shower descends.
In silence flits thro' air each viewless dart,
And fills with torturing pangs the dastard's heart.
To Hela's drear abodes embrown'd in night,
Their feeble spirits urge their downward flight.
Not so the brave, no fears their minds controul,
Unfelt their wounds, unvanquish'd is their soul.
Death then is more than victory! &mdash; The God
Of battle hails them to his bright abode.
For them he bids the plenteous banquet mine,
And the bowl flow with Hydromel divine.
Rise then, exulting in your might arise!
Conquest or death alike the valiant prize.
This, shall your days on earth with honour crown
That flat you mid the gods, and chiefs of old renown."

While thus the bards awak'd th' inspiring song,
Extatic fury seiz'd the martial throng:
And, as the close-compacted lines advance,
(Thro' winter's watry cloud thus sun-beams glance,
When threatning storms th' unshelter'd swain affright,)
On either side full many a gallant knight,
Burst thro' the gloom of war with loosen'd rein,
Couch'd the strong lance, and blaz'd athwart the plain.

More dreadful now the din of battle grows;
Spears clash with spears, with bucklers bucklers close.
Shrill flits the arrow from the twanging string,
And stones on batter'd mail rebounding ring.
The keen-edg'd falchion, helm, and hawberk rends;
The ponderous axe with thundering sound descends.
The trump's loud clangors mixt with dying cries,
And shouts of wrathful heroes shake the skies.

Th' unhallow'd sisters to the clouds repair,
And darkly-hovering on the wings of air,
Like famish'd vulture, mark'd with keen delight
The fall of warriors, and the waste of fight.

Here, furious Hacon with resistless force
Thro' yielding ranks impells his foaming horse.
Emania's monarch there, with matchless might
Wields his huge mace, and prostrate lays the fight.
Thy course of glory, Sweno, who can trace?
Thy foe's destruction, and thy country's grace!
While shook the brave, no terror Conal knew,
To prove his might athwart the plain he flew.
Nor strength, nor skill 'gainst Hacon's son avail,
Nor massy buckler, nor protecting mail:
The fatal spear thro' shield and corslet flies,
And stretch'd in dust the hapless warrior lies.

Unconscious of her Much-lov'd hero's fall,
Ithona sits in Thomond's lofty hall,
And bids the bards to him awake their lays&mdash;
For who like Conal claimd the meed of praise!
Sudden, ere yet they touch'd the warbling wire,
Burst mournful sounds instinctive from the lyre:
And lo!  the dogs, companions of the chace,
In shuddering terror gaze on vacant space.
Their lord's sad image rises to their view;
Faint gleam his arms, and pallid is his hue.
His dimly-rolling eyes on Thomond's fair
In grief he bends; then borne aloft in air,
And wrapt in darkness on the gale he flies;
Deep mourn the faithful train, and howlings wild arise.
She marks the signs that speak her hero low;
Rends her dark tresses, beats her breast of snow,
And gives her days to solitary woe.

Before his bands see Neustria's chief advance!
A bold Norwegian sinks beneath his lance.
As from his side the weighty spear he rends,
On his strong vantbrass Hacon's sword descends,
And sheers him to the bone.  His knightly train
Rush to his aid, and bear him from the plain.

Of strength unyielding, spirit unsubdued,
Like some dark rock that braves the surging flood,
Emania's monarch stands unmov'd:  the tide
Of battle rolls, and breaks against his side.
Now here, now there, he deals the deadly wound,
And mangled corses strew th' ensanguin'd ground.

Norwegia's leader thundering thro' the field,
Against the warrior's breast his lance impell'd.
Unwounded he sustain'd the mighty shock;
The pointed lance on his strong corslet broke.
Hacon again, his courser check'd, prepares
T' assail the chief; his flaming falchion bares,
Then forward spurs the steed:  his mace on high
Fiacha lifts &mdash; As hissing thro' the sky
Th' impetuous bolt descends, the blow he sped
Full on th' advancing courser's mail-clad head:
Breathless he sunk, and headlong on the plain
The monarch hurl'd:  Emania's lord again
Lifts the dread mace. &mdash; What now, O king!  avail
Thy numerous warriors, and thy temper'd mail.
No temper'd mail resists Fiacha's might;
Thy warriors distant tremble at the sight.

But generous Sweno marks the lowly laid,
And hastes with pious valour to thy aid.
Beneath the lifted arm he swift addrest
The levell'd spear:  thro' great Fiacha's chest
Its furious way the vengeful weapon tore,
And issu'd far beyond, embath'd in gore.
Thundering he falls, the ponderous mace foregoes,
And o'er his eyes the shades of darkness close.

Ierne's bands in terror quit the field;
Maronan, Adamar, reluctant yield.
Oft lion-like they turn, and, in the strife,
Gore the proud hunters that pursue their life.

Lo!  darting thro' the plain, in arms whose blaze
Rivall'd the summer sun's meridian rays,
A stately knight, on his hot courser borne,
That champ'd the golden bit he seem'd to scorn,
Appear'd, and loudly thus:  "To pale affright
Shall Arthur's friends submit in Arthur's sight?
The dastard meets the fate he shuns, the brave
By generous contest triumph o'er the grave."

Enraptur'd they behold, enraptur'd hear
The hero's voice, and scorn their former fear.
Again they turn, they form the deepning line,
And close-wedg'd shields a glittering rampart shine.

Chill, watry vapours thus that float on high,
Their grey robes waving thro' the wintry sky,
From ice-clad realms when bursts the polar blast,
Condense, then gathering shade on shade, o'ercast
The front of heaven; and on the ravag'd vale
Pour the sharp sleet, and loud-resounding hail.

Meanwhile the prince darts furious on his foes;
A grove of spears the dauntless prince enclose;
He braves, he meets the shock; and whirls around
His dreadful sword that gives no second wound:
Bursts unresisted thro' the black array;
His course is mark'd with death, and terror points his way!
An eagle thus, when o'er Plinlimmon's head
Descending clouds a robe of darkness spread,
Wings thro' th' encircling gloom his rapid flight,
Then soars exulting mid the fields of light.

Can words his actions paint, when valor's flame
Glow'd in his eyes, and lighten'd in his frame?
Where'er he rush'd, more fierce the tumult roar'd,
Around his course the blood of thousands pour'd.
Beneath th' ethereal fire's resistless stroke,
As sinks the lofty pine, the knotted oak,
Heroes and kings beneath his matchless might
Bestrew the plain:  the crowded ranks of fight
Like sun-drawn mists dissolve.  The pitying muse
Death's wasteful course reluctantly pursues.

To one alone, who claims th' applauding lay,
'Tis her's the tributary strain to pay;
Hacon's brave son &mdash; No equal yet he found;
By Deva's banks he spreads destruction round.
His lance arrests the dastard as he flies;
His force the valiant proves, and proving dies.
But short the triumph &mdash; Uther's son draws near,
And fate dim hovers round his beaming spear.

"Secure of glory in the living lay,
No longer urge to fame thy dangerous way!
Retire, nor brave yon terror of the plain!"
Thus warn'd Norwegia's bards, but warn'd the youth in vain.

Hurl'd from his seat, beside the stream he lies;
Life's fading taper in his swimming eyes
Dim twinkling gleams:  his golden locks bestrew
The plain; while struck with sorrow at the view,
His faithful steed the languid head declines;
On the green bank his shatter'd helmet shines;
O'er his broad buckler rolls the torrent grey,
And ting'd with blood pursues its mazy way.

The Briton marks with grief th' expiring foe;
"Perchance," he cries, "not mortal is the blow.
Few are thy years, yet mighty were thy deeds;
And sorrow melts my soul when valour bleeds."
Thus he replied with weak and struggling breath;
"I meet the warriors doom, and welcome death.
To swell another's fame, disgraceful thought!
Vanquish'd to live, were life too dearly bought.
No, since 'tis mine to fall beneath the brave,
I mourn not; for what honour deigns to crave,
Honour will grant; and Britain's generous chief
Accord my suit:  to sooth a father's grief,
My arms, and breathless corse restore!" &mdash; He said,
His dim eyes clos'd &mdash; the gallant spirit fled.

"Farewell, brave youth!"  thus Uther's generous son
Mournful exclaim'd, "what glory hadst thou won,
If fate vouchsaf'd thee but a longer day!
Sweno, farewell!  thou bright, but transient ray&mdash;
Approach ye sacred bards, to whom belong
The warbling lyre, and joy-diffusing song.
Not against you the vengeful blade we raise,
Who bid the hero live to future days&mdash;
Approach in safety, and dismiss your fear:
To his sad sire the breathless warrior bear;
And (may it sooth his troubled breast) relate
He fell by Arthur, who bewail'd his fate."

Hacon, retir'd beyond the martial lines,
With toil sore spent, to younger knights resigns
The field of glory; and beholds from far,
In wonder lost, the surging tide of war
Roll backward:  but amazement soon supprest,
To grief consign'd the empire of his breast.
His hapless son before his view is laid:
In speechless agony he marks the dead.
Lost is the warrior's firmness, that defied
The power of fortune  &mdash; lost the regal pride,
That mock'd at woe:  the heart-wrung tear descends,
The hoary honours of his head he rends:
And, while his bosom throbs with frequent sighs,
Clasping the clay-cold corse on earth he lies.

His bards indignant mark his frantic grief;
When Oswald thus:  "Is this the haughty chief,
Who wades to fame thro' war's empurpled tide,
Terror his lov'd compeer, and Death his guide!
Can he lament the warrior's envied state,
By valour plac'd beyond the reach of fate?
His destin'd course thy son with honour ran,
And fell a hero ere he liv'd a man.
That be his praise, to glory in it thine;
'Tis Hacon's right to triumph, not repine!"

"Cease, cease," he cried:  "can words relief impart,
And pluck the shaft of anguish from my heart?
Behold yon blasted oak!  canst thou array
Its wither'd branches in the pomp of May?
Bid it again exalt its towering head,
And to the winds its leafy honours spread?
Spring will return &mdash; but ne'er returning spring
Around its trunk the verdant wreath shall fling:
Nor time revolving to my new restore
My hero's budding honours &mdash; He no more
Shall shelter yield in danger's stormy day&mdash;
And shall I lonely moulder to decay,
A burthen to the earth?" &mdash; With vengeful mind
He mounts his steed; when Eric thus rejoin'd.

"Canst thou with stand, enfeebled by thy wounds,
And length of years, yon warrior who confounds
Embattled armies?  Hence, the thought resign!
On other realms the beams of glory shine.
Again thy prowess shall be shewn; again
Our crowded fails shall shade the burthen'd main;
Thy wonted field of honour, where the brave
Reap fame's rich harvest on the rolling wave.
Shall Sweno's lovely form be given the prey
To ravenous wolves?  wilt thou deny the lay
To Sweno's praise?  the rites sepulchral paid,
Then think of vengeance to atone his shade."

The King reluctant yields:  his glaring eyes
He backward turns, whilst in his bosom rise
Conflicting passions:  oft he checks his course,
And grasps his sword, and longs its wonted force
Once more to prove:  at length to fate resign'd,
He flies &mdash; the storm of battle roars behind.

But where the might of Valdemar engag'd,
And Lancelot the direful conflict wag'd,
Both skill'd alike in knightly lists to dare,
Or wield the thunder of collected war,
There, either host to yield or fly disdain'd;
There, equal valour, equal fury reign'd:
'Mid' slaughter'd heaps smiled terror's ghastly king,
And conquest hover'd with suspended wing.

Elate with conscious might, inflam'd with ire,
The leaders meet:  on either side retire
The hostile bands:  on them their hopes rely:
With timorous expectation every eye
On them is bent &mdash; no longer roar the plains
With shouts and clanging arms, but awful silence reigns.

Soon rag'd the combat; on each temper'd shield
The tough spears shivering sparkled o'er the field.
Each from his side the trenchant falchion drew;
In flaming circles round their heads they flew.
With lightning-speed the rapid blow descends;
Shares the broad buckler, helm, and hawberk rends.
Tho' breathless, faint, still fury strength supplies,
And gushing blood the mail with crimson dyes.
Awhile they close, then wheel their steeds around,
At greater length to aim the deadly wound.
When, trampling on his master's splinter'd spear,
The Danish courser stop'd in mid career,
Then flound'ring sunk:  the steely point upsprung
Thro' the tough hoof, and pain his bosom wrung.

The British knight, whose generous soul disdain'd
Th' advantage chance allow'd, his courser rein'd;
Resolv'd on foot to end the direful strife&mdash;
But Dacia trembled for her champion's life.
On Lancelot, loud-hissing thro' the sky,
Spears, darts, and stones, a mingled tempest fly.
Some from the plated mail innocuous bound;
Some gore his breast with many a painful wound,
Yet short of death they fall; in arms again
The knight shall shine the terror of the plain.
Minstrels of various climes shall sound his praise,
And give his glory to remotest days.

To save their friend, see Bedavere arise;
See, vengeance flames in youthful Gawaine's eyes,
His axe, the death of heroes, Lonval rears;
Beorte plunges mid the strife of spears:
Urien's undaunted breast with fury burns;
And Hoel's arm the ranks of war o'erturns.
As down the valley bursts th' impetuous flood,
They waste the plain, and roll their course in blood.

But like the wave-defying rock, when glide
Descending waters down its rugged side,
As o'er his arms the sanguine current flows,
The gloomy form of Valdemar arose,
He checks their rage; again the war-train'd steed
He mounts, and Britain's bravest heroes bleed.

See, Urien falls!  descending on his crest
The ruthless falchion cleaves him to the chest.
And, but thy burgonet repell'd the blow,
Hoel!  thy death had graced the haughty foe.
The keen-edg'd blade th' uplifted buckler rends,
And loudly thund'ring on the casque descends,
There stop'd:  advancing swift in close array
Th' Armoric knights their guardian shields display
Around their king:  nor long can they withstand
The Dacian monarch's wide-destroying hand.
He, thro' the brazen wall, resistless hews
His wasteful way, and death his course pursues.
Th' Armoric bands recede; and to the skies
Their barbarous foes' exulting shouts arise.

Far different sounds from where the Saxons sought,
Nearer the stream, the light-wing'd breezes brought:
Thence the wild voice of uproar pierc'd the ear:
The hollow groans of death, the shrieks of fear.
And lo!  in shatter'd arms, with blood disdain'd,
Fierce Ida cross'd the field &mdash; the spear sustain'd,
His tottering weight; he thus the king addrest,
Th' imperfect words in anguish half-supprest.

"Display not here thy unavailing might:
Behold, where Uther's son consumes the fight.
On Elva's banks the voice of woe shall rise,
For low in dust the gallant Cerdic lies;
And loud laments be heard on Denmark's shore;
Thy friend, the brave Biorno, is no more.
Avenge their fate &mdash; then, Valdemar, thy name
Shall stand unrivall'd in the list of fame.
Father of gods!  unfold thy spacious hall&mdash;
A croud of heroes wait thy aweful call."

He said, and died; as Valdemar beheld
The shameful rout, his manly bosom swell'd
With more than wonted ardour:  how to fly
The hero knew not, but he knew to die:
And still he hop'd, the valiant scorn despair,
From his proud foe the wreath of fame to tear.
Thro' yielding ranks his rapid course he bends,
And, like the thunder's rattling peal, he sends
His voice in bold defiance.  Arthur heard,
Couch'd the strong lance, and out-stretch'd buckler rear'd.

In storms ascending thro' the clouded sky,
As rolls th' ensanguin'd moon her orb on high,
Presaging ruin; thus his blood-streak'd shield
Uplifted, gleam'd portentous o'er the field.

The sisters dire behold; th' unequal fight
They dread:  for still with unabated might
Arthur's strong arm the ranks of war confounds,
While from the toil-worn monarch's gaping wounds
Distill'd the crimson tide, &mdash; Their quenchless hate
To virtue's cause, protracts the warrior's fate.

An insect's form, like that whose rapid wing
Plays murmuring round the opening bloom of spring,
A fiend assum'd; and in the courser's breast
Infix'd a wound:  and soon the steed confest
Th' envenom'd plague &mdash; while frenzy fired his brain,
Throbb'd in his heart, and thrill'd thro' every vein,
He bounds away, by rage, by fear impell'd,
His force increas'd, his active limbs upheld
By spirit not their own.  Vexation, grief,
And conscious shame distract the furious chief,
The spur avails not, nor the guiding rein;
The maddning courser pours along the plain.

The Briton swift pursues; and loud behind
His haughty threats come growing on the wind;
And in the hero's breast, the hated sound
Than barbed shafts, implants a deadlier wound.

But soon th' insulting foe he hears no more;
Faint and more faint the battle's distant roar
Now dies away:  the chief, at close of eve,
Th' embowering shades of Celidon receive.
There stop'd the steed; and there the raging pest,
That madden'd thro' his veins forsook his breast.
His mighty lord unable to sustain,
The panting heart's tough cordage rent in twain,
He faints, he falls:  without a groan he dies,
And motionless on earth extended lies.

Awhile the knight with grief-distracted mind
Rests, by the fountain's mossy brim reclin'd.
His shield, his batter'd arms the plain bestrew:
The verdant plain is streak'd with sanguine hue.
Now bounding from the earth, his glaring eyes
He upward lifts, and thus attests the skies.

"O sun!  who, sinking from thy towering height,
Hast seen me borne reluctant from the fight;
Thou conscious moon!  ye glittering orbs on high,
That grace her course and gild the glowing sky;
Witness this bosom, tho' to flight compell'd,
With rage indignant, not with terror, swell'd,
And you, my friends, whom I behold no more,
My tried associates in the battle's roar,
Witness, from danger's front I never fled;
Where raged the conflict, where the mighty bled,
Your monarch drove.  Your rampart was his shield,
His sword, your beacon, shone in glory's field.
Ah, friends belov'd!  for whom I mourn in vain,
Whose spirits wander o'er the fatal plain;
Or hovering on the breeze around your chief,
Mark his wild anguish, and partake his grief!
A while your flight to Odin's hall delay;
To Thora's ear the mournful tale convey.
Tell her, by fraud betray'd, not force o'erthrown,
I fled &mdash; that conscious honor is my own.
That Valdemar, resolv'd his fate to brave,
Will never sink a coward to the grave:
But on the Briton, &mdash; Vengeance bend thine ear!
Requite his wrongs, or cease those wrongs to bear.
Should I no more to Denmark's coast return,
Forbid the fair with bootless tears to mourn
My fate &mdash; to her belongs a nobler care;
Hialmar lives to pour the storm of war
On Britain's coast; t' avenge his fire's disgrace,
And guard the honors of a martial race."

Thus as he spoke, in spight of manly pride,
From his swoll'n eyes forth gush'd the genial tide.
Th' endearing joys that crown domestic life,
The smiling offspring and the faithful wife
Rise on his soul.  Ye haughty sons of fame!
Whose generous spirits high resolves inflame;
When urg'd to arms you quit your darling fair,
Or tender babes, soft objects of your care;
Can stubborn honor then your bosoms steel,
Or martial pride subdue the pangs ye feel?
Ah no!  the sigh supprest, the heart-wrung groan,
Reveals the anguish that you dare not own.

