BOOK FOURTH.
On the dark cliffs that skirt Menevia's bay,
What chief pursues his solitary way!
Bold is his mien; his wide emblazon'd shield
Bears the deep marks of many a well-fought field:
O'er his bright helm high waves the sable crest,
And anxious care sits on his brow imprest!

'Tis Lancelot&mdash;in arms of high renown,
The brave defender of the British crown;
By ruthless foes sore prest, who unsubdued,
Thro' Hengist's camp his course of havoc hew'd
At night's still hour, when his deluded foes
Were sunk in revelry, or dead repose.

Th' ensuing morn, clouds piled on clouds arise,
Black in the west; loud-echoing through the skies
Shrieks the wild wind; descends th' impetuous rain,
And the swoll'n stream foams through the ravag'd plain.

A narrow bridge across the current lay;
O'er that the warriors urge their rapid way,
Brave Lancelot the last; whilst in the rear
Borne on their trampling steeds the foes draw near.
In twain, his heroes aid, the bridge he rends;
Down the rude stream the floating mass descends:
Nor dare the foes, so turbulent its course,
Mid the wild eddies plunge their foaming horse.
Indignant fury in their bosom reigns;
The scalding tear of baffled rage disdains
The glowing cheek.  Ye rescued warriors!  raise
To heaven the voice of gratitude and praise.
Had fearless Hengist led the hostile train,
Opposing torrents would have raged in vain,
Then had he sunk beneath the whelming tide,
Or British blood the waves with crimson dyed.

But he, the warriors pent in walls disdain'd;
New foes he sought, and new renown obtain'd.
With all his knights, and half the Saxon host,
He burst in terror on Albania's coast.
Her sons in vain his matchIess force withstood;
Death mark'd his way, his path was traced in blood.
Returning now with conquest crown'd, he hears
Th' unwelcome news, and swift revenge prepares.
The weird sisters check his swelling ire,
And bid their champion to the dome retire,
Which rear'd by magic, fenc'd by potent charms,
Could mock, they proudly deem'd, the world in arms.

By rapid march the Britons render vain
Their foes pursuit, and Cambria's confines gain.
Its generous sons their friendly arms assume;
On various summits war's collected gloom,
Like winter's hovering mist, impending lours,
And threats destruction to the hostile powers.

As thus their watch th' appointed warriors keep,
Their leader hastens t'ward the billowy deep:
By Merlin warn'd, that thro' the narrow main
The prince approach'd with his auxiliar train.
Alas!  not then to Britain's sage was known
That danger's cloud hung dark o'er Uther's son.

As bends the chief his long-expecting eyes,
Like scatter'd mists on ocean's verge arise
The wish'd-for sails; that soon in swelling pride
And cloth'd with brightness o'er the billows glide;
And anchor'd in Menevia's crouded bay,
A leafless forest to his view display.

First o'er the strand th' Armoric leader prest,
Known by his sun-bright helm, and gorgeous crest,
The far fam'd Indian bird; it struck the view
With eyes of jet, and neck of purple hue,
While its gay train with gems and gold inlaid,
A splendid ring of mingled light display'd;
The high-priz'd gift of Uther's mighty son,
In combat from a Paynim monarch won;
Born on the banks where sacred Ganges pours
O'er gold-besprinkled sands his lucid stores.
Where ripen'd by the genial blaze of day
Rich gems their emulative  beams display.
Where musky sweets from flower-deck'd groves exhale;
And double harvests load the fertile vale.

Known was the Briton by his silver shield:
A callow eagle sculptur'd on the field,
To Hope's bright image bent his eager eyes,
Who rear'd her arm aloft, and pointed to the skies.

The heroes, who on Asia's burning soil
Had mutual dangers shar'd, and mutual toil,
Meet with that joy the brave alone can know,
When friendship's beams in kindred bosoms glow:
Summon'd again the shock of arms to dare,
And run together glory's bright career.

Next Clodion came; the glittering helm behind,
His crimson plumes flew streaming on the wind.
As dusky vapours ting'd with sanguine hue
The glowing comet's rapid course pursue.

Ierne's gallant chiefs, with spurs of speed,
Maronan, Conal, Adamar succeed.
Fiacha next, who ruled th' Emanian land,
Himself a host, precedes his martial band.
Beneath his shaggy brow his eye-balls glare,
Redundant waves around his sable hair,
Nor lance he wields, nor bounding steed bestrides,
But in his matchless strength, his iron mace confides.

Last, slowly-moving o'er the strand appears
(Sad, silent, trailing their inverted spears)
The knightly train, who long from shore to shore
Had rang'd with Britain's prince thro' ocean's roar.
Who, till he plung'd beneath the whelming tide,
Had mock'd at woe, and fortune's power defied.
Now grief sate heavy on each manly breast,
And pale despondence every brow confest.

Like rocks down whose cold sides the waters flow,
Th' auxiliar leaders stand in silent woe:
But grief superior, Lancelot, to feel
Was thine, and thine thy anguish to conceal.
For now from troop to troop the tidings ran,
And frequent thus th' inferior herd began.

"Bootless in idle wars to waste our blood:
The hero sunk beneath the whelming flood,
For whom alone we vow'd our arms to wield,
And brave the terrors of th' embattled field.
Fierce is the foe, but open lies the main;
For doubtful honour let us safety gain!"

"Can cold dismay, thus Britain's knight addrest
The warriors, quench the fire in valour's breast!
Leaders of battle!  low the mighty lies,
But blood, not tears, must grace his obsequies.
Like wave on wave impell'd in yonder bay,
The race of man successive rolls away:
Unnoted pass the feeble, but the brave
Survive to glory, and defy the grave.
If such was Arthur, such your generous aim,
Avenge him, warriors; &mdash; emulate his fame!
But if thro' terror vain those tears are shed,
Disgraceful to yourselves, and of the dead
Unworthy: &mdash; know, tho' you your aid deny,
The sons of Britain shall the combat try.
Their country's wrongs, their Arthur's sacred shade,
Will nerve each arm, and edge th' avenging blade.
And when our death, or conquest reach your ear,
For only death, or conquest now is dear,
Then, warriors, touch'd with generous shame too late,
Our fame you'll envy, or lament our fate."

"Your fate to mourn, or at your fame repine,
Th' Armoric king return'd; be never mine!
Not more to Lancelot, than Hoel dear,
Was Uther's son &mdash; with thee I lift the spear:
Resolv'd alike in glory's path to tread;
Resolv'd to perish, or avenge the dead."

With brow contracted stern Fiacha cries,
"Thou wrong'st us, Briton, by the vain surmise,
Sooner the feeble arm of man shall tear
Yon self-suspended lamp that fires the air
From his ethereal arch, than fears controul
Our mind, or change the purport of our soul.
And sure we trust, that spark of heavenly flame
Shall quickly animate a nobler frame.
Till, by degrees from mortal dross refin'd,
It leaves the body's cumb'rous load behind.
To conquest lead &mdash; or death!  our hearts beat high,
To gain a nearer prospect of the sky."

Like him, each gallant leader undismay'd,
On his broad buckler clash'd the glittering blade,
And loud exclaim'd:  "While these our arms can wield,
We scorn to shun the dangers of the field."
"Brothers in war, whom honor's bands unite!
Exulting thus rejoin'd the British knight,
Accept my heartfelt thanks, the grateful praise,
A glowing bosom to your virtue pays.
Dwells there in all these bands a soul so mean,
That shrinks in terror from th' impending scene,
Forth let the dastard stand &mdash; there lies the main,
And free the way: &mdash; shall we his flight restrain?
In some lone cavern let him hide his shame,
Not share with honor's sons the meed of fame."

His words with loud acclaim the valiant hear;
The coward feels not, or conceals his fear.
And now the lofty voice of war resounds
From Sabrine's, banks to Gwineth's rocky bounds.
Whilst the pale mother to her panting breast
The infant clasps, with tender fears opprest,
The father calls to arms:  from mountains hoar,
Dark woods and winding dells the heroes pour.
To guard the craggy summits they disdain;
The storm of war descends, and echoes thro' the plain.

Beneath their steel-clad chiefs in bright array,
The ranks of battle urge their rapid way.
As when the sun beams gild th' autumnal sky,
And blasts inconstant o'er the valley fly,
With varied light the waving grass is crown'd,
And quick, successive, splendor floats around.

In Carlile's lofty hall, in festive state,
The Dacian monarch mid his heroes sate.
In Hengist's absence, such the king's commands,
Th' appointed leader of the Northern bands.
Ill-brook'd by Hacon, grown in combats grey,
Norway's dread lord, beneath whose iron sway
E'en distant Thule groan'd, and lands unknown
To fame, that stretch beneath the frigid zone.

Sullen and stern he marks the genial rites;
The music charms not, nor the feast delights.
Sweno in silent grief his father view'd,
A generous youth with milder thoughts endued;
And lovely as the rosy morn that streams
Thro' vernal showers its joy-diffusing beams:
Whose voice when untam'd passions sway'd his soul,
Alone could sooth his woes, or rage controul.

The goblet circles; the resounding lyre,
And lofty strain heroic thoughts inspire.
Some vaunt their high exploits in former wars;
Some shew their batter'd shields, and deep-trench'd scars:
In brutal riot some the hours employ,
And all is dissonance, and barbarous joy.

Sudden, dark clouds the rafter'd dome o'ercast;
Upwards they turn their anxious eyes aghast:
And thro' the quick disparting shades behold
Dread Odin, seated on his throne of gold.
Black vapors, such as clothe the wintry night,
His foot-stool form'd; a meteor's vivid light
His brows encircled:  radiant arms he wore,
And shook his flaming lance distain'd with gore.
Loud as when thunder roars he silence broke&mdash;
The vast dome trembled as the phantom spoke.

"Offspring of heroes!  fam'd in fields of fight,
Who sport in danger, and in death delight,
Does this become you, sons of battle!  say,
To wear in shameful sloth the hours away?
Is this a time to feast in bower or hall,
When foes advancing to the combat call?
The host you deem'd beneath the roaring main
O'erwhelm'd, defies you to the listed plain.
The cloud of war on Cambria's height impends
No more, but darkly-lowering hither bends.
Awake, arise, and in your might confide!
Rush on, and let destruction be your guide!
Think on your father's fame, your own renown,
My favour, who with joys perpetual  crown
The chiefs, who boldly in the combat fall,
And guide their spirits to my lofty hall,
O'er arch'd with golden shields, whose dazzling blaze
Exceeds the mid-day sun's  unclouded rays.
There shall each hero share, a welcome guest,
The foaming goblet, and perpetual feast.
Again their souls with martial fire shall burn,
And host conflicting adverse host o'erturn:
While bright Valkeries, blue-eyed nymphs shall crown
With plausive smiles their actions of renown.
Be conquest yours, and fame's unfading wreath,
Or, more than victory, a glorious death!"

This said, the dark'ning cloud, the meteor's glare,
And stately form dissolves, and melts in air.
"Be all our warriors summon'd to the field!"
Cried Valdemar, and struck his echoing shield:
"On every height your banners wide unfold!
At morn we march; and let the sun behold,
As in the purpled East he rises bright,
Our arms of splendor emulate his light!"

"Tho' Valdemar's proud banners brave the skies,
Beneath his sway we march not; Hacon cries.
Know, tho' a God commands, the soul is free,
To mortal power we scorn to bend the knee,
Or yield subjection &mdash; no, were Hengist here,
Whose actions I admire, and fame revere,
Thus had I spoke:  nor deem my words, O king!
From mean distrust, or canker'd envy spring.
To lead the Danes, the Saxon bands, be thine;
So Hengist will'd, but Norway's sons are mine.
Resolv'd as brave allies your cause to own,
And no superior but their king alone."

Cerdic and Ida, Saxons far renown'd,
Upstarting at the word, indignant frown'd.
In fiercer wrath the Dacian chieftains rise;
Biorno, Grimal, roll their silent eyes,
As secretly they grasp the ready blade,
On their lov'd lord.  He, doubtful, long survey'd
His haughty rival; but reflection quell'd
The vengeful thoughts that in his bosom swell'd.

"If Hacon at our rule," he cried, "repine,
Be his apart to lead Norwegia's line.
Brave are thy warriors, and a foe draws nigh,
Who soon their prowess will severely try.
Then, generous emulation be our aim,
Best to deserve, and win the meed of fame!"

Performing barbarous rites, a gloomy band,
The priests all night before their altars stand.
Meanwhile, in cadence low, or choral chime,
The herds alternate wake the Runic rhyme,
With mystic import fraught:  but chief to thee
Swells the full peal of mingled harmony,
Dread god of battle!  so they fondly deem,
Bewilder'd, lost in error's fatal dream.
Now, a vain shadow, and an empty name,
Is he, who foremost trod the fields of fame.
Not his the form that struck their wond'ring sight,
Urda that form assum'd thro' magic sleight.
And whilst their rugged altars stream with gore,
And their wild cries the hapless victims pour;
Whilst lost in trance extatic seems the seer,
Whose words as heaven's high dictates they revere,
Urda his soul with high-wrought frenzy fires,
And fate's ambiguous oracles inspires.

"Sons of the North!  ignoble fear despise;
Propitious smiles the god who rules the skies:
And, as the wild winds, mingling in their course,
O'erturn the forest with united force;
Your strength united shall dismay the foe;
And lay the towering ranks of battle low.
Unwonted fear shall seize the hostile band,
And the pois'd lance drop from the valiant hand.
Unless your heroes first in arms renown'd,
Plant in each other's breast the deadly wound;
Arthur shall ne'er the British throne ascend,
But all his dream of pride in ruin end."

He ceas'd; convulsions shook his lab'ring frame,
And his red eye-balls gleam'd with living flame;
Then, as th' inspiring fiend forsook his breast,
He sunk unconscious in the arms of rest.

With loud acclaim the priests and minstrel train,
The presage hail, and pour the suppliant strain.
"Hear, mighty father of thy battle!  hear,
Lift thy broad buckler, shake the flashing spear!
With wrath's dark cloud thy aweful brows invest,
And scatter terror from thy nodding crest!
The foes shall sink beneath the dreadful sight,
And ghastly horror seize them in the fight."

Faint streaks of light shoot thro' the eastern skies,
And wrapt in mist the distant mountains rise.
As round their hollow oak bees swarming play,
When the sun downward shoots his fervid ray,
Athwart, direct, along the echoing plain
In wild confusion pour the martial train;
Till rang'd in order by their leader's care,
The clarion sounds, and onward rolls the war.

In two black columns their destructive way
They bend; like clouds in summer's sultry day;
Each in his womb the lurking thunder hides,
And waving lightnings edge their sable sides.

In Nubia's desarts, by th' attractive beam
Of heaven exhal'd, as poisonous vapours steam,
Ascend the skies, and from their flagging wings
Shake pestilence, and death's pernicious stings;
Such havoc marks their course; by sword, by fire,
The land lies waste, and man and beast expire.

Where Deva's streams the Cestrian plains divide,
Hacon and Denmark's lord, on either side,
High-towering in their battle's front, pursu'd
Their rapid way:  at length the warriors view'd
The distant heights in clouds of dust array'd,
And arms faint gleaming thro' the rolling shade.

"Behold," fierce Hacon cried, "behold our foes!"
(Whilst in his soul the martial transport rose)
"To rage unbounded give the loosen'd rein!
Banquet your hungry falchions on the slain!
Impel, as meteors cleave the vault of night,
A radiant shower!  your shafts' destructive flight!
In British blood the vengeful spear embrue,
And give the sacrifice to Odin due!"

Fired by their monarch's words, his daring train
Advanc'd impetuous o'er the sounding plain.
As Valdemar their rapid march beheld,
Athwart the current swiftly he impell'd
His bounding steed; the furious king addrest,
And thus the ardour of his soul represt.

"If terror-struck yon warriors shun'd the fight,
It then were fit to urge their shameful flight;
But lo!  defiance stern their battle wears:
Still, as of old, amid the shock of spears,
On highest deeds resolv'd is Britain's train,
To die or conquer &mdash; fame to give or gain.
Then, let us wait till morn the skies illume,
To prove our matchless force, and feel their doom.
For see, the sun descending from his height,
Discloses many a gulf of dazzling light
Thro' black, obstructing clouds that westward rise;
And now in sanguine radiance cloaths the skies.
A dreadful omen of the coming day
To Britain's race.  Soon o'er their destin'd prey
The birds of heaven shall shake their sounding wings,
Exulting &mdash; the gaunt wolf shall feast on kings.
'Tis ours, let dastards veil their acts in night,
To claim the sun a witness to our might."

Hacon assents:  heaven's setting splendors gild
The snow-white tents. &mdash; Thus scatter'd o'er the field,
Appears the fleecy flock at even tide,
Recumbent by the fountain's rushy side.

Not thrice an arrow's flight across the plain
Approach the vanguard of the hostile train.
Their cornets sound; their fiery coursers neigh,
And high in air their waving banners play.

