On Redbourn's bank two pining maidens sat,
Their tears fast-dripping to the water clear;
Each one lamenting for her absent mate,
Who at Saint-Alban's shook the murdering spear.
The nut-brown Elinour to Juga fair
In trouble spake, and languishment of eyne,
Like drops of pearly dew glisten'd the trembling brine.

ELINOUR.
Oh gentle Juga!  hear my weeful plaint,
To fight for York my love is clad in steel;
O!  may no sanguine stain the white rose paint,
May good Saint Cuthbert watch Sir Robert's weal.
Much more than death, in fancy, now I feel;
See see upon the ground he bleeding lies!
Some balm infuse, or else my dear love dies.

JUGA.
Sisters in sorrow, on this daisied bank,
Where Melancholy broods, we will lament;
Be wet with morning dew and even dank;
Like blasted oaks on each the other bent;
Or like forsaken halls of merriment,
Whose ghastly ruins hold the train of Fright,
Where deadly ravens bark, and screech-owls wake the night.

ELINOUR.
No more the shepherds pipe shall wake the morn,
The minstrel-dance, good-cheer, and morrice play;
No more the ambling palfrey and the horn
Shall from the cover rouse the fox away.
I'll seek the forest all the live-long day;
All night among the church-yard graves will go,
And to the passing spirits tell my tale of woe.

JUGA.
When sable clouds do hang upon the beams
Of waning moon in silver mantle dight,
The tripping Fairies weave the golden dreams
Of happiness which vanish with the night;
Then (but the saints forbid!)  if to a sprite
My Richard's form be chang'd, I'll hold distraught
His bleeding clay-cold corse, and die each day in thought.

ELINOUR.
Ah, woe-lamenting words!  what words can show!
Thou, glassy river, on thy banks may bleed
Champions whose blood will with thy waters flow,
And Redborne stream be Redborne stream indeed.
Haste gentle Juga, trip it o'er the mead,
To know or whether we must wail again,
Or with our fallen Knights be mingled on the plain.

So saying &mdash; like two thunder-smitten trees,
Or like two clouds o'er-charged with stormy rain,
They moved gently o'er the dewy leas,
To where Saint Alban's holy shrines remain;
There did they find that both their Knights were slain:
Distracted ran they to swoln Redborne's side,
Scream'd out their deadly knell, plung'd in the waves, and died.
