In strict observance of Theatric laws,
We should,  imprimis, plead the Author's cause;
Happy, at least in this, a brighter name
Than Milton's shines not in the rolls of fame;
Th' intrinsic sterling of whose deathless lays
Strikes censure dumb and supersedes all praise:
Yet, "fall'n on evil tongues and evil day,"
His COMUS, not exempt, neglected lay,
'Till genuine taste, prevailing, found its worth
And taught the lyre to call its beauties forth.
Scorning a barb'rous, dull, fanatic age,
For after times he penn'd his sacred page,
And bade his muse fit audience find tho' few,
Prophetic surely with this night in view!

O!  for a moment, heaven-born Muse, descend!
Propitious, now, my ardent pray'r attend;
As erst thy Milton's, with celestial fire,
My mind irradiate and my voice inspire;
So, as its brighter glories well demand,
MARLAY with LUDLOW might immortal stand.
Yet here tho' Naiads, Fawns, and Dryads vie,
And art and nature court the curious eye,
Could those the tooth of wrinkled care deride,
If conscious worth did not within reside?
The grand Elixir that, the potent spell,
Why here no Anger, frowns, or sorrows dwell.

Our little Actors have, indeed, their cares,
For sure to night an arduous task is theirs,
With wish'd success, to grace their glorious cause,
And, by due steps, to merit your applause;
Then, lest their tender age might suffer harm,
Your's be the part each anxious fear to charm&mdash;
Hence!  captious pedants! &mdash; envious raillers hence!
Nor dare prophane the shrine of innocence;
Nor let hypocrisy's insidious leer,
With false presentiments, shed blear influence here,
To nip our early buds and check the promised year!

When MARIANN, dispatch'd of sovereign Jove,
Performs her high commission from above,
Whate'er slight imperfections may appear,
Pure nature speaks and marks the mind sincere;
And, if I rightly of your feelings guess,
Tho' the TWO BROTHERS be but males in dress,
Such forms in fancy's eye, as Poets say,
Trip o'er the clouds and in the rainbow play,
Espousing sentiments so much their own
For all defects will easily atone.
Our dear ELIZA'S suit we next might plead,
But who can equal to herself succeed?
With simple elegance she melts the heart,
And in the LADY paints her own desert
O may she still, as now, her bosom keep
Pure as the smiling thoughts of babes asleep!
Virtuous herself, may she be Virtue's friend,
And all good angels on her steps attend!

As for our fairy BACCHANALIAN troop,
(In character promiscuously they groupe)
Careless and free, they'll top their several parts,
And ask no advocate to gain your hearts&mdash;
Nor let  my hopes your wonted goodness fail
But while you judge let candour hold the scale.
