Together long they sat, and he was kind
And she was thankful.  From her downcast eye
Sorrow still fell, and on her burning cheek
Glow'd the fine crimson of ingenuous shame.
He bade her be compos'd.  He sooth'd her heart
Lab'ring with sighs.  He took his book and read,
It was a fable.  'Ay,' said he, 'most just.
This Poet much delights me.  Hear, my child.
'Tis a short story of an aged oak
And a presumptuous brier.  I'll not read,
But tell it, left thy ear unus'd, despise
And little relish the rude Poet's style.'

There grew upon a Kentish green
What once a stately Oak had been.
His arm was large and wide display'd,
And oft the shepherd sought his shade,
And here his panting flock would rest
By summer's burning heat opprest.
High was his head and vast his shield,
He stood the sov'reign of the field.
But soon were past his better days,
And now his aged arm decays.
The burning lightning strikes his head,
The glories of his brow are dead.
His branch is bare and waste with worms,
His trunk consum'd and beat by storms.

Hard by a haughty Brier grew
(In youth and beauty much like you)
And shelter'd by the faithful tree
Was vigorous as plant could be.
Returning summer clothes her now,
And fragrant blossoms deck her bough.
The nightingale her leaves among
Warbles her sweet nocturnal song.
And ever to her branch so fair
The lasses of the vale repair,
And she her blossoms freely show'rs,
And fills their bosoms with her flow'rs.

So sought, she grew exceeding proud,
And oft was heard to vaunt aloud,
And once upon a time was bold
To scorn the Oak for being old.
'Why stand'st thou here, thou surly block,
Nor fruit nor shadow yields thy stock.
Behold how my gay flow'rs are spread
In lily white and crimson red.
Behold my leaves so fresh and green,
My verdure fit to clothe a queen.
Thy wasted branch takes needless room,
And spoils the beauty of my bloom.
The mouldy moss which thee destroys
My smell of cinnamon alloys.
Be gone, nor dare to make defence,
On pain of my displeasure, hence.'

So spake the Brier, proud and vain.
The Oak look'd down with great disdain,
And scorn'd to answer such a weed,
Once humble, but now proud indeed.
He griev'd to think his friendly arm
Had shelter'd her and kept her warm,
Had screen'd her from the storm so rude,
And yet she had no gratitude.

It chanc'd upon a future day
The Husbandman came down that way,
Accustom'd yearly to walk round
And view the trees upon his ground.
Him soon the spiteful Brier spied,
And thus in haste complaining cried:
'O thou, the author of my life,
Be pleas'd to put an end to strife.
On thy protection I rely,
O grant me succour ere I die.'

Mov'd at the Brier's piteous plea,
The good man rested on the lea,
And bade her in her plaint proceed;
When thus began the haughty weed.

'Was I not planted by thy hand
To be the primrose of the land?
In spring to shine in flow'ry suit,
In autumn yield thee scarlet fruit?
How comes it then this surly Oak,
So wounded by the thunder's stroke,
Whose ancient trunk invites the fire,
Dares to such tyranny aspire?
Forbidding me to charm thy sight,
And hiding from me day's sweet light.
His heavy branches beat me sore,
I weep, he vexes me the more.
And oft his greedy worms alight
And gnaw my tender buds in spite,
Forbidding my sweet flow'rs to blow,
To make a chaplet for thy brow.
And oft his bitter leaves are shed
Disgracing my fair flowery head.
O deign my suff'rings to assuage,
And rid me from the tyrant's rage.'

She said.  The Husbandman deceiv'd,
Was at her hardships sorely griev'd,
And home to fetch his hatchet went,
Resolv'd to give the plant content,
He comes, and with repeated stroke
Cuts down at last the aged Oak.
And low he lies bewail'd of none,
While the proud Brier stands alone.

But now with storm severe and keen
Imperious Winter sweeps the green,
And breaks the Brier's tender shoots,
And spoils her branch and tears her roots.
The watery wet weighs down her head,
The north-wind almost nips her dead,
Scarce able now to stand upright,
The falling snow subdues her quite.

Her folly then she 'gan bemoan,
And griev'd to think the Oak was gone.
But then it was too late to weep,
Her branch was nibbled by the sheep;
Wounded and hurt she cannot rise,
The cattle browse her as she lies,
And trample on her till she dies.

Ophelia felt the Fable, and again
Shed free contrition.  Elmer took her hand,
Kiss'd her and rose.  Together then they went,
And much was he rejoic'd to hold again
The jewel he had lost.  He led her home,
Bade all his house be glad, restor'd her all,
And she was happy as her heart could wish.
With tears she welcom'd her forsaken room,
Her joyful servant, her delighted dog,
Her bird, her work, her instrument, her books.
She feels the value of a friend at home,
She inwardly resolves to love him well,
And shun the friendship of the world for ever.
