Awake, my Muse, awake, Pierian Quire,
Tune the soft lute, and chord the deep-ton'd lyre!
Awake, and slowly strike the quivering strings,
While the sad strain,  repining FRIENDSHIP sings!

Yes, smiling  nymph, whose easy mirth could lend
Thy lively spirit to thy graver friend,
For thee the Muse her fairest wreath shall spread,
And fondly mourn thee as a sister dead;
For O!  no more you'll seek the hated plains,
Where Solitude in gloomy grandeur reigns,
Since crowds and courts your captive mind engage,
And all the trifles of this trifling age;
No more you'll listen to the cooing dove,
And laughing ask me, what it is to love,
While I, from pages of romance, declare
The gentle passion which I long to share:
No more the much-lov'd novel shall employ,
(The much-lov'd novel source of all my joy!)
Each hour, each moment, that we both can steal
From maiden aunts, who know not how to feel.
Oft your keen eye devour'd the tender page,
Free from the prying vigilance of age,
Till dear FIDELLE perceiv'd your dragon near,
Leap'd in your lap, and yelp'd aloud for fear;
Warn'd by the friendly sound, with speed you move
To hide from watchful prudes the tale of love;
But now far other themes with rapture thrill,
A concert-ticket, or an opera-bill.
Once, thy bright eyes the radiant flame would dart,
To fire a book-worm curate's icy heart;
While, by the well-directed aim perplext,
The bashful creature would forget his text;
But now, you scorn to wage such amorous war,
Or glance on any thing &mdash; beneath a star.
&mdash;Ah, me!  my smiling friend returns no more&mdash;
Awake, my Muse, the cruel loss deplore!
Awake, my Muse, awake, Pierian Quire,
Tune the soft flute, and string the deep-ton'd lyre!

But while for thee I raise the plaintive strain,
I strive to sooth my troubled soul in vain;
Why art thou absent now, my friend, my guide,
When peace-consuming doubts my heart divide;
When PLEASURE wooes me to her roseate bowers,
And strews her mossy couch with blushing flowers;
While PRUDENCE points to antiquated rules,
And all the dull morality of schools,
To teach, that PLEASURE'S thoughtless sons must know
An hour of transport and an age of woe?
Yes, dearest nymph, what most I wish'd to prove, 
Now fills my swelling heart &mdash; alas, I love!

One fatal, happy eve, I chanc'd to stray,
Where the long avenue rejects the day,
Intent on HELOISE (heart-melting page!)
More worth than all the volumes of the Sage!
Sudden, I cry, while kindling passions move,
"Ye Powers!  what earthly joy can equal love!"
I spoke, and cast my languid eyes around,
When, lo!  a youth stood rooted to the ground;
The robes of war his slender limbs enfold,
Not the rough steel and cumb'rous arms of old,
But melting scarlet, and seducing gold.
I scream'd aloud, and sunk in wild affiright;&mdash;
Soon at my feet appear'd the courteous knight;
He rais'd me from the earth, with tenderest care.
Press'd my warm hand, and call'd me heavenly fair:
Swift flew the hours &mdash; at length he bade adieu,
And lingering, slowly to his steed withdrew:
But oft he seeks the well-known grove again,
Sighs at my feet, and breathes the amorous strain;
Oft, by the favouring moon, we fondly rove,
Till all my soul submits to conquering Love.

O say what course thy wavering friend shall chuse?
Say, shall I dare &mdash; (but can I e'er refuse!)
Down the swift stream my little bark to steer,
And bravely scorn each base, prudential fear?
Say, shall I fly where Love would fain persuade,
And trust the honour of a dear cockade;
Or, sway'd by PRUDENCE, CUSTOM'S servile slave,
Here waste the useless bloom which Nature gave;
Here, like the nun, Religion's weeping prey,
In cold indifference pine my life away?

O wretched state, that helpless Woman knows!
All laws, all lawgivers her constant foes!
She, while soft passions in her eye-balls roll,
Pant in her breast, and kindle in her soul;
She, weak in reason, ardent in desire,
Must learn to quench the heart-consuming fire;
With look demure must veil the speaking eye,
Hide the warm blush, and check the tell-tale sigh:
While Man, who faintly feels the gentle law,
Whose frozen blood warm Love can scarcely thaw;
He, unreserv'd, may every wish reveal,
And boast a passion he can hardly feel!

But should the Maid, disdaining base controul,
Dare to pursue the dictates of her soul,
Throw off the mask, which custom bids her wear,
And scorn th' hypocrisy that guards the fair,
She roams, a wandering outlaw, through the earth,
Spurn'd from the door of those, who gave her birth;
Reproach'd, insulted by unfeeling age,
Deaf to distress, and obstinate in rage;
Nay, even the sex, who, from experience, find
What strong desires impel the female mind,
Fly the lost nymph, as if her baneful breath
Spread, thro' the listening train, contagious death.

Then, PRUDENCE, come, and teach me to suppress
What open NATURE prompts me to confess,
What Virtue checks, what coy Reserve denies,
What Stoics ridicule, and Saints despise;
Bid LOVE, affrighted at thy presence, fly,
To reign unrivall'd in a happier sky,
Where PREJUDICE no narrow limit draws,
Nor binds a servile world in iron laws;
O!  teach the female heart no more to feel
What You command us never to reveal.

Come, PRUDENCE, cloath'd in robes of dusky grey,
Come, like some warning spectre of the night,
Slow-gliding by, thy glimmering torch display,
And rouse me from the vision of delight;
Arise, and harshly cry, "Awake and weep!"
Tho' PLEASURE sweetly says, "Enjoy the soothing sleep."

Impetuous Passions seize the captive soul,
And bear it onward with resistless speed,
While You, who early should their power controul,
Still lag behind when most your aid we need;
At length You follow slow, with limping gait,
And come to chide our flight, but often come too late!

When LOVE'S soft-breathing voice has charm'd the ear,
When LOVE'S alluring form has caught the sight,
How shall weak Woman thy rough accents hear,
Or mark thy hagged visage with delight?
How shall she then thy hidden value see,
Forsake her beauteous guide, and turn again to thee?

When, from ripe fruit, which courts th' extended hand,
The stripling turns away the wishing eye;
When the parch'd Arab, midst the burning sand,
Views the clear pool, yet speeds unheeding by;
Then, PRUDENCE, Man thy dictates shall obey,
And follow, well content, where'er thou lead'st the way!
HARRIET F.
