I, who erewhile in clam'rous fight o'erthrew
DAVID, of infidelity the Dagon
Pommell'd his sceptic carcase black and blue,
And trampled him as St. GEORGE did the dragon;
Now, when the Laureat's mouth has got Death's gag on,
Awake my gothic harp's harmonious frame,
Ditties of duteous loyalty to fag on,
And in the Laureat's list enrol my name;
This, with the sack and gold, is all I dare to claim.

Already, true it is, I have a pension,
Although no reason I can render why;
My SOV'REIGN'S bounty gratefully I mention,
And burn to blazon his perfection's high.
Among the reeds, where wild brooks gurgle by,
My past'ral pipe I lay for aye to sleep;
Far other strains, far other melody,
Befit the courtly measures I must keep,
Else on mine Odes I ween no Royal eye will peep.

No more I'll sing of meads with May-flow'rs gay,
Nor banks of purple heath or yellow broom;
Pansies, and pinks, and poppies, red or grey,
No more I'll warp in my poetic loom:
On praise from me, I charge you, ne'er presume;
Bright sunshine and mild moonlight, hence begone!
Ye summer mornings mourn your hapless doom;
From you I fly to sing the radiant throne,
Where morn and day are made by GEORGE'S smile alone.

Greatest of Monarchs, must I sacrifice,
In proffering so to quit the rural shade;
For know, (the which to tell I'm rather nice,)
In minstrel EDWIN I myself pourtray'd;
Like him I loiter in the grassy glade,
I pierce pine-woods, I dive in dells profound,
And hear enraptur'd distant music made
By sheep and bullocks, huntsman, horn, and hound,
Or rattling car that rings the rocky steep around.

But who, like me, thy matchless deeds can tell,
For who with Truth so intimate as I?
Come, Goddess, from thine adamantine cell,
And help me, BRUNSWICK'S praise to magnify!
At Court thou art in estimation high,
Immutability is there in vogue,
There none invents, there none tells a lie,
But all converse like swains in an eclogue;
TRUTH, what I say is truth, or else I am a rogue.

Thy cousin, Common-sense, is also there;
And Piety, protected by the KING;
To whom my harp, on each occasion fair,
With movements sanctified, shall solemn ring,
While seraphs hover round each trembling string;
Such will his sacred Favours gently calm:
Therefore, whatever  subject I may sing,
Of drear defeat, or victory's proud palm,
The pious Ode shall end devoutly in a psalm.
