Beneath the shades of thickest night,
The child of pride and malice born,
Rush'd into life, an hideous spright,
That shuts its eyes against the cheerful morn:
The sweet return of light she hails with cries,
And from the day in rage the monster hies!

Round her black seat, eternal vapours spread
A most malignant damp; while stagnant pools around,
And deep morasses, or a slimy bed,
And herbs of baleful name, bestrew the squallid ground!
For here no soft descending dew,
Sprinkle the sun-impearled green,
No flow'rs of pleasing smell, or hue,
On this rude spot were ever seen:
But rattling hail, and rains impetuous pour,
Wild winds, and blasts infectious madly roar!
Then rush to drown the cultivated plains;
O'er all things strait the rapid deluge reigns!

Not here one bird of tuneful throat
Is heard to pour his liquid note;
She listens to the croaking frogs,
The pois'nous toad and hissing snake,
Or to the sullen sound of hogs,
That stir for food the miry lake!

With inward stings her wicked bosom bleeds;
As drops the blood, on her own blood she feeds!
In rueful hands a cup she bears,
Full of wretched mortal's tears.
When for an only child, just dead,
The strongest sorrows parents shed;
But, if some happier news to this succeed,
She screams; her limbs deformed, horror shakes,
She feels her bosom now more copious bleed,
And, hissing round her hand, bears the enraged snakes.

With evils tir'd, not sated, on her bed,
(A bed of thorns) her odious form is thrown;
There turns and tosses, without rest her head;
While ev'ry breath breathes forth a fever's groan.
Or, should she gain a momentary sleep,
Ideas horrid still disturb her mind:
Of ship-wreck'd mortals shrieking in the deep,
Or towns in flames, of plagues with famine join'd!

See at her side, what curst companions move!
All foes alike to pleasure, peace, and love,
With ears erect, attentive fear,
And look amaz'd, and trembling hand,
Starts as she treads, and spying far and near,
Seems half to go, and half to stand.
Slander, with her endless tale,
Old, wither'd, lean, and fierce, and pale;
And Jealousy, with eyes askew,
Suspecting always, something strange, and something new!

Private Revenge, with murdering fist,
With stealthy foot and frequent list,
Creeps slowly on:  with wild amaze,
Guilt stands and looks a thousand ways!
Shame too, with hanging head, stoops down so low,
As if to earth she wish'd and sought to grow;
Hatred, with her rankling thorns,
And Pride, that each associate scorns!
Close the vile tribe:  O!  foes to health, to joy, to light,
Far hence go pine in grief, and dwell in endless night.
