If, from the Gallic worthies whom you praise,
My verse withholds an equal share of bays,
Attribute it to my untravelled mind,
Which, still within its native isle confin'd,
Views every object there with partial sight,
And asks no fairer region of delight.

With polish'd manners you would join in vain
The smut of RABELAIS, coarseness of MONTAIGNE.
To sage BOILEAU what genuine strains belong?
From Horace and Tassoni flow'd his song:
Pope, from their open fountain likewise drew;
What mighty thanks are to the Frenchman due?

Before RACINE, e'en in our James's time,
Old Beaumont taught the couplet and the rhime;
Denied the stanza's boasted power to please,
And wrote with equal eloquence and ease.

His flowers from MONTESQUIEU I will not tear,
The wreath he merits let him ever wear;
Yet, must he own, beneath our English skies
He saw the brightest and the sweetest rise;
Yes, o'er this land of lawgivers were spread
The fairest blossoms which adorn'd his head;
The laws here triumph'd in their native ground,
The spirit, and the substance, here he found.

VOLTAIRE might aim his irony and wit;
Yet often, while the mark he strove to hit,
The arrow on the shooter's breast recoil'd,
His art was frustrated, his fancy foil'd.
While he has many-mingled simples press'd,
He saw not poison in the juice confessed;
Deep drank his country of the envenomed bowl,
And madness now fires each licentious soul.

ROUSSEAU a Frenchman!  He despised the name;
On other sentiments he built his fame:
Not for Parisian converse was he born;
Their music, and their manners, were his scorn.
Fancying the spacious universe he loved,
In his small sphere a misanthrope he roved;
A victim to his discontent and pride,
Without a real friend, he lived and died.

By these instructors was our judgment form'd?
By these, our taste inspired, our fancy warm'd?
Doubtless, from them our flimsy novels rose;
From them, such verse as Della Crusca's flows:
From them our frigid plays with plots so deep,
Which run nine nights, and sink in endless sleep.
But long 'ere they began their fated course,
Our's was wit, genius, elegance, and force.

'Ere they a single sprig of grace had won,
BOCCACIO, DANTE, ARIOSTO, shone:
From Greece and Virgil, TASSO caught his fire,
And strung for high heroic notes the lyre.
Sunk in barbarian ignorance was France,
Taste had not darted there her slightest glance,
When Spain, besprinkled with Castalian dews,
Beheld her Epic, and her Comic Muse;
When wit and humour to CERVANTES gave;
To free from maddening errantry the brave.
When Tagus heard the trump which CAMOENS blew,
As to Heaven's glorious arch aloft he flew;
When SPENSER pour'd his energy of strain,
And all the polish'd virtues join'd his train;
When SURREY, form'd in camps or courts to shine,
Tun'd his melodious notes to Geraldine;
O'er every bard, when MILTON fix'd his rule,
The noblest pupil of the Italian school.

But who to SHAKESPEARE gave that magic skill,
To turn and wind the passions at his will?
What masters form'd his bold and ardent mind?
Greeks, Romans, and Italians, lag behind.
France, and her sons, are wrapt in pale despair,
At what immense an interval &mdash; VOLTAIRE!

BACON, untutor'd shot his fulgid ray,
And the dark wilds of science blazed with day.
By whom was LOCKE'S perspicuous plan design'd,
When he unravelled all the powers of the mind?

Who taught our NEWTON Nature's laws to trace,
And bade his hands that ancient veil displace,
Which none e'er raised before from Isis' face?

In France, what genius, what invention flows?
What is her utmost boast but polish'd prose?
Where has she reached the nervous, the sublime!
Her best of poetry, is prose in rhime.

Her pigmy merits let her still possess;
Her art of writing is the art of dress:
Easy, familiar, sprightly, lo, she plays,
And turns a thought a thousand different ways.
With many a lily decks her barren ground,
And many blooming roses scatters round.

But this allowed &mdash; I grant her not a name
"Dear as Achaian worth to lettered fame;"
In vain your much-loved nation you advance,
She ever was, and ever will be, France:
Like Greece, or Britain, never can she shine;
Our's are the great originals divine!
