"Ah!  why, ye prospects of my early days,
Look'd ye so fair?  Why were your hills and dales
So pleasant to the view?  Why blew the gales
With such a mildness o'er your verdant turf?
Though oft ye dictated my joyous lays,
Reclin'd upon your flow'ry mantled turf,
Now sad occasion of my mournful strain,
Ye smil'd but to deceive,
Ah!  why did I believe
Your scenes would last for aye?  Idea vain,
For bliss ecstatic is of durance short.
When comes the daemon Care and spoils our sport,
And all our pleasure mingles still with pain.

"Mourn, mourn ye shepherds:  ye have cause to mourn,
By Ness's silver stream, your flocks who feed,
Sit by the willow, and the sable weed
Put on, and pluck the mournful yew,
For she is dead who has not left her peer:
Sunk is the beam so lovely to the view,
That gain'd new lustre with each new-born year,
Fled like the vision, never to return.

"And you, ye fair companions of her youth,
Though she out-shone you far in beauty's bloom,
Do ye not weep the loss ye now sustain,
Of conversation sweet, the pleasing strain
Of friendly wit; wit aye attun'd to truth,
For she knew not the tell-tale to assume.
Yes, yes, I see you mourn,
Wet are your cheeks, and sunk the rival's hate;
And as ye pass her urn,
Ye drop the tear, and wail your coming fate.
Ah!  thought distracting, must those angel forms
Grow lifeless, black, to ruthless worms a prey,
To dust fast moulder in the narrow grave?
Yes, such the sentence, though severe ye say.
If worth or beauty had the pow'r to save,
Or faith or charity could life rescue,
Eliza yet had liv'd, for these she knew.

"Whither flew ye, guardians of the fair,
When mild Eliza died?  For ye were wont
To hover o'er her and attend her aye;
Your constant pleasure and your anxious care,
That she should ever, as the youthful May,
Wear Nature's fairest garb, in bloom of health
Attracting ev'ry eye with modest look,
The brightest semblance of the purest mind.
But ye were absent, and Disease by stealth,
Who treach'rous oft occasion apt does find,
Advantage of your heedless wand'rings took,
Nipt this sweet rose, that was the garden's pride,
And left it with'ring the green sod beside;
Intent each future pleasure to annoy,
Blasting the lover's hope, the parent's joy.

"Why roll ye now with such impelling force,
Clear stream of Ness, your varied banks along?
When last I saw you, ye roar'd not so hoarse,
Nor the wood minstrels frighten'd from among
The beechy coverts; smooth ye flow'd I ween,
No one curl'd wave was on your bosom seen.
Though then each mountain high and valley low
Ye pass, wore the drear winter's suit of snow,
And the chill'd bird had ta'en its yearly flight,
Yet stern-fac'd Winter look'd a blooming Spring,
The lightsome hours pass'd by on fleeting wing,
For then Eliza liv'd, and the charm'd sight
From ev'ry prospect gather'd fresh delight.
But now she's dead, dead ere she travell'd far
In life's gay path.  As the bright morning star,
A while unrivall'd holding forth its way,
Withdraws at Heaven at the rise of day,
So she withdrew from ev'ry mortal eye,
Withdrew, ye shepherds, to be seen no more.
And now, though ev'ry dale and ev'ry hill
With summer's suit of green is cover'd o'er,
And the woods echo to the shepherd's quill,
Yet these such pleasure yield not as before,
But prompt the tear or sorrow-boding sigh.

"Enjoy the sun, O ye who never knew
What 'twas to lose your bosoms held most dear,
Whose woe-unconscious eyes ne'er dropt the tear
But gave to laughter-loving Mirth his due;
Give me the gloom of yonder waving shade,
Which no rude noisy bacchanals invade;
Where sadly-musing Melancholy dwells,
And Memory her early passion tells.
There will I rest and shun the glare of day,
Save when, returning Spring's fair mantle spread,
I cull each flow'r of variegated hue,
O'er lovely lost Eliza's tomb to strew;
Then to the shade retrace my lonely way,
And tune with thee, sad Philomel, my lay."

Thus sang the shepherd, in untutor'd guise,
In lays uncouth as first dame Nature taught;
For his plain measure knew not how to rise
Sublime; nor yet had he the spirit caught
Of him who forth such rapt'rous strains could send,
Who mourned the loss of Lycidas his friend.
