A rigourous doome is myne, upon my faie,
Before the parent starre the lyghtsome sonne
Hath three tymes lyghted up the cheerful daie
To other reaulmes must Lamyngeton be gonne
Or else my flymsie thredde of life is spunne;
And shall I hearken to a cowart's reede
And from so vaine a shade, as lyfe is, runne?
No!  flie all thoughts of running &mdash; to the queede:
No!  here I'll staie and let the Cocknies see
That Lamyngeton the brave, will Lamyngeton still be.

To fyght and not to flee, my sabatans
I'll don and girth my swerde unto my side
I'll go to ship, but not to foreyne lands
But act the pyrate, rob in every tyde:
Ther goods in Bristowe markette shall be sold.
With Cocknies bloude Thamysis shall be dyde.
My bark the lavnde of waters ride
Her sayles of scarlette and her stere of golde
My men the Saxonnes, I the Hengist bee
And in my ship combyne the force of all ther three.

Go to mie trustie menne in Selwood's chace
That through the lessel hunt the burled boar
Tell them how stands with me the present case
And byd them revel down at Watchets shore
And saunt about in hawlkes and woods no more:
Let every auntrous knythe his armour brace
Their meats be mans fleshe and theyre beverge gore
Hancele or hanceled from the human race
Bid them lyke me thyre leedor shape their mynde
To be a bloudie foe in arms, gainst all mankynd
R&mdash; I go my boon companions for to fynd.
(Ralph yoes out.)

Unfaithfull Cocknies dogs!  Your God is gayne.
When yn your town I spent my greete estate,
What shoales of citts came flockynge to my traine,
What shoales of tradesmen eaten from my plate,
My name was allwaies Lamyngeton the greete,
But whanne my wealth was gone ye kennd me not
I stood in warde, ye laughed at my fate
Nor car'd if Lamyngeton the greete did rotte
But know ye, curriedowes, ye shall soon feel
I've got experience now, altho' I bought weele.

You let me know that all the world are knaves;
That lordes and citts are robbers in disguise,
I and my men the cocknies of the waves,
Will profit by your lessons and be wise:
Make you give back the harvest of your lies:
From deep fraught barques I'll take the myser's soul,
Make all the wealth of every citt my prize,
And cheating London's pryde to dignor Bristow rolle.
