Around me night and silence reign&mdash;
My beating breast
Seems with some huge weight opprest,
And strives to shake it off in vain.
Oh, let me close my orbs of sight,
And in my bosom check the panting breath!
Encircled by the shades of night,
Let me here unnotic'd rest!
And yet, as if the hand of death
Lay heavy on me, moisture cold bedews
My shivering limbs:  and fancy views
Scenes of unknown terrors rise.
Advancing footsteps strike my ear;
Low-murmurs in the forest sound:
The rustling leaves are strew'd around.
Reluctant, yet compell'd by fear,
I ope my anxious eyes.
Now wildly through the extended plain,
With the moon's mild light array'd,
I gaze &mdash; yet all dismay'd,
Would fain, but dare not close their lids again.
See through the path in yonder grove,
Silent and slow a phantom move!
Pale grief is on his brow imprest,
And darkly down his snow-white vest
From his gor'd bosom sanguine streams descend.
He stops, he turns, on me he bends his view,
His course unknown he waves me to pursue&mdash;
Oh, let me hence my tottering footsteps bend!
Alas!  in vain I seek to fly,
My powerless limbs their aid deny;
And fear, that gave the spectre birth,
Rivets me motionless to earth.

Let me shake off this causeless dread:
Let me my fortitude resume!
In vain &mdash; for at this awful hour,
Bursting the cearments of the tomb,
Ascend the spirits of the dead,
And roam thro' night compell'd by magic's wond'rous power.
This is the time, when o'er the corse
Festering in death, with accents hoarse
The raven croaks, or beats with ominous wings
The murderer's window &mdash; at the sound
Trembling he starts, he glares around,
And feels the thrilling pangs of guilt's infixed stings.

This is the time, waiting their destin'd prey,
And shunning day's detecting eye,
In covert hid unpitying ruffians lie.
To his lov'd home the traveller bends his way,
That home he never more shall view!
At once up starts the savage crew;
By earthly fiends inclos'd he stands:
For mercy at their feet he bends;
He lifts his pleading eyes;
In anguish clasps his hands;
Conjures them by his dear domestic ties&mdash;
But lo!  the ruthless sword descends:
Cold in his breast he feels
The deadly point:  he feebly reels,
Forth bursts the vital stream, he gasps, he dies.

Hark, loudly-echoing through the glade,
Shrieks of distress my ears invade:
Nearer and nearer rolls the sound&mdash;
Like thee, poor wretch, twill soon be mine,
This transient being to resign:
I feel, I feel the life-bereaving wound.
My soul within me sinks dismay'd!
My pity, hapless man!  was thine,
But oh, I could not, durst not give thee aid!

Illusions fly!  the peaceful power
Of silence reigns o'er hill, o'er dale, and bower:
An awful stillness that my soul affrights&mdash;
For now on yon drear heath,
Hags profane, and hell-born sprights,
Plan schemes of future woe, and scenes of death.

Muttering slowly spells profound,
In mystic circle round and round
The necromantic fire they go,
Kindled from the realms below.
Now dusky wreaths of smoke arise,
Now fiercer flames ascend the skies,
As 'mid the blaze they charms unhallow'd throw.

Now they vanish from my sight&mdash;
Mingling with the shades of night,
On yonder sable cloud they fly,
And urge the wrathful tempest through the sky.
They bid its wings of darkness sweep
The surging billows &mdash; wide around
They foam, they roar; the rocks rebound.
The anxious Pilot's art is vain:

Down to the unfathom'd deep
The vessel sinks, and o'er it boils the main.
Now, horror-proof, with deadly aim,
While the moon, trembling at the sight,
Veils her silver front in night,
They wing the lightning's shafts of flame
Through sable clouds disparting wide;
Spread ruin through the peaceful plains,
And fire the cots of lowly swains;
And sink to dust the castle's towering pride.

Protect me, save me!  whence was driven
That beam which shot athwart the heaven?&mdash;
It gave a dreadful light&mdash;
Ah, whence proceeds this sudden gloom,
Dark as the mansions of the tomb,
That clothes the brow of night?
My faultering tongue amazement chains,
And ice seems creeping through my veins.

Alas!  ideal terrors have disjoin'd
My powers of reason, and unhing'd my mind.
'Twas but a Meteor's sudden glance:  again
The moon, yon blackening cloud withdrawn,
Streams radiance o'er the dewy lawn,
And skirts the wood with light, and gilds the distant plain.

Fell spectre of the haggard eye,
Wild gesture, and erected hair,
Quick from my presence fly!
Ease, ease awhile my heart opprest,
Lest, lost and woe-begone, Despair
Should seal me for her own,
And Reason, banish'd from her throne,
To Madness should resign my tortur'd breast.
