OFFSPRING OF HEAVEN!  from whose bland Throne
Thou bend'st with salutary wing,
Bearing the OLIVE Branch divine,
To grace Britannia's lucid zone;
Where, in calm majestic pride,
Her conqu'ring NAVIES proudly ride;
While ART and COMMERCE smiling join,
And to the favouring skies exulting PEANS ring!

Oh!  bend thy flight, from pole to pole;
With balmy pinions swiftly sweep
O'er the dark and foamy deep,
Where the warring Billows roll;
Where, in shad'wy vestments clad,
Ghastly Visions, pale and sad,
Rising from their prison wave,
Seem their destiny to brave;
DESTINY severe and dire!
That spurn'd each tender hope away,
Each social gleam of mortal day,
And gave their dauntless Souls to War's insatiate IRE.

Now their dismal Chorus sounds
E'en to earth's remotest bounds! 
"BEWARE!"  it says, "MANKIND, BEWARE! 
Sheath the Sword of Death, nor wage
War with Heaven's impending rage;
Nor rouse the furious FIEND DESPAIR! 
Already see, by Fate unfurl'd,
His poison'd banner shades the world;
All around him sad appears,
Stain'd with gore, and drench'd in tears;
Where'er the MONSTER bends his eye,
Beneath the fatal glance devoted millions die."

O, BLEST HUMANITY!  'tis thine
To shed consoling balm divine
Wide o'er the groaning Race beneath;
And when fell Slaughter lifts her wreath,
Let the Laurel still appear,
Gemm'd with Pity's holy tear;
Let it moisten ev'ry bud,
Glowing, hot with human blood;
And when no crimson tint remains,
When no foul blush it's lustre stains;
Bathe with oblivious balm, the dread record,
Grav'd on the page of FAME by Gallia's vengeful sword!

Mark, O!  mark the tented PLAINS,
Where exulting DISCORD reigns;
Flush'd with rage, her panting breast,
Her eye with ruthless lightnings stor'd,
She lifts her never-failing Sword,
With wreaths of with'ring Laurel drest;
By her side, in proud array,
AMBITION stalks, with restless soul;
Madd'ning VENGEANCE leads the way,
Her Giant Crest disdains controul;
Triumphantly she waves her iron hand,
While her red Pinion sweeps the desolated Land!

See!  beneath her murd'rous wing,
Howling FAMINE seems to cling!
Feeding on the putrid breeze,
Her wither'd heart begins to freeze;
With sullen eye she scowls around,
O'er the barren, hostile ground:
Where once the golden harvest wav'd,
Where the clust'ring Vineyard rose,
By many a lucid streamlet lav'd,
Now the purple torrent flows!
She marks the direful change with curses deep,
While o'er the scene forlorn distracted Nations weep!

Where the tow'ring CITY stands,
Once a polish'd Nation's pride,
See, stern DEATH, with rapid stride,
Leads on his grisly bands!
The Infant's shriek, the Sire's despair,
Rend the sulphur-stagnant air;
Nought illumes the direful shade,
Save the poignard's glitt'ring blade;
All along the flinty way,
See the tepid River stray,
Foaming &mdash; blushing, as it flows,
While every Dome resounds with agonizing woes!

Haste, HUMANITY!  prepare
Chains, to quell the FIEND DESPAIR;
Round pale VENGEANCE swiftly twine;
DISCORD bind, in spells divine;
Now where FAMINE droops her head,
REASON'S balmy banquet spread;
And where the blood-stain'd Laurel dies,
Oh!  let the OLIVE bloom, THE FAVOURITE OF THE SKIES.
