The Sun, just rising from his wat'ry bed,
Shook from his golden locks the briny drops;
The Earth her many-colour'd mantle spread,
And caught the crystal on her flow'rets tops;
While Nature smil'd, to see her rising crops
With brighter beauty glow, and richer hues;
As now the night her sable chariot stops,
Each drooping flow'r, refresh'd with morning dews,
Lifts its gay head, and all around its fragrance strews.

So fair the morn, when EMMA, fairer still,
Left the lone cottage, now her sole retreat;
And wander'd musing o'er the neighb'ring hill,
With downcast eyes, which weeping look'd more sweet.
Down to the vale she turn'd her trembling feet;
There, in the middle of a shady wood,
O'erhung with trees which branch to branch did meet;
Glided a gentle stream, where, as it stood,
Each bough its image shew'd in in the clear glassy flood.

Here paus'd the Nymph, and on the bank reclin'd,
'Neath a large oak fann'd by each gentle gale;
She swell'd the brook with tears, with sighs the wind,
And thus her melancholy fate 'gan wail.
And ye, who read her sad and mournful tale,
Oh!  drop one tender sympathetic tear!
Think that the best of human kind is frail,
Nor knows the moment when his end is near;
But all sad EMMA's hapless fate must fear.

"How fair each form in youthful fancy's eyes,
Just like the tender flow'rs of blooming May;
Like them, in all their beauty they arise,
Like them they fade, and sudden die away.
We mourn their loss, and wish their longer stay,
But all in vain; &mdash; no more the flow'rs return,
Nor fancy's images divinely gay!
So pass'd my early youth; then in its turn
Each fancied image pleas'd; for each at times I burn.

"How charming then o'er hill and vale to stray,
When first the sun shot forth his morning beam;
Or when at eve he hid his golden ray,
To climb the rocks, and catch the last faint gleam;
Or when the moon imbrued in blood did seem,
To watch her rising from the distant hill,
Her soft light trembling on the azure stream,
Which gently curl'd while all beside was still;
How would such scenes my heart with admiration fill!

"But now, alas!  those peaceful days are o'er;
Fled like the summer breeze that wakes the dawn,
Wafts spicy odours swift from shore to shore,
And gathers all the fragrance of the lawn;
Yet ere his noon-day crown the sun adorn,
'Tis past, 'tis gone; no more the scorching plains
Can shew where blew the gentle breath of morn;
The brook, the cattle, and the shepherd swains,
All seek the shade; &mdash; but peace for EMMA none remains!"
