My fruitless love, with many a lavish'd song,
And altars, grac'd thee 'midst th' immortal throng;
Ungrateful maid, neglected and forlorn,
I stand the mark for all thy shafts of scorn;
Ungrateful maid, thy fierce contempt deplore,
With sighs of living flame, and tears of streaming gore.

When my fond numbers would conceal her hate,
And snatch her beauties from oblivious fate,
From pole to pole when Clara's praises sound,
Ungrateful maid!  she mocks the am'rous wound.
Her single word a healing balm might show'r,
Yet she that word withholds, and vaunts her cruel pow'r.

Dear galling yoke, which I must never rend!
Dear cruel maid, whom pray'rs must never bend!
By one last blow, my hand, fulfil her doom,
And rest, my sorrows, in eternal gloom!
Thou wretch, at once, thy chains and life resign;
With courage worthy love, and worthy charms divine.

Tremendous pow'r, thou demon, pale, deform,
Who ne'er art call'd, but when the gather'd storm
O'er life is spread, nor hope remains below,
Despair, I call thee to relieve my woe!
Oh come, &mdash; thy kindly cruel aid impart;
Teach me, to heal the pangs that gnaw my bursting heart.

Come, ghastly phantom, with thy direful band,
Come, guide the stroke with unrelenting hand.
Oh bring me peace, and close my weary days;
No pomp of death my settled woe dismays.
Since Clara's eyes withdraw their chearing light,
The genial beams of heav'n but pain my aching sight.

I see thee come, with horror in thy train,
Affliction, phrenzy, rage, despair and pain;
Devouring flames and swords around are seen,
The baneful aconite, and poniard keen,
That set sad Pyramus from anguish free,
And gave to Cato's soul its darling liberty.

A bloody torrent rolls thy path along,
Fell, fell despite is there, and giant wrong,
That angry heav'n defy, and fortune's hate;&mdash;
I see the pangs for me reserv'd by fate,
And shame and wrath the ling'ring purpose chide,
"Oh fly thou wretch from life, nor future woes abide."

Yes, I will die, to glad the savage heart.&mdash;
Receive the victim of thy cruel art.&mdash;
Yes, thou shalt see, &mdash; no longer mock my pain,&mdash;
I burst the prison of thy fell disdain.
When pity fails to balm the lover's wound,
The rest of death remains, and poison may be found.&mdash;

Thersander spake &mdash; and fix'd on heav'n his eyes,
While birds ill-omen'd pass'd before his eyes;
As screaming round, they clapp'd their murky wings,
He grasps the steel, to drain the vital springs;
While silent night displays her sable weed,
And waits with dewy tears to mourn the frantic deed.
