See yonder dome, sequester'd pleasing seat,
Where noble Science undisputed reigns,
And Learning's votaries hold a safe retreat,
Smiling superior o'er the ample plains
That Wisdom doth unfold with mickle pains.
In there forsooth a Pedagogue ydwells,
To whom the order of that dome pertains,
Licentious Youth, and turbulent he quells;
But such as love the Muse with recompense impels.

Thrice happy Youths who habit this abode,
Whose dawning passions issue bad betray;
Eftsoons within this realm you feel the goad,
That spurs to noble acts and points the way;
Which certes after gladly, you shall say:
Tho' it may cause laments, and tears to flow,
And eke in anguish cause th' unhappy day;
Withouten that might come an heavier blow,
From loose and dissipated life, incessant woe!

There as you enter at the portal wide,
Where massy doors on grating hinges sound,
Grammar ytakes his seat; on either side
Emblems portray'd divinely shine around;
And those he fancies most, those most abound.
All in their several forms the Youths take place
In study fixt, and silence so profound
There sov'rain reigns, when eke they see the face
Of Pedagogue them proaching near with solemn pace.

Full in his right the rod of power he sways,
The Mantuan bard doth grace th' inferior hand;
The first for punishment of evil ways,
This skill'd the youthful talents to expand,
A work yprais'd in ev'ry polish'd land.
His blacken gown that sweeps along the floor,
With mantle black, respect and awe command.
Such and so terrible their eyes before,
He calls the lower forms to con their lessons o'er.

One hapless elf amid the num'rous train,
Who rare in learning ought, but sorrow, knew;
Presaging dire confusion, eke and pain,
Approach'd reluctant to the Tutor's view;
For well he kenn'd what to neglect was due.
The rev'rend Guardian 'sumes his time-worn place,
His praises there the diligent pursue:
Whilst this poor urchin, sad with tearful face,
Stood all aghast to meet his vengeance with disgrace.

The gen'rous Youths who have this Tutor's aid,
And take delight in Virtue's paths, so green,
Such in his presence free and unafraid,
And 'fore his dread tribunal firm are seen,
With count'nance compos'd and placid mien.
But on the imps to idleness a prey,
His visage ghastly terrible I ween:
His baleful eyne the miscreant eke-survey;
Who durst his great behests and precepts disobey,

Then the well known decrees eft issue find,
His dreadful voice mote start a braver ear,
But muchen more th' astonied elfins mind;
Eftsoons on back of sorrowing compeer,
Hoisted aloft, his brogues let down appear.
Down from his seat then stalks with sternest eye.
The sov'raign despot, and assaults his rear
With scourge imprinting, erst ybrandish'd high,
Heedless of cries and shrieks, which nought ysignifie.

Soon as his full meridian splendor bright,
Dan Phoebus hath ygain'd, with wild uproar
The youth outrush impetuous to delight,
As billows rolling on the sea-beat shore.
The welkin with their noise resoundeth sore;
To various games the striplings eke repair,
While some more studious on the learned pore,
Whose works have been th' effects of toil and care,
And may for future days their dawning power prepare.

Beneath the shade of deep embow'ring mast,
Some lie reposing on the grass so gay,
And eke discourse of old adventures past,
While others shouting various gambols play,
And sports of pleasure crowd the joyous day.
Some stand yrank'd the rapid course to try;
Gladden'd I ween their swiftness to display;
The word now giv'n, they with each other vie,
To reach the distant goal, and all their vigour ply.

But as I mus'd far off, in crowd conven'd,
Behind a copse I chaunced to espy,
From piercing ken of Tutor well yskreen'd:
Two combatants amain who did defy
Each other as erst Knights in chivalry;
Who whilom for a dame or lady fair,
Contended each his rival to outvie.
So rush the furious heroes to the war,
And of the sanguine plain the doubtful conflict dare.

These wights forsooth ne shining falchion knew,
Ne hurl'd the fragments of a rock uptore;
But with well-aimed fisticuffs perdue,
The foes eke gall'd, and were ygalled sore,
And badge of bloody nose their faces bore.
Ne Grecian warrior and ne Roman band,
In discord horrible, such plight afore,
Did e'er experience &mdash; but their deeds demand
The future strains and pen of some more able hand.

Now 'mong this stripling crew methinks I see
Some who in Britain's senate may abide;
Tho' now so low and groveling they be:
And here an embryo Bishop may abide;
Some too who armies and who fleets may guide:
To try poetic flights in juv'nile days,
A dawning Milton it may eke betide,
A Newton's genius here may crave the bays,
Due to his honours, name, and his immortal praise.
