Erewhile in youth's luxuriant bow'rs reclin'd,
I mark'd not the gay dawn or noon-tide ray;
And when the Western sun his throne resign'd,
Serene oblivion veil'd the close of day,
While like the fading beam life stole away:
But now does danger the fair scene deform,
Stern minister, yet raging but to save;
While Friendship shudders at th' impending storm,
And Awe controuls the good, and Horror quells the brave,
And for his banquet yawns th' inexorable grave.

Rouse thee, Reflection, from the sensual dream!
Far other paths with other hopes to climb,
Let Contemplation urge the heav'nly theme,
And snatch thee in her flaming car sublime,
Beyond the fleeting atmosphere of time;
And let Devotion arm the stedfast soul,
While Resignation waits th' approaching doom,
Teach her to triumph where the thunders roll,
Pierce with undaunted eye the midnight gloom,
Outsoar the realms of death, and reign beyond the tomb.

Nor Friendship claims in vain the pious tear;
Let Fancy to the couch of pain draw nigh,
And while she trembles for a life so dear,
List to the monitor in ev'ry sigh,
And read instruction in the languid eye;
And thro' each change the fell disease pursue,
When Reason wanders from the burning brain,
When ceaseless pangs the dreadful strife renew,
And torture hunts for life thro' ev'ry vein,
Till fierce convulsion ends th' unalterable pain.

With sacred sorrows now converse alone,
And let Remembrance cloud thy tearful eyes,
Still cherish in thine ear the parting groan,
And, while e'en now the struggling spirit flies,
Let the loud summons warn thee to be wise.
Does careless ease in vig'rous youth confide?
Hark, in yon sigh the frail protection fled;
Ah!  see the hand outstretch'd that whelms thy pride,
Where the pale worms their drear pavilion spread,
Where night eternal reigns, and silence shrouds the dead.

Thy restless fancy let the past employ:
The varied chart of early life review,
Search in thy parted hours for present joy,
And say what scenes shall active thought renew,
To cool thy burning breast with timely dew?
Say, wilt though cull them from th' infectious host
Of frantic follies that disdain controul?
Oh say, will conscience ratify the boast
Of revels that adore the midnight bowl,
While hov'ring daemons hail their conquest o'er the soul?

No; to far other joys Almighty Power
The gem divine of happiness consign'd,
And bad to sparkle in the pensive hour,
When Virtue's ardour the pure heart refin'd,
And Meditation wing'd th' aspiring mind.
Oh may Religion bear us to the prize!
Her sanctifying shade our thoughts o'ercast!
And may each hallow'd moment as it flies
Glow with a purer radiance than the past,
Till Judgment sound the trump, and Nature breathe her last!

And could not Mercy's dulcet call enforce
Thy favour'd steps to walk in Virtue's way;
But, to reclaim the wanderer's impious course,
Must vengeance the benignant form array,
And fell Misfortune stretch her iron sway?
All-gracious Heav'n!  thou know'st our feeble frame,
How thankless to the Power in whom we trust,
How sink our thoughts beneath thine awful name,
How vain the wise, how unprepar'd the just!
Our brightest virtues mourn repentant in the dust.

Still let my sacred soul the theme prolong,
The humbling theme my fervent thoughts shall raise,
For meekness wakens the triumphal song,
While soars Humanity on wings of praise,
The fairest idol of Creation's gaze.
No pious doubt, no silent prayer unknown,
Aspires to move the intercessor's ear:
Well pleas'd Omnipotence descends to own
A grateful offering in our contrite fear!
And angels ministrant shall consecrate each tear.

Author of life!  most bounteous when severe,
With transient woes dispensing bliss divine,
Teach the fond heart thy councils to revere,
Flee for protection to thy laws benign,
And to thy will her ev'ry wish resign:
And let thy blessings wait the trembling grief,
That sadly heaves the supplicating sigh;
Torn by suspence, yet fearful of relief;
While hope and fear with mingling pencils vie
To paint the dubious form of dark futurity.

Should thy decree the valued gift resume
Let healing grace support us to obey;
Or should victorious Hope the storm illume,
Let Piety salute returning day,
And Gratitude unite her heav'nly lay.
And ne'er let erring Mirth, or giddy Youth,
The desart of delusive joys explore;
But Wisdom lead us to the shrine of Truth,
And to the fount of bliss Devotion soar,
The fount that ever flows when time shall flow no more.
