Arm, warriors, arm!  despair inflames
With frantic rage th'impending foes:
A country's cause your ardour claims,
And Danger calls you from repose;
Aloud he summons to the Belgic shore,
To blast the tow'ring Gauls with wild affright;
And Glory bids the storm of battle roar,
Convulsing every nerve with fierce delight;
While o'er your conflict in the deathful field
The Guardian Angel spreads his adamantine shield.

And ye, dread sovereigns of the deep,
Britannia's floating pomp, advance!
Arise, indignant, from your sleep,
And thunder on the rage of France.
Arise, and execute the high command;
Bear to each hostile shore your country's name;
And, fraught with vengeance for an injur'd land,
Let your resistless bolts her wrath proclaim.
Confusion to the pride your might that braves!
Arise, and vindicate your empire o'er the waves.

Hark, warriors!  to the rude alarms
That riot in the southern gale;
While Gallia storms, with brandish'd arms,
The realms of Freedom to assail!
Near, and more near, the barbarous triumph glows,
And hurls defiance to the neighbouring shore.
England, thy voice the slumbering war shall rouse,
Thy withering scorn shall quell the brutal roar.
The banded Atheists sink in faint dismay,
And, in low, broken sounds, the thunder dies away.

Wake every strain of high applause
To celebrate yon hero's fall;
Who, while the dreadful sword he draws,
Expires beneath the destin'd wall!
Brave youth, let nought disturb thy latest hours!
Thine offspring yet shall find a father's care;
Rejoice!  for victory greets the kindred pow'rs
And Albion shall record thy parting pray'r.
Attend with reverence to the voice benign,
And to the country's care the much-lov'd charge resign.

Ages and empires sink in gloom,
Predestin'd to the silent grave!
But honour can reverse the doom,
And bid old Time revere the brave.
Honour shall wing them to the hoar cliff's brow,
That frowns imperious o'er the subject main;
There shall Britannia's lay their their fame bestow,
The fame that waits on her triumphant strain,
What time her terrors o'er the deep extend,
And suppliant at her throne the sons of ocean bend.

Arise then in your country's might!
Arise, and justify the boast
Of ages, whose illustrious flight
Has crown'd with fame the British host!
Arise, ye rivals of your father's praise,
With glory conquer or with glory die!
Arise, and let your patriot virtues blaze,
And be the beacons of futurity!
Ages to come shall emulate your name,
And kindle at your shrine the consecrated flame.
