When o'r the world black Night had spread her shade,
And weary men on downy beds were laid;
Scarce balmy sleep my slumb'ring eyes had clos'd,
And scarce my drowsy members had repos'd:
Methought I was transported far on high,
Beyond the paths where tow'ring eagles fly.
Beneath this sky unknown to genial day,
Where Sol ne'er shot his vivifying ray,
Sudden a structure of stupendous size,
Presents itself before my wond'ring eyes
Eternal snows and clouds beset its bounds,
An iron wall the lofty pile surrounds;
And o'er its top a sable roof is spread,
That thro' the shades erects its awful head.
Within this Temple far around are seen
Pale and lean monsters of a frightful mien:
Few dismal bells within its dome resound,
That toll a deep majestic knell around.
High on the throne a hideous Goddess stands,
And grasps a dagger in her bloody hands;
Awful she sits upon the lofty mole,
From time to time her baleful eye-balls roll;
She throws her fatal glances ev'ry way,
And casts around, grief, horror, and dismay.
A thousand portents, meagre, pale, defac'd,
Near her abode in triple rows are plac'd.
The worst of monsters that around her stood,
Was War, dire fiend, bedew'd with human blood;
Furious and fell, he waves a glitt'ring blade,
And feasts his eyes on mountains of the dead;
Whets the bright steel, puts battles in array,
And o'erwhelms empires in a single day;
'Twas he who flam'd in Philip's barb'rous van,
And fir'd him with the rage of killing man;
Excited Caesar to lay waste the plain,
And dye with human gore the gulphy main.

Next meagre Want appears with hungry rage,
Contending Discord, old decrepid Age,
And Av'rice, doom'd for ever to behold
Luxurious plenty, and high heaps of gold,
Yet starve, and ne'er enjoy the sweets of rest,
And ever seem with gnawing cares opprest:
'Twas he who taught proud Cortes' dreadful sword,
To bend beneath its edge the fierce Mexican Lord,
Induc'd Pizarro's troops to overrun
The gentle harmless children of the Sun.

Of fell Diseases next a dismal band,
In num'rous cohorts round the Goddess stand;
There writhes the Stone; there senseless Palsy lies,
Cold are her limbs; and stiff her haggard eyes.
Destructive Plague, best minister of Death,
Spreads far and wide her pestilential breath.
Decay'd Consumption best how poison blows:
And Febris dire her mad'ning fury shows.
A thousand others, not unknown to fame,
Fatal to man, the Muse forbears to name.
For who could reckon all the grains of sand,
That whirl around in Tart'ry's desert land?
Or who could count, when foaming billows roar,
The briny waves that lash Britannia's shore?
These monsters Death subjects beneath her sway,
Her laws  they keep, and her commands obey.
She from the throne beholds the earthly scene,
The barren deserts, and the forests green;
She sees the floods, and tractless oceans flow,
The spiry cities, and the realms below:
In ev'ry place, where'er her fancy bends,
Her furious monsters with a nod she sends;
Thro' earth's vast deserts then they cleave their way,
And spread on earth, grief, horror, and dismay.
They hold beneath their absolute domain,
The gold-clad monarch, and the simple swain.
Nor high ambition, nor the bloom of health,
The boast of strength, the gaudy pomp of wealth,
The boons of science, and all beauty's charms,
Can e'er shun Death's inevitable arms.
Nor can a father's or a mother's tears,
Nor e'en sweet friendship soothe his cruel ears.

Scarce had I view'd this gloomy scene of night,
All pale with horror at the dreadful sight;
When suddenly these awful words resound,
From the black depth of that abode profound:
"O flow'r!  whose gaudy bloom must soon decay;
O life!  how trans'ent is thy passing day;
How many foes against thee still conspire,
To check thy flame, or snatch thy heav'nly fire.
What furious enemies around thee rage,
In ardent youth and hoary headed age!
And thou, grim tyrant of eternal night,
O Death!  how many tremble at thy sight:
Yet not the furies that around thee stand,
Nor all the monsters that thy throne attend,
Can daunt the man, who, courting Virtue's charms,
Sought from his youth protection in her arms.
Firm is the hero, undismay'd by death,
Who for the state resigns his gen'rous breath;
Firm too the man, who nobly poor and great,
Bears with intrepid front the strokes of fate.
Such was the Theban, whose undaunted breast
Protected Greece, by tyranny opprest.
And Socrates, whose death-despising soul
Fear'd not to drink the poison'd hemlock's bowl.
Hail Virtue!  hail bright daughter of the sky,
Thou guide of men to happiness on high,
He who thy precepts in his life displays,
Above this mortal scene his hopes shall raise.
Her ghastliest visage, frowning death shall show,
Disease, and tort'ring pain, and gloomy woe,
Calm and serene, these terrors he can brave,
And look to future worlds beyond the grave."

These words I heard &mdash; but Sol's enliv'ning ray,
Dispell'd the dark, and brought the golden day:
Soon as my eyes began to feel the light,
The vision vanish'd from my wond'ring sight.
