Here (as 'tis fam'd) one beauteous summer's night,
When Cynthia tipp'd the hills with silver light;
That Phoebus, swift descending from the air,
Call'd all the Nine attendant on his car;
The rosy maids in expectation stand,
Eager to know and act his just command;
The shining sandals deck his snowy feet,
And round his polish'd limbs the ribbands meet;
Thick sparkling gems his purple vest bestrew'd,
And all his form majestic spoke the God;
Then graceful o'er his golden harp reclin'd,
Thus spoke the urgent dictates of his mind:
"Aonian Goddesses, to whom belong
The lyre harmonious and the Poet's song;
Long in sad silence have ye droop'd the head,
Saw Dulness reign, and Sloth assume her bed;
Long has your fire been suffer'd to decay,
No bard invokes, no supplient forms his lay;
That flame celestial which so long inspir'd
The ancient Homers, and the Miltons fir'd,
Which gave to godlike Greece a deathless name,
And rear'd Britannia to a mighty fame;
Say shall that fire for ever cease to glow?
Shall verse no more in sound harmonious flow?
What tho' great Shakspeare sleeps, and Chaucer's gone,
Tho' Milton, Spenser, find a funeral stone,
Yet Dryden's fire shall rouze the torpid soul,
And god-like Pope an age of vice controul.
What tho' their forms are moulder'd into clay,
Their works shall live till time dissolves away!
Mourn ye for this?  'Tis well, let sorrow flow,
And bathe your cheeks in tears of noble woe!
Yet, ah!  for ever must your sadness reign?
Must grief o'erwhelm, and must ye still complain?
Cheer then each mind, and wipe each sorrowing eye,
Let Grief's dire fountain for a while be dry.
On Richmond's Hill the fav'rite babe's convey'd,
And soft reclin'd within his cradle laid;
The infant fairies hover o'er his head,
And round the spot ambrosial incense shed.
Haste then!  I trust him to your nobler charge,
Warm his young breast, and all his soul enlarge;
With purest knowledge and true classic fire.
His growing years with just applause inspire:
THOMPSON &mdash; the name may future ages know,
And with her bays Britannia crown his brow:
Haste then!  let each her fav'rite charge fulfill,
Be quick to aid and execute my will."
He spoke; and pleasure fill'd each sparkling eye,
Quick to each cheek the blushing roses fly:
Apollo to Olympus sped his flight,
And left behind a train of dazzling light. . . .
