O, welcome home with thy triumphant sail!
Atchiev'd the noble task to thee assign'd;
With ardour such as thine it scarce could fail;
And to thy purpose friendly ev'ry wind:
All mark'd thy distant tract with eager eye,
For 'twas the glorious cause of sweet humanity.

To such a cause the Heav'ns protection lend!
Thou felt their influence in a trying hour;
When all around menac'd a fatal end,
From the black stratagems of lawless power:
For it was then they rais'd Hope's soothing form,
To cheer thy drooping heart, and calm th' impending storm.

O, snatch'd from death! &mdash; sav'd by a hand divine,
To persevere 'midst terrors round thee hurl'd,
To tread in happier times a glorious line,
And scatter blessings o'er the Western World;
Plant the fair tree of peace, the wretched save;
And give mankind far more than conquest ever gave.

What are the banners which the victor bears
From slaughter'd hosts stretch'd on the ensanguin'd field?
Wet with the orphan's and the widow's tears,
They to the mind no solid joy can yield;
The sense of fame may raise a transient glow,
But soon the laurel wreath shrinks with'ring from its brow!

The leader of the Argonautic Band
(Though his renown a while spread half o'er Greece),
Who with a daring, but a plunderer's hand
Convey'd to Thessaly the Golden Fleece;
Yet short is his glory; &mdash; torn by dire alarms,
Nor sooth'd by love's soft power, nor bright Medea's charms.

These are the fleeting triumphs of an hour,
Which one great deed of virtue far outweighs!
Those who for others' good exert their power,
On a firm base their own memorial raise.
Time views the trophy with a raptur'd eye,
And vows  it ne'er shall feel the ravage of his scythe.

Yes, my respected friend, this trophy's thine;
Where with their weight of fruit thy Bread-Trees bend,
Afric's dark sons shall in their shade recline,
And to the skies thy well-earn'd praises send,
Their comforts share; and, conscious whence they came,
Teach children yet unborn to venerate thy name.

But what eulogium's due to his good mind,
The virtuous Monarch of these happy isles,
Who first this philanthropic plan design'd,
To o'erspread the anxious face of care with smiles?
Who from his people's joy derives his own,
His subject's loyal hearts the bulwark of his throne!
