Ye Flowers!  that bow beneath the tears of eve,
Ye Gales!  that murm'ring seem like me to grieve,
Shall only ye o'er MERIT'S grave forlorn
Murmur and weep?  nor I be there to mourn?
As o'er thy Tomb, my HENDERSON!  I bend,
Shall I not praise thee, Scholar!  Christian!  Friend!
The grief which o'er a Brother's recent grave
Forc'd Nature sheds, that copious grief I gave:
But now that time his soft'ning hues has brought
And mellow'd anguish into pensive thought;
Since through the varied scenes of life I've pass'd,
And still compar'd the former with the last;
I prize thee more!  the GREAT, the LEARN'D I see,
Yet mem'ry turns from little men to THEE,
And views, with smiles that light her trembling tear,
Thy Genius, destin'd for a nobler sphere.

If human spirits then begin to live
When they mortality's frail robe receive;
And born to endless being urge their way,
Progressive Travellers through the eternal Day;
Dart wide the glance, yet dart on GOD alone,
Approaching still his ever-distant throne;
If e'en the unletter'd Peasant in that flight
Soon soar beyond a Newton's earthly height;
What height shall he attain, whose infant scan
Pierc'd through the frames of Nature and of Man?

'Twas his the times of elder fame to view,
And all that GREECE or ROME e'er writ or knew;
Now on bold pinion float mid PLATO'S blaze,
Now patient tread the SCHOOLMAN's thorny maze.
In thrice ten years his soul had run the round
Of human knowledge, simple or profound;
Alike could shape the log, or glance his eye
To where with Suns the Zodiac belts the sky:
E'er as the Lark, that groundling builds its nest,
Now bends the stalk beneath its speckled breast,
Now pierces clouds, and with a startling trill
Salutes the day-star glittering o'er the hill!

Not souls from him lay ambush'd; he could trace
The mute, unlying language of the face;
In manhood's fashion'd features knew to read,
The ruling passion stamp'd, the habitual deed;
And in the acorn's fibrils, with keen eye,
Beheld the oak's storm-swinging branches high.

So vast a mind did I dare venture near?
 O yes!  for perfect Love excluded Fear.
Tho' like an eagle he could stand sublime
On summits which no toil might hope to climb:
And tho' whene'er he spake, the sage was mute
As maiden list'ning to her lover's lute;
Yet did kind Heaven one WORTHIER gift impart,
The priceless treasure of a LOWLY HEART,
O hear thou proud one!  thou whose soul assumes
Or Wisdom's robe, or Wit's aye-dancing plumes;
Tho' Learning's alpine height before him shone,
He on the footstool fix'd a nobler throne.
E'en children doated on his accent mild,
And sported careless round their fellow child.

Ye sons of calumny!  go, hide your head!
Away, ye VAMPIRES!  that devour the dead!
Who fain would force the long-clos'd wound to bleed,
And hunt through Paradise to find a weed.
When droop'd his frame beneath its restless lord,
And cut its sheath the keen-temper'd sword;
What if an artificial aid he sought,
Worn out with prodigality of thought?
What if, his frail car driven with heedless force,
He fir'd the wheels in his too rapid course?
'Tis true, the midnight bowl he lov'd to share,
Yet never cloud it rais'd, it shot no glare;
But only made, with stimulation kind,
The body wakeful to the unsleeping mind;
But only (till unmechaniz'd by death);
Kept the pipe vocal to the player's breath.
With wonted thought, with loftier eloquence,
Truth's pure behestments would he then dispense:
So fair the effect that VIRTUE made a pause,
And only not forgave the faulty cause.
Ye sons of calumny!  go, hide your head!
Away!  ye VAMPIRES that devour the dead.

In mem'ry let those holy hours be kept,
When by his couch of pain I watch'd, and wept;
And heard his lips with faultering tone disclaim
The cymbal-tinkling praise of human fame.
The simplest truths, that else had quickly fled,
Are oracles, heard from a sick friend's bed:
How deeply then his precepts must I prize,
(Lov'd by the good and echo'd by the wise)
Who while he writh'd beneath disease's rod,
Still spake of Faith, of Mercy, and of God.

O hither come, all ye!  whose smoky lamps
Burn dim and foul mid doubt's unwholesome damps;
O hither come!  from me, the mourner, hear
What smiles a dying Christian's lips can wear,
When some kind Angel soothes the lab'ring breath,
And lifts th' emancipating wand of Death.

Then only not the friend of all mankind,
When to thyself a foe &mdash; farewell, GREAT MIND!
We wander tearful through this vale below,
But thou art gone where tears forget to flow;
Where LOVE and JOY eternal vigils hold,
And scatter healing as their wings unfold;
Where Souls their radiant course for ever run,
And move like Planets round the Almighty Sun.

If Friendship be a flower, whose am'ranth bloom
Endures that heavenly clime; beyond the tomb
I, haply I (low scenes of earth, retreat!)
Am doom'd once more thy honor'd form to meet;
Behold thee stand "girt in a starry zone"
Where Wisdom wells beneath th' Omniscient's throne;
And thou to me with outstretch'd arm shalt bring
Nectar ebullient from that Living spring.
