Ye sons of Mirth!  who eagerly pursue
The pleasures of an hour, be not alarm'd
At the tremendous name of Solitude;
Nor think that happiness evades the man
Whom Reason leads to Wisdom's holy seat;
But listen while the Muse attempts to sing
The native transports of a virtuous mind.
O Zimmerman!  had I thy various powers,
Thy wide experience, and thy fervent soul,
Then should my glowing periods penetrate
The caverns of the heart, force Vice to blush,
While timid Virtue rais'd her drooping head.
Here let me render, what thy pages claim&mdash;
Esteem, affection, gratitude, sincere:
These are thy due from him who  has deriv'd
Sublime enjoyments from thy work, and who,
Accustom'd to the contemplative hour,
Would trace the joys that Solitude affords.

Exists there not within the breast a void,
Unsatisfied by sensual delights,
That, 'mid the uproar of the midnight bowl,
Recedes disgusted from the festive board?
Ye lighter tribe, who sway'd by Fashion's gale,
Pay adoration to her fickle modes,
Confess her glitter reaches not the breast,
But leaves a lassitude it cannot fill:
And ye, who flourish in the blaze of courts,
Partake their pomp, and bask in grandeur's rays;
Say, does not greatness often smile to hide
A canker'd heart?  Where pleasure seems to dwell,
There secret Envy gnaws the rose of Joy.
O quit the poison Dissipation yields,
And the mistaken splendor of a court;
Relinquish those for the sequester'd shade
Where Meditation dwells; you may partake
The glorious treasures that she can bestow.

How sweet the breeze of Solitude descends
On him who long has felt Affliction's fang!
Far from the importunity of those
Who rush, unask'd, to Sorrow's sacred breast,
He drops a soothing tear; each new-born day
Bestows renewing peace.  He looks within,
Survey's his innate strength, and thence derives
A happy confidence, before unfelt;
Communes with Nature, soars to Nature's God,
Receives from him an antidote for grief.
Nor tiresome are the hours he passes, thus
Retir'd; if aught of former woe remains?
It hangs not heavy on the chords of life;
A pensive cast, without austerity,
Softens, yet dignifies, the mind:  his air
Denotes a student in Misfortune's school,
Who feels an int'rest when another weeps.
He wakes with Nature, quits the bed of sloth,
Inhales the fragrance of Aurora's breath,
Wanders thro' blooming wilds, and grateful pays
Internal homage with the tuneful throng.
When noon-day beams emit a sultry warmth,
Beneath some aged oak, whose foliage spreads
A covert from the heat, and near whose roots
In pleasing murmurs glides a crystal spring,
On the green turf he sits; while thought intent
Traces the causes of created things,
Combines, compares the universal scheme,
Till lost in one immensity of space,
A sense of Deity o'erwhelms his soul.
When the last sun-beam quits th' umbrageous grove,
He treads its inmost maze; in ev'ry breeze
Aerial voices whisper peace; no noise is heard,
Except some feather'd tenants, near repose,
Just warbling praises ere they sink to rest.
Shut from the prying leer of Insolence,
Free from the dull formality of towns,
O!  what a high felicity he feels!
His mind expatiates o'er the tranquil scene,
Nor fears intrusion:  meanwhile the Moon
Illumes the face of heaven; a radiance mild
O'erspreads the silent earth; then rising thought
Asserts the immortality of man,
Future rewards, and Retribution's morn.
Deluded mortals!  who pretend to prove
The sacred records false; O!  cease the toil;
While Truth and Reason can maintain their place,
Your labour's vain.  'Tis not for airy Wit to dumb
The Conscience; within a virtuous breast,
There dwells assurance of a brighter state,
Where final Justice shall decide the scales.
Expel the doctrines Revelation brings,
The soul of purity must leave the world,
And savage Vice extend his deadly rage.
It is the anchor where the good man rests:
Religion guards him from Transgression's rock,
Enlivens ev'ry purpose of his soul;
In glorious hope he views the promis'd heaven,
And feels an inward luxury divine.
Often he heaves Compassion's sigh for those
Who still persist in Error's fatal road;
For know, weak mortals, your satiric darts
Make no impression on the shield of truth;
'Tis only wav'ring minds they can affect;
And, oh!  beware, lest at another day
They rise to justify your awful doom.
Would ye frequent th' abodes of Solitude,
And there examine your assertions well,
Perhaps remorse, repentance, might ensue.
Thus speed the rosy moments of the year
With him, who lives secure from busy crowds
And festive nights; nor fade they with the Spring,
The rip'ning Summer, or Autumnal vines.
But hoary Winter has its pleasures too;
Then well-tim'd exercise hardens the frame,
And gives elastic vigor to the soul:
Or if he rather choose to contemplate
Instructive Nature, the drops translucent,
That congeal in various elegance
On ev'ry tree, present to Fancy's eye
A recreation beautiful and pure.
Should a solemnity inspire his thoughts,
Creation round appears in unison,
And speaks th' uncertainty of all below.
The lengthen'd night is not too long for him:
A love for knowledge, eager to improve,
Time steals not idly by, but in the page
Of History and Life he finds employ:
The roll of man expanded, he perceives
Deeds that exalt, and frailties that degrade;
From them experience gathers, to perform
The duties that await Humanity,
While here:  if some bright action meets his view,
Such kindred emulation beats within,
Such glory burns, that in his ravish'd mind
Imagination re-performs the deed!
When the reverse appears, where vicious men
Have marr'd the page, indignant virtue rends
The swelling breast, and sighs o'er mortal pride.
Some consolation, drawn from holy writ,
Without a secret pang concludes the day.
Thus Solitude confirms his principles,
Sweetens, exalts, invigorates his thoughts,
And fits his soul for everlasting bliss!

Mark, in the secret windings of the wood,
The beauteous victim of Deserted Love!
She revell'd once in fashion's giddy round,
Enjoy'd the praises of a servile throng,
Till the base wretch, who sought her Virgin bloom
Abandon'd both the parent and the branch.
The scales soon quitted Pleasure's eye, and then
Dark Sorrow hover'd o'er her youthful days.
The veil remov'd, she saw the fawning world
In colours true, and fled its cold embrace:
Here grief, at first, assum'd a deeper hue,
Till fragrant breezes and tranquility
Subdu'd its pow'r; amidst the woody maze,
When Melancholy touches near her heart,
Frequent she walks, there, with her smiling babe,
Feels all the silent harmony of woe;
In the young infant she beholds herself,
And weeps to think of Life's vicissitudes:
O may those features never wear, she cries,
Misfortune's tints, nor be thy Mother's lot
Renew'd in thee!  And O!  thou Power, whose love
Knows not a bound!  may Emma be thy care;
And rather take her shortly to thyself,
Than let Dishonour cloud the morn of Life!

Such, Julia, too, was thy unhappy fate;
But void of fortitude to bear the shock,
Thy feeble heart-strings sever'd with the blow:
Even Friendship lent her sacred aid in vain;
A burning fever dried the springs of life,
And thy "worn-spirit" took its-heavenly flight!
Think not, Lysander, to escape thy due:
Poor is thy triumph over innocence;
Unworthy of a man!  to guard the fair,
And not to violate, he is created;
To you, who see obdurate Beauty's wreck,
Even Solitude can have no charms; for there,
Her murder'd image shall infest your way,
And her last accents pierce your guilty soul.

How oft these eyes have swell'd with blissful tears,
To see the rural sweets of competence!
When day retir'd, the cheerful family
Assemble to partake their simple meal;
Contentment glads the scene, and on each face
Blooms healthful mirth.  Frugal refreshment past,
The pious Father takes the book of God,
And thence inculcates to his children round,
Respect for Truth, existence after Death,
And the Redemption of his sinful race:
Perhaps from Joseph's suff'rings he exhorts
To closer union and fraternal love.
'Tis then his little audience, gently mov'd
By sympathetic ties, kindly embrace,
Forget all discord past; from Joseph's fate,
They vow to banish future cause of strife.
Their lovely Mother watches ev'ry face,
Observes th' inquiring look, and satisfies
Their artless questions:  but a livelier ray
Beams from affection's eye, whene'er she hears
Mention of seats above, prepar'd for those
Who fear their Maker, and believe his word.
Her animated mind already sees
Her much-lov'd Partner and her offspring there;
Mortality is lost in such a view,
And contemplation soars awhile from earth!
Once, Sceptic, couldst thou taste this pure delight,
This confirmation of eternal peace,
Then would thy dubious spirit doubt no more.

In some lone meadow, at the close of day,
Delighted have I stray'd; attentive heard
The village bells, whose simple sounds dissolv'd
In pensive music on the distant ear:
A pleasing sadness spreads throughout the frame,
Sensation's language never can describe,
Are felt; Nature seems cloth'd in softer hues,
Fancy arranges visionary realms,
And ev'ry object wears illusive sweets!
In such a state, how glows the soul of Love!
His absent Charmer fills Reflection's eye.
If the gay lawn should be the happy place
Where they are wont to meet, nothing is lost;
For scarce a shrub appears but she has touch'd,
Admir'd its beauties, or her flowing robes
Have been entangled as she pass'd along.
Has Expectation met the look of Scorn,
And Disappointment blasted future Hope,
Here he no longer sees the frowning Maid;
And tho' retirement never may erase,
Yet it will calm the passion of his breast.
Nor are the awful regions of the dead,
Without a mournful joy; oft have I sought,
At Night's unfrequent hour, the church-yard path,
And cast a retrospect on former days.
Here with the comrades of those childish hours,
Has careless pleasure loiter'd many a game;
On yonder slab was mark'd the sportive ring,
Arrang'd the marbles, while from either side
Each anxious partner shot his fav'rite taw.
Thus mirth beguil'd the ling'ring pace of time,
Heedless of ghosts entomb'd in vaults beneath.
But if at parting day we chanc'd to pause
Near late erected monumental stones,
And conversation turn'd on scenes of death,
Breathless we fled, as to the eye of Fear
Departed spirits cross a distant grave,
And groans were heard from ev'ry new-laid corse.
Ye lov'd associates of unclouded hours,
Whom I remember still!  where are ye now?
Ah, whither tost by life's unfriendly waves!
Perhaps, on earth we never more may meet.
Even near this peaceful spot, lies one with whom
I pass'd those early days, and in whose breast
Glow'd all the treasures of maturity:
With whom I promis'd Friendship's youthful seeds
Should yield abundant fruit for years to come;
But death transplanted such disclosing sweets,
Where genial suns will ripen ev'ry bud!
Another must this bosom yet deplore,
In whom the christian graces all were seen;
Dear shade!  to me known only by report;
I saw, but was not conscious of thy worth;
Thou gav'st me birth, but Heaven to thee deny'd
The partial tendance of increasing life.
If mortal accents reach immortal scenes,
Know that thy children reverence thy name;
Will imitate thy virtues, and aspire
To meet their parent in the realms of peace.
Religion!  thy eternal truths alone
Impart submission to the mind of man,
Buoy up his spirits in Misfortune's hour,
And clear the gloom of Dissolution's cave!

But the sublime of Solitude affects
Most in the prospect of a stately Tower,
Whose shatter'd battlements and bending spires
Seem at contention with the force of Time.
What solemn grandeur such a view inspires!
Astonish'd Meditation dwells with awe
On the stupendous wrecks of human strength.
Well Superstition might erect a throne
In such forsaken courts, where the loud wind
Groans like a Slave in subterraneous cells,
Or murmurs ghostly thro' the moulder'd doors,
Where ev'ry step re-echoes, and the mind
Conceives unreal shapes, till bolder Sense
Discards such fears, and ruminates the scene.
What sullen taciturnity presides!
And the rude fabric, in the drear of night,
Appears a chaos of primeval date.
But, lo!  the clouds disperse, the planets shine;
No longer veil'd the bashful Moon is seen,
Her feeble light acquires a firmer ray,
Which serves to shew the solitary piles
And scatter'd fragments of this ancient mass.
Ah!  what ere all the boasted works of art!
Here Pride is cover'd with the moss of age,
And feudal arrogance is all forgot.
Here, Vanity, survey thy Monument;
Here, Despotism, see thy vast designs,
And dens of terror, levell'd to their base.
'Tis faded Grandeur that will teach to man
His highest ornament, Humility.
From Solitude's retreats mankind have gain'd
Invaluable pearls; some who, before
Unvisited by grief, neglected all,
When adverse times compell'd them to retire,
Have shone with lustre that had ne'er been known:
Others in prisons form'd extensive plans
Of good, wrote the true mirror of their age,
Or grafted doctrines that will never die.

The love of Solitude appears in youth,
Strengthens with years, and rests upon the tomb.
Behold what numbers toil with hopes to quit
In age the busy mart, and live retir'd!
Even Charles resign'd the robe of Royalty,
And chain'd Ambition to a Convent's walls.
If Man so wishes for Retirement's shades,
Then let him often in the prime of youth,
Quit the gay throng, and converse with himself;
Thence shall he cultivate a virtuous taste,
Nor feel the pressure of declining life;
His sun will mildly set in ev'ning skies,
And rise resplendent with a future day.

Thou friend of Virtue, and thou nurse of Thought,
Delightful Solitude!  may I repose
In thy unenvied bowers; till that arrives,
I'll visit thy retreats.  When troubles rage,
Thy soothing precepts shall abate their force;
Or would I taste bliss that has no alloy,
That renovates and dignifies the mind,
'Tis always found in thy romantic haunts.
