Night o'er the Earth had cast her sable robe,
When fierce convulsions shook the troubled air;
Terrific lightnings 'lum'd the darksome globe,
And thunders roar'd the chorus of despair.

Enwrap'd in grief, towards the blasted heath
A falt'ring Skeleton pursu'd his way;
In accents wild he mutter'd deeds of death!
Smil'd at the storm, and call'd it Mis'ry's day.

Dauntless he stood the conflict of the skies,
The blaze sulphureous, and the dismal peal;
Black Resolution fir'd his starting eyes,
And in his bosom sheath'd the deadly steel.

"I quit!  ye parasites of wealth!" he cried,
"I quit a world where talents find no friend."
Exhausted Nature could no more &mdash; he died;
But left a moral in his tragic end.

And is it true, that when the finer arts
Compose the harmony of polish'd states,
Munificence no tender aid imparts,
Still Poverty on all their children waits?

In ages past, when Learning yet was young,
And ignorant Barbarity bore sway,
When Poesy was heard with lisping tongue,
'Ere Science shed an intellectual ray;

In days like these, the finer arts might fade,
For senseless souls their charms can never feel;
No genial Sun dispers'd the dreary shade,
And Truth refus'd to chase mistaken zeal.

But when her brilliant beams resistless rose,
Driving the clouds of Ignorance away;
"And Learning triumph'd o'er its barb'rous foes,"
Then Genius should have seen a milder day.

Ye patronizers of the sacred Nine!
Who feel the raptures of poetic glow;
Defend their sons from poverty malign,
Parent of death, and never ceasing woe!

Biography is stain'd with many a blot
Of genius starv'd &mdash; a national disgrace!
May merit never meet a kindred lot;
But future times the blemishes efface.

Not the loud clarion of posthumous praise,
Elegiac lines, and tears of sorrow shed,
The wretched victim from the grave can raise,
Or meliorate the sentence of the dead.

Nor should the favour'd offspring of the Muse
Beneath imaginary evil bend;
Tho' num'rous thorns in flowery meads she strews,
Misfortune's night in brilliant day may end.

Trust not the finer feelings of the heart,
Sublimely great, yet impotently weak;
Too keenly prob'd by Scorn's malignant dart,
They ope' the avenue Despair would seek.

When that fell minister has entrance found,
The voice of Consolation speaks in vain;
Exulting Horror draws the curtains round,
And fainting Hope sinks &mdash; ne'er to rise again.

Of warm Imagination's flights beware;
Her tales of dark distress too oft' deceive;
O!  guard your spirits from the fatal snare,
Nor perpetrate what Time can ne'er retrieve.
