Whom the untaught Shepherds call
PIXIES in their madrigal,
Fancy's children, here we dwell:
Welcome, LADIES!  to our cell.
Here the wren of softest note
Builds its nest and warbles well;
Here the blackbird strains his throat
Welcome, LADIES!  to our cell.

When fades the moon to shadowy-pale,
And scuds the cloud before the gale,
Ere the MORN all gem-bedight
Purples the East with streaky light,
We sip the furze-flower's fragrant dews
Clad in robes of rainbow hues
Richer, than the deepen'd bloom,
That glows on Summer's lily-scented plume:
Or, sport amid the rosy gleam
Sooth'd by the distant-tinkling team,
While lusty LABOR scouting sorrow
Bids the DAME a glad good-morrow,
Who jogs th' accustom'd road along,
And paces cheery to her cheering song.

But not our filmy pinion
We scorch amid the blaze of day,
When NOONTIDE'S fiery-tressed minion
Flashes the fervid ray.
Aye from the sultry heat
We to the cave retreat
O'ercanopied by huge roots intertwin'd
With wildest texture, blacken'd o'er with age:
Round them their mantle green the ivies bind,
Beneath whose foliage pale
Fann'd by the unfrequent gale
We shield us from the Tyrant's mid-day rage

Thither, while the murmuring throng
Of wild-bees hum their drowsy song,
By Indolence and Fancy brought,
A youthful BARD, "unknown to Fame,"
Wooes the Queen of solemn thought,
And heaves the gentle misery of a sigh
Gazing with tearful eye,
As round our sandy grot appear
Many a rudely sculptur'd name
To pensive MEM'RY dear!
Weaving gay dreams of sunny tinctur'd hue,
We glance before his view:
O'er his hush'd soul our soothing witcheries shed
And twine our faery garlands round his head.

When EVENING'S dusky car
Crown'd with her dewy star
Steals o'er the fading sky in shadowy flight;
On leaves of aspen trees
We tremble to the breeze
Veil'd from the grosser ken of mortal sight.
Or, haply, at the visionary hour,
Along our wildly-bower'd sequester'd walk,
We listen to th' enamour'd rustic's talk;
Heave with the heavings of the maiden's breast,
Where young-eyed LOVES have built their turtle nest;
Or guide of soul-subduing power
Th' electric flash, from the melting eye
Darts the fond question or the soft reply.

Or thro' the mystic ringlets of the vale
We flash our faery feet in gamesome prank;
Or, silent-sandal'd, pay our defter court,
Circling the SPIRIT of the WESTERN GALE,
Where, wearied with his flower-caressing sport,
Supine he slumbers on a violet bank;
Then with quaint music hymn the parting gleam
By lonely OTTER'S sleep-persuading stream;
Or where his waves, with loud unquiet song
Dash'd o'er the rocky channel froths along;
Or where, his silver waters smooth'd to rest,
The tall tree's shadow sleeps upon his breast.

Hence!  thou lingerer, LIGHT!
EVE saddens into NIGHT.
Mother of wildly-working dreams!  we view
The SOMBRE HOURS, that round thee stand
With down-cast eyes (a duteous band!)
Their dark robes dripping with the heavy dew.
SORC'RESS of the ebon throne!
Thy power the PIXIES own,
When round thy raven brow
Heaven's lucent roses glow,
And clouds in watery colours drest
Float in light drapery o'er thy sable vest:
What time the pale moon sheds a softer day
Mellowing the woods beneath its pensive beam:
For mid the quiv'ring light 'tis ours to play,
Aye-dancing to the cadence of the stream.

Welcome, LADIES!  to the cell
Where the blameless PIXIES dwell:
But thou, sweet Nymph!  proclaim'd our Faery Queen,
With what obeisance meet
Thy presence shall we greet?
For lo!  attendant on thy steps are seen
Graceful EASE in artless stole,
And white-robed PURITY of soul,
With HONOR'S softer mien:
MIRTH of the loosely-flowing hair,
And meek-ey'd PITY eloquently fair,
Whose tearful cheeks are lovely to the view,
As snow-drop wet with dew.

Unboastful Maid!  though now the LILY pale
Transparent grace thy beauties meek;
Yet ere again along the impurpling vale,
The purpling vale and elfin-haunted grove,
Young Zephyr his fresh flowers profusely throws,
We'll tinge with livelier hues thy cheek;
And, haply, from the nectar-breathing Rose
Extract a BLUSH for LOVE!
