Where restless Teign, with many a surge
Foams to his sacred Logan's height,
The rockstone, at the wood's dark verge,
Shook to the moon, array'd in light;
When, as a cloud far off, disparting, flew,
A shadowy form appear'd, majestic to my view.

"Child of the dust" (the Genius cried)
"To thee (no trivial boast) 'tis giv'n,
To hear, with emulative pride,
How Concord links the inspir'd of Heaven
Not with the Muse's silken ties alone,
But in that Harmony which Friendship deems her own.

"Twas Concord bade the Bards of old
To Inspiration's numbers string
Their sweet-ton'd harps of burnisht gold
By sunny mount, or mossy spring&mdash;
Bad them, where Echo loves the sylvan dell,
The Druids mystic pomp, the Hero's prowess tell.

"The soul-subduing strain was high!
Still, still, it vibrates in mine ear!
I catch the holy minstrelsy
To Devon's faery vallies dear!&mdash;
Though central oaks no more, in forest deep,
Around the grey-stone cirque their twilight umbrage sweep.

"Snatcht from the altars of the east
I see the fires of Danmon rise!
To mark the new-moon's solemn feast,
Behold, they lighten to the skies:
And, as assembled clans in silence gaze,
The distant Karnes draw near, and kindle to the blaze!

"Fast by yon chasmed hill that frowns
Cleft by an elemental shock,
As ashen foliage light embrowns
Its rude side ribb'd with massay rock;
Lo, on the pillar'd way the white-rob'd bands
In long procession move, where proud the Cromlech stands.

"But see, where breaking thro' the gloom,
Danmonium's warrior-genius speeds
That scythed car, the dread of Rome!
See, fiercer than the lightning, steeds
Trampling the dead, their hoofs with carnage stain,
Rush thro' the spear-strown field, and snort o'er heaps of slain.

"Such was the heart-inspiring theme
Of bards who sung each recent deed;
Whether amid the mailed gleam
Of war, they saw the hero bleed;
Or, whether, in the Druid's circling fane,
They hymn'd to dreadful rites, the deep mysterious strain.

"No more to boast a spotless green,
E'er long their garlands deck'd the dead;
As, fading from the sight, the scene
Of oriental glory fled!
Then written verse for oral numbers came&mdash;
And lays of little worth were consecrate to fame.

"Then Saxon poets swept their lyres,
But harsh was their untutor'd song:
Then Norman minstrels vaunted fires
That ill to Phoebus' train belong&mdash;
Not that the Bard of Isca's elder'd vale
Told to the sparkling stream, an inharmonious tale.

"Nor idly wrapt in fairy trance
While each plume'd Edward fill'd the throne;
The daring offspring of romance
Gave to the glens a thrilling tone;
Chaunting the wizards spell in ruin'd halls,
Castles with ivy cloath'd, and mouldering abbey-walls.

"And o'er the dreary waste of years
Devonia mark'd some scatter'd rhymes:
But still, her eye suffuse'd with tears,
Wistful, she look'd to ancient times&mdash;
Ah!  few, monastic Tavy's banks beside,
Few were the BROWNES that trac'd the silver-winding tide.

"And tho' of fancy and of taste
A Rowe, the first-begotten child,
By dark romantic woods embrac'd,
Warbled his native carols wild,
'Twas from the lonely copse that high o'erflung
The Tamar's haunted wave his ditty sweet he sung!

"Tho Gay attune'd his Dorian oat,
Such as beseems a simple swain,
He only pip'd a rustic note
To cheer the solitary plain&mdash;
Where, since the Bards have slept, hath Genius wove
His many-colour'd wreath, to grace the Muse's grove?

"Where, as in Danmon's myrtle bowers
The race of Iran caught the flame,
Exerting their congenial powers,
Not envious of a rival's name;
Where now, in close fraternal union meet,
Spirits that court the Muse by friendship doubly sweet.

"Ev'n now they live!  Ev'n here they hail
Their reddening cliffs, in strains sublime;
Embosom'd in the vermil dale,
Nurst by the rosy-breathing clime!
Here many a letter'd minstrel, more refin'd
Than Bards of other times, displays the ingenuous mind.

"Behold, where lingering Isca laves
The turrets on her sloping banks,
While, far reflected by the waves
Rise her rich elms in tufted ranks,
The wreaths of Genius and of Taste adorn
Those, whom with partial smile I greet in Devon born.

"What tho' the Bards shall harp no more
To wondering ears their magic lays;
Yet shall my chosen Tribe restore
The long-lost fame of other days&mdash;
Rapt with diviner energies, aspire
Ev'n to empyreal worlds and catch the seraph's fire."

He ceas'd:  And to the faultering sound
The Spirit of the Rock replied&mdash;
The old oaks bending kiss'd the ground
Then wave'd their boughs with conscious pride,
While, born on his translucent shell, hoar Teign
Joy'd that two sons were his, to rival Isca's reign.
