Breathes there a spirit on this ample orb
That owns affection for no favourite clime,
Such as the sordid passions ne'er absorb,
Glowing in generous hearts unchill'd by time?
Is it, ye sophists say, a venial crime
To damp the love of home with scornful mirth?
Tho', led by scientific views sublime,
Ye range, with various search, the realms of earth,
Seeks no returning sigh the region of your birth?

Yes!  there are bands by which the soul is linkt
To favourite scenes &mdash; attaching all our kind:
Nor are the local sympathies extinct,
But only dormant in the sensual mind.
Nor can the philosophic few refin'd
The homeborn instinct from their bosoms chase:
The worldling still, tho' veering as the wind,
And the proud sage, whose plans the world embrace,
Some lingering hope retain, some with inspir'd by place.

Say, whence, so cherisht by familiar scenes,
This partial fondness?  Go &mdash; the mind survey:
Mark it, where such a preference intervenes.
Behold, "the throng'd ideal hosts" display
Their never-ending series.  In array
One rank arises:  sudden, a new train
In quick effulgence flashes to the day:
And lo, the close confederates of the brain,
Connected as they start, confess the secret chain.

'Tis from resemblance we observe one thought
A thought of corresponding shape excite:
Nor less from contrast are the ideas brought
Wak'd by opposing images, to light:
And thus the present and the past unite.
Nor seldom, one clear image brings to view
Myriads, from contiguity more bright;
While, as we gaze upon their kindling hue,
We court each airy form, and deem the vision true.

Thus as in magic portraiture the past
Emerging, glows before the mental eye;
MEMORY retains the picture fleeting fast,
While FANCY gives it an illusive dye,
And the fond PASSIONS all their warmth supply:
Yet JUDGMENT interposes, to repress
The volatile ideas mantling high;
Lest they should flutter in too wild a dress,
Or by their dancing shapes the dizzy brain distress.

'Tis in these powers &mdash; affections &mdash; that we own,
Borne on excursive pinion, pure delight;
Yet more or less, as some with stronger tone
Prevail or sink before superior might.
But to localities, to speed our flight,
Fondly recurring, lo, we borrow aid
From objects that, presented to the sight,
Refresh the faint ideas as they fade,
Or call them into day from pale oblivion's shade.

Thus, with delight still keener, our career
We wing:  and hence, more anxious to survey
The friendly spot, we hold its features dear.
Thus, recollecting life's mild-opening day,
If local objects but a tint display,
The eye, quick-glistening, the sweet tint perceives:
And hence, the kind assistance to repay,
The heart, as for a moment it believes
Its long-lost Joys restor'd, with grateful ardor heaves.

Such is the local love.  But not alone
Is man to sympathizing scenes awake:
The bird and beast the same sensations own,
And from localities the impression take;
Tho' but a moment they an effort make
To recollect or image; tho' their frame
But with a transitory fervor shake:
Still, from one favourite spot, a sacred flame
Seems, with its wizard line, to circumscribe their aim.

The wandering dove, amid pale wintery skies,
Far off, remembers her accustom'd nest,
And down the gloom, o'er many a long vale, flies,
Till there, with weary wing, she sinks to rest:
The dog, exulting, scours wide woods, in quest
Of his bemoaned home, with broken chain:
The warrior horse, by foreign toil opprest,
Quickens his eager pace, as, once again,
He views the hoof-beat road, within his pasture-plain.

Nor, as revisiting, the palmy grove
That waves where Ganges rolls his yellow tide,
Does the sage elephant at random rove,
But winding round the gem-fraught mountain-side,
On the known valley glances looks of pride
Where he had once, fierce victor, with the blood
Of his mail'd enemy the foliage dyed:
Then o'er the seats of youth he seems to brood,
Rears his proboscis high, and hails the conscious wood.

Meanwhile, we give not to the brutes the joys
That memory's more extensive power bestows;
Since, chiefly as accustom'd scenes arise
To sense, each animal the emotion shews.
Yet ever new to man, the enjoyment flows,
As Memory her transporting vision rears!
There Fancy's fire, there generous Passion glows,
As fast-illum'd, the landscape reappears
Replete with shadowy forms, thro' the long lapse of years!

These sympathies in vulgar breasts to implant
Heaven loves.  I hear the Grecian pilot sigh,
Amid the numbering shores of the Levant:
I see him lift to heaven his melting eye.
"Here," (he exclaims, with mingled grief and joy)
"Within my Tenedos, the favour'd isle,
Once lay the sable ships that conquer'd Troy!
Behold (he utters with a conscious smile)
The spot where chiefs were nurst, and glory crown'd their toil."

Yet 'tis the lot alone of souls refin'd
By taste, to feel the luxury that springs
From all the varied energies of mind:
To such, how oft a trivial object brings
The sweetly-pencil'd view, where Fancy flings
The tender colors of the autumnal sheaf;
While, as she sports within her faery rings,
Mixing the vivid tears of joy and grief,
She clothes each pictur'd form with rays of soft relief.

Tho' o'er his master's bow, so long unstrung,
An eye of sorrow good Eumaeus cast,
Tho' old Philaetius o'er the quiver hung,
Pierc'd by a quick remembrance of the past;
Yet was it theirs to own those feelings chaste,
Those sympathies that mov'd the widow'd fair?
Yet was it theirs, inspir'd by kindred taste,
As on an object of their fondest care
To muse, and from delight to steal a pensive air?

I see her slow the lofty stairs ascend!
I see her bosom heave delicious sighs!
Now o'er the bow I see the mourner bend,
While myriads of illusions round her rise
From the sweet relic of affection's ties,
The chronicle of many a blissful hour;
That, as the big tear trembles in her eyes,
Recals her vanisht days with soothing power,
Soft as in dreams we paint the fair Elysian bower.

Lo, by a fine ethereal spirit led,
Mid olive groves we trace Ilyssus' streams;
Or hail the solemn spot where Cato bled;
Or, where the ruin of Iona gleams,
Cherish, in holy trance, romantic dreams;
Or, with a filial tenderness, recal
Each monument of early youth that teems
With classic thought &mdash; the school's awe-breathing wall,
The bosom-thrilling bench, the academic hall.

Hence Tully, where Sicilian landscapes bloom,
Own'd all the enthusiast's fervor, as he found
Mouldering and clasp'd by briars, the sage's tomb:
In Tully's raptur'd mind 'twas hallow'd ground.
Hence, on a day that mark'd each annual round,
Due rites the muse-devoted Silius paid
Where the shagg'd steeps of Posilippo frown'd:
Hence, sweet Boccacio's vivid fancy play'd
Embower'd with Virgil's self amid the hoary shade.

Thus, then, to local objects that revive
Our former feelings, a delightful bond
Links us in friendly union; as alive
To sympathy, our bosoms correspond
With walks or arbors.  Thus affection fond
That, unexcited by the scene, would rest
In dull stagnation, like a mantled pond,
Now, like a clear brisk current, flows confest,
Sparkles to fancy's ray, and cherishes the breast.

