Nature begone &mdash; with thy dull formal laws
Our future progress has no more to do;
The vulgar scenes thy sober pencil draws
Soon fade and pall on Ardor's wearied view,
Whose restless spirit sighs for something new;
Sighs for the range of that enchanted land,
Where all is deck'd with more than earthly hue,
Where sovreign Fancy rears her magic wand,
And calls by thousands up her bright aerial band.

Come then, and hover round, ye countless Pow'rs,
Who teach the song thro' fairy fields to glide,
And o'er sweet Inspiration's richest hours,
In all your various shadowy shapes preside:
Come hither, then, and deign my steps to guide;
Before my sight that secret world disclose,
In all its wild and visionary pride,
Where ev'ry form with living lustre glows,
And ev'ry brilliant flow'r in deathless beauty blows.

The lofty Mount we now had left behind,
And from its summit bent our downward way,
With faces turn'd against the western wind,
To where old Ocean heav'd his billows gray;
On whose bare beach a bark unfetter'd lay:
This soon I enter'd with my heav'nly Guide,
And (wond'rous to relate!)  without delay
The living bark two wings expanded wide,
And flew with eagle speed across the foaming tide.

But tho' so swiftly thro' the waves we past,
We still enough had leisure to behold;
For there an army horrible and vast
Around our bark with hideous gesture roll'd,
Whose shapes were cast in Terror's, darkest mold;
Death-fishes, dire, huge whales, unwieldly, slow,
With many more of figures manifold,
And mermaids fell, that work the sailors woe,
Fair women all above, but monsters all below.

Nor had we furrow'd long the ocean's face,
Till more of marvel still we there descried;
In bold defiance of the laws of Space,
Array'd in mist, an island vast and wide
Came onward floating thro' the purple tide;
And which, advancing still our bark to meet.
At last in form apparent stood beside;
Whereon (tho' thick my heart with wonder beat)
I follow'd yet my Guide, and plac'd my trembling feet.

But ere our steps that misty veil explor'd,
Thro' which each image did but half appear;
My gracious Guardian, pausing, kindly pour'd
These words of comfort in my drooping ear:
Be bold, my son, and banish needless fear,
Whate'er alarming sights you now may find;
For all the frightful scenes and objects here
Were meant with pleasing dread to fill the mind,
And not for works of pain or punishment design'd.

Encourag'd thus, away my fears I threw,
And saw, without dismay, the strangest sight
Was ever yet reveal'd to mortal view;
Two Suns, at once, in Heav'n's meridian height,
Of equal splendor and of equal might&mdash;
But oh!  what tongue can all the glories tell,
With which their influence cloth'd that land of light,
Or from each burning orb what ardors fell,
Where Heat's whole strength appear'd omnipotent to dwell?

No common warmth, indeed, had equal been
To tinge the grass which there luxuriant grew,
Not, as in other lands, of vulgar green,
But painted rich with many a brilliant hue,
From the fierce crimson to the gentle blue.
Nor less of wonder did each flow'r disclose
That met our eyes, of shape and colour new;
The lily there in purple beauty glows,
And there, with thorns unarm'd, appears the azure rose

Nor were the trees like those of other soils;
Each barren branch was rough with golden ore,
And each prolific blush'd with precious spoils;
The plum with sapphire fruit was cover'd o'er,
And emeralds the vine and rubies bore;
Each quiv'ring leaf was a melodious tongue,
That still untir'd the sweetest notes could pour;
And ev'ry bird that on the branches hung,
Accordant to the sound, in human accent sung.

The rivers here no vulgar boons bestow'd;
Some taught their yellow waves with gold to shine,
While some with honey, milk, and nectar flow'd,
And others, rolling down the richest wine,
Supplied their happy Lords with draughts divine.
Nor less the mountains huge did our's surpass;
One seem'd of glitt'ring gold a solid mine,
Of iron one, and one of burnish'd brass,
Of rugged diamond some, and some of polish'd glass.

Thus far had Fancy wild her frolics play'd
Within the range of Matter's lifeless reign;
But wonders wilder still we now survey'd,
Encircled sudden by that endless train
Of monstrous shapes which ancient fables feign.
Extended there the hideous Hound of Hell
Pour'd from his triple throat reproaches vain;
There shook their snaky curls the Virgins fell,
And made each living lock with deadly venom swell.

To meet us next a motley monster came,
The, Lion, Goat and Snake in one combin'd,
The brutal Bull here shar'd the human frame;
And with his Rider there the Horse was join'd.
Another Steed of Nature's genuine kind
In these strange climes my chief attention drew;
But while my feet a near approach design'd,
He stretch'd two pinions wide, and upward flew,
And soar'd among the clouds, beyond my dazzled view.

But now to human forms we turn'd our eyes,
Of shape, and size, and substance manifold;
The Prince immoveable with marble thighs.
The Groom of stern, resistless, iron mold,
And the fierce Carle compos'd of purest gold
The Pygmies there we saw in dwarfish bands,
And all the haughty brood of Giants old,
From him in whose broad front his lone eye stands,
To him who threatens Heav'n, and waves his hundred hands.

The human Porcupine, whose fretful skin
Stood rough with native darts, was also there
Two Brothers, one inseparable Twin;
The PHRYGIAN Prince with iv'ry shoulder bare,
And Ocean's Daughters with their verdant hair;
But endless task it were to count them all:
Monarchs I saw, to whose unlucky share
Heads deck'd with asses' ears had chanc'd to fall,
And some, more luckless still, withouten heads at all.

Before us next appear'd a spacious tree,
And call'd by Allegory's mystic name
(For so my kind Instructor whisper'd me)
On which in shape of birds or wild or tame
Sate all the Passions of the human frame.
The Vulture Avarice I there descried,
And lurking 'mong the leaves the Owl of Shame;
Ambition's Eagle too aloft I spied,
And far above them all was perch'd the Peacock Pride.

There too the Glutton Cormorant was plac'd;
And Lechery the Sparrow him beside;
While Vanity the Parrot, tiresome, guest,
With restless tongue, by Wisdom's curb untied,
Pour'd forth of nonsense an incessant tide.
But while these forms uncouth our eyes ran o'er,
Three Bards appear'd, approaching side by side;
Two graceful Bards from rich HESPERIA'S shore,
And one more graceful still, whom fair BRITANNIA bore.

The ROMAN first to wonders tun'd his tongue,
And fill'd with shifting shapes each magic page;
In accents wilder still the TUSCAN sung
ORLANDO'S combats, and his am'rous rage,
And hopt from theme to theme like bird in cage.
The last was MULLA'S Bard, whose colours strong
Brought back old Chivalry's romantic age;
Who led the stream of allegoric song
Thro' many a gloomy glade and flow'ry field along.

There stood beneath that mystic darksome tree
A silver stool, to which their weary pace
Addressing, sate them down those noble three;
And both the elder two with courteous grace
To BRITAIN'S child resign'd the middle place;
Whose pencil pure to simpler charms refin'd
The features bold of Fable's fairy face;
Who drew so well the various tribes of Mind,
And with the wildest notes the gentlest lays combin'd.

Nor had we long pursued our onward way,
When those two solar lamps of equal might
Withdrew, with sudden haste, their double day,
And left Heav'n's empire to the Queens of Night;
For there of dazzling moons an army bright
Still broke the silence of  the midnight air,
With many-shap'd and many-colour'd light,
With azure beams and purple splendors rare,
And many an oval green and many a scarlet square.

Here from a leafless tree a stream of blood
Pour'd constant forth its crimson current dire;
And there, with fatal course, a boiling flood
Roll'd down incessant from a fount of fire.
Between their waves appear'd a tuneful quire,
Four mighty Bards, whom no restraints confin'd,
Of all their race who struck the boldest lyre,
Whose daring hands the wildest shapes design'd,
And many a breathing thought and burning word combin'd.

The first was Tragedy's ecstatic Sire,
And the stern soul of chain'd PROMETHEUS drew;
The next was father of the TUSCAN lyre,
Who brought the gloomy scenes of Hell to view,
And ting'd his verse with Horror's darkest hue;
The third the head of PHILIP'S son around
A gleam of wild gigantic glory threw;
The last the magic cell of Music found,
And gave each passion there its own expressive sound.

Beneath the boughs of that accursed tree,
Whose trunk gave birth to such a dismal tide,
Sate DANTE downy from dread or horror free,
And AESCHYLUS contented, him beside,
While each the other's face with pleasure ey'd:
Below the GREEK the sons of BRITISH fame;
But LEE to COLLINS left the better side,
Submitting thus to Fancys clearer claim,
Whom thus arrang'd we past, and reach'd the flood of flame.

And there a bridge of ice, as smooth as glass,
Unmelted still, o'erhung the hot profound;
A bridge that few had ever tried to pass,
And fewer still had scatheless passage found,
For most were in the fiery current drown'd&mdash;
No friendly ledge on either side did stand,
And arch'd and narrow was the slipp'ry mound;
But here my Guide indulgent seiz'd my hand,
Across the peril bore, and plac'd me safe on land.

There up to Heav'n a mass of rock was pil'd,
Which seem'd to mingle with the midnight sky;
Of rude access it was, and prospect wild,
And rear'd its proud ambitious head so high
As almost left behind the aching eye.&mdash;
Deck'd was the scene with beauties all its own,
Whose pow'rful charms each critic glance defy;
And on its topmost height, the regal throne
Of this romantic realm, stood AVON'S Bard alone.

Alone he stood &mdash; for there was none but he
On such a fearful precipice could stand;
Careless he stood, from fear and danger free,
And wav'd with ease that more than magic wand,
Whose pond'rous weight would numb each other hand;&mdash;
For who like him could fairy chaplets twine,
Could paint with living hues the airy band
Of shapes infernal and of forms divine,
Or dive so wond'rous deep in Fancy's golden mine?

Reluctant rising from their nether skies,
A troop of griesly ghosts before him stood,
With iron teeth and staring stony eyes,
Demons and fiends, and all the hellish brood
Which Fancy figures in her trembling mood;
Around his head those elves and spirits flew,
Who taste on earth of Heav'n's ambrosial food,
Who suck with bees the cowslip's honey dew,
And steal, to make them coats, the rainbow's brilliant hue.

There on her car sate MAB the Fairy Queen,
And dreams of various hue around her flung;
Her coachman, merry PUCK, array'd in green,
Before her on the nut-built chariot hung,
And all his knavish tricks and frolics sung.
There was the witch's child, who ne'er unclos'd
His brutal lips but forth a curse there sprung;
And ARIEL quaint, of other mold compos'd,
Who trode the winter wind, and in the gale repos'd.

But now no longer could my rapture hold,
But forth it broke in this ecstatic strain:
At last these eyes their darling Bard behold,
For whom they here so long had look'd in vain,
The great Colossus of the tuneful train&mdash;
But tell me, why should he be thus confin'd
Within one province of thy bright domain,
Who roll'd o'er ev'ry field his boundless mind?
Thus spoke my query bold, and thus my Guide rejoin'd:

I have not thus, without sufficient cause,
On each of these my sons a home bestow'd;
For this, whilst equal Fate's eternal laws
Allow to ev'ry Bard but one abode,
To shun disorder was the surest road&mdash;
Else might the Poet, whose romantic hand
ISMENO'S Grove in all its terrors show'd,
And he of SYLPHS who drew the brilliant band,
Have wanderd both at will thro' this enchanted land.

Nor here alone, but ev'n in Satires quire
The cynic POPE might then have found a place,
And honest COVERLEY'S delightful fire
Carous'd with those of Humour's jovial race.
Then he who DIDO'S pangs so well could trace,
In Pity's plaintive land might oft appear,
With him who drew CLORINDA'S dying  face,
And him whose scene presents LOTHARIO'S  bier;
And ELOISA'S Bard, to all the Muses dear.

Your idol then would no restriction know;
But he who wrapt in Pity's darkest pall
His luckless LEAR had  grac'd the Vault of Woe;
And he who painted FALSTAFF'S humours all
Were still a welcome guest in Humour's Hall;
To Beauty's Garden he might then retire,
Whose Moon on BELMONT'S bank asleep could fall;
And he whose HOTSPUR breath'd heroic fire
Might to the topmost height of Mount Sublime aspire.

Nor think that Mount a station more sublime
Than this on which I have your SHAKESPEAR plac'd;
For should your feet again its summit climb,
You still would find its highest height disgrac'd
By this romantic rock's imperial crest;
For ev'ry line illum'd by Fancy's ray
Must still be priz'd, by those of genuine taste,
Beyond the sprightly, sweet, or lofty lay,
And ev'n from Passion's page will bear the palm away.

While thus he spoke, I sent my curious eye
To scan the Mountain, and its height to know;
But ere it back return'd to make reply,
Gone was the Pow'r to whom so much I owe,
And with him vanish'd all the splendid show;
The dim diffusion of the twilight gloom
Had veil'd fair Fancy's many-colour'd glow,
And clos'd my view within  the narrow room,
Of all  this Vision wild the cradle and the tomb.
