Summer is gone, with all his splendid Hours,
His fragrance and his verdure &mdash; Autumn pale
Shrinks from the touch of Winter's icy hand;
Affrighted Beauty flies the wither'd plains;
And Harmony forsakes the leafless groves.
How blest is he (if such unfeeling joy
Deserve the name of bliss) the Man, who now,
Ev'n in this dreary season of decay,
Can wander careless thro' the bleak extent
Of Nature's desolation; &mdash; can behold
The naked horrors of her alter'd form
Without one sigh; &mdash; to whom the howling blast,
That strips the forest bare, and strews the ground
With yellow foliage, speaks of nothing more
But Winter's coming. &mdash; Ah!  far other thoughts
The scene awakens in this pensive heart,
Which loves to wander thro' the sacred gloom,
With which the pow'r of Melancholy shades,
At times, the face of Nature, to the eye
Of Fancy and of Feeling: &mdash; but this hour
Allows not such indulgence; it demands
Another soul, a soul of firmer nerve,
Replete with vigour, energy, and fire,
To tempt that arduous, but alluring task
Which yesterday impos'd &mdash; it was a day,
Ev'n in this gloomy twilight of the year,
Of more than common sadness; &mdash; thickest clouds,
Obscur'd the face of heav'n, and wat'ry Jove
Drown'd in perpetual rain the cheerless hours:
Cheerless to him whose happiness requires
A constant intercourse with things abroad;
And whose impatience loads with many a curse
The sky's inclement aspect, which confines,
His jovial Friends, and keeps himself at home.
Not so with me &mdash; for I had other Friends,
Whose presence gilds the scene of my retreat
With light perpetual; &mdash; friends, not such as those
That swarm, in ev'ry corner, whom to please
Reluctance must submit to swallow down
Inflaming draughts &mdash; whose converse must be bought
With nights of riot, and with mornings spent
In sickness and in shame; these friends of mine
Are quiet, gentle, rational, polite,
And unassuming; never tire the ear
With cold formality's unmeaning phrase;
Are not offended at a slight neglect;
Come at a call, and at a nod retire;
In diff'rent climes and diff'rent ages born,
They with the  harmony of various tongues,
Nervous or soft, can charm the list'ning ear;
Can suit each humour, whether grave or gay,
With correspondent themes; of love and war
Can talk with equal ease; of public life,
And rural quiet; trifles of a day,
And things of weight eternal; ev'ry tale
Of private virtue or domestic woe
To them is fully known, as are the deeds
Of mightiest heroes, or the fates of kings.

Such were my Friends, to whom well-pleas'd I turn'd,
Regardless of the storm that rag'd without,
And, like the Bee in Spring's Favonian hour,
That wanders restless thro' a thousand sweets,
And visits blossoms of unnumber'd hues,
With aim unfixt, as varying fancy sway'd,
Unwearied still thro' many a volume stray'd.

I.
The CRITIC page my first attention drew,
Where, from on high, poetic splendors glow,
With livelier light reflected to the view,
Like moon-beams trembling on the lake below;&mdash;
Where chemic taste assays the golden store,
By Genius drawn from Fancy's flaming mine,
Parts from the spurious dross the sterling ore,
And stamps with lasting praise the precious coin.

II.
In graver mood, then to the sober sound
Of Wisdom's lore I turn'd my serious ears;
And trac'd awhile that PHILOSOPHIC ground
Where moral Truth in various forms appears;
A dream's fantastic shape at times she bears,
Or shrouds in mystic veil her splendor bright;
The glitt'ring robe of fancy now she wears,
And now reveal'd in reason's radiant light,
She steps triumphant forth, and awes th' astonish'd sight.

III.
But hark!  the voice of ELOQUENCE divine,
Whose magic tones each adverse pow'r controul;
Those tones, where art and energy combine
To pour persuasion on the conquer'd soul.
With passion swell'd, and animation strong,
Resistless now the torrent rolls along;
And now with smoother course and gentler sway,
It soothes th' enchanted ear, and steals the heart away.

IV.
I next awhile perus'd th' HISTORIC page,
Where ev'ry fact some sage instruction brings;
Where all unites attention to engage,
And ev'ry sentence breathes majestic things:

Th' important wars contending nations wage;
Th' events of actions, and their secret springs;
The changing manners of each various age;
The rise of empires, and the fall of kings.

V.
But now to view more charming volumes rise,
Which feeling souls with rapture oft peruse,
And oft a tear the tender page bedews,
Descending soft from Beauty's brilliant eyes.

In vain would critic pride their pow'r despise,
And praise proportion'd to their worth refuse;
They still, at times, shall genuine taste amuse,
And still be read with sympathetic sighs.

For there is all that can attach the heart,
And drive the thoughts of Fiction from the mind;
Domestic scenes pourtray'd with graceful art,
By Passion heighten'd, and by Grief refin'd;
Or livelier tales, and scenes of gayer hue,
Where sportive Mirth presides, but brings Instruction too.

VI.
And lo, where next the COMIC Muse appears,
With sprightly step, and laughter-swimming eye,
While in her hand the pow'ful mask she bears,
At sight of which the startled follies fly.

Her's is the task their failings to chastise,
To hold them before Derision's view,
And glancing quick thro' ev'ry thin disguise,
In each new shape detect the motley crew,
And still with piercing shafts their trembling flight pursue.

VII.
Proceeding still in quest of something new,
On SATIRE'S page a transient glance I threw,
Where oft, assailing Vice with cautious art,
She masks in smiles her warm indignant heart;
Now bolder grows, and in her aweful hand
She lifts the whip severe to scourge a guilty land.

VIII.
Thro' RURAL scenes I then with pleasure stray'd,
Travers'd the lawn, or pierc'd the secret shade;
Repos'd at ease on beds of fragrant flow'rs,
Or sate with coolness in romantic bowr's;
Saw rustic nymphs on ev'ry mountain rove,
And heard the shepherd's pipe resound from ev'ry grove,

IX.
What next I heard was ELEGIAC strains,
Where Grief laments o'er Virtue's breathless clay;
Or luckless Love of Beauty's scorn complains;
Or Meditation pours the moral lay:
Warm from the heart the tender accents flow,
And melt the feeling soul to sympathetic woe.

X.
But now a far more pow'rful page succeeds,
Where Passion, mighty lord, despotic reigns;
While Pity's heart with pleasing anguish bleeds,
And Terror shrinks thro' all his shiv'ring veins.

Ambition there the fall of states conspires,
There Grief and Rage possess the mind by turns,
Or fierce Revenge the tortur'd bosom fires,
Or jealous Love with fatal fury burns.

Unerring Nature guides the bold design,
Inspires each weeping word, and prompts each ardent line.

XI.
But hark!  a voice of louder tone
And more commanding sound;
The LYRIC Muse assumes her throne.
And deals her thunders round.
The stream of song, with rapid course,
And wild enthusiastic force,
At times o'er rocks and bulwarks pours,
Now soft and slow, the groves among,
With devious lapse it winds along,
Thro' fragrance and thro' flow'rs.

XII.
Advancing still thro' Taste's enchanting clime,
I reach'd at last those EPIC heights sublime,
Where Admiration fondly toils to raise
The lasting monument of tuneful praise.

All there is full of high heroic deeds,
Of dauntless courage, and of bold emprize;
To each event a nobler still succeeds,
And splendid scenes in ev'ry page arise.

Nor does the Muse confine her dazzling flight
Within the narrow bounds of Earth's domain;
With daring hand she opes the gates of light,
Displays the secrets of th' OLYMPIAN reign,
And deeply bathes in Heav'n the rich ambrosial strain.

SUCH were the scenes of wonder and delight,
Which then, in quick succession, rose around;
And such the friends, in whose, assemblage bright,
My soul from pensive thought a refuge found.

Blest be that hour, in which I bade adieu
To each pursuit that charms the vulgar mind,
And rais'd from sordid aims my upward view
To nobler hopes, and objects more refin'd.

What tho', perhaps, by wayward Fate's decree,
No beam of light shall gild my humble days,
Tho' Glory's car must ne'er be fill'd by me,
Nor Wealth attend to smooth life's rugged ways;

Are not the sacred gifts of mental pow'r
Sufficient treasure to the conscious mind?
And is not Fame, with all her splendid dow'r,
For ease, and peace, and freedom, well resign'd?

Let Fortune still permit my careless hours
To haunt the gardens fair of Science gay;
To rove at will thro' Fancy's fairy bow'rs,
And bask with rapture in the Muse's ray.

Let Friendship oft my grateful homage claim,
And Love, at times, assert his soft controul;
Let Health re-animate my drooping frame,
And peaceful Virtue harmonize my soul.

Thus let me live, in undisturb'd repose,
Remote from all that Passion's flame supplies;
Till Death at last the quiet scene shall close,
And call my spirit to her native skies.

