Nor yet had PHOEBUS rear'd his banner bright,
Nor had our eyes the want of radiance found,
While the sweet dawn, with mild and sober light,
Display'd the secrets of th' Elysian ground.

But here, at once, the soft effulgence fail'd,
And day-break sudden from our sight retir'd;
At once the moon her visage pale unveil'd,
Inducing darkness ere the day expir'd.

With startled eye and lilied cheek I  view'd
So wide a breach of Nature's sacred law;
No more my feet their onward path pursued,
Chain'd to the ground by petrifying awe.

My Guide, indulgent to my weakness, smil'd,
And thus my troubled heart restor'd again:
Why droops the spirit of my darling child?
And whence these idle doubts, and terrors vain?

Hast thou forgot, that all we now survey
Is not the vulgar world, but fairy land,
Where Nature's sceptre holds not sov'reign sway,
But shares its pow'r with Fancy's magic wand?

Were you from East to West at once convey'd,
You would not surely there expect to find
(While Fate commands alternate light and shade)
The self-same sun-shine which you left behind.

And yet 'twixt East and West, by Nature's law,
Scarce are the signs of opposition more,
Than 'twixt the smiling fields we lately saw,
And those our vagrant feet must new explore.

This is the dark and melancholy vale,
Where Pity gives her tuneful sons relief,
And lends her ear to many a tender tale
Of hopeless love, and unavailing grief.

Nor think, my child, that here no pleasure dwells;
Here shalt thou taste that Mournful joy refin'd,
Which (as thou soon wilt own) by far excels
Those tranquil pleasures which we left behind.

He scarce had ended, when my alter'd soul
The full completion of his promise found,
And felt immediate thro' my bosom roll
New tides of rapture from the scenes around.

Those scenes, indeed, no native charm could boast,
Thro' which we slowly bent our downward way;
Thro' hills, whose distant tops were cloth'd in frost,
And bare bleak dales, undeck'd with flowrets gay.

But o'er these barren dales, and hills of snow,
The Queen of Night so soft a mantle threw,
And slept so sweetly on the banks below,
That all was beauty to the raptur'd view.

Descending still, we heard a distant sound
Of waters murm'ring soft their liquid song,
And soon espied a brook, with willows crown'd,
That slowly stole the lonely vale along;

And on its bank, beneath the hoary shade,
A pensive groupe was seated on the ground;
Full in the midst reclin'd a love-sick Maid,
And three desponding Swains were plac'd around.

Instant I knew the luckless LESBIAN Maid,
Whose glowing hand that rapid sketch design'd,
In which, with Nature's hues, are all pourtray'd
The speechless symptoms of th' enamour'd mind.

On her right hand the ROMAN Bard I spied,
Who sung, in plaintive notes, his DELIA'S praise;
Who daft the world, and all its hopes aside,
And gave to Love alone his careless days:

While on her left appear'd the TUSCAN Swain,
Who nurs'd for many a year the hopeless flame
Who breath'd his vows in passion's purest strain,
And fill'd VALCLUSA'S bow'rs with LAURA'S name.

Last, at her feet, and least, the BRITON lay,
Whose love his PHYLLIS with disdain return'd;
Whose simple song, addrest to shepherds gay,
Her smiles, her beauty, and her caprice mourn'd.

This darling groupe I long with pleasure ey'd,
And still had stood, unconscious of the snare,
Had not the heav'nly Pow'r my danger spied,
And thus address'd me with parental care:

It is not safe, my child, to linger here,
Where all the air is fill'd with am'rous sighs,
And the brook swell'd with many a tender tear,
Descending slowly from enamour'd eyes.

Too oft already has the fatal pow'r
Of tyrant Passion made thy heart a prey,
Enchain'd in languid sloth each pensive hour,
And turn'd from all besides thy sight away;

And were he now to seize thy soul again,
Not all my pow'r, perhaps, could yield relief;
Oh!  let us then no longer here remain.
But haste to nobler scenes of manly grief.

He said, and snatch'd my half reluctant hand,
And led me onward from the plaintive stream,
To where the russet heath embrown'd the land,
O'er which the moon diffus'd a tender gleam.

Beneath a blasted birch's dismal shade,
There FINGAL'S son, the voice of CONA, lay;
All but his head enwrapt the lifted plaid,
That head where Age had rais'd his banner gray.

Alone he lay, and thro' his hoary hair,
At ev'ry shifting breeze, the bleak blast blew;
And sighing still he turn'd, against despair,
On days of other years his mental view.

The four gray stones that mark the narrow bed
Of parted heroes, rose his couch beside,
On which the harp of pow'rful tone was laid,
His only comfort, and his only pride:

That solemn harp each lighter note disdain'd,
To nought but love and deeds of glory strung,
To which OITHONA'S death for honour stain'd,
And fair DARTHULA'S hapless fate he sung.

With quick'ning pace I to the Bard drew near,
And him to greet some courteous speech design'd,
In hopes his frank reply those doubts would clear,
Whose pow'r so strongly had perplex'd my mind;

But ere my eager tongue one word could say,
Across the heath a misty vapour flew,
Extended o'er our heads its pinions gray,
And snatch'd the hero from my anxious view.

Thus of my ardent wish at once beguil'd,
I scarce could bear the disappointment dire;
Till he who rul'd my steps in pity smil'd,
And briefly thus reprov'd my vain desire:

Restrain these idle hopes, too curious youth,
We came not here all myst'ries to explore,
Nor is my realm the porch of sober Truth,
But the gay school of Fancy's brilliant lore.

Now to another scene direct thy sight,
Where yon aspiring rock invades the sky,
On which pale CYNTHIA, from her cloudless height,
Looks down with mild and melancholy eye:

And there thou see'st is Sorrow's lonely cave,
Where yon tall cypress lifts its mournful head,
Whose fatal boughs with pensive motion wave,
And all around diffuse a doleful shade.

Hark, from the tree, by murm'ring breeze's borne,
What sounds of sadness echo thro' the vale,
While perching there, of ev'ry hope forlorn,
The widow'd turtle tells her plaintive tale.

Within that cave two Priests of Pity dwell,
To whom her sweetest, purest notes belong,
Who dipt their tragic urns in Nature's well,
And drew from thence alone the weeping song.

There is the Bard who made th' ATHENIAN stage
Resound with HECUBA'S maternal grief,
And call'd to view MEDEA'S jealous rage,
Her dreadful conflict, and her dire relief.

And he from ARUN's banks, the hapless youth,
Whose tender verse MONIMIA'S fate deplor'd,
And sung the constant and unwearied truth
Of BELVIDERA to her cruel lord.

And yet, tho' both such plaintive pow'rs possest,
And swell'd with equal skill dark Passion's tide,
As far as East is distant from the West,
So distant were their souls in all beside.

The moral GREEK, attach'd to Wisdom's lore,
In ev'ry line some useful truth convey'd,
While BRITAIN'S Bard the garb of Licence wore,
And to the cause of Vice gave impious aid.

Nor need you now, my son, desirous be
With nearer eye the pensive pair to view,
But rather (for we yet have much to see.)
Let us with more of haste our course pusue.

He spoke &mdash; and tho' my heart a wish retain'd
On PELLA'S Bard to look, I yet obey'd;
And moving on, a place we quickly gain'd,
O'er which the yew display'd  its baleful shade.

Scarce had we pierc'd this grove of dire Despair,
When the pale moon her pensive light withdrew,
And, charg'd with noxious pow'r, the midnight air
Dropt on our heads a dank and chilly dew.

And there the ugly owl and raven drear
From bough to bough still fail'd on heavy wings,
And with their dismal tones assail'd our ear,
The hateful heralds of terrific things.

Yet (strange to tell!)  their notes produc'd not there
The same discordant song they elsewhere made,
And ev'n the chilness of that midnight air
A shiv'ring pleasure to the sense convey'd.

There too, tho' deepest darkness reign'd around,
We still with wond'rous ease pursued our way;
And there we soon three tragic Masters found,
Within that dreary shade who lov'd to stray.

The first was he, of ATTIC Bards supreme,
Who drew JOCASTA and her husband-child,
And deck'd in horror's pomp the dreadful theme,
A throne with incest and with blood defil'd.

Next was the BRITON, whose impassion'd strain
Express'd heroic IMOINDA'S grief,
And ISABELLA'S fate, whose cureless pain
Could only from distraction find relief.

The last was GALLIA'S Bard, the Prince who sung
That left his wife beneath ARAXES' wave,
And to the direful banquet tun'd his tongue,
Which vengeful ATREUS to THYESTES gave.

Now had the tragic three retir'd from view,
And we, proceeding thro' the dismal shade,
Approach'd at last a gate of sable hue,
O'er which the paler drops of sorrow stray'd.

The gate we enter'd, and a church-yard found,
Where pow'rful Death had plac'd his dreary throne.
And many a sad memorial rose around,
Of humble turf and mare ambitious stone.

Above the rest, with merit's fairest claim,
Two monuments in marble pomp appear'd;
The one was black, which bore LE FEVER'S name,
And one was white, to poor MARIA rear'd.

Between these tombs the motley YORICK stood,
And wept, whene'er on them he turn'd his view;
Tho' well he could assume a sprightlier mood,
When TRISTRAM'S Uncle his attention drew.

What other names some other tombs might show,
(Such was our haste) we did not stop to see;
But moving onward, gain'd the Vault of Woe,
Where mournful passion reach'd its last degree.

For there eternal Silence reign'd profound,
And all the naked walls with horror hung;
And there one dying lamp, o'er all around,
With quiv'ring flame, the light of darkness flung.

Full in the midst a sable coffin stood,
On which reclin'd the Priest of Virtue lay;
Of all that e'er essay'd the melting mood,
Who rul'd the heart with most despotic sway,

'Twas he, who told so well the touching tale
Of proud BOLOGNA'S melancholy Maid,
And taught the world CLARISSA'S fate to wail,
By tyrant force and hellish fraud betray'd.

Two pensive pupils at his feet were laid,
Who drew sweet pictures of domestic life;
Whose art in Virtue's tend'rest robe array'd
The forms of WOLMAR'S' and of ALBERT'S wife.

The friend of JULIA, from her soul refin'd,
Obtain'd a balm to soothe his am'rous woe;
While here no rest could WERTER'S spirit find,
But rush'd indignant to the shades below.

Such were the Bards, and such the Sons of prose,
Assign'd a place in Pity's dusky vale,
Beneath whose plastic hands by turns arose
The song of sorrow and the tender tale.

How sweet with them to waste the careless day,
To range thro' all the maze of  Passion's dream,
And feel the raptur'd soul dissolve away
Beneath the weight of each disastrous theme!

And ev'n when cares invade, I seek relief
Within the circle of their magic land,
And give those tears to Fancy's fabled grief,
Which Mem'ry's juster claim, would else demand.

Still let my feet their pensive steps pursue,
Breathe sigh for sigh, and echo groan to groan;
While thus from real ills I turn my view,
And in another's woe forget my own.

