Oft, where the sylvan shades unite
To intercept the golden ray,
And shed abroad a softer day,
(O'er the winding vale reposing,
Each deep recess in solemn light disclosing)
Or where, through rising stages green
Of oak and elm, by glimpses seen,
Peeps the bosom'd hill supine,
There struck with deep religious awe,
With Fancy's eye, the FLAMEN saw
Some God descend, and mark the place
For ardent prayer and lofty praise.
Or, where the giant hand of Time
Scoop'd the cloud-capp'd hill sublime,
And left in air, suspended high,
The frowning arch to meet the sky.
While from their subterranean hall
The slumb'ring waters hear his call,
And hurry through the pendent gloom,
And fill the cave and pass the dome;
While the Naiads hear with wonder
Their own reverberated thunder;
There Fancy mus'd, and there Devotion burn'd,
Long ere the hand of Art the figur'd pile adorn'd.

Thus, before the regal hand
The bright, ennobling boon bestow'd,
Glad Fame from her aerial stand
Afar the generous claimant show'd.
The PATENT was enroll'd above,
By all the social virtues sign'd,
And Gratitude and Friendship strove
Who first the well-earn'd wreath should bind:
Among the guardians of thy native plain,
Whose banded legions keep the foe at bay,
None holds in firmer bonds the martial train,
By strong affection's sympathetic sway.
Sweet is the charm of innate worth,
When some superior soul
Like Phoebus, issuing from his vernal goal,
Invites the mental blossoms forth,
And, warbling through the deep responsive grove,
Resounds the general song of harmony and love.
Nor yet suffic'd that envy'd lot,
But partial heaven the Muse bestow'd;
Thy youthful feet, by Spenser taught,
The flow'ry paths of Fancy trode.
Fancy, that lifts the favour'd soul sublime,
O'er the Circaen fumes that flit below,
And bids the pure abstracted spirit know,
The holy raptures of a nobler clime.
Blest amulet!  that keeps the buoyant mind
From dull and sensual dregs, and sordid cares refin'd.
On Gaul's devoted shore,
Stern Nemesis, relentless queen,
Hovering o'er the troubled scene,
With iron fingers tore
The rich patrician wreath from many a forfeit head,
And shouting scorn the haggard victims led
To count their wand'ring by the changing moon,
And beg in lands remote the niggard boon;
While anarchy, like a returning flood,
O'erlooks our menac'd coast.
Yet, while Virtue keeps her post,
While honours, not at random given,
Seem the sacred stamp of heaven,
Descending on the great and good;
Whilst, like the cloud-compelling sign,
The bright reflected virtues shine,
It speaks the power that bids the furious wave
Know its primaeval bounds, and at due distance rare.
For all the floating pomp of war,
And England's flag, commanding far
Her dreadful navy's thund'ring chase,
Flashing thick in Neptune's face;
Pale Batavia's scatter'd flight,
Through the deep sulphureous night,
And tow'ring fort, and boomy chain,
And all Bellona's martial train,
Are but the outguards of the state,
Inferior ministers of fate.
Useless, as those idle toys,
Which the infant's sport destroys;
Till VIRTUE gives the great machine,
The master movements far within;
And Thanes and statesmen learn that mild control,
Thy fine transcendent art that charms the willing soul.
