Sweet power of Poesy!  I love thee well,
And I will pass with Thee this Summer's day;
Up the rude hill, or down the sloping dell,
Or whether thro the Woods I wind my way,
I'll sit me down and of thy pleasings tell,
Because, sweet Poesy, in sooth I love Thee well.

First in the dawnings of my earliest Youth
Thou bad'st me seek these woods and court this shade,
Where, musing, my fond breast would melt with ruth
At all the havock that wild Passion made,
Whether false Pleasure lur'd one breast to ill,
Or proud Ambition's range a world with woe did fill.

For who can live within a City's pale
And never hear of ills and human woe,
Or look on History's eventful tale
And not the work of proud Ambition know?
Yet whence these ills my doubting heart would cry,
And why the world without less gaily glad than I?

With my rude staff, all as a shepherd's lad,
At dusky dawning o'er the heath I hied;
Some Sage of Graecia's race I ever had,
Or Latian son of Song, or him, the pride
Of Albion's minstrels, whom the buskin'd Muse
Nurs'd in her inmost bowers, and did him nought refuse.

Falsely luxurious Man!  sorrowing I said,
(As down the steep I backward cast mine eye,
And saw yon' towered crescent amply spread,
And saw its spiry honour pierce the sky,
And saw old Wensum's splashy margins steam,
And saw him roll along his song unhonour'd stream)

Within the hollow of this boyish breast
A more ambitious stirring spirit dwells,
And ever it disdains inglorious Rest,
And ever of the GREAT DECEAS'D it tells,
And forward still to something points my mind
Which goodlier beseems than all we leave behind!

The gloss of novelty on all around,
Each unworn nerve still trembling alive,
Gay were the wonders my young gazings found,
As many, as the wings, that round a hive
Of honey-working insects, clip the wind
And guide his wayward ear that may their hoardings find.

So they that touch upon an untried shore,
Where all is Hope and ignorant Amaze,
With beating breasts the magic scene explore,
And forward spring, and cannot stop to praise,
And cannot stop to think if what they see
Of real goodness is or may but seem to be.

Fresh were the breathing of the night-born gale,
Bright was as the dew on fern and blade and thorn,
Gay was the lark that did the morning hail,
And glorious thou, O Sun, that mad'st it morn;
The herds, indeed, mop'd with a heavier eye,
But they were happy still, &mdash; and therefore so was I.

And so I yet may be, let but the Muse
Her lov'd, inspiring influence bestow,
Let me but Nature's open pages use,
And all but man and man's distresses know;
Here wander, free as the controulless wind,
And leave a warring world and all its cares behind!

Thou sweep of russet heath, ye winding vales,
Ye wavy hillocks you your Poet loves!
And thee, sweet stream, and you ye woodland dales,
And holy aisles of dimly-lighted groves,
Whose tower-like trunks tuft ivy wrappeth round,
Whose outstretch't giant arms sweep wide the grassy ground.

The man that dwells amid such scenes as these,
Sees sunny fields and breathes Creation's air,
Can aught that's low, or aught that's little please?
Can Sorrow catch him, or can Vice ensnare?
What can he know of wars and murderous strife
Who wileth thus away his golden hours of life?

O all things wild and shapen by the hand
Of real rude Nature in her roughest mood,
Such as the Lord of Nature did command
That ye should be and then pronounc'd you good,
Tho' rich, yet plain as is your simple shew
Let my loose-warbl'd strains and artless numbers flow!

O all things rustically unrefin'd,
Honest and bare accept my meed of praise!
This country coarseness winneth all my mind,
And I am wedded to its humble ways,
And I were pleas'd amid these bowers to stay
More than an Evening's hour, or a long Summer's day.
