On consecrated ground
Their trampled graves around,
Ghosts of the good, their midnight moanings vent;
Yon vacant ailes among,
Where kneel'd the christian throng,
Voices of weeping stray with strange lament,
A dew from the chill marble breaks,
While each peculiar pow'r its long-wont seat forsakes.

The quaking altars round,
A drear and dying sound
Dismays the priest amid his mutter'd toil:
Beside the golden shrine
Expires the taper's shine,
The guardian saints with wailings thence recoil;
As were it their unwilling doom
Thro' the aerial waste to rove in lonely gloom.

Celestial groves of palm,
Ye are not ever calm;
Laden with sighs, the gales of Eden flow;
Tears such as angels weep
The unfading amaranth steep;
The living waters slide more sad and slow;
The golden harps are all unstrung,
Mute to the sweeping hand, and on the willows hung.

In coarser sackcloth fold
Thy limbs of dainty mold;
Fling further off thine essenc'd kerchiefs sweet;
With brinier tears embathe,
With looser tresses swathe,
Fair Magdalena, thy lov'd prophet's feet:
Forgot is now, by man below,
The life of matchless love, the death of matchless woe.

Nor James, nor sworded Paul,
Watch in the cross-shap'd hall:
Nor the first martyr of a madding crowd.
Back to the desert air
Unmet shall he repair,
Who guided throngs to Jordan's cleansing flood.
E'en the much-lov'd disciple must not stay,
His crown of glory sheds a paler, bluer ray.

Cecilia's bright-hair'd band
Of pupil cherubs stand,
With veiling wings their drooping heads concealing:
To hymns of praise and joy
Their closed lips are coy;
To anthems high in echoing air far pealing.
Hush'd is her soul-dissolving tongue,
Nor floats aloof her proud-voic'd organ's rolling song.

Forego thy keys of gold,
The pearly gates unfold,
Cephas, thy mansioners must now be free.
Not all on high who bid
Shall grace the judge's side;
When, the new earth reclad in bridal glee,
On clouds of heav'n majestic riding,
He comes to wake the dead, the dooms of men deciding.

Whether for Constantine,
Or that mysterious Trine,
Which ranks the prophet with the Only Lord;
Or for that Dominique,
Whose cruel heat oblique
Steep'd writhing infidels in flames abhorr'd;
Or for those priests the wed-bed who renounce,
Flows the wrath-vial now &mdash; what mortal may pronounce.

The star that told the birth,
Who taught a heedless earth
How might be won the beamy home of bliss,
The queen of heav'n forlorn
From her high front hath torn;
Hurling its glories to the foul abyss,
In meet eclipse, while the arch-fiend of God,
Loos'd from his searing chains, shall wield the sov'reign rod.

The thousand years are past
For which his bonds should last,
Again he strolls abroad and roars amain;
"There is no God," he cries,
While impious shouts arise,
And laughing crouds applaud the hell-taught strain.
"No God," with lips unpalsied they declare,
Tossing their brands against the scorned domes of prayer.

Torn from its altar-stand
With sacrilegious hand,
The chalice scatters its forbidden wine:
On mystic wafers, flung
In scorn by heaps of dung,
And human flesh, dogs of the miscreants dine:
And him who on the crucifix expir'd
They hoot a felon fool by fellow fools admir'd.

Was it for these accurst,
Great Angelo, that erst
Thy chisel bad the moving marble preach?
That Raphael was not loth
The storied wall to cloathe
With those pure charities, which vainly teach?
That Pergolesi told the mother's woe
In wringing tones so sooth that seraphs lean'd to know?

As, when o'er guilty towns
Jehovah's anger frowns,
Deep bellowings thro' the nigh volcano writhe;
While priests with fault'ring tread
Their pale processions lead,
And shudder at their proper temple's highth:
So was the holy city all aghast,
When through its rifled walls the stranger-ruffians past.

The saintly father flies
To close his fading eyes,
Where yet the lonely olive strives to grow:
Not the tiara's band,
Or harmless crosier'd hand,
Would now forfend him from th' assassin's blow.
Haste to the tomb!  it waits thee long;
Thou art of purer eyes than to behold this wrong.

Avenging plagues of war
Affright the world afar;
The ranged ranks to loud-blown trumpets wheel:
The steeds so proudly dight
Are pawing for the fight;
The spear is fasten'd to the tube of steel:
The widow's shriek, the orphan's tear,
For the town-shatt'ring cannon's roar, is hard to hear.

Lo!  the fell devil-forms
That play amid the storms&mdash;
Plunder, who tears from industry his all;
Rape, who delights to rush
Where beams the virgin's blush;
Murder scarce waiting for Suspicion's call,
Ere in the bishop's hoary hair
His grappling fist is fixt, his lifted poignard bare.

But not for aye shall reign
The hell-disgorged train:
Ye will return to lift the bruised reed,
Who learn'd of Jesus' tongue
To pardon human wrong,
Cheer the shorn lamb, and bind the wounds that bleed.
Immortal mercy dwells in safe retreat,
And back to the sad toil shall wend her pilgrim feet.

Then all the angel train
Shall visit earth again;
And Michael bind the dragon's strength anew:
While the taught nations bend,
In holier pray'r to blend,
And purer, heav'n-atoning rites renew.
Force-shunning Freedom shall appear
To guard the teacher's hall, the ruin'd pile to rear.

Long absent Justice then
Shall back return to men,
With meas'ring look her scales and compass minding;
And Peace, with myrtle wand,
Shall take no fleeting stand,
From either foot her turtle-wings unbinding;
And orb a rainbow through the azure sky,
In token that the tempest-clouds are now gone by.

So when the seven-mouth'd tide
Withdraws his waters wide,
And feeds his scaly flocks in narrower vale;
Emerging groves are seen,
Enrob'd in springing green,
To branch beside the dike-bound city's pale;
And as the oozy billows sink,
Young flow'rs and waving blades dance on the fragrant brink.

Far from their impious dens,
Within the Memphian fanes,
The greedy crocodiles in fear are swum:
To rinse the marble floor,
From ling'ring slime impure,
With pearled wrist the bathing maidens come:
And joyous crouds with sport and song,
Stroll where the levelling stream trail'd its slow width along.
