From that perfidious, that degraded Land,
Where Guilt and Rapine reign without control;
Where Anarchy hurls wide her flaming brand,
And deeds of horror freeze the harrow'd soul:
From that fell Temple, where, with scowling face,
The base, dark Regicide, remorseless eyes
The bleeding forms of BOURBON'S fallen race,
And round them hosts of gory victims rise:&mdash;
Welcome to Light and Liberty once more!
Welcome to ev'ry heart on greeting Albion's shore!

Oh!  born each trying turn of Fate to prove;
Whom ENTERPRISE selected for her own,
Arm'd with resolves no adverse shocks should move,
And taught to scale the steeps of high renown;
Grav'd in the Muse's never dying lays,
Thy animating story shall impart
To Britons, ardent for their country's praise,
Whate'er inspirits and informs the heart:
Taught by the steps through ordeal tests to go,
Yet Mercy's champion prove, though merciless the foe.

Oh, Shade of RODNEY!  if yet aught below
Move Thee, reposed in Glory's starry sphere;
Thy spirit yet with patriot warmth will glow,
To trace, in thine, thy naval son's career.
Th' exulting Muse, that can the past descry,
Brings the young hero to her mental view,
Mark his calm spirit and his unmov'd eye,
While show'rs of death-wing'd bolts long round him flew,
Thus, in THY vet'ran eye, his course began,
Ere undown'd blooming youth had ripen'd into man.

Scorning of Indolence "the cygnet down,"
The syren Pleasures soul-enfeebling lyre;
To weave the mural with the rostral crown,
His ruling Genius and his Fate conspire.
Ardent his clear aspiring mind to store,
See him coy Science like a lover woo;
The arts and arms of ev'ry clime explore,
And Honour's track in every clime pursue:
From the dark stormy Baltic's frozen bound,
To soft Ionia's shores, with silver crescents crown'd.

See where the Danube's hoary genius stands;
His daring way guides through his eddying waves,
Unfolds the latent lab'rinths of his sands,
His ambush'd rocks, and all his oozy caves.
See where Ismael's desolated tow'rs,
Of ruthless sable eagles late the prey,
Rear their proud crests that mock assailing pow'rs,
And all the warrior's tactic lore display;
The Turban'd Host view, with admiring eyes,
Their fortress from the flame like a young phenix rise.

Hark!  how the Swedish shrilling trumpets swell
O'er Wyburg's and Biorko's blood-stain'd sound,
And bid the Genius of GUSTAVUS tell
Their British Champion's deeds, by Vict'ry crown'd!
The grateful Monarch, whose congenial breast
Glow'd with heroic ardour for renown,
His tutelary HERO'S worth confest,
And hail'd the guardian of his menac'd crown:
O'er his bright helm the plume of glory rais'd,
And Scandinavia's star upon his breast emblaz'd!

But not to Glory's laurel'd field confin'd,
The Hero reaps the harvest of renown;
The tender charities that bless mankind,
"The social virtues mark him for their own."
Witness ye little, hardy, nautic race!
For Britains Bulwarks on the main design'd,
Whom patriot HANWAY, with his last embrace,
His fav'rite SIDNEY'S filial charge consign'd;
To blend your private with the public weal,
His philanthropic cares, his patriotic zeal.

To make those floating bulwarks on the wave
In proud perfection formidably shine,
More prompt to hurl the thunders of the brave,
Face the dark storm, and cleave the silv'ry brine;
In philosophic, deep, exploring thought,
See him the wakeful midnight hours consume!
And, with inventive knowledge richly fraught,
The nautic page with novel arts illume:
HIS COUNTRY'S GOOD, in each pursuit exprest,
The master passion shone that fill'd his manly breast.

But hark!  Britannia's clarions sound again;&mdash;
"Britons strike home, revenge your country's wrongs!"
Swift as the Swallow darting o'er the main,
When Summer's call invites the feath'ry throngs;
Her SIDNEY rushes with his bold compeers,
Where, o'er the faithless gay provincial coast,
Toulon her castled rocks insidious rears,
And leads the British and Iberian Host,
To hurl War's lightnings in her fiercest ire,
And wraps her fleets and tow'rs in forky streams of fire.

Such was the night, and its tremendous glare,
When Ilion's stately domes and turrets blaz'd;
Such were the cries that rent the murky air,
By victor and by vanquish'd legions rais'd.
The flow'r of Greece, collected and serene,
Thus the dire redd'ning form of horror view'd;
With calm resolve explor'd the hostile scene,
Though Death in steely show'rs their steps pursu'd:
And thus, in martial terror's awful form,
Hurl'd o'er the Dardan state destruction's fiery storm.

Foremost in each bold perilous emprise,
See him the Gallic ports and shores survey,
Like the keen hawk with piercing di'mond eyes,
That kens afar and hovers o'er his prey:
At once the foe to harass and descry,
Close in their wond'ring and indignant view,
He bids the crimson cross of England fly,
O'er the grey rocky islets of Marcou;
And, in their martyr'd Monarch's hapless cause,
From his sad phalanx wins their loyal heart's applause.

But not  with equal tenour smoothly glide
Down time's absorbing stream the smiling hours;
Oft' dark and ruffled grows the changeful tide,
As fickle Fortune o'er its bosom low'rs:
Then, "as her gales for ever veering blow,
To-day tempestuous, and to-morrow fair;
Due bounds, ye mortals!  let your transports know,
Perhaps to-morrow comes a storm of care."
Thus flows the lofty Theban's moral lay,
Confirm'd by pensive Truth as ages roll away.

Her choicest fav'rites on the earth to train,
O'er thorny wilds and beetling rocks to climb,
Braving the frowns of Envy, Fate, and Pain;
To reach of deathless Fame the fane sublime;
Celestial Virtue, from her sev'n thron'd sphere,
To stern Adversity the task assign'd,
In feats of hardihood their youth to rear,
With heav'n-taught wisdom to illume their mind:
And, with her piercing steadfast eye, to scan
The mazy turns of life, the destiny of man.

Thus gallant SIDNEY!  thy eventful fate
This mortal lesson to the world convey'd;
Ne'er in thy Fortune's swelling tide elate,
Nor with her changing froward ebb dismay'd.
What though o'erpow'r'd by Gaul's infuriate bands,
And check'd awhile imperial Honour's race,
In Fame's bright records each achievement stands,
No foe can tarnish and no time efface:
And "stern Adversity" to Thee assign'd,
Shall but the more exalt, invigorate thy mind.

Now that dire Temple's spectre-haunted tow'r,
Where the lone Captive more than death endures
From dark suspense, and harsh despotic pow'r,
The Hero "from the haunts of man" immures.&mdash;
To chase the harpy cares that vex the soul,
O'er Hist'ry's page his pensive eye is led,
And speeds the leaden hours that ling'ring roll,
"Holding high converse with the mighty dead;"
While MASON'S raptur'd muse,  with epic fire,
Wakens the deep-ton'd strains of her Pindaric lyre.

"The pen of Fate, dipt in its deepest gall,
Perhaps on that ill-omen'd wall,
Now writes th' event of this tremendous day.
Oh, that our weaker sight,
Could read the characters!  and spy
What, to the unpurg'd mortal eye
Is hid in endless night.
Suspense, thou frozen guest, be gone!
The wretch, whose rugged bed
Is spread on thorns, more softly rests his head,
Than he that sinks amidst the Cygnet's down,
If thou, tormenting fiend, be nigh
To prompt his irksome doubt, his useless sigh,
His wish, his pray'r for ling'ring certainty."

Captivity's long rigours to beguile,
While tedious suns revolv'd their annual way,
Faint through the grated dungeon shed their smile,
Thus wore the tardy, solitary day.
See that brown cruse with Seine's rank water stor'd!
Hear those  reviling taunts of ruffian pow'r!
More keenly piercing than the trenchant sword;
And heaping mis'ry on Misfortune's hour:
Not with more execrable arts refin'd
Sicilia's iron scourge could lacerate the mind.

Tyrants malign!  in vain you strive to bend
A soul with Fortitude sublimely fraught;
Which viewless Mercy's angel wings defend,
And Wisdom's panoply divinely wrought.
Heroic Virtue in Affliction's night,
Sustain'd by truth and energy divine,
Glows with "a burning and a shining light,"
As beamy stars through raven midnight shine;
And meets, serenely smiling, undismay'd,
The ministers of Death, in gorgon shapes array'd.

So springs the victor palm to meet the sky,
Shoots more sublime his ever-verdant brow,
Amid the pond'rous loads that vainly try
To keep his proud aspiring honours low:
So stands the rock encircl'd by the main,
When, black with Winter's rage, the mountain wave
Assails his stubborn whit'ning sides in vain,
While through his caves the winds infuriate rave:
His cloud-cap summit, tow'ring to the skies,
With insulated state the billowy storm defies.

How long, insatiate and remorseless Land!
For ever hostile to the world's repose,&mdash;
How long shall Discord's all-consuming brand
The reign of Order and of Peace oppose?
Deaf to each prostrate nation's piteous moan,
But vers'd in artifice and serpent guile,
How long shall violated Freedom groan,
And curse thy proffer'd friendship's hollow smile?
Her heart with anguish and with madness wrung,
Seduc'd by thy base wiles, thy flatt'ring fraudful tongue.

The Tree of Liberty! &mdash; behold its fruits,
On ev'ry reeking subjugated shore,
Where'er its deleterious blood-steep'd roots
Thy plund'ring legions in their inroads bore!
Beneath its leaves lurk Anarchy and Strife,
And Rapine's brood usurp the with'ring ground;
Spurning the gentle charities of Life,
And mild religion's heav'n-erected mound,
With &mdash; fresh from gloomy Scepticism's school&mdash;
Delirious Reason's sect, wild Riot, and Misrule!

Thus the gay Syrian, or green Egypt's realm,
(With dates, with olives, with young harvests crown'd,)
Dark'ning the sun, black locust clouds o'erwhelm,
And brood rapacious o'er th' enamell'd ground:
Each verdant blade that decks the grateful soil,
The smiling promise of the vernal year,
Their keen, insatiate, harpy fangs despoil,
And leave the land a desert brown and drear;
Where meagre Famine, Mis'ry, and Disease,
Usurp the ravag'd fields and seats of plenteous Ease.

And thus the baleful laurel rears his head,
With leaves and fruits enticing to the eyes;
But with the deadliest fraudful venom fed,
The unsuspecting victim tastes and dies.
Warn'd by each desolated nation's fate,
From pillag'd Tiber to the shackled Maese,
Ere that rank poison taint each menac'd state,
Gaul's boasted badge of Freedom thus displays;
Devoted realms!  league in your common cause,
To save your hallow'd faith, your offspring, and your laws.

But, soft! &mdash; to cheer the captive's dungeon gloom,
Young Hope appears with heart-enliv'ning ray;
And Friendship dares the semblant foe assume,
Her pleasing debt of gratitude to pay;
Unbars, 'midst murm'ring Discord's grating sound,
The dreary Temple's massive, long-clos'd gate,
And bears, beyond their Argus-guarded mound,
The menac'd victim of Five Regents' hate!&mdash;
Eying, with calm and dignifi'd disdain,
Lutetia's guilty tow'rs, and Terror's ruthless reign.

Join'd by the faithful partners of his way,
O'er the bleak, tented Norman hills they wend;
Now trackless woods, impervious to the day,
From jealous foes the triple band defend:
Till, grateful to their anxious longing eyes,
Through the grey fogs the hoary Deep appears;
With sullen roar his curling surges rise,
A welcome music to their list'ning ears;
Now the frail bark, with heav'n-befriending wind,
Cheerly they climb, and leave Gaul's hateful land behind.

Thus to his native realm restor'd again,
Through Crete's dark lab'rinth Theseus sped  his way,
From jealous foes and Horror's gloomy reign,
Guided by Love and Friendship's steady ray;
Again to purge his long-infested soil,
Of prowling monsters and chimaeras dire,
Insidious, civil, trait'rous arts to foil,
And to fresh lustre fan the Attic Fire,
Bid renovated arts with arms combine,
And grace with Isthmian Games his Neptune's sea-green shrine.

To unrestricted Freedom now restor'd,
Go, gallant BERGERET!  from Freedom's reign;
And say, when wielding thy untarnish'd sword,
That, Britain's Father and his Sons disdain
Stern-ey'd Retaliation's savage call,
But, prompt at Mercy's voice to spare and save,
Ne'er wound with arts, that more than death appal
The nice, fine feelings of the vanquish'd brave;
"That valiant foes her sons admiring see,
And yield that valour praise that brightly shone in thee."

And thou, whose long-try'd, fond paternal heart,
Oppress'd with "Expectation's leaden weight,"
Felt, in thy son's, Misfortune's keenest dart,
And all his anguish of suspended fate:
Say, did not he, who twines this votive wreath,
The heart's warm tribute to thy SIDNEY'S praise,
&mdash;Did not, ere while, his muse prophetic breathe
These now time-sanction'd and auspicious lays;
Suspense and tedious absence to beguile,
And cheer thy anxious brow with Hope's celestial smile.

"Thus runs TH' ETERNAL'S sacred, high behest&mdash;
'The man, whose soul on Providence relies,
Safe in the hungry lion's den shall rest,
Beneath TH' OMNIFIC'S ever-watchful eyes:
More fell than tigers, though his foes conspire,
To shake the placid tenour of his soul,
Invulnerable 'midst their savage ire,
No foes shall harm him, and no force control;
But his bright virtues brighter shall unfold,
Try'd in the torturing fire like pure resplendent gold.'"

Behold!  to bless once more thy aged arms,
Thy darling SIDNEY to thy prayers restor'd;
Again, 'midst Terror, War, and Death's alarms,
To wield for Britain his untarnish'd sword:
See him descending on her crouded strand,
Superior to the shocks of Fortune rise!
Hear the warm plaudits of his native land,
"And read his his'try in a nation's eyes!"
Now, like the Patriarch, greet Life's ev'ning ray,
Closing (like him) serene, Life's long, dark, stormy day.

Thus, as her tuneful Apollonius sung,
Greece her fam'd ARGO'S daring Chiefs survey'd;
And thus, with Admiration's fervent tongue,
BRITONS their sympathetic hearts display'd:
For as the BRITISH ARGO shot along,
The rescu'd Chief to land on Freedom's shore,
From all her sea-green caves, this choral song,
The fav'ring gales through Heav'ns blue concave bore;
"Rule BRITANNIA!  BRITANNIA rule the waves!
For dauntless Britons never, never will be slaves."
