Lov'd stream whose noiseless current softly flows,
Once more I view thee scene of dear delight,
Thy well known banks my truant step still knows;
Their wild flow'rs still are grateful to my sight
Tho' many a year has pass'd since that fond time
When near thy wave my live-long day was spent,
I boded not (ah then in youth's fair prime)
The sorrows which my woeful heart has rent;
When fate malignant its fell poison breath'd
And wither'd every flow'r that fantastic Hope had wreath'd.

Here have I bent my steps at peep of morn
And pac'd along with unreluctant feet,
While yet the dew drops hung upon the thorn
(The owl just shrouded in its lone retreat)
Here have I paus'd at summer's noon reclin'd
Under the willow tree that shades thy shore,
Whilst rustling in the breezes of the wind
I've faintly heard the distant SEVERN roar.
Sublime its moanings floated on the gale,
And breath'd a dying sound along the verdant vale.

Along thy margin green how oft I've stray'd
At morn's fresh dawn or at the pensive hour
When solemn ev'ning spreads its length'ning shade
Heard on thy verdant banks the sheep-boy pour
The song of Idleness. &mdash; I've paus'd and view'd
The patient angler near the rumbling mill
That breaks with murmurs hoarse the calmness still,
Which else would dwell amidst this Solitude:
Here have I stood and fram'd my infant lays
Those air-blown bubbles bright that pleas'd my boyish days.

And thou sweet water-fall, &mdash; what time the star
Of night comes marching up the dusky west,
Blanch'd by dark groves bright glist'ning from afar,
I saw thee in a robe of glory drest;
Fine as the waving light of summer noon,
Soft as the breeze that sweeps the ev'ning deep,
Thy distant warblings caus'd my ear to swoon
Oppress'd with sweetness in luxurious sleep.
Ah who is he who knows not to admire
Thy blaze of silv'ry gleam, and twinkling dance of fire.

O have I gaz'd enraptur'd with the scene,
'Till dreams celestial burst upon my soul,
Sounds of delights from airy harps unseen,
Shades of the blest whose glist'ring skirts unroll
Elysian groves whence cooling odours blow,
Immingled roses in deep-burning blush,
Essential light in rushing gales that throw
O'er softest shades of green a lustrous flush?
The light-foot hours and nymphs of purpled wing
Sporting with smiling loves and zephyrs of the spring.

The neighbouring grove to contemplation dear
(And can I still those joys tumultuous trace)
In whose close shade I pour'd love's ardent pray'r,
Gazing with maniac bliss on HEBE'S face
With whom I oft have have wish'd in humble life
To pass youth's prime in sweetly loit'ring here,
Heedless of av'rice or ambition's strife,
My little bark o'er time's calm wave to steer:
But crush'd by fortune's pow'r the sorrowing strains
Sigh'd forth a sad adieu to these beloved plains.

I view that tott'ring mansion once again
Where giant ruin stalks with ruthless stride,
Where are the vanish'd beauties of the plain
The rose and violet in their blushing pride?
No more is heard among those scenes that voice
Of wisdom pure that gladden'd the sweet dells;
At poesy's soft notes no more the woods rejoice,
But in their shades a gloomy silence dwells;
Broke only by these notes unlike that fire
That breath'd thou long-lost Genius from thy classic lyre.

The Church o'erlooks the wide extended mead
With tow'r embattled. &mdash; Once I lov'd to trace
Its rustic ornaments, or slowly tread,
The winding path near which in death's embrace,
Sleeps vice and virtue mingled in the grave.
Ah!  let me now revisit these still stones
Unmoulder'd yet, that winters' blasting brave
Shielding from touch profane the sacred bones
Of village maids and swains who silent sleep,
Yet, &mdash; stay thy step too rash, why should'st thou wish to weep?

How frail is human hope!  ah here repos'd
In silent rest and mourn'd with many a tear;
In the cold grave (his earthly prospects clos'd)
A youth to friendship and to virtue dear.
Still in fond mem'ry's breast his image dwells,
Affection bursts confines of the grave;
The mind's eye views him, pausing in these dells,
Or loit'ring near the Froom's enamell'd wave,
The haunts he lov'd, &mdash; but now with moaning wail,
The sad stream slowly winds along the level vale.

There was a time when my distracted brow
With willows wan and fading flow'rs was hung;
I was not tutor'd to the world as now,
But wayward, heedless fanciful, and young,
Abroad I wander'd, weeping and alone;
And hither bending my instinctive way,
I sat me down and pour'd with artless moan
A rude, uncouth, but simple, feeling lay.
Oh!  could'st thou then my look of woe have seen,
It would have pierc'd thy heart with agony most keen.

I was a blasted ash with moss grown hoar,
Whose sinking arms with deep distress are clad;
My eyes grew dim, and on my check I wore
A haggard smile quite woe-begone and sad:
My sicken'd soul with languid faintness pin'd,
I sigh'd to die, and in my musing gloom,
With scornful smile before my shuddering mind,
Stood gazing Death, and pointed to the tomb!
My knell was rang, &mdash; I dwelt among the dead,
And on the faithful stone my sad memorial read.

And oft it was strange fancies fir'd my brain,
Important childishness and greatness wild,
I play'd with woe and made my bliss of pain,
At once was pleas'd and angry, wept and smil'd;
I watch'd the feather floating down the stream,
And laugh'd to see it dance upon the wave,
Then started, and in blank extatic dream,
Look'd at the moon contemplatively grave.
Close to my haunt the passing trav'ller came&mdash;
With trembling haste I fled, and veil'd my blushing shame.

How sadly pleasing once these meadows were;
The swelling sighs of faithful  mem'ry prove;
'Twas here I felt the bliss of pity's tear,
And heav'd the fervent throb of faithful love&mdash;
That throb that breath'd as soft and fond a sigh
As ever stole from out the breast of truth!
Delicious proof of heav'nly sympathy,
The pure effusion of unblemish'd youth.
Though sorrow's pangs may now call forth the tear,
I think how blest I was when I could linger here.

Farewell, dear stream!  no more thy banks I tread,
No more must wander through thy neighbouring vale;
That time is past when I have hush'd my reed
To listen to the plaintive Nightingale.
Ah me!  whene'er I think on that past hour
Which ever can return, the fond tears flow
Of deep regret, and to the winds I pour
The sorrowing sighs of unavailing woe.
Destin'd, alas!  far from this spot to roam,
The wearied heart still pants to find its native home.
