SONNET TO WINTER.
Hail dreary gloom, how soothing to the soul,
Care-struck, and shrinking from its weight of woes,
On that cold cliff whence dashing waters roll,
I'll lean my aching head unused to soft repose.
Sad is fair nature's face, all wrapt in shade,
Leafless the tree, and dumb the linnet's song;
No chearful sounds the list'ning ear invade,
The bleak winds dismal moan and howl along.
Charm'd with the scene, with pleasure I can see
The brown heath, bare wood, and the rushy moor:
'Tis nature kind in sympathy with me,
Who now her lulling sighs in pity pours.
Time drop thy wing, no more let spring return,
More grateful to my soul let nature ever mourn.

SONNET TO SILENCE,
WRITTEN ON A SUMMER EVENING.
Sweet soother of the melancholy breast,
Companion dear to those that love to weep;
Come thou and hush the passions into rest,
Lull the wild whirlwinds of the soul to sleep.
Yes thou art here &mdash; each rustling leaf is still,
The bird of eve pours not the song of woe;
I hear no murmurs of the purling rill,
The sighing winds are spent and cease to blow.
Fancy paints sorrow leaning o'er her urn,
The long veil shadowing o'er her visage pale:
Let me, her genuine child, my mis'ries mourn,
With tears unceasing in this lonely vale.
Fashion's gay sons thy presence may not bear,
More grateful thou to grief than fashion's "garish glare."

SONNET TO MEMORY.
Full well I trace the scenes of younger years,
How often on the green-sward have I rov'd,
(Ere the red ray had drank the morning's tears)
And mus'd along the path my fancy lov'd.
The notes of joy (I faintly hear them now)
Once did my heart's afflictions keen beguile,
And once they slightly heal'd the wounds of woe,
And spread o'er tear-worn cheeks a transient smile.
Of early joy these marks how faint and rare!
How deep engrav'd the harrowing strokes of grief!
To the hurt bosom canker'd o'er with care,
Pleasures once flown can give but slight relief.
Hard fate alas!  of wretched human kind,
That mis'ry's piercing pangs should ever wound the mind.

SONNET TO LOVE.
Ah dear associate of Youth's tender days,
When round my heart my LAURA'S charms entwin'd:
When ardent sighs quick blew the kindling rays,
That flash'd the flames of phrenzy on the mind.
Art thou of human kind the dreadful curse?
For sure thy poisons cauterize the soul;
Or of contentment sweet the soothing nurse,
When o'er the swelling heart thy mighty raptures roll.
O thou art both, for midst the pangs of pain,
Warm hope and joy in quick succession flow,
And floods of bliss too mighty to sustain,
A moment check the bitter waves of woe.
Still varying Goddess, still we bow to thee,
Thou daughter bland of Sensibility.

SONNET TO PATIENCE.
Sweet child of reason pure, whose gentle pow'r
Can cheer ev'n poverty's desponding brow,
Can soothe with accent mild that luckless hour
When nature bids the bitter tear to flow.
For thou canst smile when life's rude storms descend,
Tho' thy meek bosom ev'ry insult prove,
Can bear (thy hardest task) th' ungrateful friend,
Bear with unbeating heart, the cold returns of love.
Thou turn'st to down the thorny bed of care,
Thou art the pris'ner's friend in dungeons dank,
Fill'd with thy quelling pow'r he learns to bear
The door's harsh creak, the horrid fetter's clank.
O whilst I journey through this world of grief,
Still pour thy soothing balm to give my soul relief.

SONNET TO HORROR,
WRITTEN ON THE BANKS OF THE SEVERN.
The charms of life are fled; youth, wealth, and fame
No more with envious eye my fancy views;
Hope as delusive as the meteor's flame,
Sunk in despair my soul no more pursues.
Here where scarce heard by me the wild waves roar,
I pour the bursting torrent from my eye,
My deep moans echo round the winding shore,
The hollow wind responses to my sigh.
Horror blood-ey'd stalks through the gloomy shade,
Come thou fell fiend my roamings wild attend
Through the wet grass that skirts the tow'r decay'd,
Ah come my sole companion and my friend.
Thy gloomy presence gives a sad relief
To the shrunk heart that bleeds with unextinguished grief.

SONNET TO CHARITY.
Mild Heav'n-born Nymph, whose soft and holy flame,
Beams a warm ray upon the chilly breast,
That cheers with aspect warm the weary frame,
And soothes the sighs of poverty to rest.
Friend to the friendless when the cruel frown,
Of an unfeeling world the meek heart bows,
When pinching want breaks the sunk spirit down,
The whole soul bending 'neath its weight of woes:
Thine is the fire that lights the languid eye,
And spreads a warm glow o'er the grateful cheek,
Like the mild midnight mistress of the sky,
When thro' the dark'ning cloud her beamy white rays break.
O may my heart in thy warm cause sincere,
From mis'ry's haggard face still wipe the tear.

SONNET WRITTEN ON A SERENE EVENING.
Solemn and still all nature seems to muse,
The gilded clouds slow sweep along the sky;
On the green mead cool ev'ning sheds its dews,
The morning breeze forgets its wonted sigh.
O let me, at the rough oak's knotty root
Reclin'd, awhile enjoy the hour serene,
Such placid scenes the pensive bosom suit,
Yes, let me linger on the dark'ning green.
Fond fancy here shall bless me with her dream,
Here warbling poesy shall pour its song,
And (happy love and fame its constant theme)
Here hope her baseless vision may prolong,
To soothe the painful throbbings of the heart
Save where the fiend Despair has fix'd his poison'd dart.
