When Ormuz bade the flooded earth be dry
And for the waters scoop'd their final home,
O'er each abyss Ferouers of the sky
Took charge, lest once again the surges roam.
On trembling Kaf reposed the throne of flame
While the four Spirits wait their destined brides to claim.

The giant sovereign of the Peaceful Main
Arose majestic as his silent flood;
Then Ormuz beckoned from the immortal train
The goddess Pleasure, and her band bestowed.
Swift to the sea in swimming dance she fled
And softer-curling billows kist her sparkling tread.

The indented shore with airy haste she sought,
To arch the musky wood and roseate bower;
The nightingale from wavering boughs she taught
The warbled luxury of song to pour;
Love uncontroul'd thro' her warm empire roves
From Ind's voluptuous banks to Otaheite's groves.

The humbler Spirit of the Midland Sea
Now bent before the throne his graceful head.
Fair Taste approach'd; the youth arose with glee
Gazed and with transport seiz'd the laurell'd Maid.
In his pure wave she bathed her willing feet,
And round its myrtled bank rear'd many a hallow'd seat.

Soon on the shore she cast a dwelling eye
Where Inspiration o'er Idumean palms
First learnt to wave his seraph-wing on high;
Thence wandered statelier to Natolian realms,
Where with the lightning of empyreal frame
Her Homer's tongue she steep'd in unrekindled flame.

Slow is her lingering way from Greece, averse,
Till not a winding bay or shaded cape
Remains unwatered with the dew of verse.
Twice to Hesperia's coast she bent her step,
And saw with rapture o'er its olived height
The fore-world's crimson eve, the dawn of modern light.

The Baltic Genius then with sounding stride
Advancing, bow'd before the Lord of power;
Received stern Valor for his blooming bride
And to his amber'd strand the Virgin bore.
The steele-clad Goddess loud her love confest,
Play'd with his icy beard, and clasp'd his rugged breast.

He who the wide Atlantic Ocean binds
Now upwards turn'd a trembling hoping eye,
His prayer great Ormuz cast not to the winds
But gave his last best gift, dear Liberty.
Rich tears of joy the exulting Spirit shed
And bore the zoneless nymph triumphant to his bed.

Awhile he throned her on the snowy hills
O'ercanopied with glare of northern dawn
Where Hecla's front its liquid fire distils.
Anon, he twined her on the oaky lawn
Of Albion's coast a seldom-fading bower,&mdash;
Corruptions mildews hence!  it scorns the axe of Power.

Then far in west he built her many a fane
To the hoarse sound of Civil Discords song,
And proudly pointed to her future reign,
When swarthy tribes their sugar-isles among
Should lisp her praise, and gathering whirlwinds bear
Her deed-inspiring name to Gallia's troubled ear.
