Behind yon western hills the God of Day
To distant climes his burnish'd car display'd;
When lost in Slumber's silken arms I lay,
And sportive Fancy wanton'd round my head.
Soon as the goddess wav'd the magic wand,
What scenes of wild enchantment glow'd around;
A new creation smil'd at her command,
And double suns arose with purple glories crown'd.

Wide o'er the blissful scene methought awhile
I rov'd in grots, and groves, and gardens fair,
Where nought was seen save what might grief beguile,
And heal the woe-worn heart of deep despair:
There grew to grace the smoothly-shaven green,
Immingled flow'rs of ev'ry gaudy dye,
And spicy groves, with crystal brooks between,
Sabean odours shed, beneath a cloudless sky.

In pleasure lost, along the happy plain
Heedless I stray'd, till soon resounded near
Harmonious sounds that thrill'd thro' ev'ry vein;
Sounds that might sooth a list'ning seraph's ear.
Not mightier transports struck the Grecian band;
Nor stronger tumults seiz'd the madd'ning soul,
When syrens tempted to the fatal strand,
While the charm'd Ocean ceas'd his wond'ring waves to roll.

Onward I mus'd, till, sudden to my sight,
A splendid palace rear'd its lofty head;
Its glitt'ring front with golden pillars bright,
Round which the vine her wanton tendrils spread.
No churlish door the courtly mansion knew;
Its friendly arch invites the fearful guest;
And music warbled, as I nearer drew,
"Here joy for ever reigns &mdash; O enter and be blest."

Glad I pursu'd the path as hope inspir'd,
Mix'd with the croud the promis'd bliss to gain,
Where jointly press'd, with equal ardour fir'd,
Plenty's mad sons, and Mis'ry's meagre train.
Quick as the lightning's flash, a boundless stream
Of heav'nly splendor struck my dazzled eye,
Bright as when Iris courts the solar beam,
And spread her varied vest across the show'ry sky.

Where'er I turn'd, to please the fickle mind,
Some darling pleasure still arose to view:
Along the pictur'd walls had Art design'd
The tale as bold as Raphael's pencil drew;
Here, from Ganges, led his frantic files,
In merry pomp, the ivy-crown'd God;
There, from the sea, the new born Queen of Smiles
In softer colours shone, in naked beauty glow'd.

Here genial Plenty fix'd her constant care;
Profusely kind, an endless feast she spread;
To crown the loaded board with ample fare,
Daily she bade a thousand victims bleed;
Gave gaily-tinctur'd fruits, a various store,
Brought from a thousand climes to tempt the taste,
Fairer than those on India's happy shore,
Nor fam'd Columbus' world can boast a like repast.

And soon appear'd a rosy-featur'd train;
With glee-full heart they quaff'd the nectar'd bowl,
And loud they laugh'd, nor heeded future pain,
But cheer'd with frequent cups the sickly soul.
Eager they wak'd the sorrow-soothing lyre;
To Music's voice they joined the sprightly song;
And while the revel-raised raptures fire,
Swift steal the the jovial hours on downy wings along.

And next, of youthful nymphs a bevy fair,
With yielding looks, and pleading smiles, advance;
In artful ringlets wav'd their rose-crown'd hair,
As round they trod the light fantastic dance.
Bare to the bold admirer's lawless gaze
Luxuriant rose their undulating breast,
As to the lute they sang, in am'rous lays,
How Jove's immortal son the Lydian's pow'r confest.

Sweet flow'd th' impassion'd strain &mdash; with quick'ned throes
Wild thro' my veins the crimson current flew,
When, from her adamantine throne, arose
A Goddess, clad in robes of gaudiest hue;
Tho' youth had fled, a captivating grace
Majestic, o'er th' untimely ruin hung;
Still roll'd her eye, still artful bloom'd her face,
Nor yet forgat to charm her smooth persuasive tongue.

"Come, O my son," the gentle Queen began;
"Come, long-sought youth, and welcome to my breast;
Well has thy bark o'er life's uncertain main
Scap'd the rough storm, and found the land of rest.
Far from the dreary thorn-spread ways of woe,
Here Pleasure's primrose-paths thy steps invite;
No eyes shall here with tears of sorrow flow,
Ill they befit the scenes of ever-new delight.

"See scatter'd round the choicest gifts of heav'n;
Heav'n's chiefest care these happy seats employ;
Taste freely, then, the gifts so freely giv'n,
Nor meanly sin by fearing to enjoy.
Go, join in woodbine bow'rs the shouting band,
Let Laughter loose, and from the mantling vine
Its comeliest clusters rend with fearless hand,
And round thine am'rous brows the rosy wreath entwine.

"Let not the dread of future ills alloy,
With impotent presage, the present bliss,
But learn amid the virgin choir to toy,
Sport in yon shades, and print the balmy kiss:
Go then, my son, where beauty points thy way,
Boldly thro' Joy's unbounded empire rove,
And let thine unreluctant heart obey
Love's kind impulsive laws, and all his raptures prove."

Awhile she paus'd &mdash; nor let the frozen frown
Of bearded age too harshly chide the bard,
If haply Truth's impartial voice should own,
That pleas'd he list'ned, and with transport heard.
For sure with thoughtless ease the passive mind
Had hurried on in Passion's mad career,
Had not some Pow'r, to human frailty kind,
Deep shook the splendid dome, and call'd aloud &mdash; "Forbear."

Wond'ring I turn'd where heav'nly Wisdom stood;
No tinsel trappings deck'd the graceful maid;
With native beauty's awful charms endow'd,
Around her brows celestial glories play'd.
While angry pity flush'd her cheek, she cry'd,
"Quick from these shores thy wand'ring steps refrain,
Where fell Excess her vot'ries seeks to guide
To Ruin's gaping gulph, thro' Folly's wide domain.

"To tempt thy feet from Virtue's paths aside,
Know that the Sorc'ress weaves her guileful snare,
And rears her groves, and specious bow'rs, to hide
The near but doleful regions of Despair.
As thro' the darksome night the meteor's blaze
Deludes the weary trav'ller from his home,
And cheerful pours its momentary rays,
Then leaves the hapless wretch thro' rocks and wilds to roam.

"For ev'n beneath the fragrant myrtle's shade,
When bounds thine heart at Riot's loud alarms,
When by the toyful hand of Dalliance led,
The loose-rob'd maid resigns her heighten'd charms;
Shall sad Reflection shed the sudden tear,
Shall sharp Repentance wound thy bleeding breast;
Ev'n Music's mirthful lyre shall fright thine ear,
The cloudless sky shall frown, and cloy the tasteless feast.

"Unreal pleasures here enchant thine eyes;
Early they perish with the fleeting hour:
As insect tribes, that sport in summer skies,
Bide not the northern blast or wintry show'r.
To nobler joys th' eternal mind aspires,
Joys that shall last when Time's short reign is o'er,
When the pale sun shall lose his aged fires,
Forget his wonted course, and set to rise nor more."

'Twas thus the mild majestic Goddess spoke,
And upward straight on hasty pinions fled;
The trembling palace felt the thunder's stroke,
The blasted bow'r the lightning's rage display'd.
How vanish'd from my sight th' enchanted scene,
Where late I rov'd, in pleasing transport lost!
No blooming flow'r bedeck'd the blighted green,
But swept the whirlwind bleak along the clouded coast.

No more to grace the lovely spot were found
Its spicy groves, and grots, and gardens fair:
No suns arose, with purple glories crown'd,
But yawn'd the dreary caverns of Despair.
Loathsome to sight, there crawl'd the bloated toad,
And there the screech-owl nurs'd her num'rous young;
There sought the crested snake his curs'd abode,
Slow dragg'd his writhed train, and roll'd his forked tongue.

Ah!  who can paint what complicated woes,
What hell-born fears, my tortur'd soul oppress'd,
Till the big terror banish'd sleep, and rose
The day's bright regent in the crimson'd east.
Each dreadful object Fancy still reviews,
Tho' frighted oft she sickens at the sight;
And faithful Mem'ry prompts the fearful muse
To tell, in simple strains, the visions of the night.
