BOOK I.
Why from the Crowd must pleasure still be sought,
When calmer scenes alone can bliss bestow?
Why from wild Mirth the transient smile be caught,
When pure reflection wakes a brighter glow?
Deep in the shade, why dwells retiring woe?
More than the gaudy splendours of the day,
Charm the faint mists that o'er the evening grow;
Nor yet unsoothing shines the tranquil ray
That plays, with shadowy grace, through life's sequester'd way.

No exile here, from social converse driv'n,
Who sings of Nature, Fancy, Solitude;
No surly misanthrope to whom is giv'n
To shroud where sympathies dare not intrude:
Though I, alas!  have borne the buffet rude,
Drain'd deep the chalice brimming with deceit,
And known of Fortune in her darkest mood,
I from the world but ask some kind retreat&mdash;
Where storms remotely frown, where billows vainly beat.

I sing to soften, not to steel the mind,
To soothe and temper, not to aggravate;
From the worn brow to chase the look unkind,
To break the spell of long-inwoven hate,
And him to lower whom vanities inflate:
Nature's stray'd sons I to her paths invite.
O man, how often thine to mould thy fate?&mdash;
Lo!  yet within the heaven-enkindled light,
By whose blest beam to trace thy pilgrimage aright.

'Tis sweet, escaping from the throng's turmoil,
To breathe the cooling freshness of the grove;
And sweet, reclining on the downy soil,
Through the fair regions of delight to rove,
Exult in friendship, or repose in love:
Since all we fondly cherish, dearly prize,
All that the fancy and the heart can move,
Full oft the busy sons of earth despise,&mdash;
Too cold such joys to know, while falsely thought too wise.

Nature, all hail!  to thee, the soul oppress'd
With heaviest grief shall still imploring turn;
Thou can'st allay the tumult of the breast,
Though care annoy, or feverish passion burn,
Which other solace would indignant spurn,
Would instantaneous from its presence frown
Each syren gay, and every hope inurn:
Here in the limpid stream my woes I drown,
Nor sigh, from woodland shades, to mingle with the town.

Enough indeed though rural walks can charm
While, rich with blooms, the fragrant breezes blow,
These to the city hie, in wild alarm,
When, torpid all, nor lulling waters flow,
Nor vernal scenes emerge from wintry snow.
Enough the shade of lawn and grove can bear,
To lawn or grove when loitering thousands go;
When other notes resounding in the air
Than wild-wood songsters yield &mdash; proclaim the mob is there.

Those love of change, not love of nature prize,
Whom custom yet the wonted circuit leads
From crowded pestilence and murky skies,
To gales salubrious, and refreshing meads.
O!  at each step to pause upon its deeds,
One mingled mass of grandeur, crime and pain,
Where reason shudders, and where mercy bleeds,
If this the city's boast &mdash; to sigh in vain;
Untenanted by me may cities long remain!

Nature! &mdash; nor only thine from aching heart
The pangs of agonising thought to chase.
Perennial happiness thy sweets impart
To blissful minds, who stretch beyond this space
Of being, fetter'd nor by time or place:
Seeking immortal food, they walk the sky;
They, casting far the follies of our race,
Direct to Heaven the long-expectant eye,
And meet eternal suns, and feast on wishes high.

Thou too, mild Solitude! &mdash; the nurse of Thought!
Nature's fair sister, man's unfailing friend!
Whate'er thy touch hath form'd, or wisdom taught,
Now with each line in just assemblage blend,
Fancy and Truth, thy gifts, to me extend;
That, gently won to Meditation's bow'r,
And haply seen his nature and his end,
Some mortal, freed from Riot's galling pow'r,
May dedicate to thee his first important hour!

Specious perhaps their dogma, but confin'd,
Who of retirement the dark semblance drew,&mdash;
That, once secluded, either far refin'd
Man peers with angels, or to that vile crew
Satanic sinks; hateful and false the view,
Unworthy much of those whom vulgar lore
Blindly resisted &mdash; Sages who, still true
To science, dar'd a path untrod before,
And sought with steps untir'd its limits to explore.

Certes, not Solitude they so pourtray'd,
But gloomy banishment to wilds forlorn;
Not the calm breezes of the rural shade:
But sullen thought, of love or madness born;&mdash;
The sad resolves of him from whom are torn
Life's opening dreams, who hates even human kind;
For whom no carols wake the merry morn;
Nor suits there aught the aspect of his mind,
Save the dark gathering skies, and the rough howling wind.

See!  at such time, his steps by frenzy sped,
The Melancholy Man yon summit gain,
Firm to the tempest bare his burning head,
Then, like that tempest, scowl upon the plain.
Ah!  not to him those kindly pains pertain,
Which heal and harmonize and renovate;
Known only these to that high-favour'd train,
Who, while by nature touch'd their souls dilate,
Can wing the hour with bliss, and smile at wayward fate.

Nor him condemn, by long injustice taught,
And base ingratitude, the world to shun;
Nor marvel much, that where he fondly sought
Friendship and peace, till finding, one by one,
His friends all faithless, and himself undone,
He can no more in confidence repose:
Joyless to him sweet bloom and summer sun!
His yet the heart, while bleeding with its woes,
That pants the friend to meet, and could forgive its foes!

Far from the din of mad inglorious strife,
Not wretched he with eager feet who flies
To the mild confines of sequester'd life,
And upwards casts his unperverted eyes,
Heedless what friends believe, or foes devise:&mdash;
O bliss!  compar'd with him who feels the while
Deluded mortals laud him to the skies,
And echoing millions on his actions smile,
That all within is stamp'd with misery and guile!

Not feebly would the Muse essay to paint
Scenes which immortal energy inspire;
Scenes which, to minds that else would quickly faint,
And in disgust from kindred-man retire,
Impart renewing and sustaining fire.
Spirits there are impatient of the round
Of earth-bred hopes and miseries, who require
Fancies beyond this vague and dismal mound;
To dwell with seraph forms, and tread ethereal ground.

Say, restless Worldlings!  aye to pleasure prone,
Else trade-envelop'd, who in this unite&mdash;
That man is joyless only when alone;
Only then happy, when each vain delight
Of bustling city, lounge, or festive night
Feebly administers to sickening sense;
Can no diviner views the soul excite?
Why madly do ye strive to banish thence
Those true desires that joys ineffable dispense?

Ye seek for happiness &mdash; but vainly sued
The cold, the busy, or the fluttering throng,
Wealth's venal crew or Folly's listless brood,
For what to peace, retirement, truth belong;
The sage's precept, and the poet's song!
The heart, that loves its objects to select,
To individuate; with choice &mdash; how wrong!&mdash;
Ye give to multitudes.  Why pure respect,
And unobtrusive charms, thus fatally neglect?

'Tis ye that find &mdash; untasted by the Muse!&mdash;
The dreadful Solitude ye so decry:
Where nought the fancy, nought the soul may chuse,
Though pleasures throng unceasing on the eye;
Pleasures that all but pleasure can supply.
Ye 'tis that spend the solitary day,
With thousands near! &mdash; Come, and my verse shall try,
Leading you far from such disastrous way,
To animate your taste for sweets that mock decay.

BOOK II.
Is it in fickle Beings to forget
The worth of comforts easily possess'd?
Often to learn, but learn by long regret,
The happier lot with which they erst were blest?
Lo!  Solitude corrects the wayward breast,
Bringing, in Retrospection's clear review,
Each valued treasure to its genuine test.
Here friends again their choicest hours renew,
Retrace their early loves, and vow to live more true.

Man has no sentiment but what acquires
By concentration, its impassion'd glow;
'Tis thus, th' enthusiast wakes celestial fires;
Thus, that even bosoms cold as alpine snow,
Melted to softness, with new transport flow.
Vain were the philosophic wish austere,
A wish which not one blessing could bestow,
That man, disdain'd to shed the partial tear,
Should o'er the patriot's weep &mdash; but not the parent's bier.

Sophists avaunt!  The world's infectious guile
Shall yet produce the ethics that ye preach;
Soon shall transform the unaffected smile,
To wily ruin; turn th' unstudied speech,
To phrase equivocal; him learn to o'erreach,
Who once had shudder'd at the like deceit:
Cynics!  forbear then &mdash; since the world shall teach,
By rules more cogent, and examples meet,
The high insensate strain that sapiently ye greet!

Better to banquet on the wildest notes
That ever warbled from Aonian mount,
To quaff seducing stream that richly floats
In murmuring mazes from Castalia's fount,
Than shackle down the eager mind to count
Each dull division of the Sceptic code.
Wise if thou art, when journeying ne'er dismount
To reconnoitre the infern abode
Of sheer philosophist:  keep thou the beaten road.

Vainly these great emotions we oppose.
Art cannot stifle nor art countervail
Humanity's first springs; seeing that those,
However warp'd or fetter'd, never fail,
Regaining the ascendant, to prevail
And speak the Man. &mdash; Nobly was this design'd,
To poise the balance!  Thee again we hail,
Nature, bright transcript of th' ETERNAL MIND!
Whose hand thy varied powers to one vast end combin'd.

HE then, who nought communicates in vain,
Wisely vouchsaf'd the self-abstracting scene,
That, if desirous, man might there regain,
While no mean cares perplexing intervene,
His primal converse and exalted mien;
And there, reflecting on the days forepast,
Some dark and chill, and some of living green,
Bind all the charities of earth more fast,
And brave this boisterous sea undaunted to the last.

Erring and vain, our footsteps to betray
From virtue's path what various foes conspire!
While scarcely dawn'd poor Life's tempestuous day,
Chill'd by deceit the heart's spontaneous fire,
Lo &mdash; the fair forms of truth and love expire.
Weak were the firmest vows to Heaven preferr'd,
But from the world that godlike men retire,
Where, or by fraud or pleasure undeterr'd,
The whispers of the soul in secrecy are heard.

The "heart wants something to be kind to," wants
What the tumultuous hour could ne'er afford:
Uninterested there, it ever pants
For some lov'd nook, where, all its wishes stor'd,
It may retreat, to view the darling hoard,
Like miser bending o'er his hidden mine.
How blest, when vain all other good explor'd,
Ere the mind madden, as the affections pine,
In solitude to feed on food almost divine!

This yet they prize not, who, though keenly pain'd,
Still the dire pangs of self-corroding care,
Whether by stoic or the world restrain'd,
Concentre deep within; disdain to share
Their woes with Sympathy; nor glad repair
To scenes reposing to the lonely heart.&mdash;
Till, lo!  in sullen gait, and blank despair,
They, too suspicious of each treacherous art,
Haste from the realms of peace in anguish to depart.

'Tis well to love, though Disappointment frown;
Good to confide, though Truth and Friendship fail;
Fancy is sweet, though nought her wishes crown;
Sweeter the Hope that gilds this dreary vale.
Ah!  then imbibe not soon the chilling tale
Of graybeards, dead to all that life endears!&mdash;
Yet a few struggles, ere such lore prevail;
O'er loves forsworn, drop still some bitter tears;
Be stoicism cold the growth at least of years!

Reason shall plead, if now Persuasion's voice
Apply unheeded to the stony crowd.
Existence wins thee:  thy determin'd choice
Centers in what the grovelling and the proud
Alike pursue, forgetful of the shroud,
The world's felicity. &mdash; Even this to feel,
Hope, Fancy too, we need.  Wisdom aloud
Cries "do not haste those horrors to reveal,
Which their illusive beams benignantly conceal."

Art thou, unconscious, learning to contract
Convenient feelings, the meek-simpering face,
And universal kindness, that shall act
On all, but no one of thy suffering race;
That monument of folly and disgrace
To philosophic times?  Mortal, if so
Thy wretched ways decline; to same lone place,
Where no foul sophistry the breast can know,
But Nature warms the pulse &mdash; there haste, and catch the glow.

Then shalt thou feel, in such secluded spot,
All the best sympathies of man revive;
Sooth'd by the murmuring rill and shaded grot,
The soul to Nature and to Truth alive.
Haste, that thy breast, so long the restless hive
Of stinging passions, haply may expel
Its herd of torments; and them quickly drive
Adown the ruinous steep; thyself to dwell
With heavenly visitants, unthrall'd by former spell.

Who that shall wander down yon verdant vale
When first the Morning beams in orient skies,
Open his bosom to the springing gale,
See the bright Sun again majestic rise,
Nor with each breeze respire in blissful sighs?
And who, when fades the Day's tumultuous glare,
As Eve's soft splendours trance his musing eyes,
Shall find no respite from unhallowed care,&mdash;
While nature all is peace, him fury passions tear?

Chang'd as thou art, since HE who saw thee good,
From night and chaos call'd thy beauteous frame;
What time our great first father awful stood,
Faultless as from the Forming hand he came:
Oft though impair'd, the sympathy the same,
If to thy haunts our willing feet retire&mdash;
Nature!  thy scenes the wilder'd soul reclaim;
Rekindling there the mind's ethereal fire,
Still in illustrious joy our soaring thoughts aspire.

Oh!  when the tempest of the soul is high,
Bear, bear me ever to the sylvan shade;
With rural sights relieve the weaned eye,
Nor let the tread of human steps invade
Where Grief's wild waves in sweet repose are stay'd:
Now but from mortal foe his rest defend,
And though on stone the pilgrim-head be laid,
Celestial visions shall his sleep attend,
Once as th' angelic host to Jacob did descend!

And happy thus, safe-distanc'd from the throng,
To nurture feelings that in crowds decline:
Still, in the shade is virtue mostly strong;
Still, by reflection grow the fruits divine;
Most favour'd thou, if fruits like these be shine!&mdash;
If than what fickle Pleasure could bestow
In nights of riot, and in days supine,
Rather thou seek'st in humbleness to know
One hour's calm intercourse with undissembled woe.

Yes, happy!  if unaided Nature yield
More true enjoyment to thy thrilling heart
Than Lucre's post, than fierce Ambition's field,
Or even the studied excellence of Art.
And if, to soothe the bosom's painful smart,
To thee the gale, with healing in its wing,
Ever new health and harmony impart,
Pine not for sweets that from delusion spring;
While shine are these to boast, which peace and wisdom bring.

Yet not to those whom guilt doth sore annoy,
And fear and doubt &mdash; of guilt the offspring dire,
May sylvan haunts extend their wonted joy;
Such shall in vain, to slake their bosoms' fire,
To cooling shades or freshening rills retire;
Whom peace and love and honour all disown.
Morning's mild breezes and melodious quire
Make but to these their wounds more deeply known;
And Evening drear descends with horrors not its own.

Blame not sweet Nature, ye who to her groves
With vacant minds and tuneless souls repair!
Certes the Graces bland, and playful Loves,
And guileless Pleasures, still inhabit there:
But aye to feel the beauteous and the fair,
Demands the breast with wisdom, beauty fraught.
Ah!  how should he, the slave of grovelling care,
By vice degraded, as by truth untaught,
E'er lift to bliss divine his low and sordid thought?

How different strike, by scene diversified,
Objects not much dissimilar in kind.
Those bells, of city honour long the pride,
If haply heard where nature stills the mind,
Mingled their loud tones with the softening wind,
Of transport pure had wak'd the grateful tear,
To contemplation high the soul resign'd;
And not as now, in riot-mirth severe,
Galled, with incessant peal, the stunn'd and tortur'd ear!

Compar'd with concert, oratorio proud,
Or all that banded-chorus can perform;
Where, slowly critical and piercing loud,
Alternate reign the sighing and the storm;
The breast with happiest energy to warm,
Let but the lute's mild melody awake
On Summer's evening bank &mdash; while gaily swarm
The elves that issue from each scented brake,
Each copse, and purpled grove, their revelries to take.

See, through the mazes of the midnight ball
With rapid feet yon splendid triflers fly;
From every tongue what flattering periods fall,
How smiles each face!  how sparkles every eye!
So loud their mirth, thou deem'st no sorrow nigh.
But learn thou, erring judge!  there Envy lours,
There Jealousy extorts the bitterest sigh,
There, all her poison'd chalice Scandal pours,
And Lassitude soon clogs the bliss-devoted hours.

But O how sweet, how passing sweet to rove
Where sits unseen the Minstrel of the Night,
And trills such music o'er the listening grove
As sure might harmonize the rudest sprite!
Then while the Moon from her meridian height,
And all the countless stars that round her burn,
Shed o'er the tranquil scene their tender light;
The soul, sublimed, each earthly care may spurn,
And toward its native heaven with holy longing turn!

Then, nought of discord harsh thine ear shall wound,
Like theirs who tread the city's crowded ways!
The distant water's faintly-murmuring sound;
The whispering wind, that through the foliage strays;
The tinkling bell of sheep, that startled gaze;
The clock's deep chime, from half-hid village spire;
The watchful dog, at fancied thief who bays;
Though simple all their tones, such thoughts inspire,
That from thy bosom far shall Passion's brood retire.

Even Beauty triumphs in diviner charms,
And bids the heart with tenderer feelings glow,
When seen where nought, or sickens, or alarms;
Than mid the haunts of riot, glare, and show.
Where laugh the skies above, and plains below,
Her airy form more winning grace assumes,
With more luxuriant ease her tresses flow,
Her speaking eye more dazzling light illumes,
And o'er her dimpled cheek suffuse health's softest blooms!

'Twas June's first Morn &mdash; what time the dewy rose
Exhales its fragrance to the solar ray,
And all the flowerets of the dale unclose
Their subject-blossoms, while from verdant spray
The feather'd warbler tunes his matin lay;
That, wandering pensive mid each opening sweet,
I paus'd beside a stile that crost my way&mdash;
When the fair Being that mine eyes did meet!
One half so sweet these eyes again shall never greet.

Light to the zephyr play'd her ringlests fair,
And now her heaving bosom they enfold;
There dwelt a noble sadness in her air,
Shap'd was her form in nature's finest mould;
Her eyes, though sweet, as inspiration bold
To Heaven she rais'd; her white hand clasp'd her breast;
And the long-struggling sigh, that moment told
Things yet by mortal accents unexpress'd&mdash;
The wishes of the Good, the transports of the Blest!

From the dull round of empty pomp retir'd,
Thine be the healthy wild, or mazy grove;
Artless as Nature, and by her inspir'd,
Thine the bright Goddess of the Woods to rove!
O!  how unlike the Town's fermented love,
Swells the soft bliss that thrills the soul serene.
Pleasure and pride and glitter far remove,
Felt the mild glories of the sylvan scene,
If gay good temper charm, if virtue's holy mien.

Love!  little known where Folly still presides,
Mid the strange uproar of the giddy throng;
Found in the shade, where blushing Beauty glides
With graceful pensive majesty along,
Charm'd by the music of the woodland song.
Thee, while they dart the wild unmeaning eye,
Thee, gentle Power!  mistaken mortals wrong;
Thee, whom they charge with Lust's delirious sigh,
And, sunk in harlot mirth, yet dream that thou art nigh!

Indebted much to Thought's propitious hour
Even for the zest which public joys inspire,
Not in the present claim these joys their pow'r;
Nor in attainment can their lustre fire,
As when in musing moment we retire
To make the world of happiness our own:
Then 'tis we hang indeed o'er Rapture's lyre,
Or sigh to Pity's plaint congenial moan;
Then, that the force of each at last is really known.

Nor Love's soft bliss, nor Friendship's soothing scenes
Most in fruition seize th' enraptur'd mind;
But deep Regret, or Absence intervenes
Firm on the heart in solitude to bind
Each treasur'd look, and each expression kind,
Then by reflection more endearing made!
Nature's wide glories with effulgence blind
View'd at high noon &mdash; but charm us when survey'd
Through Evening's dewy veil, in silence and in shade.

BOOK III.
Genial to Memory and the Local flame,
To all of life that forms the grateful charm,
Is Solitude. &mdash; Who shall those Virtues name
Which Envy, Malice, Rage and Scorn disarm,
Quelling the evils that a world alarm?
Yet these, O Solitude!  are thine.  And thine
The yielding breast with fortitude to arm,
Its anguish soften with a balm benign,
And fix the wavering mind on eminence divine.

Here, calmly seen the storms that man annoy,
On the poor pilgrim ere their wrath alight;
Here, wisely prob'd each visionary joy;
Nor real ills the prescient soul affright,
Nor seeming bliss deludes her wary sight:
Lowers the deep gloom, or plays the meteor gleam;
Conscious alike of her internal might,
Through thickest clouds shall Peace benignly beam,
And the firm mind aright of earth's vain splendours deem.

Sequester'd thus, how freely Thought expands,
Recursive, o'er the years so long gone by;
Now, on the region of enchantment stands,
Pointing the colours of that vivid sky
Which gaily glitter'd to th' auspicious eye
In the fair dawning of Life's chequer'd day!
Oh, let those colours wake once more the sigh
Ecstatic, &mdash; here, shed yet one cheering ray
Bright as the orient blush of young ambrosial May!

Doubt not the high felicities of youth,
Looking to manhood as the happier age.
See &mdash; on that dimpled face the smile of truth;
That heart, whose griefs the meerest toys assuage;
That mind, which constant novelties engage;
That unchill'd hope, which rears its babel-tower,
Reckless of time, or storm's disastrous rage;
That hand, which plucks the bloom of every flower;
Untaught how seasons change, and disappointments lower.

Even such was he, whom after-days behold
Careworn and heedless of the world's esteem!
His heart to love and hope and pleasure cold,
His taste long sated, vain and worthless deem
Each boasted good, now fled &mdash; as kindly dream,
With uncouth horrors intermingling, flies.
Inverted all to Aged vision seem
The noblest prospects of those vernal skies,
Which once his hopes inflam'd, which once rejoic'd his eyes.

Whence is the magic of thy direful spell,
O world!  that thus thou can'st so soon efface
From the young heart, where love and virtue dwell,
Each warm affection and each moral grace?
Alas!  is man in nature really base?
Or learns he by dark commerce with mankind,
That truth and mercy now have little place;
And so, in spite of peace and wisdom, blend
Conforms to this vile lore the conscience of the mind?

Sweet Shades!  where first my vagrant footsteps stray'd,
While the light heart in eager joyance beat,
To you I come with much of bliss decay'd;
The world's keen thorns imprinted on my feet,
I tread, but not as once, your blest retreat;
Remembrance now but glooms each dear recess,
Too surely doom'd at every turn to meet,
In scenes that erst my various hour could bless,
The ghosts of days long past &mdash; memorials of distress.

Yet, Shades Belov'd!  ye yield a generous balm;
On the worn heart some healing drops distil,
The anarch-thought to settled sadness calm,
And link with reason the disjointed will!
E'en now the breeze, fresh-wafted from the hill,
Revives the pulse of half extinguish'd life;
I breathe th' untainted hours of childhood still,
Join with new ardour the robustful strife,
And youth's delightful train, and fairyland, are rife.

Happy the man that ere his setting day
Mid the fair scenes of opening life shall stand,
And think of those, the partners of his play,
Scatter'd by various fate on either hand:
Perhaps of some who press'd a foreign strand,
Manly in thought, in patriot valour high,
Martyrs to glory for their native land;
Who &mdash; as the tear yet wets his sadden'd eye,
Musing on years now fled, &mdash; can teach him how to die!

Slow stealing from that sportive group, behold
Him whom the paths of solitude allure.
He loves to trace the tints of blazing gold
Caught from descending sun by rivulet pure;
Anon, from vain impertinence secure
Deep in the foliage of embowering grove,
To rise to worlds whose lustre shall endure,
Then wondering melt to scenes of mortal love,
While o'er untasted bliss his ravish'd senses rove.

Cherish the vision &mdash; thou art Nature's Child!
Let thy young thought in blest delirium flow,
Yet be thy hopes unconquerably wild,
Nor thy warm feelings hesitation know;
Soon shall Experience damp the fervid glow!
And happy thou, when plough'd by furrowing care,
If in the soil so rich there do not grow,
Scatter'd the seeds of direst poison there,
Weeds full and rank as hell, and many a choking tare.

But, see!  the Morn is up. &mdash; The Stripling hies,
Rous'd by the cock's reiterated sound,
And warn'd by brightening blush of eastern skies,
To make the solitary-pleasing round.
He gains with ecstasy the distant mound,
Scornful of brambles' interposing smart;
And soon the youth by curling brook is found,
Encharm'd his ear, his fancy, and his heart;
Full loth with scenes so sweet, so passing sweet, to part.

What woe that man, for whom this scene so bright,
Alone should seek these beauties to destroy!
Oh!  bend not here, ye birds, your wonted flight;
Here, where the Fowler waits with cruel joy,
Your tiny feet, sweet Warblers!  to decoy.
Wretch!  whom nor taste nor pity shall regain,
Thee may ere long some catcher's gripe annoy;
Snared by thy passions' madly-lureing strain,
Be thou as surely caged, and beat thy bars in vain.

Meantime the little Julia cheerly shares
In the mild splendour of the morning's pride;
While to the fields the brother thus repairs,
Her rising hours the garden's stores divide:
As through their ranks her steps serenely glide,
On many a bloom, but chief the peerless rose,
Doubtful at first the preference to decide,
Her smiling kiss the Innocent bestows,
While on each heighten'd cheek the flower's own brilliance glows.

Thus if to infancy the sylvan shade
No trivial sources of delight present;
To the lorn man before whose prospect fade
All the fair blossoms heaven's own dews besprent,
What solace kind &mdash; ineffable content&mdash;
Must here upon his wearied frame descend,
Here, with all Nature seeming to relent?
Hither, poor Traveller!  thy footsteps bend,
And, lull'd at last to rest, thy toilsome journey end.

Full is the Earth of wretchedness and guilt,
But here shall neither wreck thy comfort more:
Through every clime her children's blood is spilt,
She seems to riot in her children's gore;
Thou shalt not weep, as thou hast wept before,
The myriads slain, &mdash; for never to shine ear
Shall come Oppression's tale, or Havoc's roar.
Wipe then, sad pilgrim!  wipe the falling tear;
With blameless seasons dwell, and grace the tranquil year.

Blow soft, ye breezes!  through the azure wide;
Ye dews!  sit lightly on the tender blade;
Disclose, O Sun!  the Summer's fragrant pride,
Be hills and dales in kindliest bloom array'd;
That he who now to flowery wilds has stray'd
May from their stores derive refreshing weal.
Sickness on him her withering hand has laid:
Sweet hills!  sweet dales!  sweet wilds!  in mercy heal
Him wont full many a moon severest pain to feel!

Sunk though the eyes, where manly vigour shone;
Pale though the cheeks, where dwelt a healthful bloom;
Alas!  to friends, that voice though scarcely known;
Those nerveless steps though tottering to the tomb;
Yet shall these wilds those faded eyes relume,
To those wan cheeks the mantling blood restore,
Bid that mute tongue sound joyous through the gloom,
And to those languid limbs shall grant once more,
O'er hill and dale and wood fresh beauties to explore.

Long might it seem the sorrowing train to tell,
Who, onward guided by the evening star,
With nature seek, in converse sweet, to dwell;
What time ascends the Moon her silvery car,
Diffusing holy mildness from afar!&mdash;
The victim pale of undeserved scorn,
Him glad retreating from the busy jar,
And him by poverty's rude blast uptorn
Here shelter for relief the souls to suffering born.

Nor will they shun where hangs a deeper gloom,
Whose days no good impart, nor nights repose:
Often they linger round th' unopen'd tomb,
And vainly wish that, yawning, it might close
Their long and weary pilgrimage of woes!
When nor for freedom sighs the dungeon-slave,
Nor mariner for port when tempest blows,
Or life is more than honour to the brave,
Then Grief may cease to wish the slumber of the grave.

Thrice hallowed Spot!  where human sufferings find
A kindly refuge, sought on earth in vain;
Thrice hallowed Spot!  to peace and hope consign'd
Ere the last trump, with death-dissolving skein,
Shall wake these slumbering forms to life again.
And oh!  to Friendship, Love, the dwelling drear
How blest, whose narrow limits still contain
What yet indeed may claim the bitter tear,&mdash;
The sacred dust of those belov'd through many a year!

Alas!  who life surveys with serious eye,
Little shall find to rivet his esteem.
But wretchedness, in varied forms, descry&mdash;
Passion's wild gust, and Hope's delirious dream,
Disease, and Grief, and Want's funereal scream;
Our choicest Pleasures ting'd with melancholy;
Each earthly bubble bursting on the stream,
Mirth, at the best, display unthinking folly;
And Piety itself distemper'd and unholy.

Most wretched then, who to this wretched state
Our faith and bliss and being all confine!
Who lead us blindly to the shaft of Fate;
Then to that fate our will, our hopes assign,
And quench in death the spark of life divine.
By the last struggle with encumbering dust,
Each fond regret, forbearing to repine;
By earthly friendship, and by heavenly trust;
These mouldering frames shall greet the Morning of the Just!

By all the tears by sorrowing Virtue shed,
Its efforts blasted, and its hopes deferr'd;
By Fraud and Rapine through the sad earth spread;
By crested Vice, o'er humbled Worth preferr'd;
By the heart's groan unanswer'd, not unheard;
And, given in highest mercy from the skies,
By the full promise of the UNERRING WORD;
O'er the deep tomb where moral nature lies,
Soon shall the last great day of Retribution rise.

To me, enamour'd of each pensive scene,
To me, whom deepest solitudes delight;
Alike who love day's closing ray serene,
Or concave clear with mildest lustre bright,
Or the stern blackness of involving night;
To me, not cheerless seems that passing-bell,
Announcing still the soul's eternal flight!
Calm are the sounds on every breeze that dwell,
Nor harsh, to fancy's ear, my own departed knell.

Hail ye blest shores of permanent delight,
Sublimely rais'd above this world of woe;
Whose temper'd day fears not enshrowding night,
Whose lenient skies no baleful changes know,
Whose paths among the living-waters flow,
Where music wakens to celestial hands,
And breezes rich with sainted odours blow!
Who that from Pisgah now the view commands,
But pants at once to quit these perishable lands?

Dark were indeed the destiny of man,
Did earth his being and his prospect bound:
Then, might gaunt Sorrow curse her wretched span;
Then, wild Misrule and heartless Pomp resound;
Truth then retreat, and Falsehood stalk around.
But pining Worth and prosperous Vice declare
That here for man no genial rest is found;
That now, this scene of discord to repair,
The Angels of the Throne new heavens and earth prepare.

Patient the blasts of angry Time sustain;
Its fury spent, the tempest shall subside.
Children of Mourning!  know there yet remain
Solace and peace for those by evils tried,
As woe and blackness for insulting Pride;
While loud and stern the winds of horror rave,
By friends deserted and by foes belied,
Think &mdash; that Religion can the storm outbrave,
Surmount opposing worlds, and triumph o'er the grave!

Beauty from Dust, from Death shall Life awake;
From Nature's ruins grace, duration fair:
This the great law which all things here partake.
Pleasure from Pain, high Hope from deep Despair;
Virtue, from Suffering and protracted Care;
From Toil and Thought, the world's applauding strain;
Lo!  Winter drear the blooms of Spring prepare;
Rose this bright Frame from Chaos' dark domain;
And Chaos shall return, ere Heaven's immortal reign.

Short if the gleams that gild man's toilsome day,
While long and sad the still-tempestuous night,
See &mdash; from the tomb, with more than mortal ray,
Burst the blest confines of eternal light!
A few frail suns, and all will yet be right:
Anon, the shades of doubt and fear dispel;
Who walk'd erewhile by faith, walk now by sight;
No more the eyes proclaim the heart's deep swell;
Now with the Lamb once slain, his slighted followers dwell.

How poor the grandeur of this downward state;
Balanc'd with views and promises like these!
Ah, what the glories here which men await,
Purchas'd with honour oft, and virtuous ease,
On the lost soul when Death's last tremors seize.
Wisdom be theirs, who, deaf to clamorous fame,
Ere youth's fair current stagnate in the lees,
Pleasure, ambition, mammon well disclaim;
Truth, charity and peace, and Heaven their only aim.

Nor in the tempest of tumultuous life
Are form'd the minds a wondering world admire.
From crowds remov'd, their's is the inward strife;
There, by reflection fitted to aspire,
Unnotic'd glows the soul's transcendent fire:
There best is tried the man's immortal rate,
Where soon delusive vanities retire;
Lifted in thought o'er time's contracted state,
Awhile where mortals wield the thunderbolt of fate.

Much is to fame, while to misfortune dear,
The genial influence of abstracted scene.
Him, whom disease hath doom'd to pang severe,
Forbid in youth to sport on daisied green,
May yet his days in solitude serene,
Fame's envied steep by studious effort climb:
Thence to survey, with elevated mien,
The rude advances of devouring time;
Seated himself secure on mental throne sublime.

Ecstatic, thus the Sons of Genius press
The strings that vibrate on th' immortal lyre:
Subjected long themselves to keen distress,
While their rapt strains the listening throng admire,
Still, as those strains, in moanings wild expire!
Even cold compassion to their end denied,
There list unfeeling Usurer enquire,
With staring eye and cheek-distending pride,
"Who that had useless liv'd, but unlamented died?"

Think then, dull fool!  that he has liv'd in vain,
Born to exalt and humanise the age;
And think, thyself insensate to the strain,
That others dwelt not o'er the breathing-page,
Kindling with ardour at his godlike rage!
His muse, by thee so soon to death devote,
See, the best hours of future time engage;
Myriads to come those beauties yet shall note,
Though from thy sensual orbs obscur'd by thickest mote.

Genii!  who in ethereal realms preside,
Thence to dispose the destinies of Mind;
Before whose awful eyes successive glide
Ages long past, and ages yet design'd;
Who some to native dust relentless bind,
And some to everlasting fame upraise:
If but one talent were to me consign'd,
If e'er by you inform'd my pensive lays,
Let the fair talent given resound the donor's praise.

For many an hour of saddest woe beguil'd,
For many a dissipated cloud of ill,
For balmy hopes, fresh gales and prospects mild,
For clustering branches and the healthful rill,
Grateful, O Muses!  I would offer still
The gratulation due. &mdash; You still implore
My heart to cherish, elevate my will;
The soul, else famish'd on this desert shore,
Each mortal year to aid from your exhaustless store.

Sweet are his transports, whom the Muse inspires!
His, form'd to soar, on seraph-wings sublime,
Where lessening nature from his ken retires;
His, the best suffrage of approving time;
His, the high energy that spurns at crime;
His, proud submission to the good and fair;
And his, while glowing verse or soothing rhyme
The fine emotions of the soul declare,
With distant worlds and times his sympathies to share.

How then may verse, verse not unmeet, relate
The lofty breathings of the patriot mind,
When walks th' ennobled Offspring of the State
Greatly to think on ages far behind,&mdash;
Him whom the ties of faith and glory bind
Nobly to struggle in a nation's cause;
Whom all he knows, and all he sees, remind
Of sires that erst reform'd his Country's laws,
Or rais'd her drooping head from Ruin's ravening jaws!

Where shall he tread, on his paternal ground,
A step his nobler fathers have not press'd?
Hear from that village-spire one sacred sound,
But speaks of those, within its confines blest,
On whose fair name a people's praises rest?
How on that mansion look unmov'd, which rears
Its hoary turrets to the fading West;
Proud of its valiant knights and honour'd peers,
Which seems in scorn to frown on these degenerate years?

Land of my Birth!  renown'd of elder days,
Whom Genius, Truth, and Freedom, all inspire;
England!  on whom the distant nations gaze,
And, as they gaze, reluctantly admire;
Whose sons yet kindle with no common fire,
But on the foe oft glance in just disdain,
Calm'd by whose wiles thy thundering fleets retire;
Thou mighty Guardian of the subject Main!
In arts and arms renown'd, nor thus renown'd in vain.

Proud of thy deeds, thou boast of Honest Fame!
With all thy glories bursting on his heart,
Proud that to thee he bears a filial claim,
One bard, who shares in all thy woes a part,
One British bard, sworn foe to Gallic art,
Would the great Spirit of thy Sires invoke.
O!  that their spirit might anew impart
What once insur'd thee War's decisive stroke;
That secret of their strength &mdash; the Genius of thy Oak!

But, humbled here, lament the quick decline
Of all the springs whence patriot virtues flow!&mdash;
The heart, sublim'd by energy divine
Above the stretch that casual feelings know,
To hurl no vulgar vengeance on the foe;
The generous pride of ancestry and worth;
The partial loves, from whose kind influence grow
Those firm affections tow'rds that spot of earth&mdash;
The country of our hopes, the land that gave us birth.

Of verdant grove, wild bloom, and sun bereft,
Much yet has Solitude that can detain
The mind, well-pleas'd; enough of charms still left
Awhile to mitigate the shaft of pain,
Him yet to recreate who hath sought in vain
By other medicines the soul's true joy.
He will not much of Winter night complain,
Who, where his hours no tedious cares annoy,
Can with illustrious Dead the lengthen'd night employ.

Many their pleasures, who from senseless strife
To Night and Thought and Silence can retire,
Extending there this map of human life:
Who much of evil and of good enquire;
Or, musing mildly by the gleaming fire,
Live o'er again their many-winding ways,
Recall what once could tenderest joys inspire,
Friendship's free burst, or Love's delicious gaze,
The Eden of our life &mdash; the charm of other days!

Who that has felt the pressure of the crowd,
Would wish with tottering steps in crowds to bide;
Most when in peril, impotently proud;
And, though on slippery ground, fear not to slide?
Observ'd his fate, thou shalt avoid his pride:
And wise thy way from moiling tumult force;
Winding, as gentle rivulet doth glide
From threatening deeps where rave rude surges hoarse,
To bend through flowery meads thy safe and noiseless course.

Hapless his choice, while fills th' expanding sail;
Mid threatening rocks and treacherous sands who steers:
Lo &mdash; adverse winds the flattering course assail;
Sinking his hopes, and borne alone by fears,
Tow'rds every port th' unsteady helmsman veers.
Life's early blandishments must they forego,
Who think in peace to greet their closing years;
Silence and thought in youth must bliss bestow,
The sweets of Solitude would aged bosoms know.

As youth's warm tints, by time depress'd, subside,
Dwells the fond mind on scenes of former days?
Years though they sever, and though climes divide,
Can these remembrance of one friend erase?
Turns homeward still the seaman's ardent gaze,
When tempests threaten, and when billows foam?
So they whom love of true Retirement sways,
Doom'd in the world's sad labyrinth to roam,
Feel but as strangers here; &mdash; Seclusion is their home.

I would not live, might I my lot define,
Amid a city's dull and jarring stir;
No wish have I in civic pomp to shine;
Nor towering plans for all that courts confer.
Though yet no cynic, still must I prefer
The works of Nature to the whims of Art:
Those speak their God, these oft from God deter;
Those to the soul true health and peace impart,
These oft pervert the head, and oft corrupt the heart.

Ever from unavailing toil remote,
Glad would I hold the tenure of my days;
Reckless what projects in conjecture float,
Who now may seek, or who refuse the bays
Of fickle mobs and bacchanalian lays,
Who yet with courtly feet doth prosperous tread
Dissimulation's sleek and serpent ways,
Or who from off that envied height is sped,
No more erect to bear his once-dishonour'd head.

Still from ourselves alone the bliss we draw,
Which, erring here, at distant springs we claim.
Him whom the follies of the day can awe;
Or, worthier deem'd, to build the lofty name
Who seeks from others his supplies of fame;
Or him whom Fortune's momentary wave
Can plunge unpitied to the depths of shame;
Alas!  what arm shall these from ruin save?&mdash;
Whom every breath may shake, and every toy enslave.

Doth Pomp allure &mdash; what pageant may compare
With half the charms Creation shall display?
Lo!  the great Architect of All declare&mdash;
Not Solomon, in Judah's brightest sway,
Equall'd the lily's meek yet proud array!
Lucre how dear &mdash; for wealth if thou forego
The cheering pillow, and the breezy day!
How droop the wreaths that Fame or Power bestow,
When laid the rich, the high, the vain, the mighty low!

In secret best the humble soul may rise
As grateful incense to th' ETERNAL POWER,
Winging its way above yon passing skies
To HIM who loves the world-excluded hour!
'Tis now that streams of heavenly radiance shower
On the misguided thought; now, that the ways
Of doubted Providence no longer lower;
Now, that th' enlighten'd eyes can firmly gaze
Beyond the precincts drear of this benighted maze.

O!  who that thus, e'en but in faith, can soar
Beyond the turmoil of this mean estate,
Where clouds and error interpose no more,
May well with holy confidence await
The dire vicissitudes of mortal fate:
Hopeful, though here innumerous ills assail,
That yet the good, the beauteous and the great,
O'er sin and pain and terror shall prevail;
Nor justice, if delay'd, reproachfully bewail.

Father of Truth and Life!  the sins forgive
Which here o'ercloud our best and brightest days:
Dark unbelief, when thought by faith to live;
Acts that deny, though words declare thy praise
Oft while thy works the grateful mind amaze,
Point us by these to better things on high;
From this low stage our vain affections raise;
Chasten our wanderings with a pitying eye;
And hear, O God of Grace!  the soul's returning sigh!

Through all the glooms that shade this fallen sphere,
And spite of hearts with direst evil fraught,
THOU, whom thy children still in hope revere;
Whom every form of sinful worship taught,
Sinful if rites &mdash; when thou indeed wert sought;
DESIRE OF NATIONS come!  in truth descend!
Scorn'd are the wonders that thy power has wrought,
E'en on thy courts unhallowed feet attend,
Earth for thy advent groans &mdash; her Author and her End!

Blest is the man to simple feeling true!
Blessed who sees with uncorrupted mind
Nature unvarying, though for ever new,
Only to objects present not confin'd,
Still with the future views the past combin'd;
Educing thus one great continuous end,
Where all things point.  He is not madly blind,
With eyes to see; nor deaf, who thus doth tend
His ear to Wisdom's voice, and all things wisely blend.

Not witless he on reed or spear to lean.
Better, though much by sore experience, taught,
He learns his confidence from man to wean;
And seeks not, therefore, for support in aught
By human prowess or invention wrought.
He now can know, with other aims, to prize
The greatness still by heroes most unsought;
His warmest wishes enter'd in the skies,
Within the Vail he rests his undiverted eyes!

Gay is to him the face that Nature wears;
Morn's waking blush, and meek retiring Eve!
Ten thousand blooms, pluck'd in this vale of tares,
Around his head one fragrant chaplet weave!
His not the transports truth shall undeceive!
Ah!  who hath found of sweets so pure to taste,
Shall surely with no mean contentment leave
The broad-way path o'er which the myriad haste,
Or, lur'd to syren-bowers, their glass of being waste.

Then whether Spring descend in vesture bright,
Or Summer wanton in unnumber'd hues,
Or Autumn cast around a mellowing light,
Or leafless Winter moral truth diffuse;
Whether in Nature's various path we muse,
Or lonely pause amid the City's roar;
Be it in youth, or age, &mdash; the mind pursues
That which alone shall halcyon smiles restore,
The solitary haunt by foe unharass'd more!
