Dark was the night, and bleak the wild winds how'd,
Blue lightnings menac'd, and deep thunders growl'd,
When, lost to every hope of human aid,
Amintor sought the solemn cypress shade,
Where birds ill omen'd wake th' ungrateful strain
That scare lone spectres to their graves again.
A thousand cares with gnawing pangs opprest,
A thousand whirlwind passions storm'd his breast!
That mind which erst poetic fervours fir'd
The transports of extreme despair inspir'd,
Shook ev'ry nerve, and, thro' the madd'ning brain,
Impell'd the darts of agonizing pain!
Where shall he fly?  The world's no more his friend!
What tears await him, and what ills impend?
"Ye Pow'rs!  who gave this vital spark to glow&mdash;
Who gave the crimson tide of life to flow&mdash;
Why doom a wretch, oppress'd with ev'ry ill,
To linger thus in loath'd existence still!"
He said &mdash; when lo!  the fiend accurst, which stood
Half veil'd in shades, and grim with human blood,
Black SUICIDE, approach'd &mdash; beneath his tread
The with'ring flow'rs reclin'd the drooping head;
Deeper the winds among the branches sigh'd,
And startled Nature sought her face to hide!
Round his gall'd neck the strangling cord he wore,
And in his breast the purpled poniard bore;
His hand sustain'd a poison-mantling bowl,
Around whose brim pourtray'd dark adders roll
Thro' wreaths of deadly nightshade, and below
The fatal waters of Oblivion flow.
But near him PROVIDENCE, in azure vest,
Whose countenance celestial love exprest,
Trod the light air &mdash; dispatch'd from Mercy's fane&mdash;
She snatch'd, and dash'd to earth the proferr'd bane.
Apall'd, the daemon view'd her aspect bright,
And sunk, confounded, to the restless realms of night!
While thus the Goddess &mdash; "Son of Earth, forbear,
Nor rashly Heav'n's eternal justice dare!
'Tis not for man, the insect of an hour,
To question, or evade, Almighty Pow'r;
Still be it thine submissive to attend
His will divine, and wait th' important end;
For soon &mdash; full soon &mdash; shall Time's unwearied wing
The promis'd day of explanation bring,
When angels shall approve, and mortals own
His ways th' omniscient ways of righteousness alone!
