'Twas in the golden age, as poets tell,
Ere favour'd man had tasted vice or pain,
Celestial beings deign'd with man to dwell,
And freely mingled in their social train.
'Twas then, to crown their bliss, a heavenly pair,
Love and his sister Joy, left their abode;
Immortal both, and both divinely fair,
Twin offspring of the thunder-wielding god.
Happy mortals, the blissful pair with transport hail,
For tyrants slept, and scolds forget to rail.

Both fair, both young, to pleasure both inclin'd,
Their sympathetic hearts each other meet;
Their union Jupiter himself design'd,
When years arriv'd befitting to the state.
But lo!  ere yet the happy hour befel,
The sons of men, in Vice's eddies whirl'd,
No more content in innocence to dwell,
And Ruin, giant-like, o'er-ran the world,
Astrea, with her blest celestial train,
The abodes of Vice forsook, and Vice-polluted man.

Hope, nurse of Love, her fav'rite charge detain'd,
And to Arcadian groves the boy convey'd;
There 'midst shepherds, long the youth remain'd,
'Till Jove once more appointed he should wed.
Sorrow was now appointed for his bride;
Offspring of Ate &mdash; authoress of strife,
By force, not inclination, he comply'd,
And made the melancholy maid his wife.
Sunk were her eyes, her brows with wrinkles frown,
Cypress (the type of grief) and wormwood was her crown.

Soon was their union with a daughter blest,
Of pensive features, yet divinely fair;
Her parents' tempers might in her be trac'd,
Her father's fondness, and her mother's tear.
Her mother's grief was selfish, and her own
Not kind effusions for another's smart;
Her sire's affections tended still to one,
Nor could a tenderness to all impart.
Pity (their offspring), Love and Sorrow join'd;
Sorrow for human woes, with Love for human kind.

The maids and shepherds of the neighbouring plains,
Around the nymph with fond endearment drew;
Like Love, she thrill'd their breasts with pleasing pains,
And taught the sigh to heave &mdash; the tear to flow.
A calm dejection sat upon her face,
But mild the plastic beauties of her mein;
Her voice was plaintive, yet possessing grace,
Compassion still in every look was seen.
Within her cot, a red-breast built its nest&mdash;
A dove pursu'd, found refuge in her breast.

The nymph, for hours, with fond delight would lay
Hard by some shady purling stream,
And sing, in plaintive strain, from earliest day
To milder even's more congenial gleam;
And when the virgins of the hamlet meet
And stories tell, as seated in a row,
She would to them some woe-fraught tale repeat,
And bid their bosoms melt at other's woe.
Myrtle and cypress for her crown she wore;
The emblem this of Grief, and that of Love.

As near the Helicon (the Muses' stream)
One day she sat, in melancholy mood;
With mind devoted to some mournful theme,
Her tears, by chance, were mingled with the flood:
E'er since, who taste, to Pity are inclin'd.
Hence haply blending with the poet's lay,
To soft compassion melts the tuneful mind,
And learns the heart to yield to Pity's sway,
Blest nymph, to whom a three-fold power is giv'n,
To yield relief &mdash; to soothe &mdash; to wring the soul to heaven.

Pity, by Jupiter's supreme decree,
Her mother's (Sorrow) footsteps e'er attends;
And when a heart is doom'd to Misery,
Binds up its wounds, and free from harm defends.
With garments torn, and loose dishevel'd hair,
With throbbing heart, which heaves the heavy sigh,
With bleeding feet, and panting bosom bare,
She follows Sorrow, and with her shall die:
For die she shall, when happier times betide,
And Love be wed to Joy, his long-bethrothed bride.
