Who chaunts in rural rhymes must sing or say,
The manners of his times with gentle Gay;
For still, tho' spring ten thousand beauties shows,
Where waves the verdure, and where blooms the rose,
Where on the banks the speckled daizies grow,
Where in the vales the brooks mead'ring flow,
Tho' scenes Arcadian still o'erspread our plains,
Foolish our nymphs, and brutish are our swains;
This to maintain in flowing faithful verse,
The strife of Ralph's and Gilbert's muse rehearse;
As near a dunghill they in converse stood,
In tatter'd cloaths, their feet half hid in mud.

GILBERT.
I'm ruin'd, Ralph, Oh!  Ralph, too well 'tis known,
That faithless Dorcas with the squire is gone;
Gone, gone and left me hopeless and in pain,
To groan and rave, yet rave and groan in vain;
For like a dog who under whips doth lie,
With no relief but in his yowls, am I.

RALPH.
Your case, dear Gilbert, is so like my own,
Well may I pity, while you rave and groan.
Six months, alas, are gone since Dolstraw fair,
For distant service, left me to despair;
Forsook these plains, which like a lamp she grac'd,
Or spitted fish in pitch dark cellar plac'd.

GILBERT.
O, Dorcas, Dorcas, dearest maid, with you,
My days like hours, my hours like minutes flew;
When on a sheaf of straw, I'd throw her down,
The gentle maid would call me foolish clown,
When brighter than the sun I'd swear her face,
The lovely maid would call me stupid ass;
And when I'd swear her lips than sweetest fruit,
Were sweeter far, she'd call me horrid brute:
But clown, and ass, and brute, were names of love;
For still she kiss'd like any billing dove.

RALPH.
More tender words did Dolstraw's love reveal,
She call'd me, dearest, when she bade me steal;
I want of onions for a roast, a few,
She'd cry, go fetch them, dearest Ralpho, do;
And, with your picklock, ope the garret door,
And of potatoes, steal a pouchful more;
Some parsnips too, of late, I tasted none,
So, dearest, gentlest, loveliest, Ralpho run.
And O, how sweet was every charming tale,
With which she sooth'd me, when I bottled ale;
And how the charmer toy'd like any lamb,
Whene'er, for her, I happly stole &mdash; a dram.

GILBERT.
In beauty, Dorcas did each maid o'erleap,
As much as swine are uglier than sheep,
As much as dog-dung smells far worse than grass,
So does my Dorcas every maid surpass.

RALPH.
Gilbert, I own, that Dorcas' beauties shine
Brighter, than maidens on the plain but mine;
For O!  but dung in smell to grass, I swear,
And hog to sheep is she, when Dolstraw's near.

GILBERT.
Now hold thee, Ralph, will Dolstraw's locks compare,
Their dirty brown, with Dorcas' coal-black hair?
Will e'er her lips with shining Dorcas' vie?
Or say, with her, can Dolstraw glance her eye?
On Dorcas' cheek fresh blossoms the crimson rose,
But Dolstraw's red is only on her nose;
And fat and flesh her ribs so hugely rig,
For all the world, she's like a sow with pig.

RALPH.
And how looks Dorcas, Gilbert?  Lank and thin;
She seems a hound, starv'd down to bone and skin.
You boast her hair is black, I grant it true,
As true, it is, her teeth are sable too:
A dirty brown, my Dolstraw's hair you name,
If that be true, your Dorcas' skin the same;
It is, I swear, for all the world, more dun,
Than frog's foul back when roasted in the sun.

GILBERT.
But tell me, Ralph, will Dolstraw e'er be seen,
To dance with Dorcas, on the tufted green?
Around on tiptoe, can she nimbly fly?
Or, can she, spring half a fathom high?
This can my Dorcas do; but trust me, Ralph,
Dolstraw behind, too heavy is by half.

RALPH.
If such are said to dance, as want an ear,
The colt and calf are dancers, 'twould appear;
But can she sing, The Barring of the Door,
Or Langolee; or How the Seas did Roar?
The Titty tatty; or The Irish Punk;
Or How the Parson and his clerk got drunk?
All these my Dolstraw sweetly sings; but what
Can Dorcas do, but squall like any cat.

GILBERT.
Ralph, you're a brute; a brute, why, that were well,
The merest brute will never go to hell.

RALPH.
But you man go, and go you shall with speed,
Or know this cudgel quickly break your head.

RUSSET.
Cease, clowns, your strife, your oaken clubs forego,
I'll end your disputes without blood or blow;
I heard them from the barn, and hither sped,
To tell thee, Ralph, that you're a father made.
Dolstraw, it seems, has got a charming boy,
And calls him yours, so Ralph, I wish you joy.

RALPH.
A plague confound your joy!  Would I were dead;
But more, I wish the turf on Dolstraw's head.
The brat each year will cost, at least, three pound;
&mdash;I wish the mother and the brat were drown'd.

RUSSET.
Gilbert, you smile at Ralph's unhappy fate,
Go on, but know what ills yourself await;
The squire, it seems, has said, that he can prove
You kill'd a hare, and broke his apple grove;
And now to seize you, all the justice's gang
Are sent abroad, so, Gilbert, you may hang.

GILBERT.
O curse my Dorcas, for, as death is true,
'Twas her that told him; for she only knew.
To scent her smocks did I the orchard break,
And sold the hare for garnets to her neck;
But had I known, around her neck I'd chuse,
Instead of beads, to fix a hempen noose.

RALPH.
I hate this bastard, and I've grudg'd this while
Behind the plow so long and hard to toil;
An easy life a soldier has, and so
God save the King, I'll for a soldier go.

GILBERT.
And I'll go with you, tho' they're listing hot;
The war is over, and we'll not be shot.

RUSSET.
At least till each has got another wench.

RALPH AND GILBERT.
And drown'd his cares in floods of glorious punch.
