How shall the Muse aspire in heav'nward flight
Towards an all-transcending theme of praise,
Which now harmoniously through realms of light
Flows in seraphic strains of heavenly lays!
This ever-memorable day of joy
With holy rapture through Heaven's concave rings;
Angelic choirs their golden harps employ;
And each the wondrous condescention sings,
That Heaven's annointed King, the Son of God,
Chang'd his all-perfect bliss, for sinful man's abode.

Lo, in the East, the radiant Source of Day
Emerges forth; a pure celestial smile
Comes with his peerless all-enliv'ning ray,
On Nature's face all sorrow to beguile;
At his approach, obedient Night retires
Westward with speed on his primeval car;
A cloud on yonder mountain slow aspires,
On spicy breezes wafted from afar;
Border'd with varied tints, made fair and bright
In the translucid stream of Heaven's jacinthine light.

Once more, ye Saints, exult in jubilee;
With hymns of Sion hail the day's return;
Let all mankind in unison agree,
And gladly celebrate th' approaching morn.
O ye exalted pleasures of the soul!
Bright emanations of Omnipotence!
Still may your sacred influence controul
Th' inelegant desires of earthly sense;
And guide each wanderer on the star-gilt way,
To Pleasure's fountain-head and everlasting day!

Ye who are bless'd beneath a temperate zone,
In sacred song O let your praise aspire;
With lays of love address Messiah's throne;
To extacy awake the warbling wire;
Whilst I in humble verse attempt the strains,
Where torrid climes their burning influence shed,
In longitude remote from England's plains,
And feverish heat oppressive wounds my head;
Yet let me in the Hallelujah join,
And thankfully adore the depth of Love Divine.

O could Salvation's word of life extend
To the poor Indians of this friendly shore,
With gratitude, I ween, each knee would bend,
And each warm heart its thankful tribute pour.
Although, in realms remote, the sacred sound
Of Gospel truths more favour'd nations hear,
Yet in this Isle Heaven's mercy shall abound,
An unknown Saviour's merits it shall share:
True worth escapes not his all-seeing eye,
But shall its meed receive in immortality.

As I revisit yonder solemn grove,
Whose trees their interwoven branches spread,
Where feather'd warblers chaunt wild notes of love,
That echo through th' impenetrable shade
Their artless strains with gratitude well stor'd,
Fraught with reproof, assail my list'ning ear;
Shall Christians cease to praise great Nature's Lord?
Forbid it, Heaven!  their minds from darkness clear;
Let them with humble zeal glad offerings bring
To their Redeeming Power, the Saints' Eternal King.

O Thou, at whose all-powerful edict sprung,
From night's abyss, yon sparkling worlds of light,
When with new joy th' eternal regions rung,
And ever-during beauty charm'd the sight,
As it survey'd creation's ample scope;
Uphold thy creature, Man; with thy rich grace,
Sent to his labouring soul celestial hope,
From thence all gloomy cares far hence to chace;
And when Death's ministers his peace invade,
Be then thy rod and staff his all-sufficient aid.
