As in a woodbine bower I pensive sat,
Musing on things that form Life's little day;
Where Virtue suffers by the frowns of Fate,
And all the sorrows of Adversity;
Insensibly the Sun's meridian ray
(Whose genial influence warm'd the vernal shade)
Lull'd me to sleep; whilst Fancy on her way
Through visionary scenes new truths convey'd,
Th' events of Human Life her images pourtray'd.

Methought 'twas in the flow'ry month of May,
When Nature had her fairest robe acquir'd;
Majestically slow, the king of day
Beneath the golden hemisphere retir'd;
When nightly Philomel was reinspir'd
With gratitude, that strain'd her little throat;
The primrose hills, in beauty now attir'd,
Re-echo'd back the sweetly plaintive note,
That on the ambient air melodiously did float.

Near that sequester'd rural scene I stray'd,
Where Avon's waters in soft murmurs glide;
Whose verdant banks, in violets array'd,
O'erhung the surface the hast'ning tide,
No cloud conspir'd to blot th' ethereal void,
Where in fresh lustre beam'd the ev'ning star,
Where Contemplation ever is employ'd,
And Discord never interpos'd to marr
Her high celestial flight through regions wide and far.

When lo!  from the green summit of a hill,
Descending slow an aged Sire appear'd;
At his approach the murm'ring breeze grew still;
And fragrant flow'rs their drooping heads uprear'd.
Doubt seiz'd my heart; but soon his presence clear'd
My wond'ring mind, when a benignant smile
Shone in his countenance, wherein appear'd
True sanctity, and wisdom void of guile,
Unruffled by the storms of passions base and vile.

The Sage drew near, I made an awful bow,
Saying, in quest of Peace I hither came:
When from his lips these courteous words did flow;
"Of Solitude the Genius is my name.
Thy wand'ring in these haunts are void of blame,
Here Innocence and Peace are safe from foes;
Here Meditation views the wond'rous frame
Of that expanse where endless order grows;
Where heav'nly harmony from chaos first arose.

"In honour of the great and sacred name
Of HIM, from whom all real pleasures flow!
To thee I would endeavour to proclaim
The joys that in these haunts spontaneous grow;
In these lov'd shades the soul of Man may know
The native worth in which she most excels;
Here she may find relief from pain and woe;
Here Virtue free from persecution dwells,
And sweet, celestial Hope the ills of Life repels.

"The paths of Virtue let me not disguise,
It is replete indeed with toil and pain,
Narrow yet safe the way, and rich the prize
Offer'd by Heav'n; it is eternal gain.
And who would from the glorious toil refrain?
Tho' adverse Fate around her influence throws;
Yet smiling Hope points to the heav'nly plain
Of Paradise, where joy for ever grows,
And all is pure delight and permanent repose.

"'Twas near this spot, by Avon's winding stream,
Immortal SHAKSPEARE tun'd the lyre to love;
When to the height of each exalted theme
On Fancy's wings upborne his thoughts would rove;
'Twas Solitude, and the sequester'd grove
Where his high thoughts their origin had birth;
The greatness of his mind, how far above
The giddy scenes of luxury and mirth,
Whose pleasures ne'er could lure his soul's transcendent worth.

"Here the fond mother, whose illumin'd eye
Beams with delight and inexpressive love
To see her child inspir'd with piety,
And in each op'ning day his mind improve,
Her warmest wish obtains:  the solemn grove,
The silent shades, and the sequester'd bower,
In earliest youth exalt his thoughts above
This world, and arm his with resistless pow'r
'Gainst Pleasure's secret charm, or Pain's distressful hour.

"In Life' bright morn, the energy of youth,
And love of Solitude, when well employ'd,
To the best paths of Science and of Truth
Form an unerring and perpetual guide;
Unchangeably the same, whate'er betide
The traveller in Life's eventful road;
To keep the wav'ring mind exempt from pride,
And that dire path the slaves of vice have trod;
With all th' alluring charms of Pleasure's soft abode.

"Thrice happy those, whom early years inspire
With precepts of divine Philosophy;
Whose youthful minds industriously acquire
Instruction from their earliest infancy;
Supremely blest their future days shall be,
Mark'd with the deeds of wisdom, which will claim
Honour and praise from their posterity,
Who shall display the records of their name,
And all their virtuous deeds give to immortal fame.

"To them each object glows full rich and gay,
In which appears the great omniscient Mind
Incomprehensible; whose works display
A perfect order wide and unconfin'd,
Diffus'd through all Creation, and design'd
For various purposes to man unknown;
Where Providence, with care for ever kind,
None overlooks, no creature doth disown,
In all, 'twixt lifeless clay and Life's eternal throne.

"Wouldst thou improve the pleasures of the soul,
Go frequently to Nature's varying scene,
There meditate and view without controul
Her loveliness:  there pious YOUNG has been,
Beneath the beams of Night's resplendent queen
The wonders of Omnipotence to trace;
Where deathless NEWTON frequently was seen
To calculate the stars etherial race,
And the mysterious laws of all-creative space.

"For incorporeal pleasures of the mind
Are free, unchangeable, and void of gloom;
In their duration no decay we find,
But see them flourish with unfading bloom,
Triumphant o'er the terrors of the tomb,
On Seraph's plumes at length with speed they go;
Borne from this world to that which is to come,
They quit the dark ignoble scenes below,
And gain the source from whence all real pleasures glow.

"In ages past, the good, the great, the brave
Did visit frequently the peaceful grove;
To fit the mind to stem life's hostile wave,
Or tune the soul to harmony and love.
There Prophets and Apostles did improve
Their hearts in holiness and strength of mind;
And godlike wisdom, sent from Heav'n above,
Disclos'd important truths that were design'd
For ev'ry future age t' illuminate mankind.

"Yet fain I would to nobler themes aspire,
Far greater strains to Solitude I'd sing;
O could I raise them infinitely higher,
I to Messiah's name would offerings bring;
Of him the Heavens in loud hosannas ring,
Yet did he dwell on earth, and oft would go,
From man retir'd, with Heaven's Almighty King,
To save mankind from everlasting woe,
And give Death's antient pow'r the last avenging blow.

"In Life's last stage, the sweets of Solitude
Uninterrupted pleasures do afford;
No false delusive vices now intrude,
The heart's no more by flatt'ry overpower'd;
Man's shatter'd bark is happily restor'd
To rest from scenes where ills in torrents roll
Through stormy Life.  Now Nature's bounteous Lord
Is an unfailing shelter to the soul;
And will in Life's last hour the sting of death controul.

"Revisit frequently this verdant plain;
The relaxation from Life's busy stage
Will recreate thy faculties again,
For things that may thy active pow'rs engage:
Whether in scenes of war's tumultuous rage,
Or in the school of Science, t' invite
Youth to Instruction's ever pleasing page,
Display her treasures to the ravish'd sight,
And fill the tender mind with wonder and delight.

"So shalt thou welcome that important day,
When Heav'n's all powerful mandate shall return
Thy mortal part to moulder with the clay,
Or sleep untroubled in the silent urn.
Thy soul, on Hope's triumphant wings upborne,
Gladly shall quit her late obscure abode,
(Wherein oppress'd with ills she once did mourn,)
And speed her flight on the celestial road,
Where angels guard the way to happiness and God."

He said no more, but still his meaning eye
Beam'd forth a ray of wisdom's heav'nly light.
Now Cynthia, in her native majesty,
From Eastern clouds arose upon my sight,
And made the lucid atmosphere more bright.
The reverend sage bad me a kind adieu,
That did my warmest gratitude excite;
Then disappear'd.  Sleep from my eyes withdrew,
And on her wings far hence the fond delusion flew.
