Now, urg'd by Daemons, spread insatiate war.
O'er the rich plains of Normandy it rag'd,
As PHILIP led his murd'rous force, and far
In work of ruin and of death engag'd.
His fury pitiless no tears assuag'd;
In vain th' imploring maid protection claim'd,
The infant smil'd, or bow'd the helpless ag'd:
He mark'd his way with cruelty untam'd,
By savage hope of prey and thirst of blood inflam'd.

Meantime, supplied with leaders for his force,
Who arms convey'd and store of Gallic gold,
JOHN felt no sense of duty or remorse,
Nor check'd his foul career by caution cold.
Daring in ill, in trait'rous mischief bold,
He stood unmask'd, and RICHARD'S pow'r defied.
The fatal standard of revolt unroll'd
Wav'd o'er the harrass'd realm with gloomy pride,
Denouncing future woes and horrors yet untried.

No name of high renown his numbers grac'd,
No knightly worth his enterprise adorn'd.
True to their King, by treasons undebas'd,
While England's Peers the Prince's conduct mourn'd,
They shunn'd his councils and his proffers scorn'd:
But such as crimes for tumult had prepar'd,
Such as foregone experience had not warn'd,
Who peril's front for hope of booty dar'd,
Rush'd at the cry of war, and to his host repair'd.

These, rude in fight, to deeds of arms unus'd,
The Gallic Chiefs to rule obedient made,
And to just rank and discipline reduc'd.
But he, whom tribes of hardy Welsh obey'd,
LLEWELLYN proud, brought more efficient aid.
From Conway's flood, and Snowdon's long-drawn height,
From the rich vale where winding Severn stray'd,
And where mild Clwyd roll'd with fond delight,
Th' assembled warriors rais'd their banners for the fight.

From where his dyke the Saxon OFFA drew,
And Brythyn rears his bulk abrupt and dread,
To join LLEWELLYN'S host the bowmen flew.
Where Caeder Idris lifts his forked head,
Where foaming Dee tears o'er her craggy bed,
And where Llangollen, blest secluded shade!
Smiles 'midst embattled rocks around her spread,
Each ready Chief LLEWELLYN'S voice obey'd,
And led his vassals bold, and high his shield display'd.

On ev'ry mountain's side, on ev'ry plain,
The minstrels rais'd the soul-inspiring song.
As from their fervid strings awoke the strain,
It bore remembrance of resentments strong,
Of glories past, of unrequited wrong,
And rous'd to deeds of vengeance and of blood.
The mad'ning influence seiz'd th' attendant throng,
Each manly bosom glow'd with hope renew'd,
And own'd th' enchanting sway of music's powerful flood.

From times remote, between the neighb'ring pow'rs
Discord had reign'd, and ever-during hate:
Their confines, guarded by unnumber'd tow'rs,
Shew'd deadly proofs of long and fierce debate,
Which sprung from jealous fears and feuds innate.
LLEWELLYN now the glad occasion seiz'd,
When civil warfare shook the English state:
Vengeful he led his warlike bands, well pleas'd
On England's plains to glut his fury unappeas'd.

As when a trav'ller lone, 'mid winter's snow,
Pursues his midnight way with doubtful feet,
And o'er some wild heath moves with progress slow;
Should from the darken'd sky new tempests beat,
In vain he seeks a friendly roof to meet,
In vain with piteous cry for help he calls:
Aghast he stands, unable to retreat;
Grief rends his heart, despair his soul appals,
He staggers, and entranc'd in death's embrace he falls.

Such was the state of England's hapless realm.
Where ruthless Pestilence triumphant reign'd,
And Famine join'd her glories to o'erwhelm,
Pangs more severe to crown her woes remain'd.
Urg'd by the pow'rs of Hell, with blood distain'd,
Her fatal torch on high Rebellion wav'd,
And widely rang'd with fury unrestrain'd:
O'er heaps of slain she held her course deprav'd,
While in th' encrimson'd flood her limbs obscene she lav'd.

Her outspread pinions cut the troubled air,
And vengeance lighten'd from her baleful eye,
As her foul glances scowl'd o'er England fair.
Tow'rds the rich vales on Trenta's banks which lie
She flew, while loud she rais'd her fearful cry,
Pregnant with fate, prophetical of woes.
'Gainst Fiends combin'd their arts accurs'd to ply,
In vain did Nottingham her tow'rs oppose:
Her ill-defended gates receiv'd her monarch's foes.

Nor stay'd the Daemon.  To LLEWELLYN'S force,
Whose rapid movements spread alarm around,
She bent incessant her vindictive course.
Inspir'd by her their march the rebels wound.
Where Lancaster, by frowning bulwarks crown'd,
O'erlooks the deep, she led the conq'ring host:
And Windsor, weak and unprotected found,
And Wallingford, by fraud and treason lost,
Increas'd th' usurper's pride and justified his boast.

Now, swifter than the angry bolt which cleaves,
When charg'd with wrath divine, the nitrous air,
The basely-yielded battlements she leaves.
Where on the southern coast, abrupt and bare
St. Michael's stubborn rocks the ocean dare,
Mock at its fruitless rage, and spurn its sway,
She hastens the assailant's toils to share.
There, as with potent spells she spreads dismay,
The walls which storms defied degenerate fears betray.

Well did the Fiend her hateful task perform;
Far did her desolating power prevail:
Uncheck'd she rul'd the wide-extending storm,
While Hell's dire chorus join'd her work to hail,
As borne aloft, and mounting in the gale,
Her mandates to fulfil they ruthless flew;
And, charg'd with many an ill-boding tale,
Her ghastly-sounding trumpet Rumour blew,
And scatter'd mischiefs strange, and terrors round her threw.

Where'er with foul intent she steer'd her course,
Her cry portentous doubts and fears awoke.
Now of JOHN'S host, now of LLEWELLYN'S force,
And now of PHILIP'S puissant bands she spoke;
Now, in false semblance their designs to cloak,
She told of dangers which the state oppress'd,
Of fancied ills, and harsh oppression's yoke:
Each casual woe in colours dire she dress'd,
To check reviving hope, and pang the cred'lous breast.

While Treason thus advanc'd with progress bold,
And menac'd England's throne, the Chiefs august,
To whom their King had giv'n his power to hold,
With watchful care discharg'd the sacred trust.
No weak alarm, no momentary gust
Of partial discontent their toils requir'd;
But ruin widely spread, ambition's lust
By hopes intemp'rate and successes fir'd,
And Hell's tremendous pow'rs against the realm conspir'd.

Four Chiefs compos'd the council of the state,
By absent RICHARD nam'd his power to bear.
Of these the first in rank and order sate
Rouen's wise Prelate; well his judgment clear
The bark of state thro' troubled seas could steer:
To him the chief direction was assign'd;
While Durham's Bishop, and the bold BRYWERE,
With brave FITZ-PETER, in the trust were join'd,
And for the public cause their active zeal combin'd.

With high pre-eminence and station grac'd,
The royal ELINOR her state maintain'd,
By RICHARD'S filial love as Regent plac'd.
Her kind maternal cares his youth had train'd,
Nurs'd every virtue, every fault restrain'd,
And trac'd his path to glory and renown.
Ambition wild and passions strong had stain'd
Her earlier years; but now, more temp'rate grown,
She wisely rul'd the realm, and guarded well the crown.

Soon as Rebellion rear'd her hateful head,
With prudent care the means of war she plann'd.
From his remote domains FITZ-PETER led
Of northern warriors a determin'd band,
LLEWELLYN'S rude irruption to withstand:
While, London to protect from arts undue,
From every quarter of his wide command
BRYWERE his well-appointed legions drew,
The recreant Prince to check, and crush his desperate crew.

While these prepar'd in contest rude to meet,
While high in air their adverse banners swell'd,
The Queen, at Westminster's imperial seat,
With the remaining Chiefs assembly held.
From the deluded people they repell'd
The arts employ'd their senses to enslave;
And, as they faction's daring efforts quell'd,
To their mov'd souls they glad assurance gave
Of RICHARD'S quick return his suff'ring realm to save.

The flatt'ring rumour soon obtain'd belief:
For now arriv'd from Judah's distant coast
Leicester's brave Earl, and many a gallant chief.
Of RICHARD'S worth they spoke with heart-felt boast,
Who, tho' by adverse fate and treach'ry cross'd,
Ne'er ceas'd his matchless valour to display.
They told, that, ere they left the vet'ran host,
A mighty fleet in Acre's harbour lay,
The King and all his force tow'rds England to convey.

Reviving Hope each loyal bosom cheer'd:
With freshen'd zeal she spread her joys around,
And wove her wreaths and fancied trophies rear'd.
Trophies how vain!  and wreaths how fading found!
Thus, when by ice and ocean's terrors bound,
Some fog-drawn Island greets the seaman's sight,
His heart expands, he hails th' enticing ground;
When lo!  in clouds ascends the vision bright,
Melts from his anxious eye, and vanishes in night!

Such was the scene which Hope transported sketch'd,
Of triumphs new and vainly promis'd good.
Along th' embattled cliffs, which, proudly stretch'd,
Oppos'd their barrier to the billows rude,
And, reckless of the idly threat'ning flood,
Guarded fair England with their bulwarks steep,
Expecting crouds with fond impatience stood:
Ere morn approach'd they rush'd their watch to keep,
Nor ceas'd to gaze 'till night in darkness cloath'd the deep.

When, 'cross the green waves as it faintly glanc'd,
Was seen some half-obscur'd and distant sail,
Which to the thickly-peopled shore advanc'd,
It's bosom swelling with the fav'ring gale,
High rose the shout it's bless'd approach to hail.
Fleet was the joy which fancy thus pursued!
Vain was the wish encourag'd but to fail!
Yet still the anxious eye it's search renew'd,
And Hope still unsubdued fresh disappointment woo'd.

At length, declining from his noon-tide seat,
The orb of day with milder lustre glow'd,
When widely rang'd appear'd a gallant fleet.
As o'er the waves triumphantly it rode,
High in the air the crimson pennants flow'd,
And, as by Zephyr urg'd, aloft they stream'd,
The proud emblazonments of England shew'd.
On every deck unnumber'd helmets gleam'd,
And corslets richly chas'd with strong effulgence beam'd.

Th' admiring croud beheld them with delight,
And hail'd their blest approach with loud acclaim.
While some still gaz'd and hung upon the sight,
And fondly call'd on each endearing name
Long lost to love, tho' dignified by fame,
Others, impatient to the Queen to bear
The welcome tidings, and her thanks to claim,
Rush'd from the summits, emulous to share
Her triumphs long obscur'd by sorrow and despair.

As from the wond'rous tube th' electric fire
By strong collision forc'd pervades each hand
Which grasps in concert the conducting wire,
So from the heights and thickly crouded strand
Shouts of new transport fill'd th' exulting land.
With raptur'd ear Hope caught the pleasing sound,
And, as with mounting wing the air she fann'd,
She breath'd her notes of extacy around,
Of pow'r to raise the soul and treason to confound.

Meantime, their course the lordly vessels kept.
As thro' the tranquil deep they cut their way,
Their pennants o'er the curling billows swept,
Or wanton'd in the air with am'rous play.
Now Dover's stately cliffs, whose dread array
Frown'd o'er the subject waves, they leave behind:
Now, as their lab'ring prows the helm obey,
And as their white sails quiver in the wind,
They hail old Thames, too long for distant war resign'd.

Borne on his placid bosom they advanc'd,
While on the varied shores on either hand
With eager eye and fond delight they glanc'd.
But soon, where Greenwich crowns the Kentish strand,
On Shooter's verdant top they saw expand
The royal standard.  Proudly o'er the height
It wav'd in air, by gentlest breezes fann'd.
A general shout proclaim'd th' auspicious sight,
Each warlike heart confess'd a patriot's warm delight.

The shores re-echo'd with the joyful cry:
Thro' the throng'd camp unbounded transport spread,
While Zephyrs, sporting in the midway sky,
Caught the enliv'ning sound, and fondly shed
Their joys inspiring.  O'er the drooping head
Of royal Elinor their influence fell,
What time, oppress'd by care and anguish dread,
In council close she sought the means to quell
The menac'd scene of blood, the deep laid plan of hell.

Upstarting from her couch, with hurried voice,
"Chieftains!" she cried, "heard ye the welcome sound?
Hence terrors vain!  let England now rejoice!
RICHARD returns, by fame and glory crown'd,
Rebellion's rash abettors to confound.
Hark how again his much lov'd, honour'd name
Throughout the camp is echo'd, while around
Exulting bands their loyalty proclaim,
All emulous to pay their homage to his fame!

"Their conscious hearts their Monarch's worth confess,
His force in arms, his triumphs o'er the foe:
And shall a Mother be the last to bless
Her valiant son, or, while her fond tears flow,
Delay the feelings of her heart to shew?
Ah!  let me hasten to his dear embrace!
And, while our souls with speechless raptures glow,
Be mine th' extatic transport to retrace
Those virtues which adorn the noblest of his race!"

Thus spoke the Queen; and, issuing from the tent,
She cross'd the camp, and tow'rds the verdant plain
Which lay out stretch'd beneath her steps she bent.
Meanwhile of warriors an illustrious train
Advancing throng'd, impatient to regain
Their Prince rever'd:  no more, oppress'd by care,
Suspense their breasts consum'd with ling'ring pain;
Gladly they sought the present bliss to share,
And, led by him they lov'd, new triumphs to prepare.

Th' exulting band the summit now had clear'd,
When lo!  as if on import high intent,
Approaching from the river's side appear'd
A troop tumultuous.  Up the steep ascent
Th' impatient croud their hurrying footsteps bent.
Wild was their mien, and frantic seem'd their air:
Thro' mingled murmurs rose their loud lament;
Some struck their breasts, some tore their flowing hair,
And some high Heav'n address'd in shrieks of mad despair.

A female form advanc'd before the rest,
In habits rich and royal state array'd:
A sanguine cross depended on her breast;
On her fair brow a diadem display'd
It's brilliant orb, and in the sun-beams play'd.
She droop'd with grief subdued and speechless woe;
While on her steps two sad attendants stay'd,
Whose pious sorrows seem'd like her's to flow,
As tow'rds the camp they mov'd with progress sad and slow.

"What means this mournful train," exclaim'd the Queen,
"Why raise they thus their soul-appalling cry,
What new-born woe portends their sorrowing mien?
Will fate relentless still my suit deny;
Still from my grasp must bliss expected fly,
And hope protracted still delusive prove?
Mark!  how again with wild and haggard eye
Yon weeping fair one seeks the heav'ns to move,
And rears her trembling hands, and raves of hopeless love!

"And now, behold!  on us with glances keen
Her look she fixes; now, with anxious haste
Tow'rds us she bends her way.  'Tis RICHARD'S Queen!
His BERENGARIA lov'd!  his consort chaste!
She comes!  no longer let us idly waste
The awful moment big with England's fate.
Howe'er our future prospects may be trac'd,
Tho' unfelt horrors may the realm await,
Unaw'd the stroke we'll meet, and mock at fortune's hate!"

Scarce had she ended, when approaching near
To her embrace the lovely mourner sprung.
Entranc'd with woe and agonizing fear,
Each on the other's bosom speechless hung,
While strong contending passions chain'd each tongue,
And tears refus'd their succour to impart.
At length, her breast with pangs convulsive wrung,
"Here, here," cried ELINOR, "infix thy dart!
"Here strike, nor dread to wound a mother's sorrowing heart!

"Say, lives my RICHARD!  Where is England's King?
Pity the anguish of my lab'ring soul,
And ease the tortures from suspense which spring!
Has war's fell chance, have treason's workings foul
Prevail'd his course of glory to controul?
No &mdash; in the purpled field, 'midst carnage dread,
Methinks I see, while thunders round him roll,
Immortal spirits hover o'er his head,
And 'gainst remorseless fate their shields protecting spread!"

"Oh!  may indeed the hand of Heav'n defend
His sacred life!" the weeping Queen replied,
"May angels o'er his path their cares extend,
And fav'ring seraphs still his footsteps guide!
Whether thro' oceans turbulent and wide
His light bark dances on the treach'rous wave,
Or, 'mid new toils and perils yet untried,
He lives some tyrant's cruelty to brave,
May Heav'n's propitious pow'r my suff'ring hero save!

"On distant coasts, 'mid climes severe and rude,
Where war's dread fiend her utmost malice drain'd,
One course, unaw'd by perils we pursued,
While hope still smil'd, and love his sway maintain'd.
HUBERT!  who long with constancy unstain'd
Thy gallant lord hast serv'd, the chance relate,
Which, ere the shores of England we regain'd,
Forc'd him, the victim of remorseless hate,
Far from my constant arms again to tempt his fate."

"A mournful tale," said HUBERT, "you demand.
When by the falsehood of his base allies,
By war's fell chance which thinn'd his suff'ring band,
And by the want of long desir'd supplies,
RICHARD was forc'd to quit his wish'd-for prize,
And peace with vanquish'd SALADIN to make,
From Acre's harbour, where superbly rise
The tow'rs which erst his valour taught to shake,
Tow'rd England's lov'd domain he sought his course to take.

"Vast was the fleet and royally it shew'd;
Around the standard which majestic wav'd,
Aloft in air two hundred pennants flow'd.
Those whom the fost'ring hand of Heav'n had sav'd,
When in the battle's front they oft had brav'd
The stroke of fate on Palestine's blest coast,
Midst holy scenes too long by guilt deprav'd,
By blood acquir'd, and now by treasons lost,
Rous'd by their monarch's call compos'd his princely host.

"To Asia's shores we bad a long farewell,
Heav'd the broad anchor, spread the flowing sail,
And felt the buoyant waves of ocean swell.
All nature seem'd our enterprise to hail:
Our barks, obedient to the fav'ring gale,
Cut the green billows as they curling play'd;
By night our course the moon with splendour pale
Illumin'd, while, in fiery pomp array'd,
The sun by day his orb from heav'n's high arch display'd.

"Chearful and gay, across the wat'ry plain
In order due our tranquil course we held.
Far on our right, just rising from the main,
With outline faint the hills of Cyprus swell'd,
That isle renown'd, which RICHARD'S power compell'd
For breach of faith his sway supreme to own,
It's rights restor'd, it's lawless tyrant quell'd.
Gazing we pass'd, as on it's summits brown
The setting sun spread wide a rich empurpled crown.

"Still breath'd th' inspiring gale, and soon the sky
Tinted with gold it's azure radiance wore:
In calm repose old ocean seem'd to lie,
As when the fabled deities of yore
O'er bounding waves their monarch's chariot bore,
And charm'd to peace the terrors of the deep.
Now, skirting by Scarpanti's craggy shore,
We view'd the Rhodian promontory steep,
Where amid roses sweet, envenom'd serpents creep.

"With fragrance charg'd our sails the breezes fill'd,
While, slowly rising from th' horizon grey,
In cloudless majesty her ample shield
The moon with mild effulgence 'gan display.
As mounting high she held her awful way,
Ting'd with her silv'ry light on ev'ry side
Unnumber'd isles in rich confusion lay,
Half seen, and half obscur'd, extending wide,
While round their bases broke the gently murm'ring tide.

"Fair dawn'd the day, when, op'ning to our view,
We saw the Cretan shores their length disclose.
Bright with the morning ray, and fresh with dew,
The lofty pinnacles of Ida rose,
As when, by love allur'd and soft repose,
Imperial JOVE to it's recesses came.
And now the isle which wanton VENUS chose,
Cythera green we saw, well known to fame
For myst'ries most impure and lust's unhallow'd flame.

"Tho' low in dust now lay her impious fane,
Tho' crouds no more her prostrate altars sought
With blushless front to urge their suit profane,
It seem'd as there some influence curs'd still wrought.
Thick vapours from the south collecting brought
Night premature, and gloom around us spread;
Still'd was the breeze; 'midst clouds with sulphur fraught
The sun declining glar'd with fiery red,
And tremulous shot his rays denouncing horrors dread.

"No breath of wind disturb'd th' expanse serene,
Which still, as pass'd the clouds, appear'd t' assume
Strange tints of purple, black, or varying green,
Now streak'd with light, and now obscur'd in gloom,
As, from her deep unfathomable womb,
Sullen and slow the wild sea heaving roll'd.
Fancy, prophetic of approaching doom,
Sketch'd scenes of woe and terrors yet untold,
And o'er our hearts maintain'd dominion uncontroul'd.

"Soon was fulfill'd her presage.  From the south
High mounting waves confess'd the furious blast,
And rear'd their foaming heads with force uncouth.
As on they roll'd, aloft their spray they cast,
While ocean, trembling thro' his caverns vast,
Re-echoing shook:  from his profound domain
Th' affrighted tenants of the deep aghast
Uprear'd their writhing forms, and sought in vain
To shun the threaten'd ill, and fly impending pain.

"For now, with horrors arm'd, the tempest came.
Darkness and clouds obscur'd the murky sky,
Save when, across the gloom, with livid flame
Quick-glancing light'nings shot their glare on high:
Mast'ring the water's roar, the seaman's cry,
In dreadful chorus thunders shook the air:
Borne on the whirlwind's wing, with haggard eye
Death led the storm; he shook his right arm bare,
And smil'd with joy malign to view his feast prepare.

"Helpless awhile on ruin's work we gaz'd,
Our rudders lost, and torn each spreading sail;
On every deck the mariners uprais'd
Their trembling hands, high Heav'n with pray'r t' assail.
Shrouded in night's impenetrable veil,
They ask'd for light.  To mock their hopeless woe,
A stream sulphureous gleam'd with lustre pale,
Gilding the terrors of the deep, to shew
The rocks which menac'd fate, the gulphs which yawn'd below.

"Still beat the rain, and still the tempest blew;
By force resistless urg'd, o'er billows vast
Lashing their shatter'd sides our vessels flew.
Now, from their eminence tremendous cast,
With rapid course precipitate we pass'd,
Lost in th' abysses of the wat'ry world:
Now, by new force impell'd, and mounting fast,
High in the air our straining barks were hurl'd,
Rode on the giant waves, and topp'd their summits curl'd.

"At length the day with welcome radiance beam'd.
Of all our fleet, where, but on yester's morn,
With comely pride two hundred pennants stream'd,
Not fifty barks were seen.  These, with sails torn,
And shiver'd masts, on the wild waves were borne,
As will'd the storm which still unsated rag'd,
And seem'd our vain and feeble toils to scorn.
Fire, water, air, infernal warfare wag'd,
And fiends exulting howl'd, and woes unknown presag'd.

"With glance impatient o'er the briny plain
We sought the ship which royal RICHARD bore.
Ye, who, when happiness ye look'd to gain,
When wide displaying all her richest store
Approaching bliss her smiles extatic wore,
Have seen the vision vanish into air,
And promis'd joy on faithless pinions soar,
Ye best can feel our woe, our mute despair,
When fruitless prov'd our search and vain our anxious care.

"Hopeless and sad 'mid rocks and shoals we drove:
Fortune still frown'd, and still our gallant band
Was doom'd the horrors of the sea to prove.
Where the Messenian capes their arms expand,
Driv'n on the rude inhospitable strand
Two luckless barks were wreck'd.  Nor OSBERT brave,
Nor CAUNVILLE, high in prowess and command,
Their well-earn'd fame or worth renown'd could save:
O'erwhelm'd they sank in death, and found a watery grave.

"Nor was to CLARE a fate less harsh allow'd.
His shatter'd bark a mighty wave o'ertook
As the rude bosom of the deep it plough'd,
Swept it's wide deck, and all its timbers shook.
Nor courage cool nor dignity forsook
The falling hero:  as with hope elate
To Heav'n he turn'd his last departing look,
He smil'd to meet inevitable fate,
Alike in war's dread front and in misfortunes great.

"Vain were th' attempt each scene of woe to paint,
To speak the terrors which our hearts oppress'd.
Exhausted by excessive toil, and faint,
We view'd the setting sun.  Far in the west
By murky clouds obscur'd he sank to rest,
Horrific emblem of our threaten'd doom!
With tears of agony we Heav'n address'd,
While, thro' the far-spread and increasing gloom,
Each foaming billow seem'd our inauspicious tomb.

"But milder prov'd th' omnipotent decree.
Severe in judgment, the almighty will
Poises the balance, and with just degree
The measure of his wrath apportions still.
The storm, which rag'd his purpose to fulfil,
Check'd by his power supreme, no longer blew:
Again, responsive to the pilot's skill,
O'er the smooth sea our shatter'd vessels flew;
Again reviving hope our panting bosoms knew.

"From Heav'n's high arch in brilliancy array'd,
The starry host their chearing influence shed,
And gently o'er the face of ocean play'd;
While, mounting slowly from her tranquil bed,
The orb of night her placid lustre spread.
Exhausted nature seem'd to court repose.
Yet still, tormented by remembrance dread,
In every heart reflections sad arose
Of RICHARD seen no more, of suff'ring England's woes.

"The morning dawn'd, and light returning brought
To our enraptur'd view Corcyra's coast.
Within her hospitable port we sought
A safe asylum for our wearied host.
There, by the tempest's savage fury toss'd,
Four of our scatter'd Chiefs had refuge found:
PETTEREL and FULK, their sails and rudder lost,
SAVILLE, whose bark lay stranded on the ground,
And ESSEX, puissant Earl, in many a fight renown'd.

"We hail'd the lov'd companions of our toil,
And, while refitting our dismantled fleet,
We sought misfortune's pressure to beguile
With friendly intercourse and converse sweet.
Yet oft would mem'ry from her lonely seat
The perils dark of England's King recal;
Oft would our tongues his name rever'd repeat,
Oft from our eyes th' unbidden tear would fall,
And doubts and wild despair our tortur'd souls appal.

"Ill can my voice, Oh Queen!  my task perform,
Or speak the woes which fate had yet in store.
We learn'd that, driv'n by the remorseless storm,
The bark which royal RICHARD'S standard bore
Lay wreck'd and shatter'd on Ragusa's shore.
Of him, escap'd from the o'erwhelming wave,
Fame vaguely spoke as wand'ring to explore
The regions water'd by th' impetuous Save,
And 'midst Dalmatia's rocks adversity to brave.

"To learn his further fate we strove in vain.
Soon therefore as our never-ceasing toil
Our ships had fitted for the sea again,
And ocean seem'd on our attempt to smile,
Sad and oppress'd we left Corcyra's isle.
Fruitless it were my narrative to swell
With less momentous facts.  On England's soil
Safely tho' late we landed, there to tell
With heart-felt grief, the chance which England's King befel."

As HUBERT thus pursued his hapless tale,
Each tear-swoln eye it's influence seem'd to prove:
Now flush'd the cheek, now apprehension pale
The curdling blood to its recesses drove,
As hope with fear, as grief with horror strove.
By recollections sad and woe oppress'd
Meek BERENGARIA mourn'd her absent love;
While dauntless ELINOR the pang suppress'd,
And thus with voice assur'd th' attendant peers address'd.

"Chieftains!  at length the bitter cup is fill'd;
To drain its dregs the powers of Hell command.
No more her edifice of joy to build
Enliv'ning hope extends her fost'ring hand;
No more on high her mounting wings expand.
Oh cruel mandate of imperious fate!
When plague and famine desolate the land,
When foul rebellion shakes the tott'ring state,
Thus with augmented ills to crown immortal hate!

"Oh RICHARD!  to my longing eyes more dear
Than light, than life!  for thee my grief must flow,
For thee must drop my unavailing tear.
Whether o'er mountains capt with endless snow
Thou bend'st thy toilsome march with footsteps slow,
Or 'mid barbaric tribes and wilds uncouth
O'er thee new horrors fate prepares to strew,
Oh hear our vows of constancy and truth!
Let these thy soul support, thy suff'ring spirit sooth!

"But thee nor toils nor adverse fate alarm:
Thy gallant heart, where constancy presides,
Which innate worth and gen'rous feelings warm,
Mocks at extrinsic chance and fear derides.
Tho' threat'ning oceans heave their boist'rous tides,
Tho' light'nings glare, and thunders round thee roll,
Protecting Heav'n my wand'ring hero guides,
Inspires new courage fortune to controul,
Braces each nerve, and stamps with energy his soul.

"Let RICHARD'S virtue then our bosoms fire.
Tho' Heav'n's mysterious will our hopes defeat,
Let us to equal fortitude aspire,
Like him sublime in woe, in misery great.
Think of the ills which now assembled meet;
Think of your plighted faith to England's King.
Let prompt resolve o'ertake occasion fleet:
While yet from wisdom happiness may spring,
By councils wise and firm to England comfort bring."

As when November leads her wintry train,
And stretches o'er the firmament her veil
Charg'd with foul vapours, fogs and drizzly rain,
Horror and mute despondency prevail;
If then, as rises the propitious gale,
The lamp of day dispel the noxious cloud,
Hills, vales and groves his genial influence hail:
So, when the Queen had ended, thro' the croud
Reviving hope burst forth with acclamations loud.

Meantime the Peers in close debate were seen:
But soon their suffrage, sage and well matur'd,
LEICESTER collecting, thus address'd the Queen.
"To adverse chance and hardships long inur'd,
With fix'd resolve and constancy assur'd
We view the ills which menace England's throne,
Ills which by courage only can be cur'd.
But gen'rous minds in perils most are shewn;
Honour in danger's front by action best is known.

"We feel that on ourselves our fate depends.
Tho' pestilence and famine hold their reign,
Tho' discord far her direful sway extends,
And bloody torrents England face distain,
Be our's the task allegiance to maintain.
Our lives, our treasures freely we bestow
Our country's peace and safety to regain;
Blest, if in death our parting spirits know
The transports undebas'd from loyalty which flow!

"To arm our vassals, and on every side
Our force to raise, we fly without delay.
What tho' with foul and over-weening pride
Our foreign foes their martial ranks display,
And home-bred traitors join their proud array,
Their force and arts we equally defy.
Inspiring Heav'n shall guide us on our way;
The guardian angel of our Isle on high
Fanning his fav'ring wings shall lead to victory.

"But, while your Barons thus such means prepare
As ardent zeal and loyalty suggest,
And rush the perils of the field to share,
To ease the public mind they deem it best
Forthwith with powers sufficient to invest
Some trusty messengers:  Ere yet too late
Let them thro' Europe's bound pursue their quest,
Traverse with heedful scrutiny each state,
And ascertain with truth their suff'ring Monarch's fate."

"Sage are your councils," ELINOR rejoin'd;
"But where shall we our heedful view direct
Such as the mission may fulfil to find?"
Sudden, a youthful Knight of fair aspect,
Whose vigorous form and countenance erect
Bespoke his worth, before the croud advanc'd.
To either Queen he bow'd with due respect:
His native manliness a blush enhanc'd,
As o'er th' assembled peers his speaking eye he glanc'd.

A snow-white plume his nodding casque adorn'd,
While, o'er his temples and majestic brow,
Luxuriant tresses which restriction scorn'd
Wanton'd, and down his neck descended low.
BLONDEL his name.  The unbelieving foe
Oft had his prowess felt in bloody field:
For, tho' his heart with pity soft could glow,
Yet, when the trumpet call'd, he well could wield
The deeply biting sword, and poise the pond'rous shield.

Nor him alone did valour's trophies grace.
The laws of verse by tuneful bards reported
And music's powers he early learn'd to trace.
On Loire's green banks he long the Muses courted,
And there had often with the graces sported,
When with light feet the jocund dance they led.
Fondly with him the laughing train consorted,
And, as they play'd around, from oozy bed
The spirit of the stream enraptur'd rais'd his head.

No sound the universal silence broke,
But expectation beaming from each eye
Check'd fond enquiry, as the youth thus spoke.
"Fearless of perils, and prepar'd to die,
Be mine th' important enterprise to try.
Tho' young in arms, and little known to fame,
My country's cause will energy supply:
Inspir'd by zeal, at royal RICHARD'S name
My loyal heart beats high, and owns the gen'rous flame.

"Stampt on my soul, and with my life combin'd,
Is the remembrance of my much-lov'd King;
And dear the hours which to my grateful mind
The splendid image of his virtues bring.
From this pure source of knightly prowess spring
All that of promise grac'd my rude essays.
Thus when the Eaglet tries his feeble wing,
Led by his princely sire, he learns to raise
Towards Heaven his ardent glance, and on the sun to gaze.

"Near Saumur liv'd my ever honour'd sire,
In deeds of chivalry and arms grown old,
Tho' not extinguish'd his heroic fire.
An only son his eve of life consol'd.
Oft in his fond embrace would he infold
My youthful form, and oft of vanquish'd foes,
Of combats rude and puissant knights he told.
Still as he spoke, my mounting spirit rose,
Panted for high exploits, and spurn'd at soft repose.

"When thirteen summers o'er my head had pass'd,
And boyish pastimes ceas'd my mind t' engage,
O'er neighb'ring courts his eye my parent cast,
Where, 'midst examples bright and counsels sage,
Ere yet employ'd on life's tumultuous stage,
My early youth might wise instruction gain.
'Twas then, receiv'd as princely RICHARD'S page,
At Poictiers, where he held his gracious reign,
With rev'rence meet I sought his favour to obtain.

"My humble duty his attention caught.
As o'er my artless and admiring soul
His gentle precepts, with endearments fraught,
And mild as passing Zephyrs, grateful stole,
I learn'd each boist'rous passion to controul.
My heart to GOD he taught me to direct,
Whose power almighty rules from pole to pole,
My King to honour, and with due respect
Woman, Heaven's loveliest work, to succour and protect.

"Thus, bless'd by fortune, ignorant of ill,
And daily growing in my Prince's love,
I saw five years their circling courses fill.
Now, destin'd in a higher sphere to move,
To fill the throne and empire's cares to prove,
O'er England's realm my royal master reign'd.
Still fate with his my fortunes interwove:
With kind remembrance and regard unfeign'd
Me as his humble friend he graciously retain'd.

"My grateful soul his high example fir'd:
On every word and every look I hung,
And felt my heart with ardour new inspir'd,
As with enchanting melody he sung,
Or from his harp the strain harmonious wrung.
Thus thro' the vine-sprig flows the parent juice,
Supports its weak stem and it's tendrils young,
'Till thro' it's mass revolving suns diffuse
The mystic powers which fruit and suckers re-produce.

"When to the Asian shores my Monarch led
His gallant force, his footsteps I pursued.
There, as aloft the holy banner spread,
Thro' unheard perils and encounters rude,
O'er fields with Saracenic blood imbued,
BLONDEL ne'er left his much-lov'd master's side.
Still, as the doubtful combat he renew'd,
As flow'd around the deep-empurpled tide,
Death on his faulchion perch'd spread desolation wide.

"On Jaffa's plain, where the whole Pagan host
My dauntless King with his intrepid band
Drove pale and trembling from the sea-girt coast,
By him in danger's hour 'twas mine to stand,
Watchful o'er him my ample shield t' expand,
And ward the blows which vengeful malice gave.
Heav'n knew my zeal, and guided well my hand,
Brac'd every nerve impending fate to brave,
And careless of myself my country's pride to save.

"When victory grac'd my hero's sanguin'd crest,
And vanquish'd SALADIN confess'd his fame,
His humble vassal to his heart he press'd.
Assume, cried he, a Knight's distinguish'd name!
Henceforth let honour's bright and hallow'd flame
Thy ardent soul to worth chivalric lead:
Pursue thy course without reproach or shame;
Whate'er thy lot &mdash; to triumph, or to bleed&mdash;
Where virtue points the way undauntedly proceed.

"Such are the ties that bind me to my King.
Oh gracious mistress!  if the suff'rer's cry
To your mov'd soul could e'er compassion bring,
If pow'rful sorrow e'er could draw a sigh,
Listen, and with my humble suit comply.
Thus to all-ruling Heav'n my vow I make!
Far from my troubled couch shall pleasure fly,
Peace shall this breast, and rest these limbs forsake,
Till from our dark suspense shall certainty awake!"

While thus with dignified tho' modest phrase
The gallant youth his artless tale rehears'd,
In accents loud th' assembly spoke his praise:
But when in foreign climes to dare the worst
He vow'd, a gen'ral acclamation burst
Of mingled joy and apprehension dread.
Imperial ELINOR, in thought immers'd,
The impulse strong partaking rais'd her head,
And, as she own'd his worth, thus to BLONDEL she said.

"If innate virtue can success insure,
If lively gratitude and feelings high
Can arm the soul with zeal and courage pure
Dangers to meet and perils to defy,
On thee, Sir Knight!  our warmest hopes rely.
Thy boon is granted.  O'er thy devious way
May Heav'n's great ruler look with fav'ring eye!
May his propitious aid thy toils allay,
Nor cease on thy behalf his mercies to display!

"This scarf, embroider'd by my hands, accept:
Be it, whate'er betide of ill or good,
Of my regard as a memorial kept.
While on the banks of Danube's princely flood,
Or o'er Germania, or Hungaria rude,
As wand'ring far and spent with care you rove,
By this with lasting constancy endued,
O'ercome the ills which fate ordains to prove
For me, for England's cause, and royal RICHARD'S love.

"Meantime, while earnest on your great intent
For enterprise and travel you prepare,
Let us, t' emplore Heav'n's grace and kind assent,
Forthwith to holy PETER'S fane repair.
While there we prostrate breathe our fervent prayer,
While round us censers clouds of incense fling,
And pealing anthems rend the sacred air,
From realms of bliss their way shall Seraphs wing,
To crown our ardent hopes, and save our honour'd King!"

She spake, and straightway tow'rds the sacred pile
With dignified composure led the way;
While brave BLONDEL, intent upon his toil,
Repair'd to Greenwich, where in long array
The royal armament at anchor lay.
A ready bark he chose:  forthwith the crew,
Eager his welcome mandate to obey,
And nothing loth their labours to renew,
To aid his bold design from every quarter flew.

