The lion-hearted Monarch, who display'd
His banner on Judaea's shore, I sing.
Immortal Muse!  impart thy pow'rful aid:
From the Aonian mount with rapid wing
Descending, heav'nly inspiration bring:
Teach me to trace th' effects of Austria's hate,
And the foul wrongs of Gallia's treach'rous king;
To tell how RICHARD, long oppress'd by fate,
O'er adverse hell prevail'd, and grew by suff'rings great.

Twice thro' the Zodiack's bound the glorious sun
His progress had fulfill'd and crown'd the year,
Twice had the varying months their courses run,
Since, circled round by many a gallant peer,
Towards Judah's long-insulted coast to steer
England's brave King led forth his warlike band;
Thither by zeal inspir'd his arms to bear,
Where SALADIN usurp'd the sacred land,
And spoil'd her holy fanes with sacrilegious hand.

O'er Egypt's realm, where Nile's rich waters lave
And fertilise her soil, the Sultan reign'd.
Mature in counsel, as in action brave,
The wide dominion which his arts had gain'd,
With tyranny attemper'd he maintain'd:
Yet with his ample frontier not content,
His swarthy bands with licence unrestrain'd
Against the neighbouring potentates he sent,
Who 'neath his pow'rful sway in quick succession bent.

His force resistless first Damascus own'd;
And soon beneath his arms the vanquish'd coast
Of Syria and the blest Arabia groan'd.
Nor o'er Roasia did his conq'ring host
Less strike dismay, or realize their boast
Of there confirming his despotic will.
Gesyra too her antient freedom lost,
While, urged by fury and ambition still,
He sought with war's alarms far distant Ind to fill.

Ah wherefore did he change his purpos'd course!
Why bore he not to that remoter shore
His bloody standard and remorseless force!
Then Palestine, unstain'd with Christian gore,
Had 'scap'd her loss and misery to deplore;
Then, prompted onward by his flatt'ring dream
The rich and vaunted regions to explore
Where Ganges rolls his venerated stream,
Ne'er had Judaea's plains confess'd his power supreme.

But otherwise relentless fate decreed.
Ere yet the Pagan monarch bad his train
'Gainst India's distant provinces proceed,
He paus'd, uncertain if his new domain
At much expence acquir'd he might retain,
If in it's centre he a foe should leave,
Whose well-known valour might advantage gain,
Who from his yoke Damascus might retrieve,
And from his hated sway might Syria's coast reprieve.

Ambition, as on high her wings she spread,
Scenes of new conquest and renown display'd.
But soon her visionary triumphs fled,
When Prudence with a juster hand pourtray'd
The Christian Chiefs in martial Pomp array'd,
And pictur'd perils which might yet betide.
She gain'd her cause, and SALADIN obey'd:
From every quarter of his empire wide
He now resolv'd his bands 'gainst Palestine to guide.

Soon as the brazen trumpet's sound was heard,
Their warlike King unnumber'd legions join'd.
Their banners there th' Egyptian leaders rear'd:
Curdistan's sons their savage hordes combin'd;
For hope of prey their mountains they resign'd,
And in the breeze their varied pennons wav'd:
There too their march the Medes prepar'd to wind,
And those, whose vallies rich Euphrates lav'd,
To grace his proud attempt the doubtful warfare brav'd.

From Nubia's realm, and from the regions wide
Whence Ethiopian Nile derives his source,
Her sable offspring Africa supplied.
Insidious Parthians thither bent their course:
There too the polish'd Arabs led their force;
And those in deserts bred, who hardly gain'd
Their food precarious and subsistence coarse
By watchful toils and pillage unrestrain'd,
Mounting their coursers fleet the general cause maintain'd.

As when the ruddy ev'ning gilds the sky,
And length'ning shadows o'er the vallies glance,
The busy insects in the sunbeams fly,
And joy to weave their wanton airy dance,
Their countless phalanx seeming now t' advance,
Now to retire, as thousands still pursue:
So when, drawn forth on Delta's wide expanse,
The King survey'd his far assembled crew,
With expectation fill'd he grasp'd at triumphs new.

Such was the foe which Palestine assail'd:
Alike resistless in the open field,
And war's more subtle courses, he prevail'd.
In vain their faulchions did the Christians wield;
To his superior fortune forced to yield,
Their vanquish'd hosts disgrace and ruin found.
Stript of his crown, abandoning his shield,
By him Judaea's King in chains was bound,
With many a princely Knight in chivalry renown'd.

The tow'rs of Solyma his sway confess'd:
Sidon obey'd his over-whelming hand:
Nor could Beritus, by his arms oppress'd,
Or Ascalon, his fierce attack withstand.
Against Neapolis, by conquest fann'd,
He led his host victorious:  Jaffa's loss
And Caesarea's fall inspir'd his band;
Nor with less praise did fame his triumphs gloss,
When from proud Acre's walls he drew the sacred cross.

From Libanus to Pharan's desert bare
Beneath his power the groaning districts bow'd:
In hopeless agony and wild despair
The unavailing tear of anguish flow'd.
But, while beneath his domination proud
The Christians sank oppress'd, their heart-felt woes,
Their sorrows which sincere contrition shew'd,
To the tribunal of their GOD arose,
And aid by Heav'n was sent to check their cruel foes.

All Europe own'd the soul-transporting fire:
From fertile Lusitania's shore, where reigns
Eternal spring, and to his tuneful lyre
The watchful shepherd sings his am'rous pains,
To where 'midst darkness winter harsh enchains
In icy bonds and ever-during snow
The bleak and distant hyperborean plains,
Each bosom felt th' invigorating glow,
Each chieftain urg'd his band their prowess high to shew.

Not from th' Achaian ports to Ilion's shore
A fleet so large and well appointed sail'd,
When 'gainst old Priam Greece her vengeance bore,
And on Scamander's banks her host detail'd.
Less was the force which Rome's proud ramparts scal'd,
When savage Attila her towers defac'd,
When injured science his attack bewail'd,
When sank the glories which her power had grac'd,
And wild barbaric hordes her tow'ring fanes debas'd.

His German host imperial FREDERICK led
From where proud Rhine his rich dominions lav'd:
Full many a subject prince his banner spread,
And many a vassal there his ensign wav'd.
From Danube's banks the Austrian legions brav'd
The unknown war:  their long-extended line
Confess'd the power of LEOPOLD deprav'd,
Who, tho' well skill'd their movements to combine,
Spurn'd at all human laws and mock'd the powers divine.

The hardy vet'rans from Hungaria's plain
March'd, with the bands from rude Bohemia join'd.
From rich Burgundia OTHO drew his train,
And led his force with Flandria's troops combin'd:
OTHO, than whom none better knew to wind
Thro' all the mazes of corruption's round,
To purposes of foulest wrong resign'd.
'Midst the confed'rate powers no chief was found
Of more impure intent, of maxims more unsound.

From where in Hadria's gulph the Istrian shore
Joins with the Carnian and Illyrian coast,
Nurs'd 'midst inclement skies and mountains hoar,
Forth came a vast and formidable host,
Which warlike CONRAD led.  By fortune toss'd,
To aim at regal power he now aspir'd:
With artful claims his title weak he gloss'd,
And, while ambition's flame his bosom fir'd,
He fail'd when most his aid the Christian cause requir'd.

Italia's sons the impulse strong confess'd:
From Como's lake, and Alps' tremendous height,
The daring warriors to the conflict press'd.
Ferrara's Duke conven'd his country's might;
Those who in Po's deep stream with fond delight
Were wont to bathe, or on Clitumnus' bank
Beheld their milk-white herds the herbage bite.
Calabria's youth increas'd the warlike rank,
And those who Tiber's flood in fam'd Campania drank.

Nor less the polish'd sons of fertile France
The gen'rous enterprise preferr'd to share.
In close array her troops were seen t' advance,
While their rich banners proudly cut the air.
Those who the vallies till'd with pious care,
Where Seine's slow waters to the ocean creep;
And those who press'd the gifts of Bacchus fair,
Where Rhone her torrent rolls 'twixt mountains steep,
Reigns o'er subjected plains, and thund'ring seeks the deep.

These PHILIP led, of France the pow'rful prince;
Who early in the sacred cause engag'd,
Yet ceas'd too soon his ardour to evince:
In his dark breast ambition wildly rag'd;
Pity he scorn'd; no feelings soft assuag'd
The settled purpose of his mounting soul;
Tho' avarice still a dubious warfare wag'd,
And 'slav'd his bosom with her harsh controul,
Infusing jealous fears, and framing treasons foul.

While in the East, 'gainst Saracenic hosts
Th' associate warriors urg'd the frequent fight,
The trump of fame to Europe's distant coasts,
Well pleas'd their daring conflicts to recite,
Proclaim'd their puissance and resistless might.
England her monarch's tow'ring worth admir'd;
And, while they heard the tale with fond delight,
With ardour long unfelt the aged were fir'd,
And youthful breasts to deeds of high desert aspir'd.

But not unmix'd with woe the tidings came.
Now rumour's voice the story sad detail'd
Of PHILIP'S wrongs, and faithless OTHO'S shame,
Who, when stern SALADIN their host assail'd,
From virtue's cause and vows recorded fail'd.
Now of their valiant King expos'd it told
To open perils and to treachery veil'd,
While his associates base, in treasons bold,
Leagued with their Pagan foe, their honour truck'd for gold.

With indignation strong and pity mov'd,
Each English breast the painful tale receiv'd.
Oft as the fortunes of their Prince belov'd
Their memory trac'd, their feeling bosoms heav'd,
They breath'd the fruitless sigh, and vainly griev'd:
And fancy, sick'ning in her wild career,
Such forms of woe as reason ne'er conceiv'd
Industrious drew, spectres and phantoms drear,
Of power to wring the soul and force th' unwilling tear.

Nor did her bodings dire illusive prove.
While England's King his host victorious led,
Against him Hell's tremendous phalanx strove;
Daemons to crush him foul enchantments shed,
And o'er his path perplex'd their engines spread.
Him, to the storms of adverse fate betray'd,
Remorseless Fiends pursued with vengeance dread,
Their deadliest ministers of ill array'd,
And, for destruction arm'd, their ruthless power display'd.

From Pandaemonium, where he held his reign,
SATAN the bold Crusading host beheld:
He view'd their high prows cut the foaming main,
As with propitious gales their white sails swell'd.
With indignation fierce and pride unquell'd
Oft did his eye their martial order trace,
Which seem'd by fate and succouring heav'n impell'd
To hurl destruction on his favour'd race,
Their power usurp'd to crush, their prophet to disgrace.

From Europe's clime to Asia's distant coast
Vengeful he cast his flaming eyes around,
Then quick assembled his infernal host.
His voice tremendous shook the vault profound,
And, as hell's caverns echo'd back the sound,
Dismay and terror fill'd each ruthless breast.
Slowly the Monarch rose; he sternly frown'd,
And wav'd aloft his snake-encircled crest,
As thus in accents harsh the Daemons he address'd.

"When to your delegated care I gave
The charge of watching o'er my race select,
I look'd, great Chiefs!  for zeal and efforts brave.
But well your sov'reign's mandates ye respect!
Behold yon hostile fleet, whose course direct
Destruction bears 'gainst Saracenic towers;
See how the heavens serene their course protect,
And, as the leaders cheer their warlike powers,
Mark how on every brow vindictive fury lours.

"Is then the mem'ry of your wrongs o'erpast?
Where is the hate resolv'd, the wrathful flame,
Which fir'd th' aetherial race from Heav'n when cast?
Patient of wrong, effeminate and tame,
Of prowess vaunt no more, but bow with shame.
Shall we, to torments doom'd, resign'd, and weak,
Sink in oblivious sloth our well-earn'd fame,
Or boldly daring shall we vengeance seek,
And rush on perils new our great revenge to wreak?

"But perils daunt ye, and revenge is cold:
Else here inglorious would ye not remain,
When England's monarch, confident and bold,
To victory leads his proud confed'rate train.
Nor war's rough front, nor dangers can detain
From glory's call that enterprising host.
Oh Chiefs!  unmindful of the wrongs which stain
Your lineage high, cease, cease your empty boast,
Let SALADIN be crush'd, let Palestine be lost!"

He ceas'd.  Abash'd and mute the Daemons stood,
While light'nings blaz'd, and thunders round them broke.
Each stubborn Chief, in dark and thoughtful mood,
His sov'reign's fury fearful to provoke,
In awful silence sought his shame to cloak.
But soon, with looks which inward pride express'd,
And step assur'd which arrogance bespoke,
MOLOCH, dread prince, advanc'd before the rest,
And thus with hurried voice the monarch stern address'd.

"On errors past, and duties ill-perform'd,
Let not, great King!  thy censure harsh alight.
Rous'd by thy call, to deeds of vengeance warm'd,
Each Chief infernal burns to prove his might,
And 'gainst the Christian band to urge the fight.
When erst in arms and battle's fierce array
We wag'd proud war on yonder starry height,
Zealous we rush'd thy standards to display,
And mark'd thro' Heav'n's wide plain our desolating way.

"Impatient still thy dread behest we wait:
Whether on earth to spread destruction wide,
Or bold in conscious strength to tempt our fate,
And, with fresh vigour and new force supplied,
With heav'nly power our contest to decide,
And win the glorious field, or bravely fall.
'Tis thine the movements of thy host to guide:
Our ardent zeal no perils can appal;
For action high we pant, for enterprise we call."

As thus he spoke, the Chiefs with threat'ning mien
Clash'd their broad shields, and murmur'd hoarse assent;
They shook their spears, and wav'd their faulchions keen,
And hell's high arch with warlike shouts was rent.
So, in the earth's dark womb foul vapours pent
In dull inaction waste their influence dread,
But should ill-omen'd chance afford them vent,
With fury uncontroul'd their force they spread,
Scatter destruction round, and death and ruin shed.

In open war the Christians to oppose
The stern assembly now resolv'd appear'd,
When SATAN from his lofty throne arose.
"Well pleas'd," he cried, "brave Spirit!  have I heard
Thy proposition bold, to me endear'd
By deep remembrance of my past-gone wrong.
Yet, tho' we once 'gainst Heav'n our standards rear'd,
To us no more such flatt'ring hopes belong,
No more 'tis ours to lead 'gainst Seraph hosts our throng.

"That those, who shame and endless torments feel,
Should burn a just and great revenge to take,
And to the glorious chance of war appeal,
I marvel not.  As from yon sulph'rous lake,
Whence lurid flames arise and steams opake,
I stretch my view across these fearful plains,
Indignant feelings in my breast awake:
I curse the power which here our force detains,
Secure by our defeat, triumphant by our pains.

"Say, with Heav'n's bolt, or with the pow'rful shock
Of vengeful fires, launc'd by th' unerring hand
Of him, whose word the sources can unlock
Of wrath exhaustless, and on whose command
Myriads of Angels ever watchful stand,
Can we expect successfully to cope?
Let schemes which better suit our force be plann'd;
Such as may give our subtle engines scope,
Whose well-directed aim may crown our anxious hope."

He ended.  BELIAL thus the Peers address'd.
"If fame and conquest on our helms to beam
Imperious fate deny, let not the breast,
Which hatred fosters, court an idle dream.
If insufficient prove our force, I deem
'Tis wise to try what counsel may effect.
What tho' wall'd towns impregnable may seem?
Some hidden weakness cunning may detect,
And policy may win, when fails th' attack direct.

"The Christian chieftains who associate wage
'Gainst SALADIN the war, unmov'd will stand,
Tho' powers infernal vent their utmost rage,
While they obedient prove to Heav'n's command.
But note, great Princes, a Confed'rate band
Bears in it's essence seeds of sure decay:
If nurtur'd well, they blossom and expand,
'Till ripen'd Treasons their broad front display,
Reward their planter's care, and all his toils repay.

"War's doubtful issue then to others leave:
More certain means Corruption's arts secure.
Skilful the erring judgement to deceive,
Be our's the task with hopes and views impure
Each sep'rate leader from his faith t' allure,
And tempt his weaken'd soul his vows to break.
So shall we victory gain compleat and sure,
So shall we vain their preparations make,
Blast their aspiring hopes, their vaunted projects shake."

Up started SATAN from his ebon throne:
"BELIAL!"  he cried, "with counsels just and wise
Well has thy tongue our line of conduct shewn.
What tho' th' infernal powers in mass arise,
By desperation urg'd to win the prize,
Experience tells the effort will be vain:
But, couch'd in falsehoods and conceal'd by lies,
Safely we work our purposes to gain,
And o'er subjected foes to stretch our ample reign.

"Henceforth thy sage conclusions we adopt.
To thee th' important mission we award,
With sophistry, and speech in guile enwrapt,
To tempt the chieftains of the league abhorr'd.
In hell's black register we thus record,
In characters indelible of flame,
Thy plan with more than hellish malice stor'd.
Thro' endless ages thus shall last thy fame,
And oft renew'd success thy high desert proclaim.

"From this shall we new hope and strength derive,
By this the want of equal force supply.
In vain for conquest shall the Christians strive,
Unite their armies, their resources try:
Gain'd by our prosp'rous arts, some false ally
A simulated succour shall display,
And, when the hour of enterprise is nigh,
Desert their standards, and their cause betray.
So shall our plans prevail, so shall their pow'r decay.

"Let this, great chiefs!  your suff'ring minds relieve:
Your present pains let this assurance cheer.
Thro' the thick web which fates industrious weave,
Triumphs in ages yet unborn appear.
Hark!  the loud yell of regicides I hear,
Who mark their horrid course with blood and fire:
I see rebellion high her standard rear,
I view her spreading far her influence dire,
While to unbounded sway her frantic sons aspire.

"As the storm threatens each devoted land,
All Europe arm'd to stem its force behold.
From every region hastes a warlike band:
Again confed'rate Kings, in union bold,
Exchange their faith, their banners proud unfold,
And join the menac'd ruin to avert.
When lo!  by envy warp'd, seduc'd by gold,
Apostate chiefs the common cause desert,
And crouch before the foe his fury to divert.

"What glorious scenes of misery now succeed!
Before my eyes what bloody torrents roll!
I hear the victims sigh, I see them bleed!
Their piercing shrieks transport my raptur'd soul!
The pow'rs of hell, surmounting all controul,
In tenfold terrors clad direct the fight,
And spread contagion dire from pole to pole!
Death shakes his dart &mdash; but ah!  before my sight
The flatt'ring vision fades and vanishes in night!"

Th' assembled chieftains sat in wonder lost,
And joy unusual fir'd each rugged breast,
As thus the prescient King proclaim'd his boast.
Silent awhile he stood, by thought oppress'd,
Then wav'd his hand, and thus the pow'rs address'd.
"The purpose of our council to resume,
And plan our great design, behoves us best.
Inspir'd by fate new courage we assume,
To urge destruction on, and seal the Christians' doom.

"BELIAL!  to thee th' auspicious thought we owe:
Be thine it's execution to command.
Where proudly wave the banners of our foe,
Where seek their fleets the vainly promis'd strand,
Repair with rapid wing:  in every band
Infuse suspicions, scatter doubts around,
And realize the mischiefs thou hast plann'd;
With mad ambition's sting each leader wound,
And av'rice base implant in every heart unsound.

"While BELIAL thus his deeply laid design
In Palestine pursues, be thine the care,
MOLOCH!  with his thy efforts to combine.
Haste, potent chief!  to England's shores repair:
Let her hell's direst dispensations share!
Let Civil Discord shake her troubled state,
And desolation's fangs her bosom tear.
So shall her monarch learn what ills await
From SATAN'S power contemn'd and hell's immortal hate."

He spoke.  The Chiefs proclaim'd their glad assent,
While Daemons rais'd their loud triumphant cry.
Now, to fulfil their Sov'reign's foul intent,
The chosen pair direct their course on high,
And thro' th' empoison'd air their pinions ply.
So, when half famish'd vultures scent their food,
From their lone seat with fell resolve they fly,
Tear their still quiv'ring prey, exult in blood,
And train to deeds of death their young rapacious brood.

The Fiends, intent their object to attain,
The gloom surmounted and beheld the day:
On Calpe's height they stood, as o'er the main
The rising sun disclos'd his new-born ray.
They view'd the wide seas which before them lay,
Where many a stately bark was seen to glide,
And thro' the heaving waters cut its way:
Where England's banner with becoming pride
And pomp superior seem'd o'er ocean to preside.

"To Acre's towers, where now the Christian foe
The Saracenic force beleagur'd hold,"
BELIAL exclaim'd, "on high intent I go:
To where yon orb illumes the sky with gold,
And mounting soars his splendours to unfold,
My course is bent.  Thy travel to perform
O'er northern waves must stretch thy pinions bold.
Haste then to raise and to direct the storm,
Spread hell's dominion wide, and Albion's realm deform!"

He said; and rising from the mountain's brow
Towards the red east he bent his vent'rous wing;
There to fulfil his desolating vow,
There by his impious arts distress to bring
On the Crusading host and England's King,
And hell's tremendous vengeance to disclose.
Meantime, fierce MOLOCH with exulting spring
From Calpe's craggy summit furious rose,
While ruin led the way, and marshall'd all her woes.

High in the troubled air the Daemon rode.
Hispania's fruits and Lusitania's bloom
Shrank blasted where his direful influence flow'd.
As o'er th' Atlantic vast he wav'd his plume,
Darkness obscur'd the sun, and thro' the gloom
Deep thunders roll'd, and livid lightnings play'd:
The mounting billows op'd their wat'ry tomb,
And to th' affrighted mariner display'd
Pale death's terrific form, by fear more ghastly made.

On the dread scene with joy malign he gaz'd:
And now, to Albion's coast approaching nigh,
While warring elements around him blaz'd,
O'er her high cliffs he cast his vengeful eye,
As proudly rang'd they rear'd their summits high,
To check the waves and stem their boist'rous force.
Vain now their power his terrors to defy,
Who, for destruction arm'd, pursued his course,
Deaf to compassion's voice, and heedless of remorse.

In night's dark horrors clad, in clouds array'd,
He pass'd their tow'ring fronts with stern disdain;
Then hov'ring hung, and for a while survey'd
Each boldly rising hill and fertile plain,
Where laughing plenty held her peaceful reign.
In rich luxuriance cloath'd and seemly pride
The far-spread vallies shew'd their waving grain,
While, on each flow'ry bank and mountain's side,
Rich food for flocks and herds the herbage green supplied.

'Mid the wide landscape, drawn from many a spring
With winding course majestic rivers flow'd,
On which, while Zephyr shook his fav'ring wing,
Unnumber'd vessels richly freighted rode,
Bearing from ports remote their precious load.
Around the varied habitation rose;
The peaceful cot, of virtue the abode,
The humble village, seat of calm repose,
The city strongly fenced against incroaching foes.

Their useful labours freemen there fulfill'd;
They train'd the steer, the vigorous steed controul'd,
The teeming earth with toil industrious till'd,
Tended their fleecy care to field or fold,
Or chac'd the savage tribe with ardour bold.
From av'rice free, by no vain hopes allur'd,
Their days in joy, and bless'd contentment roll'd,
While manly worth the well-earn'd meed procur'd,
And female excellence domestic bliss insur'd.

MOLOCH the happy scene intent survey'd.
If e'er compassion ruthless fiends could know,
If e'er the voice of pity they obey'd,
Or felt the force of mercy's gen'rous glow,
His hand had spar'd the fabric to o'erthrow.
But his stern heart the impulse strong defied:
Eager his malice foul and pow'r to shew,
His rugged bosom heav'd with furious pride,
He gaz'd with vengeance fir'd, and thus indignant cried.

"Must we be doom'd to never-ending pain
While men, whom Heav'n created to supply
Our vacant heritage, at ease remain?
Lost in delights with angels shall they vie,
Mock at our hatred, and our power defy?
Shall they with us to meet in conflict dare,
Provoke our wrath, and tempt our vengeance high?
Hell, ope thy gates!  Thy engines dire prepare!
Ye fiends infernal haste, revenge and death to bear!"

He said, and whirl'd his flaming brand around.
From Hell's abyss a Spectre gaunt appear'd;
Her squalid brows a snaky circlet crown'd,
Dropping foul venom o'er her eye lids-blear'd,
While far and near their hissings loud were heard.
Fleshless her limbs, her visage ghastly shew'd;
In her right-hand a pois'nous dart she rear'd;
Her locks dishevell'd like a meteor flow'd,
As with intent accurs'd o'er England's realm she strode.

Tow'rds the black north her jav'lin dire she threw.
From icy chains releas'd, the furious blast
Her mandate to fulfil impatient flew.
O'er the devoted country as it pass'd,
The forest's honours low on earth it cast,
And lordly castles levell'd with the ground.
The mountains totter'd from their centres vast,
While with rude havock from their beds profound
The foaming waters torn spread desolation round.

Where vegetation shew'd its luscious store,
Where blush'd rich fruits or wav'd the harvest brown,
The raging torrents quick destruction bore.
No more the peasant's hopes with plenty crown
His ruin'd barns and granaries o'erthrown:
Aghast he stands, as with resistless force
His flocks and herds the whirlpool hurries down,
Drowning their helpless cries with murmurs hoarse,
As to the deep it rolls it's wild o'erwhelming course.

Thus when disease, some fever'd wretch t' oppress,
Deludes his senses with a flattering dream,
His melting soul extatic visions bless,
He rules ideal realms with sway supreme,
And fancy gay prolongs th' enchanting theme
'Till morn awakes him agony to know:
So, when the sun again unveil'd his beam,
He shone but misery and distress to shew,
Proud England's glories chang'd for ruin, want and woe.

Far as the eye could stretch, the ravag'd plain
Shew'd blank and desert, as in war's dread hour,
When adverse hosts their contest dire maintain,
When on some frontier weak they ruthless shower
The wanton rage of desolating power,
And blast the joys which Heav'n design'd for man.
With aspect haughty and malignant lour
As gaz'd the Fiend, across her visage wan
A momentary glow of joy infernal ran.

But soon return'd the terrors of her brow.
With pride augmented and destructive tread
Wildly she rang'd her puissance curs'd to shew,
While angry MOLOCH wav'd his faulchion dread,
And from his airy seat new horrors shed.
Hell felt the impulse:  from her caverns foul
Black Pestilence uprear'd her fatal head,
Of power to wring with woe the stricken soul,
T' arrest the vital flood, and nature's laws controul.

She stalk'd where Famine held her wasteful reign.
While far around her baleful eyes she threw,
And gaz'd enraptur'd on the ruin'd plain,
From lips obscene a vapour dire she blew.
Thro' the wide air the sick'ning influence flew,
Charg'd with corruption and diseases pale,
With unknown dangers and afflictions new.
Ah woe surpassing!  from the Heav'n-born gale
To draw the source of death, contagion to inhale!

Jointly their hateful war the Daemons wag'd.
Where'er by Famine wrought prevail'd the dearth,
Insatiate Pestilence with fury rag'd,
And spread destruction o'er the tainted earth.
Nor sex, nor age, nor beauty's charms, nor worth,
From her oppressive grasp avail'd to save;
Nor gilded palace, nor low village hearth,
Nor tow'ring castle's height protection gave;
One fate awaited all, one undistinguish'd grave.

Where, with content and independence bless'd,
The humble swain enjoy'd his calm retreat,
Where, when he turn'd his toil-spent limbs to rest,
His heart with transport undissembled beat
His wife belov'd, his smiling babes to meet,
Affliction reign'd, and sorrow spread her gloom.
No more their innocent endearments greet:
Wrapt in one sad inevitable doom,
Mute are their tuneful tongues, and blasted is their bloom.

As o'er the ravag'd and deserted plain
The famish'd burgher looks with fearful care,
Hopeless he turns his mournful home to gain,
Where from his scanty store their meagre fare
His anxious wife and children weak prepare.
With dart uprais'd Despair his steps attends:
Condemn'd their aggravated woes to share,
O'er their pale corses as he weeping bends,
Disease invades his heart, and thro' his veins ascends.

Where, far from peopled haunts, in vale obscure,
The shepherd seeks his blushing maid to move
With ardent vows and supplication pure;
Together as thro' lengthen'd meads they rove,
Or seek some yet undesolated grove
Where woodbines sweet their circling branches wreath,
One fate pursues their unpropitious love:
Contagion hovers in their panting breath,
Each sigh with poison fraught, each fond embrace with death.

The crouded mart, where erst with eager haste
The early citizens repair'd for food,
Shew'd now a vacant and deserted waste.
No more, as at the altar high he stood,
The holy priest adorers prostrate view'd
When solemn rose the pealing organ's sound.
Dead were the ties of friendship and of blood;
The heart's best feelings were by sorrows drown'd,
And doubt and wild despair their empire spread around.

MOLOCH well-pleas'd the work of death survey'd.
"Far as infernal might extends," he cried,
"Well has my vengeful fury been display'd.
But tho' 'tis our's to launch destruction wide,
To rule the storm, and in the whirlwind ride,
Beyond the bound'ry fix'd our hate to shew
A power to us superior has denied.
Curs'd be the mandate, which forbids to flow
The ample tide of ill, th' o'erwhelming stream of woe!

"Cease then, ye Fiends, your further task to urge,
Since Heav'n prevails your efforts to repel,
And checks the influence of your ruthless scourge.
But haste, ye potent ministers of Hell!
REBELLION bloody!  CIVIL DISCORD fell!
Hither with vengeance trebly arm'd repair:
Unite the mass of England's woes to swell;
Exert your power, your engines dire prepare,
So shall her absent King his country's ruin share."

The Fiends obedient to his dictates flew,
And rush'd to execute his dread command.
Around them throng'd vain Hopes, and Schemes untrue,
Falsehood sly smiling with demeanour bland,
Pale Av'rice, clenching fast his trembling hand,
Ambition fierce, and Envy's visage lean:
Revenge and Malice led their desp'rate band,
While Jealousy advanc'd with aspect green,
And foul Ingratitude uprear'd her form obscene.

Tow'rds potent MOLOCH press'd the impious host.
As their broad pinions cut the murky sky,
They hail'd their Chieftain with insulting boast,
And join'd in chorus loud with daring cry
Heav'n and it's powers eternal to defy.
The Daemon rais'd his hand their shouts to still,
And thus address'd the crew with accents high.
"In silence listen to your Sov'reign's will:
Learn your appointed task of evil to fulfil.

"Behold yon ravag'd plains, yon desert wide,
Where with wild licence and remorseless sway
Black Pestilence and Famine proudly stride.
While thus their finish'd labours they display,
While death and havock signalize their way,
And Albion's realm our power destructive rues,
'Tis your's fresh woes to pour and new dismay;
'Tis your's her sons with falsehoods to abuse,
In each enfeebled soul suspicions to infuse.

"Thus SATAN bids.  While on Judaea's shore
Th' associate Chiefs victorious warfare hold,
And RICHARD'S might the Saracens deplore,
Be here the standard of revolt unroll'd.
In JOHN'S base soul, revengeful, dark and cold,
The smother'd embers of ambition fan;
Teach him, by av'rice moved, in treason bold,
Of favours reckless, to assist our plan,
And crown the glorious work, which Hell's dread pow'rs began.

"Haste then the mighty mischief to compleat:
Let Civil Discord England's bosom rend.
Forc'd from his views of conquest to retreat,
His crown to save, his empire to defend,
Vengeance shall on the monarch's steps attend:
Augmented ills the baffled prince shall know;
Hell shall against him hosts of daemons send,
Till, victim of his unrelenting foe,
In grief his days shall pass, his nights consume in woe."

Thus spake the Daemon.  The assembly heard
His mandate stern, and joy malign express'd:
Then, as their inauspicious wings they rear'd,
Their fatal course tow'rds Albion they address'd,
While thunders hoarse their influence dire confess'd,
And livid light'nings shot their murd'rous flame.
High beat with conscious pride fierce Moloch's breast:
To Satan's court his flight he bent, to claim
The guerdon of his toils, the trophied meed of fame.

While thus his vengeful mission he fulfill'd,
And spread wide ruin over England's land,
Remorseless BELIAL, well in falsehoods skill'd,
Urg'd his destructive toils.  His practis'd hand
Soon chang'd the fortunes of the Christian band.
In every breast were lurk'd impure desire
The latent sparks of discontent he fann'd,
Led them 'gainst England's Monarch to conspire,
And kindled in their minds ambition's madd'ning fire.

But from the Gallic King's perfidious soul,
Rankling with envy, his best hopes arose:
O'er his foul heart he held supreme controul;
'Twas there he fix'd, 'twas him the Daemon chose
To rescue Hell's allies and RICHARD'S foes.
Him not alone the ties of honour bound,
The calls of duty, or the Christian woes;
But vows of firm record, with faith unsound
At Heav'n's high altar pledg'd, and with Heav'n's sanction crown'd.

Him to seduce prevail'd th' insidious Fiend,
And proudly triumph'd in his foul deceit.
In his entangled soul he sought to blend
Suggestions base, which might his judgment cheat,
And his long-cherish'd views of fame defeat.
The rank pre-eminent and actions rare
Of England's Sov'reign oft would he repeat,
And with his own diminish'd state compare,
Mingling reflections sad with envy and despair.

Then, when with grief his lab'ring bosom heav'd,
And wounded pride it's wonted aid refus'd,
With brighter hopes the Fiend his mind reliev'd;
Now with ambitious phantoms he amus'd,
And now with views of gain his soul abus'd.
He whisper'd reasons and pretences feign'd,
By which his recreant flight might be excus'd,
Of state necessity, and treasures drain'd,
And calls of high import which could not be explain'd.

Nought now remain'd th' Apostate to delay:
With honour blasted and deserv'd disgrace,
To France, by BELIAL led, he took his way.
There, in retirement plung'd, with minions base,
Measures of vengeful hate he sought to trace.
His cause to prop, his breach of faith to hide,
And by dispensing power his fears to chase,
To CELESTINE he craftily applied.
In vain:  the Pontiff just his impious suit denied.

When thus the Church refus'd his views to aid,
His bosom with augmented malice swell'd:
And now his rancour fearless he displayed,
Avow'd his guilt, and conscience proudly quell'd.
LONGCHAMP, who late in troubled England held
Vice-regal power, by foul offences stain'd,
Who, to forsake the realm by force compell'd,
Had since in France exil'd and poor remain'd,
The guide of his intents perfidious he retain'd.

While, at the head of England's councils plac'd,
He sway'd the realm in delegated state,
With papal arms and power legantine grac'd,
He aim'd at regal pomp, and mock'd at fate.
Full oft he strove in arrogant debate
With JOHN, the brother of his absent lord,
Who, with like passions and like views elate,
Disdain'd a blind submission to afford,
But oft with taunts replied, and rais'd his vengeful sword.

From Albion driv'n with contumelious scorn,
Forc'd to resign his ill-conducted sway,
To France he came a fugitive forlorn.
Ready, as int'rest prompted, to display
Tyrannic pride, or meanly to obey,
To JOHN he now with low submission bent.
Anxious his absent brother to betray,
To shake his realm, and seize the crown intent,
The Prince a fav'ring ear to his proposals lent.

For now the Fiends, whom MOLOCH left in trust
O'er England's plains rebellion's flame to spread,
Had gain'd dominion o'er his soul unjust.
With subtle skill his daring hopes they fed,
And, while around their spells accurs'd they shed,
For deeds of foul import his breast they steel'd:
With crowns ideal they adorn'd his head,
And tempting baits of fancied power reveal'd,
While the barb'd hook within they artfully conceal'd.

Th' auspicious moment PHILIP gladly hail'd.
He charg'd the crafty priest his terms to bear
(In guise assum'd and with concealment veil'd)
By which he sought the recreant Prince t' ensnare.
He proffer'd him the hand of ALICE fair,
And all the rich domains of England's throne,
Should he the means of quick revolt prepare:
While JOHN his high supremacy should own,
And fealty swear and pay due homage for his crown.

Had JOHN e'er felt the force of honour's laws,
Such terms with warmth indignant he had spurn'd:
But terms like these accorded with his cause.
Soon as the project of the league he learn'd,
His thanks to Gallia's Monarch he return'd,
And in his guileful proffer acquiesc'd.
And now with hopes of sudden sway he burn'd;
Visions of power his working mind oppress'd,
And mad ambition's plans inflam'd his trait'rous breast.

