Fair was the wind, and smooth the sea which bore,
On high intent engag'd, from Albion's strand,
The gen'rous Chieftain to the Belgic shore.
While from the top-mast's height with practis'd hand
The seamen wrought their flutt'ring sails t' expand,
Thro' the clear waves they saw their vessel glide;
And as, by Zephyr's gentlest breezes fann'd,
The curling waters lav'd each swelling side,
High stream'd it's pennant gay with richest crimson dy'd.

From the broad surface of the wat'ry plain
The silv'ry moon now sought her solemn height,
While, far as eye could stretch, a num'rous train
Of stars and planets shed their glitt'ring light,
In varied rank and rich confusion bright.
As their effulgence o'er the ocean stole,
Tinging the green waves with celestial white,
Their influence mild sooth'd his afflicted soul;
He own'd the power divine, who form'd and rules the whole.

Now shone the summits of the waves with gold,
And from the wide horizon stretch'd a ray
Of purest light, which spread, as 'gan unfold
His ample shield the glorious orb of day.
The sea-fowls gamboll'd in fantastic play,
As thro' the Scheld's half-cover'd shoals they steer'd:
Safely the vessel cut it's winding way,
And soon their longing sight the harbour cheer'd,
Where her rich-sculptur'd fanes illustrious Antwerp rear'd.

On the broad quay, where throng'd the busy croud
Of those whom enterprise or commerce brought
To view of Europe's trade th' emporium proud,
BLONDEL prepar'd to land.  He heeded nought
Fortune's rich stores which those around him sought,
But, by warm zeal and pure affection led,
His humble scrip and staff of palmer caught,
In pilgrim's guise Germania's bounds to tread,
Heedless alike of toils and of encounters dread.

Nor Moselle's stream impeded his career,
Nor Rhine deep-sounding from his bed profound,
Nor Meyne, where Frankfort's walls her waters cheer,
In future times with trade and freedom crown'd.
Still unappall'd his lengthen'd march he wound,
Resolv'd each danger and fatigue to brave,
Thro' rich Franconia and Bavaria's round,
'Till, reaching Austria's state, he stoop'd to lave
His limbs by toils unnerv'd in proud Danubia's wave.

But him no soft delights could now delay,
Nor nature's beauties, nor the busy throng
Of peopled cities might his footsteps stay,
Or from his purpos'd course detain him long.
Deep in his soul remain'd his Sov'reign's wrong:
And still, as musing on his fortunes rude,
He felt his zeal reviv'd, his hope more strong,
O'er hill, o'er dale, his journey he pursued,
'Till now, approaching near, Vienna's towers he view'd.

'Tho' in his lowly palmer's weeds array'd
He deem'd himself from open wrong secure,
Yet well he knew that Austria's Duke display'd
A mind with malice and revenge impure,
Which haply ill might his abode assure
Within the city's walls.  He judg'd it best
In the more humble suburb to procure
The means of food and necessary rest,
And there unnotic'd urge the purpose of his quest.

Beneath a straw clad roof, in decent cot,
A sire of rev'rend mien there chanc'd to dwell:
Content he seem'd with his sequester'd lot,
While the grey locks that on his shoulders fell
Bespoke a length of years, instructed well
Of past events and councils wise to speak.
Ne'er from his door the poor did he repel;
But, when he saw them desolate and weak,
He bad them turn to him, and rest and refuge seek.

When tow'rds his humble gate the wand'rer drew,
Him in respectful terms the vet'ran greets;
And, as now 'gan to fall the ev'ning dew,
His friendly invitation oft repeats.
"I boast," cried he, "no nectar'd juice, nor meats
Of flavour high to tempt the pamper'd taste:
Far from my board be such unseemly treats,
Where nought but nature's requisites are plac'd!
Rich I esteem the feast by kindly welcome grac'd."

Nor turn'd the Pilgrim from his words aside.
With busy hand the sire his table spread;
His simple fare he cheerfully supplied,
Fresh milk, ripe fruits, and nuts, and wheaten bread.
O'er all his hospitable kindness shed
More grace and true delight, than those oft know
In splendid courts and pomp luxurious bred.
The well-heap'd hearth dispens'd it's cheerful glow,
And soon the ready thought in converse free 'gan flow.

They talk'd of Austria's state; and much the host
Of Leopold's despotic sway complain'd,
Who, since he homeward led from Judah's coast
His warlike bands, with cruelties had stain'd
The fair repute his former deeds had gain'd.
He told how oft his subjects he oppress'd,
And how brave stranger knights he oft retain'd
In durance base and tyrannous arrest,
Who lay in shameful bonds, neglected and distress'd.

"Ah!" cried BLONDEL, "amid the mournful band
Of captive knights, perhaps the well-known name
Of England's warlike King enroll'd may stand.
In Palestine he gain'd immortal fame;
Returning thence, so rumour speaks, he came
With few attendants to Dalmatia's shore.
No tidings since his destiny proclaim:
Uncertain if the fates will e'er restore
The gallant Prince, his realms their cruel loss deplore."

"From foreign climes and Judah's distant plain
Doubtless," replied the host, "you lately come,
Else had you known that HENRY'S tow'rs detain
The English RICHARD.  Him the furies doom
To sigh unheard in some dark dungeon's gloom,
Sold by our Austrian Duke:  with vengeful mind,
For insult offer'd to his flag and plume,
Him, on his coast when wreck'd, he first confin'd,
And then for sordid gold to HENRY'S pow'r consign'd."

His accents pierc'd BLONDEL'S afflicted soul;
His cheek grew pale, and tears distain'd his eye:
Yet prudence taught his feelings to controul,
To hide his grief, and check the rising sigh.
With voice subdued he ventur'd to reply,
"Since then the hapless Prince's fate you know,
Perchance where now in chains he is doom'd to lie,
Consuming life and hope in countless woe,
From friendly commerce hid, you may vouchsafe to shew."

He said.  Tho' ill his tongue perform'd the task,
His aged host remark'd not his distress.
"Pilgrim!"  said he, "full gladly what you ask
Would I resolve; but such was the address
Of those who hence convey'd him, that to guess
Where now confin'd he lies exceeds my pow'r.
Those who do wrong will scarce their wrong confess.
Yet well I deem he wastes his lonely hour
Near HENRY'S princely seat, in some well-guarded tow'r."

No more of RICHARD'S fate the sire could tell:
Yet still his tongue, more garrulous from age,
On what his heart most felt was pleas'd to dwell.
He sought his guest in converse to engage
Of Judah's land, where, daring Pagan rage,
Crusaders bold the dubious fight maintain'd.
But converse now avail'd not to assuage
The pilgrim's mind by grief and terror pain'd;
Tho' these he strove to hide, and still attention feign'd.

Now mounted high the ebon car of night,
The watch-dog bay'd the moon, and owls obscene,
From church-yard's gloom, or ivied turret's height,
With horrid concert hail'd their mystic queen.
And now, repos'd on couches low and mean,
The friendly pair address'd themselves to sleep.
But ah!  what opiate could the anguish keen
Which tore BLONDEL'S sad heart in slumber keep?
To sigh his sole relief, his best delight to weep!

Before the lark her early hymn had sung,
Or morn returning ting'd the east with grey,
From his unhonour'd couch he nimbly sprung.
In vain his host implor'd him yet to stay,
And urg'd the toils and perils of his way:
The oft-inforc'd request BLONDEL denied.
His thanks return'd, in palmer's meek array
Tow'rd Worms he now resolv'd his steps to guide,
Unaw'd by all the ills which might his course betide.

And now for many a mile again he trod
The paths which late his wearied feet had worn;
Where her wide bosom proud Bavaria shew'd,
Where o'er Franconia, rich in vines and corn,
Her treasures Autumn pour'd from copious horn.
From him her gifts could no attention claim:
He journey'd on, by pain and labour torn,
'Till to th' embattled walls of Worms he came,
Where HENRY'S rule was felt and sanguinary fame.

It now behov'd him with redoubled care
Sagely his close enquiries to direct:
For here he knew imprudence might ensnare,
And minions base, who crouded courts infect,
The object of his mission might collect,
And to the tyrant's ear the tale convey.
He first resolv'd the prisons to inspect,
If haply there, depriv'd of air and day,
His lov'd and injur'd King in cruel durance lay.

In vain he went his melancholy round;
In vain each scene of wretchedness he view'd,
Where vice it's merited correction found,
Where wild improvidence it's folly rued,
Or innocence oppress'd for mercy sued.
Fruitless was still his toil; no lonely cell
Reveal'd the object of his search renew'd,
Nor did he dare his views at large to tell,
Or risk to ask what might his anxious doubts dispel.

Yet all his cares were not employ'd in vain:
He learn'd, in many a castle's dreary keep,
Ling'ring for years in wretchedness and pain,
Unnumber'd captives were condemn'd to weep;
Some rack'd with tortures sharp in dungeons deep,
'Till death reliev'd their woe; some left alone
In ever-during solitude to steep
Their pittance coarse in tears, there still to moan,
And in close darkness pent in agony to groan.

Much did BLONDEL their piteous lot deplore;
For much his heart for human misery griev'd:
But scenes like these incited him the more
To learn his Monarch's fortunes.  He believ'd
Past labours vain while ought was unatchiev'd.
Long time his search he made with fruitless care:
At length, a rugged Castle he perceiv'd,
Which, on a spreading plain remote and bare,
Stretch'd it's forbidding front, and proudly mock'd the air.

Where heav'd a mount above th' adjacent waste
The fortress stood.  Well squar'd, each equal side
Tow'rds one of Heav'n's great points was justly trac'd,
Fenc'd by a turret huge, whose lofty pride
Inclement skies and time's attack defied.
Where spread the eastern front, with sculpture crown'd
And emblems rude of war, the portal wide
Disclos'd it's deep recess; while all around
Beyond the yawning moat the sturdy rampart frown'd.

In dreadful majesty the fabric rose:
Round it a dreary heath, where never smil'd
The yellow harvest, stretch'd but to disclose
Sterility unbounded, rocks high pil'd,
And famine's gaunt dominion bleak and wild:
Save, in the western quarter, where a wood,
Whose solemn shades the wearied eye beguil'd,
In state antique and awful stillness stood,
And rear'd aloft it's head, and wav'd o'er many a rood.

When to the solemn pile BLONDEL drew nigh
He anxiously survey'd the scene so dread,
Where 'mid the ivied walls and turrets high,
Birds of ill-omen'd note their dull wings spread,
And o'er the mass fantastic horrors shed.
Slowly, and lost in visionary trance,
The sod he travers'd with uncertain tread,
When 'cross the distant plain he cast his glance,
And saw in peasant garb a lowly hind advance.

A shepherd swain he seem'd of humble mien,
His front was wrinkled, hoar his locks from age,
Grave his demeanour, and his air serene;
Courteous he was, by long experience sage,
And not unread in legendary page,
Tho' doom'd for stipend small a flock to tend:
Yet still did higher themes his mind engage;
Oft would his knee in supplication bend,
While to just Heav'n his thoughts would fervently ascend.

Him with becoming phrase BLONDEL address'd.
Some hope he had his converse might dispel
The settled anguish of his tortur'd breast;
For he conceiv'd that near the swain might dwell,
And thence concluded that he knew right well
All the proud pile's traditionary fame.
Earnest to learn whatever there befel,
He urg'd him to disclose the Castle's name,
And what else worthy note to his remembrance came.

"Good Pilgrim," he replied, "you seek to know
What still untold might better far remain:
For who delights to hang on tales of woe,
Or glut the ear with narratives of pain?
The dread Trivallis' cursed walls contain
No vaulted hall, no dungeon damp or drear,
No chamber close, which murders do not stain.
Full oft, 'tis said, the injur'd ghosts appear,
Their shadowy forms display, their fronts ensanguin'd rear.

"Oft at the midnight hour, the guard reports,
Strange sounds are heard, when as the ghastly band
With dismal lamentation fills the courts.
Now, on the turret's top is seen to stand
Some warrior's troubled spirit; in his hand
Aloft he seems to wave his faulchion dire,
And menace judgments on the guilty land:
Now flitting shades, whose eye-balls gleam with fire,
Skirt the polluted halls, and form a fearful choir.

"Nor these reports do I unfounded hold.
Oft has my father, whose observing eye
Well noted what occurr'd, the story told.
Oft have I heard him say, that, passing nigh,
He saw the visionary phantoms fly,
Skim thro' the troubled air, and pierce the gloom:
And oft his list'ning ear had heard their cry,
As with sad voice they mourn'd their piteous doom,
Their suff'rings still prolong'd, their yet neglected tomb.

"I too have heard the strange terrific sound:
Oft cross my path obscure has glanc'd the shade,
When silence held the hour, and when around
The circling bat it's midnight gambols play'd.
Three nights ago, as here by chance I stray'd,
Strange notes I heard from yonder western tow'r.
Ne'er from my mem'ry will their cadence fade!
His wild complaint some spirit seem'd to show'r
Of vengeance unappeas'd and too successful pow'r."

"Shepherd!  if yet you can the words retain
Which strongly thus your passing ear assail'd,
Recount them," cried BLONDEL.  "I heard them plain,"
Replied the swain, "nor has th' impression fail'd:
Yet came they to my wond'ring senses veil'd
In idiom strange and foreign, such as ne'er
Germanic tongue in speech or song detail'd;
Cloath'd in such dulcet sounds, as angels fair
Chant to the raptur'd spheres when souls to Heav'n they bear."

Awhile the shepherd paus'd, and pensive stood
As one in contemplation deep engross'd;
Nor was BLONDEL less fix'd in thoughtful mood:
His busy mind by anxious doubts was toss'd;
Now hopes, now fears, his varying fancy cross'd.
But soon the swain his sad account resum'd.
"Forgive," said he, "if, in reflection lost,
I ceas'd to tell what captives there were doom'd
To ling'ring woe, or those who there remain entomb'd.

"Six hundred years have now their close attain'd,
Since over Orleans' and Austrasia's bound
With potent sway King CHILDEBERTUS reigned.
'Twas he who first decreed these tow'rs to found,
And 'gainst his pow'rful foes to circle round
The solid fortress with a rampart vast,
Which o'er the moat in sullen grandeur frown'd:
Here, in imperial pomp, his days he pass'd,
And here, tradition tells, the Monarch breath'd his last.

"Two sons he left.  To THIERRY, his first care,
He gave to rule wide Orleans' fertile state;
And next decreed that all Austrasia fair
Should on THEODOBERT, his second, wait.
Vain were it here the causes to narrate
Which 'twixt the brethren cruel war inspir'd,
Or how the bloody BRUNEHAULT their hate
Urg'd on, and still their savage fury fir'd,
'Till by foul treason struck, THEODOBERT expir'd.

"Stern THIERRY'S arms Austrasia's realm subdued,
And soon, by cruel BRUNEHAULT convey'd,
His brother's head on yonder walls he view'd,
Which to the sun it's gory front display'd.
Nor by her grandson's death was yet allay'd
Her sanguinary fury:  here she brought
His two young sons to her fell gripe betray'd;
And, while from her they fond protection sought,
With murd'rous hand their base and foul destruction wrought.

"But tho' high Heav'n, provok'd by mortal guilt,
To strike th' offender may awhile forbear,
Yet soon or late, for kindred's blood thus spilt,
Eternal justice will the bolt prepare.
Fierce THIERRY thus, when slain his nephews fair,
Nor pity feeling nor acute remorse,
As from yon turret with observant care
He view'd the movements of his conq'ring force,
By light'ning struck he fell a black and ghastly corse.

"Four infant sons he had.  To bold GARNIER
These were committed now in holy trust
That he their youth with counsel sage should rear.
But, vilely tempted by ambition's lust,
Soon to his sov'reign's sons he prov'd unjust.
Their princely hopes to quick destruction doom'd,
Like flow'rs which fade and mingle with the dust,
By baleful poison's pow'rful juice consum'd
They sank in death, and there still lie the babes entomb'd.

"Austrasia's rulers now the castle left,
Polluted thus with death and stain'd with blood.
Yet, tho' of state and regal pomp bereft,
It still accurs'd and terrifying stood:
It's lofty ramparts which access preclude,
It's moated strength, and battlements so high,
The heath around so desolate and rude,
Mark'd it a place where pris'ners sad might lie,
Unknown, unnotic'd, there to languish and to die.

"And there, for ages past, have pin'd in woe,
By cordial pity and Heav'n's light unbless'd,
Unnumber'd captives.  None their fate might know,
How long they liv'd, or when to gentle rest
Their spirits sank, by torments harsh oppress'd.
'Tis said, that arts infernal have supplied,
Where stretch the castle's ramparts to the west,
Beneath each dungeon caverns deep and wide,
Whose dark abyss from view each mangled corse may hide."

"And now within the castle's foul recess
What captives lie?"  BLONDEL impatient said.
"Pilgrim," replied the swain, "'tis hard to guess
What pris'ners now contain these chambers dread.
Mysterious silence is around them spread.
Yet saw I lately, not five months are pass'd,
A gallant captive there in secret led,
What time the early moon descended fast,
And o'er the murky sky pale night her mantle cast."

"And did you note him well?"  BLONDEL exclaim'd.
"Ill thro' the gloom could I his features trace,"
Return'd the swain; "but yet his look proclaim'd
Some warrior sprung from no ignoble race.
As the faint moon-beam play'd upon his face,
He shew'd a front which danger oft had brav'd:
With manly frown he ey'd his keepers base,
And, as they urg'd him on with zeal deprav'd,
He strode, while loose in air his auburn tresses wav'd."

As when by heaving billows rudely toss'd,
Far from its course rough storms a vessel drive,
It's sails all shatter'd, and it's compass lost,
In vain the mariners desponding strive:
Fresh clouds their hearts of every hope deprive.
Should then the moon her splendid orb expand,
And to their fainting souls her succour give,
They view with genuine extacy the land,
And hail the welcome port which shews relief at hand.

Such was the ray, which o'er BLONDEL'S sad mind
Flash'd rapidly.  Reliev'd from anxious pain,
His breast no more with grief unceasing pin'd:
RICHARD might yet survive, and once again
Restor'd to England's throne in splendour reign.
But soon reflection check'd his fond delight;
Tho' hope was giv'n, yet fears would still remain:
Much it behov'd him to reflect aright,
Lest disappointment harsh his new-born joy should blight.

Fix'd to the spot as deep entranc'd he stood,
The rampart high he long'd t' approach more near,
If haply from the turret's summit rude,
He might the pris'ner's sad complainings hear
Which lately struck the wond'ring peasant's ear.
But soon arous'd, as issuing from the gate
The bridge they cross'd, he saw a troop appear,
Which on the heath, dispos'd in warlike state,
Their lengthen'd line drew up their Chief's approach to wait.

Fearful that if thus gazing he should stand
Suspicions of his purpose might arise,
His way tow'rd Worms again to turn he plann'd,
And there unnotic'd frame some apt disguise
To lull the guard and cheat their watchful eyes.
Slow as he trac'd his melancholy way,
His busy thoughts expedients would devise,
To know if there his captive Monarch lay,
And how he might avoid his project to betray.

At length he fix'd a minstrel's garb to wear,
Whose sanction'd freedom might his views conceal;
With locks close shorn a merry harp to bear,
And thus apparell'd with the guard to deal,
To charm their caution and their secret steal.
High did he estimate the pow'rs of song;
Oft had he known the rugged bosom feel,
And oft to pity change th' intended wrong,
By harmony subdued and music's 'witching tongue.

At Worms arriv'd, without delay he sought
All that became a minstrel to provide;
A well-strung harp, with seemly carving wrought,
A robe of green, whose sleeves hung large and wide,
A doublet trim of russet colour dyed,
A ruff fair starch'd, and chain which silver shew'd,
A girdle red, and dagger for his side:
All these with fitting diligence he stow'd,
And left the town ere yet the ruddy ev'ning glow'd.

To the wide forest, which beyond the plain
Spread far it's deep and venerable shade,
He came, as first upon the wat'ry main
The sun's departing splendour 'gan to fade.
The distant hills, with purplish tints array'd,
Skirted with grace sublime th' horizon bold,
While on the scatter'd clouds the sunbeams play'd:
As by degrees their varying forms unroll'd,
They shone with silver bright, or blaz'd with dazzling gold

Far in the dark recesses of the wood,
Where tow'ring oaks, high waving to the wind,
The moss-grown tenants of the forest stood,
A narrow path it's devious course inclin'd:
To a sequester'd glade it led, where join'd
The mantling boughs to form a calm retreat,
With eglantine and ivy green entwin'd;
Fit for some hermit's solitary seat,
There on man's state to muse, on pleasures vain and fleet.

Here from the busy haunts of men retir'd,
And safely shrouded from each curious eye,
Himself in minstrel's garb BLONDEL attir'd.
Now faded slow the splendour of the sky;
Across the twilight's shade the bat 'gan fly,
And owls with heavy wing pursued their prey;
The nightingale her lonely song rais'd high,
And hail'd th' approaching gloom with plaintive lay,
While yet the waning moon withheld her pow'rful ray.

As the extended heath he slowly cross'd
And to the castle's solemn towers drew near,
Their high embattlements in night half lost
More dreadful rose, and seem'd more rude and drear.
Now hope his anxious bosom fill'd, now fear;
And, while he view'd the walls which might contain
His King belov'd, he sigh'd, he dropt a tear,
Uncertain whether all his toils were vain,
Or if by stratagem admission he might gain.

In awful stillness now was nature bound,
And night obscure her gloomy influence cast,
Save when, as going their accustom'd round,
The guard along the spreading rampart pass'd.
As they advanc'd with steps confus'd and fast,
Their gliding torches faintly glimm'ring play'd
On the wide battlements and turrets vast,
Forming huge masses of contrasted shade,
Whose uncouth forms more drear the pile terrific made.

The barren heath BLONDEL full sadly pac'd,
And still, as musing on his Monarch's fate
The fond remembrance of past joys he trac'd,
On present woe his fancy would dilate.
When sudden, rudely issuing from the gate,
Loud bursts of boist'rous mirth and laughter came,
Such, as when Bacchus' sons their orgies late
Pursuing seek their madd'ning blood t' enflame,
They shout with zeal impure and riotous acclaim.

Now ceas'd the sound, and silence wide prevail'd:
But soon again, disturbing the still air,
Fresh shouts of merriment his ear assail'd,
As if, amid these haunts of fell despair,
They sought their fears to chase and vanquish care.
Now, mid the din, in notes profound and strong
Some festive strain the passing gale would bear;
And still, as clos'd the cadence of the song,
Tumultuous voices join'd the chorus to prolong.

BLONDEL with transport heard the cheering sound,
And hail'd the hour with hopes propitious fraught.
When still'd again the clam'rous joy he found,
His pendant harp with ready hand he caught,
And strains so vig'rous and so loud he wrought,
As made the rampart's wide recesses ring;
Yet sweet as those, surpassing human thought,
Which Zephyr bears upon his fervid wing,
When with soft touch he wakes the wild Aeolian string.

Still did his hand th' enchanting strain provoke:
Nor vain his toil; soon from the rampart's height
With gratulation kind a warrior spoke.
"Thou, who amid the horrors of the night,
Canst with thy sounds divine the soul delight,
Say who thou art, and whence?  with earnest pray'r
Thee to their social board my friends invite.
Approach then, Minstrel!  to our hall repair,
Partake our flowing bowl, our banquet freely share."

"A Minstrel Squire am I," BLONDEL rejoin'd,
"Who from fair France have bent my toilsome way
In HENRY'S court a station meet to find.
In travel sore I spent the tedious day,
'Till, at the turn of noon, I chanc'd to stray
To yonder wood; there, in it's cool retreat,
Shrouded in balmy sleep too long I lay;
Since when, across the heath with wearied feet,
Wand'ring, in vain I've sought some friendly roof to meet.

"Gladly, kind Sir!  your proffer'd boon I take;
Gladly I hail your hospitable wall:
Some little sojourn if allow'd to make,
Repose and food my vigour may recal."
He said; and soon the drawbridge 'gan to fall;
The warrior hasten'd forth his steps to meet,
And straitway led him to the vaulted hall,
Where numbers stood the minstrel feign'd to greet:
Nor staid they at the board their welcome guest to seat.

Their banquet no high-season'd meats adorn'd,
No piquant cates to tempt the languid taste;
Such luxuries the rugged soldier scorn'd.
Here on the rude but ample board was plac'd
Nutritious food, by mixtures undebas'd:
Nor did the crew the copious treat disdain.
When ended was the feast, they sought in haste
To try what might the well-fill'd bowl contain,
And emulously strove the sparkling juice to drain.

While cautiously BLONDEL preferr'd to quaff,
The ample goblet oft their thirst allay'd,
And, as they drank, with loud triumphant laugh
Their prowess Bacchanalian they display'd.
With common voice they now the Minstrel pray'd
To grace with music's gay delight their cheer.
BLONDEL with ready courtesy obey'd,
And thus commenc'd his song; while, crouding near,
Each list'ning warrior press'd his harmony to hear.

"When valiant knights and courtly dames delight
In feasts and revelry to pass the hour,
Then welcome is the jolly Minstrel's sight,
Who glads with melody the vaulted tow'r,
Or charms with strains divine the festive bow'r.
Whether of love and am'rous deeds he sings,
Or of injurious force and vengeful pow'r
From antient chronicles example brings,
Ne'er sounds his voice in vain, ne'er fail his pow'rful strings.

"O'er hill and valley wand'ring far and wide,
Unaw'd by toils, by perils unsubdued,
Well is the patient Minstrel's spirit tried.
But little heeds he such encounters rude:
With courage high and constancy endued,
His task perform'd, the ready harp he takes,
And, while the pleasing subject is pursued,
Extatic rounds of harmony he makes,
Unlocks the pow'rs of song, and all the soul awakes.

"Now sings he of the damsel fair and chaste,
Whose sire severe condemns her constant love,
Compell'd in savage wilds her days to waste,
'Thro' trackless woods and forests wide to rove,
Protected only by the Pow'rs above.
Oft does the giant foe her fears alarm;
Oft is she doom'd th' enchanter's wiles to prove:
Yet, still secur'd from each impending harm,
She lives to bless the youth whose heart her beauties charm.

"Now louder strains the varying song requires.
Of arms he sings, and of the gallant knight
Whose fearless bosom warlike fame inspires.
By glory warm'd, array'd in armour bright,
Foul wrong to quell and worth oppress'd to right,
Dauntless he issues to the tented field:
There against hostile bands he proves his might,
Well skill'd his spear to couch, his sword to wield,
While routed squadrons fly and to his prowess yield.

"When conquest waves her crimson'd wings on high,
No pangs of jealousy his triumph cloud.
Hark!  how around is heard the joyful cry!
See!  as he onward moves, th' exulting croud
Unite in praise and acclamation loud!
His empire bravely gain'd he hastes to share
With her to whom his constancy was vow'd:
Long bless'd with mutual love their crowns they wear,
For valour fam'd the Prince, for matchless grace the Fair."

As hung the list'ning warriors on his song
He saw the varying passions as they rose,
And mark'd in every face th' emotion strong.
Sudden a melancholy theme he chose;
And, as he sung the fallen hero's woes,
The sympathetic chords he softly press'd.
Still, at each mournful modulation's close,
Th' impression sad pervaded every breast,
Each moisten'd eye the power of melody confess'd.

"Behold!"  he cried, "low on th' ensanguin'd plain,
Far from his host, the wounded chieftain lie!
No pitying hand is found to sooth his pain,
No friendly aid to cheer his drooping eye.
Mark, where the hostile band approaching nigh
To some lone tow'r their bleeding victim bear;
There, of all joy bereft, alone to sigh,
Alone to drop the unavailing tear,
Alone his captive hands tow'rds Heav'n in vain to rear.

"See where he wastes the tedious hours of woe,
Night's darkest horrors round his dungeon spread:
Sullen and deep the angry tempests blow,
And o'er his soul increasing sorrows shed.
Ye, to whose care devolves the duty dread
At morn and eve his pittance scant to deal,
When tow'rds his melancholy cell ye tread,
Say, o'er your minds does no compassion steal,
Do not your generous hearts a warrior's suff'rings feel?

"Cease, Minstrel!  cease," exclaim'd a panting Chief,
"No more on themes like this thy strain prolong.
Too well, alas!  we know the captive's grief;
Nor need we all the magic of thy tongue
To paint his hapless fate in colours strong.
Here, 'midst this castle's solitary walls,
Oft does the lonely pris'ner moan his wrong;
Here, while surrounding gloom his sense appals,
With languid voice for death he oft unpitied calls.

"Ev'n now, while thus we pass the festive hour,
Know that beneath this roof in bonds is held
A gallant captive.  To his dreary tow'r
Frequent I mount, by feelings warm impell'd.
A man more dignified I've not beheld.
Ne'er from his lips is heard complaint to flow:
His soul undaunted, by duress unquell'd,
Beneath misfortune's yoke disdains to bow;
Still beam with fire his eyes, still frowns his martial brow."

"Alas!" exclaim'd BLONDEL, "what pow'r severe
Condemns him thus to solitude and pain?
Who can refuse to woe like his a tear,
Or who his earnest wishes can restrain
Some further knowledge of his fate to gain?"
"Perhaps too much already have I told,"
The Warrior said; "to ask for more refrain.
While here our delegated trust we hold,
The secrets of our charge 'twere treason to unfold."

"No secrets of your charge I seek to know,"
BLONDEL replied:  "yet wherefore thus conceal
"The fate of him, who in redeemless woe
"Marks with his sighs the moments as they steal?"
"He who shall dare the myst'ry to reveal,"
Exclaim'd a rugged Chieftain, "from my hand
Shall soon th' effect of his imprudence feel!
Minstrel!  forbear to press thy rash demand:
Vainly you question those who form my trusty band."

Thus frowning spake the Chief.  The list'ning throng,
Aw'd by his word, confirm'd his stern behest.
But soon BLONDEL renew'd his lively song,
And, as again his harp's full chords he press'd,
Essay'd the rising tumult to arrest.
Of ARTHUR'S court he sang and table round,
Where valiant knights and many a noble guest
Illustrious dames with rosy chaplets crown'd,
While MERLIN'S potent wand the fiends in durance bound.

Much did the martial band the song approve:
But ill the voice of melody avail'd
From the rough Chieftain's bosom to remove
The strong suspicion which his soul assail'd.
He fear'd, he knew not why, some purpose veil'd
Which might the Minstrel to the tow'r have brought;
And, as his working mind the doubt detail'd,
Of dangers dark and stratagems he thought,
Of deeply laid designs, and plots with peril fraught.

Soon with address abrupt he sternly said:
"Minstrel!  tho' much thy song delights mine ear,
Yet must not my observance be betray'd
By pleasure to forget my trust severe.
Pleasure, tho' sweet, may yet be bought too dear.
Tho' ill th' injunction may your strains requite,
Yet hence perforce your footsteps you must bear.
The moon now mounting high dispenses light,
And with unclouded rays dispels the gloom of night."

He spake.  As round his fiery eyes he cast,
The warriors bow'd.  Too well BLONDEL perceiv'd
The apt occasion of his search was past.
As when a husbandman, his hope deceiv'd,
Surveys his field of it's rich crop bereav'd,
While tempests rage and torrents sweep the ground,
So for his thwarted enterprise he griev'd,
So did the Chieftain's voice his sense astound,
While from th' obedient crew it quick concurrence found.

"If stern necessity forbid my stay,
I bow," replied he, "to the high behest.
Yet, from the Castle ere I take my way,
Receive the thankful homage of your guest
For hospitality and needful rest.
Warriors, farewell!  tow'rd Worms my steps I bend.
Howe'er by labour and fatigue oppress'd,
My midnight travel Heav'n will sure defend,
And o'er my darkling path it's sacred shield extend."

The hall he quitted, and the drawbridge pass'd.
Still ruminating on his Prince's doom,
He sought the forest.  As his eye he cast
Along the outline of th' expanded gloom,
Each tenant of the wood appear'd t' assume
Some form fantastic, as the midnight glare
With flitting touch it's branches chanc'd t' illume:
Some ghastly warrior's mien it now would wear,
Now like some monster gape, or like some Gorgon stare.

When a quick-passing cloud it's dark veil spread,
All seem'd to vanish in the general shade;
But, whenso'er the moon her radiance shed,
Ideal phantoms were again pourtray'd
In shapes more strange and horrible array'd,
As if, in Synod there to meet compell'd,
Malicious fiends their noxious gambols play'd,
Shrouded from day and by the sun unquell'd;
For ne'er his purer beams such visions dire beheld.

Thus when on midnight couch some fev'rish wretch
Is doom'd a strong delirium to sustain,
Distemper'd dreams their fancied horrors stretch,
And whirl their madd'ning influence o'er his brain:
While the black blood impell'd thro' ev'ry vein,
Charg'd with contagion, loads his heaving heart,
His suff'ring spirit labours with the pain,
'Cross his strain'd eye-balls fiery spectres dart,
He raves and tears his flesh with wild convulsive start.

BLONDEL these strange appearances admir'd,
Which weaker bosoms might have chill'd with dread;
But he, whose soul superior courage fir'd,
Smil'd on the terrors which around him spread,
And onward walk'd with firm determin'd tread
To gain the path which wound within the wood.
Yet, ere he left the plain, he turn'd his head,
Again to view the Castle as it stood,
Sublime in barbarous pride, polluted still with blood.

On it's high walls he gaz'd and moat profound,
Which now more vast and more tremendous shew'd
In gloom obscure and night's dark mantle bound,
Thro' which in vain their windings he pursued.
But soon, from clouds releas'd, the moon renew'd
Her fav'ring light, and, on the western tow'r
Shedding her beams, disclos'd it's summit rude.
More dread it frown'd than at the noon-tide hour,
And with redoubled awe it's turrets seem'd to lour.

"And what if RICHARD there may lie," he said:
"What if the tale which struck my pitying ear
The cruel miseries of my King convey'd?
Be Heav'n my guide!  away each idle fear!
Welcome each horror of yon Castle drear!
To dare it's perils thus I fondly fly!"
Then, where he saw the threat'ning turrets rear
Their battlements, he rush'd, resolv'd to try
What fortune might betide, or for his Prince to die.

Beneath the tow'ring pile he quickly stood.
As it's wide front with warlike emblems deck'd
And far-stretch'd range with heedful eye he view'd,
It's height immense his expectation check'd.
Now, if some recent and o'er-look'd defect
An entrance might afford, the walls around
With eager care he hasten'd to inspect.
Vain was his toil; no op'ning there he found,
But firm, compact and strong the rugged turret frown'd:

Save where aloft, by gratings well secur'd,
A small and narrow window he espied,
Which to the hapless wretch within immur'd
A portion scant of light and air supplied.
Yet all access it's altitude defied.
Not more it's state inviolate maintains
The eagle's nest on Snowdon's craggy side,
Where in secluded majesty he reigns,
And rears his princely brood, and human pow'r disdains.

Here he conceiv'd the Chief in bondage lay:
But still the fissure straight so distant seem'd,
That to the dreary dungeon to convey
His cheering voice impossible he deem'd:
No sounds were heard, nor from the Castle gleam'd
The passing torches of the wearied guard:
Oppress'd by toil they slept, and, as they dream'd
Of old encounters and of labours hard,
In slumbers deep they lost the duties of their ward.

Impatient the mysterious truth to know,
He caught his harp, and struck a gentle note.
The chord, half-vibrating, subdued and low,
Scarce on the midnight breeze appear'd to float.
Softly it stole along the tranquil moat,
As when, amid some lonely wood's retreat,
Desponding Philomel attunes her throat
Her melancholy fortunes to repeat,
Her song she oft renews with cadence sad and sweet.

He paus'd awhile, but all was mute and still.
Again his harp he struck with firmer hand,
And modulations drew more loud and shrill,
Such as were wont, on Judah's holy strand,
With pious rage t' inflame the martial band.
The pow'rful harmony ascended high,
Thro' the wide air it's influence to expand.
Once more the strong vibration seem'd to die,
When from the tow'r was heard a deep and long-drawn sigh.

The mournful sound electrified his soul:
Thoughtful he stood, yet firm and unappall'd.
His cherish'd hope now rose beyond controul,
That here his much-lov'd Monarch lay enthrall'd.
Now to his working fancy he recall'd
The scenes of early youth, when on the plain
Of fair Poictou in princely state install'd
The gallant RICHARD held his peaceful reign,
And fram'd the lively song, and rais'd the tender strain.

'Twas there, ere yet the fatal feuds arose
Which chang'd for war's alarms those scenes of joy,
That RICHARD oft delighted to compose
The varying verse; to sing his lady coy
The hour of rest full oft would he employ.
BLONDEL alone those pleasing moments shar'd;
Full well their common song accus'd the boy,
Whose wanton malice neither heart had spar'd,
And still with practis'd art his venom'd shafts prepar'd.

Of these a sweet and well-remember'd air
Blondel selected, which with fond delight
His Prince had form'd for the capricious fair
Who paid his ardent vows with scorn and slight:
And thus he sung &mdash; "While to your beauty bright
I homage pay, and lowly bend the knee,
Vain are your charms true passion to excite:
Coldness but ill with raptures can agree;
Yet still my patience lasts, while all are shunn'd like me."

He ceas'd th' imperfect strain, and fix'd remain'd
In mute expectancy to catch the sound
Which from the tow'r might come.  Deep silence reign'd,
When thus a manly voice, in notes profound,
Responsive sung &mdash; "No nymph my heart can wound,
If other captives she attempts t' ensnare,
And sheds her smiles and graces all around:
Rather her scorn and hatred would I bear,
Than own her worthless sway, and love with others share."

"It is, it is my RICHARD!"  cried BLONDEL,
He lives to crown his faithful people's love!
Oh!  ease my tortur'd bosom, deign to tell
What cruel fate and envious fortune drove
Our gallant Prince this sad reverse to prove?
Oh let thy welcome voice my senses bless!
Say, can my care, my toils, my life remove
My Monarch's woe, or aid his deep distress?
Say, can my favour'd hand his mighty wrongs redress?"

"Thank Heav'n!"  replied the Prince, "at length my pray'r
Hath found acceptance at the Eternal Throne.
While doom'd to bonds and solitary care,
Oft has my sad and wearied spirit flown
To that great Pow'r who mercy now hath shewn.
Lov'd friend!  and is it then thy voice I hear?
Amid the horrors of this turret lone
It comes the sorrows of my heart to cheer,
To ease my tortur'd breast, and calm my anxious fear.

"Much have I lately known of shame and pain:
Severely has th' Almighty's pow'rful hand
Chastis'd my faults, but not chastis'd in vain.
Know, my BLONDEL!  as, wreck'd on Austria's strand,
I journey'd to revisit Albion's land,
The vengeful LEOPOLD thy master seiz'd.
Some months I lay beneath his stern command;
While he, to glut his malice dire well pleas'd,
Wreak'd on my captive head his fury unappeas'd.

"Whate'er of contumely could disgrace,
Whate'er of want could pang, I then sustain'd;
But want nor contumely could debase
My constant heart; his pow'r I still disdain'd,
With patience bore his wrongs, nor e'er complain'd.
RICHARD might captive be, but still his soul
Free and unmov'd it's dignity maintain'd:
For ne'er th' immortal spirit owns controul;
Serene and firm it stands, tho' thunders round it roll.

"At length to change my fate high Heav'n decreed:
But yet in change no comfort could I find.
From LEOPOLD'S base tyranny tho' freed,
To bloody HENRY'S sway severe consign'd
My wayward fortune still was found unkind.
Oh stain to chivalry!  oh blot to fame!
Oh strange contempt of all the ties that bind
Th' associate warriors of the Christian name!
Curs'd be your foul designs, and lasting be your shame!

"But let me not in weak revilings waste
The precious moments of our converse brief.
My soul already feels a fond foretaste
Of coming joy, and 'mid my heart-felt grief
Hope cheering smiles and promises relief.
But ah!  what sorrows may be yet in store,
What miseries yet unknown and past belief!
Say, my BLONDEL, does she whom I adore
Yet live, or must my heart her cruel loss deplore?"

"Her absent lord lamenting," said BLONDEL,
In woe the lovely BERENGARIA lives.
Her moisten'd eye and heaving bosom tell
The agony which hope protracted gives:
Her gentle spirit with her sorrows strives;
Like the poor dove, whose mate no more returns,
From bliss foregone she present pain derives,
Still with a pure and constant flame she burns,
Droops her dejected head, and lost in anguish mourns."

"Thy words," return'd the Prince, "like sov'reign balm
O'er my rack'd soul their healing influence shed.
Proceed, BLONDEL!  my painful doubts to calm:
Does my base brother still rebellion spread?
Does PHILIP, nurs'd in frauds, in treasons bred,
Confed'rate still his purpose vile provoke?
Say, are my troops to fame and conquest led,
Or check'd by foreign foes, their spirits broke,
Yield they to Gallic force, and bear th' inglorious yoke?"

"If," said BLONDEL, "his charge the shepherd leave,
The hungry wolf upon his flock will prey.
So JOHN, well-vers'd in cunning to deceive,
When far his noble brother was away,
Disdain'd his great vicegerents to obey.
By subtle workings and encounters rude
He seiz'd such castles as defenceless lay,
And, urg'd by treach'rous France, his course pursued
To snatch at England's crown, and bathe her fields with blood.

"But soon the spirit of the nation rose.
Tho' some misled in error's mazes rov'd,
False to themselves, and to their country foes,
Yet English loyalty untainted prov'd.
By gen'rous scorn and indignation mov'd,
They rush'd the royal ELINOR to join,
And grace the banner of their King belov'd.
With her their pow'rful efforts they combine,
And soon the rebel chiefs their conquests must resign.

"Such are the fortunes of your suff'ring realm.
Meantime, your faithful English urge their pray'r,
That RICHARD soon may re-assume the helm;
And royal ELINOR, with pious care,
Studious the means of safety to prepare,
Her trusty messengers thro' Europe's bound
To seek their King commissions to repair.
Of these BLONDEL with blest success is crown'd,
Well are his toils repaid, his King, his friend, is found."

"It glads my woe-worn heart," the Prince replied,
"That England to herself and King is true.
May my ungrateful brother's guilty pride
Full retribution meet and vengeance due!
May Gallia's perjur'd King his treach'ry rue!
Grant me, ye fav'ring Powers!  these bonds to break;
Then, when allow'd the traitor to pursue.
Injurious PHILIP thro' his realm I'll seek,
Nor cease, 'till on his head my just revenge I wreak.

"But ah!  how weak my threats!  my anxious mind
Vainly it's torments seeks by words t' assuage.
Torn from his native forests and confin'd
The lordly lion thus exhausts his rage,
And tears with fury impotent his cage.
BLONDEL!  I charge thee seek the English coast,
Report my wayward fortunes, and engage
My faithful Barons to prepare their host,
Their Monarch to reclaim, to win my freedom lost.

"In friendship's warm and vivid colours paint
The suff'rings of your King:  their gen'rous zeal
Will urge them to conclude my base restraint.
Tell them, to English virtue I appeal.
Their RICHARD'S woes when English bosoms feel,
Thousands will rush to vindicate his wrong,
His honour to assert, his wounds to heal:
His foes to check resistless will they throng,
Bold in the sacred cause, in loyal feelings strong.

"Haste, my BLONDEL, to England's court repair.
The wasting night now quits her high domain,
And o'er th' horizon wide the morning fair
Approaches fast to re-assume her reign.
Haply some stranger passing o'er the plain
May mark thy station, or my guard severe,
Observing thee, thy progress may restrain.
Adieu, my friend!  thy course to England steer,
To all who love their lord my best remembrance bear."

"Nor day, nor night my slacken'd course shall see,"
Return'd Blondel; "to England's court I go,
Of ills disdainful while inspir'd by thee.
My welcome voice their Monarch's fate shall shew,
And, as their breasts with cordial pity glow,
Doubt not their hands the ready sword will wield.
No sleep these eyes, these limbs no rest shall know,
'Till, by my words to vengeful ardour steel'd,
Your Barons well array'd shall croud the martial field.

"Then, when their valour shall have gain'd the prize,
And traitors mourn their merited defeat,
When victory o'er the gallant RICHARD flies,
And England's Monarch fills his rightful seat,
Let fame th' attachment of your friend repeat.
Farewell, lov'd Prince!  may angels be thy guard,
May seraphs hover o'er thy dread retreat,
Lighten thy woes, and ease thy suff'rings hard!
Soon will propitious Heav'n thy constancy reward."

He said, and from the Castle bent his way.
Now from the east the rising splendour glow'd,
And o'er the dusky sky brought on the day:
The tinted radiance o'er th' horizon flow'd,
While blushing morn with rosy fingers strew'd
On every herb and flow'r ambrosial dew.
Tow'rds the thick wood impatiently he strode,
His minstrel's garments there to shroud from view,
And in his palmer's weeds his travel to renew.

Dark shew'd the forest, yet no more the trees
Those horrid shapes and ghastly forms display'd,
Which, as high waving to the midnight breeze,
His troubled fancy lately had pourtray'd.
Airy and light they wanton'd o'er the shade,
While, 'midst their foliage hid, on every bough
Their rounds fantastic birds unnumber'd play'd,
Breathing in accents loud or murmurs low
Th' instinctive strain of love, th' inviolated vow.

BLONDEL, delighted with the tuneful choir,
The path which led within the wood pursued.
There he resum'd his pilgrim's meek attire,
And, hast'ning back, prepar'd with zeal renew'd
T' atchieve the perils of his travel rude.
As thro' Heav'n's arch the sun ascended high,
Gilt by it's rays again the tow'r he view'd,
Where fate ordain'd his much-lov'd King to lie.
In mute suspense he gaz'd, and heav'd the frequent sigh.

Thus when, from Afric's hapless regions torn,
The trembling victim of colonial crimes
To unknown scenes of wretchedness is borne;
Oft does his mind recur to happier times,
Oft does his fancy trace his native climes,
His parent's tenderness, his children's love,
And each fond tie which feeling souls sublimes:
But present pangs th' illusion soft remove,
He wakes from dreams of bliss his tyrant's pow'r to prove.

Across his mind such sad reflections glanc'd,
As on the tow'r his ling'ring eyes he bent:
Awhile he pensive stood, as one entranc'd;
But reason soon her aid consoling lent:
With step resolv'd across the heath he went,
Nor stopp'd, 'till, reaching Antwerp's proud domain,
By ceaseless cares and labour nearly spent,
He dar'd the perils of the sea again,
With welcome tidings charg'd to ease his country's pain.

