While thus BLONDEL with ceaseless ardour wrought,
Against domestic foes, whose fury dread
T' o'erwhelm their too-long harrass'd country sought,
Their warlike bands the faithful Barons led.
Far was the scourge of desolation spread:
Throughout the land, with wild vindictive sway,
Their influence dire associate daemons shed,
And, as the rebels march'd in stern array,
Their cry portended death, and ruin mark'd their way.

On ev'ry side was heard the trump of war:
High in the air unnumber'd banners wav'd,
And shew'd their rich emblazonments afar.
The gen'rous steed no more his fleet limbs lav'd
In lake or stream; the conflict rude he brav'd,
Arch'd his high neck, and shook his flowing mane:
The Chanfron rich and Poitrinal engrav'd
Firm and erect he bore; with proud disdain
He scal'd th' impending cliff, or scour'd along the plain.

As when, at eve's approach, the Alpine swain
Sounds from his deep-ton'd tube th' accustom'd lay,
To call his stragglers from the grassy plain,
Th' obedient flock his warning note obey;
No more 'midst flow'ry meads his lambkins play,
His goats no longer o'er the mountains roam,
Bound o'er the hills and on their summits stray,
While far beneath them thund'ring torrents foam:
They own their master's voice, and seek with him their home.

So, when was heard their Chieftain's welcome call,
With loyal feelings and attachment true
To every castle strong and moated hall
The zealous vassalry of England flew.
With weapons there supplied and armour due,
Each gallant leader train'd his eager band:
Before him as they pass'd in long review,
He felt with transports fresh his heart expand,
Ardour illum'd his eye, and hope his bosom fann'd.

Recruited thus, no more FITZ-PETER check'd
The gen'rous impulse which his forces warm'd.
He taught the fierce LLEWELLYN to respect
The laws of war:  where'er his power alarm'd
The tranquil seat of innocence unarm'd,
Dauntless he rush'd the victims weak to save.
In ev'ry quarter where the foemen swarm'd,
They fled confus'd before his legions brave,
Or fell beneath his sword, and found an early grave.

From Trenta's verdant meads, where wav'd aloft
The hostile standards with barbaric pride,
As if at England's pow'r they madly scoff'd,
He drove the rude invaders; far and wide
Their purple gore the fertile vallies dy'd.
Nor less from Luna's stream with peerless might
He chas'd the caitiffs who her arms defied,
'Till, once more gaining Snowdon's craggy height,
They hid their recreant heads, and mourn'd their hapless plight.

Nor less prevail'd the now augmented host
Of brave BRYWERE:  the rebel bands he sought,
And check'd with hand severe their daring boast.
Vain were the arts by fiends insidious taught,
And fruitless all the stratagems they wrought:
From Thames's bank their weaken'd force retir'd.
Where'er with loyalty indignant fraught
He turn'd his course, by his example fir'd,
England's bold youth to deeds of hardihood aspir'd.

Yet still on Nottingham's and Windsor's tow'rs
The rebel standards flew.  These to invest
With unremitting zeal he led his pow'rs,
On ev'ry side the harrass'd foe distress'd,
And either siege with ceaseless ardour press'd.
But, tho' oft-times advantages he gain'd,
Still, unsubdued by toil and want of rest,
His fierce assaults the rebel hosts sustain'd,
And brave, tho' guilty, still his proferr'd terms disdain'd.

While thus he worthily employ'd his force,
A Courier, hot with travel, to his tent
With haste impatient rush'd.  His panting horse,
Still smarting from the spur, by labour spent,
And white with foam, confess'd his high intent.
He wav'd his hand, and, leaping to the ground,
"Chieftain!" cried he, "by ELINOR I'm sent,
Throughout your ranks to spread the joyful sound,
That royal RICHARD lives, that England's King is found."

Th' assembled croud the welcome tidings hail'd;
Thro' ev'ry rank soon spread th' exulting cry,
And transport wild and extacy prevail'd.
Thus, when in wintry night to stubble dry
Their flaming brands industrious hinds apply,
O'er the wide champaign far extends the blaze;
The wanton element illumes the sky,
And, while around it's splendour it displays,
The distant villagers in silent wonder gaze.

Soon as the first glad tumult was appeas'd,
BRYWERE exclaim'd, "The tidings which you bring
"Of RICHARD'S safety I have heard well pleas'd.
From woe fore-gone redoubled transports spring.
Now, in the future triumphs of their King
Let ev'ry brave and loyal warrior share!
With sounds of joy let Heav'n's high concave ring!
And, while the brazen trumpet rends the air,
It's blast shall strike our foes with terror and despair!"

Thus bad the Chief.  At once throughout the croud
The martial symphony far-pealing broke:
The clarion shrill, the trumpet's clangor loud,
The echoing horn, the drum's redoubling stroke,
Join'd in exulting chorus to provoke
The grateful hymn of praise from every tongue.
It's fervid strain their pious ardour spoke;
And still, as rose the deep-impassion'd song,
They bless'd the pow'r supreme, th' avenger of their wrong.

While thus the joyful band their thanks express'd,
The Courier to BRYWERE at length explain'd
BLONDEL'S long dubious yet successful quest:
How, in disguise, and under semblance feign'd,
To dread Trivallis he admission gain'd,
And how, tho' baffled in his first essay,
He learn'd that there his Monarch was detain'd.
As thus he spoke, tears oft would force their way,
And oft a rising sigh his feelings would betray.

But soon as nature's tribute he had paid,
He check'd the fond effusion of his grief,
And thus the purpose of his charge display'd.
"The presence of each wise and loyal chief
The Queen requires, whose counsels sage and brief
May scan th' important crisis of our fate,
To suff'ring RICHARD may insure relief,
Save him from HENRY'S unrelenting hate,
And guard from dangers new our agitated state."

"The great occasion prompt resolve demands,"
Replied BRYWERE; "obedient to her will
To delegated rule I leave my bands,
And haste her high injunction to fulfil.
CHANDOS!  be thine the task with warlike skill
To hold beleaguer'd stately Windsor's tow'r;
While AUDLEY brave, and gallant SOMERVILLE,
Direct our cavalry's resistless pow'r
With active vigilance on ev'ry side to scour.

"SAVILLE, renown'd in war!  be thine the care
To Nottingham, where LACY presses close
The nearly-vanquish'd rebels, to repair.
Tell him, that past are suff'ring England's woes,
That once again our King shall face his foes.
With freshen'd ardour and redoubled zeal
Let him his engines of attack dispose,
'Till, 'midst their shatter'd battlements, they feel
The vengeance of our arms, and for our mercy kneel."

He said; and forthwith, vaulting on his steed,
To Windsor's heights he bad a short adieu,
And to the court advanc'd with anxious speed.
Across th' extending plains his courser flew
Uncheck'd, 'till rising to his earnest view
He hail'd the walls of London, stretching wide
Her circuit vast and princely towers to shew,
As, with becoming state and seemly pride,
Pre-eminent she rose, and grac'd old Thames's side.

Her ramparts high he sought not now to gain.
Thro' Charing's hamlet pass'd, his courser fleet
Soon brought him to the long-ennobled plain,
Where Westminster display'd her regal seat,
Of Saxon monarchs the renown'd retreat.
He cross'd the portal and the halls in haste
The Queen and England's puissant peers to meet,
Where they the means in secret council trac'd
To aid their King condemn'd his hours in woe to waste.

Above the rest, as well her rank became,
The royal ELINOR presiding sat,
Guardian of Albion and of RICHARD'S fame.
On either hand the Peers in order'd state
Grac'd the full board, and held their high debate:
The mitred Prelates, by whose counsels sage
The Queen still rul'd; PEMBROKE in battle great,
LEICESTER, who oft had dar'd the Pagan rage,
And MORTIMER well skill'd the doubtful war to wage.

There too MAULEON held his worthy place,
And GRANVILLE bold, who erst associate wore
The badge of faith religion's cause to grace;
NEVILLE renown'd, and REGINALD who bore
The royal standard on Judaea's shore,
FITZ-ALLWYN wise, and HENRY of Almaigne,
With HUBERT deeply read in antient lore,
And brave BLONDEL, who late with care and pain
Dar'd for his Sovereign's sake his foreign toil sustain.

These, as BRYWERE approach'd, in thought profound
And silence deep which rev'rence meet express'd
Listen'd, as to the Peers assembled round
The gallant LEICESTER his discourse address'd.
Sudden he stopp'd, and welcome glad confess'd.
BRYWERE return'd his greeting with respect,
Then pray'd the Earl no longer to arrest
His purpos'd counsel, whose advice correct
Their judgments might decide, their common voice direct.

"Doubtless," resum'd the Earl, "the time demands
That, with advice assur'd and counsels sage,
With voice unanimous and willing hands,
We should in this, our country's cause, engage.
Her suff'rings, caus'd by elemental rage,
By plague, by famine, and her Monarch's woe,
It well becomes our stations to assuage.
Let firm resolve on wisdom founded shew
The blest effects from zeal and loyalty which flow.

"Nor may we Heav'n's kind providence distrust.
E'en in the dreadful hour, when traitors base
With rude irruption and pretence unjust
O'er England's bosom dar'd their course to trace,
Our righteous cause o'erwhelm'd them with disgrace.
Where are their conquests now?  their triumphs high?
Driv'n from the field, our arms no more they face,
No more the combat's bloody issue try,
But vanquish'd hide their shame, and from our legions fly.

"Our shatter'd realm no longer treasons shake;
No more the jarring sounds of civic broil
To deeds of foul import the soul awake.
The further task, JOHN'S black attempt to foil,
By thine, BRYWERE!  and brave FITZ-PETER'S toil
Is happily advanc'd.  It now remains
To check the foes who Normandy despoil,
To free our Monarch from th' inglorious chains
In which base HENRY'S pow'r his war-tried limbs retains.

"He hopes, and rightly does he deem I trust,
That we, whose breasts with loyalty beat high,
Our King to rescue from his grasp unjust
With lib'ral hand his ransom will supply.
Lives there the wretch who would the means deny
Of saving him on whom the state depends?
I see your spirits kindling in each eye,
The patriot flame thro' ev'ry nerve ascends,
New strength to England's realm your gen'rous purpose lends.

"While some to Holy Rome their course pursue,
Let others to imperial Worms repair.
In terms appropriate, and with firmness due,
Let them our wrongs and just demands declare.
If HENRY to refuse redress shall dare,
Let them defiance and revenge proclaim,
And shake his soul with terror and despair.
Tho' bold in guilt, yet, when convicted, tame,
The tyrant base will crouch at England's awful name.

"Thus, while our first great duty we fulfil,
To stem the inroads of our Gallic foe
Twere fit to name some Chief of well-tried skill,
Whose ample pow'rs may ward the menac'd blow,
And in the tented field to PHILIP shew
Our English valour and untainted zeal.
Oh Queen!  to me this enterprize allow:
The proud oppressor soon my force shall feel,
Or death by honour crown'd my loyalty shall seal."

Thus spake the vet'ran Chief.  His counsels sage,
In silence heard, sank deep in every breast.
Thus, when o'erpast the rattling tempest's rage,
As if with awe and wonder still impress'd
In calm repose all nature seems to rest;
Mute ev'ry breath, and hush'd each ruder sound:
While, from his golden chamber in the west,
The setting sun with dazzling radiance crown'd
Sheds his transcendent beams, and spreads delight around.

Immers'd in thought profound the Peers remain'd;
Each eye up-rais'd enraptur'd seem'd t' invoke
Th' Eternal Power who England's realm maintain'd,
When thus the Queen th' assembly grave bespoke.
"Illustrious Chiefs!  to ward th' impending stroke
Which adverse fortune levell'd at our state,
Rightly I judg'd this council to convoke,
Where you, alike in arms and wisdom great,
Might for our country's weal with common voice debate.

"Sage your advice I deem.  Our Gallic foes,
Who now o'er Normandy's rich province dare
Urge their fell hate, let LEICESTER'S Earl oppose.
While here, with haste and unremitting care,
The means of RICHARD'S ransom we prepare,
Let MORTIMER, commission'd in our name,
To bloody HENRY proud defiance bear;
Let him our wrongs and menac'd wrath proclaim,
And urge him to redeem his prostituted fame.

"From Rome's dread Pontiff succour to intreat
Th' important task to HUBERT we assign.
If these appointments your concurrence meet,
Let us, while thus our efforts we combine,
Implore Heav'n's sov'reign aid.  The Power divine,
Th' immortal guardian of our favour'd isle,
Still to our supplications will incline;
Still on our pious energy will smile,
Confirm our patriot zeal, and sanctify our toil."

Thus spoke th' undaunted Queen.  With awe impress'd
Th' admiring Peers approv'd her counsels sage,
When MORTIMER th' assembly thus address'd.
"In tented fields tumultuous war to wage,
To dare in battle's front the foeman's rage,
My time has been employ'd:  I boast no skill
In state intrigues with courtiers to engage;
Yet to my Monarch's cause devoted still,
Behold!  I stand prepar'd your pleasure to fulfil.

"To HENRY'S court, as wills the Queen, I go:
But, rude of speech, I fear my terms uncouth
In soft persuasion's stream but ill may flow.
Would PEMBROKE, lov'd companion of my youth,
And brave BLONDEL, renown'd for loyal truth,
Join to my hearty zeal their pow'rful aid,
My path perplex'd their eloquence will smooth;
Well shall our country's wrongs be then display'd,
And England's menac'd wrath in terrors be array'd."

Thus MORTIMER.  In kind and courteous guise,
As honour'd by his choice, the warlike pair
Spoke their assent to grace his enterprise.
And now their arms and followers to prepare,
As well their rank became, employ'd their care.
An hundred bold and vet'ran knights they chose
To form their squadron and their toil to share,
Who oft, in conflict with their Pagan foes,
On Judah's plains had learn'd their fury to oppose.

As o'er the Kentish plains their way they took,
While their white plumes high wav'd from every crest,
Their gallant steeds, whose hoofs the champaign shook,
With neighings loud their eagerness express'd,
And, as if conscious of their purpos'd quest,
Urg'd their fleet course, and proudly spurn'd the ground.
Towards Dover's port their travel they address'd,
Where shelter'd by the cliffs that tower'd around,
In happy hour arriv'd, their ready barks they found.

Clear was the sky, and fav'ring was the gale.
The busy mariners their anchors weigh'd,
And stretch'd with dext'rous hand the flowing sail:
The curling billows round the vessels play'd,
While, on the top-mast's giddy height array'd,
Courting the breeze the blood-red pennants flew:
The pilot's skill the gliding barks obey'd,
And, as loud caroll'd the observant crew,
Old England's white-rob'd coasts receded from their view.

Now sank the sun beneath the western wave,
While, in calm majesty, the queen of night
From Heav'n's high arch her silv'ry lustre gave,
Tinging the waters with her radiance white.
The crouded warriors hail'd her welcome light;
And PEMBROKE, as the deck he slowly pac'd,
With MORTIMER discours'd of many a fight,
And many a combat's varied feats he trac'd,
Where the ensanguin'd cross by victory had been grac'd.

Far from the rest, immers'd in thought profound
BLONDEL, regardless of their converse, sat.
He cast his eyes the tranquil scene around,
Recalling all that had occurr'd of late,
When, to investigate his Monarch's fate,
He cross'd the sea, and sought Germania's strand.
Of dread Trivallis and of Austria's hate
He mus'd; and much the present perils scann'd,
Which menac'd his lov'd Lord from ruthless HENRY'S hand.

As with impatience in his mind he turn'd
How his enlargement he might best obtain,
His breast with hopes and fears alternate burn'd,
With op'ning joy, and oft recurring pain.
Unable now his feelings to restrain,
He join'd th' associate Chiefs.  In converse deep
They pass'd the night, till o'er th' empurpled main
Fresh from the east the morn began to creep,
And the bright sun thro' Heav'n commenc'd his progress steep.

The crew exulting hail'd his cheerful ray,
And, as their sails the fav'ring zephyrs swell'd,
The nimble barks pursued their destin'd way.
Soon the rich coasts of Flandria they beheld,
Where, charg'd with Europe's wealth, the princely Scheld
His ample tribute to old ocean pours.
O'er his broad surface by the gale impell'd,
Well pleas'd they gaz'd upon his fertile shores,
Where nature's hand display'd her variegated stores.

On Antwerp's quay they hasten'd now to land.
Soon, from their toils refresh'd, the Chieftains drew
In duly order'd rank the gallant band,
And, their high purpose anxious to renew,
Urg'd their fleet steeds their travel to pursue.
With vig'rous course they held their eager quest;
And now to Flandria's plains they bad adieu,
And o'er Germania's spreading regions press'd,
While loyalty and zeal inspir'd each gen'rous breast.

O'er hill and valley they pursued their way,
Now skirting Rhine's broad stream, where seated high,
In rude sublimity and wild array,
Unnumber'd castles brav'd th' inclement sky,
Now passing o'er the fertile vales which lie
On either bank, with corn and vineyards fair.
As still they journey'd on, they chanc'd descry
A troop array'd in habits gay and rare,
Whose banners wide unfurl'd wav'd proudly in the air.

On these were seen the Magi who ador'd
The Babe Divine, who from his heav'nly throne
Descending, deign'd salvation to afford,
Whose humble roof the eastern star had shewn.
Before the well-arm'd band there rode alone,
With stole of white and rochet rich bedeck'd,
The princely Bishop of far-fam'd Cologne.
His silver'd hairs and countenance erect
Announc'd his worth, and claim'd well-merited respect.

Gladly the English knights the prince beheld,
And, to o'ertake him, with augmented haste
Across the plain their coursers they impell'd.
The prelate, as their near approach he trac'd,
Which spoke some high intent, more slowly pac'd;
But, when their standard he distinctly saw,
Which the ensanguin'd cross superbly grac'd,
Emblem of CHRIST, and of CHRIST'S holy law,
His heart with joy beat high and reverential awe.

"Warriors!"  he cried, "by Him whom impious force
On yonder cross compell'd erewhile to bleed,
Whither and whence ye bend your purpos'd course,
And why thus arm'd, I pray ye to aread."
"Urg'd by a base and most unknightly deed,"
Cried PEMBROKE, "and our captive King to aid,
Towards HENRY'S court from England we proceed.
Too long the tyrant has his power display'd,
Too long has mourn'd our Prince by treach'ry foul betray'd.

"In me," and as he spake his helm he rais'd,
"PEMBROKE, your friend and comrade lov'd behold;
Yon puissant knight, in armour black encas'd,
Is MORTIMER, in many a fight grown old,
And he, with scarf of green, BLONDEL the bold."
Forthwith the Prince, his friend rememb'ring well,
Stretch'd forth his arms, and much rejoic'd t' infold
His brave compeer, while tears of transport fell,
As mutually they sought of past events to tell.

"Well pleas'd, illustrious knights!"  the Prelate cried,
The purpose of your mission I have heard.
Tho' HENRY may attempt his guilt to hide,
Your King's release no more shall be deferr'd.
Germania's potentates their faulchions gird;
Moguntia's Prince, of Cleves the potent Earl,
Saxonia's Duke, and Brunswick's Chief rever'd,
Their banners high indignantly unfurl,
And 'gainst the tyrant base their joint defiance hurl.

"For, tho' with watchful care and jealous heed
HENRY his pris'ner's state forlorn conceal'd,
At length the hateful and unknightly deed
By Heav'n's immediate guidance was reveal'd.
Austria's stern Duke, whose heart by vengeance steel'd
Detain'd the gallant Prince in harsh duress,
Compell'd to sickness and to pain to yield,
Obey'd the voice, which urg'd him to confess
His guilt, and when too late contrition to express.

"Forthwith Germania's peers, in numbers strong,
Call'd on their Chief the causes to assign
Which led him thus your injur'd King to wrong.
With them my warmest efforts I combine;
And hasten now at Worms their bands to join,
Where in the Diet, with to-morrow's light,
We mean to prosecute our great design.
I little need your ardour to incite,
Or urge you in the task your efforts to unite."

Th' attentive warriors his discourse approv'd,
And, still the means discussing how they best
Might ease the suff'rings of their King belov'd,
Heedless of toil, and negligent of rest,
Their vig'rous steeds incessantly they press'd,
'Till to th' imperial ramparts they drew nigh,
What time the setting sun approach'd the west,
And misty clouds across th' encrimson'd sky,
Betok'ning night's approach, in varied forms 'gan fly.

"Here," said the Prince, "awhile, brave knights!  remain:
'Twere right some fitting messenger to send,
An audience from the monarch to obtain;
While I prepare, with many a gen'rous friend,
Such aid as best may suit your views to lend.
Well pleas'd will they your worth distinguish'd greet,
And gladly will they on your steps attend,
When with the proud oppressor first ye meet,
Of England's just complaint and RICHARD'S wrongs to treat."

Thus saying, to the gate his course he bent,
While BASSET, by the chieftains charg'd to bear
Notice of their approach and high intent,
To HENRY'S presence hasten'd to repair.
Meantime, the warriors, with becoming care,
Discuss'd the points which Cologne's Prince had told,
And sought the means most aptly to declare
The hostile purport of their mission bold,
Should still injurious force complete redress withhold.

Their gen'rous bosoms burn'd with loyal flame,
And proud defiance sat on every brow,
When from the gate forth issuing BASSET came.
Approaching near, he bent with rev'rence low,
Then thus began:  "Illustrious chieftains!  know
"Imperial HENRY charges me to say,
"He waits with much impatience, 'till you shew
"Why to his presence thus you take your way,
"And why your standards wave in menacing array."

His words indignantly the Chiefs receiv'd,
Suspecting that with machinations new
The treasons, which he foully had atchiev'd,
He purpos'd still unsated to pursue.
Yet stay'd they not their course:  in order due
Through the throng'd town they gallantly advanc'd.
When to the royal palace near they drew,
O'er its wide front their eyes admiring glanc'd,
Where the materials rich the workman's skill enhanc'd.

As from their foaming steeds the chiefs descend,
The courtly heralds hast'ning from the gate,
Upon their steps obediently attend,
'Till to the hall they came, where thron'd in state,
Expecting their approach, the Emp'ror sat,
And round him, forming an august divan,
Assembled Princes stood his will t' await.
Throughout their ranks approving murmurs ran,
When, stretching forth his hand, thus brave BLONDEL began.

"Charg'd by the powers, who now of Albion's land
The watchful cares of government sustain,
Before this presence dignified we stand,
To state our wrongs, and justice to obtain.
Our cause is good, nor can our suit be vain:
For, tho' oppression may awhile display
Her impious force, and honour foully stain,
Immortal truth will vindicate her sway,
And guilt's recesses dark illumine with her ray.

"By us our country speaks:  in England's name,
Her Monarch's freedom from injurious thrall,
And full redress from thee we boldly claim.
If, deaf to conscience, you reject our call,
Think on the woes, which may thy state befal
From England's arms and congregated pow'r:
Let her denounc'd revenge thy soul appal;
And timely deprecate the fearful hour,
When for her injur'd King her vengeance she shall show'r."

"Free welcome, Chiefs!" replied the Prince, "receive:
Yet, while your presence dignifies my court,
You must allow me, noble Sirs!  to grieve,
That, trusting to a vague and false report,
A charge of deep and horrible import,
Most foreign to my soul, you rashly bring.
Thus does suspicion still the truth distort;
Thus calumny expands her treach'rous wing,
On unsuspecting worth her venom'd darts to fling.

"You talk of guilt, and of your Monarch's wrong.
Tho' confident your terms, yet I respect
The rights which to your character belong,
And, tho' misus'd, your persons will protect.
Thus stands the truth.  When, in Dalmatia wreck'd,
Your warlike King by Austria's Duke was seiz'd,
I deem'd it wrong th' occasion to neglect,
Which offer'd vengeance for my friend deceas'd,
For most unknightly deeds, and crimes yet unappeas'd."

As from his eye keen indignation flash'd,
And anger ting'd his cheek with vivid hues,
To earth stern MORTIMER his gauntlet dash'd:
"Thy proofs," he cried, "I dare thee to produce!
It ill becomes thee basely thus to use
The Christian champion, who, when paltry fear
Urg'd thee thy foul omission to excuse,
Dar'd on Judaea's shores the cross to bear,
And from the Pagan foe his trophies proud to tear."

"When on the hoary front time's with'ring hand,"
HENRY replied, "has strew'd the marks of age,
We might expect to meet with self-command,
With courteous bearing, and reflection sage,
Whose steady calmness might attemper rage,
And check the rebel passions as they rise.
I mean not, Chieftain!  wordy war to wage:
When in small compass the discussion lies,
Unseemly warmth the want of argument implies.

"'Tis true, your Monarch in my pow'r I hold;
And, did th' occasion suit the cause t' explain,
Easy it were with reasons manifold
The justice of my conduct to maintain.
But such details would now be made in vain:
For know, brave Knights!  ere to my court you came,
I pledg'd my word to yonder princely train,
That they, appreciating your Sov'reign's blame,
Should on his guilt pronounce or justify his fame.

"To-morrow's sun will view th' assembly meet.
Then to Germania's chiefs my charges grave,
Detail'd and full, I purpose to repeat.
Then shall your Monarch free admission have,
To plead his cause, his high renown to save,
And from imputed wrongs himself to clear.
There too your presence equally I crave,
That you the solemn argument may hear,
And of the Diet's voice a just report may bear."

While with ambiguous phrase the tyrant spoke,
And half the truth disclos'd and half conceal'd,
From the surrounding Peers a murmur broke,
Which indignation ill repress'd reveal'd.
Thus, fable says, beneath Phlegrea's field,
When earth's imprison'd sons with giant force
Attempt t' escape and arms again to wield,
While rocks on rocks impos'd forbid their course,
Far thro' the caverns deep resound their threat'nings hoarse.

Again to speak bold MORTIMER essay'd;
But PEMBROKE, who a quick advantage spied
From HENRY'S craft, prevented him, and said,
"Whether to truth or falsehood be allied
Thy specious plea, we need not now decide.
We hold thee pledg'd the causes to detail
Why to our King enlargement is denied:
The Diet's judgement will remove the veil
Which treach'ry foul has weav'd, and justice will prevail.

"HENRY!  farewell; we confidently count
To-morrow here our injur'd King shall stand:
Then, when his suff'rings to their full amount
Shall be recorded, and his virtues scann'd,
Expect us to renew our just demand."
He ceas'd.  The Princes courteously arose,
And led the Chieftains to rejoin their band;
For now departing day had reach'd its close,
And sleep from mortals claim'd his tribute of repose.

Her silent reign now solemn midnight held,
And from her poppies soft oblivion shed,
As high her cloudy chariot she impell'd,
And deep her shadows o'er th' horizon spread.
The conscious tyrant on his lofty bed
Alone partook not of the gen'ral rest:
From his still wakeful eye-lids slumber fled,
While strong conflicting passions tore his breast,
And shame, revenge and fear his lab'ring mind oppress'd.

Vainly to court her fost'ring aid he tried;
But she, tho' oft invok'd, her calm repose
To his still agitated soul denied.
Thro' the deep gloom ideal phantoms rose,
And flitting forms, as if denouncing woes,
Quick gliding by his couch terrific pass'd,
And groans were heard, and agonizing throes.
Starting, around his eager eyes he cast
To trace their course obscene, then sank with dread aghast.

A clammy sweat his trembling limbs bedew'd,
And wide diverging stood his bristling hair,
While conscience her appalling charge renew'd,
Shook her keen whip, and urg'd him to despair.
With horror struck, he would have breath'd a prayer:
But ere his tongue the impulse new obey'd,
He heard the sound of pinions thro' the air,
And straightway at his side appear'd a Shade,
Of outline undefin'd, as if in clouds array'd.

It seem'd as though resembling human form,
Of size gigantic and imperial mien,
Black and confus'd, as when thro' wintry storm
A mountain vast in mist obscure is seen,
When brooding tempests robe it's summits green,
And o'er it's brow contending meteors play.
From what appear'd it's head flash'd light'nings keen,
Casting around a blue sulphureous ray,
Which fill'd the tyrant's soul with terror and dismay.

Waving what shew'd a hand, around him broke
In fearful chorus thunders loud and deep,
While thus with accents harsh the vision spoke.
"HENRY!  attend &mdash; from those recesses steep,
Where Heav'n's eternal foes their station keep,
Lo!  BELIAL comes.  While now my leader's foes
Expect the harvest of their toils to reap,
And RICHARD'S thraldom fondly hope to close,
Mark my behest, and learn their efforts to oppose.

"Let others for the substance shadows clasp!
But let more certain joys thy soul invite
A present good and triumphs sure to grasp.
Enjoy the vast ineffable delight,
To crush thy rival, his renown to blight,
To blast his glories with eternal shame.
If ought there need thy vengeance to excite,
Compare with thine his far-extending fame,
'Till thy vex'd bosom own the agitating flame.

"What if, on some remote and hostile strand,
Far from thy throne, and from thine empire torn,
Fate had condemn'd thee to a tyrant's hand?
Would not thy mind resentment deep have borne?
Would not remembrance' sharp and goading thorn
Have urg'd thee to a retribution strong?
Could'st thou forgive the stern oppressor's scorn,
Or check, when able to revenge thy wrong,
Thy rage matur'd by pains, and nurs'd by suff'rings long?

"Think then, if RICHARD should his throne regain,
Should he once more o'er England's pow'rful state,
Grac'd by renown, and flush'd with conquest reign,
Think on the ills which may thyself await.
Consult thy heart to estimate his hate.
If that shall warn thee of expected harm,
Prevent thy ruin ere it be too late:
Let not unfounded hopes suspicion charm,
Tempt thee to yield thy prey, thy fury to disarm.

"Immortal Powers with thee their efforts join,
And me, their active minister, they send
To aid thy cause and prosper thy design,
Still on thy steps with watchful care t' attend,
Still thy vindictive measures to befriend,
And for to-morrow's proof thy soul to steel.
Then o'er thee shall my fav'ring wings extend;
I will instruct thee with the Peers to deal,
And skilfully the truth in mystery to conceal.

"Then with a firmness which becomes thy pride,
Arouse thee, Prince!  th' expecting Chiefs to meet,
And on thy victim's fortunes to decide.
Think how immense the prize, revenge how sweet:
Still more reflect, that now there's no retreat
From instant judgment but submission base.
First weigh the horrors which attend defeat,
Then let thy fancy all the triumphs trace,
Which, when thy rival falls, thy victor brows shall grace."

No more he added.  Trembling and amaz'd
The Prince in breathless agony remain'd,
As on the phantom eagerly he gaz'd.
It vanish'd, and again deep silence reign'd.
HENRY ere long his fortitude regain'd;
And, confident of more than mortal aid,
By neither pity nor remorse restrain'd,
The dictates of th' imperious fiend obey'd,
While in new falshoods cloath'd, his charges he array'd.

The ploughman harness'd now his lusty team,
And slowly o'er the glebe pursued his way;
Now from th' horizon glanc'd the morn's grey beam,
And o'er reposing nature shot it's ray;
The early lark, her homage glad to pay,
Caroll'd her hymn, and, pois'd on outspread wing,
Hail'd the resplendent harbinger of day,
Who gaily rose, charg'd by high Heav'n to bring
To suff'ring England joy and freedom to her King.

Scarcely as yet his emanations bright
Had ting'd the lofty tow'rs of Worms with gold,
And scarcely yet, arous'd from slumbers light,
Her gates the careful warders 'gan t' unfold
When from their couches sprang the Chieftains bold.
With gen'rous zeal their patriot bosoms beat,
And much they yearn'd their Sov'reign to behold,
As on they pass'd Germania's Peers to meet,
Who now assembled stood their wish'd approach to greet.

One common purpose fill'd each gallant heart;
With ardour emulous and feelings high
Each sought his aid and counsel to impart.
But brief their converse:  soon the trumpet's cry,
With piercing note re-echoing to the sky,
Announc'd th' imperial presence, and aloud
Proclaim'd that now th' eventful hour was nigh.
The Chieftains heard, and thro' th' admiring croud
Advanc'd in splendid rank and with demeanour proud.

Before the palace, in well order'd state
And long-protracted line, the guard was plac'd,
The Princes of the empire to await:
Their war-tried limbs in armour were encas'd,
And helms with plumes surcharg'd their temples grac'd.
With decent awe their ensigns to the ground
Graceful they lower'd as on the Chieftains pass'd,
While from their brazen tubes th' martial sound
Symphonious rose and spread rich harmony around.

Now op'd the massive portals, to disclose
The vaulted hall, where, beneath arches wide,
Seats after seats high elevated rose,
And grac'd with lengthen'd rank each spacious side.
Above the rest, with purple splendour dy'd,
O'er-canopied was seen th' imperial throne,
Bedeck'd with lavish pomp and gaudy pride;
Enchas'd in gold, full many a precious stone
Resplendent beam'd, and far with dazzling lustre shone.

The Peers arose the Chieftains to salute,
But soon their stations re-assum'd, impress'd
With deep suspense and expectation mute,
While angry glances from each eye confess'd
The feelings strong which throbb'd in ev'ry breast.
HENRY, who his intended wrong to cloak
His face in counterfeited smiles had dress'd,
With hand outstretch'd attention now bespoke,
And thus with studied phrase the general silence broke.

"No common topics now your doom abide;
No partial int'rests your decrees demand.
Convok'd the fate of empires to decide,
Before your bar a captive King will stand,
Whose warlike fame thro' Judah's distant land
Renown has grac'd with eulogy sublime.
Me, all averse, imperious calls command
To charge this Monarch, once our Europe's prime,
With many a foul offence and most unknightly crime.

"Fain would I shun the task I now fulfil:
Yet honour's voice and duties strict compel
With influence potent my reluctant will
On guilt presum'd and recreant deeds to dwell.
Should he my weighty charges answer well,
My suffrage, Princes!  shall with your's unite:
But should strong proof your judgment sure impel
His varnish'd and untrue defence to slight,
On his attainted head let vengeance stern alight."

He ceas'd.  Forthwith the gates wide-op'ning flew.
All gaz'd, when, with an awe-commanding air,
The martial King advancing met their view.
His pallid cheek denoted past-gone care,
And unconfin'd his flowing auburn hair
With many a ringlet loose his temples crown'd:
Erect he stood, as if his foes to dare;
And, as with conscious majesty around
His piercing eyes he cast, indignantly he frown'd.

As when, pursuing her accustom'd way,
The passing moon obscures the orb of light,
And hides with mantle dark his noon-tide ray,
The sad Peruvian on Pichinca's height,
Mourns his great parent overwhelm'd in night;
But, soon as 'gins retire th' invader dread,
With wild acclaim he hails the victor bright,
Exulting marks his beams reviving spread,
Renew the day, and round aetherial splendour shed.

Such was the feeling of each gallant Chief,
When first the Champion of the Cross they view'd,
Still great in woe, still dignified in grief,
And still by adverse fortune unsubdued.
The Tyrant now arose.  His bosom rude
The cordial power of pity ne'er confess'd:
But, with a look which hate vindictive shew'd,
And gesture fierce which kindling rage express'd,
Thus with imperious tone th' assembly he address'd.

"At length, most noble Peers!  the hour is come,
When England's King, whom gross offences stain,
Before your bar august awaits his doom.
To lend awhile your calm attention deign,
When of high crimes and treasons I arraign
Yon recreant Prince.  With confidence I ask,
And trust your patient hearing to obtain,
While briefly I perform my painful task,
To tear from guilt's base front her hypocritic mask.

"Let not his valour or his warlike fame
Your judgments to undue compassion lead:
'Tho' past deserts may your indulgence claim,
Yet justice still with greater force should plead.
When thus to state my charges I proceed,
On your impartial verdict I rely.
Religion's rights for vengeance intercede,
Insulted monarchs for redress apply,
And to high Heav'n ascends my murder'd kinsman's cry!

"First then, of treason RICHARD I accuse,
In that, regardless of my sov'reign right,
By specious arts and scandalous abuse
He aided TANCRED my just hopes to blight.
From me that traitor, on pretences light,
Apulia's throne and Sicily withheld,
Mock'd at my vengeance, and disdain'd my might;
Yet would my pow'r his duty have compell'd,
Had not the English Prince his arrogance upheld.

"On him, who solemn faith and service swore,
I unsuspecting my reliance plac'd,
And look'd that he my kingdoms would restore:
But little guess'd I, that, by fraud debas'd,
By int'rest warp'd, and by deceit disgrac'd,
My false ally my deadly foe had join'd!
Too late his foul contrivances I trac'd,
When my fair claim reluctant I resign'd,
And yielded to their force and armament combin'd.

"Next I accuse him, that, inflam'd with pride,
And prompted by ambition unrestrain'd,
He dar'd his hostile bands tow'rds Cyprus guide.
The isle to royal ISAAC appertain'd:
There my ally and noble kinsman reign'd,
Not less for courtesy, than arms renown'd,
'Till, with invasion rude and purpose feign'd,
Occasion fit the faithless RICHARD found,
To spoil his peaceful realm, and spread dismay around.

"Forgetful of the sacred badge he wore,
The Christian cause to succour he delay'd,
To glut his fury on a Christian shore.
The Isle he seiz'd:  it's Prince a captive made,
And, as if bent the purple to degrade,
Th' imperial Chief in bonds he dar'd to hold,
And from his coasts insultingly convey'd.
Since when, induc'd by sordid thirst of gold,
His ill-acquir'd domain to strangers he has sold.

"Such were the proud exploits of England's Chief,
When to Judaea's too-long suff'ring strand
With simulated zeal he bore relief.
Mark now, how well he used his high command,
When, by th' insidious projects he had plann'd,
The guidance of their armaments he gain'd.
He rul'd the Chieftains with an iron hand,
Slighted their counsels, their advice disdain'd,
And with oppression strange his tyranny maintain'd.

"I mean not, Princes!  to narrate at large
The crimes which each crusader bold must know:
But one unknightly deed I needs must charge.
At Ascalon, contempt and hate to shew,
Into the mote obscene he dar'd to throw
The flag of Austria's Duke, his arms defac'd,
And &mdash; can I speak such horrors! &mdash; with a blow
His matchless worth and high renown disgrac'd,
And from the rampart's height the vet'ran warrior chas'd.

"To your own hearts I boldly make appeal.
The foul indignity each gen'rous peer
With sympathetic energy must feel.
If sov'reign rights and honour ye revere,
Unite the much wrong'd Austria's fame to clear,
And from reproach his mem'ry to release!
Oh!  to yon bright and empyrean sphere
May fav'ring Seraphs mounting in the breeze
Your high resolve convey his spirit to appease!

"On crimes like these 'tis irksome to enlarge:
Still more unwillingly I now commence
Yet graver guilt on England's King to charge.
Bound as he was strict justice to dispense
To all who join'd their forces in defence
Of Palestine oppress'd by foemen rude,
On slight occasion, and on weak pretence
With brave MONTFERRAT he dispute renew'd,
And with unceasing hate the valiant Chief pursued.

"Princes!  to you his excellence was known,
His martial prowess, and his virtues high!
Dear to my blood, and nearest to my throne,
Oft for his hapless fate I've heav'd a sigh,
Oft has the tear of anguish fill'd my eye.
Oh sainted hero!  from th' angelic choir,
Where far beyond the azure-tinted sky
Thou reign'st with cherubim, my voice inspire
With force proportionate and more than human fire.

"Much injur'd youth!  nor worth, nor actions brave,
Nor high renown in many a combat gain'd,
Thy valued life from treach'rous guilt could save!
Know, Princes!  when at Acre he remain'd,
Amid the Asiatic hills there reign'd,
In state barbaric and secluded pride,
A savage Chief, by many a murder stain'd:
All foreign force his rocks abrupt defied,
While o'er the neighb'ring realms he spread destruction wide.

"The Antient of the Mountain is he call'd:
Assassins fierce his bloody throne surround,
Who, as he orders, bold and unappall'd,
Their votive bosoms scruple not to wound,
Or from some craggy summit to the ground
With force precipitous themselves to throw.
Thus superstition could their souls confound,
And thus perverted loyalty could shew
Excesses great as those from anarchy which flow.

"When, by resentment urg'd or mov'd by hate,
He sought some rival Chieftain to molest,
Forth rush'd his deadly ministers of fate.
Remorseless fury steel'd each rugged breast;
Disdaining perils, negligent of rest,
With fix'd resolve their purpose they pursued,
Nor ceas'd their foul enthusiastic quest,
'Till o'er their victim's prostrate corse they stood,
And stamp'd their tyrant's law in characters of blood.

"Such was the rule of this inhuman Prince,
And thus his slaves, subservient to his will,
Aspir'd their mad attachment to evince,
Rush'd from his mount his mandates to fulfil,
And dar'd the blood of Christian Chiefs to spill.
Could England's King with these himself connect?
Commander of the Christian armies still,
Observe the watchful care, the zeal correct,
With which th' associate bands he labour'd to protect!

"My fault'ring tongue can scarce complete its task,
Scarce can my sad and wounded spirit tell
The truths which justice and affection ask.
But, though unwillingly I yet compel
Your minds on deeds so horrible to dwell,
Imperious truth commands me to proclaim,
That, prompted foully by the powers of Hell,
RICHARD, forgetful of his pristine fame,
Join'd with th' Assassin Prince in bonds of guilt and shame.

"Oh fatal union!  oh transcendent guilt!
On the rever'd and consecrated coast
Where for lost man our Saviour's blood was spilt,
Behold the leader of the Christian host,
To virtue, decency, religion lost,
With Heav'n's remorseless foe confed'rate stand!
Forgetful of his high and vaunting boast,
With him mysterious stratagems he plann'd,
And urg'd, where malice led, his deadly-working hand.

"Soon were the fruits of their alliance known.
CONRAD'S desert, in many a perilous fight
And many a harsh encounter bravely shewn,
They basely sought with murder to requite.
When deep were spread the shades obscene of night,
Their treach'rous daggers drank his princely gore!
To realms above his spirit wing'd it's flight,
And, torn from us, who still his loss deplore,
Most damning proofs of guilt to Heav'n's tribunal bore!

"On him, my honour'd heir, my kinsman dear,
Forgive, illustrious Peers!  if I bestow
The heart-felt tribute of a falling tear!
Oh!  that with this sad narrative of woe
My task might end!  alas!  I still must shew
How England's Prince, in dark alliance join'd
With Europe's bitt'rest and most savage foe,
In guilt associate, and to honour blind,
To stamp the Christian cause with infamy combin'd.

"When CONRAD thus by treason struck expir'd,
Against the life of him whose pow'rful hand
The Gallic sceptre sway'd they next conspir'd.
Their base attempt atrociously they plann'd,
While bravely combating on Judah's strand
The King engag'd in many a conflict rude,
And led to victory his intrepid band.
Foil'd in their first essay, they soon renew'd
Their plan accurs'd, and him with bloody zeal pursued.

"Tho' by allegiance to preserve him bound,
His Sov'reign's foul destruction RICHARD wrought.
When, grac'd with triumphs and with glory crown'd,
His native shores again the Monarch sought,
Assassins dire, with vengeful fury fraught,
Still on his progress persever'd to wait.
But Heav'n their treasons to confusion brought,
Oppos'd its shield to ward the stroke of fate,
And sav'd from menac'd death the pride of Gallia's state.

"Think not that on presumptions ill defin'd
I charge yon captive, or on slight pretence.
This as his reason Gallia's King assign'd,
That now, compell'd to arm in self-defence,
Against the Norman state his force immense
To vindicate his injur'd rights he leads.
No studied phrase, no lavish eloquence,
That Monarch's provocation surely needs:
Beyond the pomp of words most forcibly it pleads.

"Now your attention to a crime I call,
With unheard guilt and tenfold horrors dy'd,
Which ev'ry Christian bosom must appal.
In vain the rage of Pagans you defied,
Vain was your toil your gallant bands to guide
Thro' scenes of blood to glory and to fame!
Fruitless indeed and impotent your pride!
The boastful RICHARD crowns your worth with shame,
And leagues with SALADIN to stigmatize your name!

"Ye holy plains!  where for a guilty world
A willing sacrifice our LORD expir'd,
Where oft the Christian potentates unfurl'd
Their banners high, and, with pure ardour fir'd,
By deeds of worth to heav'nly bliss aspir'd!
Ye walls!  immortaliz'd in sacred song,
Where prophets spake, where hymn'd the bard inspir'd!
Loud as your griefs, and as your insults strong,
Proclaim your fate severe, your aggravated wrong!

"When Europe struggled to redeem your loss,
In the great enterprise he frontless join'd;
With hypocritic zeal assum'd the cross,
And dar'd with vows prophan'd his soul to bind.
Then, even then, with SALADIN he sign'd
A truce, by which the Christian arms he foil'd,
Abandon'd Heav'n, Jerusalem resign'd,
Blasted the high renown for which we toil'd,
And left Judaea's shores degraded and despoil'd!

"Princes!  to you the pris'ner's fate I leave,
And with due def'rence your decree await.
If for MONTFERRAT foully slain you grieve,
If for my wrongs, and those of ISAAC'S state,
For Austria's honour, for Religion's fate,
And PHILIP's just complaint, your hearts expand,
Let judgment stern succeed your wise debate!
So shall your fame on lasting record stand,
And injur'd Heav'n appeas'd again shall bless our land!"

Thus with indignant air and accents high
The Tyrant sought his foul design to cloak,
While with extended arms and uprais'd eye
He seem'd eternal vengeance to invoke.
Silent the Chieftains sat:  no murmur broke
The deep attention which engag'd each breast,
As RICHARD, with a look which scorn bespoke,
And mien compos'd which fortitude express'd,
Thus with impressive voice th' assembled Peers address'd.

