"Soon as the morning gleam'd with radiance new,
Forth from the walls his band MAULEON led,
The vanquish'd host of Cypriots to pursue.
With ease he trac'd them wheresoe'er they fled;
For dismal were the vestiges, and dread,
Which mark'd their fatal course across the plain.
The ways were strew'd with corses of the dead,
And bleeding warriors, who, convuls'd with pain,
Rent Heav'n with fruitless cries, and sought relief in vain.

"While tow'rds Nicosia he his march impell'd,
Our well-appointed fleet, too long detain'd,
Before Limazzo anchor'd we beheld.
No longer now by want of force restrain'd,
I urg'd the gen'rous Chiefs, who much complain'd
That fate forbad them our renown to share,
T'attempt the glorious toils which yet remain'd.
My mandate they obey'd:  with instant care
And emulating zeal they 'gan for war prepare.

"Against Candaria, whose commanding height
O'er-aw'd the northern plain, and mock'd it's foes,
The valiant TANCARVILLE led forth his might.
Chermias, which on the west embattled rose,
With leaguer to surround bold GRANVILLE chose.
Here, as we learn'd, the Tyrant stern had plac'd
His lovely daughter in seclusion close,
Who, tho' with youth and charms superior grac'd,
Her tedious hours was forc'd in solitude to waste.

"'Gainst Famagusta, which the eastern coast
Sublimely guarded, LEICESTER'S puissant Chief
And brave FIERTE march'd their pow'rful host.
Here, when old TEUCER chid his comrades grief,
And bad them chase with wine their sorrows brief,
As exil'd 'cross th' Aegean gulph they sail'd,
The friendly port afforded them relief:
No more his home relinquish'd he bewail'd,
A second SALAMIS by Heav'n approv'd he hail'd.

"Success their various enterprises crown'd.
In every quarter of the vanquish'd isle
Wealth long amass'd our joyful warriors found,
To deck their triumphs and reward their toil.
But these contemptible they held and vile,
Compar'd to her, who from the Chermian tower
GRANVILLE exulting led.  Her temper'd smile
And eyes yet glist'ning with a briny shower,
Won every heart to own fair CHARICLAEA'S power.

"Scarce nineteen summers had their circuit made,
Since Heav'n to Cyprus gave this jewel rare.
Celestial sweetness o'er her features play'd,
And, 'mid the tresses of her auburn hair,
Love spread his toils beholders to ensnare.
Her eyes bespoke the candour of her soul;
While her commanding mien, her graceful air,
And modest blushes o'er the senses stole,
Inspir'd respect, and held the heart in soft controul.

"When GRANVILLE first his beauteous captive brought,
With courteous bearing, to the cool retreat,
Where with my BERENGARIA I had sought
A refuge from the noon-day's sultry heat,
Her gentle heart with conscious feelings beat.
The fast-receding blood her cheeks forsook,
Fearful she seem'd our keen regards to meet,
But gazing with an half-averted look,
Her tender limbs with awe and apprehension shook.

"As I remark'd the workings of her breast,
And how with terror indignation strove,
Thus courteously the Princess I address'd.
'No more let anxious doubts your spirit move:
From English valour still shall beauty prove
The kind attentions which may grief assuage.
For us tho' fortune wreaths triumphant wove,
No warfare we with lovely females wage:
We own their sway supreme, and in their cause engage.'

"Her agitation though my words appeas'd,
Still o'er her varying cheek soft blushes crept,
And spoke the terror which her soul had seiz'd.
My gentle Queen, who silence yet had kept,
Now rising, tow'rds the sorrowing maiden stept,
And kindly strove her anguish to disarm.
'Lady!'  she cried, as still the suff'rer wept,
'Let no uneasy thoughts thy fears alarm:
No rude invader here my lovely charge shall harm.

"'No more the days which youth consigns to joy
Lost to the world in solitude consume:
Those precious hours more worthily employ.
No harsh injunctions now thy beauties doom,
Unknown and unadmir'd, to waste their bloom:
Henceforth be free, to better hopes awake!
Again, sweet maid, thy winning smiles assume!
Exert thyself for BERENGARIA's sake,
And as my friend with me of happiness partake.'

"The royal maiden, as adown her cheek
The tear by gratitude excited fell,
With falt'ring accents thus essay'd to speak.
'In vain, great Queen!  of coming joys you tell:
In vain you strive my sorrows to dispel.
What joys, alas!  can my sad bosom know,
On what gay scenes of pleasure can I dwell,
When, stripp'd of empire and condemn'd to woe,
My father's hours in grief and cruel suff'rings flow!

"'Ah!  if sincerely you of comfort speak,
For his relief exert your sov'reign sway;
Console his woes, his cruel bondage break.
Then, wheresoe'er our fate may point the way,
Resign'd I'll follow, and it's laws obey:
My watchful cares his waning life shall smooth,
Cheer his distresses, and his pains allay;
Content to dedicate to him my youth,
To share his fortunes hard, his wounded soul to sooth.'

"She said, and sank on BERENGARIA's breast.
I shar'd the feelings of my lovely bride,
Which soft compassion and regret express'd,
And thus with cheerfulness assum'd replied.
'When beauty sues, her boon is ne'er denied.
Your wish your father's freedom shall atchieve,
By rashness forfeited and barbarous pride.
Let him from you the precious gift receive:
A pious daughter's worth his errors shall retrieve.'

"I ceas'd, and gave BLONDEL an earnest charge
To hasten to the fleet, and from duress
The captive Monarch straightway to enlarge.
The Princess strove her feelings to confess,
And look'd the thanks her tongue could ill express,
While from her eyes again fond tears burst forth:
Yet still her spirit struggled with distress,
As if endow'd with sense of conscious worth,
From innate powers deriv'd and dignity of birth.

"To sooth her anguish BERENGARIA tried,
And, while she present resignation taught,
The balm of hope with tenderness applied.
And now fresh strength th' afflicted maid had caught,
When from the fleet BLONDEL returning brought
Her father still in chains of silver bound.
Her looks impatiently the Monarch sought,
Who, feeble yet and languid from his wound,
As slowly he advanc'd with indignation frown'd.

"Soon as the hall he reach'd, with anxious speed
Fair CHARICLAEA flew to his embrace:
With ready hands his limbs from bonds she freed,
And gaz'd with smiles enraptur'd on his face.
He, still resentful of his late disgrace,
In sullen silence met her speaking glance:
His eye, dark scowling, yet appear'd to trace
The deep remembrance of his foul mischance,
Which seem'd his lofty soul to hold in speechless trance.

"His stern regard appall'd the blushing maid,
Who, not unmindful of his pride untam'd,
Stood trembling, of his violence afraid.
After a pause, she tenderly exclaim'd,
'Let not, oh Sire!  my duteous care be blam'd;
Look on your daughter, who from England's King
Sought your release:  fortune perhaps has fram'd
Approaching joy, time may new comforts bring,
And blisses unforeseen from present woe may spring.'

"'Talk not to me,' replied the gloomy Chief,
'Of joys which Heav'n forbids my soul to know,
Nor mock with expectations vain my grief.
For me no more the source of bliss shall flow,
But, thro' a lengthen'd perspective of woe,
Despair and horror on my path shall wait.
I spurn the mercies of a taunting foe!
Tho' stripp'd of empire and pursued by fate,
Still shall remembrance live and register my hate.'

"This said, he seem'd as if by rage impell'd
The gentle pleader from his sight to drive,
Who kneeling at his feet his garment held.
Pain'd by the scene, and anxious to revive
Some hope which yet might consolation give,
'Prince!'  I exclaim'd, 'against resistless doom
'It ill becomes heroic worth to strive:
'Midst winter's storms we look for summer's bloom,
When nature, freed from chains, her splendour may resume.

"'So, when her murky veil misfortune spreads,
Heav'n works unseen our blessings to renew,
And joys unhop'd-for o'er our dark course sheds.
Still shall my courtesy your hate pursue,
Still will I strive your rancour to subdue
By gentle bearing and demeanour fair.
For England's King, to knightly prowess true,
When hostile bands no more his vengeance dare,
From sorrow's wound delights the rankling shaft to tear.'

"With that his half-reluctant hand I caught.
His eyes, which varying passions spoke, he rais'd,
And, as if lost in agitating thought,
Awhile in silence on my face he gaz'd.
At length he cried, 'Could memory be eras'd,
Could I forget, that, fall'n from Cyprus' throne,
I stand before thee humbled and disgrac'd,
My feeling breast thy courtesy might own,
And thankfully receive the favours thou hast shewn.

"'But recollections still too strongly wake;
Nor can I yet the state from which I fell
From my torn mind on thy injunction shake.
No more attempt my anguish to dispel!
My wounded soul on grief delights to dwell:
Corroding sorrows there their empire hold,
And vengeful furies, hot from deepest hell,
There rear their snakes, their scourges dire unfold,
And agonize my heart with vengeance uncontroul'd.'

"He ceas'd, and sought his eyes suffus'd to cloak.
Still in our ears his horrid accents rung,
And terror strange in every breast awoke,
When, sudden, round the maid his arms he slung,
And on her neck in speechless anguish hung:
Then starting cried, as her fair form he view'd,
'Oh CHARICLAEA!  to reverses young!
Oh hapless victim!  must misfortune rude
In thy fall'n parent's fate thy innocence include?

"'Say, can thy strength oppose affliction's tide?
Canst thou the world's proud contumely bear?
Or is thy soul with constancy supplied
To meet the ills which coming years may share?
May'st thou forget, to save thee from despair,
What blessings fortune once for thee combin'd,
Nor what thou art with what thou wast compare!
Ah!  may'st thou, to the past and future blind,
In apathy secure, to mis'ry be resign'd!'

"His further utterance flowing tears denied.
Fair CHARICLAEA bow'd with due respect,
And thus in accents dignified replied.
'Tho' heav'nly justice may our faults correct,
It's fost'ring hand will innocence protect.
Unconscious of imputed crime, my soul
Can on the past with confidence reflect,
And trusts that Heav'n will still my fate controul,
And in it's mercy deign my suff'rings to console.

"'Cease then, my father, for your child to grieve,
Nor let ideal woes your bosom rend.
If humbly we it's chastisement receive,
Heav'n to our hearts it's healing balm will send,
And with it's dispensations mercy blend.
Already, safe from violence your child
In England's Queen has found a gentle friend,
Whose kind compassion and attentions mild
Have to the stroke of fate my feelings reconcil'd.'

"She said, and smiling with angelic grace
She caught my BERENGARIA to her breast,
And fondly held her in a close embrace,
While she the maiden tenderly caress'd,
And the warm feelings of her heart express'd.
ISAAC intently gaz'd.  The passions high
Which rack'd his soul his varying cheek confess'd;
His rugged brow relax'd, he heav'd a sigh,
And sympathetic drops stood quiv'ring in his eye.

"'Nature!'  he cried, 'thy pow'rful sway I own!
The passing dream which held my stubborn mind,
Thanks to my daughter's constancy, is flown.
Oh CHARICLAEA lov'd!  like thee resign'd,
Tho' galling chains these vanquish'd limbs may bind,
Tho' sad and painful may my moments flow
From social commerce and mankind confin'd,
Thy dear remembrance shall relieve my woe,
And, taught by thee, my soul shall consolation know.'

"'Think not,' I cried, 'that such shall be thy fate.
The gen'rous souls of Englishmen disdain
To urge beyond the battle's proof their hate.
We scorn to shew our pow'r by giving pain.
No galling fetters shall thy limbs restrain,
No insults shall thy feeling bosom rend.
Prince!  if in Palestine renown to gain
Thy heart incites thee, as my honour'd friend
I call thee in our cause thy puissant aid to lend.

"'Then, when the glorious enterprise we share,
When honour's call united we obey,
Be this our contest, this our only care,
On Acre's towers our banners to display,
Through unbelieving hosts to hew our way,
And still associate danger's front to prove:
While BERENGARIA fondly shall essay,
By every art which anguish can remove,
Thy daughter to protect with all a mother's love.'

"'Right nobly hast thou said,'' the Prince replied:
'I feel thy worth sublime, and think with shame
'Of my own faults and over-weening pride.
'My gratitude thy knightly proffers claim;
'Henceforward let renown my breast inflame,
'Let thy example bright my valour fire
'Beneath thy banners to atchieve fair fame,
'To chivalry's neglected meed aspire,
'And worthily fulfil what honour's laws require.''

"He said, and caught me in his out-spread arms.
The lovely CHARICLAEA smiling gaz'd,
And beam'd resplendently with blushing charms,
As with pure vows tow'rds Heav'n her hands she rais'd.
Now to the hall our willing steps we trac'd,
Where by my lovely bride the royal maid
And her brave Sire respectfully I plac'd.
To lasting friendship we oblations made,
Nor rose, till night had wrapt th' horizon wide in shade.

"Here, Princes!  for a moment deign to pause,
And mark the statements fraudful and untrue,
With which yon Tyrant props his worthless cause.
Those English knights, whom 'mongst ye now I view,
Partook my toils, and ISAAC'S treasons knew.
Let them declare if I have ought mistold:
If not, with confidence and def'rence due
Permit me, Chiefs!  in conscious virtue bold,
My false oppressor's wrongs yet further to unfold.

"Now were again our pennons high display'd:
From Famagusta, where in order due
And princely state our gallies were array'd,
Once more we sought our progress to renew.
Quickly across the green expanse we flew:
Sidon we pass'd, by fav'ring gales impell'd;
Scandalion's lofty tow'rs next met our view,
And soon proud Acre's ramparts we beheld,
Where rag'd the fiend of war unsated and unquell'd.

"Those high-deserving Peers, whose gen'rous zeal
Led them on Palestine's ensanguin'd plain
To vindicate by arms the Christian weal,
It would but ill become me to detain,
By repetitions or descriptions vain
Of Acre's vaunted strength and ramparts high.
When of her tow'rs no vestige shall remain,
The deeds there wrought shall lofty themes supply,
To grace th' heroic page and charm posterity.

"If Priam's fate, and once imperial Troy,
Now known no more, or only known to fame,
Immortal HOMER'S numbers could employ;
If deathless verse could consecrate it's name,
And bear ACHILLES' worth and HELEN'S shame
Beyond the ravage of consuming time:
Our Christian warriors future bards may claim,
Whose grateful suffrage and approving rhime
Their triumphs may record with energy sublime.

"'Though envy now our well-earn'd wreaths may blast,
Though foul detraction may our worth obscure,
And o'er our deeds her veil envenom'd cast,
The Muse's voice shall our renown secure,
And valour's meed for ages shall endure.
Oh thought transporting!  heroes yet unborn
The sacred song to virtue shall allure,
Shall lead them pleasure's flow'ry paths to scorn,
And with unfading praise their mem'ry shall adorn!

"When from the bonds, in which disastrous fate
Had long the vanquish'd potentate detain'd,
Victim of Pagan insolence and hate,
His freedom royal LUSIGNAN regain'd,
Far from Jerusalem, where once he reign'd,
A refuge safe in Tripoli he sought;
There for awhile securely he remain'd,
His bosom torn with agonizing thought,
And recollections dire with grief and horror fraught.

"Thither with zeal fraternal GODFREY led
From Europe's distant clime a valiant host:
Thro' Greece and Syria soon his influence spread,
And many a chieftain flock'd to Judah's coast,
Prompted to check th' insulting victor's boast,
And to the suff'ring King to furnish aid.
Their force united soon a band compos'd,
Which cheerfully LUSIGNAN'S voice obey'd,
And for approaching war their preparations made.

"As when, at morn's fresh call, the busy swarm
Forth issuing haste their labours to renew,
Where'er the sun extends his influence warm
The eager race their various tasks pursue,
And taste the flow'ry sweets yet moist with dew:
So throng'd the warriors of the Christian name,
When dauntless at religion's call they flew,
Their suff'ring brethren to redeem from shame,
To aid their weaken'd cause, and prop their tott'ring fame.

"Recruited thus, the valiant Chiefs disdain'd
In inactivity their hours to waste:
The heights of Acre rapidly they gain'd,
Their engines dire of war in order plac'd,
Spread their wide camp, and far their leaguer trac'd.
From his high tow'rs bold CARACOS survey'd
Their host, as onward they advanc'd in haste:
And, as he fitting preparations made,
Heard their loud cries and mark'd their numbers undismay'd.

"Full worthily he held the great command.
His watchful care, ere SALADIN yet reign'd
Or yet had stretch'd his rule o'er Egypt's land,
To deeds of hardihood the hero train'd.
Him, when the reins of empire he had gain'd,
The grateful monarch as his surest guide
And closest in his confidence retain'd,
And now o'er Acre and it's region wide,
Won by his puissant arm, he nam'd him to preside.

"Twelve thousand chosen troops his rule obey'd,
Whom monster-breeding Africa had sent,
With varied arms and barbarous pomp array'd,
From every quarter of her wide extent.
There their tough bows the swarthy Nubians bent,
The swift Numidians rush'd their swords to wield,
With those whom Nile within his streams had pent,
And those, who rov'd o'er parch'd Augela's field,
And whom in deserts rude wild Barca had conceal'd.

"Such were the bands which Acre's towers contain'd,
To war familiar, and now doubly bold
From all the recent triumphs they had gain'd.
LUSIGNAN'S force superior numbers told:
As his brave Chiefs their banners proud unroll'd,
Twice thirteen thousand warriors grac'd their line.
THURINGIA'S lord the multitude controul'd,
By gen'ral suff'rage chosen to combine
Their congregated force, and lead their great design.

"While thus the Christian host their leaguer held,
And strove more closely still the town t' invest,
Their fierce assaults bold CARACOS repell'd;
And, tho' by long-continued toils distress'd,
Tho' by the dread of Famine's scourge impress'd,
Whose dire approach his army's zeal unnerv'd,
He yet prevail'd their ardour to arrest:
Right steadily his charge the Chief preserv'd,
Nor ceas'd his gen'rous toils, nor from his duty swerv'd.

"Yet fate appear'd his efforts to oppose:
For now the meagre Fiend, with Death combin'd,
Pour'd on his band her desolating woes:
Weak and emaciated the warrior pin'd,
His faulchion dropp'd, his weighty shield resign'd;
From the high ramparts which the fortress crown'd,
The languid Chieftains, on their spears inclin'd,
Cast many a fond and anxious look around,
But no expected aid, no consolation found.

"At length, his desp'rate fortunes as he scann'd,
And conscious that his now exhausted host
No more the Christian puissance could withstand,
To yield the town and abdicate the coast
With deep reluctance CARACOS dispos'd.
Commission'd brave THURINGIA'S lord to greet,
A Herald hasten'd to the Landgrave's post,
And proffer'd the surrender to complete,
Were liberty secur'd, and life, and safe retreat.

"Oh!  that of war's vicissitudes aware,
And less by visionary hopes abus'd,
The Chief had granted these conditions fair!
Oh!  that by views fantastic unseduc'd
The smiles of fortune he had wisely us'd!
But, from the foe's distress presumptuous grown,
With arrogance all treaty he refus'd,
And vow'd, depending on his force alone,
On heaps of Pagans slain to plant LUSIGNAN'S throne.

"Now rag'd the war with aggravated hate:
Each day the fortunes of the foe grew worse,
And CARACOS, urg'd on by menac'd fate
His high command more strictly to inforce,
In desperation found his sole resource.
But vain his utmost efforts would have prov'd,
If, thither bending rapidly his course,
Great SALADIN, to aid his friend belov'd,
Had not tow'rd Acre's walls his host tremendous mov'd.

"As, when the sun in fiery Cancer reigns,
The Nile, green-mantling, half-exhausted, flows,
And gasping Egypt mourns her arid plains;
Soon as the torrents charg'd with melted snows
Swell the glad stream, and far their slime depose,
Plenty and joy her laughing fields adorn,
Nature with vigour renovated glows,
And fruitful Ceres from her copious horn
Scatters her gifts profuse, and gilds the waving corn:

"So, to the bands 'mid Acre's ramparts pent
Their puissant King's approach propitious seem'd.
As o'er the hills their anxious glance they bent,
A long-drawn line of helms and cors'lets gleam'd,
As if prolific earth with warriors teem'd,
And Cadmus till'd again his Theban field.
Heedless of want, of triumphs now they dream'd:
With force renew'd each Chieftain brac'd his shield,
And sought with hand infirm his trusty sword to wield.

"On Turo's heights encamp'd the welcome host,
And from it's summit stretch'd-in order due,
'Till in the plain it's sloping sides were lost.
Not XERXES, when he led his motley crew
In barb'rous pomp, such multitudes could shew,
As here the banners of their tribes unroll'd,
And girt the mountain with their long review.
The Persian Prince their numbers might have told,
But vain the effort now to count the warriors bold.

"Amid the leaders, first in rank and name
MIRALIS brave his standard proud display'd:
Him, his first born, already known to fame,
O'er Egypt's realm the King had ruler made.
MELCALEZ next, who those rich districts sway'd
Where rapid Tigris rolls his princely course,
And whom the blest Arabia's coast obey'd,
Careless alike of pity and remorse,
Led to the camp his vast and far-collected force.

"Next SAFADIN, the brother of the King,
From Syria, where his wide command he held,
Hasten'd his splendid armament to bring.
With him fierce TECADIN his march impell'd:
The stoutest Chiefs of Persia he excell'd,
And 'gainst the holy cross with ceaseless rage
And hate exhaustless his rude bosom swell'd:
He vow'd exterminating war to wage,
And with LUSIGNAN'S blood his fury to assuage.

"From Turcomania and Curdistan's bound
BELLEGEMIN his hardy vet'rans brought.
There too FALKEDIN, royal youth, was found,
Whom SALADIN the use of arms had taught,
And who in Mauritania's clime had sought
The swarthy bowmen who his rule confess'd.
The general impulse bold CORAZIN caught:
As his quick course from Ascalon he press'd,
High beat with vengeful hopes his enterprising breast.

"With these CAYSAC from Armenia's plain
To aid the cause his num'rous legions led:
There bold KAHADIM brought his warlike train,
Whose cruel sway and domination dread
O'er Galilee and Coelosyria spread:
There too the fierce BEDREDDIN was descried;
To him, 'mid wild Arabia's deserts bred,
The King had giv'n o'er Judah to preside,
And on his martial skill with confidence relied.

"While thus from Africa and Asia swarm'd
The varied bands, and on the lengthen'd height
Of Turo and of Mahumeria form'd,
Beyond the plain, which on the left and right
Spread it's wide surface fit for open fight,
And gently trended to the sea-girt coast,
The Christian chieftains had encamp'd their might,
To each allotted his appointed post,
And in well-order'd rank their armament dispos'd.

"LUSIGNAN on the north his legions plac'd,
And many a gallant knight and warrior brave
The royal standard of the Red Cross grac'd.
DE VESCY'S banners there were seen to wave,
Who, fill'd with zeal Judaea's realm to save,
Had left Burgundia's hills with vineyards crown'd:
There too, no more in Garonne's stream to lave
His manly limbs, PONTINIAC bold was found,
Not less for valour's meed than courtesy renown'd.

"With MONTMIRAIL advanc'd the fam'd DES BARRES;
Them from their youth fair Picardy had rear'd
And friendship's bonds united them in war.
Near them the ensigns of DES BRENNES appear'd,
With those of hoary GLANVILLE, long rever'd
As England's legal arbiter and guide:
Unus'd to conflicts rude, soon as he heard
The sacred call, he cast his robes aside,
And clad in iron mail the Pagan wrath defied.

"Nor less with rev'rence for the cause inspir'd
Did holy BALDWIN there his prowess shew.
When HENRY first with gen'rous pity fir'd
Conven'd his bands to face th' insulting foe,
He felt his heart with pious ardour glow;
His patriarchal duties he resign'd,
And turn'd tow'rds Palestine his footsteps slow,
Trusting on that blest shore a grave to find,
Where his great Master erst aton'd for all mankind.

"St. WALERIC there was seen, a puissant peer,
Of high descent and antient Norman race;
SACEY, whose heart ne'er felt ignoble fear,
And many a valiant Chief, who sought to grace
The sacred enterprise and death to face.
These all concurr'd brave GODFREY to respect,
Who, fill'd with ardour glory's path to trace,
And Judah's throne from ruin to protect,
Aspir'd on Acre's walls his standard to erect.

"Near these, but ranging further to the west,
Their glitt'ring front the Pisan troops display'd,
Who young VERVONI'S lib'ral sway confess'd:
And next, the host which SFORZA'S voice obey'd,
Close to the sea their wide encampment made.
Far from their native plains, for them no more
Lombardia smil'd, no more, beneath her shade,
Tranquil they cull'd benignant nature's store:
Rous'd by religion's call they sought the hostile shore.

"Where on the east tow'rd Acre's walls incline
The Mahumerian heights, the German band
In deep array drew up their puissant line.
THURINGIA'S banners there were seen t' expand;
Who, urg'd by glory, from their distant land
Had led the champions of the Christian name,
In climes remote, and on a foreign strand,
To reap the harvest of immortal fame,
And Judah's suff'ring realm to vindicate from shame.

"In snowy robes which half their mails conceal'd,
On which the sanguine cross was proudly shewn,
Their war-tried ranks the Templars bold reveal'd.
With them, not less to glory's records known
For deeds of worth and honour bravely won,
The Hospitallers dar'd the Pagan fight:
O'er their cuirasses, which resplendent shone,
Their coats of arms they wore of scarlet bright,
Emblem of holy zeal, adorn'd with crosses white.

"Next to their post his station CONRAD held,
Where bold MUSARDO o'er the ocean frown'd,
And with his craggy front the tide repell'd.
Encamp'd with him the valiant Danes were found.
The leaguer wide their force associate bound,
Which tow'rds the land was now completely clos'd;
While num'rous gallies, far dispers'd around,
With vigilance unceasing watch'd the coast,
Left succours might arrive for famish'd Acre's host.

"But fortune now deceiv'd their sage intent.
Wafted by fav'ring breezes, to the shore
A potent fleet it's course commanding bent,
Which SALADIN's imperial standard bore.
Thirty huge gallies, laden deep with store
Of corn and wine from Egypt's rich domain,
Into the town prepar'd relief to pour.
Our weaker armament essay'd in vain
By many a stout attempt their progress to restrain.

"Discomfited, and forc'd to quit the coast,
Our fleet retir'd, while from the crouded wall
A gen'ral shout proclaim'd the victor's boast.
No longer hunger's agonizing call
Prevail'd their stricken senses to appal;
No more, when close the Christian squadrons press'd,
They fear'd by want ingloriously to fall:
Plenty again their fainting Chieftains bless'd,
And hopes till now unknown cheer'd every warrior's breast.

"Nor baseless prov'd the visions they had form'd.
While from their ramparts, flush'd with sudden joy
And ardour new, tumultuously they swarm'd,
While, their besiegers eager to annoy,
Their camp to pillage, and their works destroy,
They strove with rancour and revenge unquell'd,
Stern SALADIN ne'er ceas'd his force t' employ.
Now in their turns, in leaguer closely held,
By two opposing hosts the Christians were impell'd.

"So in the seas which Africa embrace,
When hosts of finny tyrants thro' the deep
The persecuted Exocaetus chase;
His course aerial should he try to keep,
And o'er the waves with moisten'd wing to sweep,
Unnumber'd birds of prey his flight await:
Pois'd in the air, or plung'd 'mid billows steep,
Where'er he turns he meets impending fate,
And nature's doubled gifts augmented risk create.

"Whate'er distress from war's alarms could spring,
Whate'er of torment, want and ceaseless care
To pang the soldier's gallant heart could bring,
The bold Crusading host was doom'd to bear.
The sad recital willingly I spare
Of all the horrors which they long sustain'd,
When famine rear'd her scourge, and black despair
Throughout their camp with sway remorseless reign'd,
And the last dregs of woe from misery's chalice drain'd.

"But the great Pow'r from mortal ken conceal'd,
Which thus the web of agony had weav'd,
Pitying at length, their suff'ring spirits heal'd.
Guess their delight, when, from suspense reliev'd,
From hunger's fangs and ling'ring death repriev'd,
Within their port the long-expected aid,
Promis'd by Europe's Princes, they receiv'd;
When Austria's Duke his banner there display'd,
And there the well-stor'd fleet of PHILIP was array'd!

"While thus on Acre's field the strengthen'd host
Their contest with the Pagan force renew'd,
From Cyprus tow'rds Judaea's blood-stain'd coast
With ardent hope my progress I pursued.
Now near at hand appear'd her mountains rude,
When, from the north approaching to the shore,
A lordly vessel, arm'd for war, I view'd,
Which SALADIN's imperial ensigns bore,
And o'er the yielding waves it's course majestic wore.

"As, 'mid the humbler tenants of the plain,
Some venerable oak is seen to rise,
His giant limbs the winter's storms disdain,
The whirlwind's rage his ample bulk defies,
And o'er his head the blast innoxious flies:
So, with our lesser vessels when compar'd,
Tremendous seem'd this moving castle's size,
Which nought for barks so disproportion'd car'd,
But held it's way as if our hostile force it dar'd.

"While we amaz'd its force immense survey'd,
Lo!  from the port approaching to our fleet,
A well-mann'd galley it's swift progress made.
With vig'rous strokes her oars the billows beat,
And plough'd the deep our armament to meet.
When near at hand, thus loudly cried the Chief:
'Your presence, mighty Prince!  I come to greet,
Whose welcome aid ensures our quick relief
From aggravated woes and long-protracted grief.'

"Then, leaping on the deck, 'I come,' he cried,
'A boon from brave LUSIGNAN to implore.
Yon stately vessel, which with barbarous pride
And streamers gay is hast'ning tow'rds the shore,
From Baruth comes, deep charg'd with copious store
Of arms and darts for the beleaguer'd band.
These it awaits a moment fit to pour
Into the town, when, as their Chief has plann'd,
Our host shall be compell'd his forces to withstand.

"'Of twice six hundred troops consists their host,
Who, to perform their plighted vow intent,
Now, in their Monarch's presence, seek the coast,
To reinforce their friends in Acre pent.
On you, great Prince!  by Heav'n propitious sent,
LUSIGNAN and his Peers reliance place:
They trust that, on renown and glory bent,
Your zeal the glad occasion will embrace
To meet th' insulting foe, and England's standard grace.'

"'Friend of my youth, and brother erst in arms!
Renown'd DU MIRLE!'  I cried, 'the great design
With hope of fame my panting bosom warms!
Thy boon is granted:  hasten to rejoin
Judaea's King:  tell him, tho' fiends combine
With Pagan force their purpose to attain,
Mine the attempt shall be, the conquest mine;
That England's flag shall still triumphant reign,
And English valour still controul the hostile main!'

"As thus I ended, my companions brave
Impatient stood, expecting my behest:
Each sought pre-eminence of risk to crave,
And ev'ry eye, and ev'ry look confess'd
The ardour kindling in each warrior's breast.
Well pleas'd I mark'd the general influence spread,
And thus, while gently I their zeal repress'd,
Their gen'rous zeal from sense of honour bred,
And strove by temper'd phrase to calm their minds, I said.

"'When on your valour, oft in perils shewn,
And now arous'd to action, I reflect,
Your equal claims to enterprise I own.
Yet, tho' each bold associate I respect,
Impartial judgment must my choice direct,
And sound discretion regulate my will,
Such of my valiant Chieftains to select,
As, from experience past and naval skill,
Seem the impending task most fitted to fulfil.

"'Be thine, renown'd DUBOIS!  the chief command,
The great attempt let CLARE and CAUNVILLE aid,
And TALEBOR lead on his gallant band.
Oft 'mid surrounding dangers undismay'd
Your manly fortitude has been display'd:
Mark now, how all along yon mountain steep,
And yon high rampart martially array'd,
Our crouded foes their anxious stations keep!
Mark!  and by deeds of worth immortal glory reap!'

"I said.  The Chiefs, exulting in my choice,
Repair'd their bold atchievement to pursue,
And, mindful of their Monarch's cheering voice,
With doubled energy inspir'd each crew.
No breath of wind o'er ocean's surface blew,
No friendly gale the yielding canvass swell'd,
While 'cross the still'd expanse the gallies flew,
By vig'rous arms and lusty oars impell'd,
And sought the ship which yet it's haughty station held.

"Across the waves as sturdily they swept,
Stretch'd in a line appear'd each vessel's prow;
So evenly their order'd rank they kept.
But TALEBOR, who when he sought a foe
Thought ev'ry intervening minute slow,
Swift as a dart by hand unerring lanc'd,
Or feather'd arrow shot from Tartar's bow,
Before the rest intrepidly advanc'd,
While o'er the deep his bark pre-eminently glanc'd.

"Still press'd he forward, 'till, approaching close,
He reach'd the ship, which, like some mountain vast,
With front tremendous from the water rose.
As with swift stroke beneath it's stern he pass'd,
The crew, who stood in crouded order class'd,
Mocking his bold attempt, with deadly hate
Enormous stones and massive jav'lins cast.
But neither present ills nor threat'ning fate
Could his firm heart appal, or English zeal abate.

"Onward he rush'd, and, 'gainst her side sublime
His bark impelling, up the dread ascent
He bad his mariners essay to climb.
Obedient to his voice, with bold intent,
A shower of darts upon her deck they sent,
Then, bravely mounting, each with succ'ring hand
To aid his stagg'ring friend assistance lent:
Daring at once the Saracenic band,
And the deep wat'ry grave which seem'd below t' expand.

"Alike tremendous both!  alike contemn'd!
But ah!  alike destructive of his host!
Of some their felon darts the progress stemm'd,
While some, their slipp'ry hold and footing lost,
Fell headlong:  wide the treach'rous deep expos'd
It's yawning gulphs the warriors to receive,
Then o'er their cold remains for ever clos'd.
Blest shades!  for you shall mem'ry trophies weave,
And sacred be the waves which o'er your corses heave!

"But toils nor risk the heroes could appal:
Heedless of fate they urg'd their desp'rate quest,
Resolv'd to vanquish or aveng'd to fall.
Brave TALEBOR I saw:  before the rest
Mounting the deck, the Pagan crew he press'd,
And wild dismay and horror thro' them spread:
In honour'd death I saw him bow his crest;
Amid his comrades, who around him bled,
To Heav'n's eternal joys his gallant spirit fled.

"We view'd the scene with rage and sorrow fill'd,
While down each woe-struck Chieftain's pallid cheek
A flood of tears unconsciously distill'd.
When grief at length permitted me to speak,
'Whate'er may chance,' I cried, 'no feelings weak
Ought now our noble ardour to restrain!
Let us the foe with force united seek,
For our lost friends a great revenge obtain,
And offer to their shades a sacrifice of slain!'

"As thus I spoke, the trumpet signal gave.
Rous'd by th' inspiring sound, my eager crew,
Urg'd their redoubled strokes:  across the wave
Swift as the wind my bounding galley flew.
Five more besides my own, in order due
Their course maintaining, sought the vessel's side,
And with loud shouts the foe's attention drew,
While, by a circuit more diffuse and wide,
Six other potent barks I bad MAULEON guide.

"As now more nearly we approach'd the foe,
Checking our speed their force immense we view'd.
On every hand close-throng'd, above, below,
Arm'd for the fight th' insulting Pagans stood,
And wav'd their swords yet red with Christian blood:
Unnumber'd warlike engines rang'd we saw,
With jav'lins charg'd and rocky fragments rude,
While archers stout their bows prepar'd to draw,
And rais'd horrific cries and yells our souls to awe.

"And souls less constant well might they have scar'd:
But all their shew and arrogant parade
My comrades bold, who oft had perils dar'd,
With indignation and contempt survey'd;
And, hot for action, earnestly they pray'd
Permission to chastise the vaunting band.
Hardly my voice their wild impatience stay'd,
'Till I perceiv'd MAULEON near at hand,
And ready to fulfil the project I had plann'd.

"Soon as in equal rank, on either side,
Fronting the adverse ship our squadrons lay,
Thus to my eager friends I loudly cried:
'No longer now your great intent delay!
Amply the debt of vengeance now repay,
Which to yon boastful Saracens you owe!
Ply well your oars, nor from your efforts stay,
'Till, deeply pierc'd by each invading prow,
No more it's threat'ning front yon tow'ring bark shall shew.'

"Throughout my host a shout of transport broke:
My gallant comrades, on their oars inclin'd,
Swept o'er the foaming waves with vig'rous stroke;
And, swifter than the unimprison'd wind,
MAULEON's band with us their course combin'd.
Conscious of our design, the Pagan crew,
Who ev'ry quarter of their high deck lin'd,
Their weighty jav'lins cast, their long bows drew,
And from their engines huge a show'r o'erwhelming threw.

"Nor ineffectual did their efforts prove.
On DROGO'S bark, who held by me his rank,
A rock descending thro' it's timbers drove,
And split in twain the deck:  from either bank
The warriors cast beneath the billows sank.
Rising they struggled with the circling wave,
And caught each floating oar and shiver'd plank,
Which from the horrors of a briny grave
Might their exhausted frames o'ercharg'd with armour save.

"A harsher fate betided brave MARTEL.
As he his post intrepidly maintain'd,
A pond'rous jav'lin on his cuirass fell,
And pierc'd his breast:  the gushing blood distain'd
His rich surcoat; life's current quickly drain'd;
A mist opaque obscur'd his waning sight,
And o'er his frame convuls'd death sternly reign'd:
His manly spirit, prov'd in many a fight,
And honour'd in his fall, took it's eternal flight.

"The Pagans rais'd a loud exulting cry.
But brief their triumph:  to their vessel's side
Our well rang'd gallies, now approaching nigh,
So forcibly their iron prows applied,
That 'mid her broken timbers, gaping wide,
With crash tremendous entrances were made,
Thro' which impetuous rush'd the foaming tide.
No more our foes their arrogance display'd,
But desperation seem'd their bosoms to pervade.

"As thro' their mighty bark's capacious hold
They heard the waters rush with fearful sound,
A sudden terror seiz'd each warrior bold.
Hopeless of aid they glanc'd their eyes around,
And, while their cries the dire invader drown'd
And tore between the decks, they stood aghast.
All safety sought, but none a refuge found:
Some with convulsive gripe embrac'd the mast,
And some amid the waves themselves despairing cast.

"These fate severe continued to pursue:
My watchful crew awaited their descent,
And with such aim their bows unerring drew,
That many a warrior bold to death they sent;
While others, by their fruitless labour spent,
And by oppressing armour downward weigh'd,
To ocean's shadowy caves exhausted went.
Without success to save them I essay'd,
For ill my comrades' rage compassion's voice obey'd.

"But soon our wond'ring faculties were call'd
To mark a scene more exquisite of woe:
Our souls it's dread sublimity appall'd;
We wept the victims, and forgot the foe.
For now the waters, rising from below,
Fore-runners of inevitable doom,
O'er the wide deck in torrents 'gan to flow:
The shrieking warriors, wrapt in tenfold gloom,
Beneath the billows found their inauspicious tomb.

"Low sank the vessel in th' o'erwhelming deep:
Awhile the masts appear'd, on whose dread height
A wretched remnant sought their hold to keep;
These, with a grasp from desperation tight,
The cordage caught, and, stiffen'd with affright,
Rent Heav'n with cries:  soon 'mid the billows cold
Ingulph'd they vanish'd from our aching sight.
Far round the agitated whirlpool roll'd,
Foaming and black it rag'd with fury uncontroul'd.

"My victor band, as on the wreck they gaz'd
And mark'd the sinking foe, of triumph high
And mad delight a shout exulting rais'd:
Thro' all the fleet, with loud and glad reply,
Clamours of transport strove with our's to vie;
While from the Christian camp and crouded coast,
In wild but solemn chorus, rose a cry,
At once expressive of their joyful boast,
And striking deep dismay throughout the Pagan host.

"While thus applause our feelings high enhanc'd,
For conquest well atchiev'd, our puissant fleet
Tow'rds Acre's walls in seemly pomp advanc'd.
Unnumber'd Chiefs rush'd on with eager feet,
And lin'd the shores our wish'd approach to greet;
While on the ramparts wide, and mountain's brow,
Where baffled SALADIN had fix'd his seat,
In mute dejection stood th' astonish'd foe,
Their faculties absorb'd in agonizing woe.

"And now our prows triumphant touch'd the strand.
As from the bark I leap'd, with earnest haste
LUSIGNAN forward press'd and caught my hand:
Awhile in silence he my neck embrac'd,
Then cried, 'Oh Prince!  by Heav'n benignant grac'd,
Welcome, thrice welcome to Judaea's shore!
Her glories long by Pagan wrath defac'd,
Her fanes polluted by her children's gore,
Her suff'rings and her shame she now shall weep no more.

"'Thou com'st the friends, who long my weaken'd throne
Have gallantly supported, to relieve:
To thee for aid they look, from thee alone
They hope effectual succour to receive.
Oh!  may thy arms our glories lost retrieve!
May they from further wrongs, from Pagan sway,
These sacred and insulted shores reprieve!
And may'st thou, like the gen'rous orb of day,
Our path perplex'd and dark illumine with thy ray.

"'The moment is at hand, when Gallia's Prince,
In whom our confidence is well repos'd,
Prepares his zeal and prowess to evince.
Ere yet your armament had reach'd our coast,
Against the forces in the town inclos'd
Our Chiefs, with gen'ral suffrage, had decreed
That PHILIP should conduct his puissant host.
Still let him on his enterprise proceed,
And may all-gracious Heav'n his steps to victory lead!

"'Whate'er Judaea's Monarch may propose
By me shall be obey'd,' I straight replied;
'My will shall ever with his wishes close.
His potent legions oft in perils tried
Against the Pagan force let PHILIP guide:
May their attack with full success be crown'd!
Yet trust I that, whatever may betide,
When danger calls, my comrades may be found
Not less prepar'd for war, nor less in arms renown'd.'

"I spoke; and thus, with a contemptuous smile,
The Gallic King rejoin'd; 'If right I ween,
Th' event your fond expectance will beguile.
What Gallia's sons can do is yet unseen;
In onset bold, in danger's front serene,
Unaw'd, uncheck'd, they honour's path pursue,
Nor ineffectual fall their sabres keen:
Careless of life, and to their sov'reign true,
Their fortitude unmatch'd admiring worlds may view.

"'Richard, farewell!  your needless toils to spare,
And to insure renown, I hasten hence.
And you, companions brave!  who hope to share
My glorious harvest, now your task commence.
Mark how yon tow'rs, the ramparts wide which fence,
In horrid state and threat'ning grandeur rise:
Soon as his genial splendour to dispense
To-morrow's sun shall gild the eastern skies,
His all-transcendent beams shall light us to our prize.'

"He said, and tow'rds the camp his footsteps bent.
The wond'ring Chieftains now aloud express'd
The painful feelings and strong discontent,
With which his arrogance had fir'd each breast.
But soon the rising tumult was suppres'd,
When, forward moving, and with out-stretch'd hand,
Judaea's King and Nobles I address'd:
'While PHILIP hastens to his warlike band,
Duties of high import our present thoughts demand.

"'The sacred Cross, which as an emblem pure
Of holy faith and constancy we wear,
Reminds us that, Heav'n's mercies to procure,
Our hearts should still a strong remembrance bear
Of Him who knows to punish and to spare.
It much behoves us, ere repose we seek,
Before His altar to address our prayer,
With ardent vows and supplication meek
His pardon to implore, His favour to bespeak.

"'Our thanks we owe, that o'er the stormy deep
He deign'd the foaming billows to compose,
That he permitted us our course to keep,
And bear our succour 'gainst the Pagan foes.
Nor should we less implore His name for those,
Who in His sacred cause so bravely strove,
And now as martyrs, blest in death, repose;
That endless joy and transport they may prove,
And join th' angelic choir of harmony and love.'

"page

"'Oh Prince!'  LUSIGNAN cried, 'well pleas'd I hear
The pious dictates of thy grateful heart.
He who fears GOD can know no other fear.
To him the battle's front, the foeman's dart,
Present no terrors, and no dread impart;
Conscious of aid surpassing human pow'r,
At menac'd ills his soul disdains to start;
Tho' thunders break around and tempests lour,
Thrice arm'd his fate he meets, and braves the threat'ning hour.

"'Let us together kneel, together bow:
Let all our host in grateful homage join
To that great Pow'r who gave us thee to know.
In our rude camp no gilded temples shine,
No vaulted roofs our hymns of praise confine,
No white-rob'd priests in splendid state attend,
No pealing organs breathe their notes divine:
Our vows with nature's purest incense blend,
And with the mounting gale to Heav'n's high throne ascend.'

"As thus he spake, I saw a mournful band,
With hair dishevell'd and with arms revers'd,
In solemn rank advancing from the strand.
As on they came in sorrow deep immers'd,
An exclamation loud of anguish burst:
For brave MARTEL'S departed soul they pray'd;
And, as his fam'd atchievements were rehears'd,
The wound which grac'd his bosom they display'd,
And steep'd with tears the bier on which the Chief was laid.

"We gaz'd in silence on the sable train,
Which in lugubrious pomp it's progress kept,
And slowly wound along the sea-girt plain.
Thro' the still air the trumpet's full note swept;
Now swell'd the strain, in death-like pause now slept,
As sadly rose the melancholy dirge:
The awful chorus o'er our senses crept,
While, from the shore, the still responsive surge,
With hollow murm'rings seem'd it's sympathy to urge.

"With measur'd cadence and impressive state
They march'd, 'till underneath a pine's green shade
They stopp'd, as if our presence to await.
As we approach'd, we saw a grave new made,
On either side of which were duly laid
MARTEL'S bright armour, while his standard proud,
His banner, and his flag were high display'd.
At seemly distance stood th' attentive croud,
While HUBERT o'er the bier in mute dejection bow'd.

"When to the sad assembly we drew near,
He gaz'd upon us with a long-drawn sigh,
And, vainly struggling to suppress the tear
Which stood collected in his glist'ning eye,
He thus exclaim'd:  'Oh!  from those realms on high,
Where Cherubim th' Eternal's praise proclaim,
And Seraphim in songs extatic vie,
Listen, brave Hero!  while thy deathless name
And patriotic worth we consecrate to fame!

"'High in the records of approving time
The warrior's prowess history shall attest,
But higher yet the energy sublime
Of those transcendent souls, who sink to rest,
Mourn'd by the brave, and by their country bless'd.
Thy sainted mem'ry shall survive the tomb;
Thy deeds shall fire the youthful champion's breast:
From thine his virtues shall their mould assume,
And chivalry like thine for countless ages bloom.

"'Here let the earth thy lov'd remains receive!
Let friendship here her fond memorial place,
And o'er thy corse perennial garlands weave!
Let her record thy truth, thy manly grace,
Thy valour signaliz'd in glory's race!
And here, while gazing on the verdant mound
Which o'er thy dust shall heave, let her retrace
Thy modest worth, thy constancy renown'd,
And that illustrious end which thy atchievements crown'd!'

"He ceas'd.  Again the solemn chorus rose:
Around the mingling modulation spread,
Soothing our heart-felt sorrows to repose.
'And oh!'  they cried, 'as here you pensive tread
'Mid the proud trophies of the honour'd dead,
Stop, warrior!  and on gallant MARTEL'S bier
With fond remembrance and affection shed
The passing tribute of a grateful tear!
Oh!  let your pious grief his gen'rous spirit cheer!

"'Nor be the daring and heroic deed
Of self-devoted TALEBOR unsung!
For England's glory he preferr'd to bleed:
Old in renown, as yet in years tho' young,
He grac'd the worthy lineage whence he sprung,
And won a praise beyond the reach of fate.
Pride of our Isle!  and theme of ev'ry tongue!
On thee shall endless eulogies await,
On thee in life and death alike belov'd and great!

"'What tho' no tomb, no consecrated ground,
With custom'd rites protect thy honour'd dust?
What tho' above thee ocean's waves resound,
And tempests howl with over-whelming gust?
Our mem'ry, faithful to it's sacred trust,
While thus our raptur'd souls to Heav'n ascend,
Shall stamp thy worth and dignify thy bust:
Still shall regret with admiration blend,
And glory's choicest meed thy deathless fame attend!'

"As ceas'd the mournful lay, the Chiefs resum'd
Their pious toils, and wet with many a tear,
In the cold earth MARTEL'S remains inhum'd:
On the tall pine, which spread it's branches near,
They join'd his standard and his arms to rear.
As deeply pond'ring stood the host around,
I thus exclaim'd:  'Eternal Father hear!
Thou, by whose aid these regions we have found,
Thou, whose almighty hand our enterprise has crown'd!

"'Oh!  deign with fav'ring eye our zeal to view;
Grant that, still mindful of thy great design,
To Judah's cause and honour's dictates true,
Our spirits warm'd with energy divine
May glory's call with thy behest combine!
If thy supreme, inscrutable decree
Should here the period of our lives define,
Grant that our souls, from sin redeem'd by thee,
With raptur'd saints may share a bless'd eternity.'

"As thus I pray'd, my brave companions felt
Congenial transport:  on the blood-stain'd ground,
With uprais'd eyes and hands out-stretch'd they knelt,
When lo!  we heard upon our right resound
A thund'ring peal, and light'nings flash'd around.
Our minds a zeal enthusiastic caught:
We hail'd the awful and inspiring sound
Which seem'd with Heav'n's approving influence fraught,
And turning tow'rds the camp LUSIGNAN'S tents we sought.

