"Amid th' afflictions of my fate severe,
In this my spirit consolation knows,
That here, illustrious Princes!  I appear.
The sport of fate and of insulting foes,
Long have I struggled with augmenting woes,
And sadly told the melancholy hour.
Now on your truth and justice I repose:
No more oppression and tyrannic pow'r
On innocence oppress'd indignities shall show'r.

"Soldier of Christ, when to Judaea's coast
With lively faith and confidence I led
T' avenge his cause my consecrated host,
I look'd for perils and reverses dread.
There, while the Saracenic legions fled,
The labours of my suff'ring friends I shar'd,
With them I triumph'd and with them I bled:
When honour call'd, impending fate I dar'd,
Nor e'er in adverse hour of Heav'n's support despair'd.

"But still, rememb'ring man's condition frail,
When most successful, then I chiefly strove,
Lest pride o'erweening should my soul assail.
Oft as I ponder'd on my Saviour's love,
From him I learn'd with constancy to prove
Whate'er of ill might on my course await,
To bow with def'rence to the Pow'r above,
Whose will almighty regulates our fate,
And guides with prescience just our variegated state.

"Yet little deem'd I, that misfortune's hand
Should e'er so low my dignity reduce,
That here debas'd and menac'd I should stand;
That thus, with licence wild and foul abuse,
Yon recreant tyrant should my worth traduce,
Blast my deserts, and vilify my fame!
Illustrious Chiefs!  a warrior's warmth excuse:
Your patience lend, while thus with gen'rous shame
The falsehoods of his charge atrocious I proclaim.

"With full reply his venom'd speech to meet,
I look to your indulgence for support.
When with unblushing front he dares repeat
Each idle calumny, each vague report,
By envy fabricated to distort
The glory which he ever fear'd to seek,
Needs must I to a chain of facts resort,
Which to your hearts will strong conviction speak,
Prove his assertions false, his labour'd comments weak.

"Thus then, as suits a Soldier and a King,
My plain unvarnish'd story I commence.
I need not to your recollection bring,
How SALADIN, with insolent pretence
Of aggravated wrongs and high offence,
His barbarous force against Judaea led,
Or how, permitted vengeance to dispense,
Throughout her coasts he desolation spread,
While from his conq'ring arm our Christian warriors fled.

"To Europe soon th' unwelcome rumour came,
And now to all the Christian world was known
How SALADIN had triumph'd in our shame.
The plains where TANCRED erst had gain'd renown,
Where GODFREY fought and BALDWIN won a crown,
Where pure religion's standard they had plac'd,
Yielded to Pagan force:  abash'd, o'erthrown,
No more the routed bands the victor fac'd,
But with disastrous flight their pristine worth disgrac'd.

"Each gen'rous warrior's heart partook the grief;
One spirit seem'd to animate the brave,
To suff'ring Palestine to bear relief,
Her sad remains from impious sway to save,
Or share with her lost sons a common grave.
To all who rush'd their efforts to employ,
The holy Pontiff absolution gave,
And held forth pledges of eternal joy,
Wreaths of immortal palm, and bliss without alloy.

"'Twas then, illustrious Chiefs!  that FREDERICK bold,
Who both in worth and dignity excell'd,
Stood forth his sacred banners to unfold.
England my venerable Sire beheld,
By pious zeal and feelings high impell'd,
Assume the cross and for the war prepare.
Nor was the Gallic Monarch then withheld,
By those base views which since engross'd his care,
The dangers of the sea and of the field to share.

"My bosom too the fervid spirit caught:
I felt the noble flame; my mounting soul
Renown from enterprise and danger sought.
Oft as from pomp and crowded courts I stole,
O'er my aspiring heart without controul
Her sway enthusiastic glory spread:
Like the young courser, to th' appointed goal
Ardent I look'd; while, by warm fancy bred,
Of triumphs yet to come hope flatt'ring visions shed.

"And soon the sacred cross adorn'd my breast:
Of hardy warriors an intrepid band
To share my fortunes and my perils press'd.
I view'd their troops in lengthen'd order stand,
Mark'd with delight their martial zeal expand,
And gaz'd enraptur'd on their proud array.
All was prepar'd, when Heav'n's resistless hand
From England's throne my father snatch'd away,
And bore his gallant soul to realms of endless day.

"On me devolv'd his state, and all the pains
And cares of empire now my thoughts requir'd.
From Frontevault, where o'er his mourn'd remains
I dropt the tear by filial grief inspir'd,
To where my mother, sorrowing and retir'd,
Her days had long consum'd in hopeless care,
I flew:  with rev'rence and affection fir'd
Her bonds I broke, and bad her now prepare
With me th' imperial rule of Albion's crown to share.

"Soon as my brows it's orb majestic grac'd,
I first fulfill'd the rights which kindred claim'd,
And, as their rank became, my brethren plac'd.
Fit regents of my kingdom next I nam'd:
Then to the point where all my wishes aim'd,
Religion's cause, I turn'd my ardent thought.
Soon as my gen'rous purpose I proclaim'd,
Their tributary aid my Barons brought,
And for the distant war with care unceasing wrought.

"All meaner thoughts their holy zeal disdain'd;
More and more full our army daily grew,
When, her polluted wings with slaughter stain'd,
Her flowing vestments wet with bloody dew,
Fame from Cilicia's distant region flew:
Her blasting trumpet pierc'd th' attendant gloom:
In notes of woe announcing horrors new,
Of FREDERICK'S fate she told and hapless doom,
Who sunk in Cydnus' stream found there a wat'ry tomb.

"With unavailing tears his fate we mourn'd;
But tender sentiment ere long gave place
To the strong flame which in our bosoms burn'd.
Conscious we felt of merited disgrace,
Should we delay th' insulting foe to face,
Who now, from FREDERICK'S loss become more bold,
Prevail'd the Christian armaments to chase.
Each Chief his long-retain'd possessions sold,
And his paternal lands in haste exchang'd for gold.

"The Gallic King, who, ere these tidings came,
With watchful pains had preparation made,
With me combin'd his purpose to proclaim.
In martial pomp his standard he display'd,
While many a vassal who his sway obey'd
His ardent band from ev'ry quarter drew.
On Seine's fair banks, in armour bright array'd,
They pass'd in long and terrible review,
And form'd presages high of joy and triumphs new.

"Nor less sincere and sanguine was my hope.
PHILIP I knew, magnificent and brave,
By nature fram'd with war's dread front to cope:
The pledge of worth which youth's first blossoms gave,
Foster'd by early care and counsels grave,
And now in manhood's prime to ripeness grown,
Bespoke him born Judaea's land to save.
I deem'd he well would dignify his throne,
And fondly scann'd his truth and ardour by my own.

"At Vergelay we met; there, in the sight
Of that Great Pow'r our inmost thoughts who knows,
Our mutual faith and sacred vows to plight,
With common arms the Pagans to oppose,
And with united zeal to face our foes.
These pious rites accomplish'd, to complete
Our meditated enterprise, we chose
In two divisions to conduct our fleet,
And in Messina's port, where TANCRED rul'd, to meet.

"From fair Provence, by favouring gales impell'd,
Our vessels proudly cut the billows green:
The heights of Corsica we soon beheld,
While more remote, Sardinia's hills were seen.
We sought the narrow straights which intervene,
And, as on either hand their coasts we view'd,
Their promontories vast we steer'd between.
Soon far behind we left their summits rude,
And tow'rds Sicilia's isle our prosp'rous course pursued.

"Nought for a while we saw but sea and sky:
At length, when night's dominion dark prevail'd,
And hid th' horizon, flames ascending high
Shot thro' the air, and heaven's high arch assail'd:
Anon, in clouds and murky darkness veil'd,
The lab'ring moon confess'd some potent spell;
Of suff'ring spirits who their torments wail'd
Groans seem'd to burst, with many a fearful yell
Of fiends escap'd from chains of agonizing hell.

"But soon superior wonders broke around.
Thro' the deep gloom uprose with swift ascent
A fiery column.  With appalling sound
Bursting, across the black expanse it sent
'Mid light'nings fierce it's horrible content.
Myriads of glowing rocks with headlong force
Plough'd up the waves and ocean's caverns rent;
While from some distant hill, with thunders hoarse,
A flaming torrent mark'd it's desolating course.

"At wary distance on the scene so dread
Gazing, the inauspicious isles we pass'd,
While still around us fiery show'rs were spread,
And Strombolo, from out his caverns vast,
With giant force a mass ignited cast.
And now, approaching the Sicilian shore,
Scylla's dire whirlpool we beheld aghast;
Her madd'ning rage the foaming waters tore,
While wild Charybdis storm'd re-echoing to her roar.

"Between these gulphs our wary pilots steer'd,
And soon Messina's walls with turrets crown'd,
Superbly rising from the sea, appear'd.
The Gallic fleet at anchor there we found.
From the high walls and spreading camp around,
Shouts of delight our safe arrival hail'd.
As from the masts our canvass we unbound,
Foregone events we mutually detail'd,
And present joy and hope of new success prevail'd.

"To you, illustrious Peers!  it well is known,
That when by Heav'n's decree, in luckless hour,
Death snatch'd the royal WILLIAM from his throne,
Th' usurper TANCRED seiz'd upon his pow'r,
And, to avoid the payment of her dow'r,
His widow'd Queen, my sister dear, compell'd
To seek a refuge in Palermo's tow'r,
Where with attendants few, in durance held,
Hardly her feeble force his bold aggression quell'd.

"The tyrant's base design my presence check'd;
My gallant force with trembling awe he view'd,
And feign'd to greet my landing with respect.
Yet still his schemes perfidious he pursued:
While with dissembled rancour he renew'd
His proffers insincere, he strove to lead
The savage populace by insults rude
With England's bands contentions high to breed.
Too soon th' usurper found his faithless plan succeed.

"Vain would it be and needless to relate
The insults, which my suff'ring host sustain'd
From TANCRED's dark attempt and covert hate.
At length provok'd, with fury unrestrain'd
They rose in arms:  awhile the croud maintain'd
Th' unequal fight; but soon, dispers'd and chas'd,
They fled, while we Messina's ramparts gain'd.
There our victorious standards high we plac'd,
By triumphs unforeseen and unsought glory grac'd.

"Soon did report the combat's fate proclaim.
When PHILIP, skill'd a double face to wear,
To hail my conquest deep dissembling came.
He prais'd our warlike skill and puissance rare,
And, while he tried with flatt'ring phrase t' ensnare
Our unsuspecting hearts, the splendid gain
By English prowess earn'd he sought to share.
But all his arts and blandishments were vain:
Our Chiefs indignant heard, and answer'd with disdain.

"With gen'rous warmth and feelings high inspir'd,
They swore untouch'd and sacred to defend
The treasures which their valour had acquir'd,
'Till TANCRED to my just demands should bend.
The brave SABLOEL I decreed to send,
Commission'd with th' usurper false to treat
Of past-gone wrongs, and our debate to end:
While PHILIP, anxious still my views to cheat,
Burgundia's Duke dispatch'd his labours to defeat.

"Vainly to hide these dark attempts he sought;
And doubtless fatal our dispute had grown,
Had not SABLOEL from th' usurper brought
Submission, and his suit that what was done
I would pass over, and impute alone
To popular phrenzy and misguided zeal:
My sister's claim he urg'd me to make known,
Which, doubly told, he vow'd without appeal
To re-imburse, and thus our recent breach to heal.

"I bad him prove by deeds his fair intent.
Forthwith twice twenty thousand marks he paid,
And to my camp my widow'd sister sent.
When thus the recent ferment was allay'd,
Full retribution first I freely made
To such as throng'd my clemency to crave;
And then the gold, which TANCRED had defray'd,
Their faithful service to reward, I gave
In ample donative to my companions brave.

"While Discord thus from our confed'rate host
With baffled purpose took her distant flight,
In princely order to Sicilia's coast
A fleet approach'd.  We hail'd the welcome sight,
And, hurrying to the strand, with fond delight
These arms the mistress of my heart embrac'd.
In bloom of youth and pomp of beauty bright
Messina's walls my BERENGARIA grac'd,
While Love and Hymen scenes of joy approaching trac'd.

"Her from the presence of Navarre's good King,
Whose pious cares her mind to worth had train'd,
My royal mother had engag'd to bring.
Her son to meet all perils she disdain'd:
And now, with filial gratitude unfeign'd,
To my kind parent I my thanks address'd.
Ere long my lovely bride's consent I gain'd,
And, as my eager suit I fondly press'd,
Her half-retiring charms my raptur'd senses bless'd.

"Now ceas'd to blow the equinoctial gales;
Our mariners refresh'd for action burn'd,
Their anchors heav'd, and spread their flowing sails.
To reach fair England, which her absence mourn'd,
All intermediate toils my mother spurn'd:
While, their high purpose anxious to conclude,
The Gallic legions to the ocean turn'd
Their lofty prows; with confidence renew'd
Tow'rds Acre's port their course they cheerfully pursued.

"Thus have I told what fortunes here befel.
Illustrious Chiefs!  on HENRY'S charge decide:
On falsehoods longer I disdain to dwell,
But in your honour and known truth confide.
Now from Messina's port, in martial pride,
Our fleet prepar'd it's progress to resume:
In gallant rivalry our warriors vied;
Far beam'd each casque, high wav'd each nodding plume
And shouts of joy foretold the Pagan's bloody doom.

"Twice sixty barks, with martial youth replete,
Which each it's Chieftain fam'd in war obey'd,
Compos'd our vast and well-appointed fleet.
Aloft their varied pennons were array'd,
Their oars responsive 'mid the billows play'd,
Their prows resplendent shone with burnish'd gold;
While in loud notes, more sweet by distance made,
The echoing trumpet, and the clarion bold
Join'd their harmonious strains, and drums redoubling roll'd.

"But harsh was the reverse, which wayward fate,
As if to thwart our expedition bent,
On England's puissant fleet decreed t' await.
As past the Rhodian coast it proudly went,
A southern blast it's dreary caverns rent,
And o'er us with ungovern'd fury burst:
Their savage aid the mounting billows lent;
With deadly force they roll'd and rage accurs'd,
And far o'er ocean's face our shatter'd barks dispers'd.

"The sun now set oppress'd by many a cloud:
Darkness across the deep her mantle threw,
While light'nings pale and thunders hoarse and loud
Burst thro' the gloom, and sea fowls madly flew,
As if with dread appall'd and terrors new.
The storm beyond the course of nature seem'd,
Wilder the waves, more horrible their hue;
Now sheets of flame, now torrents o'er us stream'd,
And vengeful d&aelig;mons howl'd, and fiends exulting scream'd.

"When first the angry tempest round us rag'd,
And when the sea, from it's recesses torn,
With Heav'n's black cope tremendous warfare wag'd,
I left the galley, where my Queen forlorn
In silence wept and pray'd for coming morn,
And in a light bark, on whose topmast's height
A flaming censer blazing far was borne,
I sought the means to guide my fleet aright,
Amid th' inclement waves and perils of the night.

Tho' others thus my motions could remark,
I of their course could no observance keep.
Wrapt in suspense, disconsolate and dark,
I plough'd with lab'ring prow the foaming deep;
And if, at times, impell'd by billows steep,
Some straining bark approaching hail'd us near,
The mounting sea rush'd in with sudden sweep,
And left us combating it's influence drear,
To drive as fortune will'd, a prey to doubt and fear.

"Thus, worn with toil, exhausted and distress'd,
We measur'd out the tedious hours of night.
When morn approach'd, the tempest sank to rest,
The wild waves fell, and o'er th' horizon bright
The rising sun disclos'd his cheering light.
As 'mid my comrades on the deck I stood,
And o'er the wide sea stretch'd my wistful sight,
Dispers'd around my scatter'd fleet I view'd,
Whose shiver'd masts and sails bespoke their suff'rings rude.

"Anxious their Sov'reign's standard to rejoin,
The Chiefs essay'd my station to explore,
And form'd, as chance prescrib'd, a hasty line.
Ah!  think what pangs my tortur'd bosom tore,
When the proud galley which my consort bore,
And those which bold DUBOIS, and HARCOURT brave,
And valiant TURNHAM held, I saw no more.
As heaving still roll'd on each foaming wave,
To me it seem'd t' announce their inauspicious grave.

"Two days pass'd on with progress sad and slow;
And tho' fond fancy, 'midst our heart-felt pain,
Visions of flatt'ring hope would sometimes shew,
And strive o'er grief ascendency to gain,
Still unsubdued the tyrant held her reign.
When the third morn with new-born splendour glow'd,
A bark was seen, which o'er the distant main
It's spreading sails aloft appear'd to croud,
While with incessant strokes it's oars the ocean plough'd.

"A branching palm with imitative shade
O'er-canopied it's prow, while high in air
It's flag the bearings of DUBOIS display'd.
Watchful we mark'd the crew with sed'lous care
Their quicken'd progress tow'rds my vessel bear,
While their brave Chief their vig'rous efforts press'd.
Now to my deck he hasten'd to repair,
And, with a look which inward pain confess'd,
Me eager to receive his tidings thus address'd.

"'From proud Limazzo and the Cyprian coast
I come, great King!  ill tidings to unfold.
When late the storm dispers'd your shatter'd host,
And howling winds, and waves which madly roll'd,
Forbad your fleet it's destin'd course to hold,
O'er the wild sea as fate prescrib'd we drove:
The tempest's rage our destiny controul'd;
With the fierce elements in vain we strove,
While billows yawn'd beneath, and thunders roll'd above.

"'Soon as the night's dark shadows were dispell'd,
And morn's first tints proclaim'd approaching day,
A rugged shore far-stretching we beheld,
Where rocks, high tow'ring with their summits grey,
The foaming billows lash'd with ruthless sway.
As rose the sun, before us on the strand
We saw two vessels which dismasted lay:
Part of their suff'ring crews had reach'd the land,
While some the roaring surf still struggled to withstand.

"'With painful sympathy awhile we gaz'd;
But soon the waves our lab'ring vessel caught,
And, as aloft their threat'ning heads they rais'd,
They seem'd with instant death and ruin fraught.
Undaunted yet, our stern direct we brought
To meet the mounting sea which broke around,
And with such firmness and success we wrought,
That, thro' the rocks on ev'ry side which frown'd
Passing, within the port at length we refuge found.

"'To aid our suff'ring friends we now repair'd:
To HARCOURT first we needful succour gave,
Brave TURNHAM next, who his misfortunes shar'd,
My zealous crew contributed to save
From ocean's fury and a briny grave.
Of those, who crouded round the vessels wreck'd,
Food and protection we essay'd to crave:
Tho' fierce their looks, and savage their aspect,
They seem'd by pity mov'd our miseries to respect.

"'While thus on shore we sought to rest awhile,
With hasten'd steps some to Limazzo went,
Where ISAAC dwelt, the tyrant of the isle.
Urg'd by the hope of gain, with foul intent
A ruffian band of plunderers he sent.
As we beheld them pouring o'er the plain,
On deeds of rapine and destruction bent,
Anxious we sought some safe retreat to gain,
Where our exhausted troop their station might maintain.

"'Not far from where my vessel I had moor'd,
An antient castle stood:  on every side
It's walls a rock precipitous secur'd,
And with rough front hostility defied.
Thither with rapid course our Chieftains hied;
While with my comrades I again essay'd,
As fav'ring now appear'd the wind and tide,
To gain my bark:  our canvass we display'd,
And soon the ready helm the pilot's hand obey'd.

"'Nor useless did our timely caution prove.
Scarce had we left th' inhospitable strand,
When the base herd, whom hope of plunder drove,
Seiz'd on our shatter'd barks with felon hand.
Their prey secur'd, with many a flaming brand
Amid the sails and timbers fire they spread;
While near them we beheld the Tyrant stand,
Who urg'd them to complete their purpose dread,
And with incitements strong their impious fury fed.

"'Flush'd with success, and fir'd by hope of prey,
He now advanc'd the castle to assail,
And on the walls his engines 'gan to play,
When, gently wafted by the southern gale,
Across the waves appear'd a distant sail,
Which seem'd approaching fast the treach'rous isle.
Himself of this expected prize t' avail,
The Tyrant bad his savage troops awhile
Forego their rude attack, and intermit their toil.

"'Ere long, advancing nearer to the shore,
The royal standard waving high we view'd,
And hail'd the bark which BERENGARIA bore.
It's tatter'd sails the tempest's fury shew'd,
While unsuspicious still the crew pursued
To false Limazzo's port their eager way.
Thither the tyrant led his caitiffs rude,
Prepar'd by force the lovely Queen to stay,
Should vain his efforts prove her caution to betray.

"'With careful heed his progress I remark'd.
Soon as the purpose of his march I guess'd,
In a light skiff I instantly embark'd,
And to the Queen my rapid course address'd.
As her departure earnestly I press'd,
An Envoy from the subtle Tyrant came,
Who in smooth terms imparted his request,
That, trusting to his hospitable fame,
She on his isle would land, and needful succour claim.

"'Aware of what th' insidious Prince design'd,
With phrase becoming, and in courteous guise,
The Queen his proffer full of guile declin'd,
But for her bark and crew requir'd supplies,
Which for their wants immediate might suffice.
Meantime we sought the outward port to gain,
Lest ISAAC, tempted by the glorious prize,
And finding his perfidious proffers vain,
Might try by impious force our Sov'reign to detain.

"'With diligence we therefore sought the coast,
Where on it's craggy rock the castle rose,
Whose friendly walls contain'd our shipwreck'd host,
By the fierce islanders beleaguer'd close.
There, while secure from our perfidious foes
The Queen, fatigued by toils, preferr'd to stay,
Fearful of what the Tyrant might propose,
I deem'd it best, great Prince!  without delay
To seek your fleet, and prompt intelligence convey.'

"As thus DUBOIS with eager accents spoke,
My heart beat high with rage, and thro' the croud,
Who felt for England's wounded glory, broke
Indignant shouts and acclamations loud.
'Comrades!'  I cried, 'against th' usurper proud
The force resistless of your vengeance bear!
If e'er your hearts with martial ardour glow'd,
To aid my gen'rous enterprize prepare!
Let ev'ry warrior haste his Monarch's cause to share!'

"Scarce had I ended, when each Chieftain brave
The impulse felt, and forth his weapon drew,
The Tyrant to chastise, his Queen to save.
Low bending on their oars, th' obedient crew
Plough'd the green waves and o'er their surface flew.
When the bright sun had reach'd the midway sky,
And the bold hills of Cyprus met our view,
They seem'd with freshen'd zeal their strokes to ply,
And thro' their ranks arose an animating cry.

"Nor fruitless prov'd their ardour:  we pursued
Our course, 'till near Limazzo's rocky coast
The wish'd-for galley of my Queen I view'd.
'Till now, by cares of more import engross'd,
I had not notic'd that of all my host
One bark alone with mine had kept it's course,
Which brave MAULEON led:  far interpos'd
Between us and our tempest-stricken force,
Now seen no more, the sea maintain'd a wide divorce.

"Of this my gallant band took little heed:
Still on the royal bark their eye they kept,
And, now approaching, with augmented speed
And force renew'd the foaming waves they swept.
Impatient on the galley's deck I leap'd,
And, as my arms embrac'd my lovely bride,
With mingled extacy and grief she wept,
And told of perils on the ocean wide,
And dangers threat'ning yet from gloomy ISAAC'S pride.

"As when, in April's changeful month, a show'r
Softly descending cheers the thirsty plain,
Exhausted nature owns its genial pow'r,
And, as around him sprouts the various grain,
Expected harvests greet the thankful swain:
So, when the tears from BERENGARIA fell,
My heart their influence own'd; with high disdain
And kindling wrath I felt my bosom swell,
And love and honour call'd th' usurper base to quell.

"But, as unequal seem'd my weaken'd force,
I deem'd it best, ere yet to arms we came,
To mild persuasion first to have recourse.
I therefore sent BLONDEL, who in my name
Might urge the tyrant to redeem his shame
By restitution to our plunder'd crews:
But if, of justice negligent and fame,
To grant my suit he proudly should refuse,
I threaten'd on his isle my vengeance to unloose.

"Prepar'd alike for peace or war we stood,
When from the shore return'd, BLONDEL thus spoke.
'Fierce is the tyrant, and his language rude:
As if disdaining his designs to cloak,
And as if anxious vengeance to provoke,
He warn'd me thence, and, with insulting air,
Threaten'd to bring your host beneath his yoke:
Tell your young King, he cried, my troops prepare
Fit greeting, if to land his puny force he dare!'

"'Tis well,' I cried; 'since thus he braves his fate,
The warfare that he threatens let us wage!
Of gentler means no longer hold debate:
The die is cast; of conquest I presage;
Our cause is just, and from th' usurper's rage
No English spirit can derive alarm,
Or with superior numbers fear t' engage.
In BERENGARIA'S cause, brave Chieftains arm!
Beauty with honour joins your gen'rous souls to warm!'

"As thus I spoke, the Chiefs my ardour caught,
And hastily their preparations made,
As if with more than human valour fraught.
Nor slight the peril:  in the port were laid
Five stately gallies martially array'd,
And mann'd with crews inur'd to naval fight:
While on the shore, drawn up in long parade,
Appear'd the tyrant's guards, whose armour bright
Glitter'd with burnish'd gold and shot reflected light.

"Himself we saw:  far beaming on his head
A casque he wore, while o'er his cuirass wide
The shaggy trophy of a wolf was spread;
His faulchion's room an iron mace supplied,
Studded with spikes, which oft with barb'rous pride
He rear'd on high; a courser he bestrode
Of size surpassing, whose ensanguin'd side
He ceas'd not with his rowel sharp to goad,
As thro' the lengthen'd ranks imperiously he rode.

"Meantime we seiz'd some boats, which on the strand
Unguarded lay; in these a chosen crew
I plac'd, and gave MAULEON the command.
These, high in courage tho' in numbers few,
I bad their vig'rous course to shore pursue,
And boldly with th' usurper battle join,
Ere from delay his force more num'rous grew;
While I my movements might with their's combine,
To cover their descent and aid their bold design.

"Scarce had they on this enterprise embark'd,
When from the harbour, where the gallies lay,
The Cypriot Chiefs their destination marked.
In numbers bold, they doubted not to stay
Their purpos'd course, and, as an easy prey,
Before the Tyrant to conduct them bound.
With confidence advancing in array,
While high arose the trumpet's martial sound,
On ev'ry side they spread their ample force around.

"Soon as th' unequal conflict I descried,
For quick attack I instant order gave:
'Now,' cried I, 'shall your English worth be tried!
Heedless of peril, let us rush to save
From danger imminent our comrades brave;'
Nor more &mdash; intent their gen'rous zeal to prove,
Our vig'rous crews cut thro' the yielding wave,
And with redoubling emulation strove,
'Till in the adverse barks our well-arm'd prows they drove:

"My galley with the Cypriot Chief engag'd:
And now, our grapplings fix'd, and clinging close,
With mutual hate we dubious warfare wag'd.
While from each bark a cloud of arrows rose,
And rival warriors, struggling to oppose
The rude attack, the tide of carnage swell'd,
I leap'd undaunted 'mid the crouded foes.
This when BLONDEL and REGINALD beheld,
Their swords o'er heaps of slain a passage free impell'd.

"Now English valour found an ample field:
For soon against their foes my crew prevail'd,
And drove them the contested post to yield.
Mounting the deck, their King they loudly hail'd,
And with resistless energy assail'd
The adverse host.  Nought could withstand their force,
Nor helm their strokes sustain'd, nor cuirass mail'd;
Around us lay full many a breathless corse,
While others found a grave beneath the billows hoarse.

"My vengeful arm the Cypriot Chief had felt:
And now the small remainder of their crew
Submissively for grace and pardon knelt.
Granting their boon, we cast around our view,
And saw the English flag which proudly flew
On board the galley which DUBOIS engag'd,
In sign of conquest and of triumph new:
While with three vessels LACY combat wag'd,
Who join'd in rude attack with fury unassuag'd.

"Thither our course with eager haste we turn'd:
To aid his suff'ring friends with equal zeal
DUBOIS advanc'd.  With transport we discern'd,
Where'er brave LACY rais'd his fatal steel,
The hostile ranks in wild confusion reel:
Nor with less valour did his gallant band
Their leader's brave example seem to feel;
As if success hung on his single hand,
Each warrior forward press'd th' assailants to withstand.

"By turns the adverse hosts the barrier pass'd,
And from the vessel's sides, where rag'd the fight,
Full many a gallant combatant was cast,
And sank beneath the foaming waves in night.
Forthwith my bark, advancing on the right,
It's hostile prow against one vessel drove,
While on the left, DUBOIS, with strenuous might
Another grappling, forc'd it to remove,
And fairly match'd with him more equal war to prove.

"Ere long, the party which oppos'd my course,
Compell'd by hard necessity, gave way,
And, like a torrent, whose resistless force
O'ercharg'd with wintry rains no mounds can stay,
We burst in fierce and terrible array.
Now conquest our successful efforts crown'd:
The vanquish'd host confess'd our pow'rful sway:
While their imploring hands in chains we bound,
With acclamations loud we made the air resound.

"DUBOIS, who quickly our success perceiv'd,
His efforts now redoubling, thro' the foe
A bloody passage to their deck atchiev'd.
When as we saw the Cypriot flag drawn low,
We felt our breasts with treble ardour glow,
And, onward rushing, to brave LACY'S aid
A pow'rful succour we prevail'd to throw.
Thro' the opposing band our way we made,
And on the vanquish'd bark our standard broad display'd.

"The gallant LACY on the deck we found:
With conquest flush'd, by glorious toil untir'd,
And grac'd with many an honourable wound,
For further action still his soul aspir'd.
The vet'ran's gen'rous ardour we admir'd;
But to MAULEON now our thoughts we turn'd,
Whose peril imminent our aid requir'd.
Close by the shore his party we discern'd,
Which onward press'd as if the tyrant's force it spurn'd:

"'Comrades!'  I cried, 'well has your warlike skill
Thus far prevail'd to check the tyrant's hand.
It now remains fresh duties to fulfil:
Behold MAULEON and his valiant band,
Who, reckless of the forces which withstand
Their bold attempt, press onward to the fight,
And seek in danger's front the hostile strand.
Chieftains!  your country's cause demands your might,
Let England and SAINT GEORGE your gen'rous zeal incite.'

"Rous'd by my pow'rful call, across the main
With vigour fresh my crew their course pursued,
And swept the sea the Cyprian shore to gain.
Soon, near at hand, the bloody scene we view'd.
As bold MAULEON 'mid the conflict rude,
His high command with calm composure gave,
I felt my soul with ardour new endued.
'Thus, thus,' I cried, 'all perils let us brave!'
And plunging from the deck I buffetted the wave.

"Deep in the foaming element I sank,
By cuirass steel'd and weighty arms impell'd,
And largely of the briny flood I drank:
Yet still the water's whelming force I quell'd,
And thro' the billows which above me swell'd
With vig'rous arm and dauntless heart I broke.
Rising above them, I BLONDEL beheld,
Who, true to me and friendship, dar'd provoke
The madd'ning ocean's rage and fate's impending stroke.

"His welcome voice my stagg'ring senses cheer'd,
His hand my frame o'erspent with toil sustain'd:
Tow'rds brave MAULEON'S host our course we steer'd,
Which now, 'mid clouds of darts the shore had gain'd,
And doubtful strife 'gainst countless foes maintain'd.
With doubled energy the waves we beat,
'Till to the strand we came by slaughter stain'd,
Where, driven by force superior to retreat,
Th' intrepid Chieftain stood and brav'd the combat's heat.

"Thus, when on Lebanon a tempest hoarse
With furious blast assails the forest's pride,
The sturdy cedar bends before it's force,
Yet soon resumes it's state, extending wide
It's spreading arms which ages have defied.
With transport fir'd, the vet'ran Chief we hail'd,
And with our sturdy faulchions at his side
To check the savage islanders prevail'd,
Who bold from numbers still his gallant band assail'd.

"While yet their host presumptuous onward press'd,
And urg'd with freshen'd zeal th' unequal fight,
Thus with loud voice my comrades I address'd:
'Think, gen'rous warriors, of your pristine might!
At glory's potent call let every knight
Follow his King, and crush th' insulting foe!'
I said &mdash; and brandishing my weapon bright
At an opposing Chief I aim'd a blow,
Which cleav'd his burnish'd casque, and instant laid him low.

"As when amongst a herd of tim'rous deer
A lion rushes, from his puissance dread
They fly dispers'd, their speed increas'd by fear;
So, where around our weapons terror spread,
The adverse combatants disbanding sled.
More fiercely still we urg'd their quicken'd course,
Thro' bloody torrents, and o'er heaps of dead;
While groans and shrieks, and exclamations hoarse,
In chorus dire proclaim'd our desolating force.

"Meantime, bold HARCOURT from his craggy height
Beheld the fortune of the field revers'd,
And urg'd his band to share the perilous fight.
Forth from his castle furiously he burst:
His sword the adverse combatants dispers'd,
And hew'd his glorious way my force to join.
Nor less in deeds of knightly prowess vers'd,
Brave TURNHAM strove his efforts to combine,
And, emulous of fame, broke thro' the Cypriot line.

"Now blaz'd with tenfold rage our martial heat;
Now, to our val'rous efforts forc'd to yield,
The vanquish'd foe more quickly 'gan retreat,
Relinquishing the wide ensanguin'd field,
When, fiercely grasping his enormous shield,
And waving high in air with menace proud
His mace with spikes o'ercharg'd and doubly steel'd,
The Tyrant forward rode:  he check'd the croud,
And thus with mad'ning wrath inflam'd he cried aloud.

"'Oh lost to honour, loyalty and fame!
Ye worse than coward females, to disgrace
By flight ignoble your forefathers' name!
Dread ye yon remnant of an host to face,
That thus like sheep your trembling course ye trace?
Turn!  or from me expect the death ye fly!
Your King, alone, without your succour base,
Dares on his own intrinsic worth rely,
Nor needs your aid to snatch the palm of victory!'

"His potent threats the fugitives recall'd,
Who, gath'ring round him, pale and doubtful stood,
On either hand with present fear appall'd.
When still he found our fortune we pursued,
And saw his legions shun the contest rude,
He spurr'd his vig'rous steed, and, like a wave
Whose giant mass o'ertops the circling flood,
Onward he rush'd, the chance of war to brave,
And, negligent of life, his fame and crown to save.

"His gen'rous courser bore him to the coast,
With fetlocks deep in blood of Cypriots dyed.
When as he saw the small but daring host,
Whose matchless valour had his arms defied,
High swell'd his bosom with indignant pride.
'Are these the foe who mock our pow'rful sway?
Can these our warlike force oppose?'  he cried,
'Thus of their lives the forfeit shall they pay,
And on their limbs shall wolves and hungry vultures prey!'

"He said, and aim'd at me his murd'rous mace.
On my uplifted shield with iron bound
And hides well-stretch'd the sturdy blow took place.
I felt it's mighty force my sense confound,
While he, again his weapon whirling round,
Prepar'd to strike.  I caught th' occasion brief,
And on his sinewy thigh infix'd a wound.
Now with redoubled fury rag'd the Chief,
His eye-balls glar'd, and groans confess'd his inward grief.

"Again his pond'rous mace on high he heav'd,
And struck with fell intent, but struck in vain:
Harmless it fell, on my broad shield receiv'd.
But now my trusty sword his courser's mane
And neck deep-piercing, mad with sudden pain
He rear'd, he plung'd, and o'er the valley swept
As if disdainful of his barbed rein.
No longer now his seat the Tyrant kept:
With vengeance fir'd to earth indignantly he leap'd.

"Undaunted still he sought his willing foe,
His strength entire, his fury still unspent.
Now match'd more equally, full many a blow
On either helm right manfully we lent,
While, on our combat fearfully intent,
Each adverse host in mute amazement stood.
We struck, we parried, rising now, now bent,
And steadily maintain'd th' encounter rude,
Hot with the glorious toil, our armour stain'd with blood.

"At length the Tyrant aim'd a furious stroke,
Which, on my shield descending, thro' the hide
And solid frame with steel surmounted broke.
I cast the fragments o'er the champaign wide,
And with my biting faulchion's edge replied,
Ere from the blow he could his mace regain.
The trenchant blade pervaded deep his side;
A crimson flood forth-bursting dyed the plain,
Stagg'ring he fell, and writh'd with agonizing pain.

"I leap'd upon him as he prostrate lay,
And bad him, if he life or safety sought,
To yield himself to my superior sway.
But neither threats nor risk he heeded ought:
No more his senses, all astounded, wrought,
But his wan cheeks, and once commanding brow
The saffron hue of death appear'd t' have caught.
As vanquish'd thus and faint I view'd my foe,
I felt my melting heart with pity's impulse glow.

"'Bear him,'' I cried, 'from off th' ensanguin'd field,
Bind up his wounds, and give him present aid!'
Forthwith, out-stretch'd on his capacious shield,
Him bleeding still th' obedient warriors laid,
And to my bark across the strand convey'd.
The Cypriot host, in wild confusion spread,
Still more by ISAAC'S hapless doom dismay'd,
To shun impending vengeance trembling fled,
Abandoning their arms, as chance or fortune led.

"To proud Limazzo's walls their steps we chas'd,
Where, anxious to escape their threaten'd fate,
Th' affrighted fugitives repair'd in haste.
At their approach the warders op'd the gate;
But, 'mid the narrow port, with fierce debate
Close throng'd they stood, unable to proceed,
While those without, afraid our force t' await,
Press'd on with clamours rude and fatal speed,
Which serv'd but fresh alarm and contests new to breed.

"Close at their heels we urg'd th' astonish'd crew,
Who now despairing, fled on either hand.
Their host dispers'd we stopp'd not to pursue,
But suffer'd them unnotic'd to disband,
While to attempt the gate I gave command.
My comrades bold with vig'rous onset rush'd;
And soon, for none their fury could withstand,
With hopes of fame and glorious conquest flush'd,
The thickly crouded mass with force resistless crush'd.

"In vain the warders tried the gates to close:
Without, within, a phalanx close appear'd,
Alike intent their efforts to oppose.
While friend and foe thus equally they fear'd
With fresh assault our arms a passage clear'd.
Shouts of exulting transport rent the air,
As on the rampart we our banner rear'd,
T' invite our friends our triumphs new to share,
By valour well redeem'd from anguish and despair.

"Straightway descending from their barks we saw
Our ready mariners, and at their head
DUBOIS employ'd his host in line to draw.
Onward he march'd, while by the hand he led
My BERENGARIA, who with fearful tread
And trembling limbs across the plain advanc'd,
Yet strew'd with slain and still with carnage red:
Doubtful and sad around her eyes she glanc'd,
Now to soft pity mov'd, by terror now entranc'd.

"Ill did her soul with such dread scenes accord:
Her gentle spirit, while the victor's hand
Scatter'd dismay, the stern behest abhorr'd,
Which made him thus humanity withstand.
But soon as, quitting the terrific strand,
I fondly bad her in Limazzo rest,
She felt her heart with new delight expand;
Smiling she clasp'd me to her panting breast,
And overpaid my toils, by love and beauty bless'd.

