"Across the sky the shades of ev'ning stole,
The sun's last rays scarce ting'd the cloudy west,
And night began to urge her dark controul.
Silence throughout the camp prevail'd:  to rest
The Champions of the Cross themselves address'd,
Save, where the Gallic host their arms prepar'd,
And gave commandment for the morrow's quest.
To PHILIP'S tent the anxious Chiefs repair'd,
And with their Prince the cares of preparation shar'd.

"There the bold Senechal of rich Champagne,
JOINVILLE, was found, in many a combat fam'd,
With MONTMORENCY, D'AVALON, SABRAN,
And brave DES BARRES, the French ACHILLES nam'd:
There came NANTEUIL, with martial zeal inflam'd,
DE MARBY, BEAUJEU, and renown'd SARGINES;
These of their Monarch's Knights the title claim'd:
In danger's hour still foremost were they seen,
By martial zeal inspir'd, undaunted and serene.

"There MAUVOISIN, grey in encounters grown,
With VILLEHARDOUIN, hasten'd to appear:
These follow'd ENGUERRAND, for valour known,
CHATILLON of the Templars Chief, SANCERRE,
Impetuous MONTFORT, PONTINIAC, FOUGERES,
ROUVRAI, unconscious of approaching fate,
ST. VALLERY, and CLERMONT puissant peer.
These in the royal tent assembled sate,
When PHILIP thus commenc'd the dignified debate.

"'Chieftains!  it suits us well awhile to pause,
Lest rashly on a service we proceed,
Of such importance to the Christian cause.
The fate of thousands hangs upon the deed.
To conquest if our gallant host we lead,
The voice of Europe shall our efforts hail,
And fame shall grace us with her choicest meed;
But, in our arduous contest should we fail,
Where from contempt and shame our standards shall we vail?

"'For more than two long years, it well is known
Acre the Christian forces has withstood.
I need not tell what constancy have shewn
The Pagan Chiefs, or how, 'mid scenes of blood,
Reduc'd by pestilence and want of food,
They unsubdued the chance of war sustain'd.
In vain THURINGIA, anxious to conclude
The siege protracted, his resources drain'd:
His gallant warriors bled, but no advantage gain'd.

"'If thus alone, unaided by their Prince,
They stood the time's rude shock, now, doubly bold,
Against our bands their might they will evince,
Since SALADIN their efforts shall behold,
And since, no more by famine's gripe controul'd,
Fresh combatants their lofty walls defend,
And hosts immense our leaguer'd force infold,
Prepar'd, when need requires, their aid to lend,
And with confed'rate arms fresh succours to extend.

"'Such, and so well-appointed is our foe.
Illustrious Peers!  no common dangers call
Your gen'rous spirits constancy to shew.
The hero's soul no perils should appal:
Whether before you ramparts high to fall,
Or grac'd with conquest honour's meed to claim,
Your fathers' glories and your own recal:
Oh!  keep them sacred from reproach and shame,
And to your sons transmit the record of your fame!

"'Now, lov'd companions!  best support of France!
Now be your zeal and martial prowess seen.
Ere morning dawn, our stately tow'rs advance,
Our Catapultas huge, and each machine,
With rocky fragments charg'd and weapons keen,
To crush their walls, and thin their close-throng'd line.
Their efforts to direct, let bold SARGINES
With JOINVILLE sage and brave PONTINIAC join,
While NANTEUIL and FOUGERES their well-known skill combine.

"'Should these to shake the tow'ring heights succeed
And open an approach, be thine, DES BARRES,
Thy vet'ran legions to th' assault to lead.
Let ROUVRAI and SABRAN thy labours share:
While VILLEHARDOUIN and BEAUJEU prepare
To face the Pagans who our camp inclose.
Watchful meantime their succours prompt to bear,
Our other Chiefs shall a reserve compose,
To aid their friends repuls'd, and check th' insulting foes.

"'Now, comrades bold!  adieu!  let ev'ry Peer
His orders issue for to-morrow's fight,
Convene his legions, and their spirits cheer.
Soon as o'er yonder hills the dawning light
Shall glimmer on the brow of dusky night,
Our great attempt must call us to the field.
Then let our gallant Frenchmen prove their might!
Let them ST. DENIS cry!  their weapons wield!
Nor cease their bloody toils 'till Acre's ramparts yield!'

"He said.  The Chiefs, retiring from his tent,
To seek their troops, who now reposing lay,
With anxious mien and hasten'd footsteps went.
They, well-dispos'd the summons to obey,
Shook off light slumber, and in dread array
Their engines huge and rocky fragments plac'd;
Some drain'd the goblet, some retir'd to pray,
While some anew their helms and cors'lets brac'd,
And, anxious for the proof, their limbs in steel encas'd.

"Now sank the planets in the western wave,
While, rising o'er the hills, the morning star
Of quick-approaching day his presage gave:
O'er Mahumeria's height, as beaming far
His sanguine orb denoted bloody war,
He blaz'd portentous thro' the doubtful gloom.
Of either host the banners stream'd afar,
And mingling warriors, heedless of their doom,
Rush'd thro' the hostile camps their station to assume.

"As when, on some unshelter'd mountain's side,
A shepherd sees the sky with clouds embrown'd,
And mantling darkness veil th' horizon wide,
Wrapt in suspense, in dread attention bound,
He hears the solemn thunder roll around,
And trembling gazes on his fleecy care:
So, struck with awe, we heard the trumpet's sound
Throughout the camp invading the still air,
And summoning the Chiefs their battle to prepare.

"The lord of day now ting'd the eastern sky.
As his first glowing beams of light he shed
On Acre's battlements and ramparts high,
We view'd their threat'ning front and turrets dread:
The widely yawning moat which round them spread,
The outward wall which clos'd it's vast extent,
Flank'd with full many a tow'r, whose lofty head
Frown'd o'er the plain all access to prevent,
Seem'd against Gallia's force a barrier to present.

"Yet more tremendous still the host appear'd,
Which crown'd their ample range and rugged height.
Clashing their arms, their banners proud they rear'd,
And, as if conscious of resistless might,
Mock'd at the Christian bands and dar'd the fight:
While on the hills which girt around the plain,
Exceeding far the stretch of mortal sight,
The Pagan Chiefs drew up their warlike train,
Prepar'd, as need might call, their brethren to sustain.

"Such was the scene that met our wond'ring eyes,
Which might the boldest warriors have impress'd
With sentiments of awe and strange surprise.
But these the soul of PHILIP ne'er confess'd:
Whate'er foul passions might disgrace his breast,
It burn'd with glory's bright and hallow'd flame:
Nor toil nor danger could his zeal arrest;
Forth from his tent with steps assur'd he came,
And 'midst his ranks advanc'd, as confident of fame.

"And grounded well his sanguine visions seem'd.
Far o'er the field, drawn out in gay parade,
Full fifty thousand casques resplendent beam'd;
The noblest Chiefs of France, in steel array'd,
Their many-blazon'd banners there display'd,
Eager their Monarch's fortune to partake:
Their countless engines were in order laid,
Of power the vast and solid walls to break,
And from their deepest base the battlements to shake.

"Thro' the extended line glad murmurs broke
As pass'd the Gallic King, who, fill'd with joy
To note their zeal, the warriors thus bespoke.
'If now your Heav'n-born valour ye employ
By deeds of worth yon ramparts to destroy,
And on those heights your banners proud to place,
Renown immortal, fame without alloy,
And Europe's thanks your enterprise shall grace,
Nor shall your well-earn'd wreaths oblivious time deface.

"'To-day begins the harvest of your hope!
Let your sharp faulchions deathless honour reap!
Give to your just resentments ample scope!
The ruthless Pagans, who on yonder steep
Their post as yet to arms impervious keep,
Drive from their strong intrenchments:  like a flood
Surcharg'd with wintry torrents, loud and deep,
Bear on the trembling foe your terrors rude,
And mark your dread career in characters of blood!'

"He said.  As when o'er Snowdon's long-drawn height
From struggling clouds the rattling thunder breaks,
And rolls tremendous 'mid the gloom of night,
From ev'ry cragg affrighted Echo wakes,
The lab'ring mountain thro' each cavern shakes,
And, startled by convulsing nature's throes,
The screaming eagle his lone cliff forsakes:
So thro' the host a shout of transport rose,
Which breath'd defiance loud and vengeance on their foes.

"Each Chieftain hasten'd now his band to join,
And, as to bold attack or safe defence
Might best conduce, to form his martial line.
We gaz'd intent:  but short was our suspense,
For straightway 'gainst the outward wall immense,
And the high rampart which the town surrounded,
Th' assault SARGINES his legions bad commence.
Drawn to their stretch his engines huge resounded,
And from their concave beds the rocky fragments bounded.

"Some on the slope abrupt were seen t' alight,
Forming deep chasms, and harrowing up the ground:
Some ended in the moat their downward flight,
And with their strokes uncouth dispers'd around
The foaming waters from their beds profound.
But one huge mass, with elevation dread
Struck on a lofty tow'r; with horrid sound
The tott'ring fabric bow'd it's haughty head,
Sank to the dust, and far it's giant ruin spread.

"Soon as the wide-extending breach was seen,
SARGINES exclaim'd, 'Brave comrades!  charge again
With thunder-dealing rocks each stout machine!
With aim assur'd a shower destructive rain,
Till, from their tow'ring summits to the plain,
The scatter'd vestiges of either wall
No more your road to victory shall restrain!
Now your full force exert, let Acre fall,
Let Gallia's matchless worth the Saracens appal!'

"He said.  Forthwith they gave their engines play,
And once again their dire contents compell'd
Thro' the resounding air to cleave their way.
When their intent brave CARACOS beheld,
Unaw'd by peril and by toil unquell'd,
He bad his host return the greeting rude.
Now, as the adverse rocks their progress held,
And high their strange and circling course pursued,
It seem'd as if with Heav'n the Titans war renew'd.

"Their doubling arch the armies view'd aghast,
And breath'd a prayer th' Eternal to invoke
As o'er their heads the whizzing portents pass'd,
When fresh alarm a wonder new awoke.
Two mighty rocks with swift opposing stroke
Met in their mid career:  with deaf'ning sound
Their texture firm the strong collision broke;
In many a shatter'd fragment to the ground
Falling amain, they spread their deadly force around.

"Where of the Gallic host the vanguard stood
The pond'rous show'r descended:  'mid their rank
Full many a gasping warrior fell; their blood
In copious streams the thirsty herbage drank.
Struck to the ground the bold PONTINIAC sank:
A rugged mass with destination dread
Crush'd his right arm and deeply-heaving flank;
The shades of death his manly brow o'er-spread,
To scenes of endless bliss his gen'rous spirit fled.

"With still more dire effect, on either side,
Their missile charge the adverse engines sent,
Extending ravage, death and havock wide.
Destruction sure awaited their descent:
The Pagan host before their fury bent;
The strong entrenchments where their warriors swarm'd
With force resistless fearfully they rent,
Smote the broad ramparts and the mounds deform'd,
While thro' the town expos'd the madd'ning tempest storm'd.

"No longer now his zeal DES BARRES suppress'd:
He wav'd his oft-tried faulchion in the air,
And thus with potent voice his bands address'd.
'Comrades!  'tis our's the glorious work to share:
Now 'gainst the recreant foe your fury bear,
And honour's path 'mid slaughter'd Pagans trace!
Success attends on those who bravely dare.
Let hope of high renown our sinews brace,
And may immortal fame our manly efforts grace!'

"Not otherwise than when with bellowings hoarse
A mountain wave, by southern blasts propell'd,
Sweeps o'er the deep with wild resistless course;
By many a tributary billow swell'd
It rolls it's foaming mass with rage unquell'd:
So from the camp impetuous o'er the plain
Their march assur'd the Gallic legions held,
And, as they sought the adverse heights to gain,
Scarce could their leader's voice their headstrong zeal restrain.

"Yet, as the tow'ring and firm-rooted rock
Withstands the ocean's power, and unsubdued
His station keeps regardless of the shock;
So on the recent breach with carnage strew'd,
Prepar'd for action and encounter rude,
Their banners proudly waving in the wind,
The bold defenders of the fortress stood;
While either wall with warriors fierce was lin'd,
With each his sep'rate charge by CARACOS assign'd.

"NOUREDDIN, who from Nubia's sultry plain
Had led his swarthy legions, stood prepar'd
The outward wall dismantled to maintain,
And on the breach the Gallic fury dar'd.
Arm'd for the proof with him undaunted shar'd
The dang'rous warfare a determin'd band,
Who at his call to Acre had repair'd,
And now, obedient to his high command,
Spread wide their threat'ning front the Christians to withstand.

"Far as the ramparts stretch'd their rude extent,
Was seen a long and terrible array
Of archers who their bows of tough yew bent.
On every hand appear'd a dread display
Of warlike engines, while around them lay
Enormous darts and stones, whose massy weight
And size might fill th' assailants with dismay;
With every instrument, which ranc'rous hate
Fram'd to complete the work of desolating fate.

"But all this hostile shew and stern parade,
The Pagans' menace and their vaunting cry,
On the assailants small impression made.
Onward they rush'd and rear'd their weapons high,
Till to the guarded breach approaching nigh,
The adverse fronts in contest dire engag'd.
Now Slaughter 'gan her bloody work to ply;
Waving her fatal torch Destruction rag'd,
And Death his havock urg'd with fury unassuag'd.

"Now on the walls he rear'd his ghastly form,
And with appalling shrieks amid the gloom
Pour'd on the Christian force his ruthless storm:
Now, as aloft he shook his sable plume,
His hand obscene confirm'd their hapless doom,
And many a gasping warrior prostrate brought,
Whose injur'd shade, unhonour'd by a tomb,
Still hov'ring o'er the ramparts where he fought,
Laments with wild acclaim the woes which there were wrought.

"Needless and painful were the task to tell
What Chiefs were then compell'd their breath to yield,
Or who beneath the Pagan vengeance fell,
And with their lives their holy warfare seal'd.
Beyond the rest, high brandishing his shield,
The brave DES BARRES spurr'd on his courser proud,
And held his progress o'er th' ensanguin'd field:
His manly voice proclaim'd defiance loud,
As with horrific grace he chas'd the recreant croud.

"Close by his side the gallant MONTMIRAIL
Rang'd thro' the adverse ranks, and far around
Was seen their close-throng'd legions to assail.
For mutual friendship as for worth renown'd,
The kindred Chiefs together still were found;
One impulse still associate they confess'd,
And hail'd alike the trumpet's cheering sound.
Now, as across the plain their steeds they press'd,
Nought could their knightly worth and joint assault arrest.

"Soon as the warlike pair NOUREDDIN view'd,
And saw his squadrons o'er the champaign chas'd
Seeking by flight t' escape th' encounter rude,
Vaulting upon his courser fleet in haste
His weighty mace he caught, his vizor brac'd,
And thus with hurried voice to OSMYN cried:
'Say, shall our well-earn'd glories be disgrac'd?
Shall yonder knights uncheck'd our force deride,
And thro' our trembling host spread desolation wide?

"'Let us together seek th' insulting foe,
And, in our Prophet confident, unite
The matchless force of Afric's sons to shew!'
Thus spake the Chieftain:  from the rugged height
His foaming courser bore him to the fight.
Impell'd by equal fury and disdain
OSMYN his word obey'd:  with footsteps light
His fleet Arabian scour'd along the plain
With slaughter red, o'er heaps of wounded and of slain.

"Them, as their enterprising course they press'd,
Bold MONTMIRAIL remarking, thus aloud
In terms exulting his brave friend address'd:
'Mark you, where yonder thro' the yielding croud
Advance two champions, whose demeanour proud
And hasty movement note some great intent?
They seem as if with prowess high endow'd.
If here they come on hostile purpose bent,
Their meditated charge 'twere fitting we prevent.'

"Thus saying, in it's rest he fix'd his lance,
And forward rode.  DES BARRES the foe beheld,
And with like ardour made his steed advance.
Thus, when black clouds with sulph'rous vapours swell'd
By clouds their race opposing are repell'd,
Far thro' the sky their dire contents are hurl'd:
With crash tremendous and with rage unquell'd
Up-rooted forests thro' the air are whirl'd,
And madd'ning elements convulse the suffering world.

"NOUREDDIN, spurring on his charger black,
With MONTMIRAIL first met, and, waving high
His mace of steel, commenc'd the dread attack.
With sinewy arm and quickly judging eye
He struck the Christian's spear, which, glancing by,
Innoxious quiver'd.  Ere his courser's flight
By MONTMIRAIL was check'd, with boastful cry
He rear'd his mace, and with resistless might
Rudely his shoulders smote, and crush'd his armour bright.

"Casting aside his lance, his glitt'ring blade
Grasping with manly firmness, MONTMIRAIL
Soon sturdily th' aggressor's wrongs repaid.
Now rung with blows each well-attemper'd mail,
Loud as the floor which with his twanging flail
The sturdy peasant strikes, or as the field
When driv'n by storms descends the clatt'ring hail.
Not less resounded either casque and shield,
Nor did with less effect each Chief his weapon wield.

"Both unappall'd their bloody toil pursued,
Both sought the strife by valour to decide,
And steadily maintain'd th' encounter rude.
But keen NOUREDDIN an advantage spied,
And swift as light'ning on his foeman's side
His huge mace struck.  Stagg'ring he dropt his rein,
From his pale lips gush'd forth a purple tide,
Senseless to earth he fell, while o'er the plain
Rush'd his affrighted steed the Christian camp to gain.

"Exulting in his vict'ry thus atchiev'd,
Across the field his eye NOUREDDIN glanc'd,
Where, by DES BARRES unhors'd, he straight perceiv'd
OSMYN his friend in death's embrace entranc'd.
Fir'd by the sight, indignant he advanc'd,
And, while his gesture fierce and eye inflam'd
Denoted vengeance doubly now enhanc'd,
And spoke the workings of his wrath untam'd,
With voice like thunder thus the sable Knight exclaim'd.

"'Chieftain!  whoe'er thou art, whose pow'rful hand
The fates have led o'er OSMYN to prevail,
Think not NOUREDDIN's fury to withstand:
Before superior force your glories vail;
Soon shall your bands their leader's loss bewail!'
'Boaster!' replied DES BARRES, 'some meaner sword
A foe like thee more fitly might assail,
And of thy recreant limbs a feast afford
For vultures hot for blood and beasts of prey abhorr'd!

"'So might'st thou nameless and unhonour'd fall!
But great revenge and MONTMIRAIL'S lov'd shade
Inspire my arm and for atonement call.
Ye pow'rs immortal!  now impart your aid,
Let your full influence now my soul pervade!'
With that his rowels sharply he applied,
And with his lance a stroke impetuous made;
Which when NOUREDDIN saw, he turn'd aside,
And, as his foe rode on, with lusty mace replied.

"So heavily he made the steel descend,
That to his saddle's bow th' astounded knight
Full sorely shaken was compell'd to bend.
NOUREDDIN now, more eager for the fight,
His weapon rais'd, and summoning his might
Aim'd at a blow the contest to conclude.
But vain his murd'rous purpose:  from it's height
The mace descending, with encounter rude
Struck his own steed, and bath'd his ample flank in blood.

"Ill did the wound the lordly charger brook,
But, raging madly, all dominion spurn'd,
And roughly in his seat NOUREDDIN shook.
With ready eye DES BARRES their strife discern'd:
His nimble courser suddenly he turn'd,
And with redoubled force the foe assail'd,
Whose breast, where rage and indignation burn'd,
His sharp lance meeting, pierc'd his cuirass mail'd,
And drove him to the earth on it's stout shaft impal'd.

"As his well-temper'd weapon from the wound
The victor Chief with strenuous effort tore,
Forth gush'd a sanguine flood, which far around
Mantling distain'd the verdant soil with gore.
While to the camp some sad attendants bore
Young MONTMIRAIL, if haply there a leech
His strength by sov'reign med'cine might restore,
DES BARRES his foaming courser urg'd, to reach
His gallant band which strove to penetrate the breach.

"There, rank with rank engag'd and man with man,
Each army sought it's courage to display.
As first in peril's front renown'd SABRAN
Thro' mingled Pagans cut his eager way,
Associate in his gen'rous toils, ROUVRAI,
Wielding his crimson'd sword, their fury brav'd,
And thro' their crouded legions spread dismay:
While Discord o'er the scene with joy deprav'd
Cast her envenom'd glance, and high her pinions wav'd.

"Awhile, as nicely balanc'd, either host
Opposing stood; neither advantage gain'd,
Nor to superior might their station lost;
Each steadily the chance of war sustain'd,
And Conquest her still dubious scale maintain'd:
But soon the hard-press'd Infidels gave back,
While Gallia's sons, as if they toil disdain'd,
With freshen'd zeal pursued their bold attack,
And o'er their slaughter'd foes mark'd their vindictive track.

"With fatal haste th' embattled wall they sought,
Where in terrific range machines were spread,
Ready for action and with ruin fraught.
Vollies of darts with destination dread
The thund'ring Briccolas in torrents shed:
From sturdy bows unerring arrows flew;
And boiling oil and pitch, and molten lead,
From cauldrons huge a more ignoble crew
On the throng'd combatants with savage malice threw;

"Or cast a deadly show'r of Grecian fire:
That compound foul, to western climes unknown,
Pregnant with horrors and with torments dire!
It's livid flames consum'd the flinty stone;
Pervading steel, it scorch'd the warrior's bone,
And stunn'd his senses with it's noisome stench:
Plung'd in the stream it's vigour still was shewn;
No water could it's power infuriate drench,
Nor had experience yet it's terrors taught to quench.

"With these another band conspir'd to fling,
Where'er the Christian force was closely pent,
Full many a wooden hoop, whose circling ring
With sulphur and bitumen was besprent.
These, all inflam'd, with aim assur'd they sent,
And, as amid the warlike ranks they fell,
The hapless victims of their curs'd descent,
With shrieks of anguish and despairing yell,
Writh'd in the burning orb, and felt the pangs of hell.

"No valour could such modes of war sustain:
Yet, whatsoever valour could perform,
The Gallic troops effected, tho' in vain.
Amid the perils of the fiery storm
As sank the leaders, a succeeding swarm
Strode o'er their corses and assail'd the wall:
Tho' death was present in his strangest form,
Nought could suffice their courage to appal,
One impulse seem'd to guide and animate them all.

"Still did we gaze on their transcendent worth,
When, from the adverse quarter on the right,
A tempest yet more horrible broke forth.
From Turo and from Mahumeria's height
Ferocious TECADIN led on his might,
To force the camp and aid his friends distress'd.
Onward they rush'd impetuous to the fight,
And ev'ry Chieftain, as he wav'd his crest,
Join'd in the cry of war, and MAHOMET address'd.

"Not louder, when, by headstrong tempests swell'd,
Ocean's mad billows on the shore rebound,
Not more tremendous, when, by rocks repell'd,
Her deaf'ning fury shakes the vast profound,
Than rose the savage and discordant sound.
Far as extended the entrenchment wide
Their varied armament encircled round;
Some boldly sought to mount the rampart's side,
And some with engines huge the yielding portals plied.

"Soon as th' alarm was heard, renown'd BEAUJEU
With watchful care and provident intent
To the broad rampart with his legions flew.
Mid the assailants on the steep ascent,
A show'r of darts and massy rocks they sent,
While glaive-men dealt destruction on the foes,
And sturdy bowmen their tough arches bent.
Yet vain their efforts prov'd the charge t' oppose;
Tho' hundreds bleeding fell, successive hundreds rose.

"Numbers, not valour, o'er the French prevail'd:
Tho' perils threaten'd from the heights above,
Their battlements the hardy Pagans scal'd,
And from their works the brave defenders drove.
On ev'ry side with adverse fate they strove:
While TECADIN urg'd on his desp'rate band,
Plum'd with success, their sabre's edge to prove,
From Acre's walls, unable to withstand
The foe, they saw their troops disperse on ev'ry hand.

"Around confusion, dread and horror reign'd;
O'er either host remorseless Ate soar'd,
And the parch'd field promiscuous slaughter stain'd.
Still from their ranks with countless numbers stor'd
New bands of combatants the Pagans pour'd,
Careless of life and prodigal of blood;
Now lance with lance was mix'd and sword with sword,
In onset close the mingled warriors stood,
While from their riven mails fast stream'd a gory flood.

"Then shone pre-eminent the Gallic Prince.
When hardly hope his cruel fortunes cheer'd,
He sought his worth by valiant deeds t' evince:
Where rang'd most close the adverse hosts appear'd,
Dauntless he flew; his lance a passage clear'd,
And many an infidel to fate consign'd.
With him his chosen knights their faulchions rear'd,
His kingdom's pride with him their efforts join'd,
Or honour to atchieve, or glorious death to find.

"But fruitless prov'd their zeal and courage tried:
Stern TECADIN was master of the field,
And all was havock now and ruin wide.
There VILLEHARDOUIN sank; no more to wield
His potent arms, his faith CHATILLON seal'd;
There ROUVRAI, gallant peer, his labours crown'd:
The brave FOUGERES, his breath compell'd to yield,
With ENGUERRAND, no less by fame renown'd,
Close by their Monarch's side a fate distinguish'd found.

"'Twere vain the mournful catalogue to swell
With those less known, who, in the carnage wild,
Beneath the fury of the Pagans fell.
Yet, on all these Affection once had smil'd,
Had hung with rapture on the parent mild,
With fondness o'er the parting husband wept,
Or clasp'd with extacy the duteous child!
Now, from the face of genial nature swept,
In their unhonour'd graves the heart's best feelings slept.

"While thus the battle ominously rag'd,
And fresh battalions to the combat press'd,
Whose cries of triumph further wrongs presag'd,
LUSIGNAN and his Chiefs I thus address'd.
'Too long I've check'd the feelings of my breast;
But, while a chance, however small, remain'd,
That PHILIP might the adverse host arrest,
My grief and indignation I restrain'd,
And o'er my anxious soul dominion strict maintain'd.

"'I knew his jealous spirit ill could bear
That others should his hop'd-for glories seize,
Or in the harvest of his laurels share.
But danger ill with haughtiness agrees;
Nor should my help his stubborn pride displease.
Give but the word, and here my vengeful blade
The Saracenic fury shall appease,
And on their squadrons fearfully array'd
Shall retribution full and dreadful be display'd.'

"As thus with warmth and energy I spoke,
Throughout th' encircling Peers, whose noble pride
Inaction scorn'd, a shout of transport broke,
When thus LUSIGNAN eagerly replied.
'May fav'ring Heav'n your arm to conquest guide!
May fame and victory o'er your banners wave!
Proceed, great Prince!  and from th' o'erwhelming tide
Of Pagan rage the Gallic Monarch save,
Still glorious tho' o'erthrown, and tho' successless brave!'

"As when arrang'd high-mettled coursers stand,
Eyeing the distant goal across the plain,
Soon as th' inspiring trumpet gives command,
Forward they dart regardless of the rein,
Their eye-balls flash, their vig'rous limbs they strain,
Sweep o'er the vallies and surmount the height,
While bursting seems each agitated vein:
So, fill'd with hope, and confident of might,
My bold companions rush'd impatient to the fight.

"When first the fortunes of the Gallic host
Doubtfully shew'd, I bad each English Peer
Repair with silent caution to his post,
Thence, when occasion should present, to bear
His pow'rful aid their suff'ring cause to cheer.
A far-rang'd band, in many a combat tried,
MAULEON held prepar'd and station'd near,
Whose gallant movements I myself might guide,
To check th' insulting foes and stem their boist'rous tide.

"Bold MORTIMER I caution'd to remark
Whatever on the town's wide ramparts pass'd;
And LEICESTER bad on board the fleet t' embark,
And 'gainst the sea-girt walls to place in haste
The Floating Castle, which, ere yet I trac'd
My eastern course, in England had been made.
This, from six stages, burning wild-fire cast,
And stones immense, from Rhine's broad stream convey'd,
Of matchless size and force with aim destructive play'd.

"All thus prepar'd to meet the bloody toil,
Undaunted REGINALD my standard rear'd,
Where the gaunt Dragon, symbol of our Isle,
With out-spread wings and flaming jaws appear'd.
UTHER, who erst the British empire steer'd,
From MERLIN had it, who the fabric spun:
In days and glory old the King rever'd
Gave it to Arthur his illustrious son,
Who oft beneath it fought and fame immortal won.

"Soon as unroll'd it wanton'd in their view,
It's web auspicious every warrior hail'd,
Wav'd his good faulchion, home his arrow drew,
And manfully the Saracens assail'd.
While MORTIMER the breach tremendous scal'd
Strew'd with the slain, and LEICESTER's potent Chief
His Castle's terrors on the town detail'd,
Impell'd by honour, gen'rous shame and grief,
O'er the wide plain we bore to Gallia's King relief.

"Surrounded by the foe the Monarch stood,
Hot with the fight, his blade with slaughter red,
His cuirass and his helm distain'd with blood.
Full many a warrior brave, whose soul was fled,
Lay ghastly round him in confusion dread:
Himself, still daring 'mid the wild alarm,
Advanc'd with feeble and uncertain tread;
No more with energy his wearied arm
Fell on the adverse bands, or wrought it's custom'd harm.

"Thro' the thick phalanx which our host defied,
Intent the Prince to save, we hew'd our way:
And now, our purpose high atchiev'd, I cried,
'Thus let a friend his ardent zeal display!
Tho' fate forbid success, tho' lost the day,
Still shall thy matchless worth recorded stand:
Fame shall to long posterity convey
The valiant deeds enacted by thy hand,
The glories of thy brave tho' unsuccessful band.

"'Thou seem'st with toil and labour overspent,
And from thy crest a bloody torrent flows:
Disdain not to give o'er thy great intent,
Nor dread thy honours well-atchiev'd to lose,
While we, yet fresh, the Pagan host oppose,
And check the progress of th' insulting crew.
Fleeting shall prove the triumph of your foes!
Soon shall our swords their yielding ranks pursue,
And TECADIN ere long his bold attempt shall rue!'

"As thus to sooth his wounded pride I aim'd,
With gesture fierce which spoke his strong despair,
And interrupted phrase, the King exclaim'd:
'Thine aid I scorn &mdash; thy specious arts forbear&mdash;
Think not the honours of the field to share,
Nor strive with me in glory's race to vie&mdash;
None but myself my well-earn'd wreaths shall wear&mdash;
My arm can yet the hostile force defy,
Nor needs a rival's help to purchase victory!'

"He said.  As if he further speech disdain'd,
Again to wield his weapon he essay'd:
But him no more his trembling limbs sustain'd,
No more his hand his dread intent obey'd;
He felt a death-like cold his frame pervade,
And stagg'ring fell.  From off th' encrimson'd ground
The fainting King some warriors straight convey'd,
And carefully his helm and mail unbound,
To staunch the blood which flow'd from many a gaping wound.

"Meantime around us rose a fearful cry.
Before the foe triumphant we beheld
The Gallic legions in disorder fly,
While TECADIN their routed bands impell'd,
And mark'd his fatal way with rage unquell'd.
From the broad rampart, guarded now no more,
Fresh combatants his host insulting swell'd,
And, as their succour ardently they bore,
Rear'd high their faulchions keen distain'd with Christian gore.

"But soon we stemm'd the desolating tide.
Flush'd by success, with Gallic spoils bedeck'd,
The wild invaders who our pow'r defied
Firmly we met, right manfully we check'd,
And taught them English valour to respect.
Oh!  would some Pow'r with animating flame
Inspire my soul, my languid speech direct!
Then should each lov'd and honourable name
Survive the wreck of time, immortaliz'd by fame!

"But tame and lifeless must description prove.
Here might be seen, o'er mingled heaps of dead,
With blade exterminating PEMBROKE rove,
And wide destruction thro' the Pagans spread:
There valiant TANCARVILLE his vengeance shed;
And there MAULEON o'er the crouded field
His vet'ran bands with force o'erwhelming led;
While, in an adverse quarter, high his shield
Grac'd by the holy cross was GRANVILLE seen to wield.

"There, with ST. JOHN'S brave Knights, ERMENGARD bold
Unrivall'd deeds of chivalry perform'd.
Aloft their Order's standard they unroll'd:
At once by courage and religion warm'd,
Where most the fury of the battle storm'd
Ardent they rush'd, and spread around dismay.
Full many a corse their horses' hoofs deform'd,
And many a bleeding Chief around them lay,
And death and havock mark'd their devastating way.

"Not otherwise than when across the sky
Obnoxious vapours, bred from murky night,
By morn's enliv'ning breeze are forc'd to fly,
The foe retreated.  With redoubled might
We follow'd close and urg'd the bloody fight;
Nor ceas'd we 'till their routed bands we drove
In wild disorder to the rampart's height,
Where still to mount Barbarian cohorts strove,
Eager their hate and thirst of Christian spoils to prove.

"Cursing his fortune now so foully chang'd,
Tho' not despairing yet the day to gain,
Fierce TECADIN with fatal progress rang'd.
As from their sheep-cot when a peasant train
A lion chace whom recent slaughters stain,
The lordly tyrant flight ignoble spurns;
Lashing his sides, erecting high his mane,
To meet his foe with madd'ning wrath he turns,
While either orb of sight with kindling vengeance burns:

"So bold, so dreadful, the proud Chief appear'd,
When, as endow'd with force and courage new,
His giant form and potent hand he rear'd,
And on our host, who ceas'd not to pursue,
With dire intent and fell impatience flew.
Where'er he turn'd, in blood of Christians deep
His faulchion keen he fail'd not to imbrue,
And many a warrior forc'd in death to sleep,
And many a widow'd bride and orphan'd babe to weep.

"Before his trenchant sword our forces bow'd,
While his hoarse voice like thunder loud he rais'd,
And on their ranks extermination vow'd.
At deeds so dread and threats so stern amaz'd,
My comrades lost in consternation gaz'd,
And valour's worth, tho' in a foe, confess'd.
Nor less the daring feats he wrought I prais'd:
But soon more urgent duties fir'd my breast,
Grasping my shield, I thus my wond'ring friends address'd.

"'Champions of Christ!  who in his sacred cause
Display your standards and for Judah fight,
Why in the race of glory do ye pause?
An easy conquest would but ill requite
Your great revenge and oft acknowledg'd might.
Poor is the triumph which no danger knows!
Superior perils gen'rous souls incite!
Behold!  my arm the Pagan shall oppose,
And stamp by his defeat destruction on your foes!'

"As I advanc'd, the Chief his faulchion heav'd,
And, by success inflam'd, by victory flush'd,
My sturdy onset unappall'd receiv'd.
Soon was each cuirass bruis'd, each helmet crush'd;
Encrimson'd streams in copious torrents gush'd:
And, as we strove with energy intense
And wav'd our bloody swords, the croud was hush'd;
Their faculties were numb'd, their voice, their sense,
Their breath itself was lost in horrible suspense.

"Uncertain still the strife appear'd to float,
When on his shaggy crest, superbly crown'd
By an increasing silv'ry moon, I smote.
As fell the glitt'ring fragments to the ground,
In sudden trance his faculties were bound,
He rais'd instinctively his massy shield.
With shouts my comrades made the air resound,
As if already on th' ensanguin'd field
The Pagan overthrown had been compell'd to yield.

"But falsely deem'd they of the puissant Chief.
As Heav'n's bright luminary, when a cloud
His splendid orb obscures with passage brief,
And for awhile succeeds his pomp to shroud,
Bursts thro' the gloom and shines with radiance proud;
So from the stupor which his pow'rs entranc'd
The Persian Prince arous'd, with menace loud,
To dare the combat's issue quick advanc'd,
While from his eye-balls strain'd vindictive light'nings glanc'd.

"A bolder warrior ne'er my arm engag'd:
Skilful to strike, to parry, or to wheel,
The dubious contest manfully he wag'd,
And on my batter'd helm he rung a peal
So vig'rous, as to make me backward reel,
And strive to guard against his fatal aim.
As thus he urg'd me with his trenchant steel,
The wond'ring Infidels, with fierce acclaim,
United to exalt their strenuous champion's name.

"Not long I bore his salutation rude.
Breathing a pray'r th' Eternal to invoke,
With freshen'd ardour and with strength renew'd,
While tenfold fury in my breast awoke,
I rush'd upon him, and with pow'rful stroke
My debt of vengeance amply I repaid.
But now in twain my treach'rous weapon broke:
Unarm'd I stood, and destitute of aid,
T' abide the censure harsh of his well-temper'd blade.

"Soon as he saw me of my sword bereav'd,
Onward he press'd with new presumption fir'd.
On my broad shield his faulchion I receiv'd,
And, spite of his advantage thus acquir'd,
I warded off his strokes, and still retir'd,
Till, wearied, with less energy he wrought.
I watch'd th' occasion, and by Heav'n inspir'd,
As to inflict a blow again he sought,
With strenuous arm my foe around his waist I caught.

"Awhile I bound him in my rigid clasp,
While vainly he against my force rebell'd:
Then, on a sudden, loos'ning my firm grasp,
As high in air the struggling Chief I held,
And ev'ry fibre with the effort swell'd,
I cast him from me, and across the mound
Which rang'd along our camp my foe impell'd.
Headlong we saw him down the slope rebound,
Glancing from rock to rock, transfix'd with many a wound.

"A cry of horror from the Pagans rose,
When thus their Chief falling amain they view'd,
And grief and fear their stricken senses froze.
Instant my comrades their assault renew'd,
And, as with new-born hope and strength endued,
Burst on their squadrons with resistless might,
And to the rampart's verge their host pursued,
Where still fresh warriors sought to gain the height,
Urg'd by their leader's voice, and goaded to the fight.

"While thus we well aveng'd the wrongs of France,
And by our valour worthily redeem'd
The battle nearly lost by foul mischance,
When bent on slaughter every soldier seem'd,
And each his own the noble cause esteem'd,
From Acre's tow'r a standard white on high
In token of surrender widely stream'd.
Soon as in air we saw the signal fly,
Throughout our host arose a wild exulting cry.

"The trembling Pagans, whom our furious bands
Still to the breach with horrid carnage drove,
Cast down their arms, and with uplifted hands,
With tears and gestures of submission, strove
The pity of their gen'rous foe to move.
Nor were their tears and supplications vain.
While yet I bad them English mercy prove,
I saw LUSIGNAN and his splendid train
Advancing tow'rds the heights across th' ensanguin'd plain.

"Approaching near, he caught me to his breast,
And, when at length his words a passage found,
He thus the transports of his soul express'd.
'Oh far beyond all Christian Kings renown'd!
Conquest and fame thy glorious toils have crown'd!
By thee redeem'd Judaea's cause prevails:
Thee, while her shores with extacy resound,
While her triumphant voice high Heav'n assails,
Her champion she proclaims, her chief she proudly hails!

"'To English valour vanquish'd Acre bows,
And with the wreath to Gallia's King denied
The GOD of battles dignifies thy brows.
To win fair fame, to crush the Pagan's pride,
His hand has deign'd thy gallant host to guide:
Inspir'd by thee brave MORTIMER maintain'd
His country's old renown, while LEICESTER wide
On the devoted town his horrors rain'd.
What fate to us refus'd their matchless worth has gain'd.

"'See on those tow'rs, which long the Christian band
Insulting mock'd, the flag of triumph wave,
While CARACOS awaits thy high command.
Thy gen'rous mercy he submits to crave:
And from the sword his troops disarm'd to save,
To yield the Cross he proffers, and to pay
A golden ransom for his comrades brave,
Who here as hostages with him shall stay,
Till to our camp his King our pris'ners shall convey.'

"Thus spoke Judaea's Prince. &mdash; 'To Heav'n alone,'
Raptur'd I cried, 'be thanks and homage paid!
Our's is the prize, and mercy shall be shewn!
Here let our standard widely be display'd:
Let SALADIN behold his glories fade,
And know that Acre from his pow'r is rent!'
I said.  My comrades my behest obey'd,
While with LUSIGNAN tow'rds the royal tent,
Where CARACOS remain'd, exultingly we went.

"But wherefore am I thus compell'd to speak
Of deeds which others might more fitly state?
Why am I thus with declamation weak
Reduc'd my own transactions to narrate?
Not to myself impute it, but to fate.
Yon Tyrant's odious charges to repel,
To save myself from his unpitying hate,
Here on my own deserts I needs must dwell,
Must my own virtue urge, my own atchievements tell.

"I, who in Palestine rejoic'd to bleed,
Where routed Pagans trembled at my name,
And crouch'd before me, am condemn'd to plead
Like a base slave for liberty and fame.
Princes!  from you protection let me claim!
I see among you many a val'rous Chief,
Who erst the partner of my toils became;
I see my comrades lov'd, whose gen'rous grief
Led them from England's shores, who for their King's relief&mdash;"

"Oh speak not so!  Oh rack not thus my soul!"
Cried MORTIMER, as starting from his seat,
And trembling with disdain which mock'd controul,
His tears burst forth:  "Blush not his charge to meet;
Let truth the fraudful Tyrant's arts defeat.
Had I the herald of thy praises been,
Had I been charg'd thy actions to repeat,
In tints more vivid, tho' in phrase more mean,
Had thy transcendent worth and constancy been seen!

"I, who full often on the bloody field
Have view'd thee, when obdurate fortune frown'd,
Mid adverse hosts thy pow'rful faulchion wield,
Could amply tell how fled thy foes around:
I could detail, how on th' encrimson'd ground
The gasping Saracens their lives resign'd,
How, when by conquest fann'd, by glory crown'd,
Thy feeling soul on clemency refin'd,
Thy courtesy rejoic'd affliction's wounds to bind.

"Did I not share the perils of the war,
When, bruis'd thy helm, thy sword with slaughter red,
Thro' mingled hosts thy voice was heard afar,
When we together for our country bled,
When Pagan armies at thy onset fled,
When fair renown her noblest trophy wove,
And plac'd her deathless laurel on thy head?
And now, oh Heav'n and all ye saints above!
Live I to see my King yon Tyrant's victim prove!

"He, who, tho' seated on th' imperial throne,
Trembles when thus he sees thee captive stand!
Shame on the Christian world, which thus can own
A mean submission to his base command!
That he, who honour's dictates never scann'd,
Whose fears forbad his dastard soul to taste
The joys sublime which fortitude had plann'd,
Who shunn'd the paths which glory's hand had trac'd,
The sacred shores which erst a Saviour's presence grac'd&mdash;"

"Cease, MORTIMER!"  exclaim'd the King, "nor thus
Forget the public servant in the friend.
We must far otherwise this cause discuss.
Should these great Princes patiently attend,
Should they to hear my statements condescend,
I must, however loth, obey their will.
On their unbiass'd judgments I depend:
Tho' worn I feel and spent, their candour still
The task which yet remains will aid me to fulfil."

As thus the Monarch spoke, his varying cheek
Now flush'd, now seem'd with faintness pale impress'd;
When Brunswick's Duke, who his condition weak
Had notic'd, thus th' attentive Peers address'd.
"However potently each gen'rous breast
The royal pleader's narrative may fire,
'Twere fitting our proceedings we arrest:
Let the brave captive from the hall retire,
Let him enjoy the rest which nature's calls require.

"Then, when with spirits fresh and force renew'd,
When dawns to-morrow's light, he here shall come,
His interesting tale may be pursued:
Recruited then our task we may resume,
When waken'd judgment may our minds illume,
And calm reflection may our votes direct.
Meantime, while unpronounc'd remains his doom,
Germania's Chiefs the pris'ner shall protect,
And carefully whate'er betides him shall inspect."

He said.  The Peers with loud and glad acclaim
Their approbation of his vote convey'd.
Confus'd the Tyrant sat:  the guilt and shame
Which rankled in his heart his brow betray'd:
Yet, to oppose the gen'ral voice afraid,
With well-dissembled courtesy he bent,
And, while a smile on his dark visage play'd,
Which thinly veil'd his inward discontent,
From his high throne he rose, and yielded full assent.

