Now o'er the east the ray of morning beam'd,
And soon the glorious sun, his coursers fleet
Fresh harnessing, o'er Heav'n's wide surface stream'd.
The early Chieftains hasten'd now to meet;
And, soon as HENRY on his royal seat
Resum'd his station, to his former place
England's brave King was led.  He bow'd, to greet
The splendid presence, and, with manly grace,
His further warlike feats proceeded thus to trace.

"When here before ye, Princes!  I appear'd,
I told ye how proud Acre we had gain'd,
And how, with Judah's King, my steps I steer'd
To where the vanquish'd CARACOS remain'd.
Tho' joyful from the triumphs we obtain'd,
Yet thought we of the late disastrous chance,
Which Gallia's best and noblest blood had drain'd:
Still, as we ey'd the plain with anxious glance,
A pitying sigh we breath'd for PHILIP and for France.

"'Oh!  that high Heav'n, in mercy to mankind,
War and its deadly scourges had restrain'd!
Oh!  had it stamp'd upon the human mind
The mild forbearance, and the love unfeign'd,
By which alone man's blessings are sustain'd,
And conscience loses her severest stings!
Then brother ne'er a brother's blood had drain'd,
Ne'er had we known the dire effect, which springs
From nations' rivalry and jealous hate of kings!'

"Thus I exclaim'd, as from the rampart's height
Across the battle's field I bent my course.
In ev'ry quarter where I turn'd my sight,
Pallid and ghastly lay some bleeding corse,
Or groan'd some warrior, waiting the divorce
Of all that form'd him dignified and brave:
Above them vultures flew with screamings hoarse,
While, from their maws obscene the dead to save,
Their pious friends prepar'd an undistinguish'd grave.

"As with disturb'd and hurried step I pass'd,
And still my ling'ring and enquiring eye
On every spectacle of misery cast,
I heard a feeble and half-utter'd cry,
And turning saw a wounded warrior lie,
Stretch'd on the plain, his armour red with blood:
A dart his breast had pierc'd, while from his thigh,
Where still the fragment of a lance I view'd,
With fatal course distill'd a deep-empurpled flood.

"I hasten'd tow'rds him.  With a trembling hand
He rais'd his shatter'd visor, to disclose
The well-known countenance of young FERRAND;
Then cried, 'Ere yet too weak my utt'rance grows,
My fast-decaying senses ere I lose,
Let me again my much-lov'd Sov'reign greet!
Let me with him my dying wish repose!
Then shall my soul to Heav'n's eternal seat
Without a pang depart, it's gracious judge to meet.'

"Then, drawing from his breast a braid of hair,
'Before I left,' he cried, 'my native shore,
To noble MOUBRAY'S daughter, EDITH fair,
My plighted vows and lasting faith I swore.
This pledge of love, which next my heart I wore,
For her who gave it, gracious RICHARD!  take:
This to the mistress of my soul restore!
Ah!  bid her guard it for her lover's sake,
Whose constancy nor time nor death itself could shake!'

"'FERRAND!'  I cried, as leaning o'er the youth
I grasp'd his hand, 'with sorrow I receive
This dear memorial of thy gen'rous truth.
Oh!  could my pow'r thy gallant soul retrieve,
Thy loss the gentle EDITH should not grieve,
Nor should thy King regret a faithful friend!
While o'er thy corse the mould'ring earth shall heave,
A common woe shall both our bosoms rend,
And jointly shall our pray'rs for thee to Heav'n ascend.'

"My words his parting anguish seem'd to calm:
A smile of transport beam'd upon his face,
As with a gentle touch he press'd my palm;
Then gazing upward, as imploring grace,
He breath'd a sigh, and sank in death's embrace.
I felt his worth my fond attention claim,
And gave commandment his remains to place
In Acre's holy temple, as became
A Chief renown'd for truth and early known to fame.

"Now to the tent our footsteps we impell'd,
To meet bold CARACOS impatient grown:
And soon our gallant captive we beheld.
Pensive he stood, his eye now casting down,
Now viewing mournfully the captur'd town;
Then suddenly, as if he fate defied,
Our conq'ring host surveying with a frown:
While MORTIMER and LEICESTER, at his side,
With courteous bearing strove to sooth his wounded pride.

"Approaching towards him with a friendly mien,
I thus bespoke him:  'In misfortune's hour
A warrior's constancy is chiefly seen.
If in the plenitude of martial pow'r,
And flush'd with full success, his spirits tow'r,
Deceitful is his glory, small his praise:
But, when o'ercharg'd with ill his prospects lour,
If then he learn his stricken soul to raise,
Approving virtue smiles, and Heav'n it's aid displays.

"'What tho' no longer with appropriate state
Thou rul'st yon fortress which our arms have gain'd?
Has not thy bold defence confirm'd thee great?
Do not those ramparts which our toils disdain'd,
Those walls which long our force immense sustain'd,
To thy exalted worth their suffrage bear?
They join to prove thy loyalty unstain'd,
And strongly urge us, with demeanour fair
The ruin of thy hopes and fortunes to repair.'

"'Prince!'  said the Chief, 'tho' in my conscious heart
Th' expiring spark of hope no longer glows,
Some consolation still thy words impart.
Thus much at least my soul of comfort knows;
That to no common or ignoble foes
Have I surrender'd up my sacred trust;
That, since fate will'd my efforts to oppose,
I bear the fetters of a Prince august,
Not more supreme in war than in his triumphs just.'

"Mov'd by the frankness of the vet'ran Chief,
I bad th' attendants ev'ry means prepare,
To calm his anguish and appease his grief.
Then with the Queen and CHARICLAEA fair,
Who from their tent my transports came to share,
Tow'rds the proud walls of Acre I advanc'd,
Where, as with pomp majestic in the air
The lordly ensigns of our island glanc'd,
Our victor host with shouts of joy our souls entranc'd.

"Along the well-disputed breach our way
To the chief gate exultingly I led,
O'er which no longer now, in dire display,
Disgusting vestiges of blood were spread:
For pious hands already to the dead
Had paid the hasty tribute of a grave,
And pity's eye her parting tear had shed.
As on we pass'd, th' encircling heralds gave
Breath to their brazen tubes, and shook heav'n's wide concave.

"A thousand voices, joining in acclaim,
A martial and extatic chorus made,
As to SAINT JOHN'S respected fane we came.
There, as religion's dictates we obey'd,
And humbly kneeling bounden homage paid,
ERMENGARD and his valiant Knights, no more
In gorgeous helms and coats of steel array'd,
A solemn mass recited, to adore
Th' Eternal King, and His fresh mercies to implore.

"When thus in man's first duty we had shar'd,
We left the newly-consecrated ground,
And to LUSIGNAN'S splendid hall repair'd.
There on his board a banquet rich we found;
With the grape's juice our ample goblets crown'd
From hand to hand quick circulating pass'd:
The voice of harmony was heard around,
And, as on me her eyes were fondly cast,
My BERENGARIA'S smiles enhanc'd the blest repast.

"Still did the minstrel's touch a strain pursue,
Such as not Orpheus' self could have excell'd,
When suddenly the portals op'ning flew,
And Gallia's King approaching we beheld.
We hail'd him, but our greeting he repell'd,
And wav'd his hand as if inclin'd to speak.
Stern was his brow, with rage his bosom swell'd,
Tho' still he seem'd from late exertions weak,
While a faint tinge of red flush'd o'er his pallid cheek.

"Him OTHO, who the bold Burgundians sway'd,
Attended close, with CONRAD Prince of Tyre,
Suabia's proud Duke, whom FREDERICK'S host obey'd,
And LEOPOLD, who since with rankling ire
'Gainst me with yonder tyrant dar'd conspire,
And here compell'd me for my fame to plead.
As on they came, I mark'd the passions dire
Which o'er each face their gloomy terrors spread,
And in their gestures fierce unbridled wrath I read.

"Nor falsely deem'd I of their stern intent:
For PHILIP now advanc'd before the rest,
And as around a scornful glance he sent,
Thus rapidly th' assembled Peers address'd.
'Princes!  at length the treason is confess'd,
And England's King betrays his secret aim!
Of trophies won by gallant France possess'd,
He boasts his guilt, he triumphs in his shame,
And on a treach'ry foul aspires to build his fame.

"'Shall he &mdash; because, upon the field well gain'd
By Gallic valour and my puissant might,
A tame spectator he so long remain'd,
Shall he &mdash; because, when won the glorious fight,
He dar'd our compact trait'rously to slight,
And join'd my conq'ring warriors in the chace,
Say, shall he thus my high deserts requite,
Shall he his brows with Gallia's laurels grace,
Shall he on Acre's walls his banners singly place?

"'And shall he too the ransom full receive
Which for my captives SALADIN will pay?
Shall he my army of their rights bereave?
No &mdash; ne'er will PHILIP his just cause betray,
Nor shall a crafty rival hence convey
The blushing honours which his sword acquir'd!
Princes!  to you I make appeal.  Oh!  say,
Are not your breasts with indignation fir'd,
Or have you with my foe against my claims conspir'd?

"'Let England's King declare on what pretence
He claims distinction.  Is it that engag'd,
By solemn vows in Palestine's defence,
With good Sicilia's Prince he warfare wag'd?
Is it because, this enmity assuag'd,
On hapless Cyprus in accursed hour
He fell, by avarice and revenge enrag'd,
To crush it's throne, it's substance to devour?
Are these the great exploits which prove his martial power?

"'Oh that the victims of his guilt were here!
Their grateful voices surely would combine
Full testimony of his worth to bear!&mdash;'
To bear such testimony full be mine,'
Exclaim'd the Cypriot Prince, as from the line
Of list'ning Chiefs he press'd with anxious haste:
'Ill can I guess, with what deprav'd design
The daring tongue of calumny has trac'd
A charge, to blast the wreaths which England's Monarch grac'd.

"'But, if base taunts and obloquy thus flow
From an allied and long-acknowledg'd friend,
Listen while he, who late was RICHARD'S foe,
Stands forth his injur'd honour to defend.
He sought not Cyprus from my power to rend:
My haughty spirit, then by ills unquell'd,
Led me with him unjustly to contend;
My rash aggression bravely he repell'd,
And ISAAC'S fall, alas!  his victor's triumph swell'd.

"'Twas then, when sorely by defeat oppress'd,
His innate magnanimity I view'd:
His matchless worth my conscious soul confess'd;
Tho' still remain'd the mem'ry of our feud,
His courtesy my stubborn pride subdued.
Vanquish'd again by his demeanour fair,
Hither with him my course have I pursued,
Beneath his banner Pagan rage to dare,
With him the toils of war, the sacred cause to share.'

"As thus the Prince with gen'rous ardour spoke,
Each bosom own'd a consentaneous flame,
And from the croud shouts sympathetic broke.
Soon as was hush'd their turbulent acclaim,
'I do not,' PHILIP cried, 'a captive blame,
Who thus attempts to sooth his master's pride.
Chieftains!  from you a full redress I claim:
'Tis your's my just pretensions to decide,
Tho' England's boastful King my merits has denied.'

"Earnest his strange presumption to correct,
I turn'd to speak; but, with demeanour kind,
Judaea's King my warmth impatient check'd,
And thus with mild and temper'd phrase rejoin'd.
'We have not, Prince!  to wrong your worth combin'd;
To us your high deserts are fully known,
And amply for them is our praise assign'd;
Yet truth impartial bids our voices own,
That much is due to thee, but not to thee alone.

"'Amid the perils of the bloody field,
We saw and own'd your eminent desert:
But, when at length to numbers forc'd to yield,
Your hand no more could Judah's cause assert,
'Twas RICHARD'S fate your danger to avert,
To stem the progress of the conq'ring foe.
Ever to aid the Christian cause alert,
His arm the vengeful TECADIN brought low,
And forc'd beneath our pow'r the Saracens to bow.'

"As when the wind a headstrong current meets,
High mount it's waves, and with indignant stroke
It's rugged banks the furious torrent beats;
So, when with firmness thus LUSIGNAN spoke,
Fresh wrath in PHILIP'S struggling breast awoke.
'And is it thus,' th' impetuous Monarch cried,
Thou dar'st, usurper false!  my rage provoke?
Is it for thee our contest to decide,
Whose weak inglorious hand in combat ne'er was tried?

"'No more in glitt'ring arms thy limbs incase,
Cast off thy nodding helm, thy faulchion break,
And honour'd chivalry no more disgrace!
Hence to thy tent!  Judaea's throne forsake!
Sit at thy loom, Sybilla's distaff take,
Enjoy her treasures, but forego her realm!
When vengeful Pagans it's foundation shake,
Let CONRAD'S pow'rful hand direct it's helm,
His rightful sceptre wield, and SALADIN o'erwhelm!'

"As thus, with furious mien, the Gallic Prince
His wrath proclaim'd, the hall with murmurs rung,
And every Chieftain, eager to evince
The indignation which his bosom stung,
Drew forth his sword, and from the table sprung.
GODFREY, THURINGIA, bold Ferrara's Duke,
ERMENGARD, HAROLD, and VERVONI young,
Rush'd emulous the boaster to rebuke,
While with discordant cries the echoing chamber shook.

"Nor seem'd his friends more backward for the fray:
With no less clamour round the King they stood,
Waving their brands in menacing array.
And doubtless soon a dire and fatal feud
Between the angry Peers must have ensued,
Had I not stept between each adverse band,
And, while I loudly check'd their transports rude,
And sought attention with an outstretch'd hand,
Their senseless fury thus implor'd them to command.

"'Of those who arms assum'd for Judah's sake,
None than myself more truly can lament
That private strife the public weal should shake.
Was it, illustrious Peers!  with this intent
We took the Cross and here our travel bent?
Shall those, who prompted by religion's call
From thrones and princely ease themselves have rent,
Heedless of honour, in disgraceful brawl
Thus without cause engage, and thus ignobly fall?

"'Then may indeed our vanquish'd foe exult,
Again his banner on these walls erect,
And unimpeach'd our Europe's pow'r insult.
Ah let not thus our cherish'd hopes be wreck'd!
Your calmer judgments will your views direct
To purposes more worthy of applause:
And royal PHILIP will perchance reflect,
How far becomes his dignity the cause,
In which his sword yet stain'd with Pagan blood he draws.

"'Had he with coolness pleas'd his claims to state,
Ere this his fancied griefs had been dispell'd,
And ne'er had grown this turbulent debate.
No portion of his ransom I've withheld,
Nor has my breast with fancied triumphs swell'd,
That Acre's fall is due to me alone.
Our common efforts ye have all beheld;
Half of the ransom let him call his own,
And with our English flag be Gallia's banners shewn.'

"'Methinks,' cried SUABIA, 'this proposal fair
By royal PHILIP should not be refus'd:
Both well deserve, and both the meed should share.
And if, by passion's sudden heat abus'd,
The Gallic King LUSIGNAN has misus'd,
Let him with courtesy redeem the wrong;
Lest deep remembrance of his fame traduc'd,
By secret brooding grown to rancour strong,
Should lead to graver ills, and Judah's woes prolong.'

"The watchful Peers his prudent sentence pleas'd,
And, as their swords they sheath'd, on either side,
Their sudden indignation seem'd appeas'd:
But PHILIP vainly sought his rage to hide,
And thus, while flash'd his scowling eye, replied.
'Since these illustrious Chiefs have deem'd it fair
That RICHARD should my hard-earn'd spoils divide,
Let him my glory and my conquest share,
Let him, to sooth his pride, my rightful laurels wear.

"'But now, this condescension to requite,
With confidence well-grounded I demand,
Not as a boon, but as my Sov'reign right,
Of the Crusading host the chief command.
For who my high pretensions shall withstand?
Who of ye all to Palestine has brought
So vast a force, so disciplin'd a band?
Who of ye all such deeds of worth has wrought,
Or who so well the foe to feel our pow'r has taught?'

"He said.  Throughout a new confusion spread,
And indignation sat on ev'ry brow,
When young VERVONI, who the Pisans led,
Aloud exclaim'd:  'Some other titles shew,
Ere thy pretensions futile we allow!
Think'st thou the Chiefs, who here assembled meet,
To arrogance like thine will tamely bow?
Of hop'st thou, Prince!  that humbly at thy feet,
Like vassals they will crouch, thy favour to intreat?

"'No!  when we chuse the leader of our host,
Let sterling merit our decision guide,
And not an empty and vain-glorious boast.
Let sound experience o'er our votes preside,
Let truth prevail, and gratitude decide.
England's brave Monarch has alone a claim
To lead our bands:  in perils often tried,
Deeds of transcendent worth have stamp'd his name,
And vict'ry grac'd his brows with wreaths of deathless fame.

"Not otherwise than when a master's hand
From the loud organ draws his leading sound,
Obedient follows his responsive band,
And, as he winds his rich harmonious round,
The list'ning soul in extacy is bound:
So, when his fervid thoughts VERVONI spoke,
A kindling ardour seem'd to spread around;
In ev'ry breast an impulse new awoke,
And consentaneous shouts throughout th' assembly broke.

"Soon as the burst of acclamation ceas'd,
And thro' the hall the loud exulting strain
Of gen'ral approbation was appeas'd,
The Gallic King, unable to contain
The strong emotions of his fierce disdain,
Thus with indignant mien the Peers address'd!
'Too great to bow, too noble to complain,
I wish not long your patience to arrest;
My fix'd resolve may soon and briefly be express'd.

"'Princes!  what now has pass'd has fully prov'd
The servile motives which your counsels mark:
The flimsy veil which cloak'd them is remov'd,
And now they shew perfidious, mean and dark.
Attend, and PHILIP'S purpose firm remark.
He leaves you to enjoy your worthy choice:
For better climes he hastens to embark,
And feels his breast, as if redeem'd, rejoice
That his renown no more depends upon your voice.'

"Thus, as with wrath his panting bosom burn'd,
The Gallic Monarch spoke, and tow'rds the door,
Awaiting no reply, he proudly turn'd.
But, ere he reach'd it, anxious to restore
Our interrupted union, and once more
To calm his fury and our breach to close,
I cried, 'Your passage from Judaea's shore,
Forgive me, Royal Sir!  if I oppose,
And urge you, to unite against our common foes.

"'Let not th' impression of a hasty phrase,
The warm and partial tribute of a friend,
Perhaps too rashly paid, your vengeance raise;
Nor, if a sudden violence offend,
To our great cause it's dire effects extend.
Recal the moment, when, at Vergelay,
We swore these holy regions to defend,
To vindicate this land from lawless sway,
And for religion's sake our banners to display.

"'To this engagement, register'd above,
My faithful spirit is obedient still,
And seeks no other object, than to prove
How well my actions may my oath fulfil.
Conscious of thy deserts and martial skill,
To own thy pow'r supreme prepar'd I stand,
And like the rest, obedient to thy will,
T' exalt the glories of thy high command,
Confirm the Christian hopes, and save this injur'd land.'

"Thus earnestly I spoke.  The King awhile
My countenance with feelings mark'd survey'd;
Then, as across his visage stern a smile
Of mingled scorn and indignation play'd,
Which too distinctly his revenge betray'd,
With haughty and repulsive tone replied.
'Think not my settled purpose to evade:
Vainly you strive malignity to hide,
And vain your weak attempt my future plans to guide.

"'My firm resolve admits not of reply.
From Acre's port and this perfidious coast,
Soon as to-morrow's sun shall gild the sky,
Tow'rds France shall sail my ill-requited host.
Yet, still observant when insulted most,
With twice five thousand troops I OTHO leave,
On whom your trust may safely be repos'd.
This as the sum of my intent receive:
For nought my destin'd course can alter or reprieve.'

"'PHILIP!'  I answer'd, 'since the public good
Than private int'rest less affects thy mind,
By me no more thy will shall be withstood.
But let this last request acceptance find.
Before high Heav'n again thy conscience bind,
Not to attempt by force or fraud to gain,
In contravention of the league we sign'd,
My realm of England, or the wide domain
Which in thy native France dependent I retain.'

"As thus I urg'd him, starting and aghast
He wildly ey'd me, while as if of shame
O'er his pale cheek a deep suffusion pass'd;
Then quickly cried, 'Debaser of my fame!
To Heav'n and man I thus my oath proclaim!
If I in ought with England's foes combine,
If to affect thy kingdom's weal I aim,
Or 'gainst thy int'rests ought of wrong design,
May Heav'n's eternal curse and infamy be mine!

"While from his lips the imprecation pass'd,
Methought his limbs with trepidation shook,
And earnestly across the void he cast
With haggard glance an agitated look;
The sudden blush it's seat usurp'd forsook,
And madd'ning phrenzy seem'd to rack his soul.
As from LUSIGNAN'S hall his way he took,
O'er night's dark veil a gleam sulphureous stole,
And on our left we heard the sullen thunder roll:

"And ever and anon a fearful shriek,
As if from suff'rance wrung, thro' the thick air
With energy which rent the soul would break;
And forth would burst sad accents of despair,
Whose thrilling tones the boldest hearts might scare,
Might freeze the blood, and valour's impulse quell.
Imagination, piercing thro' the glare,
Form'd images of fiends and d&aelig;mons fell,
Hov'ring amid the gloom, and scatt'ring many a spell.

"Thus horribly, 'midst terror and dismay,
Pass'd the portentous and appalling night.
Soon as the cloud dispersing orb of day,
Fresh from the waves, o'er craggy Turo's height
Shot on our camp his coruscation bright,
On board his fleet, drawn up in order due,
The Gallic King embark'd with many a knight.
Calm was the ocean, fav'ring breezes blew,
And soon to Judah's coast they bad a last adieu.

"Still as, their course pursuing, o'er the main
Silent and sad we cast our wistful eyes,
Our deep regret unable to restrain,
Fortune, which oft the constant spirit tries,
And shades our prospects as they flatt'ring rise,
A new and unexpected ill had plann'd:
For CONRAD now threw off his base disguise,
And, leading from our camp his Tyrian band,
Bad them ascend his fleet which anchor'd on the strand.

"To the throng'd port our steps we quickly bent,
And earnestly implor'd the Chief to say,
Whence rose his grievance, and with what intent
He thus prepar'd to draw his force away.
'The wrongs of France,' he cried, 'forbid my stay:
From those who 'gainst my great ally conspire,
And with ingratitude his aid repay,
Honour, revenge, and gen'rous zeal require
That, ere he share their guilt, MONTFERRAT should retire.

"'Nor have you injur'd less my lawful claim.
Judaea's sceptre, which, when Sybill died,
To me in right of ISABELLA came,
By your unjust decree has been denied.
Tho' you may stoop to sooth LUSIGNAN'S pride,
Such servile baseness is to me unknown,
Nor shall your will our contest high decide.
Ne'er shall my standard on these coasts be shewn,
Till in imperial pomp it decorate my throne!'

"As thus his treasons frontless he avow'd
And dar'd our vengeance, thro' our host arose
Indignant shouts and exclamations loud:
And now they rush'd his passage to oppose,
When, earnest the unworthy strife to close,
I thus address'd them:  'An insidious friend,
When once reveal'd, 'tis fortunate to lose,
Lest, while on specious seemings we depend,
In disappointment sore our best designs may end.

"'Attempt not then MONTFERRAT to detain:
Allow the recreant Chieftain to depart,
Stain'd by his crimes, and mark'd with your disdain.
Deep in his false and irreligious heart
Upbraiding conscience will infix her dart:
While from her influence vainly he shall fly,
You, unaffected by his trait'rous art,
With duty and religion's call comply,
And on the aid of Heav'n with confidence rely.

"The Chiefs, obedient to my word, withdrew,
And left the Prince, insensible to fame,
His course from Acre's harbour to pursue,
Cloath'd with dishonour, stigmatiz'd with blame,
And foully branded with eternal shame.
Meantime our camp we hastily regain'd,
And, by a herald, forthwith sent to claim
From SALADIN the Cross our swords obtain'd,
The ransom, and the troops who pris'ners yet remain'd.

"But here, still victims to the arts of Hell,
Fresh disappointment were we doom'd to meet.
With what had lately pass'd acquainted well,
The King refus'd our compact to complete.
'Let Europe's bands from Palestine retreat,'
He cried:  'tho' now their boastful ensigns wave,
Shortly shall end their triumphs in defeat.
Let them beware how Asia's power they brave,
And by obedience prompt their host from vengeance save.'

"Dissembling thus his purposes unsound,
He bad our herald back his steps direct.
But his intention speedily we found.
For, anxious all his forces to collect,
T' impede our course, and Solyma protect,
Where all his booty and his wealth were plac'd,
And fearful lest his progress might be check'd,
From Mahumeria he decamp'd in haste,
And, crossing Belus' stream, his route tow'rds Jaffa trac'd.

"As now on me devolv'd the sacred trust
Our force confed'rate 'gainst the foe to lead,
What best became our int'rests I discuss'd,
And, by the council of our Chiefs, decreed
Without delay from Acre to proceed.
For now my troops of nought but conquest dream'd:
Panting for fame, and deck'd with glory's meed,
While still they gaz'd on Acre's towers redeem'd,
Themselves in Judah's cause resistless they esteem'd.

"And well their numbers and their martial skill
Such fervent expectations might excite,
And in their bosoms confidence instil,
Tho' robb'd of PHILIP'S and MONTFERRAT'S might.
My hardy Englishmen, with spirits light,
And mindful of their ancestors renown'd,
I order'd forth, and station'd on the right,
And bad them, when the trumpet's note should sound,
To lead our march and still in danger's front be found.

"To keep the fortress which our recent toils
From Asia's Sov'reign valiantly had gain'd,
And guard th' unransom'd captives and our spoils,
LUSIGNAN and THURINGIA's Lord remain'd.
There my lov'd Queen fain would I have detain'd:
But, hanging on me with a winning grace,
So tenderly of parting she complain'd,
That I permitted her with me to trace
The rugged path of war, and share in glory's race.

"First in the ranks the Cypriot Prince appear'd:
Array'd in arms of proof and cuirass steel'd,
His mace he brandish'd and his banner rear'd.
Nor less his daughter grac'd the martial field:
Like Grecian Pallas arm'd, she grasp'd a shield;
A jav'lin light she pois'd; her brow so fair
A casque, surcharg'd with snow-white plumes, conceal'd;
While, o'er her polish'd neck, her auburn hair
Descended low and wav'd luxuriant in the air.

"As with her matchless grace and beauty charm'd
Our warriors gaz'd, I ask'd the blushing maid
Why thus in steel her tender limbs she arm'd.
'While Europe's Chiefs are martially array'd,'
Smiling she cried, 'I bring my puissant aid,
And 'gainst the Pagans league my peerless might.'
Then, taking BERENGARIA'S hand, she said,
'In her defence I dare the per'lous fight,
And proudly stile myself her Champion and her Knight.'

"As thus she spoke, throughout our legions ran
Approving murmurs.  By my Queen embrac'd
She join'd her side, and we our march began.
Along the sea-girt shore our way we trac'd,
Where craggy rocks, in wild disorder plac'd,
Frown'd o'er the deep and mock'd the raging tide.
Thro' Belus' clear and rapid stream we pass'd,
Whose wond'rous sands to Venice first supplied
Her mirrors fam'd, and spread her matchless fabrics wide.

"Then Zabulon, no more renown'd, we saw,
And Caiphas, distinguish'd by the name
Of him who once pronounc'd the Jewish law.
We left them both, and to Mount Carmel came,
Where erst the blest ELIJAH stamp'd with shame
The prophets who their BAAL foul ador'd:
There he invok'd from Heav'n th' avenging flame,
O'erthrew their fanes, destroy'd their rites abhorr'd,
And to their King abash'd proclaim'd th' Almighty Lord.

"Next Ador's sea-girt ramparts caught our sight,
Which, when the sons of holy Israel first
The valiant JOSHUA led, he gain'd in fight.
Fall'n was it's glory now, it's tow'rs revers'd,
It's temples gone, it's multitudes dispers'd.
Then Caesarea's ramparts we survey'd,
Where, when with flatt'ry base and zeal accurs'd,
Honours divine to HEROD fierce were paid,
The bolt of Heaven in dust the impious tyrant laid.

"But tho' thus far our progress we impell'd,
Not unmolested was our suff'ring host.
In ev'ry quarter we the foe beheld,
Now on the mountain's brow in order clos'd,
Now, taking in the close defiles their post,
Or lurking 'mid the woods in ambuscade:
While we, to risk on ev'ry hand expos'd,
Our vent'rous march with toil and peril made,
By open force assail'd, by stratagems betray'd.

"Along the shore, which trended on our right,
We deem'd it most secure our way to keep.
Yet vain our efforts.  Still by day and night,
From the recesses of the craggy steep
Which rose around us, with incursive sweep
Our watchful and insidious foes would burst,
Or thro' th' entangled brakes would silent creep,
Where they, unseen, with destination curs'd
Amidst our crouded bands their fatal shafts dispers'd.

"For tho', when coping in an equal field,
We well might hope the 'vantage to obtain,
Yet from their force, in covert thus conceal'd,
And unremittingly employ'd, in vain
Or shelter or defence we sought to gain.
For all the districts far around they knew,
Where best their order'd legions might remain,
Where they might meet our columns, where pursue,
And where secure from harm might lurk their vagrant crew.

"But chiefly, from Arabia's desert brought,
The wild Bedouins on their coursers fleet
Destruction on our host and terror wrought:
For rapidly our progress they would meet,
Launce their long darts, and hastily retreat.
Not otherwise than when a buzzing fly,
Often repuls'd, his trespass will repeat,
Unwearied still his circling course will ply,
And to infix his sting unceasingly will try.

"Thus, harrass'd by the foe, of rest depriv'd,
And weaken'd by fatigue and heat, my band
To Caesarea's farther bounds arriv'd.
Rude was the country's face:  on either hand
A range of barren hills was seen to stand,
Skirting a wide uncultivated plain;
While shelving on the right appear'd the strand,
Narrow and rough, o'er which the foaming main,
When rag'd the western wind, oft spread it's furious reign.

"Along the eastern lofty range was spread
The Saracenic force:  their banners high
Wav'd num'rous in the air, while loud and dread
In fearful chorus rose their boastful cry.
Array'd they stood our progress to defy,
Which thro' the vale thus thickly guarded lay.
We saw their purpose, and resolv'd to try
Across the narrow strand to force our way,
Ere passing o'er the hills our progress they might stay.

"Approaching night befriended our design.
Soon as her shadows o'er the world were cast,
Beneath the western rocks I led my line.
There silently along the shore we pass'd,
And hop'd, as onward we proceeded fast,
To reach Capharnaum, and our toils to close.
When, suddenly, my trusty spies aghast
And breathless came, announcing that our foes
In long array advanc'd our travel to oppose.

"Of all the danger we should run aware
If they to cross the mountains should prevail,
I instant orders issued, to prepare
Forthwith the heights precipitous to scale.
My gallant comrades, eager to assail
Their cruel foe, and negligent of pain,
Obey'd my word.  Nor arms, nor weighty mail,
Nor the steep crags their ardour could restrain.
Surmounting all they strove the summit to attain.

"Safely they gain'd the hazardous ascent,
As first the sun disclos'd his dawning light,
And o'er high Heav'n his ray reviving sent.
Far stretching o'er the plain, in armour bright,
And proud display, appear'd the Pagan might.
Straight 'gan our order'd host their swords unsheath:
Eager for fame, and ardent for the fight,
They stood embattled, 'till the trumpet's breath
Should sound the bloody blast to victory or to death.

