"The foe in sight, 'twas now my task to plan
The order of attack.  The Templars bold
Form'd with ST. JOHN'S illustrious Knights our van.
Renown'd DRUELL and brave D'AVESNES I told
My Poitevin and Norman flags t' unfold,
And pointedly to each his charge assign'd.
The English host my standard wide unroll'd;
With them the Pisans, French, and Austrians join'd,
And with confed'rate ranks our battle's force combin'd.

"Soon as I saw our varied banners wave,
I bad the soul-inspiring trumpet sound,
And to commence the march my order gave.
Across the plain which the rude mountain crown'd,
In solemn state their course our warriors wound,
With step assur'd and countenance serene.
Meantime, along the vale and hills around,
The Pagan forces far dispers'd were seen,
Their busy Chiefs employ'd their legions to convene.

"Before the foe surpriz'd their front could change,
And, ere acquainted with our new intent,
To meet our plans their pow'rs they could arrange,
To charge them boldly down the steep descent
Our gen'rous host their rapid footsteps bent.
As in the Alps, when wintry tempests blanch
The icy fields, and forcibly is rent
From some lone crag the menacing Avlanche,
Thund'ring it seeks the plain destruction wide to launch:

"So rush'd our dauntless heroes from the height,
And 'mid the countless legions of the foe
Bore their tremendous and resistless might.
Still does my heart with admiration glow,
When mem'ry, pleas'd their deeds of worth to shew,
Recals th' atchievements of our valiant host,
The bloody torrents which they caus'd to flow,
Their matchless prowess, their exulting boast,
Mix'd with the fearful shrieks of many a parting ghost.

"First on their right, spurring their coursers fleet,
The Hospitallers bold, with rested spear,
Rush'd o'er the field the Saracens to meet.
Them led ERMENGARAD and the brave GARNIER,
While stout DES CARRES, and many a war-tried Peer,
In gallant rivalship their force display'd.
Where'er they join'd their rude attack to bear,
Their way o'er mingled heaps of dead they made,
And Syria's noblest sons a common fate obey'd.

"Nor, with less certain vengeance, on their left,
Were Nubia's sable crew of life and fame
By BIDDESFORD and his Templar Knights bereft.
Where'er like light'ning terrible they came,
Their stroke impetuous and unerring aim
With devastation seem'd and ruin fraught.
Vainly the foe invok'd their Prophet's name:
Ere yet complete the pray'r, their spirits sought
The grosly-pictur'd bliss which Mahomet had taught.

"While thus on either wing our force prevail'd,
With equal zeal, but less assur'd success,
Our line the centre of the foe assail'd.
How shall I tell the valour and address,
With which each Chieftain forward sought to press,
And break the phalanx which oppos'd his way?
Admiring worlds their prowess might confess,
And Heav'n with bliss eternal will repay
The Champions of the Cross who perish'd on that day.

"Against th' Egyptian armament DE DREUX
Led on the French, who on Judaea's strand
Were left the holy warfare to pursue.
With them united march'd BURGUNDIA'S band,
Who with DE VESCY had their movements plann'd,
And left to him the guidance of the war.
His merits justified his high command;
For his atchievements fame had blazon'd far,
And honour grac'd his front with many a deep-drawn scar.

"Awhile the tawny and presumptuous foes,
In numbers confident, their post maintain'd,
And Europe's vet'ran Chieftains dared oppose.
But quickly were they to retire constrain'd:
For soon DE VESCY an advantage gain'd
Where least his charge they fear'd, and, while DE DREUX,
Barring all succour, in array remain'd,
The bold Burgundians ceas'd not to pursue,
And chas'd them o'er the plain in either army's view.

"My English warriors LEICESTER's Earl led on,
Where strong embattled Persia's host he view'd,
Whose varied arms with gold and jewels shone:
Them he encounter'd with aggression rude.
Full hardily his onset they withstood,
For well they knew their faulchions keen to wield;
And oft the dubious contest was renew'd.
At length, to pow'r superior forc'd to yield,
With dignified retreat they left the bloody field.

"While glory's impulse fill'd his youthful breast,
VERVONI with MELCALEZ' host engag'd.
Onward, as danger seem'd to court, he press'd,
And, where the battle's fury chiefly rag'd,
He urg'd his course with vengeance unassuag'd.
Not long in firm array the foe remain'd:
As unappall'd the conflict dire they wag'd,
The well-fought field Arabian blood distain'd,
And with ascendance dire despair and horror reign'd.

"Not far remote, amid the hostile band
The bold DRUELL his wonders wrought around,
'Till by the stern KAHADIM'S pow'rful hand
He fell, alike in life and death renown'd,
But soon his shade a fit avenger found:
LESTANG burst thro' the intervening rank,
And struck the Pagan lifeless to the ground.
His arms resounded as to earth he sank,
And deep his purple gore the thirsty herbage drank.

"With the fierce Turcomans the Norman might
Awhile disputed the far-crimson'd plain,
'Till fortune turn'd the balance of the fight.
Against BELLEGEMIN the brave D'AVESNES
His oft-tried faulchion now employ'd in vain:
To Heav'n his pure and gen'rous spirit flew.
While friendship here it's influence shall retain,
My heart his dear remembrance shall renew,
Just to his high desert, to all his virtues true.

"Soon as their leader fell, his trembling host,
Impress'd with wild alarm and sudden dread,
As if with him their only hope were lost,
Shrank from the perils which around them spread,
And o'er the valley in confusion fled.
Them vainly VERNON, DE LA ROCHE, ST. PAUL,
Besought to turn:  to fame and honour dead,
No more they own'd the animating call,
Tho' doom'd disgrac'd to live, or stigmatiz'd to fall.

"When SALADIN, who from a neighb'ring height
With anxious eye survey'd the field, perceiv'd
Their base desertion and opprobrious flight,
His anxious bosom, from despair repriev'd,
With hopes of new success and conquest heav'd.
He bad MIRALIS brave, his princely heir,
Ere yet the task of carnage were atchiev'd,
To fierce BELLEGEMIN his succour bear,
His glorious toil partake, his bloody laurels share.

"Prompt to obey the youthful Chieftain flew.
FALKEDIN join'd his legions to arouse,
And summon them the Christians to pursue.
He from the Sultan's daughter, his fair spouse,
When fresh their loves and recent yet their vows,
Himself in search of glory lately tore:
Ne'er to revisit his paternal house,
His bride, his infant son to see no more,
But doom'd a corse to lie on Judah's distant shore.

"From the surmounting eminence they rush'd,
And soon with energetic speed they came,
To where the Turcomans, with victory flush'd,
The Normans chas'd, who, negligent of fame,
Disgrac'd the old distinction of their name.
Their swift pursuit the royal Chieftains join'd;
And now, like wither'd reeds before the flame,
The dastards sank beneath their force combin'd,
And to remorseless fate their wretched souls resign'd.

"His steed FALKEDIN urg'd amid the croud,
And with his stroke crush'd many a nodding crest,
And many a Christian Chief before him bow'd.
His spear of toughest ash he fix'd in rest,
And with dread impulse thro' their squadrons press'd;
Not otherwise than when an eastern blast
Sweeps o'er the fields by bounteous nature bless'd,
The ruin'd peasants, trembling and aghast,
Trace in their blacken'd corn where late the meteor pass'd.

"As, while his sheep just issuing from the fold
Crop the still dewy grass, some shepherd swain
Perceives a rav'ning wolf with hunger bold
Seize on his fleecy care, and the green plain,
Where erst they safely stray'd, with blood distain,
His crook he seizes, and with vengeful hand
Advances the invader to restrain:
So VERNON, when FALKEDIN urg'd his band,
Rush'd with intrepid heart his fury to withstand.

"He met the youthful Prince in full career,
And on his shield, emboss'd and polish'd high,
With vig'rous onset drove his quiv'ring spear:
As thro' each fold he made the weapon fly,
Grazing it pass'd along his sinewy thigh.
Th' indignant Chief, with no less fell intent,
His lance on VERNON'S cuirass aim'd t' apply;
But striking on the temper'd steel it bent,
And, glancing off, his scarf with gold embroider'd rent.

"Soon as the impulse of their steeds they check'd,
As if with one consent each vengeful Knight
Turn'd 'gainst his foe his fury to direct.
More sure was now the issue of their fight.
Impetuous VERNON, summoning his might,
Transfix'd FALKEDIN'S breast, and to the ground
Headlong impell'd him.  In eternal night
His dark eyes clos'd, and from his gaping wound
Flow'd in a purple stream his gen'rous blood around.

"MIRALIS saw him fall:  his courser proud
He spurr'd impatient 'gainst the Christian Chief,
And thus, inflam'd with rage, exclaim'd aloud.
'Whoe'er thou art, thy triumph shall be brief!
Not surer falls to earth th' autumnal leaf,
Than thou the forfeit of thy life shall yield,
And satisfy my vengeance and my grief!'
With that he struck so stoutly on his shield,
That with the sudden shock the Norman leader reel'd.

"Rous'd from the torpor which his sense entranc'd,
VERNON with well-pois'd lance his foe defied,
And tow'rds him inauspiciously advanc'd:
For Egypt's Prince so well his beam applied,
That deep it enter'd in his mailed side,
And roughly drove him wounded to the plain;
While, as he fell, his weapon swerving wide
MIRALIS' courser struck and pierc'd his brain.
Madly he plung'd awhile, then sank convuls'd with pain.

"Himself the youthful Prince soon disengag'd,
And, unaffected by his fall, arose,
And rush'd on VERNON, doubly now enrag'd.
But vainly sought he with the Chief to close;
For brave ST. WALERIC, who amid the foes
That day had prov'd the terror of his arm,
On his broad shield receiv'd his weighty blows.
Perceiving VERNON'S risk, in friendship warm
He flew across the field to ward th' impending harm.

"Now rag'd the perilous fight, when DE LA ROCHE
And stout ST. PAUL, who long'd their zeal to prove,
Thro' the disbanded ranks were seen t' approach.
ST. WALERIC urg'd them by their antient love
His bleeding friend from danger to remove,
And safely bear him to some sapient leech.
'While thus the precious moments you improve,'
He cried, 'no foe your efforts shall impeach,
Nor shall this Pagan's sword my suff'ring comrade reach.'

"He said.  The willing Chiefs his word obey'd:
They rais'd the fainting warrior from the field,
And him with care upon the buckler laid,
Which late he knew so potently to wield.
Meantime, ST. WALERIC all his powers reveal'd;
For 'gainst him now a host of foes conspir'd,
And on his helm with vengeful fury peal'd,
To aid their Monarch's son with ardour fir'd:
He dar'd their onset fierce, nor from their wrath retir'd.

"While doubtful seem'd the conflict to remain,
And while ST. PAUL, who now their purpose view'd,
Advanc'd in haste ST. WALERIC to sustain,
And thro' th' Egyptian host his passage hew'd,
The Persian SAFADIN his charge renew'd:
For stern BELLEGEMIN the Norman band,
Now scatter'd o'er the plain, no more pursued,
But, flying to support him, gave command
Fortune again to try, and LEICESTER to withstand.

"As when with jav'lins arm'd and spears of proof
A lordly lion Nubia's sons surround,
Urging their eager hounds, he stands aloof,
And makes the forest with his roar resound;
If, while the thickets echo far around,
His savage consort issues from the wood,
Against their foes they turn with deadly bound;
Jointly they charge, and with encounter rude
Rage 'mid the hostile band and dye the plain with blood:

"So, when aloud the Turcomanian Prince
With potent voice proclaim'd his high behest,
The Persians sought their ardour to evince,
And SAFADIN, again his crimson'd crest
Erecting high, against the English press'd.
His num'rous host, who our superior might
With dread and apprehension had confess'd,
Now re-inforc'd check'd their inglorious flight,
And fill'd with freshen'd hopes renew'd th' eventful fight.

"From either side arose a mingled cry,
Which now denoted joy, now grief bespoke,
And 'mid the clash of arms ascended high.
It reach'd MIRALIS, as with pow'rful stroke
He urg'd our host, and in his soul awoke
At once dismay and expectation new.
'Hark!'  he exclaim'd, 'our friends our aid invoke,
Fresh scenes of glory open to our view:
Let us obey the call, and victory's course pursue!'

"He said, and, vaulting on brave VERNON'S steed,
He left ST. WALERIC, raging now in vain,
And led his squadron on with vengeful speed.
Swift as the wind they spurr'd across the plain,
And on our English warriors rush'd amain,
Where seem'd their ranks in closest order pent:
While SALADIN, advantage still to gain,
A hardy band of wild Bedouins sent,
Who hov'ring on their flanks their bows unerring bent.

"Now with new fury rag'd the doubtful fight:
For life and fame the adverse armies fought.
Then gallant LEICESTER prov'd his vet'ran might:
The foremost Chieftains of the foe he sought,
And deeds of knightly hardihood he wrought.
Intrepid MORTIMER his worth display'd:
As if the stroke of fate he heeded nought,
Where'er the Pagans swarm'd his course he made,
And deeply with their blood was mark'd his trenchant blade.

"But tho' thus mindful of their old renown
With bleeding Saracens the field they strew'd,
Fortune appear'd on English zeal to frown.
In every quarter, as intent I view'd,
I saw that SALADIN his ranks renew'd,
With warriors fresh and eager for the fray.
Their quick succession and their onset rude
Compell'd our wearied legions to give way:
Backward they drew, but still preserv'd their firm array.

"I turn'd to HENRY, Count of fair Champaigne,
My much lov'd sister's son, and bad him haste
With his good troop our battle to sustain.
Quickly his host in order due he plac'd,
And 'cross the plain his rapid movement trac'd.
Meantime, while these their preparation made,
The Cypriot Prince his burnish'd helmet brac'd,
Caught his broad shield, aloft his mace display'd,
And vaulting on his steed with hurried accents said:

"'RICHARD!  to Heaven my fervent thanks arise,
Which now, to prove my late professions true,
A fit occasion to my zeal supplies!
How I esteem thee let my actions shew!
Perhaps for ever, gallant King!  adieu!'
He said.  Like light'ning bursting from a cloud,
Urging his courser fleet the hero flew,
To where BELLEGEMIN with menace proud
Against the Christian bands extermination vow'd.

"Still did my eyes pursue th' intrepid Chief,
As on his course he held, when, on my right,
A shriek was heard of horror and of grief.
Young CHARICLAEA, who beheld the sight
Which fill'd her feeling soul with wild affright,
Forgetful of herself, and urg'd by love,
Impell'd her palfrey, shook her jav'lin light,
And down the steep with madd'ning impulse drove,
Straight to the spot where now her Sire with Pagans strove.

"'Oh save her!  save her!'  cried my weeping Queen,
Is there no valiant Knight, whose pow'rful arm
Will guard her from the Pagans' weapons keen,
And shield her beauties from impending harm?'
Instant unnumber'd Chiefs, with courage warm,
Proffer'd my Consort's terrors to dispel,
And aid the Princess 'mid the dread alarm:
But, rushing 'fore them all, the young BLONDEL
Impatiently exclaim'd, as at my feet he fell,

"'Oh Prince!  if e'er thy favour I possess'd,
Grant me the boon which now I humbly crave!
On me, on me, confer the sacred quest,
The glorious priv'lege, from the threat'ning grave
This paragon of female worth to save!
My kindling soul expands at beauty's call!
And, tho' no banner here I proudly wave,
In her defence no perils can appal!
Let her but live, and I with honour crown'd shall fall!'

"'BLONDEL!'  I cried, 'thy passing worth I know:
Be thine the task to guard the peerless maid,
And bear her safely from th' infuriate foe.
GOD and ST. GEORGE protect my friend!' &mdash; I said:
Nor long th' impassion'd youth his course delay'd,
But o'er th' ensanguin'd field his progress bent,
Where unmatch'd valour LEICESTER still display'd,
And where BELLEGEMIN, with fell intent,
Against our straighten'd host his fresh detachments sent.

"Him the undaunted Cypriot Prince perceiv'd,
Hot with repeated toil, with blood distain'd,
While 'mid the carnage by his arm atchiev'd,
Like Thracian Mars by terror led he reign'd.
'Thou, who too long with vengeance unrestrain'd
Hast urg'd thy impious warfare,' ISAAC cried,
Prepare to yield the 'vantage thou hast gain'd!
Heav'n, which thy tongue blaspheming has defied,
Will nerve my hand it's cause illustrious to decide!'

"Thus spoke the Chief.  Awaiting no reply,
Against the Pagan boldly he advanc'd,
His mace tremendous brandishing on high.
Across his plumed helm the weapon glanc'd,
But with such force, that stagg'ring and entranc'd
His seat the Turcoman had nearly lost:
Before his eyes diverging spectres danc'd,
And, as his visual nerve they wildly cross'd,
Flashes of vivid fire throughout the gloom were toss'd.

"The Cypriot Chieftain stopt his courser fleet,
And, wheeling round, prepar'd with surer aim
His foe, half vanquish'd deem'd, again to meet.
But him, still mindful of his ancient fame,
And now by great revenge inflam'd and shame,
His guardian genius shielded from the stroke:
For, as the Prince impetuous onward came,
Breathing a prayer his succour to invoke
The Pagan rais'd his shield, which with the impulse broke.

"With rowels sharp he urg'd his courser's flank,
And with loud cry impell'd him 'cross the plain,
Which now of mingled slaughter deeply drank,
Advantage for his next attack t' obtain.
Then in it's rest fixing his spear again,
Soon as his fitting distance he discern'd,
His speed he check'd, and with a dext'rous rein
Back on his following foe his steed he turn'd,
While with vindictive ire his soul tumultuous burn'd.

"The Cypriot Prince observ'd his coming foe,
And, nothing dreading his encounter rude,
Aim'd at his head a fulminating blow.
But vainly he the Pagan's lance withstood:
It pierc'd his manly breast; th' arterial blood
Gush'd like a fountain from the ghastly wound;
And far extended the encrimson'd flood,
As the expiring hero press'd the ground,
Glorious in death, as erst for knightly deeds renown'd.

"The Saracen his broken spear cast by,
And grimly smil'd the fallen Chief to view,
When tow'rds the spot, with a loud piercing cry
And frantic mien, fair CHARICLAEA drew.
Loose in the wind her auburn tresses flew,
With fire her eye-balls glanc'd, her cheeks were dy'd
With tints more lustrous than the rose's hue,
And tears of rage burst forth, as she espied
Her much lov'd father's breast stain'd with the bloody tide.

"Like NIOBE, upon his mangled corse,
With sorrow petrified, she gaz'd aghast,
Then instantly, with more than female force,
Against BELLEGEMIN her dart she cast.
With aim unerring the swift weapon pass'd,
And in his brawny arm the barbed hook,
Tearing the veins and quivering flesh, stuck fast.
Ill did the Chief this salutation brook:
His frame with madd'ning rage and indignation shook.

"Urging his charger, with uplifted blade
To strike the damsel furiously he sought,
When, on his shield, extended o'er the maid,
His weighty blow BLONDEL observant caught.
'Pagan!  if warlike fame thou heedest ought,'
The gallant youth exclaim'd, 'thy wrath command;
From female foes no glory can be wrought:
But, if the proof thou dar'st, lo!  here I stand,
Prepar'd to meet the force of thy experienc'd hand.'

"'Stripling!'  rejoin'd the Chief, 'thy untried sword,
Oppos'd to skill and energy like mine,
But little chance of safety can afford:
'Twere best th' unequal contest to decline,
Ere my prov'd arm correct thy rash design.'
'Tis not for thee, I trust,' exclaim'd BLONDEL,
'The period of my labours to define:
Look to thyself, proud Pagan!  guard thee well,
And, if thou lov'st thy life, my firm attack repel!'

"He said.  As when, on Lybia's arid shore,
A tiger springs upon a tim'rous deer,
And the wide forest echoes with his roar,
If an imperial lion, prowling near,
The death-denouncing sound should chance to hear,
He rushes forth th' invader bold to meet;
The fight begins, their fangs each other tear,
While, trembling yet, and with uncertain feet,
The rescued victim flies to gain it's old retreat:

"With no less fatal and remorseless feud,
The rival Champions high their weapons wav'd,
And sturdily maintain'd the combat rude.
Deeply each helm and mail their swords engrav'd,
And bloody streams their hauberks widely lav'd.
Astonish'd at the puissance of his foe,
The Pagan loudly imprecating rav'd,
And oft renew'd his well-directed blow:
Nor was the Christian Chief to pour his vengeance slow.

"Uncertain seem'd the dread event to float:
For either was in arms instructed well;
And, tho' BELLEGEMIN more strongly smote,
And boasted greater pow'rs, yet young BLONDEL,
More active his encounter to repel,
Far better knew his trusty sword to wield,
And, as his foeman's pond'rous faulchion fell,
Had learn'd t' oppose his yet unblazon'd shield,
Where on the ringing orb with harmless stroke it peal'd.

"Long time their doubtful combat they had wag'd,
And many a hardy deed had been atchiev'd,
When the stern Pagan, doubly now enrag'd,
Collecting all his force his faulchion heav'd.
The blow BLONDEL upon his shield receiv'd,
And, ere the Saracen could raise his brand,
With puissant stroke his iron mail he cleav'd,
And sever'd from his sinewy arm the hand,
With which he erst was used his courser to command.

"He shriek'd with anguish, while his foaming steed,
Who now no longer felt the pow'rful rein,
By his loud cry alarm'd, with furious speed
Bore his unwilling master o'er the plain,
Fainting with loss of blood and mad with pain.
Close at his heels pursued the brave BLONDEL:
Nor follow'd he the Chieftain maim'd in vain,
For at his head he aim'd a blow so well,
That, bending from his seat, to earth the Pagan fell.

"Like some huge oak, uprooted by the wind,
As there outstretch'd he lifeless press'd the ground,
BLONDEL repair'd the Cyprian maid to find.
Her kneeling by her father's corse he found,
While on his bleeding breast and ghastly wound,
From her sad eyes distill'd a briny flood.
The zone which girt her waist she had unbound,
With which she strove to wipe away the blood,
Which, flowing now no more, congeal'd and mantling stood.

"Softly a few consoling words he spoke;
But, as he strove to cheer the weeping fair,
Fresh agony his tenderness awoke.
'Oh gen'rous youth!'  she cried, 'com'st thou to share
My madd'ning grief and exquisite despair?
If e'er compassion could thy spirit move,
Aid me my father's body hence to bear!
This last, dear consolation grant, to prove
My fervent, tho' alas!  my unavailing love!'

"The sympathizing youth, whose feeling heart
Not more of energy in fight display'd
Than when meek pity urg'd him aid t' impart,
With instant care the maiden's voice obey'd.
Her father's body on his shield he laid,
And, with the Princess on her palfrey plac'd,
From the red field his reliques he convey'd.
Soon as our line they reach'd, BLONDEL in haste
Bad her adieu, and back his course impetuous trac'd.

"For honour now with pow'r imperious call'd.
By stern BELLEGEMIN no longer fir'd,
The Saracens, confounded and appall'd,
Once more before our gallant host retir'd;
While these, by hopes of new success inspir'd,
Urg'd them amain, and wide confusion spread.
Now HENRY'S worth, now LEICESTER we admir'd,
As proudly ranging o'er the Pagan dead,
Like Leda's warlike sons they wav'd their faulchions dread.

"Not otherwise, when swell'd by melted snows
And wintry torrents, from it's parent source
Tow'rds ocean's shore a lordly river flows,
If there tempestuous billows meet it's course,
Tremendous is the strife:  with rival force
The adverse waves tumultuous warfare wage;
High mount their foaming heads; their bellowings hoarse
Sound thro' the deep; nought can their feud assuage,
No power avails to stem their over-whelming rage.

"Soon as imperial SALADIN beheld
The battle chang'd, and his late conq'ring band
Their course victorious to arrest compell'd,
To his remaining force he gave command
Forward to march the Christians to withstand.
Him on his charger mounted we survey'd:
His head a turban green, a spear his hand
Superbly grac'd; full royally array'd
He rode, while high in air his standard was display'd.

"But, ere the heights they could succeed to clear
Or reach the plain, their purpose I espied,
And to the knightly band, who crouded near
And watch'd my orders, loudly thus I cried:
'The time is come which must our fate decide!
Mark, on yon mountain's brow, the foe prepare
Fresh succour 'gainst our valiant troops to guide!
Behold their King himself their labour share,
The well-earn'd meed of fame from LEICESTER's brow to tear!

"'On instant action all our hopes depend:
The day may yet by energy be won!
Let those who love me on my steps attend!
Let English zeal and valour now be shewn,
And let our foes your matchless prowess own!
Here, brave BURGUNDIA!  with my Queen remain,
'Till, bless'd by Heav'n, and grac'd with high renown,
From conquest by our arms atchiev'd again,
Your joy sincere to share, I lead my gallant train.'

"I said.  My comrades straightway round me press'd,
And, emulous their ardour to display,
Wav'd their good swords and fix'd their spears in rest.
PEMBROKE, MAULEON, TANCARVILLE, GOURNAY,
GRANVILLE, DUBOIS, FITZ-GERALD and REGNIER,
And many a noble Peer of vet'ran might,
Combin'd to form my terrible array.
Onward I led them from the verdant height,
Across the plain to join the yet disorder'd fight.

"That day a charger of Arabian race
I rode, who, on his native mountains hoar,
Full oft the lion's rage had dar'd to face,
And a proud scar, pledge of his prowess, wore.
O'er the wide field, distain'd with mingled gore,
Me, to oppose the Prince of Asia bent,
With not inferior courage now he bore:
Where'er the Pagans stood most closely pent,
Thro' their dissever'd ranks a passage free he rent.

"But nor his vigour, nor the earnest hope
Which cheer'd me as we scour'd along the plain,
Avail'd:  for me with SALADIN to cope,
And end our strife, fate pleas'd not to ordain.
Nought could my daring warriors now restrain:
On ev'ry hand the Saracens dispers'd,
And, anxious from their King support to gain,
On his wide line with force tumultuous burst,
And far across the field his order'd march revers'd.

"Th' imperial Leader and his Satraps stern,
Who anxiously th' approaching ruin view'd,
Advanc'd in haste the flying bands to turn,
And, meeting them, with salutation rude
Their wild irruption sturdily withstood.
But less their menace and their fierce array
They fear'd, than those who closely still pursued;
Onward they rush'd, and with resistless sway
They forc'd on every side their desultory way.

"'Now, now,' I cried, 'while heav'n our cause befriends,
Be valour worthy of it's favour shewn!
Beneath our force the foe astounded bends!
Charge once again, and victory is our own!'
As when the grass by sturdy hind is mown,
Successive swarths beneath his sharp scythe yield,
So were the crouded Saracens o'erthrown:
Nought from our fury could their close ranks shield,
For England's worth prevail'd, and slaughter stain'd the field.

"At length, no longer able to sustain
Our firm attack and oft recurring might,
They fled on either hand across the plain.
There numbers fell:  while others o'er the height
Tried to escape, their speed increas'd by fright.
Our triumph now was full, when we survey'd
Their King himself borne in the common flight:
No more by fame or hope of glory sway'd,
He tow'rds Esdrelon's walls his rapid progress made.

"To chase the vanquish'd and far scatter'd crew,
I bad ERMENGARAD and his valiant band,
And BIDDESFORD with his knights, their track pursue.
Meantime, I caus'd the trumpets give command,
Since now no more the Pagans dar'd withstand
Our dread assault, their remnant weak to spare,
And with experienc'd and consoling hand,
With kind assistance and protecting care,
To all our wounded friends a prompt relief to bear.

"When these essential functions were perform'd,
Our fervent hearts to Heav'n's tribunal soar'd.
With gratitude impress'd, with feelings warm'd,
To the protecting and Eternal Lord
Our souls in pray'r and hymns of joy we pour'd.
Our warriors, kneeling on th' ensanguin'd ground,
The sov'reign Ruler of the world ador'd;
And, as on high the chorus swell'd around,
Immortal spirits heard, and sanctified the sound.

"Another mournful duty still remain'd.
D'AVESNES, DRUELL, and ISAAC, hapless Chief!
With solemn service and regret unfeign'd
We laid in earth.  Mute were our tongues with grief,
While, with sad state and ceremonial brief,
We paid our tribute to their worth endear'd,
And from our sorrow found in tears relief.
Of stones and turf high pil'd a mound we rear'd,
And waving over each his banner wide appear'd.

"These pious rites fulfill'd, I ardent flew
Again my BERENGARIA to behold.
Engag'd I found her with affection true
Her CHARICLAEA in her arms t' enfold:
With tender speech her suff'rings she consol'd,
And with mild reasoning and persuasion kind
Her frantic lamentations she controul'd.
Mov'd by the scene, my efforts I combin'd,
And sooth'd with gentle phrase her agitated mind.

"Soon as return'd our squadrons from the chase
Of Asia's Sov'reign and his host dispers'd,
Rejoic'd we heard the sum of his disgrace,
His blighted prospects, and his hopes revers'd.
While he, far driv'n, his wayward fortunes curs'd,
Our gallant warriors drain'd their goblets deep,
And, as they quaff'd, their day's exploits rehears'd,
'Till, satiated at length, in balmy sleep
Outstretch'd they lay, and dream'd of laurels yet to reap.

"A day we rested:  then our strenuous host
Their southern march with eagerness renew'd,
And, to the left now verging, from the coast
Tow'rds Japhia's hills their vig'rous course pursued.
As if from victory with new strength endued,
They struggled with the perilous ascent,
And travers'd the defiles abrupt and rude:
Nor, tho' beneath their pond'rous arms they bent,
Was heard throughout their ranks the voice of discontent.

"When to the summit we atchiev'd our way,
Unbounded nature burst upon our view,
Luxuriant, pompous, variable and gay:
Mountains far-spread with outlines bold and new,
High-nodding woods, enrich'd with ev'ry hue
That Heav'n in bounty prodigal bestow'd,
And ocean's vast expanse, whose waters blue
With op'ning day's sublime effulgence glow'd,
While glancing in it's beams full many a vessel rode.

"Beneath us, on the right, proud Arsur lay,
Extending far his promontory steep,
Wet with the surge, which in fantastic play
Beat on it's rugged front with murmurs deep.
Beyond it, Sharon with enchanting sweep
Was seen it's endless beauties to disclose,
It's lowing herds, it's widely-ranging sheep,
Each plant and flower which vegetation knows,
From the meek violet to it's own appropriate rose.

"Still thro' the vales the verdant forests bloom'd,
While o'er the hills was spread a mingling shade,
And tints more grave the rip'ning year assum'd.
To view their charms, Summer, coelestial maid,
In rosy wreath and stole of green array'd,
Check'd her career, and high her tresses shook,
As tow'rds brown Autumn, stretch'd beneath his glade,
She cast a fond and oft-reverted look,
And sigh'd, as with regret his beauties she forsook.

"In no less extacy our souls were bound,
While, with the view enamour'd and entranc'd,
We gaz'd on all the glorious scene around.
Unsated with delight we now advanc'd
To Jaffa, where amid the waves was lanc'd
The Prophet, who, when spoke th' Eternal Lord,
By contumacy his offence enhanc'd.
There our exhausted vigour we restor'd,
And Heav'n's protecting aid with fervency implor'd.

"The Pagan armies now the coast had left,
And all the regions which from Pharan lay
To Anti-Libanus, of aid bereft,
No longer own'd the Saracenic sway.
I bad my Queen in Jaffa's fortress stay,
Accompanied by CHARICLAEA fair,
While to the south I should direct my way,
Where Ascalon requir'd my present care,
To rear it's ruin'd walls, it's fortress to repair.

"Leaving bold PEMBROKE, to whose charge I gave
The town and neighb'ring districts to command,
With gallant GRANVILLE and CASTELLUN brave,
Again I march'd.  First, eastward from the strand,
To Ramula advanc'd my strenuous band,
Whose lofty towers the sacred fame recal
Of SAMUEL, who with consecrating hand
On Israel's throne plac'd disobedient SAUL,
Doom'd on Gilboa's hills by Heav'n's decree to fall.

"Then, by a southern course, the well-known brook
Which skirts the Terebynthian vale we pass'd,
Whence DAVID, then to arms a stranger, took
The stones which 'gainst GOLIATH huge he cast,
When Judah's legions, trembling and aghast,
Heard the fierce champion all their host deride,
And shrank astounded from his puissance vast:
As their experienc'd Chieftains he defied,
Struck by a beardless youth the proud blasphemer died.

"Bethsames next our progress reach'd, where erst
Her unbelieving and presumptuous crew
With strange and unknown chastisements were curs'd,
For that the veil mysterious they withdrew,
And dar'd with eyes prophane the Ark to view.
Proceeding on, to Thamna's bound we came,
Where th' aenigmatic Lion SAMPSON slew,
And where, with wide exterminating flame,
Philistia's sons he made to tremble at his name.

"Advancing, soon Accaron's tow'rs were seen:
There whilom BEELZEBUB his sway maintain'd,
His impious worship and his rites obscene.
Not far remote Azotus' heights we gain'd,
Where DAGON'S fane once stood with blood distain'd,
Who there, so potent prov'd the pow'rs of hell,
With monstrous form in state majestic reign'd:
But Heav'n prevail'd the Daemon proud to quell;
Before the Ark of GOD the headless Idol fell.

"Arriv'd at Ascalon, her boasted tow'rs
Dismantled and to ruin brought we found:
For, when the Saracens led off their pow'rs,
Her high and stately walls with ramparts crown'd
And princely fanes they levell'd with the ground,
Revenging thus their signaliz'd defeat.
I bad my host the ruins clear around;
And, when from Jaffa's port arriv'd my fleet,
With force combin'd we wrought the fortress to complete.

"From Austria's and Burgundia's bands alone
Murmurs would sometimes break of discontent;
Less of effective zeal by them was shewn,
And less of vig'rous aid by them was lent.
Musing on this, one eve I sought my tent,
As the declining sun illum'd the west.
There, by fatigue o'ercome, by watchings spent,
My simple couch I not unwilling press'd,
Implor'd th' inspiring grace of Heav'n, and sank to rest.

"When lo!  a mystic vision of the night,
As wrapt in sleep I lay, came o'er my soul.
Methought, amid the gloom, a glancing light
With undulating radiance gently stole:
A sound confus'd, like thunder's distant roll,
My ears invaded:  straight with solemn tread,
And mien demonstrative of high controul,
A martial form advanc'd; a casque his head
Invelop'd, and around it's plumes diverging spread.

"His aspect fill'd me with respect profound,
And, gazing, thrice to hail him I essay'd,
But awe my faculties in silence bound.
Meantime, his vizor raising, he display'd
To my fix'd eyes my Father's honour'd shade,
Such as I view'd him last, when pale and wan
His lifeless body on the bier was laid.
Through all my veins a sacred horror ran,
As thus with accents deep and hollow he began.

"'From where their final and eternal doom
Spirits from mortal coil releas'd abide,
By Heav'n supreme commission'd, lo!  I come
T' announce the perils which my son betide.
From Hell's recess, the Daemons who defied
Immortal vengeance now against thee arm,
And, with new aid by human guilt supplied,
Triumphantly prepare to work thy harm.
But let not their attempts thy constant soul alarm.

"'T' o'ercome their malice, to thyself be just:
Thy patient toil let virtue still direct,
Nor dare th' Almighty's wisdom to distrust.
Though round thee fate her direst storms collect,
Tho' shorn thine honours and thy fortunes wreck'd,
That best dependence ne'er the brave will fail:
If He thy dark and troubled course protect,
In vain shall fiends combin'd with men assail;
O'er their united arts thy courage shall prevail.

"'With envy dire inflam'd, the Gallic King,
Reckless of faith, on rich Normannia dares
The desolating scourge of war to bring:
Thy Brother, of thy love regardless, shares
His frontless guilt, and arms against thee bears:
Thy agitated and afflicted land
Nor Pestilence nor ghastly Famine spares;
While dangers still more imminent at hand,
To mar thy great designs, insidious Hell has plann'd.

"'Burgundia's Duke, by Asia's Sov'reign bought,
Waits fit occasion to withdraw his line:
CONRAD, already with foul treasons fraught,
Now meditates with him his force to join;
And Austria's Chieftain, ready to combine
With them his pow'rs, thy standard will forsake:
While SALADIN, who frames the great design,
Unceasing toils the slumb'ring war t' awake,
And Jaffa's fortress hopes presumptuously to take.

"'Let not thy soul beneath misfortune bend!
Arouse thee, RICHARD!  and the moments seize
On which thyself and Judah's cause depend.
With humble supplication Heav'n appease:
And mark me well, while thus it's dark decrees,
So far as Spirits know them, I disclose.
Sacred to England's worth shall prove these seas:
Here shall her banners wave, nor shall her foes,
Howe'er they proudly vaunt, her armaments oppose.

"'What tho' with felon aim embattled hosts
Against her weal insultingly conspire?
Their mighty fall shall signalize these coasts.
Surrounding nations shall her sons admire,
Who, in the battle's heat, 'midst blood and fire,
With dignified appeal their GOD address.
That GOD, to whom their constant hearts aspire,
Whose present aid their grateful souls confess,
Will sanctify their cause, and their exertions bless.

"'Such, in all ages, shall her race be shewn:
Prompted by freedom and religion's flame,
Throughout the world their prowess shall be known,
And climes yet unexplor'd shall own their fame.
As England's King thy share of glory claim!
As England's Champion, fortune's clouds disperse!
Recording time shall consecrate thy name,
And future bards, in ever-during verse,
Thy high exploits, thy zeal and suff'rings shall rehearse.'

"As ended thus the awful Shade, methought
I leap'd transported from my lowly bed,
And to embrace the honour'd semblance sought.
But from my eager grasp the Phantom fled:
Of grace unspeakable a smile o'erspread
His visage pale, as, melting from my sight,
He vanish'd.  I remain'd impress'd with dread,
Mingled with veneration and delight,
As to his bless'd abode he re-assum'd his flight.

"'Oh Thou,' I pray'd, 'by whom the heart is tried,
Watch o'er thy servant, and protect him still:
Deign thro' his thorny paths his steps to guide,
Confirm his courage, and direct his will.
Let me, whate'er betide, thy law fulfil,
And meet my fortunes as becomes a man.
Inspire my soul to bear approaching ill:
And, tho' my foes with daemons frame their plan,
Grant me thy sov'reign aid their purposes to scan!'

"Now fresh from ocean's wave arose the sun,
And shot his glorious beams with vigour new,
Prepar'd thro' Heav'n's wide arch his course to run.
With richest perfumes charg'd the breezes flew,
And shook from ev'ry plant ambrosial dew:
The feather'd tribes with modulation gay
Their wanton courtship hasten'd to renew:
Nature transported smil'd, as if to pay
Glad homage to the bright imperial Lord of day.

"Quitting my tent, again the works I sought,
Where, with unceasing toil and labour keen,
Their portion'd task my hardy English wrought.
But OTHO'S there nor AUSTRIA'S troops were seen.
Appriz'd of what this negligence should mean,
Musing I stood as LEOPOLD drew nigh.
I mark'd his haughty and malignant mien,
And in the glances of his scowling eye
Treason deep-rankling read, revenge and malice sly.

"With open freedom I the Chieftain hail'd:
'When thus united in a common cause,
Why have th' exertions of thy legions fail'd?
Ne'er can he reap the harvest of applause,
Who in the hour of need his hand withdraws,
Or seeks, when calls his duty, to retire.
Why then thy toils forbear?'  After a pause,
'Do'st thou,' he cried, 'such proofs of zeal require?
Ne'er did such servile toils debase my noble sire!

"'Among thy ancestors some lab'ring hind,
Brawny and vig'rous, thou perhaps may'st quote,
To whom thy mother secretly resign'd&mdash;'
No more I staid to hear, but by the throat
I caught the railing Chief, and rudely smote
The mouth from which such taunts insulting flew:
His crest and plume into the spreading moat
With his proud flag disdainfully I threw,
And with defiance stern my trusty faulchion drew.

"'If with a woman's tongue a warrior's heart
Thou join'st,' I cried, 'betake thee to thy sword!
I know thy counsels, thy disgraceful art,
Thy soul with treason and corruption stor'd.
Look to thyself!  thy stratagems abhorr'd,
Thy secret dealings with our Pagan foe,
No refuge now, no subterfuge afford.
Chuse as thou wil'st:  a manly semblance shew,
Or hide thy recreant head dishonour'd by a blow!'

"I said.  Confus'd and pale the Chieftain stood,
And from his mouth sore wounded wip'd away,
As copiously it flow'd, the stream of blood.
'Since thus,' he cried, 'my service you repay,
Beware my vengeance!  Some propitious day
May haply make me master of thy fate.
Then shalt thou crouch and tremble at my sway.
Meantime, adieu; impatient I await
A proper time to urge my never-ending hate!'

"Louring he spoke, and sought his tent to gain,
While from the wond'ring and indignant croud,
At what they deem'd a declamation vain,
Shouts of derision burst and laughter loud.
How he fulfill'd the vengeance which he vow'd,
How he succeeded on my head to wreak
The bitter workings of his spirit proud,
'Till Heav'n and you prevail'd my bonds to break,
Let my acknowledg'd wrongs, my woes protracted speak.'

