Soon as the threat'ning tumult was appeas'd
Which from the ceaseless hate of Daemons sprung,
The guards FITZ-OSBERT, pale and trembling, seiz'd,
And to the Elms conveyed him.  Much his tongue
Implor'd for mercy; round their knees he clung,
And sued for life and for his Monarch's grace.
Him on a branch, which topp'd the rest, they hung,
Midway 'twixt Heav'n and earth:  a fitting place,
For those who both alike by treasons foul debase.

Meantime, surrounded by the croud, who shar'd
His pardon, and their royal master bless'd,
The gallant King to Westminster repair'd.
Again his lovely Consort to his breast
With undissembled ecstasy he press'd;
Again his Mother he transported hail'd,
Whose firmness, most in danger's hour confess'd,
When Fiends and Men her weaken'd power assail'd,
Preserv'd the tott'ring realm and gloriously prevail'd.

But soon to scenes of nobler aim his heart,
Inflam'd by PHILIP'S broken faith, aspir'd:
Renown and great revenge now claim'd their part;
England's exhausted state his aid requir'd;
Normannia's bleeding province, where untir'd
With desolation Gallia's Sov'reign reign'd,
His patriotic soul with vengeance fir'd:
Remembrance deep his working mind retain'd.
Of vows no more observ'd, of compacts now disdain'd.

The herald's voice was heard the Peers to call,
A full and solemn festival to hold,
With more than 'custom'd state, in Rufus' hall.
Thither repair'd the Knights and Barons bold;
Their well-plum'd casques, their surcoats rich with gold,
Their gorgeous mails, magnificently shew'd:
While from the roof, triumphantly unroll'd,
Full many a Saracenic standard flow'd,
And heaps of Pagan spoils with gems resplendent glow'd.

High at the end, in seemly state was plac'd,
Fronting the northern gate, the royal throne,
Again by England's rightful Monarch grac'd.
On either hand a princely group was shewn:
Beauty might there herself reflected own;
There loveliness personified was seen,
And breathing sweetness youth and nature shone;
All whose perfections could adorn the scene,
From charms just beaming love to England's peerless Queen.

There valour too it's due precedence found:
The brave assertors of religion there,
Array'd in gay habiliments, around
The ample range forgot their former care,
And, intermingling with th' assemblage fair,
The pow'r of female excellence confess'd.
Each Chief was seen his lady's colours wear,
And, as with modest warmth his suit he press'd,
A sweet responsive glance his honest ardour bless'd.

The high roof echo'd with the trumpet's note,
O'er it's wide arch the sounds of gladness pour'd,
And joy on Zephyr's pinions seem'd to float:
In rich profusion, the capacious board
With all which appetite could tempt was stor'd,
With all which art or fancy could combine,
And all which bounteous nature could afford,
With goblets huge of hypocras and wine,
Pure as the nectar'd juice which greets Jove's guests divine.

The seventh service now the hall had grac'd,
When, suddenly advancing from the gate,
BETHUNE, in herald's tabard rich encas'd,
Approach'd to where the martial Monarch sat.
High on his head, upon a spacious plate,
A Peacock gay he bore, adorn'd with gold
And jewels, emblem of chivalric state,
Which seem'd with conscious pride his place to hold,
Rejoic'd his train with eyes thick-spangled to unfold.

Him close attended an illustrious band
Of knightly bearing, whose resolv'd aspect
Bespoke their passing worth:  on either hand
March'd a fair Dame, in royal splendour deck'd,
Whose modest grace the boldest might correct:
The lovely BERENGARIA one, by whom
PEMBROKE advanc'd, his Sov'reign to protect;
While, gazing on fair CHARICLAEA'S bloom,
BLONDEL appear'd his claim of duty to resume.

Their progress thro' the crouded hall they made,
'Till near the throne where RICHARD sat they came,
When thus Bethune with low obeisance said:
Oh King renown'd!  attend, while in the name
Of Heaven supreme, and of each princely dame
Who here assists, I offer to thy hand,
This Bird mysterious.  As of right they claim
Full retribution for this injur'd land:
Vengeance for treasons foul and perjuries they demand.

"Think, mighty Monarch!  of Normannia's grief:
See, where oppress'd by PHILIP'S power she bleeds;
To thee she looks for succour and relief,
To thee, the Champion of the Cross, she pleads.
See, where the foe his bands ferocious leads,
Where bold injustice innocence o'er-awes,
Where proud oppression on her vitals feeds:
Arouse thee, RICHARD!  vindicate her cause,
Call forth thy puissant might, and win the world's applause!"

He said.  Loud murmurs rose on every side,
And cries expressive of their strong disdain.
The martial King, slow rising, thus replied.
"When beauty pleads redress of wrongs to gain,
Her pow'rful claims can ne'er be urg'd in vain.
My conscious heart confirms the dire detail
Of treasons which the Gallic Monarch stain,
And joyfully the fav'ring hour I hail,
When o'er the perjur'd foe our valour may prevail.

"As when, commission'd by superior pow'r,
O'er Afric's plains consuming locusts sweep,
Her choicest fruits they unrestrain'd devour,
'Till, rousing from their temporary sleep,
The winds of Heav'n o'erwhelm them in the deep;
So shall the terrors of our arms be shewn:
No more her mis'ries shall Normannia weep,
But PHILIP, trembling on his blood-stain'd throne,
Shall rue his broken faith, and England's vengeance own.

"So may my earnest hopes completion know,
As here, before each knight and peerless dame,
On this Mysterious Bird I truly vow,
And faithfully my purpose firm proclaim.
By His eternal and transcendent name,
Whose pow'rful will the universe directs;
By Her, to whom th' angelic mission came;
By every Saint, who England's weal protects;
By all that Holy Church confesses and respects:

"By all the charms of this assemblage fair,
Whose pleadings vengeance in my breast awake,
And by the virtues of this Bird, I swear
On perjur'd PHILIP great revenge to take.
For them, and for my injur'd country's sake,
My arm the faithless monarch shall pursue,
Curb his oppressions, and his proud throne shake,
Nor cease, 'till amply his offence he rue,
And for his crimes atone with retribution due."

As thus the King with warmth impassion'd spoke,
The knightly band confirm'd his high behest,
And thro' the hall loud shouts of transport broke:
A common ardour reign'd in every breast;
All, as they forward came, their zeal confess'd,
And on the sacred Bird pronounc'd their vows,
To aid the cause of Normandy oppress'd.
But soon were hush'd their clamours to repose,
When royal ELINOR with grace majestic rose.

"Thanks to high Heav'n!"  the Queen exulting cried,
"Whose mercies have permitted me to share
In RICHARD'S glories and in England's pride;
To see the fondest object of my care,
Restor'd to dignity and pow'r, prepare
To launce destruction on our country's foe!
Victim no more of anguish and despair,
Of dread suspense and agonizing woe,
O'er my transported heart I feel hope's influence flow.

"Oh Albion!  destin'd to command the world!
Rejoice, for RICHARD re-assumes his pow'r,
And once again his banner is unfurl'd!
Flown is despair, and past the dreary hour,
When on thee adverse fortune seem'd to lour,
And from her unexhausted stores of ill
Calamity and death prevail'd to show'r.
Arouse!  obedient to the Eternal's will,
To vindicate His ways, His justice to fulfil.

"Now let base PHILIP tremble with dismay;
For retribution long delay'd is nigh,
And tenfold vengeance shall his wrongs repay.
No more shall England's Lion prostrate lie;
His lordly mane erect, inflam'd his eye,
On Gallia's faithless sons behold him spring:
Like scatter'd sheep before his wrath they fly,
While bright renown waves high her sounding wing,
And in ecstatic notes proclaims our Victor King.

"Oh may that valour, which Judaea's throne
Against the Saracenic force upheld,
Be now with energy transcendent shewn!
May foul conspiracy and guilt be quell'd!
May PHILIP, by my hero's arms compell'd,
Crown by submission his recorded shame!
Then may my soul, his triumph full beheld,
To kindred skies ascending, bless his name,
Stampt with his country's praise, and grac'd with well-earn'd fame!"

Still on her words th' enraptur'd audience hung,
Each kindling soul, in momentary trance,
Confess'd the potent influence of her tongue,
And hail'd the time, when England's sons might launce
Her stores of treasur'd wrath on perjur'd France,
When, as wide-op'ning flew the northern gate,
A sacerdotal band was seen t' advance,
With gesture dignified and seemly state,
To where the martial King in regal splendour sat.

He, who as chief the grave procession led,
In stole and rochet fitly was array'd;
He bore a mitre on his hoary head,
And in his hand a pond'rous sword display'd.
When near approach'd, the troop it's progress stay'd;
Each, humbly crossing with his arms his breast,
Bent low, and duly his obeisance made;
Then, with an air which rev'rence deep express'd,
Silent remain'd, while thus their Chief the Prince address'd;

"Illustrious Monarch!  whose auspicious reign
In fame's bright annals will for ever bloom,
Permit my speech.  From Glaston's holy fane,
To tell what lately there befel, we come.
'Tis known, when ARTHUR yielded to his doom,
Compell'd fate's ruthless mandate to obey,
That there the earth receiv'd him in her womb:
But, from that period, none presum'd to say,
In what peculiar spot the British Champion lay.

"For o'er his deeds dark Ignorance detail'd
Her web obscure, and his surpassing worth
In legendary tales and mysteries veil'd.
Ere waking science re-illum'd the earth,
In the proud hall, or round the peasant's hearth,
Her story oft Credulity would tell;
How MERLIN'S charms presided at his birth,
How oft he fought, and how at last he fell,
And how his soul was doom'd t' abide the potent spell.

"But his deserts, secur'd on virtue's base,
Some more discerning chroniclers have found
With true record his energies to grace.
Against the Saxon foe in war renown'd
Nine times he bravely fought by victory crown'd;
His patriot blood for Britain's cause he drain'd;
He rous'd her from her lethargy profound,
With hosts barbaric glorious war maintain'd,
And deck'd with clemency the meed his arms had gain'd.

"Him, their illustrious Chief, their darling King,
Our British ancestors with patriot flame,
By their loud harps inspir'd, were wont to sing.
For, as old Greece her ALEXANDER'S fame,
As Rome rejoic'd her CAESAR'S to proclaim,
As France her CHARLEMAGNE, and as our land
Beyond compare exalts her RICHARD'S name,
So ARTHUR'S valour our fore-fathers scann'd,
And told in rapt'rous strains the wonders of his hand.

"Forgive, great Prince!  th' effusions of a zeal
For worth departed, which an old man lead
To talk of what all English hearts must feel.
Now briefly to my purpose I proceed.
Some days are past, since, for a brother freed
From mortal vanities, a grave we made.
Taught by a dream, he oft would intercede
In a sequester'd corner to be laid,
Where JOSEPH'S thorn far spread it's venerable shade.

"With his request we cheerfully complied:
When lo!  within the consecrated ground
A stone Sarcophagus our monks descried.
As all assembled circled it around,
In meditation wrapt and silence bound,
We forc'd it to disclose it's secret trust.
A female's bones, with flaxen hair, we found:
But this as one attempted to adjust,
From his rude grasp it shrank, and mould'ring fell to dust.

"Beneath this chest, a second we survey'd,
Whose pond'rous lid with rev'rence meet we rais'd.
In it a warrior's skeleton was laid.
Soon as we mov'd it from it's place, amaz'd
On two rough pyramids of stone we gaz'd,
O'er which barbaric characters were spread,
Of form uncouth, and half by time eras'd;
'Twixt them a coffin, with a cross of lead,
On which engrav'd these words, as yet distinct, we read:

"'Here, to submit to fate's harsh mandate doom'd,
In rich Avalon's blooming island lies
ARTHUR, his country's brave support, entomb'd.'
We view'd his honour'd bones in mute surprize:
Huge their proportions, and immense their size;
Like those of Earth's aspiring sons they seem'd,
Who, as old poets feign, besieg'd the skies.
No wonder he, when living, was esteem'd
The Champion, who our isle from foreign foes redeem'd.

"As gazing we contemplated his strength,
In his right hand this massy Sword we view'd:
It's weight surpassing, it's unusual length,
And blade high-temper'd, led us to conclude
This was the fam'd EXCALIBOR, endued
By potent MERLIN with endowments high,
And which ere while, in many a combat rude
By ARTHUR borne, compell'd the foes to fly,
Who in the field had dar'd with Britain's Chief to vie.

"With rev'rence due the King we re-inhum'd:
And now, attended by my humble band,
To greet this presence, Sire!  have I presum'd,
Imploring that, when on Normannia's strand
Our valiant Monarch may decree to land,
The base invaders of his rights to face,
This matchless weapon may adorn his hand.
May it prevail the perjur'd Gauls to chase!
May victory and renown our Second Arthur grace!"

Thus saying, tow'rds the Sov'reign he advanc'd,
And at his feet the pond'rous faulchion laid.
The gift, which long tradition thus enhanc'd
And legends famous made, the King survey'd:
It's weight he pois'd, admir'd it's massy blade,
And seem'd awhile as if immers'd in thought:
Then, rising, to the age-worn Priest he said,
"My warmest thanks are due to him who brought,
To aid my cause, this sword which Britain's glory wrought.

"For him who bore it once inspir'd with awe,
As a propitious omen I receive
This sacred pledge.  Fulfill'd be Heav'n's high law,
Which thus Normannia calls me to relieve!
Oh may my arm her inj'ries soon retrieve!
May ARTHUR'S spirit in my bosom flame,
Teach me deeds worthy of himself t' atchieve,
And, as he guides my gallant bands to fame,
May new successes grace his once-lov'd Britain's name!"

Thus spake the King, and wav'd aloft the blade.
The Chieftains, who his gen'rous zeal admir'd,
With eager glance the sacred sword survey'd,
And each, as if with kindred ardour sir'd,
To snatch his portion of renown aspir'd.
Now dawn'd approaching day.  The Monarch rose,
And with his nobles from the hall retir'd,
All fill'd with hope, all earnest to disclose
The worth so oft employ'd against their country's foes.

Meantime, the Daemons, frustrated their spell,
Wide thro' the gloom their pow'rful wings display'd,
And sullenly resum'd their way to Hell.
No ray of hope their fell despair allay'd:
On they advanc'd, to meet their King afraid,
As if already to their awe-struck view
He stood in plenitude of wrath array'd.
They would have paus'd:  but still some influence new
Their deprecated course compell'd them to pursue.

Soaring reluctant thro' the troubled sky,
'Mid the dark regions of void space they pass'd,
Which never had explor'd created eye,
But from whose range, indefinitely vast,
Imagination sick'ning shrank aghast.
Now rag'd around them winds with fury dire,
Now black'ning waters, now the thunder's blast:
'Mid shoals immense of ice they seem'd t' expire,
Or scorch'd in blazing streams of elemental fire.

Far different now their feelings, than when erst,
Breathing defiance proud against their foes,
They left Hell's precincts, and with flight accurs'd
Hasten'd the bold crusaders to oppose,
And show'r on England's King remorseless woes.
Them in full chorus, with reproachful tongue,
A band infernal hail'd:  at every close
Of their foul chant the dark recesses rung,
As thus with joy obscene malignantly they sung.

"Hail to the puissant and victorious host,
Whose execution has no doubt fulfill'd
The confidence excited by their boast!
In policy beyond their compeers skill'd,
They come to reap the harvest they have till'd,
And wear the laurels they so well have won.
Behold!  our Prince, with admiration fill'd,
Waits to receive you on his awful throne,
Soon shall your well-earn'd fame and trophies high be shewn."

They heard the taunt:  with indignation gall'd
When as preparing for retort they seem'd,
Superior pow'r their faculties enthrall'd.
For now they SATAN saw:  his stern eyes gleam'd,
His snake-encircled ringlets wildly stream'd,
And high in air he wav'd his flaming spear:
The dread assemblage round him hoarsely scream'd
As on the band he gaz'd, who, drawing near,
Felt his consuming glance, and prostrate fell with fear.

BELIAL alone his potency withstood:
His front yet dignified he scorn'd to hide;
Fix'd he remain'd, and in indignant mood
His Prince offended sullenly he ey'd,
Still conscious of desert, still fill'd with pride,
And still a lordly fiend, tho' overthrown.
At length in accents of command he cried,
"Let cowards trembling crouch before thy throne!
To BELIAL'S nobler soul such baseness is unknown!

"Against my efforts had not fate conspir'd,
My matchless talents, worthily display'd,
Hell and it's peerless Monarch had admir'd.
Vast were my plans, and sagely were they laid;
I look'd the fortunes of our foe t' have sway'd,
And England's desolation to have wrought:
But unforeseen events my hopes betray'd;
Opposing Heav'n it's aid resistless brought,
And from my vengeful grasp my destin'd victim caught.

"What BELIAL'S energy has done, how well
He stands entitled to infernal fame,
Let those who witness'd his bold efforts tell:
His own exploits he deigns not to proclaim.
But, long as Austria's prostituted name,
Long as the crimes which bloody Henry stain,
And long as PHILIP'S perjuries and shame,
By him effected, on record remain,
These taunting Fiends shall own his puissance was not vain.

"No mean excuse, no subterfuge I seek:
Let those to varnish o'er their failings try,
Whose spirits, like their paltry cause, are weak.
'Twas mine with Heav'n and all it's host to vie:
With soul undaunted and with steadfast eye
I dar'd their legions, as with out-stretch'd wing
And arm'd for war they rang'd across the sky,
Commission'd by supreme decree to bring
Conquest and high renown to Albion's valorous King.

"Alone I fac'd them.  Then the boastful crew,
Who now condemn me, and whose venom'd tongue
Presumes to mock me, their support withdrew;
While round their favour'd hero Cherubs sung,
Their sounding harps approving Angels strung,
Him and his cause 'mid perils they sustain'd,
And o'er his paths their sov'reign influence flung:
I still, tho' unsupported I remain'd,
Provok'd the strife, and Hell's extremest malice drain'd.

"Nor do I now the bold encounter shun:
Speak but the word, and my impatient soul
Shall rush to end the contest I begun.
I own, dread Monarch!  thy supreme controul:
But for those dastard fiends, whose railings foul
Obscenely speak their own, not BELIAL'S shame,
Thus, far as Styx and black Cocytus roll,
Contempt and endless hatred I proclaim!
Now let thy voice pronounce my judgment or my fame."

He ended.  Thus th' infernal King replied.
"Imperious Fiend!  thy ardour I commend,
And praise the haughtiness and stubborn pride,
Which, whether good or ill thy steps attend,
Forbid thee from thy dignity to bend.
These are my darling attributes, which heal
Remorse and shame, which crimes with virtues blend,
Which teach the soul conviction to conceal,
And the firm heart against upbraiding conscience steel.

"These master passions of the strenuous mind,
Whether by nature in it's essence bred,
Or nurtur'd by indulgence unconfin'd
Are best adapted for our use, to spread
Our rule destructive and dominion dread.
Prompted by these to ill, presumptuous man
T' oppose th' eternal law of Heav'n is led:
A stranger to himself, he dares to scan
The Great Eternal Cause, and to correct His plan.

"Thee then, whose courage rises from defeat,
With unabated kindness I salute,
And as befits a potent chieftain greet.
Henceforward be thy bold accusers mute:
Distinctions proud their malice shall refute,
And high pre-eminence shall stamp the worth
Of him, whose prowess vainly they dispute,
To whose superior arts we owe the birth
Of half the mortal ills which subjugate the earth.

"For know, intrepid spirit!  thou shalt share
Thy Monarch's laurels:  'gainst the foe of hell
Jointly with me thy arm shall vengeance bear.
What tho' inferior pow'rs have fail'd to quell
The heav'n-defended King!  our potent spell
May haply blast the freshness of his bays:
Conquest and fame may yet our triumphs swell,
And those, who mock thee now, shall join to raise
To thy confess'd renown, a monument of praise.

"But those abash'd and coward daemons, those,
Whose feeble souls, when fortune smiles elate,
Possess no energy her frowns t' oppose,
A harsher sentence and severer fate,
Such as their fault has merited, await.
Far from our presence driv'n, let them conceal
Their blighted honours and diminish'd state:
Let them our scorn and indignation feel!
Away!  my firm decree admits not of appeal!"

The Monarch spoke, and frowning wav'd his hand.
Throughout th' assemblage dread arose a cry,
And prostrate still was seen the fearful band,
When, rous'd from torpor, FALSE PHILOSOPHY
Disclos'd her form bewitching, and on high
Rearing her front, the wrathful King address'd.
"I purpose not by abject suit to try
T' avert the terrors of thy stern behest:
Too strongly on my mind it's justice is impress'd.

"Ill it becomes us thy decree to scan,
When still unvanquish'd is our hated foe,
And unperform'd remains our splendid plan.
Yet, ere far hence in banishment we go,
This consolation deign at least t' allow:
Here in the face of Hell's tremendous host,
And in thy presence, mighty Prince!  to shew
That not unfounded was thy servant's boast,
That not from want of zeal our look'd-for prize was lost.

"For well and sagely were our plans conceiv'd,
Our talents, courage, and resources vast
Superior enterprize might have atchiev'd.
But execution our design o'erpass'd.
Ere yet our aptest instruments were class'd,
Ere yet a world debas'd could give them scope,
With ardour, unchastiz'd by sage forecast,
We dar'd with rooted prejudice to cope.
Thus vain our bold attempt, and baseless prov'd our hope.

"For long it takes to brutalize the mind:
Religion, and the innate sense of right;
Conscience, that monitor to each assign'd;
The various proofs of Heav'n's transcendent might,
It's boundless presence, it's all-piercing sight;
Th' advantages which governments impart;
The blessings which the social bond requite;
These are too deeply planted in the heart,
To yield to common pow'rs or to unpractis'd art.

"Yet these too rashly to subvert we tried:
No wonder then we saw our efforts fail.
But, tho' the glorious palm is now denied,
Hereafter may our potent charms prevail:
Then may kind fortune with propitious gale
To certain conquest and unbounded sway
Impel our course, and fill our ample sail;
Then circled round by horror and dismay,
Her 'sanguin'd crest may FALSE PHILOSOPHY display!

"Our measures should be fitted to the times:
As the soil dictates should our seed be sown.
Mankind as yet are immature in crimes:
Howe'er to sin and disobedience prone,
That still more damning guilt to make them own,
Which spurns at Nature and at Nature's Source,
By zeal and patience can be wrought alone:
Corruption must maintain it's steady course,
And by progression sure attain it's perfect force.

"Might I without presumption sketch a plan,
By which Heav'n's high behest to circumvent,
And fix our empire o'er the soul of man,
Thus would I realize my great intent.
Let your expertest ministers be sent
His heart against compassion's touch to steel;
'Till, callous grown, he ceases to lament
The tortures which his suff'ring victims feel,
When from his hand they shrink, and make their vain appeal.

"Let them against parental guidance rail,
And the restraints which social rules impose
On free and independent youth bewail:
Let Sophistry with labour'd comments glose,
And Metaphysics specious doubts disclose,
The arrogant half-reas'ner to ensnare;
Till, for Heav'n's will all rev'rence taught to lose,
To doubt it's providence men boldly dare,
And lead deluded herds their impious toils to share.

"When thus all physical and moral sense
Shall be perverted into gross abuse,
Let Luxury her subtle charms dispense,
And Pleasure, glancing in a thousand hues,
Her venom in their pamper'd hearts infuse:
Let them their passions temptingly assail
With glowing systems fitted for the stews;
At strict and formal virtue let them rail,
And Sensuality in Grace's semblance veil.

"Nor to these first essays alone confine
The potent influence of infernal art.
Of range more ample is my great design.
Preach to the mob, and urge it to the heart,
That all in nature's boons should hold their part:
Of rank and wealth th' unjust allotment prove;
At bolder crimes instruct them not to start;
Teach them by force the barriers to remove,
By which to guard the Crown their wise forefathers strove.

"Then, when matur'd my plan and ripe the time,
My bold Apostles may with certain aim
Lead on degraded man from crime to crime.
'Gainst Social Order then shall he declaim,
Brand Laws, and Kings, and Governments with shame,
Involve the world in universal gloom,
And, snatching at a transitory fame,
Spurn at the terrors of a wrath to come,
Of that damnation deep which lasts beyond the tomb."

"Daemon!"  exclaim'd the King, thy councils sage
My approbation and concurrence meet.
With Heav'n we thus may glorious warfare wage.
Exert thyself thy project to complete!
Methinks already, prostrate at my feet,
I view deprav'd mankind my will perform,
And Hell's dread Pow'rs th' Eternal's plan defeat:
Methinks, uncheck'd our dire Apostles swarm,
And blasted Europe sinks beneath th' o'erwhelming storm.

"Be thine the matchless enterprise to guide:
The progress of thy delegates inspect,
And o'er them with unbounded sway preside;
The aptest ministers of ill select,
Their tasks apportion and their toils direct;
Let loose the torrent of o'erwhelming woe,
And to unblushing vice the world subject.
Meantime, to Gallia's threaten'd realm I go,
To ward from PHILIP'S head the meditated blow."

Thus his infernal purpose SATAN spoke:
Enraptur'd the surrounding Daemons heard,
And thus Hell's Chorus fearfully awoke.
"Hail to our matchless Prince, whose cheering word
Shall heal defeat by meaner pow'rs incurr'd!
Now shall the chalice of despair o'erflow;
And, while no more our vengeance is deferr'd,
Shame, and despair, and desolating woe,
With tenfold force shall break on our presumptuous foe.

"Disdainful of repose our King behold,
In all his plenitude of wrath array'd!
His potent influence, free and uncontroul'd,
The furthest bounds of nature shall pervade.
Soon shall his sway imperial be display'd:
While England's Champion trembling meets his doom,
While her dominion sinks, her laurels fade,
Unbounded empire Gallia shall assume,
Her Genius undepress'd shall wave his conq'ring plume!

"Fiends!  to exalt his praise your voices join,
And, as our Monarch worthily is hail'd,
Triumphant songs of ecstasy combine.
Oft has his hand the works of Heav'n assail'd,
And oft against it's boasted plans prevail'd.
Raise the glad sound, in notes exulting tell,
How Eden's walls the Prince of Darkness scal'd,
How ADAM from his first perfection fell,
And how a sinful world was subject made to Hell.

"Daemons!  record the artifice sublime,
By which the man, by his Creator lov'd,
Was led to perpetrate the foulest crime.
Declare how he, whose wisdom all approv'd,
By SATAN tempted, in lust's mazes rov'd
With harlots and their prostituted train:
How in old age, by their enticements mov'd,
He dar'd with impious hand and worship vain
To offer sacrifice in BAAL'S sumptuous fane.

"These felt his puissance, these confess'd his sway!
Proceed, illustrious Prince!  to triumphs new,
And teach mankind thy dictates to obey.
Stretch forth thy strenuous wing, thy toil pursue,
Nor cease 'till RICHARD his presumption rue.
Proceed!  the mighty enterprise complete!
Already our victorious King we view,
With conquest crown'd, resume his awful seat,
While Hell applauding joins his proud return to greet."

"Cease!"  cried th' impatient King:  th' eventful time
And PHILIP'S danger other cares demand.
See, where collecting all his nation's prime,
Our daring foe conducts his martial band.
Ploughing the waves, he seeks the Gallic strand:
Now, near approaching the Normannic coast,
Mark how the red-cross banners waving stand;
High mounts the clamour of the war-tried host,
And Heav'n's wide arch resounds with their exulting boast.

"Above him Victory soars array'd in fire,
Points to the shore, and spreads her sounding wing.
Around him hovers an angelic choir:
I hear their strain seraphic, as they sing
The promis'd triumphs of their favour'd King.
See where they reach the strand!  'mid loud acclaim
Behold to earth the gallant Monarch spring,
His visage beaming with coelestial flame,
And firm his manly step, as if assur'd of fame!

"A man more noble ne'er did I behold:
Alike in council provident and sage,
In feats of arms pre-eminently bold,
Daemons with him may worthy contest wage,
And fitly in the glorious strife engage.
BELIAL!  no more indulge thy fruitless care:
Ere long his fall thy anguish shall assuage.
For who of human mould can 'scape the snare,
Which pow'r infernal frames, and SATAN deigns prepare?"

As thus the Monarch spoke his purpose dread,
The vault infernal shook with clamours hoarse.
High in the gloomy air his plumes he spread,
And vig'rously, unconscious of remorse,
With BELIAL his associate held his course,
'Till to the spot they came, where widely wav'd
The banners of the French and English force,
And, on the banks by Seine's broad current lav'd,
Rouen's embattled walls her stern besiegers brav'd.

In antient state and ample range they stood,
Their ramparts huge, by lofty turrets crown'd,
Skirting the northern barrier of the flood.
Close by the stream, on its exalted mound
The Citadel in state majestic frown'd,
Where LEICESTER, long to deeds of prowess train'd,
Defied the Gallic force, and, circled round
By English captains, well his post maintain'd,
And, tho' by want oppress'd, the brunt of war sustain'd.

Before it's massy gate a drawbridge hung,
Which, when occasion serv'd to gall the foe,
O'er the wide moat the gallant Chieftain flung,
And, leading cross his bands in martial shew,
Taught the proud French his energy to know.
These o'er the plain in varied ranks were class'd,
Stretch'd from the river to ST. JAMES'S brow,
Which on the north, pre-eminently vast,
Rear'd it's enormous bulk, and lesser hills surpass'd.

There, widely waving in the air, were seen
The banners of full many a puissant Knight:
JOINVILLE, DES BRENNES, DE MARBY, and SARGINES,
DES BARRES, SABRAN, all known in Pagan fight,
Their stations held and led their warlike might;
SANCERRE, BEAUJEU, by equal ardour fir'd,
With CLERMONT and NANTEUIL, in armour bright,
Their martial bands conducted, and aspir'd
T' increase their old renown in Palestine acquir'd.

With these, long-us'd to foreign war, appear'd,
In varied armaments, a num'rous host,
Who ne'er in Judah had their standards rear'd,
But now aloud proclaim'd their vaunting boast.
There, from his distant Languedocian coast,
Illustrious ST. LEGER his legions brought;
There too his vassals D'AUVILIERES dispos'd,
Whom brave BLANGIE the use of arms had taught,
And now with him new scenes of promis'd glory sought.

From their Provencal mountains GRANDMESNIL,
And MONTOLIEU, with expedition came,
Prepar'd their Monarch's dictates to fulfil.
BRANCAS and FIEREVILLE, known alike to fame,
Obey'd his call:  nor did ambition's flame
Less urge BEAUPLAN, or valiant D'EUREMODE,
With Gallia's Chiefs their ardour to proclaim.
Far as the eye could stretch their banners flow'd,
And ev'ry heart with zeal and expectation glow'd.

Encircled by the camp a fortress stood,
Fontaine Gaalor call'd, where PHILIP held
His court august, and from it's turrets rude
Survey'd the city which his force repell'd.
Inflam'd by vengeful rage and hate unquell'd,
As o'er her range he cast his eager eye,
His lab'ring breast with double fury swell'd;
He urg'd his troops their vig'rous toils to ply,
And crush the foe who dar'd his boasted pow'r defy.

But nor his puissance, nor his war-tried band,
O'er LEICESTER'S skill and vigilance prevail'd:
Like a true English Oak he made his stand,
And, tho' by angry winds and storms assail'd,
His stedfast truth and energy ne'er fail'd.
Still firm and vig'rous he maintain'd his course,
Still all the terrors of his name detail'd,
Prompting the efforts of his gallant force,
At once their friend, their chief, their model, their resource.

Inspir'd by him and by their country's love,
The toils of war undauntedly they shar'd:
Rejoic'd their antient loyalty to prove,
The boastful foe with common toil they dar'd,
Nor, 'mid their suff'rings, of relief despair'd.
Approving Heav'n their constancy beheld,
And, sanctioning their ardour, aid prepar'd;
For now, with sails by fav'ring breezes swell'd,
Tow'rds them a royal fleet it's succ'ring course impell'd.

High in the wind their blood-red streamers flow'd,
Their tall prows boldly cut the foaming tide,
Their decks with warriors close assembled glow'd,
As, with becoming pomp and seemly pride,
The lordly vessels Gallia's coasts defied.
From Rouen's walls a shout of transport rose,
When her brave champions England's flag descried,
Majestically waving to disclose
Security for them, and vengeance on their foes.

As when, o'erpast inclement winter's reign,
Hush'd are his storms, and, borne on Zephyr's wing,
With gay delight and pleasure in her train,
Breathing new joys returns the genial spring,
Her warbling choristers their carols sing,
And nature hails her domination sweet:
So, when to earth leap'd Albion's potent King,
LEICESTER'S brave band rush'd forth their Prince to meet,
And join'd with loud acclaim his glad approach to greet.

Like MARS new-lighting on his Thracian height,
Breathing defiance proud, the Monarch seem'd:
His casque with plumes bedeck'd, his armour bright,
Superbly glancing in the sun's rays gleam'd.
Whate'er of worth heroic bards have dream'd,
All that the sculptor's fancy can embrace,
Concenter'd in his manly presence beam'd.
Vain would have prov'd their vaunted pow'rs to trace
His soul-expressive eye, his more than mortal grace.

And fit companions for their King appear'd
The warriors who compos'd his num'rous train:
Their rich-emblazon'd banners high they rear'd,
As, spreading widely o'er the fertile plain
Extending to the southward from the Seine,
They rang'd their camp, which from St. Catherine's height,
That on the west stretch'd far it's lordly reign,
To ROLLO'S castle reach'd:  nor mortal sight
Their line could trace, nor tongue their numbers count aright.

There, first in station as in fame, once more
The gen'rous Champions of the Cross were seen,
Who erst with RICHARD fought on Jaffa's shore:
Brave MORTIMER wav'd high his faulchion keen;
MAULEON, still in danger's front serene,
And bold LESTANG prepar'd their arms to wield:
There LACY bad his vet'ran troops convene;
Intrepid NEVILLE boldly grac'd the field,
And REGINALD display'd his oft-distinguish'd shield.

HARCOURT, ST. WALERIC, AUDLEY and BOHUN,
Led forth their squadrons:  in triumphant shew
The standards of DUBOIS, GOURNAY, VERDUN
And gallant SOMERVILLE were seen to flow:
There PEMBROKE, MOUBRAY, GRANVILLE and DES PREAUX,
DE COURCY, BAYNTUN and ST. PAUL were found,
CASTELLUN, terror of the Pagan foe,
Illustrious TANCARVILLE, in war renown'd,
And VERNON, still infirm from many a recent wound.

There too BLONDEL in martial state advanc'd:
Eager his new-emblazon'd shield to prove,
His eye o'er Gallia's far-rang'd host he glanc'd.
The scarf he wore which England's Regent wove;
Yet still his thoughts tow'rds younger charms would rove,
For CHARICLAEA'S pow'r his heart confess'd:
In vain against her 'witching sway he strove;
Deep in his mind her image was impress'd,
And, as he gaz'd, now hope, now fear consum'd his breast.

To the fair empress of his soul attach'd,
He led her smiling from the sea-girt strand:
With eager care her ev'ry look he watch'd,
And oft, her charms unable to withstand,
Would press with gentle touch her yielding hand:
While she, soft blushes mantling o'er her cheek,
As if unconscious of his mute demand,
Of matters foreign to his wish would speak,
And with benignant grace to check his ardour seek.

As erst on Japhia's heights a spear she grasp'd;
Her swelling bosom and her tap'ring waist
A cuirass rich with burnish'd gold enclasp'd:
A splendid casque, with snow-white plumage grac'd,
And bright with gems, upon her head was plac'd.
Not lovelier look'd, on gay Cythera's plain,
The laughing Queen in MARS'S arms encas'd,
When sportive Cupids form'd her joyous train,
And Graces danc'd around, and Pleasure held his reign.

Fair BERENGARIA too brav'd war's alarms,
Beauteous like her, yet, as the full-blown rose
From the bud differs, her maturer charms
Appear'd complete perfection to disclose.
She sought the Park, where, sacred to repose,
And shrouded by it's stately forest's shade,
The Castle of Normannia's Dukes arose,
Still in uncouth magnificence array'd,
While o'er it's turrets huge the spreading ivy play'd.

Thither with Cyprus' royal maid she went.
But England's Monarch other thoughts engross'd:
To Rouen's walls his anxious steps he bent,
There to consult of what behov'd him most,
And commune with the leaders of his host.
The vet'ran warriors hail'd him as he came:
Their doubts were now in glory's visions lost,
And hope re-kindled her inspiring flame,
Since their lov'd King appear'd to lead them on to fame.

