"Ye princely guardians of Germania's state,
A captive King's defence conven'd to hear!
Ye arbiters of injur'd RICHARD's fate,
Before whose bar I joyfully appear,
To plead my wrongs, and my desert to clear,
Let me your further gen'rous suff'rance claim!
Oh!  deign awhile to lend a patient ear,
Till your free voice shall vindicate my fame,
And build my fair renown on yonder tyrant's shame!

"When Austria's vengeful Chieftain had retir'd,
I open'd to my friends his foul deceit,
And plann'd the measures which our state requir'd.
Each manly heart with indignation beat,
When thus, our task of glory incomplete,
Fruitless our hopes, and blasted our intent,
Hell's potent influence forc'd us to retreat.
With eyes to earth in thoughtful sadness bent,
My orders to fulfil the sorrowing warriors went.

"To ward th' attempt which SALADIN might make,
Jaffa's half-ruin'd fortress, ill supplied
With forces or machines of war, to take,
I felt myself first call'd on to provide.
Thither I charg'd the brave DUBOIS to guide
My vet'ran host embark'd on board the fleet,
And bad REGNIER at Ascalon preside,
There the repairs yet wanting to complete,
The too presumptuous views of traitors to defeat.

"One morn beheld DUBOIS his anchor heave,
And false BURGUNDIA'S Duke and AUSTRIA base,
Stamp'd with dishonour foul, the harbour leave.
These, heralds of their own avow'd disgrace,
To distant Tyre their progress sought to trace,
There with MONTFERRAT, partner in their shame,
With Pagan gold their feelings to solace,
There with joint force to vindicate his aim,
And, in LUSIGNAN'S wrong, his title to proclaim.

"By land to Jaffa I preferr'd to go;
For, anxious thither present aid to bear,
I deem'd that thus I should outstrip the foe.
Ten Chieftains I retain'd, of puissance rare,
The toils and perils of my route to share:
Ten, such as might with all that legends old
Of CHARLEMAGNE'S fam'd Knights have sung compare,
Or those, of whom our British bards have told,
Whom ARTHUR at his board ordain'd their seats to hold.

"Ye, who in deeds of hardihood delight,
For a few moments your attention deign,
While thus my comrades' titles I recite.
LEICESTER, MAULEON, HENRY of Almaigne,
Bold MORTIMER, well-fitted to sustain
The weight of war, LACY, in arms renown'd,
NEVILLE, and REGINALD, who ne'er in vain
Their faulchions rear'd, LESTANG still foremost found,
CHAVEGUY and FURNIVAL with many a trophy crown'd.

"These, each with his Esquire, my band compos'd.
Completely arm'd, each on his vig'rous steed,
Ere yet the sun his dawning light disclos'd,
The neighb'ring heights we gain'd with anxious speed.
To cheer our way, of many a martial deed
We converse held, 'till ruddy morning glow'd,
When far at sea we saw our fleet proceed,
Which o'er the gilded waves superbly rode,
While from each top-mast's head the crimson pennants flow'd.

"Two days our course unwearied we pursued,
'Till, on the second eve, the lofty fane
Which grac'd embattled Ramula we view'd.
Surpriz'd we saw around confusion reign:
From ev'ry quarter of the crouded plain
Their flocks and herds affrighted peasants drove;
Of babes and women a disorder'd train
Rush'd on, as if to reach the town they strove,
Whose cries and wild lament the stoutest hearts might move.

"But soon the cause of their alarm we found.
Along the craggy and extending height,
Which once-illustrious Ephraim's summit crown'd,
Appear'd in proud array the Pagan might.
Ting'd by the last departing gleams of light
Their helmets glitter'd:  down the long descent
Swiftly they march'd; while, on their left and right,
The wild Bedouins, on their steeds low bent,
Urg'd their destructive course, on blood and spoils intent.

"Still gazing on the scene, we reach'd the gate,
Thro' crouds tumultuous which around us press'd,
Where stood ST. WALERIC our approach to wait.
No time was now afforded us for rest.
To ascertain what might behove us best,
A council I conven'd without delay,
Where thus my brave companions I address'd.
'Behold the choice which fortune leaves us &mdash; say,
Shall we submit, or force thro' yonder host our way?

"'I see your gen'rous spirits scorn to yield:
Nor less resolv'd, brave chieftains!  is my own.
Oft have we rang'd together o'er the field
With slaughter stain'd, with dying Pagans strewn,
And oft immortal glory have we won.
Shall danger now our constant souls appal?
If great the risk, let equal worth be shewn!
Think, when our honour and our duty call,
Should fate our doom pronounce, triumphantly we fall.'

"The warriors, with a joint consent, declar'd,
Their fix'd resolve the great attempt to try,
And for immediate enterprize prepar'd.
But these, whate'er their zeal or courage high,
Suffic'd not with a multitude to vie.
I therefore from the troops within the town
Resolv'd my want of numbers to supply,
Boldly with them to purchase fresh renown,
Or by a glorious death my former toils to crown.

"ST. WALERIC caus'd his legion to appear.
From them two thousand vet'rans bold I chose,
One half experienc'd to direct the spear,
The others arm'd with cross or yewen bows,
And well accustom'd to our Pagan foes.
These to advance on foot no cavil made,
For so did harsh necessity impose;
And fifty war-tried chieftains they obey'd,
Who with observance strict th' assembling host array'd.

"The star of morning now pierc'd thro' the gloom;
The village cock his first salute had crow'd;
From haunted church-yards and the recent tomb
Slow-flitting ghosts skimm'd tow'rds their drear abode:
The moon from Heav'n's high arch descending rode,
And still her strain sad Philomel express'd,
When my Arabian courser I bestrode,
And join'd the gallant band.  My anxious breast
Beat high, as thus my force I hastily address'd.

"'Comrades and friends!  in equal risk involv'd,
And equally I trust, whate'er betide,
To die or grac'd by fame to live resolv'd!
Prepare the fate which threatens to abide.
This day, this hour, our fortunes must decide.
What tho' with vaunting and presumptuous boast
Your numbers small yon Saracens deride?
Soon shall they know each Englishman's a host,
And that, while one remains, our victory is not lost!

"'I urge you not your vengeful foes to meet:
Already glows each heart with gen'rous fire.
I deprecate no dastardly retreat:
For where from slaughter can we now retire?
Since then our fortunes instant act require,
Let us by pray'r from Heav'n protection claim!
Let Him whose badge we wear our souls inspire!
Thus trebly arm'd, in His eternal name
Let us to battle rush, and win immortal fame!'

"No more I said.  In well-compacted state
And silently I led my valiant train
Down the descent, which, winding from the gate,
Conducted to the far-extending plain.
Now, 'gan the dawn o'er night ascendance gain,
And with it's feeble but unerring light
Shew'd us the perils which we must sustain.
On ev'ry hand appear'd the Pagan might,
And shouts of war were heard, and yells of wild affright.

"Still unappall'd our steady course we held;
And, tho' the swift Bedouins round us flew,
Successfully their efforts we repell'd,
'Till tow'rds Ereccon's ruin'd walls we drew.
There, in a long and terrible review,
Arrang'd we saw the Saracenic line.
Halting, we ceas'd our progress to pursue,
And framing instantly the bold design,
Tow'rds Caspin's lake I bad my troop their march incline.

"Before us, far as could extend our sight,
A level plain to Jaffa's port was spread,
Crouded with foes all earnest for the fight.
CORAZIN there his bold Arabians led,
FACARDIN rang'd th' Egyptian band, and dread
SURCONDAR there his Turcomans array'd:
CAIFAR brought his host in Nubia bred;
ORASMIN there the Persian flag display'd,
And Syria's warlike sons ALMANZOR brave obey'd.

"Each squadron twice five hundred men contain'd,
All us'd to arms, each mounted on a steed
Of race illustrious and to battle train'd.
An equal troop we saw BEDREDDIN lead,
Of those whom Thabir's savage mountains breed,
And who, amid the desert's parch'd extent,
With bloody impulse and resistless speed,
Like hungry wolves the wand'ring pilgrim scent,
And with his spoils bedeck their oft-transported tent.

"Soon as the station I had mark'd we reach'd,
From the long causeway with thick hedges crown'd
I plac'd my ranks of combatants, which stretch'd
To where the lake far spreading and profound
Their left protected, and the valley bound.
My men at arms, fixing their shields askance,
Their right knees firmly planted on the ground,
In double line grasp'd each his slanting lance,
And form'd an iron fence to check the foe's advance.

"Behind, with bows of either sort supplied
And store of darts, my archers form'd a band:
Full well they knew their steady shafts to guide,
And, so unerring was their practis'd hand,
Nor helm nor cuirass could their force withstand.
I and my comrades, station'd in the rear,
Where well the movements of the foe we scann'd,
Each mounted on his steed, with rested spear
And vizor clos'd remain'd relief and aid to bear.

"Scarcely this new arrangement was complete,
When on our line a charge impetuous made
The Nubian horsemen.  Fitly them to greet
Our archers drew their bows, and undismay'd
Amid their ranks a show'r of arrows play'd,
With aim so certain and such deadly force,
That suddenly their onset fierce they staid,
And left the field o'erspread with many a corse,
While loud their cries were heard and imprecations hoarse.

"When their far-scatter'd band FACARDIN view'd,
'Tho' Nubia's sons,' he cried, 'the contest fly,
My bold Egyptians shall the work conclude:
Our arms of proof their feather'd shafts defy!'
With that, intent the enterprise to try,
The swarthy warriors, like an angry flood,
Scour'd o'er the plain, and wav'd their sabres high.
Our steady vet'rans well their charge withstood,
And ev'ry quiv'ring spear was deeply stain'd with blood.

"But soon an arrow with resistless stroke
A passage thro' FACARDIN'S helmet found:
His frontal bone it's point well-temper'd broke,
And 'mid his kindred Chiefs he press'd the ground.
Their leader slain, his squadron fled around:
While our stout archers wide destruction wrought,
And pierc'd their backs with many a shameful wound,
They, better wisdom by experience taught,
Urging their steeds the means of present safety sought.

"The Turcomanian squadron now came on,
Superbly mounted on their coursers fleet,
While far their casques and burnish'd hauberks shone:
Them the dispers'd Egyptians chanc'd to meet,
As o'er the plain they hasten'd to retreat,
And rush'd among their ranks in order pent.
Ill did the host their rude irruption greet,
While their tough bows again our archers bent,
And 'mid th' entangled croud their home-drawn arrows sent.

"SURCONDAR, their proud Chieftain, mad with rage,
Now here, now there, his foaming steed impell'd,
And strove the mingled bands to disengage.
But terror had their martial ardour quell'd,
And apprehension present danger swell'd.
Soon as the wide confusion I perceiv'd,
'No longer,' cried I, 'be our zeal withheld!
Ere yet our foes embarrass'd are reliev'd,
Deeds worthy of our fame may doubtless be atchiev'd!'

"Fill'd with disdain, and eager for the fight,
First thro' their phalanx gallant NEVILLE broke.
Than him our cause own'd not a worthier Knight.
His spear he pois'd, and with tremendous stroke
Terror, dismay, and death around awoke.
Him near approaching fierce ARSAMES view'd,
As seeking still fresh contests to provoke,
The flying Turcomans he yet pursued;
And thus aloud exclaim'd with salutation rude:

"'Well does the Bear, which dignifies thy crest,
The savage and remorseless heart bespeak
Which rankles in thy unbelieving breast!
Thus shall my lance it's foul recesses seek!'
He said, and eager his revenge to wreak,
Struck in the centre of his polish'd shield,
And shiver'd on it's boss his weapon weak.
More sure was NEVILLE'S arm.  The Pagan reel'd,
And o'er the crupper borne press'd the ensanguin'd field.

"CASSIM, who from Circassia's barb'rous shore
(Where from his Sire the use of arms he learn'd)
To SALADIN a reinforcement bore,
ARSAMES' combat and defeat discern'd.
With fury and regret his bosom burn'd:
Couching his lance the Christian Chief he sought,
Who, marking his intent, his courser turn'd,
And with such certain aim and vigour wrought,
That thro' the eye transfix'd to earth his foe he brought.

"From his crush'd brain NEVILLE his spear withdrew,
And hastily replac'd it in the rest,
As to attack him sturdy MOURAD flew.
A potent steed of Turkish race he press'd,
Of unmatch'd fierceness, which his hand had dress'd,
And taught, when rag'd the fight, his aid to join.
Thus he exclaim'd, as vengeance fir'd his breast,
'Turn, caitiff!  turn, thy trophies now are mine!
To MAHOMET thy head devoted I consign!'

"'Thee and thy Prophet, I alike regard,
And thus I answer!'  NEVILLE quickly cried,
And with his ashen spear he struck him hard.
On MOURAD'S buckler caught it glanc'd aside.
He, while his foe he hardily defied,
With well-accustom'd voice his steed impell'd:
Who, rearing, on the adverse horse applied
His savage teeth where high his arch'd neck swell'd,
And, as if us'd to blood, his gripe unsated held.

"While valiant NEVILLE, doubly thus assail'd,
Quitting his spear to draw his faulchion strove,
Stern MOURAD rudely smote his cuirass mail'd,
And soon, so vig'rously his mace he drove,
Thro' all the foldings of his buckler clove;
While his fast-bleeding charger, mad with pain,
His rude oppressor struggled to remove:
But all his efforts were employ'd in vain,
So well was he his hold instructed to retain.

"His weapon MOURAD now insulting heav'd,
And soon his fate bold NEVILLE must have found,
Had not brave REGINALD the strife perceiv'd.
He, with a shout which made the field resound,
Struck MOURAD where his neck the cuirass bound,
And, urging on his pow'rful charger's speed,
With rapid movement bore him to the ground,
And overthrowing his astounded steed,
From both his foes at once his suff'ring comrade freed.

"'Thanks to high Heav'n!'  exclaim'd the victor Knight,
'Which, when most needed, brought me to thine aid!
Together will we prosecute the fight.
Let the fierce steed which late yon Chief obey'd,
By thy more worthy guidance now be sway'd;
Brandish his mace, and grasp his ample shield!'
No hesitation valiant NEVILLE made;
And soon the gallant pair rush'd o'er the field,
Where their transcendent worth my other friends reveal'd.

"Full well did MORTIMER his share perform.
Among the squadrons of th' embattled foe
He swept tremendous, like a wintry storm,
Whose raging blasts the forest's pride o'erthrow,
And strike the time-defying castles low.
Where'er he turn'd amid th' affrighted band,
His matchless force he made the Pagans know:
They fled amain, unable to withstand
The desolating pow'r of his avenging hand.

"As o'er the field stern GEMALEDDIN glanc'd
His anxious eye, the Champion he perceiv'd,
And hastily to stem his course advanc'd.
A Georgian Prince was he, who had atchiev'd
Deeds of renown, and honours high receiv'd
From Asia's Sov'reign.  As amid the fight
Bold MORTIMER he view'd, his bosom heav'd:
'Alla forbid!  that thus a single Knight
At our expence,' he cried, 'should signalize his might!'

"With that against bold MORTIMER he rode.
At the first shock their spears in fragments flew,
And either Chief his crest unwilling bow'd.
Their weapons, useless now, away they threw,
And instantly their biting faulchions drew,
And hand to hand in dreadful strife engag'd.
At awful distance stood the trembling crew,
While doubtfully the bloody combat rag'd,
And each opponent struck with fury unassuag'd.

"At length, upon his adversary's helm
Stout GEMALEDDIN smote with impulse rude.
The weighty blow might have suffic'd t' o'erwhelm
A warrior less with energy endued:
But he, tho' stunn'd, it's mighty force withstood,
While, glancing from his crest, the weapon fell,
And in his wounded shoulder drank his blood.
Now 'gan with joy the Pagan's bosom swell,
And now again he sought his faulchion to impel.

"But vain his hope, his savage transport brief:
For, as th' encounter eager to decide
He rais'd on high his arm, the Christian Chief,
His utmost power collecting, on his side,
Guarded no more, a deadly blow applied.
Deep in his bowels sank the trenchant blade;
A crimson'd stream his polish'd armour dyed;
Quick-glancing phantoms o'er his eye-balls play'd,
And, to abide it's doom, fled his indignant shade.

"OMAR and SELIM saw their leader's fall,
As they together rang'd the hostile field.
From Georgia they at GEMALEDDIN'S call
Had hasten'd, both instructed well the shield,
The sabre, and the massy lance to wield.
Fury, regret and shame their souls inflam'd:
As if his blood for great revenge appeal'd,
And from their friendship retribution claim'd,
With joint attack their spears 'gainst MORTIMER they aim'd.

"The wary Chieftain noted their advance.
As SELIM made his charge with fell intent,
He wheel'd aside, and 'scap'd his threat'ning lance,
While, OMAR'S menac'd vengeance to prevent,
With his good sword a weighty blow he lent,
Which, thro' the cuirass that his shoulders bound
Forcing it's way, his bosom widely rent.
His spirit sought a passage thro' the wound,
And far beyond his steed he bleeding press'd the ground.

"'Those who attempt,' cried MORTIMER, 'to wreak
Like thee their rage, like thee should meet their end!
Farewell!  I go thy comrade base to seek:
His shall thy hov'ring soul ere long attend,
And death again shall give to thee thy friend!'
He said, and turn'd the furious Chief to meet:
But LACY, his associate to defend,
And SELIM'S murd'rous purpose to defeat,
Eager across the field had urg'd his courser fleet.

"Thro' routed bands, which ill his force withstood,
And hot with toil, the vet'ran warrior came,
Waving on high his faulchion stain'd with blood.
As SELIM couch'd his spear with vengeful aim,
Rushing between, he cried with loud acclaim,
'Pagan!  forbear, thy purpose vile forego:
If thy false heart be sensible of shame,
In equal fight attempt thy worth to shew,
Nor thus presume to strike an unresisting foe!'

"He said, and stood his onset fierce to meet.
The sturdy Pagan his defiance heard,
And thus rejoin'd:  'No more thy taunts repeat!
A wrangler's tongue my spirit never stirr'd,
Nor can by threats my purpose be deferr'd.
Hence!  or the vengeance of my arm abide!'
Then, summoning his strength, his steed he spurr'd,
And full on LACY'S shield his lance applied,
But from the polish'd orb it flew diverging wide.

"He sought his foaming courser's speed to check;
But, ere he could command the loosen'd rein,
With strong back-handed blow upon his neck
Impetuous LACY struck, nor struck in vain.
His head, far sever'd, bounded o'er the plain,
Which deeply of th' empurpled current drank
That gush'd in torrents from each spouting vein,
While his swift steed bore off thro' many a rank
His lifeless trunk, 'till 'mid the Georgian host it sank.

"While thus my comrades brave maintain'd the fight,
And still th' unequal strife unaw'd pursued,
My bold Arabian with transcendent might
Bore me where'er the Pagans closest stood.
My way was mark'd with Saracenic blood:
Thrice nerv'd I felt my arm, with throbbing force
My mounting heart propell'd the vital flood,
As thro' their bands I held my fatal course,
And strew'd the champaign wide with many a breathless corse.

"ORBAN first met my overwhelming spear.
He, as the proud SURCONDAR had decreed,
Was charg'd the Turcomanian flag to bear:
But Heav'n had doom'd him by my hand to bleed.
Bold HASSAN, mounted on a furious steed,
Oppos'd my progress:  him the hope of prey
From rude Circassia had prevail'd to lead;
But short and baseless prov'd his visions gay,
Thro' his broad chest transfix'd on Jaffa's plain he lay.

"Th' indignant MUSTAPHA, as near he rode,
His brother's rash attempt and fall perceiv'd.
Together had they left their sire's abode,
And many a daring enterprize atchiev'd,
And now of life together were bereav'd:
For, as against me furiously he rush'd,
And high in air his glitt'ring faulchion heav'd,
My lance the vizor of his helmet crush'd:
He fell, and from his mouth a flood empurpled gush'd.

"ALI, a Persian Prince, my wrath defied.
He, ere the trump of bloody war was heard,
Survey'd his vast domain, his pastures wide,
With many a flock enrich'd and lowing herd:
A sumptuous Harem he had lately rear'd,
To guard the beauties whom his wealth had bought,
Whose fond remembrance present danger cheer'd.
But vain relief these recollections brought:
From me he found the death his arrogance had sought.

"As thus across the field with slaughter red
I rode, and still the Pagan carnage swell'd,
SURCONDAR mark'd my crown-encircled head,
And 'gainst me furiously his steed impell'd.
'Impatiently,' cried he, 'have I beheld
Thy single force our armaments defy.
Now shall thy prowess by my arm be quell'd:
While here thy limbs a feast to birds supply,
The spoils of England's King shall grace my triumphs high!'

"'The spoils of England's King,' I straight rejoin'd,
Are not, I ween, for pow'rs like thine reserv'd!
Ere RICHARD yield, he must a foeman find,
Whose vig'rous arm more potently is nerv'd.'
We met.  His spear upon my buckler swerv'd,
While mine into a thousand fragments flew.
SURCONDAR instantly the chance observ'd,
And turn'd his steed the combat to renew.
I breath'd a pray'r to Heav'n, and forth my faulchion drew.

"Couching his spear the Turcoman advanc'd:
It struck my shield with hides and iron bound,
And from my body far innoxious glanc'd.
With better aim I wav'd my faulchion round.
Cleaving his head, my blade a passage found
Thro' his bright mail, and with resistless might
Struck his right arm and shoulder to the ground.
Bleeding he sank:  to realms of endless night
His too-aspiring soul took it's unwilling flight.

"Soon as to earth the vanquish'd Chieftain fell,
Amid his band oppress'd by grief and fear
My foaming steed I turn'd, when brave BLONDEL,
Who still my progress had attended near,
Exclaim'd, 'See yonder, where to fate severe
The bold MAULEON is compell'd to yield!
Him, his good courser slain, the Pagans bear
With shouts triumphant o'er the bloody field,
And seize his oft-tried lance, and high display his shield!'

"Thus saying, quickly from his steed he leapt,
And to my hand SURCONDAR'S weapon gave.
With vengeful course across the plain I swept,
And, fill'd with ardent zeal my friend to save,
Thro' the close-thronging multitude I drave.
Approaching near, 'Hence, ye ignoble crew!'
I loudly cried, 'forego my comrade brave!'
Appall'd they heard, and fearfully withdrew,
While tow'rds him thus redeem'd impatiently I flew.

"'Courage!' I cried, 'since thus to save my friend
My aid the Pow'r eternal has decreed,
Let us our course with arms associate bend!'
To my request the vet'ran Chief agreed,
And, seizing by the rein a wand'ring steed
Whose rider's bleeding corse the champaign stain'd,
He vaulted on his back.  With anxious speed
We rush'd, to where bold LEICESTER's Earl remain'd
Girt round by threat'ning foes, and doubtful strife maintain'd.

"While thus the Pagan's onset we repell'd,
Asia's proud Sov'reign, from a neighb'ring height,
Where 'mid his crouded Peers he stood, beheld
The unexpected issue of the fight.
'And is it thus ye prove your boasted might?
Is this your prowess?'  furiously he cried:
Princes!  with me your energy unite:
Be our's the task the contest to decide!
Let MAHOMET his sons to fame and victory guide!'

"He said.  Not swifter from a sulph'rous cloud,
When thro' the troubled and deep-mantled sky
The voice of thunder breaks abrupt and loud,
O'er Heav'n's wide arch quick-glancing light'nings fly,
Than rush'd the Prince the chance of war to try.
As when with rapid wing to earth descends
Some lordly eagle from his station high,
Where'er his flight imperiously he bends,
Terror his progress marks, and death his course attends:

"With no less vengeful force or fatal aim
Imperial SALADIN his puissance shew'd,
His routed bands to vindicate from shame.
Fir'd with disdain bold FURNIVAL he view'd,
As 'mid the host his efforts he renew'd,
And rode triumphantly o'er heaps of dead.
Him he assaulted with encounter rude:
Piercing his helm, his lance transfix'd his head,
And, as to earth he fell, the warrior's spirit fled.

"Nor did a fate less harsh CHAVEGUY betide.
He, when he saw the Asian King advance
Red with his comrade's blood, his force defied,
And aim'd against him his well-temper'd lance:
But on his shield receiv'd it pass'd askance,
While him the Monarch smote upon the breast,
And drove him to the earth in deadly trance.
Than him no worthier son Poictou confess'd,
None when alive more lov'd, in glorious death more bless'd.

"High thro' the Pagan host a shout arose,
Not less astounding than the midnight blast,
Which, pregnant with alarm and unknown woes,
Sweeps o'er the sea, while, 'midst it's billows vast,
The trembling mariner, with dread aghast,
Hears the wild surf upon the breakers rage,
And fancies every ling'ring hour the last.
So did the sound our wond'ring souls engage,
Nor did it less of ill and horrors new presage.

"We turn'd, and saw our friends expiring lie,
While tow'rds us SALADIN impetuous came,
His spear ensanguin'd brandishing on high.
My brave companions, fill'd with gen'rous shame,
Felt their bold hearts inspir'd with glory's flame,
And 'gainst th' imperial Chief their course prepar'd,
When thus I cried:  'This enterprise I claim,
This to myself I arrogate unshar'd!
Now shall the Christian wrongs and suff'rings be repair'd!'

"No more I said, nor for their answer stay'd;
But, rushing thro' the far-encircling croud,
I reach'd the spot where SALADIN display'd
His warlike prowess 'mid his Satraps proud.
Approaching near him, thus I cried aloud:
'By England's King is Asia's Prince defied!
Our congress now has fav'ring Heav'n allow'd!
Here, if thou dar'st my onset to abide,
Let us with equal arms Judaea's fate decide!'

"Thus saying, I awaited his reply.
In accents loud he quickly thus rejoin'd:
'Those, who the pow'r of Asia's King defy,
The terrors of his arm are wont to find!
Of all the Chiefs in hostile league combin'd,
None than thyself I more desire to meet.
Thanks to our Prophet, who has thus consign'd
To me thy vain presumption to defeat,
And by thy fall my hopes of triumph to complete!'

"He said.  Around him rose an outcry hoarse,
As, with his lance in rest, across the field
He drove against me with impetuous force.
Midway I met him.  On each sturdy shield,
As forcibly we struck, our weapons peal'd,
But from the polish'd orbs innoxious flew,
While with the shock our puissant chargers reel'd.
Soon disengag'd a circling course we drew,
Impell'd with equal rage our combat to renew.

"'Now to thy heart!' exclaim'd the furious King;
And, poising his stout beam with dire intent,
Struck at my shield and made it's concave ring.
With more assur'd effect my spear I bent:
His surcoat richly charg'd with gold it rent,
The gorgeous mail which deck'd his bosom crush'd,
And bore him to the earth with rude descent,
While from the wound a stream empurpled gush'd.
Trembling the Pagans stood, their clam'rous shouts were hush'd.

"But, as a branch, which rudely to the ground
A passenger has bent with pow'rful hand,
Springs from his pressure with elastic bound,
Again it's verdant honours to expand;
So rush'd tumultuously the Pagan band,
To save their prostrate Monarch from my rage.
Alone their madd'ning vengeance to withstand,
My single arm was doom'd their host t' engage,
And disproportion'd war with multitudes to wage.

"As on some mountain bleak a moss-grown oak,
When blow the wintry tempests unrestrain'd,
Firm-rooted bears their devastating stroke;
Tho' rent his massy limbs, his trunk tho' stain'd,
He keeps the station where so long he reign'd,
And scorns, whate'er of ill betide, to yield:
So, tho' around me darts and javelins rain'd,
Still I prevail'd my potent spear to wield,
Nor, tho' beset with foes, forsook th' ensanguin'd field.

"Nor small nor trivial was th' encounter rude
Of adverse arms I then was doom'd to prove.
When on the earth their royal Sire they view'd,
Furious with rage, and urg'd by filial love,
MIRALIS and MELCALEZ onward drove,
And at my breast their spears impetuous aim'd.
Nor less stern SAFADIN to reach me strove:
As his bold heart fraternal zeal inflam'd,
He shook his threat'ning lance, and high his wrath proclaim'd.

"Environ'd thus, to Heav'n's Eternal Lord,
My only refuge now, I breath'd a pray'r:
'Oh deign,' I cried, 'thy mercy to afford!
Inspire my soul impending fate to dare,
And make me worthy of the badge I wear!'
No more I added:  for, with rapid course,
Against me now advanc'd the royal pair.
MELCALEZ first with imprecations hoarse
Came on:  my polish'd shield re-echoed with his force.

"Forward he rode:  but, with succession fast,
MIRALIS rudely on my breast-plate smote.
His weapon thro' my yielding armour pass'd,
And, grazing 'twixt my shoulder and my throat,
Dy'd with a crimson'd torrent my surcoat:
Then, as his shaft he instantly withdrew,
'Let this,' he cried, 'my ceaseless hate denote!'
And, fill'd with hope his vengeful pow'r to shew,
With murd'rous aim he sought the conflict to renew.

"Nor long delay'd MELCALEZ to advance,
While potent SAFADIN spurr'd on his steed,
And bent against me his enormous lance.
But Heav'n preserv'd me in my utmost need:
For brave BLONDEL, who with observant heed
Had watch'd them, now his buckler interpos'd.
Me from MELCALEZ' dread attack he freed:
Waving his faulchion with the Prince he clos'd,
And with intrepid heart his onset rude oppos'd.

"Ill did MELCALEZ his aggression brook:
A foe so young his haughty mind disdain'd,
And with indignant ire his lance he shook.
But him to fall the pow'rs of Heav'n ordain'd:
Deep thro' his cuirass mail'd, with blood distain'd,
BLONDEL's good sword with force resistless pass'd.
From the wide wound life's purple current drain'd:
On his lov'd Sire his ling'ring eyes he cast,
And, calling on his name, the warrior breath'd his last.

"T' avenge his fall MIRALIS fiercely turn'd.
As stretch'd in death his brother he survey'd,
His grief-struck soul with tenfold fury burn'd:
His spear portentous as he high display'd,
And urg'd his steed, 'To dear MELCALEZ' shade
Thus I consign thy spirit!'  loud he cried.
Straightway against him his assault he made,
And stoutly on his shield his beam applied.
The point ill-temper'd broke, and fell in fragments wide.

"Aside his weapon, useless now, he threw,
And, drawing instantly his faulchion bright,
Against his foe with rage redoubled flew.
Their fierce encounter ill can I recite,
Or tell the terrors of their per'lous fight:
For SAFADIN, with vengeance unassuag'd,
Urg'd 'gainst my breast his lance; with fell despight
And desp'rate purpose either bosom rag'd,
As if at once for life and fame we combat wag'd.

"Both shields resounded with our frequent stroke:
Rude was the shock, and far upon the ground
The wreck was scatter'd as our lances broke.
Now high our glitt'ring blades we whirl'd around,
And many a blow we gave and many a wound:
Thro' his far-beaming armour to his breast
My biting sword a ready passage found,
While his transcendent force my helm confess'd,
And bore of his assault memorials deep impress'd.

"And now, as either mail and corselet rung,
And, while our nerves augmenting fury brac'd,
In dread suspense our doubtful conflict hung,
Their Monarch, still insensible, in haste
His faithful Satraps on a chariot plac'd,
And tow'rds Assaron, far beyond the plain
Red with his blood, their anxious travel trac'd;
There from the leech's art relief to gain,
And by the sov'reign pow'r of herbs to sooth his pain.

"Soon as this pious duty was perform'd,
On my devoted head an iron show'r
From ev'ry side with aim unerring storm'd.
O'er me remorseless fate now seem'd to lour;
And doubtless soon, in inauspicious hour,
Me, their assault unable to withstand,
Their force united had prevail'd t' o'erpow'r,
Had not, when needed most, Heav'n's guardian hand
Deign'd to support my cause, and check their vengeful band.

"For now BLONDEL his foe to earth had fell'd,
His helmet shatter'd and his cuirass pierc'd,
And boldly to my aid his steed impell'd.
MAULEON too his foes had now dispers'd,
And hastily across their ranks revers'd
Rush'd to support me with encounter dread:
While a fresh host of warriors onward burst,
All mounted on the chargers of the dead,
Before whose onset fierce the trembling Pagans fled.

"The adverse Chiefs, MIRALIS to protect,
And from destruction SAFADIN to shield,
(Who now, his sword scarce able to direct,
Seem'd to my greater force prepar'd to yield,)
Advanc'd from ev'ry quarter of the field
Soon with redoubled fury rag'd the fight:
Each combatant his utmost pow'rs reveal'd,
And, as undaunted they approv'd their might,
Death shook his sable wings, and shriek'd with stern delight.

"As thus my comrades urg'd their bloody strife,
My arm the fainting SAFADIN pursued;
And soon had ebb'd his near exhausted life,
Had not two puissant Chiefs our contest view'd:
ARASPES, whom, from Syria's deserts rude,
Among his leaders SALADIN had class'd;
And fierce BEDREDDIN, whose huge limbs endued
With strength enormous, and whose stature vast
The most redoubted sons of Araby surpass'd.

"Soon as, approaching o'er th' encrimson'd field,
They saw the peril of their gallant friend,
BEDREDDIN cried, 'Be thine his head to shield!
Ward off the blows which on his crest descend,
While I to bear him hence my succour lend!'
He said.  ARASPES instantly complied,
And, ere surpriz'd I could my shield extend,
While with loud voice my prowess he defied,
With vig'rous aim he struck my unprotected side.

"It fail'd to penetrate my cuirass steel'd,
But with effect so potent came the blow,
That with the shock unwillingly I reel'd.
I felt my breast with indignation glow,
As, forc'd the vanquish'd Chieftain to forego,
I left the conquest which my sword had earn'd,
To combat with a less illustrious foe.
Rage fill'd my soul, my heart with vengeance burn'd,
As to receive his charge impatiently I turn'd.

"While thus we were engag'd, th' Arabian Chief,
Rejoic'd to find his stratagem succeed,
Quickly advanc'd to SAFADIN'S relief.
Perceiving him from many a wound to bleed,
He firmly grasp'd him, and upon his steed
Before himself the fainting Prince he plac'd:
Then, urging on his courser's utmost speed,
Who panted with his double load, in haste
Far from the scene of blood his eager course he trac'd.

"I saw them fly, and, like a wretch forlorn
On Afric's sultry desert, from whose hand
His last refreshing draught is rudely torn,
While round him stretch unmeasur'd wilds of sand,
And arid plains by streams unblest expand,
I gaz'd awhile, lost in distracting thought.
But soon, compell'd ARASPES to withstand,
I charg'd him, and with fierce resentment sought
T' avenge the wrong which his confed'racy had wrought.

"Again his weapon he against me bent:
But fruitless prov'd his hope, his effort vain;
His shatter'd spear betray'd his fell intent.
My faulchion forc'd a passage to his brain;
Stagg'ring he dropt his unavailing rein:
Awhile, with progress swift, his frighten'd steed
Bore him unconscious o'er th' ensanguin'd plain,
'Till to the earth he fell, by fate decreed
Far from his native home the fowls of Heav'n to feed.

"While thus eventfully the battle rag'd,
A sudden and astounding shout was heard.
The pow'rful sound our wond'ring souls engag'd.
Nearer it drew, and soon in air high rear'd
The welcome banners of our isle appear'd.
I view'd my comrades, who to Jaffa's coast
In hour propitious had their gallies steer'd,
And now led on their enterprizing host,
To aid us and to share our yet appropriate boast.

"Onward they came in terrible array:
DUBOIS the gallant reinforcement led,
With HARCOURT, TANCARVILLE, and bold GOURNAY.
As from a dream replete with horrors dread,
Where hideous phantoms, from distemper bred,
Glance in succession wild, at morn awakes
Some agitated sleeper, from his bed
Starting he hails the light which round him breaks,
And from his troubled soul the fearful vision shakes:

"So cheering was the ray which o'er us burst,
When to our aid our brave companions came,
And valiantly the Pagan bands dispers'd.
Each leader fill'd with glory's purest flame,
And urg'd by hope to win his share of fame,
Seem'd danger's front ambitious to provoke:
While, deaf alike to honour and to shame,
The trembling foe before their furious stroke
Fled, and their scatter'd ranks in wild confusion broke.

"While thus, on ev'ry side, their routed band
Our troops elate with victory held in chase,
Leaping to earth, BLONDEL with careful hand
Hasten'd MIRALIS' helmet to unlace.
Clos'd were his eyes, and pallid was his face,
Yet still his pulse, with interrupted beat,
And frequent pause, pursued it's languid race,
And, round his flutt'ring heart, some vital heat
Denoted ling'ring life still kept it's wonted seat.

"As brave BLONDEL his gen'rous zeal display'd,
Nor from his foe withheld his pitying tears,
Thus to the Chiefs assembled round I said.
'Behold how lovely Charity appears,
When with kind aid her vanquish'd foe she cheers,
And mis'ry of it's sharpest sting disarms!
Her gentle sway the bonds of life endears;
By her, religion blooms with new-born charms,
And man's obdurate heart with soft affection warms.

"'Say, what return deserves the warrior brave,
Whose valour and transcendent worth avail'd,
When fate most frown'd, his monarch's life to save?
Who, when the sons of SALADIN assail'd,
Singly to crush their tow'ring hopes prevail'd?
Desert like his with never-fading bays,
And honour's choicest guerdon, should be hail'd;
For him should Chivalry her trophies raise,
And dignify the worth which soars beyond our praise.'

"From all the Peers approving murmurs broke,
When on his blood-stain'd shoulder I applied
My sword, and, as I gently gave the stroke,
Thus to the high-deserving Champion cried.
Rise, Sir BLONDEL!  thy grateful country's pride!
Henceforth assume a Christian Knight's proud name!
Still may approving Heav'n thy footsteps guide,
May thy example England's youth inflame
Like thee to win renown and bear the meed of fame.'

"I said.  With modest grace uprose the youth&mdash;
But ah!  forgive, when I behold him there,
When I recal the gen'rous zeal and truth,
Which led him, to redeem me from despair,
Again new perils and new toils to dare,
That thus my grateful feelings I proclaim.
Oh!  may there come a time, when thou may'st share,
Thrice-valued friend!  my fortunes and my fame,
And consecrate with mine thy highly honour'd name!

"Forgive, if, while his matchless worth I feel,
I speak the warm effusions of my breast.
Thus I resume. &mdash; He struggled to conceal
The strong emotions which his soul oppress'd,
Then, blushing, said, 'Too much for utt'rance blest,
By the warm tear which fond affection draws
Be my eternal gratitude confess'd!
Oh!  may I live to merit thy applause,
Or, as becomes me, fall in thine and England's cause!'

"'Trust to thy King,' I cried; 'thy worth he knows,
Thy soul to honour and allegiance true.
But now, brave comrades, while the routed foes
On ev'ry side our eager bands pursue,
Let us, with rev'rence meet and homage due,
Return our thanks for Heav'n's protecting care.
While of his mercies here the scene we view,
Let us to GOD unite in heart-felt pray'r,
And, as we shar'd the risk, in hymns triumphant share.

"'Mark where renown'd Diospolis appears!
There, where JUSTINIAN'S decorated fane
In solemn state it's dome majestic rears,
Enshrin'd the relics of ST. GEORGE remain.
Before his altar, let us seek to gain
The noblest recompence of virtuous toil:
That Heav'n to bless our sacred cause may deign,
And that the Saint and Patron of our isle,
A Soldier erst himself, on England's arms may smile!'

