"When duty's sacred call we had obey'd,
And with Hosannas to the Pow'r Divine
Our homage due of gratitude had paid,
Sighing I cried, 'Here, near ST. GEORGE'S shrine,
Let us to worth deceas'd a place assign.
Here let CHAVEGUY and FURNIVAL repose:
Let their remains by England's Saint recline,
'Till, when his awful trump the Angel blows,
Their martyr'd dust again the bursting tomb disclose.'

"I said.  Ere long across the bloody plain
The bodies of the heroes were convey'd,
And, in a grave within ST. GEORGE'S fane,
With 'custom'd rites and decent pomp were laid.
Above their tombs their banners we display'd;
And, on the altar as their swords we plac'd,
And thus our last respectful tribute paid,
Our tears the mem'ry of our comrades grac'd,
With whom so oft the paths of glory we had trac'd.

"To Jaffa now we hastily advanc'd,
Whose citizens, redeem'd from threaten'd harms,
Our prowess with triumphant songs enhanc'd.
Then sprang my BERENGARIA to my arms:
Her joy contrasting with her late alarms,
She held her victor consort to her breast,
And, beaming with innumerable charms,
While scarce her voice th' emotion strong express'd,
Bliss which expression mock'd her melting eyes confess'd.

"Soon as the leech's art our wounds had heal'd,
And rest had brac'd our limbs by travel tir'd,
And nerv'd again each arm the sword to wield,
By courtesy and feelings high inspir'd,
The presence of MIRALIS I requir'd.
His brow o'ercast bespoke his troubled soul;
Nought spake he, but, abstracted and retir'd,
His grief and shame he sought not to controul,
And kind BLONDEL had fail'd his anguish to console.

"As still from loss of blood he seem'd depress'd,
I gently urg'd him to partake my seat,
And thus with temper'd phrase the Prince address'd:
''Tis not exulting in your late defeat,
That early thus your presence I intreat.
No, valiant youth!  tho' now by fav'ring fate
No more as rivals in the field we meet,
Still I respect a captive warrior's state;
Ne'er shall his spirit curse my arrogance or hate.

"'Nay, Royal Sir!  avert not thus your face:
Soon shall you learn that Englishmen delight
The virtues of an enemy to grace.
What tho', when rag'd the terrors of the fight,
In hostile arms array'd you prov'd your might;
Shall RICHARD less your chivalry esteem?
Or, 'cause a father's suff'rings to requite,
You stain'd his armour with a crimson stream,
Shall he less nobly now of your endowments deem?'

"As thus I spoke, a deep suffusion dy'd
His pallid cheek, and, with a voice which grief
Half stifled held, he mournfully replied:
"If to my sorrows ought could bring relief,
'Twould be thy courtesy, illustrious Chief!
But, since whate'er my life endear'd is lost,
I trust thy propositions may be brief.
Can'st thou restore my Sire, my Throne, my Host?
Can'st thou revive the dead, or calm MELCALEZ' ghost?'

"'My pow'r o'er death extends not,' I rejoin'd,
'Nor can my will unlock the silent tomb:
But, to relieve from woe the sick'ning mind,
To cheer the horrors of affliction's gloom,
And bid young hope expand her soaring plume,
I trust that these my influence can obtain.
Cannot I bid thee liberty resume?
Cannot I say, Again MIRALIS reign!
Appease thy Brother's shade, and heal thy Father's pain!'

"The Prince arose with a convulsive start,
And on me as his eyes he wildly bent,
'Forbear, alas!'  he cried, 'to wring a heart
Already by contending passions rent!
The mis'ries which remorseless fate has sent
Time may perhaps enable me to bear.
But no &mdash; my fortunes never can relent:
No human aid can mitigate my care;
Death can alone appease my exquisite despair!'

"'Behold this badge,' I cried, the sacred sign
Of Him whose faith and tenets I profess;
And mark the dictates of His law divine.
He bad us aid the poor, the wrong'd redress,
The sick, the pris'ner, by relief to bless,
To feed the hungry, to support the weak,
And tow'rds our foes forgiveness to express:
He bad us comfort to the suff'rer speak,
The sorrowing spirit cheer, the captive's fetters break.

"'So spake the GOD whom Christian nations serve.
And shall we, on Judaea's sacred shore
Which felt His presence, from His precepts swerve?
No longer, Prince, captivity deplore!
Return to freedom and thy Sire once more,
And with thee brave MELCALEZ' corse convey!
Thus to thy hand thy faulchion I restore.
When thou review'st thy royal father, say
Thus does a Christian King his GOD's commands obey.'

"'If thus,' replied the youth, thy Christian law
Teaches to comfort and respect a foe,
Still shall MIRALIS think of it with awe.
Releas'd by thee to SALADIN I go:
His gen'rous heart with gratitude will glow;
No more for past misfortune will he grieve,
But consolation from thy bounty know.
From thy example may I worth atchieve,
And learn what lustre arms from clemency receive.'

"As thus he spoke, drawn forth in martial state,
By GOURNAY led, appear'd a gallant train,
On Asia's heir with due respect to wait.
With brave MELCALEZ' bier o'er Jaffa's plain
They march'd, the tow'rs of Thamnathsare to gain,
Where, with the remnant of his vanquish'd crew,
The Monarch nurs'd his heart-consuming pain.
Meantime, embark'd our progress to renew,
O'er the green waves, impell'd by fav'ring blasts, we flew.

"Ere long the view of Acre's tow'rs we caught,
And soon, within her well-known port, our fleet
The pilot's skilful hand to anchor brought.
But there, intent our purpose to defeat,
Fiends spread their treasons our approach to greet:
Base LEOPOLD, and OTHO lost to shame,
Urg'd on the croud with virulence and heat,
To aid MONTFERRAT'S enterprising aim,
And him as rightful King of Judah to proclaim.

"Ripe was the project which their guilt contriv'd,
And boldly was their purpose foul profess'd,
When at LUSIGNAN'S palace I arriv'd.
Scarce were my toils repair'd by needful rest,
When to the hall the factious Chieftains press'd.
Them closely follow'd a tumultuous band,
Whom oft with specious reas'nings they address'd,
And, as a charioteer with skilful hand
Governs his steeds, prevail'd their ardour to command.

"'Wherefore,' exclaim'd I, thus, with rude approach,
Does this licentious multitude presume
Unbidden on my privacy t' incroach?'
'Their Rights, replied MONTFERRAT, to resume,
And to support my claim, the People come!
When they their high and sov'reign will declare,
Who is there so impatient for his doom,
Who of his safety shall so little care,
As their united force and menac'd wrath to dare?'

"'Who shall oppose them?'  straightway I rejoin'd,
From me, from England's King, that favour'd isle
Where freedom blooms, resistance shall they find.
Hence with this turbulent and madd'ning coil,
Which, foully aiming Europe's Chiefs t' embroil,
To infamy and sure destruction drives!
Hence, ye insidious Demagogues!  whose guile
Support to faction and rebellion gives,
And of it's best defence our sacred cause deprives!'

"As thus I spoke with indignation fir'd,
The croud abash'd my dictate stern obey'd,
And, as if conscious of their fault, retir'd.
But CONRAD and his trait'rous band, afraid
Their fury should by reason be allay'd,
To bold invectives furiously gave vent,
And to arouse their slumb'ring rage essay'd.
So well fulfill'd they their accurs'd intent,
That threat'ning shouts once more the vaulted chamber rent.

"And now the clamour more intemp'rate grew:
Like pent-up waters bursting thro' their mound,
And urg'd by storms, rush'd on the servile crew.
Vain were my efforts; by the deaf'ning sound
Of CONRAD and his Rights my voice was drown'd:
And desp'rate deeds their fury might have wrought,
Since passion now their souls to madness wound,
Had not LUSIGNAN their attention caught,
As with his hand outstretch'd an audience he besought.

"Mov'd by the tears which down his visage ran,
The noisy croud their turbulence restrain'd,
When thus the venerable King began.
'Too long o'er Judah has LUSIGNAN reign'd,
Since now his people, by corruption gain'd,
Forget their duty and renounce his cause.
The crown, which must by contest be maintain'd,
Suits not the care-worn brow of him, who draws
His only hope from Heav'n, and Heav'n's consoling laws.

"'Alas!  too much of royalty I've known.
Consuming anguish, ever-during care,
Regret and sorrow have beset my throne,
And all my prospects pointed to despair.
There needs no force, the diadem to tear
From him, who never felt it's boasted joys:
Let those, who seek the dazzling prize, beware
Of the sharp sting, which 'mid it's wreaths annoys
Their falsely-pictur'd bliss, and happiness destroys.

"'The glare of pomp no longer can amuse
The mind in which ambitious hopes are dead:
It's splendid shadows their attraction lose.
Fancy her unsubstantial veil may spread,
Wave her gay wings, her balm Lethaean shed,
And court with smiles the victim of her art:
Arm'd with conviction from experience bred,
I drive the faithless Syren from my heart,
And seek the peace which Heav'n in mercy may impart.

"'Let my poor realm no civil feuds deplore:
Cease, England's King!  'gainst destiny to strive,
And tempt me with ideal pow'r no more.
Henceforth to GOD and to my soul I live,
From self-approving conscience to derive
That consolation which the world denies.
May He my errors and my crimes forgive,
May He compassionate Judaea's sighs,
And may, to end her woes, some great avenger rise!'

"Thus spoke th' impassion'd King; and, with a look
Which mingled scorn and majesty confess'd,
The golden circlet from his brow he took,
And to the people who around him press'd
With dignified appeal himself address'd.
'To you this Crown I solemnly resign.
May he, whose front it's orbit shall invest,
Meet with protection from the Pow'r Divine,
And may his rule be found more fortunate than mine!'

"Scarce had he ended, when throughout the croud,
Mov'd by compunction, tenderness and shame,
A tumult 'gan to spread:  with murmurs loud
Each on his neighbour sought to throw the blame,
And 'gainst their factious leaders to exclaim,
Whose guilt and high presumption they had shar'd.
Soon ev'ry bosom caught the gen'rous flame;
And now, immediate vengeance they declar'd
'Gainst those who to traduce their injur'd King had dar'd.

"The trait'rous Chieftains, fill'd with wild alarm,
Essay'd their rising fury to prevent,
And sought by pray'rs t' escape impending harm:
But still fresh shouts the hall of audience rent,
The croud 'gainst CONRAD rush'd with one consent,
When good LUSIGNAN, with benignant care,
Implor'd them to restrain their rude intent,
And urg'd me my concurrence to declare
With his resolve no more Judaea's crown to wear.

"While reign'd the tumult, as immers'd in thought
I studied how the contest I might close,
Heav'n to my aid it's inspiration brought.
'Appease this senseless strife,' I cried, 'which flows
From zeal misguided, big with future woes.
Since thus LUSIGNAN wills, no more my voice
His purpos'd resignation shall oppose:
Take in his room the minion of your choice!
Let CONRAD and his crew in splendid guilt rejoice!

"'Be their's the insults of the Pagan host,
Emboldened by their treasons, to correct;
Be their's the charge, your desolated coast
From ravage and destruction to protect:
But let LUSIGNAN, whom ye thus reject,
To climes more worthy of his virtues steer,
Where nought with Judah shall his thoughts connect,
Save, when of her misfortunes he shall hear,
Compassion from his eye may force a pitying tear.

"'His high endowments, which ye blindly scorn,
His merits, which so foully ye betray,
Th' imperial throne of Cyprus shall adorn.
There may he long maintain his righteous sway,
And to remote posterity convey
Unsullied honour and a peaceful crown!
May future joys his past-gone woes repay!
May him successive heroes proudly own
The founder of their state, and source of their renown!'

"I said.  LUSIGNAN caught my outstretch'd hand,
And, as the dictates of his soul he spoke,
From factious OTHO and his trait'rous band
Exulting shouts of clam'rous transport broke.
'Let him,' they cried, his resignation cloak
With such pretences as may gild his shame;
While we propitious influences invoke,
To guide our Monarch in the paths of fame,
And sanctify his just and now establish'd claim!'

"Advancing forward, on MONTFERRAT'S head
Burgundia's Duke the golden circlet plac'd,
And o'er his back the royal mantle spread:
Then, summoning the gazing croud, in haste
To the chief fane their boist'rous course they trac'd,
There to complete their bold and impious deed,
And consecrate a pow'r by crimes debas'd.
But otherwise insulted Heav'n decreed,
And 'midst it's triumph doom'd successful guilt to bleed.

"Oh blind to destiny, and slave to hope!
Still will presumptuous man controul disdain,
Still will he give unbridled passion scope,
And, fondly grasping at distinctions vain,
Attempt by crimes a fleeting sway to gain?
Thus CONRAD, with pre-eminence elate,
Led to the temple his tumultuous train,
And ey'd with joy his unaccustom'd state,
Unconscious of the ills prepar'd by vengeful fate.

"He reach'd the fane, and the far-dazzling throne
Bedeck'd with gold and brilliant gems he view'd,
When two strange youths, who silent and unknown
Mix'd with the croud within the portal stood,
Rush'd forward, and with salutation rude
Their murd'rous poniards buried in his side.
Stagg'ring he fell, and with his gushing blood
He breath'd his soul, the judgment to abide
Of Him, whose high behest his arrogance defied.

"With shouts of frantic rage the city rung.
Eager to know whence rose the tumult new,
With sudden impulse from my couch I sprung,
And with LUSIGNAN, and the chosen few
Who shar'd our councils, tow'rds the temple flew.
We met the multitude who CONRAD bore:
Death o'er his cheeks had spread his pallid hue,
His manly bosom was distain'd with gore,
And still of passions strong his brow the vestige wore.

"While yet, impress'd with pity, I survey'd
All that remain'd of him, whose spirit proud
It's mad ambition lately had display'd,
With eager haste and exclamations loud
Tow'rds the sad spot approach'd the busy croud.
The two Assassins manacled they brought.
With more than human confidence endow'd,
They gaz'd, as if they peril heeded nought,
And smil'd, as if a deed of glory they had wrought.

"I bade them say, with what accurs'd intent,
Which neither fear nor danger could restrain,
They thus to Acre had their travel bent,
And, by what Daemon urg'd, they dar'd prophane
With royal blood the consecrated fane.
As if prepar'd our judgment to abide,
Erect they stood, and, as with fierce disdain
And mingled joy MONTFERRAT'S corse they ey'd,
With dignified address the elder youth replied:

"'Brethren we are, and subjects of the Prince,
Whom men the Antient of the Mountain call.
Their firm attachment earnest to evince,
No pains, no death, his vassals can appal:
They scorn whate'er of peril may befal;
At his command the craggy rock they climb,
And confident in duty headlong fall;
Thro' Asia's bounds, and Europe's distant clime,
His word their zeal impels with energy sublime.

"'By him commission'd, hither we repair'd
To wreak his vengeance on MONTFERRAT'S head,
Who on his brother wreck'd at Tyre had dar'd
To perpetrate a foul and trait'rous deed.
Our daggers made the faithless tyrant bleed.
Lead us to death!  unlock the welcome gate
Of promis'd transports, where our spirits, freed
From mortal 'cumbrance and beyond your hate,
Shall triumph in the joys which loyalty await.'

"They led the bold Enthusiasts to their doom,
And, while regret in ev'ry breast awoke,
We bad for CONRAD straight prepare the tomb.
Meantime I thus th' assembled Chiefs bespoke:
'Since thus the savage and misguided stroke
Of vengeful fury has MONTFERRAT slain,
Without delay the aid of Heav'n invoke,
To guide your choice tow'rds one, whose worthy reign
May heal intestine feuds, and Judah's cause maintain.'

"Forthwith the Chiefs commenc'd their grave debate;
When Austria's Duke, whose deeply rankling breast
Teem'd with revenge and disappointed hate,
Eager their solemn council to molest,
With crafty Burgundy the croud address'd,
And sought again t' entice them to their lure:
As if with democratic zeal impress'd,
Their Sov'reign Rights they urg'd them to insure,
And 'gainst the Princes rail'd with obloquy impure.

"But fruitless now their artifices prov'd,
Nor to their views would now the people bend.
By brave MONTFERRAT'S recent murder mov'd,
They felt their hearts to slighted Heav'n ascend,
And fear'd by fresh presumption to offend:
No clamours rude arose; but, struck with awe,
They seem'd fresh chastisements to apprehend.
The sudden change their guilty leaders saw,
And sought the means themselves from peril to withdraw.

"OTHO took refuge with his Gallic band,
While LEOPOLD, determin'd to retreat
From wrong'd Judaea, hasten'd to the strand,
And with his host embark'd on board his fleet,
In other climes preparing to complete
The foul revenge which rankled in his heart.
As quiver'd in the breeze his flowing sheet,
The people, lately victims of his art,
Contemptuously beheld the recreant Prince depart.

"Tranquillity thus visiting again
Those walls from which so lately she had flown,
The Chiefs proclaim'd that HENRY of Champaigne,
Whose prowess oft in perils had been shewn,
And whose superior qualities were known
To all who war's alarms with him had shar'd,
Should fill LUSIGNAN'S agitated throne.
Rejoicing numbers him their King declar'd,
And with becoming pomp to Acre's fane repair'd.

"Now thro' the camp I publish'd my intent,
To seek fair England's lov'd domains once more:
Our barks were fitted, and our sails were bent,
And all prepar'd to quit Judaea's shore,
When lo!  from SALADIN ORASMIN bore
Proffers of friendship and fair terms of peace.
'Let us,' said he, to Palestine restore
Her long-lost quiet:  let our contests cease;
Let us our wearied hosts from further toil release.

"'Thus speaks the King, whom Asia's realms obey.
Far as from Sorec's stream to Acre's plain,
Let all the coast confess the Christian sway;
Let Ascalon to neither pow'r remain;
Let either people amity maintain,
And either confine be securely pass'd:
If English RICHARD and his Princely train
Accept these proffers, let our compact last,
'Till thrice the glorious sun complete his circuit vast.'

"The Chieftain said, and thus I straight rejoin'd.
Thy Sov'reign's offers fair and candid seem;
And, from my friends should they acceptance find,
Our full consent expedient I esteem.
After long struggles Judah to redeem,
Th' auspicious moment joyfully we hail,
When peace, Heav'n's choicest boon, again shall beam,
When war no longer shall her coasts assail,
And her lost sons no more humanity shall wail.

"'But say, illustrious Persian Chief!  whence spring
These unexpected proffers, whence arise
These peaceful overtures of Asia's King?'
'My Prince,' replied he, bad me not disguise
The cause, why thus in amicable ties
He seeks with your's his int'rests to unite;
And why he thus relinquishes the prize,
So often and so well maintain'd in fight,
While yet immense his force and unimpair'd his might.

"'To you, who often in the hostile field
His brave and countless armaments have view'd,
His vast resources amply are reveal'd.
No wish your menac'd vengeance to elude,
No apprehension from the war pursued,
Lead him to modify ambition's plan,
And thus to terminate the bloody feud.
'Twas thou who taught'st him Christian worth to scan,
And 'mid the shock of war to feel himself a Man.

"'From early youth inur'd to feats of arms,
Not all thy fame at Caesarea gain'd,
Nor Acre's fall, inspir'd him with alarms.
At Jaffa boldly he the strife maintain'd,
Where well thy practic'd valour he sustain'd
And dy'd with gore the long-contested strand.
Nor had he now to make this proffer deign'd,
Had not thy virtues, and thy self-command,
Mov'd him to own thy worth and court thy friendly hand.

"'When, by domestic anguish most distress'd,
Thou nobly sent'st him young MELCALEZ' bier,
As once again his darling son he press'd,
And on his bosom dropt a father's tear,
He learnt thy gen'rous feelings to revere.
But, when thy praise he heard MIRALIS speak,
And grateful tribute to the doctrines bear,
Which taught thee to befriend the poor and weak,
His heart impell'd him thus thy amity to seek.

"'Since, then, th' Eternal Pow'r has stamp'd each mind,
Pure and congenial, in one common mould,
Henceforward may your virtues be combin'd!
Oh!  let your spirits, free and uncontroul'd,
Their kindred gallantry and worth unfold:
Let both obey approving Heav'n's behest!
Angels and men with transport shall behold
Your hands the ravages of war arrest,
And peace again shall smile, and Judah shall be bless'd!'

"As thus ORASMIN spoke, th' applauding croud,
Mov'd by the frank avowal of the Chief,
Burst forth in shouts and acclamations loud,
While we, rejoicing in the prompt relief
Of suff'ring Judah's long-protracted grief,
Prepar'd the solemn bus'ness to transact.
With mutual confidence, and transcripts brief,
On either side we fram'd the high compact,
And call'd on conscious Heav'n to ratify the act.

"Thus did my arm the glorious work complete,
Appointed for me by propitious fate.
I found the Christians harrass'd by defeat,
By famine spent, and urg'd by Pagan hate:
I left them prosp'rous, dignified, and great.
Before I came, their vanquish'd Monarch held
A barren sceptre, and an empty state:
Th' invaders stern I fought, their pow'r I quell'd,
And Asia's force, tho' led by SALADIN, repell'd.

"When PHILIP, traitor to the sacred cause,
From Palestine retir'd, I persever'd:
When CONRAD, trampling on Religion's laws,
Rebellion's black and fatal standard rear'd,
The champion of allegiance I appear'd:
While Austria, and Burgundia's faithless Duke,
Bought by the foe, from honour's dictates veer'd,
The throne of SALADIN I roughly shook,
And from the puissant King full retribution took.

"When, for two tedious years, proud Acre's tow'rs
Against associate Europe's force had stood,
When PHILIP vainly had led on his pow'rs,
And, all unequal to the conflict rude,
Sank in the midst of Gallia's noblest blood,
The stern barbarians fearlessly I brav'd.
'Twas mine the glorious contest to conclude:
The shatter'd remnant of his host I sav'd,
And high o'er Acre's walls my conq'ring banners wav'd.

"Let Jaffa's plain, and Caesarea's strand,
The toils which RICHARD there encounter'd speak,
When, spent his forces, and reduc'd his band,
He dar'd the Saracenic force to seek;
When their firm legions he prevail'd to break,
To crush their chiefs, their armies to o'erwhelm,
And on their Monarch his revenge to wreak:
When fame and victory grac'd his bloody helm,
And English valour sav'd Judaea's tott'ring realm.

"And was it, therefore, from a Christian King
That he thus sharply should be doom'd to feel
Whate'er of woe from jealous hate can spring?
Was it for this that PHILIP dar'd to seal
With JOHN his league perfidious, and to steal
Like midnight thief on fair Normannia's coast?
Say, was it therefore, that with foul appeal
His delegates led on their trait'rous host,
Insulting Albion's shores with loud and impious boast?

"Let AUSTRIA say, if therefore, when impell'd
By ocean's rage on his unhallow'd shore,
His dungeons deep a captive Monarch held:
If all that deadly rancour had in store
On him defenceless he presum'd to pour?
Or if, unable longer to withhold
From HENRY'S gripe his prey, for paltry ore,
For promis'd heaps of fascinating gold,
He therefore England's King to yonder Tyrant sold?

"Let him, my false accuser, now confess,
If ought but base and sordid hope of gain
Mov'd him thus long to keep me in duress,
Within those walls where grief and terror reign,
Whose mould'ring tow'rs unnumber'd murders stain,
And where the victims of his ruthless sway,
Unknown, unpitied, and unwept remain,
Wasting their slow and dreary hours away,
Amid surrounding scenes of horror and dismay?

"Him to the proof before ye all I dare,
Howe'er with av'rice or resentment fraught,
Howe'er in Austria's gains intent to share,
Or prompt to crown the ills his malice wrought!
Those heroes, who beneath my banner fought,
Who, when for glory and for life we strove,
'Mid Pagan bands unfading laurels sought,
Will best the falsehood of his charges prove,
And from my injur'd fame his calumnies remove.

"To you, brave Chiefs!  who now in solemn state
Assembled sit, I make my firm appeal.
Redeem me from yon proud oppressor's hate!
'Tis your's the Tyrant's baseness to reveal,
Your's is the pow'r a Monarch's woes to heal,
Again to place him on his rightful throne.
Your gen'rous spirits will his suff'rings feel!
Let your impartial justice now be shewn;
Defend my honour, Peers!  as ye revere your own.'

The warlike King thus ended his defence.
Throughout the crouded hall no sound arose,
But all seem'd wrapt in silence and suspense.
As when, no longer pent in caverns close,
Ungovern'd winds a river's course oppose,
Their furious blasts its fetter'd waves restrain,
And lock it's current in a brief repose;
Soon as subsides their potent force, again
The stream releas'd bursts forth and rushes to the main:

So stood the Peers in mute attention bound,
Enchanted by the magic of his tongue,
And ev'ry sense to agony was wound.
But soon the vaulted roof with plaudits rung,
When England's Peers tow'rds their lov'd Monarch sprung,
When him the Champion of their Isle they hail'd,
And on his neck in heart-felt rapture hung:
Then transport and unbridled joy prevail'd,
And shouts of wild delight the Tyrant's ear assail'd.

Soon as the first glad tumult was suppress'd,
With hand outstretch'd, the Prelate of Cologne
The dignified assembly thus address'd.
"Princes!  if well your sentiments I've known,
Your loyal hearts the force of truth will own:
RICHARD, redeem'd from all imputed blame,
Your suffrage shall restore to Albion's throne,
And him, with voice unanimous, proclaim
Pre-eminent alike in valour, worth and fame."

Not otherwise, than when, thro' Heav'n's expanse,
From the dark bosom of a nitrous cloud,
With coruscations bright quick light'nings glance,
Follow responsive thunders deep and loud;
So from the pitying and applauding croud
Rose pealing confirmations of his vote.
On his empurpled throne the Tyrant proud
Trembled:  him now accusing conscience smote,
And mingled ills at hand with terrors more remote.

"Was it for this," he cried, "insidious Fiend!
Thy double oracles my hopes inflam'd?
Was this the tempting prize, the glorious end,
At which, by thee misled, I vainly aim'd?
Where are the terrors which thy guile had fram'd
To crush my rival and confirm his doom?
Behold!  his full acquittal is proclaim'd:
He lives his pristine station to resume,
By my defeat more fresh his honour now will bloom.

"If thus your promis'd triumphs are fulfill'd,
If thus with disappointment ye repay
The machinations by yourselves instill'd,
The laws of Heav'n 'twere wiser to obey,
And like the herd to own it's juster sway.
Hence, loath'd deceiver!  leave me to repel
The dangers which invade me while I may!
Thus I renounce thy pow'r, abjure thy spell,
And bid thee elsewhere seek a proselyte for Hell!"

Straightway, descending from th' imperial seat,
With simulated, ecstasy he rush'd,
The destin'd victim of his fraud to greet.
Drops of regret from either eyelid gush'd,
And, spite of art, unconsciously he blush'd,
As England's King in his embrace he press'd.
With wonder struck, the gazing Peers were hush'd,
When RICHARD, with a look which scorn express'd,
Repell'd his proffer'd grace, and thus the Prince address'd.

"HENRY!  forbear, nor, with pretences weak
Of sudden feelings and ingenuous shame,
An injur'd King's regard attempt to seek.
Do'st thou esteem me so effete and tame,
As to conceive thy artifice can claim
A pow'r to cloak thy aggravated wrong?
To me his love and hatred are the same,
Who persecutes the helpless, courts the strong,
And mocks the rights which to humanity belong.

"What was thy conduct, when thy fortune smil'd,
And fate consign'd me to thy dreary tow'r?
No kindred pity then my pains beguil'd;
Then her worst ills calamity might show'r,
Then want might pang, and sorrow might devour;
Thou shed'st no tears, no wish thy soul impell'd
To mitigate the horrors of thy pow'r:
My worst endurance calmly was beheld,
And RICHARD'S suff'rings then his Tyrant's triumphs swell'd.

"Now, when Germania's potent Chiefs once more
Call me to freedom, break my galling chain,
And Albion's sceptre to my hand restore,
To court my friendship speciously you deign,
You drop the tear, commiseration feign,
And greetings foreign to your heart repeat.
Know, base dissembler!  that with like disdain
Your terrors and your blandishments I treat,
With like contempt your hate and amity I meet!'

He said, and follow'd by the splendid host
Forth from the hall triumphantly he went.
HENRY remain'd, in deep reflection lost,
His eyes intently on the portal bent,
While warring passions in his bosom pent,
And rage, to phrenzy wound, consum'd his soul.
When lo!  the vaulted roof with cries was rent,
Sounds of despair were heard and curses foul,
And 'mid the clamour strange rose many a ghastly howl.

"Heard ye yon din?"  the trembling Prince exclaim'd,
"Methought, amid those exclamations dire,
Some ruthless Daemon my sad doom proclaim'd.
Mark where he sits, enthron'd in clouds of fire!
Save me, Oh save me from his blasting ire!
See, where around him troops of spectres stand!
Now, 'gainst me lone and helpless they conspire,
Now, arm'd with vengeance, view th' insatiate band,
As each his wings extends, and waves his threat'ning hand!"

"My Liege!"  said Adolph, no such sounds we heard,
Nor have such phantoms, as your words bespeak,
To us, who here observant stand, appear'd."
"'Tis false," cried HENRY:  "see, their ranks they break,
With flight abrupt and swift descent they seek
To pierce my bosom with a blazing dart!
Hark!  heard ye not that loud and piercing shriek?
The venom spreads with agonizing smart,
Mounts to my bursting brain and racks my burning heart!"

As thus he said, fix'd and entranc'd he stood,
Haggard his mien, and desolate his air:
Scarcely his heart propell'd his mantling blood,
And wildly started his diverging hair,
As, gazing upward with distracted stare,
He saw, 'mid mingled flames and sulph'rous smoke,
Grim BELIAL'S hideous form.  With vengeful glare
The Fiend survey'd him, and, while thunders broke,
In accents harsh and loud the Tyrant thus bespoke.

"If thus my presence fills thy soul with fear,
What wilt thou feel, when thy devoted head
Eternal torments is condemn'd to bear;
When vengeful ministers around thee spread
Their toils infernal and their engines dread,
When fate's black banner is on high unfurl'd,
When hope for ever from thy soul is fled,
And, 'mid the fragments of a shatter'd world,
Thro' warring elements thy shiv'ring ghost is hurl'd?

"Can Heav'n by thin hypocrisy be mock'd?
Know, vile Apostate!  that with tenfold pow'r
It's ample hoards of vengeance are unlock'd.
Lo!  where around thee thick'ning tempests lour;
The deadly storm on thee prepares to show'r:
Before it's rage thy fainting spirit shrinks,
Flames scorch, and never-dying worms devour;
At every agonizing pore it drinks
Essential fire, and deep in Hell's dark caverns sinks!

"Such are the pangs which dastard guilt await.
Would'st thou escape them, and 'mongst Daemons hold
A just pre-eminence and seemly state?
Would'st thou with Satan's Chieftains be enroll'd?
Shake off upbraiding conscience, and new mould
To daring enterprize thy tim'rous soul.
Where'er thou bend'st thy way let men behold
Thy blasting influence and thy dread controul,
And curse their ling'ring fate 'midst tortures new and foul.

"Haste to Sicilia's blood-polluted shore:
Break the recesses of the royal dead;
On proud Salerno wide destruction pour,
Horror, despair, and desolation spread;
On Heav'n's anointed fiery vengeance shed;
Stretch'd on the rack her tortur'd nobles strain;
On brave and loyal GIORDANO'S head
Place an ignited crown, 'till, mad with pain,
His eye-balls start convuls'd, and bursts his kindling brain.

"So may'st thou deprecate th' avenging host:
So, when thou stand'st before th' infernal throne,
Thou may'st with confidence proclaim thy boast.
Then, when thy high atchievements shall be shewn,
Thy blazon'd crimes, thy meed by murders won,
Applauding Daemons shall thy merits tell;
Satan thy sanguinary worth shall own,
Loud shall the chorus of thy praises swell,
And HENRY's fame shall grace the chronicles of Hell!"

Thus spake th' insulting Fiend, and, with a look
Which pierc'd the trembling Prince, aloft he pass'd.
High in the murky air his plumes he shook,
And, as his bulk he rear'd with impulse vast,
The Pow'rs which rul'd the air, with dread aghast,
Survey'd him tow'ring.  On his course he held,
While round him howl'd the devastating blast:
From ocean's caves his billows huge it swell'd,
Tore thro' his beds profound, and far his tides impell'd.

Earth from it's centre deep confess'd the shock:
Back to their source the foaming rivers flow'd;
The mountains totter'd, and the threat'ning rock,
Which like the wreck of suff'ring nature shew'd,
Rent from it's antient base the champaign strew'd.
The full-orb'd moon, which, cloath'd in radiance white,
Thro' Heav'n's wide arch majestically rode,
Felt his dire presence, own'd his baleful might,
And, veil'd in sanguine clouds, no more led on the night.

With crash sublime horrific thunders peal'd,
And quick responsive light'nings, as they gleam'd
With sulph'rous flash, the potent Fiend reveal'd.
The mighty ruler of the storm he seem'd:
His sable locks in wild disorder stream'd,
Widely his sounding pinions he display'd,
While ghastly spectres round him hoarsely scream'd;
Pois'd in mid sky, his fatal course he stay'd,
And fill'd with conscious pride th' a&euml;rial strife survey'd.

But sad remembrance soon his thoughts engag'd:
No more the thunder's roll, the light'ning's glare,
Th' attendant Daemons' cry, his mind assuag'd.
Like meteors glancing thro' the gloomy air,
Or comets brandishing their deadly hair
Portending war and woe, his eye-balls flam'd:
He gaz'd, and with a voice which fell despair
Denoted, and bespoke his rage untam'd,
While echo'd Heav'n's high vault, th' imperious Fiend exclaim'd.

"Cease, ye contending elements!  to rage;
Your caves remote, ye threat'ning tempests!  seek,
Nor longer unavailing warfare wage;
No more around me, rattling thunders!  break,
Nor heav'n with sulph'rous gleam, ye light'nings!  streak;
And ye, attendant Fiends!  no longer swell
The song of vengeance which we fail'd to wreak:
For unprotected virtue breaks your spell,
And man triumphant mocks the vanquish'd pow'rs of hell.

"Not thus his mission MOLOCH bold forsook:
Exulting he return'd from Albion's land,
While loud applauses Pandaemonium shook.
But we, the glorious enterprise who plann'd,
On whom devolv'd our Sov'reign's dread command,
Stamp'd with dishonour, branded with defeat,
How in his awful presence shall we stand,
When RICHARD re-assumes his royal seat,
And Gallia's baffled King his dreaded wrath shall meet?

"But is the force of hell-born vengeance spent?
Are there not yet exhaustless stores of hate,
Mischiefs unnumber'd, in her caverns pent?
Shall we ignobly shun the great debate,
And, while our victim holds his antient state,
Debas'd and stigmatiz'd our glories veil,
And crouch in abject awe?  forbid it fate!
Tho' here in foreign climes our plans may fail,
Domestic discontents and treasons may prevail.

"Come then, in all the plenitude array'd
Of ruthless pow'r, ye ministers of ill!
Be here your engines terrible display'd,
Ye potent masters of the human will!
Hasten your Monarch's purpose to fulfil;
Bring hither Sophistry, Deceit and Lies,
Prepare your secret poisons to instil,
Which slumb'ring judgment craftily surprize,
Before whose influence dire abash'd allegiance flies.

"From Hell's recess, where plans of general woe
Employ thee, FALSE PHILOSOPHY awake!
Let Albion's shores thy blasting presence know;
There may'st thou order and religion shake,
There, deep in blood, thy thirst unsated slake,
And rear aloft thy snake-encircled helm;
'Till trembling crouds their antient faith forsake,
'Till frantic mobs the monarchy o'erwhelm,
And ruin wide involve the desolated realm.

"Thither repair thy standard to unfold:
While round thee far th' ensanguin'd torrent streams,
And madness and despair their station hold,
Disseminate afar thy flatt'ring schemes,
Thy plans of conquest, thy delusive dreams
Of crimes, of triumphs, of subverted thrones.
Urge thy fleet wings; th' eventful moment teems:
Methinks already, 'midst her heart-felt groans,
Her parricidal wounds, our empire England owns!"

Thus with terrific voice the Daemon spoke.
Hell's deep foundations trembled at his word;
Again around him pealing thunders broke,
Blue light'nings flash'd, tremendous tempests roar'd,
And bursting clouds in cataracts were pour'd:
Borne on the angry winds, in dreadful choir,
Utt'ring loud shrieks, unnumber'd phantoms soar'd,
Unsightly spectres, siends of aspect dire,
In sulph'rous smoke involv'd, or rob'd in lurid fire.

Above them all, her ample pinions wav'd
The potent Daemon FALSE PHILOSOPHY:
The jarring strife of elements she brav'd,
And, as she mounted, her ill-omen'd cry,
Foreboding unknown horrors, rent the sky.
Alluring was her look, her tints were fair,
Smooth was her brow, and melting was her eye,
Her cheek with smiles was dimpled, and her air
Of all that charm'd the sense disclos'd a semblance rare.

A magic mirror in her hand she rear'd,
On whose extended surface, polish'd bright,
The gay temptations of her rule appear'd.
There was pourtray'd young reason's dawning light,
Dispersing superstition's gloomy night;
There nations freed from thraldom were beheld,
Restor'd to liberty and nature's right,
While Monarchs from their mould'ring states impell'd,
And law and faith o'erthrown, her impious triumph swell'd.

With arms outspread Humanity was view'd,
Courting the giddy croud to venture near,
Then sternly wading thro' a sea of blood.
Anon would Sensibility appear,
On a dead sparrow drop a ready tear,
And plant her dagger in a parent's breast.
Now meek Philanthropy her palms would rear,
And talk of peace; then shake her crimson'd crest,
While thousands writh'd beneath her pitiless behest.

A flowing robe, of empyrean hue,
Folded around her to conceal her shape,
And shroud her foul and monst'rous limbs from view:
A compound strange of tyger and of ape,
Where many a filthy mouth was seen to gape,
Distilling human gore, and dropping gall,
Whence Treason, Rapine, Perj'ry, Murder, Rape,
And all that tortur'd suff'rance can appal,
Or wring the soul, were seen in countless swarms to crawl.

Tow'rds BELIAL bending her resounding plumes,
Loudly she thus the lordly Fiend address'd.
"Why from my caves remote and secret glooms,
Where I repos'd in uncongenial rest,
Disown'd my power, my energy suppress'd,
Provokes me now thy invocation dread?
On what devoted land, what clime unblest,
Must the stern vengeance of my arm be spread?
Where shall my stores of wrath, yet unemploy'd, be shed?"

"Brave spirit," cried he, well thy zeal I know,
And gladly thy thrice-welcome presence hail.
On Albion's realm prepare thy pow'r to shew:
Let thy commanding arts her sons assail;
There all thy incantations dire detail,
High on her cliffs thy blazing torch display,
And o'er her laws and government prevail.
Now for the proof.  Let Hell direct our way,
And stamp on RICHARD'S fall our long contested sway!"

He ceas'd.  Around th' infernal chorus burst,
Of woe prophetic, fill'd with threat'nings loud,
And furious boast of their intent accurs'd.
Thro' the mid-air, envelop'd in a cloud
Of pitchy darkness, rode the Daemons proud,
Employ'd their fatal purpose to disclose,
And organize the mischiefs they had vow'd.
Soon reach'd they where, unconscious of new woes,
From ocean's green expanse the Queen of Islands rose.

