Darkness, dismay, and terror round them reign'd,
And still more horrible the tempest grew,
While Hell's dread delegates their course maintain'd.
As nearer to the destin'd spot they drew,
They class'd their arguments and pleas untrue,
Whose fascinating charms the croud might lead
The tempting paths of ruin to pursue.
With savage transport as they scann'd the deed,
They deem'd their triumph sure, and hail'd their glorious meed.

As thus on high exultingly they soar'd,
Opposing tempests seem'd to shake the air;
New meteors darted, adverse thunders roar'd,
And, 'mid the cliffs and promontories bare,
Responsive light'nings, with sulphureous glare,
Shed o'er the gloom profound their dazzling gleam;
While from the mass loud yellings of despair
Discordant burst, and many a fearful scream,
Like those of suff'ring ghosts on feign'd Cocytus' stream.

Dread was the conflict, hideous was the war
Of fires electric, and across the sky
The mingling elements resounded far.
BELIAL their impulse felt:  with scowling eye
He view'd the meteors, and erecting high
His princely front, with proud disdain beheld
Th' infernal band, whom MOLOCH charg'd to try
Their impious artifice, abash'd, repell'd,
And forc'd to quit their prize, by English virtue quell'd.

Like Aetna, when from forth it's caverns deep
A fiery column seems at Heav'n to aim,
And molten lavas down it's huge sides sweep,
Burst his ungovern'd wrath:  contempt and shame
Consum'd his breast with agonizing flame.
"What leads ye thus," he cried, "your flight to trace?
Avenging SATAN shall your doom proclaim;
All hell shall echo with your foul disgrace,
And tenfold pangs reward your dereliction base!"

"No treach'rous purpose, no occasion slight,"
Him answer'd CIVIL DISCORD, leads my band
Thus to impel from Albion's shores their flight.
Appointed there, by MOLOCH's dread command,
To spread contagion o'er the suff'ring land,
And shake the old foundations of the state,
Our efforts well fulfill'd the woes he plann'd:
Swift and remorseless ministers of fate,
We stretch'd our ample rule, our desolating hate.

"Had'st thou, imperious Fiend!  as well atchiev'd
The purpose by our potent Monarch taught;
If the design by him so well conceiv'd,
Mature in wisdom, with experience fraught,
Thy boasted pow'r successfully had wrought,
Ne'er would our half-accomplish'd toils have fail'd:
Then joyful might we hell's domains have sought,
And prov'd how far our energy prevail'd,
While our triumphant host all Pandaemonium hail'd.

"But when, encourag'd most our task to urge,
We look'd our daring object to complete,
When bleeding England crouch'd beneath our scourge,
Thy blasted enterprise, thy mean defeat,
Unnerv'd our arms, and drove us to retreat.
His force disbanded, lost his fleeting sway,
JOHN yields to RICHARD his imperial seat;
While we, thy influence curs'd compell'd t' obey,
Nor less disgrac'd, resume tow'rds SATAN'S court our way."

Thus spake the Fiend courageous, and abash'd
Stood BELIAL self-convicted, while around
Their full-orb'd shields the furious Daemons clash'd,
And high arose the soul-appalling sound.
Awhile his voice the madd'ning clamour drown'd,
And oft in vain to still their rage he tried,
While his black brow with indignation frown'd,
And high his bosom heav'd with conscious pride.
At length the tumult ceas'd, and thus he loudly cried.

"May ev'ry plague which spirits can appal,
And all the curses of insulted hell,
On thy foul tongue, presumptuous railer!  fall.
Dar'st thou, malignant imp!  with rancour fell
On false constructions of my high feats dwell?
Hop'st thou remission of thy pangs to gain?
Contemptuously thy slanders I repel,
And treat thy obloquy with stern disdain.
Ne'er can my known deserts thy venom'd charges stain.

"Know, base defamer of my great renown!
When thou disown'd and stigmatiz'd shalt pine,
Immortal wreaths my tow'ring front shall crown:
For me their songs of triumph Fiends shall join,
When, perfected our new and bold design,
Beneath our sway shall bend this prostrate state.
Then, when fresh glories and success are mine,
Shrink from my vengeance; trembling then await
A retribution sure from BELIAL'S endless hate!"

"Cease this insensate brawl!  let judgment clear,"
Cried FALSE PHILOSOPHY, "her seat resume:
Calmly let each my sober mandate hear.
With high commission charg'd, behold!  I come
The darken'd world with novel lights t' illume;
Thro' seas of doubt my hand shall guide the helm,
My mirror shall disperse religion's gloom,
Inundate with new-fangled codes the realm,
And law, and government, and England's self o'erwhelm.

"Tis mine on man's credulity to build,
To work upon the rude and vacant mind,
Which ne'er the ray of wholesome knowledge fill'd,
Which, deaf to reason, to example blind,
Expects in sophistry the truth to find.
These are my darling engines, these I prime
With doctrines to corrupt the heart design'd,
Then lead them by degrees from crime to crime,
'Till nations swell my train and own my pow'r sublime.

"Too long by fate from enterprise restrain'd,
I burn my energy to signalize,
And dignify the freedom I have gain'd.
Before us, lo!  our scene of high emprize:
In one great cause unite, my bold Allies!
Let us our utmost force combine, to cope
With England's Monarch who our host defies:
Let us to vengeance give unbounded scope,
Nor cease, 'till full matur'd we view our budding hope!"

She said.  The Fiends, appeas'd by her discourse,
And anxious now to join their common aid,
Address'd themselves for flight.  With outcries hoarse,
And threats of woe, their wide wings they display'd,
And cut the air:  nor was their impulse stay'd,
'Till, north of London's princely tow'rs, they view'd,
Extending far it's deep-entangled shade
Impervious to the sun, an ancient wood,
Where many a moss-grown oak and tow'ring chesnut stood.

"Behold," cried FALSE PHILOSOPHY, "where best
Congenial darkness may your group conceal;
While I, alone, in borrow'd semblance dress'd,
To bold FITZ-OSBERT may my plans reveal,
And frame with him devices apt to steal
The unsuspecting suff'rage of the croud.
Soon as your succour requisite I feel,
My voice shall reach you with a summons loud:
Then rush to perpetrate the mischiefs you have vow'd."

Thus saying, from her lips distended wide
She blew a vapour, which with influence drear
Within it's atmosphere the crew might hide,
Lest, to some passenger approaching near,
Their forms uncouth and ghastly might appear.
Then, her dire quest impatient to renew,
With outspread wing she 'gan her course to steer,
Nor ceas'd her baleful travel to pursue,
'Till the far-stretching walls of London met her view.

Now to FITZ-OSBERT sought she to impart
Her purposes of meditated wrong.
Cool in pursuit of ill, his callous heart
Knew all the turns which to deceit belong.
Grave with the old, attractive with the young,
With winding art he prob'd the secret soul;
While, by the magic of his guileful tongue,
O'er their charm'd hearts insensibly he stole,
And held their captive wills with mild but strong controul.

Intent his private int'rest to pursue,
Of moral right or wrong he seldom thought:
Whene'er the flatt'ring object met his view,
With zeal deprav'd the readiest means he sought,
And fortune to his wish obedient wrought.
The servile arts of flatt'ry he could try,
When harsh necessity submission taught;
But, when successful, his demeanour high
Princes would proudly check, and potentates defy.

He aim'd at pow'r, but not for public good:
Tho' this pretext, in each insidious speech,
He us'd to cloak his plans jejune and crude.
On public grievances he oft would preach,
Insult the laws, the government impeach;
The People's Sov'reignty he would avow,
The holy right of Insurrection teach,
And how to bring their lordly tyrants low,
And how to make the Crown before it's vassals bow.

The talents which from nature he enjoy'd,
Great, comprehensive, and by toil improv'd,
For purposes unworthy he employ'd.
Thro' vice's path unblushingly he rov'd,
And all her varied blandishments had prov'd:
Nor, wrinkled tho' his front and hoar his head,
Left he the follies which his youth had mov'd;
For, tho' to passion he had long been dead,
A concubine for shew still shar'd his shameless bed.

Night had her zenith reach'd, when, with his crew
As late he revell'd, him the Daemon found.
From hand to hand the well-charg'd goblet flew,
Chaplets of fading flow'rs their temples crown'd,
And mirth and noisy laughter reign'd around.
Yet often, when the shallow jest was past,
Their host would broach his politics unsound,
His sarcasms on establishments would cast,
And drink to the success of his conceptions vast.

And oft the sluggard people he would blame,
Who, tho' by fortune's attributes unblest,
Preserv'd allegiance, and with suff'rance tame
Their native rights and inborn power suppress'd.
The maudlin band his reas'ning's force confess'd,
And, as their voices tun'd the factious strain,
Whose chorus loud their ardent hope express'd,
The sparkling bowl they persever'd to drain,
And hail'd the blissful hour when anarchy should reign.

When all were now with full libations hot,
FITZ-OSBERT rising beckon'd for a pause:
"Be not our BALDOCK'S health," he said, forgot:
He, the firm champion of our glorious cause,
As well his toils deserve, should meet applause.
For who than he more openly has dar'd,
To mock religion, government and laws?
Than him who less for human curbs has car'd,
Who better all the means of tumult has prepar'd?"

As thus he spoke, the Daemon, who conceal'd
The progress of their close cabal had watch'd,
Herself, in BALDOCK'S semblance clad, reveal'd.
The chamber door she suddenly unlatch'd,
And thus exclaim'd abruptly:  "Friends attach'd
To freedom and her cause, your BALDOCK hear:
Mark the new mischiefs which my brain has hatch'd,
And that superior artifice revere,
Which on a moment's base can plans for ages rear.

"While here in revelry and wassel loose
Those hours, which greater cares demand, are spent,
Anxious to further our aspiring views,
To scenes of higher aim my steps I bent.
Rife were the tidings of a new event:
RICHARD redeem'd from rigid HENRY's sway,
His favour'd minion, young BLONDEL, has sent,
His wants before our Regency to lay,
And ascertain the means his ransom to defray.

"Of aids immense he comes empower'd to treat,
And, ere to-morrow's sun his height attain,
The Queen her council has decreed to meet.
Throughout the people apprehensions reign,
Visions of imposts haunt each teeming brain,
And undefin'd suspicions round are spread.
All seek society in doubt to gain:
Here one in mystic silence nods his head,
Some whisper fears, while some more boldly speak their dread.

"With diligence the public marts I sought,
Where growing discontent I tried to nurse,
And captivating schemes of tumult taught:
Then quickly hasten'd to the crouded Burse,
And join'd the well-fed citizens to curse
The weighty burthens which the state requir'd.
As I declaim'd, each usurer hugg'd his purse,
And, as my well-wrought tale his fancy fir'd,
Each, to secure his pelf, with heavy steps retir'd.

"To many a convent and religious house
I pass'd, and, as on subsidies I spoke,
I found my eloquence their zeal arouse.
While thus my efforts discontent awoke,
And murmurs loud from every quarter broke,
I charged TRESILIAN with observant heed
The cred'lous mob to fury to provoke,
And, with the dawn, his clam'rous bands to lead
To Smithfield and St. Paul's a mutiny to breed.

"So far then are my projects all mature:
On you their final issue must depend,
'Tis your's their full completion to assure.
Whene'er the hustings proudly you ascend,
To you the raptur'd populace attend,
You the protector of their rights they hail,
The People's Guardian, and the poor man's friend.
Let not, when fortune smiles, your efforts fail,
But to the fav'ring breeze expand your flowing sail!"

As thus she spoke, tumultuous plaudits burst:
While fresh libations hail'd their welcome guest,
The noisy patriots his desert rehears'd.
At length, his voice prevailing o'er the rest;
FITZ-OSBERT thus his bold compeer address'd.
"Ere this, my BALDOCK!  thy superior worth
With admiration has my mind impress'd:
Now bow I to the talents which gave birth
To schemes, which may redeem the subjugated earth.

"'Tis true, in desp'rate posture are we plac'd:
Proscrib'd by all, pursued by RICHARD'S hate,
Our faith suspected held, our names disgrac'd,
Our heads obnoxious to a harsher fate.
The rich our practices abhor; the great,
From the excesses of our tutor'd croud,
Prognosticate the downfal of their state,
And, arguing from our principles avow'd,
Trembling foretel the ills which Albion's face may cloud.

"But, if thus desp'rate are our future views,
So desp'rate be the purpose of our soul.
Of ills the lesser prudence bids us chuse.
Our's be the effort fortune to controul,
To snatch at fame, to reach ambition's goal,
And from our past defeats new strength t' assume.
Let each again salute the gen'rous bowl!
To-morrow's sun shall light us to the tomb,
Or view this prostrate land await from us it's doom!"

He said.  The Fiend thus hasten'd to reply.
"United in one great and common cause,
On thy superior talents we rely.
Yet, ere we act, a moment let us pause,
Since thus, for more than fame or light applause,
We dare encounter perils yet unknown.
He, who in Civil Broil his weapon draws,
Must trust to energy and force alone:
From his determin'd hand the scabbard must be thrown.

"Our lines of action we must therefore chuse,
Must strain each nerve, and all that strength can give,
And all that talents can suggest, must use.
Those, who supreme in RICHARD'S favour live,
To check our progress eagerly will strive;
Nor can we hope, that he, against whose sway
We thus conspire, our treasons will forgive.
It well behoves us then our plans to lay,
And frame our great design while safely yet we may.

"When you the cred'lous citizens address,
In terms pathetic for their insults grieve:
Speak of the suff'rings which the state oppress:
With phrase high-sounding, lead them to believe
Their greedy governors their faith deceive,
And drain their purses for their proper use:
Instruct them how their errors to retrieve,
Give hints of fresh oppressions and abuse,
Of plans in embrio yet, and deep-concerted views.

"'Tis wond'rous how the magic of a word,
With emphasis pronounc'd and boldly vouch'd,
Can fortify an argument absurd.
By hardy lies in fervid language couch'd
The stubborn feelings of a mob are touch'd:
Let thy experienc'd hand but press the spring,
And those, who yesterday obedient crouch'd,
Will make the air with madd'ning tumult ring,
Defy the laws, and mock Religion and their King.

"Be thine the task their passions to inflame:
Prepare them well, and leave the rest to me.
A scheme I have to bend them to our aim,
To shew how ill the Rights of Man agree,
With what their Lawyers, Priests and Kings decree;
The doctrine of Resistance to instil;
To teach them that, for Nations to be Free,
For Men, born Equal, Nature's scale to fill,
They need but feel their strength and boldly speak their will.

"'But more of this when fit occasion suits.
My hand shall scatter far rebellion's seed,
And fatal shall be found it's deadly fruits.
Lo!  where the dawn appears:  with instant speed
Let each his station to assume proceed.
FITZ-OSBERT and myself to Smithfield go:
Thence, when my voice shall have proclaim'd my creed,
Our bands shall rush, and England's pow'rs shall know,
How deeply sinks the shaft when we direct the blow."

As thus the Daemon spoke her high behest,
Their BALDOCK'S eloquence the crew admir'd,
With conscious awe and strange respect impress'd.
As with the firmness which her plans requir'd,
And with augmented zeal their souls she fir'd,
Each to his post with hasten'd footsteps went.
Her views to further thus while all conspir'd,
Th' exulting Fiend, on projects vast intent,
Resum'd her form, and wide her pinions huge unbent.

Instant she rose, and, as aloft she hung,
Her voice with potency was heard around.
With the dread note the vaulted aether rung,
The lordly forests bow'd, the stricken ground
Re-echo'd with the soul-appalling sound,
And hills and vales confess'd it's baleful force:
Amid the battlements her walls which crown'd,
London beheld old Thames arrest his course,
Shrink from his ample bed, and seek his humble source.

As in convulsion dire all nature shook,
The trembling citizens, with fear aghast,
Leap'd from their couches and their roofs forsook:
On ev'ry side with tott'ring steps they pass'd,
And wildly round them looks of anguish cast.
Astounded and half-petrified they seem'd;
And, as still vibrated the pow'rful blast,
The final day of doom at hand they deem'd:
Some wept, some breath'd a pray'r, and some with horror scream'd.

The northern wood resounded with her cry.
Straightway th' impatient Fiends with out-stretch'd plume
Cut thro' th' umbrageous vault, and soaring high,
Their deadly purpose eager to resume,
Surmounted far the widely-spreading gloom.
They joined their leader, and with heedful care
Drank in her words foreboding England's doom:
Then, as she will'd, each hasten'd to prepare
The means by her devis'd the people to ensnare.

Scarce had the sun illum'd the eastern clouds,
And ting'd the meadows sparkling yet with dew,
When from each quarter rush'd tumultuous crouds.
Tho' in disorder seem'd the noisy crew,
A sep'rate leader each detachment drew,
And, as they march'd, instill'd his doctrines foul.
Their bands more num'rous ev'ry moment grew;
They rag'd, as if already Hell's controul
Dominion full maintain'd o'er each subjected soul.

Soon with their outcries hoarse Heav'n's concave shook:
For, eager now th' increasing mob to guide,
Some corresponding shape each Daemon took.
Meantime, their ruler spread disorder wide,
And seem'd o'er all their movements to preside.
To Smithfield's plain she led her followers loud,
Where, 'midst his crew by kindred crimes allied,
FITZ-OSBERT proudly stood.  Full low he bow'd,
And waving oft his hand address'd the list'ning croud.

"Awhile, my fellow-citizens!  attend.
Here the Defender of your Rights I stand,
And, as your Guardian, as the People's Friend,
I hail your num'rous and intrepid band
Prepar'd the wrongs of tyrants to withstand.
Too long beneath Aristocratic sway
Has crouch'd this injur'd and insulted land:
Too long has freedom veil'd her cheering ray,
While you beneath the rod of stern oppression lay.

"Where is the virtue which your fathers grac'd?
Are English worth and English valour flown?
Time was, when tyranny you boldly fac'd,
When resolution manfully was shewn,
And liberty by open force was won.
Now, sad reverse!  effeminate and tame,
Tho' gall'd by chains, in silent awe you groan,
Nor feel a spark of that coelestial flame,
Which fills the gen'rous heart and goads it on to fame.

"Was it for You, ye blind and senseless race!
That RICHARD warr'd in Palestine's defence?
If so, no doubt your profits ye can trace.
What are they?  Ye were suffer'd to dispense
From your hard hands the sum of his expence,
Your own subsistence, and your children's bread,
All that from want your starving babes could fence,
All that from penury could guard your head,
All that on wretchedness some comfort scant might shed.

"Ye gave all this, and what was your return?
The tyrant's grace magnificently shews!
You and your households his proud regents spurn.
Urge ye your wants?  your wishes they oppose,
With contumely treat you and with blows.
Do ye presume to taunt them with your right,
To plead your grievances, to state your woes?
Your modest suit contemptuously they slight,
And with disdain your claim of services requite.

"What more remains your slav'ry to complete?
Comes RICHARD back with high renown bedeck'd?
Do ye the conq'ring hero proudly greet?
No! &mdash; both his fortunes and his fame were wreck'd;
But you, fate's doom still ready to correct,
Are privileg'd his ransom to prepare:
'Tis your's the mass enormous to collect,
From all the savings of your anxious care,
From all ye hop'd your wives and progeny should share.

"Say, does your cottage some small comfort hold,
Some little luxuries from toil which spring?
Haste to the mart?  let them with speed be sold:
They summon you their utmost worth to bring,
To pay the Ransom of your glorious King!
Are ye reluctant?  See the slave of pow'r
The little all ye boast prepar'd to wring,
And tenfold horrors on your heads to show'r,
That pampered sloth may feed, and England's wealth devour.

"Oh friends!  oh once your country's dearest trust!
Desert not now your own, your children's cause:
To nature's feelings do not prove unjust.
Can priestly superstition make ye pause?
The statesman's craft, the tyranny of laws,
The policy of kings, the noble's pride,
All that stern av'rice from the poor man draws,
The gilded roof, the robe with purple dy'd,
All should to action prompt, to energy decide!

"I see your souls with kindling zeal inspir'd:
Your sensibility with joy I hail.
Now forward, and by sacred freedom fir'd
With force resistless tyranny assail:
Strike home, and o'er th' oppressor's pow'r prevail!
Let liberty's proud banner be unfurl'd;
Nor let your firm and gen'rous efforts fail,
'Till England's tyrants, from their high seats hurl'd,
Prove your transcendent might, and edify the world!"

Thus, with successful effort, thro' the croud
The practic'd Demagogue his poisons spread:
His bold assertions, his demeanour proud,
Work'd on their weak credulity, and led
Their passions now arous'd to purpose dread.
They echo'd all their daring leader spoke;
And, as their wrath the crafty Daemons fed,
Rous'd by their agency loud thunders broke,
Madness prevail'd, and rage in ev'ry breast awoke.

Soon as she saw the multitude array'd,
And fitly, as requir'd her prospects, class'd,
Thus with imperious tone the Daemon said.
"Suff'rance and tame submission now are past;
The hour of chastisement is come at last:
The altar trembles, and the blood-stain'd throne,
Mould'ring to dust, before your feet is cast.
The injur'd people now no more shall groan,
But wond'ring Europe soon their energy shall own.

"Thus it behoves you, citizens!  to act:
With fire the churches instantly consume;
Let the imperial treasury be sack'd;
The rich and noble to destruction doom;
Their hoarded wealth, drawn from yourselves, resume;
Their wives and daughters for your pleasure take,
Ransack their charms and revel on their bloom;
Let the proud city's firm foundation shake,
And from his dream of pow'r let despotism awake!"

Not otherwise, than when a tempest hoarse
Tears thro' the dark recesses of the deep,
It's caverns echo to the boist'rous force
Which ploughs it's foaming surface; rude and steep
Mount it's huge billows, by whose pow'rful sweep
The navies which triumphant rode are crush'd,
And time-worn rocks no more their stations keep;
So, with the hope of spoil and slaughter flush'd,
The savage mob as will'd th' imperious Daemon rush'd.

As 'cross the field they bent their desp'rate course,
FITZ-ALWYN met them, to whose trusty hand
Was delegated London's civil force.
When rose the tumult, he conven'd his band,
And now approach'd, determin'd to withstand
The bold conspirators who mock'd his sway.
Advancing with an air of high command,
He bad them their audacious progress stay,
And in more peaceful guise their grievances display.

"Is this a time to breed insensate broil,"
Firmly he cried, "when your lov'd King's release
Spreads gen'ral exultation o'er our isle,
When thro' the realm rebellion's horrors cease,
And suff'ring England hails returning peace?
Ere retribution on your crimes await,
This uproar foul and pestilent appease.
Shame on your leaders, whose pernicious hate
Impels you thus to dare the vengeance of the state!

"Would they your understandings weak persuade,
That, by exactions from the poor and low,
The ransom of your monarch must be paid?
Their evil purpose such assertions shew,
And prove their base intent:  for, People!  know
Untouch'd your humble cottages shall stand,
While from the coffers of the rich shall flow
A golden stream, sufficient to command
The freedom of your King from HENRY's griping hand.

"Ere yet stern justice rear her pow'rful scourge,
Declare why thus disorderly ye chuse
The purpose which assembles ye to urge.
What new-discover'd wrong, what fresh abuse,
Can this contempt of government excuse?
If need there be some burthen to remove,
Think ye that RICHARD will your suit refuse,
He, who ne'er ceas'd his fost'ring care to prove,
His best prerogative a gen'rous people's love?

"From him expect protection and redress.
By conquest grac'd, and dignified by fame,
He comes our long-suspended hopes to bless:
This morn his welcome messengers proclaim
That Dover's high cliffs echo with his name,
And that ere noon our Sov'reign we shall greet.
Meantime, whate'er your wishes or your aim,
Homeward let every citizen retreat,
'Till the glad trumpet's voice invite your King to meet."

Hush'd was the multitude:  no more their cry
Gave token of th' enthusiastic rage,
Which prompted them allegiance to defy:
Their Praetor's firm address, his councils sage,
His ripen'd wisdom, and his rev'rend age,
To check their enterprising zeal conspir'd.
Ill did FITZ-OSBERT of their aid presage,
When, as no more their bosoms vengeance fir'd,
Each on the other gaz'd and from the front retir'd.

High beat with anger and disdain his breast;
He rush'd amid the foremost of his band,
Whom with impressive voice he thus address'd.
"Why thus, when honour calls, inactive stand?
Why thus, when groans our subjugated land,
Attend ye to a crafty dotard's tale?
Shall we, when he commands, our force disband,
When vengeance calls us, and when fortune's gale
Propels our bark and fills propitiously our sail?

"What tho' of royal clemency he speak?
We want it not, nor are we brought so low,
As pardon by submission base to seek.
Be our's the task our native rights to shew!
When torn the golden circlet from his brow,
When rifled his Aristocratic throng,
RICHARD may learn a people's pow'r to know.
To triumphs then advance!  in union strong,
On your oppressors' heads avenge your country's wrong!"

As when a goldsmith holds his even scale,
With such precision is the balance fram'd,
A breath to discompose it can prevail;
So when FITZ-OSBERT loudly thus proclaim'd
His fell intent, and at their passions aim'd,
The populace before his influence bow'd.
Again he led them on with rage inflam'd,
Again, 'mid cries and imprecations loud,
The Fiend's presiding voice to fury urg'd the croud.

Arm'd with their staves or faulchions, as it chanc'd,
The felon crew, with fury unrestrain'd,
Against FITZ-ALWYN and his host advanc'd,
Who worthily their fierce attack sustain'd,
And, tho' unequal, well the strife maintain'd.
Now o'er the plain the Fiends with outspread wing
Hover'd, and wide the civic tumult reign'd,
When, suddenly, the air was heard to ring,
With loud and frequent shouts of "GOD preserve the King!"

Nearer and nearer drew th' enliv'ning sound,
Which thro' FITZ-ALWYN'S band new vigour spread,
And seem'd his rude assailants to astound.
But apprehension soon was turn'd to dread,
When, in array and marshall'd order led,
A puissant troop of warriors they beheld,
With England's far-fam'd Monarch at their head.
As o'er the plain their progress they impell'd,
Mix'd with the trumpet's note the voice of gladness swell'd.

As to the scene of action they came near,
Trembling and pale was seen the trait'rous band,
Conscious of guilt, and struck with sudden fear.
RICHARD, with looks of dignified command
Advancing tow'rds them, with an outstretch'd hand
Silence bespoke, and thus the croud address'd.
"When once again I hail my much-lov'd land,
Is thus my people's loyalty confess'd,
Is it by foul revolt my welcome is express'd?

"On England's wish'd-for and regretted soil,
Scenes diff'rent far from this I look'd to meet.
Can our long-fam'd and highly favour'd isle,
Where Freedom grac'd by Law has fix'd her seat,
Where Arts and Commerce blooming Science greet,
Sons so unworthy of herself produce?
Can she, where Virtue finds her last retreat,
Own as her offspring those, whose mad abuse
Disgrace her choicest gifts by riot and misuse?

"What are the ills of which ye thus complain,
Which thus ye seek by tumult to correct?
Does not on ev'ry hand the foaming main
'Gainst foreign insolence your coasts protect?
Do not your harbours Europe's wealth collect?
When war and ravage many a clime deplores,
Does not their rage your happier plains respect,
Where all her rich and variegated stores,
With bountiful excess, benignant Nature pours?

"If these no proofs of fond attachment claim,
Think on the priv'lege which your Laws insure,
Which stamps with dignity the English name.
No chains the freeman bind, no walls immure:
His humble roof from insult is secure;
There may he live, remote from care and fear,
Enjoy his tranquil home and pleasures pure,
There, independent, children's children rear,
To sooth his age, and life's concluding passage cheer.

"These blessings, from the cottage to the throne,
Are your's; these boons to all alike belong:
None but the Guilty the reverse can moan.
Here no oppressor, in injustice strong,
Can crush the weak, the innocent can wrong:
Impartial justice holds her equal scale;
The rich man's wealth, the pleader's clam'rous tongue,
Attempt in vain her judgment to assail;
Unbiass'd she decrees, and law and truth prevail.

"Nor, 'mid the happiness which fate bestows,
Forget t' enumerate your Sov'reign's love;
On his fond care with confidence repose.
With your's heav'n's will his fortunes interwove,
Doom'd him with you one common lot to prove,
To share alike your triumphs and distress.
Then say what evils your impatience move:
If ills there be, expect from him redress,
Whose best ambition is his countrymen to bless."

He said.  As when upon the arid plain
Exhausted by the sun's meridian pow'r,
Descends a gentle and refreshing rain,
New fragrance breathes from ev'ry herb and flow'r,
Love's carol bursts from each reviving bow'r,
And nature, in her freshest robe array'd,
Owns the sweet influence of the genial show'r;
So RICHARD'S voice the conscious people sway'd,
So their approving souls the force of truth obey'd.

Not so th' indignant Fiends.  Abash'd awhile,
And aw'd to silence, sullenly they stood,
As if constrain'd to quit their baffled toil:
But soon, intent on anarchy and blood,
With march imperious and demeanour rude
The Daemon cloath'd in BALDOCK'S form advanc'd.
Her closely follow'd the infernal brood:
And, while their arts the wond'ring croud entranc'd,
She cried, as o'er their ranks her scornful eye she glanc'd:

"For Tyranny when thus a Tyrant pleads,
Can ye with patience hear his vain discourse,
While by his hand your injur'd country bleeds,
And looks to you as to her sole resource?
Where are your feelings?  Where is nature's force?
Where those exertions which her insults claim?
Trace but your suff'rings to their parent source,
The fatal truth shall dye your cheeks with shame,
Harrow your hearts, and stamp with infamy your name.

"If yet ye are to learn a People's Right,
Or how your Tyrants lawless pow'r obtain,
Attend, while thus the myst'ry I recite.
While Despots and their councils I arraign,
Learn to regard them with a just disdain,
And Reason as the Test of Truth apply.
So shall dark error and her baleful train
Vanish, as pestilential vapours fly,
When the ascending sun illumes the eastern sky.

"Too long has Prejudice the world misled,
Too long, by int'rest and chicane deceiv'd,
Doctrines, from fancy and tradition bred,
Have ye as truths of stamp divine believ'd.
Now, by our New Philosophy repriev'd
From Law's restraint and stern Religion's sway,
Man shall behold his proper Rights retriev'd:
Illumination shall her torch display,
Her influence spread, and strike our tyrants with dismay.

"Behold by her the veil from error torn!
She says &mdash; By Fate's supreme and just decree,
All ranks of men with Equal rights are born:
Without respect to order or degree,
She bids ye Man, as nature made him, see:
If Independence o'er your souls preside,
Ye need but will it, and ye must be Free!
In all, and each, the faculties reside,
Which Providence ordain'd the bark of state to guide.

"The splendid truths she speaks with rev'rence treat:
Let ev'ry bosom own her sacred flame,
Confess her influence and her law complete.
These Rights, she says, the Sov'reign People claim&mdash;
'Tis their's alone their Governors to name;
If they offend to drive them from the helm,
And for themselves a Government to frame.
Gain but these points, and then the subject realm,
As best your purpose suits, new-model or o'erwhelm.

"From this concise and comprehensive code,
Those, gifted by Philosophy's new light,
Are taught to ascertain the only mode,
By which the Gen'ral Interests can unite,
And Human Government attain it's height.
The Sov'reign People must together meet,
And, in their Personal and Sov'reign Right,
Of modelling their Constitution treat:
Then, by a Compact new, the great design complete.

"Say, did ye thus your Constitution chuse?
No, my lov'd Citizens!  to you it came,
A foul abortion, full of wild abuse,
Founded on Tyranny and Conquest's claim.
Such as it is, your own, your country's shame,
Where lurks it?  No where is the phantom found!
Then use your high prerogative to frame
A Constitution adequate and sound,
And on the Rights of Man the glorious structure ground.

"Where did your Ancestors the priv'lege find
By partial laws your freedom to restrain?
What pow'r had they Posterity to bind?
Philosophy rejects it with disdain,
And gives you back your liberty again.
Behold!  her antient empire she resumes:
Let not her awful voice be rais'd in vain!
Inspir'd by her, once more our reason blooms,
Each man a Sov'reign grows, a Lawgiver becomes.

"Mark her behest. Each generation, free,
And unconfin'd, must for itself debate,
Must on it's laws and government agree.
She teaches too enlighten'd man to hate
The poor distinctions which have stamp'd him great.
By her Illumination taught to think,
He scorns on ancestorial pride to wait;
He sees the Artificial Noble sink,
And to a dwarf before the Natural Noble shrink.

"The People's Majesty let Tyrants know:
Yon Despot from his seat usurp'd impel,
And pluck the glitt'ring circlet from his brow.
Him let Philosophy exulting tell,
It is not We who 'gainst the laws rebel,
But 'tis that Laws our inborn vigour cramp!
Let your free souls with kindling ardour swell;
Let no weak feelings your exertions damp;
In characters of blood your new dominion stamp.

"Seize on the Church's rich and wide domain,
Whence to luxurious priests the treasures spring,
Which aid them o'er men's consciences to reign.
The Tythes, which from your callous hands they wring,
Resume, or to the gen'ral coffers bring.
New-model and re-organize the realm:
Each his own ruler, ev'ry man a King,
Let individual feelings guide the helm,
Abolish ranks, and all distinctions vain o'erwhelm.

"Such is the glorious and transcendent prize,
To which Philosophy her train invites:
This to assert and gain She bids ye rise.
Behold the People's Friend!  To urge your rights,
And crown your hopes, his patriot soul delights;
With you to triumph, or with you to bleed,
He mocks at danger, and oppression slights:
With him on Reformation's work proceed,
To full success your steps Philosophy shall lead!"

She said.  The Fiends, with exclamations loud,
Confirm'd her strange and horrible discourse,
And urg'd to instant act th' astonish'd croud.
Advancing now with shrieks and outcries hoarse,
They led 'gainst RICHARD their tumultuous force,
With rage infernal fill'd each ruthless breast,
Reckless of reason, pity or remorse.
As onward with accurs'd design they press'd,
Them with commanding voice their Monarch thus address'd.

"Ere yet, by this declaimer's arts misled,
You rashly stoop to his insidious lure,
And ruin's path beyond redemption tread,
Attend!  it well behoves you to be sure,
Where tend his views and arguments impure.
Like Sodom's fruit, with outward beauties grac'd,
They captivate the eye, the soul allure,
While all within the tempting rind encas'd
Is bitter and austere, disgusting to the taste.

"Am I a Tyrant?  let my people say!
No test but their unbiass'd voice I need.
Did I the rights of Despotism display,
Argue for Tyranny, for Slav'ry plead?
RICHARD'S free soul abhors the monstrous deed!
I bad you to your Present Bliss attend,
Your actual Rights and Liberties to heed,
On that pure Constitution to depend,
Where laws distinct and known each Englishman defend.

"Does the bold pleader call on you to say
Where lurks this Constitution?  where 'tis found?
Tell him, that brighter than the orb of day,
O'er England's face it's splendour beams around.
Not more your isle, 'midst ocean's waves profound,
It's station holds, than stands it's base secure:
Of Law, Religion, Truth, the wise compound,
From your forefathers flows it's current pure,
For countless ages fram'd your blessings to assure.

"Tell him, it's bond deduc'd from Heav'n's high law
By just gradations ev'ry rank connects:
Tell him, that, blending clemency and awe,
It equally th' oppressor's crime corrects,
Defends the weak, the innocent protects;
That, while it guards the Monarch on his Throne,
The Rights of all his People it respects;
That still, more lovely as the more 'tis known,
You feel it's excellence, and hail it as your own.

"Now settle what regard his sophisms claim.
He bids you Reason as your Test employ
In search of Truth:  I bid you do the same.
Say, does not England Liberty enjoy?
Who, when the proud invade, the rich annoy,
Does not in Law a sure protection greet?
Who shall presume your comforts to destroy,
When, watchful pow'r oppressive to defeat,
Complete and full redress impartial Juries mete?

"Wherein consists the Dignity of Man,
Which thus he urges with emphatic tone?
What is it, but his real state to scan,
To guard those blessings nature makes his own,
T' obey those laws whose excellence is known,
Religion's sacred duty to fulfil,
To love his neighbour, to do wrong to none,
To rule his passions, to subdue his will,
And in creation's scale his station due to fill?

"In what consist those New, those Equal, Rights,
To which the Demagogue, with boastful scorn,
My free and envied Englishmen invites?
Is it that men with Equal Pow'rs are born?
That none Superior Faculties adorn?
Do not to all far diff'rent gifts belong?
While some their limited endowments mourn,
Others, with minds and corp'ral functions strong,
To high distinction rise, and soar above the throng.

"Or would he in exact proportions class
Our island's substance, so that each might take
His due allotment from the gen'ral mass?
Let us a moment his arrangement make:
The unsubstantial bubble soon will break.
Can his high pleasure Nature's course restrain?
Would not each Birth the baseless fabric shake?
How could each Child it's just proportion gain,
How, when no more remain'd, his Equal Right obtain?

"Does he Varieties of Rank accuse?
Would he, that what all equally admire
All should for ever equally refuse?
First let him quench that spark of heav'nly fire,
Which prompts us high distinction to desire,
Which by progressive steps to virtue leads,
And all that worth and patriotism inspire;
Which urges on the soul to loftier deeds,
For which the statesman toils, for which the warrior bleeds!

"False is the doctrine, the conclusion vain,
That would mankind of Heav'n's best gift deprive,
And all their nobler energies restrain.
Destin'd for high pre-eminence to strive,
Let them renown from virtuous toils derive,
And by desert adorn their humble name.
Then may a man be truly said to live,
When his approving countrymen proclaim
His honour well atchiev'd, his all-surpassing fame.

"Nor will the proposition prove more true,
That with the People Sov'reignty resides.
How shall ye curb, amid these Monarchs new,
The talent which inferior judgments guides?
Int'rest in all societies divides
The gen'ral will, dominion all would gain,
And oft in russet frock ambition hides:
Make them All Kings, what magic can restrain
Their views discordant, or their sep'rate pow'r maintain?

"How shall these Sov'reigns their behest declare?
Where, when, and how, from ev'ry part remote
Shall they their functions to perform repair,
And on the public weal assembled vote?
Shall a Majority their will denote?
Involuntary homage forc'd to pay,
Thousands of Sov'reigns then their Rights may quote,
While, driv'n their neighb'ring monarchs to obey,
They crouch before their rule, and shrink beneath their sway.

"No, says the crafty demagogue, the will
Of each his own concerns must regulate.
Mark now, how this his object will fulfil.
Each individual represents the state:
No public councils then, no more debate,
But all what suits their sep'rate purpose chuse;
None on their neighbour's dispensation wait,
All may agree, may cavil or refuse,
And ruin wide shall spread, and riot and abuse.

"Again his ground he changes, and assumes
The Sov'reign People Rulers may elect.
If so, what of their Sov'reignty becomes?
But how shall I this Proteus strange detect,
When next he says, To cure the state's defect,
The People may, by one supreme compact,
New model it, and all it's faults correct?
If they indeed such mock'ry can transact,
Who, if his doctrine holds, shall ratify their act?

"No laws, he said, Posterity can bind,
Or those who have not by their votes concurr'd;
That, as by nature all are unconfin'd,
Each generation must in turn be heard,
And each successive sanction be preferr'd.
If so, his grand compact, his suffrage full,
Compels him to the consequence absurd,
That this Supreme, Unalterable rule,
Each new-born babe may change, may frustrate, or annul.

"Such is the Code, sophistical and new,
By which he hopes your passions to awake.
Now mark his purpose, and discern his view.
He looks my gen'rous Englishmen to make
His engines England's commonwealth to shake,
To lead you on thro' unheard crimes he tries,
To spurn religion, and your laws to break,
That he, FITZ-OSBERT, and their crew may rise,
And, by their country's fall, attain their wish'd-for prize.

"And, if they could their parent state destroy,
Have you reflected how their new-found sway
These arbitrary despots would employ?
Like vultures swooping on their helpless prey,
Their bloody tyranny they would display,
Your wealth with greedy av'rice would devour,
Laugh at your groans, and mock at your dismay.
None so exult calamity to show'r,
As those who rise by crimes to unexpected pow'r.

"Then think in time, and scorn their base pretence.
Exert those feelings you so oft have shewn,
That steady loyalty, that sterling sense,
By which the English character is known.
Believe and make your Country's cause your own:
Shew to these demagogues in treason bold,
You love your Laws, your Altars, and your Throne;
That, firm and loyal, you will ne'er behold
Your country to her foes by home-bred traitors sold."

Thus spoke the gallant King.  In ev'ry breast,
Deep sank his sage and eloquent discourse:
Enlighten'd by the truth, the croud confess'd
It's potent influence and resistless force.
Far otherwise the Fiends:  with wild concourse
Tumultuously they rush'd, and, as they rais'd
Their sanguinary shout and outcry hoarse,
Harsh thunders roll'd around, blue light'nings blaz'd,
And shook the earth, as if by dire portents amaz'd.

Each moment grew more fertile in alarms,
And, 'mid the crash of elements, arose
The shrieks of Daemons summoning to arms,
When RICHARD loud exclaim'd:  "No mortal foes
Can thus the course of nature discompose:
With more than human instruments they deal.
To Him, who Hell's foul purpose can disclose,
Let us, my friends!  with confidence appeal,
Let us implore our GOD their presence to reveal.

"Oh Thou!  before whose all-transcendent name
Th' infernal pow'rs in mute obedience bend,
Protect us, and defeat their trait'rous aim!
To England and to England's King attend!
Them may thy gracious providence defend
From pois'nous doctrines which corrupt the soul.
While thus our pray'rs to thy high throne ascend,
Oh!  may thy pow'r their hateful arts controul,
And strip the thin disguise which shrouds their semblance foul."

Thus with uplifted hands the Monarch spoke.
In trembling expectation stood the croud,
When, sudden, on the right new thunders broke,
Rolling along with intonation loud;
Heav'n's wide concave with fiercer light'nings glow'd,
With angry blast th' increasing tempest swell'd,
Enveloping th' horizon in a cloud,
Like that, which, ere by Fiat high dispell'd,
O'er Chaos and the Deep uncouth dominion held.

The anxious multitude, with wild affright,
Beheld the face of nature thus revers'd,
When, thro' the mantle of surrounding night,
Flames fetid and to sense obnoxious burst,
And shrieks appalling, as of souls accurs'd,
In chorus dread and horrible arose;
Loud as the trumpet, which th' Apostle erst
Heard, when the Seraph prophesied of woes,
With blast which pierc'd the heart and life's warm current froze.

But soon more fearful prodigies were seen.
Compell'd their forms tremendous to resume,
From ev'ry quarter rose the Fiends obscene:
Each, as he mounted, wav'd his sable plume,
And with resounding stroke cut thro' the gloom.
Hov'ring they gaz'd around, while o'er the rest
Seem'd FALSE PHILOSOPHY her state t' assume,
While all, save BELIAL, her their Chief confess'd.
Sternly she gaz'd, and thus the pious King address'd.

"Curs'd be the influence, which our host compels
Thus to forego our half-accomplish'd aim,
Which blasts our projects and thy triumph swells.
RICHARD!  'tis thine to prosper by our shame,
By hell's defeat to dignify thy name,
And, by this high atchievement, to adorn
Th' immortal wreath reserv'd for thee by fame:
While we, our purpose lost, our honour shorn,
Prepare far hence to meet our potent Monarch's scorn.

"Exult!  for more thy virtue now has done,
Than all the toils thy constancy sustain'd,
Than all the glories which thy valour won,
And all the conquests which thy armies gain'd.
With False Philosophy to have maintain'd
Successful warfare, to have stemm'd the tide
Of principles, from Hell's recesses drain'd
To crush the world and spread confusion wide,
May well thy transport raise and justify thy pride.

"Exult!  meanwhile to other climes I go,
There, in sequester'd solitude, t' await
A time more fit my pow'rful arts to shew.
For come there will a time, prescrib'd by fate,
When FALSE PHILOSOPHY may urge her hate,
And reign triumphant o'er debas'd mankind:
When proud dominion o'er the good and great,
When human actions, and the human mind,
With sway unlimited to her shall be consign'd.

"Then, arm'd with terror and distain'd with blood,
My vengeful hand shall rule degen'rate Gaul,
And spread my far-exterminating flood.
Then, when my spells the shrinking soul appal,
Myriads of rebels shall obey my call,
Wide shall my fatal standard be unfurl'd:
Whate'er religion sacred held shall fall,
From regal state her monarch shall be hurl'd,
And philosophic mobs shall rule the bleeding world.

"Then, when amid the universal wreck
Of thrones, of altars, principles and laws,
A faithless nation follows at my beck;
Then, when victorious Hell distends her jaws,
And sends forth hosts to aid our ruthless cause,
Let England tremble!  Some shall then be found,
Who here shall greet my doctrines with applause,
Whose felon-daggers shall their country wound,
Whose hands my baleful tree shall plant on English ground.

"Then shall new BALDOCKS, new FITZ-OSBERTS, rise,
Pervert the weak, with crouds tumultuous join,
And, their fell purpose scorning to disguise,
Associations of rebellion sign,
And openly with England's foes combine.
Then horror far shall spread and wild dismay,
While well matur'd shall flourish my design,
While the mad people law shall disobey,
Contemn the voice of GOD, and mock their Sov'reign's sway.

"These and worse ills await thy menac'd realm,
Unless, what fate will scarce to hope allow,
Some honest Statesman then shall guide the helm;
Who, while his breast with youthful zeal shall glow,
Shall tear the mask from frenzied faction's brow,
Shall boldly meet the philosophic herd,
Shall, with an eloquence unrivall'd, shew
How weak their plea, their tenets how absurd,
And call on Albion's sons the patriot sword to gird.

"Then, should indeed this prodigy appear,
In vain would FALSE PHILOSOPHY disclose
Her bloody presence, or her banner rear:
Europe, exhausted by convulsive throes,
Redeem'd by him' from slaughter would repose;
While envied England, blest with pow'r and fame,
Would rise superior to confed'rate foes,
Peace and good-will tow'rds all mankind proclaim,
And high in glory's fane record her guardian's name!"

Thus with prophetic rage the Daemon said:
But now th' attendant Fiends impatient grew;
As widely their ill-omen'd wings they spread,
Round her with screams and blasphemies they flew,
And, urging her her travel to pursue,
Drown'd with their hoarse acclaim her potent cry.
Thro' the black vapour soar'd th' infernal crew,
While, wrapt in mute suspense, with uprais'd-eye
RICHARD beheld them mount and cut the troubled sky.

With them the storms which mark'd their progress pass'd:
Yet still the multitude, with dread impress'd,
Gaz'd on the vacant air with looks aghast,
When thus the King their awe-struck ranks address'd.
"While, as contrition harrows ev'ry breast,
Each self-convicted and upbraiding soul
Shudders at what yon vengeful Fiend confess'd,
Unite to thank the Pow'r, whose strong controul
Prevail'd their plans to foil, to crush their treasons foul.

"To all a full forgiveness I proclaim,
Save to the wretch, whose heart to virtue dead,
Who, deaf alike to duty and to fame,
Presum'd this rash conspiracy to head,
Whose statements, void of truth, my people led
To court destruction and their King t' o'er-awe.
His death shall cure the ills his vices bred.
Now hence. &mdash; From errors past instruction draw:
Fear GOD, obey your King, and venerate the Law!"

