Beneath the western wave repos'd the sun,
When from the forest, late th' eventful scene
Of spells accurs'd, RICHARD his march begun.
Passing Varengeville and it's precincts green,
They cross'd the gentle and meand'ring Ene,
Which, from Pavilli gliding, near Duclair
Pays it's clear tribute to the princely Seine.
Thence, thro' extending plains and vallies fair,
With vig'rous steps they aim'd to reach La Forestiere.

Her chastest beauties round them to disclose
Nature industrious seem'd.  It was a night,
When all creation courted soft repose,
When the rapt poet's soul might wing it's flight
To realms of bliss and regions of delight.
Not calmer was the hour, when Hero stood
And wav'd her flaming torch from Sestos' height,
While bold LEANDER plough'd the billows rude,
And for her love disdain'd the Hellespontic flood.

Still tinted were the western Heav'ns with red,
Glowing, tho' soft; which, by gradations due
Melting, a gleam of solemn lustre shed
O'er the first tinge of empyrean blue.
As from it's verge th' ascending arch withdrew,
The firmament with deeper azure glow'd;
Throughout, their destin'd orbits to pursue,
Innum'rous stars and planets bright were strew'd,
While 'midst her dazzling train the moon majestic rode.

Her temper'd radiance far around she shed.
While many a wood, impervious to her ray,
Obscurely shrouded rear'd it's waving head,
O'er the far-spreading plains her beams would stray,
On the still lake would undulating play,
Or with mild touch some rippling stream would gild.
No sounds were heard, save where the owl her way
Whooting pursued, or Philomela thrill'd
Her soul-inspiring song, and melody distill'd.

By night advancing, halting in the day,
Yet always by their King's attention cheer'd,
O'er the Caletian field their toilsome way
With steady course the gallant warriors steer'd.
Inspir'd by thirst of fame they persever'd
Unceasingly their duty to fulfil,
'Till, on the second morn, the sun appear'd,
Scatt'ring his beams across the vine-clad hill,
Which skirted with its base the plain where stood Foville.

Here, to recruit their strength, awhile they stay'd:
But soon, as high their breasts with ardour swell'd
T' assert the cause of innocence betray'd,
Their progress with redoubled zeal they held.
Not far had they advanc'd, when they beheld
A goodly troop, which o'er the distant plain,
As if on speed intent, it's route impell'd:
Their vig'rous coursers seem'd to spurn the rein,
And o'er the dusty field came pouring on amain.

Ere long, superbly waving in the gale,
The English Red-Cross banner they espied:
Surmounting Gallia's flag and lilies pale,
It wanton'd in the breeze with lordly pride.
The well-arm'd Knight, who seem'd the host to guide,
A charger huge of Frieseland breed bestrode,
Whose hoofs afar resounded:  by his side,
In converse close a graceful damsel rode,
While loose her veil and robes of snowy whiteness flow'd.

Approaching nearer, with a sudden spring
Their leader leap'd to earth:  with bended knee
He paid obeisance to the martial King,
Presenting to his hand a massive key.
From Fecan's gates, again from thraldom free,
"This pledge accept," he cried; "her walls confess
Thy rightful sway, and wait thy high decree.
Heav'n and it's Saints have deign'd our toils to bless,
And grac'd our righteous cause with merited success."

"My best-belov'd BLONDEL!"  the Prince rejoin'd,
"The pow'rs immortal, which the brave defend,
Have led thee on, and in thy cause combin'd.
Hither we came our succour prompt to lend,
And from impending harm to save my friend:
But thy exertions have out-stript our speed.
Say, by what wond'rous means, ere yet descend
The fourth day's shadows, hast thou wrought a deed,
Which fixes on thy brow fame's ever-blooming meed?"

"Honour and Love," the youthful hero cried,
"Combin'd with Loyalty my arm have brac'd,
And Providence my efforts deign'd to guide.
Thus fortified, my vent'rous course I trac'd,
Brav'd the wild sea, embattled legions fac'd,
And sav'd yon peerless maid from threat'ning fate.
Triumphs more ample yet my toils have grac'd:
Here, in your presence, stands the Prince ingrate,
T' abide his Sov'reign's will, his censure to await."

Him interrupting, thus the King exclaim'd.
"Awhile th' eventful narrative suspend:
With him, whose arts 'gainst England's welfare aim'd,
Whose vaulting hope made him from duty bend,
And all the sacred bonds of kindred rend,
It first behoves to speak.  Awhile retire,
And bid your troop at distance due attend:
Whate'er contempt his conduct may inspire,
The semblance of respect a Brother's claims require."

The warlike band delay'd not to retreat,
While, with an air which inward grief express'd,
RICHARD advanc'd the captive Prince to meet.
Silent he stood, awaiting his behest;
Downcast his eyes; his arms across his breast
Folded dejectedly; by shame and fear,
Mark'd strongly on his varying cheek, depress'd:
As if tormented by reflections drear,
He sigh'd, and trickling fell from either eye a tear.

As struggling passions in his breast awoke,
RICHARD, regarding him with fix'd disdain
And temper'd firmness, thus the Prince bespoke.
"If thou hast feelings, do they not arraign
And sting thy soul, that thus we meet again!
That thus in arms and menacing array,
Meanly enroll'd in perjur'd PHILIP'S train,
Thou dar'st his impious standard to display,
And league with him thy King and country to betray?

"My Brother! &mdash; Does not thy degenerate heart,
When thus my lips pronounce the once-lov'd name,
With agonizing recollections smart?
Does not thy conscience at it's sound proclaim
Thy frontless treasons and recorded shame?
Unworthy offspring of our royal line!
Could not the memory of our father's fame
The impulse check, which led thee France to join,
And 'gainst thy ligeance sworn with traitors to combine?

"Ere yet, seduc'd by their insidious plan,
Rebellion's lure thy gratitude betray'd,
My bounty thy ambitious hopes outran:
Seven Earldoms thy supreme command obey'd;
Thy banners on eight castles were display'd,
Whose territories form'd thy rich domain;
To thee a gen'rous people rev'rence paid.
Did I in ought thy grasping hopes restrain?
Say, was to RICHARD e'er prefer'd thy suit in vain?

"Yet could not these thy grasping soul content.
When our great cause had summon'd me away.
When England by domestic ills was rent,
When I, to Henry's tyranny a prey,
Within the tow'rs of dread Trivallis lay;
When honour, duty, and affection's voice
Bad you a zeal pre-eminent display,
Then were disgrace and infamy your choice,
Then could an English Prince in England's woes rejoice.

"Imagine not to gild with vain pretence
These aggravated wrongs:  have not recourse
To arts which ill can gloss thy rank offence,
Lest thy weak artifice my soul should force
To purpose more severe.  Prey to remorse,
From England exil'd, seek some distant coast,
Find, if thou can'st, from conscience some resource,
Implore forgiveness for thine impious boast,
And blush whene'er thou think'st on what thy crimes have lost!"

As thus with mingled dignity and scorn
The Monarch spoke, the Prince's heaving breast
Seem'd with the war of struggling passions torn.
Tears for a while his inward pangs confess'd,
Then, falling at his feet, his knees he press'd;
"Oh!  deign a self-accusing wretch to spare,"
He cried, "Oh!  deign his sentence to arrest!
Oh!  let him strive his errors to repair,
But oh!  condemn him not to exile and despair!

"How can I best my conscious guilt proclaim,
How my remorse and penitence define,
Or make a fit atonement for my shame?
Each secret of thy foe, each deep design,
Whisper'd in confidential trust, are mine;
His plans and all his purposes I know:
These, if thou deign'st to pardon, all are thine.
His failings and his weakness I can shew,
And well can I direct thy unexpected blow.

"Shall I to thee his private haunts betray,
And thro' blind paths, by me well understood,
To his destruction shall I lead the way,
Where thy avenging sword may drink his blood,
And by one stroke hostilities conclude?
Oh!  try me thus, but spare my cruel doom!
Pity these tears, be merciful and good!
Let me again my wonted state resume!
Think on our honour'd Sire, Oh!  think on her whose womb&mdash;"

"No more!" exclaim'd th' indignant Monarch:  "Cease
Thy fruitless tears and lamentation vain!
Thy recent guilt they serve but to increase.
Could he by fraud the Gallic kingdom gain,
Think not that RICHARD would his glory stain,
Or owe success to stratagems so base.
Tempt not to fury then my just disdain,
Nor, while thy deeds belie their gen'rous race,
Our parents' sacred names let thy false tongue disgrace.

"If, stampt with infamy, by all despis'd,
Life yet has charms, take it, and meanly live:
If poor distinctions still by thee are priz'd,
And vanity the sense of shame survive,
Still to maintain thy old precedence strive.
Small faith to thy professions I attach:
I know thee, John, and, while I thus forgive,
I mark thy working passions on the watch,
Offences fresh to frame, and treasons new to hatch.

"But, tho' I know thee well, I fear thee not:
Tho', in my absence, from thy recreant soul
O'erweening hope prevail'd my rights to blot,
And urg'd thee on to deeds of import foul,
My presence shall thy enterprize controul.
Exist then, if thou wilt, of honour shorn;
Let pageantry for character console:
The object of a loyal nation's scorn,
Let thy despis'd estate succeeding traitors warn!"

Thus with commanding air the Monarch said,
And turning tow'rds the host, where brave BLONDEL
At distance due with CHARICLAEA stay'd,
With courteous phrase he urg'd the Chief to tell
The chances which his vent'rous quest befel.
"When thus," he cried, "your fortunes you narrate,
Fear not on ev'ry circumstance to dwell:
My friend's renown, and CHARICLAEA'S fate,
In ev'ry English heart strong int'rest must create."

Hush'd was the croud, when thus commenc'd the Chief.
"On that dread night, when from Normannia's Park
The Princess was convey'd, for her relief
With fifty knights I hasten'd to embark.
The moon with clouds was veil'd, the sky was dark,
No favouring planet shot its guiding ray;
Yet seem'd propitious winds t' impel our bark,
Which swiftly thro' Seine's waters cut it's way,
And ample progress made ere dawn'd approaching day.

"As thus our course we held, in converse grave
Our time we pass'd, how best the peerless Maid
From her audacious ravishers to save.
Their various projects many a Chief display'd,
And many a plan and stratagem was laid,
Which still some obvious difficulties cross'd:
At length, brave SOMERVILLE, who nought had said,
But on whose judgment all our band repos'd,
Rose, and at my request his counsel thus disclos'd.

'When bold Sir GUALTER, from whose loins I boast
To trace my lineage, left his father's seat,
And join'd his vassals to the Norman host
Which prov'd it's worth by HAROLD'S dire defeat,
He gain'd at Wichnovre a calm retreat.
But still regardful of his kindred's claim,
Them oft with kind remembrance would he greet,
And, when occasion suited, hither came,
More by fraternal love united than by name.

'The like observance he his offspring taught,
And they their children.  Oft my rev'rend Sire,
With pious care and warm attachment fraught,
Has left his home, impell'd by strong desire
From pomp and courtly splendour to retire,
To view his ancestorial shades once more.
The same fond impulse seem'd my heart t' inspire:
With him I lov'd to trace our parent shore,
And all the scenes enhanc'd by absence to explore.

'Once, as from Pevensey our accustom'd course
In a small bark tow'rds Honfleur we pursued,
An equinoctial storm with threat'ning force
Assail'd us suddenly:  the billows rude
Wash'd o'er our deck, and with alarm renew'd
The wild wind as it roar'd around we heard.
Near us at length stern Fecan's cliffs we view'd,
Which ruggedly their beetling summits rear'd,
While o'er them tow'ring high her battlements appear'd.

'By fortune favour'd, with assiduous care
A refuge in the harbour we obtain'd.
There, our dismantled vessel to repair,
And to refresh our crew, to stay constrain'd,
Awhile within the fortress we remain'd.
Incessant tho' our toils, and brief the space,
Some knowledge of it's wide extent I gain'd,
And heedfully survey'd the wond'rous place,
Intent it's nat'ral strength and labour'd works to trace.

'Wond'rous indeed it is, sublime, and dread.
An hundred fathoms from the sea in height,
The cliff tremendously exalts it's head:
Half-way the sea-birds, winging their swift flight,
Skim thro' the air, and mock the dazzled sight;
As he looks downwards from it's perilous verge,
The giddy sentinel in wild affright
Shudders, while, far beneath, the roaring surge
Breaks, and the tyrant waves the rocks embattled scourge.

'Thus tow'rds the sea impregnably secur'd,
Tow'rds it's small river and th' adjacent land
The safety of the town is well assur'd.
On ev'ry side enormous ramparts stand,
High heave her mounds, her ditches wide expand,
Unnumber'd turrets menacing the sky,
Charg'd with machines, with vet'ran warriors mann'd,
In ev'ry quarter meet th' astonish'd eye,
And seem extrinsic force superbly to defy.

'Against such works, howe'er your valour known
May urge th' attempt, expect not to prevail.
True courage never is by rashness shewn:
Where order'd armies might in vain assail,
Our little band, howe'er resolv'd, must fail;
Unless indeed some means we could devise,
By which the cliff we might succeed to scale,
And to the ramparts unobserv'd might rise:
Then might our bold attack th' unheeding guard surprize.'

"As thus the Chieftain spoke, involv'd in thought
I weigh'd his words, and straight my working mind,
Ardent for fame, a bold idea caught.
Forthwith it's execution I assign'd
To SOMERVILLE, and bad him try to find
The means of ent'ring Fecan's guarded wall.
BAYNTUN with him his ready service join'd,
Whom, whatsoe'er of peril might befal,
I knew no toils could check, no perils could appal.

"Without delay we sought the northern strand.
They, their commission eager to conclude,
Hasten'd near Bolbec's little stream to land,
And by Ilebonne their hardy route pursued.
Our purpos'd course we instantly renew'd.
As night commenc'd, bold Havre's point we pass'd,
And, with the rising sun, at distance view'd
Fecan's proud cliffs, soaring distinct and vast,
Which o'er the subject main their lengthen'd shadow cast.

"Low'ring our mast, at distance due we kept,
And, tow'rds a creek obscure our cautious way
Bending, our oars the ocean's surface swept.
There, while our bark secure from notice lay,
We pass'd impatiently the tedious day.
Alternately we labour'd and repos'd:
Anxious alike our ardour to display,
And by the project we had form'd engross'd,
We perfected our task ere yet the ev'ning clos'd.

"The sky was overcast:  thick-mantling night
Spread o'er the firmament her murky veil;
No planet gleam'd; no star with friendly light
It's face adorn'd:  sometimes, before the gale
Propell'd, the clouds with swifter course would sail,
And momentary chasms of void space leave,
Thro' which the moon, with beams subdued and pale
Glancing, the waves allow'd us to perceive,
Which round the rocky base seem'd sullenly to heave.

"The gloom, congenial to our views, we hail'd.
Quitting our friendly creek, along the coast,
Now half-deserted by the flood, we sail'd,
While Fecan's cliffs, their heads in darkness lost,
Tower'd o'er us.  Turning to my gallant host,
Who silently survey'd them, thus I said:
'Behold, brave comrades!  our appointed post;
Here must the proof of English worth be made,
Here must your gen'rous scorn of danger be display'd.

"'What tho' tremendously these barriers rise,
What tho' their base incessant billows lave?
Honour commands, and leads us to our prize!
From trait'rous force the Cyprian Maid to save
She bids us intermediate danger brave.
Should we, her call obeying, meet our doom,
Should fate decree us here a wat'ry grave,
Our memory dear to chivalry shall bloom,
And valour's choicest wreaths shall decorate our tomb.'

"Not long did we await, for from the height
Wide-waving soon a flaming torch we view'd:
It's glare shot thro' the shades obscure of night,
And mark'd with partial gleam the summit rude.
Judging that SOMERVILLE had well pursued
His enterprising course, without delay
From our small deck another torch I shew'd,
And thrice disclos'd it's agitated ray;
Then, hurrying to the beech, upon our oars we lay.

Around us all was dreary, still and dark,
When, as the crag impatiently we eyed,
A cord descending slowly tow'rds our bark,
And undulating o'er the mountain's side,
The rising breeze obeying, we espied.
To this the cable, thro' whose long extent
Short sticks at distances were fix'd, we tied,
By whose propitious aid we boldly meant
To urge our desp'rate course, and dare the dread ascent.

"Again our flaming signal we display'd.
Straightway our friends their labour 'gan to ply,
And soon the huge machine their hands obey'd.
Far as our sight it's progress could descry,
We saw it slowly mounting tow'rds the sky.
In agonizing silence still we gaz'd,
Now a pray'r off'ring, breathing now a sigh,
As on the height our wistful eyes we rais'd;
When suddenly the torch again resplendent blaz'd.

"'Comrades!"  I cried, "th' eventful time is come,
When on ourselves and Heav'n we must depend.
The Pow'r, whose will must regulate our doom,
The boldly-daring soldier will befriend.
Say, who among ye all will first ascend?
Whom as our vent'rous leader shall we greet?
I, as the last, your progress will attend,
And resolute my purpose to complete,
My sword shall bar his way who meditates retreat.'

"I said.  One impulse seem'd t' inspire my host;
All at pre-eminence in danger aim'd,
Alike all courted the distinguish'd post,
When SEGRAVE, louder than the rest, exclaim'd,
'Sprung from a race of valiant captains, fam'd
For deeds whose lustre decorates our clime,
By me my ancestors shall ne'er be sham'd:
Be mine the glorious priv'lege first to climb,
And first to meet the foe on yonder heights sublime!'

"In vain I strove to moderate his pride,
In vain I told him that a Chief so young
Could ill suffice our enterprize to guide;
He from my hold with wild impatience flung,
And on the swinging cable nimbly sprung,
Which with his sudden effort seem'd to shake.
Mounting, the song of TALIFER he sung,
And vauntingly besought us haste to make,
Lest we should prove too late his triumph to partake.

With calmer fortitude the rest advanc'd.
Grasping the ladder with observant heed,
As tow'rds the sea beneath our eyes we glanc'd,
And felt the cable tremble with our tread,
The unexampled boldness of the deed
With strange and solemn awe our bosoms smote.
But soon unable were we to recede:
For now the rising tide remov'd our boat,
And on the billows wide our cable 'gan to float.

"Now at the mercy of the sea and wind,
And vibrating with both, our host ascended.
Darkness with risk t' appal our souls combin'd:
The frail support on which our lives depended,
The doubtful issue which our toils attended,
The cliffs above, the breaking waves beneath,
All that could daunt the firmest spirit blended.
Fate seem'd to menace in the breeze's breath,
The surge with hollow roar denounc'd impending death.

"Yet, urg'd by zeal and honour, on we went:
And now, midway between the beach and sky,
We had accomplish'd half our dread ascent,
And still our purpose urg'd, when from on high
I heard a feeble and half-utter'd cry,
And suddenly was check'd our bold career.
I learn'd that SEGRAVE, who had dar'd defy
The horrors of the night and ocean drear,
Had stopt, with terror struck, and petrified with fear.

"Lest the contagious influence of his dread
Should thro' th' associates of my toil pervade,
(Which recollection of the horrors spread
On all sides round us not unlikely made)
To him immediate orders I convey'd
To mount aloft and prove himself a man.
But vainly to arouse him I essay'd.
And now to share th' alarm the rest began,
And thro' the crouded line desponding murmurs ran.

"Inflam'd by disappointment and despair,
And conscious that a moment now to lose
Our fate would seal, I breath'd a hasty pray'r.
Resolv'd, whate'er might chance, myself t' expose,
I bad my comrades keep in order close,
And, climbing o'er their backs, held on my way,
'Till to our dastard guide at length I rose.
So overwhelm'd I found him with dismay,
That scarcely to my words could he attention pay.

"To 'wake him from his lethargy I sought;
But finding that to nothing he replied,
Him by the throat with my left hand I caught,
And, as I closely grasp'd him, to his side
My faulchion keen I vig'rously applied.
Soon as he felt it, as with pow'rs renew'd,
To scale his course precipitous he tried.
My comrades, now reviv'd, his steps pursued,
And soon th' embattled height and SOMERVILLE we view'd.

"Now rush'd we on the unsuspecting foe,
Our enterprize impatient to conclude.
Their bravest warriors sunk beneath our blow:
Our swords were stain'd with Gallia's choicest blood:
Uncheck'd our way thro' Fecan we pursued;
Our shouts of triumph made her tow'rs resound:
No more th' apostate Prince our force withstood:
Fair CHARICLAEA safe from harm we found,
Her smiles, our noblest meed, our arduous labours crown'd."

"Thrice nobly hast thou wrought," the King replied,
"And prov'd thyself a brave and worthy Knight.
But say, BLONDEL!  why seek'st thou thus to hide
The further deeds of that eventful night,
When victory deck'd thee with her trophies bright,
And glory hail'd thee as her favourite son?
Each interesting circumstance recite,
Nor, with a modesty ill-judging, shun
The merited applause by gen'rous valour won."

He ended.  Nought the youthful Champion said,
But glowing blushes overspread his cheek,
As thus with smiles exclaim'd the Cyprian Maid.
"Must I the triumphs of my hero speak?
Must I, in feeble phrase and language weak,
Become th' imperfect herald of his fame?
Ah!  why should he, who dar'd my bonds to break,
Who sav'd my honour from despair and shame,
The sum of his deserts thus scruple to proclaim?

"Say, is it not from feelings too refin'd
Thou striv'st thy signal merit to conceal?
That look confirms my thought!  thus to the wind
I give my fears, thus what I boast to feel
With virtuous confidence I dare reveal.
To thee, great Prince!  by whom his worth is known,
To thy congenial soul I make appeal:
I feel an int'rest in his just renown,
Share in his high exploits, and count his praise mine own!

"Need I describe what feelings pain'd my soul,
When, by foul force from BERENGARIA torn,
I fell within the Prince's dread controul?
As down the stream our bark was swiftly borne,
I gave myself to grief:  sad and forlorn
I ruminated on my wayward fate,
And answer'd only with increase of scorn
The traitor's suit:  nought but contempt and hate
His adulation mean and proffers could create.

"Soon to stern Fecan's dreaded walls we came.
Here, as I weeping sat, immers'd in thought,
And rack'd with dread of peril and of shame,
The Prince to calm my agitation sought,
And arguments of doubtful import brought:
But vain were his attempts my soul to move,
'Till, prostrate at my feet, my hand he caught,
And, with an insolent avowal, strove
To plead his amorous suit, and urge his hateful love.

"Then from my trance arous'd, with high disdain
His boldness I besought him to correct,
And bad him his unlicenc'd hopes restrain.
He, with an air of taunting disrespect,
Exclaim'd, 'Since thus my passion you neglect,
Deaf to my vows, and to my ardour cold,
On this stern pile and on my pow'r reflect:
Your haughty beauties here I captive hold,
'Tis mine to rule your fate, your stubbornness to mould.'

"He said, and sullenly the chamber left,
Where I remain'd, alone, in anguish lost,
And of all hope, save that in Heav'n, bereft.
Sad images of woe my fancy cross'd:
His impious threat'nings, his inhuman boast,
A prospect black and horrible reveal'd.
Weeping I knelt, and to th' immortal host,
Guardians of virgin innocence, appeal'd,
My unprotected state from violence to shield.

"O'er the rude cliffs and far-extending main
The hand of night her sable veil had strewn,
And darkness held her soul-appalling reign:
As if forgotten by the world, alone
I listen'd to the screech-owl's dismal moan,
Which seem'd despair and madness to invoke,
While, ever and anon, with hollow groan
The hoarse-resounding surge at distance broke,
And in my troubled mind reflexions sad awoke.

"But soon a diff'rent and more dreadful sound
Burst o'er mine ear, portending perils nigh.
The voice of festive mirth was heard around,
And the wide chamber echo'd with the cry
Of clam'rous joy and savage revelry.
Mingled with horrid shouts oft rose my name,
And oft the brutal Prince, in accents high,
His hopes of coming triumphs would proclaim,
And vauntingly exult in my approaching shame.

"Again to all-protecting Heav'n I knelt.
As to it's throne my meek petition flew,
Thrice arm'd against opposing fate I felt.
But soon more near the threat'ning chorus drew:
Thro' the long passages the noisy crew
Tow'rds my apartment lone appear'd to draw.
The impious band now ent'ring met my view,
And, as their torches blaz'd, with mingled awe
And horror at their head my tyrant base I saw.

"'Leave here some lights,' he cried, 'and then to rest,
Or to fresh revelling, let all retreat!'
They prov'd observant of his foul behest,
While he, advancing tow'rds my distant seat,
Stagger'd along; my heart with terror beat
As he approach'd, and scarce could I respire,
As he essay'd his greetings to repeat:
His eyes shot glances of impure desire,
Ting'd were his bloated cheeks with lust's unhallow'd fire.

"'Forgive, fair Nymph!"  he cried, 'if duty's call
Kept me so long from beauty's shrine away.
Thus at your feet, your willing slave, I fall.
Now let your charms my past-gone toils repay;
And, while thro' pleasure's flow'ry paths we stray,
While thro' new scenes of untried bliss we rove,
Increasing joys shall grace the rising day;
Thy melting soul shall unknown transports prove,
And own the matchless pow'r of all-commanding love.'

"He said, and tow'rds me sprung.  I started back,
And loudly cried, 'Perfidious traitor, hence
Forbear thy base and dastardly attack:
Alike of courage destitute as sense,
Think'st thou to win me with thy vain pretence?
Hop'st thou to realize the ills th' hast plann'd?
Heav'n and it's Saints will prove my sure defence,
Will arm my soul thy fury to withstand,
Will crush thy foul design, and blast thine impious hand!'

"'Them and their force united I defy,'
Rejoin'd the Prince; 'Do not my hopes repel,
Or coyly, when my pulse with love beats high,
When all my veins with madd'ning impulse swell&mdash;'
But how can I on his excesses dwell?
Ah!  let me to recount his words forbear,
Nor, at th' expence of wounded feelings, tell
The brutal phrases which I blush'd to hear,
The threats he vainly us'd, the oaths he dar'd to swear.

"At length, with passion and with wine inflam'd,
Me to his hated breast he rudely caught,
And boastfully his foul design proclaim'd.
Now in my soul Heav'n's blest ascendance wrought:
With anger, scorn, and indignation fraught,
I seiz'd the sword depending by his side,
And, ere of his unlook'd-for risk he thought,
To his unguarded neck the point applied,
And thus, while flash'd mine eyes with kindling fury, cried:

"'Cease, wretch detested!  from my wrath retire;
I feel immortal seraphs nerve my arm,
Brace my firm soul, and force unfelt inspire:
Cease, nor provoke my hand to work thy harm!'
Starting and pale he shudder'd with alarm,
But soon recov'ring, with accurs'd intent
He roughly strove my weak hand to disarm,
While I, th' attempt unable to prevent,
Struggling, with frantic cries the vaulted chamber rent.

"Weaker and weaker now my forces grew,
When, as his foul intent he still pursued,
With deaf'ning crash the portal op'ning flew.
Before us my preserving angel stood!
As if with more than human pow'rs endued,
Forward he rush'd, and forcibly compell'd
The traitor to give o'er his purpose rude.
Him by the throat with potent grasp he held,
While warring pride and fear his recreant bosom swell'd.

"But soon superior influence pride obtain'd.
While flash'd with rage his eyes, 'Presumptuous slave!
'Say,' he exclaim'd, 'how hast thou entrance gain'd?
Who to a stranger thus permission gave
With ruffian violence my wrath to brave?
Unhand me, caitiff!  or a fate expect,
From which no pow'r thy forfeit life shall save.
Where are my slothful guards?  Let them correct
This insolence, and thus atone for their neglect!'

"Struggling he spake, and made the echoing hall
With outcries for his followers vile resound.
But him they heard not, nor obey'd his call.
Soon thro' the vaulted passages around
Shrieks and laments arose, and groans profound,
And exclamations dread with horror fraught,
Amid the deaf'ning clash of arms half drown'd.
He shudder'd as th' appalling sounds he caught,
And still t' escape the grasp of my protector sought.

"Yet made he not the youth his hold forego,
Who, scornfully regarding him, replied,
'Prince!  who I am hereafter may'st thou know.
Heav'n, whose all-seeing eye thy crime espied,
Me to subvert thy plans was pleas'd to guide.
To guard insulted innocence I came,
To check thy foul and over-weening pride,
To vindicate yon suff'ring maiden's fame,
And brand detected guilt with infamy and shame.'

"Then turning tow'rds me, 'Lady!'  cried the youth,
Subdue thy fears, and calm thy troubled soul.
Doubt not my active vigilance and truth.
No more th' oppressor, who with purpose foul
At dead of night on thy retirement stole,
Shall here maintain his persecuting sway.
Henceforth thy pleasure shall his fate controul:
My friends, who now their banners proud display
On Fecan's tow'rs, thy will are ready to obey.'

"'Oh guardian of my honour!'  I exclaim'd,
'Say, can I e'er the services requite,
Which sav'd me from the fate his treasons fram'd?
May Heav'n's best blessings on thy head alight,
Conduct to glory thy transcendent might,
And still to guard thee from misfortune deign!
But ah!  remove yon traitor from my sight,
Whose hateful presence renovates my pain:
Leave me awhile alone composure to regain.'

"Thus briefly, gracious Monarch!  have I shewn
How CHARICLAEA'S honour and repose
Their preservation owe to him alone.
Here fitly my recital might I close,
Could I remembrance of those moments lose,
When, pass'd his labours, back my hero came,
And angels witness'd our eternal vows;
When first I own'd a corresponding flame,
And dar'd my heart's sincere effusion to proclaim.

"To yonder Heav'n, which sav'd me from despair,
Let my exulting voice the truth confess:
Let me the transport which I felt declare,
When first I blushing heard his fond address,
When first he dar'd his tender suit to press,
And all the feelings of his heart pourtray'd!
Blest in the pow'r his high desert to bless,
The dictates pure of nature I obey'd,
As to the gallant youth I thus responsive said:

"'That now, from mis'ry and dishonour free,
My breast no more with dread and anguish swells,
I owe, BLONDEL!  to Providence and thee.
My mind, while on thy noble deeds it dwells,
Feels thy desert, and forcibly impels
My reason thy pretensions just to own.
True worth the mist of prejudice dispels:
Tho' born the heiress of the Cyprian throne,
Thee my protector twice from peril have I known.

"'I see thee great in virtue, and I scorn
The poor distinction of an empty name:
Valour's immortal wreaths thy brow adorn,
And Europe's suffrage shall confirm thy fame.
Far be from me that disingenuous shame
Which makes us glory in inflicting pain,
Which, while it feels a corresponding flame,
A cold indiff'rence teaches us to feign,
And bids us love repay with harshness and disdain.'"

The Maiden ceas'd.  Her eyes with transport beam'd;
The tender blushes which her face o'er-spread
Heralds of joy and raptur'd feelings seem'd:
As she reclin'd her half-averted head,
A smile celestial on the youth she shed,
Who, kneeling, on the hand she gave him bow'd.
"Ah CHARICLAEA!  best belov'd!" he said,
"Were by our King our union but allow'd!
Ah!  would his voice confirm the homage which I vow'd."

"Your love to sanction," cried the feeling Prince,
"To ratify your plighted vows be mine!
My full concurrence let me thus evince:
May you with virtue happiness combine,
May love his choicest wreath for you entwine,
Long may you blest alike and blessing live,
And may a numerous and deserving line
From you, their great progenitors, derive
Both principles and strength in honour's race to strive!"

Thus spake the King, and join'd their willing hands.
They, like the flow'r which to the solar ray
It's golden circlet faithfully expands,
As if appropriate rev'rence to display,
To gratitude and mutual joy gave way.
And now the gallant host around them press'd
With greetings kind and gratulations gay;
And, emulous their merits to attest,
All hail'd their choice, and prais'd their Monarch's just behest.

Nought now to stay their wish'd return remain'd.
Their vig'rous coursers o'er the champaign flew:
Passing Foville, St. Clair's high seat they gain'd;
Advancing thence, the forest met their view,
Polluted lately by th' infernal crew
Which RICHARD'S virtue had compell'd to flight.
It's paths accurs'd they sought not to pursue,
But onward rode, and, ere the second night
Approach'd, proud Rouen's walls rejoic'd their eager sight.

Where, it's stream tending to the Seine, Rapaume
'Midst meadows flow'r-besprent and vallies fair,
Normannia's grace and pride, is seen to roam,
Their ample camp the warriors 'gan prepare.
Meantime, tow'rds Rouen hast'ning to repair,
The King, escorted by his Chiefs, advanc'd,
Impatient to his anxious Queen to bear
Tidings of all that had so strangely chanc'd,
By triumphs unforeseen and full success enhanc'd.

