On rude Gaalor's lofty summit stood
The Gallic King; with oft recurring glance
Tracing the course of Seine's wide-spreading flood,
He mark'd the English armaments advance,
As in succession many a helm and lance
Blaz'd with the setting sun:  he heard a cry,
Denouncing vengeance on insulting France,
Burst thro' each crouded squadron; mounting high
The chorus swell'd and loud re-echo'd to the sky.

Like the precursor of his doom it rose,
Big with his own and with his country's fate,
With horror and accumulating woes.
Still, as it breath'd destruction on his state,
His lab'ring fancy visions would create,
Fantastic spectres, which the blast bestrode,
Or in their cloudy chariots grimly sat,
And seem'd approaching ruin to forebode.
His sick'ning heart recoil'd as thro' the air they rode.

On him attendant, and alike unbless'd,
Stood JOHN, the partner of his guilt and shame,
Whom thus with hurried accents he address'd.
"Heard you yon shouts, whose piercing sounds proclaim
Death to our hopes, and ruin to our fame?
Saw you, swift-gliding thro' the troubled air,
Yon forms portentous rob'd in lurid flame,
Hast'ning, like Heav'n's dread couriers to prepare
Triumphs for England's King, for us increas'd despair?

"Be these pictures of a mind diseas'd,
By morbid fancy and distemper wrought,
Or tokens of a justice unappeas'd,
To PHILIP'S soul more terrors have they brought,
Than ere, when for religion arm'd he sought
Judaea's shore, he felt from Pagan force.
Is it thy cause, with guilt fraternal fraught,
Which thus unnerves my arm?  Is that the source
Whence flows the stream accurs'd of impotent remorse?"

"No visions have I seen," the Prince rejoin'd,
"Nor has my eye the ghastly forms perceiv'd,
Which apprehension pourtrays to thy mind.
My soul, more constant, never yet believ'd
The tales by superstitious fancy weav'd,
Told by some gossip on a winter's night,
When, the rude labours of the day atchiev'd,
Her gaping audience shudder with affright,
And tremble as they hear of ghosts array'd in white.

"I leave such trash to women and to fools,
To those whom, shrinking from eternal doom
And led by priests, imagination rules.
For them embodied spirits, from the tomb
Forcing their way, may hover in the gloom,
Their dread chains clanking prophesy of woe,
Tell of rich treasures buried in earth's womb,
And gambol 'till the dawn's loud herald crow.
Sufficient 'tis for me life's real pains to know.

"Once was I envied and by all esteem'd,
Till, list'ning to thy arts by Hell devis'd,
Caught by professions which sincere I deem'd,
Thy crafty tongue my better sense surpriz'd.
Avenging Heav'n my folly has chastiz'd.
Oh had I virtue's dictates still pursued,
Had I thy guileful blandishments despis'd,
Then might I still pre-eminent have stood,
And 'scap'd the damning guilt of perj'ry and of blood!

"Far wiser had it been, ah!  how more just!
While yet unstain'd my faith, a Brother's love
And oft-experienc'd tenderness to trust,
Than thus, compell'd from Albion to remove,
The scorn of him who wrought my fall to prove.
If Heav'n will yet receive a wretch's pray'r,
My earnest suit shall reach the throne above,
Victory and fame for RICHARD to prepare,
For thee defeat and shame, remorse and long despair!"

Thus spoke the conscious Prince, while from each eye
Fell drops of agony, and deeply swell'd
From his torn bosom a repentant sigh.
Disdain awhile the King in silence held,
But quickly, by indignant warmth impell'd,
He turn'd to vent the fury of his breast,
When SATAN, who their angry gests beheld,
Anxious to terminate their vain contest,
His bold associate thus imperiously address'd.

"Mark!  how yon fools against each other rail,
Each his accomplice eager to revile,
And fondly hoping his own faults to veil.
Ev'n Hell's stern spirits cannot chuse but smile,
When they behold their sordid engines toil
To mask their baseness under virtue's guise,
And conscience with their schemes to reconcile:
As if such poor contrivance could suffice,
Their foul intents to screen from Heav'n's all-piercing eyes.

"'Tis transport worthy of infernal skill,
To view the struggling and half-vanquish'd soul,
Led on from crime to crime, entangled still,
And still compell'd to own our high controul:
To hear man curse the subtlety which stole
Insidious empire o'er his weaken'd heart;
Still framing new pretences, to console
For added sin, yet by our potent art
From virtue's bound'ry forc'd still further to depart.

"Such vain conceits these disputants inspire:
But let them thus no more the moments spend,
Which active zeal and enterprise require.
Let it be thine their idle feud to end:
Take LONGCHAMP'S form, and on the tow'r descend
Where now with threat'ning mien they converse hold;
Chase their remorse, and their stern spirits bend
To deeds of dread import and action bold.
Unveil thy stratagems, thy potent arts unfold."

He said.  Not long th' obedient Daemon stay'd:
In semblance of the Priest, whose counsels sly
The first foundation of their league had laid,
He sought the Princes, as defiance high
Sat on each brow, and each resentful eye
With inward scorn and deep resentment flam'd,
Bespeaking instant strife.  Approaching nigh,
With courteous deference he attention claim'd,
And well-dissembling thus his subtle project fram'd.

"Princes!  well met!  At this unusual hour,
Your faithful LONGCHAMP, ever glad to shew
His vigilance and zeal, has sought your tow'r.
Since here arriv'd the legions of our foe,
My watchful cares have been engross'd to know
What is their state, and how they are employ'd;
Conceiving that, by some immediate blow,
The force which now we dread may be destroy'd,
Ere by it's efforts prompt ourselves shall be annoy'd.

"Nor has my diligent research been vain.
My spies the English armament have found,
Exhausted by their labours on the main,
Throughout their spreading camp in slumbers bound,
In wassel and in wine their senses drown'd,
Their fires extinguish'd, and the maudlin guard
Heedlessly tracing their uncertain round,
Complaining of the hardships of their ward,
And envying the repose from which they are debarr'd.

"Where old Normannia's palace rears it's tow'rs,
And o'er the Park which round it's moat is trac'd,
Half shrouded by the forest, sternly lours,
Fair BERENGARIA and her train are plac'd.
It's antient battlements, repair'd in haste,
By an exhausted multitude are mann'd,
Who listlessly their tedious vigils waste,
And who, unnerv'd by toil, would ill withstand
The unforeseen attack of a determin'd band.

"RICHARD himself, engag'd with LEICESTER'S Chief,
Within the city's walls consumes the night,
In framing projects for the town's relief,
And marshalling the order of the fight:
While many a hardy warrior with delight
And loud acclaim salutes his long-lost friend;
Pleas'd their past toils and perils to recite,
They quaff the sparkling bowl, and as they spend
The hour in talk, they fail to duty to attend.

"In their supineness is our 'vantage found.
While from our line, and from St. James's height,
Loud shouts of war the ear of midnight wound,
And from our engines with tremendous flight
Our missile rocks on Rouen's ramparts light,
Silent, and shrouded by night's mantle dark,
Let us their camp assail; while on the right
Some chosen troops, with a swift sailing bark,
Seize on the royal train reposing in the Park.

"On this th' attainment of my hope depends:
Nor will, I trust, the enterprise be vain.
If on the bold attempt success attends,
The prize will well repay my Monarch's pain.
While in his hands such hostages remain,
On his own terms with RICHARD he may meet:
Anxious these valued pledges to regain,
The baffled King inglorious will retreat,
And Normandy again her rightful lord shall greet."

Thus spake the Fiend, and either Chief well pleas'd
His scheme replete with mighty mischief scann'd:
Smooth'd were their brows, their anger was appeas'd;
With courteous bearing, and demeanour bland,
Each emulously caught the other's hand,
And clasp'd his base associate to his breast.
Meantime the Daemon his arrangements plann'd,
And, as he instant execution press'd,
Thus England's recreant Prince he craftily address'd.

"Your purpose if my wishes could decide,
(Which flow from friendship and attachment strong)
You, Royal Sir!  the enterprise should guide.
Success and fame to him of right belong,
Whom fate and fortune have combin'd to wrong.
Beauty and love my hero's toils invite,
Such as no poet in voluptuous song
E'er yet describ'd, such as may well requite
Thy former pains and shame with exquisite delight.

"Fresh as the breath of all-reviving spring,
Sweet as the fragrance of the new-blown rose,
Blooms the fair daughter of the Cyprian King.
Her pow'r, 'tis said, thy happier Brother knows.
Arouse thee then, nor by inaction lose
The blest occasion to revenge thy harms.
Disdain the perils which th' attempt oppose:
Think on his pangs, when in thy circling arms
The panting fair one sinks, and yields her matchless charms."

As spake th' insidious Daemon, o'er the soul
Of late-repentant JOHN a lustful fire,
Sublim'd by hate, despair, and vengeance, stole.
"LONGCHAMP!"  he cried, "thy words my breast inspire
With mounting ecstasy and mad desire.
Oh!  that my Brother might himself behold
The joys to which my fervid hopes aspire,
When in my arms his minion I infold,
When to unpractis'd love her melting heart I mould.

"The triumph and the transport both be thine,"
Exclaim'd the Gallic King; "to thy command
The guidance of the project I consign:
Convey her swiftly to some distant strand,
Crown'd with success, by fav'ring breezes fann'd;
While we with energetic zeal prepare
To lead to action our determin'd band,
By whose exertions we may hope to share
In toils, more glorious made by England's King's despair."

He said.  Forthwith, descending from the tow'r,
To the throng'd camp the Monarch bent his way,
His Chiefs to summon and arrange his pow'r.
He bad BOURGEVILLE and gallant LA VALLEE
Prepare a bark, and England's Prince obey;
While MOUNTFORD, NANTEUIL and renown'd FIERREVILLE
Their dread machines against the town should play,
And war-tried BLANGIE should, with practis'd skill,
Invade the careless camp, and horror's work fulfil.

His foul device while thus the foe prepar'd,
England's brave King in consultation sat,
With those who Rouen's long defence had shar'd.
Well pleas'd he heard bold Leicester's Earl relate
Their recent suff'rings, and their actual state,
Their constant valour, and yet cherish'd hope:
As the night older grew, their grave debate
Devis'd new means to give their ardour scope,
And with presumptuous France more certainly to cope.

While thus the aptest modes of war they sought,
And England's King attention yet bespoke,
Suddenly, sounds with dreadful import fraught
On every side astonishment awoke.
Throughout the town with devastating stroke
Fragments of rocks the shatter'd buildings rent,
Crush'd their proud roofs, their massy timbers broke:
The spreading ramparts felt their dire descent,
And the wide battlements beneath their fury bent.

In ev'ry quarter, shrieks of wild despair,
With lamentations mix'd and outcries loud
And groans of wounded warriors, fill'd the air.
Vainly the trembling and half-naked croud
Sought from approaching fate themselves to shroud;
Vainly to every Saint, whose boasted aid
They oft with pray'rs invok'd, rich gifts they vow'd:
No intercession their destruction stay'd,
On their devoted heads the deadly show'r still play'd.

Soon as the din he heard, in anxious haste
RICHARD, by Chiefs surrounded, left the hall,
And thro' the multitude close-thronging trac'd
His course, oft-interrupted, tow'rds the wall.
Nor horrors him nor dangers could appal:
He bad his host their engines straight advance,
Exert their zeal, their victories past recal,
And, pouring vengeance on the troops of France,
By deeds of new desert their well-earn'd fame enhance.

They, nothing loth, his high command obey'd.
To the full stretch their Catapultas bent,
Of stones and darts a show'r destructive play'd:
Swift thro' the air the charge o'erwhelming went:
The ramparts of the Gallic camp it rent,
And crush'd their legions with it's pond'rous force,
As in array they stood and order pent.
Th' ensanguin'd plain was spread with many a corse,
And cries of death were heard and imprecations hoarse.

Meantime, the Daemon to St. James's mount
With savage exultation bent his flight,
Th' attainment of his purpose to recount.
Him as Hell's Sov'reign heard with stern delight,
Heav'n was obscur'd with clouds:  the murky night
O'er nature's face her foul dominion spread:
Veil'd was the moon:  no star to mortal sight
Athwart th' expanse it's twinkling lustre shed;
All seem'd involv'd in gloom, thick-mantling, black and dread.

"Hither," exclaim'd th' imperious King, "repair
With instant speed, ye ministers of woe!
Hither, ye mighty rulers of the air!
Hasten, your deadly attributes to shew.
Bursting your northern caves, ye wild winds blow!
Ye thunders roll, ye livid light'nings fly!
Combine your efforts to astound our foe!
With congregated force your labours ply,
Shake earth's foundations deep, convulse the troubled sky!"

He said.  His voice the Pow'rs Infernal heard,
And from Hell's caves their fearful progress wound,
Prompt to obey his desolating word.
Thro' the thick air, in spells accursed bound,
Rush'd the fell storm:  the tempest howl'd around
With blast portentous:  flames sulphureous gleam'd,
Precursors of the rattling thunder's sound:
From the swoln clouds mephitic meteors stream'd,
And, as aloft they soar'd, malignant Daemons scream'd.

"'Tis well, brave Spirits!"  SATAN loudly cried,
"Where'er the banners of the English tow'r,
Extend your sway, and spread your terrors wide:
But from the path, thro' which his chosen pow'r
The Prince conducts tow'rds old Normannia's bow'r,
Withhold your fury; there let calmness dwell,
And silence her oblivious influence show'r:
Let his wide sails propitious breezes swell,
And to assur'd success his nimble bark propel."

The Daemons not unwillingly obey'd:
Their King's commandment eager to inforce,
Each his address and puissance dire display'd.
Where thro' the town and camp the full concourse
Of mingled Chiefs they saw, with deadly force
They stretch'd their noxious and remorseless sway:
Thro' the black atmosphere their bellowings hoarse
Re-echo'd loud; confusion mark'd their way,
Destruction wav'd her brand, and scatter'd wide dismay.

In slumbers deep the English bands were lost,
From labours past and late excesses bred
When bold BLANGIE the Seine's broad current cross'd,
And tow'rds the camp his martial comrades led.
On ev'ry hand the shades of death they spread.
Not otherwise, amid the fleecy train
Wolves from their mountains rush:  with carnage red
They tear their unsuspecting prey, and stain
With slaughter's bloody work the flow'r-bespangled plain.

Beneath their fury brave FITZ-WALTER sank:
BIGOD, who erst proud Acre's ramparts scal'd,
Their pow'r confess'd; his gore the herbage drank,
And fate the warrior's eyes in darkness veil'd.
Not VERDUN now preserv'd his cuirass mail'd,
Nor could bold UMPHRAVILLE his hauberk shield;
Against them Gallic perfidy prevail'd:
No more their arms 'gainst England's foes to wield,
By trait'rous swords they fell, and press'd th' ensanguin'd field.

As 'mid the gloom, by bloody thirst impell'd
And hope of booty, eager DE LA MOTTE,
With cautious steps his course destructive held,
The polish'd haubergeon and rich surcoat
Of SACEY lost in sleep he chanc'd to note.
Him, thro' his broad and unprotected breast,
With fatal stroke the base marauder smote,
Then, of his gay habiliments possess'd,
In search of further prey he re-commenc'd his quest.

FITZ-WARREN, as reposing in his tent
Exhausted by unusual toil he lay,
To early death his biting faulchion sent.
Him, all unus'd to war, his father grey
Had charg'd in arms to make his first essay,
And knighthood won by valour to assume:
Unapprehensive of the fatal day,
When for his son he should erect the tomb,
Lament his blighted hopes, and mourn his hapless doom.

Not far remote, unconscious of the foe
Invading thus his rest, beneath the shade
Of his high canopy repos'd DE PREAUX:
Near him his golden-studded arms were laid,
His splendid casque, and highly polish'd blade;
While, as of former warlike feats he dream'd,
A smile of transport o'er his visage play'd.
Him, thro' the shade as bright his cuirass beam'd,
Perfidious DE LA MOTTE his easy victim deem'd.

Tow'rds him full cautiously the caitiff crept;
His quick'ning pulse and pallid cheek bespoke
His fear, as 'gainst the warrior while he slept
With felon hand he aim'd a murd'rous stroke.
The weapon swerving with his effort broke.
Foil'd in his foul attempt, with dread he gasp'd,
As from his slumber brave DE PREAUX awoke:
His yet uplifted arm the Chieftain grasp'd,
And cried, as he beheld the dagger which he clasp'd,

"Say who thou art, and on what purpose bent?
Why at this hour forbidden dost thou dare
With bold obtrusion to invade my tent,
And wherefore dost thou thus thy weapon bare?
Speak, miscreant!  or for instant death prepare!"
"Mercy!  most potent Lord!"  th' assassin cried,
"Suspend thy wrath while I the truth declare:
If of what most imports thee ought I hide,
Be thy forgiveness now and future grace denied!

"Our Gallic troops, with BLANGIE at their head,
Are masters of thy unprotected post,
And death and havock thro' thy wide camp spread.
Uncheck'd they range amid thy sleeping host:
Ere this, I ween, full many an English ghost
Skims thro' the gloom and shivers in the storm.
Hark!  heard you not yon shout?  'Tis the loud boast
Of bands victorious, who with slaughter warm
Their course successful hold, their fatal task perform."

No more DE PREAUX permitted him to tell;
With pow'rful gripe the traitor's throat he crush'd:
Convuls'd and lifeless to the earth he fell,
While from his mouth a crimson'd torrent gush'd.
Forth from his tent the Chief indignant rush'd:
"Comrades!"  he loudly cried, awake!  awake!
Behold th' insidious foe, with carnage flush'd,
Of your unguarded state advantage take!
With England's noblest blood their foul revenge they slake!"

He said.  Nor sounded his dread voice in vain.
BLONDEL, who sleep's seducing pow'r disclaim'd,
While, to his ready harp, the rapt'rous strain
Of love and endless constancy he fram'd
For her whose beauties his fond heart inflam'd,
Rush'd from his tent, and quickly tow'rds the Knight
Advancing, thus impatiently exclaim'd:
"Say, why amid the silence of the night
Prevails thy cry, our host from slumbers to excite?"

"Yon base assassin drench'd in blood behold,"
Replied the Chief:  "Ere yet my vengeance due
Gave him to death, the dreadful tale he told.
In English gore the French their swords imbrue:
By BLANGIE led, remorseless they pursue
Throughout our line their sanguinary trade:
While yet we speak, their murders they renew.
Quickly our suff'ring comrades let us aid,
And save our friends whom fond security betray'd."

As yet he spoke, shrieks and laments arose,
Which either Chieftain's heart with pity wrung,
And call'd for retribution on the foes.
Forthwith BLONDEL the bugle-horn unslung,
Which from his rich embroider'd baldrick hung,
And thro' the tube a blast so potent pour'd,
That the wide camp and Seine's embankments rung.
Tho' rag'd the storm, tho' deaf'ning thunders roar'd,
Tho' madd'ning Daemons howl'd, imperiously it soar'd.

No longer now th' unheeding warriors slept.
Soon as prevail'd the sound with terror fraught,
Each from his couch precipitately leap'd,
And hastily his spear and faulchion caught,
Tho' still what caus'd th' alarm they vainly sought.
BLONDEL again awoke his vig'rous strain,
And 'mid the tempest so distinctly wrought,
That, doubtful now no more, the martial train
From ev'ry quarter rush'd impatient o'er the plain.

Attentive stood the warlike pair, and turn'd
Tow'rds ev'ry side the passing steps to hear,
When eagerly advancing they discern'd
War-tried FITZ-GERALD and renown'd BRYWERE;
One grasp'd a sword, the other pois'd a spear:
CASTELLUN next, wielding his weapon keen,
With DE LA ROCHE and TANCARVILLE drew near;
BLONDEL scarce mark'd them, when, with anxious mien,
Hast'ning across the field bold SOMERVILLE was seen.

Them following HARCOURT and LESTANG they saw,
WARWICK and ALBEMARLE:  nor long delay'd
To join them brave MAUELON and DUBOIS.
In quick succession WARREN they survey'd,
With GOURNAY, whom, as he his progress made,
The puissant Earl had summon'd from his tent;
ST. PAUL, and REGINALD, to join their aid,
Thro' the deep gloom their course together bent,
Eager alike to learn what the dread summons meant.

"Hasten, my brave companions!"  cried BLONDEL,
Prepare your wonted energy to shew,
And PHILIP'S forces from the camp repel!
While negligently we repos'd, the foe
Our station has surpriz'd; already flow
Torrents of English blood:  our warriors brave,
While yet we speak, fall victims of their blow.
Let us our fame redeem, our comrades save,
Or rush on death, and share their fortunes and their grave!"

He said.  At his soul-harrowing words amaz'd,
Believing now, now lost in wild surprize,
The Chieftains on BLONDEL disorder'd gaz'd,
When far around them burst discordant cries,
Shouts of defiance, mix'd with plaints and sighs,
Now in the war of elements half-drown'd,
Now in full chorus echoing to the skies:
Too well confirm'd the fatal truth they found,
And ev'ry heart recoil'd as rose the fearful sound.

"What mean these dismal cries?"  exclaim'd BLONDEL,
Heralds of ruin and approaching doom,
The fate of GRANVILLE they appear to tell.
Hark!  from his quarter louder yet they come!
And see, half-shrouded in the midnight gloom,
Advancing tow'rds us a tumultuous crew;
Now they give way!  now courage they assume!
Now turn they on their foes, who still pursue,
And on destruction bent their massacre renew!"

Mov'd by the piteous sight, each gen'rous Peer
Grasp'd his good weapon, rais'd his pond'rous shield,
And onward rush'd the fainting band to cheer.
Now quickly chang'd the fortune of the field:
Compell'd to English energy to yield,
The Gallic forces in their turn gave way.
On every crest remorseless vengeance peal'd:
As if their debt with int'rest to repay,
And emulous of fame, the Chieftains spread dismay.

Nought could their prowess and their zeal withstand:
Each stroke the tale of retribution swell'd,
And thinn'd the ranks of the retreating band,
When, as their course of victory they impell'd,
By foes surrounded GRANVILLE they beheld.
He, like a stag forc'd from his native wood,
At bay his fierce and boastful hunters held,
Who, tho' from numbers bold and hot for blood,
Shrank from his menac'd wrath, and at a distance stood.

Careless of life, their legions he assail'd,
And, tho' their force sufficient seem'd to quell
A single arm, his constancy avail'd
Their still augmenting forces to repel.
GRAMMONT beneath his sturdy faulchion fell:
His puissance felt DUPLESSIS, who 'till late
Was wont on Loire's luxuriant banks to dwell
In princely guise; nor did a milder fate
ROSCELIN from fair Auxerre, or bold AUMALE await.

These own'd the pow'r of his resistless blade,
But others still advanc'd with rage inflam'd,
When stern MAUELON, who the strife survey'd,
With rapid steps advancing thus exclaim'd:
"Hence, recreants!  whose ignoble deeds have sham'd
Knighthood's renown and honour's high behest!"
Then, rushing 'mid the croud, a blow he aim'd
With force o'erwhelming on ST. VALLERY'S crest,
Who with imprudent zeal before his comrades press'd.

A youthful Chief was he, whom war's alarms
Led from the vine-clad hills of rich Champaigne,
Where bounteous nature, prodigal of charms,
Had deck'd with matchless gifts his wide domain.
His lifeless limbs were stretch'd upon the plain.
Him falling saw his oft-tried friend RIGAUD;
With indignation fir'd and heart-felt pain
He sought t' avenge him on his furious foe:
Nor inefficient prov'd his well-directed blow.

It pierc'd his vizor, and upon his cheek
Infixed a deep and honourable wound:
But he, impatient his revenge to wreak,
Struck on his casque with waving plumage crown'd,
And beat the vaunting Frenchman to the ground.
Gasping, he oft essay'd to raise his head;
But death his senses in oblivion bound,
And round the warrior his dark shadows spread:
To join his comrade lov'd his struggling spirit fled.

While thus MAUELON well maintain'd the fight,
And while the foe, victorious now no more,
Their only hope of safety sought in flight,
BLANGIE, their state perceiving, to restore
The battle lost, his reinforcement bore,
And urg'd his host the risk of war to brave.
As, when a tempest rages, on the shore
Remounts with doubled energy the wave
Which seem'd t' have left the strand, so on the Chieftain drave.

"Oh shame!  when masters of the well-earn'd field,
When crown'd with conquest's wreath," he loudly cried,
"Shall Gallia's war-tried sons the victory yield?
Thus by BLANGIE their force shall be defied!"
Him heard BLONDEL, who straightway thus replied:
"To those, whose perfidy has wrought our harm,
By Heav'nly justice is the palm denied.
Tho' round thee hosts of murd'rous traitors swarm,
Prepare to meet the force of my avenging arm!"

BLANGIE with proud disdain his threat receiv'd.
A warrior braver or of nobler race
France boasted not; his valour had atchiev'd
Deeds such as history might delight to trace,
Or poets with immortal verse might grace.
Anxious no more for fame, he liv'd retir'd,
'Till PHILIP'S voice bad him again incase
His limbs in steel:  by loyal feelings fir'd,
He now by fresh desert to crown his fame aspir'd.

As either Chief advanc'd to the attack,
Still'd was the clamour; the expecting croud
Impress'd with awe on ev'ry side fell back.
As from the bosom of an angry cloud
Heav'n's bolt bursts forth with intonation loud,
The rival heroes to the combat rush'd.
Their high-arch'd crests beneath their faulchions bow'd,
Their mails were rent, their polish'd helms were crush'd,
And streams of 'crimson'd gore from every fissure gush'd.

Each seem'd with equal force and valour fraught,
And both with equal skill th' occasion fleet
Which varying fortune gave observant caught,
Now grappling close, now feigning to retreat,
Now springing on their foe's attack to meet.
At length mischance prevail'd BLANGIE to quell:
The turf with carnage wet betray'd his feet,
He slip'd, he stagger'd, and to earth he fell,
While waving high his blade stood o'er him brave BLONDEL.

"Yield thee, Sir Knight!"  the youthful victor cried;
To those whose gallant feats distinction claim
Our English clemency is ne'er denied."
"I ask no mercy!  when a warrior's name,"
Replied the Chief, "is stigmatiz'd by shame,
Ill it becomes him to desire to live.
Add to thine own BLANGIE'S once-tow'ring fame,
While he, disgrace unable to survive,
Asks death, which now alone can consolation give."

"Tho' thy impatient soul," BLONDEL rejoin'd,
Impel thee thus in haughty terms to speak,
From us a milder sentence thou shalt find.
I scorn to take what thou disdain'st to seek.
Ne'er will BLONDEL on those his vengeance wreak,
Whom fate's reverses to his pow'r subject:
He wars not with the impotent and weak!
Bear him away:  treat him with due respect,
'Till RICHARD'S sov'reign voice his destiny direct."

They led him off, tho' still for death he call'd,
Proudly contemning life by pity sav'd.
His foll'wers, by their leader's fate appall'd,
No more the fury of their conquerors brav'd,
But, throwing down their arms, for quarter crav'd:
Nor vainly, for compassion valour crown'd.
But now the tempest more intensely rav'd,
New thunders roll'd, new light'nings flash'd around,
And shouts were heard, and cries, of pow'r the soul t' astound.

Dreadful they rose, as when a sea-wall yields
To waves o'erwhelming, and with ruthless force
A foaming ocean deluges the fields,
Sweeps o'er the ravag'd plains with bellowings hoarse,
And marks with ruin it's portentous course.
"What mean these new alarms?"  exclaim'd BLONDEL:
"Surely some Daemons, strangers to remorse,
And arm'd with all the potency of Hell,
Ride in the troubled air, and frame their deadly spell!"

"Be they from Hell, or from our trait'rous foe,"
MAUELON cried, "it suits not us to stay:
For past neglect a debt immense we owe,
Which wounded honour calls on us to pay."
Thus saying, hastily he led the way.
The Chieftains soon a croud tumultuous view'd,
Flying in wild disorder and dismay,
While a victorious host their steps pursued,
And, hanging on their rear, their progress mark'd with blood.

As when a farmer, fearful lest some storm
His promis'd hopes of harvest may defeat,
Fresh reapers sends his labour to perform,
And bids each band their portion'd task complete;
Beneath their sickles bends the yellow wheat,
Strenuous they urge their toil, nor think of rest
'Till in the centre of the field they meet:
So on the French their fierce pursuers press'd,
While stern MAUELON strove their impulse to arrest.

Thro' their devoted mass destruction reign'd,
On every quarter desolation spread,
And sanguin'd torrents the wide champaign stain'd,
When, proudly striding over heaps of dead,
Hot with fatigue, his sword with slaughter red,
RICHARD, advancing to MAUELON'S band,
Exclaim'd, "Awhile suspend your vengeance dread;
Matters of greater import now demand
Our instant vigilance, perhaps our succouring hand.

"Too well th' events of this disast'rous hour
Our subtle foe's devices have declar'd.
Say, has my Queen escap'd their ruthless pow'r?
Have they my lovely BERENGARIA spar'd,
Or while, oh agonizing thought!  they dar'd
Presumptuously her palace to invade,
Has she the common lot of insult shar'd?
Oh!  say, may yet avail her RICHARD'S aid,
Or has relentless fate my fondest hopes betray'd?"

Thus saying, he awaited their reply.
The sad reflexion which his words awoke
Drew from each pitying warrior's breast a sigh;
As if afraid enquiry to provoke,
Confus'd they gaz'd around, but no one spoke,
When lo!  half-breathless, and with action warm,
Thro' their close ranks impatient AUDLEY broke;
"Comrades!" he cried, for instant action arm!
Fly to protect your Queen and ward th' impending harm!"

Then, as the King he saw, who fix'd in grief
And panting from indignant feelings stood,
"PEMBROKE," aloud he cried, implores relief!
Well has he stemm'd the desolating flood,
And his good sword, distain'd with Gallic blood,
As yet has frustrated their base intent:
But, as against their efforts oft renew'd
Ill may suffice his troops with labour spent,
Me to request your aid the gallant Chief has sent."

As when a tygress hears her young one's cries,
Whom from her den a band of hunters bears,
Rage fills her heart, with light'nings flash her eyes;
Pursuing quickly, present death she dares,
She rushes 'midst her foes, their limbs she tears,
Resistance goads her on to slaughters new,
And none her fury work'd to madness spares:
So fierce, so terrible, against the crew
Whose felon aim he learn'd imperial RICHARD flew.

Still thro' the troubled air the tempest swell'd,
Still in dire chorus adverse Daemons screech'd:
He unappall'd his way impetuous held.
Crossing the camp, the tow'ring wood he reach'd,
Which round the palace deep-embow'ring stretch'd:
It's intermingling boughs, it's mantling shade,
It's mossy trunks which time's slow hand had bleach'd,
Full often his bewilder'd steps betray'd;
Yet nought his purpose check'd, and nought his ardour stay'd.

Th' entangled path he resolutely trac'd:
Tho' thorns and brambles oft oppos'd his way,
As if combin'd to mock his eager haste,
By love and vengeance fir'd he spurn'd delay.
His comrades brave, their ardour to display,
Strove thro' the gloomy brakes a path to force:
No perils could their wild impatience stay,
But, guided by the shouts and outcries hoarse,
Now near and plainly heard, impell'd their vigorous course.

Their courage soon all obstacles surpass'd;
Upon the plain which edg'd the wood they burst,
And, as around their eager eyes they cast,
Beheld on every side the guard dispers'd,
And by the foe pursued, whose bloody thirst
Seem'd with increase of carnage to augment:
Still, as with murd'rous zeal and rage accurs'd
They urg'd their toil, beneath their faulchions bent
The English host, and Heav'n with piercing shrieks was rent.

New fury in each Chieftain's heart arose:
By common feelings and resentment fir'd,
They rush'd resistless on th' insulting foes.
As if by more than human pow'rs inspir'd,
They smote the traitors, who, by slaughter tir'd
More feebly the disputed field maintain'd.
Now England's Chiefs atonement full requir'd,
Now, in it's turn, French gore the field distain'd,
Death o'er them shook his dart, and horror round them reign'd.

While thus the fearful din of battle rag'd,
Superior cares and more distracting thought
The lab'ring breast of England's King engag'd.
Thro' the thick gloom which hell's enchantments wrought,
His eager glance the Norman Palace sought.
Hid were it's turrets; thro' the veil of night
Scarcely his eye it's waving outline caught,
Tho' here and there, with coruscation slight,
A torch was seen to glare and shed a partial light.

But soon their bearers, issuing from the gate,
With sudden glare the midnight gloom dispell'd:
Loud shrieks were heard, and threats of hostile hate;
The chorus dread a struggling female swell'd,
Whom in his grasp a sturdy warrior held.
Regardless of her pray'rs and cries he seem'd,
And quickly from the wall his course impell'd,
While in the wind her floating tresses stream'd,
And oft she wrung her hands, and oft for succour scream'd.

As on the Knight their rays the torches shed,
RICHARD his cuirass and the helm descried
Adorn'd with costly gems which grac'd his head;
Where, mid the waving plumes with crimson dyed,
Was seen a golden circlet, spreading wide
His princely state and lineage to proclaim.
"And is it thus," indignantly he cried,
Forgetful of his duty and his fame,
A brother seeks to crown his oft-recorded shame?

"Shade of our Sire!  thy recreant son behold!
Sanction my vengeance on the wretch who spurn'd
At honour's laws, seduc'd by Gallic gold?"
No more; for now his breast with fury burn'd,
The intermediate ranks he swift o'erturn'd,
And peopled Hell's domains with bleeding swarms,
When, on his right, he suddenly discern'd
A second warrior, bearing in his arms
A captive fair, whose cries increas'd night's dread alarms.

He, deaf to pity, still his course pursued,
Surrounded by a loud tumultuous band,
Whose taunts increas'd as she her plaints renew'd,
All prompt to execute the dire command
Of him whose savage soul the deed had plann'd.
The warlike King his vig'rous progress check'd,
When thus she cried:  "Oh!  where is RICHARD'S hand
His faithful BERENGARIA to protect!
Just Heav'n!  my hero's arm to save his love direct!"

Deep fell her accents in his stricken soul:
As o'er his cheek a flush of passion pass'd,
Forward he rush'd with rage which mock'd controul.
Not more the dread Simoom, with fatal blast
From Afric's sandy plains approaching fast,
Spreads desolation, ruin and dismay:
Th' insulting miscreants stood with fear aghast,
As thro' their crouded ranks he hew'd his way,
While round him drench'd in gore full many a Chieftain lay.

With his left hand he grip'd the warrior's throat
Who bore the Queen, and on his plumed crest
With good Excalibor he rudely smote.
Nought could his weapon's temper'd edge arrest:
It clove his head, and to his rugged breast
Pass'd with resistless impulse, while a tide
Of gushing blood distain'd his 'broider'd vest.
He fell, but RICHARD caught his trembling bride,
And, as her fears he sooth'd, exultingly thus cried.

"Courage, my love!  the ruffian's hand no more
Thy gentle nature shall prevail to harm;
Here art thou safe:  amid the tempest's roar,
The cries of war, and battle's dread alarm,
Propitious Heav'n to save thee led mine arm.
Oh BERENGARIA!  raise thy drooping head,
Let thy dear voice thy constant RICHARD charm!"
She, still o'ercome by recollections dread,
While tears her glowing cheeks bedew'd thus fondly said.

"Oh RICHARD!  dearer to my woe-worn heart
Than all that crowns or lavish pomp can give,
Do I then hold thee never more to part?
While others, prompted by ambition, strive
Glory from war's rude conflicts to derive,
My timid soul abhors their toil uncouth.
Ah!  why, when thus to tenderness alive,
Should fate deny to BERENGARIA'S truth
Her first, her only wish, thy suff'ring breast to sooth!"

"Thy fond affection, love!"  the King rejoin'd,
By endless gratitude shall be repaid:
But cares more earnest now engage my mind.
As hither I repair'd to bring thee aid,
I saw a damsel, whom the foe convey'd
From yonder walls; the torches dimly gleam'd
Athwart the gloom, and ill her form display'd;
But, as their radiance on her visage stream'd,
Half by her tresses hid, she CHARICLAEA seem'd."

"'Tis she," replied the Queen; at midnight hour,
When in my chamber we reposing lay,
She fell a victim to remorseless pow'r.
Insatiate ruffians, eager for their prey,
Bore her when torn from my embrace away,
While, struggling, she in vain for succour cried,
And strove to move high Heav'n.  Oh!  who can say
What mis'ries may my lovely friend betide,
From those whom licence wild and lawless passions guide!"

As thus the weeping BERENGARIA spoke,
From ev'ry eye drops wrung by pity fell,
And rage in every manly breast awoke,
When, rushing forward, thus exclaim'd BLONDEL:
"Tho' arm'd with all the potency of Hell,
Tho' fiends may guide them, and tho' daemons shield,
My vengeful sword the traitors shall compel
The prize their perfidy acquir'd to yield,
Howe'er by force upheld, howe'er by fraud conceal'd.

"My honest freedom, gracious King!  forgive,
When, in this presence, I presume to shew
The secret of my heart.  For her I live!
For her I've breath'd th' irrevocable vow
Of deathless truth!  My humble suit allow!
Let the great enterprize to me belong!
Heav'n will my hand with tenfold force endow:
Guided by love, urg'd by resentment strong,
BLONDEL shall soon avenge his CHARICLAEA'S wrong!"

"Thy boon be granted," cried the feeling Prince:
No more the purpose of thy soul arrest,
But all thy gen'rous energies evince.
May'st thou, successful in thy daring quest,
Redeem the maid by trait'rous power oppress'd!
May'st thou from harm her modest beauties guard!
And, when th' event thy efforts shall have bless'd,
May nought thy well-earn'd happiness retard,
But may her virgin charms thy love and worth reward!"

He said.  BLONDEL'S sad heart with rapture swell'd,
But, ere he could reply, they PEMBROKE view'd,
Who by the arm a trembling captive held;
His helm and hauberk were distain'd with blood,
And from his pallid cheeks the vital flood
Was fast receding.  "As across the plain,"
The Earl exclaim'd, "the traitors I pursued,
Closely their steps I follow'd, but in vain,
'Till to the spot we came where winds the lordly Seine.

"A bark we saw moor'd closely by the shore,
To which, attended by his band, a Knight
Grasp'd in his rude embrace a damsel bore.
Surrounding darkness mock'd my eager sight,
Yet such was CHARICLAEA'S form and height,
And such the garb in which she late appear'd.
Her loud lament and shrieks of wild affright
Struck to my soul, as they their anchor clear'd,
And with a favouring breeze down the mid-current steer'd.

"In vain their progress we essay'd to check,
For now along the stream they swiftly sail'd,
When their unworthy leader, from the deck,
With boastful phrase thus his pursuers hail'd:
'Tell your proud King, altho' his arms prevail'd
To drive me from an almost vanquish'd realm,
That now my bold endeavours have not fail'd:
Let his lov'd minion's loss his soul o'erwhelm,
While vengeance crowns my toils, and love directs my helm.'

"As thus he spake, far distant from the shore
The force united of the wind and tide
Beyond our ken th' insulting Chieftain bore.
Ranging along the strand with slaughter dy'd,
This wounded warrior 'mid the dead I spied:
Haply, his knowledge of their foul intent,
Hardly from him conceal'd, my King may guide
To ascertain what course the vessel bent,
And ere too late their plans atrocious to prevent."

"Speak!  or this weapon shall avenge her cause,"
BLONDEL exclaim'd as tow'rds the Chief he sprung.
With interrupted voice, after a pause,
He thus began:  "Ne'er should thy threat'ning tongue
Th' important secret from my breast have wrung:
But thoughts of graver import now impress
And urge my fleeting soul, by conscience stung,
The Prince's daring purpose to confess,
And, far as words avail, my errors to redress.

"By that All-seeing Pow'r, before whose throne
My disembodied spirit soon must stand,
Thus all I chanc'd to learn I truly own.
To JOHN, who doubtless the deep scheme had plann'd,
My royal master gave a bark well mann'd,
In which he now directs his rapid course
Tow'rds Fecan's walls, which o'er our northern strand
Sublimely tow'ring mock the billows hoarse,
By art and nature form'd to baffle human force.

"There, when securely shelter'd from his foes,
'Tis his intent to profit by his prize,
And terms of high advantage to propose.
He means the maid &mdash; But more my strength denies&mdash;
The hand of fate hangs heavy on mine eyes&mdash;
My widow'd wife!  my much-lov'd babes!  adieu&mdash;
Oh!  may that Pow'r, whose fost'ring care supplies&mdash;"
No more the Chieftain added; death's pale hue
O'erspread his cheeks, his soul to Heav'n's tribunal flew.

"Too well," said RICHARD, has his tale declar'd,
Tho' half untold remains, th' accurs'd design.
Let a swift bark be instantly prepar'd!
BLONDEL!  th' important enterprize be thine;
And let such warriors, as may wish to join
In brave redemption of the captive fair,
With thee their zeal and gallantry combine:
While we to Rouen and the camp repair,
Left to renew th' assault our vengeful foe should dare."

The Monarch said, and with his Queen retir'd.
BLONDEL on high his sanguin'd sword display'd,
And call'd his bold associates; they, inspir'd
With glory's flame, no hesitation made.
Fifty good Knights he chose, in steel array'd,
Who erst on Judah's shores with him had fought,
And offer'd now their voluntary aid.
The ready mariners with vigour wrought,
And soon the favouring breeze their spreading canvass caught.

