While thus the English warriors won fair fame,
Beyond St. James's mount the Gallic host
Fled in confusion strange, o'erwhelm'd with shame.
Blasted their old renown, their honour lost,
No more was heard their late exulting boast:
Far from th' entrenchments which their blood had dy'd,
They sought again Gaalor's moated post;
There their dismay and foul defeat to hide,
And, as they could, to sooth their disappointed pride.

From all secluded, and to grief a prey,
Within the deep recesses of his hold
PHILIP consum'd the melancholy day.
He saw a dark futurity unfold,
And fancy wrought presages dread to mould,
Of RICHARD'S triumph, and his own disgrace:
Tho' still presumptuous hope, with outline bold,
From JOHN'S attempt would brighter prospects trace,
And victory's splendid meed within his grasp would place.

The gay enchantment blossom'd but to fade,
And fleeting transport yielded soon to care,
When, on Martainville's heights, in proud parade
He saw the crimson banners kiss the air,
And MORTIMER his spreading camp prepare.
More yet remain'd his anxious breast to pain:
For now, to fill the measure of despair,
His spies reported, that, across the Seine,
Imperial RICHARD led his enterprising train.

Soon rumour's trump proclaim'd misfortunes new:
Of Fecan's loss it told, on whose high tow'r,
Torn from his sway, the Red Cross standard flew,
And JOHN'S disgrace, who, in disastrous hour,
Surpriz'd, remain'd within his victor's pow'r.
As when a seaman with a tempest strives,
And, while the elements around him show'r,
His luckless vessel tow'rds the breakers drives,
Th' augmented risk his soul of energy deprives:

So o'er his self-accusing spirit spread
Corroding anguish, terror and dismay;
Doubts upon doubts arose, and dread on dread.
To all the pow'rful Peers who own'd his sway,
He bad MOUNTJOY his mandate straight convey
In council to convene:  his high behest
They disobey'd not, but without delay
Impatiently from ev'ry quarter press'd.
Them, when assembled, thus the troubled King address'd.

"I know not, Chieftains!  whether most to blame
Obdurate fortune, or the weak neglect
Of those to whom I trusted Gallia's fame:
But on the change 'tis dreadful to reflect,
Which chance or treason have avail'd t' effect.
The very means, which 'gainst my foe I plann'd,
Now 'gainst myself he threatens to direct:
On Fecan's walls his boastful banners stand,
My most esteem'd ally feels his revengeful hand.

"Our noblest youth, our best defence and pride,
Unhonour'd press yon ill-contested plain:
They bled, but not our fortunes to decide;
They sank, but not their country's cause to gain.
Yet happier they, than those who live to stain
Their old renown with merited disgrace,
To see yon hostile bands, with stern disdain
Mocking our toils, their march insulting trace,
Dare us to new assaults, and brave us to our face.

"Oh curs'd reflection!  from our foul mischance
New triumphs English RICHARD will atchieve,
And pluck fresh laurels from degraded France!
What credit will th' historian's page receive,
Which tells that Gallia's primest Chiefs could leave
The path of glory ere their meed was won?
Say, what can now our blighted hopes retrieve?
Must we forego the strife so well begun,
And by concessions try impending risk to shun?

"My soul the sentiment ignoble spurns!
Can I resolve to own a vassal's sway?
No!  at the thought my heart indignant burns!
Let fate her blackest web of woe display,
Let fortune frown our int'rests to betray,
My rank superior yet will I maintain!
My sword to honour yet shall hew my way:
Resolv'd to fall, or worthily to reign,
My arm, without your aid, shall PHILIP'S rights sustain."

Thus spake the Prince; and, while th' assembled Chiefs
In mute surprize were fix'd, SARGINES thus said.
"Tho', Royal Sir, we share in all the griefs
By you with such pathetic force display'd,
Ne'er can we own that Gallia's peers betray'd
Their country's int'rests or their own renown.
Live we, alas!  to hear our King degrade,
By censures harsh, the guardians of his crown,
Who oft in peril's front their loyalty have shewn!

"To us, who often at the price of blood
Have reap'd immortal honour by his side,
To us, who circling round him have withstood
Embattled hosts and menac'd death desied,
Shall honour's well-earn'd trophy be denied?
Not thus of those, who merit his applause,
Does England's King injuriously decide:
He feels for those whose zeal maintains his cause,
And from their grateful hearts his best dependence draws.

"He ever is the same.  When war's alarms
Call'd forth his might, I've view'd him in the field,
Like MARS himself pre-eminent in arms.
Nor less his virtues were in peace reveal'd:
Soldier himself, the soldier's pains he heal'd;
He sooth'd the anguish which he could not cure;
To him the injur'd call'd, the weak appeal'd;
So equal flow'd his justice and so pure,
He seem'd his people's rights commission'd to insure."

"And is it thus," exclaim'd th' indignant King,
That, with the praises of my mortal foe,
To my torn mind you consolation bring?
Curs'd be the virtues, which, with specious shew,
Forbid the stream of my renown to flow,
And blast the glories which my deeds might claim;
This is indeed the sum of human woe,
When Gallia's Peers conspire their master's shame,
And build on his despair his hated rival's fame!"

"Sire!" cried SARGINES, "I hardly could have thought
That truth's pure voice my Sov'reign could affect.
By his harsh censure more discretion taught,
I go to remedy my past neglect,
And zeal by future prudence to correct."
He said, and, striving to suppress his heat,
Turn'd tow'rds the door with dignified aspect:
But NANTEUIL, quick his purpose to defeat,
His steps arresting led the warrior to his seat:

Then thus, in accents mild, his friend bespoke.
"When anxious cares depress our Monarch's soul,
It suits us not his anger to provoke:
'Twere wiser and more gen'rous to controul
His heart-felt griefs, his sorrows to console.
When, on the adverse field, their banners wide
Our foes with bold defiance shall unroll,
Then may we aptly shew our martial pride,
Urge our resistless course, and threat'ning death deride."

"Well hast thou," he replied, "thy judgment shewn:
Henceforth, I trust, no less my self-command
Shall in debate than in war's front be known.
But now more urgent topics should be scann'd:
Rouen's high walls, with English warriors mann'd,
Our congregated forces still oppose,
And still reproachful of our valour stand:
With victory flush'd the legions of our foes
Insult us, while our hours in vain debate we lose."

Thus he.  Around approving murmurs spread,
And emulous the Chieftains seem'd to cheer
Their gallant friend, when thus the Monarch said.
"When struggling passions in our mind we bear,
It often chances that our judgment clear,
Warp'd from it's bent, to doubts unjust gives way.
If I have err'd, forget it, noble Peer!
Henceforth my confidence shall well repay
The true and loyal faith which all your deeds display.

"From the advantage which our foes have gain'd,
We may presume, that scarcely will they now
From deeds of greater import be restrain'd,
Should we, by sloth or negligence, allow
To full maturity their means to grow:
Fresh reinforcements, from their neighb'ring coast,
To swell their ranks incessantly will flow,
While we, with blighted hopes and honour lost,
Shall be compell'd to fly before their conq'ring host.

"Since such our instant peril, I propose
By crafty propositions first to deal,
By terms insidious to beguile our foes,
And such conditions specious to reveal,
As may induce them to relax their zeal.
Should the event of this defeat my aim,
To your known prowess then must I appeal;
You then, regardful of your well-earn'd fame,
Your King and Country's praise by fresh desert will claim.

"Then be it thine, DES BARRES!  to keep at bay
The armament, which, on Martainville's height,
It's station holds in menacing array,
While I, conducting tow'rds Rapaume my might,
Provoke my weaken'd rival to the fight.
Meantime, while we to what behoves attend,
The Chiefs dispers'd on every hand invite,
Hither with instant speed their march to bend,
By a decisive blow our menac'd ills to end."

He said.  With grief and inward discontent
The Chieftains heard the projects he had plann'd:
Each from his presence sad and silent went,
And sought the station of his sep'rate band.
Meanwhile, as these enforc'd their King's command,
From the high mount, which overlook'd the plain,
Brave MORTIMER their various movements scann'd:
As from their camp pour'd forth the warlike train,
On every side arose the trumpet's martial strain.

To REGINALD, the partner of his care,
He cried, "Or ill their purposes I guess,
Or an attack our enemies prepare.
See'st thou, as if presuming on success,
Their legions with impatience onward press?
Mark you yon Knight, advancing o'er the field,
With aspect bold and dignified address,
On whose emblazon'd and far-spreading shield
A leopard charg'd with gold Byzantines is reveal'd?

"'Tis brave DES BARRES, in peril's front oft tried:
Those ensigns on the memorable day
He gain'd, when Acre PHILIP'S force defied,
Condemn'd to own our more successful sway.
See, as amid their ranks he holds his way,
The def'rence which his high atchievements claim
With salutation due the warriors pay,
While with exulting shouts they hail his name,
His oft-tried worth declare and well-attested fame.

"Trust me, my friend!  the hour is near at hand,
When, to chastise our over-weening foe,
RICHARD'S just cause our prowess will demand.
It glads my heart to find, that those, who owe
So deeply, now appear dispos'd to shew
Some inclination to discharge their debt.
My spirits at the thought more freely flow!
Oh!  that already we were fairly met,
That the vast stake were on our favour'd faulchions set!"

"All seems," replied the Chief, "to indicate,
That our opponents are resolv'd to try
The battle's issue, and to tempt their fate.
Methinks, since thus their movements we descry,
We should our friends at Rouen left supply
With prompt intelligence of their design.
Perhaps our King returning may be nigh;
Aware of their intent, his force may join,
And 'gainst the rude assault with LEICESTER may combine.

"Yet, while their legions thus the champaign fill,
And while around the foe their stations hold,
The enterprize demands no vulgar skill.
Me, ever for our Monarch's int'rests bold,
Prepar'd to execute the task behold!
The ev'ning lours my purpose to befriend,
Their sombrous veil propitious clouds unfold,
From the wide vallies mantling fogs ascend,
And o'er the mountain's brow collected vapours blend."

"Thy offer like thyself is brave and fair,"
Cried MORTIMER; "but let a chosen few
Of known desert thy expedition share."
With that LESTANG his shining faulchion drew,
Exclaiming, "To my friend and Sov'reign true,
Be mine to share his hazardous essay!
Together in the school of war we grew,
Together let us duty's call obey,
And o'er the hostile field united force our way."

"LESTANG!  my valued friend!" the Chief replied,
Our enterprize no other aid requires
Than thy known worth in which we all confide.
But lo!  the sun far in the west retires,
Scarcely yon hills reflect his parting fires!
Now holds the twilight it's ambiguous reign,
And nature with our bold attempt conspires.
Let us not waste our time in converse vain:
Much yet remains to do ere Rouen's walls we gain."

He said, and vaulted on his vig'rous steed:
Nor ardour less his brave associate shew'd.
As down the height they urg'd their coursers' speed,
In either bosom glory's impulse glow'd.
HERMAN, LESTANG'S Esquire, behind them rode:
From earliest infancy his Lord he lov'd;
With him he left his father's calm abode,
With him the chance of war full oft had prov'd,
And o'er Judaea's clime with him intrepid rov'd.

Still was the scene:  in many a circling flight,
Skirting the mist, the bat pursued his way;
And, pois'd on heavy wing, the bird of night,
As thro' the glades obscure he sought his prey,
Chaunted aloud his melancholy lay.
Shrouded in clouds the sullen ev'ning clos'd,
While momentary tints of silv'ry grey
Athwart their veil th' ascending moon disclos'd:
They pass'd, and straight in shade the wide expanse repos'd.

As when, from some secluded mountain's brow,
The lordly Falcon sails across the skies,
His flight he checks to view the plains below;
If chance a latent covey he descries,
He marks with ken assur'd his destin'd prize,
And darts with rapid pinion to the ground:
So rode the gallant Knights, their watchful eyes
On ev'ry quarter still extending round,
Their ev'ry faculty in deep attention bound.

Not far had they advanc'd, when, tow'rds the side
Where it's high boughs a wood was seen to rear,
A form quick-glancing 'cross the plain they 'spied:
A courier's gabardine he seem'd to wear,
And in his hand a sturdy staff to bear,
And swift his pace, as one on speed intent.
The cautious Knights suspended their career,
Gazing, while still his way the stranger went,
And o'er the beaten path his lonely footsteps bent.

Onward he pass'd, and no observance took,
But still with diligence his travel press'd,
While both the Chieftains fix'd on him their look.
At length LESTANG his warlike friend address'd;
"I deem it right yon varlet to arrest:
No common matters, if I reason well,
Induce him to pursue his darkling quest;
Let us the cause discover, and compel
The purport of his charge his fault'ring tongue to tell.

"Here let us stand; an enemy so mean
Too poor an object for our force would make:
Let us to HERMAN leave the task; I ween
His prowess soon the foeman will o'ertake."
Thus to his comrade bold he laughing spake.
Forthwith th' Esquire address'd him to the chace:
As near he came, the Courier 'gan to quake,
And fearfully he ran with quicken'd pace,
Oft turning back his head as HERMAN urg'd the race.

Soon as th' Esquire approach'd his trembling prey,
"Caitiff," cried he, "give o'er thy fruitless speed!
Instant thy unavailing efforts stay!"
The Courier of his words took little heed,
But many an Ave breath'd and many a Creed,
And strove his quick pursuer to outgo.
With that th' Esquire impell'd his nimble steed,
And on his shoulders broad bestow'd a blow,
Which check'd his course and on the green-sward laid him low.

The Chieftains, now approaching, from the ground
With heedful caution rais'd the fallen wight,
Whom yet his late mishap appear'd t' astound:
Gazing around him with increas'd affright,
In piteous terms he moan'd his luckless plight.
Soon as he seem'd his senses to collect,
"The purpose of thy journey straight recite,"
LESTANG exclaim'd; "Say where dost thou direct
"Thy secret way, or here thy final doom expect."

He said, and threat'ning wav'd his glitt'ring blade.
"Tho' ill my tongue my meaning can express,"
The Courier cried, "by terror thus dismay'd,
"Yet, since hard fate affords me no redress,
Thus will I briefly my intent confess.
By PHILIP charg'd, I hasten'd tow'rds Sancerre,
Commission'd the illustrious Chief to press
For instant march his warriors to prepare,
And, ere to-morrow's dawn, his Monarch's toils to share."

"Where does the Chieftain now his station hold?"
Said REGINALD.  "Forbear thy threat'ning hand,"
Replied he, "and the whole I will unfold.
See'st thou where Annebaud's green shades expand?
Beyond their farthest verge his ensigns stand:
His force I know not, yet 'tis small I ween,
And for aggression ill prepar'd his band;
Nor could he well assistant troops convene,
Were on his camp t' advance an enemy unseen."

He spoke, and sought with pray'rs their wrath to charm,
And oft with tears inforc'd his pleadings vain,
The threat'ning Chieftains' vengeance to disarm,
While they, regarding him with stern disdain,
Debated how they might advantage gain
From what his fears had forc'd him to disclose:
But first they deem'd it prudent to detain
Their captive, lest he might alarm their foes,
And their advent'rous plan instruct them to oppose.

Soon as their purpose HERMAN understood,
He led his pris'ner tow'rds a sturdy oak,
Which tower'd within the precincts of the wood;
Then from his steed a cord sufficient took,
And straightly bound him:  with dismay he shook,
And much he pray'd, and much the Chiefs besought
That they with pity on his state would look.
His supplication vain they heeded nought,
Engross'd by graver cares of what might yet be wrought.

Around them night array'd in shadows reign'd,
And oft, amid th' impenetrable shade,
The interlacing boughs their course detain'd:
Yet resolutely they their progress made,
And, gaining now a more expanded glade,
Commun'd on what they recently had heard.
Checking his steed at length, LESTANG thus said:
"Should perils, when our duty calls, be fear'd?
Let us but dare the feat, and half our doubts are clear'd.

"The hour of midnight is not yet at hand,
And from us now Sancerre cannot be far.
If warily our daring scheme be plann'd,
Him from to-morrow's junction we may bar,
And thus the aid which PHILIP hopes may mar.
Should we succeed, but little time we lose,
And should we fall, 'tis but the chance of war.
Methinks, were we the occasion to refuse,
Our comrades might our want of enterprize accuse."

"Great is the hazard," REGINALD rejoin'd,
"But come what will, since honour prompts the deed,
In me a true associate shall you find."
He said.  Each Chieftain spurr'd his gen'rous steed,
And thro' the forest with increasing speed,
Heedless of all impediments, advanc'd.
It's verge attain'd, at distance o'er the mead
Some scatter'd lights they saw, which feebly glanc'd,
And thro' the void obscure short scintillations lanc'd.

"There, there!"  exclaim'd LESTANG, "our foe behold!
Let us their careless centinels surprize&mdash;"
"Suspend," cried REGINALD, "your purpose bold;
Tho' present risk the valiant heart defies,
Rashness alone precaution will despise.
Let HERMAN tow'rds their camp in silence go:
His just report will aid us to devise,
How best our efforts may annoy the foe,
And where with most effect may fall our vengeful blow."

He said.  Th' Esquire obey'd.  Within the wood,
Awaiting his return, the warlike pair
In mute and anxious expectation stood.
But soon his welcome presence eas'd their care.
"Chieftains!"  he cried, "intelligence I bear,
Which seems propitious to your daring hope:
The foe, of all aggression unaware,
And unprepar'd with your assault to cope,
May to your vengeance full afford unbounded scope.

"When to their small encampment I drew near,
Close to it's rampart I contriv'd to creep.
Stillness prevail'd:  no voices could I hear,
No sentinels appear'd their watch to keep:
Some waning torches, thro' the darkness deep
Shedding a glimm'ring light, suffic'd to shew
The warriors scatter'd and oppress'd by sleep,
Their senses so absorb'd, they scarce would know,
When fate arriv'd, whence came it's overwhelming blow."

Their plan the Chieftains soon arrang'd, and straight
Each, from his steed descending, gave the rein,
To HERMAN'S hand, and bad him near await.
As when, on torrid Barca's sandy plain,
A Lion scents the Antelope's throng'd train,
Swiftly he rushes on his timid prey,
With bloody feast the champaign parch'd to stain:
So o'er the heath the Knights pursued their way,
Insensible to fear, and eager for the fray.

Approaching, all in silence wrapt they found;
The half-expiring torches scarcely gleam'd,
While here and there, extended on the ground,
Of past-gone toils the slumb'ring warriors dream'd.
Soon with their gore the Chieftains' faulchions stream'd:
Some fell unconscious of their fatal doom,
Some deeply groan'd, some lamentably scream'd:
While death exulting hover'd in the gloom,
Wav'd his ill-omen'd arm, and shook his threat'ning plume.

Undaunted they pursued their vengeful course:
As havock and dismay around they shed,
Full many a Chieftain sank beneath their force,
And, undistinguish'd 'mid th' inglorious dead,
And unreveng'd, his martial spirit fled.
Loud exclamations now, with horror fraught,
Rose thro' the camp, and new confusion spread.
They reach'd SANCERRE:  his weapon straight he caught,
And, guided by the sound, the scene of carnage sought.

As on he rush'd, from the deep-mantling cloud,
Which had obscur'd her orb, the Queen of Night
Burst forth:  all Heav'n with new-born radiance glow'd,
The plains and woods confess'd her influence bright,
And the wide landscape shone with silv'ry light.
With mingled rage and grief SANCERRE beheld
His comrades slain, or in unseemly flight
Thro' ev'ry quarter of the field impell'd,
While the confed'rate Knights the tide of slaughter swell'd.

As when of hinds a weak and tim'rous herd,
By shepherd dogs alarm'd, in terror flies,
The well-horn'd stag, by gen'rous feelings stirr'd,
While vengeance glances from his sparkling eyes,
Intrepidly th' aggressors rude defies;
So fill'd with indignation on he came:
"Whence this alarm, whence," cried he, "this surprise?
Cease your base flight, nor thus consign to shame
By cowardice your own and your commander's fame!"

Thus said he.  Fruitless prov'd his bold essay:
Yet still he sought their passage to arrest,
When, as around he look'd, the moon's bright ray
Glancing disclos'd LESTANG'S high-polish'd crest,
As rapidly he urg'd his bloody quest,
And 'neath his arm the flying recreants bow'd.
Disdain and fury fir'd the Chieftain's breast;
He darted forward thro' the trembling croud,
And, his keen faulchion waving, thus exclaim'd aloud.

"Whoe'er thou art, whose desolating hand
Has forc'd yon dastards foully to retreat,
Behold!  th' avenger of my host I stand:
SANCERRE himself is here thy rage to meet!"
"None but thyself was wanting to compleat
My triumph," cried LESTANG:  "soon shalt thou view
How well my weapon shall thy puissance greet!"
He said, and spurning the ignoble crew,
O'er bleeding heaps of slain to meet SANCERRE he flew.

Brief, tho' tremendous, prov'd their stern appeal.
LESTANG his sword with bold assurance heav'd,
And struck his foe's broad shield:  the sounding steel,
True to it's trust, the rude assault receiv'd,
And from the threat'ned harm it's lord repriev'd.
SANCERRE, recov'ring from th' aggression rude,
With better aim his dread intent atchiev'd;
LESTANG, his helmet crush'd, and bath'd in blood,
Stagger'd, while from his mouth distill'd a crimson'd flood.

Again the Chieftain struck, nor struck in vain:
His pond'rous blade fell heavy, and impell'd
The fainting warrior headlong on the plain.
With exultation now his bosom swell'd,
When REGINALD, who still with force unquell'd
O'er the red field the flying squadron drave,
The wayward fortunes of his friend beheld.
Tow'rds him he rush'd, the menac'd wrath to brave,
And from impending fate his comrade bold to save.

"Touch not his valued life!" he loudly cried;
By one who oft thy prowess has survey'd
Art thou, presumptuous Chieftain!  now defied!"
He said, and, whirling round his vengeful blade,
On his proud helm with vig'rous onset laid;
But, ere he could his fierce assault repeat,
SANCERRE his victim left, and undismay'd
His new assailant boldly turn'd to meet:
Nor stay'd he long his foe with manly force to greet.

Awhile well-balanc'd victory held the scale,
And either Knight to gain her suffrage sought:
But REGINALD was destin'd to prevail.
With such resistless energy he wrought,
That to the ground the Gallic Chief he brought.
Bleeding he sank, to Heav'n his spirit flew.
But now, with shame and deep resentment fraught
At sight of his defeat, the dastard crew
Around the English Knight with fell intention drew.

As when base village curs presume t' attack
A gen'rous mastiff, he with proud disdain
Eyes them, nor condescends his pace to slack;
But, should some champion of th' ignoble train
Dare with rude gripe his passage to restrain,
His potent fangs the rash aggressor rend:
So, tho' around him peal'd the foes amain,
Nought did the Chief to their assault attend,
Alone engross'd by care to aid his bleeding friend.

In vain t' arouse him with his voice he tried;
But, raising him with caution from the ground,
Gently his batter'd helmet he untied,
And the red current wiping from his wound,
Across his head his scarf embroider'd bound.
Meantime, the foe from ev'ry quarter rush'd:
Like summer gnats they buzz'd and teaz'd around,
While their rude swarms contemptuously he brush'd,
Their murm'rings marr'd, and oft their feeble corselets crush'd.

They still, in numbers confident, advanc'd,
While REGINALD, to virtuous friendship true,
Supporting tenderly LESTANG entranc'd,
As from the scene of carnage he withdrew,
Those who most boldly onward press'd o'erthrew.
As thus incumber'd he small progress made,
Seizing his horn, a pow'rful blast he blew.
The well-known signal HERMAN straight obey'd,
And hastily came on the gallant pair to aid.

Soon as he saw his faint and bleeding lord,
His bosom swell'd with vengeance and despair,
And forth instinctively he drew his sword.
"Thy brave attempt," cried REGINALD, "forbear:
My friend's protection be it thine to share,
While our presumptuous foes by me are fac'd."
Then lifting up LESTANG, with tender care
Him on his courser properly he plac'd,
And left him to th' Esquire, who closely him embrac'd.

When he perceiv'd him safe from further harm,
At the base herd with double rage he drove:
They fled dispers'd before his pow'rful arm,
Some imprecating succour from above,
Some doom'd the terrors of his wrath to prove.
As, when a storm its ravages extends,
Stript are the leafy honours of the grove,
It's far-extending boughs the tempest rends;
And thro' it's inmost shades the stricken forest bends:

So REGINALD amid the trembling band
Spread wide destruction, and with vengeful force
Prov'd the ascendance of his vig'rous hand.
But now no more were heard their outcries hoarse;
Thro' streams of gore, o'er many a mangled corse,
The Chief return'd, and, on his vig'rous steed
Vaulting, tow'rds Rouen's walls resum'd his course.
Yet rode he not with his accustom'd speed,
Lest his companion's wound, ill staunch'd, again should bleed.

Ere he the well-known ramparts reach'd, the moon,
Again involv'd in clouds whose dark veil swept
Across her waning orb, had reach'd her noon.
But, tho' in rest surrounding nature slept,
His watchful vigils England's Monarch kept.
To him the Chief was anxious to repair;
Yet first he tried to find some leech adept,
Who, skill'd in all HYGEIA'S precepts rare,
Might for his suff'ring friend employ his healing care.

This pious duty well perform'd, in haste
He sought the King, and to his private ear
The movements of the Gallic army trac'd.
"Their hostile purpose not unpleas'd I hear,"
The Monarch answer'd; "let them but appear,
And English valour shall their presence greet.
But night grows old, and morning now is near:
Send forth to summon all our Chiefs to meet,
On what may best behove our exigence to treat."

Soon as his will was known the Peers obey'd.
When all assembled in attention sat,
And ev'ry eye an earnest wish display'd
To learn the object of their grave debate,
The King began succinctly to narrate
What REGINALD had told, and how the foes
Their might around conven'd, when from the gate,
With sudden burst disturbing night's repose,
A trumpet's piercing notes, repeated thrice, arose.

"BAYNTUN!  go forth and learn," exclaim'd the King,
"What warlike summons thus the still air rends,
And who thus hails us information bring."
He went.  Returning soon, "MOUNTJOY attends,"
He cried, "and thus his humble rev'rence sends.
Charg'd by the Gallic Monarch to declare
A weighty trust, his course he hither bends:
He says his mission no delay will bear,
And from your courtesy expects reception fair."

"Bid him forthwith approach, and say we know,"
Replied the King, "what rights his functions claim:
Let him the purport of his mission shew."
Escorted as his character became,
He thus advancing said:  "MOUNTJOY my name,
By PHILIP charg'd of what concerns the weal
Of either state his pleasure to proclaim,
And, in this noble presence, to reveal
A proposition fram'd your enmities to heal.

"Thus speaks my King.  Too long has ruthless war,
With savage sway and domination wild,
Prevail'd the face of Normandy to mar.
Her vine-clad hills, her vales where plenty smil'd,
Her blest retreats by slaughter are defil'd:
No more the peasant at returning eve
Hails his chaste spouse or clasps his darling child,
The village nymphs no more the light dance weave,
No more at nature's call their panting bosoms heave.

"Desirous the stern contest to conclude,
He thus prefers the quarrel to decide,
And at a stroke to end the fatal feud.
Let the two Monarchs name, on either side,
Five hardy Knights of skill and valour tried,
And let them swear, whate'er th' event may be,
By this fair ordeal truly to abide.
Thus shall your fates with fortune's will agree,
And thus from further ills Normannia shall be free."

"MOUNTJOY!  the purport of thy mission high,"
Return'd the King, "discreetly hast thou said;
Now lend attention while I thus reply.
Heav'n knows, no hope from mad ambition bred
Myself, or those who grace my cause, has led
In these domains the Gallic King to seek.
If here in hostile guise our banners spread,
The fault is his, who dar'd his oaths to break,
And on these injur'd plains his foul revenge to wreak.

"On that Great Pow'r, who all my counsels knows,
To whom my inmost purpose is reveal'd,
With confidence unshaken I repose.
By open force provok'd and fraud conceal'd,
I stand prepar'd upon the tented field
To meet th' invader with aggression rude:
Yet rather would I from destruction shield
The unoffending, and prevent the flood
Of, what I value most, my brave companions' blood.

"I therefore with his fair proposal close,
Provided that of either gallant band
We who conduct the war a part compose.
Then, when we, King to King, and hand to hand,
Our prize a realm, in opposition stand,
When on our faulchions, oft in battle tried,
Shall hang the fortunes of this suff'ring land,
Let arbitrating Heav'n our fates decide,
And, as our cause is good, our arms to victory guide!"

"No!" cried MOUNTJOY, as he with rev'rence bent,
Such are not PHILIP'S terms.  Thus I presume
In other guise to speak his mild intent.
Much he laments that war's fell chance should doom
Such worth chivalric to an early tomb;
Much it concerns him that these warriors brave,
Vig'rous and yet in all their youthful bloom,
Blest with each gift which bounteous nature gave,
Should rush to certain death and idly court a grave.

"He, tho' in numbers confident, inclines
For mercy's sake his triumphs to forego,
And, mov'd by pity, conquest's meed resigns.
He wills that all his proffer'd boon should know.
Anxious to terminate this scene of woe,
He asks if from this too long harrass'd shore
You will on fair and just conditions go;
If you prefer to tempt your fate once more,
Or, as he wishes, peace and friendship to restore.

"If such your choice, abandon Fecan's tow'rs:
Surrender all your pris'ners to his hand:
Without delay embark your warlike pow'rs;
Fully conceding to my King's command
What now he holds in this contested land.
On these mild terms, he pledges his consent
To your free passage from the Norman strand.
I wait to know if war be your intent,
Or if returning peace shall further ills prevent."

He said.  Disdain in ev'ry breast awoke,
Vengeance illumin'd ev'ry warrior's face,
And thro' their ranks indignant clamours broke:
But to respect their kindling rage gave place,
As, turning tow'rds them, with his 'custom'd grace
RICHARD address'd them.  "Friends!  awhile forbear;
Full well your gen'ral sentiment I trace:
Thus let my voice our common will declare,
Then, as our cause becomes, for instant march prepare.

"MOUNTJOY!  thy proffers we have heard:  receive
With fit attention our resolv'd reply.
Whate'er our fate, let not your King believe
That Englishmen, when honour calls, will fly,
Or that they basely will submit to buy
By scandalous concessions a retreat.
Tell him we know to conquer or to die.
Let him be silent, 'till, by our defeat,
A title he acquire his insults to repeat.

"Thinks he that England's Monarch, lost to fame,
His Heav'n-committed charge so little knows,
As thus to stamp his country's cause with shame?
Could he with such degrading offers close,
Tell him, each drop of gen'rous blood which flows
In English veins indignantly would burn,
And nerve their souls such treason to oppose!
With this reply to Gallia's King return:
Tell him his proffer base with proud contempt we spurn!"

As thus the King with manly firmness spoke,
The Chieftains silent stood in thought profound:
But, when he ended, thro' the chamber broke
Shouts of applause; exulting cries around
Rose high, and made the vaulted hall resound.
"Since your election is for war's debate,"
MOUNTJOY departing cried, "Oh King renown'd!
I go my fruitless mission to narrate,
Yet with respect impress'd, and sorrowing for your fate."

"Then," cried the King, "to-morrow's dread appeal
The justice of our enterprise shall shew,
And Heav'n's all-pow'rful will our doom shall seal.
Tell your false Sov'reign his designs we know,
And that, when morning's earliest tints shall glow,
In equal field to meet him we prepare.
Now to your King return:  yet, ere you go,
Our hospitality and largess share;
Then, with what speed you may, our stern defiance bear."

He said.  While all their zeal and hopes express'd,
MOUNTJOY with low obeisance left the hall,
And RICHARD thus th' impatient Peers address'd.
"Th' impending hour alike imports us all:
On all alike imperious duties call.
Let ev'ry Chief prepare his bold array,
At early dawn to meet insulting Gaul.
Meantime, ere yet our banners we display,
The dictates of my soul I hasten to obey."

Thus saying, from the hall he pass'd in haste,
Attended only by the brave BLONDEL.
As the extending galleries he trac'd,
"Hard is th' attempt," exclaim'd he, "to repel
Feelings on which the heart delights to dwell:
Yet this ungracious lesson must we learn.
To-morrow's fortunes Heav'n alone can tell;
We may prevail, or never may return,
Yet honour bids us think ourselves our least concern.

"Still, ere we go one sacrifice remains:
To those whom most we love to bid adieu,
To witness all the agonizing pains
Of noble hearts warm'd with attachment true:
Doom'd haply ne'er those graces to review&mdash;
But let us these soul-rending thoughts dismiss!
The moments we can call our own are few:
These let us wisely consecrate to bliss,
And leave on beauty's lips our last reluctant kiss!"

The chamber ent'ring, England's Queen they view'd,
Who with the Cyprian Maid, tho' wan'd the night,
The pleasing labours of her web pursued.
There trac'd they Caesarea's glorious fight,
And many a champion brave, and many a knight
Seem'd there again his puissant arm to wield:
Again was seen the Saracenic flight,
BLONDEL again display'd his succouring shield,
And RICHARD there again shone master of the field.

Surpriz'd they left their half-unfinish'd toil,
And BERENGARIA, hast'ning tow'rds the King,
Greeted his presence with a heav'nly smile.
"Whate'er," she cried, "my love may hither bring,
He finds us here from time's oblivious wing
Employ'd to save the wonders of his hand.
While poetry thy great exploits shall sing,
And RICHARD'S worth by history shall be scann'd,
By us, more humbly wrought, shall they recorded stand."

"Thou know'st," replied he, "that no ampler praise
Than thy approval my fond soul requires
Tow'rds fair renown it's energies to raise.
For thee my heart beats high with pure desires,
Thy mild attractive grace my bosom fires
With pure attachment and congenial love.
Yet wayward fate against our joys conspires:
Resistless duty bids me hence remove,
Again for England's sake the chance of war to prove."

"Ah!  what," exclaim'd she, "now provokes thee hence!
Must then my fond, too-susceptible heart
Be doom'd again to anguish and suspense?
Oh death!  in pity here infix thy dart;
Strike deep, and ease at once my tort'ring smart!
Are there no means to ward the threat'ned blow?
Must we again, when scarce united, part?
Ah!  must I still augmented torments know,
In wretchedness supreme, sublime in lengthen'd woe!"

Weeping she spoke, and tore her auburn hair,
Then, with a sigh which seem'd her heart to break,
She sank, a silent image of despair.
Meantime, while tears suffus'd her blooming cheek,
Too much oppress'd by warring thoughts to speak,
Fair CHARICLAEA sat.  She rais'd her head,
And, struggling to o'ercome the feelings weak
Which in her bosom sentiment had bred,
Tow'rds the sad Queen advanc'd, and thus with firmness said.

"Oh BERENGARIA!  who so oft hast brought
Sweet consolation to my troubled soul,
Whose voice, with wisdom's choicest precepts fraught,
O'er my afflicted bosom oft has stole,
And prov'd it's pow'r my sorrows to console,
Let now thy native fortitude be seen.
Superior duties should thy grief controul:
They bid thee danger meet with front serene,
As RICHARD'S spouse becomes, and England's high-born Queen.

"Exultingly the glorious truth I prove,
And grateful bow to Heav'n, which deign'd to grace
My favour'd fortunes with a hero's love.
What tho' thro' long antiquity I trace
Th' imperial honours of my vaunted race!
The proud distinction which his choice confers
Beyond all rank or ancestry I place:
To his desert my memory oft recurs,
And all that dignifies the soul to action stirs."

She said.  BLONDEL entranc'd in wonder gaz'd,
And thus exclaim'd, as falling at her feet
Her hand enraptur'd to his lips he rais'd:
"Oh first of women!  Excellence compleat!
Ne'er may BLONDEL thy cherish'd hope defeat!
By future action shall my truth be known;
My heart with thee shall still in concord beat,
When glory and ambitious hope are flown,
And when immortal love shall faithful prove alone!"

"There spoke the lover and the hero too,"
The Maid replied:  "Proceed, illustrious youth!
Bravely the foes of England to pursue.
If CHARICLAEA'S love thy toils can smooth,
If her affection pure thy cares can sooth,
Let thy endowments fully be reveal'd:
Confiding in thy constancy and truth,
My hand thy sword shall gird, shall rear thy shield,
And my approving voice shall urge thee to the field."

Then turning to the Queen, "Should we repine,"
She cried, "if honour with resistless call
Compel us those we value to resign?
Does it become us misery to forestal,
Or picture woes our senses to appal?
On Heav'n's o'er-watching providence reflect,
Without whose word the sparrow cannot fall:
Think but on this, and then thy force collect
To prop thy weaken'd mind, thy reason to direct.

"Nay, weep not, lovely friend!  I too could weep,
But, spite of all my tears, the Pow'r above,
Who rules our fate, his fix'd resolve would keep.
He, doubtless our imperfect hearts to prove,
Will oft our transitory joys remove:
'Tis he our heroes' ardour who has fir'd;
He will return them, constant to our love
And blest with all to which their souls aspir'd,
To offer at our feet the meed by worth acquir'd."

"Could I such pleasing perspectives discern,"
Replied the Queen, "I might short sorrows brave:
But they, alas!  may never more return!"
"If the dark Cypress o'er their tomb should wave,"
Cried she, "what nobler trophy can they have,
Than the warm tear which drops from beauty's eye?
Shall we not meet again beyond the grave?
Shall not our mingling souls embrace, and fly
'Midst angel choirs to reap a blest eternity?"

Not less, when on the suff'ring Martyr's head
From op'ning Heav'n the holy Spirit fell,
O'er his mov'd soul celestial balm it shed,
Than wrought her words affliction to dispel.
With cheering hope they felt their bosoms swell:
In mutual converse and endearments chaste,
As if resolv'd intrusive doubt to quell,
The short reprieve which time allow'd they pass'd,
Entranc'd in pure delight too exquisite to last.

For now the earliest tint of morning beam'd,
And o'er the sky, in night's dark veil yet bound,
A grey effulgence from th' horizon stream'd:
The shouts of passing troops were heard around,
And shrill arose the trumpet's martial sound.
"Farewell," cried RICHARD, "best belov'd, adieu!
Soon may we meet by fame and victory crown'd!
By Heav'n supported, and inspir'd by you,
Our swords shall make the foe his daring insults rue!"

