Now broke the day, and from St. James's height
The mists which rob'd it's rugged brow unroll'd,
While o'er the vallies linger'd yet the night,
And vap'ry dews in domination cold
The widely-spreading landscape seem'd t' infold:
Thro' them the tow'ring spire and mantling wood
Now rose; now, streaming with celestial gold,
The sun pour'd forth his animating flood,
And all the glorious scene array'd in splendour stood.

Throughout the crouded streets with eager haste
The warlike youth in all directions press'd,
And tow'rds the gate their march observant trac'd:
Far gleam'd each helm, high wav'd each plumed crest,
And loudly spoke each Chieftain his behest;
The drums and trumpets join'd their cheering sound,
And, proudly conscious of their daring quest,
The lordly chargers, as they scour'd around,
Neighing, their arch'd necks rear'd, and shook the dusty ground.

RICHARD meantime, attended by BLONDEL,
His visor clos'd, his temper'd cuirass brac'd,
While ARTHURS'S faulchion from his baldrick fell,
And his right hand a spear of tough ash grac'd.
A golden coronet his helm encas'd,
O'er which a heron's plume was seen to float,
Shad'wing the gems with which it was enchas'd.
O'er his bright armour hung a rich surcoat,
With England's bearings charg'd his station to denote.

Soon as he learn'd that on th' appointed field
The Chiefs their various armaments had class'd,
He breath'd a pray'r, and grasp'd his ample shield.
As to the portal he advanc'd, the last
Of his well-order'd troops the barrier pass'd.
He leap'd upon his steed, and thro' the gate
To join th' assembling force proceeded fast,
Confiding in his cause, resign'd to fate,
And eager to conclude the long-provok'd debate.

Ere long, attended by his knightly band,
He join'd his host, and, as in order close
His gallant legions stood, with out-stretch'd hand
Thus he address'd them.  "Comrades!  see your foes:
Think on the duty which a soldier owes
To Heav'n, his country, and his cherish'd fame.
The heart, which with a patriot's ardour glows,
Will prove the force of it's inspiring flame,
And by exertions new will fresh distinction claim.

"If danger threaten, I the risk partake;
If toils await ye, I the labour share:
My lov'd companions ne'er will I forsake.
Should ye be wounded, mine shall be the care
All that may ease your suff'rings to prepare:
Should ye survive, and fame your deeds should grace,
Henceforth each yeoman shall coat-armour bear,
Shall o'er his gate his blazon'd 'scutcheon place,
And prove the founder proud of an ennobled race.

"Then live with me, your country's trust and pride,
Or die with me, to honour's dictates true:
My choice is made, whatever may betide,
I live to glory, or I die with you.
But, ere our hearts' bold dictates we pursue,
Let us, with zealous confidence impress'd,
Our humble suit to providence renew:
Then let each warrior bravely rear his crest,
Trust in th' Almighty's aid, and leave to fate the rest."

While England's bands their pious King obey'd,
And pure devotion's flame their bosoms caught,
PHILIP within Gaalor's fortress stay'd.
A prey to anxious and distracting thought,
Successive plans and stratagems he wrought;
And, tho' of BELIAL'S potent aid depriv'd,
His working fancy new resources sought,
And fresh arrangements craftily contriv'd,
From which a fleeting ray of comfort he deriv'd.

Meantime, array'd the Gallic legions stood,
While o'er the plain, which either host between
Descended gently tow'rds Rapaume's clear flood,
The movements of the English bands were seen.
The gallant Chiefs delay'd not to convene.
To seek the presence of their King they chose
Experienc'd NANTEUIL and renown'd SARGINES,
Charg'd to request he would his plans disclose,
And at their head appear to lead them 'gainst their foes.

They to Gaalor hast'ning, to the Prince
Their suit reveal'd, and urg'd him to repair
To his impatient line, and there evince
What his great soul in peril's hour could dare.
He, still engross'd by heart-corroding care,
Ill brook'd their presence and entreaties strong:
Yet still renew'd they their persuasions fair,
Recall'd the duties which to Kings belong,
And press'd him not himself and country thus to wrong.

"Already, Sire!  in burnish'd steel array'd
RICHARD," exclaim'd SARGINES, "his forces leads:
On high his boastful banner is display'd;
Against our host he daringly proceeds,
And, not unmindful of his former deeds,
By new exertions strives new wreaths to gain.
He no persuasions, no intreaties, needs;
His absence does not England's zeal restrain,
He cheers his comrades' toils, and gives their fury rein."

"If," said the King, "I have remark'd aright,
Thy speech a strange propensity displays
My rival's hated merits to recite,
And, at my cost, invidiously to raise
For England's Prince an edifice of praise.
I would not wish a judgment false to make;
But, if thy tongue thy mind's intent betrays,
'Twere better far thy Monarch to forsake,
And with his deadliest foe an open part to take."

"Heav'ns and ye sacred Pow'rs!" the Chieftain cried,
"Are thus my loyalty and well-earn'd fame
By him for whom my blood was shed belied!
Prince!  had a man of less illustrious name
At my allegiance thus presum'd to aim,
My biting sword ere this had pierc'd his breast.
Farewell!  I go to clear myself from shame:
When next we meet, my worth shall be confess'd,
Or low on earth shall lie my now dishonour'd crest!"

Thus saying, from Gaalor's tow'rs he went,
And to the army hastily repair'd,
Indignant and on desp'rate purpose bent.
PHILIP, who nought for his endurance car'd,
His orders issued and his arms prepar'd;
Then to NANTEUIL, who in amazement lost
His friend's resentment and affliction shar'd,
"Come on," he cried, "now forward to the host,
And let yon madman try to realize his boast."

"Sire!" said NANTEUIL, "a man whose high renown
All Europe owns, it suits not thus to call.
Than him none better will support your crown:
No danger can his valiant heart appal;
He will or honour gain or greatly fall."
"Let him the fulsome praises of my foe,
Which now he dares promulgate, first recal,
Then," said the King, "I may more def'rence shew:
Now to the crouded field with other thoughts I go."

Across the plain his courser he impell'd,
Whose vig'rous efforts soon the Monarch brought
To where the Chiefs their anxious council held.
Meantime NANTEUIL his valiant comrade sought,
Who, rack'd with care, their presence heeded nought,
But seem'd engag'd some dread intent to scan,
While heav'd his bosom with tumultuous thought,
And o'er his mind sharp recollections ran.
Him brave NANTEUIL approach'd, and mildly thus began.

"Not less severely than yourself I feel
Our King's unjust reproach:  yet still, my friend!
When honour and our country make appeal,
We should to their superior claims attend.
On our exertions Gallia's hopes depend.
Let not thy private feelings intervene,
T' abate the zeal which should her cause defend:
Forget the insults offer'd to SARGINES,
And, as becomes thee, first in glory's ranks be seen."

As thus he said, SARGINES with firm aspect
Surveying him replied:  "Too well I know
Honour's fair claim my duty to neglect.
My heart for France shall never cease to glow,
For her my blood shall ever freely flow;
Unbiass'd by resentment or disgust,
In her defence I only ask to shew,
That, true and faithful to her sacred trust,
Tho' injur'd by my King, to her I still am just.

"Yet, not unmindful of my Sov'reign's cause,
A cause to ev'ry gallant Frenchman dear,
To guard his head SARGINES shall never pause.
Then may my truth and loyalty appear!
But see!  our foes aloft their standards rear:
Mark their close ranks, their menacing array,
Their pealing hymns of warm devotion hear.
Honour and duty call us hence away,
Urge us to meet our fate, and chide our long delay!"

He said, and hast'ning tow'rds the spreading line,
As if forgetful of his recent slight,
Sought with NANTEUIL th' assembled Chiefs to join,
Where PHILIP, as he rang'd his warlike might,
Rode thro' their ranks and stirr'd them to the fight.
No longer now he seem'd by doubts oppress'd,
But, as if hope with inspiration light
And fancied triumphs visited his breast,
Thus, as along he pass'd, his legions he address'd.

"Warriors!  prepare to meet th' eventful hour:
Unite yon vaunting armaments to chase,
Who now so sturdily defy our pow'r.
Like high-born coursers panting for the race,
Fearless of peril, emulously trace
The path which leads to conquest and renown,
And with immortal palms your efforts grace:
Tho' dangers menace, and tho' fortune frown,
Follow where glory leads, and win her deathless crown.

"I hail your mounting ardour:  give it room,
Nor check it 'till proud Rouen's ramparts yield,
'Till Gallic prowess stamp your foeman's doom!
What tho' yon bands their threat'ning faulchions wield?
Undaunted meet them on the hostile field,
Invite the contest, and their views forestal!
Be now th' unrival'd worth of France reveal'd:
Wave high your swords, aloud ST. DENIS call,
Assert your country's fame, or in her service fall!"

As thus the Monarch spoke, around burst forth
Shouts of wild transport:  ev'ry valiant Peer
Rejoic'd that now the trial of his worth
And the bright harvest of renown were near.
Each, as he rear'd his blade and pois'd his spear,
No more the ardour of his troop restrain'd,
But bad them tow'rds Rapaume their swift march steer,
Which now the English bands had almost gain'd.
As either line advanc'd, suspense appalling reign'd.

Thus, when in air approaching tempests brood,
Hush'd are old ocean's billows, and in sleep
Wrapt are the blasts which plough'd it's surface rude:
Soon with resistless violence they sweep,
And, from the caverns of the foaming deep,
Tear the wild waves in mountains to the sky;
The rocks re-echo from their bases steep,
Amid the gloom quick-glancing light'nings fly,
And thunders roll around, and drown the seaman's cry.

VIEUPONT, to whom the guidance of his van
The Gallic King had giv'n, in order close
His archers led, and first the fight began.
"Behold advancing tow'rds Rapaume your foes,"
Loudly he cried, "Now bend your sturdy bows,
And let each arrow as it whizzes tell!"
Straightway on high an iron show'r arose;
But strength it's flight was wanting to impel,
Innoxiously it pass'd, and in the river fell.

Not so the yeomanry, whom England's Prince
Had station'd in his front, prevail'd to shew
Their prowess and their ancient skill t' evince.
Their cloth-yard arrows to the head they drew,
Which with unerring destination flew,
And spread confusion thro' the adverse band.
Nor staid they long their volley to renew:
VIEUPONT in vain enforc'd his stern command,
His archers fled, their foes unable to withstand.

Indignant to behold their foul mischance,
And anxious their misconduct to retrieve,
SABRAN his forces order'd to advance.
Let us from perils VIEUPONT'S band relieve,"
He cried, "let those who triumph now perceive
How Gallia's sons their duty can discharge:
On, my brave comrades!  soon shall ye atchieve
The glorious toil; cease not your vig'rous charge,
Till your acknowledg'd worth by vict'ry you enlarge."

They heard his pow'rful mandate, and, intent
Their friends to succour, his behest obey'd:
Tow'rds the Rapaume their eager march they bent,
And, as on high their bucklers they display'd,
Mock'd the wing'd arrows which against them play'd.
Heedless of fate, and prodigal of blood,
Tho' England's choicest youth, in steel array'd,
Crouding the adverse bank embattled stood,
They plung'd amid the waves, and boldly cross'd the flood.

Them follow'd close the band of ST. HILAIRE;
Nor was the troop of MONTREAL more slow
The dangers of the dread assault to share.
Urging his squadron's ardour, bold VITEVAUX
Bad them again their wonted valour shew.
Nor less DE MARBY felt his manly breast
With conscious worth and gen'rous feelings glow:
To dare the risk his gallant host he press'd,
And brandish'd high his spear, and wav'd his plumed crest.

Soon they perceiv'd along the river's edge
The English archers, long to warfare train'd,
Who, forming an impenetrable hedge,
A never-ceasing show'r of arrows rain'd,
And smote them as the mid-stream they attain'd.
Pierc'd by their shafts full many a warrior sank,
And with his blood the limpid waters stain'd;
Yet still they press'd, regardless of their rank,
And following brave SABRAN rush'd tow'rds the western bank.

Nor danger's front, nor death itself they fear'd;
They rush'd like wolves by thirst of prey impell'd:
As fell the foremost, others straight appear'd,
And still intrepidly their purpose held,
Tho' many a bleeding corse the current swell'd,
As England's archers bent their sounding bows.
Loud was their cry as they SABRAN beheld
Surmount the bank.  Imperiously he rose,
Breathing defiance loud and vengeance on his foes.

Not from th' Aetnean caves the sulph'rous blast
With force more horrible is seen to burst.
Whoe'er oppos'd his fury he o'ercast,
Full many a sturdy warrior he revers'd,
Broke thro' their ranks, their armaments dispers'd,
And far around him wild confusion spread.
All seem'd awhile in wonder lost:  none durst
Oppose his progress, as, with carnage red,
He rang'd across the field, and rode o'er heaps of dead.

Him TANCARVILLE, inur'd to war perceiv'd.
As the strange havock which he wrought around
He mark'd, his breast with indignation heav'd:
"Can there," exclaim'd he, "be no champion found,
To face yon warrior thus with conquest crown'd?
Be mine the task his boldness to defeat!"
With that his buckler on his arm he bound,
Pois'd his good weapon, spurr'd his courser fleet,
And hastily advanc'd his puissant foe to meet.

The Gallic leader saw him as he came,
Nor 'gainst him long delay'd his steed to guide.
Both lances shiver'd, as, with furious aim,
They sought their deadly contest to decide.
Grasping their swords, each other they defied;
Crush'd were their helms, their polish'd mails were rent,
Their rich surcoats with gushing blood were dy'd;
Yet, on the issue equally intent,
Careless of pain they seem'd, and on destruction bent.

At length the fortune of SABRAN prevail'd.
Pierc'd where his helmet with his mail combin'd,
His bold opponent fell:  his eye-sight fail'd;
With a brief pray'r, his spirit unconfin'd
The honour'd shades of his fore-fathers join'd.
For warlike fame illustrious as for birth,
Gen'rous as brave, magnanimous as kind,
His grateful countrymen confess'd his worth.
In their defence he sank, and press'd th' ensanguin'd earth.

SABRAN meantime his vengeful course renew'd;
But soon an object his attention caught,
Which urg'd him o'er the field.  In contest rude
With ST. HILAIRE renown'd FITZ-GERALD fought,
Close by the stream:  with equal valour fraught
And equal skill, the combat they maintain'd;
Now hand to hand, and horse to horse, they sought
Their blows to deal; doubtful the strife remain'd,
And either helm alike with crimson'd streams was stain'd.

Intrepid ST. HILAIRE his faulchion whirl'd,
When, yielding suddenly the treach'rous bank,
He and his steed into the stream were hurl'd:
Together in it's foaming waves they sank,
And deeply of the turbid current drank.
Soon as his friend's mishap SABRAN espied,
Fiercely he broke the intervening rank,
And, as FITZ-GERALD sternly he defied,
On his bruis'd casque a stroke with vengeful aim applied.

Dauntless the rude aggression he receiv'd;
And now between them rag'd the stubborn fight,
And either Chieftain deeds of worth atchiev'd,
When 'cross the river BRANCAS led his might:
His too successful efforts seem'd t' invite
His friend DUMONT to follow with his band.
Their charge compell'd the English van to flight:
Full many a warrior felt their ruthless hand,
And many a Chieftain press'd the long-contested strand.

The field surveying with attentive glance,
BLONDEL their progress mark'd:  his gen'rous breast
Heav'd, when he saw the lilies pale of France
Superbly waving, as their murd'rous quest
The foe pursued:  "And shall we not arrest
Their course audacious?"  loudly he exclaim'd;
"If yet, by English virtue unrepress'd,
By patriot feelings are your hearts inflam'd,
On to the charge, nor let your oft-tried worth be sham'd."

He said.  Tremendous as the God of War,
His fatal course the youthful Chieftain held:
Like thunder's voice his shout re-echo'd far;
His sword the wide-encrimson'd torrent swell'd.
In vain against him stout BRETEUIL impell'd
His vig'rous steed:  stagg'ring he press'd the ground.
Him ne'er again his anxious wife beheld;
Encircled with her smiling babes around,
Ne'er in her fond embrace her lord again she bound.

Him falling BEAUPLAN saw, who erst the fleet
Of royal PHILIP had tow'rds Acre led.
Impetuously he rode BLONDEL to meet.
Short was their conflict:  on his ill-arm'd head
The youthful hero struck with impulse dread:
The fortunes of his luckless friend he shar'd,
And his freed spirit to attend him fled.
Far better had he still the ocean dar'd,
And buffetted the waves which oft his bark had spar'd.

Him to avenge impetuously VITEVAUX
The victor Chief assaulted.  On his crest
Roughly he smote:  tho' pow'rful was his blow,
The temper'd steel prevail'd it's force t' arrest.
His own the prowess of his foe confess'd:
The trenchant weapon, cleaving thro' his brain,
Stopt not 'till deeply it transfix'd his breast.
He dropt his sword, and fell convuls'd with pain,
While, to acquire new fame, BLONDEL rang'd o'er the plain.

Death seem'd to follow him where'er he turn'd:
Nor worth, nor numbers, his assault withstood;
His vig'rous steed the dead and wounded spurn'd;
With woolly fetlocks deeply dy'd in blood
Tow'rds the Rapaume his progress he pursued,
Where brave FITZ-GERALD and the stern SABRAN
Engag'd he saw in combat long and rude:
Encrimson'd streams from either warrior ran,
Each was with toil o'erspent, and each to faint began.

He rush'd impatient to his friend's relief,
Who scarcely now his weighty arms could wield,
And furiously against the Gallic Chief
Turning, he bore him headlong to the field.
"Preserve his life," he cried, "but take his shield,
And him forthwith to England's King convey:
Give him refreshment, let his wounds be heal'd.
A foe, who thus his valour can display,
Our triumph will adorn, and grace this glorious day!"

While thus with signal valour on the right
BLONDEL his fame and country's cause maintain'd,
Less fav'ring on the left appear'd the fight.
There wild confusion and disorder reign'd;
DE MARBY there, with vengeance unrestrain'd,
Thro' broken ranks his deadly course impell'd:
There bold BRANCAS, his sword with carnage stain'd,
With English gore Rapaume's red current swell'd:
There their disastrous rule dismay and terror held.

Ill brook'd DE PREAUX the suff'rings of his host.
"Comrades!"  he cried, "redeem this foul disgrace!
Shall your renown, so well acquir'd be lost?
To Gallia's Lilies shall the Cross give place,
And England's banners PHILIP'S triumphs grace?
If yet your souls bright honour's impulse move,
Conquest atchieve, or glorious death embrace!"
With that his courser 'gainst BRANCAS he drove,
And loudly dar'd the Chief the brunt of war to prove.

He heard the proud defiance, nor deferr'd
In equal arms his summoner to greet:
His foaming courser's heaving flank he spurr'd,
And hastily advanc'd his foe to meet.
Hardly could either Chieftain keep his seat,
As on his buckler rung the adverse lance:
The potent blows compell'd them to retreat,
Yet only with new ardour to advance,
As if delay but serv'd their fury to enhance.

With surer destination now they smote.
On BRANCAS' neck, where his plum'd helmet's bound
Join'd with the border of his mailed coat,
DE PREAUX'S tough spear infix'd a ghastly wound,
While, in his own ill-guarded side, profound,
Draining his life-blood, BRANCAS' lance remain'd.
Together fell the warriors to the ground,
Their mingled gore the thirsty soil distain'd,
Each felt approaching death, yet each his sense retain'd.

Of those, who chanc'd their combat to perceive,
A croud approach'd:  each, mov'd by pity, vied
DE PREAUX, their lov'd companion, to relieve.
He, as to raise him from the earth they tried,
With broken voice and dying accents cried,
"Ah!  cease, my friends!  your unavailing care;
Tow'rds me in vain your succour is applied;
Nought now can aid me but your pious pray'r,
That Heav'n's eternal joys my flitting soul may share.

"But, if some spark of animating fire
Within my brave opponent's breast remain,
Ah!  let kind pity's touch your hearts inspire:
Bear him in safety from this bloody plain,
Let some kind leech's hand assuage his pain.
Adieu &mdash; the veil of death is round me spread&mdash;
Shew him the mercy you would hope to gain!&mdash;"
Thus gasping spake the Chief:  he bow'd his head,
And, courteous to the last, his gallant spirit fled.

His mild behest the sorrowing warriors prais'd,
And not unwillingly his words obey'd.
The Gallic Chieftain, fainting yet, they rais'd:
He breath'd, but fast life's vigour seem'd to fade.
Him on a shield with tender care they laid,
And, with the lifeless body of their friend,
With hasty footsteps to the camp convey'd.
Meantime, around new shouts were heard t' ascend,
Astounding clamours rose, and seem'd Heav'n's arch to rend.

For bold DE MARBY urg'd the dread debate.
As o'er the field with brandish'd spear he rode,
He seem'd the harbinger of ruthless fate:
Torrents of English blood around him flow'd;
His arm resistless to the dark abode
Of disembodied souls their ranks consign'd,
And with their lifeless limbs the champaign strew'd.
He rag'd amid them, like the midnight wind,
Which, as it passes, leaves a ruin'd track behind.

Illustrious CHAMVILLE and FIERTE brave,
O'erthrown by him, the debt of nature paid.
Nor could his polish'd numbers BEAUMONT save:
He erst, reposing in his native shade,
Had fram'd the verse, and sought the Muse's aid
To consecrate his gentle lady's bloom.
Ah!  had he ne'er the voice of war obey'd,
She had not prematurely moan'd his doom,
Nor had she weeping rear'd his unavailing tomb.

Young CHANDOS, offspring of a worthy sire,
Now first in arms the Gallic shore had sought.
Early he learn'd to warlike fame t' aspire,
And, by his father's bright example taught,
The gen'rous flame of patriotism had caught.
By feelings high incited and by grief,
He view'd the carnage which DE MARBY wrought,
And straightway to his suff'ring friend's relief
He rush'd across the plain, and brav'd the vet'ran Chief.

"Whoe'er thou art," he cried, "whose pow'rful hand
Thus spreads destruction thro' the bleeding throng,
Behold a youthful Knight who bids thee stand!
Bold in her cause, in conscious duty strong,
Be mine to vindicate my country's wrong!"
"To feast and revel in thy father's hall
Better," replied he, "to thy years belong:
'Twere wiser there to lead the festive ball
With sportive damsels, than unpitied here to fall."

"Should Heav'n my hopes fulfil," the youth rejoin'd,
From those fair damsels, when again we meet,
I trust a welcome doubly sweet to find:
With transport they my wish'd return will greet,
When thy rich spoils I lay before their feet."
With that, he boldly rode against his foe.
The shock made either stagger in his seat:
Their lances shiver'd with the furious blow,
And 'crimson'd streams were seen from either mail to flow.

Quickly their foaming coursers' speed they check'd,
And, turning back, their swords impatient drew:
Both seem'd their utmost vigour to collect,
Intent alike the contest to pursue.
Sparks of bright fire from either helmet flew,
Bruised were their corselets, their broad bucklers rung;
Their stern assault no intermission knew:
As each against the other fiercely sprung,
The dread event of war in doubtful balance hung.

DE MARBY'S blade his bold opponent's crest
Now shatter'd:  swiftly wielding it again,
With an empurpled tide his 'broider'd vest
And scarf wide-flowing it prevail'd to stain.
But on his foaming charger's arching mane
CHANDOS infix'd a deep and ghastly wound,
The spinal bone dissev'ring:  mad with pain,
He rear'd, he plung'd awhile, then, wheeling round,
He sank, and falling bore his rider to the ground.

Beneath his weight DE MARBY lay oppress'd,
When CHANDOS nimbly leapt upon the field,
And, his foot firmly placing on his breast,
With exultation cried, "Proud Chieftain, yield!
Confess that youth can manhood's weapons wield!
Now, by those damsels, whom thy boastful taunt
My play-mates made, thy sentence shall be seal'd:
To them thy prowess thou may'st safely vaunt,
But never more attempt a manly heart to daunt."

Thus saying, to his 'Squire the Chief he gave,
With orders to conduct him to his post,
And o'er the plain with freshen'd ardour drave.
Doubtful was now the fortune of the host;
Assail'd in every quarter, ground they lost,
And, tho' BLONDEL still urg'd them on, gave way:
For now new bands of foes the stream had cross'd,
DES BRENNES his squadron led in stern array,
And MOUNTFORT bad his troop their wonted zeal display.

While fortune thus was balanc'd, from the height,
Where circled by his gallant Peers he stood,
The English King survey'd th' uncertain fight.
He saw new reinforcements pass the flood,
Who mark'd their desolating way with blood:
He view'd his warriors ranging o'er the plain,
Fearless, and courting the encounter rude,
Intent the hostile impulse to restrain,
To cheer their broken troops, and fresh renown to gain.

But soon another scene his thoughts engag'd.
Beyond the river now the Fiend of War,
Her vengeful ministers impelling, rag'd.
Her voice, of woe prophetic, sounded far;
As o'er the field she drove her sanguin'd car,
Her hell-born coursers urg'd their progress drear;
Portentous like hot Sirius' flaming star,
She brandish'd high in air her murd'rous spear,
And high her crest begirt with snakes rejoic'd to rear.

There valiant MORTIMER his bands led on,
And with DES BARRES his deadly conflict held:
There, as their armour with the sunbeams shone,
On either side the gallant Chiefs impell'd
Their foaming chargers, and with zeal unquell'd
The work of fate intrepidly pursued:
Now England's youth in deeds of worth excell'd,
Now Gallia's champions their attack renew'd,
And all confusion seem'd, and anarchy and blood.

Now Destiny, presiding at her loom,
Prepar'd her baleful web of horrors dread.
Hov'ring between each host, her dubious plume,
Red with promiscuous carnage, Victory spread:
Wide flew her gory tresses, as she shed
Her glance infuriate o'er the crouded plain,
Strew'd far around with wounded and with dead:
Woe, Havock and Despair compos'd her train,
Exulting to confirm her desolating reign.

"On to the proof!"  the Monarch loudly cried,
The battle's issue on ourselves depends,
And worth superior must our fate decide.
Comrades!  reflect that Heav'n the brave befriends:
Tho' threat'ning ruin on his course attends,
There is a Providence, whose watchful care
Him who asserts his country's cause defends.
Arm'd with this faith, to meet the foe prepare,
Follow where RICHARD leads, and England's glory share!"

He said.  Nor more the gen'rous Chiefs requir'd:
Their hearts, which ill the foe's success could bear,
With double zeal their Monarch's voice inspir'd.
Him REGINALD and LACY follow'd near;
NEVILLE, MAULEON, and full many a Peer,
Aspir'd with him their oft-tried arms to wield.
He at their head, high-brandishing his spear,
And firmly grasping his emblazon'd shield,
His vig'rous courser spurr'd, and rush'd across the field.

As 'mid the Glacieres, where their frigid throne
Eternal frosts and wintry horrors keep,
From Furca's icy bulk the boist'rous Rhone
Forth bursting roars among the mountains steep;
O'er rocky fragments with resistless sweep
Foaming he tears, all obstacles o'erthrows,
And rolls his ample volume to the deep:
So rush'd the King on his presumptuous foes,
So fell before him all who dar'd his wrath oppose.

Soon the dread spot they reach'd, where bold BLONDEL,
And youthful CHANDOS, with his first essay
Elated, strove th' invader to repel.
In vain they sought their prowess to display;
By force superior driv'n their bands gave way,
While many a Chief, who scorn'd ignoble flight,
Stretch'd on the plain in death's embraces lay:
DES BRENNES with ardour new urg'd on the fight,
And by success prevail'd new succours to invite.

Him, as across th' ensanguin'd field he rode
Spreading around dismay, the King espied.
As with indignant rage his bosom glow'd,
He hast'ned tow'rds him, and aloud defied
Th' insulting Chief the contest to decide.
With expectation high his bosom heav'd,
As to his challenge boldly he replied:
For, flush'd with recent conquest, he conceiv'd
He now should crown the feats his valour had atchiev'd.

But visionary prov'd his daring hope,
Nor could the arm, which had so oft prevail'd
To win renown, with England's Monarch cope.
Him with resistless fury he assail'd;
Thro' his broad buckler and his cuirass mail'd
RICHARD'S good lance a ready passage found:
The shades of death his closing eyelids veil'd,
Life's purple stream fast issued from his wound,
Convuls'd the Chieftain sank, and fainting press'd the ground.

Confus'd the foe their leader's fall beheld,
And, as amid their late triumphant band
The warlike King his courser fleet impell'd,
They shrank astounded from his vengeful hand.
None could the terrors of his wrath withstand:
Where'er he turn'd his desolating might,
Were seen the boastful legions to disband,
Abandoning the now successless fight,
And rushing tow'rds the stream in desultory flight.

Surrounded by his comrades brave he sought
Their yielding squadrons:  thro' their full concourse
Ranging, new deeds of hardihood he wrought.
Not more tremendous, from it's unknown source
A Comet, urging it's excentric course,
Thro' the dark void of trackless space is whirl'd,
While suff'ring nature bows beneath it's force,
When in it's vortex many a distant world
Involv'd in flames is caught and from it's system hurl'd.

While thus his glorious progress he pursued,
PHILIP, as round he cast his anxious eye,
In ev'ry quarter threat'ning ruin view'd.
Appall'd he listen'd to the victors' cry,
As they their conq'ring banners wav'd on high,
And o'er the wide field urg'd their bloody quest.
On either hand he saw his legions fly;
Bold MORTIMER their line disorder'd press'd,
While vainly they essay'd his vengeance to arrest.

For now no longer 'gainst their strenuous foes
Renown'd DES BARRES his oft-tried warriors led,
No more his awe-inspiring voice arose.
Him MORTIMER had number'd with the dead:
Low on the plain with Gallic slaughter red
Transfix'd the Champion lay; his gallant soul
Releas'd, to Heav'n's eternal joys was fled.
No more his legions felt his strong controul;
Throughout their broken ranks dismay and terror stole.

Thus dreadful was th' alternative of ill
Which Gallia's haughty Potentate dismay'd.
As if his stern commission to fulfil,
England's exulting Genius far display'd
His sounding plumes, and, in Heav'n's wrath array'd,
With voice, which harrow'd up his perjur'd breast,
Denounc'd revenge for confidence betray'd.
Appall'd he stood, by doubts and fears oppress'd:
At length arous'd he thus th' attentive Peers address'd.

"See where harsh fortune on our prospects lours,
Oh mark!  where, pleas'd her bitt'rest woes to drain,
Her flood of vengeance she unpitying pours!
On ev'ry side shame and disorder reign!
Tho' weak our struggle, and our efforts vain,
Yet may not fortitude defeat repair?
All is not lost, if Gallic zeal remain!
Let us assume new courage from despair,
And, as becomes us, death or glorious victory share."

Thus spake the troubled King:  nor on his host,
In whose free souls the gen'rous ardour flam'd
Which grac'd their lineage, were his dictates lost.
"To death or victory!"  bold SARGINES exclaim'd;
"Sprung from the Paladins in history fam'd
For worth and loyalty, their matchless deeds
Ne'er by their brave descendants shall be sham'd.
United follow where our Monarch leads;
He wins immortal fame who for his Sov'reign bleeds!"

As when, forth-bursting o'er the eastern hills,
Day's splendid orb the distant plains illumes,
From ev'ry plant ambrosial dew distils,
The spangled meadows breathe renew'd perfumes,
And, as successive tints the vale assumes,
The tuneful choir, with vigour fresh inspir'd,
Carol their strains and spread their waving plumes:
So, by new hope and emulation fir'd,
To grace their Monarch's cause the Gallic Peers aspir'd.

The time's hard pressure no debate allow'd;
For now, on either hand, their yielding force
Beneath the faulchions of their conquerors bow'd.
Led by the shouts of war and outcries hoarse
Which mark'd brave MORTIMER'S o'erwhelming course,
To meet his fury D'AVALON advanc'd.
Across the field o'erspread with many a corse,
Once known and valued, as his eye he glanc'd,
The rage which fill'd his heart remembrance sad enhanc'd.

Him follow'd MONTMORENCY, potent Chief,
With MONTOLIEU, GUERIN and D'EUREMODE,
All earnest to insure their friends' relief.
'Mid scenes of carnage gallantly they rode,
And, while around them 'crimson'd torrents flow'd,
As if t' avenge their comrades lost, the plain
With wounded and with dead their lances strew'd.
Yet fruitless prov'd their zeal, their ardour vain,
Still MORTIMER prevail'd his 'vantage to maintain.

While thus with new exertions rag'd the fight,
PHILIP his vizor clos'd, his shield embrac'd,
And follow'd by full many a gallant Knight,
The pride and last resource of France, in haste
Tow'rds the Rapaume his anxious progress trac'd,
Where England's Monarch, master of the field,
His routed foes in wild disorder chas'd,
Who, to superior force compell'd to yield,
Shrinking before his wrath to Heav'n for aid appeal'd.

But to their perjur'd cause was aid denied:
Them to the river's marge, abrupt and steep,
England's bold warriors drove.  In vain they tried
T' escape the terrors of th' ensanguin'd deep.
As forc'd by dogs, a flock of tim'rous sheep
Gaze on some precipice with doubtful glance,
As if afraid t' attempt the dang'rous leap,
Soon from the threat'ning crag themselves they lance,
Impell'd by present risk to trust to vent'rous chance.

So Gallia's legions from the perilous bank,
Crouded with dead and wounded, sought the flood.
There numbers indiscriminately sank,
And stain'd the foaming waters with their blood;
While others, buffetting the current rude,
Prevail'd to stem the now augmented tide,
And, turning on their foes who still pursued,
By desperation urg'd their wrath defied,
And the dread work of death with vengeful ardour plied.

Successless prov'd their hazardous essay:
BLONDEL still hung on their defenceless rear,
And forc'd their weaken'd squadrons to give way.
Around him, as he brandish'd high his spear,
Dismay and terror seem'd their course to steer:
Where'er he turn'd his desolating arm,
Resistance fruitless prov'd:  o'ercome by fear,
Those, who so lately spread around alarm,
Now sought by instant flight to 'scape impending harm.

He ceas'd not their tumultuous speed to urge,
The trembling fugitives pursuing close
Thro' the red current to it's eastern verge,
Where PHILIP, sad spectator of their woes,
Indignant stood his progress to oppose.
He unappall'd the threat'ning King survey'd,
And, as impatient from the bank he rose,
Fearless his spear with slaughter stain'd display'd,
As if his single arm the battle's fortune sway'd.

As when a swain, returning to his fold,
Meets an half-famish'd wolf who bears away
His cherish'd lamb, with desperation bold
His murd'rous purpose he attempts to stay,
And snatches from his jaws his helpless prey:
So rush'd the King against the youthful Knight.
He, no less eager for the noble fray,
Turn'd tow'rds him, and, collecting all his might,
With graceful confidence address'd him to the fight.

Already each had spurr'd his vig'rous steed,
And, as they onward rode, the wond'ring host
Stood gazing on them with observant heed,
Wrapt in suspense, in mute attention lost,
When, as the river royal RICHARD cross'd,
Loudly he cried, "BLONDEL!  the strife forbear!
None but myself this enterprize shall boast:
With none this proud occasion will I share,
Nor shall another's brow my rightful laurels wear!"

As thus he said, he reach'd the bloody strand.
BLONDEL his courser check'd in middle space,
Obedient to his Sov'reign's high command,
While, his renown'd antagonist to face,
The Gallic King his circle 'gan to trace.
RICHARD, meantime, advancing thro' the croud
With native dignity and manly grace,
On his false foe a look of scorn bestow'd,
And thus, while beam'd his eye with transport, cried aloud.

"Lost as thou art to truth, by treasons stain'd,
Since Heav'n's avenging Pow'r my steps to guide
In equal field to meet thee now has deign'd,
By him thou dar'd to wrong art thou defied.
My just revenge no longer is denied.
Now, if thou can'st, thy faithless life defend:
This hour our deadly contest shall decide,
This hour the triumphs of thy guilt shall end!
May Heav'n, which knows my heart, my rightful cause befriend!"

"No less delight I feel," replied the King,
"That fortune grants us now to terminate
The deep and settled enmities, which spring
From antient rivalship and jealous hate.
No longer waste those moments in debate,
Which, since in adverse arms oppos'd we meet,
We should to deeds of vengeance consecrate.
Thus to thy heart!  May shame and foul defeat
O'erwhelm him who shall first from the assault retreat!"

He said, and 'gainst the English Monarch's breast
His weapon stoutly bent:  shiv'ring it flew
In fragments o'er the plain.  He from it's rest
The useless shaft with indignation threw,
And swiftly forth his glitt'ring faulchion drew.
Soon as his gen'rous foe the chance perceiv'd,
He dropt his spear, and with observance due
His good Excalibor on high he heav'd,
And his opponent's blow on his broad shield receiv'd.

His debt of vengeance soon did he repay.
On PHILIP'S ample and emblazon'd shield
His blade descending bore the marge away,
And drove the sounding fragment to the field.
Now both were seen their puissant arms to wield,
To strike, to rush, to parry, to retire;
Each helm and corselet, as their weapons peal'd,
Resounding rung, emitting sparks of fire,
While many a sanguine stream proclaim'd their ruthless ire.

Observing his advantage fleet, on high
The Gallic King, whirling his sword around,
On RICHARD'S crest a blow prevail'd t' apply,
And the gold circlet, which his morion bound,
Dissev'ring, struck it rudely to the ground.
"Now, if kind fate," he cried, "my efforts aid,
My hand shall thy aspiring hopes confound!
Thus to conclude our strife!"  No more he stay'd,
But summoning his strength he rear'd his pond'rous blade.

But, tho' astounded by the weighty stroke,
England's brave Monarch mark'd his stern intent,
And, in his breast as tenfold rage awoke,
Heaving Excalibor, a blow he lent,
Which, meeting PHILIP'S sword in it's descent,
Clove it in twain, and with encounter dread
His vizor rudely crush'd:  stagg'ring he bent,
His hands the reins forsook, he bow'd his head,
And o'er his bloodless cheek a mortal paleness spread.

Soon as the gallant King his state perceiv'd,
"Now shall my perjur'd foe," he cried, "be seen
Gracing the triumph which my arm atchiev'd!"
But, as he turn'd to seize him, bold SARGINES,
His vig'rous courser spurring, rush'd between.
"Thus for my Monarch I my life devote!"
Loudly he cried, and with his faulchion keen
So sturdily on RICHARD'S cuirass smote,
That dented was the steel, and rent his rich surcoat.

With vengeance and disdain his bosom burn'd.
Relinquishing his now defenceless foe,
Quickly to face th' aggressor fierce he turn'd.
Nor was SARGINES to meet his fury slow.
Dread was their rude encounter:  many a blow
They gave, and many a harsh return they bore;
From either helm and mail began to flow,
As fell their potent weapons, streams of gore,
And either high-plum'd crest marks of their prowess wore.

Meantime, while thus th' eventful combat rag'd,
The anxious Peers who PHILIP'S escort made,
Perceiving RICHARD with SARGINES engag'd,
Rush'd in a body to their Sov'reign's aid.
Him fainting yet upon his steed they laid,
And, charging those who to oppose them stood,
Far from the field their sacred trust convey'd:
Thro' the throng'd croud their desp'rate way they hew'd,
And tow'rds Gaalor's walls their progress swift pursued.

As England's King indignantly beheld
The daring efforts of the loyal band,
His bosom with unbridled fury swell'd;
Like light'ning fell his death-dispensing hand:
No more SARGINES his onset could withstand;
Thro' the steel'd cuirass, where his neck it clasp'd,
Deep in his shoulder sank his trenchant brand:
Then, as with pain the writhing Chieftain gasp'd,
Whirling again his sword, him by the throat he grasp'd.

"Now," he exclaim'd, "thy bold intrusion rue!
Since thou hast learn'd thy forfeit life to scorn,
Receive the vengeance to thy rashness due!"
"Strike!"  cried SARGINES &mdash; "True to my ligeance sworn,
What nobler trophy can my fame adorn?
'Twas mine my King from threat'ning death to save,
By me was PHILIP from destruction torn!
Again his banner may triumphant wave,
His tear perhaps may grace SARGINES' illustrious grave!"

"Thy virtues," cried the King, "thy gen'rous zeal,
From menac'd vengeance shall thy life reprieve.
While RICHARD'S soul a foe's desert can feel,
Ne'er shall his pow'r of freedom him bereave,
Who dar'd such acts heroic to atchieve,
Who nobly courted death his Prince to save.
Whate'er thy weaken'd state requires receive:
Know that true courtesy respects the brave,
And freely grants the aid which suff'ring worth may crave.

"And should'st thou, Chieftain!  England's Monarch deem
Deserving of thy friendship to partake,
Accept this pledge of his unfeign'd esteem!
Henceforward deign to wear it for his sake!
Let it the memory of this day awake,
And of thy glorious deed!"  With that in haste
He bad th' attendants from his shoulder take
The scarf which BERENGARIA'S hand had trac'd,
And on the Champion's arm the precious trophy plac'd.

"Prince!"  cried the Chief, "thy friendship I accept,
And sacred shall this pledge of thy esteem
By him who feels thy excellence be kept.
The royal virtues which around thee beam,
Our age's grace, some future poet's theme"&mdash;
"Forbear," exclaim'd the King, "the moments fleet
With mine and England's dearest int'rests teem:
Awhile, brave warrior!  from the field retreat;
I go, the task which fate imposes to complete."

The air with clamours of applause was rent,
As thus the Monarch spoke.  The wounded Knight
Was led by BASSET to the royal tent,
And ready succour found.  Meantime, the fight
No more uncertain hung:  In gen'ral flight
The Gallic troops were driv'n across the field.
Far from the scene of blood their coursers light
Some swiftly bore, while more for grace appeal'd,
Abandoning the arms they dar'd no longer wield.

Nor did brave MORTIMER less surely guide
To glorious victory his illustrious band.
He seem'd o'er all their movements to preside,
And, while he sagely issued his command,
Shar'd boldly in the enterprize he plann'd.
With such a Chief their ardour to inflame,
Nought could the force of Englishmen withstand:
Nor shall they, if by valour led, ere shame
Their country's fair renown and long recorded fame.

Confirm'd were now the fortunes of the day:
Victory on high to her loud tube gave breath,
Rejoic'd her RICHARD'S triumphs to display,
While, on his brow she plac'd her blooming wreath.
Now 'gan the English Chiefs their faulchions sheath,
And ev'ry heart with fond presages beat,
That once again, their native shades beneath,
They should their fond and lovely partners meet,
And pure affection's vows with ecstasy repeat.

With loud acclaim their valiant King they hail'd,
And o'er the plain with Gallic slaughter strew'd
Wild exultation and delight prevail'd.
RICHARD well-pleas'd their gen'rous impulse view'd,
"Comrades," aloud he cried, "to end our feud
But little now remains:  if fortune smile,
The path of glory still should be pursued:
One effort more will crown our worthy toil,
And proud pre-eminence shall grace our favour'd isle."

He said.  New hope each warrior's eye illum'd,
And, by their Monarch's bright example cheer'd,
Their march tow'rds proud Gaalor they resum'd;
Throughout the host exulting shouts were heard,
And England's conq'ring standard high was rear'd.
Now near at hand the wide embattled wall,
Frowning in rude magnificence, appear'd:
Nought could it's strength their ardent souls appal;
From perils new they seem'd fresh glory to forestal.

And soon, drawn forth in menacing array,
They 'gan the Catapultas huge to bend,
Their dread artill'ry on the tow'rs to play:
Now, thro' the yielding air compell'd t' ascend,
Fragments of rocks the fortress seem'd to rend;
Now, as replenish'd, groan'd each huge machine,
A show'r destructive they combin'd to blend,
When from the portal with submissive mien,
Waving his flag of truce, MOUNTJOY was issuing seen.

"Cease your assault," exclaim'd th' expecting King,
"'Till yonder harbinger of peace declare,
What terms his Prince commissions him to bring."
MOUNTJOY meantime advanc'd with sorrowing air;
His hasten'd step betoken'd anxious care,
And silent was his progress thro' the croud.
When near approach'd, with reverences fair,
Precursors of his humble suit, he bow'd,
Then his entrusted charge he thus proclaim'd aloud.

"Once more I come this presence high to greet.
My Sov'reign and his Peers thy puissance own,
And on these terms by me propose to treat.
Normannia shall confess thy sway alone;
France shall redeem the pris'ners thou hast won:
If other grievances shall still remain,
From ancient feuds or recent errors grown,
These they propose in future to explain,
That henceforth either state may amity maintain."

"MOUNTJOY!"  replied the King, "this answer take.
Tell him who sent thee, that a conquer'd foe
Has small pretence such haughty terms to make.
Yonder proud fortress shall be levell'd low,
Ere England will her rightful claims forego.
Let him come forth:  by us shall be discuss'd
What I shall then propose.  Let PHILIP know
To RICHARD'S honour he may safely trust,
Who ne'er, when once his faith was plighted, prov'd unjust."

He said.  MOUNTJOY withdrew impress'd with awe:
Nor in suspense did RICHARD long await.
Surrounded by his faithful Chiefs he saw
The Gallic Prince descending from the gate.
Confus'd he seem'd, and, as if adverse fate
Had bow'd his spirit, downcast was his look;
Yet still his eye beam'd with disdain and hate.
Unus'd submission and disgrace to brook,
As on he came his limbs with conscious feelings shook.

Him thus affected as the King survey'd,
The scorn which fill'd his bosom he suppress'd,
And pity his resentment stern allay'd,
As thus his vanquish'd rival he address'd.
"If yet thy haughty and unfeeling breast
A sentiment of loyal truth retain,
Sufficiently thy fortunes are depress'd.
The recollection of the crimes, which stain
Thy once unsullied fame, must wring thy soul with pain."

"'Twere bootless thy offences to repeat,
Nor shall thy perj'ries now by me be scann'd.
Heav'n has o'erpaid them all by thy defeat.
Thus, when chastis'd by my avenging hand,
To see thee here in patient suppliance stand,
To hear thee terms of clemency implore
On this long harrass'd and insulted strand,
Amply my wounded dignity restore:
They heal my wrongs, and as a Man I ask no more.

"But as a King, as he whom Heav'n's high will
Has call'd o'er favour'd Albion to preside,
The duties of my charge I must fulfil.
When first with thee in sacred bonds allied
I sought my host 'gainst SALADIN to guide,
Thy dereliction Judah's cause betray'd:
Urg'd by ambition, jealousy and pride,
Against thy friend thy banners were display'd,
And my rash confidence with treach'ry was repaid.

"When I remain'd in Palestine employ'd,
My sworn Ally his bands against me led.
This unsuspecting province they destroy'd:
With Norman gore their impious swords were red,
And Gallic vengeance on her entrails fed.
Nor less was England doom'd thy rage to bear.
There curs'd rebellion's toils by thee were spread,
By thee was JOHN seduc'd thy guilt to share,
To stain with blood the land which nature bad him spare.

"Now heav'nly justice overtakes thy crime,
And proves, tho' treason may a while pursue
It's prosp'rous course, that come there will a time,
When retribution, with atonement due,
Shall make the traitor his offences rue.
Such is thy fallen state:  and, if my soul
Like thine no guide but mad ambition knew,
If mercy could not my revenge controul,
I might to their extent repay thy perj'ries foul.

"But thus I call thee to redeem thy guilt.
By pray'r and penitence Heav'n's grace implore,
To pardon all the Christian blood th' hast spilt:
Let Normandy confess my sway once more;
Her injur'd people's property restore;
For all thy captive warriors ransom yield;
Surrender those who arms against thee bore;
Twelve hostages, who best their swords can wield,
Deliver to my hand when our compact is seal'd.

"Such are the terms of safety and redress,
To which, tho' victor, I myself confine.
Say, in these proffers wilt thou acquiesce?
To name them by the fate of war is mine,
To deem them just and courteous should be thine.
Tho' further might I conquest's rights improve,
I would not on severity refine;
Nor shall the Prince, who once possess'd my love,
When adverse fortune lours, unroyal treatment prove."

As thus impressively the Monarch spoke,
The Gallic King, confus'd, essay'd to hide
The feelings which within his breast awoke.
Silent awhile he stood, and vainly tried
To check the rising sigh, then thus replied.
"Howe'er disaster may my mind oppress,
Tho' harsh th' avowal to my wounded pride,
I must thy princely courtesy confess,
Which with new charms has pow'r e'en virtue's self to dress.

"To err is human:  least of all is he,
On whose ill-fated brow a crown is plac'd,
From risk secure or from temptation free;
Truth from his presence is by flatt'ry chas'd,
By adulation is his soul debas'd,
And servile parasites beset his throne.
Too freely did I of their poisons taste:
Tho' born for others, for myself alone
I learn'd to live, and deem'd all excellence my own.

"Thus, amid scenes which warp'd my judgment bred,
Ambition open'd her enticing views:
I follow'd as the gay deceiver led,
While she, my yielding senses to abuse,
With new-born hope prevail'd my mind t' amuse.
But, while I freely thus my faults confess,
I mean not my transgressions to excuse:
It suits me more those feelings to express,
Which thy acknowledg'd wrongs impel me to redress.

"The terms, on which thou hast propos'd to treat,
Are such as well our present state become,
And such as my entire concurrence meet.
Let us once more our ancient league resume,
Ah!  may again in pristine vigour bloom
The friendship which congenial spirits claim:
And may the Pow'r, who regulates our doom,
Grant that, restor'd to lustre, PHILIP'S name
'Mid Gallia's Kings may stand immortaliz'd by fame."

"Thus then," cried RICHARD, "let our discord end!
Thus my late rival in my arms I bind,
And hail him, as of old, my valued friend!
Henceforward prove to virtue's laws resign'd,
And me of wrongs forgetful shalt thou find.
Shew thyself worthy of thy sacred trust,
And future ages, to thy errors blind,
But to thy merits and perfections just,
With eulogies shall grace thy venerated bust."

As smiling Peace thus chas'd the Fiend of War,
The gallant warriors nature's voice obey'd,
And shouts of glad acclaim resounded far.
Soon did they Rouen's battlements pervade.
No terrors now fond BERENGARIA stay'd:
Her victor RICHARD once again to greet,
With vet'ran LEICESTER and the Cyprian Maid
Across the plain she urg'd her progress fleet,
While with unbounded joy her heart exulting beat.

As she approach'd, the echoing trumpet's sound
Announc'd 'twixt France and England firm accord.
"Oh RICHARD!" she exclaim'd, "by conquest crown'd,
Art thou once more to my fond arms restor'd!
What greater bliss can providence afford,
Than thus again to press thee to my heart?
Thanks to high Heav'n, which I so oft implor'd,
When torn my breast with agonizing smart,
That now indeed we meet never again to part.

"My life!  my love!"  th' enraptur'd King replied,
Partake my triumphs and my transport share!
No more shall fate our constant souls divide!
No more shall war's dread clamours rend the air,
Or mad ambition scatter wide despair.
Now my long harrass'd realm, redeem'd from woe,
Again shall feel it's King's paternal care:
Again my subjects happiness shall know,
And ev'ry face shall smile, and ev'ry bosom glow.

"And ye, brave guardians of our native isle!
Who oft in peril's front have glory sought,
Reap the full harvest of your gen'rous toil!
Renown is your's, by knightly prowess wrought:
By your example shall our sons be taught
That virtue will felicity insure.
Like their bold sires with patriot ardour fraught,
May they preserve their faith and honour pure!
Then to remotest time shall England's fame endure!

"And thou, BLONDEL!  my lov'd, my valued friend!
Let CHARICLAEA'S hand thy worth repay:
May blessings on your nuptial torch attend,
And chaste delights which never can decay.
Now with devotion consecrate this day,
Then to old England be our course address'd.
There, while our conq'ring banners we display,
Beneath our well-earn'd laurels let us rest,
Grac'd by the world's applause, by Heav'n's protection bless'd."

Thus spoke the gallant King, and o'er the plain,
With mien majestic and commanding grace,
To Rouen's ramparts led his martial train.
Sublime he seem'd, as, when fresh breezes chase
The envious clouds which hid his glorious face,
The Sun, in full meridian lustre bright,
Is seen thro' Heav'n's wide field his course to trace,
When nature's pow'rs his genial beams incite,
And all creation glows with rapture and delight.
