While on his daring quest BLONDEL advanc'd,
RICHARD his Queen tow'rds Rouen's ramparts led.
As o'er the camp's wide stretch his eye he glanc'd,
Where horror yet her stern dominion spread,
His sick'ning soul recoil'd, his colour fled,
And, wrung by pity, an unconscious tear
For many a valiant comrade lost he shed.
For war's effects most dreadful then appear,
When cease her loud acclaims the mounting heart to cheer.

There, wrapt in death, lay many a warrior bold:
Clos'd were those eyes that once with ardour beam'd,
The heart that panted for renown was cold,
Crush'd was the brain which policy had schem'd,
And pale those lips whence eloquence had stream'd.
The felon kite and many a carrion fowl
Hover'd around them, and obscenely scream'd:
And from his forest haunts, with savage howl,
Scenting his feast of blood, the wolf was seen to prowl.

"These are thy triumphs, War!"  exclaim'd the King:
Oh!  that ambition would awhile take breath,
And scan the woes which from her fury spring!
Ere yet the sword of conquest she unsheath,
Let her behold the ravages of death,
The varied pangs which her excesses cause,
Her guilty triumphs, and her blood-stain'd wreath!
Let her on these bestow a thought, and pause
Ere Heav'n she lose, to gain a servile world's applause."

Thus o'er th' ensanguin'd field, immers'd in woe,
He pass'd, 'till to the royal tent he came.
He bad th' attendants on the dead bestow
Such rites as suited their heroic name,
Such as were due to valour and to fame.
With pious care his mandate they obey'd:
Throughout the camp arose their sad acclaim,
As the last tribute of regard they paid,
And on each Chieftain's tomb his useless arms display'd.

Soon as was thus fulfill'd the mournful rite,
And o'er the warriors slain was rear'd the mound,
The King sent forth his heralds to invite
The Peers to council.  At the trumpet's sound,
With hasten'd steps o'er the yet-reeking ground
Obedient to their Monarch's will they press'd.
In mute attention as they stood around,
With expectation fill'd each gallant breast,
He thus in measur'd terms th' assembly grave address'd.

"'Tis not, my friends!  of errors past to treat,
'Tis not on your misconduct to dilate,
Tho' dire th' effect, I summon you to meet.
Our recent loss should vigilance create,
And urge us, when assembled in debate,
Such means of future enterprize to frame,
As may be best adapted to our state,
And may most speedily redeem our shame,
And rescue from reproach our once-unsullied fame.

"Your manly spirits will not deem it fit,
The vigour of our warriors to restrain,
Or to repeated insults to submit.
More worthy objects led us 'cross the main;
A brave and suff'ring province to sustain,
A great revenge for broken faith to wreak,
Redress and full indemnity to gain,
And by exertions new renown to seek,
We swore; nor let us now our vow recorded break.

"To the disclosure of my plan attend.
BLONDEL and his associates bold to save,
It well behoves us instant aid to lend.
Where Fecan's tow'rs the ocean's fury brave,
And proudly mock the vainly-threat'ning wave,
Perils beyond the lot of war they dare.
Their gallant efforts first attention crave:
Be it our glory, our peculiar care,
Their safety to insure, their worthy toils to share.

"This task be mine:  for, tho' he faithless prove,
Yet, on a Brother's faults when I reflect,
The fond remembrances of former love
Rush on my soul, and plead for his defect.
In him my Father's mem'ry I respect:
Tho' gross his crime, and heinous be his guilt,
A subject's hand must not his fault correct;
The blood from Him deriv'd must not be spilt,
Nor must my wish'd success on fratricide be built.

"While thus tow'rds Fecan I conduct my might,
Let MORTIMER from Rouvrai pass the Seine,
And, marching under cover of the night,
Attempt the heights near Martainville to gain,
There by his presence PHILIP to restrain,
And keep him from attending to my course.
Meantime, my Queen in Rouen shall remain,
Where, till in triumph ends our brief divorce,
LEICESTER shall guard her safe from Gallia's lawless force."

The Chiefs approv'd as thus the Monarch spoke;
Each hop'd a portion of his toils to share,
And expectation in each breast awoke.
To Rouen's walls, with BERENGARIA fair,
Imperial RICHARD hasten'd to repair:
Her to the charge of LEICESTER'S Earl he gave;
While she, oppress'd with agonizing care,
Breath'd many a vow Heav'n's sov'reign aid to crave,
And many a saint implor'd her hero's life to save.

Now from his arch sublime the lamp of day
Tow'rds his Atlantic couch descended fast;
Athwart th' empurpled clouds his chasten'd ray,
Emblem of mild beneficence, he cast,
And, as his splendour gilt th' horizon vast,
By grateful nature hail'd he sank to rest.
Throughout the camp the mingling warriors pass'd,
And, as preparing for their vent'rous quest,
Each to his leader's post with gen'rous ardour press'd.

Nor were their efforts vain.  Soon as the night
Her sable mantle o'er the earth had spread,
Bold MORTIMER, advancing on the right,
Across the Seine his firm battalions led.
The full-orb'd moon her temper'd radiance shed
To guide their way:  they pass'd Belboeuf, Montmain,
And Annebaud, where high it's branching head
Her forest rear'd, and, skirting Beaulieu's plain,
They march'd their destin'd post of Martainville to gain.

The warlike King meantime arrang'd his host,
And, where the river to the south inclin'd,
In close array it's ample stream they cross'd.
High wav'd the knightly banners in the wind,
And ev'ry Chieftain, at his post assign'd,
Seem'd emulous the common toil to share.
The walls of Montigny they left behind,
And, as the dawn first glimmer'd in the air,
Thro' the ascending mist they saw La Vaupalliere.

The sun in clouds arose, as if averse
To shew the country's desolate aspect.
Far round was seen of ruthless war the curse:
The fields no more with golden grain were deck'd,
No more, his flock at day-break to collect,
The shepherd's pipe re-echo'd from the hill;
The cottages seem'd mould'ring from neglect;
All was abandon'd, ruinous and still,
Save when the gaunt wolf howl'd, or scream'd the owlet shrill.

Here, in some hut, whose half-burnt roof yet smoak'd,
It's narrow door-way reeking yet with blood,
The care-worn peasant sat and Heav'n invok'd,
Frantic, and gazing on his infant brood,
With unavailing cries imploring food,
And calling yet upon their mother's name:
She heard not their lament; the soldier rude,
Deaf to compassion's voice, her strength o'ercame,
And bore her far away t' appease his brutal flame.

There, wildly wand'ring o'er the desert plain,
Some weeping matron sought her lov'd child's corse,
With outcries loud and exclamations vain:
Or some sad widow mourn'd her soul's divorce;
While, as dread tales they told of lawless force,
Full many a maiden, trembling and forlorn,
Of their regretted swains would hold discourse,
Whom war remorseless from their arms had borne,
And from their native shades and plighted vows had torn.

The pitying King, partaking in their grief,
Those ills, which human aid could reach, consol'd.
But what to mental woe can bring relief?
The pangs of nature cannot be controul'd;
Nor pow'r's strong hand, nor all prevailing gold,
The poison rankling in the heart can sheath:
Still sensibility past scenes will mould,
Where joy and fleeting pleasure wove their wreath,
When yet unknown was care, unfelt the sting of death.

While RICHARD thus his painful march pursued,
From their exalted seat th' Infernal Pair
With double vengeance fir'd his progress view'd.
"Is it for this, that with unceasing care,"
SATAN exclaim'd, "my engines I prepare?
Shall a weak mortal thus my plans defeat?
Has Hell no new devices to ensnare,
No potent stratagems, no strong deceit,
Which may subdue his soul, and my revenge complete?

"BELIAL!  the cause of France and PHILIP'S fate,
Again at stake, our instant aid require.
Call forth thy utmost pow'rs:  indulge thy hate:
Combine with me in RICHARD'S soul t' inspire
The strong allurements of unchaste desire:
Goad him to lust and to unlicenc'd love:
Let him, the victim of unhallow'd fire,
To virtue lost, thro' pleasure's mazes rove,
'Till angels weep his fall, and Hell triumphant prove!"

Thus saying, thro' the air his wings he spread,
And trac'd his baleful flight:  him follow'd near
BELIAL, not less intent on errand dread.
Far 'neath them flow'd Rapaume, whose waters clear
A grateful tribute to Seine's current bear:
Skirting it's lake's green marge Maromme they saw,
And Roumare's far-extended forest, where
ROLLO made known the terrors of his law,
And fill'd the savage tribes with reverential awe.

Thither the Fiends their vengeful progress bent.
Swift as the solar ray the void they pass'd,
And o'er the far-spread shade with dire intent
Their flight arrested.  Thro' it's coverts vast
SATAN with joy malign his keen glance cast:
"Here, where yon glade the mingling boughs o'er-arch,"
He cried, "my pow'r shall RICHARD'S glories blast:
Let heat oppress, let thirst his legions parch,
And force him to suspend awhile his toilsome march."

He said, and thrice he wav'd his hand on high.
Forthwith the south with murky clouds was bound,
Which, rapidly ascending thro' the sky,
The wide meridian with their veil embrown'd.
Thunders at distance broke with sullen sound,
And, as if forc'd by sympathetic sway,
With short and quick concussions shook the ground:
The sun obscur'd no longer shot his ray;
All nature seem'd convuls'd and torpid with dismay.

As o'er the plain advanc'd the English host,
Appall'd the strange transition they beheld,
And gaz'd upon the scene in wonder lost.
When, lo!  around them hollow murmurs swell'd:
A vapour dense and hot, with speed unquell'd
And pois'nous range, across the champaign came.
As rolling on it's baleful course it held,
The plants and herbage dry and black became,
Crackling beneath their feet as if consum'd by flame.

As from a furnace the ignited steam
Bursts, so infernal influence to dispense
Amid their ranks rush'd on the noxious stream.
Against it's subtlety and pow'r intense
Nor helm nor cuirass could afford defence:
The spring elastic of the air was fled;
That active principle, that lively sense,
By Providence o'er all creation spread
For wond'rous purposes, now seem'd effete and dead.

The warriors bow'd beneath its pow'r accurs'd;
Fainting they stagger'd, while from ev'ry pore
Unnat'ral floods of perspiration burst:
Their fibres, suddenly relax'd, no more
Th' o'erwhelming burthen of their armour bore.
Nor less their minds subdued the vapour dank:
Each visage marks of strong dejection wore;
No longer now observant of their rank,
They wander'd o'er the plain, or on the scorch'd turf sank.

Nor less the King annoy'd the noxious blast:
But native courage him with force supplied;
Throughout the host he resolutely pass'd,
And, as to raise their drooping hearts he tried,
He pointed out to them the covert wide,
Where shelter and fresh riv'lets they might find.
Some were to action rous'd; while others sigh'd,
And listlessly upon the ground reclin'd,
As if to reason deaf, or to their fate resign'd.

His arguments, oft urg'd, prevail'd at length:
T' advance with languid efforts they essay'd,
Tho' for exertion scarce suffic'd their strength.
As the deep wood more nearly they survey'd,
It seem'd as if, amid th' impervious shade,
Zephyr the undulating branches caught,
And with their gently-waving foliage play'd;
Now, softly swelling, to their sense he brought
Short, interrupted gales, with sweets reviving fraught.

Their faculties the balmy coolness cheer'd,
And gave them force their efforts to renew.
The friendly forest soon at hand appear'd:
More freely now the breeze inspiring blew,
And, as o'er flow'rets deck'd with many a hue
It swept, their mingling fragrancy it stole,
And from their honied cups rich odours drew,
Of pow'r the venom'd influence to controul,
Which in dominion strange had bound each warrior's soul.

"Hither, my lov'd companions!"  RICHARD cried,
"Beneath these friendly oaks, whose boughs disclose
An ample canopy, and, circling wide
Their moss-grown arms, invite you to repose,
Awhile the mem'ry of your suff'rings lose.
Here, to recruit your wasted strength, remain,
While yet the air with heat portentous glows:
Perhaps, when beams the ev'ning star, again
Your limbs from toil refresh'd new travel may sustain."

The warriors, as their Monarch spake, in haste
Ent'ring the wood, each avenue around
And ev'ry path in search of water trac'd.
Ere long, attracted by its murm'ring sound,
With verdant hart's-tongue fring'd a stream they found:
Stretch'd on its banks they drank potations deep;
Then, as their helms and morions they unbound,
Some their provisions spread, while some in sleep,
More grateful from fatigue, their senses sought to steep.

While thus, as chance prescrib'd, at ease they lay,
RICHARD, whose spirit dull inaction slighted,
Amid the wood's recess preferr'd to stray.
It's varied charms his raptur'd eye invited;
The gently-quiv'ring leaves and boughs were lighted
By the gay sun-beam; while the mass between,
A stranger to it's ray, seem'd half-benighted;
Yet, as the breeze prevail'd, throughout were seen
In rich gradation tints of vivid brown and green.

With flow'rs enamell'd, and with moss besprent,
Unnumber'd paths, which nature's hand had clear'd,
On ev'ry side their course romantic bent,
O'ercanopied with oaks, whose trunks high-rear'd
The produce huge of centuries appear'd,
With misletoe and hoary lichens hung:
While, as their flight with sportive wings they steer'd,
Thousands of birds their am'rous descants sung,
'Till with their lively strains the forest's circuit rung.

RICHARD delighted view'd the placid scene:
Congenial calmness o'er his bosom stole;
A sudden influence, potent tho' serene,
Prevail'd his warring passions to controul,
And harmonize insensibly his soul.
With careless pace he wander'd 'mid the shade,
A path pursuing, which across a knoll
Seem'd to conduct him tow'rds a verdant glade,
By the surrounding gloom more gay and tempting made.

As on he went, beauties, before unknown,
Combin'd his raptur'd senses to surprize.
O'er the smooth turf, irregularly thrown,
Fantastic beeches of enormous size,
Forming a circle vast, were seen to rise:
Each, as it rear'd aloft it's ample head,
Ting'd with brown Autumn's richly-pencil'd dyes,
On ev'ry side it's massy branches spread,
And o'er the vault immense a solemn stillness shed.

Beneath their high-thrown arch more freely grew
The variegated store, which nature gay
Around with elegant luxuriance threw,
As if intent her treasures to array:
While, as the flitting gale in wanton play
Swept o'er their waving tops, the sun illum'd
The modest lawn, and glanc'd his golden ray:
Then new-born fragrancy the air perfum'd,
More fresh the herbage sprang, more sweet the flow'rets bloom'd.

Close by them flow'd a softly-murm'ring brook,
Where, 'mid the current which translucent roll'd,
It's scaly brood their harmless pastime took.
There the swift-gliding trout rejoic'd t' unfold
His bright red circlets and his scales of gold;
The perch his scarlet fins and silv'ry side
Disclos'd, while, with dominion uncontroul'd,
The lordly pike, dread monarch of the tide,
O'er subject tribes was seen unrivall'd to preside.

There water-lilies their sweet odour spread,
And, from it's sword-like leaves of brightest green,
The gaudy iris rear'd it's yellow head.
Skirting each bank, the poplar tall was seen,
Alders, and willows, which prefer to lean,
And kiss the waves which round their moist roots wind.
To perfect the enchantments of the scene,
The rose and eglantine their scents combin'd,
And high it's graceful wreaths the clematis entwin'd.

"Oh nature!  fairest in retirement shewn,"
He cried, "when thus, by grandeur unoppress'd,
I view thy charms, and hail them all thine own,
When thy chaste loveliness is thus confess'd,
To Heav'n my soul ascends, my conscious breast
With rev'rence tow'rds the Pow'r transcendent glows,
Whose hand with beauties has creation dress'd,
Whose bounty in a stream exhaustless flows
On all that walk the earth, on ev'ry flow'r that blows.

"Here, amid shades conceal'd from mortal eye,
While round me breezes charg'd with perfumes sweep,
And birds their sweet strains carol, let me lie.
I feel a soft and gentle influence creep
O'er my exhausted frame.  Come, balmy Sleep!
Whom oft in vain the care-worn monarch sues,
My languid senses in oblivion steep.
Let me my toils awhile in slumber lose,
Nor to my wearied soul thy genial aid refuse."

Gently he sank, and, on th' enamell'd ground
Out-stretch'd, he lost the mem'ry of his care:
For more than natural sway his forces bound.
Him over-shadowing, the infuriate pair
Survey'd malignly, as they wrought their snare,
The last dread effort of their vengeance fell.
Charg'd with contagion was the troubled air,
Now saturated by the potent spell,
Devis'd by ruthless pow'r, and cull'd from deepest Hell.

"The hour approaches," SATAN sternly cried,
"When his o'erthrow, who long has spurn'd our sway,
Our contest and our triumph shall decide.
Summon the spirits who our word obey;
With them thy practis'd artifice display,
Temptations strong and novel to produce,
Which may our victim's constancy betray;
While in his soul strange poisons I infuse,
His fancy to inflame, his senses to abuse."

BELIAL exulting heard his dire command:
With savage joy and hellish transport fraught,
From their sulphureous caves he call'd his band.
Him with obedient wing the Daemons sought;
Aw'd by his word, by his example taught,
They urg'd the duties which their Chief impos'd,
And to compleat the charm of mischief wrought;
While RICHARD, still his eyes in slumber clos'd,
Unconscious of their arts and plans malign, repos'd.

As when a Vampyre, hot for human blood,
Pierces with sharpen'd tongue the turgid vein
Of some deep-sleeping wretch, the vital flood
With suction strong he perseveres to drain,
And o'er him, to obtund the sense of pain,
Unceasingly his leathern pinions plies;
Doom'd ne'er to view the light of Heav'n again,
His victim more and more exhausted lies,
Dreams out his ebbing life, and unresisting dies:

So his broad wings the Prince of Darkness spread
O'er England's King, but with intent more foul:
He sought not only by enchantments dread
And spells accurs'd his body to controul,
But to subdue and brutalize his soul,
And blast his glories with eternal shame.
As wav'd his plumes, his potent influence stole
Like fire electric thro' the Monarch's frame,
And to his heart propell'd a penetrating flame.

Soon the contagion to prevail began:
For now, the poisons, which the Fiend infus'd,
With force resistless thro' his arteries ran.
Visions, whose airy forms the soul abus'd,
Like those by fever's madd'ning heat produc'd,
In quick succession skimm'd across his brain,
And with display fantastical amus'd:
Spectres of shape uncouth, chimaeras vain,
Now breathing fond delight, and now foreboding pain.

But as, when morning re-assumes her sway,
The mantling fog, engender'd by the night,
Before the sun's new splendour fades away,
Down from the mountains roll it's volumes white,
And the gay vallies, now restor'd to light,
Their dew-dropt meads and foliage rich disclose;
So fled these phantasms from his mental sight,
And scenes more definitely trac'd arose,
On his deluded sense adapted to impose.

It's ample walls a stately palace rear'd,
Whose columns huge, rang'd in confusion bold,
And from Carrara's boasted quarries clear'd,
With shafts majestic rose the roof t' uphold,
Which, trimly fretted, and adorn'd with gold,
Spread to the day, and with it's radiance beam'd.
It's windows arching high, of Gothic mould,
Fantastically deck'd with paintings seem'd,
Stain'd with whose magic dyes the light attemper'd stream'd.

As o'er the vaulted hall it's gay tints burst,
Fresh brilliancy from sparkling gems they drew,
Which o'er the spacious chamber were dispers'd:
The purple amethyst, the sapphire blue,
The blood-red ruby, opals ever new,
The yellow topaz, and the emerald green,
Pale beryls, hyacinths of fiery hue,
The diamond of the mineral kingdom queen,
All in profusion heap'd and splendid pomp were seen.

On either side, and at the upper end,
In long array dispos'd, were tables plac'd,
With varied luxuries that appear'd to bend.
There ev'ry tempting viand might be trac'd,
To rouse dull appetite and charm the taste:
Pomona there her luscious produce strew'd,
There Flora with her gifts the banquet grac'd,
While from vast tuns the juice of Bacchus flow'd,
And perfumes rich exhal'd as in the cup it glow'd.

On couches rich, along the spacious board,
Sat many a lovely dame and lusty knight,
Carousing on the cates which there were stor'd:
These their fair partners earnest seem'd t' invite,
Their amorous suit and service to requite
With full possession of their blooming charms;
While smiling they appear'd their vows to slight,
Yet oft, t' appease their idly rais'd alarms,
Forgot their coyness feign'd, and sank into their arms.

Minstrels unseen enchanting notes awoke,
And from their harps, with chords of silver strung,
Sounds which might apathy itself provoke,
In wild and mingled modulation wrung.
Suspended now the melting cadence hung,
Now, bursting into diapason sweet,
The vault with harmonies ecstatic rung,
While heav'nly voices would the song repeat,
And swell their rapt'rous strains the chorus to compleat.

Now lovelier symphonies were heard around.
A group of wanton nymphs was seen advancing:
Light as the air they bounded o'er the ground,
By half concealment now their charms enhancing,
Now thro' their blushes smiles insidious glancing,
Which spoke impassion'd heat and fierce desire;
Then beams voluptuous from their full eyes lancing,
Their polish'd limbs entwining, to inspire
Visions of mad delight and dreams of lustful fire.

RICHARD inflam'd the tempting scene beheld,
For reason now her sway no longer kept;
High beat his pulse, his veins with transport swell'd,
And o'er his heart a flood of passion swept.
Tow'rds the gay throng impatiently he leap'd,
When, lo!  the Nymph, who seem'd to lead the rest,
Beaming angelic beauties, forward stept:
She gaz'd, she blush'd, and, while her eyes confess'd
Ecstatic joy, she caught the Monarch to her breast.

Her touch his soul with kindred ardour fill'd,
Through all his frame the subtle influence flew,
And ev'ry nerve with madd'ning fury thrill'd.
As round her yielding form his arms he threw,
Charms unexpected met his eager view:
With drifted snow her skin appear'd to vie,
Her panting bosom heav'd with impulse new,
With double lustre shone her moisten'd eye,
And all Arabia's sweets were wafted in a sigh.

Entranc'd he seem'd amidst a world of blisses;
Closer he held her in his warm embrace,
And ravish'd from her lips ambrosial kisses:
Now, bolder grown, his eye essay'd to trace
Her soft form modell'd by the touch of grace,
Which scarcely her transparent vestment hid;
While she, with glowing and averted face,
In broken accents his presumption chid,
Yet seem'd dispos'd to share what still her tongue forbid.

Sudden she burst from his encircling arms,
And, while a smile which might recal the dead
Play'd on her mouth and heighten'd all her charms,
She left the group, who with fantastic tread
Unwearied yet their wanton measures led,
And down the hall her agile footsteps bent.
He follow'd as the fair enchantress fled,
Who, turning oft, impassion'd glances sent,
Expressive of her flame, and mutely eloquent.

Not the light gossamer more swiftly skims
Thro' yielding aether when the fresh breeze blows,
Than mov'd the fair one:  from her polish'd limbs,
As if successive beauties to disclose,
Caught by the gale her loose robe oft arose,
And widely spread, as if it scorn'd to shield
Charms which might well on mortal sense impose:
These as with practis'd coyness she conceal'd,
Treasures more tempting still her erring hand reveal'd.

Thro' the expanding portals now she flew,
And 'cross a path with softest moss array'd
Nimbly advanc'd, 'till tow'rds a wood she drew,
Where, as they form'd a deep impervious shade,
The forest's tenants far their boughs display'd;
While, 'mid their knotty trunks with ivy deck'd,
With varied course branch'd off full many a glade,
Some their straight course preferring to direct,
Some tempting the pleas'd eye their wand'rings to inspect.

She hesitated not, but chusing one
Which far within the wood appear'd to wind,
Gaily tripp'd on; yet seem'd she not to shun
The ardent King, who follow'd close behind:
Oft look'd she back with smiles, as if inclin'd,
Within the dark recesses of the grove,
Some covert from intrusion free to find,
Which to warm passion might auspicious prove,
And where congenial hearts might sacrifice to love.

Nor sought she long in vain.  Of purest green
A turfy couch appear'd, with flow'rets strew'd,
O'er which, high arching, beeches tall were seen;
As mantling thick their waving branches shew'd,
With the sun's mild departing tints they glow'd:
Near them, meand'ring o'er it's pebbly bed,
And gently murm'ring, a clear riv'let flow'd;
Melodious birds in amorous circles sped,
And o'er th' enchanting scene contagious softness shed.

RICHARD amaz'd the well-known spot beheld,
Where lately, spent by toil, he courted rest:
But other objects his fond soul impell'd:
The tempting fair one who inflam'd his breast
Now vanquish'd seem'd; by lassitude oppress'd,
Sinking to earth, her swift career she stay'd;
Panting she lay; with her disorder'd vest
As if enamour'd Zephyr loosely play'd,
While beauties yet unseen his wanton touch betray'd.

"She's mine!  She's mine!" th' enraptur'd monarch cried,
And, while his heart beat high with new alarms,
He knelt o'ercome with transport by her side,
And, as he fondly press'd her in his arms,
Confess'd the full dominion of her charms.
She with feign'd coyness, as his suit advanc'd,
Seem'd faintly deprecating fancied harms;
Blushes and tears her loveliness enhanc'd,
'Till trembling on the sod she fell as if entranc'd.

Meantime, while SATAN thus his purpose dread
With persevering energy had wrought,
And o'er his victim's soul his toils had spread,
His active ministers, by BELIAL taught,
Their subtle spell had to perfection brought.
"Behold!"  he cried, "o'er his subjected frame
Our arts prevail:  be now the moment caught,
When in his waking heart th' unhallow'd flame
May reign with fatal power, and eternize his shame."

As when, engender'd by the falling dew,
The gaudy rainbow o'er heav'n's face ascends,
In quick succession, purple, violet, blue,
Green, yellow, orange, red, it gaily blends;
Distinctly each a separate arch extends,
Yet, so combin'd their outlines, none can tell
Where one begins, and where another ends:
So, imperceptibly, the potent spell
Prevail'd from RICHARD'S sense sleep's empire to dispel.

Unconscious of the rapid change he seem'd;
With instantaneous energy his soul
From supernat'ral slumber was redeem'd:
Yet did the Fiend his faculties controul
With such strange sway, that the transition stole
Unheeded and unfelt; the vision ran
Into his waking thoughts, and form'd a whole
So just, that recollection fail'd to scan
Where fiction ceas'd, or where reality began.

The same in ev'ry point appear'd the scene:
Still, in attractive loveliness array'd,
The turf and verdant canopy were seen;
Still, as it darted thro' the mantling shade,
The sun's mild lustre with the foliage play'd;
Still flow'd the riv'let; still the sweet birds sung;
Still by his side the fainting Nymph was laid;
Still gaz'd he on her charms, and on his tongue
Unfinish'd ecstacies and vows of transport hung.

The ready Nymph the favouring moment took:
Op'ning her eyes which passion strong confess'd,
While her soft frame with agitation shook,
She caught him in her arms, and closely press'd
Th' enamour'd Monarch to her panting breast.
"Victor alike," she cried, "in war and love,
Nought should thy promis'd triumph now arrest,
Would'st thou but one fond, tender, doubt remove.
Wilt thou be truly mine?  Ah!  wilt thou constant prove?"

"Treat not so lightly thy resistless charms,"
Replied he; "pleasure dances in thine eye,
And Paradise is centred in thine arms!
Increase of joy possession will supply;
Our vig'rous love shall time itself defy,
And fresh attractions shall inhance our bliss!
Then, matchless Nymph!  no more my suit deny!
Thus I adjure thee by this burning kiss
To crown my ardent hopes, and all thy fears dismiss!"

She, while deep blushes mantled on her cheek,
And heav'd with wild delight her bosom fair,
As if unable for a while to speak,
Gaz'd on him:  then with an impassion'd air
She cried, "Thus let me my resolve declare:
Tell me but once that thou art wholly mine,
That none with me thy constant heart shall share;
To ev'ry other love thy faith resign,
Then I and all my charms shall be for ever thine."

A strange emotion o'er his bosom pass'd.
The Nymph, who fail'd not it's access to trace,
Again her snow-white arms around him cast,
And, summoning each smile and winning grace,
With new endearments in her warm embrace
Him, half reluctant, half o'ercome, she held.
Ungovern'd transport now illum'd her face,
Beam'd in her eyes, high in her bosom swell'd,
And thro' her trembling frame the quicken'd blood impell'd.

"Now," she exclaim'd, "when all to love invites,
When none with eye prophane presume t' invade
This shelter consecrated to delights,
Say why, my hero!  are our joys delay'd?
Mark how the sportive songsters of the glade
Nature's blest law with ecstasy pursue:
By them her first, best, mandate is obey'd;
Fruition still unsated they renew,
As if increas'd desires from full enjoyment grew.

"See, how thro' all creation's ample verge,
On earth's green face, 'midst ocean's depths profound,
All feel the impulse, all the duty urge.
By this kind nature's great behest is crown'd:
Earth, water, air, with tenderness resound;
The tow'ring woods, the widely-arching groves,
Each gaudy flow'ret that adorns the ground,
Confess her sway; each bliss appropriate proves,
And shedding perfumes breathes it's aromatic loves.

"Why then should we our happiness retard,
Since, of superior faculties possess'd,
More perfect joys our passion will reward?
Thus let me hold thee to my throbbing breast!
Thus let my vows be on thy lips confess'd!
Thus, while our souls in mingling transports join,
With burning sighs pronounce the valued test;
Tell me but once all others you resign,
Swear that yourself, your soul, shall be for ever mine!"

"Myself!  my soul!"  the King confus'd replied,
This and it's inmost thoughts to Heav'n belong,
That claims exclusively my lovely bride.
I may not both at once so foully wrong!
Mov'd by some potency, unknown tho' strong,
Have stoop'd my captive senses to thy lure.
Strange and confus'd ideas o'er me throng:
Sure Hell itself, my passions to allure,
O'er my unguarded soul has spread it's charms impure!"

"And dost thou then my proffer'd love disdain?"
Exclaim'd the Nymph:  "Is my poor feeling heart
On apathy like thine bestow'd in vain?
Ah!  let me to some shade remote depart,
Rack'd by despair, and tortur'd by the smart
Of scorn'd endearments and of slighted charms!
What!  at a pledge of constancy to start,
When fond desire thy youthful bosom warms,
When willing beauty sues, and clasps thee in her arms!"

"Ah cease!"  he cried, "fond Nymph!  the heart t' upbraid,
Which thy fair image too distinctly bears:
The cloud, which darkly o'er my fancy play'd,
Whate'er th' illusion may have caus'd, now clears,
And, tho' with range uncertain, doubts and fears
Contend for empire and distract my mind.
Ah!  look not so!  drop not those pearly tears
Hide those perfections, lest, to duty blind,
'Again my working soul to madness be resign'd!'

"Alas!  how can I tears of anguish hide!
Can I, when breaks my throbbing heart with pain,
Command my smiles?"  she tenderly replied.
Bid angry ocean his wild waves restrain,
Bid joy the minutes of delight retain,
Or grief annihilate the gloomy hour,
But bid not me felicity regain!
Consuming flames my suff'ring breast devour,
I die the slave of love, of thy unpitying pow'r!"

She said, and fainting sank:  his fervent soul
Desire and opportunity impell'd,
And o'er his sense again wild passion stole:
Embrac'd the yielding fair one yet he held,
Still flush'd her cheeks, her panting bosom swell'd;
But tho' he still her loveliness could prize,
No longer his impetuous will rebell'd.
She, conscious of the change, her moisten'd eyes
Rais'd, and around her look'd with well-assum'd surprize.

"Truant to love!"  she cried, "whose fancies weak
With his imperious dictates interfere,
Joys more adapted to thy cold heart seek!
Ah!  leave me, thou ingrate!  to drop the tear,
While for thy sake, still to my mem'ry dear,
In silent grief I waste my virgin bloom;
While the sad willow on my brow I wear,
And, seeking some remote congenial gloom,
Invoke propitious death, and court an early tomb.

"Adieu!  too well belov'd, too faithless youth!
Soon all memorial shall thy mind dismiss
Of transient passion and oft-plighted truth.
Farewell!  but take with thee this parting kiss:
By this fond pledge of love, by this, and this,
Myself, my charms, I consecrate as thine.
Oh!  that while thus our souls are bath'd in bliss,
While thus in mutual transport we entwine,
Congenial whispers might proclaim thee wholly mine!"

Thus saying, to her wildly throbbing breast,
Which rose as if convuls'd with amorous pain,
With grasp ecstatic she the Monarch press'd.
A kindling ardour rush'd thro' ev'ry vein,
Panting he gaz'd, scarce able to sustain
The soft impressions which his heart assail'd.
But faith and duty soon resum'd their reign:
He paus'd, he sigh'd, as reason's pow'r unveil'd
The artifice refin'd which o'er his soul prevail'd.

Yet still his wand'ring senses seem'd enchain'd,
Virtue and vice in doubtful balance hung;
Now yielded he, now firmness he regain'd,
While round him she with warm caresses clung;
When, suddenly, the forest's precincts rung
With cries of mirth and music's gladsome sound;
Gay melodies enliv'ning voices sung,
And thro' the verdant glade with nimble bound
The dancing group advanc'd, and weav'd their mazy round.

Industriously they fram'd their agile measure,
While from their eyes, than sparkling gems more bright,
Flash'd wanton passion and tumultuous pleasure.
At ev'ry turn, their vestments loose and light,
Caught by the flitting gale, reveal'd to sight
Beauties, which well the fancy might inspire
With transport, and tumultuous hopes excite:
Now seem'd they urg'd by love's imperious fire,
Now lost in ecstacies voluptuous to expire.

"See where the amorous pair recline," they cried;
"With bliss transported, and untir'd by love,
Themselves from mortal view they seek to hide.
Hither we come your pleasures to improve,
With us thro' all the windings of the grove,
Besprent with moss, by perfum'd breezes fann'd,
To nature's laws obedient, gaily rove;
Hark to our cheerful call, and hand in hand
Follow the merry pipe, and join our festive band."

Thus saying, wreaths of every scent and hue,
Arrang'd with varied and fantastic taste,
O'er the astonish'd King they lightly threw.
A myrtle chaplet on his head they plac'd,
While the fond Nymph a crown of roses grac'd,
Red as the blushes which her cheeks o'erspread.
More deep these grew as she the Prince embrac'd:
But rapidly the soft suffusion fled,
As struggling to escape her circling arms he said:

"No!  tho' more potent are thy matchless charms
Than all which human beauty can display,
Tho' mad temptation revel in thine arms,
I must not, cannot, thy command obey.
Love, wedded Love, asserts his rightful sway:
Vows of recorded truth from Heav'n above
Speak to my soul, and summon me away;
They bid me quit this fascinating grove,
And fly the haunts impure of prostituted love!"

He said, and springing from her clasp essay'd
To trace the path which wound within the wood.
But soon the minstrel group his footsteps stay'd;
Again their wanton movements they pursued,
Their frontless arts and blandishments renew'd,
And, unrestrain'd by fear and unasham'd,
Chanted in notes obscene their orgies lewd;
Their eye-balls roll'd, by passion's force inflam'd
The fire, which rag'd within, their burning cheeks proclaim'd.

Where'er he turn'd, they circled round him close,
New gestures framing, while their impious din
And lawless mirth in louder chorus rose.
"Think not," he cried, "that these disguisements thin
To deeds of guilt my constant heart can win.
If specious modesty has fail'd to gain
My raptur'd soul, and urge me on to sin,
Lewdness profess'd attempts the task in vain:
Her flimsy toils I spurn with horror and disdain.

"Cease base seducers!  cease; against your art
By truth and virtue is my firm mind steel'd.
If ye be human, hence, far hence depart;
But, in those forms if Daemons be conceal'd,
Guard me, ye Saints!  ye succouring Angels shield!
Great Ruler of the world!  thy suppliant hear;
Strip their false semblance, let them stand reveal'd:
Tho' rob'd in all their terrors they appear,
Arm'd with thy faith my soul can never yield to fear!"

Thus spake the pious Monarch:  nor in vain
To heav'n's tribunal rose his fervent pray'r.
Still'd were the clamours of the boist'rous train:
Loud thunders burst, and the pale light'ning's glare
Shot thro' the murky and distemper'd air:
Clouds tempest-driv'n the face of day o'ercast;
Shrill cries were heard of anguish and despair;
Earth trembling shook throughout her caverns vast,
And nature seem'd to bend before th' o'erwhelming blast.

As, on the mimic stage, an audience sees
The gay machines and pictur'd scen'ry rise,
While houses, landscapes, palaces and trees,
Lost in confusion vanish from their eyes;
So, rapt in awe, and stiffen'd with surprise,
The wide convulsion England's King survey'd:
The beechen grove, the flow'rs of various dyes,
The riv'let clear, the bank with moss array'd,
Seem'd from his view to shrink and suddenly to fade.

The rugged forest, now disguis'd no more,
Illumin'd shone with gleams of fiery red:
Amongst it's boughs the wind, with sullen roar
Rushing amain, it's devastation spread;
Before it's rage the oak's high-branching head,
Yielding, with fragments huge bestrew'd the plain;
While, as if bound by supernat'ral dread,
And motionless, the lately sportive train
Proclaim'd with fearful screams their agonizing pain.

Them as he view'd the Monarch loudly cried:
"By His eternal and transcendent name,
Who, tow'rds His throne His chosen flock to guide,
A meek partaker of man's state became,
These borrow'd forms relinquish!  Stampt with shame,
Hence to your dark infernal caves repair!
There amid kindred glooms and racking flame,
For endless ages testimony bear,
That man, by virtue grac'd, is heav'n's peculiar care."

Thus in commanding accents spake the King.
The Fiends, abash'd and wildly-shudd'ring, heard
His invocation dread.  With out-stretch'd wing
Their bulk horrific as aloft they rear'd,
Unmask'd their full deformity appear'd.
Nor less obedient to the high behest
His course obscene amid them BELIAL steer'd:
No more a Nymph the flow'ry couch he press'd,
But rob'd in hell's array a Daemon stood confess'd.

As thro' the troubled atmosphere they pass'd,
On the triumphant King of fell despite
And baffled hate their glances stern they cast,
While 'mid their ranks, shrouded in blackest night,
His form still undisclos'd to mortal sight,
Pre-eminence imperial SATAN claim'd.
Aw'd by superior pow'r, he check'd their flight,
And, as his breast with struggling passions flam'd,
With voice like thunder thus tremendously exclaim'd.

"To combat heav'n's high will in Me no force,
No pow'rs in Me, tho' Arch-angelic, dwell;
But, vanquish'd by thy constancy, my course,
Dishonour'd and o'ercome, I bend tow'rds hell.
Thy matchless worth shall England's foes repel:
Fortune shall now her former wrongs redress;
No more shall Daemons frame their potent spell,
And urge their toils thy virtue to oppress.
Lasting renown is thine, and well-deserv'd success."

He said; and mounting high athwart the gloom,
While o'er the sky with coruscation foul
Red meteors glanc'd, he wav'd his sounding plume,
Attended by his crew, whose piercing howl
And shrieks appalling spoke his strong controul.
RICHARD beheld them pass:  in wonder lost
He pour'd in fervent pray'r his raptur'd soul,
Then, with new ardour fill'd, the forest cross'd,
And joyful sought the spot where yet repos'd his host.

