I who late raptur'd dwelt on scenes, where Yare
In sweet meander pours her inland stream,
Smit with the love of poesy, now dare
Again to meditate descriptive theme:
There nought disturb'd the mind's elysian dream,
Save when some breeze the wild flowers' freightage bore&mdash;
In rudest forms, here terror reigns supreme,
Here the mad breakers lash the sandy shore,
And Nature starts appall'd at her own loud uproar!

The landscape now had darkness ceas'd to shroud;
The morn, unclosing her cerulean eye,
Cast a mild glance on every floating cloud,
And look'd it into beauty, whilst on high
The sun, that brightest glory of the sky,
To his diurnal round again upsprung
From forth a purple tissued canopy:
On Heaven's wide arch his central orb he hung,
And o'er the expanse below the golden day beam flung.

Where rolls in Garien's port the foamy main,
Musing, I bent my solitary way;
Bound in the seaweed's mossy-woven chain,
Upon the strand full many a pebble lay,
That oft, as o'er it flash'd the silvery spray,
To Fancy's shapings still more lovely seem'd,
And, as the curlews frequent div'd for prey,
Across the waves a line of splendour stream'd,
And on their surface hoar what myriad diamonds gleam'd!

Such bracing airs of seaborn coolness blew,
As flush'd with wholesome ruddiness my face,
The whilst mine eye would stretch its eager view
Along the dim immensity of space,
And on the horizon's hazy verge would trace
A fleet of war-ships, tall their sails unfurl'd,
From earliest time the pride of Albion's race,
Which, as the thunders of their wrath they hurl'd,
To her wide-waving flag made couch the subject world.

Thou watery sphere, that from creation's hour
Around these shores hast spread thine ample cest,
In thee the wonderous, omnipresent power
Of God peculiarly is manifest!
Though now calm ripples skim thy glassy breast,
How frail the hope, that loves on thee to dwell!
Haply some storm ere long will break thy rest,
His frenzy fit this transient scene dispel,
And o'er each billow's crest succeeding billows swell.

Within thine oozy depths what caverns lie,
Thou mighty sepulchre of dead men's bones!
Caverns no living sight could e'er descry&mdash;
How oft thy surge in solemn cadence moans
With the poor shipwreck'd soul's expiring groans!
There where no sun illumes the drear confine,
His last sad dirge the night blast's fitful tones,
How oft wild weeds and branching coralline
Around his festering corse a shroud fantastic twine!

Thus wrapt in thought, I stray'd with sauntering tread,
When from a fisher's skiff a man drew near,
Few were the locks his freckled brows that spread,
The characters of age were graven there,
His cheeks with scars were furrow'd, scars most dear
Of every meed that waits the truly brave;
His garb, that weather'd many a season drear,
And to the wind its faded tatters gave,
A veteran tar bespoke, son of the ocean wave.

"Forgive my bold inquiry, for what cause
Thou quit'st the gay throng'd pier?"  he frankly cried,
"Surely no grief thy footsteps hither draws,
To pore despondent on the ebbing tide&mdash;
Ne'er may'st thou trials hard as mine abide!
Ah, for old England's king long time I fought,
And with his foes oft grappled side by side,
Till to my home these wounds a passport brought;
Since then, in yonder boat my daily toil I've sought."

"My friend!  this bosom ne'er hath felt annoy,
Yet marvel not I leave yon crowded ways,
For O, to me it is a best employ,
To follow Nature through her every maze!
As to the deep e'en now I turn'd my gaze,
Methought was pictur'd there the self same change,
That aye awaits us in our mortal days,&mdash;
Yes, 'tis the will of Heaven, whilst here we range,
That pleasure oft be ours, but oftener contrast strange!"

"Time was," replied he, "when the briny surge,
Upon the shelving spot where now we stand,
Its restless course far onward wont to urge,
Yon town, perchance, itself the only strand,
Ere yet its walls by skilful toil were plann'd&mdash;
A sad event too once befel they say,
Where yon tall vessel rides hard by the land;
The tale, I ween, attention will repay,
And, as we homeward bend, beguile the lengthen'd way.

"Fair smil'd day's early beams, as now they smile,
The morning air, as now, was all serene,
When lo (most strange to tell!)  a little isle
Was on a sudden high emerging seen;
Its brow was cover'd with a grassy green,
And many a plant the soil uncultur'd rear'd,
As though its base far ages firm had been;
Around its steepy sides the main appear'd
Alike its barrier strong, and foe whom most it fear'd.

"Amid the throng, which daily hasten'd there,
Was one, that eager cried "Ah, who can tell
How sweet, how passing sweet a joy it were,
On such a fair, romantic spot to dwell!
Me, when my wants should e'er to town impel,
How easy 'twere to ply the sweeping oar
Across the breezy ocean's gentle swell!
So should I gain ere long the neighbouring shore,
And sure the change of scene would home endear the more.

"There strait a mansion he resolv'd to build,
Where elegance and strength might both unite,
With poplars silvery grey a nook he fill'd,
Laburnum there hung flowers of golden light,
Whilst shrubs more lowly fac'd the eastern site.
Now had four suns their annual circuits roll'd,
Still seem'd the isle a fairy palace bright,
Still the soil boasted its prolific mould,
And fast the poplars grew, most beauteous to behold.

"It chanc'd that once the moon, suffus'd with blood,
To eve's dim hour gave signs of awful close,
With hoarser murmurs heav'd the gulphing flood,
High up the isle the mass of waters rose,
And sky conspiring, threaten'd deeper woes!&mdash;
The pale domestics round their master press,
'Ah, where,' say they, 'is now our priz'd repose?
Befits us then to seek some nigh recess,
Where we, from danger safe, our happy stars may bless.'

"'Why fear,' he answered, 'where no cause to fear?
The elements their rage will soon abate;
But if with coward hearts ye tarry here,
Go then, and leave me to the chance of fate,
Whilst on the shore the morrow's dawn ye wait.'
They urg'd intreaties, but of no avail,
At length departing, ere it proved too late,
Now in their boat they spread a little sail,
And, reaching swift the port, escap'd the driving gale.

"Nor were its habitants from terror free&mdash;
Loud in the quay the rocking billows roar'd,
And many an heart, for relatives at sea,
Of Providence a blessing kind implor'd,
And wish'd their ships in harbour safe were moor'd!
When now the twilight's dawning hour came on,
The rescued train with anxious eyes explor'd,
The scene, where late the island palace shone,
But O the dire reverse!  shrubs, island, all were gone!"

As thus the courteous stranger clos'd his speech,
The busy crowd hard by appear'd in view;
Aside my footsteps turning from the beach,
Reluctant to the tar I bade adieu,
And pray'd his future hardships might be few.
To thee, vast deep!  this moral truth I owe,
This moral truth obsequious fancy drew&mdash;
That as thy calm now smiles, thy storms now blow,
Each object, e'en most dear, so fluctuates here below!
