O P&mdash;!  happiest of the rural train,
Rich in content, and bless'd with mod'rate gain:
In calm retirement from polluted towns,
Beyond the reach of busy blockheads frowns:
Blockheads &mdash; and knaves, the h&mdash;r or the h&mdash;'d,
With which our city's gloriously adorn'd;
Pests to the public, and, in private life,
Fomenting broils, and sowing endless strife,
To thee I sing:  if thou approve, content;
Then hear with patience this my just complaint:
Strict truths the muse shall to thine ear impart,
Truths that may strike without the help of art:
No personal dislike inspires her rhymes,
But virtuous hatred at their swelling crimes.

Hard that man's lot, who holds his narrow cell,
'Mong wormwood hearts and tongues inflam'd by hell&mdash;
Shun but to join among the idiot croud,
Immediately ye're thoughtless or ye're proud:
Keep within doors to shun their jarring din,
Ev'n that's accounted as a damning sin:
Make books your friends, avoid all public things,
This only a more dreadful sentence brings:
"He's fretful, grossly stupid, ev'n his looks
Are quite contracted, pouring over books;
Stiff and dogmatic, always sour, but yet,
At times has something which resembles wit."
The sages thus &mdash; a rhyme comes on the town,
Some wretched Ballad or obscene Lampoon;
They read it o'er, with frantic rage they bizz,
And then conclude it surely must be his.

This case is mine, hemm'd in on ev'ry side,
By k&mdash;ves who on their vices found their pride;
Who boldly triumph in their glaring crimes,
And bless the glorious freedom of the times.

Here Ignorance maintains her gloomy reign,
With ev'ry vice attendant in her train;
A queen she sits, in lurid clouds enshrin'd,
A form unseemly, rude, and unrefin'd,
With deadly night-shade round her brows are bound,
And for a robe black darkness wraps her round.

About her fiercely whirl in furious storms,
Clouds of all sizes, hues, and varying forms,
By vice and error moulded as they fly,
Attractive baits to ev'ry vulgar eye:
These clouds the people chase with great delight,
While she among them breathes primaeval night;
Their empty heads in dismal fogs she shades,
And rank Lethean dews among them spreads:
As owls, who shun the beams of chearing light,
But safely wing their way thro' dusky night;
Ev'n so the wretches, in their clouds secure,
They lie and cheat &mdash; they drink, intrigue, and wh&mdash;re.
Kind MUSE, if that thine eye the gloom can pierce,
The leading chieftains, and their acts rehearse,
Brush all their artificial veils away,
And ev'ry k&mdash;ve expose in open day.

Mark, thoughtless and contented how they stroll,
In clouds that damp the feelings of the soul,
Clouds ever deep'ning in their horrid dye,
Impenetrable to the mental eye,
Expunging now the last remains of light,
And awful prelude to eternal night.

Here Madam Froth her wanton pleasure takes,
Amidst a croud of hollow-hearted rakes;
At different lurking corners she receives,
The gifts of Lust among her bestial slaves:
Just now, see where a clumsy clown draws nigh,
The gloom around him wears a deeper dye;
Wealthy he is, and loves his money too,
But boiling Lust ev'n miracles can do.
As when convulsive earthquakes shake the ground,
And nodding groves and mountains rock around,
At bursting mouths the vapours foul expire,
By turns in water, and by turns in fire;
Such is the tumult in his grov'ling soul,
Where Lust and Av'rice each contend for rule.
Now Avarice spreads out some golden scheme,
Then kindling Lust inwraps the soul in flame;
To ease them both, at length he forms a plan,
To use his neighbour's wife as cheap's he can;
Then living plagues may follow if they will,
The cuckold stands 'tween him and danger still.

Thus does he scheme &mdash; and, fill'd with these intents,
Comes waddling up, some tinsel trash presents,
Her beauty praising &mdash; though ill-form'd and foul,
His gifts and flatteries soon subdue her soul.
In raptures she receives his base embrace,
Without restraint before her husband's face:
He growls at first &mdash; but sees with great surprise,
Something like splendor in his hall arise;
Then smiles to think (altho' his wife be frail)
Upon the splendid trophies of her t&mdash;l:
There let him smile, 'midst rising wealth and shame,
While infamy devours his odious name.

Here NESSUS too, struts bold with formal air,
Beneath his cloud, and always speaking fair,
Among his brethren in the gloomy maze,
Still ready with some complimentary phrase;
All grace, all manners, fawning, scraping, bowing,
Ev'n when he's bent upon the person's ruin:
What's graceful in another makes him vile;
He strives to please on purpose to beguile:
Talks loud of honour, yet falls down in dust,
A humble vot'ry at the shrine of lust;
So ramp a &mdash; with ev'ry age he'll wh&mdash;re,
From blythe fifteen to beggars at fourscore.

As satan, wrapt in wild-fire sheds a ray,
Thro' night delusive on the trav'ler's way;
Or as some cunning knave with pious face,
Preaches and prays &mdash; most fervent for a place,
To all appearing (tho' his aim's the fleece)
A humble, harmless, messenger of peace;
So all his flourish is but flimsy art,
Thin cobweb cov'ring for a rotten heart;
And fair designs altho' he seems to form,
They're but as meteors in a midnight storm;
A feeble gleam half pour'd upon the sight,
Then in a moment lost in endless night.

Mark next where Gripus' awful front is rear'd,
Around him groans incessantly are heard;
Extortion fell sits frowning on his crest,
And av'rice bars out pity from his breast;
Where'er he turns, 'tis with resistless sweep,
The widows tremble and the orphans weep:
His god is gain, save loss he nothing fears,
And walks unmov'd 'midst groans and flowing tears.

Now on, my Muse, haste forward to the throne,
Where countless crimes are found compleating one;
O'erleap that cloud which little &mdash; hides,
Where, serpent-like, he snuffs and Heav'n derides,
With all its works &mdash; whence issuing forth secure,
He springs with iron talons on the poor:
'Tis nothing tho' he's void of sense or grace,
Heav'n made him for a scourge unto the place.

That other also cautiously avoid,
'Midst famish'd pointers there does &mdash; reside;
Unfold him not, his little puny soul,
Is baser than the brutes that round him growl;
And tho' ransack his multifarious crimes,
There's none but would disgrace ev'n dogg'rel rhimes.

Flee also this that's always whirling round,
With gath'ring horror ever gaining ground;
'Tis dang'rous as the mad tornado's roar,
Or night's fell breath on Afric's burning shore,
The rankest fumes that ignorance can breathe,
To reason's offspring instantaneous death;
'Twas  form'd a bulwark for his bard's defence,
Impervious to the beams of common sense;
Amidst it, there he sits in want and woe,
To reason sworn an everlasting foe.

Pass by Ostentius where he's aping pray'r,
While seeming zeal sets all his soul on fire;
But see him when aris'n from his knees,
Pursuing wealth, and acting sin with ease;
Whoever's poor he treats with open scorn,
Tho' ev'ry noble gift their minds adorn:
Heav'n's road, if rough, he'd scorn to walk an ell,
But, gild his way, he'll venture down to hell.

Thy friendly aid O grant, inspiring Light!
The dismal gloom increases on my sight.
Beneath her throne there lurks a darling crew,
The queen seems loth should be expos'd to view;
Her dusky robe to skreen them, out she spreads,
And draws across them doubly darken'd shades:
Two parties here support her regal state,
Tho' gainst each other fill'd with mortal hate.
The first, devoutly, gloomy anthems sing,
The burden still returning, Church and King:
King is a word for ever in each mouth,
And all that kings have said they hold for perfect truth.
Amidst them, frowning, Supersition sits,
Turns round their brains, and stuns their shallow wits,
Her frantic motions fill their hearts with fear,
And ev'ry breath she blows, the soughs of hell they hears.

As when heav'n's fire on the grim face of night,
In dismal gleams sheds a disast'rous light,
The trav'ler, eager some repose to fiind,
While horror creeps along his darken'd mind,
Doubles his speed, but wanders far astray,
Unfit amidst the glare to find his way;
So they, with voice distracted and une'vn,
In quaking terror ask the way to heav'n:
Still as her voice is heard they careful turn,
While kindling zeal and holy passions burn,
A thousand prospects open to their view,
And ev'ry way she sends them but the true.
Now fasting suits the genius of the times,
Now Charity can expiate all their crimes:
Now, swoln with rage, she raves in furious mood,
And blood, she cries &mdash; nought else will do but blood.
In error see where wretches yonder stray,
Go force them quickly to your righteous way,
Or with their blood your debt to justice pay.

Arous'd to rapture now, they all take way,
The foes of holy MOTHER CHURCH to slay;
They snatch their weapons with a furious joy,
And ev'ry mouth, exulting, cries, destroy:
When lo!  at once their hearts are fill'd with awe,
And all their plans are marr'd by TOLERATION LAW.
Thus oft the captive tyger in his cage,
Dreams of his empire &mdash; and in kindling rage,
With burning joy cowrs in his dark retreat,
List'ning the near approach of human feet;
He inly yearns, he champs his horrid jaws,
Bristles his hair and spreads his murderous paws;
Then springs a leap to beat them to the ground,
In vain&mdash; for ir'n bars do hem him round.

Then next and last appears a motely train,
Where ancient chaos seems again to  reign,
Creatures in rags, whose naked weans and wives,
By hunger's pow'r are pining out their lives;
Pale wretches groaning under poortith's curse,
Whose hearts are bury'd in their neighbour's purse:
Rude rakes, of whom all good has ta'en farewell,
And ev'n, in hope, has left them nought but hell;
Miscreants, whom heav'n had made to grace a &mdash;,
But spar'd have been by mercy in their fellows,
Sit plotting here 'gainst unoffending peace,
And honesty to plunder of his fleece;
Unfit to stem their own unhappy fate,
Their skill is all conjoin'd to mend the STATE:
Bribes, Places, Pensions, Taxes, Tyrants, Spies,
From fifty mouths at once promiscuous flies:
One rails at priestcraft, one cries out at kings,
A third 'gainst God himself a libel brings:
One claims his neighbour's wife, the next his horse:
One likes his lands and one would have his purse:
One in his cellar thinks he'd stench his greed,
And some there's nought could please them but his head.
So when a gang of thieves, with risk and toil,
Some miser's stores have made their gen'ral spoil,
Each claims a share his neighbour won't bequeath,
'Till often times it ends in blows and death.

With joy the queen sees from her ebon throne,
Such genuine sons of night her sceptre own,
Their meritorious service to reward,
And as a mark of pure unfeign'd regard,
She now presents amid the ragged crew,
A Hydrean monster horrible to view,
Her darling son (now rising into fame)
By hell's grim king, and ATHEISM his name:
Earth's fabl'd sons his height doth far excel,
With heads more num'rous than the Muse can tell:
Like livid flames his rolling eye-balls glare,
Terrific unto all but dark despair:
Mouths without number to the monster's giv'n,
And ev'ry mouth's employ'd blaspheming heav'n:
His countless hands as many shafts employ,
All aim'd the peace of mankind to destroy.

With rev'rance fill'd, they all without delay,
Fall on their knees and grateful homage pay:
Well pleas'd the monster "grins a ghastly smile,"
The queen with rapture eyes them all the while,
The ope's her mouth &mdash; they  bending lend an ear,
And this discourse with humble rev'rence hear.
"All hail, my friends!  who gloriously have broke,
The chains that bound you in a galling yoke,
By Kingcraft fram'd, by Priests and knaves held on,
In spite of mankind's ever murm'ring tone;
This son of mine shall henceforth be your guide;
Beneath his conduct ev'ry bliss you'll gain,
And peaceful use whate'er you can obtain;
All qualms and scruples shrink before his eye,
And conscience mute below his feet shall lie.

"Let silly creatures, press'd with gloomy fears,
In self-denial waste their precious years,
And spurn at bliss by bounteous nature giv'n,
In hopes of something which they call a heav'n,
Be't yours the present moments to employ,
On all that's pleasant &mdash; all ye can enjoy;
Spurn zealots talk of judgment, fire, and chains,
Hell no where burns but in their fiery brains:
True, plausible at times their tale may seem,
But who'd believe what idle Churchmen dream:
Let no such whim your minds uneasy keep,
Death wraps you up in everlasting sleep,
In endless sleep," she paus'd and said again.
They bow their heads, and humbly say, AMEN.
