Here on this mountain's bleak and lofty brow,
Where rocks with turf are thinly crusted o'er,
Whose scanty grass, on the dry mould below,
Is scorched by piercing rays at noontide hour;
Nor nourishment scarce yields the stinted flower,
Which grows perchance upon its parched up brink;
Nor haply nursed e'er by the genial shower,
Nor early morns refreshing dews to drink,
But on the crimpy sward its head is apt to sink.

Yet here, ev'n here, the mountain pink behold!
By nature painted with the richest glow,
The opening buds its radiant flower unfold,
Which full in all their fragrant sweetness blow:
Its beauties bright like crimson velvet show,
Tho' small, how lovely its fair blooms appear,
As rich as those that in the garden grow;
Fostered with care their bulky head they rear,
While this unseen, untruded springs and withers here.

But now, sweet flower, I'll thee remove with care;
And to the cultured border quick transplant,
There, henceforth, shalt thou blossom bright and fair,
Nor kind attention shalt thou ever want;
Tho' here thy nourishment hath been but scant,
There may thy tender roots luxuriant spread,
Thy widening crown produce a stronger plant,
And lengthening stalks support each swelling head,
Whilst withering blasts again no more shall thee invade.

But ah!  perhaps my kindness I may rue,
And my officious care may prove thy bane,
Thy vessels strained with juices rich and new,
May soon with blotches thy gay verdue stain;
And then all remedy may prove in vain.
Alas!  thy blooming beauties soon may fade,
Then fondly I might wish thee here again,
When all thy honours in the dust are laid,
And all those graces gone in which thou art arrayed.

Thus oft in some sequestered lonely cot,
A genius bright shoots forth unknown to fame,
Of gen'rous heart, content with humble lot,
Nor e'er desirous of a lofty name;
If but in virtue's paths withouten blame,
He tread; tho' all day long he toils for bread,
And blooming health invigorates his frame,
He little else, or nothing has to dread;
Not fortune's surly frowns nor favours will he heed.

But if he chance to beam upon the sight,
Of some kind Patron, who, with good intent,
Spreads wide his fame, and calls him forth to light,
No longer in the homely cot he's pent;
But now whatever lux'ry can invent,
He freely shares; till giddy with his station
He headlong plunges; and his course is bent
Down pleasure's stream, which ends in sore vexation,
Whilst in his fading frame is made sad devastation.

He's now stopt short amidst his mad career,
And death's unerring shafts, him keen assail,
Lo!  his approaching fate is drawing near&mdash;
'Tis o'er &mdash; The grave's got him within its pale&mdash;
Ah!  what doth all his genius now avail,
Since in the earth his body lies to rot;&mdash;
How vain's ambition since our life's so frail!
Sure happy is the man of humble lot,
Tho' born to live, unknown and haply dies forgot.
