Here, as with slow unguided step I stray,
And, listening to the foaming ocean's roar,
Collect the shells of many coloured ray,
Or seek the onyx on the pebbled shore,
Or the rude windings of the rock explore,
Sad recollection fills my pensive soul,
The days for ever vanished I deplore,
Down my pale cheek the briny torrents roll,
And 'midst the dreary scene I mourn without control.

Ye restless waves, ye gloomy caverns, hail!
Ye suit the mournful temper of my mind;
Ye deeply sighing winds, with you I wail,
With you lament the sorrows of mankind;
For, from the hovel of the humble hind,
To where the potent prince his palace rears,
The trace of mis'ry's iron hand I find&mdash;
Still to my view the withered hag appears
With unavailing groans, in unvailing tears.

As late I leap'd yon yawning chasm's span,
Why kept my faithful limbs their wonted force!
And as o'er yonder ridge I heedless ran,
Why did my eye direct the steady course!
Oh!  had I fallen, blended with the hoarse
Curlew's sad scream had been my dying cry,
Oh!  then for ever dried had been the source,
Which with the bitter stream oft' drowns mine eye:
For ever from my breast had fled the heart-felt sigh.

Or now, as round this rugged knoll I cling,
And watch the progress of the rising tide;
Oh!  that some mighty wave his arms would fling,
Resistless tear me from the craggy side,
And in the ocean's depths my carcase hide;
For there, though furious tempests seem to yell,
Eternal calms and lasting peace abide;
There no malignant human demons fell
United with human woes to make the world a hell!

"Mistaken youth!  deem not thy lot so hard&mdash;"
Amazed I turn, and on the cliff behold
Sweet Hope, as painted by the lyric bard,
With freely-waving locks of burnished gold,
With beaming eye so fair, modest, yet bold.
The setting sun illumes her graceful form,
Her vesture flows in many a playful fold.
She smiles: &mdash; hush'd is the wildly-raving storm!
She speaks &mdash; my frozen heart her soothing accents warm!

"Mistaken youth!  Oh let not wan Despair
Usurp the seat where I alone should reign,
His dark encroaching tyrrany beware!
For once admitted &mdash; ever then in vain
Will be thy efforts freedom to regain.
Madness, his follower, and dire ally,
Will dance and riot in each boiling vein,
Will crack thy heart-strings, burst thy glaring eye!
Oh!  from such hideous monsters turn, and shuddering fly.

"What, though unblest with fortune's favouring grace,
Thy little life has been one gloomy scene,
Think'st thou that future time will ne'er efface
Those sombre tints, and kindly intervene
The brilliant white, and ever-during green?
Though blasts and whirlwinds have disturbed thy morn,
Yet may the sun shine out with ray serene;
Though now thou wanderest rueful and forlorn,
Perhaps in social joys to revel thou wert born.&mdash;

"Then once more mingle with the bustling crew
Who crowd where Julius' ancient towers rise,
Thy much loved art with energy pursue,
And sloth and weak despondency despise;
For happiness in close employment lies:
If wealth or reputation be thy aim,
Perhaps thou yet may'st grasp the glittering prize
Sought by each ardent votary of fame,
Who emulates a Cosway's or a Shelly's name.

"Yet, should these splendid motives fail to blow
The latent spark, one yet remains unsaid,
Behold!" &mdash; I trembling view her change, and lo!
She wears the semblance of my blue-eyed maid;
Eager I climb the rock where smiles the shade
That mocks the features of my lovely fair,
But ere I reach its craggy top, they fade,
The wondrous vision vanishes in air&mdash;
O'er Maughold hills with lighten'd heart I home repair.
