The clouds in lurid billows swept the sky,
No star was seen to lend its friendly light;
When still the screaming sea bird's piercing cry
Was heard amid the horrors of the night,
As with slow-flapping wing she bent her flight,
To seek the covert of some barren rock,
Where the white surge in hollow murmurs broke.

The knarled oaks, with age and moss o'ergrown,
Before the gale their aged branches shed,
While withered leaves in awful fury blown,
Were borne on high in clouds of murky red,
Or o'er the ground in whirling eddies spread;
While the gaunt wolf, impatient of his prey,
Scar'd by the din, in terror urg'd his way.

Oithona still her way unaltered kept,
No bursting sigh escaped her tumid breast,
As nestled in her arms a cherub slept,
Lull'd by the warring elements to rest.
With anxious haste, her onward steps she prest,
While like a meteor streaming on the air,
Flowed the long tresses of her auburn hair.

"Thy mother too will quickly taste of rest,
And sleep in peace," the wretched mourner cried,
"Again will joy revisit this sad breast,
Then will I view thee with a mother's pride,
And own myself the gallant Dermid's bride,
Watch o'er thy youth with never ceasing flame,
And proudly own thee with a parent's name.

"Why cruel memory, wilt thou still renew
That fatal night which marked me out for shame?
Why point in vivid colours to my view
That night which robbed me of my virgin name?
That night, when burning with unholy flame,
Clasped in his arms, in extacy I lay,
Breathed out some half-formed words, and died away?

"Even now, methinks, I feel his burning kiss
Shoot through my maddened brain with subtle fire,
Even now I feel the thrilling pangs of bliss,
Fill every throbbing nerve with fierce desire,
And my eyes moisten with a liquid fire.
My heart still rages with a ceaseless flame,
My soul unaltered, and my love the same."

As thus she spoke, a distant mournful bell,
Amid the warring fury of the night,
Stole on her listening ear with solemn knell,
And through the mistletoe a glimmering light
Shed its dim ray, and vanished from her sight;
"My Dermid's true," the lovely mourner cried,
"And this the spot that owns me for his bride."

No more she feared the lightening's forked beam,
Or the loud thunders, from the tempest's womb;
But hastened on to where the friendly beam
Led to a pile of venerable gloom,
Whose walls were marked by many a mouldering tomb,
And night's foul bird, rocked on the turret's head,
Screamed loud, to greet her to her marriage bed.

Appalled, she gazed upon the tottering pile,
Which seemed for deeds of blood and death designed,
As the blast echoed through the long black aisle;
While the grey weeds that round the columns twined,
And the rank grass waved wildly in the wind;
She turned to fly, alas!  too late!
Loud creaked the hinge as turned the iron gate.

"Thy Dermid comes, thy miseries to spare,
Behold thy marriage bed!  behold that grave!"
Exclaimed the fiend, and seized her auburn hair,
"This is the destin'd spot, where none can save,"
Then in her breast he plunged the reeking glave;
And as the blood rushed bubbling from her veins,
He strewed the pavement with his infant's brains.

Beyond the darkest confines of the wood,
Where furze and brambles strive to rise in vain,
The villain's gibbet many a day hath stood,
And as his chains creak in the drizzly rain,
His bones lie bleaching on the barren plain,
While high in air the screaming eagle soars,
And o'er the desart waste her savage music pours.

Since then, full many a howling wintry blast
In icy fetters hath enchained the flood,
And many a spring in wild luxuriance cast
Her earliest offerings o'er the mouldering sod,
Which hides from mortal eyes this scene of blood;
Yet still at midnight hour his ghost returns,
While thro' dark frowns the flame eternal burns.
