Progressive anna's of succeeding years
Again contain the anniversary,
Of that important hour, in which appears
The dark and tragic scene of Calvalry;
Where to the direful ignominous tree,
Our great Redeemer patiently resign'd
His human form, to save from misery,
And death's else-dreaded empire, human kind,
By the resistless pow'r of his almighty mind.

'Twas then in sable dress, the sickening shade
Darken'd, and wore his veil of deepest shade:
Well might fair Nature from her order run,
And her inimitable beauties fade,
When her ador'd Creator was betray'd
By the black deeds of malice, spite, and scorn!
To death's tyrannic pow'r an offering made,
And by th' Almighty Father left forlorn!
Ah!  well might all creation sympathize and mourn!

Ye mourners, let your sorrowing labours cease;
Your Lord is rescu'd from affliction's night;
In exultation's highest realm of peace
He reigns triumphant, cloth'd with heavenly might,
At God's right hand. &mdash; To mortals erring sight,
The Sun of Righteousness forebore to shine
In his refulgent soul-inspiring light;
But the insatiate grave could not confine
His uncreated rays of majesty divine.

And is it so?  did God's annointed Son
Forego the height of glory uncreate,
That does encircle Heaven's eternal shrone,
To dwell on earth, submissive to a fate
Of deepest agony, that did await
Death's gloomy hour?  It is, how shall I raise
My soul's best intellectual pow'rs, to rate
His matchless love to Man in all his ways:
It calls aloud for strains of everlasting praise.

Therefore let Angels, and Archangels, sing,
Extol, adore and magnify his name!
Ye blissful spirits inumerable, bring
Your incense at his footstool:  and proclaim
Through Heaven's circumference his matchless fame.
Ye saints on earth, improve each fleeting hour
In extasy divine:  embrace the theme
Of endless gratitude, to him who bore
For you the keenest pang of Death's distressful hour.

O bless'd Immanuel!  still thy truth bestow,
To earth's remotest bounds thy precepts send,
Cause ample measures of thy grace to flow
From thy rich throne of glory without end.
Let thine all-healing influence descend,
And to each unenlightened mind afford
Salvation's treasure.  Let thy love extend,
Until the general burst of joy be pour'd,
Of "worthy is the Lamb," our Saviour and our Lord!
