Pages of Truth immutable proclaim
Mankind redeem'd.  Faith finds a safe repose
In his harmonious all-prevailing name,
Who bow'd submissive to a world of woes,
Having completely vanquish'd all his foes,
Led captive hell, broke Death's tyrannic chain,
And fix'd their bounds; triumphantly he rose,
The blissful shores of glory to regain;
There as the King of Kings eternally to reign.

Ye men of Galilee, what new delight!
What extacy immortal fir'd each breast,
When, in salvation's robes of spotless white,
Perfect and pure, two angels stood, confest,
Commission'd with th' Almighty's high behest,
That Jesus should re-visit your sojourn,
'Mid hiearchies, with whom he shall invest
Power that shall influence the silent urn,
His mandate to obey, "Ye dead to him return!"

Awake, my soul, in contemplation soar
To yonder far-extended void of space,
Th' immeasurable sea, without a shore,
Where first-created spheres begin their race,
Mov'd by the Great First Cause, before whose face
Darkness and Discord fled on speedy wing,
Recall the scene &mdash; Messiah's footsteps trace,
And with th' ascending bright procession sing
To thy once-suffering Lord, but now all-powerful King.

For him th' angelic hosts in numbers throng,
Who thither Christ's imperial standard bear,
And touch their golden harps; a sacred song,
To greet Heaven's victor son, they all prepare.
Th' exalted melody that fills the air
Reverberates in other skies remote;
Strains, only heard by an immortal ear,
Now on the blue translucent aether float,
And far-extending regions lengthen out each note.

With shouting choirs the blissful mansions ring,
To the Almighty Father first was pour'd
Infinite praise; Messiah next they sing
In raptures high, and hail him King and Lord;
Worship'd, obey'd, and ever more ador'd.
Open, ye everlasting doors!  display
Your sacred courts of living light well stor'd;
The King of Glory comes!  prepare the way
That leads to the supreme eternal source of day.

In their resplendent orbs, the sun and stars
(Who lately sympathising dresses wore,
For their Great Maker's painful wounds and scars,)
A second time their shouts of gladness pour:
At the ascending triumph, they adore
Heaven's everlasting son, and him applaud;
Ascribing praise and glory evermore
To their invincible great victor, God,
Return'd to his imperial throne and high abode.

Its sacred Lord Heaven's blissful realms enshrine
In glory inexpressible; arrayed
With all the Godhead's majesty divine;
By whom for us is intercession made.
He, when Time's last diurnal debt is paid,
Shall re-appear, his kingdom to secure,
To all his little flock.  The skies shall fade;
But fix'd his word on truth, which, firm and sure,
Coeval with his essence ever shall endure.

O glorious change!  when, shining from afar,
The panoply of dread Omnipotence
Descends with him, who once at Pilate's bar
In meekness bore insult and gross offece!
Now seated on his Heav'nly throne, from whence
Issues his word, t' approve or disapprove.
With him the Church, triumphant, shall commence
Her union in his brightest realm above,
And reap immortal fruits of everlasting love.
