All bounteous Autumn!  nurse of human kind!
Wilt thou no longer then thy garland wear?
Wilt thou the full-ear'd wreath, indeed, unbind,
To deck with withering leaves thy flowing hair?
Fostered so long by thee, O who can bear
Sharp Winter's searching cold? &mdash; Already low'r
The skies; each beauty of the genial year
Fades fast away; e'en now the evening hour
Brings the low-muttering storm, and frequent chilling show'r.

Yet shall sweet sympathy my bosom keep
From selfish grief; though every comfort flies
With thee, and hastens down the southern steep,
Where wanton Summer spreads her glowing skies;
Where other harvests yet for thee arise;
Where other nations now impatient stand
To hail thy coming with enraptured eyes,
Eager to catch the bounties of thy hand,
And bless thee "scattering plenty o'er a smiling land."

At length, farewell!  I feel the icy breath
And numbing influence of Winter's reign;
Around how widely spreads the realm of Death,
Usurping frolic Pleasure's gay domain!
Alas!  soft Summer's children all are slain;
They languish low, and hang the drooping head,
Or wildly tossing flutter o'er the plain,
Mix'd with the foliage that the grove has shed,
Sheltering no more the warblers that thy bounty fed.

O'er eastern hills now slowly climbs the sun,
While hoary fogs close up the dusky vale;
Now faintly shine his slanting beams at noon,
And only half-enlighten'd is the dale;
Slow-moving clouds along the horizon sail,
And darken all the solemn prospect round;
The forest murmurs in the sullen gale,
And for the reaper's song, or sickle's sound,
The howling tempest sweeps along the naked ground.

Whither, ah!  whither shall I turn my view?
Still desolation's blasting form is seen
Deepening the shades, enbrowning ev'ry hue
Of livelier tint, and sickening all the scene:
But Spring again shall, in her mantle green,
With all the Loves and Graces in her train,
O'er these sad regions bound with sportive mien,
Restore each blushing child of Summer's reign,
The music to the grove, the verdure to the plain.

Then mortal, hear!  Tho' all thy joys decay;
Tho' rosy health thy cheek forsake!  thine eye,
Sinking, no longer own its chearful ray;
Tho' friendship with thy fickle fortune fly,
And age, and want, and death, approach thee nigh;
Yet, yet endure, and lift aloft thy head:
For shouting Nature's thousand voices cry,
The silent grave is but thy resting-bed,
Soon shall awake to life and joy the sleeping dead!
