With dust encumber'd, and with heat opprest,
Deserted Bond-street thus his woes exprest:
The chariot close, that emulously hides
The quick-drawn Fair within its painted sides;
Barouches gay, that partially disclose
The smiling belles to the admiring beaux;
Or friendlier Sociable, that kind displays
Its well fill'd seats to the enraptur'd gaze;
The curricle, the pha'ton rais'd on high,
Where venturous youths each other's skill defy,
How late adorn'd my gaily crowded street!
Delightful discord and confusion sweet!
My well prest pavement boasted shining rows
Of white-rob'd ladies and gay-booted beaux;
Garffini, Addington, engage the chat,
The price of strawberries, or Invasion's threat.
St. James's bell, unmark'd, the hour declares,
Unmark'd as if it summon'd them to prayers.
But now no wheels quick-turning mark my way;
No beaux or belles my untrod paths display;
But silent, dreary, pensive and alone,
I mourn the Spring, and all my glories gone!

Now different sounds my tortur'd ears assail,
Now different sights my weary eyes regale;
Now choak'd with mortar, deafened with the sound
Of ruthless workmen hammering around;
Or when Burdett and Liberty the cry,
The rabble-rout trhough my scar'd confines fly;
Profane those stones, by Fashion sacred made,
With step unhallow'd dare my doors invade.
My woes increase &mdash; I feel by sad contrast,
That Spring is fled and all my joys are past!

Perhaps some Fair, confin'd to works and books,
"Old fashion'd halls, dull aunts, and croaking rooks,"
By purling streams as pensive she reclines,
And reads with sympathy these woe-fraught lines,
May sigh to think, when these past-pleasures rise
In gay succession on her longing eyes&mdash;
May sigh to think what tedious months must roll,
Ere Bond-street's glories re-inspire her soul;
And mourn with me, to every comfort dead,
That Spring is gone and all her joys are fled.

Sons of the whip!  far hence ye shew your skill,
And Brighton, Ramsgate, with amusement fill:
Injurious Brighton!  though 'tis now your boast
T' enjoy those honours, I, with grief, have lost;
Though your now pleasing shore and calm smooth sea,
Inspire the wanderers with delight and glee;
Yet hope not long my fav'rites to detain,
Bound in the circle of Ton's magic chain.
When frightful tempests discompose your shore,
When the winds murmur and the billows roar,
My gentle subjects then shall seek my arms,
Where pleasure gladdens, and where beauty warms:
The dazzling crowds again shall charm my view,
Spring shall return, and all my joys renew.
