Array'd in dazzling robes of purest lights
Guiding the rapid car of power sublime,
Lo!  FREEDOM triumphs o'er Oblivion's night,
And rears her trophies on the throne of Time.
What though she pauses in her proud career,
To mourn her altars, mingling with the dust,
To shed on Valour's grave a parent's tear,
The unconscious tenant, once her dearest boast,
Even then she stifles Sorrow's rising sigh,
As future triumphs rush on her prophetic eye.

Her lightning's glance can penetrate the gloom,
That dimly curtains many a slumbering year,
In whose bright course shall heavenly fires relume
Her torch, expiring in wild Nature's tear.
In ages yet to come shall ardent youth,
Warm'd by the flame that round her altar plays,
Rise the bold champions of oppressed Truth,
And if in Glory's beam their eagles gaze,
While the loud trumpet's blast of deathless fame,
Shall tell an awe-struck world each glorious name.

Oh, righteous power!  thy mighty voice shall raise
Thy shrine, where Guilt his giant powers resign'd,
Where Truth's dread helm shall glitter in the blaze
Of starry wreaths on Mercy's brow intwin'd:
Beneath the genial splendors of thy reign,
Genius shall own thy pure, inspiring smile,
And Peace shall join bright Freedom's angel-train
To tear the fetters from the sons of toil,
To pour the dew, nectareous, of the sky,
On the pale lip, parch'd with Affliction's sigh,

Thy potent hand shall holy altars rear,
Where tranc'd Devotion may her transports pour;
Her soul, unaw'd by Persecution's fear,
Shall rise, triumphant, o'er his darkest hour;
Where pallid victims groan in deep despair,
Wrapt in the shades of Superstition's gloom,
Where crushing racks turn in the livid glare
Of flashing fires, the screaming sufferers' tomb.
Avenging power!  on thee shall Heav'n bestow
Its fiery bolts, to lay the fabric low.

When o'er the cliffs of Albion's sea-beat shore,
Wild Superstition her dark pinions spread,
Her midnight orgies bathe the caves with gore,
And o'er the ocean shriek'd th' unhallow'd dead,
Her abject slaves, the ministers of death,
While gasping votaries strain'd the blood-shot eye,
Bade charming caverns fling their sulphurous breath,
In column'd terrors, to the thundering sky,
And dreadful forms rose on the shelving height,
The airy cradle of the spell-bound night.

Freedom's loud voice bade those dread terrors cease;
Her orient lustre pierc'd the Stygian gloom;
While Science came, the heavenly child of Peace,
And rear'd her dwelling on dark Error's tomb:
Freedom, blest guardian of her mystic shrine,
On Time's dark wing pour'd her celestial light.
As some bright angel, 'mid the spheres divine,
Bids morning splendors chase receding Night,
And Nature, freed from Night's terrific power,
Her matin anthem sings in Summer's fragrant bower.

Bleak blew the wind around the quivering flame,
That cheer'd the summit of the lonely bow'r,
Where pale Disease consum'd the captive's frame,
Who call'd on Frenzy at the midnight hour;
And then the centinel, at dead of night,
Pac'd the wild battlement with footsteps slow,
While the dark raven curb'd his dreary flight,
To pour through grated bars his notes of woe;
Flapping his pinion, as the clanking chain
Chas'd sleep's bright visions from the sufferer's brain.

Ah!  when the scenes of childhood met his views,
Rising in Memory's agonizing dream,
The landscape tinted with the rainbow's hue,
Its wild woods waving in the morning beam,
The airy mountain and the twilight vale,
Where light as air his infant footsteps flew;
His golden tresses flaunting on the gale,
That shook from Summer's rose the silver'd dew;
The smile maternal on his soul imprest,
That fir'd to madness his wild fetter'd breast.

How rush'd the life-blood through his palsied veins,
When Freedom enter'd the dark haunt of Night,
And from her child tore the time-rusted chains,
While beaming day burst on his aching sight.
As when he launch'd upon the azure tide,
His rustling canvass fluttering in the breeze,
The beams of heaven his bright, unerring guide,
While angel footsteps curb'd the slumbering seas,
Blest Freedom hail'd him to his native shore,
As Peace proclaim'd the reign of Carnage o'er.

To Freedom's care the awful charge is given
To watch in infancy the patriot's soul,
To warm his bosom with the fires of Heaven,
And lead his steps to Glory's dazzling goal.
Her raptur'd eye beholds his youthful frame,
With spring elastic bound across the plain,
And marks him glow with transport at the name
Of those who died to save her falling reign.
Till led by her when toil-mark'd years are fled,
Bright Glory twines her laurels round his head.

As when the valour of her Spartan son,
In vain oppos'd Ambition's whelming storm,
That shook the centre of her Attic throne,
And menac'd ruin to her trembling form
She saw the hero on Thermop'lae's field,
With frantic woe in her maternal eye,
Before her shrine his mighty spirit yield;
While spheres eternal trembled in her cry:
Rous'd by her voice, the powers of vengeance came,
And pour'd their fury on Guilt's fainting frame.

Freedom again wav'd heav'n's avenging sword,
Thron'd on the summit of the Grecian steep,
While far below the crimson billows roar'd,
As hostile nations struggled on the deep,
Tremendous power when Persia's host essay'd
To bend thy children in Oppression's chain,
On their proud legions they rush'd undismay'd
As sweeps the whirlwind on the wintry main,
Inspir'd by thee, from millions scorn'd to fly,
Till Nature rung in their victorious cry.

Yes, Freedom fled the imperial towers of Rome,
When Vice, the priest of Luxury, profan'd,
With rites abhorr'd, her consecrated dome,
While maniac Fully o'er the orgies reign'd.
In vain she pointed to her Cato's tomb,
In vain in thunders she pronounc'd his name,
They madly too scorn'd their dread impending doom,
And Faction's clouds obscur'd bright Reason's flame,
Till Destruction smote them to the dust,
And conquer'd nations own'd the sentence just.

When Evening's purple robe glows in the beam,
Her golden star shed o'er Italian skies,
And the proud wave or Tyber's classic stream
Heaves its clear bosom in her balmy sighs.
On the etherial moon-light car of Even,
The mighty shades of other times appear,
Freedom, for thee they fly the bowers of heaven,
For thee they visit Earth's nocturnal sphere,
To bid thee trust that god-like deeds sublime
Shall yet emblason the dim shield of Time.

When the dread spirit of the mountain storm
Unfurl'd his standard to the rushing wind,
That howl'd around the Caledonian's form,
On the rude fragment of the rock reclin'd,
O'er heathy hills the western moon-beams shone,
The torrents wild foam'd gleaming in the ray,
Thro' blasted pines arose the tempests moan,
Rocking the gray cliff where the hunter lay:
Freedom descending on the desert wild,
Blest the calm slumbers of her fearless child.

Dear to her bosom were those northern plains,
Oft has she listen'd when from Morven's vale
Arose the voice of Cercis' mournful strains,
Charming the spirit of the sea-born gale:
She train'd the warlike race from age to age,
And nerv'd their arm with Freedom's awful force,
She smil'd, exulting as the battle-rage
Swept Pride's dark legions in its vengeful course,
And with her spear, on the proud shrine of Fame,
Near mighty Wallace, carv'd her Bruce's name.

Freedom, thy voice can still the storm of woe,
And soothe the sufferer in the hour of pain;
While thy pure rays on his pale features glow,
As shines the moon-beam on the twilight main.
Oh, were I doom'd to Want's oblivious vale,
My lonely home her dark sequester'd dell,
Inspired by thee, I would her terrors hail,
For even with her blest Freedom loves to dwell!
Thy roses fade in Pleasure's gaudy dome,
But shed their sweets round Labour's cottage home.
