'Twas Spring; and May did her best sweets exhale;
When meadows, in their roseate bloom,
Sent forth an ambient rich perfume,
Our ship reluctantly unfurl'd the sail;
Destin'd to sail, with commerce, o'er the deep,
To shores far East of fair Indostan's plains;
Safe from the enemy our trade to keep,
Guarding it on to China's vast domains,
O'er the dread wat'ry waste, where desolation reigns.

In torrid climes, oppressive was the heat;
Where, vertical, the orb of day
Sent downward his most potent ray;
When, with wild throbs, each feverish pulse did beat:
But Providence divine, with watchful care,
Sent his selectest healing influence down,
To turn aside each pestilence severe;
Profusely were his blessings on us thrown,
Who gave us health and peace beneath the burning zone.

Great was the war of Southern seas and skies;
Where storms, in dire succession, roll
From the bleak ice-begirt South Pole,
From whence th' infuriate maddening tempest lies.
Yet was our refuge present, known, believ'd;
For o'er this ever restless wat'ry road,
Presides th' unutterable, unconceiv'd,
Absconding, yet demonstrable great God;
And jarring seas and skies obey his awful nod.

Jehovah reigns!  the elements proclaim
Him, who, from chaos and old night,
Call'd them to harmony and light,
T' exalt and magnify his matchless name.
Check'd by the power of dread Omnipotence,
Obedient winds and waves at once decrease:
'Tis he that bids their fury to commence;
He also bids their foaming rage to cease;
'Tis his omnific will, "Ye waves, be still in peace."

Long was the voyage exempt from earthly bliss,
Yet smiling hope did oft emerge,
Although Destruction's dreary verge
Frown'd near us, a tremendous dark abyss,
At length our wave-worn bark, did safe arrive,
Shatter'd by billows, on the Atlantic main.
How glad the happy few, who yet survive,
Their highly favour'd Island to regain!
Where knowledge in divine pre-eminence doth reign.

But yet indulgent Heaven was still more kind;
Tidings of Peace we gladly heard,
As by the chalky cliffs we steer'd,
Borne by December's chilling North-west wind.
Our anchor cast near Albion's tranquil shores,
Hope to the mind a pleasing scene conveys;
She, on triumphant wing, exulting soars,
And prompts the soul, with energy, to raise
In themes of adoration, gratitude, and praise!
