Amidst the winds that blustering, hollow howl,
The frosts, that creep cold on the budding spray;
The fires that glare, the clouds that deepening scowl,
In life's low vale with soul-depressing sway,
Say Muse, what lights the Poor Man on his way&mdash;
Gives him to drink at cool contentment's spring&mdash;
Sheds on his weary soul a cheering ray&mdash;
And bids him soar on Hope's angelic wing?
The Sabbath day divine, the Poor Man's Sabbath sing.

Hail holy day!  of heav'n the certain pledge,
And pleasing prelibation here below;
'Tis thine, the groans of nature to assuage,
And bind with balmy hand her wounds of woe.
Rejoicing in the morning's ruddy glow,
The labouring ox, all wet with pearly dew,
The clover'd dale at will traverses slow,
While idly gleams upon the distant view,
Far o'er the fallow field, the glittering soil-worn plough.

Yea, e'en the simple ass, the daily drudge
Of yonder wandering houseless, homeless train,
The thistle champs along the common's edge,
And lightsome ease obliterates all his pain.
But chief, in freedom from the weary wain
Exulting, roams at large the bounding steed;
Light floats upon the breeze his flowing mane;
He snorts &mdash; he paws &mdash; he skims the flow'ry mead&mdash;
The Sabbath day to him a day of joy indeed.

His milky charge there too, the farmer feeds,
While yet his family lie reclin'd in sleep;
This, on the part of labour, mercy pleads
Labour, that still an early hour must keep&mdash;
And he that would to meditation deep,
Or exercise devout, his mind apply,
Nor blooms of hope, nor fruits of faith will reap,
If drowsy slumbers hang upon his eye,
And nature unrefresh'd pour forth the languid sigh.

And down the vale where yet unmelted lie
The morning clouds around his humble home,
With careless step, in musing transport high,
Behold the week-worn cottar slowly roam.
On every hand the fragrant flow'rets bloom
A hymn of joy in every thicket rings&mdash;
Earth breathes a grateful off'ring of perfume;
While blithe the lark extends his dewy wings,
And soaring up to heaven, a heaven-taught sonnet sings.

All this he ponders o'er with silent joy&mdash;
With gratitude and love his heart o'erflows,
Yet grieved to think, that still with base alloy
Is mix'd the tribute which his soul bestows.
In rev'rence deep, his head he humbly bows,
And lifts to heav'n a supplicating eye,
Great are his wants, but words their utterance lose,
Dumb on his tongue his mighty cravings lie,
And burden'd sore, his soul pours forth a broken sigh.

And sighs are language, in th' all-gracious ear
Of Him who sits supreme on Mercy's throne,
Who kindly marks the penitential tear,
And of the broken sp'rit the faintest groan.
The meltings of the heart, will He disown?
The heart enraptured with his goodness?  No&mdash;
A gracious answer to his sigh comes down,
Warm on his soul the streams of mercy flow,
And kindling in his breast, Heaven's holy ardours glow.

Now, in his love, his friends and family share,
Before his God he spreads their every case,
Implores that he would make them all his care,
And fold them ever in his warm embrace;
But chiefly for his little infant race,
As yet unpractised in the world's vile ways,
That, by the influence of his special grace,
Conducted through life's dark and troubl'd maze,
Their last end may be peace, their whole lives speak his praise.

Nor end his fervours here &mdash; his native land,
Tho' owning not a foot breadth of her soil,
He prays, that in the hollow of God's hand,
She still may rest, the lov'd, the lovely isle;
That in her vallies peace may ever smile,
And jubilant the song her mountains raise,
While woods, and streams, the chorus join the while,
With active man, to swell the notes of praise,
Till yonder orbs surcease t' admeasure nights and days.

Untutor'd he, with philosophic ken,
Round the wide limits of the world to sweep,
To mark the manners strange of ruder men,
And, sage-like, tell what mystic rites they keep:
But he has heard, that o'er the pathless deep,
Beneath th' unbroken shade of forests brown,
The naked tribes, save that they wildly leap,
Like moody madness to the changing moon,
No blissful day of rest, no sacred service own.

That blind, at superstition's awful shrine,
Others laid prostrate, drench'd in human gore,
The direful fiends of hell, supposed divine,
With fear and awful reverence adore;
While lying flamens, boasting wizard lore,
In vain essay to read their future doom&mdash;
The rite abhorr'd, the harsh rhyme mutter'd o'er,
Cheer not the lonely dwelling of the tomb,
Which trembling doubt invests with horror's deepest gloom.

And with th' assembly great of the first-born,
Whose names are writ in heaven, in spirit join'd,
He prays that God, upon their case forlorn,
Would cast a healing look in mercy kind;
And call his gracious covenant to mind,
His promise from the times of old given forth,
That in the bonds of amity combin'd,
Through him divine, the woman's wond'rous birth,
Men Jubilant shall join, from th' utmost ends of earth.

But, from his little cot, a curling cloud
Of smoke ascending, homeward tempts his way,
To bless his family, and to serve his God,
In all the sacred duties of the day.
As fanciful, let none despise the lay&mdash;
Sweet peace in all her forms Devotion brings;
But doubly sweet her animating ray,
When, round the social hearth, Heaven's anthem rings,
And Hope exulting smiles, and Faith expands her wings.

The soothing satisfaction who can tell,
Th' emotions dear, that warm the father's heart,
As, rising sweet, these strains of Zion swell
Around his little ring, devoid of art?
Perhaps, how God beneath oppression's smart
Beholds the poor, and listens to their sighs;
Or, how in wilds and deserts far apart,
To glad the thirsty soul that fainting lies,
He bids the flowerets spring, and bubbling streams arise.

Or what, when read, &mdash; while all attentive hear,
Is some marked portion of the sacred word;
Perhaps, in Sinai's thirsty desert drear,
Or Arnon's brooks, the doing of the Lord.
Or how, when Persecution's cruel sword
Awoke, in fury, burning to devour,
By Cherith's brook conceal'd, the Prophet's board,
The ravens, mission'd by Almighty power,
With bread and flesh supplied, at morn and evening's hour.

Or, when amidst the drought-consumed soil,
Their empty urns the fainting brooks deplore,
How the poor widow's little cruse of oil
For many a day supplied the unfailing store;
Or how the weeping Bard the briny shower
Poured for the children of his people slain,
While low on earth, with ashes covered o'er,
Zion for help stretched forth her hands in vain
A hissing and a scorn to spiteful foes profane.

Perhaps, when this green earth in morning prime,
To run its destin'd course had scarce begun,
How righteous Abel fell before his time,
By meekness, faith, and charity undone&mdash;
And how the haughty, over-bearing one,
Though pitying earth the ruthless deed deplor'd,
Harden'd in pride and hate, in daring tone,
Braving the anger of th' Omniscient Lord,
Was driven out from man a vagabond abhorr'd.

Or how the peaceful Enoch walked with God,
Amidst a world of wickedness and strife;
And how he was not found in earth's abode,
Caught up immediate to eternal life.
Or how, a comfort when his cares were rife,
And foam'd the curse in wraths o'er briming horn,
To woe-worn Lamech by his faithful wife,
Noah, amidst the ungodly scoffs and scorn
Of a rejected world, a Preacher bold was born.

Whom when the day of slighted patience clos'd,
And wrath's dark night arose in starless gloom,
A miracle of mercy interpos'd,
To save amidst the all o'erwhelming doom.
And how, when on a lost world's dosing tomb,
Its relic, and its orphan poor he stood,
His grateful offering's savoury perfume,
Through precious faith in the Messiah's blood,
Rose with acceptance meet before the throne of God.

Who on his weakness turn'd a pitying eye,
Resolv'd in such sort never to contend
Again with sinful flesh &mdash; but wet and dry,
In measure meet, with heat and cold to send.
And seasons, round the rolling earth to blend
Beauty and grandeur in successive rise;
And day and night, until th' appointed end
Of all within man's visive range that lies,
The garniture of earth, the glory of the skies.

And how he bade him love and multiply,
And fill the earth, yet fair for him outspread,
And rule o'er all that run, creep, swim or fly;
The rightful owner, and the sovereign head.
And how, least in his breast a secret dread
Might harbour, and his better thoughts confine,
Of wrath remov'd, and reconcilement made,
The glorious symbol, dipp'd in dyes divine,
Bright on the rising cloud he bade the rainbow shine.

Beneath his oak, in Mamre's fertile vale,
His browsing flocks around him peaceful spread,
Abram, they see, God's Messengers regale
And here him warm for Sodom intercede.
Awestruck, they mark that careless city laid,
Full fed upon the wanton lap of ease,
Fast closing o'er her wrath's eternal shade,
Yet hoarse her tumult, rising on the breeze,
Wild as the boreal winds, or tempest stricken seas.

Her doom how dread!  the grey dawn's placid beam
Has scarcely still'd the madden'd night's uproar,
Sloth on her pillow grasps the feverish dream,
And gorg'd intemperance deep begins to snore.
The rising sun glints soft on tree and tower,
And love and joy awakes the woodland choir&mdash;
When lo!  it bursts one sulphurous flash of power,
And, in a tempest of eternal fire,
In one dread moment whelm'd the ungodly race expire.

Unhappy Lot, didst thou not now reflect
Upon thy selfish choice, thy love of gain;
Thy comfort, and thy dutiful respect
For generous Abram sacrific'd in vain.
That rich, well water'd, ever verdant plain,
So captivating to thy carnal eye,
With all upon it, swallow'd up amain&mdash;
Leaves thee in widow'd solitude to sigh,
The weeping child of woe, and cheerless poverty.

Or Isaac meek, come forth at eventide
To meditate at La-hai-roi well,
By fair Rebekah met in maiden pride,
Awakes their pious feeling's gentler swell.
And Jacob, how they lingering love to dwell
On portions of thy strangely varied tale,
Thy patient toil, thy faith that did excel,
Thy strength with th' angel wrestling to prevail,
Whence came, a prince with God, thy new name Israel.

Or Pisgah mount with Moses they ascend,
The distant land of promise to survey;
That goodly land, where hills and vallies blend,
Woods wave, streams glide, and living fountains play.
A land for which God careth every day&mdash;
Refreshed with rain and fertilized with dew;
A land whereon his strong right hand for aye
Shall rest conspicuous in creation's view,
Astonishing in grace, in judgment fearful too!

Or of th' Eternal One, a child of days,
All lowly in a humble manger laid;
Or toil-consum'd in life's laborious ways,
A man of sorrows, wanting daily bread;
Nor having where to lay his aching head,
In his own world &mdash; by his own chosen race,
His love with heartless apathy repaid,
His office power malign'd, and, to his face,
Charg'd with demoniac aid his highest acts of grace.

Or, through the frail humanity he wore,
How brightly to the eye of faith it shone,
Although at times with more or less of power,
The glory of th' alone begotten Son.
Image express of him th' unseen One,
He made his pathway the wide weltering wave;
He spoke &mdash; the winds were still, disease was gone,
And, yielding up its charge, th' oblivious grave
Proclaim'd him Lord of all omnipotent to save.

Perhaps they read, while rapture speaking tears
Like dew drops o'er their sunburnt faces stray,
How free'd from all his woes and all his fears,
Death's bands he burst upon this hallow'd day:
And gracious, as his friends pursu'd their way
Towards Emmaus, their faith and hope nigh gone,
Reviv'd their spirits with a rich display
From his own word how all that had been done
Must needs have met on him, as from the first foreshown.

Foreshown in Eden by the bruised heel
The woman's seed was destin'd to sustain;
And by his faith's accepted sign and seal,
Good Abel's firstlings for an off'ring slain&mdash;
And by the door posts sprinkled, not in vain,
With blood, when vengeance Egypt's first born slew;&mdash;
And by the Serpent rear'd on Petra's plain,
By Moses, in the congregation's view,
On which when bit they look'd, and looking liv'd anew.

In David, from the haunts of man exil'd,
Pursu'd by Saul, and that vile Edomite,
Doeg, Gods priests who unrelenting kill'd,
Four score and five men in his causeless spite;&mdash;
And by the prophets, in the sacred light
Of inspiration rising strong and clear,
Who hail'd the prospect with intense delight,
And, humbly searching, as the time drew near,
To Daniel 'twas vouchsaf'd to tell th' auspicious year.

Then, on their knees, with fervour deep they pour
Out all their hearts into his gracious ear,
Who, having prov'd temptation's evil hour,
Feels all the sorrows of his people here.
And o'er their sinful lives, their wanderings drear
From that which all their better thoughts approve,
They deep lament, with many a bitter tear,
Imploring, all his other gifts above,
An increase to their faith, their charity and love.

But not to mourning nor requests alone
Confin'd &mdash; their grateful adorations rise
For countless mercies daily to them shown,
For life and all its bountiful supplies.
For all those tender and endearing ties
That link them in affection's golden chain&mdash;
For hope, that anchoring far above the skies,
Give's them the soul's calm sunshine to maintain,
Though daily prest with toil, with poverty and pain.

And humbled to the dust, they ardent pray,
His promis'd Spirit still to be their guide,
Amidst the snares in life's bewildering way,
That, watchful, lurk unseen on every side.
And in their lot, whatever may betide
The sunny calm &mdash; or tempest howling high,
He in the cloudy-skirted storm may ride,
And whisper soft, as fainting low they lie,
"My friends, be not afraid, for see, behold, 'tis I!"

The humble meal is now in haste brought forth,
No dainties smile upon their humble board,
One homely dish each morn rewards their worth,
'Tis all they ask, and all they can afford.
Yet still, within their frugal pantry stor'd,
A savoury cheese remains, to grace the day
Of holy rest and joy, when Care abhorr'd,
Wrapt in his cloud of darkness, shrinks away
Before the radiant rise of Hope's high-streaming ray. 

Then, forth they go, for now before the door
The short'ning shadow marks the hour of nine;
And by the broomy hill are coming o'er
Their village neighbours, glittering, clean and fine.
Upon the road, with neighbours, neighbours join,
And converse sweet beguiles the tedious way&mdash;
Some trace, in Nature's works, the hand divine,
Some through the flowery fields of Scripture stray,
And some, alas!  retail the nonsense of the day.

The sun burns bright &mdash; wide through the fervid air,
Of insect wings the hum unceasing flows;
And stretch'd around, beneath th' oppressive glare,
The flowery field with dazzling splendour glows.
Adown the vale, beneath the shady boughs,
The herd seek shelter from the sultry beam,
Or under yon tall rock, that, rising, throws
All hoary, through the trees a dusky gleam,
Their panting sides they lave, deep in the silver stream

The peaceful valley smiles &mdash; with wanton glee
The hare, leaps, playful, in the broomy shade;
And clear the wild-wood strains of liberty,
All rapt'rous, sweep along the sunny glade.
With eyes of jet, and swelling bosom red,
The little Robin, flutt'ring, flits on high;
The russet Wren, beneath the brushwood hid,
Patters unseen, or on the careless eye,
Comes like a falling leaf in air light wavering by.

Sweet Nature's children!  these your haunts enjoy,
Nor yet for me one sportive round decline;
No ruffian I, your pleasures to destroy;
No, brethren, no!  the GOD ye praise is mine.
But ah!  what bands approach with fell design!
Their faces dark, with guilty horror brown;
Nor song, nor service is to them divine,
Nor holy times, nor tender ties they own,
The base, degenerate dregs of yonder smoky town.

Within their bosoms quench'd the light of Heaven,
In vain would Pity cross their guilty way;
The harmless creatures fly, in terror driven,
As, dark, they sweep along with ruthless sway.
The warbling Linnet drops the unfinish'd lay,
Frantic, to see her little nestlings torn
For ever from her eyes: &mdash; full many a day,
With feathers ragged, drooping, all forlorn,
Her plantive note shall flow from yonder milk-white thorn.

Nor there will wanton cruelty in peace,
Her woe-fraught strains allow her time to pour;
Crashes the bush, wide floats its flowery fleece,
As, aimed at her, resounds the stony shower:&mdash;
Thus, oft the Bard, in silence must endure
The prideful pelting of the ruffian throng;
Who spurn his holy flame, his feelings pure,
And arm'd in self-adoring maxims, strong,
Despise the charms of wit, and energies of song.

Ye reckless ones, why will ye scatter pain,
And carry wailing into scenes so fair?
Let nature plead, the barbarous act refrain,
The toil-built nest, the little nestlings spare.
The flood of song shall well reward your care,
While glide the life renewing months of spring;
Through Summer leafy, many a grateful pair
Shall cheer your lonely walks with social wing;
Yea, there, through winter wild, the Red-breast sweet shall sing.

But now, at length, in view the church appears,
An ancient pile, with moss-grown turrets grey,
The venerable work of other years,
Which Time's swift lapse hath placed far away.
There, oft the sons, to prayer on such a day,
In troublous times, the fathers fond have led,
Who, peaceful now, beneath the silent clay,
Lie with the congregation of the dead,
Their feet for aye from toil, their eyes from sorrow hid.

How solemn to the eye the scene appears!
The yew &mdash; the porch, with pale Death's emblems crown'd,
And sable-railed, bedecked with pompous tears,
The rich men's tombs, that, gloomy rise around;
Of some, the smooth-hewn slab marks out the bound,
Preserving still the poor possessor's name,
Perhaps his years; while level with the ground,
Many, by friendship mourned, unknown to fame,
Beneath the grass-green sod, no frail memorial claim.

Here, wrapt in thought, the poor man wanders wild,
And dark the days of other years return;
For underneath that turf, his darling child,
His first-born son, lies in the mould'ring urn.
He heaves a sigh, his heart begins to burn&mdash;
The rough grey-stone still marks his fav'rite's head;
And o'er him, beauteous in the breath of morn,
To all her children, Nature's bounteous mead,
With scarlet gayly tips, the lowly daisies spread.

"Child of my love, confess'd before my eye
Thou standest, fair in all thy blooming grace;
Wild on the wind thy sunny ringlets fly,
And dawning goodness brightens on thy face.
I see, I see thee in the sportive race,
Lur'd by the bright son of the summer beam;&mdash;
I see thee, panting, drop the fruitless chase&mdash;
For, glittering, far adown the silver stream,
He floats on air away, as fades the nightly dream.

"So fadedst thou!  for never sportive more,
Bloated, and black, upon thy bed of pain
I see thee laid: &mdash; thy short, short span is o'er&mdash;
A mournful proof, that earth-born hopes are vain.
Yet, let me never pour the tear profane&mdash;
Well hast thou 'scap'd a wicked world of woe;
The spurn of pride &mdash; Misfortune's driving rain,
And creeping chill, the baleful blast of snow;
From poverty's cold sky, hath never laid thee low.

"Thou hast not heard the child of deep distress,
In bitterness pour forth the anguish'd groan;
Thou hast not seen, and yet couldst not redress,
Poor Misery, pining, friendless and alone
Nor was it thine in sorrow to bemoan
A wandering childhood, and a wanton youth&mdash;
Ere sin had gathered strength, lo, thou west gone,
Devotion's first note trembling in thy mouth,
Raptures for aye to drink before the throne of truth."

While thus he, meditative, pours the tear
Of pious resignation o'er his dead,
The rising psalm it swells upon his ear,
A psalm that made Israel's sweet singer glad:
Because to dwell in hades dismal bed
His soul would not be left, he felt secure;
His flesh, besides, to rest in hope was made,
A joyful hope, even in death's darksome hour,
Plac'd far beyond the reach of foul corruption's power.

Perhaps the song is of creative might,
How this huge mass in shapeless darkness rose,
And God said, let light be, and there was light,
Till misty evening made the first day's close.
For thus, in wisdom infinite, He chose
To mark creation's age, the march of time,
While yet with life no creature living glows,
But over all the wide and watery clime,
Vast, on the shoreless sea, sat solitude sublime.

Or how, at the same word, rock ribb'd the hills,
Inlaid with iron and brass, with gems and gold,
Upheav'd their heads, sparkling with silver rills,
And splinter'd pinnacles abrupt and bold.
While at their feet smooth spreading vales unfold
Their ample bosoms, as the waters blue,
Beneath th' impress divine together roll'd,
And toiling many a tortuous winding through,
Into the vast abyss, their destined path, pursue.

Another word adorns the naked scene
With herbage green, and flowers of every dye,
Trees full of fruit, and of the stateliest mein,
Tall forests nodding o'er the mountains high.
He said again, and, glowing from the sky,
Majestic shone the ruler of the day,
And, all her bright attendants standing by,
Right opposite the moon, with paler ray,
Of sober suited night the sceptre soft to sway.

And now th' Omnific word is on the floods,
That pregnant all with life prolific teem,
With fowl of every kind, to cheer the woods,
Or, hid in clouds, from mountain tops to scream;
And fish disporting in the crystal stream,
Freckled with silver, crimson drops and gold,
Or, huge, laid slumberous in the noontide beam,
On far sea depths, in many a winding fold,
Sea monsters vast, whose names by man hath ne'er been told.

Once more He said, and from the womb of earth,
Minute and vast, most wond'rously combined,
The beastial tribes, exulting, bounded forth,
Each fully grown and perfect in its kind.
But still there wanted, in the Almighty mind,
Th' extreme of power and wisdom shown in one,
Matter with spirit, soul with body join'd,
A somewhat to complete th' eternal plan&mdash;
Come let us make, he said, and the result was man.

Man, fram'd of dust, but by Jehovah's hand
Compounded, and thy soul a breath divine,
Such as the love of angels to command,
How high and holy was that place of thine.
Thou west of this magnificent design,
That in the bosom of the Triune God
Lay forming from an unbeginning line,&mdash;
The consumation.  Now he pausing stood,
Revised the glorious whole, and all was very good.

He rested and refreshed beheld, well pleased,
His own Eternal Godhead thus displayed;
And now, his vast idea realized,
He ceased from making all that he had made.
And let the day be holiness, he said,
A weekly witness how the world began&mdash;
A bulwark to religion &mdash; reason's aid,
What time creation's dawn she aims to scan,
A blest seventh day's release to labour-laden man.

Or, mediately, they sing, by laws imprest
On nature, how he worketh out his will;
Each element, beneath his high behest,
Awake and active, or inert and still.
And, how for promised good or threatened ill,
The ready means in order ranked they stand&mdash;
The rain, the dew, the air have powers to kill,
Death points the sunbeam, and, if he command,
A breath, a worm, a fly, shall waste the wealthiest land.

Or, if need be, with all his world of waves,
The sea upon the sinful land shall rise,
The solid earth shall gape with open graves
Before Rebellion's fury-flashing eyes.
From its broad base, o'erturn'd the mountain lies,
Deep burying every monument of man,
Or shoots an arch of fire o'er half the skies,
That terror blanch'd through all their signs look wan,
While rueful ruin smokes beneath its awful span.

Or, sweeter, and with holier extacy,
They sing how glorious all his name above
Expands his mercy's vast infinity,
The boundless riches of redeeming love;
The flood of joy which all his creatures prove
In instincts, passions, habits, feelings fine,
When peaceful, each in course, the seasons move,
And, all exultant in their breath divine,
The vales flow out with milk, the hills with oil and wine.

Or, how they joy, in meek humility,
Once more to stand within the house of God,
Where flows the stream of life, out welling free,
And he himself delights to make abode&mdash;
Gracious, from him, worn out in life's rough road,
His hope, it may be, ready to expire,
To lift, insensibly, the galling load,
Rewaken faith, draw out the strong desire,
Till like a furnace glows his soul with heavenly fire.

Then rising all, the minister to heaven,
In suppliant mood, lifts up his hands on high,
Rich with the light six thousand years have given,
The fire of genius brightens in his eye:
But on his brow sits meek humility,
With ardent love and awful reverence join'd,
In sight of Him who, bending from the sky,
Regards the contrite heart with aspect kind,
But spurns, with loathing deep, the self-elated mind.

With him their souls in adoration rise,
Through him their deep contrition they express
For countless follies, grave iniquities,
Abused mercy, and neglected grace.
For churlish discontent and thanklessness
Beneath the joy which every day renews;
For obstinate and heartless pride of face,
Through which th' obedient shoulder they refuse,
Though law, and light, and love have left them no excuse.

But while the power and prevalence of sin,
With tears of genuine sorrow they bemoan,
They think of Him their advocate, within
The highest heaven, a priest upon his throne,
Which by obedience to the death he won,
With power o'er all existences conjoin'd,
Eternal life to give to every one,
Who, in the purpose of th' All-seeing Mind,
For that vocation high was to his care consign'd.

And now, that he would graciously shed down
His Spirit on their souls, they humbly plead,
That so the word from faith to faith made known,
May prove to them the true life giving bread.
That, the Great Shepherd, he would stand and feed
This day in all the majesty of God,
Administering, to all who sow, the seed,
Breathing of grace the fructifying cloud,
And waking warm to blow the south wind soft abroad.

And as he stills the forest rending wind,
Of seas, and all their waves the wild uproar,
So speak conviction to the sinner's mind,
And bid corruption rage and rule no more:
And on the soul, in grief afflicted sore,
Temptation toss'd, in darkness all forlorn,
The healing balm of consolation pour,
While rises bright, his pathway to adorn,
Heaven-breathing Hope, arrayed in all the hues of morn.

Prayer ended &mdash; now the Scripture page is read
And brief expounded to the simple hind,
How, by the serpent's guileful speech betray'd,
Our first grand parents from the truth declined,
By one rash act themselves, yea all their kind,
To sorrow, toil, and death delivering o'er,&mdash;
Hence wide o'er earth diffused the hateful mind,&mdash;
Hence groans the forest track'd with living gore,
And war with baleful breath has blasted every shore.

Hence wrathful ruin sweeps the troubled sky,
Or slumbers in the congregating clouds,
Or in the depths of earth, from every eye
Conceal'd, the fell resolve in silence broods.&mdash;
In cheerless gloom the face of day she shrouds,
Her breath is thunder, or with frost burns frore,
Beneath her feet the trembling earth explodes
With direful crash, prelusive to the hour
When wrapt in flame the world shall sink beneath her power.

The love of God this painful theme relieves,&mdash;
A love which doth all knowledge far transcend,
Which yet the babe in knowledge, who believes,
In some degree is taught to comprehend:
Whence came the Lowly One, the poor man's friend,
And from his lips snatch'd wrath's red cup of gall,
Which drinking, he had labour'd without end,
In direful din shut up stern justice' thrall,
Debar'd the light of hope or soothing mercy's call.

But he, though frowning Death stood interposed,
At one full draught the dregs unshrinking wrung,
While round him fierce, in fiery phalanx closed,
Princedoms and powers, rulers of darkness strong;
Who saw him laid the long lost dead among,
And number'd him with malefactors vile,
Presuming to have marr'd for aye the song,
Through life that soothed the mourner's weary toil,
And even in death's dread hour gave him the victor's smile.

Presumption vain &mdash; although the insatiate tomb
Was closed upon him with the seal of power,
And men of war, the invincibles of Rome,
Set sentinels to make his prison sure.
God's angel, as it came the appointed hour,
Another watcher, clothed in flame, descends,
Rolls back, and sits upon the huge stone door;&mdash;
Blood-cruddling fear each soldier's breath suspends,
While earth's foundations deep the heaving earth-quake rends.

And Jesus, self-reviving, takes again
That life for man he in his love laid down,
Up with him, too, he brings a glorious train,
First fruits to gem his meditorial crown:
And trophies of eternal victory, won
On that dark shore wash'd by oblivion's wave,
Sure pledges that he holds them for his own,
The keys of death and of the dismal grave,
Omnipotent, alike or to condemn or save.

Now, having died once, he dies no more,
But sits a Priest and King upon his throne;
The head of principality and power
Throughout all worlds supreme, th' Anointed One.
Because he made himself man's feeble son,
Heir to his grief, his penury, and pain,
He, by the high decree, and he alone,
With office power is vested, to sustain
Wrath's adamantine bars, and mercy's golden chain.

In faith of this, sublime the Sabbath song
The ancient church raised to the Righteous One,
Which now far lands and distant isles prolong,
And ever shall, till time's last sands are run.
And, when on earth the work of God is done,
And tears, and sighs, with sin have fled away;
The same glad notes shall before the throne,
No voice discordant, and no heart astray,
Still new, and still the same, through glory's endless day.

Stranger to this consolatory theme,
Beware the atheist's hiss, the sceptic's sneer;
Here plain to all, as with a sunbright beam,
A future judgement day is written clear.
Yes, as he went again he shall appear,
With clouds and darkness round about his throne;
His voice shall yet resound in every ear
That lives, or e'er hath liv'd the earth upon,
To him each knee shall bow, him every tongue shall own.

Once, deem'd the meanest of the mean, he stood
At Caiapha's and Herod's partial bar;
Was spit on by a base and brutal crowd,
And set at nought by ruffian men of war.
Nor did that buckling Roman, Pilate, dare,
Though awe-struck with his spotless innocence,
Aught better for his safety to prepare,
Than rods and scourging, on the vile presence,
In sordid minds, by wrong, t' awaken moral sense.

Then he was in the greatness of his strength,
Humiliation's dreary vale within,
Wrath's ample winepress treading out at length,
Beneath the burden of his people's sin.
Now he is come, in majesty, to win
The full reward of all his travail sore,
A new career of glory to begin&mdash;
Glory with God the Father, kept in store
Unseen, yea, unconceived in earth or heaven before.

Now it shines out, that glory all his own,
Ere time his silent course began to run&mdash;
That glory to the world's wise one's unknown,
Th' eternal glory of th' Eternal Son.
Nor comes he glorious as the Son alone,
With that of the Eternal Father seal'd,
But glorious as the Economic One,
By whom, in every age, have been reveal'd
The counsels high of Heaven, and in him all fulfill'd.

Think, thou, his grace who darest to despise,
How thou wilt meet him on this day of ire,
When conscience, with demonaic strength, shall rise
To dash thy soul with accusations dire.
Creation burns immense, one sea of fire,
Worlds &mdash; suns, and stars, and systems are no more.
Where wilt thou fly?  how will thy dreams expire,
Cast out thy boundless folly to deplore,
Where death's dark waters lave despair's still darker shore.

For thee in vain new heavens and earth arise,
The abodes of peace, of love, and holiness;
This found no favour in thy blinded eyes,
And these of course thou never canst possess.
Ah!  yet bethink thee, while, with peaceful voice,
He stands, th' atoning High Priest, full in view;
His precious blood, his sanctifying grace
Profering to all, with admonition due
To faith, repentance, love, and prompt obedience new.

The preacher thus, with that impressive air
Subjects so awfully sublime require,
Adjures his audience all with many a tear,
To 'scape the vengeance of eternal fire.
To rest on God, who is the warm desire
Of those that fear him, faithful to fulfil:
Who oft to rapture tunes the mourner's lyre,
Even when the rain of sorrow, falling chill,
Hath drench'd the flowers of hope, that bloom on Faith's green hill.

The sermon closed &mdash; again in prayer they join,
Prayer not preferr'd for sordid selfish ends,
But, drinking at the fount of love divine,
Wide as the world their soul's warm wish extends.
And sweet the grand prophetic song ascends&mdash;
"Mercy is built for ever firm and sure;"
On God her strong stability depends,
And still her seed, brought forth refined and pure,
Shall, as the sun in heaven, from age to age endure.

Now westward driving far, with prone career,
The red-hair'd sun rolls on his fiery road;
Day, golden hues the green-topp'd mountains wear,
And deeper shades invest the waving wood.
When clos'd the sacred work, they come abroad,
Devoutly rais'd to holy rapture some;
Some pond'ring dark, the fix'd decrees of GOD,
His awful wrath, the Sinner's final doom,
With all the shadowy shapes that frown behind the tomb.

Ah!  Christian, cease!  these dangerous themes forbear,
Or farewell hope!  farewell departed joy!
There, Frenzy wild, a legion in her rear
Of phantoms fell, lies lurking to destroy.
Surrounded once, in vain shalt thou employ
Thy powers, to force her dark entrenchments strong,
No aft can soothe, no argument annoy
Her baleful train, that thick and thicker throng,
Till whelm'd, thy reason falls, in darkness stretch'd along.

Mark, yonder, where the bean-field fragrant blooms,
Diffusing grateful odours all around,
Woful and wan the moping maniac roams,
Within her mazy fetters, mournful, bound.
His looks are ever fixed on the ground,
Despair's dark tear dim glistens in his eye;
Now he stops short, now starts with sudden bound,
While, from his bosom bursts the rending sigh,
And hell and horror still accent his wailing cry.

Upon his faded form and gestures wild,
The lowing heifer stares with wondering gaze;
And o'er him, sweet Devotion's ruin'd child,
Th' unconscious warbler mends his love-taught lays;
The lark, descending in the sunny rays,
Bends down the flowery turf with slender feet,
His spreckled breast, his rising plume displays,
The gently-breathing, balmy, breeze to meet,
And pours his raptur'd strain in warblings wildly sweet.

But what are warbling birds, or flowery fields,
To him whose heart still bleeds, whose spirit grieves &mdash;
Say, what the joy a smiling prospect yields,
When grim Despair the web of terror weaves?
"Sing on," the bruis'd one cries; "your happy lives,
Ye birds, are pure; arise on spotless wing;
Spurn earth, vile earth!  'tis but a place of graves &mdash;
Ah!  why should death your gentle bosoms wring?
'Tis I &mdash; poor wretched I, have forged the fatal sting.

"Thy fires, O vengeance!  in what corner hid?
Thy victim I, thy speedy act implore!
Why hangs thy red bolt, Justice, o'er my head?
Exact thy due, and I shall be no more.
In vain I call!  those skies must ever lower!
This dreadful shade, Remorse, still crush me down:
O Mercy!  Mercy!  is thy season o'er?
Will God for ever, thus in anger frown,
And stalking terrors guard all access to his throne?

"Yes, still to me &mdash; I see the dark decree
Firm as the pillars of th' eternal throne!
O Hope, sweet Hope!  on all thy flowery tree
No blossom blows, to ease my dying groan."
Thus hapless, day by day, his life glides on&mdash;
Not so where Reason aids Religion's reign;
There, though the tempest howl, fair Hope, anon,
Far beaming, brightens Faith's immense domain,
Where free the soul expands, exults, and smiles serene.

From church return'd, our simple cottar see,
His babes around him innocently smile;
His spouse, with looks of kind complacency,
Hastes to present again the frugal meal.
And as they eat, what text was read he'll tell;
What doctrines thence deduc'd, what sins reprov'd,
What motives given to cherish holy zeal,
What views to faith of Him her best Belov'd,
By whom upheld, she stands in fiery storms unmov'd.

To him, their guide, they lend a willing ear,
While he at large instructs them as he can,
The path of truth to tread, their God to fear,
And thus fulfil the great design of man.
Nor sneer ye sages &mdash; though unfit to scan
Your systems jarring, intricate, and wild;
Some previous outlines of Salvation's glory,
How man far, far from happiness, exil'd,
By grace may be restor'd, he yet can teach his child.

Nor can the simplest here be at a loss,
Thanks to our great forefather's pious care,
Who, shunning doctrines crude, and customs gross,
Built up our church compact, a fabric fair;
With formularies, rich, beyond compare,
In all the elements of truth divine,
Especially the Shorter Compend, where,
Concise and neat, in each perspicuous line,
Great thoughts with simplest words felicitously join.

Rang'd in due order, there the little ones&mdash;
A sight which seraphs stoop from heaven to see&mdash; 
Each in its gravest mood, and firmest tone,
The running question answers full and free.
Even he, the infant on his mother's knee,
A lisping lamiter, of feeble frame,
Distinguish'd as his elders, too, must be,
To speak the Spirit's grace, the Saviour's fame,
Although 'tis but by halves he can pronounce the name.

And one whose life seems drawing near the grave,
Darken'd her day, her nights with pain opprest,
She, too, her custom'd place and say must have,
Leaning her head upon a sister's breast.
A psalm, too, she has got as well's the rest,
Though ears do now the want of eyes supply&mdash;
"How truly every humble soul is blest
Who can, by faith, on Jacob's God rely,
Who made and peopl'd earth, the sea and heaven high.

"Who giveth, gracious, to the blind their sight,
And leads them by a way they do not know;
The bowed down doth make to walk upright,
And the pale cheek with roseat health to glow.
In whom compassions, never ceasing, flow,
And mercy reigns an attribute supreme,
Long suffering, to aught like anger slow,
And bounteous, in the trying hour extreme,
From all iniquity his Israel to redeem."

Thus, from the mouth of babes, the song of praise
Ascends to heaven, at eve or dewy morn;
Hence honest honour, with unborrow'd rays,
In humble life the meanest may adorn.
Yes, oft the hind, thus taught, can laugh to scorn
The varnish'd vices of the vulgar great,
And, on the wings of faith and reason, borne
Above the mists that cloud his mean estate,
Turn them to blessings rare the rigours of his fate.

Parental teaching clos'd with family prayer,
Each seeks, for soft repose, the peaceful bed;
The sire except, who, by the evening fair,
To muse along the greenwood side is led.
The setting sun, in robes of crimson red
And purple gorgeous, clothes the glowing west;
While sober eve, in misty mantle clad,
One bright star, lovely, beaming on her breast,
With feet all bathed in dew, comes slowly from the east.

Now clos'd &mdash; the daisy droops its dewy head,&mdash;
Hush'd are the woods, the breathing fields are still,
And soft beneath the meadow's flowery pride,
Creeps gurgling on its way &mdash; the mossy rill.
Sublimely solemn rolls the mingling swell,
At times with many a mournful pause between,
Of streams rude, rushing down the sounding dell,
Re-echo'd wide from distant wilds unseen,
And lambs that softly bleat far o'er the flowery green.

Fast follows on the cloud of night's dark noon,
And bright the fires of heaven begin to blaze;
While o'er the misty mountain's head, the moon
Pours, in a streaming flood, her silver rays.
White on the pool, her radiance, flickering, plays,
Where shadows, faintly glimmering, shadows mar;
And clear, the cottage window, to the gaze
Of solitary wanderer, gleaming far
Up yonder green hill side, appears a glittering star.

Our Poor Man here, in converse with the sky,
Lone, o'er the uplands holds his wandering way;
His bosom swells, he heaves the frequent sigh,
And tears start sudden, ere he well knows why.
'Tis nature stirs him &mdash; verging to decay,
Through all her works, she pours the weary groan;
Even now, by faith, he hails th' eventful day&mdash;
He hears the trump of God &mdash; the great white throne
Is raised &mdash; creation melts &mdash; lo, heaven and earth are gone!

"And thou my soul!"  he cries, "shalt thou survive,
When quench'd in years, these living fires shall fade?
Yes, in immortal vigour thou shalt live,
And soar and sing when every star is fled.
For so hath GOD &mdash; GOD thy Redeemer said:
A higher song than seraph's shall be thine,
Yea, though in mould'ring clay this flesh be laid,
These very lips, with energy divine,
Heaven's high resounding harp in holy hymns shall join.

"To GOD, for ever let thy song ascend,
Though stormy howlings sweep thy rugged path;
Though weeping woe thy straiten'd steps attend,
And sin thy green leaves soil with burning breath;
There yet remains a rest reveal'd to faith,
A rest from sin and all its dire distress;
A Sabbath sweet, beyond the realm of death,
Bright with the beams of God's all-gracious face,
The gift of sovereign love, the rich reward of grace. "

Sooth'd with this sweet idea, he retires,
His brow serene with calm contentment's smile,
To rest, till ruddy morning's glowing fires
Again awake him to his weekly toil.
FOUNTAIN OF GOOD!  grant me to keep, the while
My span extends, thy Sabbaths thus alway;
My reason clear, my spirit free from guile:
And of thy light still shed a purer ray,
Till glory's sun arise in bright refulgent day.
