Fair is thy seat, Oh Learning!  rear'd sublime
On base of adamant; thy porches wide,
Awful, yet lovely, mock the rage of Time.
Within a heav'nly pair by turns preside;
Judgment and Genius, cherubs eagle-eyed.
Ardent the one, like the bright God elate
O'er Python slain, in youth and beauty's pride:
The other glory-clad in elder state,
Like the mild form of Jove pronouncing joyful fate.

There dwell the sons of wit-exalted mirth,
That still can smile in terror's threat'ning hour;
There meek Philosophy, not scorning earth,
But smit with awe of Nature's wond'rous pow'r,
Intent on truth, yet caring not to tow'r
The dazzling object of an envying herd;
Candour, whose brow was never seen to low'r
At Folly's unpremeditated word,
But for the most malign shew'd grief, as most absurd.

Pure Friendship there has found a firm abode.
Nor is young Love repell'd, whose witching look
Revives the soul oppress'd with anxious load:
But here he brings no shaft with barbed hook,
Grief-poison'd, fearful of the thrice-read book.
Alas!  for those whoever err'd aside
From paths of peace and love, who e'er forsook
The gate of harmony, aye open'd wide,
To join the wrangling throng that bow to pedant pride.

I mourn to tell how by the sacred seat,
Unholy hands a strange pagoda rear'd;
And o'er the gate inscrib'd, with wily cheat,
"Of Learning here behold the dome rever'd"
In many tongues this lying line appear'd:
And like to Learning's porch, with fraudful art
The massy vestibule was wrought, but smear'd
With gaudy lacquer over ev'ry part,
Disgusting Taste refin'd, but gladd'ning Folly's heart.

So strolling actors irritate a king,
With tinsel scraps, in quaint confusion tied,
Glass beads and women's glitt'ring toys they fling
O'er head and neck, to shew a bright outside
To clowns, with eyes and mouths y-gaping wide.
Within the porch, a sullen porter sat,
Dulness y-clept, sour visag'd and blear-ey'd:
He never dofft his puritanic hat,
Nor e'er was known to give to question answer pat.

In liquid opium oft his hand he dipt;
And, as each erring passenger went by,
Close to his side the leering losel slipt,
And sprinkled the dull drops in either eye.
Truth's holy form thenceforth could none espy,
But fuming Vanity inflam'd the soul:
Her symptoms well may sober sight descry,
The brows are knit, the eyeballs wildly roll,
Contempt each feature twists, and corrugates the whole.

All hurry forward to the central Hall,
A dome of fair proportion, broad and long,
But geometric lines deform the wall,
To tell how strict the art, the work how strong.
Each varied side, attracts a buzzing throng.
Here all the Grecian styles the gazer sees;
Each part how right!  the jumbled whole how wrong!
There Gothic shafts, and points, and monsters please.
This side Moriscoes wrought, and that more quaint Chinese.

High on a gorgeous throne, thick overlaid
With tinsel bright, which the misjudging crew
Deem genuine gold, in tinsel robe array'd,
Sits Pedantry, a hag of sallow hue,
Sunk-ey'd and beetle-brow'd, and warp'd askew;
Yet lab'ring to be thought of portly mien,
Biting her lips, with oozing venom blue.
But such the opiate's magic pow'r, I ween,
Thousands before her bow, and hail her Beauty's Queen.

And round about the throne a daemon throng,
Like buzzing flies, wheel wide in airy dance:
Pride, like a winged toad, is borne along,
With viper-formed Jealousy, whose glance
In search of prey seems ever turn'd askance.
There, like a parrot, Affectation flits;
Rage, like a hippogriffe, appears to prance:
Hypocrisy, cameleon-like, by fits
Changes her colour oft, which way her int'rest sits.

Peace dwells not here, eternal discord reigns,
A war of dissonant tongues and voices proud,
Explosions dire of overcharged brains.
Like that confusion which amaz'd the crowd
At Babel, clamb'ring tow'rd the soaring cloud,
(Not weening simple vap'ry fogs to find,)
Each in a diff'rent language bellows loud,
And seems to scorn his neighbour's weaker mind,
To other language more, or other arts inclin'd.

Their haughty sov'reign all approach with fear,
Save one, an envoy imp, hight Defamation,
A bat-wing'd swarthy ape, that feeds her ear
Aye with fresh news from Learning's happy nation:
News foully marr'd, I ween, in such narration,
Of new-found arts to save mankind from harms,
Of nature's hidden laws new explication&mdash;
Her looks of wrath betray her soul's alarms,
Like royal Bess when told of Scottish Mary's charms.

Then from unholy pouch the daemon draws
Such scroll as Satan, at St. Martin's pray'r,
Be-scribbled o'er with female gibes and saws.
Full many a quibbling sland'rous tale is there,
Misconstr'ng characters and writings fair.
Such meek-ey'd Candour never could endure.
These bawl'd aloud excite the vulgar stare.
Behold they cry, "of Taste a standard sure,"
Emblazon'd on the front, "Scandal of Literature."
