O Thou, that aye thro' ev'ry swelling vein,
Roll'st the warm tides of energy along,
That prompt the poet to the deathless strain,
And urge thy sons the bloody ranks among
To dare the deeds, that live in latest song,
Scotland!  thy influence to my lay impart,
That while my humble strings the notes prolong,
Perchance their sounds may make one tear to start,
Awake some slumb'ring thought, or melt some gen'rous heart.

Well have thy Poets strung the harp to war,
And tun'd the lyre to pleasure and to glee;
Hark!  the wild-mingling strains are borne afar,
And meet the soul, like some strange melody
That rises when in sleep the senses lie.
Well have thy Warriors fought &mdash; from Egypt's height
Behold th' Invincible in terror fly&mdash;
Low lie the brave expiring in the fight,
And the dim Pyramid fades from the swimming sight.

Still as around the fire the rustics throng,
When wint'ry storms thick, desolate the grove,
As rings the harp by Minstrel Henry strung,
To notes that truth and fiction rudely wove,
Oh!  may their souls in thrilling transports move,
And pause to list the wonders of the strain;
How oft on war's red field, The WALLACE strove.
And strode in terror o'er the heaps of slain,
Till death, with night came down, o'ershadowing the plain.

Or, if his native race to freedom dear,
Cross to Columbia's shore the howling wave,
Where sweeps the torrent thro' Savannahs drear,
And thund'ring cataracts eternal rave:
&mdash;Their heart still faithful, and their arm still brave&mdash;
In memory may they trace the rolls of time,
To muse the deeds that first keen rapture gave,
And chaunt the simple, legendary rhyme,
By wild Ontario's lakes, or India's sunny clime.&mdash;

&mdash;Oft have my footsteps at the fall of Ev'n,
Explor'd the woodland brook, and winding dell,
When dubious light hung o'er the face of heav'n,
And all was peace around &mdash; the solemn swell
Of waving woods, and the far-distant bell,
Came pensive to my soul with pauses deep,
That seem'd in fancy's ear the Hero's knell;
Howling along the lengthening echoes sweep,
While sad I press'd the bank, where WALLACE once might sleep.

&mdash;Still to the patriot breast his haunts are dear,
By desert stream, with birch and alder crown'd,
Blending in shade &mdash; some shaggy cavern near
Was all the Warrior's home &mdash; Ne'er did the sound
Of Edward's train disturb the woods profound:
Tho' slavery bound his country, he was free
To range thro' nature's charms the vales around;
The birds that flutter'd joyful on the tree,
Sung sweet, and carol'd loud, the praise of Liberty.

Let Irvine tell how by her lovely side,
The youth would roam, and snare the sportive fry,
Or, gaze in silence on the passing tide,
That roll'd like youth, its quiet current by;
How swift!  how unperceiv'd!  a rising sigh
Would swell unconsciously &mdash; the wood and stream
Were silent all, no wand'ring footstep nigh;&mdash;
And hopes and wishes rise, and darkly seem,
Like the strange thoughts that float in some forgotten dream.&mdash;

And still he nurs'd his hopes &mdash; Hail!  Nature, hail!
With all thy woods and rivers, winding-lone,
That wander down and skirt the hermit vale,
With oak high-crown'd, and yellow leaflets strown;
'Tis there the mind can feel a deeper tone,
And muse on nobler deeds &mdash; the stream that brawls
Unheeded joins the melancholy moan
Of groves &mdash; no sound the distant world recals,
None heard but dew that weeps, none but the leaf that falls.

The Star of Eve was bright &mdash; down the lone dell
With rocks up-pil'd, and mould'ring turrets crown'd,
Many a clear stream and mountain-torrent fell,
And sparkled to the gloomy woods around.&mdash;
A calm, unwonted, fill'd the forest-bound&mdash;
When, lo!  a voice the slumb'ring silence broke;
And, as the strangely-sad, prophetic sound
Rose in the woods &mdash; each hoary giant oak
Shook hollow in the wind! &mdash; And thus the Genius spoke&mdash;

"Rise, Sun of Valour!  on thy native land,
As bursts the day-spring on the pilgrim's way;
For, lowly sunk beneath a wasting hand,
Her proud tow'rs moulder, and her chiefs decay&mdash;
Her wealth, her palaces the tyrant's prey&mdash;
While, thick as leaves on Winter's sweeping blast,
Edward pours far around his proud array:
Lo!  as along yon plain the warrior past,
Ruin rais'd high his voice, and howl'd amid the waste!"

Silence ensu'd &mdash; the music dy'd away&mdash;
Deep in the covert of the forest-bound
The infant WALLACE with his mother lay,
Where hung the oak's broad arms in gloom profound.
The mother saw no vision &mdash; heard no sound&mdash;
For Sleep her senses with his touch beguil'd;
But, ever as the music flow'd around,
His spirit steep'd in ecstasy, the child
Look'd on the angel-form, enchanted look'd, and smil'd.

Deep flow'd the sounds into the infant's mind,
And ever on his early thoughts impress
The nameless charm, the nameless chains that bind
Heroic actions to the swelling breast.&mdash;
And ever, when with childish sports opprest,
His wayward footstep sought the peaceful shade,
Before his sight flam'd high the gleaming crest,
And plumed helms in warlike show display'd,
That, glancing to the sun, in airy substance fade.

When faint he felt the sultry summer hour,
The day-star flaming in the noontide sky,
Loit'ring, he wander'd to his shadowy bow'r,
Where, brawling, flow'd the shelvy streamlet by.
There, lull'd in slumbers, would the infant lie,
And, deep in solitary trances, seem
To roam thro' armed courts, and castles high;&mdash;
So bright in visionary pomp they gleam,
That, when he woke, he thought his waking was a dream.

Then would he wander by the river's side,
Where many a rock his shade gigantic flung,
In sullen grandeur o'er the gloomy tide,
And deeply to his echoing footsteps rung:
Enraptur'd, while he rov'd these scenes among,
Fancy's wild visions peopled ev'ry glade
With armed knights; and ev'ry bird that sung,
The minstrel's warlike modulations made;
And ev'ry tow'ring rock its banner'd pomp display'd.

To him the mystic shapes that float at Eve,
Dim and remote on the sun's dying beam,
When fairy films the swimming eye deceive,
And gloaming trembles on the haunted stream,
Unfolded all their forms in wavering gleam;
Till doubt and wonder fill his throbbing breast,
Whether the pageant were an airy dream
That bathes its pinions in the rosy west,
When peace descends on earth, and mortals sink to rest.

Or if to him aerial sprites reveal'd
The forms unseen of human ken that fly,
When music murmurs in the wood and field,
And soothes to slumbers with its lullaby,
And pictures of another world sail by
And charm with glamoury &mdash; Lo!  far away
To the dim confine of the northern sky
They sail, ere from the ocean bursts the day,
And leave th' astonish'd wight in wonder and dismay.&mdash;

Ah!  sure exists a race from mortal pains
And anguish free, who wing'd on beams of light,
Fly when bright Hesper rides the heav'nly plains,
And sport on this green earth, tho' human sight
Discern no wings that flutter glancing bright
To the soft-burning stars &mdash; for oft we hear
Strange sounds that seem to hail the shadowy night,
More than the voice of waters murmuring near,
More than the hum of life, that meets the human ear.

&mdash;Oft in deep solitude he lov'd to roam,
Embow'r'd in pendent foliage to survey
(Far from the charms and softer joys of home)
A Gothic mansion venerably grey&mdash;
The faint memorial of a better day!
Its form majestic, and its tow'rs to view&mdash;
But now, in rooms of state, once richly gay,
Round clust'ring columns hung, the ivy grew;
And mould'ring fragments huge, the desert halls bestrew.

Long would he linger by the ruin hoar,
Gaze on its form with never-wearying sight;
Then, sadly muse upon the times of yore,
Its solemn shows, its tournaments so bright;
The captive lady, and the Red-cross Knight!
But soon the tear of bitter thought would flow:
The torch of Edward flaming from the height
Fell on those tow'rs &mdash; the ruins fiercely glow,&mdash;
Their dying gleam illumes the dark deep glen below.

When op'ning youth bright sparkled in his eye,
Was nought so sweet as warlike song to hear;
Tho' oft it prompted the unconscious sigh,
And dash'd his glist'ning eye with sorrow's tear,
Yet would he drink the strain with wond'ring ear.
He lov'd the pain; he lov'd the wild amaze;
Nor ever other strains were half so dear;
No other song such strange delights could raise,
That swelling thro' the breast, with burning transports blaze.

His mother sung how kings and warriors, led
All by the love of some high, peerless dame,
At mighty jousts, in doubtful combat bled,
To win the smile of her who caus'd their flame,
And lowly to her proud-built castle came.
But she, ah!  reckless of their ardent love,
Bade them thro' distant realms resound their fame,
And long, long years in exil'd plight to rove,
Their passions constant faith, and knighthood's boast to prove.

Or, she would melt his soul at some sad tale
Of a fair maid, in deepest dungeon bound,
Who, ceaseless pour'd her melancholy wail,
While gloomy aisles roll'd back the fearful sound.
&mdash;Oh!  low her lover lies!  with many a wound
Deep gash'd, by sacred knighthood's foullest stain,
Whose dastard slaves the warrior-chief surround,
And leave him bleeding on the lonely plain,
Ah!  ne'er perhaps to meet his lady's smile again.

The flitting fire of indignation dy'd
His youthful cheek &mdash; but soon it pass'd away,
And rapture's burning tears unbidden glide,
For, lo!  Hope's lifted torch shines bright and gay;
The chief is heal'd!  &mdash; and soon his bands display
Their sounding shields, where high the frowning tow'r
Throws its black shadow o'er their long array&mdash;
In vain its banners wave, its turrets low'r;
It falls! &mdash; the lovers meet &mdash; joy gilds their blissful hour!

Or, she would sing how Paladins and Kings
Cross'd the broad ocean to the Holy Land&mdash;
Hark!  Libanus amid his cedars rings!
And, proudly stretch'd by Gaza's winding strand,
The Sarazin's tall gorgeous tents expand.
But, lo!  where golden crescents gleam'd before,
The red-cross waves; the ring, th' enchanted wand
Avail not; Salem's tow'rs, and Gilead's shore,
Where many a battle rag'd, run red with Pagan gore!

To gallant wand'ring knight she turns the note,
Who for emprise has bound himself to ride
Thro' many hideous lands to realm remote,
Where old Euphrates rolls along his tide;
And tow'rs and temples glitter on his side:
Onward he hies on his advent'rous way,
Nor heeds where forests wave their branches wide
And from their gloomy haunts debar the day,
Where fiery serpents hiss, and tygers howl for prey.

Onward the hero hies, the lance in rest,
And grasping in his right the trusty brand;
And lo!  as light fades waning in the west,
From the dark tower is stretch'd a lily hand,
And lily neck &mdash; the waving arms expand
And ask relief &mdash; the talisman is vain&mdash;
The knight his bugle sounds till all the land
Trembles as from the hills rebounds the strain;
He leads the damsel forth and bursts the magic chain.

Onward he hies to where rich Bagdad's shrine,
Barbaric gold and gems and pearl inlay,
Or where Bassora's wond'rous columns shine,
That when the languid eye-ball loathes the day
Diffuse with fresh'ning gleam an em'rald ray,
Till verdure seem to cloathe the length'ning street&mdash;
Then back the traveller wends his homeward way,
And ev'ry vow perform'd, with greetings meet,
His costly gifts prefers at his lov'd mistress' feet.&mdash;

And now of Charlemagne's proud peers she sings,
Their courage, truth, and loyalty renown'd,
And Arthur and the courtly knights and kings
Who throng'd at Caerleon his table round;
Their pomp, their tournaments, and merry sound
Of minstrels, harping strains of antique lore,
Of Launcelot's valour &mdash; of the fairy ground,
That lies enchanted on th' Armoric shore,
Of Avalon's blest isle, and Snowdon's summits hoar.

Next the keen Archer and his gallant train,
Her accents to his raptur'd vision bring,
Who in the forest held their jovial reign&mdash;
&mdash;Hear Robin to his merry comrades sing&mdash;
"O sweet it is in the fair months of spring,
Under the boughs of good greenwood, to hear
The little birds with their sweet jargoning
Hailing the buds fresh-opening to the year,
And mark across the lea bound quick the tim'rous deer."

But now she sings &mdash; (ah!  wherefore flow these tears?
Why starts the youthful hero at the song?)
How Edward high th' insulting banner rears,
And pours his host, innumerably strong,
Scotland's green hills, and flow'ry vales along.&mdash;
Ne'er shall their blooming beauties smile again
Till some bold chief arise her sons among,
Whose arm shall blast the proud usurper's reign,
And strew, with deep dy'd blade, his phalanx on the plain.

"And thou, my Son!" &mdash; but here burst forth her wo&mdash;
He heard while fury kindl'd in his mind;
Then, straight, indignant to the hall would go,
Where hollow rung to ev'ry passing wind
His fathers' shield; and on his arm would bind
The clanging orb, of old in fight renown'd;
For high, advent'rous deeds he seem'd design'd;&mdash;
Startling with joy, he heard its welcome sound;
And dealt, in high disdain, the visionary wound.

And while he mus'd, in contemplation tranc'd,
On all the fleeting forms of Chivalry,
On all its blazon'd pomp, its splendour glanc'd,
The hopes of triumph lighten'd in his eye.
He wish'd, and wish'd, yet wish'd he knew not why;
Some nameless feelings in his bosom move;
And in his wayward fancies would he sigh,
In bold emprise his hardihood to prove,
To rescue the oppress'd, and win his country's love.

Yet would some milder thoughts his youth engage,
And he would wish to climb the green hill-side,
To bound along the vale, a little page,
To serve some lady fair his only pride;
Her snow-white palfrey's steps with care to guide,
The dun recesses of the wood to trace,
To seek her courteous knight, whate'er betide,
And bring him joyous to the trysting-place&mdash;
Enough for this, one smile of her angelic face!

And yet to see resign'd her heav'n of charms
To aught on earth &mdash; himself a slave the while,
And all to bless another's favour'd arms,
&mdash;Ah!  from the hateful trance his thoughts recoil,
Himself the lover now, he woos her smile,
And soft she smiles; in bow'rs by fancy drest
Reclin'd, what dreams their souls of earth beguile:
Her cheek that burns on his! &mdash; her swelling breast!
The burning tears of joy! &mdash; Oh!  more than mortal blest!

But, oh!  how soon each gentler vision fled,
When Edward, Edward!  flash'd upon his soul,
The shout of war &mdash; the beacon blazing red,
The voice of wo, and the long heavy toll
For warriors fall'n in vain &mdash; Shall aught controul
His fancied might?  high flames th' unconquer'd sword!
Then back the waves of ruin fiercely roll
In desolating swell on Albion pour'd,
And knights and nobles mourn, in loud lament, their lord!

&mdash;Oft, when the moon pale-glimmering thro' the sky,
Pour'd on the slumb'ring earth her mellow light,
And bath'd both castle hoar, and mountain high,
In her full radiance, trembling, soft, and bright,
Fair-wand'ring thro' the silent world of night,
The scene a solitary joy impress'd,
And steep'd his throbbing heart in still delight;
While forms of ancient days his spirit bless'd,
Lull'd on some heathy slope to visionary rest.

How calm he sleeps! &mdash; his eyes in mildness close&mdash;
Soon shall those eyes with wasting terrors shine,
Flash their disast'rous lightning on his foes,
And wither, with a look, the marshall'd line.&mdash;
The sapling bough, high-favour'd youth, resign!
And seize the glitt'ring ensigns of command!
The serried mail, the helmet now be thine,
To beam salvation o'er thy native land!
The sword, the shield, the spear, grasp in thy saviour-hand!

Yet lov'd he nature in her wildest mood,
Her clifted rocks, magnificently high,
Her mountains, awful, vast, sublime, and rude,
Lifting their giant crests amid the sky;
Interminable glens that mock the eye;
More than the gentler beauties of the dale,
More than the flocks that on the greensward lie,
The shepherd piping in his peaceful vale,
The cot half-hid in trees wav'd by the noiseless gale.

Lo!  where, reclin'd beneath the vaulted steep,
Lonely he lies, and marks with wistful gaze,
The broad red sun descend into the deep,
And shed around his fiery flood of rays,
Till dy'd in blood, the paths of ether blaze;
And silently the breaking surges lave
The slumb'ring shore; and faint the last beam plays
On the still bosom of the dark'ning wave;
And awful night descends, deep, silent as the grave.

And hark!  the storm! &mdash; loudly the wild winds blow,
And swift descending on the troubl'd main,
Lash the vex'd billows to a plain of snow&mdash;
Rolls the long thunder; and the whelming rain
Sweeps desolating o'er the blasted plain.
Yet, unappal'd, he hears the dismal roar
Of warring worlds; the tempest's voice in vain
Shakes with convulsive peal the sounding shore&mdash;
He sits beneath the cliff, o'er-arching, huge, and hoar.

How smil'd the youth to hear the high winds rave
The wide-resounding antique woods along!
When ev'ry winding dell and savage cave
Bore the strange-mingling notes the vales among!
And oaks loud to the mountain-tempest sung,
And strew'd their boughs gigantic on the ground,
While to the gale the wizard-cavern flung
Its long, long howl; and ev'ry rock around
And echoing glens return the solemn dreary sound.

PART II.
It chanc'd, as forth he rov'd, one balmy Ev'n,
The yellow moon-beam glitter'd on the rill,
And shed its radiance o'er the darken'd heav'n,
Bathing in streams of light the distant hill:
The river murmur'd, and the grove was still:
His heart slept tranquil mid its calm delight
When, lo!  soft strains the winding valley fill,
Stealing faint, mellow, on the slumb'ring night&mdash;
He gaz'd, and gaz'd, no form met his enquiring sight.

He gaz'd, and soon the music rose again;
Now, gently sweet it flows &mdash; now, wildly strong
Breathes forth in swelling tide its varying strain,
And sweeps in ling'ring tones the stream along,
Or echoes loud the sleeping woods among.&mdash;
Lonely he stood, the mould'ring castle near;
Faint on his mind mysterious bodings throng,
Impressing thoughts, unutterable, drear&mdash;
When lo!  these solemn sounds came pensive to his ear.

"Ye shadowy towers!  magnificently pil'd
O'er the steep mountain of my native vale!
In whose long halls I carol'd when a child
Free as the light wings of the joyous gale.
Now bow'd with wo, I wander here to wail
Your solitary gloom &mdash; to my dull sight
No pleasure comes &mdash; no sorrows now avail,
And tears but mark the trace of past delight,
For Scotland's bloody sun has set in lasting night."

Forth to the  wood impatient WALLACE sprung&mdash;
Beneath an oak's outstretching arms he stood,
While dying on the gale the wild harp rung,
And sooth'd the dreary silence of the wood:
O'er-arching cliffs with savage grandeur rude,
With sadder gloom o'erspread the dismal scene:
Beneath a spreading tree, in mournful mood,
The Minstrel sat, and thro' the forest green
The wind blew loud and sad, each lengthen'd pause between.

His harp now ceas'd to sound &mdash; his aged eye
Was dimly fix'd upon the falling pile,
That glimmer'd pale beneath the moonlight sky&mdash;
Sometimes a tear would flow, sometimes a smile
Would faintly play, his sadness to beguile.
For, tho' his eye look'd stedfast on the tower,
His heart, with rapture wildly mov'd the while,
Throb'd inwardly, for Mem'ry's living power
With ancient feeling fraught, smil'd peaceful on his hour.

Then suddenly he sung his own sad tale,
And wept the joys his better day had seen
While flow'd the harp's deep tones along the vale,
And far around, with ever-varying sheen,
Steeping in silver light the forest green,
The wan moon shone &mdash; and as the trembling wire,
The woody cliff and sounding flood between,
Breath'd the loud sorrows of the aged sire,
The youth, to transport rous'd, glow'd with a kindred fire.

"My years are past &mdash; a momentary dream!&mdash;
Soon shall this frame return to parent clay&mdash;
Amid the rising sons of youth I seem
Like the brown leaf that lingers on the spray,
Doom'd desolately to a long decay,
While green around the buds of spring appear.
Shall the dim eye, the tresses thin and grey
Revive and live in any future year,
Or shall a dead son e'er my joyless bosom cheer?

"Yet shall I ne'er forget my early day,
The only solace that this bosom knows,
(When all the springs of life and thought decay;
And cold misfortune's blast around me blows,
Scatt'ring my locks, white as the wint'ry snows&mdash;)
Nor shall I e'er forget my blooming boy,
Bright in the morn of manhood he arose,
But ere his noon, o'erwhelming storms destroy
'My beautiful!  my brave!'  my hope!  my only joy!

"'Exulting forth he went to stain his spear'&mdash;
On Carron's banks he met the Southron foe&mdash;
My son!  thou see'st not that thy fate is near!
&mdash;Oh!  archer, bend not thus thy deadly bow!
The arrow flew; and sunk my hero low;
Alas!  I was not there my son to save:
They brought him to his father sad and slow;
O'er my lone towers death's sable banners wave:
My weeping spouse went down in sorrow to the grave.

"The foe came on &mdash; swift-rolling from afar&mdash;
And on the cliff his haughty standard hung;
While in the vale the giant voice of war
Redoubling bellow'd the high woods among:
The shout wide echo'd, and the mountain rung;
To me it thunder'd courage, not dismay;
My locks were hoary, but my arm was young;
I lov'd my native vale, its castle grey,
And hop'd it yet might see a future better day.

"&mdash; Vain hopes!  I live &mdash; the last of all my race&mdash;
Oft I delight these well-known haunts to view,
The tower, the stream, the dell, the wood to trace,
And, deep in melancholy mood, pursue
My onward path, sad mem'ry to renew
Its forms so sweet!  oh!  never to return!&mdash;
But now, ye joys of life!  a long adieu!
No hopes that soothe, no woes that inly burn,
Can wake from fast repose the tenant of the urn.

"And thou, my harp!  a long and last farewell!
Ne'er shall thy soft strain soothe my troubl'd ear;
Ne'er thy sweet tones in dying murmurs dwell,
The rankling wounds of deepest wo to cheer;
Nor shall thy warbling, solemn-sounding, e'er
Awake the fleet stags from their lonely bound,
But, mould'ring sad, my grassy mansion near,
Thy broken strings shall strew th' unconscious ground,
Silent and cold, as he who wak'd their tuneful sound."

The youthful hero heard where sad he stood&mdash;
While thoughts of deep revenge his bosom thrill,
Then wander'd pensive thro' the lonely wood,
Where an old ruin nodded on the hill&mdash;
The sounds of life were ceas'd, and midnight still
On the deep woods a holy calm impress;
Faint dying murmurs the wide valley fill,
And the pale moon, soft harbinger of rest,
Shone clear amid her stars &mdash; all nature round was blest.

While pensively he stood, the sullen brook
Came sudden down, and loud his waters flow,
The wood grew gloomy and the castle shook,
&mdash;A distant voice was heard like one in wo,
And a tall form stood by, around whose brow,
Dreary as winter's darkness hung a shroud,
A ghastly paleness wrapt his face below,
'Mid the deep night he rais'd his voice aloud,
Like thunder when in storms, it rolls from cloud to cloud.

(From Ercildoun's lone walls the prophet came,
&mdash;A milk-white deer stood lovely by his side,
&mdash;Oh!  long shall Scotland sound with Rymour's name,
For in an unknown cave the Seer shall bide,
Till thro' the realm gaunt kings and chiefs shall ride,
Wading thro' floods of carnage, bridle-deep:
The cries of terror and the wailing wide,
Shall rouse the prophet from his tranced sleep;
His harp shall ring with wo, and all the land shall weep.)

"Well do I know thee!  and the wasting fire
That bursts from slumber in thy youthful eye,
At the keen sorrows of the aged sire,
Proclaims thee WALLACE, wight of Ellerslie,
The promis'd boon of ancient prophecy&mdash;
And lo!  tho' darkness broods along the glade,
I see thy mingling actions floating by,
Now bright their shadowy forms, and now they fade,
The northern clime they seek, and melt in endless shade.

"Lo!  where along his dale impetuous Clyde,
O'er rocks loud-dashing rolls his angry flood,
'Mid glens and arching woods upon his side
Full many a year the Celtic towers have stood&mdash;
There glancing thro' the op'nings of the wood
Thy spearmen meet the Southron &mdash; to the skies
The sound of war ascends, the English blood
Dyes the green leaves &mdash; where Lanark's turrets rise,
Again in ancient pomp, the Scottish banner dies.

"And where with crest high-tow'ring to the north,
In giant strength Strevlina proudly rears
Her gloomy walls, that shade the circling Forth,
&mdash;She stands, the memory of former years&mdash;
Dim is the watchman on her top &mdash; he hears
The sound of armies rushing to and fro
With shrieks of death &mdash; he marks the light of spears,
Dance rapid in the stream that winds below,
And hears the frequent shaft whizz from the English bow.

"Twangs the loud string as Cressingham his band,
O'er the frail plank in gallant splendor leads,
To where his foemen on the adverse strand
Erect and firm appear &mdash; he little heeds
The yielding arch &mdash; it bends &mdash; the flouncing steeds
Plunge in the waves, the warrior sinks amain,
Or to the hostile shore escap'd he bleeds:
Down roll the gorgeous trophies of the slain,
And plumes and banners float, and gild the wat'ry plain.

"From the dark north I see thy footsteps bend,
With many a faulchion girt and many a spear,
And from their grim retreats the Barons wend,
And swell thy strong array &mdash; But ah!  I fear
The Comyn's treacherous soul  &mdash; The Scottish tear
Shall oft on Falkirk fall &mdash; In terror fly
Thou wolf of Badenoch, the tim'rous deer
Shall wander where thy castles rear'd on high,
Look from their eagle height, and tow'r amid the sky.

"Hence to thy hills of storm!  thy dismal glen
That shuts its barren bosom from the spring
Gladd'ner of earth; far from the haunts of men
Be thy accurs'd abode &mdash; ne'er shall the string
Of bard resound to thee &mdash; I hear him sing
How 'mid his gallant spearmen Stuart fell;
And now the sacred accents louder ring,
To Graham they raise their melancholy swell,
Who lies beneath the shield, he rear'd in fight so well.

"Is there a form that like a shade of night,
Stalks mailed where the streams of Carron roar,
And weeps the Graham who perish'd in the fight?
&mdash;I hear thee WALLACE on that lonely shore,
And sad around thy gallant bands deplore
Their brother in the fight &mdash; But coming gloom
Involves the future deed so bright before,
Save where the torches dismal fires illume,
A tower and glimm'ring ax, and point a midnight tomb.

"I see thy heart's unconquerable rage:
The fire of valour in thy bosom glows&mdash;
Thine arm shall soon avenge the MAN of AGE!
His eyes in balmy peace shall yet repose!
For, lo!  uprear'd above th' unfeeling foes,
The fires of vengeance and destruction glare.
The Thistle tow'rs above the haughty Rose;
And in the vault of heav'n, serenely fair,
The Lion's fiery mane floats in the ambient air.

"The time shall come; and Freedom's touch restore
To injur'd Scotland's arm the sword of might;
The dawn of peace rise on her darkling shore,
And chase the fiends of peril and affright,
Swift as the sun-beam rushing from his height&mdash;
And loud the song of Victory shall rise
To hail her warrior-train; the banner bright
Waving all-glorious in proud triumph flies;
Perpetual smile her fields, perpetual smile her skies!

"Go!  bind the buckler on thy vengeful arm!
And grasp the flick'ring brand!  Lo!  transport flows
Thro' every Scottish breast, and pale alarm
Darts thro' the legions of the Southron foes;
Around the fields the dazzling armour throws
A trembling gleam &mdash; then lift thy guardian shield,
And tip the wide green plain with crimson glows,
O'er their stern host th' unsated faulchion wield!
Go forth!  God be thy guide thro' Glory's arduous field!"
