CANTO II.
ARGUMENT.
By shows of seeming pleasure led,
The wat'ry maidens stray,
Forsake the flower-enamell'd mead
To mix in airy fray.

But why repine?  if Youth's luxuriant tide
Begins to ebb, yet calmer days succeed;
What tho' my blossoms vail their vernal pride,
Yet summer brings along the timely meed
Of golden fruit, and now the gen'rous seed
That fill'd the fost'ring glebe in early spring
Begin apace the milky stem to breed,
And o'er the wavy tilth, on wanton wing,
Float the redundant gales, and round their fragrance fling.

Tho' Comus flees, with all his sportive glee,
Yet Study boasts her sober charms instead;
Yet sports the Muse beneath the hawthorn tree,
That crowns with solemn shade the dewy head
Of yonder hill, where oft, by SPENSER led,
I meet the gentle breeze at sultry noon;
Or when the sun has reach'd his western bed,
I wander slow the woodland vale adown,
And, twinkling thro' the copse, salute the rising moon.

And oft, at early dawn, the HEBREW swain
Rouses to serious task, with potent call,
To trace from age to age the spreading stain,
From common sire descending over all.
The HAND divine that broke the mighty fall,
And from the foe reclaim'd the ransom'd spoil,
Deep cause of sorrow thro' the STYGIAN hall,
When the dark monarch saw his deadly guile
On his rebellious head with double rage recoil.

At times, the sabbath morn returning bright,
Invites her decent vot'ries far and near,
And rang'd in seemly pews, (a solemn sight)
The silent audience lend an heedful car,
Where the pure gospel page explains the seer,
And to the prophet's lore the apostle lends
Reflected light, till from her radiant sphere,
In sunny robe celestial Truth descends,
And with the hallow'd strain her voice harmonious blends.

Thus gently rolls the varied week along;
The solemn sad commixt with sprightly gay,
And oft the deep delight of ancient song
In rapture sends the gliding hours away;
And oft the Muse, with many a faint essay,
Flutt'ring her pinions vain, attempts to soar.
Ah, may no critic mark her idle play,
Nor envious hand derange her childish store,
Nor proud declaimer scorn her unsubstantial lore!

And oft the parish clerk, a rev'rend guide,
Directs with kindly care my younger skill,
To deck my garden trim with decent pride,
And how 'tis meet a scanty glebe to till,
Along the thirsty mould he leads the rill,
With birchen fork he props the bending pea;
A vet'ran unsubdu'd, of stubborn will,
Right seldom known to bend an humble knee,
Except on SUNDAY morn, to say AMEN with me.

Long the disastrous life of arms he led,
Expert in all the deadly trade of war;
In many a wolf-contested field he bled,
From Belgic Fontenoy to Niagar,
And where the swarthy Indian sees afar
Old Europe's active sons, a spoiler train
By Ganges flood; beneath the sultry star
Claim the rich soil, and arrogate the main,
Then sinks ignobly down, and hugs the servile chain.

Unhappy life!  from hence the soldier learns
Habitual to renew his wasted powers
With CIRCE'S charmed cup, and thoughtless earns
Untimely eld, that o'er his blooming hours
Hangs immature, and all the man devours,
And the fair fruitage in the germ destroys,
While dark'ning still before, the prospect lours,
And blights autumnal wither all his joys;
Yet still the charmed bowl his slumb'ring sense decoys.

This hangs portentous o'er the rev'rend sire,
An hovering fog that dims his closing day;
Else, smiling, calm, his ev'ning might retire,
And ebbing life, without a pang, away
Gently might steal.  But now, in foul array
Disgraceful ills the lamp of life invade,
The HYDROPS still athirst and slow decay,
The gout from head to heel that roams unstaid,
With many a grinding pain that mocks the leeches aid.

Such the sad lot of many a soul renown'd,
By social bent seduc'd to drink their bane,
While Mirth and warm Benevolence around,
Illusive sports with all the seeming train
Of virtues fair; and from the heart amain,
Th' expanded heart, in full augmented tide,
Fresh spirits mount, and warm the seething brain,
With notions new, to sober hours deny'd,
And gay fantastic shapes, by dubious light discry'd.

To strong incentives thus, tempestuous flaws
The tainted spirits us'd, forget to rise,
And flagging in their course, ignobly pause,
Till CIRCE'S CUP their wonted speed supplies,
The common notices, the common ties
Of life, solicit faint; the feeble call
To the unfeeling sense in vain applies,
Till gradual creeps the torpor over all,
And sinks the man below the tenants of the stall.

Ah whence, ye Naiad Nymphs, the dire mistake,
To foster thus an imp of STYGIAN brood;
Soon round the plaintive shores of NYGIA'S lake
Shall every nymph that rules the western flood
Lament your doom, in watchet weed endu'd;
And execrate aloud the fatal morn
That first beheld the simple sisterhood
Receive with pearly arms the babe forlorn,
And round with asphodel his cradle soft adorn.

Ye nymphs of CYRRHA, now your secret springs
Unlock, a louder strain demands your aid,
NARCESTES' fraud with fuller note to sing,
And how his guile beneath the pendent shade
Of old each silver-footed fair betray'd.
My yet unpractis'd Muse presumes to tell
Their fate; nor ye despise a rural maid,
No taint obscure she brings, to blot your well,
Nor breathes infection round the Heliconian cell.

"OGYGIA'S guardian saw the storm impend,"
ADGISTES thus prolong'd his tale of woe,
He knew 'twas vain his vassals to defend,
When heav'n design'd, with deep inflicted blow,
The genuine temper of their faith to show,
And prove with menac'd plagues the favour'd race.
He saw the simple NAIADS doom'd to know
The taint of STYGIAN guile, with new disgrace,
To sanctify the fraud and weave the magic maze.

"Now Circe mark'd the crisis of her fate,"
Adgistes thus proceeds, "her right to claim,
She mounted to her sire's meridian state;
There with prevailing tears the mourning dame
Implor'd his aid with all-subduing flame,
To help her arts, and fire the fervid year.
Too well her parent saw her deadly aim,
But to her pray'rs inclin'd an heedful ear,
He mark'd the will of heav'n, and mourn'd the doom severe.

"Now LEO claim'd the skies, and scorch'd the plain
To russet brown, and mute the streamlets stole
From niggard urns that scantly seem'd to yield
Sufficient stores to reach the distant goal.
No shade avail'd his fervours to control,
On these dry plains expos'd to CIRCE'S hate,
Where erst the rigours of the wint'ry pole
Smote frore, and from the south a banded freight
Of ills, by SIRIUS sent, fulfil'd the works of Fate.

"Thro' the sick plains the ling'ring NAIADS crept,
Murm'ring complaint, and wail'd their fountains dry,
And scarce their wonted pace the wand'rers kept,
Spent with the horrors of a brazen sky,
Their failing urns could scantly now supply
Their bed, and fixt they stood in pale despair,
Gazing around with dull, desponding eye,
In vain; no zephyr cool'd the burning air,
Nor Auster dar'd around to shake his humid hair.

"Yet kept the nymphs their due allegiance still,
Tho' sore besieg'd by many a deadly foe,
Still tow'r'd the ocean each assiduous rill
In soft meander flow'd, or seem'd to flow.
Still bore the parent flood in silent woe
His pangs, and hid his mighty grief beneath,
Scorning his pain like vulgar streams to show,
Tho' Sol began his sea-green locks to scathe,
And singe around his brow the hoary poplar wreath.

"But who at length refresh'd the sun burnt soil,
And cloth'd the fringed banks with umbrage gay?
NARCESTES first reviv'd the gasping isle,
He call'd the shower that cool'd the burning day,
And led unusual umbrage to allay
The heats of noon, an unexpected shade:
Again the NAIAD Nymphs were seen to stray,
Warbling their soft note thro' the sylvan glade,
And wanton'd thro' the meads in verdant stole array'd.

"From LOTOS' strand the busy demon drew
His seeds, and sow'd them in the passing gale;
Fam'd LOTOS' strand, where erst Ulysses' crew,
With thoughtless joy beheld the parting sail,
Nor could th' endearing thought of home prevail,
To lure the wand'rers from the charmed shore.
Reckless of all, they stray'd along the vale,
Or wanton'd on the rich autumnal store
Of that seducing plant that quell'd the reasoning power.

"Of this the noxious seed NARCESTES brought,
To aid the nymphs with shows of friendship fair;
The nymphs rejoic'd, all innocent of thought
That augur'd ill, as thro' the ambient air
The bidden blasts convey'd the fatal snare
To each steep bank, and winding border long,
And future scenes of rural joy prepare,
With balmy breath, unconscious of the wrong,
Nor knew the fatal freight that on their pinions hung.

"And still a viewless choir was heard to sing,
'Ye Zephyrs blow, and fall ye fragant dews,
Soon shall the wond'ring plants luxuriant spring,
And o'er the founts a grateful shade diffuse;
Then haste, ye Naiad Nymphs, your streamlets loose,
And feed the nascent plants with kindly toil,
Soon will their boughs, replete with genial Juice,
Shade your cool streams, and bid the beam recoil,
That draws your forming rills, and bids your channel boil.'

"The willing seeds the potent summons heard,
And felt unusual life, as Cadmus' brood
Erst from the teeming ground portentous rear'd
Their waving crests by Dirces winding flood.
Thus, in a few short springs, the Naiads view'd
Shade meeting shade, their languid heads above,
The banish'd Sylvans came, and wond'ring stood
To see deep-woven bow'rs, retreats of love,
And thro' the gladden'd vale a young, aspiring grove.

"Thro' chequer'd light and shade the tuneful train
Wanton'd at will, and now let in the day,
Now, deep embow'r'd, their journey to the main,
At ease pursu'd, thro' vales invested gay
With pendent boughs, impervious to the ray,
And sooth'd the list'ning fawns with slumb'rous song,
While wov'n with poplar pale, and willows gray,
The flaunting LOTOS o'er the borders hung,
And shed a mimic light the velvet banks along.

"To feed the noxious plants with kindly dews,
And tend the green stem, trembling o'er the wave,
The virgins lov'd, and in the baneful juice
That wash'd their roots, were often seen to lave
Their pliant limbs, in many a pearly cave,
Thoughtless of fraud, nor fear'd the coming ill,
Nor saw, (when to the bath their breasts they gave)
Deep venom tinge the medicated rill,
And down their polish'd sides in copious streams distil.

"Thus DIDO clasp'd the young insidious God
To her warm breast, while thro' her tingling veins
In stealthy tides she pleasing poison sow'd,
And wrapt her easy soul in viewless chains;
When erst allur'd by CYTHEREA'S trains,
She hugg'd with rapture fond the seeming boy,
Deep cause of sorrow thro' the fair domains,
When she, the victim of unlawful joy,
Deplor'd the fatal day she saw the fleet of Troy.

"The pure quintessence yet, from heav'n deriv'd,
Awhile the PHLEGETHEAN drop o'ercame;
The fatal moment hardly yet arriv'd
When the fell poison thro' the tender frame
Convulsive rag'd, while each unconscious dame
Perceiv'd a lulling transport steal around
Her raptur'd sense, a gentle lambent flame;
Then seem'd their heads with fresher garlands crown'd,
Benignant Aether smil'd, and laugh'd the verdant ground.

"But soon, by swift degrees, the venom spread
Beneath the gay disguise of genial joy,
And to the seat of thought ascending sped:
Thick coming fancies now their spells employ,
The sober course of reason to annoy;
Weak mem'ry fail'd, and high-engender'd pride
Ting'd the pure mind with earthly, dark alloy,
While each fond nymph that rul'd the limpid tide
Deem'd her low sylvan race to highest heav'n ally'd.

CALLIRRHOE climbs in thought Olympus' height,
And mounts the yielding air on rainbow wing;
The splendid roof she views with fixt delight,
And hears its echoing domes responsive ring,
While to th' immortal chord the Muses sing,
And gods and heroes round the living lyre
Attentive throng to hear the Sminthean king
The unexpressive, lofty song inspire,
And send it sweetly round the HELICONIAN choir.

"Pale CHLORIS seem'd to dread the jealous rage
Of Jove's proud spouse, and fled her wrath before,
SHE calls the stormy sovereign to engage
The blust'ring brethren, whom she rais'd of yore
To drive ANCHISES' Son on AFRIC'S shore.
Loud roars the gust, and tears her tender form;
The weeping Naiad knows her place no more,
High on the swelling blast, with wild alarm,
All desolate she flies, amid the sounding storm.

"LIGEA dreams of DIAN'S silver bow,
And hears (or dreams she hears) Orion's horn,
She longs her willow borders to forego,
And mount the heath crown'd hills at blush of morn.
Fearless of wanton PAN, or Dryad's scorn,
Or ambush deep, amid the sylvan maze,
With crescent dim, her ringlets to adorn
She tries, and binds her brows with mimic rays,
While round her lovely neck a starry meteor plays.

"At this the Moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
Enwraps in hazy gloom the pendent woods,
And stains, with rising fogs, AURORA'S hair.
The subject stream forsakes his humid lair,
And, mining thro' the soil his secret way,
Follows the huntress far; in deep despair
She sees around her native currents play,
And burst in devious dells afresh to open day.

"In vain she flies, the constant flood pursues,
And saps with eager speed the trembling soil,
Till far and wide the treacherous plains refuse
To bear the lab'ring steer, or peasant's toil;
The way-worn trav'ller feels the sward recoil
Beneath his weary step, and stands aghast,
While, by his weight dislodg'd, the waters boil,
Portentous bubbling thro' the dreary waste,
Flound'ring, at length, he sinks forlorn, and looks his last.

"Then were thy fens, renowned ALLAN, spread
O'er many a flow'ry field and spacious plain,
As from the western flood LIGEA led,
With omens all averse, her humid train.
And now the quagmire brown, from main to main,
Had cloth'd the verdant isle in foul disguise;
But tir'd, at length, by long protracted pain,
Her error, late, the wand'ring fair descries,
And fond laments her lot, with unavailing cries.

"Too late the fraud she found but stops at last,
Fatigu'd and breathless, in a vale unknown,
From her pale brow the seeming star she cast,
And sate her down, her phrenzy to bemoan,
All comfortless, unfriended, and alone,
And soon her tears a way began to find
Thro' the deep bosom of the rugged stone
On which the fair, desponding NYMPH reclin'd,
And still the current flow'd, and still the Naiad pin'd.

"Till wasting to a shade, she vanish'd quite,
And thro' the yielding rock a fountain sprung,
Where still, at close of eve, and dawning light,
By many a Fay unseen, her dirge is sung:
And when returning May, with verdure young,
Has cloth'd the sunny slopes of BELIN'S Vale,
With many a garland gay her bower is hung;
And as her sisters stray adown the dale,
By turns they weep her fate, and tell her piteous tale.

"Unequal task for my degraded strain
How BLOMIUS wept the Naiad's fall to tell,
While round his lofty brow by OREAD train
Haunted of old, where Summer lov'd to dwell,
A dark, portentous wreath was seen to swell,
And stain, by dim degrees, the face of day;
In dusky folds the fun'ral vestments fell,
Clothing his ample sides in hoary gray,
While CLODIO wept her spouse in many a dol'rous lay.

"But thine RHEUSA, thine the direst fate
Of any nymph that wore an azure stole,
Minerva's thund'ring power to emulate,
And dart the mimic bolt from pole to pole:
Fondly she strove, and drew with high control
Her sulph'rous bands to stain the welkin sheen,
But louder thunder now began to roll,
And lightning blue to mar her borrow'd mien,
Down the vain shadow sunk, and left the troubled scene.

"In vain she fled, for still the flame pursu'd,
Th' avenging flame, and rent the gaping soil.
The flying Nymph, in wild distracted mood,
Sees from below the molten rock recoil,
And in its womb the glowing minerals boil;
She struggled to retreat, but strove in vain,
Then, on th' abrupt, tremendous verge awhile
Ling'ring she hung, and plunging down amain,
Soon met the sable flood that bounds the realms of pain.

"And thou, great queen, that rul'st the Nereid train,
And roll'st from shore to shore the ocean's brine,
When, raving loud, the Naiads sought the main,
What wild surprise and troublous thoughts were thine,
When all unconscious of the dire design
You felt their currents thy broad bosom rave,
Tainting thro' all their depths thy flood divine,
And, charg'd with double fate, the swelling wave
Sent the contagion round thro' every pearly cave.

Then discontent began, and mutiny
Thro' all the wide Nepturian realms to rise;
And envying Jove his azure realms on high,
Old NEREUS summon'd up his dark allies,
Combin'd with him to scale the ample skies
The squadrons dim obey the summons soon,
And mount the moaning winds, in due disguise,
In long files streaming to the point of noon,
While CERES veil'd her face, and mourn'd her fruitless boon.

"No transient fog, nor vapour soon exhal'd,
At touch ethereal of heaven's fiery beam,
But, deep'ning on, the dark procession sail'd,
Her waste supply'd, at large, by Ocean's stream;
And tho', at times, the fiery-harnest team
Of golden SOL the mass divided sheer,
Yet soon, arising dim, the murky steam
With foul invasion marr'd the mellowing year,
And hid in humid veil the glories of his sphere.

"The Nymphs of air, that saw the gath'ring storm,
Furl'd their wet veils, that us'd to float so gay,
Thorough mid heav'n they fled the band deform
Of dark usurpers leagu'd, in wild dismay;
And where, with ZEPHYRS bland, they us'd to play,
On wanton wing above th' enamell'd plain,
Degraded now, in final disarray
Darkling, the vanquish'd troops descend amain,
Flung from their radiant sphere, where long they us'd to reign.

"Then, leagu'd with many a power to life adverse,
O'er the sick isle the vengeful sisters brood,
Mephitic fell, that loads the frequent hearse,
And Hypochondria still in murm'ring mood,
That wails alone, by fancy'd ills subdu'd.
Pale Hydrops, bloated fiend, and fierce Catarrh,
That breeds the racking cough, for years renew'd;
Dire Apoplex, that aims his shaft afar,
And lays his victim low, without declaring war.

"While sadd'ning oft the smiling rear of May,
November dark his dreary pageant led,
And marr'd with murth'rous mock her trim array,
While o'er her lawns, in tend'rest verdure clad,
She saw, with deep dismay and sudden dread,
From sullen January the driving sleet,
And o'er her smiling plains, untimely shed,
Whit'ned the drifted snow, a garb unmeet,
While Winter check'd her rills, and bound her frozen feet.

"E'en June in widow'd stole, a long arrear
Of wat'ry woe to dark December paid,
And each sad sign that decks the radiant sphere
Receiv'd the sun in mourning weeds array'd,
While SIRIUS, rising red, in vain essay'd
With timely heat to fill the golden grain,
Nor fruit nor golden crop his beam repaid,
No plenteous harvest blest the toiling swain,
For still the welkin lour'd, and IRIS wept amain.

"In that sad year, whatever babe was born
Slow dragg'd with pain the load of life along,
Of health, of hope, and every joy forlorn
That tends the call of fancy, ever young;
No TULLY thence had charm'd the list'ning throng,
No reasoning sage, nor son of sportive mirth,
No bard sublime, that swells the rapt'rous song,
Was ever known to date his favour'd birth,
But all was wat'ry phlegm and dull inactive earth.

"Nor less upon their sires with tyrant sway
And leaden load the wayward season fell,
While mixt with Stygian woof her trim array
Sick Fancy show'd, and ever lov'd to dwell
In dreary dusk immur'd, and haunted dell.
The poinard turn'd against the owner's breast
No year so often saw, as annals tell,
When sick'ning life, by black despair opprest,
Full oft the venom'd bowl, or strangling cord, releast.

"Veil'd in a night of clouds, the victor crew
Together throng'd, with gratulations dire,
Assembling nigh, with savage glee to view
The wild aerial fray, loud Neptune's ire,
And the devoted isle in dim attire,
With each successive plague that rose beneath:
When thus the leader of the Stygian choir&mdash;
'Courage, my mates!  pursue the work of death;
Come earn on yonder plains a never dying wreath.

"'No mighty magic now, nor potent charms,
You need to circumvent the sons of clay;
Fright not the feeble race with loud alarms,
With Gorgon's hideous mask, or foul array,
But gently steal their slumb'ring souls away
With soft Elysian scenes, to fancy fair;
As late ye led the Naiad nymphs astray,
And taught them to despise their shelly care,
And proudly sweep along a vapoury length of air.

"'Hence brew those ills that cloud declining life,
Hence rheumy damps and torpid poisons blend,
To sink the soul beneath th' unequal strife,
Then with benignant hand the CORDIAL send,
With Circe's drugs infus'd, the seeming friend,
Whence love and life their failing springs supply,
Dispel the doubling vapours which offend
The soul, and bid the cheated wretch defy
Yon dark oppressive plagues, that load the cheerless sky.'

"Just in the point where youth to manhood yields,
And all for action burns the mounting soul,
And longs for busy scenes, or fighting fields,
Then gently from the fair, inviting goal
Divert his eager steps with soft control,
And now and then, with seeming shows of worth,
Rais'd by the magic of the charmed bowl,
Delusive call his slumb'ring virtues forth,
Till cheated Fancy smiles, and hails the wond'rous birth.

"When sated Fancy now has had her fill,
And Reason longs for more substantial food,
Full on the soul the magic drop distil,
That fires the soul with images of good,
While warm and num'rous in the fervent flood,
By art sublim'd, the bastard virtues swell,
And ape, in heav'nly tints, the genuine brood,
That in the virtuous few delight to dwell,
What heav'n applauding views, and Bards enraptur'd tell."

