SMYTH!  in the mirror of thy mind I view,
By Fancy's magic drawn, the solemn shade,
Where on swift wing the social moments flew,
When thou and Friendship charm'd the summer glade.

How often on the green hill's side we sate,
List'ning afar to Clodio's sounding fall!
Or pacing down the winding, woody strait,
Met the cool air in PAN'S umbrageous hall!

O stainless was the mirror of thy mind,
The forms of Vice and Folly past away,
Nor left a taint; while, brighten'd and combin'd,
Virtues ethereal hues were seen to stay.

Nor have revolving seasons borne away,
One trace that there the hand of heaven design'd;
The mellow tints return the heavenly ray,
By pure Religion heighten'd and refin'd.

Often you urg'd me, as at ease we lay,
And caught thro' waving shades the fairy views,
By fits illumin'd by the setting ray,
To give these scenes the tribute of the Muse.

"Did never minstrel here," you often said,
At Love or Pity's call, his pipe essay ?
Did no heroic deed renown the glade,
To generous claimant wake the poet's lay?

"E'en SPENSER here, perhaps, of old has view'd,
Day-dreams of glorious deeds, that Fancy flung
Across his woodland range, for yonder flood
And you majestic cliffs the poet sung.

"And yon retiring uplands still display
The ruins, where the frowning fort arose,
Built by the poet's plan to keep at bay
The formidable rage of England's foes.

"Does Inspiration here no longer breathe,
Her fairy summons in the waving boughs?
O haste my friend to claim a sylvan wreath,
Perhaps the gentle Muse may hear thy vows."

To thee I owe, that with presumptuous hand,
I try'd the chords in that sequester'd vale,
Where noble Feltrim met the ruffian band,
And the pale Dryads heard the WOODMAN'S TALE.

Those shades you left, and that romantic hill,
To nobler toils by heavenly guidance led
There many a summer eve I wander'd still,
And with poetic dreams my fancy fed.

But oh!  how mean a task, compar'd with thine,
When, with the lamp of heaven, you found your way
To those, condemn'd in hopeless gloom to pine,
Without the grateful change of night or day!

But spirits no material aid require,
They reach their kindred souls on viewless plume,
You bade celestial Hope their minds inspire,
And shed new transport thro' the cheerless gloom.

I saw the living flame diverge, and run
Like heaven's own lightning thro' the dusky band,
When with a beam, unborrow'd from the sun,
You bade their slumb'ring energies expand.

I heard them, like the symphonies above,
When Raphael breathes the sweet, prelusive strain;
In loud alternate songs of faith and love
Proclaim the glories of Emmannel's reign.

I heard them sing the kind, creating hand
That planted eyes within, whose piercing ray
Beheld Elysian prospects wide expand,
On the bright noon of everlasting day.

Go on, my friend!  Oh may you never hear
Bellona's clangour mix its baleful tones
With those fine strains that pierce the mundane sphere,
And call down cherubs from their splendid thrones.

Go on, my friend!  the gentle hand of Time,
At length, this envious shadow will remove;
Then will your pupils, in another clime,
Return the raptur'd glance of joy and love.
