CANTO III.
ARGUMENT.
A brigantine the tempest wings
To fair Ogygia's coast,
His hapless fate an exile sings,
And ancient honours lost.

"O COMUS' bowl, why seem'st thou still so sweet,
And sooth'st with visions gay the idle train,
When round the genial board with joy they meet,
And tell the mirthful tale and quaff amain?
See there!  who wait to mar the mirthful vein,
What guests, unbid, the table crowd around,
In dark disguise the family of pain,
A Motley band, with baleful Cypress crown'd,
And each his victim marks, and aims the mortal wound.

"It was not thus, enwrapt in Stygian woof,
Ye first entic'd the simple race astray;
Then stood your griesly ministers aloof,
Waiting the word their terrors to display;
While erst, with smiles benign and gestures gay,
Ye taught the wond'ring swains their cares to steep
In Nectar new, when wreath'd in dun array,
Successive steaming from the neighb'ring deep,
November's dreary fogs began around to weep.

"'Twas on that eve, when first Orion show'd
His giant form, in starry cincture drest,
From his steep cliff the tempest's angry god
The signal saw, and from his den releast
The ruffian winds, that sweep the groaning waste.
Shrill roar'd the blast, and thro' the turbid air
His fiends in fiery bands the coil increast,
Gliding before the rack with angry glare,
And round the shore were heard the shrieks of wild despair.

"Long hours of darkness rag'd the furious flaw,
Till the gray Dawn, with pallid eye, survey'd
The waste of Night, who now began to draw
Far to the west her slow decreasing shade;
The storm at length o'erblown, her call obey'd,
Yet black and dismal o'er the face of Morn,
His gloomy rear the firmament array'd,
And many a plague in lazy volumes born,
From many a tainted clime o'erhung the land forlorn.

"No song the muffled morn was heard to hail,
Of lark, nor village cock, with clarion shrill,
Nor thro' the hanging wood, or winding vale,
The hunter's call, return'd from hill to hill:
Mute was the Zephyr, mute the bubbling rill,
And wrapt in mourning weeds of hoary gray,
With recent toil o'erwearied, faint and still,
Nature entranc'd in torpid slumbers lay;
Scarce seem'd exhausted life along her pulse to play.

And ever and anon the billows bore
Some plank or shatter'd mast with tackle rent,
(The hideous wrecks of yesternight) to shore,
Or precious cask, or corse unseemly sheet.
At length, where o'er the bed of ocean bent
The hanging sky, and met the toiling main
Afar, discovered in the orient,
A brigantine, along the liquid plain
Was seen to point her prow, and to the harbour strain.

At length the tempest-beaten barque arriv'd,
And on the welcome shore its freight resign'd,
A faint, o'erlabour'd train, that scarce surviv'd
The wrath of heaven, with want and labour pin'd,
Nor Libya seem'd to boast their race, nor Ind,
Nor any coast to navigation known,
From the chill climes at either pole, that bind
The pendent globe, to that prolific zone
Where balanc'd day and night alternate claim the throne.

"And in the midst, a man of pensive mien,
Lofty of port above the vulgar band,
In musing mood, with measur'd step was seen
All comfortless, to pace the level sand,
While his observant train along the strand
With anxious look his wand'ring seem'd to tend,
As if they fear'd his rash, misguided hand
Against his life the hapless chief might bend,
And seek with desp'rate deed his galling grief to end.

"And lovely, though distress'd, around their sire,
Watching his looks, were seen a youthful train;
The wild waves had not quench'd their native fire:
In some the soften'd charm, most apt to gain
The heart, was seen, and some with high disdain
The menace of their fortune seem'd to view:
One look'd with terror on the surging main;
An angry glance to heaven another threw,
As on his sire he look'd, and tempest beaten crew.

"Then, turning to the sun an haggard eye,
That o'er the main a languid radiance shed,
The stranger gaz'd awhile the ample sky:
'Tis past,' he cry'd, 'and this devoted head
Must pay the price; but oh!  thou living dread,
Whose terrors found thy slave amid the deep,
Thy slave that vainly from thy justice fled,
Hear me, and oh!  thy dark avengers keep
From this sad soul, that longs to sink in endless sleep.

"'Ye heaven-commission'd storms, that o'er the main
From coast to coast pursue my guilty flight,
Since silver CYNTHIA thrice was seen to wane;
At length desist, and oh, ye sons of Night,
Who see the frantic wretch, with stern delight,
Before your terrors fly, in moonstruck maze,
Upon this head your undisputed right
Assert at once, the sentenc'd wretch obeys,
And to his country gives the remnant of his days.

"'And oh ye mighty shades of heroes old,
Why was it mine, the first of all your race
With dastard deed to shame your ashes cold,
And the long glories of your line disgrace?
Let then my death at last the taint efface,
Since ruin dogs my coward heels so fast!
Had I but call'd thy Gods my nerves to brace,
I had not rank'd of all your line the last,
But wak'd the trump of Fame, and swell'd her loudest blast.'

"The gentle islanders, whom chance had led
To the sad shore, to watch the sinking storm,
With deep amaze, the mourning chief survey'd,
And mark'd with pitying eye his faded form;
The general breast compassion seem'd to warm,
He saw, and straight the melting moment took,
With moving tales the simple race to charm,
And thus with firmer voice, and steadier look,
The much-enduring man the list'ning swains bespoke.

"'Strangers, that seem a ready sense to show
Of human ills, and on your friendly coast
With melting eyes receive the sons of woe,
Tell on what strand the breath of heaven has tost
An exil'd train, that mourn their country lost,
Who dar'd the victim bound to snatch away,
The fated price of many a ransom'd ghost,
When the high powers had nam'd the dreadful day,
Ordain'd by righteous heaven the penance due to pay?

"'Does sea-girt isle, or mainland claim your race,
And know ye laws, or regal power divine,
And boasts your lord his pedigree to trace
From JOVE direct, or owns a mortal line?
Unhappy they, that in that doubtful sign
Of fav'ring heaven repose their feeble trust,
When sin pollutes, or angry stars combine
To lay their tarnish'd honours in the dust:
Their old distinguish'd lot they loath with sick disgust.'

"He added not, for overwhelming grief
With mortal weight his utterance seem'd to choke,
Till from the parting crowd an aged chief
Of rev'rend port the awful silence broke.
'OGYGIA'S race ye see, by slavish yoke
Yet never gall'd, nor luxury's baneful power,
Loud Fame of us in other lands has spoke,
And of our chief, who never guilty hour
Yet knew, nor ever wish'd his subjects to devour.

"'A chief, whom never suppliant saw in vain,
Nor stranger left his friendly courts forlorn,
Whether in perils of the angry main
Long verst, or naked left by Fortune's scorn.
And whether here by heavenly guidance borne
You touch our shore, or by misfortune led,
Or from your native land by exile torn,
Thro' brethren's hate, or blood in quarrel shed&mdash;
Disclose whatever cause your voyage hither sped.'

"He spoke, and thus reply'd the woeful chief:
'If bent the process of our plagues to know,
Prepare to hear a tale of royal grief,
And learn to shudder at a nation's woe,
By all the wealth that timely show'rs bestow,
Or genial suns mature, enrich'd of old,
Till Envy seiz'd the baleful pow'rs below,
Whose hell-born hate her rising bliss controll'd,
And chang'd to stubborn steel her darken'd age of gold.

"'Who has not heard the name of BELMARIE,
Her plains by PHOEBUS lov'd, his regal line
Of SOLAR stern renown'd from sea to sea,
That held his sceptre long with hand divine,
Till Fate, in league with Hell, began to twine
With deep Tartarian black the splendid woof,
When JUNO bade her noxious fogs enshrine
Hyperion's genial beam, and seen aloof
Dark signs of dismal change enwrapt the heavenly roof.

"'PAN yet with FLORA mixt in every wood,
And PALES with POMONA crown'd the year,
No star autumnal push'd the horned flood,
To sweep away the hind and lab'ring steer,
When LOVE, who long had rul'd the shining sphere,
Forsook the sky on light, unconstant wing,
Resolv'd beneath his sway the shadows drear
With all the vast PLUTONIAN world to bring,
And touch with warm desire her solitary king.

"'In evil hour this upper world he left,
The weeping plains of genial bliss forlorn,
The air and ocean seem'd of joy bereft,
And from the steadfast globe her axle torn;
Thus, whilst all nature seem'd his loss to mourn,
The wayward power the land of shadows sought,
Thro' upper and thro' middle darkness borne,
Till Destiny the winged warrior brought
To PLUTO'S steely dome, by hand eternal wrought.

"'Tis not for me to tell, from hope exil'd,
How DIS began to lothe his lonely state,
Nor how the tyrant's stubborn heart recoil'd,
Nor Proserpine, ensnar'd by cruel fate,
And forc'd to pass the flood of endless hate,
The rape, the rushing car, and groaning ground,
Nor how on STYGIAN shore his lovely freight
The grisly king secur'd, and hemm'd around
With walls of beaten brass, and adamantine mound.

"'Then earth and hell a closer tie combin'd,
And fiends more frequent bask'd in open day,
Then Circe first the deadly guile design'd,
And fill'd her cup with charms the mind to sway,
And change to savage forms the sons of clay;
Thus first the venom'd bev'rage saw the light,
By fiends distill'd, and potent to betray
Whoever tastes, with shows of vain delight,
Till intellect is lost, and reason yields to night.

"'His healing arts the Epidaurian god
In vain employ'd, and PALLAS saw the soul
Shrunk from his lore, beneath the opiate rod
Of CIRCE lull'd, nor found, from pole to pole,
What pow'rs confed'rate join'd their dark control,
To taint the germ of health with venom'd store,
And mix with deadly drugs the simple bowl,
Deadly to all that touch'd the dang'rous shore,
When Temperance sway'd of old, but knew her place no more.

"'The NAIADS only seem'd their aid to lend
To mix her poison, and her charms distill
Their sacred lymph, so late the gentle friend
Of life, was deem'd the source of every ill.
Then to the gods, conven'd on IDA'S hill,
Th' accusing power the black impeachment brought
'Gainst those who feed the fount, or pour the rill,
Who now an higher post ambitious sought,
And dar'd, with arts unknown, to cloud the seat of thought.

"'O thou, whose presence glads thy favour'd isle,'
He cry'd, 'Great author of our royal race,
See'st then unheeded Circe's deadly will,
And her dark spells thy favour'd brood deface;
The NAIADS now forsake the wat'ry maze,
With rites prophane the wayward work to aid,
Intent no more to seek our winding bays,
Or steal with soft foot thro' th' embow'ring shade,
They ply in caves obscure th' unutterable trade.

Forgetful of thy power, whose welcome sway
Releast them oft, in icy fetters bound,
Who gives their streamlets unreprov'd to stray,
And bids them lead the spring, and vest the ground,
By thy blest radiance led, but now disown'd
And scorn'd, thou see'st them join thy rebel foe,
Content to spread her steaming poisons round,
In Pleasure's lap the seeds of ill to sow,
And give with viewless hands the soul degrading blow.

"'He heard, and flash'd intolerable day,
Sign of wak'd wrath; the full assembl'd powers
Vote to assert his long-contemned sway,
And thro' their caverns deep and shadiest bowers,
Tho' summer lost her fruits, and spring her flowers,
To chase with burning beams the Naiad train,
To dry their bubbling channels to the source,
Their tresses singe, and from the neighb'ring main
With terror of his eye their headlong course restrain.

"'Then who can tell the woes of BELMARIE,
The pendent horrors of a brazen sky,
When flocks and swains in sad society,
And haggard throngs, beneath the burning eye
Of day were seen to droop, or climbing high,
Watch'd from the hills the cloudy speck afar,
That seem'd with livid stain to mark the sky,
And oft they pray'd the HYADS' wat'ry star
To rise, thrice welcome sign of elemental war.

"'Now up th' ethereal vault the Naiads soar,
Justice to claim against the lord of day,
And spread with mourning stoles the splendid floor,
Prostrate to him above, whose boundless sway
The universal tribes of life obey,
Their plaints to hear, and venge the mighty wrong;
But he resolv'd the suppliants to delay,
The dubious plea in long suspension hung,
And weeping off to earth he sent the baffled throng.

"'Whether to propagate the deadly feud,
And vex with plagues the guilty human race
He meant, or on the sisters of the flood
To stamp a flagrant mark of new disgrace,
Uncertain seems; but still with cloudless rays
The lord of day along his burning road
Went on, and still the fierce collected blaze
Pursu'd the Naiads thro' their deep abode,
Till ocean seem'd to shrink beneath the angry god.

"'Nor reckless of revenge, nor lost to fame
The Naiads seem'd, nor stoop'd again to sue
With baffled plea, but 'gainst the torrent flame
On murky wing their rallying forces drew
To final fight, and clad in vapours blue,
Their gloomy squadrons mount the lurid air;
Full soon the welkin bright was lost to view,
And Auster seem'd to shake his humid hair,
While the glad champaign hop'd the humid boon to share.

"'But premature the joy of field or swain,
Of flock, or wavy tilth, or drooping flower,
No more the sisters sad were seen to rain
In soft'ning, silent flow the pregnant shower,
That fill'd the glebe with vegetative power.
Corroding plagues instead, and mildew hoar,
Wide o'er th' expecting isle, in luckless hour,
The nymphs disperst, and blasted all the store
Of Phoebus favour'd isle, triumphant now no more.

"'Fell Thirst before had spent its utmost rage,
And Famine now his dismal course began,
His wrath, in vain, with ardent pray'rs to suage
The people strove; in vain the holy man
For thousands pray'd on life's extremest span
Suspended sad, of heavenly help forlorn.
Why need I tell how oft the matrons wan,
Clinging around the fanes, were seen to mourn,
And saw their fervent vows returned with sullen scorn.

"'And now a chosen train, resolv'd to brave
At once the utmost rigour of their fate,
Left the sad isle, and to the circling wave
Resign'd the fortunes of their sinking state:
Before the speeding gale the sacred freight
In happy moment touch'd the DELPHIC strand,
And, due oblations paid, submiss they wait
From him their final doom, whose mighty hand
Had dealt, for ages forth, the fates of many a land.

"'At length, in accents clogg'd with death, it came,
The sad response, and this the purport dire;
'The last of Phoebus' line in funeral flame
Shall end his days, then with the god of fire
In ancient league the NAIADS will conspire,
Appeas'd at last, and give their vengeance o'er;
This and a sacred pile the powers require,
Built to the Naiads on that happy shore,
That place where flames the pyre is blest for evermore.'

"'It ceast; dismay'd and blank the band remain'd,
Pond'ring, in silence sad, the stern behest,
For well they knew for whom the Fates ordain'd
Those plagues; on whom the sentence seem'd to rest:
No lengthen'd search it ask'd, no tedious quest
To find the last and least of Phoebus' line;
On me, with one accord, on me, unblest,
They turn'd the menace of the voice divine,
And heaven has seal'd their doom with many a fated sign.

"'In evil hour my destiny I fled,
And stain'd the ancient glories of my line,
But all in vain from shore to shore I sped,
Thro' ev'ry sea pursu'd by wrath divine.
Twice has the sun illum'd the fleecy sign,
And twice the BALANCE weigh'd the waning year,
Since first I saw the gath'ring storms combine
Against my peace, and many a sad compeer
By sea, the surge devour'd, by land, diseases drear.

"'But fate has struck her last and deepest blow,
And late repentance comes.  but comes in vain,
The time is past &mdash; no more the Gods bestow
On me the power to measure back the main,
Or tinge with blood the Belmarinian plain,
And there redeem the glories of my race;
Then tell the chief that owns your sea-girt reign,
What long renown shall deck the favour'd place,
Which my disastrous fall with streaming gore shall grace.

"'Tell him the NAIADS still must spend their wrath,
On land and main, and thro' the burden'd air
Still load the gale with elemental death,
And turn the bloom of Hope to wan Dispair,
'Till my wish'd fate the deadly flaw repair,
And bring at last the jarring powers to peace;
Then shall his isle the dear-bought blessing share,
From plagues aetherial free and dire disease,
While seamen spy her cliffs above the subject seas.

"'ONE awful monument of wrath allay'd,
For ages to endure the fates ordain;
Claim'd from HYPERION by each wat'ry maid,
High o'er the PARENT SPRING, a solemn fane
Must raise its glittering dome above the plain,
By art VULCANIAN rais'd and magic sleight;
For VULCAN raging for his CYCLOPS slain,
By Phoebus shafts, with never ceasing spite,
Still seeks occasions new to thwart the God of light.

"'Nor from the God this solitary boon
May you expect, but if your vows you pay
To Mulciber, beneath the midnight moon,
And hail with hymns his subterranean sway,
Redoubted rival of the Lord of Day,
With his Aetnean trumpet, breathing flame,
The God will answer glad, and soon convey
His warmth, aspiring thro' the mundane frame,
And the deep boiling spring his bounty shall proclaim.

"'The powers of life and health, that us'd to soar
From the broad surface of the river clear,
To shed the genial balm from shore to shore,
And with new joy the flagging spirits cheer,
Tho' lull'd asleep for many a languid year,
Deep in the bosom of the parent spring,
Loos'd by the fiery potentate, shall rear
Their angel forms, and spread the sylphid wing,
And o'er the ardent lymph exult in wanton ring.

"'Yet over earth and air the vagrant train,
Wasting their genial powers in vain, would roam;
He only their excursions can restrain
In the vast concave of his magic dome,
Till, like the summer swarms, they own a home,
And in mixt conflict recollect their powers
Of energetic life, as when the womb
Of CHAOS held the congregated stores
Of jarring elements, that shook the mundane shores.

"'Then hovering o'er the deep fermenting bed,
The social bands shall quaff the rising fume,
Which round the vasty concave o'er their head
Shall vest the dim vault in CIMMERIAN gloom,
Till heaven's empyreal elements relume
And paint their shadowy forms with dawning ray;
Their forms, soft twinkling thro' the cloudy room,
Shall pierce the murky mist, with streaming day,
As Phoebus, when he smiles the driving rack away.

"'Then pregnant with the seeds of light and heat,
And charg'd with hoards of more than mortal joy,
Weary and longing for a cool retreat
From the reflection of that brazen sky,
The mighty Magian to a portal nigh
Shall lead their steps, whose op'ning valves afar
Its mazy depths disclose, that cheat the eye,
Meanders dark, unseen by sun or star,
Where still he points the way with kind assiduous care.

"'There all refresh'd, and vig'rous to the race,
Again the tribes shall feel the magic rod,
Their wings shall moult again, their limbs unbrace
And melting into lymph, the fiery god
Shall lead them forth, in form a sparkling flood
Of Nectar pure, elixir of delight.
This mixt with water clear shall send the blood,
In transport thro' the pulse, the spirits light
On Fancy's wing sublime shall mount an eagle flight.'

"He ceast, and instant thro' the list'ning crowd
A mingled murmur past, and thus was heard,
At intervals, the voice of joy aloud:
'And is it thus at last the Gods have clear'd
Their dark decrees, and thus benignant cheered,
With welcome beam, the long disast'rous night?
Hail happier day than ever yet appear'd,
Since first against our isle the furies spite,
This elemental fray was suffer'd to excite!'

"From shore to shore the gladsome rumour ran,
The king and all his people throng'd to view,
From every coast, the false devoted man,
And nearer now the solemn season drew,
The busy priests prepar'd in order due
The consecrated flour and holy wreath,
For uncouth obsequies, lustrations new,
For human victim meet, condemn'd to death,
And bent for public good to render up his breath.

"The hours at length brought on the dreadful day
For the oblation mark'd by wayward fate;
Dim vapour muffled up the morning ray,
And darkness overhung the eastern gate;
The sacred valves unfold, in solemn state
The white stol'd priests appear, a splendid train,
And for th' eventful hour in silence wait,
Appointed to remove the nation's stain,
And bring, with better hopes, the golden age again.

"Before, a pile was seen, with garlands crown'd,
Of linked laurels mixt with willows gray,
Symbols of jarrs compos'd, and Peace profound,
Betwixt the power that rules the circling day,
And those that teach their silver streams to play
In wanton mazes thro' th' empurpled mead;
High rose the structure fair with poplars gay,
And unctuous pines the raging fire to feed,
With baleful Cypress mixt, for funeral rites decreed.

"At length, attended by his faithful band,
The victim came, the sounding portals clos'd,
Awhile he stood, then wav'd his awful hand,
And silence on the pitying crow'd impos'd:
'Ye tribes,' so late to heavenly wrath expos'd,
He cry'd, 'attentive hear my last request;
So may no curse invade your sea-beat coast,
No canker foul your waving crops infest,
Nor famine, plague, nor war disturb your sacred rest.

"'For me a slight attention may suffice,
My dust to gather from the sinking pile,
And where her streams the mother fount supplies,
Whose springs perennial cheer the thirsty soil,
Scatter with sparing hand the hallow'd spoil;
Thus shall the Naiads calm their wonted rage,
Nor longer mix in loud aerial broil:
But crown their banks with many a smiling pledge
Of love and union sweet, from many a coming age.'

"Mute Sorrow chok'd his voice; he gave the sign,
And round his knees appear'd his infant train:
Weeping he cry'd, 'To you I now resign
These precious pledges long reserv'd with pain
In the long perils of the land and main;
And ye, if aught my voluntary fate
Of good or glory for your isle obtains,
If their fall'n sire supports your sinking state,
To them your friendship pledge, while I my doom await.

"'For them, for you, my blood I freely give;
For theirs the lot, had I refus'd the doom,
Yet from my ashes may their fires revive,
And once again the wond'ring world illume,
When their lost parent fills the silent tomb;
And if to future days my sight extend,
Succeeding times shall see the youths assume
The awful task this island to defend,
And from their low degree by godlike steps ascend.

"'Cherish the boys, nor scorn the humble meed,
That melting pity on her friends bestows,
Tho' thus condemn'd the heir of Cynthius bled,
And sees the period of his lengthen'd woes;
Still in his race the flame paternal glows,
That marks, from age to age, the sons of day;
Then hail the boon that fate indulgent throws
On yon blest isle, to fiends no more a prey,
Nor wan diseases wrapt in winter's foul array.'

"Struck with the semblance of a father's woe,
A mingled murmur pass'd the crowd among,
Their sobs were heard, and tears began to flow
The porches wide and echoing courts among,
But graver business interrupts my song;&mdash;
Adieu fair hills, and haunted glades adieu,
Some hour with leisure blest, your sylvan throng
Again I'll meet, and catch the rapturous view,
When no illiberal cares your grateful Bard pursue."

