CANTO IV.
ARGUMENT.
Example's weight Eumolpus tries,
To warn of coming guile;
But heaven the due success denies,
The stranger mounts the pile.

But from the central hills that crown the isle
With woody height, by seamen seen afar,
Her genius mark'd the loud aerial toil,
Of fighting winds and elemental war;
He saw old Ocean burst th' eternal bar,
And sweep with foamy pride the trembling shore:,
He saw the barque impell'd by luckless star,
With canvass rent to rags, and lab'ring oar,
That to the fated beach the seeming stranger bore.

He saw the Demon hide his deadly freight,
In seeming show of royalty distrest:
He saw the nation verging to its fate,
And hasted down, impetuous, to arrest
The fraudful rite, while glanc'd from east to west,
Portentous lightnings own'd the coming power;
Dark gathering clouds the welkin dim invest,
With armed gust surcharg'd and haily shower,
And o'er the solemn pile the storm was seen to lour.

"Unusual horror seiz'd the list'ning crowd,
And for a time restrain'd the sanguine rite,
With sudden gust the rocking temple bow'd,
And o'er th' assembly hung unusual night,
While ever and anon a livid light
Around the trembling crew excursive play'd,
Th' assistants sprung aloof, with pale affright
The startled priest forgot his bloody trade,
And deem'd some god averse the pious rite survey'd.

"First Mnemon felt an energy of heaven,
(Who still the rite withstood.)  The hoary sage
Began:  'Have then the pow'rs of vengeance giv'n
A welcome pause, a moment to assuage
Your hot mistemper'd zeal and headlong rage,
Thwarted at last by heaven's unquestion'd doom,
That stamps with truth the words of doubting age
Hail heavenly fires, commission'd to relume
The sad benighted souls, and break the mental gloom!

"'With livelier hopes, and better omens now,
I rise once more to urge my baffled plea,
If yet your patient ears a pause allow,
And deign to weigh the dread result with me;
If thus, not forc'd by Fate's supreme decree,
You dare with alien rites your faith to stain,
And bring a wand'rer, tost from sea to sea,
Exil'd from earth, and sent to rove the main,
With visionary schemes to vex your quiet reign.

"'Why need I tell the tenure of your peace,
On which the fortunes of your isle depend,
When first sublime above the subject seas
The Naiads saw their favour'd realm ascend?
Then all their genial powers for her to blend
They vow'd, and still the tide of life supply,
If their chaste eyes no alien rite offend,
Nor foreign mixture come, nor strange alloy,
Thus to supplant their power, beneath their native sky.

"'These simple laws obey'd, the temp'rate bowl
Is ours, the genuine lymph and milky store;
Hence no fell passions harrow up the soul,
Hence Virtue, Freedom, Love, our sacred store:&mdash;
Can unperverted nature seek for more?
Know your own bliss, enough for man to know,
Some monstrous birth, perhaps, unsought before,
Some unsuspected brood of coming woe
Lurk in these rites unknown, this seeming simple show.

"'Why need I tell the fate of Naxos' isle,
When forc'd to feed the interdicted vine,
The Naiads mourn'd the too successful wile,
Till their deep wrongs brought down the wrath divine,
Which mixt for man the medicated wine,
With sharp disease, and stormy passions fell;
Then dire Alecto learn'd her snakes to twine
With Autumn's purple store; and lov'd to dwell
Amid the festal train, and hear the chorded shell.

"'The Naiads are incenst, &mdash; and will their ire
To profanation yield, or scatter'd dust?
Can impious reliques of unholy fire
Calm their just rage, when heedless of the trust
From them deriv'd, and fir'd with impious lust
Of change, we dare to taint the living tide
With the foul gleanings of a funeral bust,
(Mixture abhorr'd) and rashly fling aside
The pledges of our peace for alien gifts untry'd?

"'Haply these signs of elemental wrath
Still o'er the trembling isle portentous hung,
These humid plagues on high, that drizzle death
Thro' our pale bands, and thin the sickly throng,
By heaven's permission came to try how long
Our faith will stand, by terror uncontroll'd:
For what is man by anguish never stung,
To virtue lost, to soft compassion cold,
Till trials purge his dross, and turn his lead to gold?'

"He added not, for faction now began
Gradual among the list'ning train to spread,
Thro' the throng'd courts an hollow murmur ran;
Now Reason seem'd, and Passion now, to lead
The undecisive crowd, and sacred dread
Began the influence of the fiend to quell;
For now to earth his great opponent sped,
Eumolpus' form he took, and chorded shell;
Eumolpus wont of old the holy strain to swell.

"He heard, when late the sovereign voice forbade,
By force, to strip the Demon's fair disguise,
Unsooth'd by hope, by terror yet unaw'd,
Still man was free to seize the guileful prize,
Or shun the gulph, by cool experience wise.
None but himself secur'd his weal or woe,
Yet some dark warning from th' indulgent skies
Was granted, half the danger to foreshow,
But in a mystic veil the blessing to bestow.

Attention with his hand the Bard bespoke,
On every side the multitudes retire,
When from his lips these thrilling accents broke,
Attemper'd sweetly to the silver lyre:
'Hymns best appease the Gods.  the Muses' choir
Chant round the throne of heaven's immortal king;
Their sacred numbers quench th' eternal fire,
Verse charms the fiends, and draws the tort'ring sting,
E'en hell's inflicted pains no more the bosom wring.

"'With sacred verse the maids of CYRRHA sought
LYAEUS' aid, on that eventful day
When from the rig'rous north BELINUS brought
The ministers of wrath in dread array,
When aged Haemus saw, with pale dismay,
O'er Thracia breath'd the firing cloud of war,
From many a snowy realm and frozen bay,
Dark myriads nurst beneath the Boreal star,
From bleak Germania came, and Celtic plains afar.

"'With mingled pray'r resounds the Pythian fane,
Deputed crowds the holy temple throng
From far Messene round, to Malea's main,
And where old Peneus sports his nymphs among,
From either shore the victims urg'd along,
Advance, while sheath'd in arms a chosen band
Line the deep strait, where, over ocean hung,
Fam'd Pylae's steeps the narrow pass command,
And Oeta's woody heights o'erhang the shady strand.

"'But no weak Asian now the battle leads,
No Bactrian sends afar the feath'ry flight,
The hardy Gaul his singing javelin speeds,
Or hand to hand provokes the mortal fight,
The banded Greeks they see, with stern delight,
And to the op'ning pass their dreadful course
Collected urge; in vain their foes unite,
In vain with firmest front repel their force,
They yield, and down the rock the wedgy squadron pours.

"'Now Phocis weep, lament ye Locrian train,
Ye Muses weep around Castalia's hill,
The throng'd Barbarians spread from main to main,
Successive flame your forts from hill to hill;
No more your squadrons feel their bosoms thrill
At Freedom's voice, nor lift the beamy spear,
But stoop ignobly to a tyrant's will,
Or, conquer'd, shed by stealth th' indignant tear,
Of liberty bereft, and all they held most dear.

"'Still at Lyaeus' feet the virgins lay,
But still in vain the Theban God implor'd,
Tho' in the west Dodona's green array
Sunk in the flame, for many an age ador'd.
Then sad Epirus saw the ruthless sword
And fires barbaric waste his borders fair;
But when his Cyrrha felt the rage abhorr'd
Of ruffian foes, the god, in wild despair,
Sprung from his golden throne and rent his flowing hair.

"'He wept, for all the warrior gods aloof,
By Jove's stern law withheld, deploring stood,
And saw indignant from th' Olympic roof,
Fam'd Achelous run a purple flood.
Alone th' eternal edict to elude,
And try the close approach of secret guile
He dar'd, for still th' assailants, unsubdu'd,
By Fate were doom'd the subject realm to spoil,
Till his own erring hand his dire intent should foil.

"'It chanc'd, from toils releas'd, at close of day,
The Gallic chieftain stray'd along the vale,
And winding through the woods his devious way,
He saw, with headlong haste adown the dale
A stripling come, that breathless seem'd and pale;
A stern assassin urg'd the chace along,
Who, when he saw his bloody purpose fail,
And round the warrior's knees the suppliant hung,
With sudden terror fled, and skulk'd the woods among.

"'The boy's ingenuous tears, that flow'd apace,
Mov'd the stern chief, unus'd a foe to spare,
He bade him tell his country, name, and place.
Recovering from his dread, with modest air
He told how long beneath a parent's care
He liv'd, nor was Aulestes' name unknown,
The sole dependence of an aged pair
Whose fathers call'd the fertile plains their own,
Of Daulia, long renown'd, till Fate o'erturn'd their throne.

"'He told how, by a ruffian Gaul pursu'd,
He fled, unknowing where, the cruel foe,
He told what countless sums should buy his blood,
If haply still his aged sire should know
His son was yet alive, to soothe his woe;
Fast to the heart his melting words made way;
Somewhat of heaven his aspect seem'd to show;
His tearful eyes, that shed a dewy ray,
And auburn locks that seem'd around his neck to play.

"'Soon can the heavenly powers obtain their way
Through the dark passes of the human breast:
Amaz'd, Belinus felt his pride decay,
And in his soften'd look the man confess'd;
Then bending low, the monarch of the west
The suppliant rais'd, and bade his fears subside,
And to the royal tent his blooming guest
The chief dismiss'd in safety to reside
Till on his future lot his bounty should decide.

"'The banquet waits; the stripling station'd near
Crowns the bright goblet with a purple flood;
In order round, on every prince and peer
The youth attends, the Gallic warriors view'd
Intent the boy, with heavenly grace endu'd,
And ask, astonish'd, whence the wonder sprung,
Whether from earth, or some celestial brood
With angel bloom adorn'd, for ever young,
On some high errand sent amid the martial throng.

"'But soon to darker doubts their wonder turn'd,
When all for banquet gay, and minstrelsy,
Sorrowing they saw their great designs adjourn'd,
Tho' still their terrors spread from sea to sea,
But now the God, secure of victory,
With fraudful art, his consummating blow
Design'd, intent his native soil to free,
From the rude insults of a barb'rous foe,
The soil where Science fair was destin'd long to grow.

"'When Paean's darts of old the Python sped,
And drench'd the Cyrrhan plains with venom'd gore,
A mantling vine its sunny clusters spread,
And hung with tempting grace the pathway o'er:
Here, ere he chac'd the Caledonian boar,
ALTHEA'S son the deadly fruit survey'd,
He pluck'd, he eat, and soon from Reason's lore
Estrang'd, with Fates averse, and murth'rous blade
Besmear'd in kindred gore, the mortal fine he paid.

"'Here too th' unhappy Theban chanc'd to stray,
Whose dire mistake the bloody sceptre won,
There spent beneath the burning beam of day,
He cropt with eager hand the fruit unknown;
Anon the hollow earth was heard to groan,
And soon the fated trav'llers met his view;
Thwarting they met, unaided and alone,
Full at their chief the luckless stranger flew,
And urg'd by fate severe his hoary father slew.

"'Hither the chace unhappy Phaedra led,
With Theseus blooming heir, a faithful guard,
Unspotted yet, and constant to her bed,
A sister's love the youthful hunter shar'd;
At last the weary nymph, unkindly starr'd,
With heat and labour faint, indulg'd her taste,
Soon in her heaving breast the passions jarr'd,
And lengthened time the growing plague increast,
Till all her fever'd soul the spreading ill confest.

"'From this the boy a goodly cluster bore,
Gather'd with charms, and sprent with midnight dew;
At that dread hour when borne from shore to shore,
The night hag flits, and calls her Stygian crew,
With her combin'd the deadly draught to brew;
This, in the royal bowl, by stealth infus'd,
He takes his stand, and waits the mandate due,
When mirth and wine the victor's cares had loos'd
And sober Reason sunk by rising fumes abus'd.

"'Anon the sovereign calls a larger bowl,
The medicated cup Aulestes brought,
The potent bev'rage lav'd his inmost soul,
And breath'd oblivion sweet of sober thought,
The mighty bowl, with starry gems inwrought,
Forsook his hand, and thro' his veins convey'd,
Gradual, the stealing charm his senses caught,
And soon at large his mighty limbs display'd,
And wrapt his slumb'ring powers in deep Lethean shade.

"'Late, late he woke, but found his limbs relaxt,
And powers absorpt in pleasing lassitude,
His op'ning ear the stunning clangor vext,
Of matin trump, and all the man subdued,
The din of wak'ning camps, and clamours rude,
With images of dread his fancy fill;
The martial notes by Cyrrha's caves renew'd,
And echoing round the steep Parnassian hill,
With sharp, convulsive fears the sov'reign bosom thrill.

"'Thus look'd th' unwarlike Sybarite of old,
When first he heard the hostile trump afar,
Thus quak'd the son of dalliance to behold,
Unfolding wide the glittering front of war,
And bann'd with bitter cries his luckless star.
Nor less the Gaul his dastard fears confest,
When sheath'd in steel beneath the burning star
Of day, with loud acclaim his bands addrest,
Their chief so matchless erst, and fear'd from east to west.

"'Yet forth he came, with show of wonted cheer,
Tho' much his breast the martial scene abhorr'd,
The deep battalions bent around to hear,
And hail with clashing arms their conquering lord.
He stood, and silence thro' the host restor'd,
Thus spoke, with rev'rence due, 'Ye chiefs attend
My first resolve; with this victorious sword
I mean to grace my young, illustrious friend,
And Gallia's troops shall learn beneath his sway to bend.

"'Sitalces!  Comius!  in the future fray
Shield his lov'd head, or pay it with your own,'
He spoke, his slave appear'd in armour gay,
Against the sun his polish'd aubern shone
The god in mortal guise, who deign'd to own
A servile shape, the deadly Gaul to quell.
Thro' the long files a deep and general groan
Was heard, and grief began each heart to swell,
While down their manly cheeks the tears indignant fell.

"'But deadlier passions mark'd the guilty night,
And vengeance brooded in her murky womb;
Ye vet'rans, meet your foe in open light,
And blush to seek by stealth a rival's doom.
Conven'd, the fierce barbarians to the tomb
Sentence the youth, and name the fatal hour;
A band besets the hospitable room,
When midnight's deepest shades began to lour,
But mortal strength is vain, engag'd with heavenly power.

"'With forms terrific, call'd from lowest hell,
And panic fears that wither'd every arm,
Some power unknown they felt their prowess quell,
And yelling Maenads led the dire alarm.
No fancy'd BACCHUS now was found to warm,
A present god impels the raging train,
The blank assassins own the powerful charm,
Unwonted terrors seize each madding brain,
With speed the ruffians fly, and seek their tents again.

"'Slow on their baffled hopes the pallid morn
Portentous rose, and forth with sullen sound
The squadrons pour; the Gauls with bridled scorn,
And looks averse, their stripling chief surround;
But soon a startling trump their murmurs crown'd,
And down the rocks the bands successive sweep;
The gleam of armour fluctuates o'er the ground;
Till hid in dust, the shadowy squadrons deep
Flash out by fits afar, slow winding round the steep.

"'Ill fated bands!  full little do you deem
On yonder plain what dire assailants wait;
Full soon the parched field and arid stream
With mystic warning shew'd their coming fate
Dan Phoebus seems, before the dire debate,
To threaten burning death &mdash; the sickly bands
Whose coming terrors shook the Dorian state,
To Vengeance, Vengeance pay his due demands,
That o'er their sickly host his iron wing expands!

"'Their chieftain seem'd alone to bear the sway
Of torrid skies, with firm undaunted breast;
His voice had arm'd with death the fervid day,
His power the terror of the clime increas'd,
Yet hale his might the fraudful god supprest,
And oft with healing words their anguish charm'd;
But when they snatch'd a moment's space to rest,
Some panic strange their slumb'ring files alarm'd,
And cold, unusual dread their slacken'd nerves disarm'd.

"'To Boreal blasts enur'd, and winter's flaw,
The hardy Gauls, beneath the sultry clime,
With growing pain, their limbs encumber'd draw
O'er the burnt soil, or up the hill sublime,
And whether Phoebus sought the point of prime,
Or dipt his glowing wheels in Calpe's sound,
Their blooming chief, unharden'd yet by time,
First led the march along the tainted ground,
The ambuscade explor'd, and scorn'd the threaten'd wound.

"'Oft to his mates the seeming hero said,
Why shrinks the Gaul, like some ignoble swain,
That, panting, seeks the forest's welcome shade,
When Sirius fires the parched hills amain
O tell it not on cold Aemathia's plain;
Let not the vanquish'd know their victor's fear,
Lest they resume their baffled arms again,
And lift once more the late undreaded spear,
To intercept our march, or glean the routed rear.

"'Yet persevere, your toils are near an end,
For see!  Boeotia's viny slopes arise,
Where still the nymphs their liquid tribute send
To Tethys' realm, and scorn the fervent skies.
When other plains the rage of Phoebus fries,
A cooling zephyr from the neighb'ring shore
The half extinguish'd lamp of life supplies
With vital strength, and genial dews restore
The cheerful vest of spring, his favour'd champaign o'er.

"'But danger guards the path &mdash; a warlike race
Tills the fair fields, and prunes the gen'rous vine,
Who never saw the hostile bands deface
Their labours unavenged:  a royal line,
That claims from Jove an origin divine
They boast, nor yet on heavenly aid alone
Depend, but wave aloft the martial sign,
And hem with steely bands their favour'd throne,
Nor fear to meet in arms the sons of either zone.

"'And let us meet in arms, the chief exclaim'd,
To arms, to arms, the cheerful bands return'd;
Lightning around their heads, their falchions flam'd.
Again their martial fires instinctive burn'd
From file to file, and much the warriors scorn'd
Their recent toils, that seem'd a vision past;
The troops no more their fading glory mourn'd,
But sprung obedient to the warning blast,
And trode, with measur'd march, the wild, uncultur'd waste.

"'But further on the desert seem'd to smile,
With rising lawns adorn'd, and copses green,
At length Boeotia's prospects pay their toil,
The wary warriors spy, with transport keen,
Her tow'ring woods with echoing walks between;
And ever and anon the distant fall
Of dashing waters cheer'd the solemn scene,
The parch'd barbarians hail the welcome call,
And pierce, with dreadless steps, the forest proud and tall.

"'Nor vain they wish, no fabling hope had led
Their vent'rous feet in fancy'd bowers astray;
Here no sick fervours smite the helmed head,
Nor swart star sent a pestilential ray,
Embow'ring woods to intercept the day,
Their canopies above, wide waving, threw,
While thro' the vistas brown, in long array,
His wond'ring files the seeming chieftain drew,
And oft the passing brook regal'd the fainting crew.

"'And fruits that seem'd Hesperian hues to boast,
Bent the long boughs with vegetable gold,
And grapes inviting hung; the Gallic host
Stood rapt awhile, and linger'd to behold
Scenes ev'n unthought, amid the bitter cold
Of northern climes, beneath the armed dew
Of winter; and her stormy sons controll'd.
Doubtful they stood, mistrusting what they saw,
Till strong desire at length o'ercame their coward awe.

"'And now they riot in the full repast,
Till the loud trump recall'd them to the toil,
Band after band the thronging warriors haste,
And thro' the wood in long battalion file;
Now, cried their leader, now a nobler spoil
Not distant far, your hardihood invites,
There haughty Thebes o'erlooks the subject soil,
And old Cithaeron sees the mystic rites
Of Bacchus interchang'd with ever new delights.

"'Yet no unbloody toil awaits your arms,
Yet owns the warrior god his dragon brood,
In suffering verst, and bred in fierce alarms,
To wounds enur'd, and prodigal of blood,
First in the field, and first to tempt the flood;
E'en Bacchus too, their martial vigour aids,
Their inmate god, whose power their plains endu'd
With virtues new, by sudden veins convey'd
Thro' the glad soil afar, to each luxuriant shade.

"'Hence no unnerving power pollutes their bowls,
Nor fell disease pursues the generous draught,
The potent juice anew inspires their souls,
Expands the mind, and lifts the tow'ring thought.
Hence still unquell'd by steel by gold unbought,
They guard the limits of their old domain,
For this, from age to age, their fathers taught
The mystic rites, so lov'd on yonder plain,
And slaughter'd hecatombs the solemn temples stain.

"'Thus not unworthy of the Gallic sword,
Expect a foe, but first with rev'rence due
To Bacchus pay your vows, with joint accord;
For all these woods that fill th' extensive view,
And all the purple stores profan'd by you
Are his; your prayers must calm the wrath divine;
Perhaps by suppliant prayer, in accents new
Repaid, he may admit the northern line
In friendship with the race of Cadmus to combine.

"'But war must first decide:'  he spoke, and round
His temples twin'd an ivy garland gay;
The bending squadron catch the welcome sound,
And sudden wreaths along the deep array,
Hide their bright helms, and o'er their vizors play.
While the fair victims, from the neighb'ring plain
Selected, bleed to him whose gentle sway
With purple stores repays the careful swain,
And gives the gen'rous bowl to soothe his subjects' pain.

"'Prest from the grape that bloom'd on either hand,
The mazer large with ready must they fill,
Then dealt around to each desiring band;
And soon they felt the hallow'd juice instill
Unusual warmth, and oft, secure of ill,
With deep, repeated draughts the bowl they drain,
Nor felt the hand that led astray their will,
And hung portentous o'er the band profane,
That dar'd his fruits deface, and desolate his reign.

"'Again the warning trumps a signal send,
And onward soon th' embattled squadrons move,
Shoot o'er the vale, and up the hill ascend,
Where old CITHAERON, with his hallow'd grove,
Westward appear'd, and swelling far above,
O'erlooks with summit proud the subject towers,
Aloft the insidious progeny of Jove
Points the fair prospect to his Gallic powers,
Where each consenting god a various blessing showers.

"'All calm and peaceful seem'd the cultur'd scene,
No wasting hand had spoil'd the vintage fair,
No trenched camp had marr'd the velvet green,
Where, unsuspicious of the coming war,
The joyous peasant yok'd his groaning car
With golden sheaves, or winding o'er the lea,
Turn'd the rich glebe aslope with shining share;
The prospect smil'd as far as eye could see,
That promis'd to their arms a bloodless victory.

"'Yet fear of guile to closer march compell'd,
Their strength compact, and on secure they bode,
Thro' length of viny shade, whose clusters swell'd
By rip'ning beams, o'erhung the level road,
Till Thebes, at length, her tow'ry summits show'd,
And near Ismenos old was seen to sweep
Thro the dark wood, and near the lov'd abode
Of demi-gods, his quiet waters deep
Then seem'd to wind away beyond Cithaeron's steep.

"'No warlike sound disturb'd the quiet state,
Nor startling trump was heard, nor warning bell,
No warrior crown'd the walls, nor clos'd the gate,
But flowers of vernal hue, and fragrant smell,
Strew'd deep the smiling path, and seem'd to tell
No tale of blood, but festal pomp and play,
And joyous notes were heard around to swell,
Proclaiming loud their god's distinguish'd day,
And strains that held the soul in am'rous, sweet delay.

"'Deep thro' his tingling veins the raptur'd Gaul
Felt the sweet lay, and half resign'd his spear,
List'ning intent to every dying fall,
Nor reck'd the glorious boon that seem'd so near;
By hope incited, yet repell'd by fear,
They saw their foes already half subdu'd;
In vain their leaders strove their wonted cheer
To wake; in thought absorpt the vet'ran stood,
And now the portal fair, and now the empires view'd.

"'Nor long they stood at gaze, for now the noise
Of onset seem'd to end each milder thought,
While beating cymbals pierc'd the vaulted skies,
And echoing brass the starry welkin smote,
The Gallic trump return'd a shriller note,
The siegers stand to arms, and wait the fray,
Daring, with levell'd spear, th' incursion hot,
When lo!  instead of troops in firm array,
The op'ning portal pour'd a train of damsels gay.

"'To the soft flute, and sweet alluring song,
In mystic dance the beauteous bevy came,
And as the dazzling van they pass'd along,
Each kindling bosom felt the nascent flame;
Unconscious they how fast their fading fame
Evanish'd sad before the lambent fire,
While from the glance of each seductive dame,
Thro' the thick squadrons shot pernicious fire,
Still as they tript along enkindling new desire.

"'A slender javelin, deckt with ivy twine,
Each fair hand grac'd, and on each head a wreath,
Pluck'd from the tendrils of the teeming vine,
With flow'rets wove that mix'd the balmy breath,
With zephyrs sweet that sent oblivious death
Thro' the charm'd sense, and lull'd the slumb'ring war.
Bellona's faulchion slept in idle sheath,
And Mars stood wond'ring in his sanguine car,
While Venus smil'd to view the triumphs of the fair.

"'And Love triumphant laugh'd to see the sight,
As nearer now the wond'rous crisis drew,
The barb'rous foe, subdu'd by young delight,
Relaxt his files, and 'mongst the armed crew
Soon mixt the nymphs, a gaily chequer'd view,
And ev'ry warrior singled out his maid,
While here and there a yet untainted few
Deplor'd their honour lost, and Gaul betray'd,
And all her vet'rans fall'n in deadly ambuscade.

"'In vain; for now the hallow'd cymbals struck
A louder strain, and from the alter'd breast
The ling'ring, last remains of manhood shook,
And in its stead inspir'd a madding pest.
Their lengthen'd files the virgin train addrest,
The signal to attend, for loud and shrill
The timbrels sounds the startled sense arrest,
The loud trump answers from Cithaeron's hill,
And every panting heart with sacred fury fill.

"'Religion with Desire his force unites,
And Bacchus holds with Love a blended sway,
Each warrior burns to join the hallow'd rites,
And o'er the sacred mountain longs to stray;
There hid from war's alarms, and sight of day,
To melt the happy hours in dalliance sweet.
For still the Nymphs, with ling'ring, sweet delay,
Seem'd from their mates in sorrow to retreat,
As love had set their souls at variance with their feet.

"'To high Cithaeron now began to draw,
With measur'd step, the consecrated train,
With bleeding hearts the soften'd warriors saw
The sad divorce, and loudly own'd their pain.
And now, slow rising from the subject main,
Still eve, with shaded face, their cares renew'd
Deep night invested soon the peopled plain,
The sacred hill, the slowly winding flood,
Old Dirce's awful tow'rs and consecrated wood.

"'Now through the broad encampment mute and still
All seem'd, but were not all to sleep resign'd,
While, girt with wand'ring fires, Cithaeron's hill
Sent a mix'd murmur on the passing wind;
With vocal strains the Lydian flute combin'd,
The timbrel swell'd the Bacchanalian glee,
The wakeful lover heard, and straight consign'd
His martial oath to air, and down the lee
Stole from his slumb'ring mates that dreamt of victory.

"'With wand'ring lovers flock'd the trench profound,
As single or in pairs they sought the height.
Nor yet the widow'd camp her weakness found,
Buried in sleep, and double shade of night;
But now in troops, disdaining coward sleight,
Flocking they come, and pass the vigil bands;
Bent on some bold emprize that shunn'd the light
They seem'd, and sped along the yielding sands,
Where near Ismenos' banks the winding vale expands.

"'Fond youths!  they thought the strong emotion sent
From heaven, a sign of peace and union fair;
Rapt at the thought, they felt their hearts relent,
And dreams of blood disperst in empty air.
Now dusky Night, enthron'd in ebon ear,
Had measur'd more than half her ample round&mdash;
An hour that Love and Magic seem'd to share&mdash;
It saw the warrior pass the tainted ground,
Following, with charmed ears, the pipe's delusive sound.

"'Ne'er did their feet repass the yielding sand;
Whether they fell in deadly ambuscade,
Or some avenging pow'r the slaughter plann'd,
Is yet unknown, or if by love betray'd,
And sunk in slumber by the reeking blade
Of female treason dire, an easy prey.
But when the breaking morn afar display'd
Her rosy tints, a martial trophy gay
With pale and dismal gleam return'd the glance of day.

"'Why need I tell of Gallia's pale affright,
Robb'd of her strength, and how the leaders strove
To save their thin remains by timely flight;
While, hemm'd by plagues and smote by angry Jove,
They paid the forfeit of disast'rous love;
And last BELINUS, by himself subdu'd,
Clos'd the dire list of death
And calm'd celestial vengeance with his blood&mdash;
Unwept, unurned, he lay, beside Castalia's flood.

"'Ill-fated king!  thy fall Andraste wail'd,
And mighty Thor his thund'ring chiefs bemoan'd
In vain; the Muses and their God prevail'd,
Great Bacchus too the kindred quarrel own'd,
Soon with his dearest blood the foe aton'd
His easy faith, and mourn'd his minion's love:
But haste, your rites by me too long postpon'd,
Go immolate th' aethereal seed of JOVE,
But first, be sure he bear a mission from above.'

"He spoke.  'twas all he durst, forbid by fate,
Who left them free to judge, and free to will.
Low thro' the temple ran the long debate
Th' assistants stood, attentive, mute, and still,
Waiting the awful word to save or kill,
And life and death alternate bore the sway,
The king, that wish'd the purpose to fulfill
Of heaven, by turns prevailed, by turns gave way,
As wind and sea contend in elemental fray.

"The shades of ev'ning hover'd o'er the fane,
Before they could decide their country's doom
The council they adjourn, till o'er the main
Ascending day should chase the scattering gloom.
The rising stars the face of night relume;
Till Phosphor's hand unlock'd Aurora's gate,
Again the seniors meet, again resume,
With passions all inflam'd, the fierce debate,
On that great day ordain'd to fix Ogygia's fate.

"Some taught by art to mend the noxious soil,
And purge with fire and steel from every vein
The latent plague that us'd to mock their toil,
And spread thro' earth and air prolific bane;
Whence drizzling death that thin'd the humid plain,
To charms and magic spells unus'd to yield;
But they who still ador'd the gentle reign
Of native ease, maintain'd the dubious field,
And with Barbarian rage calm Reason's force repell'd.

"Yet Prudence had prevail'd, but now a deed
Of dreadful note was done, that turn'd the tide
Of human passions with resistless speed
To Circe's current, for while yet supply'd
With forces new, the votes on either side
Ambiguous mixt in even balance hung,
A wretch whom fell disease had long deny'd
To breathe the balmy air, amid the throng,
By fatal impulse led, had dragg'd his limbs along.

"Whether he thought a Leaches' help to find
In that vast concourse, or resolv'd to aid
The cause with feeble voice, or 'reft of mind
Among the justling crowd at random stray'd;
Or if the fiends the languid wretch betray'd,
For their insidious ends his doom to meet,
Is all unknown; but while his limbs essay'd
To press still nearer to the judgment seat,
He sunk, and life began with gradual ebb to fleet.

"His friends collected round him as he lay,
And try'd to wake the vital spark again,
But fruitless was their art, the rigid clay
For ever had dismist to Hades' reign
The wand'ring ghost, but now a furious swain
(His brother) swore to 'venge a brother's blood;
And, forcing on, where Mnemon held the train
In mute suspence, by reason half subdu'd
He pierc'd the senior's side, and sluic'd the vital flood.

"He fled, and some pursu'd with pious haste,
Others old Mnemon rais'd, but rais'd in vain,
For soon his trembling eyeballs look'd their last,
And out the crimson current gush'd amain;
Some bear the corses thence, and some detain
The ruffian seiz'd as thro' the port he flew.
Some vote for instant death, but some detain
The course of vengeance, till enquiry due
From the assassin's breast his secret motive drew.

"Nor long the daring homicide within
The deadly cause conceal'd, nor did he seem
Like one who labour'd with a sense of sin,
But from his eyeballs shot an angry gleam;
Red as the fire of Autumn, seen to stream
Across the lived sky, when storms impend,
And thus he spoke:  'My blood I nought esteem,
If it be shed to such a glorious end
As proves me to the state a more than common friend.

"'I saw Disease and Want, confed'rate foes,
Lay waste our lands, and bounteous heaven proclaim
What rites we need the direful pass to close,
Through which that deadly tide of evil came,
While that blasphemer dar'd (eternal shame
To manhood and to truth!)  to keep at bay
The will of Heaven, till Phoebus quench'd his flame
In Ocean's wave, then rose upon the day
To see our nerveless hands the glorious deed delay.

"'Twas not my brother's fate that rous'd my soul,
Twas heaven's own energy that steel'd my blade,
That hoary unbeliever to control,
And send this harbinger before the shade
Of our prime victim, now the price is paid,
Exact the forfeit if ye deem the deed
Merits untimely death.'  Thus undismay'd
The murth'rer spoke, the wond'ring crowd recede,
And in each others looks their varying passions read.

"At length a voice was heard aloud to cry,
'It is the doom of heavern, its stubborn foe
Has fallen;' its swift contagion seem'd to fly
Like lightning thro' the press, the lorrid glow
Of Zeal was seen in every face to show
Her fiery ensigns, while the frantic crowd
With general voice applaud the direful blow,
And vote th' oblation by the victim vow'd,
To save Ogygia's realm by Providence bestow'd.

"Then stepping forth with more than mortal tread,
The stranger bold approach'd the funeral pile,
And pond'ring for a space his fatal bed,
He stood collected in himself awhile,
Then cry'd, 'Ye lords of this deliver'd isle,
Prepare no tomb for me, nor hallow'd urn,
But the small reliques of this earthly spoil,
Of fickle Fortune long the abject scorn,
The Naiads claim, to them my fated dust return.

"'Yet ere the moon her silver crescent fills,
Ere the dark south collects her wat'ry store,
And roll'd tumultuous from a thousand hills,
The cloud-collected torrents seek the shore,
In the pure parent flood my ashes pour,
And soothe their rage before they seek the main,
Thus to the nymphs their wonted calm restore,
And please with off'rings due the Naiad train,
Then shall your prayers at last an answer due obtain.

"'Then shall glad Ceres see her harvests bend,
Nor blighting dews, nor storms autumnal fear,
The Nymphs appeas'd, their humble task shall tend,
Nor more with flaws deform the mellowing year;
Quartana, wont to load the frequent bier,
Shall fly the fields with disappointed rage;
The sire no more shall drop th' untimely tear
On the cold grave that holds his precious pledge,
Nor curse the tardy flight of slow consuming age.'

"He said, and call'd his mates, the faithful train
Soon on the pile the noble victim laid,
While others kept aloof the crowd profane;
Meanwhile the sign was given, the priest obey'd,
And straight embru'd in gore, the reeking blade,
The hallow'd pile was seen, and smoking ground,
An hand beneath the speedy torch convey'd,
And soon the spreading flames their victim found,
While groans, with mixt applause, were heard to ring around."

