CANTO I.
ARGUMENT.
The secret way Narcestes shews,
The fancy to beguile;
And Circe's train, with snares enclose
Ogygia's favour'd isle:

COMUS, farewel!  farewel, ye nights of glee,
When letter'd care was lost in genial joy,
When ALMA trim'd her evening lamp for thee,
Whose beam dispell'd the tedious, dull, annoy
Of ZENO'S lore; and bade her sons employ
In kindlier tasks the Attic ev'ning long;
While mirth and wine evok'd the talent coy,
The bandied jest, the deep engaging song,
And each spontaneous birth of fancy ever young.

For ever now farewel!  and oh ye Powers
That o'er th' assembly shed a softer light,
Ye saw no feud deform our social hours,
Nor malice rankling deep, nor louring spite,
They fled, and mingled with the shade of night:
And Friendship, holy Hermit!  came instead,
With Candour join'd, to bless the gladsome rite;
And ancient Faith the fair procession led,
And sometimes LOVE himself would show his radiant head.

There every virtue, by reflection rais'd,
From rosy bowls spontaneous seem'd to spring;
Touch'd by the spell, the hidden talent blaz'd,
Successive kindling round the jovial ring.
There oft the future Bard essay'd to sing,
Or ready fiction grac'd his simple tale,
And youthful ROSCIUS try'd the soul to sting
With fancy'd woe:  or down the gloomy vale
Of terror, led at will his list'ning audience pale.

Argute, of right and wrong, the MAN of LAW
The nice distinction drew with subtle speed:
With accents tun'd the general breast to thaw,
The patriot learn'd his country's cause to plead.
Cosmo!  you seem'd ordain'd to every meed
That Virtue on the chosen few bestows;
And ev'ry Muse your wand'rings seem'd to lead
Thro' various paths, yet on thy morn arose,
Thy bright distinguish'd morn, a train of dark'ning woes.

O say, while on the banks of Ganges' flood
Thou feel'st the sun embrown thy manly frame,
Or prodigal of long-descended  blood,
Follow'st on RODNEY'S decks the call of fame:
Say, feels thy bosom yet the lambent flame
That warm'd our kindred souls in Alma's bowers,
And haply kindling at some glorious name,
With song heroic sooth'st the sultry hours,
Or call'st to fond review the scenes that once were ours?

Or, if thou wing'st thy disembodied flight,
And view'st with pitying look thy friend beneath;
Turn hither from yon argent fields of light
Thy cherub eye, and mark the constant faith
That still pursues thee down the vale of death;
And oh!  one beam of intellectual day
On him who weaves for thee this simple wreath
Dispense benign, to guide his lonely way,
Where minstrel, old or young, was never seen to stray.

Or do thy old compeers attract thy view?
Oft wilt thou see the renegade belie
Those seeming virtues that spontaneous grew
Midst scenes of Bacchanalian revelry;
Like gourds that spring beneath an Asian sky
By night, and sicken in the blaze of noon.
O teach thy friend the backward spell to try,
That disenchants the soul, by Circe's boon
Entangled; as he strays beneath the midnight moon.

From yonder Naiad nymphs I long to know
The liquid meaning of their warbled strain,
If some sad tale they tell of ancient woe,
Some baleful chance that spoil'd their fair domain:
Often they seem of broken faith to 'plain,
Of rites disturb'd and violations foul,
Of deep, successful guile, by Stygian train
Long hatch'd; and realms, beneath the dark control
Of vice and slavery sunk, that damp the rising soul.

Was there a time that saw your virgin choir
With vows addrest, and deck'd with honours due,
When on your altars rose the hallow'd fire,
Guiltless of blood, and happy mortals knew
No draught that fires the veins, but call'd to you
For that pure lymph that sports the meads along,
That clothes in vernal vest the smiling view,
Feeds the bent boughs, with fruits autumnal hung,
And cheers the happy droves that yon green pastures throng?

There was &mdash; for see!  long ages past return,
And seem to bring again the times of gold;
Kesars and kings forsake the funeral urn.
Lo!  Rome's long vanish'd glories first unfold,
SPARTA'S grave sons, and ATTIC triumphs old,
AFRIC and IND before the mental eye
Expanded sweep, and many a region cold
And swarthy nation fleet in silence by,
At length a broad isle shows her rocky verge on high.

Hail!  ye rude scenes and devious dells forlorn,
Ye rising slopes, bedeck'd with various green,
Though yonder cliffs are clad with rugged thorn,
As here the hand of art had never been,
Sweet smiles the lawn that spreads the bow'rs between,
Yon glades that steal in checquer'd light away;
Yon streams that wander thro' the solemn scene;
How bright their bosoms clear reflect the ray,
As yon indented vale they cross in wanton play.

Yet marks of heavenly wrath were seen around,
The swart stars rage, and blight of noxious dew;
Her stateliest plants confess'd the thunder's wound,
And by the slanting shaft of lightning blue
Transfixt, were seen to pine, a piteous view:
'Mongst them an hermit ply'd the heavenly art,
And slowly seem'd their vigour to renew,
Closing the scar of Jove's avenging dart,
And sighs and bursting groans bespoke a loaded heart.

With gentle voice I hail'd the man of toil:
Mild he reply'd, and from his labour ceast,
As glad a respite of his woes awhile
To find, and meet at length an human guest.
Then, on the sward, inviting welcome rest,
He sate, and 'gan this moving tale to tell;
By what disast'rous chance a wretch, unblest,
Degraded from the heavenly choir he fell,
While anguish deep was seen his aged breast to swell.

"Worn with the toils of many a century,
A being, once for nobler tasks design'd,
Thou seest!  when active, unconfin'd, and free
I trode the ooze, and wanton'd on the wind;
But now, my early honours all resign'd,
Folly has seiz'd, and left me heir to Shame,
And here the wayward powers their captive bind,
The stubborn trunk with ceaseless care to tame,
Till Fate's concluding stroke dissolve the mundane frame.

"Commission'd erst to watch the human soul,
To tend the generous seeds of early worth,
Prolific vice and folly to control,
And lead the nobler thoughts to timely birth;
With heavenly gifts I blest the sons of earth,
Their minds illumin'd, and their fancy fed
With visions pure, and call'd the cherub forth
With early speed the ways of heaven to tread,
While Virtue round their paths successive glories shed.

"Pow'rs, how abus'd, and gifts how misapply'd!
With dark intent the human soul I scann'd,
With foul design his noblest pow'rs I try'd,
Found out his bent, and thence his ruin plann'd.
'Twas when the son of CIRCE touch'd the strand,
In evil hour, from eastern realms afar,
An exile sad, expell'd by armed hand.
The midland surge he past, and CALPE'S bar,
Led to this fated isle by some malignant star.

"Too soon I broke my faith, his wiles to aid,
And Virtue's glorious image to deface.
Too soon OGYGIA'S feeble sons betray'd,
Saw her long glories sunk in sad disgrace:
But, wak'd to vengeance for her favour'd race,
Heav'n spoke in storms the traitor's direful doom,
And me confin'd to this enchanted place;
Bound to this central oak, in sylvan gloom,
To tend its tardy growth, a weary woodland Groom.

"And I, that mark'd the silent march of thought,
And led the fancy far beyond the range
Of yonder stars, am now by Fortune taught
To watch the seasons' slow-revolving change;
While, vig'rous still, my active powers avenge
My crime, and urge me still beyond the bound
Heaven mark'd; the twining fibres' growth to range,
To bid the green blood dance its tardy round,
And clothe the sullen year with gradual honours crown'd.

"How lively seems the spring to mortal eye!
Misjudging men!  that know not whence it grows,
Whence those fine perfumes scent the summer sky,
Whence buds the bloom, and smiles the op'ning rose.
Little they think what unrelenting woes
Are ours, to whom such labours are assign'd;
While still the unextinguish'd spirit glows,
(Heav'n's energy) and pains th' aspiring mind,
To gross; material tasks and earthly cares confin'd."

Eager to learn the process of his fate,
"Oh say," I cry'd, "if yet 'tis giv'n to tell,
By what sad steps you left your former state,
And how the deep disastrous chance befell."
His smother'd sorrows seem'd afresh to swell:
Then thus &mdash; "Oh painful task, to number o'er
Those happy days, before this magic spell
Bound my sad feet to this accursed shore&mdash;
Ye golden hours, mispent, adieu for evermore!

"But now to things beyond thy narrow ken
Attend, for Heav'n has heard thy fervent pray'r;
Then leave awhile the toilsome walks of men,
And try with me to breathe a lighter air.
To hear a tale of ancient times prepare,
By minstrel yet untold, or poet sung,
And learn the hand that wove the deadly snare
That o'er this isle the foul contagion flung,
From whence a hateful crop in sad OGYGIA sprung.

"OGYGIA'S ancient kings their lineage drew
From man, but mingled with the FAIRY line,
The water Fays were destin'd to renew
The royal progeny by right divine.
Still, when the senior king obey'd the sign
Of Fate, and in his place another rose,
And HYMEN call'd in wedlock's bands to join,
A LADY OF THE LAKE the Monarch chose,
The sovereign throne to share till time his term should close.

"On this, and on the old establish'd laws,
That kept unstain'd and pure the primal rite
Of NAIAD worship still, the gen'ral cause
Rely'd, nor could th' assembled Pow'rs of night,
And Chaos join'd obscure the golden light
Of love and rural joy, that ever crown'd
Their placid years, till Circe's deadly spight
Was rais'd, to see, beneath the Lunar bound,
Scenes of Elysian bliss, and guiltless peace profound.

"She ask'd, but Heav'n deny'd the bold request,
With desolating hand to scourge the isle&mdash;
Heav'n guarded still OGYGIA'S sacred rest
From hostile inroad, or Demonian spoil;
But still success might be ensur'd by guile.
Her arts the goddess then resolv'd to try,
For much she mourn'd that one distinguish'd soil
Her mighty sway, presumptuous, should defy,
When all was hers besides beneath the ample sky

"HYDRANOR now was laid in marble mound;
CRENAEUS in his room was call'd to sway
The regal rod, but ere his head was crown'd
With golden diadem, the solemn day
Was fix'd, within the NAIAD'S fane to pay
His vows, that from the floods and fountains clear
Call'd the soft wat'ry Nymphs, in sheen array,
Before the youthful monarch to appear,
To chuse, as love should point, his future consort dear.

"Within the sacristy a mirror hung,
Of old by MULCIBER for THETIS made,
When, from the welkin by his father flung,
The goddess o'er him drew the ample shade
Of ocean for defence.  In charms array'd
Of heavenly tint, OGYGIA'S future bride,
Amid the forms by magic art display'd,
That seem'd along its polish'd plane to glide,
Taught by victorious charms the monarch to decide.

"Oblation now was past, the moment came,
The magic glass disclos'd a pageant fair
Of bright successive nymphs, that seem'd to claim
An angel's love, and turn to blank despair
That man's presumption who aspir'd to share
A bliss beyond the hopes of breathing clay;
Yet powerless all, as images of air,
They past; but one at length, like rising Day,
Sent through the monarch's heart a keen resistless ray.

"'Twas no deluding form of passing air,
For soon the bright original was found,
A nymph unknown before, but heavenly fair.
The unsuspicious train her title own'd,
Although her spring, emerging from the ground.
Was seen but lately in a northern dale;
For many nymphs, from Ocean's caves profound,
Oft pour'd their full urns o'er the rocky pale,
And from new fountains sprung, that lav'd the gloomy vale.

"But when the diadem adorn'd her brow,
With signs of cloudy hate and cold disdain
She met the nymphs, and oft a ranc'rous glow,
That ne'er was known the harmless smile to stain
Of any meek-ey'd daughter of the main,
Her glance disclos'd, and oft she kept aloof
The sisterhood, who in each former reign
Had grac'd with fairy charms the regal roof,
And led the circling dance, in weeds of azure woof.

"This bred surmise, and in a gloomy cave,
By secret summons call'd, the nymphs convene,
And all resolv'd, that, when from ocean's wave
Emerging bright, the solemn day was seen
That call'd their squadrons on the hallow'd green
To undergo lustration's usual rite,
A charm they would prepare to prove their queen
(Their queen that seem'd their homage due to slight)
Whether of Ocean bred, or born of ancient Night.

"They sought (for well they knew) the parent spring
From which the ministers of nature's lore
To every tribe the vital blessing bring,
And the warm tide transfuse from shore to shore,
Creation round, for hence the waters hoar
Their shoals deriv'd, and hence the plumy train
That through the winnow'd air exulting soar,
With all that haunt the hill, or tread the plain,
And man, imperial lord alike of land and main.

"No deep disguise this hallow'd fount withstood,
Of power the genuine features to restore;
The vizor fell beneath the sprinkled flood,
Whatever mask the foul dissembler wore,
It shrunk at once the searching lymph before;
And to his native train with fury sent,
Or bound a season on the Stygian shore
His darksome days the sad deserter spent,
And there at leisure learnt his follies to lament.

"In secret then the hallow'd urn they fill;
Th, expectant Naiads form a circle round,
And wait the awful trial mute and still.
At length th' elected nymph, with poplar crown'd,
Uplifts the lustral bough &mdash; the rocking ground
Her mutter'd magic felt and mystic spell,
The trembling wood her incantation own'd;
They saw, or dream'd they saw, disclosing hell,
And heard, in Fancy's ear, the song of torture swell.

"It ceast, and now she rais'd her streaming bough,
And o'er th' assembly dash'd the moisture far;
Once more a wailing strain was heard below,
And loud laments, and notes of shrill despair.
Straight from OGYGIA'S queen her borrow'd air
And veil of azure hue disruptive fled;
A snaky ringlet bound her horrent hair,
And flames sulphureous play'd around her head,
As on th' astonish'd crew she scowl'd unusual dread.

"But not permitted then to vent her spite,
Down to the Stygian strand she fled amain,
And to the brood of Erebus and Night
Her loss deplor'd, and late deserted reign.
'Twas CIRCE who forsook the realms of pain,
'Twas her the spell dismist, with vengeance due,
From her high post amid the virgin train,
Where, like a Naiad, cloth'd in amice blue,
She try'd with borrow'd charms to lure the monarch's view.

"Amazement first and fear the monarch show'd,
Then gratitude to Heav'n, with kindly glow
His cheek diffus'd, to Heav'n that thus bestow'd
The means to 'scape his dark, insidious foe.
With better omens soon his nuptial vow
He plighted to a nymph of genuine race:
And now the tide of time in quiet flow
Went on, nor dark mishap, nor foul disgrace,
In fair OGYGIA'S bounds could find a lasting place.

"But nought beneath is found of stable state:
For whether all the powers above, combin'd
Man's fortitude to try' or rigid Fate
This dark vicissitude of old assign'd,
In the long tissue of their doom, design'd
Ere ancient-time began, is hard to tell.
But soon the Naiad Nymphs their fame resign'd
For vigilance; secure of demon spell,
No bounded intellect all errors can dispel.

"Yet BACCHUS on the hills benignant reign'd,
On which he founded fair his sunny seat;
Nor Dirce's fields alone his sway sustain'd,
But far it reach'd across the OEUBEAN strait,
Thence to the shores of THRACE the sacred freight
Was wafted gradual o'er with viewless hand
While old LYCURGUS rul'd in temperate state.
Amaz'd the monarch view'd the moon-struck band.
Lead their mad orgies round, and tumult all the land.

"Then Licence reign'd, and rude misgovern'd Joy.
And wild Misrule, and scorn of rigid right;
The noise of Riot struck the lofty sky,
And guiltier scenes profan'd the conscious night:
Fair Temperance felt the unexpected blight,
Like some sweet flower that withers ere its prime;
A sudden palsy undermin'd the might
Of manhood fair, and marr'd his look sublime,
And Waste and Wassail rul'd thro' all the frozen clime.

"But heav'n besides to foul infection doom'd
The isles that lie beyond the midland main,
And now the sparks of liberty illum'd
To daring deeds the yet untainted train;
Incenst, the monarch vindicates his reign,
He gives the word, and SOPHRON leads the band,
To purge, with ruthless steel, the spreading bane;
The screaming BACCHANALS forsake the strand,
E'en Bacchus hid his head, and own'd the conquering hand.

"Intemperance fled before the victor's arms,
And giddy Joy and brainsick Mirth retir'd;
Where'er the Thracian spread his dire alarms,
The social bowl no more the circle fir'd,
Nor to wild deeds the revel rout inspir'd;
Down from its stay the interdicted vine
Abandon'd hung, nor more the elm attir'd;
Old RHODOPE beheld the sacred sign,
Her frantic orgies ceast, and own'd the hand divine.

"Then westward far before the ruthless sword,
With his foil'd squadron fled the purple God,
His vine-clad hills the victor's rage deplor'd,
And immature, resign'd the generous load.
COMUS, an exile too, reluctant bode
Full many a barren soil with feet unblest,
And many a driving storm sublime he rode,
At length this land, by Neptune's arms embrac'd,
Receiv'd the God, and down he sunk with toil opprest.

"O'er all the islands in the western main
This isle was fam'd, where yet unrivall'd stood
The Naiads' power, and still beneath the reign
Of maiden worship, bent the guileless brood;
A spotless race, that quaff'd the running flood
And milky stream, unstain'd by fraud or strife;
The snowy flock, the glebe, and pendent wood,
(Innoxious stores!)  preserv'd their simple life,
Nor in their gentle breasts could ranc'rous Hate survive.

"In the pure fount the Naiad train distill'd
Sweet PANACEE, to 'swage the mental storm;
Spontaneous flow'rets clad the rural wild,
And ridgy rocks put on a soften'd charm,
Nor inborn Hate, nor Terror's wild alarm,
With dark contagion touch'd the deep serene;
Virtue alone and Freedom's glow could warm
The gen'ral breast, and Love, resistless queen,
Oft stole, with harmless smile, their rural cares between.

"'Twas when the moon, that led the golden rear
Of gaudy Summer, shone with fainter ray,
And gentle Ceres saw the rip'ning ear
Her winding vales and sunny slopes array,
Forth as she wander'd at the close of day,
To drench her poppies tall with balmy dew,
She met, in woeful plight, the banish'd FAY:
Full soon his name and race the Goddess knew,
And at his dismal tale her gentle pity grew.

"Too soft compassion &mdash; near akin to love!
The kindred warmth her easy heart betray'd,
Nor much against th' insidious power she strove,
That came in Pity's holy garb array'd.
At length, as Fate ordain'd, the conscious glade
Conceal'd in evil hour the am'rous theft,
Nor long in dalliance fond the victor staid,
But changing, soon his easy conquest left,
Of spotless name, at once, and inward peace bereft.

"Nine Crescents now had led the Months along,
And Spring, in amber car returning, smil'd;
The bird of MAY renew'd her simple song,
And op'ning blooms adorn'd the fragrant wild:
When, by the river's side, the matron mild
Produc'd in secret shade her youngest born;
The gentle Naiad nymphs receiv'd the child&mdash;
Poor orphan babe!  of mother's care forlorn;
Alas!  they soon had cause their tender pains to mourn.

"His childish years, secure, in pearly caves,
In meads arid rushy dells, the foundling past,
Now on the bank, and now beneath the wave,
And all his peers in active feats surpast,
Whether to ride in rage the stormy blast,
Or dreadless plunge adown the deep descent,
As o'er the trembling rocks in fury cast
The wintry deluge roar'd in deep ferment,
When sad Aquarius' urn his wat'ry stores had spent.

"But darker deeds employ'd the conscious night,
And soon the habits of his sire were shown,
For oft, in midnight hour, the busy sprite
His baneful business ply'd, nor ply'd alone,
For all the murky tribes below that own
The simpling trade, and pois'nous dews distill
With charms, suppos'd of old to disenthrone
The lub'ring moon, or stop the murm'ring rill,
In throngs attended oft, obedient to his will.

"'Twas then, with Fates averse, I first began
At times to listen to his magic lore;
In secret mingling with the dark divan,
When night o'er all the whit'ning lands breath'd frore.
Then oft I heard the wailing FAY deplore
His ancient loss, and oft lamenting tell
How, in sad exile from this happy shore,
His sires, repuls'd of old, were driven to dwell
Where round th' Atlantic coast the southern surges swell.

"He told how CIRCE from her native bourne
Erst by the NAIAD nymphs was banish'd far,
To Aeas' isle, where still she lives forlorn,
Till Time remove the interposing bar,
Or Fate, by covert guile, or open war,
Her ancient rites restore:  'Her right to claim
I come, her destin'd heir, with happier star,
To break the bonds of servitude and shame,
Or earn, though overthrown, a never-dying name.

"'And ye, fall'n elves!  by plague ethereal struck,
Why deign ye thus in petty ills to spend
The precious hours, and underneath the yoke
Of our GRAND FOE with abject fear to bend?
Is it for YOU the deadly blight to send,
With mildew hoar the milky stem to spoil,
Or overhead th' unkindly fog to blend,
Or brew the blast that mars the peasant's toil?
Renounce th' ignoble task, and scorn the puny wile.

"'Shall Temperance lead the Virtues in her train,
And her pale vot'ries find the way to fame?
Shall Freedom lose the strong CIRCEAN chain,
And match HIS fires with her immortal flame?
Shall yonder nymphs acquire a deathless name
For wat'ry stores supply'd, and milky cheer?
Shall their calm sway the stormy passions tame,
Your right usurp, and rule the circling year?
Say, can you thus submit the galling load to bear?

"'Go claim your own again, and try your arms
On man, revolting man; their favour'd race!
Nor dream of onset fierce, nor loud alarms;
No vi'lent deeds the haughty foe displace.
Oh were it given our Fury to deface
With STYGIAN flames the whole creation fair,
No coward doubts should e'er your zeal debase,
No weak compassion bid your vengeance spare:
But HE, whose voice we dread, forbids th' unequal war.

"'But still their virtue fears our secret force,
Till pure it glows, by long probation try'd,
Our arts can lure them from their rigid course,
And drag their weak supplanted steps aside;
For while th' ethereal spark to dust ally'd
Inhabits here, the tenant of a day,
'Tis doom'd for life the trial to abide
Of long successive ills in dark array,
And with the powers beneath maintain a dubious fray.

"'But if, to unbecoming fears resign'd,
Ye still recoil, and shun th' unequal fight,
Some other means our godlike race will find,
By force or fraud to gain our ravish'd right,
Then, ye degen'rate sons of ancient Night
When proud Rebellion feels the galling chain,
On YOU the Vict'ress shall employ her might;
Then, doom'd to double toil by land and main,
Your labours Shall support the weight of CIRCE'S reign.'

"They heard, and were abash'd, and through their files
Pale terror spread beneath the glimm'ring moon;
Then, offering all at once their ardent toils,
They close him round; the chief accepts the boon;
Then with their dusky lord consulting soon,
The thronging elves with cloudy aspect meet;
Then once again the master FAY begun
With surer wile to plan the deadly feat,
And weave the Stygian snare, conceal'd in dark retreat.

"'Say, ye that know,' our ELFIN regent cry'd,
'The readiest avenue to reach his heart;
To win his warmest passions to our side,
And mimic nature's power with deepest art.
All in the glorious toil shall bear a part,
And help our cause with elemental aid;
Elves of the liquid air, and spirits swart,
That ply in caves th' unutterable trade,
And shed the sickly damp in dreary fogs array'd.'

"'Twas then in evil hour my counsel drew,
Attention deep as best of all the train,
Temptation's soft seductive hour I knew,
And when with surest hand to spread the stain,
Then thus, 'Assembled powers of earth and main,
My counsel tend; my first and early care
Was still, by long observant watch, to gain
Knowledge of man; commission'd to repair
Whate'er malignant chance, or wayward choice can mar.

"'Ripen'd by time, when now the vig'rous shoots
Of intellect can boast their full increase,
And the mind boasts her more than mortal fruits,
Then loves the free, expanding soul at ease
To wander o'er creation's fair degrees,
And thro' her varied stores to range at will.
Of earth, and ambient air, and subject seas,
Tracing the wide extent with eager skill,
Unfalt'ring in her flight, her wish unsated still.

"'From this strong bent, by Nature's hand impos'd,
Fair Knowledge shines, and sage Experience draws
Her arts benign, to sweeten life; expos'd
To various ills by Fate's relentless laws.
Hence, worn with care, to gain the late applause
Of times unborn, beneath the noon of night,
When all the works of Nature seem to pause,
The lone sage plies his task beneath the light
Of lamp, or taper dim, remote from human sight.

"'This master movement of th' aspiring soul
To KNOWLEDGE leads, while HABIT lends her aid
To push her pupil onward to the goal
Which virtue points, in modest charms array'd;
Her features thrown by Time in softest shade,
And chast'ned mild by REPETITION'S power,
Till to his heart the potent charm convey'd
Strikes root, and wide displays the vernal flower,
And heavenly fruitage crowns the rich autumnal hour.

"'Here then, ye simpling tribes, your utmost skill
Employ, and brew with charms the potent draught,
Which thro' the working fancy may instill
False energy, and warm the mounting thought
With phantoms gay, in airy visions brought,
Shifting, as fancy wills, the gaudy scene,
In grateful change, by mortal toil unsought,
While forms of livelier coinage fleet between
The grave saturnine shapes, and please their moody queen.

"'Thus with false lights the active mind employ
And waste her powers, for nobler tasks design'd,
With semblance fair of rich VARIETY,
Fit phantoms to deceive the prison'd mind;
Let HABIT then, for virtue's aid assign'd,
Potent, but blind, by soft seduction led,
On the sick soul the incantation bind,
Till Mem'ry's self forgets her path to tread,
And Reason last declines and sinks among the dead.'

"Then to the front advanc'd a meagre sprite,
NARCESTES nam'd, who every simple knew
Of numbing power, and oft, at dead of night,
From his dark stores the steaming poison drew,
Which, like the Parthian shaft, or lightning blue,
Smites the distorted limb with palsied stroke;
Or thro' the shiv'ring nerves a STYGIAN dew
Sheds frore, or bends the man beneath the yoke
Of dire spasmodic charm, or ague's chilling shock.

"About his robe a scaly Dipsas wreath'd,
And round his locks the baneful hemlock twin'd,
A sceptre in his hand, by fate bequeath'd
Of CYRNEAN yew; on this the sage reclin'd,
And thus began:  'Ye Elfin powers that bind
The soul at will, or set the prisoner free:
The habitudes and bents of human kind
ADGISTES well hath shown, now leave to me
The means to hurl them down from reason's proud degree.

"'Those spirits bland, that by the nerves convey
Quick notices of every chance below,
I can retard or speed with mighty sway,
And urge their haste with strong instinctive glow.
Thus on the seething brain my art will throw
Illusions fair, till half to frenzy wrought
The waken'd powers of fancy seem to flow,
In a full tide of energetic thought,
And glorious visions bring, before with labour sought.

"'But while in jocund tides the spirits roll,
Commixt, a cold Lethaean liquor mines,
Invading every passage to the soul,
While nature to the nerves in vain assigns
Their task, unless the cup of CIRCE joins
HABITUAL aid, to urge them in their course,
Till half extinct the beam of reason shines,
And thought lies smother'd in its infant source,
Till wak'd again to life by drugs infusive force.

"'Thus reason, heavenly gift, with HABIT join'd,
And lent to man to wing his upward flight,
Shall quit their standard, and with us combin'd,
Assist the arms of HADES and of night;
And soon, if yonder stars I read aright,
Fit for our ends, a season will ensue
When LEO'S rage, with SOL'S meridian might
Combin'd above, shall scorch the sylvan crew,
The gath'ring clouds consume, and drink the kindly dew.

"'Then first, the virtue of my charms to try,
The Naiad nymphs themselves the draught shall prove,
Most guileless race of all beneath the sky,
That range the plain or thro' the green wood rove:
'Tis easy to beguile with shows of Love
And Friendship fair the simple sisterhood;
For no suspicions haunt the hallow'd grove,
Nor dreams the gentle tribe that rules the flood
How long they foster'd fair an imp of STYGIAN brood.

"'A nobler end the wat'ry toil awaits
Than the mere process of a magic rite;
At length the trial shall involve the fates
Of MAN, and on his head in ruin light;
While he, unconscious of the STYGIAN sleight,
Spontaneous plunges down in CIRCE'S wave;
Ruin he meets, which, by a timely flight,
He might have shunn'd:  our wiles he long might brave,
No Tartar den he dreads till to himself a slave.

"'Be this my task:'  his elves, with loud applause,
Consent, and range beneath his dusky wing,
The necessary aids."  But now to pause:
Night calls, and PHILOMEL begins to sing,
The Muse, fatigu'd, to Aganippe's spring
Retires, and Hesper lights his lamp afar.
The falling dews their welcome tribute bring,
And rising CYNTHIA yokes her silver car,
While to their quiet homes the weary swains repair."

