BOOK III.
Ah!  how shall I presume, with trembling hand,
To touch the tuneful harp which B&mdash;e strung,
Obsequious only to his high command,
In soul-subduing numbers while he sung,
While truth and harmony adorn'd his tongue!
The shepherds, listening to his moral lays,
Wak'd loud applauses, till, around them rung
The hoary Grampians, echoing to his praise,
Louder and louder borne, with growing length of days,

Thou chastest Minstrel of the Scottish grove,
My friend, instructor, and my dearest pride;
The tribute due of gratitude and love,
Permit me here to pay; while I abide,
Still, in this bleak sojourn, rest of my guide,
Lonely and sad, without thy wonted smile,
In every wo that solace kind supplied;
Beset with snares of Selfishness and Guile,
Extending now so wide their domination vile.

To thee I owe whate'er this heart can boast,
Of pious, just, benevolent or true;
When, in the Sophist's thorny labyrinth lost,
With nought but Desperation dark in view;
Thy energetic voice of Truth I knew,
Warning the wanderer of Confusion's fate,
The gathering storm of Anarchy, t' eschew,
By pride engender'd; and profane debate,
Threatening each holy fane, each hoary tower of State.

On fluttering pinions while I strive to rise,
With ardour fir'd to emulate thy flight
Sublime, pursued thro' pure aetherial skies,
Thy Genius I invoke, to lead me right,
With well known, kindly care; if spirit bright
Like thine, and gentle, still may condescend
To animate the soul of mortal wight,
The Muse's steep, attempting to ascend,
Her native charms divine, like thee, to recommend.

Thus, I dependent on the inspiring Power
Of heavenly song, thy Edwin's course shall trace
From that lamented, inauspicious hour
Of thy heart-breaking grief, when manly grace
Seem'd to forsake his melancholy face,
When clouds of sorrow quench'd his bursting flame,
That promis'd fair, the glory of his race
To make him rise, and reach the height of Fame,
Support, in strength mature, the MINSTREL'S sacred name.

Tho', first, enamour'd of the flowery lay,
Of hollow, tinkling sound and tinsel-show;
Yet, now, his nervous numbers 'gan display
The chaster graces that spontaneous flow
From inborn energy, and ardent glow 
Of thought, or plaintive, dreadful, or, sublime,
In strains of triumph breath'd, or tender wo,
Form'd to delight in Music's varied chime,
With Nature's fervent voice thro' every age and clime.

As yet, he had attun'd his earliest song;
Only, the rural beauties to display;
The simple, jocund, shepherd-train among,
On Nature's bounty, who, from day to day,
Contented lived, like th' aerial warblers gay,
Fed and protected by the liberal hand
Of Providence, that guides their certain way,
Winter to shun and seek a foreign strand,
In Summer's fruitful fields t' enjoy the zephyrs bland.

His open heart, devoid of artful guile,
Still warm and generous, bent with pure delight.
His eye appear'd on all benign to smile,
Esteeming others as himself upright.
But, chiefly Phyllis, now, in beauty bright,
With fascinating glance inspir'd his strain,
Of all the fair, appearing in his sight
Most fair.  For, O!  what muse-enamour'd swain
Was ever found t' escape Love's soft, bewitching chain!

The purest passion, too, her bosom warm'd,
In grateful, kind return; and Edwin's lays,
Breathing his fervid flame, melodious charm'd
Her ear attentive, while he sung her praise,
That the envy seemed of rivals vain to raise.
The swains repeating oft her honour'd name,
Of singing choirs she drew the constant gaze;
When every tongue was heard aloud t' exclaim,&mdash;
"Charms so divinely sung deserve unfading fame."

During this simple, patriarchal age,
The ecstatic fire of Love and Song refin'd,
Sublimed the soul, to look beyond the stage,
Where grovelling, selfish Interest, ever blind
To mental grace, the glory of mankind,
Pursues his crooked path, to plant a snare
For those of guileless, unsuspicious mind;
With venom'd fang to seize them unaware,
To chill their genial glow, to sink them in despair.

Such havoc dire was wrought by rebel-Pride
And Luxury, among the shepherd-train,
Who joyous hitherto, had lived, denied
To pleasures that intoxicate the brain,
And rouse to madness.  Thus the lust of Gain,
Ever insatiate, raging for supply,
Of fancied bliss, still proves a deadly bane:
Contentment seems, still, farther off to fly,
And every generous spark eternally to die.

Man, now, with jealousy and cautious care,
Beheld his brother man, suspicious still
Of dark design, to inveigle and ensnare.
Hence apathy and disaffection chill,
Distant reserve and watchful cunning skill,
To overreach, supplant and undermine,
Was the prime lore that Wisdom seemed t' instil;
The Sophist's wisdom, taught in Mammon's shrine,
Design'd, each sacred Truth with Error to entwine.

"Arise, ye gods of earth, resume your pride,
Your native pride, disdainful of control:
('Twas thus the Sceptic to the nations cried,)
To you the page of Science I unroll,
Assert the rights of every free-born soul,
Shake off, at length the tyrant's galling chain,
Your reverence blind of sacerdotal stole;
Your independence strenuously maintain,
And reinless roam at will thro' Liberty's domain.

"Shall mighty man still drudge a menial slave,
In these auspicious and enlighten'd days!&mdash;
Man!  destin'd to command of wind and wave;
When pure Philosophy wide spreads her rays,
Illuminating earth with fervid blaze:
When priestcraft, prejudice and vulgar dreams
Of Superstition, conn'd in canting phrase,
Are sinking fast in dark Lethean streams,
Like goblins grim of night before the morning beams.

"Reason adore, ye sons of new-born light,
Omnipotent director of the mind.
'Tis she alone can lead her votary right,
Thro' many a labyrinth long, the truth to find,
Remove each scruple of the bigot-blind,
Attach'd to antiquated creeds and modes
Of Faith and Polity, contriv'd to bind
In durance dark, by legislative codes,
The human race, thro' all thron'd Tyranny's abodes.

"To Reason only, your devotion pay,
From her decision, mark the good from ill.
No more shall phantoms, then, your heart dismay,
Of future fate, with fearful presage, fill;
But, free t' obey your own almighty will,
Thus wisely regulated, then, with scorn
Of rule superior proud ye shall fulfil
The end of men, all great and equal born,
Their dignity maintain, their nature bright adorn."

Mankind, impatient, ever, of restraint
On their rebellious will, gave greedy ear,
Obstreperous roar'd unanimous consent
To lore so flattering, to their heart so dear.
They burn'd to drive thro' Freedom's boundless sphere,
In bold defiance of, or earthly Power,
Or heavenly, to oppose their fierce career;
All bent to level, plunder and devour,
To mingle with the dust each strong and stately tower.

Ah!  who can fully number all the woes,
So oft that have imbitter'd human life,
Arising from unhallow'd lore, of those
Promoters of sedition, hate and strife;
Among the sons of Luxury so rife.
Here, vain Philosophy, Religion vain,
Have cruel torn the husband from the wife,
Brother from brother, bursting kindred's chain,
And all the sacred ties that family love maintain!

Edwin, instructed by the Hermit-sage;
In purer wisdom, beaming from on high;
Had now deep studied Inspiration's page,
Celestial Truth revealing from the sky;
To man prescribing much Humility,
Chief ornament of his degenerate kind,
In servitude, to Passion proud, who lie,
A tyrant dread, that drives him desperate, blind,
To work his wicked will inhumanly inclin'd.

Like wasteful Pestilence, in hottest rage,
The mental madness flew from heart to heart;
As still it wont, in every hapless age,
When Hate and Envy, rous'd by demon-art
Of Sophistry, are furious seen to dart
Their flaming firebrands thro' each peaceful vale
Of human life, with violence to dispart
The bonds of Polity, and rude assail
Each loyal subject blest within her sacred pale.

Yet, long before the conflagration dread
Had burst the establish'd barriers of Law,
And death and desolation widely spread;
The sparks fast flying round, sage Edwin saw,
Fair order, right and truth, in Ruin's jaw,
High thrones and altars rocking on their base.
He marked gaunt Anarchy, with monstrous maw,
From the foundation, threatening loud to raze
Each hallow'd pile of State, the pride of ancient days.

Now, all, within, his Spirit rose in arms,
Now, burst in flame his pure, poetic fire;
All eager, timeously to sound alarms
Of nigh-approaching doom.  He seiz'd his lyre,
Loud struck the notes of honest, generous ire,
Waked the assault of Truth's malignant foes,
Who dared, in deep-concerted league, conspire&mdash;
The established laws of Nature to oppose,
To whelm mankind with flood of everlasting woes.

Ah!  why awaked his warning voice in vain?
Why listened not the nations to his lay?
On pillage bent, they hugged black Error's chain,
Darkness preferred to heavenly light of day;
Taught, only, philosophic rule, t' obey,
By new-born Oracles of Truth profound
Among the wise these claim'd superior sway,
Profess'd, all Nature's darkest depths, to sound,
To push their labour'd course transcending Reason's bound.

Thus, wildly wandering thro' forbidden space
Ah!  who can tell what terrors mark'd their way
What thirst of blood inflamed the human race,
Render'd more fell than fiercest beasts of prey;
Raising the clouds, o'er every landscape gay,
Of purple carnage!  Each, his neighbour chief
Desired to plunder, murder, or betray,
As, armed assassin, or, as, nightly thief;
While Law, exiled afar, could tender no relief.

Loathing, like deepest Erebus, a theme
That teems with sights and sounds of hellish wo;
Leave we, my Muse, such scenes of guilt extreme,
To History's records, that horrific show
In characters of blood, what evils grow,
When lawless Lust, false knowledge hath inflam'd,
Hath still made earth with wretchedness o'erflow,
From earliest date; when men have, bold, disclaim'd
The sovereignty of Law, her hallow'd rights defam'd.

Proceed we, only, to describe the rage,
Remonstrating aloud, that rose sublime
In Edwin's bosom, when, on every stage
Of human life, gigantic grew each crime,
Of Nature, marring the harmonious chime;
When all the bonds of social love he found,
(The bliss, the praise of simple, pastoral time)
In sunder rent, and scatter'd o'er the ground;
Distraction and Distrust, scowl sullenly around.

"Ah!  whither have ye sudden fled," he cries,
"Ye days before enjoy'd of peace and love?
Why, thus, discordant and terrific rise
Sedition's broils in every cot and grove?
Where shepherds gay their olive garlands wove;
Who never thus had broke the sacred band
Of Amity, commission'd from above,
To guide them, careless sporting hand in hand,
Delighting still t' obey, unquestion'd, his command.

"What feuds now spread!  what lust of lucre fires
Each gentle nymph and swain!  devoted, now,
Uncheck'd t' indulge Ambition's gross desires,
Alone, in Mammon's filthy fane to bow,
Alone, the sovereignty of wealth t' avow.
The wreaths here gather'd by her creeping crew,
The soul most sunk, seem richly to endow
With honour, dignity and splendor new,
Before, to Virtue's friends accounted, only, due.

"And reigns the Lust so wasteful and so wide,
That Phyllis, generous Phyllis, owns its sway;
Falls she the victim of ignoble Pride,
To venal Vanity a captive prey?
And must her vows, her virtues all give way
To griping Avarice, that fiend most fell,
Low crouching, to entrap and to betray;
Who, from the breast so quickly can expel
Each feeling, tender, pure, as by Enchantment's spell?

"This heart despairing, too, can Damon wound;&mdash;
He, too, insult my life-consuming pain;
Whom, long, so fond, so faithful I had found,
Till gorgeous Luxury began his reign,
Till he inlisted in her pageant-train?
Can he, thus harden'd, burst Affection's ties,
And scornful hear me bitterly complain,
While basest appetites imperious rise,
To rule the selfish soul, where every virtue dies?

"When joys of Love and Friendship pure are fled,
When gold alone can heart to heart unite,
To every kindly generous impulse dead;
When Interest sits sole judge of wrong and right,
When Sophistry, with ever shifting light,
Of sound Philosophy usurps the seat,
Creating doubt, misrule and black affright;&mdash;
Now, let me fly to some obscure retreat,
For sad reflecting thought and melancholy meet.

"This plaintive Harp, sole partner of my way,
My only property, my only pride,
Shall vibrate still, t' alleviate my dismay.
Tho' now its woodland warblings be decried
By those, whose pompous strains more gaily glide;
Yet, still, they shall awake in some lone dale,
Some sweetly-murmuring rivulet beside;
Accordant to the Evening's sighing gale,
Or, Philomela's lay, that pours her widow'd wail.

"Nor, yet, am I bereft of all relief,
From the soft sympathy of human-kind.
Still, happy, one may live, to ease my grief,
My early friend, perchance, I yet may find,
The Hermit of the cave.  To him my mind,
All it can boast of worth, or science, owes;
From his calm shade, too far I have declin'd
Thro' climes estranged, embroil'd with splendid woes,
Where Insurrection's storm with ceaseless ravage blows."

This said, with hasty step he took his way,
Eager to fly from Riot's horrid roar,
That overpower'd his unavailing lay,
His gentle ear with dissonance that tore.
Pining with anguish, he, alas!  no more
Could strive and justle with the stubborn crowd;
But sought, his fate, in silence to deplore,
Under Retirement's most impervious cloud,
Remote from rabble-strife, and insult of the proud.

Onward he sped, plodding his dubious course.
Strong, adverse, passions, struggling in his breast,
Shook all his frame with truce, convulsive force,
Sunk him to earth with agony oppress'd.
Anon, his brighten'd eye, stern joy confess'd,
A smile contemptuous as he cast, behind,
On the dun towers which smoky clouds invest:
Where cunning casuists more becloud the mind,
With deep and learn'd debate, beyond its reach refin'd.

Thus agitated, now, like statue still
He stood; in wildering consternation lost.
Now, starting quick, he hurried up the hill,
His arms around him violently toss'd,
At once, in love, in fame, in friendship, cross'd.
His motions to behold, he seemed bereaved
Of reason, while Despair his soul engross'd.
But Hope, still glimmering, gradual he retrieved
His wonted aspect mild, as by some charm relieved.

At length the summit of a mountain high,
With difficult and panting breath, be gain'd,
O'er all the expanse below he cast his eye,
That hamlets, groves and glittering streams contain'd;
But, here, soft silence unmolested reign'd.
O!  what relief the lone Enthusiast found,
When here, his swelling bosom unrestrain'd,
He full commanded all th' horizon round,
To where the welkin sinks in Ocean's hoar profound!

"Ye heavens and earth, expanding fair and wide;"
Loud he exclaim'd, "how little, low, appear
Yon fretted roofs and pinnacles of pride,
'Midst this magnificence of Nature's sphere!
Etherial Genii surely hover here,
Inspiring elevation new of soul,
Its native fields of Freedom who endear.
Escaped from gorgeous Vanity's control,
It mounts on seraph-wing, and looks beyond the pole.

"What son of earth, deep weltering in its mire,
Can, silent, this stupendous frame survey,
Not moved with ardour, heaven-ward to aspire,
To love, to venerate, and to obey
The Power omnipotent?  These scenes display
Designs of goodness, wisdom infinite,
Commanding men to lift th' adoring lay,
With grateful voice of pious, pure, delight,
With tongue devoid of guile, with all the heart upright.

"O bliss ineffable!  for man design'd
His chief, and, oft, his only stay below,
Untasted, unconceived by every mind
Unjust and insincere, that must forego
The smile of Heaven, and inly-soothing glow
Of Innocence and firm Integrity.
These brave the brandish'd darts of gloomy Wo,
Upheld by mental might and energy,
These, cheer'd by Faith and Hope, still stand secure and free.

"Be this my first, my unremitting care,
For these propitious visitants divine,
A heart, all honest, humble, to prepare,
Where, these may shed their influence benign.
Then, shall I ne'er distrustfully repine,
Tho' Fortune's blast I may endure a while:
These, with redoubled ray again shall shine,
With Heaven's decrees my sufferings reconcile,
O'er all my clouded sphere, anew, make gladness smile."

His oraison, thus warm, spontaneous, pour'd;
He slow descended to a woody dale,
Felt his serenity of soul restor'd,
While softly breath'd around the winning gale.
A shady covert, far within the vale,
He found, inviting him to calm repose;
And o'er his eyelids, Sleep 'gan now prevail.
He laid him down, forgetful of his woes,
In peace with all mankind, forgiving all his foes.

Soon as arose the grateful, dappled dawn,
With darkness, quickly fled his slumbers light.
His mossy couch he left, and, o'er the lawn,
Refresh'd and sprinkled with the dews of night,
Now, in the morning beam bespangled bright,
His pathless course with vigour he pursued,
The landscape green expanding to his sight:
And, oft he stopp'd, and, eager listening, stood,
To voice of purling streams, and warblers of the wood.

Full many a mountain, many a valley past,
By route, it seem'd, no human foot had trod;
The abandon'd solitude he reach'd at last,
Where th' aged Hermit long had his abode.
Here, thro' the matted woods a streamlet flow'd;
And, from the cliffs, in awful grandeur pil'd,
On mighty wing the eagle soar'd abroad,
As lord unrivall'd of the rocky wild;
From whose tremendous tower all foes were far exil'd.

In deep solicitude, he halted nigh
The cavern'd mansion of his Friend so dear;
Lest, hapless, he should find him lifeless lie,
Or, wanting needful aid, deserted here,
Worn out with age and abstinence severe.
Slow he approach'd, with reverence profound,
To every motion giving heedful ear;
When sudden, burst above, this welcome sound&mdash;
"My Edwin, lost so long, my child, now have I found?"

Raising his eye, he flew, and, in his arms
Received the Sage, descending from his seat
Of shelving rock, which banish'd his alarms,
With warmest transport made his bosom beat:
While thus each other cordially they greet,
The beams of Friendship, from their moisten'd eyes,
Like Heaven's mild lustre, shone benignly sweet.
O, how unlike the grinning smiles that rise
On Flattery's wreathed front, concealing fraud and lies!

"Now, O my Father, and my only Friend
I yet have found in all this world so wide!
Here, let my rankling cares and sorrows end,
The treacherous lures of Lucre and of Pride.
The various paths of life I have descried,
For years on years, rolling their weary round,
Their criminal enjoyments all denied,
Of guile and vanity; have ever sound,
The more those paths are trod, these, more and more, abound.

"Henceforth, let me remain with Heaven and Thee.
Here, only, I can taste substantial joy,
From bondage base of Pageantry set free.
Here, her rude squabbles never can annoy,
This sweet serenity of mind destroy.
No more I wish to glitter with the vain,
To indulge in pleasures that disgust and cloy.&mdash;
Hide me, ye woods, from th' impious and profane,
The barbarous rabble-rout, and Lucre's sneaking train!

"'Twas these that stung thy honest, guileless heart,
To shun the world's deceitful, crooked ways;
Inflecting deep the agonizing smart,
That seem'd to quench Love's warm celestial rays,
That struck thee dead to earthly blame and praise.
'Twas these that drove thee to this calm retreat,
With Peace and Innocence to pass the days,
Capricious Fortune's malice to defeat,
Disdainful of her smile, and of her blackest threat.

"Thy counsel sage oft warn'd my heedless youth,
To aim against the menaces of Fate.
Experience now has proved thy words of Truth,
By demonstration dread.  But, then, elate,
And eager to ascend Fame's radiant height,
I mingled with her votaries, in strife
Profane and foul, of Jealousy and Hate.
Lurking like vipers venomous and rife,
Spreading distrust and fear thro' all the tracks of life,"

This said, he told a melancholy tale
Of sufferings long, severe, he had endur'd,
With others many, in this tearful vale;
Whose youth, Ambition's clarion had allur'd,
Of wealth and honour, whom she had assur'd,
But left unpitied, overwhelm'd with wo,
Their orient worth by Envy's breath obscur'd.
The Hermit heard, and shook his locks of snow.
And o'er his Time-bleach'd cheek arose a reddening glow.

"Thy generous indignation, O my Son,"
In solemn tone he said, "I must approve,
Rising from nameless sorrows undergone
By thee, by many, which compassion move
In every sympathetic heart, where Love
Of Truth and clear Integrity resides,
Warm flaming like the radiance from above.
This Love cold-blooded Avarice derides,
In whose phlegmatic soul no genial spark abides.

"He, deeming others, as himself, unjust,
Dares not, in them, his own deceit arraign.
He eyes mankind with callous, calm distrust,
Patient of wrong, while hunting after gain,
O'erlooking crimes, of which he would complain,
If innocent, with full determin'd hate.
Thus spread Corruption's boughs a deadly bane,
Which, unrestrain'd, the enormous guilt create,
That sinks in wreck at last the heart-corroded State.

"Ah!  how unfit are Plants of heavenly birth,
To prosper in such unpropitious soil!
Here every weed most noxious, from the earth
Spontaneous springs, without or care or toil:
Whose rank luxuriance, oft is seen to foil
The improver's nicest, best directed skill.
How oft must he behold the foe despoil
Virtue's fair opening charms, as Mildew chill,
The blossoms of the year is cruel seen to kill!

"Thy Worth, my Son, deep rooted and matur'd,
Can, now, defy the sporter's aim and art;
Whose force and fraud, unhurt, it has endur'd.
Let not Despondence overcome thy heart,
Susceptible, I own, of keenest smart,
Felt from the stings of Insolence and Scorn,
Allow not these, thy noble views to thwart,
Condemn thee, here, in solitude to mourn,
In manly prime of life, of thy due laurels shorn.

"'Know thine own worth, and reverence the lyre.'
Let Opposition, only, rouse to flame
More bright and vehement, thy slumbering fire,
Rouse thee to mount thy firmament of fame.
Tho' the earth-chain'd, selfish crowd refuse thy claim
To meed deserved, yet, many shall be found,
Still ready to respect the MINSTREL'S name,
When just alarms, he gives his harp to sound,
Of Anarchy and War, now, brooding close around.

"Let not the previous boon, bestow'd on few,
To thee be given in vain:  but mark the flight
Of bold Maeonides, full to thy view
Displaying scenes that ecstasy excite;
Or, when his thundering song provokes the flight,
Or, when, to quell Sedition's wild uproar,
He drags her forth, all monstrous to the sight,
With foamy jaw, and weltering deep in gore
Of Greek with Greek embroil'd, on the Dardanian shore.

"Should arts of Peace demand a softer strain,
The loyal love of rural life to sing;
Then, let the music of the Mantuan swain 
Attune thy reed.  Along the fields of Spring,
With him, like Zephyr, fly on downy wing;
Marking varieties of clime and soil,
The sources tried which health and plenty bring,
The powers combin'd that aid the tiller's toil,
The causes most that speed, and most his labours foil.

"But, chief, against the visionary vain
Give warning due; whose meteor leads astray,
From paths of sage Experience safe and plain,
Misled by Fancy's ever flitting ray;
Knowledge profound affecting to display.
Thus deep involved in mazy tracts unknown,
Desperate he drives along Perdition's way;
Till, all his innovating schemes o'erthrown,
He sink amidst the wreck of his aerial throne.

"More blest would pass my few remaining days,
Could I enjoy thy converse kind, and here
Join in thy heart-improving moral lays.
But, thus, my selfish bliss must interfere
With duties, in the world's beclouded sphere,
Which public danger calls thee to perform,
To admonish all, who happily may hear,
United, to repel the rising storm,
The assault of foreign foes, and rage of rash reform.

"Then, go my Son, again thy harp awake.
For suffering-sunk Humanity I plead,
For Truth expiring, wounded Virtue's sake.
Shall these be suffer'd to complain, to bleed
Contemn'd, abandon'd in their utmost need?
One zealous Champion yet remains, I know,
Whose prowess high, I trust, may still succeed;
In conflict with the impious, rebel foe,
His treason to expose, and lay his laurels low."

"My Friend revered, my Oracle of truth;"
Edwin, submissive, candidly replied,
"Thy words I held as sacred law in youth;
Thro' age, may I regard them as my guide!
Thy counsel to obey is still my pride;
Thy approbation still my highest aim.
This sweeter consolation has supplied,
In every heavy hour, than loud acclaim
Of multitudes, that proves, full oft, their idol's shame.

"By thee encouraged thus, I now depart:
Nor shall I cease to wake my feeble strain,
Too simple far, to develop the art;
Of cunning Sophistry's insidious train:
Nor shall I hope, enjoyment pure to gain,
Till, hither I return." &mdash; In close embrace
They silent stood, but tears bespoke their pain.&mdash;
Parting abrupt, the Minstrel turn'd his face,
Down thro' this tearful vale, his footsteps to retrace.

BOOK IV.
Soon as the young adventurer, thro' the world,
Ardent begins his race, before him, still,
Fair Hope he sees on high, with flag unfurl'd;
Assured, the smiling Goddess must fulfil
Her gracious promise, to his utmost will:
Tho', often warn'd of its delusion vain,
Yet, trusting to his own unrivall'd skill, 
Onward he bounds, the blissful boon to gain,
Unsatisfying still to her devoted train.

Should he, perchance, thro' many years of toil,
Attain the darling object of his heart;
What unexpected plagues may quickly spoil
His happiness, subject him to the smart,
All unforeseen, of Disappointment's dart!
Rankling, in room of Hope's obstructed ray,
Who, from her place, is sudden seen to part
Afar, still luring pilgrims on their way,
With gaudy, tinsel toys, to dazzle and betray.

Of small account, tho' Edwin, such esteem'd
The lures of Vanity and vulgar Pride;
From chaster charms, he, yet, too fondly deem'd
His worldly hopes should full be gratified.
In humble peace, he pray'd his days might glide
Smoothly along, unruffled by the cares
And tempests that convulse Ambition's tide,
Harsh grating to the Minstrel meek, who shares
The Muse's choir, enrapt with her melodious airs.

Compell'd, her calm retirement to forego,
Where he had hop'd with her, and with one Friend,
To heal the bosom-festering stings of Wo;
Down to the world, again, behold him bend
His plodded path, preparing to defend
With all his powers of warm, heart-breathing song,
Truth's falling fame, and now alone depend
On Heaven's high aid, to brave th' ungodly throng;
Solely to whom, dismay and sure defeat belong.

"No more," he cries, "shall earth-born Hope deceive
This soul, pois'd firm, that looks beyond her sphere.
Her spell, no more, shall gladden me or grieve,
Unbiass'd, while I hold a conscience clear.
Then, may I scorn the menace dark of Fear,
Lucre's base bribe, and Luxury's embrace,
Yon demon-pair, so wide who domineer,
The gods chief worshipp'd by a recreant race,
Whose lustful sway is found, man's heavenly form t' efface."

Thus, musing deep, while Mem'ry to his mind
Recall'd the sorrows of his pilgrimage,
Upon a mountain's brow, faint he reclin'd,
When sudden rose the storm in blackest rage.
Light'ning and hail seem'd ruthless to presage
Death instantaneous to the houseless wight.
Below, he spied an oak all gray with age,
Standing alone, the wanderer to invite,
Beneath its spreading aims, to ease his piteous plight.

But leafless now, small shelter they could yield
Against the tempest, waxing still more dread.
Yet, close beside, a cave he found to shield
His batter'd frame, and rest his weary head
Upon the velvet moss.  "O grateful shed!"
With panting breath and lifted hands, he cried;
"Nor, ever, lordly hall, nor downy bed,
To scept'red prince more comfort sweet supplied,
Than here I feel, while safe from Ruin's rage I hide."

Exclaiming thus, a crash, like earthquake, shook
The cavern'd rock.  Up starting all aghast,
Forth o'er the wild he threw an ardent look,
Beheld the oak uprooted by the blast,
Adown the precipice in shatters cast;
Tearing along the threshold of his cave.
Thus sudden falls the pride of ages past.
Here, Edwin also would have found his grave,
Had HE who guides the storm not stretch'd his arm to save.

Safely enjoying now the scene sublime,
Within his rocky tower, in raptur'd strain
Loud burst his heart. &mdash; "In this abandon'd clime,
The Lord of Nature I discern to reign
With providential power, while here I gain
Rescue from death and bounding joy of soul.
Ne'er let me, hence, with dark distrust complain,
Tho' round me blasts and fierce sea-billows roll,
While these are subject still to his supreme control.

"Fly forth, ye Winds!  ye bolts of thunder, roar!
In you th' Almighty's warning voice I hear:
Your ministry, your message I adore.
By these, ye speak his awful presence near,
T' appal the guilty, and dispel the fear
Of hapless Innocence, meek and resign'd;
His child on earth whom he esteems most dear,
Most ready still his favour free to find;
Proffer'd alone to him of honest, humble mind."

Here, tho' inwrapt with storm and blackest night,
Yet, warm he felt the sunshine of the breast:
Till joy and beauty, with the morning light,
Smil'd o'er th' horizon.  From refreshing rest
He rose, his gratitude to Heaven confess'd.
Looking abroad, the mountain-tops he view'd,
His native glen, that bounded on the west;
On which he first the willing Muse had woo'd,
Prizing his highest bliss, her charms and solitude.

Unnumber'd images of early loves,
Tumultuous rush'd on his transported mind;
While he beheld the well-known grots and groves,
Much shrunk tho' they appear'd.  Eager to find
Some shepherd-swain, as erst, all courteous, kind,
The tidings of the vale who might relate;
Nor swain, nor flock save hare, or startled hind,
Could he perceive to move on plain or height;
But Silence reign'd around in melancholy state.

The house approaching which he call'd his home;
For once he had a home, ere Fortune frown'd,
Through foreign realms ere he began to roam;
The house, the mirthful hamlet, all he found
Consum'd by fire, and strew'd along the ground.
In sorrow turning from the dismal sight,
He sought the churchyard on th' adjacent mound,
Where ashes of departed friends invite,
In honour of the dead, to pay religious rite.

Her venerable dome appear'd to share
Th' unhallow'd rage of sacrilegious hands;
Where often he had join'd in psalm and prayer.
In the wide wreck of houses, barren lands,
All bore the marks of Desolation's brands.
Leaning against a riven trunk of yew,
In mood most melancholy, Edwin stands.
Half-hid in grass, a tomb-stone struck his view;
Spelling the inscription rude, his father's grave he knew.

Prostrate and fainting on the ground he fell;
Long time, as deep entranc'd, or lifeless lay:
When wak'd, he gave his harp the notes to swell,
That all the emotions of his soul obey.
"O happy dead, escap'd this evil day!
O, why all leave me here to weep alone?
While, angel-choirs ye join in white array,
Why must I here abandon'd, friendless, moan,
Now sinking in the dust like this moss-cover'd stone?

"For, sure, if warmest piety of heart;
And truth, aught of Heaven's peculiar care;
If, never from their onward paths to part,
With crooked aim, the gains of Fraud to share;&mdash;
If merit such may ever man prepare,
Mercy to find; my parents, both rever'd!
Such worth was yours.  Still, may I witness bear,
That, not in vain, your sacred lore I've heard;
Which knowledge of the world to me has more endear'd.

"Such knowledge false, inculcating deceit,
By word and work, deep sapping Virtue's base;
Such, had I never learn'd in school or street,
Pure, wise, like you, as in my early days,
Unchafed by censure, unseduc'd by praise,
With God and Nature, competence and peace
I might have walked, escaping Error's maze;
But, still, my sorrows more and more increase;
An outcast now from home, where shall my wanderings cease?"

Devoutly casting up his tearful eye;
A bending form, in sable weeds, array'd,
Of widowhood, he saw, slow slipping nigh.
"Hail!  sweetly plaintive Minstrel," mild she said,
"What comfort has thy pious strains convey'd
To this my broken heart!  Nor, to thy fame,
Nor, to thy house and kindred now decay'd,
Am I estranged.  I feel thy fervent flame,
I knew thy early worth, and honour Edwin's name."

This waste, by thee deplored, arose from pride
Of Wealth, and hate of old Baronial power,
Bursting the bounds established that divide
The ranks of life.  Still, darker tempests lower
Of Anarchy, gaunt, gasping to devour
Whatever treasures, won by blood and toil,
Adorn th' eschuchon'd hall and hamlet bower.
These her rebellious rout have mark'd their spoil,
Join'd with a foreign force to ravage and embroil.

"There, lies my husband, butcher'd in the strife,
In my defence, who brav'd the barbarous foe,
Till I escap'd, so narrowly, with life,
Obliged our flaming mansion to forego,
To pass my every future hour in wo.
Happy, thy parents!  whom kind Death retriev'd
From view of this dread, desolating blow,
In peace who died, and direful dirge receiv'd;
While, now, of house and friends so many are bereav'd.

"Nor, yet, has Discord spent his deadly rage.
Earl Ethelwold collects his warrior-train,
In battle all impatient to engage,
Against the murderous spoilers of the plain.
Though mild he rules within his own domain,
If wrong be offer'd, by a stranger's hand,
To one, his charge, the humblest shepherd-swain;
The cause he counts his own, still proud to stand
The Guardian of his tribe, and his paternal land.

"But, lo!  yon setting sun bids me depart,
To his high mounded castle, now my home;
Whence, hither, to relieve my woful heart
In tears and meditation, I have come.
Nor, can I leave thee longer here to roam;
Thy well-known worth a welcome shall procure
To this our patron's hospitable dome.
Till now, thy house, and mine, long stood secure,
Beneath his shielded arm, though untrophy'd and obscure."

The pair arriving, Edwin's name declar'd,
His hand the venerable Earl receiv'd.
"I am full inform'd," he said, "how thou hast far'd,
How often been distress'd, how oft reliev'd.
And, now, I feel how sorely thou art griev'd,
To see the effects so dire of mobbish-rage,
Our loss, our anguish, ne'er to be retriev'd.
With night-incendiaries I am forced to engage,
With hell-envenom'd worms a warfare vile to wage.

"But, ere that moon her nightly march renew,
Our blood, with blood, shall amply be repaid;
Chiefly, of those ringleaders of the crew,
Whose poison'd principles and lust invade
Like pestilence the tenants of the glade,
Insatiate thirsting for the viands foul
Of foreign growth, the luxuries of Trade;
Till men, like wolves, for blood and rapine prowl,
To gild their piles of clay, and fill their maddening bowl.

"In this retreat, let thy wide wanderings end.
Still, here, the Minstrel's merit is rever'd.
Be mine the pride, this merit to defend,
Against the grovelling herd whose hearts are sour'd
With lucre's lust, deaf to his strains that cheer'd,
Rais'd to renown, the Fathers of our race,
In Honour's high abodes their souls inspir'd.
Here, long they have maintain'd their power and place,
Here, only, stand secure our glory and our grace."

Now, filled the spacious hall, bold knights and squires,
And long-rob'd dames, in sovereign beauty bright,
That rapturous love and chivalry inspires,
The hero animates, to excel in fight.
A plenteous plain repast enjoy'd; t' excite
Sublimer joys, the Chief majestic rose,
Enjoining silence, still as breathless night,
To hear a tale of wars or melting woes,
That tempest all the soul, or sweetly that compose.

Edwin ascended to the Minstrel's seat;
With harp in hand, aback his robe he threw,
The strings attuned to harmony complete,
His head uprais'd and eyes clos'd on the view.
As swell'd the notes, his rage still warmer grew,
Till, rushing midst the battle's thickest throng,
Starting at once, to arms the warriors flew&mdash;
"Revenge!  Revenge!  immediate of our wrong!"
Thus sudden clamour check'd the high, heroic song.

"Here, still, has been rever'd the sacred lyre,
And still shall be:"  Lord Ethelwold exclaim'd.
"While breathing, as at present, purest fire,
The deeds resounding of our Fathers, fam'd
For patriot spirit, which it high enflam'd,
And made them rise the heroes of its strain.
Let us, with these, aspiring to be nam'd,
The Poet's dignity, our own maintain;
Let no discordant sound the harmony profane."

Amidst the silence solemn and profound,
The harp was heard anew with varied tone,
And numbers, darting ecstasy around,
Tuned to the woes and wrath of Radnor's son,
Resistless Raymond, who unrivall'd shone
In battle's front, of stern, unbending pride;
The bolts who braved, deep thundering from the throne,
His sword who drew each quarrel to decide;
His sinewy arm his god, and sovereign will his guide.

In public danger, King and Country view'd
Raymond chief bulwark of the common cause;
With mightiest force invasion who withstood,
Disdaining the control of lord or laws,
Scornful of every palm, save first applause
In tournament.  Wherever, in the field
He rode, the advancing foe were seen to pause,
Appall'd by lightnings of his brazen shield,
When frowning he was seen his ponderous spear to wield.

Count Orville ruled the neighbouring domain,
Elfrida's dower, gay Rosamonda's dale,
Wide scattering riches o'er the peopled plain;
A mercenary host equipped to assail
Raymond's high tower that scowl'd upon the vale,
His hills and herds devoted as their prey.
Like lion roused, the Chief, in massy mail,
Forth with his vassals march'd in close array,
While, loud, the martial pipe proclaim'd the battle-day.

The hirelings view'd the silken banner'd host,
Outnumbering far his chosen men of might;
Advanc'd like bacchanals, with clamorous boast,
In Raymond's castle-hall t' enjoy the night,
And drown, in brimful bowls, the toils of fight.
To stem the torrent in a rocky strait;
The Chieftain stood, all terrible in sight,
Here, to repel the foe-men from the gate,
Here fall, or, unimpair'd, maintain his ancient state.

Foremost he strode in strength, and challeng'd, loud,
Their Chief, with him the combat to decide.
A while they paused, then, onward rush'd the crowd,
Stung with reproach, to overwhelm his pride.
But ah!  what carnage soon the faulchions dyed,
Of raging Raymond and his followers fierce,
Who, rolling red, like high-sworn mountain tide,
Their thickest throng were sudden seen to pierce,
Wide through the woodlands dark their columns to disperse!

Lurking in terror, 'midst a thorny brake,
Count Orville by his golden helm was spied;
Who, seeing Raymond's bloody rapier shake
Above his head, with tears for mercy cried.
"O, spare Elfrida's husband, now allied
To thee and to thy noble house !  From thee,
Her guardian, I receiv'd my lovely bride.
O, never be disgraced thy pedigree,
With blood of stranger fallen thus low an bended knee!"

"Such deed dishonourable I disdain.
Nor stranger, yet, nor supplicating foe,
This hand's protection ever sought in vain;
As thou, sleek traitor, hast been taught to know
Too well.  Behind I leave thee, onward go,
To sweep from earth thy pestilential train,
By thee inflamed to work my overthrow,
With lust of liberty, and lawless gain,
To whelm with ruffian-force this hospitable plain."

Raymond rushed through the flame-disploding gate,
With headlong fury &mdash; to be seen no more.&mdash;
To weep the mighty fallen from princely state,
The woes of lawless Faction to deplore,
The widow's wail, the rabble's horrid roar;
The impassion'd Minstrel made his harp resound;
New strains accordant, that the heart-strings tore
With rage convulsive; till the hall around,
Loud bursts of sorrow fill'd, the magic numbers drown'd.

Next morn, the day brave Ethelwold prepar'd
To hurl his vengeance on th' invader's crest,
His lovely, consort, all his cares who shar'd
With deep concern, thus Edwin, meek address'd.
"My heart, long time with anguish deep oppress'd,
This day I feel reliev'd.  The dubious fate
Of war, my Lord has ponder'd in his breast,
Trembles to think what ruin may await
His house and country dear, from dark Sedition's hate.

"Thy thrilling  verse, thy harp's alarming sound,
Seem'd, all the night, upon his heart and ear
Still dreadfully to peal.  Th' assassin's wound,
The midnight yell, he seem'd to feel and hear.
His noble soul, unknown to coward fear,
Not for himself, but others, felt dismay;
Amidst his threat'nings, awfully severe,
Against my brother, who provok'd th' affray,
That gave these happy fields the cruel spoilers' prey.

"Yet, none more bitterly the deed deplores,
The secret-spreading roots of discord dire;
Now, when Invasion threatens all our shores,
'Gainst Scotia's Crown when foreign foes conspire.
He wishes, now, to soothe my husband's ire,
His mighty arm, with treasures rich, to aid,
In quenching Disaffection's smould'ring fire,
Such frightful desolation which has made,
Where prowling felons lurk in every gloomy glade.

"O that thy song, with like effect, might flow!
Of civil broils, th' unhallow'd rage to tame,
Wide o'er the realm' against the common foe
To turn the hero's arm, and patriot's flame;
Then, honour'd still, should rise the Minstrel's name.
If, to the royal ear access I find,
And not rejected be, for him my claim;
The blooming laurel soon his brow should bind,
Which, for their favour'd bard the Muses have entwin'd.

"A council of his peers, our gracious king
Has summon'd, with the northern tuneful train,
The mighty deeds of ancient chiefs to sing,
Rousing the hero's fire, by martial strain,
Our laws, our rights, our freedom, to maintain,
Against yon merciless Usurper's power,
Who, still, by force must hold despotic reign,
Or none; still bent to level and devour;
In whose suspicious eye eternal tempests lower."

At court, th' assembled nobles of the land,
Held consult high, on dangers of the state.
Here Edwin kneeling kiss'd the sovereign's hand,
Amidst the acclamations of the great,
Eager to hear the strains that celebrate
The glorious actions of their hardy sires,
Prompting the sons their fame to emulate,
Emblaze the innate, hereditary fires,
By which the ennobled soul to deathless fame aspires.

The royal feast, how soon the peers had shar'd,
Edwin, in splendid Minstrel-robe array'd,
Was placed on high, with full-tuned harp, prepar'd,
That all the transports of his breast obey'd,
The listening throng with kindred passion sway'd.
Rapt into Minstrelsy of ancient time,
When flew the Roman eagle to invade
The nations prostrated, in every clime,
Its energy he felt, thus to inspire his rhime.

"The spirit of your Fathers now I sing,
The patriot spirit, waked by patriot-rage
Of gallant Corbred, Caledonian king,
That rous'd them, the defensive fight to wage,
Dauntless, the conquerors of the world t' engage,
Their proud career to check.  My Barons brave,"
He said, " still unsubdued in every age;&mdash;
Now, shall we brook the indignity of slave?
All, sooner, let us sink in battle's glorious grave.

"These badges, titles, which your Fathers gain'd
By valour, still unvanquish'd in the field,
These, shall their sons allow to be distain'd,
While sword or javelin their arm can wield,
Their dearest homes and heritage to shield?
Our children's children, shall they curse our day,
Our crimes and cowardice, that could basely yield
Their lives, their property, an alien's prey,
Leave them to groan in chains of his tyrranic sway?

"Their blood, shall we exchange, for proffer'd gold,
Which now they plenteous waft around our shores;
Deeming our country ready to be sold,
Subdued by lust of their luxurious stores,
The bribes, we trust, each Scottish liege abhors?
Here see the warfare of Corruption's crew!
Behold the wisdom the great world adores!
Convulsions swelling horrible to view,
Ripening to final wreck, their doom so justly due!

"They bid us welcome to their gilded towers,
Protection, riches, liberty to share,
To abandon these our homely, native bowers,
As all unworthy of our love or care.
Of such enticing, serpent-guile, beware!
Design'd our freedom and heroic fame
Eternally to crush.  Still, let us dare
United, warm'd with patriotic flame,
To stem th' o'erwhelming tide of Slavery and Shame.

"Their gorgeous palaces, already, see,
By guilt corroded, tottering on their base.
Their spoils of traffic, spread o'er land and sea,
Invite the envious  robber's greedy gaze,
Virtue and valour from the mind erase.
Yon northern sky I see begin to lower,
With storms to blot, their proud imperial blaze,
With vengeance to confound Corruption's power,
The gaudy plains of pride and luxury to devour.

"Now, unseduced by mad desire of change,
Of galling golden chains in pomp to shine,
In quest of wealth thro' foreign realms to range;
Here, in our country's cause let us combine,
With invocation of the Powers divine,
With mutual love, their gracious chief command,
That, long and happy may remain our line
Of heroes, bulwark of their native land,
Impregnable in heart, invincible in hand.

"Ye valiant chiefs of a redoubted race,
Our people, as your children, watch and guard
From avarice, man's curse and worst disgrace;
Then love and loyalty shall still reward
Your kindly care, and never shall be heard 
Sedition's murmurs, glooming hill or dale.
Ye fathers of your tribes, ne'er disregard
Of injur'd Innocence, the plaintive wail;
Thus, sovereign o'er the heart your power shall still prevail.

"The hand of Justice, let us firm unite
To strengthen and support; that sneaking Guile
And Treason bold, may tremble at his might,
Supreme empower'd, th' unruly and the vile,
As deadly bane of social bliss t' excite.
Still watch the putrid springs of civil strife,
Which, oozing unobserved, must soon defile,
With streams pestiferous, the walks of life,
Environ'd, then, with thief and fell assassin's knife.

"Before such fiends our dear domains infest,
Now breeding tumult thro' each neighbouring state;
Let us, aware, their progress dread arrest,
Avoid the horrors of their certain fate,
Party's intrigue, and villainous debate,
Forerunning ruin.  Firm as clustering oaks,
Braving the tempest on the mountain's height,
Firm, as our rooted, surge-repelling rocks;
Thus bound, we shall defy Invasion's fiercest shocks."

The battle signal now the Minstrel sung,
The Scottish with the Roman host engag'd;
While, to the roar, the Grampian ridges rung,
As with redoubled din the combat rag'd.
Till thirst of blood began to be assuaged.
In hurried strain he sounded the retreat,
Tumultuous, of the invading foe, who wag'd
No more the war, despairing to defeat
The files resolved, or death, or victory to meet.

The strains concluded, instant, with the bays
The Bard was crowned.  All hastened to the coast,
Each leading on his troop in armour's blaze;
Already where the landed Danish host
Made all the shores reecho to their boast.
The Scottish clans advanc'd thro' clouds of night,
Their torches while the Danes in triumph toss'd;
The anchor'd fleet seiz'd with resistless might,
And sudden set on fire, to bar their hopes of flight.

With consternation these beheld the flame,
In wild disorder rushed their barks to save;
While shrieks of terror their dismay proclaim.
Before they reach'd the red reflecting wave,
They met the spears, the bucklers of the brave,
The thick embattled Caledonian band;
By thousands fell beneath their glancing glave,
To birds and beasts a prey, bestrew'd the strand,
Which they had rashly deemed subdued to their command.

The king return'd with his victorious train,
The feast to share &mdash; reward, with honours due,
Their deeds of arms, the glory of his reign.
Edwin, with higher swell inspir'd, from view
Of raging battle, 'gan his strains renew;
Each hero's prowess gave to ring around,
To every voice and feat of valour true,
In varying verse and corresponding sound,
Thro' many a distant age decreed to be renown'd.

"Thus, strike the string, thus, frame th' heroic rhime,"
The prince, now, Edwin ardently address'd,
"The triumph of this day, to future time,
Recording faithful.  Here, our honour'd guest.
Henceforth, in peace and independence rest,
Devoted solely to the sacred lyre.
Our patriot-zeal this day, by deeds confess'd,
To thee we trust; in lofty lays to inspire
Our children, yet unborn, with all their Father's fire."

"Be mine this charge," Earl Ethelwold replied;
"His choice is fixed, to enjoy the Poet's sphere,
In rural, calm retirement, to reside,
Still, to the Muse's votary, most dear.
Mine is the duty, to prevent his fear
Of future weary pilgrimage and woe.
Exempt from care, with conscious Freedom's cheer,
Then, only, can the Minstrel's raptures flow
In current pure, sublime, with Inspiration's glow."

With honours crown'd, Edwin from court retir'd,
His bosom burning to impart the tale
Of his adventures, to his friend admir'd,
And best beloved, the Hermit of the dale.
'Twas he whose counsel kind had sooth'd his wail,
His youth inform'd, when reft of every stay,
When nought but Fortune's darts he found t' assail
His solitary walk, by night and day,
In bitterness of heart oft chiding Death's delay.

The sage he found in life's extreme decline,
Yet, still, retaining energy of mind.
His narrative made rays of gladness shine
Upon his twilight-hours.  "Now, all resign'd,"
He said, "I part in peace, no care behind
I leave.  To thee, my son, my dearest care,
Up from thy early dawn, has been confin'd.
Thy star now beams on high serene and fair,
Smiles o'er thy earthly foes thro' fields of azure air.

"While heroes, patriots, with deserving fame
Are celebrated, by thy living lays;
O, never prostitute the Minstrel's name,
To demagogues or tyrants yielding praise!
Still, let the moral strains, the mind that raise,
Ennoble and refine, thy harp adorn;
Such as may most delight thy latest days,
When venal verse shall be review'd with scorn,
The hero and the bard of all their radiance shorn."

The heart-united pair their days employ'd
In meditation deep, on themes divine,
The transports pure of heavenly hymns enjoy'd,
With choirs celestial that the soul enshrine,
Where Truth and Harmony triumphant shine;
Till Edwin clos'd the hoary Hermit's eyes,
Exclaiming &mdash; "Let my death be soft as thine,
The purpose of my life, like thee to rise,
Full ripened for the bliss of th' empyrean skies."

The funeral rites perform'd, homeward he hied,
Where Ethelwold, his hermitage recluse
Had furnish'd, by a river's woody side,
To Edwin consecrated, and the Muse,
Their themes of Minstrelsy at will to choose;
Among mankind, by melody subdued,
The love of peace and country to diffuse.
Here, lov'd rever'd, tho pride of Song, he stood
The friend of sovereign Law, the foe of rebel Feud.
