In 'elder times' our rugged fathers dwelt,
Deep in their woods, unblest by infant Art,
Ere the soft passions yet had taught the heart
To throb with love, or with compassion melt.&mdash;
Far lurk'd the savage in his sylvan cell,
Or trod, with sullen pride, his niggard soil,
Fierce as the storms, that on his mountains fell,
Rude as the rocks that fring'd his native isle.

Or when the orient vermeil streak'd the morn,
By want impell'd, he snatch'd his wooden spear,
Arous'd his grey dogs, with his bugle-horn,
And chac'd o'er pathless heights the bounding deer;
Or when the hostile yell was heard afar,
Down from his dark hills rush'd, and swell'd the din of war.

As when the lion, on Numidia's shore,
Swift from his den, with gnawing hunger flies,
Death in his heart, and fury in his eyes,
While trembling forests echo to his roar.
Such was the Briton, even than beasts more fell,
The slave of appetite's ungovern'd rage,
Nor left the dark recesses of his cell,
Save passion's furious impulse to assuage.

No chord of sympathy his soul confess'd,
That to the touch of Nature trembl'd true;
Nor Reason's sterner influence repress'd
The angry storms that round his bosom flew;
Nor yet had music charm'd his melting soul,
Nor beauty o'er his heart with soft enchantment stole.

And Nature, like her sons, uncultur'd, wild,
Display'd no charms, where none those charms could taste;
The woods alone Spring's vital touch confess'd,
Or heaths impurpling as the Summer smil'd.
No hamlet smoking thro' the mists of dawn,
No garden blushing through its fostering dew,
No herds wild browsing o'er the daisied lawn,
No busy village charm'd th' admiring view.

But Solitude sat on the russet moor,
And listen'd to the wild bee's pensive hum;
And shun'd the hostile caves, the dells obscure,
Where dwelt the savage in his kindred gloom;
Who, as he mid his woods or mountains trode,
Nor paus'd o'er Nature's charms, nor mus'd on Nature's God.

No streamlet's plaint his fond attention drew,
As down the steeps its liquid silver fell;
No stream he sought but parching thirst to quell;
Nor wood &mdash; but where wild fruits and berries grew.
Not the vast rolling sphere of blazing light,
That leads the Seasons smiling in their march;
Not the pale orb that cheers the gloom of Night;
Not the bright stars that stud the dark blue arch;

Not Morn's gay smile, nor Evening's milder blush,
When from her yellow hair the dews she flings,
Spontaneous notes, that burst from every bush.
And joys that flutter from a thousand wings,
These nor his fancy pleas'd, nor charm'd his heart,
Which oft to souls refin'd such ecstacy impart.

Yet slumbering still within his rugged frame,
The seeds of all the gentler virtues lay.
Thus hides the shell the pearl's mild beaming ray;
Thus the dark cave conceals the diamond's flame.
To pick subsistence from a scanty soil,
The widening sphere of intellect confin'd,
Till now a happier age began to smile,
And wake the softer sympathies of mind.

Spirits of Song!  that guide the poet's soul,
To mortal ken the sacred truths disclose,
How other ages now began to roll;
How in a savage breast soft passions rose;
Flow fair Britannia, bending from her skies,
On her dark-wooded isle look'd down with pitying eyes.

From roseate realms, where joys unfading smile,
She in a veil of radiant clouds convey'd
Art, the fair boy, and Science, infant maid,
To the thick woods that cloth'd our wave-bound isle.
"Here be your seat," our guardian goddess said,
"Here teach untutor'd man your soft'ning lore,
Let Albion, swelling from its azure bed
Of savage rudeness be the prey no more;

"Here strike the harp, and wake the heavenly strain,
That animates to joy, or melts to love;
That locks the bitter source of mental pain,
And bids the heart to soft compassion move."
She spoke, &mdash; soft music breathes the woodlands round,
The listening Echoes charm'd, thro' all their grottoes sound.

Th' astonish'd warriors, as the music flew,
Felt strange emotions in their bosoms rise;
The tears of nature bursting from their eyes,
Of generous actions prov'd the fostering dew.&mdash;
Such charms can sound to poesy impart,
As bend the haughty savage to their sway;
Still the fierce storms that struggle in his heart,
And bid the beams of softer passion play.

The woods that erst but hostile sounds had known,
Burst to the song of humanizing Love;
While the stern breast, now true to Feeling's tone,
Delights each blissful sympathy to prove.
And Friendship's social joys begins to know,&mdash;
Friendship, the cheering sun that lights this world below!

Oft was the shivering native wont to fly,
Mid sheltering woods to shield his naked form,
When thro' the waste air rag'd the maniac storm.
Yet not the woods a constant shade supply,
Taught by young Art, now in the vale he weaves,
Of pliant boughs, the wigwam's simple bower,
'Neath whose green canopy of clustering leaves,
He shims the heat, and tempest's furious power:

Improving still, the shifting tent he made,
That, when night found him on the desert moor,
Spent with the chace &mdash; beneath its welcome shade,
Soft on the brown heath, might he sleep secure;
And strike his tent when blush'd the kindling day,
And seek his scatter'd tribe along the dewy way.

Art taught him next, his naked form to veil,
In varying dress, &mdash; and thro' the storms of war,
Taught the stern chief to guide his Celtic car,
And case his sinewy trunk in plated mail,
And bind the helmet round his ample brow,
Whose nodding plumes majestic stream in air,
And guide the shield, and bend the twanging bow,
And dart, with surest aim, the pointed spear.

And Art him taught to sweep the trembling wire
That melts to Pity, or to fight impells;
That fans the subtile flame of soft Desire,
While on the ear the sound melodious swells.
Such were our fathers, that of yore defied
Great Caesar's mighty power, and Rome's imperial pride.

Thus Pity smil'd, and smil'd her sister Love.
Unmov'd no more the British damsel stood,
While man the brother shed the brother's blood.
Warm in her heart now softer passions move.
Those lips that once the bloody war-hymn sung,
To sweet Compassion give their accents bland,
Oft round the rugged warrior's neck she clung,
Rebuk'd his ire, and staid his murderous hand.

None but the brave exalted love inspires;
And he whose coward soul to blood is prone,
Ne'er deeds achiev'd that generous Virtue fire,
Nor in another's bliss, e'er felt his own.
Thus Beauty charm'd, when now perceiv'd her charms,
And folds the brave alone within her snowy arms.

Beauty!  thou tamer of the savage breast,
Nurse of soft joy, and sweet domestic ease,
That first inspir'dst the generous, wish to please;
For he who bliss imparts, himself is blest.
On Morven's snow-clad wilds, on Thule's isles,
On climes where surly Winter ceaseless frowns,
The hardy native gladdens in thy smiles,
Sinks on thy breast and all thy rapture owns.

Blest in thy charms, beside the faggot's blaze,
His long-liv'd nights in social pleasures move;
Soft on his pipe, thy charms resistless plays,
And drowns each thought of war in sweeter love.
Music and Poesy, inspired by thee&mdash;
Unlock the mazy springs of melting sympathy.

Thus, with success their smiling empire crown'd,
Young Art and Science now delighted view'd,
Men for the cot, forsook the cavern rude,
Forgot the chace, and till'd the peaceful ground.&mdash;
Friendship and Love now twine the social tie.
The busy village rises on the green,
And breathes the hum of noisy industry
O'er the still, solemn, silence of the scene;

And hoary Druids light the sacred fire,
And speak the mandates of the gods above:
Th' unletter'd tribes hear, wonder, and admire,
Bound in the chains that Superstition wove.
Thus civic laws are from the altars giv'n,
And men are rul'd on earth, by terrors drawn from Heav'n.

Unending task, tho' yet unsung were mine,
To tell how Art first taught a martial race,
To tame those flocks they once were wont to chace,
And from their woods to lure the milky kine.
As Manco Capac, and his beauteous bride,
From solar realms to fair Columbia flew,
To verdant vales by Titiaca's tide;
And taught th' untutor'd natives of Peru,

To sow with various seeds the various soil,
And reap the fruits which cultur'd nature yields;
That please the fancy, or reward the toil,
Perfume the gale, or beautify the fields.
So Art and Science taught our native swains,
To sheath their blood-stain'd swords, and till their peaceful plains.

Then came the pastoral age, of rural joy,&mdash;
Mild peaceful age, when war delights no more!
And on those plains so lately stain'd with gore,
The warrior's son now dwells a shepherd boy.
And sportive flocks adorn the sunny hill,
And lowing cattle cheer the winding dale;
And on the primros'd verge of every rill,
Some love-sick shepherd breaths his amorous tale.

And oft at eve awakes the village dance,
While moon-light sparkles on the pearly dew:
Even Heav'n looks down with a benignant glance,
On joys so sweet, so innocent, and true.
Nor Av'rice yet these blissful walks had trode,
Nor steel'd the heart to Love, to Nature, and to God.

O!  happy age!  of sweet ingenuous love,
That knows no guilt, and seeks no vain disguise;
When Beauty, with her soft expressive eyes,
Seems to invite the bliss she longs to prove;
And love to dwell amid our wave-bound isle,
Maternal Peace, and Quiet musing mild,
And honest Candour, ignorant of guile,
And artless Innocence, sweet Nature's child,

And Mirth, gay laughing on her rosy seat,
Nut-brown Content, that quaffs the limpid spring,
And sees unmov'd each varying frown of Fate,
Smiles at Misfortune, and defies her sting,
And Liberty dwells in her sparry cave,
Whose locks, with heath-bells twin'd, light o'er her bosom wave.

Thus heav'n-born Art improves our happy isle.
And still he Science sought, sweet musing maid,
Shar'd all her joys, who lov'd his toils to aid,
Hung o'er her charms, and gladden'd in her smile,
From friendship oft a keener passion flows,
When mutual beauty lights a mutual fire,
And Science, blooming like the summer's rose,
Woke in young Art the throb of fond desire.

On the green banks of sweetly winding Thame,
Where trees o'er-canopy the twilight glade,
Th' impassion'd youth once met the wandering dame,
And robb'd the vestal honours of the maid;
Nor many moons had glisten'd on the shore,
Ere, mid a sea-worn cave, she a sweet infant bore.

So Commerce sprung, nymph of advent'rous soul,
Nor like her mother lov'd the rural plain;
Her charm'd the plaintive cadence of the main,
That oft in balmy sleep her senses stole.
And oft the slimy beach she wander'd o'er,
And mimic boats of shelly valves design;
Or cull'd the sea-weeds tangling on the shore,
Which round her yellow hair she graceful twin'd;

Or sat and listen'd to the sleepless wave,
Breathing hoarse music as it rose and fell;
Or view'd the squalling gull her white wings lave,
Or proudly ride upon the heaving swell;
Or while soft Eve the floods with roses dy'd,
View'd the Sun's flaming orb plunge in the roaring tide.

And longing much to cross th' expansive tide,
She fell'd the oak, and launch'd it in the brine,
And on its hollow'd trunk dar'd to recline,
And visit climes unknown she far descry'd.
Thus first she ventur'd in a rude canoe,
O'er the green bosom of the heaving wave;
When Art, her rising genius charm'd to view,
The nobler ship to his fair daughter gave.

The sails are spread, the vessel rides away,
And spurns the impulse of the feeble oar:
Surpris'd she sees her native hills decay,
Dissolve in mist, and please the eye no more.
Soon fade the pale shores of the vast profound,
Which Heav'n's imperial vault is only seen to bound.

To guide her lorn track o'er the pathless foam,
She mark'd the stars, that stud the blue serene,
Whose lamps, that in the dark wave twinkle sheen,
Are oft obscur'd behind the tempest's gloom.
Forsaken then, by every guide of Heav'n,
While on the storm Destruction howling rode,
Mid clust'ring reefs her fragile bark was driv'n;
Or devious toss'd wide o'er the mountain flood.

At length, the curious nymph from Science stole
The magic needle, &mdash; Navigation's pride,
Whose trembling point that constant woos the pole,
Proves her unerring talisman and guide;
Sure of her path, on the cerulean deep,
Tho' Night in sable state ride down Heav'n's concave steep.

"Go then," said Science to th' advent'rous fair,
"And lift thy canvas pinions o'er the main;
Remotest lands link with thy golden chain,
And to our isle their choicest blessings bear.
From Athens, which the cool Ilissus laves,
And ancient Rome, where yellow Tiber glides,
And the fam'd walls wash'd by Bosphorean waves,
And Venice, swelling from the azure tides.

"And down those streams thro' woody mountains roll'd,
That still Iberia's cruelty deplore,
Hills lin'd with silver, and streams edg'd with gold,
And Indian riches waft to Albion's shore.
Go, lovely maid, still blest by Liberty&mdash;
'Tis mine to teach the world, that Commerce must be free!"

Long Ocean held his unexplor'd abode,
Heav'd the proud surge, and roll'd the foamy tide;
And long he strove the nations to divide:
Now the frail ship defies the angry god.
Safe on the wave, tho' loud the tempests roar,
Advent'rous Commerce spreads her canvass wings,
Or from Potosi bears the silver ore,
Or from Golconda, the bright diamond brings.

From woody Afric, panting on the line,
To Greenland shiv'ring 'neath the frozen skies,
She bids the scatter'd tribes of men combine,
And wakes their torpid minds to bold emprize.
From pole to pole, extends her welcome voice,
And makes the blooming cheek of Industry rejoice.

"Oh!  happy land!  not more by Science blest,
Than blest by guileless Faith and virtuous Toil.
Thus sung the guardian goddess of our isle,
As high she hung o'er Albion's hills of mist:
Where late the wild heath wav'd its blossoms red,
In beds of flow'rs the milky herds repose;
For now the solitary haunts are glad,
And the dry desert blossoms as the rose.

"By every tide convey'd, &mdash; by every gale,
Commercial treasures on thy coasts are thrown;
Remotest seas reflect a British sail,&mdash;
Remotest isles her rising glory own.
Triumphant navies guard their parent shore;
The world their thunder hears, and trembles at the roar.

"Thy mountain oaks, when threat'ning danger calls,
Descend to shield thee on the briny wave
Then every sailor proves a patriot brave,
And pours destruction from his wooden walls.&mdash;
Britain!  fair seat of Industry and Art;
And Commerce that extends her plenteous reign,
And oak-crown'd Courage, nymph of dreadless heart,
That Freedom leads triumphant in her train;

"Alas!  to thee, far other scenes unfold,
By Love, nor Truth, nor generous Virtue, blest,
An iron age succeeds an age of gold.
Such is of Fate the dread, but sure, behest."
She spoke, &mdash; and in a cloud of dazzling light,
Conceal'd her bursting tears, &mdash; and vanish'd from the sight.

