Thus have we sung, how in our native isle,
Man, savage as his wilds, those wilds forsook,
Resign'd the sword to grasp the shepherd's crook,
Taught by young Art to soften weary toil.
Taught by young Art the wand'ring herd to tame,
And the rough wastes of nature to improve,
While glow'd in simplest minds the softest flame,
And woods and dales rung with the songs of love;

And have we sung, how Art to Commerce gave
The mighty ship, to sweep across the tide,
While every parent stream was seen to lave
Some village swelling to the city's pride,
When Wealth, lur'd from Columbia's palmy shore,
Had to our sea-girt coast convey'd his baneful ore.

Thus sung the Muse, then pour'd a sadder strain,
How Luxury from Wealth and Commerce sprung,
Parent of many woes, &mdash; nor left unsung,
How Av'rice fir'd to lust of sordid gain;
But chief, how the soft queen from royal halls,
Even spread to rural bowers her wid'ning sway,
As when the stone in the smooth river falls,
Quick to its banks expanding circles play;

How the once happy monarch of a shed,
That knew no bliss beyond his sylvan cot,
Sigh'd for unreal wants by Lux'ry bred,
Sought the gay town, and spurn'd his humble lot,
Sought the gay town, and join'd the giddy crew,
And bade to Peace, and Love, and Nature's charms, adieu.

And sung the Muse, how Art and Science came,
To heap their choicest gifts at Luxury's shrine,
How Commerce rov'd from Greenland to the line,
Spoiling the world to bliss th' insatiate dame;
How torn for her, from Afric's woody shore,
Knows the poor negro no repose from toil!
How Virtue blooms, and Piety no more,
Nor Love delights, nor simple manners smile.

Such was our theme, but now the bolder lyre
Sublimer notes must breath from all its strings;
Me, fairest nymph, of fairest isle, inspire;
Come Liberty!  and guide my muse's wings
May still to thee the sacred charge belong,
To fire the Briton's heart, and swell the British song.

High on her car of dazzling clouds reclin'd,
Whose radiance round her pour'd, and from the sight.
Her beauty veil'd, dark with excess of light,
Britannia rode upon the viewless wind.
And when her much-lov'd isle afar she view'd.
Enthrall'd by Luxury's malignant power,
Tears of compassion in her mild eyes stood,
That shone like diamonds beaming thro' the shower.

And thrice she sigh'd with bosom heaving slow,
So heaves the ocean when the storms are past,
While from that beauteous seat of grief and snow,
She breath'd her plaint, soft on the listening blast,
Around their queen the nymphs attendant hung,
Charm'd with the sounds that fell melifluous from her tongue.

"O thou whom frugal Nature nurs'd of yore,
In niggard climes, &mdash; far in a northern cave,
Where climbs o'er ice-pil'd steeps the aspiring wave,
Fair Temperance descend to Albion's shore!
And take with thee, with cheeks of rosy red,
Thy daughter Health, sweet smiling in thy train;
And thou Religion!  that too long hast fled,
And active Virtue, bless our isle again.

"In British hearts the latent sparks excite,
That in their patriot sires were wont to burn,
And the whole state in firmest league unite,
Bewitching Lux'ry from their shores to spurn.
Her's be no more my Britons to enslave,
And rule with fatal sway &mdash; the green isle of the brave.

"Yes!  lovely nymphs!  ye only can restrain
Or Avarice, or Lux'ry's baneful sway,
Or on the sceptic pour conviction's ray,
The reign of Reason is Religion's reign.
Alone your power a manly race can rear,
Or wake the bosom from its sensual spell,
And from the palace to the rural sphere,
Again make all the simpler graces dwell.

"Then shall the fairest island of the west,
As green it rises from its circling tide,
The best in manners, as in arms the best,
Thro' all the nations spread its influence wide.
Yes!  there divine Religion be thy throne,
And thro' the world extend thy power from zone to zone."

She ceasd, &mdash; the nymphs assenting by their smiles,
Aslant the chrystal azure quickly flew,
To that fair land which once they fondly knew,
To Albion swelling mid its clust'ring isles.
"We come" they cried, "your fatal spells to break,
Shame!  thus dissolv'd in Lux'ry's charms to lie,
Then Britons from your sensual dreams awake,
Better than live inglorious &mdash; is to die!

"Say, were these rugged fields by Nature giv'n,
O'er which your giant oaks their branches throw,
And these proud hills that lift their brows to Heav'n,
Beat by the storms, and whiten'd by the snow,
Were these by Nature destin'd as the scene,
Where Luxury should hold her soft voluptuous reign?

"Not thus ignobly were our sires subdu'd,
Better, they said, the dead man than the slave,
Ours be the smiles of Freedom, or a grave,
The bliss of Britons is their country's good.
Such were the heroes of a better age,
Whose manly spirits spurn'd each base controul,
No soft delights could quench their noble rage,
Theirs was the Warrior's form, the Patriot's soul.

"And live their sons in wretch'd thrall to lie
On the soft lap of Luxury reclin'd,
Who smiles to kill, and lures but to destroy,
Consumes the body, and unnerves the mind?
O more than woman soft, &mdash; arise again!
Shake off disgraceful sloth, and feel that you are men.

"Say, of the creatures of this nether sphere,
Was man alone endu'd with Reason's sway?
Then shall he give each untam'd passion play,
And lend to Lux'ry's 'witching voice his ear.
Came he for this, fair from his Maker's hand,
With Heaven's own image stamp'd upon his breast,
Monarch of Nature, destin'd to command,
Yet be himself with basest bonds opprest?

"And was he doom'd in mental charms to shine,
And lovelier still, in bliss and goodness rise,
Near, and more near, perfections source divine,
As clouds grow brighter as they reach the skies,
Then waste in low pursuits your manly prime,
Tho' form'd with brow erect, to gaze on things sublime?

"Around you all move to their natures true,
Whether the ocean swells, the river plays,
Or seasons bloom, or circling planets blaze,
Unvarying, all their various ends pursue.
Then, form'd for heav'n, shall ye to earth be chain'd?
Inspir'd with Reason, yet by Folly sway'd,
Feeble, e'er ye to manhood have attain'd,
And in green life with wild excess decay'd.

"O!  say, for this were Art and Science giv'n,
For this celestial truths to man convey'd;
Awake!  arise!  let Luxury be driv'n
Far from your isle, where she too long has staid.
Awake!  arise!  and break her cursed spell,
When to obey is guilt, &mdash; 'tis wisdom to rebel."

Thus as they sung the Britons round them crowd,
For rous'd from Lux'ry's spell they starting woke,
And struck, as if by lightenings smarting shock,
They on the enchantress direful vengeance vow'd.
When lo!  touch'd by the nymphs her beauties fled,
No more to charm &mdash; a haggard witch she grew,
Disease her cheeks with sickly yellow spread,
Her rheumy eyes scarce glar'd their sockets thro',

And soon, like shrivell'd leaves, all shrunk and dry,
Her skin became, till scarce herself she knew,
Such as she ever seem'd to Virtue's eye,
Then melting into flame, away she flew.
Next Av'rice, 'neath his hoards, they buried deep,
And sleepless Care consign'd to never-ending sleep.

And soon that palace, blazing on the light,
Where Lux'ry dwelt, so charming once and fair,
On all the hellish crew that harbour'd there,
Fell crashing loud, and faded on the sight.
Yes!  struck by Virtue all dissolv'd away,
Like ice-pil'd mountains floating from the Pole,
Which, soon as touch'd by equatorial day,
Melt in the roaring tides that round them roll,

Or as the bow'rs which Fancy's fingers twine,
Fade with the blissful reign of airy dreams,
Or as the Fays that gay in moonlight shine,
Quick flit away before the morning beams;
So of the fairy halls to Lux'ry rear'd,
Was left no trace behind &mdash; all, all had disappear'd.

Thus when 'mid Summer's pure cerulean skies,
When not a zephyr cools the sultry hours,
Cloud upon cloud in bright disorder tow'rs,
And blazing groups in forms fantastic rise,
Then loves the eye in the etherial clime,
Some fancied semblance wond'ring to behold,
Some goddess o'er her train enthron'd sublime,
Bold rocky shores, or towns of blazing gold;

Or loves the eye to view their image cast,
Distinct and fair, on the smooth lake's expanse,
Or while it undulates soft to the blast,
Admires the scene in gay reflection dance:&mdash;
Sudden the thunder roars, the light'nings glare,
Then all the cloud-form'd show dissolves in liquid air.

Isle of Britannia!  While thou spurn'st the wave,
Spurn Lux'ry from thy rude romantic coast;
Safe from each proud invader's haughty boast,
Still be thy walls THE BOSOMS OF THE BRAVE.
And blest, O loveliest island of the main!
Beneath thy guardian goddess' fost'ring care,
In thee may Love and Freedom ever reign,
Thy sons still loyal, as thy daughters fair!

And may thy blessings reach Ierne's shore,
Where weeps Humanity at Discord's shrine,
May Faction frame his hellish pike no more,
Nor more her badges green, Rebellion twine.
In peace secure, long may thy sister isle,
Grow with thy growing strength, and gladden in thy smile!
