Hail, Goddess of the rapture-breathing lyre,
That leads on high the sphere-borne tuneful choir;
Warm'd with a ray of thy celestial flame,
What transport thrills the Poet's feeling frame!

While Nature's music cheers the summer plain,
How glows the bosom of the Mantuan swain,
Spontaneous pouring the mellifluous lay,
Soft as the breath of rose-expanding May!
To Love and Phyllis he attunes his song,
While echoing woods the melting notes prolong.
His eye now marks the bright Maeonian star,
That lights the fields of desolating War;
Fir'd with the view, he quits the shepherd-train,
To trace the Hero through the stormy main,
His every toil and triumph to proclaim;
And each he consecrates to deathless fame.

Sweet Bard!  the Muse's pride and favourite care,
To whom she gave her purest flame to share,
To shine while Science pour'd her brightest ray,
Emblaz'd thy beauties in their full display.
"Come, gentle swain," imperial Caesar said,
"Enjoy my bounty in thy native shade.
Thy flocks in safety hence shall range the plain,
In safety thou shalt make thy woodland strain."

From Mantua's cultur'd velvet-shaven lawn
Where laurell'd Poesy hails the rising dawn,
Where, taught by Nature, secret-working Art
Lops rambling branches, pruning every part;
See Independence turn with eager eye,
To view her champion Nero's frown defy;
To see him shine triumphant in his fall,
And, daring Death, to 'scape tyrannic thrall.
Behold her bending o'er his laurell'd tomb!
My son, she cries, crush'd in thy early-bloom!
Let others boast their due superior praise,
Of softer, purer, more harmonious lays;
Thy native fire, and zeal in Freedom's cause,
Resistless flaming claims her due applause.
If venal verse did e'er thy honour stain,
Thy heart recoil'd, and quick revok'd the strain.
When Nero's crimes proclaim'd thy praise misplac'd,
How soon thy streaming blood the blot effac'd!
While others drag their godships from the skies,
Above these gods Pharslia's heroes rise.
While rebel-rage demands a despot's powers,
Thy Cato's soul unstain'd, unconquer'd, towers.

In frolic mood the Latian lyrist sung,
While curious Art chastis'd his flowing tongue.
With happiest hand a wreath of flowers he wove,
Pick'd from the plenty of th' Aonian grove,
His waving hair, soft bound in simple braid,
That native ease with elegance display'd.
The Loves and Graces, from th' Aegean isles,
With luring looks and nods, and dimpled smiles,
Around him met, and lightly tripp'd the plain,
In dance attemper'd to his Lesbian strain.
Descending oft from Fancy's dazzling sky,
Mankind he mark'd with philosophic eye;
Saw coxcomb-Folly flaunt in plumage gay,
And bared his baldness in the face of day;
Laid Vice, unweeting, prostrate on the ground,
And dealt, in playful guise, the cunning wound.

Amidst the slavery and succeeding gloom
That whelm'd the splendour of imperial Rome,
With honest rage bold Juvenal appear'd,
The torch of Truth o'er Error's dungeon rear'd;
Proud Luxury exposed to eternal shame,
A painted fiend that blasted Roman fame.
While Justice bled, rude trampled by her foes,
Resistless, fierce his indignation rose.
Despising danger, he espous'd her cause,
Her rights asserted; and her injur'd laws;
Arraign'd Corruption in decisive tone,
And hurl'd the Demon headlong from his throne.
But cruel Persecution crush'd the sage,
Now hoary bending with the weight of age,
Exil'd him far from friends, and native home,
Through Lybian wilds a fugitive to roam.

Dark scenes of anguish, haunts of grim Control,
Scenes doubly dreadful to the Poet's soul!
Why, Goddess, why, in these are doom'd to pine
Thy sons sublim'd by energy divine;
Why doom'd, by stern Necessity's command,
To strike the sacred lyre with venal hand;
With courtly sounds to sooth rude Grandeur's train,
Or rouse the vulgar rout with scrannel strain?
While they delight to roam the mountains wild,
And climb the cliffs in pomp of nature pil'd;
On Fancy's wing, while they unfetter'd tower,
And spurn the chains of lawless Pride and Power;
Never may they with demagogues conspire,
To light red horrors of Sedition's fire;
Never may they calm Liberty abuse,
The bands of mad Licentiousness unloose;
To thousand dunghill-tyrants bare their breast,
Of one to beg protection from the rest.

Lo!  where Avona rolls his magic tide,
The buskin'd Hero moves in lordly pride.
While wakes his voice, and waves his crimson lance,
Deep thunders roar, the lurid lightnings glance.
His mighty arm unbars the gates of Night,
And drags her demons to the realms of Light.
Grief, Joy and Terror, at his nod obey,
And shake the soul with quick alternate sway.
Nature, neglectful of corrective Art,
Rais'd full her voice, and instant reach'd the heart.
Ah!  now constrain'd, by Fortune's frown severe,
To quit the precincts of his native sphere,
In clownish guise enchain'd he limps along,
A suppliant cringing to the idiot-throng.

While Anglia's sceptre sage Eliza sway'd,
A shepherd sung in Gothic garb array'd
Wide thro' the air he wav'd a wizzard-wand,
Pluck'd from a stem that grac'd th' Ausonian strand;
When Fairyland was sudden seen to rise,
A new creation strange to human eyes.
Sidney alone enraptur'd could descry
The forms aerial thro' the dubious sky.
He placed the laurel on the Poet's brow,
Caus'd Bounty's stream around his field to flow.
But ruthless Rigour with succeeding sway,
Ravag'd his fold and dragg'd his flocks away,
Left him to wail, hence reft of all relief,
While sadly Mulla murmured to his grief.

How bright o'er Eden's blissful bowers arose
The Muse's beam, their beauties to disclose!
While Genius, Learning, mingled thick their rays,
Nor earth, nor heaven, confin'd the orient blaze.
How shone its radiance o'er each distant clime,
Each mazy tract of ancient dusky time,
Down thro' the caverns of primeval Night,
Her deeds of darkness full reveal'd to sight
Pierc'd the deep files of dread, celestial war,
While rode Messiah on cherubic car.
He frowned &mdash; direct his bolts of vengeance sped,
His lightnings flew, the rebel legions fled,
With sudden terror and confusion driven,
Rush'd thro' the rending battlements of heaven,
Thro' yawning chaos, with tremendous yell,
Plung'd 'midst the horrors of profoundest hell.
Fierce flam'd the blaze that thro' the boundless sphere,
Each path illum'd, untrodden, dark and drear.
Unhailed it rose and spreading fir'd the skies,
It set unwept, unmark'd by mortal eyes.
The Bard, desponding, left his seat sublime,
Darkly to roam thro' an ungenial clime;
Polemics, pedants, casuists to engage,
With learned lumber clog the Muse's page,
In marish dull his sky-wove weeds to drench,
There wallowing low his mighty rage to quench.

Where sensual Riot yonder holds his reign,
And scowls contempt on all the Muse's train;
A mighty master of the Song appears,
Who pours the strain to deaf, unwilling ears.
Thro' classic fields he flies with rapid force,
Each victor rivals in his serious course,
The Roman now in sharp, satyric rhime,
And now the Grecian in his flight sublime.
But rudely checked by fang of cruel Fate,
Headlong he falls from his aerial state;
A hireling weltering in Corruption's tide,
Weaving a wreath her Gorgon-front to hide,
Wasting his giant-strength in deserts drear
Their fabled forms where goblins, monsters rear.

A Bard who boasts a more propitious star,
With rigid rein commands a steadier car;
Nor dares to mount with Dryden's lofty bound,
While with unbridled rage he rides his ample round.
Along the level lawn secure he hies,
Shuns fen and fog with quick discerning eyes;
Whose finished verse harmonious, warm and clear,
Oft melts the heart, still wins the willing ear;
Where sense and sound, where truth and fancy shine
With blended charms in one bright nervous line.
High favoured Bard, above a thousand blest,
At once by Fortune and the Muse caress'd,
From youth to age allow'd to pour thy lay,
Unchill'd by Want, uncheck'd by cruel sway!
Thee Freedom fired to spurn the proffer'd bribe,
Thee Virtue roused, to lash the vicious tribe,
To crown her votaries with honest fame,
The villain damn to everlasting shame:
Thee too, we mourn, as sharing adverse fate,
With Dryden doom'd for lucre to translate,
With servile drudgery to imitate;
With gilded chariot and sleek prancing pair,
To drive Achilles; prankt in moodish air;
Who dreadful frowned from high Maeonian car,
That thundering shook the field, and swept the ranks of war;
Begging to glimmer in reflected light,
While shone thy native flame so warm and bright.

What notes of rapture echoed to the roar
Of Conway's waves fierce warring with the shore!
Abrupt the Bard loud struck the Theban lyre, 
His breast enflam'd with more than Theban fire.
Confounded, Dullness sullen stared around,
The strain root-gnawing Envy clamouring crown'd;
Despondence chill his rising rage repress'd,
Mute he retir'd to shades of listless rest.
Fastidious, scornful of the glutton-crest,
He sipped alone the pure ethereal dew;
Leaving the crowd gross garbage to devour,
He sucked the sweets of each untasted flower.

Where tuneful Tweed meandering rolls along,
Thro' verdant vales renown'd in pastoral song;
Thy power inspir'd a Druid to proclaim,
With music's voice, fair Truth's unsullied fame.
The laurel twin'd with flowers that brightest blow,
A dazzling wreath compos'd to shade his brow.
With scanning eye he travers'd Nature's sphere,
Marking her motions thro' the varying year;
With Fancy's pencil heighten'd Summer's bloom,
And doubly deepened Winter's awful gloom.
As the early lark high carols 'midst the skies,
While yet the world below in slumber lies;
So he first wak'd his rich descriptive strain,
Unseen, unheeded on his native plain.
Against his breast Misfortune aim'd her dart,
Forc'd him to fly, with anxious heavy heart,
Imploring refuge in a distant land,
For help dependent on a stranger's hand.
Long wandering wild, pursued by gulling Care,
Till verging nigh the brink of dark Despair,
Kind Pity lent at last a twinkling ray,
And led him back from dungeons to the day.
Yet urgent Want could ne'er his soul incline,
By serving Gain to shame the Muse divine:
Virtue and Truth he followed unrestrain'd,
Till, Fate subdued, a spotless palm he gain'd.

How sweetly sung yon generous simple swain,
Who wailed the fate of Auburn's guileless train,
By Rapine's rod expelled their native seats,
The bowers of Innocence and Love's retreats;
To prove the horrors of the Atlantic deep,
Thro' foreign climes to wander and to weep!
Behold, celestial Nymph!  in deep dismay,
The fond adorer of thy genial sway,
The scenes of song and rural bliss forego,
Friendless and famished wade thro' Alpine snow.
Ah!  see the heart refin'd by heavenly fire,
The hand inform'd to wake soft Pity's lyre,
Now waste their vigour in ignoble toil, 
With cheerless labour dig the barren soil,
With dull compilers vulgar fame to share,
The withering laurels won by creeping Care.
"Farewell, " he cries, "my glory and my shame!
Dear Poesy!  no more secure of fame;
Nurse of each virtue and each art sublime,
Gone with thy train to bless a kindlier clime!"

On Leven's banks bright shone a laurell'd Bard,
Whose soul the Muse's loftier spirit shar'd;
Ambition's slave who still abhorred to yield,
And Independence follow'd to the field;
With him undaunted rov'd from clime to clime,
Sounded his praise in matchless verse sublime.
But chill Necessity soon checked his strain,
Drove him for ever from thy hallowed fane.
With tresses torn thy choir his fate bewail'd,
Yet nought their love or piteous plaint avail'd;
Then no Maecenas listened to their moan,
Or stretch'd his hand to prop thy falling throne.

Where Dee's hoarse torrents dash'd from mountains steep,
Wide cleave the billows of the German deep;
The blooming Minstrel waked his matin lay,
To hail the beauties of the rising day.
Enamoured of the Muse, her charms he sung,
While Grampian mountains hoar responsive rung:
But long ere Phoebus reach'd the western main,
He drops his harp, in sorrow ceas'd the strain.
What baneful star, O Goddess!  ruled the hour
When thus thy favoured son renounc'd thy power;
Whose morn auspicious promis'd to restore
Thy long lost fame on Caledonia's shore,
To rear a monument on Deva's tide,
Of Graecian art, of Gothic strength and pride;
That laurell'd Thames no longer, with disdain,
Might view th' inglorious streams of Scotia's plain.

The Muse, now, Scotia, flies thy frozen land,
Where joyous once she led her choral band,
When Fortune's smile and Glory's bright reward
Attended still each venerated Bard;
Whose Celtic song the hero's breast inspir'd,
Thro' future ages made his name admir'd;
When Truth and Honour, Lore and Valour reign'd,
By Faction, Fraud, and Avarice unstain'd.
Behold thy slaughter'd sons the field bestrow,
Without the meed of due poetic woe:
In heaps they fall, unpitied and unknown,
Save by a friend's or brother's secret moan.
Their gallant deeds attend them to the tomb,
All sink unheeded in oblivion's gloom.
No more thy heroes' or thy patriots' praise
Is left recorded in immortal lays.

Douglas alone of all thy warlike band,
Is snatch'd from fate with harp-arousing hand;
In simple majesty who treads the stage,
In youth still green, and unabating rage.
See now each fame-commanding lyre unstrung,
Thy echoes mute, and mute each tuneful tongue.

Now cease we, Muse, the sad, disastrous theme,
My Fancy steep in dark Lethaean stream:
No more let Memory her rolls display,
Afresh to blot thy votary's chequer'd day.
Yet ah!  What forms of ghastly mien appear
To claim the tribute of a parting tear!
Along the dusky grove, with thorn o'erspread,
They sullen glide by grim Misfortune led.
Lo!  Arun's bards, a gentle, pensive pair,
Condemn'd the scourge of Famine fierce to bear!
There, Butler see, who wak'd the sparkling flame
Of wit and learning, bigot-rage to shame!
There Chatterton mad driven by grief and pain,
In dungeon dark the poison'd bowl to drain!

Alas, my early friend!  I mark thy shade
Moving majestic thro' the glimmering glade;
I view thee L&mdash;n vulgar concourse fly,
And darting back a stern contemptuous eye.
I mark the emotions of his towering mind,
By Learning, Genius, Harmony refin'd:
In converse close with B&mdash;e he hies away
To opening regions of unsetting day.

Sons of the Muse!  with heavenly raptures fir'd,
Alive, despised; dead, honour'd and admir'd;
Pure from your sacred choir what transports flow!
What sighs of anguish from your shades of woe!

Queen of the Song!  in whose wood-circled fane
A thousand vows are daily breath'd in vain;
If this thy chosen few are found to fare,
What hopes can hence inspire thy suppliant's prayer?
The morning rays that op'd his early bloom,
He sees ere noon involv'd in deepening gloom;
Here sees gaunt Penury obstruct his way,
With icy-hand and heart-congealing sway.
Ambition there, allures with treacherous bribe.
To join his servile, mercenary tribe,
Who quaff rich beverage from the golden bowl,
While o'er it wave the scourges of Control.

Why thus, O Goddess!  with thy smile inspire
Celestial passion, ardent pure desire;
Thy votary then from promised bliss debar,
With frowning Fate to wage incessant war,
Or vanquished led, with sorrow at her shrine,
His fame, his freedom and his lyre resign?
Why tune his fame to such refined accord
That Zephyr's breath may bend each trembling chord;
Then far expel him from thy vocal bowers,
Where summer gales still fan the op'ning flowers;
To roam the waste where wintry tempests rave,
Or drudge inglorious, chain'd in Mammon's cave?
Behold him slowly from thy shades depart!
Hark how he pours the sorrows of his heart!

"Ye hills and dales, where streams of rapturous joy
Are copious quaff'd, nor ever found to cloy!
Thou sweet inspirer of the tuneful breast,
With whom on roseate beds I wont to rest;
While Fancy painted all th' horizon gay,
And Hope illusive pour'd her dazzling ray:
Ye joys which now I must no more pursue,
And thou dear Sovereign of my soul, adieu!
No more thou lead'st a freeborn, votive train,
From youth to age, thro' thy Arcadian reign;
No more that laurel thou canst now bestow,
That wont to guard from Fortune's cruel blow;
And now no more that genial gale supply
Which fans thy flame and makes it pierce the sky."

While thus he sung dark Tempest rose around,
The plaintive lyre with deafening clamour drown'd.

PART II.
Now Night o'er earth her raven-mantle threw,
And thunders roar'd and rapid lightnings flew;
When, sudden bursting on the Poet's eye,
A golden cloud illum'd the darken'd sky;
Whence, thus respondent to the Muse's lyre,
Awak'd the voice of her seraphic Choir.
Hush'd winds and waves as magic-struck gave ear,
Rapt Nature silenc'd all her reign to bear.

"When Heaven's creating Lord first hung on high
The ponderous spheres amid the radiant sky,
To me, to Harmony he gave the power,
Thro' boundless space to guide their circling tour;
And bade me cheer this seat of man below,
Thro' hill and vale make strains of rapture flow;
With choicest influence of my sacred Art,
Attune to ecstasy the human heart;
That thus each fibre of its frame might move
In concord pure with hymning hosts above.
Thus, heaven-inspired in ardor-breathing lays
It first rejoiced to pour the Maker's praise,
Creation's pomp admir'd with joy sublime,
Accordant beat to Nature's perfect chime.

In these primeval days serene and gay,
Mankind acknowledg'd my auspicious sway.
While I presided o'er the rural throng,
Each heart was rapture, and each voice was song:
Thro' every vale and every blooming grove,
Melodious flow'd the strains of Piety and Love.

When demon-Pride and Luxury began
To waste and gloom the blest abodes of man;
When Lust of Wealth, the source of every woe,
Had seared his heart and knit his smiling brow;
I fled the earth now hostile and profane,
With Peace and Love and Friendship in my train.
Yet since, I oft revisit human-kind,
And shed my spirit o'er the feeling mind,
Which Nature's works and Nature's music charm,
Which Glory's trump and generous flame can warm.

Bare me the breast sweet Poesy cannot pierce,
Unthrill'd by harmony of Voice and Verse;
There mark the haunts of Treason, Rapine, Guile,
Of every hell-hatch'd fiend, envenom'd, vile;
Deadly and dull its cold affections creep,
As moves dark mist along the Stygian deep.
Where Music fails to harmonize the soul;
There Robbery, Lust, and Avarice shall prowl.
Woe to the bard born in malignant hour,
When these exert their persecuting power:
And woe to those who rouse his honest rage,
Their shame to sound thro' every future age!

A favoured few, of energy divine,
Fair Virtue's champions bright I give to shine,
Her name to rescue from the wrecks of Time,
Her deeds recorded in their strains sublime.
Such glorious task employed the ancient bard,
To crown Desert with honour's just reward;
To soar the heights where only seraphs dew,
On rapid wing transcending vulgar view;
The mystic oracles of Heaven to scan,
Its will reveal to blind apostate man;
Explore the scenes in future darksome times,
And point the paths that lead to heavenly climes.
Thus sacred Song, of old by Gods inspir'd,
By godlike men was honour'd and admir'd:
Thus shone my sons in laurell'd dignity,
The first in fame, the favourites of the sky.

Such flourish'd Orpheus the Thracian swain,
Who tam'd with song a wandering savage train,
Quench'd their desire of bloody lawless prey,
And taught to own religion's sacred sway.
Hence, some report, his numbers could assuage
The tyger's fierceness and the lion's rage,
Could charm the rigid powers of death and hell,
Make fiends and furies cease their hideous yell.

By Music's power the gloomy desert smil'd,
While lofty Thebes arose amidst the wild.
Hence rocks and groves, as mov'd by magic spell,
Were feign'd t' obey Amphion's chorded shell.

Conspicuous rais'd amidst my choral train,
Appears the Master of the lyric strain;
Still to the Muse's love and honour true,
To Gods and heroes paying tribute due;
Exalting Virtue in sublimest lays,
On Virtue's sons alone bestowing praise.
O'er cloud-wrapt Pindus eagle-like he flies,
Now dazzling bright, now hid from vulgar eyes,
Now soft, now strong, the sweeps th' Aeolian lyre,
While states assembled listen and admire.
See, sacred to the Muse his mansion rise,
While wide around proud Thebes in ruin lies.

Nor sole to profit tends my sacred Art,
But chief to captivate and charm the heart,
To wake false fear, or joy's transporting glow,
And sooth the heavy cares of want and woe.

Such power he prov'd who rul'd with timbrel'd sound
The victor-prince, swift whirl'd his soul around,
Now rais'd his pity and provok'd his tears,
With martial strain slow pierc'd his tingling ears.
As sudden rous'd by battle's' dread alarms,
The hero rose, aloud he cried "to arms."
Sweet languid notes now softer passions move,
And lull him ravish'd in the lap of Love.
Loud o'er his dream now bursts the trump of Fame,
His bosom fir'd with Glory's brighter flame:
He mounts his throne wide waving empire's rod,
In look and gesture speaks the conscious god.

What hosts of heroes, lords of mighty states,
Deny'd my honours by th' invidious Fates,
Have nameless sunk in Time's devouring tide,
With all their monuments of power and pride!
Yet sooner Time shall heaven and earth destroy
Than blot the glory of my ancient Troy.
Hark!  thundering still in Homer's lofty strain,
How storms Achilles on the martial plain!
His brandish'd spear and nodding crest behold,
His helmet flaming with refulgent gold;
The lightnings darted from his moony shield,
That far around with terror fill the field.
Still hear the words that flow'd from Nestor's tongue,
While on his lips the Argive armies hung;
Words sweet as honey bidding discord cease,
The strife of princes charming into peace.
Still know each labour sage Ulysses bore,
Ere safe he landed on th' Ithacan shore;
Recorded all in matchless sacred song,
Which age to age and clime to clime prolong.

In gloomy grandeur, terrible in rage,
Still see the mighty father of the stage.
The infernal furies chanting round him rise,
With horror flashing from their livid eyes.
In rhyme prophetic hear Cassandra sing,
While high above bright Rapture claps her wing.
Sicilia's lord the poet's guardian rose,
His musing age to nurse in bland repose

Led by the light of his wide orient blaze,
Yet hear Colone's bard exalt his lays;
Who guides his courser with a steadier rein,
And soars sublime in grave majestic strain;
While Judgment tempers Fancy's darting fire,
And Art subservient modulates his lyre.

Attentive listens Pity's tearful throng,
As softly warbles the Pillaean song,
Which sage Morality was wont to bear
In Plato's shade with never sated ear;
Which once the scepter'd Macedonian prais'd,
The buskin'd bard to highest honour rais'd,
Refus'd his ashes to the native shore,
Tho' begg'd with prayers and loads of golden ore.

As rises Lucifer with gladdening ray,
The welcome harbinger of dawning day;
So Dante shone with fair auspicious light,
Gilding the dark profound of Gothic night;
With Freedom's voice, in firm, indignant tone,
Arraign'd fierce Tyranny and shook his throne;
Wide o'er a long enslav'd and slumb'ring world,
The flag of Liberty and Truth unfurl'd.
Thus he obtain'd the bard's and patriot's praise,
Disdain'd the dastards who profane the bays,
Who guilty greatness and their own disgrace,
Extol aloud to every future race.
In glorious exile, with redoubled rage,
Dauntless he lash'd the vices of his age.
In tender lays now hear his lovers sigh;
His dreadful notes now rend the scowling sky,
While far he darts thro' Pluto's drear abode,
Or soars aloft above the solar road.
Now see him shine his country's pride and shame,
O'er every nation spread his fervid flame.

From Tasso's height how bright my glory blaz'd.
While o'er the crescent high the cross was rais'd;
When Salem's Muse victorious Godfrey sung,
When Jordan's banks with joyful paeans rung!
The Bard enraptur'd struck his magic shell,
Whose sound awak'd the powers of Heaven and hell,
To join the Christian and the Pagan band,
To swell the conquest of the victor's hand.
From fields of light, and Zion's lofty towers,
He now descends to Love's delightful bowers,
Where young Aminta and his Sylvia sing
In tenderest strains amidst the blooms of Spring.

When first I clasp'd him in my fond embrace,
And bade him rise the glory of his race;
A father cries, all trembling for his fate,
Infatuate youth!  beware what woes await
The wayward wight, whose dazzled eye pursues
The fatal favours of th' attuning Muse.
Around her fane that crown yon mountain wild,
Has Fortune e'er with eye indulgent smil'd?
Forbear, my son, to tempt the dangerous steep;
Along the vale thy course securely keep,
Where Epicurus leads his jovial crew,
The paths of Wealth and Pleasure to pursue.
Here see the bard by kings and courts caress'd,
With honours loaded, but with cares oppress'd:
Aghast he starts, as wak'd from wizard trance,
Beholds a fiend with scowling brow advance,
His name Dependence, bearing chains to bind,
In durance vile, the free aspiring mind.
Alarm'd he flies from scenes of splendid woe,
Where, hid in roses, poison'd briers grow.
Careless of grandeur and of sordid gain,
He seeks the pleasures of the humble plain;
The pleasures pure harmony and song,
Unaw'd by Pride, unruffled by the throng.
Th' Aonian maids with grateful care prepar'd
A garland rich to crown their generous bard;
Which o'er the world its verdure shall display,
When golden diadems in dust decay.

On wider wing bold Ariosto flew,
The regions wild of Fancy to review;
Scorning the critics' servile course to run
With eye still fix'd on the Maeonian sun.
He follow'd Nature through her boundless sphere,
Nor stoop'd to Art amidst his high career,
Rous'd with the sound of my harmonious choir;
He dar'd the frown of an offended sire,
Who long had chain'd him to the wrangling bar;
To deal dispute, and wage the wordy war;
Indignant fled to Rheggio's peaceful plain,
And sung Orlando in heroic strain;
Now wav'd sublime keen Satire's flaming blade;
Now with the nymphs gay caroll'd in the shade.
Leo with rapture listen'd to his lays,
Imperial Charles adorn'd him with the bays;
Proud to appear the patrons of a name,
Now bright in records of e'ernal fame.

More hapless Camoens, how I wail'd thy fate,
The toils and miseries of thy mortal state;
Born to ennoble Lusitania's race,
To shine at once their glory and disgrace!
How gothic Grandeur and barbarian Pride
Thy rightful tribute of renown denied,
Bound thee a hireling to a master's board,
While o'er thy head Dependence hung his sword!

To escape the dungeons of soul-sinking Care,
I saw thee roam o'er Afric's mountains bare.
In wanderings wilder than thy Gama knew,
I smooth'd thy way, presented to thy view
The future glory that should gild thy name,
And dash thy foes with ever-during shame.
This round thy prison walls a lustre spread,
When every hope, save hovering Death, has fled.
When oft invok'd, he clos'd thy weary eyes,
Loud o'er the world thy fame began to rise:
Compassion's tears bedew'd the plaintive page,
Which still shall stream through each succeeding age.

Love's blooming Minstrel wak'd his melting lays
By Arno's stream, my Petrarch gain'd the bays.
Admiring Rome bestow'd the bright reward,
With golden gifts allur'd the laurell'd bard.
Blind to the glare of Fortune's transient ray,
He scorn'd to shine her pageant of a day.
By Love invited, and the favouring Muse,
He sought the shades and fountains of Vaucluse;
A shepherd here with Independence stray'd,
Where Tumult's voice could ne'er his peace invade.
The woodland fruitage and the silver springs
He more enjoy'd than costliest feast of kings.

Hail Springs renown'd in his immortal lays,
While here retir'd be sung his Laura's praise!
Hail, favour'd nymph, whose charms still yield delight,
When rival beauties long have set in night!

A chosen race of such ennobled name,
I give through earth my Honours to proclaim:
Yet few Aonia's hallow'd heights have gain'd,
Or borne the lyre unbarter'd, unprofan'd.

What breast, though glowing with my purest fire,
Though love of virtue and of fame inspire,
Can all the assaults of furious foes sustain,
That haunt the way to my exalted fane?
When first his new-fledg'd wing my votary tries,
His eye full fix'd on th' empyrean skies,
Straight rouses Envy from his couch of slime,
And marks him soaring towards th' aerial clime.
With venom rous'd, hot rankling in His heart,
He bends the bow, and points the poison'd dart.
How oft rude Ignorance loud roars around,
Whose clamour drowns the lute's harmonious sound!
How oft his raging rout are seen to raise
Dark smouldering clouds to quench the Muse's rays!

Now views my son, before his eager eyes,
The frozen form of Poverty arise.
Aghast he sees, and sudden starts aside,
To where the pompous train of Wealth abide.
Here sensual Joy applies her fatal force,
To damp his rage, and check his daring course.
Here sordid Lucre cries with tongue profane,
"Resign the lyre, or raise the venal strain;
For Fortune sacrifice an empty fame,
For present gain, a lasting noble name."

O Thou, who would'st my cheering smile detain,
The Syren's voice regard with just disdain.
If Lust of Wealth e'er seize thy sinking soul,
Or Pleasure bend thee in her base control
Straight dies each impulse of sublime desire,
Each transport kindled by the Muse's fire:
Thy breast no more to Music's raptures known,
By envy, pride, and hate, is sear'd to stone.
Ah!  fly such foes, and shun eternal shame,
Which oft is found to dim the brightest fame;
While he, empower'd to sail the azure skies,
At Grandeur's shrine enchain'd, inglorious lies.
Be such the bondage of the spurious throng,
Who painful build the nerveless form of song;
Where native baseness is enammell'd o'er,
With jewells ravish'd from my sacred store;
Where nought of Nature's fire is found t' impart
Congenial raptures to the kindred heart.

Thus Beauty's shape of sallow clay may rise,
Dazzle the eye with bright and borrowed dyes;
Spotless may shine the alabaster brow,
And pure vermilion on the cheek may glow:
Yet what avails the lifeless form refin'd,
That boasts no beauty but of foreign kind,
That, stript of gay disguise, betrays to view
A mouldering mass of dark and deadly hue.

Thou, whom I claim among my honour'd born,
The rhyming herd devoid of spirit scorn;
On points and tinkling syllables who pore,
And pick each glittering trinket of my store,
With awe-struck eye on tinsell'd Pomp who gaze,
And court his smile with mercenary praise;
While round his altar they profusely throw
The rude-cropt flowers that fair on Pindus blow;
But reft of fragrance by their hands profane,
Withering they heap the bleak and barren plain.

While these in Mammon's mine their labours ply,
With breast congeal'd, and microscopic eye;
My Minstrel see, a solitary wight,
With vocal harp, in russet-weeds bedight,
Wandering at large along the mountains hoar,
With rapture listening to the torrent's roar;
Insatiate gazing on the ridges pil'd
In rustic grandeur 'midst the pathless wild.
Now seems he sad, immers'd in thought profound,
Now starts aghast, and eager stares around;
Now dart the rapid lightnings of his eyes,
And o'er his face the crimson flames arise:
With quick transition, lo!  he smiles serene,
While inborn rapture brightens all his mien.
Attun'd to Nature's voice still beats his heart,
Disdains the thrall of guile-instructing Art.
To 'scape rude tumult, servile toil and care,
He braves the tempest with his bosom bare,
O'erleaps the bounds that limit vulgar view,
And treads in dust the toys that catch the crew.

In vain shall he, who bends at Fortune's shrine,
Implore the influence of my power divine,
How rarely he, wrapt in her warm embrace,
Has e'er been number'd with my tuneful race!
Would'st thou, my son, aspire to spotless fame,
And still, unquench'd, preserve thy native flame;
With venal strain near stoop to sooth her ear,
Her golden boon the badge of shame to wear,
That buys the freedom of thy towering soul,
And binds it sunk in dungeons of Control;
Where rankling Care, and scoffing Pride conspire
To tear thy heart, and quench thy kindling fire.

From Luxury's domain now turn thy eyes,
To where gay Nature's sunny hills arise;
The seats of peace, of calm content and health,
Unstain'd, unravag'd by imperious Wealth.
What sights and sounds of joy attract thy view,
Enamell'd meads and mountain-summits blue,
That mock the mimic power of Pigmy Art,
And whelm with wonder the exulting heart!
How every scene thy bosom must inspire,
To pour the song, and join the general choir!
The various voice of echoing wilds and woods,
The roar sublime of loud-resounding floods,
The summer-sun high flaming in his noon,
And silent march of winter's midnight moon.

O Thou, whose breast the notes of Nature charm,
Whose frame refin'd my thrilling fire can warm;
Shun Luxury's licentious gaudy court,
To which the servile, sensual rout resort;
Where, 'midst the jargon of the jarring throng,
Expires each power of harmony and song.
With me retire to Contemplation's shade,
Where no rude noise thy visions can invade.
At Virtue's shrine here duteous homage pay,
Her form adorning in my fair array,
Which oft makes Vice, a fiend deform'd and vile,
Assume her shape, and sweet angelic smile.
Though here thou share her frequent fate below,
Her persecution, poverty, and woe;
Yet dauntless still her injur'd cause maintain;
To sooth her foes in fawning guise disdain:
Arm'd with my flaming torch their force engage,
Nor spare to pour the torrent of thy rage.
The clouds of strife a while may blot thy fame,
But future time thy triumph shall proclaim.

To Glory's heights now raise thy languid eyes,
My sons behold who have obtain'd her prize;
At length repaid for all the griefs they bore,
With swelling paeans rung from shore to shore.
Let this bright boon, still plac'd before thy view,
In each distress thy drooping age renew,
When hissing Envy, barbarous Power and Pride
Shall perish, plung'd in dark oblivion's tide;
When scorn shall curse the vice-adorning strain,
Or gentler Pity weep to wash the stain;
Thy purer praise ascending still shall rise,
Till angels sound it through th' eternal skies.
