Curst be the day when Cortes plow'd the main,
And thro' the azure mists of unknown skies,
New mountains view'd, and woods, of fairer dyes,
Where Mexico expands her golden reign.
And curs'd the day when from Panama's towers,
The bold Pizzaro bade a last adieu;
And curst the day in Caxamalca's bowers,
He seiz'd th' imperial treasures of Peru.

Then gaz'd the warrior on a richer feast
Than Asia e'er before her califs spread;
And as he gaz'd, &mdash; died in his guilty breast
Each generous thought, &mdash; and all the hero fled,
Oh!  damned gold!  that blunt'st the heav'n-born soul
To Pity, Friendship, Love, and Honour's stern controul.

Still mid the ruins of his ancient halls
Mourns Montezuma's shade at dusky eve;
And Guatimozin, even in torture brave,
Wild from offended Heav'n on vengeance calls.
And, lo!  of subject ghosts a countless train,
Invoke revenge on Europe's guilty shore,
Point to their native fields, where strangers reign,
Their native fields, still reeking with their gore.

Yes!  from your hills, and streams of golden sand
Revenge shall rouse him from his lengthen'd sleep,
Shall waft your treasures to each hostile land,
Shall waft the shining death far o'er the deep.
Yes!  what your ruin prov'd shall prove their bane;
And vengeance shall be yours, &mdash; ye spirits of the slain!

Now Commerce bloom'd in Beauty's ripening pride,
Quick heav'd her snowy breast with fond desire,
And beam'd her blue eyes with a keener fire,
And soft illusions round her fancy play'd.
Once as she stray'd on the Peruvian shore,
A dusky chieftain caught her wondering sight,
Around his neck full many a gem he wore,
And his rich armour glisten'd in the light.

Flash'd like Heav'n's bow around him as he trode,
His diamond crown with snowy plumage dress'd,
While high in air he wav'd a golden rod
Whose magic power each object quick confess'd.
Such charms had Wealth (for so the chief was nam'd),
As soon to keenest love the beauteous nymph inflam'd.

Destin'd they were a mutual flame to prove,
Not flow'rs more constant drink their evening dews,
Not the bright steel the kindred magnet woos,
Than throb'd their bosoms to congenial love.
And soon, by Commerce urg'd, Wealth left the shore,
Where long the Indian felt his peaceful reign;
Far o'er the deep with his fond bride he bore,
To Albion swelling from its parent main.

Where in their sylvan haunts of cheerful toil,
Men only virtue and contentment sought,
By Friendship blest, and Love's enliv'ning smile,
Love yet unconscious of a venal thought;
Where the stern Patriot still in virtue bold,
Ne'er yet a had blush'd to see his Freedom pledg'd for gold.

And scarce had Wealth our sea-beat shores imprest,
When to the Harp that o'er his shoulders hung,
Such 'witching strains, (till now unheard,) he sung,
As woke Ambition in the Peasants breast.
"Ah!  what avails to dig the barren field,
Or droop unheeded in the rural bower,
No fruit these toils to high ambition yield,
Nor e'er unlock the golden gates of power?

"Lives there a charm which Wealth cannot procure,
A soul that spurns by riches to be rul'd;
What Beauty yields not to the glitt'ring lure,
What power defies th' omnipotence of gold?"
He sung, &mdash; while thousands list'ning to his strain,
Sought thro' his beauteous Bride his royal smiles to gain.

And men to Wealth a ready homage pay,
While little minds by selfish lore imbu'd,
Rise on the ruins of the great and good;
For Wealth to power and honour points the way.
Offended Virtue flies the giddy scene,
And dwells with modest worth a fond recluse,
To Nature lives, amid her woodlands green,
To Nature lives, to Science, and the Muse.

No golden sands adorn Castalia's fount,
That sheds on pen'ry's urn its sacred dew,
Nor men to Wealth by Merit's temple mount,
That stands on steeps appalling to the view.
And they, who rapt, awake the silver wire,
Feel Poverty's chill frost repress their heav'nly fire.

Yes!  merit droops, for, in this venal age,
Wealth, and not glory, is the sole pursuit,
The tree of Science yields no golden fruit,
And her best sons must war with Fortune wage.
Where art thou Genius?  in what wretched haunt,
Lead'st thou thy Spencer thro' new fairy climes?
Or with thy Butler pin'st in cheerless want?
Who lash'd a frantic age with careless rhymes.

Or Johnson mourn'st, our laughter skill'd to move,
To playful mirth, even in misfortune prone
Or him who sung Monimia's tragic love,
Yet sung no tale so tragic as his own?
Or with the Bard unheeded lov'st to reign,
Who made the mortal year immortal in his strain?

Yet towns with novel pomp enrich our isle,
At once the bane and glory of the state,
In virtue poor, but in their splendour great,
Where Wealth, rejoicing, basks in Commerce' smile.
Now lave the streams of Caledonian Clyde,
Commercial towers that on his green banks rise;
And Forth delighted views his Scotia's pride,
Edina!  lift her dark walls to the skies.

And Don and classic Tweed, and rural Tay,
See prouder halls their sylvan banks adorn.
And thou sweet Avon!  where the Muses stray,
That still thy Shakespear mourn'st with plaintive urn,
And Mersey by her red walls murm'ring flows,
Which groves of thick'ning masts, scarce to the eye disclose.

And beauteous Eden, Were, and reedy Ouse,
And Yar, and Humber, mid whose stormy wave,
The Celtic Eugene found a watry grave,
Each o'er his waves new towns increasing views.
And view new cities grace their cultur'd shore,
The sedge-crown'd Cam, long by fair Science woo'd,
And Severn, whence full forty Naiads pour
Their tribute urns, to swell his copious flood.

And Medway, whom 'twas thine Old Thames to wed,
In 'olden time' &mdash; in thy sweet poet blest,
And shallow Lone, slow creeping o'er-his bed,
And Tyne, with many a dark sail on his breast.
And classic Dee, where, loves the Muse to dwell,
That ancient Deva sees proud o'er his waters swell.

But to recount it were an endless theme,
Each town that rose round Albion's winding shores,
Where busy Commerce wafts her floating stores,
Up the smooth current of each parent stream.
Yet shall the Muse forget thy princely towers,
Thou grand emporium of the western world,
Where Thames his rapid floods majestic pours,
White on whose waves are thousand sails unfurl'd.

Immense thy walls burst on th' astonish'd eye,
Where millions worship at Wealth's dazzling shrine,
London!  with thee could ne'er Bysantium vie,
Nor Carthage boast magnificence like thine.
And Thames, soft pictur'd on his bosom blue,
Admires as splendid courts as charm'd old Tiber's view.

And mid those cities that to Wealth arise,
Art's busy sons ply the mechanic trade,
And to those noisy haunts of smoke and shade,
The swain, from scenes of tranquil nature flies,
Flies from his peaceful cot, which woods embower,
Where Quiet loves, by bubbling brooks, to list,
Where rose-crown'd Fancy marks each op'ning flower,
And where content makes bliss itself more blest,&mdash;

Flies from his native vale where Nature blooms,
To scenes where Int'rest cons his selfish lore,
Where hellish Fraud Religion's garb assumes,
Whom Penury to low-bred cunning bore,
Where coward Theft, abhorrent of the light,
Skulks, like the hated owl, and acts his deeds of night.

Yet Wealth, say, why thy charms alone can please?
Canst thou to pain a soothing balm impart,
Or light up joy in Sorrow's drooping heart,
Or heal the subtile poison of disease,
Or the sharp pangs of conscious guilt remove,
Or smooth the struggling tempests of the soul,
Or stay that matchless arm, which from above,
Hurls the red bolt, and bids the thunders roll?

Say, canst thou lull the care-wom heart to rest,
On Beauty's cheek preserve the rose's bloom,
Or wake young Fancy in the aged breast,
Or give to life one moment from the tomb?
Ah no!  deceitful idol of mankind,
Gay smiling to deceive, and dazzling but to blind.

A city life to Commerce was more dear,
Than all the charms of rosy laughing May.
Eve's mildest blush, and Morning's liveliest ray,
Alone the 'busy hum' could charm her ear.
Still o'er the bustling stage 'twas her's to move,
Where Wealth gives life and energy to toil,
Him still pursu'd, and, with increasing love,
Still drunk new pleasures from his every smile.

And in those halls whose cope of blazing gold,
With tow'ring pride mark'd Wealth's imperial bower,
Fair Lux'ry, form'd in Nature's finest mould,
The nymph produced in an ill-fated hour.
Wealth press'd the infant to his breast, and smil'd;
Prophetic sigh'd the nymph, yet lov'd her beauteous child.

And as she grew, each sweet, bewitching grace,
That fancy, taste, and elegance admire,
That wakes to joy, or melts to fond desire,
Shone in her form, and brighten'd in her face.
With freshest vermeil from the rainbow drawn,
Ting'd were her lips, and sham'd the orient glow,
And, scarcely veil'd, beneath the lucid lawn,
Her bosom rose like a twin wreath of snow.

Not on the Cydnus shone th' Egyptian queen
More fair, while smiling o'er the conscious wave,
Not Venus rising from the ocean green,
When to the light her beauteous form she gave,
Than Lux'ry seem'd, whose op'ning charms impart
Love to the gazing eye, and rapture to the heart.

Oh!  thou who charm'd'st the Bard, by Mulla's stream,
As oft he woo'd the allegoric Muse,
Thy power, sweet Fancy!  o'er my soul diffuse,
While Luxury's soft empire is my theme.
Give me thy pencil, to portray each flower
That in the garden of the Muses grew,
For them she cull'd, to deck her fairy bower,
And in her train she Art and Science drew.

And Wealth obey'd her as her willing slave,
And Commerce spread her white sails for the maid,
And fearless o'er the ocean's stormy wave,
To her the spoils of distant worlds convey'd.
All lov'd her smile, tho' smiling to destroy,
With dazzling splendour lur'd, or soft voluptuous joy.

But who can paint to Fancy's wond'ring sight
Her palace which unrival'd Art display'd,
Whose canopy on marble columns laid,
Blaz'd like an orient temple on the light.
And at the gate, whose valves assunder flew,
By false desires, were countless numbers driv'n,
Desires which ne'er unbias'd Nature knew,
That chain to earth souls only made for Heav'n.

Crowds prest on crowds, yet ne'er they look'd behind,
To list to Reason's sad imploring cry,
But light as insects, buzzing in the wind,
Quick to the inner porch were seen to fly,
Where Fashion, portress, stood, and with her song,
Still lur'd the flick'ring crew that Passion drove along.

Yes!  there th' enchantress, in fair Beauty's pride,
Yet ever varying with cameleon hue,
Before them gliding like a meteor flew,
Beyond the inmost gate which, op'ning wide,
Turn'd to soft harmony, &mdash; where prest amain
The revel rout, who, when that porch they past,
Ne'er could they measure back their steps again,
For quick the closing Portals shut them fast.

And lo!  there stood within a giant form,
Who, with firm grasp, a knotted sceptre held,
Torn from some mighty oak that brav'd the storm,
With which the refluent crowds he back impell'd.
Habit yclep'd, who in their shrines secur'd,
The giddy imps of Sin, by Fashion's charms allur'd.

But who may hope to trace th' unrival'd Art,
That mid the inner-halls resplendent shone;
There might be found the spoils of every zone,
That charm the fancy or delight the heart.
And Painting there her mimic skill display'd,
Waking to life the images of things;
There buxom Cupid with his Mother play'd,
Clung round her neck, and fan'd her with his wings.

And there the airy graces seem'd to move,
While each in beauty seem'd with each to vie
Even forms ideal woke to real love,
Even pictur'd charms convey'd a real joy.
Yes!  Painting there her mingling colours threw,
Whate'er or learn'd Poussin, or Titian's pencil drew.

And Nature there in fancy seem'd to live,
And soft thro' Claude's warm Evening glow she smil'd,
Or came from Rosa's hand dark, fierce, and wild,
Such magic powers can Art to Genius give.
And Sculpture there with nice proportion charm'd,
Struck life and beauty from the shapeless rock,
And heav'n-born Poesy each bosom warm'd,
And each soft passion into madness woke.

And many a web, by surest instinct wrought,
Fine as the gossamer at Morn serene,
From orient climes there Commerce smiling brought,
And rob'd with insect spoils the witching queen.
For her soft furs, from shaggy monsters tore,
That prowl'd on Dwina's banks, or Oby's distant shore.

And on the ear delicious music stole,
And round the wide halls breath'd its melting plaint,
Sweet as the strains that sooth some dying saint,
And steep'd in melody the list'ning soul.
Here might be heard Ausonia's softest airs,
And Celtic measures that to mirth inspire,
From Beauty's lips &mdash; to charm away our cares,
And wake the throbbing pulse of young Desire.

Young nymphs, that blush'd in roses not their own,
To the light measures tript in wanton maze,
Whose limbs beneath the silken azure shone,
Inflam'd the heart, and catch'd the lawless gaze.
And every object mov'd at Fashion's call,
And her deceitful smiles were woo'd and sought by all.

And here each instrument of cunning make,
Ingenious Art had erst to Music given;
Ev'n the soft lyre, mov'd by the winds of Heav'n,
Essay'd their powers of harmony to wake.
Peal'd the loud organ with its voice sublime,
Yet mov'd not to Devotion's holy fires;
And might be heard the harpsichord to chime,
And guittar tinkling from its trembling wires,

And the piano's quickly varying sound,
While the light fingers prest its ebon keys;
And Erin's grander harp, in song renown'd,
Young Beauty swept in attitude to please.
All join'd their various tones in concert sweet,
Yet there no trump was heard, nor drum of war to beat.

And mid these halls some quaff'd the purple wine
From cups that sparkled in the lustre's beams,
Or woke with opiate draughts delicious dreams,
On Persian sofas stretch'd in sleep supine.
And oft the echoing noise of banquets flew,
With sounds confus'd, of mirth and riot join'd,
And spent in youth, there doz'd a sensual crew,
Each on some wanton's lap his head reclin'd.

Where now, ye feeble race, the manly forms,
That grac'd the ancient tenants of your isle?
Free as their winds, but dreadful as their storms,
Say, was it theirs to bask in Lux'ry's smile?
With little pleas'd, no fancied wants they knew,
But blest with rosy health, their days unclouded flew.

And lo!  reclin'd in her triumphal chair,
Whose canopy upheld the winged loves,
Fair on whose summit sat two billing doves,
With softest down, and pinions spread in air,
The queen in graceful, languid beauty shone,
Whose cheeks Art taught with mimic blush to glow,
Whose lawny robes around her loosely thrown,
Scarce veil'd with wavy light her form of snow.

Or now she mus'd by fits, by fits she smil'd,
Now listen'd to sweet Music's melting sound,
Now the dull hours with mirthful games beguil'd,
Or now her cares with draughts oblivious drown'd.
Ne'er did she court Reflection's heavenly sway,
But spent was all her care, to charm all care away.

Mild beam'd her blue eyes thro' their glist'ning dew,
Oft thrown askance, with conscious pride, would trace
Her symmet'ry that swell'd with matchless grace,
Dim thro' the silk she round her white limbs threw.
So Nature smiles, wrapt in the mist that plays,
In silv'ry azure o'er her liveliest dyes,
Yet every tint seen thro' the swimming haze,
But the more lovely seems to Fancy's eyes,

A wavy wreath her auburn ringlets grac'd,
Of clust'ring rose-buds from the wild woods torn,
Her tap'ring form a lucid zone embrac'd,
Wash'd in the scarlet blush of kindling Morn.
Now with a lute the feverish sense beguil'd;
Or now she melting sung, while meltingly she smil'd.

"Behold the birds that wing the liquid sky,
Melodious throng!  that neither spin nor toil,
Nor gather into barns th' autumnal spoil,
But ever chaunt their songs of grateful joy.
Say then, shall man, prince of this nether sphere,
For whom all nature smiles, yet smiles in vain,
Shall he become the weary drudge of Care,
The heir of Pleasure &mdash; yet the slave of Pain?

"Why in rich clusters hangs the circling vine,
Nor veils, with purple pride, its thick'ning leaves,
If ne'er he tastes its soul-enliv'ning wine,
Nor drinks the cup of bliss that Nature gives?
Or why the peach, or apricot, unfold
Their pulpy orbs, and shew their hues of blushing gold?

"Why beams the eye but on the charms to gaze,
Of beauty blessing only to be blest?
Why form'd the car, but to the charms to list,
Of rapture-moving sound's commingling maze?
Or why was youth borne on so fleet a wing,
If we to joy give not the tripping hours?
Then let us cull each rose-bud of the Spring,
And strew life's barren path with choicest flowers.

"Fond as the wild-bee on the desert vale,
From every blossom sips delicious dew,
Be ours on joys profusely to regale,
And feast on pleasures various, sweet, and new.
Since Heav'n to man a lengthen'd life denies,
Then let him give to bliss each moment as it flies.

"Sure he who ever dwells in bliss complete,
Delights to view our happiness the while;
For this he bade the varying Seasons smile,
And each desire congenial objects meet;
For this bade Fancy, with prophetic dream,
To Passion give the wings of keen Desire,
And made even Hope itself enjoyment seem,
And the slow mind with energy inspire.

"To sterner lore ascetic fools may list,
And wretch'd pine in Contemplation's haunt,
Dead to all joy &mdash; to live is to be blest,
And mine the task each wish of heart to grant,
Them distant joys in distant worlds be giv'n;
Be theirs the future still &mdash; ours be the present Heav'n.

"Ne'er form'd was man to pass his moments here,
In studious toil, since all his toils are vain,
For never can his insect soul explain
Those laws that rule this universal sphere.
Ten thousand flowers has Summer round her thrown,
Then shall he be to all her beauties blind,
Tho' not to Reason, but to Passion, prone,
Not to seek Truth, but Happiness design'd.

"Let cynics then, with fierce contention try,
'Mongst jarring systems Truth's coy face to find,
Best is the sage who best can life enjoy,
This is the true philosophy of mind.
Avails not Truth which adds not to delight,
All else the rainbow chace, or meteor of the night.

"Hail beauteous flowers!  that blossom in the gale,
Hail ye gay birds!  that chaunt your morning song,
Hail wanton flocks!  that roam the vales, among
Gay insect tribes, and sportive fishes, hail!
What time the Sun looks from his rosy bower,
On the green earth, and shews his laughing face,
'Tis yours to give to joy each fleeting hour,
Till spent at Eve, he close his weary race.

"'Tis yours to live as Nature bids to live,
Yours to fulfil her ever bounteous plan!
All other systems lead but to deceive;
The book of Nature is the guide of man.
'Be blest,' is the first law to mortals giv'n,
The only end of man, &mdash; the only wish of Heav'n."

In melting strains, thus Lux'ry oft address'd
The thick'ning crowds she to her palace drew,
Herself in winning attitudes she threw,
And every strain with suited action grac'd.
And round her throne, in gaudy pomp, await,
Intemp'rance, with her eyes confus'd and dim,
And Vanity, that flaunts in empty state,
By Fashion led, by Phantasy, and Whim,

And pamper'd Sloth, and impotent Desire,
And Indolence, nurs'd on the lap of Ease,
And Lust, with giddy pace, and loose attire,
Vers'd in each art that Vice has taught to please:
Hypocrisy, in smooth politeness skill'd;
And Scandal, an old hag, with secret rancour fill'd.

And thro' these halls a mazy entrance wound,
To an arch'd-gate whose valves were open flung,
Dread o'er a steep, where mournful shadows hung,
Where lo!  a huge, unshapely monster frown'd,
Nam'd Ruin, &mdash; and of yore conceiv'd by Sin,
When mad Ambition first had peopl'd Hell,
Now shew'd his double teeth, with hideous grin,
Now shook the echoing, halls with frantic yell;

And still on mischief would he love to pore,
While with red ire his starting eye-balls flash'd,
And the sad tribes that sought his mournful door,
Forth o'er the yawning precipice he dash'd.
False shame returning penitents with-held,
Whom Ruin down the gulf with fiercer wrath impell'd.

But in that gulf, by the stern monster driv'n,
Thy sons, O Luxury!  what ills await,
Where haggard Misery reigns in awful state,
O'er lands ne'er lighten'd by a beam from Heav'n,
There Poverty still mourn'd with dismal cry,
There Madness gnaw'd her flesh with anguish wild,
There mute Despair dark roll'd his bursting eye,
And call'd on Suicide his darling child.

And there, half-seen amid the twilight shade,
Sat fell Remorse, his crimes still brooding o'er,
Fierce on his liver still a viper prey'd,
While burst his bloody sweat from every pore.
And Grief, in Mem'ry's glass, still lov'd to view
Her former happy state, &mdash; then sobb'd and wept anew.

But who the dire diseases can relate,
That languish'd in this vale of cheerless gloom,
There blue-ey'd Phthisis blush'd with hectic bloom,
Blest in her happy ignorance of Fate.
There brawny Gout lay fetter'd on the ground,
Convuls'd with torture, and his eye-brows knit;
There Hydropsy, with belly large and round,
There Lethargy entranc'd in drowsy fit.

There maniac Fever, as a furnace glow'd,
While, like a casement shaking in the wind,
Her shatt'ring teeth her chill sensations shew'd,
While horrid visions fright her wand'ring mind,
And Proteus-like a thousand shapes she chose;
And Apoplexy there lay sunk in deep repose.

And there a nymph, with ever-changing mood,
Or scream'd with laughter, or with sorrow cried,
Hysteria nam'd, &mdash; while musing at her side,
With vacant gaze, wan Melancholy stood.
There too were seen the victims of Disease,
Which but the magic touch of kings can heal;
And, like the aspin shaking in the breeze,
There Palsy shook thro' all her members pale.

Ye dismal realms!  where Ruin smiles at Woe,
No more the Muse your mazes will explore,
Where Lux'ry's hapless race is doom'd to know
The dire effects of her bewitching lore&mdash;
Yet still she reign'd triumphant in our isle,
And all her pleasures charm'd, all gladden'd in her smile.

