Say, thou dread Monarch of the earth and heaven,
That, from the expansive circle of the skies,
Behold'st or nations fall or nations rise,
True to those laws which thou thy self hast given,
Shall men for ever trace their various round,
Like growing moons soon tending to their wane,
From rudeness to refinement's destin'd bound,
Then into rudeness gradual sink again?

Or comes a brighter age, till now unknown,
That ne'er shall limit the career of mind,
But from the Equator to the frozen Zone,
Shall spread the charms of Science 'mongst our kind?
Yet vain the spheres of intellect expand,
When not with Science moves fair Virtue hand in hand.

Thick from the soil that yields the beauteous flow'r
Luxuriant brambles grow, and rankling weeds,
'Tis thus in states, where Commerce Luxury breeds,
Hiding their very weakness in their power.
The increasing gifts of Science and of Art,
But soften toils that every fibre brace,
Unnerve the manly vigour of the heart,
And nurse in nations an enfeebled race.

Is not the cheek suffus'd with freshest bloom,
When thro' the frame the sick'ning hectics play?
Thus Wealth's proud palaces are Virtue's tomb,
Where kingdoms in their seeming health decay;
And long have sunk in dark Oblivion's tide,
Assyria's mighty pomp, and Persia's gorgeous pride.

Where Memphis rear'd her proud walls to the skies,
Oft lows at misty eve the unconscious herd,
And oft the wild goat shakes her snowy beard,
Where Tadmor heap'd, on the lone desert lies,
Fallen the splendid fane, where Judah's race
Perform'd their annual rites with holy joy,
And the fierce Turk pollutes the hallow'd place,
Where trembling Nature saw the Saviour die.

And mid the academic woods no more,
Of classic Athens, walks the cultur'd Sage;
Where now her temples? &mdash; where her virtuous lore?
Her matchless eloquence?  her polish'd stage?
All, all are gone, &mdash; even Rome herself decay'd;
Shall then our sinking state their mournful doom evade?

For, charm'd by Luxury's enchanting lyre,
The British youth leave Virtue's stern controul,
Dead to those nobler energies of soul
That earth-born men to heavenly deeds inspire.
Consum'd by Passion's wild licentious fire,
Even in green life they feel the woes of age.
Thus trees are blasted by the light'ning's ire,
And flow'rets wither'd by the tempests rage.

Robust no more, they dread the wintry reign,
Nurs'd on the soft bed of voluptuous ease,
While their weak nerves, too sensitive of pain,
Shrink at the cold touch of the northern breeze,
While by the chords of sympathy conjoin'd,
Slow on its sickly frame, acts the impelling mind.

Nor please the joys that cultur'd Nature yields;
Now the gay squire contemns his calm retreat,
His rich domain, his pleasant country seat,
His woods, his lawns, his vistas, and his fields.
Farewel those haunts which Virtue learns to prize,
Where Contemplation courts the sylvan maze;
Quick to the town, to Luxury's shrine, he flies,
And, like an insect, flaunts in Fashion's blaze.

In vain to him, amid his woodlands green,
The pure expansive stream is pour'd along,
Or yellow Evening paints the soft'ning scene,
Or from his hawthorns bursts the mattin song.
Not such the charms, tho' charms unmingl'd these,
Which thy corrupted sons, O Luxury!  can please.

Then say, why Heaven unfolds the vernal flow'r,
Or paints with varying hues the shadowy wood,
In graceful error leads the tuneful flood,
Or makes the spangling bow illume the show'r?
Or pours o'er shelving steeps the white cascade,
Where weeping birch trees drink the cloudy spray;
Or tips, with trembling dews, the spiky blade,
To sparkle in the blush of kindling day?

Or from his nightly couch, with roses dyed,
Bids the Sun wake, rejoicing in his might,
And up Heav'n's, azure vault, with blazing pride,
Roll his bright car, and scatter round his light;
Or hangs the Moon mid the star-cluster'd heav'n,
While laugh the clouds that o'er her pensive disk are driv'n?

Say, why those beauties the green earth displays,
In hill, or dale, or wood, or living stream,
Or which amid the Heav'n's vast concave beam,
If not, O!  man, to charm thy wond'ring gaze?
Bloom not for thee the Seasons as they roll,
Smile as they bloom, and vary as they smile,
Yet give no bliss, no transport, to thy soul,
Nor to Devotion melt thy heart the while?

Harmonious moves the universal frame,
In beauty, order, majesty, and grace,
Thou only, man, deform'st the lovely scheme,
And livs't a guilty blot on Nature's face.
Thee to delight a universe was giv'n,
Yet thou alone art dead to every bliss of Heaven.

Do not the songsters tip their downy wings,
And thro' the blue air wheel their tow'ring flight,
And warbling pour their transports of delight,
To send to Heaven that joy from whence it springs?
The flowers and trees look upwards to the skies,
As if to point whence all their beauty flows;
Even the mute herds uplift their wond'ring eyes
To smiling Heav'n, which all their good bestows.

Nay, from the bottom of the mighty deep,
Comes the huge whale, and flounders on the brine,
While from their cells ten thousand fishes leap,
As if to view Heav'n's glorious face divine.
But man, immortal, born to look on high,
To earth, and earthly joys, still bends his grovelling eye.

Yet Science blooms, and Art improving still,
And from effects still mounting to their cause,
Shew, as they work, coy Nature's secret laws,
Nay, even surpass her in their chemic skill.
Who dreams the china that of finest mould,
With the pure virgin snow in whiteness vies,
With wavy margin veil'd in fluid gold,
Was once the clay the marshy earth supplies?

Or that the chrystal, whose transparent glow
Outshines the sparkling dew drops of the morn,
Was once a rude flint on the mountains brow,
Or sleeky pebble by the billows worn?
Thus Art, by fire, exerts his influence keen,
And turns th' obdurate rock to spangling gems serene.

O!  Fire, thou minister of Heav'n below,
That cheer'st all nature by thy vital charm,
And into life evolv'st the embryo germ,
Nursing the forms of being as they grow!
Tell, secret pow'r, how in remotest time,
Art first to man thy use domestic taught,
To blunt the rigours of a northern clime,
And wake a torpid race to active thought.

Snatch'd he a faggot from the heaven-struck pine,
By eddying winds to swift combustion whirl'd,
Or seiz'd an ember from the ignited mine,
Where the volcano shakes the affrighted world;
Or on the flint first struck the kindling rays,
Or by attrition forc'd the arid wood to blaze.

To thee Peruvian mountains yield their ores,
Whate'er the earth, dark in her womb, contains,
Mix'd with the rocks, or pregnant in their veins,
Melts at thy touch, and pours its glist'ning stores.
And every plant that blossoms on the soil,
Blooms on the stream, or wantons on the sea,
Its breathing odour yields, its balmy oil,
Yields all its precious elements to thee.

Yet but avail the wondrous pow'rs of Art,
That guide thy subtile influence, O Fire!
To raise new wants in the corrupted heart,
And wake in pamper'd Vice some new desire;
For Art and Science serve but as they shine,
To bring more baneful pomp to Luxury's dazzling shrine.

Say, what avails the microscopic lens,
Which to the eye reveals the wondrous scene,
Where insect millions hold their short-liv'd reign,
Minutest tribes, &mdash; that'scape our grosser sense?
Or what with optic tube avails to trace
Those spheres that whirling sound Time's rapid march,
Whose laws, swift as they roll thro' shadowy space,
Great Newton mark'd around the starry arch?

Or what, tho' mid the blue ethereal way,
Herschel some unknown wand'ring orb descry,
Or in the fainter galaxy display
Bright clust'ring worlds to the astonish'd eye?
It nought avails, &mdash; while men from Nature's laws
Rise not to Nature's God, their guide, support, and cause.

'Tis vain to know how in the lone dark cave
The chrystal shoots, the stalaktite depends,
As from the arch that o'er the streamlet bends,
The dripping icicle o'erhangs the wave;
And vain to know how, wafted from the shore,
The spiral shells, sprung from their insect slime,
Form the huge rock; or pillar'd cavern hoar,
Of snowy marble or cerulean lime.

Or how the channel of the mighty deep,
Upheav'd by fire o'er the incumbent tides,
Broke as it rose in mountains huge and steep,
That wond'ring saw the billows lash their sides,
Their shelvy sides, on which in later time
The fluid granite pour'd its pond'rous floods sublime.

In vain to know how from green Nature's lap
Sprouts the young flow'r, and breathes the vital air,
Shrinks in the shade, or opens in the glare,
Or up its tubes propels the milky sap.
In vain to know what first great Hervey shew'd,
How, sent impetuous down the arterial maze,
Warm from the heart, descends the purple flood,
Or up the vein, with softer motion plays.

Or how the breathing organs ceaseless toil,
To rob the bland air of its slumbring flame,
To keep alive life's wasteful torch the while,
To give new vigour to the languid frame
Or how the infant cherub made to grow,
Clings to its parent breast, and drinks the orb of snow.

It nought avails, tho' to the admiring soul,
Art points to Science the unerring road,
Or Science tells how Nature's matchless God
Binds with fix'd laws the universal whole,&mdash;
Tells how light issuing from the solar sphere,
Reveals creation beauteous to the eye,
And bids each hue of mingling light appear,
In the gay flow'r, or crimson-margin'd sky;

Tells how unseen from the expansive mains
The silv'ry vapours rise thro' ether blue,
Soon to return to the green earth again,
Bright in the shower, or sparkling in the dew;
Tells how mid tow'rin'g clouds, that beam afar,
The electric flame awakes the elemental war.

Or tells how drawn by soft attraction's chain,
In peace, the jarring elements unite,
To charm the laughing seasons in their flight,
Yet Science all thy gifts to man are vain.
For not the knowledge of fair Nature's page,
Devotion wakes, or grov'ling Vice reforms,
Or tames low Appetite's licentious rage,
Or stills the lawless passions maddening storms.

And not the knowledge of Heaven's bounteous Sire,
Of Love still glowing with exhaustless flame,
Inspires his children with the blest desire,
'To love each other as he loved them.'
Themselves they give each thought to mankind due,
The prey to fancied wants which Nature never knew.

For thee, O Luxury!  the hapless slave
Must till the earth, or dig the cheerless mine,
His all the toils, but all the treasures thine,
Which Commerce wafts triumphant o'er the wave.
And the poor negro from his natal land,
Where smiling Spring mid vales of cassia roves,
Is by his tyrant brother's ruthless hand,
Torn from each object that his bosom loves.

Lo!  how he marks the vessel's furrowy track,
And strews with many a leaf the shifting floods,
As wont to trace his devious footsteps back,
Thro' the green alleys of his pathless woods.
Too simple man! &mdash; not these shall guide thee home,
Dispers'd even in thy sight, wide o'er the billowy foam.

In vain, poor slave!  thou tear'st thy wooly hair,
Or wistful look'st to Gambia's banks so wild,
Where thy fond wife and little darling child
Deplore their absent lord with many a tear.
In vain, when Evening falls with soft'ning glow,
They gaze from the green wigwam's matted door,
To see thee homeward ply the light canoe
Up thine own stream; fraught with the finny store.

And vain thou furious struggl'st to be free,
Rav'st on the deck, and clank'st thy cursed chain,
Poor slave!  the white man feels no pagn for thee,
What christian hand relieves the negro's pain.
Far from thy native streams and mountains borne,
Thee waft the merc'less winds &mdash; ah!  never to return.

But yet for thee, far other ills are stor'd,
In other lands, where doom'd thou art to bear
One ceaseless toil, beneath the parching glare,
To glut the coffers of thy niggard lord.
Ah!  there, when sinking with a broken heart,
Thou on the turf shalt lay thy weary head,
Then must the lash thy bleading shoulders smart,
While thy deep sighs in vain for pity plead.

Yet Hope that on the wretch delighted smiles,
O'er the green mountains shall thy fancy wing,
Where dwell thy fathers in their roseat isles,
Free as the winds, and lively as the spring.
For soon to thee, forgetful of thy pain,
There comes a peaceful land, where shall no tyrant reign.

A place there is where all thy sorrows close,
To pain oblivion, and to care a balm,
Shade from the heat, and from the storm a calm,
Where shall at length the weary find repose.
Oh!  'tis a rest from anxious plodding toil,
A silence which no tyrant's voice shall break,
A long long night, on which no moon shall smile,
A long long sleep, on which no dream shall wake.

Oh!  'tis a lonely, still, and peaceful bed,
Where shall no captive drag his clanking chain,
Where thou, poor Slave!  shalt lay thy woolly head
Down in sweet sleep, &mdash; nor rise to toil again;
No more by Luxury's pamper'd sons opprest,
When lies the welcome sod, soft on thy slumb'ring breast.

Such Luxury was thy reign, &mdash; yet of Wealth's brood
Most fell was Av'rice, darling of his sire,
Whose heart ne'er glow'd with Friendship's sacred fire,
Nor with his own e'er join'd another's good.
Charm'd with the heaps, and dazzl'd by the glare,
Of cumb'rous treasures that from Wealth he drew,
Around him still he cast a jealous stare,
Fearing each noise the distant echoes threw.

Thus sat he in his vaulted chamber lone,
Planning dire wiles the unwary to subdue,
While thro' its grates his narrow window shone,
Full on his meagre cheeks with deadly hue,
As when by moonlight o'er his pictur'd saint
The monk adoring bends, with visage wild and faint.

And oft beside him sat his sister Care,
A very ghost, with grief and watching spent,
Pale on her snowy hand her head was bent,
While o'er her face thick stream'd her matted hair.
Dull on the earth her eyes were pensive thrown,
Invincible to Sleep's delicious sway,
Nor o'er her dismal heart had ever flown
Those sportive dreams that round young Fancy play.

Long from the maid the purple light had fled,
That glows along the cheeks of dimpl'd health,
Chief to the rich her hated court she paid,
Lur'd by the vot'ries of her father Wealth,
And spurn'd the humbler bower with rushes clad,
Where slumbers sweet Content, soft on her mossy bed.

Ah!  who can tell thou cruel selfish god!
What ills from thee to wretched man proceed,
Thou bid'st the assassin plan his murd'rous deed,
And bathe his guilty hand in guiltless blood.
Impell'd by thee, man flies 'gainst man, to arms,
Friend against friend, and furious contests wage;
And even young Beauty yields her venal charms
To the embrace of cold enfeebl'd Age.

Impell'd by thee, with sordid lust of play,
Whilst lost the parent in the gamster's name,
The mother wears the eventful night away,
Dead to each thought that Love and Nature claim.
Ah!  say can hearts that feel no tender throe,
In loveliest bosoms dwell like rocks hid under snow?

Thus where is seen thy influence to extend,
O Avarice!  flies every social thought,
Sold is the friend, and is the mistress bought,
Nor lives the wish that knows no selfish end;
No more the bosom throbs to Nature true,
Nor weeps Compassion at Misfortune's shrine,
Dissolv'd the tie which generous natures drew,
That link of souls which Int'rest ne'er can twine.

Round thee, O Fiend!  thou breath'st the baneful frost,
That chills the streams of melting Sympathy,
Thy venal sons to patriot virtue lost,
Feel not the fire that animates the free.
Theirs is no wish, but to increase their store,
Unblest 'midst all their joys, 'midst all their treasures poor.

Thus Avarice, and 'witching Luxury hold,
In our degen'rate isle their baneful sway,
Her chief the young, him most the old obey,
Youth pleasure lures, and Age illusive gold.
Yet live there still, whose souls superior tow'r,
To the low cares that vex the sordid breast,
Who greatly live in Merit's humble bower,
And feel that to be good is to be blest;

Who court the tranquil shade, where Truth divine,
With Contemplation haunts the sylvan dale,
And decorate Religion's hallow'd shrine,
With fairest flowers that bloom in Science' vale,
Their study Nature, Nature's God their theme,
With peaceful bosoms steal down life's sequester'd stream.

A time there was when the benighted soul,
The servile chains of Superstition wore,
Whom Fear, on Ignorance, begot of yore,
While trembling Nature shook from pole to pole;
And in her train the sister hags she drew,
That thro' the storm in 'airy roundels' speed,
Or round the magic cauldron, flaming blue,
Lead the fell dance, and plan the hellish deed;

And sheety Ghosts that in the midnight gleam,
And Wizzards that in cunning spells delight,
And Fays that skim in acorns o'er the stream,
That softly glimmers in the starry night,
Or pace in airy rings the moonlight green,
And Kelpies o'er the deep that light their torches sheen.

And long she reign'd in the monastic shade,
Up whose long aisles, mid the still solemn night,
The Monk adoring led the taper'd rite,
Or to the unconscious image bow'd his head.
Or in the cloister dwelt the haggard dame,
Where the young vestal, still to passion true,
Oft with devotion mix'd a softer flame,
And on the world still cast a wistful view.

And yelling fierce from Superstition's throne,
Wide o'er our isle unnumber'd terrors flew,
But when the increasing charms of Science shone,
Quick fled the Fiend, with all her ghastly crew,
For Science knew no empire but her own,
Till Luxury taught the nymph to worship at her throne.

For that fam'd power that spreads amongst our kind
The gifts of Art, &mdash; herself best gift of Art,
Chac'd Superstition from the trembling heart,
And from the world dispell'd the eclipse of mind.
Hail, Printing!  fairest messenger of Truth,
Who Knowledge keep'st from dark oblivion's tomb,
Who givest to Science an immortal youth,
And bid the flowers of Fancy ever bloom.

And as the Sun his blazing chariot drives,
Up thro' the orient light'ning to his rays,
All Nature at his vital touch revives,
And every floweret gladdens in his blaze,
So Briton smil'd when sunk in Gothic night,
Thou pourd'st thy cheering blaze of intellectual light.

Glad was the hour when. by their peaceful fold,
As Bethlehem shepherds watch'd their fleecy care,
Divine effulgence fill'd the midnight air,
And seraph sounds a Saviour's advent told.
So glad the hour when from the tenfold shade
Of monkish night, again thy voice reveal'd
The unmingled truths Heav'n erst to man convey'd,
Which Vice corrupted, and which Fraud conceal'd.

From that long night of twice five hundred years,
Again thou bad'st the mental morning rise,
Chac'dst from the trembling heart its slavish fears,
And taught'st on earth the wisdom of the skies,
And bad'st the free-born soul of man disclaim
The awe of earthly pow'r, &mdash; the reverence of a name.

Yes!  when Heaven's light in cloister'd shades was shrin'd,
And Superstition, raging o'er the world,
O'er proudest thrones her demon thunders hurl'd,
And on the altar forg'd the chains of mind,
Thou cam'st, &mdash; and bad'st a happier age unroll,
Spread'st wide abroad the cheering beams of Heav'n,
And from the Equator light'ning to the Pole,
What all concern'd by thee, to all was giv'n.

But on our isle chief shone thy brightest day,
For soon its daring sons were taught by thee
To spurn the inglorious bonds of tyrant sway,
And feel that to be men &mdash; is to be free;
Were taught by thee in Freedom's cause to bleed,
To choose a patriot king, &mdash; and own a Christian creed.

But now seduc'd by Luxury's fatal lore,
They yield the heart to Passion's maniac sway,
Whose tempests cloud the intellectual day,
Thro' which the beams of Reason feebly pour.
"Oh!  if e'er Virtue," said the Attic sage,
From god's 'mongst simple men should venture down,
Her charms to love should every breast engage,
And men confess no empire but her own."

At length she came, whom ancient Bards had sung,
And veil'd celestial charms in mortal guise,
To men the gates of Heaven asunder flung,
And bade Hope soar, exulting to the skies.
But Luxury's sons now spurn their sacred guide,
Or toss'd on Passion's storm, or drown'd in Pleasure's tide.
