While the rough surge of Life's tempestuous wave
To desolation speeds its course,
And with a wild o'erwhelming force
Consigns progressive ages to the grave,
Unalterably true the Solar ray
Darts from the East th' important day to bring,
While heavenly powers resume th' exalted lay,
And with divine harmonious concord sing
The wondrous high descent of their incarnate king.

O memorable day!  what joys divine
The courts of highest Heaven pervade,
Where to th' extatic view display'd,
In bright array the heirs of glory shine!
While there, to celebrate thy blest return,
Immortal beauty beams upon the sight;
And martyrs, whom salvation's robes adorn,
Reflect the purity of spotless white,
That issues from the source of Everlasting Light.

Awake, O man!  the natal morn invites;
To heavenly themes attune the soul;
Yield to that sacred sweet controul,
That brings pure mental permanent delights.
Let earthly cares obediently retire,
And to the soul's eternal worth give place:
Kindle the fervour of sublime desire,
The wonders of the Saviour's love to trace,
The glories of his reign, the riches of his grace.

Swift fly the hours with more than eagle's haste,
Like rolling years beyond the flood,
When the great Author of all good
Gave beauty, life, and light, an empire vast.
Yet e'en this transient sublunary state
Will to the mind celestial good afford;
The Christian soars above the reach of Fate,
Feasts on the faithful premise of his Lord,
And drinks the pure delights of his most holy word.

Great name of whom the saints and angels boast!
Him the most ancient seraphs knew,
And while his realms they strove to view,
Their powers though great were in his empire lost!
O infinite eternal King of kings,
Compar'd with thee, immensity is small!
The most stupendous of created things,
Weigh'd in thy balances, to nothing fall,
For thou through endless space art God of All in All.

Unbounded space its choicest incense yields;
But most apparent to the mind,
The omnipresent God we find,
Ador'd throughout Creation's ample fields.
The starry orbs from human eye remote,
In their bright courses praise their Lord above;
They in the blue expanse of ether float,
And for his glory regularly rove
In yonder vast domain of his almighty love.

If this diurnal sphere from pole to pole
We trace, to seek our heavenly fire,
Or for his attributes enquire,
A lasting train of wonders feast the soul:
These their incessant grateful task fulfil,
Speak the Creator's all-transcendent fame,
And minister to his unerring will:
These in full concert raise th' exalted theme,
To join the general shout of praises to his name.

But O what glories from Salvation's plan,
The mind's perceptive powers entrance,
As heralds with the news advance,
That God through Christ is reconcil'd to man!
Safe on her golden anchor stay'd, sweet Hope
Gives to the wind the terrors of the tomb,
And Faith, surveying yonder starry cope,
Explores those mansions in the world to come,
The soul's perpetual rest and everlasting home.

Here rivers of delight, that know no pause,
Their essences profusely pour
On minds that ne'er could reach the store
Of philosophic fruits in Nature's laws:
Here from a pure translucid ambient stream
Comforts divine their sorrowing bosoms soothe,
Through all its avenues th' immortal frame
Drinks from the fountain of eternal Truth,
That gives the blooming health of undecaying youth.

Since the first coming of the Prince of Peace
Excites the joy of Heaven and Earth,
To hail the wonders of his birth,
To praise thy name, Jehovah, shall I cease?
Rather the primogenial spring of heat
May in Life's crimson current cease to glide;
Ah!  rather may I pass Death's sable gate,
Than e'er from thee my humble offerings hide,
For with thee endless life and honours till abide.
