When Man's majestic form at Nature's birth,
Rose, newly fashion'd, from the teeming earth,
Pleased with his noblest work, th' eternal Sire
A portion of his own aethereal fire
Breathed on the senseless mass: &mdash; the kindling clay
Felt the pure flame, and bounded at the ray.
But Life with myriad humbler forms He shared,
For Man a nobler boon His hand prepared;
He gave him Reason's powers, and through his soul
Bade the warm current of the Passions roll:
Almighty GENIUS then that hand bestow'd,
And all his features with the Godhead flow'd.
Uninjur'd, unimpair'd, by age or clime,
Bright as the Sun, and as its source sublime:
While Time's uncounted cycles roll away&mdash;
Fervid, immortal, flames its hallow'd ray!
E'en Slavery's bonds its radiant beams illume,
And penetrate the dungeon's deepest gloom;
Hear laughing Terence pour his comic strains,
Hear fabling Aesop warbling in his chains!
How bright in Nelson glow'd its ardent flame!
What splendours blaze, round Pitt's unrival'd name!
Immortal Patriots!  o'er whose honour'd bier,
Virtue, and Britain, shed th' unceasing tear!
O'er subject Earth and Seas 'tis Genius reigns,
And rolls the Planets through yon azure plains.
No grov'ling native of this nether sphere,
The radiant Child of Heav'n's eternal year!
Beyond the flight of vulgar thought he springs,
Nor human laws restrain his eagle wings!
To all his bold eccentric darings kind,
The proud excesses of a lofty mind;
Those errors that from burning feelings flow,
When high the spirits, &mdash; warm the pulses glow,
Nor wholly overlook, nor nicely scan,
And for his Godlike talents, spare the Man.
Oh!  in no mean terrestrial balance weigh
The good, or ill, that marks his brilliant day;
But in that lofty balance rear'd on high,
For ever blazing in his native sky,
'Tis only in celestial LIBRA weigh'd,
GENIUS, thy dazzling merits are display'd.
Reflect through all the radiant march of time,
Whatever great, or daring, or sublime,
Fills the vast volume of recording Fame,
From Genius sprang, and hallow'd be its flame!
As the bright Phoenix at the solar beam
Drinks life and vigour from its parent stream,
The Phoenix GENIUS, at a fount more bright
Quaffs the pure blaze, and beams reflected light.
Like watchful Magi guard the virgin fire,
Nor let its blaze in penury expire!
Would daring mortals check his bright career,
And chain to earth a native of the sphere?
Go, the sweet influence of the Pleiads bind,
Bid their mild radiance cease to bless mankind.
Or vast Orion with thy nod control,
And loose Arcturus from the gleaming Pole.
When Nature thus obeys thy ruling hand,
Then bend proud GENIUS to thy stern command.
Think'st thou that He, whose soul delighted strays
In the bright tract where circling Planets blaze,
Will bend his spirit of immortal birth,
To heap the treasured dross of shining Earth?
Perish the thought! &mdash; who sings the rolling sphere,
And paints the beauties of the vernal year,
For him the Summer's golden fruits should glow,
And the rich torrent of the vintage flow:
Who to the banquet gives its genuine zest,
For Him &mdash; Him only should the grape be prest.
Your's is the sacred charge, by Heav'n assign'd,
On earth to cherish this proud Child of Mind.
That charge how glorious!  how sublime the trust!
To Heav'n be faithful, &mdash; and to Man be just.
Guard this rich gem of the celestial mine,
And bid its light to latest ages shine.
Behold, with all the glow of Genius fir'd,
For letters, with unbounded zeal inspir'd,
That PRINCE, &mdash; whose heart beats high for Britain's fame,
And bounds at Liberty's transporting name,
On Heav'n-born Talent sheds a cheering ray,
Auspicious promise of a brighter day!
Nor unrequited shall his bounty stream&mdash;
GENIUS rolls back the bright reflected beam;
For cherish'd fires, confers sublime renown
And with new glories gilds the British Crown.
Foster'd by You, &mdash; beneath these frozen skies,
I see new SHAKSPEARES, SPENSERS, MILTONS rise.
I hear new DRYDENS, but in manlier strain,
Resound some future GEORGE'S glorious reign.
And other JONE'S, if the fates are kind,
With all their talents, all their fires combin'd,
In Orient climes uphold the British name,
And bless the FUND that nurs'd their rising flame.
