FIRST MINSTREL.
The budding flow'ret blushes at the light,
The meads are sprinkled with the yellow hue;
In daisied mantle is the mountain dight;
The tender Cowslip bendeth with the dew;
Through leafy trees, whose green tops touch the skies,
Wak'd by the gentle wind, soft whispering sounds arise.

The evening comes, and brings the dew along;
The western sky with golden radiance shines;
Sweet Minstrels tune the cheerful village song;
Young ivy round the cottage door-post 'twines;
I lay me on the grass; yet, to my will,
Through all is fair around, there wanteth something still.

SECOND MINSTREL.
So our first father thought in Paradise,
Where heav'n and earth did homage to his mind;
In woman man's supremest pleasure lies,
Man's first and best delight is woman-kind.
Go; take a wife unto thine arms, and see,
Winter, and russet hills will have a charm for thee.

THIRD MINSTREL.
When Autumn bare and sun-burnt doth appear,
With golden hand gilding the falling leaf,
Bringing up Winter to fulfil the year,
And bears upon his back the ripen'd sheaf;
With forest-seed when all the hills are white,
And thro' the blazing sky oft' gleams the northern light:

When the fair apple, red as evening sky,
Doth bend the tree unto the fruitful ground;
When juicy pears, and berries of black die,
Dance in the air, and all is glad around;
Then, be the evening foul, or evening fair,
Methinks my heart's delight is mingled with some care.

SECOND MINSTREL.
Angels are painted as of neither kind,
And angels only from desire have rest;
There is somewhat in the human mind
That without woman never can be blest.
There is not sainted hermit, but the sight
Of lovely woman fires, and "cheers his dulled spright."

Woman for man, not for herself, was made,
Bone of his bone, and child of his desire;
To him from whom she sprang, she flies for aid,
Her gentle frame less mix'd with native fire;
Therefore the fire of love is giv'n, to heat
Her milkiness of kind, and make herself compleat.

So, without woman, man yet kindred were
To savage beasts, and war his sole employ;
But woman bade the spirit of Peace appear,
And won the brutal mind to love and joy:
Then let a wife be to thy bosom prest!
In marriage-life alone can man be highly blest.
