I, who erewhile in artless numbers sung,
The Sabbath-service of the simple swain,
Whence Peace, Content, Delight for ever young,
And heavenly Hope, rose smiling in his train:
Now to the trem'lous, sorrow-breathing strain,
With faltering hand attune the rustic lyre;
How sick Dejection, Poverty, and Pain,
And weeping Sympathy, in death, conspire
To dash his high-form'd hopes, and quench his heavenly fire.

Yet all conspire in vain.  Tho' cold the clime,
And dead-like oft the spark of grace may lie,
Surmounting all the heavy damps of time,
A blaze at length, it mounts its native sky.
And Thou, who taught the Bard of old to cry
For help, because of faithful men's decay,
O turn on me Thy light dispensing eye,
Teach, as I trace forlorn the weeping way,
In faith and hope, resign'd, to meet my dying day.

The sickly sun sinks gloomy in the west,
The storm rolls dark along the scowling sky;
With weary wings, wild warping on the blast,
And clamorous cry, the ravens homeward fly.
The torrent, tumbling from the mountain high,
In plaintive tone, prelusive, shrieks afar,
Black on the distant hill the thick clouds lye,
And hollow sounding, from the rugged scaur,
Strange voices issuing, hail the coming wintry war.

Now, happy he who o'er the blazing fire,
And flowing bowl with cheerful friends around,
Pours forth the strain, as health and mirth inspire,
While in the laugh the storm's rude voice is drown'd;
But o'er the cot where weeping pain is found,
Where sickly Sorrow tells the lingering hours,
Where Poverty, upon the mortal wound,
Her rankling poison still unceasing pours;
'Tis there th' approaching storm in all its horror lowers.

Yet there will Wisdom oft retire, to mark,
O'er mortal bliss, how Misery's bleak wind blows;
How, oft involv'd in cloudy tempest dark,
The glimmering day of human life must close.
There, joyful late, the smiling morning rose,
With gambols cheery, dusky night drew on;
There, late Content, with Love and Temperance, chose
To dwell retir'd &mdash; while Hope, in starry zone,
Nd Health, of rosy hue, o'er all auspicious shone.

There, late, at gloaming hour, the ingle clear,
The well-swept floor, the frugal table spread,
The mother pleas'd, the prattling children dear,
Were all in waiting for returning dad.
Behind the door, set by his weary spade,
Water to wash, the children fond would bring,
And stockings clean &mdash; thus comfortable made,
Down he would sit, amid the social ring,
Ah!  happier sure, by far, than e'er was pageant king.

But chang'd, alas!  for late upon the hill
Loud roar'd the winds, with drenching sleet and rain;
Yet there his labour he continued still,
That so his week unbroken might remain.
And ever since, perplex'd with racking pain,
And heart-consuming sickness, sad he lies;
Its skill the village, too, has tried in vain;
Unnerv'd his arm, and death-like dim his eyes,
No strength the healing herb, nor cordial draught supplies.

The table still is spread &mdash; but, ah!  their cheer
The father and the husband cannot bless;
The mother, though she strives to hide her fear,
All wild her looks declare extreme distress.
Her tears to her are meat; yet not the less
Her helpless children occupy her care;
Often she strokes their heads, and oft will press,
Yea, oft will help them to their simple fare,
For poor, alas!  ere long, she fears must be their share.

The father, too, tho' dreadful in his face
The grim and grisly King of Terrors stare,
Yet hears their plaint, beholds their helpless case,
And all his woes a blacker aspect wear.
Only to die, his better thoughts might bear,
Though from the light of life untimely torn;
But, ah!  his babes, abandon'd to despair,
To toil, to hunger, nakedness and scorn,
Rush on his bleeding heart, too heavy to be borne.

To hide the grief that in his bosom burns&mdash;
The melting magic of their looks to shun,
Round from the light his faded face he turns,
And o'er his cheeks the tears in silence run.
And soon, their sadly cheerless dinner done,
The careful mother rouses up the fire?
And trims her wheel; for something must be won,
Things honest ever were her great desire;
And all her efforts now their pressing wants require.

But first the children must be put to bed;
For drowsy languors, listless, o'er them creep;
No father's fond caress to make them glad,
No trick, nor tale, to shift the hour of sleep.
Still, little John, her eldest boy, will keep,
With filial care, her company awhile;
Will listen to her plaint, and with her weep,
Or dwell with transport on the transient smile,
When fears of future woe she struggles to beguile.

Yet, soon o'ercome, he too begins to doze,
His closing eyes confess the drowsy power,
And, said his prayer, he hastens to repose,
For tir'd attention can apply no more.
Then, solitary, all the long night o'er,
She counts the lagging moments one by one,
Listening, at times, the wild wind's stormy roar,
At times, her husband's feeble, weary groan,
Which, as it rises slow, she mingles with her own.

Meantime, the storm more strong begins to blow,
The rattling hail behind the chimney rings,
And, rising wild, the fancied notes of woe,
All mournful, sweep from echoes airy strings.
And Chanticleer, unwonted, claps his wings,
And thrice he fills the cot with echoes drear;
Sudden the jattering door wide open flings,
As raising up its voice distinct and clear,
Above the sick man's bed the death-watch strikes her ear.

Her task unable longer to pursue,
She rises up to go &mdash; she knows not where,
Walks round the floor, as something she would do,
Which yet she cannot for the blinding tear.
Out to the night she looks; there all is drear,
No silver moon nor starry clusters rise,
Terrific Winter rides the groaning air,
With sombrous wing he, sullen, shades the skies,
While thick the shapeless drift tempestuous round him flies.

Back from the gloom she, shrinking, shuts the door,
Thankful that yet a house remains her own,
While, even now, some friendless wretch and poor,
Far o'er the waste, fatigued, may lay him down,
Bewilder'd, faint, and hand to help him none;
The drift his covering, the cold earth his bed,
The wild blast answering, dreary, to his moan,
And from his view fair Hope for ever fled,
The thick cold damps of death swift closing round his head.

But soon recall'd her thoughts, for out of sleep
Awaking sudden with a feeble cry,
The sick man starts, in spirit groaning deep,
And staring round with wildly frantic eye.
Yet, once awake, he, with a softer sigh,
Happy to find the horrid vision fled,
And now, the hour of rest supposing nigh,
Desires their night devotions should be made,
That safe they all may sleep beneath th' Almighty's shade.

Oft was he wont, on such a cheerless night,
With Israel's royal Bard, in rapture high,
To traverse wide the dewy fields of light,
Beholding, vast the treasures of the sky.
The hail, the snow, the lurid clouds that fly,
Around the footsteps of the eternal King,
When to the troubled earth he draweth nigh,
Envelop'd in the whirlwind's withering wing,
And an approaching God, the good in triumph sing.

But troubles great against him now prevail,
Untune his tongue, and dim his closing eyes,
Yet, pillow'd up, his frame infirm and frail,
Once more to lead the song divine he tries.
Before him his delight, his Bible, lies,
With trembling hand the sacred leaves he turns,
To find some strain that to his case applies;
Some strain, perhaps, that pamper'd Folly spurns,
But where the precious fire of holy fervour burns.

The ardent breathings of the man of God,
When, by the mandate of a cruel king,
Shut out in desert drear to make abode,
Far from the social haunt of living thing;
Yet, borne on Contemplation's glowing wing,
Bright scenes he nightly through the gloom descries;
Bold notes of triumph wake the sounding string,
God was his help; on God he still relies,
Who counts his wanderings all, his tears and painful sighs.

Or, of our God the mercy and the grace&mdash;
A face of wrath he will not always wear;
For, as a father doth his infant race,
He pitieth such as truly do him fear.
Our frame he knows, our short continuance here;
Frail man, alas!  like flower in field he grows&mdash;
Fair in the dewy morn its leaves appear,
Drooping at noon &mdash; the breeze of evening blows,
And, lo!  'tis gone, its place again it never knows.

And let no scoffer think his labour vain,
If in desertion's dreary gloom he pine&mdash;
No; tho' compell'd the melancholy strain
Of troubled Asaph's plaintive harp to join,
When he beheld the wicked's wealthy line,
Encompas'd round with violence and pride,
Lofty and loud blaspheming power divine:
Or digging deep, their horrid thoughts to hide,
Yet safe, from day to day, in peace and ease abide.

Or with the mournful Heman, day and night
Who lifted up to God his fervent prayer,
Yet to his weary soul found no respite,
Brought to the very borders of despair;
In dreadful deeps, and dismal darkness, where,
Boiling and black, the frowning cliffs among,
On which grim Vengeance stands, with red arm bare,
The turbid tide of terror, deep and strong,
With hoarse horrific roar, tremendous, flames along.

In words like these his cry to God is sent,
Before whose throne, found waiting he would be:
"Hear, Lord!  my prayer at morn shall thee prevent;
O wherefore hid'st Thou thus Thy face from me?"
Then to the page, proclaiming pardon free,
Through Christ, who came the dying to redeem,
He turns &mdash; but this his spouse must read, for he
No more can bear the taper's trembling beam,
So deep, before his eyes, the dark mists thickening swim.

With fervent heart, though broken voice, she reads,
Tears falling oft, with heavy sobs between,
Of Him, who once, array'd in humble weeds,
A man of woe and matchless grief was seen;
Our sorrows bearing, mock'd by miscreants mean,
With cruel thorns crown'd by the fiends of war;
Drag'd, in ridiculous purple &mdash; with th' unclean
Sisted before a venal judge's bar,
There scourg'd, condemn'd, and slain; while from him God was far.

But now alive, on the right hand of power,
With majesty encircled, He appears;
Before Him all the heavenly hosts adore,
And the dread keys of hell and death he wears;
And still the meek and tender heart He bears
Toward his people, tempest toss'd, below;
He guides their weary wanderings, counts their tears,
Rebukes the storm that would their steps o'erthrow,
And with His smile dispels the gathering clouds of woe.

Up to Him, then, by prayer they lift their eyes
For strength to bear them up in this distress,
When far away each earthly comfort flies,
And rising griefs on griefs their spirits press;
That, water'd by the living streams of grace,
Fed from the fulness of His bounty still,
They, even in tribulation, may rejoice,
Submission learning to his holy will,
Since all His works are good, and wrought with matchless skill.

That, if his end be now in the decree,
Of them he leaves the guardian and the guide,
The father and the husband He would be,
All needed help and comfort to provide&mdash;
And from his present prospect, wild and wide,
The dreary gloom, the shades of doubt remove,
Bestowing, death's dark Jordan to divide,
The mantle of his righteousness and love,
True faith, and heavenly hope still anchoring firm above.

Thus finish'd their devotions, he again
Lays down his weary head in anguish deep;
She, faithful, by his bed side will remain,
Over his rest a mournful watch to keep.
For tremblings o'er him, chill, begin to creep;
His leaden looks assume a ghastlier hue;
Convuls'd his nerves with frequent flutterings leap,
And large, in drops, in her astonish'd view,
Stands on his palid face a cold and death-like dew.

His eyes are clos'd; but soothing sleep is gone,
Of dark-brow'd Thought to shun the angry scowl:
His lips are silent, save the plaintive moan,
That now and then bespeaks his troubled soul.
Upon the verge of Time's receding goal,
Th' eternal world expands before his eyes,
Yet still, within him, dark, deform'd and foul,
The motley children of Corruption, rise,
And far away his God the wonted smile denies.

Mock not, ye sons of ease, who never knew
What 'twas beneath Affliction's hand to lie,
On whom chill Sorrow's rough wind never blew,
Nor lower'd Temptation's sable shrouded sky.
Think, while ye riot in the rich supply
Of all your souls can wish, or bodies crave,
O!  think on him who pours the ceaseless sigh,
Placed on the precincts of the dismal grave,
While darkness reigns within, and storms around him rave.

Nor you, ye scorners bold, in whom, profane,
The atheist fires of hell, Heaven-daring, burn;
Who with audacious front, in folly vain,
At judgment scoff, and mercy proudly spurn.
Think, when with cares, with years, and sorrows worn,
Where, or on what your feeble hopes shall rest;
Bereav'd, alas!  how will ye sink forlorn,
When rises up, before your eyes confess'd,
Tremendous, Truth, sublime, in all her terrors dress'd.

For who can tell th' amazement of the soul,
When Christ, the day-star, hides his blessed beam,
When long and deep, the Law's dread thunders roll,
And through the gloom the fires of Tophet gleam;
When Conscience, rous'd, pours forth a fiery stream,
That, hissing, thunders wild, from steep to steep;
When giant Doubt leads forth his dragon teem,
In Faith's fair field to draw his furrows deep,
And wild, o'er Hope's green hill, Despair's dark whirlwinds sweep.

The roaring of the beastly debauchee,
By lust laid low in Horror's dismal cell;
Or of the crooked slave of Penury,
The woeful end, in proof we need not tell.
Nor his, whose heinous blasphemies excel
The dreadful darings of the damn'd below;
On whom, e'en here, the direful worm of hell
Full oft, enfuriate fastening, gives to know,
These gnashing of despair, which form the world of woe.

E'en he, who with the just hath come and gone,
Sabbaths and solemn times his chief delight,
Around him looks for light, and finding none,
Gropes, darkling, thro' temptation's dismal night;
While forms gigantic on the doubtful sight,
Of awful mien, glide horrid through the gloom;
And thoughts, o'erturning thoughts, within him fight,
Presenting now the dark and noisome tomb,
And now th' incensed Judge, and endless fires of doom.

What though he oft, with extacy divine,
Hath drunk at Shiloh's soul-sufficing stream,
When earth, and hell, and heaven, seem to join
In witnessing the whole was but a dream&mdash;
His hope, the self-deceiver's transient gleam,
That, glistery, glimmers on the dazzled eye,
Then, far and faint, in darkness fading dim,
Adds tenfold horror to the murky sky,
Where, wrathful, brooding grim, the fires of Vengeance lie.

Forward he cannot, backward if he look,
His eye, in secret, pours the silent tear,
Remembering how sweet Peace hath often shook
Her healing dew upon his wanderings drear.
And, oh!  to think, his griefs howe'er severe,
Her gentle voice, in soothing whispers borne,
May never more entrance his raptur'd ear;
His soul, with horror breathing terrors torn,
In deeper darkness sinks, unspeakably forlorn.

As one benighted on the pathless waste,
Of fellow men far from the blest abode,
Toils on, in hopeless agony, aghast,
The stormy north around him raging loud;
When lo!  the moon, light through the opening cloud,
Upon him sudden pours the whiten'd blaze,
And straight before his eyes the wish'd for road,
The distant city, dim and huge, displays,
While all around their heads his native mountains raise:

So he, in doubt, in darkness and despair,
Roams far and wide, with unabating toil,
In dread distractions oft &mdash; yet many a prayer,
To Heaven for succour, breathing out the while.
And sudden on his soul the gracious smile,
Effulgent beams; the dusky shadows fly;
No dubious cloud the prospect to beguile,
Faith grasps the promise, Hope unveils the sky,
And radiant Glory bursts upon his raptur'd eye.

Meantime, her bosom torn with anxious pangs,
Sorrow in silence streaming from her eyes,
O'er him his spouse in deep compassion hangs,
And breathes into his ear the softest sighs.
And oft, in sweet ejaculations, rise
Their ardent wishes to th' Eternal throne,
Where hid the hope of all the righteous lies,
And whence, abundant, while the weary groan,
The soul-reviving dews of grace are showered down.

O blest employment, exercise divine!
Which fools neglect, and worldly-wise men spurn,
To feed afresh the lamp of Hope 'tis thine
What time its fires with faded lustre burn:
By thee, the soul, that cleaves to dust forlorn,
Feels secret vigour animate her wing;
By thee, the spirit, with distraction torn,
Drinks healing draughts from Mercy's living spring,
And in the very fire lifts up its voice to sing.

Thus, through the silent night, in speechless of woe,
Both exercis'd; with grateful hearts they hear
The chirping hen, the shrill cock's frequent crow,
Declare the long, long look'd for morning near.
The cloudless north burns bright with frost severe,
Blirty, the blast with drift encumber'd flies,
Far south the beams of morn yet scarce appear,
The moon, pale, wanders o'er the western skies,
And wild, the wailing owl her plaintive ditty plies.

When forth she fares to wake a neighbouring hynd,
But flound'ring in the snow, sinks down oppress'd,
Through rising wreaths a way unfit to find,
Till day's glad beam illume the trackless waste;
So turning back, the tumult in her breast,
Once more, with patience, labouring to still
Her babes, arous'd untimely from their rest,
Around the fire she finds them, weeping, chill,
Whom now to soothe and dress a while employs her skill.

Then, by their father's bed she sets them down,
His last advice and blessing to receive;
For though his toils were hard, his bread but brown,
No other patrimony he can leave.
Nor you, ye children of the lowly, grieve,
And foolishly the ways of God arraign;
Possessions large a father's care may give,
But can he chase afar the fiends of pain,
Or from his blood-stain'd wealth God's wasting curse restrain?

No; robbery legalized, and smooth deceit,
May gather much, and after more aspire;
On lazy couch may loll in silken state,
Sooth'd with the idle chauntings of the lyre:
But surely God will in the end require
The cruel grinding of the helpless poor;
Will judge the smooth deceiver, and in ire,
Even while he laughs beneath the vernal shower,
At once his branches green, and deep struck roots devour.

Behold that roofless tower adown the vale,
The storm howls hollow in the time-torn walls,
And rushing from the hill, with weary wail,
A wizzard stream behind it ceaseless brawls.
There learn the hapless fate that pride befals;
Rude time, remorseless, sweeps it all away;
In vain the turrets huge, the sumptuous halls,
Did some designer's mighty mind display&mdash;
A Naesmith bold, perhaps, or Adams of his day.

For there Oppression's crouching lion fill'd
His den with ravin, and his holes with prey;
While gorged with fat, in sloth supinely lull'd,
His lioness, and strong young lions lay.
And there, like Vandals of the present day,
Offended with the poor man's humble shed,
His simple life, his children's noisy play,
His reptile race, the land a ruin made,
That streams unseen might glide, and sullen forests spread.

But Vengeance, though she seem'd to slumber long,
With tenfold fury at the last awoke,
And of its gorgeous state, its turrets strong,
The glory wither'd with a single stroke.
And lo!  his rod of rude oppression broke,
An outcast vile, the owner roams distress'd,
Happy to court the hospitable look;
Yea, happy to become the humble guest
Of those whom, in his pride, he wantonly oppress'd.

And in his palace Desolation brown,
And awful, ever-during silence dwells,
Save when the gray owl to the cloudless moon,
At midnight hour, her rueful story tells.
And save the hunter, wandering o'er the fells,
Who o'er its fate will sometimes turn to muse;
Or bard at eve &mdash; no human footstep else
E'er brushes, light, away the falling dews,
Or, on the grass-grown path, the faded print renews.

Behind it frowns the yew, and one old oak
And shrivell'd in the blast, with branches bare,
Where two gray ravens lodge, and hoarsely croak,
But gentle linnet never warbles there.
Before it lies a marshy puddle, where,
Is sometimes heard the solitary hern,
And wandering seamaws glean their fishy fare,
Among the broad sedge roots and faded fern,
What time they, dark, afar, the coming storm discern.

The very heavens above it seem to lower;
Mists hide it oft by day, and fires by night,
Terrific on the tottering topmost tower,
Far blazing, shakes the peasant with affright;
And gorgeous oft, 'tis said, array'd in white,
With tearful eye, and sallow aspect lean,
Or, terrible, as warlike vizor'd wight,
The troubled spirits of the dead are seen,
To round, with gliding pace, the solitary green.

Such felon fate is ever found to lye,
In wait for pride, on grandeur's dizzy steep;
And thus, o'er dazzling honour's burning sky,
The dismal shadows of Oblivion sweep.
More blest the man, who, though he humbly creep,
Despis'd and spurn'd by all the sons of show,
Yet taught the track of beamy Truth to keep,
And Pleasure's baneful potion to forego&mdash;
His rock remains unmov'd, whatever storms may blow.

This poor man, lifting up his death-dim'd eye,
Of those he lov'd to take a farewel view,
And giving them, by faith, to God on high,
Finds in his soul more satisfaction true,
Than if he saw, with every wind that blew,
Wafted for them, the wealth of Asia's shores;
Than if he left them crowns, or rich Peru
Were opening, vast, her subterranean doors,
For them th' astonish'd world to heap with all her stores.

Yet still, no Stoic he, with cold neglect
To treat his own, despising nature's tye;
Nor raving, rapt, enthusiast, to expect
A miracle from heaven for their supply&mdash;
No, no; the dew that moistens either eye,
The heavy sigh he labours to suppress,
While stretching forth his feeble hand, to dry
The stream of grief that flows on every face,
Compassion, love sincere, and deep regret confess.

"My lovely flock," he cries, "for whom e'en toil
Was sweet at morn, at noon, or twilight gray,
If still I found you with complacent smile,
Around me gather'd at the close of day.
Oft, while the silent hours have wing'd their way,
Each shedding soft on you its soothing power,
Watchful, have I remain'd behind to pray,
That Heaven might long defer this trying hour,
And kind, upon your heads, its choicest blessings pour.

"But Heaven denies in part &mdash; This arm no more
Shall lend you aid, my sands of life are run;
Alas!  I see you, worn with travel sore,
In life's lorn thickets wandering one by one:
But turn, O turn your eyes to Mercy's throne,
There fix your hopes, lodge all your sorrows there;
He never met the suppliant with a frown,
Though doom'd by man the victim of despair,
O sweet!  His gracious smile can every loss repair.

"Farewel my babes!  afar from rude alarms,
In life's low valley be your quiet abode;
Around you be the everlasting arms,
And your strong refuge still th' Eternal God.
And, O!  my spouse, the stream of woe how broad!
A heavy, heavy charge devolves on you;
On Jesus lay the overwhelming load,
His grace alone can bear you safely through&mdash;
Let him have all the work, and all the glory too.

"And as ye all shall answer in that day,
When, melting, every element shall burn,
When heaven and earth for fear shall fly away,
And Time expire upon his broken urn.
Beware from duty's path ye do not turn,
To sport in wanton Folly's circling maze;
Or basely reason and religion spurn,
As oft is done in these degenerate days,
To catch the sickly gleam of Error's meteor blaze."

He adds not &mdash; for beneath the frost of death,
Heavy, life's clogged wheels can scarcely play,
Falters his speech, and weak his fluttering breath,
At every pause seems dying quite away:
Yet as his help-mate shrieks in wild dismay,
He lifts a look of pity on her case,
And, stretching forth his hand with faint essay,
Exclaims, while pleasure brightens on his face,
"Weep not, my woes are o'er &mdash; the path I tread is peace."

Heavy, meanwhile, the long-expected morn,
Pale, lifts upon the world her languid eye;
Hoary the weary forests bend forlorn,
And hill and vale one dazzling ruin lye.
Swell'd, huge around, the distant mountains high,
Cold on the view their lofty summits raise,
Like white clouds gleaming from the middle sky,
And, broad, the rising sun upon the gaze,
A dark red globe of fire streams through the frosty haze.

Dim creeps along the heath, the misty hoar,
Dogs all around a ceaseless barking keep,
And wildly swells the shrill inconstant roar
Of torrent's rushing down the sounding steep,
Scatter'd upon the hill the bleating sheep,
And shepherd's voice, afar responsive rings;
Cold, from his turf beneath the drifty heap,
With clamour loud, the gorcock whirring springs,
And wild ducks, circling, shake the marsh with sounding wings.

When little John, to call a Christian friend,
Across the muir, advent'rous, works his way,
Now in the hollow of the deep wreaths penn'd,
Now straggling o'er their tops in open day.
When lo!  the friend he seeks, his thin locks grey,
And bonnet blue, with cranreuch cluster'd wild,
Draws near, surpris'd to see thus lonely stray
Amidst these dangerous solitudes the child,
And where, or what he seeks, enquires in accents mild.

His pressing case he tells, while o'er his cheek,
Sincere, the tears of filial sorrow flow;
Nor less the old man's grief, unfit to speak;
He careful leads him back in silent woe.
For as the son, of old the father so,
O'er these same barren desarts hath he led,
Ere time his head had cover'd thus with snow,
Ere with repeated strokes his heart had bled,
And ere his latest Joy in Death's cold urn was laid.

And hence arose that intimacy warm,
Which gather'd strength from every passing year,
Where piety and passion join'd to charm,
In friendship ardent, generous, and sincere.
In toils united, often did they bear,
The scorching summer noon, the wintry morn,
And wandering, have they linger'd oft to hear
At eve the redbreast warbling from the thorn,
Or soft, with fairy hum, the beetle winds his horn.

And soothing oft the sullen hours of toil,
Would they, digressive quote th' historic page,
How kingdoms vigorous wore the beamy smile,
Or doz'd through dull Oppression down to age.
How, in the winning garb of wisdom sage,
Villains have, fawning, seized the rod of power,
Then driving, dreadful, with the whirlwind's rage,
Than death more cruel, bloody, bathed in gore,
O'er earth gave war to waste, and famine to devour.

But still more sweet, and more sublime by far,
Redemption form'd their heart-enlivening theme;
And Him, who doth in righteousness make war,
The King of kings, and Lord of lords, His name!
Of Providence who plan'd th' amazing scheme,
And rapid rolls along the burning wheels,
Unerring, while the fierce devouring flame,
Or darkness dread, their steady course conceals,
And, struck through all her powers, astonish'd Nature reels.

And of experience past, or future hope,
Now from his dying friend he hastes to hear;
Or, if involv'd in gloom, that he may drop
Some soul-reviving word into his ear.
Too late, his friend hath pass'd that portal drear,
Whence never back shall traveller return,
Till on the clouds of heaven the Throne appear&mdash;
The great White Throne, with ensigns angel-borne,
Whose streamy blaze shall melt yon bright sun's golden urn.

The body breathless lies, yet still his face
Retains, tho' faint, that last triumphant smile,
When, with himself, and with his God at peace,
He hail'd the final end of all his toil.
His babes, amaz'd, look on, and, void of guile,
Weep loud, altho' their loss they do not know,
His widow'd wife above him hangs the while,
Pale as a marble monument of woe,
Nor sigh to ease her soul, nor softening tear can flow.

Till, turn'd her eye upon her aged friend,
The kind companion oft of happier hours,
Who on her ear, in melting accents kind,
The healing balm of tender pity pours.
Then rous'd, her busy recollective powers
Fly back to scenes that never can return,
Scenes, that fond Memory purples all with flowers,
But hides the thistle and the vexing thorn,
And flows the flood of grief while fierce her feelings burn.

And who can blame her tears?  These eyes are dim,
That wont on her with extacy to beam;
And cold that face, with livid aspect grim,
Where all the virtues shone with mingled gleam;
And clos'd these lips, whence, grateful, many a stream
Of wisdom flowing, sooth'd her eager ear,
Powerful, to sweep away the dazzling dream,
To wash the stain of Sorrow's rankling tear,
And clear, with roseate bloom, the faded brow of Care.

And nerveless lye these limbs, the steps of toil,
That, vigorous, wont with pleasure to pursue;
Whence, sweet, the placid look and lightsome smile,
The laughing hours, and winged minutes drew;
Whence, kindly, Competence her genial dew,
Diffusive, on their heads in silence shed;
And whence their little cot, with dauntless brow,
His favorite haunt, bold Independence made,
While pompous Pride and Scorn afar his presence fled.

Long, long, alas!  her wounded heart shall grieve&mdash;
And oft her babes shall see with secret fear,
As to the fields she looks at dewy eve,
Rush sudden o'er her cheek the silent tear.
And still as Spring re-animates the year,
She, with her little flock, shall duly come,
On Sabbath noons, between the hours of prayer,
To weep anew upon his simple tomb,
Where green the long grass waves, and white the gowans bloom.

And oft, when shut the door upon the storm,
And eve has closed the weary winter day,
While eident, cricking, wires the stocking form,
Or from their laps the twining spindles play;
His virtues she with fervour shall display,
His zeal for God, his Christian temper even,
Till, each confessing one enlivening ray,
Their hearts renew'd, their trespasses forgiven,
A family ripe, at length they all arrive in heaven.
