In Virtue's plain, where many a stream doth glide,
Full richly fed, from Pleasure, fountain fair!
Doth ev'ry spring of happiness abide;
And many a fane its head exalteth there,
Where virtues dwell; of Virtue children all,
And as the parent we the offspring call.

There doth Contentment greet the wand'ring eye;
Unspotted Chastity, of modest mien;
And sober Temp'rance; meek Humility;
And many mo, whose titles fair, I ween,
And goodly deeds, in Virtue's page, with care,
For imitation, all enrolled are.

But, chief of all, there dwelleth Charity;
Withouten whom none Virtue's presence find;
Who else attempt them Self-security
Still intercepteth; he a power unkind!
And near the fane he skulks to seize on all
Who turn a deafen'd ear when Charity doth call.

And woe betide all whom he seizeth on!
From Virtue's plain he them conveyeth far;
Before their eyes impervious mists are thrown;
And haughty Pride conducteth them to where,
Destruction hight, a horrid pit there been;
And down they fall, and never mo are seen!

In other's good doth Charity rejoice;
Supporting hapless offspring not her own;
Prompt at the call of Misery's falt'ring voice;
And ever trying to allay the moan
Of guilty breast; by ev'ry soothing art,
Instilling hope to heal the broken heart.

If Envy ever, with base Scandal join'd,
Doth try her gen'rous actions to bewray,
She smileth pardon; conscious that her mind
To deeds unseemly never did give way;
And then in tender pity doth she sigh,
That such there are who deal thus spitefully.

If, by a pow'r superior e'er oppress'd,
Her deadliest foe in thraldom chance to fall,
Again doth pity actuate her breast,
And his unkindness she forgetteth all;
His sad condition causeth her much pain,
Nor doth she rest till she his freedom gain.

If when she, forc'd, contendeth with a foe&mdash;
And foes, Heaven knoweth, she hath not a few&mdash;
She him o'ercome, and all his arts o'erthrow,
Her 'vantage ne'er to farthest doth pursue;
But kindly spareth; holding it to be
A crime to crush a fallen enemy.

Ah!  may ne Self-security my way
With mists too surely fatal e'er obscure;
But gentle Charity my bosom sway;
That I in Virtue's palace may secure
A fair reception; and avoid the fate
Which all her foes doth, certes, aye, await!
