DEAR LAUNCE,

As I find you have taken the quill,
To put our gay town, and its fair under drill,
I offer my hopes for success to your cause,
And sent you unvarnish'd my mite of applause.

Ah, Launce, this poor town has been woefully fashed;
Has long been be-frenchman'd, be-cockney'd, be-trashed;
And our ladies be-devil'd, bewilder'd astray,
From the rules of their grandames have wander'd away.
No longer that modest demeanor we meet,
Which whilom the eyes of our fathers did greet;
No longer be-mobbled, be-ruffled, be-quill'd,
Be-powder'd, be-hooded, be-patch'd and be-frill'd;&mdash;
No longer our fair ones their grograms display,
And stiff in brocade, strut "like castles" away.

Oh, how fondly my soul forms departed has traced,
When our ladies in stays, and in boddice well laced,
When bishop'd, and cushion'd, and hoop'd to the chin,
Well callash'd without, and well bolster'd within;
All eased in their buckrams, from crown down to tail,
Like O'Brallagan's mistress, were shaped like a pail.

Well &mdash; peace to those fashions &mdash; the joy of our eyes&mdash;
"Tempora mutantur," &mdash; new follies will rise;
Yet, "like joys that are past," they still crowd on the mind,
In moments of thought, as the soul looks behind.

Sweet days of our boyhood, gone by, my dear Launce,
Like the shadows of night, or the forms in a trance:
Yet oft we retrace those bright visions again,
"Nos mutamur," tis true &mdash; but those visions remain.
I recal with delight, how my bosom would creep;
When some delicate foot from its chamber would peep,
And when I a neat stocking'd ankle could spy,
&mdash;By the sages of old, I was rapt to the sky!
All then was retiring &mdash; was modest &mdash; discreet;&mdash;
The beauties, all shrouded, were left to conceit;
To the visions which fancy would form in her eye,
Of graces that snug in soft ambush would lie.
And the heart, like the poets, in thought would pursue
The elysium of bliss, which was veil'd from its view.

We are old fashion'd fellows, our nieces all say:
Old fashion'd, indeed, coz &mdash; and swear it they may&mdash;
For I freely confess that it yields me no pride,
To see them all blaze what their mothers would hide;
To see them, all shiv'ring, some cold winter's day,
So lavish their beauties and graces display,
And give to each foppling that offers his hand,
Like Moses from Pisgah &mdash; a peep at the land.

But a truce with complaining:  &mdash; the object in view,
Is to offer my help in the work you pursue;
And as your effusions and labors sublime,
May need, now and then, a few touches of rhyme,
I humbly solicit, as cousin and friend,
A quiddity, quirk, or remonstrance to send:
Or should you a Laureat want in your plan,
By the muff of my grandmother, I am your man!

You must know I have got a poetical mill,
Which with odd lines, and couplets, and triplets I fill;
And a poem I grind, as from rags white and blue
The paper mill yields you a sheet fair and new.
I can grind down an ode, or an epic that's long,
Into sonnet, acrostic, conundrum or song:
As to dull Hudibrastic, so boasted of late,
The doggrel discharge of some muddle brain'd pate,
I can grind it by wholesale&mdash;and give it its point,
With billingsgate dish'd up in rhymes out of joint.

I have read all the poets&mdash;and got them by heart,
Can slit them, and twist them, and take them apart;
Can cook up an ode out of patches and shreds,
To muddle my readers, and bother their heads.
Old Homer, and Virgil, and Ovid I scan,
Anacreon, and Sappho, (who changed to a swan;)
Iambicks and sapphicks I grind at my will,
And with ditties of love every noddle can fill.

Oh, 'twould do your heart good, Launce, to see my mill grind
Old stuff into verses, and poems refined;&mdash;
Dan Spencer, Dan Chaucer, those poets of old,
Though cover'd with dust, are yet true sterling gold;
I can grind off their tarnish, and bring them to view,
New model'd, new mill'd, and improved in their hue.

But I promise no more &mdash; only give me the place,
And I warrant I'll fill it with credit and grace;
By the living!  I'll figure and cut you a dash
&mdash;As bold as Will Wizard, or 'SBIDLIKENS-FLASH!

PINDAR COCKLOFT.
