The Passions once, in frolic pastime gay,
Stole Fancy's magic lantern for a day;
And each, in order, its effect essay'd,
On some new Phantom, which herself pourtray'd.

Fierce Anger first her hasty hand apply'd,
And sketch'd an earth-born giant's tow'ring pride:
Vast was his strength, and terrible his nod;
He spoke in thunder, and on storms he rode;
He mow'd down armies, and he kick'd down thrones,
And infants call him still, raw-head-and-bloody-bones.

Valour, of glorious hazard only proud,
Drew dragons hissing from the bursting cloud;
Sorcerers, whose spells cloud wrathful warriors tame;
And wedge to rifted rocks the captive dame;
Till happier hardihood th' inchantment broke;
And magic adamant dissolv'd in smoke.

Fear's trembling pencil group'd a goblin crew,
Ghosts clatt'ring chains around the church-yard yew;
Forms without heads, that cross the midnight ways;
Head without limbs, where saucer eye-balls blaze!
And shape grotesque, down eve's grey shade that slide,
And buzzing, grinning, chatt'ring, screaming, glide.

To her succeeded Hope; intent to trace
A friendly wizard's comfortable face;
The rev'rend Merlin of a former age;
Unconquerably just, benignly sage.
Low o'er his breast a milk-white beard was spread:
Awed by his wand the pow'rs of Mischief fled:
Till (every peril past) sure triumph grac'd
The brave, and happy wedlock crown'd the chaste.

A scene far different wild Despair employ'd;
Furies, whose whips clash thro' the darksome void;
Demons with forks of fire, and breaths of flame,
That howl revenge, and chuckle at our shame;
Mock guilty misery's most alarming hour;
And to the rage of malice, add the pow'r.

Mirth then display'd a jocund troop to view;
Trim fairies, frisking on the twilight dew;
Fantastic Will-a-wisps thro' brush and briar,
That lur'd the staring clown, and sous'd him in the mire;
And fire-proof elves, that round the cauldron squat,
And burn the housewife's dumpling to the pot.

Then Superstition came, her sprites to show,
That make the mastiff's yell the note of woe;
At melancholy's window flap their wings,
In concert with the dirge the raven sings;
O'er Natuare's face a veil of omens spread;
Perplex the living, and belie the dead.

Envy's shrunk finger next th' occasion caught;
And scratch'd the hideous image of her thought:
A scraggy witch, on broom-stick hors'd for flight,
Equipp'd with all th' artillery of spite;
Mildews and blights, to blast the forward grain:
Philtres t' intoxicate the madd'ning brain;
Pray'rs mumbled backwards, discord to promote;
And crooked pins, to rend the suff'rer's throat.

Love still remain'd &mdash; but lo!  while she prepares
Her little family of joys and cares,
Fancy herself surpris'd the wanton train,
Reclaim'd her lantern &mdash; and resum'd her reign:
Seiz'd on the spot, the visionary scroll,
And then the Genius gave the motley whole.

Genius, sublime with taste, correct with ease,
Alternate soften'd those, and heighten'd these;
From features rude, and parts of monstrous size,
Bade mystic sense, and moral beauty rise;
Engag'd tradition on the side of truth;
And made the tale of age, the oracle of youth.
