The Christian, while life's journey he pursues,
A stranger and a wanderer appears,
But still in prospect as the end he views,
It serves to dissipate his anxious fears,
The glorious end its beauties doth display,
And to the faithful traveller smooths the weary way.

Though storms, perhaps, assault him on his road,
Internal peace will break their utmost force,
His eye once fix'd on Heaven's secure abode,
No tempest can arrest him on his course;
Steady, by faith's unerring light he steers
His devious course along the vale of tears.

Even from afflicitions he finds cause for joy,
They urge him forward, and his loiterings chide,
They tend self-love's allurements to destroy,
Which oft the soul from Jesus would divide;
If he has labours, they are "those of love,"
And every grief is sunk in hopes of joys above.

When storms disperse, and skies no longer lower,
Our stedfast traveller does not slack his speed;
Prosperity has not the magic power
To make him deviate in word or deed;
He knows, his master's business must be done,
By watchfulness and care the heavenly prize is won.

Yet still he does not churlishly refuse
To taste the sweets presented as he goes,
But careful not the blessings to abuse,
He grateful thanks the hand which good bestows;
Enjoys the comforts Heaven to him has lent,
Nor, if they are refused, gives way to discontent.

With an observing eye he looks around,
And what is beautiful or grand admires,
If aught or strange or wonderful is found
Into its nature curiously inquires;
His master's wonder-working hand he sees,
In earth, sea, air, in herbs, and flowers, and trees.

His fellow-travellers with love he greets,
Enjoys their pleasures, and their sorrow shares.
If any wandering from the path he meets,
He aids with counsel, and they have his prayers;
He helps the helpless, sooths the sinking soul,
And firm resisting stands 'gainst vice's dire controul.

His Master's great example still he makes
The rule of life; and where weak nature fail,
The holy spirit's powerful aid he takes
Against those enemies who oft assail;
In vain the world its tempting baits display,
His shield of faith turns Satan's fiery darts away.

At length we see him at life's utmost bound,
His journey over, and the prize in view,
Nor death nor hell can his firm soul confound,
He finds his Saviour's promise just and true;
Jesus for him disarms the horrid king,
"Where is thy victory, grave? &mdash; death where thy sting?"
