You may labour and toil, wipe the sweat from your brow,
See your children half starv'd and in rags;
You may dig in the mines, waste your strength at the plough,
To enrich and fill insolent money'd men's bags.
You may practice each virtue, each feeling pursue,
Truth prompts, conscience dictates, and honour approves;
You may have in your heart all that's noble and true,
All that elegant taste and fine sentiment loves:
While WORLDLINESS will tell you, with scornful regard,
That VIRTUE &mdash; is ever its own sweet reward.

While poverty presses you down in the earth,
As each dictate of reason, and right, you obey;
Lo!  the children of vanity, vice, and of mirth,
Pass by you regardless, all flaunting and gay.
Each duty of life, whilst you are pursuing
Both day and night anxiously spending in toil;
While nothing awaits you but famine and ruin;
The rich, and the worthless, the pension'd, and vile,
Unheeding your sufferings, though ever so hard,
Will assure you, that &mdash; VIRTUE'S its own sweet reward.

See where yon proud equipage waits at the gate,
Where each riot, and luxury, croud the domain;
There a bully, and wanton, in splendour and state,
Lord it haughtily over the neighboring plain.
To support their extravagance, plunder'd behold
Those whose suff'rings unceasing, their riches supply;
From whose labour and toil is wrung out the gold,
These unprincipled minions and miscreants enjoy.
Such, with sneers, will the children of VIRTUE discard,
Which hath ever, they'll say, its own sweet reward.

On the public what paupers, on every side,
Blast the means of the wise, the industrious, and good;
Who, trod on by creatures of wealth, and of pride,
Pine for health, and for liberty, raiment, and food.
Great, great GOD OF NATURE!  amidst all this maze,
Say, who can the mode of thy government scan?
Who trace out thy seemingly-retrograde ways,
And justify evils, like these, unto men?
Who shall say, why the lot of the worthy is hard,
And why, VIRTUE gets only its own poor reward!

While the bard thus indignantly utters his plaint,
Though wounded his feelings, his heart remains true;
And though prompted this general picture to paint,
To glorious exceptions, his tribute is due.
He knows there are some, and he hops there are more,
Who, blest with abundance, abundance bestow;
Whose greatest delight is to take from their store,
To lessen the burthens of want, and of woe.
Who, the children of need, and oppression regard;
Nor leave them to get &mdash; only VIRTUE'S reward!
