Tremendous Pow'r! &mdash; whose chilling band,
Relentless tyrants of the soul,
Obedient to thy dread command,
The vital springs controul;
The gasping tongue no longer free,
And pulseless veins betoken thee;
The pallid cheek, the haggard eye,
And ev'ry fearful mark of wild insanity.

The tortur'd wretch, who courts repose,
Prostrate, his thorny couch along,
(When the twin-gates of steep unclose,
And swarms the airy throng)
Starts trembling, as thy shadowy form
Urges th' infernal-brooding storm,
While famish'd vultures scream for food,
And wave the high-plum'd wing, and snuff the scent of blood.

Athwart the dreary church-yard now
Forlorn he seeks yon cypress' gloom,
Whose sable branches bending low
Weep o'er the mould'ring tomb.
Calm Peace is fled &mdash; but gaunt Despair
And agonizing Woe are there.
See, murd'rous fiends their victim crave,
And yell the mystic chaunt, and drag him to the grave.

Nor to the restless child of pain
Thy potent influence is confin'd,
Thy Phantoms seize the ardent brain,
And sweep the tract of mind;
As the pale spectres cross her way,
Lo!  RATCLIFF shudders with dismay,
Sees the dread Fury's visage low'r,
And shake her serpent-torch, and riot in her pow'r.

The down where Guilt reclines his head
Thy Ministers with thorns have strown,
Thou pressest to the Murd'rer's bed,
And mark'st him for thy own.
The daring Robber trembles now,
The Judge recants his perjur'd vow,
And gasping with his latest breath,
Pours forth his soul to thee, a penitent in death.

When vanquish'd Reason yields her throne,
And bound by Superstition's chain,
Whene'er deluded mortals groan,
And sigh for hope in vain;
All cheerless as thy sable vest,
Uncertain pangs distract the breast;
Thy hand uprears th' envenom'd dart,
Directs its secret course, and points it to the heart.

Thy fears pervade th' embodied air,
And blasts that sweep the wintry sky,
Rob'd in vindictive terrors, bear
The frowning Deity,
Wing'd with his all-consuming ire
Flashes the vollied lightning's fire,
And roar the pealing thunders loud,
And speak his threat'ning voice in each tempestuous cloud.

Is this Religion's heav'nly form,
Round which bright emanations play,
Of pow'r to lull the rudest storm,
And chase each cloud away?
Why dwells the mind affrighted still
On Sinai's flame-encircled hill;
When the blest tow'rs of Sion stream
With softer tints of grace, and mercy's milder beam?

But the dread Pow'r who rules above
Instruct thy Suppliant to revere,
And oh!  unite with fervent Love
Thy gentler sister Fear.
Teach him to bend beneath the rod
That arms the chastening hand of God;
Kneel prostrate at his holy shrine,
And feed the sacred fire with frankincense divine.

Insatiate Queen!  whose rigid sway,
Wide o'er the realms of dire affright,
Deforms with clouds the smile of day,
And scares the steep of night;
O'er Innocency's sainted brow
Why give thy scorpion-lash to flow?
Why chill, that hopes to be forgiv'n,
The soul redeem'd from Earth, and dedicate to Heav'n?

In Fate's dread hour when doom'd to part,
The dreams of worldly rapture fly,
No more to wake the throbbing heart,
Or light the asking eye;
Borne on the dark funereal gale,
What forms of direful omen sail?
What black'ning clouds of sulphur roll?
Why gapes the deep abyss to catch the parting soul ?

Celestial Hope!  yet deign to stay,
Oh!  chase these visions of despair,
For thou canst cheer the destin'd way,
And plant thy roses there.
Bid the black phantoms urge their flight
Enshrowded in the rear of night,
And point to where the heav'nly choir
Their blooming garlands weave, and sweep the golden lyre.

So when the day of life is o'er,
And night's black veil is closing fast,
May Mem'ry yield her treasur'd store,
And point to moments past&mdash;
May tranquil Virtue hover near,
Her faithful Vot'ry's end to cheer;
The grisly Tyrant's frown beguile,
And shew the gates of bliss expanding at her smile!
