There is a Sabbath for the Man of Cares:
Then wail not thou, whom daily toils oppress!
There is a resting-place for him who fares,
Upon the rugged road to happiness!
Scorn, if ye will, ye Sons of Carelessness,
Who eat your bread with worldly plenty's leaven,
This day, the poor man's joy &mdash; your heaviness;
To shun its thoughtful calm, by uproar driven,
Your ways bespeak, I ween, ill neighbourhood with Heaven!

Scorn, if ye will!  tho' never mote ye feel
That scorn return'd into each thoughtless breast,
Whene'er the Searcher of the heart shall steal
Into its chambers, where unweeting rest
Each virtue lulls, and Vice her painted crest
Nod o'er the couch &mdash; Yet, if I read aright,
That heav'nly watchman will pursue his quest
With his lamp-burning spirit, 'till the night
Of evil, ye have lov'd, stand trembling in its light!

O could ye learn to love the simple joys,
Simple but pure, which I have chanc'd to find,
As wand'ring, I have fled the City's noise
To quiet fields, there most to dwell inclin'd
Among the swain-like folks and shepherd kind:
There hath the world's most ancient holiday,
Oft led my footsteps 'mid their cots to wind;
And there, the muse, framing her rustic lay
To oaten pipe, thus rudely did of late essay.

The Sabbath's dawn, bright peering on the skies,
From orient hills, the gladsome peasant sees;
Who deems it time from sleepy couch to rise,
Wak'd by the carols in his cottage trees.
And certes much his rising thoughts must please,
That, after all his weekly hard turmoil,
This morn will bring another day of ease;
Bless'd day!  which Heaven itself has freed from toil,
And hallow'd into rest for him who delves the soil.

Right gleeful wight, the welcome morn he hails,
In which no sound of busy din he hears;
No echoing barn resounds the thumping flails;
No labouring team across the plain appears;
Ne voice of early hind salutes his ears:
Nought, save the bell, which from yon ivy'd tow'r
(That scant, its humble time-worn summit rears
O'er many an elm, which does its walks embow'r,)
Bids village swains prepare to meet at sermon hour.

Soon all appear, in Sunday's trim bedight,
In seely hat, with buckle and with band;
The clean round frock, all dazzling, snowy white,
And shoen, all nicely kept by careful hand
Of thrifty dame, who well does understand,
And mouchel loves economy in all;
And wonts them ever bear this strict command
In mind, lest foul mishap their clothes befall,
To keep their decent plight, ne use them ill at all.

The lasses too, full trimly dight, I ween,
In straw-wove hat, with ribbons passing gay,
In flower'd gowns and figur'd kerchiefs clean,
Their morning meal fordone, themselves array,
And take, at call of bell, to church their way;
(Their bosoms deck'd with many a nosegay sweet,)
With sires and dames, whose eld mote cause delay;
Yet, at the porch, nath'less their pastor meet,
Whom many a lifted hat and comely curtsie greet.

Eftsoons they entrance make, with rev'rence due,
Befitting those in solemn worship found:
Each takes his wonted place in oaken pew,
And makes response, while all the walls resound.
Then finds that text the preacher shall expound;
Who haply teaches each attentive breast
How all to keep the Sabbath-Day are bound,
And reads them how it aye was deemed best,
To make this day a day of worship and of rest.

Ah me!  that such there be, whose pride disdains
(When these some metred psalm do use to sing,)
The artless measure of th' untletter'd swains,
Who, chaunting praises to th' Eternal King,
All' they no fine harmonious numbers bring;
Nath'less, I ween, in Heaven's impartial sight,
Are sweet as loftiest changes art can ring;
Since these, thro' nature, undisguised quite,
Speak with a soul devout, that weens to speak aright.

And sooth to say, the lowly peasant finds
In practis'd piety, a covert bower,
For shelter from neglect's cold frequent winds,
And from the surquedry of passing stower.
And in the sunshine of his happiest hour,
(Like happy hours, O!  many him betide,)
He loves to gaze upon this fadeless flower,
E'en then more dear to him than all beside,
And wears it in his breast as rose that never died.

Possessed of this, he learns how false the fear
Of man, in him who builds on things above;
Heeds not the sceptic's doubts, nor feels the sneer
Of infidelity his faith remove:
Him, hope shall centre in Eternal Love,
Nor shall the vapid ore, opinion's mine
Yields to the worldling, aught of this disprove;
For never will that swain his peace resign
For phantasies of vice, or folly's mad design.

Soon as the wonted time of service o'er,
Homeward with sober step and talk they tread;
Where the good dame well skill'd in housewife lore,
Full daintily the whitened cloth has spread,
And all in order meet the table laid;
Where soon is pight the savoury pudding rare,
And tempting rashers, streak'd with glowing red;
The which, while all the rustic household share,
Some praise the sermon past, and all the present fare.

Nor let the proudly rich, and gorgeous great,
Despise these humble peasants' unbought store;
Who, tho' they feast not in luxurious state,
Ne taste the dainties of a foreign shore,
Yet have enough, ne do they care for more;
For, in their cot, does fair Contentment rest,
Who flies Intemp'rance and her wild uproar,
To wonne within some little poor man's nest,
Far o'er the gold-wrought court of knightly grandeur blest.

How sweet to see them check the happy smile,
That oft will o'er their honest features fly,
When, (as he ever wont,) the sire awhile
Implores a blessing on them, from on high;
Not with a tongue which doth the heart belie:
For oft, I wis, upon the simplest heart,
Does kind Religion, from her sacred eye,
Beam purest rays, ne brighter can impart
To those with learning fraught, and choicest thewes of art.

Their wholesome meal dispatch'd, and clear'd with care,
The frothing jug is spied, full pleasing sight!
Then seated at his ease, in elbow chair,
The sire his smoking tube begins to light,
With fragrant herb supplied, Tobacco hight;
Which, when as Winter scowl'd upon the plain,
He used to quaff beside his hearth so bright,
While rang'd around him smil'd his elfin train,
Whose tattlings then have pleas'd, and please him yet again,.

Now, (since with summer scenes the muse begun,)
'Neath the wide elm, that shades his cottage o'er,
Behold him placed, well sheltered from the sun,
In chair, which whilom had his father bore,
And eke his grandsire old had us'd before:
There welcome neighbours meet, in chat to pass
A social hour, &mdash; commend their garden's store,
Talk of the plough, of grain, of summer grass,
Or who for active skill in husbandry surpass.

Or heed the dame, with Bible on her knee,
And spectacles from paper case 'y took,
Withouten which she mote not algates see
To read some story from that sacred book:
As how Elijah hid by Cherith's brook,
Receiv'd from ravens, daily meat and bread;
Nor was in time of greatest drought forsook,
When to Zarephath's dame that prophet sped,
And from her wasteless cruise, and growing meal was fed.

Or how young David did Goliath slay;
That giaunt marvellous for strength and height;
Who, when he list his pourtance fierce display,
Full sorely Israel's armies 'gan affright,
Ne dar'd their Champions prove th' unequal fight.
Yet was this Shepherd stripling willing found,
Nor aught adred for all that paynim's might,
With shepherd's arms, a sling and stone, did wound
And him attonce o'erthrew, in that self-vaunting stound.

These and the like, inscribed in sacred writ,
She culls thereout, to read them &mdash; how, of old,
The men of God their fiercest foemen smit;
As of the captive Israelites we're told,
Whom Pharoah long had pent in grievous hold;
Whence Moses led them out, with holy hand:
And how the parting waters did uphold
Their resiant waves, so they mote safely stand,
And passen thro' unwet, as on the driest land.

And how the pride of Bashan's King they fell'd,
And Sihon, eke, the Amoritish prince,
And all their fone, &mdash; so heav'n their might upheld,
In their great deeds its puissance to evince;
With miracles, which caus'd the durest flints
To gush forth waters in a limpid stream,
And other wonders there preserved since;
Full many more than here it would beseem
The muse to write, sith here to read them best I deem.

Yet may I not withouten blame forbear
Of Judah's glorious bridal day to sing,
When Angel triumphs fill'd th' exulting air,
What time on Earth that mighty Saviour king
Came down, and did Salvation with him bring.
This heavenly story reads th' admiring dame
Her soul upborne on love's ecstatic wing,
And on those faytours vile cries cursed shame,
Who scoff'd the Son of God, and sore blasphemed his name.

But how indignant rise her feelings keen,
When, on the cross our bless'd Immanuel nail'd,
The world's stupendous sacrifice was seen!
Death's victim He, whom minist'ring seraphs hail'd
Their Prince. &mdash; Yet nought Death's iron doors avail'd:
He brake them, in His own eternal might,
The adamantine rocks of Tophet scal'd,
And soar'd aloft to Heaven's supremest height,
His Father's holy throne, and palaces of light.

But long to rest beneath this public shade,
The youthful swain, whose bosom dwells on love,
'Note much enjoy: &mdash; he finds his fav'rite maid,
And wends with her to seek the breezy grove,
Where beech-hung walks invite the feet to rove;
Insuring by their silent far retreat,
An hour apart, their mutual flame t' improve,
With converse such as love alone can mete;
Ne fits it here such talk to ev'ry ear repeat.

Whether the rustic's love be so complete
As his on whom a higher lot is fell?
Tho' education much refine the sweet,
If more it fixes it, I weet not well;
But this I weet, and this can algates tell,
The rustic's humble flame is fare more bright
Than theirs, who led by riches, buy and sell
That goodly tie of fair connubial rite,
For sake of loveless gold, which blinds their dazed sight.

For 'tis not gold can strengthen virtuous love,
Ne is it thence can happiness acrue;
That noble passion soars all else above,
Save the firm basis of allegiaunce true,
Mammon has nought with Cupid's band to do;
And ever when he does his glare display,
Tempting the heart to thither turn its view,
From what it best should love, O!  weal away!
I deem that wretched wight mistaketh night for day.

Not so the guileless swain, who only loves
His maid, because she chiefest charms his sight;
Content and happy, when her heart approves
His proffer'd love, and makes return aright;
Nought else has she his service to delight,
No rich possessions, nor a ponderous purse;
But, void of these, in native worth is dight,
These, which of wedded pair oft prove the curse,
And stir up strife, than which, 'twixt such, is nothing worse.

But now is time the saucers blue to range
On oaken table, and the cups beside;
Which tempt the sire his pungent fumes to change
For sipping milder tea, the gossip's pride,
Which had whylear the rich alone supplied;
Nath'more so still, for now its taste benign,
Full dearly is to village dames allied,
Who would to miss its grateful streams repine,
Much as the bard, if forc'd Castalia's fount resign.

And now Dan Phoebus han unyoked his team,
And blushing back to Thetis 'gins descend;
The smiling fields reflect his tingent beam,
Inviting forth the lover and the friend:
Grave matrons too, and groups of children blend&mdash;
While mazy feet thus lead the younker train,
The old and stay'd apart their steps do bend,
Looking along how fares the blooming grain,
Bless the all-ripening sun, or augur coming rain.

Then passing homewards, as the shadows fall
From Night's dim curtain, and the silent dew
Empearls the turf with drops of moisture small,
They seek their cots, which soon again they view,
Just ting'd with crimson's last decaying hue;
Which reach'd, full many a farewell wish is made,
And parting whisper from the lover true;
Who steals perchance a kiss, no whit afraid
To give offence, or have that friendly pledge gainsaid.

Then all assembled round their homely board,
The Ev'ning's temp'rate meal together share;
The Sabbath supper haply may afford
Some greater dainty than their common fare;
But, ever when 'tis o'er, they all prepare
To bend their knees, in seemly order round
Their thankful sire, who ends the day in prayer,
To Him whose goodness thro' that day they've found,
And begs this night, and aye, his grace may so abound.

Hail!  tranquil eve of undisturbed day
How pure the joys, that floating on thy beams,
Bid their mild radiance on the bosom play,
Rousing the soul from earth's delusive dreams,&mdash;
To seek the fruitful banks of Zion's streams;
There drink instruction, and imbibe the word
Of Wisdom, such as best the mind beseems.
O!  may the swains for ever thus accord,
In worship to enshrine the Sabbath of the Lord!

Now wishing each to each a night of rest,
They to their humble beds attonce retire,
With peace of mind, and health of body blest;
More worth than all that pomp which some desire;
More worth than fame, which wreathes the poets lyre;
More worth than that the warrior toils to gain,
'Mid strifeful scenes of blood, and wrathful  fire;
More worth than is with victor kings to reign;
Is this advauncement high, which crowns the simple swain.

All who possess a diamond so rare,
Are truly rich, nor other riches need;
The guerdon this which Virtue has to wear,
To mark her dignity and lofty stead,
E'en when discover'd, clad in peasant's weed:
But not confin'd to humble life, I ween,
Is this, of all her sons the happy meed,
Some few of lordly tire, with her are seen,
Albe, 'mong these, full sorely misempriz'd she been.

Nor grant attendance on my lay awhile
Ye who the shepherds of the sheep-fold stand;
Right fain I would that Heaven upon you smile,
And cause you right to lead the simple band;
Nor, when the salvage spoilers be at hand,
Forsake your tender charge, like hireling base;
But stoutly 'gainst each Bear and Lion stand,
As did that shepherd lad of Jesse's race,
Who Salem's royal Courts with kingly praise did grace.

So mote ye teach the swains to love the Lord,
By shewing Wisdom in her pleasant ways,
And how her paths do truest peace afford,
Far other than the world's deceitful maze,
Gild with false splendor of vain Fancy's rays.
So mote that heavenly light to you descend,
Which brightens, with it's soul-refreshing blaze,
All willing minds, to you it's fulness lend,
'Till your long toil in Heaven's eternal Sabbath end.
