Man loves to wing to genial climes his way:
Some seek the crowd, and some the lonely vale,
Where Health and Youth their crimson cheeks display,
And man roves free as Zephyr's breathing gale.&mdash;
Deep in the bosom of this wooded dale,
An ancient pile uprears its ivy'd head,
Whose dark brown walls, from wintry storms conceal
The lonely Hermit of the smiling glade,
Who from the follies of this world hath stray'd.

In youth he liv'd (so says the village tale)
Unknown to Folly's wild and lawless band;
Fair Virtue round him drew her purer veil,
And Wisdom too his youthful bosom fann'd;&mdash;
With Resolution he his course had plann'd,
'Long Life's uncertain miserable road,
And his long way was made by Fortune bland,
For life to him was not a weary load,
Since Virtue guided him, and bless'd his small abode.

He shunn'd the follies of the giddy town,
Where life is spent in ignorance and shame,
Whose ills, innum'rous, real Virtue drown,
Whilst Vice swims on the top of Folly's stream;
There deeds are done, and all without a name!
Deeds too which lie in dark oblivion's shade:
The good man does bears [sic] an immortal fame,
And never in the book of life will fade,
But there 'twill fresh appear, for ever undecay'd!

Now age hangs darkly o'er his wither'd eye,
And round each limb his palsy'd mantle flings;
Ah!  oft, 'tis said, he breathes the tender sigh,
When Mem'ry to his gentle bosom brings
Each scene of youth:  and Mem'ry often stings
The man of years, and proves to him a foe;
Should he be bless'd with sublunary things,
He'll sigh for youth, which Nature can't bestow,
To us depending mortals in this world below.

Ah!  busy Mem'ry to the Hermit's heart
An agonizing pang has often brought;
She, of his love, who held the dearest part,
Now occupies a drear unhonour'd spot;
And such of all will be the common lot:
Death pays no deference to the worldly great,
Nor in his book will princes be forgot,
They, like the mean, must yield to unseen Fate,
Dismantled lie at Death's dark shrouded gate!

As Phoebus from this hemisphere retires,
Beneath our horizon remains unseen,
Old Athan loves to hear the woodland lyres,
When Even's close is heavenly serene:
And when, adown the dew-besprinkled green,
The children of the village peasants stray,
In ecstasy he cries, 'How dear the scene,
Where Health and Youth still wing their laughing way,
And Joy and Cheerfulness their pow'r display!

Yet youthful joys no longer sweets impart
When dark usurping Sickness leads the way;
Youth has its pleasures, &mdash; pleasures of the heart,&mdash;
When Health beams froth the sweetly-smiling ray;
She gives new beauties to resplendent day.
I too have pass'd with joy my little hour,&mdash;
Swift flew the time on pinions light and gay;
But sadly drooping is the blushing flow'r,
When high winds rise, and clouds terrific low'r.

And here I'll spend my little time, and die;
And Spring, that gives new beauties to the vale,
Shall o'er the sod where these old limbs will lie
Sweetly imprint her dew-bespangled veil;
And softly there shall breathe fond Zephyr's gale
Around my tomb; and flow'rs of pensive hue&mdash;
The blue-ey'd bell and primrose lovely pale&mdash;
Shall Nature's sweetest lib'ral hand bestrew,
And on my head-stone this: &mdash; Adieu, vain world, adieu!
