Ah me!  how doth my heart in pity melt,
Whene'er I think on that neglected train,
Whose worth dull Ignorance has never felt,
But treats with cruel sight and proud disdain,
Reckless of those whom thus he dooms to pain!
Lend me thine aid, Apollo!  let my verse
Their suff'rings tell, whose genius toils in vain;
That feel chill Penury, with ev'ry curse
Which can the man betide that owns an empty purse.

In many a garret, roof'd with shatter'd tile,
Involv'd in smoke, and scarcely seen below,
There lives, in threadbare garb, and lowly style,
A wretched wight, whose looks his calling show!
An author he &mdash; whom printer's devils know;&mdash;
They grieve him sore, while, on proof-sheet intent,
Urg'd by the pow'r of hunger, (clam'rous foe!)
He oft doth give his passion sudden vent,
And with vile names abuse the caitiff who them sent.

Full in his sight a bay it's head did rear,
Which nigh his window some kind hand had plac'd;
Whilom a wither'd stump it did appear,
Tho' now with full luxuriant foliage grac'd:
And when his future eminence he trac'd,
When Hope the fond idea brought to view
Of wealth and fame, to be by him embrac'd,
Still, as he look'd, he found his ardour grew,
And shap'd it into wreaths, and kindled at the view.

So have I seen (who has not may believe)
A lambent vapour o'er a marshy ground;
How some poor traveller it doth deceive,
And lead him far from house, a weary round,
While with false hopes his heart doth oft rebound.
Sad disappointment!  May such fearful chance
No gentle pilgrim's senses e'er confound;
Ne Superstition's pow'r his mind entrance,
Ne Fancy's magic dream mislead in airy dance.

Near to his room there stands a closet dark,
Where spiders do their industry display,
And on his door the milkman leaves a mark,
Lest smaller sums he should forget to pay,
Eager perdie t' escape the reck'ning day.
The sounds uncouth, which do from hence arise,
Our author's hiding-place full oft betray,
Where, lo!  he trembling sits, in haggard guise,
And with a fearful stare the op'ning door he eyes.

His cap, once blacker than the raven's wing,
To dust and age compell'd, alas!  to yield;
His vest, with snuff begrim'd; (a filthy thing!)
From sight his linen's dingy hue conceal'd;
And 'twixt his bony fingers he doth wield
A grey-goose quill: &mdash; with serious thoughts oppress'd,
With sad forebodings of the future fill'd,
And sore perplex'd, he seems; as one possess'd,
And mainly anxious how t' express his thoughts the best.

Who but has heard, conven'd in noisy sort,
The clam'rous sons of the mechanic train&mdash;
Smiths, cobblers, tailors.  Mischievous their sport,
When potent liquor fires the giddy brain,
And turbulent Misrule assumes the rein:
And, if to wild Imagination's pow'r
The author yield, how can he hope to gain
The meed of praise, which, like a vernal show'r,
His drooping spirit cheers, oppress'd in gloomy hour?

A rusty gown was o'er his shoulders cast;
So tatter'd, scarce it fenc'd the nipping air:
'Twas purple damask when the loom it past;
And, tho' of threads become exceeding bare,
Yet did its master deem it passing rare:
And sooth to say, if age demand respect,
Then might it challenge reverence, and dare
Comparison with garments erst that deck'd
The form of ancient sage, of the most rigid sect.

Albeit no flatt'ry did his pen debase,
Ne pomp allur'd him with a glitt'ring show;
Of prince or minister scarce saw the face,
Nor at their levee e'er was seen, I trow;
Yet rank he honour'd &mdash; ne'er of Kings the foe&mdash;
"Ne would esteem him act as mought behove,"
Who to high birth and merit would not bow;
For no man in exalted sphere may move,
But Envy him more hate will raise then Merit love.

One book he chiefly took delight to read;
It was the "Art of Poetry" by name;
Whence, ever and anon, he would proceed
To not such rules as might attention claim,
And aid him to acquire poetic fame:
And if, perchaunce, in journal old he found
Fragment of verse, he would transcribe the same;
For beauties ofttimes in such scraps abound,
Scarce e'en surpass'd in works of poets most renown'd.

Lo!  the Review is issu'd through the land;
Eftsoons to read it authors do repair:
The books of stature small they take in hand,
Which, with a wrapper blue, secured are,
To save from injury the title fair.
The type so small, which on their back is seen,
Some publication new doth oft declare,
From which thilk wight that has a gazing been
Kens the forthcoming work will soon appear, I ween.

Ah, luckless he!  born surely 'neath the beam
Of star malign; it grieves me to recite;
As erst the Bard near fair Sabrina's stream,
When he recounted infants' doleful plight,
Wept at their woes, and did with grief indite;
For, opening the book, he doth begin
To cut the leaves (once work of much delight);
Long grows his face, extended in his chin,
With beard rough as the coat of angry porcupin!

Oh, rueful sight!  victim of critic rage!
This author doth in utmost peril see
His fav'rite work:  how doth he eye the page
In which his fame and fortune slaughter'd be?
He meditates how he may set them free;
Nor gentle Pity would his foe deny
(If Pity with reviewers did agree)
To his dismay, that low'rs in either eye,
And him oppresseth sore, that he could wish to die.

No longer can he now his wrath command;
And hardly he forbears, replete with ire,
To rushen forth, and, with revengeful hand,
On critic foe to wreak resentment dire.
On thee he calls, Phoebus!  his patron sire;
(Unheedful now of wretched authors' wo;)
He knows no friend whose aid he can require;
And soon his rage in oaths begins to flow,
With eyeballs glaring wild, and cheeks of fiery glow.

But, ah!  what pen his anger can display?
Or what device his wrathful looks explain?
The grin that doth his inward rage betray?
The frown severe, that will denotes his pain?
The visage mark'd with sadness and disdain?
While he, with frequent stamp, the floor doth pace,
Ne careth aught for friend or worldly gain;
Or when he thinketh on his dire disgrace,
And to o'erwhelming spleen "all passions then give place."

His brother authors, seiz'd with sore dismay,
Attentive con their works with mickle care;
By his example warn'd, each line survey,
And from th' effects of critic wrath beware,
Dreading, I wis, lest they the same may share;
Till, oft revis'd, each work becomes complete;
And to the well-known printer they repair,
Whence with enliv'ning hope they come elate,
And cheer'd with prospect fair of more propitious fate.

See to their homes they hie, in merry glee,
And fill'd with pleasant musings sitten there;
All but the wight by critic galled; he
Abhorreth home, and all his comforts there;
(This hand on forehead plac'd, that rends the air;)
And eke with sighs profound, and heaving breast,
And execrations dreadful, does declare
His grievous fate, by injuries opprest,
And scorns all thoughts of peace, while wrongs are unredress'd.

His face, convuls'd, with furious passion glows&mdash;
His manly face, that seems an angry sky,
Which o'er the earth its low'ring aspect shows,
All black with clouds that bode the tempest nigh;
(Oh!  the poor caitiff's cruel destiny!)
All, all but he, who caus'd the dire affray,
All, all but he, regard it with a sigh;
Yet hence the author, hence the heav'ns display,
If so I justly deem, a more resplendent day.

Beside the fire, enwrapt in doleful thought,
Heedless of food, the wretched wight reclines;
Nor careth he for books, or converse aught,
But to sad melancholy all resigns,
And deems it wrong if he to mirth inclines;
And from his breast a sigh will ofttimes vent,
Whence short relief that breast oppressed finds;
And still, as on his foe his thoughts are bent,
The more doth he resolve his haviour to resent.

Alas!  how doth it seem like love of fame;
But, if it that should be which thus doth move,
Be cautious, critics!  nor incur the blame
Of quenching what to raise would best behove:
Far greater friends would ye to learning prove,
Such means to use as urge th' aspiring mind;
The soul sublime, that soars the earth above,
Like Newton's daring genius, more inclin'd
To range amid the spheres than mingle with mankind.

For, nurs'd with care, what brilliant talents shine!
E'en now doth Memory to view display
How long obscure did "rare Ben Jonson" pine,
And Otway, cherish'd by "no fost'ring ray!"
Oh!  hard their fate if Pen'ry can dismay
Such minds as look for fame that ne'er shall die!
Thus once they crept along the lett'rd way,
Not weeting how their Muse should mount on high,&mdash;
They hop'd, poor scribbling elves, some patron to escry.

And then, perhaps, would Censure (cruel foe!)
Low lay the fabric which their hope did build:
Such is the course of rigid fate below,
And many a poet to its force must yield,
And many an author cease the pen to wield;
Or, sour'd by critics, to a cynic turn;
Like him who now, by spleenful passions fill'd,
Surveys my parody, and frowning stern,
Cries "all such trash as this should with waste paper burn."

But some there are t' whom Phoebus gives his aid,
And to their wits unbars the prison-door;
The, as a rushing torrent doth invade,
And all the grassy level cover o'er
With boist'rous rage and overwhelming roar,
So thousand ways doth wand'ring Genius move;
(Heav'n shield the brain from phrensy, I implore;)
For well may Wit, when thus uncurb'd it rove,
Appear to thoughtless elf more dangerous than Love.

Enjoy, poor Bards!  enjoy your sportive Muse,
And chase dull Care with gay poetic flow'rs;
For, when my pen I can no longer use,
Still may ye blithsome waste your careless hours
"In knightly castles, and in ladies' bow'rs!"
O, vain to seek delight in such abodes,
But chief in palaces, when Envy low'rs!
Deluded poet!  who writes servile odes
Beneath the pompous dome of such terrestrial gods!

See in each Bard what varied tastes appear:&mdash;
These in wild strains compose romantic lay;
Those, glancing at the age an eye severe,
Attack with satire all that cross their way:
Some pamphlets write that scarce outlive the day:
Some to the magazines assistance lend,
With verses smooth, that Love's soft pains display;
Thilk to the publisher's abode do wend,
In hopes of ample sum for all that they have penn'd.

Here, as each author adds to Learning's store,
Each author's works in order ranged been;
Some with gilt leaves, and Russia cover'd o'er,
Galling full sore the student poor, are seen;
And others deck'd in colours blue or green:
And here of worth renown'd the classics stand;
Fine books!  of sterling merit too, I ween:
O!  by no wight of Learning's favour'd band
May such unequaled works be ever slightly scann'd.

See poems here in splendid volumes bound,
The wire-wove paper, and the margin wide,
Where type and vignette highly wrought are found,
With tempting look to draw their eyes aside
Who dare not by lest penury betide:
Here law-reports appear in homely brown;
And here each month do all those works abide,
Whose writers' names to Fame are seldom known,
Tho' far and wide they spread Britannia's high renown.

Admir'd Britannia!  that, with conscious pride,
Eyes her fair form in Neptune's circling wave;
Fam'd for her navies, that unconquer'd ride,&mdash;
For females lovely, and for heroes brave!
Ah!  'mid the rest, may tears bedew his grave
Whom gen'rous ardour prompted first to raise
A fund, that Learning's sons might shield and save
From cheerless want! &mdash; Oh!  may the meed of praise
Such noble deeds call forth &mdash; live in each poet's lays!
