CANTO I.
How trodden is the field of poetry,
How worn in ev'ry path by countless feet!
By travellers of high and low degree,
Whom at each torn in glowing haste we meet&mdash;
For all the way is cool'd by breezes sweet,
And streams that glide and murmur pleasantly
Among the flow'ry banks, and vallies deep,
Inviting to the cave of gentle Sleep.

Green as that cave, which lies within the wood
Skirting the base of yonder easy hill,
And, shadow'd in the mirror of the flood,
Gains fresher calmness, and repose more still.
Oh!  'tis a spot to fix the wav'ring will,
And bid the journeyer rest in happy mood,
Forever bound to one delightful home,
With many a sigh to stay, without a wish to roam,

For noiseless there the fragrant dews of night
Descending shed their fruitful balm around;
There, as the silver moon's unclouded light
Steals through the bow'r, and trembles on the ground,
Safe from the rabble world's unholy sound
How joyously the muse would take her flight
To realms of purer peace, and blest and free,
Range through thy fields, divine Philosophy!

Nor uninhabited that pleasant cave,
Nor yet by fabled deity possess'd:
For, farther on, beside the winding wave,
Sir Edgar dwells &mdash; a knight by fortune bless'd,
Once fam'd in war, but now retir'd to rest,
"Buried, yet living, in a rural grave,"
(So laugh'd his courtly friends) but well I ween
Repaid for fool-born jests by this enchanting scene.

Hither retreating from the noisy crowd,
That fill'd his neighb'ring castle's spacious walls,
He seeks the charm of grief &mdash; to think aloud,
And, only answer'd by the waterfalls,
Pour unobserv'd the murmur, that recals
Those happier days, when Emma was not proud,
When Emma was not sunk in Folly's maze,
But innocent as fair&mdash; "Oh!  lost and happy days!

"Oh!  days forever gone," the mourner cries,
Why did ye smile, yet cease so soon to smile?
If life's best glory is but born and dies,
What charm shall man's unhappiness beguile?
If truth is chang'd to falsehood's subtle wile,
If Heav'n itself deceives in woman's eyes,
Well shall we burst at once these bonds of woe!
But see!  the band of God arrests the frantic blow.

"To give our reason scope he placed us here,
To try the nerve and vigour of our soul:
Each has a task, in his allotted sphere,
To keep the rebel passions in control:
Life is our arduous race, and Heav'n the goal&mdash;
Hope and reward, and punishment and fear,
On either side encourage us to win,
Excite to virtuous strength, deter from sluggish sin.

"And shall we faint, like cowards, on the road,
And quit the glorious contest in despair
No!  pressing on to that divine abode
Where joy unfading breathes th' ambrosial air,
Eager we'll cross the low damp grounds of care,
Despise dull labour's momentary load,
Climb the steep upland to a brighter sky,
And snatch the prize of Immortality.

"If such our aim, with blazing light before
The Son of God shall guide and cheer our way;
Himself expand that everlasting door,
The King of Glory, and the Star of Day!
Oh!  how shall we sustain the dazzling ray
Of pow'r's transcendent brightness?  how implore
Love's unimagin'd mercy, to forgive
Man's guilty race, and die that we should live?

"Should live for ever in the realms above,
Redeem'd from death, the penalty of sin!
Should feel the blessedness of sacred love,
And glow with speechless gratitude within&mdash;
When shall the eternal round of joys begin,
When shall we spread the pinions of the dove,
And fly away from earth, and be at rest?
Forbear th' impatient hope, my fond presuming breast.

"From dust, from nothing, to this beauteous earth
Creation rais'd us at th' Almighty word;
Fair, universal Nature hail'd our birth,
And own'd the chief whom God himself preferr'd:
Th' obedient brutes his lofty mandate heard,
And bow'd to man supreme in power and worth&mdash;
To man, yet destin'd to a nobler sphere,
And born to deathless bliss, when all has vanish'd here.

"Thou inexhaustibly abundant source
Of Providential good!  shall man receive
Thy whole benevolence?  the gather'd force
Of all the Godhead's energies?  believe,
Ye thankless progeny of sinful Eve,
Who madly follow a forbidden course,
Believe enough to tremble, and confess
Unmerited the gift of heav'nly happiness.

"Free gift, and purchas'd by the holy blood
Of that unspotted Saviour, who could deign
To quit th' immortal throne of grace that stood
On the right hand of God, in Heav'n's domain,
To take the form of penury and pain,
Endure unnat'ral ills for others' good,
Range the vile earth at cruel man's control,
And pay his guilty debt, and save his ransom'd soul.

"Oh!  is it not enough that nature spreads
Her bounteous feast for ev'ry living thing?
That Heav'n's blue arch is stretch'd above our heads,
Beneath our feet earth's grassy treasures spring?&mdash;
That all around the balmy breezes fling
Their healthful odours from the mossy beds
Of flow'rs with countless hues, that deck the land,
And testify the work of God's incessant hand?

"Oh!  is it not enough that curious art
Improves the growth of nature's fairest fruits?
That cultivation's prudent toils impart
New wealth to men, and nobler use to brutes?
That ev'ry taste a various pleasure suits,
That elegance adorns the generous heart,
And all the native bullion of the mind
Is fashion'd into gold, exalted, and refin'd?

"Enough for man, that such a store of bliss
Should, undeserv'd, be offer'd to his pow'r:
Enough, that reigning o'er a world like this
We live the lords of time's contracted hour:
For half the storms that on our fortune low'r
Are rais'd by thoughts that drive us to distress,
Rais'd by ourselves, by passion wildly strong,
By unresisted love that hurries us along.

"We are our own most unrelenting foes,
And blindly forfeit what we could enjoy:
Infuriate suicides of life's repose,
Wishing we taint, possessing we destroy:
The charms that most delight us soonest cloy!
Forgetful of its sweets, we scorn the rose
Pluck'd from its rifled tree, and, cruel!  haste
To crop another flow'r, create another waste.

Shall we, the conscious slaves of guilt presume
To criminate the God who gave us life
Shall we resent th' imaginary gloom,
The willing toil, the self-excited strife,
The late, late knowledge of a once-lov'd wife,
That surest anguish of our mortal doom?&mdash;
Shall we, who bring upon ourselves our grief,
Accuse at once our lot, and supplicate relief,

"Oh miserable man!  thy soaring pride
To lowest meanness has reduc'd thy state!
Has vainly set thy Saviour's strength aside,
And, on thine own perfection, dar'd await
Th' inexorable law's terrific fate!
And dost thou hope, weak mortal, to abide
The wrath to come?  Oh!  tremble, and repent
Ere yet too late, and hail the pardon sent.&mdash;

"Sweet Emma!  loveliest girl of southern lands,
How shall my heart recal thy youthful charms!
That hour the holy father join'd our bands,
That hour thy virgin beauty bless'd my arms!
The soft remembrance wakes such wild alarms
That manly sense no more my mind commands,
That all my boyish tenderness returns,
And with reviving love thy vanquish'd Edgar burns.

"But not for him does Emma's bosom beat
With fondness, mindful of those happy hours,
When wand'ring down the glade with careless feet
We sought together our paternal bow'rs!
When for her hair I wove the wreath of flow'rs,
Or taught the wood to sound with echoes sweet
Answ'ring my artless lute's impassion'd lay,
Unconscious of the close of many a summer day.

"Ah!  how can she forget the soothing scene,
The frequent gaze of love's responsive eye,
Vows interchanged, and kisses snatched between,
The flow of faithful hearts, when God alone is nigh?
Ah!  how can she forget his presence high,
When words and looks in yonder arbour green,
The tenderest words and looks that man could melt,
Confess'd the mutual warmth my yielding Emma felt?

"And is it past, the vision of delight?
Does cold and fickle vanity succeed?
Is Edgar now indifferent to her sight,
And can she see unmov'd his bosom bleed
Oh!  life is then a worthless waste indeed,
A dreary, long, impenetrable night
Of thickest clouds, and desarts spread below,
Peopled with horrid shapes, and echoing shrieks of woe!

"Return, return, thou holy Faith, from Heav'n,
Descend in gentle dews on Emma's breast!
Wake the pure wish that pants to be forgiv'n,
And sighs for regions of eternal rest:
Of weak and worldly cares her soul divest,
Restore obedient thoughts, affections even,
Blest days, in angel charities employ'd,
Nights of connubial love, in noiseless peace enjoy'd."

Thus to the secret grove the mourner spoke,
Stretch'd on a bank that overhung the wave;
When on his ears the distant revel broke,
And fierce he hasten'd to his inmost cave:&mdash;
Thither nor haughty chief, nor humble slave
Would dare to follow, when from yonder oak
Wav'd the black flag of Solitude, and show'd
Its lord was present in the dread abode.

One cloud of stern severity alone
Darken'd the soldier's philosophic mind;
This grot so sacredly be held his own,
That lofty peer alike, and lowly hind
Shudder'd to enter, where he lay reclin'd
On fix'd and solemn hours, and pour'd the groan
Of secret sadness, from the world apart,
In still communion with the pensive bears

And hence about the vale dark stories ran
Of midnight converse with th' uncoffin'd dead&mdash;
Of voices wilder than the voice of man,
And wondrous lights that flash'd dismay and fled&mdash;
Nay, by some fearful villagers 'twas said,
When one strange air within the wood began,
Of more than mortal height a spirit past,
Wrapp'd in a shadowy veil, shrill-rustling in the blast!

And hence compassion, ever prone to err,
Condol'd with Emma's inauspicious lot;
Sank, in return, her lord's fair character,
Belied his thoughts, his charities forgot:
The scandal reach'd the knight, but hurt him not;
No words ungrateful could his hand deter
From kindest acts; no tales of folly mov'd
His ling'ring step to quit the cave he lov'd.

But gay and joyous was his lady's life,
And fill'd with splendid guests her castle tow'rs,
Where lordly gallants vied in courteous strife
To wing with liveliest art the wanton hours,
Or deck the heavy chain of time with flow'rs&mdash;
Not that the blithesome fair forgot the wife,
But smil'd delusive hope on all the throng,
And listen'd to the praise of many an am'rous song.

Among the rest Sir Algernon would try
(Nor often try in vain) to please her ear;
Sir Algernon, the flow'r of courtesy,
The brightest star in fashion's royal sphere:
The court quite languish'd, while he sojourn'd here,
Saw half its flow'rs of beauty, droop and die,
Uncherish'd by the breath of tuneful praise,
Robb'd of the conscious pride his voice alone could raise.

Blithe were the sports of Emma's high-born guests,
The round of pleasure chang'd each lively morn;
Song and the dance adorn'd her splendid feasts,
Her park loud echoed to the hunter's horn:
Or when the fields were sea, and woods forlorn
Groan'd with their snowy load, then cheerful jests,
And games of glee pass'd round the wint'ry fire,
And ladies' eyes inflam'd each rival lyre.

A silver urn was plac'd upon the board,
And there each knight his votive off'ring threw:
Emma, the guardian of the tuneful hoard,
The well-seal'd lots with playful archness drew:
The songs were read, but none their authors knew,
Except the name of that victorious lord
Who won th' appointed prize, with sweet acclaim
Pronounc'd by all the fair the hero of the game.

It chanc'd one eve two candidates had sung
A strain esteem'd so equal by the fair,
That now the prize on Emma's sentence hung,
Accustom'd arbitress of worth so rare:
With grave and thoughtful looks of critic care,
With eye intent, and duly pausing tongue,
The beauteous judge her graceful task began,
And thus the first ambitious numbers ran.

POEM THE FIRST.
Oh!  dream not of a future life,
Ye earth-born sons of ceaseless care!
From dust ye sprung to toil and strife,
To dust return, and moulder there.

Some wanton chance to being call'd
This union strange of fire and clay;
In matter's chains the spark inthrall'd,
And bade it burn its little day.

Then fill the bowl, and weave the dance,
And crown with flow'rs the poet's brow!
Let beauty's smile our hearts entrance,
And fabled heav'n be tasted now.

The frigid dreams of drowsy priests
Their waking transports well belie;
Forbearance flies their glutton feasts,
And love has lit the holy eye.

But heed not art's deceitful race,
When nature speaks the solemn truth,
That here alone we find a place,
Die, and enjoy no second youth.

The tree, despoil'd of verdant leaves
By surly winter's iron hand,
Another robe in spring receives&mdash;
But liv'd beneath the frosty land.

Struck by the woodman's axe it falls,
And lies extended on the plain&mdash;
What genial sun its life recals
What show'rs shall bid it bloom again?

Then cease the vain delusive tale
That likens man to nature's fruits:
We cross a short but mournful vale,
Then perish with our kindred brutes!

So fill the bowl, and weave the dance,
And crown with flow'rs the poet's brow!
Let beauty's smile our heart's entrance,
And fabled heav'n be tasted now.

The pensive lady paus'd, and through the throng
In silence fix'd a chilly tremor stole&mdash;
They gaz'd to find the framer of the song,
And pleasure seem'd to quit th' insulted soul.
Fair Emma seiz'd in haste the rival scroll,
And as its manlier measure roll'd along,
"How carelessly ye read, with warmth she cried.
That ye could smile before, and waver to decide!"

POEM THE SECOND.
Vain is the toil of honour; vain the care,
And low contention of this troubled air;
Life is a scene of sadness; death bestows
A soothing silence, and a calm repose.

Tell me, my love, if yet a hope remains
That quicken'd once with joy thy youthful veins!
"Yes, yes!"  thy heart with eager leap replies&mdash;
"Ah!  spare the tears that cloud our mortal eyes!"
Spare them I will &mdash; but hear the higher rhyme,
And spurn the little joys of transient time.

Canst thou believe, that when thy soul has flown,
And left this lifeless body here alone,
That soul is lost in undistinguish'd space?
Or has it yet a being, yet a place?
It has, my love!  as strongly as it feels,
(When heavy sleep the closing eye-lid seals)
Though robb'd of sense, with neither ear, nor eye,
Taste, smell, or touch, its native energy&mdash;
So strongly shall it burst corporeal chains,
When time is gone, eternity remains,
And, in some realm appointed by our God,
The deathless spirit finds a last abode.

No rhapsody I pour &mdash; yon burning heav'n
Behold with joy, nor hope to be forgiv'n,
Doubtful of Him who bade his sacred light
Adorn the cheerful day, and gem the silent night,
&mdash;To light and life he gave their sudden birth,
And deck'd with fruits and flow'rs the grateful earth;
Bade the rich vale in varied wealth expand,
And rob'd in pleasant green the smiling land.
Here, at his word, majestic rivers run
With streams that glitter to the golden sun;
Proud on their banks time-honour'd woods arise,
And hills behind, that emulate the skies;
While towns and scatter'd villages between,
And grazing flocks, diversify the scene;
While lordly man amid the picture moves,
And God beholds the happiness be loves.
&mdash;While from the vale, green field, and winding flood,
And heath-crown'd bill, and dark encircling wood,
Earth's smoking incense to the skies ascends,
And in blue mist the fading distance ends.

Think'st thou tho beauteous pageant only spread
For the short journey ere we join the dead?
Think'st thou no realm with fairer charms will glow,
No guiltless paradise, estrang'd from woe?
That the high flame thy bosom feels within,
Though damp'd by sorrow, and obscur'd by sin,
The flame of pride, of freedom, and of sense,
The wondrous soul's divine magnificence,
Will sleep forever in the dreary tomb,
Languish and die in earth's ungenial womb,
Chain'd to that prison it despis'd before,
And left in life through heav'nly fields to soar,
On fancy's wing its future joys pursue,
And catch of Eden a prophetic view?
No!  where the pow'r of song has clearly giv'n
The stamp and earnest of our native heav'n,
Where love corroborate' the high bequest,
Exalts at once, and purifies the breast,
There God himself erects his human throne,
And sees the glowing spirit all his owe.

"And can ye doubt," the lovely umpire cries,
"Between force of reason, and a jest?"
She said, and sought with animated eyes
To find the secret emblem, which express'd
The poet's name, and her's whom he address'd:
She read her own with joy &mdash; but oh!  surprize
With throbbing tumult fill'd her, as she view'd
Edgar &mdash; thy lord &mdash; the friend of solitude."

Oh!  speak the feeling of the husband's heart,
Ye who have lost, and struggle to regain
A wife's affections!  all your warmth impart
To the reviving rapture of my strain,
Open of love that old exalted vein,
By nature's self inspired and ignorant of art!
As with remember'd tears of soft'ning truth,
Fair Emma give her hand to him she lov'd in youth.

The crowd rejoic'd &mdash; but Algernon alone
Conceiv'd malignant envy in his mind;
Swell'd with augmenting hatred's stifled groan,
And griev'd so fruitless all his arts to find:
What, shall a grov'ling hermit leave behind
The courtly knight in studies all his own?
In secret wiles a lady's soul to win,
And turn the path that pleasure slopes to sin?

Baffled by him whose nobler deeds abroad
Had sham'd Sir Algernon in many a fight,
Whose high ascending genius proudly aw'd
The prostrate glory of each yielding knight,
Baffled by him, in labours gay and light,
In joyous song &mdash; with deep and pois'nous fraud,
The wily courtier sought that pleasant balm
Revenge alone can yield the jealous breast to calm,

Revenge!  thou of a dreadful hour
In gen'rous souls!  but in the sordid slave,
Thou unextinguish'd, everlasting pow'r,
Till thy lost victim withers in the grave!
Never, oh!  never dost thou haunt the brave,
Beyond the natural frowns that fiercely low'r
Upon the offending wretch who wrongs their worth,
Beyond the hasty blow that sweeps him from the earth.

Revenge inflam'd Sir Algernon &mdash; but skill,
But practiced cunning, kept his fury back&mdash;
"And yet, thou sage!"  he thought, "I'll work thee ill,
And yet I'll force thee from thy holy track!
Such plausible report thy soul shall wrack,
That thou shalt wonder at thy guilty will;
Thyself shalt be astonish'd, saintly sage,
To find so lewd thy Christian pilgrimage!"

Our thoughts are actions, when conceiv'd with force&mdash;
And thus, at once, Sir Algernon essay'd
By subtle tales, concealing still their source,
By kind address, and brib'ry's shameless aid,
To scandalize the chaste and holy shade
Of the green wood by yonder river's course,
With doubtful hints that in the cave of sleep
More sprightly guests their wanton vigils keep.

But, glad to crown his am'rous task, the knight
Contriv'd another trial of the muse;
Where Edgar, so he deem'd, would scorn to write,
And with a manly pride the victory refuse:
The theme was better fitted for the stews,
For regions of abhorr'd and lawless night,
Than for the polish'd court of decent rule,
For beauty's galaxy, and fashion's school.

The theme was wine &mdash; but well th' intriguer knew
Rude Bacchanalian mirth forbidden here:
So gentle colours o'er the scene he threw,
And prais'd that joyous season of the year,
When, cheering yellow autumn's colours sere,
The clusters of the vine with brightest hue
Burst through their veil of leaves, a grateful scene,
The blooming purple, and th' enliv'ning green!

POEM THE FIRST
Talk not of immortality!  the grape,
The grape alone immortal rapture yields!
Who can the grasping fangs of death escape?
Who tastes the nectar of the Elysian fields?

Tis but a dream!  no ecstasy survives
The adamantine barriers of the tomb:
God in no future world our guilt forgives&mdash;
We die! &mdash; and wine alone consoles our doom.

Not wine alone &mdash; for woman's melting eye,
For one dear woman's penetrating smile,
Not only soothes our toilsome destiny,
Not only can our hours of grief beguile,

But makes us fond of life's most worthless scene,
This checquer'd darkness of our doubting minds;
These show'rs of tears, with scarce a smile between,
But Hope &mdash; that seeks for all, and nothing finds!

Oh woman!  loveliest work of Nature's hand,
Bright are the beams that play around thy charms!
Who can thy fair, thy soft'ning sight withstand?
Who doubt to clasp thee in his glowing arms?

For him no jog in Eden's bow'rs would dwell,
If Eden's bow'rs were aught but fabled dreams:
To him the myrtle grove of Pagan hell,
The black Cocytus, and Avernian streams,

Are all alike! &mdash; for when fancy strains
To reach its highest joy in future heav'n,
The bowl of rosy juice it only drains,
It only clasps the fair, and is forgiv'n!

So sang the slave of Mahomet &mdash; but loud,
And high, and sudden to the list'ning throng,
Bursting abroad, electrified the crowd
Sir Edgar's unpremeditated song,

POEM THE SECOND.
I will not hear, I will not hear
The sluggard tone of wanton ease;
Strains ill prepar'd for lady's ear,
Strains that the harlot's soul should please!

'Where is the gaze of mutual love,
Where is the kiss of fond desire?
The feeling to our God above
That lifts as with a heav'nly fire?

Oh!  diff'rent is the body's glow
From the pure warmth that fills the soul;
Oh!  diff'rent is affection's flow
From rapture kindled by the bowl.

Ye sons of cold luxurious earth,&mdash;
And thou, enjoyment's selfish slave,
Betraying thy ignoble birth,
The dust that form'd thee is thy grave!

But is thy meanness justly brought
The proof of God's diminish'd pow'r?
Hast thou not check'd the nobler thought
That led thee to a future hour?

Hast thou not struggled to suppress
The high indignant soul within?
By folly lost earth's happiness,
And lost celestial bliss by sin?

Say, hadst thou not the freedom to resist?
Say, could thy lawless deeds have not been done
Soldiers of vice, in virtue's cause enlist!
Soldiers of vice, the field can yet be won!

Advance, ye warriors of the bleeding cross,
Advance your dauntless bosom to the spear!
What, if ye lose the battle, is your loss?
High wealth hereafter, chang'd for sorrow here.

"Pardon, fair dames, the loudness of my strain,
I only sigh to win your souls to bliss;
I only strive to guard you from the pain
Of hope encourag'd in a scene like this:
Farewell!  and fondly think of happiness
With those ye love &mdash; for oh!  'tis all in vain
To labour in our world, without the wife
Who shares our joy and grief, and gives its worth to life."

These words were whisper'd in fair Emma's ear,
These soft concluding words of Edgar's speech;
And, as he spoke, she dropp'd a gentle tear,
A tear that could a heart of iron reach&mdash;
It melted his; and much he long'd to teach
A softer lesson to his consort dear,
But, with a mischievous success, the knight
Thriv'd in intrigue, and stirr'd amusement light.

High in the hall he vaulted, and defied
The younger lords to vigorous display:
Then, with the smile of courtly grace, he tried
To turn Sir Edgar's hurtful thoughts away&mdash;
And, "Oh!  to-morrow be the joyous day
Of joust and tournament," he gaily cried,
Then shall we prove the temper of our arms,
Then shall the conq'ring knight deserve his lady's charms.

All irresistible the laughing grace
That deck'd Sir Algernon's enlighten'd air;
Sir Edgar's self saw genius in his face,
And Emma found too many beauties there&mdash;
"Oh!  how shall I reclaim my fickle fair!"
The husband sigh'd, as now with mournful pace
He walk'd awhile within his fav'rite bow'r,
Then sought the lamp that lit the western tow'r.

There anxious Emma waited for her lord
With passions half his own, and half estrang'd;
Recall'd each tender, each resentful word,
Now felt the same, and now was wholly chang'd&mdash;
While the sad chief the lonely valley rang'd,
And long'd lo drive th' intruder from his board,
"But Oh!  how worthless were the fair," he cried,
"Who only 'scapes the sin that chance denied!

"Emma!  if yet a lurking spark remains
Of genuine nature in thine alter'd breast;
Emma!  how willing were my fondest pains
To rouse the dormant virtue from its rest:
The transient warmth thy late applause confess'd,
How amply it repaid my humble strains!
Oh welcome, Hope!  to-morrow I may raise
By val'rous deeds the love of youthful days."

CANTO II.
The morning breaks &mdash; and from the glitt'ring hills
The clouds, in fleecy volumes, roll away;
Clear flows the current of the rapid rills,
As o'er the green and pleasant vale they stray:
The birds within the wood salute the day
With grateful music; dewy fragrance fills
The cool fresh air around; and nature's face,
Lit by the smiling sun, assumes its fairest grace.

Forth from the castle ride the gorgeous train,
In shining arms magnificently dight:
But ill would it become my graver strain
To tell the trappings of each diff'rent knight,
Their shield's insignia gain'd in glorious fight,
Their helm and crest &mdash; such knowledge light and vain
As school-boy heralds crowd upon their page,
Dull antiquarian trash, to please a childish age.

Enough for me, that gallant was the show
Of warlike banners waving in the air;
Enough for me, that England's stoutest foe
Had trembled to behold the soldiers there:
That not a realm could boast diviner fair,
More grac'd by dress, more rich in beauty's glow,
Than the gay dames of Emma's brilliant band,
Emma herself the brightest in the land.

The lists are form'd &mdash; and, eager to advance,
The chosen knights anticipate the prize;
Their ladies' eyes the victory enhance,
Defeat were dreadful in their ladies' eyes:
War's animating music rends the skies,
I hear the crash of each encount'ring lance,
I see the steeds roll'd headlong to the ground&mdash;
The whirling falchions flash!  the rapid blows resound!

Wave we their names and honours &mdash; for, behold!
Of nobler size, and more commanding mien,
Clad in refulgent arms of burnish'd gold,
Firm on his prancing steed, a knight is seen
To cross with martial air the tented green&mdash;
He bows around the ring with duty cold,
But halts a longer space at Emma's seat,
And lingers gazing there, unwilling to retreat.

But hark!  a loud defiance strikes his ears,
And answering trumpets interchange the threat:
Cas'd in black mail a dauntless chief appears&mdash;
High tow'r his nodding plumes of gloomy jet;
Resistless in the rest his lance is set:
Pale turn the dames, and shake with dizzy fears,
As, reeling from the shock together giv'n,
They part, like thunder-clouds that burst in heav'n.

Another charge of such tremendous force
Distain'd with blood the golden-armour'd knight,
Shook him, half breathless, from his falling horse,
And thrill'd the whole assembly with the sight.
His foe dismounts, and pauses from the fight,
(A noble pause in his victorious course!)
To give his rival breath, and let him find
His hardihood of limb, and tone of mind.

Again they meet &mdash; how terrible the clash
Of sounding arms, the combat's savage pride!
Fierce at each other's breasts their weapons dash,
Their balanc'd strength no witness can decide:
And now a direful blow has swept aside
One warrior's helm &mdash; the steely lightnings flash
With fire and force redoubled &mdash; and behold
The brave Sir Algernon, the knight of gold!

A look too fearful now the combat wears,
Too like the genuine strife for glory's meed:
But still Sir Algernon so nobly bears
The shock that hurl'd him, wounded, from his steed,
Still sees so carelessly his bosom bleed,
That the surrounding crowd dispel their fears,
View his firm footstep with admiring eye,
And hail his sure advance to victory.

Transcendent beauty o'er his forehead play'd,
His forehead shades by his flowing hair;
A generous blush his burning cheeks betray'd,
And mantling pride etherializ'd his air&mdash;
You might have heard the bosoms of the fair
Beat high and loud with terror, as array'd
In all his dreadful gloom, the sable knight
Came on, with lofty stride, to terminate the fight.

Dark wav'd the plumes upon his iron casque,
A more than human grandeur fill'd his form&mdash;
Such, in those sands were sun-burnt Arabs bask,
Stalks the black column through the deep'ning storm.
What hope can now the gentle bosom warm?
How shall their knight sustain his awful task?
How shall Sir Algernon escape the blow
Suspended o'er his head with aim secure and slow?

With shield uplifted to receive the sword,
Sir Algernon approach'd &mdash; and now the throng
Hasten'd to interpose, and check the lord
Contending with a foe too fierce and strong:
And doubtful murmurs ran the seats along,
That the black knight was stranger to the board
Of good Sir Edgar's hall, and lawless, came
To win unknightly praise, to snatch forbidden fame.

Their doubts were ended by the sudden thrust
Of brave Sir Algernon's recover'd hand:
He laid his stern opponent in the dust,
And o'er the fallen soldier wav'd his brand!
Then dropp'd, himself, exhausted on the land,
And died, the victim of accursed lust&mdash;
For, lo!  his rival rises, and exclaims,
"Such be the fate of guilt, ye knights, and beauteous dames!

"This Emma, be the fate," he feebly said,
"Of him who touch'd too deep thy faithless mind"&mdash;
But, as he doff'd the helmet from his bead,
And on the bosom of his squire reclin'd,
He fainted, ere be yet the tones could find
For Emma's startled ear, who swiftly sped
To take old Conrad's place, and catch each word
That slowly struggled from her wounded lord.

Sir Edgar gasping lay &mdash; "attend, my love,
Attend," he sigh'd, "to this my last request&mdash;
Bear me, Oh!  bear me to my fav'rite grove,
And where I liv'd in quiet, let me rest!"
Unutterable anguish swell'd the breast
Of beauteous Emma, as she fondly strove
To make atonement for her thoughtless life,
And at her husband's death to be his tender wife.

I pass the tumult of th' astonish'd crowd,
The fearful ladies hurrying from the ring;
The shrieks, resounding through the vale aloud,
And birds of evil omen on the wing:
The minstrel's harp through every thrilling string
Awaken'd by the wind; the waves that flow'd
With sadder sound along the woodland glade,
To soothe Sir Algernon's departing shade:

To soothe Sir Edgar's faint and weary sprite,
Not yet releas'd from this terrestrial chain;
Yet panting for the fields of heavn'ly light,
Yet conscious of the world's degrading pain&mdash;
Too desperate was the contest to regain
His Emma's love; and sudden set the night
Upon her dawning virtue, as she hung
On the last accents of his trembling tongue.

"This cave, my Emma," said the dying chief,
This cave, my Emma, be my funeral bed!
And thou, indulging no unworthy grief,
Revisit the cold earth where I am laid:
Let many a night thy sacred vows be paid
At this lone shrine &mdash; and Oh!  the sweet relief
That conscious faithfulness shall bring thy heart,
Will recompense the loss of all the pomp of art.

And now, farewell!  to other realms I go,
And wait thee, Emma, in a nobler sphere,
If the fond heart that lov'd so well below,
Shall meet in heav'n the fair it cherish'd here!
Restrain, my love, that self-accusing tear&mdash;
Oh, Emma!  little were my parting woe,
If I could hope again to see those eyes,
Were that dear breast my pillow in the skies.

"I faint &mdash; farewell! &mdash; let no unmeaning pride
Disgrace the simple burial of the brave:
Let no reflecting sage the pomp deride
That lays a worthless mortal in the grave.
Here, in my coffin place my trusty glaive,
My helm and shield &mdash; and, frequent, at the side
Of Edgar's rural tomb, let Emma weep,
Mourn her lost lord, and bid his ashes sleep."

He said &mdash; and Conrad from the dark'ning grove,
Conrad, his old companion in the fight,
Bore with officious baste his weeping love,
And quick perform'd th' injunctions of the knight.
Scarce had the sun diffus'd his dawning light
On the successive morn, when slowly move
(Twas thus Sir Edgar will'd) the funeral train,
And bear his rival to his entire plain.

Then, gladly had she sought the much-lov'd cave,
And clasp'd the lifeless corse, reposing there;
Then, gladly had she shar'd her husband's grave,
Nor ever breath'd again this hateful air&mdash;
But Conrad's words diminish'd her despair,
Told her, her lord each little wrong forgave,
Lov'd her in death as dearly as in life,
This his last pray'r, "reunion with his wife!"

And scarce, retiring from the sadden'd scene,
What once was gay Sir Algernon had pass'd;
When Conrad, with regret's dejected mien,
Announc'd the hour Sir Edgar breath'd his last.
Oh!  then the sun was veil'd, the chilly blast
Spoke death to Emma; then, in anguish keen,
She urg'd each lord to quit her Edgar's tow'rs,
And ev'ry dame to leave her guilty bow'rs.

"And save her," thus the squire prolong'd his tale,
"Save her, Sir Edgar cried, the painful sight
Of mourners rob'd in black, and torches pale
That shed upon the tomb their holy light:
With decent care let each religious rite
Be secretly observ'd, within the vale
Where Edgar sinks to rest &mdash; but tell my love,
'Till all is o'er, to fly that solemn grove."

The mournful fair obey'd; and strove to find
In her lone chamber consolation high,
From pray'r, the med'cine of the wounded mind,
From guilt confess'd, the sleep of misery:
Fast fell the teardrops from the beauteous eye,
Heav'd the soft breast to pleasure late resign'd,
And unavailingly recall'd the hour
When Edgar yet surviv'd, and love was in her pow'r.

"Oh!  I have dropp'd my treasure in the stream,
Like some poor infant in unconscious play!
Gone is my virtuous youth's unvalued dream,
I wake to vain regret's too tardy day:
Wherefore, oh!  wherefore was he torn away,
He whose soft counsel could my mind redeem,
He who could win my steps from folly's maze&mdash;
Oh!  wherefore is it lost, the chance of better days?"

Thus griev'd the fair &mdash; and now a month had flown,
Though weary was its flight, in tears and sighs:
Still did the wretched lady dwell alone,
Still scorn the world's alluring luxuries:
When hope is gone, 'tis easy to despise
The paltry charms we once have wished our own,
Th' unreal joys of fashion's heartless choir,
The whims of useless wit, and fancy's dang'rous fire.

But heavier was the weight of Emma's woe,
For she had lost the fairest knight on earth!
Driv'n by herself to meet the fatal blow
That robb'd the world of his unrivall'd worth:
She wept th' unhappy moment of her birth,
And sought the cave, with measur'd steps and slow,
With folded arms, and deeply thoughtful eye,
Resolv'd to mourn the day where Edgar's ashes lie.

The day was suited to her sad intent;
Thick low'ring clouds the rayless skies o'erspread,
It's fury on the wood the tempest spent,
And trembling birds from crashing thickets fled:
Rough was the lady's path, and o'er her head
The branches show'rd their raindrops, and besprent
Her robes with chilly dew &mdash; but on she far'd,
Nor for the lightning's flash, nor bellowing thunder car'd.

At length she reach'd the cave &mdash; and here, in sight,
(Heart-breaking sight to her who gave it cause!)
Lies the rude tombstone of her murder'd knight,
And this inscriptive verse the shudd'ring fair-one awes&mdash;
"Ye, who approach these shades, a moment pause!
How pass your lives!  in turbulent delight?
In folly's easier chace?  return, return,
Nor with unhallow'd touch pollute my lowly urn.

"But if, chastis'd by grief, and pierc'd by shame,
Ye pay the last sad tribute to my tomb;
If penitential tears your soul reclaim&mdash;
Smile through those teen, dispel that pious gloom!
For, know!  a glorious prospect gilds your doom:
Yes, ye shall see recover'd joy and fame,
Far brighter than before your years shall roll,
And unimagin'd blessings sooth your soul."

"Dead is my soul to rapture," Emma cries,
Though kindly did he speak, my parting love!
Oh!  well to me th' inspiring verse applies,
But 'tis too late the promis'd joy to prove:
What future hope can Emma's bosom move?
When cold within the tomb her Edgar lies,
By her unfeeling vanity destroy'd,
Oh!  how shall any peace by Emma be enjoy'd?

"Yet far, how far beyond my own design
Did accident impel my guilty way!
Ye, whose light steps to folly's path incline,
Beware how close to infamy ye stray:
If caution's drowsy  guards their post betray,
Your feet shall find the snare that lurk'd for mine,
Down the same steep of wretchedness shall fall,
And vainly for the help of banish'd wisdom call.

"Against the well-known temper of my lord,
Though kind forbearance bound his manly tongue,
Amusements loose, and gaieties abhorr'd,
Fill'd my vain hours:  my home with revel rung,
And wanton dames, and gallants blithe and young
Shar'd the luxurious pleasures of my board,
While, proud in conscious virtue, I disdain'd
The fancied rigours of the heart I pain'd.

"And then, oh quick deceitfulness of pride!
He wrongs my innocent and spotless name,
He wrongs a matron's dignity, I cried,
Imagining with patience cold and tame
I will endure these insults to my fame:
No!  he shall cast this sullen gloom aside,
Shall quit this woodland solitude, and strive
By graceful arts to keep my love alive.

"Oh!  prodigal of bliss, that plainly lay
Before my easy grasp, my licens'd hand;
How could I throw life's thornless rose away,
Struggling for pow'r's unauthoriz'd command,
For the first rank in fashion's senseless band,
For the unworthy brilliance of a day,
Ah!  too forgetful of my earlier love,
And our dear wand'rings in this hallow'd grove?

"Edgar, my first, my last, my only care,
(Ah!  that thou hadst been only!)  couldst thou know
That in the secret bosom of thy fair
None but thyself e'er rais'd affection's glow&mdash;
Perchance it might appease thy ghost below,
To learn how deep, bow settled the despair
That gives thy Emma's life to ceaseless gloom,
To midnight vigils at thy sylvan tomb!"

Thus, in the cave, the lovely mourner spoke
Unconscious of the night's o'erspreading shade&mdash;
Till solemn music on the silence broke,
And lights, ascending, through the darkness play'd!
The tombstone slowly rose, and lo!  array'd
In death's pale shroud, as if the dead awoke,
A ghastly figure issued from the ground,
And wav'd its mournful arms, majestical, around.

Deep on its side appear'd the stain of blood,
The limbs seem'd wasted by some fatal ill;
But, as the night-wind shook its falling hood,
The well-known face might be distinguish'd still!
Heav'n!  what intolerable horrors fill
The breast of wretched Emma, as she stood
Transfix'd with wild astonishment, and saw&mdash;
(A sight to thrill the mutest heart with awe)

Advancing from the tomb with hasty stride,
Sit Edgar's self! &mdash; and "Oh!  look up, my wife,
Look up," the animated figure cried,
"Behold thy lord restor'd to thee and life!
He can no longer brook th' ungenerous strife,
Enough, enough, thy fealty has been tried,
Enough, I've read the tablet of thy heart,
And thus we meet again, oh!  never more to part."

Close to his breast be strain'd the doubting fair,
And hung in transport o'er her varying face;
Impress'd the glowing kiss of fondness there,
And swell'd with pride, reviving hope to trace,
Breathing surprize, and love's deep-blushing grace,
At once her strengthen'd faith, and joy declare!
Then, as he gently hush'd her in his arms,
A flood of grateful tears reliev'd her dread alarms.

They paus'd, unutterably sooth'd, awhile,
And felt the stealing warmth of silent bliss&mdash;
Till good old Conrad with the speaking smile
Of honest truth, that shar'd their happiness,
Warn'd them to quit the scene of past distress,
Eager each sad remembrance to beguile,
To lead th' exhausted lady to her bow'r,
And cheer her with the sight of day's returning hour.

For day return'd with such a lovely light
As never yet had cheer'd sweet Emma's eyes!
Black was the contrast of the busy night,
And, like a hideous dream, the painful picture flies.&mdash;
See from yon hill the golden sun arise!
See Heav'n's blue canopy expanding bright
O'er the protected earth!  and flow'rs and fruits
Reviv'd, and man awake, amid his subject brutes

Fast by yon verdant meadow see the bow'r,
"The bow'r she lov'd so much in early years,
Emma, the sharer of his brightest hour,
Emma, the solace of his youthful tears!"
There, at her side, that happy lord appears,
Gathers the sweets of many a woodland flow'r,
And tells remember'd tales of tender love,
Tales not unanswer'd by the murmuring grove.

O!  never did that grove before impart
So fond a feeling to his Emma's breast;
Nor touch with equal joy his manly heart,
With joy that may be felt, that cannot be exprest.
But still the lady's look her shame confest,
And vainly she forbade the tear to start,
That threw a pensive sadness o'er her charms,
E'en in the kind embrace of Edgar's circling arms!

So soft a languor fill'd her azure eye,
Despondence seemed to dwell within her mind
Like one, who in this vale of misery,
Ceas'd to pursue the good she fail'd to find;
And yet, with sweet complacency, resign'd
Her earthly hopes &mdash; resolv'd in Heav'n to try
For calmer scenes than boist'rous passions give,
For scenes where guiltless angels love to live.

Not such was Emma's mind &mdash; but reason shook
At the dark vision of the dreary cave&mdash;
Almost the firmness of its seat forsook,
As she recall'd, slow-rising from the grave,
(A figure that would petrify the brave)
Her lord, imagin'd dead, with hollow look,
With eyes of glue unspeakable, and brow
Clad in terrific frowns &mdash; oh God!  she saw it now.

"Look up, my love!"  her knight impatient said,
Thy own, thy happy Edgar lives for thee!
Conrad shall tell the tale, who feign'd me dead,
He who partook, explain the mystery&mdash;
But careless rapture and unbounded glee,
And song shall flow, and garlands crown my bead,
And I will rise, like morning, from the tomb,
To dissipate the clouds of night's too mournful gloom."

The board was pil'd with fruits and gen'rous wine,
And Conrad struck the harp within the wood,
"And thus!"  he cried, "may beauty still incline
To bless the valorous, to reward the good!
Thus may intriguing fraud be still withstood,
Thus may the wretch, who lays the deep design,
 Still fall entangled in his self-form'd snares,
And rue th' atrocious villainy he dares!

"Frown not, Sir Edgar, for I long have known
The false Sir Algernon's infernal art:
In foreign camps, in battles not our own,
Thy Conrad has perus'd that traitor's heart:&mdash;
Scarce would ye trust the tales I could impart,
How he betray'd his country's injur'd throne,
How Britain's king had lost new-conquer'd land,
But for the sudden help of true Sir Edgar's hand.

"Frown not, Sir Edgar, for thy lady's face
Smiles on old Conrad's ill-connected tale&mdash;
But why recount our wars in peaceful place?
In the green bosom of this quiet vale?
Here shall connubial comfort never fail,
Here shall unruffled age it's path retrace,
And, breathing freshness in the vernal air,
Remember'd pleasure smooth the brow of care.

"Forgive the talkative delight of age!
I cannot but forget all scenes but this;
I weep for joy in life's concluding page,
And more than share my lord's ecstatic bliss:
And yet how near ye lost your happiness!
How near ye fell sad victims to the rage
Of plotting Algernon's destructive wiles&mdash;
Oh!  I shall cloud with fear your unsuspecting smiles.

"One night we sate conversing in the hall,
And weigh'd, as vassals will, the various worth
Of ev'ry knight &mdash; and this was stout and tall,
Gen'rous and brave, as any lord on earth,
And that was famous for his noble birth&mdash;
But still the praise unanimous of all
Fell on two chiefs I need not blazon here,
One lost in vice, and one to virtue dear.

"Fierce grew Sir Algernon's devoted squire,
And rous'd th' opposing ardour of the throng;
With prudent skill I hid my bosom's ire,
And only answer'd by a joyous song:&mdash;
The hours in noisy revel roll'd along,
And, as I saw the lessening crowd retire,
I plied the glass, in friendship's gay presence,
To win that squire's unwilling confidence.

"At length he own'd, that on the following day,
When gallant knights contended on the plain'
Sir Algernon prepar'd a deadly fray,
And would not meet his hated foe in vain!
That, conquer'd by the poet's idle strain,
No longer would he strive in boyish play,
But, under mask of exercise, remove
Th' offensive barrier that restrain'd his love.

"That all was hasten'd to Sir Edgar's ear,
That manly valour would not shun the fight,
That guardian heav'n foredoom'd reunion here,
That victory has crown'd the cause of right)
That long thy lord has dwelt in cheerless night
I need not tell &mdash; nor how his empty bier
Was carried to the cave with mimic grief,
Nor how my daily cares reliev'd my wounded chief.

"Less need I tell th' unwilling aid &mdash; but hold!
Sir Edgar's eye forbids me to proceed."
Then sternly spoke the knight &mdash; "Too rash and bold
Thy freedom, Conrad &mdash; yet the sight indeed
Was terrible!  my heart must ever bleed,
To think it could devote with vengeance cold
To such a sight my Emma's lovely eyes!
But hush!  my brain grows wild &mdash; those madd'ning throbs arise.

"Thy chief, good Conrad, is supremely blest
In such an earnest friend, a wife so true&mdash;
But how shall he console his Emma's breast
For the deep sighs that seat of sorrow drew?
Too well in youth her faithful heart he knew
To doubt, to try her thus, to kill her rest,
For long, long nights to watch her lonely tears,
And drink her widow'd groans with cruel ears.

"Yes, I have hung, my Emma, o'er thy bed,
And heard thy lips pronounce my happy name!
(My noiseless steps the wary Conrad led,)
And oh!  too pleas'd to find their grief the same,
Thy generous soul o'erwhelm'd with guilty shame,
Thy love still sacred to the ceaseless dead,
After long weeks of solitude &mdash; I bore
My deathly prison, and thy woes no more.

"Ask you, my Emma, why an imag'd ghost
With wild device I shock'd thy gentle sight?
Emma!  thy tenderness I once have lost&mdash;
Emma!  my purpose was not vain and light&mdash;
Stern is my mind, perchance, and clouds of night
At times my tott'ring reason may have crost&mdash;
But never wilt thou now the dream forget!
Emma, revive!  we shall be happy yet!"

"We shall, my lord!  chastis'd by grief and shame,
I paid the last sad tribute to thy tomb&mdash;
Soft penitential tears my soul reclaim,
And smiles disperse their salutary gloom!
I see a glorious prospect gild my doom,
Yes, yes, I feel recover'd joy and fame,
Far brighter than before my years shall roll,
And unimagin'd blessings sooth my soul.

"We'll range together this sequester'd wood,
And not an hour shall witness us apart;
Calm, as the current of yon glassy flood,
Shall flow th' obedient feelings of my heart:
A long farewell to miserable art!
Welcome, thou guardian of the wise and good,
Welcome, immortal nature, to my breast,
And thus in Edgar's arms I'll sink to happy rest!"

The lady spoke &mdash; and Edgar's gladden'd eye
Beheld her soften'd heart, her charms improv'd;
Hail'd the blest work of heav'nly agency,
The new-born virtue of the fair he lov'd.&mdash;
In one pure course their future moments mov'd,
Nor wish'd for change but such as books supply;
Books, that at home the world's rude dangers teach,
As glasses show the shipwreck from the beach.

To quick and ready minds 'twere dull to tell,
How baffled Algernon's loquacious squire,
(By whose vain tongue his guilty master fell)
Confess'd at court that knight's malignant ire;
And how he long had sought with foul desire
To win the bride her Edgar lov'd so well&mdash;
'Twere dull to tell the swift-decided cause,
Or boast my country's safeguard in her laws

My country!  glorious was thy old renown,
When fear-struck France beheld thy Edward reign;
But, from those ancient days descending down,
Full gladly would I sing in fervent Strain,
(But that th' aspiring song were pour'd in vain)
The later honours of Britannia's crown!
But ah!  neglect and penury attend
The Muse's child, who has no better friend.

Forgive me, gentle Love!  thy soothing smile
In want, in misery attends the Muse;
Th' sweet communion can her days beguile,
And o'er her couch ethereal dreams diffuse!
Sweet, as the tear that Emma's cheek bedews,
As, sitting by her lord, she feels the while
Divine philosophy's consoling balm,
Remembering stormy seas in safety's harbour calm.
