Mysterious visitant!  whose beauteous light
Among the wondering stars so strangely gleams;
Like a proud banner of the train of Night.
The unblazoned flag of Deity it streams;
Infinity is written in thy beams;
And Thought in vain would thro' the pathless sky
Explore thy secret course; thy circle seems
Too vast for Time to grasp: &mdash; O can that eye
Which numbers hosts like thee, this atom earth descry?

O Thou my every hope, my only fear;
Father of Lights, round whom the systems roll,
With all their Suns and Comets, sphere on sphere,
Thy all-pervading energy, the soul.
Thyself the centre of the mighty whole!
When Death shall purge the film of sense away,
And Truth with irresistible control
Shall seize my ravish'd mind, &mdash; that awful day
How shall my soul sustain, &mdash; the infinite survey?

Then shall I shudder at the guilty past,
And feel thy awful presence on my heart:
Was it at thee, O God, my sins I cast?
Oh!  on my trembling soul thy mercy dart,
For now I feel how terrible thou art!
Thou wert All-present, and I saw thee not;
Thou art my bliss, and yet I said, "Depart;"
Murmured, tho' boundless mercy fixed my lot:&mdash;
And wilt thou own the soul that thee so oft forget?

O wond'rous thought, the high and holy One,
Inhabiting Eternity, will make
The humble soul his dwelling place; the sun
Whose rising beams on orbs innumerous break,
Doth shine as much for the poor reptile's sake;
To HIM is nothing great &mdash; is nothing small;
He fills a world, &mdash; he bids the insect take
His being full of bliss; &mdash; he formed them all;
He guides the Comet's course, &mdash; He marks the Sparrow's fall.

Man &mdash; Man, tho' in the dust his insect birth,
Beholds his nature unto God allied,
Link'd to the golden throne this creature earth
By ties that shall eternally abide;
Let suns, let systems perish &mdash; Jesus died;
Nor shall one vital spark be quenched in night,
Which God has kindled: &mdash; Here my soul confide,
Safe in the arms of everlasting Might,
And circled with the beams of uncreated Light.
