CANTO I.
Some men there are, cold as the winter's snow,
Whose souls were never touched by poet's strain,
Rapt in the sacred beam, from earth below,
And ride aloft oh heaven's azure main;
Or laid supine, upon a flowery bed,
Along the banks of some clear gravelly brook,
Think oft he hears the water nymph's soft tread,
Who has to gain his love, her native stream forsook.

Let them enjoy, through life, their life less calm,
I cannot envy their ignoble lot,
No feeling friend, helps out the dreary span,
And soon as laid in grave, they are forgot.
For them no child sheds oft the pearly tear,
Or Sorrow pales her once full blooming cheek,
And when inhumed, each village hind forbears,
To gather wild flowers oft, their new made mounds to deck.

From youthful lines like these, let such refrain,
And may the work, neglected, lay unread;
But you, enamour'd, of the poet's strain,
Who love his scenes of beauty, and of dread,
For you I write; come, read this early lay,
Yet come not armed for critic's fierce assault;
But scan with friendship, what I here display;
A youth has wrote these lines, and youth is full of fault.

Upon those banks, where Garonne's silver stream,
Progresses on, with irremitting way,
Once dwelt the present hero of my theme,
And there he passed his early life away;
A youth he was, ORLANDO was his name;
Not deeply skilled in human lore was he:
But yet some little science might he claim,
And he was ably skill'd in heavenly minstrelsy.

His antiquated father, once had been
A minstrel, of the old Provencal line,
And who, before him, lords and knights had seen
Melt at the pleasing sadness of his strain.
Or when he chose to sound a nobler lyre,
And sing the deeds heroic chiefs had done;
Quick every bosom thrills with warlike fire,
And emulates the fame which they had ably won.

But now, Orlando was his only care,
(And oft he thought he was a noble youth,)
Of glittering vice he taught him to beware,
And fix'd the seeds of virtue and of truth.
I ween Orlando was no vulgar boy,
And Fancy's fairest garb was o'er him hung,
For him were scenes of visionary joy,
And to those visions sweet, his wild harp often rung.

To him was every charm of nature sweet,
Whether it was beautiful, or was sublime,
At early day, he rose the sun to greet,
Or sung his native songs, in simple rhyme;
Or wandering on the Garonne's verdant side,
With limes embower'd, or weeping-willows hung.
Whose pendent branches, drank the rippling tide,
Or flitting on whose boughs, the feather'd minstrels sung.

Here oft reclined, beneath the arching vines,
That formed o'erhead, a high luxuriant bower,
He read some native poet's amorous lines,
Or twin'd around his harp, full many a flower,
That grew in rich profusion every where;
When sudden strike as will'd his fancy wild
His decorated harp, with many an air,
That through his answering bosom sweetly thrill'd.

Now is he silent.  Hark!  the echoes round,
Reverb'rate softly through the distant hills,
And distance gave them, far, a sweeter sound,
Join'd to the babbling of the crystal rills.
A melancholy moraliser oft was he,
On the green swelling bank his head reclin'd,
While the fair streamlet murmur'd far away,
Such were the feelings of his youthful mind;

"See yonder leaf, upon the dimpled stream,
Borne by its lucid tide, afar away,
And such, alas!  is Life's quick fading dream,
Man the possessor of a cloudy day;
Ah!  soon he feels Misfortune's iron hand
Tear him away, from his uncertain tree,
Borne down the horrid wave, by Death's fierce band,
And quickly borne away from earthly misery.

"But why, (he sudden cried) should man repine,
Why should anticipation chill the present hour,
Is not fair Hope's all-cheering power thine,
To grant her aid, when darkening tempests lower?
Is not to thee, the angel Fancy given,
Wherewith to soar beyond this grovelling earth,
To mount the whirlwind, ride aloft to heaven,
Or even in this world, give joy immortal birth?"

Such thoughts as these soon cheer'd his vigorous mind;
Before young Fancy, Melancholy flew,
Then his light soul no earthly bounds confin'd,
Quick from his eyes terrestrial scenes withdrew.
But soon, alas!  the pleasing frenzy's o'er,
Yet still remains his soaring heart sublimed;
Nature's mild views are pleasing now no more,
And soon he leaves his seat, sublimer scenes to find.

Then would he gain some spot of nature wild,
Where rugged cliffs, in awful grandeur rise,
Where rocks on rocks, in savage splendour smil'd,
Or frowning, rear'd their summits in the skies.
Through yonder rift that yawning earthquakes made
Hoarse dashing down, the 'whelming torrent pours,
Now on the base in foaming white array'd,
Then winding through the steep, the current roughly roars.

Or gain some dell, where Alpine heights arise,
Where nought was heard to break the silence deep,
Save the bold eagle soaring in the skies,
Save the wild chamois bounding up the steep;
Or hoary goats upon the mountain's brow;
Here some reclin'd, abroad there others stray'd,
A moving speck on the eternal snow,
While all around them clouds, and shadowy billows play'd.

Dear was to him, the hour of early morn,
When every flower puts on its bloom anew,
Each shrub, with sweet fresh blossoms is adorned,
And every lime-tree glitters with the dew.
Adown the dale, the smoking streamlets glide,
With ruddy tints the misty mountain glows,
Hark, from the trees that grow on every side
How sweet upon his car the birds' wild music flows.

The milk-maid carols forth her simple lay,
The brisk young peasant whistles o'er his plough,
The shepherd drives his snowy flock away,
Or tunes his lute beneath some shady bough.
Oft would he now some eminence ascend,
Where the old Pyrenees majestic rise,
While all around him loveliest views extend,
Expanding far and wide before his admiring eyes.

The silver stream, that trickles by his feet,
Then dashing, foaming o'er the rocks does run,
Through laughing meads, it now meanders sweet,
Now lost in shade, now shining in the sun.
By trees embower'd adown in yonder glade,
Reflected in the stream the village lays,
And just beyond, the school with whitened pale,
That oft in early youth, had seen his sportive plays.

Then farther on, o'er many an orchard green,
And yellow field, and many a verdant mead,
There where the forest's darkening shade is seen,
The warlike castle lifts its towering head,
Its turrets frowning o'er the forest brown;
Unhurt, as yet by Time's destroying hand,
Which oft within its massy walls has known
Its owner's noble tread, a prince of high renown.

Then distant far, the scene extended wide,
Here cities rising from the vernal plain,
There villages, some rural stream beside;
Here rivers wandering to the azure main,
With sails expanded on their bosom clear;
Old castles stood, on many a cliff sublime,
Old abbeys' walls, in distant view appear,
And numerous low chateaus, embosom'd round with lime.

Sweet was the morn, and pleasant was the hour,
And not a cloud obscured the cheerful sun,
Orlando's mind soon felt its balmy power,
From contemplation mild he thus begun:
"Cold is the heart, cold as the mountain snow,
That cannot Nature's loveliest scenes enjoy,
While all around him, softest flowrets blow,
Can grovelling earthly views his wand'ring mind employ.

"Dearer to me is the lov'd hour of morn,
Than kingly titles, or than kingly power,
Than all the honours of a golden crown,
The glittering pageants of the heartless hour;
The sheep-bell tinkling in the distant fold,
The lowing herds, in yonder greensward vale,
The shepherd's pipe, who seated, I behold,
Near yonder water-fall, that murmurs through the glade."

Oft did he wander at the dewy eve,
When Sol's red beams were sinking in the west,
And hastening home, the ploughman then does leave
His brightened share, to seek for home and rest,
With weary step, the shepherd trudges on,
The school-boys frolic o'er the village green,
The rural lass, before her shady home,
Sings forth her cheerful lay, and whirls her spinning-wheel.

The chattering swallows circle through the air,
And dusky twilight holds the eastern skies,
The western mountains ruddy summits bear;
Soft o'er the woods the silver moon does rise,
And sweetly sleeps upon the bank around,
Her mellow light reclines on tree and bower;
The lofty trees give not a ruffling sound,
But all is silent now, just like the midnight hour.

Then would he wander to some haunted spot,
Where fabled ghosts, by peasants oft were seen,
A place renown'd for many a murderous plot,
Where many a traveller's blood had stain'd the green.
Here would he sit and quickly here would hie,
Formed by his airy mind, "from airy nought,"
A thousand flitting forms, of blackest die,
With crimes so dark and deep as terrified e'en thought.

When black and dismal, loud the night wind pour'd,
Electric light'nings flash'd across the sky,
Through the dark heavens, the conscious thunder roar'd,
And screaming sea-gulls, raised their horrid cry,
Then would he see, upon the murky air,
The lurid witches on the light'ning ride;
Each blast of wind a thousand fiends did bear,
And dismal shriek'd the ghosts that flitted by their side.

When sweet the moon-light on the green bank lay,
(He view'd) disporting on the crystal dew,
The blithsome fairies at their nightly play,
As through the mazy dance they swiftly flew.
When loud and chill the wintry winds did roar,
With fellow school-mates seated all around,
Hear'd tales of old traditionary lore,
While yet his infant mind did tremble at the sound.

When ruby gold bedew'd the western heaven,
He travell'd oft, near ocean's waves to be;
The snowy sails, before the light breeze driven,
On the blue bosom of the sparkling sea;
Sweet was the dash of waves the shore along,
The dipping oars were heard adown the tide,
The rustic fisher sung his simple song,
While the soft lute did sound from distant vessel's side.

The vintage season blithe to him was dear,
When all the country shone with fruit around,
And the bright products of the plenteous year,
Blush'd on each vine, with ruby liquours crown'd.
Laden with baskets now the rustics come,
Quick from the curling vines the grapes are borne,
With their rich spoil the labourers hasten home,
And press the ruddy juice, against the winter storm.

But evening comes, and now the work is o'er,
Sinks in the Atlantic wave, the cheerful sun,
And every peasant at his cottage door,
Joys that the autumnal toil at length is done.
Soon as the crescent moon, from orient skies,
Rises, in silver majesty serene,
From their low cottage seats they all arise,
And joining in a band, they gain the village green.

Soft plays the moonlight on the checker'd grass,
The dulcet lute, and tabor gently sound;
Each simple rustic takes his blushing lass,
And meets the dancers standing all around.
The merry piper plays the favourite tune,
With nimble feet they tread the dewy green,
Quick fly the couple till their turn is done,
Then other rural maids and smiling lads are seen.

Their ancient parents, on the oaken seat,
Scan all their actions with a heartfelt joy,
Muse on the time, when they were quite as fleet,
And when such pleasures did their hearts employ;
Tell the lov'd actions of their early days,
(Sweet tales of memory ever, ever dear,)
Point to the spot the scene of youthful plays,
While on their aged cheeks oft glitter'd many a tear.

Aye would Orlando join the sportive dance,
Or watch the gladness sparkling in their eyes,
As they tripped down with all the naive of France,
Dressed in their habits neat, of various dies.
Such scenes as these, he thought could touch the heart,
Raise gladness e'en on Melancholy's brow;
For all their charms kind Nature did impart,
And lovely is the grace that does from Nature flow.

But man is oft deceived by tinsel's glare,
And thinks that happiness in riches dwell,
Deceiv'd by Grandeur's proud and haughty air,
Her swelling titles on his ear sound well.
Why foolish man repining at thy lot,
Does Discontent not dwell in gaudy dress!
Then let aspiring dreams be all forgot,
For know, to be content is thy true happiness.

But few there are upon this ball of earth,
That know Contentment's pure and perfect state,
Fain all would be nobility by birth,
Or by ambitious actions would be great.
Some would again the part of Caesar act,
And stain with blood the fertile fields of Gaul,
With smiling eye view cities burn'd and sack'd,
While prostrate o'er the land the murder'd millions fall.

Horrid ambition, that can raise a throne,
From sanguine heaps of fellow mortals slain,
Rather by doing good, oh!  gain a crown,
Then thou art worthy honours, let them rain.
To ameliorate the suff'rings of mankind,
From aged Sorrow's eye to wipe the tear,
To raise the weary and afflicted mind,
Are acts that well deserve a noble praise to bear.

Such as great Howard, in the latter days,
In heavenly charity has dared to do;
Be thou humane, and follow all his ways,
Pursue a path, 'tis worthy to pursue.
May oft as rises pale the evening star,
The village maids around his tomb repair,
Shed on the green turf oft the paly tear,
Spread flowers o'er his sod, the sweetest of the year.

Here pause my youthful lyre, here pause awhile,
Let all thy quiv'ring strings be lain aside,
Should fair Columbia now but deign to smile,
Their youthful poet's hopes are gratified.
Forgive, my country, oh!  forgive my choice,
Of foreign theme, for this my first essay;
Should I dare rouse again poetic voice,
Then will I sing of thee, and all my tribute pay.

CANTO II.
Ah!  what a variegated scene is human life!
Here sweetest vales, extent of purest joy;
Dear vales, with every human blessing rise;
There troubled views, of deep distress annoy.
Such is our lot; why then does man expect
Unsullied pleasure, in each future hour:
Vain worm of earth, why dost thou not reflect:
See'st thou, not oft, the rise and fall of earthly power?

But grieve not sore, at this thy common doom,
So clouds and sunshine, checker every day;
Though prospects, sad, thy present landscape gloom,
Soon will they flee, and brightest sunbeams play:
Fair Hope attends, like evening's beaming star,
The cheer and solace of our devious way,
Points happier views, advancing from afar,
E'en o'er the mourner's face, reflects a sprightly ray.

But who can see, and yet not feel some gloom
Steal o'er his mind, to view young genius fall,
Unwept, unheeded, to his clay cold tomb,
And not a friend to bear his dusky pall.
Such a mean fate thy tow'ring soul disdain'd,
Oh!  Chatterton, the pride of British song,
By one rash act, an early death obtain'd,
Fled from a guilty world, all conscious of thy wrong.

The sun's last ray proclaim'd the approach of even,
The dew drops sparkled, on the velvet green,
While roseate gold shone in the western heaven,
And cast its hue, on mountains in between.
On Garonne's flowery banks, there was a grove,
Where cypress green, and bending willows rose,
A sacred spot, to melancholy love.
And here Orlando led, his father followed close.

In that sweet spot, the verdant willow rows
Form round the monument a mournful shade,
With ever pendant, ever weeping boughs;
See the wild brook, that dashes through the glade,
Sweetly meand'ring through the blooming trees;
This was the place that held his mother's tomb:
And oft the murmuring brook, and sighing breeze,
Seem'd sadly to lament her beauties' early doom.

Sweet is the tear, that from affection flows,
In brilliant dew drops, trickling from the eye.
His father here would think on all his woes,
And heave for her he lov'd, the frequent sigh;
Aye recollect, when first, in Spanish bowers,
He woo'd the maid, then blooming, fresh, and young,
How swift and pleasant, pass'd those joyful hours,
When love was all he breath'd from his enraptured tongue.

'Twas to this sacred spot the way he led;
And now they gain'd the monumental stone:
"Sit down my son, Orlando, here he said,
And listen to my tale of times now gone:
Long have I kept you in this staid retreat,
Distant from courts, and busy men's rough noise;
Now then, 'tis time this unknown world to greet,
Partake its numerous ills, or share its nobler joys."

"But why," Orlando cried, "why must we part?
Why must I leave thee, father, kind and good?
Who thy gray locks will comb, or sooth thy heart,
Wipe from thy furrowed cheek, the briny flood;
Who with sweet flowers, this sacred spot will grace,
When morning's sun beams gild the eastern skies?
I cannot leave thee, father, leave this place,
To seek a guilty world you taught me to despise."

"Forbear, my son, forbear to touch my heart!
Know then that thou art born of noble blood;
To gain thy honours due 'tis now we part,
And thou must be a knight, right brave and good;
Wouldst thou then live a hind's ignoble life?
Cast off such thoughts, and seek the fields of glory,
Urge thy fell way through many a lordly strife,
A son of mine must live in fame and future story."

"You boil my blood, my father, I will go,
Pursue my way through glory's noble course,"
"Then hear, my son, a lengthen'd tale of wo,
And how my all was lost by guilty force:
Of fraudful man, my son, you must beware,
Though honour dwells in many a noble breast,
Yet still Deceit hold forth her gilded snare,
Each on the other preys, Vice is in Virtue drest.

"I dwelt in youth near Ebro's merry shore,
Of Arragonia's fairest maid possest,
And many a happy day, I thought in store,
In all my heart could wish supremely blest;
Frowning with antique grandeur soar'd my towers,
In vegitated splendour spread my plains,
Checker'd with palm trees green, and orange bowers;
Few were the Spanish lords that own'd such rich domains.

"Then held the regal sway a noble king,
In all his actions kind, and truly just,
Ah!  whence again, shall e'er his equal spring,
For he, alas, lies slumbering in the dust:
I soon obtain'd, and felt his matchless love,
For I esteem'd the heroic deeds of youth,
This arm then nerv'd, not oft in vain I strove,
The foremost knight in war, the foremost knight in truth.

"One eve all Nature spread her brightest bloom,
Around in clusters grew the roses wild,
The fragrant breath of May shed sweet perfume,
All in lone dell, where the blue violet smil'd,
O'er the dark woods, the setting sun beams stray'd,
The sturdy shepherd on the green hedge hung,
Saw the dun mountains cast a longer shade,
Or lov'd to hear the blackbird whistle forth his song.

"O'er the calm lake, the breathing zephyrs stray'd,
Its bosom ruffled by the dashing oar,
Or where alone the glossy wild duck play'd,
Or gain'd with paddling feet, the grassy shore;
Rose the bland moon, the eastern hills above,
The breeze was still, and every noise was stay'd,
Save the sweet accents of the voice of Love,
Soft whisper'd to the lass beneath the palm tree shade.

"Then we walk'd forth these pleasing scenes to view;
Fond on my arm, my raptured lady hung,
O'er all her works, her eye sweet Nature drew,
She listen'd soft, while Philomela sung.
Whence came that piercing scream?  our heads we rais'd,&mdash;
A dreadful sight struck on our doubting eyes,
In one red flame, our ancient castle blaz'd&mdash;
Sunk Anna in these arms, that shook with dread surprise.

"Now shrieks and shouts, in mingled tumult rose;
But, hark, that foot fall quick!  'twas Jacques came,
'Ah!  fly my lord,' he cried, 'the worst of foes&mdash;
Ah!  fly, a fiend more dread than yonder flame:
A tyrant's bands each avenue defend.'
Quick from its sheath, my trusty blade I drew,
Resolv'd on conquering, or a noble end.
Leave Anna here to die, I caught her up and fled.

"Through gloomy woods, my faithful Jacques led;
Louder and louder, rose the shouts behind,
Swifter o'er many a hill and dale we fled,
As swift as though we rode upon the wind.
Now tir'd we sat us on a mountain high,
Then lay the dreary way, we came in sight,
The castle flaming, burnish'd all the sky,
And heav'd and flash'd the lake intolerably bright.

"Ah!  who can think upon the days of youth,
When all was beauty, all was innocence,
When every thought, and every word was truth,
Nor at the thought, one sacred tear dispense.
Bright were those scenes where first my breath I drew,
And Nature smiled, beauty was ever nigh,
All, all are gone, for beauty quickly flew,
And clouds of ashes darken all the evening sky.

"Forgive the lengthen'd story of old age.
With morning rose a village to our view,
Here Jacques bought a minstrel's equipage,
For Anna dear, a ploughman's garb of blue;
Here too he learnt, with sorrow in his eye,
Our noble king, had been dethron'd and kill'd,
That me, and other lords, were doom'd to die,
Sworn faithful to our prince, in battle ably skill'd.

"At home no longer could I now remain,
But sought, in my disguise, the land of France;
My little harp procured us bread in Spain,
What time I softly play'd the evening dance;
At length I reach'd thy flowery banks, Garonne,
And built my mansion on yon curving swell;
Jacques is dead, alas!  my Anna's gone,
And thou alone remainst, to take my last farewell."

He paus'd &mdash; fell down his cheek the tear,
Then thus pursued the history of his life:
"A stranger knight, last eve came here,
And brought a tale, with pleasing wonders rife.
The lords rebel against the usurping chief,
And wish my son to join their gallant force,
With morning's sun, haste to dear Spain's relief,
Clad in thy armour bright, on yonder prancing horse.

"Go then, my son, as duke of old Castile,
These papers all the rest will tell.
Oh!  what a fluttering at my heart I feel,
Catch me, Orlando, in thy arms &mdash; farewell."
Steel firm thy heart, oh!  man, 'gainst ill,
In this dark world is sorrow mixt with joy,
Submit submissive to the eternal will.
Orlando's all was gone, he was an orphan boy.

Aye the soft tear, fell glittering from his eye,
To think him dead, who watch'd his infant hours,
Lov'd his wild prattle, when on tending knee,
Or deckt his little breast with blooming flowers,
Who taught him first, fair Nature's works to love,
Or more sublime, her savage scenery wild;
Or listen'd to his harp in orange grove,
And on his first attempts with approbation smil'd.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Now on his prancing horse, he darts afar,
All his fair limbs in beaming mail array'd,
Floated his lofty plumes in ambient air,
Round his bright helm, a blazing radiance play'd,
Yet still he linger'd on the mountain height,
And cast a wishful, tender look behind,
The village cots, his ancient home in sight,
The lov'd companions there, rush on his melting mind.

He turn'd and look'd upon the mountains then,
Oft had he wander'd o'er yon misty hills,
Or silent roving through the lonely glen,
Heard the far dashing, of the lucid rills:
Oft had he climb'd to yonder haggart scenes,
Lov'd the wild rocks for each fantastic form,
But more delightful, to these youthful dreams
When o'er the darken'd heights, lower'd the thunder storm.

Long did he travel o'er the hills forlorn,
Where nought was heard upon the breezy gale,
Save the loud echoes, from the bugle horn
Of the wild hunter, rushing through the dale,
Chasing the ibex up the steepy hill,
Or howling on the wind his bandogs grim.
Trailing her shadows far, came evening still,
Purpled the snowy heights, crimson'd far ocean's stream.

Now gloomy night began to spread around;
Yet still Orlando climb'd the giddy steep,
Startled by rocks, that tumbling far profound,
Sent sullen echoes from the dashing deep.
And nought appear'd, save in the distant glen,
Flash'd its red glare around, the gipsy fire,
On savage rocks, or still more savage men,
And aye the quivering light made darkness still more dire.

The mountains now were pass'd, the effulgent morn
Glow'd on the Spanish heights, fresh blew the gale,
Yet still he wander'd, through a wild forlorn,
Where briars grew, or bushes fill'd the dale:
Sudden a bloomy lawn appear'd in view,
And blazed the rising sun through yonder trees,
'Twas fragrant perfume, where the flow'rets grew,
And sung the feath'ry choir, melodious on the breeze.

A darkling stream soft murmur'd through the grove,
Then gleaming distant in the enamel'd vale.
Who could see yonder maid, and yet not love,
Or the sweet poison with his breath inhale,
That ruby lip, and aye that downy cheek,
Those melting eyes, cast on the sparkling ground,
Her aubern hair, darken'd a charming neck,
So sweet a form as hers, no zone before had bound.

With back half bent, and hand upon his breast,
And modest look, (his beaver thrown aside,)
This beaming maid, in accents soft addrest;
She blush'd as sweet, as Provence rose beside.
"Tell me, fair lady, where count Delsa dwells,
Lives he afar, from these cool blooming bowers?"
"I am his child; these are my native hills,
Follow me stranger, then, to yonder lofty towers."

How odorous was the gale across the mead,
From rosemary, or lavender, or thyme,
Or where the gorse its golden blossoms spread,
Orlando felt the influence of the clime;
Cast many a side long glance upon the maid,
Enraptured as they walk'd In converse sweet,
How fleeting was to him the time they stray'd,
For they at length had reach'd the wide spread castle gate.

The noble chieftain's presence soon they won,
The knight his father's ring and papers gave;
He look'd:  was startled:  "Art thou Castile's son.
Where is he?  Why those tears?  he is in his grave&mdash;
Ah!  has the friend, of infant hours fled&mdash;
Cast off this wo, we seek the field of war,
This eve; and midst the dying and the dead,
We crown our youthful king; or death we nobly dare.

"When in infantine days, then blythe and light,
Our children we betroth'd, our race to join,
Seest thou my daughter there?  my heart's delight.
Gain her consent alone, and she is thine."
Now heaven and rapture, in his face was blent,
He caught her hand, and on his knee addrest;
She blush'd like crimson eve, yet smil'd consent,
Their hands together join'd, kneeling they both are blest.

How soon the time arrived when they must go.
Mounted aloft, upon their champing steeds,
Elvira waved her hand of lily snow;
They clatter'd along o'er the sounding meads:
Fair groves of verdent cork trees rose in view,
And spread the oaks, their leaves forever green,
And sweet the vales, where the silk cistus grew,
Where amaryllis bright, or jonquils gay were seen.

And now afar, across the level plain,
Gay in the air, the streamers were afloat,
Soon was in ken the camp of warlike Spain,
And sounded shrill the martial music's note:
Frequent was heard the crash of beamy spears;
The ancient soldier lean'd upon his arms,
Or scatter'd in the groups; nor death he fears,
Nor combat's fiercest shock, nor all wild war's alarms.

Here as I write, near Trenton's glassy stream,
And think on all the horrors of a war,
Methinks I see the distant watchfire gleam,
Or hear the death shriek darting from afar:
Or as I walk along thy orchard hill,
Now gloomy night has all things overcast,
Departed ghosts obedient to my will,
Scream on the darkling flood, or ride the enfuriate blast.

Here died, perhaps, full many a noble youth,
Whom Genius warmed with her extatic flame,
Whom Science might have taught her noblest truth,
Fell'd by the stroke of death without a name.
And here, perhaps, some one who might have grasp'd
The sword of empire, or led armies on,
Fell his ambition in the scathing blast,
And the long waving grass his monument alone.

Will you sweet maids who deck Trentonia's bowers,
Attentive listen to your poet's lay,
Oft has he past with you the pleasant hours,
Well pleas'd to hear your frolic accents gay.
To rove with you 'twas sweet o'er meadows bland,
When soft the gale from clover field has blown,
Enchanting L****, with her lily hand,
Would playful wish to deck, my brows with myrtle crown.
