'Tis not to swell a father's poignant woe,
Or wound the wretched with an idle song,
I bid the mournful numbers now to flow,
That to Bellona's louder harp belong;
And has she left the world's unworthy throng,
To hold with angel essences her sway,
To breathe the lovely hierarchy among,
Eternity's interminable day,
Far from unruly strife, and man's mistaken way?

E'en now mine ears the heavenly accents meet,
Seeming like airs that sweep Venetian skies,
"Mourn not for the departed, &mdash; she will greet
The Father, as to eternity she flies!
Suppress the tears of those impassion'd eyes,
In lovelier realms thy saintly mother reigns,
Free from the world, its torments and its sighs,
Where one just Power immortally sustains
Her pure, unspotted soul, releas'd from all its pains!"

But it is hard, in life's most lovely hour,
To feel the tenderer bonds of nature riven;
To feel the wrath of death's gigantic pow'r,
Part the fond soul, tho' destin'd to its heaven!
Why has it bloom'd 'till now? &mdash; 'till now why thriven,
If in its prosperous beauty it must fade?
Ah!  wherefore, wherefore was the treasure given,
If all its worth must vanish to a shade,
In that most pressing hour which call'd for all its aid?

And will those pleasant times no more return,
When seated round their winter-evening's fire,
Without one wretched incident to mourn,
The tender parents saw their hopes aspire?
Oh!  'twere in vain, thou sorrow-breathing lyre!
To paint their joys, in such an hour divine,
Far sweeter numbers wou'd the theme require
Than ever warbled from a harp like mine,
Whose inharmonious tones no soothing pow'rs combine.

Calm and unclouded, like the summer sky,
Here shone the spirit that to Heaven hath flown,
Maternal passion glowing in her eye,
And in her breast a meekness rarely known;
Her gentle nature knew not anger's frown,
And from her lips reproof with softness fell,
Oh!  might I make her virtues all my own,
And praising her's, my own perfections tell,
Which few shall ever peer, and none can e'er excel!

Her various worth the muse may ne'er proclaim,
She was the star of a sublimer sphere,
Diffusing life and peace where'er she came,
Where'er she held her promising career!
To every virtuous bosom she was dear,
And every tongue will answer in her praise,
And o'er her tomb compassion shed the tear,
As she reverts to those delightful days,
Those calm domestic hours, on which she loves to gaze.

Her's were the charms that triumph and delight,
That spread a glorious sunshine on our days,
Not the mean glitter that confounds the sight,
A transient hour, and then for e'er decays:
Her's were the pure, the heav'n-descending rays
Of virtue, meekness, piety and sense,
And not the slippery, false, exterior blaze
Of worldly beauty; &mdash; her's was the excellence
Of fond maternal care, and just benevolence.

Yet, oh!  restrain, thou woe-enamour'd Lyre!
Thy melancholy numbers, &mdash; and impart
Joy to her sad survivors, &mdash; and inspire
With nobler hopes the sorrow-laden heart;
Say that in Heav'n she acts a better part,
And that she does, her earthly manners tell,
And with thy sweet and soul-entrancing art,
Teach every gentle breast no more to swell,
For her who lives in bliss, where none but Angels dwell.
