Slow down the heav'ns, with smiling pomp, once more
The sunbeams languish in the purple west;
The distant summits, feebly gilded o'er,
Warn the tir'd lab'rer to his couch of rest:
Along the vale, while flits the cooling breeze,
Their evening track his homeward steps renew,
To where, embower'd amid the tufted trees,
His straw-thatch'd cottage rises on the view&mdash;
The glad repast, the slumber void of care,
And peace, and social love, shall throng to meet him there!

Yet still luxuriant breathe the rich perfumes,
In fragrant wildness from the meads upborne,&mdash;
Ere the moist flow'rs have hid their latest blooms,
And shut their leaves to waken with the morn;
And ah!  how sweetly on the gales around,&mdash;
Yon tangled thicket's echoing shades among,&mdash;
The distant blackbird pours, with mellow sound,
The dulcet warbles of his farewell song:&mdash;
Creation smiles with joy, and seems to raise
One tributary hymn, one universal praise!

Now faint and fainter, from the village green,
The rural murmurs gently steal away,
A deep'ning grandeur wraps the sylvan scene,
And pensive silence lulls the dying day;
The downy flocks are gath'ring to the fold,
The whistling ploughboy to his shed retires,
Approaching twilight veils the setting gold,
And glimm'ring stars emerge their lambent fires:
Wide o'er the plains soft-gliding shadows creep,
Smooth'd is the brow of toil, and nature sinks to sleep.

Hail, placid hour!  when Meditation flies
From scenes of folly, and the haunts of men,
To trace the wonders of the glitt'ring skies,
Or muse unheeded in the darksome glen&mdash;
Anxious alike the busy world to leave,
With her I haste to share thy blest controul;
And smitten with thy charms, delightful Eve!
To lure those tranquil raptures to my soul
Which stole upon my breast in earlier years,
When flattering hope beguil'd, and laugh'd away my tears.

Though fled, and past recall, those blissful days,
'Tis thine, oh Memory!  of power supreme,
With secret magic influence to raise
The noonday rev'rie, and the midnight dream:
And oft, in mute submission to thy will,
My airy footsteps roam the walks between,
Where nodding Beechgrove tops the verdant hill,
And frowns majestic o'er the woodland scene&mdash;
There wand'ring, first the sportive muse I woo'd,
Amid the leafy bow'rs of sylvan solitude!

And dear rememb'rance pictures oft again
The shady coverts and the lone retreats,
Where virtuous Bathurst rules the wide domain,
And lavish nature flings her choicest sweets.
Delightful haunts!  in mem'ry ever fair
Ye blossom still,  and with your loveliest dress,
Such as when free from ev'ry busy care,
I've plung'd amid your darksome wilderness;
And oft my ramble check'd, awhile to trace,
Your rustling foliage wave, in summer's parting grace!

Ah!  well might Fancy weave her chaplets then,
And lull with fairy hopes that joyous smil'd,
Nor reason whisper, as they told of men,
The painted Eden was a thorny wild:
And well might simple strains attune my tongue
Where ev'ry charm the kindling bosom fir'd;
Approving beauty listen'd as I sung,
And friendship's cherish'd what the muse inspir'd&mdash;
But time, unpitying, with funeral knell
Dissolv'd the blissful trance, and burst the golden spell.

Yet why should mem'ry weep that, frowning, Truth,
So early chac'd the mock'ries of delight,
The idle dreams that flush'd the cheek of youth,
And glitter'd baneful on the dazzled sight?
She hath not murder'd hope, though distant far
And trembling at her voice, with drooping plume
Gay fancy flies; nor quench'd that better star
Whose radiant orb can cheer the wintry gloom&mdash;
Where sacred virtue rears her hallow'd nest,
There peace shall linger still, companion of the breast!

Hope yet survives; and ah!  though faded now
The gilded Paradise of other years,
Oft blazing beauteous o'er her saddest brow
Triumphant lustre sparkles through her tears&mdash;
Must ev'ry vision perish that would plan
Terrestial bliss &mdash; no refuge here be giv'n
To shield the lovely visitant of man?&mdash;
Then, lo!  on seraph wing she mounts to heav'n!
Rave, rave ye fiends of sorrow, and despair,
Thy madd'ning vengeance hurl &mdash; ye cannot wound her there!
