When sorrow wakes the sad and silent tear,
And sickness flings around her mournful gloom;
When fancy droops her wing, as truth severe
Frowns on the joys which she hath bid to bloom;
And hope, the torn companion of her doom,
Turns far from earthly things her streaming eye,
And fain would lift the soul beyond the tomb;
Ah!  then how sweet, as from her native sky,
Are heard the seraph tones of heav'nly sympathy!

Oh!  it is their's to bid the mourner rest,
To cheer the heart no other sounds may cheer,
To wake to ectasy the  thrilling breast,
All as they rise celestial on the ear,
Bearing the soul above her mortal sphere:
Yes!  for their sake, she'll bless the present ill;
And treasure up in many an after year,
When other pangs may pierce, and sorrows chill
The ever sacred sound, and be enraptur'd still.

Thus bending thoughtful o'er her humble lyre,
As with its trembling strings she rudely play'd,
The grateful muse, too daring, would aspire
Some less unworthy tribute to have paid
To one whose fostering praise hath frequent bade
The light of pleasure glisten in here eye;
But ah!  in vain her feeble hand essay'd;
And, with the conscious sounds that trembled by,
Mingled her bosom's deep, but unavailing sigh.

Yet deem not those from whose inspired shell
Genius and virtue breathe the living strain,
Deem not the tones which late were heard to swell,
Died on the gale unheeded, &mdash; that in vain
To soothe to peace the wearied breast of pain
Thy numbers flow'd; oh!  deem not, tho' unknown,
That thou hast sung to one who could restrain
The warm tear's gratitude, when sad and lone
She heard sweet pity's pray'r ascend to mercy's throne.

No!  ever dear will be that hallow'd sound!
Dear as the memory of pleasures past,
When darkly roars the wintry tempest round,
And shrinks the shudd'ring spirit all aghast.
And oft the silent tear-drop, falling fast,
Will speak the inward feelings of the soul;
Will softly whisper that while life shall last,
And pensive memory hold her fond control,
There is no gloom so drear, but it may well console.

Nor was it vain, that secret, "holy prayer,"
Heav'n bless'd the wish benevolence had form'd;
Yet once again the scene of life is fair,
And the rude terrors, which but late alarm'd,
"Exulting hope" triumphant hath disarm'd.
Yes!  she hath "scatter'd far the wintry gloom,"
And with her sunny smile the bosom warm'd;
Which, pondering late upon the dark, chill tomb,
Dreamt not of "happier days," nor scenes of bliss to come.

And though the secret soul may haply know
That which, prophetic, bids her to prepare,
While yet a wanderer in this vale of woe,
For many a future pang, and future care;
And that which long hath bade her to beware
Of fixing here the treasure of the heart;
Still through each future scene, however drear,
The soothing "voice of friendship" shall impart
That peace which but with life alone can e'er depart.
