Vain is to me the low and mourning breeze,
Which swells the requiem of departed day,
Pouring sad music through the quiv'ring trees;
Vain are the far off sounds which die away,
And round mine ear in ling'ring murmurs play.
Chaste, tranquil eve!  thy sweet and solemn rest
Alone could never wake the slumb'ring ray;
Much nobler call, and far more high behest,
Must fan the secret flame, and rouse the heav'n-born guest!

What shall I call thee?  thou, whose placid eye
First on the cradle of my boyhood fell,
And stamp'd my future doom in infancy!
Thou, who first shew'd me that aerial cell,
Where, far from moral view, the Muses dwell!
There, ever and anon, a wayward child,
I tried to build the rhyme I lov'd so well;
With song the hours of idleness beguil'd,
Pour'd many an uncouth strain, and o'er its rudeness smiled.

For much of tourneys, and of barons bold,
Of spell-wrought feat, I knew, and mystic lore;
Of Him who to th' accursed his being sold,
And Him, the matchless wizard, whom of yore
To the foul fiend an earthly mother bore;
Nor less could tell the wand'rings of that knight,
Who from the monster's fangs his leman tore;
Thrice sank the wondering day-star on their fight,
And thrice the charmed flood restored his fallen might.

Whence is thy secret power, sweet Poesy;
The hidden spell that binds my soul so strong?
Why 'mid my sorrows can I fly to thee,
And, rapt in holy mysteries of song,
Forget the cares which to dull earth belong?
It is not He, the bard of courtly ears,
Nursed 'mid the busy hum and flaunting throng,
That swells my hopes, and solaces my fears;
What though he raise my smile, he cannot soothe my tears!

The polish'd numbers of the grotto shade
Touch no respondent string of grief or joy;
At other founts, my weary course is stay'd,
Where, 'neath her moss-grown cell, the Naiad coy
Wells forth the spring, unstain'd by art's alloy;
To other days the rhymes I love belong,
(Those lofty rhymes may no rude hand destroy)
Where truth is twin'd the faery wreath among,
Fierce wars and faithful loves, the moral and the song.

Still, e'en in dawning manhood's riper age,
These elder minstrels bid my bosom glow;
Oft will they lure me to their magic page,
And viewless forms and airy fabrics show,
And teach me shapes of other worlds to know;
And while I hear their inexpressive strain,
Far fly the charm-bound fiends of earthly woe:
Ah!  ne'er may reason stretch her chilling reign,
Unbind this "silken tye," or break this "silver chain!"
