Deep wave the woods, and twilight's dusky shade
Steals o'er the hill, and wraps the distant glade,
As fancy led, thy poet turns once more
To pause O Wye, beside thy winding shore;
Once more along thy shadowy cliffs to stray,
And hear the wind in dying whispers play,
Or watch the sun thro' op'ning clouds awhile,
Light the dim mountains with his parting smile.
Congenial scenes!  how oft as Autumn threw
O'er the dark woods her yellow fading hue,
He fondly lov'd your chequer'd walks to trace,
And mark the landscape in its saddest grace;
There as he wound his desert path alone,
And heard the breeze in fitful pauses moan,
On ev'ry breath what sweet delusions stole,
What fairy visions sooth'd his pensive soul;
Then far away he fled in airy dreams,
To sacred forests, and poetic streams,
Where Mona's harp the joy of other times,
Swell'd thro' the halls of Cambria's misty climes
Congenial scenes!  let lighter spirits rove
Where love and pleasure haunt the vernal grove,
Where rosy hours their fairest tribute bring,
And the gay vales rejoice in endless spring;
Enough for me, some cavern'd rock beneath,
To hear your woods in solemn murmurs breathe,
Or watch the cliffs as twilight lingers slow
O'er the deep glens their length'ning shadows throw:
Or let me oft a lonely hermit stray
Where hoary Tintern rears her arches grey;
With step devout each ivied cloister tread,
And hold communion with the parted dead.
Deserted walls!  how sad and silent now
Where erst the beadsman breath'd his pious vow;
Where massy shafts their mingling branches wove,
And the dim light thro' gorgeous windows strove:
Here holy truth and meditation sage
Cheer'd the calm ev'ning of declining age,
And rais'd his hopes to higher scenes sublime,
Untouch'd by sorrow, unassail'd by time!
Deserted fane!  now friendless and alone,
Sad thro' thy aisle the winds of winter moan,
Forgotten now thy shapeless arches fall,
And the wild flower waves mournful on thy wall!
No more his step the peasant shall prolong,
To catch the murmurs of the vesper song;
No more the boatman fondly pause awhile,
To bless the tenants of the cloister'd pile.

And lo!  as here my foot sequester'd strays,
And busy Mem'ry dwells on other days,
Dim thro' the shade, with solemn march, and slow,
What hooded shapes, and kingly warriors go.
All hail the chief that erst with dauntless hand
Hurl'd the swift dart on Erin's distant strand;
Wide o'er her vales the fires of ruin spread,
And strew'd her shore with mountains of the dead:
Say, warrior stern, what boot thy triumphs now?
Thy might that laid each hostile chieftain low?
That portly form with limbs of giant mould,
That chac'd the foe o'er Leinster's hills of old?
Where now the pile whose tow'ring walls among
Lav'd the wild harp to breathe its kindling song,
Where mingling torches shot a quiv'ring gleam
On the dark bosom of the passing stream?
No more shall there the hoary Minstrel tell,
By Pembroke's arm what bleeding myriads fell;
How Erin mourn'd her noblest heroes slain,
How sank her children breathless on the plain.
And see where Arthur's hallow'd form appears,
The pride of song, the joy of other years;
Scared at his frown how quick th' invader fled!
What falling chiefs beneath his faulchion bled!
Chac'd by his band from Britain's sea-girt coast,
What panic seiz'd the routed Saxon host!
Swift flew their train his giant arm before,
Launch'd the tall bark, and left the fatal shore.
And who is he the chief that wanders by,
Death in his frown, and lightning in his eye?
Warrior of old, he spread the carnage wide,
By distant Tweed and Severn's boiling tide:
In vain proud Cambria sent her squadrons forth
To face his Saxons pouring from the North,
Through all her ranks the fatal slaughter spread,
And chiefs unnumber'd join'd th' inglorious dead.
Then burst the vales with cries of wild dismay,
Where mingled heroes pale and gasping lay;
Then groan'd the Wye with heaps of mangled slain,
And her dark waves rush'd gory to the main.
And art thou too lamented Morris here?
Still dost thou roam a pensive mourner near!
Still thro' each haunt a lonely spirit stray,
Musing on woes that chill'd thy mortal day?
'Twas thine to brave th' Atlantic's wildest roar,
Torn from each joy that cheer'd thy path before;
Scorn'd by each wretch thy former bounty fed,
With suppliant hand to ask a little bread.

What scenes of death thy peaceful waters knew,
Thro' all thy dells what shrieks of horror flew:
When first, O Wye, the Roman hand distain'd
Thy woods where peace and gentlest quiet reign'd;
Then swift beneath the sheltering gloom of night,
What hapless myriads wound their harass'd flight,
While scarce the war-fire's ghastly blaze reveal'd
Gigantic forms advancing o'er the field:
Yet fled thy sons, ill-fated country, far,
Scared at the cry of death, the blast of war!
Unmov'd beheld they Murder's gory hand
Spread the grim slaughter o'er a bleeding land!
No!  from their homes where Snowden's rugged form
Rears its proud height, and triumphs o'er the storm;
From crags uncouth in mystic circles thrown,
Where the pale victim breath'd its parting groan,
Rous'd at their wrongs how burst thy heroes forth,
Swift as the meteor sweeps the wintry North,
To Cambria's foes to bring the battle's roar,
And chace th' oppressor from a freeman's shore.

Oh blest the bard, whose spirit fondly strays
Thro' scenes of old, and deeds of other days;
Whose bosom wakes at Howel's hallow'd name,
Or him the chief that bled for Cambria's fame;
Dear to his soul each waving wood shall seem,
Where hope may soar in many an ardent dream,
And Fancy there the secret shades among,
Cheat the lone hours with Shakespear's magic song.
There as the Spring her balmy odours showers,
And scatters wild her bloom of op'ning flowers;
When ev'ry wind that idly wantons by,
Bears the sweet notes of woodland harmony;
At earliest dawn his step shall haste away,
Where Llancaut smiles in vernal beauty gay,
And gently borne aerial murmurs breathe
From upland height, and shadowy dell beneath;
And there as twilight spreads her mantle deep,
The whisp'ring waters lull'd to tranquil sleep,
As sunk in peace each rustling leaf is still,
And the last sun-beam lights the dusky hill,
Ten thousand shapes by fairy fancy wove
In solemn march shall round his pillow move,
Slow thro' the gloom shall Runic Minstrels sail,
And wake their harps to ev'ry dying gale.

Or as November's melancholy breeze
In fitful murmurs sweeps the faded trees,
As sorrowing then he treads the mournful wood,
Shall pensive Mem'ry's sadder scenes intrude:
Then  shall he think what varied woes were thine.
Lamented prince of Britain's ancient line!
Doom'd o'er thy hills with hermit step to roam,
While grim destruction swept thy native home;
'Twas thine to mark fierce Edward's Saxon host
Spread desolation o'er thy bleeding coast,
While Age itself sank breathless on the plain,
And ask'd a few, short added years in vain.

Lo, Winter comes!  December's bitter gale
Sings thro' the wood, and sweeps along the vale,
Swift thro' the air the arrow'd tempests fly,
And midnight spirits walk the sullen sky:
Now feats of old his raptur'd soul shall charm,
What nations bow'd to Odin's dauntless arm:
Immortal chief!  before his daring might
What Celtic heroes sank in endless night!
Or shall he think how Othere's bark of yore
Trac'd ev'ry isle, and measur'd ev'ry shore,
In crystal piles where mount the polar waves,
Or howls the storm in Angle's naked caves:
In desert realms where Winter's spectre train
Sports in the blast, or scours along the plain,
Where snows on snows a gather'd mountain rise,
And the red meteor sweeps the angry skies ;
There far remote the hardy peasant grew,
Free as the winds that o'er his vallies blew.
Wide to the breeze his swelling sail unfurl'd,
O'er paths unknown to seek another world.

Ye hallow'd woods, whose deepest glooms among
Wont the stern bard to breathe his magic song;
Ye from whose boughs mysterious murmurs fell.
When the grim Druid wove his grisly spell;
Now as I roam your winding ranks between,
And muse on scenes your hoary shades have seen,
While on the stream the leaves of Autumn float,
And the lorn breeze sends forth a plaining note,
Your whispers wild and yellow fading hues
Thro' ev'ry sense a secret charm diffuse,
O'er all my soul a solemn sadness cast,
And lead her back to feats of ages past
Where now the race renown'd in Celtic song,
That watch'd, O Wye, thy wooded shore along,
Whose shouts of triumph shook thy rocky side,
When Cambria conquer'd, and the Saxon died?
No more for them the kindling harp shall tell
By Arthur's hand how oft th' invader fell;
No more the war-pipe sound its shrill alarms,
And rouse each chief to tumult and to arms.

lndulgent Wye, thy sacred woods beneath,
Oft shall thy bard his simple measure breathe;
Oft to thy shore with step devout shall stray,
And here awake his tributary lay:
Blest could he leave each busy scene afar,
The rage of faction, and the blast of war,
Beside thy wave life's ev'ning hour to close
Midst the calm shades of quiet and repose.

What minstrel rhymes should ev'ry day prolong,
Hoar Chaucer's tale, or Spenser's magic song,
Or scenes of yore, ere Norman's hated hand
Hurl'd the swift dart on Hasting's bloody strand;
By rolling Thames, or Severn's raging tide,
How erst the Briton march'd in native pride,
With freedom sat his oaken shade beneath,
Or chac'd the wild deer o'er the naked heath:
Or should he turn to hail each warring host
That met of old on Scotia's windy coast,
What warrior corses strew'd the banner'd plain,
Of Gothic chiefs, or Morven's Celtic train;
From desert wilds and tempest troubled caves,
How Lochlin's heroes plough'd the western waves,
While Scotia's sons receiv'd their daring band,
And mingled chiefs lay breathless on the strand.

And say, sweet stream, when Life's gay pictures fled,
Low in the dust reclines this wearied head,
When Hope's fond visions silent steal away,
And the cold turf enwraps this mould'ring clay,
Shall e'er thy elves at sober dusk be seen
With airy step to trace the humble green,
To seek thy vot'ry's simple bed awhile,
And dress in flowers his solitary pile?
Oh let them pause his Gothic harp beside,
When rising Hesper rules the ev'ning tide,
And gentle winds that breathe in whispers low,
Sing thro' each string a song of magic woe;
Then shall his spirit fondly ling'ring near,
Catch the deep murmurs with a silent tear,
Trace the glad scenes his fancy lov'd before,
And watch and weep along the twilight shore.
