Where Flora's loveliest carpet spreads the ground,
And nature sits, by smiling summer dress'd,
While gentle zephyrs ever breathe around
"The spicy gales of Araby the bless'd,"
By hyperboream winter, ne'er oppress'd,
Fair Lusitania lifts her head on high,
Wreath'd with the purple vine, her flowing vest;
Her gilded turrets pierce a cloudless sky,
And round her front the strains of love's soft melody.

Hail queen of cities, long in Tajo's wave,
Long may'st thou view thy charms reflected bright,
Who at thy footstool, low, a humble slave
Spreads his broad mirror to th' enchanted sight
The sons of commerce leads, in habits dight
Of every various clime &mdash; from every shore,
Low at thy feet to cast a navy's freight;
May Heaven no more its wrathful vengeance pour,
Nor war pollute with blood thy gay luxuriant bower.

The Muse hath seen, when earth's convulsive throes,
Hurl'd to the dust, your fair devoted head,
She saw and wept, but smil'd as you arose
Like fabled Phoenix, from your funeral bed,
With more than former radiance round you shed;
She saw, (again she wept,) along thy strand,
When from their foes thy royal exiles fled,
Thy children droop, a melancholy band,
As for a distant clime Braganza left the land.

Can all the jems that fair Brazilia boasts,
Can all the joys luxuriant climate yields,
Can the warm breezes of her spicy coasts,
Vie with the zephyrs of his native fields?
Can the bright ray, her mellow fruit that gilds,
Dry up the tears, the exiles cheek that stains?
Ah no, alas!  for powerful memory wields
A fairy wand, and Lusitania's plains
Rise to her tortur'ed sight, and home its hold retains.

Let modern stoics boast that they embrace,
(While thro' their visionary maze they rove,)
With equal love, the whole of human race&mdash;
Man has his orbit still, in which to move:
In his first thread of life Heav'n interwove
A ruling principle that never dies;
A partial, not an universal love,
That bids him gravitate, where'er he flies,
Still to th' attractive point which love of home supplies.

Hail, love of country!  kindest gift of Heaven,
(Without thee life were but a joyless dream)
To all mankind, for wisest purpose given.
The slave of Afric (Europe's endless shame)
Loves his brown desert, and his sooty dame;
'Mid strangers thrown, the hapless mourner sighs
For "local habitation and a name,"
Home his last haven of hope &mdash; in death espies,
The road that leads to life, beneath his native skies.

'Tis thou that warm'st the godlike patriot's breast,
The soldiers sword without thee edgeless falls;
'Twas thou, when Gallia's murd'rous hordes opprest,
'Twas thou defendedst Saragosa's walls.
Once more thy welcome voice Braganza calls,
His panting country bursts the tyrant's chains,
Her open arms no more the fetter galls;
"Come then, Braganza, launch into the main
Thy tempest-beaten bark, and bless thy home again."

That home late ravag'd by a lawless fiend,
Scourge of the earth &mdash; a monster fell and dread,
For purpose wise awhile from vengeance skreen'd
Havoc and death o'er half the world to spread,
Like famish'd wolf, by love of slaughter led,
Whom nature shrinks from, for his breath is blight,
His drink is blood, his food the murder'd dead;
But, lo!  where Britain rises in her might,
Abash'd the monster shrinks in wild disorder'd flight.

Rise Lusitania!  rise!  From Sant'rem's brow,
View Wellington and vengeance in his rear,
But mix'd with thine the victor's tears must flow;
Who trac'd the blood-stain'd path, where dastard fear,
By disappointment urg'd, forbade to spare
The hoary head of age, or helpless dames&mdash;
Unfurl'd the British ensigns float in air!
Almeida's plain with wars fierce lightning flames,
And victory's cheering shout thy freedom loud proclaims!

Well pleas'd the Muse beholds the dawn of day,
That comes, thy mists of error to dispel,
Down to her darkset cave, before its ray,
Stern bigotry shall fly &mdash; a monster fell.&mdash;
E'en her dread instrument, that child of hell,
Whose grasp is death, shall with a groan expire.
Of "Acts of faith" alone shall legends tell,
When frantic zeal blew fierce the torturing fire,
And stretch'd the living victim on his funeral pyre.

Rise Lusitania!  from thy lowly bed,
And halcyon days shall bless thee once again;
A friendly arm supports thy drooping head,
Rise and survey thy foe with proud disdain.
Rouse, be thyself and give thy valour rein,
Thy gallant spirit to the conflict brace,
The glorious meed of chivalry regain,
Assert the honors of thy generous race,
In Camoen's deathless page thy former glories trace.

View where thine own De Viseo struck the spark;
That shed on Gothic gloom dawn of light:
Bursting the clouds of feudal ages dark,
The sun of commerce rose &mdash; dispell'd the night;
De Gama saw and hail'd the cheering sight,
Launch'd his advent'rous bark and spread the sail;
Nor winds nor untried seas the chief affright,
No tears can move, tho' kindred round him wail,
At Belem pays his vows, and courts the favouring gale.

Thro' boist'rous seas towards the rising sun
His daring course the adven'trous hero bore,
Nor e'er looks back, his voyage once begun&mdash;
Though treachery's steel assials, and tempests roar,
And happy hails, at last, the Indian shore.
Let the same spirit urge thy daring mind,
Soon shall thy foes thy courage rous'd deplore,
War's iron tempest beats with fraud combin'd,
Yet shall thy sea-wash'd bark a happy haven find.

Lo, on Evora's plain, thy sons in arms
Couch the strong spear and raise the blazon'd shield,
While patriot fire each warrior-bosom warms,
"Victory or Death" they cry, and scorn to yield,
Or count the lances which the foemen wield;
Against true valour's charge what foe can stand?
With Moorish blood is died the battle-field;
Routed they fly, though numerous as the sand,
Nor more the barbarous horde pollutes thy happy land.

Not less barbarian is thy present foe,
Less brave thy sons than were their sires of old,
The rust of sloth and peace their sabres show,
Thy ensigns long in dust inglorious roll'd,
Spread to the winds, and let the foe behold:
Strike from the sword the slow consuming rust
Upon their crests. &mdash; Be confident and bold&mdash;
Lay their proud eagles prostrate in the dust,
Drive from thy weeping plains the sons of blood and lust.

Let hearths and altars, drench'd with dearest blood,
Thy tapers holy blaze, thy social fire,
Quench'd in life's purple stream that pour'd a flood
From the pierc'd hearts of wife, of child, and sire,
To noble vengeance rouse thy burning ire!
Forgive the Muse who not presumes to chide,
She sees thy sons to gallant deeds aspire;
And Lusitania by Hyspania's side,
Once more is Europe's boast, once more is Europe's pride.

Hail brave Hispania!  all an artless Muse
To thee can give, and more, is justly thine.
Nor generous thou the humble meed refuse:
Hail, brave Hispania!  born in arms to shine,
To wield the knightly sword and form th' embattled line.
Rous'd from the sleep of sloth and peaceful rest,
Thy spirit scorn'd inglorious to repine,
With treachery's dagger rankling in thy breast,
Higher thy courage rose the more it was opprest.

Lo, crouching Europe views thy deeds with shame,
As at the Tyrant's feet she hugs her chain.
May, from thy blaze, spread. far the patriot flame,
And to the conflict rouse her might again,
To blot from history's page th' inglorious stain,
E'en those, his vassals, fetter'd to the oar,
Whom Rhine with shame beholds, shall yet disdain
To row his pageant barge &mdash; shall spurn his power&mdash;
Burst their disgraceful bonds, and be his slaves no more.

Thy clarion's Voice shall rouse a world to arms,
From Belgia's marsh to Russia's frozen clime;
Its animating sound each bosom warms,
Each heart beats Freedom's arduous steep to climb,
And feels that base submission is a crime.
The Austrian eagle, spurning forced ties,
At glory's sun shall aim her flight sublime,
And humbled Prussia from the dust arise,
Whilst the Czar's banners float again in southern skies.

Hark!  while  my harp to war's high note I string,
The flash of victory gilds the brow of night!
Her pealing thunders bid the welkin ring,
And expectation listens with delight,
While Fame relates how, rushing to the fight,
Not e'en the deadly breach with few appals;
Britons with Lusitania's sons unite,
The only strife who first shall scale the walls!&mdash;
To storm the ramparts yield, and strong Roderigo falls.

The frequent flash of glory's radiant blaze
Bursts from the British arms with dazzling light;
Victory on victory treads the voice of praise
Lags far behind; in vain she would recite
Thy deeds, O Wellington &mdash; bewilder'd sight,
Scarce rests a moment on Vimiera's field,
When Talavera darts a ray more bright.
A Conqueror's sword Busaco sees thee wield,
And all the paths thou tread'st a hero's harvest yield.

While an applauding nation hails thy name,
And on thy deeds the songs of triumph raise;
One solitary voice forbids thy fame,
With Faction's hand would hide the noon-day blaze.
Thy country, gallant chief, th' attempt surveys
With indignation &mdash; and the wretch contemns,
"Whose praise is censure, and whose censure praise,"
That  name still brighter shines which he condemns,
And every envious word thy crown of glory gems.&mdash;

Ungrateful were the Muse, if you alone
Engross'd the humble efforts of her Song;
Numbers surround thee, not to Fame unknown.
Barossa's hero chief amid the throng;
To Hill, to Beresford, her strains belong;
But endless were the task, in Briton's host,
To count what her might her theme prolong;
The various meed of praise would art exhaust,
While British soldiers still are valour's proudest boast.

And thou, Britannia,  to thy latest day,
To fainting Europe shall thy succour yield;
Proudly thy conq'ring banners shall display.
In freedom's godlike cause thy falchion wield,
And 'gainst the oppressor raise thy dreaded shield.
The historic Muse shall, in her brightest page,
Record thy hero's deeds in battle-field;
Or where their thunders with resistless rage,
Sweep from the subject wave the foe that dares engage.

Nor less exulting, homeward turn thine eye,
Behold the morning breaks, my grief to cheer;
The beams of glory paint the orient sky&mdash;
Before the rising Sun shall disappear
The clouds of dark mistrust. &mdash; In cavern drear,
Her foul mis-shapen form to Faction hides;
While pilots' rage thy gallant vessel steer,
O'er her proud course a Patriot Prince presides,
As thro' contending seas triumphantly she rides.
