How sweet, when morning's blushes tinge the sky,
And nature wakes to life and joy again,
Far from the city's crowded haunts to fly,
And rove at freedom o'er the flow'ry plain!
To hear the feather'd warblers pour the strain
Of untaught harmony, to Nature's sire,
As with fleet wings th' aerial heights they gain!
How sweet the countless beauties to admire,
That dark creation round, and ecstasy inspire!

Behold how summer's fostering breath has clad
The trees and shrubs in robes of living green!
The wild-flowers, o'er each hill and valley spread,
Wave their light heads, and grace the varied scene;&mdash;
The birds sing sweetly of their loves I ween;&mdash;
The roving breezes, as they wanton round,
Disperse wild thoughts of woe, and sullen spleen,
Till in the breast a sacred calm is found,
And sweet content, and peace, and love and joy abound.

Is there a soul to Nature's beauties dead?
Say, is there one, with Reason's stamp imprest,
Which, void of sympathy, and dull as lead,
Feels not the charms which now the Eye invest,
In all her gay luxuriance richly drest?
Alas!  that soul, how joyless must it be,
That now in senseless apathy can rest!
How blind those film-bound eyes that cannot see
These marks of sov'reign pow'r and love, and bounty free!

The sun has mounted now his golden car,
And flings around his vivifying rays,
Now with extinguish'd light the morning star
Is quench'd amidst the high, majestic blaze;
On stream and lake the beamy radiance plays;
A face of gen'ral joy creation wears;
Who now of human kind around can gaze,
Nor feel his heart rejoice, and lose his cares,
And ev'ry passion dire that peace and health impairs!

Does not the common bliss that reigns around,
A kindred feeling to the soul convey?
Does not the earth with life and beauty crown'd,
Inspire such thoughts as banish grief away,
And discontent, and sullen envy's sway
The healthful breeze, the sun's enliv'ning pow'r,
The goodness that makes nature all so gay
In grove, or wildnerness, in field, of bower,
Brings new delight and life with each revolving hour.
