Sir Guyon was wand'ring at close of the day,
When its radiance repos'd on the billow;
And bright was the sea-bird that rock'd on the spray,
Where the foam curl'd white for its pillow.

Not a breeze from the mountains or woodlands had swept
O'er the sea-surf, in trembling emotion;
And lovely the moon-beam that silently slept
On the beautiful breast of the ocean.

The night-bird had woke its response from the grove,
To welcome the spirit of even,
That descended array'd in the emblems of Love,
And its veil was the twilight of Heaven.

The radiance of night was begemming the sky,
While the spirits of millions ascended;
And sweet was the lay of the ransom'd on high,
From their lyres in extasy blended.

Sir Guyon, he paus'd, for a transport of joy
Was spread o'er his bosom of sadness,
The warm tear of rapture was bright on his eye,
And his heart-strings dilated with gladness.

His soul in the dream of Elysium is lapt,
In its fine choral pauses and numbers;
His thoughts in the visions of angels are wrapt,
As they hung o'er his sanctified slumbers.

When suddenly burst on his dreaming eye bright,
A being in beauty immortal;
In his hand was a magical mirror of light,
And the keys of Eternity's portal.

His face was the sun on the mountain of snow,
His wings were the radiance of even;
His zone was the colours that blend in the bow,
When it spans the dark arches of Heaven.

He descended, while Guyon is extasy gaz'd,
All hush'd was each ruder emotion;
On his bosom the star of eternity blaz'd,
Like a gem on the breast of the ocean.

In accents more sweet than the songs of the blest,
To wear out the traces of sorrow,
The Angel of Mercy Sir Guyon address'd,
And told him of life's latest morrow.

"Behold in this mirror the wonders of Truth,
When allied to Religion and Duty;
They flourish immortal:  eternal in youth;
And deathless the bud of their beauty.

Lo!  these that you see, rob'd in raiment divine,
In garments more white than the billow,
Where the beams of the moon on its wide surface shine,
And the sea-maid is rock'd on her pillow;

Are the thousands who pass'd through the dark ocean flood
Of suffering, of death, and of danger,
Whose relicts are swaddled and shrouded in blood,
Afar in the land of the stranger.

Their souls are refin'd from each merciless stain,
That passion and pride had engendered,
Now pure as their God they shall ever remain,
And eternal their joys shall be render'd.

This Key is the passport of virtue and love,
Absolv'd from their weakness and errors,
Shall open the regions of glory above,
Shall disarm death and hell of their terrors.

This Key shall be thine, when returning from sin,
In pardoning mercy forgiven;
When pure from pollution, and hallow'd within,
Thy angel shall call thee to heaven.

For lo!  on yon bridge, that bestride the dark flood,
Bounding time and eternity ever;
What legions are passing, who faithful have stood,
Nor Death from their portion shall sever.

This road is the stay of Religion and Truth,
It is faith in a Saviour immortal;
Shall guide them safe home to the regions of youth,
Beyond nature's dark bounded portal.

Then take thou these emblems, awake and arise,
Life's journey is over to-morrow;
Press onward, thy home is that joy in the skies,
Where the pilgrim shall rest from his sorrow."

He said, then more swift than the whirlwind's wing,
Fled far thro' the regions of Heaven;
And sweet was the music from voice and from string,
As he soar'd by the Palace of Even.

Sir Guyon awoke from his dreaming bed low,
His heart beat with love and devotion;
While brightly the moon beams in extasy glow,
On the surf-cover'd breast of the ocean.
