O for that pond'rous broomstick, whereon rode
Grim Beattie Laing, horsed daringly sublime!
So would I fly above the solar road,
To where the Muses sit on high and chime:
Eigh!  I would kiss them in their bright abode,
And from their lips suck Poetry and Rhime,
Till Jove (if such my boldness should displease him)
Cry, "Fie, thou naughty boy!  pack off and mount thy besom."

It needed not that with a third exclaim
King JAMES'S trumpeter aloud should cry,
Through his long alchemy, the famous name
Of him who, piping, got the victory;
For, sooth to tell, man, boy, and girl, and dame,
Him the great Prince of Pipers testify,
Not with huzzas and jabbering of tongues,
But with hard-puffing breasts and dance-o'erwearied lungs.

And truly, had the crier will'd to shout
The doughty piper's name through polish'd trump,
His breath had not sufficed to twang it out,
So did the poor man's lights puff, pant, and jump:
Wherefore, to rest them from that dancing-bout,
Awhile they sat or lay on back or rump,
Gulping with open mouths and nostrils wide
The pure refreshing waves of Jove's aerial tide.

But, unfatigued, upon the hillock's crown
Stood ROB, as if his lungs had spent no breath,
And look'd with conscious exultation down
Upon the dance's havock wide beneath,
Laughing to see th' encumber'd plain bestrown
With people whirl'd and wriggled nigh to death.
Ere long he thus addrest, with reverent air,
The King, that, breathless yet, sat puffing in his chair. 

"My Liege, though well I now with triple claim
The guerdon of my threefold toils may ask,
As independent of success i' the game
Of jingling words, the ballad-maker's task;
Yet, as I too, with honourable aim,
Have tapp'd Apollo's rhime-o'erflowing cask,
Allow me, good my King, to ope my budget,
And tell my witty tale, that you and MAG may judge it."

Whereto his breathless King made slow reply:
(He drew a gulp of air each word between:)
"Great &mdash; piper! &mdash; Mighty &mdash; ROB! &mdash; Beloved &mdash; of sky!
O proved &mdash; too well thy &mdash; piping &mdash; craft &mdash; has been;
Witness my lungs &mdash; that play so puff &mdash; ingly,
And witness yonder &mdash; laughter &mdash; moving scene.
I'm pinch'd for wind &mdash; Ha, ha! &mdash; scarce breath I draw
Pardi! &mdash; a sight like you my Kingship never saw.

"Woe's me!  how, sweating, in prostration vast,
Men, wives, boys, maidens, lie in dust bestrown,
Gaping for respiration, gasping fast,
Half my liege subjects wreck'd on ANSTER Loan!
'Twill need, methinks, a hideous trumpet-blast
To rouse them from thus grov'lling basely prone;
For such effort my man's lungs yet are frail,
So, ROB, take thou his trump, and rouse them for thy tale."

He spake, &mdash; and at the hint, the RANTER took
The throated metal from the herald's hand,
And blew a rowing clangour, wherewith shook
Green sea, and azure sky, and cloddy land.
Up-sprung, as from a trance, with startled look,
The prostrate people, and erected stand,
Turning their faces to the knap of ground
Whence burst upon their ears the loud assaulting sound.

Then, crowding nearer in a vasty shoal,
They press their sum of carcasses more close,
Till crush'd, and cramm'd, and straiten'd round the knoll,
They rear and poise their bodies on their toes.
So were they pack'd and mortised, that the whole
Seem'd but one lump incorp'rate to compose;
One mass of human trunks unmoved they show,
Topp'd with ten thousand heads all moving to and fro.

And from the tongues of all those heads there rose
A confused murmur through the multitude,
As when the merry gale of summer blows
Upon the tall tops of a stately wood,
And rocks the long consociated houghs,
Rustling amid the leaves a discord rude:
High perch'd aloft the cuckoo rides unseen,
Embower'd with plenteous shades and tufts of nodding green.

Then waved the RANTER round and round his hand,
Commanding them to still their hubbub loud:
All in a moment still and noiseless stand
The widely-circumfused and heaving crowd,
As if upon their gums, at ROB'S command,
Were pinn'd these tongues that jabber'd late so proud.
Tow'rds him, as to their centre, every ear
Inclines its mazy hole, th' expected tale to hear.

But when the RANTER from his height beheld
The silent world of heads diffused below,
With all their ears agape, his visage swell'd,
And burn'd with honest Laughter's ruddy glow;
For who had not from Gravity rebell'd,
Girt with infinitude of noddles so?
He soon into composure starch'd his phiz,
And oped his fluent mouth, and told his tale, which is&mdash;

"Where Thirdpart-house upon the level plain
Rears up its sooty chimneys high in air,
There lived of old, in ALEXANDER'S reign,
Miss SUSAN SCOTT, a lady young and fair,
Who, sith that death her parents both had ta'en,
Sole child, their coffers and their fields did heir,&mdash;
Their fields, that waved with Ceres' green array,
Their coffers, gorged with gold, where Mammon prison'd lay.

"Her form was beauteous as the budding Spring,
Shaped by the mother of almighty Love;
Her soul was but a sorry paltry thing,
As e'er was quicken'd by the breath of Jove:
Her person might have pleased a crowned King,
Or shone a Dryad in her Thirdpart grove;
Her soul, her silly soul, alas, to tell!
Was as a rotten egg enclosed in golden shell.

"All day she, sitting at her window, cast
O'er her estate a proud and greedy eye;
Now measuring her fields, how broad, how vast,
How valuably rich they sunning lie;
Now summing up the bolls that in the blast
Wave yet unshorn, obnoxious to the sky,
And counting, avariciously, what more
Of gold th' unsickled crop would add unto her store.

"But when the grim and hooded night let fall
O'er Thirdpart's smoky roofs her ugly shade,
She hasten'd from her candle-lighten'd hall
To where her darling coffer'd god was laid,
And, freeing him with key from box's thrall,
On floor the gaudy deity display'd,
And with a miser's fumbling palm'd each toy,
And kiss'd bare Mammon's limbs, and laugh'd in silly joy.

"With her resided that famed wizard old,
Her uncle and her guardian, MICHAEL SCOTT,
Who there, in Satan's arts malignly bold,
His books of devilish efficacy wrote;
And, lackey'd round (tremendous to be told!)
With demons hung with tails like shaggy goat,
Employ'd their ministrations' damn'd, to ring
Madrid's resounding bells, and fright the Spanish King.

"Fit guardian he for such a peevish ward:
He check'd not her perversity of soul,
But, hell's pernicious logic studying hard,
Gave up the lady to heir own control;
Thus fost'ring, by his foolish disregard,
The cank'ring vice that o'er her spirit stole.
Captious and proud she was, and fond of strife,
The pertest, prettiest jade of all the girls of Fife.

"Yet not the less her beauty's wafted fame
A mob of suitors to her mansion drew;
Her face had charms to lure them and inflame,
Her dow'r had mickle fascination too.
On capering steeds from all the county came
Fife's sparkish lairds, all resolute to woo,
And win, with courtship's sly assiduous art,
Fair SUSAN'S worthy dow'r, and pettish worthless heart.

"So numerous were her lovers, that, in troth,
I scarce by name can reckon up them all:
ARDROSS and LARGO, gallant fellows both,
PITCORTHIE, and RANKEILOR, and NEWHALL,
And NEWARK, with his coat of scarlet cloth,
And short STRAVITHY, and RATHILLET tall,
And proud BALCOMIE, with his tassell'd hat,
And GIBLISTON the lean, and SAUCHOP round and fat.

"All these, and many more love-pining men,
She flouted from her chamber scornfully;
To one alone she used not such disdain,
The goodly CHARLIE MELVIL of Carnbee;
For he, the singly cunning of the train,
Enforced with costly gifts his amorous plea,
And bribed her dull affections, icy-cold,
With jewell'd gairish rings, and, knacks of labour'd gold.

"For every time he snatch'd her downy fist,
With its soft warmth to paddle and to play,
He hung a bracelet on her iv'ry wrist,
A golden bracelet like a sunbeam gay;
And when her lip he rapturously kist
(A kiss she ne'er refused for such a pay),
He dropt upon her white neck from his hand
A tangled chain of gold, worth many a rood of land.

"Till of his trinkets so profuse he grew,
That soon exhausted was his purse's store,
And half his lands were in a month or two
Mortgaged for money to procure her more;
Yet ne'er could he prevail on froward SUE,
Though ne'er he ceased t' importune and implore,
T' appoint the long-retarded marriage-day,
And cure his love, and give her promised hand away.

"One summer eve, as in delightful walk,
Handed they past down Thirdpart's avenue,
And, in a lightsome interchange of talk,
Whined out their loves, as lovers use to do,
Whilst every hairy bush upon its stalk
Nodded for joy around them where it grew,
CHARLES took advantage of the lovely hour,
Again t' impress his suit with tongue's glib wordy power.

"'O my sweet SUSAN!  sweet my SUSAN, O!&mdash;
(Here beat the poor laird his afflicted breast,)
Cast round thine eye, that eye that witches so,
On God's wide world in beauty's garment drest,
On yonder many-listed clouds that glow
Heaven's tapestry curtaining the blazing west,
On yonder setting rays up-shot on high,
Like tiny wires of gold aslant the gorgeous sky.

"'Look how the bushy top of every tree
Is mantled o'er with evening's borrow'd sheen,
And seems to wag and wave more boastfully
To the sweet breeze its leafy wig of green;
Each herb, and flower, and whin, and bush, we see,
Laughs jocund in creation's richest scene,
Whilst earth reflects on heaven, and heaven on earth,
Of God's created things the beauty and the mirth.

"'All these are passing lovely to the view,
But lovelier, tenfold lovelier, are to me
Thy form and countenance, my bonny SUE!
Creation's beauties all are summ'd in thee.
Thine eye out-lustres heaven's most lucid blue,
Thy cheek out-blooms earth's bloomiest flower and tree,
And evening's gaudy clouds, that paint the air,
Are frippery to the locks of thy long golden hair.

"'Then, hey!  my sweeting, when shall come the day
Ordain'd to give much transcendent Charms?
Still must I pine and fret at thy delay,
Capriously forbidden from thy arms,
And, like a pair of bellows, puff away
My sighs, and swelter in hot Cupid's harms?&mdash;
For Heaven's sake, SUSAN, on my case have pity,
And fix our wedding-day, my chick, my dear, my pretty!'&mdash;

"This said, he, gazing on her saucy eye,
Forestalls the angry answer of her tongue;
When, hark!  a sound of rushing, wildly high,
Is heard the trees adjoining from among,
As if a whirlwind, bursting from the sky,
Their tops on one another sore had swung;
And, lo!  out springs, in maddest pitch of wrath,
PITCORTHIE'S biggest bull upon their peaceful path.

"'Fly, fly, my love!' the generous MELVIL said,
And interposed to meet the monster's shock;
For fiercely rush'd he on th' endanger'd maid,
Mad at the glaring of her scarlet frock:
'Fly, fly, my love!' &mdash; She turn'd about and fled,
With face through terror pale and white as smoke,
And left her laird, at danger of his scull,
To wrestle for his life, and parry with the bull.

"The bull's long horns he griped, and, tow'rd the ground
Press'd down with might his hugy head robust,
Whilst, madder, thus defrauded of his wound,
The brawny brute his bulk still forward thrust,
And, riving with his heels the soil around,
Bespatter'd heaven with turf, and, sod, and dust,
And bellow'd till each tree around him shook,
And Echo bellow'd back from her aerial nook.

"At last th' intrepid lover, guessing well,
That now far off from harm his SUE was sped,
Ungriped the horns, that, white and terrible,
From brow their long and curling menace spread;
But scarce his grasp was loosed, when (sad to tell!)
Th' advantaged brute toss'd churlishly his head,
And with one horn, that suddenly uprose,
Demolish'd and tore off the gallant MELVIL'S nose.

"Clean by the roots uptorn was MELVIL'S nose,
Leaving its place deform and foul with blood:
Yet stood he not to reap some heavier blows,
And catch in napkin the red rushing flood;
But, quite regardless of his face's woes,
He, hurrying down the alley of the wood,
Fled as if life were hung upon his heels,
Nor in his sweaty haste his nose's torment feels.

"Thus by the mettle of his heels he bore
His life in safety from the brute away,
And left behind his wound's unsightly gore,
To all the wild-cats of the grove a prey.
Homeward, in dumpish mood, afflicted sore,
He took with lamentation loud his way,
Wailing his piteous bitterness of case,
His nasal honours crush'd, and ghastly havock'd face.

"Six weeks he kept his mansion at Carnbee,
Waiting his nose's re-establishment,
In vain; repair'd, alas!  it could not be,
Too sore that horn the cartilage had shent.
Fife's surgeons crowding came, for love of fee,
With plasters and with saws of loathsome scent,
In vain:  what could or saw or surgeon do?
Gone was the good old nose, and who could rear a new?

"Meanwhile, he ceased, not twice a-week to send
Sweet cards to her who did his thoughts employ,
Memorials dear, which as he sat and penn'd,
Perch'd laughing on his quill Love's mighty boy,
And on the paper from its inky end
Distill'd delight, and tenderness, and joy.
His cards he sent, but (O, the sin and shame!)
From wicked shameless SUE there ne'er an answer came.

"Nor could her cruel silence be explain'd,
Till Fame blew up the tidings to his house,
That she, for whom his nose was marr'd and pain'd,
To whom so long he had addrest his vows,
Had, for another, now his love disdain'd,
Urged by her uncle NEWARK to espouse;
That publish'd were their banns, that now was fixt
The wedding to be held on Monday forenoon next.

Then was the heart of injured MELVIL rent
With bitter passion at a slight so base;
That moment up he started, with intent
To go and chide th' apostate to her face:
Forth from his house in surly chafe he went,
Apparell'd in his coat of golden lace,
And eastward took his way, alone and sad,
Half cursing, in his heart, a maid so base and bad.

"But when the little boys and girls survey'd
His lack-nose visage as he travell'd by,
Some to their mothers houses ran, afraid,
To tell them what a face had met their eye;
Some with their fingers pointed undismay'd,
Giggling and blithe at his deformity;
Even ploughmen, at the road-edge, paused from toil,
And held their sturdy sides, and loudly laugh'd awhile.

"Yet onward held the hapless laird his pit,
Regardless of their mockery and worn;
His sole vexation was the girl ingrate,
In whose defence his beauty had been shorn.
He soon attain'd the ample hall, where sate,
In morning dishabille, the fair for-sworn;
Mid, entering boldly in his angry mood,
With grimly-flatten'd face before her frowning stood.

"'Fie, Horror!  who art thou,' she scoffing said,
That with defeature horrible to see,
Darest thus into my room advance thy stride,
To fright my lapdog and to sicken me?
Go, hie thee homeward, thou deform, and hide
That aspect in the dingles of Carnbee,
There with thy rabbits burrow thee, till sprout
Forth from between thy cheeks a beautifying snout.'

"This said, th' insulting creature from her chair,
Red with resentment, on a sudden springs,
And bolting forward with a saucy air,
Her shapely person from the chamber-flings,
Leaving her honest laird confounded there,
Heart-anguish'd by vexation's sharpest stings,
That he may vent his anger and his fume
On the fair carved chairs that decorate her room.

"He got no long time to displode and vent
On the fair chairs his bosom-choking ire;
For, from his closet by Miss SUSAN sent,
Sir MICHAEL rush'd, the sorcerer stout and dire,
With staff in hand, to rattle chastisement
Upon the ribs and backbone of the squire:
He beat him from the house with magic stick,
And added surly words, and rude discourteous kick.

"Poor MELVIL!  grieved, and mortified, and dampt,
His back he turn'd upon th' uncivil door,
And, musing vengeance, down the alley trampt,
As boil'd his heart with indignation o'er.
He bit his lip, and cursed the soil, and stampt,
Chafing his wrath with imprecation more;
For what man, so misused, could have forborne
To ban Sir MICHAEL SCOTT, and SUE the fair forsworn?

"So down the avenue he banning past,
Scarce conscious whither in his fret he went,
Till twilight tenanted the sky at last,
Pavilioning o'er earth her sable tent,
And the round moon, up-wheeling from the vast
Of sea, in pomp of clouds magnificent,
Embellish'd, with her sober silvery shine,
The leaves and barky trunks of Thirdpart's fir and pine.

"'Alas!  was e'er like me poor lover crost,
(He thus aloud deplored his wretched case,)
So fool'd, abused and cocker'd to my cost,
So beaten into sorrow and disgrace!
Was't not enough that for the jade I lost
The rising honours of my ruin'd face;
But, like a hedge-born beggar, tatters-hung,
Thus from her hated gate I must be switch'd and flung?

"'May vengeance seize thee, thou foul wizard churl,
For basting me at such an irksome rate!
May Satan gripe thee by the heel, and hurl
Thy carcass whizzing through hell's hottest gate!
And as for thee, thou proud ungrateful girl,
Whose baseness, to my grief, I know too late,
May some good power, the injured lover's friend,
On thy perfidious head a wing'd requital send!'

"His prayer he thus ejaculating spake,
Nor knew that some good power was nigh to bear;
For in the middle of a flowery brake,
That white with moonshine, spread its thicket near,
Lay Tommy Puck, the gentle fay, awake,
And Mrs. Puck, his gentle lady dear,
Basking and lolling in the lunar ray,
And tumbling up and down in brisk fantastic play.

"Quoth frisky Tommy to his elfin wife,
'Didst thou not hear the gentleman, my chuck?
'Tis young CARNBEE, the sweetest laird of Fife,
Whom sour Sir MICHAEL With his cane has struck.
What think ye? &mdash; By Titania's precious life!
Fits it not now the tender-hearted Puck
T' assist an injured lover, and to plot
A scheme of nice revenge on SUE and MICHAEL SCOTT?'

"'Surely, my dear!'  his fairy consort said,
'Go forth, and to the man address thy talk.'
This heard, he from his bushy arbour's shade
Flung out his minim stature on the walk,
And stood in dwarfish finery array'd,
Gaudy as summer-bean's bloom-cover'd stalk.
He doff'd his hat, and made a bow profound,
And thus bespoke the laird in words of pleasing sound.

"'Marvel not, MELVIL, that before thy feet
I plant me thus in fearless attitude;
For I have heard, within my close retreat,
What thou hast utter'd in thy fretful mood;
And well I know thy truth how with deceit
Repaid, thy faith with base ingratitude.
Good soul!  I pity thee with all my heart,
And therefore from my bush to thy assistance start.

"'For much it grieves Tom Puck's too feeling breast
That one so good, so liberal and true,
Should thus become a laughter and a jest,
Mock'd, jilted, beaten into black and blue.
I like to help whom malice has opprest,
And prompt a lover generous as you;
So with attention list what I propose,
To baffle, and avenge, and laugh to scorn your foes.

"'On Monday next, t' appointed wedding-day,
For perjured SUE, her NEWARK to espouse,
When her long hall with feasting shall be gay,
And smoke with meats, with riot, and with bouse,
From thy paternal mansion haste away,
At height of noon, to Thirdpart's bustling house,
That thou, by time of dinner, may be there,
Prepared to climb the steps of her detested stair.

"'And when th' exulting bridegroom and his bride,
Surrounded with their festive, spousal train,
Are seated at their tables long and wide,
Wielding their noisy forks and knifes amain,
Then burst into the hall with dauntless stride,
Through menials, greasy cooks, and serving-men,
Nor speak a word though in thy way they stand,
But dash the scroyls aside with swing of boist'rous hand.

"'Surprise, be sure, shall seize the feasters all
At such a bold intruder on their treat;
Their forks, half-lifted to their mouths, shall fall
Down on their plates, unlighten'd of their meat;
Yet speak not still, but, casting round the hall
An eye whose every glance is fire and threat,
Thou in a corner of the room shalt see
Sir MICHAEL'S magic staff, the same that basted thee.

"'Snatch up that magic energetic stick,
And, in thy clench'd hand wielding it with might,
On MICHAEL'S white bald pate discharge thou quick
A pelt enough to stun the wizard wight.
Strange consequence shall follow from that lick;
Yet be not thou amazed or struck with fright,
But, springing to the table's upper end,
Let on his nieces nose an easier pat descend.

"'I will not now unfold what odd event
From either stroke will suddenly ensue;
Enough to know that plenteous punishment
Shall light on grim Sir MICHAEL and on SUE.
Go &mdash; by your nose's cure, be confident,
That Tommy Puck aright thus counsels you.'&mdash;
This said, he, from a vial silver-bright,
Pour'd out upon his palm a powder small and white;

"And to his mouth up-lifting it, he blows
The magic dust on MELVIL'S blemish'd face,
When (such its power) behold, another nose
Sprouts out upon the scarr'd and skinless place,
And to th' astonish'd moon, fair-jutting, shows
Its supplemental elegance and grace:
Which done, he, shining like a bright glow-worm,
Plunged deep amid the brake his puny pretty form.

"Amaze had taken MELVIL, when appear'd
Erect before his steps the pigmy fay;
Yet not with less attention had he heard
What courteous Tommy did so kindly say:
That heart, late vex'd and tortured, now was cheer'd,
And merrily beat in hope's delightful play.
Homeward he jogged from Thirdpart's haunted shade,
Proud of his novel nose, and Tommy's tender'd aid.

"Arrived the day when saucy SUE should wed
Young NEWARK, vap'ring in his scarlet coat;
From his paternal mansion MELVIL sped
To Thirdpart-house, t' achieve his ready plot.
'Twas dinner-time; the tables all were spread
With luscious sirloins reeking richly hot,
Gravies and pies, and steaming soups of hare,
And roasted hen and goose, and titbits nice and rare.

"SUE at the table's place of honour sat,
Dealing the warm broth from its vessel out;
Whilst, slashing with his knife through lean and fat,
Carved at the lower end Sir MICHAEL stout.
'Twas nought but mirth, and junketing, and chat,
And handing wings, and legs of fowl about,
And noise of silver spoons, and clank and clatter
Of busy forks and knives, of porringer and platter.

"Squire MELVIL heard without the dinner's din,
Nor tarried, but, with brisk and boist'rous bound,
Jump'd up the stairs, and rudely rushing in,
Dash'd down whom standing in his way he found.
Menials and apron'd cooks of greasy chin,
Fist-founder'd, went a-rapping to the ground,
With all their loads of sauces, meats, and plates,
In ruin fat and rich hurl'd on their pitiful pates.

"Astonish'd were the feasters when they view'd
Such bold intruder stand before their eyes;
The morsels in their mouths that lay half-chew'd
Could not be swallow'd through their great surprise;
Their half-raised forks, bestuck with gobbets good,
Dropt, as if impotent more high to rise;
Each on his neighbour cast a meaning stare,
As if he dumbly ask'd, What does Squire MELVIL there?

"'Twas for a moment silent in the hall,
As if pale Death, the chapless and the grim,
Had taken by the throat, and choked them all,
With his long, fleshless, scraggy fingers slim;
Till, throwing round his glance from wall to wall,
The squire discern'd the staff with tassel trim,
Sir MICHAEL'S staff with head of silver white,
Wherewith he was enjoin'd its owner's poll to smite.

"He flew, he grasp'd it by its silver rind,
And to the ceiling swinging it on high,
Brought down on MICHAEL'S pate, as quick as wind,
A pelt that whizz'd and rattled horribly:
Sounded his bald scull with the stroke unkind,
Re-echoing in each lore-fill'd cavity,
When, O the wonder!  on his high arm-chair,
Changed was the churlish knight that instant to a hare.

"His dainty head, with learning so replete,
Collapsed, grew round, and little, and long-ear'd;
His arms, that yet were stretch'd to carve the meat,
Quite shrunken into two fore-legs appear'd;
His brawny thighs turn'd hind-legs on his seat,
Whereon his metamorphosed form was rear'd;
And, to complete the quadruped, out sprouted
A short tail from his rump, with plenteous hair about it.

"He sat not long, so transmew'd, on his chair,
But, lighting on the carpet-cover'd floor,
Scudded as swift as lightning down the stair,
On his four bestial legs, to gain the door.
'Hollo!'  cried boy and groom, 'A hare!  a hare!'
As flew he from the house their eyes before:
'Hollo!  let loose on Puss the fleet greyhound!'
Was bawl'd in Thirdpart's court from one to t' other round.

"Unkennell'd in a twink was fleet greyhound,
And after Puss commenced the keen pursuit;
O'er plough'd, o'er sown, o'er green, o'er fallow ground,
With lev'ret craft, and wile of weary foot,
With skip, and scud, and ditch-o'erleaping bound.
The wizard ran in guise of hairy brute,
While, snuffing out with sapient nose his track,
Came yelling at his heels all Thirdpart's clam'rous pack.

Eastward they scour'd, out-scampering the gale,
Long winded dog and pursy panting hare,
Till, taking refuge in the streets of Crail,
Sir MICHAEL plunged him in a jaw-hole there,
And left without his foes with wagging tail,
Worrying the sky with bark of loud despair,
As he, secure, was fain to slink and cuddle
Encaved beneath the street, within his miry puddle.

"There let us leave the knight to cuddle fain,
And long-tongued dog to volley out his yell,
And turn we to the banquet-hall again,
Where MICHAEL'S metamorphosis befell.
No sooner saw the squire that not in vain
The stag had lighted, but succeeded well,
Than, bounding up to where jilt SUSAN sat,
On her fair nose's bridge he brought a gentle pat.

"A second miracle ensues; for, lo!
That nose her countenance's pride and grace,
Grows out, and shoots, and lengthens at the blow,
Ridiculously sprouting from her face;
And aye it swells and beetles moe and moe,
Tapering to such a length its queer disgrace,
That dips its point at last amid the broth
That near her lies in dish upon the tablecloth.

"Nor did her aspect only suffer shame;
For, in proportion as extends her nose,
Her shoulders, late so beautiful of frame,
Into a hump upheaving, hugely rose,
Most mountainous and high, as ill became
Fair bride array'd in sumptuous wedding-clothes;
Her very gown was burst and riven through
With the large fleshy swell, so strangely big it grew.

"Then shook the room with laughter's frequent crack,
As saw the guests each droll excrescence rise;
One pointed to her still-upheaving back,
One to her nose's still-enlarging size:
'Ha!  ha!'  from every squire's throat loudly brake;
'Te-hee!'  each lady chuckles and replies;
'Heav'ns, what a hideous nose!'  cried every dame;
'Heav'ns, what a hideous hump!'  did every laird exclaim.

"Such was the punishment which silly SUE,
From her resentful much-wrong'd lover bore;
And so was sour Sir MICHAEL punish'd too,
For caning honest MELVIL from her door.
Wherefore, as now the work of vengeance due
Was finish'd, CHARLIE left her chamber-floor,
And turn'd his face, rejoicing, towards home,
Muttering his grateful thanks to little elfin Tom."

