Last night I dream'd, that to my dark bedside
Came, white with rays, the poet of the "Quhair,"
And drew my curtain silently aside,
And stood and smil'd, majestically fair:
He to my finger then a ring applied,
(It glitter'd like Aurora's yellow hair,)
And gave his royal head a pleasant wag,
And said, Go on, my boy, and celebrate thy MAG!

The sun, upcharioting from Capricorn,
Had 'tween the Ram's horns thrust his gilded nose;
And now his bright fist drops, each April morn,
O'er hill and dale, the daisy and the rose:
Wantons the lewd Earth with the god unshorn,
And from her womb the infant verdure throws,
Whilst he, good paramour!  leaves Tithy's valley
Each morn by five o'clock, with her to sport and dally.

Old Kelly-law, the kindly nurse of sheep,
Puts on her daisy-tissued gown of green:
On all her slopes so verdurous and steep,
The bleating children of the flock are seen;
While with a heart where mirth and pleasure keep
Their dwelling, and with honest brow serene,
The shepherd eyes his flock in mood of glee,
And wakes with oaten pipe the echoes of Carnbee.

And see how Airdrie woods upshoot on high
Their leafy living glories to the day,
As if they long'd t' embrace the vaulty sky
With their long branchy arms so green and gay!
Balcarras-craig, so rough, and hard, and dry,
Enliven'd into beauty by the ray,
Heaves up, bedeck'd with flowers, his ruffian side,
Like giant hung with gawds, and boasts his tricksy pride.

Ev'n on the King's-muir jigs the jolly Spring,
Scattering from whin to whin the new perfume;
While, near the sea-coast, Flora tarrying,
Touches the garden's parterres into bloom.
With joy the villages and cities ring;
Cowherd and cow rejoice, and horse and groom;
The ploughman laughs amid his joyous care,
And ANSTER burghers laugh in prospect of their Fair.

For lo!  now peeping just above the vast
Vault of the German Sea, in east afar,
Appears full many a brig's and schooner's mast,
Their topsails strutting with the vernal harr.
Near and more near they come, and show at last
Their ocean-thumping hulks all black with tar;
Their stems are pointed toward ANSTER pier,
While, flying o'er their sterns, the well-known flags appear.

From clear-sky'd France and muddy Zuyder Zee
They come, replenish'd with the stores of trade;
Some from the Hollander of lumpish knee
Convey his lintseed, stow'd in bag or cade;
Heav'n bless him!  may his breeches countless be,
And warm, and thick, and ever undecay'd!
For he it was that first supplied the Scots
With linen for their sarks, and stout frieze for their coats.

Some bring, in many an anker hooped strong,
From Flushing's port, the palate-biting gin,
Th' inspirer of the tavern's noisy song,
The top-delight, the nectar of each inn,
That sends a-bounding through the veins along
The loit'ring blood when frosty days begin,
The bev'rage wherein fiddlers like to nuzzle,
The gauger's joy to seize, and old wife's joy to guzzle!

Some from Garonne and bonny banks of Seine
Transport in pipes the blood of Bacchus' berry,
Wherewith our lairds may fume the fuddled brain,
And grow, by bousing, boisterously merry;
And whereby, too, their cheeks a glow may gain,
Abashing ev'n the red of July's cherry.
O, it is right; our lairds do well, I ween:
A bottle of black wine is worth all Hippocrene.

Soon, hurried forward by the skittish gales,
In ANSTER harbour every vessel moors;
Furl'd by the seamen are the flapping sails;
Fix'd are the halsers to the folk-clad shores;
Their holds discharge the wealth of Gallia's vales,
And Amsterdam's and Flushing's useful stores,
All to augment, with commerce' various ware,
The bustle and the trade of famous ANSTER Fair.

Nor distant now the day:  the cream-fac'd sun,
That, rising, shall engild to-morrow's air,
Shall shine with courteous beams upon the fun
And frolic of the celebrated Fair;
And now, already, have the folk begun,
(So eager are they the delight to share,)
In flocks to MAGGIE'S borough to resort,
That they may all, betimes, be present at the sport.

Each hedge-lin'd highway of the king, that leads
Or straightly or obliquely to the loan,
Seems, as the Muse looks downwards, pav'd with heads,
And hats and cowls, of those that bustle on.
From Johnny Groat's House to the border-meads,
From isle of Arran to the mouth of Don,
In thousands puffingly to Fife they run,
Gold in their pockets lodg'd, and in their noddles fun.

Say, Muse, who first, who last, on foot or steed,
Came candidates for MAGGIE to her town?
St. Andrew's sprightly students first proceed,
Clad in their foppery of sleeveless gown:
Forth whistling from Salvador's grate they speed,
Full many a mettlesome and fiery lown,
Forgetting Horace for a while and Tully,
And mad t' embag their limbs, and leap it beautifully.

For ev'n in Learning's cobweb'd halls had rung
The loud report of MAGGIE LAUDER'S fame,
And Pedantry's Greek-conning sapient tongue
In songs had wagg'd, in honour of her name;
Up from their mouldy books and tasks had sprung
Bigent and Magistrand to try the game;
Prelections ceas'd; old Alma Mater slept,
And o'er his silent rooms the ghost of Wardlaw wept.

So down in troops the red-clad students come,
As kittens blithe, a joke-exchanging crew,
And in their beads bear learned Greece and Rome
And haply Cyprus in their bodies too:
Some on their journey pipe and play; and some
Talk long of MAG, how fair she was to view,
And as they talk (ay me!  so much the sadder),
Backwards they scale the steps of honest Plato's ladder.

Others, their heeds of weariness to cheat,
Repeated tales of classic merriment,
How the fool Faunus, on his noiseless feet,
At midnight to the cave of Tmolus went,
Scorch'd as he was with Venus' fiercest heat,
On cuckold-making mischievous intent,
Till, from the horny fist of hairy Hercules,
He got upon the cheek a most confounded jerk, alas!

Nor come they only down:  in chaise or gig
Th' endoctrin'd sage professors lolling ride,
Their heads with curl'd vastidity of wig
Thatch'd round and round, and queerly beautified;
In silken hose is sheath'd each learned leg;
White are their cravats, long and trimly tied.
Some say they came to jump for MAGGIE too,
But college-records say they came the sport to view.

See, as their coachwheels scour the Eastburn-lane,
Rattling as if the pavement up to tear!
How men and women, huddling in their train,
And hallooing shouts of loud applause appear!
Red-cheek'd and white-cheek'd, stout and feeble men,
With staff or staff-less, draw to ANSTER near;
And such a mob come trampling o'er King's-muir,
They raise a cloud of dust that does the sun obscure.

Next, from Denino's every house and hut,
Her simple guileless people hie away:
That day the doors of parish-school were shut,
And every scholar got his leave to play.
Down rush they, light of heart and light of foot,
Big plowmen, in their coats of hodden gray,
Weavers despising now both web and treadle,
Collier and collier's wife, and minister and beadle.

Next, from the well-air'd ancient town of Crail,
Go out her craftsmen with tumultuous din,
Her wind-bleach'd fishers, sturdy-limb'd and halt,
Her in-kneed tailors, garrulous and thin;
And some are flush'd with horns of pithy ale,
And some are fierce with drams of smuggled gin,
While, to augment his drowth, each to his jaws
A good Crail capon holds, at which he rugs and gnaws.

And from Kingsbarns and hamlet clep'd of boars,
And farms around (their names too long to add),
Sally the villagers and hinds in scores,
Tenant and laird, and hedger, hodden-clad.
Bolted are all the East-nook houses' doors;
Ev'n toothless wives pass westward, strangely glad,
Propping their trem'lous limbs on oaken stay,
And in their red plaids drest, as if 'twere Sabbath-day.

And barefoot lasses, on whose ruddy face
Unfurl'd is health's rejoicing banner seen,
Trick'd in their Sunday mutches edg'd with lace,
Tippets of white, and frocks of red and green.
Come tripping o'er the roads with jocund pace,
Gay as May-morning, tidy, gim, and clean,
Whilst, joggling at each wench's side, her joe
Cracks many a rustic joke, his pow'r of wit to show.

Then, jostling forward on the western road,
Approach the folk of wind-swept Pittenweem,
So num'rous that the highways, long and broad,
One moving field of gowns and coat-tails seem.
The fat man puffing goes, opprest with load
Of cumbrous flesh and corpulence extreme;
The lean man bounds along, and with his toes
Smites on the fat man's heels, that slow before him goes.

St. Monance, Elie, and adjacent farms,
Turn their mechanics, fishers, farmers out;
Sun-burnt and shoeless schoolboys rush in swarms,
With childish trick, and revelry and shout;
Mothers bear little children in their arms,
Attended by their giggling daughters stout;
Clowns, cobblers, cotters, tanners, weavers, beaux,
Hurry and hop along in clusters and in rows.

And every husbandman round Largo-law
Hath scrap'd his huge-wheel'd dung-cart fair and clean,
Wherein, on sacks stuff'd full of oaten straw,
Sits the Goodwife, Tam, Katey, Jock, and Jean.
In flow'rs and ribbands drest, the horses draw
Stoutly their creaking cumbersome machine,
As on his cart-head sits, the Goodman proud,
And cheerily cracks his whip, and whistles clear and loud.

Then from her coal-pits Dysart vomits forth
Her subterranean Men of colour dun,
Poor human mouldwarps!  doom'd to scrape in earth,
Cimmerian people, strangers to the sun!
Gloomy as soot, with faces grim and swarth,
They march, most sourly leering every one,
Yet very keen, at ANSTER loan, to share
The merriments and sports to be accomplish'd there.

Nor did Pathhead detain her wrangling race
Of weavers, toiling at their looms for bread:
For now their slippery shuttles rest a space
From flying through their labyrinths of thread;
Their treadle-shaking feet now scour apace
Through Gallowtown with levity of tread:
So on they pass, with sack in hand, full bent
To try their sinews' strength in dire experiment.

And long Kirkaldy, from each dirty street,
Her num'rous population eastward throws:
Her roguish boys with bare unstocking'd feet;
Her rich ship-owners, gen'rous and jocose;
Her prosp'rous merchants, sober and discreet;
Her coxcombs pantaloon'd, and powder'd beaux;
Her pretty lasses tripping on their great toes,
With foreheads white as milk, or any boil'd potatoes.

And from Kinghorn jump hastily along
Her ferrymen and poor inhabitants:&mdash;
And th' upland hamlet, where, as told in song,
Tam Lutar play'd of yore his lively rants,
Is left dispeopled of her brose-fed throng,
For eastward scud they now as thick as ants.
Dunfermline, too, so fam'd for cheeks and ticks,
Sends out her loom-bred men, with bags and walking-sticks.

And market-maids, and apron'd wives, that bring
Their gingerbread in baskets to the FAIR;
And cadgers with their creels, that hang by string
From their lean horse-ribs, rubbing off the hair;
And crook-legg'd cripples, that on crutches swing
Their shabby persons with a noble air;
And fiddlers with their fiddles in their cases,
And packmen with their packs of ribbons, gauze, and laces.

And from Kinross, whose dusty streets unpav'd
Are whirl'd through heav'n on summer's windy day,
Whose plats of cabbage-bearing ground are lav'd
By Leven's waves, that clear as crystal play,
Jog her brisk burghers, spruce and cleanly shav'd,
Her sullen cutlers and her weavers gay,
Her ploughboys in their botch'd and clumsy jackets,
Her clowns with cobbled shoon stuck full of iron tackets.

Next ride on sleek-maned horses, bay or brown,
Smacking their whips and spurring bloodily.
The writers of industrious Cupar town,
Good social mortals, skill'd the pen to ply.
Lo!  how their garments, as they gallop, down,
Waving behind them in the breezes fly;
As upward spurn'd to heavn's blue bending roof,
Dash'd is the dusty road from every bounding hoof.

And clerks with ruffled shirts, and frizzled hairs,
Their tassel'd half-boots clear as looking-glass,
And sheriffs learn'd, and unlearn'd sheriff-mairs,
And messengers-at-arms, with brows of brass,
Come strutting down, or single or in pairs,
Some on high horse and some on lowly ass;
With blacksmiths, barbers, butchers, and their brats,
And some had new hats on, and some came wanting hats.

Astraddle on their proud steeds full of fire,
From all the tree-girt country-seats around,
Comes many a huffy, many a kindly squire,
In showy garb, worth many a silver pound;
While close behind, in livery's base attire,
Follows poor lackey with small-bellied hound,
Carrying, upon his shoulders slung, the bag
Wherein his master means to risk his neck for MAG.

From all her lanes and alleys, fair Dundee
Has sent her happy citizens away;
They come with meikle jolliment and glee,
Crossing in clumsy boat their shallow Tay;
Their heads are bonneted most fair to see,
And of the tartan is their back's array.
From Perth, Dunkeld, from Brechin, Forfar, Glams,
Roll down the sweaty crowds, with wearied legs and hams.

And from the Mearnshire, and from Aberdeen,
Where, knit by many a wench is many a stocking;
From Banff and Murray, where of old were seen
The witches by the chief so fain to grow king,
Descend, in neckless coats brush'd smooth and clean,
And eke with long pipes in their mouths a-smoking,
The northern people, boisterous and rough,
Bearing both chin and nose bedaub'd with spilth of snuff.

Comes next from Ross-shire, and from Sutherland,
The horny-knuckled kilted Highlandman:
From where upon the rocky Caithness strand
Breaks the long wave that at the Pole began,
And where Lochfyne from her prolific sand
Her herrings gives to feed each bord'ring clan,
Arrive the brogue-shod men of gen'rous eye,
Plaided, and breechless all, with Esau's hairy thigh.

They come not now to fire the Lowland stacks,
Or foray on the banks of Fortha's firth;
Claymore, and broad-sword, and Lochaber-axe,
Are left to rust above the smoky hearth;
Their only arms are bagpipes now, and sacks;
Their teeth are set most desp'rately for mirth
And at their broad and sturdy backs are hung
Great wallets, cramm'd with cheese and bannocks, and cold tongue.

Nor staid away the Islanders, that lie
To buffet of th' Atlantic surge expos'd:
From Jura, A'rran, Parra, Uist, and Skye,
Piping they come, unshav'd, unbreech'd, unhos'd;
And from that Isle, whose abbey, structur'd high,
Within its precincts holds dead kings enclos'd,
Where St. Columba oft is seen to waddle,
Gown'd round with flaming fire, upon the spire astraddle.

Next from the far-fam'd ancient town of Ayr,
(Sweet Ayr!  with crops of ruddy damsels blest,
That, shooting up, and waxing fat and fair,
Shine on thy braes the lilies of the west,)
And from Dumfries, and from Kilmarnock (where
Are nightcaps made, the cheapest and the best),
Blithely they ride on-ass and mule, with sacks
In lieu of saddles plac'd upon their asses' backs.

Close at their heels, bestriding well-strapp'd nag,
Or humbly riding ass's backbone bare,
Come Glasgow's merchants, each with money-bag,
To purchase Dutch lintseed at ANSTER FAIR;
Sagacious fellows all, who well may brag
Of virtuous industry and talents rare;
Th' accomplish'd men o' the counting-room, confest,
And fit to crack a joke or argue with the best.

Nor keep their homes the Borderers, that stay
Where purls the Jed, and Esk, and little Liddel,
Men that can rarely on the bagpipe play,
And wake th' unsober spirit of the fiddle;
Avow'd freebooters, that have many a day
Stol'n sheep and cow, yet never own'd they did ill;
Great rogues, for sure that wight is but a rogue,
That blots the eighth command from Moses' decalogue.

And some of them in sloop of tarry side
Come from North-Berwick harbour sailing out;
Others, abhorrent of the sick'ning tide,
Have ta'en the road by Stirling brig about,
And eastward now from long Kirkaldy ride,
Slugging on their slow-gaited asses stout,
While dangling at their backs are bagpipes hung,
And dangling hangs a tale on ev'ry rhimer's tongue.

Amid them rides, on lofty ass sublime,
With cadger-like sobriety of canter,
In purple lustihood of youthful prime,
Great in his future glory, ROB the RANTER;
(I give the man what name in little time
He shall acquire from pipe and drone, and chanter;)
He comes apparell'd like a trim bridegroom,
Fiery and flush'd with hope, and like a god in bloom.

No paltry vagrant piper-carle is he,
Whose base-bribed drone whiffs out its wind for hire,
Who, having stroll'd all day for penny-fee,
Couches at night with oxen in the byre:
ROB is a Border laird of good degree,
A many-acred, clever, jolly squire,
One born and shap'd to shine and make a figure,
And bless'd with supple limbs to jump with wondrous vigour.

His waggish face, that speaks a soul jocose,
Seems t' have been cast i' the mould of fun and glee,
And on the bridge of his well-arched nose
Sits Laughter plum'd, and white-wing'd Jollity;
His manly chest a breadth heroic shows;
Bold is his gesture, dignified and free;
Ev'n as he smites with lash his ass's hip,
'Tis with a seemly grace he whirls his glitt'ring whip.

His coat is of the flashy Lincoln green,
With silver buttons of the prettiest mould;
Each buttonhole and skirt and hem is seen
Sparkishly edg'd with lace of Yellow gold;
His breeches of the velvet smooth and clean,
Are very fair and goodly to behold;
So on he rides, and let him e'en ride on;
We shall again meet ROB to-morrow at the loan.

But mark his ass ere off he ride:  some say
He got him from a pilgrim lady fair,
Who, landing once on Joppa's wave-worn quay,
Had bought him of Armenian merchant there,
And prest his padded pack, and rode away
To snuff devotion in with Syria's air;
Then brought him home in hold of stout Levanter,
All for the great good luck of honest Rob the RANTER.

Along Fife's western roads, behold, how hie
The travel-sweltry crowds to ANSTER loan,
Shaded, o'erhead with clouds of dust, that fly,
Tarnishing heav'n with darkness not its own!
And scarcely can the Muse's lynx-sharp eye
Scan, through the dusty nuisance upward blown,
The ruddy plaids, black hats, and bonnets blue,
Of these that rush below, a motley-vestur'd crew!

Nor only was the land with crowds opprest,
That trample forward to th' expected FAIR:
The harass'd ocean had no peace or rest,
So many keels her foamy bosom tear;
For, into view, now sailing from the west,
With streamers idling in the bluish air,
Appear the painted pleasure-boats unleaky,
Charg'd with a precious freight, &mdash; the good folks of Auld Reekie.

They come, the cream and flow'r of all the Scots,
The children of politeness, science, wit,
Exulting in their bench'd and gaudy boats,
Wherein some joking and some puking sit.
Proudly the pageantry of carvels floats,
As if the salt sea frisk'd to carry it;
The gales vie emulous their sails to wag,
And dally as in love with each long gilded flag.

Upon the benches seated, I descry
Her gentry; knights, and lairds, and long-nail'd fops;
Her advocates and signet-writers sly;
Her gen'rous merchants, faithful to their shops;
Her lean-cheek'd tetchy critics, who, O fie!
Hard-retching, spue upon the sails and ropes;
Her lovely ladies, with their lips like rubies;
Her fiddlers, fuddlers, fools, bards, blockheads, blackguards, boobies.

And red-prow'd fisher-boats afar are spied
In south-east, tilting o'er the jasper main,
Whose wing-like oars, dispread on either side,
Now swoop on sea, now rise in sky again.
They come not now with herring-nets supplied,
Or barbed lines to twitch the haddock train.
But with the townsfolk of Dunbar are laden,
Who burn to see the FAIR, &mdash; man, stripling, wife, and maiden.

And many a Dane, with ringlets long and red,
And many a starv'd Norwegian, lank and brown,
(For over seas the fame of MAG had spread
Afar from Scandinavian town to town,)
Maugre the risk of drowning, and the dread
Of krakens, isles of fish of droll renown,
Have dar'd to cross the ocean, and now steer
Their long outlandish skiffs direct on ANSTER pier.

Forward they scud; and soon each pleasure-barge,
And fisher-boats, and skiffs so slim and lax,
On shore their various passengers discharge,
Some hungry, queasy some and white as flax;
Lightly they bound upon the beach's verge,
Glad to unbend their stiffen'd houghs and backs.
But who is that, O Muse, with lofty brow,
That from his lacker'd boat is just forth-stepping now ?

Thou fool!  (for I have ne'er since Bavius' days
Had such a dolt to dictate to as thou,)
Dost thou not know, by that eye's kingly rays,
And by the arch of that celestial brow,
And by the grace his ev'ry step displays,
And by the crowds that round him duck and bow,
That that is good King James, the merriest Monarch
That ever sceptre sway'd since Noah steer'd his own ark?

For as he in his house of Holyrood
Of late was keeping jovially his court,
The gipsy Fame beside his window stood,
And hollow'd in his ear fair MAG'S report.
The Monarch laugh'd, for to his gamesome mood
Accorded well th' anticipated sport;
So here he comes, with lord and lady near,
Stepping with regal stride up ANSTER's eastern pier.

But mark you, boy, how in a loyal ring
(As does obedient subjects well become)
Fife's hospitable lairds salute their King,
And kiss his little finger or his thumb:
That done, their liege lord they escorting bring
To ANSTER House, that he may eat a crumb;
Where in the stucco'd hall they sit and dine,
And into tenfold joy bedrench their blood with wine.

Some with the ladies in the chambers ply
Their bounding elasticity of heel,
Evolving, as they trip it whirlingly,
The merry mazes of th' entangled reel.
'Tween roof and floor, they fling, they flirt, they fly,
Their garments swimming round them as they wheel;
The rafters creak beneath the dance's clatter;
Tremble the solid walls with feet that shake and patter.

Some (wiser they), resolved on drinking-bout,
The wines of good Sir John englut amain;
Their glasses soon are fill'd, and soon drunk out,
And soon are bumper'd to the brim again.
Certes that laird is but a foolish lout,
Who does not fuddle now with might and main;
For gen'rous is their host, and, by my sooth,
Was never better wine applied to Scottish mouth.

With might and main they fuddle and carouse;
Each glass augments their thirst, and keens their wit;
They swill, they swig, they take a hearty rouse,
Cheering their flesh with Bacchus' benefit,
Till, by and by, the windows of the house
Go dizzily whirling round them where they sit:
And, had you seen the sport, and heard the laughing,
You'd thought that all Jove's gods in ANSTER House sat quaffing.

Not such a wassail, famed for social glee,
In Shushan's gardens long ago was held,
When Ahasuerus, by a blithe decree,
His turban'd satraps to the bouse compell'd,
And bagg'd their Persian paunches with a sea
Of wine, that from his carved gold they swill'd,
Whilst overhead was stretch'd (a gorgeous show!)
Blue blankets, silver-starr'd, a heaven of calico.

Nor less is the disport and joy without,
In ANSTER town and loan, through all the throng:
'Tis but one vast tumultuous jovial rout,
Tumult of laughing, and of gabbling strong;
Thousands and tens of thousands reel about,
With joyous uproar blustering along;
Elbows push boringly on sides with pain,
Wives hustling come on wives, and men dash hard on men.

There lacks no sport.  Tumblers, in wondrous pranks,
High-staged, display their limbs' agility;
And now, they, mountant from the scaffold's planks,
Kick with their whirling heels the clouds on high,
And now, like cat, upon their dextrous shanks
They light, and of new monsters cheat the sky;
Whilst motley Merry-Andrew, with his jokes,
Wide through th' incorp'rate mob the bursting laugh provokes.

Others upon the green, in open air,
Enact the best of Davie Lindsay's plays;
While ballad-singing women do not spare
Their throats, to give good utt'rance to their lays;
And many a leather-lung'd co-chanting pair
Of wood-legg'd sailors, children's laugh and gaze,
Lift to the courts of Jove their voices loud,
Y-hymning their mishaps, to please the heedless crowd.

Meanwhile the sun, fatigued (as well he may)
With shining on a night till seven o'clock,
Beams on each chimney-head a farewell ray,
Illuming into golden shaft its smoke;
And now in sea, far west from Oronsay,
Is dipp'd his chariot-wheel's refulgent spoke,
And now a section of his face appears,
And diving, now he ducks clean down o'er head and ears.

Anon uprises, with blithe bagpipe's sound,
And shriller din of flying fiddlestick,
On the green loan and meadow-crofts around
A town of tents, with blankets roofed quick:
A thousand stakes are rooted in the ground;
A thousand hammers clank and clatter thick;
A thousand fiddles squeak and squeal it yare;
A thousand stormy drones out-gasp in groans their air.

And such a turbulence of gen'ral mirth
Rises from ANSTER loan upon the sky,
That from his throne Jove starts, and down on earth
Looks, wond'ring what may be the jollity.
He roots his eye on shores of Forthan firth,
And smerks, as knowing well the market nigh,
And bids-his gods and goddesses look down,
To mark the raze of joy that maddens ANSTER town.

From Cellardyke to wind-swept Pittenweem,
And from Balhouffie to Kilrennymill,
Vaulted with blankets, crofts and meadows seem,
So many tents the grassy spaces fill:
Meantime the Moon, yet leaning on the stream,
With fluid silver bathes the welkin chill,
That now Earth's half-ball, on the side of night,
Swims in an argent sea of beautiful Moonlight.

Then to his bed full many a man retires,
On plume, or chaff, or straw, to get a nap,
In houses, tents, in haylofts, stables, byres,
And or without, or with, a warm night-cap:
Yet sleep not all; for by the social fires
Sit many, cuddling round their toddy-sap,
And ever and anon they eat a lunch,
And rinse the mouthfuls down with flav'rous whisky punch.

Some, shuffling paper nothings, keenly read
The Devil's maxims in his painted books,
Till the old serpent in each heart and head
Spits canker, and with wormwood sours their looks;
Some o'er the chess-board's chequer'd champain lead
Their inch-tall bishops, kings, and queens, and rooks;
Some force, t' inclose the Tod, the wooden Lamb on;
Some shake the pelting dice upon the broad backgammon.

Others of travell'd elegance polite,
With mingling music MAGGIE'S house surround,
And serenade her all the live-long night,
With song and lyre, and flute's enchanting sound,
Chiming and hymning into fond delight
The heavy night-air that o'ershades the ground;
While she, right pensive, in her chamber-nook
Sits pond'ring on th' advice of little Tommy Puck.

