O that my noddle were a seething-kettle,
Frothing with bombast o'er the Muses' fire!
O that my wit were sharper than a nettle!
O that with shrill swan-guts were strung my lyre!
So would I chime and chant with such a mettle,
That each old wife in Fife's full-peopled shire
Should, Maenad-like, spring from her spinning-wheel,
And frolic round her bard, and wince a tottering reel.

Again the herald, at the King's desire,
His tube of metal to his mouth applied,
And, with a roysting brazen clangour dire,
Round to the heaving mass of rabble cried,
Inviting every blade of fun and fire,
That wish'd to jump in hempen bondage tied,
Forthwith to start forth from the people's ring,
And fetch his sack in hand, and stand before the King.

No sooner in the sky his words were blown,
Than through the multitude's compacted press
Wedging their bodies, push to th' open Loan
Th' audacious men of boasted springiness;
Some, Samson-thigh'd, and large and big of bone,
Brawn-burden'd, six feet high or little less,
Some, lean, flesh-wither'd, stinted, oatmeal things,
Yet hardy, tough, and smart, with heels like steely springs.

Nor were the offer'd candidates a few;
In hundreds forth they issue, mad with zeal
To try, in feats which haply some shall rue,
Their perilous alacrity of heel:
Each mortal brings his sack, wherein to mew,
As in a pliant prison, strong as steel,
His guiltless corse, and clog his natural gait
With cumberance of cloth, embarrassing and strait.

And in their hands they hold to view on high,
Vain-gloriously, their bags of sturdy thread,
And toss and wave them in th' affronted sky,
Like honour-winning trophies o'er their head,
Assuming merit, that they dare defy
The dangers of a race so droll and dread,
Ah!  boast not, sirs, for premature's the brag;
'Tis time, in troth, to boast when off you put the bag.

Onward they hasten'd, clamorous and loud,
To where the Monarch sat upon the knoll,
And having to his presence humbly bow'd,
And bared of reverential hat their poll,
Their dirty sacks they wagg'd, erect and proud,
Impatient, in their fiery fit of soul,
And pertly shaked, even in the Monarch's eyes,
A cloud of meal and flour that whirling round them flies.

But as the good King saw them thus prepared
To have their persons scabbarded in cloth,
He order'd twenty soldiers of his guard,
All swashing fellows, and of biggest growth,
To step upon the green Loan's listed sward,
That they may lend assistance, nothing loath,
To plunge into their pliant sheaths, neck-deep,
Th' ambitious men that dare such over-vent'rous leap.

They stepp'd obedient down, and in a trice
Put on the suitors comical array;
Each sack gaped wide its monstrous orifice,
To swallow to the neck its living prey;
And as a swineherd puts in poke a grice,
To carry from its sty some little way,
So did the soldiers plunge the men within
Their yawning gloomy gulfs, even to the neck and chin.

As when of yore the Roman Forum, split
By earthquake, yawn'd a black tremendous hole,
Voracious, deep'ning still, though flung in it,
Were stones, and trees with all their branches whole;
Till, in a noble patriotic fit,
The younker Curtius, of devoted soul,
Down headlong yarely gallopp'd, horse and all,
And dash'd his gallant bones to atoms by the fall:

So fearlessly these men of fair Scotland
(Though not to death) down plunged into their sacks,
Entoiling into impotence to stand
Their feet, and mobbling legs, and sides, and backs,
Till tightly drawn was every twisted band,
And knotted firmly round their valiant necks,
That, in their rival rage to jump forthright,
They might not struggle off their case of sackcloth tight.

Nor, when their bodies were accoutred well,
Upon their cumber'd feet stood all upright,
But some, unpractised or uncautious, fell
Sousing with lumpish undefended weight,
And roll'd upon the turf full many an ell,
Incapable of uprise, sad in plight;
Till, raised again, with those that keep their feet,
Join'd in a line they stand, each in his winding-sheet.

O 'twas an awkward and ridic'lous show,
To see a long sack-muffled line of men,
With hatless heads all peeping in a row.
Forth from the long smocks that their limbs contain:
For in the wide abyss of cloth below,
Their legs are swallow'd, and their stout arms twain;
From chin to toe one shapeless lump they stand,
In clumsy uniform, without leg, arm, or hand.

And such their odd appearance was, and show
Of human carcasses in sackcloth dight,
As when the traveller, when he haps to go
Down to Grand Cairo in the Turk's despite,
Sees in her chamber'd catacombs below
Full many a mummy horribly upright,
A grisly row of grimly-garnish'd dead,
That seem to pout, and scowl, and shake the brainless head.

So queer and so grotesque to view they stood,
All ready, at the trump's expected sound,
To take a spring of monstrous altitude,
And scour with majesty of hop the ground:
Yet not so soon the starting-blast ensued;
For, as they stand intent upon the bound,
The humorous Monarch, eyeing their array,
Gave them his good advice before they rush'd away.

"O friends!  since now your loins are girt," he cried,
"For Journey perilous and full of toil,
Behoves it you right cautiously to guide
Your ticklish steps along such vexing soil;
For perilous the road, and well supplied
With stumps, and stumbling-blocks, and pits of guile,
And snares, and latent traps with earth bestown,
To catch you by the heels, and bring you groaning down.

"And wo betide, if unaware you hap
Your body's well-adjusted poise to lose,
For bloody bump and sorrowful sore slap
Await your falling temple, brow, and nose;
And, when once down and fetter'd in a trap,
Hard task 'twill be to extricate your toes:
So, lads, if you regard your nose's weal,
Pray pick out stable steps, and tread with wary heel.

"And he that longest time, without a fall
Shall urge his sad perplexity of way,
And leave behind his fellow-travellers all,
Growling for help, and grovelling on the clay;
He, for his laudable exertions, shall
Be sung the second victor of the day:
And so God speed you sirs!" &mdash; The Monarch spoke,
And on the surging air the trumpet's signal broke.

As when a thunderclap, preluding nigh
A storm, growls on the frontiers of the west,
Ere yet the cloud, slow toiling up the sky,
Hath in its mass the mid-day sun supprest,
Alarm'd, the timid doves that basking lie
Upon their cot's slope sunny roof at rest,
At once up-flutter in a sudden fray,
And poise th' unsteady wing, and squir in air away:

So started, as the herald gave the blast,
At once the suitors in their sacks away,
With gallant up-spring, notable and vast,
A neck-endangering violent assay:
The solid earth, as tip to sky they past,
Push'd back, seem'd to retire a little way;
And, as they up-flew furious from the ground,
The gash'd and wounded air whizz'd audibly a sound.

As when on summer eve a soaking rain
Hath after drought bedrench'd the tender grass,
If chance, in pleasant walk along the plain,
Brushing with foot the pearl-hung blades you pass,
A troop of frogs oft leaps from field of grain,
Marshall'd in line, a foul unseemly race;
They halt a space, then vaulting up they fly,
As if they long'd to sit on Iris' bow on high:

So leap'd the men, half-sepulchred in sack,
Up-swinging, with their shapes bemonst'ring sky,
And coursed in air a semicircle track,
Like to the feathery-footed Mercury;
Till, spent their impetus, with sounding thwack
Greeted their heels the green ground sturdily;
And some descending kept their balance well,
Unbalanced some came down, and boisterously fell.

The greeted earth beneath the heavy thwacks
Of feet that down centripetal alight,
Of tingling elbows, bruised loins and backs,
Shakes passive, yet indignant of the weight;
For, o'er her bosom, in their plaguy sacks,
Cumbrously roll (a mortifying sight!)
Wreck'd burgher, knight, and laird, and clown, pell-mell,
Prostrate, in grievance hard, too terrible to tell.

And aye they struggle at an effort strong
To reinstate their feet upon the plain,
Half-elbowing, half-kneeing, sore and long,
Abortively, with bitter sweat and pain,
Till, half upraised, they to their forehead's wrong
Go with a buffet rapping down again,
And sprawl, and flounce, and wallow on their backs,
Crying aloud for help t' uncord their dolorous sacks.

Not in severer anguish of distress
The fabled giant under Etna lies,
Though rocks and tree-proud promontories press,
With vengeance fitting Jove, his ruffian size:
Wallowing supine beneath the mountain's stress,
Half-broil'd with brimstone ever hot, he fries,
And, as he turns his vasty carcass o'er,
Out-belches molten rocks, and groans a hideous roar.

In such vexatious plight the mortals lie
That founder'd on the threshold of the race,
Where let us leave them, and lift up our eye
To those that keep their feet, and hop apace.&mdash;
Gramercy!  how they bounce it lustily,
Maugre their misery of woven case!
How with their luggage scour they o'er the Loan,
And toil, and moil, and strain, and sweat, and lumber on!

Strange thing it is that men so penn'd in clout,
So wound with swaddling-clothes, should trip it so;
See how with spring incomparably stout,
Spurning the nasty earth, they upward go,
As if they wish'd t' unsocket and knock out
With poll the candles that i' the night-sky glow!
See how, attain'd the zenith of their leap,
Earthward they sink again with long-descending sweep!

They halt not still; again aloft they hop,
As if they tread the rainbow's gilded bend,
Again upon the quaking turf they drop,
Lighting majestic on their proper end:
I ween, they do not make a moments stop;
O who may now his precious time misspend?
'Tis bustling all and swelt'ring &mdash; but, behold
Swop!  there a jumper falls aflat upon the mould.

How can his gyved arms be forward thrust
To break the downsway of his fall just now?
Ah!  'tis his tender nose alone that must
In loving-kindness save from bump his brow:
His soft nose, to its site and duty just,
Is martyr'd to its loyalty, I trow,
For, flatten'd into anguish by the clod,
It weeps &mdash; see how it weeps &mdash; warm trickling tears of blood!

He bleeds, and from his nostrils' double sluice
Redly bedews the sod of ANSTER Loan,
Till in a puddle of his own heart's juice
He welt'ring writhes with lamentable moan,
And sends his sack in curses to the deuce,
Banning the hour when first he put it on.
Meanwhile, o'erlabour'd in their hobbling pother,
Douse!  drops a second down, and, whap!  there sinks another.

Wearied, half-bursten with their hot turmoil,
Their lungs like Vulcan's bellows panting strong,
Pow'rless to stand or prosecute their toil,
Successively they souse and roll along,
Till, round and round, the carcass-cumber'd soil
Is strewn with havock of the jumping throng,
That make a vain endeavour off to shuffle
The cruel sackcloth coil that does their persons muffle.

All in despair have sunk, save yonder two
That still their perpendic'lar posture keep,
The only remnant of the jumping crew,
That urge their emulous persisting leap:
Oddspittkins!  how with poise exactly true,
Clean forward to the ribbon'd pole they sweep;
I cannot say that one is 'fore the other,
So equal side by side they plod near one another.

The pole is gain'd, and to the glorious sun
They turn their sweaty faces round again;
With inextinguishable rage to run,
Southward, unflagging and unquell'd, they strain.
What! &mdash; Is not yonder face, where young-eyed Fun
And Laughter seem enthroned to hold their reign,
One seen before &mdash; ev'n ROB the Bord'rer's phiz?&mdash;
Ay, now I ken it well, by'r lakin it is his!

Haste, haste ye, ROB, half-hop, half-run, half-fly,
Wriggle and wrestle in thy bag's despite;
So!  shoot like cannon-bullet to the sky;
So!  stably down upon thy soles alight
Up, up again, and fling it gallantly;
Well flung, my ROB, thou art a clever wight:
'Sblood!  how thy rival is a step before;
String, string thy sinews up, and jump three yards and more.

'Tis done:  but who is he that at thy side
Thy rival vigorously marches so?
Declare, O Muse, since thou art eagle-eyed,
And thine it is, even at a glance, to know
Each son of mortal man, though mumm'd and tied
In long disguising sack from chin to toe.
"He, boy, that marches in such clumsy state,
Is old Edina's child, a waggish Advocate.

"For he too has for MAGGIE LAUDER dared
To prove the mettle of his heel and shin;
A jolly wight, who trickishly prepared
A treach'rous sack to scarf his body in,
A sack whose bottom was with damp impair'd,
Fusty, half-rotten, mouldy, frail, and thin,
That he, unseen, might in the race's pother
Thrust out one helpful leg, and keep incaged its brother.

"And seest thou not his right leg peeping out,
Enfranchised trait'rously to help his gait,
Whilst th' other still imprisond in its clout,
Tardily follows its more active mate?"
I see it well &mdash; 'tis treachery, no doubt;
Beshrew thee now, thou crafty Advocate!
Unfair, unfair!  'tis quite unfair, I say,
Thus with illicit leg to prop thy perilous way!

Half-free, half-clogg'd, he steals his quick advance,
Nearing at each unlicensed step the base,
While honest ROBERT plies the hardier dance,
Most faithful to his sack and to the race.
Now for it, ROB &mdash; another jump &mdash; but once&mdash;
And overjump'd is all th' allotted space.
By Jove, they both have reach'd the base together;
Gain'd is the starting-line, yet gain'd the race hath neither.

At once they bend each man his body's frame
Into a bow, before the King and MAG;
At once they ope their lips to double-claim
The race's palm (for now Auld Reekie's wag,
As snail draws in its horn, had, fie for shame!
Drawn his dishonest leg into his bag);
At once they plead the merits of their running,
Good ROB with proofs of force, the wag with quips and punning.

Me lists not now to variegate my song
With all his sophistry and quip and pun;
O 'twould be tiresome, profitless, and long,
To quote his futile arguments air-spun,
His oratoric tricks that dress the wrong
In garb of right, his gibes of naughty fun,
Quiddits and quillits that may well confound one,
And make a rotten sack appear a goodly sound one.

But ROBERT to the people's sight appeal'd,
And to the eyes of royal JAMES and MAG,
Who saw his rival's foot too plain reveal'd,
And impudently peering from its bag:
He said 'twas roguish thus to come afield
With such a paltry hypocritic rag;
The very hole through which his foot was thrust
Gapes evidence to prove his claim was quite unjust.

Long was the plea, and longer it had been,
Had not the populace begun aloud
T' express with clamour their resentment keen
At him who quibbled in his rotten shroud:
A thousand hands, uplifted high, were seen
Over the hats and bonnets of the crowd,
With paly hens' eggs that their fingers clench,
To hurl upon his sack conviction, slime, and stench.

Which when he saw all white upheld to view,
Ready to rattle shame about his ears,
He straightway the perplexing claim withdrew,
Urged to resign by his judicious fears;
For had he but one minute staid or two,
He, for his subtilties, and quirks, and jeers,
Had reap'd a poor and pitiful reward,
And smell'd from head to foot &mdash; but not with Syrian nard.

The Monarch, then, well pleased that thus the mob
Had settled with prejudging voice the case,
Orders his trumpeter to blazon ROB,
Again the winner of the second race.
The fellow blew each cheek into a globe,
And puff'd into deformity his face,
As to the top of heaven's empyreal frame
He, in a storm of breath, sent up the conq'ror's name.

His name the rabble took; from tongue to tongue
Bandied it flew like fiery-winged shot,
That the blue atmosphere around them rung
With the blabb'd honours of great ROBERT SCOTT:
Nor, when they thus his triumph stoutly sung,
Were the race-founder'd gentlemen forgot,
That in their trammels still aflound'ring lay,
And, had they not been raised, had lain there to this day.

But soon uprear'd they were:  the lads that late
Had help'd their uncouth livery to don,
Now step upon the green, compassionate,
To free them from the house of dole and moan:
The cords that on their necks were knotted strait,
Are loosed, and, as they lie extended prone,
Of their long scabbards are discased the men,
And stand upon their feet, unclogg'd and free agen.

They take no time (such shame the vanquish'd stung),
Each to snatch up his bag and bring it off;
Away they start, and plunge amid the throng,
Glad their embarrassment of cloth to doff
(So shoots the serpent to the brake along,
And leaves to rot his cast despised slough:)
Deep in the throng with elbows sharp they bore,
And fear contemptuous laugh and hateful egg no more.

But now the sun, in mid-day's gorgeous state,
Tow'rs on the summit of the lucid sky,
And human stomachs that were cramm'd of late,
Now empty, send their silent dinner-cry,
Demanding something wherewithal to sate
Their hunger, bread and beer, or penny pie:
The crowd, obedient to the belly's call,
Begin to munch, and eat, and nibble one and all.

Some from their pockets or their wallets drew
Lumps of the roasted flesh of calf or lamb;
Some ply their teeth-arm'd grinding jaws to chew
The tougher slices of the thirsty ham;
Others with bits of green cheese nice and new,
Ev'n to the throat their clownish bellies cram;
While horns of ale, from many a barrel fill'd,
Foam white with frothy rage, and soon are swigg'd and swill'd.

JAMES, too, and MAG, and all the courtly train
Of lords and ladies round them, not a few,
With sugar'd biscuits sooth'd their stomachs' pain,
For courtly stomachs must be humour'd too;
And from their throats to wash the dusty stain
That they had breathed when from the sacks it flew,
A glass of wine they slipp'd within their clay,
And if they swallow'd twain, the wiser folk were they.

Nor ceased the business of the day meanwhile;
For, as the Monarch chew'd his sav'ry cake,
The man whose lungs sustain the trumpet's toil
Made haste again his noisy tube to take,
And with a cry, which, heard full many a mile,
Caused the young crows on Airdrie's trees to quake,
He bade the suitor-pipers to draw nigh,
That they might, round the knoll, their powers of piping try.

Which when the rabble heard, with sudden sound
They broke their circle's huge circumference,
And, crushing forward to the southern mound,
They push'd their many-headed shoal immense,
Diffusing to an equal depth around
Their mass of bodies wedged compact and dense,
That, standing nigher, they might better hear
The pipers squeaking loud to charm Miss MAGGIE'S ear.

And soon the pipers, shouldering along
Through the close mob their squeezed uneasy way,
Stood at the hillock's foot, an eager throng,
Each asking license from the King to play;
For with a tempest turbulent and strong
Labour'd their bags, impatient of delay,
Heaving their bleated globes outrageously,
As if in pangs to give their contents to the sky.

And every bag, thus full and tempest-ripe,
Beneath its arm lay ready to be prest,
And on the holes of each fair-polish'd pipe
Each piper's fingers long and white were placed:
Fiercely they burn'd in jealous rivalship;
Each madding piper scoff'd at all the rest,
And fleer'd, and toss'd contemptuously his head,
As if his skill alone deserved fair MAGGIE'S bed.

Nor could they wait, so piping-mad they were,
Till JAMES gave each man orders to begin,
But in a moment they displode their air.
In one tumultuous and unlicensed din:
Out flies, in storm of simultaneous blare,
The whizzing wind comprest their bags within,
And whiffling through the wooden tubes so small,
Growls gladness to be freed from such confining thrall.

Then rose, in burst of hideous symphony,
Of pibrochs and of tunes one mingled roar;
Discordantly the pipes squeal'd sharp and high,
The drones alone in solemn concord snore;
Five hundred fingers, twinkling funnily,
Play twiddling up and down on hole and bore,
Now passage to the shrilly wind denying,
And now a little raised to let it out a-sighing.

Then rung the rocks and caves of Billyness,
Reverberating back that concert's sound,
And half the lurking Echoes, that possess
The glens and hollows of the Fifan ground;
Their shadowy voices strain'd into excess
Of outcry, loud huzzaing, round and round
To all the Dryads of Pitkirie wood,
That now they round their trees should dance in frisky mood.

As, when the sportsman with report of gun
Alarms the sea-fowls of the Isle of May,
Ten thousand mews and gulls that shade the sun
Come flapping down in terrible dismay,
And with a wild and barb'rous concert stun
His ears, and scream, and shriek, and wheel away;
Scarce can the boatman hear his plashing oar;
Yell caves and eyries all, and rings each Maian shore:

Just so around the knoll did pipe and drone
Whistle and hum a discord strange to hear,
Tort'ring, with violence of shriek and groan,
Kingly, and courtly, and plebeian ear;
And still the men had humm'd and whistled on,
Even till each bag had burst its bloated sphere,
Had not the King, uprising, waved his hand,
Checking the boisterous din of such unmanner'd band.

On one side of his face a laugh was seen,
On t' other side a half-form'd frown lay hid:
He frown'd, because they, petulantly keen,
Set up their piping forward and unbid;
He laugh'd, for who could have controll'd his mien,
Hearing such crash of pibrochs as he did?
He bade them orderly the strife begin,
And play each man the tune wherewith the fair he'd win.

Whereat the pipers ceased their idle toil
Of windy music wild and deafening,
And made too late (what they forgot erewhile)
A general bow to MAGGIE and their King.
But as they vail'd their bare heads tow'rd the soil,
O then there happ'd a strange portentous thing,
Which had not good my Muse confirm'd for true,
Myself had not believed, far less have told to you.

For, lo!  whilst all their bodies yet were bent,
Breaks from the spotless blue of eastern sky
A globe of fire, (miraculous ostent!)
Bursten from some celestial cleft on high;
And thrice in circle round the firmament
Trail'd its long light the gleamy prodigy,
Till on the ring of pipers down it came,
And set their pipes, and drones, and chanters in a flame.

'Twas quick and sudden as th' electric shock;
One moment lighted and consumed them all:
As is the green hair of the tufted oak
Scathed into blackness by the fulmined ball.
Or as, spark-kindled, into fire and smoke
Flashes and fumes the nitrous grain so small,
So were their bagpipes, in a twink, like tinder,
Fired underneath their arms, and burnt into a cinder.

Yet so innocuous was the sky-fallen flame,
That, save their twangling instruments alone
Unsinged their other gear remain'd the same,
Even to the nap that stuck their coats upon;
Nor did they feel its heat, when down it came
On errand to destroy pipe, bag, and drone,
But stood in blank surprise, when to the ground
Dropt down in ashes black their furniture of sound.

Crest-fallen they stood, confounded and distrest,
Fixing upon the turf their stupid look,
Conscious that Heaven forbade them to contest,
By such a burning token of rebuke.
The rabble, too, its great alarm confest,
For, every face the ruddy blood forsook,
As with their white, uprolling, ghastly eyes,
They spied the streaky light wheel whizzing from the skies.

And still they to that spot of orient heaven,
Whence burst the shining globe, look up aghast,
Expecting when th' empyreal pavement, riven,
A second splendour to the earth should cast:
But when they saw no repetition given,
Changed from alarm to noisy joy at last,
They set up such a mix'd tremendous shout,
As made the girdling heavens to bellow round about.

And such a crack and peal of laughter rose,
When the poor pipers bagpipeless they saw,
As when a flock of jetty-feather'd crows,
On winter morning, when the skies are raw,
Come from their woods in long and sooty rows,
And over ANSTER through their hoarse throats caw:
The sleepy old wives, on their warm chaff-beds,
Up from their bolsters rear, afear'd, their flannell'd heads.

Then did th' affronted pipers slink away,
With faces fix'd on earth for very shame;
For not one remnant of those pipes had they
Wherewith they late so arrogantly came,
But in a black and ashy ruin lay
Their glory, moulder'd by the scathing flame:
Yet in their hearts they cursed (and what the wonder?)
That fire to which their pipes so quick were given a plunder.

And scarce they off had slunk, when, with a bound,
Great ROBERT SCOTT sprung forth before the King;
For he alone, when all the Pipers round
Stood ranged into their fire-devoted ring,
Had kept snug distance from the fated ground,
As if forewarn'd of that portentous thing.
He stood and laugh'd, as underneath his arm
He held his bagpipe safe, unscathed with fiery harm.

His hollow drone, with mouth wide-gaping, lay
Over his shoulder pointing to the sky,
Ready to spue its breath, and puff away
The lazy silver clouds that sit on high:
His bag swell'd madly to begin the play.
And with, its bowel-wind groan'd inwardly;
Not higher heaved the wind-bags which, of yore,
Ulysses got from him who ruled the Aeolian shore.

He thus the King with reverence bespoke:
"My Liege, since Heaven with bagpipe-levell'd fire
Hath turn'd my brethren's gear to dust and smoke,
And testified too glaringly its ire,
It fits me now, as yet my bagpipe's poke
Remains unsinged, and every pipe entire,
To play my tune &mdash; O King, with your good will
And to the royal ear to prove my piping skill."

Nodded his Liege assent, and straightway bade
Him stand atop o' th' hillock at his side:
Atop he stood; and first a bow he made
To all the crowd that shouted far and wide;
Then, like a piper dext'rous at his trade,
His pipes to play adjusted and applied;
Each finger rested on its proper bore;
His arm appear'd half-raised to wake the bag's uproar.

A space he silent stood, and cast his eye
In meditation upwards to the pole,
As if he pray'd some fairy-power in sky
To guide his fingers right o'er bore and hole;
Then pressing down his arm, he gracefully
Awaked the merry bagpipe's slumbering soul,
And piped and blew, and play'd so sweet a tune,
As might have well unsphered the reeling midnight moon.

His every finger, to its place assign'd,
Moved quivering like the leaf of aspen tree,
Now shutting up the skittish squeaking wind,
Now opening to the music passage free;
His cheeks, with windy puffs therein confined,
Were swoll'n into a red rotundity,
As from his lungs into the bag was blown
Supply of needful air to feed the growling drone.

And such a potent tune did never greet
The drum of human ear with lively strain;
So merry, that from dancing on his feet
No man undeaf could stockishly refrain;
So loud, 'twas heard a dozen miles complete,
Making old Echo pipe and hum again;
So sweet, that all the birds in air that fly,
Charm'd into new delight, come sailing through the sky.

Crow, sparrow, linnet, hawk, and white-wing'd dove,
Wheel in aerial jig o'er ANSTER Loan;
The seamews from each Maian cleft and cove
O'er the deep sea come pinion-wafted on;
The light-detesting bats now flap above,
Scaring the sun with wings to day unknown:
Round ROBERT'S head they dance, they cry, they sing,
Shearing the subtile sky with broad and playful wing.

And eke the mermaids that in ocean swim,
Drawn by that music from their shelly caves,
Peep now unbashful from the salt sea brim,
And flounce and plash exulting in the waves:
They spread at large the white and floating limb,
That Neptune amorously clips and laves,
And kem with combs of pearl and coral fair
Their long sleek oozy locks of green redundant hair.

Nor was its influence less on human ear.
First from their gilded chairs up-start at once
The royal JAMES and MAGGIE seated near,
Enthusiastic both, and mad to dance:
Her hand he snatch'd, and look'd a merry leer,
Then caper'd high in wild extravagance,
And on the grassy summit of the knoll
Wagg'd each monarchial leg in galliard strange and droll.

As when a sunbeam, from the waving face
Of well-fill'd waterpail reflected bright,
Varies upon the chamber-walls its place,
And, quivering, tries to cheat and foil the sight;
So quick did MAGGIE, with a nimble grace,
Skip pattering to and fro, alert and light,
And, with her noble colleague in the reel,
Haughtily heaved her arms, and shook the glancing heel.

The lords and ladies next, who sat or stood
Near to the piper and the King around,
Smitten with that contagious dancing-mood,
'Gan hand in hand in high lavolt to bound,
And jigg'd it on as featly as they could,
Circling in sheeny rows the rising ground,
Each sworded lord a lady's soft palm griping,
And to his mettle roused at such unwonted piping.

Then did th' infectious hopping-mania seize
The circles of the crowd that stood more near,
Till, round and round, far spreading by degrees,
It madden'd all the Loan to kick and rear.
Men, women, children, lilt and ramp, and squeeze,
Such fascination takes the general, ear
Even babes, that at their mothers' bosoms hung,
Their little willing limbs fantastically flung.

And hoar-hair'd men and wives, whose marrow Age
Hath from their hollow bones suck'd out and drunk,
Canary in unconscionable rage,
Nor feel their sinews wither'd now and shrunk.
Pell-mell in random couples they engage,
And boisterously wag feet, arms, and trunk,
As if they strove, in capering so brisk,
To heave their aged knees up to the solar disk.

And cripples from beneath their shoulders fling
Their despicable crutches far away,
Then, yoked with those of stouter limbs, up-spring
In hobbling merriment, uncouthly gay:
And some on one leg stand y-gamboling;
For why?  The other short and frail had they:
Some, whose both legs distorted were and weak,
Dance on their poor knee-pans in mad, prepost'rous freak.

So on they trip, King, MAGGIE, knight, and earl,
Green-coated courtier, satin-snooded dame,
Old men and maidens, man, wife, boy, and girl,
The stiff, the supple, bandy-legg'd, and lame,
All suck'd and rapt into the dance's whirl.
Inevitably witch'd within the same;
Whilst ROB, far-seen, o'erlooks the huddling Loan,
Rejoicing in his pipes, and squeals serenely on.

But such a whirling and a din there was
Of bodies and of feet, that heel'd the ground,
As when the Maelstrom in his craggy jaws
Engluts the Norway waves with hideous sound.
In vain the black sea-monster plies his paws
'Gainst the strong eddy that impels him round:
Rack'd and convulsed, th' ingorging surges roar,
And fret their frothy wrath, and reel from shore to shore.

So reel the mob, and with their feet up-cast
From the tramp'd soil a dry and dusty cloud,
That shades the huddling hurly-burly vast
From the warm sun as with an earthy shroud;
Else, had the warm sun spied them wriggling fast,
He sure had laugh'd at such bewitched crowd,
For never, since heaven's baldric first he trod,
Tripp'd was such country-dance beneath his fiery road.

Then was the shepherd that on Largo-law
Sat idly whistling to his feeding flock,
Dismay'd, when, looking south-eastward, he saw
The dusty cloud more black than furnace-smoke:
He lean'd his ear, and catch'd with trembling awe
The dance's sounds that th' ambient ether broke;
He bless'd himself, and cried, "By sweet St. John,
The devil hath got a job in ANSTER'S dirty Loan."

At length the mighty piper, honest ROB,
His wonder-working melody gave o'er,
When on a sudden all the flouncing mob
Their high commotion ceased, and toss'd no more;
Trunk, arm, and leg, forgot to shake and bob,
That bobb'd and shaked so parlously before;
On ground, fatigued, the panting dancers fall,
Wond'ring what witch's craft had thus embroil'd them all.

And some cried out, that o'er the piper's head,
They had observed a little female fay,
Clad in green gown and purple-striped plaid,
That fed his wind-bag, aidant of the play;
Some, impotent to speak, and almost dead
With jumping, as on earth they sat or lay,
Wiped from their brows, with napkin, plaid, or gown,
The globes of shining sweat that ooze and trickle down.

Nor less with jig o'erlabour'd and o'erwrought,
Down on their chairs dropt MAGGIE and the King,
Amazed what supernat'ral spell had caught
And forced their heels into such frolicking:
And much was MAG astonish'd, when she thought
(As sure it was an odd perplexing thing)
That ROBERT'S tune was to her ear the same
As what Tom Puck late play'd, when from her pot he came.

But from that hour the Monarch and the mob
Gave MAGGIE LAUDER'S name to ROBERT'S tune,
And so shall it be call'd, while o'er the globe
Travels the waning and the crescent moon.
And from that hour the puissant piper ROB,
Whose bagpipe waked so hot a rigadoon,
From his well-managed bag, and drone, and chanter,
Obtain'd the glorious name of Mighty ROB the RANTER.

