Gay-hearted I began my playful theme,
But with a heavy heart I end my song;
For I am sick of life's delirious dream,
Sick of this world and all its weight of wrong.
Even-now, when I again attempt to stream
My merry verse, as I was wont, along,
'Tween every sportive thought there now and then
Flows a sad serious tear upon my playful pen.

Scarce had the victor ceas'd his hindmost clause,
When, from th' immensity of folk afar,
Rose such a hideous shout of loud applause,
As ever stunn'd with outcry sun or star.
Each tongue grew riotous within its jaws,
Clacking an acclamation popular;
Hands, high o'erhead uplifted, round and round,
Struck plausive palm on palm, and clapt a rattling sound;

And twice ten thousand hats, aloft upthrown,
In black ascension, blot heaven's blue serene,
O'ercanopying ANSTER'S crowded Loan
With crown and rim, as with a dusky screen;
And bonnets broad, and caps of sharp'ning cone,
Afloat 'twixt earth and firmament are seen;
And lasses' cowls and hoods, uptost on high;
Encroach with tawdry clout upon the clouds of sky.

As when a troop of locusts, famine-pined,
From Edom's unblest monster-breeding womb,
Sail on the hot wings of the southern wind,
Wriggling aloft their sky-hung mass of gloom
And where El Sham's clear golden riv'lets wind,
Through her gay gardens distributing bloom,
They light, and spread their devastation round,
Bepainting black as pitch the green luxuriant ground:

Just such a darkness mounts into the sky,
Of hat and hood, of bonnet and of cap,
So thick, that those who swing them up on high
Below i' th' shade are heard to shout and clap;
For still the folk applaud it lustily,
And pain their tingling palms with noisy rap,
Expressing thus, with deaf'ning acclamation,
Of ROBERT'S merry tale their hearty approbation.

Nor sits the Monarch idle to th' acclaim;
But, rising up majestic from his chair,
With kingly praise augments the Victor's fame,
And, clapping, grinds between his palms the air;
Then seizes he the fingers of the Dame,
And gently raising from her seat the fair,
He, as the sign and seal of marriage-band,
Slips into ROBERT's grasp his MAGGIE'S tender hand.

He bade his choir of trumpeters apply
To mouth their hollow instruments of sound,
And, in an unison of clangour high,
Publish the marriage to the world around.
The fellows blew it to the peak of sky,
And sky sent down again the loud rebound;
Earth did to heaven's high top the news up-throw,
And heaven rebruited back th' alarum down below.

Out now the beam-hair'd coursers of the sun,
All smoking with their fiery hot fatigue,
Their task of charioting had pranced and run,
And hurl'd in sea their hissing golden gig;
Their unshorn driver had but just begun
Beyond the Isle of Bute the Wave to swig;
And, twinkling o'er Auld Reekie's smoke afar,
Peep'd through heaven's mantle blue the modest evening-star.

And soon the moon, in hood of silver drest,
All glistering and gladsome as may be,
Forth from her glorious casement in the east
Look'd laughing down upon both land and sea,
And on the bosom of the darkening west
Her pearly radiance shot rejoicingly:
Also the heads of all that fill the Loan
Wax'd yellow with the rays that on them streaming shone.

Wherefore, as now the damp nocturnal air
Began to dribble down its chilly dew,
And as of all the business of the Fair
Nought now remain'd upon the green to do,
The herald, from beside the Monarch's chair,
Abroad the signal of dispersion blew,
That the wild multitude, dispread around,
Should now break up its mass, and leave the nighted ground.

Which heard, the congregated folk upbroke
With loud disruption their diffusion vast,
And, split and shoaling of in many a flock,
With homeward squeeze they turbulently past.
Beneath their feet the pillar'd earth did rock,
As up to Jove a dusty cloud they cast,
That blear'd the bright eyes of night's glimmering queen,
And choked the brilliant stars, and dimm'd their twinkling sheen.

And such the clutter was, when shoal from shoal
With violent impulse was torn and riven,
As when the vaulting ice that floors the pole,
Touch'd by the fiery shafts of warming heaven,
Splits into fractured isles, that crash and roll
Diverse, athwart the molten ocean driven:
The Greenland boatman hears the noise afar,
And blesses for its heat day's winter-routing star.

So loudly rush'd from ANSTER'S cumber'd Loan
The burthenous and bustling multitude,
Kicking th' o'ertrampled earth they trod upon
With saucy heel in their impetuous mood.
Some to their tents of blanket jump'd anon,
That on the fields and crofts adjoining stood;
Some to their booths and houses in the town
Hie hot with huddling haste, and hop and hurry down.

Meanwhile, the King, as now sufficient space
Was for his passage clear'd about the mound,
Descended from his lofty honour'd place,
Where sat he 'mid his gallant courtiers round.
Close at his right hand downward walk'd, with grace,
The well-earn'd prize, bright MAGGIE the renown'd;
While the great Victor at his other side
Attended blithe and brisk, exulting in his bride.

On their brave nags their persons up they swing,
And to the borough gently jogging ride,
Hemm'd thick around with an illustrious ring
Of gay court-ladies, trooping side by side,
And lords, whose coats, with gold lace spangled, fling
Back on th' abashed moon her beamy pride,
And jolly knights, and booted esquires stout,
And burghers, clowns, and boys, a noisy rabble-rout.

As downward to the town they tramp and trot,
The mingled peals of gratulation rise;
For, on their catlings, fiddlesticks, I wot,
Bicker'd and skipt in funny furious wise,
And trumpet rear'd again its solemn note
Sonorously, assailant on the skies,
Full, loudly lifting, in a jocund tune,
The name of RANTER ROB up to the man i' the moon.

And sounding cymbals clink and ring sublime,
Clash'd overhead in lofty unison,
And fife and flute in merry whistle chime,
Soothing the lulled ear with dulcet tone,
While aye the bass-drum, at his proper time,
Swallows the music with his sudden groan;
Till drum, flute, cymbal, trumpet, all are drown'd
In shouts that pealing rise from the mad mob around.

Thus rode the train, as if in triumph, down,
Exulting, through the night's moon-gilded shade,
Till, reaching MAGGIE'S quarter of the town,
Stops at her house the splendid cavalcade;
(For be it now, my good co-townsmen, known,
That in th' East-green's best house fair MAGGIE staid,
Near where St. Ayle's small lodge, in modern day,
Admits to mystic rites her bousy masons gay.)

At MAGGIE'S door they stopp'd; when, lighting there
The bridegroom brisk, and jolly-minded King,
And showy nobleman, and lady fair,
From pad and saddle on the causey spring,
And, passing in due order up her stair,
The good landlady to her chamber bning,
A pomp of rare attendance brave and bright,
With sweetly-biting jest, and joke of dear delight.

In her torch-brighten'd chamber down they sate
Upon her chairs jocundly one and all,
And exercise their tongues in social prate,
Till MAGGIE'S cooks and JAMES'S seneschal
May well prepare and range each supper-plate
On her long table in her dining-hall.
There let us leave awhile King, Lord, and Lady,
And saunter through the town till supper's fare be ready.

Heavens!  how from street to street the people reel,
As if they knew not where to rush for joy!
How rocks the causey with incessant heel
Of hurrying man, and wife, and maid, and boy!
From lane and wynd the sounds of gladness peal,
Hitting the stars with clamorous annoy,
As all the houses' walls and roofs are bright
With bonfire's yellow glow, and candle's gentler light.

For in each window's every pane is seen,
Stuck into fitly-fashion'd wood or clay,
A tallow-candle flinging forth its sheen
T' augment th' illumination's bright display:
How flame the houses with a lustre keen,
In emulation of the sun-bright day!
Even the poor old wife's back-room window glows,
Gilding the good green kail that underneath it grows:

While in each well-paved street and alley strait,
And at the Cross, and up along the Loan,
Their spiry curls huge bonfires elevate,
Cracking with heat the ground and causey-stone;
For every bonfire was a cart-load great
Of Dysart coal, that redly flash'd and shone,
Emblazing with its tongues of flame so bright,
The dusk and smutty brow of star-bestudded night,

And gawntress'd round each ruddy fire about,
Hogsheads of porter and of cheery ale
Forth from their little gurgling bungholes spout
Their genial streams in tankard, pot, and pail.
O 'twas a wild notorious guzzling-bout!
That night no throat was narrow or was frail,
But, in long draught delicious, swallow'd down
The barley's mantling cream, and beverage stout and brown.

(Not from thy brewhouse's well-barrell'd store,
O ROGER!  comes a drink of stronger proof,
Though foams thy hearty ale the tankard o'er,
And sends its cork a-thundering to the roof:)
Even ancient men, whose hairs were thin and boar,
Then staid not from the fuddle's' fun aloof,
But drank till every head was giddy turning,
And to their reeling eyes each fire in sky seem'd burning.

Yet not all night each brisk warm-blooded boy
Sat drinking with his sweetheart blithe and boon;
They, on the Loan, in many a reel employ
Their bouncing bodies wriggling to the moon,
And almost wince away their heels for joy,
Tossing and riving their dance-bursten shoon,
Whilst, ever and anon, or ere she wist,
Smack by her partner dear each bonny lass was kiss'd.

Such out of doors was the disport and bouse,
But higher was the pitch of joy within:
That night was ANSTER'S every barn and house
Converted into tippling-shop and inn;
Garrets and bed-rooms reek with hot carouse,
And steaming punch of whisky and of gin;
The kitchen fires are crowded round and round
With rings of lively lads that swig their bowls profound.

Hey!  how their glasses jingle merrily!
How rings the table with their revel-roar!
How, as they toast their MAG with three times three,
Sounds with loud heel the vex'd, tormented floor!
They sing, they clap, they laugh with honest glee;
Were never seen such merry men before!
Through window glass and stony wall bursts out
Abroad on night's dull ear the wassail's frequent shout.

But now, in MAGGIE'S tapestry-decked hall,
Served is the sumptuous marriage-supper up,
And clean neat-handed cook and seneschal
Hath set each mess, and dish, and plate, and cup;
So down in seemly order sit they all,
With stomachs stiff and resolute to sup,
And set their griding forks and knives to work
On turkey, goose, and hen, cold veal, and cheek of pork.

Behoves it not my bardship to relate
What various viands burden'd MAGGIE'S board,
What lay on this, and what on t' other plate,
What lady first was help'd, and by what lord,
What mess the King, and what the others ate:
That would be tedious trifling, 'pon my word.
I will not do't, though I could tell, in sooth,
How oft each fork was raised to every munching mouth.

Suffice it, good my townsmen, that ye know,
That there fastidious teeth found pleasant food;
That all the cates which kingly banquets show
Were spread before them, fragrant, rich, and good;
And that, though some ate less and some ate moe,
Each ate as much, be certain, as he could,
Till, tired at last of piddling with their gums,
They eased of knife and fork their fingers and their thumbs.

But when the sound of teeth had ceased, i' the hall,
And fork and knife lay idle on their plate,
And guest and hostess, backward leaning all,
Their toothpicks now were plying, saturate,
Up from his seat arose the bridegroom tall,
Where to his blooming spouse, opposed he sate,
And, ere the tablecloth was ta'en away,
He turn'd him to the King, and thus addrest his say:&mdash;

"Think not, my Liege, that fortune or that chance
To-day hath made me in my conquest blest,
Impelling me by casual circumstance
To jump without a warrant like the rest
'Twas not alone with Heaven's high sufferance
I put My jumping-prowess to the test;
'Twas by its order I in sack bound.
'Twas with its favour, too, that I my bride have found.

"Nor deem that some dumb beldam, Satan's tool,
Or wily witch, or second-sighted seer,
Hath, oracling, deceived me like a fool,
To think I to supernal power am dear:
No, Monarch; by the cowl of old St. Rule,
I heard the order with no proxy ear,
And with my own true eye unfalsified,
I even upon my chair the goodly vision spied.

For, on an evening in December last,
('Twas just the evening of that day whereon
The stout-lung'd criers through the Border past,
Proclaiming what should hap in ANSTER Loan,)
As down to suppers sober cool repast
I sat me in my dining-room alone,
Musing upon the late heard news so odd,
Blown from the trump of fame and crier's throat abroad;

"I happen'd in my fingers up to take
The pepper-box, where lurk'd my spicy stores,
And held it o'er my plate, intent to shake
The fragrant atoms from its little bores,
When, as my hand inverted it, there brake
Out from the lid's small perforated pores
A stream of beauteous smoke, that, like a mist,
Curl'd its delicious wreaths around my shaded fist.

"Astonish'd at the prodigy, I threw
The steaming box upon the tablecloth,
When more with miracle t' amaze my view,
It frisk'd and trotted 'mid the plates, i' troth,
And ceased not from its numerous holes to spue
Its incense, white as flakes of ocean froth,
Up-sending to the ceiling of the room
Its supernat'ral flux of pure and fragrant fume.

"I sat and gazed &mdash; not long; when, strange to say,
Forth from that reeky pillar's paly base
Started at once a little female fay,
Giggling and blithely, laughing in my face.
Her height was as the lily, that in May
Lifts to the sun her head's envermeil'd grace,
Her beauty as the rays of various glow
That glorify the length of heaven's sea-drinking bow.

"The gown in which her elfship was array'd,
Like to the peacock's painted feather shined,
And on the tablecloth redundant spread
Its lustrous train for half a foot behind;
Over her breast her purple-striped plaid
Lay floating loose and thin as woven wind;
And gorgeous was her head-dress as the hue
Of Iris-flower, that spreads her velvet petals blue.

"Deck'd was her neck's circumference with row
Of diamonds, strung on thread in costly band,
Small pearly berries that are wont to grow
Upon the bushes of old Fairyland;
And in each diamond's orb so fair in show,
My candle's image burning seem'd to stand,
That her white slender neck was all in gleam,
Doubly impearled thus with light's reflected beam.

"And pendent from her neck by golden thread,
A little dangling silver-lute I saw,
Of fashion rare, and quaintly polished,
Not thicker than a pipe of oaten straw.
She laugh'd and nodded courteously her head,
Belike to clear away my doubt and awe;
For, sooth to say, I was not unafear'd,
When from my pepper-box good lady fay appear'd.

"She dropt a curtsy, reverently low,
And thus bespoke in clear and mellow voice;
'Twas sweeter than the chiming winds that blow
Upon th' Aeolian harp a whiffled noise:&mdash;
'Excuse me, good your worship, that I so
With my quaint presence mar your supper's joys:
I have some little matter to impart;
'Twill not detain you long, Nay, ROBERT, do not start.

"'Compose thee Squire, and calmly give thine ear
To what shall from my gentle mouth proceed,
For mickle shall it profit thee to hear
And prize aright the value of my rede;
And be assured thy person, ROB, is dear
To the slim creatures of the fairy breed,
That thus I peer from out my box of spice,
To tender, for thy weal, my uncompell'd advice.

"'Hast thou not heard the wondrous news to-day,
Through all the marches of the Border blown,
Of sports, and games, and celebrations gay,
Promulgate to be held in ANSTER Loan,
And that a maid the victor's toils shall pay,
A maid whose beauty is excell'd by none?
Thou hast &mdash; and I surprised thee deep in muse,
A-pond'ring on th' import of such amazing news.

"'Go when o'er Cockraw peeps light's golden horn,
And seek a supple ass whereon to ride;
Go, seek a long sack, sturdy and untorn,
Wherein to jump with drolly-trammell'd stride;
Go, seek a bagpipe whose wind-pouch, unworn,
May well the wrath of poison'd breath abide;
Go, set thy brain to work like vat of ale,
And skim thou off for MAG some smart ingenious tale.

"'And know, when at the Loan is tried thy skill,
Thy ass I'll nettle on with spur unseen;
Into thy bones and sinews I'll instil,
Great vigour to o'erjump the quaking green;
Thy bagpipe's pouch with tempest I will fill,
Lending thy tune a witchery not mean;
And from thy study-rack'd perplexed brains
A merry tale I'll squeeze, the helpmate of thy pains.

"'So shalt thou, Squire, in Scotland's view be crown'd
Upon the spot with victory and fame,
And ride a happy bridegroom from the ground,
Elate, and glorying in thy peerless dame:
Yet when thy toil's transcendent prize is found,
And marriage-revelries thy joy proclaim,
I charge thee, as my aid shall make thee blest,
Forget not what I now, as to my box, request.

"'This box &mdash; this pepper-box &mdash; this homely shrine,
Wherein confined by wizard spell I stay,
Must be transported in a pouch of thine,
When thou to ANSTER Loan dost take thy way;
And when thou down to marriage-feast and wine
Shalt sit in MAGGIE'S hall, a bridegroom gay,
Then from thy pocket draw it in a trice,
And on the tablecloth lay down the box of spice.

"'Ask not the purport of my odd behest,
'Twill be unriddled in the proper place;
'Tis thine t' effect the task, and leave the rest
To Madam Puck's good complaisance and grace.'&mdash;
Here Madam Puck her piping voice supprest,
And with a sweet smile on her little face,
Rear'd up the small lute in her lily fist,
And with her rose-red lip its furbish'd silver kiss'd.

"She play'd a tune so delicate and sweet,
So overpowering with its ravishment,
That sit I could no longer on my seat,
But up and capering o'er my chamber went,
As if within the soles of both my feet
A store of frisky mercury was pent;
(And, by the bye, 'twas just the tune with which
My bagpipe did to-day your reeling Loan bewitch.)

"At length she ceased, and in a stroke o' the eye
Delved down within her spicy jail again,
And in her stead left curling bonnily
A smoke whose odour ravish'd nose and brain.
No more, my gracious Liege &mdash; what need have I
Longer to talk, where talking would be vain.
Behold &mdash; what Mrs.  Puck commanded me&mdash;
'Tis but a sorry thing &mdash; the pepper-box &mdash; d'ye see?"

Thus speaking, from the pocket of his coat,
Wherein he had convey'd it to our town,
The goblin-haunted pepper-box he brought,
And, laughing, set it on the table down.
Great laughter crackled in the Monarch's throat,
As on the cloth he saw the thing y-thrown;
And giggling guest gan fling his jeers and jokes
Upon the paltry frame of ROB'S poor pepper-box.

But soon was changed their blithe to fearful mood,
When straight afore each half-mistrusting eye,
The bawbling box of pepper, where it stood,
Began again to dance spontaneously,
And fidged and frisk'd, in strange inquietude,
Among the plates that thickly-ranged lie,
Directing to the table's middle part
Its motion by the side of broken pie and tart.

Yet to a greater pitch their wonder grew,
When, at the table's other end, they spy
Fair MAGGIE'S mustard-pot commencing too
To gambol and to fidge, in sympathy;
(The self-same pot whence burst to MAGGIE'S view
Of late Tom Puck, with brightly-breeched thigh;)
As would a hen leap on a fire-hot griddle,
So leap'd the mustard-pot toward the table's middle.

Short while they flirted, pepper-box and pot,
Most laughable, yet fearful to be view'd,
Till, meeting on the table's midmost spot,
Stock-still th' ignoble bouncing vessels stood.
And from their little cells, where lay the hot
Ground pepper, and the biting mustard good,
Were in a moment seen at once to break
Two parallel white shafts of silvery spouting reek.

Ascending curl'd, not long, each sep'rate fume,
Up-throwing to the roof its preciousness,
When, with a fire-flash that emblazed the room,
Burst from the hollow mustard-pot's recess,
Good Tommy Puck, the fay of roseate bloom,
Clad in his custom'd gaudery of dress;
And, with a second gleam of flashy light,
Sprung, from the spicy box good Madam Puck to sight.

With faces to each other turn'd they rise,
Scarce sunder'd by a finger's length of space,
And in an instant, as they recognise,
With glimpse of quick eye, each the other's face,
They fall as if o'ercome with sweet surprise,
On one another's necks in close embrace,
Like friends that, having long lived far apart,
Meet and relieve in tears the joy-o'erburden'd heart.

Astonishment his whitely ensign shows
On each spectator's visage at the sight;
Courtier and King, that sat to table close,
Push'd quickly back their chairs, confounded quite;
The ladies hid their faces in their clothes,
Or underneath the table slunk for fright;
Save MAG and ROB, who laugh'd to see once more
The tricksy kindly ouphes that hail'd them heretofore.

Awhile the pair of pigmies on the spot
Lock'd their fantastic persons jole to jole,
And, as two doves of plumy varnish'd throat
Sit billing in their dovecot's nested hole,
Their liquid wee lips twitter'd kisses hot,
In fond commutuality of soul:
It was a treat to see how sweetheart-like
Their fiery fairy mouths the dear collision strike.

At length, as rapture's first excess was past,
They disentangle their endear'd embrace,
And tow'rd the King and guests that sat aghast
Turn'd round each minim prettiness of face.
Dame Puck to MAG and those beside her placed
Let fall a curtsy with a courtly grace;
Tom, fronting JAMES, took hat from off his brow,
And curved his goblin back into a goodly bow.

A glance upon the company he shot,
And smiled on MAG that sat at head o' the board,
Then from his silly dulcet-piping throat
Sweet utterance of word-clad breath he pour'd.
"O Monarch, let amazement seize thee not;
Be of good cheer, each dame and noble lord;
Ungown your timid faces, all ye fair;
Draw ye to table close, each gentleman, your chair.

"For do not think that in us twain you spy
Two spirits of the perter wicked sort,
That, buzzing on bad errand through the sky,
In pranks of molestation take their sport,
Confounding old wives' churns, and slipping sly
Their stools from underneath them to their hurt,
Or chucking young sweet maids below the chin,
That so they bite the tongue their tender mouths within.

"Of kindlier hearts are Tommy and his spouse,
Aidant to some, benevolent to all;
For oft we sweep the thrifty matron's house
With besom quaint, invisible, and small;
Oft from her cheese and butter chase the mouse,
Preyless, into the cavern of his wall;
And oft her churn-staff gripe, that in a twink
The waves of bubbling cream to buttery masses sink.

"But chiefly of young lovers true and kind
The patrons and the guardians good are we,
Linking each mutual and harmonious mind
In silver cord of dear complacency:
But when the vows that should restrain and bind,
Broke to another's misery we see,
'Tis ours to take the injured lover's part,
And on the perjured, head deal out th' avenging smart.

"Witness what vengeance hit Miss SUSAN SCOTT,
Whose back and visage, for her breach of troth,
Obtain'd a penal and opprobrious blot,
Swoll'n out to counterpoise each other's growth;
And though, for our suggestion of that plot,
To punish her and her sour guardian both,
My wife and I have suffer'd hard and long,
Yet, by my Monarch's beard!  'twas right t' avenge the wrong.

"O we have suffer'd much &mdash; That wizard foul,
(Beshrew his meagre, vile, malicious ghost!)
No sooner 'scaped from Crail's vile sewer-hole,
And took again the shape that he had lost,
Than, with his long-tail'd demons black as coal,
That whiz to serve him from hell's every coast,
Consulting in his study, soon he learn'd
Who prompted CHARLES to wreak the vengeance justly earn'd.

"Then churn'd the sorcerer's mouth the surly foam;
He clench'd his fist, and swore by BeeIzebub
He forthwith should o'er half the country roam,
Beating each thicket with his oaken club,
To find out dapper intermeddling Tom
In his inhabited and secret shrub,
And heel him forth reluctant to the day,
And for his pranks chastise upon his breech the fay.

"His hat he put on his craft-crammed head,
He griped his hugy gnarled stag in hand,
And down his study-stair, with sounding tread,
Came spitting smoke like newly-lighted brand:
Forth from the gate he in a hurry sped,
To beat the total bushes of the land,
Cursing at every step the harmless breed
Of elfs, that aid the wrong'd in grievous time of need.

"Need it be told?  Alas!  too soon he found
The bush where with my dame I sleeping lay;
Too soon his cudgel, thrashing round and round
Grazed our slim bodies in its dangerous play;
And, had not Oberon saved us both from wound,
Our brains had fairly been dash'd out that day.
We woke &mdash; we shriek'd &mdash; his rugged hand he stretch'd,
And from our leafy bed us by the heels he fetch'd.

"His long-nail'd hairy fingers, grasping tight
Our waists, uprear'd us to his bearded chin,
And held us there in melancholy plight,
Wriggling our innocent frail members thin:
He spat upon our faces with despite,
Glooming his phiz into a joyful grin;
Then, lowering down, he plunged us, ere we wot,
Each int' a sep'rate pouch of his great clumsy coat.

"There lay we button'd in, and closely pent
In a dark dungeon of detested cloth,
As, tracing back his steps, he homeward went,
And to his chamber bore us dangling both.
He drew us forth, the wicked churl, intent
On base revenge, malevolent and wroth,
And with unseemly usage treated each,
And slapp'd with scurvy palm my little harmless breech.

"Then did, he in his wickedness begin
To practise his detestable device:
He took a paltry pepper-box of tin,
And hoisting up my consort in a trice,
He push'd her weeping ladyship within,
Clean through the lid, amid the pungent spice:
(For fairy shapes can be contracted so
As through a needle's eye right easily to go.)

"He push'd her, shrieking, down into the cell,
With cruel taunt and mocking devilish,
And mutter'd o'er her a confining spell
Of hell's abhorr'd and uncouth gibberish:&mdash;
'Lie there, Dame Puck,' he cried, 'and bed thee well
In the snug durance of thy penal dish;
There be a tenant till the day shall come,
Ordain'd t' enfranchise thee from thy ignoble tomb.'

"A sorry mustard-pot then took the knight,
And 'tween his fingers lifting me sublime,
He push'd and plunged me, yelling with affright,
Amid the mustard's yellow sloughy slime;
And 'Lie thou there,' he cried, 'thou meddling sprite,
And do the proper penance for thy crime;
There be a tenant till the day shall come,
Ordain'd t' enfranchise thee from thy ignoble tomb.

"'Nor meet Tom Puck and Madam Puck agen,
Until the fairest maid of Scottish land
Shall to the supplest of all Scotland's men,
Charm'd by his jumping, give her bed and hand.'
This said, he mumbled o'er me in my den
His damned spell too hard to understand,
Of virtue to impound and cage me there,
Even till the day foredoom'd to let me loose to air.

"And further, he, to sunder us the more,
And interpose large space between us twain,
To Melrose Abbey journeying, with him bore
The spicy jail, where lay my spouse in pain,
And gave it to the monks, skill'd deep in lore,
That in their charge it might for years remain,
To grace the abbey-table, and supply
Their kail on feasting-days with pepper hot and dry.

"And there, methinks, for ages it has been
Till as roll'd onward Time's fulfilling round,
By the wise care of our fair fairy-queen,
To ROB the RANTER'S house way it found,
Where, from her box upstarting to his eyne,
(The spell that moment lost its power compound,)
My wife bade Scotland's supplest man prepare,
All for her weal and his, to jump at ANSTER FAIR.

"For me &mdash; when first that stern felonious knight
Had dungeon'd me in penal pot so fast,
My jail he did commit that very night
To Pittenweem's fat monks, of belly vast,
That from its small profundity they might
Supply with mustard every rich repast,
And in the abbey-pantry guard the cell,
Where I, alas!  was doom'd for many an age to dwell.

"And there I dwelt in dolesome house of clay,
Far sunder'd from my wife in sad divorce,
Till onward drew the freedom-giving day,
Fix'd and appointed in time's fatal course,
When Oberon, the silver-sceptred fay,
That rules his phantom-tribes with gentle force,
My mustard-pot by secret means convey'd
To MAGGIE"S house &mdash; the house of Scotland's fairest maid.

"Here, as one night upon her supper-board,
Imbogg'd amid my biting mire I lay,
My King a moment broke the spell abhorr'd
That kept me pent and pester'd night and day.
I rose, I loosed my tongue, to mortal word,
Commanding her to publish, sans delay,
The merry games effectual to decide
What supplest-sinew'd Scot should gain her for his bride.

"Abroad the games were blown o'er Scottish ground,
And hurried thousands in to ANSTER FAIR:
The work is done &mdash; the supplest man is found,
He sits the bridegroom and the landlord there;
The fairest maid of all the realm around
Sits yonder, star-like shining on her chair;
The happiest couple they of all beside:
God bless you richly both, fair bridegroom, and fair bride!

"Nor think, my wedded dears, that you alone
By ANSTER'S gamesome FAIR are render'd blest:
We too, that have so long with mutual moan
In torment and divorcement lived distrest,
Meet now again (great thanks to Oberon!)
Re-wedded, re-possessing, re-possess'd,
A pair of happy fays conjoin'd for ever,
Whom henceforth wizard's hate shall have no might to sever.

"And now, my Lord, O King!  we must away
To taste the sweets of new-found liberty,
To ride astraddle on the lunar ray,
In airy gallop to the top of sky,
And lave our limber limbs, and plash and play
Amid the milk that dims the galaxy.
Farewell!  May joys be rain'd on each of you!
Adieu, thou bridegroom sweet!  Thou bonny bride, adieu!"

This having said, he on his shiny hair,
Did gracefully his silver hat replace,
And seizing by the hand his lady fair,
Awhile look'd smerking, winking, in her face;
Then, swift as spark from fire or beam from star,
That unsubstantial, slim, frail, fairy-brace,
From table heaving of their phantasms small,
Sheer through the window flew of MAGGIE'S dining-hall.

Sheer through the window fleetly flew the twain,
Mocking the eye that tried to follow them;
Yet, strange to add!  nor wood nor glassy pane
Was injured of the fay-pierced window-frame.
Amazement ran in every beating vein
Of bride, and groom, and king, and lord and dame,
As they beheld the coupled goblins fly
Through window-shut and glass abroad into the sky.

Recover'd quickly of their short surprise,
They drew to table nearer each his chair:
"A bumper fill," the sportive Monarch cries,
"To Tom and Lady Puck, the elfin pair!"
Landlord and guest his brimming glass supplies
From bottle with the dainty vine-blood rare;
Clean to the dregs their glasses drink they all,
As "Tom and Mrs. Puck" sound echoing through the hall.

Thus they the social happy minutes spend
In wine, and chat, and harmless revelry,
Till slow began the round moon to descend
Down the starr'd ladder of the western sky,
And sleep, that toil-worn man's frail frame must mend,
His spunge's balsam wrung on human eye:
From table, then, withdrew to sleeping-room
Courtier, and king, and dame, and bride, and glad bridegroom.
