I wish I had a cottage snug and neat
Upon the top of many-fountain'd Ide,
That I might thence in holy fervour greet
The bright-gown'd Morning tripping up her side;
And when the low Sun's glory-buskin'd feet
Walk on the blue wave of th' Aegean tide
O, I would kneel me down, and worship there
The God who garnish'd out a world so bright and fair!

The salfron-elbow'd Morning up the slop
Of heav'n canaries in her jewell'd shoes,
And throws o'er Kelly-law's sheep-nibbled top
Her golden apron dripping kindly dews;
And never, since she first began to hop
Up heav'n's blue causeway, of rich beams profuse,
Shone there a dawn so glorious and so gay
As shines the merry dawn of ANSTER Market-day.

Round through the vast circumference of sky
Scarce can the eye one speck of cloud behold,
Save in the East some fleeces bright of dye,
That hem the rim of heav'n with woolly gold,
Whereon are happy angels wont to lie
Lolling, in amaranthine flow'rs enroll'd,
That they may spy the precious light of God,
Flung from the blessed East o'er the fair Earth abroad.

The fair Earth laughs through all her boundless range,
Heaving her green hills high to greet the beam;
City and village, steeple, cot, and grange,
Gilt as with Nature's purest leaf-gold seem;
The heaths and upland muirs, and fallows, change
Their barren brown into a ruddy gleam,
And, on ten thousand dew-bent leaves and sprays,
Twinkle ten thousand suns, and fling their petty rays.

Up from their nests and fields of tender corn
Full merrily the little skylarks spring,
And on their dew-bedabbled pinions borne,
Mount to the heav'n's blue key-stone flickering,
They turn their plume-soft bosoms to the morn,
And hail the genial light, and cheerly sing;
Echo the gladsome hills and valleys round,
As all the bells of Fife ring loud and swell the sound.

For when the first up-sloping ray was flung
On ANSTER steeple's swallow-harb'ring top,
Its bell and all the bells around were rung
Sonorous, jangling loud without a stop;
For toilingly each bitter beadle swung,
Ev'n till he smoked with sweat, his greasy rope,
And almost broke his bell-wheel, ush'ring in
The morn of ANSTER FAIR, with far-resounding din.

And, from our steeple's pinnacle out-spread,
The town's long colours flare and flap on high,
Whose anchor, blazon'd fair in green and red,
Curls, pliant to each breeze that whistles by;
Whilst, on the boltsprit, stern, and topmast head
Of brig and sloop that in the harbour lie,
Streams the red gaudery of flags in air,
All to salute and grace the morn of ANSTER FAIR.

Forthwith from house and cellar, tent and byre,
Roused by the clink of bells that jingle on,
Uncabin'd, rush the multitude like fire,
Furious, and squeezing forward to the loan;
The son, impatient, leaves his snail-slow sire;
The daughter leaves her mam to trot alone;
So madly leap they, man, wife, girl, and boy,
As if the senseless Earth they kick'd for very joy.

And such the noise of feet that trampling pass,
And tongues that roar and rap from jaw to jaw,
As if ten thousand chariots, wheel'd with brass,
Came hurling down the sides of Largo-law:
And such the number of the people was,
As when in day of Autumn, chill and raw,
His small clouds Eurus sends, a vap'ry train,
Streaming in scatter'd rack, exhaustless, from the main.

For who like arrant slugs can keep their heads
In contact with their pillows now unstirr'd?
Grandfathers leave their all-year-rumpled beds,
With moth-eat breeches now their loins to gird,
And, drawn abroad on tumbrils and on sleds,
Chat off their years more blithe than vernal bird:
Men whom cold agues into leanness freeze,
Imblanketed walk out, and snuff the kindly breeze.

And flea-bit wives, on whose old arms and cheeks
The spoiler Time hath driv'n his furrowing plough,
Whose cold dry bones have all the winter weeks
Hung shivering o'er their chimney's peat-fed glow,
Now warm and flexible, and lithe as leeks,
Wabblingly walk to see the joyous show;
What wonder?  when each brick and pavement-stone
Wish'd it had feet that day to walk to ANSTER Loan.

Upon a little dappled nag, whose mane
Seem'd to have robb'd the steeds of Phaeton,
Whose bit, and pad, and fairly-fashion'd rein,
With silvery adornments richly shone,
Came MAGGIE LAUDER forth, enwheel'd with train
Of knights and lairds around her trotting on:
At James' right hand she rode, a beauteous Bride,
That well deserved to go by haughtiest Monarch's side.

Her form was as the Morning's blithesome star,
That, capp'd with lustrous coronet of beams,
Rides up the dawning orient in her car,
New-wash'd, and doubly fulgent from the streams;
The Chaldee shepherd eyes her light afar,
And on his knees adores her as she gleams:
So shone the stately form of MAGGIE LAUDER,
And so th' admiring crowds pay homage, and applaud her.

Each little step her trampling palfrey took
Shaked her majestic person into grace,
And as at times his glossy sides she strook
Endearingly with whip's green silken lace,
(The prancer seem'd to court such kind rebuke,
Loit'ring with wilful tardiness of pace,)
By Jove, the very waving of her arm
Had pow'r a brutish lout t' unbrutify and charm!

Her face was as the summer cloud, whereon
The dawning sun delights to rest his rays;
Compared with it, old Sharon's vale, o'ergrown
With flaunting roses, had resign'd its praise;
For why?  Her face with Heav'n's own roses shone,
Mocking the morn, and witching men to gaze;
And he that gazed with cold unsmitten soul,
That blockhead's heart was ice hewn out beneath the pole.

Her locks, apparent tufts of wiry gold,
Lay on her lily temples, fairly dangling,
And on each hair, so harmless to behold,
A lover's soul hung mercilessly strangling;
The piping silly zephyrs vied t' infold
The tresses in their arms so slim and tangling,
And thrid in sport these lover-noosing snares,
Playing at hide-and-seek amid the golden hairs.

Her eye was as an honour'd palace, where
A choir of lightsome Graces frisk and dance;
What object drew her gaze, how mean soe'er,
Got dignity and honour from the glance.
Wo to the man on whom she unaware
Did the dear witch'ry of her eye elance!
'Twas such a thrilling, killing, keen regard&mdash;
May Heav'n from such a look preserve each tender bard!

Beneath its shading tucker heaved a breast
Fashion'd to take with ravishment mankind;
For never did the flimsy Coan vest
Hide such a bosom in its gauze of wind:
Ev'n a pure angel, looking, had confest
A sinless transport passing o'er his mind,
For in the nicest turning-loom of Jove
Turn'd were these charming hills, t' inspire a holy love.

So on she rode in virgin majesty,
Charming the thin dead air to kiss her lips,
And with the light and grandeur of her eye
Shaming the proud sun into dim eclipse;
While, round her presence clust'ring far and nigh,
On horseback some, with silver spurs and whips,
And some afoot with shoes of dazzling buckles,
Attended knights, and lairds, and clowns with horny knuckles.

Not with such crowds surrounded, nor so fair
In form, rode forth Semiramis of old,
On chariot where she sat in iv'ry chair,
Beneath a sky of carbuncle and gold,
When to Euphrates' banks to take the air,
Or her new rising brick-walls to behold,
Abroad she drove, whilst round her wheels were pour'd
Satrap, and turban'd squire, and pursy Chaldee lord.

Soon to the Loan came MAG, and from her pad
Dismounting with a queen-like dignity,
(So from his buoyant cloud, man's heart to glad,
Lights a bright angel on a hill-top high,)
On a small mound, with turfy greenness clad,
She lit, and walk'd enchantment on the eye;
Then on two chairs, that on its top stood ready,
Down sat the good King James, and ANSTER'S bonny Lady.

Their chairs were finely carved, and overlaid
With the thin lustre of adorning gold,
And o'er their heads a canopy was spread
Of arras flower'd with figures manifold,
Supported by four boys of silver made,
Whose glittering hands the vault of cloth uphold.
On each side sat or stood, to view the sport,
Stout lord and lady fair, the flow'r of Scotland's court.

On their gilt chairs they scarce had time to sit,
When uprose, sudden, from th' applauding mob,
A shout enough to startle hell, and split
The roundness of the granite-ribbed globe:
The mews of May's steep islet, terror-smit,
Clang'd correspondent in a shrill hubbub;
And had the Moon then hung above the main,
Crack'd had that horrid shout her spotted orb in twain.

Thrice did their shouting make a little pause,
That so their lungs might draw recruiting air;
Thrice did the stormy tumult of applause
Shake the Fife woods, and fright the foxes there:
Sky rattled, and Kilbrachmont's crows and daws,
Alarm'd, sung hoarsely o'er their callow care.
O never, sure, in Fife's town-girdled shire,
Was heard, before or since, a shout so loud and dire!

Nor ceased th' acclaim when ceased the sound of voice;
For fiddlesticks, in myriads, bick'ring fast,
Shriek'd on their shrunken guts a shrilling noise;
And pipe and drone, with whistle and with blast
Consorted, humm'd and squeak'd, and swell'd the joys
With furious harmony too high to last;
And such a hum of pipe and drone was there,
As if on earth men piped, and devils droned in air.

Thus did the crowd, with fiddle, lungs, and drone,
Congratulate fair MAGGIE and their King,
Till at the last, wide-spreading round the Loan,
They form'd of huge circumference a ring,
Inclosing green space, bare of bush and stone,
Where might the asses run, and suitors spring:
Upon its southmost end, high chair'd, were seen
The Monarch and the Dame, and overlook'd the green.

Anon the King's stout trumpet blew aloud,
Silence imposing on the rabble's roar;
Silent as summer sky stood all the crowd;
Each bag was strangled, and could snort no more:
(So sinks the roaring of the foamy flood,
When Neptune's clarion twangs from shore to shore:)
Then through his trump he bawl'd with such a stress,
One might have known his words a mile beyond Crawness.

"Ho!  hark ye, merry mortals!  hark ye, ho!
The King now speaks, nor what he speaks is vain;
This day's amount of business well ye know,
So what ye know I will not tell again:
He hopes your asses are more swift than doe;
He hopes your sacks are, strong as iron chain;
He hopes your bags and pipes are swoll'n and screw'd;
He hopes your rhime-cramm'd brains are in a famous mood.

"For, verily, in ANSTER'S beauteous Dame
Awaits the victor despised reward;
Sith well she merits that the starry frame
Should drop Apollo on that grassy sward,
That so he might, by clever jumping, claim
A fairer Daphne than whom once he marr'd;
So fair is MAG:  yet not her charms alone;
A present from the King shall be the victor's own:

"For, as a dowr, along with MAGGIE'S hand,
The Monarch shall the conqueror present
With ten score acres of the royal land,
All good of soil, and of the highest rent;
Near where Dunfermline's palace-turrets stand,
They stretch, array'd in wheat, their green extent:
With such a gift the King shall crown today,
The gen'rous toils of him who bears the prize away.

"And he, prize-blest, shall enter MAGGIE'S door,
Who shall in all the trials victor be;
Or, if there hap no victor in the four,
He who shall shine and conquer in the three:
But should sly Fortune give to two or more
An equal chance in equal victory,
'Tis MAG'S of these to choose the dearest beau:
So bring your asses in, bring in your asses, ho!"&mdash;

Scarce from his clam'rous brass the words were blown,
When from the globe of people issued out
Donkeys in dozens and in scores, that shone
In purple some, and some in plainer clout,
With many a wag astraddle placed thereon,
Green-coated knight, and laird, and clumsy lout,
That one and all came burning with ambition,
To try their asses' speed in awkward competition.

And some sat wielding silver-headed whips,
Whisking their asses' ears with silken thong;
Some thrash'd and thwack'd their sturdy hairy hips
With knotted cudgels ponderous and strong;
And some had spurs, whose every rowel dips
Amid their ribs an inch of iron long;
And some had bridles gay and bits of gold,
And some had hempen reins, most shabby to behold.

Amid them enter'd, on the listed space,
Great ROB (the RANTER was his after name),
With Fun's broad ensign hoisted in his face,
And aug'ring to himself immortal fame:
And aye upon the hillock's' loftier place,
Where sat his destin'd spouse, the blooming Dame,
A glance he flung, regardless of the reins,
And felt the rapid love glide tingling through his veins.

She, too, upon the Bord'rer's manly size
With prepossessing favour fix'd her sight;
For woman's sharp and well-observing eyes
Soon single out the seemliest, stateliest wight;
And, oh!  (she to herself thus silent sighs,)
Were't but the will of Puck the dapper sprite,
I could &mdash; La!  what a grace of form divine!&mdash;
I could, in sooth, submit to lose my name in thine!

Forward they rode, to where the King and MAG
O'erlook'd, superior, from the southern mound,
When, from his brute alighting, every wag
His person haunch'd into a bow profound,
And almost kiss'd his shoe's bedusted tag,
Grazing with nose most loyally the ground,
As earthward crook'd they their corporeal frames
Into obeisance due, before the gracious James.

"Rise, rise, my lads," the jovial Monarch said,
"Here is not now the fitting place to ply
The courtier's and the dancing-master's trade,
Nuzzling the nasty ground obsequiously:
Up, up &mdash; put hat and bonnet upon head&mdash;
The chilling dew still drizzles from the sky;
Up &mdash; tuck your coats succinct around your bellies;
Mount, mount your asses' backs like clever vaulting fellows.

"And see, that, when the race's sign is given,
Each rider whirl his whip with swingeing might)
Or toss his whizzing cudgel up to heaven,
That with more goodly bang it down may light;
And let the spur's blood-thirsty teeth be driven
Through hide and hair by either heel aright;
For 'tis a beast most sluggish, sour, and slow.
Be mounting then, my hearts, and range ye in a row:

"And look ye northwards &mdash; note you mastlike pole,
Tassell'd with ribbons and betrimm'd with clout;
Yon &mdash; mark it &mdash; is the race-ground's northern goal,
Where you must turn your asses' heads about,
And jerk them southward, till with gladsome soul
You reach that spot whence now you're setting out;
And he that reaches first, shall loud be shouted
The happy, happy man &mdash; I'll say no more about it."&mdash;

This said, they, like the glimpse of, lightning quick,
Upvaulted on their backbones asinine,
And marshall'd, by the force of spur and stick,
The long-ear'd lubbards in an even line;
Then sat, awaiting that momentous nick
When James's herald should y-twang the sign.
Each whip was rear'd aloft in act to crack,
Each cudgel hung in sky surcharged with stormy thwack.

Frisk'd with impatient flutter every heart,
As the brisk anxious blood began to jump;
Each human ear prick'd up its fleshiest part,
To catch the earliest notice of the trump;
When, hark!  with blast that spoke the sign to start,
The brass-toned clarion gave the air a thump,
Whoop &mdash; off they go &mdash; halloo &mdash; they shoot &mdash; they fly&mdash;
They spur-they whip &mdash; they crack &mdash; they bawl &mdash; they curse &mdash; they cry.&mdash;

A hundred whips, high toss'd in ether, sung
Tempestuous, flirting up and down like fire;
'Tween sky and earth as many cudgels swung
Their gnarled lengths in formidable gyre,
And, hissing, from their farther ends down flung
A storm of wooden bangs and anguish dire:
Wo to the beastly ribs, and sculls, and backs,
Foredoom'd to bear the weight of such unwieldy thwacks!

Wo to the beastly bowels, doom'd, alas!
To bear the spur's sharp steely agony!
For through the sore-gall'd hides of every ass
Squirts the vext blood in gush of scarlet dye,
While, as they slug along the hoof-crush'd grass,
Rises a bray so horrid and so high,
As if all Bashan's bulls, with fat o'ergrown,
Had bellow'd on the green of ANSTER'S frighted Loan.

Who can in silly pithless words paint well
The pithy feats of that laborious race?
Who can the cudgellings and whippings tell,
The hurry, emulation, joy, disgrace?
'Twould take for tongue the clapper of a bell,
To speak the total wonders of the chase;
'Twould need a set of sturdy brassy lungs,
To tell the mangled whips, and shatter'd sticks and rungs.

Each rider pushes on to be the first,
Nor has he now an eye to look behind;
One ass trots smartly on, though like to burst
With bounding blood and scantiness of wind;
Another, by his master bann'd and cursed,
Goes backward through perversity of mind,
Inching along in motion retrograde,
Contrarious to the course which Scotland's Monarch bade.

A third obdurate stands and cudgel-proof,
And stedfast as th' unchisell'd rock of flint,
Regardless though the heaven's high marble roof
Should fall upon his scull with mortal dint,
Or though conspiring earth, beneath his hoof,
Should sprout up coal with fiery flashes in't,
Whilst on his back his grieved and waspish master,
The stubborner he stands, still bangs and bans the faster.

Meantime, the rabblement, with fav'ring shout
And clapping hand, set up so loud a din,
As almost with stark terror frighted out
Each ass's soul from his particular skin:
Rattled the bursts of laughter round about,
Grinn'd every phiz with mirth's peculiar grin,
As through the Loan they saw the cuddies awkward
Bustling, some straight, some thwart, some forward, and some backward.

As when the clouds, by gusty whirlwind riven,
And whipp'd into confusion pitchy-black,
Detach'd, fly diverse round the cope of heaven,
Reeling and jostling in uncertain rack,
And some are northward, some are southward driven,
With storm embroiling all the zodiac,
Till the clash'd clouds send out the fiery flash,
And peals, with awful roll, the long loud thunder crash:

Just in such foul confusion and alarm
Jostle the cuddies with rebellious mind,
All drench'd with sweat, their blood becomes so warm,
And loudly bray before, and belch behind.
But who is yon, the foremost of the swarm,
That scampers fleetly as the rushing wind?
'Tis ROBERT SCOTT, if I can trust my eyne;
I know the Bord'rer well by his long coat of green.

See how his bright whip, brandish'd round his head,
Flickers like streamer in the northern skies;
See how his ass on earth with nimble tread
Half-flying rides, in air half-riding flies,
As if a pair of ostrich wings, outspread,
To help him on, had sprouted from his thighs.
Well scamper'd, ROB &mdash; well whipt, well spurr'd, my boy!
O haste ye, RANTER, haste &mdash; rush &mdash; gallop to thy joy!

The pole is gain'd; his ass's head he turns
Southward, to tread the trodden ground again;
Sparkles like flint the cuddy's hoof, and burns,
Seeming to leave a smoke upon the plain;
His bitted mouth the foam impatient churns;
Sweeps his broad tail behind him like a train:
Speed, cuddy, speed!  O, slacken not thy pace!
Ten minutes more like this, and thou shalt gain the race.

He comes careering on the sounding Loan,
With pace unslacken'd hast'ning to the knoll,
And, as he meets with those that hobble on
With northward heads to gain the ribbon'd pole,
Ev'n by his forceful fury are o'erthrown
His long-ear'd brethren in confusion droll;
For as their sides he, passing, slightly grazes,
By that collision shock'd, down roll the founder'd asses.

Heels over head they tumble; ass on ass
They dash, and twenty times roll o'er and o'er,
Lubberly wallowing along the grass,
In beastly ruin and with beastly roar;
While their vext riders, in poor plight, alas!
Flung from their saddles three long ells and more,
Bruised and commingled with their cuddies sprawl,
Cursing th' impetuous brute whose conflict caused their fall.

With hats upon their heads they down did light,
Withouten hats disgacefully they rose;
Clean were their faces ere they fell and bright,
But dirty-faced they got up on their toes;
Strong were their sinews ere they fell and tight,
Hip-shot they stood up, sprain'd with many woes;
Blithe were their aspects ere the ground they took,
Grim louring rose they up, with crabbed ghastful look.

And, to augment their sorrow and their shame,
A hail abhorr'd of nauseous rotten eggs
In rascal volleys from the rabble came
Opprobrious, on their bellies, heads, and legs,
Smearing with slime that ill their clothes became,
Whereby they stunk like wash-polluted pigs,
For in each sputtering shell a juice was found,
Foul as the dribbling pus of Philoctetes' wound.

Ah!  then, with grievous limp along the ground,
They sought their hats that had so flown away,
And some were, cuff'd and much disaster'd, found,
And haply some not found unto this day.
Meanwhile, with vast and undiminish'd bound,
Sheer through, the bestial wreck and disarray,
The brute of Mesopotam hurries on,
And in his madding speed devours the trembling Loan.

Speed, cuddy, speed &mdash; one short, short minute more,
And finish'd is thy toil, and won the race&mdash;
Now &mdash; one half minute, and thy toils are o'er&mdash;
His toils are o'er, and he has gain'd the base:
He shakes his tail, the conscious conqueror,
 Joy peeps through his stupidity of face,
He seems to wait the Monarch's approbation,
As quiver his long ears with self-congratulation.

Straight from the stirrup ROB dislodged his feet,
And, flinging from his grasp away the rein,
Off sprung, and, louting in obeisance meet,
Did lowly duty to his King again:
His King with salutation kind did greet
Him the victorious champion of the plain,
And bade him rise, and up the hillock skip,
That he the royal hand might kiss with favour'd lip.

Whereat, obedient to the high command,
Great ROBERT SCOTT, upbolting from the ground,
Rush'd up, in majesty of gesture grand,
To where the Monarch sat upon the mound,
And kiss'd the hard back of his hairy hand
Respectfully, as fits a Monarch crown'd;
But with a keener ecstasy he kiss'd
The dearer, tend'rer back of MAGGIE'S downy fist.

Then took the trumpeter his clarion good,
And, in a sharp and violent exclaim,
Out from the brass among the multitude,
Afar sent conquering ROB'S illustrious name;
Which heard, an outcry of applause ensued,
That shook the dank dew from the starry frame;
Great ROBERT'S name was halloo'd through the mob,
And Echo blabb'd to heav'n the name of mighty ROB.

But, unapplauded, and in piteous case,
The laggers, on their vanquish'd asses slow,
Shame-stung, with scurvy length of rueful face,
Ride sneaking of to save them further wo;
For, cramm'd with slime and stench and vile disgrace,
Th' abominable shells fly moe and moe,
Till slink the men amid the press of folk,
Secure from shame, and slime, and egg's unwholesome yolk.

