Thou silver moon!  that, clad in lustre pale,
While all the landscape round is hush'd and still;
Dost fling thy radiance o'er the dewy vale,
The winding streamlet, and the distant hill,
As musing thus, a rambler of the night,
I pace the church-yard solemn walks between,
Oh!  let me woo thy melancholy light,
To lull my bosom to the pensive scene;
Where scatter'd broad thy cloudless rays are thrown,
Gilding each flow'ry turf, and monumental stone.

Is it in mock'ry of the silent dread,
Of those that slumber in sepulchral gloom,
That beauteous here thy lovely glory shed,
So sweetly glimmers on the senseless tomb?
They see thee not &mdash; beneath the rugged mould
For ever stretch'd, they bid the world farewell;
Thou can'st not soothe them, as, perhaps, of old;
Thou can'st not wake them, in the narrow cell;
Nor burst their sullen trance, nor tempt their gaze
To watch thy midnight path, and wonder at thy blaze!

How calm ye sleep within your dark abode,
Ye fallen trav'llers of an earlier hour!
No more ye wander in a thorny road,
No more ye struggle with the pelting show'r;
Soft, on its native dust, in blest repose,
The troubled heart forgets the throb of care;
And, shut from ev'ry grief, the eyelids close,
As though the tear had never glisten'd there:
The world's rude clamors can no longer tire;
Dull, on your frozen ears, the mingling shoots expire.

For ah!  secure, upon a quiet shore,
Like weary mariners, ye rest, at last,
Safe from the terrors of the ocean's roar,
The surge loud dashing, and the furious blast;
Nor friendship, now, nor love, nor slight, nor hate,
Again shall rouse you, as in death ye lie;
Nor all the varying storms of adverse fate
Shall harm you more, but flit unheeded by;
E'en as the vesper winds shall gently pass,
That o'er your green turfs sigh, along the trembling grass!

Oh!  I could wish, beneath the verdant soil.
In mute oblivion, pillow'd thus, below,
To steal, like you, from ev'ry busy toil,
From ev'ry sadd'ning doubt, and ev'ry woe&mdash;
But, hark! &mdash; methinks, with strange, unearthly sound,
Some warning spirit seems to whisper near&mdash;
Say, can'st thou pierce beyond my narrow bound,
Or hope the sinner meets a refuge here?
Alas!  not him my prison-house can save;
He finds no refuge there, no solace in the grave!

'Tis only they, the pious and the just,
When doom'd no longer through the world to roam,
Shall prove my noiseless tenement of dust
A shelt'ring covert, and a blissful home.
Poor foolish reas'ner!  hence upon thy way,
Nor idly mourn the destiny of man,
But virtuous live thy transitory day,
And dedicate to Heaven the little span;
Then shalt thou hail me as the bed of peace,
Where ev'ry pang shall die, where ev'ry sorrow cease!
