Come genial Wynter!  Welcome to my sight
Thy dark, dim clouds, thy mountain drifts o' snow!
Yes, let the sons of ease and sloth delight,
In summer's wanton lap reclin'd, to throw
Their limbs beside the streams which sweetly flow,
Or 'neath the shelter of some shady tree;
Yet tho' the sleet descend, the tempest blow,
And howling winds sweep fiercely o'er the lea,
Wynter and wintry hills have still their charms for me.

What tho' obscure, and shorn of half his light,
The day's bright monarch warm our blood no more;
Tho' now no more the meads be daisy dight,
The meads so late with flow'rs enamell'd o'er;
Tho' snow-clad forests, leafless now and hoar,
Wave their dark branches as thy storms begin,
Beat, Wynter, beat against my humble door,
I heed thee not, thy mighty blasts, thy din;
Tho' cheerless all without, 'tis comfort all within.

Faint gleams the sun behind the Eastern hill,
And looks askance upon a world of snow,
The smoke is rising in the welkin still,
The torpid stream almost forgets to flow;
Thick hang the icicles the thatch below;
The little birds of snows and cold complain;
While bumpkins to their daily labours go,
The waken'd sluggard eyes the frosty pane,
Then turns him in his bed, and goes to sleep again.

'Tis night, and labour's daily task is done:
The stars are twinkling in the frosty sky,
The mastiff howls unto the pale pale moon,
The mallard wings his airy flight on high,
And all the village lost in slumber lie,
Save where some melancholy antique crone
Comes from the distant copse, slow-creeping by,
Her little faggot o'er her shoulder thrown,
To dress her wynter's meal &mdash; that meal she shares alone.

'Tis Christmas eve; and happy we who meet
This happy time the cheerful blaze around;
Friends welcome friends, and lovers lovers greet;
Laugh echoes laugh, the merry glass goes round
Unceasing, till the jolly rebec's sound
Bids in the dance the youths and maidens move:
Ah, then, I ween, full quickly may be found
(Tho' mothers frown, and maiden aunts reprove),
How sympathize the hearts of those who truly love.

Now Fashion's minions throng the city's streets:
The carriage rattles o'er the crowded way,
Chair jostles chair, with coachmen coachmen meets,
Knave elbows peer &mdash; 'tis Fashion's holiday.
To rout, assembly, masquerade, or play,
Unknowing why, and reckless here, they run.
O fools!  Who strive to squander life away;
Yet think, O think, if not another sun
Be yours to spread, alas!  how little have ye done?

And ye, who sated from the table rise,
Gorg'd with the feast, by ev'ry climate fed,
Earth, seas, and air's exhausted luxuries,
For whom the fatlings of the flock have bled,
O spare to age his scanty dole of bread,
Nor hungry send the child of want away,
That heav'n may show'r its blessings on your head,
And ye may boldly ask (if e'er ye pray),
"Lord, give our daily bread, to satisfy to day."

Such joys the town can give &mdash; a happier theme
The simple scenes of rural life supply;
Nor yet forget where, by the smoking stream,
"The sportsman's thunder breaks the frozen sky;"
Nor where, amidst the rustic revelry,
The squire recounts the perils of the chace
O'er his brown ale; while proudly placed on high,
The jolly sirloin shews his honest face,
The Englishman's best food, his table's boast and grace.

Now is the very witching time of night
(If true it be what ancient legends say),
When earth's inhabitants, ghost, gnome, and sprite,
Forsake their narrow tenements of clay,
To wander up and down the churchyard way:
And now it is, the pale and silent dead
Burst from their tombs before the judgment-day,
To strike the villain's guilty soul with dread,
And shake the torch of hell around the murd'rer's bed.

Hark!  'tis the village clock, whose iron tongue
Tells twelve unto the drowsy ear of night&mdash;
Mute the loud laugh, and ceased the merry song,
The candles seem to yield a paler light,
And tipp'd with blue the fire which burns so bright:
Then near and nearer crowds the timid fair
In terror of some unexpected sight;
The child clings closer to his grandam's chair,
Nor dares to look behind, lest some strange form be there.

Then too, perhaps, some aged sire has told,
Since age is narrative, and loves to tell,
Of cruel massacres in days of old,
Or solitary murder which befel
All by some lonely heath or murky dell:
And how, about the fall of even-tide
(Himself has seen it, and remembers well),
The villagers would turn their steps aside,
Nor dare to pass the spot whereon the stranger died.

And something too, perhaps, that sire has said,
Night waning fast ere half his tale is done,
Of Egypt's wonders, Nile's secret head,
And burning Lybia, birthright of the sun;
Of towns and cities, battles lost and won,
(O foul extravagance of human blood!)
Of melancholy streams which slowly run
To join their waters to old Ocean's flood,
Where empire sat enthron'd, and cities once have stood.

'Tis merry in the hall; and through the night
The jovial crew unceasingly prolong
The loud hoarse laugh of unrestrain'd delight,
The annual tale and oft-repeated song:
And some there are, the happy group among,
Who, till the day's return, their revels keep,
O'er nappy ale, October stout and strong;
While others to their beds securely creep,
Ere from the distant hills grey morn begins to peep.

O ye, the happy sons of peace and ease,
Who round your Christmas fires your revels keep,
Bless those bold hearts who, toss'd by winds like these,
Bear Britain's thunders o'er the stormy deep:
Aye here ye dance, or sing, or sweetly sleep,
Unconscious of the waves' tremendous roar,
Nor heed the wintry hurricanes which sweep
Along the mazes of our rocky shore,
And dash the foamy brine, as heav'n and earth were o'er.

Of this enough &mdash; O be your slumbers light;
And God's good angels guard ye evermore.
Ere orient Sol dispels the shades of night,
The minstrel's carol shall attend your door,
To hail the happy morning, when, of yore,
The Godhead did in mortal form appear:
Then pass with humble joy His threshold o'er;
Praise Him for mercies past; with holy fear
Implore His bounteous hand to bless the coming year.
