Children of ISHMAEL!  to realms confin'd
Where sternly nature frowns throughout the year,
Unfetter'd sands, that mount before the wind,
Plains ever wild, and valleys ever drear,
Where Spring's unwilling footsteps scarce appear;
For you no harvests rise, no vintage grows,
No shadowy groves the sultry noon to cheer;
Nor blooms the painted pink or scented rose;
But all around is waste, and desolate repose!

Children of ISHMAEL!  a rugged home
By fate is yours; but, let the favour'd race,
Through fertile meads and water'd vales who roam,
Or flow'ry paths in groves of verdure trace,
Declare if happiness depends on place.
Can crystal rills, or waving woods supply
Sweet solace to the wretched, or the base
Alas!  bright scenes are lost on sorrow's eye,
Careless of verdant shades, and streams that murmur by.

As bounteously the dews of bliss descend
On the lone Desert, as on Tempe's vale:
True joys are of the soul &mdash; on mind depend,
Nor influence own of scene, or veering gale.
The sons of Greece tell sorrow's bitter tale
Beside the rill, beneath the spreading tree;
In citron groves the Grecian maids bewail;
While speeds o'er sands the Arab blest and free,
And loves his native home &mdash; the home of Liberty.

Free as his winds he roves &mdash; and if his mind,
Rude as the scene in which his breath he draws,
Owns no subjection, no respect of kind,
And bids defiance proud to social laws,
His sterner virtues still extort applause&mdash;
Mankind his common foe, the foe of all
He combats, sever'd from the social cause;
But who so swift to hear the stranger's call?
Who for the suppliant guest to conquer or to fall?

Fantastic Honour, still opinion's child,
Of differing temper in each differing land,
Courage, that loves to quarry in the wild,
Take in the Desert's tent a watchful stand.
Generous as brave, nor only free of hand,
But prodigal of life, the weak to aid,
The noble savage leads his wand'ring band;
While, o'er his soul, the sweet poetic maid
Spreads her enchanting spell, and fondly is obey'd.

Blest was ALASHTAR once, nor ever eye
In joy's full radiance more serenely play'd;
Nor ever mirthful heart and spirit high
O'er more intrepid bosom lightly sway'd:
Nor ever Arab youth more gallantly
Urg'd his hot courser o'er the Desert sand:
Or bade the wind-outstripping falcon fly;
Or cast the rapid dance with firmer hand;
Or rais'd in battle's shock, the desolating brand.

Alas!  how chang'd!  behold ALASHTAR now,
For ever quench'd that eye's enliv'ning ray,
Deep gloom for ever settled on his brow,
As thunder-cloud obscuring summer's day;
Fierce on his heart the fangs of sorrow prey;
Nor might he stand on BRUSA'S magic mound,
Or all ISTAMBOL'S towery pride survey,
Would brighter look repay the scene around,
Than that despairing glance, he fixes on the ground!

The world is now a dread and dreary void
To one, who once its burthens gaily bore&mdash;
The chase, that erst allur'd him, now annoy'd&mdash;
The true-bred courser pleas'd his eye no more&mdash;
He loath'd to think upon the days of yore,
For all the joys of former days were fled.
E'en love, that in his inmost heart before
Had sweetly bloom'd, is rooted out and dead&mdash;
Revenge has blighted love, and reigns in pleasure's stead.

'Tis Eve &mdash; Appeased is the scorching beam,
The Desert's burning sand has ceas'd to glow;
Around, the cooling gales of freshness stream,
Restoring nature, as they softly blow;
At large, th, unloaded camel, pacing slow,
Crops the rough herbage or the tamarisk spray&mdash;
ALASHTAR, restless from habitual woe,
Rush'd from his tent, and took his lonely way,
Engross'd in darksome thoughts that on his quiet prey.

Full soon, obedient to the warning hour,
Forth into air the dark encampment prest,
Catching the gifts of evening's balmy power;
The gladden'd Desert hail'd its hour of rest.
Here warriors' lips to heav'n the prayer addrest;
There, dreamers, torpid in a still delight,
Inhal'd the vapour that becalms the breast;
Yonder, the noisy circle loud recite
The acts of recent war, the wonders of the fight.

For came from recent fight the conqu'ring band,
Rich in the rifled strangers' Eastern store;
The men of Bagdad, bound for Syrian land,
Left Ophir's pearls, and Cashmere's palampore,
When, fierce and dreadful as the torrent's roar,
ALASHTAR crost their way:  in triumph high
Homeward their treasure now the captors bore,
Anxious the distant tents of Ad to spy,
To spread the glitt'ring spoil, and glad the maiden's eye.

Nor long or ere ALASHTAR'S gloomy form,
As far he loiter'd, fell on DARAN'S sight;
(Daran, more fierce than ocean's wintry storm,
Wild as the savage beast that hates the light;)
"Behold," he cried, "where be, the chief of might,
Holds converse with the sorrows of his breast!
Oh!  Ad's heart-cheering ruler and delight!
Happy the people who, by Allah blest,
Beneath that iron frown's protecting influence rest.

"I counsell'd him to play a certain game,
And, if MOHAREB'S self escap'd his power,
To scorch his foeman's tribe, with penal flame,
Consuming plant mature, and op'ning flow'r,
Childhood and age, in one destructive hour.
His soul had rested, thus by vengeance fed,
But he disdain'd, he said, his wrath to show'r
On those who guiltless blood had never shed:
Justice his only end &mdash; his mark, MOHAREB'S head.

"Then let the torturers, that never die,
Feed on his heart who stays his dastard hand!
Still let a brother's blood for vengeance cry,
Still, unappeased, stain the tainted sand,
And shame's detested mark the chieftain brand
Whose arm has not aveng'd." &mdash; "Fall bitter shame
On thee," (cried HASSAN, eldest of the band,)
On thee who dar'st profane ALASHTAR'S name,
ALASHTAR, soul of fight, the chief of spotless fame.

"When he, beneath whose arm that brother fell,
Escaping fled, o'er wide Arabia's reign
Flew not ALASHTAR, crossing hill and dell,
The stranger's land, the desert's boundless plain,
Tracing each course, th' assassin's track to gain?
And, if he fail'd to find the latent foe,
Shall not his look of agony and pain,
Years of regret and endless length of woe,
Disarm the stern reproof, and lay detraction low?

"ALASHTAR smiles no longer; still his soul,
Wounded and pierc'd, not harden'd, by despair,
Relaxing, bows to Nature's soft control;
Whether he hears the stranger-suppliant's prayer,
Or on the tents of Ad bestows his care.
And still, when battle gives a pause from thought,
Rises he not as lion from his lair?
What sword like his with might and fury fraught?
Had yonder spoil been won, unless ALASHTAR fought?

"But thou wert ne'er his friend." &mdash; With glowing cheek
Indignant DARAN heard the saws of age,
And all his fury rose &mdash; he burn'd to speak,
But now ALASHTAR'S nearer steps engage
Th' attentive band, and awe the tongue of rage.
Uprose the circle to receive their Chief,
Yielding the homage due to prince or sage;
ALASHTAR, struggling with his inward grief,
Repell'd oppressive thought, and grasp'd at short relief.

His clearer brow reveal'd a beam of light ,
"Brothers!"  he cried, "for of ALASHTAR'S kind
All were discover'd in the recent fight;
Well met!  your deeds are ever in my mind;
Would we were nearer those ye left behind!
'Tis strange the troop for whom we wait, delay.
The merchant's rifled gold would swiftly find
The grain they sought &mdash; full well they know the way:
Nor has a city charms to make an Arab stay.

"Fair is the Syrian Queen &mdash; our comrades there
Will view the gushing stream, the verdant grove,
The halls where dashing fountains cool the air,
The thrones of ease, of luxury, and love;
But who within that magic circle move?
Not men, but trembling slaves; the Desert's horde
Scorn the green arbour of the captive dove;
These sands their choice, secured by freedom's sword,
Where victor never trod, nor sway'd a tyrant lord.

"Yes!  in the glist'ning eyes that sparkle round,
I read th' assenting spirit I revere;
Thron'd on the Desert's stern unconquer'd ground,
Reign ISHMAEL'S children, yet unknown to fear,
Here blest with freedom's good, and only here&mdash;
All, all, save one, content" &mdash; the darksome cloud,
That for a space had seem'd to disappear,
Now wrapt ALASHTAR'S brow in wonted shroud;
Lost in his secret thoughts, he saw nor tents, nor crowd.

"Alas!" (cried HASSAN,) "are the children blest
Who read that anguish in the father's face?
Oh!  son of SORAB!  ALLAH grant thee rest!"
"MOHAREB lives!  then shall the world's wide space
For scorn'd ALASHTAR yield a resting-place?
Oh!  might th' assassin's dark retreat be known,
Might thirsty vengeance drink!  Eternal grace!
Give me to hear MOHAREB'S dying moan,
And be that parting sigh succeeded by my own!

"AGIB!  my brother!  years have circled round,
Since thou hast fill'd thy cold and bloody grave,
Nor yet thy restless shade has quiet found.
Nightly before my tent I see thee wave,
Thy crimson'd vest &mdash; 'Oh!  impotent to save
How long,' thou criest, 'his arm shall vengeance stay?
ALASHTAR!  rise!  draw forth the tardy glaive!
Remember AGIB!'  years have roll'd away,
Yet nightly speaks the voice, and chides the base delay.

"Shame is on SORAB'S race! &mdash; Ye dews of heav'n
Fall not where'er conceal'd the assassin lies!
Withhold, oh Earth!  thy fruits; in fury driven,
Rise from thy fiery bed, SIMOOM, arise!
And cross his blasted way &mdash; turn flame, ye skies,
That give MOHAREB breath!"  The circle near
Watch'd the wild flashing of ALASHTAR'S eyes,
And started at the voice they paus'd to hear;
E'en DARAN'S soul was struck, and own'd a sense of fear.

Sudden, from far, the camel's distant bell
Rung through the silent Desert from the west;
"Our friends!  they join us at th' appointed well."
ALASHTAR silent heard, and, care-opprest,
Mov'd to his lonely tent: &mdash; his stormy breast
Had not a kindly welcome to bestow,
Nor would he mar the pleasures of the rest.
Lost in remember'd ills, and present woe,
He fled to lonely thought, his refuge and his foe.

Swift, through the circling palms, the band survey'd
The kindred troop advance; but saw, with dread,
The foremost Arab, by a comrade's aid,
Supported on a camel that was led&mdash;
Had there been battle? &mdash; forth the party sped
Anxious and fearful; nearer as they prest
They saw a stranger's face, his turban red
Of Syrian form, his many-colour'd vest,
One not of ISHMAEL'S stock, or Desert race confest.

Greeting and question rose in noisy din.
The camels crouch, the wearied troop descend,
And, loud and sharp, the voices mixt begin
A war of tongues, that promis'd ne'er to end,
But soon the troop around the stranger bend,
(Mischance, they found, their brethren had not known)
How gladly all a prompt assistance lend!
For, gash'd with wounds, and helpless, and alone,
The guest became a friend, a comrade of their own.

Him had the Arabs found, deserted found,
(As from the city's walls they bent their way,)
Expos'd, unshelter'd, on the burning ground,
Scorch'd by the sun, to parching thirst a prey.
Scarce had the stranger force and voice to say,
That fate had led him to a traitor's snare,
Who seiz'd his wealth, his camel bore away,
And left him, wounded and deserted there,
To meet a ling'ring fate, and perish in despair.

The Syrian's story reach'd ALASHTAR'S ear:
He, rising from his dream of anguish, cried,
"Be this the stranger's tent, convey him here!"
The sufferer in they bore, and swift applied
Cool moisture to his lips, and swiftly tied
On aching wounds, the precious herbs that heal;
ALASHTAR, kneeling by the stranger's side,
Soothing another's woes, forgot to feel
The pressure of his own, the edge of sorrow's steel.

Nor rudely mark'd, nor stamp'd in common mould,
ALASHTAR saw the Syrian's nervous frame.
Destin'd his arm a warrior's sword to hold;
His mien, though faded, spoke a soul of flame.
And, as returning life and vigour came,
Commanding air and high majestic look,
Flash'd from his rolling eye &mdash; no Rayah tame
He seem'd, nor wonted Turkish rule to brook,
But Freedom's dauntless son, of soul that never shook.

CANTO II.
Oh golden link!  connecting man with man,
Celestial Charity!  Oh, rarely seen
Since lust of rule and thirst of gold began
Unhallow'd reign &mdash; whene'er thy look serene
Sheds placid influence, how the soften'd mien,
And soften'd heart, consenting, own thy sway!
Thus rifted ice, enchain'd by winter keen,
Thaw'd by the sun, in rivers rolls away,
And glads the parched waste, and sparkles to the day.

Alas!  thy steps avoid the peopled town,
And shun the haunts of science and of art,
Where soft refinement smooths each feeling down;
Or baser interest chills the glowing heart,
Presents the mask, and trains to act the part.
Deserts and wilds are Charity's retreat;
There guileless bosoms at her bidding smart
With Nature's throb, and glow with Nature's heat&mdash;
There thorns are pluck'd away from fellow pilgrims' feet.

Watchful beside the troubled couch of pain
ALASHTAR sat till morning ting'd the skies.
The wearied stranger tried to sleep in vain&mdash;
ALASHTAR heard his heart-appalling sighs;
Saw fever'd starts and wild emotions rise.&mdash;
Oh, Sleep!  how falsely call'd the friend of care,
Thou hearest but the blest: &mdash; the weeping eyes,
That want thee most, thy blessings may not share,&mdash;
No poppy-wreath hast thou for comfortless despair.

Yet cheer'd and strengthen'd by the morning breeze
The stranger slowly rais'd his sunken head,
And bless'd the guardian chief &mdash; but look of ease
Or sign of joy, that might have well repaid
Escape from fate, with not a smile o'erspread
The rescued stranger's cheek &mdash; frequent arose
His hollow moanings; and, "Oh!  fatal aid,"
He cried, "that came to lengthen out my woes;
Oh!  why was death deferr'd; why snatch me from repose?"

ALASHTAR silent heard, and sigh'd to find
One fated like himself; then mild replied:&mdash;
"Oh, child of sorrow!  let the tortur'd mind
Disclose the pangs 'tis misery to hide;
For one is near by destiny allied
With those who weep, this breast is pierc'd like thine;
These lips have drunk affliction's bitter tide;
These eyes with kindred tears already shine;
For sorrow's bleeding heart is pity's sacred shrine."

"I know thee not, yet see thee lov'd and great,"
Exclaim'd the guest &mdash; "the shepherd of thy fold,
Art thou partaker then of adverse fate?"
A smother'd groan ALASHTAR'S feelings told;
And, "by the rank," he cried, "that mortals hold
Their wealth, their honours, e'en the look they shew,
Judge not the heart within: &mdash; he must unfold
The mazes of the soul, who seeks to know
Our true, our real lot, of happiness or woe."

"Chief!  I have lost my all &mdash; as much alone
Art thou in cheerless life?"  return'd the guest,
She, she, the sun-beam of my day, is gone,
And all is darkness now: &mdash; in Syria's breast
My all of bliss, my hopes, my-treasure, rest.&mdash;
That treasure lost, I loath'd the alter'd land
That from her presence all its charm possest,
And, calling back to thought the realms of sand,
I sought the Desert's plain, and join'd the traitor band.

"For not to Syrian race I owe my birth,&mdash;
The Desert's true-born son &mdash; compell'd to fly
With her I lov'd, I left this native earth,
And breath'd for years beneath a foreign sky:
Such was the written will of Destiny.
From home and friends an eager flight I bent,
Led by the guiding ray of beauty's eye,
And pitch'd on Lebanon my wand'ring tent,
Safe on the fortress height &mdash; the home of banishment.

"This arm had slain a foe &mdash; nay &mdash; start not, Chief!
He robb'd me of my love! &mdash; paternal sway,
Cold and regardless of a daughter's grief,
To might and riches gave the prize away;
But as the rival, on the marriage day,
Bore home my plighted maid, a chosen train,
To quell his pride, in secret ambush lay&mdash;
Beneath this arm he fell &mdash; Oh!  triumph vain,
The Bride I won is lost, may ne'er be mine again.

"Oh!  thou for whom I cast aside my name&mdash;
Oh!  thou for whom my native land I fled&mdash;
For whom I bore the burning mark of shame,
Shunning the stern avenger of the dead,
Oh!  would I shar'd thy cold and peaceful bed!"
Like palm-tree, bent beneath the wintry wind,
Trembled ALASHTAR'S form &mdash; for wild and dread
The rushing thoughts, the horrors undefin'd,
Wak'd by the stranger's words, that flash'd across his mind.

Silent be stood, for speech refus'd to flow;
At length fierce struggles way for utt'rance found;
Yet scarce he said, in hurried voice and low,
"Stranger, reveal thy name." &mdash; "On Arab ground
'Twas once MOHAREB!" &mdash; At the hated sound,
The fatal hinge of all his destinies,
Like one transfix'd by sudden mortal wound,
ALASHTAR started back; before his eyes
The object of his search, the hidden serpent lies!

Wond'ring MOHAREB saw the troubled mien,
The pale and quiv'ring lip, the redden'd eye;
And, "thus," he cried, "is mild compassion seen?
Is this the look of promis'd sympathy?"
Wild, bursting forth the phrenzied Chief's reply
Struck on his soul.  "Oh!  ting'd with bloody stain;
Oh!  thou who bad'st thy hapless rival die;
Expect not now compassion's meed to gain,
ALASHTAR at thy side; the brother of the slain!"

Sprung from his couch, as if without an ill,
MOHAREB (gush'd his op'ning wounds anew);
"Amongst the sons of AD?  no &mdash; distant still
The unforgotten border-line they drew&mdash;
These the avoided tents? &mdash; the hostile crew?&mdash;
ALASHTAR, thou?" &mdash; "The sons of AD are here.
On scent of prey, from distant home we Hew;
And AGIB'S name, resounded in thine ear,
Shall dissipate the doubt, and prove th' Avenger near."

Now (for ALASHTAR'S phrenzy, heard without,
Through all the camp had scatter'd swift dismay)
Rush'd to their Emir's tent the Arab rout,
"Behold MOHAREB!"  triumph's lurid ray
Illum'd each face, as wonder sunk away.
Mov'd by remembrance of ALASHTAR'S woe,
"Revenge;" the voices clamour'd, "smite and slay!"
Fierce DARAN'S voice provok'd the righteous blow,
"Now take our Chief his due; the life-blood of his foe!"

Pale from his recent wound, but undeprest,
MOHAREB stood with lifted front elate;
The lion thus, whom hunters close invest,
Glares on the circling host; and "welcome, fate!"
He cried; "ALASHTAR!  flesh the steel of hate!
Yet, ere I fall, that never brand of shame
On one of SAAD'S free-born race may wait,
Mark, that himself to save from vengeful aim,
MOHAREB never fled, or veil'd his father's name.

"At ZEINEB'S prayer, with ZEINEB'S self he fled,
Seduc'd and won by timid beauty's tear,
Who, had he for himself alone to dread,
Had met thee hand to hand, and spear to spear,
And then defied thee, as he braves thee here."
Flew to his sword ALASHTAR'S eager hand,
And seem'd MOHAREB'S fated moment near;
But, potent still his fury to command,
ALASHTAR slow replac'd the half unsheathed brand.

"MOHAREB!  for revolving years," he cried,
"ALASHTAR'S soul has long'd to meet his foe.
In search of thee, he travers'd regions wide,
The plains of flame, the distant heights of snow;
And now this sword might give the final blow.
But thou hast shar'd my tent &mdash; a man distrest&mdash;
And therefore safe:  e'en vengeance must forego
His bloody right, the steel of hate must rest;
Sacred the stranger's claim &mdash; secure ALASHTAR'S guest!"

He spoke; high sounding from the circling band
The murmurs deep of sullen anger swell'd;
"Preserve him now? &mdash; restrain the vengeful hand?
Oh!  woman-hearted Chief!  if vainly held
ALASHTAR'S sword, by us be ruffians quell'd!"
And DARAN rush'd to strike; but, fix'd between,
Th' indignant Chief his desperate horde repell'd,
MOHAREB'S guardian shield; nor vainly seen
The menace of his arm, and terrors of his mien.

Then, to his foe &mdash; "henceforth exempt from fear.
MOHAREB rest; if unremov'd his hate,
ALASHTAR still remains thy fortress here:
Believe his word &mdash; and here securely wait
Till art shall bid those pangs of thine abate,
Which art can heal; then half ALASHTAR'S train
To SAAD's tents shall guard thy lonely fate.
While we, diverging o'er the southern plain,
At length our distant homes, and border-line regain.

"Hereafter must we meet:  I see thee brave,
And therefore trustful at the combat place
Shall wait, where one of us must find a grave.
Poorly aveng'd were SORAB'S injur'd race,
Poorly remov'd ALASHTAR'S long disgrace,
Smote be a feeble foe: &mdash; three moons shall fade,
And wonted force MOHAREB'S sinews brace,
Or e'er we join the sharp and deadly blade;
Then come the battle on; be vengeance then allay'd."

"Decide we now!"  MOHAREB cried, but weak,
And powerless, as he mov'd, exhausted fell;
"Hereafter then," he scarce had voice to speak,
Slowly uprais'd, "these careless limbs rebel
And fail me now."  Restor'd and cherish'd well
Again the spent MOHAREB turn'd to rest,
And seem'd as in a brother's tent to dwell.&mdash;
ALASHTAR true, and watchful o'er his guest,
Himself each want supplied, and danger still represt.

Nor long or ere, refresh'd and freed from pain,
MOHAREB, not alone, began his way;
Then struck the band their tents; then mov'd again
The joyous troop, impatient of delay;
The shout of pleasure hail'd the parting day.
Sagacious of the path where, vast and wide,
Trackless as Ocean's breast the Desert lay,
Onward they sped; at night their ruling guide
As erst to seaman's course, the starry host supplied.

How fair is night to Arab rover's eyes!
What though alone the dreary waste he dare,
Companion'd still he feels, so gemm'd the skies
With myriad habitants, that, sparkling there,
Discomfit darkness, making all the air
One living blaze:  nor cloud nor vapour chill
Obscures the azure vault; but harmless flare
The meteor lights that seem to rove at will&mdash;
Oh!  fair is eastern night; so cool, so bright, so still.

Three days the band advanc'd; a fearful sign
The fourth reveal'd &mdash; th' horizon, thick and red,
Announc'd the Desert's storm &mdash; the wrath divine
Sounds in the blast, and fierce and dark, and dread,
The rushing progress of the tempest sped;
Heap'd into waves, the sandy ocean, riven,
Tumbles convuls'd, and rises from its bed&mdash;
The Desert moves; and, lash'd by winds of heav'n,
A curtain dark of death across the wild is driven.

Trembling the band survey'd the storm's advance&mdash;
ALASHTAR trembled not; but, gazing round,
Fix'd on the cloud a wild, indignant glance:
"Comes then destruction when the foe is found?&mdash;
Shall vengeance fail?" he cried, "nor mortal wound
Repay MOHAREB?"  but the written doom
Decreed not this ALASHTAR'S vital bound:
The veering tempest turn'd the coming gloom,
And bore to other plains the army's sandy tomb.

Rescued from fate, the scarce-recover'd train
Beneath the sun advanc'd; but soon descried
A palmy island rising from the plain:
Arriv'd at length, the Desert's secret tide
They found, to all but Arab eyes denied.
The tents are pitch'd; they chas'd the thoughts of fear;
And, hunger's dictates briefly satisfied,
The social ring they form, and pause to hear
Tradition's oral tale, to Arab circle dear.

Again they mov'd or ere the East was red,
And left the level sand &mdash; the morning's light
Reveal'd the rocks, the toiling camel's dread.
But here, though hill and dell arose to sight,
Still mourn'd the region, curs'd by nature's blight;
Stern Desolation's standard, still unfurl'd,
Shadow'd each stony vale and barren height&mdash;
It seem'd as refluent ocean, backward curl'd,
Had ceded to mankind a new and dreary world.

Now, glancing past the windings of the rock,
They open'd on a bay of secret land,
Where herbage, coarse and thin, supplied the flock.
Oh!  welcome sight to journey-wearied band!
The tents of AD in those recesses stand.
Then thunder'd forth the cries of victory,
Return'd by welcome shout and waving hand;
Long parted friends to friends' embraces fly;
And triumph beams around, and pleasure's sparkling eye.

And one there was, a tender graceful maid,
Returning from the Desert's scanty spring&mdash;
Her weighty pitcher on the ground she laid&mdash;
And, darting forwards, on affection's wing
Flew, round a brother's manly form to cling.
She saw him smile, him erst the son of woe,
And blest the change that time had power to bring&mdash;
"ZORA, my sister, let thy triumph flow!
"Rejoice," ALASHTAR cried, "discover'd is the foe!"

CANTO III.
How sweet is woman's love, is woman's care!
When struck and shatter'd in the stormy hour
We droop forlorn; and man, with stoic air,
Neglects, or roughly aids; then, rob'd in power,
Then Nature's angel seeks the mourner's bower.
How blest her smile that gives the soul repose!
How blest her voice, that, like the genial shower
Pour'd on the desert, gladdens as it flows,
And cheers the sinking heart, and conquers half our woes!

Nought, save the magic sound of ZORA'S voice,
Might ever calm ALASHTAR'S  fix'd despair;
And she, deciding with a steadfast choice,
Regardless of the charms that were her share,
(Of darkly beaming eyes and raven hair,
The cypress form its graceful height that rears;)
Deaf to the suitor's oft-repeated prayer,
ZORA resign'd the pride of beauty's years
To sooth a brother's lot, whom misery endears.

She, like ALASHTAR, mourn'd a brother slain,
But ZORA bade her sorrows seem to sleep;
And, bent alone to sooth ALASHTAR'S pain,
Smil'd in his presence, and withdrew to weep,
And, when she saw the cloud of passion sweep
Dark o'er ALASHTAR'S brow, when rankling hate
Drove to his heart the goading arrow deep,
Fix'd at his side would ZORA fondly wait,
And press his burning cheek, and bid the storm abate!

Or, when in milder sorrow's thoughtful gloom,
ALASHTAR sat, absorb'd in waking dream;
Then ZORA, bending o'er her Arab loom,
Or spreading fruits to catch the sunny beam,
Alone on maiden's task intent would seem;
The while her eye would dart its cheerful ray;
Her voice would fall like ear-refreshing stream;
Artful, but innocent, her looks that play,
And from himself at length the mourner steal away.

In earlier years how blest the little race,
The branches green of SORAB'S rising tree!
Then AGIB liv'd, and, in that happy space,
The loving brothers ne'er apart would be;
ZORA, their queen, in playful infancy.
Anon they watch'd the herd, together still,
And daily ZORA, blithest of the three,
Would bring the pitcher from the distant rill,
And o'er their parched lips the precious drops distil.

Hunters ere long, each gallant stripling sought
One kindred end &mdash; how mounted AGIB'S pride,
Who first her tame gazer to ZORA brought;
How blest ALASHTAR, when at ZORA'S side
He plac'd the wild bird's plume.  Oh!  years that glide
On downy pinion!  could the youthful mind
The page of written fate have then descried,
How had they started back &mdash; amaz'd to find
A world so darkly false, that wore a face so kind!

Oh!  thou deceiver life, how brightly gay
Thy future scenes on youthful fancies rise,
Till cold experience draws the veil away,
And, drest in all its dread realities,
Dark in our sight the blighted prospect lies:
So from afar the faithless deserts shew
Ideal lakes to cheat the pilgrim's eyes
Thirsting he toils across the plains that glow,
And finds a waste of sand, where waters seem'd to flow.&mdash;

With sinking heart did tender ZORA hear
That undiscern'd the foe no longer rov'd;
Dread was ALASHTAR'S joy &mdash; his smile severe
Shew'd that the combat was not far remov'd,
Shew'd danger near to all that ZORA lov'd.
Could she regret ALASHTAR'S day of shame?
His day of anguish? &mdash; ZORA'S heart reprov'd
The selfish thought that still arose the same,
And all unhing'd her soul as on the trial came.

Now ZORA nightly mark'd the warning ray
That linger'd in the sky &mdash; for ZORA knew
What deeds awaited on the orb's decay.
Knew that, before another crescent grew,
One heart must cease to beat &mdash; her alter'd hue
The anguish of a sister's soul betray'd.
And darksome were the scenes that fancy drew,
When in her sight ALASHTAR'S hand display'd
The bold Avenger's steel, the consecrated blade.

The moon is dark in heav'n &mdash; the morrow's light
Leads forth ALASHTAR &mdash; now at AGIB'S tomb
He prays alone, and gives to silent night
The yearnings of his soul &mdash; through storm and gloom,
Lo!  sorrow's daughter &mdash; fear-struck ZORA come!
There on the sandy mound, to her bow dear!
She kneels, all desolate in beauty's bloom,
Pauses ALASHTAR'S troubled voice to hear,
Her lips without a sigh &mdash; her eyes without a tear!

"AGIB!"  ALASHTAR'S voice exulting cried,
"To-morrow, and the fated blood shall flow!
To-morrow, and this sword, in crimson dyed,
Shall give thee vengeance &mdash; oft restrain'd and slow,
How longs a brother's arm to reach thy foe!
Sister of AGIB!  triumph for his sake,
Who, unappeased, sleeps in dust below;
Oh!  might the tenant of the tomb awake,
The joys of vengeance share, the crimson cup partake."

Then ZORA struggled with her grief in vain&mdash;
"Alas!  the hand, that made us mourners here,
To-morrow strikes at SORAB'S race again!
 Oh!  last of SORAB'S sons!" &mdash; "Unworthy fear!
 Shall not ALASHTAR well become his bier,
If not alone he fall? &mdash; is life his care?
Be red the foe's, if red ALASHTAR'S spear!"
Then ZORA shriek'd, and tore her streaming hair,
"Oh!  clos'd be ZORA'S eyes, if heard ALASHTAR'S prayer!"

That frantic voice ALASHTAR'S soul o'ercame&mdash;
"Daughter of misery, would ZORA'S sight
Contented gaze upon a brother's shame?
Oh!  no &mdash; nor think, who rusher, on the fight
Cuts short his day &mdash; on Eden's guarded height
"Does not the book our destinies display?
Our doom is written ere we see the light;
Man only falls on fate's appointed day;
That hour no mortal act can hasten, or delay."

"Alas!  what eye foresees the destin'd close?
Fate moves in darkness!"  in the East display'd,
Shone warning blushes; SORAB'S son arose&mdash;
"AGIB!  I go!"  the agonized maid,
(Who, scarcely-conscious, passively obey'd,)
ALASHTAR to the tent in silence led;
Then, seizing Arab lance, and shining blade,
Rush'd forth, as night's retiring shadows fled,
Summon'd a scanty train, and on to vengeance sped.

Twice had the morning left the eastern gate;
Still ZORA, torn by doubt's corroding woe,
Nor saw the warrior more, nor heard his fate.
Oh!  worst of agonies &mdash; Oh!  not to know
If struck, or shunn'd, the deprecated blow!
Still ZORA, station'd on the topmost height,
Watchful survey'd the Desert's track below;
At length, as sunk the third receding light,
The slow-returning band arose on ZORA'S sight.

Moment of breathless hope and breathless fear!
Lives, lives ALASHTAR? &mdash; from her airy post,
(Swift in her passage as the bounding deer,)
ZORA descended &mdash; yet in distance lost
Th' uncertain features of the coming host
Escap'd her gaze &mdash; their slow and mournful pace,
Their silence, deep and still, disturb'd her most.
Nearer they come &mdash; his very form &mdash; his face:&mdash;
He lives! &mdash; Oh!  precious sight for ZORA'S eye to trace

Forwards the maid with beating bosom sprung;
They meet &mdash; Oh!  meeting how unlike the last!
'Twas he &mdash; but tempest on his forehead hung:
ZORA he saw &mdash; but, darkly shudd'ring, cast
His mantle o'er his face, then hurried past,
Careless of ZORA'S voice: &mdash; the silent train
Spurr'd their impetuous steeds and follow'd fast;
On each the weeping sister call'd in vain,
But dim was HASSAN'S eye, and DARAN smil'd disdain.

Is it a vision, by delusion sent?
Does ZORA wake? &mdash; a form of senseless stone
Awhile she stands, then rushes to the tent.
There sat ALASHTAR, thoughtful, and alone&mdash;
"Oh!  speak!  'tis ZORA;" one oppressive groan
Burst from ALASHTAR'S soul, and gave reply.
On ZORA then, as one unlov'd, unknown,
He fix'd the wildness of his vacant eye;
Unanswer'd saw her weep, unanswer'd heard her sigh.

Frantic she hurried forth, and sought the train;
"Friends of ALASHTAR!  tear aside the veil!
Oh!  save a bursting heart, and mad'ning brain!"
But DARAN answer'd, "Let the weak bewail!
"Well may the mild, the woman-hearted fail."
"Insulter!  thus on misery to tread!"
Cried HASSAN, "ZORA, hear the bitter tale!
Daughter of SORAB!  still the injur'd dead
Sleep unreveng'd &mdash; the coward foe has fled!"

Then ZORA knew the agony of shame
That bound ALASHTAR, and an icy chill
Shot to her heart, and quiver'd through her frame.
Speechless awhile &mdash; at length &mdash; "Let ALLAH fill
The bitter cup, and work his holy will&mdash;
Blessed be ALLAH'S name &mdash; now HASSAN trace
The thread of woe:  for ZORA'S heart is still&mdash;
Oh!  wherefore, Fate!  reserve for SORAB'S race
Ills sharper than the sword &mdash; the worst of ills, disgrace?"

"Like eagles darting on their distant prey,
We flew," said HASSAN, "to the appointed ground:
ALASHTAR cloud and gloom had cast away&mdash;
A guest he seem'd to marriage banquet bound;
No foeman, bent on blood &mdash; about, around,
Searching the host, he cast his eager glance&mdash;
He rais'd his voice &mdash; the rocks return'd the sound&mdash;
Then all was still &mdash; nor distant troop's advance
Broke on the boundless plain. or glitter'd distant lance.

"Dark and more dark ALASHTAR'S brow became&mdash;
Restless, from spot to spot, from height to height
He wheel'd his course, till died the western flame&mdash;
Vain all his search: &mdash; at day's departing light
We pil'd the blaze, to guide MOHAREB'S sight.
Sleepless, ALASHTAR pac'd from side to side;
Now fancied sounds of horsemen through the night;
Then paus'd &mdash; but stillness hush'd the Desert wide,
Save when the breezes past, or lone hyaena cried.

"At morn's return, how wild ALASHTAR'S look!
'Seek we,' he cried, 'this traitor's hiding place&mdash;
He comes not here!'  Our onward way we took,
And reach'd at eve the tents of SAAD'S race.&mdash;
'Are SAAD'S sons protectors of disgrace?
Hide ye the skulking traitor's recreant head?'
'Nor are ourselves, nor is MOHAREB base&mdash;
Two suns have set since hence our brother sped
To meet ALASHTAR'S sword, the foeman's blood to shed.'

"'Two suns have set? &mdash; he flies!'  ALASHTAR cried&mdash;
'We watch'd in vain &mdash; the spot MOHAREB knew
The slave, the coward, flies!'  Insulted pride
Fir'd ev'ry heart &mdash; the sons of SAAD drew
An hundred swords, and on ALASHTAR flew:
Then turn'd our Chief; nor gleam'd his sword in vain;
They shrunk &mdash; ALASHTAR and his comrades true
Unhurt through hosts their desperate passage gain,
Spur their undaunted steeds, and bound across the plain.

"But never, since the battle's stormy hour,
Has stern ALASHTAR rais'd his drooping head&mdash;
The flight was clear &mdash; the foe beyond his power&mdash;
Silent he rode, and o'er his visage dread
Shame and despair a pale dominion spread,
Wrath and confusion; &mdash; now he clench'd his hand;
Now mutter'd curses deep on him who fled;
Now groan'd aloud &mdash; the boldest of the band
Nor durst approach his track, nor in his presence stand."

"Oh!  what may now console him?"  ZORA cried;
"The scorpion sting &mdash; destruction to the brave&mdash;
Shame goads his heart.  Oh!  constant at his side
Shall ZORA wait, explore each art to save,
Sustain his spirit, or partake his grave!"
And ZORA turn'd to go &mdash; when, rushing near,
Mounted, ALASHTAR came, and warning gave
In these departing words, &mdash; "Expect me here
When the assassin's blood has dyed th' avenging spear.

"Till then ALASHTAR is in exile gone!"
He spoke; nor pausing further word to say,
Past, like a meteor's flame.  "Oh!  not alone,"
Cried frantic ZORA, "let ALASHTAR stray:
HASSAN!  conduct him back; pursue his way
Their's is the lot of anguish who remain!"
ALASHTAR'S friends, impatient of delay,
Leapt on their coursers, and along the plain
Pursu'd their Emir's track &mdash; his track of wrath and pain.

ALASHTAR saw them come, nor stay'd, nor spoke,
Reckless of friend or foe:  the faithful band
Observ'd his course aloof, nor silence broke.
The sun shot level on the burning sand;
But Shame's severer flame, and hotter brand,
Smote on ALASHTAR'S breast, and urg'd his speed
He sought beneath no shading rock to stand;
He past the well, nor would its treasures heed,
Though parch'd his fever'd lip, and faint his panting steed.

All, all was hush'd beneath the blazing sky;
The very lizard fled the scorching gleam:&mdash;
Sudden, a distant troop the band descry;
Nor less in desperate haste the strangers seem;
Nor less regardless of the noon-tide beam&mdash;
They come &mdash; by whom, what chieftain, are they led
Does fortune smile, or does ALASHTAR dream?
Near and more near the rapid horsemen sped&mdash;
LO!  SAAD'S eager sons &mdash; MOHAREB at their head!

Red flash'd the lightning from ALASHTAR'S eyes&mdash;
As famish'd lion from his dreaded lair,
Forward th' avenger springs, and distant cries&mdash;
"Coward, well met &mdash; behold thee in the snare
Thou sought'st to shun &mdash; now tremble, now despair,
Not flight itself can baffle vengeance more."
The foe rush'd on &mdash; "that sword I come to dare;"
(Nor shame nor terror on his brow he wore;)
"Thy vengeance I defy &mdash; nor sought to shun before."

"Oh!  false as base!"  in fury and disdain,
ALASHTAR cried; but check'd his fierce career;
What new device shall screen thy fame again?
"Speak, and be brief."  "ALASHTAR!  not by fear,
But chance, withheld, I fail'd to meet thy spear.
Advancing, on the battle's eve, we slept
By SHEDAD'S well, the place of combat near&mdash;
Unseen, their watch the sons of CALED kept,
And seiz'd us in the night, and into bondage swept.

"They seiz'd us unawares, and bore away
To CALED'S tents, the tents of grief and shame&mdash;
And, if, ALASHTAR, on the battle day
Thy wrath arose &mdash; believe my wrath the same;
I knew reproach would dare assault my fame.
Jewels and gold I promis'd; told my tale;
Implor'd; but, till the ransom-camels came,
Vain all my grief, my prayers without avail:
They mock'd my powerless rage, and left me to bewail.

"In death my fury thought to seek repose;
But hope this blissful moment gave to view,
And check'd my desperate hand; at length the foes
Receiv'd their price; and, freedom scarce he knew,
Ere to redeem his pledge, MOHAREB flew.
Now, Chieftain!  be the game of death begun,
And crimson be the reeking weapon's hue:
Clear is the spotless fame of SAAD'S son;
Let fate decide the rest, and ALLAH'S will be done.

"Then art thou still ALASHTAR'S fit compeer!"
Return'd the Chief; "a vile and trembling slave
Had ill-appeas'd revenge &mdash; decide we here;
Decide we now &mdash; indifferent to the brave
The place, the moment that prepares a grave."
"Advance," MOHAREB cried, "stand either train
Afar &mdash; nor interpose to aid or save&mdash;
Be life the stake, and may this steel, again,
Receive in SORAB'S blood an honourable stain."

"Thus AGIB greets thee!"  cried the rushing Chief:
The moment gain'd that was his being's aim;
Long baffled vengeance, long collected grief,
Fan the wild fury of th' avenging flame;
While doubted worth, and long o'erclouded name,
Urg'd on the rapid foe; what eager eye,
That saw the progress of the deathful game,
Nor for a moment clos'd? &mdash; what bosom by
That beat with even pulse, nor lost its constancy?

Thunders the earth beneath the trampling steeds,
As either horseman shuns or aims the lance,
Nor yet ALASHTAR nor his rival bleeds;
At length MOHAREB'S weapon, aim'd askance,
Struck on ALASHTAR'S arm; with burning glance,
Th' indignant Chieftain, furious from the wound,
Spurr'd on amain; but, powerless to advance,
Spent with o'erlengthen'd toil, an utmost bound
ALASHTAR'S courser tried, and sunk upon the ground.

The gallant foe (disdaining to engage
In fight unequal) swift to earth descends.&mdash;
The combat mingles with redoubled rage!
Soon trembled at their post ALASHTAR'S friends;
For o'er his weaken'd foe MOHAREB bends
In act to strike; but now the loosen'd sand,
As strive the twain afoot, in clouds ascends,
And veils each warrior from the observant band;
Stiff'ning in dread suspense, the doubtful squadrons stand.

Silent the awful pause; still nought is seen,
Save the chance glitter of the lifted blade;
Nought heard, save iron clash of weapons keen;
Each squadron mute &mdash; the bravest heart dismay'd:
At length a falling crash, a groan convey'd
Death's awful sign &mdash; the din of swords is o'er&mdash;
Loosen'd no more, the sand withdraws its shade&mdash;
Who, who may triumph? &mdash; Lo!  outstretch'd in gore
MOHAREB'S lifeless corse &mdash; ALASHTAR, conqueror!

In shouts the sons of AD their joy exprest,
And hurried to their Chief &mdash; but short their glee,
For gush'd the life-blood from ALASHTAR'S breast&mdash;
And yielding now, and sinking on his knee,
Th' exhausted victor falls.  Oh!  stern decree!
Oh!  fatal doom that crops the victor's wreath!
Oh!  latest branch of SORAB'S wither'd tree!
Upheld in HASSAN'S arms he pants for breath,
But scarce regards the wound, and smiles at coming death.

"Revenge is mine!"  exclaim'd th' exulting Chief&mdash;
The son of SORAB has not liv'd in vain,
And dies content &mdash; his soul has known relief&mdash;
Here end the feud &mdash; nor ye, ye faithful train,
Renew the vengeance for ALASHTAR slain;
Henceforth in peace let AD and SAAD join
HASSAN!  be ZORA's shield!  that pang again!
Death!  I contemn thee now &mdash; revenge is mine"&mdash;
He spoke:  dark AZRAEL came, and gave the fatal sign!
