Come not, ye muses, with a smiling air,
As ye were wont in Spring's exulting hour,&mdash;
For me, no more your rosy wreaths prepare,
Pluck'd from bright Fancy's variegated bow'r;
Those fragrant wreaths have lost their former pow'r,
And yield no source of profit or delight:
O, come not with them, for each opening flow'r
Seems, as it were, disgusting to the sight,&mdash;
Since every hope is wrapt in everlasting night.

Where are those happy scenes which May foretold,
When, softly-stealing from her blissful skies,
Clad in her vests of verdure and of gold,
Her angel features charm'd these ravished eyes?
And were those splendid robes but to disguise
The woes that fill our bosoms with dismay?
Came she to rob us of the sacred prize,
To snatch the star eternally away,
That awed rapacious France, and circumscrib'd her sway?

Yet, why this fond enquiry of the cause,
This wish to wander through the glooms of fate;
Why search those fixt inevitable laws,
That only mock our impotent estate?
Thy ways, just God!  are wonderful and great,
Nor will the muse thy attributes arraign,&mdash;
Yet nature, struggling to relieve the weight
That stings her bosom with incessant pain,
Strives to repair the loss, but fondly strives in vain.

That he was great, his dauntless soul declares,
That he was blest beneath thy fost'ring sight,
His virtuous life the testimony bears,
That mocks the murderer's meditated spite:
Oh!  that for him the muse might now unite
All the sublimer powers of her lyre,
And with a nobler song his worth requite,&mdash;
To teach succeeding statesmen to aspire,
And merit that renown which all the good desire.

Sweet are the tears by kindred spirits shed,&mdash;
Sweet the warm sighs of undissembled woe,
Pour'd o'er the ashes of the virtuous dead,
That softly slumber in the grave below:
Oh!  then, ye tears, in larger currents flow,
For he was Virtue's most distinguish'd child;
Within his breast the flame was wont to glow,
The flame of freedom, pure and undefiled,
From selfish aims exempt &mdash; by passion unbeguil'd.

Then let his torn and lacerated corse
Be honor'd, Pity, with thy noblest tear;
For he has stem'd the terror-breathing force
Of headstrong bigots in their dark career:
Deaf to their sland'rous taunts, unknown to fear,
Like Atlas firm he bore each giant shock;
Look'd from his awful and stupendous sphere,
Heard the proud billows dashing on the rock,
And saw its stubborn base their fruitless efforts mock.

Oh!  could I pour into the aching heart,
That mourns, dear shade, thy melancholy fate,
The balm of consolation, and impart
Joy to its tortur'd and tumultuous state,
Then would the triumph of the muse be great,
Then might she yield a more impressive verse,
And smile to think, the rash attempt, though late,
Were not unworthy his distinguish'd hearse,
Since nobler harps have fail'd his virtues to rehearse.

Him, nor the vengeance of unruly minds,
Bent on the wreck and ruin of the state,
Nor all the winning sounds that Flattery finds
To please the senses of a soul so great,
Could move, &mdash; or aught his energies abate,
Or lure the patriot from his nobler aim;
His was the brighter pathway, leading straight
To honor, immortality, and fame,
The highest, best reward a virtuous man can claim.

Well may the jarring spirits of the land,
Whose views seem centred in their country's fall,
Who with red Anarchy's infernal brand,
And Desolation's terror-clouded pall,
Would half their brethren cheerfully enthrall
In one sad scene of misery and woe;
Well may they blush, and labor to recal
Those harsh resentments they were wont to show,
Ere yet Destruction's hand had sped the fatal blow.

But let the apostates pass; &mdash; their daring schemes,
Their high ambitions, shall their meed obtain;
And all their wild, though fondly-cherish'd, dreams,
A black memorial of their guilt remain.
And when they fall, for them shall none complain,
But all exulting, hail the happy day
That rids our country of the rebel train,
Who strove to fill that country with dismay,
And undermine the rock where all her greatness lay.

No, fond enthusiasts of a deadly soil,
Ye ne'er shall greet that promis'd day of woe;
Nor with your savage vengeance, nor the toil
Of many years, that splendid work o'erthrow,
Which he preserv'd from many a villain-blow,
Whose fate the muse shall silently bemoan;
And though the tyrant's heart may inly glow
To make our country and her sons his own,
Ye shall not forge the chain to bind them to his throne.

His was the daring, the intrepid soul,
By honor prompted, and by freedom fir'd,
Beyond the reach of party's rash controul,
By other views than selfishness inspir'd:
His were those manners, even his foes admir'd,
That spoke a liberal and enlighten'd mind;
His tongue no winding sophistry requir'd,
His heart upright, intelligent, refin'd,
A pattern to direct, and meliorate mankind.

Proud of his cause, and conscious of his charge,
He shone the brightest champion of the state,
March'd boldly forward, and with Virtue's targe,
Repell'd the torrent of the fierce debate,
Complacent still, and eminently great;
For passion ne'er found refuge in his breast:
Oh!  may his bright example but create
Spirits, with half his energies possess'd,
Then, 'midst conflicting woes, our country shall be blest.

Immortal soul!  (and that his spirit live
In realms beyond this sublunary sphere,
Let none presume to doubt, but freely give
To such sweet credence his attentive ear&mdash;)
Immortal soul!  to heaven thou art dear,
For heaven endow'd thee with its noblest worth,
Smil'd on thy bright and promising career,
Even from the happy moment of thy birth,
Till nature mourn'd the shock that tore thee from the earth.

But can we e'er forget those left behind,
Who claim alike our pity and our aid?
Shall it be told that Britons were unkind,
Nor saw the patriot's services repaid?
Oh!  let it ne'er, in future times, be said,
We boast no more the virtues of our sires;
In other climes be told our souls were dead
To all that god-like Charity inspires,
Those fellow feelings sweet, Humanity admires!

That he is past our powers to restore,
Too well the melancholy truth we know;
But shall we not the widow's loss deplore,
And soothe the torture of her children's woe?&mdash;
For them, for her, shall nature cease to glow,&mdash;
For their sad sufferings, shall we cease to feel?
Curse on the tear that cannot promptly flow,
Curse on the savage heart, the heart of steel,
That beats not with remorse, and aids the warm appeal!

And shall it e'er be said, in future time,
That Albion's sons were deaf to Pity's call;
Lost to each impulse, noble and sublime,
That mourns a kindred's or a stranger's fall?
Ne'er may that tale be told, but least of all,
Of those, who flourish'd in his bright career,
For much that tale our children would appal,
Much would it shock their hesitating ear,
Their indignation rouse, and prompt their warmest tear.

Britons!  if virtue ever blest our isle,
Or honor centred in a statesman's heart,
Here may ye pause and contemplate awhile
The man, whose soul was innocent of art;&mdash;
From truth's fair road he never would depart,
But stood his country's, and his monarch's friend:
Then let us now perform the worthier part,
To all the calls of his survivors lend
Attention's gen'rous ear, and all their woes befriend.

Go to thy heaven of rest, where all is peace,
Sweet spirit!  and adore thy Father's name,
Where all contentions, all commotions cease,
Crown'd with the glories of immortal fame!
There free from nature, and each worldly aim,
Blest shalt thou roam eternity's abode.
Cold-hearted murderer!  'twere in vain to blame
The savage deed, at which thy bosom glow'd;
Heav'n shall judge of thee, for all the blood that flow'd!

Cold is that breast which burnt with patriot fires,
And mute that tongue which startled every ear,
To other realms his joyous soul aspires,
Remote from this our miserable sphere;
But to our country is his memory dear,
For Virtue arm'd him with her brightest shield:
He lov'd her freedom, and his faith sincere
Scorn'd to its ruthless enemy to yield,
Whose daring aims he foil'd, whose guilty arts reveal'd.

Around his grave shall hang the muse's wreath,
And there, at eve, impressive anthems swell;
There shall the softest airs be heard to breathe
Along the chords of the Aeolian shell;
There too the Genius of our island dwell,
And weep her champion's melancholy fate,
Of all his virtues and perfections tell,
Those great endowments which secur'd the state,
Amidst the wreck of thrones, and Gaul's relentless hate.

Here cease the song, for 'twere in vain to trace
The spirit's glorious pathway to the skies;
The senseless grave its relics may embrace,
But, rapturous thought!  the spirit never dies.
Oh, let no doubt of its existence rise,
For he was born to heav'n, if heav'n be just!
Lo!  from the tomb the immortal vision flies,
Freed from its cold habiliments of dust,
To seek the throne of God, the anchor of its trust!

Beyond the power of malice to annoy,
It mounts the azure regions of the air,
Roaming through temples of perpetual joy,
With kindred worth eternity to share.
But aim not, worldling, to pursue it there,
Aim not to reach its palace of delight:
Still grov'lling through her pilgrimage of care,
Urge not the soul beyond her earthly flight,
That were presumption foul, exceeding nature's right.

THE INSCRIPTION.
Here, stranger, pause, for near this marble sleeps
The man, who Virtue's fairest chaplet wore;
Here Albion's Genius her lone vigil keeps,
To mourn that greatness which exists no more.

'Twas not his lineage, nor his high estate,
So long endear'd him to each gen'rous heart;
'Twas not the strength of talent, nor the weight
Of all the honors princes could impart;

It was that virtue, eminently fair,
Whose only object was his country's pride,
That constant wish and unremitting care,
To spread her conquests and her freedom wide;

'Twas these endear'd him to the great and good,
'Twas these secur'd that everlasting fame,
Which mark'd the course his nobler mind pursued,
And gilds his honour'd and lamented name.

Then, statesmen, learn from excellence so bright,
To seek the path that leads you to renown;
To keep the glory of the land in sight,
Protect the people, and defend the crown:

So shall your names be honour'd and ador'd,
From tongue to tongue celebrity shall fly,
And, spite of Faction's miserable horde,
The good respect you as they pass you by:

Nor shall the muse, ambitious to display
Each nobler action and resplendent deed,
When heaven shall call you to a lovelier day,
Withold her bright imperishable meed:

Her glowing hand your virtues shall inscribe,
The patriot's soul to cherish and inspire,
To awe Rebellion's sanguinary tribe,
And teach the trembling traitor to admire.
