"Ye forests wide, from whom I feel the breath
Of spring, that bears ten thousand odours, blow!
Ye mountains, gay with purple blooming heath,
Once more your scenery vanquishes my woe!
Once more I feel poetic ardours glow!&mdash;
Through shadowy groves of never-fading pine,
I watch the crystal currents glittering flow;&mdash;
Nor fairer rays within those waters shine,
Than bright responsive gleams of rapture that are mine!

"O fool to think, that never, never more
For me the pulse of joy would throb again,
While yet far distant from the peaceful shore
I combated the waves and wintry rain,
And my frail bark was beaten back amain
To the wild sea where ceaseless tempests blew!
But now, fast moor'd, I smile at former pain;
Soft are the gales, the skies of lovely hue,
And all my infant raptures swell my heart anew.

"Oh, Heaven!  what ecstasy to weave again
The purple heath-bell into garlands wild!
To meet in haunted glades the dryad train,
And tread the path I loved while yet a child!
No more from these calm solitudes exiled,
Struggling I'll join Ambition's venal crew;
But here, mid mountain steeps and woodlands wild,
The path of joy and ecstacy pursue,
And the sweet Muse that loves the mountain forest woo!"

Thus, as the well-known landscape open'd wide
Its varied treasures to his raptured sight,
With vernal hues and white haze beautified,
And tinted here and there with radiance bright,
Childe Alarique 'gan utter his delight
To the rude cliffs, beneath whose rocky steep,
In early days, full many a summer night
'Twas his in transport all dissolved to weep,
What time the fairy train their mystic revels keep.

Oh, who can tell the varied joys that wait
The young enthusiast in the lonely shade,
When, all entranced, he goes to meditate
On Nature, in her richest charms array'd!
What artist e'er the magic hues pourtray'd
That float on hill and dale! &mdash; Ah, happy he,
If joys like these had not been doom'd to fade,
Like leaves in Autumn withering on the tree,
And yield to pale decay and ceaseless misery!

Go then, unapprehensive Youth!  explore
Whate'er of rapture woodland scenes can yield!
On dauntless pinion let thy fancy soar,
And thousand airy structures busy build!
Be all of Nature's richest stores reveal'd
In sweet succession to thy watchful eye,
While yet the hues of glory light the field,
And yet is heard celestial harmony
From every copsewood grey and haunted steep on high!

See now, the Childe to coverts green repair
In the fair, blushing, dewy morn of May;
What bliss in every breath of "common air!"
What transport in the blackbird's choral lay!
What grandeur in the landscape's fair array!&mdash;
But, ah!  what mortal strain his thoughts can tell,
What pencil could the melting forms pourtray,
That on his ravish'd sight inviting swell
Oh, dreams beloved!  whilom I knew your influence well!

But now, alas!  my feeble mind no more
Is borne aloft on Fancy's azure wing;
Those dreams have died, like ice-built temples hoar,
That fade before the first warm breath of spring;
Or like the wreck of dry leaves rustling,
That choak the pathway in November chill.
Childe Alarique, thy songs of gladness sing;
For thee they blossom yet on dale and hill;
Pursue thy woodland path; of joyaunce take thy fill!

Behold the Youth that late we left at morn,
Now eager watching the mild rays of even;
While the loved woodlark from his flowery thorn
Carols a vesper hymn of praise to Heaven,
And in the breeze ten thousand odours driven,
Bathe the Childe's forehead in ambrosial dew
What visions to his raptured sight are given!
What shapes are glittering the copsewood through,
What-while fair twilight sheds her own enchanting hue!

What transport then on the cold reeds to lie,
That fringe, romantic Teith!  thy crystal tide,
And watch the wild tints of the evening sky
That linger on the mountain's rocky side,
Where the red heath-flowers double red are dyed!
To mark the mystic train that round him rise,
And, beckoning, through the tangled forest glide!
To "hear the inexpressive harmonies,
That seem to float on earth, and warble through the skies."

Then, too, the Childe unrolls the magic store 
Of old romance; unlocks the enchanted spring
Whence Milton drew his choicest draughts of yore;
And now Imagination dares to bring
The forms of bleeding chief and scepter'd king,
That on the self-same plains had fought and died,
Where now he burns to wake the trembling string,
And feels his heart dilate with conscious-pride,
That to those dauntless chiefs his spirit is allied.

Pass we awhile the summer hours unsung,
And now the tranquil charms of autumn view!
Behold the Childe in some rude cavern flung,
Weaving the heath-bell into garlands new;
While the wide lake unfolds its waters blue,
Slumbering beneath the sun's attemper'd ray;
And all is silent, save the plaintive coo
Of the lorn dove, or, screaming for his prey,
The falcon's voice remote, from lonely summit grey.

Or meet him wandering through thy rocky vale,
Glenfinlas, where, by watchful shepherds seen,
Ghosts of the mighty dead are known to sail,
And marshal shadowy troops upon the green:
See him, enraptured with the lovely scene,
By lone Moneira's current bend his way,
Till pensive Evening sheds her light serene;
And now, to watch the tints of dying day,
Reclined upon the heath, his listless length he lay.

Intent he gazes on the roseate dye
That lingering decks the chambers of the west,
While not a voice disturbs the harmony&mdash;
The blissful calm that reigns within his breast.
How still the woods!  All, all is hush'd to rest:
You hear the dry leaf parting from the tree.
But, lo!  what new enchantments are confest!
Why rolls his eye in kindling ecstacy?
Why starts the Childe, amazed, from his tranquility?

Is it the star of even that quits her sphere,
Descending to the darkling realms below?&mdash;
Behold on earth an angel form appear!&mdash;
Art thou the messenger of joy or woe?&mdash;
Celestial glories round the seraph glow
But now her heavenly features are reveal'd&mdash;
Joy, joy alone from thy regards can flow,
Inhabitant of yon cerulean field!&mdash;
Lowly the wondering Youth in adoration kneel'd.

Cheering with smiles ineffably serene,
Childe Alarique that angel form drew near:
Now on her arm an airy help was seen,
And now her voice most ravishingly clear,
Now that enchanted harp salutes his ear!&mdash;
Deep in his bosom thrills the magic lay,
And kindling rapture vanquishes his fear,
When soft he hears that heavenly Minstrel say,
"Behold thy Guardian Power, and her behest obey.

"Take this enchanted harp, and swear to keep
Inviolate the laws which I impose:
Swear never more to tempt the raging deep,
By low ambition plunged in fruitless woes,
And I will shew thee whence true rapture flows!
I'll build thee palaces in woodlands wild!
Thou know'st the fragrance of the wild-briar rose;
Thou lovest the reign of summer evening mild;
And thou shalt live as best befits the Muse's child."

Pass we unsung the wintry hours, and now
Behold the Childe in yon sequester'd glade:
Fresh leaves are bursting forth on every bough;
The scenes in morning brilliance are array'd;
Even the dark ravine, and the cliff display'd,
Where gleams the orient sun on Ben Venue;
The woodlark carols clear in flowery shade;
The blue lake glances fair the copsewood through,
And all is bright again and Paradise to view.

Behold him listening to the legends hoar
Some venerable seer or shepherd tells;
While, seated on Loch Katrine's wooded shore,
The landscape's fair expanse before him swells;
Or in the rocky mountain's mystic dells,
Where Superstition holds her ancient reign,
And many a dreaded ghost and ourisk dwells,
Delighted watch the visionary train
Of images that float on his creative brain.

Or meet him when at eve the vapours pale
Float on the forest, and the verdant spray
Of weeping birch perfumes the southern gale;&mdash;
Behold him leave the banks of Loch Achray,
And through the rocky forest bend his way,
A wilderness of sweets beyond compare,
Till, gleaming wildly in the purple ray,
Loch Katrine opens wide her scenery fair!
Oh for an angel's voice his transport to declare!

Not always in the wilderness astray,
Where late we left the visionary Childe,
Did Alarique devote the summer day
To faery dreams of superstition wild;
Ofttimes his fleeting moments were beguiled
In lowland vales, where peaceful hamlets smoke,
And where the mouldering towers sublimely piled
Of fortress old o'erhang the wooded rock,&mdash;
There oft the raptured Youth poetic strains awoke.

Oh, how enchanting, when the western gale
Unlocks the fragrant bud of verdant hue,
Again to wander through the steaming vale,
And hear the thrush his vernal song renew!
To breathe ten thousand odours wafted through
The copse, where mingling birch and hazel twine,
And roam in thought the heaven's unclouded blue,
While "without effort flows the impassion'd" line;
Oh days of fleeting bliss and ecstacy divine!

But not in verse alone Childe Alarique
Fix'd the wild forms of his creative brain:
In painting's glowing art he knew to seek
Sweet solace, when the visionary train
Of shapes came wildering on his sight amain
And when the magic tints of vernal light
Gleam'd with enchanting splendour on the plain,
He knew to arrest the lovely scenes aright,
And all their charms pourtray in kindred colours bright.

And oh, how soothing at the close of day,
When Twilight's magic tints adorn the wood,
To explore some venerable ruin grey,
To him, I ween, no lonesome solitude;
For there the peerless maid of melting mood
Meets her fond lover, blushing like the morn;
And champions fierce renew their ancient feud,
And wake on either side the signal horn,
By Fancy's power recalled from charnel-house forlorn.

But not by Fancy's power alone was given
To people that old tower with maidens gay,
Knights and squires; but duly when at even
Fair Twilight 'gan unfold her amber ray,
His guardian Genius thither bent her way.&mdash;
Oh, she was fairer far than mortal maid!
What artist might her lovely form pourtray,
When floating through the forest's dusky shade
The radiance wild of evening on her features play'd!

Her voice was sweeter than the blackbird's lay;
With her the Childe explored the fragrant bowers;
No more in solitude he passed the day&mdash;
To her he gave both morn and evening hours.
With her he wove fresh wreaths of early flowers;
With her he listened to the cheering song,
Which on the ear of night the skylark pours,
And heard the drowsy beetle borne along
Sweet soothing sounds, I ween, unknown to city throng!

But, think not these were all the joys they knew!
They twain did revel in the Naiads' court;
And they did frolic with the Fairies too,
Which to the moonlight forest made resort.
Ah joys too little prized, of date how short!
How soon your phantoms faded from the view!
One fleeting summer passed in careless sport,
A gathering tempest o'er the woodlands threw
Its everlasting clouds of melancholy hue.

PART SECOND.
Ah, me!  is this the Childe that wont to view
The simplest scene with kindling ecstacy?
Ah, me!  his hollow cheek how pale of hue!
How faded now the lustre of his eye!
Joyless he roams the mountain scenery,
Or feebly drags his fainting steps along;
"He passes all he sees unheeded by:"
In vain for him the woodlark's cheering song,
And all the charms that reign the vernal woods among!

Ah, me!  what grief to meet the western gale,
Yet feel within no joys responsive rise!
To tread again the flower-bespangled vale,
The path that woke our infant ecstacies,
In years when every hour unheeded flies!
To twine once more the vernal garland gay,
Yet feel that nought can sooth our agonies,
That all our cherished dreams have fled away,
For ever fled &mdash; nor aught can renovate their sway.

Yet now, when brightly gleams the noonday son,
And opes the landscape wide its fair array,&mdash;
Will no faint trace of former joys be won?
Nor when the southern breezes softly play,
Wafting the sweets of many a blossom'd spray
Nor when the skylark warbles loud and clear
Nor when through favourite scenes he bends his way,
Where Fancy's brightest visions did appear?
No!  all to him is cold and desolate and drear.

"And have they died, and never, never more
To wake again, those visionary hues,
That wont to charm my woodland path of yore,
And on each mountain scene their light diffuse?
Hast thou departed too, celestial Muse!
No more to cheer thy votary's lonely way?
Ah, me!  what soul-appalling gloom ensues,
When thou withdraw'st shine animating sway?
What reckless fiends e'en now are watching for their prey!

"Oh Heaven!  it is the blessed breath of spring!
The groves again their green attire assume;
It is the blackbird loudly carolling,
These are my favourite flowers that round me bloom:&mdash;
Oh what shall cure this everlasting gloom?
What charm shall still the voice that seems to cry,
'Go to the charnel vault &mdash; the rayless tomb&mdash;
Here is no path in our sweet scenery
For thee, detested child of guilt and misery!'

"Is this the radiant path I trod of yore?
Green grows the grass &mdash; the skylark soars on high!
Lo!  yonder is the castled summit hoar,
Beneath whose cliff I watch'd the evening sky.
Oh, God!  the sunbeam sheds its brilliancy
On that surpassing scene!  but, ah!  for me
What scene shall wake responsive ecstacy?
Where is mine innocence?  mine inward glee?
Oh, days of early bliss, how soon your transports flee!"

Thus mourn'd the Childe with many a tear and sigh,
As on the grass his listless length he threw;
Where on his head the fragrant canopy
Of blossom'd wild-wood shed ambrosial dew.
In vain for him the ringdove's plaintive coo,
Or cuckoo's mirthful note is heard around;
No charms his wonted raptures could renew,
Or quell the fiend Remorse, that grimly frown'd,
And still with blood-stain'd fangs infix'd the deadly wound.

In luckless hour did Braggadochio vilde
His pastime in that wilderness pursue;
In luckless hour he met the happy Childe
Wandering as wont the mountain forest through.
In luckless hour, alas!  the Childe he drew,
Reckless of his allegiance, from the shade
Where all his hours on wings of transport flew,
And straight to his accursed haunts convey'd,
Where Bacchanalian Rout and rude Disorder sway'd.

'Twas on the chillest eve of chilling March,
And "hoarse and high" the northern breezes blew
Through the dry branches of the leafless larch,
When echoing notes were heard the forest through,
Of hound and horse and horn!  a jovial crew
With laugh and shout approached the quiet bower,
Where, rapt in visions of celestial hue,
Childe Alarique was laid that luckless hour.
Ah!  where wert thou, sweet Muse, the poet's guardian power!

With song and laugher rude the Sorcerer vilde,
And robed in scarlet mantle rich and gay,
Entred the portal of that mansion wild,
And straight in accents bland began to say,
How he and all his train had lost their way,
And came for shelter from the winds of night&mdash;
The luckless youth could not him answer nay,
But proffered food and rest; and, stirring bright
The faggots of the hearth, awoke a cheering light.

Long time elapsed not ere his dangerous guest
Enquired, in well-feigned accents of surprise,
Why such a youth, with health and genius blest,
Wasted his days so far from courtly joys?
Replied the Childe, "To me this bower supplies
More charms than all the world besides could shew;
Nor would I change these lonely ecstacies,
For aught that courts and cities could bestow&mdash;
Too well the grief that clouds their pageantry I know."

Right artfully replied, with courage new,
The Sorcerer vile &mdash; "O shame, O sophistry!
Deem'st thou that man no duties has to do,
But such as in those narrow limits lie&mdash;
No joys to taste &mdash; to win no dignity?
Shame on such coward creed!  Be thine to dwell
Where Virtue tried proves best her purity,
And Fame's inspiring trump has space to swell&mdash;
To souls inglorious leave the rude inglorious cell."

'Twere long those artful speeches to recite,
Deep-fraught with sophisms false in lengthened chain;
By which, at length, in Solitude's despite,
The Youth he won to join his wicked train;
And, once more combating the restless main,
To search for Joy, where Joy was never found,&mdash;
For Virtue, where unbounded Vice did reign,&mdash;
For Love and Sympathy, where all around,
Dead to each purer charm, in base delights were drown'd.

An "innocent crime" it was; for magic art
Its blackness all in duty's veil array'd;&mdash;
But did no secret pangs invade his heart,
And did he quit with joy the peaceful shade?
Oh, no!  the sigh, the starting tear, betrayed
The wasting throes of inward misery,
To leave the groves where, with the heavenly Maid,
'Twas his whilom the wild-flower wreath to tie,
And all his hours had fled on wings of ecstacy.

Behold him now the sport of seas and wind,
On the wide waves of ocean tossed again,
All happiness, all virtue, left behind:
Nursing a brood of fancies wild and vain!
Loud sings the gale, the ship was tossed amain;
And many an hour of toil and fear had they,
Ere that unlucky bark a port could gain
Of the proud city, where, in rich array,
Sojourned the unholy peers of Braggadochio gay.

Proud were that city's towers; they rose on high,
Founded on rock sublime; and all around
Were magic scenes of wild variety,
And seem'd, at distance, all was fairy-ground,
And Hope high raptures in the prospect found.
But when the voyagers, landed, did explore
The dusky streets and lanes that there abound;
Or mingled with the crowd that thronged the shore&mdash;
Oh, Christ!  their fairy dreams for ever all were o'er.

It was, the sooth to say, a lovely place,
That Nature had created passing fair;
But it was peopled by a numerous race
That cared not what aspect the scenes did wear;
Nor aught admired of beautiful or rare.
Sunk were they all in apathy profound,
And nought but sensual joys their hearts could share!
The mind was wanting on that lovely ground,
To cast its own celestial light on all around.

As onward mid the crowded scenes they hie,
Each countenance the Childe did read in vain
To find a trace of sensibility&mdash;
All, all were furrow'd by base passion's reign,
Or puffed and bloated by the pride of gain.
And in each glittering female, vainly, too,
He sought for charms that might the heart enchain,
Such as, of yore, amid the groves he knew,
Far, far remote, that now he never more might view.

To him whose purer senses from the gale
Of springtide could unmingled rapture gain;
O weary, flat, unprofitable, stale
Were the coarse joys that grovelling minds enchain!&mdash;
Though never yet did Vice his ear obtain,
But loathsome still appeared with all her wiles,
Yet, mingling with each base ignoble train,
Contagion dire his purity defiles,
And all his wonted gleams of ecstacy exiles.

Rescued from that accursed society,
And to the peaceful groves restored again,
Behold the Childe in vain each fountain try
To purify of sin the lurking stain!
His days are spent in solitude and pain.
To the free mind of Innocence alone,
Pure as the breeze that sweeps the vernal plain,
Are the true pleasures of the wild-wood known,
And the bright forms that play round Fancy's radiant throne.

If chance, with trembling hand he touched the lyre
That on the wild birch-bough suspended hung,
With feeble hope to wake the wonted fire,
What words can paint the grief his heart that stung,
To hear the altered notes that feebly rung!
Such notes, I ween, as those that now I raise,
Whose Doric lyre whilom loud accents flung;&mdash;
But now for ever hushed its ardent lays!
For ever crushed and dead Hope's once resplendent blaze!

As when a grove of reverend trees in spring,
Smiling in all their luxury and pride,
And to the motion of the zephyr's wing
Casting their fragrance far on every side,
By the fell axe are laid in ruin wide,&mdash;
Most desolate and mournful to the sigh
Is the sad scene!  So, in that ruined mind
All chill and blank became, and void of light,&mdash;
That erst was filled with rays of genius passing bright.

Morn after morn dawned on the wretched Childe,
The clouds rode gaily, and the breezes blew&mdash;
Morn after morn, amid the woodlands wild,
He heard the bittern boom &mdash; the ringdove coo:&mdash;
The falcon screamed; the cock full loudly crew&mdash;
The scenes in brightest brilliance were arrayed&mdash;
But from their charms the Childe no gladness drew&mdash;
All seemed to him involved in blackest shade&mdash;
"His" own dark cheerless "mind his own" dark "dungeon" made.

Past were the Spring's sweet reign; the Summer's pride,
And Autumn's days serene; November chill,
With darkening clouds, covered the mountain side,
Casting her influence drear on dale and hill&mdash;
Dense wreaths of frost-fog 'gan each vale to fill,
And the sear leaves were torn by every wind,&mdash;
Then first the Childe confessed a rising thrill
Of sympathy that soothed his troubled mind;
And in the desolate scene sweet solace could he find.

Midnight; and on the woods most heavily
Slept the dull clouds; the southern breezes blew,
And sung aloud their mournful minstrelsy;&mdash;
Seemed as a voice echoed the forest through,
That called the Childe to some aventure new!
Forth rushed he then on the wide heath alone;
Where nought was heard &mdash; nor aught was there to view:
No murmur save the tempest's angry tone,
The river's distant roar, the mountain cataract's moan.

Anon, a form seemed into life to spring,
Most like a darker cloud &mdash; Night's dusky reign
Usurping, &mdash; as it moved on shadowy wing,
(Floating with fearful influence o'er the plain)
And now beside the Youth a place did gain!
Most horrible it was:  yet, strange to tell,
The Youth was drawn amid that spectre's train,
As by magnetic force or magic spell,
Resistless led along o'er moor and rock and fell.

That most unhappy Childe that would have fled,
Resistlessly the fell fiend led along
To the dread brink of the swollen river's bed;
Then gibberings rose, and laughter, mid the throng,
That ever grieved at right &mdash; rejoiced at wrong,&mdash;
And all was well nigh lost!  But, lo!  the gleam
Of some new guest, breaks forth those fiends among,
And lights the waters of the turbid stream;&mdash;
Vanish the ghastly crew like some fantastic dream.

PART III.
As withered by the lightning's flash they fade,
And soothing music floats along the air,
Anon a Form in spotless garb arrayed 
Stood smiling, where erst stood the fiend Despair&mdash;
Her own bright form shed its own lustre fair;
But in her hand a dazzling light was seen,
A talisman, whose magic orbit rare
Shone like a sun-beam on the dusky treene,
And on the torrent shed a radiance most serene.

That hand extending, to the wondering Childe
She gave the lustrous gem; and softly rose
Her accents, like a strain of music mild,
As to the Youth its matchless worth she shews:&mdash;
"This talisman, best cure for earthly woes,
Receive, and bear it ever in thy sight;
So shalt thou vanquish thine unholy foes,
And fail not, when thou mark'st its radiance bright,
To think on Her who gave the magic orb of light.

"But if, through negligence or wicked art,
That magic orb no more thy guide shall be;
If thou shalt fail to wear it next thy heart,
And still from slothful stain to keep it free,
And thou neglectest to remember me&mdash;
O then, unhappy Childe!  beware the day!
For thou shalt drink the cup of misery!
No more the noontide glow, or evening ray,
Or aught of light and joy shall cheer thee on thy way!"

The vision fled; but still the melting fall
Of heavenly music lingered on its way,
In long withdrawing notes, &mdash; like those that call
Some sainted spirit to the realms of day;&mdash;
And still remained the unextinguished ray
Of that rare talisman, whose heavenly light
Poured a rich lustre mid the forest gray,
And emanated through the gloom of night
With soul-exalting influence, most divinely bright.

The heavenly strains of soothing music died
Like the soft summer gale in languid mood;
But the bright talisman was left to guide
His homeward steps amid the tangled wood.
The Youth, who, long by Melancholy's brood
Of hideous phantoms haunted night and day,
Felt all the bitterness of solitude,
Now saw the wonted forms in bright array
Arise with sunny smile to cheer his lonely way.

Grovelling and false apostates all are they
Who tell us Nature has no charms to show,
When Winter's heavy clouds deform the day,
And on the woods their darkening shadows throw;
It is the influence dark of worldly woe,
And worldly wickedness that mars the scene:
From Nature's every change can transport flow
To the free mind of Innocence serene,
Alike in groves decayed, or prank't in freshest green.

The soft south-west, pregnant with odours new
From the dank musky matted heaps that rose,
Perfumed the mountain-bowers; and gently drew
With "breezy call" the Childe from his repose,
The while with gratitude his bosom glows
To her who saved him from the fiend Despair&mdash;
And straight a strain of heavenly music rose,
And, for a moment, that bright form was there,
And with one rosy smile banished each lurking care.

O happy, happy Childe!  no, not alone
Himself his own dark dungeon as before,
Is Alarique amid the wild-wood gone;
No!  there were other brighter joys in store.
Though the sweet self-same Muse he loved of yore
Is absent, yet the talisman is there!
And still, as, rapt, he muses more and more
On Her who gave the gem of lustre rare,
Again that form he sees that saved him from Despair.

"On man accursed, &mdash; whose dire dominion still
O'er all the inhabitants of earth and air
Tortures inflicts with diabolic skill,&mdash;
On man himself, whom agonising Care,
Whom dread Remorse and Apprehension tear,
And hydra Passion's multiplying brood&mdash;
What mind can meditate and not despair,
And feel that nought in earth or air is good&mdash;
But all is vice, and woe, and pain &mdash; and solitude?

"Who muses on this rank unweeded field,
Where nought but seeds of sin and grief have grown;
If happy still, he faery dreams can build,
Must have a heart of iron or of stone:
Contentment here is wickedness alone!
That man is wise and good who quits the scene,
Burst the base trammels of Delusion,
Leaving for lasting joys this "nook" obscene,
Or dies indeed &mdash; and rests in endless sleep serene.

"It must be so!  when closed the eyes that see,
The ears that hear &mdash; and dead and cold the frame&mdash;
And, mouldered down, that frame has ceased to be,&mdash;
Can sight, and touch, and hearing, be the same,
When turned to dust the organs whence they came?
And what is Mind, but touch, and eye, and ear?"
So wont of old the Sophist to declaim,
But now the lustrous gem, with radiance clear,
Far banished from the Childe such dreams of grief and fear.

The spells were broke that had enchained his mind,
And he had but to press the jewel bright,
And straight his heavenly guest, with glances kind,
Removed entire the veil from off his sight,
And straight his intellect was filled with light&mdash;
The light of Hope and Confidence in Heaven;
No more mid clouds of intellectual night,
His lonely bark on rocks and shoals was driven,
But all again was calm, and all his crimes forgiven.

O pride, O narrowness!  O sophistry
That seeks celestial mysteries to scan,
And deeds of God by human laws to try!
Let man himself first answer, What is Man?
Or what is thought?  what language?  what the plan,
That rears the simplest bud in Flora's train?
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

But leave awhile each object here below
That custom familiarises &mdash; lift shine eye
To sights divine that such delight bestow?
That habit cannot quench our ecstacy!
Look on the glories of the vaulted sky&mdash;
The sun that pierces now the misty veil&mdash;
The moon at even &mdash; the countless worlds on high,
And other suns by distance rendered pale,
Amid the mighty sea of boundless space that sail!

Can sights like these be viewed, and shall the mind,
That for a while puts off its base alloy,
And soars to distant regions, unconfined,
Not feel a rising gleam of hope and joy,
A confidence that nought can e'er destroy,
That there shall come a glorious time, when all
The doubts and fears that here the mind annoy,
Shall fade away &mdash; as Night's retreating pall,
Before the Morning's ray, and "incense-breathing call?"

"Now blow, thou southern breeze!  what ecstacy
To meet thy balmy breath with wonted glow&mdash;
Now lour, ye dark clouds of the wintry sky&mdash;
And on the woods your saddest influence throw&mdash;
Unwearied through the wild-wood let me go&mdash;
Where the fallen leaves in matted volumes lie&mdash;
And the swollen river's turbid currents flow&mdash;
For now each varying aspect of the sky
Wakes inspiration new &mdash; and meditations high!"

So sung the Childe, while through the groves he strayed,
And former transports all revived again;
Beauties to him even wint'ry storms displayed,
When swept the driving darkening clouds amain!
The wild heath dark of hue and dank with rain,
The desolate lake, the gray and watery sky,
The long grass rustling on the upland plain,
And all the scenes of wild variety
In Winter's mournful reign new rapture could supply.

Even when arose the volumes vast on high
Of snow-clouds riding on the Borean gale,
When groaned the woods, and flocks and herds did fly
For shelter to the deepest rocky vale&mdash;
Then, cheered by inward joys that never fail,
The happy Childe explored the wonted wood,
Trod the pure snows; and when at evening pale
The tempest raged along in fiercer mood,
Homeward, rejoicing still, the well-known path pursued!

Then was that home enlivened by the lay
Of many a mighty bard; and witchery
Of eloquence that never meets decay,
Lifted resistlessly the soul on high,
And chief the legends wild of chivalry
With eager hand did Alarique unroll,
The while (the wild blast idly sweeping by)
Their mysteries deeply sank into his soul,
And awful transport woke that yields not to controul.

March came; and brought the self-same wicked train,
With song and laughter, to the quiet bower;
The self-same echoing sounds arose again;
But Alarique was not alone that hour&mdash;
No!  the bright talisman, the heavenly Power,
Were there to save him from the fiends of Hell;
Yet, sooth to say, so fiercely did he shower
Reproach and curses on the demons fell,
That almost had he lost the guide he loved so well.

The while his burning ire was wreaked on them
In fearful menaces and accents wild,
A demon dire had almost seized the gem;
But he was checked by the awakening Childe,
That listened now to precepts meek and mild
Of Her who taught him, that the surest way
To quell that sorcerer and his demons vilde,
Was but to hear unmoved all they could say,
Reckless of all their wiles and magical array.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

'Tis night; but oh what nameless influence reigns?
What soothing balm is floating in the air?
'Tis night; &mdash; but are there not celestial strains,
Of power to cure all sadness but despair?
Aye, wandering witch-notes sweet beyond compare
Rising at intervals? &mdash; O yes!  the lay
Of the gay woodlark from the forest fair,
And the loud blackbird hails the morning ray,
And thousand long-lost dreams the cheering call obey.

Aye, morning dawns; for on the mist-wreaths pale
Faint gleams of rosy light are shed; and lo
The waters faintly gleaming in the vale!
And now, O heaven!  behold the orient glow
That o'er the eastern skies begins to throw
Enchanting influence!  while the dewy lawn
In diamonds decked unfolds a glittering shew,
And onwards move the glories of the Dawn,
And from the landscape fair the vapours are withdrawn.

But yet no foliage in proud canopy
Adorned the grove; but many a budding spray
Gave promise fair of future majesty
Whence odours met the zephyrs on their way;&mdash;
'Twas April, season of uncertain sway,
When fields of new-born verdure charm the sight,
And new-born flowers adorn the wanderer's way,
And the gay lark pursues his cheering flight&mdash;
O days of soothing hope, and promise and delight!

Yet though no foliage wantoned in the gale,
To him who long to Pain and Woe the prey,
And haunted long by fiends and spectres pale,
Weary had passed the night, weary the day,
The simplest object in the forest gray,
The simplest note that met his watchful ear,
Brought thousand sunny forms in bright array,
Such as of yore his pathway want to cheer
When all the scenes were gay and all the skies were clear.

O hues of glory well remembered still!
How break ye on my long bewildered brain!
Effulgent rays that on the purple hill
Your purple tints oft poured at Evening's reign!
Forms of magnificence that rose amain
How had ye all dissolved by chill decay!
How were ye rent and scattered by the train
Of unrelenting fiends, that night and day
Fed on my wasted heart, and wore my life away!

Days, too too little prized, of pure delight
That fled on rapid wing, Oh yet again
Shall the same lovely charms salute my sight?
Shall I the same enchanting walks regain?
Shall the same light revisit my parched brain
That shone by fits not duly prized of yore?
Is that the skylark's voice, the blackbird's strain?
Are those the morning mist-wreaths floating hoar?
And shall these peaceful shades my wonted peace restore?

In lays incondite, thus Childe Alarique
Again his long-lost ecstacy exprest;
The glow of gladness mantling on his cheek,
And new-born ardour rising in his breast,
Through the wild scenes his wonted way he prest,
And watched, entranced, the opening scenes of morn.
O boundless springs of rapture, purest, best,
To minds that Fancy's faery beams adorn,
By no dire self-reproach or worldly passions torn!

Henceforth, where'er the Childe his path pursued,
Even when through crowded scenes he dared to go,
He dwelt in that surpassing solitude
That few have known, and few shall ever know&mdash;
He moved amid the scenes of vice and woe,
To him innocuous, trusting in the power
Of Her whose arm had saved him from the blow
Of the fell fiend Despair at midnight hour,
When the loud torrent raged, and darkest clouds did lour.

Scarce is it mid the vernal woods more sweet
Than in the haunts of men, alone, to be;&mdash;
Where all is vice, woe, folly, and deceit&mdash;
The bosom to preserve serene and free;
The varying scenes of various life to see,
Trusting in Heaven, that "all shall yet be well,"
Though now unsearchable is Heaven's decree!
And feeling that "to doubt is to rebel,"
Onward to go rejoiced &mdash; till sounds the warning knell.

And yet, the sooth to say, 'twas sweeter far
To thread the wild-wood mazes, and to view
The lake-waves glitter to the evening star,
And renovate the soul-enchanting hue
That poesy o'er all the wild-woods threw,
And meet again that Muse beloved of yore,
While, "purer from the searching fire," he knew
The soul more vigorous and apt to soar
Through Virtue's flowery paths to heights unknown before.

I write not to the dull unthinking few,
That need demand whence broke the heavenly ray
That o'er the Childe celestial influence threw!&mdash;
And feeble grows my voice; and fast away
The visions from my raptured sight decay;
And "pangs reviving rend my heart anew:"
How quickly melts the vision's fair array!
How fast return the clouds of murky hue!
And now the wild-wood scenes all vanish from my view.

But whoso loves the Youth, or loves the lay
That feebly strives his fortunes to declare,
Or loves in faery dreams to waste the day&mdash;
Let him to yonder lonely vale repair;
There sleeps the Childe; and faery revellers there
Each night with freshest flowers the sod bestrew;
And "light of heart" the "village maiden fair"
In "morn of May" oft glides the valley through,
And braids her hair with flowers besprent with fragrant dew.
