The Sultry sun in Virgo 'gan to shine,
And hot upon the meads did cast his ray;
The apple reddend from its sallow green,
And the ripe pear did bend the leafy spray;
The merry goldfinch sang the live-long day;
'Twas now the pride the manhood of the year,
And eke the ground did in its gayest dress appear.

The sun was gleaming in the midst of day,
Dead still the air, and eke the welkin blue;
When from the sea arose, in drear array,
A heap of clouds of sullen sable hue,
The which full fast unto the woodlands drew;
Hiding at once the sun's all-glorious face,
And the black tempest swell'd and gather'd up apace.

Beneath an holme, close by a pathway side,
Which did unto Saint Godwin's convent lead,
A hapless pilgrim moaning did abide,
Poor in his look; ill-sorted in his weed,
Long conscious of the miseries of need,
Where from the hall-stone could the pilgrim fly,
There were not houses there, nor any convent nigh.

Look in his gloomy face, his spirit scan,
How woe begone, how withered, pale, and dead!
Haste to thy last repose, unhappy man,
Hie to thy grave, thine only resting bed;
Cold as the turf which will grow on thy head
Is charity and love among high elves,
Nobles and barons live for pleasure and themselves.

The gather'd storm is ripe, the big drops fall,
The sun-burnt meadows smoke, and drink the rain;
The low'ring darkness doth the herds appal,
And the full flocks are driving, o'er the plain;
Dash'd from the clouds the waters fly again;
Heav'n opes above, the yellow light'ning flies,
And the hot fiery-smoke in the wild flashes dies.

List how the thunder's rattling roaring sound
Rolls slowly on, and then redoubled clangs
Shake the high spire, and lost, dispended, drown'd,
All on the coward ear of terror hangs;
The winds are up, the lofty elm-tree swangs:
Again the light'ning, and the thunder pours,
And the full clouds are burst at once in stony show'rs.

Spurring his palfrey o'er the wat'ry plain,
The abbot of St. Godwin's convent came;
His chapournette was drenched with the rain,
And his work'd girdle met with mickle shame;
Full many a curse he mutter'd at the same.
The storm encreas'd, and he drew aside
With the poor alms-craver, beneath the holm to bide.

His cope was all of Lincoln cloth so fine,
With a gold-button fasten'd near his chin;
His autremete was edged with golden twine,
And his peak'd shoe a lord's might well have been:
Full well it shewed, he thought expence no sin:
The trappings of his palfrey pleas'd his sight,
For the horse-milliner, his head with roses dight.

An alms, Sir Priest, the bowing pilgrim said,
O let me wait within your convent door,
'Till the sun shines on high above our head,
And the loud tempest of the air is o'er;
Helpless and old am I, alas!  and poor:
Nor house, nor friend, nor wealth I call my own.
Nor worldly good, except this silver cross alone.

"Varlet!"  replied the Abbot, "cease your din,
This is no season alms and pray'rs to give;
My porter never lets a begger in;
None feast with me who not in honour live.
And now the sun with the black clouds did strive,
And shooting on the ground his glaring ray,
The Abbot spurr'd his steed, and forthwith rode away.

Once more the sky was black, the thunder roll'd;
Fast running o'er the plain a priest was seen;
Nor proudly dight, nor button'd up in gold,
His lope and jape were gray, and eke were clean;
A Limitour he was of order seen;
And from the pathway side then turned he,
Where the poor pilgrim lay beneath the good holm-tree.

"An alms, Sir Priest," the bowing pilgrim said,
"For sweet Mary and your order's sake;"
The Limitour then loos'd his purse's thread,
And did thereout a groat of silver take:
The pilgrim's hand for thankfulness did shake;
"Here, take this silver, it may ease thy care,
Nought have we of our own, we but God's stewards are.

"But ah!  unhappy pilgrim, learn of me,
To heav'n, scarce any give a tithe away:
Here take my semicope, thou'rt bare, I see;
'Tis thine, the Mightiest will the debt repay:"
He left the pilgrim and pursued his way.
Virgin and Saints who God's behests fulfil,
Or give the good man power, or give the mighty will.
