Hail!  yon bright herald of long-absent Guest,
That on th' expanding wing of morning flies!
Hail to yon messenger of PEACE and rest,&mdash;
The snow-white Dove, that quits her native skies,
And seraph-like her downward pinion plies!
Her golden beak the Olive-Branch sustains,
Celestial fragrance breathing as she flies;
And o'er the blighted fields and drooping plains,
Her wings shed healing dew, like gentlest summer rains!

Hail to yon bark that glads th' expecting sight,
Whose ample canvas wooes the southern gale,
To Albion's shores to waft her honour'd freight!
The breeze springs up; the fav'ring winds prevail,
And spreads majestic now the swelling sail:
The spotless Dove pursues, loud Fame precedes,
And shouting thousands line the beech, to hail
The gallant ship, as into port she speeds,
And to fair Britain's coast th' illustrious Strangers leads.

The answ'ring clouds fling back the gladsome sounds,
From fair Augusta's princely towers that rise:
O'er distant seas, thro' earth's remotest bounds,
Thro' burning climes afar and wintry skies,
The choral Hymn of thousand Nations flies.
All hands unite the altar'd pile to rear,
Where Discord, restless fiend, expiring lies:
And banish'd Hate, Revenge, and jealous Fear,
They sheathe the keen-edg'd sword, and snap the warrior-spear.

War's thunders die:  his battle-sounds recede,
And on the ear in sullen murmurs fade.
Warbles from upland steep the shepherd's reed;
And down the shelter'd vale or woody glade,
Sweet tunes her artless song the village maid.
Beguile the peasant's toil his merry lays,&mdash;
The toil by Autumn-suns so richly paid;
And from the grove the feather'd songsters raise
Nature's spontaneous hymn of gratitude and praise.

And now the budding leaves of hope expand;
A long, a stormy winter passes by,
That chill'd the fairest promise of the land,
Nipp'd ev'ry bud, and bade each blossom die.
But oh!  what wondrous scenes salute my eye!
Yon Sun of Glory bursting thro' the gloom!
While 'neath a purer air and milder sky,
The blighted Lilies shed their lost perfume,
And flushes England's Rose, fresh with immortal bloom.

Ah!  whence those bright Elysian scenes, that glow
With fairy freshness on the ravish'd sight?
Ah!  whence does such celestial dawning grow
On the wild tempest of so dark a night?
But now I view'd the battling whirlwinds fight,
And listed to the savage tempest's howl!
But now the red-wing'd vengeance flash'd so bright,
So loud were heard the bursting thunders roll,
Affrighted earth that shook, from burning line to pole.

Where now is He, that in his bootless rage,
His living tempests scatter'd thro' the land,&mdash;
The Pride, Contempt, and Wonder of the age,&mdash;
Bade kingdoms rise, as 'neath a magic wand,
And pois'd the globe upon his single hand?
Huge Atlas of the world!  and art thou crush'd
Beneath the mighty pile thy folly plann'd?
The maddest tools of mad Ambition blush'd,
When that stupendous fabric to its ruin rush'd.

Mark'd ye the light that fir'd the Northern sky,&mdash;
The uproar huge from Scythian wilds that rung,
When must'ring Scythia peal'd her battle-cry?
'Twas thence, from Moscow's flames, the Phoenix sprung,
Vulcanian bird, immortal, fresh, and young,
That pounc'd the Eagle in his plumy pride:
The tow'ring Eagle, &mdash; theme of ev'ry tongue!
&mdash;The feather'd Choristers that scatter'd wide,
And chas'd the snow-white Dove, for which we've vainly sigh'd.

What powers may point that night of pride, of woe,
Of deathless glory, and of deep despair,
When Roxalania's Boast was levell'd low!&mdash;
When, with dire portent, thro' the midnight air,
Proud Moscow rose on fiery wings, to scare
The fierce Invaders of her deep repose;
That rain'd in ruins round the desart drear,
And flaming vengeance on her banner'd foes,
Roll'd a red blazing storm on ev'ry wind that blows.

'Twould seem the central fires had burst their bound,&mdash;
Some new Vesuvius heav'd from Earth's dark womb,
To vomit death, and scatter ruin round
The fairest scenes that on her surface bloom!
'Twould seem the morn of everlasting doom,
When Nature, Time, and Death himself shall die,
Had dawn'd in fire upon that night of gloom;
Or all the penal flames, deep-sunk that lie,
Their Inmates, battle-arm'd, rapt to the burning sky.

Shot up, with all-devouring rage, on high
One crimson column thro' the dark profound,
Whose base was Moscow and its crown the sky.
The fiery whirl convolving clouds wreath'd round;
And from within, like bursting battle's sound,
(As rent, with heat intense, tall spire and tower,
Or temple-dome in ruins shook the ground,)
Pierc'd Night's dull ear one congregated roar,
To tell th' admiring world proud Moscow was no more.

Stupendous sacrifice!  that might have turn'd
Ev'n mad Ambition from his bootless toil,
To fix the yoke that rugged Freedom spurn'd!&mdash;
&mdash;When ruin'd thousands could serenely smile
Upon imperial Moscow's funeral pile;&mdash;
Could houseless shiver in the midnight air,
And bless Muscovia's guarding Gods the while,
For that keen woe, the pains, the pangs they bear,
Their native land to shield from ruin and despair!

But hurtles oft the din of battle past,
And many a fatal field is lost and won,
Ere Moscow's ashes freight the wintry blast.
Blaz'd to its setting many a warrior's sun,
That long in van of fight had with'ring shone:
And many an orient star, of feebler light,
Whose circling round of glory, but begun,
Glow'd with rich promise of meridian-height,
Was swept in god-like fray to everlasting night.

See yon dark hosts, like clouds of rolling smoke,
From Southern clime in martial pride advance,
To humble Scythia to a foreign yoke!
And seen invaded Scythia's banners dance
Against the Eagles of invading France!
From Lapland wilds, where day's retiring star
On glitt'ring wastes of snow looks down askance,
To where he fires Cathaya's burning air,
Her must'ring hordes she pours, to try the sacred war.

No common ruin mark'd the onset-shock:
But chief in Borodino's fateful vale,
When either side for death or Vic'try struck,
And Vic'try pois'd so long the golden scale,
That victims to their noble rage 'gan fail:
When redd'ning Moskwa, flush'd with slaughter, told
Thro' all his sinuous track the murd'rous tale;
And proud Bagration, as a lion bold,
Blaz'd thro' the cloud of war, and life for glory sold.

As when on battling winds two storm-clouds fly,
Fraught with black vengeance and supernal ire,&mdash;
In mid-air shock, and thro' the hurtled sky
Peal the loud roar, and with'ring flame expire:
As jarring seeds of earth, and sea, and fire,
That in primaeval choas slumb'ring lay,
With hideous uproar and combustion dire,
Thro' boundless space had rush'd in fiend-like fray,
And swept inchoate worlds and embryo suns away.&mdash;

&mdash;With such wide ruth, &mdash; when blew the blast of war,
And startled Scythia, snatch'd the spear and shield,&mdash;
With such wide ruin, ruth, and frantic jar,
Conflicting myriads shook th' embattled field,
Burst, blaz'd, and wasted &mdash; stagger'd &mdash; storm'd, and reel'd.
Such the exterminating rage was there,
That ere again the madding onset peal'd,
In space where late two mighty armies were,
Two mighty wrecks were left to taint Muscovia's air.

But still rush on, in death's and fate's despite,
Like some wild conflagration's wasting blaze,
Gaul's banner'd hosts, sad remnant of the fight!
Still round them Russia's sword avenging plays,
Thins their proud ranks, and on their bravest preys.
What man began, avenging Heav'n completes,
And low the crest of blind Ambition lays,
Mars his fell purpose, and his aim defeats,
When from sad Moscow's wreck th' unshelter'd foe retreats.

From frozen regions, unexplor'd and wild,
Far, far within the wintry Arctic's round,
Where foot ne'er trod, nor vegetation smil'd,
Nor trace of life or living thing was found,
But in perennial fetters earth lies bound:&mdash;
From that bleak shore and dark inclement sky,
Where icy Alps, by snowy Andes crown'd,
The huge concreted mass of years gone by,
Let the strong north-blast loose, and bid their tempests fly;&mdash;

&mdash;Thence came that breath of Heav'n, in wrath so strong;&mdash;
Came like the tigress stealing on her prey,
And pour'd the sightless certain death along,
That swept like undistinguish'd herd away
The best and bravest of Gaul's proud array.
More keen the with'ring north-wind struck, more true,
Than warrior's wasting steel on battle-day;
And like destroying angel as it flew,
Wide havoc mark'd the track, and death and ruin grew.

Where now those hands so brave, those hearts so free?
Oh!  it might teach a warrior's eyes to weep,
And melt the sternness of his mood, to see
Th' inglorious harvest brother-warriors reap!
As Heav'n's eternal magazines, where sleep
The embryo storms of many an unborn age,
Had burst their bars with one tremendous sweep,
On Nature's works destructive war to wage,
And vent on feeble man their fierce unprison'd rage:

Rode on the pinions of the brumal blast,&mdash;
That stoop'd the crest of Gallia's martial flow'r,
And wither'd all their vigor as it past,&mdash;
The vollied vengeance of Immortal pow'r,
That ask'd and urg'd the retributive hour.&mdash;
&mdash;Bewild'ring snows, fair robe of Winter's reign,
Thick-driving sleet, sharp hail in arrowy show'r,
And frost intense, that stay'd the glowing vain,
And bound the breath of life in adamantine chain.

Th' invaders, as their homeward way they wound,
In act to speak, or breathe the plaintive moan,
Were glued, as marble statues, to the ground.
So, in the gelid cavern, deep and lone,
With tangling briars and pendent shrubs o'ergrown,
Where living crystals gem the yawning pass;&mdash;
So have I seen concrete to solid stone
The pure descending streams of liquid glass,
And forms once animate transmute to rocky mass.

Ah ruthless Chief!  how sicken'd then thy soul,
To see thy airy schemes of conquest vain!
Thou that hast bid thy cloudy myriads roll
From Syrian heats to icy Scythian main!
Where now thy horsemen proud, &mdash; that mighty train?
Ask Russia's wintry winds!  One setting sun
Saw countless hoofs bid thunders shake the plain:
At morn he rose, his ceaseless round to run,
And lo!  they sleep in death!  their final march is done!

Thou frantic Ammon!  that, like Death, on high
Sate symbol'd with thy sateless spear and shroud!
Like his thy fiat, "die!"  and hosts must die!
Swift the freed lightnings issue from their cloud,
Wide roar the vollying thunders &mdash; long and loud!
How low the crest of pride, that tower'd so far,
Beneath th' avenging sword of Scythia bow'd,
When pour'd her thronging myriads to the war,
And quench'd in priceless blood thy bright meridian-star!

Thy warrior's eyes inglorious slumbers seal!
Oh what disgraceful flight the remnant sav'd
From Scythia's wintry wind and wasting steel!
That on the shudd'ring victims storm'd and rav'd;
And this like guardian-sword of Eden wav'd,
And pil'd the wolf's repast and eagle's prey.
They who so oft a world in arms had brav'd,
And kingdom's crush'd and wreck'd, now dearly pay
For blood of murder'd thousands, timeless swept away.

Then, valiant Frederick!  through thy injur'd land
Burst forth the patriot flame, and blaz'd, and ran,
By deepest wrongs and foulest treach'ry fann'd.
'Twas then the Glorious Union first began,
Whence rose and ripen'd all the mighty plan,
That proudly foil'd the dark Oppressor's boast;
When flew from rank to rank, from man to man,
Undaunted Yorck, and with his warrior-host,
Spurn'd the detested league, and blaz'd at honor's post.

Then ev'ry gen'rous feeling of the soul,
That stirs the spirit GOD and Nature gave,
And bids her tide thro' burning pulses roll,
Rous'd from their rest Silesia's peasants brave,
Their hearths, their altars, all that's dear to save.
Then too "Revenge" awoke a daring band,
Strong as Despair, relentless as the grave,
That swore, each man upon his battle-brand,
That blade should never sleep, till freed his native land.

Then, then that glorious thunderbolt of war,
Immortal BLUCHER, like a meteor glows,
And blaz'd in battle, Prussia's leading-star;&mdash;
Then many a slumb'ring warrior greatly rose,
Renew'd in strength and vig'rous from repose.
Fast they pursue and scathe; but still more fast
Retreat, a scatter'd wreck, their flying foes;
Nor deem them safe from that rude northern blast,
Till far, majestic Rhine!  thy bounding stream is past.

As on Icelandic coast its bulk uprears
Some pyramid of everlasting snow,
The huge concretion of a thousand years,
That long has brook'd the battling surge below:
When torrents rush, and wilder whirlwinds blow,
Down from its rest in horrid grandeur flies;
And vengeful bursting on the surgy flow,
The hidden depths of frighted Ocean dries,
And sounds his watery load in bubbles thro' the skies.

So vanish'd Gallia's strength! &mdash; But is yon band,
Whose glitt'ring eagles dance so proud in air,
Again to tempt its fate in Scythian land,&mdash;
Again the breath of Scythian skies to dare?&mdash;
Again explore those heartless desarts drear,
Where sleep th' unburied corses of the slain,
And bleaching bones their ev'ry step shall scare?
Then art thou victim of a mind insane,
For Borodino bled, and Moscow blaz'd in vain.

'Tis thus the stern unbending soul of Pride
Soars high for fame, and mocks at homely joys.
'Tis thus Ambition, (reckless suicide!)
Fired with the cursed lust that never cloys,
Destroys a world, and then herself destroys.
Behind each height she gains another glows;
Forgot the tott'ring props her steps that poise,
One fatal slip she makes; then downward goes,
And finds a gulph more dark &mdash; more deep &mdash; than whence she rose.

There, in still solitude and awful gloom,
The torturing past with leisure to survey,
She feels and mourns the justice of her doom:
There must she writhe and pine the live-long day;
There must she groan the tedious night away.
Reft of her helm and adamantine shield,
Pale Grief shall on her inmost vitals prey,
And fell Remorse his scorpion terrors wield,
Till bursts the mighty heart, could never, never yield.

Ah!  which of all the Hydra forms, that jar
And raise their whirlwinds in the human breast,&mdash;
Ah!  which with fall'n Ambition may compare?
Can Envy pale, that knows nor sleep nor rest?
Can black Remorse, in gorgon horrors drest?
Revenge, &mdash; (foul name!) dark Guilt, that inly mourns,&mdash;
Or deep Despair, that pines and dies unblest?
Ah no!  for with them all, &mdash; with each by turns,
Prostrate Ambition writhes, and pants, and glows, and burns.

But glory calls:  the clarion's loud alarms
Ring round Germania's wide-extended reign.
Lo!  rises to the strife a world in arms!
Imperial Austria leads a countless train,
To strike for glory on their native plain,&mdash;
Now ev'ry hope of bloodless peace is fled,
Each mediating art essay'd in vain:
And Sweeden from her piny mountains  led
A race of hardy warriors, bold and battle-bred.

Fain would the muse Fame's circle here run round:
Fain on the laurell'd plains of Denn'witz stay;
More proudly still immortal Katzbach sound:
But calls a mightier field, a nobler fray,
And dawns full on me Leipzig's deathless day.
That day, which rose so fair, and shone so bright,
On many a leaguing nation's proud array,
Ere burst the fury of that madding fight,
That swept a host of heroes to the realms of night.

Blazed thousands and ten thousands to the day,
Dark numbers numberless, &mdash; at deadly game,
For kingdoms and imperial crowns to play!
Here frown'd the varied candidates for fame,
From Europe's realms and Asian skies that came,
That Holy League to join:  and Gallia there,
Proud of her Leader, and a blazon'd name,
In curving line was stretch'd to distance  far,
With nerve firm-strung, to brave the onset shock of war.

Gods!  how the feeble pow'rs of mortal man
Ev'n with your own immortal might may pair,
When with concentrate force, and aim, and plan,
In arms he courts the glorious tug of war,
Shakes earth, and sea, and hurtles upper air!
When 'mid huge ruin, stithy smoke and flame,
And closing yell th' unearthly fiends might scare,
Colliding myriads shock for deathless fame,
And nobly earn with blood th' unfading wreath they claim!

Four times the shades of pitying Evening seal'd
The gulph of fate!  four times the flaming sun
With dawning glories fired the listed field;
And as he rose his circling round to run,
Astonish'd saw the work of woe undone.
His fate how many a dying warrior blest,&mdash;
Smil'd on the gory wreaths his valor won,
And couch'd his head for everlasting rest,
Calm as tho' bed of down his aching temples prest!

Ye viewless forms!  that flit your airy round,
Where erst thick battle bled and perils grew;
And love to linger near th' immortal ground,
Where once in Freedom's cause the blade ye drew,
And high to heav'n her conqu'ring banner flew!
Look round, and view the mighty wrecks of pride,
That Leipzig's plains of deathless glory strew,
Where nothern spears and Southern sabres vied,
To conquer Fortune's smile, and turn her adverse tide!

If 'twere that mine were some pernnial name,
With dying time alone to pass away;
And your's, ye Godlike shades!  were fleeting fame,&mdash;
The fickle offspring of a summer-day,
That must or might with rolling years decay:&mdash;
If such could be, &mdash; ah!  with what grateful pride,
The Muse would haste her holiest debt to pay!
Th' unfading wreath would twine and scatter wide,
The fresh unfading wreath, for which ye fought and died.

Ah such were pleasant task!  the tribute high,
To pay to worth that slumber'd in the grave;
To bid survive, &mdash; what else should droop and die,&mdash;
Praise of the Just, red glory of the Brave;
Fair Faith and Truth snatch from oblivion's wave;
The Patriot's brow with choicest chaplet twine,
His native land that died to serve or save;
Thro' time to bid each high example shine,
And touch the generous bosom with their fire divine.

Full many a daring vessel spreads the sail,
To waft your fame thro' ev'ry age and clime!
I see th' expanding canvas woo the gale,
I pant to follow, nor can deem it crime,
Ye daring barks!  roll down the stream of time,
And bear your freight from wreck and danger free,&mdash;
That priceless freight of many a deed sublime,
That trumpets loud to ages yet to be,
That godlike man was born for godlike Liberty.

Great SCHWARTZENBERG in joint array leads on
To deathlike fame, thro' glitt'ring fields of fight:
High o'er the HETMAN'S brows the splendors shone,
That beam'd upon his cloudy Cossack's sight,
And cheer'd them thro' the battle-mists of night:
He that so nobly turn'd upon the foe,
And saved the wreck of Eylau's mournful flight.
While close behind leads on the surgy flow,
A train th' exhausted Muse scarce can find breath to shew.

There gallant Wittgenstein, Woronzow bold,
Fleet Czernicheff, that untam'd Scythian gale,
And Bulow on the waves of battle roll'd,
Like heav'n's red bolts the charging hosts assail:
And yet their rage seems tame, &mdash; to flag and fail,
Compared with din that rose, and steely jar,
When dash'd his force full on the wavering scale
The veteran BLUCHER, pride of Prussia's war,
With Benningsen the brave, and SWEEDEN'S royal HEIR.

From thousand engines big destruction flash'd,
And veil'd the horrors of the scene from view,
As roll'd the wreathing eclipse slowly past,
Death's flaming throat the meteor-rocket threw,
That burst, and blazed, and wither'd as it flew:
Thro' broken bands and shatter'd squadrons tore;
And stirr'd and roused the fainting strife anew,
With din like angry thunder, or the roar
Exploding Aetna peals thro' scared Sicilia's shore.

Vainly Macdonald raged on Russia's van,
And strove against the gather'd storm to stand;
Regnier in vain would cheer his Saxons on,
To rivet fetters on their native land:
In vain lamented Poniatowsky's hand
Round his scarr'd brows the last red laurel bound;
Insulted Europe's fame-emblazon'd band
Fate's verge o'erleap to close the earthquake wound,
That spreads its deep abyss, and threat'ning yawns around.

So in the world's proud capital unseal'd
Its pond'rous jaws that hideous gulph of gloom,
That mystic oracle to man reveal'd,
Again should never shut her yearning womb,
Till glutted with the costliest gift of Rome:
So eager self-devoted Curtius hied
His land to save, and seal her living tomb;
Rush'd to the pit in all a warrior's pride,
'Mid shouts of rescued thousands plung'd, and sunk, and died.

&mdash;Now grisly Famine strides the steed of Death,
That tramples squadrons in his wild career:
Then pale Contagion blew his with'ring breath,
And piled with mightiest names Gaul's fun'ral bier,
As boreal blast the promise of the year:
The Cossacks' charging lance its terrors plied,
And disarray spread thro' the flying rear:
Till past again, bold Rhine!  thy barrier tide,
A space the ruin paused upon thy shaggy side.

Proud Corsican!  that once proud day is past,
When, at each movement of thy 'wild'ring maze,
Thrones trembled, and the nations stood aghast:&mdash;
That day is past, and thy expiring blaze
Unheeded bursts, and round thee harmless plays.
Vict'ry no longer on thy banner waits;
Thy sword is blunted, dimm'd thy warrior-praise;
And while thy feeble bands threat other states,
Thy conqu'ring foes press on, and reach fam'd Paris' gates.

Like eagle's pinions to th' advancing sun,
Wide spread the portals to the victor-train.
Behold the mighty toil of heroes done;
And see them laurel-crown'd turn home again!
See exiled Kings resume their native reign!
In one short hour long years of mis'ry paid!
While spreads the branching Olive o'er the plain;
And kindred nations 'neath the grateful shade
The solemn compact swear, and sheathe the battle-blade:&mdash;

The world now rests. &mdash; But ruin'd Leipzig mourns;
And wide Germania weeps the heavy blow:
Bedews her slaughter'd children's gory urns;
And ceaseless bids the streaming sorrows flow,
For smoking towns, and peasant-cots laid low.
The Orphan's anguish and the Widow's sigh,
In all the silent eloquence of woe,
Plead to the feeling heart and melting eye,
And ask that sacred boon that gen'rous breasts supply.

Albion!  to thee they plead; to whom belong
More dazzling honors than my Muse can pay!
Thou swift avenger still of fraud and wrong!
To storm-tost wanderer the stormless bay,&mdash;
The beacon-fire that lights him on his way!
Home of the exile and unshelter'd head!
On dark horizon still thy beaming ray,
Though far and faint, a saving light has shed,
And o'er a 'nighted world new-dawning hope has spread!

Be this, thou matchless, thou unrivall'd land!
Thy noblest meed, thy brightest wreath of fame!
On this firm base secure thy name shall stand,
By time unchanged &mdash; unshaken &mdash; still the same,
Till failing time shall wrap the world in flame!
Nor be thy praise forgot, &mdash; nor least, nor last,
Be deem'd the growing honors deck thy name;
Thou that aside th' impending ruin dash'd,
And each opposing barrier to our wishes past.

'Twas thou, that when the guiding pilot fail'd,&mdash;
When roaring winds and wrecking seas 'gan rise,
Bold seized the helm, tho' death, tho' fate assail'd,
And steer'd the bark, thro' storms and rayless skies,
Safe to that glorious haven where she lies.
There, as again she rides in halcyon days,
And high to heav'n her streaming standard flies,
To thee a grateful people freely pays
The tribute of their thanks and undissembled praise.

Oh!  might I linger &mdash; on those names to dwell,
On land or wave, in council or in field,
Have loved and serv'd their native land so well,
And shone her glory, boast, and fencing shield!
The shout triumphant Albuera peal'd,
Whence Beresford to fame's proud summit rose:
Bright honors red Barrosa's laurels yield,
That bloom eternal round her Graham's brows;
And many a trophied day, for youthful Hill that glows.

But chief, immortal WELLINGTON!  for Thee,
The godlike leader of the dazzling train,
The Muse would twine her wreath of Victory!
Thou, that hast blazed thro' India's burning reign,
And roused and fired the slumb'ring soul of Spain:&mdash;
In fame's first rank bade Lusitania shine:
And saw Pyrenean summits soar in vain,
To frown and threat, &mdash; proud Gallia's bounding line,
Or save her flying armies from a host like thine!

And oh!  ye Spirits of the mighty dead!
Ye that once fired the blazing field of fight,
And now sleep sound on honor's crimson bed!
Though 'parted, still ye shine with soften'd light,
And point the spot ye tower'd your eagle flight!
As in yon climes, where the bright orb of day
Still gleams upon the way-worn trav'ller's sight,
And sheds, when set, the friendly glimm'ring ray,
That lights the dubious wand'rer on his homeward way.

Sweet to the bosom of declining Age,
His GOD adoring, and beloved of GOD,
As on he journeys thro' life's pilgrimage,
Serene to dwell upon his last abode!
As sweet to Poet, (tho' that steed he rode,
That whirl'd the Theban Lyrist thro' the sky,)
To quit the field by clanking war-steed trod,
The shout of vic'try, and expiring cry,
To rest on flow'ry plains, in Peace that basking lie.

But can &mdash; Britannia!  can the poet's powers
To thee depict the blessings of repose?
Can land, ne'er shudder'd to the wintry show'rs,
Prize to its price th' unsetting sun that glows?
For tho' perchance one tear maternal flows,
One maiden's bosom heaves the hopeless sigh,
'Tis all of war thy favour'd island knows,
Save when she hymns the strains of victory,
Or hails her laurell'd warriors home with shouts of joy.

When then of culture-smiling vallies sing,
Of hills but varied by vertumnal stains,
Of fields but echoing the glad voice of Spring?
Say &mdash; knew e'er other thy sea-girdled plains?
Requite then &mdash; ah!  requite one minstrel's strains!
Ah!  give his lyre to wipe one tear from woe!
Think of Germania's houseless shiv'ring swains,
And all they've known, and know, may'st thou ne'er know;
But long, and bright, as now, thy Sun of Glory glow!
