SCENE &mdash; THE CONFINE OF A WOOD.
THE GOOD GENIUS ENTERS.

GOOD GENIUS.
In that bright region of the middle air,
Abode of chosen beings, who partake
Of the celestial nature, &mdash; Genii call'd,&mdash;
My proper station is:  for of the order
Of these the lesser deities I am.
And sooth it is, though men may think it fabled,
That unto each of the whole human race
Two demons are assign'd, of equal power,
To virtue and to vice inciting them&mdash;
True progeny are they of Heaven and Hell&mdash;
Who from the first breath to the last, attendant
Are ever found; and by their agency have power.
Now I on earth, with human form invested,
Am come as man's Good Genius:  friendship's name
And office bearing, while I mark the path
That to the consecrated temple leads
Of honour, truth, and justice. &mdash; Glorious goal!
A goal which whosoe'er attains, perceives
A more than mortal animation warm
His full and throbbing bosom:  native dignity,
A perfect sense of the high rank he holds
In vast creation's round:  still more ennobled
By his own virtuous deeds, awakes such consciousness,
That worldly limitations seem to him
But made for worldly men.  Through all the barriers,
By these set up, his ardent soul would break:
Fain would it soar, fain reach the ethereal space,
Or higher empyrean, where the hierarchy,
The host of angels met in holy synod,
And deep revolving on eternal mind,
Prepare to execute the sovran will.&mdash;
To that high seat his eager eye is turn'd,
That blissful place where man's benighted spirit,
All free, all comprehensive &mdash; once so bounded!
And with still purer essences communing,
Loses in love divine all sensual pleasures.
For this he panted whom 'twas mine to lead
Through the drear mazes of this nether world;&mdash;
And, now supremely blest, on seraph wing
He gains the glorious mansion of the skies;
Meet recompense for goodness next to Heaven's.&mdash;
Yet even on earth his joys were all sublime,
For those of mind alone he cared to cherish;
By me embolden'd too, he calmly travers'd
The vasty desart, haunt of salvage men&mdash;
A new Alcides, emulous of good&mdash;
Nor fear'd more potent, nor more subtle foe,
Closed in his coat of steel, the gift of TRUTH!
In vain the evil Genius spread his wiles,
His glittering baits to draw him to the springe:
Onward he mov'd untempted; &mdash; for the arts
Of Vice he saw, though gloss'd with seeming Virtue.
Him, and all such, superior Genii honour.
But oh!  sad case, when he who thwarts me ever,
The envious demon using all his cunning,
Like to a black magician with his spells,
Has practis'd on the weak, unthinking heart,
And brought it to his lure; then for some little time,
An inmate he becomes of Pleasure's palace:
Her magic dome, where Beauty's sparkling glance
Invites him to the mask and midnight revel,
Where reign still varying, ever new delights.
Next the gay, festive board allures his eye
With fancied charms: &mdash; anon his raptur'd spirits
Send him quick bounding, like the elk, to join it.
He tastes ambrosia!  nectar's in the cup!
But soon he finds the whole was touch'd with poison.

But to my sacred duties: &mdash; else the name
Of Abdiel, servant of the Most High, but ill
To me would appertain. &mdash; Hear then those duties,
Yet better pleasures call'd:  my well-tried charge
No sooner join'd the immortals, than another
Was to my tutorage given. &mdash; The lov'd youth,
The princely mind, whom I am now to prompt
To all such generous, all such noble conduct,
As, though his place be high, shall most distinguish it.
Yes, with the princely boy, become my care,
I straight must converse hold, and put in act
Those sweet propensities, those happy gifts,
Which even in childhood budded, promise giving
To grow and ripen with his growing stature.
O, happy nonage!  my strict watch not demanding.&mdash;
But that now nearly past, it well behooves me
To counteract the dark and deep designs
Of my fell rival, Sathan &mdash; Such the name
By which earth knows him:  albeit the agent only
Of him who bears it vauntful &mdash; man's prime enemy,
The great deceiver, parent of sin and death!&mdash;
Well, young Marcellus, soon shall it be known
If thine be actual worth, for such I think it.
So much hast thou to encounter, that the experienc'd
Might bend, perchance succumb, on such assailment:
Beset on all sides, great will be the peril&mdash;
Yet, if from forth the field thou victor com'st,
How vast must be thy merits!  none assisting,
No mortal arm!  Nor can I succour offer,
O'er human deeds no power to me is given:
A spirit of persuasion merely am I, and man
In all free agent:  and thence his honour or disgrace:
For as he may demean himself, or one or other
Will still to him attach, nor in his death be lost.
But he I'm bound to instruct will soon be here,&mdash;
For these calm scenes of pure and simplest nature,
His meditative humour most affects.
I must be then mere mortal &mdash; and the name
Of Abdiel forego for that of Socius&mdash;
The appellation by which mankind acknowledge me.
Cruel exchange; but that the prospect's gladsome.&mdash;
For should this youth escape the present danger,
Should he resist the allurements of my adversary,
I then may quit him; safe, though unadmonish'd:
Safe in his innate goodness &mdash; fully assay'd&mdash;
His character on Virtue's tablet blazon'd.&mdash;
Thus think I of him:  yet will watchful be, and by vision,
Precepts impart as in my earthly capacity&mdash;
Then may I seek again my airy dwelling,
And all my proud distinctions there resume,
All my celestial properties &mdash; a spirit pure!
'Till death has shut Marcellus in the tomb,
And some new duty calls me.

But it is meet that now my sprites
I summon; and perform the rites,
Those holy rites which, though but shown
In vision, still shall for my own
This adolescent fix so rare,
This imp deserving all my care.
Then hail'd as mine and Virtue's son,
He no inglorious course will run;
And if in arts or arms renown
He gain &mdash; decreed the festive crown&mdash;
That fame shall live, though quench'd his fire,
Nor but with time itself expire.

Zephon!  and ye inferior sprites, be present.&mdash;
When she, the glory of the Stars, shall next
Pursue her splendid course, we mean to send
In solemn act our thanks to highest Heaven,
For all the bounties on us and mankind long shower'd.
Prepare the custom'd rites, &mdash; that so the Eternal
Be ever honour'd in our love and duty.

ZEPHON.
Prince!  we this summons joyfully obey:
And still more pleas'd will execute your orders,&mdash;
The time when Cynthias revels we resume,
The time so meet for sacrifice and homage.

Cynthia with her silvery light
Hath scared away black visag'd night.&mdash;
The while bright Hesperus is seen
Conductor of the bright-brow'd queen.
Now she will dance the wavy main,
Attended by her starry train;
Then, ever changeful, dart with speed,
And gambol o'er the daisied mead.
Anon ascend the craggy steep
To watch Endymion in his sleep;
Next, graceful, seek the leafy grove,
Tempering the youthful breast to love:
Or by some violet-border'd stream,
Inspire the calm poetic dream,
Which, 'mid the haunts of Philomel,
Each gentler spirit loves to tell.&mdash;
While he, fond-frenzied Fancy's child,
Who joys to roam the wood and wild,
More deeply touch'd, the ecstatic song
Pours out the rugged rocks among,
Till Echo, waken'd by the sound,
Sends through each cave in quick rebound
The notes, which lesser echoes bear
Murmuring &mdash; then lost in distant air!
Now too the lone enthusiast strays,
Chanting his great Creator's praise:
Or else contemplative he walks,
Or with the unembodied talks
Enraptur'd &mdash; till sleep close his eyes,
When visions still sublimer rise!
These are the charms which Heaven bestows,
To sooth man's self-created woes;
Boons that full oft to transports move,
Scarce less than we, the air-born, prove.

GOOD GENIUS.
Yet, &mdash; ere these rites, &mdash; have ready at my call
The several phantasms which we late devis'd
To charm the young Marcellus&mdash;

ZEPHON.
Abdiel, we go.
And, best belov'd, doubt not our care and diligence.

GOOD GENIUS.
No, dear associates: &mdash; ye were faithful ever.
Then to your task.  Away!  Here comes my pupil.
Slowly he moves, on some grave matter bent,&mdash;
And now, aloud, he with himself is reasoning.
I will remain unseen by him awhile;&mdash;
Perchance, that way, I may some bosom secret
Discover; &mdash; which might else be hidden
From me his friend profess'd, and own'd as such,&mdash;
Youthful timidity &mdash; or it may be shame&mdash;
If shame belong thereto &mdash; urging concealment.
But I must now my sky-tinct vest put on,&mdash;
Work of Minerva's hand; which, being compos'd
Of filmy dews, lies in this ring's small compass.
This must I do, and into air resolve me:
For so 'twill be, &mdash; or unto mortal eye
So seem, &mdash; since all will then to his dim sight
Be perfect void:  nor can I then my shape,
My human form resume, 'till doff'd this habit,
This heavenly robe, for heavenly purpose given me.
Now then, unconscious, he'll to me impart
His joys or sorrows. &mdash; Much I wish to know them;
Not idly curious, but still to him bearing
A love which prompts me to become his true adviser.

MARCELLUS enters.

MARCELLUS.
This interdiction of my honour'd father
Should be in all obey'd, however painful&mdash;
However adverse to my dearest wishes.
On foreign travel long my hopes have rested,
But this is now forbidden. &mdash; Strict the mandate,
And yet for such restraint no cause assign'd me.
O Anacharsis! &mdash; thou whose splendid mind
'Mid Graecia's sons acquired still greater splendour:
Who, by thy wayfare through her happy states,
Hast to thyself and countrymen procured
Such high advantage, &mdash; how envied must thou be!
Fortunate youth, who no restriction knew'st:
To thee a large extensive route was given,
A route which led to pleasure, fame, and profit.
For me, beyond the circuit of Trinacria,
This little isle, my step must never deviate:
My views all narrow'd by its narrow limits.
My soul, disdainful of these trammels, pants,
Even while it owns a parent's high authority;
For objects worthy of its nobler exercise.
In this dilemma, what should I determine?
A bold remonstrance on this harsh proceeding,
Is yet remaining for me. &mdash; I will try it.

GOOD GENIUS.
I must some counsel give him, or this warmth
May lead to serious mischiefs.  All hail, Marcellus!

MARCELLUS.
All hail, my full-approved, high-valued friend:
Grieved though I am, thy presence sure will cheer me.

GOOD GENIUS.
Whence this dejection?  whence these sounds of sorrow?

MARCELLUS.
Whence?  when all my honest pleasures are denied me.
Much cause for sorrow, or I err, good Socius.
'Tis to thy guidance, thy advice I owe
That happy state of mind, &mdash; which had now remain'd;
But that my budding hope to tread the steps
Of him, who "many men and manners saw,"
Lies wholly blasted.  See me now condemn'd
To yawn out life in wretched inactivity.

GOOD GENIUS.
Must thou inactive be, because forbidden
In foreign climes to roam?  Much may be urged
How distant travel, injures or improves;
Since every land evil and good produces.
'Tis true, indeed, that the superior character,
He that's by Vice untouch'd, arm'd and right proof
Against her machinations, charms and smiles&mdash;
For smiles and charms she has, though meretricious&mdash;
To him who thus is armed, and triple shielded,
Good may arise from travel:  that enlargement,
That comprehensiveness of mind, &mdash; that intellect,
Which brings to the possessor highest honour:
Yet this acknowledged, I would not infer
That 'twould be unattain'd by private study:
Nay, from this last, perhaps advantage greater
Might be derived, since much will still depend
On genius, disposition, inbred qualities&mdash;
In fine, whom Nature more than Man has fashion'd.
But to relieve thy sorrows, tell me briefly
In what I best may serve thee.

MARCELLUS.
Oh!  thou art kind.

GOOD GENIUS.
Good youth!  and yet thou little know'st how much
I have labour'd for thee in the world's opinion:
How oft set forth thy virtues to full view;
And bade the admiring people tend them nicely.
This, like the sunbeams to the opening flower,
Has into day brought that which else had wither'd.
But when some future moment shall reveal me,
Perhaps thou'lt grant I am not a talking friend,
One prodigal of words alone or promises,
One, who at will, from forth his guileful eye
Pours tears, as do the syrens; when those tears
May best entice their victim.

MARCELLUS.
But I shall lose thee;&mdash;
For thou hast said that soon to distant regions
Thy step must be directed.  Ah me!  unhappy.
Friendship, all-powerful friendship, that enchants us
By ever new regards, &mdash; say whence thy being,
Earth-born or heavenly art thou?  Surest, heavenly!
Yet, like Astrea visiting this ball
In pity to our hapless, woe-worn race,
Not long thy sojourn here, to make earth glad.
Wilt thou then go, and may not I attend thee?

GOOD GENIUS.
That cannot be.  Take from me this assurance,
I travel swift, and oft will visit thee.

MARCELLUS.
Thy words bring comfort. &mdash; for e'en now as ever,
New life I find when thou but merely counsell'st me.
I know not whence thou art nor what; &mdash; but know,
Thou seem'st my better angel, my good Genius!

GOOD GENIUS.
Right hast thou judged; and such I stand confess'd;
But still as a mere mortal must thou hold  me:
Temperance thou lean'st to, &mdash; Now I to thy sight
Will raise such beauteous and majestic vision,
That thou wilt be enamour'd of her fully,
Unless the Evil Genius, my proud enemy,&mdash;
And who, like me, has leave to call in aid
Of all his purposes the sprites of air,&mdash;
Shall by his fascinations more engage thee:
For gay Volupia still attends his beck.
And loves on youth to practise all her witcheries.
I cannot, like to him, a promise give thee
Of pleasures but from bodily sense arising,
Since mine are calm enjoyments, sanction'd by Reason:
Nor can I countervail the least his artifice;
But soon of these thou wilt have power to judge.
Thou hast thy choice, &mdash; with me or him may'st side;
Yet much I hope to hail thee, my adopted,
While Virtue thou shalt greet as foster-mother.

MARCELLUS.
Agent of Heaven!  I list thy sacred counsels;
Say then what course pursue:  O how conduct me?

GOOD GENIUS.
Hear, then.  Forbidden, for reasons doubtless cogent&mdash;
And which thou soon wilt know &mdash; to quit thy country,
Yet think not that thy coming years must thence
Be heedless thrown unprofitably away:
Or that on Luxury's couch supinely thrown,
To conjure up imaginary wants,
Make fancied evils; and then to Heaven complain,
Of its hard dealing with thee, were befitting
This thy high state &mdash; practis'd too oft by many!
For other cause have life and health been given thee.
But still thou fear'st if kept at home, thy days
Will pass ingloriously: &mdash; that senseless apathy
Must, in such case, the sure attendant be.
Yet wherefore this?  Large store of wealth thou hast,
Extensive thy domain, and great thy power;
Look then around thee, and employ all these,
As well becomes the lord of such possessions:
Search out for virtue, merit, palsied age,
Sickness, and labour sinking under penury.
Then if thou canst, be idle &mdash; and idle wretched;
If with indifference thou canst view men's ills,
Blest as thou art with every earthly comfort,
I will at once renounce, and leave thee wholly:
Nay, thus degenerate, all shall learn to shun thee.
Yet wherefore talk of sloth?  Marcus' first wish
Has been to see his eldest born a soldier.

MARCELLUS.
Oft he with strenuousness hath urged me to it.

GOOD GENIUS.
At length resolved on this, he doth expect
Thy full compliance&mdash;

MARCELLUS.
O direful tidings!

GOOD GENIUS.
How say'st thou, &mdash; direful!  thy loved country serving?

MARCELLUS.
All war is direful &mdash; I am no coward, Socius,
Yet should stern Fortune take me to the field,
Pity, the eldest daughter of the skies,
Would aye be in my sight.  Methinks I see her,
When the dread battle rages at its full,
In heavenly radiance skim along the plain:
Anon behold her mount the glittering car
Of some, great warrior; with downcast, streaming eyes
She strives to move him:  he regards her not,
But levels at the coming foe his lance.
His lance she seizes, and would turn its point,
From wretched man to wound the air alone;
But fierce Bellona lends her savage aid,
New-nerves his arm, and gives the deadly blow.&mdash;
The weeping goddess bangs her head and sighs:
Then, gathering fortitude, she bravely bears
The view while fiercely rolls the tide of war;
Yet when the battle's done, she thinks that those
Who show'd like pards or tigers in their rage,
Will hear her heavenly voice.  With sounds as bland
As Zephyrus, when first he wakes the spring,
She whispers in the victor's ear the law,
Which was by gods ordain'd, to aid the afflicted;
To give to trembling agony assuagement,
The balm of comfort, and the hopes of peace.
Is she unheeded still? &mdash; Then farewell, Virtue!
Farewell to all that marks our nobler kind!
Let man no longer boast himself supreme,
But give to lesser animals his place,
His rank in fair creation.

GOOD GENIUS.
O fine declaimer!
What boots this virtue which thou vaunt'st so bravely?
Do we not daily see this boasted PITY,
Dash'd to the ground, and trampled on by those
To whom her arm was stretch'd out in the hour
Of danger and dismay?  Do we not see her
Stabb'd to the heart, while pouring oil i' th' wounds
Which the dread Fates with erring hand had made?

MARCELLUS.
Too sure we see it!  and too sure Ingratitude,
That first-born fiend of hell, full oft appears
On earth, and spreads her baleful influence  round:
Yet shall we think the many imbibe the poison,
Gladly imbibe it?  Far, far be such opinion.
It is the great, prime quality in man,
To feel for others' miseries and to soothe them.

GOOD GENIUS.
Yet hast thou thought what splendours will await thee,
If from the field victorious thou return'st,
In conquest clothed, and trumpet-toned renown?

MARCELLUS.
Conquest!  Renown!  name not these hateful phantoms.

GOOD GENIUS.
So victory in the world's large volume's written;
So blown abroad, whate'er the cause for quarrel.
But though the laurel deck thy victor brow,
Forget not that it drops with human blood:
Though an admiring people give thee welcome,
With shouts and songs of triumph:  still thy bosom,
By sympathy's sweet influence moved, can feel
For the vast wretchedness Bellona brings,&mdash;
Too surely brings to all who bear her standard.
I did but speak of war in seeming favour,
To try thy nature.  War, indeed, is infamous,
And save on the defensive, never justified.&mdash;
And such Trinacria may yet sustain.
You hate your tyrant ruler, but you love
Your fruitful country; therefore will protect it
Against the invader, wholly bent on rapine.

MARCELLUS.
To the last spark of life I would defend it:
But 'tis not now our country's cause that calls us;
'Tis Dionysius' battles we must fight.
The expedition, by himself projected,
Plann'd, there is little doubt, but to avert
From his own head the mischiefs threat'ning him,
And now will on a mild and peaceful people
Bring dire calamity, and it may be ruin.
My father sees not this usurper's baseness,
Or to such hateful warfare would not urge me.

GOOD GENIUS.
I feel my Rival near.  Now, kindred spirits,
Attend:  and bring, in vision, all those pleasures
That purer souls delight in.  Let graceful dance,
With sweetest minstrelsy, be brought in aid of them.
Meet show for him, the youth whose days are given,
To heaven-taught poesy, and who strikes the lyre
With boldest hand &mdash; a master in the art;
The Muses love him, and at their command,
I on his head Castalian dews distill;&mdash;
High grace, though not like that which Melesigenes
Did from their mighty prince receive.  But still
Such inspiration had he, that his name
Shall live in after times, &mdash; Trinacria's glory!

ZEPHON AND OTHER INFERIOR SPIRITS ENTER.

Goddess!  each rude passion quelling,
Take Marcellus to thy dwelling.
Quick!  so full confess'd of truth
And goodness, now receive this youth:
He's most unfit fell war to wage.&mdash;
Receive, retain him as the gage
For peace within your lov'd retreats,
The Virtues' and the Muses' seats,
He, with the nymphs, in hallow'd groves
And old Sylvanus frequent roves.&mdash;
How, on the pearly river's brink,
Must he then love to sit and think
With thee, of Nature's higher laws,
Or ponder on the first great Cause!
Who to the world's stupendous frame
Gives life and order, &mdash; boons that claim
Our sense of good:  the which we own,
In peals sent up to Mercy's throne.

GOOD GENIUS.
But see, our foe is here.  Awhile retire.

THE EVIL GENIUS AND HIS ATTENDANT SPIRITS ENTER.

EVIL GENIUS.
Now then, confederate spirits, let us prove
Our zeal in this great service.  Abdiel's powers
Are all employ'd against us:  all at work
To win the young Marcellus to his purpose.
We must devise some show, some splendid pageantry
To catch his eye.  The inexperienc'd mind
Not long against the fascinating mockery
Will make resistance.  Soon his boasted virtues,
And self-denials, into air shall vanish;
The while his proud preceptor stands confounded.
No little glory ours in such a warfare
To come off victors &mdash; conquerors over him
Who boasts celestial succours.  Think on that,
And let the unequal contest more inspirit ye.
'Tis true, indeed, the Genii of our order
Far more successful are than those of Abdiel;
Since mortals almost all to Luxury's charms,
And witching beauties, turn a willing eye.
Not such the present temper of this stripling;
Tutor'd by him we hate, he yet withstands
Our gay allurements.  Something more attractive
Must then forthwith be practis'd:  some bright vision,
Some fine illusion. &mdash; Till in the giddy whirl,
His senses lost, and reason quite thrown down,
We straightway claim him subject of our master.

GOOD GENIUS.
Behold the fiend!  We now with him must try our strength.

ZEPHON.
Gold-hair'd Aurora wakes the day,
And glittering Phanaeus holds his way
Over high heaven's transparent arch:
The Horae following his proud march,
Graced with the ensign of his sway,&mdash;
A sceptre, bearing on its top an eye,
To note that through his means we do all things descry.
Hark!  the sweet melodious measures;
Hear ye not Music's thrilling notes,
Brought by Favonius' breath that floats
Balmy, &mdash; bringing pastoral pleasures.
See!  a true Tempe we enjoy:
And now the rural nymphs advance,&mdash;
Haste not away, then, gentle boy,
But join our sacred song and dance,&mdash;
Our delights have no alloy,
Pastimes that the soul entrance!
Sports we own which love the light,
No veil'd Cotytria of the night
By us are known.  The flower-sprent green,
Press'd by the silver-footed queen,
Sends forth new fragrance, grows more bright,&mdash;
As to Comarchian strains she lightly moves,
While round the Graces play, and ever blooming loves.
Who feel Minerva's holy fire,
To joys beyond this earth aspire:
Quickly they flee from pomp and show,&mdash;
Too frequent harbingers of woe!&mdash;
So here, 'mid shady groves and bowers,
Serenely glide the short-lived hours:
While we our homage duly pay
To heaven's great King, in holiest lay.
This can alone true peace impart&mdash;
This the true rapture of the heart!

EVIL GENIUS.
Away!  Nor think that joys like these,
Such unsubstantial bliss, can please.
Let the poor transports of the mind
To poring schoolmen be confined:
We genuine pleasures higher rate,
Smoothing th' asperities of fate!
Lo!  where the rosy god appears,
The god that woe-worn mortals cheers;
Mirthful, and in eternal youth;
Daring the great dictator Truth!
He seeks our light disportive throng,
To join with him, renown'd in song
The mighty Sol, who doth dispense
Impartial, his blest influence.
Hail, deities!  that make both day
And night all joyous, ever gay:
Your gifts anticipate the sky,
And lap the soul in ecstasy;
For wine and verse were surely given,
As foretastes of the bliss of heaven;
Bacchus behold!  as erst he came,
Leading the Cytherean dame;
Beauteous as from the wave she rose;&mdash;
Around her humid eyes she throws
Blissful:  while on her lip the sigh,
The half-fram'd murmuring accents die.&mdash;
A goddess, sure!  and hail'd above,
As here below, the Queen of love.
Bacchus and Venus!  powers divine,
Lowly we bend before your shrine&mdash;
You our great solace here on earth,
Since dire Pandora's plagues had birth.

ZEPHON AND OTHERS OF THE GOOD SPIRITS.
Daughter of heaven!  immortal Truth,
Behold this brave, ingenuous youth.
O, shed thy radiance o'er his mind;&mdash;
Then shall these phantoms to the wind
Be quickly given:  high rais'd his name;
And quell'd the foe in fear and shame.

INFERIOR OF THE EVIL GENII.
Come, no more reject our proffers;
Far be from you such heartless scoffers,
Who rail at pleasures their dull taste
Could never relish.  Haste, O haste
To dwell with mirth!  and share the whole
Delights that move 'twixt either pole.

SUPERIOR OF THE EVIL GENII.
Yet listen:  We will more ensure,
Than these our agents can procure.
All elements we know:  the earth,
Air, fire, or water fit our birth;
So the extremest points we try,&mdash;
Delve to the centre, mount the sky!
'Till, with the labour tired, we lave
Our limbs in Neptune's wat'ry cave.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
Now then, observe how we have sped.
See, coral from old Ocean's bed
We bear, with gems which far outshine,
The choicest of Golconda's mine;
Pearls, which royalty might wear,
Snatch'd from bright Berenice's hair.
So we command the stars:  can sway
The Queen of night and King of day.
Task then our service.  Shall we bring
Jupiter's belt, or Saturn's ring?
But more, in hope to gain renown,
Wouldst have famed Ariadne's crown?
Or do you wish for purest gold,
From Pluto's realm?  Your slaves behold!
Speak, then &mdash; nor fear our aim we miss,
'Twixt heaven's high dome and hell's abyss.

EVIL GENIUS.
Some mortal tread approaches; &mdash; seek your covert.
We must not now be seen.  Soon will I summon ye.

GOOD GENIUS.
Who is the female, pacing yonder glade?
In meditation lost, she sees us not.

MARCELLUS.
'Tis Galatea, daughter to good Simonides&mdash;
Lovely as Eos, when from forth the cave
Of Nox she issues, to announce great Sol,
The brilliant God; he who to all creation
Gives health and vigour, evermore maintaining them.
Happy Simonides!  And in his muse high favour'd;
For not in Doric or Aeolic verse,
Or even Ionian, far the most esteem'd&mdash;
Not in the lyric song, nor epic flight,
Is he surpass'd; save by the Theban swan,
And the Maeonian eagle, &mdash; claim'd of many.
Think not this praise, though high, is undeserv'd,
Since, with the Teian, and fam'd Lesbian maid,
In competition oft hath he been set,
Nor found inferior.  Blest thus in himself,
No adventitious good from others seeking,
He, with his daughter, in yon woody wild,
Leads the primaeval life in all its dignity:
Ascetic seeming, though without austerities.
Long has he thus in calm seclusion dwelt,
Yet much had suffer'd, but this peerless woman&mdash;
If woman I may say, whose every action,
Whose every deed, superior nature intimates&mdash;
With watch incessant, to his wants still ministers:
Nay, makes that burthen light, which else would press
On him full heavily; for his years are many.
Yes, much has she endur'd to aid this father;
From th' world's contumely and pride has sav'd him; 
Combating perils even at her life's hazard,
But this from Heaven will meet with just reward.

GOOD GENIUS.
Most sure.  What better can claim celestial favour,
Than love of parent, kindred, or of friend?
But filial chiefest.  Above that sacred duty,
Nought can be found; nor is there aught so enviable:
It is from such affections that the soul
Takes her best energies &mdash; derives her fire:
Untouch'd by these, e'en Genius, Wisdom, Valour,
Their brightness lose, and sink in estimation
With Virtue's pupils.  Galatea's excellence
Full well I know; nor hast thou overrated it.
Scarce more Aeneas, old Anchises bearing
Forth on his shoulders, from the flames of Troy,
Renown deserv'd.  Scarce more the Roman matron,
The virtuous Arria, when in her breast the dagger
She deeply plung'd, and then to Paetus gave it,
The while she calmly bade him "Use it likewise,&mdash;
Adding with smiles &mdash; believe me, 'tis not painful."

MARCELLUS.
And yet such beauty in this desert fading,
This dreary solitude to her must&mdash;

GOOD GENIUS.
Speak not thus;
For Galatea, like thyself, is charm'd;
And in retirement she ever dwells delighted.
Be thou assur'd, that heart is incorrupt,
Which finds in such a state its best enjoyments.
In a sequester'd life, the higher virtues
Show themselves more than with the crowd commingled.
This may to some a paradox appear,
But unto him who knows its actual pleasures,
All others are but mockery, mere illusions!
'Tis there all worth, all purity abides,
In cities seldom found:  or found, fantastic,
Unreal &mdash; an ostentatious charity display'd;
While Vice, perhaps, holds empire in the breast,
And like Tisiphone but scatters mischief.&mdash;

MARCELLUS.
But see!  the sylvan nymph in haste retires,
Alarm'd, as it would seem, at our intrusion.

GOOD GENIUS.
Blest spirits!  To Galatea raise the song.

ZEPHON.
1.
Goddess of the silver bow,
Huntress, Dian, &mdash;  kindly show
To thy follower in the chase,
To thy virgin votary grace&mdash;
To Galatea!  she who claims
A place among the brightest names
Which thou, impartial, hast set down
As worthy of the star-deck'd crown
To Virtue promis'd.  'Tis for her&mdash;
For Galatea, we prefer
Our humble suit.  O lend thine ear,
And favour grant her, &mdash; Goddess dear!
So shall she, a distinguish'd dame,
Like thee, still live in endless fame.

2.
O Piety!  illustrious fair,&mdash;
Devote to Heaven, and thence its care,
Behold a maid from thine own school:
Practis'd in each sovereign rule
By thee laid down, our faith to prove,&mdash;
Regardful of the Almighty's love.

Thy precepts, &mdash; which a parent's good
To seek enjoin &mdash; least understood!
By her are held as holy laws,
And strictly follow'd. &mdash; Thus she draws
From her own breast that true delight,
Which smiles in Fortune's utmost spite.

Then, ever-gracious, while on earth,
Point out such high, unequall'd worth;
That when translated to the skies,
She more may charm our wondering eyes.

OTHERS OF ABDIEL'S BAND OF SPIRITS ENTER, HABITED LIKE SICILIAN SHEPHERDS.

FIRST SPIRIT.
See!  'tis full meridian day;&mdash;
Now the sprightly Aurae play
Around us, &mdash; fragrant odours bringing,
Which, from their downy pinions flinging,
Nature revives with livelier bloom,
And wider spreads the rich perfume.

SECOND SPIRIT.
With Io Paeans fill the air,
Trinacria still is Phoebus' care,
'Tis here he casts his kindlier rays,
Here sing we then his higher praise;
Let songs, let Paeans reach the sky,&mdash;
Such as with Delphic hymns may vie!

THIRD SPIRIT.
Lo!  at our call the glorious Nine,&mdash;
Urania first, yclep'd divine:
Celestial muse!  who never sings
Of aught save heaven and heavenly things;
While next Melpomene appears,
In all her beauty &mdash; bath'd with tears:
Follow'd by her of studied wiles,
Thalia hight &mdash; the Queen of smiles.
Then comes Euterpe, whose sweet strain,
The listening ear must long detain.
And Erato, who e'en in Jove
Might light anew the flames of love;
Clio, whose pen inscribes the name
Of worthies on the roll of fame;
Terpsichore, whose graceful ease
In dancing evermore will please!
Polhymnia, still memory's friend,
Wont on the youthful mind to tend:
And last Calliope, whose voice
Makes Nature's general soul rejoice.
All hail, Aonian maids!  The knee,
To you and bright Mnemosyne,
Your happy mother, &mdash; see we bend;
Votaries so faithful then befriend,
Our breasts inform:  and O inspire
Some portion of your heavenly fire!
So we the great Apollo's praise
May sound, in ever-living lays.

FOURTH SPIRIT.
Now sing we universal Pan,
Great Nature's symbol; &mdash; He whom man
In lowliest reverence hails a god.&mdash;
Life's prime sustainer!  at whose nod
Eleus and Ceres their large store,
Gain'd from the Earth's warm bosom, pour
Forth to the world, in amplest measure,
Whence spring health, and peace, and pleasure.
O Deity!  from out the hills,
Where now thou roam'st, recruit the rills
By Sirius drain'd; and still thine eye
Keep watchful, &mdash; Nymphs!  our founts supply.
Yet more &mdash; Kind power, protect our flocks,
Where now they stray o'er Etna's rocks;
Nor let the heifers of the vale,
In udder'd treasures ever fail:
Still give the gold rod of our fields
Unmildew'd, &mdash; grant what Terra yields
Pure, and to thee in sacrifice
Flames from our altars still shall rise!

GOOD GENIUS.
Again the wily machinator appears.

THE EVIL GENIUS  AND ATTENDANT SPIRITS ENTER.

FIRST SPIRIT.
Old Silenus with the fauns,
Satyrs, and nymphs have left the lawns.&mdash;
Welcome the Mimallonian crew!
Prepare the rites to Bacchus due.

SECOND SPIRIT.
The Priests and Bacchae now draw near:
Evohe!  Evohe!  greets mine ear.
Prepare the rites:  when mortals sleep,
We then shall higher orgies keep.

THIRD SPIRIT.
Now, too, behold the Paphian train,
Laughing, approach gay Eros' fane.
The Erycinian goddess there
Presides, to list her votaries' prayer:
There, too, bright Hymen ready stands,
To knit them in his silken bands.
Haste, deck it with your rosy wreaths,
What time the west wind gently breathes.
Who would war with pleasure wage,
Save trembling Eld? &mdash; Yet how engage
This peevish youth?  Come, taste our joys:
Immortal sure, &mdash; where nothing cloys.

FOURTH SPIRIT.
He listens. &mdash; Zephyrus, Cupid's sire,
Will kindly watch the lambent fire
Which round the young Marcellus plays,
And fan it to a brighter blaze:
Such as on Venus' altar glows,
When to relieve her pungent woes
For dear Adonis slain, &mdash; we bring
Oblations suitable, and fling
Incense thereon, &mdash; whose vapours rise
In grateful odours to the skies.

ZEPHON, ATTENDANT ON THE GOOD GENIUS.
Haste, beauteous Flora, &mdash; hither bring
The various sweets of laughing Spring:
For well we know the gentle hours
Cull from your garden choicest flowers,
Which, with the bay and myrtle twined,
The Graces into garlands bind,
To deck the brow of Valour, Worth
And Wisdom, &mdash; most esteem'd on earth!
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
Come, judges!  your rewards dispense,
On him who boasts each excellence.
The youth to pleasure's syren strain
Deaf as Ulysses' ear-stopt train:
Come!  your impartial course pursue,
And give to honour, honour's due!

MARCELLUS.
Behold, where Galatea comes.  Retire,
Nor interrupt in aught her peaceful pleasures.

GALATEA.
What have I heard?  To Dionysius' court,
With specious show of friendship my sire invited!
'Tis said my personal charms, though mean and few,
Have met with high report; and thence this bidding,
This seeming kindness, and this seeming honour,
Envied, no doubt, by some.  But though command
Might yet be his, guile must by us be practis'd:&mdash;
The many excellences of my honour'd parent,
Belov'd of the whole isle, arrest his violence.
Tyrant though in heart he be, his fears prevail,
The people lately rose in arms against him.&mdash;
Yet this he thinks may now engage us better.
No, dear Simonides, to his insidious words
Thou shalt not listen:  to art be art opposed;
Devise we something then to cheat this slave,
Whom fond and trembling nations style a king.
A king?  Dishonour'd title! &mdash; Kings should boast
A more than earthly goodness:  celestial attributes
In part belong to them.  The sword they hold
Should be the sword of justice, and that only:
Yet oft 'tis drawn to most nefarious purpose.
If we can lull this Dionysius, well:&mdash;
But should he still persist to call us hence,
I will awake him to a sense of danger.
Forbearance then will follow:  for, firmly oppos'd,
His craven heart hath frequently betray'd him.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

O native woods!  O wilds!  where even in infancy
I loved at large to roam.  O nymphs!  O dryads
O, ye inhabitants of this blest domain,
This place where treachery never yet found dwelling!
And shall I then for Dionysius' splendours
Your sacred haunts abandon?  Never, never.
Since force he dares not use, here will I tarry,
Here will I ever dwell, and to the rocks
My fond complainings utter.  The rocks and caves
Will, by their echoes, wont in my griefs to share,
Tell to the sylvan train this newer sorrow.
'Tis they must give me comfort &mdash; the golden lyre,
By Nomius' self invented, when in the vale
Of Arcady he led the pastoral life,
The life of nature, far from me is thrown;
The lyre priz'd by Simonides beyond a diadem&mdash;
Even by the master's hand now touch'd, the sounds
So late all harmony, would to my ear be discord.

[ENTER SIMONIDES.]

But here he comes, who is to me an empire.
My much-lov'd father!  say, why wilt thou leave
Thy couch till higher day? &mdash; Scarce has the bird of Jove
Prun'd his moist wing, and from his airy dwelling
Through earth's dense vapours sought the solar road,
Than from repose, so needful to thy age,
With all its honours, thou art come&mdash;

SIMONIDES.
To seek a daughter,
A child to me more precious than the founts,
The vital founts which play within my heart:
To offer, likewise, at that sainted shrine,
The tomb of her who brought thee into being,
My orisons to the great Power who all things orders:
The Omnipresent, &mdash; and of whose immensity
Nature speaks loudly:  even in her atoms speaks;
And brings confusion on that impious tongue,
Which dares to question Heaven's eternal goodness.

GALATEA.
Celestial spirits!  ye, who the faith of old,
And honour love, &mdash; protect, O, still protect him;
This best of fathers, and this first of men!

SIMONIDES.
Cease, cease these fears.  Life has for me no charms,
But such as are derived from thee alone:
There is my boast!  For thee, then, I would live
Beyond man's date.  But death &mdash; O death!  what art thou?
Something or nothing:  substance, or shadow only?
Thou who affright'st men in the social hour;
Even, when the Queen of love, and God of wine,
Sit smiling at their board.  Dreadful to all thy nature,
Save those who by Philosophy's mild precepts
Moulded and fashion'd are:  who ne'er repine
At aught that may await them &mdash; equal in all things!

ENTER MARCELLUS.

MARCELLUS.
To thee, Simonides, and thy fair daughter,
Marcellus wisheth health.  Our mighty master,
As fame hath told, invites you to partake
His princely pleasures:  yet you here remain
Recluse, as though such honours were as nothing,
Or of you unworthy.

SIMONIDES.
Well hast thou augur'd:
Such we must hold them, &mdash; honours to us are nought,
But from a soul of honour.  Yet fearing Dioilysius,
His power still great, dissimulation have I practis'd,
Though to my nature foreign and declined them, humbly.
Yet Galatea harsher answer would have given him.

MARCELLUS.
His power, so seemingly great, unstable stands.
Guarded by mercenaries, he dreads his people.
No act of violence hath he committed lately,
But yet I fear he will not brook denial:
And see, his captain comes, &mdash; no doubt, to seek ye.

ENTER CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD.

CAPTAIN.
From Dionysius am I come &mdash; who sorrows
That good Simonides' age will not admit
Removal to the palace:  but for his daughter,
The lovely Galatea &mdash; I have orders
To urge her instant hence, and to high honours.

GALATEA.
Honours to me?  and from him, too!  'Tis insult.

CAPTAIN.
Maiden, you bear yourself by far too proudly:
Know &mdash; to superior power the mind should bend,
And learn humility from adverse fortune.

GALATEA.
Yes, base, ignoble souls may crouch to power,
The storms of fate to them may dreadful seem.
I see the tempest gathering o'er my head,
Yet stand unmoved, nor deprecate his vengeance.

CAPTAIN.
It yet may reach thee.&mdash;

GALATEA.
Why, that is nobly said;
To add to miseries which himself has wrought,
Were glorious triumph!  'twould befit the hero!&mdash;
Then to distraction driven, I&mdash;

MARCELLUS.
Distraction?  O, mortal!
Thou wondrous microcosm, &mdash; how dost thou show
When Reason abdicates her beamy throne,
Giving to lawless rage supremacy?&mdash;
When all is anarchy and wild uproar,
Within thy nobly plann'd, though little state.
Be calmer, fair one.

CAPTAIN.
More temper, scornful beauty.

GALATEA.
For what is valour, what are deeds in arms,
Unless injustice crown them by a smile?
Poor and unmeaning all!  Go seek this conqueror:
Go, bid him hail the Eumenides. &mdash; They will twine
Their snakes and scorpions for his manly brow,
A wreath that well will grace it.

CAPTAIN.
Away!  Is this a language which the weak
Should hold towards the strong?  Best buy his friendship.

GALATEA.
Perish his friendship!&mdash;
I would not buy it on the easiest terms:
But rather dwell amid Hircanian wilds,
My drink the dew-drop, and my food the berry,
My bed the cold dank earth, &mdash; and for my clothing,
The skins of beasts which least  resemble him;
All this were better than to call him friend.
Go then, &mdash; to Dionysius bear my answer:
I will not leave my dear, my honour'd parent.
Your king boasts power; but know, in strength, my father
Surpasses him by far &mdash; a thousand fold!
His guards are Prudence, Fortitude, and Justice.
Go!  bear my answer straight.  We do not fear him.

CAPTAIN.
This contumely your father's head may atone for.

[EXIT.

SIMONIDES.
He goes in anger; and will no doubt report
In all unfavourably of us. &mdash; O, Galatea!
Who would not be a father, if all children
Were like to thee!  the very type of Heaven
I am of all who bear that name the happiest,
The proudest, and the greatest. &mdash; Men shall proverb me!&mdash;
The sabre hangs across my neck, and yet
I would not change my state with any prince
However loud his fame &mdash; howe'er distinguish'd.
Enough, that Galatea is my daughter!

GALATEA.
O cease this praise, &mdash; nor teach me to believe
That duty must be merit.

MARCELLUS.
Be of good cheer,
Thy daughter's boldness may successful prove:
Submissiveness were ruin.  Much I honour her;
Her heart yet speaks its anguish 'mid this courage.
Sweet Galatea!  much, too much she suffers&mdash;
Be witness for me, all ye blessed host,
I seek not to expound the ways of Heaven,
Inscrutable to man. &mdash; And yet the mind,
Distracted long with complicated ills,
Is lost in doubt &mdash; in error's maze she wanders:&mdash;
Thinks Virtue should not be the sport of Fortune;
Sorrows at seeing her a poor, pale trembler,
While rosy Vice stands laughing at her side;
Then questions heavenly Justice, and repines
Unheedful of the future.  Weak, weak humanity!
Maiden! &mdash; dismiss all fear of Dionysius.
Soon will mild Evening call bright Luna forth:
She, when thou once regain'st thy groves, will calm
Thy now too ruffled spirits.  I must away,
To do a father's pleasure.

GALATEA.
&mdash;Yes, 'twere indeed most charming,
To walk the margent of some rippling brook,
O'er-canopied with oziers thickly set;
While the night's Empress, that refulgent beauty!
In her white mantle decorously clad,
Paces it by us all majestical.
To hear the lute-tongued, plaintive bird of even,
Pour out his notes chromatic.  O, 'twere ecstasy!
Such as the vulgar soul, whose thoughts are earthly,
Knows not, nor e'er can know &mdash; 'tis all from Heaven!&mdash;
Come, ever honour'd, we will once more gain
Our peaceful dwelling-far from pomp and power.

SIMONIDES.
That we be driven from it, kind Heaven forefend!

MARCELLUS ENTERS, FOLLOWED BY THE EVIL GENIUS.

MARCELLUS.
In vain you tempt me:  since to every pleasure,
Save those which Heaven approves, my sense is dead.

EVIL GENIUS.
Come, we will lead thee to the field of glory:
The embattled field, &mdash; where Valour's sons contend
For high renown: &mdash; the prize, a mighty empire!

GOOD GENIUS AND ATTENDANT SPIRITS ENTER.

MARCELLUS.
Call you this glory?  far from me be such ambition.

GOOD GENIUS.
He hath a valour to defend, not wrest
From others their possessions.  Soft Humanity,
And all the manlier virtues, make his glory.
Know, then, that War, aggressive War's not of them.

ZEPHON.
See where the god of battle comes!&mdash;
Terror sits upon his brow:
Rage augments his swelling veins.&mdash;
Mark!  from forth his burning eye,
Beamy lightnings flash around:
Hark!  along the vaulted sky,
His threats in deep-toned thunder sound.&mdash;
Now he shakes his pondrous spear;
Yet hear, O Mars!  thy suppliant hear.
Let our lov'd sons in peaceful honours vie,
Go!  and in vice-stained realms thy fierce and boasted valour try.

And thou, Bellona, who wert wont
Across the embattled field to drive
Thy foaming coursers, urging still
Thy brother thro' the thickest fight,
The while fell Discord, rudely dight,
In tatter'd garments flies thy car before,
Her reeking garments stain'd, O dismal sight!  with human gore.

To thee we, fear-inspiring goddess, bend:
Awhile thy dread and cruelties suspend,&mdash;
Think on the orphan's piercing cries,
Think on the matron's streaming eyes,
Think on the dying father's speechless woe,&mdash;
O think on these, and yet forbear the blow.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Quick, from forth the blood-stain'd plain,
Turn thy chariot's falchion'd wheels:
O contemplate yon heaps of slain!
Think on the pangs each country feels;
Whose sons, perhaps, of useful arts the nurse,
Now, mutually, pour forth the ban, the dire inhuman curse!

MARCELLUS.
See!  Dionysius' captain comes to seek us.

CAPTAIN.
O dread event!  the king our master's slain.

MARCELLUS.
Slain, say'st thou &mdash; where, by whom?

CAPTAIN.
E'en in the temple's porch.
Some disaffected persons there laid wait:
Secure in numbers, menacing they met him.
After repeated blows the monarch fell,
His guard not interposing.

MARCELLUS.
Dreadful end!
Yet common to the oppressor.  But tell me, Captain,
How show'd your master in this fatal moment?

CAPTAIN.
Like some poor shipwreck'd mariner he show'd,
When standing on a splinter'd, wave-wash'd rock,
Which each rude wind shakes at its utmost base,
And threatens with destruction!  so seem'd he:
Trembling he view'd the storm, &mdash; yet stood its brunt,
Unknowing where to flee.

GOOD GENIUS.
Peace now is yours.
His son has virtues worthy of a throne:
They best can expiate all his father's crimes.
Convey these tidings to Simonides&mdash;
I deem the hut where honour dwells a palace&mdash;
Assure to him and Galatea safety,
The while ye ask them to unite with us,
In prayer to Heaven for the new monarch's welfare.&mdash;
For thee, Marcellus, think no more of war,
The life to which thou wert so late devoted.
A soldier's name thou hadst, and still must bear.
Yet all that appertains thereto is this&mdash;
That soon, &mdash; so very full of years is Marcus,&mdash;
Thy vows to Haeres Martia will be given.

MARCELLUS.
But where is now my tempter &mdash; gone for ever?

GOOD GENIUS.
Slunk to the den of night, fully discomfited.

MARCELLUS.
Now, then, what praises shall to thee be given,
Thou minister of good, celestial tutor!&mdash;

GOOD GENIUS.
I ask no praises &mdash; of thyself be proud;
For no compelling power hath Heaven assigned me.
Thou hast the fiery ordeal pass'd unhurt&mdash;
Sure proof of innocence; while thy sure reward,
On earth, is heartfelt joys; and ever after,
Raptures such as the soul can ne'er conceive,
Or e'er the tongue express.  Farewell, blest mortal!
Now to the realms of light I wing my way,
Yet soon again will see thee, lov'd Marcellus:
Once more, farewell.  Be virtuous and be happy!

ZEPHON, AND OTHER SPIRITS.
Glorious mortal! &mdash; to high birth
Add we now thine inborn worth:
Glorious mortal!  now approv'd,
By all must thou be full belov'd.
O youth!  thou nearly mayst compare,
With us, the denizens of air.
Much favour hadst thou at the hand
Of Abdiel, prince of our blest band;
Those ranks thou'lt join &mdash; when thy freed soul,
Through the vast space darts to its goal&mdash;
Where virtue dwells, and to renown
On earth acquir'd, presents the crown:
Immortal hands will then decree,
Gifts worthy her, and worthy thee!
