Must the unbending heart at last resign
The dear, dear treasure it has held so long,
And through the lingering day neglected pine,
The laughing sons of indolence  among?
Still must I weave the melancholy song
For her, whose soul commiserates my lot,
And, shunning mirth's infatuated throng,
Review the sweet, the pleasurable spot,
Where first that bliss ensued which cannot be forgot?

Oh, my beloved!  must I turn me back 
To those blest days of rapture and delight,
When even trembling friendship was not slack,
Thy smiles with secret passion to requite,
Those heavenly smiles, so ravishingly bright,
That fill'd my bosom with ingenuous pain?
Must I return to that delicious night
When, wrapt in love, we loiter'd on the plain,
Clung to each others' lips, and vow'd to meet again?

Come, ye soft visions of delusive joy,
Ye viewless spirits of ethereal flame,
Who round the poet's couch your hours employ,
And lead him up the slippery heights of fame,
Borne on your lightest pinions, o'er my frame
Extend awhile your most enchanting spells,
And teach my aching bosom to reclaim
Its wonted peace, where disappointment dwells,
Where recollection lives, and every hope dispels.

Oh, teach me to resign the heavenly prize
To some unknown (perhaps unworthy) breast,
To lose all fond remembrance of those eyes,
Where love had fixt his enviable nest;&mdash;
Oh, snatch me from the bosom I have press'd,
And from my nature every feeling tear,
For how can passion ever be suppress'd,
While memory holds her strong dominion there,&mdash;
How shall my heart escape the tortures of despair?

Yes, they have triumph'd: &mdash; but the conquest brings
Love's bitterest tears, and envy, and despite,
And tho' remorse my bursting bosom wrings,
Years yet will cease of unreprov'd delight,
Moments of rapture, innocent and bright,
And many a thought congenial to the heart,&mdash;
Years yet arrive our sorrows to requite,
And, freed from every miserable art,
Love spread his boundless wings, and every joy impart.

But ne'er may I forget, to damp the flame,
What coward plots their enmity has tried,&mdash;
What arts pursued to violate thy name,
And rob thy bosom of its fairest pride;
But who the rushing cataract shall guide,
Or who restrain the hyperborean blast,
That howls and thunders on the Baltic tide,
Uprooting mountains ages had made fast?
Who but ourselves, my love!  can recompense the past?

What tho' the parting sun some cloud obscure,
As down the western hills he holds his way,
Will, will not hope a brighter hour insure,
Beneath the morning's animating ray?
Will she not promise a sublimer day,
And deck the future with a softer hue?
Yes, she will smile, our injuries allay,
She still will prove benevolent and true,
And point to lovelier days, and raptures ever new.

And though discretion bid me to depart,
Resigning all the dear delights we've known,
The warm impassion'd kiss, &mdash; the yielding heart,
Blest with a flame exclusively its own,
Still must we think of many a pleasure flown,
When in the woodlands, at the close of day,
Far from the ken of man, and left alone,
We took our harmless and sequester'd way,
Indulging many a smile that told what love would say.

Oft shall I think me of those melting hours,
When Sol's bright chariot glitter'd in the west,
And love, and joy, and innocence were our's,
And all the fiends of malice were at rest,&mdash;
When smiling hope, too beautifully drest,
Our mutual passion flatter'd and inspir'd,
Promising days when guilt should be suppress'd,
Guilt, that to blast thy character aspir'd,
And all those pleasures bloom we equally admir'd.

And thou wilt ponder, at the midnight hour,
And view me gazing with enraptur'd eye,
Lonely and sad, upon the moon's bright tow'r,
That shines sublimely in the southern sky,
And on the wild gale breathe the languid sigh,
And think of days that never may return,&mdash;
Days that, alas!  in retrospective lie,
And to the pleasures which they promis'd turn,
Grasp at the fleeting charm, and Hope's deceptions learn.

And oft amidst the silence of the night,
When all is peace, and not a zephyr moves,
And all is sheen beneath that holier light
Reflection courts, and innocence approves,&mdash;
Thou'lt fondly ponder on out mutual loves,
And think how many a memorable hour,
When evening deck'd her amaranthine groves,
Securely harbour'd in her moonlight bow'r,
We bent our yielding souls to love's persuasive pow'r.

Oh, my Leanthe!  can'st thou think of these,
These pleasant times, nor heave th' ingenuous sigh,
Such as the kindling ear of her may please,
Who scans the past with a regretful eye,
And thinks the frail, tho' heavenly, vision nigh,
While pondering o'er each well-remember'd spot,
Where, unobserv'd, we oft were wont to lie,
Charm'd with our deem'd inestimable lot,&mdash;
Lost to the wrangling world &mdash; by all the world forgot?

And yet, bewilder'd girl!  'tis all in vain,
To think those glowing hours will e'er return,
Those melting hours of pleasure and of pain,
When first my soul thy passion cou'd discern;&mdash;
They all are vanish'd!  and I've now to learn
That stubborn task, no lover can perform,
How can I chase her from my thoughts, &mdash; how spurn
The lively recollection of her form,
And those indulgent eyes with sweet affection warm?

Where is that breast, so lovely to these eyes,
That heav'd responsive to her thoughts, and told
Of bliss she vainly labour'd to disguise,
Of bliss that Nature could not but unfold?
Does absence make that darling bosom cold,
Or rob it of the feelings it once knew,&mdash;
Does it not beat for me, tho' I behold
No more its soft and alabaster hue?
Yes, it still beats for me, to me alone 'tis true.

Oh!  she is lovelier than the morning rose,
And sweeter than the hyacinth's perfume;
Upon her cheeks the flush of nature glows,
And in her eyes the laughing loves entomb,&mdash;
There honor, truth, and warm affection bloom,&mdash;
There peace, and joy, and inspiration dwell,
Fancy!  'twere thriftless to extend thy loom
With her perfections, &mdash; 'twere in vain to swell
For her the chords of thy sublimer shell.

Her's are no vulgar charms which art can give,
No fleeting blush adorns her youthful cheek,
There the pure rose of nature loves to live,
Blent with the lily, innocently meek;
But, wherefore now these frailer beauties seek,
While worth remains, triumphant to the end,&mdash;
O!  that I might of all her virtues speak,
That I (her faithful paramour and friend)
From Slander's envious tongue those virtues might defend!

Curse on the brutal impulse of that heart,
Which aims to blast her honorable name,
To crush by every ignominious art
The splendid glories of her virgin fame,
To stamp her cheeks with infamy and shame,
(The scoff of fools and libellers obscene)
And load with sorrow that superior frame,
Where grace and affability were seen,
The praise of every tongue, the pride of every scene!

But let the tempest howl, &mdash; the whirlwind rage,
And the loud thunder echo through the skies,&mdash;
Atlas with all their fury can engage,
And mock their vengeance and their blasphemies;&mdash;
He scorns his nobler features to disguise,
Smiling amidst their congregating roar,&mdash;
So virtue, pondering with unshaken eyes,
Sees red-arm'd Havoc traversing her shore,
Trailing her offspring's limbs envelop'd in her gore!

And will Leanthe of her favourite think,
When distance sets their aching souls apart,&mdash;
Will she, in thought, upon his bosom sink,
And bind his melting spirit to her heart,
And to his lips her wonted kiss impart,
And lull his feverish temples in her breast,&mdash;
Watch o'er his tortur'd slumbers, nor depart
'Till all his wounded feelings be at rest,
And every hope destroy'd and every thought suppress'd?

Let not the unfeeling heart that cannot taste
Love's pure, and sweet, ineffable delight,
And all those joys which nature hath embrac'd,
To set the wrongs of our existence right,
Presume the buddings of my song to blight,
Nor of its glowing properties complain;&mdash;
Those who attest the passions will unite,
To guard the muse and vindicate her strain,
And in their raptures own she has not sung in vain.

But if it meet my sweet Leanthe's eye,
And charm awhile her melancholy ear,
If it call forth one unaffected sigh,
One unpolluted and ingenuous tear,&mdash;
I laugh to scorn the Cynic's vulgar sneer,
And all the malice of inveterate hearts,
For dear is Feeling's voice, and trebly dear,
The heavenly tones which Gratitude imparts,
Free from each selfish aim, and all ignoble arts.

Ah!  cou'd'st thou ponder on the tender strain
Unmov'd, that charm'd the sympathetic air;
Or hear at night the soft guitars complain,
Touch'd by the hand of amorous despair&mdash;
Or see the floating gondolas prepare
To waft their couples to the realms of bliss,
Where neither withering prejudice nor care,
Annoys the sweet, the passion-breathing kiss,
And those endearing plots Love never deem'd amiss?

Hark!  'tis the flute's wild melody that floats
Along the willows of yon silent stream,
Where Fancy, listening to the love-sick notes,
Seems softly swooning in a rapturous dream:
There the pale crescent sheds her virgin beam,
And holy visions drink the viewless charm;
In such a sphere the murderer might seem
To taste awhile the sweet Lethean balm,
And think himself secur'd from conscience and alarm.

But where the murderer finds a place of rest,
From all his own, and all the world's misdeeds,
Love feels new tortures rushing through his breast,
And, 'reft of hope, upon destruction feeds:
At every thought his bursting bosom bleeds
At every thought he gushes into woe,
And in the future scarce a promise reads
Of meeting that dear spirit, who below
Charm'd his deluded heart and bade his bosom glow.

Ye soul-entrancing visions of delight,
That watch the lover as he lies at rest;
When on Venetian bowers the pale moonlight
Seems by some magic influence impress'd:
Oh, bear me, bear me to Leanthe's breast,
There let me taste of pleasures that are past,
Print on her ruby lips, with rapture blest,
One only kiss, the sweetest and the last,
Lie in her wreathing arms till death has bound me fast.

'Tis all the pleasure that Philander asks.
'Tis all he wishes or can hope to share;
And who shall tell his rapture, while he basks
Upon a spot so innocently fair?
Who, but whose love may venture to compare
With his &mdash; alive to tenderness and woe?
'Tis not for sordid spirits to declare
The joyous thrills which through his bosom glow,
Whilst there he feels the weight of death's avenging blow.

Oh, might I languish in her circling arms,
For days, and years, and ages yet to be,
The sole possessor of her heavenly charms,
Even to the portals of eternity;
For what's the world with all its joys to me,
If 'reft of worth I never knew before&mdash;
Love, beauty, truth, and dove-ey'd constancy,
That bosom, fraught with intellectual lore,
Which every eye might bless, and even saints adore?

Star of my days!  that in Italian bowers
Now shed'st abroad thy animating light,
Love-beaming star!  that court'st the dusky hours,
When songs of pleasure warble thro' the night,
May Venice all thy injuries requite,&mdash;
If virtue can an injury sustain,
Restore thee to the dear and anxious sight,
Of her who lov'd thee, nor who lov'd in vain,
Whose fond maternal cares shall solace every pain.

Oft may those bowers which Fancy lov'd to view,
From these cold regions, shroud thee in their gloom,
There may'st thou oft the pleasing hope pursue,
That smiles beyond the vengeance of the tomb;
There may the soul its firmer tone resume
And dwell on raptures that shall ever cease;&mdash;
May they observe thy future hours bloom,
In endless sunshine and perpetual peace,&mdash;
Restore forgotten joys, and every doubt release.

Then shall I think me of that happy field,
(For Love, how vast a memory has he!)
Where first my timid passion was reveal'd,
By the pale moon-light, sweetest girl!  to thee;&mdash;
And will Leanthe turn her thoughts to me,
When first I press'd those lips of rosy hue,
(Mingling our tears &mdash; the tears of ecstacy)
And from her lips the sweet confession drew,
That she approv'd my love, whilst I believ'd her true?

Yes, she will turn with passion's glowing eye,
To where she met me tranquil and alone,
Wand'ring beneath the Summer's evening sky,
And fondly list'ning to the night-bird's moan,
(For sorrow then had mark'd me as her own)
And she will think of many a bashful look,
And many a kiss, to vulgar eyes unknown,
The interchange of smiles, as down the brook,
Beneath the shady wood, our silent path we took.

Then, fare thee well, Leanthe!  and may heav'n
Protect thy slumbers, and thy steps attend;
And tho' by fate our yielding forms are riven,
In sweet communion shall our spirits blend,
For guilt and malice have attain'd their end;
Yet shall the sweet duplicity remain&mdash;
Oh!  write me all thy sorrows, and the friend
Of love will prove their energies in vain,
Who strive to check his flight, or circumscribe his reign.

Oh, breathe one parting kiss, &mdash; Leanthe, breathe
One of those murmurs love remembers well,
And round me, sweet!  those arms of pleasure wreath,
Ere yet Philander take his last farewell:
For in that murmur'd kiss, which none excel,
And in those arms of passion and delight,
There lurks a nameless, a bewitching spell,
That brings a thousand incidents to light,
Reflection loves to view, and Constancy requite.

Then, dearest love!  bestow another kiss,
Ere yet those frail remembrances decay,
And with those looks of overpowering bliss,
The poignant sorrows of my heart allay,&mdash;
Speak, love!  whatever tenderness can say,
And in thy dreams my spirit shall appear,
To cherish that which malice tore away,
When pleasure smil'd upon its bright career,
In spite of slander's tongue, and anger's vulgar sneer.

Already, love!  I feel thy warm embrace,
And softly swoon beneath thy kisses sweet,
Raptur'd I gaze on that unearthly face,
And feel our spirits innocently meet,&mdash;
In every look thy chastity I greet,
And seem enchanted with its holier pow'rs,
As when in pleasure's exquisite retreat
Ere yet the sorrows of the world were our's,
Unheard, unseen, unknown we spent the evening hours.
