The contemplation of these ruins hoar,
Which erst could boast the strength of Gothic art,
And flourish'd fair whilome in days of yore,
May well impress with awe the thoughtful heart;
A useful lesson to it well impart;
Shew how unstable are the things of sense;
May for a time assume the preacher's part,
And moral precepts to mankind dispense,
Instruct them to rely on Providence.

One evening, straying near this ruin'd pile,
Hither by lonely contemplation led,
Invited by the scene to muse awhile,
For, slowly rising from her heavenly bed,
Bright Cynthia's orb a flood of glory shed;
Deeply contrasted with dark shades, I ween,
Which partially their sable curtains spread,
And edg'd at intervals with moon-light sheen,
Gave solemn interest to the awful pleasing scene.

It was a scene, at once sublime and grand:
For, while midst Heaven's blue vault the moon rode bright,
Soft'ning each object with her radiance bland,
Rose, darkly frowning on the lovely night,
These ruins drear in Gothic-gloom bedight.
With solemn reverence I approach'd the spot;
And still, while poring o'er their ancient scite,
Recall'd to mind past scenes so long forgot,
Which, like these ruin'd halls, in dull oblivion rot.

A deep and awful silence reign'd around,
Save the low murmurs of Ouse rolling tide,
Which here were soften'd to a whisper's sound;
Beneath the walls his rapid torrents glide;
And, as they pass'd, the silence seem'd to chide,
When sounds unearthly on my ear deep broke:
Was it Imagination which these sounds supplied?
Fix'd to the spot I stood like rooted oak,
When, lo!  methought a more than human voice thus spoke:

"Moral, attend!  nor slight Instruction's words,
Which but the thoughtless and the vain despise.
This ruin'd pile a useful theme affords,
Whereon to ponder and to moralize;
Know all his vanity beneath the skies.
Here, give free scope to the inquiring mind,
For in reflection all true wisdom lies;
Be to thy future good no longer blind.
But bow to Heaven's behest, with fortitude resign'd.

"What are the ills of life which thee surround,
That urge the sigh, or dim the tear swoln e'e?
Has envious fortune on thy prospects frown'd,
And cast thy lot with frigid Poverty,
And all those ills on which attendant he,
Has Knowledge too withheld her ample page,
Y'fraught with Science and Philosophy?
Do vain regrets for these thy thoughts engage?
Here may'st thou learn their end, and reap instruction sage.

"Albe these towers, firm in their morning prime,
Stood boldly frowning o'er the Ouse silver wave,
Seem'd to defy the heavy hand of Time;
Yet what terrestrial thing his power may brave?
Towers and Empires but their periods have!
Nay, more, this rolling orb of earth and sea,
With all which it inhabits, what can save
From Time's wide-wasting ruinous decree,
Which hastes to sweep it into vast eternity!

"The former tenants of this drear domain,
Warriors or Prelates, whither are they fled;
Their names and titles here no more remain,
They're gone to join the long-forgotten dead;
Each on the lap of earth for ever laid.
Dost envy these their past exalted state,
Their honours faded, and their clay-cold bed?
Learn, hence, how false the epithet of great;
How weak a shield it proves against the shafts of Fate.

"Here Wolsey sigh'd, whose high aspiring aim
Soar'd to the acme of terrestrial power;
Here quail'd that heart, in which Ambition's flame,
Burnt fiercely bright, in Pride's delusive hour;
Yet it was quelled by Fate's tenebrious lour,
Which of his parting greatness toll'd the knell;
From hence he saw advance the deadly stour,
Which o'er his breast roll'd high with furious swell,
And swept Ambition hence &mdash; here his ambition fell.

"Then why should Man, that puny worm of earth&mdash;
The frail ephemeron but of a day,
Boast of his glory, riches, titles, birth,
Which in their using wither and decay,
A blast can sweep them all from hence away.
Oh!  let reflection these mad boasts control:
Think how precarious is on earth your stay;
Suffer Religion to possess your soul,
Then, in their proper sphere, you chast'ned thoughts will roll."

These awful tones, now sunk in silence deep,
No more vibrated on my shudd'ring ear&mdash;
Seem'd as tho' rous'd from death's oblivious sleep,
In list'ning mood I still stood fix'd to hear,
But not an echo broke the silence drear.
My limbs, which late in impotence were chain'd,
Chill'd by the freezing touch of palsied fear,
A sudden freedom from his bonds obtain'd,
And life's suspended powers, their wonted course regain'd.
