How still the woods!  save when the cheering voice
Of the gay redbreast from his fading tree
Bids the lone wanderer's pensive heart rejoice,
Who marks the forest's varying canopy!
How bright the noonday's mild serenity,
Beneath whose reign the sparkling currents dance;
While, as my heart renews its vernal glee,
And roams mine eye the lanscape's fair expanse,
Straight has my fancy fallen in visionary trance.

For now, I view once more the valley drear
Where lone Moneira wakes his sullen moan,
And straight revives the "supernatural cheer"
Which to my ravished fancy there was shewn,
When I had wandered through the woods alone,
O'er cliff and moor, one clear autumnal day,
Till evening's shadows o'er the scenes were thrown:
Then from the Heavens appeared in bright array
The Genius of the Land, and woke the mighty Lay.

Then seemed departed monarchs there to wake
Echoes anew from wood and rocky vale,
As through Glenfinlas' copse and tangled brake
The stag, new roused, fled, swift and morning gale;
And as from far the notes were heard to sail
Of merry horn that calls the reaper crew,&mdash;
Wild-echoing through the copse and mountain dale,
Seemed as the hunter gay his bugle blew,
And urged the jovial chace the lonely forests through.

Then, called from old traditionary lore,
Strange legends did that lofty Muse impart;
At morn, I saw the prancing steed that bore
The hunter from the mistress of his heart,
I marked her ominous dread and inward smart.
At eve, I saw here lover stretched afar,
And each fond hope from that fair Maid depart,
As now she heard the rallying shout of war,
And saw the watch fire gleam on silvery Vennachar.

Then too I marked, on Lubnaig's lonely stand,
The maid, of lovely form and laughing eye,
At evening hour, unconscious idly stand
To mark the sunset's purple brilliancy;
While the fell Kelpie took his station nigh,
And, as the twilight splendour died away,
Woke duclet strains of magic harmony;&mdash;
Then, as she listened, seized his hapless prey:&mdash;
Nor ever more that maiden met the light of day.

But ever as through haunted wood and moor,
At morn or soothing eve, I bent my way,
His strains deep graven in my heart I bore,
Who woke the "Northern Harp" and "Border Lay,"
And decked with flowers full many a legend grey,
That else had slept in dark neglect forlorn;
But now shall flourish in unfading day,
And brighten, like the glories of the morn,
To renovate its hues in "ages yet unborn."

Here, as in these lone woodlands I devote
The day to floating dreams and careless rhyme,
Each object thus to Fancy's eye is brought,&mdash;
Each form of ragged oak or cliff sublime,&mdash;
Each feature wild that marks that magic clime
Where Superstition holds her ancient reign!
I hear Inchmahon's sacred vespers chime,
I see that Goddess of the cliffs again,
And hail the spreading lake far gleaming on the plain!

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Oh might the heaven-born influence that inspired
The soul of Cona's deathless bard of old
Illume once more those scenes beloved, admired,
So might I their enchanting grace unfold!
But, ah!  my touch is weak, my fancy cold!
Dark clouds e'en now have veil'd each floating dream;
Vainly I strive high colloquy to hold
With wandering Muses by the mountain stream:
Gone are my rising hopes!  decayed each dazzling gleam!

Yet leave me not!  Oh, do not all depart!
Seems as the world, with its detested crew,
Each warm emotion freezing in my heart,
Their darkening influence on my senses threw,
And dashed each beauteous image from my view.&mdash;
O, dreams beloved!  solace of many a day,
Once more dark Melancholy's clouds subdue;
Brighten once more my path with magic ray,
And drive the spectre forms of real life away!
