To themes the wonder of uniting spheres,
My muse devotes her simple social lay;
And that sweet boon which foe to foe endears,
With all the labours of the lyre repay.
Oh!  could hope's season prove unchanging May,
Her blossoms from the warring Winter free,
Warm'd and matur'd by Friendship's solar ray!
Then her soft smile would speak her mild decree,
And give mankind to love, repose, and liberty!

Young lovely Peace, her branching olive bends,
Like the gay arch of Iris in the skies,
A pleasing symbol mercy's hand extends
To glad the sight with all its dewy dies
Yet sad, to beauty, mourning kindred ties,
Pluckt far apart, by death's dividing arm,
Her brightness, like the rainbow, early flies,
Hiding in dew the glances made to charm,
Which once in vain essay'd some dear one to disarm.

Long had the shadow of death's raven wing
Swept fast between this world's departing light,
And eyes (that leaving life's last evening)
Clos'd on the field in everlasting night,
When War's harsh clarion to the fatal fight
Call'd forth his victims never back to roam;
For valour knows not fear's disgraceful flight;
Prompt only to pursue and overcome;
Or find in glory's grave an unrecorded home.

Long had the voice of lonely, pale despair,
Greeted the fancied form of him who fell;
Shriek'd in the gusts of night her frantic air,
Too terrible for music's tongue to tell!
Her harp attun'd unto the dead man's knell;
And whilst her wasting fingers madly strove
The deadly calm by discord to dispel,
Adown the strings her following tears would move,
And change the tone to grief, for unreturning love!

The restless hand of ever-warring strife
Stretch'd far its gore-dew'd sceptre o'er the land;
And most it claim'd the tributary life
Where mercy vainly rais'd a pleading hand,
When Europe bled at tyranny's command,
And ceaseless seem'd the flow of blood and tears
From heart and eye; a melancholy band
Of yet unwidow'd bosoms fill'd with fears,
That saw no coming joy with time's approaching years.

Ambition lifted his colossal form,
And kneeling nations mov'd but to obey;
For in his front roll'd on the battle storm;
His name the herald of despotic sway!
The flight of freedom from her summer day
On broken wing, that life drops daily shed,
Spoke danger to her sons, but not dismay,
For slavery's chain, fresh clanking horrors spread,
And shrin'd anew th' unconquer'd spirits of the dead!

Then Gallia pour'd her flooding legions forth,
O'er unoffending climes, and yielding thrones,
As white-wing'd Peace flew homeless from the north,
And echo breath'd her sad incessant moans;
Proud tyranny, whose rule mankind disowns,
Save when the smile conceals the hate of art,
Stifled by falsehood's tongue a nation's groans,
Bade sweet repose from Gallia's offspring part,
And gloss'd the serpent's tooth that prey'd upon each heart.

Then every breeze that kiss'd fair England's shore
Came like a lover laden deep with sighs
To her who bids hie bosom hope no more;
And told of hapless hearts, and rayless eyes,
That sought for souls to aid and sympathize,
Thro' joyless rivers of imploring tears
Asking the thunder of the island skies.
Not vain the suff'rer's plea, for England hears,
Arms her brave sons, and in defending perseveres.

Thy voice like dark Afric's cry,
Rous'd the recumbent lion to relieve,
And rais'd the signal "to resist, or die!"
When Albion's senate saw thy thousands grieve;
Wealth, power, was lent this freedom to achieve;
Yet nerveless seem'd the sinews of thy frame,
And coldly welcom'd the desir'd reprieve:
A captive half consenting to thy shame,
Uncovetous alike of freedom, life, or fame!

Then (to support thy conflict and thy cause)
Brave Friendship fell a slaughter'd sacrifice
That hour which saw thy guardian genius pause
(As she beheld the hero's spirit rise),
Gather'd foul gloom around thine enterprize;
Let fall thy grateful tears on that lone grave
For buried bravery, and idolize
The memory of him who came to save
And on thy children's hearts the name of MOORE engrave.

Gigantic tyranny, insatiate still,
O'er wrecks of subjugated kingdoms strode,
And mark'd new realms unfetter'd by his will
Where joy yet revell'd in her dear abode,
Unconscious of the wild and thorny road,
Her airy feet should trace; when wrap'd in fire,
Her cottage fell, and stern oppression's goad
Repress'd her smile, and render'd mute her lyre,
Whilst millions saw content, her parent, friend, expire!

Slumber'd the spirits of each kingless realm
In shackled dreams of future peaceful hours?
Or secret, silent, anxious to o'erwhelm
With quick and certain force the fiend-like pow'rs
That ever on the galled captive lours.
Feign'd they that vision, valiant Tyrolese,
When bursting from your native wild-wood bow'rs,
Ye gave great freedom's banner to the breeze,
And taught surrounding slaves lost liberty to seize?

Wide o'er the waters, to the fragrant East,
The hand of tyranny in hostile threat,
(Which ever grasp'd, but ne'er its prey releas'd)
Defied the swarthy sons of Mahomet.
But Britain bound her saving amulet
Round Egypt's rights, her monarch of the main,
Her Hero NELSON Fame should ne'er forget,
And time's last record shall his deeds retain,
"Albion shall never look upon his like again!"

Fast follow'd by defeat, disgrace, and hate,
Napoleon sought again the billowy world,
That mock'd his every effort to create
One subject wave, for still the surges curl'd
To kiss their wedded lords, when high unfurl'd
The streaming standard of their loveliest isle,
Flung its broad frown on foes, for ever hurl'd
From ocean's empire, and his fav'ring smile,
Doom'd him to feel recoil of each defeated wile.

How fraught with terror was that guilty look,
His mem'ry ventur'd on the land he left!
His joyless soul, like aspen foliage shook,
When conscience spoke of Jaffa's sons, bereft
Of life, and hearts, by treach'rous murder cleft;
Then (as the moon's light glanc'd along the sea)
Arraigning shrieks proclaim'd the demon's theft
Of sweet existence from mortality,
And fierce Napoleon felt the curse of Tyranny!

Sweet Peace (still exil'd by the potent voice
Of bad Ambition) over mountains stray'd,
And wilds, where silence bade her breast rejoice;
Yet thoughts of home her travel oft delay'd,
And Europe bleeding, sinking, and dismay'd,
Her backward glances caught; the clouded sphere
In grieving, pitying stillness she survey'd;
Each passing moment saw her home less near,
And e'en her twilight gleams in darkness disappear.

Yet, as a ling'ring look the virgin cast,
Caressing and caress'd by her white dove,
(Those happy periods long bad glided past
When human bosoms shar'd her gems of love),
She saw thro' war's dark chaos slowly move
The star of hope, and o'er Iberia shine;
The name of WELLINGTON was interwove
With laurell'd glories, and she bless'd the sign;
Wishing her Olive with that Victor Wreath to twine!

When groaning Europe mark'd that beacon bright,
Its lust'rous beams augmenting with each hour,
She tore the faithless film, regain'd her sight;
No longer base beneath the despot's power,
(Abroad to plunder and at home to cover)
She hurl'd the pond'rous crushing fiend away;
Existing to deceive, destroy, devour,
And arming in her ancient brave array,
From Slav'ry's fatal night sprung into Freedom's day.

Lynx-eyed Napoleon saw the effort great,
To live with Liberty, or live no wore;
And breathing forth a vow t' exterminate,
From aged sires their only offspring tore;
And neither dar'd their hopeless fate deplore;
Sever'd each sacred union of the heart,
Where years perchance had heap'd affection's store,
Fix'd in each bosom death's too welcome dart;
And with his breast unmov'd, bade even life depart.

Then Desolation marr'd the peasant's pride,
Low lay his fertile crops of rip'ning grain;
His sick'ning hopes just bade adieu, and died!
Where scepter'd Ceres held her summer reign,
The subject harvest wav'd a golden plain;
Nought now is view'd, save ruin's lawless waste:
The once untravell'd, simple, harmless swain,
By health and industry for labour brac'd,
Mingled with man, became refin'd, and then debas'd.

Thou, Tyranny, in each gradation seen,
Most skilful seeming, yet art most unwise:
From insects tortur'd by an infant's spleen
To man, who writhes ambition's sacrifice.
The love of life, and hate of pain will rise,
And turn upon the great, or lesser brute
Those wrongs inflicted, ere the feeling dies
Beyond the pow'r employ'd to persecute;
Devoting to revenge life's latest attribute.

The guiling fiends of vengeance and of rage,
(Most apt in all variety of vice,
Trebly pre-eminent in villanage)
To the fell Tyrant proferr'd paradise.
In empire measureless; the hellish price
Brave Russia, bleeding from her ev'ry pore,
Or known a kneeling, abject sacrifice,
E'en murder at that horrid compact wore
A look less hideous, than the wretch who lav'd in gore!

Illusive evil, o'er thy present face,
Are smiles diffus'd, like ocean's waveless plain;
Beneath thy superfices few can trace
The frowning tempest of the future pain;
E'en so unmark'd his elemental bane
By stern Napoleon, in the arctic sky,
Denunciation from his lip profane,&mdash;
Destruction flashing from his savage eye,
He dar'd the forces of OMNIPOTENCE defy!

But Conquest wove a red Autumnal wreath,
Deep dy'd and with'ring round th' usurper's brow,
Whose steel had never known its peaceful sheath
Since Gallia's monarch felt the martyr blow;
And heav'n had heard a nation's holy vow
To guard its temples from unholy hands,
And deign'd with tenfold strength the arm t' endow
That would repel aggression's lawless bands;
The cause religion!  liberty!  what force withstands?

Now had the despot brav'd the confine drear
Of Russia's clime, where Winter's form abides;
Where the soft Goddess of the Eastern year
O'er her mild blossoms scarce an hour presides:
Expanding flame the atmosphere divides;
A godlike offering for a nation's good
Gleams greatly dreadful, and the tyrant guides
To Moscow's centre, fill'd with fire and blood;
A burning barrier to conquest's only food!

His soul of adamant with selfish fear
Shrunk from the contemplation of the scene;
His homeward view met Winter's aspect drear,
Scowling through clouds where frozen plagues convene,
And nature's shiv'ring form, unclad and lean,
For shelter proferr'd many a leafless pine;
His coward eye beheld the fiery mien
Of patriarchal Moscow slow decline,
And leave a ruin'd, relicless, unlovely shrine.

No servile train compulsive greeting gave,
No lauding shouts the tyrant's entry hail'd;
It seem'd death's welcome to his last still grave.
And sullen gleams his sullen glance assail'd;
Beneath that sight his cruel spirit quail'd;
No safe asylum his fierce horde allures,
And policy o'er interest prevail'd:
Brave Russia's offspring every loss endures,
To gain the glorious height that Europe's Peace secures.

Swift was the flight, in motion retrograde,
Of eagle standards from the frightful clime;
Vainly the despot search'd for mortal aid,
Cursing the rapid stride of foes and time;
Pursu'd by just revenge, weigh'd down by crime,
His dastard soul the coward's meanest art
Adopted quick; the form, once deem'd sublime,
Alone, in dark disguise, could tearless part
From every faithful, native, dead, and dying heart!

Each Gallic leader of the flying force
Sought refuge singly from avenging foes;
Whilst o'er pathless, frigid, fearful waste,
(O'er devious mountains of unwasting snows,
Where vegetation Nature never knows,
Skimming the glacier where eternal ice
O'er the lost earth a mailed vestment throws)
The despot sped; and bless'd the low device,
That honour's tongue denounc'd as guilty cowardice.

Once more, proud Gallia's varied colours stream'd
The banner'd badges of defiance still;
Once more the spear for fell Napoleon gleam'd,
And the harsh trumpet sent its summons shrill,
To France the victim of his bandit will;
But victory guided every Cossack's lance,
By heroes led, who own'd a master's skill
In war's perplexing art, and each advance
Carried thro' Gallia's ranks dismay and fresh mischance.

Whilst Leipzic's plain its wounded bosom spread,
Like Asia's pelican to pour the stream
Of parting life; as the libation red
Augmented blushes to the dyes extreme,
With hues as deep the mountain summits teem,
And down the Pyrenean steeps descend
(Iberia's rights from bondage to redeem),
The Island warriors, born each nation's friend,
Who dares against the form of Tyranny contend.

For Wellington's great Duke, his country's pride,
Brave Albion's still unconquer'd legions led,
Triumphant thro' the battle's whelming tide;
Yet mercy o'er the victor's exploits shed
Her mild preserving lustre as she fled;
Nor vain the angel voice that whisper'd "Spare,"
His valiant bosom no incentive fed,
The prostrate form of foes subdued to tear,
For pity's eye impearl'd his virtues wear!

Not to lay desolate the fields of France,
Her sons to slaughter, and her scenes deface,
Came Britain's hero, but deliverance
From her Lycaon, rancorous and base,
Whose rule long prov'd a burthen'd realm's disgrace!
Prompt in the cause of Bourbon's banish'd right,
See Bordeaux's walls, the Lilly first embrace,
Where dawning Royalty's returning light
Broke through the gloomy sphere, and Gallia hail'd the sight.

Hyena-like, by hunters, hardly press'd,
Gall'd by new wounds, Napoleon check'd his speed,
But sought again his Parthian flight distress'd,
Compell'd from every conflict to recede,
Foil'd in his futile efforts to impede,
The hast'ning hand of justice doubly arms
To level Tyranny, maintain her creed,
And for the martial trumpet's loud alarms,
To yield the rustic reed with peaceful music's charms!

Where lives the man such matchless virtue owns,
As firmly to survey his ancient home,
To flames a prey, and hear the final groans
Of his brave sons, religion's sacred dome,
Echoing the oaths of vile brigands, who roam
The licenc'd butchers of their hapless kind,
And when the instant of revenge is come,
When passion triumphs o'er the modest mind,
And stay his threat'ning band to raise the wretch reclin'd?

Thou, Alexander, &mdash; Russia's valued chief,
From just retaliation's painful plea,
Turn'd to the cause of all thy woes and grief,
And great forgiveness was thy soft decree;
Then every bosom shrin'd a Jubilee!
Marmont, humanity's unchanging friend,
Proclaim'd all Parts from the tyrant free,
From her rejoicing thousands, shouts ascend,
And Alexander's Magnanimities extend!

By fortune's form abandon'd and alone,
By crime's extremest curse reflection pain'd,
Napoleon saw his long polluted throne
No more by usurpation's name profan'd,
And all that rapine, fraud, and blood obtain'd,
Fade like the vapours of a regal dream;
His latest act e'en female fear disdain'd,
His life by abdication to redeem,
And forfeit every hope of bravery's esteem!

The fiend, ambition (like the viewless wind,
That strikes in tempest, and in storm destroys,
Leaving no token, save its wreck behind),
Forsook his heart; but left its meanest joys
And for the last delight, he deigns to plead,
That centres in the title he enjoys;
In Elba's Isle posterity shall read
"The fall of Tyranny the Tyrant's self decreed!"

From the kind shores of shelt'ring England came,
The Royal Louis, grateful to the isle
That grants support to every exil'd claim,
And soothes, the sorrowing features to a smile;
Regret had cloth'd her less'ning cliffs awhile
In all her saddest tints, till Gallia's scene,
Courting his glances, serv'd to reconcile
The pain of parting from old Ocean's Queen,
And majesty gave place to man's delighted mien!

Ask of the heart that once knew perfect bliss,
In the dear names of husband, father, friend,
Yet harshly plung'd to space and time's abyss,
Where wilds Siberian o'er the thoughts extend,&mdash;
Where years and distance still those joys suspend
That live in unions with affection's glow,&mdash;
How the embracements of twin hearts transcend
In the refinement of soft feeling's flow
All earthly happiness that sensual bosoms know.

In beauty's full maturity appears
The long remember'd landscape to that eye
Which dwelt with true delight in youthful years
On native scenes, till from them forc'd to fly,
Tho' far from sight, to memory ever nigh;
So Gallia's vine-clad hills and flower'd vales,
Her chrystal streams, reflecting Summer's sky,
Repeated retrospection's happy tales,
And gave her monarch welcome in her fragrant gales!

Still discord's finger riots o'er the string,
And calls reluctant images of ill,
To dull my minstrelsy, and dirges sing,
Where death-drops from the front of Mars distil;
E'en yet thro' valour's vein the dying thrill
Imparts an icy silence to the breast,
Once beating high, and ardent to fulfil
Hard peril's task, and by his deeds attest
A loyal life of fame, or evermore to rest.

Misguided nations, let thy conflict cease!
Nor like the sire and son by passion sway'd,
Let deadly wrath still exile gentle Peace!
Why from Britannia and Columbia stray'd
The silent footsteps of that mild-ey'd maid?
May former amity in lasting ties
Bind each rode hand, till friendship's mutual aid
Shall arm them 'gainst oppression's enterprize,
United ever to assist, or to chastise!
