The sun has risen, the youthful blush of day
Laughs ruddy nature into life again;
The fairy tinge of morning's golden ray
Smiles on the ocean, mountain, wood, and plain;
Rousing to weary toil the humble swain,
Waking again the city's buzzing sound,
Calling to life dull traffic's busy train,
Spreading the bustle of existence round;
Till in the night again the noisy din be drown'd.

Yes, day!  to what a thousand varied calls
Is mankind summon'd by thy ceaseless roll!
On what a mixed throng thy radiance falls!
How diff'rent too thy dawn to every soul!
Some ever joy in thy benign control;
Yet others still destest thy fulgence bright,
Such as would willingingly infest the pole,
There to enjoy a demi-year of night;
They love so much the dark, they hate so much the light.

Oh!  thou are pregnant with uncertain turns!
So full of change &mdash; thy sun hath often rose
On the fond fancy as with joy it burns,
And mark'd it frozen ere thy journey's close,
Lost in the dreary thought or drown'd by woes,
O'ercome by sad reverse, the bosom's bane:
How tedious roll away the hours to those,
Who, doom'd to linger out a life of pain,
Sustaining many an ill, must many an ill sustain.

There are who hail thee with a heart of glee;
Those who await thy beam to make them blest:
Binding the lovers, settling captives free,
Giving to each that something in the breast,
That lulls the feelings into happy rest;
Freeing the glad'ning thought from fell suspense,
Bestowing certainty, a welcome guest,
Raising emotions that delight the sense,
Possessing sadness' place, and driving sorrow thence.

But oh!  to him who pines in lonely cell
Till thy short lapse fulfil his tragic fate,
How quickly does thy course his bosom tell
That life's career draws tow'rds its final date;
Waking remorse's pang, but all too late,
Until the hour arrive, oh dreadful thought!
As flies remembrance back to happier state,
How sinks the haggard eye with madness fraught!
Hopeless, despairing still, he feels what sin has wrought.
