See where yon aged minstrel rude,
Beneath the blasted oak reclined,
Enjoys the pleasing solitude,
And flings his wild notes to the wind,&mdash;
Around &mdash; the hills in state majestic rise,
And mix their dim blue summits with the skies:

From yonder rock, with awful sound,
A torrent thunders to the vale,
Then, tossed 'midst rocks, it flings around
The feathery spray along the gale&mdash;
Darkling, the minstrel sings, and only hears
The torrents thunder sounding in his ears.

His hoary beard streams to the air&mdash;
His head, the chilling snows of time
Have silver'd o'er &mdash; his looks declare,
Tho' dimm'd his sight, the bard sublime.
Yet, hush! &mdash; these notes re-echo from his lyre,
Wild as the warblings of the woodland choir.

"Alas!  for me the orb of day
Pours not from heaven his sacred light&mdash;
Nor does for me pale Cynthia's ray
With silvery lustre gild the night.
For me no more the beauteous seasons roll,
With all their varying charms, to glad my raptured soul.

"And thou, my harp!  my only treasure!&mdash;
Thou once couldst mirth and joy inspire&mdash;
Oft, to a brisk and lively measure,
Has thy fond master woke each wire,&mdash;
While laughing gay, with rustic glee around,
The dancer's foot light quivering beat the ground.

"When Scotia's with war's alarms&mdash;
Tho' marched her sons in conscious pride&mdash;
Yet, struck with dread, they took their arms,
And strove the heartfelt doubt to hide,
Till roused to valour by thy martial strain,
They marched and won the laurels on the plain.

"But cease, O harp!  from frolic strain&mdash;
Resound the plaintive and forlorn;&mdash;
Oh!  win thy master's heart from pain&mdash;
Or with thy master's sorrows mourn!
No more the sprightly notes of joy impart,
But soothe with plaintive tones his melancholy heart.

"Ye bards!  he lived in days of old,
And sung the legendary lay,
I seem your dim forms to behold,
And smiling, beckon me away!
Soon shall I come, ye bards, I see you stand!
Roll the wild eye, and wave the visionary hand!

"Superior, midst the shadowy throng,
I mark sage OSSIAN'S noble mein;
Who, far renowned for mystic song,
Was reverenced by the minstrel train:
I know his frenzied look, his eye of fire,
As when with sacred rage he swept the sounding lyre.

"Soon shall my years of misery close&mdash;
Soon shall this spark of vital flame,
To seek that long &mdash; long wished repose,
Forsake this languid, tottering frame&mdash;
Soon shall my woe-worn spirit seek that shore,
Where you in peace reside, and griefs can vex no more!"
