Son of the tuneful voice &mdash; sweet in Coulhall,
Awake the spirit of thy melody,
Take down yon harp that hangs upon the wall,
And fling thy grand, commanding notes on high.
Oh!  tell to us in sounds that ne'er will die,
The joys, the pleasures of our little band:
Oh!  blend it sweet with music's witchery;
And as thou hast our monarch's soft command,
Tell how King Coila ruled sweet Ayr's bewitching land.

The son of song obeyed &mdash; the harp he took,
And gracefully his manly fingers played,
Piercing and wild was his seraphic look,
As o'er the chords the wandering pitch notes strayed,
And many a pause and many a start he made.
Sometimes false music made her discord roll,
Till all at once each truant chord obeyed,
And kindling up the lightning of his soul,
He sung the brilliant glories of the good King Coul.

Peace to the race of Coila!  though of yore
He oft with death traversed the well-fought field,
As through the Saxon's broken ranks he bore
Old Caledonia's red and battered shield;
For never, never was he known to yield.
Dear to his soul was battle's raging glow,
Sharp was the falchion he was wont to wield,
And oft in justice to the invading foe
He portioned them the land &mdash; mayhap six feet or so.

Fierce were his looks of battle &mdash; but in peace
His eyes beamed mildly like the morning star.
At home all love, he bade true joy increase,
Dove-like with friends, but lion-like in war.
His fame for courtesy was spread afar,
From burning Indies to the frozen pole;
And rosy Phoebus in his golden car,
Where'er the heavenly charioteer may roll,
Aye heard the glorious praises of our good King Coul.

War long had ceased on Coila's bonny bound,
When, by his majesty's benign command,
He caused be framed a table large and round,
And at it placed a blithe and jovial band;
All knights they were, proved by their master's hand.
None had their 'scutcheons either marred or riven&mdash;
They were the happiest fellows in the land,&mdash;
Nay, were an oath required, it should be given,
They were the jolliest mortals 'neath the roof of heaven.

But life is like the purple setting ray
That trembles on the bosom of the stream,
Or like the opening of a splendid day
That quick dispels a horror-breathing dream.
Who can for aye on life's wild ocean swim?
The lamp of life, oh!  soon, too soon expires;
And kings themselves, I'm sure, can never deem
Their lamp will blaze up with eternal fires;
So worthy old King Coul was gathered to his sires.

But not before a charter he prepared,
And caused it 'mong his records be enrolled,
And as he for the same had great regard,
'Twas writ in letters of the virgin gold.
'Mong other things this princely charter told
That the high order of the noble Coul
Should once a week a splendid chapter hold,
Swayed by a king, a jovial merry soul,
One like himself, who loved his friend, his lass, and bowl.

This noble order through a lapse of years
Has now descended to the present day,
And it as fresh and lovely now appears
As if its founder was but hours away.
Come then, my brothers, let's be blithe and gay;
Remember that the moments swiftly roll;
We'll trill, Sir Knights!  some sprightly roundelay;
&mdash;But hush!  send round in silence now the bowl&mdash;
Drain it to our great founder, worthy old King Coul.

The voice now ceased; high in the lofty hall
The son of song hung up his harp again,
And oft I saw it vibrate on the wall,
As if it wished to echo o'er the strain;
And oft I saw its master's eyes remain
Fixed full upon it, and his features wore
A look, as if he seemed to say, "'Tis all in vain;
I cannot woo thee as I did of yore:
My hand is feeble now, and I will sing no more."
