Well mounted I come from the stream of Parnass,
My palfrey a long-ear'd and well-curried ass;
While arm'd with a quill, and the dear ebon juice,
Precedes me with ink-horn the sage waddling goose,
Whose quacking you'll own is the very repeater
Of my famous Muse when engaged upon metre.
Yet, soft!  shall I dare, a presumptuous elf,
Thus claim all the quills of a goose to myself?
Forbid it, Ma'am Candour, its quackings belong
To crowds that like me claim the Bays for the Song;
Since furor scribendi now rages so wide,
That rhymsters may waddle with geese side by side:
But in proof of the prowess my wit can infuse,
And stamp myself truly a son of the Muse,
Though loudly the Bards all against me may halloo,
I rank with the Nine a true chip of Apollo;
And my name when you hear it must make a great splash,
I'm christ'n'd Sir Noodle O'Scribblecumdash.
Some writers there are, who possessing no fame,
Would snatch from my temples the Laurel I claim;
Who dare, without reading, all subjects critique,
Whether Metre or Prose, Hebrew, Latin, or Greek;
But vers'd in all topics I'm fram'd for my station,
The Giant Reviewer of England's great Nation!
My noddle with erudite lore arm'd quite thorough,
Defying Reviewers of fam'd Edinborough;
Who, staunch as their itch, send each Author to pot,
That cannot proclaim he's by birth a true Scot.
With feelings more candid I 'gin my career,
And judge, without prejudice, peasant and peer;
The fine vellum, wire-wove, broad margin, hotpressed,
With Bulmer and Ballantine's types choicely dress'd;
Not plates with vignettes can my acumen blind,
And make me commend where I cannot trace mind:
So if Smithfield's Long Lane e'er should pathos produce,
I'd praise whity-brown, and consign to a use
Which here can't be mention'd the hot-press'd that bore
Of title and fortune the dull leaden lore.
I envy no talent in poor or in great,
I laud or condemn void of spleen or of hate;
For genius I search, truly fir'd in the cause,
And merit, when found, shall ensure my applause;
While upstarts, that dare load the press with their trash,
Shall taste of Sir Noodle O'Scribble the lash.
And faith there's of Authors so many found tripping,
Where one merits praise, ninety-nine deserve whipping;
So each back of offender my weapon assails
Will doubtless exclaim, 'tis a cat with nine tails;
But if idiots will arrogate Wisdom's array,
They deserve to be laugh'd at as donkeys that bray:
Thus having spoke plain to each genius and doodle,
They know what they have to expect from Sir Noodle,
Who now ends his comment with counsel that's trite,
Let men learn to read ere they venture to write.
Since man in his nature cannot control wit,
"Poeta," says Ovid, is born and "Non fit."
As the grand Mart that issues most trash that appals
Is close to the Temple of Pray'r, fam'd Saint Paul's;
Lo!  I on the gold ball aloft take my stand,
To view all the scribbling tribe of our land;
And as I my comments thus chaunt from above,
I scorn Folly's anger, revere Wisdom's love;
With Swift I must cry, may it e'er be my fate,
By fools to be hated as Folly I hate.

Good Lord, from this summit what tribes meet my view!
Of asses, how many!  of wise men, how few!
The friend of Religion by dulness inspir'd;
The Methodist Ranter with blasphemy fir'd;
The Moralist tame on the virtues he handles;
The Politic Wight penning trash to light candles;
Historian with mind just obscur'd in a mist,
As dense as his brother dull Topographist.
Next Surgeons and Doctors prescribe horrid lotion;
The Satyrist puts gaping feeling in motion;
Biographer comes to assume leaden station,
And wretched pretenders to new Education;
With whom Commentators may well assume place,
And grave Antiquarians, a maniac race.
Next follow the Poets; my stars, what a number!
Romancers and Novelists, Folly's true lumber;
The stay at-home writers of Travels and Tours,
Of snug chimney corners renown'd connoisseurs;
While Dramatists vapid alike join the band,
And Musical Doctors that dance hand in hand.
To these let us add the poor drudge, Pamphleteer,
Periodical Writers that sot over beer,
The Scribes Miscellaneous, but mere hodge-podge rakers,
Great Lexicographers and Catalogue-makers:
In fine, the amalgama serves as a mark,
To point out the tenants of Noah's great ark;
Since by all that is holy, with beast and with bird
You'll find as good company I'll pledge my word.
The Greeks and the Romans had Poets we know,
Who felt of Apollo the exquisite glow;
An Homer, with Hesiod and Pindar, combine
The soul-thrilling flights of a Fancy divine;
While Horace and Virgil, with Ovid, proclaim
The genius that blazon'd the old Roman name:
But of Data more recent, our England has shown
That talent adorn'd once Britannia's bright zone.
For imag'ry Spenser ranks first 'midst the band;
A Shakespeare and Milton illumin'd the land;
As satirist, Butler unique is enroll'd;
In Dryden, the Poet sublime we behold:
To these join a Thomson, and high-finish'd Pope;
In science, give Bacon, Locke, Newton full scope;
For style chaste and easy, note Addison, Steele,
With Goldsmith, whose pathos makes ev'ry breast feel;
While to these might be added an host worthy praise,
Deserving the loudest applause from my lays.
Such once were the Suns that shone forth in our sphere;
Reverse now the scene, and let moderns appear.
Too pompous to study, thro' thick and thro' thin
They dash on, the bright wreathe of verdure to win;
Disdaining, at all times, to think or reflect;
Too proud to re-read, to re-write, or correct:
As if, when composing, perfection was in 'em,
And Phoebus himself was determin'd to win 'em.
In fine, the press teems with such trash in each quarter,
One would think all the world quaff'd Parnassus's water;
I mean dirty puddle, not oozing from fountain,
But slush from the ditch that's in rear of the mountain.
For as it is said, when true glory impels,
The loud tongue of Fame ev'ry noble deed tells;
But that when, vice versa, the act's only base,
She blows second trump from a contrary place:
So Poets, who taste of the pure limpid stream,
Are warm'd by the radiance of Phoebus's beam;
While rhymsters, divested of merit, must drink
Of liquid quite stagnant, that laves ditches brink.
Thus, to prove of the former how scant is the list,
While of those lastly mentioned how many exist,
Was the cause why this greatest of writers 'mongst men,
Sir Noodle O'Scribblecumdash, took the pen;
Whose erudite notes to my care Fate consign'd,
A pocket-book fill'd with wit, learning, and mind:&mdash;
But perhaps 'twere as well, with a trifling digression,
To state of this relic how I got possession.
As I long aim'd to rank Apollonian nibbler,
And thus share the fate of each quill-driving scribbler,
I dwell in back garret just six stories high,
While opposite lattice, in lieu of the sky,
A huge stack of chimneys obscures the day's light,
And Sol's poorest blaze never gladdens my sight:
From this you may guess I am not over wealthy;
However, my abstinence keeps me quite healthy:
For if once in the week I procure boil'd or roast,
O'er his Turtle no Citizen louder can boast.
As for wine or strong spirits to make Fancy free,
The chandler's shop beer is Nepenthe to me:
In short, with Tub-cynic I well may compare,
Though he enjoy'd more, for he saw the Sun's glare.
I've said once a week it perchance proves my lot
To regale upon roast meat, or boil'd from the pot;
But when no such banquet my longing eye sees,
I rank Epicurus o'er Gloucester's thin cheese,
Which by penny's worth I from the chandler's shop bear,
Since hunger's a sauce, sir, that beggars compare.
So it chanc'd as I sped on this errand one day,
Of paper a pile on the counter there lay,
Which by weight had been purchas'd, brown sugar to fold,
Tea, soap, butter, cheese, starch, blue, dip or choice mould:
Thus, waiting my turn to be serv'd, I conn'd o'er,
Of paper consign'd to such use, the old store;
When, dusty, at length from the heap forth I took
Sir Noodle's choice labours, that blazon this book;
Which the vender of sundries, to science quite blind,
For Two-pence, mine All, to my hand straight consign'd.
Thus, Copyright mine, let the Trade frown, I scoff it;
The Publishers, d&mdash;n 'em, shall not filch the profit;
Since, gluttons for pelf, they will never knock under;
A phalanx of Harpies, intent upon plunder;
Just deaf to the wailings of genius and merit,
As mentally 'reft of one germ of true spirit:
A race which no venom can too much bespatter;
Whose deeds deserve lash of the most poignant satire:
Mere jugglers, subjecting the toils of the press,
To issue forth nonsense in fine wire-wove dress.
For let them but once, as they wish &mdash; feel their way,
Obscenity, falsehood, and trash they'll display.
Style &mdash; Genius, mere nothings: &mdash; since Dryden sublime
Might starve with his pathos, while fashion's dull rhyme
Is palm'd forth, and thus public feeling debas'd;
Since publishers heed neither judgment nor taste,
Two requisites hackney'd &mdash; not worthy a thought
Of moderns; &mdash; with far diff'rent acumen fraught.
To booksellers thus, and the press, we all owe
Of science profound the complete overthrow;
But such as lack proofs, soon as conn'd are my pages,
Will find asses rank on a par with the sages;
So affirms wise Sir Noodle; and who dares deny him?
If such recreant now lives, I as champion defy him.
