In the gay hours of unsuspecting joy,
What lovely visions Hope delights to rear,
What dreams of bliss the youthful mind employ
With doubts unclouded, undisturb'd by fear.
Stern Disappointment!  how thy stroke severe
Has dash'd their fairy prospects at a blow!
How many an eye has shed the bitter tear
O'er fancied pleasure, chang'd to real woe!
How many a heart, through ill-directed pride,
Its baffled hopes disdaining to confide,
Has silently consum'd, or impiously died.

Those who Ambition's rash career pursue,
And seek the vain rewards his votaries claim,
Who scorn th' applauses of the wiser few,
And choose the giddy vulgar's loud acclaim,
The sound of titles, or the boast of fame;
Security or joy can never know,
Thy sudden stroke oft mars his cherish'd aim,
And sinks the wretch to infamy and woe.
So o'er the tyrant's head thy thunder burst,
Though long in Grandeur and in Vic'try nurst,
Now vainly may he rage, accursing and accurst!

How oft the mind, which purest genius fires,
And feelings worthy of its flame, adorn,
Which learning polishes, and taste inspires,
Is doom'd to share neglect, contempt, and scorn;
The harsh reproaches of the proud to mourn,
The keenest anguish to a mind like thine,
Ill-fated Chatterton!  unknown, forlorn,
Thy haughty spirit could not stoop to pine,
Thou could'st not brook the scornful coldness, shewn
By minds, so far inferior to thine own,
Thou could'st not bear to live, unnotic'd, and alone!

Alas!  how wretched is the heart that bears
Those pangs!  neglected genius oft must prove,
How doubly wretched he, whose bosom shares
The sharper dart of unrequited love.
The festive scenes, that once his heart could move,
He passes heedless and unheeded by;
Each blooming field, each sweet and shady grove,
Appears a desert to his sick'ning eye.
Let Nature stiffen in unvarying snow,
Or Summer suns with scorching lustre glow,
Unmark'd are both by him &mdash; he feels but inward woe.

Oft reason, fairest gift of bounteous Heav'n,
Has sunk beneath the woes it could not bear;
Oft the weak heart, by Disappointment riv'n,
Has flown to madness to avoid despair.
Behold yon maniac, how his wild eyes glare
Towards one fixed spot, with unrecoiling view,
'Twas there he last beheld his fair one &mdash; there
He saw her lovely, and he deem'd her true;
His looks were high &mdash; uncheck'd  by doubt or dread,
When burst the tempest o'er his hapless head&mdash;
Her falsehood pierc'd his heart &mdash; his shatter'd reason fled.

Along the margin of yon frozen stream
Who wanders with unequal steps and slow,
His eyes no more in sparkling pleasure beam,
But wildly glancing, speak his inward woe.
"Alas!"  he cried, "my joy exists below.
No happiness awaits the sanguine mind,
Its fairest visions, like yon fields of snow,
Vanish and melt &mdash; nor leave a trace behind.
The dame of Mis'ry glows within my breast;
There will it rage, unceasing, unreprest,
No prospect of relief, no hope of earthly rest.

"Now Winter triumphs o'er the closing year,
And veils each prospect in congenial gloom,
Ere long will milder Spring once more appear,
And clothe the valleys in their wonted bloom,
Their glitt'ring colours and their rich perfume.
O!  may no earthly Spring to me return!
O!  may the rays that Summer skies illume,
Beam unreflected o'er my mould'ring urn!
Then my torn heart, in yonder distant sphere,
No more the wayward slave of love and fear,
Shall find at length that rest it sought so vainly here."
