When in the battle's onset dread,
The plumed Chieftain bravely dies,
What funeral honours grace the dead?
A host's applause &mdash; a nation's sighs!
For him the mausoleum rear'd,
To distant times records his fame;
For him the Poet's lyre is heard,
Whose strains immortalize his name!
Each tribute of regret and praise,
The living to the dead can raise,
Is by a grateful country paid,
To soothe the Warrior's fall, and gratify his shade!

But when in lowlier station plac'd,
The gallant soldier sinks, o'erthrown,
His bier is by no trophies graced,
His name forgot &mdash; his deeds unknown!
Tho' with a hero's spirit warm'd,
That tower'd above his abject state,
He first the serried phalanx storm'd,
And purchas'd Victory by his fate&mdash;
Sunk 'mid the general mass, he falls;
No tongue his memory recalls:
Save when some widow'd wife deplores,
Or hapless orphan child his fruitless sorrow pours!

Or when, as Thou, of all bereft,
Unhappy Matron!  bent with years;
A childless widow sadly left,
Mournest thy son with ceaseless tears:
The only solace of thy age,
For ever ravish'd from thine eyes;
In foreign climes, by hostile rage
Slaughter'd &mdash; unwept, unburied lies!
Oh!  what to Thee avail the deeds
Of heroes, when thy darling bleeds?
To Thee one joy can conquest yield,
Whose life's sole hope lies slain on Victory's sanguine field?

To thee, what boot the liberal sums,
A nation's grateful bounty gives?
Alas!  the thought thy mind o'ercomes,
"Thy boy no more to share them lives!"
And keener still the pang succeeds,
To dash with gall each proffer'd good;
That, while thy child unaided bleeds,
The boon is purchas'd by his blood!
Oh!  aim &mdash; benevolent in vain,
To soothe with gifts a parent's pain!
The heart, such sorrows doom'd to feel,
No recompense can pay &mdash; no alchymy can heal!

Yet weep not still with vain regret
Thy son &mdash; tho' slain in life's fair spring;
Nor scorn of gratitude the debt,
His country's grief and pity bring!
Awhile thy woes it may remove,
From want thy closing years may save;
And, if from happier realms above,
Where live the wise, the good, the brave,
Thy son the blest effect can know,
That from his blood thy comforts flow;
His filial shade shall hail his doom,
Nor envy Chiefs of Fame their laurels, or their tomb!
