INTRODUCTION.
Thou Queen of Caledonia's mountain floods,
Theme of a thousand gifted bards of yore;
Majestic wanderer of the wilds and woods,
That lovest to circle cliff and mountain hoar,
And with the winds to mix thy kindred roar,
Startling the shepherd of the Grampian glen!
Rich are the vales that bound thy eastern shore,
And fair thy upland dales to human ken;
But scarcely are thy springs known to the sons of men.

Oh, that some spirit at the midnight noon,
Aloft would bear me, middle space, to see
Thy thousand branches gleaming to the moon,
By shadowy hill, gray rock, and fairy lea;
Thy gleesome elves disporting merrily
In glimmering circles by the lonely dell,
Or by the sacred fount, or haunted tree,
Where bow'd the saint, as hoary legends tell,
And Superstition's last, wild, thrilling visions dwell.

To Fancy's eye the ample scene is spread;
The yellow moonbeam sleeps on hills of dew,
On many an everlasting pyramid
That bathes its gray head in celestial blue.
These o'er thy cradle stand the guardians true,
Th' eternal bulwarks of the land and thee,
And evermore thy lullaby renew
To howling winds and storms that o'er thee flee;
All hail, ye battlements of ancient liberty!

There the dark raven builds his dreary home;
The eagle o'er his eyrie raves aloud;
The brindled fox around thee loves to roam,
And ptarmigans, the inmates of the cloud;
And when the summer flings her dappled shroud
O'er reddening moors, and wilds of soften'd gray,
The youthful swain, unfashioned, unendow'd,
The brocket and the lamb may round thee play:
These thy first guests alone, thou fair, majestic Tay!

But bear me, Spirit of the gifted eye,
Far on thy pinions eastward to the main,
O'er garish glens and straths of every dye,
Where oxen low, and waves the yellow grain;
Where beetling cliffs o'erhang the belted plain
In spiral forms, fantastic, wild, and riven:
Where swell the woodland choir and maiden's strain,
As forests bend unto the breeze of even,
And in the flood beneath wave o'er a downward heaven.

Then hold thy visioned course along the skies,
O'er fertile valley bounded by the sea,
Girdled by silver baldrick, which now vies
In broadness with the ocean's majesty;
Where pleasure smiles, and laughing luxury,
And traffic bustles out the live-long day;
Where brazen keels before the billows flee&mdash;
Is that the murmuring rill of mountain gray?
Is that imperial flood the wilder'd Grampian Tay?

Far on thy fringed borders, west away,
Queen of green Albyn's rivers, let me roam,
And mark thy graceful windings as I stray
When drowsy day-light seeks her curtained dome.
Fain would a weary wanderer from his home,
The wayward Minstrel of a southland dale,
Sing of thy mountain birth, thy billowy tomb,
And legends old that linger in thy vale;
To friendship, and to thee, is due the simple tale.

Old Caledonia!  pathway of the storm
That o'er thy wilds resistless sweeps along,
Though clouds and snows thy sterile hills deform,
Thou art the land of freedom and of song!
Land of the eagle fancy, wild and strong!
Land of the loyal heart and valiant arm!
Though southern pride and luxury may wrong
Thy mountain honours, still my heart shall warm
At thy unquestioned weir and songs of magic charm.

Oh, I might tell where ancient cities stood;
And I might sing of battles lost and won;
Of royal obsequies, and halls of blood,
And daring deeds by dauntless warrior done.
Since Scotland's crimson page was first begun,
Tay was the scene of actions great and high;
But aye, when from the echoing hills I run,
My froward harp refuses to comply;&mdash;
The nursling of the wild, the Mountain Bard am I.

I cannot sing of Longcarty and Hay,
Nor long on deeds of death and danger dwell;
Of old Dunsinnan towers, or Birnam gray,
Where Canmore battled and the Villain fell.
But list!  I will an ancient story tell,
A tale of meikle wo and mystery,
Of sore mishaps that an Old Sire befel,
Wise dame, and Minstrel of full high degree,
And visions of dismay, unfitting man to see.

And thou shalt hear of Maid, whose melting eye
Spoke to the heart what tongue could never say,
A maid, right gentle, frolicsome, and sly,
And blythe as lambkin on a morn of May;
Whose auburn locks when waving to the day,
And lightsome form of sweet simplicity,
Stole many a fond unweeting heart away,
And held those hearts in pleasing slavery.
Wo that such flower should e'er by lover blighted be!

But ween not thou that Nature's simple Bard
Can e'er unblemished character define;
True to his faithful monitor's award,
He paints her glories only as they shine.
Of men all pure, and maidens all divine,
Expect not thou his wild-wood lay to be;
But those whose virtues and defects combine,
Such as in erring man we daily see&mdash;
The child of failings born, and scathed humanity.

CANTO I.  The Hunting.

ARGUMENT.
God prosper long our noble king,
Our lives and safeties all!
A woeful hunting once there did
In Chevy Chase befall;
To drive the deer with hound and horn
Earl Percy took his way;
The child may rue that is unborn
The hunting of that day.

Haste, ranger, to the Athol mountains blue:
Unleash the hounds, and let the bugle sing!
The thousand traces in the morning dew,
The bounding deer, the black-cock on the wing,
Bespeak the route of Scotland's gallant king;
The bearded rock shouts to the desert hoar;
Haste, ranger! &mdash; all the mountain echoes ring,
From cairn of Bruar to the dark Glen-More,
The forest's in a howl, and all is wild uproar!

And many a gallant hart that time was slain!
And many a roebuck founder'd in the glen!
The gor-cock beat the shivering winds in vain;
The antler'd rover sought his widow'd den;
Even birds that ne'er had seen the forms of men,
But roosted careless on the desert doone,
An easy mark to ruthless archer's ken!
No more they whir and crow at dawning boon,
Far on their grizzled heights, contiguous to the moon.

Where'er the chase to dell or valley near'd,
There for the royal train the feast was laid;
There was the monarch's light pavilion rear'd;
There flowed the wine, and much in glee was said
Of lady's form, and blooming mountain maid;
And many a fair was toasted to the brim:
But knight and squire a languishing betrayed
When one was named, whose eye made diamonds dim!
The king looked sad and sighed!  no sleep that night for him!

The morning rose, but scarce they could discern
When night gave in her sceptre to the day,
The clouds of heaven were moored so dark and dern,
And wrapt the forest in a shroud of gray.
Man, horse, and hound, in listless languor lay,
For the wet rack traversed the mountain's brow;
But, long ere night, the monarch stole away;
His courtiers searched, and raised the loud halloo,
But well they knew their man, and made not much ado.

Another day came on, another still,
And aye the clouds their drizzly treasures shed;
The pitchy mist hung moveless on the hill,
And hooded every pine-tree's reverend head:
The heavens seem'd sleeping on their mountain bed;
The straggling roes mistimed their noontide den,
And stray'd the forest, belling for the dead,
Started at every rustle &mdash; paused, and then
Sniff'd, whistling in the wind, and bounded to the glen.

The king was lost, and much conjecture past.
At length the morning rose in lightsome blue,
Far to the west her pinken veil she cast;
Up rose the fringed sun, and softly threw
A golden tint along the moorland dew:
The mist had sought the winding vales, and lay
A slumbering ocean of the softest hue,
Where mimic rainbows bent in every bay,
And thousand islets smiled amid the watery way.

The steeps of proud Ben-Glow the nobles scaled,
For there they heard their monarch's bugle yell:
First on the height the beauteous morn he hail'd,
And rested, wondering, on the heather bell.
The amber blaze that tipt the moor and fell,
The fleecy clouds that roll'd afar below,
The hounds' impatient whine, the bugle's swell
Raised in his breast a more than wonted glow.
The nobles found him pleased, nor farther strove to know.

The driver circle narrowed on the heath,
Close, and more close, the deer were bounding by,
Upon the bow-string lies the shaft of death!
Breathless impatience burns in every eye!
At once a thousand winged arrows fly;
The greyhound up the glen outstrips the wind;
At once the slow-hounds' music rends the sky,
The hunter's whoop and hallo cheers behind!
Halloo!  away they speed!  swift as the course of mind!

There roll'd the bausind' hind adown the linn,
Transfix'd by arrow from the Border bow;
There the poor roe-deer quakes the cliff within,
The silent gray-hound watching close below.
But yonder far the chestnut rovers go,
O'er hill, o'er dale, they mock thy hounds and thee;
Cheer, hunter, cheer!  unbend thy cumbrous bow,
Bayard and blood-hound now thy hope must be,
Or soon they gain the steeps, and pathless woods of Dee.

Halloo!  o'er hill and dale the slot is warm!
To every cliff the bugle lends a bell;
On to the northward peals the loud alarm,
And aye the brocket and the sorel fell:
But flying still before the mingled yell,
The gallant herd outspeeds the troubled wind;
Their rattling antlers brush the birken dell;
Their haughty eyes the rolling tear-drops blind;
But onward still they speed, and look not once behind!

The Tilt is vanished on the upland gray,
The Tarf is dwindled to a foaming rill;
But many a hound lay gasping by the way,
Bathed in the stream, or stretch'd upon the hill;
The cooling brook with burning jaws they swill,
Nor once will deign to scent the tainted ground;
The herd has cross'd Breriach's gulfing gill,
The Athol forest's formidable bound,
And in the Garcharye a last retreat has found.

One hound alone has cross'd the dreary height,
The deep-toned Jowler, ever staunch and true.
The chase was o'er; but long ere fell the night,
Full thirty hinds those gallant hunters slew,
Of every age and kind; the drivers drew
Their quarry on behind by ford and lea:
But never more shall eye of monarch view
So wild a scene of mountain majesty
As Scotland's king beheld from the tall peaks of Dee.

On gray Macduich's utmost verge he stood,
The loftiest cone of all that desert dun;
The seas afar were streamer'd o'er with blood!
Dark forests waved, and winding waters run!
For nature glow'd beneath the evening sun;
The western shadows dark'ning every dale,
Where dens of gloom, the sight of man to shun,
Lay shrouded in impervious magic veil;
While o'er them poured the rays of light so lovely pale.

But oh what bard could sing the onward sight!
The piles that frowned, the gulfs that yawned beneath!
Downward a thousand fathoms from the height,
Grim as the caverns in the land of death!
Like mountains shattered in th' Eternal's wrath,
When fiends their banners 'gainst his reign unfurl'd&mdash;
A grisly wilderness!  a land of scathe!
Rocks upon rocks in dire confusion hurl'd,
A rent and formless mass, the rubbish of a world.

As if by lost pre-eminence abased,
Hill behind hill erected locks of gray,
And every misty morion was upraised,
To speak its farewell to the God of Day:
When tempests rave along their polar way,
Not closer rear the billows of the deep,
Shining with silver foam, and maned with spray,
As up the mid-way heaven they war and sweep,
Then, foil'd and chafed to rage, roll down the broken steep.

First died upon the peaks the golden hue,
And o'er them spread a beauteous purple screen
Then rose a shade of pale cerulean blue,
Softening the hills and hazy vales between:
Deeper and deeper grew the magic scene.
As darker shades of the night-heaven came on,
No star along the firmament was seen,
But solemn Majesty prevailed alone
Around the brows of Eve, upon her Grampian throne.

Steep the descent, and rugged was the way
By which the monarch and his knights came down,
And oft they groped and stumbled on the brae;
For far below, on vale of heather brown,
The tents were rear'd, and fires of evening shone:
The mountain sounds had perished in the gloom,
All save th' unwearied Jowler's swelling tone,
That bore to trembling stag the sounds of doom,
While every cave of Night rolled back the breathing boom.

Th' impassioned huntsman wended up the brae,
And loud the order of desistance bawl'd;
But aye, as louder wax'd his tyrant's say,
Louder and fiercer, Jowler, unappall'd,
Across the glen, along the mountain brawl'd,
Unpractised he to part till blood was seen&mdash;
Though sore by precipice and darkness gall'd,
He turned his dewlap to the starry sheen,
And howl'd in furious tone, with yelp and bay between.

Well known that spot, once graced by sovereign's sleep,
Still bears it the memorial of his name;
The silver torrent play'd his vesper deep,
The mountain plover sung his loud acclaim;
Inured to toil, and battle's deadly flame,
The Stuart rose the son of health and might,
Ah!  how unlike the bland voluptuous frame
In this unthrifty age, that takes delight
To doze in qualms by day, and revel out the night.

The Night had journey'd up the dark blue steep,
And leaned upon the casement of the sky,
Smiling serenely o'er a world in sleep,
At millions of her wand'ring elfins sly,
Harassing helpless mortals as they lie
With dreams and fantasies of endless train;
With tantalizing sweets that mock the eye;
With startling horror, and with visions vain,
And every thrilling trance of pleasure and of pain.

In mantle wrapt, and stretched on flowery heath,
She saw the King of Scotland weary lie;
So deep his slumber, that the hand of death
Arrests not more the reasoning faculty;
Yet was his fancy wrapt in passion high:
He toil'd with visions of a wayward dream;
Quiver'd his limbs, his bosom broke the sigh,
He clasped the yielding heath, and named a name,
He would not for his crown to Noble's ear it came!

The heavenly guardian of the royal head,
That rules events and elements at will,
Unused in wilderness to watch his bed,
Or spread his sheltering pinion on the hill;
Unrife in circumstance foreboding ill,
Yet trembled for some danger lingering near.
What gath'ring sound comes nigher, nigher still,
Why does the wakening hound turn up his ear,
Then start with shorten'd bark, and bristle all with fear?

Fast gains the alarm &mdash; the nobles, half awake,
Restrain their breathing mindless where they lie;
The sleepy ranger starts from out the brake,
With mouth wide open and unvision'd eye;
Knight, squire, and hind, in one direction fly,
Mix'd with the hounds that loud in couples bay,
All to the downward burn that sounded bye,
For there arose the dubious, frantic bray,
That raised the dreamer's eye, and all that loud affray.

Oh, smile not at the confluent midnight scene,
The blazing torch, the looks of wild dismay!&mdash;
It was no angry spirit of the glen,
No murd'rous clansmen mix'd in red array;
There stood the monarch of the wild at bay,
The impetuous Jowler howling at his brow,
His cheeks all drench'd with brine, his antlers gray
Moving across the cliff, majestic, slow,
Like living fairy trees of blench'd and leafless bough.

With ruthless shaft they pierced his heaving breast,
The baited, thirsty Jowler laps his blood;
The royal hunter his brave hound caress'd,
Lauded his zeal and spirit unsubdued;
While the staunch victor, of approval proud,
Roll'd his brown back upon the prostrate slain,
Caper'd around in playful whelpish mood,
As if unspent by all his toil and pain,
Then lick'd his crimson flue, and look'd to the hills again.

For three long days the deer were driven afar,
And many a herd was thinn'd and sore bespent;
Through dark Glen-Avin, and the woods of Mar,
Hart, hind, and roe, in trembling trails were blent.
Still in the wild remain'd the royal tent;
One little bothy stood behind the lea,
Where oft at eve the king and nobles went
The setting sun and soaring erne to see,
Behind the dreadful cliffs that watch the springs of Dee.

One eve they sat all in a jocund row,
The cruel Knight of Souden he was one;
They noted horror staring on his brow,
His lip was quivering, and his colour gone!
And aye he looked the startled knights upon,
Then roll'd his troubled glance along the hill.
"What moves thee?"  said the king, in mildest tone:
He bowed his head, but held his silence still.
"What moves my gallant knight?  Speak Souden, art thou ill?"

"My sovereign liege, forgiveness I implore;
Strange recollections dim my palsied sight;
But this same dreary scene I've seen before,
Either in trance, or vision of the night.
Some dismal doom shall soon my honours blight,
I know these bodings fraught with wo to be.
It seems as demon dragg'd a deed to light,
That lies unfathom'd even to destiny!"&mdash;
Oh, ne'er may leal man keep with murderer company!

No more he spoke that eve, as legends tell;
No orders issued to his page or groom;
But servitors, with trembling, mark'd full well
A wondrous face behind him in the gloom;
Of flame it seem'd, yet nothing did illume;
Laughing revenge gleam'd red in every line:
But how it enter'd the pavilion'd room,
Or how it past, no mortal could divine!
A visitant it seem'd from some unhallow'd shrine!

Again the low'ring clouds immure the hill;
Again the sportsmen stretch their limbs in rest;
To the lone bothy, by the sounding rill,
The king retir'd, its wildness pleased him best,
With his good knights to list the song and jest;
His ancient minstrel waiting at command,
Gilbert of Sheil, by all the land confest
A minstrel worthy by his king to stand,
And play his native airs, with sounding harp in hand.

That evening, call'd to sing, he framed a lay,&mdash;
A lay of such mysterious tendency,
It stole the listeners' reasoning powers away;
They dream'd not that they lay in moors of Dee,
But in some fairy isle amid the sea,
So well did Fancy mould her visions vain:
Bent was the minstrel's eye, and wild to see,
The whilst he pour'd the visionary strain:
Oh, ne'er shall Grampian echo murmur such again!

THE HARPER'S SONG.

There wals ane auld carl wonit in yon howe,
Lemedon!  lamedon!  alden lillehu!
His face was the geire, and his hayre was the woo
Sing Ho!  Ro!  Gillon of Allanhu!
But och!  quhan the mure getis his cuerlet gray, &c.
Quhan the gloamyng hes flauchit the nychte and the day, &c.
Quhan the crawis haif flowin to the greinwode schaw,
And the kydde hes blet owr the Lammer Law;
Quhan the dewe hes layde the klaiver asteep,
And the gowin hes fauldit hir buddis to sleep;
Quhan nochte is herde but the merlinis mene&mdash;
Och!  than that gyre caryl is neuir his lene!

Ane bonnye baby, se meike and mylde,
Ay walkis wythe hym the dowie wylde:
The gowlin getis of sturt and stryffe,
And wearie wailis of mortyl lyffe,
Wald all be hushet till endless pece
At ane blynke of that babyis fece!

Hir browe se fayre, and her ee se meike,
And the damyske roz that blumis on her cheike;
Hir lockis, and the bend of her bonnye bree,
And hir smyle mochte waukin the deide to see!

Hir snoode, befryngit with mony a geme,
Wals stouin fra the raynbowe's brychtest beme:
And hir raile, mair quhyte than snawye dryfte,
Wals neuir wovin anethe the lyfte,
It keust sikn lychte on hill and gaire,
It shawit the wylde deer til hir laire;
And the fayries waknit fra their beddis of dew,
And they sang ane hyme, and the hymne was new.
List, lordyngs, list!  for nuir agyne
Shalt' heire sikn wylde wanyirdlye strayne.
For they sang the nychte-gale in ane swoone,
And they sang the goud lockes fra the moone;
They sung the reidbreiste fra the wud,
And the laueroke out of the merlit clud;
And sum wee feres of bludeless byrthe
Came out of the wurmholes of the yirthe,
And swoofit se lychtlye round the lee,
That they waldna kythe to mortyl ee;
But their erlish sang it rase se shill,
That the waesum tod youlit on the hill!
O lordyngs, list the cronach blande!
The flycherynge songe of Fayrie-land!

THE SONG OF THE FAIRIES.

SING ADEN!  ADEN!  LILLELU!
Bonnye bairne, we sing to you!
Up the Quhyte, and doune the Blak,
No ane leuer, no ane lak,
No ane shado at our bak;
No ane stokyng, no ane schue,
No ane bendit blevir blue,
No ane traissel in the dewe!
Bonnye bairne, we sing to you,
AYDEN!  ARDEN!  LILLELU!

Spiede!  speide!
The moone-rak speile!
Warre the rowar, warre the steile,
Throu the rok and throu the reile,
Rounde about lyke ane spynning wheile;
Throu the libbert, throu the le,
Rounde the yirde and rounde the se,
Bonnye bairne we sing to thee,
Round the blumis and bellis of dewe,
AYDEN, AYDEN, LILLELU!

Speide!  speide!
Lyving or deide!
Faster than the fayrie gleide,
Biz throu Laplin's tyrling dryfte!
Rounde the moone, and rounde the lyfte,
Aye we ring, and aye we sing
Our hune!  hune!
And ante-tune!
Neuir!  neuir!  neuir dune!
Up the Leider and doune the Dye
Aye we sing our lullaby!
Bonnye bairne, we sing to you,
AYDEN!  AYDEN!  LILLELU!

Ryng!  ryng!
Daunce and sing!
Hinche on the brume year garlandis hyng!
For the barnis sleipe is sweite and sure,
And the maydenis rest is blist and pure
Thro all the lynkis of Lammer-mure;
Sen our bonnye baby was sent fra heven.
Scho comis owrnycht withe the dews of even,
And quahn the sone keikes out of the maine,
Scho swawis with the dewe to heven again.
But the lycthe shall dawne and the houlat flee,
The deide shall ake, and the say shall be
Quhan scho shall smyle in the gladsum noone,
And sleipe and sleipe in the lychte of the moone!
Then shall our luias weke anewe,
With herpe and vele and ayril too,
To AYDEN!  AYDEN!  LILLELU!

Hyde!  hyde!
Quhateuir betyde,
Else and dowle that ergh to byde!
The littil wee burdie mai cheipe in the wu,
The plevir mai sing, and the coke mai craw,
For neuir ane epyrit derke and doure
Dar raike the creukis of Lammer-mure:
And everlike gaiste of gysand hue
Shall melt in the breize our baby drew!
But we ar left in the grein-wud glen,
Bekaus we luf the chylder of men,
Sweitlye to sing our flawmand new;
Bonnye bairne, we sing to you.
AYDEN!  AYDEN!  LILLELU!

Pace!  pace!
Spyrits of grace!
Sweite is the smyle of our babyis face;
The kelpye dernis, in dreide and dule,
Deipe in the howe of his eirye pule;
Gil-Moules frehynde the hallen mene fle,
Throu the dor-threshil, and throu the dor-ke,
And the mer-mayde mootes in the sairfrone se.
But we are left in the greine-wud glen,
Bekause we luf the chylder of men,
Sweitlye to sing and neuir to rue,
Sweitlye to sing our last adue;
Bonnye bairne, we sing to you!
AYDEN!  AYDEN!  LILLELU!

Sing!  sing!
How shall we sing
Rounde the bairne of the spiritis Kyng!
Lillelu!  lillelu!  mount in a ryng;
Fayries away!  away on the wyng;
We too maune flytt to ane land of blisse
To ane land of holy silentnesse!
To ane land quhair the nycht-wynd neuir blewe!
But the fayre spryng shall euir be newe!
Quhan the moone shall waik ne mayre to wane,
And the clud and the raynbowe baithe are gane,
In howirs abone the brik of the day
We'll sing to our baby for ever and ay!

Then the caryl he saw them swoof alang,
And he herde the wordis of thair leifu sang;
They seemit to lyng saklent the wynde,
And left ane streamourie trak behynde;
But he heirit them singying as they flew,
AYDEN!  AYDEN!  LILLELU!

Than the caryl liftit the babe se yung,
And nemit hir with ane tremilous tung;
And the lycht of God strak on his face
As he nelit on the dewe, and callit her Grace:
And he barrit the day of sorrowe and reuth
To flee fra the bairne of Heavenly Truthe,
And he barrit the deidis that nurice plaine
Euir to thrall the world again.
Than he claspit his handis, and wepit ful sair,
Quhan he bade hir adue for evirmare.
O heuir wais babyis smyle se meike
Quhan scho fand the teir drap on her cheike;
And neuir wals babys leuke se wae
Quhan scho saw the tail auld carrl gae;
But all his eiless ouphen trayne,
And all his gaistis and tyis war gane;
The gleides that glemit in the derksome schaw,
And his fayries had flown the last of a':
Than the puir auld caryl was blythe to fle
Away fra the emerant isle of the se,
And neuir mayre seikis the walkis of men,
Unless in the diske of the glomyng glen.

The harper ceased; the chords, with sighing tone
On list'ners' ears in soft vibrations fell;
They almost ween'd they heard the parting moan
Of some old reverend sire, and wish'd him well!&mdash;
On gospel faith, and superstition's spell,
The converse turn'd, and high the dispute ran;
And words were said unfitting bard to tell;
Unfitting tongue of poor despondent man,
Still prone to yearn and doubt o'er all he cannot scan.

To what unsaintly goal the words had borne,
Dubious conjecture only can portray:
Just in the blab of Souden's impious scorn
Enter'd a stranger guest in poor array!
His locks were thin, and bleach'd a silver gray;
His reverend beard across his girdle hung.
Each mind was carried, by resistless sway,
To the unearthly strain the minstrel sung.
Blench'd was the proudest cheek, and mute was every tongue!

He stood erect, but raised not up his eye,
Seeming to listen for expected sound;
But all was still as Night's solemnity,
Not even a sandal grazed upon the ground.
Transform'd to breathing statues, all around
The nobles sat, nor wist they what to dread;
But every sense by hand unseen was bound,
On every valiant heart was chillness shed,
As to that wild had come a message from the dead.

At length to Scotland's Monarch rose his look,
On whom he beckon'd with commanding mien,
With manner that denial would not brook,
Then gliding forth he paused upon the green.
What the mysterious messenger could mean
No one would risk conjecture; all were still.
In converse close, the two were lingering seen
Across the lea, and down beside the rill,
Then seem'd to vanish both in shadow of the hill.

And never more was seen the royal face
By Athol forest or the links of Dee;
Oh why should haughty worm of human race
Presume to question Heaven's supremacy;
Or trow his God, alike unmoved, can see
To death exposed the monarch and the clown;
That night was done, by the supreme decree,
A deed that story scarce may dare to own;
By what unearthly hand, to all mankind unknown.

At midnight, strange disturbing sounds awoke
The drowsy slumberers on the tented heath.
It was no blast, that on the mountain broke!
Nor bolised thunder wrapt in sable wrath!
Yet were they listening, with suspended breath,
To hear the rushing tumult once again:
It seemed to all the passing sounds of death,
Or angry spirits of the mountain reign,
Combined at midnight deep to clear their wild domain.

Six gallant yeomen rose, and, hand to hand,
Set forth the bothy's wild recess to gain;
Despising fate, and monarch's strict command,
That all should quiet at the tents remain:
They harbour'd fears that tongue could not explain.
Darkling and silent, midway on they past,
When power unseen their passage did restrain;
Each onward step they deemed would be their last,
And backward traced their path, unboastful and aghast.

The morning came, in pall of sackcloth veil'd;
The cliffs of Dee a sable vestment bound:
Then every squire and yeoman's spirit fail'd,
As slow approach'd a maim'd and bleeding hound,
Sad herald of the dead!  his every wound
Bespoke the desolation that was wrought!&mdash;
Oh, ne'er may scene in Scottish glen be found
With wonder, woe, and death, so fully fraught!
So far beyond the pale of bounded mortal thought!

No knight walk'd forth to taste the morning air,
The bugle's echo slept within the hill!
And &mdash; Oh the blasting truth! &mdash; no cot was there!
No!  not a vestige stood beside the rill!
Though trace of element, or human skill,
In all the fatal glen could not be found,
The ghastly forms, in prostrate guise and still,
Knight, page, and hound, lay scatter'd far around,
Deform'd by many a stain, and deep unseemly wound.

The king was sought by many an anxious eye;
No king was there! &mdash; Well might the wonder grow!
They rode &mdash; they searched the land afar and nigh&mdash;
He was not found, nor learned the tale of wo!
Hast thou not mark'd a lonely spot and low,
Where Moulin opes her bosom to the day,
O'er which the willow weeps and birches blow,
Where nine rude stones erect their frontlets gray?
There the blasphemers lie, slain in mysterious way.

When nine long days were past, and all was o'er;
When round his nobles slain had closed the mould,
The king return'd to Scotland's court once more,
And wonder'd at the tale his huntsmen told:
His speech revolted, and his blood ran cold,
As low he kneeled at good Saint Bothan's shrine.
Where he had been no tongue did e'er unfold.&mdash;
List to my tale! &mdash; if thou can'st nought divine,
A slow misfashioned mind, a moody soul is thine.

