PART FIRST.
Breeze of another clime, whose gentle gales
Sigh in soft whispers through yon fairy grove,
Mid Transatlantic streams, and hills, and vales,
Still in the vision of remembrance wove!
Oh!  yet ere time each vivid tint efface,
Yet might the Muse, on Mem'ry's wing, explore
These western shades, &mdash; the varying landscape trace,
And weave the soothing lay, and half restore
Those scenes that once could charm &mdash; now haply view'd no more!

And bright on Fancy's view the picture glows,
The wood-crown'd  hills of Canada arise,
And many a forest waves its verdant boughs,
And many a cultured vale between them lies.
Wide through the land her own St. Lawrence pours
His swelling stream, to meet the ocean's waves;
Now calmly steals along his sylvan shores,
Now rushing o'er the rocky rapids raves,
His village-skirted banks and spire-crown'd island raves.

Or gliding onward rolls his azure pride
Beneath his guardian fort's majestic walls;
Round smiling Orleans leads his spreading tide,
And meets the rush of Montmorency's falls;
Or wid'ning sweeps, where lonely forests shade
The untrodden banks, and distant mountain's breast;
Where haply scarce a hunter's step has stray'd;
Nor sounding bow, nor thund'ring tube, molest
The moose-deer's grassy haunt, the wild-bird's woodland nest.

Delightful land!  though Winter keen and chill,
Long o'er thy clime with piercing rigour reign,
Bind in its icy chains the freezing rill,
And load with drifting snows the viewless plain;
Yet sweet the fruits thy glowing summer yields,
And gay its wilding bloom's luxuriant dye,
Rich are the various products of thy fields,
Thy ample woods the cheerful blaze supply,
Healthful thy keenest breeze and clear thy azure sky.

Ev'n while around it fall the feath'ry snows,
May comfort in thy loneliest cottage smile;
Bright in the stove the blazing maple glows,
And Plenty gaily spreads the board of Toil;
Nor yet unpleasing is the wintry waste,
Where o'er the ice-bound wave, or beaten way,
Along the path with verdant branches graced,
Unwearying Industry, and Pleasure gay,
Lead the deep loaded traine, and guide the rapid sleigh.

Or where on high the lofty cedar throws
Its branching arms, and towers in air sublime,
As thick around the deep'ning forests close,
The wond'ring trav'ller finds a milder clime,
Where mingling with the pine's unfading green,
The wither'd foliage of the oak tree's bough,
And elm, and maple's leafless sprays are seen,
And spreading beech, and spiry poplars grow,
And many a youngling plant rears its light stem below.

Come then a while the forest path essay;
Though lone the wild, and deep the yielding snow,
Yet many a passing traine has track'd the way,
And scarcely through the bush the breezes blow
Through checq'ring trees to fancy's view appears
A cottage in the wild's sequester'd bound;
'Tis but a pine tree's roots, o'er-borne by years;
The pond'rous trunk has spread a-ruin round,
Branches and trees o'erthrown cumber the snow-clad ground.

Used to the path, the hardy horses scour
Down the quick slope and up the snowy hill,
Smoothly they pass where Spring's delightful hour
Saw the wide spreading swamp and flowing rill.
See, bending low yon youngling birch-tree throws
A drooping thicket in the narrow way,
Shake from its loaded boughs the weight of snows,
The fleecy shower deserts the trembling spray,
And free'd, o'erhead, once more the quiv'ring branches play.

Brighter through op'ning boughs the sun-beams gleam&mdash;
Whose axe sounds heavy in the sylvan wild?
Dear is that habit in a foreign clime,
Thy well-known tartan, Caledonia's child!
By hard-drawn rents and pinching want compell'd,
He left the heath-crown'd hill and verdant glen,
The straw-roof'd cot &mdash; the bothy's summer bield,
To seek a home beyond th' Atlantic main,
Deep in these circling woods; &mdash; nor sought that home in vain.

The axe, the flame assail'd the trembling glade&mdash;
The cottage rose, on disencumber'd ground,
Mid lands new ravish'd from the forest's shade,
The winding wormfence stole its simple bound;
Deep bosom'd in th' embowering wood's embrace,
His store increasing mark'd the flight of time;
And fondly there he rear'd his youthful race
From childhood's blush to manhood's blooming prime,
And reap'd the fertile field, and bless'd the gen'rous clime.

Yet as by strangers rear'd an orphan'd child,
While his fond heart allows each grateful claim,
May still recal how once his parent smiled,
And his eyes glisten at a mother's name;
Thus on each bosom pictured seems to dwell
Some dear remembrance of a distant shore,
While-fondly querulous of Scotland's weal,
Still hangs the father o'er the tales of yore,
Still sighs to say, "We view our native land no more!"

But those who cling around their grandsire's knees,
Or course the floor in frolic gambols bland,
When fleeting years mature the blooming race,
Shall love this western world, and know no dearer land.
Farewell, &mdash; for day declines &mdash; the slanting ray
With fainter lustre gilds the cottage room,
And, ere the moon her silver lamp display,
Shall twilight wave on evening's fairy loom;
Short is the path, but deep the forest's sombre gloom.

Soon shall those spreading boughs be lowly laid,
Through which now blushing gleams the western sky,
Fast stealing on the forest's inmost glade,
Glengary's scatter'd villages are nigh.
Nor need ye ask her race from whence they sprung,
The stately step of Scotland's sons is there;
Flows from that maiden's lip the Celtic song;
Not such the charms that grace Canadienne fair,
Deep is her cheek's warm blush, and bright her flaxen hair.

Sweet cottage homes! &mdash; abodes of rural peace,
Of hospitable joy and harmless mirth!
Far from your bowers shall Mem'ry oft retrace,
How bright the faggots on each household hearth
Blazed; &mdash; as a stranger, &mdash; to Columbia's clime,
Who came, perchance, to pass a wint'ry day,
Led to these village haunts in joyous time,
And kindly welcom'd by the circle gay,
Join'd in the mazy dance, and shared the glad strathspey.

PART SECOND.
Pilgrim on earth!  although the book of Fate
Thy page of life in gloomy hues pourtray,
Mourn not. &mdash; Its summer days, how short their date!
Its winter nights, how fast they fleet away!
Lo!  from yon azure arch the orb of day
A downward beam o'er arctic regions throws,
Trembles the faithless ice beneath his sway,
Reflected from the wide expanse of snows,
Keen on the dazzled eye the bright effulgence glows.

Now while the frost still hangs on evening's train,
And mild at morn the melting south-wind blows,
'Tis time the maple's luscious juice to drain;
Sweet through the new-made wound the liquid flows.
The trees are pierced, &mdash; the vessels placed below,
Slow o'er th' inserted wedge the sap distils,
Beneath the cauldron crackling faggots glow,
And thick'ning o'er the fire the sugar boils,
Guiltless its sweets, for here no wretched Lybian toils.

O'er the dark mead the eager cattle bend.
Where Autumn's pale grass specks the melting snows,
The ice gives way, &mdash; the softning showers descend;
Wide o'er the land the genial moisture flows.
Fann'd by the southern breeze's softest wing,
Beneath the ardent sun's refulgent glow,
At once the various verdure of the Spring
Spreads o'er the vales, and bursts from every bough;
Gay in luxuriant white th' extended orchards blow.

And ere the dawn of June's resplendent morn
Has Nature's hand her sweetest chaplet wove,
Mingled the lilac with the milk-white thorn,
And hung with op'ning blooms the wildest grove;
The yellow marshflower paints the swamps with gold,
O'er violet tufts the wood's pale lilies blow,
The creeping strawberry its buds unfolds,
The wild vine winds around the poplar's bough,
Th' uncultured plum-tree spreads its wreaths of flowering snow.

Scenes gaily wild &mdash; though there the vernal bloom
With fleeting fragrance vanish'd from the eye;
Though fierce the radiance of the summer's noon,
Sweet was the blush that tinged its orient sky,
As o'er the river's undulating breast
The bright-hair'd Morn her dawning lustre threw,
And woodland isles in azure waves embraced,
Hill, spire, and cottage met the wand'ring view,
And fields where fragrance breathed, impearl'd with glist'ning dew.

While haply doom'd to see no second Spring,
The unconscious lamb the juicy herbage press,
And the gay humming-bird on radiant wing
Hung o'er the towering sunflower's golden breast,
And Labour, waking to his glad employ,
View'd with elated heart the prospect fair,
While Nature seem'd with life, and Love and Joy
Play'd o'er the earth and warbled in the air,
And still'd the throb of grief and chased the gloom of care.

Hark!  'tis their shout &mdash; and lo, in wild costume
The roving Indians' tawny forms appear!
Waves through their sable locks the gaudy plume
Painted and arm'd &mdash; perchance the foe to dare,
And see &mdash; along the dusty road they pass&mdash;
Behind the warrior band a female train!
Daughters of Europe!  though uncouth their guise,
Though they must bear the load and till the plain,
Yet look not, &mdash; gaze not here with undeserved disdain.

What though no zone in graceful folds confine
The short dark vest that hides her bosom's swell,
Yet may that form a gentle heart enshrine,
Where spotless faith and mild affection dwell;
Though born to toil beneath an ardent sky,
No sweet vermilion blush her cheek adorn,
Yet feeling lightens in the Squaw's dark eye;
Haply her bosom nobly knows to spurn
Your pity, should it blend th' ungen'rous glance of scorn.

A while beneath an elm their steps they staid,
Then two approaching claim'd a nearer view,
Each in her hand her spell-wove wares display'd,
The box and basket dyed of various hue;
The one &mdash; her blanket thrown across her arm,
Her hat's dark band a blushing wild rose stay'd,
Gay beam'd her glance with youth's attractive charm,
Gay on her lip the smile of candour play'd;
Sedate the other's mien beneath a beaver's shade;

An olive blanket almost hid from view
Her form, yet well beneath its folds were seen,
The scarlet leggins edged with darker blue,
The tinsel fringe and pliant mocasin;
Back o'er her shoulders from her forehead hung,
What seem'd a basket deck'd with gaudy taste;
Gently her hand the leathern band unswung,
And gently on the floor the burden placed,
Shaded with flowing silk &mdash; with azure ribbon graced.

Softly aside the crimson veil she lays,
Removes the muslin deck'd with tinsel toy,
Still, still, unconscious of a stranger's gaze,
He smiles through guiltless dreams, her slumbering boy!
Not on the cradle's downy bed composed,
Nor softly pillow'd on his mother's breast!
By thongs suspended, and with hoops inclosed,
Prison'd his little limbs, &mdash; his moveless waist
Close to th' unpliant board with circling fillets braced!

Ah!  seldom hast thou known the sweet caress,
Clasp'd in the arms or dandled on the knee;
Yet if that eye's dark glance her heart express,
With all a mother's love she looks on thee.
Child of the hut!  shall philanthropic breast
Lament thy present lot or future doom?
Peaceful thy bosom now and sweet thy rest;
But through the storms of passion yet to come,
What star shall gild thy path?  what beam thy soul illume?

Shall mild Religion woo thee to be blest,
And chase the shades of Superstition drear,
Insidious Murder's lifted arm arrest,
And drown Revenge in Mercy's hallow'd tear?
Or civil life with all its soothing art,
The sweets of comfort round thy mansion strew?
Or Science ev'n her simplest truths impart,
To tell thy soul how former ages flew,
Or guide through Nature's realms thy fond inquiring view?

Yet if to thee Heav'n's noblest gift denied,
Not thine the guilt to cast that gift away;
Nor shalt thou at the shrine of Wealth or Pride,
For sordid int'rest, Friendship's cause betray;
Nor learn to lock from Want's imploring eye
The glitt'ring hoard by fav'ring fortune giv'n;
Nor in the cause of Infidelity,
By Passion's voice from Truth to Error driv'n,
Strive in the mist of Doubt to veil the light Heav'n.

And ah!  though sad the doom their victims prove,
Yet Truth shall give thy forest race their due,
The praise of fearless courage, kindred love,
And patient fortitude, and friendship true.
And sure ungentle is the heart that e'er
Could to the wand'rer of these tribes deny
The welcome draught in Summer's parching air,
Or nightly shelter from the wint'ry sky,
Or aught that Want can ask and Kindness well supply.

For through their woods if Europe's sons have stray'd,
When falling night her shadowy curtains drew,
As deep'ning gloom involved the forest's shade,
And thick around them rose the chilling dew;
Then, &mdash; if an Indian's lowly hut appear'd,
Has not its tenant's hospitable care,
Soon as the ent'ring stranger's voice was heard;
Renew'd the blaze, and bid the white man share
The wigwam's shelt'ring roof &mdash; the hunter's forest fare?

Yet "Europe's race, and wild Columbia's train,
Are haply creatures of a diff'rent mould."
Shame to th' ungen'rous thought! &mdash; Has Heav'n in vain,
Told whence the spreading waves of Being roll'd?
Blest be th' enlighten'd soul, in Lybia's child,
Who sees a ruder form of kindred earth;
Nor spurns the tawny wand'rer of the wild;
Nor scorns to mark in form of forest birth,
The spark of native wit, or unembellish'd worth!

Unloose the band of fond fraternal love,
And who for Afric's sable sons shall plead?
Or should the blood-hound scour yon western grove,
Who, who shall rise to bar the barb'rous deed?
Ages long lost return!  in Britain's isle
Hark!  'tis the human victim's dismal groan,
See!  'tis the frantic Druid's lurid smile,
Mark the wild native, &mdash; cheerless and alone,
The ties of civil life and all its joys unknown!

Rise, sons of Doubt! &mdash; the sacred page denied,
Say "These are beings of ignobler race."
Go with Expediency's presumptuous pride,
And sweep the savage tribe from Nature's face!
Truth sought the land, and Industry, and Art,
And Social Order in her train appear'd;
Reason the soul, and Rapture claim'd the heart,
Her guarded banner bright-eyed Freedom rear'd,
And Learning trimm'd her lamp, and Fancy's harp was heard.

So where Columbia's red-plumed warriors roam,
Rude and uncultured as their wildest grove;
As bright a beam may gild the forest's gloom,
And Justice reign, and Art and Science rove.
Yes, &mdash; the bright vision of the hallow'd sage,
The loveliest form by poet's pen pourtray'd,
Comes on the wings of Time &mdash; the blissful age,
When Peace and Love in lucid robes array'd,
Shall reign from Hoogly's banks to Indiana's shade.

The orient's blush is lost, the air serene,
Th' ascending sun has drunk the spangling dew,
And scarce a milk-white cloud is wand'ring seen,
To speck the face of Heav'n's ethereal blue;
Tired of the blaze the cattle seek the stream,
Or crowd to rest beneath the spreading shade,
The breeze is hush'd; &mdash; but hark where chaunted hymn
And murmur'd prayer the list'ning ear invade,
And lo, a simple band wind slowly round the glade!

O thou!  whose faith embraced a purer creed,
To whom a ray of clearer light was giv'n,
Firm in the hallow'd path of truth proceed,
And bless the kind mysterious care of Heav'n:
But though thy heart's indignant feelings glow,
To trace the crimes of Rome's tyrannic day,
While yet her power annull'd the dearest vow,
Wrested the sceptred monarch's rightful sway,
Mock'd at the martyr's groans, and bade a world obey:

Yet frown not here as the Canadian kneels,
Or joins the white-robed priest's attendant train,
As past his fields the slow procession steals,
To thank th' all-bounteous God, and bless the rising grain.
Nor with thy harshest censure brand the rite,
Perhaps their hearts with gratitude expand;
Who but the power that dwells in viewless light,
Can mark the chain of thought's mysterious band?
'Tis His to hold the scales that suit no mortal hand.

Though still th' enlighten'd soul may sigh to trace
The dark remains of fear, with error twined,
And all the dictates of the cloister'd race,
Stamp'd on th' undoubting, unresisting mind;
Yet calm the peasant's life, and dear his home,
Amid those scenes he pass'd life's gayest day,
Roved o'er yon vales, and in that wild wood's gloom,
Where now, perchance, his rambling children stray,
First plucks the blushing plum and strips the nut tree's spray.

There too, when Winter spread the whit'ning shower,
And piercing frosts confirm'd his iron reign,
Braced round his warm capot the gay ceinture,
And led with infant pride his mimic train;
And well I ween can Mem'ry paint the day,
When first his scythe assail'd yon flowery mead;
And how he sought, with evening's twilight ray,
Her father's bower, by youthful fancy led,
And woo'd, and won the fair that shares this rural shed.

Pleased as he views the moon's nocturnal rays,
He knows not, dreams not, man of mortal birth
Has e'er explored the planet's mystic maze,
Measured the sun's bright orb, or spann'd the earth;
And as at wintry eve, or festal day,
The song, the game amuse his simple mind,
He joins the dance, he joins the choral lay,
To thoughtless mirth or vacant ease resign'd,
Sighs for no scene more gay, no pleasure more refined.

Nor may the tenant of these vallies vie
With the bold cossack, or the fierce hussar,
Nor all their ardour kindle in his eye,
Should martial glory woo to distant war;
Yet here when peals Invasion's shrill alarm,
Her hostile squadrons still may meet the brave,
Nor fear nor sloth shall chain the peasant's arm,
Summon'd his laws, his rights, his land to save,
Firm shall his step advance and keen his weapon wave.

PART THIRD.
Dwells there on earth with heart of sullen mould
Who scorns the flow'ry charms of Spring to share;
Joyless can see the vernal blooms unfold,
Tread the green vales, and breathe the balmy air;
Or when her sweet but transient reign is o'er,
And bright-eyed Summer, empress of the plain,
Decks her rich zone with many a glowing flower,
The lovely symbols of her radiant reign,
Can view the changing scene with listless dull disdain?

Dwells there on earth whose cold unfeeling pride,
Secured by wealth from want and selfish fear,
Unmoved can view the green fields waving wide,
With the rich promise of a plenteous year?
Go, and the fond enthusiast's bliss deride;
Go, and pursue Ambition's emptier toy;
But, child of Nature, turn thee not to chide,
Now while she breathes benevolence and joy,
Oh!  let no ruder thought the hallow'd thrill destroy!

Gay o'er the gentle slope and spreading vales,
In green luxuriance waves the bending grain,
The op'ning beanflower scents the murm'ring gales,
The drooping pea-bloom blossoms o'er the plain;
Its flower-crown'd stem the dark potatoe rears,
Deep in the drill the roots increasing store;
A gayer green the springing buckwheat wears,
In August's sun to spread her milky flower,
And yield her rich increase at harvest's latest hour.

Plant of the East!  when Rome with thund'ring arm,
Pour'd on thy native plains the fierce crusade,
Some friend to culture stole thy dark-brown germ,
And bade its blossom grace th' Italian glade
Thence spreading fast the small prolific grains,
Once more Improvement's genius bore away;
And well the product suits those western plains,
Where Winter ling'ring chills the vernal day,
And April's gentle showers fall in the lap of May.

In towering ranks the loftier maize enfolds
Her swelling grain the verdant husk below,
And bright beneath with flowers of orient gold,
The broad-leaved pompkin creeps from row to row;
Wide o'er the mead beneath the scorching ray,
A jocund band its fading fragrance spread,
The new-fall'n flowers, that drunk the dew to day,
Ere evening tinge yon western sky with red,
Borne from their parent field may strew th' inclosing shed.

Faint o'er th' unshelter'd plains the zephyr blows,
Yet whisp'ring welcome waves yon verdant shade,
Where rich around the juicy wild rasp glows,
And creeping vines th' unripen'd cluster spread;
Ah!  there a thousand puny darts invade;
His shrill trump sounding the musquito flies,
In restless myriads swarming through the glade,
From bush and fen the insect armies rise,
And still the thirsty lance the tiny warrior plies.

The shrinking stream in fainter murmurs flows,
Droops the green blade and fades the sick'ning flower,
O'er panting life the tide of splendour glows,
And still and sultry rolls the noontide hour.
But lo!  dark louring o'er the changing sky,
Yon livid cloud the coming storm foretells;
The vivid lightnings bluely flash on high,
The rattling hail-shower sweeps along the vales,
And frequent, deep, and loud the rolling thunder peals.

No more embattled hosts, in chill amaze,
Shrink at the sound &mdash; pale Omen's spell-bound prey;
Calmly the sage can view the meteor blaze,
Shoot through the ambient gloom its forky ray;
Yet fate may mark its course; &mdash; but now remote
The echoing thunder rolls along the sky,
Still the deep murmur soothes to sober though
And solemn awe, &mdash; from Contemplation's eye,
Afar the frolic train of mirth and fancy fly.

Impending vapours robe, in sombrous hue,
The shrouded summit of yon rising hill;
And, veiling still the bright etherial blue,
O'ershadowing clouds their liquid store distil;
And darker glooms may hide from mortal view
The secret purpose of Almighty Power;
Yet He who spreads the lucid pearls of dew,
Wings the dread bolt, and bids the torrent pour,
Nor vainly gleams the flash, nor idly falls the shower.

And say, has Science ranged through Nature's store,
Found in the mossy shore, or stormy main,
Still brighter proofs of Wisdom, Love, and Power,
Still closer links of Being's wondrous chain?
And yet athwart the soul-ennobling ray,
Shall sceptic Pride invidious darkness fling,
Does self-bewilder'd Reason frame the lay,
That suits no chord in Nature's tuneful string,
Or blinded Folly list and wild Presumption sing?

"The vapour, wafted from the billowy deep,
Shall seek once more the bosom of the main;
The leaves that mould'ring in the forest sleep
May rise to vegetable life again;
But the bright beam of thought, th' inquiring mind,
Intent to mark, and eager to unfold
The laws to matter's varying forms assign'd,
Since first the great creative mandate roll'd
Earth through the vast expanse, and hung yon lamps of gold;

"Which still, on bolder wing, with nobler aim,
Can seek the Sire of Being's awful shrine;
And bending there, with filial rev'rence, claim
Its Maker's care, and trust his power benign;
That soul which, pausing at th' extent of space,
Still sighs new worlds, new wonders, to explore,
Extinct at once shall sink in Death's embrace,
Lost in oblivious gloom to rise no more;
Tis but a transient spark, the meteor of an hour.

"Lo!  in the caves where Ocean's waters ooze,
The struggling lobster bursts his pris'ning shell,
Not vainly taught; creative power renews
O'er all his swelling form its shel'tring mail;
See the green insect seek its slumb'ring cell,
Then drop the shroud and spring to life again;
Mark but the meanest reptile of the vale,
The feath'ry race, the tenants of the main,
All in their sphere are blest, no instinct given in vain.

"But thou who o'er this nether world supreme.
May'st gaze on Nature with a monarch's eye!
Thou in whose loneliest cave, and wildest dream
Floats some bright form of Immortality!
Yet fated from the cradle to the tomb,
The sport of care, and disappointment's prey;
Th' aspiring hope that shines through sorrow's gloom,
To light thy view to climes of happier day,
Is but a fev'rish dream &mdash; an ignis fatuus ray."

And yet if Wisdom rule, and earth its care,
Where is the reign of Virtue, Joy, and Love?
Ah!  why should Vice corrupt, or Grief or Care
With painful throb the anguish'd bosom move?
Mark but the haughty tyrant's dread decree,
The treach'rous smile, th' assassin's cowardly arm!
Deceit more faithless than the summer sea,
And passion wilder than its wintry storm,
Rise in the human soul, and all its charms deform.

Still the blest tenant of a happier sphere,
(Should such the haunts of Adam's race explore,)
Might say, "the lofty ruin once was fair,"
The voice of Mercy has unfolded more.
And thou who lovest to trace the guiding clue,
And mark how Nature's poison guilt began,
If e'er the sacred volume to thy view
Display'd the birth, the fall, the fate of man;
Go, and with angels muse on Heaven's eternal plan!

PART FOURTH.
Soft is the touch of Habit's fairy wand,
But strong the spell that mystic touch conveys;
'Tis hers to mock the storm on Lapland's strand,
Or blunt the fervours of the torrid blaze.
'Tis she that soothes the dull mechanic's toil,
For whom unseen the sweets of Nature bloom,
Who, scarcely conscious of the Summer's smile,
Amid the city's smoke and dust and gloom,
Bends o'er the sultry forge, or plies the tedious loom.

Yet, does his heart's warm stream as purely flow,
As that which circles in the peasant's breast?
Or can the never-varying task bestow
As sweet a charm to labour or to rest,
As round his sun-burnt brow the zephyr flings,
At morn's gay dawn, or evening's calm decline,
As that which greets him when the wild-bird sings,
While skies, and fields, and woods, their charms combine,
And aye their changeful wreath the fleeting seasons twine?

Scarce the last ling'ring rose has left the spray,
When early harvest whitens o'er the plain,
And, mid their sultry task, content and gay,
Spread o'er the waving field the reaper train;
And now beneath the sickle sinks the grain,
And now the swelling sheaves behind it rise,
Not long to linger on the stubble plain,
Beneath the sunny beam of August's skies,
Fast on the zephyr's wing th' exhaling moisture flies.

And yet, fair Scotland!  though thy hills and moors
At farther distance drink the genial ray,
Though oft unkindly blasts and chilling showers,
In Winter's livery shroud the autumnal day,
Full well thy ripen'd harvests may compare
With those which bask in Summer's radiant smile,
For Industry has nursed Improvement there,
And Wealth and Art have nerved the arm of Toil,
And charm'd the rugged clime and tamed the stubborn soil.

Nor Wealth nor Art attended culture here,
When first from lillied France th' advent'rous band,
O'er the wild Ocean held their bold career,
And raised their homes amid the sylvan land;
For many an age the forest's annual spoil
Had swell'd the sod with vegetable mould,
The forest blazed, and o'er the kindly soil
Luxuriant harvests waved their rip'ning gold,
Wide o'er the half-till'd plains the tide of plenty roll'd.

Successive harvests rose, &mdash; th' exhausted fields,
"One grateful mite of all they gave," demand;
Till, ill repaid, and earth reluctant yields
A scantier increase to the reaper's hand;
Marking the change, yet heedless of its cause,
Father and son the self-same plan pursue,
Calm ignorance still bends to custom's laws,
Nor change nor rest the wearied fields renew;
And light the wheat ear waves where rich erewhile it grew.

And are there none who, versed in Nature's lore,
Might kindly stoop to guide the rustic's toil;
Each fav'rite product of the clime explore,
And lend new vigour to th' exhausted soil?
Proudly they fled who might have nobly staid,
Lords of the rural dome and fair domain;
Have led the Muses through the sylvan glade,
And woo'd Improvement to the cultured plain,
Pride of the infant land, and patterns of the swain

Mould'ring beneath some tasteless peasant's care,
Or waste and lone the Seigneur's mansion lies;
Sweet bard of Auburn!  could'st thou wander there,
Ev'n thou might'st love to see the villas rise.
Yet ne'er may Grandeur stalk with giant stride,
And grasp with iron hand the wide domain,
To rear the dome of solitary pride,
And "spurn the smiling cottage from the plain,"
Lull'd to luxurious ease, or wrapt in cold disdain;

Or grinding Av'rice watch the time of need,
To seize with fox-like gripe the sacred soil,
(Heedless though Pity's cherub accents plead)
To children hallow'd by their father's toil;
Then bid the meads with fresher verdure shine,
The well-till'd fields with teeming plenty wave,
And &mdash; on his native plains the rustic pine
In vain, to share those stores his labour gave,
Sigh at a tyrant's pride, and sink a cheerless slave.

For still his fields th' unskilful toil repay,
Still swells the peasant's heart to gladsome tone,
As the green blade salutes the vernal ray,
The labour his &mdash; the harvest too his own;
He fears no rising rent &mdash; no landlord's frown,
And here perhaps might Av'rice frown in vain.
The wild deer flees to forests all his own,
Woods yet unknown, and fields untill'd remain,
And well the rustic race might spurn Oppression's reign.

But tasks beyond her wasted plains demand
The hand of friendly aid and fost'ring care;
The lamp of knowledge dimly lights the land,
The years of childhood fleet neglected there;
Oh!  is it Reason's wish or Fancy's dream,
That hails the dawning of a lovelier day,
Where public-spirit blends its radiant beam
With Learning's light and pure Religion's ray,
Sweet as the blush of morn that gilds the wand'rer's way!

When Worth and Taste shall grace the rural shade,
And fan in vulgar breasts the patriot flame,
To youthful eyes the page of knowledge spread,
And point to emulation merit's claim;
And still with watchful eye and liberal hand,
Direct the stream of bounty where to flow,
To lead Improvement o'er the smiling land,
And bid the orphan's grateful bosom glow,
Or cheer the heart of Age and Poverty and Woe.

And who each gen'rous aim shall dare arrest?
Blooms Science only for the cloister's cell?
Came Revelation to be wrapt in mist?
Ah!  lift from Truth's fair page th' impending veil!
And lo, where Prejudice with squinting eye,
And Error limping from his shadowy cave,
And Ignorance, and Superstition fly,
On sullen wing, beyond Ontario's wave!
There in congenial glooms to chaunt their spells, and rave.

Faded the splendid west &mdash; the breeze is still,
And silence slumbers on the vales around,&mdash;
When hark!  at once, o'er echoing grove and hill,
Rings on the ear the bugle's martial sound.
And nearer now, amid the twilight scene,
A passing troop wind o'er the hill's steep brow,
Th' artill'ry's wheels th' attentive ear may ken,
And horses' hoofs, with sounding pace and slow,
They pass the shadowy copse that skirts the vale below.

Ye who have view'd assembled troops depart,
To seek their country's foes from Britain's shore,
Is there no soft emotion thrills the heart,
Or whispers, "Which of these returns no more?"
Still where alarm has told of danger near,
And proud Invasion rear'd his threat'ning crest,
As on their route the guardian bands appear,
A keener feeling vibrates through the breast,
And swells the grateful tear of sadness unreprest.

The fast-approaching scene of deathful strife,
A sanguine picture, rises on the view;
And something tells, "The flowery sweets of life
They leave to fight, to bleed, to die for you."
Uninjured still amid these smiling vales,
May patient Labour lead th' autumnal plough;
But loud afar the sound of battle swells,
Nor guiltless waves the sabre of the foe,
Though Britain's squadrons crowd to ward or meet the blow.

Full many a youth, th' unconscious father's boast,
Stretch'd in the dust, shall bless his sight no more;
And many a heart throbs high, on Albion's coast,
For those who slumber on a foreign shore.
Oh!  yet again return ye envied hours,
When faint as whispers of a distant stream,
Amid these peaceful plains, and rural bowers,
Th' alarm of war rung but in mem'ry's dream,
The gossip's wonder oft, and oft the old man's theme!

Seen through the deep blue vault, thin sown and far,
Each spangling star its lonely lustre sheds;
Floats not a cloud round Cynthia's silver car,
Pure from her orb its mellow'd radiance spreads;
Soft round each painted cottage floats the beam,
Woods, hills, and vales reflect the checq'ring blaze;
Sparkles, in trembling light, the distant stream,
And, frequent flashing on the watchful gaze,
Bright o'er Heav'n's farthest verge the lambent lightning plays.

Is there an hour that boasts for Fancy's child
A charm more soothing than the glare of day?
Is there a tranquil pleasure, chaste and mild,
Beyond what Art could give or Pomp display?
Ye glades, where Mem'ry still delights to stray!
Scenes that full well might grace a loftier strain!
Oft have ye lured my wand'ring steps away,
Through the green copse or o'er the dewy plain;
Sweet was the lonely hour &mdash; 'tis past &mdash; nor comes again!

PART FIFTH.
Full many a flower the passing breeze has strew'd,
The changing groves a duller green display,
And leaves of flaunting crimson spot the wood,
Or paler yellow sicklies o'er the spray;
Unwelcome tints, forerunners of decay;
Yet warm the noon-tide ray and mild the air,
And tinged with varied hues, profusely gay,
The orchard's ripen'd burden, bright and fair,
Shines in th' autumnal beam, and claims the gath'rer's care.

Where boasts the rich fameuse the rose's glow,
Or rougher pommegris russet tints displays,
They bend the twigs or scale the loftiest bough,
And strip with careful hand the loaded sprays;
Easier the task to shake yon drooping trees,
Whose blushing boughs, o'er-borne, the hand invite;
Their cruder burden, destined to the press,
Comes showering down; and cyder, sparkling bright,
Shall quench the summer's drought or cheer the wintry night.

Then, half amid its stately rows conceal'd,
A busy throng collect the ripen'd maize;
Or where th' uprooting plough has traced the field,
From the dark mould the smooth potatoe raise;
Or from its bed the mellow gourd they bear,
Nor boasts Iberia's fruit a richer dye;
These, when its wintry robe invests the year,
Shall to the stall nutritious juice supply,
And bid the dairy's store with summer's produce vie.

In sombre guise the plunder'd fields appear,
The harvest closed and closed the lab'rer's toil;
Save where preparing for the coming year,
Again the shining ploughshare cleaves the soil;
And now, to husk the maize, a mingled band
Of youths and maids, in joyous mood, convene;
In shriv'lling folds, beneath th' encircling hand,
The faded leaf deserts the glossy grain,
And tale and song and jest amuse the frolic train.

Simple their mirth &mdash; but ye in Fortune's bowers,
Who still can mark her follies!  who shall chide
Th' untutor'd joy?  What sweeter wings the hours
Of flippant Fashion, or pedantic pride?
Yet some, nor sternly wise, nor idly gay,
Have all the charms of intercourse combined,
Where lofty sense, and feeling's sparkling ray,
Inform'd with science, and by taste refined,
Spread the bright feast of thought, the banquet of the mind.

Though in the cottage bower content may smile,
And many a simple charm the scene endear,
Where rural pleasures cheer the summer's toil,
And rural plenty crowns the circling year;
The sweets of polish'd life, of wealth, of taste,
Think not the lay in sullen mood would scorn;
Pure is the breeze that fans Benlomond's breast,
Richer the fragrance on the zephyr borne,
Where India's spicy groves wave to the breath of morn,

Pleasing the art that decks the spacious room,
If social bliss the fleeting hours beguile;
Gaily the tapers gild the winter's gloom,
When round the sculptured hearth the Lares smile;
But oh!  if sordid care and vulgar strife,
Through all the scene of mimic pleasure stray,
If madd'ning Discord from the lip of life
Dash the translucent cup of joy away,
Or jealous Envy lour, or cold Deceit betray;

If neither Friendship bless nor Wit adorn
The festive hour, to specious trifling giv'n,
Who that has loved to gaze on Nature's form,
Till Contemplation wing'd her flight to Heav'n,
Who that could weave around Retirement's bower
The wreath by Peace and Independence twined,
And blend with cheerful toil the leisure hour,
Where calm Reflection nerves the musing mind,
Or fans th' exalted glow of sentiment refined,

Would yield for Pleasure's semblance joys like these,
And sport with Folly or with Dulness pine;
Or bending at the altar of Caprice,
The charms of Reason, Freedom, Peace resign?
No, happier far from crowds and cares exiled,
Sweet are those scenes no jarring sounds invade,
The breeze soft whisp'ring through the flowery wild,
In Nature's ever-varying vest array'd,
The river's murm'ring flow, the music of the glade,

But see its trembling leaves around the grove,
In eddying whirl, the winds of Autumn strew,
And bound for southern climes, a faithless drove,
Retiring warblers bid these shades adieu;
While, ill conceal'd amid the thin-clad tree,
The squirrel bounds, the threat'ning tube forbear,
Free let him sport, he asks no boon from thee;
Oh!  spare th' impris'ning cage, th' insidious snare,
Dear is his native haunt and sweet his sylvan fare!

Now while as yet, through cloudless skies serene,
O'er faded fields the Indian summer glows,
Go, from the vine the latest cluster glean,
And shake their treasure from the nut-tree's boughs.
'Tis past. &mdash; The frost defies the noon-tide beam,
In the steel'd furrow rests the useless plough,
Still thick'ning ice encrusts th' half-cover'd stream,
Unusual mists foretell th' approaching snow,
The flaky shower descends, the wint'ry tempests blow.

Ev'n Winter brings its toils. &mdash; The blaze to heap,
Enclose the fields, or form the bounding lines,
The forest, echoing to its sounding sweep,
Beneath the axe her stately race resigns.
Again the snow-clad path the peasants trace,
And urge through drifted heaps the panting steed,
Till o'er the new-form'd road with fleeting pace,
In fearless haste th' unloaded traines proceed,
Erect the drivers stand, and vaunt their coursers' speed.

With hearts elate the homeward path they trace,
Heedless of piercing frosts and day's decline,
Slow o'er the snows retiring twilight strays,
And soon shall Heav'n's blue arch with lustre shine;
Yet dearer, sweeter than yon evening star,
Gleams on the rustic's view a twinkling ray,
'Tis his own cottage, glimm'ring from afar,
Through the shrunk shutter beams of welcome play,
And there shall comfort wait, and rest his toils repay.

Ere long, a nobler Muse, on loftier wing,
May seek those shades, and every charm unfold,
That spreads its beauties in the fleeting Spring,
Or Summer's blush, or Autumn's locks of gold;
O'er the broad lakes in daring pinion sweep,
Or with bold step the forest path explore,
Where to Niagara's resounding steep
Rolls the proud stream, and down with thund'ring roar,
Flings his white dashing waves, and shakes the trembling shore.

Not such the minstrel's skill, nor such the lay,
No classic grace adorns these simple strains;
'Twas but the passing pilgrim of a day,
Who view'd with ling'ring glance yon verdant plains,
Who haply found, &mdash; ev'n in that foreign clime,
Some fleeting hours, that live in Mem'ry's view,
"In colours mellow'd, not impair'd, by time,"
Some artless friend that wept to bid adieu,
Who, with unpractised hand, the changeful picture drew.

Back to those scenes the dream of Fancy stole,
And many an hour unfelt has wander'd by.
The vision fades, the winds of Winter roll
Its darkest clouds athwart yon louring sky;
And not a beam of radiance shines on high,
Or gaily sports o'er ice-clad groves below;
Nor traine, nor passing sleigh salutes the eye:
Unfetter'd here the rush-crown'd streamlets flow,
And Scotland's dark-brown heath peeps through the drifted snow.
