Lo!  with the breeze impregnate swells the sail,
And wanton Zephyrs 'mid the cordage play,
And deeply murm'ring in the wat'ry vale,
The waves' wild music wakes the pilot's lay.
Come, then, who yield like me to Fancy's sway!
The bark impatient on the Willow rides,
To yon bold coast to bear us swift away,
Where in the cloud the cliff's proud summit hides,
While sunbeams gild its base, and glitter o'er its sides.

Hark!  sweetly pealing from its height sublime,
E'en now transporting melodies resound,
And scenting far the clear elastic clime,
Fresh vernal gales and flowrets breathe around.
Ah!  there with light, and life, and beauty crown'd,
With Genius, her immortal offspring, reigns
Enthusiasm; and on the world profound,
A glorious scene of ocean, Alps, and plains,
Looks down, and dwells, enrapt, o'er Nature's wide domains.

But ere our bark approach that hallow'd place
Where waves the streamer, on the deck ascend,
And thence aloof the passing wonders trace
Which o'er the shore and azure main extend.
Lo!  what unnumber'd trains incessant bend
Their eager course along the sinuous verge!
See, to the space where sky and ocean blend
Their doubtful bound, what fleets o'erspread the surge,
Till as in air they float, or from the clouds emerge!

Vast crowds of various class, which, from the wild
And savage world Columbus erst explor'd&mdash;
From Affic's wastes which once a garden smil'd,
Till peaceful Science fled the Vandal sword&mdash;
From Asia's fruitful soil, with jewels stor'd,
And from that happier clime, where largely heap
The liberal arts their universal hoard,
Vast crowds of various class, which onward sweep,
And spread, as o'er the strand the surges of the deep.

These, and yet more, who would the Muse defy
To paint their feature, garb, and varied hue&mdash;
Some with rapt gaze, and joy-illumin'd eye,
Or look with science fraught, their course pursue
Some with deep thought, proud step, and lofty view,
Or to the lyre or martial trump advance;
Some o'er the wave, the beach, or mountain dew,
Press ardent on the race &mdash; the course &mdash; the dance:
All &mdash; all with joy elate, and flush'd with esperance.

And now, their feet have gain'd the sacred mount,
Whose base lies compass'd with a waving wood,
Whence cooling streams gush forth from many a fount,
And gales exhilarating fan the blood,
Infusing life, and joy, and lustihood;
But pierce we with the throng the forest belt,
To know what Nature, in her kindest mood,
Within the woodland zone has lavish dealt,
To tell what sights are seen &mdash; what mystic charms are felt.

Here, thro' the foliage of the flow'ry glade
As wanton Zephyrs waft the veil aside,
Are sweetest sounds of harmony convey'd,
Are fairest scenes and happiest forms espied&mdash;
Gay crowds in gilded barks are seen to glide
O'er mazy currents, glitt'ring thro' the grove;
Or, link'd in plighted pairs, at eventide,
Thro' myrtle glens and laurel alleys rove,
And breathe in rosy bow'rs enraptur'd vows of love.

There, as the vista opens to the view,
Extending tracts of fenceless plain appear,
Where many a circling throng, and sportive crew,
With loud enliv'ning shouts salute the ear:
Sounds which the champions of the village cheer,
Who manly games and rustic revels keep;
Or playful notes of immaturer year,
Of those who thread the ring, or lead the leap,
Or headlong search the stream, or climb the dizzy steep.

See!  where thro' parted rocks to yon deep glen,
Equipp'd for sylvan chase, a troop descend,
To rouse the spotted leopard from his den,
Or with the fierce and tusked boar contend;
And more remote, at early dawn, are kenn'd, 
Swift as the wind across the valley borne,
A hunter train, who all the welkin rend
With tuneful din of voice, of hound, and horn,
Whilst Echo wakes the woods, and cheers the coming morn.

But louder still, the spirit-stirring note
Which from the martial trumpet swells the gale,
Which calls to nobler deeds, where proudly float
Yon lofty banners o'er the lowland vale:
There bright in arms, and cas'd in studded mail,
And fir'd by Beauty's valour-kindling eye,
Advent'rous Knights in warlike tilts assail,
And honour, love, ambition, nobly vie
In gallant feats of arms and proofs of chivalry.

Yet such the enchanted soil, nor din of  arms,
Nor rustic sport, nor horn, nor savage roar,
Those haunts contiguous vex where Science charms,
Revealing to her sons her sevenfold lore;
Where Art industrious culls the varied store
Of herb and flower &mdash; or, dug from dreary mine,
The mineral proves &mdash; or ponders to explore
Mechanic Pow'rs &mdash; where weave the sister Nine
Their wreaths, and heav'n-born Truth declaims with breath divine.

Lo!  what a goodly range the eye beholds
Of woods, and walks, and groves of olive green
And where a broader space the vale unfolds,
What forms are those, that wind their way between?
Beings of lofty look, tho' careless mien,
Their brows as if with wreaths of triumph crown'd&mdash;
And from each verdant avenue are seen
Admiring crowds that press with zeal around,
While bursts of loud applause, woods, walks, and groves resound!

Say, are the laurell'd victors, who have won
Of senseless multitudes the mad acclaim?
Who for a little pageant pride have run
Their desolating course thro' blood and flame?
Ah no!  true sons of Genius, they who aim
To charm alone the virtuous, and the sage,
To conquer bloodless in the lists of Fame,
To soothe with art each evil passion's rage,
And with enlighten'd lore the ills of life assuage.

These, fairy region!  but a part present
Of all the scenes thy midland tracts contain;
Nor less, in ruder garb magnificent,
Thy rampart coast impending o'er the main:
There rocks &mdash; and rocks beyond &mdash; a mountain chain,
Rich in metallic tints, the eye surveys,
While ocean's glassy flood reflects again,
With gentler flame, the mitigated rays
Which dazzle all the shore, from Sol's meridian blaze.

There, from the rock repell'd, the scatter'd waves
Wind down the channell'd steep in many a rill,
Or, oozing thro' the vaults of coral caves,
In countless drops of liquid gems distil;
And thence, as opes the bay, or sinks the hill,
Dim shores appear, and distant fleets display,
In nautic fight, the gallant seaman's skill.
Or beating fearless thro' the tempest fray,
To worlds yet unexplor'd career their vent'rous way.

But hark! &mdash; what sudden notes of heavenly choir!
What mingling peals of instrumental swell!
Fair Fancy tunes the wild Aeolian lyre,
And Hope and Genius strike the sounding shell:
More sweet than these, or warbling Philomel,
Than melting cadence of melodious lute,
A voice divine is heard! &mdash; touch'd with the spell,
The wond'ring throng in rapt attention mute
Remain, while these glad words their ravish'd ears salute:

"Welcome, ye beings of sublimer sphere!"
(Thus pours the mellow voice its liquid lay;)
"Welcome, whose ruling star, divinely clear,
Has hither led and brighten'd all your way:
To you whom Apathy nor Idless sway,
Shall blooming Nature all her charms reveal;
For you shall Hope each object fair array
In Life's amusive walk; for you Life's weal
Shall yield a double zest &mdash; the mystic zest of zeal.

"For what avail, if Taste forsake the cheer,
The choicest dainties of the feast combin'd?
Can sweetest song enchant the impervious ear,
Or Beauty's best proportion charm the blind?
But not alone to sensual joy confin'd,
Taste, fragrance, feeling, song, and form allure;
Here matchless shine the treasures of the mind,
The sage, the grand, the gen'rous, and the pure,
Ambition to attain &mdash; and firmness to endure.

"Here to the active frame, and ardent soul,
Virtue and Toil their energies impart;
And those who fondly hope to gain the goal,
Must strive with vigour, as with fervour start:
Here to the enervate limb, and selfish heart,
Nor Sloth nor Vice dispread their base decoy,
But healthful Nature, and industrious Art,
For ever emulous their powers employ,
And urge this noble rule, Exert &mdash; excel &mdash; enjoy.

"Say, but to proud Perfection to advance,
Why was an ardent soul and fancy given?
Why, but Man's earthly pleasure to enhance,
And, led by Virtue, light his path to heaven?
Wrapt in the chill, ungenial shades of even,
Fled is the bloom of groves, of vales, and plains!
But, lo!  the Sun bursts forth, and, darkness driven&mdash;
The world awakes, Life renovated moves,
Creation smiles again, Creation's God approves!

"And thus the mind of Man by gloom o'ercast,
Involv'd in steril sloth, and torpor cold,
Lost is the grace of Genius, Wisdom, Taste,
Till sudden glows the intellectual mould
With flame enthusiastic? &mdash; then, behold!
The mist of Ignorance and Languor flies,
Heav'n breathes benign, the mental powers unfold,
Truth's opening fruits, and Fancy's flowers arise,
And yield more grateful sweets than those which scent the skies.

"Too oft, perchance, prolific Fount of Light!
Warm'd by thy beam, has thriv'n the baneful weed,
Too oft, alas!  the deadly aconite
Has scatter'd o'er the soil its noxious seed;
But soon the vale, the mountain, and the mead,
From all foul tares of rank, fanatic kind,
By fast-advancing culture shall be freed,
And Superstition, rooted from the mind,
No more be planted there, by bigots fierce and blind.

"Monsters like these, and all the worthless race
Of Ignorance, of Apathy, and Guile,
Whom numbers, grandeur, harmony, nor grace
Can ever charm, shall Wisdom hence exile:
But ye, her votaries, whom the genial smile
Of Nature, and her lovely scenes inspire,
Come, freely range thro' this enchanted isle,
And Zeal and Genius, with their hallow'd fire,
Shall warm your hearts to love, to virtue, and the lyre.

"Come!  favour'd sons of Nature and of Art!
And learn from Reason, and from Truth, this lore:
Life's good appraise &mdash; acquire &mdash; enjoy &mdash; impart:
Its passing ill despise &mdash; its vice deplore &mdash; despise
The God of Life, a God of Light adore,
And not a Deity of wrath and gloom;
And when your mortal being is no more,
When all of earth shall wither in the tomb,
Deathless in higher scenes your heav'n-born minds shall bloom."

Thus ends the vocal strain; nor more the choir,
Nor mingling notes of melting lute entrance;
Like fleeting mists, the fairy forms retire,
And mock the vision with the void expanse.
All fled!  for hitherward the steps advance
Of one whose youthful cheek, by beauty grac'd,
Glows, and gives lustre to his ardent glance
Of one who seems as if, in anxious haste,
He sought those airy forms himself has rashly chas'd.

'Tis Albert!  he whose feats of infant age
Erewhile my lay adventur'd to recite;
Who now escap'd from academic cage,
Wings to his native wilds his joyous flight.
O day of full and unrestrain'd delight!
E'en now I love thy pleasures to renew;
E'en now recall, with rapture exquisite,
Thy first fair dawn, when, with the sportive crew
Homeward exulting loud, and light of heart, I flew.

Or, when full many a freak and frolic play'd,
The parting group their diverse course began,
What fairy pictures Fancy then portray'd,
As thro' her realms with riot joy I ran!
In rapid train revolving each wild plan&mdash;
Now for improvement-now for pleasure keen:
Big with importance of the future man&mdash;
The world unfolding, and myself, I ween,
No humble actor deem'd in life's eventful scene.

Such airy fabrics, haply Albert rear'd;
Such dreams, perchance, his wand'ring fancy wrought;
But soon like mists of morn they disappear'd&mdash;
When in the dawn his eye delighted caught
The tow'ring cliff that mark'd his natal spot&mdash;
The opening vale &mdash; and, rising to the view,
The village spire &mdash; the brook &mdash; the bridge &mdash; the cot&mdash;
The straggling fence &mdash; the gate &mdash; the avenue
And last, the well-known roof, remotely peering thro'.

Oft as he paus'd, how many a mingling note
Of rustic life his car attentive charm'd!
E'en the harsh clamour of the peacock's throat,
Or shy Galina, with her brood alarm'd,
Or noisy rooks, that in rude tumult swarm'd,
Flush'd by his step.  But, lo!  the lawn he gains,
And, by the loud and cheering welcome warm'd,
Quick rushing on, no longer he restrains
The tide of homefelt joy his swelling heart contains.

Thrice happy youth!  who thus by partial Heaven,
Art destin'd 'mid romantic scenes to dwell!
Ah!  happier still, since to thy lot is given
Of such wild scenes to feel the magic spell:
Little can they the charm of nature tell,
Whom wealth allures, and worldly cares confound;
Whom luckless stars to courts and camps impel;
Whom Luxury subdues, or Sloth has bound,
Or riot Pleasure led to run her giddy round.

Would that the Bard, with sympathetic art,
Those feelings of refin'd delight could trace,
When first, Enthusiast!  thy exulting heart
Glow'd with the love of Nature's rural grace:
Feelings that no vain pleasures could efface,
Tho' oft their spell thy fancy might decoy&mdash;
Emotions, that the rash and ardent chase
Of sports ungentle never could destroy:&mdash;
Of sports, whose risk had charm'd, but for their savage joy.

Yet, Nature, say &mdash; I take no note of you,
Children of Affectation's sickly breed,
Whose tears of sensibility bedew
The victims for your festive boards that bleed:
But, Nature!  thou and heav'n-born Truth aread,
Does aught of crime the sylvan chase betray?
'Gainst thy unerring law does Pity plead?
Does preying Man thy dictates disobey?
Man &mdash; but himself a link in life's long chain of prey.

Is it a crime the villain fox to kill,
Who reeks with slaughter of the feather'd brood?
To fell the songless bird, whose cruel bill
Can find in insect murder grateful food?
To shed in turn the amphibious monster's blood,
Who stains the tide with gore of mangled fry?
Or snare the scaly rovers of the flood,
Who in their wat'ry haunts insidious lie,
And merciless devour the streamlet's fairy fly?

Feel these from mortal arm severer pang,
Than from the throb of Nature's parting breath?
Or anguish keen, as when the cruel fang
Inflicts the lengthen'd agony of death?
But if by Fate supreme, to Man beneath,
For sport, or food, is each brute creature given,
That haunts the flood, the forest, or the heath,
O far let wanton Cruelty be driven:
If mercy Man deny, what hope has he from Heaven?

Abhorr'd the hand, that, with relentless steel,
Shall pierce, ere sense be fled, the quiv'ring scale;
Shall bid the living bait in torture reel,
Or on the barb the writhing worm impale;
Nor ever he in lover's suit prevail,
Who, bent alone his puny skill to prove,
Shall scatter desolation thro' the dale,
Shall doom to death the minstrel of the grove,
And silence all the lay that woos to joy and love!

Not from such deeds could Albert triumph feel:
The throb of flutt'ring victim never thrill'd
His heart with transport &mdash; but tho' Health and Zeal
Ne'er bore him joyful to the sportive field,
They knew a thousand higher charms to yield;
And soon as thro' the sylvan range he sped,
A growing sense of grace and grandeur fill'd
His soul with rapture and romantic dread;
And Mem'ry nurs'd the thoughts that busy Fancy bred.

For, did he wend along the winding stream,
Still on the varied margin Fancy play'd,
And link'd the visions of her waking dream
With beauties that the living scene array'd&mdash;
Each flow'ry bank, and bord'ring lawn, and glade,
Blending with Fairy haunt, and Fairy feat,
Each rocky tor, or cleft, or forest shade,
With airy castle, cell, or bower'd seat,
Of Genii, Hermit, Nymph, and Knight, the lov'd retreat.

Or when as rose the wild game from the fen,
In breathless hope he trod the trembling waste,
And press'd advent'rous thro' the upland glen,
To win the mountain's snowy height unpac'd;
There, while the healthful breeze each light limb brac'd,
What awful pleasure swell'd his bosom high!
What thoughts his soul expanded, as he trac'd
The dread surrounding scene with wond'ring eye,
And mark'd each frowning form of Winter's imag'ry!

Dark trackless woods, o'er whose hoar heads the wind
Sigh'd mournful, as it shook their snows around;
Floods that, no longer to their depths confin'd,
Burst with wide-rending crash their icy bound&mdash;
Rocks from their bases loosen'd &mdash; gulfs profound&mdash;
Foul frothing waves &mdash; and frosted cliffs sublime&mdash;
Mountains in clouds of angry splendour crown'd,
Whose snow-clad summits Fancy lov'd to climb,
And range to higher worlds, thro' boundless space and time.

Thus lov'd he, Nature!  thro' thy wilds to stray,
By Fancy led &mdash; as by a meteor bright,
That tempts the wand'ring traveller from his way&mdash;
And oft bewilder'd; till the growing light
Of Science fix'd his intellectual sight
With Art and Culture, Judgment then combin'd
To guide Imagination's eager flight,
And regulate each impulse of the mind,
Its ardour still undamp'd &mdash; its pow'rs still unconfin'd.

And now has winter pass'd, and the long night
That yielded to his mind instruction store;
He wanders forth, and seeks, with fond delight,
New wonders of creation to explore.
And while Remembrance muses on her lore,
Comparing Nature with contending Art,
A thousand feelings never known before,
A thousand fresh associations start,
And to his kindling soul a twofold charm impart.

But never lov'd he to recall the theme,
Of Gloom and morbid Melancholy born,
Whence fearful forms and apparitions teem,
Of goblins, witching hags, and ghosts forlorn.
O foolish mortal!  thus to cloud thy morn
With dreary shades of visionary harm!
Such taste distorted, Truth and Nature scorn,
And teach, dispelling ev'ry vain alarm,
To brave Life's real ill, and Death's unsparing arm.

Yet ere Life's ill be thine, or Death draw near,
With gladd'ning scenes thy gloomy mood relieve;
Or if not these can thy dejection cheer,
Come try the soothing solitude of Eve:
Her gentle dews a healing balm can give
For care or woe, and, lulling each loose will,
Her breath can bid the bosom lightly heave,
Her calm the vex'd and restless thought can still,
And all the chasten'd soul with holy musing fill.

See!  to the western wave declining low,
The deep-red Sun undazzling meets the eye;
Gilding each form of wild fantastic show,
That decks the azure tablet of the sky.
Awhile the distant cliff, and beacon high,
And lofty inland objects, all partake
His parting glory, while with varied die,
In the broad mirror of the glowing lake,
Clouds, mountains, rocks, and woods, their mellow'd tints awake.

Too transient splendour!  for o'er Nature's face
The vermil blush has pass'd!  But sober Shade
To each mild feature lends a pensive grace.
And peace and softness all her form pervade.
Now with the cloud-created picture fade
The last faint gleams on mountain, cliff, and main;
Tho' yet the grove, deep vale, and hollow glade,
And nearer objects of the rural plain,
In unobtrusive hue, their humble charms retain:&mdash;

The winding stream, and pathway close beside,
Like lovers wand'ring thro' the flow'ry mead;
The rustic bridge, and, thro' its span descried
O'er oziers green, the cottage roof of reed;
The ivied rock, and bank o'ergrown with weed,
And dripping wheel of silent mill beneath,
The gate, the stile, and narrow lane that lead
To croft of blossom furze and new-fenc'd heath,
Where from the blazing turf rolls many a smoky wreath.

Now loves the eye to watch the homeward flight
Of bird and insect to their close retreat;
To mark the winged wand'rers of the Night,
Who with awaken'd joy her coming greet:
For when the weary rook has gain'd her seat
Of ancient roost, and wild bee humm'd her way
With the last burden of collected sweet,
Then beetle, moth, and bat, and owlet gray,
Are dimly seen to rove thro' twilight's dusky ray.

'Tis then the list'ning ear delights to note
The sounds that mingle rural scenes among;
The echo of the sheep-dog's bay remote,
And bleat of flocks that to the penfold throng;
The plowman's mellow voice, that charms along
The lagging team, or call of him that throws
To lowing herd the bait; the milkmaid's song
Of plaintive love; and, last, the tuneful close
Of clock that chimes the hour of peace and soft repose&mdash;

Repose to him, who from the rugged soil
Has reap'd of industry the well-earn'd food;
Sweet rest to him, who with delightful toil
Has clos'd his happy day of active good;
And peace to him, who, wrapt in holy mood,
Seems from the tongue of time that hour to hear,
Which Pride, nor Pow'r, nor Riches can elude,
Which Sorrow courts, which Vice and Folly fear,
And Virtue hails the hope of her immortal sphere.

Yet, ardent youth, who long of Natures works
The spell hast known, from thee that hour be far;
From thee in whose glad heart no demon lurks,
Thy sublunary joy Perverse to mar.
Ah!  would that Man no more might blame his star,
Nor distribution just of Heav'n deny,
Nor wage with his own weal self-vexing war,
Nor bounded state of earthly bliss decry;
For he who loathes to live, not best has learnt to die.

Scorn'd be the lay that pictures life a vale,
Where all is trouble, bitter tears, and sighs;
Contemn'd the bard, who, with unceasing wail,
To damp aspiring hope and ardour tries.
Say, shall the traveller bent on bold emprize,
Faint and dishearten'd from the prospect turn,
If, in his course, opposing mountains rise?
No!  let him ev'ry toil and danger spurn,
And, as obstruction grows, with new ambition burn.

Thus, Genius!  is thy Progress ever keen
Thro' Truth's fair reign, or regions of romance;
And should some wayward object intervene,
Fancy and Hope the adventure but enhance,
And nobly urge, thro' every hostile chance,
To gain the envied goal of deathless fame.
Thro' Nature's scenes thus eager to advance,
Would Albert follow each romantic aim,
Uncheck'd by winter breme, or scorching summer flame.

And chief, enchanted by each noble form,
Each awful object eager to survey,
He lov'd, amid the tumult of the, storm,
O'er cliffs and tempest-beaten rocks to stray,
There thro' the rugged mazes wend his way,
What time the billow broke with hollow roar,
And from the surf the wild wind swept the spray,
Or thro' the troubled air resistless bore,
For shelter screaming loud, the seabird to the shore.

There on the barren brow of some proud steep,
Or dizzy verge of vast projecting pile,
Rent from the parent coast, would Albert keep
Sublime his breathless watch, and wait the while,
Till ocean's flood encompass'd deep his isle;
And ever as against the rocks bold side
The wave renew'd its fury would he smile
To see it backward hurl'd, and scatter wide
Its ineffectual rage upon the foaming tide.

The scudding vapour thro' the welkin driven,
With fancy-teeming eye would he pursue;
And watch intent, as in the vault of heaven
The gath'ring shades of sombre Even grew,
And o'er the deep a gloom unbroken threw&mdash;
Save where the squall upturn'd the surges white,
And mark'd its fearful progress as it flew,
Or where the Sun, long shrowded from the sight,
Flung thro' his wat'ry veil an angry gleam of light.

Rapt would he stand, to view the orb enlarg'd,
In misty grandeur from the scene retire;
Or low'ring cloud, that, with combustion charg'd,
Roll'd o'er the boiling wave in turbid ire;
To mark, with threatful din of ruin dire,
The ocean deluge thro' the void obscure
Come tumbling on &mdash; Ah!  scarce could he respire,
With fearful joy, thus proudly to endure
The shock of whelming waves, pois'd o'er the wreck secure!

But late his wonted haunts has Albert left,
O'er forms and scenes of gentler grace to dwell:&mdash;
Where channell'd rills ooze thro' the rocky cleft,
And bubbling founts from wave-worn basins well,
And coral, spar, and weed-inwoven shell,
Contend in variegated tint and glare;
Thither, as to Calypso's fabled cell,
Perchance the visionary might repair,
And picture with her nymphs the fairer goddess there.

And ever as by magic pow'r impell'd,
Has he at eve to yon lone cavern stray'd,
Whose arching roof, by pillars light upheld,
Seems by some spell or ocean Spirit laid:
Thence from beneath the rock-form'd colonnade,
Full long, with earnest eye and thoughtful mien,
A newly-stranded bark has he survey'd:
Haply o'er Prospero's enchanted scene
Or fair Miranda's charms, he fondly lov'd to lean?

Ah!  no; nor fabled goddess fix'd his thought,
Nor gentlest nymph of her immortal train,
Nor happiest image Poet ever wrought,
Nor fairest form in Fancy's airy reign:&mdash;
'Twas thine, resistless Love!  to whose soft chain
E'en soaring Genius yields his willing wing,
'Twas thine his ravish'd senses to retain
In sweetest bondage &mdash; but the Bard shall sing
From what eventful cause his musing mood might spring.

The sun had set &mdash; the wintry day was o'er,
Loud grew the blast, and high the surges swell;
The flashing breaker foam'd along the shore,
And from the cliff was heard the heath-hounds' yell,
Fierce on the shatter'd bark the tempest fell,
And the whelm'd seaman struggled in the wave,
Yet not in vain; for haply some could tell,
What aid thy ready hand, Enthusiast!  gave,
What risk thy heart defied, to succour and to save.

Fair dawn'd the morn, and o'er the tranquil deep,
Of the past storm no gloomy vestige hung,
Save where a cloud, as on the wreck to weep,
A few soft drops of parting sorrow flung:&mdash;
Fair dawn'd the morn, when from his couch upsprung
The glowing youth, and to the sun's first rays
While yet the lark her airy carol sung,
Hied him aloof, to shun that painful praise
Which to the gen'rous heart the grateful debtor pays.

"Ah, vent'rous mortal!  who, with fickle gale,
O'er faithless ocean dost thy course pursue;
Should wreckful storms thy fragile bark assail,
May Hope be ever near, and Pity too!"
As o'er the kindling wave his glance he threw,
Thus Albert pour'd his short but fervent pray'r,
When sudden burst on his enraptur'd view
A form that Hope or Pity well might wear&mdash;
It was an earth-born Nymph, as gentle and as fair.

Pensive she leant, and, as soft Zephyr's wing
Wav'd the light tresses from her glowing cheek,
Full were its charms reveal'd, as morn of spring
Blushing thro' fleecy clouds is seen to break.
In each fine feature, with expression meek,
Were life and bright intelligence combin'd;
And ev'n her graceful figure seem'd to speak
Perception exquisite, and thought refin'd,
The whole a finish'd frame, all beauty and all mind!

Such was Eugenia &mdash; who, with Mournful eye,
To mark the ravage of the tempest came;
Or haply in her heart a hope might lie,
To learn each circumstance of Albert's fame.
Whate'er the cause, let it no wonder claim,
That Beauty was by youthful valour mov'd,
That Beauty youthful valour should inflame.
They met &mdash; the mutual blush their feeling prov'd,
And soon the mutual sigh bore witness that they lov'd.

Yet, Albert, let not Indolence control,
Nor Languor's melting breath thy pow'rs abate;
Prove well thy wonted energy of soul,
For noble ends thy destiny await:
Away the pining thought, the wilder'd gait,
The look dejected, and the plaintive voice,
And hail thy happy lot with joy elate;
For Beauty bids thee in her smile rejoice,
Her gentle heart is thine &mdash; be worthy of its choice.

Thus to the youth, his listless mood to chide,
The tutelary spirit inward spoke,
Nor spoke in vain:  contending shame and pride
O'er his ingenuous cheek in blushes broke,
And soon with fervour urg'd him to invoke
The sister band in lov'd Eugenia's name;
For, priz'd by her, their witching arts awoke
A double charm:  thro' Love's impassion'd frame,
Zeal kindled all its fire, and Genius felt the flame.

And first he sought, in Painting's magic school,
On varied scenes the pencil to exert;
With faithful outline, and perspective rule
To each fine feature aiming to impart
Its just expression &mdash; with distinctive art
Contrasting, yet combining, objects bold
And graceful &mdash; bidding them projected start
With light and shade, as if from Nature's mould,
And clothing them in tints rich, clear, and manifold.

Lo!  on the dawning blank, cloud, hill, and main,
In soft gradation glow; and in the beam
Obliquely flung upon the distant plain,
Romantic forms in light succession teem&mdash;
Forts &mdash; cities &mdash; forests &mdash; lakes. &mdash; The glassy stream
More near reflects the cot, the bridge, the tower&mdash;
While rocks, falls, ruins, catch the broken gleam
Of brighter day; and plant, and leaf, and flower,
In rival verdure bloom, and hail the plastic power!

Transcendent art! &mdash; by thee, from Fancy's loom,
In living colours are her works array'd;
By thee preserv'd, the charms of Nature bloom,
When thy faint pictures, fleeting Memory, fade.
Enchanting power! &mdash; by thy true touch portray'd,
Does Hope her form of absent love retain,
Does Love hang fondly o'er the faithful shade
Of life departed, while the godlike train
Of ancient Truth, and Worth, and Genius live again!

With rival ardour did the youth aspire,
Celestial Harmony!  thy spell to gain;
As emulous he wander'd with the lyre
Thro' all the mazes of thy magic reign,
List'ning enamour'd to thy varied strain,
That trouble, pain, and sorrow could control,
And rage, revenge, and each fell passion chain,
Could bid the tide of love and pleasure roll,
And win &mdash; compose &mdash; delight &mdash; and elevate the soul!

But chief, by ardent zeal and genius warm'd,
He woo'd of Poesy the art divine;
And in that art, a hope he fondly form'd,
The charm of song and picture to combine;
And tho' not yet the intellectual mine
Could boast of judgment deep or lore profound,
The Muses' fire had yielded many a sign
Of promise bright, as from metallic ground
Oft bursts the meteor flame, where hidden ores abound.

The Muses' fire! &mdash; alas!  how oft has glow'd
Its lustre but to mark Misfortune's gloom!
How oft its flame a noble heat bestow'd,
Him whom it warm'd untimely to consume!
Yet, ever-honour'd Nine!  whate'er my doom,
To me thy votary a spark concede,
A spark more priz'd than Glory's gaudy plume,
Than Fortune's favour or Ambition's meed,
Or all the pomp and pow'r that Pride and Folly feed.

Thus Albert, who, by growing taste refin'd,
The chaster form of things sought to descry;
What Nature and what mimic Art design'd,
Viewing with curious and corrected eye,
What grandeur, grace, and heav'n-born Harmony,
And beauteous Imitation could inspire,
What Fancy's store collected could supply,
Seeking with zeal industrious to acquire,
And with the Muse adapt to the symphonious lyre.

E'en such his hope, when, with romantic thought,
Amid his native rocks wild wandering,
He first in unambitious numbers sought
The rude but witching scenery to sing;
Or when he rang'd on Fancy's playful wing,
Tuning the light and fairy note, or aim'd
To wake pathetic strains, or bade the string
To passion vibrate; but whate'er he fram'd,
His fix'd and fond regard still Love alluring claim'd.

For, did he dream of Peaceful cot and vale,
And picture rural bliss in lowly sphere,
Or visionary joys of fortune hail,
And cheat the hour in pleasure's gay career;
Or did his wild imagination rear,
The palace dome and castle's banner'd hall,
And wield the hero's sceptre or his spear,
Eugenia ever came at Fancy's call,
Partaker of each scene, enchantress of them all!

Thus did his heart, enthusiastic, own
The spell of Fancy and the pow'r of Love;
A heart perchance too oft to passion prone,
Too oft allur'd at Pleasure's call to rove:
But Genius would erelong ascendant prove,
And all his native energies restore,
Would soon each false and baneful charm remove,
And then the sister band he lov'd the more,
And with rekindled zeal awoke the Muse's lore.

Thy pious son, Ulysses, thus by guile
Of Beauty's wanton queen was led astray,
But soon, repentant, from her Cyprian isle
Again with Wisdom, nobly bent his way.&mdash;
Now cease awhile the lyre; a worthier lay
Haply the Muse may deign to wake anon;
Meantime, young Hope!  enjoy youth's blooming day,
Nor mourn that it must fade, when age steals on;
For Genius still shall charm, when youth and bloom are gone.

