"Alas!  how many in this mortal scene,
By Indolence allur'd, life's good forego!
How many o'er life's ill dejected lean,
And weep and droop in unavailing woe!
How few that ever-ardent spirit know,
Which toil can brave, or baffle subtile Care,
Can dauntless meet Misfortune's heavy blow,
Can each rude shock of disappointment bear,
And bid, unbroken still, defiance to Despair!

"Let Care, Mischance, and Disappointment spread
Around my furrow'd brow their threefold gloom;
Tho' wilder'd oft, still patient will I tread
The path that leads unerring to the tomb&mdash;
For still shall Fancy in her fairest bloom
Each visionary scene and form attire;
And when old Time this vital torch consume,
Hope breathe gently on its parting fire,
And wake a brighter gleam, ere the last spark expire.

"There are, for ever brooding, and austere,
Who would not brook the voice of guileless Mirth,
Nor mortal man with hope immortal cheer,
Who seeks not heav'n thro' misery on earth&mdash;
There are, who Joy would strangle in its birth;
But Nature, Truth, and Reason all maintain,
These are not sons of Wisdom, nor of Worth,
But gloomy bigots of perverted brain,
Who deem all pleasure vice, and make all virtue pain.

"Thou, Great Supreme!  when in the void of night
This star first rose, when o'er its wat'ry wild
Thy Spirit mov'd, and, ray'd with sudden light,
Another world in form and beauty smil'd;
Was the wide wave controll'd, the mountain pil'd,
The breeze breath'd sweet, the valley clad
In charms bewitching, but to mock thy child?
Ah!  no; thy laws of Nature never bade,
Amid Creation's smile, that Man alone be sad.

"Ah!  no; for Man was this fair orb design'd,
And o'er its surface all thy bounties strew'd;
Yet not for him whose weak or selfish mind
The ends by Thee appointed would elude:
Man was with active faculties endued,
And wisely taught their twofold use to feel,
That, whilst his good peculiar he pursued,
To others he a portion might reveal,
And perfect thus the scheme of universal weal.

"Then, favour'd being, labour to fulfil
The first best purpose of thy sojourn here;
Exert thy talent, and thro' toil or ill
Thy course with unabated ardour steer:
Then, happy mortal, in whatever sphere
The hand that form'd has fated thee to move,
View good in all &mdash; let Virtue ever cheer&mdash;
To Vice and Woe resist, and thou shalt prove
That there's a heav'n below, which leads to that above."

So sang the rapt Enthusiast, he whose eye,
Tho' oft by sorrow dimm'd, still beam'd with joy&mdash;
Whose heart with expectation still beat high,
Tho' pain with  pleasure there had mix'd alloy;
Whose spirit Discontent could ne'er decoy,
Rashly at Chance to rail &mdash; whose devious way
Vexation cross'd awhile but to annoy;
For, if o'ercast by clouds the promis'd ray,
Still onward would he press, nor doubt a brighter day.

And such wert thou, of whom in fervent strain&mdash;
Blest be thy shade!  the Bard shall fondly sing;
And should his daring hand essay in vain
To strike with tuneful art the trembling string,
Should he adventure, on Icarian wing,
The sun of Genius vainly to explore,
This consolation e'en defeat shall bring,
That he has fall'n, with thee intent to soar
Where haply other Bard had never soar'd before.

Yet ere thy impulse, Friendship!  he obey,
Say, Nature, why with such unequal fire
Dost thou thy models of the self-same clay
Inanimate?  why brutal, in the mire
Does this form grovel? &mdash; why does this aspire
Godlike beyond its earth? &mdash; why this form driven
Thy mental Eden &mdash; while to this, the lyre,
With all the spell of harmony, is given,
To lull each grosser sense, and lift the soul to heaven?

Ah, Nature!  not for Man must thou withdraw
The mystic veil which hides thy wise design&mdash;
Enough for him to learn thy sacred law&mdash;
Enough to know the gift of Genius thine:
But vain the boon, if in the soul supine
The unexcited powers inglorious rest;
But vain the boon, if yet no breath divine
Shall fan the flame that glimmers in the breast,
By fear ignobly damp'd &mdash; by indolence oppress'd.

Spirit of lofty zeal and fancy warm!
To thee the mystic pow'r does Heav'n impart,
Man's sluggish intellect to wake, and charm
To noblest energy his languid heart;
For oft in its recesses, wizard Art,
Or giant Sloth, the better feelings chain,
Till thou their fetters loosen &mdash; then they dart
Thro' ev'ry thrilling fibre of the brain,
And joy, and bliss refin'd, o'er all the senses reign.

'Tis thine, with sacred and celestial heat,
To thought sublime the sage devout to raise,
Whether, lone musing in his lov'd retreat,
He seek to trace of moral lore the maze;
Or wander wond'ring forth when earth displays
The changeful beauties of her various mould,
When ocean brightens in the borrow'd blaze
Of day, or night's deep shades the heav'ns unfold,
Where, rang'd thro' boundless space, beam living worlds untold!

'Tis thou canst teach the uncorrupted Bard
To spurn the choice of Epicurus' board;
Nor think his pittance scant, his fortune hard,
Whilst he may cull from Natures choicer hoard;
Whilst he, whate'er her rich domains afford,
Fondly may deem his own; or proudly borne
To Fancy's realms, where bards have ever soar'd,
'Tis thou canst bid him, tho' by watching worn,
Look down on bloated Ease and pity senseless Scorn.

By thee inspir'd, what numbers from the Nine&mdash;
What strains from Eloquence and Wisdom flow!
What witching sounds of harmony divine
Now loudly peal, now murmur sweetly low!
What models from the breathing marble grow!
What splendid fabrics lift their lofty form!
What scenes upon the living canvass glow,
Lash'd to the mast, while Vernet mocks the storm,
And paints its wildest rage in tints sublimely warm!

By thee unmov'd, had Man aspir'd in vain,
Where Genius soars, and keen-ey'd Science pries;
By thee unled, ne'er brav'd the trackless main,
Borne by the storm to where new worlds arise&mdash;
Nor, more adventurous still, had rang'd the skies:
By thee unwarm'd, the Muse had ceas'd to glow,
And all her votive train to idolize&mdash;
Heav'n's Poet ne'er had bid his numbers flow,
Nor Nature's favourite Bard immortal been below.

Yet foul-mouth'd Slander, on thy injur'd fame
Breathing her noisome and envenom'd taint,
Too oft has charg'd thee with fanatic flame&mdash;
Too oft, alas!  has Inspiration feint
Thy name usurp'd &mdash; and Simulation saint,
And blindfold Zeal with pious rage insane,
And Bigotry perverse and virulent
With Superstition, Faith's accursed bane,
Have dar'd Religion's cause and thee alike profane.

But far, my Muse, be the discordant theme
Of zealot Pride and Persecution's ire;
Wake thou no other warmth than may beseem
The love of nature and the tuneful lyre,
The mimic pencil, and, thy sacred fire;
Than such as Virtue, Truth, and Taste alone,
And objects beauteous and sublime inspire;
Such as to philosophic soul are known,
And thou, Enthusiasm, and heav'n-born Genius own!

Come then, and fondly claim your favour'd child,
In whom e'en now a kindling fervour glows;
On whom, tho' few fleet summers yet have smil'd,
O see what early beauties they disclose!
Not such as match the lily and the rose,
And give fresh lustre to the beaming face,
Not beauties which the speaking form bestows,
Unequall'd symmetry, unrivall'd grace&mdash;
Not such perfections these as fain the Bard would trace.

Yet well may these delight the wond'ring eye,
Well may the heart in sweet enchantment bind,
But soon, like dazzling meteors, shall they fly,
And leave no traces of their light behind.
I sing the, budding beauties of the mind&mdash;
Those shoots, in which betime we may descry
The future bloom &mdash; those germs in which we find
How sweet the mental flow'r shall blow: &mdash; ah!  why
Do these unnurtur'd droop &mdash; uncultivated die?

Thine, long-neglected orphan, (such the wight,
Whose mental blossoms would the Muse portray;)
Thine, Albert!  unregarded, to the blight
Of chill unkindness were expos'd; for aye
Thy infant sallies, and thy childish play,
Meant but a smile from Rigour to entice,
And the mere frolic of thy boyish day,
Were deem'd impatience, humour, folly, vice
And guiltless hast thou paid full oft of guilt the price.

It was, in truth, thy fortune to possess
A mind of happiest frame; for never there
Could froward Spite maintain its hold, far less
The sad or sullen fiend vindictive wear;
Yet never hadst thou known a parent's care,
But, to the guardian's faithless charge consign'd,
Or harshness, or neglect, wert doom'd to bear,
Now rudely check'd, now rambling unconfin'd,
Wild o'er thy native rocks, as sweeps the ocean wind.

And 'mid those rocks, and thro' their savage gloom,
Does Nature in sublimest form appear;
And there, fair type of Albert's hardy bloom,
By storms unwither'd, does the myrtle rear
Its verdant wreath, and deck the wintry year;
There still the mansion stands, thro' ages past,
Where dealt his ancient race their noble cheer;
By spreading groves once shelter'd from the blast,
But now a mould'ring pile amid a lonesome waste.

There did the sire, too prodigal!  his child,
Like a wild flow'r, amid the ruin leave,
The prime of his fair heritage despoil'd,
Yet o'er its wreck not doom'd forlorn to grieve;
For e'en tho' Fortune of  that wreck bereave,
At her poor malice say, shall he repine,
To whom such gifts has Nature deign'd to give,
As none but blind to reason would resign
For all the boasted good that wealth and birth combine?

Yet stay, my Muse, thy errant course, to mark
When first the mind's faint dawn breaks thro' the night
Of dormant reason, when the latent spark
Of mental spirit quickens into light;
Stay ere the young wing tempt a loftier flight,
To lead it flutt'ring o'er the plain below;
Stay ere thy ardent strain shall tell how bright,
How warm the intellectual flame may glow,
Some early-beaming hope of that bright flame to show.

Thine, Albert, kindled, soon perchance as thought
Found its first utterance from thy infant tongue,
When thy rapt gaze the glowing picture caught,
And on its tints thine eye enchanted hung;
When with rich harmony the wild harp rung,
Or sigh'd in notes Aeolian to the wind,
Or haply when come humble minstrel strung
A touching melody of simpler kind,
And with the charm of song his plaintive lay combin'd.

But on thine ardour no fond parent smil'd,
Seeking each impulse of the thought to scan,
Nor watch'd with fond prophetic eye the child,
To trace in each fine trait the future man,
Albert!  when first thy orphan course began,
Full many a proof of pure and gen'rous blood
Thro' thy transparent veins unvalued ran,
Full many a sign of intellectual good
Or shed its light unseen, or seen not understood.

Not that, as fables feign, such promise thine&mdash;
The forward imp shall Genius aye disclaim,
And of its fire the Muse shall thee assign
Such hope alone as Natures child became;
Such as might yield a heart of happiest flame,
When Joy or Grief in strain impassion'd spoke,
When Pity wept, or Wonder thrill'd the frame;
When gen'rous Rage against Injustice broke,
Or when the gentle act thy grateful warmth awoke:

Awoke for him, who from his rustic toil,
Thy kind, tho' humble friend, oft stole to bring
Some hoarded sweet of Autumn's fruitful spoil,
Or early flowret of returning Spring;
For him who bent the bow, or plied the swing,
Or sought the beech, and brook-imbedded vale,
To cull the polish'd pebble for the sling,
Or scoop'd the tiny skiff, and breath'd the gale
Which o'er the rippled pool impell'd her paper sail:

Or, when intent to rise on bolder wing,
Help'd thee the little palfrey to bestride;
Lur'd thee aloft to climb, or bravely spring,
Borne on elastic pole o'er ditches wide;
Taught thee supine to float, or stem the tide,
To mark the brood, and bear the feather'd spoil,
Or, pacing gently, thy quick step beside,
With legend tale or ditty sought the while
To charm thy wond'ring ear, and win thy ready smile.

Days of ingenuous childhood!  when unknown
To selfish Pride, or Apathy's dull sway,
All that it felt the heart would truly own,
And to emotion wild and warm give way.
Such his in truth, who now inspires my lay;
Yet, true to candour, shall the Muse confess,
Full oft the force of Nature might betray
That heart to childish folly, and excess,
Tho' never was o'erwhelm'd its wonted gentleness.

For still, tho' reckless of the coming night,
O'er wild'ring heath, or thro' the forest shade,
Truant he wander'd, or, to win the height
Of some proud cliff, with doubtful grasp essay'd,
No feather'd songster of the grove or glade,
No wave-wash'd tenant of the rocky shore,
E'er mourn'd the step that 'mid their lone haunts stray'd,
E'er wail'd the foot adventurous to explore,
That to their wild abodes thro' toil and peril bore.

Alas!  can cruel act have charms to lure
A heart that bows, to Nature's law alone?
Can that just law a deed, a thought endure,
Which Pity's gentle bosom would disown?
Wherefore, to harm thus ignorantly prone,
Glistens with, keen delight the infant eye?
Ah!  why does Heav'n, ere Wisdom's voice be known,
Some secret impulse to the heart deny,
That may the force repel of instinct cruelty?

Why, favour'd man, but plainly to impart
The bounty that exclusive flows for thee;
To show thy pride and folly what thou art,
And teach thy reason what thou yet mayst be?
Dost thou not hence more, glad, more grateful see
The mind's unrivall'd worth?  more blest appraise
The gift of that transcendent faculty
Which from the brute can thy condition raise,
And truth and heav'n reveal to thy enraptur'd gaze?

But gradual is the dawn, and the advance,
Of mental day, &mdash; and to its height sublime,
Slow as the sun ascends thro' heav'n's expanse,
Is Man's aspiring genius doom'd to climb.
Mind is in infancy as twilight time;
In childhood, as the morn, when forms appear
Wrapt in deceptive mists; in youthful prime,
As noontide dazzling bright; in riper year,
As Eve's attemper'd glow, when all is calm and clear.

Progressive thus thro' each peculiar stage,
The morn, and noon, and eve of intellect,
In childhood, youth, and man's maturer age,
With airy shapes and images bedeck'd;
And pictur'd each as Fancy way direct,
In colours false or true; but Reason's rule
Forbids from Sense untutor'd to expect
Those just conceptions, which Reflection cool,
Of Truth and Beauty wins, from lore of Wisdom's school.

Of School! &mdash; ah me!  at that unwelcome name
How sad a train of fancied evils start!
To Albert when the fated mandate came,
What pangs of smother'd sorrow swell'd his heart!
O see, the urchin, doom'd from home to part,
Leans o'er his little Eden in despair,
Bewails his fruitless toil, his useless art,
Or seeks the bow'r thick sown with flowrets fair,
To hide the starting tear, and sigh unheeded there!

How each lov'd object of the ling'ring scene
Pass'd in succession melancholy by!
The grassy plot, and slope, and meadow green,
The long deep vale, and rock projecting high&mdash;
The brook beneath, thro' which the troutlet shy
Shot swiftly on, and baffled all his skill;
The broader shallow, whence the minnow fry
To crystal vase he doom'd &mdash; the channell'd rill,
Turn'd from the deeper stream, his turf-fenc'd pond to fill:

The grove, where erst he gamboll'd in the shade&mdash;
The shed, where oft he shelter'd from the rain&mdash;
The busy farm-yard, where at noon he stray'd,
And scatter'd to the featherd group the grain&mdash;
The full-fledg'd linnet, whose melodious strain
Repaid his early care &mdash; the bounding fawn,
That now will seek the hand which fed, in vain;
And the fond dog, that still, at early dawn,
To catch his well-known call, will listen on the lawn.

Objects like these, at parting doubly dear,
The lorn Enthusiast sore with woe oppress'd;
But oft thro' weeping clouds the ray shoots clear,
And thus in grief his spirit shone confess'd;
And soon, to lull each painful thought to rest,
A thousand schemes of future course he scann'd,
A thousand forms in garb amusive dress'd,
A thousand projects, rich in pleasure, plann'd&mdash;
By Fancy kindled all, by Hope inspiring fann'd.

Thus would the Wight his drooping spirit cheer,
The trials of the little world to bear;
Trials, to dull and selfish soul severe;
A world to such, of sorrow and of care,
Not so to him, who finds for ever there
Some fair incentive to his active mind,
Some artless friend, his joy or grief to share,
Haply in riper year by Heav'n design'd
Friendship's romantic bond with firmer knot to bind.

Not so to Him who emulous of praise,
Pants to excel in ev'ry boyish feat;
Who strives from rival imps to bear the bays,
Whether he skim the course in contest fleet,
Or on the topmost branch exalt his seat,
Or seek thro' parting floods the pebbled floor,
Or haste, incited by a nobler heat,
At gloomy eve or matin chill, to pore
O'er learned page, and gain the meed of classic lore.

Blush not the Muse: &mdash; in vain does classic Lore
For taste yet unrefin'd her worth unfold;
In vain her lay for early Genius pour,
When random Fancy wanders uncontroll'd,
And wild Extravagance and Fiction hold
Of Justness and of Harmony the place:
In childhood ever thus the mental mould,
Till Truth shall objects of false glare efface,
And purer forms imprint of dignity and grace.

Blush not the Muse: &mdash; in vain does classic Lore
To Albert's wand'ring thought display her charms:
Releas'd awhile to range his native shore,
More 'witching theme his truant fancy warms;
The captive damsel now his soul alarms,
And rescuing knights rush on in breathless speed;
Great Gui of Warwick for the battle arms,
St. George of England mounts his fiery steed,
And dragons, giants, fiends, and fell enchanters bleed.

Rous'd by the fancied blast of herald's horn,
With high-plum'd casque, and corslet richly steel'd,
All glitt'ring in the golden ray of morn
The visionary champion seeks the field&mdash;
And now, enamour'd, lifts his ready shield
O'er suppliant Beauty, weeping sad, and pale;
And now, in wilder trance, prepares to wield
His sword of magic temper, and assail
The monster whose hard heart o'er virtue would prevail.

Mock not, ye beings of maturer year,
Deeds which by Fancy warm'd a child could do;
Your fam'd exploits as childish oft appear&mdash;
Ah!  would to Heavn they were as harmless too!
For then would man no mad ambition rue,
Nor frantic War his bloody trophies rear;
To Folly then the smile alone were due,
While now, alas!  she claim's the bitter tear,
Unmov'd by Sorrow's plaint, or Reason's frown severe.

Yon broken stile, that to his pregnant brain
Presents the drawbridge which the moat bestrides,
E'en now the doughty imp has gain'd &mdash; in vain
The' opponent bramble, with its bristly sides,
Has cross'd his passage, for awhile he chides
The guile and baseness of the enchanter foe;
From his just rage in vain the villain hides,
His guarding fiends have felt the vengeful blow,
And giant thistles bleed &mdash; and monster weeds lie low!

The wicked spell dissolves!  but, ah, sad Knight
Short is thy happy vision of renown
No rescu'd virgin will thy deeds requite&mdash;
No myrtle chaplets will thy  temples crown:
The charm has pass'd &mdash; for yon insensate clown
Has dar'd upon thy sacred haunt intrude.
And heedless thrown thy fairy fabric down,
Thy airy trophies to the winds are strew'd,
And chas'd is all the dream of thy romantic mood!

Mischance be his! &mdash; but on the lowly hind
To waste her anger let the Muse refrain;
Nor less to her just scorn be those consign'd,
(By gen'rous zeal unwarm'd, a Cynic train,)
Who view each flight romantic with disdain, 
Who, wise in worldly lore alone, deride
Save what the narrow bounds of self contain:&mdash;
Poor sons of Prejudice and sordid Pride!
What bliss of soul refin'd has Heav'n to you denied!

But he, with Fancy who exalts his flight,
Not long the cloud of disappointment knows,
And when the fleeting vapour flies his sight,
In fairer tints the op'ning landscape glows:
Thus, when the storm departs, the budding rose
Yields to the bee a sweeter, fresher grace;
Thus, when the heavy hour of trouble goes,
Hope brighter, happier beams, and every trace
Of sore vexation past, successive joys efface.

And thus with Albert, who in vengeful mood,
Or fruitless sorrow, but an instant frets,
Who, yet unus'd in sullen fit to brood,
Fires &mdash; frowns &mdash; forgives, and with a smile forgets:
Onward he hastes again, as hopeful sets
The mariner his sail, new tracts to find,
As mariner who but awhile regrets
The cloud-created shore, then to the wind
The' illusive phantom leaves, nor casts a look behind.

O heart of happy frame, on which unharm'd
Life's lessen'd evils ever lightly glance;
To which, by Nature, Hope, and Fancy warm'd,
Whatever can this mortal lot enhance.
Yields tenfold joy &mdash; O blest inheritance
Of heavn-born Genius!  that, with view sublime,
Still unsubmitting combats with Mischance,
And presses on, the envied steep to climb,
Unaw'd by pride or power, uncheck'd by change or time.

But, lo!  what new-born whim the urchin's brain
Delighted broods?  for now, with gesture wild,
Forward he lightly urges, now again
Stops sudden:  wherefore strays the giddy child,
As if some meteor false his steps beguil'd?
Wherefore with outstretch'd arms intently dwell
On empty space, and chide, in accents mild,
The unconscious air?  ah!  now I ken full well,
Fancy!  again he yields to thy resistless spell!

Bewitching Fancy!  whose effulgent wings
Waft thro' the ambient air their magic hues,
That o'er the dull reality of things,
Illusions ever new and bright diffuse:&mdash;
Enchanting Fancy!  who the willing Muse
Dost tempt thro' realms yet unexplor'd to stray;
And whilst the Bard with fondest hope pursues,
(To each devoting his enamour'd lay,)
Leadest thro' Fairy-land his wild adventurous way.

Behold yon cavern on the misty strand,
From whence the fretful wave, with sullen roar,
Retires reluctant o'er the yellow sand,
Its white foam scatt'ring on the craggy shore&mdash;
That cavern, dread to view, contains a store
Of Nature's wonders exquisitely wrought,
Of such as Neptune erst enamour'd bore,
To decorate a favour'd Nereid's grot&mdash;
'Tis now, as beldames tell, of elves the haunted spot.

Thither would Albert stray, when from the main
The drooping sun withdrew his ling'ring rays,
And muse till Cynthia rose upon the strain
Which told the frolic feats of Fairy days,
There once so dwelt he on the witching lays,
That Fancy seem'd to realize the scene;
For thence as o'er the deep he turn'd to gaze,
The wave with airy forms appear'd to teem,
And sweetest sounds were heard, as in enchanted dream.

In truth, were never yet to mortal ken
More wondrous sights by Fantasie supplied,
Nor haply will o'er mortal ear again
Notes of more melting modulation glide:
'Twas e'en as if the boist'rous ocean tide
Had felt of soothing Harmony the spell;
For, as the strain in sweep Aeolian sigh'd,
The soften'd surges with the cadence fell,
Or, with the fitful breeze, rose to the growing swell!

Anon a distant shout, as from the deep,
Faintly was heard to mingle with the strain;
And now a living vessel seems to sweep
With animated sail across the main;
Her holds of little sprites a host contain,
And on her polish'd deck are seen to stand
Of Minstrels, and of guards, an elfin train;
Titania's heralds, and her dulcet band,
By Nautilus, I ween, wafted from Fairy-land.

Lo!  as the bark the gentle billows lave,
Awhile her crew turn silent to the scene,
Where, on the bosom of the furthest wave,
Emerging Luna pours her silver sheen:
Ah!  see, as they approach, the deep serene
Gleams with a new and gradual splendour bright&mdash;
The rival splendour of the Fairy queen!
Herself like star of eve, and each fair spright,
In dewy gems bedeck'd, dimming the moon-beams light!

Again the little Minstrels strike the lyre,
And distant echoes waken at the sound,
Mermaids and Syrens join the vocal choir,
And playful float the fairy bark around!
Again the breezes blow, the caves resound
With louder, livelier note; the sail unbends,
And on the beach the vessel strikes aground&mdash;
The marshall'd host debark &mdash; the Queen descends&mdash;
She waves her wand &mdash; she speaks &mdash; the list'ning train attends.

"Spirits of Eve!  to enterprising Man
Let guardian Gnomes with friendly aid repair;
Let gentle Sylphs with wing ambrosial fan,
And sportive Zephyrs flit around the fair:
Athereal Elves!  be your peculiar care,
The infant tribe to watch, and shield from harm,
Their guileless joy, and guiltless grief to share,
Their flexile hearts with love of truth to charm,
And all their wayward whims and froward thoughts disarm.

"Soft on the unclouded brow your poppies shed;
But when 'tis still, and dim the taper's light,
Perch on the pouting lip and eyelid red,
And as to slumber sinks the sullen wight,
With sudden scream his sinking heart affright:
But first with me to yonder cave advance,
Where sleeps an urchin worthy of our care;
Around him lightly tread our fairy dance,
And chant our fairy lay, to charm him in his trance."

She ceas'd &mdash; some rapid wheel her pearly car,
Some thread to lively lute the magic ring,
Whilst others from the roof of glitt'ring spar
In pendent wreaths of living lustres swing.
Alas!  too loud the vaulted caverns ring!
Too bright for Albert's eye their arches shine!
He wakes!  away they waft on airy wing&mdash;
Again the waves' regressive margin line&mdash;
Now top the wat'ry mount &mdash; now in the vale decline.

To chase how vain!  for, in the lunar beam,
He sees afar their forms pellucid play,
Now sudden brighten in the quick'ning gleam,
Now fade commingled with the languid ray.
At length, as gradual dies the melting lay,
Feebly illum'd they glide along, and leave
A few faint flushes on the liquid way,
Till in light weftage with the clouds they weave,
And their soft shadows blend with deeper shades of eve.

Such are the faithless phantoms, which e'en now
Thro' tangled brake, o'er torrent's rocky bed,
And trackless waste upon the mountain's brow,
To yon bleak crag precipitous have led
The rapt Enthusiast: &mdash; O more lightly tread
The weak and hollow footing beneath
Wide yawns the gulf, and pointed reefs are spread,
Wild sweeps the squall across the rustling heath,
And sudden the loose soil breaks from the verge of Death!

"Fond imp!  thine Ardour, and thy bold ascent,
The fading objects of thy fruitless chase,
The sad vexation o'er thy features sprent,
How true the picture which of life they trace!
How like the projects of the sanguine race,
Who, bent each rainbow fancy to attain,
With eye misjudging, and with heedless pace,
Press on &mdash; and, when the purpos'd spot they gain,
Find the false vision fled, and all their labours vain!

"Then from thy fearful height, rash boy, descend,
Lest o'er the giddy gulf thy senses fail;
Hither thy way with wary footstep bend,
And tread secure the lowly shelter'd dale.
Here Quiet dwells, and balmy airs prevail,
To sooth Ambition's rage with danger rife;
And here thy little bark may smoothly sail
Adown the gently flowing stream of life,
From gusts of passion free, as from the storms of strife."

Thus, sober Reason haply may declaim,
And fondly strive Youth's fervour to assuage;
But Youth, unheeding, still pursues his aim,
And spurns her caution with a gen'rous rage.
Vain are the golden maxims of the sage:
'Tis by experience wisdom we acquire:
Then gaily let us pace Life's early stage,
Where Hope and Fancy lead, ere Genius tire,
And chilling Age o'ertake, to damp its noble fire.

This lot be his, to whom the impartial Muse
Yields the full measure to his merit due&mdash;
Be his, to whom no venal lays refuse
The ready censure to his failings too;
For oft where Fancy prompted to pursue,
With blind enthusiastic warmth he stray'd,
Nor could Reflection that wild warmth subdue;
Still urg'd by Hope, each impulse he obey'd,
Nor ever dreamt, fond imp!  her promis'd joy could fade.

Yet, may not faults like these indulgence claim
From him who views, with hopeful joy elate,
That happy presage, Genius, of thy flame?
That warmth, enthusiastic and innate,
Which Childhood's cares nor crosses could abate?
That ardour, kindled by the attractive store
Which Fiction link'd with Nature could create?
For wonder-teeming Fiction charm'd no more,
Unless of chaster Truth some semblance still she wore.

E'en such the wight, whose childish acts to trace,
Whose infant thoughts to picture I essay&mdash;
Such ends alone aspiring to embrace
As truly might those childish traits convey,
Some proof of Genius seeking to portray,
When objects by sensation newly brought,
First on the mind as on a mirror play&mdash;
When forms delusive win the tender thought,
By novelty's vain gloss and gaudy vision caught.

Yet such his mental frame, that never there
Could image monstrous and distorted dwell;
Form'd to attract the wondrous and the fair,
But all that outrag'd Nature to repel.
What more of Genius can the mind foretell?
The infant mind, where gentleness benign,
With buoyant spirit, and the gen'rous swell
Of emulation, blend &mdash; when thus combine
Wild and romantic zeal, and love of truth divine?

If traits like these be worthy of the lyre,
Then, Albert, thine may well its lay engage;
Nor can the Muse from Childhood more require,
Nor can the mind, whilst in its infant stage,
And prone to change and wonder, more presage
Of taste and judgment in maturer year&mdash;
Then pause, my Muse, with Childhood's happy age.
Till Fancy, Hope, and Zeal, with Youth appear,
Thro' tracts of wider range to lead his glad career.

