Why hang the sweet bells mute in Magdalen-Tower,
Still wont to usher in delightful May,
The dewy silence of the morning hour
Cheering with many a changeful roundelay?
And those pure youthful voices where are they,
That hymning far up in the listening sky,
Seem'd issuing softly through the gates of day,
As if a troop of sainted souls on high
Were hovering o'er the earth with angel melody?

This day the pensive Choristers are mute,
The Tower stands silent in the shades of woe,
And well that darkness and those shadows suit
The solemn hush shed o'er the courts below.
There all is noiseless as a plain of snow,
Nor wandering footstep stirs the unechoing wall.
Hark &mdash; hark!  the muffled bell is tolling slow!
Into my mournful soul its warnings fall&mdash;
It is the solemn day of Vernon's funeral.

No sound last night was heard these courts within,
Save sleepless scholar sobbing in his cell;
For mirth had seemed a sacrilegious sin
Against the dead whom all did love so well.
Only &mdash; at evening-prayer the holy swell
Of organ at the close of service sent
(While on their knees the awe-struck weepers fell,
Or on the pillar'd shade in anguish leant)
Through the dim echoing aisle a sorrowful lament.

All night the melancholy moonshine slept
O'er the lone chamber where his corpse was laid:
Amid the sighing groves the cold dews wept,
And the sad stars in glimmering beams array'd
In heaven seemed mourning o'er the parted shade
Of him who knew the nature and the name
Of every orb to human ken display'd,
Whether on silent throne a steadfast flame,
Or roll'd in music round the Universal Frame.

And now the day looks mournful as the night,
For all o'er heaven black clouds begin to roll,
Through which the dim sun streams a fitful light
In sympathy with man's desponding soul.
Is nought around but images of dole!
The distant towers a kindred sorrow breathe,
Struck 'mid their own groves by that dismal toll;
And the grey cloisters, coldly stretch'd beneath,
Hush'd in profounder calm confess the power of death.

Sad for the glory that hath parted thence,
Through spire, tower, temple, theatre, and dome,
Mourns Oxford in her old magnificence,
Sublimely silent 'mid the sunless gloom.
But chief one College weeps her favourite's doom&mdash;
All hearts turn thither in the calm of morn;
Silent she standeth like one mighty tomb,
In reverend beauty &mdash; desolate &mdash; forlorn&mdash;
For her refulgent star is all-untimely shorn.

Her courts grow darker as the hour draws near
When that blest corpse must sink for evermore,
Let down by loving hands to dungeon drear
From the glad world of sunshine covered o'er
By the damp pavement of the silent floor!
&mdash;Sad all around &mdash; as when a gentle day
All dimly riseth o'er a wreck-strewn shore,
When Love at last hath ceas'd to heaven to pray,
And Grief hath wept her fill, and Hope turn'd sick away.

Yea!  even a careless stranger might perceive
That death and sorrow rule this doleful place&mdash;
Passing along the grey-hair'd menials grieve,
Nor is it hard a tender gloom to trace
On the young chorister's sunshiny face,
While slow returning from the mournful room
Of friend where they were weeping o'er the days
With Vernon past &mdash; profoundly sunk in gloom
The pale-fac'd scholar walks, still dreaming of the tomb.

Now ghastly sight and lowly whispering sound
On every side the sadden'd spirit meet&mdash;
And notice give to all the courts around
Of doleful preparation &mdash; the rude feet
Of death's hir'd menials through this calm retreat
With careless tread are hurrying to and fro&mdash;
And loving hearts with pangs of anguish beat,
To see the cloisters blackening all below
With rueful sable plumes &mdash; a ghastly funeral-show.

&mdash;Come let us now with silent feet ascend
The stair that leads up to yon ancient tower&mdash;
&mdash;There, lieth in his shroud my dearest friend!
Oh!  that the breath of sighs, the dewy shower
Stream'd from so many eyelids had the power
Gently to stir, and raise up from its bed
The broken stalk of that consummate flower!
Nought may restore the odours once when shed,
That sunshine smiles in vain &mdash; it wakens not the dead!

Behold!  his parents kneeling side by side,
Still as the body that is sleeping there!
Far off were they when their sweet Henry died,
At once they fell from bliss into despair.
What sorrows slumber in that silvery hair!
The old man groans, nor dares his face to show
To the glad day-light &mdash; while a sobbing prayer
Steals from the calmer partner of his woe,
Who gently lays her hand upon those locks of snow.

He lifts his eyes &mdash; quick through a parting cloud
The sun looks out &mdash; and fills the room with light,
Hath given a purer lustre to the shroud,
And plays and dances o'er those cheeks so white.
"Curst be the cruel Sun!  who shines so bright
Upon my dead boy's face!  one kiss &mdash; one kiss&mdash;
Before thou sink to everlasting night!
My child &mdash; my child! &mdash; oh!  how unlike to this
The last embrace I gave in more than mortal bliss."

Pale as a statue bending o'er a tomb,
The childless mother!  as a statue still!
But Resignation, Hope, and Faith illume
Her upward eyes!  and her meek spirit fill
With downy peace, which blasts of earthly ill
May never ruffle more &mdash; a smile appears
At times to flit across her visage chill,
More awful rendering every gush of tears
Shed at the dark eclipse of all life's sunny years.

The whole path from his cradle to his grave
She travels back with a bewilder'd brain!
Bright in the gales of youth his free locks wave,
As if their burnished beauty laughed at pain,
And godlike claim'd exemption from the reign
Of grief, decay, and death!  Her touch doth meet
Lips cold as ice that ne'er will glow again,
And lo!  from these wan lips unto his feet
Drawn by the hand of death a ghostly winding-sheet!

She hop'd to have seen him in yon hallow'd grove,
With gay companions laughing at his side,
And listening unto him whom all did love!
For she had heard with pure maternal pride
How science to his gaze unfolded wide
Her everlasting gates &mdash; but as he trod
The Temple's inner shrine, he sank and died&mdash;
And all of him that hath not gone to God
Within her loving clasp lies senseless as the clod.

With tottering steps she to the window goes.
Oh!  what a glorious burst of light is there!
Rejoicing in his course the river flows,
And 'neath its coronet of dark-blue air
The stately Elm-grove rises fresh and fair,
Blest in the dewy silence of the skies!
She looks one moment &mdash; then in blind despair
Turns to the coffin where her Henry lies&mdash;
&mdash;The green earth laughs in vain before his closed eyes!

The Old Man now hath no more tears to shed&mdash;
Wasted are all his groans so long and deep&mdash;
He looks as if he cared not for the dead!
Or thought his Son would soon awake from sleep.
An agony there is that cannot weep,
That glares not on the visage, but is borne
Within the ruin'd spirit's dungeon-keep,
In darkness and in silence most forlorn,
Hugging the grave-like gloom, nor wishing for the morn.

Lo!  suddenly he starteth from his knees!
And hurrying up and down, all round the walls
Glances wild looks &mdash; and now his pale hands seize,
Just as the light on its expression falls,
Yon picture, whose untroubled face recalls
A smile for ever banish'd from the air!
"O dark!  my Boy!  are now thy Father's halls!
But I will hang this silent picture there,
And morn and night will kneel before it in despair."

With trembling grasp he lifts the idle gown
Worn by his Son &mdash; then closing his dim eyes,
With a convulsive start he flings it down,
Goes and returns, and loads it where it lies
With hurried kisses!  Then his glance espies
A letter by that hand now icy-cold
Fill'd full of love, and homebred sympathies;
Naming familiarly both young and old,
And blessing that sweet Home he ne'er was to behold.

And now the Father lays his wither'd hand
Upon a book whose leaves are idly spread:
Gone &mdash; gone is he who well could understand
The kingly language of the mighty dead!
&mdash;There lies the flute that oft at twilight shed
Airs that beguiled the old man of his tears;
But cold the master's touch &mdash; his skill is fled,
And all his innocent life at once appears
Like some sweet lovely tune that charm'd in other years.

But now the door is open'd soft and slow.
"The hour is come, and all the mourners wait
With heads uncover'd in the courts below!"
Stunn'd are the parents with these words of fate,
And bow their heads low down beneath the weight
Of one soul-sickening moment of despair!
Grief cometh deadly when it cometh late,
And with a Fury's hand delights to tear
From Eld's deep-furrowed front the thin and hoary hair.

His eyes are open, and with tearless gleam
Fix'd on the coffin!  but they see it not,
Like haunted Guilt blind-walking in a dream,
With soul intent on its own secret blot.
The coffin moves! &mdash; yet rooted to the spot,
He sees it borne away, with vacant eyes,
Unconscious what it means!  hath even forgot
The name of Her who in a death-fit lies,&mdash;
His heart is turned to stone, nor heeds who lives or dies!

Lo!  now the Pall comes forth into the light
And one chill shudder thrills the weeping crowd!
There is it 'mid the sunshine black as night!
And soon to disappear &mdash; a passing cloud!
Grief can no longer bear &mdash; but bursts aloud!
Youth, manhood, age, one common nature sways,
And hoary heads across the pall are bowed
Near burnish'd locks where youthful beauty plays&mdash;
For all alike did love the Form that there decays!

List!  list!  a doleful dirge &mdash; a wild death-song!
The coffin now is placed upon its bier,
And through the echoing cloisters borne along!
&mdash;How touching those young voices thus to hear
Singing of sorrow, and of mortal fear
To their glad innocence as yet unknown!
Singing they weep &mdash; but transient every tear,
Nor may their spirits understand the groan
That age or manhood pours above the funeral stone.

Waileth more dolefully that passing psalm,
At every step they take towards the cell
That calls the coffin to eternal calm!
At each swing of the melancholy bell
More loud the sighing and the sobbing swell,
More ghostly paleness whitens every face!
Slow the procession moves &mdash; slow tolls that knell&mdash;
But yet the funeral at that solemn pace
Alas!  too soon will reach its final resting-place.

How Vernon lov'd to walk this cloister'd shade
In silent musings, far into the night!
When o'er that Tower the rising Moon display'd
Not purer than his soul her cloudless light.
Still was his lamp-lit window burning bright,
A little earthly star that shone most sweet
To those in heaven &mdash; but now extinguished quite&mdash;
&mdash;Fast-chain'd are now those nightly-wand'ring feet
In bonds that none may burst &mdash; folds of the winding-sheet.

Wide is the chapel-gate, and entereth slow
With all its floating pomp that sable pall!
Silent as in a dream the funeral show
(For grief hath breathed one spirit into all)
Is ranged at once along the gloomy wall!
Ah me!  what mournful lights athwart the gloom,
From yonder richly-pictur'd window fall!
And with a transitory smile illume
The dim-discover'd depth of that damp breathless tomb.

All hearts turn shuddering from that gulf profound,
And momentary solace vainly seek
In gazing on the solemn objects round!
Those pictur'd saints with eyes uplifted meek
To the still heavens, how silently they speak
Of faith untroubled, sanctity divine&mdash;
While on the paleness of each placid cheek
We seem to see a holy lustre shine
O'er mortal beauty breath'd from an immortal shrine!

What though beneath our feet the earthly mould
Of virtue, beauty, youth, and genius lie
In grim decay!  Yet round us we behold
The cheering emblems of eternity.
What voice divine is theirs!  If soul may die,
And nought its perishable glory save,
Unto yon marble face that to the sky
Looks up with humble hope, what feeling gave
Those smiles that speak of heaven, though kindling o'er a grave!

O holy image of the Son of God,
Bearing his cross up toilsome Calvary!
Was that stern path for sinful mortals trod?
&mdash;Methinks from that calm cheek, and pitying eye
Uplifted to that grim and wrathful sky
(Dim for our sakes with a celestial tear),
Falls a sweet smile where Vernon's relics lie
In mortal stillness on the unmoving bier!
Seeming the bright spring-morn of heaven's eternal year.

&mdash;Down, down within oblivion's darksome brink
With lingering motion, as if every hand
Were loth to let the mournful burden sink,
The coffin disappears!  The weeping band,
All round that gulf one little moment stand
In mute and black dismay &mdash; and scarcely know
What dire event has happen'd!  the loose sand
From the vault-stone with dull drop sounds below,&mdash;
The grave's low hollow voice hath told the tale of woe!

Look for the last time down that cold damp gloom;
Of those bright letters take a farewel sight!
&mdash;Down falls the vault-stone on the yawning tomb,
And all below is sunk in sudden night!
Now is the chapel-aisle with sunshine bright,
The upper world is glad, and fresh and fair,
But that black stone repels the dancing light,&mdash;
The beams of heaven must never enter there,
Where by the mould'ring corpse in darkness sits Despair!

Where now those tears, smiles, motions, looks, and tones,
That made our Vernon in his pride of place
So glorious and so fair!  these sullen stones,
Like a frozen sea, lie o'er that beauteous face!
Soon will there be no solitary trace
Of him, his joys, his sadness, or his mirth!
Even now grows dim the memory of that grace
That halo-like shone round the soul of worth!
All fading like a dream!  all vanishing from earth.

Where now the fancies wild &mdash; the thoughts benign
That rais'd his soul and purified his heart!
Where now have fled those impulses divine
That taught that gifted youth the Poet's art,
Stealing at midnight with a thrilling start
Into his spirit, wakeful with the pain
Of that mysterious joy!  In darkness part
All the bright hopes, that in a glorious train
Lay round his soul, like clouds that hail the morning's reign!

Ah me!  can sorrow such fair image bring
Before a mourner's eyes!  Methinks I see,
Laden with all the glories of the spring,
Balm, brightness, music, a resplendent tree,
Waving its blossom'd branches gloriously
Over a sunny garden of delight!
A cold north-wind comes wrathful from the sea,
And there at dawn of day a rueful sight!
As winter brown and sere, the glory once so bright.

I look into the mist of future years,
And gather comfort from the eternal law
That yields up manhood to a host of fears,
To blinded passion, and bewildering awe!
Th' exulting soul of Vernon never saw
Hope's ghastly visage by Truth laugh'd to scorn;
Imagination had not paus'd to draw
The gorgeous curtains of Life's sunny morn,
Nor show'd the scenes behind so dismal and forlorn.

To thee, my Friend!  as to a shining star
Through the blue depths a cloudless course was given;
There smil'd thy soul, from earthly vapours far,
Serenely sparkling in its native heaven!
No clouds at last were o'er its beauty driven&mdash;
But as aloft it burn'd resplendently,
At once it faded from the face of even,
As oft before the nightly wanderer's eye
A star on which he gazed drops sudden from the sky!

Who comes to break my dreams?  The chapel door
Is opening slow, and that old Man appears
With his long floating locks so silvery-hoar!
His frame is crouching, as if twenty years
Had pass'd in one short day!  There are no tears
On his wan wrinkled face, or hollow eyes!
At last with pain his humbled head he rears,
And asks, while not one grief-chok'd voice replies,
"Show me the very stone 'neath which my Henry lies!"

He sees the scattered dust &mdash; and down he falls
Upon that pavement with a shuddering groan&mdash;
And with a faltering broken voice he calls
By that dear name upon his buried Son.
Then dumb he lies!  and ever and anon
Fixes his eye-balls with a ghastly glow
On the damp blackness of that hideous stone,
As if he look'd it through, and saw below
The dead face looking up as white as frozen snow!

O gently make way for that Lady fair!
How calm she walks along the solemn aisle!
Beneath the sad grace of that braided hair,
How still her brow!  and what a holy smile!
One start she gives &mdash; and stops a little while,
When bow'd by grief her husband's frame appears,
With reverend locks which the hard stones defile!
Then with the only voice that mourner hears,
Lifts up his hoary head and bathes it in her tears!

At last the funeral party melts away,
And as I look up from the chapel-floor,
No living object can my eyes survey,
Save these two childless Parents at the door,
Flinging back a wild farewell &mdash; then seen no more!
And now I hear my own slow footsteps sound
Along the echoing aisle &mdash; that tread is o'er&mdash;
And as with blinded eyes I turn me round,
The Sexton shuts the gate that stuns with thundering sound!

How fresh and cheerful laughs the open air
To one who has been standing by a tomb!
And yet the beauty that is glistening there
Flings back th' unwilling soul into the gloom.
We turn from walls which dancing rays illume
Unto the darkness where we lately stood,
And still the image of that narrow room
Beneath the sunshine chills our very blood,
With the damp breathless air of mortal solitude.

O band of rosy children shouting loud,
With morris-dance in honour of the May!
Restrain that laughter ye delighted crowd,
Let one sad hour disturb your holiday.
Ye drop your flowers, and wonder who are they
With garb so black and cheeks of deadly hue!
With one consent then rush again to play,
For what hath Sadness, Sorrow, Death to do,
Beneath that sunny sky with that light-hearted crew!

And now the Parents have left far behind
The gorgeous City with its groves and bowers,
The funeral toll pursues them on the wind,
And looking back, a cloud of thunder lowers
In mortal darkness o'er the shining towers,
That glance like fire at every sunny gleam!
Within that glorious scene, what hideous hours
Dragg'd their dire length!  tower, palace, temple swim,
Before their wilder'd brain &mdash; a grand but dreadful dream!

Say who will greet them at their Castle-gate?
A silent line in sable garb array'd,
The ancient servants of the House will wait!
Up to those woe-worn visages afraid
To lift their gaze!  while on the tower displayed,
A rueful scutcheon meets the Father's eye,
Hung out by death when beauty had decayed,
And sending far into the sunless sky
The mortal gloom that shrouds its dark emblazonry.

Oh!  black as death yon pine-grove on the hill!
Yon waterfall hath now a dismal roar!
Why is that little lake so sadly still,
So dim the flowers and trees along the shore!
'Tis not in vernal sunshine to restore
Their faded beauty, for the source of light
That warm'd the primrose-bank doth flow no more!
Vain Nature's power!  for unto Sorrow's sight
No dewy flower is fair, no blossomy tree is bright.

&mdash;Five years have travelled by &mdash; since side by side
That aged pair were laid in holy ground!
With them the very name of Vernon died,
And now it seemeth like an alien sound,
Where once it shed bright smiles and blessings round!
Another race dwell in that ancient Hall,
Nor one memorial of that youth is found
Save his sweet Picture &mdash; now unknown to all&mdash;
That smiles, and long will smile neglected on the wall.

But not forgotten in that lofty clime,
Where starlike once thy radiant spirit shone,
Art thou, my Vernon!  'mid those courts sublime
The mournful music of thy name is known.
Oxford still glories in her gifted Son,
And grey-hair'd men who speak of days gone by
Recount what noble palms by him were won,
Describe his step, his mien, his voice, his eye,
Till tears will oft rush in to close his eulogy.

In the dim silence of the Chapel-aisle
His Image stands!  with pale but life-like face!
The cold white marble breathes a heavenly smile,
The still locks cluster with a mournful grace.
O ne'er may time that beauteous bust deface!
There may it smile through ages far away,
On those, who, walking through that holy place,
A moment pause that Image to survey,
And read with soften'd soul the monumental lay.
