Blest be the day, tho' parting Love might weep,
When, fir'd the path of knowledge to pursue,
My native wilds I left, and brav'd the deep,
For loftier scenes, and skies of brighter hue,
Ah!  then, as wide creation rose to view,
Warm thro' my veins what thrilling rapture ran!
Amid her works what thoughts of Nature grew,
Gradual as she display'd their matchless plan,
And at each step reveal'd her master-wonder Man!

O say, can aught excel the joy refin'd
Of him who journeys thro' each varied land,
And with the lore enlarg'd of human kind,
Feels all his heart dilate, his soul expand?
Yes, that fond hope, by fav'ring breezes fann'd,
When bending to the well-known cliffs his ken&mdash;
Yes, that warm bliss, when, bounding on the strand,
The world's enlighten'd, happy Denizen
Speeds to his native wilds and weeping love again.

How felt the wand'rer, who thro' many a clime
Had urg'd his course, by noblest aim impell'd;
Had scenes of Nature, beauteous and sublime,
And men, and imitative arts beheld;
Had trac'd the mould'ring monuments of eld,
Till many a toil endur'd, and peril past,
Wth fond desire of home his bosom swell'd&mdash;
How felt the wand'rer, lightly when at last
Within the welcome port the bark her anchor cast?

It was that season, when from budding flowers,
Their first, fresh sweets are fann'd by Zephyr's wing;
When o'er the teeming soil, in blossom showers,
The early-forming fruits their promise fling&mdash;
It was that season of romantic spring,
While yet upon the trembling wave the ray
Of undimm'd morning-star hung glittering,
When Albert, reckless of the dawn's delay,
Printed with eager step his dew-besprinkled way.

As on he hied, lost in luxurious thought,
What blissful dreams that busy thought possest!
Dreams of sweet rest, more sweet by labour bought,
And love from absence and past grief more blest.&mdash;
And in those blissful dreams of love and rest,
What joy, what good, for others pictur'd he!
What high-born hopes in brilliant colours drest!
Visions, aspiring Genius!  rais'd by thee,
Visions of future fame &mdash; of triumph yet to be!

As day awaken'd, with what pure delight
His heart dilated to the cooling gale,
That down the mountain wing'd its viewless flight,
And drank the dewy fragrance of the vale!
What rapture his that incense to inhale,
When the wild beauties of his rural wonne,
With all its woods, and glens, and cliffs, and all
The waves that swell, and brooks that murm'ring run,
Blush'd with the first mild beams of morn's emerging sun!

It was as if some magic light had gleam'd,
As if some breath enchanting fill'd the air;
And all around, the fairy scene he deem'd
A smile more glad, a dress more gay to wear&mdash;
As if, in sooth, his welcome to prepare!
It seem'd as on his dwelling's airy dome,
A ray of heav'nly lustre rested there,
To win him to his long-deserted home,
No more from peace to part &mdash; no more from love to roam.

Yet on those charms but little while he hung;
Sudden, as if some object to descry,
From their sweet influence his glance he flung,
And pass'd with rapid step impatient by:
Along the upland path he seem'd to fly,
Till o'er a deep, sequester'd, woody vale,
Intent he stood &mdash; ah!  wherefore fix'd his eye
On that lone spot? &mdash; ah!  wherefore ye can tell,
Ye who like him have hop'd &mdash; have lov'd so long &mdash; so well.

O thou!  to win whose sweet, approving smile,
To kindle in whose soul a kindred flame,
With ardent spirit, Albert brav'd each toil,
And all his trials light of heart o'ercame&mdash;
Thou, at the magic only of whose name,
A thousand promis'd joys to Fancy grew,
When hope was far &mdash; what transport shook his frame,
Now each lov'd object rose in living hue,
To realize the bliss enamour'd which he drew!

"Awake!  arise!" with wild delight he cried,
"Fair as the twilight ray ere yet it glows;
Fresh as the breeze of morn, o'er ocean's tide
Or brow of mountain; sweet as when it blows,
And breathes the fragrance of the blushing rose;
Gay as the song of birds that glad the grove,
Yet gentle as the vocal strain that flows,
And wafts the matin pray'r to realms above&mdash;
Warm as young Friendship's wish &mdash; chaste as first sigh of love!

"Wake from soft sleep, and visions that entrance;
Rise, and in all thy wonted charms appear;
With all that beauty and that love enhance,
With all that virtue and that truth endear:
The melodies of morn thy coming cheer;
Thy Eden blooms, and echoes to the sound;
Thy Albert, too long parted, now is near:
He hastes &mdash; he flies &mdash; his fondest hopes are crown'd:&mdash;
Ah!  no; he lingers still, as on enchanted ground!"

There are, but only those who love can tell,
Moments ere on the lap of bliss we sink,
Moments when o'er that bliss awhile we dwell, 
And, tho' by longing fir'd, forbear, and think:&mdash;
There are, when as it were upon the brink
Of rapture, feelings that themselves restrain,
That struggle &mdash; rally &mdash; and that rallying shrink,
Lest giddy Reason may no more retain,
By ecstacy o'erwhelm'd, her empire o'er the brain.

Thus thought he, dwelt he, loveliest one, on thee!
And thus his wilder'd senses to recall,
E'en at the threshold of felicity,
Did Albert pause &mdash; but vain his efforts all,
The tumult of his feelings to enthrall:
They rose but wilder, breaking from their chain,
And more they rose, the deeper did they fall:
So, when he sought the embowered porch to gain,
Scarce could his trembling limbs his languid frame sustain.

With hope &mdash; with doubt &mdash; his heart alternate beat;
Faintly he utter'd thy lov'd name, and sigh'd:
Heard he a distant voice that name repeat?
Yes; 'twas the echo of his own that died.&mdash;
More loud he call'd &mdash; the hollow walls replied!
"Can love expectant thus her vigil keep?"
He listen'd &mdash; ponder'd &mdash; almost turn'd to chide&mdash;
"Love wakes at pleasure's call, if not to weep;
Hope, joy, and grief alike, dispel the charm of sleep."

From the void roof he turn'd to note around,
O'er all the scene what gloomy silence slept;
Thro' the rank grass the walks neglected wound,
And 'mid the garden sweets, that bord'ring swept
Those walks along, full many a weed had crept.
Sad where the lawn and grove, more sadly shown
In the clear stream o'er which the willow wept&mdash;
All seem'd to say, Here mayst thou weep alone;
Long from these, sorrowing wastes has their lov'd tenant flown!

Ah!  mournful presage, that too truly told
The yet severer trial of thy doom;
That thou wert destin'd hapless to behold
Thy day of fairest promise wrapt in gloom;
That, like a transient sunbeam o'er the bloom
Of Spring, thy light of joy had pass'd away&mdash;
That, like a meteor, never to relume
The vault of heav'n with bright delusive ray,
Thy star of hope had fall'n &mdash; had beam'd but to betray!

Where, Albert, now the bliss thy fancy gave?
Where now thy dreams, thy happy visions fled?&mdash;
For ever vanish'd! &mdash; sunk into the grave;
For all that thou didst love on earth is dead!&mdash;
Where shall the wand'rer lay his weary head?
To what deep drowsy solitude repair?
Where for his thoughts find sleep, but on the bed
Of Death?  for, in the mind's oblivion, there&mdash;
Alone is rest from woe, is refuge from despair.

Thus he, who, heedless of the stormy blast,
Aloft with ardent expectation flies,
And pois'd upon the high and rocking mast,
Sees from afar his land of promise rise;
But sudden as the vessel reeling lies,
Dash'd on the billow from his giddy height,
Sad o'er the watry waste he casts his eyes,
Weeps as the less'ning sail eludes his sight,
And sinks of hope bereft, whelm'd in the waves' dark night!

And thus sank Albert on the earth forlorn!
But not to life and thought to wake no more:
Again he rose, yet not with tears to mourn,
Nor with deep plaint his suff'ring to deplore;
Not one soft tear to soothe them could he pour,
Nor plaintive sigh nor murmur breath'd he one;
Yet wrong it were to deem his sorrows o'er&mdash;
Sorrows, alas!  untimely but begun,
Just as the goal of bliss his ardent fancy won.

Stunn'd with the weight of woe awhile he rov'd,
Like one in sense bewilder'd or beguil'd,
Scarce conscious of the forms that once he lov'd,
Regardless of the scenes around that smil'd;
Yet from his trance at times he started wild,
As if in doubtful balance reason hung;
And oft he turn'd to gaze, as one exil'd,
And seem'd within to struggle, as if stung
By some remember'd pang that sore his bosom wrung.

Nor was that inward effort vain: &mdash; at length
His feelings, like the river torrent's swell,
Burst ev'ry bound with wide o'erwhelming strength,
And in a flood of weeping sorrows fell.&mdash;
Ah!  child of woe!  misfortune would ye quell,
The force of grief's inevitable tide
Patient endure &mdash; but strive not to repel;
Free let it flow &mdash; and soon shall it subside,
Or in a calmer stream of melancholy glide.

Yet wouldst thou from a prying world conceal
The heart-consuming pang that pales thy cheek,
Thy suff'ring to the midnight moon reveal,
Or morn's lone star, ere twilight blushes break;
And when day beams, the darksome forest seek
Thy tears and sighs to winds and waters pour,
To rocks and trees thy deep affliction speak,
Or search some cavern on the desert shore,
And mingle thy sad plaint with ocean's murm'ring roar.

"Ye lone dark cliffs" (as o'er the past he sigh'd,
Thus Albert pour'd his solitary strain,)
"Deep in your rocky vaults a mourner hide,
Who flies from scenes where joy and nature reign;
For, lost to hope!  since, he has lov'd in vain.
Not all the blooming beauties earth can yield,
Not all the changeful wonders of the main,
Nor yon bright beams that earth and ocean gild,
Can warm a heart like his, by disappointment chill'd.

"Ye lone dark cliffs!  what tho' each wave-worn grot
May bar the smile of Nature from my view,
Can solitude conceal from bleeding thought
The sad remembrance of the bliss I knew?
No! &mdash; still relentless mem'ry will pursue,
And mock with parted moments of delight
Moments, alas!  how fleeting and how few!
Like moonbeams in a wild and wintry night,
When from the-passing cloud they gleam upon the sight.

"E'en as that cloud along the drear expanse,
By stormy blasts impell'd, by lightning riven,
Thro' a wide world of mourning and mischance,
With rended heart, Eugenia!  am I driven.
O to my prison'd spirit that 'twere given
To burst its mortal bonds, and, unconfin'd,
Trace the bright lustre of thy course to heaven,
O'ertake thee with the swift wings of the wind,
And earth, with all its ills, for ever leave behind!

"And is that hour, for all appointed, far?
Shall we not meet erelong beyond the tomb?
Shall not this promise, like a beaming star,
My melancholy pilgrimage illume?
What tho' untimely wither'd is the bloom
Of those fair wreaths and flow'rs that Fancy wove,
What yet of life remains shall grief consume?
Wouldst thou, blest shade, look down from bliss above
And deem my fruitless plaint deserving thy pure love?

"Ah, lost perfection!  if of thee bereft,
If now nor fame nor fancy can allure;
Thou whisper'st still &mdash; A noble task is left:&mdash;
For other's good each selfish aim abjure,
Thy mental pow'rs exert &mdash; improve &mdash; mature;
Toil, and be patient &mdash; kiss the chast'ning rod;
Thy spirit then, as ore refin'd and pure,
Purg'd of its dross, may quit its mortal sod,
Approv'd of her thou lov'st &mdash; acceptable to God."

Thus thro' a heart half yielded to despair,
The hope-inspiring breath of Genius stole,
And kindling ev'ry gen'rous passion there,
Fir'd with enthusiastic, flame the soul.&mdash;
Genius!  shall chance or change thy pow'rs control?
Shall mortal ills the immortal mind appal?
No: &mdash; let the dark tide of misfortune roll,
Let the full tempest of affliction fall,
Still shall thy true-born sons superior rise to all.

And thine was Albert. &mdash; Oft might cold neglect
The mind's unfolding growth in childhood cramp,
In youth by pleasure might its course be check'd,
In manhood might mischance its vigour damp;
Still joy and sorrow did but lend their stamp:
And when his visionary bliss had fled,
Still with the dawn of morn, or night's pale lamp,
He turn'd from errant Fancy but to tread,
With less bewilder'd step, where Truth and Wisdom led.

"O thou!  supremely fair!  sublimely great!
Thou from whose uncreated Spirit flow
Virtue and mental light, to raise elate
Man's heart, and soften his apportion'd woe&mdash;
Pure Source of love and happiness below!
On me a beam of thy mild radiance pour,
That I, a lonely wanderer, may know,
The ways of Wisdom rightly to explore,
And in her paths, of peace may win thy sacred lore.

"But where shall Hope my eager step incline?
Ah!  whither bend the anxious ear and eye,
To catch an echo of thy voice divine,
And some bright traces of thy march descry?&mdash;
In the deep maze of man's philosophy?
Too oft, alas!  what, mists of error there!
What false, fantastic lights are seen to blaze,
That, like the meteor's transitory glare,
But, leave the path more drear, more dark the troubled air!

"Yet say, shall I the search enervate shun?
Shall difficulty daunt?  shall toil deter?
Ah!  no:  immortal truth is to be won,
Man's life is short, and bids him not defer.
Were it not better far awhile to err,
Than quit the field of enterprise untried?
And perils, to the fearless traveller,
Are they not lofty beacons but to guide
To bolder, nobler aim, his patience and his pride?

"And lo!  amid the gloom expanding far,
Shall not the Historic Muse the mirror hold
Of Truth, and pour its guidance like the star,
Whose lustre led to Bethlehem of old?
Her various knowledge, shall, she not unfold,
And paint each fact with faithful dignity,
Show to the bad, the crimes of vice enroll'd,
The deeds of virtue bid, the guileless see,
And tell what man has been, to teach, what he should be?

"Alas!  throughout her picture of time past,
What dim, confus'd, deceptive forms succeed!
What motley hues o'er all has Fancy cast!
What colours Falsehood mingled to mislead!
And e'en where Truth has, from delusion freed,
E'en of those objects which herself has trac'd,
How many cause the feeling heart to bleed!
Man stain'd with blood, by lust and fraud disgrac'd,
By tyranny depravd &mdash; by slavery debas'd!

"O Being born for wisdom and for peace!
When will thy folly and thy madness end?
When with thy fellow-mortal wilt thou cease
For tyrants and their minions to contend?
Did war, and war's vain triumph, ever mend,
By spoils or pow'r, the lot of human kind?
No; they but serve the social ties to rend,
To swell the pride of despots, and to bind
In chains thy native rights &mdash; thy freedom of the mind.

"Witness ye warriors of my native land,
Ye who of late so bright in arms have shone!
Who long have wielded the triumphant brand,
And spilt the foe's best blood, and shed your own:&mdash;
Alas!  how are your gen'rous hopes o'erthrown!
For those whom ye from bondage would reclaim,
Again content beneath the yoke to groan,
Reap from your aid but slavery and shame,
Victims of idiot pride and persecuting flame!

"Return, my Muse, but not thro' fields of death,
Of spoil and carnage, to pursue thy way;
Turn from such scenes, and, with thy kindling breath,
Inspire a nobler warmth than these convey.
O let that breath each wild desire allay,
And whilst it wakes the passion to be free,
Still teach the dauntless spirit to obey,
Still bid in ev'ry patriot breast agree,
Valour with social love, and law with liberty.

"O Liberty!  how oft thy hallow'd name
Have Fiction and her demagogues profan'd!
How oft, as if enkindled by thy flame,
Have anarchy and civil discord reign'd!
And tyranny and hateful craft enchain'd!
How oft Rebellion has her flag unfurl'd,
And of its bravest blood a nation drain'd!
How oft her bolts has mad Ambition hurl'd,
And dar'd, beneath thy mask, to desolate a world!

"Ah!  where that model, 'mid the various forms
Of civil rule, which policy has plann'd&mdash;
Ah!  where that heart which patriot freedom warms,
Foes such as these unshaken to withstand?
Lo!  what wild uproar reigns!  on ev'ry hand
What motley hosts contending, crowd the stage,
With passions fir'd by guile, by folly fann'd,
All swoln with hate, revenge, and party rage,
All bent unnatural war with Liberty to wage!

"And let them come:  if but as open foes,
The free-born spirit mocks their fellest hate;
Are there not breasts still panting to oppose,
And hearts and hands still prompt to vindicate?
But where Corruption stealing lies in wait,
Where, Luxury and Idless win their way,
Soon shall enfeebled fall the proudest state:
Wealth may, without, a florid bloom display;
But all, alas!  within, is weakness and decay!

"Albion!  wouldst thou thy foes defeat, watch well
The traitors to beguile thee who devise:
Baffle with industry, Sloth's baneful spell,
And Luxury, and all her lures, despise;
Seek active arts, and deeds of high emprize:
Then shall Corruption, conquer'd, lick the dust;
Then bloated Pomp, and all her vanities,
And all the minions of her pride and lust,
Shall yield their pow'r to hearts more worthy of thy trust.

"But wouldst thou prove as happy as thou'rt free,
Let thy sage sons their light of knowledge spread;
Bid thy fair daughters, (pride of them and thee,)
The humbler walks of life delight to tread,
And on their dwellings truth benignly shed;
And there, while Health and Industry are blent,
While Freedom is with true Allegiance wed,
While love and social ties the laws cement,
Teach that true bliss on earth, is virtue and content."

Touc'd with these truths, from search of civil lore
Awhile did Albert turn his ardent view,
The depths of moral science to explore,
Now bent with toil redoubled to pursue;
As if the fire of Genius fiercer grew,
That fire, enthusiastic child of Fame!
Which thy fond dreams so oft have taught to rue,
Which, while it lights thy eye with brighter flame,
Consumes thy pallid cheek, and wastes thy languid frame.

"To me," he cried, "be life's true knowledge given,
Then haply I within my sphere may show
The duties which man owes to man and Heaven,
And help to fit him for his end below.
First culture on the mental soil bestow,
Then fair shall bloom the fruits of liberty;
Ere yet with freedom's keener heat it glow,
Let the mind virtuous and enlighten'd be:
Who best himself can rule, is worthiest to be free."

Warm'd with these thoughts, Albert, with eye intent,
From morn's faint ray, till twilight's fading gloom,
Hung o'er the page profound; but as he leant,
Oft would he wander from the studious theme,
And yield to Fancy's lighter spell, and dream
Of golden days long past, of joys long flown,
But now that at his call returning seem;
Of virtue and of bliss once perfect known,
In fair primaeval bow'rs, now smiling round his own!

Ah!  dream, in truth, of bliss that cannot be,
While Heavn shall frame its earth-born creature frail;
While, thro' this wide world of uncertainty,
Evil and good, virtue and vice prevail.
And let not Man his checquer'd lot bewail:&mdash;
More sweet is pleasure from the smart of pain;
More priz'd is peace, where woes of war assail;
More bright, from gloom of grief beams joy again;
More glad the smile of Spring, from Winter's frowning reign.

"Nature!  in vain the keenest eye would trace
Thy mystic maze of moral right and wrong;
But dull that heart which cannot feel the grace,
The soft enchantment, which to thee belong:
Again then let me range thy walks among,
And mildly charm me with thy morning blush,
And gently cheer me with thy morning song,
And with thy soothing eve my sad thoughts hush,
And with thy cooling gales allay Grief's hectic flush.

"Ye grots and bow'rs!  deserted seats of love!
Haunts of my musing in a happier time!
Ye woods, and vales, and mountain rocks above;
Where oft at morn and eve I lov'd to climb,
To list the cadence of the distant chime,
Or catch the wild sound of the water's fall:
Ye waves, and sands, and cavern'd cliffs sublime!
Beauties of earth, wonders of ocean, all,
What dreams of vanish'd joy, alas!  would ye recall!

"Shall I not rather turn my mournful view
From scenes, which but the recollection bring
Of joys for ever fled?  which but renew
The first keen pang of disappointment's sting?
Ah!  no: &mdash; lov'd scenes!  tho' sore my heart ye wring,
Still on your sadden'd beauties will I dwell,
Still to the bliss that ye have, witness'd cling,
Still with my lyre your sorrowing echoes swell,
And nourish, of loves lay the melancholy spell!

"Yet not to Heav'n's dark doom I bend forlorn&mdash;
No; with new zeal will I my harp attune,
To wake the beauties and the blush of morn,
To hail the bright magnificence of noon&mdash;
To woo the grace of eve &mdash; and when the moon
Sheds o'er the face of Nature her mild light,
With thee, O lov'd too dearly &mdash; lost too soon!
Shall Hope and Fancy wing enrapt their flight,
And with thy spirit range the beaming vault of night.

"Come peaceful Night! &mdash; to me thy darkest shade,
Thy deepest silence, will no dread convey:&mdash;
To me, when Earth and all her beauties fade,
What awful splendour does thy gloom display!
O but for thee, how long in dazzled day
Had blaz'd the glory of one sun alone!
O but for thee, how many a star's bright ray
To mortal eye invisible had shone!
How many a radiant world had roll'd its course unknown!

"Lo!  as the heav'ns their ample frame unfold,
Order how perfect!  harmony how grand!&mdash;
Is there a wakeful eye that can behold
The vast stupendous scheme, and doubt the hand
That all its wonders, all its glories plann'd?
Is there a wakeful heart, so cold and drear,
That does not at the boundless scene expand?
And, touch'd with holy inspiration, rear
Its hope beyond the bourne of earth's contracted sphere?

"Say, in Man's heart can Heav'n a wish implant,
That wish with dark despondence but to kill?
Bid him with thirst of bliss immortal pant,
The cup of promis'd rapture but to spill?
Faultless in all but Man, shall Nature fill
His frame with reason and with thought, that he,
Still struggling with unprofitable ill,
In life his transitory good may see,
And feel a pang in death from which the brute is free?

"Ah!  deem not thus the will of Heav'n unjust,
Doubt not the ways of Providence are wise:
Tho' sink this perishable form to dust,
Its spirit incorruptible shall rise;
But when in dust its mortal dwelling lies,
Where then it wanders, wherefore seek to know?
In bow'rs of lasting bloom, or 'mid the skies,
Enough for me, if but that spirit go,
To live and love with those whom it has lov'd below."

Buoy'd with this hope, a mingled feeling rose,
Fervent, yet calm &mdash; which, while it lull'd to rest
The keen despondence of the mourner's woes,
Still fann'd the flame of Genius in his breast,
And urg'd him more to persevere in quest
Of Nature, and the search of lib'ral Art,
Till, richly of their treasur'd lore possess'd,
A portion to his lyre he might impart,
And fire the gen'rous soul, and, touch the gentle heart.

Vision of fancy!  dream of wand'ring thought!&mdash;
How oft the dewy promise of the morn,
With light, and grace, and vernal odour fraught,
Is dimm'd by dreary clouds and mists forlorn!&mdash;
Son of the Muse!  to disappointment born,
How oft thy op'ning prospects fade in gloom!
How oft the wreath that should thy brow adorn,
With all the beauties of thy mental bloom,
Untimely shed their sweets, and wither in the tomb!

Albert!  while thro' thy veins the life-blood flow'd,
And health again seem'd sparkling in thine eye&mdash;
Whilst on thy cheek a blush of vermil glow'd,
That with the blossom of the rose might vie,
I saw beneath that blush the canker lie&mdash;
I saw that blush the fever flame betray,
I mark'd the damp cold brow, and shiv'ring sigh,
Just like the changes of an April day,
Now chill'd by Winter's frost, now scorch'd by Summer's ray.

In vain did these sad signs of mortal change
Thy mental labour warn thee to forbear;
In vain thro' Nature's landscape bade thee range,
Or to the margin of her wave repair:&mdash;
Alas!  amid her loveliest scenes &mdash; e'en there
Her cooling breeze that o'er the billow came,
Her lowland zephyr, and her mountain air,
Did but thy spirit brace, and fan the flame,
That with intenser thought consum'd thy mortal frame.

But who that mark'd thy outward smile alone,
Thy brighten'd eye, and ever-ardent mien,
Thy hour of languor and of pain had known?
Thy sorrow that consum'd within had seen?
E'en I more watchful had deluded been:&mdash;
But She whom still my secret tears deplore,
She o'er whose memory I love to lean,
She taught, alas!  my cheated hope before,
To trust the hollow faith of earth-born joy no more!

Still lov'd one!  is that bliss of mem'ry mine,
Which bids us bear the loss of those most dear;
Which whispers, when in sickness doom'd to pine,
To soothe their pain that we were by to cheer;&mdash;
Yes; in thy hour of trial I was near,
Fondly to watch &mdash; and pray beside thy bed&mdash;
To press thy hand &mdash; to dry thy parting tear&mdash;
To pillow on my heart thy drooping head&mdash;
Hail thy last smile of hope, kiss thy cold cheek when dead!

Alas!  whate'er for thee I did, in vain,
For Albert with the same fond zeal I strove;
Thy sympathetic heart confess'd its pain,
And sought for consolation from my love;
Thy gentle spirit, like the light-wing'd dove,
Tho' bent to flee away and be at rest,
Still turn'd and linger'd from its bliss above,
To soothe a kindred heart with woe oppress'd,&mdash;
More kindly anxious thou to bless than to be blest.

His were far other feelings: &mdash; he on earth
Had no lov'd object with regret to leave;
What most he once had valu'd there of worth,
Of this dark fate had destin'd to bereave:
To him no more of joy had life to give&mdash;
Then wherefore should he mourn to find release
From all its cares and pains?  then wherefore grieve,
That soon its long and troubled dream should cease,
And, the short sleep of death wake to immortal peace!

Yet it the heart exalted to behold,
As slowly to decay his weak frame bent,
How ev'ry plaint of suff'ring he controll'd,
And patient strove till pain itself was spent;&mdash;
To mark, as on eternity intent,
Each look of holy awe and hope resign'd;
To see, as from its mortal element,
Gradually freed, the spirit beam refin'd,
Till all that life had left, seem'd but embodied mind!

Then, Genius, was thy triumph &mdash; then the voice
Of Virtue and of Reason whisper'd sweet:
True son of Science and the Muse, rejoice
Thy task is done &mdash; thy trial is complete!
Of Nature gifted, thou, with ardour meet,
To win the meed of knowledge well hast striven,
Improving still, with unabated heat,
The noblest, proudest attribute, which Heaven,
To wake immortal hope, to mortal man has given.

If brief thy term of life, brief too its ill:
But those bright hours which sorrow could not steal,
With what fair dreams didst thou their sunshine fill!
What rapture to thy hopes did they reveal!&mdash;
Ah!  who the charm of Fancy that can feel,
Who that aspires the Bard's proud palm to seize,
Who that would nobly toll for human weal,
Would barter hopes, and thoughts, and toils like these,
For a few added years of vain inglorious ease?

Albert, farewell!  fast fades thy life away,
As droops yon sun earth's darkling bound below;
But happier thou: &mdash; for the sunk orb of day
The same shall rise from darkness, but to throw
His wonted lustre on a world of woe&mdash;
While thou, when past death's unreturning night,
When thy imperishable mind shall flow
Back to the Fountain of all life and light&mdash;
Thou!  in more blissful scenes shalt beam for ever bright!

Albert, farewell &mdash; alas!  of thee bereft,
Life now for me has little to resign;
Yet while one solace to my grief is left,
Shall I ungrateful to the Muse repine?
That solace, son of Genius, once was thine;
And now, as sadly round thy hallow'd urn,
A wreath (alas, how fading!) I entwine,
To bend to Heav'n thy spirit bids me learn,
And with a Bard's fond hope still to that solace turn.

Friend of my joys!  companion of my woes!
My lov'd and faithful lyre &mdash; whose soothing strain
So oft has lull'd my sorrow to repose,
And calm'd my fever'd pulse and throbbing brain,
Still to a heart where warmest passions reign&mdash;
Where anxious hope and doubt alternate sway&mdash;
Where beat the wild extremes of joy and pain&mdash;
Still to my heart thy wonted charm convey,
And cheer my wand'ring steps thro' life's uncertain way.

For 'tis perchance my checquer'd doom to mourn
Beneath a load of troubles yet untried;
Tho' my full share already have I borne,
Of heaviest ills that human lot betide,
Smarting for slander'd fame, and wounded pride&mdash;
Sighing at baffled hope, too prompt to soar&mdash;
Sighing for friends whom lurking foes divide&mdash;
Weeping for those who lov'd till life was o'er&mdash;
Bleeding, alas!  for those who live and love no more.

These and a thousand pangs that rack the mind,
(Can pain of grosser sense with these compare?)
These with the weight of others' woe combin'd,
Hast thou, my faithful lyre, still taught to bear;
For, when my soul has leant to dark despair,
'Twas but my fingers o'er thy chords to fling,
And gloom has fled, and all again been fair&mdash;
'Twas but to strike howe'er unapt, thy string,
And Hope again has wak'd, to soar on lighter wing.

Nor has the Muse, who first inspir'd my thought
To woo thy spell, a heart unthankful found,
A heart where ev'ry joy by Fancy wrought,
Has danc'd more glad thro' Pleasure's magic round&mdash;
A heart, where scarce a wish but has been crown'd,
Where Truth o'er Craft and Malice has enjoy'd
Her triumph &mdash; where, with kindred ardour bound,
Friendship has glow'd unchang'd, and love, uncloy'd,
Has realiz'd the dream of rapture unalloy'd.

But joy nor woe could in that grateful heart
Its pure devotion to the Muse decrease;
Nor shall it fail to love her witching art,
Till fate from life's last pilgrimage release:
Then soon remembrance of the Bard shall cease&mdash;
But if one virtuous deed thy strain inspire,
If to one troubled thought can whisper peace,
And wake of Genius the desponding fire,
Thou haply yet shalt live, my lov'd and faithful Lyre!
