Thee shall the Muse disclaim, whom selfish woes,
Whom pride, or cold neglect, can doom to weep,
With'ring your mental bloom, as blighted rose,
Whose blossoms chilling winds untimely sweep:
Nor less her scorn, who well might brave the steep
Of deathless fame, and win its height supreme,
Yet on the bed of sloth dost idly sleep,
Whose transient Wit shoots forth a fickle gleam,
Whose fancy fades away, a wild and empty dream!

But thou, true son of Genius and of Zeal!
Boast of the lyre!  for lofty purpose born;
To woes or wrongs thy heart undaunted steel,
And meet the scoff of Pride with tenfold scorn;
View not the trials of Mischance forlorn;
For these may but your energies incite;
But from the spell of Sloth and Pleasure turn;
For those, alas!  may dim the mental light,
And wrap the dawn of Hope in dark despondent night.

Say, Albert, shall this hapless dawn be thine?
Wilt thou so soon its clouded promise rue?
Lur'd on the lap of Languor to recline,
Shall baneful Indolence thy soul subdue?
Ah!  no; with ardent and enlighten'd view,
Shalt thou a prouder destiny fulfil,
Like him of eld a nobler course pursue,
And Pleasure's tempting cup triumphant spill&mdash;
Warm'd by the gen'rous Muse, and, true to Genius still.

Beyond thy bourne of rural walk aspire;
Enough with homebred Nature hast thou stray'd;
Too long with love, and with the love-strung lyre,
Thy feet have wander'd thro' the grove and glade;
Too long the length'ning strand, and beach embay'd,
Thy steps have printed; now the sister-band
Would lead thee from the shore and sylvan shade,
Would bid thee quit awhile thy native land,
And o'er an ampler range thy bounded ken expand.

Yet sad and painful 'tis, in truth, to part
From happy scenes where we are wont to dwell;
And firm and nobly fram'd must be the heart,
The gentle heart that Genius can impel
To bid to all it loves, a long farewell.
O Genius!  great thy pow'r that can o'ercome
Youth's warmest passion, and unloose the spell
That binds him closely to his native home,
Urging to realms afar, thro' toil and risk to ream.

"Scenes of my infant joy!  from you awhile&mdash;
Haunts of my youthful love!  from you I go;
Yet riot on me so fair in sunshine smile,
As if to mock, alas!  my parting woe.
Let darkling day a gloom congenial throw,
That ye may seem in sympathy to mourn;
Then shall my soul its wonted vigour know,
As from afar my last fond look I turn,
And go where Science leads, by cheering Hope upborne.

"Lo!  to my search is not the wide world given?
Does not boon Health my limbs for labour brace?
I long to breathe the changeful climes of heaven,
I long the wonders of the earth to trace;
What joy, what knowledge, in the attractive chase!
To rove sublime and beauteous scenes among,
To mark the rival arts of mortal race!
And as instruction guides my steps along,
Haply the willing Muse shall then inspire my song.

"Blest song, Eugenia!  if alone thy heart
Approve the humble tribute of my lay;
Then shall my strain a twofold charm impart,
Joyful as I retrace my homeward way.
Yes, happier hours &mdash; yes, many a smiling day,
My recollected labours shall requite,
As to the traveller the morning ray
Breaks on his couch of balmy rest more bright,
From his remember'd toil, and wand'rings of the night."

In Fancy's warm and magic colours drest,
Such were the hopes that Albert lov'd to raise;
That pictur'd her who all his heart possess'd,
Delighted, list'ning to his future lays:
Thus Nature that inherent bent betrays,
Which does the soul of Genius ever move,
That bent to please, that fond desire of praise:
And who a richer recompense would prove,
Than such sweet praise to win from beauty and from love?

E'en thus enthusiastic did he seek
With dreams of joy his sorrow to control;
And when lie mark'd, Eugenia!  thy pale cheek,
And saw the flood of grief in silence roll,
If from its fount a tear congenial stole,
Soon did a blush arise that tear to chide:
O painful struggle of the gen'rous soul!
Intent alone thy selfish woe to hide,
The child of feeling thou, nor less the man of pride.

First in a throng of wild'ring projects lost,
A train of objects that his fancy wrought;
A maze of winding paths his view that cross'd,
Like living statue by enchantment caught;
The fond adventurer involv'd in thought,
As if some potent spell his pow'rs o'ercame,
Stood fix'd &mdash; till, back to life and action brought,
The quicken'd blood ran thrilling thro' his frame,
Restor'd his torpid force, and fix'd his wav'ring aim.

'Twas yours, ye matchless masters of the lyre!
Ye heav'n-born sages!  and ye bards of yore!
'Twas yours his ardent purpose to inspire;
For lately had he known your classic lore
To prize &mdash; and now it rous'd him to explore
Those hallow'd seats of Wisdom and the Nine,
Those seats where human art first learnt to soar,
And rival Nature in her works divine
A zealous vot'ry he &mdash; a pilgrim to their shrine.

'Twas yours to bid his mental pow'rs expand,
And freely whilst expanding to select;
For Nature's changeful forms, graceful or grand,
With blending objects oft their charms reflect&mdash;
Charms with delusive rapture that affect;
Objects that feeling wildly has embrac'd,
Nor ceas'd with faultless Beauty to connect,
Till, by your lore illum'd, the mind has trac'd
The pure and lucid source of philosophic taste.

O sense refin'd of all that fair or great
In art and nature dwells!  O life and light
Of intellectual bliss!  whether innate,
Thy pow'rs awake perception exquisite,
Or judgment's deeper search those pow'rs excite,
'Tis thine with Genius ever to pursue
Nature's true step and Fancy's lawful flight,
To point fresh wonders to the curious view,
And to familiar forms give graces ever new.

But see!  for Fancy still the wand'rer sees.
As first expectant on the deck he stood,
And mark'd the swelling sail, and hail'd the breeze,
And felt the bark glide lightly thro' the flood:
Thrice welcome breeze!  to him who long has woo'd
Thy breath suspended, who with sudden glow
Feels the fresh current fan his ardent blood,
Who pants new realms to seek, new arts to know,
And hopes in changeful scenes erelong to cheat his woe.

Nor sought in vain &mdash; for his was not the eye
To which wide ocean could no charm unfold;
Nor his the heart, to pass unfeeling by
Those cavern'd shores to which the wild wave roll'd:
'Twas his with warmth romantic to behold
Each shelving strand, deep bay, and shallow creek,
Each rocky isle, and cliff abrupt and bold,
That faded gradual with the headland bleak,
The slowly sinking coast, and cloud-commingled peak.

What thoughts arose!  when Night her mantle spread,
And all was dark o'er ocean's dread extent,
Save where a star its feeble lustre shed,
Or ambient wave its light phosphoric lent,
Till welcome Luna, with her bright ascent,
Illum'd the world of waters that appear'd
Hung as the spheres in heav'n's vast firmament,
While the lone vessel, like that bark rever'd
Which o'er the billows went, before the light wind steer'd.

What rapture woke!  when Sol from ocean's bound
Diffus'd his blaze the kindling billows o'er,
And when the land-breeze many a jocund sound
Of waken'd life and morn harmonius bore&mdash;
The restless surge that broke along the shore&mdash;
The thund'ring signal from the banner'd fort&mdash;
The bark unmooring, and the busy oar&mdash;
And distant hum of bustling mart and port,
Where Traffic's motley crew, and War's wild sons resort.

In many a foreign clime did Albert view
The life and change that to such scenes belong,
The life and change of scenes more polish'd too,
Where oft he mingled with the fickle throng
Of Vanity.  But Pleasures syren song
Not long could from his purpose tempt to stray;
He tarried but the city crowd among,
The state of arts and manners so survey,
Then with new warmth pursu'd his meditated way.

"Hail land of Genius!  land in truth divine!
Where gods have dwelt, and where immortal men
Have deck'd thy temple, Fame!  with many a shrine;
O hail, unrivall'd Greece, that to the ken
Of eager Fancy now dost live again;
As once enlighten'd, and as once renown'd&mdash;
Brave, free, inventive, just, and wise, as when,
With arms, and arts, and civil science crown'd,
Thy pow'r no equal own'd, thy glories knew no bound.

"And you, fair isles!  that on the Aegean main,
Smile in the shelter of your kindred shore;
To whom the honours of your former reign,
Imagination fondly would restore;
And to yon states Ionian, as of yore,
When fir'd o'er proud oppression to prevail,
From the Barbarian brow the palm they tore,
When each display'd within its narrow pale
A world of matchless deed &mdash; fair states and isles, all hail!

Such Albert's ardent strain, when thy dim coast,
And distant capes, Laconia!  met his view;
When in deep thought of other ages lost,
O'er waves and clouds remote his glance he threw,
And those far isles that circle Delos drew,
And those far realms that bound Icaria's sea,
Prone as each son of Genius to pursue
Fancy's free flight, awhile forgetful he,
Once happy realms and isles, of your sad destiny!

Ah!  sad in sooth; for, echoing from the strand,
No more the voice of Freedom glads the wave;
No more exulting, Hellas!  o'er thy land,
It wakes to honour and to arms the brave;
Fear, ignorance, and sloth, and vice deprave
The soul by baleful tyranny o'erborne;
Foul treachery awaits; and the pale slave,
Of viler slaves the victim and the scorn,
Weeps o'er his native soil, robb'd of its fruits forlorn!

Ah!  sad in sooth &mdash; for now is heard no more,
Thy pastoral cadence &mdash; thy heroic song&mdash;
Thy hallow'd streams their numbers cease to pour,
Thy sacred mounts those numbers to prolong;
Silent the tuneful tongue, and mute the throng,
That swell'd their acclamation to the skies;
Thy walks of science, and thy groves among,
'Mid ruin'd arts the lurking robber lies,
And starts when in the wind the shade of Genius sighs.

Isle of Apollo!  e'en thy splendid fane
And (wonder of the world that worshipp'd there)
Thy matchless altar, which, alas!  in vain
Aw'd the proud Mede, and taught him to forbear,
Those beauteous relics which e'en Time could spare,
That Art erelong her ling'ring beam might shed&mdash;
E'en these the brute and gross barbarian share&mdash;
O'er the rank sod in shatter'd fragments spread,
Or, shap'd by hands profane, rude pillars for the dead!

That heart alone, to which each high design,
Each graceful form of classic art is dear,
That dwells with rapture on the works divine
Which Genius and which Zeal were wont to rear,
And wond'ring after-ages to revere&mdash;
That heart alone can tell what awe profound
Albert first felt, as slowly wafted near
Thy shores, Latona!  from their rocky bound,
Thro' the lone waste he heard the mournful wave resound.

There, Delos!  from thy solitary steep,
As pensive he beheld, on Ocean's bed,
Those once-fam'd isles that now degen'rate sleep;
Ah!  where, he cried, are all your glories fled?
Where are the fleets that once the wave o'erspread&mdash;
The sacred bark &mdash; the consecrated band&mdash;
The festive train that to the temple led,
With hallow'd off'rings from each pious land,
While clouds of incense rose, and perfum'd all the strand?

Incense, and off'rings from the fruitful store
Of bright Mycone &mdash; from the fertile plains
Of Cythnos, Ceos, and Rhenea's shore,
Which but the ashes of the dead contains;
From cultur'd Tenos, where no more remains
Her grove the fane of Neptune to surmount;
From Lassia, where no longer Bacchus reigns,
Nor, as his happy votaries recount,
Wine, Joy, and Love, and Mirth, flow from his magic fount:

First fruits and homage from the fragrant vales,
Which now, alas!  in Siphnos cease to smile;
Where now, as erst, no breeze its balm exhales,
To lengthen the short span of life awhile&mdash;
From rugged Seriphus &mdash; Oenoe's isle&mdash;
Volcanic Melos &mdash; Dia's green abodes&mdash;
And Pactia's marble depths, where many a pile
Of matchless structure, now degraded, loads
The groaning soil, and mocks the vengeance of the Gods!

Land of Praxiteles!  is there not left
One breathing image of the Parian stone
To rival Phryne's grace?  art thou bereft
Of all of Phidias but the name alone?
Yes; all their wonders with their days are gone!
Yet o'er thy sons let Genius cease to mourn:
Their spirits but to other climes have flown,
And from the ashes of their classic urn,
Wafted to Albion's isle, in other bosoms burn.

There Sculpture still her monumental wreaths
Loves on devoted valour to bestow;
There to departed worth the marble breathes
For living Friendship all its warmth and woe:&mdash;
Ah!  would that mine with rival art might glow!
A faithful model then of finish'd frame,
Of Worth and Valour, after-times should know,
And, Bettesworth!  thou a nobler tribute claim,
Than my unequal lyre can yield to thee and fame.

O thou in Cynthus once ador'd supreme!
If haply wand'ring thy late haunts among.
Scorn not, howe'er unworthy of its theme,
The lay, amid their gloom, that Friendship sung&mdash;
Feelings that from this sacred source have sprung
Has Genius ever own'd, and first the lyre,
Free from self-love, for others fondly strung;
Till won by Fame, and tempted to aspire,
The Muse at length has wak'd her more ambitious fire.

That fire but feebly yet His bosom felt
Whom not a wish of selfish aim possess'd,
Tho' haply there a glow as ardent dwelt
As ever heart enthusiastic blest;
And Genius by that magic glow impress'd
The train of thought Association wove,
With each fair form of things romantic drest,
And gave to Him a twofold bliss to prove,
Who Natures charms beheld with fancy and with love.

With these he wander'd thro' each classic scene,
Each isle that bloom'd beneath Aegean skies,
Where breath'd their fragrance thro' the clime serene,
Gay flow'rs that sprang from Zephyr's balmy sighs:
With these would he his numbers harmonize,
And deck each object in the fairest hue;
And should a busy thought of home arise,
With grief his heart unguarded to subdue,
Her lay of promis'd joy would Hope erelong renew.

With these o'er Io's peaceful shore he rang'd,
And thence with fav'ring gale to Thera bent;
Once blooming Thera &mdash; now, alas, how chang'd!
Whose hills and dales a dreary soil present,
Or scorch'd by flame, or shock convulsive rent.
And now o'er Ocean's calm he turn'd to gaze,
Where woodless Anaphe her soft extent,
And fair Astipaloea's isle displays
Her flower-enamell'd meads and deep-indented bays.

Thence wafted, soon Amorgo's length'ning coast,
And cliffs in lichen clad, he left behind;
And blest the region which thy birth could boast,
Father of med'cine!  friend of human kind
Where fled by genius, and by taste refin'd,
With magic touch the lover learnt to trace
Woman's soft image rob'd in woven wind,&mdash;
Learnt from the fairest maid of mortal race,
To give to Beauty's queen new charms and finish'd grace.

Alas!  fair Science, and the sister train,
Long from their Coan garden have been driven!
Yet but for Tyranny's all-blighting reign,
Again the flow'rs they nurtur'd might have thriven:
For there to man, could Freedom wake, is given
All that his past condition might restore;
There Beauty still enchants, there partial Heaven
On Nature loves its genial warmth to pour,
And Nature, still unchang'd, blooms grateful as of yore.

Not so where once o'er wider tracts she smil'd,
Which scatter'd now in many a rocky heap,
By Earth's convulsion into ruin pil'd,
Or whelm'd by Ocean's wild resistless sweep;
Bleak, barren isles, and wave-worn islets steep,
That soar in craggy peaks, or cavern'd lean
In fearful poise, or from the mournful deep,
Sunk in broad shoals, emerging oft are seen,
To show to short-liv'd man where peopled realms have been!

Who from these wrecks, the lofty parent land,
Whence torn they parted, calmly can behold?
Who see, amid her matchless bloom, expand
The waste and ruin which her shores enfold?
Who think, Ionia!  with a heart more cold,
On thee, and those with thee confederate&mdash;
Who muse upon the days and deeds of old,
When Freedom triumph'd, and your sons were great,
And sigh not to compare their past and present state?

Well might awhile their woes, and blighted fame,
In Albert wake a train of mournful thought;
Yet not for him in sooth that mental frame
Had Fancy and perverted Genius wrought,
Which ever-brooding melancholy sought,
And joy'd in darkness, rather than in light:
Ah!  no &mdash; his soul was with that sunshine fraught,
Nature's fair scenes which pictur'd still more bright,
And e'en life's darkest clouds in hopeful tints bedight.

Thus, as he mark'd Ionia's native bloom,
Would he with fancy better times recall;
Would he with hope her saddest scenes illume,
And break the fetters which her sons enthrall:&mdash;
"Empires and states have had their rise and fall;
Thou oft (he cried) hast fall'n to rise again;
And if thy wealth and pow'r have vanish'd all,
Still the bright records of thy fame remain,
And prove that thou and thine have not been great in vain.

"Bear witness ye whose blood has nobly flow'd,
To shield your country from despotic rage;
Ye on whom Wisdom has her light bestow'd,
Whom matchless arts and science could engage;
Who, bright assemblage!  on our bounded stage,
All that is great, and graceful, could combine,
Bard &mdash; patriot &mdash; warrior &mdash; legislator &mdash; sage&mdash;
Who, in their galaxy like stars that shine,
O'er all the path of worth have shed a light divine.

"What tho' of Cnidus, and her myrtle groves,
But dreary ruins and foul wastes are known,
Ruins and wastes, from whence the weeping Loves,
Bereft of Beauty's modell'd form, have flown;
What tho' where Caria's monarchs rear'd their throne,
Where, record of thy love, devoted queen!
Thy tomb of Mausolus in splendour shone,
Or where Miletus in her pride was seen,
Is left no trace to tell the wonders that have been?

"What tho' no more thy temple shall reveal,
Queen of the Gods!  the spot where thou wert born;
Nor Dian's ruin'd fane, which pious zeal
Rais'd from its fall, more richly to adorn,
Can boast a relic for the Moslem's scorn?
Tho' Teos &mdash; Lebedos &mdash; and Colophon,
Beneath some village roofs now lie forlorn,
And e'en from cities prouder still is gone
The Mem'ry of the site they flourish'd once upon?

Such mortal labours but endure awhile,
How many a monument of nobler kind
Than city, temple, or triumphal pile.
Hellas!  thy race inspir'd have left behind;
Memorials far more lasting, of the mind&mdash;
Works that with ev'ry good and beauty teem,
Which Virtue, Art, and Science, have combin'd&mdash;
Works that in truth an emanation seem
Of mental light divine &mdash; of excellence supreme!"

Ah!  think whose hearts of classic ground have felt
The charm &mdash; think with what feeling Albert's glow'd,
As, warm'd by Fancy, o'er each scene he dwelt,
Where Worth and Genius, worshipp'd once, abode;
Think what his deep emotions as he trode
Those silent haunts, that solitary spot,
Where once, immortal bard!  divinely flow'd
Thy lay; tho' now, alas!  thy hallow'd grot
And murm'ring fountain stream of Meles are forgot!

There as he mus'd, the recollected strain
And lofty numbers of the bard awoke;
Of high enthusiastic thought, a train
Which into wild impassion'd accents broke,
As if the breath of Inspiration spoke,
And bade him rise on more advent'rous wing,
Bade him the Muse of epic song invoke,
That he might strike with bolder hand the string,
And arms, and glorious deed, and gods and heroes sing.

There first ambition fled, and now from love
He chas'd the languor of Ionia's clime;
And as he past her hill, and dale, and grove,
Scarce heeded he their scenes of vernal prime,
Scarce heeded he the rocks and cliffs sublime,
Athalia's fairy region that surround,
Till from afar he heard their pealing chime,
Then turn'd he to behold and bless the ground,
Where Genius sad and blind a welcome refuge found.

With morn's fair star he saw those shores retire,
In day's last blush Aegira caught his eye;
But little thought he of Arion's lyre,
Of Phrynis' or Terpander's harmony;
E'en Sappho's woe rais'd but a transient sigh:
So kindled he with ardour to behold
Those fields of glory, and achievement high,
Where gods, with warriors and with kings enroll'd,
Bade the bard sing their deeds, and heav'n and fate unfold.

Eve long had reign'd &mdash; and o'er the tranquil wave,
On lonely Tenedos the lamp of night
Shone with the same wild ray as when it gave
To guide the wily Greek its fav'ring light,
When from the surge its lofty headland height,
In silver tints, he saw Sigaeum rear;
But winds arose, and wing'd their troubled flight,
And gath'ring clouds obscur'd the hemisphere,
As to the foaming waves of Ilion he drew near.

Strange sounds in ev'ry gust now seem to float,
Like din of distant arms; in ev'ry gleam,
That faintly flashes on the cliffs remote,
Visions and forms in wild confusion teem
Visions and forms of other times that seem,
Such as at midnight hour the Muse presents
On Troja's shore, and by Scamander's stream,
Of guards, and glimm'ring spears, and sails, and tents,
And palace domes, and spires, and tow'rs, and battlements.

Driv'n by the tempest, now to Fancy's gaze,
The clouds that Ida's mystic top conceal,
Quick parting to the lightning's awful blaze,
The angry councils of the Gods reveal&mdash;
Deep gloom succeeds, and with the length'ning peal
Olympus trembles &mdash; Ocean from the shore,
And shock of Neptune's trident, seems to reel,
Hope droops, and sees the promis'd land no more,
Lost in the war of waves, and wind's contending roar!

Deluded wand'rer!  not to thee is given
To trace the flow of Xanthus, nor inhale
On Ida's hallow'd brow the breath of heaven.
Fate yields thy hopes to the resistless gale:
Yet cease thy wayward fortune to bewail;
For if by thee untrod be Ilion's plain,
Still o'er the fabled scene her magic veil
Shall Fancy spread, and still shalt thou retain
The undiminish'd charm of her enchanting strain.

Mourn rather, ere the tempest ceas'd to rave,
That from thy sight fam'd Helle's shores had fled,
Whence, like a dark cloud sweeping o'er the wave,
The host by Macedonia's warrior led,
Thro' the wide world his mad dominion spread.
Ah!  by the lust of conquest less engross'd,
Had they in Freedom's cause as nobly bled,
How worthier of renown had been the boast
Of that ambitious chief and his all-conquering host!

From those same shores pitying hadst thou beheld
Where lov'd Leander sunk, and Hero died;
Where Persia's haughty chief by blows impell'd
His coward slaves o'er Helle's blushing tide;
Thence as the despot view'd, in pageant pride,
His motley myriads, sudden from his throne,
High rais'd o'er all &mdash; "Not one of these (he cried)
Shall breathe when but a few fleet years are gone!"
Then wept, in sooth, to think their mortal lot his own,

For, had his selfish heart to pity leant,
And mourn'd the mis'ries which on war await,
Why that sad source of mortal woe augment?
Why &mdash; but to swell his proud, imperial state?
Steel'd by ambition, and with pow'r elate,
Like other tyrants little heeded he
Of his vast hosts the waste of blood how great,
So that their lawless might subdu'd each knee,
And yok'd each bended neck to his fell tyranny.

But tho' his countless hordes thro' many a realm
Awhile could scatter ruin and dismay,
Deep floods could drain, proud cities overwhelm,
Bid mountains to their mad career give way,
And mountain waves turn'd from their depths obey&mdash;
O impotence of numbers, and of force!
Thought he the war-tried spirit to affray?
Hop'd he of patriot love to drain the source?
Or stem the torrent tide of freedom in its course?

How sunk his hope, when Sparta's chosen stood
Firm in the pass of Phocis to arrest
His gather'd pow'r!  how was his pride subdu'd,
When to his regal couch at night they press'd
Thro' flames and blood!  what rage his soul possess'd,
When o'er the wave he saw his scatter'd fleet
Yield to the Greek!  how fell his haughty crest,
When, his past pomp contrasting with defeat,
Forlorn thro' Helle's strait in his frail bark he beat!

"Tyrants and conquerors!  to you of eld,
Such the example which the Persian gave;
Such in these latter days have we beheld,
In fall'n Ambition's bolder, mightier slave.
Shades of the virtuous!  spirits of the brave!
Rous'd by your name, in evry age a race
Of freeborn Heroes shall their banners wave,
To cheek the despot's wildest rage, and chase
His wan and wasted force with vengeance and disgrace."

Thus Albert, as he saw the dawn illume
The dun horizon, and from ocean's swell
Gradual dissolve its melancholy gloom,
Save where the deep'ning shades of Athos fell&mdash;
Where in the night-storm once were heard the yell
Of rav'ning monsters, and the screams of woe,
But now the soften'd surge, and convent bell,
Alternate echo'd thro' the caves below,
Whilst all the scene above grew bright in matin glow.

Thence o'er the wave that Persia's blood had dy'd,
As straight to Salamis he bent his way,
Warm'd with remembrance of her ancient pride,
Would he the impulse of his zeal obey;
To sing your triumphs, Greece!  would he essay,
And e'en, fond dream!  to classic praise aspire:
But, ah!  how undeserving seem'd his lay,
How oft dejected he renounc'd the lyre,
And felt, as Fancy soar'd, how weak the Minstrel's fire!

Felt all his warmth and inspiration fail,
To paint his thoughts enkindling as they grew;
When tow'ring o'er her subject plain and dale,
Athena's far-kenn'd fortress chain'd his view,
When Sol to the horizon nearer drew,
And his full flame on those bright pillars pour'd,
Which from their mountain base of deeper hue,
Magnificent as airy fabrics soar'd,
And scenes of glory past, and better days restor'd:&mdash;

Days when the first in beauty, worth, and song,
To flute and lyre, with sacred olive crown'd,
Up the proud steep and column'd pass along,
To Wisdom's shrine in slow procession wound;
Whilst on thy image strew'd with flow'rs around,
Pallas!  thy rich-wove mantle as they flung,
The dome of Victory, and the cave profound
Of Pan, re-echo'd to each joyful tongue,
And with glad Paean strains the Pythian temple rung.

Fled are those festive scenes!  fall'n are those walls,
Which once contending Wealth and Genius grac'd!
Their storied sculptures, pillars, pedestals,
By Turk, and Goth of modern time defac'd:
But tho' the Saint and Prophet long have chas'd
Athena's goddess from her lawful fane,
Tho' other worshippers have long displac'd
Thy altar, sire of gods!  without a stain,
And others yet may rise, and these expel again:

Say, on this change shall Contemplation dwell,
Presumptuous doubt and discontent to raise?
Doubt which, if felt, 'twere folly not to quell,
But, to proclaim, a vicious heart betrays.
Dark sceptic, say, must incense vainly blaze,
Because the ends of Heav'n thou canst not scan?
Because all form of mortal frame decays,
Bounding his spirit to an earthly span,
Wouldst thou to dust transmute the incorporal soul of man?

Away!  nor, with reviving sophist lore,
Shame thou again the spot where Athens stood;
Truth, Wisdom, Virtue, Beauty, Taste abhor
That morbid genius which delights to brood
'Mid ruin'd arts, and grope alone for food
To glut the spleen of a distemper'd mind,
Which breathes malignant, that the great and good,
Of ages glorious, and of times refin'd,
Have past, and left, alone &mdash; an empty name behind.

Here, where the Turk's rude battlements ascend,
Rais'd on the wreck of ages let us pause;
And o'er thy ruin, Athens!  as we bend,
Still think with wonder on thy weal that was,
Thy golden age of piety and laws,
Thy glorious aera, when, with justice arm'd,
Valour and Virtue won in Freedom's cause;
Thy brilliant days, when Art and Science charm'd,
By guardian Genius woo'd, by rival Beauty warm'd!

Musing on these, shall not the heart expand,
Albeit the eye o'er Desolation rove,
And mark the last proud relies of the land,
The crumbling fanes of Pallas and of Jove?
Albeit the pale of Justice, nor the grove
Where Science nobly labour'd to illume,
The halls where wit, and taste, and genius strove,
The warrior's column, nor the patriot's tomb,
Are longer now beheld amid thy olive bloom?

O not of all thy matchless arts bereft;&mdash;
Enough remains to guide the hand of Skill&mdash;
Enough to Science has thy genius left,
The heart with wonder &mdash; with delight to, fill.
Of Nature, and of Man, of good and ill,
Thy sires of wisdom yet their knowledge yield,
Thy Bards and Orators enkindle still,
Thy sons of valour call to honour's field,
And bid for freedom still, the brave their weapons wield.

O ye!  who on Iberia's soil have bled,
(Peace to the shades of those who haunt the plain
Of Marathon!) since for her glory shed,
Your country deems your blood not spilt in vain,
Grateful will she your valiant deeds retain,
And honour'd where ye fell shall be the spot,
Honour'd and wept, when long the Cynic's strain
Shall die forgotten, or, if not forgot,
Live but to shame the heart that would your mem'ry blot.

God of Parnassus!  from thy hallow'd mount,
On thee an unknown voice presumes to call;
If from the Muses' consecrated fount
Can flow a stream contaminate with gall,
O let the bitter inspiration fall
On stubborn Vice, or Folly's hoary head&mdash;
Let it the proud subdue, the bad appal;
But softest dews of Castalie be shed,
And sweetest, wildest flow'rs, bloom o'er the valiant dead!

But thou perchance o'er Delphi's sordid shrine
Didst never reign, as fabling Poets tell;
Else from its altars had thy light benign
Fail'd not their mystic honours to dispel.
Say, could the gentle Muses love to dwell
With venal priests, and prostitute their name?
Say, could the Nine harmonious wake the shell
For idiot Superstition, and proclaim
Discord, and savage war, and desolating flame?

Ah!  no: &mdash; tho' art for pious guile has wrought
Works that with holy rapture might inspire;
Tho' gloomy or corrupted Bards have caught
A spark celestial of the Muses' fire,
And tun'd, for tyrant kings and priests the lyre,
Where thy glad rays, bright sun of science, shine,
The peaceful arts and Heliconian choir
Breathe freedom, truth, and harmony divine,
And won by Wisdom's voice, genius and worth combine.

O Genius!  ever on the ardent mind
Thy brightest influence benignly pour;
And bid the youthful Bard, of soul refin'd
Whether with Fancy he delight to soar,
Or patient seek amid the precious store
Of priceless knowledge Truth's pure gem to trace,
Or Nature's rich and varied scenes explore,
Bid him each dark and mournful image chase,
And see thro' all her reign, joy, order, good, and grace.

Thus Albert, with romantic vision blest;&mdash;
But if in Nature's humbler walks he view'd
In fairest tints each scene familiar, dress'd,
Each homebred form in happiest attitude,
When he sublimer scenes and forms pursu'd,
How thrill'd, as he beheld those realms, his heart,
Those classic realms, to fancy, which renew'd
All that of glory, virtue, wisdom, art,
Ambition could inspire, and talent could impart!

While on that land of past renown he gaz'd,
What recollections to his wond'ring thought
Her race of heroes and of sages rais'd!
What love of fame their great example taught!
What thirst of lore their high-born genius wrought!
As o'er each spot where once they breath'd he hung,
What inspiration from the scene he caught!
What new-born transport in his bosom sprung.
As to their shades rever'd his lyre spontaneous rung!

But to those shades, and silent haunts alone,
Did he attune his tributary lay;
Feelings enthusiastic as his own,
If haply equal numbers could convey,
He fear'd to hearts less ardent to betray,
To hearts that might not with those feelings chime,
To hearts, O Greece!  that never knew the sway
Of thy wild scenes and solitudes sublime,
Thy suns thy waves, thy skies, thy soul-exalting clime!

And happier had it been, fond Bard, for thee,
Hadst thou not thus adventur'd on a theme
Which now thou findest, with diminish'd glee,
Too deep for thy unpractis'd art I deem;
Like him who tempted by the flowing stream,
Floats thoughtless on in fancied skill elate,
Till 'mid the current, waking from his dream,
He feels his spirit fail, his pow'rs abate,
And sore repenting mourns his rashness and his fate.

Immortal Muse!  if aught the Bard has fram'd,
Can Virtue, Reason, Beauty, Worth offend,
Then let him sink, a wretch by thee disclaim'd,
And all his visions in despondence end:
But if his lay has labour'd to extend
The love of Nature, and of Wisdom's lore,
The light of Science and of Truth, O lend
Thy ready aid, his drooping hope restore,
And his reviving strain to Genius raise once more!

