How sweet it is at early morn, to spring
From sleep and its bewilder'd fantasies;
To catch the rose's fragrance on the wing
Ere the first dews have faded from its dyes;
To trace the changeful tissue of the skies,
The purple stealing on the tender gray,
Then the streak'd red &mdash; the long, gold line that lies
Fringing the hill that seems to cheek its way;
Then the broad, surging flame, and lo!  the king of day!

Lovely &mdash; but lovelier still, when that bright morn
Unfolds the vision of some first-seen land;
And as the twilight clouds are upwards borne,
Foreign the hills, the vales, the streams expand;
Charming the wanderer's foot suspense to stand,
As, like a young creation, round him rise
Its thousand shapes of soft, and bright, and grand;
All strange, all spell-touch'd; ev'n the wild wind's sighs,
The peasant's call, to him, romantic melodies!

Yet who can feel it like the luckless wight,
In France's lumbering wains through midnight pent,
With heavy lids that will not slumber quite,
Stiff limbs and beating brow, and spirit spent;
When on the eastern hill's slow-gain'd ascent,
The breeze first meets him from its bowers below,
Streaming cool odours, living element;
And his clear'd eye sees mount and forest glow;
And the whole landscape lights its whole enchanted show.

'Tis dawn upon Mont Martre!  O'er the plain,
In flake and spire, the sunbeam plunges deep,
Bringing out shape, and shade, and summer-stain;
Like a retiring host the blue mists sweep.
Looms on the farthest right Valerien's steep,
Crown'd with its convent kindling in the day;
And swiftly sparkling from their bowery sleep,
Like matin stars, around th' horizon play
Far village vanes, and domes, and castle-turrets gray.

'Tis a rich scene; and yet the richest charm
That e'er cloth'd earth in beauty, lives not here.
Winds no green fence around the cultured farm;
No blossom'd hawthorn shields the cottage dear.
The land is bright, and yet to thine how drear,
Unrivall'd England! &mdash; Well the thought may pine
For those sweet fields where, each a little sphere,
In shaded, sacred fruitfulness doth shine,
And the heart higher beats that says, "This spot is mine."

St. Cloud!  How stately from the green hill's side
Shoots up thy Parian pile!  His transient hold,
Who wore the iron crown of regicide!
He treads its halls no more &mdash; his hour is told.
The circle widens; Sevres bright and cold
Peeps out in vestal beauty from her throne,
Spared for Minerva's sake, when round her roll'd
From yon high brow th' Invader's fiery zone,
Resistless, as can tell thy faded tow'rs, Meudon!

A trumpet! &mdash; at the sound Mont Martre's spread
With martial crowds, a glittering, crimson tide,
Pouring incessant from its sunbright head.
Part, that in splendour deepen down its side,
In square, and line, and column wheeling wide
To many a solemn touch of harmony.
Part, to the far champaign that clanging ride,
Like the long flashes of the summer sky,
Like fresh-plumed eagles darting from their aery high.

The British bands!  A power is in the sound,
It speaks of freedom, valour, virtue nigh;
It calls up England upon foreign ground!
Far be from us the false philosophy
That owns not country's nobly-partial tie!
The thoughts that like a second nature come
In distance and in death to fix the eye
On the heart's classic soil; &mdash; by temple, tomb,
By all loves names endeared, &mdash; by all in one, our Home.

War has its mighty moments: &mdash; Heart of Man!
Have all thy pulses vigour for a thrill
Prouder than through those gallant bosoms ran
When first their standards waved above that hill?
When first they strove their downward gaze to fill
With the full grandeur of their glorious prize&mdash;
Paris!  the name that from their cradle still
Stung them in dreams; now, glittering in their eyes,
Now won &mdash; won by the Victory of Victories!

For this had bled their battle round the world;
For this they round the world had come to war;
Some, with the shatter'd ensign that unfurl'd
Its lion-emblems to the Orient star;
And some, the blue Atlantic stemming far;
And some, a matchless band, from swarthy Spain&mdash;
With well-worn steel, and breasts of many a scar;
And all their plains to their last conquering plain
Were sport, and all their trophies to this trophy vain.

And there are symbols round the Mount that show
What terror on the boastful land has been;
Glares from its embrasures the iron row,
With scarp and fosse is cut the tender green,
The howitz watches down the spiked ravine,
The steel-barbed frize, the pyramid of ball,
Start on the eye from cot and vintage-screen;
And from the summit tower the flagstaff tall
Lifts England's banner'd cross &mdash; triumphant over all!

All looks a stranger's land &mdash; the tawny meads,
Track'd by the sleepy Seine's meanders blue;
The vintage ripening on its sloping beds,
Like sheets of emeralds, dropping purple dew;
The forest belting with its waste of yew
The chateau, lonely as the exiles tomb
Where rests its lord; the hill's exotic hue;
The foliaged roads, that from th' horizon come,
Like arrows, to one point, where still broods morning's gloom.

There sleep'st thou, Paris!  What profounder sleep
Were thine, had matchless hearts not sieged thee round!
When those who sow'd in blood, in blood should reap,
When the bold hunters from earth's farthest bound
At length the tiger in his cavern found;
Then, not yon cloud that wraps thy giddy dream,
But the red vapour of the bloody ground,
Such as o'er Moscow hung, had caught the gleam;
The midnight fires of death, thy last, wild, waking beam.

The gale has come, &mdash; at once the fleecy haze
Floats up, &mdash; then stands a purple canopy,
Shading th' imperial city from the blaze.
Glorious the vision!  tower and temple lie
Beneath the morn, like waves of ivory,
With many an azure streak and gush of green,
As grove and garden on the dazzled eye
Rise in successive beauty, and between
Flows into sudden light the long, slow, serpent Seine.

For Paris now. &mdash; Now farewell hill and vale,
And silence sweet, fresh blooms, and dewy sky!
Farewell the gentle moral of the gale,
The wisdom written in the rose's dye!
I go to meet the wizard city's eye,
That puts on splendour but to dim the soul.
A thousand years of crime beneath me lie!
One glance! &mdash; I stand as on a mighty mole,
Around whose base not waves, but evil ages roll.

And ye enduring monuments that rise,
In your calm grandeur, round this fortress-hill,
Masses of solemn shade and orient dyes!
Are ye not each, as in that sea an isle,
Sheltering the few and statelier memories, while
The feeble pass like foam upon the wave?
I gaze not here on Greek or Gothic pile!&mdash;
I see but emblems of the days that gave
An impulse to the world, to empires throne or grave.

'Twas a dark time, which on Valerien's brow
Rear'd the sad refuge of that convent tower!
There mind was buried, wither'd beauty's glow,
There passion lost its hope, but not its power;
Yet good was mixed with ill; its midnight hour
Heard prayers from haughty lips that then first prayed;
And woman who had wept her loveliest dower,
There hid her broken heart in calm and shade,
And turned her to HIS fold, who sought the lamb that strayed!

There, Invalides!  thy summit, like a star,
Glitters before the sun's ascending fire;
Thou golden palace, temple, grave of war&mdash;
Proud be the day that saw thy pomp expire!
Where are thy trophies now!  The lowliest spire,
The darkest cell, was glorious to thy prime.
The Fiend came from thee &mdash; but the earth's desire
Rose up against him, and an arm sublime
Blasted the gloomy Idol of thy age of crime.

Earth had a burst of madness; come, and gone,
Like lightning from its cloud &mdash; a withering blaze.
There stand its lonely halls, its Pantheon;
Then were those halls not lonely; &mdash; nights and days
Roll'd o'er their thousands, pouring heaven's high praise,
From more than pagan lips, to harlotry.
Temple of many gods!  while One delays
For wisdom deeply veiled from human eye,
To strike it into dust, till ev'n its memory die.

The emblem-circle's wound.  The sunbeams flow
Latest, yet loveliest, on St. Denis' wall.
But is there not a brighter sun than now
Vestures in gold that patriarch cathedral?
Is not earth's veil at length about to fall,
As the slow shadows from that temple hoar;
And the true faith unfold her gates to all;
And man be glorious as he was before;
And earth be Paradise, till time shall be no more?

The hour shall come! &mdash; It is no mystic's trance,
But true as HE, who wills, and it is done!
The hour shall come, &mdash; is come!  Our feeble glance
Ev'n now sees stooping from its clouds the throne
Where One shall rule o'er earth &mdash; The MIGHTY ONE.
Its kings his hallow'd viceroys &mdash; man's old stain
Fast brightening from the spirit; &mdash; war unknown;&mdash;
Till death has died!  and, rushing from his chain,
To heaven th' immortals rise, with angel plume and strain.

Now, from the Mount! &mdash; Through solid dust we sweep,
Choak'd, crushing, struggling to wile back our sleep.
The barriers reach'd &mdash; out rolls the drowsy guard;
A scowl &mdash; a question &mdash; and the gates unbarr'd.
And this is Paris!  The postilion's thong
Rings round a desert, as we bound along,
From rut to deeper rut of shapeless stone,
With many a general heave, and general groan.
Onward, still darker, doubly desolate,
Winds o'er the shrinking head the dangerous strait.
The light is lost; in vain we peer our way
Through the rank dimness of the Fauxbourg day;
In vain the wearied eyeball strains to scale
That squalid height, half hovel and half jail:
At every steep the struggling vision bar
Projections sudden, black, and angular,
Streak'd with what once was gore, deep rent with shot,
Marks of some conflict furious and &mdash; forgot!
At every step, from sewer and alley sail
The crossing steams that make the senses quail,
Defying breezes breath and summer's glow,
Charter'd to hold eternal mire below.
Grim loneliness! &mdash; and yet some blasted form
Will start upon the sight, a human worm
Clung to the chapel's wall &mdash; the lank throat bare,
The glance shot woeful from the tangled hair,
The fleshless, outstretch'd arm, and ghastly cry,
Half forcing, half repelling charity.
Or, from the portal of the old hotel,
Gleams on his post the victor-centinel,
Briton or German, shooting round his ken,
From its dark depth, a lion from his den.

'Tis light and air again:  and lo!  the Seine,
Yon boasted, lazy, livid, fetid drain!
With paper booths, and painted trees o'erlaid,
Baths, blankets, wash-tubs, women, all but trade.
Yet here are living beings, and the soil
Breeds its old growth of ribaldry and broil.
A whirl of mire, the dingy cabriolet
Makes the quick transit through the crowded way;
On spurs the courier, creaks the crazy wain,
Dragged through its central gulf of mud and stain;
Around our way-laid wheels the paupers crowd,
Naked, contagious, cringing, and yet proud.
The whole a man of folly, filth, and strife,
Of heated, rank, corrupting, reptile life;
And, endless as their ouzy Tide, the throng
Roll on with endless clamour, curse, and song.

Fit for such tenants, low'r on either side
The hovels where the gang less live than hide;
Story on story, savage stone on stone,
Time-shattered, tempest-stained, not built, but thrown.
Sole empress of the portal, in full blow,
The rouged grisette lays out her trade below,
Ev'n in her rags a thing of wit and wile,
Eye, hand, lip, tongue, all point, and press, and smile.
Close by, in patch and print, the pedlar's stall
Flutters its looser glories up the wall.
Spot of corruption!  where the rabble rude
Loiter round tinsel tomes, and figures nude;
Voltaire, and Lais, long alternate eyed,
Till both the leper's soul and sous divide.
Above, 'tis desart, save where sight is scar'd
With the wild visage through the casement barr'd;
Or, swinging from their pole, chemise and sheet
Drip from the attic o'er the fuming street.

But, venture on the darkness; and within
See the stern haunt of wretchedness and sin.
The door unhinged, the wall of plaster bare,
The paper pane, the gapp'd and shaking stair,
Winding in murkiness, as to the sty
Of forlorn guilt, or base debauchery;
The chamber, tattered, melancholy, old,
Yet large &mdash; where plunder might its midnights hold;
And, in its foulest corner, from the day
Sullen and shrunk, its lord, the Federe.
Meagre the form, the visage swart and spare,
Furrowed with early vice and desperate care;
Hollow the cheek, the eye ferocious guile,
Yet gentle, to his hard, habitual smile.
His end, on earth, to live the doubtful day,
And glean the livre for the Sunday's play.

Heavy that chamber's air; the sunbeams fall
Scattered and sickly on the naked wall;
Through the time-crusted casement scarcely shown
The rafter'd roof, the floor of chilling stone,
The crazy bed, the mirror that betrays
Frameless, where vanity yet loves to gaze;
And still, the symbols of his darker trade,
The musquet, robber-pistol, sabre blade,
Hung rusting, where around the scanty fire
His squalid offspring watch its brands expire.
His glance is there; &mdash; another, statelier spot
Has full possession of his fever'd thought;
In the fierce past the fierce to-come he sees,
The day return'd of plunder'd palaces,
When faction revell'd, mobs kept thrones in awe,
And the red pike at once was King and Law.

Yet, contrast strange!  beside that dismal cell
Tow'rs on the eye the Seigneur's proud hotel.
Repelling too, no waste of outward state
Here told th' exclusive pleasures of the great;
Yet, in those bounds, the cup of luxury
Was brimm'd as rich as e'er made midnight fly.
Beauty and pomp were in its festal hall,
Gay valour, courtly wit, youth, passion, all.
Sight of enchantment, &mdash; down its vista's blaze
Of gold and jewel-vestured forms to gaze!
One buoyant, brilliant dance of tress and plume
Gleaming o'er diamond eyes and cheeks of bloom;
And shapes that like the breeze-kiss'd roses move,
Lit by the thousand crystal urns above.
Nor lovely less, to turn, where through the shade
Faint from the glow, the groups of beauty stray'd.
The suite of silent, stately chambers past,
In each the distant radiance feebler cast;
In each the concert's sweetness softer sent;
Till on the burning cheek, new element,
New life, breathed in the night's delicious air,
Streaming from violet bank and rose parterre.
Heart-swelling hour!  On her profoundest sky
In glory thron'd, the moon's lone majesty;
From that huge, slumbering city sent no sound;
Above, all brightness; soul-felt silence, round!
Save where, as sudden opes the distant hall,
Faint as its light, the tones in sweetness fall,
A breath of harp and flute, a silver sigh,
A charm, wild, swift, of fairy harmony;
Save where the fountain murmuring in its shell
With the far concert's murmurs mixeth well.

But pass the porch, and all was past: &mdash; The wall
Long, blank, surmounted by the turret tall;
The loophole, massive buttress, thundering gate
That shuts upon the world the court of state,
The casement dim, with bar and bolt secur'd,
The sculptured shield, the high roof embrazur'd,
Strike to the stranger's eye the sudden thrill,
And give the felon and his dungeon still.

But pause!  what pile athwart the crowded way
Frowns with such sterner aspect?  The Abbaye!
Is it not curst?  has not the smell of blood
Struck it for ever into solitude?
No!  To the past as to the future cold,
Self and the moment all his heart can hold,
The deep damnation of the deed forgot
Before the blood was stiffen'd on the spot;
Gay in the sight, the shadow of the pile,
The meagre native plays his gambol vile.
Above, tolls out for death the prison knell,
Below, dogs, monkies, bears, the jangling swell;
The crack'd horn rings, the rival mimes engage,
Punch in imperial tatters sweeps the stage;
The jostling mob dance, laugh, sing, shout the rhyme,
And die in ecstacies the thousandth time.
And look!  around, above, what ghastly row
Through bar and grating struggle for the show,
Down darting, head o'er head, the haggard eye,
Felons!  the scarcely scaped, &mdash; the sure to die!
The dungeon'd murderer startles from his trance,
Uplistening hears the din, the monkey-dance,
Growls at the fate that fix'd his cell beneath,
And feels the solid bitterness of death.

Yes, 'twas the spot! &mdash; where yonder slow gendarme
Sweeps from his round the loitering pauper-swarm;
Where up the mouldering wall that starveling vine
Drags on from nail to nail its yellow twine;
For ornament!  Still something for the eye;
Prisons, nay graves, have here their foppery:&mdash;
There, primed for blood, Danton drew up his band,
The Marseillois, the Fauxbourg's black brigand.
The gate roll'd back, &mdash; as out to liberty
One bounding came, &mdash; the murderers met his eye,
He heard their laugh, &mdash; he dropp'd in desperate prayer
For life &mdash; for life! &mdash; His brain was spattered there;&mdash;
Another came &mdash; recoil'd &mdash; gave one wild wail,
And sank in gore, &mdash; the bullet stopp'd his tale.
The work went hotly on.  Dark place of crime!
What hideous guilt, what suffering sublime
Were in thee, emblem of the ruin'd land!
Frequent, amid the shoutings, of the band,
Rose from within prayer, laughter! &mdash; Pass that wall,
A crowd were gather'd in a lofty hall,
An ancient chapel, lingering each till came
The harrowing, certain summons of his name.
A man stood in its pulpit; one strong ray
That through the grating struggled down its way,
Fell on his upturn'd brow, and tonsure bare.
His hands were clasp'd, he prayed with mighty pray'r,&mdash;
Then bent him where the failing light below
Just glanc'd on shapes and visages of woe.
And there were those who felt, yet scorn'd to feel,
And smil'd in ghastliness to see his zeal;
And knowing they had reach'd their dying day,
Resolv'd to think no more, and turn'd away!&mdash;
And those, who weary of the cell and chain,
Saw the last day of life the last of pain;
And, sadly flung upon the chilling floor,
Listen'd lethargic to the outward roar&mdash;
But there were those, who on him fixed the eye,
In the deep gaze of utter agony;
Kneeling without a heave, without a groan,&mdash;
As if that hour had struck them into stone.

The shouts had died, &mdash; 'twas silence, &mdash; sudden rang
A shriek throughout the prison! &mdash; All upsprang;&mdash;
Each fixing on his fellow wretch the eye,
In the broad glare of desperate sympathy;
Another miserable hour, and they
Who shudder'd there might be &mdash; but gore and clay!
The preacher bow'd his head; &mdash; his hands were prest
A moment with his Bible on his breast;
His voice a moment stopp'd: &mdash; the pang was past,
'Twas nature's terror, &mdash; painful, &mdash; but her last.
His voice awoke; his spirit in him burn'd;
All eyes instinctive on the martyr turn'd.
He told them of the things that man's dull ear,
Fill'd with life's flatteries, so hates to hear;
He told them of the Christian's cross and crown,
And rais'd his hands to bless them; &mdash; all sank down,
All humbly bow'd their heads to earth, all felt
At his ascending prayer their bosoms melt;
All trembled, &mdash; and strange thoughts upon them stole,
That look'd like heavenly dawnings in the soul;
And tears began down wither'd cheeks to flow,
Not tears of joy, but far too soft for woe!
They rose; &mdash; and they who knelt upon that floor,
Were naked spirits ere that day was o'er.

Behind that chapel's altar oped a room&mdash;
Gloomy &mdash; the deeds done there were fit for gloom.
A torch, that languish'd in the heavy air,
Feebly made up the daylight's sullen glare;
It shew'd a table, soil'd with wine, and strew'd
With plunder in still deeper stain embrued;
Around it, on the platform benches, lay
Dark, muffled shapes that slept their drench away.
A few, in whom the past debauchery
Was squalid still, hung loose and lowering by,
And judged! &mdash; For this was a tribunal; &mdash; these,
Judges! &mdash; The basest rabble's basest lees,
These slaves of vulgar folly, guilt and rage,
These mountebanks upon a bloody stage;
Wretches!  whose aspects told of hell begun;
Their joyless joy, to see mankind undone!
And they were speedy too; no ancient saws
Check'd the bold current of the rabble's laws;
A glance &mdash; a taunt upon the victim cast,
A sign, &mdash; he pass'd away &mdash; to slaughter passed.

And now, a prisoner stood before them, wan
With dungeon damps and woe &mdash; an aged man,
But stately; &mdash; there was in his hoary hair
A reverend grace that Murder's self might spare.
Two of the mob, half naked, freshly dyed
In crimson clots, waved sabres at his side.
He told his tale, &mdash; a brief, plain, prison tale,&mdash;
Well vouch'd by those faint limbs and features pale:
His words were strong, the manly energy
Of one not unprepared to live or die.
His judges wavered, whispered, seemed to feel
Some human touches at his firm appeal.&mdash;
He named his king! &mdash; a burst of scoff and sneer
Pour'd down, that even the slumberers sprang to hear;
Startled, to every grating round the room
Sprang visages already seal'd for doom;
Red from their work without, in rush'd a crowd,
Like wolves that heard the wonted cry of blood.
He gazed above, &mdash; the torch's downward flame
Flash'd o'er his cheek; &mdash; 'twas red, &mdash; it might be shame,
Shame for his country, sorrow for her throne;&mdash;
'Twas pale, &mdash; the hectic of the heart was gone.
His guards were shaken off; &mdash; he tore his vest,
A ribbon'd cross was on his knightly breast,
It covered scars; &mdash; he deigned no more reply;
None, but the scorn that lighten'd from his eye.
His huddled, hurried judges dropp'd their gaze;
The villain soul's involuntary praise!
He kiss'd his cross, and turn'd him to the door&mdash;
An instant, &mdash; and they heard his murderers' roar!

'Twas shapeless carnage now; in meek despair,
Gazing on Heaven, the pastor died in prayer;
The soldier met the sabre's whirl unmoved;
The matron perish'd on the corse she loved;
Yet there were dying bursts; with rush and reel,
Some 'mid the assassin ranks made desperate wheel,
Down-stricken, rising, bleeding, tottering round,
Till the ball stretch'd the struggler on the ground;
Others, the red knee clasping, sank and wept;
Alike o'er faint and bold the havoc swept.
The evening fell, &mdash; in bloody mists the sun
Rush'd glaring down; nor yet the work was done;
'Twas night; &mdash; and still upon the Bandit's eye
Came from their cavern those who came to die;
A long, weak, wavering, melancholy wave,
As from the grave, returning to the grave.
'Twas midnight; &mdash; still the gusty torches blazed
On shapes of woe, dim gestures, faces glazed;
And still, as through the dusk the ghastly file
Moved onward, it was added to the pile!

Ruler of Heaven!  did not the righteous groan
Rise from this spot in vengeance to thy throne!
Or did the torrent that so redly ran
Round those heaped remnants of what once was man,
That mass of cloven bone, and shatter'd limb,
And spouting brain, and visage strain'd and dim,
And horrid life still quivering in the eye,
As chok'd in blood the victim toil'd to die&mdash;
Did it sink voiceless in the thirsty ground?&mdash;
No!  from that hour the iron band was bound,
No!  from that hour was fixed the mighty seal
To the long woes that France was doomed to feel;
Plague, famine, in GOD'S sterner wrath untried&mdash;
Her deeper sentence, man, the homicide!

Perish the vision! &mdash; no, &mdash; on France's eye
Still let it hang, &mdash; as o'er a murderer's
His victim's shade, &mdash; in noon, in midnight nigh,
'Till she has laid it in repentant tears;
'Till man has seen what fruit rebellion bears;
The noblest sure to perish by the low,
Stripp'd by their rapine, slaughter'd by their fears;
Guilt's tender mercies, that uplift the blow,
While from its pallid lips "faith, honor, country" flow.

But musing's done. &mdash; The rabble round me press,
With every cry of earth since Babel's fall.
The world's in gala. &mdash; Poissarde loveliness
Glides, faint and feather'd from her last night's ball,
Dispensing glances on the friseur small,
The tiptoe thing beside her, &mdash; all bouquet;
His bowing head, a curly carnival;
His shoulders to his earrings, grimly gay;&mdash;
All have put on their smiles; 'tis the King's holiday.

A cannon peals, &mdash; a rocket cleaves the air
In rushing beauty, waving up its way,
Like a red snake.  With backward step and stare
The crowd pursue its burst, &mdash; 'tis lost in day.
Now white flags on the palace turrets play;
And soon, like sheets of newly waken'd flame,
They rise from many a roof and steeple gray,
Thick meteors, rayed with cross and patron name;
The royal Gonfalon rolls broad o'er Notre Dame.

Below, the streets are changing; tissues trim
From door to door, from house to house are swung;
Deep with devices, shatter'd now and dim,
For fortune's turns in loyal darkness flung.
One turn has come, with lilies all are hung.
The mob, the troops that down the distance stand
Lingering and loose, are with the white badge strung;
The poissarde group that dance around their band
Fling up the exiled flower with shouts; &mdash; such is the land!

A distant trumpet sounds; the river shore
Sends it in echoes on; the soldiers haste
To loose their piles of muskets; &mdash; standards soar,
Drums rattle, &mdash; voices clamour, &mdash; bugles blast;
The mob confused from side to side are cast;
Horsemen dash by with spur and slacken'd rein.
Moment of tumult!  quickly come and past.
To bridge and wall the crowd like billows drain,
And all their myriad eyes are fix'd along the Seine.

The flourish swells again.  The Louvre arch
Pours out an instant flood of sight and sound.
Dense as a wall the steel'd cuirassiers march,
With clash, and clang, and charger's mettled bound,
And leader's cries, as squadron'd, wheeling round
Successive from the porte, they meet the glare
Blazed back from helm and mail.  Yet all are drown'd
In the wild, sudden shout that rends the air,
As on his barb reins out the royal mousquetaire.

'Tis the heart's shout.  The vilest of the vile
By instinct bow before the virtuous brave;
Nature, however sunk, is nature still;
Vice may debase, but cannot all deprave,
The spirit never knows that final grave.
In Heaven's long-suffering given, a spark of shame
Keeps sense alive and stinging in the slave;
Ready to light the heart with sudden flame,
Perhaps, in higher worlds to clear its dark-dyed frame.

It was a dreary hour; that deep midnight,
Which saw those warriors to their chargers spring,
And, sadly gathering by the torch's light,
Draw up their squadrons to receive their king:
Then, thro' the streets, long, silent, slumbering,
Move like some secret noble funeral;
Each forced in turn to feel his bosom wring,
As in the gleam shone out his own proud hall,
His own no more; &mdash; no more! &mdash; he had abandon'd all!

And when, thro' many a league of chase and toil,
With panting steed, red spur, and sheathless sword,
At last they reach'd the stranger's sheltering soil;
They saw their country, where they saw its lord.
All ruin'd now, they fenc'd his couch and board,
But with still humbler head, and lower knee;
And scorn'd the tauntings of the rebel horde;
Nay, in the hour that seal'd the base decree
Of exile, pledged their faith in proud festivity.

I love not war, too oft the mere, mad game
That tyrants play to keep themselves awake.
But 'tis not war &mdash; it earns a nobler name&mdash;
When men gird on the sword for conscience sake,
When country, king, faith, freedom are the stake.
And my eye would have left earth's gaudiest show,
To see those men at their poor banquet take
The sword, and, mid the song and cup's gay flow,
Swear on it, for their prince to live &mdash; or to lie low.

Yet they were happier in that foreign soil,
The exile's home, perhaps to be his grave;&mdash;
Than those who came to revel in their spoil.
The feast was over in the bandit's cave,
The first, hot, wild excess had ceas'd to rave;&mdash;
And now 'twas hush'd debate and jealous fear;
The ruffian's hand, the ruffian's heart misgave;
And crowded close, with sword half drawn, quick ear,
They seem'd the yet unsummon'd steps of wrath to hear.

Why, 'twere a lesson worth an age of man,
To look upon that council chill and late&mdash;
The grand Impostor, now with conscience wan,
Waiting his own, who fix'd an empire's fate;
One of the crew, for terror knows not state.
Round him of glaring visages a cloud,
Like naked passions, shame, ire, horror, hate;
Each taunting each, all on their tempter loud,
All seeing in their steps the dungeon and the shroud.

The rebel sank to chains:  the violet&mdash;
How could its humble sweetness catch that eye!
Soon wither'd, in the bravo's heart's blood wet,
That but refresh'd the Albion roses die.
And now the Household march with gaze and cry
Of the same thousands who had bade them bleed;
Gallant and young, a glittering chivalry,
As ever in the tourney broke a reed,
Or thro' the fight high spurr'd the springing Arab steed.

Of gold the sculptur'd helm; the harnessed vest
Crimson and gold; the cuirass golden bared;
Of gold the sun that blazed upon its breast;
Of gold the spur, the bit, the sabre guard;
The velvet housing, crimson, golden starr'd;
Of gold the frontlet of the white-shell'd rein;
Broad boss'd with gold the holster-skin of pard;
Of gold the knots on chest, and croup, and mane;
They pass like forms of dreams, not things of this Terrene.

The pomp has deepen'd.  Thro' the Louvre-arch
Swells out the horse and foot's unwearied tide;
A sheet of steel the close-lock'd column's march,
Waving, as plants the mass its solid stride;
A following cloud, the squadron's plume of pride
Floating above. &mdash; But soon and statelier bound
A troop, to whom, as down the lines they ride,
The deep drums roll, the standards stoop profound,
The sinking musquets give the clash'd, saluting sound.

'Tis the king's troop! &mdash; the bridge, the roof, the wall,
Are lined with faces struggling for the show.
The pageant comes; &mdash; uncapp'd and hush'd are all;
It comes, with many a pause, expanding slow
In splendour, like the summer's showery bow;
A press of horse and herald, lance and vane,
And pages piled in gold and scarlet-glow
On chariot roofs, and barbs with ribbon'd mane,
And chiefs hot spurring round, with star, and staff, and chain.

Marshal and duke, in flank, and front, and rear,
An inner cohort, guard the Sovereign,
And that fair, jewell'd form &mdash; his daughter dear.
Stately the monarch bows; and where the train
Halt for the moment, bursts the shout again,
And swell the trumpets lifted to the sky.
They move, &mdash; and still arise the shout and strain,
And all along their march is ear and eye,
'Till in the Abbey's porch the last deep concords die.

The pile is full; and oh, what splendors there
Rush, in thick tumult, on the entering eye!
The Gothic shapes, fantastic, yet austere;
The altar's crown of seraph imagery;
Champion and king that on their tombstones be,
Now cluster'd deep with beauty's living bloom;
And glanc'd from shadowy stall and alcove high,
Like new-born light, through that mysterious gloom,
The gleam of warrior steel, the toss of warrior plume.

The organ peals; at once, as some vast wave,
Bend to the earth the mighty multitude,
Silent as those pale emblems of the grave
In monumental marble round them strew'd.
Low at the altar, forms in cope and hood
Superb with gold-wrought cross and diamond twine,
As in the pile &mdash; alone with life endued,
Toss their untiring censers round the shrine,
Where on her throne of clouds the Virgin sits divine.

But, only kindred faith can fitly tell
Of the high ritual at that altar done,
When clash'd the arms and rose the chorus-swell,
Then sank, &mdash; as if beneath the grave 'twere gone;
Till broke the spell the mitred abbot's tone,
Deep, touching, solemn, as he stood in prayer,
A saintly form upon its topmost stone,
And raised, with heavenward look, the Host in air,
And blessed the prince and people kneeling humbled there.

Gorgeous! &mdash; but love I not such pomp of prayer;
Ill bends the heart 'mid mortal luxury.
Rather let me the meek devotion share,
Where, in their silent glens and thickets high,
England, thy lone and lowly chapels lie.
The spotless table by the eastern wall,
The marble, rudely traced with names gone by,
The pale-eyed pastor's simple, fervent call;
Those deeper wake the heart, where heart is all in all.

Vain the world's grandeur to that hallow'd roof
Where sate our fathers many a gentle year;
All round us memory; at our feet the proof,
How deep the grave holds all we treasure here:
Nay, where we bend, still trembling on our ear
The voice whose parting rent life's loveliest ties;
And who demands us all, heart, thought, tear, prayer?
Ev'n He who saith "Mercy, not sacrifice,"
Cares He for mortal pomp, whose footstool is the skies!

If pride be evil; &mdash; if the holiest sighs
Must come from humblest hearts, if man must turn
Full on his wreck of nature to be wise;
If there be blessedness for those who mourn;
What speak the purple gauds that round us burn?
Ask of that kneeling crowd whose glances stray
So restless round on altar, vestment, urn;
Can guilt weep there?  can mild repentance pray?
Ask, when this moment's past, how runs their sabbath day!

Their sabbath day!  Alas!  to France that day
Comes not; she has a time of looser dress,
A time of thicker crowded ball and play,
A time of folly's hotter, ranker press;
She knoweth not its hallowed happiness,
Its eve of gather'd hearts and gentle cheer.
Paris!  how many an outcast might confess
Her heart's first dazzling in its guilty glare!
What saith yon melancholy Morgue? &mdash; the victim's there!

'Tis open! &mdash; Never fails its sight of woe!
And crowds are rushing to that fearful dome,
And crowds are scattering out, subdued and slow;
They've seen, &mdash; to what complexion life may come,
'Tis narrow as the grave, a house of gloom:
And on the wall, with ouze and blood long dyed,
Are hung a spangled robe, a broken plume,
Dropping, as fresh-drawn from the river tide,
And cold beneath them lies &mdash; the lost! &mdash; the suicide!

A few rude boards are now her beauty's bed;
Her still and roseless cheek has now no veil
But one long, dripping lock across it shed;
Yet her wide eye looks living.  Oh!  the tale
Told there &mdash; of reason that began to fail,
Of wild remorse, of the last agony,
When wandering, desperate, in the midnight gale,
She flung to sightless heaven her parting cry,
Then in the dark wave plunged, to struggle and to die.

The crowd pass on.  The hurried, trembling look,
That dreaded to have seen some dear one there,
Soon glanced, they silent pass.  But in yon nook,
Who kneels, deep shrinking from the oriel's glare,
Her forehead veil'd, her lip in quivering prayer,
Her raised hands with the unfelt rosary wound?
That shrouded, &mdash; silent &mdash; statue of despair
Is she who through the world's delusive round
Had sought her erring child, and found, and there had found!

The mass is closing. &mdash; Hark!  the harmony
That from the altar with its incense soars,
Then seems to vanish in the opening sky,
Bearing the vow an humbled people pours.
Fair Angouleme!  that tear of thine implores
Pardon for France.  But on those orbs of blue
Comes there no tear for thoughts the grave restores?
Thy gentle cheek has lost at once its hue;
Yes, forms of grief and love are rising on thy view.

Daughter of France!  in what empurpled bow'r
Pass'd thy young loveliness the sunny hour?&mdash;
Her sun was dim.  The prison was the clime
That struck upon the royal infant's prime.
Her joys, to watch the centinel's dull round,
Till her ear sicken'd at the weary sound;
To count yet care not for the hour's slow wheel,
As one on whom the grave had set its seal;
To pine upon her pillow for the day,
Yet, seen, to wish its cheerless beam away;
Then, tremble as drew on the tedious night,
And feel as life was parting with the light;&mdash;
Then &mdash; to her couch, to weep and watch for morn,
To shew her she was living &mdash; and forlorn!

She had companions.  Deeper misery!
All whom she loved on earth were there &mdash; to die!
And they must perish from her &mdash; one by one&mdash;
And her soul bleed with each, till all were gone.
This is the woe of woes, the sting of fate,
To see our little world grow desolate&mdash;
The few on whom the very soul reclin'd,
Sink from the eye, and feel we stay behind;&mdash;
Life, to the farthest glance, a desert road,
Dark, fearful, weary &mdash; yet that must be trod.

Daughter of France!  did not such pangs compress
Thy heart in its last, utter loneliness?
Didst thou not droop thy head upon thy hand,
Then, starting, think that time was at a stand,
And find its flight but by the thicker gloom
That dimm'd thy solitary dungeon-room?
Didst thou not gaze upon thy glimpse of sky,
And long to bid the last, best hour be nigh?
Or melted even by that moment's view,
Stoop to the world again, and think, how blue,
How bright to thousands spread its canopy;
How many a joyous heart and laughing eye,
Buoyant with life and hope, and free, &mdash; oh, free!&mdash;
Based in the brightness thou shouldst never see?
Her world was past; her hours, or few or more,
Left her bound, wretched &mdash; all she was before!
This, this is misery &mdash; the headsman's steel
Strikes, and we perish &mdash; but we cease to feel.

The Temple tower is fallen; yet still the grot
Lives in pale mockery of the woeful spot;
The weedy walk still borders the parterre,
A few wild shrubs chok'd in the heavy air;
And, helped by some rude tracery on the green,
The eye may image where the pile has been:
But all is past, &mdash; trench, buttress, bustling guard,
For silence, ruin, and the pale, dead sward.

Heaven!  what wild weight of suffering was prest
In this close den, this grave in all but rest!
What hope, fear, agony the high hearts thrill'd,
That mercy, though 'twas blood, so quickly still'd;
And what high hearts that fiery circle ran,
And what fiends urged them, in the shape of man!
I trod the ground with reverence, for that ground
Was holy to my tread; its dungeon-bound,
Dear as the spot where blood and ashes tell
That there the martyr closed his triumph well;
The tortures tools even hallow'd &mdash; brand and stake,
Scourge, fetter &mdash; all, all relics for his sake.

Even on that weedy path had moved the train
Who never move to human eyes again.
Sad Antoinette!  Alas!  her morning star
Was set, and all its worshippers were far.
She had no sphere to lighten now; that wall
Enclosed her palace, kingdom, world &mdash; her all!
Yet, to the last, her glance was majesty,
Or dimmed but when it met her partner's eye;
And learn'd its patience of the eye that met
The chain, the dungeon, death, as nature's debt;
No murmur on the monarch's lip, in heaven
The heart, the world forgotten and forgiven.
And there their infants clung, subdued and nigh;
There followed the meek sister, fix'd to die.
It was a walk of woe.  By spy and guard,
The converse of the pining heart debarr'd;
Forced to hear taunts that shock'd the purer ear,
And while they wrung their souls, not seem to hear;
Longing to lay down life, yet driven to win,
For their unconscious babes, the men of sin;&mdash;
Till the bell toll'd, and some grim centinel
Block'd up their path, and turn'd them to their cell.

Yet hours were spent within that fearful pile,
When the lip wore the sainted spirit's smile;
When books, and such light toil as smooths away,
If aught can smooth, the lingering prison day:
And more, that holy unity of heart
That smil'd together, only wept apart;
Peace, prayer, and heaven, their gentle hearts enwove,
Dungeons themselves but ministers of love!
Their days were number'd, and the grave's dark stone
Soon chill'd their agonies; &mdash; one, orphan'd one!
Left here to weep: &mdash; no! &mdash; left to wait the time
Destined to give them the revenge sublime;
Destined to bid their child, their heroine, bear
A nation's sorrows to their sepulchre.

'Tis Noon:  the flags cling close on roof and spire,
The sun burns fierce, a ball of living fire;
The sky is blue-deep, beautifully blue:
Here rise no sulphurous smokes to shroud its hue;
No leagues of pestilence, that still and forge,
To blot out heaven and poison earth, disgorge.
Now comes the idler's hour.  The beggar-bard
Takes his old quarters on the Boulevard;
Beneath the trees the Conjuror spreads his tools;
The Quack harangues his group of graver fools
In lofty lies, unruffled by the jar
Thrumm'd from his neighbour Savoyard's guitar;
Veil'd virgins beam, like Dian in a mist;
Philosophers show mites; she-tumblers twist;
Each the fix'd genius of some favourite tree,
Dryads and fauns of Gallic minstrelsy.
In double glories now, the broad Marchande,
Fire-eyed, her skin by Gascon summers tann'd,
Red as the kerchief round her coal-black hair,
Lays out her tempting trays of rich and rare.
Resistless ruby bands, delicious rings,
In genuine paste; the true wax coral strings,
Mingling with wonders of profounder art,
Woman's dear helps to mystify the heart;
Crisp auburn curls, &mdash; to hide th' obtrusive gray;
That stubborn hue, which yet will make its way;
Glass eyes, mouse eyebrows, teeth like studs of snow,
Grinning in grim good humour row by row.
Secrets so stiffly kept from upper air,
Yet here let loose, the sex's whole repair;
And here, in all the splendors of placard,
Beauty's last polishers, the rouge and fard!
Mysterious things!  that, like the tricks of dreams,
Make what is seem not, while what is not, seems;
Deep witcheries!  whose absence makes the fright,
Raising their ghosts at morn, their nymphs at night&mdash;
Soft potions!  ministered with softest skill,&mdash;
Yet used with desperate intent &mdash; to kill;
Obedient charms!  that many a charming maid
Summons long after all the rest are laid!

The air grows furnace-hot; flag, awning, screen,
Peep endless from those lovely lines of green;
Yet Autumn has been there; &mdash; the russet tinge,
Deep purples, pearly grays the poplars fringe;
And ever, in the distance some proud tower
Looks out in feudal beauty from its bower.
All a strange, mirthful, melancholy show;
Stately decay above, wild life below!
This is no city-scene.  The tree, the tent,
The small, bright flags that break the line's extent;
The guns defiling down the central road,
The escort round the halted convoy strow'd,
The courier Cossack rushing in career
With low bent head, slack rein, and levell'd spear,
The clang within the lines, the measur'd tramp,
The mime and minstrel sounds, &mdash; is this a camp?
And this a hurrying army, that have made
Their forest-halt till noon's high blaze is staid?
To move with eve, to see the twilight's gray
Float on their banners many a league away?
At morn to spring to arms, at noon &mdash; be laid
Silent and pale &mdash; nor care for sun or shade?
It is a camp; a matchless host; &mdash; the breeze
That lets in sunlight through the heaving trees,
Flings into sudden splendor form and plume,
Like visions, flashing bright, then past to gloom;
Perpetual blaze of gem and steel and gold;
Russ helm, Hungarian mantle's broidered fold,
Green Tartar-turban, Georgian orange shawl
O'er silver mail; deep sables of Ural;
Broad bosoms corsleted with crow and star;
Dark, haughty faces bronzed with glorious war,
Champions, that each a battle's strength has stood,
Chief caterers of the vulture's fearful food;
Now mingled, &mdash; mighty with one triumph more,
Greatest and last, &mdash; Earth's day of war is o'er!

A distant bell has toll'd, &mdash; the wanderers well
Know in its heavy clang the palace bell;
And each puts on his speed, and many a stride
Has passed its courts before the sound has died.
The gates stand closed; the Swiss, a thing of state,
Poising his key as if the key of fate,
Smiles, soothes, impartial deals his soft survey
To the proud strugglers whom he keeps at bay;
The answering smile, bribe, menace tried in vain,
An entrance from his weaker man to gain.
The signal comes at last.  The portals all
Are instant open, instant fill'd the hall;
Winding, a long, bright column, up the stair,
On press its plumaged host of brave and fair,
With many a wondering glance, and voice of mirth.
But France!  thou guiltiest of the guilty earth,
Why lives in all thy scenes of great or gay
Something that makes the spirit turn away,
Some traiterous taint, some odour of the vault,
Scarce to be thought on, ne'er to be forgot?
If man would worship murder, man might fall
At murder's darkest shrine in that high hall.

Broad day, &mdash; the nation gazing on the deed,&mdash;
A righteous king unthron'd &mdash; torn out &mdash; to bleed!
His band in blood above, his gallant band,
That stair their fort, their field, their last sad stand.
Then roll'd the crowd &mdash; no press of holiday;
'Twas steel to steel, to musquet musquet's play;
Then there were sparklings through the balustrade&mdash;
'Twas the sword shivering on the bayonet blade;
Up to the roof 'twas cloud, &mdash; a mass of night,
The volley's livid burst the only light;
Scarce known where man was gorging upon man,
But by the clots that down its sculptures ran,
Or the lopp'd head that by the gory hair
High whirl'd, shot like a meteor down the stair,
Or the torn wretch who, gash'd too deep to fly,
Dragged to the porch his mangled limbs to die.
The roar went on above.  Vile, noble trunk
On that red spot in thick communion sunk;
The glorious dead, the guilty in one gore,
They met in madness, and they part no more.

'Tis past, or past to those who now spread on
Sportive, through chambers thick with couch and throne;
Large, lofty, gorgeous, all that meets the eye
Strong with the stamp of ancient majesty;
The impress which so undefined, yet clear,
Tells that the former Mighty have been there.
All looking hoary pomp; the walls rich scroll'd,
The roof high flourish'd, arras stiff with gold,
In many a burning hue and broad festoon
Wreathing those casements, blazon'd now with noon;
The marble tablets on their silver claws,
Loaded with nymph, and grace, and pix, and vase;
Beside the mirror foot, the Indian screen
Dazzling the eye with dragons red and green:
The mighty mirror, brightning, doubling all,
In its deep crystal lit an endless hall.

The rout a moment paused, gave glance and smile,
Then scatter'd on to wonder through the pile;
Yet there was beauty in the very light
That through the chamber roll'd its gush of white,
And one paused there, half-sense, half-soul his gaze,
Tranced by the bright creations of the blaze.
It stoops, a pyramid of fire, &mdash; the floor
Gleams like a shifting bed of molten ore;
It strikes the antique mail, the mail returns
A sanguine flame; the vase in jasper burns
The deep-nich'd statue in that lustre thrown
Gleams as the light were flashing from the stone;
The altar curtain droops, a pale, proud fold,
'Tis touch'd &mdash; 'tis living purple, imaged gold.

A massive porte rolls back; the walls, thick starr'd
With pike and pistol, tell the hall of guard.
War all its emblems, from the gloomy roof
Girt with its bold, black forms in knightly proof,
Down to the floor, where by his bright stockade
Paces the mousquetaire in slow parade.
But man may be the sterner emblem still;
Marshal and prince around the canvass fill;
War's thunderbolts!  their track was blood and flame,
They blazed and sank &mdash; their country's boast and shame.
The heart turns from them; like the desert blast,
They rose to slay, they slew, and they are past,
And treachery has been here.  There hangs a pall
For ever on the Marshals' pompous hall.

The crowd have scatter'd far, &mdash; a distant room
Has check'd their laughter; swift and hush'd they come.
What holds the wonderers now?  A canopy,
Topped with a mouldering plume, a golden bee
Half from its curtain's faded crimson torn,
A cypher deep defaced, a wreath forlorn,&mdash;
They gaze but on a chair. &mdash; Yet lo!  the throne
Of conquest, crime, despair &mdash; Napoleon!
This was Earth's heart!  when here the sceptre strook,
Through all her realms the keen vibration shook.
The murmur here &mdash; swell'd forth an oracle,
And nations heard it in its wrath, and fell.
Here stamp'd the foot, &mdash; and bursting up like flame,
The crown-givers, the eagle legions came.
There was a darkness on it; woe to eye
That dared to pierce the evil sanctuary!
Prowess and pomp were there; the gloomy spear
Waved in incessant circuit; prince and peer
Bowing their haughty foreheads helm'd and crown'd,
Hung like a fiery cloud the throne around.
It had a mightier guard, &mdash; that cloud within,
Sate Guilt that chill'd the heart, substantial Sin;
And man had bled, and diadems been riven,
Till terror saw it delegate of heaven.
Judgment must strike, but mortal hearts were wan
Before the form, the man, if that were man!

Is there not one &mdash; a being from his height
Of glory fall'n, a shape of burning might,
A ruin'd grandeur, angel beauty marr'd,
On his trench'd brow the early crown unstarred?
Condemn'd thro' earth on restless wing to range,
His joy, his agony, revenge, revenge:
And has he not the passing power to dart,
Supernal vigour through the traitor's heart?
Seduce the weak before him, bend the high,
'Till the world owns its present Deity?

The Tyrant's peace was fearful.  Fatal guile
Entombed the slaves who trusted to his smile.
But when he scorned the mask, and shouted war,
And here unroll'd the banner of the star;
Who slumber'd then? &mdash; what land but fix'd its eye
For omens on the eagle's augury?
The ancient empires shook.  The mighty North
Sent her reluctant suppliants hurrying forth;
The South gave up her gold.  The Ottoman
Cower'd to a haughtier sultan's dark divan.
And he, the MASTER, sate beneath that plume,
And kings stood here, nay trembling, in this room;
His vassals &mdash; wither'd in his evil blaze;
And now the meanest hind may scoff and gaze!

The final vengeance came!  but sent by whom?
Was it in man to burst this den, this tomb!
Lives there the human heart that dared to hope
To stand in scorn beneath this charnel cope?
'Twas as if heav'n would bare to human eyes
Its empire o'er its own fierce agencies.
As if the tempest-cloud had oped its gorge,
To shew the secrets of the thunder's forge.
As if some final shock had drank the wave
That rolls in gloom o'er ocean's central cave;
Stripping to man its bosom, boundless vale
Of wreck and buried wealth, and corpses pale;
The world of storms, the great life-swallower nude;
All one wild waste &mdash; death, silence, solitude!

Stranger and enemy are round that chair;
But are no sterner shapes of friendship there?
No haughty frowns, bold tauntings, bitter sighs,
No pangs our nature knows not, till it dies?
Gaze ye not here, who, freezing in your gore,
Made the drear halt on Berezyna's shore;
And heard the Tartar's shout, and rushing wave,
Mark, through the dusk, the limits of your grave,
And felt the polar night your gashes sear,
And died in torture, but to fix him here?
And ye!  the plumed and trampling chivalry,
Who rode on Leipsic's plain of death to die;
And met the German sword, and fiery shower,
To save him for another, fiercer hour!
It came; &mdash; ye last, consummate sacrifice!
Wing ye not here in deeper agonies?
Ye, round whose hearts still hangs the clotted blood,
Whose flesh is still the Flemish raven's food;
Rolls not upon the wind your countless train,
With cloudier visages of shame and pain?
Yet in the field ye fell.  Ne'er battle soil
Such booty bore, where corpses were the spoil.
And he, for whom ye bled, on whom your eye
Turn'd in its dimness, dared do all but die!
Ye massacred!  behold the prize ye won;
The throne, and him who sat upon that throne.

The heavens were sick of crime, &mdash; the endless strife
Where black ambition flung its stake of life.
The trial came. &mdash; On rush'd, with shout and ban,
The rebel hosts, their Idol in the van;
Strength of their heart, and wonder of their eye;
Illusive glory, for his hour was nigh.
Their rites of blood arose.  In vain the name
Of their dark Baal echoed.  Evening came.&mdash;
Then the true thunders roll'd.  Their livid gaze
Saw the horizon one advancing blaze;
They saw it smite their Idol on his throne;
And he was smote, &mdash; pomp, art, illusion gone.
Then died his worshippers.  The jealous steel
Raged through their quivering ranks with faithful zeal.
The sacrifice was done!  and on its wing
The earth sent up the shout of thanksgiving.
