Pale Contemplation!  abstract, pensive pow'r!
Wrapt in thy mantle I would choose to trace
Thy fav'rite haunts, where, at the midnight hour,
When darkness thick hides nature's smiling face,
Lost in the depths of thought thou tak'st thy place
To ponder o'er the scenes for ever gone&mdash;
To number all the mis'ries that embrace
This mortal life, and mark when scarce begun,
That it for ever ends, and all its works are done.

I saw thy form on Hecla's frozen height,
Where chains of adament for ever bind;
Where snows eternal clothe in glowing white
Her dreary region, and the bleak north wind
Blows awful round her summit; there reclin'd
Thou view'd'st where Desolation rears her head;
Thou view'd'st the dire confusion left behind
By storms, which shower'd their furies as they fled,
And ice, in mountains pil'd, all o'er the ocean spread.

When I beheld thee on fam'd Aetna stand,
Where devastation holds her ruthless sway;
Where fires volcanic wave their deadly brand
And vapour, cloud, and smoke obscure the day:
There did'st thou brood o'er the unceasing fray
Of warring elements hurled from their source,
Which, pregnant with destruction, bear away,
In mingled ruin, all that meet their course;
While long remain the marks of their o'erwhelming force.

I saw thee wander Tiber's banks along,
Whose rev'rend streams now humbly lift their waves;
And stray the sacred vestiges among
Of classic Rome, and trample on the graves
Of Consuls, Heroes, Emperors, and Slaves;
Musing upon the wond'rous deeds there wrought,
Which now Oblivion, frowning, vainly craves:&mdash;
Lost in the depth of years remote, thy thought
Then bent on conquests gain'd and sanguine battles fought.

Say &mdash; dost thou love the churchyeard's solemn bounds,
Where deathlike silence reigns, and spectres glide
Swift as the moon-beams o'er the earthy mounds&mdash;
Time's proud memorials of her sweeping tide?&mdash;
Or where red Carnage, with gigantic stride,
Hastes o'er the field, and rears her crimson spear&mdash;
Spreading destruction swift on ev'ry side;
While corses thick, as Ocean's waves, appear,
Claim from each heart a sigh &mdash; from ev'ry eye a tear.

But when no more revolving transient time,
When things eternal sway'd thy wond'ring mind,
With fixed gaze, wrapt in the thought sublime,
To Calvary's Mount thy footsteps then inclin'd,
And round thy heart a holy awe entwin'd,&mdash;
Unnumber'd, as the drops of morning dew&mdash;
As true devotion hallow'd and refin'd,
Down thy pale cheeks the tear-drops rapid flew,
And all thy soul diffus'd while bending o'er the view.

O'erspread with sorrow, poignant yet serene,
Thy looks bespoke the temper of thy soul:
As shines the sun the melting clouds between,
So beam'd thine eye in mildness through the whole.
Girt with devotion's flame thy thoughts did roll
To where the Great Redeemer rules on high;
A heav'nly heat thy passions all controul,
As still thy fancy view'd his friendly eye
Serenely bend on men for whom he once did die.
