Come not, ye Muses!  from  your sylvan shades,
As ye were wont, with traits serenely fair;
But leave your flow'ry and romantic glades
In all the signs of sorrowful despair:
For SHE is dead, whose virtues were so rare&mdash;
CHARLOTTE is dead, her infant Prince no more;
Grief clouds the nation, and the people wear
Such marks of sadness as they never wore,
So much they feel her loss &mdash; so much her death deplore.

There is a gloom o'er all the kingdom thrown&mdash;
A sudden check to HOPE'S auspicious dreams,
For which no promised splendour can atone,
However fair the distant prospect seems;
For SHE was formed of VIRTUE'S loveliest beams,
And in her heart the kindliest passions reigned;
All that benignant CHARITY esteems
Within the heart was quietly maintained,
To succour those who craved, or mournfully complained.

'Tis as a dream of the distempered brain,
That haunts the mind, and keeps it from repose,
So great's the change from happiness to pain,
From joys ecstatic to the darkest woes!
Nought lightens up the picture; &mdash; and the throes
Of mem'ry seem on ev'ry breeze to swell;
All eyes are bathed in tears; &mdash; all England shows
Its grief for HER whom Heav'n approved so well&mdash;
Whose name we love to hear, whose worth delight to tell!

But SHE is gone, our darling hope and pride,
The blissful star that cheered us through despair,
That taught us how to patiently abide
The dark reverses of this seat of care,
And turn to times more lovely and more fair,
When Heav'n should grace her temples with the crown,
And to the sov'reigns of the world declare
Her virtues and incomp'rable renown,
And make them fear her arms, and tremble at her frown!

For she was formed to win us and command,
To kindle love, and to enforce respect;
Not by too lenient nor too rash a hand,
But by that goodness none could dare reject,
Or think was giv'n so early to be checked,
In all its bright and promising career:
But, oh!  our hopes, irrevocably wrecked,
Are as the leaves, all scattered and all sear,
That fill the wintry wind, and cover Autumn's bier!

Unpitying Death!  what havoc hast thou made
Amidst her virtues and affections sweet,
And all those brilliant promises displayed
In CLAREMONT'S calm and dignified retreat,
Where Peace and Charity were wont to meet&mdash;
Where Love for ever joyously sojourned&mdash;
Where HYMEN reigned in paradise complete,
Nor for a change of situation yearned,
Till thou, remorseless pow'r!  his sanctu'ry o'erturned!

How sweet is every scene, through every hour,
To watch th' affections of the Royal Pair!
To see them yielding to each other's pow'r,
Blest in each other's confidence and care!
No lukewarm wishes, no suspicions there
Dwelt for a moment!  but supreme delight
Followed their gentle natures every where
Throughout the day, or more endearing night,
When, wrapt in blissful dreams, they stole from mortal sight.

Their's was the love but few are formed to taste,
The love of peace and sentiment refined,&mdash;
Whate'er by elegance may be embraced,
Or issues from the cultivated mind&mdash;
Or leaves immortal dignity behind,
When snatched from nature and her darkened sphere;
Nor can the Muse a single instance find
Where such benevolence and love sincere
Amidst the millions of this nether world appear!

Oh!  they were formed by Heav'n's peculiar pow'r
To raise our hopes above their wonted height;
To give to ev'ry scenes, to ev'ry hour,
Uncommon splendour, beauty, and delight;
But DEATH, with more than his accustomed spite,
Has marred our prospects; and his gloomy shroud,
Blasting their comforts with untimely blight,
Hath darkened all our expectations proud
Of her advancing Reign, that seemed without a cloud!

E'en whilst the mind, exulting, turns to Heav'n,
And sees her spirit freed from mortal care,
Fond Mem'ry oft shall roam where Love had giv'n
His sweetest blessings to the youthful pair,
And feel the pangs of disappointment there,
And, wrapt in sorrow, say &mdash; "this was the spot,
Where oft she wandered to enjoy the air
Of fragrant summer, when the noon had shot
Its rays on these sweet grounds, that smiled without a blot!

"Here would she sit, enamoured of the scene,
Here pore delighted o'er th' Historic page,
Lovely in all her manners, and her mien
Freed from the pomp of courtly equipage;
Oh!  it was sweet so early to presage
Her future worth, had Heav'n prolonged her years;
To see her with such cheerfulness engage
In every act assuasive of the tears,
And bitter wants of those, whose sorrowings met her ears.

"This is the very walk she loved so well,
And that the scene most pleasing to her view,&mdash;
These were the flow'rs most grateful to her smell,
Ere yet dismantled of the morning dew;
But they are dead, and never can renew
Those sweet sensations they were wont to raise;
Changed is each prospect, and each avenue
Is darkened with the memory of those days
When CLAREMONT'S happy pair were England's pride and praise.

"There's not a single situation here
But yields some strong memorial of her fame,
But stimulates the sympathetic tear,
And turns aside each pleasurable aim;&mdash;
The winding walks reverberate her name&mdash;
And CHARLOTTE'S virtues live in every breeze&mdash;
The children bless her, and the aged claim
Her benedictions on their bended knees,
From Heav'n believing still that she their suffering sees!

"'Twas round this plot, with autumn leaves o'erstrown,
Lock'd in each other's arm, at evening tide,
Th' enamour'd couple took their walks alone,
In all affection's fascinating pride,
No wish withheld, no aim ungratified,
That Virtue loves, and Innocence inspires,&mdash;
Each with the other pleas'd and satisfied,
Anticipating all those elegant desires
Which harmony can prompt, and Heav'n itself admires.

"Ask ye if FASHION lured them to her fane
From the enchantments of their fav'rite seat?
Truth answers 'No!' &mdash; her visionary reign
Charmed not their spirits by its bland deceit:
They saw its folly, and they loathed the cheat,
And blest with all that Virtue could supply,
Preferred their CLAREMONT'S dignified retreat
To evanescent show, that feeds the eye,
To warp the reasoning mind, and wreck its constancy.

"No! &mdash; they were far superior to the show
Of Fashion's minions, splendid though they be,
Whose rounds of pleasure only end in woe,
Death-bed afflictions and despondency:
They were not lured by such hypocrisy,
And, had it pleased th' Almighty to have spared
Our darling Hope from this calamity,
Her great and noble spirit would have dared
To walk for aye with GOD, for his high heav'n prepared!"

So Mem'ry tells, and so she would have reigned,
Had heav'n ordained her for an earthly crown;
But God's high pleasure must not be arraigned
By man, who ought to tremble at his frown,
Nor trust in mortal greatness and renown;
For he is just in all his works and ways,
And looks with gladness on a Christian down,
As through this thorny pilgrimage he strays,
And to his righteous will unforced submission pays.

Thus did she live, and thus, unshaken, die,
Prepared for realms immortal as her soul,
Full of that faith and glorious constancy
Which baffle Death, and smile at his controul:
She was not partly perfect, but the whole
Of her chaste spirit of its Maker beamed;
And, having gained the enviable goal
By ev'ry Saint and Christian so esteemed,
God snatched her to his breast, all perfect, and redeemed!

Then weep not, PRINCE!  for her translated worth,&mdash;
Weep not her absence from this seat of clay;
Her's is the glorious and delightful birth
Of bliss that lives and flourishes for aye;
And such her Offspring's, whom the light of day
Greeted in other and in fairer skies,
Where nought can sicken, nor can fate away&mdash;
Where all who live in full perfection rise,
Chanting their holy hymns and saintly symphonies.

Then weep not, though thy CHARLOTTE be no more,
Thine's the assurance of her perfect bliss,
In realms where none but angels can adore,
Or find that pleasure which they never miss:
How widely diff'rent from a world like this!
Where thousands sue for mercy, and in vain,
Where round about us ENVY'S serpents hiss,
Where MURDER holds her sanguinary reign,
And millions pine in want, and uselessly complain,.

But be thou strong and constant in thy faith,
Heav'n hath for thee its blessings yet in store;
Still cling to VIRTUE, nor let sorrow scaith
That gen'rous heart whose anguish we deplore;
But trust in GOD e'en now and evermore,
Nor of thy CHARLOTTE'S destiny complain:
'Tis not for mortal wisdom to explore
The Deity's impenetrable reign,
Who acts in all things wise, and never acts in vain!

Our worldly bliss is but of transient date,
If bliss be granted while we here abide;
More lasting joys the Christian's soul await,
Beyond this seat of vanity and pride,
Where the Creator reigns beatified:
And this, great Prince!  is the consoling thought
In which we all exultingly confide,&mdash;
That she has acted as a Christian ought,
Sure of her Maker's love, which zealously she sought.

Her life &mdash; her actions &mdash; her benignant mind&mdash;
Her feelings for the wretched and the poor,
Distinctly told to whom her soul inclined,
No less than her submission to endure
The will of Him, whose judgments are all pure,
However hard our suff'rings may appear;
Whose word and promises are never sure
To such as love him, and his mandates fear,
And to his precepts lend a calm, attentive ear.

Thou hast the bright and gratifying truth
For ever beaming to thy pensive view,
That she survives where misery and ruth
Are changed for joys and transports ever new;
Where all things wear a pleasurable hue,
And worldly troubles seem but as a shade:
Then, gen'rous Prince!  thy bitter grief subdue,
And on thy brow be quietude displayed,
Since she is with her God, and now immortal made!

And let it be thy comfort and delight,
As oft as busy mem'ry may prevail,
Whether by day, or more afflicting night,
When CHARLOTTE'S voice may seem to fill the gale,
Or her fair semblance on the moonbeams sail,
To know she treads the mansions of the sky,
Wishing thee rescued from a world so frail,
Where all that blossoms, blossoms but to die,
Beneath the icy hand of cold mortality!

And may it be our country's future boast,
That thou wert cherished by the people's care,
Who loved thee for the gentleness, but most
For those afflictions thou art doomed to bear,
Since Death hath robbed thee of the virtuous Fair,
Whose life and comfort were thy chief delight;
And may th' unbribed historian declare
Thou wert a star pre-eminently bright
Amidst th' unhallowed orbs attending England's night!

Blest in th' assurance of such high renown,
With all the benedictions of the land,
Thine is the prospect of a brighter crown
Than men can give, or potentates command:
And when the hour of death shall be at hand,
Faith shall support thee through the transient gloom,
Cheering thine eyes with exhalations bland
Of an unearthly and immortal bloom,
Where soul unites with soul, triumphant o'er the tomb!

But, ere we close the melancholy song,
The Muse would pay some tribute to Her name,
Whose ev'ry action, whether right or wrong,
Has never been identified with shame!
She to our pity hath no common claim;
For CHARLOTTE was her comfort and her stay,
The star that shone auspicious on her fame,
Dispersing every cloud of sorrow and dismay!

How many thoughts will rush upon her mind&mdash;
How many horrors penetrate her heart,
When to her startling ear the tale shall find
Unwelcome entrance, borne from ev'ry part!
But while she feels Remorse's thrilling smart,
Her mind shall look to HEAV'N for its redress,
Where every wicked and inhuman art
Is punished, though the guilty would suppress
The evidence that lives to prove their worthlessness!

How many pictures of benighted bliss
Will strike her vision, when the mind shall dwell
On her decease, whose rapture-yielding kiss
Consoled the mother whom she loved so well,
And made her heart exultingly to swell
With hopes that now are blasted and o'erthrown!
None, none, the number of those scenes may tell;&mdash;
So crowded are they, and so overgrown,
They seem as thick as weeds upon the sea-shore strown!

But SHE shall triumph!  and the day may come
When reconciliation shall prevail;
When each malicious sland'rer shall be dumb,
Nor dare her splendid character assail!
Oh!  it will prove a gratifying tale
To ENGLAND, when that union shall be known;
It is a blessing which we all shall hail,
Which only for our anguish can atone,
And give unblemished grace to England's envied throne!
