Prince Arthur and his nephew base
Do combat hond to hond,
Each slays his foe; &mdash; how Arthur was
Convey'd to Faery londe.

O! why should Virtue in this world succomb
To hateful Vice her bright, celestial head?
Oh!  why is Vice permitted to assume
Fair Virtue's semblaunce &mdash; worshipp'd in her stead?
Certes, at this I eft have mervailled:
But who high Jove's mysterious ways may scan?
By mortal wight they are not to be read:
Nathlesse he'll justify those ways to man,
When Time shall cease to roll, he will unfold his plan.

These grave conceipts have passen through my mind,
Eft as I've ponder'd o'er Prince Arthur's end:
Sure Fortune to her minion seem'd unkind,
Whenas th' adult'rer did his couch ascend,
And with unhallow'd love his honour shend.
Albe he sought redress in martial strife,
Ne Virtue bright, ne Valour mote defend
From the vile faytor's swerde his sacred life,
Fore-doom'd he was to fall, through his disloyal wife.

Of all the beauteous flowers beneath the sun,
In sooth, sweet woman is the loveliest flower;
But soonest blighted, when y'breath'd upon
By passion's gales, in whot temptation's hour.
Ah, me!  faire beauty is a perilous dower:
If virtue guard not, eften frail, as sheen,
Wooing the gaze of wanton paramour:
Such were the frailties of that dame, I ween,
Who shar'd the prince's bed, his own annointed queene.

Bright dawn'd the morning of that fatal day,
When royal Arthur bow'd him to his fate;
He set his martial bands in firm array,
Fir'd with revenge, and more than mortal hate
'Gainst him, who robb'd of peace his marriage state,
Mordred, th' incestuous, whose vile arts had turn'd
From love and honour Arthur's tender mate:
All terms of overture the monarch spurn'd,
And for the traitor's blood with rage resistless burn'd.

With golden streaks Dan Phoebus 'gan to fret
The eastern clime, the morning mists uncurl'd:
When those fierce fone in deadly combat met,
A stern defiance from each chief was hurl'd;
And where the royal standard wav'd, unfurl'd,
The battle clos'd; there rag'd the wild uproar,
There fought and bled the bravest in the world:
Knights of the Table Round were bath'd in gore,
There Arthur met his foe: &mdash; they met to part no more.

Like as two lions on Numidian plain
Together rush, in fierce hostility:
Fire in each eye, and terror in each mane,
Certes, it is a selcouthe sight to see,
All beasts amated fro the combat flee:
So when those heroes at each other dash'd,
Large vantage ground their wond'ring hosts left free:
Fierce was the strife, they strook, they foin'd, they lasht,
Whilse from their batter'd arms bright floods of sparkles flasht.

But all the wonders of that dreadful fight,
What mortal bard, what mortal tongue can tell?
When two such champions met in all their might,
Even fabled deeds of arms they did excell.
Pierc'd by his uncles hand, the traitor fell,
And breath'd his last upon the bloody plain:
But, see!  the victor reels upon his selle.
His radiant arms life's crimson currents stain,
He sinks, and yields his soul upon his foeman slain.

Whilst life's faint flame still flicker'd in its urn,
The dying prince commaundment gave to throw
His trenchant magic glave, hight Caliburn,
Into a lake, whose waters ne'er did flow.
But ere it cleft that lake's sheen surface, lo!
A mighty hand stretch'd forth arraught the same:
And thrice in air ywav'd it to and fro;
When loudly thrice responding thunders came,
And suddenly it sunk, wreath'd in the levin-flame.

When two dark clouds, with hidden fury fraught,
In welkin meet; loud bursts the levin-brond:
Sudden the wind, whyleare to madness wrought,
Ceases its brawling, and in cadence bland
Whispers serenely over sea and lond;
So when their chiefs in fight had slain each other,
Incontinent did either hostile band
Surcease their strife, like children of one mother;
Each shook his foeman's hand as tho' he were his brother.

Thus fell the pride and flower of chivalry
By treason's hand.  Alack!  and well away!
Whose stalworth arm had bow'd the surquedry
Of Saxon fone, in many a bloody fray.
Four hundred felt his prowess in one day.
Farewell to thee, thou mirror of true glory!
Tho' cruel foes did here thy peace bewray,
And low  thou liest 'neath the sod once gory,
Thy deathless fame shall live for aye in minstrel story.

Some say, to Faery londe the Prince was borne
By elfin fays, and wonnes in groves of bliss.
Unfading flowers its smiling fields adorn;
A land of peace and love &mdash; unlike to this:
Ne pain, ne grief, ne death comes there ywis.
Bright elfin sylphs his light attendants are,
And eke the Faerye Queene his consort is,
In amaranthine bowers reside the pair,
Blest with immortal youth, immortal joys to share.
