PROVENCE! &mdash; by every heart remember'd long,
Scene of the Hero's fame, and Lover's lay;
Where erst thy Troubadours awoke the song
With some wild legend, and forgotten fray,
Or made the festal moment yet more gay,
When labour's duties had with evening ceas'd;
Caroll'd their ballads to the closing day,
To hail the swain's return from toil released,
Or strung their tuneful harps, to greet the vintage feast.

In hall or bower their melodies were sung,
Through each dark waving wood and cultured plain;
Thine olive vallies with their sonnets rung,
And every echo gave the notes again.
Romance, and song, and love-tales' glowing strain
Breathed their soft cadence on the blue Rhone's shore;
And dear to high-born Lord, and peasant swain,
Were Music's wandering bards in days of yore,
When welcome ever hail'd the lowly Troubadour.

On the bright margin of the swift Durance,
What time the star-fires shot through twilight's gloom;
They sang the knightly chivalry of France,
Her fruitful vineyards, and her gardens' bloom.
Hymn'd the sad requiem to that hapless doom,
Which join'd in death the lovers of Vauclose!
Twining grief's minstrel garlands round their tomb,
Where many an holy tear its shrine bedews,
And Eloisa's fate is mourn'd by every Muse.

Lov'd Land, farewell! &mdash; nor blame me for the wrong
Thy charms have suffer'd from this idle rhime;
Though an all-feeble Minstrel weaves the song,
That tells strange legends of thine earlier time,
When feudal power was stain'd with feudal crime,
And e'en thy flowery paths were track'd with blood;
Deeds all unmeet for such celestial clime,
Whose beauties live alike in field and flood,&mdash;
On sky-capt mountain's height, and mulberry shaded wood.

Land of Romance! &mdash; a last, a long adieu!
Thy scenes are fading from my sight away,
Nor dare my skilless touch their themes renew,
While on the breeze my fitful notes decay,
As sinks the western sunbeam's golden ray,
To veil its glories in the ocean's swell;
E'en with that rude breeze dies my ruder lay,
Awaking Fancy bursts her fairy spell,
And the Muse bids her own romantic land &mdash; Farewell!
