Thou proud memorial of a former age,
Time-ruined Crookston; not in all our Land,
Romantic with a noble heritage
Of feudal halls, in ruin sternly grand,
More beautiful doth tower or castle stand
Than Thou!  as oft the lingering traveller tells;
And none more varied sympathies command;
Though where the warrior dwelt, the raven dwells,
With tenderness thy tale the rudest bosom swells.

Along the soul that pleasing sadness steals,
Which trembles from a wild harp's dying fall,
When fancy's recreative eye reveals
To him, lone musing by thy mouldering wall,
What warriors thronged, what joy rung through thy hall,
When royal Mary, yet unstained by crime,
And with love's golden sceptre ruling all,
Made thee her bridal home. &mdash; There seem to shine
Still o'er Thee splendours shed at the high gorgeous time.

How dark a moral shades and chills the heart,
When gazing on thy dreary deep decay!
To think what thou hast been, what now thou art!
Bleak desolation holds a reckless sway
Where pomp and grandeur marshalled their array,
And gallant crowded many a noble guest,
Till all was splendour, joy, and revelry;
And Beauty smiled within thy sheltering breast,
Lulled in Love's radiant dreams of pure celestial rest.

Of what thou wert, the shattered remnant now!
Age-worn to shapes fantastic!  the clear sky
Is all thy roof; the bramble on thy brow,
Where waved thy banner, nods in mockery!
Even like the tombstones of the years gone by,
Thy fragments sleep around with briers entwined;
The clamorous wild birds, wheeling o'er thee fly,
And claim thee for their own; and every wind
Among thine ivied clefts its harp of woe my find.

In cultured fields the lusty peasant plies,
And numerous stand the cheerful mansions round,
But sad and still thy form is seen to rise
In solitude, as from a funeral mound.
Thou to the living by no tie art bound;
O'er thee the cold airs breathe, the spirit broods
Of ages gone, whose reverie profound,
Lulled by the rushing waves, the sighing woods
Is startled when one sound or passing step intrudes.
