When not a breath hath heav'd thy gentle breast,
How oft I've sought thee at the break of day,
Ere lazy man would spurn his downy rest,
Or linnet rise to chant her morning lay,&mdash;
To catch the first glance of Phoebus' golden ray
Shot lightly o'er thy mead's empurpled vest,
And mark how, while it drank morn's misty grey,
'Twould wake the hum of life from east to west:
And oh!  'twas sweet to read this title-page of day.

Pleas'd have I trod thy softly swelling hills,
Where yellow Ceres and sweet Flora meet,
Throwing betwixt thy tributary rills
Rich floods of living gems and golden wheat;
And eke thy plains, where noisily do beat
The dusty clappers of thy busy mills,
To muse me where some broadly dashing sheet
The gauzy cloud of humid mist distills:
But ah, I traverse now Augusta's crowded street.

Oft have I sported on thy level side,
Where the fleet racer shoots across the green;
Oft have I laved me in thy glassy tide
In boyhood's days, all spotless and serene,
Or, buoyant, scudded up thy banks between:
But ah, those days are gone, and I must chide,
For memory will betray that I have been
Where tow'ring Hinchingbrooke's old gothic pride
Peeps thro' the wood, and smiles o'er all the scene.

Oft have I, hid in hedge or leafy nook,
Sat by thee, shaded from noon's parching gleam,
To watch the patient angler with his hook,
Dancing and eddying down the purple stream,
Beguile the simple roach: &mdash; or skim the cream,
Delightful task!  of some poetic book,
Where useful lore and pleasant fancies beam,
When all around me seem'd as 'twere but shook
From Heav'n for mortal weal!  all life a pleasant dream!

At eve I muse me oft and deeply, Ouse,
How pleas'd I've rambled by the side of thee,
When weary labour quits the glitt'ring dews
That gem the dark green carpet of the  lea,
Listening the shepherd whistling angrily
His lazy sheep, that cunningly would lose
Themselves behind or spreading bush or tree
That fringe thy verdant banks, delightful Ouse,
Loth, loth to leave thy peaceful haunts, like me!

Oh!  and I've rambled up thy banks at night,
When man was mute, and clos'd was every door,
To see, beneath the moon-beam's misty light,
The little boat go gliding up the shore;&mdash;
To hear the music of the splashing oar;&mdash;
Perchance some flute, as sweet as Stephens quite,
Whose silver notes did float along before,
Trilling with melody the meadows bright:
But ah, those nights are gone!  I will not muse them more.

Farewell, sweet Ouse! &mdash; thy image may I keep
For ever.  O Fancy, let me, when my brain
Doth gamble on my pillow, let me leap
Again in Ouse's bosom!  and again
Broil on his banks with Pleasure's giggling train
In boyish frisk! &mdash; Farewell!  oh, I could weep
To think thou hast no turn, life's sullen lane,
To point us back, for aye, youth's sweet, sweet days again.
