Yes!  I had fixed mine eye on that bright star
Which lures its votaries to an early grave,
Early and glorious &mdash; aye and happier far
Than they who live to lose, what fortune gave
In fickle mood. &mdash; I rode upon the wave,
My bosom swelling like the ocean; &mdash; proud
That in the band sent forth to free and save,
My name was numbered &mdash; at the fane I bowed
Of Honour, &mdash; brilliant star! &mdash; I worshipped with the crowd.

But not that they did worship; &mdash; from my birth
I yielded homage to an unknown shade;
It had no semblance to the things of earth;
In Truth's white robes the phantom I arrayed,
Then knelt before the image I had made:
I formed it bold, &mdash; abhorrent of deceit;
By aught on earth save baseness undismayed;
On every vice it frowned; but loathing hate
For one alone reserved &mdash; the sin insatiate.

Fell Avarice!  that 'midst the lesser crimes
Shines like a comet; &mdash; fertile source of woe;
Thou, &mdash; vice peculiar to these latter times,
Triumphing o'er the hearts of men dost go,
Scattering thy poison weeds on all below:
Thy marble robes repel the sigh-breathed prayer
Whispered by meagre Want. &mdash; Despair's deep throe,
The sigh that rives the breast, &mdash; the blood-tinged tear
Gushing from blighted hope, &mdash; with thee &mdash; are idle air.

Thou, like a rock torn from its earth-bound base,
And wandering amongst mortals, reckest not
The ruin of thy course, and we may trace
How thou dost crush, and crumble into nought
The human passions that with thee have fought,
And fallen. &mdash; Mark the gathering of that brow,
That eye earth-fixed in agony of thought;
There, once, sat smoothness, brightness, gladness &mdash; now &mdash;
Oh!  'neath thy glacial sway, the life-warm feelings bow.

Poet of broken hearts! &mdash; had I the power
That lives, and lightens in thy glowing page,
I'd tell how this gigantic vice doth tower
Above its compeers &mdash; tearing in its rage
The wrung heart piecemeal: &mdash; mortal war doth wage
With all of good or beautiful on earth,
Mocking at young-eyed hope, and feeble age,
All godlike virtues withering in their birth;
Leviathan of sin, &mdash; dark sepulchre of worth.

Moloch of passions! &mdash; thou hast been to me
A mountain weight, clogging my upward flight;
Oh!  from thy chilling influence were I free,
I'd roam and revel in the fields of light,
And scale of honour's steep and topmost height,
Or perish in the daring: &mdash; I would rend
The veil that wraps me in oblivious night,
Down glory's stream to after ages send
A laurel-circled name, &mdash; that now, alas!  must blend

With the  ignoble. . . .
