Friend Hal,
As I once gave my word, you should certainly know
What pass'd, should I visit the regions below;
From a dark gloomy room with the stump of a quill
I have pen'd this short journal, my word to fulfil.

Know then, my affairs being settled, that done,
I had nothing to do, but to die, and begone;
In due form of law then, I fairly departed,
And quickly, and safely, was hither transported.
As I know you are curious in search of things strange,
I'll relate what I found, by my whimsical change!

The POETS, both Grecian and Roman, of old,
Of whom, we so many fine things have been told,
Live here in great state, are Grandees of the court,
To whom all the moderns most humbly resort;
Yet few find admittance, or favour with those,
So poor their appearance, so shabby their cloaths,
Some, indeed, if they've interest, a place may obtain,
And enjoy, what by merit, was sued for in vain,
But the rest are a poor shabby crew in the main:
In short the whole tribe, are at best but so, so,
As you'll find by their state, and condition below.

Old CHAUCER and DRAYTON are here in good plight,
And SHAKSPEAR AND SPENCER appear pretty tight;
BEN JOHNSON sells ale at the side of the trill,
And BEAUMONT and FLETCHER go halves in a mill;
Old MILTON'S still blind, but is much in request
With HOMER and VIRGIL, and most of the best;
And ADDISON, lately assigned as his guide,
Enjoys a small place, and a pension beside;
Poor SAVAGE looks cheerful, and OTWAY'S well fed,
But appears much averse to the sight of new bread;
I found CUMBERLAND dull, tho' of late he's grown merry,
And mended his looks, since he shook hands with SHERRY;
That wit's just arrived, and seems perfect at ease,
For he finds here no dun, writ, or bailiff to tease.

Yet BUTLER of all, looks the best, let me tell ye,
Has money, good cloaths, and can now fill his belly;
Is lately prefer'd as his highness's jester,
For which he, per diem, has two and a tester;&mdash;
In troth, I was glad to see BUTLER so mended,
Who had suffer'd so greatly, before he descended;
Old DRYDEN sells Nectar, an excellent dram,
And SHADWELL is kept by a wealthy old dame.

POPE and SWIFT, when they met, arm in arm took their way,
In search of their much esteem'd friend, JOHNNY GAY;
They call'd at each tavern, and sought all around,
Where they thought it most likely he was to be found;
'Till at length being hungry they happen'd to drop
As kind fortune will'd it, into a cook shop;
There they spied their old friend, full as round as a hoop,
Regaling himself o'er a bason of soup.

Old DRYDEN sells nectar, I told you before,
But has lately put up a new sign at his door,
And if he goes on, as he hath done of late,
In a very short time, he will get an estate;
For honest CHARLES CHURCHILL approves of the plan,
And takes to his house all the custom he can;
They've establish'd a club, and when he takes the chair,
The true sons of Genius are sure to be there;
The nectar's so good, and the members so hearty,
You'd be glad, I am certain, to be of the party,
For HALL and old YORICK, with three or four more,
Such as FIELDING and Co. keep the board in a roar.

Here are more &mdash; but so ragged, so poor, and so sad,
'Twere a shame you should know, their conditions so bad.
As for me!  I am just advertised to be let,
So that will become of me, cannot tell yet.
Still a change for the better, I look &mdash; for I need it,
Which long service won't gain me, I find, should I plead it!
So must leave that to chance, what desert can't effect,
And invoke from the just, a reproach on neglect.

When I first came, some ask'd my condition on earth,
So I told my mishaps, from the time of my birth;
My relation, they said, oft excited their grief,
But to some parts, they own'd, they could scarce give belief;
They thought me hard used!  Bid me be of good cheer,
Nor doubt that an act of atonement was near:
On this hope, tho' 'twas pleasing, I shall not depend,
For practice has prov'd, Fortune was not my friend,
But when once I am settled, I'll write t' ye again,
'Till when, your fast friend, honest F&mdash; I remain.

POSTSCRIPT.
The playhouses, I've learned, are all in a bad way,
And if not back'd by talent, must fall to decay;
That wise as the age is, a good play is so rare,
That the boxes, and pit, look deserted and bare.
This distaste is promoted by snakes in the grass,
Who are known to hold forth against play, drame, or farce,
This I'm sure, should the actors be left in the lurch,
It will not be the fault of our good mother Church,
But those sprouts, set methodic, which if spread to a tree,
Will o'ershadow all rational pastime you'll see;
The most innocent sport they'll ne'er cease to revile,
And with the face hypocritc, decry e'en a smile.
Thus THEATRES in time will Conventicles be,
And deceit prove the downfal of taste, wit, and glee!
