Rapt into ages past, the Muse,
Triumphant over fate and time,
With independent voice pursues
Crimes sanctified in every clime.
Bold in the cause of Truth, she tears
The mystic veil that Falsehood wears,
And strips the sorc'ress of her art;
Friend to no sect, the bard disdains
The sordid boon that baseness gains,
And lays at Virtue's shrine the incense of the heart.

Thou imp of fraud, with double face,
Whose features war and peace proclaim!
Thou demon, fruit of dubious race,
That giv'st to crime fair Virtue's name!
In thee the passions take their turns,&mdash;
Now Love inspires, now Fury burns,
Now urg'd by impious, blood-stain'd zeal;
In thee each wide extreme we find,
That raises or degrades the mind,&mdash;
In either hand thou hold'st the olive and the steel!

Come, Superstition, stand confess'd,
And in these lines thy features see;
These lines with force, but truth express'd,
The colours and the theme agree!
Come, and behold thy woeful deeds;
See at each vein how Nature bleeds:
No tie, no law, from death can save!
Pierc'd by the son the father dies,
The son the father's victim lies,
And in the mother's womb the infant finds a grave!

What woeful cries the desert rend?
What thousands fall untimely slain?
Tyrant!  the reeking Sword suspend,
A murder'd nation heaps the plain!
Ah!  say, why dying millions bleed,
What crime could prompt so foul a deed?
What guilt provok'd the skies?
'Tis Superstition arms the hand,
And scatters death o'er all the land;
Tis Amran's cruel son, th' affrighted desert cries.

Fierce as a comet, poisn'ing day,
To vex the earth the monster flew,&mdash;
War, Discord, Death, led on the way,
Hell's progeny, a horrid crew!
First Discord, deaf to Mercy's cries,
Her arm th' almighty throne defies,
Red with the blood of brothers slain;
Next War, in sanguine robe appears,
Mother of sorrows and of fears!
And, brandishing his dart, Death clos'd the hideous train!

How trace the mischief in her flight?
Come, Muse, on bolder pinion soar;
The eagle shoots thro' fields of light,
And darts on Ocean's farthest shore!
Now borne on wings of fire they fly,
Wild as the storm that tears the sky,
And blasts and withers with its breath:
The sun a veil of darkness wears,
The guardian spirits quit their spheres,
And Nature cries aloud, "Woe to the sons of Earth!"

Where Tiber pours his classic urn,
And bathes with pride the Latian shore,
The fiends of hell impatient turn,
And o'er the eternal city soar.
There Chlorus' son the cross display'd,
With prostrate millions round him laid,
Fit instrument of crime they find:
Then, mad with savage joy, they shed
Each noxious influence o'er his head,
And turn the tyrant loose, to persecute mankind.

Around those fanes, by Virtue rais'd,
Where Love's exstatic transports rung,
Where Friendship's purest incense blaz'd,
And ev'ry lyre to joy was strung:
But oh!  how chang'd the blissful scene!
No songs are heard, no lovers seen,
No vows preferr'd with breath of fire!
There Murder lifts the blood-hot steel,
There Torture plies the racking wheel,
And human hecatombs on beds of flames expire!

Imbolden'd by successful crimes,
New scenes of death the fiend explores;
Beyond the Alps seeks other climes,
And wings her flight to Gallia's shores!
There, in a convent's lewd retreat,
Of each foul passion foulest seat,
The curse of Europe, cries to arms;
Nursing the hell within his breast,
The furious zealot knows no rest,
Besieges ev'ry throne, and ev'ry state alarms!

Pleas'd with the sight, the monster smil'd,
And, smiling, blasted Nature's face;
Then hail'd the holy mischief child,
And, 'midst her sons, assign'd his place,
At Bernard's voice, the frenzy gains
O'er the gay realms where Lewis reigns,
Whom impious folly now adores:
From the rich plains the Rhone divides,
To where the Sein thro' vineyards glides,
The brazen throat of war in horrid dirges roars!

What gen'rous cause the bosom warms,
Thrills thro' the heart, and fires the veins?
Does Freedom call her sons to arms,
Or Slav'ry dare to break her chains?
No, &mdash; Superstition plies her art,
And pours her poison o'er the heart,
Inflicting deep and deadly wounds;
To ravage Asia, Europe flies,
Her youth with blood the Jordan dies,
And Oreb's olive mount with cries of war resounds!

In loftier strains shall I rehearse
The battles fought round Sion's walls?
Or tell, in bold ambitious verse,
How Raymond bleeds, or Dudon falls?
Did Freedom's cause such deeds inspire?
How pleas'd the Muse would strike the lyre,
And call forth all the pow'rs of song!
But Albi's walls demand my strains,
Her victims, her ensanguin'd plains,
And Tarnis swell'd with blood, to my free Muse belong.

'Tis hers to hold out guilt to shame,
To drag to justice Freedom's foes,
To save the martyr'd patriot's name,
And grant a tear to Virtue's woes:
In conscious independence great,
The Muse shall force the palace gate,
And brand the culprit on the throne;
Her vengeance shall pursue his crimes,
And Truth transmit to latest times
The guilt of Ferdinand, &mdash; to kings themselves unknown.

'Tis hers in forceful lays to sing
The horrors of that guilty day,
When Superstition urg'd a king
The vile assassin's part to play.
By Medicis to murder train'd,
His royal robe with blood all stain'd,
Th' annointed villain aims his blows:
With rapture sees Coligny's head
By ruffian hands in triumph led,
And at his mother's feet the impious offering throws!

'Tis her's, &mdash; but O!  my country, say,
Shall he who lives, who breathes for thee,
Whose vows for years provoke the day,
When Erin's sons shall flourish free,&mdash;
Shall he thy bleeding bosom bare,
And, dead to filial duty, tear
The wounds by British tyrant's giv'n?
No, Muse, in sorrow veil the lyre,
And let this truth her children fire,
No hope remains for them, but in their hands, and Heav'n.
