What boots it that the traveller to the grave,
Should feel the glow of that seraphic fire,
Which lights the actions of the wise and brave,
Or "wakes to ecstacy the living lyre?"
Doom'd from his dawn of lifetime, to admire
The steep and slippery pinnacle of fame,
He scarce attains his object of desire,
When all his prospects vanish like a dream;&mdash;
He dies, and leaves behind the phantom of a name!

Such is the fate of genius at the best,
When bless'd by fortune with a golden shower;
But, ah!  what conflicts agonize the breast,
When clouds around, in threat'ning anger, lour,
And want and woe embitter ev'ry hour!
And he whose heart beats high, must crouch for bread
To the stern dunce, possessing wealth and power:
Far happier he, who, number'd with the dead,
Deep in some lonely church-yard rests his head.

Think of old HOMER, first and best of bards,
Sublimely singing Greek and Trojan arms,
And learn how man the poet disregards,
Though proud and boasting of his muse's charms,&mdash;
Chaunting the magic tale of "ANGER's HARMS,"
He feels of common sustenance a dearth&mdash;
Blind and forlorn, as fear of death alarms,
He begs through towns that boasted of his birth,
Who had no house or home, or friend on earth!

See the wise EPICTETUS as a slave,
By a rude churlish master bought and sold;
And trembling TERENCE, tott'ring o'er the grave,
Creep to a baker's oven from the cold!
Nor of old times alone, such tales are told&mdash;
Oh, hear our own SPENSER's note of sorrow;
For him, whose days in courtiers' halls pass on,
Condemn'd to speed to-day, yet fail to-morrow&mdash;
"To plead, to beg, to wait, to ride, to run,
To doubt, to hope, to trust, and be undone."

Prophetic bard!  on Mulla's grassy side,
Responsive to the swan, his wild notes rung;
Each, e'er he sunk in Time's o'erwhelming tide,
His funeral dirge pathetically sung.
'Twas Spenser's fate to shine in Courts, when young
To view fair Erin with a statesman's eye;
To tune in Fairy land, the poet's tongue;
Yet in old age, in vain for friends to sigh,
And, worn with care and indigence, to die!

In this sad line, now blazon'd high in fame,
Stood BUTLER, OTWAY, CHATTERTON, and BURNS,
And GOLDSMITH too, our country's boast and shame,
Whose hapless fate a wealthy nations mourns:
Alive, they starv'd &mdash; and dead, found BUSTS and URNS;
While many a wretch, by nature form'd a slave,
For vilest offices had rich returns&mdash;
Honours and wealth to decorate the knave,
Deserving best a rope, and felon's grave.

Let the fond father, then, who loves to see
The dawning bust of genius in his child,&mdash;
When the boy brings a Primer to his knee,
Tell him to run into the woodland wild,
And hunt the beasts there, rather than, beguiled
By love of books, to earn a pedant's name;
To pass his days neglected or reviled
Till life rolls over, like a sick man's dream,
While BLOCKHEADS thrive, and win the palm of fame.
