Though pointless still, on man's obdurate brain,
Advice, the wizard, pours the warning strain;
Though, hardest far of every hardened ear,
The tuneful culprit still disdains to hear;
And turns (brave victim of his erring choice!)
An adder's deafness to the friendly voice&mdash;
Yet may that voice, by wondrous chance, resound
In Reason's hour, and heal without a wound;
Recall the Muse to Learning's noble aim,
And waken Harold to a loftier fame.

Or, if in vain that airy dream of hope
Thrills the fond lyre; and, far beyond the scope
Of our poor planet, in serener skies,
The guardian stars of wandering Genius rise,
To lend his bark, ere quite to quicksands driven,
The struggling beams of interrupted Heaven&mdash;
&mdash;Then, for the sons of feebly echoed song,
Whom playful Genius joys in guiding wrong,
The fry of nameless fish, who watch the tail,
And follow in the wake of each vast whale,
For them, at least, the monitory lay
May chase example's dangerous clouds away;
Retard their frolics of imagined wit,
And teach the pace for plodding dulness fit&mdash;
Teach them to join again the ranks of Trade,
People the counter, not the myrtle shade;
And yield their grey-goose quill, and rest content
The geese, without the quill, that Nature meant&mdash;
Nor rescue only these &mdash; but, happier, guide
Some worthy footstep from the gulphs of pride;
And bold, but true to Wisdom's ancient track,
Compel the wise to classic models back:
Bid them no more in paths eccentric run,
But move obedient round great Homer's sun;
Draw light and heat from him, their common source,
And dart the rays of regulated force;
Safe from the comet bards, who idly grace
The vague dominions of poetic space;
Now here, now there, the random fire impart,
Entrance the head, and wear away the heart;
Shoot noxious glory down the sparkling waste,
And brightly desolate the spheres of Taste.

Yet, oh!  that, rising at some awful hour,
The warning voice could breathe resistless power;
And touch at once, in Truth's and Friendship's key,
The first of living minstrels &mdash; Harold, thee!

Not to an earthly bar, a judge unknown,
With faults, if different, heavy as thine own,
Here art thou summoned for thy moral stains&mdash;
(Forgive them, God! &mdash; and Oh, if Pity gains,
Soul-softening, human Pity, on thy grace,
Let him, who helped the wretched, see thy face!)
Enough: &mdash; but eager as the Muse has proved
To shield a name much-censured, much-beloved;
So deeply still she feels, so truly knows
The spotted plague from injured Taste that flows;
So trembles when she hears, in Rome's decline,
Virtue's last sigh o'er Learning's trampled shrine;
While, through each former or each following age,
The social ruin blots the storied page;
And, in their strength as languages decay,
Graces and glories pass at once away;
That, with unequal harp, but soaring mind,
Their wondrous union she aspires to find;
And, should her vision end in noonday truth,
With angel cry to waken England's youth!
Turn them from Sloth's corrupting tones, and bend
Their heart again to Virtue's rigorous friend,
To ancient Learning &mdash; at that hallow'd fount
Still may they drink upon the Ionian mount,
The rock that flowed at Homer's magic wand,
Only less pure than that in holier land,
Which poured a gushing flood at the divine command.

The first dull cavil of perverted sense,
That ever fights in wild misrule's defence,
Is levelled at the Mantuan's deathless fame:
As moths still gather to the brightest flame.
"An echo all of the Maeonian song,
His measured imitation creeps along."
Yes, such a mimicry as charms the soul,
When moonlight lakes reflect the unclouded pole;
Where deeply mirror'd, as the planets shine,
A softness not their own but makes them more divine.

'Ts not an insulated thought, or strain
Still flowing in the first Homeric vein;
'Tis not a throng of similes, of things
That ope their thousand eyes in Fancy's quivering wings,
However kindred, or the same, that throw
A cloud o'er light like this &mdash; great Maro, no!
But, doubly bright has burned that inborn fire,
Fanned by the breathings of thy master's lyre;
While the keen eye, that pierced thro' Nature's frame,
Saw Truth and Homer differing but in name;
Saw for itself the world's expanded scene,
But clothed the picture in his natural green;
Wisely assumed what Wisdom gave to view,
Refreshed her colours, but retained their hue;
Nor cast a beam, originally vain,
O'er the wronged offspring of the fruitful brain.

Learn then this truth, ye scribblers of a day!
Cowper's false light, and Wordsworth's weaken'd ray,
Flow from one source &mdash; from Vanity! &mdash; that sheds
Cameleon tints on Folly's myriad heads.
&mdash;Their tint was Novelty's o'erweening charm:
This could in one all earlier taste disarm,
A scholar's knowledge, and a poet's fire,
And make a Jew's-harp of a Grecian lyre!
This, in his duller brother (him, whose mind
When Virtue formed, if Taste had but refined,
If Learning had but nerved, and Common Sense,
Lent the faint shadow of her worst defence,
Oh!  what a moon o'er Keswick would appear,
And light thy wintry waters, cold Grasmere.)
This, in his duller brother, deeper still,
From wandering reason, and from steady will,
Drove the fixed nonsense of a newbom tongue,
Where verse should ape the vulgar and the young;
Where strange conceptions, in familiar prose,
Should startle first &mdash; then pull you by the nose;
Lap all your soul in metaphysic airs&mdash;
Then slap your back, and ask you "how it fares?"

Incongruous mixture of sublime and low,
Of household matters mixed with moral woe!
Of drawling, quaker-like, conceited phrase,
To dress the sentiments of nobler days!
Whence could'st thou rise? &mdash; Ask whence the squinting priest,
Half oracle, half farce, both man and beast,
Ask whence illustrious Whitfield charmed the land?
In Tottenham's tabernacle see him stand,
Roll the deluding white of saintly eyes,
And antedate his sons' increasing dignities!
&mdash;Or, if thou rather shoulds't prefer the wall,
Where motionless, though moved, the thousands fall
With their frail stone support &mdash; Oh!  there behold
The triumphs won by Methodists of old.

Verse has her Methodists &mdash; and these are they&mdash;
They must be great &mdash; and Novelty's the way!
Closed, as they deemed, each track of trueborn fame,
By Dryden's great, by Milton's greater name&mdash;
(Milton!  whom moderns would repress, so far
Behind the swiftness of so bright a star,
As even to dull Bootes' tardy wain,
Even to the tamest of the tuneful train!
Hallowing their heavy lump of basest leaven,
By careless strains o'er which he weeps in Heaven)
Closed was this track, they deemed &mdash; but erring here&mdash;
Bright, as the dawning beauty of the year,
The immortal vest, that Nature loves to take
From Homer's hands, and wear for Homer's sake;
That true Elijah's mantle, caught on earth
By Milton, Dryden, all of nobler worth&mdash;
No coming age shall see that garment fade,
Nor Genius cease to glory in its shade.

"Homer!  still Homer!" &mdash; Yes, and, as afar,
Lone in his tent, an alien from the war,
Achilles yet inspires each absent strain,
And brings us to his myrmidons again&mdash;
So, matchless Harold!  to thyself returns
The song, that but for thee with satire burns;
And pants to rescue thee from sluggish ease,
From Gothic wildness, loved by times like these.

Oh!  were it not that godlike minds may stoop
To drink contagion from the meanest group;
Were it not plainly, pitifully true,
That gross compeers have stained thee, Harold, too;
That barbarous bards have led thee to betray
Thy native tongue to Sloth's unmeaning sway;
To broken sense, low phrase, and rugged verse,
To false sublimity's familiar curse&mdash;
Where ancient Pistol strives with modern Scott,
And Grammar gasps in death, and all that is, is not!&mdash;
Were it less painful, thus obscured to see
So strong a sunbeam, and that sunbeam thee;
No hour of mine were wasted to condemn
Such flitting phantoms, and those phantoms them!

That hour shall dawn, nor long that hour delay,
When Taste and Reason re-assume their sway;
When to the gulph they crawled from yesterday,
To that deep darkness which they felt before,
The Gothic band shall sink &mdash; to rise no more.
Perchance, the future wanderer o'er their waste
May catch some air, inspired by classic taste;
But, as he lingers like the Ovidian maid
To hear the softened voice that fills the shade;
The fell barbarians from the wood shall dart
The poisoned arrow to the listener's heart;
Inflict the wound that illjudged fondness meets,
And mix unnumbered bitters with their sweets.

Poets of passages!  was Horace wrong,
When but a "splendid patch" he nam'd your noblest song?
Nor did severer Pope himself refuse
Her rare Oasis to your desert Muse.
No!  ye have moments, when the murky night
That veils your brows, lets in a ray of light;
And, at the contrast gladdening all around,
With vacant joy your dull admirers bound!
So, when the capers of the parent ass
Delight the vernal travellers as they pass;
Dissolved in laughter they behold beside
The long-eared race exult in filial pride.

But shall the well-weighed plan, the lofty tale,
The varying scene, whose colours never fail;
Through every change the character maintained,
The melted heart, the moral object gained;
The dreamlike music of the unerring lute,
Now high, now low, the ruling pang to suit,
But all alternate harmony &mdash; no pause
Discordant there, and none without a cause&mdash;
Shall gifts like these, despoiled of glory's prize,
Fade, ever fade, from England's blinded eyes?
Shall wild and rough variety of sound
Charm the dulled ears, that Dryden's magic bound?
Shall loose, disjointed vehicles of sense,
Words without bonds, be used without offence,
Where Dryden's clear and flowing diction gave
Pathos to grief, and ardour to the brave?
So custom wills &mdash; so mighty Scott ordains&mdash;
And Harold echoes his, and Wordsworth's strains!
&mdash;Harold, whose lays with airier visions teem,
Than ever thronged that gifted minstrel's dream;
Harold, whose eye with manlier fondness looks
Even on the sheltered vales, and solitary brooks,
Than thine, thou warbling Botanist!  whose heart
A blameless sexual fervour can impart
To all inanimate Nature, every tree,
Herb, stock, or stone, that holds small talk with thee&mdash;
Harold himself has pilfered thee, and Scott!&mdash;
Oh, tell it not at Athens, tell it not
In Rome's imperial towers, where not a sound
E'er echoed, worthier of the hallowed ground,
Than his deep melody of woe, who wept
The mouldered dust, where what was Scipio, slept;
And bade the tear of thrilling genius flow
For Tully lost, for Eloquence laid low.

Gods!  can the breast that glows o'er Virgil's urn,
Or sees the Sabine to his farm return
From smoke, and wealth, and splendid noise of Rome&mdash;
The breast that feels fair Italy its home&mdash;
Can such a breast each heaven-born throb forego,
Resign the spell unearthly bands bestow,
(The spell that Spenser might be proud to boast,
Prince of Descriptive Song's prolific host)
And feebly drawl in metaphysic tones,
Rough as Scott's hymns, and dull as Wordsworth's groans?

Not this thy note, in youth's aspiring day,
When holy N-s-d claimed thy filial lay;
And, through her venerable turrets heard,
A musical, a melancholy bird,
A nightingale of sadness, breathed the strain
For days of glory, ne'er to dawn again!
Not this the note, that sigh'd from Sorrow's breast
For the dove's wing, that bears her to her nest
Like her to flee away, and be at rest!

Nor &mdash; when thy reckless foes essayed to crush
The rose just springing from its vigorous bush;
And, grasping hard with cold unaltered mien,
Found England's thorns as Scotia's thistles keen&mdash;
Thus did thy generous vengeance wake in song;
But rolled in angry harmony along;
And, like thine own Apollo, watched the dart
With beauteous vigour launched at Rancour's heart;
While Critics, shrinking to their northern cave,
Confest that Prudence well became the brave;
And, ere again they damn'd a rising bard,
Resolved to wait for English Wits' award.
&mdash;What callous bosom can forget the Muse
O'er hapless White, that poured soft Pity's dews?
When on her son pale Learning dealt the blow,
And his own feather laid that eagle low.

Think not, ye weak impugners of my lay!
In equal hues of brilliance I array
Harold's young rose, and full-blown sweeter flowers&mdash;
No! &mdash; Sorrow's furnace has sublimed his powers;
And Observation's ranging eye has given
His harp each tone that sounds from earth to heaven
His was the Poet's genuine step, that trod,
Inspired, the realm of Inspiration's god&mdash;
For him Castah" deepest fountain flows,
And his own sun has lit Parnassus' snows.

Hark!  'twas a later, and a loftier strain&mdash;
Rome, Rome, arises at his voice again;
Fresh, as in youth, she wakes from Slavery's night,
And calls her conquering centuries to light.
Long martial pomps the capitol ascend,
Exulting thousands in the forum blend;

Majestic frown the statues of the brave,
And Glory hovers o'er her Tyber's wave.
Yet gaze again &mdash; a dying, dying gleam
Dwells in fond languor o'er the yellow stream&mdash;
The death-like marble city dimly shows
O'er the low banks, where yon sad river flows;
While, slowly winging to her funeral shades,
To tombs unknown in fallen colonnades,
The bird of night sails, mournful, through the air&mdash;
Soothed by her fitful moanings, Harold there,
Sole in that world of ruins, lays him down,
And mourns a nobler than the Punic town;
Himself a tuneful Marius, who can throw
O'er grandeur lost a social gloom of woe.
&mdash;Such is lone Harold still &mdash; but every strain,
Successive, deepens in each Gothic stain;
Leaves the pure models of its opening course,
Virgilian pathos breathed with English force;
Strings random pearls on hemp of texture vile,
And dims his Pilgrim tears with Beppo's clouded smile.

Hear then, ye docile!  and ye calm, attend!
The warning voice of Harold's hidden friend
Glows with his joy, and saddens with his tears,
And faintly dreams his music of the spheres&mdash;
But, all indignant to observe his muse
Gathering poor scraps, that Coleridge might refuse,
From Gothic wastes &mdash; where Crabbe, at length, has roved,
Crabbe by great Johnson, and by Burke approved&mdash;
(Such the dire taint of toleration, lent
To each spoil'd child of song, whose good intent
Redeems the slipshod licence of his tongue)
Indignant to observe so rudely sung
Such noble themes, and by a harp, whose power
Sounded so clear in Glory's dawning hour;
To language, language, that articulate gift,
(Deprived of which tho' monkeys make a shift,
Men are scarce men who waste it!)  to that boon,
Now blighted by some influence of the moon,
The warning voice her Harold would recall,
Scott, Wordsworth, Southey, Crabbe, nay, one and all.

And thou, anonymous!  who darest arraign
Thy native bards, as rugged and as vain,
What are thy rights to fill the censor's place?
None, but deep reverence for that ancient race;
None, but an ardent sigh for Glory gone,
A worship of the Sun that once o'er England shone.

If excellence alone may censure sin,
Where shall the business of reform begin?
When clouds of night so far obscure the mind,
The blind must act as leaders of the blind;
And nobler harps, in sleep inglorious laid,
Draw forth a lowly brother from the shade.
&mdash;Heed the monition, Bards!  tho' not the man;
Blame what ye will, but mend by what ye can:
Though hacked as your's his Pegasus, or worse,
The Critic's rules may yet redeem his verse;
May teach the truths as docile babes ye knew;
By manlier Folly hidden from your view;
For long-forgotten Sense your zeal revive,
And keep the seeds of Grammar still alive.
&mdash;Well may yon sign-post guide you on your way,
Condemned itself in silent rest to stay;
Well may yon whet-stone fine your blunted dart,
Itself unfit to penetrate the heart.

Varied the vices of each tuneful name:
But vicious indolence in all the same.
Southey, with plainness levelled down to prose,
And intermingled swearing, dully flows;
Still low in tone, though oft in thought divine,
Assumes the man, but yet retains the swine&mdash;
Perverted slave, 'mid Circe's conquered rout,
His heart Ulysses, but his mouth a snout!
&mdash;Say ye, who e'er have glanced at Roderic's page,
Found ye the gems that decked a fairer age?
The figured wealth of Gray's immortal lines,
The glow of Collins caught from Attic shrines;
The mingled beams from Milton's orb that dart,
Fire the raised eye, and melt the applauding heart?
&mdash;Nor here can Prejudice, with poisonous gall,
Mar the sweet truth &mdash; these all were scholars, all!
Flew o'er Hymettian flowers with pinion free,
And sought the thyme that fed the Matine bee.

Horace!  oh Harold!  drop the tear of flame,
And light Affliction's palest cheek with shame,
To own, and gazing on Horatian vales,
That Horace self to charm thy bosom fails!
Recall, recall the dangerous creed, that deems
Spoiled by repeated draughts those heavenly streams;
And, lest the look of lingering love deface
That blooming immortality of grace,
Would fix on meaner forms the youthful breast,
And with a vulgar wonder break its rest.
&mdash;Full many an opening eye, that glowed to see
The deathless pile of classic majesty,
By Homer founded, and through every part
Speaking the mighty Master's varied art&mdash;
Whether it thrill through Virgil's Epic wire,
Deepen the cadence of the Sabine lyre;
Or lend that tragic, that compatriot band
The tone of woe, the sceptre of command&mdash;
Full many an ardent soul, that oped at once
On this high scene, had deadened to the dunce,
Led by base guides o'er Learning's deep-ploughed soil,
And lost that charm which animates the toil.

Nor hence alone rare Genius may be stirred
To soar, triumphant, o'er the vulgar herd;
But here too roused, plain Nature's countless tribe
A new-born vigour through their frames imbibe;
While, like the spark that bids the thunder roll,
Electric language wakes the unfolding soul.

Who has not marked, in Mind's mysterious round,
Sound kindling thought, ere thought revives in sound;
Words call ideas into life, and then
Ideas germinate in words again?
As opening buds give birth to blossomed flowers,
Then re-assume their first productive powers.
&mdash;Say, if this circling interchange combines
The mental image with its answering signs,
Small is the moment how those signs we chuse?
&mdash;If guardian Shame would shudder at the muse
That slurred the purity of infant eyes,
With pictures base, or bold impieties&mdash;
A fainter zeal, but still a zealous view,
Should wisely watch o'er Taste's corruptions too;
And, trembling at each error of the will,
Anxious protect the reasoning power from ill.
Nor can that power confront a direr foe,
Than empty words in loose career that flow;
Cloud Fancy's colours for the glance of youth,
And paralyze her grasp of flitting Truth.

By wondrous ties are Taste and Truth combined,
And such the spell of language o'er the mind.
The daring voice, that barbarizes speech,
And laughs at rules that greybeard pedants teach;
Grows, by degrees, insensible to shame,
When neighbouring Vice with Virtue changes name&mdash;
When leaky fools win open Candour's praise;
Or (screened beneath some bulwark of a phrase,
Some giant term, like HONOUR) conquering Sin
Storms the lost heart, and leads his thousands in.
Then Lust is Levity, and crowned with fame;
Then Prudence Avarice, and stamped with blame;
Pride grows Reserve; and Courage &mdash; noblest flood
That fills man's veins &mdash; pours forth his brother's blood.
&mdash;Oh, dwell not, Infidels!  with scorn misplaced
On realms by blinded Piety disgraced;
Nor with cold smiles, instead of manly tears,
Survey the shrines that Superstition rears.
&mdash;Not with more fury o'er his trampled slave
Rolls Jaghernaut, and opes a nation's grave;
Not with more ignorant and bestial zeal
Successive wretches crawl beneath the wheel;
Than o'er her captive thousands Fashion rides,
Than sink those slaves, with Pharaoh, in the tides.

Prepared by weakening negligence of phrase,
How prone the thought to sink in Error's maze!
Terms indistinct leave blots upon the mind,
As colours mixed are still to black inclined.
&mdash;Then let Precision, like the noonday sun,
Each image mark, and paint them, one by one
With Judgment's clear, with Fancy's changeful hues,
The flash of Wit, the rainbow of the Muse.
Learning o'er all her hallowed light shall shed,
And living bards recall the tuneful dead.
&mdash;Nor shall one note in that harmonious choir
Discordant crash, to scandalize the lyre&mdash;
Though every part betrays contrasted charms,
Or dies in love, or swells in war's alarms;
Still o'er the contrast music breathes her soul,
Varying adapts, dividing blends the whole.
Thus, through Creation's complicated frame,
One spirit moves, in every change the same;
Forms the mute mass, inspires the pulse of life,
Links worlds to worlds in bonds of loving strife;
By differing paths reclaims its first abode,
Pervades fair Nature, and is lost in God.

Yet have we Judges, Gothic as our Bards,
These by rude numbers, those by false awards,
Who scoff at Taste, who deem Discretion cold,
Applaud the Muse extravagantly bold;
From beauteous Order turn unmoved away,
And call for grand Chaotic disarray.
As well might Chaos with Creation vie,
Or Man himself be matched with Deity;
As such unfinished embryos of the brain
With the formed product of that ancient strain;
As the stray sweetness of a chance-born line,
With music breathing through some vast design;
Where each pure part blends softly in the whole,
Beauty the frame, and glowing Sense the soul.

If, as in elder time the critic taught,
'Tis Perspicuity lends grace to thought;
As, Beauty's medium, the pellucid air
Makes all the charms of Nature's face more fair;
Shows the grey distant tower, the darkening tree,
And sheds distinctness o'er variety&mdash;
If the high gift through years of glory shone,
And waning Greece produced a Lycophron;
Then, Harold!  ere thy quaint oracular phrase
Stamps thee the Lycophron of later days,
Rescue thy Muse from shadows, that beguile
The gaping wanderer through thy tortuous style;
Be freed from vague obscurity's offence,
And pour forgotten sunshine on thy sense,
&mdash;So shall thy notes, when loftiest themes inspire,
Flow forth in liquid clearness from the lyre;
So shall thy words, harmoniously combined,
Wake answering order in the amended mind;
So shall &mdash; if thus mysterious Grace ordain!
A holier rapture yet arouse thy strain;
Exalt the unclouded song of heavenly birth,
And draw down angel joy, to swell the hymns of earth.

Correct and clear, and exercising, well
The patient judgment all his depth to tell,
Horace flows on &mdash; (to Him, ye wise, return!
Nor, idly taught by wanton Harold, learn
To bend your footsteps from his sacred urn&mdash;)
Horace flows on &mdash; and while, for riper minds,
He teems with golden fruits that labour finds;
For young Perception, and for opening Sense,
Full, but translucent, learn'd without pretence,
He spreads the manly page, replete with use,
And graced by gems, still simple, though profuse.

Who can with vigour till such teeming fields,
Nor reap, at least, that harvest vigour yields?
Nor gain, though doomed no foreign ore to find,
Health to the frame and juices of his mind?

Propped by such strength, adorned with varied lore,
England's best sons have ranged from shore to shore;
Lit firm Resolve with Learning's vivid spark,
And twined the wreaths of Pococke and of Park.
&mdash;Hence gifted Greece has seen her valleys prest
By glowing steps of many a worthy guest;
Hence, first and dearest of her votive throng,
Athens herself would welcome Harold's song,
Were Athens yet herself &mdash; Oh, thought of pain!
That England might have breathed an Attic strain,
In these, the loftiest numbers of her age&mdash;
Had but the fire, that kindled, fed their rage.

"What!  shall the bright-eyed children of Romance,
Cease to enthral us in their pleasing trance?"
No! &mdash; let them aid the brilliance of our dreams,
Refresh old figures, or supply new themes;
Enrich our matter, not our manner guide&mdash;
Let nobler vessels sail their lovely tide.

If youthful tastes from Gothic models draw,
No right obedience follows faulty law;
But tinge them early with the classic creed,
And orthodox the fruit that springs from such a seed.

There are, who, blinded by a partial view
Of that pure style to general nature true,
Deem that within too close a sphere we bind
The untamed excursion of the dawning mind.
Fatal mistake! &mdash; what realm that Nature shows,
What realm, where Fancy's offspring only grows,
Is yet untrodden by the Muse, whose voice
Inspired the Grecian soul, or bade old Rome rejoice?
None &mdash; but conceive not hence no wealth is left,
That all is barren, and of hope bereft,
For after labourers in the eternal mine
Gemmed by great Nature's hand &mdash; still, still, they shine,
Those unexhausted treasures &mdash; into day
Lift them thyself, while Homer points the way:
With thine own eyes the magic dwelling trace,
But set the jewels there with ancient, alien grace.

When France, convulsive, set the world on fire,
Thrones, altars, fell &mdash; and what could save the lyre?
New thoughts, licentious, swept all bounds away,
And in one chaos life and learning lay.
Then monster-breeding Germany, who caught
Her neighbour's plague with vaccinated thought,
Calved a dire race, the suicide, the sage,
And the foul hydras of dramatic rage.
&mdash;When mind so sickened, how could language thrive?
The wonder's here &mdash; that style should yet survive.
Then England's rhymesters, with infected brains,
Sang vulgar heroes in congenial strains;
A Marten's fate inspired the people's phrase,
And Tyler asked the Billingsgate of praise.
Unhappy Tyler!   &mdash; thou hast lost thy bard&mdash;
And laurels yield the Apostate's due reward.
Oh!  that the sack, which dulcifies his Muse,
Would dress her too in Fancy's figured hues;
Make his blank essays verses, and transmute
The drone of Marsyas to Apollo's lute.

But whence, in bolder England, could arise
This prosing tameness, fit for German skies?
Klopstock!  thou leader of the droning band,
Thou drowsy bee that humm'st o'er Judah's land;
Whose heavy note, half snored, and hardly sung,
Cloyed with the sweets, without the sting of Young,
Bursts in bombastic pop-guns, now and then&mdash;
To thee, in part, we owe our foolscap men.
&mdash;But nor the heightening screams, nor closing groans,
The hubbub wild of Jacobinic tones,
That burst o'er Europe in a cloudy maze,
Blood and blank verse, and politics and plays
Not all these horrors of the Rhine and Rhone
Stained England's Muse &mdash; her ruin was her own.
Palely she drooped, in melody's decline,
From Cowper's loose, to Southey's looser line;
Till Wordsworth dared on Keswick's banks to plant
The verse of Klopstock with the sense of Kant.

Oh my loved country!  still inspire thy race,
The hallowed fields of classic lore to trace;
"O'er plains of Asphodel" in youth to run,
Pleased with those flowers that graced an Addison;
(Those flowers, new-wreathed, to form a bolder band,
Than twined that elegant but timid hand)
And fixed, in rapture, on the hardy tree,
That, Dryden, lent its vivid leaf to thee&mdash;
A leaf whose green no mixture would impair,
Had not the Goth diffused his nightshade there.

Thou too, sad Otway!  from whose kindred soul
Strains, that Euripides might envy, roll;
Thou too may'st whisper, in thy moving strain,
How wild the modern dream, the wish how vain,
To follow Nature by a different road
From that which led to Grecian Fame's abode.

Yes, from each Gothic tongue I hear the hiss&mdash;
"What!  measure Shakspeare by a scale like this?"
Shakspeare!  be-rhymed, be-praised, bespattered name,
That wonder damns to indiscriminate fame&mdash;
Oh, how thy modest sense had blushed to find
Each perfect tone to thy wild harp assigned!
How had'st thou, laughing in thy sleeve of wit,
Seen solemn fools by wanton folly bit!
And many a thought grotesque, and antic phrase,
Made gold, pure gold, by alchemy of praise!
&mdash;No heart can hail thee with a keener joy
Free from pedantic dross, or foul alloy,
In those blest moments, when the heaven-born fire
Outstrips the clouds, and lightens frorn thy lyre;
And, seated on thy hill of holy awe,
In thunder to the world thou givest the law&mdash;
&mdash;But who shall copy thee? &mdash; Go, strive to find
Some guiding image in the viewless wind;
Go, catch the track yon rapid boat has made
In ocean's bosom &mdash; or embrace a shade,
With hot Ixion's ardour &mdash; easy task!
But would thy muse in that strange sunbeam bask
Which plays round Shakspeare's brow, too soon thou'lt feel
The flitting Iris from thy fancy steal;
Or, idly quivering in dismembered rays,
Shine, a child's prism, to thy baffled gaze.

Yet are there those who wield (God help the while!)
The dangerous, two-edged cutlass of his style;
Or polish down, to suit their small content,
That huge, two-handed, giant instrument;
To pretty, formal daggers of their own&mdash;
The Lilliputian guardsmen of his throne.

Ye wits of James's and Eliza's reign,
Ye masters of the bold dramatic vein,
Oh!  if the rough and mimic choir, that groans
In idol adoration o'er your bones,
Have pierced the laurelled cave, where tranced ye lay
In golden sleep beyond the milky way,
Drop from the realms of rest their hushing dews,
And wrap in night that imitative muse!
Or, if no opiate shower can lull the rage,
The fond revival of your hoary page,
Deem every hope from Reason's medicines o'er,
And purge the brain with mystic hellebore.

'Tis not a racy word, of native growth,
Or strong, transmitted foreign phrase, or both
That Satire blames &mdash; too well she understands
What Horace sanctions, and what Sense demands.
Enrich your tongues, ye moderns!  now and then,
With grave, sweet Massinger, or pithy Ben;
Or, balmier yet be sorrow's music pour'd,
Dipped in the liquid tenderness of Ford.
But scorn to steal the body of their style&mdash;
Nor drag their glory from its Gothic aisle,
To meet the wondering eyes of altered days,
And force unwilling laughter at the gaze.

But will the voice, that censures as a crime
The borrowed mantle of our olden time,
The ruff and fardingale of years gone by,
Allow, nay urge the soaring bard to fly
To Vulcan's forge, for classic panoply?
Yes! &mdash; for that armour, tempered high in Heaven,
Like the bright shield to swift Achilles given,
Boasts such a fair variety of hue,
To Nature's colouring so divinely true,
And, 'mid its brilliance, bears a point so keen,
That, like some glorious heir-loom, still 'tis seen
To deck the warriors of each following age,
And dart redoubled light from deathless page to page.

Clad in such arms, thy strong aetherial strain,
Complete as Pallas from the Thunderer's brain,
Leapt out, immortal Pope!  Thou vanished Power,
Oh!  for one hour of thee, for one short hour,
To flash that Aegis at thy living foes,
And stretch them in the dust from whence they rose,
Robbed of that slimy life they trail along
O'er the pure marble of thy faultless song.

What!  shall the bard, majestically sweet,
Who on the pallid walls of Paraclete
Hung an undying wreath of softest green,
While, sadly murmuring through the enchanted scene,
Fell with new charm the solitary floods,
And holier moonlight veiled the sleeping woods&mdash;
What!  shall the bard, whose swan-like note of death
On thee, brave Cobham!  at thy parting breath,
On many a great and glorious name, bestowed
The tuneful passage to Renown's abode&mdash;
Shall he be summoned to the bar of shame,
And slander fix false tinsel on his fame?
Guard him, great hero of the tuneful field!
Guard thine own Teucer with thy sevenfold shield;
While, safe beneath the shadow of thy power,
His kindred darts beam forth in brilliant shower.
Nor thou alone &mdash; but she, the Athenian queen,
In more celestial mantle never seen,
Wisdom's calm Goddess &mdash; let her guard the ray
That cleared the shade from darkest themes away;
Showed Man his part in Being's general frame,
Shed round the lamp of Truth a vestal flame;
Arrayed her ethic lore in winning dress,
And strewed with flowers the steep of Happiness.

True, that the wealth of wit at times betrays
The balanced numbers to too rich a blaze;
True, that those numbers might, at times, have flown
With Dryden's notes o'er regions scarce their own;
Dared the contrasted pause, and streamed more free
In soul-o'erflowing tides of harmony;
Skill'd, like our great Timotheus, to combine
"The varying verse, the full resounding line,
The long majestic march, and energy divine."
But shall we vilify the morning star,
Bright as he shines o'er earth's dim clouds afar,
Because unequal to the noonday sun,
And doomed a humbler course in Heaven to run?

Oh match the partial spots in light like his,
With that dim picture, Harold! &mdash; or with this!
With rude irregular Scott, or Southey tame,
Or Crabbe, degenerate from his purer fame&mdash;
Genius in these, with clear acknowledged force,
Stirs the deep vein, and feeds its generous course;
But Taste, indignant, from their slothful lay,
Or quaint new system, turns in frowns away;
Denies that praise which Reason scorns to join,
And brands the baseness of the adulterate coin.

Time was, when Scholarship and Taste refined,
And some prepared nobility of mind,
Were deemed essentials in the Poet's task:
And those who read, such qualities would ask
In those who wrote: &mdash; for then, the polished few
Included all; the bard, and critic too.
Then, like some high magician from his throne,
Ruling a fair creation of his own,
The Poet rose &mdash; and sights and sounds of rest
Charmed weary life; as blow o'er Ocean's breast
Soft airs, and sunbeams fall, from islands of the blest.
But now! &mdash; Oh Heavens! &mdash; see harlot Fancy blaze
In faded finery o'er the public ways;
Lavish on all her worthless smiles, and crown
The skull of every idler in the town.
Nor rests she here; &mdash; but, lower still, invades
Shops of the men, and dairies of the maids;
Calls boys from flocks, the miner from his shaft,
And makes immortal song a "whistling craft."

Oh!  that we thus our Grammar's gifts abuse!
And, eager, Learning's current to diffuse
O'er all the land, and wash away its stains,
Wash with them too some portion of its brains!

Sound Mother-Wit, that knows her proper sphere,
Ne'er with her betters dares to break a spear;
Leaves not her counting-house for verse, nor tries
On waddling duck-legs to usurp the skies&mdash;
&mdash;While, 'mid the maddening sons of Church or Kirk,
Broad frames and odes throw thousands out of work;
While every "calling for this idle trade"
Is left, and each commandment disobey'd;
Sad she invokes those times of nobler note,
When few, but gentlemen and scholars, wrote&mdash;
When none, but Nature's licensed minstrels sung&mdash;
Ere Cowper taught the tame colloquial tongue
In awkward measurements of verse to crawl,
Like limber willows trained against a wall.
Then rushed at once the "unnumbered" host to seize
The vulgar palm, that all may wear who please.
"Damn discipline! &mdash; advance! &mdash; open a fire
Irregularly bold from every lyre!"
Victorious squad of Awkwardness!  they rout
Parnassus' guards, and drag the Muses out.
Exposed to general sight, the tuneful train
Lose their young blush, that ne'er shall bloom again;
(Effaced, ah cruel!  by a barbarous band,
Vandals and Goths that overrun the land)
Learn airs plebeian from their suitors coarse,
Or yield reluctant love to brutal force.

Meanwhile, possessors of a cheap renown,
The short-lived insects buzz about the town!
None hate the rhymesters who no envy raise,
And brother annuals change receipts of praise.
Barter secure of Folly's circling ore!
Which he who pays is wealthy as before;
Tho' light as tin, tho' stamp'd with barefaced brass,
In Vanity's Exchange 'tis sure to pass.

All other arts some prenticeship require,
While untaught Ignorance may strike the lyre:
By feet profane the Delphic shrine is trod,
As self-made priests approach a holier God.
Restrain them both, Discretion!  or erect
Thy statue, Scorn!  to either lawless sect;
With thy dread finger, and thy grin, degrade
On England's shore the growing gasconade;
Make Ridicule for once the shield of Truth,
Reform our rhyming, and our preaching youth;
Bid these submit to canons fix'd of yore,
Dive deep again in patriarchal lore;
By Scripture's test examine what they feel,
And point by Reason's rule the flames of zeal:
Bid those recall Britannia's music fled,
Nor shame the manes of her harpers dead;
Return once more to Pope's illumined line,
And heap fresh flowers on Dryden's falling shrine&mdash;
&mdash;Thus shall the breathing land recover Peace,
And canting song, and rude Religion, cease.
&mdash;Or, as Eclectic Wisdom still would try
To cull the fruits of each philosophy;
So, from each varying style, may Taste combine
The assorted flowers of many a scattered line;
Snatch the rough vigour of the Goth, and strain
Through classic gauzes to a purer vein:
So Methodistic rivalry may speed
The loitering champion of a nobler creed;
And "general good from partial evil" drawn,
May nerve our Muse, and vivify our Lawn.
&mdash;Prosper the first good work, ye Bards!  at length,
And raise your song in renovated strength;
While glorying Faith beholds the last begun,
And new-born ardours through our Churchmen run&mdash;
Thus may their common Mother yet revive
In power reformed, through every pulse alive;
And rise triumphant o'er the bettered realm,
Peace in her frame, and Judgment at her helm.

But say, must jewels still adorn the Nine?
Must every bard be formal, and be fine?
No &mdash; but some limits to his loose undress
Will aid his grace, or veil his ugliness.

If free, familiar argument demands
A style didactic at the Poet's hands,
Such be his style &mdash; and Dryden's reasoning lay,
Plain, but poetic yet, will show the way.
There "proper words in proper places" fall,
And easy harmony involves them all;
Like common plums, in sugared juice enshrined,
The words gain value in the tuneful mind;
Bid us the poet's own dispraise deny,
And laud the smooth Religio Laici.

Knowledge and Taste will fix a certain bound
To case of style, to carelessness of sound;
Suit to the humbler theme the lowly strain,
Nor launch the thunder of the Muse in vain.

Tho' grave the task, and weighty be the care,
In Pagan thoughts to sift the foul and fair;
Tho' oft the guidance of a brighter creed
Must win from fame some nobly-seeming deed;
Where self-bewilder'd Pride in vain would raise
Her own dark temple of deluded praise&mdash;
Tho' warier yet, on quick Pollution's stains
The guide must dart, and weed the poisonous strains&mdash;
Still, far outspringing all their bonds, they rise
Those ancient bards, and breathe their native skies;
By flights beyond the clouds their birthright prove,
And sit like eagles on the throne of Jove.
&mdash;From them the breast heroic valour gleans,
And Freedom kindles o'er her infant scenes;
Through them refined the rays of Virtue shine,
And men half tower from mortal to divine&mdash;
While in blest realms, where fuller day-beams spring,
Nor soars such vigour, nor such poets sing!

If Heaven, in pity, to the weak, the blind,
The wandering outcasts of forlorn mankind,
Lent them some partial rays of purer sense,
Some scattered beacons of intelligence;
If such, in infant Greece, her Orpheus sung,
And this the music of Amphion's tongue;
Sure, holier yet, and brighter far than these,
Shone the broad beam of great Maeonides.
&mdash;Not the bland lore of Plato's honeyed page,
Not the clear strength of Athens' martyred sage;
So rectify the will, so warm the heart,
So spread o'er Nature's fruits the lucid shade of Art.
&mdash;Nor yet exhausted, in one mighty lyre,
The Sage's wisdom, or the Prophet's fire:
Nor would thy parent, Ovid!  justly bind
In silent awe thy many-gifted mind.
Enchanting Ovid!  though, perchance, thy dream
Lingers too fondly on the favourite theme;
Enchanting Ovid!  who from thee can turn,
While Grecian wood-nymphs round thy funeral urn
Weep, as for him who call'd their exiled train
To fill their desolated shrines again?
Yes, at thy bidding, from the Ionian deep,
Where wrapt they lay in cold unconscious sleep,
They wing their visioned wanderings, and the glades
That once they haunted, dark Dodona's shades,
And Delphi's airy nest, and Tempe's vale,
Hear their faint voice, and see their phantoms pale.

Boast not, ye later minstrels!  that the train
Of "delicate fairies," and their moonlight reign,
Sprung from your fiat &mdash; lightly tripping elves
Through shadowy groves, are older than yourselves;
Dance in dim rings for Ovid's magic wand,
And crowd the lonely shore at Maro's high command.
Or, if thou seek'st Erictho's awful den,
As the sad ghost slow climbs to light again;
If, palely shown in his infernal lore,
Thou view'st the wanderers on the Stygian shore;
Where, linked in eager concourse, as they tell
Rome's rising discords to the ear of Hell,
Faint shouts of joy her traitors yet maintain,
And Catiline exults, and shakes his airy chain&mdash;
Let Vigour charm thee; list to Lucan's song:
But see thou sink not in that current strong,
Where, white with foam, the roaring waters flow,
And pointed rocks lurk terrible below;
Rocks of false Taste, where many a bark has died,
Lured to sail down the deep majestic tide.

He too, that hoary bard, who sits remote
In Sybil caves, and pours the broken note
Of fitful inspiration through the wood,
Heard with wise ear, with governed wonder view'd,
May breathe high harpings through that laboured whole,
That masterpiece of Heaven, the Poet's soul.
For, as the world, arranged in every part
By all unseen, but all-pervading art,
From elements, that work within her, draws
Beauty and Light, while Darkness veils their cause&mdash;
So, in that wondrous microcosm, the mind
Filled with the Muse, ten thousand charms refined,
Ten thousand mighty workings, dawn and blaze,
Fed by those secret tributary rays.

But thou, my Harold!  when thy lyre ascends
To these her best, to these her earliest friends;
And sounds such notes as listening Satyrs bear
With all their old intensity of ear;
While many a beauteous Dryad from her oak
Leans forth again, as if a Grecian spoke&mdash;
When great Lucretius frames his magic charms,
And shows thee, tranced in Love's ambrosial arms,
The languid lord of War, &mdash; while on her eyes
Mute he looks up, and drinks long ecstacies,
With head reverted from her beauteous breast,
To gaze upon the soul that grants his glowing rest,
In those blue orbs of Heaven unutterably exprest&mdash;
When, as in some high Sorcerer's mystic glass,
These pictured forms before thy fancy pass&mdash;
Stain not the mirrored beauty of the scene
With Gothic clouds that grossly intervene;
Nor chill at once, and scorch us, with an "urn,"
Where cold conceits flow forth, and "lava kisses" burn.
&mdash;Thy lyre was tuned to loftier tones than these&mdash;
Tones, not by fitful harmony to please,
And then sink lost in Discord's mazy round,
In metaphysic labyrinths of sound&mdash;
But, ever clear, in varying music even,
To move serene on earth, and lose their height in Heaven.

When warped Ambition, and mysterious Pride,
To show at once his wonders and to hide,
Roused the boy Minstrel &mdash; thrilling notes were heard,
That none but Avon's swan, bright Nature's bird,
E'er breathed before &mdash; young Freedom then arose,
And looked a Spartan daring at her foes;
To Dorian strains she stalked upon the heath,
And the hills echoed "Victory or Death!"
Braids of wild myrtle bound her hair, and high
The naked sword she held in Power's astonished eye&mdash;
But who inspired the song? &mdash; On England's shore,
When meet the brave, to part in life no more,
'Tis Homer's warmth inflames the Minstrel's breast,
And Pope shines plain through Chaucer's borrowed vest.
That borrowed vest &mdash; (had years maturer lent
Genius her guide, and Wit her ornament;
Had England seen, exulting in her son,
A purer Shakespeare rise in Chatterton)&mdash;
The Bard had cast away, and poured his rage
In natural notes, in accents of his age.

Gods!  have we then exhausted thus the power
That nerved our language in her nobler hour?
Can Johnson's polished steel no pride recall,
The piercing sword of Britain's Juvenal?
Where Freedom (Oh!  that Freedom's bloom is brief!)
Girt Truth with flames, and hallowed Virtue's grief;
Can that bold weapon of Ithuriel force,
Be left for baser tools, nor wake a bard's remorse?
Can Goldsmith, tenderest child of Nature's race,
Who casts a mellow light, a dying grace
O'er rural solitudes, and haunted groves,
Where manhood weeps for youth's deserted loves&mdash;
Can he, who lent Simplicity a spell,
That, haply, echoed from the Cean shell,
But, wafted down the o'erwhelming tide of time,
Sounds in fleet murmurs to our distant clime;
Can he, who marked the impassable domain,
Where Nature leaves, and Folly finds the strain&mdash;
Can Goldsmith, Harold!  cease to charm thy soul?
Left without rudder thus, or chart's controul,
To wander on, o'er seas of tuneful space,
Where faithless beacon-lights pervert thy rapid race!
&mdash;Where Scott, the Kelpie, from his coral caves
Springs, to deform the calmness of the waves;
Lends roar and roughness to the narrow reign,
But rolls no billows of the mighty main&mdash;
Such as those billows that o'erwhelm the strand,
Launched by the force of thy Neptunian hand;
When, stretched above the many sounding sea,
It swells the waves to mountain majesty;
And, glorying o'er the wonders it performs,
Hurls on the thundering beach a war of floods and storms.

Well has this heart (howe'er it spurn his faults,
Mark where the music howls, the grammar halts,)
Felt how his potent spell that northern seer exalts.
Too much on thee that dangerous spell has wrought;
And, Harold, hence, o'erhonour'd in thy thought,
He bears the glorious Ariosto's name,
And robs Italia's child of rightful fame.

What! &mdash; shall the tuneful father of Romance,
The Bard, who bears us in a blissful trance
From realm to realm, o'er Fancy's airy sway,
With music, fond companion of his way,
Measured, enrapturing music; where the skill
Pursues the boldness, and adapts it still
To every rapid change of scene or state,
Lulls the green shade, or strikes the palace gate&mdash;
Shall he be levelled to the northern lyre,
Where Discord jangles in the creaking wire?
Tho' Fancy too, with gayest banner, streams
O'er the loved lay, and throngs its mountain dreams
With storied brooks, and castle-covered heights,
And ladies in their bowers, and fierce encountering knights.

Power of Example!  whose tremendous sway
Leads millions wrong, and few in Wisdom's way;
Enough, enough let Harold deem the stain,
In plundering heroes, of the Marmion strain,
Poured o'er his page &mdash; but let the Corsair flow
Still nobly on; still classically show,
At least in harmony, at least in phrase&mdash;
And be what Dryden was, in all his noon of praise.

Nor let reflecting Harold fail to see,
How poor the sphere, how humble the degree
Of his contracted song, who paints the scars
And sighs and wonders of his border wars,
In strains one nation hardly understands,
Sealed, as by magic, from all foreign lands&mdash;
While every realm o'er Ariosto glows,
And still, where'er transfused, in light he flows,
Strong, and the same &mdash; like that sweet river maid,
Who, borne beneath the sea, thro' wastes of shade,
Bursts, yet herself, on far Sicilia's woods,
And darts the unmingled brightness of her floods?

Such too, melodious Gray!  thy general aim&mdash;
No foreign lamp could dim thy native flame;
Still would'st thou feed thy satellites with fire,
Thrill Europe's bard, or rouse Columbia's choir.
&mdash;Be this the test &mdash; "translateable, or not?"
Tremble, thou, Harold! &mdash; and be hidden, Scott!

Southey, perchance, in Gallic dress might shine,
And Wordsworth flourish on the banks of Rhine.
Yes!  they are clear &mdash; and thus without offence&mdash;
God knows no mortal can mistake their sense.
But oh!  as sad to angel eyes to see
The sun that wakes this world's deformity;
When, fondly sighing for the veil of night,
The curtain that obscured our crimes from sight,
They loathe the "garish beam of gaudy day,"
Opening that dim, that intervening way,
Where, like a map, of horror, lies beneath
The realm of Guilt, of Conscience, and of Death&mdash;
So sad shall distant Judgment mark the page
Crowned with our laurels in a shameless age;
And wish Oblivion wrapped with all her dews
That fallen, lost, degenerated Muse.

Where is the rich, the metaphoric tongue,
That godlike Chatham spoke, that Johnson sung?
Where is the ruder force beloved of yore,
When Southey's wreath a laurelled Jonson bore?
Stiff tho' he was, and cramped in Learning's chains,
Language, well-poised, upheld his haughty strains;
And vigorous words, even where in taste they failed,
Left a bright charm, that o'er their blots prevailed.
But Southey!  Wordsworth! &mdash; are they verse, or prose?
"It is not every one that fact who knows"&mdash;
So might themselves have sung, that gentle pair!
Alike in stature, different but in air:
And who, on earth, for such a difference cares?
Heaven fixed their height &mdash; they gave themselves their airs.

Can he, who peopled with the blockhead throng
That stern creation of Satiric song;
Can he, who put that rabble rout to flight,
(Like Uriel, following in the Archangel's light)
That long-eared rout, the Della Cruscan host,
Can he look tamely at the fools, who boast
A kindred vigour to his favourite few,
And call an ancient school their affectation new?
Call homely talk true Nature, and pretend
Milton their guide, while Withers is their friend!
Could he endure one laurel leaf to crown
So bald a head, were laurels now renown?
&mdash;Persius is his, and Juvenal arrays
His honoured temples in a living blaze:
His the firm song where Genius feels her scope,
And England glories in a second Pope.

Oh!  rise, in all thy strength, thou classic bard,
And deal, with justice, thy divine award!
Enter Fame's temple, and with scorn survey,
And drive the money-changing crowd away.
Not there, descending with a harpy wing,
Celaeno sisters should have dared to sing;
Not there, *, *, nor any star, of light
So feeble. so obscure. should mock the night&mdash;
No! &mdash; while thou soar'st, the sun of modern Wit,
Owls, in mid-day, before thee should not flit.
Well could'st thou brand the vile pretence of those
Who vend for verse their aromatic prose;
And, while the horse-dung floats down Honour's tide,
"Lord!  how we apples swim!"  exclaim in conscious pride.
Well could'st thou brand &mdash; but hold!  in silence rest&mdash;
When he who best could shame them, hides them best.

Mournful we turn to that ill-omened day,
When early fondness wept where Anna lay;
Mournful we linger o'er the hallow'd tomb&mdash;
Go, ponder, Harold!  in that gifted gloom,
And feel that sorrow, in her deepest vein,
Can yet her music, yet her strength retain.
Well hast thou felt the melancholy truth&mdash;
But oh!  how soar'd it, Harold's voice of youth,
O'er many a later, many a weaker note,
Jelly just fit for Taste's corrupted throat.

Is there not Rogers, whom thou lovest to praise,
Is there not Moore to countenance thy lays,
Even if they yet returned to Roman strength,
Or breathed Athenian elegance at length?
Moore, whose diffusive song from west to east
Bears Music's jubilee, and Learning's feast;
Bright as the fire-flies in Columbia's groves,
And warm and soft as Oriental loves.
While high-wrought Campbell (tho' too stiff a grace
Antiquely shines in Gertrude's garb of lace)
With Hope's, fair torch illumines Nature's fall,
Or wings a transient flight, ye Bards!  above you all.
Delightful Rogers!  whose ideal beam
Streams o'er the vale, and should forever stream,
Where, polished minds on rural manners gaze,
And lend coarse Truth Imagination's rays&mdash;
While he, the parish Bard, from Life's brief day
Has "torn the decent drapery" away;
And rudely stooped, with barbarous eye, to trace
The pencilled wrinkles of Affliction's face!
&mdash;Yes, in a gradual slope from bad to worse,
From flowery Thomson's Asiatic curse&mdash;
(Hear, hear again, ye pettifogging crew!
Ye quibblers, hear! &mdash; I value Thomson too;
Value for love of Nature, for the sound
That sang "the varied God" in Life's revolving round&mdash;
But scorn the weakness of his tongue diffuse,
The wishy-washy ichor of his Muse&mdash;)
From flowery Thomson, to the meaner train,
To drowsy Cowper, and to Wordsworth vain,
Who sink, like Jacob's angels, till they reach
From Heaven to earth in lowered scales of speech&mdash;
Yes, in so prone a slope, fair England's style
Drops all its charms, and saddens &mdash; to a smile!
A sickly smile, from Taste's pale sunset cast,
Like Evening's faintest colours, and her last.

"Define the point," I hear quick Harold say;
"Define the point, to which you bound my lay."
&mdash;When phrenzied Atys through the Phrygian wood
Rushed, and distained the branches with his blood;
&mdash;When, as he reached the dim, the distant shrine,
Faint, breathless crowds around the steps recline;
When, as in eager dread he sought the shore,
And saw his native land, the wide waste billows o'er,
Tears, in soft torrents, down his bosom pour
There, Harold, there, in learn'd Catullus, find
Modes for thy harp, and matter for thy mind.
For there, tho' wild, to Phrenzy's pictured verge,
The Poet's hurried thoughts his numbers urge;
Still, regular in rage, he rolls along;
Forms, bright as rapid, animate his song;
Clear in each change, and ev'n in haste serene,
A rainbow glancing o'er a mountain scene.

Deem not, I call thy spirit to translate!
Deem not, I fashion for a strength so great
The bold, but slavish task, to imitate&mdash;
But, as the river, through whole kingdoms led,
Drinks vassal streams, by melting snows is fed;
And, gathering beauteous fulness as it goes,
Forgets the varied source from whence it flows&mdash;
Thus, from the treasures of each ancient sage
Pleased would I mark thee decorate thy page;
Thyself the home where all their stores combine,
The bullion foreign, but its impress thine.

If Sorrow e'er, in tender notes and faint,
Sighed out the heart's indelible complaint;
That sorrow, Ovid, by the Pontic wave,
Wore thy lone life, and sanctified thy grave.

If simple Elegance, secure to please,
E'er graced the hours of fortune, rank, and ease,
What heart, Tibullus!  can attend to thee,
Untouched by love dissolved in melody?

Revisit, Harold!  as thy numbers roam,
Greece in her children, who adorn their home;
Revisit Italy in this her race&mdash;
And, as sweet Tasso's ill-deserved disgrace
Dwells on thy burning. memory, pause awhile&mdash;
Thy Pilgrim Muse has travelled many a mile.

Pause, till thy gathered soul this truth has weighed&mdash;
Tasso reached Heaven by Virgil's heavenly aid.
&mdash;Where, in those governed notes, that strongly poured
The beam of Faith from Godfrey's Christian sword;
&mdash;Where, in Armida's groves of Siren rest,
Stealing the soul from Valour's melted breast,
Where, Harold, where, in Tasso's calmer lyre,
Shone the wild blaze, the wandering marsh-fed fire,
Thy daring reverence sheds around his brows?
Not thus he languished for his highborn spouse,
Not thus he mourned &mdash; but, uniformly great,
Folded his robe, like Caesar, o'er his fate;
Showed, as he fell, a Poet's ruins there,
And charmed his den with musical despair.

Bow not, in vain, at Glory's ancient shrine&mdash;
The fire thou honourest, if thou wilt, is thine!
Thine every gift that lavish Nature gives&mdash;
Add but wise Art &mdash; thy verse forever lives.

One whisper more, and, all his labours done,
Advice, the wizard, through his race has run;
Resigns the wand he seized for Harold's sake,
And, pleased, relapses into Lethe's lake.

Knowest thou the Muse, sublime, to Nature true,
(Alas I how much we scorn we never knew!)
Knowest thou her, Harold, in whose tragic scene
Grief asks a pause from eloquent Racine?
If such thy knowledge &mdash; where was candid Truth,
Respect for Genius, or relenting Ruth.
To close the Gothic lips, that dared defame
Gaul's true possessors of the Poet's name?
&mdash;If for the dead, for high Corneille, thy heart
Beats not in quickening wonder &mdash; or can part
Unmoved from Zaira's sorrows &mdash; yet revere
(Thou hast no party spleen to blind thee here)
Frascati's tuneful habitant, who pours
Glory and Light on Tyber's ancient shores,
With ancient energy of song &mdash; refined,
Harmonious, pure, the zephyr of the mind.
&mdash;Would'st thou recall departed years to light?
Wander with him o'er Tusculum's loved height;
And trace the Fabian reliques, as ye go&mdash;
Lift from the dust the form of Cicero;
And, Harold!  there, o'er Rome's time-honoured bier,
Hear notes, that Tasso would have joyed to bear.

Thus, o'er a wide arena have I past,
Perchance too slightly, and 'tis plain too fast.
Not, as a hostile gladiator there,
Poetic Harold to the fight I dare&mdash;
(Too strong the pulse that throbs within my frame,
While Love, Grief, Memory, hail that cherished name)
Not as a captious censor have I sung
The blots, the brilliance, of my native tongue,
To all a Monitor &mdash; to one a Friend
Unknown, ambitious of no loftier end
Than Harold's genuine glory &mdash; and in this,
Involve, Oh Mercy!  Harold's genuine bliss.
