What sounds are these that grow upon the ear,
Like dreadful, deepening thunder?  though around
The blue vault brightens, and beneath appear
Rays of a glittering rainbow, that astound
The gazer's eye?  a bridge of fairy birth,
Low hangs the pictured arch &mdash; a smile of Heav'n, on earth.

Quick steps advance &mdash; oh soul-inspiring sight!
Dashed from his throne of rocks, at once in view,
Unutterably loud, intensely bright,
Fell and leapt up the Cataract!  high flew
The sea of foam, while hills and wooded shores,
Niagara!  fling back the crash that round thee roars.

That quickened step was Theodore's, that eye
Of wonder his &mdash; but he, who erst had seen,
Thrilled with a poet's rapture, strange and high,
Creation's mightier efforts, with sad mien
Dejected, and fresh tears, beheld the place
Where Honour sank in snares of India's faithless race.

Oft by yon awful stream, at night's calm hour,
When, like the voice of that vast solitude,
The sleepless torrent spoke with solemn power,
His friend would stray; or on to deserts rude,
Unconscious of the guile his footsteps court,
Far from the warlike shield of Britain's guardian fort.

All in his heart was native Wales, pourtrayed
With bolder features &mdash; pensive would he roam,
Though greenest myrtles wreathed his patriot blade;
While, but the shadow of his distant home
Soothed his tired spirit, and with nameless joy
He seemed to haunt the woods, again a happy boy.

His soul was there with Theodore; and still,
When giant trees o'erhung the forest path,
Or loftier than from Cambria's parent hill
The hoarse-resounding waters hurled their wrath,
He pined for narrow glens of noiseless rest,
Where Snowdon's image sleeps in loved Llanberris' breast.

Vain are the glittering wings that round him fly,
And paint the wood with many-coloured light;
And vainly murmuring there her melody,
That fairy wanderer smooths her plume of white&mdash;
Vales of less wondrous charm, but vales more dear,
Wake Memory's sigh, and hallow Friendship's tear.

Well is that warmth returned &mdash; with eager band
Of brave admiring Britons, to pursue
The restless search for much-loved Ferdinand,
Advanced young Theodore, the firm, the true;
Grace, glory, victim of his cause, and free
From each repining thought &mdash; save, Ellen, grief for thee.

There's not a deed that man must do,
There's not a sorrow he must bear;
But Friendship's eye will, calmly view,
But Friendship's heart will freely share.

Oh holy, but polluted name!
What faithless crowds thy shrine debase;
Bring outward incense there, and claim
The birthright of thy chosen race.

Grant us some talisman divine,
To know thy sons, the false, the true;
And banish from that lofty shrine
The venal and voluptuous crew.

The danger met with soul assured,
The virtuous joy together known;
The suffering by condolence cured,
These honours, Friendship, are thine own.

The toil sustain'd by mutual force,
The mutual dread of foul disgrace,
Still guard thy bright and blameless course,
And fit thee for thy Maker's face.

Fair broke the morn o'er Apalachia's height;
And, deeply scattered in the glen below,
The reed-roof'd huts arise &mdash; the sudden sight
Bids watchful Caution wake; and mute and slow
They trace the downward wood &mdash; till, winding near,
Fierce on the rude retreat they rush in close career.

'Tis desert all and silent &mdash; as they fly
From low-browed roof to roof, upon the floor
Some unstrung bows and scattered hatchets lie,
Their edge yet red with blood &mdash; and full before
Their startled eyes, upon the frowning walls,
The fresh and ghastly scalp fell Murder's knife recalls.

They quit those dens of darkness &mdash; onward yet
They pierce the thickening glooms, the waste of shade&mdash;
Till (as the Sun in broad-orb'd splendour set,
And burst the brave defence that forest made,
Mere vast outspreading oaks, and plane trees high,
Flung their eternal arms, and strove to veil the sky&mdash;

Fit scene for sacrifice of blood&mdash;) till here,
Wrapped in close bonds of rushes, on the ground,
Worn out with age, and misery, and fear,
For ruthless rites, for vengeful torture bound,
A dying wretch reclines; and, piled at hand,
The new-cut branches speak the hostile savage band.

They loose the grateful victim, and his eyes
Look faded hope again &mdash; 'tis all too late!
Lost in the struggling gladness as he dies,
While on his lips his breathless rescuers wait,
His feeble finger points the westward hill&mdash;
The withered frame once shudders &mdash; and is still.

Heart-sick they journey on &mdash; "those leaves of green
Seem not of Nature's strewing!"  search beneath,
Ye anxious wanderers!  printed here is seen
The barbarous foot &mdash; that company of death
Has travelled here &mdash; fulfil, ye daring few,
Fulfil your dream of hope &mdash; grant, Heaven!  that dream be true.

Still lasts the fearful track &mdash; pursue it still!
They scent your keen advance; they now are nigh&mdash;
See, o'er the slope of yonder hut-crowned hill,
The tawny host in coward panic fly&mdash;
Haste, haste, ye brave, that narrow valley o'er,
Leap down from rock to rock, and follow Theodore.

Ardent as him whose threatening godlike eye
Pursues the passage of his vengeful dart;
Swift as that dart the hero seems to fly&mdash;
O'er all the opposing bounds that feebly part
His friend and him &mdash; oh!  speed him on his way,
Thou, who controul'st the world with just and piteous sway.

They reach the trembling village:  women there,
And helpless babes, in wild disorder wait:
Eager, but watchful of some Indian snare,
They hear their guide repeat what these relate:
Brief, but severe the tale &mdash; "yon flying band
Bears not the white man with them from the land&mdash;

"And yet, perchance, he lives! &mdash; but yesternight
Remoter warriors by their dwellings past;
And brought strange tidings of some glorious fight,
Where many a rival chieftain breathed his list:
There, too, the white man fought" &mdash; so closed the tale,
And left the listener's brow with speechless horror pale.

The sorrowing Britons urge their onward way;
And now, advancing soft with silent feet,
The sudden windings of the wood betray
An Indian band &mdash; in vain, dispersing fleet,
The savage host recoils &mdash; pursued, o'ercome,
And bound by eager foes, in scorn they wait their doom.

Wearied they seem with recent warlike toil:
Torn every plume, and pierced each spotted vest,
Foul blood and dust their gloomy features soil,
And gaping wounds their patriot zeal attest:
Sullen at first their silence; till the guide
Soothed them with promised gifts, and stern their chief replied&mdash;

"Yes, great had been the fight &mdash; his nation there
Thousands had slain, though forced at length to yield:
He hastened now for succours to repair
His brief disgrace, and win a bloodier field.&mdash;"
Such his sole purport &mdash; but amid the band
A youth there stood, whose speaking eye and hand,

Whose anxious gestures, big with meaning, draw
Attention round him &mdash; captive in the fight,
Tortures and death he dreamt of, till he saw
The rescuing Britons &mdash; gladdened at the sight,
Hope, gratitude awoke; and each quick word,
To Theodore conveyed, thrilled through him as he heard.

Dragged by fell force to join the battle's rage,
The white man saw Venango's fatal plain:
Thence, as the ranks of barbarous foes engage,
From the foul scene he flies, but flies in vain
Borne off for slaughter when the fight is o'er,
In chains he seeks Miamis' wooded shore.

There, where the shrine of Areskoui stands,
Devoted to their God the victim falls;
Vengeance alone with lightning in her hands
The lifted hatchet from its aim recalls!
So felt the Britons &mdash; but when India's race
Saw them thus following on their foeman's trace,

Eager they pant to aid their fierce pursuit&mdash;
Loosed from their bonds, they point the forest road;
And, swift preceding on the well-known route,
Staunch human bloodhounds, to the far abode
Of that relentless god, they lead the band
Whose every footstep seems too late for Ferdinand.

Cold evening gusts across the mountain came,
And dewy mist dimmed all the vale below
When the first sparkles of a distant flame
Seem in the grove that skirts their path to glow;
Prompt on their face the leading Indians lie,
And turn the subtle ear, and dart the piercing eye.

There darkly seen, of turf and stone combined,
A savage altar rises in the wood;
And there the sanguinary God enshrined
Awaits the tribute of the white man's blood;
Unless the deed be done &mdash; 'tis doubtful yet!
Around their sacred fire the dusky chiefs are set.

Behold the hoary juggler at the shrine,
Armed with his knife &mdash; the point yet free from gore&mdash;
Now nearer, nearer, now in kneeling line
On the pale host your sudden volley pour&mdash;
Loud rings the deathful echo through the glen,
Low falls the accursed priest &mdash; the thunder rolls again.

Down tangling paths, from sheltering bush and tree
Indian and Briton leap &mdash; the astonished foes
Faintly resist, or fall around, or flee
In fear redoubled as the tumult grows,
And frantic haste &mdash; yet hurl they on their path
Too many a fatal bolt, and leave the records of their wrath.

Through circling shafts, through grappling foe and friend,
Breathless and wild with fear, that gallant youth
Has reached his painful wandering's aim and end&mdash;
Oh!  what a last reward for so much truth!
Can that be he, or even his lifeless frame,
So silent and so changed, beside you lurid flame?

On a green hillock's side, stretched out and cold,
Lies the pale form &mdash; a blood-stained wolfskin vest
Wraps the worn limbs in many a floating fold&mdash;
A ghastly wound gapes fresh upon the chest&mdash;
In the closed eyes, white lips, and hollow cheeks,
In every feature Death, with tongue of terror, speaks.

Clasped to the throbbing breast of friendly love,
Why lingers yet the refluent warmth of life?
Mercy's own God, who hear'st our prayers above,
Look down upon the dread, the speechless strife!
Oh God!  he lives &mdash; ere horror's hour is o'er,
Waked as in angel arms, he knows his Theodore.

Then freely bursts the frozen stream of woe
From the prest heart of that unrivalled friend&mdash;
And Gratitude's sublime unearthly glow,
And countless rushing thoughts, that wildly blend
The name of Ellen with the present scene,
Shake his exhausted frame, and change his pallid mien.

Oh thou art well repaid, thou heart of truth!
And she, thy worthy love, thy noble choice,
How will her blushing cheek of beauteous youth
Hail the blest day that bids thee now rejoice!
But turn to him, whose mute and deep surprise
Sheds the faint glance of joy from suffering's rayless eyes.

Watchful and wise that art, whose hand may hope
To raise upon the stem this fallen plant:
Here, feebly fluttering in her narrow scope,
Life asks the care a friend alone can grant
Light are such cares to him, whose eager eye
Ere yet the wish is born, its dawning can espy.

On close-bound branches, thick with leaves o'er-strown,
They bear the youth &mdash; ye sons of Triumph, yield!
No joy like this your bosoms ever own,
Returning bright from Glory's bravest field&mdash;
The Friend, that gently carried couch beside,
Grasping the weak loved hand, moves on in silent pride.

Slowly they trace their backward happy way
To Erie's banks &mdash; where, launching on the flood,
In peaceful motion by the shore they stray,
Feeling that calm unutterable mood
Which generous labour's pause on man bestows,
When Virtue's deeds are done &mdash; a balm for all his woes.

The moon was up, and o'er the unruffled wave
Shone, like forgiveness, on the parting soul;
Shedding a brilliant calm o'er Sorrow's grave,
Where Angels hover, with unseen controul;
All felt around a sympathetic rest,
And motionless the light o'erspread the water's breast.

How smoothly o'er the moonlight lake
The wings of Silence sweep!
Sorrow and Rage the world forsake,
And all but Love's asleep.

And well may blameless Love conspire
With calm Devotion's trance,
To gaze, to ponder, and admire
Beneath yon blue expanse.

The placid concave of the sky,
Reflected in the flood,
Presents a realm to Fancy's eye,
Prepared to bless the good.

No tumult floats in that pure air,
No cloud o'ercasts the breast:
"The wicked cease from troubling there,
The weary are at rest."

Divided once by envious Time,
Stars to one sphere confined,
There Sages meet from every clime,
And share the gifted wind.

There Science darts collected light&mdash;
While, freed from progress slow,
Virtue advances to the height
She viewed in vain below.

There Patriots find that gentle reign
They sought in dreams on earth;
Attracting, with a viewless chain,
Free Love to ruling Worth.

Them every heart, that met in life
Its own reflected form&mdash;
Nor vexed by care's unworthy strife,
Nor tost by passion's storm&mdash;

In union with that kindred heart,
Finds a blest home above&mdash;
"No trial there shall bid us part,
My Ellen, oh my love!"

The long dark woods, the green o'er-topping hills,
Sleep in the depth of silence &mdash; not a sound,
Save of the falling oars, or distant rills,
Where, issuing swift in Erie's blue profound
Through black Cayuga's rocks, the indignant tide
Rears its hoarse waves on high, repulsed from either side.

Repose lay soft upon the sufferer's head,
Like summer dew upon the thirsty soil:
The friend sate musing by the cabin bed,
Revolving visions past of weary toil
That heightened present peace &mdash; revolving more
That fairy dream of bliss, by Vaga's loveliest shore.

"Oh will it e'er return, that fairy dream?
Will Ellen's voice again delight mine ear?
Will Ellen's eye of love with rapture stream
To see me safe from Danger's distant sphere?
And that dread barrier, which our love opposed,
Changed to a crown of joy, and thus in triumph closed?"

Gliding insensibly from thought to thought,
On soothing theme like this, the captive wind
Sank into rest &mdash; but wakeful Fancy brought
The same dear river's bank, and, unconfined
By envious space, he gazed upon the pride
Of green Silurian vales, with Ellen at his side.

Soft was the figured vision &mdash; evening round
Illumined Wye, and Clifford's ivied tower;
Where Rosamond, with matchless beauty crowned,
Found matchless, sorrow in her altered hour:
The woods looked strangely fair, the sky, the stream,
All wore a pensive light, the sun-set of a dream.

Fresh as from April showers, and breathing sweets
From violets unseen, but thus betrayed,
Two happy cottage homes, adorned retreats,
That seemed for love in blest seclusion made,
Rose from a furzy bank, of wildest grace,
And many a branching oak shut in the verdant space.

One was his friend's retirement, one his own&mdash;
A face and form his eye had never met,
In yonder shady woodland roamed alone&mdash;
Her lord in fields of war was absent yet;
But Ellen soothed her soul with winning care,
And still that sister smile forbade her to despair.

And lo!  returning up that watery road,
Through the low grounds beside the river's course,
A soldier, hastening to his loved abode,
Calls the proud courser to his utmost force&mdash;
'Tis gone &mdash; the dreamer starts &mdash; and, as the dead
Awake to distant scenes, the world of sleep has fled.

Grey dawn returns; and gradual o'er the lake
Ascends a misty steam that veils the air:
The roughened waves against the vessel break,
And breezy murmurs rouse the pilot's care&mdash;
'Tis but the morning's birth, attended still
With tears of omen strange, and whispering presage chill.

Well might that hour with fabling fear accord,
And paint her phantoms now returning home
To that pale empire, those domain abhorr'd,
Whence on their midnight rounds they due to roam&mdash;
Well might they seem down that lone shore to stray,
Half veiled in gathering mists, that rise to shade their way.

'Tis noon &mdash; and, blazing from the cloudless skies,
Darts the keen radiance on the sailors brow:
Where yon tall reeds in clustering ranks arise,
Mark ye that seeming branch, emerging now,
Now wavering, fixed at length? &mdash; beneath the flood
There lurks the chourasou, and waits his feathered food.

"At you deep thicket" (thus the pilot told
His tale repeated) &mdash; "once we sought the shore;
And scarce our canvas, to the air unrolled,
A hasty tent, began to shade us o'er,
When, from a bush enclosed within the round,
The sudden rattle came with heart-appaling sound.

"Breathless we fled:  more daring than the rest,
One backward looked, where, curled in horror, lay
The monster snake with dark, erected crest
Crowning his ample folds, he barred the way;
While, shining in the sun, behind appeared
The serpent brood of Death, in these wild forests reared."

So roll the hours away:  not unemployed
In sweet, though broken converse, by the friends;
Their fuller bliss not yet to be enjoyed,
Till at the rock-built fort their voyage ends,
Where, fann'd by genial gales, life's languid strength,
Like some worn harp of air, may gain its tone at length.

They reach the fort &mdash; that sight of pride to me,
Loved England's colours floating o'er the walls,
Shoots through the soldier's breast new energy&mdash;
And, as each morn some well-known face recalls,
That shared his hard-fought fields of toil and fame,
Young Hope inspires his breast, and Health his frame.

There that brave comrade met him, crowned with power,
And warlike honour here, whose voice had told
The distant Theodore of peril's hour:
And much his heart admir'd that ardour bold,
Of either generous friend:  he too essayed
To fix the pulse of health, and lend a brother's aid.

But chief his watchful care, his wondrous zeal,
Who braved all dangers to redeem his friend,
Bid the blest youth a buoyant vigour feel&mdash;
And, granted now his homeward steps to bend,
From scenes of well-earn'd peace, he pants to stray
And share, with friendly eyes, the beauties of the way.

The sunny dawn with transport fills their hearts,
As, by Niagara's resounding side,
(Their warlike guard safe confidence imparts)
Mute they behold that unimagined tide&mdash;
High o'er their heads the screaming eagles go,
And quit the lifeless prey the stream has wrecked below.

Remembrance shudders o'er the fatal place
Where Ferdinand was lost &mdash; their course they speed;
And, joyous now his perils to retrace,
As on they wander through a flowery mead,
O'erhung by spreading planes, and cedars high,
The soldier paints the past to Friendship's following eye.

"That night, my Theodore!  when India's host
Bore me resisting vainly through the wood,
No feeling but Despair thy friend could boast:
Let loftier hearts oppose Misfortune's flood
With high unbent resolve, and noble pride
For me the death of hope a gloomy strength supplied.

"So swift they forced me through the midnight trees,
Wounded, disarmed, and helpless, on their road,
That, dying soon upon the distant breeze,
Unheard Niagara's loud torrent flowed
Nor gave the day more rest &mdash; they hurried on,
Till twice the morning beams in hottest splendour shone.

"Unconscious, long ere this, of toil or woe,
Sunk in a transient grave my senses lay
I woke &mdash; and, trembling, gazed around &mdash; when lo!
Close at my side, with locks of sacred grey,
A pale old man in anxious seeming bent,
And watched my waking eyes with fatherly content.

"England's blest sounds surprise my gladdened ear!
And well my country's worth that Indian knew&mdash;
'Be still&mdash;' he cried &mdash; 'their women yet are near,
Though in the woods they hunt, that warrior crew&mdash;
Age left me here alone &mdash; thy life is spared,
If all their works and ways by thee are freely shared.'

"Shuddering I heard the promise:  but, if war
Asked not my arm, to join their sylvan toils
Honour allowed &mdash; and oft, in forests far
From Europe's boldest search, the spotted spoils
Of many a slaughtered lynx, or margay bright,
Or swift oblique racoon, I claimed by conquest's right.

"The fiercer wolf gave spirit to the chase,
The reasoning beaver fixed my well-pleased eye;
To mark those structures of his, labouring race,
Where untaught art with human rules may vie:
Where social wisdom plans each separate home,
And finely tapering piles support the wondrous dome.

"Vain were the task to tell my various cares,
Repose and grief:  the chase alone was rest&mdash;
But, warned too soon of danger's hidden snares
By him, who bore beneath an Indian vest
An English heart, I prayed for honest fame,
And steeled my suffering soul to die unstained by shame.

"The hour of trial came &mdash; War, lawless War
Roused the true Indian to his native trade&mdash;
The shell of vengeance sounded from afar,
And savage friendship brings his eager aid&mdash;
Glorying they meet:  their sharpened axes gleam,
And shouts of triumph hail the chief's auspicious dream.

"Their faces blackened for the bloody joy,
And wildly streaked with deep vermilion lines,
Demons of death, impatient to destroy,
Each well-named band in silent march combines,
Tiger, or wolf &mdash; nor sounds, nor sights betray
The sudden terrors of their secret way.

"One o'er the rest pre-eminent, whose hand
Wielded a giant's club &mdash; august he stood,
Like some self-rooted tenant of the land,
Cedar, or pine, surmounting all the wood.
The host obeyed his eye &mdash; and oft on mine
It glared in struggling rage, too easy to divine.

"The white man's friend (oh friendship ill repaid!)
Erst would that chief each willing toil have borne.
Danger, or death, for us &mdash; but now, betray'd
By murderous guile; his wife, his children torn
From Huron's widow'd arms; for him remains
No drop of kindred blood in any human veins.

"Well might I look for vengeance from a foe
Bereft like this, by English wrongs bereft&mdash;
But why repeat the pains thy heart must know,
Thy heart, my friend!  that all for me has left,
Home, and thy Love &mdash; yes, Theodore, I fear,
Thy silence speaks a grief, half hidden from mine ear.

"Thy heaven-sent rescue snatched me from a tomb,
Dread as it was, yet welcome to my soul,
That only saw dishonour for its doom,
Dragged to barbarian war by base control&mdash;
Oh how can life return a gift more dear
Than life and all its joys, thine angel presence here?"

So journeyed on the friends &mdash; Ontario's sea
Is wondered at, and past &mdash; and now once more,
With doubled sense of Nature's majesty,
Blest Ferdinand beholds each pine-clad shore,
Where fallen rocks resist the giant tide,
Till fair Montreal's towers adorn its cultured side.

Here, long estranged from soft unwarlike life,
They rest awhile in Safety's beauteous home:
So from rude blasts, and clouds in gloomy strife,
Blue Peace resumes the clear etherial dome.
Yet even this calm to soothe their spirit fails&mdash;
They sigh to breathe again the long-lost air of Wales.

Down the bold stream they glide, and many a scene
Unmarked before, or feebly traced, appears,
Lit by new suns, adorned with lovelier mien,
Like the first blush of youth's unthinking years&mdash;
Beneath the sheltering sail in talk they sit,
Or in that mute repose for conscious pleasure fit.

Ere this of honoured Egbert's weal or woe
Young Ferdinand had sought with grateful heart;
And pleased had heard, where Elbe's rich waters flow,
His patron well had played the soldiers part:
France oft had felt his arm &mdash; but chiefly then,
When Minden's hard-faught field called forth the souls of men.

Immortal Minden!  yes, for thee alone,
France reaped her laurels on Germania's plains&mdash;
For thee she raised on high her humbled throne,
And forged once more those cast and broken chains
That Marlborough shook from Europe's prostrate neck
'Twas thine the oppressor's pride again to cheek.

Shade of undaunted Granby!  if a sound,
Breathed by that harp thy grandson gives to sing,
Shame not thy glory, all its tones are wound
To grateful Joy, and every thrilling string,
Flower of thy gallant race, shall honour thee,
Second, yet first that day of England's chivalry.

Firm on thy generous steed I see thee fixed:
Thine eager eye has caught the wished command;
Already with the foe thy ranks are mixed,
Bare thy brave head, and raised thy patriot hand
Nor falls that sword in vain, recoiling France
Tells through her scattered lines where Rutland's horse advance.

Thus, at one hour, the lion flag unfurled
To spare the conquered, to subdue the proud,
Shades with its brilliant compass either world&mdash;
While, 'mid the general joy, less marked and loud,
But deeper far the bliss, to clasp again
Deserted Friends, endeared by that desertion's pain.

How beat the heart of Theodore, when swift
By Abraham's deathless heights, and proud Quebec,
On their swoln breast the river billows lift
The gallant bark; no adverse gale to cheek
Their rapid entrance on the expanding main,
Where unperceived it joins St. Laurance' kindred reign.

Now all is sea before them, till they pass
Bermuda's lonely isle, a home for care;
Through whose mute woods, and glens of waving grass
Well might he roam, the child of blank despair,
Whom promised Love had left; or Fancy given
A faithless dream obscure of never granted Heaven.

Unlike thy glow of hope, thou happy friend,
Thou happier yet in love!  for thee Content,
Elysian bowers for thee prepared, attend
Thy coming steps &mdash; thy brief distress was lent
But to enhance thy raptures, and impart
The contrast nature loves to man's excited heart.

And filled with hope, though strange and undefined
As summers noon-day mist of silent heat,
Was joyous Ferdinand:  his glowing mind
Felt in his friends return a sense more sweet
Than separate bliss could yield, as on he roved
With him, the unrivalled youth, the well-beloved.

Each early scene, each favourite book they knew,
Varied their soothing converse; and so soon
The cheated way was past, that many a view
Of Ocean's day-break glories, or the moon
Bright on the level wave, was lost to those
Whom high remembrance fixed, who lovelier studies chose:

Whom their first awe for thee, thou Lord of All!
Detained, well-pleased, in musing love and praise,
O'er thy protecting wonders, that recall
The watchful guardian of their infant days,
By thee commissioned o'er their youth to Tread
Religion's tempered shield &mdash; "ah!  sleeps he with the dead?

"Ah!  sleeps he with the dead?  thy sire and mine?"
(So Ferdinand had mourned when first the tale
Of Ulric's loss was told) "his voice divine,
Yet murmuring soft to memory, shall prevail
O'er each rude gust of passion, and shall hold
In chains of living love the heart it once controll'd."

Such honours paid to Ulric, ever dear,
Lamented ever in the filial mind,
Down Friendship's cheek would draw the manly tear,
And closer still the according heart combined&mdash;
But lo!  that light from far Ierne shone,
And every thought but one from Theodore is gone.

Ellen, deserted Ellen, only thee
He sees, hears, loves &mdash; and often doubts his heart,
Whether thy soft and tender purity
Were not abused by him, who bore to part
From such confiding sweetness; and could stray,
Even for the holiest cause, so far from thee away.

"But soon, oh soon, to thee, sweet girl!  restored,
No hour again shall part us &mdash; we shall live
Both ever blest in Him by both adored,
Whose gift alone is all earth seems to give,
All promised after earth &mdash; when, Ellen, thou
Shalt re-assume the heart thy virtue governs now."

Thus, at the fall of night, when o'er the main
Hibernian watch-fires cast a steady ray,
The lover mused &mdash; but drops of sullen rain
Presage the gathering storm, and long ere day
Has op'd the expanse of ocean, o'er its face
Rough frowns of rage arise, that shade the watery space.

Boldly at first they run before the gale,
With sails full set &mdash; but warier art must give
Her instant aid, or in that deep sunk vale
Of yawning waves the vessel cannot live&mdash;
With fearful sway she rolls from side to side,
And see!  the invaded hold admits the rushing tide.

All hands at once to work, or all are lost!
Hark to the crash above!  'tis borne away,
That haughty pine, well known on many a coast&mdash;
And hearts oft tried in battle's desperate day,
Or on the stormy good, confest a sense
Of baffled human skill, and looked for Heaven's defence.

No prayer was heard of that unhappy crew&mdash;
Louder the blast, and loftier swells the wave:
The buried hull now fades upon the view
Of Erin's breathless sons, who wait to save
On their green shore; now high in air it rides,
Upon the moving mountain of the tides.

Fear and despair are round them &mdash; but alone,
But chief in utter wretchedness, the friends
Together stand in silence &mdash; not a groan,
No, not a look of murmuring. &mdash; Thus then ends,
For ever ends, youth's pictured scene of love,
The flower-wreathed nuptial cot, the world-excluding grove;

The walk, the rest from care, the mutual thought,
The well-imagined tale, unknown before;
The summer joy in woodland wandering sought,
The blazing wintry hearth, and tuneful lore;
Music, made doubly sweet by Ellen's voice,
Unnamed, unnumbered charms, that bless our bosom's choice;

Yes, fast they vanish, all!  "Oh, who shall tell
The dreary tale to thee?" &mdash; time just was given
To breathe these hopeless words, to breathe a prayer
For her to whom they spoke &mdash; when sudden Heaven
Bursts on the parted soul! &mdash; for all is o'er&mdash;
And wished-for morning rolls the wreck upon the shore.

Calm, as when stilled by Christ's commanding word,
Slept the dumb ocean &mdash; on the verdant land
Shone the clear sun; no breath in air was heard
All looked like peace &mdash; alas!  upon the strand,
Who, who are they that lie together prest,
Death locked in death, and faithful breast to breast?

There, honour, friendship, youth, unchanging love,
Extinguished lie &mdash; bear, bear them to the tomb!
Their spirits are at rest with God above.
And ye, Ierne's sons!  who weep their doom
Well shall your generous hands those duties pay
That Virtue ever lends to Friendship's dying day.

Yet shall they never die, whom Earth admires,
Whom Heaven approves, whom Heaven's best image mourns,
The blameless virgin mind &mdash; those ardent fires
That lit their lives, shall blaze within their urns
When the last trumpet stirs their sleeping clay,
And dart an unobscured though interrupted ray.

But what shall comfort thee, what glowing hope,
When all is cold within, thou lonely maid?
'Tis not in cheerless life's contracted scope,
To comfort thee &mdash; to lend thine anguish aid&mdash;
How didst thou bear the tale? &mdash; mute Pity gave
Each natural prop, to stay thee from the grave;

And thine were moments, when a soothing voice,
Like music heard in dreams, through fairy bowers,
Bade thee yet hope, and tremble, and rejoice&mdash;
While, o'er thy tears, at such unearthly hours,
To angel prayer, or silent suffering giv'n,
A light would gleam, that spoke the peace of Heav'n&mdash;

And time, and sorrow shaded by repose,
By soft Silurian vales, thy native sky,
All wooed thee to subdue thy bosom's foes,
Memory, and love &mdash; alas, in vain they try
Ere long thy fading form is lost in gloom,
A broken flower of love, entwined o'er Friendship's tomb.
