In glittering pomp the gallant march began,
File after file advancing from the shore:
Those well-known colours floated in the van,
That youthful Hope and untried Honour bore:
Long groves of steel glance bright against the sun;
The field's alive with war, and seems already won.

And is not England's banner proudly known
Where'er the waters roll, or mountains rise?
Where barbarous Tyrants shake on Asia's throne,
Or France turns pale beneath Canadian skies?
Here now she trembled, as her ancient foe
Renewed in distant climes Britannia's battle blow.

Britannia!  name as venerably great
As Time's emblazoned records yet contain;
(Purer from human stains what human state?)
Britannia!  name that quickens every vein
In her true sons &mdash; Oh never may she fade
From records high in heaven, that wings of angels shade!

Now o'er the blue Atlantic kingdom borne,
Her guardian instruments of wealth and war
Had launched her race (from tenderest pleasures torn,
From dearest homes) on ruder lands afar;
Where proud St. Laurence guides his ocean floods
Through worlds of old contemporary woods.

From Breton's conquered Cape they wind their way,
Led by that warrior who the conquest won;
Doomed yet to veil, by Glory's riper day,
The dawn of youthful fame so well begun:
See high-born Valour crowd his bright career!
Wolfe calls to arms, and England glows to hear.

Nor shall thy worth, illustrious Townshend!  rise
Unfelt, unsung by England's lowliest lyre&mdash;
Thee nor the frowning storms of polar skies,
Nor Danger throned where all her hills aspire,
Nor well-skilled war, with barbarous rage combined,
One moment shook, or touched thy patriot mind.

The softer struggle of reluctant love,
The tears of home &mdash; Ambition conquers all!
Ambition, kindled by a flame above
That meteor light, the Tyrant's rise and fall&mdash;
The heaven-born halo that enwreathes the brave,
Or sheds an evening beam on Valour's early grave.

Unknown his name, untried his dawning worth,
Save by the partial glance of Friendship's eye;
Yet the last heir of those whose honoured birth
Connatural Virtue graced, and Genius high;
Eager, how eager!  in a soldier's hand
To wield a soldier's blade, stood gallant Ferdinand.

Friends soon were his &mdash; though Theodore afar,
The first, the dearest, ruled his changeless soul;
Though he who roused him to the pride of war,
The generous Egbert, by his chief's control,
On German plains the faithless foe withstood,
And dyed the distant Elbe with Gallic blood.

Thus, cast upon himself, and fixed alone
'Mid strangest scenes, the youthful soldier felt
The joy of duty well-discharged his own:
Deep in his breast his Country's image dwelt,
Loved, and obeyed; while Honour's guileless face
Confessed him brother of her true-born race.

They camp by Montmorenci's echoing wave,
And front appalled Quebec:  yet Courage there
Sits plumed on high; and, guardians of the brave,
Long practised Art and patient Skill prepare
Their sure defence:  Hope soars on either side,
Pervades their adverse ranks, and spurns the parting tide.

The ford is crossed &mdash; oh, lamentable sight!
Not in unbroken bands of gathered force,
Not in Britannia's full resistless might&mdash;
The winds and waters drive her from her course;
And watchful France, entrenched on Safety's rock,
Meets and repels the battle's fruitless shock.

What dogs of War are slipped from yonder hills?
They spring like panthers through the sheltering woods;
Their savage yell the circling echo fills;
They scour the plains, they pass the opposing floods;
They charge the scattered rear of England's war,
And Murder whets her steel, and mounts her Indian car.

Oh ye, who first, by Culture's arts refined,
By Christian rules (abhorred impostors!)  taught,
With Europe's sword the barbarous knife combined,
And dared a deed too black for human thought,
By Hell itself inspired &mdash; what coming age
Shall blunt its keen reproach for Gallia's ruthless rage?

Drop, tears of fire, on Britain's blushing cheek!
Thou too, my Country!  long shalt show the stain;
Though angel truth in Chatham's tongue shall speak,
The heavenly warning shall be heard in vain&mdash;
No "spotless ermine" shall o'erspread thy fame,
No "holy lawn" avert thy brand of deathless shame.

The last sad remnant of that bloody field,
Scotia and Erin each have left a son,
Too weak for flight, nor scorning now to yield
When all was o'er, and Glorys struggle done&mdash;
Hold, hold, ye vollied deaths from Gallia's train!
Whelm ye your wounded foes, and these but twain?

And hark!  the human howl!  the licensed race
Of cold and captive slaughter &mdash; on they come,
And who shall rescue now?  the desert space
Lies strewed with dead &mdash; Ah!  happy they, whose home,
Already reached, on golden clouds afar
Soothes their brave spirits from the woes of war.

Not thus the brother chiefs &mdash; on racks of pain,
In impotence of courage firm they stand,
And mark the varied fate that girds the plain&mdash;
Now in unequal contest, hand to hand
Fearless they front their wild and rapid foes,
And all the robber hosts with yells around them close.

Yes, 'tis a Highland shout that swells the gale!
Look up, brave sufferers, list with raptured ear
To those advancing cries, that never fail
To speak a threatened friend's deliverance near&mdash;
Quick be Macdonald's step, and fiercely poured
On slaughter's tribe the lightning of his sword.

And who of England's sons is foremost there?
Who fights for Friendship's rescue in the van?
'Tis he &mdash; 'tis Ferdinand!  young Glory's heir,
To seize her guerdon, swift as Hope he ran,
Grasped the fierce Indian, as he aimed the blow
At Erin's fallen son, and laid the murderer low.

Far from the field the savage dastards turn
Their plumes and shaggy skins to hurried flight.&mdash;
But oh!  what mingling flames of passion burn
In him, the leader of the luckless fight,
The noble Wolfe?  his soul consumes his frame
With Valour's wounded pride, with Virtue's conscious shame.

Alone at midnight in his tent he sits,
Revolving all the records of disgrace&mdash;
How Fortune's children rise and sink by fits
From Honour's highest to her lowest place:
How Greece repaid her sons; how mighty Rome;
And how Success alone still swayed his ardent home.

Amid the generous band, unduly viewed
By blinded mobs, or (still severer doom!)
By rival faction's ruthless hate pursued;
Amid the forms that filled the pictured gloom
Of ages present, past, or yet to be,
One mangled shape he saw (oh foul indignity!)

And turned, much-injured Byng!  in hot disdain
From the dire sight &mdash; "On thee, my native land!"
Thus flowed the hero's thoughts &mdash; "no blushing stain
 Of cruel outcry, of insane demand
For miscalled justice, shall thy son impress&mdash;
Victory or Death his aim thy millions shall confess."

High on her marble throne o'er confluent tides
Of subject waters, girt with mighty woods,
Sits fair Quebec:  but where yon Navy rides,
The ceaseless thunders, echoing o'er the floods,
Strike her crushed towers, and half with ruins spread
The proud Canadian sovereign bows her head.

Yet undismayed, unshaken yet by war,
Her crown of rocks above the combat shines;
And hurls aerial vengeance from afar
On dauntless England's disappointed lines:
But vain her hottest rage those sails to check
That mount, through fiery death, beyond alarmed Quebec.

The silent shade enwraps St. Laurence' wave;
The boats glide stilly down the guarded stream&mdash;
"Who passes there?"  the answers of the brave
Like answering France in sudden quickness seem&mdash;
They pass!  Oh Hope!  on England's leader now
Thy new-born sunbeam pours, and lights his faded brow.

They land &mdash; that feeble form, that sunken eye
Has seized a giant's nerves, a martyr's smile&mdash;
Forgotten all but England's triumph nigh,
Where are the doubts, the griefs he felt awhile?
Oh beat, ye hearts of fire, with answering sound,
When fair on Abraham's heights the flag of Wolfe unwound!

On, on, ye rival race, ye dauntless isles,
On, on!  the slippery shore, the craggy hill,
The loose ascent, the wooded deep defiles
Are past &mdash; the heights are plain &mdash; before you still
What but your foe?  Oh charge!  and all is gone,
Quick as the clouds of Night, when Day's first star has shone.

Yet gallantly your foe begins the fight&mdash;
And, oh!  what gathering crowd at once appears
At yonder point?  why, in the conquering right,
One instant pause those forward cavaliers?
His hand has prest his heart &mdash; their leader falls,
And faintly to the charge with dying accent calls.

But France has fled, and thou hast heard her shame,
Thou matchless flower of Valour's youthful race!
What worthy numbers can embalm thy name,
Thine!  that no unborn champion shall displace
From Glory's loftiest fane, where shrined thou art
'Mid England's offspring of the lion heart.

Yet, ere thy spirit to its home retire,
That sun-lit home where parted patriots rest,
Mark how thine orphan host, with doubled fire,
Seeming at once with thy brave soul possest,
Push on the foe, where yet he feebly stands,
And chase to pale Quebec his scattered bands.

High o'er Canadian towers thy colours wave!
Blest shade, farewell! &mdash; But not unneeded yet
The watchful eye, firm hand, and spirit brave
By England's host:  impatient to forget
In happier fields her laurel's faded leaf,
And win due vengeance for her slaughtered chief.

France sounds again to arms, nor sounds in vain:
Whelmed by the howling thousands of the wood,
The lion yields:  thus Murray's dauntless train,
That, worn and wearied long the foe withstood,
Retires at length; while vaunting lilies rise
Round their old towers, and claim their ravished prize.

But each dismantled wall, and ruined fort,
Wearing new strength, and manned by nobler guard,
Repels their pride:  see Britain vie to court
The worst extreme, through Winter's frown debarred
Her rescuing flag from Laurence' icebound flow,
And War raged round her o'er his worlds of snow.

Terrific War!  whom Nature cannot bind,
The scourge of Heaven on Guilt's unhappy sphere;
Thy throne of blood the ruthless human mind,
Pale Woe and wasting Famine in thy rear,
And graves uncheered by Hope &mdash; Oh when shall Hell
Confine thee, War, at length, where thou wert formed to dwell?

Not thus thy children deem; or, lost to thought,
Feel thy blind impulse only in their veins&mdash;
But whose, among the first to combat brought,
Where yon hot strife the steel-girt church profanes,
Is that brave troop?  there Ferdinand has fix'd
His flag, and grappling foes in fierce embrace are mixed.

Himself beholds their leader, as they meet
In rapid charge confronting, horse to horse,
And man to man, that instant at his feet&mdash;
Ill could the chief sustain the Briton's force,
And less endure the generous hands that raise
A fallen foe from earth &mdash; he melts in tears of praise.

Thus, ever mingling with the Soldier's wrath,
His manly mercy healed the blow he dealt
When strife was o'er &mdash; on some dark forest path
So breaks the moons bright comfort, doubly felt
From that soft contrast with the circling shade
The awakened Queen of Night at once has made.

Nor unrequired that angel pity here,
Where oft, expiring on the bloody plain
The soldier lay, beneath the wild career
Of conquering foes and friends that fled amain&mdash;
Held high the warning hand of mute distress,
Then sank unheeded down, amid the trampling press.

Or, spared perchance awhile by friends and foes
To drag a dying hour of anguished breath,
New shapes of grisly danger round him close&mdash;
In frantic circles, threatening dreadful death,
The wounded steeds without their riders rush,
And, careless now of man, their shuddering victims crush.

Life yet remains &mdash; but oh!  that mournful sight,
Where o'er the distant mountains darkened head
Defeated France retires; and fitful light,
Flashed from her scattered guns, with gloomy red
Illumes the black horizon where she flies,
Terror's hurrying shout grows faint along the skies.

Then, issuing forth, to search the mangled mass,
And bear each pale surviving wretch away,
Through kindred ranks the sorrowing youth would pass,
And snatch from hovering Death his hopeless prey;
Then turn to bleeding France, as prompt to show
The branch of healing olive to his foe.

Awful and strange, upon the frozen plain
That locks the indignant river's rage beneath,
The bright-robed legions spread their crimson train,
And o'er the slippery track of hidden death 
Encountering Europe maddens to destroy,
And India's dusky child drinks deep the savage joy.

Spring bursts the chain the slumbering waters bore:
"What sails are struggling up the unfettered tide:
Oh, 'tis ill-omened France!  she darts before
Our lingering country to the battle's pride&mdash;
Yet mark again &mdash; what quick and wild alarms
Rise in her rear? &mdash; 'Tis England's self in arms!"

Those all-victorious masts on high are seen,
And chase the scattering foe &mdash; brave sons of Hope,
Break your beleaguered walls with joyous mien,
And earth and sea shall lend their double scope
For Wolfe's avenging heirs &mdash; advance, advance,
And win her western world from shorn and trembling France.

'Tis done &mdash; but bright Montreal's towers remain,
But one unconquered foe, and all's your own.&mdash;
Ye distant bulwarks of Britannia's reign,
Ye builders of her new and noble throne,
In realms whose vast immeasurable space
Seems formed for beings of a mightier race&mdash;

Say, shall some future round of rolling years
Behold blest man his destined summit reach,
His proud expanse, where darkness disappears,
And heaven-born Truths a heaven-born offspring teach
Wisdom's best lore, and Virtue's loftiest prize?
And shall this radiance dawn beneath Columbian skies?

Rest, visionary gleams!  and sighs more vain,
That mourn the brilliant phantoms, sink to rest.&mdash;
Lo!  bound by wondrous bonds, the barbarous train
Led by brave Johnson from their rock-built nest
On Niagara's hoarse-resounding sides,
Urge their keen course o'er vast Ontario's tides.

Not these the brutal tribes, who erst bedewed
Ohio's banks with nightly flowing gore;
Untaught the phrenzy of their natures rude,
Their foul and human hunting now is o'er:
Nought but his falcon plume, and leopard vest,
And hue of dusky red wild India's son confest.

"Oh!  that each borrowed arm of lawless war
Had thus been wielded by my native land!"
So, when he heard that Legion's praise afar,
Burst forth the soul of generous Ferdinand;
Hastening himself to join the kindred brave,
While laurelled Amherst quits Oneida's wave,

And guides his bands to that devoted seat
Where each concentering ray of England's power
Shall blaze at once.  Turn pale, thou green retreat,
Thou garden reign of France, her summer bower,
Her blest Montreal!  thither all they bend,
Those feared and fatal hosts, and seek one glorious end.

No heart is bounding with a livelier glow,
No eye is kindling with a nobler pride,
When, fresh from triumph o'er the baffled foe,
They wind their way up fair St. Laurence side,
Than that gay soldier's &mdash; Hope and Joy are his&mdash;
"But, oh that Theodore could share the bliss!"

Not from old Deva's waves &mdash; though bold and rude
Thine aspect, Nature, on thy Cambrian throne,
And Earth's fresh vigour in thy form is viewed&mdash;
Not from those waves, thyself had ever shown
Thy charms to Ferdinand with such bright force,
Such eloquence of eye, as up that river's course.

All was enlarged creation &mdash; waving wild,
A sea of forests o'er the unbounded vales;
The worId's coeval woodlands, undefiled
By touch of man &mdash; the snow-charged polar gales
Their only foes, that leave their bare heads riven
Like giants blasted in their war with Heaven.

And lo!  the varying landscape's wondrous change&mdash;
From where the North lies clothed in wintry white,
To southward Apalachia's airy range,
All seasons, every clime, enchant the sight&mdash;
Fresh breathes the Spring round Richelieu's fabled isles,
And graced with Gallia's towers her loved St. Laurence smiles.

Hail, blossomed woods, and banks of rising corn,
Ye sheltered farms, ye hanging orchards, hail!
Rich herds, and varied wealth of Labour born,
And Beauty sleeping on the summer vale:
And thou, the stream from light's pure source above,
Blest Sun!  the general sire of life and love.

Oh pitying sentence!  doomed to turn the soil
That gave him birth, when Man from Eden flies,
A new-born blessing crowns the exile's toil,
And half restores his forfeit Paradise&mdash;
All-grateful Nature owns her offspring's care,
And brightens in the dress he bids her wear.

So Ferdinand was blest, as on he fared
Through greenwood paths, or up the pleasant stream;
Grieving more fondly for his joys unshared,
As each fair view awoke some youthful dream
Of still remembered Wales, and him whose eye
Would mark that likeness well, were he but nigh.

Still as the current narrowed on its way,
And moss-grown rocks, with springing shrubs between,
O'erhung his boat, his silent heart would say,
"Oft in thy windings, Dee!  so calm a scene
Has soothed my Brother's soul, and bade him feel
The world he wished for, where thy fountain steal.

"Ah, have I left him in that world alone,
Perchance alone?" &mdash; and then the soldier's eye
Wore an unwonted dimness, not its own;
His long-neglected art he fain would try,
And fix some imaged home that round him glows,
As peaceful evening brought the martial band's repose.

When distant from his native walls,
O'er foreign fields the wanderer roves,
If some soft woodland scene recals
The likeness of the home he loves,

How beats his heart, surprised to find
One other landscape upon earth
So pleasing to his patriot mind
As that dear vale which gave him birth.

The charm is gone! &mdash; yon tower aspires
Sublimely through the sheltering trees;
Those bells, as pensive he retires,
Are faintly dying on the breeze&mdash;

But oh!  that tower beloved of yore,
Those silver bells in youth he knew&mdash;
There's nothing on this foreign shore
So sweet to hear, so fair to view.

What human clouds are crossing yonder banks?
Swift as the stormy rack, and pale with fear,
The stern Mohawk, the dire Cayuga ranks,
Like hunted elks they catch with quickest ear
The coming death &mdash; far, far the torturers haste
To Allegany's huts, and wooded mountain waste.

They scent the fall of France &mdash; and gathered now
The conqueror's various bands their force combine:
Here then to earth shall England's rival bow,
And smooth the path to clemency divine&mdash;
How sweet the rest from war!  when, locked before
In patriot bonds, the social heart runs o'er!

Not framed, in Nature's better part, for strife,
When shall those rivals cease to shake the earth?
Oh!  what an altered scene of golden life
Would dawn for each, if each but saw the worth
Of her she scorns! &mdash; ye days of halcyon peace
Arise, and let THEIR love the suffering world release.

Now, free to range o'er each recorded post
Fresh with Britannic wreaths of living bays,
(Where Champlain's guarded lake repelled their host,
But still repelled in vain &mdash; thy scene of praise,
Oswego wild!  and thine, where ampler shores,
Ontario, hold thy sea, and that dread torrent roars.)

The gallant chiefs of Britain's rapturous band
Pursue their woodland paths; recalled by turns
To watchful charge of that new-conquered land&mdash;
Amid the rest one bosom fondly burns
To view the wastes unknown, the dark domain
Peopled with howling tribes, and man's uncultured reign.

That ardent thirst was Ferdinand's; to bear
Fresh stores of high and pleasing wonder home;
But chief for listening Friendship to prepare
The kindred tale:  such scenes they loved to roam&mdash;
Ah!  that together now, in native Wales,
Or wide Canadian woods, they asked no absent tales.

Yet soothing, sweetly soothing, to the eye
Of parted friend the safe, the sacred page
That bears affection from a distant sky,
Painting the toilsome march, or battle's rage,
Or softer dreams of Love; who sheds perchance
O'er woods, and darkling wilds, his strange and bright-eyed glance.

Then speed thee well, young Soldier!  speed thee well&mdash;
Thy Friend remote recals the wandering song:
Thou shalt be heard, whate'er the tale thou tell;
But welcome now, ye hills unheeded long,
Ye much-loved hill of Wales!  to you once more
The willing heart returns, and hail your Theodore.

