Not on his native hills, nor wandering nigh
The wooded margin of prophetic Dee;
Nor 'mid old Snowdon's kingdom vast and high
The homeward Muse her favourite child shall see&mdash;
In vain she seeks him through each winding vale,
And breathes a name but answered by the gale.

He o'er Silurian lowlands from his home
Ranges unseen, and feeds his secret woe:
And well that hapless youth may love to roam
Through sheltering summer forests, sad and slow;
And mourn a Father's loss, in that green earth,
That beauteous land which gave his gentler parent birth.

There too kind Ulric's honoured image dwells,
Twined with that earlier loss, and melts his heart
To the lone woods the filial grief he tells;
Yet nobly strives to learn the firmer part
Of Heaven-descended patience, Heaven-repaid;
And prays through bursting tears for Christian sorrow's aid.

Not without hope that sorrow; for above,
Free from earth's care, and pure from earthly stain,
The blest reunion of parental love
Consoles their suffering child; and speaks again
Of his own welcome by their angel eyes,
When his rejoicing soul shall join them in the skies.

And lo, that sacred task, not yet begun,
Recals each selfish sigh for lonely rest.
Well had the dying sire prepared his son
For such celestial charge, such duty blest&mdash;
But Nature claimed awhile the pause from toil,
And thus subdued he ranged Siluria's cherished soil.

Nor failed sad Fancy's eye full oft to paint
That unforgotten scene, the dying bed;
Such as some pensive sage, or suffering saint
Himself might own &mdash; he too, that held the head
Of an expiring father, well had proved
The tranquil strong resolve he learned of him he loved.

For high and holy warnings breathed the sire,
Even at that hour of weakness; like the sound
Of some forerunning wind, that tells the fire
Of pent volcanos bursting under ground&mdash;
Ne'er had such awful force inspired his tongue,
As England's shadowed fates the dying prophet sung.

The past revealed the future to his eyes;
And changeless man to watchful wisdom spoke
One thrilling truth &mdash; "The good we lose we prize;
The good we have we scorn:  Oppression's yoke
Must gall the neck ere Freedom be adored;
And yet how void her shrines ere long restored!

"Two glorious beacons mark thy stream of years,
My troubled, native land!  when Nassau's star,
New-lit by seraph Liberty, appears
O'er the black bigot cloud, and iron car
That cloud conceals &mdash; and when, in wondrous time,
Thine infant Church is born, and nursed by hands of crime.

"What doom is thine, loved Freedom?  wilt thou keep
Thy calm bright course, unfed by meteor fire?
Or, while thy natural guardians idly sleep,
Shall lawless hands to lift thine ark aspire?
Forbid it, Heaven! &mdash; and oh!  that holier ark,
Defend its inmost shrine from Error's phantom dark.

"When from the shades, that veiled his morning birth,
The struggling Sun has freed his radiant brow;
When no exhaled pollutions of the earth
Retard his course, eclipse his glory now;
If o'er his face some self-born spots arise,
And sudden sadness dims the exulting skies,

"Droops not man's heart? &mdash; but hearts in Heaven would weep,
When from the bosom of corrupted Rome
Blest England's faith had burst, and darkling Sleep
And Winded Zeal had sought another home,
If from that rescued Church new darkness rose,
And deeper rage inflamed her native foes!

"Forbid it, Lord!  the faith that martyrs sealed,
The faith that Reason won from papal pride;
Where heaven-born Learning cleared what Truth revealed,
Courage its shield, and liberty its guide&mdash;
Forbid it, Lord!  that phrenzy's fearful day
Should make that glorious faith Rebellion's second prey.

"Oh mark the springs of rain, plainly traced
In her own dreamless and unconscious rest&mdash;
For dizzy Power, on Fame's bright summit placed,
If once it sink by idle ease opprest,
Though e'er so girt with guardian rocks around,
Falls from the tottering height, in viewless whirlpools drowned.

"Fear not thy foes without, thou Church of Truth!
The Sceptic's slander, or the Bigot's rage;
Fear inbred Sloth, the canker of thy youth,
The cureless worm &mdash; oh chase it from thine age&mdash;
To cloistered glooms the kindred pest confine,
And ever-springing Hope, and untired Toil be thine.

"Yet fly not thence, with erring zeal and wild,
To air-drawn visions of prefigured bliss;
Nor fancy thou, Religion's English child,
Thy Heaven half perfect in a scene like this&mdash;
Act well thy part on earth, and fixed on high
Still hold, in trembling hope, thy raised but humbled eye.

"Thoughtful and grave each holy sentence weigh,
But let thy creed embrace the balanced whole:
There wisely rest; nor aim, in life's brief day,
To find each heavenly knot that holds the soul:
Think of the dust thou art, the dust thou'lt be&mdash;
Made the Supreme his Judge in making thee?

"And darest thou thus, with free and human tongue,
Sink to the sounds of every passing hour
That unborn Name, by awe-struck angels sung,
The Symbol of unutterable Power?
Oh impious piety, and prayer profane,
And pride of converse held with Heaven in vain!

"But thou, my Son!  by not a thought impure,
By not a word but Virtue's ear may know,
By not a deed but those her eyes endure,
Thus thy firm sense of God's high presence show&mdash;
And save thy fervent love for secret vows,
Or when thy gathered Church calls down her heavenly spouse.

"And chief, oh!  chief the hallowed path preserve,
The appointed channel of unfailing Grace:
Tremble from rites thy Saviour taught to swerve,
Nor hide HIS beams of mercy from thy race!
His separate sons no separate spirit own&mdash;
Favouring the just alike, God makes their hearts his throne."

Thus Ulric taught; and Theodore retained
The vivid echo of each parting word
Deep in his breast:  there all his father reigned,
And Duty strengthened what Affection heard&mdash;
Nor less his mother's ancient race had taught
This needful lesson to his pious thought,

To guard his native Church &mdash; nor fiery zeal,
Nor frozen sloth &mdash; to suffer in her son&mdash;
That ancient race, when England's dearest weal
Was wrecked at home; and fierce fanatics won
The crown and mitre from her sacred head,
That suffering ancient race from mitred honours fled;

And sought retired Siluria's loveliest vale,
Where still in peace their good descendants dwelt&mdash;
Hither approaching now, with sorrow pale,
And doubly touched by all he long had felt,
Their pensive kinsman wound his lonely way,
As cloudless evening shut the sultry eye of day.

The well-known belt of oaks enclosed the scene,
And, spread beneath, in beauty green and wild,
The rising wood, and scattered shrubs between,
And straggling rustic walk, all undefiled
By tasteless Art; and murmuring soft below,
'Mid rocks and roots of trees, the winding streamlet's flow.

The chequered light that played around the wood
Looked hope and gladness:  but like him, the sage
Who mused reflective by the forest flood,
And saw (as pictured in that deathless page)
The wounded deer, or like that wounded deer,
The sorrowing youth stood fixed in silence here&mdash;

So bright, so sad the scene &mdash; "And thou too erst,
By these sequestered woods, this holy well,
Hast wandered in thy youth, when Nature first
Spoke to thine eye, my mother!  thou could'st tell
How deeply, yet how softly, on the heart
Sink such remembered vales, till life itself shall part.

"Oh if thy gentle Spirit yet may roam
In guardian airy wanderings o'er the grove
Where yon blue smoke betrays the guileless home
Of all that now remains for me to love&mdash;
Oh listen to thy son!  and shield him there
From hidden ills to come, from Death's undreamt-of snare.

"Yes, may ye live!  and live untorn by grief,
Strangers to shame, nor vexed by worldly fear,
Loved ring round yonder hearth!  and thou the chief,
Their high-souled sire; and thou, almost as dear,
His generous partner &mdash; is it meet to bring
These faded eyes of woe to dim that joyous ring?

"Yet Joy is banished thence; for well they loved
My lost, my priceless father &mdash; oh!  that then,
While yet his present voice his value proved,
The gentlest, wisest, noblest, best of men,
This heart had doubly felt his lofty worth,
Nor mourned a day unused, that dawns not now on earth!"

And now the westering orb of glory sank
Below remoter Cambria's beacon hills;
The lowest clouds his dying splendour drank,
And gradual shade the lessening landscape fills:
The wanderer nears the roof, that sheltered stands
Beneath embowering trees, and girt with fruitful lands.

The same witch-elm in early youth he knew,
The rough-cast wall where climbing roses blow,
The windows, yet expanded to the view
Across the summer vale; the gathering row
Of healthful children at the happy door,
Bid the prest heart the unwilling tribute pour.

That honest grasp has cheered him &mdash; oh delight
Unutterably dear, when face to face,
When hand to hand, long-parted friends unite!
When softer kindred yield the quick embrace
Of artless love, and human hearts are given
The joy of meeting families in Heaven.

But who is She, the fair and youthful guest,
Who stands aloof, yet seems to feel for all?
An orphan charge, the child of the distrest,
Remote in lineage &mdash; yet, at such a call,
She felt the ties of blood full firmly bind,
And mingled sorrow rose o'er Ellen's grateful mind.

She too, erewhile, in speachless woe had sunk
Beside a widowed mother's dying bed;
Torn like the unclasping ivy from the trunk
Of its loved fallen elm, her drooping head
Was raised by him who sheltered now her youth,
And led her orphan steps through flowery paths of truth.

The grief is struggling at each gentle heart&mdash;
But Theodore beheld &mdash; his manly soul
Lent aid to those who bore the lighter part,
And showed the ennobling power of self-control&mdash;
That power which dries not sorrow's hidden source,
But bids it flow within, and cheeks its outward course.

Dawn after dawn in soft decrease of woe
Steals on &mdash; and Nature's orient beams diffuse
A light o'er sorrow's tears, like that bright bow
Which streaks the watery clouds with roseate hues.
They range the greenwood bank, the breezy hill;
Or trace the level sward that skirts the gurgling rill.

They roam Siluria's plains, her pastures fair,
Fed and adorned by streams that wandering Wye
Guides through her reign &mdash; fresh breathes the mountain air
From yon surrounding heights, now soaring nigh,
Now back retreating in the blue expanse,
Till greatness undefined scarce shows them to the glance.

Some crowned with wood, a long and even range;
Some bare and brown, where wintry torrents lead
Their rock-worn path; and some (enchanting change!)
Green as the vale below, where scattered feed
The whitening flocks, while hamlets at their base
And holy towers arise, fair England's general grace.

Here, o'er the ripening corn, the bended bough
Hangs rich with fruit, whose red and mellow store
Disdains the sheltering leaf; for brighter now
Siluria's orchard wealth than e'er before;
As down her glades of oak warm sunshine plays,
And o'er her freshened fields yon herds of beauty graze.

Here too its verdant chain the hop-yard twines,
A graceful treasure, girt with branching wood;
While through the fairy scene old Vaga shines,
As morning mists roll upwards from her flood:
Oh land of pictured pleasure!  who can see
Thy softening face of love, nor sigh to dwell with thee?

But now, when Autumn's waning eve had thrown
Her farewell radiance o'er the yellow wood,
Those loftier joys to that pure band were known
That sages, bards, and saints, the great, the good,
Of every age and clime, for them prepare
Whose minds to range that space, to reach that summit dare.

Such minds were here assembled; and the voice
Of him, the honoured sire, would love to pour
The chosen strain, or guide the general choice;
And oft the soul of tuneful Theodore
Would burn o'er Milton's virtue-breathing page,
Or catch the chastened glow of Dryden's holier rage.

And when, 'mid Satire's strong but lawless strain,
Or Reason's erring lay, some nobler flow,
Some opening of that old prophetic vein
Betrayed the secret bard, who sank below
His own appointed height; they mourned to think,
How his proud coursers stood on Glory's brink&mdash;

Yet feared to launch into that boundless main
Himself pourtrayed &mdash; where guardian Angels fling
O'er each divided and embattled reign
The shadowy compass of their heavenly wing;
What epic laurels lost must England mourn,
When silent from such realms she sees her son return!

Yet for the fabled Muse of vivid years,
The softened sunset of thy blazing day,
All thanks, immortal Bard!  for who thy peers?
Though, following in thy train, the faultless Gray,
The inspired unhappy Collins, yet proclaim
How long the radiant track of England's line of fame.

From these, her heirs of honour, from the rest
Who gem her robe's expanse, the cautious Sire
Selects whate'er of brightest or of best,
Pregnant with Heaven's own unpolluted fire,
The mighty band have left to cheer their race&mdash;
But scorns the meteor lights that shoot o'er Learning's space.

And well that Sire could nerve the breast of youth
With Honour's precepts:  through each lettered path
The one great lesson that he taught was Truth&mdash;
Marking with Man's contempt and God's just wrath
Ignoble Falsehood &mdash; "oh!  may Heaven's own tongue
Stamp it, like Judah's Urim, on the young!"

With careful hand he culled each bank of flowers,
And left the entangling weeds to rot alone&mdash;
That priest inspired, who ruled all Natures powers,
And past into the world beyond her throne,
Wild, matchless Shakespeare, he too lent his aid
To chase the lingering sigh that fond remembrance paid.

And thou, delightful Addison!  whose lore
First called the slumbering diamond into light,
The uncultured female mind &mdash; though high of yore
Some scattered beacons shone, yet all was night
For Mans beloved companion o'er the land,
Till thou, with sorcerer's art, hadst waved thy fairy wand.

The magic touch ne'er woke a virgin heart
To nobler rapture than in Ellen's breast:
Her's was all Nature's wealth, and generous Art
But lent the glowing forms a graceful vest&mdash;
Ingenuous, ardent, tender, firm, refined,
Oh what but angel gifts were spared to such a mind?

And such a wind, thou fair and favoured Isle!
Dwells in thy daughters, spreading every hour;
Lights with sublimer fire the virgin smile,
And lends the matron eye a seraph power
Spread yet, aetherial flame!  and Man, be just,
To raise the kindred soul, thy loved and sacred trust.

All hail, ye nuptial hours for England's race,
Of answering thought, of intellectual bliss!
Though Youth's bright day-beam fades from Beauty's face,
What evening shadows close a light like this?
Serene, when worldly stars are sunk in gloom,
It gilds declining life, nor sets beyond the tomb.

The rural Sabbath shines &mdash; and, struggling now
To gain unruffled strength, the mourner shares
His love who comforts all. Peace smooths the brow,
And hovers round the heart &mdash; how human cares
Fade at the touch of Heaven!  how Mercy's breast
Welcomes her orphans home, and lulls their sighs to rest.

Reviving Hope surveys the scene of life
With altered eye:  her talisman divine
Can make the waste a garden, where the strife
Is only Beauty's contrast, born to shine
Beneath a partial sunbeam &mdash; such appeared
Siluria's woodland home, and every inmate cheered.

To crown the sunny vision of content,
The wafted glory o'er the ocean came,
And told how France her conquered neck had bent,
How Ferdinand was first in ranks of fame&mdash;
Oh throbbing pulse of Friendship!  well thy beat
Answers a Brother's praise, and glows with kindred heat.

"Oh thanks to Heaven, that held around thy head
The guardian buckler when thy leader fell,
My dauntless friend!  wert thou too with the dead,
Thy Theodore would seek his orphan cell
Insensible to joy &mdash; but thou art spared
For dawning smiles of peace, with him thy brother shared."

Nor lost, nor buried in more private praise,
Was thy compatriot name, devoted chief
As, o'er some pictured group, thick shadows raise
Round the projecting form a bold relief,
So, through the tide of time, brave Wolfe shall stand
Drawn forth to light by Glory's circling band.

Of him, of all the great embalmed by Fame,
Would Theodore delight to dream alone:
But most of Ferdinand's ascending name
Anxious he mused &mdash; "will Virtue be o'erthrown
By proud, by dangerous praise?  kind Heaven, defend!
As Friendship binds the good, let Goodness shield the friend."

The crested pride of crimson war,
The conqueror on his laurelled car,
What dazzling lures are these!
They banish Reason from the breast,
And Pity's dove deserts the nest
The vulture Passions seize.

Oh!  in the battle's loudest rage,
Still let that dove thy wrath assuage,
My best, my bravest Friend!
And ever, as the baffled foe
Lies in the dust before thee low,
Thy falling sword suspend.

How could I doubt that heart of thine?
'Tis Honour's seat &mdash; 'tis Mercy's shrine&mdash;
Ah!  rather let me pray,
That some descending angel guard
May from thy wounded bosom ward
The vengeful steel away.

Yet who, remorseless War!  can tame
Thy votary's thirst for maddening fame?
Drowned in the torrent strong,
The gentler feelings droop and die,
And Friendship with dejected eye
Beholds them borne along.

Come then, the suffering world's release,
Man's general friend, come, heavenly Peace!
Love of the wise and good,
Return, and smooth the brow of Earth
As first it smiled, at Nature's birth,
Ere stained with Brother's blood.

Oft, too, on Ellen's listening ear he poured
The friend's, the brother's praise &mdash; his craving heart
Called for some present balm, till Heaven restored
His banished Ferdinand; and here, in part,
That balm he found, where Virtue's kindred glow
Seemed to partake his joy, and half disarm his woe.

So pondered pensive Theodore &mdash; and age,
And taste, and spirit gentle yet sublime,
Linked in strange unison, the youth engage
(Unconscious led along the lapse of time)
In such soft snares of fondness, that he loves
Ere yet the power unseen of Beauty's face he proves.

But loveliness indeed was now her own;
And, as he sate by guileless Ellen's side,
He felt that kings descending from their throne
Might sue for favour from so bright a bride&mdash;
More tranquil dreams are Ellen's; yet they feel
Wrapped in one human heart her future woe or weal.

Still as they read, resembling feelings woke
At each high truth, each kindling deed of yore;
Whether the nations burst Oppression's yoke,
Or peaceful Wisdom dealt her soothing lore
To heal the wounds that Valour's sword had made,
And bear from Attic shores her own loved olive shade.

Yet holier honey than of Plato's lips
For them distilled from Learning's sacred hive;
Nor did the blaze of ancient mind eclipse
The Genius late entombed, or still alive,
That lit their native land &mdash; not yet obscured
With clouds of Taste corrupt, by careless eyes endured.

Too many a blot already stained the page
Inspired by Britain's Muse &mdash; but foul misrule,
But barbarous boldness, in that fresher age,
Dared not to raise licentious Folly's school&mdash;
Not yet the wholesome dread of thee was o'er,
Proud wit! &mdash; but Dulness thrives, for Pope is now no more. 

And thou, Corruption heavier far and worse,
Adulterate feeling of a German breed&mdash;
Oh!  can an English soil sustain thy curse,
Conceit thy sire, and Infamy thy seed?
Where wondering Vice young Virtue's blush retains,
And robbers die like heroes, not in chains!

In tribes untaught, where India's waste of wood
Shelters her houseless savage, Hatred then,
And Vengeance, swift to shed a brother's blood,
Were deemed to dwell &mdash; but now &mdash; 'mid polished men
The fiends, let loose from darkness, rise and claim
Nor rest, nor mercy, but applause and fame.

Veiled in bright robes of free and generous pride,
Wreathed with sweet flowers of fair confiding love;
By Beauty favoured, and to Truth allied,
O'er blighted realms the brave banditti rove&mdash;
So round some Upas trunk might roses twine,
Or Hell breathe odours of an air divine.

As, broken into capes and hollow bays,
Irregularly grand, the spreading globe
That ancient inundation's power betrays,
When all was covered with a watery robe;
When the first mould of Nature's faultless grace
Was lost and wilder charms usurped the vacant place;

So, from the fall of Man, his angel mind,
Robbed of calm splendour, and of governed force,
Darts clouded beams of passion unconfined,
And runs through wasted life with meteor course:
While, o'er its wrecked but still majestic mien,
Deep traces show where fires of death have been.

Say, is it guilt's disorder bids us love
A kindred wildness in the world around?
Find we within, whatever wastes we rove,
As shapeless rocks, as unproductive ground?
While simpler forms, and more serenely chaste,
Fatigue the restless glance of earth's polluted taste.

If dreams like these be built on hidden truth,
How shall those faithless watchfires be forgiven
That only shine to lead bewildered youth
Still farther from their home of peaceful Heaven?
Plunge them in Passion's whirlpools, and array
Night's blackest phantoms in the garb of day?

Oh rather be your aim, my native bards!
To raise, to purify your fellow men;
And brighter than of earth those fair rewards
That wreathe with amaranth your virtuous pen&mdash;
Think of this thrilling promise and refuse
To sell, to slavish vice the high-born, heavenly muse.

What fruits shall, bloom on that envenomed tree?
Lust, and Revenge, and Murder &mdash; and proud Scorn
For all that humbler hearts with reverence see&mdash;
Self is their God; for them was Nature born,
For them shall last its doom; then silent rest
Buried with them at once, in Sleep's eternal breast.

A subtler danger still awaits thy race,
My injured country!  this revolting shame
Ne'er can pollute thee long &mdash; but oh!  efface
The deeper, direr stain that blots thy name&mdash;
Nature shall wake, and cast the slough she wore,
And hate the recreant limbs that such vile covering bore:

But Nature long may love, and cherish still
Her own ideal vigour; and disdain
Submission meet to his Almighty will
Who marks alone the bounds of Virtue's reign:
Then how shall she, the Moral Muse, atone
For fixing wretched Man on motives all his own?

How shall the youthful crowds, who pleased admire
The glowing picture, and the varied tale,
Approach false virtue's self-supported fire,
And no hot breath of poisonous pride inhale
And where was warning Truth, when Pride bereft
The world of Heavenly light, and still its shadow left?

Virtue is Heaven's faint shadow, thrown on Earth
(Where contrast makes it brilliant) for a guide
To wandering man &mdash; but varying in its worth,
As Heaven still lights, or leaves it dark with pride:
And, for its full reward, that ne'er is given,
Though earth may yield a part, till Virtue end in Heaven.

And is not ardent genius brightly their's,
Those wild and wandering comets?  is not sense
Keen and profound, that no weak warmth impairs,
That Moral Muse's birthright? &mdash; vain defence!
Why lead those stars to darkness?  why destroys
That maimed imperfect lore our best and safest joys?

Such thoughts perchance had filled (if time had asked
Such thoughts) the mind of reasoning Theodore&mdash;
But happy they, whose hearts were never tasked
To ache for suffering England, deluged o'er
With foreign sins; with "God-forgetting" France,
Or climes whose duller guilt its deepening tints enhance.

They, in their quiet sojourn, sweetly wing
The well-directed hours:  nor idly slept
The harp of Ellen; nor forgot to sing
The youth's loved muse &mdash; one circling course they kept,
Mirth, converse, study, healthful walks, the same
Joys that are born and die, nor have nor want a name.

That tuneful parent of the pleasing dream,
Where Allegory spreads her lucid veil,
Who wove his moral song by Mulla's stream,
Would soothe their bosoms with the figured tale;
While from his unknown lyre the trembling youth
(With hand how weak to that!)  would call the mystic truth.

Placed in an Island on the main,
Where rolling waves for ever swell;
Chequering their hours with joy and pain,
Two lovely Nymphs together dwell.

The one looks back upon the past
With many a pensive sigh and tear&mdash;
Mourning the lights that would not last
To shine upon her brief career.

The other to the future still
Casts an assured, a sanguine eye&mdash;
Forgetful of recorded ill,
And careless of the griefs gone by.

Life is the speck that marks the void;
Space is the sea of boundless scope:
And those, whose days are thus employed,
Pale Memory and glowing Hope.

Oh!  grant them, Heaven, thy warning page&mdash;
To guide aright their wayward youth:
For Memory thus her woes assuage,
And turn the dreams of Hope to truth.

Nor did soul-raising Science fly their home&mdash;
But oft, by wonder-working optic aid,
Their eyes with angel keenness loved to roam
O'er seas of space that slept in changeless shade,
Till pierced by power like this &mdash; a power bestowed
To lift the longing soul more near to Joy's abode.

Hail, gifted instrument of daring art,
That brings unbounded worlds within the scope
Of one earth's eye; and fills our human heart
With thrilling dreams of unextinguished hope
For God's whole vast creation &mdash; that the curse
Of kindred guilt may not pervade the universe&mdash;

Oh may those myriad tribes, whate'er their place,
Angels or men, or clothed in robes unknown
Of senses strange to us, a nameless race,
Obedient bow before their Maker's throne,
And ever safe in virtue, ever blest,
Attain our banished good of unpolluted rest!

Or, if the thought be vain, nor power, nor skill
Of faultless Justice could ordain a state
Of moral Freedom unexposed to ill
By inbred crimes, or outward tempter's hate&mdash;
Then, with our favoured realms redeemed be their's,
And they like us become one Saviour's heavenly heirs!

Survey yon vault of blue with gems inlaid;
These of the steady beam, and wavering those
With fitful radiance, as the passing shade
Of air's thick hosts may briefly interpose&mdash;
Wavering to us their light, but fixed they shine
Suns of the countless spheres that gird their throne divine.

Down, impious pride of Heaven-insulting man,
Down to thy measured earth!  and humbly thence
Look up to Mercy's all-embracing plan,
To growing soul, to graduated sense,
Beyond brief time, through still unfathomed space,
Diffused from world to world o'er every varying race.

Deem'st thou for thee alone this wondrous frame,
Beauty, and light, and harmony, and love
Still rolling on, obedient to the claim
Of all-unseen Attraction, from above
Dropping its golden bond of soft control&mdash;
Deem'st thou for thee alone sprang forth this sudden whole?

Even from creation's moment &mdash; when the word
"Let there be light!"  ran round the abyss of shade,
And, through the unformed and void confusion heard,
Beauteous at once bright Order's birth displayed&mdash;
Even from that birth, amid yon starry train
Some rapid beams have blazed, nor reached thy narrow reign.

Blaze they for none but thee?  oh human thought!
Turn, trembling, turn to that all-seeing eye
Whose restless rays, on swifter pinions brought
Than vollied lightnings lend, for ever fly
Throughout created space, at once pervade
Globes, suns, and subject hearts, and judge what God has made.

If from those distant worlds to thine were driven
The quickened circles of advancing sound,
(Since first arose that morning shout of Heaven)
Through the vast void, the measureless profound,
Nor yet, nor myriads of thine years to come
That winged sound would pierce thy silent home.

Then deem awhile &mdash; but pause not, daring, here&mdash;
What will that echo be, which calls the dead,
Unutterably loud from sphere to sphere
Dark with their fading suns, in concourse dread
Before the throne of Christ, now raised on high,
Now visible to all, in yon unbounded sky?

Ye clustered glories of Night's awful reign,
Stars upon stars receding, backward yet,
(Like brilliant islands in a shoreless main)
Each in your round of rolling planets set,
To wake the verdant life that through them springs,
And warm their moving crowds of animated things;

Say, will ye rush together from the skies,
And sink at once in fearful night obscure?
Or, as untired the immortal ages rise,
To prove the race ye hold awhile endure;
Then die at differing periods, till at last
One universal Now absorbs the future and the past?

Oh!  many are the mansions to receive
The emancipated crowds of every globe&mdash;
All who one Lord obey, one Lord believe,
Shall wear at length their amaranthine robe,
On those apportioned thrones of glory placed,
All their sighs hushed, and all their tears effaced.

Thus soared the aerial dreams, the inspiring cares
Of raptured Theodore, and her he loves:
But rolling Time, that pities not, nor spares
One human joy, now warns him from the groves
Of blameless rest &mdash; alone he hastes to roam
O'er Cambrian hill of snow, and seek his desert home.

Yet, ere they part, the fondly plighted hair,
The promised interchange of thought, to smooth
The furrowed brow of absence, wan with care;
And gentle words, and whispered blassings, sooth
The wanderer's war &mdash; but chief the tender vows,
That Spring shall crown the hopes of Ellen's grateful spouse.

He wrings his kinsman's honourable hand;
To each and all, a quick, a soft farewell&mdash;
Yet, as he passes through the sorrowing band,
"One word, sweet girl!  with thee" &mdash; what tongue, can tell
That word &mdash; his fading form no more in view
Leaves all the landscape bathed in strange and misty hue.

That fairy wood is past, unheeded past&mdash;
Vain steals the sunshine through the quivering leaves,
Vain sounds the brook below; 'tis all o'ercast,
'Tis silent all for him, whose bosom grieves
Void, and uncheered by all but Ellen's eye,
And breathes for Ellen's voice the full and frequent sigh.

Yet her soft image, her unchanging love,
Her worth remembered, all her promised charms
Speed him to that lone nest, where Beauty's dove
Ere long shall plume her wing in Honour's arms&mdash;
And firmer now he mounts the ascending ground,
Where Winter's forward darts are hurtling all around.

As, when the chilly gale bereaves
The forest of its falling leaves,
In dry pale heaps together cast,
Memorials of their honours past,
Whispering. they fly, and seem to tell
"Beauty has bid the year farewell"&mdash;
Thus too for Man, my loveliest friend!
His brilliant hours too swiftly end;
And shadows pass oer Memory's eye,
Dim shadows of the joy gone by.
But, as the wintry air revives
The pulse of Health in all that lives,
And kills corruption's embryo forms
With keen yet purifying storms&mdash;
Thus active energy and toil
Lend riches to the mental soil;
And drive self-wasting grief away
From fair Improvement's youthful day.
Dear Ellen!  mark the moral rhyme&mdash;
So shall we speed the flight of Time;
While, like the bird, whose broken song
Flits round our roof the winter long,
And antedates the dawn of spring
With trembling voice that strives to sing;
Hope, sunk at times in silent gloom,
And buried in enjoyments tomb,
Still struggling with each thought of pain,
Hope breathes the fond unaltered strain,
"We meet again &mdash; We meet again."

Fast fall the whitening flakes &mdash; beneath the trees,
Or sheltering walls, the flocks in stillness press;
One dreary waste the wandering lover sees,
And feels within the same blank dreariness:
Changeful and wayward still, as fancy guides,
He roams the snow-clad rocks by Deva's hoary tides.

How all his father rushes on the son,
And Ellen's self is lost, when home appears&mdash;
Home, sacred home!  when man's best joys are won,
When the heart sickens o'er her bitterest tears,
What doubly charms, what still consoles the breast?
Home, sacred home!  Elysium's earthly rest.

And there that aged friend, his father's friend,
Filled the known chair &mdash; the natural tear is shed
To see it thus &mdash; a thousand feelings blend
In the pale youth &mdash; remembrance of the dead,
Grateful respect, for present worth, regret,
Affection, manly pride &mdash; all is not conquered yet.

There rests the unfinished page, together read
With Ulric, gentle sire:  there idly stands
The staff that propped his steps:  the hours that fled
Marked by that pensive glass, his honoured hands
Oft gave again to roll &mdash; the last sad hour
Is yet unchanged, and speaks with melancholy power.

But now the long-expectant flock require
Their destined shepherd's care &mdash; yet not alone
Wandered that flock &mdash; good Anselm's temperate fire
Was ever grateful to those hearts, that own
The pleasing ardent calm, the glow of love
Religion yields to hope, when hope is fixed above.

In each poor hut his quickened step was known,
Where Misery sate, and fixed the faded eye
At his approach Pain drew a softened groan,
And lone Impatience learned in peace to die&mdash;
The balm of earthly comfort he bestowed;
The balm earth cannot yield his guiding finger showed.

Oft, by the weary bed of sickening age,
Gently he breathed the hope-inspiring prayer
And smoothed some lingering passion's guilty rage,
Till framed to live in Joy's unruffled air:
The wine and bread of life his hands afford&mdash;
And Faith the blood and body of the Lord.

Such was his father's friend; and well pourtrayed
In him the youthful Theodore beheld,
Free from alloy of Learning's vain parade,
Faith built on Reason, Zeal by Prudence quelled&mdash;
"Oh when that robe of sacredness is mine,
May I too grace it thus, before Jehovah's shrine!"

Good Angels bear thy prayer, ingenuous youth!
Yet holy awe was beating at his breast,
As nearer to his task of solemn truth
Time drew him on; and, ere the unworldly vest
Is yet assumed, he pauses to impart
To Ellen's pious love the burthen of his heart.

What genial odours steal from yonder grove?
The violet, lurking on the sunny bank,
Betrays the coming hour of light and love:
The awakening birds their bounteous Parent thank
For this, her youthful season, joyous Spring:
Woods, streams, and bill exult, and every living thing.

There is a spirit in the varying year,
That holds its changeful union with the muse
Stirring with Autumn's smile of death the tear;
Waking with new-born Spring's ambrosial dews
A soft dissolving pleasure; that can throw
The tranquil veil of light o'er gloomiest shades of woe.

But Hope, but Love, are in enchantment then&mdash;
Filling the fairy land with sounds of bliss,
Unheard, as those bright spheres by tuneless men
That pour in air their midnight melodies&mdash;
Blest, blest the conscious pair, who then may stray
Where sunbeams glance around, where gushing waters play.

Or, if apart, who then in secret vales
Revolve the lines unutterably dear,
By unchecked fondness traced; the guileless tales
Of suffering absence, the pursued career
Of study planned by both; the unborrowed thought
That sprang from either mine, by both to brilliance wrought.

Pleased o'er new paths they journeyed, where the Night,
Long throned in shade, from slumbering kingdoms fled;
And, startled at her own awakening light,
The mind of Europe rose as from the dead&mdash;
In wanderings bold essayed her youthful force,
And, giant-like, rejoiced to run her morning course.

No more shall Painting weep her perished boast,
The dim creations of her earlier hand:
Urbino's touch revives a Grecian host;
And nobler forms at Angelo's command
Rise o'er the past, as high as heaven above
The dispossest Olympian throne of Jove.

No more in silence shalt thou hover round
Thy Tuscan birth-place, or Campanian tomb,
But thou shalt listen, Virgil!  to the sound
Of new-born sweetness through the haunted gloom;
To those high native strains, that proudly poured
The joy of Sion to her God restored.

And he too, seated on his hill of pride.
Majestic, inaccessible, alone,
He too beholds, approaching to his side,
One after Bard &mdash; yes, England!  'tis thine own
Darkness for both has veiled the visual ray,
But Heaven has lit within condensed and brightened day.

If for the last more awful daemons rose,
A direr blaze illum'd their native Hell:
If Eden's bowers a holier shade disclose,
More soft upon the sense that music fell
Hymning the dawn of Nature, when the skies
Wore the first blush of light, the Spring of Paradise.

Awhile they wandered o'er each strange domain
That venturous pilgrims gave them to partake&mdash;
Romantic Raleigh oped his golden reign,
And circled worlds spread all their stores for Drake&mdash;
Fame's deathless band, their natures highest grace,
Still charmed them most &mdash; and first her English race.

The mind's oasis in the waste of night,
Rose Alfred there; and there that sable pride
Of old Plantagenet; and Henry's light
Redeemed from clouds of youth:  but most they vied,
Those generous students, in their fond applause
Of all, or friends, or foes, who fell in Freedom's cause.

Thou, whose breath inspires the souls
Of the few that firmly stand,
Where yon Persian battle rolls
Ceaseless on their bleeding band&mdash;

Thou, that, glorified of yore
In thy native Grecian shrine,
Or on Tyber's warlike shore,
Wert by mortals held divine&mdash;

Liberty! &mdash; oh where are now,
Plucked by Valour's patriot hands,
The green myrtles for thy brow?
Not in these thy favourite lands.

Languishing on earth they lie,
Through their loved Athenian home;
Pale along those hills they die,
'Mid the towers of fallen Rome.

Never shall they bloom again
On their own primeval ground?&mdash;
Chalky cliffs beyond the main,
Where the British thunders sound,

Never shall those thunders guard
Freedom's ancient, honoured race?&mdash;
No!  the glorious hope is barred
By the depth of their disgrace.

Prostrate in their chain they rest&mdash;
Dwell then, Freedom, with the brave;
Warm the heart in Honour's breast,
And thine Alfred's country save.

Where Carron's waves divide the plaided band,
The band of brothers, from their mightier foe,
By godlike Wallace' side they took their stand;
And marked o'er Bruce's brow the kindling glow
Of Shame, and stifled Freedom, reassume
Young Honour's veins, and ask a kingdom or a tomb.

"Adieu, sweet France!  thou land of love, adieu!"
Thus, as the vine-clad hills in distance die,
And regal pleasure fades from beauty's view,
They list to Mary's voice &mdash; that rugged sky
Ill suits the foreign rose &mdash; fall, Pity's tear,
On Virtue's blushing cheek, and mourn her doom severe.

Not thus for thee, thou best-loved, brightest Jane!&mdash;
Not thus they weep: &mdash; from Broadgate's summer bowers
They see thee torn &mdash; thy brief unwilling chain
Hid, vainly hid, by Splendour's withering flowers&mdash;
Rapturous their tears, when sacred Courage gave
A martyr's wreath of sunbeams to thy grave.

They mourn, for Roman Sidney, born to shine
In spheres less dim with shade &mdash; more softly mourn
For thee, brave Russel! &mdash; in thy light divine
Thy consort shares, and gilds thee in return
With virtue's fairest beam &mdash; they look their last&mdash;
"And now &mdash; the bitterness of death is past!"

O'er each recorded roll of glory gone
Thus roamed their eyes, o'er genius past away&mdash;
Lights, that through Times expanded ocean shone,
Like mattered streaks of Truth's eternal day,
When all shall shine like them &mdash; but they shall rise
First denizens of Heaven, to gem their parent skies.

Through the same hallowed fields, in life's first spring,
The youth had strayed, with Friendship's step combined&mdash;
But shadowy lights of golden colouring
Flit o'er the scene from Ellen's mutual mind;
Sudden, and bright, and noiseless as the gleams
O'er waving grass and corn that move in hurried Streams.

Sweet was the task of Theodore; and well
That gentle maid had kept the pledge she gave:
He too, in varied verse, had loved to tell
How the young treasures of her mind enslave
With softer ties than Beauty's self can blend,
Though Beauty's self is her's, her lover, guide, and friend;

Soon, soon to be her lord &mdash; but she, meanwhile,
Siluria's flower, for her can absence fly
On pinion swift of pleased and useful toil?
Few woman's tears have dimmed her pensive eye&mdash;
Her heart opprest knew where to seek relief,
And modest sense forbade to feed the dangerous grief.

Yet, 'mid the grateful tasks that duteous zeal
Still urged her to fulfil, 'mid guardian care
Of Want's unseen abodes, she dared to steal
At times to yon loved wood; and ponder there
On summer's vanished dream &mdash; on him who woke
Those unknown feelings first, that thus her bosom spoke

"See Nature's child, like Nature's smile, depart!
With Theodore has fled her summer reign&mdash;
Yet, from this wintry gloom that chill the heart,
The year shall wake with Theodore again.
Return, ye fragrant hours!  return, and bring
The light of Love and Nature on your wing."

And lo!  the unfaded leaves of constant blue,
The violets, breathing yet the sweets of Dee,
Safe in those lines of love, have met her view&mdash;
They come, the promised harbingers of thee,
Thou happy youth &mdash; and new and strange alarms
Best in thine Ellen's breast, and kindle all her charms.

How vain the wish in words to tell
The love that binds my heart to thee&mdash;
Thy heart alone can read the spell,
In that pure warmth it feels for me.

Thou knowest, that through the cheerful day
Thine image still pursues my track&mdash;
And, in the mists of morning grey,
The dream of fondness brings it back.

Thyself a soft and airy dream,
Thou camest to one of all bereft&mdash;
To bid Grief's eye with rapture stream,
And fill the void by Friendship left.

And now, whate'er the world can give
Is worthless all, with thee compared&mdash;
Lost is the very wish to live,
Unless that life with thee be shared.

The day of blest reunion dawns at length&mdash;
Through the green lane, up every neighbouring hill,
That eager group still runs, with playful strength
And childish hope alert &mdash; and Fancy still
To older eyes pourtrays the friend in sight&mdash;
No, 'twas a fond deceit, and Nature sinks in night.

Three anxious days have closed, and yet he stays&mdash;
The wisest feared; the firmest heaved a sigh:
Oh!  why so soon have closed these anxious days?
Delay, harsh Time!  the heavier certainty&mdash;
Does Theodore yet live?  at such an hour
Does Theodore yet live, nor seek his Ellen's bower?

Now lend thine angel aid, Religion, now
To breaking hearts &mdash; who kneels in yonder shade,
Where one repose their social graves allow
To much-loved Clara's ashes, long decayed,
And Ulric's pale remains?  why stream his eyes
With newly wakened grief, where each lost parent lies?

A scroll, with tears bedewed, beside him thrown,
Reveals his woe &mdash; the fatal tale is told&mdash;
In far Canadian wilds his friend, alone,
His generous friend, too confidently bold,
Has ranged 'mid India's race, and girt with chains,
Or leads a life of shame, or dies in torturing pains.

Where are love's roses now? &mdash; begone, begone,
Thou withering chaplet of expected joy!
Thee may some happier brow with pride put on,
The tears of grief thy brightness would destroy
"And who shall rescue thee from Murder's band,
And who shall rescue thee, my gallant Ferdinand?

"I, I shall rescue thee!"  He said &mdash; and rose
Confirmed by Heaven the holy task to bear&mdash;
On Ulric's friend with trusting voice he throws
His destined flock's defence &mdash; a softer care
Succeeds-and, struggling all his soul to move,
In Friendship's victim wakes unhappy Love.

In vain &mdash; he hastens to the dread adieu&mdash;
But Nature, sinking with the sudden weight,
Retards awhile his path; and, as he drew
Still nearer to the roof, that erst elate
With other hopes he left, his shuddering frame
So changed, that limb nor look was now the same.

Pale, as in death, before him Ellen stands&mdash;
Speechless they rush to share the wild embrace&mdash;
The only name she heard was Ferdinand's,
The only sight she saw that woe-worn face&mdash;
"And is it thus, at last, we meet?"  she said&mdash;
And mute on Sorrow's neck hung Beauty's lifeless head.

O'ercome at first, nor able to sustain
Those awful tidings of his purposed way
Across the billows of the boundless main;
Perchance to Danger's rude and fierce array,
Sweet maid, thy strength has failed &mdash; and, caught from thee,
Contagious weakness shakes the friend's fidelity.

Her noble eye has marked it &mdash; and disdain,
To think her distant blood should want the force
Of his directer lineage, in each vein
Stirs keen Resolve; and lifts that current's course
To female Fortitude's high pitch, that man
Ascend it though he may, surmount it never can.

All is subdued at once of softer love&mdash;
Her lover's honour, mingled with her own,
Would almost urge her voice to bid him rove
At Friendship's thrilling call o'er wilds unknown&mdash;
Had not himself been steeled, and fixed to find
In Duty's brave discharge the stay of Virtue's mind.

They strengthen thus each other for their doom&mdash;
And o'er their pallid features past a light,
Like spectral radiance on some forest tomb
Poured by the struggling moon through shades of night&mdash;
Freed from this world, yet lingering on its bound
They seemed &mdash; and sighing still for Love's enchanted ground.

"Ellen, farewell!  the God of Mercy shield
My guileless Ellen! &mdash; oh, if Heaven decree
These bones to rest in Danger's distant field&mdash;
Weep not, sweet love! &mdash; that Heaven shall comfort thee&mdash;
For well thou knowest, where'er the body lies,
The soul shall meet again its kindred in the skies.

"There shall we meet, my Ellen! &mdash; why despair
Of earlier union here? &mdash; ah say not, 'no!'&mdash;
The faithful heart is God's peculiar care&mdash;
And where can God himself his favour show
To heart more true than thine?  nay, doubt him not&mdash;
He scourges whom he loves &mdash; we share his favourite's lot.

"Think, when returning, with my rescued friend,
I touch the crags of Albion's chalky shore;
Think, as o'er sunny vales to thee I bend,
And claim thy hand for happy Theodore;
What heightened joy that rescued friend shall give,
And how our peaceful home shall guard him &mdash; if he live!"

"And is he gone, for ever gone?" &mdash; oh where
Is courage now, and where is female pride?
Down sinks the whole lost heart in blank despair,
And even her honoured kin man at her side
Offers a fruitless comfort &mdash; haste, ye hours!
Crushed Virtue, shed thy balm from Sorrow's fragrant flowers.

