"Life is a dream," and "rounded by a sleep,"
A heavy sleep, and oh!  a sorrowing dream,
And wild, and fever'd:  be its closing deep&mdash;
Oblivions as Lethe's fabled stream,
Untroubled by one soul-reviving beam,
Lest I should wake again to some new race,
Vext as the past:  of which I well might deem
'Twas as Night's broken minutes, through whose space
Things hideous, fearful, agonizing, all held place.

Yet innocent and beautiful the forms
In opening vision o'er my senses play:
Serene the Heav'ns, as if there ne'er were storms,
And bright, as if eternal were the day.
With my companions, how I bound away,
Rude-laughing at each freak, careless and free.
Ah!  merry little fools, in frolic gay
How we disport, brimful of nature's glee:
I wake, 'tis past &mdash; 'tis gone &mdash; the dream of Infancy.

Arcadian bowers!  were ever bowers so fair
As these I thread?  was ever painted mead
Like this I move upon?  whose flowerets rare,
All that the earth e'er perfected exceed!
Such gorgeous colours, and such shapes indeed,
As win the eye to gaze, as if delight
Would ceaseless on the dazzling wonder feed
Increasing; while to spoil this scene so bright,
Is near nor sting, nor thorn, nor snake, nor envious blight.

And on my arm She leans, who fairer still
Makes all this paradise; my promis'd bride!
Soul-join'd, of love, and joy, we prate our fill,
As wandering all adown that river's side,
Years coming, like its pure waves, placid glide,
Ah, faithless bank!  why tempted I thy brink?
Precipitate, and plunging in the tide,
Love's dream is o'er!  I struggle, gasp, and sink,
And she her troth and fate doth with another link!

A shadowy Spectre, of tremendous power,
Approaches dimly, stretching forth an arm
Impalpable, its finger points an hour&mdash;
It drags me on resistless; magic's charm
Hath not, nor ever had, such gift of harm.
That hour is death, and all between is pain,
Racking the joints, freezing the life-blood warm.
Thou art Disease, thou spectre of the brain,
Night's grimly visitant &mdash; in life man's direst bane.

Horror!  'tis on my limbs, my breast, my soul,
The fell Hag rides, nor motion, breath, nor life
Are mine &mdash; so dead, and heavy her control,
I cannot even groan for help:  her knife
Is in my heart &mdash; pangs through each nerve are rife.&mdash;
Exulting see the demon bloat and swell
O'er the poor victim's faint and dying strife:
Her name the Night-mare, as weak dreamers tell,
But Poverty it is:  which makes the world a hell.

Were not that power to shriek for help denied,
How friends would rush to chase the fiend afar!
With such I converse hold, though yet untried,
Whose sympathies congenial, know no jar,
But, born beneath one influencing star,
Admiring, hating, loving, each the same;
Fixed in esteem, no accident can mar,
Ready to aid, as either aid may claim,
All human parallels, and differing but in frame.

From books, from social bliss, to Nature's store
We range together &mdash; Now the bright orb'd sky
We scan with wonder, and its Lord adore;
Now earth we meditate &mdash; now ocean eye,
In all its grandeur from this rock on high,
Whence to the shore dare scarcely Fancy creep&mdash;
Yet down the impaling precipices I
Am hurl'd &mdash; Friends help!  they dash'd me o'er the steep&mdash;
And mock these dreams &mdash; thank Heaven, all rounded by a sleep.
