CANTO I.
Ah!  why should they whom Fancy's splendid wings
Transport, like eagles soaring at the sun&mdash;
Love, Rapture, Genius, breathing o'er their strings,
Forget the scenes where first young Passion won
Those silver tones, from soul to lyre that run&mdash;
And give far lands the gilding of their rhyme?
Though shunned by such, when I, my Country!  shun
To sing thy beauties, softened and sublime,
Let silence seal my lips &mdash; ingratitude my crime!

I ask not inspiration from the Maids
That whilom sang on famed Parnassus hill;
I ask not laurel from Aonian shades,
Though dews Olympic on the leaves distil;
Nor hope to quaff Castalia's vaunted rill;
Nor trust the Delian Archer to inspire:
My invocation more ambitious still&mdash;
I sue bright Beauty!  should she fail to fire,
Can these impart a soul &mdash; a language to my lyre?

Say, when the storm-tost wanderer homeward steers,
What lends that magic to the far-seen shore?
Say, why the exile turns, with starting tears,
To haunts his hollow eye can mark no more?
Each scene doth wear the hue which Beauty wore,
As sunrise gilds the darkly-rolling sea:
Mead, woodland, valley, heath, and mountain hoar,
Proud Beauty!  steal this latent charm from thee&mdash;
Be thou &mdash; for these he sings &mdash; the Bard's divinity!

You that would climb with me the Hill of Caves,
No flowers need hope, but such as wildly grow;
For there the wanton red-rose never waves&mdash;
The lily scorns to bare her breast of snow:
Yet, blent with weeds, some blossoms haply blow
On violet bank, or primrose-tissued spot,
Whose golden cups with liquid gems o'erflow:
Take these, my Friends!  in rustic garland wrought;
And, twined with these, the flower, maids call "forget me not."

Now to my theme, and thee, sweet Annadale!
Oft from thy lattice o'er the Lagan sheen,
As pensive Memory set her shadowy sail,
For days gone by, and pleasures that had been&mdash;
My glance, regardless of an humbler scene,
Hath fondly rested, where the Hill of Caves
Heaves his dark forehead in the blue serene;
And, towering tow'rds th' ethereal cope, engraves
A profile proud and high o'er broad Loch Carrick's waves.

Dull were that vision, to the Arctic thrown
From Lagan's southern bank, which did not trace,
By Nature sculptured in the living stone,
The sleeping semblance of a giant face;
Touched with a godlike, seeming conscious grace,
Crowning the summit's Alpine majesty:
In dreams of fancy, gazing on that place,
Methought the Mountain Genius thus might lie,
Struck to an arid rock beneath th' offended sky.

Or chance, that image on the nodding steep,
O'erhanging Dalriada's bastioned shore,
Bound in the silence of a marble sleep,
Had been some giant fugitive of yore,
When Odin whelmed amid the ocean roar
His impious clan &mdash; their Causeway, and their throne:
Nor far he fled; &mdash; a lightning arrow bore
Swift to its mark, and seared his form to stone&mdash;
A beacon o'er the deep, stupendous and alone!

O, well I deem it is a peerless sight,
When evening mellows the meridian ray,
To mark that form amid a ring of light,
As sinks behind the ruby car of day!
Ten thousand glories o'er its forehead play,
Confronting heaven; and there Apollo reins
The fierce flame-breathing coursers on their way,
Ere from his sight that scene of beauty wanes,
Yon steep-encircled vale of groves and glades contains!

Sure, did the wild Tungusian mark that brow
Borne to the clouds above the mountain's breast,
No more his knee to Baikel's God should bow,
Poised on the Shamane promontory's crest
That flinty God who breaks the water's rest,
And bids the Spirit of the Tempest rave:
Ah me!  the mariner by peril prest
May vainly hope to shun the whelming wave,
Should fierce Dianda frown, nor list his prayers to save.

Theme of my song!  I've marked, on summer morn,
Ere glowed the noontide of a sultry day,
Deep floating mists, from ocean's bosom borne,
Unfold a fleecy line 'long Carrick's bay,
Till on the waves which lave thy base they lay:
Then through the vapoury waste thy summit rose,
Like a lone fortress in a troubled sea;
Or rock heaved upward by the earthquake's throes,
Round which the breaker foams, and clouds and tempests close.

Then would a sunbeam on thy brow alight,
And change thee straightway to a floating isle,
Such as in waking-visions met his sight
Who sang so well of "Faerie Lond" erewhile,
Where in the "Bowre of Bliss" did sweetly smile
Young Pleasure, blushing on a bed of roses;
Transparent robes her glowing limbs beguile&mdash;
As lucid wave the lily's hue discloses,
Whilst, warm to Passion's gaze, the wanton nymph reposes.

But with the fading mist Illusion fades,
And all is cold reality; no more
That bright Morgana Fancy paints, pervades
The altered scene: &mdash; yet, what on life's bleak shore
Were beautiful, did she not smile it o'er?
She tinges earth with hues of heaven &mdash; she flings
That glory round the lovely we adore&mdash;
Her magic mirror shows forbidden things,
As through the sounding spheres she waves her rain-bow wings!

Aspiring Mountain!  could thy Genius speak,
What tales of other times would charm the ear!
For there are monuments on every peak
Which prove the hand of man once mighty here&mdash;
Altars on high, and caverns deep and drear,
Whereon old sears of mining steel remain:&mdash;
The mystic Druid, lonely and severe,
Thought human temples, as their builders, vain;
And worthier of a God this cliff-piled mountain fane.

And there the victors of their day repose&mdash;
Breasts that had burned with glory's sacred glow;
Yon Cairn, o'er which the wild weed idly grows,
Entombs them.  Ye, who work a deadlier wo
Than poison-blasts &mdash; for they in deserts blow&mdash;
Ye chiefs, ye kings, behold, and blush for shame!
Those laid forgotten here&mdash; nor long ago,
Hoped their high deeds had purchased deathless fame&mdash;
And is this all survives? &mdash; a stone without a name!

Yet, o'er the records of the monument
Oblivion oft in mercy sweeps her wing;
Though Flattery's tropes, miscalling crime, have lent
A mocking lustre &mdash; false as that foul ring
In darkness round the reptile glittering&mdash;
To deeds which Truth would otherwise translate!
When victors climb to thrones, and poets sing
Their guilty fame, what eye but marks with hate
Fields drenched in gore, towns sacked, and cities desolate?

And through such scenes Ambition's progress leads&mdash;
Her drum is echoed by the Widow's cry;
The bloody rule &mdash; the rightful ruler bleeds;
Chains, broken sceptres, sculls, domes flaming high,
Shine on her flag in crimson marquetry!
But they, perchance, in this unsculptured Cairn,
Free having found, had kept their birthright free,
Spite of invader fierce, or tyrant stern:
Such should not nameless sleep beneath the mountain fern!

Borne downward darkling on the tide of Time,
Even Empires merge in thy unfathomed sea,
Forgetfulness!  where Virtue sinks with Crime&mdash;
Their stain or lustre ever lost in thee;
Yea, things that Earth deemed writ by Destiny!
Yet relics, like moth-mouldered scrolls, are here,
Which glowing Fiction loves to lean on, free
From History's cold rebuke, and eye severe&mdash;
As thus, in vision-hues, she bids the past appear.

THE DRUID'S SHRINE.
Othal, who swayed the Western Isles,
Which stud like gems the ocean foam,
Had turned his plumed and plaided files
From Norway's hills victorious home;
And trophies shone in tower and dome,
And Chiefs and Bards were gathered far,
And Beauty came, in rosy bloom,
To blush beneath the northern star:
One youth from rocky Albin steers,
Her sceptre's hope of future years.

"O'er billows kissed by morning's dies,
With broad wings spread upon the breeze,
How fleetly fair our galley flies&mdash;
A snow-white swan on summer seas!
And soon the clustering Hebrides
Shall glad our sight, where Othal's towers
Ring loud to Love and Valour's praise;
And harps are sweet in Ladies' bowers."
Thus Irial said, as o'er the sea
His dark eye flashed exultingly.

But winds and waves are faithless ever,
As Lover's vow, or Leman's tear;
Though smooth their seeming, trust them never&mdash;
Those lead to death, and these despair!
Ere eve, the breeze which blew so fair
Was hushed; the sails flapped loose, as tossed
The galley idly in the air;
The shadow of a tempest crossed
The troubled deep; and, passing by,
Each gust was like a spirit's sigh!

Then burst the cloud which o'er them hung;&mdash;
On ocean's breast a moment's brightness
Flashed far; the pealing thunder rung
'Thwart Heaven; each forehead reeled with lightness&mdash;
An instant rolled each eye-ball sightless;
And darkly now and fiercely speeds
The impetuous blast; in foamy whiteness
Leap the mad waves, like battle steeds,
Whose silver manes toss high and far
Amid the sable storm of war!

Borne wildly on the tempest's wing,
The groaning pinnace rides the wave;
Now sweeps the cloud with rapid swing&mdash;
Now plunges to a gulfing grave:
And, though the mariners were brave,
When Death thus made his visage bare,
And fainting Hope saw nought to save&mdash;
The boldest eye &mdash; the sternest there&mdash;
Seen in the lightning's passing blaze,
Looked frozen in its fixed amaze!&mdash;

All, save young Irial's; &mdash; sternly bright,
As lion's glance at hunter's spear,
His seemed to catch a bolder light
From that which fired the hemisphere!
He felt &mdash; but feeling was not fear&mdash;
Each coming billow might o'erwhelm:&mdash;
When sunk the pilot in despair,
He firmly grasped the abandoned helm,
And looked, his keen eye heaven-ward cast,
As half exulting in the blast!

Behold!  a beacon gleams afar&mdash;
Unknown the land from whence it glows:
Perchance that lone and lovely star
Deceives them to their country's foes&mdash;
More dread than breaker's rage were those!
Yet now the warring surge and gale
Had chafed them to a dark repose:
But shattered mast, and shivered sail,
Forbade return; &mdash; the tempest's roar
'Twas sweet to change for that still shore!

That point of Innisfail they won,
Where Dalriada's peaks aspire:
The anchor cast, the mooring done,
They hasten tow'rds the friendly fire:
But, gazing upward on that pyre,
They marked, illumined with its rays,
A frantic host in white attire
Dance wildly round the ruddy blaze;
And, echoed by the cliffs along,
Thus pealed their deep-toned, mystic song.

ANTHEM.
1.
Soul of Ocean, Earth, and Air,&mdash;
Awful Spirit, hear our prayer!
The comet is thy fiery car&mdash;
The black eclipse thy shadow makes;
And, as thou stepp'st from star to star,
Beneath thy foot each axis shakes:
Lo!  panting on thine altar lies
A captive chief &mdash; his heart beats high;
That heart is pierced &mdash; he shudders &mdash; dies&mdash;
So let thy foes and Ullin's die!

2.
Thou, whose tongue the thunder utters,
When through vaulted Heaven it mutters;
Thou, whose eye the lightning flashes,
When on earth thy glance is bent;
Thou, whose breath the billow dashes
'Gainst the scowling firmament;&mdash;
On hostile Albin's loftiest peak
Thus may thy sacred altars glow&mdash;
Thus may her warriors' life-blood reek&mdash;
Thus blush upon her mountain snow!

3.
By the hosts which here adore thee&mdash;
By the gore that reeks before thee&mdash;
By thy rites, in darkness sped&mdash;
Light of battle, lend thine aid!
When bucklers ring, and blades are red,
Be thou our buckler and our blade!
Thy holy groves on steeps shall nod,
Where foes pursue the savage game;
The waste shall own a present God,
The trembl'ing rocks repeat thy name!

When slept those steeps, whose towery line
That death-song echoed, passing o'er,
Which scared gaunt wolves, who sought the shrine
Of death, where oft they gorged before&mdash;
A voice exclaimed &mdash; "No more, no more
Our God accepts the sacrifice;
Unworthy streams this victim's gore&mdash;
No columned fume ascends the skies!
Ere thrice the silver moon return
A worthier gift must bleed and burn.

"The flower of proud Lismora's stem
Sheds in you cave the captive's tear;
Soon, stead of regal diadem,
Her brow a flaming crown shall bear:
That victim, won by Ullin's spear,
May soothe the wrath of Heaven; and he
Who holds her past his kingdom dear,
Must never hail his daughter free;&mdash;
No!  when he seeks that form of light,
Her passing shade shall blast his Sight!"

Then had the shipwrecked Warriors fled,
But swiftness boots not, should they fly;
Each path alike to peril led:&mdash;
Outlived they flood and field, to lie
Beneath a frantic Druid's eye,
With bosom bared to murderous knife?
Forbid, the valiant thus should die&mdash;
'Mid foemen give them life for life!
In stern despair, they rose to seek
Their fate upon the mountain peak.

With toil they scaled the beetling crest,
Where oak-wreathed Druids stood around
Whose arms were folded on their breast,
And looks bent darkly to the ground:
At bold intruding footsteps' sound&mdash;
Like lightning breaking forth from gloom&mdash;
Keen flashed their eyes 'neath brows which frowned:
Escaped, they seemed, from trance or tomb,
Ere withering sights had yet resigned
Their empire o'er the fevered mind.

Relaxed each brow, when 'midst them passed,
Wet, weary, worn &mdash; but fierce, though faint&mdash;
The pale survivors of the blast:
Then from the altar one was sent,
Who led them to the royal tent
Where Ullin's King, enthroned in state,
That night with all his nobles spent&mdash;
Awaiting the award of Fate:
And now he heard, with sullen scowl,
Heaven's blood-bribed auspices were foul.

"Doth then," he cried in scornful rage,
"A cloud o'erhang the book of doom?
This hand shall tear it from the page&mdash;
This sword shall penetrate the gloom,
Though holy altars idly fume&mdash;
And carve its own bright destiny!
Ere wanes a month, this helmet plume
Shall soar, a bird of victory,
Amid the deepening clouds of war&mdash;
Whilst heroes writhe beneath my car!"&mdash;

Then, turning to the wanderers, said,
When told their fortune in the storm&mdash;
"Warriors!  howe'er to Erin led,
The name of stranger hath a charm
To melt the heart, and check the arm:
Take then your right &mdash; the soldier's couch;
And share his cup, secure from harm;
Not here the treacherous wolf dares crouch;
But, when the golden morn thrice glows,
Ye answer &mdash; are ye Ullin's foes?"

Two tedious suns had dawned and set:
Suspense &mdash; that worm, which coiling round
The heart, defies us to forget
Her sting, long threatening ere it wound&mdash;
Was torture!  nor the deadly sound
Denouncing fate, by steel or stake,
So irks the brave; yet Irial found.
His soul for others' wo awake;
One fear alone could claim a sigh&mdash;
Not death &mdash; but, to dishonoured die!

And it was night &mdash; yet sleep sent not
Forgetfulness to seal his eyes;
On dark and desperate deeds he thought:
The hour approached for sacrifice&mdash;
That hour the captive Virgin dies!
He sees her at the altar kneel&mdash;
He hears her supplicating cries&mdash;
He shuddered as the uplifted steel
On Fancy's vision flashed &mdash; "Hold!  hold!"&mdash;
He panted &mdash; and his blood ran cold.

Stung by that waking dream, he rose
To seek his friends, and prompt their flight:
The morn before, unmarked by foes,
Was planned the purpose of the night:
The rising moon shone broad and bright,
And wooed her image in the water,
As Irial had the cave in sight
Which held Lismora's lovely daughter:
A shadow crossed his path &mdash; "Now wo
Betide thee, shouldst thou prove a foe!"

"Ha &mdash; hush!  thou stepp'st the brink of danger"&mdash;
A voice suppressed and hollow said:
"Yet will I prove thy friend, bold stranger!
If trusted in this hour of dread.
Sure Heaven thy steps hath hither led&mdash;
I blest the hope thy coming gave!
Thy galley's sail is prompt to spread&mdash;
The west-wind curls the lubric wave&mdash;
Thy band awaits &mdash; away, away!
They marvel at thy long delay.

"But, there is one 'twere base to fly;
One, that in childhood joyed to cling
About my neck, and weep, whilst I
The plaintive song she loved would sing&mdash;
A Cherub round me fluttering!
Fair as the purple-tinctured even,
And pure as yet untasted spring,
And guiltless as the Saint forgiven.
Chieftain!  thou wilt not blench to aid
A helpless and a captive Maid?

"In bold Lismora's halls of glory
Her smile a hundred Bards could fire,
As rose her line's heroic story
Responsive to the golden wire:
'Twas mine to lead that gifted choir,
Ere breach of truce in Ullin's King
Betrayed me to the victor's ire,
In other halls with grief to string
A sullen harp, whose altered tone
Still echoed dull as dungeon stone.

"I gained, 'twere idle how to say,
The cavern key, since star-rise hour,
Which bars young Cara from the day,
At mercy of the Tyrant's power:
My guards where yonder summits lower
All reckless rest:  this bow I brought,
And quiver, from my prison bower;
And, when to fly, my harp I caught,
A thrill came o'er the chords, more sweet
Than mingling sighs when lovers meet!

"Through sleeping tents then swiftly past&mdash;
Noiseless as doth a spirit glide
In midnight mist; a shroud o'ercast
The sky, as if my flight to hide:
But, when I won the mountain side,
Where lay the thickest of the foe,
The moon streamed forth a sudden tide
Of dazzling light &mdash; enough to show
The slumbering tempest round me &mdash; then
She hid behind her cloud again.

"That host doth fierce Siornah lead,
Thy fated country to invade;
But human victims burn and bleed
To purchase their Avenger's aid&mdash;
Ere yet they draw the battle blade,
And bale to Albin's valleys bear:
Within one hour the captive Maid
Shall look upon the altar's glare&mdash;
Nor know for whom that altar blazes
Till on the naked knife she gazes!

"Now to the prison cave we fly!"
As Irial and the Bard drew near,
Her lily cheek, and earth-ward eye,
Seemed fading in a still despair;
And crowding o'er her bosom fair&mdash;
Like radiance breaking through a cloud&mdash;
Rich tresses shed their sunshine there,
As wildly, mocking bands, they flowed:
A lamp burned o'er her couch, and shed
Its lustre on that drooping head.

And there, two Hags of Hatred sleeping,
Looked like the Demons of the Cell,
Who held that Angel, calmly weeping
O'er silent griefs, by cursed spell;
And oh!  the diamond drops which fell
So lucid from their lovely spring,
Had paid an empire's ransom well&mdash;
Seen down that young cheek glittering;
For Valour's soul would value them
O'er those which stud a diadem!

The Virgin turned with timid eye,&mdash;
Snatched quick the lamp that near her shone,&mdash;
Flung back her braids of orient die,&mdash;
Gazed fearful as the startled fawn,
Which shrinks from all it looks upon:
But, when the light o'er Conra's face&mdash;
Her Father's best-loved Bard &mdash; was thrown,
A glow of wonder warmed with grace
That marble cheek; and eyes long dull,
Beamed through wet lashes beautiful!

"Say, Conra!  art thou come to save
From dread and death Lismora's Child?
To snatch her from a living grave
Whom thy sweet harp hath oft beguiled
Of tears &mdash; till at those tears she smiled?
Even then the shadows o'er me flew
Of storms that since have ravaged wild&mdash;
Hope's sunshine promise proved less true!
But, break not that thy presence gave me&mdash;
Oh Conra!  wilt thou &mdash; canst thou save me?"

"Yes, injured Maid!  this warrior Youth
Hath vowed to fall or set thee free:
Repose thy safety on his truth&mdash;
Haste!  haste!  nor gaze thus doubtingly.
O'er yon far-frowning summit &mdash; see!
The moon turns pale &mdash; red flames arise:
Thou know'st it not &mdash; they blaze for thee&mdash;
Thou art the destined sacrifice!
Dost thou doubt me &mdash; dost thou falter?&mdash;
Oh, mark once more yon mountain altar!"

The keepers of that dismal cell
Are chained to earth &mdash; but were they men
They had not woke, with strife and yell,
To look upon the light again&mdash;
Their sepulchre had been that den!
In silence down the seaward hill,
The fugitives fled swiftly then:
All slumbered, save the brawling rill,
Whose waters with the moonshine blending,
Seemed silver from the rocks descending.

Speed, Irial, Cara, Conra &mdash; speed!
The hour is come of impious rites&mdash;
They whet the blade by which ye bleed&mdash;
The mountain's brow is crowned with lights&mdash;
His echo in that shout unites
Which tells your doom:  away &mdash; nor thus
Look back upon a scene that blights!
The knife itself gleams tremulous,
As conscious of its destined deed&mdash;
Speed, Irial, Cara, Conra &mdash; speed!

They now had gained the gentler slope
Extending downward to the deep,
Supporting that faint Maid with hope
They ceased to feel.  From steep to steep
Far-flaming torches wildly leap,
As meteors fire the midnight sky:
Their splendour broke the eagle's sleep&mdash;
He fled his craig, and seemed on high
Some Spirit poised on dusky wing,
In the moon's circle hovering!

All seemed confusion, as they threw
Short glances backward in their flight:
But now, their foes that path pursue
Where foot-prints meet the torches' light&mdash;
The fugitives are now in sight!
For life &mdash; for freedom &mdash; forward straining&mdash;
They bear the Maid &mdash; but ah!  in spite
Of utmost effort, on them gaining,
Rush their fell foes behind; and raise
A cry in which the blood-hound bays!

Now friendly blades, unsheathed to save,
Against the coming torches gleam;
And Irial's foot is in the wave,
And gore hath dimmed his faulchion's beam;
From foremost foeman's heart that stream
Is gushing; breast-high through the billow
He bursts &mdash; and, in her death-like dream,
His shoulder is young Cara's pillow:
Another step &mdash; the bark they gain!
Let Druids gnash their teeth in vain!

That host was rushing through the water,
As rose the galley's swelling sail,
With blades which thirsted for the slaughter,
And torches waving in the gale;
Kind Heaven &mdash; they may not now avail!
But lo!  careering tow'rds the shore,
In white-plumed crest, and glittering mail&mdash;
His charger's flank embossed with gore&mdash;
A Warrior, madly wroth, draws near,
And fiercely shakes his flashing spear.

'Twas stern Siornah, Ullin's King:&mdash;
Quick seized the Bard his bow, and drew
An arrow to its point &mdash; the string
Snapped ere that winged avenger flew;
Not so the Tyrant scapes his due!
A chord rent swiftly from the harp
Now twangs upon the sounding yew;
The shaft is smooth &mdash; the steel is sharp&mdash;
No more that Chief through blood shall roam&mdash;
His own is on the white sea-foam!

So let the Bard who sings of fame
Be bold to do the deed he sings&mdash;
His lyre, illumed by Glory's flame,
Wound Tyrants deep as scorpion stings&mdash;
Or death-spell muttered o'er the strings!
It dawns-the galley, fleet and free,
Glides stately as the west-wind springs:
And Conra, gazing pensively,
As o'er the bounding waves they flew,
Thus bade his fathers' land adieu.

1
Farewell, native Isle!  and ye forest-clad mountains&mdash;
This Harp which your echoes have hailed, as it rung
In your sweet-scented meads, by your clear-gushing fountains,
Though wild were its numbers, must now be unstrung!
Alas!  whilst this bosom with anguish is burning&mdash;
Like the nest-rifled nightingale's &mdash; sad were its swell;
Then sleep, Harp of Sorrow!  till welcomed returning
By smiles from the vales we are bidding farewell!

2.
Erin's blue hills have faded &mdash; and sun-set shall roll
A dark sea between us; yet, distance and years
Can but colour her image more deep on my soul&mdash;
For 'twill warm in my sighs, and shine brighter through tears.
Thou wast prized, lovely Land!  ere my first hopes had perished;
And since, as the grave of some dear one who fell;
But never &mdash; O never!  so faithfully cherished,
As now, that I breathe thee an Exile's farewell!

Ierne!  such the strains thy Bards of old
Sang, o'er the sculptured Harp impassioned bent;
Their shining vestments falling fold on fold
To earth, as snow-wreaths from the cliff's descent:
O'er their broad temples silvery tresses sprent,
Seemed glory with the circling oak entwined;
And &mdash; like the Prophet forms kind Heaven once sent
To bare the curtained future for mankind&mdash;
Their glowing glances shone like sun-bursts of the mind!

Ye vanished masters of Hibernia's Lyre!
Who erst in Tara's trophied halls did string
Those speaking chords which set the soul on fire,
Till from its prison-cage it strove to spring,
And beat the heart with wild impatient wing&mdash;
Forgive, that with this feeble hand I sought&mdash;
Like distant streamlet faintly echoing
The cataract &mdash; to wake the tones ye taught;
These Erin's Harp forgets, as she hath been forgot!

Long through her ivy-fettered chords the breeze
Of midnight whispered &mdash; none could set her free!
And long that tide of soul was doomed to freeze,
Which flowed unmatched in her wild melody.
But now, thy Country's day-star shines on thee&mdash;
Loved Harp, awake!  it burns ascendant now,
And gilds thy kindling chords effulgently!
Awake!  Wit, Valour, Beauty claim thy vow&mdash;
And MOORE hath broke thy trance &mdash; thy Genius wreathed his brow!

CANTO II.
Away!  Aurora opes the eastern port,
Crowned with fresh roses culled in Eden's bowers;
Incense her breath, her eye-beam full of sport,
Health in her train, and all the laughing hours:
Away!  the mountain-path is pranked with flowers
Which court thy feet; the Sun o'erlooks the wave,
And first beholds yon steep basaltic towers,
Which brighten up, as they his welcome gave&mdash;
Whilst Night, on noiseless wing, seeks dark Cuchullin's cave.

Heath-mantled Hill, thou'rt won:  and lo!  a world
Of life and loveliness salutes the view,
As Nature's magic map lies far unfurled&mdash;
Bound in a circle of cerulean blue:
There, Strangford's lake a hundred islands strew,
'Mong which her waves of molten silver play;
Here, Carrick frowns, where blazoned banners flew
O'er tower and battlement, in proud array,
To welcome great Nassau on glory's stainless way!

And fair yon vale of beauty doth expand
Beneath the shadow of thy awful brow:
Westward unfolds that mirror of the land&mdash;
Lough Neagh's shining bosom; lone and low
Shane's Castle &mdash; once a terror to the foe&mdash;
Moulders upon her shores:  aspiring proud,
Far to the northward, peaks are tipped with snow&mdash;
And Rathlin's surge-lashed rocks roar to the storm aloud.

Like giant bastions, dark and distant spreading,
Lo!  Caledonia's cold blue Mountains rise,
To bar the ocean-surge, too wildly heading,
Or piled so high to prop the Arctic skies:&mdash;
Hail!  land of worth &mdash; hail!  race of enterprise&mdash;
Famed all alike in battle and in song:
One lyre of thine did echo Erin's sighs,
When heart and harp-strings both were breaking:  long
Her sons shall love the Bard who felt her Exile's wrong!

Here placid Lagan, from her silver urn&mdash;
A flood of quivering crystal, pure and bright&mdash;
Glides through the vale with many a sinuous turn;
Her sun-lit windings glancing on the sight,
Shine like a circling serpent in the light,
Who rolls his wavy volumes o'er the plain:
Through all her course the loveliest meads invite&mdash;
Now lost in groves &mdash; now gliding forth again&mdash;
She flows reluctant on, and mingles with the main.

I've seen thy waters, o'er the green bank straying,
Like youthful hopes of rapture pass away!
Yet oft methought they looked as if delaying,
To hold the landscape in that fond delay,
Which imaged on thy glassy surface lay!
And I have seen reflected forms thereon&mdash;
Dear to my soul &mdash; the young &mdash; the fair &mdash; the gay!
Albeit the wave reflecting these be gone,
Not Lethe's flood from me can steal the simplest one.

Fast by the brink of this romantic tide,
And eastward washed by Neptune's emerald wave,
A city flourisheth in Fortune's pride&mdash;
BELFAST the name an unknown founder gave;
"Her daughters lovely, and her striplings brave:"
By every breeze on ocean's bosom fanned
Her noble fleets the bounding billows cleave,
And laden with the wealth of every land&mdash;
From Norway's icy rocks to India's burning sand.

Yet do some thankless tenants harbour there,
Who, wronging Freedom, cry they are not free;
Nor turn one candid glance to climates where
Oppression seals the bond of slavery:
Accursed with sight which nought but ill can see&mdash;
Accursed with speech which nought but ill can speak&mdash;
They torture terms, and call that Liberty
Where Law is laughed at &mdash; Justice worse than weak&mdash;
And deem restraint from crime a bond the brave should break.

Those wights are goaded by a Demon Dwarf,
Who hides beneath his cloak the traitor's knife;
Disordered on his brow a bloody scarf
Is bound &mdash; that once, in treacherous midnight strife,
He stripped from butchered Loyalty, with life:
Men name him REVOLUTION:  in his hand
A mirror globe he bears, with mischief rife,
Wherein the Caitiff grasps the Noble's land&mdash;
And all things, upside-down, in foul reflection stand.

But they, so fooled, are trivial in repute&mdash;
Nor dim for sounder heads, and better hearts,
That fairer fame their poison would pollute&mdash;
Thou friend of Justice, Science, and the Arts!
Let maniacs trace o'er folly's erring charts
By false degrees for latitudes of good,
Nor glean the truth which history's page imparts&mdash;
That nought so perfect stands, hath ever stood,
As this all-shielding code they sigh to blot with blood!

BELFAST!  it were not well to leave unsung
One virtue, cancelling many a crimson stain;
Sweet in the sight of Heaven, from whence it sprung&mdash;
The stay of wretchedness &mdash; the balm of pain;&mdash;
Angels record it thine! &mdash; to thee in vain
None tell their griefs &mdash; none turn unheard from thee;
Thou lovest to bid the mourner smile again&mdash;
To feed the hungry &mdash; set the captive free:
In Heaven thy cause is urged by soft-eyed Charity!

Dear native Down!  thy cultured bosom courts
My fondest gaze &mdash; receding south away:
Yet, now I view the scenes of infant sports,
As spots the sun made pleasant yesterday&mdash;
But where his laughing beams no longer play!
Hence let my glance, with falcon swiftness fly,
Till perched on Morne's magnificent array,
Where mountains piled on mountains awe the eye&mdash;
Crowned by Slieve Donard's peak, which meets the leaning sky.

Yes!  I have seen Morne's heaven-ward summit towering
Like a vast giant set to guard the strand;
And as I gazed, the marshalled tempest, lowering,
Turbaned his brow in clouds, and gave his hand
The thunderbolt to hurl from land to land;&mdash;
Then burst his muttered threat along the deep!
The pilot heard that mountain voice unmanned&mdash;
On ruffled plumes, the eagle fled the steep,
Whose rocked foundations broke the burrowed fox's sleep.

Now, tell me &mdash; ye who o'er the world have wandered&mdash;
What lovelier scenes than these have met your gaze?
Ye who on Delphi's sacred brow have pondered&mdash;
Ye who have marked Vesuvius' midnight blaze&mdash;
Ye who have hailed the Glaciers with amaze&mdash;
Floods banked with gold; and crowned with amber foam&mdash;
If from your hearts those magic haunts could raze
That holy love the Patriot bears his home&mdash;
Unblessed hath been your toil &mdash; ah!  wherefore did ye roam?

My Country!  were thy green hills turned to stone,
Which now with sunny bosoms court the sky&mdash;
Thy laughing vallies desolate and lone&mdash;
Thy woodlands leafless &mdash; and thy fountains dry&mdash;
Dear wert thou yet to me!  Nor question &mdash; why?
Thou heartless stranger in thy Fathers' land,
Whose lot might idly claim thy smile or sigh!
If peril scowled, would'st thou her champion stand?
O no! &mdash; the loveless heart had still a nerveless hand!

That Mount I sing reveals a living scene
When April comes so gay and debonair&mdash;
Like young coquet, now frowning, now serene&mdash;
And lures a thousand idle truants here,
Who while the day in revelry and cheer,
And cull the first-born blossoms of the dell,
Wherewith to die for many an urchin peer
The snowy egg:  ye simple joys that swell
The pulse in life's young morn &mdash; be ever blest your spell!

Yes!  sport ye reckless ones!  your sunny hour,
Gay as the rich-plumed songsters of the spring:
Too soon Delight resigns her magic power;
And Hope forgets to wave her golden wing&mdash;
Though now so full of sweet imagining!
The day &mdash; alas!  that any could foreshow&mdash;
The day shall come when Disappointment's sting
May rankle in a heart of cureless wo.&mdash;
But this is not my theme &mdash; ye livelier numbers flow!

What notes proclaim the bliss of Easter morn!
The Heavens are sheen, the birds are blithely singing&mdash;
Buds bathed in dew are glistening on the thorn,
The far flocks bleat, the merry bells are ringing&mdash;
The streamlets gush, the primrose banks are springing&mdash;
The huntsman's horn is echoing through the dale&mdash;
The clear cascade its diamond sparkles flinging&mdash;
The milkmaid carols in the fragrant vale&mdash;
And all these mirthful sounds give music to the gale!

Now group on group is seen to follow far,
Like to a Persian army in array;
On foot, on steed, coach, jingle, cart, and car&mdash;
Tow'rds the high Hill of Caves they wend away;
But, at the base each equipage must stay;
Proud steep!  thou well dost ape that summit bright
Where whilom strung his lyre the God of Day;
For wheels &mdash; save those which hurl the car of light
O'er crimson-skirted clouds &mdash; can conquer neither height!

Here might you mark life's anxious, ardent strugglers,
Of every hue &mdash; whate'er their cast or calling&mdash;
Musicians, pedlars, show-men, dupes and jugglers&mdash;
Not Babel tower had echoed to such bawling!
Carousing, begging, singing, laughing, brawling,
The fiddle's flourish, and the bag-pipe's grunting&mdash;
Shrill barking curs, and embryo caitiffs squalling,
Maids screaming out, for men are most insulting&mdash;
Here brays a panniered ass, there boys are badger-hunting.

With laugh, and jest, and antic feat, they rise
The mountain's side:  but many a grievous trip
Doth send more woful music to the skies,
From luckless wight foredoomed by Fate to slip;
Whilst youthful imps the giddy pathway skip,
And gibe at those whom time hath tardier made;
Too fat to climb, with bottle at the lip,
Some think their fellows' toil but ill repaid&mdash;
Who pity them in turn, and scorn the midway shade.

Nor these the sagest &mdash; they who love to climb
Up steeps of solid earth, or slippery fame&mdash;
And, trust me, this is truth, though told in rhyme&mdash;
Will find the climate as they rise grow breme;
Keen cutting winds assail th' unsheltered frame
On mountain summits; and their virgin snow
That foot which sullies is consigned to shame:
Yet, when the sun shines o'er them, few below
Would deem it soothly said &mdash; they glare, but never glow!

Full many a well-heaped basket lines the way,
Where tempting fruits, and witching liquids spread;
But, such must grieving gaze as cannot pay
For that grim guard, with mob-cap muffled head,
Swans through an eye by fell suspicion fed
Each lounger near, lest such should slily spring,
Unstored with coin, by lawless longing led,
Upon that nest of luxury I sing&mdash;
Now foul may him befal would do so base a thing!

Hard by, and gazing on that merchandise,
An elf, with watering teeth, pulls forth his store,
Late won by well-conned task &mdash; O envied prize!
Yet won, ere long, to grieve his heart right sore&mdash;
So Fortune tantalizeth evermore!
On fruit and coin his looks alternate rest&mdash;
But, early read in scoundrel niggard lore,
To squander pence it pains his little breast,
And, gnawed too soon by care, he trembles to be blest.

A mid-aged wight &mdash; full fain as he to hoard
The glittering trash &mdash; observes with anxious eye
The freaks of Chance upon the chequered board;&mdash;
He tempts her frown &mdash; a week's hard wages fly!
Close clinging to his coat, and ripe to cry,
His urchin son doth see his wealth's decay&mdash;
Right sad to think how hunger, by and by,
Shall pinch, for this, the little troop who play
At home &mdash; nor bode of tears to-morrow must survey!

Behold that graceless slave with shirtless back,
Shoe down of heel, and kibe-betraying hose,
Hat void of rim, surtout like tattered sack,
All blood-shot eye, and purple-spotted nose!
With silver, won by midnight guilt, he goes
To yonder jar, which burning liquor fills,
And down his throat a brimming bumper throws,
Till at his heart like liquid flame it thrills;&mdash;
The subtlest draught, I ween, Intemperance distils.

Such recreant knave escaped to other climes
(For in his own he dare no more delay)
Adds daily to his catalogue of crimes&mdash;
Assuming characters to suit each day:
Sometimes a cripple crawling by the way;
Anon, a war-maimed veteran sues thy aid,
The robber's ruffian garb his next array&mdash;
Which, flapping, shows the midnight moon his blade:&mdash;
A scaffold-scene concludes the guilty masquerade!

Now to the breezy top the foremost reach&mdash;
Panting and wearied with the toilsome way:
Note well that damsel shy, whom no soft speech,
Though slyly said as sighing swain could say,
Before might answer better gain than &mdash; nay!
Yet now the youth may boldly grasp at bliss&mdash;
(Lovers like chiefs should choose a favouring day,)
Faint with fatigue she rests her arm on his&mdash;
And, through a half-feigned frown, smiles at the stolen kiss!

Leave those to talk of love!  and hasten where,
With bounding hearts, yon merry circle wheels&mdash;
Some lightly springing, seem to leap on air,
Some beat the earth with iron-studded heels;
Whilst the sly maid her taper leg reveals,
As though unwitting, to the graceful knee:
Hibernia's planxties, Caledonia's reels,
Are plied by those who quaff the cup of glee
Sparkling from Pleasure's fount, and feel its luxury!

The dance is o'er &mdash; but hark!  the plaintive tone
Of minstrel string is breathing in the wind:
There sits neglected on the gray cairn-stone
His country's latest Bard &mdash; poor &mdash; aged &mdash; blind;
Ah!  why is Fate to Genius thus unkind?
Sorrow hath chased the sunshine from his cheek&mdash;
Her shadow length'ning as his day declined:
Yet through the cloud ethereal flashes break&mdash;
And gleam along the lyre, and bid its Spirit speak!

Couched at his feet an Irish wolf-dog lay&mdash;
Last, like himself, of once a valued race,
Whose glancing eye of fire flashed every way&mdash;
Sagacious, fierce, and matchless in the chase:
Full oft would he regard his master's face,
With pointed ear, as anxious to obey
Whate'er of wish or will he there might trace;
Nor would he leave that foot by night or day
Which faithfully he led o'er moor and mountain gray.

And close beside there stood a pensive Boy,
Who bore that Minstrel's harp where'er he went;
The passion-breathing lay, a painful joy
To his rapt spirit in its sadness sent:
Won by the charm of song, his soul scarce bent
To aught of earth &mdash; eccentric, warm, and wild!
He fled his home of love and calm content&mdash;
Forsook his kindred &mdash; by that harp beguiled,
Which dearer grew than all to Nature's way-ward child.

And he knew moments &mdash; that unfriended Youth&mdash;
Which blood-bought crowns were idly pledged to buy,
Although his ragged weeds might raise the ruth&mdash;
Perchance the mirth of many a butterfly,
Decked in its gaudy garments passing by!
Moments that but the sons of song can know&mdash;
Pure gleams of more than earth-born ecstacy&mdash;
Which light the soul's bold wing to Heaven, and throw
A magic colouring o'er even this dark world of wo!

Again the Harper's withered fingers swept
Th' awaking chords:  an old and lofty lay
He chose, o'er which have royal Virgins wept;
And lion Valour-roused from lethargy&mdash;
Hath grasped the burnished blade, whose living ray
Seemed borrowed from the hero's glance of ire!
That theme was dear to Erin's happier day,
When History's Muse enraptured strung her lyre&mdash;
And gang immortal deeds, and wrote with pen of fire!

KING AHOD'S DAUGHTER.
1.
Why droops, so sad and lily wan,
King Ahod's young and lovely Daughter?
The dawning dream of her peace is gone&mdash;
Too soon to weep hath Sorrow taught her!
Why pine the peerless Maids of Meath,
And leave unwove the rosy wreath
Which bound their brightly braided hair
Round foreheads arched and ivory fair?
The rosebud, o'er those temples twined,
Which seemed to blush on polished snow,
Is withered, rent &mdash; and unconfined
Their radiant tresses flow!
Turgesius the tyrant &mdash; the infidel Dane&mdash;
Hath but wiped from his faulchion the heart's-blood stain
Of lovers and brothers, and kindred most dear&mdash;
Then ask not why Beauty should beam through a tear!
That relentless Chief, with the gore-reeking hand,
Hath cast his stern eye on the pride of the land;
And her Father, with age and with ills bowed down,
Marks the cloud of disgrace o'er the star of his crown.

2.
As the sun on earth, doth Woman's eye
Shed light on love, on hope, on pleasure;
More dear to the soul her tender sigh,
Than gales which waft Arabia's treasure:
And Clona's eyes, of sparkling blue,
Shed sunshine on a Father's breast&mdash;
And o'er a faithful Lover's threw
That light in which his hopes were blest:
Her voice was sweet as angel numbers,
Heard by saints in happy slumbers;
And, O!  her form of fairy lightness
Looked more than Woman in its brightness!
But he, that Chief of Denmark's race,
By lawless passion swayed,
In victor pride, would bring disgrace
On Meathea's princely Maid.
Her Father sues, on suppliant knee,
One brief night's truce with infamy;
And her Lover broods, in secret grief,
A tragic scene to the Danish Chief,
Ere the Murderer's arm be the fair Maiden's pillow&mdash;
Or the sun twice descend to the gold-crested billow.

3.
Thus prayed the King for that delay:&mdash;
"In pity to a Parent's sorrow,
O!  spare my Child to me this day&mdash;
She's thine, relentless chief!  to-morrow.
But if soft Pity may not melt&mdash;
The pangs a Father feels, unfelt&mdash;
If gray hairs, bending to the grave,
Nor Honour's voice, nor Mercy's, save&mdash;
Then, hear my promise &mdash; ere the even
Shall purple o'er to-morrow's sky&mdash;
(Though first this hand would give to Heaven&mdash;
These dim eyes see that Daughter die,)
A train shall attend her, all lovely and young,
As stripling hath dreamed of, or minstrel hath sung;
Full fifteen the fairest of Meath's noble Maids&mdash;
The bloom of her valleys, the boast of her shades:
Let these purchase respite &mdash; how useless and brief&mdash;
It guards not her honour &mdash; it heals not my grief!
Ah, Clona!  sole hope of my house and my pride&mdash;
Ere the death of thy fame &mdash; would!  thy Father had died."

4.
The dome is lit with a thousand lights,
The banquet spread &mdash; the goblet flowing;
That Chieftain, and his favoured Knights,
With wine and passion glowing,
Await the Virgin victims there&mdash;
Alas, how fortuneless and fair!
The spoilers bless the joyous day
They bore from Scandia's coast away
Tow'rds the Emerald Isle of the dark-blue ocean&mdash;
The garden of beauty &mdash; the eye of the world;
And to Odin they vow, in their impious devotion,
His banner should stream, in its glory unfurled,
From the North to the South of the conquered land&mdash;
That his victims should blaze &mdash; that his altars should stand&mdash;
That his holy groves &mdash; hush!  hark!  slowly expanding,
The folding doors turn, and without them are standing,
In robes, dazzling white as the Gualte's snow wreath,
The Maidens devoted &mdash; the loveliest of Meath!

5.
Each joyful Knight from his couch leaped up,
Where anxious he had lain reclining;
And left the ruby-sparkling cup
For lips more red, for eyes more shining:
The Maids approached &mdash; but veiled each face&mdash;
With downcast eye, and trembling pace:
And as they move, with bosoms beating,
Through foes from whom is no retreating,
An aged Minstrel, sternly sharp,
Surveys the helpless Virgin band&mdash;
Ere the song is o'er, from the sounding harp
Descends his trembling hand.
Whate'er his doubts, or his fears may be&mdash;
The Knights see not &mdash; nor care to see;
The banquet's excess drew a cloud o'er their sight:
To their captives they spring, who recoil with afright,
And rend from each forehead the folds which conceal&mdash;
Is the dome in a blaze?  Do the lamps gleam on steel?&mdash;
Each Dane lays his hand on his sword, with a start&mdash;
But &mdash; ere he can draw &mdash; one is sheathed in his heart!

6.
Hark to that hurrying to and fro!&mdash;
The war-steed's neigh &mdash; the chariot's rattle&mdash;
Victorious shouts &mdash; deep groans of wo&mdash;
Hibernia's sons are in the battle!
O'er the Danish camp breaks the sudden blaze,
And the warriors spring from their sleep in amaze;
Through flame-folded tents in confusion they reel,
And fly &mdash; but to fall by the merciless steel!
Then thirsty Carnage drank her fill,
And the yet warm crimson dew
Was shed on the emerald shamrock, till
Its leaves wore an amethyst hue:
The banner of Erin reflected the light
Of blazing pavilions &mdash; seen far in the fight;
And, emblazoned thereon &mdash; which the Dane marked with awe&mdash;
Beamed &mdash; "ERIN MA VOURNEEN!  ERIN GO BRAGH!"

7.
Whence comes the Maid, whose milk-white steed
Exults beneath his lovely rider?
And whence is he, in sable weed,
On the foaming coal-black barb beside her?&mdash;
'Tis Ahod and his Child &mdash; restored
To happiness by Valour's sword!
Lo!  light-bounding Virgins are flying to meet them&mdash;
And gallant young Warriors triumphantly greet them;
No more in the white-flowing robe they conceal
The terrors which flashed from their bosoms of steel:
Though vain was the bribe of the Tyrant to buy
Their faith &mdash; it was won by the heart-stealing eye!
Though vain were the links of his blood-rusted chain,
The gold-flowing tress did not fetter in vain!
And that bevy of Maids in their loveliness yield
To the Chiefs who protected with dagger and shield;
And Clona, whose eye shone as brightly and blue
As the sapphire of India when dipped in the dew,
Young Desmond the Dauntless hath blessed with her hand&mdash;
Who gave the Invader but soil for his grave.
Thus the Brave, roused by Beauty enfranchised the land&mdash;
And Beauty was shielded and won by the Brave!

Languid and faint the Minstrel's song began&mdash;
But soon enthusiast Passion claimed her throne;
And, ere the battle o'er the deep strings ran,
Soul, voice, and harp, had found a firmer tone;
Spirit of Feeling!  he was all thine own&mdash;
Unheard &mdash; unheeded &mdash; crowds around him tread!
But, when the pittance misery claimed was thrown,
The dreamer woke &mdash; the fond delusion fled&mdash;
In wounded pride he rose &mdash; and blushed to sing for bread!

And now the Sun is journeying tow'rds the West,
And but delays to kiss the Eastern hill&mdash;
Warning the weary revellers to rest:
And now, save bleating flock and rippling rill,
No sounds are heard &mdash; the heath is lone and still;
Behind the far blue mountains of Tyrone
Hath sunk the sun &mdash; the breeze of eve grows chill;
Yet o'er Lough Neagh's farthest verge is thrown
A line of lambent light, where day's last look had shone.

On cottage hearths the cheerful fagot burning,
Gleams through the lattice in the vale below;
At twilight seen by merry groups returning,
Who feel a grateful welcome in the glow:
And many a happy wight as down they go&mdash;
Cheered by the blaze which marks his home of rest&mdash;
Counts o'er the joys that cottage can bestow;
And owns his lot, though humble, very blest&mdash;
His partner by his side &mdash; his infant at her breast!

Loved Hill!  when all forsook, I joyed to rise
Thy brow &mdash; though touched with evening's graver hue&mdash;
And look upon the landscape's fading dies;
But then would Memory steal me from the view,
And clouds that once rolled o'er the heart renew!
Why, gazing from yon cliff, recurs for ever
That pennant to my soul, as once it flew,
Which waved the fatal signal doomed to sever
Those who in Heaven shall meet &mdash; on earth, O never!  never!

Young, generous, gentle &mdash; cast in manhood's mould
Of strength and beauty; that dark, speaking eye,
Beheld but once &mdash; though many a year had rolled&mdash;
Would flash its lightning o'er the memory!
And such was he whose fate demands my sigh&mdash;
Nor truth, nor talent, aught availed to save:
The pitying stranger, saw him droop and die&mdash;
But, when the foreign turf his pillow gave,
Reeked not how many hopes were buried in that grave!

Lamented JONES!  thy summer-day was brief&mdash;
Pride, enterprise, fair prospects, led thee on;
But, there were eyes of Beauty dimmed with grief&mdash;
And breasts that throbbed with pain when thou wert gone;
And many a secret sob &mdash; and cheeks grew wan
Whereon thy smile had shed its brightning beam;
Tears now are shining where young blushes shone&mdash;
Enough!  our being's but a troubled stream&mdash;
A melting rainbow hope-and happiness a dream!

No &mdash; nought will be on earth as it hath been!
Founders of empire are sojourners here:
New caravans in turn employ the scene,
And toil their way across the desert drear;
Whilst Arab hordes, for ever hovering near,
Waylay and spoil &mdash; nor these the best may shun:
But wisest he who strives the path to cheer
With hope of peril past &mdash; fair Mecca won&mdash;
His are the freshest springs, and spots, to rest upon.

For there be spots amid the wilderness
Where Rapture, like the desert rose, may dwell&mdash;
And there be springs, the parching lip to bless,
Sweet as the flood from Horeb's rock that fell:
Hope lights the onward track, and Memory's spell
Illumes her fresco landscape far behind;
If cold Injustice stab, the heart must swell&mdash;
But conscious Worth her deepest wound can bind;
With these Love pours her balm, and Friendship, nobly kind!

Love, that nor aim, nor wish, nor purpose, knows&mdash;
Save what concentrates in its idol's joy;
True in the test of absence, slander, foes&mdash;
That fate &mdash; alas!  though blighted &mdash; can't destroy!
Friendship, whose feeling knows of no alloy&mdash;
That seeks no future chances to repay
The present sacrifice &mdash; that could not cloy
As others cool &mdash; nor push the claim away,
Invited &mdash; courted oft &mdash; ere frowned the trial day!

And there is one, endeared by Brother's blood,
Such friendship doth not less to me endear:
Prospects have changed, and hopes have been subdued,
But thou art changeless, generous, sincere!
Wide oceans part us with a bar severe&mdash;
Yet from the weeping West or frozen Pole,
To that bright Source of Day which thou art near&mdash;
Yea!  though between the stars themselves should roll&mdash;
Affection's viewless chain can bind us soul to soul.

The world itself hath changed since we have met&mdash;
Some that played foot-ball with the globe, are now
Captive to those who were their captives late&mdash;
The bruised laurel stains the humbled brow&mdash;
True love hath sickened o'er the broken vow&mdash;
Friends dearly valued are no longer dear&mdash;
The lovely, wrapped in winding-sheets, laid low&mdash;
The dead forgot &mdash; reviewing these, I fear
Lest thou should'st ne'er return, or find me wanting here!

Though young, thy path hath been through toil and danger,
Peril was sport, and only irksome rest;
The Deep thy home, to other home a stranger&mdash;
And least enjoyed by those who love thee best:
When wilt thou &mdash; as the bird her native nest
Seeks in the Spring, which fled fell Winter's reign&mdash;
Revisit scenes in boyhood reckoned blest;
All thou hast suffered &mdash; seen &mdash; to tell?  O, when?&mdash;
Till then may Fortune smile &mdash; farewell!  farewell till then!

Thus have I mused as Fancy, Feeling led&mdash;
Whilst Time, on downy pinion, stole away
Uncounted hours; and o'er the mountain's head
Night spread her sable, star-wrought canopy:
Then, journeying forth upon the track of day,
The rising Moon o'er green Cairngaver beamed,
Crowned with the gems of Heaven's serenest ray;
Her car of clouds embossed with glory gleamed&mdash;
And far on spire and peak the soft effulgence streamed.

Ye long-loved scenes, ye rocks, ye glens, adieu!
I now must turn me to a foreign shore:
And yet my heart can never stray from you&mdash;
For ye are coloured on its inmost core!
May Heaven's protecting wings wave blandly o'er
Those haunts where Friendship hath been tried, and true!
And &mdash; when this Gothic Lyre is heard no more&mdash;
My name be welcome to a chosen few:&mdash;
But whither do I stray? &mdash; again, dear scenes, adieu!
