Beside the dimness of the glimmering sea,
Weaving swift language from impassioned themes,
With that dear friend I lingered, who to me
So late had been restored, beneath the gleams
Of the silver stars; and ever in soft dreams
Of future love and peace sweet converse lapt
Our willing fancies, till the pallid beams
Of the last watchfire fell, and darkness wrapt
The waves, and each bright chain of floating fire was snapt,

And till we came even to the City's wall
And the great gate, then, none knew whence or why,
Disquiet on the multitudes did fall:
And first, one pale and breathless past us by,
And stared and spoke not; &mdash; then with piercing cry
A troop of wild-eyed women, by the shrieks
Of their own terror driven, &mdash; tumultuously
Hither and thither hurrying, with pale cheeks,
Each one from fear unknown a sudden refuge seeks&mdash;

Then, rallying cries of treason and of danger
Resounded:  and &mdash; "they come!  to arms!  to arms!
The Tyrant is amongst us, and the stranger
Comes to enslave us in his name!  to arms!"
In vain:  for Panic, the pale fiend who charms
Strength to forswear her right, those millions swept
Like waves before the tempest &mdash; these alarms
Came to me, as to know their cause I leapt
On the gate's turret, and in rage and grief and scorn I wept!

For to the North I saw the town on fire,
And its red light made morning, pallid now,
Which burst over wide Asia; &mdash; louder, higher,
The yells of victory and the screams of woe
I heard approach, and saw the throng below
Stream through the gates like foam-wrought waterfalls
Fed from a thousand storms &mdash; the fearful glow
Of bombs flares overhead &mdash; at intervals
The red artillery's bolt mangling, among them falls.

And now the horsemen come &mdash; and all was done
Swifter than I have spoken &mdash; I beheld
Their red swords flash in the uprisen sun.
I rushed among the rout to have repelled
That miserable flight &mdash; one moment quelled
By voice, and looks, and eloquent despair,
As if reproach from their own hearts withheld
Their steps, they stood; but soon came pouring, there
New multitudes, and did those rallied bands o'erbear.

I strove, as drifted on some cataract
By irresistible streams, some wretch might strive
Who hears its fatal roar: &mdash; the files compact
Whelmed me, and from the gate availed to drive
With quickening impulse, as each bolt did rive
Their ranks with bloodier chasm: &mdash; into the plain
Disgorged at length the dead and the alive
In one dread mass, were parted, and the stain
Of blood, from mortal steel fell o'er the fields like rain.

For now the despot's blood-hounds with their prey,
Unarmed and unaware, were gorging deep
Their gluttony of death; the loose array
Of horsemen o'er the wide fields murdering sweep,
And with loud laughter for their tyrant reap
A harvest sown with other hopes, the while,
Far overhead, ships from Propontis keep
A killing rain of fire: &mdash; when the waves smile,
As sudden earthquakes light many a volcano isle,

Thus sudden, unexpected feast was spread
For the carrion fowls of Heaven. &mdash; I saw the sight&mdash;
I moved &mdash; I lived &mdash; as o'er the heaps of dead,
Whose stony eyes glared in the morning light,
I trod; &mdash; to me there came no thought of flight,
But with loud cries of scorn which whoso heard
That dreaded death, felt in his veins the might
Of virtuous shame return, the crowd I stirred,
And desperation's hope in many hearts recurred.

A band of brothers gathering round me, made,
Although unarmed, a steadfast front, and still
Retreating with stern looks beneath the shade
Of gathered eyebrows, did the victors fill
With doubt even in success; deliberate will
Inspired our growing, troop, not overthrown
It gained the shelter of a grassy hill,
And ever still our comrades were hewn down,
And their defenceless limbs beneath our footsteps strown.

Immovably we stood &mdash; in joy I found,
Beside me then, firm as a giant pine
Among the mountain vapours driven around,
The old man whom I loved &mdash; his eyes divine
With a mild look of courage answered mine,
And my young friend was near, and ardently
His hand grasped mine a moment &mdash; now the line
Of war extended, to our rallying cry
As myriads flocked in love and brotherhood to die.

For ever while the sun was climbing Heaven
The horseman hewed our unarmed myriads down
Safely, tho' when by thirst of carnage driven
Too near, those slaves were swiftly overthrown
By hundreds leaping on them: &mdash; flesh and bone
Soon made our ghastly ramparts; then the shaft
Of the artillery from the sea was thrown
More fast and fiery, and the conquerors laughed
In pride to hear the wind our screams of torment waft.

For on one side alone the hill gave shelter,
So vast that phalanx of unconquered men,
And there the living in the blood did welter
Of the dead and dying, which, in that green glen,
Like stifled torrents, made a plashy fen
Under the feet &mdash; thus was the butchery waged
While the sun clomb Heaven's eastern steep &mdash; but when
It 'gan to sink &mdash; a fiercer combat raged,
For in more doubtful strife the armies were engaged.

Within a cave upon the hill were found
A bundle of rude pikes, the instrument
Of those who war but on their native ground
For natural rights:  a shout of joyance sent
Even from our hearts the wide air pierced and rent,
As those few arms the bravest and the best
Seized, and each sixth, thus armed, did now present
A line which covered and sustained the rest,
A confident phalanx, which the foes on every side invest.

That onset turned the foes to flight almost;
But soon they saw their present strength, and knew
That coming night would to our resolute host
Bring victory, so dismounting close they drew
Their glittering files, and then the combat grew
Unequal but most horrible; &mdash; and ever
Our myriads, whom the swift bolt overthrew,
Or the red sword, failed like a mountain river
Which rushes forth in foam to sink in sands forever.

Sorrow and shame, to see with their own kind
Our human brethren mix, like beasts of blood
To mutual ruin armed by one behind
Who sits and scoffs! &mdash; That friend so mild and good,
Who like its shadow near my youth had stood,
Was stabbed! &mdash; my old preserver's hoary hair
With the flesh clinging to its roots, was strewed
Under my feet! &mdash; I lost all sense or care,
And like the rest I grew desperate and unaware.

The battle became ghastlier &mdash; in the midst
I paused, and saw how ugly and how fell,
O Hate!  thou art, even when thy life thou shed'st
For love.  The ground in many a little dell
Was broken, up and down whose steeps befell
Alternate victory and defeat, and there
The combatants with rage most horrible
Strove, and their eyes started with cracking stare,
And impotent their tongues they lolled into the air,

Flaccid and foamy, like a mad dog's hanging;
Want, and Moon-madness, and the pest's swift Bane
When its shafts smite &mdash; while yet its bow is twanging&mdash;
Have each their mark and sign &mdash; some ghastly stain;
And this was thine, O War!  of hate and pain
Thou loathed slave.  I saw all shapes of death
And ministered to many, o'er the plain
While carnage in the sun-beam's warmth did seethe,
Till twilight o'er the east wove her serenest wreathe.

The few who yet survived, resolute and firm
Around me fought.  At the decline of day
Winding above the mountain's snowy term
New banners shone:  they quivered in the ray
Of the sun's unseen orb &mdash; ere night the array
Of fresh troops hemmed us in &mdash; of those brave bands
I soon survived alone &mdash; and now I lay
Vanquished and faint, the grasp of bloody hands
I felt, and saw on high the glare of falling brands:

When on my foes a sudden terror came,
And they fled, scattering &mdash; lo!  with reinless speed
A black Tartarian horse of giant frame
Comes trampling over the dead, the living bleed
Beneath the hoofs of that tremendous steed,
On which, like to an Angel, robed in white,
Sate one waving a sword; &mdash; the hosts recede
And fly, as thro' their ranks with awful might,
Sweeps in the shadow of eve that Phantom swift and bright

And its path made a solitude. &mdash; I rose
And marked its coming:  it relaxed its course
As it approached me, and the wind that flows
Thro' night, bore accents to mine ear whose force
Might create smiles in death &mdash; the Tartar horse
Paused, and I saw the shape its might which swayed,
And heard her musical pants, like the sweet source
Of waters in the desert, as she said,
"Mount with me Laon, now" &mdash; I rapidly obeyed.

Then:  "Away!  away!"  she cried, and stretched her sword
As 'twere a scourge over the courser's head,
And lightly shook the reins: &mdash; We spake no word
But like the vapour of the tempest fled
Over the plain; her dark hair was dispread
Like the pine's locks upon the lingering blast;
Over mine eyes its shadowy strings it spread
Fitfully, and the hills and streams fled fast,
As o'er their glimmering forms the steed's broad shadow past.

And his hoofs ground the rocks to fire and dust,
His strong sides made the torrents rise in spray,
And turbulence, as of  a whirlwind's gust
Surrounded us; &mdash; and still away!  away!
Thro' the desart night we sped, while she alway
Gazed on a mountain which we neared, whose crest
Crowned with a marble ruin, in the ray
Of the obscure stars gleamed; &mdash; its rugged breast
The steed strained up, and then his impulse did arrest.

A rocky hill which overhung the Ocean:&mdash;
From that lone ruin, when the steed that panted
Paused, might be heard the murmur of the motion
Of waters, as in spots forever haunted
By the choicest winds of Heaven, which are inchanted
To music, by the wand of Solitude,
That wizard wild, and the far tents implanted
Upon the plain, be seen by those who stood
Thence marking the dark shore of Ocean's curved flood.

One moment these were heard and seen &mdash; another
Past; and the two who stood beneath that night,
Each only heard, or saw, or felt the other;
As from the lofty steed she did alight,
Cythna, (for, from the eyes whose deepest light
Of love and sadness made my lips feel pale
With influence strange of mournfullest delight,
My own sweet sister looked), with joy did quail,
And felt her strength in tears of human weakness fail.

And, for a space in my embrace she rested,
Her head on my unquiet heart reposing,
While my faint arms her languid frame invested:
At length she looked on me, and half unclosing
Her tremulous lips, said:  "Friend, thy bands were losing
The battle, as I stood before the King
In bonds. &mdash; I burst them then, and swiftly choosing
The time, did seize a Tartar's sword, and spring
Upon his horse, and swift as on the whirlwind's wing,

"Have thou and I been borne beyond pursuer,
And we are here." &mdash; Then turning to the steed,
She pressed the white moon on his front with pure
And rose-like lips, and many a fragrant weed
From the green ruin plucked, that he might feed,&mdash;
But I to a stone seat that Maiden led,
And kissing her fair eyes, said, "Thou hast need
Of rest," and I heaped up the courser's bed
In a green mossy nook, with mountain flowers dispread.

Within that ruin, where a shattered portal
Looks to the eastern stars, abandoned now
By man, to be the home of things immortal,
Memories, like awful ghosts which come and go,
And must inherit all he builds below,
When he is gone, a hall stood; o'er whose roof
Fair clinging weeds with ivy pale did grow,
Clasping its grey rents with a verdurous woof,
A hanging dome of leaves, a canopy moon-proof.

The autumnal winds, as if spell-bound, had made
A natural couch of leaves in that recess,
Which seasons none disturbed, but in the shade
Of flowering parasites, did Spring love to dress
With their sweet blooms the wintry loneliness
Of those dead leaves, shedding their stars, whene'er
The wandering wind her nurslings might caress;
Whose intertwining fingers ever there,
Made music wild and soft that filled the listening air.

We know not where we go, or what sweet dream
May pilot us thro' caverns strange and fair
Of far and pathless passion, while the stream
Of life, our bark doth on its whirlpools bear,
Spreading swift wings as sails to the dim air;
Nor should we seek to know, so the devotion
Of love and gentle thoughts be heard still there
Louder and louder from the utmost Ocean
Of universal life, attuning its commotion.

To the pure all things are pure!  Oblivion wrapt
Our spirits, and the fearful overthrow
Of public hope was from our being snapt,
Tho' linked years had bound it there; for now
A power, a thirst, a knowledge, which below
All thoughts, like light beyond the atmosphere,
Clothing its clouds with grace, doth ever flow,
Came on us, as we sate in silence there,
Beneath the golden stars of the clear azure air.

In silence which doth follow talk that causes
The baffled heart to speak with sighs and tears,
When wildering passion swalloweth up the pauses
Of inexpressive speech: &mdash; the youthful years
Which we together past, their hopes and fears,
The common blood which ran within our frames,
That likeness of the features which endears
The thoughts expressed by them, our very names,
And all the winged hours which speechless memory claims,

Had found a voice: &mdash; and ere that voice did pass,
The night grew damp and dim, and thro' a rent
Of the ruin where we sate, from the morass,
A wandering Meteor by some wild wind sent,
Hung high in the green dome, to which it lent
A faint and pallid lustre; while the song
Of blasts, in which its blue hair quivering bent,
Strewed strangest sounds the moving leaves among;
A wondrous light, the sound as of a spirit's tongue.

The Meteor shewed the leaves on which we sate,
And Cythna's glowing arms, and the thick ties
Of her soft hair which bent with gathered weight
My neck near hers, her dark and deepening eyes,
Which, as twin phantoms of one star that lies
O'er a dim well, move, though the star reposes,
Swam in our mute and liquid ecstasies,
Her marble brow, and eager lips, like roses,
With their own fragrance pale, which spring but half uncloses.

The meteor to its far morass returned:
The beating of our veins one interval
Made still; and then I felt the blood that burned
Within her frame, mingle with mine, and fall
Around my heart like fire; and over all
A mist was spread, the sickness of a deep
And speechless swoon of joy, as might befall
Two disunited spirits when they leap
In union from this earth's obscure and fading sleep.

Was it one moment that confounded thus
All thought, all sense, all feeling, into one
Unutterable power, which shielded us
Even from our own cold looks, when we had gone
Into a wide and wild oblivion
Of tumult and of tenderness?  or now
Had ages, such as make the moon and sun,
The seasons, and mankind their changes know,
Left fear and time unfelt by us alone below?

I know not.  What are kisses whose fire clasps
The failing heart in languishment, or limb
Twined within limb?  or the quick dying gasps
Of the life meeting, when the faint eyes swim
Thro' tears of a wide mist boundless and dim,
In one caress?  What is the strong controul
Which leads the heart that dizzy steep to climb,
Where far over the world those vapours roll
Which blend two restless frames in one reposing soul?

It is the shadow which doth float unseen,
But not unfelt, o'er blind mortality,
Whose divine darkness fled not, from that green
And lone recess, where lapt in peace did lie
Our linked frames; till, from the changing sky,
That night and still another day had ted;
And then I saw and felt.  The moon was high,
And clouds, as of a coming storm, were spread
Under its orb, &mdash; loud winds were gathering overhead.

Cythna's sweet lips seemed lurid in the moon,
Her fairest limbs with the night wind were chill,
And her dark tresses were all loosely strewn
O'er her pale bosom: &mdash; all within was still,
And the sweet peace of joy did almost fill
The depth of her unfathomable look;&mdash;
And we sate calmly, though that rocky hill,
The waves contending in its caverns strook,
For they foreknew the storm, and the grey ruin shook.

There we unheeding sate, in the communion
Of interchanged vows, which, with a rite
Of faith most sweet and sacred, stamped our union.&mdash;
Few were the living hearts which could unite
Like ours, or celebrate a bridal night
With such close sympathies, for to each other
Had high and solemn hopes, the gentle might
Of earliest love, and all the thoughts which smother
Cold Evil's power, now linked a sister and a brother.

And such is Nature's modesty, that those
Who grow together cannot choose but love,
If faith or custom do not interpose,
Or common slavery mar what else might move
All gentlest thoughts; as in the sacred grove
Which shades the springs of Aethiopian Nile,
That living tree, which, if the arrowy dove
Strike with her shadow, shrinks in fear awhile,
But its own kindred leaves clasps while the sun-beams smile;

And clings to them, when darkness may dissever
The close caresses of all duller plants
Which bloom on the wide earth &mdash; thus we forever
Were linked, for love had nurst us in the haunts
Where knowledge, from its secret source inchants
Young hearts with the fresh music of its springing,
Ere yet its gathered flood feeds human wants
As the great Nile feeds Egypt; ever flinging
Light on the woven boughs which o'er its waves are swinging.

The tones of Cythna's voice like echoes wore
Of those far murmuring streams; they rose and fell,
Mixed with mine own in the tempestuous air,&mdash;
And so we sate, until our talk befell
Of the late ruin, swift and horrible,
And how those seeds of hope might yet be sown,
Whose fruit is Evil's mortal poison:  well,
For us, this ruin made a watch-tower lone,
But Cythna's eyes looked faint, and now two days were gone

Since she had food: &mdash; therefore I did awaken
The Tartar steed, who, from his ebon mane,
Soon as the clinging slumbers he had shaken,
Bent his thin head to seek the brazen rein,
Following me obediently; with pain
Of heart, so deep and dread, that one caress,
When lips and heart refuse to part again,
Till they have told their fill, could scarce express
The anguish of her mute and fearful tenderness,

Cythna beheld me part, as I bestrode
That willing steed &mdash; the tempest and the night,
Which gave my path its safety as I rode
Down the ravine of rocks, did soon unite
The darkness and the tumult of their might
Borne on all winds. &mdash; Far thro' the streaming rain
Floating at intervals the garments white
Of Cythna gleamed, and her voice once again
Came to me on the gust, and soon I reached the plain.

I dreaded not the tempest, nor did he
Who bore me, but his eyeballs wide and red
Turned on the lightning's cleft exultingly;
And when the earth beneath his tameless tread,
Shook with the sullen thunder, he would spread
His nostrils to the blast, and joyously
Mock the fierce peal with neighings ; &mdash; thus we sped
O'er the lit plain, and soon I could descry
Where Death and Fire had gorged the spoil of victory.

There was a desolate village in a wood
Whose bloom-inwoven leaves now scattering fed
The hungry storm; it was a place of blood,
A heap of hearthless walls, &mdash; the flames were dead
Within those dwellings now, &mdash; the life had fled
From all those corpses now, &mdash; but the wide sky
Flooded with lightning was ribbed overhead
By the black rafters, and around did lie
Women, and babes, and men, slaughtered confusedly.

Beside the fountain in the market-place
Dismounting, I beheld those corpses stare
With horny eyes upon each other's face,
And on the earth and on the vacant air,
And upon me, close to the waters where
I stooped to slake my thirst; &mdash; I shrank to taste,
For the salt bitterness of blood was there;
But tied the steed beside, and sought in haste
If any yet survived amid that ghastly waste.

No living thing was there beside one woman,
Whom I found wandering in the streets, and she
Was withered from a likeness of aught human
Into a fiend, by some strange misery:
Soon as she heard my steps she leaped on me,
And glued her burning lips to mine, and laughed
With a loud, long, and frantic laugh of glee,
And cried, "Now Mortal, thou hast deeply quaffed
The Plague's blue kisses &mdash; soon millions shall pledge the draught!

"My name is Pestilence &mdash; this bosom dry,
Once fed two babes &mdash; a sister and a brother&mdash;
When I came home, one in the blood did lie
Of three death-wounds &mdash; the flames had ate the other!
Since then I have no longer been a mother,
But I am Pestilence; &mdash; hither and thither
I flit about, that I may slay and smother:&mdash;
All lips which I have kissed must surely wither,
But Death's &mdash; if thou art he, we'll go to work together!

"What seek'st thou here?  the moonlight comes in flashes,&mdash;
The dew is rising dankly from the dell&mdash;
'Twill moisten her!  and thou shalt see the gashes
In my sweet boy, now full of worms &mdash; but tell
First what thou seek'st." &mdash; " I seek for food." &mdash; "'Tis well,
Thou shalt have food; Famine, my paramour,
Waits for us at the feast &mdash; cruel and fell
Is Famine, but he drives not from his door
Those whom these lips have kissed, alone.  No more, no more!"

As thus she spake, she grasped me with the strength
Of madness, and by many a ruined hearth
She led, and over many a corpse: &mdash; at length
We came to a lone hut, where on the earth
Which made its floor, she in her ghastly mirth
Gathering from all those homes now desolate,
Had piled three heaps of loaves, making a dearth
Among the dead &mdash; round which she set in state
A ring of cold, stiff babes; silent and stark they sate.

She leaped upon a pile, and lifted high
Her mad looks to the lightning, and cried:
"Eat!  Share the great feast &mdash; to-morrow we must die!"
And then she spurned the loaves with her pale feet,
Towards her bloodless guests; &mdash; that sight to meet,
Mine eyes and my heart ached, and but that she
Who loved me, did with absent looks defeat
Despair, I might have raved in sympathy;
But now I took the food that woman offered me;

And vainly having with her madness striven
If I might win her to return with me,
Departed In the eastern beams of Heaven
The lightning now grew pallid &mdash; rapidly,
As by the shore of the tempestuous sea
The dark steed bore me, and the mountain grey
Soon echoed to his hoofs, and I could see
Cythna among the rocks, where she alway
Had sate, with anxious eyes fixed on the lingering day.

And joy was ours to meet:  she was most pale,
Famished, and wet and weary, so I cast
My arms around her, lest her steps should fail
As to our home we went, and thus embraced,
Her full heart seemed a deeper joy to taste
Than e'er the prosperous know; the steed behind
Trod peacefully along the mountain waste,
We reached our home ere morning could unbind
Night's latest veil, and on our bridal couch reclined.

Her chilled heart having cherished in my bosom,
And sweetest kisses past, we two did share
Our peaceful meal: &mdash; as an autumnal blossom
Which spreads its shrunk leaves in the sunny air,
After cold showers, like rainbows woven there,
Thus in her lips and cheeks the vital spirit
Mantled, and in her eyes, an atmosphere
Of health, and hope; and sorrow languished near it,
And fear, and all that dark despondence doth inherit.

