ST ANDREWS!  name unmeet for tuneful lay,
And all unapt the Bard for tuneful part&mdash;
Be his the task thy features to pourtray,
Thy every charm of nature and of art;
Thy bays, thy rocks, thy ruins that apart
Uplift their towers beneath the pale moon beam,
Thy colleges that form the head and heart,
Professors, which those colleges beseem,
Thy student, golfer-crew &mdash; a multifarious theme!

Be mine the rocky station that o'erlooks
The rushing German, in his wintry guise
Whilst not one wing the sweeping tempest brooks,
Nor shines one friendly star amid the skies,
Till on the dusky brow of night arise,
Struggling to pierce the belt of darkness thro',
Greeting with saviour gleam, the sailor's eyes,
A ruddy Star of ever changing hue,
Which shoots its trembling rays afar o'er ocean blue.

Be mine in summer air from eastern verge,
The dim discovered, ever passing sail,
The broad capacious bay, where dark and large
The snorting porpoise shews his shapeless tail,
Nor ever silent to the sea-bird's wail
O'er sands more level than the marble deep,
Thro' which an oily path-way seems to trail,
And far beneath upfrowns the nodding steep,
Whilst twilight stillness holds, and day-born breezes sleep.

Or give me to enjoy the cooling wave,
Which gently tides these rocky creeks along,
Whilst many a fervid wight, his limbs to lave,
Essays his swimming powers, the surge among,
And all around is summer's motley throng,
The limpet fish-wife searching with her creel,
And youth's unhallowed jeer, and boyhood's song,
And stranger's downward peep, and lass's squeel,
Expressive of the rage they much affect to feel.

But on that creek, designed the "witch's lake,"
Let winter rush in desolation wide,
Till all the "hill," where suffered at the stake
Th' unhappy victim, mingle with the tide!
There let no grass appear, no fish abide
For ever!  This thy destiny and doom&mdash;
But o'er the drifted bark let ruin ride,
And shipwrecked sailor find an early tomb,
And venturous swimmer sink amidst his youthful bloom.

But spare old ocean, oh!  in mercy spare,
That green recess which freshens on the view,
And I will plant one little chaplet there,
Of brightest bay, and never fading yew,
Sacred to those successfully who drew
The Scottish bow, in that auspicious day,
When to their king and native prowess true,
They bore from Gallic skill the prize away,
The prince-beseeming Butt, imperial Malmsy.

Beware, oh stranger, howsoe'er intent,
To cross that little rivulet, beware,
For bleaching in the sun, of noxious scent,
The carcases of horses lumber there;
Bare is each rib, the leg and cheek-bone bare,
And rotting in the filth the victim lies
Of man's ingratitude &mdash; 'tis nothing rare!
Vile brutish man his selfish purpose buys,
Then turns his servant o'er a prey to dogs and flies.

Be rather mine at eve's untroubled hour
Beneath thy ruined towers to hold my way,
To feel oblivion's sorrow-soothing power
Come o'er the recollections of the day,
Till up the past the soul be borne away,
To times of superstition, hurt and shame,
Thro' which the Legate moved, and Friar Grey;
Till many a noted, long forgotten name,
Rise from their mother dust, then sink to sleep again.

And grant me at some midnight tide to view
The solemn moonshine drifting down the night,
Whilst all above is one unclouded blue,
And all below is lovely on the sight,
Beneath the softening influence of light.
Along these cliffs be mine in peace to stray,
While thro' each shattered wall, and turret height,
The beaming glory pours cross my way,
And many a mirrored beam bright sparkles from the bay.

Here let me muse on all the motley crew,
That graced or shamed this memorable place,
(Since when, St. Rule, thy masonry was new,
How vast the wear of man's time-wasted race,)
Each plundering each in undulating chace,
The march of mind thro' error's devious way,
Grim superstition's terror-breathing face,
The twilight of reform, truth's lightning ray
That burst upon these towers in ruin and dismay.

Within these walls of high cathedral state,
No altar, priesthood, holy rites, appear,
Of all that once was splendid, sacred, great,
To catch the eye, or fascinate the ear!
Tis shapeless ruin all, and silence here!
And let it pass &mdash; yon starry arch remains,
The temple of our God, no hands can rear;
The work of man, or flourishes, or wanes,
Heaven's temple to the last its workmanship retains.

And let it pass &mdash; in noise and tumult melt
Down with each monument of man's disgrace:
Here leagued with tyrants superstition dwelt,
And forged their chains to subjugate our race!
It is a hateful, much detested place.
The place of skulls, golgotha of our Isle,
Thro' every shattered arch, and window-space,
I see thy features, reformation, smile,
Whilst Knox stands musing by and freedom shouts the while.

And let it pass &mdash; and passing in its train,
Down to the waves of darkness evermore,
Descend that ruined "castle" of the main,
That hurls its tide-worn fragments on the shore,
Beneath it still let mining surges roar,
Till nothing shall survive of all the boast,
Of him, whose hands were red in human gore,
Who joyed a brother-man in flames to roast.
Inhuman was the act, the actor most accurst!

Besuits it too to muse on later times,
To which that Aisle attracts the gazer's heed,
That monument to infamy and crimes,
To every crooked, every cruel deed!
"Drive furiously along, postilion speed,
Th' avenger is behind thee, urge thy flight,
Oh save thy master in his utmost need;
And save from future obloquy, and blight
The covenanted cause of Scotland, and of right."

And died the Shepherd at his shieling door,
And gasped frail womanhood amidst the flood,
Did Scotland grieve from east to western shore,
Her glens and mountain-wastes besmeared with blood?
Hast thou on every free-born feeling trod,
With unrelenting malice urging on,
Condemned the guiltless, and betrayed thy God
Till all thy cup of crime was overrun,
And must we own, at last, the deed was foully done?

Not all the sympathy thy fate demands,
And every human heart will mourn the deed
Which stained with priestly blood unholy hands,
Nor reverenced a parent's hoary head,
But in a daughter's presence, saw him bleed!
Not all that power, that party can attest,
That even this lying monument can plead,
Can wipe one drop from out thy mitred crest,
Nor of eternal shame thy memory divest.

Then turn we from the view to yonder Fane,
Where sleeps the dust, Salvator, of thy Sire;
Long may that curious workmanship remain,
In mimic cornice, tracery, and spire,
For many a passing stranger to admire,
Whose heart, when pausing on the solemn past,
Shall in a prayer of gratitude aspire,
To him whose virtues as his name shall last,
Till baffled nature sink in one oblivion vast!

The men of blood have passed and dosing still
O'er them and theirs comes darkness and despight,
The fame of nobler minds, like mountain rill,
Burst out at length in all its crystal light:
As smiles mid yonder heaven the queen of night,
They ray their beams to Time's unmeasured line,
Whilst fades each twinkling starlet on the sight,
In all their native loveliness they shine,
Asserting from their orbs pre-eminence divine!

Of this enough.  Along thy stretching quay,
Whilst fishermen unships his finny store,
Let me advance, the Haddock, Cod, to see,
Dragged by the noisy fish-wife to the shore.
Meanwhile the husband rests upon his oar,
His labour past, or swings his chilly hands,
Advancing homewards; whilst his steps before
Runs gleesome speed, and ragged filth in bands,
Which nor a mother's threats, nor father's curse commands.

And now the baskets are arranged and set,
Crammed with a scaly mass of teeming life;
The husband idly smokes, or mends a net,
Trusting the sale to ever-bustling wife,
Who, glorying in the bothering and the strife,
From house to house her boasted treasure bears,
Or mounted on a cart for Cupar-Fife
To market-cross, on market-day, repairs,
And palms on Writer fat her finger-fumblesd wares.

But hark!  'tis Croaking Johnny's little bell
That tinkling jingles him along the street
In accents of the damned, his tale to tell,
And totter on with time unsettled feet
And fresh are all his fish, his butter sweet,
Yet cares he not the message to deny,
But "rather dowed," will knowingly repeat,
If that a sage professor pass him by,
And ride-long tip the wink with truth enquiring eye.

 [Stanzas XXII-XXV are represented by asterisks.]

Strange City of Obscurity come forth
From out thy native darkness into day,
Stand lampless in the nightly stranger's path,
And spread thy masonry amidst his way,
Nor be those heaps concealed, which fishers lay.
In close array, along thy narrow lanes,
Thy street-ward dunghills festering to the ray
Of mid-day sun, thy "causeway" that retains
Of sun-dried fish the glaze, of every filth the stains.

Ye Deacons, Bailies, that enrich the state
And Parliament with wisdom and controul,
Who having dined abroad, returning late,
Besplash your stockings in the gutter-hole&mdash;
Or 'midst the mud magnificently roll,
Shine out in lamps on this unhallowed night,
Or people will affirm, upon my soul,
Because your actions cannot brook the light,
You robe them in a veil of darkness from the sight.

Oh!  dull resort of every sickened brain,
Flesh-lacking maidenhood, with sunken eye,
The Nabob labouring with his load of gain,
Who all but health and happiness can buy,
O'er whose sun-withered heart no youthful tye
Retains a hold &mdash; the jointured widow prim&mdash;
The ever-calling dame that loves to fly
From door to door, in all her withered trim,
And boarding-school's long shew of necks and ankles slim.

All here are golfers &mdash; strangers, natives, all
The sons of science, idleness, and war,
Who can or wield a club, or hit a ball,
Professor, Soldier, Student-lad, and Tar,
And country Laird, attracted from afar,
With some mischancy Writer to engage
Whilst oft the rag, and spirit-chafing jar,
Provokes to sudden bet, and smothered rage,
Which twice another round will quietly assuage.

It is indeed a goodly right to see
These red-coat champions marshalled for the fray,
Driving the ball o'er bunker, rut, and lea,
And clearing, with imperious "hove," the way,
Enlivening still the game with laugh and say,
Whilst trotting club-man follows fast behind,
Prepared with ready hand the "tee" to lay,
With nicest eye the devious ball to find,
And of the going game each player to remind.

It is in sooth a goodly sight to see,
By east and west, the Swilkin lasses clean,
Spreading their clothes upon the daisied lea,
And skelping freely barefoot o'er the green,
With petticoats high kilted up I ween,
And note of jocund ribaldry most meet;
From washing tub their glowing limbs are seen
Veiled in an upward shower of dewy weet!
Oh!  'tis enough to charge an anchorite with heat!

Is there dull student much disposed to watch
By midnight lamp, on lettered page to pore,
O'er problematic lines his head to scratch,
Or cram his skull with philologic lore;
"A skinny thoughtfulness," book-withered sore,
Night-dried, and costive, seldom at his ease,
Whose very food is nutriment no more ;
Let him with distant peep his fancy please,
While careful Johny bulls most knowingly the "Tees."

Ye doctors that attack book-reading men
With bolus, potion, recreative drug,
Who do your best, and doing what you can,
Lodge them be-east the town in mansion snug,
Go, and administer to lady's pug,
Which backward strains with many a rueful look;
Yon frame so sappy, and yon face so smug,
From air and exercise its physic took,
And for these manly sports your laxatives forsook.

Ye who uplift instructions hallowed lid,
To minds prepared, or not prepared to drink,
Oh, kindly view the effort, if unbid,
I strive your merits to invest in clink:
Blink on my labour, only deign to blink,
And I shall sing, as never Phoebus sung;
Already am I maddening, yes I think
I feel the hurried couplets on my tongue,
And from my hiving brain are winged ideas flung.

But who may dare with temerarious pen,
Of "Masters nine," the merits to pourtray,
To reach the depths of professorial men,
In sober, suiting, inoffensive lay,
"Bout ship," to leeward I behold the spray,
The angry waves with chafing rocks contend,
The anchor from my bow is borne away,
The breakers burst around my nether end,
And o'er my dripping deck a thundering drift they send!

Grave City of instruction, pregnant still
With Latin, Greek, Philosophy, and Truth,
With all that nerves the soul, or guides the will,
That forms the habits of untutored youth,
Thou art a very hospital, in sooth;
Thither resort, diseases of the mind,
Dark ignorance, rusticity uncouth,
And doubt's hysteric-fit, and error blind,
And vanity blown up with unemitted wind.

Thither resort, the Grampian sons of frost
Y-born beneath a drifted heap of snow,
Questioning the miles, the labour, and the cost,
O'er many a mountain sheep-tract, as they go;
It is indeed a smile provoking, show,
To view these mountaineers in scarlet gown,
Whilst peeps the coarse and clouted garb below,
Seeming their present purpose to disown,
And through their winter robe with summer visage frown.

And lurks there, too, beneath that rustic form,
Stout resolution, never-damped emprise,
The heart prepared to brave misfortune's storm,
And o'er adversity in triumph rise,
Nerve to perform, and wisdom to devise;
These are thy guardians, Scotia, ever true,
True as the Pole star of their native skies;
What time fell Gaul, her mailed host updrew,
And many a bonnet waved o'er blood-stained Waterloo.

And thither doth repair a straggling band,
From Western islands, and Atlantic roar,
And still at leisure hour they haunt the sands,
Shooting their kindred sea-gull on the shore;
Not much affect they literary lore,
But chieftain-born, they love the chieftain-life,
And deem it folly o'er a book to pore,
Wasting the Sunny morn of human life,
Apart from vassal-state, and revelry, and strife.

And here conveen Anguscan, Fifan, each
Mamma's own progeny in head and heart
And thither flock the sons of those that preach
"In Mary's sacred bowers" to play their part,
And nature yields to all subduing art.
Then, like the Chrysolis disrupt the shell
Forth from their crusted awkwardness they start,
Assume the beau &mdash; yet just it is to tell,
Draining the hallow'd tide from Mary's sacred well.

And here be sure fair science spreads her wing,
From College turrets o'er the gaping town,
And doubtless here does "Cassilis Catherine" fling
Amidst the listening crowd her message down!
All-learning here, is learning to disown,
There is no love of science in the place,
The very soul by moss is overgrown;
It is a scandal-propagating race,
Whose ignorance sits throned on each unmeaning face.

This is the day of trial &mdash; dreadful thought!
That day to which so many days have led,
When sage Professors robed in deepest thought,
And gown of dread solemnity, have sped
To sit in judgment on each college lad,
To lift Examination's eagle eye,
To hear the problem solved, the classics read;
By varied question, varied merit try,
Whilst [Greek characters]  blazes from on high.

The work is done, the sixth day's labour o'er,
The seventh day comes, a day of welcome rest,
Respite from sitting, now a rest no more,
As every nether bone can well attest,
And deep-depressed seat, where like a nest
Of learned loin remains the indented shape;
All merit here is who attends the best
Resists all inclination to escape,
Filling the student's eye with Professorial shape.

But see they scud their classic garb aside,
In social dress they congregate to dine
Where what of comfort may in beef reside
Or what of merriment in cheering wine
Is shine, and most deservedly is shine,
Thou labourer of the winter, fagged, and dull;
Thy pupils yet, through other years shall shine,
To distant times shall glow each student skull,
From Cheviot's southern ridge to furthest peak of Mull.

Thus far the Muse, in mad unlicensed lay,
Hath run the gauntlet of her wild career,
Nor did she yet one sober truth essay,
But streight she marred the couplet with a jeer:
But fair and softly &mdash; now the end is near&mdash;
Of sober truth, one parting stave I sue,
One verse which merit may unblushing hear,
And genius recognize as justly due,
This tribute of respect I imprecate of you.

Edina's sons with hammers may combine,
And knowledge dig from out the very cliff,
And Glasgow boys in composition shine,
And Aberdonians may do well enough;
But thou, St. Andrew, art the very stuff,
In classic, moral, mathematic lore;
All other Colleges, thou beat'st to snuff,
Great Alma Mater of our kings of yore;
Ere yet our Scottish Prince a southren sceptre bore.

Thy pupils more enured to sober thought,
More deeply conversant in classic page,
With useful knowledge more completely fraught,
More mentally matured in early age;
Than &mdash; but I greatly scruple to engage
By contrast thus thy merits to compare,
Else my last sixpence I could safely pledge,
There is no seat of education where
Professors teach their sons Salvation with thy care.

And who is he our Northern Davy deemed;
And who is this our Scottish D'Alembert,
Who from our Northern hemisphere have beamed,
In glowing radiance, o'er the world afar,
Though seated they in fame's far-beaming car,
By genius lifted to her highest moon,
Though shining forth, "o'er morn and evening star;"
Salvator fed them with her classic spoon,
And crammed with mother care her mathematics down.

And now, farewell my theme, my task is o'er;
Professors, Students, Golfers, all farewell.
Farewell ye Dames that sit before your door,
Queens of the midden-dub and mussel-shell,
Of you no more, nor of your fish I tell;
Farewell ye Lanes, a long farewell to you,
Your breath betrays a most ungrateful smell;
Farewell ye streets, my gown where off I threw;
Ye Towers and Ruined Walls &mdash; Adieu &mdash; Adieu &mdash;  Adieu!
