Oh Thou, whom eye hath seen not, ne'er shall see!
Whose way is in the deep &mdash; whose steps unknown,
Enshrin'd thyself in clouds of mystery,
Yet darting beams of heavenly brightness down,
Thou art my God; and prostrate at thy throne,
And warm in Faith, and strengthen'd by thy power,
I yield my all &mdash; Oh God, accept thine own,
From the frail heart that seeks to know no more
Than that Thou liv'st and reign'st, to tremble and adore.

Oh, let my soul, content to worship Thee,
Each daring thought, each prouder wish resign;
Till thine own voice shall set the spirit free,
And mortal knowledge ripen to divine!
Perhaps, (forgive that daring hope of mine,)
Thine eye of grace the humble thought may view,
And bid thy heavenly light more brightly shine
On those who, panting for its beams, yet knew
To wait in patient hope, till death the veil undrew.

Oh, not on doubt's interminable main
Let my frail bark by varying winds be tost,
Where human aid, alas!  but shews in vain
To the wreck'd wretch the port for ever lost:
Who shall assuage thy woes "when tempest tost"?
Or speak of comfort, "comfortless" to thee?
Who, but the Power that knows thy weakness most,
And in his own good time shall set thee free,
Spreading the oil of peace o'er thy tumultuous sea?

And let not him who never felt a fear,
Safe in his pride of heart, thy woes deride;
Perhaps that scornful eye or brow severe
Hath thoughts less hallow'd thou thine own to hide.
E'en the dark days of doubt have purified
My chasten'd soul from many an earthly stain;
And chas'd, for ever clos'd, the demon pride
That once had mark'd thee in his menial train;
But now hath lost his power, and spreads his lures in vain.

Father of Life, whose "loveliest name is Love,"
Whose throne the humble seek &mdash; the guilty fly,
Thou art my God &mdash; around, beneath, above,
I trace no frowns, no terrors in thine eye,
All breathes of that pervading harmony
Which draws from present ill the future good:
All leads our spirits to that peaceful sky
Where banish'd far, nor sorrow's gloomy mood,
Nor fancy's wayward dreams, nor real ills intrude.
