How careless meets our little world again!
Sad only that such meeting comes so fast&mdash;
And whether more of pleasure, or of pain,
Hath o'er the idle interval been cast,
Is equal now &mdash; the motley crowd throngs past;
Some, whose first wond'ring gaze these scenes engage;
Some who with calmer feelings look their last;
And quit the precincts of life's happier age,
To play a busier part upon a wider stage.

And some are gone forever: &mdash; where is He,
Happy in well-earn'd fame so lately seen?
Now taught, alas!  how quick the loss may be
Of all, which loveliest in our life hath been!
He snatch'd the cup of Honour; and between
None came to dash it from him &mdash; he has quaff'd
That cup, so sweetly, smilingly serene;
And then, ev'n then, Death hover'd near and laugh'd,
As if there lurk'd beneath some poison in the draught!

They say, in spirit free and frank he shone,
And warm in heart &mdash; both now are quell'd and cold&mdash;
Was gay &mdash; but now his gaiety is gone&mdash;
Was fair in looks, which none shall more behold
With pleasure, or with envy &mdash; had unroll'd
The book of knowledge, yet was skill'd and bold
In youth's more manly graces: &mdash; why are told
The gifts which, though they deck'd him, could not save?
Wit, talents, beauty, strength, lie with him in the grave.

They say, a mother gaz'd upon that youth
With most maternal fondness; and would pray,
That turning all her dearest hopes to Truth,
His rising honours might her cares repay,
And, ever strength'ning, shed a brighter ray,
To warm the frost of her declining soul,
And gild its darkness! &mdash; Ye vain thoughts away!
Those fond desires shall never reach their goal;
But cheerless to their end her wint'ry years must roll!

Yet died he, as the wise might wish to die,
With his fresh fame upon him; while the dear,
The approving smile of friendship met his eye,
The voice of Gratulation sooth'd his ear.
We may die otherwise:  our dim career
May rise and set in darkness; or may give
Some partial gleams, that leave more drear:
And oh!  'tis sad their brightness to survive,
And die, when nought remains for which 'twere well to live!
