Hast thou not left whereon to hang a rhyme?
Nothing whereby to fix thy early birth?
Plague on't!  thou wert a favourite with Time,
Yet his hard hand hath patted thee to earth!&mdash;
How thou once gave thy marble halls to mirth,
Where now the mean usurping nettle springs;
What bold War-Chiefs and Dames of lofty worth,
There hung their nights on pleasurable wings:
Ah me!  no music now &mdash; save when the bleak wind sings.

Thy poor old sides are naked to the skin!
And what unseemly rents are gaping there!
Thy big proud head hath long since fallen in;
Yet they have clapt a modern mock'ry where
Thine own rose high to catch the purer air.
One lone weak branch of ivy to the blast
Flings ever and anon her limbs, all bare;
Like a poor Orphan to the world out cast,
Sighing aloud that each rude sweep may be her last.

Where are thy clanging doors? &mdash; thy lofty towers?
Of bright blue waters where the ample sheet?&mdash;
Where are thy roomy parks, and cool dark bowers?
The enamell'd ground that flush'd around thy feet?
Fit place for Kings from bus'ness to retreat.
Are they all gone?  All melted to "thin air?"
Nought left but proof that Time and Ruin meet,
To make strange havoc in this world of care!
A skeleton behold &mdash; a wreck of things that were!

To-day the Monarch nods beneath a crown,
A crown perchance with ages' wisdom fraught:
Look ye to-morrow &mdash; Well? &mdash; All crumbled down;
All into one most pigmy atom wrought!
Worth millions now &mdash; to-morrow not a thought.
It matters not with Time, whate'er we prize&mdash;
Whatever good, our mortal ties have caught&mdash;
Love, honour, friendship, glory, all are spies,
That, smiling, crush to death, our best, best sympathies!

Farewell, old Ruin:  I shall think on thee,
I'll read thy lesson on life's dreary way:
Thou tell'st me plainly, that my path may flee,
Clean off that bears me gaily up to-day,
Leaving me stuck down deep in mire and clay;
"Go to &mdash; be wise."  I will, and that in time,
Ere fades my taper to an ev'ning grey:&mdash;
Ere life's clear stream is weeded o'er with crime,
My thoughts, big clouds their steps, still Heavenward shall climb!
