I stand within Pompeii; and mine eyes
Recall the images of childhood dream:
Forgotten splendours from the dust arise&mdash;
And triumphs wheel again, and eagles gleam;
But soon the vision dies in reason's beam:
The pageant colours fade and dissipate:
The loud acclaim is hush'd, and heroes seem
To shrink into the tombs of ancient great&mdash;
While all around is silent, lifeless, desolate.

O ye whose ardent antiquarian zeal
Upheaves the column from its sandy tomb;
Who pore, with pleasure ye alone can feel,
O'er shiver'd monuments of mighty Rome!
Behold where, rescu'd from her parents' doom,
A daughter of your mistress lifts her veil;
And girt with many an hue of ancient bloom,
That her long sleep has not sufficed to pale,
Sits in her open grave and woos again the gale.

Her masters died &mdash; Pompeii only slept,
A changeless sleep, thro' ages full of change:
Her sister-cities, war and whirlwind swept,
Forbid within her buried halls to range,
Or aught by ruin consecrate, derange:
She lay like beauty tranc'd in beauty's shrine;
Meanwhile the world above grew old and strange,
Rome learn'd to conquer in another sign,
When glory's rampart fell protected by divine.

Above her silent grave the vines were strung
In purple wealth, stretched out from tree to tree;
And children gambol'd oft, and peasants sung
The last faint songs of Roman liberty:
Beneath 'twas one wide wild'ring vacancy,
With judgment seats that had survived their laws,
And stately halls that were a mockery:
Where worms usurp'd the seats of senators,
And lay in lazy coil in bath or polished vase.

Lull'd by the busy murmurs of the day,
The watchman slumber'd thro' the stilly night;
The volumed vapours on Vesuvius lay,
And Nature, shudd'ring, usher'd in the light.
When, hark!  loud bellowing from its flaming height,
'Mid air the mountain hurls its storm of stones;
Fast ebbs the foaming sea, and wild affright,
In misery's sad variety of tones,
Commingles childhood's shriek and age's feeble groans.

A tow'ring column, lit by balls of fire
And sheets of flame, went roaring up on high,
As tho' the giant should again aspire,
Bursting his bounds, to beat down heaven's pure sky,
With fierce and demon-wrought artillery:
Till, spending all his strength in effort vain,
Foil'd, and in a rage, he turns his pow'r to try
On earth &mdash; abandon'd to his horrid reign:
So spent, the mountain's storm comes thundering to the plain.

In fatal speed adown its smoking side,
Thro' the thick clouds the floods of lava break:
Spread as they go, transforming in their tide
The fertile plain to one black boiling lake.
To sounds of woe the sylvan echoes wake;
The bleating flocks wild round their pastures roam,
While shepherds, husbandmen &mdash; all, all forsake
Their fleecy wealth, their labours, and their home,
And join the shrieking crowd that choak the road to Rome.

One dared return, by hope of plunder led,
Tho' earth was rocking 'neath his flying feet;
Return'd with light'nings hanging round his head,
Brush'd off the gath'ring stones descending fleet,
And ent'ring found the miser at his seat!
Both shudd'ring turn'd, and fled from whence they came,
Inhaled the sulphur breath, and found ('twas meet),
A night of ashes in a world of flame!
Past is that long, long night, behold them still the same!

Save that on these poor bones now bare and dry,
A scented coat of flesh was hung of old;
And from these hollows lowr'd a jaundic'd eye,
As tho' 'twere "stain'd with watchings of its gold."
But still, as then, his linked fingers fold
Around, as if he sought to hide, his keys;
While the gaunt robber grasping in his hold,
A purse that panic paused awhile to seize,
Stands in the eye of day, and crumbles in the breeze.

The marble slab at yonder doorway placed,
Is stained with wine pour'd out to fav'ring Jove:
The cups remain &mdash; the drinkers fled in haste,
Compell'd with houseless multitudes to rove.
Yet were there deeds of piety and love
That none could mark, and none here giv'n to fame:
And some that like Rome's flying father strove
To snatch a parent from impending flame,
Themselves caught up to heav'n have left on earth no name.

These painted walls, like mirth above the graves,
Appal, methinks, while they delight the eye:
'Tis seventeen ages since, some trembling slaves
Sought, in the cells beneath, a place to die!
Who ent'reth there may still their forms descry,
By ashes press'd against yon farthest wall;
His lip still moves as though it breath'd their sigh,
And his ear beat as tho' it heard their call,
Sent up to Heav'n and men &mdash; but sent in vain to all.

Pass we yon prison's fettered skeletons,
Ring-bound, and shrunken in their ancient chain;
Pass we where Italy's benighted sons
To idols bow'd in this time-honour'd fane.
Here fancy's fair creation once held reign,
Minerva's crested brows, Apollo's lyre,
And Venus rose from Neptune's clasp again,
While, side by side, stood frowning o'er their fire,
Imaginings of fear and demons of desire.

Statues are here raised to the doubly brave,
Who more than empires, their own hearts subdued;
And some that from the chisel of a slave
Came forth to sooth a tyrant's tiger-mood.
There, honour'd still by Roman feelings, stood
The patriot with his brow of stern control,
Furrow'd with thoughts that for his country brood,
And with one cent'ring int'rest of the soul,
O'er ages, blest and free, beguiled a trusting roll.

Oh, Rome!  the vast, the mighty, and the stern,
Oft to thy chequer'd page our minds resort,
And drink in silence from thy fallen urn,
The soul of liberty, and manly thought.
The gorgeous splendours of thy golden court,
Thy taunted captives, and thy thronging slaves,
And thy wide circus, with its brutal sport,
We envy not &mdash; where happier pow'r but waves
Where thy proud eagle tore, and where it trampled saves.
