And has Childe Harold bade us, then, farewell!
The gifted being, in whose deep felt woes
A thousand hearts have shared?  Is then the spell
Wherewith he bound the nations doom'd to close
While his departing strain more sweetly flows
Than all that charm'd before?  Lone bird of night,
Ere melts thy thrilling music in repose,
So dost thou kindle more intense delight,
Winding the raptured spirit to its utmost height.

Offspring of Truth and Fancy &mdash; undefin'd,
Childe Harold, thou dost flit before mine eyes,
Link'd with whatever leads th' admiring mind
In blest captivity:  and as I see thee rise,
Soaring o'er snowy Alps through starry skies,
Watchful I strive thine inmost soul to know,
And mark if Fate reserves some lofty prize,
To pay the mighty debt we mortals owe,
Whose bosoms in thy radiant sunshine melt and glow.

Nor to this age is circumscribed the boon;
Ever enlarging, as the tide of time
Sweeps all away beneath the changing moon,
Save man's immortal thought, and lofty rhyme;
While empires vanish, they shall rise sublime,
Their aye-increasing boughs shall spread in air,
For ever blooming in the greenest prime;
And in the flower and fruit their branches bear,
Myriads unborn, with grateful orisons, shall share.

Lord of the lyre!  why banish from our eyes
One thou hast thus enrooted in the heart,
And with thyself combined in such a guise,
That none have found the keenly-sought-for art,
To trace the wav'ring boundaries that part
The brilliant halo from its parent star;
In whose Promethean ray past feelings start
Into young life, though dimly seen, and far
Glimm'ring through Time's dark cloud their causes are.

Oh, deem not all ungrateful to thy muse,
Though she has forc'd &mdash; not won &mdash; the world's applause,
Which many an envious tongue would fain refuse.
A searching spirit &mdash; with an eye that awes,
And heart that beats in Freedom's holy cause,
Are of light value to the sons of clay,
Who scan the diamond but to seek its flaws,
To them more welcome than its brightest ray,
Easing the deep respect their hearts perforce must pay.

High priest of beauty! &mdash; thou whose gifted eyes,
Her lightest step through secret haunts can trace:
Whether on Nature's snowy breast she lies,
In Alpine solitudes, with awful grace&mdash;
Breathes a sweet sadness o'er Medora's face&mdash;
Flings from the cool cascade her silvery spray;
Or linked with death, in strange sublime embrace,
O'er icy features sheds a parting ray,
Moulding, in marble loveliness, the cold transparent clay.

Thou poet's poet! &mdash; for they most admire
Who best adore the powers of sacred song,
Thy thoughts condens'd &mdash; thy words of purest fire,
The breathing sweets that to thy strain belong,
Shedding their fragrance &mdash; e'en when dark and strong,
Dismay and horror bind us in the chain
Thine hands have wrought &mdash; and bring a countless host
Of images we seek to chase in vain:
In dreadful beauty they maintain their post,
And he most feels the barbed shaft, who struggles most.

Thou poet of Remorse!  thy moral strain,
Searching our hearts, e'en to the inmost core,
Stern in its sweetness &mdash; is not heard in vain:
Thy warning voice, that bids us sin nor more;
Painting th' internal fires that o'er and o'er,
Burn in the bosom of the guilty man;
(Burn, but consume not) &mdash; and from shore to shore,
Cling to the pilgrim in his fruitless plan
To fly from mem'ry's grasp, on earth's contracted span.

When thoughts, too full their likeness words to find,
Press'd on this o'er-fraught heart, and bade it break,
Thy strong expressions eas'd my tortur'd mind,
And gave my struggling sorrows power to speak.
Nor vainly at thy hands shall Passion seek,
The soul-felt language of delight or pain,
But hanging o'er thy page with changeful cheek,
And flashing eye &mdash; find thine unearthly strain,
Like a clear mirror &mdash; give the life of life again.

Perhaps 'tis well thy varied song should end
With him &mdash; the glorious image of the day:
Thy verse personified.  'Tis thine to blend,
Opposing graces with harmonious sway,
Like that embodied emblem of thy lay.
As conscious power, and beautiful disdain,
Are there attemper'd with the purest ray
Of loveliness &mdash; e'er lent on earth to reign;
So to forgiveness melts thy strong indignant strain.

Farewell a while!  for we shall one day meet,
Perchance in brighter spheres, if not in this.
Oh, who can see Hope's early visions fleet,
Nor turn to other worlds for views of bliss!
Where Malice cannot sting, nor Envy hiss!
Nor merit rise, a mark for Folly's dart,
(Her dart, 'though blunt, is seldom known to miss);
Nor love be deemed the weakness of the heart;
Nor souls, in tenderest bonds entwined, foredoom'd to part.
