The blue eyed Wanderer is return'd again,
The stamp of many a summer on his brow,
Where images &mdash; that o'er his youthful brain
In fleet succession pass'd &mdash; have settled now;
But not companions scatter'd or laid low,
Nor change by time ywrought upon his prey,
Have quelled the young enthusiast; still the glow
Flushes his cheek, as in his earlier day,
When throbbed his young heart high at Beauty's maddening lay.

See from his free limbs how they fall away&mdash;
The soft, luxurious foreign chains that bound him&mdash;
At the rude welcome of our ocean spray;
While England winding her white arm around him;
Presseth to joy that she again hath found him;
Kneeling in duty to his native land
Upon the spot where late her blessing crown'd him,
Swelled the true impulse of his good right hand,
And gave to lofty thought the brow her sea-breeze fanned.

Italian skies have glowed upon his view,
Helvetian melodies enriched his ear;
Yet sighs he not such charms to bid adieu&mdash;
He shall their loveliness encounter here,
In eyes, for blue expression without peer,
And in the voice from Her soft bosom swelling,
Whose dimple doth imbed a joyful tear,
For hour beyond all youthful hour excelling,
Illumining thro'out the soul's irradiate dwelling.

Maids of his native land he loves you well,
Your household loveliness he knows to prize;
Albeit he of other nymphs could tell,
Idalia's blue &mdash; Iberia's sparkling eyes,
And Gallic lips, where beauty laughs and lies
Thro' coiffure, rouge and aimabilite;
But dearer far to him your native guise.
Your open-hearted frankness that would say,
"There's joy within our hearts, and therefore are we gay."

Hark, from the roof of his paternal hall
Acclaim of visitor and vassal blending,
Echoes his name along the leafy wall,
That o'er yon throng unto the castle wending,
In mimicry of Gothic arch is bending;
The while his presence lights up every eye,
To gladness uncontrolled it's triumph lending:
But there are bosoms in the crowd that sigh
For one calm hour, to list his travel's history.

Nor long before the traveller's tale will flow,&mdash;
First of the spot where Albion sprung to wield
Her weapon, tried in tyrants' overthrow,
Red Waterloo's anticipated field;
Where France her faulchion drew for lack of shield,
And flung her scabbard at the foe in heat,
Yet was enforced another plume to yield,
Tho' led by one, for onset and retreat
Alike in war renowned, the man of winged feet.

Plumed then be every foot!  &mdash; faint sons of Gaul!
The foe is far upon the road before ye;
There is no rallying round your Capital,&mdash;
Vainly in den of crime, or hall of glory,
Plot the performers of Her tragic story:
Already Conquest to the Arts hath cried&mdash;
No more at such a shrine shall man adore ye;
Back to thy lowest ebb, Imperial tide,
And o'er thy billows float the galleries of Her pride.&mdash;"

The islander, in pride of empire scoffed,
Had then her palaces and places thronged;
The standard o'er her ramparts wav'd aloft,
That to the scorned and hated land belonged;
And o'er the world had triumph, trumpet tongued,
Oblivion of the reckless past proclaim'd:
Whilst they, the free-born conquerors, doubly wronged,
Beheld their chief &mdash; astonished and ashamed&mdash;
Sanction the bloody deed that never must be named.

Ere yet the latest fiat was gone forth,
All eyes of all men center'd upon him;
As flashed the instruments of kingly wrath,
The glory of his thousand fights grew dim:
Then did no vision o'er his senses swim,&mdash;
As when in Pizzo's hall, amid the gloom
A form of ghastly look and mangled limb,
Unto the warrior of the silver plume
Appeared, with angry look to taunt him with his doom?

No; the vain chief, who came with naked sword,
And heart on fire, to set the bondsmen free,
Hath now his weapon to its sheath restored,
And seized and dashed his pen through &mdash; Liberty;
With aught so sacred what to do hath he?
He &mdash; a mere warrior, &mdash; nurtur'd but to slay
By licence of the high-born powers that be;
Hath he forgotten Cintra, and the day
When Frenchmen laughed to scorn their conquerors in the fray?

Thence bounding to the Switzer's mountain land,
His young and buoyant spirit shall rehearse,
How the brave peasant, with a dauntless hand,
From his free nature shook it's bondage curse;
What time the Austrian saw his bands disperse,
And from the land he entered to subdue,&mdash;
A warrior at his weapons foiled, or worse,
A scorned and hunted fugitive, &mdash; withdrew
Before the thousand blades that flashed upon his view,

Then patriot nerves will thrill to kindling mention
Of the rich beachen shade on Uri's rock,
Where steady of his heart and eye's intention,
A father's energy withstood the shock
Of tyranny's unanswerable knock,
Falling upon the portal of his heart;
Whereat the children of the lovely Loch
Uprose, to fling their servile chains apart,
And blend that holy tie the sword alone can part.

And soon the pencilled arch o'er beauty's eye,
Will be imbowed to admiration's height,
In bright imagining of scenery,
Created for the love-lorn heart's delight,
Blazoned by golden day or silver night;
The voyage upon the lake, &mdash; the bower on shore,&mdash;
Sweet song, ascending on the clear star-light,
With faint accompaniment of dipping oar,
And ever and anon the torrent's awful roar.

But close on these delights a track hath war
Thro' Europe's adamantine breast-plate made,
And brandished to the morning light afar,
The rugged welcome of her thirsty blade;
Here did the wily Carthagenian's shade,
Startling by night Rome's latest centinel,
Reluctant from the rising day-beam fade,
And rung at parting over Alpine dell,
Upon his shadowy shield the tottering Empire's knell.

Then will the traveller's tale assume a glow,
Warm as the coloring of Italian clime
Outstretched that Alpine dizziness below;
Bower of the mimic arts, and honied rhyme!
Where yet, oh shame!  at superstition's shrine,
Man reads of God in bigotry's dull tome;
Fallen far below the spirit, and the time
When, Queen of all the land, Republic Rome
Enshrined her household gods in Freedom's early home.

And from his heart shall burst the unconscious sigh,
To tell the wreck of glories that bespread
This field of greatness utterly gone by,
Where now on every side the vulgar tread
Tramples the ashes of the mighty dead;
And man &mdash; his sense and faculties asleep&mdash;
Where freemen trode and earth's great conquerors led,
Along his glorious birthright seems to creep:&mdash;
At such a falling off who would not chuse but weep!

Glance at the lovely garment nature weaves
O'er earth and sea, from mountain peak to vale,
Even to the region whence Vesuvius heaves
Hot ashes on the mariner's far sail:
Count up her mountain streams that never fail&mdash;
Her woods, that clothe each glen's romantic bank&mdash;
Gay flowers that show fair freedom's corse more pale&mdash;
And, bating that the human soul hath shrank&mdash;
Where is the land on earth with which She may not rank?

Where is the land an empire's ample tomb
O'erwhelms in such magnificent array!
Mid bloomy flowers &mdash; the fruit of nature's womb&mdash;
Temple, and obelisk, and column grey,
And aqueduct, whose giant limbs o'erlay
The valley and its fountain, &mdash; ocean's wave
Rolling on emerald isle, or marble bay,
Sapping imperial mole, or swoln to lave
With tributary dash the last bold Roman's grave.

Nor shall the land of chivalry compete
With her, the glory of the world, and queen;
Though foiled by thee, and baffled to defeat,
Iberia!  hath the world's great conqueror been!
Though blasted in the battle, thou hast seen
From forth thy rescued land, the recreant Moor
Bear the dimm'd lustre of the crescent's sheen:
Tho' once besmear'd with crime, and stain'd with gore,
The sceptre of a world thy faithless monarchs bore.

Yet still art thou most lovely, and the tales
Of other days &mdash; recurring at the sight
Of every stream that intersects thy vales,
Or gushes from thy dizzy mountains' height&mdash;
In patriot bosoms stirs a full delight:
The castanet and light bolero still,
At nightfall cheer thy vintagers, despite
The bondage of the spirit, that would chill
The bursting bud of truth and curb the human will.

And anxious on thy beach Iberia sits,
Like Her imprisoned in the brazen tower;
And weeps, and triumphs, by alternate fits,
To see her cradled Freedom in the power
Of seas that overwhelm, and skies that lower:
Then floating in a sun-burst o'er the foam&mdash;
And bright as e'er that burst, an awful hour
In its accumulated might shall come,
And Freedom lead the free to rescue of their Home.

For doth it not the kindliest nature gall,
To see the children of a soil so fair,
Writhing in misery beneath a thrall,
That &mdash; like the Trojan serpent, every where
Straining its grasp &mdash; is coiled around them there?
While they, who from his prison-house of late&mdash;
Strong in the madness of a brave despair&mdash;
Upraised the fortunes of that poor ingrate,
Now groan beneath the yoke they battled to create.

And yet the nations have no shuddering felt,
No memory of the pious fight they won!
And therefore is no retribution dealt
For all his fiendish acts and evil done:&mdash;
But there are spirits still, &mdash; tho' some are gone,
The best and bravest of the patriot band,&mdash;
Who yet shall live to purify the throne,
With vindicating sword and fiery brand;
And sweep the pestilence from forth this lovely Land.

Man is not humbled so, &mdash; nor monarchs so
Above the genius of the world uprear'd;
Nor are they now what they have been, altho'
For one short season sanctified and feared
A senseless bigot, with a conscience seared,
And in the very wantonness of might,
And callous in forgetfulness, hath dared
Around the sun of science, and its light,
To fling a darkling cloud, and liken it to night.

And what is royalty &mdash; its envied crown
Of gem, and power, and borrowed radiance shorn&mdash;
Its throne by angry myriads trampled down&mdash;
Its sceptre broken, and its purple torn:&mdash;
What, but a mark to point the hand of scorn?
A beacon streaming o'er the sea of time,
With blood-red lustre, to deter and warn
The young and giddy aspirants, that climb
Ambition's upward rock, the precipice of crime?

But Thou, his country!  great and independent
Despite an evil star of dark portent,
That revels for a time in its ascendant,
As tho' unto thy pride in judgment sent&mdash;
His heart is full of thee; and as he bent,
That Blue-eyed wanderer of the world &mdash; his knee,
The joy within his patriot bosom pent
Burst forth in agony of prayer for thee,&mdash;
That ever thou mightest reign, the freest of the Free!

Then unalloyed be now his heart's rejoicing,
To see on every side the welcome press
Of tearful age, and boisterous stripling voicing,
In every tone, endearment, and caress.
Then unalloyed be every pleasure: &mdash; Yes!
For what hath he to do with woe or care,
With silent agony, or loud distress?
He was not born like such as me, to bear
About a load of grief, and anguish, and despair!
