Hark!  heard ye not, borne on the passing gale,
The orphan's shriek, the widow's wail of woe?
Sounds not the voice of sorrow from the vale?
Saw ye not heav'd the agonizing throe;
And from the eye the scalding tear-drop flow?
For he to whom the poor and needy sped&mdash;
He whom the houseless wand'rer hailed below&mdash;
Who dried the tears by Misery's children shed,
Lies at Death's noiseless feet, and slumbers with the dead.

The song of pleasure, or the minstrel's strain,
No more shall strike upon his listless ear;
No mourner's plaint shall break his rest again,
No spring no summer in the tomb appear:
The worm alone shall find an entrance there!
Vainly, with grateful tears, his bier we lave&mdash;
No sorrowing sigh can reach his mansion drear;
No mortal power from Death's dire dart can save,
Or break the lingering sabbath of the silent grave.

Where erst of yore the Dane's proud ensigns fled,
Where the mailed warrior high his crest did rear;
Where Alfred battled, and where Alfred bled;
Rushing impetuous on his flying rear,
Till the black raven crouched before his spear,
Where erst the war-steed spurn'd the trembling ground;
O'er these lov'd scenes, to free-born Britons dear,
THROCKMORTON cast his pitying eye around,
To banish black despair and heal misfortune's wound.

Oh!  had ye seen him, as with accents bland,
He sooth'd the wretched, set the prisoner free,
Wide scatt'ring blessings with a lavish hand,
Like a tall cedar shelt'ring many a tree,
Scarce would ye deem that one so great as he
Had silent pass'd through Jordan's refluent wave;
And reached the portals of eternity:
For could bright Virtue boast the power to save,
Then had THROCKMORTON liv'd, and triumph'd o'er the grave.

But heaven-born Virtue, though our surest friend,
Boasts not the power the Tyrant's arm to stay;
Nobler her aim, and more sublime her end,
Through life's rough path she leads the dubious way,
And when o'ercome by terror and dismay,
Our courage droops, and numerous foes assail,
She shews the dawnings of a brighter day,
And bids the followers of her footsteps hail
A beam that ne'er shall set, &mdash; a hope that ne'er shall fail.

And though her shield wards not the stroke of Death,
Yet doth the good man's end her power attest;
For though she stay not the receding breath
Still shall remembrance sweet of actions blest,
Blunt the barbed dart that brings him to his rest;
And lo!  where clad in robes of beamy light,
She meets the view in all her charms confest;
While the grim Monarch, by her matchless might,
Reft of his terror, stands thrice welcome to the sight!

Oh!  were it mine wild Ossian's harp to string,
Or wake to rapture Homer's sounding lyre;
And soaring high on inspiration's wing,
Strike their bold chords with more than mortal fire!
Yet would my trembling Muse in vain desire
To sing the brightness of THROCKMORTON'S fame.
No mortal bard can with fond hopes aspire
His oft-repeated bounties to proclaim,
Or tell the virtuous deeds that crown his deathless name!

Oh!  ye who bask in pleasure's rosy bower,
View him when entering on th' eternal shore;
There fix your gaze, and own Religion's power;
Firm on the heart his memory shall endure,
When the fierce warrior's deeds are known no more.
And though his name in no proud field appear,
Though raised to him no trophy, decked with gore,
(By misery built, and stained with many a tear)
He claims a nobler fame than Parian stones can rear.

And lo!  where Ganges' tepid waters stray,
Through green savannas, and the teak tree's shade,
Where first bright Science shot her morning ray,
And far-famed Indus, with her sparkling wave,
Doth beatling cliffs and gem-fraught mountains lave,
Where couched in palm-clad groves the Leopard lies;
Where the tall Lion issues from his cave,
And prowling, oft, the dread Hyaena cries;
The sullen Tiger growls, and the fell Vulture flies.

To these dark climes without one cheering gleam
Of orient Truth, he sent the Gospel Star:
The sable Indian rapturous view'd its beam,
Cast at his feet the instruments of war,
And shouting, hailed its glories from afar:
From his dark eye rolled quick the joyful tear;
High heaved his breast, bedecked with many a scar,
And as he felt its milder radiance near,
Turn'd to the azure skies and own'd his Saviour there.

And he who lit the widow's funeral pyre
Made the wild woods with notes of terror ring,
Sung the death song, and reared the brand of fire,
Now bows the knee to heaven's eternal King,
And to his praise doth hymns of triumph sing;
With transport bends before Religion's light,
While hope, exulting, plumes her eagle wing,
And from his ebon throne with lingering flight
Dark Superstition glides and seeks the realms of night.

O Power Supreme!  whose equal eye surveys
Alike the Indian's and the white man's soul;
Whose awful justice ponders all their ways,
At whose dread nod the boist'rous billows roll,
Or smoothly glide beneath thy vast controul;
From whose kind bounty every blessing flows,
Haste the glad period when from pole to pole
Thy various children shall in peace repose,
And the parched desert live, and blossom as the rose.

Thou warrior chief, who from whole myriads slain
To Fame's proud temple turns thine ardent eye,
Hoping from mortals like thyself to gain
The glorious mede of immortality&mdash;
Oh!  from the presence of red Battle fly,
Ere the reft mother raise her aching head
To view the children of her bosom die,
And the loved partner of her bridal bed
Sink on th' embattled plain, his blood by tyrants shed.

Or dost thou bend before Ambition's shrine?
Say, lovest thou in her wily paths to stray?&mdash;
Ah!  then full surely anguish will be thine
If still thou followest her delusive ray;
For in her brightest beams doth anguish prey:
And shouldst thou dare to climb her towering height,
The fiery meteor that misleads thy way
Shall, like a star dropped from the robe of night,
But for a moment glare, then vanish from thy sight.

Go, view the good man as his end draws near
Bend to the stroke without a lingering sigh,
Nor breathe one wish to tarry longer here;
Joyous he views the wished-for haven nigh;
While softest strains of heavenly minstrelsy
Are lightly wafted round his peaceful bed;
See joys seraphic fire his closing eye;
And lo!  where hov'ring o'er his dying head
The white-robed sons of light their mildest lustre shed.

The pomp of battle plain, or tented field,
The war's dread thunder, or the trumpet's strain
Can ne'er such glittering glories yield,
Nor the loud shout of crimson Victory gain
Such brilliant honours for her martial train;
Grant me, O heaven!  ambition to resign,
Teach me such bounteous blessings to obtain;
Around my brow let calm contentment shine;
And let THROCKMORTON'S life &mdash; THROCKMORTON'S death, be mine.
