The busy City, shrouded in its smoke,
We left with merry footsteps, and away
Into the rural depths we plunged, while woke
Mid deep-empurpled clouds, the blushing day;
And carolling on high the lark of May
Invoked young Fancy from her silent seat:&mdash;
Off with her fetters! &mdash; to her long-lost sway
She springs majestic, with a smile so sweet&mdash;
A thousand vassal thoughts bend weeping round her feet.

Oh!  once again the woodlands glow in green,
And sparkling dew-drops glisten on the leaves,
A fragrant incense breathes from all the scene,
Which Heaven with glad and grateful smile receives;
And oh!  exultingly the bosom heaves,
And the quick feelings burst into a song.
As on we pass, where rapid Clutha cleaves
Her gently-winding way clear, deep, and strong,
Through her rich leafy glades, her sun-bright hills among.

Majestic Clutha!  as a princess moving,
From the pavilion of thy morning rest,
To where the Atlantic sits, with smile approving,
And folds his daughter to his ample breast,
Throned in sunset, monarch of the west:&mdash;
On thee he pours the treasures of his reign,
And wreathes Columbia's riches round thy crest.
The Indies love thy name, &mdash; and the long train
Of myriad golden isles, that gem the azure main.

The deep-embowering woods of Bothwell wave
Their vernal glories in the light of morn,
And Clutha's wide and swelling waters lave
The bosom of the vale &mdash; as downward borne
They glide from out the grove &mdash; Behold!  they burn,
Like glowing streams of Naphtha, till the wood
Again receives them in its emerald urn,
Where, in his shady haunt, in placid mood,
The water-spirit rests &mdash; the genius of the flood.

In his own proud magnificence of towers,
Like veteran chief, retired to solitude,
Lo!  there the furrowed brow of Bothwell lowers
On the meek homage of the murmuring flood:
Lord of the Vale, he keeps his lofty mood,
Folded within his dusky mantle's grace,
And scorning, in his haughty attitude,
The gaudier haunts of modern men, you trace
The tales of other times scarred deeply on his face.

We tread no common ground &mdash; the very air
Is breathing with the songs of the olden day;
And bounding o'er the scene, behold you there,
The gallant forms of high plumed chivalry;
And scatter'd through these woods their grim array
Of trusty vassalage, with crests of fire;
And hush!  the spirit of antiquity
Pours the wild music of his viewless lyre
From 'neath yon ivy's screen, and round yon fragrant brier.

Ascend the turret &mdash; take the eagle's station
Amid the walls, all ruinous around,
And from those moss-grown seats of desolation,
Hark, how the names of other ages sound!
And forth behold their loftiest spirits bound:
Note ye chief of cold, ambitious air,
That darkly stalks along the charmed ground?
The exulting favourite of the young and fair,
The Lord of Mary's love, stern Darnley's murderer.

But lo!  amid the music of the grove,
In mild and melancholy grace of mien,
Behold whose steps of beauty onward move?
'Tis she &mdash; the worshipped goddess of the scene,
The loved, the lovely, Scotland's peerless queen,
Breathed forth in Nature's most bewitching smile,
But thrown on ruffian times and hearts, I ween,
The lily among thistles, grief 'mid guile,
A star to gild the storm, the Venus of our isle.

Farewell majestic ruin!  sad and slowly
We leave thy lonely reign, and oft look back
Upon thy port so proud, so melancholy,
As our warm footsteps quicken o'er the track,
Where Monmouth quelled the Covenant's brave attack;
Until we hail the woods and waterfalls
Of princely Cadzow, seated in a lake
Of wavy green, &mdash; and pace her splendid halls,
Where art triumphant sits, and greets you from the walls.

Behold the prophet in that place of fear!
The horrid heads of lions fierce and fell
Growling around &mdash; a rueful sepulchre
Yawns in their thirsty throats: &mdash; the victim's knell
Re-echoes through the cave in that wild yell.
He's gone, &mdash; the cold, damp sweat of agony
Is bursting o'er his limbs. &mdash; But mark how well
The hope and firm composure of that eye
Repels all human fear, reposing in the sky.

But Rubens!  though I love thy work and thee,
Detain me not within the thralls of art;
For Nature calls me forth, and the wild glee
Of the melodious woodlands swells the heart
With more of vernal influence; let us part.
On &mdash; on &mdash; a lovely landscape lies before us:
Its music sweeter than if sweet Mozart,
Amidst his choicest minstrels, led the chorus,
And glowing, as we pass, the orchard blossoms o'er us.

Behold o'er all the vale the ambrosial flush,
The freshness and the rosiness of spring,
Like love's first balmy and luxuriant blush&mdash;
The bursting blossoms forth their odours fling,
And shower their honey on the zephyr's wing;
While, 'mid the radiant rapture of the scene,
Their morning madrigals the small birds sing,
Exulting in this paradise of green,
With gold and purple tints enamelled rich between.&mdash;

Within the far depths of his own ravine,
Where winding waters musically meet,
And the proud ridge abruptly swells between,
Craignethan moulders on his rocky seat,
Like hoary age within his youth's retreat,
Listening the tale of every garrulous bird,
Aye droop, and mourn, and moulder so &mdash; 'tis meet,
For in your halls her farewell plaint was heard,
When Albyn's regal dove by English Kyte was snared.

The rock of Stonebyres echoes with the roar
Of the conflicting waters: &mdash; flung amain,
Foaming and fierce, magnificently hoar,
Like shaggy lion, plunging to his den,
And with deep growl thence thundering forth again,
Leaps the wild wave adown &mdash; where silently
The grim and horrible Leviathan
Expands his thirsty throat devouringly&mdash;
And the black bloody gush gluts forth and welters by.&mdash;

Follow the falcon &mdash; plunge into the dell,
On whose stupendous battlements are reared
The spring's green standards.  Hark!  amid the swell
Of precipice and wood, a name is heard&mdash;
A name that Scotland loved &mdash; that England feared&mdash;
The boast of Caledonia &mdash; sent to save
Her prostrate honours from the carrion bird&mdash;
Wallace of Ellerslie, the good, the brave,
Whose hands the crown he won &mdash; magnificently gave.&mdash;

Now evening's rose-tints rest upon the spire
And high house-tops of Lanark, and a flood
Of glittering sunbeams, like internal fire,
Streams from the western windows, &mdash; a warm cloud
Of amber radiance moves along the wood,
Blending its splendours with the milder green
That there embosoms Cranstoun's solitude.
'Tis in the harmony of such a scene,
The muses ever haunt with those they love, I ween.

Hist!  hear you not that far and lonely sound,
That changes with each step its deepening tone,
Now on the wind it dies &mdash; and now the ground
Trembles beneath its thunders.  'Tis the moan,
The sullen, ceaseless, melancholy moan
Of tortured water-spirit, like the yell
Of gnashing agony, the thrilling groan,
That echoes through the caverned depths of hell;
'Tis the eternal voice, that shrieks in Corra's dell.

Come on &mdash; approach the airy precipice,
And gaze on Nature's grandeur.  Head-long on,
Heaving its strength o'er the rocky buttresses,
Rushes the river, with a sullen groan;
Till, from the giddy brink, descending prone,
Abroad it waves its flickering wings of snow,
Then dives into the gulf, dark, deep, unknown,
While through the ample cirque above, below,
The screaming gosshawk wheels, and croaks the sooty crow.

And ere to his pavilion of the night,
Palled in its gold-fringed sable, he descends,
Glowing in smiles, the radiant prince of light,
To taste the scene's sweet beauty hither wends,
He bathes him in the snowy shower, and blends
His glory with its glory &mdash; yonder set
On the fair tresses of the nymph that tends
His state, behold his diamond coronet!
He's gone &mdash; it darkens round &mdash; but here I linger yet.

Yes, I would often linger near thy seat,
All-perfect Nature, gazing, like a child,
Upon thy beauty, while benign and sweet,
Maternal wisdom from thy features smiled,
Moulding my feelings to a mood as mild,
As calm, as pure and lofty as thine own:&mdash;
But the malignant, heartless world hath styled
That meet devotion madness, and thy son
Must come to visit thee in peril and alone.

But be it so, &mdash; the world shall never win
My homage, nor disturb my filial rite:
And if that rite by day be deemed a sin,
I'll wander forth beneath the screen of night,
While stilly watching with her fitful light.
The moon shall guide me through her shadowy halls,
And teach my harp's lone music to unite
With Nature's own Eolian madrigals,
The moaning of the wind &mdash; the roar of waterfalls.

Away!  I ask no sympathy of thine,
Thou mercenary minion of to-day!
Go, deck thee with the gems of Mammon's mine,
And cramp thy cautious car to fashion's lay,
And smile, and fawn, and pamper, while you may,
And herd thee with the base, obsequious train,
Whose curbed, subdued, and soulless thoughts obey
The wayward freaks of fortune's silken reign,
Pale Eunuchs taught to crawl &mdash; and lick the dust for gain.

Back to your simpering duty at the board,
To lisp your puling flatteries with care,
But deem not Nature may be thus adored,
Nor taint the ambrosia of this mountain-air:
Nor, with the prying rudeness of your stare,
Profane the sanctity of this retreat,
Where on the warm heart of its worshipper
Deep thoughts descend from Heaven, in accents sweet,
Soft as the ring-dove's coo &mdash; dear as the lambkin's bleat.

Oh!  it is rapture to be thus alone!
The spirit, springing from its irksome thralls,
Remounts to its own empyrean zone,
And forth like flame, when the rent ruin falls,
Long-fettered thoughts o'erleap their prison walls,
Exulting to be free &mdash; and bourne on high,
They soar along the Ether's vaulted halls:
Tears gush, the heart o'erflows, we know not why&mdash;
We are ourselves again &mdash; part of eternity.
