"Alas, good Sir!"  &mdash; and while she spoke, she pass'd
Long round white fingers o'er a whiter brow,
And back her dark and clustering tresses cast&mdash;
"An orphan's tale is ay a tale of woe.
Where the wild waves of the wide Solway flow
Far up the Dee, beside an aged wood,
There dwelt my sire; our windows threw their glow
Upon the tide, so nigh the sea we stood;
A rock rose high behind, where eagles scream'd for food.

My father lived where he was born; he loved
His native land too well away to roam;
A frugal man was he and unreproved,
Who sought his food amid the ocean foam,
And on the hills &mdash; he had a heartsome home,
Thick swarmed his sheep and loudly lowed his kine.
Men said that in his courtship high he clomb.
He won the daughter of an ancient line,
And she was Sybil called &mdash; and all her name is mine.

Her name, no more.  When on this head of mine
Ten summers had their dews and fragrance shook&mdash;
One morn &mdash; the raven on a blasted pine
Croaked, and the gray owl hooted from an oak&mdash;
I might have known that they of evil spoke.
Men say that strange tongues ran up Solway shore&mdash;
I know not &mdash; but the angry ocean broke
His chains and burst into our sea-side bow'r,
And there my mother died."  She paused, and spoke no more

For some few moments space.  "Midnight her rain
Shed on my father often while he wept,
And many a morn-beam dried it up again,
As homeward from my mother's grave he crept:
He never smiled, ate little, less he slept,
But chief he loved along the lonely shore
To walk, and while the surge his slow foot swept,
He chid it for his love and wept.  The roar
Of Solway-sea he dared when it was foaming o'er.

"His shallop then he launched and reckless rode,
With the rough storm in dread companionship;
Or when the sweet eve sent her stars abroad,
Oft on the prow of a night-foundered ship
He watched &mdash; while, with my finger on my lip,
I lurked beside him; on the moon and sea
He gazed &mdash; from his distracted tongue would slip
The name of her he loved so tenderlie&mdash;
Also he sometimes grew so madly fond of me,

"That, while the rain beat and the whirlwind sung,
He to the shore my trembling footsteps took,
And bade me pray, while on the waves he flung
His fearless shallop.  Ah!  at last forsook
By heaven, he through the soughing surges strook.
Then rose the tempest, loud the ocean vast
Howled all through cavern'd Colvend, till it shook
The pines like reeds, and flashing red and fast
From heaven the burning fire was on the billows cast.

"He went who ne'er returned.  Beyond the Dee,
And left sole heiress of an ancient line;
Lived a young dame who pity took on me;
When seventeen summers I could reckon mine
She clung to me as doth the tendrilled vine,
Nor counted kindred, riches, rent or birth.
With her came joy as gladness comes with wine.
Though oft I looked upon the foaming firth
My father never came, and grief gave way to mirth.

"I lived with her, who like a queen did reign
O'er five broad parishes from side to side;
Proud waxed her heart, she carried grew and vain.
An ancient priest a sermon preached on pride,
And instanced her in robes of crimson dyed;
And peasant dames, grown in experience gray,
Sighed for her fame, when titled lovers tried
With smiles, nods, shreds of wit, laced garments gay,
And oaths from Holyrood, to wile her heart away.

"Far different thoughts were nourished in her breast;
To me she spoke &mdash; I heard with wonderment&mdash;
'I am in love; a youth lives in the west,
Obscurely born &mdash; but not to proud descent,
Are lofty souls and leading spirits lent
Alone.  I see fair written in his look
Such inborn nobleness, true hardiment,
As clear as e'er was printed in a book&mdash;
Swains say the sweetest corn is in the ragged stook.

"'Attired as a bond-maiden will I go
To my love's land, and near him I'll remain;
Spin wool and flax, bleach webs as white as snow,
Ted the fresh hay, and reap the golden grain:
Close round the heart of my elected swain,
I'll twine my thoughts, and gently win my way;
And should his soul be of the purest strain,
I will at once my birth and rank display&mdash;
Nay, Sybil, do not smile, my name is ne'er said nay:

"'My famed ancestress, who did Carrick sway,
Won thus a lord, who gave to Scotland's throne
The great king Robert.'  Saying so, away
She went at eve, and ere the morning shone,
O'er many a hill and hollow had she gone,
Or with her white feet marked the rivulet sand;
Till on a pastoral mount she stood alone,
Shed back her dewy ringlets with her hand,
And with the morning sun looked on her true love's land.

"While thus she went to read her riddle, all
Her menials wantoned through the livelong night,
And to it added day.  In vain I call
To stay lascivious sounds and chamberings light;
My soul grows sick, and saddens with the sight.
My humble garments all I gladly gather,
And with the morning star commence my flight
Through glens of grass, o'er hills of blooming heather,
Till lone Dalgonar smiles, where dwells my second father."

Grave looked Miles Graeme, his words were soft and mild;
"Be cheerful, Sybil; sorrow not, young maid,
Be comforted:  live with us as our child,
Beneath our roof none dare make thee afraid.
Light is our work, and heartsome is our trade;
Corn yields us food, the chrystal well yields wine,
And when for thee the bridal feast is made,
Twelve ewes, two cows, and gowns of Lincome twine,
And mantles white as pure Dalgonar's swans are thine."

"Cast sadness from thee, like an ill-made gown,"
Said douce Eupheme, "this is no desert rude,
Where song and dance and mirth are never known;
Where beauty dies that never has been woo'd,
Nor loveliness unsung here sad of mood,
Pines for the minstrel honour; list and hear
Bairns' tongues as blythe as birds in budding wood&mdash;
And those who love a home and husband dear,
And sweet domestic peace, will find such blessings here."

Fair Sybil's heart was cheered.  Now faint and low,
The hearth fire glimmered; far into the west
The moon sank down.  Man's drowsy eyelids show
'Tis now the hour of sweet and silent rest:
Young Sybil's hand Eupheme sedately prest,
And to a little chamber made her boune;
The walls in whitest livery were drest,
High swelled a bed hung round with Hawick-brown,
Where clothes of Cheviot-fleece were laid o'er canna's down.

Eupheme sighed sore, and spread the white sheets down;
"Ah!  she who plucked for me this fragrant bed,
To heaven with half my happiness has flown;
God has our house in wrath admonished:
Two lovely shoots from our sad tree are shred,
One daughter fair I've lost &mdash; one darling boy:&mdash;
Sound be thy slumber, till the sunbeam shed
His golden light, and wakes the earth to joy,
The wild birds to their work, and man to his employ."

So spoke she, and while speaking left the maid,
Who like a lily in the winds of spring,
This way, now that, her beauteous head she swayed,
And slow perused and ponder'd o'er each thing.
There hung a helm plumed with a heron's wing;
Above a pastoral harp of magic tone,
Fingers had lately waked to words each string;
There hung the braided corn:  and there alone,
A short and sheathed sword wreathed round with holly shone.

There, too, a bow hung with its sinew slack,
And arrows nine, plumed from the goose-wing gray,
A spoil won perilous from an archer's back
Of Lancashire, on Bannock's bloody day.
And there lay music; many a lyric lay,
Yet sung by cottage dames and maids of rank.
She looked, she read, sighed, stript her green array,
And like a rose amid a lily-bank,
Prest down the snowy sheets and deep in slumber sank.

She slept, and there was visioned in her sleep,
A hill: &mdash; above its summit sang the lark;
She strove to climb it:  ocean wide and deep
Gaped for her feet, where swam a sable bark,
Manned with dread shapes, whose aspects doure and dark,
Mocked God's bright image; huge and grim they grew;
Quenched all the lights of heaven, save one small spark,
Then seized her &mdash; laughing to the bark they drew
Her, shuddering, shrieking:  ocean kindled as they flew.

And she was carried to a castle bright;
A voice said "Sybil, here's thy blythe bridegroom."
She shrieked, she prayed; at once the bridal light
Was quenched, and changed to midnight's funeral gloom;
She saw swords flash, and many a dancing plume
Roll on before her, while around her fell
Increase of darkness, like the hour of doom:
She felt herself as chained by charm and spell&mdash;
When one to win her came she knew, and loved right well.

Right through the darkness down to ocean flood
He bore her soon; the deep and troubled sea
Rolled red before her like a surge of blood,
And wet her feet &mdash; she felt it touch her knee.
She started &mdash; waking from her terrors, she
Let through the room the midnight's dewy air;
The gentle air, so odorous, fresh, and free,
Her bosom cooled:  she spread her palms, and there
Knelt humble, and to God confessed herself in prayer.

"God of my fathers &mdash; thou who didst upraise
Their hearts, and touched them with heroic fire,
And madest their deeds the subject of high praise,
Their daughters' beauty charm the poet's lyre&mdash;
Confirm me in the right &mdash; my mind inspire
With godliness and grace and virtuous might
To win this maiden venture.  Heavenly sire,
Chase darkness from me; let me live in light,
And take these visions dread from thy weak servant's sight."

Even while she prayed, her spirit waxed more meek
'Mid snow-white sheets her whiter limbs she threw;
A moonbeam came, and on her glowing cheek
Dropt bright as proud of her diviner hue.
Sweet sleep its golden mantle o'er her threw;
And there she lay, as innocent and mild
As unfledged dove or daisy born in dew:
Fair dreams descending chased off visions wild,
She stretched in sleep her hand, and on the shadows smiled.

Day dawned.  The laverock from his wing the showers
Shook 'neath the day-star as he warbled forth;
Flocks shone with dew; the small birds from the bowers
Sent joyous carollings o'er the brightening earth;
Flocks rose, and lowing, joined the general mirth;
Tower top and tree to kindle had begun;
The cottage smoke went streaming to the north;
To harvest horns rung vale and upland dun,
And forth young Sybil came, and rose the spotless sun.

Amid the clear and dewy air she stands;
To her comes Eustace Graeme &mdash; her hand he took:
"Nay, I'm thy brother. &mdash; Sybil, these soft hands
Need gentler labour than the reaping hook;
But let us climb the bank and pass the brook,
And on yon sunny hill together stand,
That I may show thee every fairy nook,
Each tower and stream of thy elected land&mdash;
The spots where minstrels mused, and warriors drew the brand."

Vale of Dalgonar, dear art thou to me!
Dearer than day-light to the sick at heart;
Hills rise atween us and wide rolls the sea,
Only to prove how passing dear thou art:
'Tis with my feet not with my heart ye part.
Dear are your fairy dales and flowery downs,
Your woods, your streams where silver fishes dart;
Your martyrs' graves, your cots, your towers, your towns,
Gray sires and matrons grave, with their long mourning gowns.

And fair, O vale!  thou didst to Sybil look,
What time the west wind wafted from afar
The shepherd's song, and from the rustling stook
The farm-lad whistling filled his tumbler car;
Flies swarmed &mdash; among them leaped the mottled par,
The sun dried up the dew, and loud and clear
Horns rung on Campel and horns rung on Scaur;
Men stooped them to their tasks, and far and near
Hands moved, and sickles shone beneath the ripened ear.

Hall looked o'er hall and cot o'er cot arose;
Hill towered o'er hill, green brae succeeded brae;
Wood waved o'er wood, and white as winter snows
On knolls around the shepherd's hirsels lay.
The village smoke curled in long wreaths away,
The scent of herbs and flowers filled all the breeze;
The black cocks crowed upon the mountains gray,
The flocks came lowing forth to lawns and leas,
And tongues of busy bairns hummed thick as swarming bees.

A hedge of hawthorn, mixed with holly, swept
Around each garden, screening every cot;
Among them all a bleaching rivulet crept,
Where webs lay white as lily without spot.
The parish kirk, through reverend elms remote,
Stood 'midst its grave stones, row succeeding row;
O'er all the distant city's steeples shot;
Bright in the sun, the Solway slept below,
Where sailors charmed the wind, yet still their ships swam slow.

In secret wise young Sybil's dark eye glanced
Upon Miles' dwelling, sheltered, trim and neat;
The burn with chrystal-running waters danced,
And in the sun-beam dimpled past the gate:
Here, twenty years and more, he held his seat
Reverenced for wisdom; his proverbial fame
Made him the patriarchal magistrate;
His word the wildest spirit straight could tame,
'Twas deemed a kind of spell to name in feuds his name.

From Scottish land he was a wanderer long,
Had Heshbon hill, Sinai, and Carmel trod&mdash;
With eastern shepherds had he joined in song,
At altars bowed with palm-branch unto God:
Blood to the lips in battle had he rode,
With good Lord Maxwell in poor Scotland's right;
In civil wars, too, he had seen the sod
Red wet with gore, and right o'ercome by might,
And freedom's holy star quenched in ambition's night.

Stript of his proud inheritance, he cared
Not who was king, or triumphed in the land;
Brave Holyrood, and all its glittering guard,
Seemed less to him than did a grain of sand.
The shepherd's crook, more than proud knighthood's brand
He prized, and in Dalgonar glen he took
Health by the left, and Peace by the right hand;
More than red wine loved he the murmuring brook,
And deemed himself unknown and blotted from the book

Of Scotland and her chivalry.  "Now look,
Fair Sybil," said he, Eustace Graeme, "and mark
O'er many a farm-house, many a ranked stook,
Our pastoral country's upland barrier dark,
Where flocks graze numerous and the sheep dogs bark;
Along yon moorland brown with heather bells,
There swarm the honey-bees and sings the lark;
While grouse, which summer saw burst from their shells,
Rough-footed run o'er knowes where moss-bees build their cells.

"Nor deem, because it wants the cowslipped knolls,
The white swans grazing the flower-bordered flood,
The lily beds which scent the naked soles
Of pilgrims, with the scallop-shell and rood,
That it is desolate utterly and rude:
The brackeny dells, the music of the rills,
The skipping lambs &mdash; e'en the wild solitude&mdash;
The chrystal tarn where herons droop their bills,
The mute unchanging glory of the eternal hills:

"Mute, save for music of the many bees,
And dead, save for the plover and the snipe;
Such scenes and sounds would thee, young maiden, please,
And all those souls escaped from Mammon's gripe.
To pluck blae berries luscious, black and ripe;
To reap the snowy fleece with sharpen'd shears,
To dance &mdash; to listen to the shepherd's pipe,
To drink his tales in with delighted ears
The deeds of other days, and thoughts of other years.

"All these are lovely, and I've proved them all.
Or is thy heart touched and delighted more
With the glad farmer when he strews his hall
With rushes, and, like Ceres self of yore,
The corn-crowned maiden ushers o'er the floor;
With shout and clap of hand, and sound of horn,
And dames behind upon her ringlets pour
All odorous things, as thick as dews at morn,
To honour her whose hand cut the last stalk of corn,

"And brought in Plenty.  Rather with the crowd
Would'st thou cast care aside, and mock at want,
And on the barn-floor raise a din so loud
Of dancing, as a timorous dame would daunt;
Men rub their hands, maids part their lips and pant;
Music amongst them falls like spark on powder.
The rapt musician lays his cheek aslaunt,
His best bow-hand more skilful grows, and louder,
Old men leap up and shout, "Saint Andrew bless thee, Crouder!"

"Or blyther still:  when gay in wedding weeds,
Joy in all hearts and laughter on all lips,
For mirth the bridal-train scarce sit their steeds,
While like the May-sun 'scaping from eclipse,
The maidens shine; his bride the bridegroom grips,
The practised priest, and dames demure come flocking,
She hangs her head like lily when it drips
With summer-dew; she, blushing, throws the stocking,&mdash;
Dames think of caudle-cups and joyous cradle rocking.

"Or when the storm falls thick and fast from heaven,
And furr and hollow all are streaked with snow,
And stars and moon sink in the drift, at even
Bright lamp and hearth-fire cast a lustrous glow,
On sires and dames, and damsels all a row;
Then household thrift, glad tale, and heartsome song,
Make the grim hours of winter smile and go;
Men whisper, maidens laugh, the tempest strong,
May rule and reign, &mdash; none care, or for the day-light long.

"These, and a thousand natural joys are ours;
Yet there are sorrows which we all must heir,
Woe, sickness, death, the winter's sleet and showers,
O'erstepping March, to darken May's sweet air;
The burning droughts which strip our pastures bare&mdash;
The scorching lightning &mdash; the untimely rain,
Which rots our corn and robs the fold and share
Of half their honours:  blight in growing grain,
And murrain 'mongst the flocks; these make our farmers plain.

"For finer souls are other ills, which men
Mock with much mockery; he who thirsts for fame,
Hath an eternal sorrow on him &mdash; when
Did this dread passion either 'suage or tame
This burning fever of the soul &mdash; this flame
Which seeks by song or deed of derring-do,
To win from the cold world a lasting name;
And that bright fire which burns as holy too,
Love high and nobly placed."  He turned and from his brow

Wiped off the burning drops, and sad and low,
'Twixt whispering and open speech, thus spoke
"Of love; to feel the unrequited glow,
And bow the spirit 'neath its giant yoke,
Is far more fearful than the battle shock;
Or seeking fame in fancy's splendid train:
But love's a dream, and fame is empty smoke,
Pursued:  when won, what are they, light and vain:"
Horns rung aloud, men called, and rattled many a wain.

Dry blew the wind, and warmer waxed the sun,
Full fast the pronged fork heaped the golden threaves
On car and cart, and Miles Graeme had begun
To rear the round ricks with the rustling sheaves;
Sheaf following sheaf, the active peasant heaves;
Then o'er the whole, to shield from rain and snow,
Of long green broom, an odorous coat he weaves.
"See," Eustace said, "the sun begins to glow,
And I must off to toil, for we no sluggards know.

"The west wind rustling 'mongst the the ripened grain,
The loaded wain loud creaking o'er the lea,
Are sounds less vocal than the muses' strain,
But they are sounds made sweet by use, to me:
Yon is thy dwelling, gentle Sybil, see,
A light and pleasant task awaits thee there."
He said, and parting with the maiden free,
He left her as the bee leaves lilies fair,
In balmy tremble, shining 'mid the morning air.

And who is she?  said many a bondsman gray,
And who is she?  said many a reaping mate?
A dame who ne'er had good of one to say,
Cried "Cummers, have ye heard of Souple Kate,
John Rosebro's daughter of Lochmaben-gate,
Wha made young Edie Cubin staid and steady,
Cast his work-tools o'er Cluden brig elate,
With thoughts of marrying her a landed lady!
Lady of two loose shanks; she ruined sackless Edie."

"Rise with the sun and fair be as the rose,
Wake with the moon, and be as primrose pale,"
Said good Eupheme, when she saw Sybil; "those
Who keep that precept, maiden, never fail
To be wives virtuous, and mothers hale:
Now take this wool &mdash; and finer, maiden, mind,
Ne'er drank the dew on hills of Annerdale;
And take this fleece of raven-black, entwined
With skill, the twain will make a plaid of rarest kind,

For my ae' son, against the winter snow."
Young Sybil bared her arms, her tresses wound
Above her brow, laid out the wool, and lo!
Like swarming bees the big wheel sends a sound,
And there came yarn like satin smooth and round:
E'en while the damsel plies her pleasant task,
She sings of love that knows no let nor bound,&mdash;
Love that speaks every tongue, wears every mask,
And fills the heart with joy, as sweet wine fills the flask.

"Song sweetens toil," Eupheme said, "and thy song
I love; yet love much more to see thee pull
The even thread, round, shining, smooth and strong;
There's not a lass 'tween Cosincon and Mull,
But who would gladly spin such beauteous wool,
And sing as sings the laverock; did she know
'Twas for my son, like swan in summer pool,
Full proudly would she crest her bosom snow,
And, Sybil, sing like thee, with temples all a-glow."

