I sing of days in which brave deeds of arms
And deeds of song went hand in hand; our kings
Heroic feelings had and owned the charms
Of minstrel lore &mdash; they loved the magic strings
More than the sceptre:  still their kingdom rings
With their gay musings and their harpings high.
To noble deeds fair poesie lends wings;
She lifts them up from grovelling earth to sky,
And bids them sit in light, and live and never die.

Our queen sat on her nurse's knee, and strife
Was 'mongst our nobles; still a deed so brave
As that wrought at Dalswinton, warmed to life
Feelings which faction froze up like the grave.
The spear once more had foiled the bill and glaive;
Herds to their flocks, and hinds at plough and harrow,
From Solway smooth to Pentland's stormy wave,
Up classic Tweed and down romantic Yarrow,
Sung how the Scottish lance had foiled the English arrow.

'Twas sung on uplands where the Tweed and Clyde
And silver Annan flow, three slender rills;
'Twas sung far inland, where the mountains hide
Their heads in heaven; 'twas sung on pasture hills
Where his rude pipe the hind with music fills:
'Twas sung in isle and bay with sea-foam blanched&mdash;
Sung where Latoun with all his swords and bills
Stood by the Border, while his wrath unstaunched
Was like the levin-bolt red burning to be launched.

Sir Ralph Latoun sat by the Sark; beneath
His mailed foot fast flowed the gentle river;
His helm lay on the grass, and in its sheath
Slept his sharp sword, which limbs could shred and sever;
A thousand polished shafts lay in the quiver,
A thousand war-horse bridled, barded, ready,
Neighed; and a thousand warriors by them ever,
Swore loud by saint, and vowed by gentle lady,
To ride from Nith to Dee; their gathering word was "Steady."

He sat by Sark:  towards the heat of noon,
A Scottish maiden sought the river's brim,
And sat and sang:  "Ken ye Sir Ralph Latoun,
Who came with fetters for us, neck and limb,
A warrior gruesome in his looks, and grim,
The flower of all King Harry's chivalrie?
A peasant's spear proved all too sharp for him&mdash;
He left his bravest in their blood, and free
His steed spurred till he foamed, and cursed the north countree.

"Now should you know him, say to him, proud knight,
The Scottish bards with harpstring and with rhyme,
To sing a Fitte in honour of thy flight,
Are called from eastern and from western clime;
Come learn from them before to-morrow's prime,
How small a sum eternal shame will buy;
Come hear thy name in brightness to all time,
Embalmed as amber closes in a fly."
She sang and went:  but still the silver river by

Sate Ralph Latoun; amid his chiefs he smiled,
And said, "The maiden sings both loud and clear,
Her merry voice yet through the woodland wild
Sends its sarcastic chorus to mine ear."
He snatched in haste his helmet and his spear,
Leaped in his selle, and loudly did he hollo,&mdash;
"Those who would fain the minstrels' harpings hear,
Mount, and my banner o'er the Border follow&mdash;
I'll tame these ballad bards, by Chaucer and Apollo!"

That morn a hind came to Dalgonar glen,
And said, "Ye reap and sweat and sleep, and so
Time moves along:  shut from the ways of men,
Little ye see, and less still do you know.
There stands a tower where Solway waters flow,
Called Elvar, and there dwells a lovely dame;
And she has vowed with gold to bind the brow
Of him, who sings best how our spears did tame
The pride of Ralph Latoun &mdash; now mark me, Eustace Graeme,

"The minstrel strife's to-morrow."  He is gone
To take his tidings east, west, south, and north.
By pure Dalgonar, Eustace sat alone,
And sighed, and said, "This green and gladsome earth
Has given me neither land nor lofty birth;
Fame knows me not by either deed or word:
Then shall I to the poet-strife go forth,
'Mongst golden-mantled minstrels; me, the lord
But of an ivory pipe and a well-tempered sword?"

So by the river Eustace sat, and took
Drink from the stream, and from the wild tree fruit;
Nor e'er before was shadowed in the brook
A fairer figure or a fleeter foot;
His bright looks spoke e'en though his lips were mute,
And when he talked, his voice was sweeter far
Than song of lark, or sound of harp or lute.
Straight as a rush, and pure as morning star
He shone; sweet song he loved far more than strife and war.

He bathed his temples white, and lightly placed
His plumed bonnet on his shining brow;
And on his limbs his buskins tighter laced.
Forth from his pouch an ivory pipe he drew,
And on the breeze some charmed notes he threw;
Then down the glen he bounded like a roe:
He leapt one brook, another waded through,
And like a sunbeam o'er the mountain, lo!
As swift, and scarce less bright, see the enthusiast go.

He with his spirit as he went communed&mdash;
"I go &mdash; for surely it is sweet to hear
The harp to songs of inspiration tuned
By some bold minstrel, soldier, priest, and seer;
And her of Elvar, men, too, far and near,
Report so passing lovely, none may look
On her but love.  Poor Eustace, slender fear
Of thee!  what high-born damsel e'er forsook
Her golden hall to grace a peasant's clay-built nook?"

Dalgonar glen he leaves behind, and Dee
Glimmers before him, dark and deep and loud,
Lifting his voice and calling on the sea;
Threive his broad banner 'gainst the sun hangs proud;
Above the eagle mingles with the cloud;
The heath below the moor-cock's bosom brushes;
Old Criffel mountain from his morning shroud,
Touched with the sun-beam into glory rushes,
While like a maiden's cheek the heaven above him blushes.

He clomb up Falconhill, and distant down
Looked on a valley strewn with herb and flower,
Close girdled in with uplands high and brown,
Deep fenced with groves and many a holly bower:
High in the middle rose an ancient tower,
Round which a stream kept singing in its flowing;
Upon the whole the sun burst, and a shower
Of radiance fell; tower, stream, and tree were glowing,
And wild birds' carollings mixed with the milch cows' lowing.

But other sights and other sounds were there:
Poets and harpers, raven-locked or hoary,
Sat mantled proud amid the sunny air,
To sounds divine to add inspired story,
And sing of heroes' deeds, of patriot glory&mdash;
And Scotland saved from thraldom.  All about
Stood warriors famed in many a border foray:
The Herries, Halliday, the Maxwell stout,
With sandalled bedesmen bald, all silent and devout.

The minstrel strife called forth ten thousand feet.
Ae sent her maids demure and meek as nuns,
And moorland Annan sent her damsels sweet;
Romantic Nith poured forth her stately sons;
And men who dwell where haunted Cluden runs,
That morning treading on the unsunned dews,
Came with their looks all bright as summer suns;
Mute on the far-seen Solway much they muse,
Her bosom white with foam and sunshine and sea mews.

The men were there too of the rocky Orr,
With those who sing along the pastoral Dee;
They came from lake and stream, and vale and shore,
The inland mountain, and the greenwood tree.
It was a proud sight, Eustace thought, to see
Maidens and youths in many a lusty throng,
All in the sunshine mirthsome as the bee,
And like the bee too as they streamed along
Raising a joyous din, and humming many a song.

He stood and gazed, and heard the distant sound
Come softened into music up the brae,
And saw snow-white pavilions pitched around,
With banners borne in many a bloody fray;
White dancing plumes and streamers glancing gay;
And while he held his hand above his brow,
A visor'd rider on a gallant gray,
In cloak and helm, rode from the greenwood bough;
He stayed where Eustace stood.  Meek were his words and low.

"Good morrow to thee, gentle youth &mdash; the corn
Lacks reapers sorely, come these men to reap?
They seem too many for the hound and horn;
Or come they for some good man's death to weep?
Perchance the birth-time of a saint they keep?
Or are disposed to eat and drink and dance;
Or list some preacher with his doctrines deep,
From dark Geneva or from changeful France,
Preach Rome and relics down?"  A wary look askance

He gave the youth, who threw on him again
A glance like the gore-falcon's, quick and sharp.
"They come not here," he said, "to reap ripe grain,
Nor dance nor drink, nor hear the gospellers carp
'Gainst Rome and relics, nor to list them warp
God's Word to some dark purpose:  they are here
To list poured out unto the lute and harp,
Inspired words fit for a warrior's ear,
How men fight for their country, scorning flight and fear."

Loud laughed the rider:  "Thou the minstrel's skill
Lovest much I hear; now by my hope of spurs,
I'd leifer hear the fox howl on the hill,
The croak of toads, the cry of beaten curs,
Eat thistle heads, dine on unbuttered burs."
He said, he bowed, he gave his horse the rein,
And pricking freely o'er the grassy furs,
He looked on no one, nor of speech seemed fain&mdash;
He stopt where minstrels stood, and tents filled all the plain.

And leaping from his wearied courser said,
"A stranger I to mark your minstrel sleight
Am come, and in this masquing trim arrayed
I wish to bide; perchance, ere fall of night,
My hand may give some measure of its might.
A warrior I less skilled in harps than swords,
Yet led here by the poet's blessed light,
I fain would bide."  A minstrel all his chords
Touched, saying, "Sir, abide;" nor waiting other words,

The stranger staid.  The summer flowers with bees
Ne'er swarmed more populous than the lonesome glen;
The swelling hillocks and the lofty trees
Are covered less with grass and leaves than men;
For one staid dame I wot are damsels ten,
With gladsome eyes, white hands, and sunny brows;
The brook clear shadows all their shapes agen;
Pure as it runs its tranquil course, it glows
With eyes like new-found stars, and cheeks like odorous rose.

He stood, and far and wide with falcon-glance
Surveyed the glen.  "To sing my flight and shame
These minstrels come," he muttered; "it may chance
Their tongues and harps may find a sadder theme:
He dies who names of Ralph Latoun the name."
More had he said, when shout arose on shout,
For bards, the sons of Scotland and of fame,
Touching their harp-strings as they moved the foot,
In grass-green mantles gemmed, stood up, and gazed about.

Proudly they gazed, and well might they be proud.
Their honours were of God, and not of kings;
Heroes had throbbed, and belted earls had bowed,
Charm'd with the sorcery of their thrilling strings:
To words of earth they added heavenly wings.
Their scorn, too, like the canker-worm had bitten
Cowards to the core; fierce as the venomed stings
Of serpents were the words which they had written,
When stirred into just wrath to smite when they were smitten.

Bards' scorn cuts sharper than a two-edged sword,
Their wit's more dangerous than a flying arrow;
Their taunt taints blood as doth the hangman's cord;
O, how the pinched penurious soul they harrow,
And pour their liquid hell-fire through his marrow.
But for heroic souls the immortals will
A blessing twice, as they have blessed the Yarrow&mdash;
More bright than all earth's rivers runs the rill,
And conscious winds its way in fame by holm and hill.

Each stream sent forth its poet:  classic Tweed,
Thy bard with Border glories came inspired;
Old Yarrow's poet from his elfin reed
Breathed magic notes untiring and untired.&mdash;
With pastoral splendour Annan's bard came fired;
And he of Ayr breathed from his burning core
Love's passion and pure pathos; while attired
As martial songsters, they of Dee and Orr
Laid fingers on the strings new cleansed from battle gore.

Nith sent no minstrel, she had none:  alas!
Thou gentle stream, such joy was never thine&mdash;
Sun-bright and beauteous to the Solway pass,
Meekly and mute, no poet's magic line
Makes thee among immortal rivers shine:
Flow on, flow on, in many a loop and link,
For all of thee except thy song's divine&mdash;
Flow on, flow on; the gowans on thy brink
There's one will no more pull, nor of thy waters drink.

Flow on, flow on, sweet stream; yon herald's tongue
To other business calls, else had I now
A song of thee and of thy daughters sung&mdash;
Thy daughters dark of eye and bright of brow&mdash;
And made thee in poetic radiance flow
Up with the fairest.  Hearken; he doth call
The sons of song the gentle Muse to woo&mdash;
And see, the minstrels rise up and let fall
Their right hands on their harps &mdash; now listen one and all.

"Hear me, ye men," aloud the herald said,
"Who weave the martial Muses' weft and warp&mdash;
Sing ye how Scotland quelled proud England's raid,
Smote her barbed steeds, and broke her arrows sharp;
Sing one by one &mdash; come carp, my minstrels, carp&mdash;
Though come from Caithness, Bellenden or Belvar&mdash;
Whoso sings sweetest to the lute or harp
Be he knight, squire, or shepherd, ditcher, delver,
His is this golden gift from our Fair Maid of Elvar."

Fame, fame &mdash; thou warrior's wish, thou poet's thought,
Thou bright delusion; like the rainbow thou
Glitterest, yet none may touch thee:  thing of nought,
Star-high with heaven's own brightness on thy brow,
Blazoned and glorious I beheld thee grow&mdash;
Vision, begone, &mdash; for I am none of thine.
Of all that fills my heart and fancy now,
From dull oblivion not one word or line
Wilt thou touch with thy light and render it divine.

Even be it so.  I sing not for thy smiles&mdash;
I sing to keep down sighs and ease the smart
Of care and sadness, and the daily toils
Which crush my soul and trample on my heart.
Far mightier spirits of the inspired art
Are mute and nameless, and the muse in grief
Calls from the eastern to the western airt,
On tale, tradition, ballad, song, and chief
On Thee, to give their names one passage bright and brief.

She calls in vain:  like to a shooting star
Their storied rhymes shone brightly in their birth,
And shot a dazzling lustre near and far;
Then darkened, died, as all things else of earth.&mdash;
On with our Tale. &mdash; The songs by fauld and firth
Have ceased; the sun a level light is shooting;
There is much more of gladsomeness than mirth,
And gentle clap of hand, and gentler shouting,
Where o'er their ancient harps the rival bards are louting.

O'er rival harps they lean and smile.  Meantime,
Close to the pasture mountains sinks the sun;
On Dee's green groves, and Solway's cliffs sublime
He spills his liquid lustre; rivulets run
So bright, their glory seems but new begun.
Forth comes the herald, and aloud he cries,&mdash;
"Six bards have sung, and has the muse no son
Besides, will sing for Lady Sybil's prize;
Ye bards of Nith and Ae, arise, my children, rise."

He called, none answered.  On a green knoll, hemmed
With broom as with a garland, graceful stood
Two fair hand-maidens:  curling and ungemmed
Their locks fell o'er their shoulders in a flood.
Upon them, bright of eye and staid of mood,
Men looked, but looked not long:  beside them there
Sat one so lovely, peasants rough and rude,
From her white foot glanced to her jewelled hair
Awe-struck, for seldom dame so meek, so mild, so fair

As Sybil Lesley blest their eyes.  The moon,
That through a snowy cloud casts down her light
In chastened glory from the heaven aboon,
Looks all more lovely in the shepherd's sight;
So look'd that lady through her veil of white,
Which from her forehead to her small foot stream'd;
Nor glanced her eyes, nor shone her brow less bright:
It veiled her beauty nought, whate'er she deemed;
Through all her loveliness like to the moonlight beamed.

To her the herald went, bowed low, and laid
The chaplet at her feet, and said, "O thou,
Discreet as beauteous; wilt thou, peerless maid,
This chaplet on the worthiest bard bestow,
And place it with thy white hands on the brow
Of him whose song is sweetest:  on my knee,
With looking on thy loveliness, I vow
My heart and soul are fluttered so, from me
All skill in verse has flown; &mdash; I think on only thee."

Her bright brow darkened a small space:  she smiled,
And while the chaplet glittered at her feet,
She heard a man say, "Eustace Graeme, my child,
Be ruled by gray hairs; list to words discreet:
Strive for the prize; thou hast a voice more sweet
Than thrush or laverock, and thy song's divine."
She heard again a softer tongue entreat,
"Sing, Eustace Graeme; sing but one glowing line,
And may I ne'er be wed but that bright wreath is thine."

She through her veil looked for a space, and there
She saw a form such as she ne'er had seen;
A peasant surely, yet of such an air
As spoke high nobleness of soul:  his mien
Was modest, and his garb a deep sea-green.
Just then his bonnet from his brow he took,
And shook his glossy ringlets back:  I ween
That lady read in his enthusiast look
Of bards and heroes thoughts as clear as in a book.

She read aright.  For though to pastures green
He drove his flocks in summer time, and took
Them from the mountains when the frost came keen,
To warm and sunward lairs by bank and brook;
Though sword, scythe, plowshare, and the sharp reap-hook,
He knew them all; his chief, his soul's delight,
Was pondering deep on Nature's mystic book;
On elves, and fays, and shapes which haunt the night,
He mused, and limned their looks by Fancy's wizard light.

"Eustace," she said, and from a veil of snow
Drew forth a whiter hand, and waved it.  Bright
And thick as dew-drops on the lily, glow
The jewels upon her fingers round and white.
He looked, he bowed, and crimsoning with delight,
Stood full before her.  With a meek regard
She said, "Go thou, and try the poet's flight&mdash;
A golden chaplet is a rich reward&mdash;
Trust Nature's strength and try &mdash; be bold, or be no Bard.

"Lady," said Eustace, "such thing may not be;
I was an humble warrior in the hour
That wrought this land's redemption &mdash; so for me
The chaplet shines not; nor is mine the power
To charm with martial themes:  in lady's bower
My rustic harp-string never yet hath rung:
For, like the lark, my muse the daisy's flower
Loves best, and by lone fairy fountains flung
Sings of domestic love in her rude country tongue."

On him she gazed, and said, "Art thou the youth
Whom barons name not, but to whose swift sword
And promptitude of soul we owe, that south
Proud England turned her horse at Fleuchar-ford?
If thou art he, fair Holyrood, no lord"&mdash;
Away turned Eustace, brow and bosom glowing.
"Lady," quoth one, "'tis Scripture every word&mdash;
But praise on him is lost &mdash; 'tis next to sowing
Corn on the Solway &mdash; see, his heart is nigh the flowing.

"With maids he's softer than the cloud in March;
But had you seen him, lady, in his ire,
When like one born of thunder he did march,
And struck men down as stubble sinks in fire&mdash;
Yet that same right hand deftly wakes the lyre&mdash;
Besides, fair one, he hath a tongue could wile
The laverock from the cloud."  Another sire
Said, "What man lives 'tween Criffel and Carlisle
Can form a sweeter song, or sing it so?"  Meanwhile

The lady Sybil smiled, and said, "For me
The rudest sough of nature hath a charm;
Her voice untamed, untutored, frank, and free,
Comes from the heart and comes forth wild and warm.
Sing what thou wilt &mdash; let no vain fears alarm
Thy spirit, take this sculptured harp and try
Its strength &mdash; a bard can work its strings no harm;"
He bowed &mdash; he took the harp with downcast eye,
Unclasped his mantle green and laid his bonnet by.

"Lady," he said, "since 'tis thy will, I fain
Would chaunt no old tradition, but a new
And tender story, which men's tears like rain
Has frequent brought:  our shepherds vouch it true&mdash;
Indeed, my sire both son and mother knew,
And saw the final tragedy:  but hear;
I sing not for that chaplet bright, I woo
Song for its own sweet sake; I'd rather wear
The polished holly bough gemmed red with clusters clear."
