I sing a song of other times.  Between
Two thrones was shared the rule of this broad Isle,
And nobles round the cradle of our queen
Dealt Scotland 'mongst them like a conqueror's spoil:
Corn sown in dread, was reap'd with bloody toil;
Fair maidens sat not by the Tweed and flung
Their ringlets o'er their white necks with a smile;
Nor with bright glances and a witching tongue,
Songs steep'd in pastoral love, or chivalrous ardour sung.

Woe, woe was ours.  Chief drew his sword on chief:
Religion with her relique and her brand,
Made strife between our bosom-bones, and grief
And lawless joy abounded in the land;
Our glass of glory sank nigh its last sand:
Rank with its treason, priesthood with its craft,
Turned Scotland's war-lance to a willow-wand.
Knee-deep in Tweed stood England with her shaft,
And whiles she menaced war, and whiles in scorn she laught.

"Go, go," said England's king, &mdash; "Go, Ralph Latoun,
With all thy merry men, and pennon broad,
And bill and brand; to Scotland make thee boune:
Bow and begone, &mdash; ye know the ready road,
Go find a grave beneath the northern sod,
Or win an earldom."  Swiftly from his knee
He rose, and soon his foot, with iron shod,
Was in the stirrup:  loudly shouted he,
"Come, England's conquering sons, to Scotland come with me!"

They mustered, marched:  in Scotland every tower
Sent up a sudden light, on every hill
A beacon burned; each glen an armed power
Sent gleaming forth as it sends forth its rill:
Spears shook, swords flashed, war-axes shone, and still
The pipe called loud and louder; all aghast
Young mothers started from their slumbers:  shrill
They shrieked to hear the war-horse rushing past,
And prayed, and wept, and prayed, and clasped their babies fast.

The invaders came, nor stayed for haunted Dryfe,
Nor yet for silver Annan:  through the wood
Of fair Dalswinton swift they marched to strife;
Short while to gaze on Nith's pure stream they stood;
Their barbed steeds went flashing through her flood.
First of the foremost shouted Ralph Latoun,
"An English sword ne'er rusts with Scottish blood!&mdash;
Tame these proud Maxwells &mdash; on them, by Mahoun
We'll break their spears like reeds, and tread their eagles down!"

Sternly he spoke, as sternly did he ride
O'er Nithsdale's strength, till heap'd like new-mown hay
Her Maxwells and Kirkpatricks, side by side,
Gory and gashed beneath their coursers lay,
Their looks in death wore still the wish to slay:
Amidst them stood the victor freshly gilt
With warfare's dread emblazonry; full gay
He looked around and kissed his falchion's hilt,
And said, &mdash; "Blood has been shed, but more must yet be spilt,

"Before I win thee, with thy bowers and halls,
Romantic Nithsdale:  every glen and brook,
Thy mountains from whose tops the eagle calls,
Down to thy deepest dell and fairy nook,
Shall taste of blood."  His golden casque he took,
And waved it glittering; on his brow the steam
He gladly fanned, and out his tresses shook,
Then eyed his martial shadow in the stream,
And looked of Nith's green vale lord in his own esteem.

He looked a warrior bold and leader free,
As e'er drove prey on either side of Sark,
For lordly looked and lordly limbed was he,&mdash;
A frame of iron, a right arm long and stark,
A rough loud voice, a visage somedele dark,
A heart which rose as danger rose, and ne'er
Sunk save in peace; like to the merry lark
He sang when beacons burned, and bugles clear
Bade England draw her shaft, for Scotland grasped her spear.

His soldiers shouted, and then hailed him lord
Of Nith's green vale; for lordships then were got,
As kingdoms now, by the sharp spear and sword,
The bearded arrow and the culver's shot,&mdash;
And cities sacked, and limbs stretched out to rot.
His soldiers shouted, and then trumpets twain
Awoke a blast so thrillingly; I wot
The rocky Molach, Creehope's caves were fain,
When that dread blast grew dumb and waked them not again.

By a lone stream which hath from man no name,
And joins the Nith where Blackwood stands embower'd
In ancient woods, there sat young Eustace Graeme;
His grass-green mantle by his mother flower'd,
Unclasped was all with night-dews dropt and shower'd;
A shining pipe beside him lay, and nigh
His hunting-spear leant 'gainst an oak, and cower'd
Two chase dogs bloody mouthed, that seemed to eye
A dead deer and the burn that ran in silver by.

They lapt the water, and then couched, while he
Took up his pipe, and woke a gladsome air.
The bird that slumbered on the greenwood tree,
The fox, the wild roe in her secret lair,
Were rapt; meanwhile his long and glittering hair
Lay on his shoulders like a sunbeam bright;
He raised his brow to heaven, the hand of care
Had touched it with no sadness, and the light
Of his two eyes o'er all shone, as stars shine in night.

He heard the war note; up his ivory horn
He snatched and blew; the sound small, shrill and clear,
Up Blackwood brook, up Closeburn glen, was borne;
And at the well-known call, with sword and spear
A hundred youths came like the bounding deer.
"What wouldst thou, Eustace?"  asked the eager band.
"He who loves Scotland," Eustace said, "must bear
A resolute heart and a determined hand,
For Ralph Latoun is come to win and keep the land."

Away they went, the sun had sunk, the moon
O'er Tinwald-hill was in her wakening flush;
Away they went, to green Dalswinton soon
They came; there war had made a bloody crush.
O'er slaughter'd men Nith's current with a gush
Flowed, crimsoning all her silver.  "Warily peer,"
Said Eustace, "through each tangled brake and bush,
Bared be each sword, be ready every spear!"
A step or two he took, and whispered, "He is here!"

There like an eagle which upon twin-lambs
Had fallen and feasted, grim the victor sate,
Bedappled o'er with blood; between his palms
He held fruit in his casque and silent ate.
His conquering comrades all with mirth elate,
Drank to their Earl of Nithsdale; others twined
A chaplet for his brow, nor deemed that fate
Had in her book a sterner judgment signed;
And some sat carolling loud, and gave care to the wind.

Forth stept young Eustace.  "Ralph Latoun, if thou
Desirest to reign, some blood hast thou to spill,
Before the golden honour binds thy brow."
Rain down the wind, fire on a heathery hill,
Or Solway when with man it works its will,
Ne'er rushed more fierce, than now with lance and sword,
The Scot rushed on the Southron; evening still
Woke with the clamour, through the Nith's deep ford,
Flew many an English steed that owned no rider lord.

The ground was mossy, thick and dark the grove
Spread wide, with louring boughs and briar and broom;
There England's practised squadrons vainly strove
To form in line and gain good charging room.
To peasant's blows stooped many a knight his plume,
Yet in the fray they bore them firm and well,&mdash;
Till with their blood the grass began to swoom;
Some bled, some sank, some in the gory selle
Fought wounded sore; yet one bled not, nor fled, nor fell,&mdash;

'Twas Ralph Latoun.  With sure hand and quick eye
Flew Eustace round him, as the eagle flies
Around a wolf; with sharp beak and fierce cry
He smites him down, assails him in the rise,
Then claps his wings and threats him from the skies.
So Eustace fought, nor lacked he of the sleight,
Which they have most who are both wight and wise;
He added sleight to speed, and both to might,
And wheeled and turned, and struck and sorely prest the knight.

He pressed him sorely.  "Youth," thus said Latoun,
"Thou art a bold and brave one; thou art here
Lost unto daring deeds and fame:  yon moon
That o'er green Skiddaw hangs so round and clear,
Shines on my tower by Solway side, and dear
Shalt thou be there to me, while spurs of gold
Be sure thou'lt win them in thy first career;
And beauteous dames, for beauty loves the bold,
Will bless thee with their love."  Word neither warm nor cold

Spake the proud youth; his stature seemed to wax
And fiercer grew his mood; he moved not now,
As one who shunned by sleight, or spear, or axe,
With gleaming eyes, and with a blood flushed brow,
Thrust upon thrust he made, and blow on blow:
As well against a tower of steel or brass
He might have struck; though a red drop or so
To his fierce thrusts stained here and there the grass,
Sir Ralph turned short his steed, and sought the Nith to pass.

Full twenty lances met his bosom:  back
He turned and waving right and left his blade
Spurred and was lost in darkness; evening black
Lent him the greenwood and the cloud for shade.
He plunged into a long and winding glade
With herbs and scented flowers wove green and soft;
High verdant walls the polished hollies made;
And oaks and elms rich ceilings formed aloft&mdash;
Through which a sweet wind came, and glowing stars looked oft.

Away he rode.  The ring-doves sat in pairs
And started when they saw his armour gleam:&mdash;
Away he rode, the wild deer from their lairs
Sprang up and gazed, while from Dalgonar stream
The heron uttered his discordant scream:
The maid and lover by the trysting-tree,
Saw this armed vision burst upon their dream,
And thought of war; morn's light on hill and lea
Showed Criffel's cloven crown, and the wide Solway sea.

Beneath him flowed the deep and swelling sea,
Dimpling and glittering like ten thousand glasses;
Around him lay tower, town, and stream, and tree,
And knolls and woodlands in their bright green masses:
The silken canna whitened all the mosses;
Men's hoary heads shone in the dewy light;
And merry songs from Criffel's lovesome lasses,
Filled all the vale and climbed the woody height
Where stood Sir Ralph Latoun; his heart swelled with the sight.

"All that wide scene of loveliness was mine
An hour ago, &mdash; moor, mountain, glen, and brake
On which yon sun takes such delight to shine,
As if it glittered for the landscape's sake:
But let it go, no heavier moan I'll make,
The earth hath other earldoms.  My fair steed
From battle broil no more thou'lt bring me back,&mdash;
There, thou art free, with ragged colts go feed,"&mdash;
Said Ralph Latoun:  away it neighed o'er moor and mead.

"And thou good corslet, which my bosom fenced
From France's javelin and from Scotland's sword,&mdash;
Off which the Genoese cloth-yard arrows glanced,
I now unclasp thee, shield some luckier lord:"&mdash;
And leaving thus his mail upon the sward;
With helm on head, a steel blade at his thigh,
To seek some fishing-skiff and leap on board,
And homewards o'er the Solway's waters fly,
Was now his wish:  when as he walked 'tween wet and dry,

He came unto a small and pleasant bay&mdash;
A crescent-bay half garlanded with trees,
Which scented all the air; whose blossoms gay
Were rife with birds, and musical with bees;
And danced in beauty in the seaward breeze;
While o'er the grove ascended Elvar Tower,
A mark by land, a beacon on the seas&mdash;
With fruit trees crowned, and gardens hung in flower,
Dropt round with fairy knolls and many an elfin bower.

Even as he stood, there came from Elvar Hall
A peerless one, with handmaids hemmed about&mdash;
Fair Sybil Lesley, lovesome, straight and tall,
Sweet as a lily ere the bloom bursts out:
A seaman looked and scarce suppressed a shout&mdash;
A shepherd saw her and looked down with awe;
Even Ralph Latoun, a warrior tried and stout,
Seemed moved somewhat when he this vision saw,
Which with the rising sun came down the greenwood shaw.

Fair Sybil comes:  the flowers which scent her feet
Bloom for her sake alone; the polished shells
Raise as she touches them a sound as sweet
And musical as the breeze breath'd on bells;
Her hand waves love, and her dark eyes rain spells,
Her mouth, men might mistake it for the rose
Whose opening lips afar the wild bee smells:
Her hair down gushing in an armful flows,
And floods her ivory neck, and glitters as she goes.

There calmly while the sea-surge at his side
Sang 'mid the shells and leaped upon the sands,
Dipping his fingers in the swelling tide,
And cleansing blood alike from brow and hands,
Sir Ralph Latoun before young Sybil stands.
"Stranger," she said, "o'er Solway's dread sand-bars
The storm oft drives us men of foreign lands,
Who trust in fickle winds and faithless stars&mdash;
But we wage war with none on whom the tempest wars."

"Nor seas nor sands do I blame, gentle one,&mdash;
Nor stars nor storms have made me thus bereft;
I come from fields where shafts and lances shone,
And death his hand glued to his falchion heft,
And casques alike of knave and noble cleft&mdash;
Steeds of their riders eased ran wild and free,
And I sole relic of war's rage am left&mdash;
What says the minstrel &mdash; 'Lady rue on me,
Thine own poor knight.'" He bowed, and gave the grass his knee.

Her colour changed, and with her little foot
She stamped the ground, and said, "False knight, begone,
I know thee now.  Thy person and thy suit
I scorn as dust doomed to be trampled on&mdash;
Away!"  A horn hung at her golden zone,
She wound it thrice, and all the sounds which slept
In cliff and cavern answered every one&mdash;
Away the sound by Elvar turrets swept,
The warder loud replied, and up ten warriors leapt.

Sir Ralph stared on her.  For one moment's space
The man seems fled, and nought but fiend is there,&mdash;
Hell in his heart, and fury in his face,
Twining like adders seems his curling hair;
His brows sink o'er his eye-balls, but the glare
Of fury sparkles through his black eye-lashes.
He smiles and half his willing blade makes bare&mdash;
Then in the sheath the weapon quick he dashes
And flies, and as he flies the water round him flashes.

Beside him lay a small and nimble skiff,
Which through the surge could swim like the sea-mew;
In it he bounded from a jutting cliff,
And snapt like straw the mooring chain in two:
He stretched its wings forth to the winds and flew&mdash;
And when a stone cast from the shore, he cried,
"I'll come again in bridal trim to woo,
And Criffel-hill shall sink in Solway-tide,
If, lady fair, I fail to pay thee for this pride."

He spoke, and laid against the surge's sway
The skiff's slim side; the sole sail, half resigned
Unto the breeze, felt all its force; away
It bounding goes, and snores with sea and wind,
'Till Scotland's brown hills far are left behind.
Proud looked the lady &mdash; prouder was her word,
"I'll live a slave unto the humblest hind,
Or with my life's blood stain my father's sword,
Before that Ralph Latoun is Sybil Lesley's lord.

I know him brave as is his well-tried brand&mdash;
A counsellor subtle and a leader proved&mdash;
With wisdom fitting for a king's right hand,
Firm in resolve, nor from his purpose moved&mdash;
Then what lacks he to render him beloved?
He woo'd and won a gentle heart &mdash; and more,
He trampled it to dust:  yet unreproved
He cumbers earth."  And sighing sad and sore
For sorrows not her own, she walked along the shore.

Now o'er the land flew tidings far and wide,
"A battle has been struck:  at first full sore
It went for Scotland; England vowed to ride
Triumphant from the Tweed to Solway shore;
Her chief has fled, her conquering days are o'er."
So spoke the courtly scroll:  another lay
By hinds was sung.  "For Ralph Latoun no more
Let maids grow pale, or mothers weep and pray,
His helmet plume is soiled; his sword no more shall slay.

His war-steed's running riderless; the steel
Which fenced his breast lies rusting in the mire&mdash;
Nor hath his conqueror gold spurs on his heel:
A good sharp sword, and a wild warbling lyre
Which pours forth song as heaven pours forth its fire,
Are his sole portion:  how can Eustace Graeme
Have more?  the whole earth hath no glories higher
Than peace of heart and happiness at hame,&mdash;
The poet's deathless praise &mdash; the saviour hero's name."

So sung they, while with his companions brave
Homeward hied Eustace Graeme by stream and tree.
Some spoil he had; a gold casque and a glaive
Hafted with gold, and rough with diamonds, he
Won them from Selby in stark jeopardie:
And for his mother, what he prized the most,
A mantle richly flowered and curiouslie
O'erwrought with some historic painter's boast,
Of Scotland's Thistle trode down by a Southron host.

Much mirth was theirs &mdash; war was no wonder then;
Dread fled with danger, and the cottage cocks,
The shepherd's war-pipe, called the sons of men
When morning's wheel threw bright dew from its spokes,
To pastures green to lead again their flocks:
The horn of harvest followed with its call;
Fast moved the sickle and swift rose the shocks,
Behind the reapers like a golden wall&mdash;
Gravely the farmer smiled, by turns approving all.

The ripe corn waved in lone Dalgonar glen,
That, with its bosom basking in the sun,
Lies like a bird; the hum of working men
Joins with the sound of streams that southward run,
With fragrant holms atween; then mix in one
Beside a church, and round two ancient towers
Form a deep fosse.  Here sire is heired by son,
And war comes never:  ancle deep in flowers
In summer walk its dames among the sunny bowers.

Upon the morn of which I sing, its church
Sent holy sounds into the brightening air,
And men with hoary haffets sought its porch,
And ancient dames and damsels passing fair;
The melody of hymns, the voice of prayer,
Rose high to heaven for our afflicted land.
Miles Graeme knelt down, and sad his snowy hair
He stroked, and prayed, that God's own helping hand
Would Scotland and his Son shield from the Southron brand.

He rose, and homeward by the slumbering stream
Walked with the morn-dew glistening on his shoon.
The sun was up, and his outbursting beam
Touched tower and tree and pasture hills aboon;
The stars were quenched, and vanished was the moon;
Loud lowed the herds and the glad partridge' cry
Made corn-fields musical as groves at noon:
Birds left the perch, bee following bee hummed by,
And gladness reigned on earth and brightness claimed the sky.

"Song to the bird," he said, "bloom to the bough,
Fruits to the earth, and fragrance to the morn,
Flowers to the bee, to Winter sleet and snow,
To Spring her lilies in the sunshine born:
To Summer berries, and to Autumn corn,&mdash;
Fowls to the air, fish to the silent stream,
Speed to the roebuck, echoes to the horn,
Motion to water, light to the moonbeam,
To Age sad doubts and cares &mdash; to Youth his golden dream:&mdash;

"To Youth his short and sunny dream &mdash; alas!
How bitter, bitter must the wakening be.&mdash;"
Just then, descending through the woody pass
Which joins the valley with the uplands, he
Saw Eustace Graeme with all his comrades free&mdash;
Men came and gazed and left the corn unreap'd,
Gray Miles for gladness was nigh fit to flee;
He cried, "God bless thee!"  high his old heart leapt,
He tried to run &mdash; for joy he could not &mdash; but he wept.

He wept, but 'twas with gladness and great joy,
For dearer far than conquerors' trophies, hame
Came his sole child, his heart's delight &mdash; his boy.
He stretch'd his arms and faintly named his name,
And said, "Hast thou come from a field of fame?
How went the fight?  a warrior stout and fell
Is Ralph Latoun &mdash; a spirit like the flame
That mounts and burns &mdash; I mind his father well&mdash;
O I have much to ask, and thou hast much to tell."

"Aye, thou mayest die, Miles Graeme, as soon's thou wilt,
Thy happy day is come," John Lorburne said,
"For ne'er was stout hand laid on weapon hilt
With such good will as our young leader laid.
Lord Selby tried the sharpness of his blade;
From Ralph Latoun he made the red blood rain.
With Eustace Graeme and the good saints to aid
We won green Nithsdale to our Queen again."
He spoke and gladdened all &mdash; an hundred hearts were fain,

And as he ceased they shouted.  Shout on shout
Made all the glen of green Dalgonar ring;
Fast from their homes, as from their hives gush out
The bees when on them bursts the blooming spring,
Men start forth first, and high their bonnets fling&mdash;
Dames follow, glad in all men's joys to share;
The foot of dowie care has found a wing,
And gray fourscore roused from its dreamy lair
Comes forth to swell the joy and fill with song the air.

And plucking holly boughs and pulling flowers,
The maids and matrons forth to greet him go.
Upon his head so thick the fragrant showers
Fall, that Eupheme his mother scarce can know
The son for whom she dreed the birthtime throe.
Her joy found every form but that of words,
Her breast could scarce contain her heart's o'erflow&mdash;
She murmured low, "The praise be all the Lord's
And good Saint Bride's, that saved thee from the Southron swords."

No gentle oath a peasant swore.  "Saint Bride!
Believe her not!  no more in gods of stone
Shall I put trust; amid the battle's tide
I called on her, for fierce Latoun rushed on
And would have sped me, when a nobler one
Than any saint of metal, stone, or tree,
Stopt the dread Southron &mdash; Eustace Graeme alone,
Henceforth sole saint to Simon Burn shall be."
He laughed, and threescore youths laughed louder still than he.

"Mock not the saints, my children, said the dame,
Though now to mock them men so fiercely preach&mdash;
But humble be of heart, kneel at the name
Of holy things; far far beyond the reach
Of our blind knowledge, God sits high to teach
With pest, war, thunder, lessons dread and deep;
We are but scattered pebbles on the beach,
O'er which eternity's dread waters sweep."
A bandsman sighed, and said, "Aye, as we sow we reap."

She spoke, whom all revered.  Home, home they go
Rejoicing with great joy:  the land is freed
By native yalour from a foreign foe.
Now reap and plow in peace, and sow the seed,
And let the minstrels give to merit meed,
Sage matrons said:  meanwhile with ear and eye
On gladsome youth, they kept sagacious heed,
And paused, and said, amid their grave employ,
"Let meek-eyed Holiness aye fill the cups of Joy."

