He touched the harp, and thus he sung.  "There stood,
Where Closeburn cushats bask them in the sun,
A little cottage nigh the Castle-wood,
Thatched o'er with heath, and built of polished stone;
Fair as a snow-wreath in the sun it shone
Amid its garden; there was odorous store
Of bloom for bees; both bank and brae were sown
With glowing foxgloves and with gowans hoar;
A trout-stream shot through all, and sang beside the door.

"There dwelt a widow with her only son,
A boy of sixteen summers old or so,
And William was his name:  how she would run
And toil in autumn's warmth and winter's snow,
To warm a hearth where crickets seldom now,
For joy of warmth, make melody; yet she
Wrought with a smile maternal on her brow;&mdash;
Her love of him was deeper than the sea,
And stronger, too, than death &mdash; if love can stronger be.

"All winter-long the snowy wool she twined,
In spring-time span white flax, in summer clear
Turned the green grass swathe to the drying wind;
In autumn 'neath the ripe and golden ear
Her sickle gleamed.  Meanwhile her William dear
In beauty brightened, as in height he grew;
In books and learning he found no compeer,
And many a maiden's wish and sigh he drew,
Ere on his tresses dropt his seventeenth summer's dew.

"But war arose in Scotland &mdash; civil war;
Serf warred with chief, and father warred with son,
The church too warred with all:  her evil star
That rules o'er sinking realms shone like the sun&mdash;
Her lights waxed dim and died out one by one&mdash;
Woe o'er the land hung like a funeral pall;
The sword the bold could brave, the coward shun,
But famine followed fast and fell on all&mdash;
Pale lips cried oft for food which came not at their call.

"In her poor home the widow sat and prayed
For man and beast, and for the troubled land;
When there came rustling through the greenwood glade
A cruel chief &mdash; with him a spoiler band;
Oaths on each tongue and weapons in each hand.
He looked on her, and springing from his selle,
Cried, 'Come, old witch!  else this conjuring brand
Shall help our need, and serve us for a spell&mdash;
So bring forth food and drink, spite all the hags of hell.'

"She brought them meat and drink.  'Dame, well and warm
You seem to live.'  Quoth she, 'This lone abode
Is all I have, beside the threefold charm,
My milch-cow, and my garden, and my God!&mdash;
My husband lies beneath the churchyard sod,&mdash;
Save my son William, there lives nought to cheer
And lighten life of its most grievous load.'
She turned aside, and but half hid a tear,
Which started with the thought of him she loved so dear.

"The leader smiled.  Beneath his horse's hoof
Her garden greens down he triumphant trod;
Then snapt his pistol 'neath the thatch &mdash; the roof
Flashed up to heaven, and vale and mountain glowed;
The milch-cow rushed into the glare and lowed:
He strikes his spear right through her sides. &mdash; Lo, see!
He gives the weeping widow one gay nod,
Then spurs his charger o'er the lilied lea&mdash;
Laughs back upon the fire, and whistles in his glee.

"Home William came; he raised his mother, lo!
He vows, while down the hot tears pour like rain,
Revenge both deep and measureless, and so
He dries his tears:  the widow is right fain
To see him rear for her a house again,
Where with her bible and her gown of gray,
She rules, she smiles, and O, but she is vain,
And blesses him &mdash; will gladness last for aye?
That night to the dread wars he wildly ran away.

"From Tinwald-top on Nith he turned his eyes&mdash;
Ah!  ne'er again, save in some troubled dream,
To him will those fruit groves and tow'rs arise;
The distant rushings of his native stream
Seem mourning o'er some melancholy theme.
The war trump calls, and, answering to the strain,
His young heart leaps and beats, his dark eyes gleam;
This is the path to vengeance &mdash; o'er the main
He sails, and plows the sand upon the shore of Spain.

"The Spanish gentle kneels and tells his beads,
And jewelled o'er sits smiling many a dame,
To see stern England's arrows, France's steeds,
And Scotland's lances, set Castile on flame.
Loud drum and trumpet call to mortal game;
Thick in the smoke the plumes and pennons dance,
As Victory, like a strumpet, went and came.
They likened it unto some gay romance,
Where spears were broke, blood spilt, for lady's glove and glance.

"A field is won.  The warriors on the grass
Sit thick; the wine, the wit, and jest abound;
They toast their country, kindred, wife, or lass.
Some sing vociferous to the bagpipe's sound,
Or talk of gallant deed, or ghastly wound,
Or chargers running wild and riderless.
There William sat among them on the ground,
The stains of battle cleansing from his dress,&mdash;
For well the youth had borne him in the bloody press.

"And while they sat and talked of war-deeds bold,
'All that is nought,' cried one of mark and rank,
'To what I did &mdash; nor is the story old&mdash;
To a witch dame who dwelt on sweet Nithbank.
Her God, her milch-cow, and her green kale rank,
Were her sole friends; I thought them friends so odd,
I rose and played her an unsonsie prank:
I burnt her cottage, killed her cow, and trod
Her green kale down, and bade her try and live on God.'

"'Dost thou not rue &mdash; not rue that cruel deed?'
'Sayest thou so, stripling,' cried the chief, on flame,
'And "thou" too!  take a buffet for thy meed.'
He struck &mdash; the youth rose &mdash; forth his broadsword came&mdash;
'Remorseless fiend! &mdash; that was my mother's hame.'
A clansman ran, his battle-blade he drew&mdash;
'Now on all manhood everlasting shame!'&mdash;
Far from his hand the half drained goblet flew,
'Stand back, my noble lad, I'll give this debt its due.'

"Young William's eyes gleamed in the starting dew&mdash;
'It may not be &mdash; so give the sheath thy blade;
My mother's wrongs doth from my claymore sue
For debts of blood that shall to-night be paid.'
Aback the warrior stood, and scarce obeyed,
Ere gleamed the sharp swords in each eager hand,
Nor mail nor fence the sad youth's weapon stayed;
Deep in his enemy's bosom sank his brand,
He dropt, groaned, grasped the dust, and spurned the bloody sand.

"While he lay weltering in death's withering throes,
Clamouring and drumming with his heels the sod,
William said sighing, 'Hadst thou rued her woes,
I would have left thy punishment to God;'
Then in the sheath thrust back his claymore broad.
Some one the story told to good lord Graeme;
Both rank and friendship he at once bestowed
Upon the youth.  Swift to his mother came
The news; she sang for joy &mdash; and happy was her hame.

"One night &mdash; 'twas when a second field was won&mdash;
The troops their thirst in wild carousal quenched;
Around them mourn the maimed; the dying groan,
One called on God, while his life's blood unstaunched
Flowed fast; one washed him all with gore bedrenched;
In quest of gold some trod o'er wounded men;
Others prayed fervent, battle-toiled and blanched
With loss of blood; the gaunt wolf in her den
Growled glad, her mouth was red with the life's blood of men.

"Sad and apart he sate.  On Nith's sweet vale
A gladsome yet a troubled glance he threw;
Again each cottage, tower, and turret pale,
And stream that wimpled glen or greenwood through,
Came with his mother and her home to view,
And mingled with the faint unceasing wail
Of wounded men; which of the scenes were true
He scarce could reckon:  all around the dale,
Turned to the silver moon lay many a fair form pale.

"Sudden the trees as with a tremor shook,
And like the rush of water came a sound;
The green knoll trembled where he sat; awoke
He scarcely deemed himself.  Up from the ground
He rose, for brightness covered all the mound;
And to him from the midmost glory came,
His father's spirit, robed with radiance round;
He fell upon his face, and thrice his frame
Felt an immortal touch, and thrice he heard his name.

"The vision vanished:  unto God he prayed
To soothe his heart for death's approaching pang;
His blooming face to the cold earth he laid&mdash;
That instant, rush of steeds and trumpet clang,
And cannon peal, to which towers rocked and rang,
Came fierce and fiercer through the midnight air.
Lo!  see his mother Nith's lone groves among&mdash;
Her soul is with her son; thick in her hair
The cold dew shines; her eye is sick with woe and care.

"Silent she sat beneath the ample shade
Of Closeburn oak, whose antiquated bole
Had register of rustic loves been made,
And amorous breathings of the pastoral soul;
'Neath it the print of many a pilgrim's sole
Had in the times of fast and vigil been:
Beneath its boughs Nith's lucid current stole,
From silver dark'ning to demurer green;
Doves roosting in the top were 'mid the moonshine seen.

"Mute dropt the wind, and silent slept the wave,
Wide shook the woods and yet no blast was there;
The flood fowl quailed, nor dared a plume to lave;
The dun doe lay and trembled in her lair;
Dread tongues were given unto the dewy air;
A strange illumination kindled all.
She gazed, awe struck with the portentous glare,
When of her name she thought she heard a call,
And saw a pale hand wave her from a funeral pall.

"Close by her side a shining vision stood,
In shape and look her son, but more divine
Than living thing, who said, 'The salt sea flood
With blood of foes waxed ruddier than the wine;
And oh!  I thought how soon 'neath Closeburn pine
We twain should meet.  Alas!  the God aboon
Decreed it different; my heart's blood the brine
Dyes &mdash; see!  beyond yon round and darkening moon,
Mother, my dwelling is!  and I shall see thee soon.'

"Forth her two arms to clasp him close she threw&mdash;
The phantom gave one feeble cry and sad,
And swifter than a shooting star withdrew,
And as it vanished so the moonlight fled;
The moorflame sole burned on the mountain head.
From that hour forth by haunted streams and deep
She wandered ay, and made green woods her bed;
Sweet peace of mind and heaven's refreshing sleep
Were her's no more, and soon she ceased to wail and weep."

So Eustace sung, and as he ceased, the sun
Behind the mountain's summit slowly sank:
Crows came in clouds down from the moorlands dun,
And darkened all the pine-trees, rank on rank:
The homeward milch-cows at the fountains drank;
Swains dropt the sickle, hinds unloosed the car&mdash;
The twin hares sported on the clover-bank,
And with the shepherd o'er the upland far,
Came out the round pale moon, and star succeeding star.

Star followed star, though yet day's golden light
Upon the hills and headlands faintly stream'd;
To their own pine the twin-doves took their flight;
From crag and cliff the clamorous seamews screamed;
In glade and glen the cottage windows gleam'd;
Larks left the cloud, for flight the grey owl sat;
The founts and lakes up silver radiance steamed;
Winging his twilight journey, hummed the gnat&mdash;
The drowsy beetle droned, and skimmed the wavering bat.

When Eustace ceased he sought away to go&mdash;
But from the knoll-heads and the holly bowers,
There came upon him like the drifting snow,
Green plaited wreaths, while garlands of ripe flowers
O'er him by white hands shaken were in showers;
And ever and on there came a gladsome shout&mdash;
"Where is a warrior and a bard like ours?
Go, minstrels, break the harp and burn the lute,
And in the strife of song for evermore be mute."

There with the golden chaplet in her hand,
And her long ringlets reaching nigh her feet&mdash;
Did the young veiled Sybil Lesley stand;
Beside her two handmaidens, grave, discreet,
Mute, hearkening to the strain so sadly sweet&mdash;
Of that true tale her cheek took every hue,
Her heart smote sore against her side, and beat
Till it was heard &mdash; her large eyes, bright and blue,
Flowed with the tender strain, and dewed her white veil through.

She said, "Young bard, while woods grow green, and while
Flowers bloom in summer, waters fill the Dee;
Birds sing, fish swim, and maids on mankind smile,
And heath has honey for the murmuring bee;
So long shall men delight in naming thee,
In palace, cottage, tower &mdash; on stream and lake;
Far as that brook's exceeded by yon sea&mdash;
So doth thy song surpass all others; take
This golden chain, and say you wear it for my sake."

Around his neck the long and linked gold,
Warm with her own white bosom's heat, she hung;
"The bold in song may be in all things bold,"
She said, and back her flowing veil she flung.
I've seen the looks of which blest poets sung&mdash;
The faces monarchs knelt to:  I have known
The loveliness from dreams and visions sprung&mdash;
But she transcended all &mdash; fair Sybil shone
Like to a new-found star, all lovely and alone.

He knelt, and as he knelt she turned away,
And like a sun-beam down the vale she flew
With all men's praises with her:  twilight gray
Descended glad, and o'er her beauty threw
A veil sedate, dipt in the scented dew&mdash;
The grass o'er which her painted mantle swept,
Seemed proud to be so touched; nor rein she drew,
Nor glanced behind, but sometimes sighed, and kept
Her way to Elvar Hall, where Solway's waters slept.

Now the whole multitude dissolved like snow.
Each separate glen received its people back,
The murmuring brooks, which from the uplands flow,
Showed in their streams their children's shadows black:
Along the moorlands' brown sheep-trodden track,
Maiden and swain hath homeward made them boune.
By Orr's wild fountains, through a woody slack
Young Eustace hied, and hoped Dalgonar soon&mdash;
'Twas now the hour when earth has light from sun and moon.

And there were many pleasant sounds abroad,
The tinkling streams, the folded wethers bae&mdash;
A courser neighed, and up a stranger rode,
The visored rider of my second lay.
He bade good e'en, and said, "Nay, minstrel, nay,
Draw not thy sword; more meet for such soft hand
Is harp or lute &mdash; I have one word to say,"&mdash;
He louted low, and touching thus his brand,
Said, "We shall meet again &mdash; youth, dost thou understand."

"I understand thee passing well, Sir Knight,
And know thee, also."  "Proud hind, sayest thou so!
I came with far less will to talk than fight,
And I brought with me hands could work much woe:
Though I'm called Scourge of Scotland, peasant, know
'Tis only with her plumed and helmed I war,
Not surely when she feels the poet-glow,
And sings of mother's love &mdash; deeds when her star
Shone bright.  I'd give my hand did thine not smell of tar."

Loud laughed young Eustace.  "Sweet's the smell of tar,
And beauteous is the fleece, and fair to see
The pasture mountains to the western star
Joining their summits, white as far's the e'e
Can mark, with mute sheep grazing &mdash; so to me
The trade of shepherd's dear:  but know, proud Knight,
No English eagles build aboon the Dee,
Nor on the Nith; we shepherds have the sleight
To prune their soaring wings, and mar their venturous flight.

"And this I add, moreover, ye have said
To work us woe ye came; in yonder glen,
For thy three hundred horse, with southern blade,
There shine four hundred lances; so, God-den,
Well armed and wary will ye find us when
Ye come with trump and banner."  Swift away
As speeds the falcon in its flight amain
He Nithward rode, nor spared his bonnie gray.
"Now, Eustace, who is he, yon visored man, I pray?"

A dame enquired.  "On Sybil much he looked,
And much on thee:  the dove beside the hawk
Shrinks as she shrank from his rude glance; rebuked
He seemed 'neath thee."  Another dame the talk
Took up, and spoke thus on her homeward walk:
"Ah!  Sybil's sweet:  can sweetness e'er dissemble&mdash;
The unsunned lily on its slender stalk,
When breezes rise and silver dews assemble,
Shakes, as thy song shook her, and put her in a tremble.

"Then rushed back to her cheek the blood, as wine
Sets all the crystal goblet in a glow,&mdash;
How her two eyes seemed drinking out of thine
Love's luscious venom, while her bosom's snow
Swelled till it snapt the silken lace in two.
Ah!  love's mute symptoms, I can read them weel,
The bright eyes which say aye when lips say no,
The low delicious tremor which maids feel
When arms of those they love around them softly steal."

With talk like this all weariness they wiled
Away, and stole some long miles from the road;
Lads spoke, maids listened, and, approving, smiled&mdash;
All that was lovely seemed to be abroad:
Dews lay like diamonds showered on every sod;
Rills murmured music, torrents rushed less rude:
The sky above was brightness, &mdash; brighter glowed
The arched heaven, where mirrored in the flood
Lay mingled all her stars, with mountain, tower, and wood.

But down an eerie and a rugged way
Rode Ralph Latoun; through Ruthwell's pine-trees dark
He spurred:  the desolate bat and owlet gray
Skimmed round; he heard the stealthy weasel's chark;
The lonely glowworm kindled up its spark;
Stars flashed and darted wildly through the night:
Men saw on Solway sea the spectre bark;
A maiden shrieked &mdash; for lo!  a dismal sight&mdash;
A corse in a kirkyard that held a burial light.

He held right onward; soon the darkness sank,
Forth burst the mild moon:  'neath her ray he rode
Through a green valley, down a river bank,
Along a fragrant and a fairy road.
His foaming coarser soft and softer trod,
And neighed, for there a massive tower and gray
Hung o'er the river, dimpling, deep, and broad:
Before the gate, right in the middle way,
Stood a stone cross, round which the weary pilgrims pray.

The scene at once flashed on the Knight; he knew
The stubborn tower, from which a stalwart band,
When late he harried Annan valley, threw,
Against his squadrons, battle-axe and brand;
Their blood ran rife adown the river sand,
While on their tower he cast devouring flame.
Now as he o'er his forehead held his hand,
He thought a light from that dark ruin came,
And in the light he heard a dread voice name his name.

He drew his sword, and 'gainst a scorched door
Struck with his mailed foot; straightway it burst:
There grim and gruesome, on the crumbling floor
Sat a dark Shape; a shape more dread, accurst,
Was ne'er from sinning to perdition thrust;
An iron-bound book lay opened at his feet&mdash;
Of all its words he had but read the first;
Till on his brow huge drops of bloody sweat
Sprung out in agony; &mdash; his dolorous breast he beat,

And sinking deep his sharp teeth in his arm,
He read and gnawed.  Sir Ralph before him stood;
The sight of baptised thing wrought like a charm&mdash;
Mild beamed his eyes; he sobered down his mood,
And from his black lips wiped the foam and blood,
And smiled, and shut, well pleased, the iron-bound book;
Then motioned with his hands; his body rude
Was straightway clothed, and there were odours shook:
None of the fiend remained, save his unhallowed look.

"O welcome, Ralph Latoun:  thou'rt come at last,
Much like a sleuth hound 'neath the huntsman's lash;
I've wearied much for thee &mdash; now that is past&mdash;"
And as he spoke his eyes began to flash
For very glee; his teeth went gnash on gnash.
He smiled a bitter smile, then gently laid
His garment back, and shewed a cruel gash
But newly healed, as if a two-edged blade
Through all his bosom bones a sheer descent had made.

"The love of blood," he said, "and lust of power
Have wrought my ruin; they are working thine;
I fell from glory, in an evil hour,
When front to front forms evil faced divine&mdash;
But one by one into hell's scorching brine
Ambition's godless progeny were dashed;
The heaven glowed red with many an angry sign&mdash;
From God's right hand the living thunder flashed,
And wronged me beyond cure" &mdash; his iron teeth he gnashed.

"No might of hell this rankling wound could cure;
Green earth I sought; by darksome glen and stream,
By lonesome hill and unfrequented bower,
Five thousand years beneath the wan moonbeam
I roved and moaned."  A fierce unearthly gleam
Flashed in his eyes; he writhed him like a worm;
And from his nostrils gushed a burning steam;
His elf-locks shook like rushes in a storm&mdash;
All hell seemed in his thoughts &mdash; thus spake again the Form.

"One eve amid the sweet and dewy cold
I stood upon a mountain head, and broad
Earth lay below me, and wide ocean rolled&mdash;
Serenest heaven above me lustrous glowed;
Tears came; the sight my spirit touched and awed;
An angel sudden stood by me, and said,
'Bless'd be these tears &mdash; I come to thee from God&mdash;
Be whole.'  His minist'ring hand he on me laid&mdash;
I smiled, who never smiled &mdash; the immortal pang was staid.

"The pang was staid, but a more cureless pain
Shot through me &mdash; one for which earth hath no word&mdash;
Malice and hatred, envy and disdain
Are sweeter than the mercy of the Lord;
The torturer's rack, the tyrant's cruel cord,
Hot pincers, boiling oil, and, worse than all,
Revenge's kindness, and faith's fiery sword,
Detraction's venom, mockery's bitter gall,
The pity of the vile, the critic's venomed scrawl,

"Are all endurable, nay, are endured
By that poor worm which God made last &mdash; called man;
But there's a wound that never can be cured,
Far hotter than hell's wrath or heaven's dread ban;
A wound which counts ten thousand years a span,
Given by God's tender mercy.  Oh, for me
Fires without end and darkness without dawn&mdash;
The linked thunder, hell's hot liquid sea&mdash;
The thrones of opening heaven where I no more shall be.

"Though smitten sore and in this dungeon chained,
And doomed my body thus to gnaw and tear;
It is a pleasant thing to be ordained
To live 'mongst men and feast on woe and fear,
See hatred grow 'tween friends long tried and dear,
And thirst of glory change to thirst of blood.
So warrior hail, be glad and of good cheer,
For thou wert born to tame the fiery mood
Of many a haughty Scot, by valley, hill and flood.

"But glory hath its limits.  Now thy plume
Dances unscathed amid the culverins' smoke.
Around thee warriors fall, war-horses fume,
Guns gleam, swords glitter, men with lances flock;
Yet comest thou harmless from the bloody shock.
So now look with me o'er the Solway brine;
Thy tower sits like an erne's nest on a rock&mdash;
The casements all with bridal torches shine,
And cheeks of wedding guests are ruddier than their wine&mdash;

"And there is mirth amongst the maidens all,
Bedward they glance and trim the torches bright.
But where is he the lord of that proud hall?
The priest is there, the bride-maids all in white
Come red as roses on their tiptoes light.
The smile, the titter, reign o'er them by turns&mdash;
Lo!  to the bridegroom comes at dead of night
An armed man.  Behold how dimly burns
The wedding light, like lamps in cold sepulchral urns.

"Hark, there is screaming 'mongst the maidens &mdash; now
Laces are cut and slackened many a sash.
Amazed, they like a falling torrent go
To where the Solway waters foam and dash:
And lo!  the bridegroom; fast, from thrust and gash,
His life's blood reddens all the shuddering water&mdash;
Go, Ralph Latoun, bid swords and axes flash;
Spare neither boy nor man, nor dame nor daughter,
For brief be sure's the space which God gives thee for slaughter."

"Sir Goblin," cried he, "Then I've much to do;
Revenge to take, ambition's race to run,
A land to conquer &mdash; a proud dame to woo."
He said, and as he said uprose the sun
And chased far from his path the vapours dun.
He sat and mused, and gave his steed a check,
Till, like a spider, his frail web he spun;
Nor thought that Fate's iron foot was on his neck,
Or, if he thought, I ween full little did he reck.

