O'er Criffel top the sun sank red and bright,
The mist curled round the mountain thin and gray;
Full on the sea the moon her level light
Threw in long lines on Siddick beach and bay;
The meanest star which gems the milky way
Shone with increase of lustre:  clear as noon
Were seen the sea-mews, rocked on waves alway:
On earth below, in radiant heaven aboon,
Nought spoke save silver streams, and nought moved but the moon.

The weary labourers to the harvest horn
Come merrily homeward down the Elvar-brook,
That day beneath the golden-bearded corn
Full deftly had they moved the reaping-hook:
Old men behind walked numbering every stook;
But when they came where rocks the firth o'er-tower,
Upon the full tide's loveliness to look;
They stood, they graver grew &mdash; the sober hour
Of night, and the wild sea, o'er rudest minds have power.

Beyond them streamed the lights of Elvar-hall,
'Mongst fruit-tree groves and ranks of cedar trees&mdash;
Before them rushed a ship whose twin masts tall,
With snow-white sails, stooped forward in the breeze,
And creaked and quivered; o'er the foaming seas
It danced and wantoned, streamer'd all in pride,
Like colt unbridled on its native leas.
The burnished prow cut swift in twain the tide,
And threw the frying brine in furrows from each side.

Her loosened pennon, fluttering free and far,
Waved high in air, as soars the summer-lark,
Danced with the wind, and streamed to every star;
While bounding forward on its shadow dark,
Through haunts of sea-gulls flew the fearless bark;
Far, far behind rose Skiddaw, shone Saint Bee&mdash;
It was a sight worth musing on, to mark
Man's frail work breasting so the billows free,
And like a thing of life walk on the swallowing sea.

And had it been a living thing, and not
Hewn by the axe, and shaped by man's right hand,
It had not moved more dauntlessly; it shot
Alike past sunken rocks and sucking sand;
Lo!  now it lifts its wings to fly to land,
Nor heeds, where piled in many a warning heap,
The wreck of ships lie cumbering all the strand&mdash;
It leaves and clears them all &mdash; the whirlpool deep
And mermaid rocks it shuns, which oft make mothers weep.

Still stood the hinds on Siddick headland gray,
At this bold bark all wondering, and all mute&mdash;
But, roused at once, rung cliff and bight and bay,
Unto their startling and repeated shout&mdash;
"Ho!  stand more seaward &mdash; put your helm about!
Rocks lurk in foam &mdash; Lot's-wife lies on the lee!
Some fiend's on board!  what mariners could shoot
O'er Robin-rigg! &mdash; lo!  past the Needle-e'e
She dances like a cork &mdash; where bark should never be!"

John Corson looked; his tresses thin and hoar
The snows of seventy winters wore and seven:
O'er Nature's mysteries much he loved to pore,
And in her aspect read the will of heaven.
"The fiend," he said, "of darkness and wild levin
Makes forms, and this is one of his dread ships!
It comes to tell of men to judgment given,
By flood, by field, by tempest, and eclipse."
He paused, and a short prayer came muttered from his lips.

"It is the spectre-ship; each sign I know,"
He said; "no mariner trims a sheet or sail,
Its freight is human misery and woe,
Sorrows unnumbered, and diseases pale;
It taints with pest, for three long leagues, the gale;
I saw it fashioned once:  'neath the moon-flame
I heard a shout, and then I heard a hail,
When down to Solway came an ancient dame,
One whom we know and fear:  I name no evil name.

"East-ward she looked &mdash; then from her foot took she
Her shoe and launched it on the shuddering wave;
Like to a beaten baby moaned the sea&mdash;
The heaven above in darkness matched the grave:
First rose a mist, the mist a whirlwind clave,
Then from the middle darkness started out
A goodly shallop manned and masted brave;
On board stept the enchantress fell and stout,
On man on beast and bird she dealt her spells about.

"The first spell fell on fish; in streams and lakes
The trout and salmon lay, and gasped for life.
The second fell on beasts; cows at the stake
And sheep on moorlands, where the gorcock's rife,
Moaned like things lying 'neath the butcher's knife;
The third spell fell on man:  a bridegroom blythe
Fled forth the chamber from his bedded wife &mdash; "
A matron with a visage like a scythe,
Cried, "Sirs!  I mind him weel, his name was Hugh Forsythe.

"His mother's name was Girzie Kingan, kin
To umwhile Kingan's of the Kittle-naket;
And his wife also was a bairn of sin,
A giggling hempie glib of tongue and glaiket;
Before she was a wedded dame she traiket
With young Barcloye. &mdash; See!  darker far than pitch,
Yon black cloud pours, like pouring from a bucket&mdash;
Her grandame too &mdash; ye mind her weel &mdash; a witch,
As sure as ever rode through Sanquhar on a switch."

Even while she spoke, a dark cloud through the beams
Of the bright moon shower'd down its thunderous drops;
From cloud to cloud glanced thick and fast the gleams
Of levin kindling all the mountain tops.
Yet not for that the venturous shallop stops;
But runs, and catches as it runs, the breeze,
To surge and shower drip all its sails and ropes:
Shoreward it swings, its bowsprit 'mongst the trees
Shoots sudden &mdash; lo!  a sight the marvelling peasant sees.

The shallop lately moved by magic, now
Sends to its decks full fifty men in mail;
Swords in each hand, and helmets on each brow,
On shore they leap; no bugle to the gale
Their coming speaks.  Each reaper's cheek grew pale
As straight to Elvar-hall the invaders wound
Their swift and silent way; around them sail
The scared and clamouring rooks &mdash; no other sound,
No not one whispered word, awoke the woodlands round.

And he who leads them points with his sheathed sword
To Elvar-tower:  in Elvar as they go&mdash;
Of some sweet song they hear at times a word,
Which mixing with the fountains in their flow,
Lends to the woods a tone of mirth or woe;
Then of the dance they hear the lively din,
And see the casements all with candles glow:
The dame who dwells that fairy-hall within,
Hath this night twenty years breathed in a world of sin.

There is no want of gladness and great mirth;
The harper with a merrier hand the strings
Sweeps, and the pride of blood and lordly birth
Is slumbering with all other slumbering things.
Loud joy hath lost its feet and found its wings;
Where Lady Sybil dances in the hall
The old men gaze, young men lean round in rings;
The portraits of her lineage on the wall
Seem touched with sudden life, rejoicing one and all.

And she hath called to mind an Interlude
Or rustic play, where Waste makes war on Thrift.
Forth to the floor there steps a peasant shrewd,
Who of each national drollery knows the drift.
With lighted torch he sings and dances swift;
Soon by his side a maiden o'er the floor
Moves grave, and scarce her foot at first can lift;
She bears a distaff in her hand, and sure
Draws out the thrifty thread, and sings a song demure.

Thrift dances as she sings, and all her strain
Is of domestic gladness, fire-side bliss,
And household rule; nor thought loose, light or vain,
Stains her pure vision of meek happiness;
Religion's comforts, wedlock's holy kiss,
The white web bleached by maiden's whiter hand,
The lisping children in their homespun dress,
The wealth which gathers 'neath Thrift's magic wand,
The fame of a chaste life amid a virtuous land.

Waste danced, and sang a free strain and a light;
Of young Joy's foot which gaily out can measure
Life's weary way; of Love, whose fingers white
Strew all youth's way with fresh flowers plucked from pleasure;
And Laughter loud, who never yet found leisure
To pause and think; and Merriment, who coins
The tears of sadness into current treasure;
And Wantonness, his hot lips moist with wines,
And Pleasure ever gay, with loose ungirded loins.

They danced with many an antique touch and turn,
And like wild levin flashed and flew about;
Waste with his torch strove aye the roke to burn,
While Thrift as nimble as the starting trout,
When slacks the sharp shower and the sun shines out,
Turned, wheeled, and flew &mdash; and there rose such a clamour:
"O well done, Thrift!"  the hoary-headed shout;
While young men's tongues rung sharp as a steel hammer&mdash;
"Waste, well done, Waste!  now nought will save the roke but glamour."

And whether Thrift had conquered or had lost
May not be known:  for tramp succeeding tramp,
With ready swords above their plumage tost,
And words attuned to a marauder's camp,
Their corslets glancing bright to torch and lamp,
Came fifty warriors, and came Ralph Latoun.
He on the threshold stood and gave a stamp,&mdash;
Then took one step into that gay saloon&mdash;
Three damsels shrieked, three wept, and three fell in a swoon.

Up Sybil rose, nor did she shriek or swoon,
But her cheek roses like the lily grew&mdash;
For as she looked, she knew him Ralph Latoun&mdash;
Her heart throbbed most her silken lace in two.
Her maids all round like fluttered ring-doves flew,
Nigh her the fierce knight comes, then sudden stands.
Some of her old retainers, staunch and true,
Have armed, while his, with steel blades in their hands,
Bear looks which promise quick to work their lord's commands.

Her stature waxes and her eye expands,
Her glowing neck seems ivory wet with wine;
There is heroic motion in her hands,
Around her head her tresses seem to twine,
God through her breathes an ardour all divine.
She waved her hand, &mdash; "What is your boon, Sir Knight,
The land you breathe in and this tower are mine."
He smiled and said, "The tide is in its height,
And I have said and sworn thou sailest with me to-night."

"Oh weak," she said, "nor yet so weak as vile;
Shame to thy knighthood and thy martial fame!
In the wide circuit of fair Britain's isle
No man save thee would work an orphan shame:
The lowest hind who owns a nameless name
Would scorn a deed so base."  He stayed no more,
But sheathed his sword and sprang to seize the dame;
Old John of Raes, with tresses thin and hoar,
Clung round his mailed knees &mdash; he dragged him o'er the floor.

And his right hand had reached her, when the dame
Who acted Thrift, clapt to the torch her roke,
And in his face quick dashed the flashing flame;
Locks, beard, and eyebrows, crackled in the smoke.
Then from the chamber Lady Sybil broke,
And darted darkling down a secret stair,
Which met a path that led to Elvar oak;
Loud, as she went, rose shout and shriek and prayer,
For all the wrongs which wrath and vengeance work, were there.

Where is the Lady Sybil?  Room and hall,
The dizzy turret and the gloomy vault
Sir Ralph seeks round, and seeks them all in vain;
At every step there is a sharp assault;
The young, the old &mdash; the feeble and the halt,
Assail with lance, sword, dagger, plowshare, club.
"For Southron lips, Scotch drink is brewed right salt,
Home to your pudding-pan, and pickling-tub&mdash;
And pipe and pot.  Come ye to reave us and to rob?"

Latoun smiled at those rude and ready words,
And through the tower flew as one wode outright;
He struck down plowshares, trampled o'er the swords
In ancient hands, and for that lady bright
Called loud and looked the way she took to flight;
He called, he looked in vain; fierce waxed his ire:
"A flaming torch I'll lend to give her light,
And guide her small feet over moor and mire&mdash;"
And stamping with his feet, cried "Fire!  bring me fire!"

It was a gentle and a lovely night,
The rain had cooled the air, stars shone serene:
When quick a pillar of upstarting light,
From Elvar-tower flashed o'er its fruit-trees green;
Sheep on the hills, ships far at sea were seen:
Broader it burst, and to the clear round moon
A grosser light united.  Through the screen
Of glossy holly, fire came spouting soon,
And Siddick hill and bay shone bright as in mid-noon.

Men came from mountain glen, and bank, and brook,
Like winged things.  To Elvar-tower they rushed;
"And who did this?"  they cried, with wondering look.
All sounds save that of the red fire were hushed;
O'er tower and hall its conquering surges gushed,
And roared to heaven.  They marked where armed men
Had lately been, the green sward deep was crushed
With mailed feet, and here and there the glen
Shewed where men fought and fled, then turned and fought agen.

They tracked them to the Solway; on the sands
There men stood mourning in the fair moonshine,
And matrons called down curses, held their hands
Above; even where their footsteps met the brine,
Which gemmed the green sward with a shining line
Of wreathed shells, which fabling seamen say,
Give of the coming tide this wondrous sign,
They sough and sing in every bight and bay:
There stricken down and dead three Southron warriors lay.

"Now, why thus stand ye at the dead of night
With moistened eyes and steel-blades red and bare;
While one may count beneath yon dismal light,
The mountain flocks, and number in mid air
The startled sea-fowl shrieking here and there?"
"Aye, we may mourn until that faithless sand,
And that deep sea grow solid earth, and fair&mdash;
Fair Sybil's lost, the loveliest of the land,
She of the gentlest heart, and the most generous hand."

"There's balm in Gilead," said an ancient swain;
"I saw her like a sunbeam through the air
Fly, when yon stern marauder strove in vain
To seize her; down the dark and secret stair,
I saw her bright eyes flashing, and her hair:
Now sure as God is strong, and Satan weak,
Yon reaver knight hath not our lady-fair.
Heaven's hands are ever round the good and meek,
I'll pray for her return thrice seven times a week."

The reaver-ship sailed from their sight, but still
They stood till darkness grew to silver gray,
And the glad sun came dancing up the hill,
In brightness clad, and like a bridegroom gay,
Thick showering gems, and gold on bank and brae;
Dew on his wings, and incense on his feet:
The mottled lark toward the milky way
Turned his grey bosom, and his proud wings beat,
And hymned and perfumed heaven with songs and earthly sweet.

That sun sunk on Dalgonar, glen and hill;
Tower, tree, and fountain wore a golden stain;
In busy hands the sickle glittered still,
And as it moved fast sank the bearded grain:
Each maid looked up, so did each hoary swain,
For o'er the new-shorn field a Maiden came;
Her feet the short sharp stubble filled with pain;
Weary she seemed, like one strayed far frae hame,
And no one knew her face, and no one knew her name.

Fair in her form as in her dress sedate,
She seemed the daughter of some rustic cot;
Downcast of eye, of meek and modest gait;
Her glossy ringlets were wound neat about
Her brow, and bound with virgin snood devout;
Her long manteel was white as Cheviot flocks,
Beneath it whiter moved her snowy foot:
Slow as she came among the yellow shocks,
Her twentieth autumn's sun was shining on her locks.

"O reverend Sir!"  &mdash; thus said the stranger maid&mdash;
No reap-hook rustled while she meekly spoke&mdash;
"Far from my home in sore distress I've strayed;
To pastures green, say, can I lead thy flock,
Or dress ripe corn, or twine the white hause-lock?
The churchyard turf on my dear mother lies;
My father sailed and perish'd."  'Gainst a shock
She leaned, and few and bitter were her sighs,
And half she turned her round to hide her glistening eyes.

Her by the hand Miles Graeme affectionate took&mdash;
Said, "Weep not, maiden, thou shalt with me go,
And like a daughter grace my cottage nook;
Eupheme loves eyes which are acquaint with woe.
In twining flax or fleeces white as snow,
Or pressing fragrant curd, come, show thy skill;
Or add that sweet voice, musical and low,
To tender songs which make the heart-strings thrill;
Or to the glad pipe dance, when snowy winds are shrill."

She looked up ruddy as the rose of June,
And thanked him with her eyes.  Horns told aloud
That day was done; stars glimmered; shearers soon
Dropt their reap-hooks, and in the crystal flood
Cooled their hot hands and brows, all toil bedewed:
Homeward they went, and as they went they sung
Of holy love, or some unholy feud;
Or told sad tales which live but on the tongue
Of hinds, and made us weep when we were soft and young.

Even while he spoke, he at his open door
Arrived, and o'er the threshold led the maid;
A peat fire sparkled on the smooth stone floor,
And round the house a twinkling twilight made;
Which first the form and then the thrift display'd
Of his Eupheme, who toiled that she might tell
How with her wheels her husband she arrayed
For kirk or fair:  she looked up &mdash; she knew well
It was a stranger's foot that on the threshold fell.

She smiled a welcome as she looked, and met
A look all loveliness.  "Eupheme, I say,
Haste thee, and sweetest of all sweet things get,
For this young thing hath walked a weary way;
God's hand hath taen her kindred all away&mdash;
She goes unfriended through this world alone."
"O welcome to me as the light of day,"
The matron said; "cheer thee, thou beauteous one,
Old eyes like mine should weep" &mdash; nor made she farther moan.

The stranger maid her mantle clasp unloosed,
Shed back her flowing locks of darkest stain,
Bared her round fingers long and white, composed
Her swelling bosom, where a pleasant pain
Fled and returned with double throb again;
With neat and ready hand Eupheme her cheer
Placed on the board:  cakes of the sifted grain,
Curds quenched in fragrant cream, and pure and clear
The honey from the comb, and breg-wort, sweetest beer.

Eupheme now bade the stranger one draw near;
Miles bared his brow and the small banquet blest&mdash;
A sound unwonted to that maiden's ear,
But yet most welcome; she could scarcely taste
The cream and curd; the breg-wort cup she kiss'd,
And passed it meekly to the cottage dame,
While the frank farmer drank her health and prest&mdash;
"Come cheer thy heart, and think thyself at hame&mdash;
The friendless foot is dear to all who bear my name.

"Cheer thee, my child," &mdash; 'twas thus his converse ran&mdash;
"The lowly are happier than the lofty far;
Rank wars with rank, and wealth works woe to man;
Blood is no stay; relationship no bar
With peers and princes when they long for war.
Far better he who, in a low estate,
Scorns fickle fortune, trusts no treacherous star&mdash;
Turns from the way which leads to glory's gate,
And with humility is conqueror of his fate.

"Cheer thee, my child; no armed men in mail
Bruise down our gowans with a gory foot;
War's horn ne'er waked the echoes of this vale,
It is so lonesome &mdash; here the drum is mute.
The reapers' horns, the shepherd's pipe and flute,
Alone are heard our homes and halls among,
Save when the song in many a linked bout
Of melting melody, from one as young,
But not so fair as thee, comes mended from the tongue."

The maiden heard a light foot on the floor,
And sidelong looked, and there before her stood
Young Eustace Graeme:  far from the pasture moor
He came; the fragrance of the dale and wood
Was scenting all his garments green and good.
A sudden flush when he the maiden saw,
Burned through his temples, kindled up his blood;
His stifling breath waxed nigh too tight to draw,
He bowed, and silent stood in wonderment and awe.

The father smiled, the mother smiled.  Now why
Are her eyes downcast and his white brow glowing?
Say, have they vowed while heaven was witness by
With all her radiant lights like fountains flowing,
To love while water runs and woods are growing,
And stars glowed conscious of the compact pure?
They never woo'd, nor, love for love bestowing,
Met with the moonshine in the green-wood bow'r,
Nor looked and sighed, and looked and drank love by the hour,

Yet they have met.  Though not fools of the flock,
On whom love like the tiger gives one bound,
And then the heart is rent &mdash; a thunderstroke
That makes men dust before they hear the sound;
A shaft that leaves dark venom in the wound;
A frost that all the buds of manhood nips;
A sea of passion in which true love's drowned;
A demon strangling virtue in his grips;
A day when reason's sun is quenched in dread eclipse.

True gentle love is like the summer dew,
Which falls around when all is still and hush;
And falls unseen until its bright drops strew
With odours, herb and flower, and bank, and bush.
O love, when womanhood is in the flush,
And man's a young and an unspotted thing!
His first breathed word and her half conscious blush,
Are fair as light in heaven, or flowers in spring&mdash;
The first hour of true love is worth our worshipping.

"Now, Eustace, harken &mdash; take thou heed, my son,"
Said good Miles Graeme, "there sits a comely child,
Sent here of heaven:  I found her wandering lone,
A motherless lamb, cast on a moorland wild&mdash;
Pure is our home, preserve it undefiled;
Be thou a brother to her night and morn&mdash;
I would not have mine ancient honour soiled&mdash;
(Though fallen our house our honour's yet unshorn),
Better mine only child had been this hour unborn."

"Husband," said mild Eupheme, "what words have crost
Thy lips about this only child of thine?
I am not prone to make a mother's boast,
Thou knowest; yet when has he shown mark or sign
From which we lack of reverence might divine
For truth and virtue:  if he weakness ever
Shows, 'tis when pouring forth the minstrel's line,
Vain verse and light comes rushing like a river;
Yet his hand has been light &mdash; shall I be thankless? &mdash; never."

"Our God is good," Miles said, "once and alway,
The gift of song is his best gift, and thou,
Should'st honour it:  the poet with his lay,
Eternal sunshine sheds round honour's brow&mdash;
But of this maid let our discourse be now;
More of her lineage I would gladly hear."
Composed he looked, and smoothed his locks of snow
O'er his high brow and backward from his ear,
And moved his ancient seat the stranger maiden near.

