More had she said, when up the door-latch rose;
All looked, and straight along the floor there came,
His grass green mantle powder'd o'er with snows,
His plumed bonnet doft, young Eustace Graeme.
"Bless thee, my son, why wert thou from thy hame
On this dread night, when wild in grove and fen
Things evil roam?"  Close to the clear hearth flame
He stood, and said, "God sends to hill and glen
Blest shapes to watch the ways and cheer the souls of men."

"Thou hast seen something; what mean'st thou, my child?
Alas!  I dreaded aye 'twould come to this.
Indeed I said that by some streamlet wild,
Where elves haunt aye, and nought that's holy is,
Some fiend would tempt thee, and there has, I wis."
"Mother," said Eustace, "I to-night have been
With shapes which less belonged to bale than bliss."
"Alas!"  she answered, "shapes on Halloween
Are angels, but all black and fallen ones I ween."

"Not all," said Eustace.  "On the mountain's peak
The round moon rested; on the rivulets clear
The stars were pictured:  forth I went to seek
South running waters.  I no sound could hear;
A robe of brightness all the land did wear;
Mute sat the owl upon the castle wall;
Town, village, church, and tombstones bright, did rear
Their heads; the groves by clear Dalgonar all
Stood moving not a leaf.  I went up to the fall&mdash;

"The fairy fall; and there came such a sound,
As if that earth and heaven a song had sung;
It came as come from instruments attuned
Soft tones with music mixed of woman's tongue;
The very hills and vales with rapture rung.
I looked, and lo!  before me danced a light,
And midst the light a maiden fair and young
Rode on a palfrey of the purest white,
And from her golden locks the radiance shot outright.

"Behind her came her riders all in green,
Bare were their heads, and o'er their shoulders rolled
Their curling ringlets, like the sunshine sheen,
Starred o'er with gems, and clasped with bars of gold.
In every hand a horn of antique mold
Breathed charmed notes upon the enamoured wind.
I gazed, and scarce my spirit in could hold;
I called the dreams of poets all to mind,
And thought them faery-folk, and thrice the cross I signed,

"And thrice I called on God.  On Croga top
They stayed, and leaping from each snowy steed,
Led them where herbage at their wish grew up,
And on the fragrant fodder fast they feed;
While from the greensward rising in their need,
A table stood, with silver feet I ween,
And dainties heaped:  all sorts of odorous bread,
And wine that sparkled in the crystals sheen&mdash;
There midst her chivalry sat down the Faery Queen.

"Now towards them I could not choose but go,
For willing wings seemed growing to my feet;
So on I went.  May-morn, when winds are low
And lilies out, has ne'er a smell so sweet
As had that feast; yet it was scarce discreet
To look upon them.  Loud an outcry rose,
'A pinch, a pluck for mortal thing is meet!'
The queen cried, 'Nay' &mdash; as our own Sybil does&mdash;
'But bring him here, he's none of the good fairy's foes.

"I went; a gold cup glittered in her hand,
From which she drink of such a sort did drain,
That spill a spoonful on a barren land,
And straight it shoots up crops of yellow grain.
'Mortal,' she said, 'upon an errand vain
Thou wanderest now; more meet that thou should'st ken
Why I am here with all my fairy train;
'Tis my last visit to the haunts of men,
The last time I shall look down green Dalgonar glen.

"'Long, mortal, long on Croga hill's green crown,
E'er since the gowan graced the velvet sod,
We've held our fairy feast, and deeply down
Within its gladdened bosom found abode;
Whence went we on our errands bright abroad,
Spreading abundance o'er the barren ground,
Giving to fruit-trees their delicious laad,
Healing sad blights or lightning's fiery wound,
And breathing balmy airs the pastoral hills around.

"'The flocks wild browzing o'er the wilder hills,
Much of our care and tenderness partook,
Rich milk their ewers, a balmy burthen, fills,
And winter herbs grow for them by the brook.
Man next, a savage fierce and rude, we took,
Taught him the wool to reap, the yarn prepare
For garments; led him to a sunny nook,
Reared him a shealing, brought him wild fruits rare,
And taught immortal things to his companion fair.

"'Wild woods bore fruit, rich roots filled all the land,
To toil and labour there was little need;
Bees swarmed; and deer in many a stately band
Ranged wide the hills, and hares unnumbered breed;
The land was sown with a spontaneous seed,
All, all was there that natural man could claim
To keep him happy; even the shepherd's reed
Was prompt to soothe him when the evening came,
And his fair children sat around his shealing flame.

"'Dalgonar then by evening and at noon,
Lay like a maiden in a pleasant dream;
No trees were from the river's margin torn,
And vexed and hewn to swim the ocean stream;
No oxen dragged the plough's misshapen beam;
No tools of iron in earth's green bosom dear,
Had delved in search of gold's pernicious seam:
Man had not reined the steed, nor yoked the steer,
Nor whet his hook to reap the wild grain's yellow ear.

"'Then sweetest of all things, the poet's song,
We taught to shepherds as they shut the pen;
We watched the mother in her birth-time pang,
And brought her blooming to our haunts again:
We showed ourselves amongst the sons of men.
But 'las there came a sad disastrous change;
All glorious nature men to mock began,
And by perverse inventions dread and strange,
Fettered their thoughtless feet from nature's balmy range.

"'The earth was measured out as with a rod,
Loud to the axe-edge groaned the forest shade,
The vales and hills shorn of their honoured load,
Turned up their bosoms to the ploughman's blade:
A nauseous mixture o'er the land was laid;
Then rose, but not of God, the pampered ear,
Enclosures soon and land-marks wide were made,
And thine and mine, the bridled steed, the steer,
And petty lords arose, and princes too appear.

"'Then slavery came and sweat.  Man bowed the head
To fellow man, who in his chariot drawn
Perchance by mortals, crushed, like to a reed,
His spirit down; then holmland and red lawn,
Grew feverish 'neath the ministrings of man;
Corn faded:  herbs lay poisoned on the plains.
Grim pest, which in pollution first began,
Appeared, and rankled in man's shuddering veins,
And war unsheathed the sword upon life's poor remains.

"'Thus usurpation o'er our green domains,
Grew wide and wider; soon our lightsome feet
Were driven from the river sides and plains;
On lonesome hills and high we sought a seat;
But here the share comes furrowing, here the sweat
Reeks on man's forehead, here the grievous moan
Of souls with slavery racked, comes when we meet
With song and with sweet instrument:  the groan
Of men for their lost rights disturbs our Fairy throne.

"'No more, no more, shall our melodious feet,
Shine in the moonlight 'mid the elfin-ring:
No more, no more, responding wide and sweet,
Shall we at midnight wake the charmed string,
Nor mortal, won so with our ministring,
Will woman's solace for our very sake
Forego.  Away, where there's perpetual spring,
We fly:  glad swans in pairs swim on the lake,
Sweet odours soothe our sleep, and birds sing us awake.

"'Then, mortal, of our parting cup partake.'
A cup she held with red wine welling high:&mdash;
I drank, when lo!  my spirit seemed to wake
From earthly slumber, and before my eye
Stood men whom I had known, and crouding nigh,
Came maids on whom I thought the daisies bloomed.
In more than mortal brightness marched they by,
And smiled on me; I saw friends long entombed
In Solway &mdash; or to death on fields of battle doomed.

"She said, 'Behold, these are earth's sons whom we
Saved in great peril.  Farewell, we must be gone;
Farewell, sweet land, from Sanquhar to the sea.
Farewell, we leave thee to the sigh and groan;
Far in a foreign land we fix our throne,
Where neither ploughman plows, nor ditcher delves.
Farewell:  we leave thee to be preyed upon
By spell and charm, and shafts of evil elves.
Farewell, men of the land &mdash; ye honour not yourselves.

"'For thee, young mortal, I shall not unbar
The door of darkness, and let in the light;
Put not your trust in spells; know there's a star
Arisen, a fair one, which will guide thee right.
All I shall say, is this; a fortune bright
Is thine, so be thy heart is strong and true:
Prepare thy sword, and gird thy baldric tight,
The Maid whom thy young spirit clings unto,
Thou'lt find her o'er the sea, beside thy deadliest foe.'

"She waved her hand; up all her people sprung,
And laid their thighs o'er palfreys white as snow;
Some mournful words to a sad air they sung,
Words which would charm the waters from their flow.
She said, 'Take thou this blessed cup, and know
The wine within it shall for ever welle,
While they who drink, believe.' And saying so
Away she went, and as she went there fell
Thick darkness o'er her path.  I have no more to tell.

"But see the gift!"  The wine-cup dazzling bright
He shewed:  all marvel o'er the fair design.
Around the brim were sculptured doves in flight,
Beneath were bleating lambs and lowing kine,
And poet shepherds piping airs divine.
There too, the fairy folk were pictured fair,
The queen with damsels three, and minstrels nine;
While as you gazed the magic landscape rare,
Changed &mdash; still the lovely queen and all her court were there.

Young Eustace took the cup, and reverentlie
Drank of the wine; his soul all sad before
To think his true love was beyond the sea,
Brightened at once, a bouyant look he wore.
An ancient hind whose years had reached fourscore,
Said, "Let me taste, I'm faint and fit to sink;"
He drank:  "I'm made again, more, Eustace, more,"
He cried, "I'm plucked off from the grave's dread brink,
More, give me more!  Now this I call celestial drink!"

The moon was now high in her midnight march,
From earth to heaven was filled with purest light:
Stars thick inlaid God's hieroglyphic arch:
Wide o'er the north, Aurora wandered bright,
Shaking her radiant ringlets o'er the night.
Hugh Wilson rose and said, "The witching hour
Is gone, and homewards I must steer my flight.
Sybil!  'gainst fairy charms, and poet's power,
See ye bar not your heart."  So saying, to the door

He went, and went the others.  Eustace now
Looked on sweet Sybil, saying, "Thou art pale,
Why what hath chanced to sadden so thy brow?
Have nuts burned darkly, or could'st thou not wale
One fair straight stem among six hundred kale?
Or hast thou heard sad tidings?"  "Tidings, nay,"
Replied she, Sybil, "but thy wondrous tale,
Has chased all gladness from me far away.
Dost thou believe it all, now, Eustace, soothly say?"

"Believe it?  yea.  Can I believe mine eyes,
Can I believe my ears, my touch, taste, smell?
That fairy cup is gold, it tells no lies.
Look on it, maiden, see the wine doth welle
For ever up as fountains in their swell:
Yet there are shadows which my heart o'ercast,
If my love lives in foeman's lands, farewell
To my delicious dreams:  the past is past,
The future all is dark, and yet the die is cast.

Sweet Sybil smiled.  "Now I could make thee lord,
By prophecy of fortune ten times fairer,
And quite as certain as the riddling word
Of elves, in whom men say the fiend's a sharer.
A wife from foemen's lands!  A story rarer
Was never framed, and sweet to thee as honey
It seems to be.  Now who would be the bearer
Of such a tale for either love or money?
Bards aye will be beguiled while summer suns are sunny."

"'A wife in foemen's lands;' these were the words
Indeed," said Eustace, "yet they scarcely say,
That she's of foemen's blood:  the cruel cords
Of fate may drag my winsome one away,
Far o'er the hills and o'er the ocean gray;
And my firm heart and my most faithful brand,
May win her back:  have I not read, I pray,
This riddle wondrous well?"  He touched her hand,
Whiter than milk, and said, "Dost thou not understand?"

She grew much paler than the lily grows,
And said, "O'er hills and over ocean wide!
Alas!  alas!  when will our house's woes
Cease, and the deep waves of dismay subside?"
She paused:  a blush, cheek, neck, and bosom dyed;
She looked aside, "I scarce know what I say,
Alas, good cause have I to fear the tide,
Although for other's harm it swells.  Away
It swept my sire &mdash; but now what was thy meaning, pray?

"What didst thou mean?"  She gave him such a look,
As man resists not:  Eustace, drawing near,
Sat at her side, her waist he chastely took
Within his arm.  "I"ll make my meaning clear:
My meaning was thy meaning, Sybil dear."
They gazed in others eyes, both sighed, and he
Said, "Trust in God:  be faithful and no fear;
But perils will be vanquished, though they be
As strong as tempests are, and sterner than the sea.

"I would not leave old Scotland's mountain gray,
Her hills, her cots, her halls, her groves of pine,
Dark though they be; yon glen, yon broomy brae,
Yon wild fox cleugh, yon eagle cliffs outline
An hour like this; this white right-hand of thine,
And of thy dark eyes such a gracious glance,
As I got now, for all beyond the line,
And all the glory gained by sword or lance,
In gallant England, Spain, or olive vales of France."

Unto her lips her heart came with a dance,
Her temples burned as burns a kindled coal,
While on her love she sideways threw a glance,
Bright as a ray, half open and half stole:
Yet with it came the warmth of heart and soul,
Secret his arm around her neck he slips,
Love in their hearts reigned with a chaste controul,
As in one soft entrancement touched their lips:
She blushed blood red for shame, and starting from his grips,

Said, "Now I've proved, it is not as men say:"
And her disordered ringlets shook.  "I deemed,
The inspired framers of the poet's lay,
The meekest of all mortals:  how I dreamed!
And yet as such the world hath them esteemed;
It was so once:  perchance a ruder race
Have followed."  Her bright eyes such sorcery beamed,
And leaped her heart so 'gainst her silken lace,
That for to touch her not young Eustace wanted grace.

He said, "I glory in the summer's prime,
The wild birds' warbling and the wild bees' hum;
I love rough winter with her storms sublime,
The sea that scatters man's best work like scum.
I love the moonshine when the breeze is dumb,
And more to muse at gloaming when dews fall,
On minstrel exaltation yet to come.
My spirit now hath a diviner call,
One kiss of thee like this is dearer than them all."

With a mild meek composure on her brow,
Gently she thrust the enthusiast youth away.
"These are the idlings of thy fancy now,
Art thou oft this way, Eustace, now I pray?"
"Frequent at night, and sometimes in the day,"
Replied the bard, and more perchance had been,
But that Eupheme called from her room, "Away,
The day will dawn ere Sybil shuts her een."
She vanished like the light that's once and no more seen.

Snow on the hill and ice upon the ford:
Time hastens on, and so too must my story:
Fire on the earth, and victuals on the board,
Grave matrons there, and hinds with heads all hoary,
And mendicants from Cumrae come, or Corrie.
Lads mending graith; maids humming at the wheel,
Miles Graeme reposing in his patriarch glory:
Eupheme heed taking of both roke and reel,
And Eustace penning songs on Sybil fair and leel.

A rustic picture by a hand as rude,
But true to nature, for December air,
Brings so much snow, that scarce the mountain flood
Can to the ice-fringed river now repair;
The sheep are shivering in their upland lair.
Nought may the weary storm-staid wanderer ken,
As he looks down Dalgonar valley fair,
Save tower and stream, the kirk, the folding pen,
And smoke ascending from the cottages of men.

For one wide expanse of untrodden snow,
In even layers or wreaths fantastic blown,
Deep mantles hill and holm and valleys low:
Labour has down both spade and mattock thrown,
The sounding flail is heard and heard alone:
Or maiden's song when winnowing in the barn.
A single star sits on the hill head lone,
The silent wild swan seeks the reedy tarn,
The ground rings like a bell from Moorkirk to Moorwharn.

Snow drifted thick, when there came to the door
A feeble knock, and eke a feeble cry:
Up Eustace rose, and started forth; before
The threshold there a mendicant did lie;
He raised him up, and low and dolorously
He plained of cold and hunger.  "'Tis a sin,
My son, to keep him 'neath so cold a sky,"
Eupheme said, sorrowing, "Move him gently in."
He came:  with warmth and food he did his tale begin.

"My name is Lydal:  from Sark's border water
I come.  I've been a soldier, and I bled
For Scotland, when by Solway Moss the slaughter
Was of her children sore:  a captive led,
I passed to England; from my bonds I fled,
And fought again.  Suffice it, I must wander,
And seek a crust of bread, and a straw bed.
Such blessings Scotland to her son will render,
Who ever since a boy has been her bold defender."

"Mock not thy country, mock her not, I say!"
Miles sharply answered; "Know ye not we all
Must fight her battle on the battle day;
Glad if we win, forgotten if we fall;
If maimed, we wander, and on brethren call
For food and shelter; thou hast found them both:
A back as good as thine must take the wall."
The soldier swore a bitter southern oath
He loved his country well, to mock her he'd be loth.

"Then speak with reverence, and whene'er ye speak,
Swear not."  A flush passed o'er the harden'd brow
Of Lydal, but he laughed and said, "'Tis weak
To swear, I'm told &mdash; I've heard the thing ere now;
But come, though I'm a mendicant, I trow,
'Twas not for nought, on firing Carlisle wall,
I with my sword plucked from the scorching lowe
Lady and child &mdash; I heard the young thing squall,
She paid me well with gold, but red gold was not all.

"See here's a ring, a little ring, 't would fit
A fairy's finger:  now this ring ye see,
To me has brought some sorrow; little wit
It takes to guess this pretty gem must be
A dangerous thing for a poor man like me,
To bear through this wild country; I have said&mdash;
Not sworn &mdash; I'll swear no more &mdash; to give it free
Whene'er I find some gentle shepherd maid,
Whose finger it will fit."  There was some bustle made

Between the two bondmaidens.  Much they tried
To put it on:  but Lydal smiled, "No!  no!
It will not do; but here's a maid beside,
I guess thy daughter, with a neck like snow.
What not thy daughter or relation?  So&mdash;
Well well, I reck not, let the ring but fit,&mdash;
So try it, maid:  no!  that's a proud word, O;
An that thou livest, thou'lt stronger grow in wit.
See:  of the good red gold this is a pretty bit."

Young Sybil looked on him:  she knew not why
Her gentle heart went fluttering like a bird,
What time the hawk is hovering in the sky;
She knew not why, but she was sadly stirred;
It was not in his look nor yet his word;
Perchance it was that quicken'd sense which knows
Of coming danger; but not made of curd
Is woman's spirit:  Sybil's strongly rose
And trampled on her fears as she would tread the snows.

"Put up thy gold, old man; it came with blood,
And blood will follow it:" nor more said she,
But twirled her snowy distaff round:  he stood
And looked upon her with a searching ee;
"Well, well:  a fair maid's fancy is as free
As is the loosened arrow."  Eustace said,
"There is thy seat, and there's thy wallet, see&mdash;
Cease speech &mdash; dost see that Sybil is dismayed:"
The soldier glared, as glares the wolf upon the blade

That's drawn to strike him.  Much he seemed disposed
To give a fiery answer; but he smiled,
Sate down, his two broad palms of iron he closed
Over his knees, while on his wallets piled
He placed his head and slumbered like a child:
Yet 'neath his eyebrows, whoso looked might mark
His stealthy glances glimmering quick and wild.
Eupheme rose up; said, "Maidens, cease your wark,
Go sleep until the morn and rise up with the lark."

They heard, and they obeyed.  The wandering man
Said, "Much I needed food &mdash; more needed heat,
Now I have both &mdash; so, let me stay till dawn,
For ere the sun is three hours high, my feet
Shall, please the saints, be on the merry street
Of old Dumfries, where in the Friar's vennel
A comrade dwells &mdash; a pious man, discreet.
I'm sick of wandering; old hounds seek the kennel;
Thanks for the simmering cup, such kindness comes but sennel."

Ere Sybil went to slumber, close she shut
And bolted fast her chamber door, and placed
An antique chair against it:  then she put
A poniard 'neath her pillow, richly chased;
And her white bosom's boddice she unlaced,
Undid her snood, and straightway down there gushed
A flood of ringlets o'er her slender waist;
She listened &mdash; all within the house was dushed,
She knelt &mdash; and prayer her bosom comforted and hushed.

Ere Eustace sunk in slumber, he couched low
As the lynx couches, and with ear and eye
Watched Lydal, for to him of meikle woe
His coming spoke, and yet he knew not why,&mdash;
Yet young doves know the goshawk's brood:  a sigh
Was all he heard, and then a muttered prayer,
To saints, perchance, or to the God on high;
Young Eustace gave suspicion to the air,
Nor thought that woe o'er him now stretched her right arm bare.

