I fear this song hath fallen on evil times;
Small honour now awaits a humble lyre:
Each ear is filled with proud and lofty rhymes
Of lords and learning, bright with classic fire;
The natural step and matronly attire
Of Scotland's peasant muse is much too staid.
She loves from courts and castles to retire;
And with her wild pipe seated on her plaid,
To chaunt such songs as please the simple shepherd maid.

I trow 'tis not ordained the rustic muse,
A barefoot maiden 'mongst the blossomed broom,
To braid with classic wreaths her snooded brows;
And plain that Scotland is too scant of room
To give free flight to her high soaring plume,
And breadth to the wide glory of her mind;
An humbler duty is the muse's doom:
One maiden's love, the deeds of a young hind,
To sit and artless pour o'er Albyn's hills of wind.

Sweet sang young Sybil, and sweet smiled Eupheme,
And every song there were kind words between;
Till nigh the hill the sun's bright border came,
And poured its fire slaunt on the summit green:
On every field were busy labourers seen,&mdash;
On every road there rolled the tumbler-car;
Whips smacked, steeds snorted, fast the pitchforks sheen
Moved, and the corn-ricks, 'neath the twilight star,
Rose fast, and harvest-horns rung o'er the hills afar.

Sweet was such sound to those who toiled since morn,
Maids hung their sickles in the standing stook,
And from their ringlets plucked the bearded corn;
Or from their hands the stinging nettles took,
And laved their foreheads in the running brook,
And gave their hot necks to the dewy air;&mdash;
The dewy air its glittering diamonds shook,
Bright and profuse amid their snooded hair,
And cooled the grass, and gemmed white feet and ancles bare.

The horses loosed from labour gambol round,
Drink in the streams or browze the tender grass;
Cows leave their pastures, o'er the moistened ground
Their udders drop white fragrance as they pass;
To where with milk-pail stands the bare-armed lass,
And every vale and hill and haugh pours home
Its people; nigh each farmer's door a mass
Of rustics stand; slow moving others come,
Enjoying eve's sweet air on rivulet bank, and holm.

This was the last night of the week, and joy
Was in the land, both man and beast were glad;
The air was balmy, from the heavens high
The clear moon chased off every vapour sad;
The groves with rooks as thick as leafs were clad,
The honey dew the hare licked from her feet;
The shepherd freed his right arm from his maud,
His plum-tree whistle dipt in odorous weet,
And from the green-hill side sent down his ditty sweet.

From earth to glowing heaven is full of joy.
Meantime within the spense young Sybil sits,
Her white hands labouring in her new employ,
Her mind seems elsewhere, see, she works by fits.
From task to task the eyedant matron flits,
Her yarn hanks reckons, cheese lays on the shelves,
Sets forth her supper table, nor demits
Till her hearth-stone might be a throne for elves,
And in the polished presses men can see themselves.

"'Tis Saturday at e'en &mdash; cease, maiden, cease
Thy thrift," Eupheme said, "and our gladness share;
This sacred eve brings the blest morn of peace,
The day of duty and the night of prayer,
And gives that rest to which all flesh is heir;
The dumb brutes know, the wild birds hail the hour,
Rejoicing sounds fill the nocturnal air,
The bee with nectar drunk reels from the flower,
And heaven is in the breeze, and God is in the shower.

"So cease thy thrift, young Sybil, and rejoice."
And as she spoke, were heard the door within,
Her husband's first, and then her ae son's voice,
Accompanied with the low and tittering din,
Of snooded maids and bandsmen of the bin.
Pair after pair came gladsome o'er the floor,
On Sybil looked and sate &mdash; a falling pin
Had made a noise; with palms outspread, demure,
Miles prayed, God bless the food he gives the meek and poor.

They ate, and as they ate, &mdash; a bandsman said,&mdash;
"These seventy years I've lived by Croga-keep,
But saw I ne'er such barley in the blade;
Such heavy corn stoop to the sickle's sweep,
As thine, Miles Graeme, which we to-day did reap;
And yet I mind me in that year of grace,
When stout Lord Lesley from the Solway deep,
Slew black Earl Clifford on Dalswinton chace,
Corn, heavy, ripe and long, waved white in every place.

"But trampling down the ripe corn as he rode
Lord Lesley came.  I think I see him now,
With sweat and dust dark dappled o'er, and broad;
A bloody sword waved o'er a bloodier brow;
Down in the lady-mead where rushes grow,
We dug six score of Southron graves.  'Twas sad
To think men trampled down God's victual so,
To mar his sacred image.  It was mad,
But 'las the quiet must yield unto the bold and bad.

"But, as I said, the corn that year was long&mdash;"
"Miles Graeme," a second bandsmen thus began,
"'Las for Lord Lesley; one wise, wight and strong,
Was he; we miss him from the battle's van.
But man is chaff, and fate comes with his fan;
Man is a worm that down to dust must crawl.
I heard yestre'en, the tale like wild-fire ran,
How rude sea rovers had burnt Elvar-Hall.
God's malison and mine, light on them one and all!"

"And what of Lady Sybil?"  Eustace cried.
"Why this; when fire flashed o'er her castle-wall,
And red sparks rushed a mile o'er Solway side,
She bravely foiled her foes and fire and all,
And through the secret postern of her hall,
Spite of the flame which singed her silk attire,
She 'scaped; men say to Holyrood, to call
For sharp revenge.  I loved her for her sire;
But now more for herself &mdash; I love her and admire."

"Alas!  how loose ye talk," a hind exclaimed;
"Love the wild flame which fires the midnight air?
James Bryce, thy snowy locks might feel ashamed,
For what thou sayest:  I grant her passing fair,
But, oh!  she's not the bairn of fast and prayer;
More than a sermon, loves she the touched string
Of harp and dulcimer:  with bosom bare
She loves to tinkling tunes her feet to fling;
Or bend her white neck thus, and idle ballads sing."

"You've seen her, then?"  said Sybil.  "Seen her, aye?
'Tis safer for to see her, than to know
So light a quean:  I saw her once:  she nigh
Melted my heart as summer heat melts snow;
A virgin veil fell o'er her breast and brow,
And hid all save one small and nimble foot,
Which 'neath her kirtle wantoned to and fro.
My very soul came to my lips; I put
My hands before mine eyes, my feet seemed taking root.

"I like a statue stood, with bow and hound,
The deer stood also 'neath the greenwood shaw,
Our hunters all stood motionless around,
Spell-fixed with beauty; laugh ye ane and a',
Against the deer I tried my bow to draw,&mdash;
Aye, smile young maid; I drew the shaft in vain.
She raised her veil, my right hand felt an awe
At sight of so much loveliness, a strain
Too strong I gave my bow, and snapt the loom in twain.

"And Eustace, mind'st thou that proud day, when thou
Got that linked idol round thy neck. &mdash; I swear,
I saw thee sick with Sybil's love, and bow
Beneath her sorcery; e'en the lady fair
Gazed on thee till she glowed both red and rare.
Go wed warm words unto some darling tune,
And cast them like a spell into the air;
They'll charm her as the serpent charms in June,
The proud lark from her tour amid the light of noon."

"Talk on, talk on," said Eustace, "one and all,&mdash;
Talk on, talk on:  I wish I had been near
When those sea-rovers fired old Elvar-hall,
And filled that lady's heart with dread and fear:
For by the hand which gave the chain, I swear,
Warm from her breast, I'd saved her or had died.
I'm but a peasant, &mdash; would I were a peer:"
He said no more, but secretly he sighed.
"Peace, peace, said good Miles Graeme, why speakest thou in such pride?

"Thou art a man, and what can man be more
Than virtuous, brave, and honoured in the land?
A peasant may be all:  thy sires of yore,
Have fought, and sate upon a king's right-hand.
'Tis honour greater with my ploughman band,
To till my holms, and treasure corn for food;
A plowshare's worthier than a warden's brand;
Eustace, my child, tame thy adventurous mood,
Thy father warns thee; &mdash; he has proved and found it good."

"'Tis counsel good, and cast away," said one,
Whose tongue wove words in thick as warp and weft:
"Young man, I saw thee as the sun sank down,
And Sybil's looks were all the light was left,
Gazing as if her glance thy soul had cleft,
When she the fair chain gave thee.  Seest yon moon,
Yon brilliant star?  Woo them; art thou bereft
Of sense?  so high yon lady shines aboon
Thee &mdash; Eustace, hope to wed proud Scotland's queen as soon."

Young Sybil smiled, and gave her locks a toss;
"Maid, dost thou doubt the sense of what I say?
Speak &mdash; let us know thee:  let us have no loss
Of female wisdom."  Sybil answered, "Nay,
The sense I doubt not, but love works its way
Alike with peasant, lord, or crowned king;
Love to the world is as the light of day,
Which shines and sheds its glory on all thing
Alike:  on man, bird, beast, and lilies of the spring.

"Now, I see not why courage, conduct, worth,
The patriot's pureness, and the poet's fire,
Might not in inborn loftiness go forth,
And full of God's good gifts and strength, aspire
Above rank's idle pomp, and starred attire.
True genius is a winged thing, and flies
O'er all mean men &mdash; o'er Mammon and his mire:
And, like the lark, is doomed in light to rise,
With less of earth than heaven, a tenant of the skies.

"Then tell me not that genius e'er can woo
Aught worthier, or aught loftier than itself.
It is a light of heaven, and cannot glow
In souls which sleep on lucre's sordid shelf,
With earth-worms vile, whose only God is self.
Were I a princess, and this isle my right,
I'd scorn the sceptred hand was soiled with pelf;
I'd love the hero bold, the patriot bright,
And deeper still the soul which soars the poet's flight.

"I'm but a bondmaid, and can hardly reap
The round ripe grain, the fleece, or white lint twine;
Milk cows and ewes, press fragrant curd, the sheep
Tend on the hill; make cups and cupboards shine;
Reel and count yarn, my name of Sybil sign,
Sing true love ditties, battle ballads chaunt;
Yet would I rather this right hand of mine
For threescore years the bridal ring should want,
Than wed with one gross-souled &mdash; of sense and spirit scant."

"God bless thy heart," Hugh Wilson says, and nods
A head of hair as white as Criffel snow;
"Dalgonar lads will be but soulless clods,
Not made for use, but shaped for empty show
If they let thee unwedded from them go.
Gaze not on me, &mdash; these bright eyes pierce like swords:
Now Eustace, tell me what I fain would know,
Had yon proud Sybil, girt with knights and lords,
A face as sweet as ours, to charm thy thrilling chords?&mdash;

"Enough," Hugh Wilson cried, "that look's enough;
Thou art in love, &mdash; God help thee, my poor bard!
This world to poets haughty is, and rough;
To toil in song is sentence stern and hard,
And laughter and neglect its chief reward.
Thy fate a heart of flint might melt or pierce:
In love!  in rhyme!  was ever youth so starr'd.
Heaven's wrath is burning 'gainst thee, red and fierce,
Else why this double sorrow, both of love and verse?"

"Laugh on, laugh all," said Eustace, "earthly love
Is born in heaven, nor can the dull and gross
Feel the full gladness of the things above.
Sooner shall toad fly like the soaring goss,
Men warm them with the wild-fire in the moss;
Love is a chain, and heaven holds fast the links
Of purest gold &mdash; gray Mammon got the dross&mdash;
When laid on him whose spirit droops and sinks,
He rises more than man, and as an angel thinks.

"And for sweet song &mdash; the world on me hath shut
All gates to glory, save the lance and lyre;
On all high places, hath the proud not put
Their idols gross?  and through fierce Moloch's fire
All men must pass who unto rank aspire.
An humbler and far sweeter task be mine,
To sit, what time the birds to roost retire,
And muse on love amid the fair moonshine,
And garlands for the locks of Scotland's daughters twine.

"Or when war comes, and on the daisied sod
Of pastoral Nithsdale barbed horse stamp the hoof,
Is he a man who makes his fears a god,
And from the crush of battles bides aloof?
Man's god is freedom, sheathed by her in proof,
He comes in might like Nith in her o'erflow;
The growing grass upon his cottage roof,
As soon the teeth of England's steeds shall know,
As he to aught but death his plumed head will bow."

"Peace, peace, my son!"  the matron said, "this night
Next to the day thrice blest and holy stands;
And thou must use no language vain and light,
Of minstrel verse or work of bloody brands.
But with clean hearts and unpolluted hands,
With humbled heads, and eke far humbler prayer,
Ourselves make ready ere the morn expands
Her golden wings &mdash; so speaks a mother's care&mdash;
Sybil, and thou, my son, &mdash; to meet your God prepare."

She spoke whom all approved; then rose her son,
Arose each husbandman, and harvest maid;
All from the chamber issuing one by one,
Went each their way.  Some to the cold earth laid
Their brows devout, and kneeling long-while prayed;
Others hummed Cowden-knowes or Pou the rashes.
Young Sybil rose, words few and meekly said
Were hers:  on Eustace there fell two such flashes
From love, who sat enthroned beneath her long eye-lashes!

They prayed, they slept, they rose.  The Sabbath morn
Is sweet &mdash; all sounds save nature's voice is still;
Mute shepherd's song-pipe, mute the harvest horn;
A holier tongue is given to brook and rill.
Old men climb silently their cottage-hill,
There ruminate and look sublime abroad;
Shake from their feet as thought on thought comes still,
The dust of life's long dark and dreary road;
And rise from this gross earth, and give the day to God.

Dalgonar kirk her warning bell hath rung,
Glade, glen, and grove, sound with the solemn strain,
Wide at the summons every door is flung,
And forth devout walks many a hoary swain,
Their spouses with them; while a gayer train
Their daughters come, and gladden all the road.
Of laughing eyes, ripe lips, and ringlets vain,
And youths like lambs upon the sunny sod,
Come light of heart and foot, and seek the house of God.

It was a gladsome thing, up hill and glen
Upon the morn of the Lord's-day to look;
For every place poured forth its stately men,
And matrons with staid steps and holy book.
Where'er a cottage stood, or stream'd a brook,
Or rose a hall, or tower'd a castle gray,
Youth left its joys, old age its care forsook:
Meek beauty grew, and looked sedately gay,
Nor at her shadow glanced as she went on her way.

There Eustace came as nature comes, all clad
In homely green, and much with hoary men
He came conversing, and sedately glad,
Heard stories which escaped historic pen,
To live with hinds on hill or pastoral glen;
And much they talked upon their kirk-ward way
Of ancient heroes, who by flood and fen,
Triumphed or fell to English swords a prey;
Then paused, and held their hands toward their tombstones grey.

Before them walked young Sybil, as a beam
Strayed from the sun upon creation's morn;
Pure as the daylight in the running-stream
By which she walked, sweet as a rose new born
To summer.  "Eustace," thus said John of Sorne,
"What maid is she, who goes thy mother by;
Comes she to watch the fold or reap the corn?
See, now she glances hitherward her eye,&mdash;
Aye!  aye!  I read her look, and understand thy sigh."

"Ye read both wrong, perchance.  All woe begone,
On Roodsmass eve she to my father came;"
Thus Eustace said, "and with her orphan moan
Won so his heart, that to my mother hame
He took her.  Sitting by our chamber flame
I found her &mdash; while her cheeks with blushes dyed,
She told her sorrows, and she told her name:
And as she spoke, the rose and lily tried
Which best became her looks."  "Peace, peace," the old man cried,

"And heaven forgive us, if to think and speak
Of heaven's best works in pureness be a crime."
He spoke, and passed the churchyard gate, and meek
Trod with a foot religious through the clime,
Where mortal might had closed accounts with time;
And every footstep measured kindred dust.
There poets slept 'neath unmelodious rhyme;
There misspelt prose of matron fame took trust,
The rough grave-digger's spade stood there red o'er with rust.

Filled was each seat, and thronged was every pew;
A sea of foreheads, tresses waving gray,
White necks and eyes of heaven's divinest blue
Were there.  Arose the preacher up to pray:
A learned and bold man of the elder-day,
With Rome he warred and struck her idols blind
And wooed much sin and levity away
From lord and peasant, bondmaiden and hind;
And poured o'er all the strength and fulness of his mind.

And well and wisely preached he in that hour
Of virtue's glory, which can never fade;
And sweetly sung the people, roof and tower
Rung with the mournful melody they made;
Their heart and soul lent matron and lent maid;
The wild were awed, the souls of sinners shook:
Her swelling bosom cambric-zoned, she laid
Fair Sybil o'er the bless'd inspired book:
Faith glowed upon her brow; heaven lightened in her look.

And there were eyes the sacred page forsook,
To gaze enraptured on the stranger fair;
Hearts with love's fever for the first time shook,
And even the preacher in his parting prayer,
Shut his dark eyes, and warned men to beware
Of beauty.  'Midst them like a star she shone,
Or a pure lily born in May-morn air,
Or rose the moment of its opening:  none
Could look on her but wished to look on her alone.

All looked on her, save Eustace Graeme, for he
Had his heart full of other love; when, tall
And fair before him Sybil rises, see
Whiter than snow she lets her white veil fall
O'er face and form, and walks forth 'mongst them all:
Eustace looked up, and looked up with a start;
He thought her sure the maid of Elvar-hall,
And love of her rushed through him like a dart;
But ere three burning throbs were numbered by his heart,

He saw 'twas Sybil.  Straight he 'gan to muse
On tales of yore, when high-born dames did pass
From tapestried halls unto the greenwood boughs,
And trimm'd their ringlets in some fountain glass;
And supt and sung with shepherd lad and lass,
To cool their bosoms kindled with love fire:
Or with the twin lambs, seated on the grass,
Twined garlands, while the birds' assembled choir
Sung over-head of love, and kept alive desire.

Thus mused he and walked with her.  Other men
Eyed Sybil, and then thought of trystings sweet
In hawthorn bower, green grove, or hazelly glen,
Or broomy braes, where fairy rivulets meet;
In stackyard trim, or garden's gay retreat,
Flower banks o'erhung with birk or odorous broom;
And as they muse, the sound of gentle feet
They fancy coming through the twilight gloom,
And see the sweet one shining in her beauty's bloom.

To less romantic thoughts and musings given,
Some men presume that they can charm and loose
Her door, what time the moon is dark in heaven,
And snow falls fast, and loud the wild wind blows;
To her presumptuous fancy brings them close;
And soft they whisper, drawing still more near,
Till the felt heavings of her breast of snows
Tell they are growing welcome, sweet and dear&mdash;
Thus fancy feeds them with her visionary cheer.

Some pleasant summer pilgrimages plan
Around her dwelling, 'mongst the arbouring trees,
To woo her out ere evening work began,
White wool to comb, or press the curdling cheese;
As round the ripe rose swarm the busy bees,
So thought they round the maid to swarm, I wot,
With soft tales framed her maiden ear to please,
Concerning bridal mirth and plenished cot,
While 'gainst her spotlessness some baser 'gan to plot.

To Jock of Cairn, thus spake he Tam of Cample,
"She has a tongue, they say, can clip like steel,&mdash;
A flowing wit which o'er men's strength can trample,
Like flooded Nith, which drowns the miller's wheel."
To him thus Jock of Cairn made answer; "Weel,
The wittier not the wiser; but I'm saying
There's Eustace Graeme, ye ken, a ringing diel
For either fighting, rhyming, courting, praying;
If they draw up, I wot, we need na gang a-maying."

Homeward she walked, and seemed no one to note,
The green grass sweeping with her syde-gown hem,
Pure as the snow unstained by earthly spot,
Star-light in fountains, or a polished gem
Brought from afar for Scotland's diadem:
All praise her beauty and her mien admire.
Where was she born, whence comes she, what's her name?
From whence descended, dead or lives her sire?
How lady-like she looks, though in homespun attire!

"How lady-like!"  an old dame sharply spake,
Who once on Solway water had her hame,
"She looks but like herself then; for her sake
I'll say nae mair; Saint Mary shield the dame;
None of her lineage ever came to shame.
There's Miles Graeme too, who in our valley fell
Like a slung stone:  I ken ane who could name
The sire he sprung from; 'tis a tale to tell!
But this is not the hour such secrets chip the shell."

