Thus held the people conference:  meantime
The mountain head the sun departing kest,
The bearded thistle gathered fast the rime,
The heron dropt his long bill on his breast,
The eve star glimmered in the misty west;
When to his door douce Miles devoutly came:
He blest the beauteous eve, his threshold prest,
And called his family nigh him each by name&mdash;
Sedate along the floor his duteous family came.

The lamp was lighted, floor and rafter shone;
Sheep-dogs their white breasts to the clear flame spread;
When thus Miles Graeme, &mdash; "Not sacred books alone
Teach sacred things; God has his volume laid
Before us open:  he who runs may read.
So list, my children, and one lesson learn
From him before you with a hoary head&mdash;
A lesson from his life; a master stern
Has sad experience been e'er since I was a bairn.

"I was self-willed, and little loved the coil
Of household pleasures, or indulgence sweet
In harmless pastimes, nor harmonious toil
To music of the merry maiden's feet;
And though I loved a beauteous one to meet
At twilight, in the grove of blossom'd thorn,
I scorned the speech of hoary men discreet;
Nor furrowed fields, nor reared green bladed corn,
Nor waked the husbandmen with my loud harvest horn.

"My pleasure was to trim the battle-bark,
And dare the onset when the arrows sang;
The squadrons rushing into conflict dark,
The war steed hurrying to the trumpet twang,
The shivering lances and the claymore's clang&mdash;
These heaven my heart predestined to adore,
And these my heart have filled with many a pang,
And caused me hide on hills, coast headlands hoar,
My foot prints leaving lone on many a foreign shore.

"Woe reigned on earth and tempest ruled the sky,
The hour I left behind my native hill.
Alas!  my sharp sword slept not at my thigh;
War blew her trumpet &mdash; I had blood to spill&mdash;
I left it reddening Clifton's moorland rill,
And pushed my shallop on the waters fast:
Up sprang a land breeze which my sails did fill.
Away I roved, companioned by the blast&mdash;
O, many a sunny shore and odorous isle I past.

"As sank the breeze, a fair land rose in sight;
I landed, and a lodge of boughs entwined
Beside a fount where wild birds winged their flight,
Melodious carolling, while the fragrant wind
Cooled me with paradisial fannings kind.
But soon all this to dreariness was turned:
The burning sun vexed herbs of tender rind,
On parched leaves the sad grasshopper mourned,
And 'neath man's sandalled foot the forest verdure burned.

"Six days I fled, and on the seventh looked down
From a steep hill; and O my heart was fain!
Groves like a wreath enclosed a rural town,
And camels, sheep, and milch cows filled the plain.
I went &mdash; a dame, with handmaids in her train,
Dandled a sweet babe in the sunny air;
She set my breast a throbbing with her strain,
For loud she sang, 'Oh, Bothwell Bank how fair,
With all your bonnie bowers, ye make my bosom sair.'

"She shrieked out when the honoured garb she saw
Of Scotland, and my forehead calm she kest.
'Thrice welcome badge and bearer; thus in awe
I hail ye both &mdash; be all your wishes blest,'&mdash;
She said, and then my right hand fondly prest,
And led me to a large and sumptuous room;
There laved my feet, with travel sore distrest,
Bathed my hot hands, and did my locks perfume,
And drest me all in robes pure as the rose's bloom.

"I ate, I drank, and as my strength returned,&mdash;
'O Scottish wanderer,' said the blooming dame,
'Long, long have I for home and kindred mourned;
For strange sea rovers stormed and took my hame,
And reddened the midnight billows with its flame.
Still in my ears I hear the plashing oars,
Which to destruction, not to rescue came;
Far was I swept from Scotland's cavern'd shores,
Her sounding pipes and viols, her red and ruthless wars.

"'Say, rings broad Scotland now with mirth and song,
Or is the widow's wail and orphan's there?'
Ah me, I said, those that delight in wrong,
Her halls have plundered and her holms made bare:
Pest, famine, sword; the hands which never spare,
The eye which weeps not, and the heart of stone,
Have turned fair Scotland to a wild beast's lair;
A place for moralists to muse upon,
And for men's deeds to sigh and raise a dolorous moan.

"Tear following tear her rosy cheeks bedewed:
Her husband sat with serious brow meantime,
While she to him in Syrian language showed
What sad mishaps befel her kindred clime.
'Twas midnight, and the moon was in her prime;
I talked till morn of civil wars and woe,
Of lordly heads hoared o'er with winter rime,
Of ancient tresses pillowed on the snow,
Whose castles ceased to smoke &mdash; their cottage cocks to crow.

"Six moons I sojourned in this pastoral land,
I knew no sorrow, and I owned no lord;
Words from sweet lips, wine from a fair one's hand,
Were ever mine, and dainties heaped the board.
I thought on Scotland; belted on my sword:
Tears flowed profuse our parting words between.
Through desolate parts I wandered; on shipboard
I went, and ploughed the murmuring ocean green,
And on the thirtieth morn fair Scotland's hills were seen.

"I leaped ashore, and gained the greenwood bough,
Then secret hied at night o'er moor and rill;
My hair was filled, like Cheviot fleece, with dew,
Before I won a well remembered hill.
The moon rose radiant, winds were hushed and still;
A fair one came, I clasped her in my arms,
And of her ripe lips had a husband's will.
My wedded love! &mdash; the scene my breast still warms,&mdash;
Thou never wert more dear in all thy maiden charms."

Around the neck of his delighted dame
His arm Miles threw, and took one tender kiss.
Young Sybil, seated by the clear hearth-flame,
Had seen soft visions of domestic bliss,
Yet never dream'd ought that transcended this.
In converse grave the evening past has flown,
In prayer for those heartsick and comfortless,
For her whose infant brow wore Scotland's crown;
Then found they all repose on billowy beds of down.

Restless upon his bed young Eustace lay,
And thought aloud, "This life's a drunkard's jest,
A mystic riddle; in a cloud by day,
My father sits in rustic masquing drest;
A falcon he dropt in this plover's nest.
And here is lovely Sybil; there's some token
Of gentle birth &mdash; ah, who shall read the rest. &mdash; "
What else he thought it was so faintly spoken,
His words seemed words of one whose slumbers had been broken.

Day dawned:  and then thy voice, Eupheme, was heard.
"Arise, my maidens, put your raiment on;
The frost wind's sporting with the thistle's beard&mdash;
Short is the day; grim winter comes anon.
Choose out each sullied mantle, gown, and zone,
The fleecy blanket, and the hose impure,
And where the rivulet glitters in the sun,
Go wash, and spotless render them and pure,
To keep us feal and warm in winter's frozen hour."

She spoke, nor useless flew her words away;
Her two bondmaidens waked, and up they sprung,
Their tresses snooded, donned their gowns of gray,
And with them came sweet Sybil fair and young;
Gladsome she came, and as she came she sung;
"Love sweetens labour, and makes bondage light."
Then on a car the garments whole they flung,
And sought the stream, for now the sun in sight
His head raised o'er the hill, and all was life and light.

And soon they reached the deep and lonesome linn,
With grove o'er grove encompassed closely round;
The stream was heard and seen the woods within,
And 'mongst clear pebbles sang with ceaseless sound.
And where it issued rose a little mound,
Where stone for martyrdom memorial stood;
There the first primrose of the spring is found,
And there in summer sabbath solitude,
The pious peasants come, and walk in saddened mood.

Nor stood the white armed maidens musing long;
The sullied vesture from the car they took,
And o'er stream-burnished pebbles walked along,
And thrust them down to soften, where the brook
Wheeled silver dimpling in a sunny nook;
Then kindled fire, their cauldron placed amain,
And busy toiled; nor word exchanged or look,
Till pure and limber, freed from every stain,
The clothes all like to wreaths of new fallen snow remain.

Where hazels grew with tufts of tender grass,
And floods the pebble-heaps had render'd pure,
There spread they forth, that winds might o'er them pass,
The unsullied vesture in the mid-day hour;
Then where green hollys grew and formed a bow'r,
They sat them down, while mirrored in the flood
The bright sun shone amid his heavenly tour:
Through all the linn the warm breeze came abroad,
And gently stirred the groves, and fanned the grassy sod.

Southward, they saw green vale and spreading wood,
The bannered castle, church, and hall, and town;
Northward, in wild magnificence, the flood
An hundred feet poured its bright waters down.
Their hours of labour o'er, the maids have flown;
They take their food, drink from the stream; within
A holly garland on a green knoll's crown,
They sing and dance, and raise a pleasant din;
Loud to their merriment remurmurs all the linn.

Slow towards them a wanderer came; he layed
Him 'neath a tree where summer lilies spring:
A dry brown crust he took from his gray plaid,
Supped water with his palm, and thus did sing.
"The plumes shall cease to shoot on falcon's wing,
The groves their odorous garments to renew,
The flowers sweet smell in summer time to fling,
The bee to hum, and hunt the honey dew,&mdash;
When fickle womenkind turn tender-souled and true."

"Alas!"  said Sybil, "yon sad heart and brow
Have held hard contest long with woe and time;
No mischief doth he mean to us, I trow,
The hand is harmless when the tongue can rhime:
Soft of the soul are bards of every clime,
So let us cheer his heart with drink and food.
Minstrel!  thy locks will catch the twilight rime;
Bare are thy feet, and thin thine ancient blood:
Come, cheer thee at our fire beside the dimpling flood."

The old man pulled his bonnet o'er his brow,
Up from the grass quick gathered all his gear,
And stared around, as stares the startled roe,
Then spoke when he perceived the maidens near.
"Lo!  are ye shepherd damsels dwelling here?
Or come ye forth like me, the stars to mark,
And read in heaven of earthly woe and weir?"
"Bless thee, old man," said Sybil, "steeve and stark
Thy frame and heart must be, gray prophet of the dark."

"Aye, maid," he said, with mournful voice and drear,
"From sea-girt Arran have I wandered far;
Touched by the doleful spirit of a seer,
Forsook have I my wife, my cot, my car,
To mark beneath the storm-sted moon or star,
Or evil wind, which strips the balmy grove,
Or darksome toil of elemental war;
Or read in meteors which o'er waters move,
Men's deeds, and women's wiles: &mdash; the pangs of ill-placed love.

"For ever in my sad bewildered eye
Are blood-soaked fields and burning cities drawn;
And all such miseries, as the God on high
Predestinates to mar the pride of man.
Grave-ridges reddening all the churchyard lawn,
Of youths new risen up to manhood's might,
And women wailing noon, and night, and dawn,
With eyes to heaven, their sad and piteous plight:
Maid, wife, and widow; all in one unhappy night.

"But sometimes in the visions of the night,
When war and woe have ceased my soul to stound,
Scenes of domestic glory bless my sight.
First, minstrels come, and raise a gladsome sound,
With youths and maids in bridal-ribbons crowned.
Then comes the bridegroom and the bride demure,
Her lustrous eye, aye lingering on the ground.
Thou maiden with the snood snow-white and pure,
Say, shall I see for thee the merry marriage hour?"

"See something for me sweet, and see it soon;"
Young Sybil said.  Thus spake he.  "On the floor
I see thee blooming with thy maids at noon;
There comes the priest; &mdash; lo!  there's thy bridal bow'r;
The nuptial bed swells like a snow-wreath pure.
Six years roll on &mdash; behold a graver thee
With four fair sons to bless thy marriage hour.
Fair is thy home, far from the Solway sea;
And glad is thy gudeman, and blest in his degree.

"But that sad curse 'neath which all flesh is born,
Of toil and sweat, to him will closely cling,
To pull green flax, to reap the rustling corn,
And o'er the furrowed fields the white corn fling;
And clip the fleece, and to the market bring
Earth's fruit and sell it."  &mdash; Joyful from the grass
Rose Sybil, shouting till the rocks did ring,&mdash;
"Bless thee, and will thy words all come to pass?
A husband!  home!  four sons! &mdash; and I an orphan lass!"

She laughed, cried, Praise be blest!  and danced her lane,
All in a breath:  the maidens said, "Be wise,
To wed is often woeful.  Kate Harestane
Wished for a man, and got him:  pleased her eyes,
And broke her heart; in our kirkyard she lies."
"Aye, but" said Sybil, "her lot was the dimmer;&mdash;
A happy home!  a husband!  four sweet boys!
And all as true as leafs are true to timmer.
Will it this winter be &mdash; or maun I keep till simmer?"

The moon arose, the wanderer went:  the maids
Took home their spotless washing from the wave.
"Now woe to those who walk yon darksome glades,"
A bondmaid said; "to-night a vagrant knave,
Such as do wrong, and dig the midnight grave,
Or rob the church, or strip the goodman's tomb,
To us a fearful visitation gave.
Go warn the vale, and watch each lonely home,
'Tis not for prophecy so base a prophet's come."

She spoke as she believed.  Well Sybil wist
What man he was; thus she the tale pursued.
"He was a prophet; sad and sore distrest
Was he:  we cheered him with our fire and food,
And soon in sprightlier current ran his blood;
From sea-swept Arran had he wandered far,
The seer's dread spirit discomposed his mood,
And he saw visions of red ruthless war,
And heard connubial songs sung 'neath the western star.

"And may the rightful prophet's spirit speak
Inspired within him:  may he prove a seer.
He told a tale that warmed me, brow and cheek,
A tale might charm off winter from the year,&mdash;
His words they came like music to my ear.
A husband, one who loves me, four fair sons
Are mine; a pleasant home and goods and gear,
Won with a sweaty brow.  Such fortune stuns&mdash;
I hope his words are sooth &mdash; I wonder where he wons."

While Sybil spoke, young Eustace gazed, but she
Stood all unmoved even as an image stands,
As fixed, in hue and sentiment, and free
From change as marble from the sculptor's hands.
"A seer is one who works the Lord's commands;"
Said good Miles Graeme, "and did he speak of woe?
Alas!  old Scotland; soon the Southron brands
Will gleam again:  thy children's blood must flow:
The will of God be done, 'tis doomed and maun be so."

He shook his gray head sadly, and he sank
Down sighing in his old ancestral chair;
An oaken settle, once a seat of rank,
There swords and helms were carved with curious care;
The dogs a wild deer rousing in his lair;
And that armed flower, which Scotland's glory keeps.
A line of song, likewise a word of prayer,
The scythe which mows, the crooked steel that reaps,
And corn, the life of all, and fruit in clustering heaps.

There Sybil sate, like one whom some sweet dream
Had set a glowing, neck, and breast, and brow,&mdash;
The lamp and hearth fire made the rooftree gleam;
The burnished pewter bright and brighter grow,
While painted poreclain in a glittering row,
Lined all the walls which other thrift adorned;
White flax and fleece hanks like the sifted snow;
The maid too felt, as dairy-wise she turned,
Odour of milk, and cream, and butter newly churned.

There hung, Miles Graeme, thy casque and good clay-more,
No hand irreverent dared the blade unsheath;
Each hack a history had, each mark of gore
Heroic blazon claimed, and deed of death:
'Twas wet on Bannockburn's immortal heath;
In Flodden ranks made openings long and large.
The Maxwell, Johnstone, Halliday, and Keith&mdash;
The Lowland steel cap and the Highland targe,
Had gladly sought its help to stay the Saxon charge.

Now rose the latch, in came a hind, who said,
"Hugh Wilson bids thee to his harvest-home;
So come, Miles Graeme, come with thy wife and maid,
And bring our Eustace, gladness will be dumb
Unless our poet and our warrior come;
And bring young Sybil &mdash; we shall lack no light,
If she but bring her eyes."  He paused to hum,
"Bid Bankhead, Braehead, Brandyburn; that's right
Foregirth and Fardenrush."  Then winged his way in night.

The farmer smiled and said, "Eupheme, now haste,
Haste thee too, Sybil, also thou, my son&mdash;
All put on fair apparel."  He said, and placed
His mantle right and his broad bonnet on&mdash;
"Hugh Wilson's kirn was won at set of sun."
Young Sybil first stood at the old man's side;
Save native loveliness, charm there was none:
Her kirtle short, her flowing locks hung syde,
And such dark lustrous eyes what maid would wish to hide?

They went, and as they wended forth their way
There came a youth, and numerous flocks had he,
Blythe were his looks, and maids said seldom nay;
He clasped fair Sybil with his right arm free:
And said, "Young maiden, try to fancy me,&mdash;
For by my farms, and they reach far and wide,&mdash;
And by my flocks, and they are fair to see,&mdash;
And by my name, and its a name of pride,&mdash;
And by the moon and stars, I wish thee for my bride."

Thus answered she, "Alas!  where wast thou born,
That thou so little knowest of woman's heart?
Thou comest to her, as thou wouldst come to corn
Ripe for the reaper.  Go and try thy art
In things that suit thy wisdom, &mdash; lead a cart,
Thrash, delve, dyke, ditch; nay, tar thy hands, and try
The surgery of sheep &mdash; or, mirth apart,
Eat when thou'rt hungry, drink when thou art dry;
Do ought, do any thing, save on thy wit rely."

"Nay, be not scornful, maiden:  beauty comes
The fairer when in meekness, mildness drest;
Embalming her as in its own perfumes
The rose is steeped:  thou knowest what suits thee best.
I hope to harry a far nobler nest,
Built on a fairer and a loftier bough."
She laughed, "Thy fortune is right readily guessed,
With a wise look and a most resolute brow,
Thou'lt climb some sour crab tree in hopes sweet pears to pou."

They parted.  Wintry sounds came on the ear;
The sere leaf's rustling, and the linn's deep roar,&mdash;
The wind by gusts that swept the mountain near,&mdash;
The swans descending through the night-cloud hoar,
With clang successive on the river shore,
The tender herbs to graze till dawn of morn.
Hugh Wilson now stands at his steading door,
And wide Dalgonar answers to his horn,
Which calls its maids to mirth o'er the last cut of corn.

Quick at the summons, flocking far and wide,
Came many an aged and many a youthful pair;
Gay youths not yet in bonds of wedlock tied,
And maids who make that holy state their prayer:
The miser smiled, and half forgot his care&mdash;
The rosie widow, with her cheeks new stained
With sorrow; all and more than all were there.
Joyful old men the step of twenty feigned,
And youths ran wild as colts that never yet were reined.

The thatched stack-yard, the naked stubble ridge,
The sere leaves heaped, these all are certain signs
The fruitful season's o'er; the leafless hedge
With songsters' nests revealed, tell now the reins
Of rule have passed to sterner hands:  in chains
The lakes are bound, the forest trees are reeling
Beneath the axe:  the snowy monarch reigns
On hills, and drives the shepherd from his shealing;
And cold, like age on man, is o'er the wide land stealing.

And yet dark winter is a happy time:
God gives the earth repose, and earth bids man
Wipe his hot brow; the poet pours his rhyme,
And mirth awakes; the dance from dark to dawn
Rings through the house till clatters every pan;
The busy curler sweeps his slippery rink,
Joy boils the pot and Pleasure fills the cann;
Devotion pours a blessing o'er the drink,
And Bondage drops her chains, nor leaves one galling link.

