At night the snow lay on the land, and frost
Froze up the rivulets; nature's genial growth
Seemed stayed, and all creation's foyson lost;
But on the morn a wind came from the south,
As soft as that from April's primrose mouth.
Snows melted, rivers flowed, and every bird
Rejoiced in air and tree, with bounds uncouth
The very sheep showed they were deeply stirred;
Time &mdash; fourth of Mary Stuart, December twenty-third.

The days were short, nights long; but in those days
For house, clothes, food, man had but little toil.
Then three days' work kept him a week; his ways
They were all pleasant:  turning o'er the soil,
Winnowing the corn, or when his cruse with oil
Flowed o'er, he sung and danced:  in graver times
He heard the preacher thundering through the isle
'Gainst image worship, and Rome's scarlet crimes,
And whiles he solace sought in minstrel's laxer rhymes.

Then were kirn-feastings; heatings of the house,
With 'prentice loosings gay, and bridal mirth,
And that still merrier banqueting, with douce
But blythe old people, when a bairn has birth;
To-night Eupheme and Miles to Cummergirth
Have gone, for there an only son was born.
"Marvels are not uncommon on the earth,"
The father cried, "since we were wed the corn
Has been on Cummercroft just seven times sown and shorn."

Eustace and Sybil sat awhile, and spoke
Of the departing snow and coming flowers;
Eustace and Sybil sat awhile &mdash; her roke
Stayed in her hand, they talked of sunshine, showers,
Trees budding, and birds lilting in the bowers;
And speaking of the sweet and genial day,
Their looks grew softer, and the winter hours
Flew balmy o'er them, like the wings of May.
Much maidens said they looked, and little did they say.

"There are blest days," said Eustace, &mdash; "days which heaven
Has heap'd with blessings, as with corn, the floor;
That day when first my father breath'd, was given
A good man to the world, for, seek it o'er,
Where is there worthier; dare I value more
That day of harvest, that most blessed day,
When Sybil came, God-guided, to our door;
Say not 'twas chance, sweet maiden, made thee stray,
If so, an angel came, and God had still his way."

"Oh, not in chance, and yet if God me sent,
He sent me not in love, I dread and fear,
But who can find or fathom his intent;
Be it for bliss or sorrow, I am here,
Happy, if, with my humbleness, I'm dear
To those who thus have with affections built
Me round, as with a wall:  now, Eustace, hear
One word from me, nor let my words be spilt
As water on the ground; nay, speak first if thou wilt.

"I read it in the tone of thy last word,
I read it in the darkening of thy look,
That thy next speech will smite like a sharp sword,
When it should come like sunshine to a brook,
To light it up."  Her in his arms he took,
And kissed her cheek &mdash; she sought her face to hide&mdash;
"No longer let God's purpose be mistook;
He sent thee here, my blessing and my pride,
Nay, turn not so from me," for Sybil looked aside.

"Turn not away, nor thy refusing hand
Hold so; I loved thee when first hour I saw
Thee, like a strange dove flown into our land
From fowlers' snares:  around thy steps was awe,
With gentleness, and purity's chaste law;
But more &mdash; that mystic sympathy of ee,
Which kindred souls, like chains of steel, can draw
Together.  Now my date of bliss shall be,
Sweet Sybil, from that hour, if thou canst fancy me."

She looked &mdash; she wist not what to say &mdash; she blushed,
And softer in the enthusiast's claspings grew;
It was in vain she bade her heart be hushed,
Whilst he his converse did this wise pursue.
"Sweet one, thou knowest my flocks and herds are few,
A cot's my palace, peasants are my kin,
A hand for toil, a heart warm, stedfast, true;
A spirit which counts sloth a heinous sin,
Nor more have I to give, thy maiden love to win."

Her beauteous face was lightened with a smile
Of that sweet sort that wiles men's hearts away.
"Now, Eustace, think thee.  Will continual toil
In summer's heat and winter's stormy sway,
Aye seem as heartsome as it seems to-day;
A poet with his true love at his hand,
Can cast such sunshine on life's future day,
That straight a desert flows like Judah's land,&mdash;
But toil into a snake may turn the poet's wand."

"And is the love of song a thriftless sign?"
He glowing said.  "Can bards nor till nor sow?
He that loves water better than old wine,
And counts the breeze which brings the flaky snow
Gladsome as winds which fan the myrtle bough,&mdash;
And who as bright as Solway's pearls can deem
The drops which rest on worthy labour's brow,&mdash;
Is he a spirit with a cold esteem
For labour, and loves best to sail in fancy's stream?

"No, Sybil, no:  song sweetens toil, and I
Love both &mdash; to both I much of gladness owe,
And both must be my solace yet:  nor sigh
Then hear of mine, nor mark me sad of brow;
The very birds seem of my heart to know,&mdash;
The soaring laverock, and the building bee,
The flowers which bloom, the hares which hirpling go&mdash;
Even silent nature, calm, and fair, and free,
Hold, like my Sybil's looks, inspired talk with me."

"I love to hear thee speak thus," meek she said.;
"My heart has had its warnings &mdash; visions odd,&mdash;
Eustace, I am not as thou seest, afraid;
Yet &mdash; art thou sure that no one hears us? &mdash; God
Holds over us his pride-chastising rod,
And sorrow lies before us, like a stream
Which we must pass, without or ford or road."
"Sybil," said Eustace, smiling, "we will swim,&mdash;
And so I spell thy warning, so I read thy dream."

"Something I wish to say," she said; and down
She looked, as looks the lily when it's laden
With dew &mdash; "I've heard thee, Eustace, nearly own
Ye loved another &mdash; her &mdash; that noble maiden&mdash;
One I can name not &mdash; her of Elvar."  Shading
Her face so with her hand, she gave a glance,
As gives the moon when in the clouds a-wading.
"Sybil," he said, "need I say more than once,
I would not wed with rank:  up from my humble stance

I may not rise by wedlock:  with a heart
So triply mailed in pride as mine, could I
Win honour by espousing it?  Ye start&mdash;
The fount of glory, Sybil, is not dry,
And I shall have one drink before I die,
But not from marriage with her golden cup."
Something of this, young Eustace knew not why,
Distressed the maiden, for she looked not up.
A softer tone he took &mdash; "My Sybil, let us sup

"With that good hind Simplicity &mdash; his ways
Are ways of peace.  Now in Dalgonar glen
Where we pulled nuts; new built below the braes
There stands a cottage known to shepherds ken,
Those who look once, stay and look twice again;
Fruit-trees behind it raise a fragrant screen,
While in its porch, grey, venerable men
Tell old traditions; half concealed and seen
A rivulet sings, with swans that graze its margin green.

"Think that my home.  Slow towards it at eve
I weary walk, and hail its window ray;
And mark the shadow of my loved one leave
Her work to watch me on my homeward way.
There with her matron grace, and gown of gray
She trims her house, makes cup and dresser shine,
And soothes and smiles my weariness away.&mdash;
Now be that loved, that wedded one &mdash; be mine,
My gentle Sybil," &mdash; she could murmur but "I'm thine."

But in those simple words were freely given,
Heart, feeling, soul:  her bright and beaming look
Told she had nought reserved which holy heaven
Desires bestowed.  A foot the threshold strook,
In stept Miles Graeme, down in his wonted nook
He silent sate:  while his douce spouse likewise
Appeared, and straight a beauteous web she took,
A web of wool and flax of various dyes,
And spread it forth &mdash; her shears and needle she applies,

And then to Sybil said, "Come hither &mdash; there!
Such thread, such workmanship, but seldom come
To kirk or banquet, kirn-carouse, or fair;
It has a look like violets in their bloom,&mdash;
Sure ne'er from lowland shuttle or from loom
Was web so beauteous and so silk-like seen;
'Twould grace a bride who had for her bridegroom
The first of men:  nay, knowest thou whom I mean?
Sit down and sew a gown might well become a queen."

She sat:  of wedded joy she tried to chaunt;
She could not, as her heart was full:  the tale
Miles Graeme took up.  "Let not earth's sorrows daunt
Man's heart, nor make him loose his loins, and wail
In caverns dark, and wildernesses pale;
But watch his flocks, and rear the bearded grain:
Meanwhile, let fortune out her favours deal,
As blindly as the east wind deals the rain;
Those who delight in peace, will leave her syren train,

"And seek the tranquil joys of life; and seek
Them when the pulse is quick and hope is high&mdash;
Seek wedded solace ere that life's bright wick
Burns nigh the socket and young feelings die.
For love hath wings, and doth for ever fly
From those who mock his generous warmth:  all ye
Whose souls are linked as stars are in the sky,
Come ye, and hearken as ye come, to me.
Go!  God has paired your hearts &mdash; ye blessed twain go be

"As one, and be ye happy.  This fair morn
No farther gone, I leased a beauteous cot,
Where the first lily to glad May is born;
A fairy scene, where two clear streamlets trot,
And doves in pairs pant when the sun is hot.
There stray deer browze on trees by axe unshorn,
And honey-suckle round holly ties a knot
Of fragrant beauty:  there on New-year's morn,
I'll place a wedded pair &mdash; I've said so, and I've sworn."

Sudden he rose, and unto Sybil went,
And took her hand and prest it for small space,
Then whispered, "Maiden, could'st thou be content
With him thou lovest that little cot to grace?"
How her pure blood from breast to brow did race!
She looked all ways, but not on him, and twined
Her fingers in her breast's outbursting lace.
"Fair one, my Eustace loves thee much, and blind
Are those who cannot.  Maiden!  call some words to mind,

"And tell me an thou lovest him."  Up she rose,
And said, "If loving him be mortal sin,
I've sinned."  Nor spoke she other words than those,
Her tongue so faultered her fair lips within,
And her knees shook like wild leafs of the linn.
"Eustace, come here," the reverend father says,
"This hand, which belted earls were blest to win,
Kiss thou and keep."  On either head he lays
His hands.  "Love God &mdash; love man &mdash; each other love always,

"And heaven will give you length of happy days."
They kissed each other.  Now rose glad Eupheme,
And cried, "I'm happy:  to His name be praise,
That sent thee hither:  gladness never came
In such a gush, since first my own Miles Graeme
I won from envious maidens.  Go, get wed&mdash;
And bring fair boys, and keep a heartsome hame."
Fair Sybil's cheeks blushed so ye might have bled
Them with a rush, the dame scarce knew what she had said.

And yet she was a woman wise, for she
Said, "Son and husband, ere the lark is stirring,
Ride down to fair Dumfries, and see that ye
Buy bridal gear enough:  the bridal fairing
Is one that must be worth my daughter's wearing.
I mean a gift given by her own gude-mother.
And see ye shame us not:  we'll give't an airing
At kirk and market, who would try to smother
The beauty of our bride, we'll ne'er see such another."

They slept, they mounted, rode and bought, then took
Their horses forth to start for home again.
But ere, Dumfries, thy causeway they forsook,
The sun sank dark, the moon betoken'd rain;
Stars in the westward trailed a blazing train,
Men looked to heaven, then left the market fast;
The wind fell lowne, then wakening fresh amain,
Poured forth a bitter and a bitterer blast.
Their bonnets o'er their brows men plucked, and galloped past.

But fleeter than the fleetest there goes one
On a dark horse, and at each snort and bound
The rider cheers him, bids him hurry on:
The winds augment, the cedars shake around,
A dismal darkness swallows up the ground.
'Tis not the tempest which the wisest fear,
Nor yet the river with increasing sound,
Nor a sad cry which rings still in his ear
That makes young Eustace haste so in his fleet career.

He bought his bridal gear, scarce stayed to greet
Friends whom he had not met for many a day:
Of them an old man followed down the street,
Saying, "Eustace, hearken to a head that's grey:
What says wise Solomon?"  &mdash; he brake away,&mdash;
When harp in hand a minstrel came:  "Now tarry,
Young bard, and listen to an ancient lay,
Sung to the grandsire of our crowned Mary.
The tune True Thomas learned in the wild land of faery."

Sweet needs that song be, which can gain the heed
Of one for a dark journey mounted ready;
Sweet needs the song be, that in bridal speed
Can stay a joyous groom who loves his lady:
And sweet it was.  See how the chaunt already
Hath charm'd him down; like to a child he listens,
As sweeps along by stream and forest shady
The fairy-ballad:  bright his dark eye glistens&mdash;
Fair fall thee, Poesie, thou chief of earthly blessings.

For thou dost cover man as with a cloak,
Art to his heart and soul a wondrous solace;
In glory's wheel thou art the brightest spoke:
Thou makest us smile as fortune works her follies;
When dark misluck aims her repeated vollies,
Even as a charm thy ever magic strain
Guards human nature, and the giant rallies;
The cloud departs, and all is bright again.
So thought he, Eustace, while with left hand on his rein,

And gold in his right hand he sate.  Full low
He to the minstrel bowed, and bounteous largess
Bestowed, then spurred his willing steed, and now
He flies.  Meanwhile the storm her sway enlarges,
And wind and rain come with redoubled charges;
He faced the pouring sleet, the driving hail
And forked fire, as he would face the targes
Of fierce Latoun with all his men in mail,&mdash;
Full soon he gained the gorge of green Dalgonar vale.

He gained the vale, and by the lovely river
Rode swiftly forward; now his heart he fills
With Sybil's image, and his spirit ever
Dwells on her mind's perfections.  O'er the hills
The moon one moment's troubled lustre spills;
He marks his home, while sudden on his mind,
There comes a cloud with sad and ominous thrills&mdash;
Those strange forebodings, dark and undefined,
Which, like the twilight tell, that night is still behind.

Unto his father's house he comes; he sees
No gladsome light, he hears no gladsome word,
And down he leaps, and there upon her knees,
He finds his mother:  through him like a sword
Dread terror rushed.  "My son, upon the Lord
Call in this sad calamity, and he
Will cause thy brided love to be restored."
"Mother," he cried, "where is my Sybil?"  She
Held up her bleeding arms, saying, "See, my Eustace, see.

"To-night, my child, our lighted chamber rung
To a sweet song, sung by thy own sweet bride,
When in upon us armed horsemen sprung,
And seized on Sybil:  loud on thee she cried,
These feeble arms in vain to save her tried;
Round her I linked them, but the leader flung
Me like a baby from him in his pride.
As in the saddle he before her sprung,
He said, 'Be still, my love,' in a soft English tongue,

"Then gallopped southwards."  Eustace sudden took
His ivory horn and blew it once; the sound
Made twenty youths start up by glen and brook;
He blew it twice &mdash; a score of brands were bound
Unto a score of waists:  a third time wound&mdash;
They breasted twenty steeds, and gathering fast
Before his door, all armed their chief they found.
"An English tongue!  and southward gone; a cast
Dangerous and bold we'll play before this night is past.

"To night armed reavers from the south have come,
And harmed my mother, and borne off my bride:
By hopes in heaven and happiness at home!
By injured love and by insulted pride!
I swear green earth holds nought for me beside,
Until I win her back again.  Away!
We'll find them yet ere they reach Solway side,
And woe to them &mdash; my softest word is slay."
Forward he leant, and seemed to swallow up the way.

And when they unto haunted Cluden came,
They slacked their bridles, bade their coursers drink.
Then up all armed among them said Miles Graeme,
"God leads the wicked prosperous to the brink
Of dark perdition, and then lets him sink,
Even so will it be now."  A peasant spoke,
"All this last night I could not sleep nor wink;
At the dead hour a voice came crying, 'Jock,
A wily fox has ta'en the fairest of thy flock."'

With resolute hearts and hurrying haste they go,
The roosting doves look startled down, nor fly,
Nor moves the wild deer couched amid the snow,
So quick the fiery tumult flashes by;
Lincluden's ruins on the leftward lie;
In fair Dumfries the sound of mirth they hear,
And see her festal lights gleam to the sky;
Unto no one they spoke, till they drew near
The close piled tombstones dark of thy churchyard, Troqueer.

'Midst the ranked gravestones knelt a maid, her love
Lay buried there &mdash; and there in dool and sorrow
She frequent went, and like a wounded dove
Murmured her grief on death's dark doleful furrow.
Said Eustace, "Maiden, sawest thou hurrying thorough
Six lawless riders with a lady?"  Nigh
She came and pointed southward:  like an arrow
They cleft the air and cleared the ground; till high
Rose Criffel's cloven head crowned with the gloomy sky.

Afar before them Solway pours her tide,
Colvend her haunted caverns dark displays,
Her lights Arbigland scatters far and wide
With Preston-hall and the grey tower of Raes;
Soon beauteous Siddick's elf and fairy braes
They pass, and still they trace along the land
New hoof-prints by the dull moon's fitful rays;
Then pause where Siddick water o'er the strand
Rolls:  for they see no more the marks upon the sand.

Within a bay whose crescent bosom kept
The barks of Elvar, an old man was seen;
His halve-net drawing from the tide, which leapt
Retiring with its murmuring waters green;
Some sight or sound had discomposed his mien:
He stared and stammered like one much dismayed.
"O, here," he groaned, "from eighty to eighteen
I've fished, and life out of these waters made;
But now I'll quit the craft for fiends have ta'en to trade."

"Father," said Eustace, "have you seen to-night,
A Maiden borne off by six lawless men?"
"Seen what!  no, truly:  but I've got a fright,
I doubt I'll ne'er be John of Raes agen;
I heard a rush of horse &mdash; a shriek, and then
There came six fearful shapes down to the flood;
They whistled thrice, &mdash; scarce had they whistled, when
Right towards them a wondrous shallop stood:
A shallop never framed from God Almighty's wood,

"But by the sleight of fiends:  oh!  they can work
Most marvellously; these evil shadows bore
A beauteous Maid on board, then like a cork
Away the shallop danced for England's shore,
I'd seen enough, and I could stand no more;
Now, if ye'll listen to a man gray-haired,
Cross not to-night dread Solway's waters o'er;
'Tis glamour all:  I trow ye'll be ensnared."
Down leapt they from their steeds, nor for his counsel cared.

Straightway the halser of a barge they loosed,
And thrust her from the shore; quick to the breeze
They spread the sail, and as they spread it, roused
The wind came seaward sweeping through the trees,
And furrowed in a gurly mood the seas.
The ancient fisherman gazed on aghast,
"I've seen wild youths, but none so wild as these,
Pursue a barge made by the fiends!"  they passed
Swift seaward as he spoke &mdash; he shouted out, "Avast!

"Ye've ta'en the Lady Sybil's barge &mdash; beware,
There's tempest in yon angry moon:  I say,
Keep out of Lot's wife's lap and steer her fair
Past Robin-Rigg &mdash; so, by the saints, I may
As well talk to a stag that stands at bay."
Young Eustace Graeme, said, "Steady!  lo the glare
Of that dread lightning showed me south away
The shallop flying o'er the waters &mdash; there!
I saw her tack e'en now."  At once the midnight air

Grew thick, choked up the moon and stars, and down
A whirlwind stooped, and northward rushing threw
A furrow up, such as a fleet would drown,
And with its foam besprinkled all our crew.
A strange sail nigh to this devourer drew,
Which seized the canvas, and then whirled it round;
The yell of perishing mortals heavenward flew&mdash;
The whirlwind passed:  the treacherous sea around
Smoothed its huge curls, and smiled as if it ne'er had frowned.

And there like foam upon the waters lay
One man, no more; straight from the darkened sea
Eustace he snatched him; some stern pilgrim gray,
Or palmer-monk, or anchorite looked he;
Stately he was, and stalwart seemed to be:
He shook the sea-foam from him thus, and said,
"God yet has some good work in store for me,
To save me thus so wondrously:"  he laid
His broad palms o'er his breast, and inwardly he prayed.

"Yes, God has got some work for thee.  Now mark,
Young Eustace said, "and weigh well what I say:&mdash;
Sir Ralph Latoun has to his castle dark,
By force, not love, ta'en my sweet bride away;
This night we go &mdash; and heed my words, I pray&mdash;
This night we go to win her back, or leave
Our bodies to the southern birds of prey."
The Pilgrim laid his palm on Eustace' sleeve,
And said, "Good youth, say now, how wilt thou this achieve,

The tower is strong, its chieftain stark."  "Yea, both,"
Replied he, Eustace.  "Comrades, warily steer,
For rocks are lurking 'midst that broiling froth;
Now we have passed them:  'tween the dark and clear,
Lo!  see the castle:  in this haven here
We'll moor, and go ashore, and, Palmer, then,
Comes what God wills; but whoso lives shall hear
We bore us like a score of Scottishmen&mdash;"
On them the night around closed darksome as a den.

