So thinks Hugh Wilson as he joyful stands,
And shouts, to see Miles Graeme approaching near.
Hark to the salutation of their hands.
He whispers Eustace, and in Sybil's ear
Pours pleasure.  See each window's shining clear.
The hinds already have in thought begun
To dance, and each one eyes a maiden dear,
And shakes his foot preparing for the fun&mdash;
When in walks reverend Miles, with Sybil and his son.

The fiddler smiled when he young Eustace saw,
And laid his left cheek to the thrilling thairm,
Then drew his best bow hand; in joy and awe
Men hearkened, and seemed touched by magic charm.
But when full inspiration moved his arm,
Maids' feet found wings, men's minds began to soar
Above the world, with all its toil and harm.
An hundred feet at once smote on the floor,
And cracked an hundred thumbs, and matrons smiled demure.

He paused:  a brimming cup young Eustace brings,
The crouder takes it &mdash; drains it to a drop&mdash;
A new soul now seems sounding in the strings;
Each heart leaps light as starts the music up;
The rooftree trembles with its grassy cope,
From hole and crevice mice in wonder peep;
The hoary bandsmen nod each bonnet top,
Dance with their knees and regular measure keep,
Adown their ancient cheeks the drops of gladness dreep.

Now Eustace leads the fair young Sybil out&mdash;
Her feet beat witchcraft as she heads the dance;
Lads, like a garland, hem her round about,
While love rains on them from her dark eye glance:
The maidens near her, tittering, take their stance,
And on her swan-white neck and snowy arms,
Her small and nimble feet, they look askance;
The hoary fiddler, as he listens, warms,
And draws a lustier bow, and gazes on her charms.

But when the music's full infection stole
Thoughout her frame, and kindled up her veins,
She shook her curls, and through her eyes her soul
Sent such a shower of rapture, all the swains
Stood gaping, as the parched flower when it rains.
She sailed along, and, like a sorceress, flung
Her own sweet spirit o'er the crouder's strains:
Her feet had language, such as hath been sung,
That spoke to every heart as plain as with a tongue.

"Now by my fiddle and my honoured bow,
Which threescore winters have amused this land,
No foot before ere answered music so,
Her eye-glance, too, nigh marred my good bow-hand.
Now, Eustace, out of my poor eyesight stand,
That I may look upon her &mdash; there she goes,
O'er all men's hearts like Solway o'er its sand."
So saying, he shook a head on which the snows
Of seventy winters lay; renewed the music rose.

Nor did young Eustace dance unheeded.  "See,"
A douce dame said, "how lightsomely he springs;
Nay, look on him; he bears o'er all the gree,
He moves along as he were borne on wings,
His nimble feet seem formed of fiddle strings;
And how he talks!  dame, have ye heard the rumour?
There is a little bird as good as sings,
How he'll be wed before spring grows to summer,
On Sybil &mdash; there they sit; what think ye of it, cummer?

"What think I of it?  I think nought that's good,&mdash;
I think the lassie's mad &mdash; his parents blind.
Poor simple quean, how weel she sets her snood;
He wed her?  He's none of the marrying kind,&mdash;
Let her beware, although his words are kind
And sweeter than the mouth of May, and softer
Than thistle down.  Now dame, bear this in mind;
Ere ten months time she will cause meickle laughter.
I think that every year our maids grow daft and dafter."

While thus they talked there came an ancient hind,
A stranger in these parts; he louted low
To Sybil, saying, "Ah, I call to mind
When these same locks were not like Siddick snow,
But black as plumes which on sea eagles grow;
These blessed days afar have fled from me,
But yet I'm sure, if I read right thy brow,
Thou'lt dance wer't but for Christian charity."
She said "Aye," with a smile had cured the sick to see.

She rose and danced; meanwhile the glad old man
Said, while his sole remaining locks he shook,
"Now, lady, list:  where many a lithe-necked swan
In winter graze, by Clifton's moorland brook,
My cot stands, sunny in a sheltered nook,
Nigh to the hall of Lesley's honoured name&mdash;
I see, I see &mdash; I understand that look:
That flashing eye:  thy father had the same.
Nay, be not wroth, 'twas not to spy thee out I came."

"Name not my name; name not my lineage &mdash; name
Nought that is mine," she said, "nor seem to know
Me, else henceforth go find another hame."
The old man stood and sadly smoothed his brow,
And with his fingers combed his locks of snow.
She look'd as looks a princess when she's crowned,&mdash;
And gently said, "Nay, nay, forgive me, now,"
And gave to him her fingers white and round;
"Forget we ever spake &mdash; forget I ever frowned."

He clapt his hands &mdash; he leaped balk high &mdash; he said,
"Now, fiddler, play a gladsome tune and fast;
This night ten years of eild aside I've laid,
Grim Care smiles on me, and then passes past.
Play up!  I'll dance though I should dance my last.
Play up, I say, the gardener and his dibble,
The Gallant Graemes, or Nelly Weems. &mdash; Man, hast
Thou ne'er a new one?  play me 'trout, come nibble,'
A fisher's gallant reel &mdash; what tune wilt thou have, Sybil?"

All eyes were sparkling and all hearts were light,
Waved many a hand and bounded many a foot;
Old men of past and youths of present might
Smiled gladsome, and with whisper, smack, and shout,
Through reels in dozens swept the dames about;
The barn-roof wagged to its remotest raft:
Light, mirth and music gushed in gladness out,
Far o'er the lea:  old men looked on and laugh'd,
Cried, weel done Jock and Jean, then deep of brown ale quaffed.

The barn has mirth, so has the farmer's hall;
The song and jest are held in full esteem&mdash;
For there a motly and a mirthsome throng
Good liquor better far than dancing deem,
And social talk than either; o'er the steam
Of fragrant bowls they scatter sayings sage,
And from the milk of humour skim the cream.
Age claps his hands to youth, and youth to age,
And drouth grows dryer still the more they it assuage.

Than drink, more solid dainties load the board;
The damasked haggis large and fragrant reeking,
Black luscious puddings; unctuous collops scored;
Potatoes mashed in milk and butter, smeeking:
A singed sheep's head that puts a man past speaking,
With feet, as with a garland garnished round,
And ale that by the hearth fire long lay beeking,
Which made the corks up to the rafters bound;
With bracksha best of food on moor or mountain found.

The savour of the supper seemed to find
Its way among the dancers; lighter smote
Their feet upon the floor, and in the wind
The fiddler felt the fragrance coming hot,
His good bow-hand drew out a feeble note;
A voice cried loud, "Cease mirth, now carle and kimmer,
Music, I say, keeps naething in her pot;
No living soul has ever seen it simmer:
Come, supper loads the board, ale foams aboon the timmer."

The crouder put his fiddle in its case
As monk would put a relic:  then he slung
It o'er his shoulder, and with joyous face
Went speaking lightly as he went along.
"Long o'er the thairms my right hand have I flung,
But Sybil, lass, to-night, that foot of thine
Bewitched my bow with gallant horse-hair strung,
And filled the tight strings with a voice divine."
Loud Grizel Grierson laughed, "Mind ye the eighty-nine:

"'Twas a sad year, sore famine vexed the land,
And war, its dread twin brother, came; but never
Will man be wise; John Rodan of the Rand
Gave such a kirn &mdash; there drink ran like a river,
And dames danced daftly.  Sure as God's a giver,
There danced a stranger lass with locks like lammer,
Her deevlish dark een made me grue and shiver;
And having witched the laird of Knappenhammer
She vanished &mdash; she was one framed by the fiends of glamour."

"Aye, dame, but Sybil's formed of daintier stuff,"
Hugh Wilson said, "I'll warrant she's nae vision.
But ask our Eustace there &mdash; for he made proof
Some hour agone &mdash; it was a sweet collision,
Between their ripe lips I saw nae division.&mdash;
But here's the supper."  Soon his brow is bare:
To God all good he offers an orison,
Then cries, &mdash; "fall on, eat, drink, and dinna spare;
In good food smother woe; in amber ale drown care."

Amid the grace the haggis on the platter
Raised such a steam, the douce laird of Drumbreg
Could not endure't &mdash; his mouth was in a water.
"Ha'done, ha'done," he said, a jocteleg,
He snatched and cut; far gushing o'er the peg
There came a reeking deluge, rich and savoury.
"Take this now, Marion; and take that now, Meg;
This is a food unknown in lands of slavery."
Dames smiled, but dreading drops quick gathered in their bravery.

At the board head, like Ceres' self, a maid
Sat, crowned with braided corn, and proudly waving
Her locks, which o'er her white neck threw a shade
Like ink spilt over ivory:  Nancie Caven
Men called her; and her ringlets, like the raven,
Were dear to all the youth of wide Dalgonar.
Even wooers came from Dee's wild waters raving;
From Annan some threw wistful looks upon'er,
And now e'en gray-haired men were prompt to do her honour.

For she that morn had reaped with her sharp sickle
The kirn &mdash; the latest lock of growing grain;
And saved mild Autumn from the sleety trickle
Of stormy Winter, with her snow and rain;
And she was vain &mdash; no wonder she was vain.
The board was cleared, and with a serious face,
Hugh Wilson looked, and said a "pleasant strain,
Come, let us chaunt to do this night some grace;"
He signed &mdash; and there was silence for a little space.

The first song touched on harvest's golden joys,
The ripened corn, the reaping hook, the flail.
The second was of pleasure, such as cloys
With nature never; in a sunny dale
A rustic pair, a cottage, cow and kale.
The third song sore complained of Cupid's bow,
Of Venus and her doves &mdash; hearts ne'er were hale
From his sad arrows, and a cureless woe
That came from Chloris' eyes and Chloe's breasts of snow.

"Enough, enough!"  Hugh Wilson cried, "enough
Bake Venus' doves in pies; drown Chloris, Chloe.
Give me a song like thistles, sharp and rough,
Rather than silken strains so soft and showy,
Give me the heathery hill top of Glenhowie,
By fierce winds swept, where no ambrosial breathing
Of breezes come, nor nymphs with bosoms snowy,
Trip full of panting, fainting, raving, writhing&mdash;
Vain coinage of some bard, with brain in learning seething."

The fourth song was of moorlands and of hills,
And sunny knolls where adders twine their beads;
Of lowing flocks which feed by murmuring rills;
Of shepherd maidens dancing to the reeds
Of their fond lovers, clad in pastoral weeds;
White bosomed dogs lie slumbering by the crooks,
While o'er the curds his creed some shepherd reads.
Maids sing &mdash; to which the melody of brooks
O'er pebbles simmering sweet, is as the voice of rooks.

The fifth song was a dolorous chaunt:  asleep
At first it seemed, then in a passionate tune
It sung the sea-boy on the ocean deep,
The Solway furrowing one sweet summer noon;
Musing upon a mother's welcome soon,
And carolling homewards o'er the smiling wave&mdash;
A whirlwind woke, and ere arose the moon
He waked his shrieking mother, bade her save
His sad corse from the storms by Clifton's lonely cave.

The sixth song was not sorrowful; it sung
Of one who loved an evening hour to snatch
From rest, and, with a sweet and oily tongue,
Keep for some witty maid a wintry watch,
Listening to hear her cannily lift the latch;
The temptress from her staunce unseen the while,
Lets him hang there like ice-drop to the thatch,
And calls her aunt &mdash; she comes with canker'd smile,
Unbinds the big house dog, and hounds the losel vile.

The seventh pictured summer's gloaming hour,
When hawthorn scent filled the nocturnal air&mdash;
A fairy glen, a honeysuckle bower,
The blackbird's latest note was lingering there;
In it, as in a shrine, a modest pair
Are seated &mdash; look, and heart, and thought, the same;
One is a rural maiden, one the heir,
But of a poet's pipe and rustic hame:
They little say, look much:  a meek and holy flame

Is in their cheeks.  And more had Eustace said,
For his the song, when with a wreathed bough
Of rustling holly, rose a blushing maid,
And placed it like a garland on his brow.
Its scarlet clusters did not ruddier glow
Than glowed his face; he turned him round, a kiss
Or twain he took; Hugh Wilson cried, "I vow
Parnassus ne'er had ought surpassing this,
Nor Eildon's cloven hill, where muses dwell, I wis."

Young Sybil turned her head aside; men say
A sudden flush of her displeasure told,
And Eustace marked it; be that as it may,
Maids tittered, gray dames smiled, and bondsmen old
Laughed measureless, clapt hands, and shouted bold;
The cricket chirruped merrier from the nook,
The watch dog broke his bands and gambolling rolled;
Upon his tree the solitary rook
Cawed and looked down; he heard the sounding of the brook

Grow loud and louder; straightway to the heaven
He turned, there boding dark tumultuouslie,
He saw dark cloud o'er cloud enormous driven,
And raised his wings, and straight prepared to flee.
Meanwhile down dark and dismal on the ee
Midnight in stormy majesty descended.
Mirth ceased, men drew the bonnet o'er the bree,
And maids and dames with plaids all well defended,
Went scudding 'fore the blast, and homeward warily wended.

Ere Sybil donned her mantle wooers came,
Impatient each to guide her on her way;
When sudden at her side stood Eustace Graeme,
And took her hand:  the maiden said, "Nay, nay,"
Yet went; lads saw that hopeless cause had they&mdash;
The minstrel's witchingness of tongue they knew,
His hand too some had felt in lover fray&mdash;
They cursed his cleverness and slow withdrew,
While he, and Sybil fair, their homeward way pursue.

I said that night had fallen dense from heaven;
The blood-fox howling by the guarded pen,
The forest tops to sweeping breezes given,
The river rushing, which the cavern'd glen
Repaid with melancholy groan agen&mdash;
Were the sole sounds way-faring folk might hear:
"Sweet Sybil, to the hearts and souls of men
The mournful tone of Nature's tongue is dear;
E'en that fierce river's rush has music for my ear.

"There stands the hill on which I wont to seek
My way in verse, that I might make me known
To fame; when came the night that ends the week,
Thoughtful, not sad, I sauntered on and on,
Whiles with twin-lambs consorting; more alone
I sat &mdash; or touched with momentary fire&mdash;
Muttered wild words, till morning sought his throne,
And bade me to my homely couch retire;&mdash;
The dews all shining on my negligent attire.

"And when the day-beam o'er the eastern steeps
Had placed his herald star on Burnswark-hill,
Close by the tomb where the dark Douglas sleeps,
And shepherds saw the Fairies by the rill
I roamed &mdash; the sun began his light to spill
On Orr's wild loch, on Greirson's castle gray;
I heard his mate the curlew summons shrill,
And larks rejoice:  the cottage smoke away
Curled, and men lonely knelt, and unto God did pray.

"It was no idle rapture which I felt,
What time the earth with morning dew was sown,
And man and matron to their maker knelt,
And humbled them before the Almighty's throne;
To sit upon the sole remaining stone
Of some razed castle, and there muse on man&mdash;
Half God, half dust, and sometimes fiend, and moan,
We saw so little of the immortal plan,
And knew but like a dream how this proud world began.

"Now what is man, or what is woman; who
Shall tell us, Sybil?  see, along the plain
The forest leafs are coursing to and fro,
Backward and forward, whirling on amain
The roused wind sweeps them:  now they stay again,&mdash;
Even so is man with his impassioned feeling."&mdash;
She looked up in his face:  the coming rain
Was heard afar, and thunder distant pealing,
She looked &mdash; for now his arm around her waist was stealing.

"I know not, Sybil, how it is," he cried,
"I know not that I love thee, yet 'tis dear
To be beside thee, and I love beside
To tell thee what I feel, whilst thou thy ear
Inclinest so gently with a look sincere:
And then thy modest word of aye, or no,
Is ever right, while in that forehead clear
I read thy meaning plain as tongue can show;
I love thee not:  and yet my spirit says not so."

"Talk not so, Eustace, &mdash; Eustace, talk not so,"
Young Sybil said; "a poor bondmaiden I,
Without a home or parent, let me go;
You love the Maid of Elvar &mdash; Eustace, fye!"
She looked with some displeasure in her eye.
"Shame on thee, man, and I an orphan maid,
What would thy father say?  and he is nigh."
He answered, "Sweet one, why art thou afraid?"
A lightning flash that moment kindled all the glade.

"Love her of Elvar?  do I love the moon
Now hid in heaven, or do I love the star
Next her in lustre?  I would woo as soon
The bright Aurora when she mounts her car;
Her rank and mine would wage continual war:
I thought her lovely and I found her kind,
The Maid of Elvar! &mdash; an eternal bar
There is atween us &mdash; dost thou deem me blind?
No!  no!  such high placed love is but to woo the wind

"And wed destruction."  For a little space
They spoke not, but both sighed.  Without rebuke
He clasped her thus, and laying face to face,
One kiss, yea more, for kisses three he took,
While her two knees like fountain lilies shook;
And her soul's secret sat upon her lips,
And high her proud heart 'gainst her bosom strook:
They heeded not that lightning cleft to chips
A gnarled oak, and passed, and left them in eclipse.

"Well are you come, my children," &mdash; said the chief,
"Soon of our home the tempest will make proof;
To-night the storm will scatter many a sheaf."
Even as he spoke red thunder rolled aloof,
And one by one big drops plashed on the roof;
He took them ben, he barred the quivering door,
And said, "Alas!  flocks that divide the hoof,
The silly sheep on mountain moss and moor
May moan, but most may man on ocean's tumbling roar."

The cottage cock shakes on his 'customed perch,
The windows rattle and the winds arise,
The rain comes plunging, rooks in clamorous march
Sail with the storm that darkens as it flies;
Woods roar, and wild linns echo to the skies,
Kine low, dogs whine, superior man alone
Sits thoughtful, ruminating, and his eyes
Turns up to heaven amid the mighty moan
Of Solway's fearful tide, and the dread thunder's groan.

Down comes Dalgonar rushing red, and lifting
His voice above the thunder; Nith as loud
Calls o'er the uplands, on her bosom drifting,
Seen by the lightning flashing from the cloud&mdash;
Or by the wan moon weeping from her shroud,
The golden harvests of ten thousand hands.
In storm and tide the distant Solway proud,
Pours her long lines of waves o'er quivering sands,
Fierce as the ranked steeds rush foaming on the brands.

"Ah, who untouched," said Miles, "may hear the sound
Of streams, that down our glens like torrents boil;
The rivers rushing, wild woods waving round
Their stately shafts like fencer's pliant foil.
Man!  worm!  creep low and stoop thee as to toil,
That flash might strike thee to a senseless clod;
The angry elements in dread turmoil,
To waste thy labours all are come abroad;
Feel even thy refuge earth rocks 'neath the foot of God."

The room was dark, save when the lightning came,
And then 'twas brighter than the brightest day.
Strange agitations shook young Sybil's frame,
For as she knelt by Eustace' side to pray,
Around his neck her white arm did she lay
Unconscious.  Now the elemental moan
Ceased, and the storms forsook the mountains gray;
The rivulets lessened, forests ceased to groan,
The river's mighty voice was heard, and heard alone.

Miles Graeme walked forth, climbed up a knoll, and hark!
He calls his son to come and view the ground
Where late they reaped; in loud confliction dark,
Beneath Dalgonar dashed o'er moat and mound,
And midst its rushings whiles they heard the sound
Of swimming flocks, which raised a piteous wail.
To Sybil's heart there went a dismal stound:
First came a man, and then two children pale&mdash;
Of twelve alone they're left to tell the mournful tale;

How their fair cottage on Dalgonar side
Was by the river swept at once away;
How three were saved, and how nine others died
Amid the flood that made their flocks a prey:
How happy once &mdash; now who so sad as they.
"Ah!  who," cried one, "will give us clothes, or feed
The desolate, the orphan; who will lay
A good warm pillow for an old white head?"
Young Sybil wept, "I will."  &mdash; "And wilt thou do't indeed?

"And thou, Miles Graeme's poor handmaid?  O, alas!
In extreme tenderness of soul you speak,
Forgetting thou'rt a desolate orphan lass;
But bless thee for thy sympathy."  His cheek
He wiped, and muttered, "'las!  but I am weak."
A token from her glittering locks took she,
And whispered in his ear:  'twas scarce a week
Had passed, when men cried to each other, "See,
John Robson works by spells &mdash; a wondrous man is he.

"A plenished steading!  flocks on hill and lea!"
He answered all enquiries, "God is good,
And sends an angel in extremitie."
But from that hour, when kneeling at the Rood,
He prayed for her that gave his children food;
His reverend white locks, when he ever saw
Fair Sybil at the kirk or by the wood,
Were instant bared:  of douce John Robson's awe
For Miles Graeme's bonnie lass, maids talked in house and ha'.

