There shines a light in every tower; a light
Streams far from every cottage; from the top
Of Blackwood hill &mdash; from where the river white
Comes foaming down the moorland's heathery slope;
From ancient woods, and from the castle cope,
And from the hills that shade the vale aboon,
The murky veil of heaven is lifted up;
Bright from the parting clouds walks out the moon
With her unnumbered stars &mdash; and all is clear as noon.

"Thus God," Miles Graeme said, "mocks the dreams of man.
That flood the riches of a valley reaps;
The winds which now thy forehead, Sybil, fan
So gently, late tumultuous moved the deeps.
Man's Babel towers away, the High One sweeps,
Like words on snow, or signs on Solway sand;
His is the eye which slumbers not nor sleeps&mdash;
Where is the strength that 'gainst his will can stand?
Man!  thy audacious head bow to his chastening hand.

"There is a voice in every flower, a tongue
In praise of God in all things; late I saw
Thee in the dance, sweet Sybil, glad the young
And cheer the old:  thy charmingness did draw
Full many a sigh.  But soul and heart in awe
I heard thee, when the thunder shook the plain,
Call upon God.  What says the ancient saw?
The maid whom He to rule hearts did ordain,
As first in loveliness, is first to own His reign."

He looked to heaven, then did to Eustace call,
"Lo!  see the thunder's fiery pen hath wrote,
As did that dread hand on the Syrian's wall,
Words full of meaning.  Listen now, and note:
Of peace and war yon tokens are, I wot,
Invasions and fierce onslaughts, civil wars;
See o'er the plough and elwand darkly shot
The burning trains of two consuming stars,
And see yon armed shapes mount thunderous clouds for cars."

He gazed with terror pictured on his brow,
Spoke with a hollow voice and livid cheek.
Meanwhile the rack went shifting to and fro,
Stars writhed, and rushing seemed of man to speak;
From cloud to cloud passed voices low and weak.
He looked, and cried, "Ay, now I surely see,
From Solway-flow to Pentland's northern peak,
Old Scotland, days of joy and peace to thee&mdash;
Days coming &mdash; but, my child, for neither thee nor me."

And all round Scotland he beheld arrayed
Nation on nation in tumultuous jar;
Bridle the steed and whet the battle blade,
And issue on the cannon from the car,
With flags unfurled and trumpets heard afar,
While tower and city blazed with furnace flames&mdash;
Where men forged tube and brand for island war&mdash;
Meanwhile the Scotts, Homes, Leslies, Maxwells, Graemes,
Held Scotland's ancient land, and her fair spotless dames.

It was a dread as 'twas a glorious sight,
For one who looked on visionary time,
To see bright nations darkening into night,
And others rising from barbaric clime,
Showing their foreheads o'er the world sublime
A little while, then sinking to decay;
Leaving a trace in history or rhyme&mdash;
A broken statue wreathed with starry bay,
Or ashes in an urn.  Miles from the sight away

Turned and walked homeward:  moon and stars shone clear;
When with a sorrowing and a reverent air,
And Sybil at his side, the hoary seer
The threshold passed and sank into his chair:
The silver moonshine glittered in his hair.
"Come nigh, my children, for we may not sleep
Till we have God appeased with song and prayer;
So he His right hand round our homes may keep,
For many a mother's doomed o'er slaughter'd sons to weep."

So saying, forth he put his hand, and mute
Took God's book down; the family reverentlie
Hemmed him, like Joseph's visioned sheaves, about:
A holy light in his rapt looks had he.
He opened wide the clasped book o'er his knee&mdash;
"Now let us worship God, and in his praise
Sing that sweet pastoral song, psalm twenty-three,
'The Lord's my shepherd.'"  The clear moonbeam's rays
Seem'd radiance from his head, as loud the sacred lays

Arose melodious.  One voice high and clear,
It seemed, save whiles a more seraphic sound,
Such sounds as poets feign and angels hear,
Went through the chamber warbling round and round,
And still its sweetness knew nor let nor bound.
Young Eustace felt its sorcery:  now may grace
Be his &mdash; his gracelessness let priests expound,
If not forgive &mdash; he thought for some short space,
First on the sweet clear voice, then on the sweet fair face:

And then how Sybil's seraph tongue would lend
Fresh lustre to his pure and national lays;
How fame would come, and glory without end:
His songs by damsels o'er the broomy braes
Of Scotland lilted ever and always,
By princes quoted and princesses sung.
His father ceased &mdash; said, "Let us now His praise
Read in that Prophet with the poet-tongue,
Isaiah, fifty-third."  How Eustace' soul was stung.

"Who hath believed our report &mdash; to whom
Hath God reveal'd his strength, for he shall grow
Up as a tender plant &mdash; now see him come
A man of sorrows and acquaint with wo,
Of man rejected; bruised with stripes, and, lo!
Smitten of God, and to the slaughter led
As men do lead a lamb."  Young Sybil so
With sobbing shook, and tears so thickly shed;
Miles paused, nor to the close the melting chapter read.

"Now let us pray," he said.  Knelt every knee,
And down into the dust stooped every face;
All lights were quenched, save that which seraphs see
At night hung o'er the angels' dwelling place.
All humbly now, before the throne of grace,
He poured his spirit forth, and there was given
Much rapture to him for a little space&mdash;
Thought flashed on thought as bright and fast as levin;
Something there was of earth, but there was more of heaven.

Of heaven, there were his holy hopes:  of earth,
There was his country and his glory, where
Had she a son who loved her more; whose worth,
In such a station, could with his compare;
There was his son, and such a son; and there
Was his young gentle bondmaiden, whom none
In merit matched.  Young Sybil gazed; his hair
And his clear brow so in the moonshine shone,
She thought the lustre rose from his blest head alone.

Sleep followed this; morn came, and with the morn,
Of harvest horns no more was heard the sound;
No more the reap-hook 'neath the ripened corn
Moved, while the merry song rung round and round.
The harquebus' shot, the hallooing to the hound,
The shepherd's whistle and the thrasher's flail,
All these, and other gentler sounds abound;
The ice-fringed brook scarce singing down the dale&mdash;
The gentle maidens sigh at some sad shepherd's tale.

The golden hours of the glad year are gone;
The forest's fragrant plumes are pluck'd &mdash; how short,
And stormy, too, the journey of the sun;
The vessel gladly makes her destined port;
The hares unto the green kale yards resort;
The plough lies idle in the half-drawn furrow;
The barnman's chaff comes down like snow; his sport
The hunter takes; the rabbit keeps his burrow;
And old men shake their locks, and sigh 'tis winter thorough.

That year stern Winter trod on Autumn's heel;
Snow wrapt the mountains, and the frost came next,
And laid his cold hand on the miller's wheel,
And nearly stayed it; old dames were perplext;
They deemed it witchcraft, quoted that dread text
Wherein the Lord bids Israel's king destroy
Those with familiar spirits; stirred and vexed,
They muttered, "There's the stark witch of Drumboy,
Who on the Solway side works seamen much annoy.

"Even our lone glen is with her sisters swarming;
Text, horseshoe, rowan-tree, are of no avail.
Were I but king, Lord!  they should have a warming,
Then we would have milk in our milking pail."
Even as they spake there came the pattering hail.
"Speak of the de'el! &mdash; we ken who sent us thee."
The frozen wind came roaring down the dale;
"He rides the blast!  Then help the ships at sea&mdash;
Dark spirits rule the wind &mdash; O we have much to dree!"

That eve sweet Sybil by the cottage hearth
Sate, and when hail came drifting in a shower,
She sighed, "Ye little birds of song and mirth,
Where dwell ye when the north-wind strips the bower;
No pairing carol from the opening flower
Ascends at morn, or glads my heart at even;
No dew-winged laverock, in melodious tour,
Pours his sweet ditty in the ear of heaven:
The flower, the forest tree, are all to winter given.

"Thou timid hare, where cowerst thou in the brake?
Thy steps are written on the snowy dale;
A long and perilous journey thou must make,
O'er moor and lea to eat thy frozen meal,
Lest swollen luxury snuff thee in the gale,
And shoot or seize thee in the narrow way.
O, come and nibble on my castle kale,
Choose fragrant shoots; at morn then scud away
To Clifton's brakeny hills, or Siddick's mountains gray.

"A little while in summer's bloomy prime,
Man bids thee go and propagate and shoot,
Nurse thy twin little ones on banks of thyme,
And couch 'mongst buds and berries, odorous fruit,
Roll in the dew, and lick thy scented foot,
Or bear thy bosom o'er green bladed corn,
Or eat the honeyed clover, dig the root
Of fragrant cornick &mdash; till man winds his horn,
Levels his tube, and taints with sulphury smoke the morn.

"Ah, nought is safe!  no, not the sweetest thing
That glads the soul or keeps creation blythe;
Whether they fan the welkin with the wing,
Or drink the dew before the mower's scythe,
Man makes them yield to him a mournful tithe;
He robs the air, the grove, the stream, the green,
That he may feed on the delicious lythe."
Still mused she, when the matron said, "Bedeen
Will young and old come here to hold their Halloween.

"And Halloween it well may be; for look,
The stars are sunk in heaven, a darksome cloud
Conceals the moon, and mist conceals the brook;
The mountain's swathed up in a snowy shroud,
The flocks dismayed down from the uplands crowd.
There is an eerie murmuring in the glen,
And hear Dalgonar stream now lowne now loud;
There is no light in the abodes of men,
And what all that denotes, sweet Sybil, well ye ken?

"This is the eve on which men tell ye, God
Gives to the spirits of evil might and rule;
Hags on their ragwort chariots come abroad,
Wild Will his treacherous lamp hangs o'er the pool,
And elves shoot 'mongst us shafts of wo and dool.
Alas, for him, who so forgets himself
As to mool in with fairies:  Robin Roole
Of Dalmakitten, pious and fond of pelf&mdash;
Lass, have ye heard how he was trysted by an elf?"

"Aye, weel I wot that's true," a neighbour said,
Passing the threshold. &mdash; "Rob, I kenned him weel:
He pious!  'las this world!  he never prayed.
'Twas said he had a paction with the deel;
I ken he never brought an empty creel
Frae Annan water; fient ae fin of fish
Could others catch.  By and attour atweel
I tell ye &mdash; do ye mind when Jess Macnish
Bore twins to him we aye called Saul the son of Kish."

"Hout tout," cried one, "of shameless things will ye
Discourse, when earth's forsook by shapes of bliss;
Had ye but seen what I ae night did see,
Your words would be of modest sort I wis.
'Twas Hallowmass, and no sae far from this,
I met John Tamson of the Hempie Howe;
Daft words ensued, and he aye said a kiss,
When there came something with its locks on lowe&mdash;
I held a grip of John, and he cried Worriecowe!&mdash;"

"And I cry turnip-lantern," said a lass
As she came laughing in.  The well trimmed lamp
And fire made roof and rafter gleam like glass;
Old men in iron-shod shoon came tramp on tramp,
Saying, "Peace be here!"  and shook their bonnets damp.
Maids light of foot, like shadows mute came gliding,
Next douce Hugh Wilson came and gave a stamp,
And said, "Its no for pious folks abiding
The misrule in the air, and witches rudely riding.

"Ah Sybil, thou'rt to me a charm, a spell,
Both heavenly:  dost know that poisonous rime
Will drop, the stars will sicken sore, the fell
Dread warlocks back will say the infernal rhyme,
And mounting on their invisible steeds sublime,
Take flight away as swans for Lochar mound;
While loosed from pangs in hell's hot penal clime,
As a dark exhalation from the ground,
Satan will rise and rule his grim conclave around.

"But where's the high priest of our Hallowmass mirth?
Where's he, the poet? &mdash; where's our Eustace, where?
Say, is he putting a girdle round the earth
With elves? &mdash; or boldly in the warlock's lair,
Gathering dark knowledge in, by pith of prayer?"
"I saw him" said a maiden, "near the gloaming,"
A maiden with bright eyes and snooded hair;
"Musing and heedless but still onward roaming
Toward the Fairy-hall where the dread linn is foaming."

"Preserve my child!"  Eupheme cried.  "Have no dread
Of Eustace," said old Robin Riddel, "he
Is safe from spells; he wears an adder bead,
A moonlight splinter from the green row'n tree:
Now will he learn the truth, through his own ee,
Of tales I've told.  See how the queen of Fairy
Rides through the Nith, Dalgonar stems, while Dee
Hears her charm'd bridles ring:  nor will she tarry&mdash;
She comes to take her tithe of all maids ripe to marry."

Two maids grew pale, two well nigh scream'd, two smiled,
And cried, "we're no safe here, douce Robin Riddel."
"Aye, safe as reliques are, else I'm beguiled,"
Quoth he:  "these thirty years Hugh Paisley's fiddle,
Has made some of ye loup, and jink, and diddle.
These are vain words, so let us fall to wark,
But first I'll pray the prayer of Sandie Griddel;
A prayer of might from Salterness to Sarke,
'Twill give our house a guard &mdash; a sentinel in the dark.

"Thou drudging Goblin; by thy southern name
I call thee:  guardian of our flocks and corn;
Thou surest sentinel o'er the good man's hame.
O Brownie with long arms and locks unshorn,
Watch round our dwellings to the dawn of morn.
Guard us from witches, elves, the unbaptized feet
Of fairies, and with odorous cream thy horn
Shall mantle, and with meal cakes knuckled sweet.&mdash;
Come with thy shadowy flail, and keep thy watch discreet."

Pleased with the prayer and bribe, the goblin brown
Waved his bare arms, and gave a gladsome scream;
And after midnight, when the moon was down,
'Tis said he couched him by the embers' beam,
And supped till his swart visage dropt with cream:
Then up he sprung, and shook his shadowy flail,
And round the dwelling marched.  Now by the gleam
Of lamp and fire commence the song, the tale
Of deeds performed by charms; fate told by phantoms pale.

To prove love's constancy and wedlock's gladness,
Paired nuts are baptized, burnt &mdash; how bright they lowe;
To prove hope's strength, and save some hearts from sadness,
Kale stocks are pulled, and chips cut from the plough.
Some riddles read, or hempseed venturous sow,
While maidens three times sift the empty air,
Or pluck forth corn stalks with a doubtful brow;
Or in the cups with water foul and fair
Dip dread their hands, and seek to read their fortune there.

There froward damsels saw with darkening eye,
The dismal sentence of a single fate:
While others scarce contained themselves for joy,
An early bridal and a frugal mate:
One saw as in a dream, her future state,
The penance stool, the stern rebuke, dismayed,
She muttering vowed all folly to abate:
Two inly cursed all spells and charms, and bade
The foul fiend seize them quick, and black avowals made.

But he who tries a more adventurous spell&mdash;
A spell men say will either kill or cure&mdash;
Steals out unnoted o'er the haunted fell,
What time the moon reigns in the witching hour,
And dips his shirt-sleeve where two rivulets pour
Their mingling waters south; then home he hies,
Hangs it before the fire, and asks the power
Of night to make his true love's form arise,
And turn the fated sleeve, as slow it reeking dries.

To some have come no sweet and smiling maid,
But a cold hand held shivering from a shroud;
And some have seen a gliding spectral shade,
Descend, as comes a star-beam from a cloud,
And turn the sleeve, look upward and seem proud;
Then beckon them to take the immortal road.&mdash;
And some have heard a summons dread and loud,
Enough to make the soul quit its clay load,
Saying, "Rise, ye guilty spirit &mdash; come and be judged of God!"

And meikle warning had the adventurous wight,
Lest on his errand he might stay to mark
By a lone fire of hemlock glimmering bright,
A hoary hag at her unhallowed wark,
A beverage brewing fit to wile the lark
From his sweet morning carol, and compel
The hind of mind and body steeve and stark;
Forsake the powers of heaven for shapes of hell,
And wile him amorouslie with wrinkled hags to mell.

"And oh my child, put ye God's holy book
Into your bosom:  even with that beware;"
A matron said:  "A fiend deceitful took
A fair maid's form once, with dishevelled hair,
An azure eye, a snowy bosom bare,
And godless tongue; into Cumlongan brake
She wiled Mark Snedden to her treacherous lair,
And when his amorous thirst he sought to slake
She gave him gibbeted bones in his embrace to take.

"And chief beware when comes the gloaming gray
Of Hallow-eve:  hell keeps an open road,
For those who go from gospel paths astray,
Hags then to seek their palfreys come abroad,
They'll soon transform ye to a steed, and goad
Ye with the infernal spur and magic rein.
I knew a lad &mdash; he dwelt in Quarrelwood,
Was handled so; he shook the shuddering plain,
With brazen hoofs, neighed loud, and tossed a fiery mane.

"And oh, my son, shun ye the Solway sand,
Where wizards visionary vessels ride,
And moor their golden halsers to the strand;
Their silk sails spread with all a sailor's pride,
And long-haired mermaids carolling on their side
Enchanting songs of such a powerful strain,
That mortals may not choose but climb and bide,
To hear their melody.  Flash o'er the main,
Fast flies the fairy bark: &mdash; home sees them ne'er again."

So talked they, and the night wore on:  meanwhile
Miles Graeme sat gravely by the ingle side;
Near him sat Sybil, and a credulous smile
Played o'er her face as maids their fortunes tried.
Around her brow a snowy cincture tied
With silken bands; a gown of glossy gray
Covered her shape, but sought in vain to hide
Its beauty:  one sighed, "Sybil, turn away
These eyes &mdash; I love no eyes that turn night into day."

Miles Graeme now spoke, and he spoke wise and kind&mdash;
"Enough, my children, we have given to mirth,
Perchance to folly; now bear ye in mind
My counsels, and make them your rule on earth.
Man's but a child; God gives him at his birth
His genius and his passions:  as he grows,
These grow and wax in stature and in girth.
My children all, I've watched ye as ye rose,
And marked your doings down."  Serene his open brows

Show, while he bids each his own spirit follow
The way that nature leads:  to one the wings
He gives of commerce; o'er the billows hollow
He bids him go, one of our merchant kings.
One from rare herbs the healing virtues wrings;
One ruminates upon the barren plain,
And golden crops and verdure o'er it flings.
He bids none go and join the Muses' train&mdash;
For much he dreads a toil so profitless and vain.

Upon a youth he laid his hand and cried,
"Go, go, my child; go forth, expound and preach
God's holy word:  see ye turn not aside
From this grand duty; let your stern voice reach
Pride in his place, and stint not to impeach
Crowned heads for crimes and follies:  see ye smite
The sensual Mammon; let your right hand stretch
O'er red ambition in his reckless might&mdash;
Great is the high priest's power to whom God's law is light."

Upon a second youth he laid his hand&mdash;
"Be thine the gentle and persuasive way
To rule by life of righteousness the land&mdash;
By mildness, wisdom, and by worth; thy sway
Will grow more glorious in thy latter day.
Matrons their children's children will hold up&mdash;
'There goes the Lord's true servant, look I say:'
Thus will the wine of gladness fill thy cup.
But of another drink this youth is doomed to sup,&mdash;"

He said, and touched a third one:  "Thou wilt be
Long while a tassel at misfortune's cloak;
Like labouring emmet or the moiling bee,
Or farmer airing autumn's moistened shock,
So wilt thou work, but work in vain:  the rock,
The gaping quicksand, and what none eschew,
Sickness of mind, and sorrows in a flock.
Nay, weep not, youth, ere threescore years ensue
Thou'lt shine, like Gideon's fleece, in fortune's golden dew.

And thou, my child," a fourth he thus addressed&mdash;
"Sure some sad deed has thy forefathers done;
Now by the demon of the muse possessed,
They see their conduct punished in their son.
Of all the miseries 'neath God's blessed sun,
The bard's is that for which there's least remede;
The light may cease to shine and rivers run,
But for the follower of the Muses' creed
Sorrow will never cease, till he be dull and dead.

"Go plow &mdash; 'tis cold to turn a wintry furrow;
Go sow &mdash; 'tis toilsome in the seed time sowing;
Go reap &mdash; and waken ere the clear sun skurrow;
Go mow &mdash; a sweaty task and hard is mowing;
Go herd &mdash; when winds are high and clouds are snowing;
Go sleep &mdash; sad visions watch o'er us when sleeping;
Go sail, when tempests wake, and seas are flowing;
Go weep &mdash; though some find comfort in their weeping;
But as ye wish to live, keep from the Muses' keeping&mdash;"

Sweet Sybil said.  "Nay, to the bard is given
A daring spirit, and a soul to soar
As near as thing of earth can go to heaven;
He goes in life, and nigh the angel's door
Sends his glad voice in herald song before;
Then slow, like lark, earthward he sings again,
And from his kindled spirit and burning core,
Pours forth to gladden man his happy strain&mdash;
Ne'er call the Poet's song, light, profitless, and vain."

