Grim as a wolf's throat grew the night, and fast
The waves flashed shoreward, while a thunderous cloud
Hung on huge Skiddaw, whence a curtain vast
Of darkness, fell o'er Solway like a shroud;
The fire came spouting, and the wind waxed loud:
Men met each other in the street and road,
And upward looked, and paused, and said aloud,
"What may this darkness to old England bode,
Sore famine &mdash; civil war &mdash; of Scots a fierce inroad."

Proud in his tower, that on a headland stood,
Like to an erne's nest on some perilous cliff,
Sir Ralph Latoun looked o'er the Solway flood;
And as he heard the tempest wakening stiff,
He laughed, and said, "Fair fall my nimble skiff,
That 'fore the blast bore me so steeve and steady;
And, as my love would say, bide but a gliff,
Thou good firm heart, there's something making ready
To please and grace thee too, &mdash; a sweet and winsome lady.

"And thou, Hugh Lydal, hast thou given my banner
Unto the winds; and are the guests invited;
And has my Sybil got three maids to fan her,
To cool the flame my courtship hot has lighted;
And has the proud Priest of Saint-Bees alighted?
I tell thee, Lydal, I design thee honour,
Thou shalt to court, and, by the saints, be knighted,
Wer't but for that sweet inroad on Dalgonar;
She's queen of all the north, and in my heart I'll throne her."

"The banner's spread, and all the torches blazing,
Long lines of light flash o'er the darksome wave,
The sheep might all be seen on Criffel grazing,
Save that a cloud has come down like the grave:
All, all is bright; the bridal bower is brave;
The tables spread, the stair is strewn with rushes,
The gates are opened to the meanest knave,
And each calls loud as he the wine-cup crushes,
Blessings on this black hour, 'twill hide our sweet bride's blushes."

The Priest alighted at the castle gate,
And said, as up the vaulted way he passed,
"This night has robed the earth in funeral state;
See there, the darkness ominous and vast,
Stands round thy castle, distant a stone's cast&mdash;
Is this the bride thou hast so boldly won?"
Adown her cheeks the bright tears trickled fast:
He took Sir Ralph aside, "Now, my fair son,
Before the church makes thee and that young creature one,

"I must ask of thee, hast thou had consent
Of this sweet dame?  she is of northern birth."
Replied Sir Ralph.  "Now, by both Tyne and Trent,
Sir Monk, thou art a man inclined to mirth;
Dost know the wild Scot otherside the firth?
Those who go there to woo from southron land
Must needs their bodies in steel harness girth:
Saint George!  they else would bless them with a brand!
How I that lady won, Sir Priest, now understand.

"I asked her broad lands did they wish to wed
With mine far spreading toward the Roman way?
They answered: &mdash; Priest, now hearken what they said:
Aye, willing, but there was a mulct to pay
To Mother Saint-Bees, o'er the deep Solway."
"Now, by the holy Peter," said the Priest,
"The wooing was done deftly:  no delay
Shall happen till I make twain one at least;
So now unto the altar &mdash; then unto the feast."

Mirth had commenced, so had the feast; the glow
Of torches and of tapers threw a stain
Upon the goblets in their red o'erflow,
By pledging hands high lifted up to drain:
The minstrel, too, was ready with his strain,
And maidens with their feet.  Into the hall
The Priest came:  "Children, it is not in vain
Ye drink and dance; for mortal men are all
Weighed in the balance; words God wrote on Babel's wall.

"One little hour &mdash; one little hour, and ye
Are gone for ever, like the summer flowers:
Gone like the sunshine of the maiden's ee;
Gone like the song which gladdened all the bowers:
So dance and sing &mdash; the present hour is ours.
Now, what readest thou, fair bride, in that dark sea,
Thou lookest so serious on it:  all the shores,
From Allan water round to bright Saint-Bee
Are in thick darkness wrapt:  what, lady, dost thou see?"

"I see nought, Father:  I but turn my face
To my fair country &mdash; to green Elvar side&mdash;
To that sweet land where my abiding-place
Has been &mdash; and shall be."  "Daughter, do not hide
Such feelings; they are human nature's pride."
She heard no more:  a sudden burst of levin
Showed her the Solway flashing far and wide,
And a small shallop anchoring in the haven,
Beside the castle wall.  She held her hands to heaven,

And said, "God help the righteous &mdash; smite the bad!"
"Daughter, in this meek frame of mind, 'twere meet,
That thou should'st to the chapel-altar:  glad
The church will be espousals such to greet,
Beauty to Bravery &mdash; to the Strong the Sweet."
"Father," she said, "lead on; to lady's bower
I never went with half such willing feet:
There is a saye &mdash; high Elvar house shall tower,
When its last child is won even in the witching hour."

"Come, then, to church," the Abbot said, "fair child."
"Sir Monk," the bridegroom cried, "this castle hall
Shall be my church:  the chapel has been soiled
By Luther's vermin:  there his blind worms crawl,
And leave their slime upon the blessed wall;
So now, good Father, wed us where we stand."
"Sir Knight, we may not disobey the call
Of Mother Church; nay, never touch thy brand,
I stand like Skiddaw fell, or Solway's stubborn strand."

Hugh Lydal came and said, "A holy man,
A hermit or a strolling monk, is come,
And asks for shelter till the morrow's dawn."
"Now in good time," Sir Ralph said, "give him room.
Father," he said, "art thou from holy Rome,
Or from the famed Lorett?  if so, decide,
And what thou sayest shall be with me a doom:
Here where I stand I wish to wed my bride;
This holy Abbot says, at the high altar side."

"Stay," said the Abbot, "Wanderer, who art thou
That comest in palmer's weeds with locks unshorn:
A morion better would befit thy brow;
And for those lips a warrior's battle horn.
Thou art no godly priest, I dare be sworn."
"No priest, but godly," thus the Palmer said,
"For I have been where our true Lord was born,
In Judah's land:  in Heshbon's holy glade
I've knelt, and silent walked 'neath Carmel's sacred shade.

I am, Sir Priest, of Scotland, and I've drunk
Of woes as full as warriors e'er drank wine;
One that I loved was in the waters sunk,
And I went mad:  Sir Knight, this tale of mine
Is not for bridal speed.  On Solway brine
To night a whirlwind found me and my bark;
That I was saved I hold it as a sign
God yet has work for me."  And low'ring dark,
He looked around, marked all, yet seemed no one to mark.

"Now to your question.  'Tis unholy deemed
To wed save in some sacred place, and where
Is ought so sacred in the world esteemed
As is the holy church?  Fearest thou the air,
And that this maiden with the forehead fair
Will falter:  ah!  Sir Knight, ye little know
How willingly young maidens wander there."
"Peace, peace," cried Ralph Latoun, "ho!  torches, ho!
And ope the chapel doors.  Sweet lady, wilt thou go?"

Young Sybil rose, and standing 'midst the hall,
Shook back her wandering curls, and mournful said,
"I speak less to your lord, than to you all,
Here I, a captive, from my home conveyed,
Perforce; by force, in bridal gear arrayed,
By force ta'en to the altar, and by force
Wedded to one I cannot love, and made
A world's wonder.  Have ye no remorse,
And fear ye not the Lord.  Oh, many a blackened corse

"This deed of thine shall make."  "Nay, daughter, nay,"
The Abbot said, "be soothed; ah, marvellous sweet
Will this be to thee ere the break of day."
Just then came torches flashing 'mongst their feet;
The gates flew wide; they heard the big waves beat,
As down they went, for 'neath the castle rock
The chapel stood.  The timbrels waked and meet
The bridal time the culverines loudly spoke&mdash;
A levin flash said twelve by the high castle clock.

Forth to the chapel altar now they pass;
Bride maids all in a smile and titter go;
Next them the bride, her brow, as in a glass,
Showed much of anguish and a heart in wo.
By her the bridegroom, with his sable brow,
And weapon at his side; men said that he
Looked wild, and aye his glance went to and fro.
Hugh Lydal walked behind, and two or three
Of his staunch comrades came, all jesting, frank, and free.

The Abbot's hands are on the holy book,
The bridegroom's on the bride's; but who is he
That comes, nor comes alone?  calm is his look:
'Tis Eustace Graeme, and he says smilinglie,
"Sir Knight, true love is as the sunshine free&mdash;
So, Sybil, come."  Sir Ralph Latoun her hand
Drops, and his sharp sword plucks out suddenlie:
"Ho!  stay her Lydal &mdash; I'll stay him."  Each brand
Was in that moment quenched, and darkness ruled the land.

Lydal had stayed her, but a stalwart grasp
His shoulder got; a low voice in his ear
Said, "Frozen serpent &mdash; viper &mdash; poisonous asp:"
And as each word was said a weapon clear
Was thrust and thrust.  Latoun cried, "Comrades, here&mdash;
Here with your swords; there's traitors in the church."
Even as he shouted, helm and sword and spear
Came hurrying on:  right through the castle porch
Rushed many a wondering face and many a flaming torch.

Down from the church unto the shallop, see,
As flies the dove when hawks are in the air,
Flies Sybil &mdash; Eustace follows, turns, and he
Strikes as he turns, and guards her here and there.
"Spread high the sail, pluck up the anchor, fair
The wind blows o'er to Elvar; wondrous good
Is God:  and see, of all rare things most rare,
Here's my sweet Sybil.  Now by book and rood,
Glad is the sea to bear such beauty o'er its flood."

Ere good Miles Graeme bore Sybil through the flood,
And set her on the deck, there came a cry
Such as the famished vulture gives for food,
Ere lambs are yeaned, and he is in the sky.
Back foot by foot, for no one thinks to fly,
Young Eustace with his comrades gain the strand.
Aloud the Palmer cries, "My gallant boy,
Thy bride is won:"  and saying so, his brand
Struck down the foremost man, the boldest of the band.

"She is not won yet, churles," cried Ralph Latoun,
And down into the combat fierce he swept,
As grim death comes when he has much unmown,
And here his harvest seemed but half way reapt.
Stroke follows stroke, and blow on blow is heapt;
Some drop, some bleed, yet still the field make good,
And gain it:  last of all young Eustace leapt
Into the barge, and all unskaithed he stood,
And cried, "Now, my love now, thou'rt free as Solway flood."

"She's won, she's won!"  a score of tongues replied;
"She's won, she's won!"  and at the gladsome sound,
Against the surge the shallop laid her side,
And started as the deer before the hound.
Down in the surge Latoun came with a bound&mdash;
"Return, base churl, and fight me, else I'll chase
Thee far as Scotland owns an inch of ground;
Return, or else even in thy dwelling place,
I'll beat thee with a rod before thy mother's face."

Eustace said, "mother!"  and straight on him gushed
Remembrance of her wrongs:  his sword he drew,
And made the flood flash o'er him as he rushed
Back to the shore; ere well his rival knew
He stood before him.  "Death between us two
Holds up his glass, and shakes his latest sand."
The shallop back into the haven flew&mdash;
Young Eustace stood alone; he sheathed his brand,
Leaped in &mdash; pushed off &mdash; a moan was heard along the strand.

A moan arose along the strand, &mdash; lo!  look,
Strong help is come when help is no avail;
The life's-blood's gushing from him like a brook;
He digs the sand with each convulsive nail,
And o'er him there is heard a woman's wail:
Around him comrades hang the mournful face&mdash;
"Sir Ralph Latoun, last lord of Allondale,
Lies smitten down, even in his pride of place.
Farewell, thou sternest chief of a most venturous race."

Then like a bird the dark waves breasting free,
Fast flew the shallop; as it flew, the cloud
At once was lifted up from land and sea;
The stars shone out, and glistened on each shroud;
Lone Criffel shewed her snowy forehead proud
On Siddick hills, and Siddick's lonely stream,
The sheep and star-light lay &mdash; amid the crowd
Of her deliverers, there, as in a dream,
Sat Sybil.  Now the moon 'gan on the cliffs to gleam

And showed old Elvar wood, and Elvar tower,
Not as when red with blood, and rent with fire,
It stood, what time Sir Ralph Latoun did pour
His unavailing wrath and deadly ire.
How different now!  the walls have risen higher;
The turrets darkly frown and look on high;
A flag is fluttering from the topmost spire;
Below, the mounted culverins ready lie,
And warders man the walls.  Long while his eager eye

The Pilgrim bent on Elvar; far and near
He looked &mdash; on Siddick hill, and wood, and sea,&mdash;
And then said, "Eustace &mdash; gallant youth; I ne'er
Can pay thee back the good deed done to me.
We part not here, &mdash; long from my own countree
Though I have wandered, still I'll find the power
To do some deed of gentleness to thee,
And give, perchance, thy bride a bridal dower."
Even as he spoke, the gates were ope'd of Elvar tower.

And forth a hoary warder came, and said,
"The Lady Sybil Lesley bids me say,
That fame already hath to her conveyed
The brave deeds wrought in distant Allonbay;
Of England's knights the flower is wede away.
So come, refresh thee in her dwelling place,
Thou with thy bride and brethren &mdash; say not nay,
She means thee and thy comrades meikle grace.
So come, that she may greet thee even face to face."

They went &mdash; all went:  fair Sybil glanced aside
On Eustace, but his look was fixed and calm.
She glanced &mdash; men say there was a flush of pride
Came o'er her brow, as through the lanes of palm
She walked; 'twas to her fluttered spirit balm
To walk in freedom in her native groves.
'Twas where she oft had heard the evening psalm,
And minstrelsy which maidens' bosoms moves
With scenes of tender joy; proud knights, and ladies' loves.

Fair Elvar tower stood on a swelling brae,
A grove, a holly garland wreathed it round:
Swans swam within the moat, and upward lay
A thousand deer in groupes upon the ground.
"Such beauteous place on earth is nowhere found,"
The warder said, and straightway through the gate
He led them:  high o'erhead the archway frowned;
Next to a hall they passed; a hall of state,
Where warriors' statues old, all ranked in order sate.

All ranked in order sate, while on the wall,
Of Elvar's ancient lords a long array
Were pictured nigh to breathing:  stern and tall,
Bearded, and plumed, and hawk in hand stood they.
Some in the flush of youth, &mdash; some worn and grey.
There sat a lady painted nigh a river,
And at her feet a suppliant warrior lay,
Love's sweet warm breath seemed her ripe lips to sever:
She gazed on him and seemed to bid him live for ever.

Eustace had seen, he thought, her face before,
And as he mused what lady it might be,
The sweating sewers with meat and drink good store
The table filled.  "Much need of food have ye;
Perils on shore, and tempests on the sea,
Ye have endured."  Then came a snooded maid,
Who turned to Sybil, "Maiden, come with me
To Lady Lesley."  "Friends," the Pilgrim said,
"Eat, drink and welcome:  here none may make us afraid."

Then stretching forth his shrunk hands o'er the food,
He ate as eats the wolf, though doubt and gloom
Seemed in his sun-scorched brow to stir and brood.
High o'er his head waved many a victor plume,
And weapon that in Saxon ranks made room:
He ate, then filled a cup:  "Fair sir, thy name?
And art thou churle's blood?"  "Amongst the broom
I watch my flocks, proud Pilgrim, and I claim
This good man for my sire; men call me Eustace Graeme."

"A shepherd churle!  Yet what a ready hand,
And what prompt judgment!"  "Pilgrim, I have told
My name and lineage, who art thou?  A brand
Becomes thee more than doth the cross; for bold
Thy bearing is."  The Pilgrim answered cold,
"My name's a riddle."  &mdash; As he spoke, asunder
The gallery doors were at a signal rolled,
The trumpets told, the culverins said in thunder,
Young Sybil Lesley comes, wide Scotland's fairest wonder.

She came: &mdash; a veil descending from her brow,
Unto her kirtle's golden hem, concealed
Her beauty nought, &mdash; for through it all the glow
Of cheek and bosom were alike revealed;
She seemed a lily up in crystal sealed.
Even as she came, aback her veil she cast,
And cried out "Eustace!"  Drunk with love she reeled
Into his arms, and tears came flowing fast.
He clasped her, how he clasped!  as if he'd clasp his last.

"Welcome," she said, "sweet minstrel, to thy hame,
And to the bosom of thine own true love.
Long, long I strove 'tween love and maiden shame,&mdash;
But faithfulness will ever strongest prove.
Stern Ralph Latoun came here and fiercely strove
To win me:  straight to thy romantic vale
I fled:  the story will some poet move&mdash;
In other name I told my own true tale.
A pleasant bond-time I had in Dalgonar dale."

"Oh, Lady!"  thus said Eustace, with a tone
Most exquisitely mournful &mdash; "What hast thou
In thy supreme affection to me done?
Thou art my love with brightness on thy brow,
And numbered with the loftiest here below;
Whilst I, thy peasant lord, must be the scorn
Of men.  Ah, Sybil, my soul's striken through.
The noble wife &mdash; the husband meanly born,
Will be a household jest from eve to dewy morn."

"No, no, my love, &mdash; no, no, my Eustace, no,&mdash;
Our marriage will read rank a lesson stern:
'Tis genius and true worth I wed, and who
Shall say I wed not nobly:  men shall learn
From Eustace and his Sybil, to discern
'Tween God's own nobles and those soulless clods
Whom kings exalt from their corrupted kerne,
And set the wooden idols up as gods;&mdash;
If I read heaven aright, much good our love forebodes."

"No, it bodes evil, and behold 'tis come!"
Replied the Palmer with a kindling look.
"Thou art my daughter:  Elvar's lord's come home!"
The table as he spoke he fiercely strook,
And in each hand the lovers 'twain he took,
And thrust them wide asunder.  "So I sever
Thou and that churle:  now by God's holy book
I vow &mdash; as water drunk from Siddick river
Returns no more, I thus part him and thee for ever."

"The water drunk may come no more, but I
Return again," said Eustace:  "know, proud lord,
We have made vows, those vows are gone on high,
And we are one.  'Tis no menacing word,
And haughty look, no, nor the sharpened sword,
Shall sever me from Sybil.  Threat not me
With prison, wheel, axe, claymore, or with cord;
Love laughs at them, as I laugh, lord, at thee."
Fair Sybil with a shriek clasped her fierce father's knee.

"Father, oh father, thou didst leave thy child,
Alone in this wide world, and evil men
With language shameless, and with purpose wild,
Came round thy orphan.  Lord of Elvar, then
Who was to guard or counsel her?  or when
That fierce dread knight whom thou sawest done to die,
Desired to lay thy deer in his wolf's den,
Who came to succour me?  Thy daughter, I
Shall keep my vow as sure as yon sun shines on high."

And saying so she stood.  Her kindled brow
Glowed like a warrior's when the trumpet's pealing;
All other thoughts are banished from her now,
Save Love that, like a flooded river reeling
From bank to bank, o'erflows all meaner feeling.
"Now, mark me, Sybil," and he touched his sword&mdash;
"Go with thy lover to his shepherd shealing;
Go watch thy sheep, and strain the milkwhite curd,
But never churle's son shall be of Elvar lord."

"John Lesley, Lord of Elvar," Eustace said,
I am the offspring of an humble race,
Whose blazoned banner is the shepherd's plaid,
A sheal &mdash; a cottage, their chief dwelling-place;
But were this Holyrood, there, face to face,
To Scotland's haughtiest nobles I would say,
Thy daughter's love is but free Nature's grace;
And were such vindication needful, lay
My lance in rest 'gainst him who dared to say me nay."

A while on both Miles Graeme looked on and smiled,
Then said to Sybil, "Is it wise to brave
Thy father thus:  thou art his only child:
My son's a peasant; noble blood doth crave
Blood like itself, and Sybil might enslave
Even Scotland's mightiest."  She sharp answer made:
"Love comes and goes not like the Solway wave;
Though thou forsakest me, Sir, I'm undismayed
And firm in my resolve, come sunshine or come shade."

"Thou art a princely lass, and for thy sake,
And that alone, I cast aside disguise;
John Lesley, Lord of Elvar, now betake
Thee to thy sword; here stands before thine eyes
No churle, but one long reckoned wight and wise;
Till, warring with thee, rank he lost and land:
Such was the regent's will &mdash; but in me dies
Hereditary hate; the shepherd's wand
With me is worthier far than is the lordly brand."

Even as he spoke did the Lord Elvar give
His sword unto the sheath; he scarcely tarries
Till speech is done:  "Now, as I hope to live
Here and hereafter."  His stern colour varies:
"What!  my old chivalrous foe, the good lord Herries!
Not know thee, man!  with such good cause to mind
Thy heart and sword!  Now, by the three blest Maries!
That voice, that look!  I'm dull as well as blind:
Our children's faithful loves!  Now, God in this is kind.

"O God is good, and we are but as worms
That crawl upon the surface of his earth,
And put on airs, and prate of rank and forms,
And loftiness of blood, and noble birth;
Know with the angels man's poor pride makes mirth.
Come here, my Sybil; Eustace, thou, my son:
Each other love, and long by Solway firth
Be blest together, and your thoughts be one."
He blest them:  they were blest.  My rustic tale is done.

My song is ended:  may my country see
Order and beauty in my rude design:&mdash;
My song is ended; I have poured it free:
May they who read it deem its roughest line
Tastes of fresh nature like well flavoured wine.
My song is ended:  it was long to me
As light to morn &mdash; as morn to Solway brine,&mdash;
As showers to corn &mdash; as blossom to the bee;
And dearer since, dear Wife, 'twas pleasant unto thee.
