Ah me!  how arduous is the poet's task,
Who tunes to serious lays a simple lyre;
No Muse's feign'd assistance deigns to ask,
Nor warms his fancy in Apollo's fire!
Such task is mine:  No fabled Nine inspire
The song which Taste and Science bend to hear:
No laurel wreath my humble thoughts require;
My theme condemns each selfish hope and fear,
And bids me seek to please the all-attentive ear.

I cannot rove with Harold, wayward "Childe,"
To cull poetic flow'rs on classic ground;
Nor would I, with a strain so strangely wild,
Each gentle ear and pious heart confound.
Nor may I bid the Northern Harp resound,
Like Scotland's bard of love and chivalry,
Whom noble "dames and crested chiefs" surround,
To list his storied song "sublime and high,"
Of Valour's "dauntless deed and Beauty's matchless eye."

Not mine the aim a vacant mind t' amuse,
And please the idle with an idle lay:
Well might the wise and fair a song refuse,
Which would but cheat their precious hours away.
Truth is the Genius of our happy day,
To her my humble tribute let me bring,
In measure that bespeaks her sober sway,
The while a weak and trembling hand I fling
O'er Spenser's ancient lyre, with long resounding string.

Yet may fair Virtue's eulogist essay
To deck a heavenly theme with earthly flow'rs;
Nor does Religion aye forbid to stray
Through the soft shade of Fancy's blooming bow'rs,
Nor scorns the meed of scientific hours;
But guides the progress of a studious mind,
Gives to the noblest use our noblest pow'rs,
Cheers the rapt soul with pleasures most refin'd,
And leaves earth's fading scenes and tinsel toys behind.

Oh!  I have lov'd, in youth's fair vernal morn,
To spread Imagination's wildest wing,
The sober certainties of life to scorn,
And seek the vision'd realms that Poets sing&mdash;
Where Nature blushes in perennial Spring&mdash;
Where streams of earthly joy exhaustless rise&mdash;
Where youth and beauty tread the choral ring,
And shout their raptures to the cloudless skies,
While ev'ry jovial hour on downy pinion flies.

But ah!  those fairy scenes at once have fled,
Since stern Experience waved her iron wand,
Broke the soft slumbers of my vision'd head,
And bade me here of perfect bliss despond.
And oft have I the painful lesson conn'd,
When disappointment mock'd my roving heart,
Still of its own delusions weakly fond,
And from forbidden pleasure loath to part,
Though shrinking oft beneath correction's deepest smart.

And is there nought in mortal life (I cried)
Can soothe the sorrows of this lab'ring breast&mdash;
No kind recess, where baffled Hope may hide,
And weary nature lull her woes to rest?
Oh!  grant me, pitying Heav'n, this last request,&mdash;
Since I must every loftier wish resign&mdash;
Be my few days with peace and friendship blessed;
Nor will I at my humble lot repine,
Though neither wealth, nor fame, nor luxury be mine.

O!  give me yet, in some recluse abode,
Encircled with a faithful few, to dwell,
Where power cannot oppress, nor care corrode,
Nor venom'd tongues the tale of slander tell&mdash;
Or bear me to some solitary cell,
Beyond the reach of ev'ry human eye;
And let me bid a long, a last farewell,
To each alluring object 'neath the sky,
And there in peace await my hour in peace to die!

"Ah, vain desire!  (a still small voice replied)
No place, no circumstance can peace impart:
She scorns the mansion of unvanquish'd pride,
Sweet inmate of a pure and humble heart.
Take then thy station &mdash; act thy proper part&mdash;
A Saviour's mercy seek &mdash; his will perform.
His word has balm for sin's envenom'd smart,
His love diffus'd thy shudd'ring breast shall warm,
His pow'r provide a shelter from the gath'ring storm!"

O welcome hiding place!  O refuge sweet
For fainting pilgrims on this desert way!
Oh kind conductor of these wand'ring feet,
Through snares and darkness, to the realms of day!
Soon did the Sun of Righteousness display
His healing beams; each gloomy cloud dispel;
While on the parting mist, in colours gay,
Truth's cheering bow of precious promise fell,
And Mercy's silver voice soft whispered, All is well.

Ye devious paths, ye pois'nous sweets, adieu!
Quench'd be each sensual passion's blasting flame&mdash;
Quick let me join the lone and lowly few,
Who, counting all things loss for that dear Name
Which Angels rev'rence, part with wealth and fame,
And ease and pleasure, for a heav'nly prize;
Bear with meek smiles, the scandal and the shame,
On future glories fix their eager eyes,
And tread, with steady step, their pathway to the skies.

And is their journey joyless?  Ask those tears
Of melting penitence, that silent flow,
At thought of Him whose love dispell'd their fears,
And taught their breasts with gratitude to glow.
Oh!  'tis a taste of heav'nly bliss below,
Those pearly drops of pious grief to shed;
To pour the soul, in luxury of wo,
Before the eyes that wept &mdash; the feet that bled,
To call down blessings on the trembling sinner's head.

O happy hours to pure devotion giv'n,
When, on the wings of faith, their spirits rise,
To hold exalted intercourse with Heav'n,
And bow before the Monarch of the skies!
How fair, when earth's delusive vision flies,
Yon land of promise swells in distant view;
Where Love's full fount unfailing joy supplies,
Where Eden's bow'rs their forfeit sweets renew,
And all is pure and peaceful, all sincere and true!

Nor less the pious pleasures that attend
His daily walk of active usefulness,
Who, like his heav'nly Master, Man's best Friend,
Lives but to love, and loving, lives to bless.
Untaught each gen'rous impulse to suppress,
By worldly maxims, and by selfish fears.
A nobler aim his kindly deeds confess:
Heav'n's bounty with the poor he freely shares,
And soothes the widow's grief, and dries the orphan's tears.

Sweet is the musick of a grateful voice,
In whose soft accents grief and gladness blend;
Where pity bids a drooping heart rejoice,
And helpless mis'ry finds an unsought friend.
When days are dark, and gath'ring clouds impend,
Who would not ev'ry selfish wish forego,
To act as Heav'n's kind almoner, and send
Those comforts which the sad alone can know,
And calm the swelling breasts, and hush the voice of wo?

Poor are the pleasures of luxurious ease,
Of pamper'd appetite, or wealth or show:
The toys of earth one little hour may please,
Its blooming bow'rs some transient sweets bestow:
But soon the fading wreath aside we throw&mdash;
Soon the rich banquet palls upon the taste&mdash;
The jest grows stale &mdash; the spirits cease to flow&mdash;
From scene to scene we disappointed haste,
But find all barren still, a cold and dreary waste.

Oh!  ye who, sleepless, press your beds of down&mdash;
Who rise unfeasted from your sumptuous board,
And wonder at your lassitude, and frown
At scenes that once such pleasure could afford&mdash;
Now leave the paths thus fruitlessly explored;
From your past folly future wisdom gain&mdash;
Buy heav'nly friendships with your useless hoard&mdash;
Lend to the Lord &mdash; nor think his promise vain&mdash;
Exhaustless wealth and endless joy ye shall obtain.

Ye favour'd ones, who roam the shady groves
Of Academus with the great and wise,
Your high pursuits Religion well approves,
For Knowledge is the offspring of the skies&mdash;
Yet, while to scientific heights ye rise,
And still extending realms of light survey,
While Nature still to your admiring eyes
New works of pow'r and wisdom shall display,
And art and fancy bear your raptured souls away&mdash;

O!  yet beware of philosophick pride!
Frail reason's bold, advent'rous flight restrain:
Lest, having left her sole unerring guide,
She waste her strength in wand'rings wild and vain.
Respect your nature &mdash; your high rank maintain&mdash;
Let not the love of fame your mind enthral&mdash;
Think not enough a world's applause to gain&mdash;
For soon oblivion's deepest shade must fall
On all th' ephemeral glories of this earthly ball.

The scholar a useless fund of classic lore,
Shines but to dazzle with deceptive glare;
And, like the miser's watch'd and worship'd store,
Is told and treasur'd with a bootless care.
Science, as Virtue's handmaid, shines most fair;
The rich attainments of a lib'ral mind,
Serve but for higher duties to prepare;
Give nobler aims and feelings more refin'd,
And make the man a greater blessing to his kind.

Virtue alone is wisdom.  From the ways
Of fashionable folly to depart&mdash;
To render all their dues &mdash; To God, just praise&mdash;
To man, the helping hand and feeling heart&mdash;
This is true knowledge, this the sacred art,
For which the learn'd and rude alike must bend
Low at His feet, whose word can light impart,
Each errant thought correct, each fault amend,
Till taste and principle in every duty blend.

It is the Gospel's glory that it suits
The learn'd and ignorant, the great and small,
The Tree of Life has rich and various fruits,
And leaves of healing virtue, free for all;
And loud and earnest is Heav'n's gracious call;
And bounding youth and tott'ring age may come,
To catch the nectar'd clusters as they fall,
And taste of pleasures that survive the tomb,
Imparting health immortal, and unfading bloom.

Would'st thou be noble?  See from yonder throne,
Disrob'd of royal radiance, descend
The King of Kings &mdash; Jehovah's equal Son&mdash;
The Lord of Angels, and &mdash; the sinner's Friend!
Go learn of him &mdash; in filial meekness bend
Beneath thy heav'nly Father's high behest;
The arms of boundless charity extend&mdash;
Live for mankind, and be thine aim confest,
By lowliness to rise &mdash; in blessing to be blest.

Would'st thou be mighty?  Seek not in this field
Of groans and blood to triumph o'er the slain;
The weapons of a nobler warfare wield,
A more important victory to gain.
Subdue thy passions &mdash; the good fight maintain,
With each rebellious inmate of the soul:
Each turbulent and lofty thought restrain&mdash;
Preserve thine inward empire firm and whole,
And reign in bloodless majesty of self-control.

Wouldst thou be rich?  Delve not in Mammon's mine,
Nor grudge the golden fetters of his slave,
A gen'rous and a humble heart be thine,
And thou art wealthier than the ocean wave,
That hides what thousands died to gain and save;
Yet cold and cheerless holds the shining store,
The Merchant's spoiler and the seaman's grave!
Then be content &mdash; no needless gift implore&mdash;
To-day's supply is promised &mdash; Worlds could yield no more.

Seest thou yon lonely cottage in the grove&mdash;
With little garden neatly plan'd before&mdash;
Its roof, deep shaded by the elms above,
Moss-grown and deck'd with velvet verdure o'er?
Go, lift the willing latch &mdash; the scene explore&mdash;
Sweet peace, and love, and joy, thou there shalt find:
For there Religion dwells; whose sacred lore
Leaves the proud wisdom of the world behind,
And pours a heav'nly ray on every humble mind.

When the bright morning gilds the eastern skies,
Up springs the peasant from his calm repose:
Forth to his honest toil he cheerful hies,
And tastes the sweets of nature as he goes&mdash;
But first, of Sharon's fairest, sweetest Rose,
He breathes the fragrance, and pours forth the praise:
Looks to the source whence ev'ry blessing flows,
Ponders the page which heav'nly truth conveys,
And to its Author's hand commits his future ways.

Nor yet in solitude his prayers ascend:
His faithful partner and their blooming train,
The precious word with rev'rent minds attend,
The Heav'n-directed path of life to gain.
Their voices mingle in the grateful strain&mdash;
The lay of love and joy together sing,
To Him whose bounty clothes the smiling plain,
Who spreads the beauties of the blooming spring,
And tunes the warbling throats that make the vallies ring.

And are there those, can grasp with eager hand,
The various bounties of indulgent Heav'n,
Nor yet their hearts with gratitude expand,
To Him whose favors are so freely giv'n?
Why are thy not from all these beauties driv'n,
Where joyless hills of snow perennial rise,
Where barren plains, by frosts relentless riv'n,
Spread their pale horrors to the gloomy skies,
And Nature o'er her desolation ceaseless sighs?

Oh!  God is merciful.  His pitying mind,
With patience almost infinite, endures
The guilty stupor of the thankless hind,
And his, whom false philosophy allures
From the plain path which heav'nly peace insures,
To sceptic glooms and reason's clueless maze.
Still goodness proves them &mdash; mercy's voice conjures&mdash;
Insulted justice long its wrath delays,
And still the Book of Truth its precious light displays.

Who loves his country?  Let him bend the knee
Before that throne, whence ev'ry gift descends;
And, while he prays Columbia may be free,
And to Heav'n's kind and constant care commends
The glorious empire, that so fast extends,
Where late the beast and savage only trod&mdash;
O let him ask that Virtue's faithful friends
May spread her influence o'er their new abode,
And there erect the altar of their father's God!

Religion is the glory of our land;
The strength of Law, the guard of Liberty.
Who love her precepts will most firmly stand
For order, peace, and virtuous harmony.
Who love them not, deserve not to be free:
For vice unchain'd is man's severest foe&mdash;
Breathes discord, feuds and direful anarchy&mdash;
Aims at our dearest rights a deadly blow,
And whelms each patriot heart in deep and lasting wo.

Then let each freeman's honest suffrage raise
To posts of dignity and seats of pow'r,
The men who blush not at their Maker's praise,
Nor fear to keep devotion's sacred hour.
When foes assail and threat'ning tempests low'r,
Their prayers and counsels shall united raise,
Like Salem's wall and Zion's moveless tow'r,
To shield and bless the fav'rites of the skies,
While each impending storm in harmless murmurs dies.

Such was the man, whom yet we love to call
Our country's Father:  whose immortal name
Could once fair Freedom's fiercest foes appal,
And long shall swell the loudest note of fame.
And while Columbia's favor'd race shall tame
The soil his wisdom and his valor won,
Each grateful tongue his honor shall proclaim,
And every patriot father teach his son
To emulate the noble deeds of WASHINGTON.

Thus does Religion teach her sons to shine
In private duties, or affairs of state.
Who forms his temper by her laws divine,
Whate'er his station, shall be truly great.
Who loves to watch at Wisdom's temple gate,
Shall not implore her heav'nly aid in vain.
True wealth and honors on her vot'ries wait:
Honor that sland'rous breath shall never stain,
And wealth that mocks the miser's perishable gain.

Oh!  when shall Truth's kind influence pervade
The various grades and walks of social life;
To bless with peace retirement's deepest shade,
And hush the clam'rous voice of public strife!
When shall the crimes and mis'ries now so rife,
Yield to the Gospel's pure and peaceful sway;
And murd'rous Malice drop his bowl and knife,
And Envy's hissing locks be shorn away,
And lips profane and vile be taught to praise and pray!

When shall the nations cease, by art or arms
For wealth or power or glory to contend&mdash;
When shall war's trump suppress its loud alarms,
And man in every fellow find a friend&mdash;
And each to each his prompt assistance lend,
In mutual deeds of kindness and of skill;
While distant lands their various bounties blend,
While peaceful tribes each fruitful valley till,
And plenty's golden off'rings wave on ev'ry hill?

Such scenes shall open &mdash; the revolving skies
Roll on the glorious period, long foretold,
When brighter days on this dark world shall rise&mdash;
A second age (not fabulous) of gold.
Ye longing saints, your suppliant hands uphold;
Heav'n on your pray'rs e'en now propitious smiles;
With bright'ning promise Truth's fair leaves unfold,
And many a pious breast with rapture thrills,
While the Millenial dawn spreads o'er the eastern hills.

What solemn sounds my list'ning ear assail,
From where yon barque waits at the crowded strand,
And spreads her canvass to the passing gale,
And strains the cord that binds her to the land?&mdash;
Why doth the seaman leave that tight'ning band?&mdash;
What means the stillness of the attendant throng?&mdash;
What mean the falling tear &mdash; the waving hand?
And what's the burden of that melting song
That on the murm'ring billows softly floats along?

Those hands that from the deck so gently wave,
A silent answer from the strand obtain&mdash;
Those falling tears a heaving bosom lave
For friends those eyes shall ne'er behold again&mdash;
The seaman lets that tight'ning cord remain&mdash;
Th' attendant throng in solemn stillness stand,
While Christian Pilgrims hymn their parting strain,
Meet the last grasps of many a kindred hand,
And catch the last sweet echo of their native land.

From country, kindred, friends and home they go,
To distant shores long wrapp'd in error's night;
To wand'ring millions life's fair path to show,
And guide their footsteps to the world of light.
They go the battles of the Lord to fight,
Against the hosts of darkness close array'd:
Girt with his sword, and in his armor dight&mdash;
Of Righteousness the shining breast-plate made&mdash;
Faith the protecting shield, and Truth the conqu'ring blade.

Beneath their hand no vanquish'd foe shall bleed&mdash;
No smoking ruins their success proclaim&mdash;
They seek not by the warrior's ruthless deed,
A crimson record on the roll of fame.
They go, in great Immanuel's glorious name,
To rear the banner of the Cross and Dove;
From long revolt his subjects to reclaim,
And bid returning rebels sweetly prove
The pow'r of cleansing grace and all redeeming love!

Haste, Heralds, on your peaceful errand haste!
While pray'rs unceasing swell the fav'ring gale,
That wafts you safely o'er the wat'ry waste,
And songs of praise your certain vict'ry hail&mdash;
For yours is God's own cause, and must prevail&mdash;
His pow'r and truth that sacred cause defend:
Nor can that arm decay &mdash; that promise fail,
To which your humble efforts ye commend,
While Heav'n's best gift ye bear to earth's remotest end.

The reign of darkness hastens to its close&mdash;
God a holy, happy kingdom soon shall come!
E'en now the desert smiles, by Sharon's Rose
Perfum'd with fragrance, and bedeck'd with bloom.
Lo!  on th' expiring heathen's darksome tomb,
The Light of Life descends in cheering rays:
His eyes, long wrapp'd in error's deepest gloom,
On heav'nly glories fix their parting gaze,
And his last falt'ring accents lisp a Saviour's praise!
