The world's tired captive, weary of the chain
That binds him, and in binding, frets and galls;
Condemn'd the dregs of sorrow's cup to drain,
Sick of a world that with mysterious thralls
Compels a hated life within it's walls;
Of all that charm'd that life, robb'd, dispossess'd&mdash;
For wings like thine, sweet bird, impatient calls,
And vainly hopes, that with thy pinions blest
He then might flee away, he then might be at rest.

But if the power invoked, propitious give
The boon desired, what would the gift avail?
In crowds, or solitude, if memory live,
Still will its venom'd stings the heart assail:
Still, still, corroding thought can never fail;
With life alone can perish man's despair.
The grave alone has cure for every ail:
There, "tho' the worm feed sweetly on him," there
The wretch's hope is fix'd, there center'd ev'ry pray'r.

For this, the patient man his pray'r preferr'd;
For this, with earnest vehemence he sought:
'Tis misery's cry &mdash; a cry that will be heard&mdash;
A bitterness of soul with grief distraught,
That will complain:  with eloquence unbought
That calls for rest, altho' it call in vain;
'Tis nature's groan, by sense of suffering taught;
The heart that's wounded, shall it not complain,
Tho' every ear be deaf as adders to the strain?

Let the world strike (the trampled worm will turn),
And I will deal its malice blow for blow:
Still unsubdued that spark of hate shall burn,
(Or rather with my age and strength shall grow,)
Struck by a rude collision with my foe.
My wounds are green and rankling; Time may heal
All other griefs, but Time can ne'er bestow
Oblivion here, until I cease to fell,
The hate I bear thee, World, I strive not to conceal.

Take my defiance, then, and know, that thou
And I can never henceforth live in peace.
I will not "pull my cap upon my brow,"
But give my feelings words, and thus release
Part of the burthen, ere the load increase:
And yet, there is one gentle creature, meet
To bid this wordy war a moment cease;
Thou, faithful ****, slumb'ring at my feet,
Deserv'st a kinder strain; and thus thy love I greet.

To ****
To thee, who once when hearts were tried,
When friends were cold and love estranged,
Wert seen still faithful at my side,
Thine eyes all fond, thy heart unchanged;

To thee, when mute was Flattery's voice,
And Fortune's summer things had flown;
Who made a falling friend thy choice,
Found at thy post &mdash; and found alone;

Devoted thus, in praise or blame,
In bane or bliss, in weal or woe;
True, when all else were false; the same,
When all look'd cold and strange below:

To thee, I give one grateful line;
The rest, thy fellow brutes condemn:
Their shame, they have no worth of th ine;
Thy boast, thou hast no part with them.

Yes, my poor dog, tho' man may sneer,
Thy truth this verse may celebrate.
Thou art the only thing that's dear&mdash;
The living form I do not &mdash; hate.

O!  for a portion of that bitter spleen,
Which throb'd in Timon's breast, and edg'd his tongue
With sharpest eloquence!  whose venom, keen,
And from the tainted source of hatred wrung,
Unsparingly commingling old and young,
Pour'd its deep curse on Athens and &mdash; yet no&mdash;
He whose high soul the world indeed hath stung;
May trust his wrongs; they surely will bestow
Its venom to the shaft, its vigour to the bow.

What boots it here in piteous strains to tell
What hopes aspiring mock'd my youthful view?
Enough!  such thoughts have heard their funeral knell,
And Hope hath whisper'd in a last adieu,
She dwelleth only with the happy few;
That Misery's pallet hears her voice no more.
There yet remains one passion to subdue&mdash;
Despair; whose frantic energies restore
The heart's expiring pulse with life unknown before.

Each form of wretchedness, each shape of woe,
Sorrow in each variety of name
That fiction paints, or real grief can know,
All have I felt, yet these could never tame
A spirit masterless, nor quench its flame.
No:  tho' ye trample on the bruised reed,
'Tis yet unbroken, tho' a blighted name
Be all my portion; tho' the heart may bleed,
Pierced with unnumber'd darts &mdash; yet bleeding I proceed.

Broad is the beaten road, the vulgar plod;
And should some daring spirit deviate,
Nor keep the quiet path his fathers  trod,
Grey heads will shade, and pious dotards prate;
If his thoughts soar beyond this mortal state;
His "airy notions" pass the low degree
By dunces mark'd; ah!  woeful is his fate;
Sage prophets tell of ruin soon to be,
And, prophet-like, assist the ruin they foresee.

Then must he bear each calumny and wrong
Malice can frame, or Folly's self devise;
Denounced as madmen, and proscrib'd his song
As Belial's &mdash; words of sophistry and lies.
Yet, genius ever will triumphant rise,
And leave the crowd below; and bold as true,
Its aspirations to its native skies,
No priestly cant shall check, no whining crew
Shall daunt, nor all the powers of Ignorance subdue.

From the dark catalogue of woes I start,
To which the child of Genius oft is heir:
The wounded spirit, and the broken heart,
Slow wasting misery, madness, and despair.
The wreath the Sons of Song are doom'd to wear,
Is often twined with the sharpest thorn;
And loftiest Bards, on earth have liv'd to bear
A weight of shame, of poverty, and scorn;
Lived, but to curse the hour that every they were born.

Nor has the plenitude of fame, bestow'd
Peace to the mind, altho' the living head
Be crown'd with wreathes unfading:  ye may load
The name with flattery &mdash; incense ye may shed&mdash;
But what avail they, if the heart be dead?
Like pious rites that Love and Friendship pay,
Ah, what avail the fragrant flow'rs they spread?
Lift but the earth, and tear the shroud away,
And lo!  the greedy worms that riot on their prey!

Oh, rightly did they judge, the wise of Thrace;
And well did they apply the truth severe,
Who mourn'd the birth, and hail'd the finished race,
Wept o'er the cradle, danc'd around the bier.
More polish'd we, reverse the smile and tear:
Then laugh ye giddy, and smile on ye gay;
Yours is the maniac's moody laugh, I fear:
Yet still laugh on in any guise ye may;
To-morrow is not yours, then freely laugh to-day.

There is a song that cometh not of mirth,
A strain in which the feelings have no part;
A smile, that e'en to sadness owes its birth,
And a wild laugh that is not of the heart.
Such in the festive scene with practis'd art,
The strain I've utter'd, and the smile I wore;
And when the laugh was loudest, has the dart
Of mimicry struck deep &mdash; aye!  even to the core&mdash;
And not a sigh betray'd the conflict which I bore.

There is a mental agony, intense,
Which from one dark and settled feeling springs,
A dread of future, not a present sense
Of evil; this much torment never brings
As do these horrible imaginings,
Pois'ning all enjoyment; trebly woe
To hearts surrender'd to these scorpion stings.
Philosophy may preach, yet only show
How vain is hope for such, how murder'd peace, below.

Full to satiety, if such confess,
This world a vale of misery and woe,
If he can deem his life a wilderness
Who chose the "broad way and the green" below,
What terms are left for sorrow to bestow?
Yet might this path be trodden, if to save
A fainting Brother were our aim &mdash; not so&mdash;
The weak are crush'd, the fallen serve to pave
They way, all finding the same resting place, the grave.

Beyond, are all those pageantries of flame
Which priests have kindled, or that poets feign;
The place (that childhood shudders but to name)
Of endless torment and enduring pain.
Why this parade?  knock at my heart, and gain
A fiercer Hell than this &mdash; Sin's dark abode
Is there, can fabled Tartarus contain
More worms that gnaw, more cankers that corrode,
More furies that pursue with fire, and lash, and goad?

There is a home, a Heaven, of which we read,
Hope of the weary!  haven of the good!
Oh, this to gain were happiness indeed;
For sorrow comes not here, nor cares intrude.
Or is it fable all?  in happier mood
Has some pure fancy sketch'd a fairy plan?
For once, with earth's polluting stains imbued,
Has aught gain'd entrance that was ever man,
To such bright peaceful scenes?  who ever could, or can?

Ye white stol'd saints, ye pure angelic choir,
On golden harps who pour your minstrelsy,
How shall corrupt mortality aspire
To join your spotless thousands?  who shall free
Man's tainted soul, for such society?
What tho' yon Heaven nor fable is, nor dream,
Yet are its chrystal portals shut to thee:
Thou child of darkness, couldst thou bear the stream
Of such bright effluence?  no &mdash; not a single beam.

When on his mighty march Time joyous mov'd,
From chaos, order &mdash; light from darkness sprang;
From Heaven its own stupendous work approv'd;
When the glad morning stars together sang,
And with a shout of joy creation rang;
In Eden's bower, a Paradise y'clept&mdash;
Man, innocent and happy, knew no pang;
Angels around him holy vigils kept,
And cherubim were there, who watch'd him as he slept.

Degraded, lost, and fallen, see him now,
Beneath the hand of vengeance doom'd to bleed;
The thankless soil subued with burning brow,
Curs'd, and in sorrow till'd his bitter meed:
We to this heritage of woe succeed,
Heirs of his shame, and guilty by descent:
Feel the primeval curse to all decreed,
The day in toil, the night in sorrow spent,
Partake his fall from Heaven, and share his banishment.

Yet will this living clod, this breathing clay,
This dust, still calm its kindred with the skies;
With lips, that flatter only to betray;
A head of mischief and a tongue of lies;
A look of pity beaming from his eyes,
To charm the victim for his wrath design'd;
Feet, that are swift th' unwary to surprise,
Hands with a brother's blood incarnadin'd;
Can he aspire to Heaven? &mdash; and such are all Mankind!

Where'er this foul destroyer's foot has trod,
Have we not seen the fiends around him move,
Himself described the image of that God,
Mercy whose essence is, whose spirit love?
Dark tribes of Africa!  ye well can prove
How true this likeness; yet the piercing groans
Of ye, and of your little ones, each grove
Re-echoes; yes, his deeds the "very stones
Shall prate of;" his, whom outrag'd Heav'n disowns!

Know ye one claim of brotherhood, a chain
Of sympathy, that man to man can bind&mdash;
Still bearing on his brow, the mark of Cain,
The impress of hostility to kind?
And still his power is ever us'd to grind
The wretch beneath him, trampling on the low;
His malice prompt, his cruelty refin'd,
He makes, where'er he cannot find, a foe;
His vengeance, swift and sure, and his forgiveness slow.

A smiling group around a Father press;
An infant climb a happy Mother's knee;
The tear at parting, and the fond caress
Of meeting friends, some will delighted see;
But doubly hateful is such sight to me.&mdash;
In every brow, deceit and guile I trace;
Sorrow and shame in every loath'd degree
Shall soon succeed; and every smiling face
Bears the fix'd traits of guilt, of misery, and disgrace.

And shame upon the day, for aye accurs'd,
That woman's tongue could e'er my soul beguile;
The false I trusted, and the faithless nurs'd,
Bask'd in the fatal sunshine of her wile,
And stak'd my all of peace upon her smile.
The tale is old, nor is there aught so brief,
So frail, as hopes we build on such a pile;
The flash, the dew, the bubble, and the leaf,
Less changing than her love &mdash; more lasting than her grief.

Lives there who has not in youth's brighter day,
On some "dear friend" his pure affection set?
And breathes there who (himself unchang'd) can say
The friend I lov'd in youth, I hold him yet?
Go, trusting fool!  'twill soothe thy vain regret,
To join the millions, plaining in thine ear,
Of Friendship's broken claims how vast the debt;
And find no bond of union men revere,
That mammon has not forg'd &mdash; all else is useless here.

And what is Virtue?  'tis the braggart's creed&mdash;
The vaunting of a heart unprov'd, untried:
Since Man first yielded (if aright we read)
His price is fix'd &mdash; Experience shall decide,
That tempt him in his weakness or his pride;
Attack with cunning, or with art cajole:
And he, the boaster, who all bribes defied,
Shall "lay the flattering unction to his soul,"
And barter every hope, for aught the fiend shall dole.

And for man's curse, Religion's wrath is pour'd:
Bigots for senseless creeds to Heav'n appeal&mdash;
Belief or Death &mdash; the koran or the sword&mdash;
And thus fanatic faith, misguided zeal,
And superstition, with their blood will seal
Some monstrous fraud, and hence the cross, the stake,
The Inquisition's fires, the assassin's steel;
Each form that persecution loves to take,
Arm'd with her thousand deaths, all for Salvation's sake.

Oh!  that the reptile man should have to chide
His brother worm for doctrines not his own!
On speculative points of faith decide,
And dogmatize on mysteries unknown.
It well might check this arrogance o'ergrown,
To know, that distant Newtons scarce descry
Him and his mighty world, perchance; or shown
At best, a luminous speck on which the eye
Of childhood oft is turn'd to soothe its willing cry.

And liberty, forsooth!  her banners rears,
Her aim and end &mdash; the enfranchisement of man:
Her course she tracks in blood and burning tears;
Behind her, chains, and conquest in her van!
Oh, lust of sway!  resist it ye who can,
Thro' all gradations passing &mdash; from the crown
To crosier, ruling synod and divan,
The ermin'd robe of law, the priestly gown;
And thus oppressing and oppress'd, life's hated draught goes down.

If yet thy pulse can throb, thy heart can bleed,
If thy young blood be yet uncak'd nor cold,
Go, search the chronicles of eld, and read
What kings and priests, what men have done for gold,
The dark stain'd page of History unfold;
And from the damning record thou shalt rise,
Fill'd with that hate a narrative that's told
In characters of blood too well supplies;
Oh!  thou wilt loath thy nature, and thyself despise.

Give me the wilds of savage life again;
Mine be the lion's range, the tiger's lair;
For ever let me fly the haunts of men:
Ere I those polish'd fetters deign to wear,
A world call'd civiliz'd, has forg'd, I tear
As withs the trammels that free thought would bind.
What my heart prompts, that let my tongue declare:
The soul's debasement, slavery of mind,
Avaunt!  bow ye who list; I will not be confin'd.

Ye mountain spirits, unembodied, pure,
Genii of Alps that now before me rise!
With you be my communion; and secure
From human eye, I pour without disguise
The rapturous thoughts that in my bosom rise.
Here is my passionate devotion paid;
The caged in cities here I more despise,
While, artificial forms that man has made,
Are here unknown, or here their emptiness display'd.

From every claim of country he is free,
Whose eye can rest on no one sacred spot.
What ties of kindred or of home has he
Who by nor heart beloved, loveth not?
There breathes not one, with whose congenial lot,
Whate'er it be, I now could link my own.
I am &mdash; myself, "remember'd, or forgot."
Nay, if all else that live were overthrown,
Destroy'd "at one fell swoop," I were not more alone.

And in this solitude of heart I roam,
Nor hail the dawning of a happier day;
Exil'd from all Hypocrisy calls home,
Where'er my destiny shall lead, I stray;
And find with him for wisdom fam'd, for aye,
That all is vanity beneath the sun:
And oft, like him, a spirit vex'd betray;
For darkness sigh ere day have well begun,
And pray in restlessness of soul that night were done.

Or eagle plum'd, on daring wing I soar,
And revel in the tumult of the sky;
Catch with unshrinking ear the thunder's roar,
And gaze on light'ning with unstartled eye&mdash;
I seem the powers of darkness to defy.
Be the last throe of dying Nature near,
Let earth's foundations shake, unmov'd am I:
Rage on, ye elements, I feel no fear:
For know, a stormier spirit than your own is here.

And it were bootless knowledge did I tell
The why, the where, arose this mortal hate
By what dark magic, by what sign, or spell,
I work, or by what influence create
Beings, that minister to this proud state;
Sublimed to alienation's highest tone,
That will not bind aught human with its fate;
That congregation with other worlds unknown,
And syllables a tongue, a language of its own.

For these are things unmeet for mortal eyes;
Sounds that may well a mortal ear appall;
And such may not prophane these mysteries&mdash;
Let darkness rest upon them, and let fall
The deepest veil on rites so mystical.
A grievous penalty he paid, who sought
Forbidden knowledge:  at the price of all
In this world dear, of future hope was brought,
With immaterial forms, this interchange of thought.

Nor shall this intercourse be lost in air;
For yet, the world its bitterness may feel,
The scenes of woe, the ravings of despair,
All that the human heart would most conceal.
What the dark chambers of my soul reveal,
May to the startled eye of man be given;
My spirits walk, stamp'd with the burning seal
That marks the reprobate of Earth and Heav'n&mdash;
Each bond that knits to kind, asunder torn and riv'n.

In gentler mood, I've gazed upon the moon,
Till thought was madness:  ever then would rise
The ghost of joys late known, and parted soon,
The absent, and the dead, whom most we prize,
Till feelings long abjured would fill these eyes.
I wept:  but what have I to do with tears?
Mine is a path, in rugged wilds that lies;
A pilgrimage which no companion cheers,
My life a desert waste, "where never flower appears."

The Earthquake's shock is sudden, and 'tis past;
The fiercest storms will spend themselves to rest;
Volcanic fires awhile in smoke are cast,
Their pow'rs suspended, and their rage supprest;
Such is the tempest of the human breast.
Fierce are the heart's convulsions, and subside,
To nurse the feelings which, again possest,
Explode; but I a lighter strain have tried
In vain &mdash; the torrent rolls, and will not be denied.

To ****
If not a smile which late I wore
Now lighten o'er this gloomy brow;
If all that pleas'd this heart before,
Have fail'd to soothe and please me now;

Unquestion'd, let me bear my lot:
Oh!  ask not how, oh know not why:
There burns a fire that's quenched not;
There gnaws a worm that cannot die:

An angry spirit's curse to bear;
Beneath the heart's reproach to bleed;
What is it?  living but to share
The agonies of death indeed!

But there are worlds, where souls releas'd,
Find endless rest, from sorrow free:
Yet how are earthly pangs increas'd,
To know, such worlds are clos'd to me!

"Oh!  who, with such conviction crost
Or life or reason could retain?&mdash;
There lives not, Heav'n, a wretch so lost,
Who seeks thee right, and seeks in vain."

Yes, such the plea the good may urge
Religion, thus prefer her pray'r:
But He, who rules the angry surge,
Alone can reason with despair.

Lives their the power, the art to teach,
The eye, to gaze with calmness on
A state beyond redemption's reach&mdash;
Anchor and stay for ever gone?

With steady nerve the heart may view
Its wither'd hopes, its peace o'erthrown;
The wreck of every joy it knew;&mdash;
If there the bolt shall fall &mdash; alone.

But oh!  too sure "the curse to kill,"
The anxious features to explore
Of one, whose gentle nature, still
Looks kindly but to wound the more!

A heart, that speaking peace to all,
Seems gay, yet slowly breaks the while:
The tears repress'd ere yet they fall;
The sigh subdued, the borrow'd smile&mdash;

The cooling drop he well may sue,
Who writhers in hourly fires like these:
Can fabled Hell, such pangs renew?
Its pains were bliss, its torments ease.

This is that "perilous stuff which weighs
Upon the heart," nor owns controul:
This is the worm that inly preys;
The curse, that's heavy on the soul.

Be hush'd, for ever hush'd, the plaintive strain;
Now let the coil of woe still harder press;
Burn with perpetual fires, my mad'ning brain,
And writhe my heart in constant bitterness.
Yet, half enamour'd of this proud distress,
One comfort yet, I borrow from despair:
I stand without compeer in wretchedness!
Nor is there one who draws this vital air&mdash;
Such madness who can sooth such sorrow who can share?

In tears, let gentler natures find relief:
Let softer souls the midnight couch bedew,
And weary Heav'n with prayers:  for me such grief
Avails not, and no pitying powers I sue.
"Pour on, I will endure," &mdash; and still renew
From such endurance, spirit unsubdued,
And doom'd to prove Promethean torments true,
Here, o'er its prey, the vulture Thought will brood;
Here gorge his "rav'ning beak" with undecaying food.

And 'tis my pride to suffer:  did I feel
This torment less, or could I once resign
This stern defiance, then the coward's steel,
And the cold quiet of the tomb were mine:
But as with hate no language can define,
Man's sympathy I loath, ne'er shall his tear
Disturb my ashes, nor his empty whine
Lament the suicide; and death tho' near&mdash;
He who with life contends, has never cause to fear.

The lonely shrub &mdash; tost to the blasted heath,
The ship, deserted on a stormy sea,
Verdure that mocks the ruin'd tow'rs beneath,
The dark and moonless sky, the wither'd tree,
May speak my state, and typify of me:
But these shall end, while I appear to bear
"A charmed life," which shall not cease to be
As wretched, as prolong'd; but when or where
This burthen I may cast, I neither know nor care.

The stone of Sisiphus, Ixion's wheel&mdash;
But no, such feelings may not speak aloud:
'Tis past, and silence has impress'd her seal.
No more th' unquiet Spirit to the crowd
Shall speak its restlessness:  close be the shroud,
And may the grave inviolate remain,
That hides a heart, in desolation proud:
Back to your charnel-house, ye spectre train!
Wait his behest, who soon may summon ye again.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Thus far had I pursued the daring theme,
With wild impiety and stubborn pride;
Nor light propitious broke the troubled dream;
The past, the future, each alike denied
All hope, all comfort; and I might have died
The death, that never can atonement find,
By Hell's delusions, spell-bound, chain'd, and tied,
Urg'd by despair, that nightmare of the mind:
But He, who knows our griefs, a better fate design'd.

For He hath spoken; He, the Holy One,
Whose word is stedfast, and whose promise sure;
In characters  of light, that all who run
May read display'd, the glorious words allure:
"Come unto me, ye guilty and impure,
With care o'erburthen'd and with sin opprest;
Here shall ye find your grief's effctual cure;
Here shall the weary soul have endless rest:"
Such is his gracious love, and such his high behest.

"Oh, ye afflicted, tempest toss'd," like me,
Who know no comfort and who find no rest;
By whom, afloat on life's dark shoreless sea,
Nor chart nor guide  nor anchor is possest;
Ye, who unaided, with wild waves contest,
Nor port, nor home, nor haven, have ye known,
Oh, might I point to ye, in gloom unblest,
The Hope, the Light, to me in mercy shown,
That ye may make this Hope, this heavenly Light, your own!

While ye who scoff at Heav'n's reveal'd decree,
Or ye who lightly deem of truths divine;
Still will ye scoff this humble page to see;
Still may ye lightly deem of hopes like mine:
Thou, child of misery, still mayst trust the line
That speaks "of day spring from on high," of blind
Restored; for thou mayst make redemption thine:
Thy broken heart thou yet in peace mayst bind;
Thy sorrows yet may end, thy woes deliverance find.

Consult the oracles of God, where Love
Invites thine ear, and sues thee to obey:
Here shall ye find, the "wisdom from above,"
The peace the world can never take away.
If earthly hopes and prospects  shall decay,
Afflictions try; tho' human friends may spurn,
This "Rock of Ages" then shall be thy stay;
Here the repentent sinner too may learn,
"Abundant pardon" waits the Prodigal's return.

Oh, Salem!  thou for whose impending fate
The tears of pity stream'd from eyes divine,
How may I recognise in thee, the state
Of cold indifference that once was mine?
O'er thee, the world's Redeemer wept the sign
Of thy destruction from thine eyes conceal'd;
"The things that to thy peace belong'd," 'twas thine
Not to discern; while to our eyes reveal'd,
God's purpose is unroll'd, his myst'ries are unseal'd.

And He, whose power from Horeb's wond'ring rock
Brought welling streams, as  gush'd each smitten side,
He, Israel's Shepherd, who his famish'd flock
In desert wastes with Angel's food supplied;
He, He alone, can melt that rock of pride,
The human heart; the hungry soul can feed;
And He alone, who sweeten'd Marah's tide,
Can change the spirit's bitterness; 'till freed
From murmuring thoughts, new light and life succeed.

That change is come; the storm hath spent its strength,
The whirlwind of the passions now is past:
The "still small voice" neglected erst, at length
Hath spoken comfort, and is heard at last.
The midnight darkness is retiring fast,
And Hope, the Morning Star, emerging now,
Smiles sweetly, tho' it show how fierce the blast
Escaped; Great Power!  before whose throne I bow,
Be thou my earliest theme, my latest homage Thou!
