Babes of my love, ah!  whither are ye fled!
Imparadis'd beyond these glowing skies,
By life's green tree, and glory's stream made glad,
Is sorrow hid for ever from your eyes?
Or do ye sometimes mark a parent's sighs,
And secret tears that unavailing flow?
And still within the bond of earthly ties,
Feel ye the pangs of sympathetic woe!
No, hope with seraph smile, sweet hope, she answers,

No; ye have reach'd those fields of dewy light,
Where sin hath ne'er effus'd its mortal stain,
Where joy on every face sits, beaming bright,
Unknown to care, beyond the reach of pain.
For you my groans, my tears are all in vain!
Ye hear, nor see them, and ye must not feel!
Or if ye did, sure sorrow's drizzling rain
All unawares, from your bright eyes would steal!
And even your glowing cup, the frost of woe congeal.

And thou, sweet spirit, who for twenty years,
Hadst all thy hopes, thy joys commis'd with mine,
Couldst thou behold my woes, my painful fears,
And sympathy's sweet exercise decline?
It cannot be; perfection all divine
Invests thee now angelical even here&mdash;
Thy virtues with seraphic splendour shine
Supremely bright, in glory's brightest sphere,
Where ceaseless joy divides and rules the eternal year.

O could I but this mortal life lay down,
This living death!  this load of sense and sin!
With you that I might share th' immortal crown!
And the bright palm of endless glory win!
Glad would I rest death's peaceful haven within,
Beyond the tempest's reach, th' appalling roar
Of breakers wild, where the turmoil, the din
That ceaseless sweeps along that wreck strewn shore,
The shouts of hope and fear, might never reach me more!

Ah hope, why didst thou my young steps beguile,
And round me with thy blossoms strew the ground?
And love, why didst thou too deceitful smile,
Nor show the cypress wreath thy brows that bound?
And why, amidst this solitude profound,
Reckless, and restless, memory wilt thou raise,
To fret afresh grief's never closing wound,
In all the hues that native truth displays,
By thy resistless power, these lost, ah!  lost, lost days.

Yet stay a moment, blissful vision stay!
These lovely looks how sweet, how void of guile!
Will ye again resume your noisy play,
While I for you pursue the paths of toil?
Ah!  no!  even as I gaze, entranc'd the while,
Shoots o'er your angel forms the swift decay,
Fades in your lustrous eyes the living smile,
The roses on your red lips melt away,
And there again ye lie, cold, cold and breathless clay.
