Awake my lyre at Friendship's sacred shrine!
And thou, my Anderson, the lay attend;
If one whose barren brow no wreathes entwine,
May call the sage whom Percy lov'd, "his Friend:"
If he who listen'd to hope's song may bend,
A feeble minstrel's wayward strain to hear:&mdash;
Yes!  well I know thou wilt attention lend;
Thou ever lov'st the song to virtue dear,
And every moral lay, has music to thine ear.

The air was balmy, and the breeze was still;
A lovely evening clos'd a fervid day;
And bright behind each distant western hill,
The skies reflected the departing ray,
When down her garden Stella bent her way;
Gladly I flew to seek her converse there,
And try her patience with an uncouth lay:
I pluck'd two Roses, in my hand to bear,&mdash;
One, like her cheek's fresh bloom &mdash; one, as her bosom fair!

I made the off'ring, and look'd round to gain
Some other tribute to her virtues due;
When the lov'd nymph exclaim'd in playful strain,
"Tell me what gave this crimson Rose its hue?
In the same soil their parent bushes grew;
Entwin'd their branches in the sunbeam hung;
Alike they shar'd the tempest, shower, and dew,
Declare from whence their different colours sprung;
Or when my judgment fails, restrain thy flippant tongue."

Smiling I turn'd, but backward shrunk amaz'd,
Pale terror seiz'd me, as mine eye survey'd,
The flood of bright effulgency, that blaz'd
On all the features of the lovely maid;
I felt a rich perfume the air pervade,
More sweet than ever came from Syrian strand;
I turn'd my sight towards a myrtle shade,
And saw an angel 'midst the foliage stand,
His shining wings half clos'd; &mdash; to heav'n he rais'd his hand.

A radiant crown of glory grac'd his head,&mdash;
The myrtle wav'd his form aerial through;
The frail mimosa bent not with his tread,
And still beneath the violet sipp'd the dew;
Prostrate on earth my trembling frame I threw;
But Stella with a smile &mdash; to guilt unknown&mdash;
Advancing, knelt, and paid the homage due;&mdash;
On her the angel deign'd to gaze alone,
And thus address'd the maid, in music's sweetest tone.

"Daughter of earth, behold thy guardian here!
Till now attendant on thy steps, unseen;
Thy paths, thy couch, I ever hover near,
And blest and happy has my labour been!
For seldom mortal through this earthly scene,
So pure and spotless, has an angel led;
Had Eve possess'd thy dread of sin, I ween,
Never from earth had angels mournful fled;
Eden had not been lost, &mdash; nor had that rose been red."

"When into being the Almighty Power
Spoke the dry land, the sea, the azure height,&mdash;
Array'd the earth with every herb and flower,&mdash;
Fill'd it with life, and rob'd it round with light,&mdash;
When Man rose perfect in his Maker's sight,
And round Heaven's gate the hosts seraphic press'd,
To view the new-born world with rapt delight,&mdash;
I flew to Eden, at the Lord's behest,
To guard, of all his works, the fairest and the best.

"While yet the morning stars together sung,
Our heav'nly legion gain'd the favour'd place,
As from the ground the waking Adam sprung,
And saw the Mother of the human race,
As yet a stranger to his pure embrace;&mdash;
Then first his eye an Angel's form espied,&mdash;
But most he lov'd the woman's charms to trace!
We saw him gaze &mdash; and, drawing to his side,
Gave to the first of men the fairest earthly bride.

"For ever happy are the hosts above:
But height'ned rapture beam'd in heavenly eyes
When first &mdash; to share the fellowship of love&mdash;
We saw on earth two lovely beings rise,
Pure as the holiest seraphs of the skies!
With them we hop'd for evermore to stay!
But, ah!  they list'ned to the Sire of lies&mdash;
Hapless they went from Wisdom's path astray,
And fell to every woe, to every want, a prey.

"Ah!  need I tell what Man has lost by sin,
When God's own likeness once his frame impress'd?
When all was joy without, and peace within,
And angels join'd the praise his tongue express'd?
Ah!  need I tell how Paradise was bless'd
When from its bow'rs th' eternal throne was seen?
When there Archangel came, a frequent guest,
To gaze delightful o'er the enchanting scene,
Not Heav'n itself more pure, more verdant, or serene!

"Then peerless Queen of all the beauteous Flow'rs,
The Rose, beside the Tree of Knowledge grew,
And oft we wand'red from th' immortal flow'rs,
To mark its stately stem and lovely hue,
Its tender buds unfolding to the view.
Ah!  never more shall flow'r so fair adorn
An earthly scene, or sip its tainted dew;
Through all the air its fragrant breath was borne,
Its leaves were spotless white, its stem without a thorn.

"But when with fatal hand the Woman took
The deathful fruit, and pain her guilt reveal'd,&mdash;
When sudden pangs the womb of Nature shook,
And first in Heav'n the awful thunder peal'd,
The sun was dark'ned, and the streams congeal'd,&mdash;
When trees and rocks were first by tempests riv'n,&mdash;
When all proclaim'd the doom of mortals seal'd,
When sighing Angels from the world were driv'n,
And woe began on earth, and grief was known in Heav'n:&mdash;

"Then, from the stem of which the fruit had grown,
Hot tears of blood gush'd on the rose amain;
Instant the whiteness of the flow'r was flown,
And still it bears the monitory stain."
Then ceas'd the gracious angel's dulcet strain;
I saw him take the red rose in his hand,
And breath upon its folds, nor breathe in vain,
For straight I mark'd its fragrant leaves expand,
It grew a snow-white flow'r, magnificently grand.

The vision fled; and darkness for awhile
Seem'd to succeed the glorious blaze of light;
Yet soon I saw my Stella with a smile,
Gaze on that rose, and grasp it with delight;
But at her touch it grew less purely white,
For o'er its leaves a blush like Stella's spread:&mdash;
I took the flow'r &mdash; its whiteness vanish'd quite,
It felt my guiltier hand, and hung its head,&mdash;
It lessen'd on my eye, and grew a crimson red.
