Queen Juno does an artful wile,
'Gainst Jupiter employ;
And hinders him, by aid of sleep,
From giving help to Troy.

The golden-throned queen of heaven beheld
The arduous conflict from the Olympian height;
Well pleased she saw, upon th' ensanguined field,
King Neptune toiling in the glorious fight:
But Jove she viewed not with the like delight
On wat'ry Ida's loftiest peak reclined;
The goddess, filled with hatred at his sight,
Stood pondering long what method she could find,
With artful wile to cheat th' Almighty Thunderer's mind.

Thus she resolves at length; to go to Ide,
Adorned with all the aiding powers of art;
There on the force of beauty she relied,
To win the Aegis-bearing monarch's heart
Then from the fight to turn his eyes apart,
Bending his lids with sleep's oblivious load;
Pleased with the thought she hastens to depart,
And speeds her steps to gain her own abode,
Built by her favourite son, Vulcan the artist God.

Then to her secret bower she bent her way,
None, save herself, its threshold ever passed;
Its doors she oped with her mysterious key,
Then entering, closed the splendid Portal fast:
O'er her fair form ambrosial streams she cast,
And oil, soft, fragrant, grateful to the sense;
Its powerful perfume from the chamber past
Through the whole dome; the gales conveyed it thence,
O'er all the heavens and earth new fragrance to dispense.

This labour done, she wreathes her heavenly hair,
On her immortal head in curls to twine;
Then round her casts the robe of beauty rare
Which Pallas wrought with many a rich design;
Its folds above bright golden clasps confine,
A circling zone close binds it at the waist,
A zone round which a hundred tassels shine,
A splendid fringe; then in her ears she placed
Her sparkling rings of gold, with three fair brilliants graced.

Next her fine form the mantle's fade surround,
New-woven, of splendour dazzling as the sun;
Her sandals last upon her feet she bound,
And then the pleasing cares of dress were done;
Straight from her bower to Venus has she gone,
Whom she addressed, withdrawing her apart;
"Say, daughter dear, shall my request be won?
Or wilt thou scorn my suit, enraged at heart
That I espouse the Greek, and thou the Trojan part?"

Fair Venus gave the queen a mild reply,
"Be thy request, imperial Juno, made,
Nor fear that Venus will the suit deny;
If I can grant thy bidding is obey'd."
With artful wile the heavenly sovereign said:
"Grant that I may those powerful charms display,
By which the sons of heaven and earth are swayed;
For I to earth's far limits bend my way,
Where Ocean, sire of Gods, and ancient Tethys sway.

"Me to their realms my mother Rhea sent,
Where I was bred beneath their fostering care;
Where Saturn, under earth and ocean pent,
Resigned to Jove the empire of the air.
I haste to reconcile the ancient pair,
Since angry quarrels have disturbed their peace;
No more the genial couch of love they share,
But if my voice should bid the contest cease,
How would their former love, for such kind care, increase."

"Could I refuse," the queen of smiles replied,
"The regal consort of the Almighty Sire?"
Then from her breast the cestus she untied,
In which was stored whate'er can love inspire;
In it was tender passion, warm desire,
Fond lovers' soft and amorous intercourse,
Th' endearing looks and accents that can fire
The soul with passionate love's resistless force,
'Gainst which the wisest find in wisdom no resource.

Into Saturnia's hand she gave the zone,
And said, "Conceal this cestus in thy breast&mdash;
Such is th' embroidered girdle's power, that none
Can e'er refuse to grant thee thy request."
Gladly the queen received it, and expressed
Her heartfelt pleasure by a gracious smile;
Quick to her bosom she the girdle pressed:&mdash;
Fair Venus sought the Thunderer's lordly pile,
And Juno left the skies to seek the Lemnian isle.

Above Pieria's realms the goddess speeds,
O'er fair Emathia, o'er the mountains steep
Of snowy Thrace, renowned for generous steeds;
Nor touched the earth.  She then descends to sweep,
From Atho's summit o'er the billowy deep;
Lemnos, where noble Thoas held command,
Quickly she gains, and meets the god of sleep;
Death's drowsy brother taking by the hand,
She urges thus her suit in accents soft and bland:&mdash;

"Sleep, whose dominion gods and men obey,
If to assist me thou did'st e'er incline,
Assist me now.  I grateful shall repay,
If Jove's bright eyes to slumber thou consign,
While in his fond embraces I recline.
A golden throne Vulcan my son shall mould,
In recompence for this, with art divine;
A throne and footstool of the purest gold,
Which will thy shapely feet at the gay feast uphold."

Sleep thus replied:  "Saturnia, queen supreme,
On any other should my influence fall
Among th' immortals, even upon the stream
Of ancient Ocean, parent of us all,
But not on Jove, save when he deigns to call.
At thy request I ventured once before
In my soft bonds his senses to enthral,
What time his conquering gallies from the shore
Of subjugated Troy the great Alcides bore.

"Around his soul my balmy influence cast
Lulled into sleep th' all-seeing eyes of Jove;
While, roused by thee, the terrors of the blast
Against his son in tempest fury strove,
And into populous Cos his vessels drove
Far from his friends &mdash; when Jove awaked again
He hurled th' immortals through the halls above;
Me chief he sought, to 'whelm me in the main,
Did not resistless Night his 'vengeful ire restrain.

"To her, who spreads her unsubdued control
O'er men and gods, I bent my hasty flight,
Jove then forgave, though angry in his soul,
For he revered the power of ancient Night.
Then canst thou me forgetful thus invite,
Rashly again the sovereign's wrath to dare?"
"Let not such idle thoughts thy soul affright,"
Juno replied, "Has Jupiter such care
For Ilium's haughty sons, as for his valorous heir.

"Can they to him their lofty lineage trace?
But come, I'll gift thee with a heavenly bride,
Pasithea, the fair, the youthful Grace,
The maid for whose bright charms thou long hast sighed."
She ceased, o'erjoyed the slumberous god replied,
"By Styx, inviolable river, swear;
Let one hand touch the ocean's level tide,
Let fruitful earth the other hand upbear,
That the dark gods below the solemn vow may hear.

"That they may witness, from the depths of space,
Where round old Saturn circled they remain,
That thou wilt gift me with that heavenly Grace
For whose bright charms I sigh so long in vain."
Fair Juno took the oath; in solemn strain
By name invoking from the realms below
The subtartarean gods, the Titan train,
That they the sacred covenant might know,
Thus was the contract made, and ratified the vow.

Then bent on speed, the Imbrian shore they leave,
And wrapt in darkness, for Mount Ida make;
Arrived at Lectos, springing from the wave,
Aloft in air their soaring course they take;
Beneath their feet the lofty forests shake,
As o'er their topmost boughs in haste they flew,
And where the branches formed a veil opaque,
Somnus remained, to shun the Thunderer's view,
Perched in a lofty fir, the tallest there that grew,

Changed to a mountain bird, concealed from all,
Close nestling in the shadowing boughs he lies,
(The shrill-toned bird which men Cymindis call,
Calchis the immortals name it in the skies),
Meanwhile to Gargarus Saturnia hies,
And there she met the cloud-compelling Jove:
He saw!  he loved!  such beauties met his eyes,
That all his soul love's warmest transports move,
Not warmer did he feel when first he learned to love.

Not even when first in her encircling arms,
In sweet, in stolen embrace, he reclined;
Seized with desire, enraptured with her charms,
He thus addressed the queen in accents kind
"Why didst thou leave thy car and steeds behind,
And thus on foot from far Olympus stray?"
Him Juno answered, with dissembling mind,
"To Earth's far limits I direct my way,
Where Ocean, sire of Gods, and ancient Tethys sway.

"In youth they reared me with parental care,
And now to them I hasten as a friend;
For filled with wrath, the couch no more they share,
And much I wish the angry strife to end;
At Ida's foot my steeds and car attend,
Seated on which o'er land and sea I speed;
But ere on this long tour my course I bend,
I ask thy leave; for quarrel it might breed,
Did I, unknown to thee, to Ocean's streams proceed."

Her answered thus the cloud compelling Jove:&mdash;
"That task, fair queen, another time perform;
But now devote the precious hours to love;
For ne'er did mortal on immortal form
My soul ere this with such fierce passion warm:
Not even Ixion's wife, from whose embrace
Pirithous came, had such a power to charm;&mdash;
Not even fair Danae, maid of matchless grace,
From whom brave Perseus sprung, noblest of human race!

"Not so I loved the royal maid of Tyre,
From whom just Rhadamanth and Minos came;
Nor did Alcmena's charms such love inspire,
Who bore Alcides, chief of glorious name;
Not so did Semele my soul inflame,
Who Bacchus, joyous god to mortals, bore;
Not so I loved Queen Ceres, fair-haired dame;
Nor Leto &mdash; no, nor even thyself before,
As now with fond desire transported I adore."

With artful words Queen Juno answered Jove,
"What dost thou thee, impatient king, propose?
Wouldst thou the sacred mysteries of love
On Ida's top to open view expose?
What would ensue if, ere from sleep we rose,
Some God should view me locked  in thy embrace,
And to the Immortal Powers the tale disclose?
Ne'er to thy dome could I my steps retrace,
Arising from thy couch, confounded in disgrace.

"But if to love thy wishes be disposed,
To thine own bower, by Vulcan built, repair;
His art the solid doors has firmly closed,
And there the genial bed of fare we'll share:"
"Nor God nor man," cried Jove, "(dismiss that care)
Shall view us here; for such a dusky cloud
Of gold shall darken the surrounding air,
Not even the sun shall pierce th' obscuring shroud,
Whose beams with brightest powers of splendour are endowed.

He spoke, and round the queen his arms he flung.
Beneath them Earth her freshest herbage threw;
For their soft couch the hyacinth up sprung,
The saffron flower, the lotus bathed in dew;
Upraised on this they lay concealed from view;
A golden cloud enveloped them around,
Distilling dew-drops of resplendent hue;
The monarch's arms his lovely spouse surround,
On Gargarus' lofty top, in love and slumber drowned.

Thus Jupiter with Juno here,
Forgot the fight below,
While Ajax, helped by Neptune's might,
Does Hector overthrow.
