Hence!  Fiend of Hell, who lov'st to brood
O'er sad misfortune's load of woe,
And snatch with haste, as sweetest food,
The tears that pain has forced to flow:
Nor here, thou stern, relentless Power,
Prepare to blast each sweetest flower,
That e'er adorns life's tedious way,
And blooms in gentle youth, and blushes while 'tis May.

Hence &mdash; for not here the guilty soul,
The conscience-stricken breast thou'lt find,
Whom Virtue's laws could ne'er control,
Whom Honour's pledge could never bind.
With such as these thou lov'st to dwell,
And give to life the pangs of hell;
While all around fell woes appear,
Sharp Pain, and moody Hate, and self-avoiding Fear.

To thee is sweet the lonely heart
That owns no tie of love on earth,
To ease it from the frequent smart
That lurks beneath the veil of mirth;
Upon whose drear and desert state,
Not one last ling'ring ray may wait,
Of all that once was precious here,
Of all that beauty gave, or happiness made dear.

To thee is sweet the maiden's breast
That Fury's boiling passions tear,
That knows no interval of rest
From bitterest pangs the frame can bear;
To thee is sweet the cold glazed eye
That glares in hideous vacancy;
To thee is sweet the gasping breath,
The blood-bespatter'd hand, and agony of Death.

Go, search thee out the blasted heath,
Where Madness walks his nightly round,
Where the owl shrieks, and deeds of death
Are whisper'd in the night-wind's sound.
Go, search thee out the darksome shed,
Where Crime conceals his guilty head,
Strikes o'er again the last death-blow,
And hears in every gale the footsteeps of a foe.

Go, search thee out the wretch accursed,
Who thinks no hope for him remains,
Whose spleen, by sin and malice nursed,
Writhing beneath disease's pains,
He vents alike 'gainst Man and God,
Careless of all that o'er him nod,
Of all the terrors Fear inspires,
Of adamantine chains that wait, and penal fires.

Father of Heav'n, Almighty Power!
Let not such pangs this heart infest;
Let not Despair's renvengeful hour
Afflict thy lowly suppliant's breast:
Give me the soul, that nobly great
Can meet unmoved the shock of fate;
Bear &mdash; firmly bear &mdash; Misfortune's blow;
And smile beneath the weight and bitterness of woe.

Grant me, though doom'd by thee to drain
Its bitterest dreg from Sorrow's bowl,
Grant me to smile beneath the pain
That racks, but not subdues, my soul.
Grant me the calm, though tortured mind,
Hopeless and friendless &mdash; yet resign'd;
And let me scorn the coward's cry,
Whom misery can move to "curse his God, and die."
