Who says that dreams are visionary things,
Nor thinks that life itself is but a dream;
Who spurns the awakened slumbering, which brings
Back to the soul its best-beloved theme:
Who of the sunshine of the past one gleam
Desires not; who would plod his weary way
'Mid cheerless, barren wilds, which memory's stream
May ne'er refresh; &mdash; oh, not for him this lay&mdash;
Another eye than his shall my poor toil repay.

There's magic in a dream of other times,
Though in its very nature not to last;
It heightens good deeds, and e'en softens crimes,
For all we do is hallowed when 'tis past.
There's sweetness when the frame, by sleep o'ercast,
Allows the soul to wander unconfin'd;
When from its waking sorrows fleeing fast,
In other climes an early friend to find,
And meet and mingle with a sympathizing mind.

Allan!  lost joys returned to me last night&mdash;
I liv'd anew o'er moments that are gone;
Again our happy heart enkindleth bright,&mdash;
Its rays upon united friendship shone,
There, in the corner you had made your own,&mdash;
In your own chair you sat; and counted o'er
The perils you had past in deserts lone;
Loves you had felt, but were to feel no more&mdash;
While ever and anon the gladsome laugh would pour.

Now from the melancholy Childe we take
Large draughts of inspirations, in his woe
We more than share, and in our bosoms make
A refuge for the wanderer; &mdash; now we glow
While on "the field of skulls" he stands to show
How vain man's mightiest efforts, and how vain
His pamper'd dreams of glory; this to know
As he instilled the knowledge, made us fain
Deem that huge worshipped phantom but a stain

On England's fair escutcheon; and that guilt&mdash;
Tyrannic guilt was master in that field
Where so much young and faintless blood was spilt,
And freedom's unbought champions taught to yield;
Thus was the exil'd bard's high power revealed&mdash;
Thus even English prejudices hushed;&mdash;
Before a mighty ruin thus we kneeled,
Where all that life had given &mdash; time had crushed,
But yet where Heaven's high tide of inspiration rushed.

Again the scene is changed, and then you sit,
Amid a crowd of beauties &mdash; all are young,
And ONE how passing fair! &mdash; around her flit
Shadows of loveliness, and from her tongue
Fall words of sweetness, which, like odours flung
Upon the ever patient amorous air,
O'ercome us with their gentle power; they've clung
For years to my fond memory, &mdash; 'spite of care
And long disquiets &mdash; they &mdash; they still are there!

It grieves me, Allan, to the very heart
To think how few the joys that we could steal
From Life's dark page; &mdash; yet we had got the start
Even of Time; and more than some may feel
(For constant joy doth human love congeal)
For friends who cling and cherish them for aye&mdash;
Our voiceless looks of sorrow did reveal&mdash;
When, doomed, alas, to wander far away,
We saw thee in thy bark o'er the wide waters stray.

And thou art gone &mdash; yet there remaineth still
They better part &mdash; thy soul is ever here;&mdash;
And let they fortune cast thee where it will,
That soul will never find a home so dear.
Oh, how that home fond recollections cheer
Of hours that by thy presence were made gay;&mdash;
Again in youthful bloom dost thou appear&mdash;
Again the vision melts in air away,
We 'wake &mdash; reality commands &mdash; and we obey.
