Owl-eyed to splendour, eagle-ey'd to spy
Spots on the disk of glory, Envy's eye
Admires no loveliness, beholds no worth;
Her soul is darkness, for her brain is earth:
No joy she knows, but in another's smart;
No God she worships, but her own black heart.
Hell dreads her coming, with erected hair,
For, envy absent, 'tis Elysium there!
No fiend, o'er fiery broth, with hollow eye,
Pines to behold his neighbour's brimstone pye;
No sparkless devil damns, in scribbling ire,
The happier, hotter devil's pen of fire;
But Satan, pleas'd, resigns his earthly throne,
And swears our monthly hell exceeds his own
In dulness, darkness &mdash; every thing, but light:
Down, zealous Simon, set his dunces right!
Run, mother Ph&mdash;ps, teach his worship spite!
Back to that isle, the banish'd maids of song
Let Southey lead, with stripling hand, along.
Struck by th' assassin's blow, let genius come,
Knock at his heart, and find her friend at home,
From her pierc'd brain to draw th' envenom'd steel,
And all but cure the wound which death must heal.
Let him, with Spenser's mastery, and his own,
Paint Madoc, David, Conrade, Rhoderic, Joan;
Wild Laila, fiction's cherub; in her sire
Evil, that will not hope; in Julian's ire,
Faith wounded, trampling glory in the dust,
Arm'd vengeance, almost in rebellion just;
What in Florinda?  beauty, sorrow, worth,
A suffering angel, in the garb of earth.
Let him to light drag Hades; bid the deep,
Reserv'd for him, Fate's awful secrets keep;
And (wildest spirit, on the strongest wing)
Soar sightless heights, a matchless wreath to bring
From that bright heav'n, where none but he durst soar,
And never flower was snatch'd for truth before.
Triumphant o'er the ear-offending tone,
Sublimely mournful, let Sheaf's bard, alone,
Attain in rhyme great Shakespeare's rhymeless ease,
The pleasing sweet that never fails to please.
Tearing from want's dread woes the rags and all,
Let Crabbe the eye of startled ease appal,
Obtrude a gorgon on his dream of bliss,
And show poor human nature as it is.
Let Erin's child produce his wond'rous gem,
And set the emerald in her diadem,
That she, unrivall'd in her sons before,
May strike ev'n envy silent, bless'd with Moore.
What second Shakespeare, faultless without plan,
Creates anew the wond'rous Proteus, Man?
Who steals from Heav'n a pencil wildly true?
Scott, Scott alone, can draw as Shakespeare drew,
Dip the heath's bell in immortality,
Bid landscapes bloom in hues that cannot die,
Paint battle's rage, while awe his hand controls,
And sketch the surge of horror as it rolls;
Or, give the wild weird sisters' attributes
To her whose wildness well such horror suits,
More dire than they who made their presence &mdash; air,
Who seem'd not of the earth, and yet were there.
Let Byron, in his hurried line, condense
"Impassion'd music," energy, and sense,
And proudly reign, with misanthropic scowl,
Lord of the realms of pathos and of soul;
Or snatch from Churchill's urn, with dreadful hand,
Resistless satire's asp, and torturing brand;
Or play at boyhood, with a seraph's smile,
Drink on love's lip the sweetness, with the guile,
Win wisdom's heart, by praising her darn'd hose,
And, laughing, rip her garment, in the close.
