There's glory on thy mountains, proud Bengal,
When on their temples bursts the morning sun!
There's glory on thy silver-tower'd wall,
Proud Ispahan, beneath his burning noon!
There's glory &mdash; when his golden course is done,
Proud Istamboul, upon thy waters blue!
But fall'n Damascus, thine was beauty's throne,
In morn, and noon, and evening's purple dew,
Of all from Ocean's marge to mighty Himmalu.

East of the city stands a lofty mount,
Its brow with lightning delved and rent in sunder;
And thro' the fragments rolls a little fount,
Whose channel bears the blast of fire and thunder;
And there has many a pilgrim come to wonder;
For there are flowers unnumber'd blossoming,
With but the bare and calcined marble under;
Yet in all Asia no such colours spring,
No perfumes rich as in that mountain's rocky ring.

And some, who pray'd the night out on the hill,
Have said they heard &mdash; unless it was their dream,
Or the mere murmur of the babbling rill,&mdash;
Just as the morn-star shot its first slant beam,
A sound of music, such as they might deem
The song of spirits &mdash; that would sometimes sail
Close to their ear, a deep, delicious stream,
Then sweep away, and die with a low wail;
Then come again, and thus, till LUCIFER was pale.

And some, but bolder still, had dared to turn
That soil of mystery for hidden gold;
But saw strange, stifling blazes round them burn,
And died: &mdash; by few that venturous tale was told.
And wealth was found; yet, as the pilgrims hold,
Tho' it was glorious on the mountain's brow,
Brought to the plain it crumbled into mould,
The diamonds melted in the hand like snow;
So none molest that spot for gems or ingots now.

But one, and ever after, round the hill
He stray'd: &mdash; they said a meteor scorch'd his sight;
Blind, mad, a warning of Heaven's fearful will.
'Twas on the sacred evening of "The Flight,"
His spade turn'd up a shaft of marble white,
Fragment of some Kiosk, the chapiter
A crystal circle, but at morn's first light
Rich forms began within it to appear,
Sceptred and wing'd, and then, it sank in water clear.

Yet once upon that guarded mount, no foot
But of the Moslem true might press a flow'r,
And of them none, but with some solemn suit
Beyond man's help, might venture near the bow'r:
For, in its shade, in beauty and in power,
For judgement, sat the ANGEL OF THE WORLD:
Sent by the prophet, till the destined hour
That saw in dust Arabia's idols hurl'd,
Then to the skies again his wing should be unfurl'd.

It came at last.  It came with trumpets' sounding,
It came with thunders of the Atabal,
And warriors' shouts, and Arab chargers' bounding,
The Sacred Standard crown'd Medina's wall.
From palace, mosque, and minaret's golden ball,
Ten thousand emerald banners floated free,
Beneath, like sun-beams, thro' the gateway tall,
The Emirs led their steel-mail'd chivalry,
And the whole city rang with sports and soldier glee.

This was the eve of eves, the end of war,
Beginning of Dominion, first of Time!
When, swifter than the shooting of a star,
Mohammed saw the "Vision's" pomps sublime;
Swept o'er the rainbow'd sea &mdash; the fiery clime,
Heard from the throne its will in thunders roll'd;
Then glancing on our world of woe and crime,
Saw from Arabia's sands his banner's fold
Wave o'er the brighten'd globe its sacred, conquering gold.

The sun was slowly sinking to the west,
Pavilion'd with a thousand glorious dyes;
The turtle-doves were winging to the nest
Along the mountain's soft declivities;
The fresher breath of flowers began to rise,
Like incense, to that sweet departing sun;
Low sank the city's hum, the shepherd's cries:
A moment, and the lingering disk was gone;
A moment, and th' impatient Angel's task was done.

Oft had he gazed upon that lovely vale,
But never gazed with gladness such as now;
When on Damascus' roofs and turrets pale
He saw the solemn sunlight's fainter glow,
He heard the Imauns' sacred voice below
Swell like silver trumpet on the air;
The vintagers' sweet song, the camels' low,
As home they stalk'd from pasture, pair by pair,
Flinging their shadows tall in the steep sunset glare.

He rais'd his sceptre, and a rush of plumes
Shook the thick dew-drops from the roses' dyes;
And, as embodying of their waked perfumes,
A sudeen crowd of forms, with lightning eyes,
And flower-crown'd hair, and cheeks of Paradise,
Circled the bower of beauty on the wing;
And the rich air was fill'd with symphonies
Of seeming flute, and horn, and golden string,
That slowly rose, and o'er the Mount hung hovering.

The Antel sat absorb'd in lofty thought,
Back from his splendid brow his ringlets flung,
His broad effulgent eye on Heaven's blue vault;
Another moment, and his wing had sprung,
The evening hymn broke off. &mdash; A pilgrim clung
To the pavilion's steps.  The Sun was gone;
His quivering plume upon the breeze was hung,
He heard the pilgrim's deep and struggling groan,
He paused, &mdash; and sank, half wrath, half pity, on his throne.

Yet all was soon restor'd; this labour past,
His sojourn on the cloudy earth was done.
His glance again upon the form was cast,
That now seem'd dying on the dazzling stone;
He bade it rise and speak.  The silver tone
Of Earth's high Sovereign mingled joy with fear,
As summer vales of rose by lightning shown;
As the night-fountain in the desert drear;
His voice was sudden life to that fall'n suppliant's ear.

The form arose &mdash; the face was in a veil,
The voice was low, and often check'd with sighs;
The tale it utter'd was a simple tale;
A vow to close a dying parent's eyes,
Had brought its weary steps from Tripolis;
The Arab in the Syrian mountains lay,
The caravan was made the robber's prize,
The pilgrim's little wealth was swept away,
Man's help was vain.  Here sank the voice in soft decay.

"And this is Earth!" the Angel frowning said;
And from the ground he took a matchless gem,
And flung it to the mourner, then outspread
His mighty pinions in the parting beam.
The pilgrim started at the diamond's gleam,
Look'd up in prayer, then, bending near the throne,
Shed the quick tears that from the bosom stream,
And tried to speak, but tears were there alone;
The pitying Angel said, "Be happy and begone."

The weeper raised the veil; a ruby lip
First dawn'd:  then glow'd the young cheek's deeper hue,
Yet delicate as roses when they dip
Their odorous blossoms in the morning dew.
Then beam'd the eyes, twin stars of living blue;
Half shaded by the curls of glossy hair,
That turned to golden as the light wind threw
Their clusters in the western golden glare.
Yet was her blue eye dim, for tears were standing there.

He look'd upon her, and her hurried gaze
Was at his look dropp'd instant on the ground;
But o'er her cheek of beauty rush'd a blaze;
And, as the soul had felt some sudden wound,
Her bosom heaved above its silken bound.
He looked again; the cheek was deadly pale;
The bosom sank with one long sigh profound;
Yet still one lily hand upheld her veil,
And still one press'd her heart &mdash; that sigh told all its tale.

She stoop'd, and from the thicket pluck'd a flower,
Kiss'd it with eager lip, then with faint hand
She laid it on the bright step of the bower;
Such was the ancient custom of the land.
Her sighs were richer than the rose they fann'd;
The breezes swept it to the Angel's feet;
Yet even that sweet slight boon, 'twas Heaven's command,
He must not touch, from her tho' doubly sweet,
No earthly gift must stain that hallow'd judgment-seat.

The flower still lay upon the splendid spot,
The Pilgrim turn'd away as smote with shame;
Her eye a glance of self-upbraiding shot;
That pierc'd his bosom like a shaft of flame.
The humbled one pronounced and bless'd his name,
Cross'd her white arms, and slowly bade farewell.
A sudden faintness o'er the Angel came;
The voice rose sweet and solemn as a spell,
She bow'd her face to earth, and o'er it dropp'd her veil.

Beauty, what art thou, that thy slightest gaze
Can make the spirit from its centre roll;
Its whole long course, a sad and shadowy maze?
Thou midnight or thou noontide of the soul;
One glorious vision lighting up the whole
Of the wide world; or one deep, wild desire,
By day and night consuming, sad and sole;
Till Hope, Pride, Genius, nay, till Love's own fire,
Desert the weary heart, a cold and mouldering pyre.

Enchanted sleep, yet full of deadly dreams;
Companionship divine, stern solitude;
Thou serpent, colour'd with the brightest gleams
That e'er hid poison, making hearts thy food;
Woe to the heart that lets thee once intrude,
Victim of visions that life's purpose steal,
Till the whole struggling nature lies subdued,
Bleeding with wounds the grave alone must heal;
Bright Spirit was it thine that mortal woe to feel?

Still knelt the pilgrim cover'd with her veil,
But all her beauty living on his eye;
Still sunny bright the clustering ringlets fell
Around her forehead's polish'd ivory;
Her hidden cheek was still the rose-bud's dye;
He heard her parting sigh beside him swell,
He glanced around &mdash; no Spirit hover'd nigh&mdash;
He took the flower, and blushing, sigh'd "farewell."
What sound has stunn'd his ear?  A sudden thunder-peal.

He look'd on heaven, 'twas calm, but in the vale
A creeping mist had girt the mountain round,
The golden minarets thro' it glimmer pale;
It scaled the mount, &mdash; their last faint gleam was drown'd.
The sky was with its livid hue embrown'd,
But what was mist swift grew a circling sea,
Reflecting lovely from its blue profound
Mountain, and crimson cloud, and blossomed tree,
Another Heaven and Earth in bright tranquillity.

And on its waters swam a small chaloupe,
That bore a woman by the mountain's side.
The silken sail that flutter'd o'er its poop,
Was all its canopy, too slight to hide
A form that look'd an Houri in her pride;
A hunter, as the day began to fail,
Was hastening home, he linger'd by the tide,
He listen'd to the sweet deceiver's tale,
And trusted to the wave, for beauty will prevail.

A sudden flash illumed the vast Mirage;
The sky grew dark &mdash; the hurricane was come;
How shall the skiff with that wild sea engage!
In vain the quivering helm is turn'd to home.
The prow sprang arrowy swift through piles of foam;
One billow chased it on with rush and roar
It reach'd the prey, the hunter saw his doom;
Clasping his love, he sat, and strove no more;
It came and pass'd away.  His corpse lay on the shore.

The Angel's heart was thrill'd &mdash; but that touch'd flower,
Now opening, breathed such fragrance subtly sweet,
That he still held it, &mdash; felt it overpower
His soul &mdash; he ventured not her eye to meet,
But gazed upon the small unsandal'd feet
That shone like silver on the floor of rose;
At length he raised his glance; &mdash; the veil's light net
Had floated backward from her pencil'd brows,
Her eye was fix'd in melancholy, mild repose.

A simple Syrian lyre was on her breast,
And on her lip the voice hung murmuring
A evening hymn, which from the mountain's crest
The Angel oft had heard the shepherds sing.
She paused, &mdash; her white hand floated o'er the string,
Like the Aurelia o'er the hyacinth's bell,
Like lilies waving in the airs of Spring,
Then woke its inmost soul's enchanting swell.
The thunder nearer roll'd: &mdash; the Angel heard no peal.

He heard not even the strain, tho' it had changed
From the calm sweetness of the holy hymn.
His thoughts from depth to depth unconscious ranged,
Yet all within was dizzy, strange, and dim;
A mist seem'd spreading between Heaven and him;
He sat absorb'd in dreams; &mdash; a searching tone
Came on his ear, oh how her dark eyes swim
Who breathed that echo of a heart undone,
The song of early joys, delicious, dear, and gone!

The Angel felt his madness, waved his hand
To bid her leave the arbour &mdash; and arose;
But nearer still the Minstrel took her stand,
Impassion'd beauty on her young cheek glows;
In a sweet, tender smile her lips disclose
The pearly teeth &mdash; her form of symmetry
Bends like a rose-stem, when the Zephyr blows;
And tho' her voice is trembling as a sigh
Love triumphs in her smile, and fond, delicious eye.

At once the strain awoke &mdash; wild, potent, grand,
The praise of hearts that scorn the world's control,
Disdaining all but Love's delicious band,
The chain of gold and flowers, the tie of soul.
She stopp'd &mdash; strange paleness o'er her beauty stole,
She glanced above, then sank her glowing eye,
Blue as the star that glitter'd by the pole;
One tear-drop gleam'd, she dash'd it quickly by,
She dropp'd the lyre, and turn'd &mdash; as if she turn'd to die.

The night-breeze from the mountains had begun;
As if it wing'd among the clouds of even,
That slept along the horizon, where the Sun
Still blazed below the fiery verge of heaven;
Their volumes in ten thousand shapes were driven;
Like flaming mountains, mighty palace halls,
Whose lights, from gold and emerald lamps were given;
Then chang'd to citadels and battled walls;
Then sank in valleys sweet with silver waterfalls.

The sight was glorious; but the Angel's heart
Was all unsettled:  and a bitter sigh
Burst from his burning lip, and with a start
He cast upon the Earth his conscious eye.
The whole horizon from that temple high
Spread out in vision, from the pallid line
Where old Palmyra's pomps in ruin lie,
Gilding the Arab sands, to where supine
The western lustre tinged thy spires, lost Palestine!

But loveliest of the vision was the vale
That from the mountain sloped &mdash; the vale of bow'rs;
Inlay of all rich hues, &mdash; the tamarisk pale,
Dyed with geranium, and the Indian flow'rs,
Of the spiced clove, and jessamine's white show'rs,
Like shiver'd silver, and the gorgeous rose,
And, in the midst, Damascus' golden towers,
Bathed in the purple beauty of repose,
All but the central mosque that in red splendour glows.

He saw the vale reclining in the shade
Of its bold mountains, like a smiling child
In its mail'd father's bosom; crag and glade
Festoon'd with myrtles to their summits wild,
And villages, and domes of marble piled
On rocks still towering thro' the tender mist,
That, tinged with eve, now veil'd that valley mild,
And, as the rising star their foreheads kist,
Were lustrous pearl, sweet sapphire, weeping amethyst.

And still he gazed &mdash; and saw not that the eve
Was fading into night.  A sudden thought
Struck to his dreaming heart, that made it heave;
Was he not there in Paradise? &mdash; that spot,
Was it not lovely as the lofty vault
That rose above him?  In his native skies,
Could he be happy till his soul forgot,
Oh!  how forget, the being whom his eyes
Loved as their light of light?  He heard a tempest rise&mdash;

Was it a dream?  the vale at once was bare,
And o'er it brooded broad a sulphurous cloud:
The soil grew red and rifted with its glare;
Down to their roots the mountain cedars bow'd;
Along the ground a rapid vapour flow'd,
Yellow and pale, thick seam'd with streaks of flame.
Before it sprang the vulture from the shroud;
The lion bounded from it scared and tame;
Behind it, dark'ning Heaven, the mighty whirlwind came.

Like a long tulip bed, across the plain
A caravan approach'd the evening well,
A long, deep mass of turban, plume, and vane;
And lovely came its distant, solemn swell
Of song, and pilgrim-horn, and camel-bell.
The sandy ocean rose before their eye,
In thunder on their bending host it fell
Ten thousand lips sent up one fearful cry;
The sound was still'd at once, beneath its wave they lie.

But, two escaped, that up the mountain sprung,
And those the dead men's treasure downwards drew;
One slowly, but the softer round him clung;
For now, in light, short gusts the tempest blew,
And the high tomb of sand like vapour flew.
There, naked lay the costly caravan,
A league of piles of silk and gems that threw
A rainbow light, and mid them stiff and wan,
Stretch'd by his camel's flank, their transient master, man.

The statelier wanderer from the height was won,
And cap and sash soon gleam'd with plunder'd gold.
But, now the Desart rose, in pillars dun,
Glowing with fire like iron in the mould,
With fiery speed they rush'd, recoil'd, sprang, roll'd;
Before them waned the moon's ascending phase,
The clouds above them shrank the reddening fold:
The giant columns deepened blaze on blaze,
The pilgrims died, embracing in the burning haze.

The Angel sat enthroned within a dome
Of alabaster raised on pillars slight,
Curtain'd with tissues that the earthly loom
Had never equall'd, web of blossoms bright
Of all the flowers that drink the morning light,
The roof was starr'd with buds, the flower-festoon
Waved from the columns of translucent white,
Breathing fresh odours to the mystic throne,
That in their tender shade, one glorious diamond shone.

And still at night, round pedestal and plinth,
Those dewey flowers were lamps before the throne,
All-colour'd radiance; there, the hyacinth
Beam'd amethyst; the broad carnation shone
In circling rays of pearl and ruby stone;
The myrtle buds pour'd down a diamond shower
The tulip was the opal's changeful moon;
An urn of lovely lustre every flower,
Burning before the King of that illumined bower.

And nestling in that arbour's leafy twine,
From cedar's top to violet's lowly bell,
Were birds, now hush'd, of plumage all divine,
That, ever as the rays upon them fell,
Shot back such hues as stain the Indian shell,
Touching the deep green shades with light from eyes
Jacinth, and jet, and blazing carbuncle,
And gold dropt coronets, and wings of dyes
Touch'd by the flowers and stars of their own Paradise.

The Angel knew the warning of that storm;
But saw the shuddrring Minstrel's step draw near,
And felt the whole deep witchery of her form;
Her sigh was music's echo to his ear;
He loved &mdash; and true love ever banished fear.
Now night had droop'd on earth her raven wing,
But in the arbour all was splendour clear;
And like twin spirits in its charmed ring
Shone, that sweet child of earth, and that star diadem'd King.

For, whether 'twas the light's unusual glow,
Or that some dazzling change had on her come;
Her look, tho' lovely still, was loftier now,
Her tender cheek was flushed with brighter bloom;
Yet in her azure eye there gathered gloom,
Like evening's clouds across its own blue star,
Then would a sudden flash its depths illume;
And wore she but the wing and gemm'd tiar,
She seemed instinct with power to make the clouds her car.

She slowly raised her arm, that, bright as snow,
Gleam'd like a rising meteor thro' the air,
Shedding white lustre on her turban'd brow;
And gazed on heaven, as wrapt in solemn prayer;
She still look'd woman, yet more proudly fair;
And as she stood and pointed to the sky,
With that fixed look of loveliness and care,
The Angel thought, and check'd it with a sigh,
He saw some Spirit fallen from immortality.

The silent prayer was done, and now she moved
Faint to his footstool, and, upon her knee,
Besought her lord, if in his Heaven they loved,
That, as she never more his face must see,
She there might pledge her heart's fidelity.
Then turn'd, and pluck'd a cluster from the vine,
And o'er a chalice waved it, with a sigh,
Then, with bow'd forehead, rear'd before the shrine.
The crystal cup. &mdash; The Angel rose in wrath &mdash; 'twas wine!

She stood; she shrank; she totter'd.  Down he sprang,
With one hand clasp'd her waist, with one upheld
The vase &mdash; his ears with giddy murmurs rang;
His eye upon her dying cheek was spell'd;
He glanced upon the brim &mdash; its bright draught swell'd
Like liquid rose, its odour touch'd his brain;
He knew his ruin, but his soul was quell'd;
He shudder'd &mdash; gazed upon her cheek again,
Press'd her pale lip, and to the last that cup did drain.

Th' Enchantress smiled, as still in some sweet dream,
Then waken'd in a long, delicious sigh,
And on the bending Spirit fixed the beam
Of her deep, dewy, melancholy eye.
The undone Angel gave no more reply
Than hiding his pale forehead in the hair
That floated on her neck of ivory,
And breathless pressing, with her ringlets fair,
From his bright eyes the tears of passion and despair.

The Heaven was one blue vault, inlaid with gems
Thick as the concave of a diamond mine,
But from the north now shot quick, phosphor beams,
That o'er the mount their purple net entwine;
The smallest stars thro' that sweet lustre shine;
It shakes &mdash; it spreads, its glorious streamers die:
Again light quivers on the horizon's line
A surge of violet lustre fills the sky,
Then sinks, still flashing, dancing everlastingly.

But wilder wonder smote their shrinking eyes:
A vapour plunged upon the vale from heaven,
Gloomy as night; it tower'd of mountain size;
From its high crater column'd smokes were driven;
It heaved within, as if pent flames had striven
With mighty winds to burst their prison hold,
Till from the summit to the vale 'twas riven
With angry light, that seem'd in cataracts roll'd,
Silver, and sanguine steel, and fierce burning gold.

The black volcano gave a hollow roar,
An Earthquake groan, that told convulsion near:
Out rush'd the burthen of its burning core,
Myriads of fiery globes, as day-light clear.
The sky was fill'd with flashing sphere on sphere,
Shooting straight upwards to the zenith's crown.
The stars were blasted in that splendour drear,
The land beneath in wild distinctness shone,
From the far billow to the Desart's pale red zone.

The globes have gone to heights above all gaze,
And now returning, look like moon-light rain;
But, half way down, again flash their rays;
War floods the sky, they cross, whirl, burst in twain,
Scattering the night from mountain, vale, and main,
Or round the concave, as the storm retires,
Like mighty serpents draw the mazy train,
Gigantic sweeps of green, gold, scarlet spires,
With peral and diamond heads instinct with living fires.

The storm is on the embattled clouds receding,
The purple streamers wander pale and thin,
But o'er the pole an amber flame is spreading,
In shooting, starry points, and far within
Revolves a stooping splendour crystalline.
It opens, but who sits uponthat throne?
The Angel knew the punisher of sin.
Check'd on his lip the self-upbraiding groan,
Strain'd with wild arms his love, and joy'd to be undone.

And once, 'twas but a moment, on her cheek
He gave a glance, then sank his hurried eye,
And press'd it closer on her dazzling neck.
But even in that swift gaze, he could espy
A look that made his heart's blood backwards fly.
Was it a dream?  there echoed in his ear
A stinging tone &mdash; a laugh of mockery!
It was a dream &mdash; it must be.  Oh!  that fear,
When the heart longs to know, what it is death to hear.

He glanced again &mdash; her eye was upward still,
Fix'd on the stooping of that burning car;
But thro' his bosom shot an arrowy thrill,
To see its solemn, stern, unearthly glare;
She stood a statue of sublime despair,
But on her lip sat scorn. &mdash; His spirit froze,&mdash;
His footstep reel'd, &mdash; his wan lip gasp'd for air;
She felt his throb, &mdash; and o'er him stoop'd with brows
As evening sweet, and kiss'd him with a lip of rose.

Again she was all beauty, and they stood
Still fonder clasp'd, and gazing with the eye
Of famine gazing on the poison'd food
That it must feed on, or abstaining die.
There was between them now nor tear nor sigh;
Theirs was the deep communion of the soul;
Passion's absorbing, bitter luxury;
What was to them or heaven or earth, the whole
Was in that fatal spot, where they stood sad, and sole.

The Enchantress first shook off the silent trance;
And in a voice sweet as the murmuring
Of summer streams beneath the moonlight's glance,
Besought the desperate one to spread the wing
Beyond the power of his vindictive King.
Slave to her slightest word, he raised his plume,
A purple cloud, and stood in act to spring;
Thro' that fierce upward sea of storm and gloom;
She wildly kiss'd his hand, and sank, as in a tomb.

The Angel sooth'd her, "No!  let Justice wreak
Its wrath upon them both, or him alone."
A flush of love's pure crimson lit her cheek;
She whisper'd, and his stoop'd ear drank the tone
With mad delight; "Oh there is one way, one,
To save us both.  Are there not mighty words,
Graved on the magnet-throne where Solomon
Sits ever guarded by the Genii swords,
To give thy servant wings like her resplendent Lord's?"

This was the Sin of Sins!  The first, last crime,
In Earth and Heaven, unnamed, unnameable;
This from his gorgeous throne, before all time,
Had smitten Eblis, brightest, first that fell.
He started back. &mdash; "What urged him to rebel?
What led that soft seducer to his bow'r?
Could she have laid upon his soul that spell,
Young, lovely, fond; yet but an earthly flower?"
But for that fatal cup, he had been free that hour.

But still its draught was fever in his blood.
He caught the upward, humble, weeping gleam
Of woman's eye, by passion all subdued;
He sigh'd, and at his sigh he saw it beam:
Oh!  the sweet frenzy of the lover's dream!
A moment's lingering, and they both must die.
The lightning round them shot a broader stream;
He felt her clasp his feet in agony;
He spoke the words of might, &mdash; the thunder gave reply!

Away!  away!  the sky is one black cloud,
Shooting its lightnings down in spire on spire.
Around the mount its canopy is bow'd,
A vault of stone on columns of red fire;
The stars like lamps along its roof expire;
But thro' its centre bursts an orb of rays;
The Angel knew the Avenger in his ire!
The hill-top smoked beneath the stooping blaze,
The culprits dared not there their guilty eye-balls raise.

And words were utter'd from that whirling sphere,
That mortal sense might never hear and live.
They pierced like arrows thro' the Angel's ear;
He bow'd his head; 'twas vain to fly or strive.
Down comes the final wrath:  the thunders give
The doubled peal, &mdash; the rains in cataracts sweep,
Broad bars of fire the sheeted deluge rive;
The mountain summits to the valley leap,
Pavilion, garden, grove, smoke up one ruin'd heap.

The storm stands still!  a moment's pause of terror!
All dungeon dark! &mdash; Again the lightnings yawn,
Shewing the earth as in a quivering mirror.
The prostrate Angel felt but that the one,
Whose love had lost him Paradise, was gone:
He dared not see her corpse! &mdash; he closed his eyes;
A voice burst o'er him, solemn as the tone
Of the last trump, &mdash; he glanced upon the skies,
He saw what shook his soul with terror, shame, surprise.

Th' Enchantress stood before him; two broad plumes
Spread from her shoulders on the burthen'd air;
Her face was glorious still, but love's young blooms
Had vanish'd for the hue of bold despair;
A fiery circle crown'd her sable hair;
And, as she look'd upon her prostrate prize,
Her eyeballs shot around a meteor glare,
Her form tower'd up at once to giant size;
'Twas EBLIS!  king of Hell's relentless sovereignties.

The tempter spoke &mdash; "Spirit, thou might'st have stood,
But thou hast fall'n a weak and willing slave.
Now were thy feeble heart our serpents' food,
Thy bed our burning ocean's sleepless wave,
But haughty Heaven controls the power it gave.
Yet art thou doom'd to wander from thy sphere,
Till the last trumpet reaches to the grave;
Till the Sun rolls the grand concluding year;
Till Earth is Paradise; then shall thy crime be clear."

The Angel listen'd, &mdash; risen upon one knee,
Resolved to hear the deadliest undismay'd.
His gold starr'd plume hung round him droopingly,
His brow, like marble, on his hand was staid.
Still thro' the auburn locks' o'er hanging shade
His face shone beautiful; he heard his ban;
Then came the words of mercy, sternly said;
He plunged within his hands his visage wan,
And the first wild, sweet tears from his heart-pulses ran.

The Giant grasp'd him as he fell to Earth,
And his black vanes upon the air were flung,
A tabernacle dark; &mdash; and shouts of mirth
Mingled with shriekings thro' the tempest swung;
His arm around the fainting Angel clung.
Then on the clouds he darted with a groan;
A moment o'er the Mount of ruin hung,
Then burst thro' space, like the red comet's cone,
Leaving his track on heaven a burning, endless zone.
