That day an Empire's eyes with tears were dim,
For her whom yet they deemed a saint in heaven,
Released from Earth to bliss:  the tear, the hymn,
To ease their own o'erburden'd hearts were given;
But Windsor in thy towery courts that even
Was sorrow for the daughter of the throne:
There wav'd thick plumes; the dewy air was riven
With trumpet sounds; and torch, and cresset shone,
Like crouding stars, on lance and proud caparison.

And many a form of age and martial pomp
Swell'd that procession thro' the aisle's long maze,
To chauntings rich and organ's solemn tromp,
Till on the chancel-roof the torch's blaze
Flashed in a thousand melancholy rays
From pendant helm and sword and gonfalon,
The fading emblems of the fleeting days,
That down thy stream, forgetfulness, have gone,
No, they shall live till Earth's last hour is done.

The chaunt had ceased, the final pray'r been said,
Slow like a parting shade, the bier gone down,
There came a form, with feeble step, bow'd head,
The snows of eighty winters on it strown;
The ancient herald.  By the vault's dark stone
He stood; the torch-flame bursting from below,
Glow'd on his brow and golden habergeon,
Emblem of age above youth's grave in woe,
He came, to tell her pomps whom earth no more shall know.

And this is life!  This, grandeur, beauty, birth,
Who are these weepers?  England's men of fame,
Sages and warriours, lords and lights of earth!
And who sleeps there?  I cannot name her name,
Our young Elizabeth, the soul of flame,
She of the regal brow, the gentle eye,
That like a passing spirit to us came,
And having done her deed of charity,
Rose sudden from our glance, to teach us all must die.

But she was honour'd!  never obsequies
Were seen like hers on earth; that livelong day
The empire was a burst of tears and sighs;
The cities in one funeral silence lay;
Their millions, with one instinct took their way
To the high refuge of the heart's despair.
Authority spoke not.  They rush'd to pay
Grief's tribute; to lay heart and spirit bare,
'Twas one great, contrite, voluntary day of pray'r.

England, I've seen thee conqueror, seen the crown
Laid on thee while the earth before thee knelt;
And felt, if heart's earth-wean'd such thoughts may own,
Proud thoughts, that have no voice, that are but felt.
But thou wert nobler when thy spirit dwelt
Within the temple:  all thy murmurings gone,
All melted, as in tears thy soul did melt,
Was it in mercy eclipse veil'd thy throne?
To teach us England yet could pray, weep, love, &mdash; be ONE!
