I. 1.
"Lo!  A King of the Sky comes forth,
Marching stately tow'rds the North;
Awful stranger!  dost thou bear
Omens, sparkling on thy hair?
Does thy train of blazing glow,
The battle's hurly burly show?
Or does thy pale orb's misty gleam
Show that widows' tears must stream?
Dost thou come in pomp to bring,
Or wrath to take away a King?
Making now and now undoing,
Gamboling with Fate and Ruin?
Art thou come to show God's ire,
A migratory world on fire?
Or, art thou He, who at the birth
Of Gallia's Lord alarm'd the earth?
Is the Eagle, soon to fly
Where he'll droop his wing, and die?"
Thus the wond'ring Red Man spoke
As his sleep an Earthquake broke.

I. 2.
Ah!  the Earthquake shakes again!
The tumbling Column strews the plain.&mdash;
How like the Waterfall, what time the Star
Of Night comes pacing up the dusky West,
Back'd by dark groves, bright glistening from afar
I saw thee, France, in robes of Glory drest;
Fine as the waving light of summer noon,
Soft as the breeze that sweeps the evening deep,
Thy distant Paeans in luxurious swoon
Made my exulting ear enchanted sleep;
Ah!  where is he, who knows not to admire
The meteor blaze of Fame, and twinkling dance of Fire?

I. 3.
Oh!  I have gazed enraptr'd with the scene
Till fairy dreams upraised my buoyant soul;
Sounds of delight "from airy harps unseen,"
Shades of the blest, "whose glittering skirts unroll"
Elysian groves, whence cooling odours blow,
Immingled roses in deep burning blush,
Essential light in streaming gales, that throw
O'er softest glades of green a lustrous flush?
The dancing Hours and Nymphs of purpled wing,
Sporting with smiling Loves and Zephyrs of the Spring.

II. 1.
Alas!  while thus we sleep and dream,
How sad to breathe but pestilential steam;
Pity and Hope go hand in hand
To sue, where Fate does not command,
But cannot bear a form to see
More ugly, than Adversity;
Ages, like the waters, sweep
In rolling volumes to the deep;
And Grandeur's perishable pride,
A bubble floating down the tide,
Glitters in the noon-day beam,
Then bursts and mingles with the vulgar stream.&mdash;

II. 2.
Sorrow, Red Man, thou must not feel
Hammer and forge thy soul to steel;
Thou mast Away to pull the bell
Which tolls a dying Empire's knell;
While, o'er his writhing prey, a lion roaring
Shakes his majestick mane, and mocks the tone deploring.

II. 3.
Loudly once the Red Man knocks;
The doors unfold, the chamber rocks;
"Hero, doom'd to flight and shame;
Listen to him, thou canst not name;
Dost thou hear the thunder roll?
It bodes a tempest in thy soul.
Will thy Wolf attempt to tear
His white beard from the Northern Bear?
Know'st thou not, his breath alone
Can freeze the ruffian into stone?
Ah!  look not thus with sneering eyes,
The Summer with the swallow flies.
Is ambition void of woe?  Russia is a Hell of Snow.

III. 1.
Close thy imperial ashes in an Urn,
Thy soul, an Aetna, will for ever burn.
Giant of France, and Husband of her choice,
The Oracle of Victory thy voice!
Spur again the horse of War;
Ah!  what but Vapour is the falling star?
Those warriors old, who scorn'd to fly,
In dumb astonishment must die:
Is the Emperor and King
An insect now without a sting?
Shoulder'd from his gaudy throne
By those, whom he was proud to own;
Fair was the bride of Austria, fair the Morn,
When he the Caesar King was born.
Screw the torture to his heart?
The Father from his only Child must part;
Are his Marshals false and hollow?
Will Birds of Prey not carrion follow?
In black procession to inter his fame
They stalk; but still the smoke betrays surviving flame."

III. 2.
What dost thou laugh in scorn?  Ah!  then
Thou dog within a lion's den,
Take the boon contempt will give;
A statue on a pedestal to live;
Gaze on to-morrow's Sun, and see
The signs that Heaven shows to thee;
Say then, 'I see; but not believe;'
Hereafter, 'I have seen; and grieve.'"

III. 3.
Land of the bravest brave and fairest fair!
Thou land, that worshippest God's blessed Son!
Thou land, that teachest to forgive and spare!
Thou land, that praisest, when God's will is done!
Too great to fear, and too humane to hate,
Royal in mind, he's still in patience great;
Let Nature's saintly milkiness, in grace
Grant to the Sire once more a Son's embrace;
A Belisarius without a home
Who fears?  who now regards his pageant reign of Rome?"
