Illustrious fortress!  once the pride of kings,
What ancient splendour doth thy wreck display!
Still to thy walls some royal vestige clings,
That shows the glory of some former day:
But now, alas!  thy strength must fade away,
(Ah!  wreckless time, what hast thou here been doing?)
Yet thou art lovely even in decay,
And while I stand thy hoary grandeur viewing,
My soul is charmed with thee &mdash; All hail, thou mighty ruin!

Yes, still there is a princely look displayed
In thy lone walls, and yet a noble mien;
What though thy former grandeur be decayed,
In what thou art, we see what thou hast been.
Delightful spot!  how beautiful the scene
Where chieftains dwelt, &mdash; where now the raven dwells!
Here all around are nature's beauties seen,
Before &mdash; the tide of mighty ocean swells,
Behind &mdash; the woods, the glens &mdash; the everlasting hills!

Ah me!  how oft have heroes from afar
With giant prowess trode these vales below,
While the loud-pealing elements of war
Thundered destruction on the daring foe!
But time at last hath struck the final blow.
And hushed to peace the warnings of the brave;
And now these lonely towers no discord know,
But all is still and peaceful as the grave,
Save the far distant sound of Solway's dashing wave.

Majestic fabric!  there alone thou art,
While those who have the imperial sceptre swayed,
Who deemed themselves more lasting than thou wert,
Are buried in oblivion's thickest shade;
The warrior too in terror's form arrayed,
Hath meekly fall'n, as if he'd ne'er been tried
In freedom's cause &mdash; the priest, that often prayed
In wrapt devotion, slumber side by side,
And not a stone is seen, to tell they lived &mdash; and died.

Yes, they are gone, but thou'rt a palace still,
And in thy sad and desolate remains
All undisturbed the fowls of Heaven dwell,
Nor rank nor precedence their honour stains:
The fleecy flocks that roam the flowery plains,
Within thy vaulted caverns freely stroll,
Where once the captive's spirit-bending chains
(Who saw no day &mdash; beheld no planet roll,)
Clanked in the gloomy vault, that chilled his manly soul.

But kings and subjects all alike must go
Down to the dust, from whence at first they came;
Palace and cottage both are humbled low
Together in the all-devouring flame,
Fed by corrosive time &mdash; and scarce a name
They leave to tell the anxious lookers back,
That it has been, and still must be the same,&mdash;
Though mightiest barriers destiny shall break,
Nor art nor wealth procures salvation from the wreck!
