Say, glorious orb!  Whose undiminish'd lamp
Hath lighted countless nations to repose,
When didst thou mark in court, or bower, or camp,
A statelier train, or comelier forms than those
Whose long array yon ample gates enclose?
The Chiefs are there, who bade the lion wave
On earth and ocean o'er Britannia's foes;
The Senate there, who to the vanquish'd brave
Her arts, her equal laws, her rescued freedom gave.

Worthy are they to clasp the gilded spur,
To pace with plumed head, and gartered knee,
While velvet glows beneath pale minever,
The sumptuous garb of antique chivalry;
For not at high Poitiers beat hearts more free,
Not hardier knights the proud Armada met,
Than gird thy golden pall, and beat for thee,
Monarch, whose rule in Albion's crown hath set
Gems that may Tudor mock, and shame Plantagenet.

And now that peerless crown adorns thy brow,
Thine arm sustains the sceptre of command;
Princes before thy throne their fealty vow,
And every voice, and each exultant hand,
Attests the homage of thy native land.
The white-robed choir respond, and music's wings,
Fraught with a nation's prayers, for heaven expand;
From base to battlement the fabric rings,
And silence guards no more the sepulchre of kings.

Dreams my fond brain &mdash; or hath that sound affrayed
The slumbering tenants of the sculptur'd tomb?
Methinks I track along the dim arcade
Whose storied panes increase its twilight gloom,
Long-buried chiefs that wait the day of doom.
Sebert is there, who bade the cross divine
On Thorney's barren islet bud and bloom;
Meek Edward quits his desecrated shrine;
And Henry wakes, whose name shall with these walls decline.

Potent in arts alone, the wavering Sire
Leans on the dauntless son, his life's support,
On him whose wisdom curb'd the nobles' ire,
Whose valor won the Cambrian's mountain fort;
And there strides on the Knight of Agincourt
In equal pace with him of Cressy's field,
Victors in vain, since Fortune's fickle sport
To jarring chiefs consign'd th' unblemish'd shield,
And left to babes the sword scarce Ascabart could wield.

Warriors and war's flood waves thus idly ebb;
But mark the pile where brass has learned to breathe,
And stone, like dew-drops on Arachne's web,
Looks lightly down o'er bannered stalls beneath.
Thence come the peaceful kings with sword in sheath,
On Richmond's brow the blended roses twine,
Red Albin's thistle decks here Stewart's wreath,
But Erin's flower, for ages doomed to pine,
Reserves its bloom to bless the Heir of Brunswick's line.

Nations repose:  for man's impetuous pride,
His schemes, his strifes, by death's cold hand are hushed;
Remorseless Mary walks at Edward's side;
Eliza views the beauteous Foe she crushed,
Nor paler grows her cheek that never blushed;
Voluptuous Charles, thrice bound in Bourbon's chain,
Meets great Nassau with Bourbon's conquest flush'd;
And Stewart's daughters, him whose golden reign
Ruled the white steed that ramped o'er Stewart's lost domain.

Silent the train recedes &mdash; but ah!  To him
Who claims their throne, that silence speaks more loud
Than the glad People's voice, their splendor dim
Dispels life's pageant like a Summer cloud.
Pensive on him gaze all &mdash; the meek &mdash; the proud,
The valiant and the weak &mdash; but pensive most
Pale Richard's shade &mdash; see, see!  The crimsoned shrowd,
His lingering waves, and ere in darkness lost,
Gives language to the looks of all the shadowy host.

"Monarch!  The feast, the song, the banquet cup,
For thee shall glad yon raftered roof to night;
And every angel form that bears it up,
Shall bathe his pinions in a flood of light,
For thee, in orient pearl, and plumage white,
Shall beauteous Albion lead her starry train,
For thee, the Prince, the Noble, and the Knight,
The lawn-robed Prelate, and the lowly swain
Shall shout till vales and hills and oceans shout again.

"The hand untaught to serve on thee shall tend,
And maple vie with gold thy touch to meet;
The knee unused to kneel to thee shall bend,
And like its mountain lord, the falcon fleet
Shall stoop from air, and chirp thy hand to greet;
While trump, and drum, and clarion's thrilling call
Herald the youthful Champion, at thy feet
To seal his challenge with the gauntlet's fall,
By high-born Howard backed, and Him who quelled the Gaul.

"Quaff the full cup of bliss:  yet oh, beware!
As high it foamed for me, when that fair roof
My master-work, first spanned the yielding air,
And echoed first the charger's clattering hoof,
My Champion too was there in arms of proof;
No hand opposed, no tongue defiance spoke;
Thousands thronged round who stood ere long aloof,
And he who hired the assassin's kindlier stroke,
Knelt lowest of the low &mdash; the faithless Bolingbroke.

"Then trust not thou the flatterer's hollow zeal,
Court not the wavering crowd's vociferous zeal,
Be just &mdash; if mortals deem thee just, rejoice,
But if the traitorous Malison they deal,
To Him who made thee King, make thine appeal,
Be His strong arm thy buckler, He thy might;
So mayst thou stand unmoved, nor fear nor feel
Seditious breath that taints the breeze of night,
Or bold Rebellion's shaft that shames the noonday light.

"And in that hour when mortal strength is weak,
When thou, like us, shall own a tyrant's sway,
Supreme o'er Valor's arm and Beauty's cheek,
And ev'n o'er Virtue's tenement of clay,
With whom thy Sire and mine alike decay,
And thy fair Daughter's bloom untimely shewed&mdash;
Oh!  In that awful hour be Heaven thy stay,
And there be thou enthroned, through His dear blood,
Who wore the thorn-wove crown, and dyed the Holy Rood."
