Muse!  take the sorrowing harp that long has hung
Mute on the drooping willow, &mdash; and, again,
Give it a voice of grief, &mdash; a thrilling tongue;
Wake the wild chords of ecstasy and pain,
And bid the plaintive lute betwixt complain,
For weary wear my hours; and I am now
Lost to the joy of being; &mdash; the sad strain
May bring, perchance, a lulling balm for woe,
And half unbind the wreath of night-shade from my brow.

My friend, can I forget thee &mdash; whilst the ray
Of busy mem'ry brightens o'er the past?
Whilst feeling rolls, or life's pulsations play,
My friend, can I forget thee? &mdash; to the last
Thine image came, and o'er my fancy cast
Thoughts, such as in the pitying bosoms dwell
Of angels sorrowing o'er distress: &mdash; 'tis past,&mdash;
And thou art laid within thy silent cell,
And darkness wraps the form which many lov'd so well.

All that mortality could claim is given,
A nothing &mdash; to the coffin and the shroud;
Yet did surviving friendship hail thee riven
From her rejoicing sight; &mdash; a passing cloud
Dimmed her sad eye; &mdash; and murmurs deep, not loud,
Swell'd on the gale when earth thy reliques hears'd.
O'er thee in muteness the pale mourners bow'd
To catch their parting glance; &mdash; then freely burst
The passionate flow of grief which feeling long had nurs'd!

Can they but choose to weep, &mdash; when he who shed
A radiance o'er their path, and bade them keep
Vigils of gladness; &mdash; when the voice is fled
Whose words were music, can they choose but weep?&mdash;
No! &mdash; the sweet flowers in winter's snows, that sleep
Spring may revisit, &mdash; their young blooms may wave
Fresh beauty o'er thine head; &mdash; her dews may steep
Thy turf with greenness; &mdash; but the hand which gave
To Death, recalls not thee from thy chill home the grave.

Spring may revisit us: &mdash; the daedal earth
Put forth her glories, &mdash; floweret, herb, fruit, tree;
Suns shine; all things  be happy in their mirth;
The fountain burst its chains, and warble free,
Rejoicing in its strength, &mdash; the murmuring bee
Had the creation on delightful wing,
And banquet on the bloom she loves; but we,
Over thy bright remembrance sorrowing,
Can taste no more the bliss which these to others bring.

But hush!  in that there is a mournful charm,
A long lost feeling, tempering with regret
Exalted thought, &mdash; a lenitive &mdash; a balm;
The memory of thy worth is left us yet:
And though our tears gush forth, our cheeks be wet,&mdash;
There is a Name shall free us from the sway
Of meaner griefs; thy star of life is set,&mdash;
Silent thy voice &mdash; the worm is in thy clay,&mdash;
But this for ever lives, triumphant o'er decay.

For thee life hung her blossoms from the tree
In colours of such richness as might suit
Young Hope's aspiring energies; &mdash; for thee
Life hung the blossom, but denied the fruit.
Th' historic page, the laurel, and the lute
Hung round thy path enamour'd of their love,
Thy hours unheeded flew in sweet pursuit
Of that ennobling spirit which of yore
With science, letters, arts, adorned the Ausonian shore.

Touched with what generous impulse didst thou tread
Each laurell'd path in Learning's various maze;
Journeying from shade to shade, as Science spread
Fresh vistas from the lamp of vanish'd days:
But still it was thy pleasure and thy praise
Meekly to tread, and humbly to pursue
The light which burst on my admiring gaze;
And guide thy steps by virtue's sacred clue
Till Faith reveal'd to sight what Reason never knew.

Truth spread her awful page: &mdash; what then to thee
Was Roman sweetness, or Athenian grace?
A shadow to a sun! &mdash; eternally
To view th' Almighty Being face to face;
To rove a spirit through the peopled space;
To dedicate thy energies to HIM
Who spoke creation into birth; to trace
His steps, and worship with the Cherubim;
Oh!  'twas a thought might make all earthly glories dim.

From the translucent fount of bliss which wells
From out the throne of God, the glorious thirst
Of knowledge didst thou slake:  the song which swells
Around the holy shrines, in harpings burst
Whisp'ring enchantment in thine ear, and nurs'd
Thy glowing spirit to the high emprize
Of self-correction; &mdash; gradual truth dispers'd
Each man'cling film that barr'd thee from the skies,
And op'd with Mercy's key the gates of paradise!

Then each severer trial, each pure thought,
Became a lifting pinion; each warm sigh
Of penitential sorrow nearer brought
Thy soul's beatitude; and hovering nigh,
What if some guardian seraph of the sky
Compass'd thee round, as in the wilderness
Shone the bright pillar, heralding on high
The pilgrim's host, through peril and distress,
A visitant from Heav'n, omnipotent to bless!

Then was thy soul a nobler sanctuary
Than Art could raise, or Wisdom fabricate,
A sacred temple which the Deity
Might hallow with his presence; consecrate
To solemn worship, which can here create
A shadow of the joys which soothe the blest
In high Elysium, where the bitter weight
Of human sorrow flies, the unclouded breast,
The wicked cease to vex, the weary are at rest.

And reckless of the unsubstantial joy
Which fills our earthly being, thou wert wending
Fast to that land of spirits, when mine eye
First gaz'd on thee; the tempest was descending
Which smote thy vernal leaf &mdash; serenely blending
A transient beauty with its dark'ning shade,
I mark'd the sudden flush of sickness lending
A glow to garnish o'er the wreck she made,
Whilst, underneath the bloom, th' insidious canker prey'd.

A few brief moons in life's serene eclipse
The stamp of tranquil suff'ring on thy  brow&mdash;
A sigh &mdash; a smile upon thy pallid lips&mdash;
A heaving of the heart &mdash; and what wert thou?
A denizen of worlds beyond the flow
Of change and time, &mdash; a limitless delight,&mdash;
To whom all firmer hope, dread, pleasure, woe,
Were but as fleeting visions of a night,
Which, vanish'd, leave thy track, Eternity, more bright!

What lovelier garland can Affection bring
What nobler tribute Admiration pay
What sweeter requiem can the Poet sing
To hallow man, the "pilgrim of a day,"
Than this: &mdash; "he sorrow'd, trembled, pass'd away,
And harmoniz'd, as thou, sweet spirit, hast,
With those whose life was truth, &mdash; their name a ray
A guiding star &mdash; a beacon of the past,
Souls in the glorious mould of mental grandeur cast!"

Such be thy epitaph, engraven deep
In hearts who mourn thee sever'd from the stem,&mdash;
In hearts whose only solace is to weep,
Not that thou wert and art, &mdash; but that to them
Thou art not; &mdash; chide not Reason, nor condemn
That vainly how our tears, &mdash; our bosoms swell.&mdash;
Alas!  Affection knows no holier gem
Than her own tear, &mdash; no purer type to tell
How much we love and mourn. &mdash; Sweet spirit, Fare thee well!
