To beauteous, dear, delightful, witching woman,
The noblest bards have poured their deathless lays
And in the muse's train, it were uncommon,
To find a minstrel silent in her praise.
In reverence for the sex, I yield to no man;
To them, my heart its silent homage pays;
And still I wonder, as I think about them,
How dismal were our fate, if doomed to live without them.

There is so much in women to admire,
In youth so kind, in age so wise and solemn;
That would Apollo but impart the fire,
I'd sing their virtues in a quarto volume.
But faint the warblings of my rustic lyre,
And niggard fate forbids to raise a column;
Then humbly bowing to my fortune stern,
I, like a Scotsman true, will heap a little cairn.

Of modern monuments to woman's fame,
Byron's are built of marble, dark and strong;
And on the pedestal is many a name
His hand has rescued from oblivion's throng.
Moore's is a gilded altar, where a flame
Breathes luscious fragrance, softly borne along;
On this we gaze &mdash; admire its beauteous polish;
That ruder form, we own, time only can demolish,

But both, ungrateful to their native land,
Of foreign beauties have enraptured sung;
Their forms have sculptured with unwearied hand,
And round the statutes loveliest drapery hung:
Forgot, the graces of Green Erin's strand,
And Caledonia's daughters fair and young:
To Lalla Rookh, Moore's strings his softest lyre,
And infidels alone can Byron's muse inspire.

Though Scotia cannot boast her myrtle vales,
Yet waving birch, and sweetly scented thorn,
Breathe gentle fragrance to the twilight gales,
And waft their odours on the breeze of morn:
Around, rich Commerce spreads her whitening sails,
Mid golden harvests her gay fields adorn;
Her rivers roll, soft glide her crystal rills,
And o'er her flowery glens, high tower her heath-clad hills.

Her woodlands wave with buds and bushes green,
Where many a warbler plumes his wanton wing,
When dewy morning sheds her smile serene,
Their song of love makes rocks and vallies ring.
In sun-bright summer, breathes the scented bean,
And cowslips deck the mossy banks of spring,
Her lowing herds in every vale abound,
And flocks, with fleeces white, bleat on the hills around.

But Scotia, still of nobler wealth possess'd,
Can boast her hardy independent swains;
And fairer, lovelier sweets, are hers confess'd,
Than waving woods, green fields, and flowery plains.
The modest virgin's blush, and swelling breast,
Where love in secret sits, to forge his chains,
'Midst every charm, and winning nameless grace,
That beauty deigns to shed on woman's angel face!

This brings me to the point from whence I started,
From which, I own, I've made sad aberration,
But every reader, if he's patriot-hearted,
I'm sure will smile, and pardon the digression.
Besides, when from my subject I departed,
It was not easy to resist temptation,
For dearly as I value woman's charms,
'Tis Caledonia's fair that all my bosom warm.

Fair country-women, is it not a shame,
For Byron's muse your beauties to neglect,
To dwell with rapture on a stranger's name,
And hang his pearls about a Tartar's neck
However fair?  I think he's much to blame;
Your virtues claimed a little more respect;
And they should echo over land and sea,
If I like him could sing &mdash; if he could love like me.

Methinks, I see your cheek with anger flush,
And scorn the praise his Lordship could bestow;
The Laureate of Don Juan! &mdash; do not blush&mdash;
No Scotian fair e'er read the book I know!&mdash;
Though you have heard the public talk &mdash; but hush!
I hail and laud that bashful modest glow;
Cheer up, loved fair!  nor fear oblivion's lake,
Yet better sink forgot, than float in Julia's wake.

Shame to the bard, who prostitutes his skill
To flout the sex, in vile lampoons satiric;
For me, I've every want, except the will
To sing your praise, in sonnet, ode, and lyric!
Dull as I am, more softly glides my quill,
Whene'er employed, to write your panegyric:
Even now, inspired, so warm my bosom glows,
I feel my pen unfit for writing sober prose!

But though I long to shine in epic glory,
At first, I must not soar too near the sun;
For trust me, I should be exceeding sorry
To fall, my flight so short, and just begun.
Well, let me try a short and simple story;
Perchance the muse may make it smoothly run;
Yet I have fears &mdash; this stanza is so bad,
It is not poetry, but measured prose run mad!

My scene's in Forfar, fam'd the country round,
For leather brogues, and philosophic lore;
For Osnaburgs, peat-reek, and law profound;
A lake, more famous far in days of yore;
Its muddy waters many a witch had drowned;
The muse might tell of twenty wonders more;
Such as its mosses, marl, and modern steeple,
That ornaments the kirk as piety the people.

But let them pass &mdash; I must my theme pursue;
Yet gentle readers, ere we further go,
My tale is old, although the version's new;
You must look back, some sixty years, or so;
But still, perhaps, it may be strange to you,
Although your face does disappointment shew;
In fond anticipation, you expected
To hear of Radicals and lordly self-elected!

But borough politics have long been stale,
Beyond the boundaries of the corporation;
They'll do for deacons, guzzling home-brew'd ale,
Or magistrates, for evening recreation:
One party finds them like a thrice-told tale;
The other hates to hear their botheration!
Between them, if you please, we'll leave the strife;
Far better hear my tale &mdash; 'tis of domestic life.

Tom Hood was young &mdash; a blacksmith to his trade,
His smithy stood just midway down the Spout;
The noise his hammers in the morning made,
Roused young and old from rest, all round about;
For Thomas was a thrifty thriving blade;
Whoever called, the blacksmith ne'er was out:
And though the lasses bloom'd, like roses, round him,
Nor Love, with subtle dart, nor Beauty's charms could wound him.

Tom had a tongue that never tir'd of talking,
His eloquence in native fervour glowed;
His stature tall, he seem'd a May-pole stalking;
A Hercules &mdash; earth trembled as he trod;
But still, he was not quite the thing for walking;
For on the street his gait was somewhat odd;
The cause was one, would neither cure nor smother,
One limb, though not a lath, was shorter than its brother.

Kate Gow was fair, a gaudy flaunting flower,
Just in the noon of youth and beauty's pride;
And saw delighted, at the twilight hour,
The Beaux, by dozens, crowding at her side,
Who flatter'd, fawn'd, and own'd her beauty's power,
And made her time on rosy pinions glide;
Then left the fair one, fancied conquests dreaming;
Now musing on the past &mdash; now future projects scheming.

For Kate was not the lily of the vale,
That bends its head beneath the dews of morn;
Neither was she the modest primrose pale,
That meekly blooms beneath the sheltering thorn:
She was a garden flower, that fear'd the gale,
And long'd some gentle bosom to adorn; 
She could not stoop &mdash; would ne'er degrade her charms,
To hide her virgin blushes in a rustic's arms.

For she a lady's maid some years had been,
And knew the fashions of a drawing-room;
Of modish manners, much had learned and seen,
And many an art for heightening beauty's bloom;
Knew how to dress, and where to place each pin,
Amidst the labours of the silken loom;
What colour best became her beauteous face,
And all that could improve each native virgin grace.

And nature had on Kate (benignly kind)
Bestowed a face beyond most others fair;
If features were an index to the mind,
Of wit and spirit she had ample share;
Her slender neck and sparkling eye combined
To give the maid a most enchanting air;
Her smile so gentle, seemed to say, "Come, sip
Young Love's celestial nectar from my ruby lip!"

Had niggard Fortune been but as propitious,
The maid might then had husbands, pick and clause;
She had gallants, who thought it most delicious,
When she would smile, their evenings to amuse;
But they were such as deemed it injudicious
To run their necks into the marriage noose:
True, she had been to Hymen's fane invited,
But it was still by those her pride or prudence slighted.

Two hungry lawyers, lacking food and fees,
With faces sallow, as a parchment skin,
Were both nonsuited in their amorous pleas;
Next came a splay-foot weaver, lank and thin;
A son of Crispin sought the fair to please,
A shoe-brush bristling on his greasy chin;
A London tailor hoped her mind to measure;
The trio was dismissed &mdash; such was the lady's pleasure.

Hope, that had once a burning meteor blazed,
Now dwindled to a dimly twinkling star,
Which fainter grew as Catherine fondly gazed,
And clouds would sometimes all her vision mar:
And when her languid eye the maiden raised,
She saw it glimmering in the welkin far,
Its distance greater each revolving night,
And sick was she at heart to view its waning light.

Kate to religion paid the reverence due;
Tom Hood was seated near her every Sunday;
Her face, set fairly in the blacksmith's view,
Made dreadful havock in his heart, on Monday!  
In vain he tried his passion to subdue,&mdash;
Love lent him courage, and the lad went one day&mdash;
Where think you?  To the barber to be trimmed,
His black and bushy beard with culm and smoke begrimmed.

Removed his weekly crop of bristling hair,
And in his Sunday clothing neatly dress'd,
He sat till twilight curtained o'er the air,
Love, like his bellows, heaving in his breast;
Then limping, hastened to the beauteous fair,
And in her ear his ardent love express'd:
She meant to smile; but happening to look down,
Glanced on his crooked foot, and changed it to a frown.

Kate feigned resentment, which she did not feel;
But prudently resolved his suit to parry;
And calmly answered thus the man of steel,
"No Sir &mdash; I think &mdash; I'm sure &mdash; I'll never marry;
But even if I've a match in Fortune's wheel,
I'm not in haste &mdash; and rather chuse to tarry
Than wed with you &mdash; a blacksmith &mdash; lame beside!
The world would think me rash and fain to be a bride!"

Tom Hood had mother-wit, and common sense,
And felt it not his interest nor good breeding
To let a lady's language give offence,
Though wounded pride was in his bosom bleeding;
But prudence whispered, "Send your anger hence,
And shew your wit, since you're a man of reading;"
For Tooke's Pantheon taught the lad mythology,
And memory brought to mind a passing fair apology.

He smiled, and said, "Dear Kate!  I'm sure you know
The tale of Venus, Queen of Love and Beauty;
Her husband, Vulcan, ne'er was deemed a beau;
Like me &mdash; a blacksmith, cripple, grim, and sooty!
Now you are Venus, Queen of Love below,
And I, your Vulcan, pledge my love and duty;
And since a kindred goddess sets example,
You cannot, charming Kate, on such a pattern trample!"

Tom's rhet'ric was so flattering to her pride,
That though she tried, she could not look unkind;
He went and came; she faintly still denied,&mdash;
Then craved for time, till she made up her mind&mdash;
At last, as ladies do, she blushed and sighed,
With silent meekness, to her fate resigned:
He got a legal charter to her charms,
And blooming Venus lay in Vulcan's brawny arms!

Tradition tells us, that their honey-moon
Was sweet and fragrant as the blooming heather;
They seem'd a couple, in an air-balloon,
That lightly soared above the world together;
Love shed around them all his summer noon,
His sun-bright skies, and warm delightful weather;
How long it lasted, we can but conjecture;
Folks cannot always sup on blushes, smiles, and nectar.

When conquering love his youthful victim captures,
His tickling shafts just titillate the frame,
The subtle poison kindles into raptures,
And fancy deems they still for ever flame;
But wedlock's history has its different chapters,
And one would tire to find them all the same;
The sun resplendent we more highly prize,
When thunder-clouds and storms have darkened o'er the skies.

The wisdom by our great-grandfathers earned,
Tom's mother taught, and he had ne'er forgot;
For they were laws which half an eye discerned
Such as "'Tis industry that boils the pot;"
"Bad lessons grow to habits when they're learned;"
"A penny saved is just a penny got."
These maxims had too much of Tom's regard,
They formed the constant rule by which his life was squared.

At early morn, (his Kate in slumbers drowned,)
Up Tom would rise &mdash; his daily toil begin;
The bellows heave with deep and hollow sound,
And strike the anvil with such thundering din
As waked the fair one from her sleep profound,
Whene'er he deemed it time to rise and spin;
And would perhaps some pleasing dream destroy,
Some visionary bliss, which she could ne'er enjoy.

The happiest minds will sometimes languor feel,
The brightest eye be dimmed in slumbers deep;
While Tom was hammering at the stubborn steel,
With Kate the leaden hours would slowly creep;
The ceaseless humming of her drowsy wheel
Would almost lull the lovely fair asleep,
For having led a talking, lightsome life,
The change was great indeed, &mdash; a dull domestic wife!

To cheat the lingering hours, that seemed so heavy,
Kate sought for comfort in a cup of tea;
With half a score of gossips at her levee,
When o'er their Congo, Hyson, or Bohea,
Such tittle-tattle would inspire the bevy 
That all was laughter, frolic, mirth, and glee,
And sometimes, when the dames were wondrous frisky,
They parted o'er a glass of good Glenlivet whisky.

Were I inclined my subject to prolong,
The muse could sing of much that makes us merry;
The virtues of that sedative souchong,
And cheering influence of the Mocha berry,
With frothy chocolate eke out the song,
And cocoa too &mdash; but I in kindness spare ye;
Although, perhaps, the lay might still delight ye,
Were I to add a verse in praise of aqua vitae.

I'm well aware, that courtly Roman Flaccus
Could smack his lips, and sing the joys of wine;
The Greek, Anacreon, worshipped jolly Bacchus,
And round his brows the ivy loved to twine;
And we have bards, who boast, and boldly crack, as
Good whisky were a beverage most divine:
For me, I deem it man-destroying liquor&mdash;
Why did the dram-glass e'er supplant the brown-ale bicker?

So thought Tom Hood; and reader, so think I;
But then, the blacksmith thought the same of tea,
The clattering cups still made his bosom sigh;
And there with him, I flatly disagree;
It cheers the brain, lights up the drowsy eye,
I'm sure the ladies will accord with me!
Come muse, proceed &mdash; we never can be wrong,
If maids, and wives, and widows, all approve the song.

Tom's heart was grieved, to see his darling Kate
Twice every day sip the insipid trash;
Besides, it did the blacksmith's bosom grate
To find it made such inroads on the cash;
But his dislike arose to downright hate,
When six or eight sat down to sip and clash,
And though good manners forced him to be civil,
A gadding, wanton crew!  he wished them at the d&mdash;l!

His tortured mind in cogitation wandered,
With grief he saw the coterie increasing;
While o'er their cups he heard his neighbours slandered&mdash;
And then the afternoon oft spent in dressing&mdash;
Thus, time and money both were sadly squandered,
A tradesman's house could not afford such messing;
But Kate was docile, and would list to reason,
If it were gently told, and at a proper season.

Night seemed the time.  Tom introduced the strain,
With long and laboured praises of frugality,
And though he wished his house should still retain,
And practise all the rites of hospitality,
Yet it were foolish, and far worse than vain,
For tradesmen's wives to follow folks of quality.
"I loathe," said he, "your idling gossips' chatter!
And beg, I may not hear so many tea-cups clatter."

Tom's pedantry 'bout him of Lemnos isle,
In Catherine's breast had anxious itching bred;
For though she heard him with approving smile,
She ne'er of Vulcan and his Venus read; 
But nought her chace of knowledge could beguile,
With such a wondrous history in her head;
By perseverance, and some private friends,
Kate got the tale in full, prompt at her finger ends.

Tom clos'd his counsel with a kiss most kind;
"'Tis thus," thought Kate, "you would your wife cajole!
Though he must lightly prize a woman's mind,
Who would her simple pleasures thus control;
But, stingy Vulcan, you may come to find,
Your Venus has an independent soul;
Yes smile, or frown, kiss, counsel, or make speeches,
My resolution's formed, that I shall wear the breeches!"

Kate, thus resolved to stand upon her mettle,
Next week invites her cronies half a score,
When brightly burnished was the copper kettle,
And nicely sanded the snug parlour floor:
"To-night," thinks she, "the dubious point shall settle,
My reign confirm &mdash; the rights of wives restore; 
If spouse should gloom, and look a little sulky,
Yet sure, the Queen of Love can manage honest Vulky."

It was a warm and sultry afternoon,
The smith, half naked, o'er his furnace broiling;
(For it was in the latter end of June,)
And he was thirsty, o'er the anvil toiling;
And from his temples sweat was pouring down,
As if his marrow and his brains were oiling;
When past the door he saw the gossips flocking,
He made the bellows groan, the case was so provoking.

Who has not seen new ale in bottle pent,
While in the process of brisk fermentation?
It hisses, fumes, and struggles for a vent,
In furious, dire, internal perturbation.
The foaming liquor, still on freedom bent,
No longer can control its agitation,
Bounce goes the cork!  or crash the bottle flies,
While froth and shivered glass salute the gazer's eyes.

So felt Tom Hood, in that eventful hour
Of rank rebellion to his sovereign will;
Such stern defiance of a husband's power,
Did all his soul with deeds of vengeance fill.
He stamped, and swore, "Yes, Madam!  you shall cower,
And find, with shame, that I'll be master still."
Such was his wrath &mdash; such strength in every stroke,
That every blow he dealt a hammer handle broke!

He's called &mdash; walks in &mdash; a poker in his hand,
A splendid set of china graced the tray;
Rich sweetmeats ranged around the phalanx stand,
The ladies sit in smiles, and garments gay.
Tom stretched his arm, and waved his iron wand,
The whole a mass of glittering ruin lay!
Then, to the ladies, made a blacksmith's bow,
And with complacent smile, said, "Drink tea now, Kate Gow!"

Some women would have screamed, and wept, and fainted,
Perhaps have scolded, and increased the strife;
But Kate, though she the shame and loss resented,
Appeared serene, &mdash; a meek submissive wife;
And with a smile, that shewed a heart contented,
Went calmly to the kitchen &mdash; seized a knife&mdash;
Passed to the smithy, where (as histories tell us)
Her angry Vulcan stood, and puffed his ponderous bellows.

Tom turned his head, though he was glad to find
That she was come, the quarrel to compound;
Kate forced a smile, then softly stole behind,
And coolly ripped the roaring bellows round:
Tom pulled and tugged, but still there came no wind&mdash;
Their breath had issued at the yawning wound!
With calm composure Kate before him stood,
And meekly smiling, said, "Now, puff and blow, Tom Hood!"

The rumbling bellows having breathed their last,
Kate, chuckling, like a statue saw him stand;
And while he looked like one bewitched, aghast,
Advanced, and smiling, pressed his horny hand.
"Now, kiss and friends &mdash; we'll both forget the past;"
She said, &mdash; "I love you &mdash; honour your command;
But mind, my dear, &mdash; I'm not a fool &mdash; a flat!
For wrong by day or night, I'll give you Tit for Tat!"
