CANTO I.
Oh!  mortal man, whose inconsistent mind
Is ever varying, ever discontent,
If thou wouldst learn true happiness to find,
Enjoy the blessings bounteous Heaven hath lent!
Yet certes 'twas by Nature wisely meant,
Albeit possessing, man should not enjoy
Continued bliss; were the bow always bent,
The cord would break; a constant feast would cloy,
And man would loathe his life if lacking its alloy.

In London town, fast by the Thamis' side,
On pleasaunt bank of variegated lands,
Smiling betwix Sainct Clement and Sainct Bride,
Lyk moder twix her sonnes, a Tempill stands:
Here lig the sable and sagacious bands,
Whose wicked lore on ample folios shines,
Ingrost I ween by many clerkly hands,
From age to age, in long and labour'd lines;&mdash;
Of man's imperfect nature, sad, but certain signs!

In sooth, sagacious bands: &mdash; while silly strife
To other men brings sorrow, sin, and shame,
Pois'ning the purest elements of life,&mdash;
To them it yieldeth affluence and fame!
Natheless to solder broken faith they aim,
To prop the weak, and moderate the strong;
But eager in ambition's glorious game,
They reck not of the right side or the wrong,
But careless pass their hours their bokes and briefs among.

Within this Tempill stands a goodly pile
Of buildings strong, albeit of Paper hight,
Where, at the head of many a winding file
Of crazy steps, there lived a merrie wight.
A cheerful wonne it was, of aspect light,
By massive door and double bolts secured,
With inner valve and knocker rubb'd so bright,
To try its power the passing hand it lured;
And here the live-long day this wight was close immured.

The outward room was desolate and bare,
Save seat for roguish Clerke who entraunce gave;
But far within, on pompous easy-chair,
Knee deep in papers, sate the master grave:
He was, to weet, a fascinating knave
As e'er charm'd men with magic of the tongue,
For, or in open court or close conclave,
All on his honied words with transport hung;
So that through England's land his fame was loudly rung.

On every side were thick-bound quartos flung,
And lesser tomes in sheet or board of blue,
And tape-tied trash, (as erst my master sung,
When yon sad Castle of Delights he drew;)
Lackt not the saffron-back'd and dun review,
The modern tale, the old romantic lore,
Ne flippaunt magazine, ne pamphlet new;
'Mid such varietie of letter'd store,
Save reading, you mote thinke he had to do nought more.

And all around were nicely suited shelves,
For every size and character of boke,
From giant folios down to pigmy twelves,
Old, middle aged, and new, &mdash; a motley stock!
"Treason" upheld by "Hale," and "Crime" by "Coke,"
"Frauds" by "The Common Law," "Crown Pleas" by "Powers,"
The "Life of Faith" by "Hume" and "Bolingbroke; "
Twix "Rules" and "Precedents" plain "Practice" towers,
And Socrates o'er all in bronzed stucco lours!

In inner chamber, hid from vulgar sight.,
Maps, globes, and instruments, confusedly lay,
Prints, drawings, music, all in tatter'd plight,
The still-loved studies of his youthful day;
Full oft, he lengthen'd visits here would pay
To sweet remembrances of pleasures gone;
Here legal caution lost its icy sway,
Here dropt the studied look, the solemn tone,
And here his full heart spoke in language all its own.

And here each might, retired from drafts and pleas,
He ay withdrew; and rid of all controul,
Scribbled in leetle boke his notes and fees;
Then with some mental feast refresh'd his soul:
Then pampering scraps of wit he would unroll,
Or on the gifted page of genius pore,
Strike to Mozart the angel-strain'd viole,
Or weep abandon'd Dido's sorrows o'er,
Or Shakespeare's magic world contemplate and adore.

Ah me, the cares of man!  Dan Persius cries,&mdash;
Dissatisfied, ambition-blinded man;&mdash;
From happy still to happier he flies,
Sad cause of his first fall and Heaven's first ban!&mdash;
When Fame to trump my hero's name began,
He sigh'd the Senate as the bar to shake,
Forsook the course he long victorious ran,
And lost the high while playing higher stake;&mdash;
Which of another song shall subject matter make.

SECOND CANTO.
Oh Poesie, thou sweetest, loveliest maid
Of all who minister man's bliss below,
Purest of mental beings, by whose aid
Celestial transports we on earth foreknow!
How often at thy feet my griefs I throw;
How well I love, but ah!  how worthlessly,
These trickling witnesses too soothly show,
When from a world I little love, I flee,
To one all flowers and sun-shine, form'd, sweet maid, by thee.

I woo thee not for fame or filthy gain,
I seek thee not in schools of modern date,
I disavow thee 'mong the critic train,
Who, as their factions dictate, love or hate;
In solitude I sue thee, ear' and late,
On native mountain or in kindred glade;
No richer gifts of Heaven I supplicate,
Than health, content, and thee, thou heaven-born maid:
Ah, gracious God, with these my joys would never fade!

But to my tale; &mdash; Near this our wight's abode,
A little higher up the Thamis' stream,
Where by Westminster's arches 'tis ystrode,
Sainct Stephen's antiquated turrets gleam;
From Lambeth's shores a little town they seem,
By architects of every nation plann'd;
And certes every nation's plans make theme
For mickle work, to the debating band
That nightly fashion laws for England's thinking land!

A mottled clump of roofs and walls it was,
Ne portal visible to unskill'd e'e,
As though by open access none mote pass,
And nought but dark and hidden ways were free;
And hidden ways enow I wot there be,
For entraunce to that house of high renown:&mdash;
How our wight entered, boots not,&mdash;there was he,&mdash;
Of all his tow'ring wishes at the crown,
When in Sainct Stephen's hall at last he sate him down.

Who but Sir Member now was nightly seen,
With swelling strut and consequential air,
But ill conceal'd by the affected mien
Of self-unworthiness that simper'd there;
But the peer'd eyebrow and the listless stare,
That, while it favor'd, seem'd to pity too,
Disclosed the aspect that the face would wear,
Were its reflection to the bosom true:&mdash;
Good Lord, with what nice arts deceit doth man endue!

On bed of roses now the Templar view,
By senatorial influence upborne;
But ah!  what bed of roses ever grew,
Where lurk'd not the unwelcome stalk of thorn!
Eftsoons his heart with secret stings was torn,
When that sooth tongue that ay attention won,
And oft success, to causes most forlorn,
Unheeded e'en in Freedom's cause begun,
While ill-bred cough and yawn round sleepy hearers run.

Ay, sicker, 'twere a subtle tongue indeed
In predetermined cause that could prevail,
Albeit for truth and liberty it plead,
As too soon found the hero of my tale.
He founder'd in the ministerial gale,
The sea of public principle that sweeps,
'Whelming th' advent'rous barks that dare to sail
Beyond Expediency's unfathom'd deeps,&mdash;
Which in continued strife the state's own vessel keeps.

Yet to those gallant barks that brave the storm,
Be one triumphant shout of glory given,
Loud as the billow in its fiercest form,
On ocean rock by western whirlwind driven.
See proud Oppression's chains asunder riven;
While e'en gaunt Power shrinks scowling 'neath his helm,
And swoln Corruption hears the voice of heaven
In patriot tongues, her minions that o'erwhelm,
And hurl in awful peals the vengeance of a realm.

Alack for our poor wight!  at this he aim'd;
And as right noble was the prize he sought,
So be the failure less severely blamed,
In pity to the sufferings on him brought:
For ruin to his peace of mind it wrought,&mdash;
In his whole chain of happiness no link
It left entire; his future life was nought,
For his first fame had died &mdash; Ah me!  to think
That e'er absurd ambition man so low should sink.

The shrub the fury of the blast oft braves,
When the proud oak in summer vigour falls;
The cockboat oft rides safely through the waves
That ruthless swallow mighty ammirals;
The lightning strikes the turret-crested halls
That daring glisten on the mountain height,
But spares the low-roof'd cabins' humble walls
That in the valley scarce impede the light:&mdash;
And so in moral nature fared it with our wight.

Thus ends my tale:  albeit this seely youth
Repenteth sore the errour of his way,
Yet suffering for folly is most sooth;
And now his heart feels Hope's reviving ray;
She with her magic finger marks a day,
Nor distant far, his life that will renew,
No more in vile ambition's paths to stray:&mdash;
And, these consoling prospects in his view,
To self reproach and shame he then will bid adieu.
