With transient brightness glow'd the Eastern sky,
As Sol's first rays impearl'd the tears of morn:
The soaring lark, disdaining human eye,
Pour'd his glad strain; while, from the scented thorn,
The sportive Zephyrs stole a sweet perfume,
And gave to Beauty's cheek a fresher, lovelier bloom.

Bright as the morn, to Henry's mental view,
By hope illumin'd, shone each coming hour,
As tow'rd the cot with eager haste he flew,
Where Anna, modest as spring's earliest flow'r,
Shrunk from his gaze, and, half-reluctant, sigh'd,
As mem'ry said, "He comes, to claim his promis'd bride."

Th' unbidden tear forsook her down-cast eye,
To kiss that cheek with loveliest colours spread.
So, gently stealing from the half-veil'd sky,
The dew-drop trembles on the rose's head:
So looks that rose, when morn's reviving ray
Unfolds the varied sweets of summer's genial day.

And why that sigh?  and why that speaking tear?
Could Anna doubt her lover's long-tried truth?
Ah!  no!  she knew him gen'rous, kind, sincere;
And, with the ardour of confiding youth,
Return'd his love; nor vainly strove to hide
Her cherish'd hope, through life to own so dear a guide.

Yea, he was dear:  yet still the tear would flow;
And struggling sighs would still her bosom heave.
Say, ye, whose breasts with kindred feelings glow,
Why, in love's brightest hour, did Anna grieve?
Say &mdash; for you best can paint th' obtrusive fears,
That chill'd her heart's warm tide, and dimm'd her eyes with tears.

And ye, who, proud of beauty's envied reign,
In dress and folly waste its fleeting day,
Learn, ere its pow'r has lock'd the lover's chain,
And man imperious claims perpetual sway&mdash;
Oh!  learn to doubt, while Flatt'ry wings the hours,
And strews in Hymen's path its swiftly fading flow'rs.

"Obey!" &mdash; The word sounds harsh to Beauty's ear:
And Beauty's lip will oft its pow'r deny:
But Anna, taught by Virtue's rules severe,
Own'd its full force, and view'd with anxious eye
The future scene, to Henry's fancy fair;
For, oh!  his love was strong, his heart devoid of care.

She knew he lov'd, yet fear'd her pow'r to please,
When youth's bright tints and 'witching smiles were fled&mdash;
Fear'd the cold glance that bids loves current freeze,
While Hope and Joy their with'ring blossoms shed&mdash;
Th' affected tone, that Truth's warm bosom stings,
And all the cheerless train, unblest Indiff'rence brings.

Sweet maid!  thy Henry own'd a charm more rare
Than beauty boasts, or joyous youth can give.
His eye had trac'd it on thy brow so fair:
And, while he vow'd for thee alone to live,
He felt its pow'r, and thank'd benignant heav'n,
That to his longing arms so rich a boon was giv'n.

Thus, when, beneath Ausonia's cloudless sky,
Th' observant traveller delights to rove,
While the gay landscape smiles, his raptur'd eye
Marks the rich promise of the golden grove,
Where flow'rs and fruit the ambient air perfume,
And, through the varying year, in sweet succession bloom.
