There is a living spirit in the spot
Touched by the sceptre of Antiquity;
The splendours by its parting pinions shot,
Still shed a solemn beauty on the eye.
Proud Carousel, what thousand memories lie
Within thy marble walls!  what steps of kings
Have trod thee to yon throne of luxury!
What pomps, woes, tribes of grand and guilty things,
As from the grave, the sight of thy pavilions brings.

Prince, warrior, priest &mdash; the crown, the helm, the hood,
Here rose, and sway'd, and plunged in swift decay.
Behold that golden portal!  there HE stood&mdash;
The curse and omen of our evil day.
He marshall'd from that spot his last array,
That went to battle, ne'er to come again;
Their Xerxes shed no tear!  they went to slay;
Vengeance awoke at last, and they were slain!
And now above it waves the Lily's exiled vane.

There stands his Arch of victory, but there
Glitter his victor's spears, &mdash; His day is done!
Close by the pile sits Austria's cuirassier,
Busy and gazing groups are on it strown,
A wain is at its foot, as if for one
Who on that crowded scaffold came to die;
And the quick murmurings there, the engine's groan,
Short, deep, give semblance of a dying cry:
France, on that scaffold ends thy gloomy sovereignty.

For thence must stoop the glorious Grecian steeds
That his fierce hand had yoked to Victory's wheel.
Now, following where a newer conqueror leads,
To thy blue waters, Venice, bends their heel!
Trophies!  how oft has steel thus shiver'd steel,
Since first their wanderings fixed the doom of war!
But lives not in those fiery fronts a spell?
Were not those orb'd eyes moulded, when the air
Of midnight shook and glowed with the red comet's glare?

Ye stars!  bright legions that, before all time,
Camped on yon plain of sapphire, what shall tell
Your burning myriads, but the eye of Him
Who bade thro' heaven your golden chariots wheel?
Yet who earthborn can see your hosts, nor feel
Immortal impulses &mdash; Etemity?
What wonder if the o'erwrought soul should reel
With its own weight of thought, and the wild eye
See fate within your tracks of sleepless glory lie?

For ye behold the MIGHTIEST.  From that steep
What ages have ye worshipped round your KING!
Ye heard his trumpet sounded o'er the sleep
Of Earth; &mdash; ye heard the morning angels sing.
Upon that orb, now o'er me quivering,
The gaze of Adam fix'd from Paradise;
The wanderers of the Deluge saw it spring
Above the mountain surge, and hailed its rise
Lighting their lonely track with Hope's celestial dyes.

On CALVARY shot down that purple eye,
When, but the soldier and the sacrifice
All were departed. &mdash; Mount of Agony!
But Time's broad pinion, ere the giant dies,
Shall cloud your dome &mdash; Ye fruitage of the skies,
Your vineyard shall be shaken! &mdash; From your urn
Censers of Heaven!  no more shall glory rise, 
Your incense to the THRONE! &mdash; The Heavens shall burn:
For all your pomps are dust, and shall to dust return.

Yet, look ye living intellects. &mdash; The trine
Of waning planets speaks it not decay?
Does Schedir's staff of diamond wave no sign?
Monarch of midnight, Sirius, shoots thy ray
Undimm'd, when thrones sublunar pass away?
Dreams! &mdash; yet if e'er was graved in vigil wan
Your spell on gem or imaged alchemy,
The sign when empire's hour-glass downwards ran,
'Twas on that arch, graved on that brazen talisman.

Greece!  thou wast still a country, Memory bleeds
To think how early died that glorious name!
Yet still 'twas glorious, while the matchless Steeds
Stood on thy Isthmus gate.  The Roman came,
Red from the fight, his eagle's wing of flame
Waving o'er idol shields, and wolf-crests tall
The widowed city groan'd, in all her shame,
To see the Lictors mount the pedestal.
Then Greece was doom'd to fall; a deadly, final fall.

The glass ran down!  the immortal Steeds again
Must set to rise, like empire's fatal star;
The ancient victors seem'd the vanquished then.
The unhelmed Roman beat his breast afar,
The spoilers march'd in pomp of eastern war.
There lower'd from elephants the turban'd brow,
There archers gleam'd on camel and on car,
And there, in gold and gem's barbaric glow,
Triumph'd the purpled Greek &mdash; the King of Kings below.

But stronger omens chill the idolater;
Above the standards towers a CROSS of red.
Oh, if he knew that sign, no sign of fear!
Rome's crown is rent; now may the Pontiff shed
The ashes on his brow, the Augur spread.
His eyes to mark the lightning o'er his shrine.
The hour has come!  The mystic steeds have fled,
The Eagle stoops before the cross divine;
Empire has gone, to dwell with mighty CONSTANTINE.

The glass ran down!  Long had the coursers stood,
Of Fate and Empire the unchanged record;
Long had the EASTERN HARLOT'S cup of blood
Made drunk the nations at her midnight board;
Long had the martyr's groan from racks been pour'd;
Their graves cried out, the winds bore up the cry,
And it was heard, and in the West the sword
Was girded on the Christian champion's thigh:
Woe to her turban's scroll of pride and blasphemy.

A hostile trumpet summon'd. &mdash; 'Twas a sound
That ne'er before had pierced her jewell'd ear.
On her indignant brow the helm was bound,
With giant grasp she seized the mace and spear,
She look'd upon the sea.  A cross was there,
Red as her own, and with it rush'd a train,
That seem'd like Ocean's lords their barks to steer,
An endless cloud of mast, and sheet, and vane,
With bursts of glorious arms, far flashing o'er the main.

I must to other themes, yet thought delays
As o'er a noble grave, above the scene,
Now living all before me; &mdash; morning's blaze
Shot on the wall, the shore, the surge of green,
The galleys, like a wood, the capes between,
Then flashing onwards; &mdash; on the foremost prow
A warrior who his ninetieth year has seen,
To whom the ring of gold-mailed princes bow,
As if to "WAR" grown old, immortal Dandolo!&mdash;

Constantinople! &mdash; then thy shout arose,
And from thy ramparts roll'd the mystic flame
Unquenchable. &mdash; The ranks of battle close:&mdash;
The galleys rush'd with catapult and ram,
Like hail the lances from the turrets came,
And decks were fired, and champions downwards flung,
Till wall and shore, and surge in crimson swam,
'Twas noon, and still the charging trumpet rung,
At eve, the entering knights their deep Te Deum sung.

The Hippodrome is girt with axe and spear,
For the bright Steeds must sail the western sea;
And round the Circus gallop in career,
With blazon'd shield, helm barr'd, and lance at knee,
Like towers of steel the Latin Chivalry.
The Venice mariner, in cap and plume,
And gold-seamed gabardine, looks on with glee;
The Greek stands rapt, as by an opening tomb,
As if his spirit saw the Turk in Sophia's Dome.

The glass ran down!  and Venice must resign
The talisman of empire to the Gaul.
Her emerald no more must wed the brine.
Feebly she falls, yet more than she must fall:
A thousand years had stood her sacred wall,
The Isthmus-guard to lovely Italy;
And now the horn has blown the final call
That bids in chains another Corinth lie
Another Greece be bow'd by blood and perfidy.

A throng was in St. Mark's, but 'twas no throng
Like that, which o'er the Adriatic foam
Had borne the Steeds with shout and warrior song,
Then fix'd them for long glory o'er the dome:
She sinn'd, and now the hour of wrath was come;
Tho' 'twas the robber made the adulteress bare:
The crowd were fierce-eyed men with pike and drum
And brazen gun, and banner's taunting glare;
The pale Venetian stood aloof, in weak despair.

Such is the sport of Time! &mdash; Thou sullen thought!
Empires might stand, unshaken as their globe.
But which has worn its ermine without spot?
'Twas Justice, and not Time that tore their robe.
What sent the steel their pamper'd hearts to probe?
'Twas their own blow, no matter by what name,
Conspirator, or Conqueror, Monarch, Mob.
They built their pile, then Judgment sent the flame,
To rid the Earth of guilt, the wearied Heaven of shame.

'Tis not in mockery of man that Earth
Is strewed with splendid fragments, temple, tower;
That realms, where glory sprang full arm'd to birth,
Are desolate, the snake and tiger's bower;&mdash;
They lie the monuments of misused power,
Not freaks of fate but warnings against crime;
And ancient Babylon might, at this hour,
Had she been guiltless, stand as in her prime,
Nay &mdash; stand in growing pomp till God had finish'd time.

England!  my great, my glorious, &mdash; loved with love
That almost makes a portion of the soul;
The hour has come to fix thine eye above.
There lie the thunders thou alone must roll,
And roll upon thyself; &mdash; There spreads the scroll,
Where thine own hand must write thy destiny.
None can decide but thou, if wolves shall howl,
And the black viper in thy temples lie.
Be holy, and thou'rt saved; England, thou must not die!

Now ebb the sands of France!  The Steeds must range,
And ever thus?  or has the day begun,
Aera of God!  when thrones no more shall change?
Has his Great YEAR been roll'd by empire's sun?
Back to their Adriatic queen have gone
The Steeds, with Princes glorying in their train;
The signal of the last subverted throne?
We talk no more of spells. &mdash; On land and main
Peace shall keep watch till comes the UNIVERSAL REIGN.

The Louvre halls are fill'd with strange turmoil
Of axe and hammer, steps and voices loud,
For there the victors seize a noble spoil;
'Twas won by England's arm in Soignie's wood.
Yon bayonets still are rusty with the blood
That drench'd its dark ravines.  The struggle's o'er,
So may the restless rancour be subdued.
The final lesson's given.  The might that tore
That matchless prize from France, bade her "Go sin no more."

Kingly and broad ascends the Parian stair,
Fit entrance to the regal glories nigh;
And toilsome 'tis to make the passage there,
Thro' its thick crowd incessant rushing by.
The summit gain'd, &mdash; like lightning on the eye,
Bursts the deep vision, from  the stately door,
One colour'd splendour, far as glance can fly,
Gold, marble, giant mirror, o'er and o'er,
Flashing in sun-like streams from fretted vault to floor.

The eye is tranced, and from the portal-arch
Looks down the unmeasured length in dim delight,
Piercing the radiant lines the mighty march
Of armies of the mind; &mdash; on left and right,
Banners as rich, as on the mountain's height
Rises the morn; &mdash; There Rubens' blaze of gold,
In eastern pomp above his legions bright;
Delicious Titian, there thy rainbowed fold,
There Raphael's, wove of rays from saint and prophet roll'd.

Imperial thing! &mdash; Now lowest of the low,
Could not the sword fulfil thy hate of man?
Napoleon had not war enough of woe,
The mighty at thy footstool, weak and wan,
Empire uprooted by thine iron van?
But the last relic misery could resign,
Dear as the blood that in her pulses ran;
That thou must rend, and rob the grave and shrine?
All sacrilege was pure, thou felon king!  to thine!

These were the guardian Spirits!  and when they
Were gone, the oracle of soul was dumb.
Still, in the heaven of Italy the day
Awoke on roses, and the evening gloom
Sail'd down the azure on as soft a plume
As ever fann'd the air in Summer's bower;
But the high voice that bade the nations come
To love and worship, parted in that hour.
These were her crown of stars, her glory, and her power!

But these were her revenge. &mdash; The spoiler's spoil'd;&mdash;
Ev'n on this spot is given the deadliest blow.
Here on the robber's head his crime recoil'd.
Strange scene, of wonderers hasting to and fro,
And soldiers on their posts parading slow,
And the fixed native with his livid glare,
And woman with her ready burst of woe,
And eager artists scaffolded in air,
Catching its pomps before that gorgeous wall is bare.

But man and earth had vanish'd from the eye,
Once on its host of silent beauty roll'd,
Ranged in their tribes, ascending majesty!
Holland's fine touch, the Flanders pencil bold,
Superb Venetian, pearl and purple stoled;
Romantic Lombard, fiery Florentine,
Brightening, as up the Alp the evening's gold
From the deep vineyard to the crown of pine,
Till, on the marble peak, 'tis mix'd with Heaven, &mdash; divine!

Corregio, Titian, Raphael, Angelo,
What made your age a wonder and despair
To all the future? &mdash; a resistless flow
Of the soul's frozen depths; &mdash; a hallowed glare
Of lightning that dissolved the prison bar;&mdash;
A sudden trumpet piercing the profound
Of the world's night; &mdash; a call of star to star,
In bright Conjunction for the moment bound,
Never to meet again in all time's weary round?

What are those tablets round me?  Living minds,
The mighty soul in form and pressure wrought;&mdash;
Unfolded natures, &mdash; where the vision winds
Thro' what was dream, deep throb, unutter'd thought;
There breathes Salvator!  That red lightning shot
From its dark throne to fire that forest hoar,
That combat in its burnings madly fought,
That lake convulsed before the tempest's roar,
All in Salvator's soul toss'd, battled, burned before.

And o'er them, o'er these very hues have hung
The men, whom empires reckon in their fame,
Kings, sages; &mdash; Here from morn till midnight clung
Immortal genius, lavishing its flame.
Guido for this flung down his maddening game,
Startling the revellers, who saw his eyes
Flashing with thoughts that like the lightnings came,
And his brow clouding, as the vision'd cries
Of PETER woke his own repentant agonies.

Here, Raphael!  is reveal'd the mystery,
That fixed the hectic crimson on thy cheek&mdash;
Here sank the earnest radiance of thine eye,
Dying beneath the passionate thoughts that wreck
Spirits like thine; &mdash; Those eagle flights  that seek
And perish in the sun-beams; &mdash; glorious fires,
That from their heaven around the mountain break
With crowning splendour, till the storm retires,
Leaving but smoke and dust of all its marble spires.

Behold the MASTERPIECE, &mdash; as not with hands
Of human weakness wrought!  how fiercely cold
That boy, divested of his nature, stands,
Maddening! &mdash; his eye in wild possession roll'd!
How shrinks the father from his stony hold!
What sorrow in the kneeling sister's eye
Turns on the group of more than mortal mould,
That o'er him all their words of wonder try,
All vain, all vanquish'd, he must writhe, and waste, and die.

The hope of hopes is there!  but to the mount
Scarce dare their holy hands or eye-balls turn.
For on its brow, amid a fiery fount,
HE floats, by his instinctive virtue borne,
HE, for whose wounds the tribes of earth shall mourn,
Transfigured, in the majesty divine.
Jerusalem!  that glory was thy scorn,
Thy king was made a mockery and a sign;
For this shall Rome's red torch be shook o'er thee and thine.

Resplendent Titian!  what a host of thoughts,
What memories of stars and midnight moons,
And long hours pass'd beneath the emerald vaults
Of forests; and the sweet eve's thousand tunes,
When the breeze rushes through the vine-festoons,
Show'ring their dew-drops; are concentred here!
And forms of prince and knight in proud saloons,
And dames with dark Italian eyes, that ne'er
Knew sorrow, or but wept the heart's bewitching tear.

Prometheus of the pencil!  life and light
Burst on the canvass from thy mighty hand.
All hues sublime that ever dazzled sight
Where tempests die on Heaven, or ever waned
On hills, the evening's azure thrones, or stain'd
Ruby or beryl in their Indian cell,
Or glanced from gem-dropt wing, or blossom vein'd,
Or tinged in ocean-caves the radiant shell,
All, at thy sceptre's wave, from all their fountains swell.

There shines thy trophy!  a delicious maze
Of forest paths luxuriant, where the run
Sinks, like a far-off city in a blaze,
Sheathing in purple trunk and umbrage dun.
But there a fearful vengeance has begun!
The murderer's sword is in his victim's brain,
The Bigot's race of blood in blood is run.
He falls &mdash; his eye-ball writhes with mortal pain,
Yet flashes fiery pride.  He struggles, &mdash; faints, &mdash; he's slain.

Now to thee, loveliest! &mdash; Painter of the heart!
Corregio, all my spirit turns, like one
Who sees some pomp of kingly war depart;
And now, where trumpets clang'd, but hears the tone
Of shepherd song and flute in valleys lone.
The spirit dwells upon thy line serene,
As on the cloud with eve's last roses strown.
There is enchantment round thy "CATHERINE," 
And the black scaffold seems but love and beauty's shrine.

But lo!  the East is darkening; and the shade
Floats in grey softness down the gorgeous Hall,
Veiling the crimson cheek and glossy braid;
And wreathing in its slow and sweeping pall
Mirror, and bust, and Parian capital.
Silence is throned, &mdash; in distance dies the tread,&mdash;
And in the gloom its kings and champions all,
Sitting with truncheon'd hand and hoary head,
Look an eternal Council of the mighty dead.

But light is strong on every shaft and plinth,
And painted roof and sculptur'd architrave
In the rich halls below; that Labyrinth,&mdash;
Whose people are the gods of sky and wave,
Idols!  that Greece to the World's worship gave,
The madness, dream, delight of sterner days.
Now, like uprisen spirits from the grave,
They stand enshrined; &mdash; and the sweet sun delays,
As on their Grecian domes of old he loved to gaze.

Are they but stone? &mdash; Ay, many an age the wave
Has beat on beds as precious, and the sheep
Has nibbled the wild vine-shoots round the cave
Where their white beauty slept, and still might sleep,
Had not the master-chisel plunging deep
Awoke the living image from the stone.
Was their Creator born to swell the heap
Of earth's decay, &mdash; be measured by a moon?
The soul's supremacy decrees the soul its throne!

Tombs are deceivers &mdash; What a mass of mind
Were church-yards, &mdash; if the chambers of the brain
Dungeon'd the spirit!  Sceptic, grasp the wind,
Rule the outgoings of the storm, then chain
The fiery thought that neither mount nor main,
Not earth, heaven, time, nor thou, Eternity,
With thy dark-frowning grandeur, could restrain.
There lies the house of bondage, let it lie!
The ransom'd slave's gone forth &mdash; his freedom was to die.

I have descended to the ancient vault,
And held communion with the remnants there.
What saw I then?  I saw the velvet rot;
I saw the massive brass, like cobwebs, tear,
Shewing within its rents a shape of fear,
A wreck of man; from which the reptile stole
Scared by the light. &mdash; Decaying slumberer,
The thunders on thine ear unheard might roll!
Is this pale ruin the tomb, the temple of the soul!

Oh!  misery if it were:  That gliding worm
Might make its mock of us, &mdash; it feeds and then
Is full and happy &mdash; and the lordliest form
That ever ruled its fellow-wretches, &mdash; men&mdash;
What were it but the lion in the den,
Biting its fetters, groaning for the sweep
Of its strong sinews? &mdash; Better, ne'er have been.
Than desperate gaze on Heaven's forbidden steep,
Than feel this world a woe, the next Death, ashes, sleep!

But the freed spirit's gone; &mdash; upon the floods
The rolling of whose waves is life, 'tis gone!
And it has mingled with the diadem'd crowds
That wing not in the light of star or sun,
It lives at last, &mdash; its being has begun!
Ay, from the moment that its clouded eye
Shut on the chamber hush'd and taper dun,
It gazed on things unutterable, high
Above all height, &mdash; all thought, &mdash; on Immortality!

Now, to the world. &mdash; The graver thought has past!&mdash;
It came, and for itself made words, and now
Has gone &mdash; as fitful as the summer blast.
Around me lies imperial overthrow,
The halls resound with engine's crash and blow,
And trooping feet, and labour's hurrying cries;
For there the God of many a realm lies low,
Unthroned, upon the floor's mosaic dyes,
Yet worshipp'd still, the love, the wonder of all eyes.

That crowd itself a wonder; half the world
Seem'd to have sent it for some final deed.
There gazed the deep-brow'd Calmuck, that unfurl'd
His flag by China's wall: &mdash; In wolfskin weed
The bearded Bashkir with his lance of reed;&mdash;
There the bold hunter, nursed beneath thy sky,
Blue Tyrol; &mdash; There the Austrian's high-plumed head;
There the dark Prussian-vengeance in his eye,
Till the last debt is paid to bitter memory.

There the green Russian, that across thy wave
Wild Euxine!  shoots his glance of wrath and scorn
On the proud Sultanry, stupendous grave!
Where power sits throned in shadowy pomp forlorn
Beneath the Crescent's swift-declining horn.
There towers, in gold and scarlet harnessries,
The lordly Briton, by whose lance was borne
The GODLESS to the earth, no more to rise!
Champion of Man and Heaven &mdash; the ransom'd world's his prize.

But all is rapture, reverence round one shrine,
The sun has arched it with a burst of rays;
A form seems floating out, a youth divine,
Half throned, half mantled in the amber haze,&mdash;
High scorn, instinctive power are in his gaze;
His bow is scarce relax'd, his shaft scarce flown,
His arm uplifted still, his tress still plays,
He bends to catch the Python's dying groan,
Yet bends as if that spot were his Olympian throne.

King of the sun-beams &mdash; on the silvery shore
Of Delos stood thy glory, and thy name
Rose solemn from its caves and forests hoar,
And on its sparkling waves proud pilgrims came
Bearing upon their barks the incense-flame;
Bards, warriors, kings, with laurel-wreath and lyre,
Bound to the Mystic Isle, where life a dream,
A lovely dream!  nor cradle knew nor pyre,
Greece!  like thy early heart, its fire, all hallow'd fire!

The Persian millions came. &mdash; Thy oracle
In thunder o'er them utter'd Destiny!
From the barbarian's hand down dropp'd the steel,
Back rush'd their prows, it told they came to die!
Silent as death, the trump, the myriad cry,&mdash;
The slave, the satrap on his galley-throne,
The Sultan in his jewell'd canopy,
All prostrate, till afar their hosts were gone,
Girding the horizon blue, a golden, sunset zone.

They perish'd! &mdash; On them rush'd the evil day
From ev'ry mountain-ridge, and hollow shore,
The gathering tempests watch'd their stately prey,
The Grecian spearhead thirsted for their gore.
Then battle smote them, &mdash; then the whirlwind's roar
And hostile lightnings roused the crimson'd waves
To deadlier battle, &mdash; Dog and vulture tore
The limbs of princes mingled with their slaves;
Mountain and vale, shore, sea, their crowded, countless graves.

Laocoon!  round thy splendid form are flung
Inextricable spires, &mdash; twin serpents chain
Thy mighty limbs, &mdash; like fire, the forky tongue
Shoots o'er thy brow, that writhes with more than pain;
Their plunging fangs thy patriot life-blood drain,
Their volumes clasp thy sons, and, all must die,
But wrath and wrong are burning in thy brain,
Upon thy boys is fixed no father's eye,
'Tis cast on Heaven, in bold, accusing agony.

Beside him sinks a warrior on his shield,
Whose history the heart alone must tell!
Now, dim in eve &mdash; he looks, as on the field,
Where when he fell, his country with fell.
Death sickens all his soul, the blood-drops steal
Slow from his breast, congealing round the wound;
His strong arm shakes, his chest has lost its swell,
'Tis his last breath, &mdash; his eye-ball glares profound,
His heavy forehead glooms, bends, plunges, to the ground!

Yet had he high revenge, if Roman tears
For Roman slaughter could rejoice his soul.
Did he not hear the crashing of the spears?
When like a midnight tide, his Warriors stole
Around the slumbering legions &mdash; till the roll
Of the wild forest-drum awoke the glen;
And all was havoc; &mdash; and the German pole
Bore Varus' head o'er many a hill and fen.
Chains and the spear are chaff, when Heaven gives hearts to men!

Had not that glance the fuller, haughtier joy,
To see the Caesar stand a weeper there?
Fated Germanicus!  when, years gone by,
The Legions came the funeral pile to rear;
With silent march, bare head, and trailing spear,
Piercing the forest o'er the slaughter grown;
In horror finding chief and comrade dear
In wolf-torn graves, and haggard piles of bone
Along the ramparts' ruins, and marshy trenches strown.

Still frown'd the fatal altars, now in robes
Of giant weeds that sheeted down the boughs
Of the brown pines.  There had the thronging globes
Of German warriors held the night's carouse,
And groans of death, and Magic's fearful vows
Startled the moon.  But now the murder'd lay,
The human hecatomb!  in ghastly rows,
The leaders still unmix'd with meaner clay
Tribune and consul stretch'd in white and wild decay.

And have I then forgot thee, loveliest far
Of all, &mdash; enchanting image of Love's queen?
Or did I linger but till yon blue star,
Thy star, should crown thee with its light serene?
There stands the goddess, by the Grecian seen
In the mind's lonely, deep idolatry;
When twilight o'er Cythera's wave of green,
Drew her rich curtain, and his upturn'd eye
Was burning with the pomps of earth, and sea, and sky.

Anon, upon him rush'd the ecstasy,
And from the lilied vale, the myrtle wood,
The mountain's coronet, &mdash; Music's soul breathed by;&mdash;
White meteors shot along the distant flood;
And now sail'd on, like an advancing cloud,
Chariots of pearl, and proud sea-horses curb'd,
That with their breasts the green to silver plough'd;
And nymphs and tritons lifting trumpets orb'd,
Young Venus!  round thy throne, in its own light absorb'd.

The shore is reach'd, and fear, bewitching fear,
Is in her bending form, and glancing eye,
And veiling hand, and timid-turning ear;
She listens, &mdash; 'twas but Eve's enamour'd sigh!
Yet has it heaved her bosom's ivory.&mdash;
Yet has it on the shore her footstep spell'd;
'Tis past, &mdash; The rustling rose alone is nigh,&mdash;
She smiles, and in that smile is all reveal'd
The charm, to which so soon the living world shall yield.

Venus!  thou'rt lovely; but on other feet
Was press'd of old the kiss of guilty fire.
Thy look is grace, too deeply, purely sweet
To tell of passion that could change or tire.
From those rich lips no fatal dreams respire;
There lives no evil splendour in that eye,
To dart the flame on failing Virtue's pyre.
Dark thoughts before thy sacred beauty die;
Queen of the soul's bright tides!  thy spell is modesty!

Now farewell all! &mdash; Go, conquerors of Time!
Ye whom the Grecian soul inspired with soul,
Ye whom the Italian in her radiant prime
Lit with the hues that in her sunshine roll;
Go on your triumph.  To the line, the pole,
A great, divided prize o'er earth ye steer,
Each a proud trophy, each a glorious whole,
Where there are eyes to see or ears to hear,
Proclaiming Liberty; &mdash; your Hall, a Hemisphere!

There is a vital richness in the air,
That comes in gushes on this fading hour;
And, Tuilleries!  tho' Attic taste might stare
At thy strange garden freaks of fount and bower;
There lives a little soother, where one flower
Springs from its turf, a soother meant for man;
Perhaps to win his heart with silent power
To fields and peaceful thoughts from cities wan,
Where it so oft "disquieteth itself in vain."

Night's wing is on the east &mdash; the clouds repose
Like weary armies of the firmament,
Encamp'd beneath their vanes of pearl and rose;
Till the wind's sudden trumpet through them sent,
Shakes their pavilions, and their pomps are blent
In rich confusion.  Now the air is fill'd
With thousand odours, sighed by blossoms bent
In closing beauty, where the dew distill'd
From Evening's airy urns, their purple lips has chill'd.

How subtly Nature mingles in the heart
The past, the future, in this lovely time!
How home and heaven together on us start!
England!  'tis now thy autumn-sky sublime
Reminds us of the parted spirit's clime,
The hamlet clock strikes solemn as a knell,
The breezy sounds that from the forest swim,
The heavy harvest-team's returning bell,
The gleaner's homeward call, seem life's sad, sweet farewell.

But thousands, tens of thousands in thy fields
Are counting every shade that dims this hour,
With frequent sunward look till day-light yields,
And each can turn him to the humble bower.
Where his own hand has planted every flower;
Time out of mind his father's quiet home;
Where waits him one, whose virtue was her dower,
Cheering her infants, as the deepening gloom,
Shed from the poplars, tells, he sure and soon will come.

He comes; the moon has lit him home at last,
And he has thrown his harvest hook away,
And kiss'd the nut-brown babes that round him haste,
Each with the little wonder of its day.
The lowly meal is spread, the moon-beams play
Thro' panes that bushy rose and wall-flower veil,
And soon to make them music, on her spray,
Her wonted neighbour spray, the nightingale
Pours on the holy hour her thrilling, endless tale.

Land of the Graces, where even beggars meet,
With bow and compliment, and hat in hand,
The gay grimacers of the dungeon street,
Till cringe and smile dissolve the conference bland;
Where bending age loves doubly bent to stand
With fond, faint simper, on its shoulders strew'd
Its locks in sentimental waving plann'd;
France, in thy bosom all the heart's subdued,
Thy world a stage, thy life a toilsome attitude.

The place is for the mimes: &mdash; the tortured trees
Seem ranging for a vegetable ball;
The ground is torn with vagrant traceries,
The struggling founts in antic spirtings fall;
Each orange shrub confronts a partner tall,
In some shorn poplar, or new peruked lime;
The bronzes low'r, sad gazers from their wall;&mdash;
All echoing with the tongue's eternal chime,
All throng'd with life's extremes, pomp, folly, famine, crime.

The breeze has fall'n &mdash; but sudden symphonies
Swell from beyond the gate and statued wall;
As if they echo'd from the breathless skies,
The wavings of the night's o'ershadowing pall.
I am no weeper, but their rise and fall
Disturbs me, &mdash; Is the soul a harp whose strings
Vibrate tumultuous tones at music's call?
A fount, that when her touch unseals its springs
Gushes thro' all its old, enchanted wanderings?

There is a flash of steel thro' yonder trees,
A wave of standards and a toss of plumes
O'er scarlet ranks, like foam-bursts upon seas
Ruddy with lightnings, &mdash; Hark!  those well-known drums
Rolling along the shadowy camp, as comes
The night breeze rolling, then with distant wing
Sunk in wild music, &mdash; Now along the glooms
Echoes the silver trumpet, cymbals ring,
'Tis England's martial hymn! &mdash; there swells, "God save the King."

"God save the King" &mdash; a thousand shapes of war,
Of glory, freedom, heroic suffering,
In sudden vision crowd the marble air,
Raised at the sound.  Yet fearful memories fling
Their darkness on the spirit. &mdash; Here a King
Laid down his sacred head and died! &mdash; Oh, crime,
What torrents of black carnage were to spring?
What havoc of the rebel nation's prime?
Before her soul repaid that monarch's death sublime?

Paris!  there was no sleep beneath thy roofs
The morn that saw this deed.  The dim streets rung,
Long before day, with cannon, trampling hoofs,
And fearfullest of all, the Tocsin's tongue.
Startling the eye, the passing torches flung
Their flash thro' many a chamber from beneath,
Then vanish'd with the thick and hurrying throng;
While the heart-sinking listener held his breath,
Catching in every sound the distant roar of death.

But earlier than that dim and early hour
A lonely taper twinkled thro' the gloom,
'Twas from the casement of the Temple tower.
'Twas from a king's, a martyr's, dungeon-room!
There he subdued his spirit for its doom;
And one old priest, and one pale follower,
Knelt weeping, as beside their master's tomb.
Rude was the altar, but the heart was there,
And peace and glorious hope were in that prison prayer.

But trumpets peal'd, and torches glared below;
And from the Tower rose woman's loud lament
And infant cries; and shadows seemed to go
With tossing arms, and heads in anguish bent,
Backwards and forwards hurrying, then, as spent,
Sink down, and all be silent for a time;
Until the royal victims' souls were rent
With some new yell of cruelty and crime,
Or thunder'd thro' the dusk the Tocsin's deadly chime.

The morning came in clouds; the winter's blast
Swept down in stormy gusts, then sank away
In ominous moanings, chilling, as it past,
The thousands posted in their stern array.
There was no opening door, no sound of day,
No song, no cry along the pale Boulevard;
And, save some ghastly banner's distant play,
Some clang, when in the gust the lances jarr'd,
All stretch'd before the eye one endless charnel yard.

And 'twas as wild and still within the square,
This square of Luxury!  The morn arose;
An iron harvest bristled through the air,
Bayonet and pike in countless, close-lock'd rows.
Silent as Death the crowd, &mdash; the grim repose
Before the earthquake; &mdash; None from roof or wall
Might look; no hand the casement might unclose.
And in their centre, frowning o'er them all,
Their Idol &mdash; The sole God before whose name they fall.

The Guillotine! &mdash; when Hell prepared the feast,
Where guilty France was drunk, but not with wine,
Till madness sat upon her vision'd breast.
This was the press that crush'd her bloody vine.
To this grim altar came the shuddering line,
Whose worship was, &mdash; beneath its knife to lie;
The haggard traitors to the throne and shrine,
By traitors crushed, that in their turn must die;
Till massacre engulphed the wreck of Liberty.

The Guillotine, &mdash; It stood in that pale day
Like a huge spectre, just from earth upsprung,
To summon to the tomb the fierce array
That round its feet in desperate homage clung.
But on the wind a sudden trumpet rung.
All eyes were turn'd, and far as eye could stray,
Was caught a light, from moving helmets flung,
A banner tossing in the tempest's sway,
A wain, that thro' the throng slow toil'd its weary way.

'Tis done, the monarch on the scaffold stands;
The headsmen grasp him! &mdash; Of the myriads there,
That hear his voice, that see his fetter'd hands,
Not one has given a blessing or a tear;
But that old priest who answers him in prayer.
He speaks; his dying thoughts to France are given,
His voice is drown'd; for murder has no ear.
The saint unmurmuring to the axe is driven.
If ever spirit rose, that heart is calm in Heaven.

The grave must tell, when it gives up its dead,
Their after hours who o'er that blood blasphemed,
How many perish'd on a bloody bed,
By the pursuing hoof and sabre seam'd;
What haughty heads upon that scaffold stream'd,
What eyes rain'd anguish in the den and chain,
When on their dying hour this moment gleam'd;
What wretches felt it maddening all their pain,
When night and winter found them on the Russian plain.

France was anathema. &mdash; Her cup before
Was full, but this o'ertopp'd its burning brim.
And plagues like serpent-teeth her entrails tore;
Crime slipped to ravage thro' a land of crime!
In the sack'd sepulchre caroused the mime;
On God's high altar sat Idolatry;
Before the harlot knelt the nation's prime,
And sons dragg'd fathers, fathers sons to die
'Till Judgment girt the bow, on its eternal thigh.

This was our nature freed from God and king!
This was Rebellion's consummated dream!
Evil unchain'd, &mdash; all tortured, torturing;
The light of life &mdash; a wildering phantom gleam,
The vapour of the hot and livid stream
Shot from the gory fount of Regicide;
The strife of madness, &mdash; Fiery hearts, that teem
With shapes of guilt that but that den could hide;
Gnashings, and taunts, and groans, ascending wild and wide.

And by that place of torment England sate
Like a bright spirit with unsleeping eyes,
Commission'd to keep watch at Hell's dark gate;
Hearing within its voice of agonies,
Seeing its smokes of restless torture rise,
Itself unstain'd, and on that fearful guard,
Still holding high communion with the skies;
Still on its brow the helmet-diadem starr'd,
The splendid plume still pure, the angel cheek unmarr'd.

Father and king!  thy more than kingly mind
Saw the bolt burn, but saw not where it fell.
For thou wert rapt from dreams of human kind.
O that one ray had reach'd thy sacred cell,
One shout of triumph o'er the Infidel.
Hadst thou but known what England's arm has done!
For we have triumph'd gloriously, &mdash; the wheel
That bore the oppressor broke, &mdash; His host o'erthrown,
Rider and horse ingulph'd, or on the red shore strown.

France was in dust, &mdash; a dying funeral pyre;
But from its embers sprang a sudden throne,
That round the kingdoms shot resistless fire.
In its pavilion sate a fearful one,
Alone in power, in gloomy guilt alone;
Stern, subtle, selfish; &mdash; cruelty his sword,
Apostacy upon his brow the crown,
He sat the homicidal empire's lord;
Heaven's instrument of woe, man's fear, adored, abhorred.

His glance look'd o'er the nations as a field
For slaughter, &mdash; and his trumpet rang their knell;
For they were stain'd, and Faith's high-tempered shield
Sank from their grasp before the infidel.
Then did his heart with impious boastings swell;
Salmoneus!  'tis thy tale of mockery.
His meanest thought was might and miracle,
His idlest word an omen from on high,
And France, a ready slave, re-echoed all the lie.

But rushing from its clouds, a viewless grasp
Seized the impostor in his car of flame,
And cleft the crown, and tore the vesture's clasp,
And show'd him as he was! &mdash; The nations came
Around in laughter stern, and lofty shame
To see the tyrant bend his naked brow,
Fawning for abject life, &mdash; the tiger tame&mdash;
Dragging his chains, &mdash; the rabble's vagrant show,
Licking the dust before his first, last, noblest foe.

Was this the work of man?  Eternal King,
Thou hearer of the orphan's midnight cry!
What tribute shall the ransom'd empires bring
For that new life of life, for Liberty.
Earth had been one wide dungeon but for thee,
And man had lived in woe, in woe had died.
In vain the mighty hills, the surging sea,
Where could the victim from the oppressor hide,
When all her realms lay crush'd beneath one iron stride?

The chains were forging fast. &mdash; The mad career
Already mark'd its circuit round the ball.
Then what were Earth, a gloomy, godless sphere,
A hell anticipated &mdash; torment, &mdash; thrall,
Where one fell nature trampled upon all;
Man darkening into daemon; crime on crime
Thick burning, from each fall a lower fall,
Till Heaven insulted rose in wrath sublime
And call'd its fires, and swept the guilty orb from time.

The veil is rent above us.  'Twas a word
Omnipotent, which check'd that final hour.
It summon'd not the faithful warrior's sword;
The world stood hush'd at its descending power.
Then follow'd its fierce armies, cloud and shower,
The hail that shot its arrows from on high,
The blast that on the atheist host burn'd frore,
The snow-storm roll'd like midnight on the sky,
To make the deadly sheet in which their limbs must lie.

Magnificence of ruin!  what has time
In all it ever gazed upon of war,
Of the wild rage of storm, or deadly clime,
Seen, with that battle's vengeance to compare?
How glorious shone the invader's pomp afar?
Like pamper'd lions from the spoil they came;
The land before them silence and despair,
The land behind them massacre and flame;
Blood will have blood. &mdash; What are they now?  a name.

They came by hundred thousands, column deep,
Broad square, loose squadron, rolling like the flood
When mighty torrents from their channels leap,
'Whelming the land beneath the multitude
Of their devouring billows; on thro' wood,
O'er rugged hill, down sunless, marshy vale,
The death-devoted moved, to clangor rude
Of drum and horn and dissonant clash of mail,
Glancing disastrous light before that sun-beam pale.

They reach'd thee, fatal Borodino!  still
Upon the loaded soil the carnage lay,
The human harvest, now stark, stiff and chill,
Friend, foe, stretch'd thick together, clay to clay;
In vain the startled legions spread away;
The land was all one naked sepulchre,
The shrinking eye still glanced on grim decay,
Still did the hoof and wheel their passage tear
Thro' cloven helms and arms and corpses mould'ring drear.

The field was as they left it; fosse and fort
Steaming with slaughter still, but desolate,&mdash;
The cannon flung dismantled by its porte;
Each knew the mound, the black ravine whose strait
Was won and lost, and thronged with dead, till fate
Had fixed upon the victor &mdash; half undone.
There was the hill, from which their eyes elate
Had seen the burst of Moscow's golden zone;
Now death was at their heels, they shudder'd and rush'd on.

Still they rush'd on, thro' height and depth, their line
Covering the soil with the swift, dazzling flow
Of conflagration.  Autumn's rich decline
Still linger'd on the champaign, and its glow
Tinctured the marshy heaths and copses low
With cheating beauty, and their hearts so late
Dejected, thought no more of overthrow.
Madmen!  that field of death was but the gate
To a still deadlier field.  They trod the verge of fate.

The hour of vengeance strikes.  Hark to the gale,
As it bursts hollow thro' the rolling clouds,
That from the north in sullen grandeur sail,
Like floating Alps.  Advancing darkness broods
Upon the wild horizon, and the woods,
Now sinking into brambles, echo shrill,
As the gust sweeps them, and those upper floods
Shoot on their leafless boughs the sleet drops chill,
That on the crests below in freezing showers distil.

They reach the Wilderness!  The majesty
Of solitude is spread before their gaze,
Stern nakedness, &mdash; dark earth, and wrathful sky.
If ruins were there they long had ceased to blaze,
If blood was shed, the ground no more betrays
Even by a skeleton the crime of man;
Behind them rolls the deep and drenching haze
Wrapping their rear in night, before their van
The struggling day-light shows the unmeasured desert wan.

Still on they sweep, as if their hurrying march
Could bear them from the rushing of his wheel,
Whose chariot is the whirlwind.  Heaven's clear arch
At once is covered with a livid veil,
In mixed and fighting heaps the deep clouds reel,
Upon the dense horizon hangs the sun,
In sanguine light, an orb of burning steel;
The snows wheel down thro' twilight, thick and dun,
Now tremble men of blood, the judgment has begun.

The trumpet of the northern winds has blown,
And it is answer'd by the dying roar
Of armies on that boundless field o'erthrown:
Now in the awful gusts the desert hoar
Is tempested, a sea without a shore,
Lifting its feathery waves.  The legions fly;&mdash;
Volley on volley, down the hailstones pour;&mdash;
Blind, famish'd, frozen, mad, the wanderers die,
And dying, hear the storm but wilder thunder by.

Such is the hand of Heaven!  A human blow
Had crush'd them in the fight, or flung the chain,
Round them where Moscow's stately towers were low,
And all be still'd.  But Thou!  thy battle plain
Was a whole empire; that devoted train
Must war from day to day with storm and gloom,
(Man following, like the wolves, to rend the slain,)
Must lie from night to night as in a tomb,
Must fly, toil, bleed for home; yet never see that home.

The despot 'scaped; for his was yet to show
What mimes may play ambition's haughtiest part,
To show the recreant branded on his brow,
Whose noblest art was but the slaughterer's art;
Lest future villains from the mire should start,
And rave, and slay, and dare to call it fame.
Behold him now, the man without a heart,
Him of the battles, &mdash; him the soul of flame,&mdash;
Scorn'd, banish'd, chain'd for life; and glad to live in shame.

He's gone! &mdash; The world in arms pronounced his ban,
His wand is plunged ten thousand fathoms deep:
The sword of wrath has broke his talisman;
And now, to his foul tomb content to creep,
The outcast wanders on the loneliest steep,
That ever whiten'd to the ocean wave;
A monument of blasted guilt, to weep,
If his hard eye can weep, the price he gave,
To meet that spot at last, &mdash; his prison and his grave.

Look on the exile! &mdash; ay, that gloomy steep
May show him sights the world could never show.
Conscience has slept, but shall it always sleep?
Knows he not things 'tis agony to know?
Do not the  murder'd on his vision grow?
What are ye to his midnight, &mdash; rack and wheel;
When conscience heaps the coals upon his brow?
Tho' sheathed in selfishness from head to heel,
The assassin's lonely heart shall suffer, &mdash; if not feel.

But he has perish'd, as the broken surge
That at his feet now dies along the shore:
The scourge's work fulfill'd &mdash; the gory scourge
Is flung abhorr'd away &mdash; his world is o'er.
Fool!  see thy emblem; where with rush and roar
The ocean-pillar whirls to meet the sky,
Ploughing with giant speed the waters hoar,
Fear to the distant, ruin to the nigh;
It bursts &mdash; it sinks &mdash; 'tis gone &mdash; its very echoes die.

Earth shook with that wild empire's overthrow;
And the foundations, that as fate seem'd deep,
Are dust &mdash; and England gave the final blow.
France rush'd like lava from the mountain's steep,
But England met it with the ocean's sweep,
And o'er it roll'd in towering majesty,
Leaving its burning mass, a gloomy heap.
Transcendent Waterloo! &mdash; thy name shall die;
But die on the same pile with glory, memory!

Monarch of England!  in our trial-hour,
Thy prayer was to thy people shield and sword;
Thy secret spirit was a living power.
Like his that on the mountain's brow ador'd
When round its base the pagan battle roar'd;
The lifting of thy hands was victory;
A deadlier host around our mountain pour'd.
Now dust and ashes on their standards lie,
Yet was that triumph hid from thy paternal eye!

It was in mercy!  Thou wast spared the blow,
Worse than the worst that bruised our victor crest:
Thou didst not see her beauty pale and low,
Whose infancy was to thy bosom prest.
She bloom'd before thee, and thine age was blest.
And it was spared the after-pang that wrung
An empire's heart, and she was laid at rest,
Beneath the banner on thy turrets hung;
Thou knew'st not that she slept, thy beautiful, thy young.

Thou didst not stand and mourn beside the bed
That held the dying partner of thy throne.
Thou didst not bend a fathers hoary head
In hopeless sorrow o'er thy princely son.
Servant of God!  thy pilgrimage was done!
And dreams of Heaven were round thy lonely tower;
Still lived to thee each loved and parted one;
Till on thine eye-ball burst th' immortal hour,
And the dead met thy gaze in angel light and power.

We talk not of the parting rites &mdash; the pomp&mdash;
Our heart above our Father's grave decays.
Yet all was regal there; the silver tromp,
The proud procession thro' the Gothic maze,
The silken banner, thousand torches' blaze,
Gilding the painted pane, and imaged stone;
The chapel's deeper glow, &mdash; the cresset's rays,
Like diamonds on the wall of velvet strown.
And, flashing from the roof, the helm, and gonfalon.

Yet still the thought is hallow'd; and the train
Of solemn memories o'er the mind will come
With long and lofty pleasure, touch'd by pain.
I hear the anthem; now as in the tomb
Dying away; &mdash; then, thro' the upper gloom
Roll'd, like the Judgment thunders from the cloud,
Above that deep and gorgeous catacomb,
Where sat the nation's mightiest, pale, and proud,
Throned in their dim alcoves, each fix'd as in his shroud.

Still lives the vision of the kingly hall,
The noble kneeling in his canopy,
The prelate in his sculptured, shadowy stall,
The knight, beneath his falchion glittering high,
All bending on a central pall the eye,
Where melancholy gleams a crown of gold,
An empty crown.  'Tis sinking, silently,
'Tis gone!  yet does the living world not hold
A purer heart than now beneath that crown is cold.

And ye ethereal ministrants, whose eyes
Night veils not; splendid watchers of our sphere;
Heard ye not rising to your solemn skies
From the land's widest limits voices drear,
As if in each that moment sank the bier?
From mount and shore roll'd up the mighty peal,
Then died! &mdash; and all was death-like on the ear.
But it was gone afar, the ocean's swell
Round the hush'd world had borne its noblest monarch's knell.

Raise we his monument!  what giant pile
Shall honour him to far posterity?
His monument shall be his ocean-isle,
The voice of his redeeming thunders be
His epitaph upon the silver sea.
And million spirits from whose necks he tore
The fetter, and made soul and body free;
And unborn millions from earth's farthest shore
Shall bless the CHRISTIAN KING, till the last sun is o'er.

Twilight has come in saffron mists embower'd,
For the broad sun is on the Atlantic surge,
Now sparkling in the fiery flashes shower'd
From his swift wheels; the forest vapours urge
Their solemn wings above &mdash; white stars emerge
From the dark east, like spires of mountain snows
Touch'd by the light upon th' horizon's verge;
Just rising from her sleep, the young moon shows,
Supine upon the clouds, her cheek suffused with rose.

This is the loveliest hour of all that day
Calls upwards thro' its kingdom of the air.
The sights and sounds of earth have died away.
Above, the clouds are roll'd against the glare
Of the red west &mdash; high volumed waves that war
Against a diamond promontory's side,
Crested with one sweet, solitary star,
That like a watch fire trembles o'er the tide,
Brightening with every shade that on its surge doth ride.

Swift changes are at hand; the chiller gale
Strikes through the vapoury depths, and all are tost
O'er the blue champaign, scatter'd, broken, pale:
Yet, like the scattering of a Persian host,
That strews the field with vanes and arms embost
With royal blazon and the light of gems,
Magnificent in the defiling dust;&mdash;
On the clear'd heaven still many a fragment gleams,
As hewn from chrysolite rocks, or dyed in ruby streams.

Again, the ranks are rising thro' the gloom
Like pilgrims crowding to their sun-god's fane,
Illumed with sudden beauty as they come;
An airy embassy from earth and main.
Each robed in its delicious native stain,
The forests' umber'd brown &mdash; the vermeil glow
That evening kindles on the mountain chain,
The azure of the lake, the foamy snow
That dances on the surge, when winds are wild below.

The gale has roused its strength. &mdash; The glittering march
Is check'd &mdash; dissolv'd &mdash; the whirling vapours fly
Up to the zenith; then, in arch on arch
Black ribb'd and vast, descending span the sky.
Along the dome the stars hang quiveringly,
Like wind-shook lamps.  Thro' the huge aisles anon,
Tall, sable shadows thicken on the eye,
Procession endless, &mdash; to the heavy tone
Of the funereal wind.  Day to its grave has gone!

Now Night sits sovereign on the boundless Heaven,
That in its shade looks sad yet beautiful,
Like death upon the lids of one forgiven.
These are the moments when the world's control
Seems calm'd, &mdash; the fetter, loosen'd from the soul,&mdash;
The bosom hush'd by the descended dove,&mdash;
When all our speech is but strong tears that roll
From eyes scarce conscious of their gaze above;
The swelling of the heart, &mdash; involuntary love!

Spirits of light, do ye not stoop to earth
To stand by us in beauty when our gaze
Is fix'd on Heaven, &mdash; to fill us with the birth
Of thoughts immortal? &mdash; In the argent phase
Of the lone, lovely moon &mdash; the shafted rays
Shot from the stars, &mdash; the ether's shoreless sea
Mere in bewilder'd pomp the comet strays,&mdash;
Pressing upon the soul Infinity,
His burning might whom eye hath seen not nor can see.

"These are thy glorious works."  The rolling world
Is full of beauty made for man to love.
The sun might plunge in night, like lightning whirl'd
Into the sea's black bosom, and above
Leave no fond, farewell beam; the clouds might rove
Unpainted by the morn o'er dale and hill,
No evening fragrance hover round the grove,
No evening music murmur from the rill,&mdash;
All nature stamp'd with awe, all stern and sovereign will.

Earth was absolved; the primal curse was gone
The hour the deluge found its hollow shore.
Man's bread no more in bitterness is sown.
Yet all are pilgrims, and the foot is sore
With many a thorn before the travel's o'er,
That all must tread along the narrow vale.
And Nature has its tears, like drops of gore,&mdash;
Past human help, &mdash; that make the spirit pale,
Tears that leave life a dream, a broken reed, a tale.

The world must still have trial, but the pang
That makes the trial agony is crime.
There lies the poison of the viper's fang.
But toil was planted in our path sublime
To make our virtue life, to nerve our prime
Worthy the high supremacy to come,
To send us from the cloudy gates of Time,
No feeble births of the surrendering tomb,
But kingly; &mdash; fit for Heaven, lords of the crown and plume.

For wisdom dies not with the dead! &mdash; the mind
Sinewed with knowledge &mdash; the ennobled heart
That strove its nature's bondage to unbind,
Shall noblest on the race immortal start.
He that on earth has chosen the better part&mdash;
Shall shine, where all is bright, as star o'er star,&mdash;
Sublimer visions through his soul shall dart&mdash;
Knowledge and virtue wreathing his tiar&mdash;
Even ere his wing's first sweep leaves Earth's pale orb afar&mdash;

Yet, if the shaft does strike us on its way,
Mourn we as those who have no hope?  The wound
Is felt, but felt as mercy, and we lay
Inquiry on our spirit's depths, and sound
Its darkness till the evil place is found.
Then worship, weep; &mdash; but those are gentle tears,
They sink not voiceless in the thirsty ground.
There is an eye that sees, an ear that hears;
And that hour's sorrow makes the joy of hallow'd years.

And in the darkest shade of pilgrimage
We have our comforter, &mdash; The mighty Book!
Written in light and wisdom, on whose page
No humbled heart in vain has look'd, shall look;
The history of glorious lives that took
Woe for their privilege, &mdash; were dungeon'd, slain;&mdash;
The manacle, the sword, the flame that broke
From their own burning limbs, all counted gain,
Till from a thankless world they loosed the heavier chain.

Guilt, folly, mad ambition, yet were left
To range o'er earth their long appointed hour;
Till upon Satan's brow the crown was cleft.
A storm of fate is gathering; does it lower
To dart upon his throne the fiery shower?
Or lift him on his desolate way again?
Sending him forth, in doom'd and doubled power&mdash;
To wreck his final malice among men,
Before th' archangel's hand shall seal him in his den?

Silence is breathless round me, yet the clash
Of arms is deepening on the inward ear.
Darkness has wrapt me, yet I see the dash
Of horse and horseman on the bloody spear.
The stormy roar advances &mdash; hark!  I hear
The burst of battle on the Apennine.
Now Alp to Alp shoots up the splendour drear
Of beacons, and steep ranks of warriors line
Forest and vale and ridge, up to the granite spine.

The wrath has burn'd for ages, that must fall
On Rome, &mdash; gigantic, living sepulchre!
Do not the courts of Heaven resound the call
Of those, who in their bloody robes appear
Beneath the altar &mdash; hath their king no ear?
When shall the Great Pollution be undone,
That held the earth in blindness, guilt and fear?
Are those aerial shouts, this rushing on
Of viewless chivalry, the summons from the throne?

But stoop or pass the tempest as it will;
The hour is fix'd, when the Resplendent One
Seen by the Prophet in his Patmos isle,
The Seraph, from whose forehead flames the sun,
Shall bid the Evil City be undone;
Then with one fiery foot upon the shore,
And one upon the ocean's shrinking zone,
With lifted hand and thunder's sevenfold roar,
Send up his cry to Heaven, that Time shall be no more.

Then the Deliverance comes!  the crimson scroll
Writ with the madness of six thousand years,
Shall be like snow; from Heaven the clouds shall roll;
The Earth no longer be the vale of tears.
Speed on your swiftest wheels, ye golden spheres,
To bring the splendors of that morning nigh.
Already the forgiven desert bears
The rose; the Pagan lifts th' adoring eye,
The exiled Hebrew seeks the day-break in the sky!

I see the Tribes returning in their pomp;
Before them moves the Babe of Bethlehem's star:
They come with shout and hymn, and uplift trump
That rang of old on Sion's holy air.
They come from every region wild and far,
That woe e'er trod, with every swarthy stain
Of storm, and slavery, and barbaric war;
Sons of the desert, dungeon, mountain, main;
Turban'd, and capp'd and helm'd, a countless, boundless train.

One conflict more, the fiercest and the last!
When the old dragon-monarch of the air
His sails upon the groaning storm shall cast,
To fight the final battle of despair.
But from the cope of Heaven a sword shall share
His fiery pinion in the sight of man.
Down to the depths shall rush th' eclipsing star,
Condemn'd the cup of agonies to drain,
A thousand years of night, &mdash; wild horror, &mdash; scorpion pain!

Ancient of Days!  that high above all height
Sitt'st on the circle of eternity!
The hour shall come, when all shall know thy might,
And earth be heaven, for it shall look on thee!
Blessed the eye which lives that day to see.
The grave may wrap me ere its glorious sun:
Even, Father, as thou wilt; but thou art he,
That sees the sparrow perish from thy throne;
Father, in life or death, thy sovereign will be done.
