Hallowed by sorrow &mdash; wept by million eyes,
The Queen of England's heart sinks in the grave;
Last link of old and lofty ancestries,
Descendant of the kingly and the brave!
To Caroline of Brunswick gave
No common fire of soul and strength of frame;
Yet that strength sank, no human aid could save&mdash;
And that soul quail'd which wrongs alone could tame;&mdash;
Oh, shame on her false friends &mdash; on her stern foemen shame!

Shame on her false friends, who, for paltry bribes,
Deserted honour, truth, and innocence,
And mingled with the sleek and servile tribes,
Who can with all but their base gains dispense;
'Gainst whom th' oppressed can have no sure defence,
And in whose favour the dark shield of power
Is lifted over, so to recompense
The fawning crouches of the royal power,
The heartless sycophants of Fortune's shining hour.

Shame on her foemen! &mdash; was there nought to soothe,
In woman's gentle name, their causeless rage?
A woman, tortured from her very youth,
Even till her hair was silvered o'er by age;
Oppressed and slandered through life's every stage!
Foul stain on Albion's 'scutcheon! &mdash; a disgrace
That will stand darkly on its record's page.&mdash;
Oh, had she lived for kindness to erase
Of all her early pangs the deep-indented trace,

It had been happier for all; &mdash; but she
Has left us &mdash; and the hour that was her last,
Saw none of kin &mdash; no tie of family
To soothe her wounded spirit as it past
From this cold scene of sorrows that had cast
A cloud upon her life that darkened then;
No child was there &mdash; no husband with kind haste
To calm her in that dread hour's trying pain,
When all but such a love is worthless, weak, and vain.

Yes, she has left us! &mdash; long her soul opposed,
With gallant firmness, deep indignity;
But all is over now, &mdash; the scene is closed,
And this ill-fated Queen no more shall be
The victim of her foe's malignity;
Love need no longer sigh &mdash; or fate be glad;
She soars above all love or enmity,
And her worst foe must own, if faults she had;
She had been deeply wrong'd, &mdash; nor died as die the bad.

The only treasure that she still had left,
She died possess'd of &mdash; all a nation's love!
Of this proud boon she could not be bereft,
Although to wreck this last hope Malice strove;&mdash;
She died possessing what alone must prove
The virtues of her character, &mdash; the true
And tried affection of those who, above
All others, knew and served her best &mdash; the few
Who clung to her unchang'd, thro' changes sad and new.

She sank with gentleness into the grave
Which lengthen'd sorrows had prepared for her;
And long will be lamented by the brave
And good, who know that all who live must err,&mdash;
And who protected the lone wanderer,
When there were none beside her rights to guard;
And when their fearless virtue could confer
But danger on themselves &mdash; the sure reward
Of all who seek the course of tyrants to retard.

Peace to her spirit! &mdash; and in lofty places
May her sad fate a warning lesson be!
So she, "whose virtues, talents, gentle graces,
Were formed to charm and win society,"
But whom deep griefs pursued unceasingly,
Will not have borne her weight of woe in vain;
May monarchs in her fate a lesson see,
Which here to trace may not befit this strain,
But which they ought to feel and ponder o'er in pain!
