CANTO I.
Thou eldest of the elements that sprang
From underneath the Spirit's brooding wings,
When chaos heard that Voice whose fiat rang,
Commanding life and being to all things,&mdash;
Hail, WATER! &mdash; beautiful thy gushing springs,
Thy lakes and rivers; &mdash; shrined in clouds or dew;
In ice or snow; or where the rainbow flings
Its radiant arch; &mdash; in every form and hue,
Thou, glorious Element, art ever fair and new!

Ever fresh springing in the wells and fountains,
The virgin waters rise and overflow;
The cloud-nursed torrents hasting down the mountains,
Pursue in devious brooks their course below;
Onward the broad bright river glides, although
A steadfast object, from the hills descried;
And mighty ocean, heaving to and fro,
Rocked by the undulations of the tide,&mdash;
Is with perpetual renovation purified.

Charmed by the music of the rolling deep,
The Muse, that pours her own sweet song to heaven,
Might lingering stay beside the rocky steep
Till the day fled and came the star of even:
But she a boon has to her votary given;
With him to view the Dovedale of the Peak;
And trace its River, in meanders driven
Through the deep-channelled hills its way to seek;&mdash;
To tread the glens and caves, and climb the mountains bleak.

Lo, now she beckons from the battlement
Of yonder pile, high-named of Waterloo;&mdash;
She saw the nuptials of the Dove and Trent,
But long before that mushroom fabric grew:
Each came with pomp of flowing retinue;
Each slow to meet, came on with winding wing;
And this the language of their interview:
"Comest thou alone, proud Dove, or dost thou bring
Some tributary river from another spring?"

"Imperious Trent!  thy better mood disowns,
(Replied the fairer stream,) this greeting harsh:
But know that I am sprung from mountain thrones,
Beyond far Longnor's hills of pine and larch;
Dovedale's rock-spires, and caves, and rock-built arch,
Ashbourn's blue smoke, Uttoxeter's bright gleam,
And Burton's joyous bells announce my march.
These honours were sufficient dower, I deem,
Came I alone &mdash; but wilder waters swell my stream.

Two rivers weary of the sun, that sheds
No beauty on their banks with shale embrowned,
Have dared to plunge and leave their stony beds
Empty, with naked track to wander round
The dreary moors. &mdash; What ear can reach the sound,
From ledge to ledge as the bold torrents leap
Through echoing caverns locked in gloom profound!&mdash;
Hamps roars to Manifold, deep answers deep,
As with converging tides the darkling rivers sweep.

I know thy meadows, Trent, are rich and green;
Thy swelling slopes are gay with lawn and wood;
But couldst thou visit Ilam's sylvan scene,
Where grotto, cliff, and groves of various bud,
O'erhang each rising river's fountain flood,
As cool and crystal-clear it springs to air,
And deeply drinks the light as 'twere life-blood;&mdash;
It well might shew that some enchantment rare
Had scooped that mountain nook, and poured those rivers fair.

With them, by Alton Abbey's castle-den,
The Churnet hither trails her willow locks:
'Twould seem those iron times had reached this glen
When giants played at hewing mountain blocks,
So bold and strange the profile of the rocks
Whose huge fantastic figures frown above.
But I refrain &mdash; for Trent no longer mocks
With cold repulse, but courts with ardent love
The bright espousals of his own sweet murmuring Dove!

Roll on, bright Pair, in galaxy of light,
Through the green meadows toward your ocean-home:
My fancy kindles at the flashing sight
Of your soft-moving waters, as they come,
Reflecting in their depths the clouded dome
Of that blue heaven to which they seem allied:&mdash;
And oh, ye rivers!  from what sacred womb
Of clouds or mountains sprang your fountain tide,
That flows with music light and beauty vivified?

Wast thou, fair Dove, a stream when Paradise
With rivers watered its delightful flowers;
Before the Peak beheld you summits rise,
And Dovedale's portal arch high-roofed with towers?
Or when the drowning Deluge poured its showers
Wast thou produced?  Or later dates thy birth&mdash;
Engendered where the caverned Geyser lowers
And flung in steam condensed through fissures forth,
The child of fire, upsent to warm and water earth?

Dark as the galleries of that aisle sublime
In Thor's huge Fane, which yet doth open stand;
Gone without record is the olden time
When first thy robe of beauty decked the land;&mdash;
Thy robe embroidered rich by Nature's hand,
With pictured rocks that o'er the margin lean,
With trailing shrubs and trees whose boughs expand
Their varied foliage, light and sombre green,
Arching with graceful curves the wave that flows between.

O river of the mountain and the mead!
Whose path has deepened like that fountain-train
Where stepped the angel with his measuring reed;
With joy I meet thee on this open plain:
Thou bearest onward to the distant main,
In whose vast home of waters ends thy course;
My path pursues thy channel in its wane,
Where flows the current with decreasing force;
Till passing many a vale I reach its trickling source.

Not thy famed wealth, that tempts the fisherman,
With line and rod and wallet fitted out,
To seek thy banks, has me allured; I can
With higher motive trace thy varied route.
If chance I see the crimson-spotted trout
On light fin darting up the lucid stream,
It ministers to thoughts not undevout;
And better its shy beauties grace my theme,
Than gold or silver fish that love the tropic beam.

The pride of Burton, that stupendous bridge
Whose crowded arches span the floods of Trent,
I pass not now; but toward the northern ridge
Of Needwood with the Dove my steps are bent:
I tread the classic ground where Mundy spent
His youthful hours; when emulous he strove
With Darwin and the Gisbornes, each intent
To sing the charms of nature as they rove
On Weaver hills, or woodland watered by the Dove.

Here noble Vernon oft led forth his hounds.
A pack that never shamed their good descent:
His sire had trained them on these forest grounds;
And braving oft the wintry element,
Beyond the precincts of the chase he went&mdash;
As once to Shirley Park what time he vied,
With hounds on cry, and horn deep-winded, bent
Foremost of all the gallant train to ride,
Yet curbing gracefully his fiery courser's pride.

The hills rebounded as the hunters past;
Echoed the champaign, every bank and bush
Remurmuring back the music and the blast,
And shouts of horse-and-foot-men, as they rush
Through Dove, whose stream recoils with troubled gush.
Morn had dispelled the fogs, when from his cell
Reynard was roused; and ere they seized his brush,
(That trophy of the chase,) the evening bell
Of distant Ashbourn sounded into Wooton Dell.

The ballad of this fox-chase has been sung
With strength of lungs that roared it out with glee;
And when the chorus round gave mouth, it rung
As though the hounds had joined in company.
But this obstreperous mirth ill suited me:
The wise man tells us laughter has its time;
Yet deeper on my spirit strikes the key,
When beauty, pathos, power, and gifts sublime
Of high imagination I "build the lofty rhyme."

And I can find enjoyment in this task
Of humbler measures; with a pure delight,
When nature beckons in her sylvan mask,
I trace her footsteps, whether she's bedight
With blossoms, or with berries, glossy bright.
I climb the sandy cliff of Marchington;
And thence to Hanbury's conspicuous height,
Far from the river banks I wander on:
Before &mdash; behind &mdash; a glorious scene to gaze upon.

Lo, like the Hindoo's sculptured idol-god,
Firm on his cushioned root old Swilcar stands;
Casts his broad shadow o'er the lawn's green sod,
And frowns upon the larch grove's upstart wands;
Here, lifts his foliage high with shaggy hands;
And there, still stretched to meet the thunder cloud,
One bare enormous arm aloft expands;
While, questioned by the summer tempest, loud
His voice with deep and solemn roar gives answer proud.

Oh Swilcar, while before thy pillared trunk
I stood and gazed upon its amplitude;
It seemed the generations risen and sunk
Since from the acorn thou didst first protrude,
Before me in distinct succession stood:
They vanished &mdash; still magnificently great
Thy living cloud of foliage crowns the wood;
On life's vast theme enquiring, still I wait,
Like Mona's Bard before the oracle of fate.

Is to the sturdy oak vouchsafed a term
So ample, that a thousand years may roll
Before the plant upspringing from its germ
To earth again returns the crumbling bole,
And can we dream of man's etherial soul,&mdash;
Time's hour-glass measures out its destiny?
What though the body seems to find its goal
In the dark grave; yet Faith is there to see&mdash;
The seed must die before it can produce the Tree.

Ah that some clump remained of mossy piles,
Some vestige of that Temple of the wood,
Which once resounded through its verdant aisles
With Mundy's lyre.  Then all was fair and good;
And Needwood Forest in its glory stood:
Free ranged the deer, and every beast of chase;
There couched the pheasant o'er her nestling brood;
The song-birds carolled; hummed the insect race;
And sights and sounds of wildness tenanted the place.

The hand is powerless now, the lyre unstrung,
That charmed the dingles with exulting tones;
That from the hollies where retired it hung,
Was reached once more, to chant in tuneful moans,
The Fall of Needwood with its stately cones!
Yes, Needwood Forest now is but a name;
And Mundy sleeps beneath the tomb's grey stones:
Yet still, besides his Bust, survives to fame,
His Verse, by genius haloed with her purest flame.

Time cannot hide, power cannot quench the lamp
Of genius, kindled far above the sun!
The works of art are crushed beneath the tramp
Of rude barbarians flushed with victory won;
Age wastes the giant to a skeleton;
And man's immortal spirit has been driven
To shrink in idiocy, with woe undone;&mdash;
But genius through the night of years has striven;
And Homer's deathless song to this late age is given.

The starry banners round night's azure cope
Are conquered by the golden shafts of morn;
So the bright rays of mind, beyond the scope
Of matter reaching, yet attain a bourne
Impassable, that baffles as in scorn
Their trembling gleam.  But He who reigns above,
Pitying our weakness was in weakness born,
In darkness crucified; that He might prove
Strength, light, and wisdom, to the children of his love.

Where reason halts, and genius sinks in dearth,
Faith ventures, with the Bible in her hand:
She hails the country of her second birth,
And seeks companions to that promised land.
Spread then the holy book!  the work is grand,
Is God's, and waits not purblind man's complying:
The vision John beheld on Patmos' strand
Is now fulfilled; from clime to clime is flying
The angel of the Everlasting Gospel, crying:

"Fear God, ye nations, kindreds, sons and daughters
Of every tongue and people, worship Him!
He made the earth, the fountains of sweet waters
He bound the restless ocean with a rim
Of rocks and sands it cannot overswim,
And stretched on high heaven's glorious canopy.
Sing then, with cherubim and seraphim,
In universal choir sing loftily,
His mercies, judgments, glory, and eternity!"

But from her task imagination roves;
I am not here on Cannan's happy shore;
These banks are not the Jordan's but the Dove's,
And yonder towers that gleam in distance hoar,
Recal me to my chosen theme once more.
Alas, the vanity of human powers,
And earth-built structures!  Tutbury of yore
Reared in magnificence those castle towers,
And now they bear the mockery of the passing hours.

The palace-prison once of Scotland's queen!&mdash;
Ah, hapless Mary, hurried to the tomb
By bloody hands, the tools of jealous spleen!
Henceforth, whoever treads the shadowy gloom
Of yon proud ruins, will bewail thy doom
And long captivity. &mdash; Thou wast a gem
Of royalty, in beauty's roseate bloom:
Thy nobles would have kissed thy garments' hem;&mdash;
Yet thou upon the block didst bow thy diadem!

The pilgrim's motto, "Earth is not our home,"
On yonder walls is doubly written:  Time
In broken lines, and History from her tome,
Have scribed it.  Like the exile's speech sublime
Who sate on ruined Carthage, their deep chime
Of meaning awes me. &mdash; Oh, within these walls,
Roofless, defaced, and sullied now with slime,
Is there no ghost doth rise to tell the thralls
Of her that sate enthroned in Edin's regal halls?

Look down upon the Dove!  within her deeps
Yon walls and towers inverted reappear:
And imaged there a holy fabric sleeps,
So tranquil in the liquid hemisphere,
So perfectly at rest, you almost fear
'Tis but illusion.  No, &mdash; upon the slope
Of you bold eminence the church doth rear
Its Saxon arches, rounded like the cope
Of heaven's bright bow of promise, symbol dear to hope.

What new attractions need the tourist ask
To tempt his visits here!  May he not find
The beautiful, the bold, the picturesque,
And works of rare antiquity, combined
With recollections sacred to the mind?
The splendor of the feudal time is past,
But much of interest yet remains behind;
The wretched hypocrite has broke her fast,
But this fair church, these towers, for ages yet may last.

Adieu!  long wave your ivy crests above
The smoke of Tutbury upcurling blue!
Ye Forest Banks that overhang the Dove,
Ye dingles and romantic dells, adieu!
Winding in folds of mist till lost from view,
The stream up toward an open country leads.
Here heaven has poured its blessings like the dew:
Deep rolls the corn, and richest verdure feeds
White flocks of sheep, fair herds of kine, and dark-maned steeds.

Reflecting the sun's rays, the gilded ball
On Sudbury's high dome, gleams o'er the grove
Embosoming its hospitable hall,
With brighter sheen than when at eve it strove
To rival, in the placid depths of Dove,
The perfect image pictured by the moon.
The porter here admits me, by the alcove,
Where haply minstrel bards have sought a boon,
Or Palmer resting, doffed his scrip and sandal shoon.

Before my mind what flitting fables cross!
And sure, if ever waves, or earth's green sod,
Or floor of rock, or woodland bank of moss,
By Naiads' or by Dryads' feet were trod,
Here should I look to see the River God,
And list his Tritons blow their azure shells:
For Dove that in the vallies long abode,
Oppressed with shadow, now rejoicing swells,
And hither brings the waters of a thousand wells.

At distance due from yonder waving limes,
With equal pomp a shining lake is spread;
And nature's rarities from distant climes,
Their mingled odours on its bosom shed.
The stately Tulip tree here lifts her head;
With palmy foliage the Magnolia towers
O'er the smooth lawn; rich is the Orange bed;
And fed by artificial heat and showers,
The spicy plants of Ind are nourished in these bowers.

On Trent's broad bosom float the snow-white swans,
Like painted ships becalmed in ocean bay:
How beautifully arched their plumy vans!
The jet and scarlet on their heads how gay!
But can the rapid Dove obtain their stay,
While rivalled by the fairer-bosomed lake
That skirts the lawn?  Or will that lake betray
Its isle, the haunt of heron, coot, and crake,
And household stork, that loves its sedge and sheltering brake?

Risen to the surface, like the good man's alms
Cast on the wave which multiplied returns,
The Water Lily spreads her leafy palms,
And o'er them bears her gold and silver urns.
From bulb nutritious that beneath sojourns,
Its forky leaf the Arrow-Root extends:
With genial heat the Water-Soldier burns,
Alert to show himself; and here ascends
The Rush that like a chandelier her flower suspends.

With tresses mantled like the weeping birch,
Muffled with ivy like a hermitage,
In yonder nook is screened a gothic church.
Its venerable aspect might assuage
The stormy passions, that too often wage
Unhallowed conflict in the human breast.
Nature here seems in homage to the age
Of Holy Writ to wear this sober vest,
And shadow forth below the sabbath of the blest.

Here, Vernon, when to shun the sultry noon
Thou seekest this cool invigorating shade;
And oft at evening when the pensive moon
Suspends her crescent o'er the chequered glade,
May thanks for past and present bliss pervade
Thy inmost spirit.  Heir of noble blood!
Of Thee and of thy Lineage be it said:
"The ennobling virtues well they understood;
Theirs was the godlike exercise of doing good!"

Quitting with fond regret, this solemn place,
A sinuous path conducts me to the lawn,
And park magnificent.  In uncurbed space,
With towering woods and vistas far withdrawn
It spreads before me.  But the mists of dawn
Hot noon has quaffed:  within the sheltering dome
Of the deep-shadowed oak the panting fawn
Beneath its green roof finds a pleasant home:&mdash;
I hasten on, and track the river's crest of foam.

Unlike the plume upon the warrior's helm,
That tosses mid the battle's hottest strife,
This waves alone in nature's peaceful realm,
Far from the din of drum, and trump, and fife,
The "pomp and circumstance" of martial life.&mdash;
'Tis sweet to drink at the pure fountain-head;
To watch the streamlet in its snow-white coif
Wild-leaping down its rocky mountain bed;
To mark the deepened flood in brightness garmented.

Whoe'er has trod the slopes of Doveridge park,
Where like a crescent wind's the "horned flood;"
Or with the morning and the early lark
Has climbed to Eaton's high o'er-hanging wood,
And seen the landscape stretching many a rood,
Silvered with mists and streams, &mdash; if he could find
In all this prospect of the fair and wood
Nothing attractive, let him stay behind;
The power of waters cannot melt his sullen mind.

But oh, like Beauty's cestus is the stream
Its glowing chain of waters with a spell
Constrains me, and the fascinating theme
My verse pursuing, shall delight to tell
Of rills and torrents, and the sink and swell
Of water-breaks and fountains, that anon
Will greet me, in the lone romantic dell
Piping, with clearer voice than Helicon,
Such liquid melodies as echo dreameth on.

The rapid Churnet joins upon the plains
Of Rocester.  Here a loud-resounding mill
In its capacious hold awhile detains
The river, harder functions to fulfil
Than wandering in the flowery fields at will.
Fettered like Sampson to the groaning wheels,
The plunging waters roar and toss and spill,
With desperate strength till all the fabric feels
The multitudinous motion whirl its thousand reels.

Where art or wast thou, O time-honoured Tree,
That gavest thy name unto the fruitful Hundred
Round which the Dove meanders fair and free?&mdash;
Thy branches, trunk, and root, have long been sundered;
Gone is the multitude that stood and wondered
At thy rich bloom or weight of golden fruit;
The chieftains too, that sat beneath and pondered,
With equity deciding each dispute.&mdash;
In worth one oak-leaf now excels thy bravest suite.

Lo, the round Weaver hills, that bound the sight,
Hang like a bed of clouds in sombre blue&mdash;
But not o'er Dove; beneath the smiling height
Of Calwich sweeps her graceful avenue.
And now at Hanging Bridge I bid adieu,
Fair Hundred of the Apple-Tree, to thee!
A bolder district bursts upon the view;
The rocky parapets of Peak I see,
And in those mountain holds, my spirit pants to be.

But night has issued from her caves; her gloom
Climbs like a mist, and darkens every steep;
The light that purpled all the west with bloom
Is vanished, and along the flowing deep
A veil of dewy haze doth softly sweep,
Fine as the gossamer, and pearly white.
Thus warned of the approaching hours of sleep,
I haste to Ashbourn, and with new delight
Pass by its windowed spire with moonbeams tinted bright.

CANTO II.
Oakover's lofty pines in distance seen,
Allured me onward when the morning smiled:
Within the mansion sheltered by that screen
Is Raphael's sweetest work &mdash; the Virgin mild,
Pictured with Jesus her most holy child.
All things are tranquil here; the River flows
In utter stillness, 'scaped from regions wild;
And those twin streams twice-born join her repose;
Upon her gentle breast their silver pinions close.

Ilam, thy ancient Hall is swept away!
A fairer soon shall lift its domes and towers;
While still thy fountain-deeps ebullient play,
And newborn rivers grace thy laurel bowers
And fossil grots.  Strike on and bring the hours,
Thou clock embosomed deep in ivy bloom!
Time holds the garland yet of Rousseau's flowers;
Still broods antiquity o'er Bertram's tomb,
And Congreve's hermit cell, shrouded in sylvan gloom.

Shell of the waters!  in thy jasper cave
Slumbering for ages &mdash; petrified thy strings,
And deaf thine echoes; &mdash; like the springing wave
Shake off thy thraldom; from the spell that flings
Its marble cerements round thee on the wings
Of music rise!  Rocks, rivers, mountains bare,
High-waving woods, and all inanimate things,
Are vocal now with gladness, all prepare
To greet the Pile in Gothic splendour rising there.

Hail, thou cloud-mountain, on whose veteran front
The storms that move at winter's stern behest
Have beat for ages!  Thou endurest the brunt,
Guarding, like knighthood of unshaken test,
Dovedale's rock-gardens and her caves of rest.
Bound on a pilgrimage to nature vowed,
Hither I come with no ungracious quest:&mdash;
Then lift thy battle-axe, O blue Thorp Cloud!
And answer to my hail with clash of echoes loud!

Now breaks the marvellous Glen upon my sight.
A beaten sheep-path to a hawthorn bower
Ascends; and seated near, on a green height,
The valley's central knoll, I feel the power
And beauty of the prospect &mdash; from the flower
Whose novelty attracts me, as it peeps
Above the herbage, to yon shelves that lower
In anger still &mdash; threatening the death he sleeps,
Whom erst they hurled, both horse and rider, down their steeps.

But soon the alpine vista, lengthening on,
Disturbs me by its grandeur from my seat.
What wondrous region do I gaze upon?
Rocks striding up the hills, &mdash; where not the fleet
High-bounding goat, nor coney's nimbler feet
Might venture; &mdash; opposite, a rude display
Of piles romantic, such as erst did greet
Perchance some paladin at break of day;&mdash;
Dark ivy-mantled towers, and spires and turrets grey.

How fair the limpid Dove!  whose waving line
Gives life and freshness to each sloping mound.
There to the bee her bank's wild eglantine
Shews its sweet rose reflected; floret-crowned,
Her plants diffuse their sea-green tresses round;
With starry water-breaks her surface gleams;
And far above, by shadows part embrowned,
Part bathed in golden light of orient beams,
A wilderness of wood looks down upon her streams.

Here flourishes the thorn &mdash; her milk-white bloom
Now changed for summer's garb; light oziers swing,
Dipping their flexile wands; the furze and broom
Vie with their locks, as on the steeps they cling;
And soft the blossom-showers descend to bring,
Erelong their forest berries glossy red.
From hoary crags the yew his dark-green wing
Expands untired; and every leaf that fled
From winter's wrath is here again in joyance spread.

Let not the wanderer of the Switzer alps,
Who oft has seen the clouds beneath him sweep,
And far above beheld the naked scalps
Of the huge glaciers, or within the deep
Dark piny forest on the mountain steep
Has been benighted, treat with cold disdain
These raptures; passion here may reap
Strong pleasures, and the soul a glimpse obtain
Of nature's wondrous works, and wisdom's boundless reign.

He bears a grovelling mind who slights the charms,
That decorate the country's open fields;
The man that listless views her cultured farms,
Tastes not the bliss her wilder landscape yields:
The dark cave-dwelling which the mountain shields
Invites not him &mdash; he treads the ground for hire.
No power which high imagination wields,
Shaping these rocks, may draw him to admire
Their fascinating beauty or their rich attire.

Grass of Parnassus.  can the vagrant muse
Pass on, unmoved by thy inspiring name?
Not blushing roses bathed in morning dews,
Nor may the primrose of the evening claim
Such title to the poet's meed of fame,
(Though many a charmed verse has told of them,)
As thou, among the flowers the mountain dame,
That, seated on thy shapely pillar-stem.
Art lovely as the light-reflecting opal gem.

Midst odorous thyme impregnating the air,
The slender Catchfly swings her silver bells
On the high cliffs, upon whose topmost stair
The mountain Scabious nods:  those pinnacles
Named from the village of the holy wells,
Screen at their feet the Lily of the vale.
And oft the shepherd girls that haunt these dells
Choice garlands cull &mdash; Anthyllis, Cistus pale,
And Orchis, mimicking the armed insect's mail.

Still, Dovedale, yield thy flowers to deck the fountains
Of Tissington, upon its holy day;
The customs long preserved among the mountains,
Should not be lightly left to pass away.
They have their moral; and we often may
Learn from them how our wise forefathers wrought,
When they upon the public mind would lay
Some weighty principle, some maxim brought
Home to their hearts, the healthful product of deep thought.

Now through a copse of underwood the path
Its course beside a roofless hovel brings.&mdash;
"Is this the only structure Dovedale hath?
Is there no temple-tower that heavenward springs?
No palace-inn to stretch its crescent wings?"&mdash;
Yes, Nature builds where Art eludes the search:
Look up, and see the ponderous arch that flings
Sublime from rock to rock, its towered porch;
Mark her high-storied caves!  her ancient crag-built Church!

Thou venerable Fane!  thy walls were reared,
Thy ivied arches springing roofed the void,
Thy fretted spires above the trees appeared,
Ere Science one fair Order had employed,
One metal, gold or silver unalloyed,
To shape and ornament her piles with grace.
And yet the high emotions here enjoyed,
The humbling thoughts that human pride abase,
Might well befit the service of a holier place.

I glance around the dale from right to left;&mdash;
It seems as Paradise were passing by,
And I beheld it from this secret cleft.
Flowers yield their fragrance; trees, luxuriant, high,
Climb the rude rocks; and in the orient sky
O'er yonder peak the sun reveals his fires.
The sparkling stream of Dove has caught his eye;
His glory lightens all the cliffs and spires;&mdash;
I see, I feel, my spirit glows with rapt desires.

O hither bring the harp from Judah's palms,
With psaltery, sackbut, dulcimer, and lute
The music tuned of old to golden psalms,
This crag-built church, these rocky aisles will suit.&mdash;
They come &mdash; the wilderness no more is mute.
The winds have brought the harpings of the sky;
Dove breathes her dulcet tones, the lark his flute;
The psaltery trees, the sackbut caves supply;
And one harmonious voice of praise ascends on high.

ODE.
Thou mountain pyramid, all hail!
In majesty thy Form unveil!
Throw back thy misty shroud,
Unclasp thy helm of cloud,
And down the vista of the dale
Reverberate aloud.

Yet waken not yon river-pool
In softest shadow sleeping cool;
Thine image is the dream
That charms the silent stream,&mdash;
Till twilight's deeper shadows rule,
And Cynthia's placid beam.

Lift up your heads, ye giant rocks!
Like clashing cymbals rear your blocks
High in the upper air;
And may the thunders spare,
When the earth reels beneath their shocks.
Your top-stones loose and bare.

Ye caves, that in the summer's bloom
Afford a cool refreshing gloom,
A rest to weary feet;
Still when the snow-storms beat,
With stalactites of ice illume
And screen the coy retreat.

And ye precipitous defiles,
That, rising like cathedral aisles,
Catch the first gleams of dawn;
The sunshine on the lawn
Between your walls so sweetly smiles,
O be it ne'er withdrawn.

When winter comes in shape deform,
And the hills shiver in the storm,
Scattering their stones like hail;
Still may he harmless sail
By every spire whose graceful form
Gives beauty to the dale.

Adown these slopes no torrents dash;
But here aspires the mountain ash,
The purple thyme doth cling;
And wild-fowl on the wing,
Are gilded by the rays that flash
Upon the rainbow's ring.

Wheeling with loftier sweep, the Daw
Reiterates his plaintive caw;
And on the cliff's bold breast,
The Martin, summer guest,
Fixed safely with tenacious claw,
Models her stucco nest.

And thou, sweet Dove!  thy voice is mild,
Thy stream is playful as a child;
Nor want'st thou shady bowers,
Or bright aquatic flowers:
Yet hast thou seen a period wild,
When horror ruled the hours;

In dreadful agitation tossed,
Each moment fearing to be lost;
For, from the deep abyss,
With fiery vapours' hiss,
Rose Earthquake, like a troubled ghost,
Darkening the scenes of bliss.

"Then shook the hills by thunders riven;"
And Ruin's ploughshare, fiercely driven,
Broke through the rocks its way.&mdash;
Who bade the tumult stay?
Who turned the hell into a heaven?
The God whom worlds obey!

To Him be glory evermore!&mdash;
The rocks, the hills, the spangled floor
Of earth, this arch, these caves,
And Dove's rejoicing waves,&mdash;
Let every object Him adore,
Whose power in mercy saves.

So when the plague at Eyam thinned the flock,
The voice of worship on the sabbath day
Within the hollow of the Cucklet rock
Resounded.  There with mingled sobs they pay
To pitying heaven their vows.  Thor's hammer lay,
All impotent, to dust and darkness hurled;
No more to idol-gods the people pray;
The banner of the cross, in light unfurled,
Had swept that brood of giants from the northern world.

Ah Memory, if like echo thou couldst give
The sound that has departed voice again;
Couldst thou present, as in a mirror live
The forms before it, my loved Sarah, &mdash; then,
I'd bid thee solace me in this deep glen
With her sweet voice, her angel countenance:
But she, though faithful as fond Imogen,
Comes not; no slumber can renew the trance
That once o'ercame me like a vision of romance.

She stood upon the threshold of the cave,
Whose darkness was a foil to her light dress:
The mountain masonry of nature gave
A picture framed with rock, in whose recess
Glistened the Dove; along the wilderness
Cloud shadows swept, chased evermore away
By the green sunshine; her gay votaress,
The Halcyon, glanced above the snowy spray;
And with unquiet wing flitted the timid Jay.

Nature is still the same; the birds, the cave,
The stream remain; but her whose presence bright
The consummating grace and glory gave,
I miss; and wanting her my sole delight,
All other joys seem dead and withered quite.
Ah, love and friendship still are precious things;
Man was not destined for an anchorite,
But for that sweet companionship which brings
Joy to his joys, and comfort to his sorrowings.

The buoyant spirit within me sank, subdued
By the pervading influence of the spot,
Its silence and oppressive solitude.
Nor mine nor quarry mars this hidden plot;
The Fox still shelters in the mountain grot;
And though no flaming sword forbids access,
Yet here the peasant shuns to fix his cot;
For nature has her sanctities, no less
Than Eden's garden, left to utter loneliness.

I scaled the craggy cliffs up to the niche
That on their summit like a watch-tower stood:
Down to the depths of Dove mine eye could reach,&mdash;
A dizzy sight, unfit to calm the blood,&mdash;
But here it roused the torpor of its flood:
The freshened breeze in eddies round me curled;
And now descending in a livelier mood,
I sought the gorge through which the floods are hurled
When Dove seems breaking from an inundated world.

As when, outstretching up the azure sky,
The clouds dispart their purple-tinted wings,
We gaze upon the canopy on high
Till admiration into wonder springs;
And fancy paints, in bright imaginings,
A heavenly shape to wield those mighty plumes;
So where the cataract its torrent flings,
An arch of rainbow hues the spray assumes,
And forms of beauty dance amid the shadowy glooms.

Such where Niagara hurls her thundering flood
Are seen, as roving Indians make report;
But Dove, when swoln with rains and dark with mud,
Unwieldy welters in far different sort:
And rather would I watch the mimic sport
Of bright cascades, in Chatsworth's gardens tossed;
Or wait till Winter holds his brilliant court;
Then seek the pillared caves with ice embossed,
And all the magic pageantry of snow and frost.

She mocks not now the angry deep's uproar,
Nor puts her rocky barriers to the proof;
But gently glides beneath the frowning shore,
As fearful lest the masses piled aloof
Should fall like thunder bursting heaven's cloud-roof.
Here skip the sheep the stepping stones along,
Reckless of danger, and with unwet hoof:
I following through the chasm, reach where a throng
Of naked rocks protrude the mountain glades among.

Whence came this spectacle of rugged cones?
Was it that some vast inundation hove
Hither the Kraken of the deep, whose bones,
Then stranded on the margin of the Dove
And petrified, give to the mountain cove
Its horned aspect?  Or was this a camp
Of the huge Titans warring against Jove?
And these their weapons, thus, with echoing stamp,
Upreared from earth the valour of high heaven to damp?

They lodge on either mountain as a flock
Of sheep might rest, or herd of antlered deer;
And One, more vast, fronting the Needle Rock,
Above the dense white fog uprises clear.
It seems an isle of a serener sphere,
Dependant not on earth, but on the laws
That guide the orbs of heaven in their career;
But now, upon its base I see it pause,&mdash;
Like Nature's finger pointing to the Great First Cause.

Such is the final scene magnificent!
These are the closing Portals of the Dale:
And lo, within, but placed more eminent,
A Lion, sculptured on colossal scale,
Couched like a Sphinx:  his body and his tail
Are hidden; but his noble head and breast
Declare the guardianship of this proud vale
Upon his magnanimity may rest;&mdash;
Approach, ye Tourists, he will harm no loyal guest.

With quiet lapse the gliding waters lave
An open plot of verdant meadow ground;
Where, faring on, I reach a double cave,
Above whose entrances, wide-sweeping round,
A frontal arch by nature's hand is wound
Encircling both:  the stony floor is dry;
And where the shadow deeper falls, are found,
As in a gallery retiring high,
Ledges of rock, that seats and tables rude supply.

Here entering, I refreshed myself within
With rest and food, and, more desired than all,
With Dove's pure lymph.  It was no sumptuous inn
No 'Haven' on the moors, this gloomy hall,&mdash;
Which yet pleased me; for here I might recal
Judean scenes.  The sheepcotes and strong hold
Where David nobly spared the life of Saul,
This Cave, yon Shepherd's Abbey with its fold,
Brought like a sacred vision of the days of old.

Lend me, O Chantrey, thy creative skill;
And give to verse the powers of sculpture, now:
For on the apex of that conic hill
There stands &mdash; in listless apathy &mdash; a Cow.
No bushes, not a solitary bough,
To break the charmed figure interfere;
But, as a statue fixed, she keeps the brow,
That seems its rocky pedestal to rear,
Bearing the idol-goddess Egypt did revere.

By the dense air dilated, on the height,
That object still the mind's attention fills,
Pondering the effect of place, and shade, and light.
Nature exacts our wonder as she wills:&mdash;
The Shadows dancing on the sunny hills,
And those of spectral shape, that walk the clouds;
The Echos, whose wild voice the desert thrills;
The silent Mists, passing in wreathed shrouds;
The giant Crags, sole-peering, or in banded crowds;

The lurid Banner of the thunder storm,
Flashing athwart with elemental fire;
The Water-Spout, whose strange portentous form
Stoops its proboscis like a downward spire,
The crater of the clouds; and, from the pyre
Of kiln or furnace vomited amain,
The Smoke, whose trailing serpent folds attire
The moorlands; these are the majestic train,
The retinue of Dove in Nature's mountain reign.

In this romantic region wandering on,
(Where every living cry can stir the mind,)
Recurs the bold rock-scenery:  anon,
A rustic bridge appears, and lodged behind,
A group of cottages, with mill to grind
Their slender harvest.  Gladly did I hail
The sight, in this lone place, of human kind:
But I must quit them, and pursue my tale
Beneath the tors and turret-peaks of Narrow Dale.

Valley of Shadow!  thee the evening moon
Hath never visited; the vernal sun
Arrives too late to mark the hour of noon
In thy deep solitude:  yet hast thou One
Will not forsake thee:  here the Dove doth run
Mile after mile thy dreary steeps between,
Where rise the Iron Tors, of aspect dun:
While oft pursuing her dark wave are seen
The sportive king-fishers, on wings of emerald green.

Thy only buildings are the stepping stones,&mdash;
A path of peril to the unpractised foot.
But at thy valley-head the country owns
A firmer bridge, outstretching from the root
Of a high hill that might with Hanson Toot
Have gained a name from Cotton's classic pen.
Here, in the glorious sun-light, I recruit
Awhile my overburthened spirits; then,
I pass the meads to Beresford's enchanting glen.

But who can paint the beauties of Pike Pool?
Thy Duddon, Wordsworth, in its splendid route
Has nought so soft and green, so shadowy cool.
'Tis haunted by the grayling and the trout;
And from the sleeping water rising out&mdash;
Fairer than workmanship of elfin hands&mdash;
Appears an obelisk, a rocky sprout;
Like those of coral seen on Indian strands
Or shapely pine that sole in some deep valley stands.

Shrubs and steep crags a crescent skreen have drawn,
That on its southern side the river bounds;
The fellow bank is a smooth slip of lawn,
Skirted abrupt by bold romantic mounds,
With foliage hanging as from garden grounds:
These lead the eye to open fields of grass:
But loveliest is that pool the glen surrounds.
High above all rears a stupendous mass,&mdash;
A rock-built range of towers that frown upon the Pass.

Enough, methinks, is told of Nature's grace,
Poured freely on this stream, to anglers dear.
Diviner worth has sanctified the place.
That Fishing House amid those firs which rear
Their tops above it, leads me to revere
The seal of Friendship warm as filial love.
Twined in one cypher, on the front appear
Walton and Cotton's names; there fixed to prove
A record of affection near their favorite Dove.

The heroism of friendship, he could tell
Who lay in jeopardy by Ezel's-stone;
What time beyond its mark the arrow fell
Winged with his adverse fate.  There, met alone,
Wept Jonathan and David, till the moan
Of David's grief prevailed:  and when, erelong,
His friend among the mighty lay o'erthrown
Upon Gilboa's mountains, O how strong
He poured his loud lament, in agony of song!

But here the affections flowed in a more calm
Though varied tenor.  Cheerful, sage, and mild,
Walton's discourse was like the honey balm
Distilled by flowers.  Along these waters wild,
Smit with the love of angling, he beguiled,
With his adopted son, the hours away:
While Cotton owned the fondness of a child
For him, in whose glad company to stay,
Had made the whole year pass like one sweet month of May.

Peace to the memory of these plighted friends!
And peace to this fair glen and garden grove!&mdash;
Where Hartington up yonder slope ascends
I hasten &mdash; still in presence of the Dove,
That now appears delightedly to rove,
With ampler sweep, receding from the hills.
Yet ever as the springlets from above
Rush down, she turns to meet their glittering rills,
With volume serpentine, whose train the valley fills.

The "Nile of England!"  do not think it strange
If She can prove that queenly title good:
Look on from Ludwell; &mdash; what a lengthened range,
On either side, of moorlands; bare of wood,
(A luxury here,) yet covered with a brood
Of feeding cattle and innumerous sheep:
These heap the ground; and in the time of flood
The gathering torrents, with resistless sweep,
Convey the rich manure to fertilize the deep.&mdash;

The deep, that downward rolling to the south,
Wastes not its riches while the rifted dale
Confines its course; yet soon with liberal mouth
Outpours them where, in many a milky vale,
Fair damsels track the dew with brimming pail.
But now within its wonted bed the stream
Impels its billows, darkened here with shale:
I trace them upward, guided by the gleam
Of Parker's giant helm that meets the sunny beam.

But wearisome the way; this vale's extent,
Whose long perspective fascinates the eye,
Not hastily is measured; and o'erspent
With heat, I sought the friendly shelter, nigh,
Of a fine ash that braved the sultry sky.
On a sharp knoll it stood; but as I drew
Near to its shadow, haply there to lie
In dreamy mood, came suddenly in view,
A cave, about whose mouth the twisted ash-roots grew.

A turfy bank on either side, o'ergrown
With creeping brambles, toward the entrance led.
Approaching here, to the grey light was shewn
This native grotto: &mdash; stretching o'er its head,
A marble slab; its floor a liquid bed;
Its marble sides festooned with mosses thin:
I softly entered, with unsandalled tread;
When hark!  I heard an echoing voice within&mdash;
It was a fountain chanting with melodious din.

With strength and freedom flowed the water-song;
And clear as morning, came the gelid wave,
That from a dark recess now gushed along,
And spread a molten mirror bright, to pave
The fair interior of the fountain-cave.
Adown the hollow then through verdure deep
Of plants whose flowers and floating tresses gave
Their mantle to the stream, its waters sweep,
Till on her bosom Dove receives them from the steep.

Then said I, tasting that delicious lymph,
"Of life's dull tedium I'll complain no more:
The haunted isle where Circe, goddess-nymph,
As fabled, with Ulysses dwelt of yore;
The Syrens singing on their sun-bright shore;
With less of true enchantment sway the mind,
Than this wild region fraught with nature's lore.
Stretch on, ye vallies!  whereso'er ye wind,
The waters guide me still, your dusky glens to find."

Where sleeps the giant in his mountain-tent;
Where from the deluge Croome upheaved his shell,&mdash;
Its mammoth bulk with ribs embossed and bent,&mdash;
The river hurries by each spectacle,
As loth in such dread neighbourhood to dwell.
But charming was the picture at Wash-Gate!
There, through a rustic arch the waters fell;
An aged peasant by one cottage sate,
And one, with ivy garlanded, stood desolate.

Now like a playful brook the Dove is spread
Among dark stones and pebbles, mossy green,
That loitering wanton in her amber bed;
Yet still is homaged as a river-queen.
Even here, she is the glory of the scene;
The eye of light, that animates the ground;
The ear, that tunes to harmony serene,
The piping rills, the torrents roaring round
And tumbling waterfalls, that rush with deeper sound.

Quitting the stream to shun a deep morass,
It meets me soon again in humbler plight;
With mosses, rushes, flags, and tufted grass
As in a cradle folded, yet still bright,
Busy, and cheerful, &mdash; still in eager flight
I clamber onward through the boggy sedge;
And now the Peak's dark alp displays its height:&mdash;
Great Parent of swift rivers, which there fledge
Their infant wings; the cloud-sustaining broad Ax Edge!

There rise the Goit, the Dane, the Wye, the Dove!
And if, as when on Ida's summit viewed
The rival goddesses for beauty strove,
If there the proud contention were renewed
By these four rivers, Dove would win the feud.
She, like the turtle dove that cleaves the sky,
Pursues her brilliant passage many-hued;&mdash;
Amber blue green and silver, every dye,
That peat shale marbles clouds or foliage can supply.

At length 'tis gained, the heathy cloud-capt mountain!
Not at the hamlet of Dove Head I rest,
But higher up, beside a bubbling fountain
That makes within a little well its nest.
Here springs the Dove!  and with a grateful zest
I drink its waters, that first serve the poor.&mdash;
O when shall they repose on ocean's breast?
How long must their rough pilgrimage endure?
They ask not, but commence their wild romantic tour!

Harp, to the sweeter voice of waters played!&mdash;
Where Ilam's fountains rise in crystal rings;
And where, mid Dovedale's cliffs, each wild cascade
In sun and shadow sports on brilliant wings;
Here mayest thou hush to rest thy quivering strings
For I have viewed Pike Pool's deep-mirrored cone;
Have drunk the marble cave's pellucid springs;
And resting now upon Dove's fountain-stone,
Thy music dies away &mdash; her soft pipe trills alone!
