Then, spent with weary wandering, on the bank
All tissued with sweet flowers, I flung my side;
And bathed my forehead in the herbage dank
That sprouted cool beneath the willows wide:
There was the spot where broken hearts might hide,
So thought I, from the world of evil men;
Gazing for ever on the silver tide,
Or listening to the murmurs of the glen,
Or echo sweet that woke its hollow sounds again.

How lovely were it thus, from day to day,
To glide through life, from all it's troubles clear,
To leave at morn my rushy couch to pray,
Then forth and walk, companion'd by the deer,
And timorous hare, and wood-dove cooing near,
The friend of every innocent wild thing
That wing'd or grazed beside me without fear,
All in those secret arbours worshipping,
As once in paradise, their lonely pilgrim king.

And what were wealth to me?  those little flowers,
Were thy not richer than the gems of Inde?
What kingly tapestry like those waving bowers?
What throne so glorious as that wild rock lined
With golden moss, with love-sick rose entwined?
What were the banquet of the proud saloon
To the young almond's pulp, the citron's rind
That scoop'd the stream, when the pure feast was done?
Those are the Hermit's joys, to kings and courts unknown.

And when the twilight sent her pearly star
To tell me that the hour of rest was come,
My music be the waterfall afar,
The hunter's mellow cornet winding home,
The bleat of distant folds, the wild bee's hum,
Like evening's anthem rising to the skies,&mdash;
Then turn to sleep within that rushy room
Where slumber never from the Hermit flies,
Till morn looks smiling in, and breathes upon his eyes.

So mused I in a dim, delicious trance,
Till dreams upon my sinking eyelids clung.
A shout awoke me, swift and strong the lance
That through the thicket o'er my forehead sung.
Half blind and dizzy to my steed I sprung,
Beside his shrinking hoof a knight lay slain.
Fierce fight was round me, spear and mace, high swung,
Through proud helms crash'd their way; blood gush'd like rain,
And all was trumpet-bursts, and yells of mortal pain.
