Aye &mdash; many a Sun hath set, since my young hand
Smote the wild lyre; and many a fitful breeze
Hath passed along the chords, since Fancy's wand
Called forth her shapes to dazzle, and to please;
And every throb and passion is at peace.
Awake my harp!  is there no untried theme
To rouse thy tremulous strains?  can Memory cease
To woo the musings of her once-loved dream,
As dear, as ever warmed a bard by wizard stream.

The thoughts of other days, in shadowy throng,
Tumultuous pass before me:  dost thou see
Superior 'mid the forms, that float along,
One lovelier than the loveliest Nymph may be?
Aye &mdash; by the blossom of that cheek 'tis she:
She, for whose love my every pulse is beating;
And, as the past awakes a hollow sigh,
I feel the blood advancing and retreating&mdash;
Yet oh!  deceptive bliss, the pangs of absence cheating.

A world of time enshrouds the slow-paced hours,
That part young bosoms, melting in deep love:
When last thy full eye sank in tender showers,
Methought it spoke of pangs, we had to prove.
Yet lovely as the Moon in her alcove
Of starry splendour, when a robe of dew
Is wreathed around her, and her handmaids move
In mystic maze &mdash; it glistened to the view,
As fain it would have looked my bosom through and through.

Sweet star of Memory!  I bless thy beam
With dear devotion, for to thee I owe
The phantom of my joy.  As waters gleam
Reflectively, and bright, and beauteous flow
In triumph to the dancing rays, that throw
Athwart the blue expanse a blaze of  light:&mdash;
So, Memory, dost thou teach my heart to know
The sweetness of the past, till I delight
To catch the fairy forms, that flit before my sight.

A few, brief, little moons &mdash; and oh!  how sweet
To rove with thee, fair sovereign of my breast,
Fair Idol of my faith, while feelings beat
In fondest unison to lot so blest.
The waters rolled around us; and the crest
Of distant cliff was streaked with paly red,
Caught from the Sun, just sinking into rest;
All Nature slumbered in her Summer bed,
The wild winds were enchained, and nought was heard to dread:

Nought, save the dash of billows &mdash; like the noise
Of busy city, murmuring round the head
Of calm Philosophy, whose "still small voice"
Rose faintly, fitfully:  methought, it said,
How lovely in the storms of life is shed
The ray of peace o'er some romantic cot,
By two hearts tenanted, whose thoughts are led
To one magnetic point; whose wish is not
For pomp and grandeur, but a still sequestered spot.

In such a moment we were wont to pause,
And gaze upon the star of Destiny:
Did we not deem it, like transparent gauze,
With spangles studded to enchant the eye?
Oh!  we did whisper (and a little sigh
Betrayed too legibly of future scenes)
That star would guard us from the ills, that ply
Poor Man: &mdash; alas!  delusive Fancy gleans
Against the woes of life fond, flattering, faithless means.

And now the waves divide us (did we deem
The pang of parting half so keen?)  I gaze
On that same twinkling star, till tear-drops stream
In showers of feeling, and departed days,
Like phantoms, sweep around me; &mdash; dost thou trace
With lingering look yon brilliant of the sky,
Communing with me through a world of space?
Love whispers "yes"; and curbs the anxious sigh,
That struggles forth, whene'er I muse on joys gone by.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
