When Revolution, fidler blind, was young,
(While yet in modern France he sung)
The Democrats to hear him sing
Thronged around the vulgar ring;
Exulting, trembling, raging, fainting,
Fudddl'd, beyond the Muse's painting;
By turns they felt a moon-struck mind;
To Castle-building much inclined;
With fresh supplies of Gin then fired,
Fill'd with fury, rapt, inspir'd;
They snatch'd from the surrounding boys
Their various instruments of noise:
And, as they oft had heard apart
From thieves, the signal whistle's art;
Each, for madness rul'd the hour,
Would prove his own seditious power.

First HARDY came his skill to try
Amongst the corresponding trade;
And back recoil'd &mdash; he well knew why&mdash;
Of neck-extension sore afraid.

TOM PAINE, conbustible most dire,
Next made the rich Stockholders sweat;
The hangman to his tail set fire,
And off he scamper'd, deep in debt.

In Purley's meadows, JOHN HORNE TOOKE
With parts of speech his grief beguil'd;
The Verbo-philosophic book
By fits was fine, by starts was wild.

But thou, O Fox, with speech so fair,
What was thy opposing measure?
Still it whisper'd pension'd pleasure,
And bade the places good at distance hail;
Still would his touch the strain prolong,
And from the India bill's sad tale,
He called on Westminster through all the song:
And when to toast the Sov'reign mob he chose,
His title lost, he mourned at every close;
And Fox neglected wept, and wav'd his pig-tail'd hair;
Yet longer had he sung &mdash; but with a frown,
BURDETT impatient rose;
And threw his bonnet rouge in thunder down;
And with his Palace-Yardian look,
The mob-collecting trumpet took;
And blew a blast so loud and dread,
Ne'er were the Cornish Burghs so full of woe;
And ever and anon he beat,
The COBBET Drum with furious heat;
And though at times each dreary pause between,
Th' Attorney General at his side,
His soul-subduing voice applied,
Yet still he kept his wild unalter'd mien
Till in the Tow'r close shopp'd he laid his aching head.

Thy numbers COCHRANE to the Funds were fix'd,
Sad proof of thy distressful state;
Of war and politics the theme was mix'd,
And now he woo'd employ, now raving called on hate,

With eyes uprais'd, as one inspir'd,
PITT in the Treasury sat retir'd;
And from his snug official seat,
In notes, by Lucre made more sweet,
Pour'd through the Commons' House his winning soul,
From Opposition Rocks around
BURKE jump'd away and hail'd the sound;
Through corp'rate towns the safety-measures stole,
And o'er the bottle's talk with fond delay,
Jacks in office port-wine boozing,
Constitution toasts diffusing,
At civic banquets drank away.

But Oh!  how alter'd was its marching tone,
When Government, a nymph of brawny hue
With Habeas Corpus o'er her shoulder flung
And Volunteers in buskins gemmed with dew,
Blew an inspiring air, that inn and pot-house rung.
The soldier's call, to tippling idlers known;
The Cyprian fair, and their dram-drinking queen,
Drummers and corporals were seen,
Peeping from forth our alleys green;
Pipe-clay'd Militia-men rejoic'd to hear,
And six-foot tailors grasp'd the sergeant's spear&mdash;

Last came FINANCE'S dubious trial,
He with the income-tax advancing;
First to the yellow Gold his hand address'd:
But soon he saw the Bank-restriction viol
Whose more prolific notes he lov'd the best;
They would have thought, who heard the strain,
They saw in Lombard street the Bankers mad,
All bills discounting, whether good or bad;
To rising Stock perpetual dancing;
While, as his flying fingers kiss'd the strings,
PITT and the Bank framed a fantastic round;
Loose were her tresses seen, her zone unbound,
And he amidst his frolic play,
As if he would one time or other pay,
Exchequer bills shook from his paper wings.

Oh!  Money, earth-extracted maid!
The lender's loss, the borrower's aid,
Say, Goddess, why to us denied
Layest thou prices high aside;
As in that loaf-in-seven-days year
When things were most confounded dear;
Link'd arm in arm, O Nymph endear'd
Thou hast with strumpets forg'd appear'd&mdash;
Where is thy native form unlying,
Scales and weights and dirt defying?
Arise as in that elder time,
Sweated and clipp'd, but still sublime;
Thy wonders in that golden age
Fill England's subsidizing page.

'Tis said, (and I believe the tale)
That Guineas were expos'd to sale;
And that our last best cask of beer
The Sinking Fund was tapp'd this year;
PITT, I with weeping say, seduc'd
The Bank, and left her much reduc'd;
Scarce left her bare back clothes enough,
And made her Fame a Lottery Puff;
Abortive drugs were given by PITT&mdash;
But now laid in, she bears gold yet.
