Oh, I am blind with gazing!  I have seen
A glimpse of opening heaven, streak blend with streak
Of living light, carnation, crimson, green:
Once I have seen a sunset, vain and weak
My verse to tell its wonders, when the lake
Blazed like a sapphire, melting from the view,
As sunk his orb beneath the furthest peak
Of pine-clad Jura, into one deep blue,
Than all but woman's eye more exquisite of hue.

Wooed by the Autumn's breath whose kisses sere
The leaves that to his honied flatteries
Listen, as some fond maiden lends an ear
To whispered accents and impassioned sighs
Of one she loves, trusting his treacheries,
Leman!  what gorgeous vesture clothes thy woods
And sloping vines with many tissued dies,
The whilst an amethystine vapor broods
Over the calm expanse of thy marmoreal floods.

It was a sea of glory, such as man
Must dip his brush in heaven to paint; no dream,
Visioned amid the enchantments that the brain
Of wizard fancy, fevered by the stream
Of inspiration, conjures could redeem
Its splendours, or recall from out the bier
That shrouds them, their intolerable beam,
Reflected in the lake, whose mirror clear
Imaged a giant camp, whose snowy tops appear.

Deepens the shade to purple; still the eye
Of golden day smiles on those heights of snow,
Those everlasting glaciers, that defy
His feeble radiance, and, whilst all below
Is wrapt in gloom, are burnished with a glow
Fresher than childhood's cheek, and rosier dyes;
And now dissolves that passing beauteous show,
And their vast outline fades at length, and dies
In mists of night away, mingling with earth, lake, and skies.

The southern breeze is on her cradling breast,
As if enamoured of its beauty, sleeping,
Hushed like an infant in its innocent rest,
Save where confused and floating murmurs creeping
Along the shore, in balmy opiate steeping
The inebriate sense, o'er all my pulses steal
A magic influence, o'er my bosom sweeping,
Of momentary power almost to still
Its throbs, and staunch those wounds that nought can ever heal.

Nor I alone!  all nature seems to feel
The soothing silentness of this sweet hour;
Breathless as if for joy, the lake so still,
That heard the buz of insects, fluttering o'er
Its glassy surface.  Lower now and lower,
List to a watch-dog's bark!  succeeds anon
A mule's dull tinkling, whilst from off the shore
Is borne at intervals the sullen moan,
As if of grief at parting, of the filial Rhone.

Moveless the little boat, and seated high
A sylph-like form; the heaven of her clear brow
Images peace, and in her eloquent eye,
Of deeper, softer azure than the glow
Of skies, and brighter than the star that now
In single loveliness, the deity
Of twilight and of silence, smiles below
On this his world of beauty.  I read that he
Is most the object of her soul's idolatry.

Twilight, and night, and silence, sisters!  ye
I love to adoration, worthier
From this our intercourse; strange sympathy
Knits human hearts to nature, and from her,
Or Gods or Fiends, men take their character;
'Twas this deep love was early steeped in thine,
Rousseau!  thou wast her darling worshipper,
The child of nature, and in every line
She breathed her inmost soul in passion's strains divine.

Corinne!  around thy memory shines a light
Of halo loveliness; thou hadst a mind,
Bursting the Anarch Custom's reign of night,
Attun'd to all the sympathies that bind,
With e'en our very essence intertwined,
The purest, best, on earth; and thy freed spirit,
In fellowship with beings of its kind
It rarely met on earth, doth now inherit
Regions of love and light, the guerdons of thy merit.

She was the day-star of thy earliest fame,
Rank, riches, honours, victory, renown.
A greatness, only equalled by thy shame,
Once in a people's hearts had built thy throne,
But thirst for arbitrary sway, a crown,
Made thee a Daemon &mdash; God thou might'st have been
If cursed ambition had not hurled thee down,
And, like an empty pageant, all the scene
Fled with the guardian light, thy genius, Josephine.

This was the stream that fed thy fortune's tide,
And it rushed onward with a torrent's force
When she, the spring, its nourishment supplied;
Bright as a meteor was thy rising course,
Thy setting as inglorious:  now remorse,
The pangs of foul ingratitude, await
Thy scorpion heart; a self-inflicted curse
Is thine, a retribution, just though late,
The vulture and the rock &mdash; a Promethean fate.
