"Art is man's nature," said a soul of fire;
Away with vain distinctions then, away!
Man's natural impulses in him inspire
Wish for society:  but to array
Him in that order which the peaceful sway
Of social life requires, requires besides
That he should oft repress the natural play
Of his emotions, and should take for guides
Reason, and patient thought, rather than passion's tides.

If man be social deem'd, essentially;
As things important are i' th' social scale,
He will importance give them:  all agree
That none so much with this acclaim we hail
As those who grasp the reins of rule. Their tale
Is seldom thence devoid of interest's zest;
They also well deserve to countervail
Interests of lesser note; since self-rule, guest
Must of that bosom be, whose influence is blest.

If man must have society, he must
Endure subordination:  if we read
The oldest chronicles; e'en those whose just
And super-human estimates proceed
From the Almighty Spirit, there indeed
The natural elements of man we find:&mdash;
In them we're told, that he, to whom decreed
Is, rank, wealth, rule, is one, by Heav'n assign'd,
To be the favour'd mark of deference to his kind.

The generous loyalty of a liberal spirit
Is loftier far than insubordinate pride;&mdash;
Those who from heaven rightfully inherit
Life's vantage stations, ought to be espied
With fear and reverence:  as power well applied
Is surest source of veneration; so,
To whome'er power is not by Heaven denied,
There is in him, whether for other's woe
Or weal its sway he bear, that whence deep interests flow.

It is, methinks, a philosophic rule,
A simple one, and one which hath its root
More naturally in man's heart, to mark the tool
Of mighty purposes, &mdash; of high pursuit
The splendid votary, &mdash; with a reverence mute,
We never pay to one of low degree;&mdash;
'Tis surely more instinctive to salute
Heaven's chiefest instruments with bended knee,
Than theories to frame of man's equality.

As there can be no trust where there's no power,
So in proportion as the last is lent,
The first is given too; this is the dower
From the inscrutable arbitrement
Of Heaven deriv'd, by which we mark th' extent
Of valid agency:  and we aver
That 'tis more natural, wheresoe'er the bent
Of Fate hath stamp'd power's lofty character,
To feel augmented awe, than homage to demur.

We should remember, with augmented sway,
That awfullest of awful claims doth grow
Awful, in reference to its least display;
But still more awful when the Heavens bestow
Their mightiest privilege:  awful to know
That 'tis of us requir'd in least degree;&mdash;
Responsibility!  To Him, whose slow
But sure behests are just, the glory be,
T' arraign the guilty soul, and set the guiltless free!

'Tis this which sets upon the soul of man,
When holily he doth himself acquit
Of such a trust, the seal, which nothing can,&mdash;
Nothing of human pride, or human wit,&mdash;
Nothing efface! 'Tis hence that he is fit
For the historian's, or the poet's page;
And we aver of power, that, e'en as it,
Other things being the same, doth mark each stage
Of his life's progress, so he interest can engage.

'Tis thence, and thence alone, in reason's eye,
That the ennobled, noble really are;
Not that they fasten Fortune's livery
Around their brows, or that a name they bear,
But since, that in the privilege they wear,
Appeal is made to thoughts which influence man:
Ignoble he may be who boasts a star,
But never he, upon whose front we scan
He hath credentials clear from Heav'n's august divan.

'Tis thence, indeed, that e'en the very bard,
Philosopher, the hero, statesman, rise
In dignity, since are on them conferr'd
Powers o'er man's everlasting sympathies:
He who such awful boon to man supplies,
Gives to his fellow citizens a sense
That they've an interest in his destinies;
To them he is responsible:  intense,
(Or vain were all these gifts,) their varied influence.

'Tis hence that men of turbulent mind attract
Attention; not because their mental throes
Are theme of wonder; but because exact
In the proportion to the fire that glows
Within the soul, that soul it will dispose
For feats of power; to good or ill inclin'd:&mdash;
Thus, since where lofty passions souls disclose,
The germ of greatness seems; of human-kind,
As they chief mysteries were, we pay them homage blind.

Thus we assert that chiefly power can give
A right to human interest:  further still,
That various gifts of men from power receive,
From agency on his miraculous will,
All their pretensions.  With a gentle skill,
Authors, we know, have virtuous portraits made
From life's most humble scenes, and thus appeal
To the power of worth alone:  but, we're afraid,
Virtue, t' excite effect, must ask extrinsic aid.

Again, if attribute divine there be,
T' immortalize, to deify the soul,
'Tis that of self-renouncement.  How can he
Who hath o'er things external no controul,
Through whose dull breast the tempests never roll
Of ardent passion; tam'd, as he is, down
To a dull lethargy, by the hard dole
Of daily labour; how can he have known
Those conflicts of the heart whence sons of luxury groan?

How can he too, like them, a victor be,
If they have conquer'd?  No, we say, not all
Man's difference is in wealth or poverty:
But this we say, were minds in great, or small,
Always the same, that poesy might call
The great her favourite sons.  But since there fare
High minds in ranks obscure, and since befall
Heart-stirring chances oft to Penury's heir;
Exceptions to our rule we must confess there are.

We say, then, and from those who know us well,
We fear not, when we thus speak, to excite
Stigma of abjectness, that those rebel
Against man's natural instincts, who delight
To cast a shade o'er all the exquisite
Of artificial life; who have denied
To all the modes of art, a lawful right
To be the Muse's theme; who, unallied
With adventitious zest, have nature magnified.

Imagination, is thy spirit felt?
If it be felt, this truth will then be known,
That to those souls, who 'neath thy influence melt,
There is no principle they would disown,
Or pull down from its self-erected throne,
With such an earnestness, as that y'clept
Sectarian!  They whom thou wouldst call thine own,
In all things for which man hath smil'd or wept,
That energy can see towards which their hearts have leap'd.

Their store of images creation forms,
Only subordinate to the natural world;
The world of art their every impulse warms;
And though where mountain is on mountain hurl'd,
The banner they devoutly see unfurl'd
Of power adorable; for this no less
The tide of population, which is whirl'd
Through a vast city's labyrinths, &mdash; the stress
Of aspects of all arts, &mdash; their rich souls do impress.

We know a man, a man of genius too,
Who says, that he had rather walk the streets
Of London; that from thence there can accrue
To him, more strong emotion, than when greets
His eye a mountain region; when retreats
Day's glare, the lamps shine, and the windows blaze
With cressets bright, when at each step he meets
A tide of population, whose thick maze,
And multitudinous heart, deep human feelings raise.

We've heard him say, that, at such hour as this,
Stronger emotion, London!  he hath known
In thy dim haunts; more felt with emphasis
"His bosom's lord sit" proudly "on his throne,"
Than when his eye, with glories all her own,
Romantic nature greeted. Now attend:&mdash;
For this man well we know.  Is he thus prone
To give to Art precedence, Virtue's friend?
Say, would he personate her, would he have aught to mend?

To us it seems then, an erroneous plan,&mdash;
Though one from philanthropic feeling sprung,
One sprung from a deep feeling, that, in man,
As man, source of true interest lies:  one wrung
From the conviction, that, round old and young,
There is more, howe'er different our estate,
Of sanctity inalienable hung;&mdash;
More of resemblance 'twixt the small and great;
More which may universal sympathy create;

Than of discordance; &mdash; yet, to us, it seems
An error, though one which we reverence,
To hold up peasants, for poetic themes,
As fit exclusively:  and, consequence
Of this, the works of art to banish thence:&mdash;
And to this ostracism add beside,
Proscription to all scenes, for eloquence
Of the true bard, save those where are descried
Mountains, and lakes, and rocks, and nature's sterner pride.

Methinks, that, in the argument to which
These lines reply, there is one error clear;
Wherein it says, that natural objects teach
The peasant's soul; that with "their passions" there
"The permanent, the beautiful" appear
"Incorporate;" that they are nature-taught:&mdash;
But is't a fact, experience test to bear,
That forms external are in spirits wrought,
Proportion'd to the time they have been near them brought?

'Tis in an effervescent state, the mind
Receives impressions; oft from contrasts rise
The strongest ones; and oft those most inclin'd
T' adore the country, love it, in its skies,
Since their town's native smoke doth not arise:
It is not opportunity to see;
They are our passions, which, or ope our eyes,
Or close them; who, for "hard-earn'd penny fee"
Doth toil, for scenes the most sublime what careth he?

We then affirm, let one with leisure blest,
From distant region gorgeous scenes explore,
And in the very circumstance, confess'd
A cause will be, why he should love them more,
Since then such scenes first taught his heart to soar:
While the rude natives, who, though they have eyes,
As those who saw not, see; if he his score
Profusely pay, each charm which round them lies
Will sooner far forget, than their propitious prize.

Further, it is by knowing that there is
Something, to what we see, dissimilar,
Which makes us feel its worth.  Our daily bliss
We oft despise, 'till we have learn'd how far&mdash;
By sad experience, which our fate did mar,&mdash;
We were from cause of grief:  so men contemn
That, 'twixt which, and themselves, no let, or bar,
Did ever intervene; well-known to them,
E'er since, from life's first stage, their progress they did stem.

'Tis contrast makes us value, and reflect;
Till we have seen, of first distinguish'd forms,
The opposite, we seldom recollect
That e'en the greatest opulence of charms,
Which may, around our dwelling, glow in swarms,
Is more than man's accustom'd privilege;
Till some reverse our consciousness alarms,
Though ours life's first distinctions, we allege,
That seldom for their boon our gratitude we pledge.

'Tis contrast makes us value; makes us think;
A man who ne'er has seen, save forms sublime,
The chance is, that his sightless eyes will blink
Upon his native hills, as, of earth's clime,
The usurpation, were the original crime
Of unprolific tracks, unmeet for food:&mdash;
And we aver, that, that till it chance some time,
He quit his mountains, he will, in no mood,
"Incorporate" their "forms," with "feelings" high, or good.

We would concede, that the immortal forms
Of this most gorgeous world are paramount
To art's creation:  but, who guides the storms,
As He too, as from ever-living fount,
Created human instincts, we account
That He too primarily did create,
That which those instincts fashion:  hence th' amount
Of their results, and what they propagate,
Seems, to the thoughtful man, stamp'd with the seal of Fate.

Hath not a ruin, speech?  Hath marble wall
Of Grecian temple, or of Roman arch
The bulk colossal, not the power to thrall
Man's glorious faculties?  When 'neath some larch,
Which starts from crumbling fanes, we hear the march
Of Byron's lofty strains, and mourn with him,
That desolation's fiery blast should parch
His trophies all to dust, is that light dim,
Which, consecrating art, doth consecrate his hymn?

Soonest can man philosophize or feel?
Will cold deductions, or the strenuous claim
Of mighty energies, the likeliest steal,
With modifying influence, to tame
His eager senses, and his heart of flame?
Answer this question, ye who would postpone
Both splendor, power, and magic of a name,
To equalizing theories, unknown,
Save where the first have been, 'till human  zest was gone?

Indirect causes, in this world of means,
Of causes more direct, oft take the lead,
In operative agency:  to scenes
Where frowns the battlement amid the spread
Of trees time-honour'd, go!  While of the dead
Ye ponder, think how many a human breast
Hath swoln with victor's pride, or victim's dread,
'Neath banners, which, when the sun's rays impress'd
This lower world, did stream upon its mural crest.

Hadst thou, &mdash; had not the instinct which did build
This edifice, existed; had not been
The pride which rais'd it; the despair which thrill'd
Through its dark dungeons; &mdash; found so fit a scene
For human contemplation, where the spleen,
Gender'd by petty ills, may be smooth'd down,
By thoughts of glories which this place hath seen,
While all that is not charter'd for renown
Imperishably bright, is rifled of its crown?

And yet how little did the man design,&mdash;
Or they who once did in this fortress dwell,&mdash;
To form materials for a dream of thine?
Thus, when we see some gothic structure tell
Of ancient superstition, when the swell
Of the deep organ hath our ears engross'd,
When we behold, with curious eye, how well
The sculptor's mimic art hath here emboss'd
'Scutcheons, saints, sceptres, crowns, and heaven's angelic host;

Can we refrain from welcoming the lore,&mdash;
Mistaken though it were, &mdash; which wrought such grand
Structures, where meditation loves to soar,
To that great Governor of sea and land,
Who wants not temple built with human hand?
So may a principle of brotherhood,
Towards men whose use we scarce can understand,
Visit the heart; when thus, of things, is view'd
Their ministry to unpremeditated good.

Go to some abbey's wall, beneath the shade
Of cluster'd ivy muse, and there reflect,
Were true devotion, or compunctuous dread,
Of this the planner, and the architect?
How little need its origin be deck'd
With motive laudable, to make us prove
(Both while its ancient splendor claim'd respect,
From all who saw, and now, while it doth move
To meditation's trance) a superstitious love?

So feels the poet.  Had not rich men been,
Who, as it were, have Genius' cradle rock'd,
Whose dwellings now are like a fairy scene,
Within whose classical saloons are lock'd
Its rare creations, with all treasures stock'd
Which art can furnish, or which wealth can gain;
Had not these men existed, ne'er unblock'd
Had been for it the path to that domain,
Where ease, of Genius' sons, doth loose the palsying chain.

Leisure with wealth comes, and with leisure all
Those vain caprices, that fastidious taste,
Which, while they make man fancy's wretched thrall,
Incline him still, wherever he be plac'd,
To have his earthly habitation grac'd
With all that flatters sickly appetite:
Thus, sons of luxury, with nerves unbrac'd,
Seek with avidity and feel delight
In all which charms the ear, the feeling, and the sight!

Now who can see a morbid son of wealth,
With much complacency?  Yet recollect
That very softness, which unstrung the health,
That very daintiness, so circumspect
In all that tends to self, is architect
Likewise of those desires which make men feel
Wish to augment sensation's bounds.  Uncheck'd
This, by necessity, to no appeal
Which talents make to them, can they their bosoms steel.

Say, what so much as contrast does subserve
To means of interest, for the human eye,
And for the human mind?  Did nothing swerve
From one all perfect uniformity,
Then, where were terror's thrill, or pity's sigh?
We would affirm, calamities, of those
Conspicuous who have been, better supply
Theme for the tragic muse, than homely woes,
Whose uncontrasted shades no agonies suppose.

Besides, in artificial modes of life,
The natural feelings are so much repress'd,
Superinduc'd compliance is at strife
So much, &mdash; in those whose characters are dress'd
Daily for exhibition, &mdash; with the zest
Of natural impulse, that, or ere the stream
Of passion, in such souls, the bounds transgress'd
Of fit indulgence, in each wild extreme
It must have known the throes of transport's ardent dream.

Therefore we say, that, from the ranks of those
By talents privileg'd, by title, power,
Moods can be found of passion, to disclose
Fitter for service of that fiery dower
Which consecrates the bard, than all the shower
Of natural charities, &mdash; the poor man's lot:&mdash;
A philosophic bard may plant the flower
Of fine humanity, near shepherd's cot,
But tears of tragic muse his annals ne'er will blot.

Whom can we most with all the stores invest
From all the arts? &mdash; From painting, harmony?&mdash;
Him of the cottage, or the palace guest?
Oh, banish theory!  Let man still be,&mdash;
Of all beneath the heavenly canopy,&mdash;
The dearest thing to man!  Oh, bring ye forth,
Ye men of Genius, for our eyes to see,
Or Scotland's "Cotter," from his hallow'd hearth,
Or Adam from the dust, and we shall hail your birth!

With great men's characters we may combine
All natural beauty; but how can we make
Harmony, sculpture, painting, themselves 'shrine
Upon the tablet pre-ordain'd to take
The impress of a peasant?  For their sake,
To make them natural, we must bid farewel,
While in their presence, to deep tones which shake
The seat of sense, to harmony's loud swell,
To passion's mazy wiles, to art's voluptuous spell.

Peruse our Shakspeare, read of his remorse,
Whom fell ambition did to murder urge;
Say, could a peasant, with so deep a curse,&mdash;
With accessories, &mdash; heights, from th' extreme verge
O' th' human  compass, to its depths, which merge
The soul in passion turbulent and wild,&mdash;
Be thus encompass'd?  Could the saddest dirge
On rustic woes, even from "nature's child,"
As for this monarch's fate, our tears have so beguil'd?

Besides, in all the drapery of life,&mdash;
I' th' sister arts, in painting, harmony,&mdash;
Are there not mysteries link'd, with passion rife,
With that which most affects in poesy?
Sometimes, in real life, we've chanc'd to see
Men exquisitely sensitive to all
Beauties of nature, who, to all which we
Admire in art, could never be in thrall,
Who painting's charms despise, whom music's banquets pall.

Now, if the self-same soul could never love
Beauties of nature, and of art, at once,
We surely most that spirit should approve,
Who, for the first, the latter did renounce:
But since it is not so, we must pronounce
That the most gifted soul whom both have won;
Who, with an eagle grasp can bravely pounce
On things terrestrial, yet who doth not shun
To "play i' th' plighted clouds," and emulate the sun.

We do not mean, in what we here have said,
T' imply that pastoral life presents not theme
For loftiest poets.  No, we should be led
By error almost great, as that whose scheme
We here invalidate, should we thus deem:&mdash;
We say "almost as great," for we confess
We think patrician annals often teem
With sources of true interest, which no stress
Of genius ever gave shepherd or shepherdess.

No!  In each attitude of human life,
And in each aspect of the human mind,
In each spot where the passion's fearful strife
May be admitted, deem we bards may find
Theme for their high discourse.  We do not bind,&mdash;
Like theory we confute, when it would raise
The poor alone as fit to be assign'd
To the bard's lore, &mdash; ourselves the rich to praise,
As alone meet to be the theme of tuneful lays.

We say that all are fit.  But, in a sense
Superior to the rest, those on whom fate
Hath richly lavish'd her dread influence,
Of all which makes us love, and makes us hate;
Of all which makes us low, or makes us great;
Of all which makes us sad, or makes us blest;
As in the art of painting, to create
A simple sketch, doth surely not attest
The genius by th' historic painter manifest;

So in the sketch of him, the humble son
Of humble life, we surely must allow
The scope is not requir'd there, as in one
Which would the heights and depths of nature shew.
How can such amplitude of glory glow,
How can such masses of deep shadow lour,
Upon a humble peasant, as we owe
To him, who did inherit, with life's dower,
Th' arbitrement of well, or ill-directed power?

This is the object of our reasoning here,
That we may hasten with a march too fast
Towards moral perfectness in the bard's sphere:
A legislator, when he would recast
Social establishments, doth, &mdash; of the past,&mdash;
And that which is, &mdash; rather himself avail:&mdash;
On tried foundations, tried, and found to last,
Rather rebuild, than frantically hail
Th' abolishment of all, since parts were weak and frail.

So we would say, the poet, he whose aim
Is to produce impression, man should take
Rather as he finds man, more strive to frame
A fabric calculated to awake
Establish'd prejudice, than, &mdash; for the sake
Of philosophic name, &mdash; on theories build&mdash;
New theories of man, &mdash; his claim to make
Demands upon our sympathy, distill'd
Through ancient channels best, howe'er the bard be skill'd.

Yet let us say, for unsaid we might well
Deserve injustice' stigma, that the man,&mdash;
Whose theories of verse we here repel,&mdash;
How little theoretic errors can
A native glory dim, &mdash; how in the van
Of his own errors god-like he doth fare,&mdash;
Proves to all honest hearts!  Yes, we should scan
Our toil with treble joy, if being heir
Of errors like to his, his glories we might share.

Before he rose, there were, for every theme,
Many prescriptive phrases, all inane,
Since all bombastic; and with these did teem,
And with their misplac'd ornaments, and vain,
Whate'er profess'd to be poetic strain:&mdash;
These, universal, ere he 'gan his task,
He hath quite banish'd from the bard's domain;
We thank him, poesy, that we may bask
In light of thy clear face, from whence he tore the mask!

And let us add, that in the magic page
Of legendary lore, where in "the fate
O' th' Nortons," he our pity would engage,
A glorious monument he doth create,
Where on his theme all accessories wait,
Pomp, superstition, mystery, pride of name!
There let the scoffer turn; there consecrate
Will he behold, to a legitimate fame,
All that which may confirm the bard's immortal claim.
