I.
It is not mirth, can ease my heavy woes,
Or calm the throbbing of my breast;
O!  there is nought that can my eyelids close,
Or rock my spirits to a peaceful rest;
No &mdash; life appears in ebon colours drest,
Where'er I turn my woe-worn aching sight;
The morning dawns by every grief opprest,
And sombre twilight fades to cheerless night,
Bereft of every joy and void of each delight.

If pleasure meet my ever-weeping eye,
I see a demon lurking 'neath its flow'rs;
The smile of joy but wakes the heavy sigh,
And seems as sad as when the tempest low'rs:
O!  there is nothing in love's rosy bow'rs,
Can charm my heart, or blunt grief's poison'd stings;
Despair each cup of bliss with misery sours,
And o'er the scene a shade of sorrow flings,
While ever in my ear the knell of ruin rings.

II.
O!  how I love to ponder o'er the tomb,
And view the clay that wraps my Ellen's form;
Sweet to my soul the yews funereal gloom,
And lovely to my sight the coming storm;
The smiling flow'r would but her grave deform,
Its gayest charms would give me no delight,
No warbling sound my frozen heart could warm;
But O!  how dear the owlet's silent flight,
The lonely turtle's wail, the deepest shade of night.

Cease, comforter!  to pour thy honey'd strain,
But whisper sorrow's accents in my ear;
O!  let me hear the mournful lute complain,
And breath the sound that starts the sudden tear.
Can aught that's gay or cheerful now be dear?
Think you, this world will ever please me more?
No &mdash; let me rest upon my Ellen's bier,
O!  let me hasten to that peaceful shore,
Where hush'd is every storm, and still the tempest's roar.

O!  I could hide me in the darkest cave,
And weep till grief my heavy eyelids close;
My only solace is the gloomy grave,
'Tis there alone my heart can find repose:
Life is a dreary wilderness of woes&mdash;
No flow'r of friendship blossoms on the wild,
Despair's dark wave in freezing current flows,
Where mercy ne'er the orphan heart beguil'd,
Where Pity never wept, and friendship never smil'd,

What is a friend?  A hollow-hearted thing,
That smiles and smiles, when fortune's look is fair;
But when the knell of ruin 'gins to ring,
Those lying lips no smiles nor simpers wear.
Can I this cruel coldness longer bear?
Ah!  shall I bend and scarcely dare complain?
No &mdash; for the horrors of the grave I dare,
I long that dreary, still abode, to gain,
Where friends shall ne'er deceive nor flatterer's mock again.

To play upon a soul, that feels like mine,
To raise its hopes, then brush them all away&mdash;
To charm it with a transient rainbow's shine;
It is a devil's sport, a demon's play.
Sport with the soul that's never sad nor gay,
But alway plods in life's dull joyless road,
That never smil'd in pleasure's shining ray,
That ne'er was chill'd with grief, with passion glow'd&mdash;
But leave the feeling mind to its own thoughts and God.
