Welcome once more, pale evening's sombre host,
Shadows and darkness hail!  hail gentle night!
As o'er the world thy sable wing thou throw'st,
And wrap'st in vapours fanciful and light
Thy starry throne, all glowing, pure and bright!
Hail peaceful season!  when I love to roam
Beneath thy shade, and taste the warm delight
I ever feel in gazing on the dome,
That Nature's Architect hath raised o'er Nature's home;

Majestic fabric!  to my wond'ring eye
A marvel, endless, infinite, unknown.
I love thee, night, and yet I know not why,
For in thy quiet I was wont to moan
The sorrows of my youth, and sigh alone
O'er woes to come, or disappointments past;
Till hope uprising pointed to the zone,
The galaxy above me broad and vast,
Where no corroding care disturbs the soul's repast.

That silver wreath of heavenly asphodel!
That clear, broad, boundless sheet of living light,
On which the melancholic eye may dwell,
And deem it almost heaven; the shadow bright,
That gloomy chaos spares to mortal sight,
Of that empyreal region, where the blest,
In one eternal rapture of delight,
The Almighty's throne with choral songs invest;
And in high chorus hail Him wisest, first and best.

E'en from my boyhood, when I deemed the stars
But sparks of fire all beauteous as they seem,
Secluded from the world's unholy jars,
Beneath thine influence I was wont to dream
Of future life, and manhood was the theme
Whereon I dwelt, with joy that never tired:
There too my young ambition learnt to scheme
The glorious path, to which my soul aspired;
Now urged by meteor hopes, and now with glory fired.

And when as yet a stripling, and I rode
Upon the far Atlantic's boiling wave,
Watching your glimmering, from my drear abode,
In argent beauty; peace unbroken, save
The green sea billows undulating lave,
That soothes the drowsy mariner; I sigh'd
O'er follies past, for I was passion's slave;
And, like the storm toss'd bark no helm to guide,
Was drifting loose and wild on life's perturbed tide.

Thus oft I mused and gazed upon the sky,
Till heaven's high arch became a lovely book;
Whereon to read, with deep enamoured eye,
The Wonders of th' Almighty and to look
Above was extasy, and gently took
All worldly feeling from my anxious heart.
And thus from time to time I learned to brook
The hypocritic wile, the sneer of art,
The threat, the frown of power, and smile beneath the smart.

And I have well deceived th' ill-judging world,
Nor craved it's interested sympathy,
That weeps without a tear; whose lip is curled
With cynic smiles at others' misery;
And only mourns with envious eye to see
The virtuous prosper; I am sick at heart,
And feel as if I were not formed to be
A sojourner with such, but set apart
For suffering; as a mark for dire misfortune's dart.

The child of disappointment I have been,
Since to my eyes the light of day was new;
But long and heavy sorrows cannot wean
My heart from feeling; though the dew
Hangs not upon my eyelash as I view
Time's harsh bereavements; though I ne'er complain
I do not cease to feel; but strive anew
To cover with a smile a fevered brain,
And unconcerned appear enduring inward pain.

Thus set my young ambition, as I found
Her gory laurels easier worn than won;
And lost than either; and the path renowned,
That led to glory, dangerous to run;
Whilst plunder, rapine, murder, must be done
To gain a warrior's wreath, a hero's fame:
Hence then such guilty glory I would shun,
And rather live and die without a name
In dull obscurity, than wear such honoured shame.

I know not why I love thee thus, oh!  night,
But that my brightest dreams have been with thee;
And I have made thy pale unearthly light
My confidant; and, unreserved and free,
Have told my plaintive tales of woe to thee;
And thou hast seemed to listen till I thought,
In youth's enthusiastic reverie,
The gentle moon's pale features kindly wrought
With looks of sympathy; and this was what I sought.

Mild arbitress of night!  ordained to mix
In low communion with a world like this;
The poet's mistress, and the lunatic's,
To whom alike the sight of thee is bliss:
Fair traveller in yon infinite abyss,
Making the wise man mad, the mad man wise;
That dost the lover, drunkard, murderer, bless
With the same pearly light; to thee the sighs,
The groans, the oaths, the prayers of countless millions rise:

To thee, through many a long and lovely night,
From this untoward world I lift mine eye,
And leave its cares behind; that, like a blight,
Lead slowly to the tomb; and then I sigh
That such must he my home, yet long to die;
To leave this load, these troubles to disperse;
To be an atom of eternity,
Where thought no more shall earth's sad scenes rehearse;
To form a part of thee, and this great universe.
