Clos'd is thy strange career, fall'n chief, and Death,
With all-subduing arm, hath conquer'd thee,
Or rather say, by robbing thee of breath,
From this world's cares and woes hath set thee free;
For what is life when in captivity,
Cooped up and stunted in its noblest aim?
What deep desire of living can there be,
When breath is all the pining frame can claim,
Of every hope bereav'd, yet still in soul the same?

Mean minds feel naught of grief or care beyond
The body's sufferings, &mdash; hunger, thirst, and pain;
The low born slave, familiar with his bond,
No shame or lash or chains his thoughts contain.
But who the lion's fiery rage can rein,
Roaming majestic o'er the scorching wild;
Or what the noble captive's grief restrain,
From friends, home, country, all that's dear, exil'd?

Go take the eagle from his native skies,
And chain him to the barren rocky shore,
Consum'd within itself, his spirit dies,
For liberty he pines, he seeks no more.&mdash;
Those wings that wont the welkin to explore,
Are flapped impatient on his aching breast,
He longs again high 'midst the clouds to soar,
Nor can his untam'd spirit e'er find rest,&mdash;
Great Nature claims her due, unceasing, 'till possess'd.

What tho' the griefs be hid from mortal ken,
Great minds endure; the stoic's fortitude
May feign indifference in the sight of men;
But ever at his heart the tempest rude
Imprison'd  rages, and with deadly feud
Batters in 'ts rage the poor devoted bark,
Until the pilot's spirits sunk, subdued,
Bear him no longer up; and then a mark,
A mighty wreck he falls, which those who see,
Cry, such the end of earthly pow'r must be.

Such lot is thine, departed chief!  but rive,
Despair, the heart that glories in thy fate;
Disgrace to Britons, if such one there live,
May conscience gripe, and hot pursuing hate
Of generous minds his dastard steps await,
'Till crush'd he sinks, with obloquy and scorn
O'erwhelmed; for only fit with brutes to mate
Is he, who, when his bitterest foeman shorn
Of every honour, shall before him lie,
Spurns with unmanly foot his prostrate enemy.

Oh!  did in British breasts such treason lurk
To wither of their glorious deeds the bloom,
The souls of warriors from sepulchres murk
Rising with death-cold hand would seal their doom.
Great Nelson's spirit, starting from the tomb,
His fierce eye flashing with indignant ire,
Leading the laurel'd dead, 'midst awful gloom,
Shades of the empty air, spirits of fire,
Would execrate the base ignoble race,
Unmindful of their sires' renown, who seek
Of their high deeds the memory to erase,
And tinge with shame the living hero's cheek.

But breathes there such a heart!  oh!  surely no,
For Britons, ever noble and sincere,
Disdain to triumph o'er a fallen foe,
Or name his fate with harsh ungen'rous sneer.
They love their country &mdash; oh!  that name how dear,
They'll fight, they'll bleed, they'll die for it and fame,
But when its right's asserted, drop the spear;
A gallant foe their sympathy can claim,
For bravest minds for others deepest feel,
Well knowing honor's wounds go deeper than the steel!

Well, thou art gone, &mdash; let history record
Thy deeds of good and evil; thou hast been
A scourge, a sweeping pestilence, &mdash; thy word
A law to kings, &mdash; destruction, fire, and sword
Follow'd thy footsteps &mdash; ever wert thou seen
Like lightening, bright but blasting; as the sun
Too fiercely glaring in meridian sheen,
Burns with hot eye the earth, so wert thou one
Gleaming like Mars upon th' ethereal way,
Thy flame emitting forth a bright but blood-like ray.

But such have been all conquerors:  what more
Than human butchers are they, taking life
As if they could create afresh, &mdash; with gore
Reeking, while tears of mother, orphan, wife,
Bedew their laurels, gain'd 'mid the strife
When bleeding corses o'er the field are strown;
And worse, when dying sufferers ask the knife,
In pity to stop short the soul wrung groan,
Where dying, dead, friend, foe, in mingled heaps are thrown.

Such scenes, Ambition, mark thy fatal course,
That like a raging whirlpool, once thereon
Embarked, it hurries with resistless force
In giddy round, and hurls us madly on
To sure perdition, or like one upon
Some precipice he's climb'd, whose height immense
Confounds his swimming senses, till quite gone
In dizziness his reeling brain; from thence,
He headlong falls, and so from his high throne
Th' imperial eagle fell, by his own power o'erthrown.
