Art thou return'd again?  The lab'ring breast,
The full and swelling soul, the throbbing brain,
Are signs of thee; by these wert thou confess'd
In the fierce glow of summer, in the wane
Of autumn, in the cloud and hurricane
Of winter, and the changeful dawn of spring.
Thou art return'd, for fancy wakes the strain;
And as I bend me to her summoning,
Thy spell is o'er me cast, thy visions round me cling.

Whence, and what art thou?  I have felt thy power
When my soul wish'd not for thee.  I have sought,
And found thee not.  In life's aspiring hour,
Courted and worship'd, to my youthful thought
No utterance thou gavest.  I had wrought
The chaplet for my fair one; I had strung
The rosary of hope, and love had taught
My heart love's rhetoric; yet never hung
Thy charm upon my lips, thy numbers on my tongue.

I courted thee no longer, for the tomb
Made havoc of my hopes, and I became
The sport and prey of sorrow; but in gloom
And solitude, in misery and shame,
In every feeling that unnerves the frame,
Thy impulse was upon me:  then arose
My first and rude attempt; then didst thou claim
Thy long rejected suppliant, and disclose
In simple humble strain the descant of his woes.

Simple, but not unmeaning; the full heart
Hath language of its own; no gay conceit,
No boyish declamation held a part
In that sad strain, nor did the mourner beat
With frantic hand his bosom:  but his feet
Ne'er fail'd in their due office; to the tomb
They bore him all unheeding.  His lone seat
Was ever there, its solitude and gloom
Were loveliness to him.  It was Eliza's tomb.

Eliza's!  my Eliza's!  there she lay,
And there I laid me silent and alone;
There knelt, there wept, upon the senseless clay
There call'd in love and suffocating tone.
Is grief forbidden?  Did my feeble moan
Disturb her, that they tore me from her side?
Eliza lay beneath that lonely stone,
And I but wish'd to rest me by my bride:
Why was that boon withheld, &mdash; my only wish deny'd?

They bade me bear my sorrows.  I did strive
And grapple with calamity and death;
Became but as the form of one alive,
The semblance of a man.  I drew my breath
Like one, to whom the insulting foeman saith,
"Lo!  thy last moment;" but anon my brain
Grew torpid as the child's that slumbereth:
Anon, 'twas fire and madness, and again
Thy spell was on my soul in wild impassion'd strain.

I shook thee off, and to the brawling stream,
The silent glen, I hurried me away.
I fought with fate, for on my troubled dream
The past return'd in agony:  thy sway
Relax'd not, till at last the cheerful day
Was as the night; one dread unearthly hue
Came on the face of all things, and I lay
Full in thy presence.  Was that vision true?
Didst thou possess the mind, or madness cheat the view?

I know not, and I care not.  There is joy
In deep delusion:  wherefore should the wise
Recall my thoughts to truth's sever annoy,
And hold her painful mirror to my eyes?
As dear to me as aught I now may prize,
Each visionary gleam or touch of thine,
All idle fancies that unbidden rise.
As dear to me as aught that can be mine,
The wild and wand'ring thought, the rude and untaught line.

I will not, cannot fly thee; thou must be
As present on the full and noisy mart,
As in the desart; upon plain or sea,
On wold or mountain, of myself be part.
I cannot fly thee:  round this widow'd heart
Cling, if thou wilt, but spare thy wearied slave:
Exert thy nobler power, thy gentler art;
Bid the vain world assume whate'er it gave,
But speak of brighter hopes, of bliss beyond the grave.
