How light and lovely is that parting hour,
When, swath'd in lambent gold, the autumnal sun
Centres upon the west his pomp and power,
And tells in glory that his work is done!
How deep the joy, at such an hour to shun
All that the expanding spirit might controul;
To seek, in solitude, the Eternal One,
Where the wide waves their glorious vespers roll,&mdash;
And muse the voiceless thought, and gaze the impassion'd soul!

The shoreward deep like molten emerald glows;
The distant burns with quivering rubies gay;&mdash;
As, o'er its bower of green, the crimson'd rose
Shoots into air, and trembling drinks the day:
Each keel that lordly ploughs the crashing spray
Furrows its course in foam and light behind;
Around the bark careering sea-fowl play,
With sidelong wings to woo the breeze inclined;
While the hoarse ship-boy's song floats mellowing on the wind.

Pregnant with light some sprinkled cloudlets swell,
In burning islets, o'er the illumined west,&mdash;
Long to retain the lingering sun's farewell,
Like the last smile of Love on Grief impress'd.
Day sinks, but triumphs as it sinks, to rest,
Like Virtue lightening through the grave to Heaven:&mdash;
Yet, even on earth, what more than earthly zest
To the rapt spirit's sun-ward glance is given,
While thus it springs to drink the glassy gold of even!

A world of light and music! &mdash; Many a breeze
Pants on the wave, and trembles to the shore,
Whispering its love-tales to the dimpling seas,
And fleeting, soon as its light vows are o'er.&mdash;
Oh!  these are hours when the poor soul may soar,
In dreamful blessedness to climes above,&mdash;
May join the beings it had loved of yore
In starry spheres of cloudless light and love,
Where through the bowers of bliss the immortal waters rove.

Lo, the proud Mount!  whose form, in graceful sweep,
Dyed with the last hues of the year and day,
Curves, like a forest-rainbow, o'er the deep,
Which heaves, all foamless, round its sheltering  bay!&mdash;
Pilgrims of Beauty!  ye who, far away,
Roam where poetic deserts sadly smile!
Gaze here, and own &mdash; Can distant climes display
A scene more rich than yonder gorgeous pile?&mdash;
Oh!  ere you leave her, search your own unrivall'd Isle!

For who, with human heart, could ever roam
Through scenes and hours like these, nor prize them high&mdash;
Hail the green land that girds his childhood's home,
And cease for brighter suns and realms to sigh?
"Vain &mdash; very vain" &mdash; to search a distant sky
For charms profusely sparkling o'er our own:
For he who seeks, will find beneath his eye
All that can teach what Genius e'er has known,
And bid the heart aspire to Glory's Alpine throne.

Low sinks the sun, &mdash; and dim, o'er shore and sea,
Steals a transparent shade, of deepening gloom;
And louder swells the wave's wild melody,
As if its tones might fill the sun-light's room:
Now come the enchanted hour, when Fancy's loom
Weaves o'er the visible dark her mystic charms&mdash;
Calls forms from Heaven, or wakes them from the tomb,&mdash;
All that the weak or guilty soul alarms,
And with Elysian dreams the mourner's spirit warms!

List!  heard ye not, amid the pausing surge,
Some more majestic and unearthly tone;
A strange deep sound &mdash; Day's momentary dirge&mdash;
At whose lone voice the waters hush'd their own?
It seem'd the sighing and sepulchral moan
Of Syren, wailing in her sparry cell,
O'er powers and charms no longer fear'd or known:
And wild and sad that mermaid-voice did swell,
As, o'er the dusky heath, the distant funeral  bell.

'Tis hush'd:  and o'er the darkening waste once more
I hear the waves, and sea-bird's desolate cry:
The nearer waters melt into the shore,
While their far verge is blended with the sky:
The star which lovers worship, gleams on high;
And, traced in glittering fragments on the main,
Binds Heaven and Ocean in a golden tie&mdash;
Type of that bright and more than mortal chain,
Which links young hearts, where Love and Love's sweet witcheries reign.
