Among th' Olympian Chronicles I find&mdash;
No matter where I read them &mdash; it is stated
That Love was not, as we suppose, born blind;
He lost his eyes, so the account is dated,
Soon after man and Folly were created;
This story, quite an antiquarian treasure,
I shall set down, not as 'tis there related,
But tagg'd with rhyme, and here I feel great pleasure
While spoiling a good stanza in a slipshod measure.

Love who had often thought it pretty sport
To play with Folly half an hour or so,
Was lured by her at last to Plutus' court,
A place which Love, at that time, did not know;
And there was offer'd a fine golden bow,
And golden shafts, and peacock-feather'd wings,
And money-bags that glitter'd in a row,
Besides a thousand other hateful things,
Old parchments, rent-rolls, law-suits, jewels, chains, and rings.

Love laugh'd at all he saw; Folly look'd grave,
And preach'd about the wond'rous riches there:
"Ha!  ha!" says Love, "and are you Plutus' slave?&mdash;
I'm sorry, &mdash; for I liked you as you were,&mdash;
A hearty wench, buxom and debonair;
Farewell!  I'm neither to be bought nor sold;&mdash;
Bless me!  I feel a dampness in the air,&mdash;
A palace is a dungeon in the air,&mdash;
And, faith!  I half believe it, for I'm very cold.

"I'm off!"  But Folly seized him by the head,
Threw gold-dust in his eyes, and quench'd their sight,
Alas!  for ever!  "Now, now," Folly said,
"We have him to ourselves, &mdash; here, day and night,
He shall do penance for our best delight!"
Stark nonsense!  but what else could Folly say?
Meanwhile the poor blind boy, to left and right,
Sobbing and sighing, tried to grope his way,
But could not from that prison flee, ah!  well-a-day!

Darkling he blunder'd, sad and sore distress'd,
And wander'd drearily from hall to hall;
Sometimes he tumbled in an iron chest,
And was lock'd up, or got a painful fall
Over some cash accounts, or, worse than all,
Whenever his escape by flight he tried,
He bruised his wings against the hard stone wall;
Till, wearied out, he sat him down and sigh'd
So heavily, it seem'd as if he must have died.

Heart-sick he pined and dwindled to a shade;
Folly too grieved, but Plutus' sons were glad
At his gaunt plight, because he might be weigh'd
Against the very smallest coin they had,
And be found wanting; this done, they forbad
His living any more at their expense,
And turn'd him out of doors, calling the lad
A vile impostor upon common sense,
With many ribald words which gave him great offence.

Poor Love was very ill, and his physicians,
Pleasure and Youth, day after day attended,
Night after night, with hourly repetitions
Of kissing draughts with ladies' fingers blended,
Sweetmeats, and heart's ease, &mdash; lord!  how fast he mended!
And then they warm'd him to his heart's content
With Cyprus' wine, and lo!  his sickness ended:
So Love revived, and now on vengeance bent,
He call'd aloud on Jove for Folly's punishment.

"Revenge!"  he cried, "revenge me upon Folly!
Behold me, Jove, she had put out my eyes,
My happy eyes, now dark and melancholy!"
Jove listen'd to his little grandson's cries,
And cited the delinquent to the skies;
At first this heavenly summons made her wonder,&mdash;
Then she felt certain she was found too wise
To live on earth, &mdash; but, when she saw her blunder,
She trembled like a leaf, being much afraid of thunder.

Her fears, as usual, vanish'd presently;
Then, looking round her with a saucy face,
She ask'd if such a goodly company
Could find it worth their wisdom to disgrace
A girl like her, whose fault, in the first place,
Was but a slight one, and withal committed
Purely to serve her own dear human race:
"I grant," said she, "the boy is to be pitied,
Yet as he should be blind I ought to be acquitted.

"Think what a blessing it will be to man,
And woman too, made up of imperfection,
That Love no more can closely spy and scan
A blemish on the mind or the complexion;
Besides, as he must make a blind selection,
Pairing them off to fill his motley train
Just as his arrows take their chance direction,
How many a squinting nymph and loutish swain
May ogle and be spruce, nor find their frolics vain.

"Again, I'd have you know that Jove and all
The gods may be beholden&mdash;"  "Hush!" says Jove,
"This argument grows somewhat personal;
Already hast thou said enough to prove
Thy guilt; in justice, therefore, to young Love
A grievous penalty shalt thou abide;
And as 'tis fit the little god should rove
Fearless throughout the world, thus we decide,&mdash;
Love shall for evermore have Folly for his guide."
