The moon was rising calmly o'er the hill,
And we the noisy city left behind,
In love of nightly solitude &mdash; where still
Celestial thoughts and feelings fill the mind.&mdash;
Oh!  what is all the bustle of mankind&mdash;
What all their trappings, pleasure, pomp, and power,
To what sweet quietude the soul can find
'Mid Nature's loneliness, in wild or bower,
At opening morn, or noon, or evening's peaceful hour!

Is there aught lovely in those narrow ways
Which many mortals in confusion trace?
Is there a pleasure in the endless maze&mdash;
A sound, a lesson in the form or face
Of those who love such giddy groupes to grace&mdash;
That musing mind should ever long to read;
Or which, when read, could satiate the race
Of worm-like woes which from this life proceed,
And on the lonely heart with ceaseless gnawings feed?

If such there be &mdash; seek not these scenes afar,
Ye whose best longings bustle can fulfil,
Sally not forth wild Nature's bliss to mar,
Let solitude be solitary still;
Reserv'd for those to whom, of earthly ill,
Forgetfulness by her is kindly taught;
Reserv'd for those, whose beings own a will
To range still onward in their world of thought,
Through scenes the more belov'd, the more by man unsought.

We climb'd the mountain; and the moon, the sky,
The din of men died on the airs of night;
Clouds there were none, save such as often lie
Asleep on heaven, thinly spread, and white
As lawn, o'er maiden's bosom heaving light,
In simple loveliness; &mdash; while many a star,
With beams of glory beautifully bright,
Came curling onward in its little car,
And seem'd to woo our thoughts to blissful worlds afar.

We climb'd the mountain &mdash; bounding over cliffs
And time-worn precipices &mdash; with the toil
Our souls seem'd dignified &mdash; wild Nature's gifts
Are these; which avarice can never spoil,
Else were they spoil'd &mdash; for man, of soul most vile,
Could burn creation, were its ashes gold;
Nor think of Nature's loveliness the while,
Of trees, or flow'rs, planted by her of old,
Nor rocks, nor rills, nor aught that mortal eyes behold.

The works of art to me can yield no charm,
Till Time and Tempests their assistance lend;
What were the palace that ne'er stood the storm,
The tow'rs high pinnacles &mdash; the polish'd pend?
Let warring elements these masses rend,
And Time bestrew of moss his mantle hoar,
And Nature forth her creeping families send,
Of little woodbines wild, to warp them o'er,
Binding together that which art but bound before.

And then the eye which hates the barrenness
Of human grandeur, shall unwearied roam,
Counting the beauties &mdash; then the soul confess
Sensations that would claim it as its home;
And the fond soul still lavish on the dome
Its own eternity of mystic thought&mdash;
These attributes of being far which come,
In strong associations wildly wrought,
Of all remembrance time or fancy ever brought.

We turn'd aside to trace the aged walls,
Rising in grayness 'neath the loftier steep,
On which moon-light is long before it falls.
The nightly shadows round them were asleep,
And all was solitude and silence deep;
Enchanted loneliness!  which still would seem
Such wildering influence o'er the soul to keep,
That fled of life is every other scheme,
Save that it evermore might here enjoy the dream.

Our very beings seem'd in calmness bound,
As if even Nature would exert a power,
That none who came should break the stillness round
The massy rocks and melancholy tower:
Ages would here seem shorter than an hour,
Spent mid the noisy mortal-crowded ways.
Oh!  Nature is no tyrant &mdash; we endure
What blessed load she to the heart conveys,
Nor of the weight complain &mdash; save in congenial lays.

To those who love her she can charms impart,
Purer than aught that comes to life below,
Rooted are, in the feelings of the heart,
The loveliest blossoms of the mind that blow;
The waters these, through solitude that flow,
Nursing the little garden of the soul;
Whose happy scenery no change shall know,
But bloom in beauty, while far ages roll,
And ages yet shall bring no tempest nor control.

And man shall yet be glorious and free,
Even with the earliest moment he may spend,
Within the circle of eternity&mdash;
But where shall I my longings thus extend?
Nature, with thee, oh!  let my being blend,
Even with thy elements and grandeur wild,
Mingling in love, that cannot dream of end&mdash;
Love to an immortality beguil'd,
Of all thy glorious charms by mortals undefil'd.

And thus I love thee, Nature, yet can claim
No spot of earth on which thy seeds are sown!
Yes these are scatter'd &mdash; where my father's name
Marks of mortality the mournful stone:
And this is mine &mdash; this little earth alone
Of which, those who have most would most be free;
But this full heart shall the possession own,
Pouring thereon its tear-drops &mdash; though it be
Hopeless to weep for those who cannot weep for me.&mdash;
