Son of a glorious race I welcome thee!
Nor more thy father's than thy mother's claim
On Sires renown'd &mdash; the flow'rs of chivalry,
Who left their sons a never-dying name:
The props of thrones! &mdash; of battles still the flame!
Where honour called the vanguard, did them see!
Urging triumphant to the goal of fame,
By matchless deeds to bear off victory,
Or burst a tyrant's chains, and make a nation free!

Whether from Bannockburn's immortal plain
To red Culloden's dusky field of blood,
The purple currents in thine every vein
Have flow'd through sires that on those fields have stood,
And ever thrill'd with joy when foes subdued
Confess'd them conquerors in fair Freedom's right&mdash;
Honored the patriot race was still renewed,
And shone their country's most refulgent light
Undimm'd, and unobscured, by dark dishonour's night.

Such from thy mother flows! &mdash; thy fathers too,
Or in the senate or embattled plain
A race confess'd of patriot warriors true,
Alike redoubted in fair honour's train!
Nor is yet degenerate in its wane,
Nor needs it former virtues to renew,&mdash;
Say Lusitania, vanquished Gaul, and Spain&mdash;
But why should I appeal dark states to you?
Rise proudly on their crest immortal Waterloo!

Welcome young Stranger!  happy be thy fate!
The wish arises from a kindred bard.
May virtue still thy youthful mind dilate,
And honour ever be thy simple guard.
Thy state is lofty &mdash; enviably starr'd&mdash;
Valour is thine inheritance &mdash; thy sires
For patriot worth their countries did reward.
Be thou like them, since thou retain'st their fires!
Be nobly, nobly good! &mdash; 'tis all their fame requires!

Anticipation draws her golden line&mdash;
The present to the future &mdash; fondly run
From hope's bright pillar in each parent's mind,
And fondly fastens glory to their son!
Be all affirmed their boding hope's begun!&mdash;
(Their bard aspiring prays in feelings high)
May ne'er his youthful mind to vice be won,
Nor cause his parents' breasts a sorrowing sigh,
But furnish feasts of love, and founts of purest joy.
