Whate'er thou art, from realms celestial sprung,
Spirit!  whose genial lore my bosom sway'd;
Whose fingers struck the harp which fancy strung,
When rapture wanton'd as the syren play'd:
No more thy impulse sheds its blissful aid,
The flight of soul impress'd with bold design;
Around thee hangs oblivion's misty shade,
And ecstasy and hope no more are mine.
My breast hath lost its glow, these eyes no longer shine.

Farewell!  ye hours, when first in youth's gay trance
My raptur'd bosom heav'd to fancy's spell;
Or join'd with blooming hopes in sportive dance,
Nor shed a tear, but what from rapture fell.
Themes of my youth, my prime, my age &mdash; farewell!
My trembling hand now faulters o'er the string,
No more my lay the deeds of old shall tell,
Nor love's soft throb nor valour's legend sing,
Since in this aged breast, no kindling transports spring.

Sleep, spirit of my lay! &mdash; enthusiast spark,
That fir'd my soul, and gem'd the raptur'd eye;
For all within is comfortless and dark,
Unbless'd by hope's fond ray or passion's sigh!
And thou, O harp! &mdash; dost all thine aid deny,
Thy strings no longer wake the notes of glee;
No mental transport lights my dimmed eye,
While the loud plaudit fans to ecstasy,
And I, who sung so well, have  none to sing of me!

In life's bright morn, when this chill breast was young,
How gay my ready fingers swept the string;
No knight could toil, no maiden bloom unsung,
While fancy o'er my soul was fluttering.
But what avails the thought of life's gay spring,
While memory wails &mdash; and this sad heart is cold;
Hope is the guide of youth's fond wandering,
But flies the hoary wight &mdash; objected &mdash; old,
Whose pleasant lay is o'er &mdash; whose tale will soon be told!

In song of bard the hero's prowess lives,
And patriot worth, and beauty's witching spell;
Immortal wreaths the minstrel's legend gives,
And throngs admire the feats his numbers tell.
But he &mdash; who chronicled, and sung so well,
The hapless bard! &mdash; is dull oblivion's prey;
His aged fingers strike his own death knell,
And with the strain, his memory flies away,
And transient April beam, &mdash; the flow'ret of a day.

When I am number'd with the silent dead,
Inclose this harp beneath my turf's green mound&mdash;
Faithful companion of my lowly bed,
And mute, unconscious of a genial sound.
There, at the last great day, together found,
The joyous bard shall to his task arise;
Again his harp's glad numbers swell around,
And join the blooming minstrels of the skies,
Whose strains can never cease &mdash; whose transport never dies.
