Ah me, what folly actuates mankind,
To keep them always in a savage state,
By urging, them with acrimonious mind
Their BENEFACTORS to caluminate!
No man on earth was ever truly great,
Who has not been by ENVY'S tooth assail'd,
Since base THERSITES full of wrath and spite,
The rancour of his heart 'gainst kings reveal'd,
'Till wise ULYSSES over him prevail'd.

When DAVID by Divine appointment rose,
To rule in righteousness o'er Israel's throne,
Having in presence of a host of foes,
GOLIATH a slaughter'd with a sling and stone,
He reign'd in good men's hearts; yet he alone
Of all the princes of his royal race,
A railer met, his power to disown,
To cast against him language of disgrace,
Pursue, abuse, and curse him to his face.

Who's this dead dog that dares to curse my Lord,
Our sovereign king, (said ABISHAI the brave,)
Let me go to aim, and my trusty Word
Shall fit his carcase for a traitor's grave.
Let him (said royal DAVID) rail and rave,
It may be he's commission'd in this way,
By Heaven's command my humbled soul to save
From vengeance, just, and all my friends may say,
Our King was bless'd by being curs'd to-day.

As WELLINGTON the friend of Church and Crown,
With laurel blooming on heroic shield,
Found late in London, that the high renown
His sword had gain'd on Waterloo's fair field,
Where Europe's haughty Tyrant learn'd to yield,
Avail'd but little to avert disdain,
Of fickle mobs against his merit steel'd,
'Gainst him, who disregarding toil and pain,
Had for his country conquer'd France and Spain;

Just so when he who in religion's cause,
Had crush'd in British realm the Hydra's head,
Who gain'd and merited the high applause
Of PERCIVAL, now number'd with the dead,
To rule a province of the Church was led,
By royal favour, ENVY could not sleep,
But rais'd a Lunatic, reports to spread,
That he, a faithless Pastor, could not keep,
But sought to harass and afflict his sheep.

Did he fair schools erect, and feed and teach
And clothe some hundred children of the poor?
Did he the doctrine of ATONEMENT preach,
And many a wise man's gratitude secure?
And did his son great pains and toll endure,
In teaching youth from dawn to dewy night?
Yet could not all their honest fame secure
From ENVY'S efforts, to defame or bright
A lustre that annoys and dazzles feeble sight.

But let them rail and use invective coarse,
To please the blockheads, whose polluted ear
The Libeller may lull till he is hoarse;
While grateful multitudes rejoice to hear,
That he who in Truth's armour did appear
A Christian Champion in a doubtful day,
Is justly call'd to be a Primate Peer,
And rule with steady hand and gentle sway,
A Church he lov'd and guarded from decay.
