Byron &mdash; alas!  that such a soul as thine,
So richly gifted with poetic fire,
Form'd as a light in darksome time to shine,
Should sink in sensuality's foul mire.
Bard of proud Unbelief and wild Desire,
Would nothing serve thee but a sacred theme?
To play with thunderbolts would'st thou aspire?
Nor, when misusing GOD'S most holy name,
Fear dreadful wrath in fierce avenging flame?

And yet all bold and daring as thou art,
Fear seems to haunt thee in thy dark retreat,
When a misgiving, undecided heart,
Would prompt thee to deny a future state,
Where woes immense the infidel await.
But quite consistent is the graceless wight,
Victim of pride, and vice, and self deceit,
Who vainly strives to draw the veil of night
O'er scenes terrific to his feeble sight.

In vain thine eye o'er Holy Writ may rove,
Or trace the woes of Cain's unhappy wife,
Or Moses bring, with prophets, to disprove
Our blessed hope of everlasting life.
To that bright state, with joys unfading rife,
Was Enoch call'd to leave his native land,
Translated from this vale of tears and strife,
Before the Throne, at GOD'S benign command,
In endless joy and happiness to stand.

I know, says Job, that my Redeemer lives,
And on the earth shall stand at latter day,
When he who cheers my hope, my sin forgives,
Shall raise my body from its bed of clay;
And tho' my flesh and skin must both decay
And worms destroy them &mdash; yet, by HIM set free
From Death's cold hand, in rapture borne away
HIM for myself my joyful eye shall see,
And in that sight for ever happy be.

I set Thee always, LORD, before mine eyes,
Said Israel's king, and of thy glory tell,
And in thy realm beyond the vaulted skies,
In bliss with Thee for ever hope to dwell;
Thou surely wilt not leave my soul in hell;
My body from the grave shalt Thou restore,
The chorus of eternal joy to swell,
Where blissful myriads thy name adore,
At whose right hand are pleasures evermore.

So spake the Psalmist; having first defin'd
The kind of man who on GOD'S holy hill
Shall dwell in rest; whose pure and spotless mind
Is train'd in truth, and meditates no ill:
And further proof have we from David still,
Who, when for sin he was condemn'd to see
His infant dead, bent low his wayward will
And said, I weep no more at Heaven's decree,
I'll go to him &mdash; he'll not return to me.

Isaiah says, that when the righteous die,
Their favour'd souls shall enter into peace,
And only from their earthly trouble fly,
To rest and happiness, which never cease.
Ezekiel, bless'd by Heaven's inspiring grace,
Describes the resurrection of the dead,
When ev'ry bone shall re-assume its place;
And tho' the vital spark be long since fled,
With flesh and sinew shall be overspread.

Daniel depicts that everlasting Throne,
On which the JUDGE shall rake His awful seat,
Whose jurisdiction all the world shall own;
Whilst Kings and Emperors, the small, the great,
Shall trembling stand to hear their final fate.
Forth from the Throne shall issue floods of flame&mdash;
The dead shall rise &mdash; but oh!  their different state!
Some wake to find in life's great book their name,
Others to scorn and everlasting shame!

Then shall the wise shine forth in radiant light,
Happy partakers of the life divine,
And those who lead the weak from wrong to right,
Like stars in firmament for ever shine.
O, BYRON!  would that such fate may be thine!
Pity it is, that one who well could make
Melodious concert with the choir divine,
Celestial poesy should e'er forsake,
To join the dismal hissings of the snake.

What would'st thou give on that tremendous day,
In view of torments which must never end,
That thou hadst never thought on "HAROLD'S" lay,
Or vile "DON JUAN'S" ribbald stanza penn'd.
Then, yet &mdash; be wise &mdash; to calm enquiry bend,
Nor kind advice from humble verse disdain;
From Pride's frail pinnacle in time descend,
Fall on your knees in penitential pain,
And shun the fate of Lucifer and Cain.
