The sun, half slumb'ring, streaks the soft blue sky,
Ere down the west his ling'ring beauties set;
Giving the dark green woods a richer dye,
And glowing on the distant mountain yet.
The calm clear sea receives the fisher's net,
While softly float the tones of vesper bell;
Lest Labour's sons, hard toiling, should forget
Their duty's evening song, to wake the spell
Of echo, slumb'ring sweet within her wood-bound cell.

The virgin hymns in sweetest numbers float,
While gems fall sparkling from the nimble oar;
As ocean's gentle bosom heaves the boat,
And scarcely murmurs as it leaves the shore.
The cotter sings, well pleased the toil is o'er,
Or artless shepherd pipes along the vale,
While the fond youth, with secret passion sore,
Sighs to the warblings of the nightingale,
That sweetly charms the ear on wing of balmy gale.

Now more presuming, as the day retires,
Night's silver crescent meets the pilgrim's view;
Within the grove the glow-worms trim their fires,
And every flower is bright with glitt'ring dew.
With well-fill'd flask, the sons of humour, true
To gen'rous glee, send round the joyous chear,
While rapt attention hangs as if it grew
On traveller's tale or song of mountaineer,
As round the cottage door they revel free from fear.

And there the mirthful village band advance,
While age sits smiling 'neath the shelt'ring tree,
Retracing o'er their youth, &mdash; while on the dance
They gaze with conscious pride and kindred glee.
Truth, love, and nature!  'tis a sight to see,
Might stop a herald seraph as he flies,&mdash;
The bright moon beaming o'er them, cloudless, free,
And soft blue stars, like love-sick maiden's eyes,
As to the youth's fond sigh their dewy glance replies!&mdash;

Now, while one hand in gentlest freedom strays
Round the light form of softly sighing maid,
His bosom's smiling hope the youth conveys
Within the verge of her pastoral shade.
Much he would say, but, fault'ring, seems afraid
Her rising frown might mar his longing bliss,
Till mutual passion gives the trembler aid,
And while they press, bestows one saint-like kiss,
While raptur'd virtue smiles nor pants for more than this.

O sweetest clime!  where first the birth of art
O'er slumb'ring Europe shed its quick'ning spell,
Why sleeps thy genius, languid, cold at heart,
While weeds luxuriant grow where temples fell?
'Tis superstition sound the heroes' knell,
And damps the flame that gave the world its light;
And hearts of might and worth within the cell
Are withering in the gloom of monkish night,
Whose cowl conceals the beam which freedom sheds so bright.
