Where is he now?  an awful question!  where?
'Mid disembodied sprights in realms of light,
Viewing angelic shapes more dazzling there,
Than those which gave him while on earth delight:
Such as appear'd unto his mental sight,
When he would dare create, what Art alone
Like his could realize, a goddess bright,
A Hebe, or a Grace without her zone,
Or all that poets dream of Beauty's queen, in stone.

Whate'er of beautiful, high-minded Greece
Imagin'd, from Canova's chisel sprung:
And must that master-hand for ever cease
To mould those forms so graceful and so young,
In praise of which the mystic bards have sung?
Those forms, o'er which ideal loveliness
Is, at it were, by touch etherial flung!
That hand, which in cold marble could express
All-perfect beauty, youth, eternal happiness!

His delicate Hebe almost seems to move:
So light thy step, fair daughter of the skies!
Thou art the gentle power that waits on Jove:
Thou art the flower of youth that never dies.
Sure 'tis a spirit that delights our eyes!
But Psyche, a celestial lover's pride,
With her sweet rival in proportion vies;
While beaming, like a twin-star at her side.
Cupid, as finely wrought, clasps his life-giving bride.

O!  'tis a super-human skill that turns
To being such creatures of the brain
As the fond worshipper of fancy burns
To paint in glowing colours, but in vain.
Look on these breathing marbles &mdash; look again&mdash;
They are the visions of our youth brought forth,
Though motionless, yet beautiful!  no stain
Sullies their charms; they are not of this earth,
But pure, as when the bards' conceptions gave them birth.

How o'er the sculptor's manly features play'd
The light of genius, as with modest zeal
He spoke of those immortal works survey'd
By him, with raptures such as he must feel
To whom Art loves her secrets to reveal.
The Phidian fragments!  in decay sublime,
Whence Art gives laws 'gainst which there's no appeal.
Such were man's labours in the olden time,
When freedom quicken'd thought, and a soul-wakening clime.

Yet in Canova's mind were nursed those fine
Imaginings, that, but by few possest,
We call, adoring their results, divine;
Since those who have them are indeed most blest
Of mortal beings, far above the rest.
The poetry of sculpture must be caught
From Heaven:  it gives a feeling unexprest
When bodied forth, to those by Art untaught:
'Tis an ambrosial flame &mdash; the very soul of thought.
