Is then the final sheet before me laid?
No further space, if 'twere but for Balaam?
Thou skittish, though sexagenarian, maid,
Maga!  can nought detain thee, shirk or sham?
One kiss &mdash; one page &mdash; a thousand things ram-stam
Rush to my tongue-tip &mdash; lots of topics rise,
My spirit is the scene of such hot cram
As when some blunderer's tourniquet upties
Some apoplectic cit, who, if he bleed not, dies.

All I have said, at leisure I review,
The hum of public speech is in mine ear.
Yet what I felt when Whigs first croak'd is new,
Ne'er from that rump my foot with "pluckless" fear
Recoil'd: &mdash; where Whigs alone once travell'd &mdash; there
I, starting like a Jehu, smash'd their teams;
Therefore, they follow, cursing the career,
Which shew'd that all their trophies were but dreams,
And fill'd the turf where once they lorded it with screams.

Where some folks scarce durst look, I dared to sit,
What they thought Alps were anthills to my view.
I pounded Whiggery's drivelling power:  Whigs fret;
So well beseems a wretched residue,
Whose only business is to perish:  True
To which sure fate these cudgell'd sons of crime
Labour themselves, in blindness, for their due:
Writhing and clamouring still (in prose and rhyme) &mdash;
While my huzza of scorn resounds from clime to clime.

The Muse hath wove for me a Cat-o-nine,
To cross thy huge posteriors, Roaring Cant!
&mdash;Rope that here rings upon the brazen chine
Below Lord Archy, Hume, and J. P. Grant.
There on still frailer stuff its coil doth Plant,
The secondary rump that wears no veil,
Groaning with Revolutionary rant
One lump of Folly bellowing with Jones (Gale,)
Round Cockaigne's paper crown, and Morgan and her Male.

Far as from Holland-house to Chelsea hulks,
Ay, or New-Holland, my keen eye can range,
And CANT that crows aloud, and CANT that skulks,
(As in dumb dogs the stink detects the mange)
Lie clear beneath my glance &mdash; in jumble strange,
Whigs, Radicals, to Treason's utmost bound&mdash;
Jeffs, Hones, in amicable interchange,
But hush! &mdash; "I'll prosecute!" &mdash; In that one sound
The once Briarean voice of whiggish wrath is drown'd.

Beats not an English heart beneath B&mdash;'s gown!
When did a S&mdash; blush upon a fee?
Let FREEDOM die:  but ne'er shall ye bring down
Your noble selves:  from that suspicion free,
Whig counsellors, of whatsoe'er degree,
The rostrum mount &mdash; there think no more of RIGHT,
No simple scruple check your hireling glee,
Soft bank-notes crumpled in your palms &mdash; the Mite
Of some tormented booby glittering in your sight.

When in their courts some lawyers I discern
Lead ing some libel-case, me much it cheers
Mine eye on Perry's patriot print to turn,
The Morning Chronicle of LITTLE's years;
I also love to ponder on its jeers,
That work of kindred spleen which maul'd the Lakers!
Laureates might frame fine issues, were your sneers
Of power to make them in your tricks partakers.
Even when SIR RICHARD stirr'd, you trembled like Bob Acres.

Volumes of libels, ex Cathedra, roll'd
The blue-and-buff Review adorn: &mdash; ay, see
One after one the pages that unfold
The triumphs ; of that scribbling tyranny,
From the first basting by those prating three,
(Jeffrey, and Brougham, and Sydney Smith,) until
Great Hogg arose, the Bard of Chaldee,
Though wrong'd by pluckless, witless ninnies, still
Unveiling, one by one, each whiggish Bobadil.

Some are mere dolts:  Some funckish hankerings fill;
Yet, not the less for them, I onward hold;
The honest efforts of my strength and skill
Fall not, though victims screech, and faint-hearts scold;
The Cause of King and Country makes ME bold
I trample my detractors into dust,
I call on the unfearing and unsold,
Not to be generous, (that I scorn) but just!
Use but your eyes, ay read:  then speak, for feel you must.

For these confounded Jacobins! &mdash; no more!
LIGHT wide and wider sheds its growing flood,
And prejudice goes puff! &mdash; as Hogg's barn-floor.
See Hogg's strong flail distinguish chaff from food.
CANT'S at a discount &mdash; TRUTH brings what it should.
Go forth my articles!  no longer slumber,
Go forth to tease the vermin &mdash; charm the good,
Nor be the feeling stiffled if this Number
Convince the world all works compared to NORTH'S are lumber.
