And art thou wearied, BERTHA?  &mdash; has thy heart
Grown dull and heavy o'er the lengthen'd lay?
Nor can the Muse one 'livening thought impart,
To charm thy listless drowsiness away?&mdash;
Yet must thou not resign to Morpheus' sway,
Nor late thy taper dwindle paly beam;
For still, my BERTHA, I have more to say,
Though certes, Love, far other is the theme,
Than Fancy's fey-wove spell, or Fiction's airy dream.

Arouse, my fair one!  trim thy lamp once more,
Shake off this listlessness, &mdash; and let there be
Upon thy lip that smile that wont before
To ever play so sweet and gracefully:
How oft indulgence have I claim'd from thee,
Thou who hast still unwearying kindness shown;
Than whom a dearer friend ne'er smiled on me,
And in whose love &mdash; though blest with thine alone&mdash;
My soul forgets her woes, and lightsomely lives on.

And hast thou heard my Fairy Minstrel's song,
And hast thou seen my elfins, fair and bright?&mdash;
But blame me not, if I alas!  too long
Have wrapt myself in fancies, vain and light;
For oh!  'tis sweet in visions of the night,
When the soul wanders from her home of clay,
To dream we've found a land of pure delight,
And feast on happiness the live long day
Where human cares and fears can come no more for aye!

But dreams are only dreams.  So let it be.
The sleep-magician's midnight spell is o'er,
And sith I've 'waked to truthful love and thee,
The misty things of Fancy charm no more:
And I might here be happy as before,
When charm'd and dazzled by her fairy spell,
But Discontentment, with invidious lore.
O'erspreads this earth with miseries dire and fell,
Where care and woe, 'tis said, are ever doom'd to dwell.

My heart grows sick to think it!&mdash; I must weep,
To wash this heaviness of soul away;
For sorrow meets my wandering eye &mdash; and deep
The lyre strings tremble with a larum lay:
Lo!  here the Vices stalk in stern array,
With fell Destruction following in their train;
While, from Life's morn to Age's closing day,
The Juggernaut of Sin drives on his wain,
And o'er his hideous track strews wide the mangled slain.

Come!  let us scan this Babylonian world,
This thick-grown jungle of promiscuous souls,
Where Satan hath his impious flag unfurled,
And where of guilt the fearful torrent rolls:&mdash;
See!  here in glittering pomp and luxury lolls
The God-denying mortal, bent on ill;
There, deep in crime, a low-bred menial strolls&mdash;
The stout contemner of high Heaven's will,
Who, oft reproved, remains a stern blasphemer still!

Here sits a king, and slays the men of God,
Who dare with him in faith and feelings jar;
And there the tyrant, whose ungracious nod
Can kindle deadly Battle's scorching star,
That summons thousands to the Almighty's bar;
Nor cares nor questions he, if bad or good?
The while his honourable "dogs of war"
Lap up their gorgeous beverage of blood,
And joyfully to Fame, wade through the reeking flood!

Here group the mean transgressors &mdash; thief and knave,
Dark-browed assassin, planning mischief sure;
The fiend-like scourger of the low-born slave;
The famish'd miser &mdash; with his look demure,
Well framed to grind the faces of the poor;
The jolly drunkard, foaming out his shame;
And Falsehood, aiming at sweet Virtue's flower;
With thousand other ills of meaner fame,
Which Slander grovels near, and owns the lowest name.

Woes cease not yet! &mdash; still cast thine eyes abroad,
The wide extent of Life's far-stretching plain,
And mark what legions bear the galling load
Of care and sorrow &mdash; misery and pain:
Here princes gorge in sensual joys, and then
Pine 'neath the burden they themselves have chose;
There in the dungeon clanks the wearying chain,
That rings responsive to the captive's woes,
Perchance who sorrows on till death his sufferings close.

Here, press'd with cares, a toil-worn mortal view
In labour hard, till strength and spirits fail,
Condemn'd by Poverty to struggle through
The bushy thickets of Misfortune's vale;
Hark!  there lone pilgrim tells a doleful tale,
How still with ceaseless trials he must go;
And, as his own sad heart is never hale,
Thus sums the heritage of man below,
And notes the spacious world a lazar-house of woe!

And here Affliction spreads her baleful wings,
That far and wide their damping influence shed,
O'er beggar's hut, and palaces of kings,
Till thousands languish on her sickly bed;
See, too, in deep and sable mourning clad,
The widowed relative, lamenting sore
Some friend's decease, and weeping o'er the dead&mdash;
The blessed dead &mdash; that here can grieve no more,
Nor dread the whelming surge that wreck'd their bark before!

And now what thinks my BERTHA? &mdash; is not this
A saddening tale to greet thy gentle ear?
Alas!  what lack of peace and happiness&mdash;
What ravishment of pain and woe is here!
Yet still, methinks, thou wilt a little bear,
Tho' saddening numbers from the harp-strings flow;
For sure 'tis well, while earth's our destined sphere,
To search our portion in the land below,
And learn the slippery path o'er which our footsteps go.

I know thou lovest me, thou kind-hearted one!
With more than sister's love, nor wilt deny
To mourn with me where misery is known,
And ope thine ear to Pity's moving cry:
I know thy heart is sad when mine doth sigh&mdash;
But wherefore thus of distant woes complain?
Lo!  grim Despair himself is hastening nigh,
I feel his finger touch my shrinking brain!
Soon must I fall! &mdash; Oh, Love!  how wilt thou sorrow then?

Wilt thou not weep, to see the dark controul
Of blanching Penury this bosom mar?
Nor drop one tear to mark my weary soul
Shook by the Jolting of Misfortune's car&mdash;
While bleak Adversity inflicts her scar,
And grief o'er grief like foaming surges come&mdash;
While Sorrow flares her flambeau red afar,
Scorching the sweet green gourd of friends and home,
And I throughout the world, a wandering outcast roam?

Wilt thou not weep, when o'er my hapless head
Lowers big and black the thunder-cloud of doom;
When sickness hovers round my dying bed,
To pine this healthy frame with wasting gloom,
And rob the living tenants of the tomb,
(Ungracious revellers!)   of half their cheer;
While pleasure's flowers for me no longer bloom,
And fast the dreaded hour is drawing near,
That terminates my day of sad sojourning here?

Wilt thou not weep, when on Corruption's chart
Thy pitying eye shall mark my name enroll'd,
When o'er this now full kind and faithful heart
The lazy reptile trails each clammy fold;
When this warm bosom shall be chill and cold,
Its former hopes and fears remembering not;
When, pent and shrouded in my narrow hold,
Even BERTHA'S very self I'll have forgot,
While rank weeds gaily wave above my slumbering spot?

Yes!  nature's weakness and soft-hearted love
The tribute due to Sympathy must pay: &mdash;
But hush repinings! &mdash; why so blindly rove,
To waste our strength 'neath Melancholy's sway
What!  BERTHA! &mdash; boots it that we fret alway,
And whinge eternal curses on our care?
Or boots it we should grieve from day to day,
Forever whining sorrow and despair?&mdash;
Has Gilead got no balm? &mdash; Is no Physician there?

Yes!  there is balm &mdash; there a Physician too,
To heal the sick, the blind, the halt and maim'd:&mdash;
Who is this great and high Physician &mdash; who?
For nations languish till they hear him named:
We may perchance by sceptic fools be blamed,
To sound the sacred mystery abroad&mdash; 
Ay! &mdash; but I'll speak it! &mdash; shall we be ashamed
To own the PRINCE of LIFE!  whose heart-drops flow'd
To wash our sins away, and seal our peace with God!

And rests our faith on His exalted name?&mdash;
If true, this truth is blessedness indeed;
This is the light that kindles virtue's flame,
Is all we wish or want &mdash; is all we need;
This is the cord that binds the broken reed,
The conquering sword, that shines in triumph grand;
The anchor sure, when darkly over-head
The waves of tribulation wide expand;
And the great shadowing Rock that glads this weary land.

Let cold Privation's withering hand invade,
And club her famished myrmidons around,
This is the saint's surrounding palisade,
That bars their entrance on forbidden ground;
Let Sickness, too, inflict her deadliest wound,
And Trouble all his wasting horrors spread,
This is the dew that flowers the barren ground,
That pours fresh balm upon the sufferer's head,
And softens into down Affliction's thorniest bed.

Yea, let himself the King of Terrors come,
Ghastly apparelled for the dreadful fight!
This is the hope that mitigates our doom,
And blunts the poison'd arrows of his might;
That bids the victim bravely holla &mdash; "Smite!"
While his glad soul, unshackling from her clay,
Big with importance, and in triumph dight,
Wings o'er the Almighty's path-way &mdash; lives
And flouts with victor-smile the stern avenger's sway!

Who told me earth no smile of beauty wore?
That here no flowers of bliss may ever bloom?&mdash;
Well &mdash; let us turn and view the world once more
I long to see this great Gomorrah's doom?
But, are none righteous? &mdash; will the fire consume
Nor slack devouring for good fifty's sake?
Say forty? &mdash; thirty? &mdash; or to twenty come?&mdash;
Nay, peradventure ten may save the wreck,
Appease Heaven's wrath, and turn the fiery deluge back?

Ten!  say ye, Lot? &mdash; well, here are number'd ten 
Who worship not the idols of the land;
Ten &mdash; ay!  and thrice ten thousand righteous men,
See 'neath their Saviour's silken banners stand!
Behold how lovingly they, hand in hand,
On Life's far march move happily along!
Together link'd by love's endearing band,
Joy in each heart &mdash; each tongue enrich'd with song,
While Peace extends her wings wide o'er the heavenly throng.

The world seems now Devotion's hallowed place,
Where men are walking in the fear of God:&mdash;
But where have vanish'd yon rebellious race,
I late beheld in Babel's dark abode?
Whence hath the foul blasphemer gone abroad?
The war-king and his followers, where are they?
The tyrant and his desolating rod,
The red assassin, lurking for his prey,
The liar, thief, and all &mdash; whence have they bent their way?

Lo!  they have perish'd like the crackling thorn,
And shrunk to nothing in Religion's fire;
The flood of light from her resplendent morn
Hath swept their dwelling from its site of mire;
And, like the phoenix from her loathsome pyre,
Up from their dust new generations spring,
Who, with their body, spirit, and desire,
Their hearts an offering to high Heaven bring,
And build their happy homes beneath Salvation's wing.

But saw I not, in dull Misfortune's vale,
A group of mourners? &mdash; whither have they gone
The man of Want, chill'd with her frosty gale&mdash;
And the sick heart long to Affliction known;
The weary pilgrim, ever wandering on
With clouds and tempests lowering o'er his head;
And Sorrow's children sighing sad and lone,
Or weeping o'er the unforgotten dead&mdash;
Such rank I lately saw &mdash; but whither have they fled?

Oh!  now they've found relief from every woe,
And pitch'd their tents in Virtue's fair domain:
The poor man here has ample wealth, and lo!
No prince nor beggar e'er are heard complain;
The toil-worn pilgrim quits his load amain;
The suffering invalid shakes off distress
The mourners see their dead revive again,
And rise from sleep their longing eyes to bless;
While all together live in harmony and peace.

Then tell me not of boundless sorrow now,
Say not there is no happiness below;
I feel my heart grow merry, and my brow
Relax its wrinkles! &mdash; Hope with sunny glow,
Dispels the brooding mists of cloudy woe,
And a fair Goshen greets my ravish'd sight;
Peace and Contentment all their glories show,
Faith, Meekness, Love, and Temperance, unite;
And the wide world becomes a Canaan of delight.

Oh!  that our hearts may ever follow those;
Who flaunt the banners of the Christian faith!
See!  how all gloriously that phalanx goes,
Blest while in life, and undismay'd at death!
See!  wafted gently by Religion's breath,
The barren earth a fruitful vineyard seems;
The scene presents a paradise beneath;
With love and joy the whole creation teems,
And on my raptured sight one grand millenium beams!

Away with Fancy's dreams and fictions now!
This scene excels her worlds of loveliest bloom;
And well I know my BERTHA'S blessed too,
To taste the sweetness of its rich perfume:&mdash;
Oh!  may its splendour still our souls illume,
And true devotion in our hearts abound,
Till the great Dresser of the Vineyard come;
Lest being barren and unfruitful found,
His sword shall cut us down as cumberers of the ground!

But have I tired thy patience &mdash; spent thy time&mdash;
Till Love itself is fain to be away,
By harping long the notes of serious rhyme,
To wile thy heart from Mirth's delusive sway?&mdash;
Forgive me, BERTHA! &mdash; sooth I might be gay,
And smooth the song with adulations vain;
But well thou know'st I scorn the Flatterer's lay,
Who barters Truth blind favour to obtain,
Or win some gaping fool to laud his worthless strain.

I might have talk'd of beauty, vowed of love,
And sported lightsomely at Folly's shrine&mdash;
Have praised thy charms all others' charms above,
And for thy goodness pictured thee divine:
But what avails the banquet and the wine,
When the poor prodigal hath spent his all?
Alas!  he feeds upon the husks of swine,
And drinks of keen remorse the bitter gall&mdash;
No man to give him bread &mdash; no friend to mourn his fall!

'Tis surely better to endure a shower
A little portion of the summer day,
To wet the soil, end to refresh the flower,
Than bask for ever in the sunny ray,
Till foliage withers from the parched clay:&mdash;
Yes!  better leave earth's pleasures for a time,
And cast our load of worldly toys away,
The lightlier Zion's steepy mount to climb,
And reach perpetual joy upon her heights sublime.

Our home in Zion! &mdash; what desire we more?
What more require of riches, honour, fame?
Our home in Zion! &mdash; let the strain be o'er,
For this obtain'd, no farther goes its aim:
So high in hope I quit the pleasing theme.&mdash;
Come, BERTHA, haste we to that dwelling fair;
The mean despiser may our choice disclaim,
And the rude mocker enmity declare, 
But scorn, or sceptic's blame, shall ne'er molest us there.

And now, my loved one!  that the King of Peace
May bend our hearts to his Almighty sway,
And richly clothe us with the robes of grace,
While here on earth; &mdash; when call'd from earth away,
That we may meet our Judge without dismay,
And ever with the great Redeemer dwell&mdash;
Shine in the realms of everlasting day,
And the eternal song of triumph swell&mdash;
Is my most fervent wish! &mdash; Sweet BERTHA, fare thee well!
