The rose-bud, blushing through the morning's tears,
The primrose, rising from the brumal waste,
The snow-drop, or the violet, that appears
Like nun within the myrtles' shadow pieced,
Wear not a smile like thine, nor look so chaste,
Fair Innocent!  that, from thy mother's knee,
As yet by Earth's despoilment undefaced
Smil'st, and unheeding what the fates decree,
Dream'st not of hapless days, that yet will frown on thee!

Say, o'er thy little frame when slumbers steal,
And watch above thy cradle seraphs keep,
Do they, in love, futurity reveal,
That thus thou sweetly smilest in thy sleep?&mdash;
Thy pure blue eyes were sure ne'er form'd to weep;
Those little lips to breathe the sighs of woe;&mdash;
Alas!  in life it may be thine to steep
Thy senses in nepenthe, glad if so
Thy memory may the dreams of wretchedness forego.

For passion is a tyrant fierce and wild,
Leading the thoughts from Virtue's pure career;
And spirits, in their natures calm and mild,
Are duped by Flattery, or subdued by Fear;
Love, that with promise to illume and cheer
The path of life, oft lures us to betray;
And hopes that, robed in iris hues, appear
When the heart swells in Youth's exulting day,
Dreaming sweet dreams alone, in darkness melt away!

Sweet child, thy artlessness and innocence
Kindle deep thought, and cause my heart to bleed;
For even to the best the Fates dispense
Sorrow and pain, nor are the happiest freed
From ills, that make existence poor indeed;
Sadness doth of its lustre rob the eye;
And those who ever, in the hour of need,
To mitigate our griefs were kindly nigh,
Like shot stars, one by one, all disappear and die!

Earth is at best a heritage of grief,
But oh!  fair cherub, may its calm be thine;
May Virtue be thy solace and relief,
When Pleasure on thy lot disdains to shine!
There was a time, when being was divine,
No sin, no sorrow, &mdash; paradise the scene;
But man was prone to error, and his line
In frailty like their sire have ever been;&mdash;
How happy mightst thou be, were Eden's bowers still green!

Ah!  may I guess, when years have o'er thy head
Their passage winged, maturity thine own,
How may on Earth thy pilgrimage be led?&mdash;
Shall public cares, or privacy alone
Thy life engage?  or shall thy lot be thrown
Where timbrel, horn, and martial drum inspire?
Or, soothed to softness, and a holier tone,
Draw down aerial spirits to thy lyre,
Or call upon the muse to arm thy words with fire?

Thy flaxen ringlets, and thy deep blue eyes,
Bring to my mind the little God of Love;
The last outvie the azure of the skies,
The first are like the clouds that float above
The Spring's descending sun.  The boy whom Jove
Wrapt from the earth &mdash; fair Ganymede &mdash; to dwell
Above the realms where Care has wing to rove,
Thy cherub features may betoken well;
Or if the one excell'd, perchance thou mightst excel.

Even now, begirt with utter helplessness,
'Tis hard to think, as on thy form I gaze,
(Experience makes me marvel not the less,)
That thou to busy man shalt rise, and raise
Thyself, mayhap, a nation's pride, and praise;
'Tis hard to let the truth my mind employ,
That he, who kept the world in wild amaze,
That Caesar in the cradle lay &mdash; a boy,
Soothed by a nurse's kiss, delighted with a toy!

That once the mighty Newton was like thee;
The awful Milton, who on Heaven did look,
Listening the councils Or Eternity;
And matchless Shakespeare, who, undaunted, took
From Nature's shrinking hand her secret book,
And page by page the wondrous tome explored;
The fearless Sidney; the adventurous Cook;
Howard, who mercy for mankind implored;
And France's despot chief, whose heart lay in his sword!

How doth the wretch, when life is dull and black,
Pray that he were, pure Innocent, like thee!
Or that again the guileless days were back,
When Childhood leant against a parent's knee!
'Tis meet that Sin should suffer &mdash; it must be:
To such as at the shrine of Virtue meek,
Remorse is what the righteous Fate's decree;
On conquest bent, Sennacherib awoke,&mdash;
But Heaven had o'er his camp breathed death in the Siroc.

The unrelenting tyrant, who, unmoved,
Lays for a sweet and smiling land his snares,
Whose callous, unimpassion'd heart hath proved
Beyond the impulse of a mother's prayers,
Though not for Beauty's tearful eye he cares,
A tyrant among tyrants he must be
A Herod with a Hydra soul, who dares
To spill the blood of innocents, like thee,
All smiling in his face, and from a parent's knee!

Adieu!  fair Infant, be it thine so prove
The joy, of which an earnest thou wert sent;
And, in thy riper years, with looks of love,
Repay thy mother for the hours she spent
In fondness o'er thy cradle; thou wert meant
To be her solace in declining years;
Raise up the mind, with age and sorrow bent;
Assuage with filial care a parent's fears,
Awake her heart to joy, and wipe away her tears!
