Lo!  surly Winter flies the flow'ry meads,
The green-clad, hills and hawthorn shady vales;
In sullen flight his hoary train recedes,
And leaves creation to more genial gales
And see!  where Phoebus, source of life and light!
O'er Southern hills displays his golden bow;
The hills and vales are by his splendour dight;
The glassy streams reflect his banish'd glow,
And fragrant zephyrs grace his crimson-beaming brow.

Yet Boreas' blasts succeed the milder ray,
And driving sleet assails the budding trees;
The transient gleams of Zephyr flee away,
And icy-coats again attire the breeze:
Tho' each possess alternately the air,
And rove at large along the sylvan plain;
Yet gleaming hope adorns this nether sphere,
And blends in sweet oblivion the strain
Of pleasure's blissful thoughts or pangs of rending pain.

Hope!  sweetest hope!  that cheers the galley slave
When chain'd for life unto the galling oar,
That sheds a ray of rapture on the wave
Of grim Despair, and lends a soothing pow'r
To case the dungeon captive's troubl'd heart;
'Tis Hope celestial!  lovely to behold!
That does th' enchanting period impart
When Venus' train the blushing flow'rs unfold,
And deck the shady groves and plains with fluid gold.

Favonius pour'd a genial fragrant dew,
Upon a bank, whose mossy sides were gay
With violet dress'd in robe of purple hue,
And modest primrose in its best array; 
Adown its side in plaintive murmurs roll'd
A glassy streamlet &mdash; holding to the sky
Its azure mirror, ting'd with beaming gold
Sprinkled from Phoebus' chariot wheels on high,
What time he mounts majestic th' empyrean sky.

Mellifluous music fill'd the neighbouring grove,
Greeting with softest strains my ravish'd ear.
The speckled songster tun'd his notes to love, 
And woo'd his tender mate soft warbling near.
The jetty minstrel strain'd his feather'd throat,
And echo swell'd the trembling notes along
The sylvan scene,&mdash;the magic numbers float
In wildest pathos, and the enchanting song
In ling'ring accents loathe to quit the warbler's tongue.

Their little hearts with soft emotions swell,
And beat responsive to the gladsome strain,
To greet Aurora in each shady dell,
Each flow'ry dale, each mossy-dighted plain:&mdash;
To welcome Flora dipt in heavenly dews,
Dispensing odours from her aerial feet,
And sprinkling flow'rs array'd in varied hues;
Clothing with influence mild their sweet retreat,
To screen with care their bow'r of bliss from hostile feet.
