Vain world, depart; nor with thy smiles intrude!
Be this place sacred to most solemn thought!
Hush'd be the sound of voice or footstep rude,
While ages past before the mind are brought,
And silent musing is to rapture wrought.
For ever, here, be Folly's face unknown,
And be this temple oft by Wisdom sought:
That soaring youth may list her voice alone,
Reading of life's true worth from page of mouldering stone.

Lo, the vast works of ancient art are placed
The admiration of a far-famed land!
Yet when they first sprang forth to view, and graced
That goodly fane which doth a ruin stand,
Plunder'd, and midst its desolation grand,
This spot was an unpeopled wilderness;
Save here and there a little savage band,
Chasing the boar with barbarous address,
Or couch'd round mud-built huts, slumbering away distress.

Daughter of Beauty, calling Britain &mdash; Home!
Come pass an hour within this hallow'd place;
And when thy thoughts o'er distant ages roam,
The steps of Nature or of Art to trace,
Let not a form adorn'd with youthful grace,
Round which the loveliest hues of health may play,
Nor yet the sweetness of an angel face,
Thy love-fill'd heart to vanity betray:
For think, Oh!  think how soon ye pass from earth away.

Remember, fair one, though thy charms may vie
With the enchantment o'er these relics flung,
Though virgin love may light thy beauteous eye,
And in thy praise full many a lay be sung;
Forms, fair as thine, have o'er these marbles hung,
Whose ringlets wander'd o'er as bright a brow;
With whose sweet praise the minstrel's lyre oft rung;
Before whose smiles ev'n Science learn'd to bow!
Yet these all droop'd and died &mdash; Alas!  where are they now?

Brethren!  do ye too pause in manly guise,
Nor trifle in the presence of the great:
The statues of the mighty and the wise,
Long ceased from earth, here meet in marble state;
Pointing to men whose genius could create
Works to amaze the world throughout all time!
On whose stupendous labours yet await
Ages of glory; till their native clime
Perchance may rise again to state still more sublime!

Here ponder deep in solitude profound,
And back to years long past, awhile retire;
We tread, as 'twere, upon enchanted ground,
Where rang the echoes of fair Sappho's lyre!
And here are they who did her song inspire!
The harps of ancient bards ring forth again
The hymns o'er which our spirits never tire;
But pause to attend the soft, aerial strain,
And drink the fancied bliss from out the cup of pain.

A nation's fame here urn'd in marble lies!
The silent glory of departed days
Lives like the sun in eve's unclouded skies,
When lovely light around the spirit plays,
While the rapt soul inhales the radiant rays.
Pause here, and mark how giant Art doth wage
Battle with Time, who on his offspring preys&mdash;
Their names are read upon the sculptured page,
Whose works illume the world in this far distant age.

"Her dead are turn'd towards the setting sun,"
And Athens weeps o'er many an envied bier;
The race of glory hath been lost and won,
And Athens' woes implore the patriot's tear.
No more her sons the shout of victory hear;
Fall'n are her heroes, and her foes are strong:
Freedom's firm notes their hearts no longer cheer,
Raised to redress a much-loved nation's wrong!&mdash;
Hush'd is the minstrel's voice, ceased his inspiring song!

Yet Athens triumphs in her heroes' dust,
And conquers by the 'magic of a name.'
The ashes of her sons, a sacred trust,
For her, the homage of a world must claim,
Which boasts no mightier monument of fame.
The spirits reign the monarchs of the past;
Their memories live, like an unwasting flame,
From which bright beams o'er many realms are cast,
To light the path to Fame, as long as Art shall last.

Hark!  far-off music falls upon the ear,
Like the light sounds that haunt an honour'd tomb&mdash;
Delusion sweet!  as lone we wander here,
Within the confines of this narrow room,
Fancy recalls the spring-time, and the bloom,
Of Grecian glory; and we stop to muse
Upon the darkness of her latter doom;
And wonder how our country can refuse
Her aid, to crush the foes that such fair realms abuse!

I view the labours of the far-famed dead,
The wondrous works of many a mighty mind&mdash;
Broken but not destroy'd!  Their beauty's fled&mdash;
The new-born sweetness, pure, but undefin'd,
That flush'd them o'er when first they were design'd,
Their early loveliness is gone!  but now,
Youth's vigour, manhood's strength, and age, combined,
Have rear'd a throne to which the world must bow,
And torn a wreath from Time to bind round Art's bright brow.

The fragments here of fine hewn forms I see,
Which were the wonders of the world of old;
And ever will the pride of nations be,
Until the heart-blood of their sons is cold!&mdash;
Come nearer, and drink in the charm &mdash; behold
Where, in his hoary strength, Ilissus lies,
O'er whom the floods of many an age have roll'd,
Since first his mighty form was seen to rise&mdash;
Ere the great artist's soul had sought its native skies!

Rise!  Rise!  Old guardian of the peaceful stream,
And to thy ancient place of rest depart!
Lift thy huge bulk, that, fill'd with life, doth seem
From its hard seat e'en now about to start!
Strength nerve that arm if thou material art;
That foot firm grasp the ground without delay!
Though call'd a God, thou canst not upward dart,
And quit this spot, where thou art doom'd to stay
Till superhuman strength bear those large limbs away.

Time!  Time hath marr'd thee; and the solemn glance
Of thine unearthly eye is seen no more!
And ever dost thou seem about to advance,
An awful fragment, from the marble floor,
Where yet thou liest, still, as heretofore!
Say, where the remnants of thy form now lie?
Sunk in what sea, or scatter'd on what shore?
Shame that a God should, mangled, meet the eye,
The marvel of the wise, or jest of passers by.

Thou wert the offspring of a giant mind,
That tower'd above the spirits of the earth;
Born of a nation lofty, and refined,
Whose sons yet dream'd of Gods of mortal birth,
Whose attributes might half excite men's mirth.
Thou art a wanderer from that classic clime,
And art indeed of most surpassing worth;
Would I had seen thee in thy youthful prime,
Ere thy fine form was scathed by the rude hand of Time!

Sweet flows thy unprotected river still,
And shepherd swains upon its banks reside;
And the smooth waters pass by many a hill,
Down which perchance hath rush'd the crimson tide
When war's red hand that stream's fair bosom dyed:
Calm flows thy river, though long lost to thee!
Yet will not I thy shatter'd power deride&mdash;
Thou art no God from mortal frailty free,
But made by man to share his immortality.

And doth thy temple on the brink still stand,
Of that clear current, where it erst was rear'd,
Whither, of old, went many a rural band
Of worshippers, thy shadowy power who fear'd?&mdash;
Or, with the beams that once the nation cheer'd
From Art's fair sun, now risen on Britain's isle,
Have both the fane and idol disappeared?
And is not one poor relic left awhile,
To cheer her children's hearts with memory of a smile?

Well, well &mdash; our years roll on like ocean's waves,
Which all things in their mighty way do sweep;
And tyrants help at length to fill the graves
Where thousands of their gory victims sleep;
For they who sorrow sow, affliction reap.
O'er Athens, now, despotic darkness reigns&mdash;
Her country groans &mdash; yet let not Athens weep!
A new-born hero yet shall tread her plains,
And rise, like him of old, to snap her hated chains.

Here Athens' king reclines, his labours o'er;
His fine limbs stretch'd in undisturb'd repose!
Theseus, thy work is done; and never more
Thy roused strength shall crush thy giant foes:
Ceased are thy toils, with all thy warlike woes!
Thy tasks Herculean all completed are:
But Grecian annals to the world disclose
A tale, which stains thy reputation fair&mdash;
Of Cretan monster slain, and Cretan maid's despair.

Lovely thy mutilated form appears!
Oh valiant monarch, how couldst thou endure
To look on Ariadne's starry tears?
What shall this world from cruel deeds secure,
If heart so hard could dwell in form so pure?
Wert thou indeed so beautiful of mien?
Or hath the sculptor's art, the world to allure,
Bestow'd on thee an aspect so serene?
Thou wouldst not seem so fair if thy lost love were seen!

Thy heart was hard, great king, to murder love,
Whose earliest seed was in affliction sown;
Scarce may thy name deserve to rank above,
For such dark deeds in Heaven are never known.
Thy death was cruel, but could not atone
For sad desertion of a weeping maid:
Thy memory then is best preserved in stone;
For thus thy nature is at once display'd,
And thus in Pluto's realms thou wert of old delay'd!

Happy art thou, in that thy name doth live,
'Shrined in the glory of the artist's fame,
Whose hand an immortality could give,
Vast as surrounds the Theban hero's name,
To rival whom it was thy fruitless aim&mdash;
How many, richly fraught with virtues rare,
Whose patriot deeds thy famed exploits might shame,
No honours like to thine shall ever share,
But die away from earth without a nation's care!

Latona, where art thou?  In Delos' isle
Thy everlasting home should be; where night
Looks lovely from thy meek-eyed daughter's smile,
And thy son's presence maketh day most bright!
Apollo and Diana link'd in light!
Fair twins, aye join'd in Love's aerial chains,
Walking the skies to gladden mortal sight!&mdash;
Not long their light one favour'd spot retains:
Their beams are scatter'd far o'er earth's remotest plains.

Thy tale, Latona, hath not ceased to claim
Some tender sympathy &mdash; perchance a tear!
Surely 'twas meant to shadow forth the same,
That such a fragment only should be here!
And that thou should'st so desolate appear,
Thy smiling children parted from thy side;
Whose lonely birth must them to thee endear,
Born on an island in the ocean wide:
These thoughts so fill our hearts, we half forget to chide.

Pale, pale, fair sea-nymph of the brilliant wings,
Iris!  where hath thy rainbow beauty fled?
Art thou the messenger from heaven, that brings
Tidings of sunny peace in tempests bred?
Oh, with what airy lightness dost thou tread,
Thy dainty garments streaming in the wind!
Like a young spirit soaring from the dead,
Just on the point of leaving earth behind,
The ethereal realms to reach, and traverse unconfined.

Minerva's battles, and old Neptune's deeds,
Here, in loose fragments, float on memory;
Like ancient wrecks bedeck'd with smiling weeds,
On the dark billows of a solemn sea:
Hyperion, too, emerging bright and free
From the deep gloom of hoary Ocean's caves:
And Night, descending to the main, where she
Her star-girt chariot, in the morning, laves,
Plunging her coal-black steeds deep in the midnight waves.

Look on that head all motionless as death!
Though life seems flashing from the fiery eye,
And the proud nostril seems to strive for breath,
As if the snorting steed, too strong to die,
Had just been struck by lightning from the sky
And changed to animated stone; how strive
The marble muscles Reason to belie!
And by the magic might of Art contrive
To force the mind to yield and dream them still alive!

And here is many a monumental urn,
Telling sad tales of unavailing woe,
Of souls departed never to return,
For whom affection's tears have ceased to flow;
The mourner, with the dead, long since laid low:
And the frail vase, too faithless to its trust,
Hath let, alas!  its sacred treasure go,
The relics of the dead!  whose ashes, thrust
From these their little homes, are mingling with the dust.

Pass on, and muse upon the warriors' doom,
The men who fighting for their country fell:
Here is the epitaph!  But where their tomb?&mdash;
Ask not:  for that hath learning fail'd to tell;
And we may now but wish their spirits well.
Then turn away and yon inscription read;
O'er which the tenderest heart will longest dwell:
It speaks of beauty fall'n; and seems to plead
For something more than tears, pale Sorrow's wonted meed.

Ah me!  I ween half sad must be this strain;
For relics rise at ev'ry step, to bring
The recollection that earth's glory's vain,
Which Time so soon o'ershadows with his wing.
Enough!  We will, not longer stay, to sing
Of the bewitching groups of ladies fair,
Dancing with Grecian youths, as they would spring
Up from the stone into the vaulted air,
And, like half-heavenly things, their sport continue there:

Nor of the forms so exquisitely sweet,
Seen in procession as they pass along:
Where people strange of every order meet,
And to the temple of their idol throng.
Where is the light-limb'd boy, and warrior strong,
The veiled priestess, and the virgin band
Destined to sing aloud the sacred song,
Holding the written hymn with tasteful hand&mdash;
Girls chosen from amongst the noble of the land!

And graceful women, tall, and delicate,
Bearing the gifts on altar to be laid:
With vase and candelabra, all in state!
And, true to nature, in the stone display'd,
Until that love-sick fancy wooes some maid
Among the fairy company.  And then
Chariots arrive, and horsemen rich array'd,
And youths for ever young, and aged men,
And officers of state, with many a citizen!&mdash;

Shall earth ne'er see a second Pericles,
The slumbering genius of a world to wake?
To rouse the energies of men like these,
Of whose rich thoughts our spirits now partake
And are refresh'd?  When, when will princes make
Again such use of riches and of power?
The pomp of fashion, and false show forsake&mdash;
Ceasing to build but for the passing hour&mdash;
And some great fabric rear which Time may not devour!
