Ye who recline on sofa or on chair,
Supine and idle, having nought to do;
If chance no gouty member seeks your care,
Nor deep brown study more engageth you;
Take up my rhymes, and read one line or two,
And, if they please you, read a little more:
If not, you cannot have great cause to rue,
Since then you know what you knew not before;
Tell, then, your neighbour so &mdash; the rhyme is quite a bore!

Oft have I chanced, with studious look, to spy,
At country fair, and eke in borough town,
A man and woman, with their little fry,
That humbly wander'd life's low vale adown:
In sooth, they were not held in small renown,
Albeit they could not boast of money bags;
For if their purse contain'd but half-a-crown,
And if their backs were cover'd, though with rags,
They car'd for nothing more &mdash; these philosophic wags.

The luckless husband was most sadly shent,
For he had been in battle's bickering fray;
And now, unfit to march in regiment,
He was disbanded from the ranks away,
Withouten aught of pension or of pay;
Nathless his country owed him for his blood;
One only eye did look upon the day,
And only on one living leg he stood&mdash;
For why?  the other limb was made of beechen wood.

Yet he was fit for trade of many a kind,
And oft along the busy streets was seen,
Yshouting "Scizzors ho!  and knives to grind,"
The while he trundled on his huge machine:
And he did make the weapons sharp and clean,
While rasping them upon the whirling stone,
By which your gums with spittle fill'd had been,
While showers of fire around the grinder shone,
Until he laid the steel upon a smoother stone.

At times this office would he casten by,
And somewhat nobler occupation reach;
New Almanacks at Christmas would he cry,
Whose pages many a coming wonder teach:
And now he vended last and dying speech
Of malefactor hung on gallows tree;
Wherein the luckless wretch was made to preach,
That people all, of high and low degree,
Should timeous warning take, and honest beings be.

His loving mate yclad in mantle red,
Of different kinds &mdash; some nappy and some bare;
And darn'd, I ween, with many a colour'd thread,
Which deftly show'd her needle's busy care;
Ane old straw bonnet she was proud to wear;
Her face was much imbrown'd with summer's heat;
In elfin tresses curl'd her raven hair;
And, though her apron was both clean and neat
She was withouten shoon or sandals to her feet.

Ane creeking basket on her arm she bore,
Fill'd with the potter's cunning work of clay,
With which she nimbly sped from door to door,
Their shining gilt and pictures to display:
Cups, saucers, plates, and jugs, in fair array,
All which the housewives with much longing saw,
When she did hold them to the light of day,
First wiping off the dingy dust with straw,
Then rang them with her thumb, to show they had no flaw.

And she would sell, for shirt or napkin worn,
Or aught of linen rags cast by and old;
Such things as would the mantel-piece adorn,
Or mote the tea or sugar aptly hold;
Or jug for ale, with Wellington so bold,
Most cunningly depainted thereupon,
Or, present for my nephew mote be sold,
Whene'er he did his lesson nimbly con:&mdash;
Thus did the vagrant change for rags, her ware of stone.

Full well they knew, through all the country round
What time were holden races, tryst, and fair,
And with much joyance to the merry ground,
Would they, with others of their kind, repair,
Where busy chapmen vend their little ware,
And ballad-minstrel bawls the noisy song,
And Maister Punch displays his wonders rare,
And gaping Children thread the tawdry throng
The penny rich to spend &mdash; ykept in purse too long.

There buxom lasses, trigg'd in kirtles gay,
Are seen in bevies, smirking, arm in arm,
The clean-wash'd face and ribbon to display,
Which mote the swain's delighted bosom charm:
Some taste the tapster's glass, to keep them warm,
Some get ane lapful of confections nice,
And others hurry though the pressing swarm,
To buy them gowns and combs of quaint device,
And much they love the gear, but sorely grudge the price.

There, too, the vagrant at his trade was seen,
Amid ane jolly and obstreperous crew,
Yplacing wooden pins upon the green
(Temptation great to younkling gambler's view)
At which the lads ane oaken bludgeon threw,
Or else ane ball, with cunning effort, roll'd;
And as the pins fell down, the payment due,
Of gingerbread in cakes, was fairly told;
And thus the game went on, till all the cakes were sold.

Sometimes the Wheel of Fortune he would guard;
Ane painted beard with dingy ha'pence crown'd,
Most like unto the sailor's compass card,
With needle, too, that spun the fateful round:&mdash;
"Come try your luck!  a penny or a pound,
Ne'er did faint heart a lovely lady win"&mdash;
He cries; and soon the adventurers abound,
The cash deposit, and the needle spin,
Whose pausing point they mark with many a growl and grin.

His wife meantime, to chear the list'ning crowd,
(Whose mass with creeping foot she moves among),
With gaping mouth and tongue ybawling loud,
Doth tane the measure of ane rustic song;
And while she passen through the idlesse throng,
Holding her ballads forth for swain to buy,
Her little imps she beareth all along,&mdash;
To help her music one doth, squalling, try&mdash;
One sleepeth on her back &mdash; one at her side doth cry!

At night, when topers rally from the tent,
And brawl and bicker in their maudlin fray,
The jolly vagrants to their shelter went,
And summ'd the gather'd earnings of the day;
Right glad and merry o'er their jubbs were they,
The which, in dainty mouthfuls, they would quaff,
Their brats, meantime, would round about them play,
And munch their crust, and, in their fulness, laugh,
Then ligge in nook obscure, and sleep among the chaff.

Sad plight, I ween!  but such as they have borne
Throughout their lives in this sojourn below,&mdash;
To squat together 'mong vile straw to morn,
And nowthir counterpane nor blanket know;
Then all day long to journey to and fro,
Until their little feet are gall'd and sore;
And then their legs across the ass they throw,
One o'er the rump &mdash; one o'er the neck before,&mdash;
And one in pannier stuff'd, among much other store!

In barn, or bothie, or in miller's kiln,
Famed as a houff for their poor pedigree,
Or farmer's ha' sometimes at night they fill,
And pass the time in merriment and glee,
With legends old, some marvellous that be,
With songs befitting well the pipe and glass,
With telling fortunes, which on cards they see,
Meantimes most careful what shall come to pass&mdash;
Ane lover rich and rare to every buxom lass.

Betimes their urchins, as in years they grew,
The parent's age from grievous burden freed,
Though in the world 'twas little that they knew,
Ne having learnt to spell, much less to read;
Untutor'd also in the Christian creed,
They found them names, though 'twas not at the fount;
In moral garden each ane sorry weed.
Untaught to turn their lives to wise account,
And so it fared with them &mdash; dishonour was th' amount.

Their first-born, Walter, (oftener Wattie hight,)
Was taught his father's art of grinding knives;
Eftsoons he left such mean, but honest plight,
And join'd some secret horde of lawless lives;
Drones were they all within the public hives,
Whose talk and knowledge were base art and slang;
Whose heads in pillory, and feet in gyves,
And swinging bodie oft in chains did hang,&mdash;
Ah!  God forfend ilk man from such a worthless gang!

In soldier's coat and cap, their second son
Was finely dight, and march'd to regions far,
To push the bay'net, and to fire the gun,
Or hurl the gaping cannon on its car;
But soon he languish'd in the toils of war,
Forsook his post, and cowardly ran off;
But being known full well by certain scar,
He was secur'd, and forced, perdie, to doff
His coat to cruel lash, amid his comrades' scoff.

Bes was the third-born of this vagrant fry;
Fair, though she frown'd, but lovely when she smil'd;
She had a cunning witchcraft in her eye,
Which mov'd the heart with glances keen and wild:
But, ah!  this lovely lass was soon beguil'd&mdash;
Herself the mother of ane dainty boy;
And she did walk the country with her child,
By palmistry portending other's joy,
While care, and want, and grief, her comfort did destroy!

Some other imps sprung from the vagrant pair:
As Rob, with bludder lip and scarlet nose;
And Tam, with head ycrown'd with ruddy hair;
And Jock, with eyne and cheeks all blue with blows.
These in succession, up to manhood rose,
And raked the world in search of daily food;
As for their occupation, I suppose
'Twas of a kind by secrets understood;
But whatsoe'er it was &mdash; it savour'd not of good. 

To ken their fate the veil we dare not draw,
Though well I guess what chances may befal:
Some throttled by the villains of the law,
And led, in dolorous plight, to justice-hall;
Therein arraign'd for noisy midnight brawl,
Or pilfering coin from lieges' careless pouch;
While they, beholding judges clerks, and all,
And sullen watchmen, who the deeds can vouch&mdash;
They stoopen low their heads into ane humble slouch:

And one is sent to Bridewell's dreary cell
To work the mill (the lazy miscreant's dread);
He for a certain season there must dwell,
On bread and water daily to be fed:
And one through pillory shows his grinning head,
The while the mob him hail with muddy slime;
And, peradventure, one is doom'd to tread
The lonely ground beneath a foreign clime,
Exil'd from native land, to expiate his crime.

Ah, me!  how luckless is the vagrant's fate,
Doom'd to ane life of penury and cold!
Ne can they boast of lordly high estate,
Albeit their pedigree is staunch and old;
Shreds, they are call'd, of true Egyptian mould,
Or of the ancient minstrels of our land,
Who harp'd the deeds of barons brave and bold,
And loves of ladies touch'd by magic wand:&mdash;
Alak!  those witching scenes are banish'd from our strand!

I might have writ a tale of fancied good
With much odd learning setting forth of truth;
But I was not in such didactic mood,
Nor do I love great tomes of prose &mdash; good sooth.
Yet, though my verse is rugged and uncouth,
And somewhat savours of ane bygone age,
Both eyes of spectacles, and eyes of youth,
May see some things that shall their hearts engage:
So here my rhyme is done:  so also is this page.
