On Jordan's sacred brink I sat alone,
While on my hand my wearied head did lie,
When in the sky a sudden splendour shone,
And sounds divinely sweet came breathing by:
Then in the parted heavens my wondering eye
Beheld a golden-tinted cloud appear,
By angels borne, and guided through the sky;
It waver'd slowly through the downward air&mdash;
Then paus'd above my head &mdash; and stood suspended there.

My eyes, with that unearthly brilliancy,
Were dim and dazzled; in that misty shroud
My heart confess'd a present Deity,
My knees devoutly to the dust were bow'd;
Then from the bosom of that bursting cloud
Three nymphs came forth &mdash; all fair, beyond the flight
Of thought to paint, or tongue to tell aloud&mdash;
All fair; but one, to my delighted sight,
More heavenly fair appear'd &mdash; more eminently bright.

White was her vesture &mdash; with a starry crown
That sparkled through her darkly radiant hair,
And eyes that ever on the earth look'd down:
A robe of cheerful green the second bare,
With lifted looks and hands, as one in prayer:
In royal purple was the last array'd,
And from her loaded lap, into the air
Scatter'd her fruits and flowers:  their course they staid,
And thus, in strains divine, discours'd that white-rob'd maid:

"O Mortals weak, and obstinate as weak!
O madly deaf &mdash; immedicably blind!
Ye wander from the path of Heaven, and seek,
Amidst the tempests of the world, to find
Balm to the soul, rest to the weary mind&mdash;
Peace in the midst of war, and joy in pain;
But Love Divine, even in its anger kind,
Grants to your mortal weakness once again
To hear the words of life &mdash; O let them not be vain!

"Man wakes to weeping in his very birth&mdash;
Sad omen of his future destiny;
Nor breaths the meanest living thing on earth
More powerless in its helpless infancy:
Doom'd, in the golden days of youth, to be
Mazed in a worldly labyrinth of ill,
He wanders on, unwilling to be free,
Still murmuring at his lot, and labouring still&mdash;
Feeling the worm within, that cannot have his fill.

"For what can slake the accursed thirst of gain,
Or cool the fever'd longing for delight!
What charm can Envy's rancorous tongue restrain
Or bound Ambition in his eagle flight?
And if some gleams of pleasure cheer the sight,
'Tis but a meteor light that lures us on&mdash;
A syren's song, that doth to death invite,&mdash;
A dream, that, like some shifting cloud, is gone,
Which, ere we mark its shape, hath past and overblown.

"Death waves above your heads that fatal blade
That only waits the signal stroke on high,
Whose course is all too swift, when most delay'd,
And nearest oft when least ye deem it nigh:&mdash;
O ye, that, in the boundless energy
Of youth, live fearless of your coming doom,
As if existence were eternity&mdash;
Soon shall ye stoop into a narrow room,
A humble heap of dust, coop'd in a nameless tomb.

"Thou, too, that in thy prime of life elate,
So fondly deem'st thy life's uncertain thread
With adamantine strength commensurate,
Thou too shalt hear, when sick and lowly laid,
The loud lament around thy dying bed,
And leaving all on earth that glads the mind,
Be in the silent mansion sepulchred;
Happy that last sad resting-place to find,
Not like the brutes, to die, and leave no trace behind.

"O mortals, truly wretched, if in sooth,
That parting pang annihilated all;
Then sorrow were the sad reward of truth,
And loftiest minds would have the lowest fall,
And knowledge be but bitterness and gall:
But fear not ye &mdash; the soul's immortal ray
Burns brightest when releas'd from mortal thrall,
And when the body crumbles into clay,
The spirit soars, and smiles secure amidst decay.

"And Virtue, fearless though the tempest lour,
Looks calmly forward to her home on high,
Endures alike the bright or stormy hour,
And with sweet Patience tires Adversity.
Then would'st thou learn to look with stedfast eye
On joy and grief below, and tempest tried,
To find thy home and harbour in the sky;
Let holy reverence fill the place of pride;
Who seeks the fount of Truth, must stoop to taste the tide.

"Look forth, where those eternal planets roll
Harmonious through the pathless heaven, and trace
A Power that guides and animates the whole;
Mark with what prodigality of grace
Majestic Nature clothes her varied face,
And say what hand adorn'd that rolling ball&mdash;
What voice was His, that, from the depths of space,
Bade worlds awake at its creating call,
And breathed the breath of life and vigour through them all?

"Who lent the flow'rs their scent, and bade them beam
With such a rich variety of dye?
Who from his wat'ry stores supplies the stream?
Who gives the soaring bird the strength to fly?
Who sets the ocean-wave his boundary,
And guides the seasons in their constant flight,
And circles with a starry crown the sky,
And gives the sun by day, the moon by night,
Their everlasting course, and their unwearied light?

"The earth &mdash; the air &mdash; the sea's resounding base,
Are but the tongues that speak th' Almighty mind;
And mirrors that reflect his glorious face,
Clear to the eye, which no vain errors blind:
All Nature speak his pow'r; and shall mankind,
Amidst creation's voice, be dumb and dead?&mdash;
Proud Man!  to whom Heav'n's bounty hath assign'd
Pre-eminence of glory, and dispread
Its own eternal rays around his honoured head&mdash;

"He who o'er Nature's vast variety
Sits as a Ruler on his lofty throne,
Himself creation's vast epitome,
And God's own image &mdash; who in him alone
Beholds a portion of his glory shown,
And watches o'er him as a parent kind;
O weakness of the soul, to error prone!
What fatal magic fetters down the mind
In darkness thus to dwell, to Truth's effulgence blind?

"Bright beam of Truth!  though clouds obscure the ray,
Nor mortal eye may view thee as thou art;
Yet doth thy presence o'er the darksome way
Shoot forth a stream of glory, and impart
Wings to the feet, joy to the troubled heart;
Thine was the guiding-star, that led along
Those pure and peaceful spirits, who, apart
From the rude bustle of the worldly throng,
Sought peace in humble weeds, the woods and grots among.

"And O!  ye blessed martyrs, that have won
Those glorious palms, that ages cannot fade;
Ye too rejoiced in that all-cheering sun
When to the axe ye bow'd the hallow'd head
Undaunted as the tyrant's voice, and shed
Your blood like water &mdash; not with groan or cry,
But looks of hope, and hymns of joy instead,
Rose from the stake and scaffold to the sky,
Till patience vanquish'd pain, and wearied cruelty.

"By us sustain'd amid that fearful hour,
Serene ye saw your tortures, and defied;
When vain are mortal strength and mortal power,
WE stand united by the Christian's side&mdash;
The chosen of God, to counsel and to guide
His footsteps in his perilous enterprize,
Till victor at the last, and purified
By stern and fiery trial, he arise
Stainless, and repossess his own paternal skies.

"But I above my fellows do sustain
His upward footsteps to that heav'nly height,
Which mortal strength unaided may not gain,&mdash;
But gain'd, all objects dwindle to the sight.
Then let thy grateful voice with mine unite,
The glory of thy Maker's name to raise,
Bounteous in mercy, as supreme in might;
And where thy falt'ring tongue in vain essays,
Let thy full heart at least in silence speak his praise.

"O Sun of Righteousness!  at whose uprise
This other sun of ours grows pale and wan;
Light of the world!  at whose creating voice
Arose this mighty and harmonious plan;
Fountain of life!  that from no source began,
Thou ever-flowing, yet abounding river,
Whose waves still scatter'd blessing where they ran,
Eternal from the first, and changing never,
Whom eye hath never seen, nor thought encompass'd ever.

"Thou who, enamour'd of thy heav'nly light,
The longing soul, that, panting to be gone,
Strong as a new-fledg'd Phoenix, waits its flight,
Whose plenitude of bliss depends on none&mdash;
Sufficient to itself &mdash; whose voice alone
Assigns the task, alone decrees the crown&mdash;
Who sees't the future in the present shewn&mdash;
O let thy grace, from heav'n descending down,
Infuse into my soul a portion of thine own!"

So sang the nymph divine, and, as she sang,
I felt my swelling heart with raptures bound;
Soft rose the other's answ'ring song, and rang,
Th' angelic harps responsive to the sound.
Then smil'd the face of heav'n, and earth around
Shone lovely as a second Paradise;
Then knew I now the lore of man is found
Worthless, and how the eye of Faith supplies
A vision passing far the sight of mortal eyes.
