The fires grew pale on Rome's deserted shrines,
In the dim grot the Pythia's voice had died;
&mdash;Shout, for the City of the Constantines,
The rising city of the billow-side,
The City of the Cross! &mdash; great Ocean's bride,
Crown'd with her birth she sprung! &mdash; Long ages past,
And still she look'd in glory o'er the tide,
Which at her feet barbaric riches cast,
Pour'd by the burning East, all joyously and fast.

Long ages past! &mdash; they left her porphyry halls
Still trod by kingly footsteps.  Gems and gold
Broider'd her mantle, and her castled walls
Frown'd in their strength; yet there were signs which told
The days were full.  The pure high faith of old
Was changed; and on her silken couch of sleep
She lay, and murmur'd if a rose-leaf's fold
Disturb'd her dreams; and call'd her slaves to keep
Their watch, that no rude sound might reach her o'er the deep.

But there are sounds that from the regal dwelling
Free hearts and fearless only may exclude;
'Tis not alone the wind, at midnight swelling,
Breaks on the soft repose by luxury woo'd!
There are unbidden footsteps, which intrude
Where the lamps glitter, and the wine-cup flows,
And darker hues have stain'd the marble, strew'd
With the fresh myrtle, and the short-lived rose,
And Parian walls have rung to the dread march of foes.

A voice of multitudes is on the breeze,
Remote, yet solemn as the night-storm's roar
Through Ida's giant-pines!   Across the seas
A murmur comes, like that the deep winds bore
From Tempe's haunted river to the shore
Of the reed-crown'd Eurotas; when, of old,
Dark Asia sent her battle-myriads o'er
Th' indignant wave, which would not be controll'd,
But past the Persian's chain in boundless freedom roll'd.

And it is thus again! &mdash; Swift oars are dashing
The parted waters, and a light is cast
On their white foam-wreaths, from the sudden flashing
Of Tartar spears, whose ranks are thickening fast.
There swells a savage trumpet on the blast,
A music of the deserts, wild and deep,
Wakening strange echoes, as the shores are pass'd
Where low 'midst Ilion's dust her conquerors sleep,
O'ershadowing with high names each rude sepulchral heap.

War from the West! &mdash; the snows on Thracian hills
Are loosed by Spring's warm breath; yet o'er the lands
Which Haemus girds, the chainless mountain rills
Pour down less swiftly than the Moslem bands.
War from the East! &mdash; 'midst Araby's lone sands,
More lonely now the few bright founts may be,
While Ismael's bow is bent in warrior-hands
Against the Golden City of the sea:
&mdash;Oh!  for a soul to fire thy dust, Thermopylae!

Hear yet again, ye mighty! &mdash; Where are they,
Who, with their green Olympic garlands crown'd,
Leap'd up, in proudly beautiful array,
As to a banquet gathering, at the sound
Of Persia's clarion? &mdash; Far and joyous round,
From the pine-forests, and the mountain-snows,
And the low sylvan valleys, to the bound
Of the bright waves, at freedom's voice they rose!
&mdash;Hath it no thrilling tone to break the tomb's repose?

They slumber with their swords! &mdash; The olive-shades
In vain are whispering their immortal tale!
In vain the spirit of the past pervades
The soft winds, breathing through each Grecian vale.
&mdash;Yet must Thou wake, though all unarm'd and pale,
Devoted City! &mdash; Lo!  the Moslem's spear,
Red from its vintage, at thy gates; his sail
Upon thy waves, his trumpet in thine ear!
&mdash;Awake!  and summon those, who yet, perchance, may hear!

Be hush'd, thou faint and feeble voice of weeping!
Lift ye the banner of the Cross on high,
And call on chiefs, whose noble sires are sleeping
In their proud graves of sainted chivalry,
Beneath the palms and cedars, where they sigh
To Syrian gales! &mdash; The sons of each brave line,
From their baronial halls shall hear your cry,
And seize the arms which flash'd round Salem's shrine,
And wield for you the swords once waved for Palestine!

All still, all voiceless! &mdash; and the billow's roar
Alone replies! &mdash; Alike their soul is gone
Who shared the funeral-feast on Aeta's shore,
And theirs that o'er the field of Ascalon
Swell'd the crusader's hymn! &mdash; Then gird thou on
Thine armour, Eastern Queen!  and meet the hour
Which waits thee ere the day's fierce work is done
With a strong heart; so may thy helmet tower
Unshiver'd through the storm, for generous hope is power!
