The sun was setting in the western heaven,
And night was veiling fast the azure sky;
The solar rays by darkling clouds were riv'n,
Which seem'd to spread their shade, that mortal eye
Might now behold the glorious canopy;
Clad in its glowing tints:  long streams of light
Yet glanc'd upon the earth and radiantly
Illum'd the scene of conflict, where the night
Now chas'd th' unwilling sun, and bade him take his flight.

And oft the rays upon the ocean's waves
Tremblingly danc'd; as if they pray'd the deep
To chain the conquering night, down in its caves
Of crimson coral; and it seem'd to weep
It could not climb the vast etherial steep
To aid the day's bright monarch; and a thrill
Of pity, murmur'd from the billow's sleep,
As the low night-wind bade their heads be still,
Until the morn again should climb the eastern hill.

There was a stranger on the sandy shore,
Who watch'd with eye intent the heavenly scene,
And gaz'd upon the sun, until no more
The western sky had tint of glorious sheen;
And then he turn'd him to the ocean's green,
And fix'd his gaze upon the silent sea,
Upon whose mirror'd surface now were seen
The placid moonbeams sleeping tranquilly,
Serenely joying in their short-liv'd victory.

There was a deep expression on his face,
A countenance where beauty once had shone,
There yet was much of majesty and grace,
But still the eye might mark how much had gone,
Chas'd by dire sorrowings from their manly throne.
And from his eye the lustre too had fled,
Whose lightning glance had spurr'd whole thousands on
To conquer or to death:  it now but shed
A sickly beam, as if its hope had withered.

The stranger look'd upon the boundless deep,
And on his cheek there fell an anguish'd tear.
'Twas sad to see the lonely stranger weep,
But feelings came to him, that once were dear,
And which he dream'd, had died on memory's bier;
And when that darken'd eye glanc'd o'er the main,
That oft had graz'd on death, devoid of fear,
Dark visions of the past then came again
And fill'd his mourning breast, with sad and bitter pain.

And then he gaz'd upon the starry sky,
Where distant worlds like shining gems appear'd;
And when the meteor flash'd; he oft would sigh,
And liken their brief glare to splendour rear'd
Upon a baseless pomp, the sooner to be sear'd
By cold misfortune's blast:  reflection's power
Came on him like a dreaded spell; &mdash; he fear'd
To meet the chillings of that icy hour,
When memory gains her sway and and blights the heart's best bower.

For he was then an exile from the land
Of that sweet home his eyes could view no more;
And he would oft' times pace upon the strand
And look towards his country:  then would soar
His spirit's mightiness, and the waves' wild roar
Would equal not his soul's tempestuous ire,
When the remembrance of the deeds now o'er,
Would fill his bosom with that phrenzied fire
Whose flame was feelings scath'd, his heart their blazing  pyre.

But there were times, as in this twilight hour,
When pensive melancholy grief bore sway;
When the full heart emitted forth a shower
Of briny tears, that dimm'd his eye's bright ray,
As he would watch the last dim streaks of day:
And oft sad thoughts would rend his labouring breast,
That he would try in vain to force away;
Then homeward would be his, but not to rest,
His bosom was a throne where sorrow reign'd confess'd.

Or if the shades of balmy sleep o'erhung
Th' unquiet lids yet moist with recent weeping,
Unwonted sounds would issue from his tongue,
Or frightful dreams would chase his transient sleeping;
Whilst in a sea of grief his soul was steeping:
Or if a kinder dream then lur'd his heart
And gave it to a blissful moment's keeping,
His waking time would but new woes impart,
To add fresh poignancy to sorrow's venom'd dart.

He was the pinion'd eagle of a rock
That rear'd its crags from out the pathless ocean;
He was a pillar levell'd by the shock
Of congregated nations; yet devotion
(Nutur'd by the heart's intense emotion),
E'en there did not forsake him; there were men
Unsway'd by gold, or worldly-minded notion,
Who brought their hallow'd souls to him, and then
Rejoic'd to share with him his pestilential den.

His day is gone!  Voiceless in death he sleeps
The slumber of mortality; his fame
Will ever live.  There yet is one that weeps&mdash;
She who once shar'd his glory and his name,
Who lov'd him in adversity the same
As when the millions of the crouching world,
With recreant monarchs, trembled at the flame
That shed its halo round his flag unfurl'd,&mdash;
Ere from his hill of might the conqueror was hurl'd.

The ground entombs him; o'er his verdant grave
No marble gleams with monumental glare;
The drooping willows  sympathetic wave;
And serve as nature's banners in the air,
To mark the spot.  No chisel'd titles there
Display their pomp, with by-gone deeds to urge
Reflection:  silent in his earthly lair
He lies; and the deep voice of ocean's surge
Sung, and still sings, the once-fam'd conqueror's dirge.
