Sweet Isle!  thy hearths are cold, thy walls are bare,
Thy bowers are broken, and thy dwellers gone:
O'er thee hath Ruin pass'd her burning share;
And where soft Music breath'd her sweetest tone,
Through blacken'd walls is heard the hollow moan
Of the lorn breeze; man's tread hath died away,
Save when perchance some mourner steals alone
Through thy mute dwellings, at decline of day,
When evening's curtain falls o'er earth and ocean gray.

Deserted is thy hallow'd, haunted shore,
Where heaves the hero's solitary mound,&mdash;
Where Ocean sings his dirge for evermore,
And cypress waves and weeps o'er sacred ground,
That wraps his slumbers, dreamless, dark, and sound&mdash;
Where o'er the lonely place of his repose,
The moon, through all the veil of vapours floating round,
Sheds a dim halo, which all feebly glows,
As doth the light that Fame through mists of Time bestows.

When day had set along the distant sea,
There lovers hied, and hail'd the blessed hour,
When to the evening star, from shady tree,
The bird of music 'plains in her green bower,
When dew drops are the guests of leaf and flower;
Through waveless woods when dying breezes sigh,
When melts the heart beneath the blended power
Of sound and silence, and the melody
Of nature soaring sweet into the dark blue sky.

Methinks I see them, seated side by side;
A few brief suns shall see their fates made one:
So hearts will dream, though one short hour may hide
A gulf to yawn &mdash; a headlong tide to run
Between fond bosoms:  snowdrops in the sun
Not faster melt than fairest hopes decay,
Like April gleams &mdash; a moment seen and gone!
Eve found them happy &mdash; ere another day
Waned o'er the wave, they too had pass'd away!

More blest their lot, who bloom'd to wither there&mdash;
Who in their birth-place found an early grave,
And linger'd not that worst of woes to share,
Felt by the young, the beautiful and brave,
Who liv'd the captives of the Moslem slave,
When of their own lov'd Isle each sound and sight
Wax'd faint and far; and tomb'd beneath the wave
Was its sweet shore &mdash; the scene of past delight,
And all was one dark waste of ocean, sky, and night.

From that sad hour they ne'er were heard of more;
The tears that fall for them must fall in vain,
For they were wafted to the Paynim shore,
Whence they shall never be restor'd again;
Dragg'd to the distant clime and desart plain!
To friends &mdash; as years of sorrow wander by&mdash;
Shall Fancy paint the youth in slavery's chain,
Doom'd in a weary land to droop and die,&mdash;
Oh!  for oblivion's drop, to quench dark memory!

And thy fair daughters, Scio!  where are they?
Say, dwells in Tyrant's domes their deep despair,
Where, when the blooming charms of youth decay,
The sack and sea await the fading fair?
So black a dream the bosom may not bear,
And can but hope, when they were torn away,
The heart with links that twined around it were,
Must needs have broken, and the lovely lay
Like flowers some ruthless hand hath strew'd on the cold clay!

Ye moaning echoes of the mouldering wall!
Ye faded garlands of the ruined land!
Are ye not felt, e'en now, a sacred call
To fire the patriot's heart &mdash; to arm his hand
With red Extermination's blade and brand?
Does not the howling wilderness reveal
The deeds of murder? &mdash; can the heart withstand,
Each wordless, but all-eloquent appeal,
That doth its burning core to tenfold vengeance steel?
