There is a love-charm in thy magic smile,
Pale star of evening.  As thy circlet shone
In twilight's rosy ocean, like an isle
Elysian, I have gazed and wandered on,
And paused fantastic lays of love to con,
And started with a sigh, and gazed again.
The visions of the love-sick boy are gone;
Yet still thy spell recalls their idle train,
And memory's quiet tears the cheek of manhood stain.

In the wild worship of the earlier day,
Youths, blest by vows at Hymen's virgin shrine,
Enraptured viewed at last thy loitering ray,
And deemed that love's own goddess might entwine
Her power, her honours, and her name, with thine.
Still thou art love's own star; the fond and fair
Still smile to see thee in thy beauty shine;
And burning blushes, murmured tones, are there,
More deep than twilight glow, more soft than evening air.

Love breathes his sighs in stillness and in shade;
And purple clouds, dim stars, and twinkling dews,
And slumbering music by the breezes made,
A love of loving to the soul infuse.
O'er eve's calm beauties sweet it is to muse
In some flushed Southern climate of the day,
Where light more lovely lives in all her hues;
How sweet, though many a wild and lonely way,
By slant Italian sun, with lady-love to stray!

Such paradise the dreaming mind may form,
And fly from colder climes and duller skies:
And oft, when night lets loose the gathered storm,
And trees are moaning, and the wind's low sighs
In louder gusts of sudden wrath arise,
And the blast beats upon the rattling pane;
The mingled murmur on my senses dies,
And fancy wanders in her golden reign,
And eyes meet eloquent eyes, and yielding lips complain.

Once more thy smile too well remembered beams;
Thine eyes of light upon my soul are glancing,
Fair lady of my lonely land of dreams;
The magic of some twilight hour enhancing,
And thought in thought's best paradise entrancing.
In eve's soft shadows once I roamed with thee,
And watched her star upon the waters dancing:
And oh!  that I were as my spirit free,
To Arno's sun-set glades, and thee, and love, to flee!
