Oh would I not, the pulse of love to waken
E'en in a being by the world rejected,
Stoop to compliances the least connected
With aught could flatter self?  Ah, was not this
What of himself, when he himself depicted,
Frankly confessed the paradox-loving Swiss
"To meet a second self is the sublime of bliss?"

Ah, was not this my wish?  My hope supreme?
Cannot a being, or in earth, or heaven,
Be met with, &mdash; from the stigma of a dream,&mdash;
To rescue him, who has with much toil, striven
For such communion?  Like a spirit driven
From comprehension by connatural things
I, from the extremest ardour, ever given
To man, for human sympathy, my wings
Now flag, and glad would be to drink lethean springs.

Whenever I have turned to meaner themes,
From thee Religion, so much more as I
Have been enabled by warm-glowing gleams
To give resplendence to their imagery,
So much the more, of infidelity
A sense has risen, in my conscious breast,
Towards that, which I know well is worthily
Alone, on the well govern'd mind impress'd,
Towards that, whose joys alone no after stings molest.

Celestial Spirit which erewhile didst deign
Our elder Milton's hallowed prayer to hear,
Do thou inspire my tributary strain,
Breathe thou through every word that sense severe
Of Truth; and if aught eloquent appear,
Let it to every one be manifest,
That it flows from that empyrean clear,
Where thou beside God's throne, a heavenly guest,
With vision beatific evermore art blessed!

Long, long enough, have I on love enlarged,
Wasting on idle theme my idle prime;&mdash;
Not that I mean with folly may be charged
Whate'er is not devotional in rhyme.
But grant, that, from them shall result no crime,
Yet human loves are vain, and end in air.
Whereas that love which mounts on wings sublime
Towards heaven, as everlastingly is fair,
As sources whence it rose imperishable are.

The natural impulse, of each natural mind,
Enough doth souls to natural passions move:
We little need persuasives, whence inclined
The human heart may be to human love.
But does experience, towards religion, prove
This natural bias, in the human heart?
Rather doth not each stress tend to remove,&mdash;
Each impulse both of nature and of art,&mdash;
This noblest of all themes from man's immortal part?

'Twixt other attributes which man doth share
This is the difference, and religious lore,
That ere on its first rudiments he dare
To cast an eye, e'en to its inmost core
The heart must be renewed; no soul can soar
To its most simple rules, till, on the wings
Of the most holy Dove, it learn t'explore
Truths, which, to those are, round whom this world clings,
In heaven's own archives kept, unutterable things!

Father who gav'st me talents, 'tis my prayer,
Since all unfit for bustling scenes I be,
Since sequestration from those places, where
Mankind, to grave affairs, most actively
Is called, best suits my pensive tendency:&mdash;
Do thou my humble aspiration bless,
To bring a contribution tremblingly
To that pure stock of truth, whose perfectness
Best stays man's tottering steps through life's bleak wilderness.

Father!  I ask, or in thy vineyard deign
To let me be a labourer; to be
But "in thy house" "a door-keeper!" &mdash; no strain
Of mine shall then flow discontentedly.
Oh deign to make me something; deign on me
To shed th' anointing oil, that I may sing
Loudly thy praises! &mdash; Or, if thy decree
Claimant unfit deem me to touch the string
Of thy most hallowed harp, hear my petitioning,&mdash;

I then implore that thou would'st fashion so
My natural talents, that, with them, I may
Become a labourer while here below,
To lessen human sorrows! &mdash; Oh, I pray
That I may be a something! &mdash; May the day,
E'en of my pilgrimage, or ere it wane
Behold a monument, whence men may say,
"He, in his day, did his day's work!" Oh deign
My lot to rescue from "unprofitable" stain!

Yet, if thy will be such, that neither I,&mdash;
Or for "another and a better world,"&mdash;
Must throw my mite in of utility;&mdash;
Or e'en, in this, must see the flag unfurl'd
Of active use; &mdash; if I must thus be hurl'd,&mdash;
To keep me humble, from each high career,
Whence man is hailed with blessings; &mdash; if I'm whirled
Thus, from distinction's gratifying sphere:&mdash;
Still moisten my pale cheek with gratitude's meek tear!&mdash;

Yes, let me never, never turn from thee!&mdash;
Whether I be an instrument of use:
Or whether I am bound to bend the knee
In nothingness; &mdash; whether I can produce
Aught of effect; or whether, thou, t' unloose,
To unloose utterly, the mortal strings,
Which bind me to this world, see'st fit, with noose,
Hard as the gordian knot, to cramp my wings,
And stamp me while I live, vilest of vilest things!

Yes, be thou "with me in the way I go!"
Whether or poverty or wealth thou send;&mdash;
Be thou my all in all!  Be thee to know,&mdash;
My heart's best treasure &mdash; as my soul's best friend!
To touch unworthily, do thou forefend,
With an unhallowed hand, that ark of thine!&mdash;
What, what am I?  Though in the dust I bend,
Let me rejoice, that while I lowly pine,
Thousands of purer souls in thy white raiment shine!

I've elsewhere said, "cannot in earth, or heaven,
Being be found, from stigma of a dream
To rescue him who hath with much toil striven
For human sympathy?"  Such the extreme
Of folly, to expect, from turbid stream,
To draw transparent waters, as to try
In what is finite, what we still must deem
Imperfect, stamped with mutability,
There realized to find perfectibility!

No, no!  There is but One, God is that one,
Who all the soul's deep wants can satisfy;
No, no!  There is but One, that Being alone
Who made the heart, who thoroughly can spy
Its labyrinthine windings. We may try
To find another self as well, may seek
As soon to double our identity
As hope on earth the blessing to bespeak
Of perfect love in man, so faulty and so weak!

As it might easily be made appear
A perfect sameness in the inner frame
Of the mind's structure, in two beings here
Would argue that their persons were the same&mdash;
Though biform, two such beings would but claim
Common identity.  Therefore, I say,
At such a consentaneousness to aim,
Is, but in other words, to be the prey
Of wishes fond as those which did Narcissus sway.

It is, in short, to wish a second self,
Yet not a second self to find:  it is
The wish to find another, whom some elf,
Versed in fantastic metamorphosis,
Hath made so like us, that in him we miss
Nought save entire identity.  How fond
Is it on such a dream to found our bliss!
He who the finite ne'er can go beyond,
Seeks happiness in vain, enthralled in error's bond!

To make this clear.  If we but once allow
(As most in present times admit) there dwells
'Twixt such and such a temperament (though how
Causation here doth operate quite repels
Man's finite guest) yet if the fact compels
Our credence, that a given cast of mind,
A given symmetry of form foretels,
Then must we grant, that, if two forms enshrined
Twokindred souls, they were to kindred forms assigned.

Now since two bodies never were the same,
To seek two minds alike, vain is the quest:
Alleviation is what we should claim,
A soothing of the ills which life molest
From human sympathy; but he whose breast
Is fired with notion that he may discern
Being through whom he may be wholly blest,
Seeking for that which cannot be, will earn
Nought but conviction sad how idly he did yearn.

Besides &mdash; but that 'tis foreign to our theme&mdash;
It were not difficult the fact to prove
That those most sympathy enjoy, whose stream
Of thought, like twy-born founts, diversely move.
We, those that are our opposites, most love;
Where we're deficient, those who most abound;
Those who're deficient where we soar above
The common standard; if with candour crowned,
And mutual comprehensiveness such tie be found.

In such a case a mutual aid is given;&mdash;
One moral being of two counterparts
Is formed; and thus each brings a leaven
Whence each to t'other's scantiness imparts.
But e'en in this, best tie of human hearts,
Those imperfections which are still the bane
Of all that is of man, with poisonous arts,
Will interfere:  no plant of earthly strain
Did e'er yet grow mature, unblemished with a stain.

No, he who made the heart, can only know
Its wants; he only who is infinite
Can e'er appease th' unutterable throe,
With which the soul doth pant for pure delight:
He who while he doth perfectly requite
That individual wish, can do as much,
As for that individual, by his might,
For every one whose heart doth own the touch
Of grace, which leads it still from heaven its all to snatch.

Though man be finite, still his wishes are
Indefinite, if not infinite:  tell me then,
Is there not an insuperable bar,
'Twixt finite beings rendering back again
T' each other all they wish?  As we are men
We're with pure reason gifted. This doth tend
To th' infinite.  However we may strain
All possibilities, when man doth blend
With man, an aching void that union will attend.

No accidents of chance can hinder this;
No possibilities of fate evade;
Cease then the vain complaint of scanty bliss
Attending human sympathy!  By aid
Of true philosophy is soon displayed
Its impotence to satisfy the soul
Athirst for living waters, Disarrayed
Be man then of the captivating dole,
Falsely to him ascribed, man's comfort to controul!

If thou have sensibility, a heart
Impatient of th' imperfect joys of earth;
If thou have vainly sought to play thy part,
For blessings deemed here of most reverend worth;
And if, like bubbles, thou have found their birth
But harbinger'd their doom; how soon the stream
Exhausted, which from this world gushes forth;
If thou have found that joys from earth which teem,
When once their taste is o'er, are joys but in a dream.

Remember still there's a resource for thee:
If thou'rt a mystery to thyself, to all;
Still to thy God thou art no mystery:&mdash;
Yes, He, without whose care there doth not fall
A sparrow to the ground, however small;
Howe'er profound, how utterless soe'er
Thy griefs, if thou on him with faith wilt call,
Can bring a sure relief to thy despair;
And raise elysian blooms where all seemed bleak and bare.

There cannot be a mood of mind so dim,
So evanescent, imperceptible,
But it is clear as noon of day to him;
He sees thy rising cares or ere they fill
Thine eyes with tears; and if with passive will
Thou at his foot-stool meekly wilt fall down
The tumult of thy anguish he will still,
And all the contrite tears thy cheek which drown
Will add a living gem to faith's immortal crown.

So far with tolerance th' instinct do I see
Which leads the spirit with devotion fond,
To seek in youth for perfect sympathy
In other human hearts, that few this bond
Who have not sought, few who have never conned
With weak idolatry, a human face,
And found how vain were human loves; beyond
Were everled to go:  triumphs of grace
Are oftenest gained by souls driven from love's earthly race.

The principle of love must be implanted,
Or e'en divine love ne'er will take its root:
Small hope for those who're of this instinct scanted:
Small hope for those involved in low pursuit
Of interest or ambition!  Who with brute,
And earthward gaze see nought beyond themselves:
But hope, ye mourners, who with anguish mute,
See each foundation, like a train of elves,
Vanish, which human skill unprofitably delves.

As to Religion's cause, one well might hope,
Rather to gain th' idolater, than one
Who loves in atheistic gloom to mope:&mdash;
So may we rather hope he may be won
To love his God, him whom the fervid sun
Of love hath fevered, whose still earnest eye
Some outward idol still is fixed upon,
Than him in self-involved captivity,
Who thinks he's free since self doth doom his slavery.

Passion, love, adoration!  Fine the links
That in progressive process join these three,
Cursed is that soul, which gifted, basely sinks
From last of these to that first named!  So he,
Who is so wise, if he defeated be
In passion, and in love, to raise his thought
In adoration, from th' idolatry
Of passion, and of love, will soon be taught
That superhuman bliss is by the latter brought.

"There is a bliss the eye hath never seen,
There is a bliss the ear hath never heard,
Nor hath it ever comprehended been:&mdash;
And though on man's heart 'tis sometimes conferred,"
Never except on him whose heart is stirred
With spiritual communion:  he who drinks
Of that immortal fount, to him preferred
Is that pure peace, which while it deeply sinks
Into our heart of hearts, speech from its utterance shrinks.

Oh God, give me, and I will never crave
An earthly joy, that peace which passeth words;
That peace whose smile can hover o'er the grave,
That peace whose inner wealth can shame all hoards
Of bliss terrestrial; that peace which affords
Pity to other's sorrow; and which feels,
E'en while it braves the edge of hostile swords,
And binds all human wounds, and while it kneels
E'en by the bed of death, a blessedness which heals.

Yes, I rejoice in spirit, when I think
On this tried panacea:  'tis a balm
Which to the depth of deepest wounds may sink,
Which the most troubled soul may quickly calm.
Ask it of God then, ask it!  'Tis an alm
He freely doth vouchsafe:  but oh, how rare
The privilege to sing a grateful psalm
For its bequest, save by those, who, in prayer,
Bankrupt in earthly hope, turn heavenward in despair!&mdash;

Yes, could I wish for others or myself;
It were, that, pierced the veil 'twixt thee and me,
My God, I, sacrificing earthly pelf,
Might view, as the supreme reality,
Thee, and the world of spirits. Who that's free
Would wish to be imprison'd?  Who that could
Carry his thoughts to all eternity,
In glad progression, forward, would be mewed
In seventy years brief space of ailing flesh and blood?

But how shall this be gained?  By fervent prayer&mdash;
"In season, out of season, in prayer" "be
Instant," th' Apostle saith.  First station there&mdash;
In yon bright mansion of eternity,
Thy heart's chief loves, and thou wilt quickly see,
With spiritual eye, far clearer than on earth,
To the natural eye &mdash; with more reality&mdash;
Than to that eye those forms which here have birth,
Objects surpassing man's weak powers to body forth!

I talk not of ecstatic vision! &mdash; no:&mdash;
Nor of conversion instantaneous speak:
Few, few gain such immunity below,
From thrall of flesh and blood, save him whose cheek
Contrition oft hath dewed with tear-drops meek:
'Tis a slow process in most hearts, to wean
Them so from this world's coil, that on them break,
With all the freshness of a real scene,
Those glories hid behind mortality's dim skreen.

Be humble, &mdash; be resigned, &mdash; be penitent:&mdash;
Be God's thy will: &mdash; the spirit of prayer be thine;
The spirit of love:  be with each chance content
That seems to fall out in th' appointed line
Of Providence.  Let not thy soul repine,
Nor yield it e'er to fruitless retrospect.
Save when thou feel'st admonished from the shrine
Of awful conscience, that, by some neglect
Of thine, thou pay'st the fine for God's will by thee checked.

In God thou liv'st, thou mov'st, thy being hast;
Bring this truth home to constant consciousness;
About thy bed, about thy path, is placed
The angel of his presence.  Dost thou press
Thy bed down-lying; rising, doth the stress
Of the day's duties crowd upon thy thought;
Still ever in adoring awfulness
Be, to thy spirit, the reflection brought,
That wheresoe'er thou art, is with his presence fraught.
