Alas!  what worthy characters these are,
Unknown to fame, in life's sequestered shade;
Unto whose sterling value, homage fair,
By gentle Bard, is never never paid:
Spirit of Shenstone!  O vouchsafe thine aid!
Awhile to me, thy firm admirer true:
That spirit, which so faithfully displayed
Thy humble old School-mistress to our view&mdash;
Certes a finer sketch, no poet ever drew!

Nathless I venture on my pleasing theme,
A village character schoolmaster hight;
Who is as worthy &mdash; if I justly deem&mdash;
Of fame as any other village wight&mdash;
Blind Fidler, Blacksmith, Farmer, Miller white,
Clerk, Curate, Sexton, or whate'er his toil&mdash;
He teacheth stupid imps to read and write:
Hard lot!  for ever in such state to moil,
Withouten hope of change, unblessed with fortune's smile!

And such as he throughout our smiling land,
In many a rural village may be found.
Lo!  where apart, the humble school doth stand,
Its scite betraying by its gabbling sound.
Collected there from cottages around,
Children of every temper, age, and size,
On forms and stools the master's chair surround,
While he, attentive, the assembly eyes,
Now hears the task repeated, now subdues the noise.

See, on the walls each dreadful instrument
Display'd to public view, &mdash; a sight uncouth!&mdash;
To suit the age and crime the punishment;
A rod for infancy; a cane for youth;
A label vile, to punish an untruth;
A ferule sharp, the noisy crew to tame;
And used by seldom, &mdash; prudently in sooth!
An instrument of still more dreadful name,
The Fool's cap, trimmed grotesque, that worketh meikle shame.

Full well is known unto that reverend man,
That to correct is matter delicate;
He knows the various tempers of his clan,
And rules, judiciously, his little state;
He knows temptations numerous await
The little urchin every step he goes;
And muchel doth from childish faults abate,
And when repentance or contrition shows,
But rarely 'tis that he proceedeth unto blows.

Well stored is he with many a tale I ween,
That forces mirth and laughter at its end;
And ever and anon, at times, he'll deign
His gravity of feature to unbend;
And while to please them he doth condescend,
His merry tale a warm reception meets;
All ear, the youngsters mute attention lend,
And laughter loud its gay conclusion greets;
And each again at home the master's tale repeats.

But oftentimes, the muse must needs declare,
He not in this delightful view appears;
His countenance, where smiles were beaming fair,
Now the dark frown, severe and gloomy, wears.
As when the breeze, along the welkin bears
The huge dark cloud high o'er the smiling land,
And thunder mutters slow, and lightning glares,
Aghast the fearful husbandman  doth stand,
And silence rests on all the jovial harvest land.

So, when the frown comes gathering o'er his brow,
The children know ere long the storm will burst;
Their babbling then subsides in whispers low,
Or all are in their lessons deep immersed;
All but the culprit, fearful of the worst,
Downcast, and gloomy, standing all alone,
To the dark corner banish'd, as accurs'd,
Waiting his trial that shall soon come on,
And make his crimes and punishment, to all well known.

At length the wished, yet, dreaded moment comes:
The wonted business of the school is staid;
The culprit looks of penitence assumes,
Or summons resolution to his aid;
Yet can he not offences dire evade;
Ne from the smarting punishment recede;
And now the master &mdash; dreadfully arrayed&mdash;
Doth in his task, reluctantly, proceed,
And aye laments the cause, and doth stern duty plead.

And while the rest look on with silent awe,
Chuckling themselves nor yet withouten fear;
He careful will from the occasion draw,
For their instruction many a lesson clear,
And pour it warm impressive on the ear,
That crime is follow'd still by shame and pain,
That they their parents kind should aye revere,
The Sabbath keep &mdash; from wicked ways refrain,
Ardent their learning mind, and great will be their gain.

O!  who can tell the worth of such a sage,
That thus will on his youthful charge impress
Those principles which in their after age,
Conduce to virtue, peace, and happiness;
Whose every action hath that neat address,
Which wins the youthful heart ere 'tis aware,
And having won it turns the wilderness
Into a fruitful garden blooming fair,
The worth of such a man no mortal may declare.

The stretching branches of the leafy trees,
That in their shade the village school embower,
Bend lightly by its casement, as the breeze
Unceasingly descends, with gentle power;
High soars the sun in his ethereal tour,
His beams glance sweetly through the foliage green,
And all the brightness of the forenoon hour,
Is shed upon the noisy bustling scene,
Where countless atoms small are dancing in the sheen.

And now the gabbling school is in its prime,
And all in action vigorous and strong;&mdash;
Some poring are o'er grammar rules sublime,
Some drawing out the copy fair along,
Some reading loudly with a tone of song;
Toiling in figures some their dubious way,
Fully engaged and variously the throng;
There are no idlers, look where'er you may,&mdash;
Though here there is no lack of mischief, talk, and play.

But hark!  the old church clock, a welcome sound,
Vibrating long the hour of noon proclaims,
Echoed by those in cottages around:
The master ne'er his children's ardour blames,
But gladly sends them to the village dames,
Whose tasks have been their dinners to prepare,
Which, having took, they hie them to their games;
Meantime their master eats his humble fare,
And quiet smokes his pipe in his old elbow chair.

Not long must he this calm repose enjoy,
By which he doth fresh store of spirit gain,
For fast the moment is approaching nigh,
That calls him to the noisy crew again,
Who eager yet about the village lane,
Or on the green their lively sports pursue.
O!  short lived pleasures free from care and pain!
How memory brings our youthful days to view!
And while she paints them fairest, paints them just and true!

Ah!  then we had no cares, but light away
Our winged fairy hours of pleasure moved;
We felt no hopes, nor fears, but ever gay,
We neither wished, nor dreaded, longed, nor loved,
But all unthinking carelessly we roved,
Chasing the butterfly that crossed our path,
Or plucking flowerets, yet we sometimes proved,
The rose its thorn &mdash; its sting fair pleasure hath,
When on the guilty truants fell the master's wrath,

Then did we promise fair, but all know well
What strong temptations wile us from the school;
Again we stray adown the lonely dell
To fish the brook, despising law and rule:
Again to bathe we speed to river cool,
In hedge and brake now seek the warbler's nest,
And now ere winter hardens pond and pool,
When autumn hath the fields in plenty dress'd,
We often roam the woods of clustering nuts in quest.

Youthful pursuits for ever changing are,
And every change the master's care demands:
Now this is dangerous he doth declare,
And this as all unworthy he withstands,
And that with name of cruelty he brands,
And some he deprecates as wasting time;
"Ye cannot follow this with guiltless hands,
And O!  beware and shun the smallest crime,
So shall ye grow in worth and piety sublime."

'Tis afternoon and now the sultry heat
Hath over all a languor soft bespread;
Chief in the village school, where on its seat
Full many a chubby imp nods low his head,
With sleep I ween, as heavy made as lead;
And now the noise sounds dizzy, dull, and low;
And aye, the dust springs from their shuffling tread,
And  many an eye hath lost the sparkling glow,
And cheek the ruddy tinge that morning did bestow.

But time speeds on and whirls about the hours,&mdash;
Short is the space from dawn till set of sun,
Though flag the children's and the master's powers,
He still the various duties urges on,
Until each task is well and fully done,
When, happy glimpse!  wide open'd is the door,
And jostling one another out they run;&mdash;
Rejoice they may, released from thraldom sore,
So will their master too, his daily labour o'er.

Day after day the business of the school
Is carried on in this unmarked routine,
And unto many an imp a life so dull,
And so unvaried, wearisome hath been;
But merrier times are drawing on, I ween,
These they anticipate with high delight,
Chief, when with sprigs of hardy evergreen,
At Christmas every cottage-pane is dight,
And up the chimney wide the yule log blazes bright.

And tapped are casks of foaming nut-brown ale,
And nuts are cracked as well as jokes of mirth,
And glee and song and well-told merry tale,
Enlivens every cheerful festive hearth;
Such scenes continuing till the new year's birth,
Though keen without the blasts of winter blow,
Wild hoarsely whistling o'er the frost-bound earth,
And door and casement rocking to and fro,
And nipping chill from off the dreary waste of snow.

Now of that joy which Christmas ever brings
Shall not the village school a portion share?
It shall, and all as jovial be as kings,
At parting day, when nuts and apples rare,
And spice cakes heaped upon the table are,
And sweet hot ale is freely dealt about,
Till gloom is banished far, and all their care
Is now, as wont, to bar the master out,
This they accomplish soon with loud triumphant shout.

Yet he a seeming, stout resistance makes,
Which doth of course for custom's sake prove vain;&mdash;
And being conquered straight himself betakes
To neighbour's house in quiet to remain,
While his exulting scholars break his cane&mdash;
That many a time their backs hath galled sore&mdash;
Now mount his stately chair and about amain,
While chairs and forms and desks are tumbled o'er,
And all is one wild scene of riot and uproar.

Now having passed in chat an easy hour,
While they in school are revelling uncontrolled,
The master wends again to claim his power,
And when he knocks advance a few most bold,
And through the latch-hole parley with him hold,
And the conditions of admittance state,
That he long holidays shall not withhold;&mdash;
His  promise given, the door is opened straight,
And soon sends them home, all hearts with joy elate.

And now while he the holidays enjoys,
He is invited by the neighbours round,
To christmas feasts where delicate mince pies,
And other rural luxuries are found;&mdash;
Where mirth inspiring wassail bowls abound,
And free and hearty welcome zests the cheer;
Where all the scene is with good humour crowned,
And old companions, severed long, appear,
And social friendly bonds are strengthened every year.

Without the old Schoolmaster took his place,
A christmas feast it scarcely would appear,
On every hand he met a warm embrace,&mdash;
For all, his gentle virtues did revere;
Grave were his manners ever, not austere,
He never was to decent mirth a foe,
Kind, unassuming, friendly, and sincere,
And much of men and manners he did know,
And oft-times sound advice he did on all bestow.

At church unfailing, every sabbath morn
Saw him devoutly hold his wonted seat,
And he, I ween, the service did adorn,
When in a tone most tremulously sweet,
He ever the responses did repeat;&mdash;
Or joined to elevate the sounding psalm.
The sabbath day he always deemed a treat,&mdash;
He loved its soft tranquility and calm,
That on the harrass'd soul descends as healing balm.

And well I ween he loves the evening hour,
That closes soft and sweet the summer day;
And in some little, mind-relaxing tour
Will carelessly around the village stray,
Chatting with neighbours, who may cross his way,
About their farms and other rural news;
Or when the warblings die upon the spray,
Alone, and in sweet solitude to muse,
Will seek the woods enwrapp'd in shades of gloomiest hues:&mdash;

Or lonely wander by the pensive stream,
That murmuring hoarsely chafes its pebbles o'er,
Or now to see the sun's departing gleam,
He seeks the mighty ocean's stretching shore,
Where billows dash, and winds for ever roar.
Pleased there to see the sun's bright ruddy glow
Play on the vast expanse outstretched before;
Or he will climb some mountain's airy brow,
To view the landscape scenes that peaceful lie below.

Yet him on summer eves his neighbours see,
Oft busied in his little garden ground,
And of his better scholars, a posse,
Most manfully assisting him are found,
Which muchel doth unto their praise redound.&mdash;
To toil for him, as favour they regard,
And though it strange, yea, passing strange, may sound,
He grants it to the good as a reward,&mdash;
From privilege so great the bad are aye debarred!

Now evening's shades along the welkin creep,
The sun is wending to his wonted rest,
And hovers o'er the surface of the deep,
In the horizon of the distant west,
Whose clouds he hath in robes of glory dress'd,
As opening, they before his path retire;
But yet awhile each lofty mountain crest,
The stately tree tops, and the village spire,
Retain the bright reflection of his lingering fire.

Hushed are the softened murmurs of the bee,
The warbling of the woodland choir is still;&mdash;
Homeward the labourer wends across the lea,
The shepherd hastens from the dewy hill;&mdash;
Ceased hath the rumbling of the village mill,
And gentle evening silence rests on all;
Uninterrupted, save by tinkling rill,
Or melancholy sounding waterfall,
Or, busied all in play, the village children's brawl.

Yon sound of mirth with which the green doth ring,
Not only points our memories to the past,
When we were young and playful, but doth bring
The sad reflection that it will not last,&mdash;
For rising cares the dawn will overcast
Of coming manhood, aye with troubles rife,
And soon and varied will their lots be cast
In a wide world of never ceasing strife,
When they must arduous toil their various lengths of life.

Hark!  the shrill trumpet and the rolling drum,
High sounding, fill the land with stern alarms!
Some in their country's cause forgo their home,
Afar in tented fields to carry arms;
Some see in naval life peculiar charms,
And seek their fortune on the stormy main;
Some stay and manage their paternal farms,&mdash;
The peaceful dwellers of the peaceful plain;
To bustling cities some proceed in search of gain.

O sweet will be to him who wanders far,
The recollections of his youthful years!
Amid the bustling world's tumultuous jar,
Oft will he think upon his young compeers&mdash;
And to his native village when he steers
His course once more, by powerful impulse led,
Unchanged each scene, but changed each face appears,
And he, while musing o'er the silent dread,
On the schoolmaster's grave will tears of sorrow shed.
