Sing, Muse, of Pan, Mercury's darling child,
Goat-footed, two-horned friend of jocund noise,
Who, traversing leaf-shaded valleys wild,
Mix'd with dance-loving nymphs, his hours employs.
The bright-haired pastoral god who shares their joys,
They sing, on mountain tops where goat ne'er climb'd;
Nor does his careless trim repress the voice
By which the lord of cliffs with snow bedimm'd,
Of hills' uplifted brows and rocky points is hymn'd.

He wanders here and there through thickets dense,
Now charm'd with gentle rivers' murmuring flow,
Now scaling tops of loftiest hills, from whence
He casts his eyes over the flocks below;
Oft will he to the far-spread mountain go,
The haunt of goats, and oft the hills among
Hunts with keen eye, and lays their monsters low;
While, rising o'er the reeds, his dulcet song
Hesperus utters forth, with trumpet clangor strong.

A song, than which the bird of melting strain,
Who hid beneath the leaves in flowery spring,
Doth pouring forth her honied notes complain,
No chaunt of sweeter harmony can sing:
To aid the song the nymphs their voices bring,
The mountain-nymphs their voices all so sweet,
Around a dark-streamed fountain in a ring,
Dancing unwearied with fast-beating feet,
While echo from hill-top will the soft strain repeat.

A lynx's speckled hide great Pan arrays,
As through the dance he winds his joyous way,
Cheered by the influence bland of sweetest lays,
In the soft meadow where in rich inlay,
Crocus and hyacinth with colours gay,
And odours rich 'broider the verdant ground;
Meanwhile due honours to the gods they pay,
Chaunting their names with hymnings' holy sound,
But praise above the rest Pan's heavenly father found.

For in their loudest strain mild Mercury,
Giver of good, heaven's messenger they sung,
How to Arcadia's sheep-walks erst came he
To his own Mount Cyllenus, where, though sprung
From gods, yet he aside his godhead flung,
And for a mortal kept the fleecy fold,
Through love of Dryope's daughter fair and young
His suit was soon, and when nine months were told,
She gave the god a son most monstrous to behold&mdash;

A horn'd, goat-footed, noisy, laughing child.
The nurse jumped up, and dropped the boy and fled;
For his huge bearded ugly visage filled
At the first look her very heart with dread,
But over Hermes' soul great joy was spread
And taking in his hand his bantling rare,
To the Olympic towers he went, and led,
Close swaddled in the skin of mountain hare,
His boy, and show'd to Jove the object of his care.

Among the gods he sate:  a general joy
Through heaven at sight of Hermes' offspring ran.
But most of all did Bacchus hail the boy,
And from their love th' Immortals call'd him Pan;
For Pan is all, in dialect of man
Interpreted, and he to all was dear.
Hail, monarch of the woods!  and gently scan
The song of prayer I pour into thine ear;
Soon to thy praise from me a fresh strain shalt thou hear.
