Ah, what avails the wisdom of the wise,
Are they more virtuous, or their follies few?
Ye moralists, if man with man still vies
In vice, ah what avails your proffer'd clue?
Do ye point out the path yourselves pursue?
None is, who turns the page or turns the sod, free
From the foul moat that dims our doubtful view.
'Tis dark delusion all.  We are an odd fry.
Thus, musing o'er his shovel, spoke Old Bob Godfrey.

"Hence, clam'rous casuists, with your visions vain!
Hence all that Hume, and Bayle, and Berkley, wrote!
Or, if one solitary truth remain
Of all ye triumph'd in and all ye taught,
'Tis a sweet flow'ret from the wilds of thought.
In vain do priests the holy temple enter,
In vain their themes with sacred sapience fraught;
Religion scorns the gaudy garb that's lent her
By the proud mitred prelate, or the demure dissenter.

"Lo, the poor worm that coils beneath my tread,
Crush'd as he is by all the clods that tumble,
Hung as his life is by the slenderest thread,
He, not philosophers, shall man humble;
Man!  that shall soon be clods for him to crumble.
Avaunt, ye visionaries!  dream of fame,&mdash;
Dream of stability, &mdash; and, dreaming, stumble;
Perish for an imperishable name.
Heroes that vanquish'd worlds the lowly worm shall tame.

"Perchance, these worthless particles of clay
Once form'd a Caesar or a Philip's son;
They now shall form a carrot or a pea,
That man, perhaps a beast, shall feed upon.
Was it for this their victories they won?
For this the bloody path of conquest trod?
That prodigies presag'd his race was run,
And this claim'd kindred to his patron god;
E'en so, great Wellington, my sons may sow thy sod.

"Source and receptacle of man, O earth!
I own thy kindred to my breathing dust;
From thee, I've drain'd existence from my birth;
To thee, my elements, return I must,
Unclaim'd by rebel monument or bust.
E'en he who boasts celestial lays his lyre on,
And moves the pensive soul with pleasing gust,
Shall lie with me, cold as my shovel's iron;
Yes, he, the mortal great immortal bard, Lord Byron.

"Brief to eternity's the longest span.
An insect flutters in the blaze of day,
And dies within the hour his life began.
The morning dew-drop sparkling on the spray
Ere noon mounts up to meet its parent ray.
Thus man th' aspiring spirit leaves to rot,
Though round his temples twine th' unfading bay.
Poets and poems too shall go to pot,
Coleridge, Wordsworth, Laureate Southey, and Sir Walter Scott.

"The varying seasons bring the various flower;
The with'ring tulip sees the lily bloom;
Successive blossoms fall in painted shower;
Successive roses fling the rich perfume;
But droop all flow'rets in the brumal gloom.
As once Anacreon, now Moore is love all;
Yet his sweet odes shall not avert his doom.
Pale Death will tap at palace and at hovel,"
He said, and spitting to his hands, shoved at his shovel.

"Herschell, that count'st the spangled canopy!
For thee the spirit of the midnight star
Did trim her pale lamp, glimm'ring in the sky,
Through darkling regions as she rolled her car.
Thou, that fortell'st when comets from afar
Shall seek our sun, and where they floating roam;
Mark'st wand'ring worlds in orbits regular,
And the fixt millions in the sparkling dome,
Thy name and orb shall shine: &mdash; thou, sink into the tomb.

"See unbought patriots abuse a bribe
(As knaves untempted spurn a luckier knave),
And stoutly curse the ministerial tribe.
Yet all their vaunted virtue shall not save
Them from the foul corruption of the grave.
E'en here the sacred dust of noble Hamond
May mix with ashes of the meanest slave;
And Hunt, though rotten C*stl*gh he d&mdash;n on,
Shall also rot.  All, saith the preacher, all is gammon.

"Glory!  thou glitt'ring phantom of the mind
That dost delude the good, the wise, the brave,
Thou art a bubble bouyant on the wind,
Transient as moon-beams on the glassy wave,
Or billows bursting on the shores, they lave.
'Vain pomp and glory of this world' &mdash; are trouble!
Such are the baubles then for which they rave.&mdash;
'Tis twelve o'clock:  my crock begins to bubble,"
He said, and, should'ring his tool, homewards began to hobble.
