The gentlest pair that ever roved the earth
Now low, but beautiful in death!  are laid;
Join'd by the ties which link'd them from their birth,
The luckless lover and the faithful maid&mdash;
When by unfeeling and false friends betray'd,
Found in a cloister's quiet cell their GOD&mdash;
To whom &mdash; together, though apart they pray'd,
Who led them in the pious path they trod,
And taught them thankfully to kiss the rod.

Ye dwellers in gay bow'rs and palace-halls!
See how the lamp that lit them to the tomb
Dispell'd the darkness of monastic walls&mdash;
Cheer'd all the chillness of their dungeon's gloom,
And, soften'd down their solitary doom:
When fond affections equal fondness meet,
No vain regrets can ever there find room;
The breast reposes on the thought, replete
With an assurance so sublime and sweet.

Their mutual passion was immortal, pure,
Never by mortal powers to be riven;
In that consoling confidence secure&mdash;
Resting their hopes of happiness on Heaven,
To them the fortitude was kindly given
To part asunder in their early youth&mdash;
To this last refuge by unkindness driven:
Affording instance of that oft-proved truth,
"The course of true love never yet ran smooth."

Their's was no common passion!  but a fine
Unearthly essence of ethereal love;
An emanation of that spark divine
In mercy shed upon us from above,
To purify our spirits &mdash; to remove
From out our natures every gross alloy,
And taint of human frailty, which might prove
A bar to the fruition of that joy,
Reserv'd for the beatified on high.

When on the fire that trembles through our frame
Religion sheds its heav'n-descended light&mdash;
Kindling within an hallow'd, holy flame,
Which fortune's breath can ne'er extinguish quite,
Then are our sympathies excited right&mdash;
Then, like this couple, may we smile at pain:
But, oh!  for two so starry and so bright
The world, alas!  may sigh full long in vain&mdash;
Scarce can such hearts exist on earth again.

They fled from out a crowd too cold &mdash; too wise
For souls untutor'd in its wiles &mdash; and rife
With aspirations of their kindred skies,
Cherish'd in solitude their life of life:
Oh!  happy they, to shun the ceaseless strife
They feel that in the ways of mankind tread!
Though wretched Abelard ne'er call'd her wife,
She sought his bosom in that narrow bed
Wherein the weary lay in peace their head.

Soft on their silent pillow let them rest&mdash;
Calm and unconscious of their slumber deep,
Until the trumpet which shall wake the blest
Summon them joyful from their dreamless sleep,
To bliss ordain'd for spotless saints, who weep
Out of much sorrow. &mdash; Ye!  whose tears deplore
Their adverse lot, remember still to keep
Your vows to Heav'n entire &mdash; that ye may soar,
Where Faith and Constancy shall mourn no more.
