Poor girl!  she seemed of an unearthly mould,
A thing superior to the frowns of fate;
But never did my tearful eyes behold
A maid so fair and so disconsolate;
Yet was she once a child of high estate,
And nurs'd in splendour, 'till an envious gloom
Sunk her beneath it's harsh o'erpowering weight,
Robb'd her pale features of their orient bloom,
And with a noiseless pace, mov'd onwards to the tomb.

She walk'd upon the earth as one who knew
The dread mysterious secrets of the grave;
For never o'er her eye of heavenly blue,
Lightened a smile; but like the ocean wave
That roars unblest with sunshine, through the cave
Rear'd in the depths of Coolann, she had flown
To endless grief for refuge; and would rave,
And tell to the night-winds her tale unknown;
Or, wander o'er the heath, deserted, and alone.

And when the rain beat hard against the hill,
And storms rush'd by upon their wing of power,
Lonely she'd stray beside the bubbling rill,
Or, fearless, list the deep voic'd cataract's roar;
And when the tempest's wrath was heard no more
She wander'd home the mountain sod to dress
With many a wreath, and many a summer flow'r,
And thus she liv'd, the sister of distress,
The solitude of love, nurs'd in the wilderness.

Of grief she was the child; earth, sea, sky,
Mountain, and cataract, fern-clad hill, and dale,
Possess'd a nameless charm in her young eye,
Pure and eternal:  for, in Deva's vale,
Her heart first listen'd to a lover's tale,
Breath'd by a mountain kerne; and every scene
That wanton'd blithly in the odorous gale,
Had oft beheld her lord's enamoured mien,
As tremblingly she sought each spot where he had been.

But she is gone!  the cold earth is her pillow,
And o'er her blooms the summer's sweetest flow'r;
And o'er her ashes weeps the grateful willow
She lov'd to cherish in a happier hour.
Mute is the voice that breath'd from Deva's bow'r,
Chill'd is the soul of the neglected rover;
We saw the death-cloud in destruction low'r
O'er her meek head: &mdash; The western waves roll'd over
The corse of him she lov'd, her own devoted lover.

But oft, when the faint sun is in the west,
And the hush'd gales along the ocean die,
Strange sounds re-echo from her place of rest,
And sink into the heart most tenderly.
The bird of evening hour &mdash; the humming bee,
And the wild music of the mountain rill,
Seem breathing sorrow, as they murmur by,
And whispering to the night, while all is still,
The tale of the poor girl &mdash; the "Lady of the Hill."
