I stood upon Platea's plain, where sleep
The brave who died two thousand years ago;
A few Sarcophogi, where lichens creep,
Tinting with many dyes the marble's snow,
Point out the sacred place: &mdash; the grass below,
And wild flow'rs pearled with dewy heads,
Unpress'd by mortal footstep, rankly grow;
And, all uncheck'd, the straggling bramble leads
His weary length across that wilderness of weeds.

Night mantled the lone scene, and a deep calm
Hung o'er its desolation, still as death:
So stangnant was the air, a slender palm,
A widow'd tree, sole on that lonely heath,
Stood motionless, like sculptur'd stone; no breath
To wake a sigh amidst her leafy plume,&mdash;
A crown funereal, that cast beneath
It mossless shadow on a fractur'd tomb,
Shrouding, as with a veil, the ruin in its gloom.

The ruins lay, upon the lonely waste, like wrecks
Floating unmasted in the moonlight beam
After a storm, that from their massive decks
Swept the bold crews.  The deeds they record seem
But the delusion of a splendid dream
That plays around the fancy and flits by;
Athwart a midnight sky, a twilight gleam;
A meteor blaze, that mocks the gazer's eye
With all its shining train and march of majesty.

And is it so?  Hath, then, the patriot host
Of godlike men, who fell upon that plain,
Died but to mingle with the dust?  Is lost
All memory of their deeds to Greece?  In vain
Proclaim these ruins, to her sons, the slain,
Stamp'd by the hand of slav'ry on her soil?
And, where their sires could pow'r supreme maintain,
Are doom'd their recreant sons to sweat and toil,
And for their pittance delve in trouble and turmoil.

Night mantled the lone scene; &mdash; the pale moon
Her silver crescent in the vault of sky,
And a chill light upon the ruins flung&mdash;
Their tombs who died for Greece!  Who would not die
To save his country?  Who, that could defy
The power of time to quench the living flame
That blazons deeds of worth, would basely fly
The hero's fate, forego the patriot's fame,
And barter for mere life eternity of name?
