Poets have sung of beauty, till the theme,
But for its infinite variety,
Would pall the hearer like an oft-told dream:
No charms have shone &mdash; of colour &mdash; symmetry&mdash;
That have so often been man's bliss to see;
Which pen and pencil have not tried to trace&mdash;
The eye in all its silent witchery!
The mighty magic of the perfect face&mdash;
And forms that lightly moved with every living grace.

Yet hath there o'er the mental vision past,
The more than earthly charms of shape and eye;
And have such fascination round them cast,
In life &mdash; to see &mdash; and lose them &mdash; were to die!
In vain the Poet's highest efforts try
To give to others' ken those forms reveal'd,
That burst on him in lightning, but defy
The pencilling of language &mdash; that must yield,
And leave perfection still to blaze in fancy's field.

And such was Eva!  form than hers more fair,
Ne'er floated in the golden flood of light:
Lips sweeter &mdash; lovelier &mdash; never breath'd the air;
Nor eyes so softly blue, and yet so bright,
Shed such intoxication on the sight:
Like diamonds in a limpid brook they seem'd,
Darting their colours through its veil of white;
And shining but the clearer as it stream'd:
So set in liquid light, her orbs of azure beam'd.

Yet it was not her lovely eye, that shone
Full, bright, and blue as heaven's unclouded sky&mdash;
'Twas not her angel countenance alone,
Nor any single charm that caught the eye,
Won where it thought to pass unsmitten by&mdash;
It was that harmonizing, perfect whole,
Which might with beauties cull'd from thousands vie;
That shed such full delight upon the soul,
And captive held the heart, spite of the will's controul.

And she was innocence itself!  her heart
Ne'er harbour'd one impure, unholy thought;
Her breast ne'er knew a wish &mdash; which to impart
Might force a blush across her cheek, nor aught
Beyond what vestal virtue might have taught:
Attuned to finest feeling, every nerve
With chastest sensibility was fraught;
Which in her warmest moments, did but serve
To guide her in the path from which she might not swerve.

Cold to herself, not others; she had been
Full oft' observ'd to shed the genuine tear,
When she had sought some sad and gloomy scene,
To sooth the pangs of sorrow or of fear:
She, with unenvying pleasure, thrill'd to hear
Of aught that made another's happiness:
The joy of others seem'd to her as dear
As that she found her own pure soul to bless,
The seat of feeling, truth, and angel loveliness.

It was her pleasure up the steep to climb,
When the gray morn led on the golden day
Over the eastern hills; to view sublime
The opening landscape, that ground her lay,
While the dim mists, slow melting, roll'd away:
To see the silver lake, the ceaseless stream,
Awaking in the dancing light to play;
While trembling dew-drops caught the glittering beam,
And seem'd upon the eye in fields of gems to gleam.

She sat in silent adoration there,
Till the unwearied sun was thron'd on high;
Breathing the fragrant and untainted air,
And feasting on the scene that fill'd her eye;
Where earth seem'd turn'd to gold beneath the sky;
Where every tint creation wears, appear'd
To robe the world, and her rich canopy:
Till lovely nature grew the more endear'd,
And through her beauteous works her Author more rever'd.

Where the thick wood hung darkly over head,
Till scarce a ray reliev'd the shadow'd ground;
Where tangled shrubs their mingled foliage spread,
And noontide twilight seem'd to reign around;
Lone in its deepest shades she might be found,
Tracing the charms of nature's hidden store,
That else had lived and died in that profound,
Ungather'd and unseen, but lov'd the more
For the retiring forms, and modest hues they wore.

None was more fond than she, when noon was shot,
To cull the fairest of the garden's pride;
The blushing beauties of each favor'd spot,
With every deep and soften'd colour dyed;
These, in a lovely, fragrant cluster tied,
She placed to decorate the lonely room
Where mourn'd her Father for his buried bride;
Who, smitten in perfection &mdash; pluck'd in bloom&mdash;
Was wrested from his arms, an offering to the tomb.

Eva had many a deep and burning thought,
Within her glowing, half-enthusiast mind:
With that wild, energetic fervour, fraught,
That few would think in form so fair to find!
They were not light, nor fleeting, but divined
The mysteries that common souls glide o'er;
Profoundest truths, of deep and awful kind&mdash;
The wonders of created things &mdash; the lore
Of nature, 'midst her vast and inexhaustless store.

Though few can see with apathy of eye,
Th' expanse of stars that roof the arch of night
None e'er contemplated the scene on high,
With vaster thoughts arising from the sight!
She saw not merely glittering gems of light&mdash;
But worlds, that in illimitable space
Roll'd their unerring round in ceaseless flight
And suns, whose planets ne'er reveal'd their place,
Whose beings and whose scenes, her fancy burn'd to trace.

And most she loved to stray, when Dian's beam
Pour'd down in soften'd light &mdash; in some deep glen
To sit, and see her silver arrows stream
Betwixt the whispering foliage, that then
Waved o'er her, happy that no vulgar ken
Beheld her transports, that no mortal ear
O'erheard her self-communion, which dull men
Had folly deem'd; and blest to think the tear
She shed in rapture, fell, and dried where none were near.

And often in that solitude were heard
Melodious sounds, that through night's shadows rung&mdash;
(The wond'ring listener stopp'd &mdash; nor breath'd, nor stirr'd&mdash;
But stood all ear, as if some seraph sung;
And round his sweetly trembling echoes flung&mdash;)
Rising from out that depth in harmony,
As fabled Sirens erst, with magic tongue,
Pour'd their bewitching music o'er the sea&mdash;
Hers shed as much delight, but left no misery.

But there was sorrow when its dying tone
Expired, as if some joyous dream were o'er;
The listener felt abandon'd and alone,
Like one left lonely on a desert shore;
But still he linger'd, hoping it might pour
Again its soul inspiring music round;
Praying to hear that heavenly strain once more;
Trembling in sweetness, till the full, rich sound,
Th' intoxicated sense in spell of magic bound.

Nought is so sweet as music heard at night,
After the tumult of the toiling day
When the eye scarcely feels the loss of light,
Nor marks the western twilight's setting ray:
It seems to draw the barb of grief away;
Leaving the thrill of happiness behind;
And proves one sense alone, in joyous play,
Hath power to tranquillize and bless the mind,
Rapt, as if all the rest were in that one combin'd.

Near where her Father's rural mansion stood,
(Screen'd by a hill and half embower'd in trees&mdash;)
Hung o'er a glassy lake's expanding flood,
A Castle's ruins caught the murmuring breeze:
In its drear chambers fancied fears might seize
The starting form that traced their shadowy gloom.
Few found in its dark grandeur aught to please;
But in its caverns saw the living tomb,
Where met the prison'd wretch his swift or lingering doom.

In lonely desolation frowning high,
Above the vale so vast a shade it spread,
It might be deem'd a cloud hung o'er the sky,
To intercept the light that morning shed:
More awful in its solitude, its head
Was veil'd in clouds that damp'd it as they past:
'Twas view'd by passing peasants with that dread
The fearful tales of bygone centuries cast;
Till groans in fancy's ear seem'd mingling with the blast.

Though it was founded on the granite rock&mdash;
Not ev'n that rock itself resists decay&mdash;
Though age had turn'd its walls to flint; the shock
Of elements was wasting them away!
Time stole unseen its fragments day by day;
Exposed to all, the warring winds of heaven,
And beating rain; of fiercest storms the prey,
That full against its battlements were driven;
Their ceaseless efforts wore what thunder scarce had riven.

Though half in wreck, enough was left to tell
What in its day of pride that pile had been;
In ruin terrible, it spoke too well
Of many a wild, and dark, and cruel scene;
When murder stalk'd its prison walls between:
Its deep and massy dungeons seem'd to speak
The deeds of slaughter &mdash; they were formed to screen;
Whose arches rung with many a desperate shriek;
When dying victims bore all tyrant hate could wreak.

Yes!  they might shriek &mdash; but through those flinty walls
Of sorrow or of madness past no sound;
The writhing sufferer's agonizing calls
Burst unavailing in that dread profound;
Their life's last drop might stiffen on that ground,
Yet redden not on man's attesting eye
Their bones might whiten where they fell around,
Nor flash one proof of crime but to the, sky&mdash;
Unseen &mdash; untomb'd &mdash; unpitied &mdash; unarranged to lie!

Such hath it ever been since life began,
That man of his own race hath been the foe;
With ruffian violence, or wily plan,
To wring, to trample, and to lay him low;
To force his groans to burst, his tears to flow&mdash;
And but that some have liv'd who would not swell,
But mitigate, the other's work of woe&mdash;
This world, where such remorseless beings dwell,
Had been a den of guilt, and less like earth than hell.

Eva's was all the spirit of romance;
She often toil'd that Castle's steep ascent;
And traced, in fancy, glittering sword and lance
Gleam through its courts, as once, when loud shouts rent
Its echoing walls, with clashing weapons blent:
The tramp of war, the clattering of arms
The wrath of its besiegers, idly spent;
The marshalling of bands; the loud alarms;
Successive past her mind, in fancy's magic charms:

The gorgeous pastime and high festival
The banquet scene of desperate revelry,
That shook the armour-decorated hall;
The friendly fierceness of proud chivalry;
The roar of half intoxicated glee,
When lord and vassal mingled at the board&mdash;
While minstrels woke the chords of harmony;
When all that joy could ask, or power afford,
Was spread &mdash; nor scarce was spar'd the war-devoted hoard.

But now there was no sound of living thing;
Save when the night-bird, startled from her sleep,
Toil'd through the gloom, with heavy flapping wing,
Breaking with moans the silence dread and deep,
That seem'd its breathless empire there to keep:
Nor voice, nor tread, proclaim'd that life was there;
The eye that loved the haunts of man, might weep
To see the desolation and despair,
That reign'd betwixt those walls; damp, tenantless, and bare.

There she embodied those dark histories
In childhood often heard with wond'ring ear,
As present seen &mdash; living realities&mdash;
Saw them as passing &mdash; but devoid of fear:
Treading its galleries, long, dark, and drear;
She seem'd to share the deeds of days gone by;
She gave each fancied sufferer the tear;
For long departed captives breath'd the sigh;
As rapt in musings deep, each figure fill'd her eye.

Each passage &mdash; chamber &mdash; dungeon &mdash; as she past,
Her tread in hollow echoes flung around;
But in the midnight shadows that they cast,
No form to wake one throb of dread she found;
She fear'd no spectre, gliding without sound&mdash;
'Twas the romantic feeling that arose
From that wild scene, to make the pulses bound,
The spirit thrill &mdash; it was for this she chose
In fancy to revive its grandeur and its woes.

She did not shudder when in hollow moans
The wind rush'd howling through those avenues;
Rising and sinking, like expiring groans,
That well in weaker minds might fear infuse;
Yet did but o'er her ardent mind diffuse
A wild and awful thrill &mdash; intense delight
Rose from its loneliness and solemn hues!
Perchance it raised her fancy to a height
Unsafe to wing, because it veil'd life's truths from sight.

But none can tell, who know not such high feeling,
The secret joys of such wild solitude;
What undefinable sensations stealing,
Entrance the mind in that romantic mood:
When thoughts are cherish'd, and when scenes are view'd,
That own no tie to earth, nor life can show;
When every grov'ling passion sinks subdued;
When the soul seems to snap its chain below
Rapt in the extacies that none but such can know.

There was at home one sacred &mdash; little spot,
Eva most idolized, and oftenest sought:
No day unvisited &mdash; no hour forgot&mdash;
Where in the garden's deepest shade was wrought
A Mother's monument; to which she brought
The fairest of that garden's flowers, to strew
Around the urn.  With pious sorrow fraught;
The tears she shed refresh'd them like the dew,
While many a bitter thought across her bosom flew.

Those thoughts she loved to cherish, though they sent
A feeling of bereavement through her soul:
She lov'd to' rouse that sorrow, though it rent;
And once awaken'd, spurn'd the will's controul:
Though but to see that spot was woe &mdash; she stole
To ponder there, as 'twere a place of rest;
Whose sight, instead of wounding, might console!
Lean'd on it as it were a mother's breast&mdash;
View'd it as though her eye that mother's form possess'd.

It was possess'd &mdash; as if that stone had breath,
She there felt not alone:  that cherish'd form
Floated around the urn that spoke her death,
As if the very marble seem'd to warm
Beneath her gaze &mdash; as though she could transform
To breathing life that sculptur'd shape of woe!
As if recover'd from the feasting worm,
The buried started forth again to glow;
Past tenderness, and faith and loveliness, to show.

And every tree of dark and mournful hue
Hung over it &mdash; the cypress cast its shade;
Above it waved the melancholy yew,
As if its foliage there a pall had made;
The drooping willow by its side display'd
Its pendant branches, as in sorrow hung;
Behind its lonely seat, a dark stream stray'd
The deeply rooted trees and shrubs among:
Amidst whose leaves the wind its plaintive murmurs flung.

'Twas evening &mdash; all around was soft, serene;
No breath among the branches seem'd to play;
Not ev'n a leaf was moving in the scene;
The Sun was sinking gorgeously away,
And crimson curtains veil'd the close of day:
The golden clouds that slumber'd in the sky,
Stretch'd out like ocean's waves in bright array;
Edg'd with the lingering rays that glanc'd from high,
Over the western hills, to gild them to the eye.

The lake was still; not ev'n a dimple past
Across its surface, where reflected seem'd
Another world to lie, as two were cast
From out one mould, so perfectly it gleam'd:
There the trees spread their branches, and there stream'd
The many-colour'd clouds, as bright &mdash; as fair;
Another setting sun as redly beam'd;
Cot shone, and mountain threw its shadow there,
As motionless as those that rais'd their tops in air.

'Twas evening &mdash; she was leaning on that tomb,
Pond'ring a mother's look &mdash; a mother's love!
An eye was turn'd upon her through the gloom,
Whose glance might well the strongest feelings move&mdash;
She started &mdash; strain'd her eye towards th' alcove
That hid the mystic form that look who sent&mdash;
'Twas gone &mdash; there past a sigh &mdash; in vain she strove
To see its utterer &mdash; deep'ning twilight lent
No ray to mark his form, nor trace the path he went.

What did he there?  approach'd he as a spy
Upon her lonely, meditating hour?
Or was it rather with arrested eye
He fascinated hung on beauty's power;
And sought unfear'd, unwitness'd, to devour
The charms which bloom'd in that sequester'd place;
To gaze in secret on that guarded flower;
The beauty of its tint and form to trace;
And worship, (though unseen,) its pure and matchless grace.

She left that spot &mdash; nor was it all in fear;
She turn'd &mdash; and turn'd again, with searching eye&mdash;
Her father greeted &mdash; but her absent ear
Heard but the fancied echo of that sigh;
That glance of fascination still was nigh;
'Twas in her dreams in all its mystery;
She scarce would chase it &mdash; and it did not fly&mdash;
Who might that gazer &mdash; what his purpose be?
Who, spite of better thoughts, had work'd this witchery.

'Twas the first time that ever living form
Had rais'd within her bosom such emotion;
'Twas the first time that eye could e'er so warm
Her heart, or rouse her thoughts to such commotion;
Now restless as the waves of troubled ocean&mdash;
'Twas the first time she ever felt within
The spirit's earthly object of devotion&mdash;
And if such worship be a fault &mdash; a sin&mdash;
O who way ever hope a future heaven to win!

That eye had such inscrutable expression
As language could define not &mdash; but 'twas felt
At heart beyond the power of repression;
Where it but once had lighted, there it dwelt,
Until the coldest feelings seem'd to melt
Beneath its penetrating influence;
Till soften'd and subdued the victim knelt,
Resigning every thought, and every sense,
To that new tyrant power it could not banish thence.

Though it might be that dim and dubious light
In which she saw it, clothed it with a power
It had not own'd if blazing on the sight
In noon's transcendent, all-displaying hour&mdash;
But no &mdash; the night might darken &mdash; morning lour&mdash;
Its light was in itself, nor e'er could fail:
'Twould flash amidst the tempest and the shower;
No time could dim it, and no shadows veil,
From one whose spell-bound soul it purpos'd to assail.

Morn found her on that spot again &mdash; but why
She scarcely knew &mdash; it was not that she sought
That stranger form &mdash; she was too pure and high,
To cherish so unfeminine a thought&mdash;
But there she was; and now that place seem'd fraught
With an increased, unusual interest;
As if her soul new inspiration caught
From thence, which glowing, thrilling in her breast
Prov'd something still might be to doom her curst or blest.

He was not there &mdash; but on the ground there lay
A picture &mdash; dropt by chance, or left to tell
Who had been there &mdash; and that she might survey
Its features, till they work'd into a spell&mdash;
She grasp'd it breathlessly &mdash; she knew full well
Th' expressive eye she view'd but to adore!
Though seen but once, yet ever more to dwell
In fancy and remembrance, till it wore
All feelings, thoughts, away, that cherish'd were before.

She gazed &mdash; till line and lineament devour'd,
Sunk like a honey'd poison in her soul&mdash;
Till reason fail'd, bewilder'd and o'erpower'd;
And treacherous intoxication stole
Through every sense, defying all controul.
She ponder'd on that eye's bewitching beam;
That manly cheek; that fascinating whole,
Till her half-conscious reveries might seem
The wonder-working sport of some romantic dream.

How long she gazed &mdash; herself alone might know;
How oft she started, lest some eye the while
Might fancy in her features love's warm glow,
None else could say &mdash; It was not that her smile&mdash;
Her blush &mdash; she deem'd were aught that could defile
Her soul, or stain its virgin purity;
But pride might slander &mdash; prudery revile&mdash;
Her bosom told her there was extacy;
Which, since none else could judge &mdash; she would none else should see.

But such is woman!  mystery at best
Seeming most cold when most her heart is burning&mdash;
Hiding the melting passions of her breast
Beneath a snowy cloud, and scarce returning
One glance on him, for whom her soul is yearning:
Adoring, yet repelling &mdash; proud, but weak&mdash;
Conquer'd &mdash; commanding still; enslav'd &mdash; yet spurning:
Checking the words her heart would bid her speak;
Love raging in her breast, but banish'd from her cheek.

He who would read her thoughts, must mark unseen
Her eyes' full, undisguised expression; trace&mdash;
(If trace he could, while distance stretch'd between)&mdash;
The feelings blushing, quivering, on her face:
He who would know her heart, must first embrace,
And feel it beat uncheck'd against his own;
Chill'd not by pride, nor fear; nor time, nor place
As in a dream &mdash; unwitness'd and alone;
When every fearful thought unconsciously has flown.

That picture, now the partner of her walk,
She gazed on, till its features seem'd to move&mdash;
Until its pencill'd lips appear'd to talk,
And its eyes beam the speaking looks of love;
Whether in sunshine, or the twilight grove&mdash;
Not now, as once, alone she seem'd to stray;
However far her wand'ring feet might rove,
He still was there, the sharer of her day;
As though a living form beneath that image lay.

But what is all the pencil's power to trace,
With all the lustre colour can bestow,
The workings of the soul that light the face&mdash;
The changing passions &mdash; these it cannot show&mdash;
Nor aught but the same form of joy or woe;
The shape, the hue of feature, may be there&mdash;
It is but death vermilion'd!  cheeks may glow,
But ne'er turn pale; there lacks the speaking air&mdash;
The transient smile and tear &mdash; th' alternate hope &mdash; despair.

Sad through the ruins sigh'd the evening wind;
Eva sat listening to its plaintive moan:
A pleasing melancholy thrill'd her mind:
She deem'd &mdash; but scarcely felt herself alone&mdash;
Sudden there stole upon her ear the tone
Of distant harmony!  That place before
To her ne'er echo'd utterance but her own:
In all her visits she ne'er found it bore
One other soul, the strain of joy or grief to pour.

She started, wondering whose that voice might be,
That broke the silence with so sweet a sound&mdash;
Whether it were some spirit's minstrelsy;
Or warblings of a soul that sought and found
Peace &mdash; safety &mdash; in the solitude around:
Some spirit that the world had wrung to madness&mdash;
Some heart, that man had trampled to the ground;
That sought unheard, unseen, to vent its sadness
Hoping in secrecy to find some gleam of gladness.

Now dying distant, and now swelling near;
Its sound among the hollow arches hung&mdash;
Before one note expir'd upon the ear,
Another, following its echoes, flung
Its mingling strain, as though two voices sung:
Now full, and strong, its utterer might be deem'd
Some bard inspired &mdash; and now so sweet it rung&mdash;
Softer than woman's softest tone it seem'd,
As with the very soul of harmony it teem'd.

It drew her near it with unconscious tread&mdash;
She knew no evil, and she fear'd no ill;
Yet trod as if a sound might wake the dead;
Intent upon those melting strains, that still
Seem'd not th' ear only, but the soul to fill;
Till near enough to see, her eye beheld
A form that caused her panting heart to thrill&mdash;
She gazed till extacy her bosom swell'd;
And rising passion, spite of sense and will, rebell'd.

She saw a form of more than manly grace;
Perfect in symmetry of shape and limb;
Winning &mdash; but nothing feminine, that face
On which she look'd till sight grew almost dim,
And her bewilder'd senses seem'd to swim&mdash;
That form &mdash; that air &mdash; she could not doubt 'twas he!
She saw &mdash; she felt &mdash; at last she gazed on him,
Whose image she had ponder'd secretly;
When she scarce thought or wish'd his living self to see.

The light stream'd on him from a space above;
The glow of evening on his features fell;
His eye &mdash; his countenance &mdash; were form'd for love:
The scene &mdash; the hour &mdash; conspired to work the spell,
That drew its circle round her heart too well.
She caught the words that warbled in his song;
Whose tone and accent seem'd at once to tell
Some inly-cherish'd passion, deep and strong,
Which bore thought, feeling, all &mdash; tumultuously along.

As a rose in the desert that blooms almost lost,
As a jewel that fate had been kind to conceal;
I have look'd on the lovely one &mdash; gazed to my cost;
But cannot, and dare not, affection reveal;
Though my soul in a whirlwind of passion is tost,
She knows not the pangs she has caused me to feel.

As nothing that nature hath form'd can compare
with the bloom of her cheek, and the light of her eye&mdash;
As another ne'er flourish'd so perfectly fair;
Nor can scarcely be hoped as a boon from the sky&mdash;
So no tempest can equal my depth of despair;
Though it blacken below, and roll thunder on high.

Though I saw her but once &mdash; 'twas enough to impart,
In the hope of her love, the intenseness of joy;
A moment were even too much for the heart,
To endure the despair that must quickly destroy&mdash;
Yet that one deep impression can never depart,
But my soul must in bliss or in anguish employ.

Though ceas'd the strain; yet still did Eva seem
Its past bewitching harmony to feel;
Like the sweet memory of some pleasing dream.
He cross'd her path &mdash; as lightning turns to steel
Their glances met; but what they might reveal&mdash;
Who could unfold &mdash; since man doth oft' assume
Passions he feels not &mdash; woman her's conceal;
So much, that lovers scarcely know their doom;
Whether the bridal wreath, or passion's early tomb.

They met &mdash; but past not unregarding by&mdash;
They met &mdash; but not like strangers, though unknown&mdash;
Their introduction was the speaking eye&mdash;
A welcome greeted in the look alone;
Where mute surprize and pleasure mingled shone&mdash;
Needless are words when souls congenial meet;
If no disguise be o'er the features thrown,
The face with eloquence is so replete,
That speech could little more than what it told repeat.

At times 'twould seem as if the judgment sate
In wisdom thron'd within the searching eye;
Whose intuition dooms if love or hate
Should be the meed of him who passeth by:
As inspiration lent its power to try
His heart &mdash; as if it lay exposed and bare
While every thought, wish, feeling &mdash; seem to lie
Unveil'd before those piercing glances there;
Which he so judg'd might deem were hid with closest care.

And O!  though falsehood may at times deceive&mdash;
Oft' is that instantaneous sentence right!
Though passion, wilful &mdash; blind &mdash; will scarce believe
The fiat that the soul proclaims at sight,
But turns from day, and is betray'd by night;
Till time dissolves the mist, and truth relumes
Her radiant torch, and reigns enthron'd in light
Pierces the mask hypocrisy assumes,
And hideous, naked vice, to scorn and loathing dooms.

One look alone had beam'd &mdash; and they were friends&mdash;
Half lovers at the second &mdash; from their eyes
Flash'd the pure, bright intelligence, that tends
To show, or win a soul &mdash; the sympathies
That light the face, uncurtain'd by disguise;
When the heart's secret, on the changing cheek,
To him who bears a brow as open, lies&mdash;
The quivering lip, though silent, still may speak;
When words are wanted not &mdash; or if they came, were weak!

He walk'd beside her to her father's door;
There breath'd, as from his soul, a soft good-night.
The ground had ne'er seem'd passed so soon before&mdash;
She never felt so much the loss of light,
For now the darkness veil'd him from her sight,
Though his slow sounding steps still reach'd her ear.
She had not check'd him like a prude &mdash; nor quite
Indulged him with a smile; but free from fear,
In conscious innocence, reck'd not what eyes were near.

The child of nature, what she felt she show'd,
As far as female purity may do;
Her glances froze not when her bosom glow'd&mdash;
When joy was in her heart, her features too
Smiled; and her, eyes display'd a brighter blue;
What she might blush to look, she fear'd to feel:
Nothing like those, who, thoughts of darkest hue
Forbid the struggling visage to reveal&mdash;
But in a living mask their infamy conceal:

Yet these at times forget disguise &mdash; the heart
Will force despite its blackness on the face;
Nor, does th' unwelcome cloud at will depart;
Some demon passion will too often trace
Its furious passage o'er that treacherous place,
And flash unbidden lightnings from the eye!
In spite of guile, thoughts &mdash; feelings &mdash; fierce and base,
To the betraying countenance will fly;
As sudden storms arise, and sweep the placid sky.

And Leon, (such the name he bore,) was one
Might soon attune to love a woman's soul;
He vanquish'd ere his purpose seem'd begun;
So silently into the mind he stole&mdash;
Fixing his empire there above controul;
So imperceptibly he won his way
Into the heart, whose conquest was his goal
Which, e'er it fear'd his power, confess'd his sway;
And found him rooted there, to bless or to betray.

The next day saw him at her father's board,
To whom his name, his lineage, once was known:
Next evening by her side with joy he pour'd
The rapture in his kindling face that shone&mdash;
He seem'd awake to love, and love alone;
The magnet of his eye was Eva's face;
His ear seem'd closed to all but Eva's tone;
As with insatiate sight he gazed to trace
Uncloying loveliness, and still increasing grace.

Romantic bosoms soonest feel the power
Of love, and feel it at its fiercest height;
While weaker spirits plod their dull, cold hour:
The highest trees are soonest topp'd with light&mdash;
Are first to meet the tempest in its flight&mdash;
And fall, wrench'd, crush'd, and levell'd by the blast&mdash;
While the low shrub, that scarcely meets the sight,
Survives, to flourish when the storm is past;
Above whose bending head its wrath was idly cast.

The widest ocean rolls the vastest waves&mdash;
The deepest sea is last to sink to rest&mdash;
So when in man the storm of passion raves,
Its wildest throb is in the mightiest breast;
There soonest blazes, and is last represt!
The depth of feeling, and the range of thought&mdash;
Th' omnipotence of spirit &mdash; is imprest
On all it shows; whether with rapture fraught,
Or in its bursting rage to maniac fury wrought.

But 'tis not every face, nor eye, can move,
(However fair &mdash; however bright they be&mdash;)
Beings of that superior stamp to love!
Such seek a spirit of like energy;
From plodding thoughts, and earthborn feelings free!
No face they worship where they do not find&mdash;
No eye admire in which they do not see&mdash;
The path of thought, the lightning of the mind;
Whose vivid impress leaves form, colour, far behind.

When beings of that favor'd order meet,
Both flourishing in youth and loveliness;
When, not the tongue, but souls that kindle, greet&mdash;
Looking what language never could express&mdash;
'Tis then that love must madden or must bless!
'Tis there that passion lights its fiercest fire&mdash;
Burns equal to the spirit's mightiness!
While every feeling, sense, and thought, conspire
To feed that master flame &mdash; that one intense desire.

Such souls were their's &mdash; though both forbore to speak,
Each saw in each the simultaneous thought
Eye answer'd eye, and cheek replied to cheek,
As both at once the same idea caught;
As their two forms were with one spirit fraught&mdash;
Whether they turn'd on earth the wond'ring eye,
Or, to enthusiastic fervor wrought,
When Dian lit her silver lamp on high,
Peopled the glittering orbs that gemm'd the trackless sky.

His mind was strength and brilliance &mdash; her's the sweet,
The soften'd lustre of a milder light;
He, like the noontide sun, whose blaze and heat
Spreads fiercely when no cloud obscures the sight;
Shone out in all the force of mental might&mdash;
She beam'd the beauties of his evening ray,
When clouds of gold and crimson herald night&mdash;
His was the fulness of the perfect day&mdash;
Her's was its beauteous blush, before it sinks away.

To every eye the moonlight scene is sweet,
But most of all to lovers when they stray;
Yielding just light enough to guide their feet,
But not for prying eyes to watch their way&mdash;
Sufficient to unfold the smiles that play,
Through its transparent gauze, on beauty's face;
Showing the features soften'd by its ray:
It not denies the eye their charms to trace,
But o'er their lustre sheds a milder, softer grace.

The triumph then is that of form alone,
When bank &mdash; tree &mdash; hill &mdash; display their outline fair;
When colours, lost, or blended all in one,
Scarce leave the eye a wish to find them there&mdash;
All things are figur'd in the pale blue air;
Though nothing can a dazzling brightness show;
The dancing waters shine, but do not glare;
The cheek is lovely, though it does not glow,
And eyes that flash at noon, there silver glances throw.

Pure is the joy at such an hour to rove;
Whether it be to breathe in Beauty's ear
The murmuring whispers of accepted love;
Or with a friend, firm, ardent, and sincere;
When souls congenial know each other dear&mdash;
The mind oft' wakes at the approach of night
As if it strove its lustre should appear,
(When earthly objects darken on the sight,)
To pierce its deep'ning shades with inly-kindled light.

And Eva's days past swiftly as a dream,
When health has tuned the pulse to joyous play;
The rapid flight of time did scarcely seem
To wait the dawn &mdash; the noon &mdash; the close of day&mdash;
But sped, as in a meteor flash, away&mdash;
As bright &mdash; as transient &mdash; as the bliss it brought!
Hours swiftest fly from those who wish their stay;
And linger longest where their boon is nought
But grief, despair, and pain; and ever-wearing thought.

Who never loved, hath lost earth's highest bliss&mdash;
Who never felt its thrill &mdash; its sting &mdash; can know
Nothing of that where life's chief pleasure is!
The brightest days that man enjoys below,
Are those that pass in its inspiring glow;
When new sensations seem to wake the soul
As to a second being &mdash; to bestow
Thoughts, feelings, hopes, that bound beyond controul;
And show in this dark world, at least one joyous goal.

What though it may at times the bosom wring&mdash;
There is a rapture even in its pain!
What though it leave a deep, and burning sting&mdash;
The wounded heart will wake to joy again;
As hope &mdash; despair &mdash; alternate rule maintain:
A bitter pleasure mingles with the sigh,
The breather would not, if he could, restrain&mdash;
And ev'n the tear that rushes to the eye,
Comes a half-welcome guest, that soothes while trickling by.

Where is the lover would his pangs forego?
What doating heart craves unimpassion'd peace?
Who loves the cause of sorrow &mdash; clasps the woe&mdash;
Nor scarce would wish the frequent sigh should cease;
Nor from such willing thraldom ask release:
When he, perchance, might draw th' envenom'd dart,
He leaves it rankling, though his pangs increase;
Until the festring wound, and burning smart,
Corrode the springs of life, and waste away the heart.

And what is reason, when oppos'd to love?
What though the object might be justly spurn'd,
As shorn of truth or virtue &mdash; nought can move
The heart that doats; crimes &mdash; follies &mdash; not discern'd,
Or heeded not &mdash; affection not return'd&mdash;
Nothing can shake its madness from the mind!
For this ambition, that for empire burn'd,
Hath lost a throne; to shame &mdash; destruction &mdash; blind!
Friends &mdash; country &mdash; home &mdash; all good, it leaves despised behind.

Eva had named the day to make them one&mdash;
If more united they could ever be,
Whose souls to mingle had at first begun;
Whose feelings seem'd to move in unity:
She show'd in her silent looks; and he
Breath'd it in all the eloquence of speech&mdash;
Time roll'd to stamp unceasing constancy;
Each seem'd to live to prove the joy of each
Secure as if no shaft of ill their hearts could reach.

