The Slave!  Hark!  now I hear the sounding lash,
Far louder than his agonizing cries:
As, from the scourge, gash after ghastly gash,
Spills his hot blood beneath the burning skies.
Lo, lo, he dies!  the shrieking victim dies!
Slain by his master's merciless command!
See where in dust his quivering body lies,
Whilst o'er him still his slaughterer doth stand,
And from his mangled corse scarce stays his bloody hand.

Driven from the world, he scarce can find a grave;
Unless, by night some trembling comrade steals,
To where yon rocks o'erlook the cavern'd wave,
And there his brother's gory frame conceals&mdash;
Awake!  awake!  The Negro's blood appeals
To Heaven and Earth, for vengeance on the head
Of him, whose heart no indignation feels
When thus that blood by Power's red hand is shed:
Whose every drop still lives, a witness for the dead!

I heard the Negro, on his couch of straw,
When rankling wounds denied his eyelids sleep:
I heard him ask, by what unrighteous law
The oppressor bore him o'er the billowy deep,
And left him in a foreign land to weep?
No friend was near to lend his soul relief;
Moaning he lay, condemned alone to keep,
The midnight vigils of consuming grief;
Driven to the dreadful hope, that life might prove but brief.

He looked in anguish for the lingering morn
To call him to his toils as heretofore;
And oft he cursed the moment he was born,
And oft, despairing, named his native shore,
And the loved scenes he must behold no more;
And thought upon the golden hills and plains,
That all the year their summer garments wore;
Where the wild birds still sung their mellow strains,
Sipping the sparkling dew, which Heaven at evening rains.

There had his savage youth been thoughtless spent,
Free as the wild beasts of his favourite chase,
When over Afric's pathless plains he went,
Join'd with the warriors of his sable race.
There had he learn'd with them the steps to trace
Of the large lion, on his den-bound way;
Fearless to rouse him from his dreadful place,
And hold the angry forest king at bay,
Till, fall'n beneath his spear, the dying monarch lay.

Oft in the even, when the sun was set,
And the fair-featured moon walked on her way,
These roving children of the desert met
Round their rude huts, to dance till dawning day!
And there he oft, with spirits light and gay,
Mingled, delighted with the mirthful band;
Or sought, with one he lov'd, in peace to stray,
Hard by some stream, or near the wave-washed strand;
Where they might rest unseen, or wander hand in hand.

Know ye the power of music-breathing love&mdash;
How it doth make the human heart to glow;
Kindling desires that fain would soar above
To purer scenes, no change or end to know?
Behold, it is the same with all below,
Whether its heaven-born influence be known
In the cold regions of uncheerful snow,
Or on the hot plains of the torrid zone&mdash;
By Negro in his hut, or Prince upon his throne!

There was a cry heard of distress and fear,
And his wild people saw him not again;
The Man-hunter's infernal crew drew near,
And bore him, pinion'd, o'er the moon-lit main:
There, as he floated on the briny plain,
And to his early love his young heart clung,
Loudly he raved, but raved, alas!  in vain;
For they, who on their prey like beasts had sprung,
Cared not with how sore pain his sever'd soul was wrung.

He lay in torture on the vessel's prow,
Looking upon the fast receding shore;
The sweat-drops standing on his swollen brow,
By mental anguish, forced from every pore;
He heard the loud dash of the seaman's oar,
The moaning of the glittering waves around&mdash;
He heard, or thought he heard, a voice implore
Her lover's help, and started at the sound,
Then rais'd a fearful shriek, to find his limbs fast bound.

Oh, Nature!  strong art thou in every breast,
Binding the heart to earth with countless ties;
And the dark Slave, by cruel bands opprest,
Reveals thy power beneath the Indian skies!
Long, long it must be, ere remembrance dies,
Of home-bound pleasures, howsoever rude;
And dire the struggle, witness'd by his cries,
Before his free-born feelings are subdued&mdash;
Ere, crush'd by strong despair, they never more intrude!

He died away into delirious sleep,
And dream'd that to the maid's relief he flew;
And when he woke, far o'er the widening deep
He found he had been carried by the crew.
Strange scenes he now was called upon to view,
Down in a slave-ship's suffocating hold;
Where fiery fevers their scorch'd victims slew,
Alike the ungrown youth and warrior bold;
Whilst living, dying, dead, in rank confusion roll'd.

He saw the conflict of all passions there,
With the black train of life-consuming woes&mdash;
Fury and fear, and multiform despair;
Curses and screams, and agonizing throes!
Some calling loud for vengeance on their foes;
Others more deeply moaning their dread doom,
Praying that Death's lean hand might interpose,
To snatch them from a worse than living tomb;
That in unfathom'd graves their bodies might consume.

Daily the sea devoured the envied dead,
Into her jaws without contrition thrown:
And some were given her, ere life had fled,
And from her trembling seat the soul had flown:
These heavily sunk, with one convulsive groan,
Into the cavern of the deep profound;
Whilst bubbling billows for a while made known
The place wherein those dying men were drown'd&mdash;
But soon these swept away, and silence reign'd around.

Without was peace; but war within prevail'd&mdash;
The strife of spirits struggling with despair!
For threats, and oaths, and torturing scourges, fail'd,
Silence to claim midst those assembled there:
They were oppress'd beyond what men may bear;
And, driven to madness, death itself defied&mdash;
They even longed the hopeless end to share,
Of those whose blood the murderer's hand had dyed,
And disappointment felt, this hideous boon denied.

There were death-shouts, and ceaseless cries for water;
Now fainter heard, now stronger, as at first;
Most like the tumult on a field of slaughter,
Where rampant Death is dared to do his worst,
And, in new blood, to slake his endless thirst.
The angered ship-men knit their swarthy brows,
And in amongst their cargo oft-time burst,
Striving their suffering victims to arouse,
With threats of deadly hue, and blows, and vengeful vows.

All was in vain:  as if a man should go,
Into a lazar-house, devoid of skill,
And seek by wounds to heal a madman's woe;
Or with hard words a vacant heart to fill!
All was in vain; the slaves remained still,
By anguish arm'd, of Death the least afraid:
With ardour, which the hottest rage might chill,
They dar'd the drawn sword's sharp and shining blade,
And curs'd the gain-bound hand, the lifted steel that stay'd.

At length the Negro, thus for weeks immured,
Beheld the light, and breathed the air again;
Not to exult in liberty secured,
So long denied him on the pathless main;
On shore he looked for mortal friend in vain;
The multitude unpitying pass'd him by,
Without one kindly glance to soothe his pain,
Or care to listen to his deep-breath'd sigh&mdash;
None bade him lift his soul and look for help on high.

Amidst his fellow-men unown'd he stood,
Like a scathed sapling, by the sun unblest,
Whose beams erst cheer'd his early solitude:
But he had been so long a dungeon's guest,
That now the light of heaven his eye opprest,
And pain'd his dazzling sight; scarce could he bear
The brilliancy of day, and his stiff breast,
Expanded by the fresh and beauteous air,
Ached, as if from their bones, the tendons parting were.

But still it was a change from what had been,
Since his afflicting bondage was begun;
Here was an altered, though a bitter scene,
And a black change is better borne than none,
Where there are soul-consuming woes to shun,
And pains and tortures, hard to be sustain'd
By Nature, when her sternest mood is won!
And thus this captive's grief was half restrain'd,
When the vile place of sale, his shackled feet had gain'd.

One son of pride, by wealth, not worth, made proud,
The price demanded for his body, paid;
But, as he led him through the heartless crowd,
The sullen Negro saw his captive maid!
Then first his soul its native fire display'd,
And in the rage of love he burst away;
But fetter'd soon, and from all hope convey'd,
Down in the dust in blank despair he lay,
Until his owner came with whips the wretch to flay.

Is Slavery the child of Time, or did it spring
Among the rebel bands from heaven that fell?
Where, in his gloomy strength, the demon King
Reigns o'er the regions where his angels dwell&mdash;
The burning mounts and fiery plains of hell!
When was it first upon this world beheld,
That men, like brutes, their fellow-men should sell;
That, by the strong, the weaker being quell'd,
Should for their tyrants labour, by the scourge compell'd?

When was the first slave?  Who on earth can say?
Perhaps the scene of his despair was laid
In that wild world the deluge wash'd away,
Where every crime was found that could degrade
The soul of man; and power, perchance, was made
Alone the arbiter of life; in chains,
Binding the helpless, until God survey'd
The dire disorder on earth's groaning plains,
And swept man from his world, to Death's unblest domains.

I heard that Negro, on his bed of straw,
Thus rack'd in soul, thus tortur'd in his frame,
I heard him ask, by what ensanguin'd law
The hand of Power such mastery could claim!
Oft he repeated one heart-cherish'd name,
Whilst deep within his breast, in that same hour,
Revenge was burning, like a smother'd flame,
Ready to rise, anon, with hellish power,
And in its calm black rage, it's victim's life devour!

Now tell me where Philosophy may find
A remedy, to be at once applied,
For healing such a desolated mind,
To which the light of art hath been denied,
And all that is to mental worth allied!
Say to what quarter we may look for aid,
When a dark soul by darker grief is tried!
Where hope hath pined to death within the shade,
By ills of sudden growth, and rank luxuriance, made!

There came a man from some far distant isle,
Proclaiming to the world the reign of peace;
Telling the slave, that yet a little while,
And he might dwell where all his toils should cease,
Where love and joy for evermore increase!
And pointing out how best he might upbear
Against those ills from which lie sought release&mdash;
Revealing to him, that he should repair,
In Christ's thrice hallowed name, to God, in secret prayer!

He open'd up the wonders of the cross
Before the stricken slave's admiring soul,
Till unto him, the world appear'd but dross,
And down his cheek the tear in silence stole!
Till his new joy he could no more control,
But lifted up to God his grateful voice,
Whose mercy would his humble name enrol
With theirs, who in his presence aye rejoice,
And who of old were led to make his ways their choice.

Yet while he thus was filled with glorious joy,
His outward lot unchanged in aught remained;
Save that his owner sought ev'n more to annoy
His victim, for the hope he had obtained:
For lo, the master's restless soul was pained,
His slave's ennobled nature to behold&mdash;
Seeing the peaceful strength his mind had gain'd;
Not to be moved, or bought with mines of gold&mdash;
The inwrought peace of God, which cannot be controll'd!

The Negro, in the arts of men unlearned,
In heavenly lore by God himself was taught;
Trampled to earth, and as an outcast spurned,
By those whose gold his very blood had bought,
His soul with blessings from above was fraught,
Through Him whose life to save the world was given;
To whom, on wings of faith-elated thought,
He soar'd, and dwelt with, in his promised heaven,
Where saints for ever reign, who from the world are driven.

He was a slave still, but his soul was free,
Clothed in the liberty of light divine:
From which all forms of mental darkness flee,
Like night-shades, when the morning sun doth shine!
And he was heard no longer to repine,
Though rugged was the pathway to his grave;
For well could he earth's poor delights resign,
The which his untuned heart had ceas'd to crave,
Since he had learn'd of Him who died his soul to save.

Time came, when that the malice of his foes
Christ's minister of peace to him denied;
Whereby they sought the door of hope to close,
And quench the light on which his soul relied:
They tore his Saviour's herald from his side,
But the divine Redeemer still was there;
And though the servant as a martyr died,
The mourning slave enjoyed the master's care,
Of whose unwearied love his faithful followers share!

Man is a spirit for awhile confined
Within a tabernacle built of clay:
There visited by Him, whose skill designed
This dwelling, destined erewhile to decay,
Yet beautiful as is the living day,
Whose eye illumes its walls:  but from this place
Man passeth like a broken dream away&mdash;
Wak'd up not far from his Creator's face,
Somewhere within the vast untravell'd realms of space.

'Tis then, if not till then, that he discerns
The mystery of his being, which is more
Than now it doth appear; for there he learns,
That powers were given him wherewith to soar
Beyond this sphere of vision, and adore
His Father, God, who sent his only Son,
To lead his spirit tow'rds that blissful shore,
Where everlasting glory is begun,
By those, who through his death, Faith's great reward have won!

I heard that Negro, on his lowly bed,
Thus forced to bid to earthly hopes adieu:
I heard him pray for mercy on the head
Of him, whose bitter wrath his brother slew!
Lonely he lay, but still the sufferer knew,
That more than this his heavenly master bore,
When on the cross, expos'd to public view,
His dying breath forgiveness did implore,
For those whose hellish hate was glutted with his gore!

Slave-masters!  such is pure Religion's power!
These are the morals Christ's disciples preach!
Let interest alone, then, rule the hour,
And still this gospel will your servant's reach!
Shame!  that it should be needful to beseech
A British subject, in these polish'd days,
To let a godly man draw near, and teach
His heathen household, Britain's God to praise,
And train their souls to walk in Wisdom's pleasant ways!

O ye who wear free England's royal name,
Mark!  Upon slavery hath been conferr'd
An immortality of dreadful fame!
Say, what is comprehended in that word,
To fill up which, hard avarice hath concurr'd
With the worst passions of  the human soul!
Within it lie, all that the ear hath heard,
Of blighted love, and grief that spurns control,
Affections blotted out, and lives o'erwhelm'd with dole!

Name ye the gain this fearful cost affords,
Beyond the curse which God to crime decrees!
Men may be gay around their jovial boards,
And drown the cries of truth, whilst health and ease
Renew to life its transient power to please:
But pleasures fly, nor leave a trace behind;
And how shall they those troublous thoughts appease,
Which never fail to haunt the guilty mind,
When on the couch of pain, by strong, disease confined!

Let death draw near &mdash; The warrior stern may die,
And pour his soul out on a gory bed:
But on what couch shall lie, the oppressor, lie,
Who oft the blood of innocence hath shed?
Where shall the Man-slayer rest his throbbing head,
Whose heart by fiery lust of wealth was sear'd?
How shall he bear to shake hands with the dead,
With whose red life his palms are yet besmear'd;
Whose tongue, with curses scorch'd, the mourner never cheer'd?

There stands an angel near the Eternal's throne,
Whose roving eye this moon-like orb surveys;
Whose ear retains the sound of every groan,
Heav'd from the heart on which oppression preys:
His memory, immortal  as his days,
Lays up a record of each lawless deed,
That will affiright the soul when life decays&mdash;
When, from the toils of time, her wings are freed,
And forth, as swift she flies, she sees this world recede.

Then will she read these records of the past,
And on unblotted guilt with horror pore:
Then will the soul upon her hope be cast,
And turn the pages of her annals o'er,
And every cruel act of life deplore:
Remorse will reign, and hope no light will shed,
Unless to Christ she hath been wont to soar:
But agonizing darkness will o'erspread
The ante-hells that hold the unredeemed dead!

Ah!  what a fearful meeting will it be,
Between the tyrant and his tortur'd slave,
When they each others unrobed souls shall see,
Within the awful precincts of the grave!
My soul!  How will the lordling spirit rave,
With those it spurn'd, by Death's strong fetters bound;
Made to lie down, nought near to soothe or save,
And helpless wait, till at the trumpet's sound,
The evil and the good, God's judgment bar surround!

Then shall be seen the round earth cloth'd with fire,
And from their graves the wondering dead arise:
Then shall the sun, and moon, and stars, expire,
And vanish from the desolated skies:
Then shall be heard the death-imploring cries
Of blood-stain'd men, just driven from the tomb,
Imploring, that again their long-seal'd eyes,
Just opening on the tyrant's fiery doom,
Might close them in the grave's impenetrable gloom!

Where shall the Oppressor flee?  His victims' graves&mdash;
These are the store-house of his treasur'd woes;
The ground that drinks the crying blood of slaves,
Which, unreveng'd by human justice, flows,
Shall to the world its dreadful trust disclose,
Upon the last the pregnant judgment morn;
When they that in Death's silent halls repose,
Are, by the call of God, to life new-born,
Immortal praise to share, or everlasting scorn.

He who upon his brother's spirit treads
Earns for his soul Heav'n's never-failing curse:
And each proud nation, slavery o'erspreads,
The Lord of all will humble or disperse!
Let Rome arise, the pride of ancient verse,
The glory of the world in days of old:
Let her the history of her fall rehearse&mdash;
Hark!  she proclaims that liberty was sold
That Freedom's robes of light, in guiltless blood were roll'd!

Rome lies in ruins, like a crownless Queen,
Amidst the fragments of her fallen throne;
And the proud wrecks of glory which hath been,
Makes but the force of her destruction known&mdash;
Say not the curse alights on her alone!
Thou, Gallia, tremble, lest thy plains, in turn,
Be with the relics of thy power bestrown&mdash;
Lest fire-arm'd Freedom should her danger learn,
And wake her slumbering ire, and bid her vengeance burn!

Oh, Albion!  the sea-encircled bower,
Where Liberty hath dwelt for many an age!
Sleep not, my country, while steel-hearted Power
War with the world's best interests may wage:
But seek to soothe men's spirits, and assuage
The rigour of their ills!  He that complains
Of slavery &mdash; him point unto the page,
Of everlasting truth, the which contains
The master's only hope, and their's who wear his chains!

Hail, Wilberforce!  the Slave's unwearied friend!
Glory's fair light surround thy saintly head!
Hope's silvery form thy shining steps attend,
And when thy feet life's silent borders tread,
Peace, like an evening star, sweet lustre shed,
And smile thee into heaven!  All hail to thee!
But loftier praise to Him, thy soul that led,
And call'd his honour'd servant forth to be
The agent of his will, which sets the captive free!

And ye whose voices have for years been heard,
Pleading aloud the helpless Negro's cause,
Blessings be on your truth-arm'd souls conferr'd,
And everlasting honour and applause!
Let not your energies decline, nor pause
One moment in your heav'n-observ'd career;
For lo, your fame already overawes,
Those heartless realms that Freedom's visits fear,
And tremble when they dream her angel form is near!

Her army are ye!  By your leader stand,
And with the work of liberty proceed!
Not Afric only, but full many a land,
Beneath tyrannic pride and lust may bleed,
If aught the triumphs of your arms impede:
The eyes of kings are on you!  if ye fail,
The cause of Truth triumphantly to plead,
A thousand well-bribed tongues your fall will hail,
And henceforth ruddy Power o'er struggling Right prevail.
