Alas!  how bounded is the sight of man!
Though dreaming he can pierce futurity&mdash;
The very morrow blasts his cherish'd plan:
This hour in hope &mdash; the next in misery!
A sudden tempest brings his destiny&mdash;
Secure, while ruin lies but just before him:
The bolt of death he hears not &mdash; nor can see:
Self-flatter'd ev'n while darkness gathers o'er him,
Till sunk within th' abyss, whence nothing can restore him.

Eva one morn was missing from her home;
And Leon travers'd each accustom'd spot;
Trod every track he knew she lov'd to roam&mdash;
The wood &mdash; the ruins &mdash; each contiguous cot&mdash;
The borders of the lake &mdash; but found her not:
Explor'd the mountain to its snowy peak&mdash;
No path she used to wander was forgot;
She was not there &mdash; and o'er his blanching cheek
There past a chilling fear he would not &mdash; dared not, speak.

Past from her father's board th' untasted meal&mdash;
He sought his child in anguish deep and wild!
Parents alone can judge what he must feel;
Nor they &mdash; save they have lost an only child!
He cried &mdash; "Some fell destroyer hath beguil'd&mdash;
But no!  impossible!  her heart so pure,
So firm, would never live to be defil'd&mdash;
Would rather death in all its worst endure
She may be tortur'd &mdash; slain &mdash; her innocence is sure."

Leon return'd at noon &mdash; but came alone&mdash;
'Twas but one word &mdash; one deep emphatic &mdash; "No!"
His tongue could utter &mdash; but its withering tone
Had in it all the eloquence of woe!
All he said not his anguish'd looks might show.
Both stood the living statues of despair!
The father spake not &mdash; not a tear would flow&mdash;
That proof of weaker sorrow came not there,
It was a burning woe, that no relief could share.

And Leon scarce could bear to see the place,
Where his heart-cherish'd idol should have been;
Who gave it every joy, and every grace;
The very hope and spirit of the scene&mdash;
'Twas like earth blasted &mdash; reft of all her green
Cold &mdash; dreary &mdash; lifeless &mdash; sunless &mdash; desolate!
Where if one beam of day the eye could glean,
It serv'd but to depict the bliss that Fate
Once blest the heart with there, before she launch'd her hate.

He wander'd long and lonely &mdash; evening came&mdash;
But Eva came not &mdash; nothing could controul
His anguish &mdash; though the day went down in flame,
'Twas darkness &mdash; midnight darkness to his soul!
The stars came brightly out &mdash; he saw them roll&mdash;
They only show'd she gazed not with him there!
And for her absence nothing could console!
Nothing was joyous that she did not share&mdash;
He felt alone on earth &mdash; abandon'd to despair!

The night grew deeper &mdash; darkness stole along&mdash;
Nor sight nor sound of Eva could he gain:
Grief, fear, and disappointment, grew so strong,
They raged almost to madness through his brain!
He strain'd his eyes to pierce the shades in vain&mdash;
In vain her name burst from his fever'd tongue;
His anxious ear could no return obtain
Though loud from hill to hill the accents rung,
No answering sound arose their solitudes among.

That night, nor sire nor lover pillow prest&mdash;
It was a night of horror &mdash; not repose;
An agony of thought, cut off from rest:
The eye might in its socket burn, but close
It could not &mdash; overwhelm'd in woes,
The father paced his echoing room; the lover
Sought every spot where fancy might suppose
A hope remain'd his Eva to discover;
Urging the useless search, till night and hope were over.

Sleep!  sleep may be for those whose hearts, though aching,
Have still some hope, that, spite of all, they keep&mdash;
But not for those that in despair are breaking:
Those eyes may be revisited by sleep,
That still have tears &mdash; refreshing tears to weep&mdash;
Not those that have none left, but burn to madness!
Slumber comes not to pangs so wild and deep;
Though it may settle on the brow of sadness,
And ev'n forerun a day of calm and gentle gladness.

Sleep!  no &mdash; in sensibility alone
Could find it in that scene of woe and dread;
The breast that then could slumber, must be stone!
Sleep might as soon its placid influence shed
On him, who feels an earthquake lift his bed;
Or sees the charg'd volcano scorch the sky,
And burning rivers round his dwelling spread;
Or heav'd upon the angry waves on high,
With scarce a moment left to know that he must die.

And yet the robber sleeps upon his spoil!
The murd'rer on his bloody hand can rest&mdash;
Nor terror nor remorse their slumbers foil;
As if the couch of innocence they prest,
Or conscience were no inmate of the breast;
While he whose guiltless heart is rent by grief,
Can scarce in its forgetfulness be blest;
To whom, it oft denies that short relief
It ev'n vouchsafes to give the slayer and the thief!

Oh!  how unlike the bosoms of mankind!
Some on no living thing bestow a tear;
Their feelings all within themselves enshrin'd&mdash;
Some weep if but a wounded bird, appear&mdash;
Some quaff the goblet on a father's bier!
Where, other eyes would weep their orbs away,
Some gaze in apathy, as nought were near&mdash;
Some live to feel for others, day by day;
Some are but breathing stones, that feeling ne'er betray.

Succeeding years of bliss could scarce atone
The Father's horrors through that long, drear night:
He thought it never &mdash; never would be done&mdash;
And yet he scarce had hope that with the light
His child would come again, to bless his sight!
He told the clock &mdash; how long before its sound
Would strike his ear again!  in wild affright
He listen'd from his casement &mdash; but profound
Silence prevail'd, save when the night-wind mourn'd around.

Far better to behold the bed of death;
And the last moments of a loved one see&mdash;
To gaze upon the form, though reft of breath,
Than weep its loss in dubious misery;
Upon the rack to know its destiny&mdash;
Whether still left on earth, or in the grave&mdash;
Tortur'd to frenzy by uncertainty;
Ign'rant what path might lead to find, or save
Though willing in that search the worst of ills to brave.

Day came; but on that soul no morning breaks
That does not dawn in hope &mdash; the day and night
Are but as one to him whom she forsakes:
The sun shines not for spirits reft of light!
His radiance, to that wretched father's sight,
Did but appear his misery to mock;
Leaving him dark when all around was bright;
Unconscious of his beams as the scath'd rock,
Unmov'd by melting noon, or tempest's fiery shock.

The only tie for which he loved the world 
Was snapt &mdash; snapt rudely by one cruel blow;
The living temple of his love was hurl'd
In sudden desolation &mdash; nought below
Remain'd, but one unbroken path of woe:
He did but live the prey of every thought
That wastes the springs of life &mdash; to feel and know
That earth, with all her scenes, to him was nought,
Or but a cheerless waste, with grief and frenzy fraught.

He now had but one thought the world to give&mdash;
He now had but one boon &mdash; life's last &mdash; to crave!
That thought &mdash; how long he was condemn'd to live&mdash;
That boon but this &mdash; a quickly yielded grave!
His last &mdash; sole joy he hoped no more to have:
Like one upon a lonely island thrown,
From whom the world has taken all it gave&mdash;
All, but what dying wretches make their own&mdash;
The freehold of the tomb &mdash; all else for ever flown.

He lived &mdash; breath'd &mdash; walk'd, like one of sense bereft!
He saw not &mdash; heard not, any living thing!
He seem'd a moving form that mind had left;
His consciousness, absorb'd in one wild sting,
Found not an object friend or foe could bring,
To rouse his spirit from its apathy!
He mutter'd to the wind; and seem'd to fling
His glance on air, as if he hoped to see
Some form embodied there, that lived in memory.

He sat within his desolated room,
And gazed for hours on the unmoving door;
As watching for some form that might illume
His deep'ning darkness &mdash; but it came no more
To smile on him &mdash; its glance of light was o'er!
Then &mdash; sheets of lightning might have wrapp'd his head&mdash;
And nearest thunders peal'd in loudest roar&mdash;
Nor rous'd him from that trance, so deep and dread&mdash;
By frequent start alone distinguish'd from the dead.

When the wild storm of rage and sorrow closes;
When the mind sinks into a listless state
Exhausted, and in living death reposes&mdash;
When nought can rouse its fear, nor love, nor hate&mdash;
'Tis then beheld most lost and desolate!
It shows the chords of feeling in that strain
Have burst; and the heart sunk beneath the weight
Of woe, from which it ne'er may rise again&mdash;
Curs'd even in the loss of wrath, and fear, and pain.

Yes &mdash; there is life in anger and in sorrow&mdash;
The rage may cease &mdash; the tear be dried away&mdash;
The heart, though wrung to day, may thrill to-morrow;
The starting pulse resume its healthful play;
As night and cold are chas'd by warmth and day&mdash;
But when the soul, unmov'd by joy or woe,
Sinks listless &mdash; reckless in its shell of clay&mdash;
When neither sigh will heave, nor tear will flow;
Its state is hopeless then &mdash; it scarce will wake below.

Some men have minds of such elastic power,
That there is scarce a grief can weigh them down;
They maybe tortur'd &mdash; wrung &mdash; in sorrow's hour.
But rise they will, despite fate's darkest frown&mdash;
Others, by loss of fortune, friends, renown&mdash;
Seem crush'd as if they ne'er again could soar&mdash;
Few eyes have waked that tears could never drown;
Few hearts have beat that anguish never bore;
But each has some fine chord may shake it to its core.

And Leon &mdash; did he droop in grief at home?
No!  he was wand'ring like a restless shade,
Doom'd for a penance round some spot to roam,
Where all it loved in life &mdash; was mould'ring laid&mdash;
Where memory all its perish'd joys portray'd&mdash;
Nor peace by day, nor sleep by night he knew;
Reck'd not what ills he bore, nor where he stray'd;
Nor felt the rain that fell &mdash; the wind that blew&mdash;
So lost to all but one absorbing grief he grew.

Sometimes upon a precipice he lay,
That crumbled o'er a horrid gulph below!
But stirr'd not &mdash; shook not &mdash; fear was past away;
All but the stubbornness of desperate woe!
An earthquake heav'd the hills &mdash; he did not know
It had been there &mdash; unfelt by him it past!
Life &mdash; death &mdash; no worse than he had borne could show:
Upon the lake a frenzied look he cast,
As deeming there his love perchance had breath'd her last.

He felt like exile on his prison rock;
Or felon on the morrow doom'd to die&mdash;
Whom the bright hues of nature do but mock
With cruel splendour; on the glowing sky
He look'd but with a thankless &mdash; desperate eye:
The very wind past by him with a groan!
Night was the welcomest &mdash; then he might lie,
And vent his furious grief, unseen &mdash; alone&mdash;
Her starless darkness best accorded with his own.

If sleep would come &mdash; 'twas but a fever'd dream&mdash;
His burning hands were clench'd in agony.
His wild and restless fancy did but teem
With shapes of horror &mdash; sights of misery!
Eva, was ever there; and seem'd to be
The living, suffering spirit of each scene;
Now struggling with some ruthless enemy&mdash;
Then lifeless in her gore &mdash; as she had been
The victim of some crime, that fill'd that space between.

Then he would madly strain his eager grasp,
As if he hoped to snatch her from the grave&mdash;
Now felt her cold &mdash; now burning in his clasp&mdash;
Panting to succour &mdash; to avenge &mdash; or save&mdash;
He saw the phantom pass &mdash; and woke to rave!
Darkness was in his soul and round his head&mdash;
No thought was left that light or promise gave;
The spring of youth &mdash; the glow of life, were fled;
And hideous, dark despair, its fatal influence shed.

Reck'd it to one so lost that earth was green?
That fields, flowers, trees &mdash; blush'd in a flood of light?
For him there was no blessing in the scene&mdash;
Nature for others smiled, and heaven was bright&mdash;
He saw all blasted with a sudden blight!
His curse clung to him wheresoe'er he went;
And blacken'd what would else have blest his sight:
He look'd and felt like one whose heart was rent,
To find the hopes of life in one wide ruin blent.

Who knew him happy, scarce had known him then&mdash;
His cheek was deathly; dim and sunk his eye;
He seem'd a spectre in the paths of men&mdash;
As murderer shuns the morning, would he fly
The busy, smiling throng; where joy was nigh
His curse was doubled; and he felt alone
Far more, than when beneath the midnight sky
He stray'd; he would that none should hear him groan&mdash;
Since none could sooth his pangs, he wish'd them all unknown.

It is no common sorrow that can turn,
To one dark theme, a mind that ranged o'er all&mdash;
And chill the ardent soul that erst did burn
With more than mortal fire; and ev'n inthral
The wings of fancy, till they close and fall;
Or bind a young heart to one changeless thought,
Till it is work'd to frenzy past recal!
Till the intense excitement, o'er-wrought,
Hath o'er the shaken mind, the rage of mania brought.

The lamp was glimmering in the Father's room;
And its dim ray, through that still chamber spread,
Gave only light enough to show the gloom&mdash;
A taper in a mansion of the dead!
What foot is that which moves with noiseless tread,
And steps as if it fear'd the floor might speak?&mdash;
Is it a  foe that comes his blood to shed
No!  'tis a form of love &mdash; it does but seek
To steal a last look there &mdash; and once more kiss that cheek.

'Tis Eva!  does she fear a Father's eye?
She who around him loved her arms to throw&mdash;
No &mdash; she but dreads to see its agony&mdash;
She trembles lest she wake him to his woe&mdash;
She deems him slumb'ring &mdash; ah!   she does not know
'Tis but the stupor of a spirit broken!
She would not cause his tears again to flow
For worlds &mdash; howe'er desiring one last token
Of his unalter'd love whether 'twere look'd or spoken.

She bends her o'er his couch with streaming eyes;
She starts &mdash; she shrinks &mdash; as though she knew him not!
His alter'd features freeze her in surprize;
As something scarce remember'd, nor forgot&mdash;
And &mdash; "Oh" she cried &mdash; "what woe hath been thy lot,
To work so deep a change in such short space!
In those few days since last I saw this spot,
The bloom &mdash; the flesh hath almost left thy face;
Where paths of scalding tears, in these deep tracks I trace.

"Too well I see what agonies have wrung
Thy heart, to, change thy features thus to sight;
The hue of death sorrow hath o'er them flung,
And sudden turn'd these late dark tresses white:
Too soon the grave will pall them in its night&mdash;
I see the shaft hath sped &mdash; this is no sleep
To cheer the, soul &mdash; 'tis on the eve of flight!
Not many times these eyes will ope to weep&mdash;
Not many hopeless nights of painful vigils keep!

"But few days past &mdash; and I was happy here&mdash;
This form so lifeless now &mdash; then look'd and smiled
And thought and felt as there were nought to fear:
One star his path illumin'd &mdash; and beguil'd&mdash;
It was his last &mdash; his only light &mdash; his child!
A cloud came o'er it, and 'twas lost for ever&mdash;
For him it left a dark and hopeless wild;
It brought a storm that only burst to sever
His soul from light and life; from whose dark void it never

"Can wake on earth again!  why did I seek
This sight of more than agony!  to view
The hand of death upon so dear a cheek!
'Tis cold and damp with life's last ev'ning dew&mdash;
And yet I wish'd to breathe one last adieu
Unheard &mdash; unseen to take one look &mdash; the last&mdash;
Of him round whom my soul's affection grew&mdash;
I long'd to clasp his hand ere life was past;
Then perish like the flower that falls beneath the blast."

She stood some moments o'er him, breathing woe;
Full of the bitter thoughts of days gone by;
As one upon the verge of all below!
And from her breast there burst a long, deep sigh&mdash;
From sleep it might have rous'd him &mdash; but his eye
Exhaustion seal'd &mdash; she knelt &mdash; his hand she grasp'd&mdash;
A tear fell on it that she would not dry&mdash;
She gave her full soul vent &mdash; his neck she clasp'd&mdash;
And kiss'd his pale, parch'd lips; and shook, and sobb'd, and gasp'd!

And yet he did not rouse him from that trance;
There still was warmth, else she had deem'd him dead!
And he was all unconscious of the glance&mdash;
His Eva's glance &mdash; the tears his Eva shed!
Yet she was near him &mdash; saw him &mdash; touch'd him &mdash; bled
At heart, to see him petrifying there;
She with whom hope, joy, life and spirit, fled&mdash;
Whose loss alone had wrought that deep despair&mdash;
Was then beside his couch, his last of woe to share!

She had design'd, unmark'd, to view his face,
With one unwitness'd look to sooth her heart:
(As some fond spirit, comes unseen to trace
The form it loved in life) &mdash; and then depart&mdash;
She fear'd her presence would revive the smart&mdash;
But now to see him in that apathy,
Was worse than deepest sob, and wildest start;
That state of living death, and misery,
Whatever might befal, she could not bear to see.

She grasp'd him harder &mdash; wildly kiss'd his cheek!
And laid her burning face upon his neck&mdash;
The chamber echoed with a desperate shriek,
That fear no longer prompted her to cheek!
He roused a moment from his being's wreck&mdash;
Like a wild sun o'er an autumnal frost;
That yields, before it sinks, one last bright speck
Betwixt the clouds the storm hath round it tost&mdash;
Then drops in deeper shade, and is in darkness lost.

He moved &mdash; he roll'd his wild and glassy eye
Upon the form that, o'er him weeping bent&mdash;
Burst from his lips a strange and piercing cry,
Like maniacs utter when their souls are rent!
Where every tone of human voice seem'd blent&mdash;
There but escap'd his lips one thrilling word&mdash;
'Twas Eva's name &mdash; to Eva's soul it went!
Then backward on his pouch he fell, nor stirr'd&mdash;
Nor sign of life was left &mdash; nor sound of breath was heard.

She waited for another look &mdash; in vain&mdash;
His eyes were closed for ever &mdash; then she felt
His heart &mdash; 'twas still &mdash; it knew not joy nor pain:
Kind fate the last and welcome blow had dealt;
And freed the spirit that in torture dwelt.
She stood some moments in a frenzied woe,
Till her too conscious soul began to melt;
When sorrows unrestrain'd and gushing flow,
Reliev'd her bursting heart, half broken by that blow.

She wept an hour beside him, nor once moved
Her eye from his unanswering, marble face:
Although that form, the first, last, most beloved&mdash;
Half blinded by her tears, she scarce could trace:
And Oh!  what thoughts rush'd crowding in that space!
Years past in swift and agoniz'd review&mdash;
The many deeds of love &mdash; the look &mdash; th' embrace&mdash;
And the kind word in quick succession flew;
Making that hour a life, in thought, and feeling too.

She moved to leave him &mdash; but return'd again,
To take another look; to sob one more
Farewell, as if her heart, though wrench'd with pain,
Scarce wish'd that scene of suffering to be o'er&mdash;
Thrice her limbs trembled &mdash; totter'd to the door&mdash;
As  often she return'd again, to see
The last impression that those features, bore;
To grave them deeper in her memory&mdash;
Nay &mdash; ev'n to wake again those thoughts of agony.

Hard is the parting, when the call of death
Has bidden some loved spirit take its flight&mdash;
But scarcely with the last departing breath,
Does the survivor feel forsaken quite;
There still is something left to meet the sight&mdash;
The form is there, although the soul has sped&mdash;
But when the grave has pall'd it in its night&mdash;
Then &mdash; then we feel alone &mdash; for all is fled!
Then first we truly know what 'tis to mourn the dead.

She gave his hand her last &mdash; her farewell pressure
'Twas clammy &mdash; cold &mdash; she felt she must &mdash; must go&mdash;
Yet hung like dying miser o'er his treasure,
About to pass from all he loved below.
Love, ev'n for things inanimate, may grow
From long acquaintance &mdash; how much more for those
Who lived affection's kindest proofs to show;
From whom to part for ever, seems to close
The door on hope, to leave life nothing but its woes.

To each loved spot she past she sigh'd farewell&mdash;
They were the scenes of happiness gone by:
A thousand silent objects seem'd to tell
Of past delights &mdash; whatever met her eye&mdash;
Her books &mdash; her harp &mdash; not useless wont to lie&mdash;
Her favourite bird, whose cage was now his tomb&mdash;
With her own desolation seem'd to vie!
Lone, dreary, silent, was each lifeless room;
Save when her hurried steps rung hollow through the gloom.

She left the place where every tie once bound her;
Her soul was in the deepest &mdash; last distress!
The night was dark &mdash; the wind clasp'd chilly round her;
The very air seem'd fraught with bitterness:
The world had nothing left to sooth or bless&mdash;
Save &mdash; one fond, faithful being &mdash; he alone
Remain'd to cheer the hopeless &mdash; fatherless:
To answer every tear, and every groan;
To blend his grief with hers, and make her wrongs his own.

And he was as the star that led her on,
Amidst the blackness of that withering night;
When every other orb of heaven was gone:
With that she did not feel abandon'd quite&mdash;
And but for that despair had seal'd her sight&mdash;
So looks the seaman on the polar star,
When clouds have veil'd each other gem of light;
Whose solitary ray, that shoots afar,
May haply guide him through the elemental war.

And did she seek to bless him with her love&mdash;
Him, next her sire, the being of her soul?
Far sterner passions now that youth must move&mdash;
Far fiercer looks than love's her eye must roll!
Revenge was rous'd, and raging past controul!
The sorrow that had torn her heart, was turn'd
To vengeance, and to wreak it was the goal
For which her chang'd and madden'd spirit burn'd;
While every softer thought was from her bosom spurn'd.

Leon was stretch'd upon his couch, from sleep
As far as if amidst the battle's heat:
The thoughts that fill'd his mind were wild and deep&mdash;
His pulse was striking with a frenzied beat,
Till reason, seem'd half shaken from her seat.
He would not &mdash; nay, he could not banish thence
The image of his Eva, though replete
With every anguish that can wring the sense
With sorrow and despair, devouring and intense.

There burst a well known voice upon his ear!
He scarcely hoped it from a mortal tongue&mdash;
It woke a thrill of mix'd surprize and fear&mdash;
He started &mdash; listen'd &mdash; and again it rung!
He dash'd his window open; and among
The trees his eye a cherish'd figure caught&mdash;
An instant past not, ere his arms were flung
Around the neck of Eva!  every thought
With wonder and delight almost to frenzy wrought.

Awhile she left him in his dream of joy&mdash;
She knew it was his last of happiness!
Her resolution falter'd to destroy
His bliss, whom nought, when that was past, could bless. 
His kisses burning on her lips &mdash; nor less
The grasping pressure of his arms, declared
How vast his present joy &mdash; his past distress&mdash;
He wept in bliss to think that fate had spared
Her whom to meet on earth his soul had long despair'd.

Yes &mdash; there are times when custom's fetters drop,
Even from souls the purest and the best;
When the warm gush of feeling will not stop,
For all the coldness of a virgin's breast;
When heart to heart, and lips to lips are prest&mdash;
But guiltless as the love of infancy!
When prudish eye, and censure half exprest,
Chill not, nor cheek the bosom's extacy;
When triumphs over all pure feeling's energy.

Such moments are when sorrow, joy, or fear,
Awake the uncurb'd spirit's native play;
When not a hand is rais'd to dash the tear,
That dims the eye it does not shame, away&mdash;
Such are when lovers meet, who, long the prey
Of absence, wept in wild and hopeless grief:
And well such moments do those pangs repay&mdash;
More welcome, since they are so few and brief:
Like sleep to pain, they bring a timely, sweet relief.

Such moments then were Leon's; while he held
The weeping fair one in his straining fold:
But O!  their breasts what different feelings swell'd?
He saw not that her eye in frenzy roll'd&mdash;
He did not dream her heart was wrench'd and cold;
The very home of life's complete despair!
He thought her agitated breathings told
That hope, and love, and rapture revell'd there&mdash;
And happy deem'd himself such strong regards to share.

There past some moments, and they swiftly past,
Before the question came &mdash; "Where hast thou been?
What hast thou suffer'd since I saw thee last&mdash;
What mystery hath work'd those days between?
To tear thee from thy friends &mdash; thy home &mdash; the scene
Of all thy joys &mdash; to wring thy father's breast,
And mine, with fears so wild, and pangs so keen&mdash;?
O!  tell me, that suspense may sink to rest; 
And joy awake again; and love pronounce us blest!"

"Leon!  I do not come to talk of love&mdash;
Vengeance demands those hours that else were sweet!
I come thy courage and thy faith to prove&mdash;
Nay &mdash; nay &mdash; I doubt them not &mdash; nor need entreat
Thy arm to right me; for thy heart will beat
With fury and with hate as deep as mine&mdash;
Thy soul will burn for vengeance as complete
As I would launch, had I a hand, divine!
If mine the grief and shame &mdash; the wrong is also thine!

"I left my Father on his bed of death&mdash;
One blow has smitten him, and me, and thee!
My burning lips receiv'd his parting breath
And I was in the depth of misery!
And yet &mdash; tis best he did not live to see&mdash;
To hear my wrong; without avail to mourn
A daughter's hopeless, cureless injury;
Outliving peace &mdash; hope &mdash; honor &mdash; and to burn
That happiness to feel, that never could return.

"A villain seiz'd me &mdash; brutal strength prevail'd&mdash;
I had no dagger, and my hand was weak!
He found me in the ruins &mdash; there, assail'd
By force, I suffer'd &mdash; what, were I to speak,
The burning blushes would consume my cheek!
I had no lightnings in my frenzied eye&mdash;
There were no thunders in my desperate shriek&mdash;
What now remains but to avenge and die;
Since sunder'd from the earth is every cherish'd tie?

But I escaped &mdash; for though I felt that life
Was blasted, and had nought but bitterness;
Nor more could hope the joys of mother, wife&mdash;
A wrong'd and broken heart, like mine could bless&mdash;
And though I wish'd to die &mdash; what could I less&mdash;
I would not &mdash; could not &mdash; ere I saw the wretch,
Whose ruffian guilt had stabb'd my happiness&mdash;
Beneath the sword of justice &mdash; vengeance &mdash; stretch&mdash;
And his last lab'ring breath in gasping anguish fetch."

And Leon seem'd as wrath had stopt his breath!
His bosom like a pent volcano heav'd&mdash;
His cheeks &mdash; his lips, became as white as death&mdash;
Fierce as a Lion, of his mate bereav'd,
Turns on the hunter who her fall achiev'd;
So did he burn for vengeance on his head,
Whose work of woe could never be retriev'd!
Whom, if a curse could kill, it had not sped,
So ardently he wish'd himself his blood to shed.

But when he look'd upon that lovely form,
Bent as in shame, and withering in her woe;
And smitten like a lily in the storm;
O'er his fierce passion pity seem'd to throw
Her soft'ning influence &mdash; tears began to flow&mdash;
He strain'd her to his sympathizing heart;
Whispering that peace himself could never know;
And striving, with affection's kindest art,
To heal &mdash; if ought could heal, her deep-wrung spirit's smart.

It did shed comfort on her soul to find,
Who loved her happy &mdash; loved her now no less&mdash;
That he, despite of ruin, still was kind,
As in her days of hope and joyfulness!
But most it pierc'd her that she could not bless
A being so unalterably true;
That one so valued, she could ne'er possess;
And o'er the darkness of her thoughts it threw
A more entire despair &mdash; and clouds of blacker hue.

"Thou talk'st of dying &mdash; No!  my Eva, live&mdash;
To know my vengeance was complete &mdash; severe&mdash;
What peace life yet hath left, 'tis mine to give:
Mine though thou canst not be, we may be dear&mdash;
Dear to each other still &mdash; mix tear with tear,
In some unbroken, dreary solitude;
There, far from mortal eye, and mortal ear,
We still may sooth each other, though we brood
On grief, until we find e'en joy in that dark mood.

"But tell me now &mdash; where does this fiend abide?
For he and I breathe not another day!
Do thou to his accursed presence guide&mdash;
And one or both, the sword shall surely slay.
Nor food, nor sleep, shall cheer, till I obey
This paramount command!  I hold my life
But as devoted to this deadly fray&mdash;
Whichever heaven may destine to the knife,
It is not ours to tell &mdash; 'tis mine to seek the strife.

"'Tis sure we do not meet as common foes;
One sword shall be the messenger of fate:
Once met &mdash; we do not part till death shall close
The eyes of one for ever!  such a hate
No doom, while pulse remain'd to beat, could sate
If life's last drop in anguish be not drain'd;
The smarting wounds &mdash; the pangs however great&mdash;
All &mdash; all were nought!  If life &mdash; if hope remain'd&mdash;
Revenge's burning wish would be but half attain'd."

She spake &mdash; "Thou know'st the ruins &mdash; where we changed,
If not the sweetest looks of love, the first
That scene, where oft' in innocence we ranged,
Became to me the blackest and the worst&mdash;
'Twas there the villain &mdash; be his soul accurst!
No pitying heart &mdash; no helping arm were near&mdash;
On the black walls my cries unheeded burst!
O!  had they reach'd a sire's or lover's ear;
They had not rung in vain, nor I had ought to fear."

The night was more than dark &mdash; and the clouds drew
Together in their blackness:  wild and dread
At intervals the fiery tempest flew;
And rending midnight's sable mantle, shed
A transient, awful light; the thunder spread
Its deep reverberating roll around:
Broad sheets of lightning flash'd above the head,
Reaching at once from heaven to the ground:
Then vanish'd but to leave more dark night's dread profound.

They started not, nor trembled, at the roar;
And when the lightning wrapt them in its flame,
Though standing in its flash, they felt no more
Than if the kindest beams of morning came:
Had nature smiled, their thoughts had been the same;
Their inward anguish mock'd all outward ill:
An earthquake might have shaken nature's frame;
And the unbridled sea o'er plain and hill
Roll'd deluging &mdash; their souls no fiercer pangs could fill.

Full scope had they within for every thought&mdash;
She bore the wrong that woman feels the most;
That leaves a virtuous soul to madness wrought!
That dooms peace, honor, hope, for ever lost;
And frame and spirit in one ruin tost:
That stamps a stain no time can wear away;
That sheds a woe, sighs, tears can ne'er exhaust;
A keen regret, that sharpens day by day;
Till of those blended pangs ev'n life becomes the prey.

And if there be an injury that can wake
The breast of man to more than mortal ire;
And from his soul all feeling, pity, shake;
And light revenge and hatred's fiercest fire&mdash;
And if there be a wrong that could inspire
His hand a brother's &mdash; father's blood to shed&mdash;
That wrong was Leon's &mdash; and his wrath was dire!
Love check'd or thwarted has to slaughter led;
But blasted thus would crave to torture ev'n the dead.

Were it a demon who had shed the blood
Of all he loved on earth, and 'midst their gore
Before his harrow'd sight exulting stood;
His spirit could not thirst for vengeance more!
Life has no deeper hate than what he bore!
Robb'd of his destin'd bride in all her bloom&mdash;
Dash'd from the hope that nothing could restore
From its untimely &mdash; unexpected tomb&mdash;
And love and all its sweets buried in one black doom.

They tarried not, nor hasten'd, for the storm
But past like troubled spirits o'er the ground,
Who sped some deed of darkness to perform:
Like guilty things they travers'd night's profound;
They reach'd th' ascent on which those ruins frown'd:
They heard the murmur of the waters dashing,
Breaking the silence that prevail'd around;
Save when the thunder broke in awful crashing;
And the wind's sudden gust the rising waves was lashing.

From one dark tower there broke a feeble light;
Like Mars' red beam through midnight's murky air:
Soon as its ray had flash'd on Eva's sight,
She started &mdash; shriek'd &mdash; and cried &mdash; "The wretch is there!
I know it by the torch's wavering glare!
Ev'n now perchance he seeks me in that tower&mdash;
Be it his scene of horror and despair!
There may he perish ere another hour;
And more than death's worst pangs his ruthless heart devour."

Like Tiger scenting prey, when Leon knew
He was so near the presence of his foe;
Forward with swift and sudden bound he flew;
His spirit burning to inflict the blow;
And thirsting for that heart's last drop to flow.
With lightning's speed he swept the steep ascent&mdash;
He could as soon have staid for morn to show
Its golden beam, as cull the path he went,
Where rock nor yawning gulph his progress could prevent.

Eva o'ertook him in the outer court;
The weakness &mdash; softness &mdash; of her sex she spurn'd:
Her native energy could still support,
Though now 'twas, all to hate and fury turn'd:
Within those walls the direst passions burn'd
That can a wrong'd and desperate bosom tear&mdash;
Within their fatal precincts first she learn'd
What depth of crime a guilty soul can dare;
How man can glut on woe and revel o'er despair!

The warmest &mdash; brightest scenes that earth can show,
Oft' see the tempest's wildest fury flung;
The noblest &mdash; kindest hearts that beat below,
By wrongs unmerited, to madness wrung,
Are oft' the deadliest when too deeply stung!
As if all but their strength had past away&mdash;
The generous feelings that around them clung,
Seem changed to deep, dark passions, whose fierce sway
Might sear the softest heart, and make it joy to slay.

And Eva &mdash; she who ne'er could hear, nor see
The plaint &mdash; the woe &mdash; but what she shared and felt&mdash;
She who could scarcely dream of misery,
But her whole soul would into, pity melt;
In her changed breast now found that fury dwelt,
And thirsting vengeance; joy'd she could have stood&mdash;
To see in that foe's heart the death-blow dealt;
And steel'd by wrongs, had smiled to see his blood
Spread round her very feet its red and stiff'ning flood.

They stopp'd for breath &mdash; they heard him pace the room,
Muttering deep curses at his victim's flight&mdash;
Instant the door was shiver'd; and the gloom
Of one pale lamp reveal'd him to the sight!
His figure was of broad and towering height;
A sable plume his lofty brow o'ershaded;
He seem'd a demon stalking through the night!
A momentary fear his breast pervaded;
When, starting, he beheld his solitude invaded.

Rolling a glance of stern and black defiance,
His sword was in an instant bared to view;
For well he knew it was his sole reliance:
Like answer Leon gave him, for be drew,
And sent a look of such dark, deadly hue,&mdash;
If look could blast, one soul had perish'd there!
Had then an angel interposed to sue;
For mercy &mdash; pardon &mdash; pray'd him to forbear&mdash;
The boon had been refused &mdash; that man he would not spare.

And Leon held no parley with that foe;
He sought him not to wage a war of speech:
The look he sent was follow'd by the blow,
And mortal fury nerv'd the arm of each;
The single aim who first the heart might reach&mdash;
It was not pride, nor glory, that inspired;
Interminable hatred form'd the breach&mdash;
The fiercest vengeance man can cherish fired;
And nothing short of death to sate its thirst desired.

Fast flash'd their swords, and heavily they fell
Though Leon in such wrath could scarce be cool;
Yet still he knew to wield his weapon well:
His adversary, taught in discord's school,
Was not a foe the best might ridicule;
But Leon's eye and arm were quick as thought&mdash;
Though hard he found the task to overrule
The rage with which his panting breast was fraught,
Still every blow that came, his ready weapon caught.

The floor was shaken by their heavy tread;
And the walls echoed with the iron clash;
The wavering light the lamp around them shed,
Gleam'd from the steel, like lightning's distant flash&mdash;
The ruffian seem'd his very teeth to gnash
At the successless efforts of his ire;
While his life-blood flow'd fast from many a gash:
Their breath seem'd rushing from their lips in fire,
As in that lengthen'd strife their vengeance grew more dire.

But Leon, as his foe exhausted grew,
Gather'd from hope new strength of limb and mind,
Instant with one deep thrust his sword past through,
And fix'd him writhing 'gainst the wall behind:
His head upon his bleeding breast reclined;
His heart was sever'd, and his weapon fell;
Anguish of body &mdash; wrath of soul, combined
To make his dying scene the type of hell;
Entwined and crush'd at last in evil's fatal spell.

Stretch'd on the bloody floor his pond'rous length;
Death's pallid cloud crept slowly o'er his cheek;
Though the red stream had drain'd his limbs of strength,
He look'd the rage he had not power to wreak&mdash;
He tried to leave a curse &mdash; but could not speak!
One deep but momentary flush there past
Across his face &mdash; 'twas like the wild red streak
Of setting sun, when storms are round it cast;
'Twas passion's wrathful close, that flash'd in death its last.

As the fierce Indian, when some snake has bitten
His best belov'd, his young and destin'd bride,
Looks on the reptile that his arm has smitten,
And sees it rolling, writhing by his side&mdash;
His wrath not in its death half satisfied&mdash;
So Leon o'er his lifeless victim stood;
His vengeance scarcely sated, though he died:
He could have crush'd the carcass in its blood;
Embedded as it lay in its once vital flood.

Eva, pale, trembling, had beheld the strife,
Fearful lest vengeance might not be complete;
And more than anxious for her lover's life&mdash;
But when she saw his enemy retreat,
And fall, and gasp, and stiffen at his feet&mdash;
She had no further wish, nor object, left:
Save quickly life's last welcome throb to meet&mdash;
Of all that could her being bless bereft,
Ah!  what was life to her with heart so deeply cleft!

As Leon stood, wrapt, gazing on his foe,
As though he wish'd to wake him from the dead;
To pierce &mdash; to rend him with another blow;
Until his ruthless soul again had fled&mdash;
He heard her fall &mdash; he started &mdash; saw she bled!
The fatal dagger in her hand was grasp'd:
Too late he flew &mdash; he rais'd her throbbing head&mdash;
Her bleeding bosom to his own he clasp'd,
And as he prest it there but felt how quick it gasp'd.

Deep sorrow choked the words he would have spoken;
He could but gaze, and groan in agony;
His thoughts were frenzied &mdash; wild &mdash; his heart seem'd broken,
To feel her growing colder; and to see
Her life in that red gushing torrent flee;
Another hour she would be gone for ever&mdash;
And he the prey of lonely misery!
Perchance one minute more &mdash; and he could never
Behold that living form, from which 'twas woe to sever.

He had just look'd on death so pityless,
It might be thought his soul was void of feeling&mdash;
But when he view'd her dying loveliness,
From whom the vital stream was swiftly stealing,
His thrilling brain in agony was reeling!
He saw the dews of death o'erspread her face&mdash;
The liquid light within her eyes congealing;
Till their late heavenly blue he scarce could trace,
Through the pale mists of death, that came their beams to chase.

Long as her orbs the living spark possess'd,
Their souls seem'd beaming from each other's eyes&mdash;
Long as her heart had motion in her breast,
They spoke their grief &mdash; 'twas all they could &mdash; in sighs!
In such a scene the look at once supplies
The loss of language &mdash; words are all too weak
To paint the frenzied feelings there that rise&mdash;
'Tis the eye's question, and the answering cheek&mdash;
'Tis these alone can tell what lips could scarcely speak:

And well they understood them; nor had need
Of words, their thoughts &mdash; their feelings to explain&mdash;
And though he mourn'd, he scarce could blame the deed;
He felt &mdash; he own'd &mdash; she never could regain
The hope that she was dash'd from; nor obtain
The restitution of her joy, &mdash; her fame:
What choice was left her, but to burst the chain
That bound her to a life of grief and shame&mdash;
Or perish by degrees beneath a blasted name?

He, agonized, knelt leaning over her&mdash;
She fondly turn'd her closing eyes on him&mdash;
Wrapt in each other, neither seem'd to stir;
But she was dying fast &mdash; th' exhausted limb
Sunk ne'er to rise again!  Her sight grew dim;
And death was fixing her last look in stone!
Her head fell back &mdash; her senses seem'd to swim&mdash;
The ling'ring life was smitten from its throne;
And consciousness expired in one faint &mdash; faultering groan.

And life's last pang was past &mdash; the opal spark
That shone within her eye, was quench'd in night&mdash;
That animated eye was soulless &mdash; dark&mdash;
Like an extinguished star in heaven's blue light:
Gone was the magic smile that charm'd the sight!
That mind of more than female energy,
Had taken its irrevocable flight:
That perfect form &mdash; those limbs of symmetry&mdash;
Fix'd in the sunless frost of death's cold statuary.

A moment past &mdash; there was a being there,
On whom his happiness, his hopes depended&mdash;
And now he is alone, and in despair;
And every feeling that he cherish'd ended&mdash;
A moment past, their looks, their sighs were blended;
And now there does but lie a lifeless thing&mdash;
A corse upon its bed of blood extended;
That can no longer share, nor know, the sting
That recollection leaves, his sever'd heart to wring.

She, young and fair, and in the bud of life,
Had cut its thread and leapt into the tomb&mdash;
While thousands shrink, and tremble at the knife;
And cling enamour'd to a wretch's doom;
In age, pain, poverty, and dungeon's gloom;
Cherishing to the last life's fluttering flame;
Though anguish, want, despair, and wrongs consume,
They fasten still to earth, in grief or shame;
And dread at last to quit a wrung and wither'd frame.

In one short hour how much had Leon borne!
His lost love found &mdash; but found in misery&mdash;
Fond hopes revived, to be as quickly torn&mdash;
A tale of horror heard in agony!
A mortal fight &mdash; a slaughter'd enemy&mdash;
The dying scene of her whose bliss he sought&mdash;
These in that space had past so suddenly;
It might be thought some troubl'd dream had wrought
Its wild creations there, with fear and horror fraught.

With folded arms, and looks of fix'd despair,
He views the form where still affection clings:
Th' unwelcome beam of morning finds him there&mdash;
Is it because the sorceress, Memory, flings
Her circle round, he bears her thousand stings;
And moves not &mdash; looks not &mdash; from that sight of woe!
He will not quit it, though it wake the springs
Of all &mdash; the sharpest sorrows man can know,
And force the deepest sighs that e'er he heaves below.

That was the form which in its life return'd
A love as pure as mortal heart e'er felt&mdash;
Those were the lips, and that the breast, that burn'd;
And those the eyes that made his spirit melt&mdash;
In whose blue softness fascination dwelt&mdash;
Now they are nothing &mdash; yet he would not leave them,
Till fate its last remaining blow had dealt;
And that was when he saw the earth receive them;
When tears his burning eyes might visit &mdash; and relieve them.

As pure a heart as ever throbb'd with life,
Was there lain lonely in its narrow rest;
Beyond the further reach of pain or strife&mdash;
As fair a form as earth's green couch e'er prest,
There slept, and wild-flowers bloom'd above her breast:
There the night-winds in mournful dirges swept;
And there, with all-devouring grief possest,
When all was dark around him, Leon crept&mdash;
Nor saw &mdash; nor thought of aught &mdash; save her for whom he wept.

How soon the scene of human bliss is wreck'd:
Heaven sends the bolt &mdash; the loved ones drop away!
Each lives to bear what none could once expect&mdash;
Fond hearts of sever'd feelings fall the prey!
Friends perish &mdash; parted &mdash; scatter'd in dismay!
One day gave Sire and Daughter to the grave&mdash;
And e'er another shed its noontide ray,
It saw the lover bounding o'er the wave;
Reckless if rode his bark, or sunk where none could save.
