Loved Harp!  I do not say farewell to thee,
As Poets erst have said, who meant it not:
Thou sole kind soother of my destiny;
With whom the pangs of life I oft' forgot;
If fate, in her dark will, should e'er decree
Our separation &mdash; then she seals my lot&mdash;
Hope from that instant sets no more to rise,
Nor earth with all her scenes show aught to charm mine eyes.

Not yet farewell &mdash; not yet &mdash; I have but tried
To wake thy chords with rude and feeble hand;
Untaught in all that form'd my joy and pride:
Fain would I hope to pour a sound more grand;
Now more adven'trous, since so rich a tide
Of harmony hath thrill'd my native land;
And raised it to that rapture with the strain,
That bard untutor'd scarce can hope to wake again.

Would I resign thee!  not for all that earth,
Known or unknown, contains within her womb;
No!  not to stand the first of princely birth;
The highest &mdash; richest sublunary doom,
Without there were a prize of little worth;
Or having lost thee &mdash; but a gilded tomb!
Who once has known the thrill of mental joy,
Would rather life should close, than fate that boon destroy.

I will &mdash; must cherish thee; for thou hast been
The sweet beguiler of full many an hour,
When withering darkness, closing o'er the scene,
Had sunk me else beyond hope's saving power:
By thee recall'd, she shone the clouds between,
That, while I touch'd thee, seem'd nor more to lour&mdash;
Care &mdash; sorrow &mdash; fortune's frowns &mdash; all past away;
And through the wintry gloom there burst a sunny ray.

Though in those hours of darkness and of sorrow,
I swept thy chords with scarcely conscious hand;
Though midnight lent no hope to cheer the morrow,
And nought but shapes of woe my spirit scann'd&mdash;
Still &mdash; still &mdash; from thee alone I seem'd to borrow
Some nameless charm to cheer life's wildering land:
It beam'd like friendship 'midst the dungeon's gloom;
To wing the captive's hours, and mitigate his doom.

Oh!  could I hope to other ears thy strain
Might yield but half the joy it gave to me&mdash;
To know I had not touch'd thee quite in vain&mdash;
To live, when dead, in some kind memory&mdash;
'Twould  smooth the passage through this track of pain;
And blunt the sharpest sting of destiny.
'Twas all I sigh'd for &mdash; all I now can hope&mdash;
My fancy's fondest dream &mdash; ambition's widest scope.
