Whilome in Limehouse docks there dwelt a youth,
Childe Higgins hight, the child of curst ennui,
Despair, shame, sin, with aye assailing tooth,
Had worn his beauty to the bone. &mdash; Ah me!
A lone unloving libertine was he;
For reft of health and hope's delusive wiles,
And tossed in youth on passion's stormy sea,
He stood a wreck 'mid its deserted isles,
Where vainly pleasure wooes and syren woman Smiles.

He was a merchant, 'till ennui'd with toil
Of counting house turned but to small account,
Sated of home, and Limehouse' leaden soil,
Nee more to his dried heart a freshening fount
Of kindly feelings; he aspired to mount
To intellectual fame, for when the brain
Is dulled by thoughts aye fearful to surmount,
When youth, hope, love, essay their charms in vain,
The rake-hell turns a blue as doth his sky again.

Thus turned the Childe, when in the Morning Post,
The Herald, Chronicle, and eke the Times,
He read with tasteful glee a daily host
Of the Strand bard's self-eulogistic rhymes;
He read, and fired with zeal, resolv'd betimes
A pilgrim to that minstrel's shrine to move,
As Allah's votaries in Arabian climes
To far Medina's hallowed altar rove,
There low to bend before the idol of their love.

He left his home, his wife without a sigh,
And trod with pilgrim-pace the Limehouse road,
The morn beamed laughing in the dark blue sky,
And warm the sun on post and pavement glowed:
Each varied mile new charms and churches showed,
But sceptic Higgins jeered the sacred band;
For his full tide of thought with scorn o'erflowed,
Or deep immersed in objects grave and grand,
Dwelt on the Warren's fame, at Number Thirty, Strand.

He passed Whitechapel in such ireful mood,
Where murdered muttons bob to every wind;
He saw the runnels red with bestial blood,
Their lazy streams through street and alley wind:
He saw and sickened in his inmost mind,
Felt how the heart with savage spleen ycrammed,
In blood alone can strange endearment find;
But such is man, (each pure affection shammed,)
Mean, heartless, lawless, dull, detestable, and damned.

A truce to thought, for attic Billingsgate
Already lures the pilgrim from his road;
Awe-struck he sees each naiad and her mate,
Haggling for halfpence with some river god,
Her Doric dialect, beautiful as broad,
Her plump cheek redolent of ancient grease,
Her fleecy hose with yellow worsted sewed,
Recall proud Athen's days, its golden fleece,
Its academic wits, and fame that nee shall cease.

Not so thy street, Boeotian Leadenhall!
Famed for new novels, leaden all and dull
Though wags thy library "Minerva" call,
Yet very British is Minerva's skull.&mdash;
Her brainless books seem'd doom'd to gather wool,
Or sold to vile cheesemongers by the pound,
To scour the soulless sculleries of John Bull,
While pots and pans (not sylvan) aye surround
Each panic-stricken tome, despite its lore profound.

And this is fame, that covetous cooks' shops
Should form the graves of every martyr'd work,
That Southey's strains should wrap up mutton chops,
Or Cheshire cheese anoint the leaves of Burke.&mdash;
That Theodore Ducas &mdash; Catiline &mdash; should lurk
'Mid Granger's sweets, with Wordsworth's Peter Bell,
Or Chalmers's Lecture on the Scotish kirk
Sleep with its fathers in some London hell,
Some fruiterer's fruitful shelf where dirt and dulness dwell.

But, lo, th' Exchange!  a busy world is here,&mdash;
A world of knaves in wide confusion blent;
Here beams the smile, &mdash; there falls th' unheeded tear,
For stock well-purchased, or for gold ill-spent.
All are on one fool's errand madly bent,
And Turk and Christian pass unnoticed by,
While Israel's sons nee more to discontent
A prey, &mdash; the new Jerusalem espy,
In this barbaric booth, this fair of vanity.

Ah me!  how grovelling is the mind of man!
How fixed on perishable hopes, and mean!
Wealth, honor, pride, engross his paltry span
Of life, &mdash; then leave him scathed in heart as mien.&mdash;
Here where I stand, the spirit of the scene
Enchains all hearts with talismanic spell,
In vain aspiring youth with blossoms green,
Bedeck'd comes forth; &mdash; here Mammon tolls his knell,&mdash;
And round him weaves the chain of avarice and of hell.

Th' Exchange is past, the Mansion House appears,
Surpris'd the Childe surveys its portly site,
Dim dreams assail him of convivial years,
And keener waxes his blunt appetite.&mdash;
Luxurious visions whelm his fancy quite,
Of calipash and eke of calipee,
While sylphs of twenty stone steal o'er his sight,
Smiting their thighs with blythe Apician glee,
And licking each his lips right beautiful to see.

Twas here they tucked, &mdash; these unctuous city sprites,&mdash;
'Twas here like geese they fattened and they died,
Here turtle reared for them her keen delights,
And forests yielded their cornuted pride.&mdash;
But all was vain, 'mid daintiest feasts they sighed;
Gout trod in anger on each hapless toe;
Stern apoplexy pummelled each fat side,
And dropsy seconded his deadly blow,
'Till floored by fate they sunk to endless sleep below.

But hark, the hum of multitudes, the roar
Of carts and coaches, and the various squalls
Or cries, that pierce the ear-drum's inmost core,
Have roused the Childe's attention at Saint Paul's.
Cheapside to near Guildhall in thunder calls,
Guildhall replies, of lungs with justice proud;
Milk-street and Lothbury, glad to join the brawls,
Have found a tongue, while Wood-street from her shroud
Rebellows to Lad-lane, who calls to her aloud.

And in the midst, as leader of the band,
Stands the magnificent Saint Paul's; &mdash; he towers
Sublime to heaven, by winnowing breezes fanned,
Unknown on lower earth; &mdash; the rattling showers,
The storm, the whirlwind that in vengeance lowers,
Pass him unharm'd; &mdash; he lifts his giant brow,
As if in mockery of their puny powers,
Or rapt in clouds like conscious guilt in woe,
Soars from the vulgar ken a mystery as now.

Something too much of this; but now 'tis past,
And Fleet-street spreads her busy vale below:
Lo!  proud ambitious gutters hurry past,
To rival Thames in full continuous flow;
The Inner Temple claims attention now,
That Golgotha of thick and thread-bare skulls,
Where modest merit pines in chambers low,
And impudence his oar in triumph pulls
Along the stream of wealth, and snares its rich sea-gulls.

Hail to this shrine of barristers and brass!
Of wigs and wags of learning and of lead!
Solomon's brazen temple &mdash; but alas!
With old king Log, king Solomon instead.
Ye gifted spirits of the legal dead,
Will none arise to grace degraded law?
Vain hope, despite the lore of each long head,
Satan hath found their lives a moral flaw,
And on them, bailiff-like, hath laid his ebon paw.

And thus the world is rife alone with fools,
Who clank in chains while fashion holds the noose;
Court, camp, and church, &mdash; what are they but the tools
Of sin, shame, slang, buffoonery, and abuse?
Momus with man has made a lasting truce.
And hence our patriots puff, &mdash; our warriors bray,&mdash;
Hence critics flood us with a muddy sluice
Of maudlin prose, &mdash; hence cant holds sovereign sway,
And sinless saints are spurn'd, while sainted sinners pray.

Our life is one fierce fever &mdash; death the leech
Who lulls each throb; &mdash; the has been, and to be;
The sole divine whose welcome aid can teach
The mysteries of a dread futurity.&mdash;
Come when he may, his advent will to me
Be spring and sunshine, for my soul is dark,
And o'er the billows of life's shoreless sea,
A sea uncheer'd by hope's celestial ark,
Cradled in storms and winds floats lone my little bark.

Thus mused the Childe, as thoughtful he drew near
The sacred shrine of Number Thirty, Strand,
And saw bright glittering in the hemisphere&mdash;
Like stars on moony nights &mdash; a sacred band
Of words that formed the bard's cognomen grand
Each letter shone beneath the eye of day,
And the proud sign-boot, by spring breezes fanned,
Shot its deep brass reflections o'er the way,
As shoots the tropic morn o'er meads of Paraguay.

Childe Higgins hied him to this bless'd abode&mdash;
Not forked Parnassus &mdash; Crete's Olympian hill&mdash;
Not Ilium's plain &mdash; by kings and warriors trod&mdash;
Calypso's cavern, Aganippe's rill,
Or Circe's isle famed for enchantment still&mdash;
Ere thrilled his soul with such intense delight
As thrilled it now when Warren's magic till
Thro' each shop-window gleamed upon his sight,
Clear as Italian dawn that gilds the brow of night.

But I forget &mdash; my pilgrim's shrine is won&mdash;
And he himself &mdash; the lone unloving Childe&mdash;
His Limehouse-birth, his name, his sandal-shoon,
And scallop shell, are dreams by fancy piled,
His dull despairing thoughts alone &mdash; once mild
As love &mdash; now dark as fable's darkest hell,
Are stern realities; &mdash; but o'er the wild
Drear desert of their blight the soothing spell
Of Warren's verse flits rare as sun-beams o'er Pall Mall.

Farewell &mdash; a word that must be and hath been&mdash;
Ye dolphin dames who turn from blue to grey,
Ye dandy drones who charm each festive scene
With brainless buzz, and frolic in your May,
Ye ball-room bards who live your little day,
And ye who flushed in purse parade the town,
Booted or shod &mdash; to you my Muse would say,
"Buy WARREN'S BLACKING," as ye hope to crown
Your senseless souls or soulless senses with renown.
