I look upon a noble tomb!  Lo, here,
The fine remains of all antiquity,
The rich works of the resting dead appear,
Clothed with a glory, ages hence to die!
Heroes of art!  Around, their labours lie,
Like spell-bound fragments of their vanish'd lives&mdash;
Moments immortal made whilst fleeting by,
Treasur'd by Fame, whose power old age survives,
And from the lapse of years a reverend strength derives.

The place is hallowed by its solemn trust,
Bequeath'd us by the fallen great and wise;
Whose frames, dissolved, are mingling with the dust,
And their wing'd souls escap'd into the skies!
With how much state these buildings seem to rise,
When looked on as the consecrated halls,
Where Science, resting from her labour lies,
With Memory by her side on whom she calls,
And Art to range her spoils around the sacred walls!

Are there no heav'nly visitants, that leave
The gates of their celestial realms, what time
Pale Venus sits upon the throne of eve,
To listen to the plaintive vesper's chime?
Are there no spirits from some far-off clime,
Up in the fair spheres of eternal day,
Loving to linger o'er these wrecks sublime,
Of Genius, parted from the earth away,
And minds, that sever'd are, from homes of crumbling clay?

Are there no secret, silent, visits paid,
At midnight, and by moonlight, to this spot,
By souls of ancient men, whose bones were laid,
Long ages since, within their tombs to rot?
Their memories, likewise, many an age forgot!
The people in the nether world that dwell,
Though once the denizens of this, do not
Their pondering ghosts o'erstep death's narrow spell,
And meet within this place, of former times to tell?

Some might look in their emptied urns, design'd,
The ashes of their clay-built home to hold,
Which thousand years ago they left behind,
To enter upon myst'ries still untold&mdash;
Death and the grave alone can them unfold!
Some to dark Egypt's treasures might repair,
And see the coffins of gigantic mould,
Which it was meant their kings, when dead, should share,
Though centuries have elaps'd since they were slumb'ring there!

O could we meet the spirits of the past!
If ever in this temple they are seen;
What floods of knowledge might their legends cast
Over these shades of glory which hath been!
How might we, from their tales of sorrow, glean,
Hints of lost truths which learning seeks in vain!
Discover what those mystic writings mean,
Engraven deeply in the granite's grain,
Yet, wrapp'd in grave-like gloom, secure, from light remain!

Perchance, if we could join such ghostly throng,
Their thrilling whispers might in part make known,
To whom the embalmed effigies belong,
O'er which the pall of silence hath been thrown,
Whilst years and ages o'er the world have flown,
And look'd on empires, into deserts made,
And deserts into mighty empires grown,
All since those bodies were in shrouds array'd,
Still standing on the earth, though dead, yet undecay'd!

But these are fancies, and this ward of art,
May never boast of an untombed guest,
Wand'ring amidst these ruins, to impart
The secrets of the grave!  Let the dead rest!
And, ah!  that all their souls with peace were blest!
Turn we to muse on those whose living feet,
The hallowed pavement of these halls have prest;
For this is Learning's, Science', Art's retreat,
And, for immortal ends, within these walls they meet!

Here may you see, full oft, with brow serene,
Philosophy, her fine and pensive eye,
Roving in silence round the solemn scene,
Which rich food doth unto her soul supply,
And seeds of giant thought, whose fruit shall vie
With the productions of the mighty dead;
They, whose remains in great profusion lie,
Over this splendid mausoleum spread;
Strewing with time-wreck'd skill the ground whereon we tread.

Here Meditation, too, is oft beheld,
Slow walking, grave Philosophy beside;
And you may see that her chaste bosom's swell'd,
With feelings strong, to mournfulness allied,
And large ideas that stretch their pinions wide,
Far spreading o'er the shadowy past, and o'er
The still more ample future, dim descried,
Like to some distant visionary shore,
Where temples built by Hope, crumble to dust no more!

Some Muse, not seldom, bears them company,
Whose brilliant eye with heav'nly light is fill'd,
Rolling with sweet poetic majesty;
And whose most intellectual glances, gild
The works whereon they rest; for she is skill'd,
To gather living beauties from the grave,
And with the fragments she obtains, to build
A fairy structure, beautiful and brave,
Sweet as an Iris' bower, arch'd o'er an evening wave!

Sometimes, perchance, though not so oft we fear,
Soul-royal Piety adorns their train;
Whom vilest minds, in their worst moods, revere,
And in her presence feel instinctive pain!
So fair is she, all beauty seemeth vain,
Which her sweet smile doth not illuminate;
And ev'n Philosophy may not obtain,
Such awe-struck fame as on her steps await,
But veil'd is by the light of her celestial state!

And there is active Knowledge with them found,
A gay-born nymph, yet not devoid of grace
Viewing with curious eye the scene around,
Perusing well the wonders of the place,
And searching every record there, to trace,
What truths may lie conceal'd from casual sight;
Long buried in oblivion's cold embrace,
Slumb'ring with Time through his perpetual night,
Which Knowledge, like a star, illumines with her light!

And Wisdom, her preceptress, near her stands,
With brow most like to Piety divine!
The gifts of Knowledge, fill her seraph hands,
Who doth to her, those varied works consign;
Well doth she ponder each elaborate line,
Casting the worthless from the good away;
And Knowledge, though full oft she may repine,
The laws severe of Wisdom to obey,
Yet doth she flourish best beneath her virgin sway.

These all most unobtrusive seem, and walk
The marble halls about, with silent feet;
And in low whispers of those wonders talk,
That in these dwellings of the ancient meet!
And students to this tomb of art retreat,
Seeking to catch the spirit of the past;
Here, day by day, they thoughtful take their seat,
A resurrection to effect at last,
Of all those master-works, by Death's shade overcast.

But others of a less ennobled class,
Within these awful precincts will intrude:
Dull-featured Ignorance is seen to pass
Through these free portals, with a footstep rude,
Marring the stillness of a solitude,
Whereon with silent awe the wisest gaze&mdash;
And there she makes her observations crude,
Looking along the walls with void amaze,
Or loading what she sees with most unwelcome praise.

And to this birth-place of the future wise,
Will Folly come, that most unthoughtful maid!
With Vanity, of fashionable guise,
All in gay garments, childishly display'd,
Around these halls of greatness to parade
And, worse than all, accompanied by Mirth,
Whose hollow peals the vaulted roofs invade,
As if light laughter, meteor of the earth,
Rose from amidst the wrecks of minds of heav'nly birth.

'Twere endless labour to enumerate
The motley tribes, their way that hither wend;
Coming to look upon the lofty state,
Of other lands and ages, and to spend
A vacant hour among their dead, that lend,
In the great glory of their mental might,
A lustre to the world, till time shall blend
With the new rising of eternal light,
Over the star-lit gloom of this life's lingering night!

Alas, for man!  His triumphs are but vain,
When 'neath the yoke of death his neck is bow'd!
Lo, then, the meanest living may profane,
The works of which his soul was once so proud!
Here we behold his glory in her shroud,
And see the brow of genius, cold yet fair,
Stain'd by the rude touch of the vulgar crowd;
All heedless of the beauty slumb'ring there,
In which their souls can have no shadow of a share!

But let the Muse a theme more grateful seek,
And tell how virtuous Beauty here is found;
Smiling, yet modest &mdash; lively, yet most meek,
Her head, perchance, with regal honours crown'd!
For know ye not, that this art-hallowed ground
Oft echoes to the tread of princely feet,
Whose natal halls our English homes surround,
Where patriot hearts with loyal freedom beat,
Ready, for England's weal, to man her guardian fleet!

This is Art's tomb, but still the monument
Of a great nation's gratitude, to those,
Whose labouring lives were in the service spent,
Of a far-fallen world, and who thus chose,
In lieu of calm and ignoble repose,
To lift on high their country's prostrate name,
And leave, until the book of time shall close,
Some few memorials of their noble aim,
To be revered by all the future sons of fame!

I love to seat me on some mouldering stone,
Some relic of the mighty days of yore:
There to recline and meditate alone,
Upon the grandeur of the dead, and pore
Over their giant memories, and o'er
Those soul-enshrining works which still remain,
Reminding us that now we may deplore,
The fall of many in the Muses' train,
Whose absence leaves a void, time scarce shall fill again.

Here the soul stands, and ponders on the past,
Held by the spirit of another clime,
And of an age long since from life outcast,
Lost mid the multiplying wrecks of Time!
Here she exults in visions most sublime,
Or looks in sadness on the mighty's fate,
Whose lives were seal'd up in their very prime,
Or whilst the plaudits of a world might wait
Upon the brightening march of their protracted state!

Egypt, Greece, Rome, whose thrones have been the world,
Hither the relics of their greatness send;
To tell, their towering fame is not yet hurl'd
From life's domains, but that they still contend
With the usurping throng, that fain would rend
Their glory from their stiffen'd grasp, and rive
The rev'rend honours from their brows, to lend
Their own a graceful lustre, and to give
Their names a place with those that shall hereafter live.

This is a chamber to the soul, wherein
Solemn she muses, from the world retired,
And from Time's eye; and shut out from the din
Of present things, until she hath acquired
Acquaintance with the dead who once aspired,
As men do now, to an immortal fame,
And with the frenzy of ambition fired,
Fought for the little triumph of a name,
And sacrificed their souls, such vague reward to claim!

But, hush &mdash; all were not so:  for there were some,
That bled in Liberty's thrice noble cause;
And these shall live for many an age to come,
The guardian names of truthful Freedom's laws!
Time, o'er their faults, a veil in silence draws,
But brings their brilliant virtues forth to view,
With a majestic force, which overawes
The soul that would their sun-like track pursue&mdash;
These were Earth's noble sons!  Of such, alas!  how few!

With sad memorials this temple teems,
Relics of glory falling to decay!
Rich as the fragments of those broken dreams,
Which, when the soul of youth hath pass'd away,
Do still about the halls of Memory lay,
Dear to the labouring heart!  Like these they flee,
Becoming fainter still from day to day,
Till, in the lapse of years, the world may see
No more of these, perchance, than those which are to be!

For future things, and past, shall into one
Hereafter mingle, and a later age,
Though still enlightened by yon lasting sun,
Shall read of those whose labours now engage
Our thought-engend'ring souls, upon the page
Of mutilated legends; and the young
Shall sweetly listen, while some hoary sage
Tells them of long-lost works, their praises sung,
By bards, with whose renown age after age hath rung.

Oh, what a fruitful subject have we found;
Germe of a thousand tales!  For there doth dwell,
With every fragment on this haunted ground,
Shadows of many spirits, like a spell,
Working on kindred souls; and they compel
The living to revere the fame-clothed dead,
Whilst of the triumphs of their minds they tell;
Illustrious as the light, now sweetly shed
Over their lofty works, in ruins here outspread.

Turn in and speak not, for the dead reside
Shrined in their own bright works, within this place!
Embalm'd with honours, here they still abide,
Lying in endless state!  And you may trace
The mental features of a mighty race,
By looking on the relics of their skill,
Which the strong arms of this great fane embrace;
Whose ancient halls such gems of science fill
As might adorn a temple on Parnassus' hill!

Nature and art their treasures here combine;
And marbles, and sepulchral vases, meet,
Beneath this roof, with fruits of many a mine&mdash;
Jewels, and minerals, that grace the feet
Of monarch mountains &mdash; and those insects sweet,
That wing the sun-beams of each orient vale&mdash;
And reptiles strange &mdash; and beasts, whose wild retreat
Is where the morn no human eye doth hail&mdash;
And birds of alien plume, 'neath foreign skies that sail!

Monarchs, and more illustrious bards, have here
Their marble representatives; admired,
As they themselves were, when, in this our sphere,
Their bright souls dwelt, in mortal flesh attired&mdash;
The beauteous shrine from whence their minds inspired,
Like oracles, the listening world, and gain'd
The ear of proudest nations, and acquired
A lordly name, which o'er the earth long reign'd&mdash;
Behold the small remains of what such power obtain'd!

The world is but a haunted sepulchre,
Where men like spirits dwell, and rove among
The graves of those, whose energies might stir,
In times by-gone, with eloquence of song,
Or noble deeds, or arguments more strong,
Whole nations up to glorious works!  And they
Glide off into their waiting tombs, ere long,
For others, in their turn, thus making way&mdash;
So phantom forms retire before the advancing day!

And life is like a star-lit night, which sin,
At oft returning intervals, doth shroud;
Leaving us, as with prison'd time, shut in,
Whelm'd by the darkness of a moral cloud;
The which, those minds with brightest thoughts endow'd,
Hardly with one lone ray illuminate,
Ere they themselves beneath Death's power have bow'd,
And tearful honours on their urns await&mdash;
Ere those that drank their light, regret their timeless fate!

What then are all the galleries of art&mdash;
The treasuries of knowledge?  Are they not
The tombs of vanish'd genius, where a part
Of her embodied thoughts repose?  And what
Are all the riches of this hallowed spot&mdash;
This temple, on whose threshold now we tread?&mdash;
Fragments of many a nation's fame, whose lot
Is now to be with barbarous hosts o'erspread,
Though sons they had, whose names reign o'er the ancient dead!

Here, let ambition pause, that blazing star,
Whose fervent path with quenchless heat doth burn;
As when hot Noon, upon her sultry car,
Rides o'er the panting world!  Here let her learn,
To drink cool wisdom from the dead man's urn&mdash;
That marble cup which Nature fills with tears,
As her sweet children to the dust return;
Struck down in youth, or from the mount of years,
Where, full of fame, they stood beside their brave compeers!

Our mourning thoughts, when on these works we gaze,
Beget rich fruits of wisdom; and the tears,
Dropt o'er the vanities of other days,
Are gracious as the dew of twilight spheres,
Which, though in darkness horn, the soul it cheers!
From solemn meditation joy doth grow,
Maturing, like the oak, with length of years;
And, if the love of heav'n therewith we know,
Then, though Death cut it down, it ceaseth not to blow.

'Tis not time lost, to talk with antique lore,
And all the labours of the dead:  for thence
The musing mind may bring an ample store
Of thoughts, that will her labours recompense.
The dead hold converse with the soul, and hence,
He that communeth with them, doth obtain
A partial conquest over time, from whence
The soul departs, for ever to remain,
Where life, with all its pomp, appeareth worse than vain.

Turn, turn, from earth to heav'n, for here we find
That all is vanity:  and we are taught,
By these best treasures of the world, to bind,
With everlasting truth, each new-born, thought;
That, when the glories of this life are nought,
As now in Wisdom's eye they all appear,
With wealth divine our spirits way be fraught,
Then resident in some yet unknown sphere&mdash;
The praise of living men, no more to heed or hear.

There is a better hope than mortal gain,
To which immortal spirits may aspire,
Whose substance all, if willing, may obtain,
Whose help each soul hereafter will require:
For Justice, armed with a sword of fire,
In judgment on this crime-heap'd world shall rise;
And myriads, in that dread hour, shall desire,
When waked from death, to look on flaming skies,
That they in life had fled to Christ, their sacrifice.

