Old Egypt!  In the still and midnight hour,
When, through yon casements' tall and narrow panes,
The moon-beams steal into this marble bower,
To watch, like spirits, round the huge remains
Of the dark grandeur of thine ancient plains,
Whereon thy Pharaohs held despotic sway,
Barbarian splendour filling up their reigns,
And mystic glory, long since pass'd away,
From temples and proud halls, sublime in their decay.&mdash;

Old Egypt!  Here at such an hour I'd muse,
Some cold sarcophagus my throne of thought,
Where dwelt the vanish'd dead!  Here would I lose
All consciousness of mortal things, till nought,
Save the dread visions of the past, were brought
Before my silent soul, and her cleans'd sight,
The shadow of thine old renown had caught;
Seen in dim state amidst the dubious light,
Thrown by the spectral moon athwart the realms of night!

Then might these fragments of past greatness, tell
Tales of thy monarchs, mingled with the dust!
Ah!  frail remains of some time-broken spell,
Now to the verge of dark oblivion thrust,
Though once deem'd worthy to uphold the trust
Of artist's skill, and hero's blood-earn'd fame!
Yet the rude relic of colossal bust,
Or demon form, unworthy of a name,
Ere now, hath well nigh fail'd, one passing sigh to claim!

The pyramids, thy giant tombs, still stand
Upon the burning deserts, where of old
Their vast foundations were, beneath the sand,
Laid by a thousand hands of mortal mould,
Whose labours, by despotic power controll'd,
Built for the living and the future dead!
These, in dark vision, we might here behold,
Rising amidst our thoughts, as they were led,
Among these granite wrecks, by silence deep and dread,

Which walks at midnight on this marble floor,
And, in dumb wonder, with an eye of stone,
Gazes on ruin'd grandeur, now no more
Making the worship of a world its own,
But seated, as with Death, upon a throne,
Rear'd with the relics of its ancient reign,
From which the laugh of life long since hath flown;
Of whose rich lustre, little doth remain,
Save remnants of old power, ne'er to revive again!

Thy black magicians, Egypt!  where are they?
Bring forth their charming-wands, that we may raise
Their dark and bearded forms, in grim array,
As they were wont to frown on former days;
When, by their star-fix'd and mysterious gaze,
The hearts of mighty men wax'd wondrous weak,
And tyrant monarchs, stricken with amaze,
Of fate-doom'd future heard the sorcerers speak,
When of their midnight dreams, the burden they would seek!

Where do the cabalistic masters dwell&mdash;
The princes of the hell-born science, where?
Let the dread forms of yonder mummies tell,
Which, like immortal statues of despair,
Swath'd in their spell-wrought shrouds, oblivion dare!
Ask them where Egypt's prophets may be found,
For they were dwelling with the mighty there,
Ere Thebes the ancient, o'er the world renown'd,
In overwhelming seas of desert sand was drown'd!

Ages on ages, like the advancing waves
Of ever-widening seas, have overswept
The dim memorials of a nation's graves,
Wherein the ashes of her sons are kept,
Who, in embalmed state, long years have slept
In the unconscious chambers of the dead
Damp with the tears by widow'd Science wept,
And by full many a learned pilgrim shed,
Within the cavern'd tombs, oft echoing with their tread!

We ask in vain the mystery of the past:
The dead, though well preserved, are silent all!
A sullen stillness hath their homes o'ercast,
And, on the dark roof of each vaulted hall,
The wizard bats cling round the rocky wall,
For nought is there to break their constant sleep!
In vain upon the shrouded forms we call,
Whose voiceless scorn but makes the living weep!
The counsel they've received, with stern resolve they keep!

Egypt, the ruin of a nation, stands,
Crumbling upon the deserts, whence she rose,
The earliest work of Art's time-wearying hands,
Whose labours seek no guerdon of repose,
Till the vast volume of the world shall close,
And the sun's bright and ever-wakeful eye
Shall cease to read the record of its woes,
Pass'd, like a storm-cloud from an April sky,
Where tempests on the wings of summer breezes fly!

Yea, Egypt is a ruin; and the halls,
Wherein it is our lot to meditate,
Hold relics of a grandeur, which appals
The soul that muses on her tomb-like fate:
Foretelling what vain-glorious meeds await
The fame-crown'd energies of human pride,
Whose triumphs are of such a transient date&mdash;
Unto Oblivion's conquests near allied,
With which they hold debate, or slumber side by side!

How soon a nation's proud schemes are forgot,
When the wild chorus of her life is o'er!
Here are the idols, but the priests are not!
Their hoary forms are seen on earth no more,
Stain'd with brute blood, perchance with human gore,
The dread libation to some demon god,
Which Superstition's hand was prone to pour
In lands, obedient to those tyrant's nod,
Whose annals are enwrapp'd in hieroglyphics odd&mdash;

The written symbols of a mystic tongue&mdash;
Rude-pictured thoughts, the wing of time hath veil'd!
O'er which the muse of learning long hath hung.
Though to decypher them her skill hath fail'd!
Oblivion over Art hath here prevail'd,
And, in stern triumph, borne away the name
Of priest, or king, whose fiats once were hail'd,
And echoed by the hungry trump of Fame,
Feeding alike on deeds of glory or of shame!

Fragments of mortal forms are spread around
This decorated sepulchre of art;
Wherein the rude resemblances are found,
Of men, that now in this world have no part&mdash;
Deserted chambers of their souls, whence dart
No glances of the spirit, nor the rays
Of life-illuminating thoughts, which start,
At intervals, from earth, ere life decays, 
And on celestial visions fix their dazzling gaze!

The palaces of many minds are here,
Deserted by their lords, whose dwelling-place
Is now transferr'd to some less changeful sphere;
Whilst the rude rites of restless years deface
Their ancient habitations, where we trace
Their fading footsteps, in the avenues,
Which their enkindling thoughts were wont to grace,
With the love-charms of life's delicious hues,
Though ruins they've become, wherein of death we muse!

And the fair portals, whence of old they peer'd
Over the realms of Nature, now appear
As marble relics, evermore uncheer'd
By the sweet touch of life, once fresh and clear
As the spring smile of a rich-guerdon'd year&mdash;
The orbit where the eye roll'd like a star,
Filling, with cheerful light, its lovely sphere,
Stored well with beauty, brought in from afar,
And made unto a fairy's dwelling similar&mdash;

Those chambers, too, which Nature's melodies,
Of fragrant breath, were wont of old to fill,
Waiting an audience of the soul &mdash; all these,
Here represented by the artist's skill,
Remind us of the men of old; but still,
More like to tombs than temples do they seem,
And call up thoughts of undefined ill;
Like the wan forms of some unearthly dream,
Which set the soul on thirst for morn's heart-cheering beam.

We look around this place, and know not where
Our meditation to begin or end!
Idols of horrid form, and hideous air,
Like demons on our wand'ring thoughts attend!
On these we gaze; and marvel men could bend
The knee, such grim and savage shapes before;
And, howsoever dark, that they should lend
Their souls to such base service, and adore
These works, whose aspect seems the vilest art e'er wore.

Mummies, adorn'd with colour'd beads of glass,
Taken from coffins standing by their side,
Plead for our notice, as we onward pass,
Along these chambers where the dead abide!
Nor should the pilgrim's pity be denied,
Nor ev'n the muses' tears, where Death and Time
Have thus, with Love's last efforts, been defied,
On the dim borders of their own dark clime&mdash;
Stealing a mournful triumph, transient, yet sublime!

'Twas thus the ancient world, when art was young,
Strove her dead children to immortalize;
And to their soul's late temples fondly clung,
Perhaps not knowing they were in the skies!
Ah, me!  how vainly weeping nature tries,
Her fleeting offspring on the earth to keep!
For lo, alas!  each generation dies,
Like a spent billow in the stormy deep;
And what to Love is left, save o'er their dust to weep!

Yet are these mummies, partial triumphs, too,
Samples of Nature's tenderness and power!
It is not much, but all that she could do,
So to prepare them for the grave's cold bower,
And cheat, in part, Destruction of his dower!
And we, a sorrowing lesson may receive,
Who now are filling up life's later hour,
When, for awhile, the bustling world we leave,
To look upon these dead, and o'er earth's troubles grieve!

Lo, these embalmed people, walk'd the streets
Of cities, which have likewise pass'd away!
Nor History herself their name repeats;
And where they stood no mortal tongue can say!
Fame, annals, life, alike gone to decay!
And who are these, the aromatic dead?
Noble, or learn'd, or unrenownd were they?
Alas!  we know not! &mdash; All that can be said,
Is, that on earth they dwelt, and thence their spirits fled!

Here lies a bust of most enormous size,
A ruin, from a ruin'd city brought!
Dragg'd from a fallen temple, where still lies,
Immoveable, it's huge remainder, wrought,
Ev'n by its own dead weight, with help of nought,
Deep down into the burning desert sand;
Yet rear'd for him who with Achilles fought,
And fell in presence of his armed band!
The Aethiop Memnon, fam'd through every age and land!

This Memnon was a mighty man of yore,
Son of the Morning and Tithonus bright,
Who with Aurora dwells for evermore,
A young cicada singing in her sight,
Charm'd by the sweet spell of her lovely light!&mdash;
He was a Trojan warrior, and his glance
Review'd ten thousand men, all strong for fight,
Waiting till he should bid each rank advance,
And, in the crowded combat, take a soldier's chance.

And Memnon fell into a hero's grave,
Beneath the death-stroke of a valiant foe!
And yet his people held him great and brave,
As Egypt in her dying hour can show,
Though one more strong than he had laid him low!
There was a temple in his honour rear'd,
And travellers the place thereof still know,
Dispread with wrecks, by pilgrim hands half clear'd,
Upon the site where once Thebes in her pride appear'd!

Aurora, Memnon bore!  She is all light,
And youthful loveliness, whilst his great name,
Lives in the darkness of Egyptian night,
Lighting, as with a dim sepulchral flame
The gloomy grandeur of a warrior's fame,
Long standing mid the wrecks of many years,
Now unto ages grown, whose heroes claim
The guerdon of our towering nation's tears,
Ris'n, like a late-born star, among the ancient spheres.

Our native land, some think, is growing old,
And near advancing to that hour of need,
Which our forefathers, in their day, foretold,
Might quickly to her glorious reign succeed!
And now of them their late descendants read,
As men who lived in times long since gone by;
And the full fame of many a valiant deed,
Wrought by their hands, ere they were call'd to die,
Seems fading fast away, like twilight from the sky!

They had their merry days, when birds were singing,
From early morn till evening's dewy close:
And long they listened while the bells were ringing,
Or danced until the summer moon arose,
To light them homeward to their sweet repose!
Now of their lives we read in olden lore,
And round their graves the bearded thistle grows:
Deep are their slumbers, and they hear no more
The mellow evening bells, still ringing as of yore!

Abbots and Templars, barons, bards, and kings&mdash;
Shadows of times remote &mdash; have pass'd away!
The minstrel sweeps no more his silent strings,
When Evening sleeps upon the mountain grey,
Or Morn throws wide the pearl-built gates of day!
Echoes no more the loud and lordly hall!
Listens no lady fair to love-lorn lay,
Sweet as the moon-light in a fountain's fall!
Dreams, dreams of elder days, for tears alone that call!

The pilgrims sleep within their narrow cells!
And generations, mingled with the dead,
Like them oft heard the melancholy bells,
And tears on their forefathers' ashes shed!
And many a live-long night the moon hath spread
Her lovely veil of light o'er hill and plain,
Since these were borne unto their lowly bed,
From whence they never more shall rise again,
Till Death himself is dead, and Time completes his reign!

And all these things seem ancient!  Yet the page
Of history was old when these occurr'd!
And Egypt's glory had, for many an age
Ere then, been on her pyramids conferr'd!
And long before had new-born nations heard
The echoes loud of Egypt's hoary fame;
And ev'n these recent realms, a mere by-word
To other lands, long ere these days became,
For Greece had lost her life, and Rome her royal name!

Albion leans on her ancient tombs, and weeps!
And these are trembling with their weight of years!
But here, where Egypt's giant grandeur sleeps,
She like an infant of the world appears,
Or virgin, bath'd in youth's affecting tears!
And that which here antiquity we deem,
And which, as such, the pilgrim soul reveres&mdash;
This, view'd beside Egyptian eld, doth seem
Well nigh too fresh to form a minstrel's reverend theme!

This solemn store, whereon with awe we gaze,
As from the tomb for veneration calls;
And tells, that for these wrecks, our hands should raise
Some place, resembling more their native halls!
No new-cut stones should form the rising walls,
Nor modern marble, grace the spreading floor;
No columns, crown'd with Grecian capitals,
Nor caryatides, the roofs explore;
Nor Art, in Roman robes, stand waiting at the door!

All should Egyptian be &mdash; a solitude,
Unlike all others form'd &mdash; unique, yet grand:
Rear'd like barbarian temples, greatly rude,
Wanting the polish of the classic hand:
The pillars, simple and sublime should stand,
Upstarting from an aged granite base,
And form'd of rough wrecks, gather'd from the land,
Where lived and died the great and gloomy race,
By whom of old were wrought the wonders of this place.

Such should the temple be &mdash; worthy of those,
Whose hands the sea-like lake of Moeris made;
Whereto th' exuberant wealth of Nilus flows,
And 'neath whose waves, as hath of yore being said,
Foundations of two pyramids were laid,
Which far above the waste of waters tower'd;
Whilst on their top, as on two thrones display'd,
Two marble giants o'er the waters lower'd,
Dark as Oblivion's frown, which hath their strength devour'd.

Or rear a labyrinth in miniature,
For those who built that endless one of yore,
The ashes of twelve monarchs to secure,
And reptiles, which they reverenc'd even more&mdash;
It stood upon Lake Moeris' ample shore,
And near the Town of Crocodiles; so call'd,
Because such creatures they were prone to adore!
Its vistas vast, the wilder'd mind appall'd,
And by its serpent ways the feet were long inthrall'd!

Twelve palaces, and each a wilderness
Of glory, rang'd round twelve halls, and containing
Rich rooms and cavern'd chambers numberless,
Where superstitious Solitude was reigning:
These were the wonders &mdash; still in part remaining&mdash;
For they exist in many a minstrel's song,
Whose spell, the frail works of the world enchaining,
Their fame to latest ages doth prolong;
Thus giving them a place, the gems of earth among.

Build for the dead!  For Egypt's mighty, build!
Not for the living, less sublime than they&mdash;
Where are their pyramids; or are they skill'd
To make, like them, age after age their prey,
And bid the chariot wheels of time convey
Their venerable fabrics of renown&mdash;
Which yet endure, while realms around decay,
And on the wrecks of later labours frown&mdash;
Great, though impair'd, to unborn generations down?

Build for the dead, then, for they built for fame,
That of their glory the full stream might run
Long parallel with time, till it became,
Like their own Nile, inferior to none
That have o'erflow'd the world since time begun,
Or shall, until the end thereof &mdash; for ne'er
Hath art, the labour of their hands outdone,
Whose towers of strength the young earth's marvel were,
And now the aged world's unequall'd wonders are!

Thebes was their work!  Thebes of the hundred gates;
The Babylon of Egypt!  Still there stand
Within it, palaces of unknown dates,
Immeasurable!  and a countless band
Of sphinxes, gloomy as their native land,
Keep everlasting watch, where walks extend
Between unshaken columns, all as grand
As obelisks, which there to heaven ascend,
With temples, statues, halls, and glories without end!

A dark enigma doth the Sphinx appear
Genius of desolation form'd to be:
And to preside o'er regions waste and drear,
In mountain wilds, or by the lonely sea,
Or in dark caverns whence the living flee,
And dragons dwell, and dread chimeras sleep,
And things that would from mortal light be free;
Choosing to haunt the wild shores of the deep,
Where, round wave-riven rocks, the bellowing billows sweep&mdash;

There should the Sphinx be placed &mdash; or lonely lie,
Awful and silent, on her native plains;
Where towns and temples once might cheer the eye,
But now where desolation only reigns,
And Ruin's banner waves on fallen fanes,
Borne o'er the deserts by the homeless wind
Which, ever unto night, sings stormy strains,
As mourning deep for Oedipus the blind,
Who quench'd his sight to show the darkness of his mind.

The shepherd of some king of Corinth, found
Young Oedipus upon a branch suspended,
Belonging to a mountain tree &mdash; unbound
The weeping babe, who was by birth descended
From a then reigning king, though undefended,
Left thus to famish on a mountain high;
That so his fear-curs'd life might there be ended,
And give the famous oracle the lie,
Which had foretold, the father by his son should die&mdash;

And so he did:  for lo, the stranger Queen,
The infant from her shepherd's hand received;
Who, growing up, knew not how he had been,
In early life, of regal right bereaved:
But finding after all his soul aggrieved,
To the Corinthian court he bade adieu;
For of his birth there was a tale believed,
Which soon unto a sland'rous story grew&mdash;
And, wand'ring forth from thence, his sire he met and slew!

He knew not then, that in the hour of pride,
His father by his wrathful hand was slain;
But onward went to Thebes, and there he tried,
The riddle of the murd'rous Sphinx to explain:
Nor long the royal wand'rer tried in vain&mdash;
'Twas infancy, and manhood, and old age&mdash;
And thus the monster by his skill was slain,
Who dash'd her brains out in her witch-like rage!
But what ensued we leave upon the classic page&mdash;

Read me this riddle the great Sphinx propounds:
A tablet of rude writing she hath sent,
Whose character of mystery, confounds
The learning of the age &mdash; Perhaps she meant
To tell us, that the time her vot'ries spent
For her, was labour lost; and that the wise
Of these more polish'd times, might rest content
With things less deeply hid from mortal eyes&mdash;
For in her service, still, but small advantage lies.

She was the child of some perverted thought,
The ill-form'd offspring of a goodly mind,
Whose native strength, with hard condition fought,
And strove in darkness, and alone, to find
A path to immortality, and bind
The memory of its struggle for a name
Around Time's brow, that it might be entwin'd
With the remembrance of its nation's fame,
When mightier works, grown old, should Egypt's strength proclaim.

'Tis an Egyptian mystery, like its land,
Darken'd by fable; and in vain we strive,
The shrouded truth thereof to understand:
The form, its vanish'd meaning doth survive,
And from its own obscurity derive
A portion of sublimity, which leads
The soul into its deep design to dive,
Though from its ken the drift thereof recedes&mdash;
Pass on, for stream more clear the thirsting spirit needs.

Night have I seen, in cloudy robes array'd,
Draw beauty from the moon's transparent urn,
Which flung around an amber-colour'd shade;
An emblem here of Egypt I discern,
Stately as midnight, and as darkness stern;
Yet memory is a moon to her, to whom,
As to a fount of light, she still may turn,
And her disconsolate features re-illume&mdash;
But still 'twould be like moon-beams sleeping on a tomb.

Egypt, of nations was the eldest born:
The legislator of the world, where first
Law sprang to light, and bless'd earth's second morn!
The land where Art a new-born babe was nurst!
Where sun-like Science into being burst,
Remotest ages to illuminate,
Deep in the waves of ignorance immers'd!
Mark now and mourn the hoary nations fate:
A den of slaves become, though once so wise and great!

Land of Osiris, Saturn's murder'd son
Whose regions lie along the Great-Sea coast,
And reach unto those deserts, over-run
By the rude Arab's wild and warlike host!
Land of the dead!  say where is now thy boast
Of twice ten thousand cities, once thy pride,
Yet dwindled to a tale, which hath almost
The rainbow glance of memory defied;
That daughter of the earth, and heaven's betrothed bride.

Darkness and light, in Egypt's history,
Are strangely mingled, and we marvel how
She could have school'd the native dignity
Which erst sat thron'd upon her lofty brow,
So that her spirit should descend to bow
To things that creep on earth, and homage pay
To forms of meanest creatures, such as now
No land within the human eye's survey,
Is base enough to laud with one ignoble lay.&mdash;

Not far from hence, a broken altar stands,
Whereat a mutilated figure kneels,
Supporting it with both uplifted hands;
Whilst, on the top, an ill-shap'd stone reveals
The object worship'd, and the spirit feels
Indignant at idolatry so base;
For lo, a sightless beetle's form appeals
For adoration to a heav'n-born race,
So fall'n, that they could thus defile earth's holiest place!

This altar, to the scarabeus rais'd,
The depth defines of human nature's fall:
Well might the Grecian's loftier soul be prais'd,
Which on an unknown god was wont to call,
When thus Egyptian darkness doth appal,
By reason of it's depth, the astonish'd mind!
Strange folly this, most marvellous to all,
However to religion's glory blind,
That in such worship vile, man's soul should pleasure find!

Standing among these marble wrecks, the soul
Recalls the history of this land to view,
Through which the waves of seven-mouth'd Nilus roll;
Where reign'd the kings, that labour'd to subdue
The ancient fathers of the wand'ring Jew,
Whose nation, now extinct, in after-time
Into a great and warlike empire grew;
And, ere they fell from this their height sublime,
Fill'd ages with their deeds of glory or of crime.

Upon Grand Cairo's rock a castle stands,
Wherein is Joseph's well!  Oh, tearful thought,
If such it be:  for where are those, whose hands
The work thereof so marvellously wrought?
And where is now that glory gone, which brought
Surrounding nations to their land for bread,
Men their young Hebrew ruler was besought
By starving realms, from Egypt's store-house fed,
To take their sons for slaves, who else must join the dead!

Fall'n art thou, Egypt!  Nations proud and strong
Have sprung up on the earth, and been renown'd
For works that live in many a minstrel's song,
Since thou wast monarch of all nations crown'd!
And these are lost in darkness most profound,
Whilst Egypt lives &mdash; or rather lies alone,
Like a fall'n giant, grov'lling on the ground,
Beneath the Moslem tyrant's trembling throne,
Sapp'd by its subject's blood, and weak from violence grown!

Nile was not young three thousand years ago,
When, in a rushy ark, a new-born child
Slept by his side, unconscious of the woe
Felt by its race, to slavery exil'd&mdash;
When to his stream, where grew the weed-grass wild,
Pharaoh's dark daughter with her damsels came,
And saw the waken'd babe, which on her smil'd,
As if the royal virgin's love to claim&mdash;
That first bright step which led to Israel's peerless fame!

A shepherd in the Midian wilderness,
His father's flock the future prophet fed;
Thence was he summon'd forth by God to bless
His people, when from Pharaoh's hand they fled&mdash;
Thus David in a shepherd's tent was bred,
Ere he was call'd to conquer Israel's foes:
And thus the Lord of life, for us that bled,
In humble sphere prepared to bear our woes,
And, from a borrow'd tomb, to God's right hand arose!

And Moses, laden with the weight of years,
Upon Mount Nebo took at length his stand;
And, as the setting sun illumes two spheres,
His beaming eyes beheld the promised land,
And that wild waste where Israel's numerous band,
Ready for march, near Jordan's borders lay:
There his great soul received her last command,
And, in full glory, bore from earth away,
Calm as the evening light at close of summer day.

Silent and soft, as from some moon-watch'd fountain,
In the still skies, descends the sphere-born dew,
The prophet's soul left Nebo's lofty mountain,
And to the regions of the blessed flew!
Not peaceful thus do all men bid adieu
To time's fair scenes, those types of things unknown:
And Egypt, whose remains we now review,
Once heard, appall'd, an army's dying groan
When in the sanguine sea her hosts were overthrown.

Hark!  hark!  I hear the bellowing roar,
As of two dreadful seas in full tide meeting,
Their billows bearing down the rocky shore,
Wave upon wave in wild commotion beating:
And there are thousand tongues for help entreating;
And cries of battle-steeds in tumult dying;
And shouts which struggling warriors are repeating,
Not vanquish'd by their foes, nor from them flying,
Yet grappling hard with death, and in strong torture crying&mdash;

The clash of swords is heard, drawn out in vain,
And sheath'd in billows by their own blood dyed;
War-chariots sinking in the watery plain,
With glittering helms and armour are descried!
Swords, spears, and shields, toss'd on the foaming tide,
And ensigns floating on the boiling surge,
Aid not the men that Israel's God defied!
Thrice from the wild abyss their brows emerge,
And then the mingling waves ring on their funeral dirge.

Thy ten plagues, Egypt, now to mind I call:
Nile's waters changed into a bloody wave&mdash;
Swarms of vile reptiles o'er the land that crawl&mdash;
Ulcers and fiery biles on prince and slave&mdash;
And tempests, from whose wrath no arm can save&mdash;
Vast troops of locusts o'er thy coasts bestrown&mdash;
With darkness, deep and dreadful as the grave,
Into whose maw thy first-born sons were thrown
And such feast, since the deluge, death hath never known!

At midnight there were cries heard through the land:
Lovely princesses, with dishevell'd hair,
At palace gates were trembling seen to stand;
And humbler maids, struck speechless by despair,
Their dark eyes fix'd upon the vacant air,
Mourn'd in mute anguish for their brothers slain;
Each of the other's loss yet unaware,
Till timid day-light had return'd again,
To tell the havoc made in one night's murderous reign!

The terrors of that night, bow'd Pharaoh's head,
When God was by his heaviest judgment known:
He felt the Angel of Destruction's tread,
Who, passing, shook the harden'd monarch's throne:
He heard a shriek as if a soul had flown;
And learn'd, commission'd Death had dealt his blow
On Egypt's first-born, and on them alone&mdash;
Then rose to let heav'n-guarded Israel go!
Ah, what will not God do for those his love that know!

There is a people, scatter'd wide indeed,
Yet from the mingling world distinctly kept&mdash;
Doth Egypt not remember Abrah'm's seed,
Though in the grave their glory long hath slept,
Since their last lord o'er falling Sion wept
Ages ago, the Roman standard stood
Upon her ruins, yet have ages swept
O'er Rome herself, like an o'erwhelming flood,
Since down Jerus'lem's streets she pour'd her childrens' blood!

And still the nation lives!  So God ordain'd,
When his prophetic bards her downfall sung;
Yet no reward their tuneful warnings gain'd,
When their loud lyres with fiery vengeance rung:
Still to their idols rebel Israel clung,
And when Messiah came, their prince they kill'd&mdash;
Like demons on their nation's hope they sprung,
And thus the measure of their guilt was fill'd!
God!  what a base whereon thy work of love to build!

Egypt shall fall, but Sion rise again
To glorious life, for ever to endure;
For lo, Jehovah's promise doth remain
Firmer than earth, as heav'n itself secure!
Yet, to the waters of salvation pure,
The thirsting Jews shall with the Gentiles throng&mdash;
But pause we here, nor let this theme allure,
The muse to linger with these thoughts too long&mdash;
Time-laden Egypt claims the burden of our song!

Memphis, a nymph, one of great Nile's dark daughters,
Gave name unto a city now unknown;
For years have o'er it swept, like mighty waters,
And all its palaces are overthrown:
Nor is there left one frail memorial stone!
Yet somewhere near the spot on which it rose,
The pyramids ascend to heaven alone,
Whose walls might well a nation's dead enclose;
And lo, at their vast feet doth wearied Time repose!

And yet their tops touch heaven, and terminate
As mountains do, each in a barren peak;
And the pale stars on evening's steps that wait,
Seem as their lofty summits they would seek;
And down their length'ning sides full many a streak
Of trembling light they dart, lost in mid air;
For, wearied with the distance, they wax weak,
And half way down stand still, as in despair,
Or as they sought the rest of those within to share!

These pyramid's, by art's rules unconfin'd,
Soar simply to the skies, yet do they seem
To rival the conceptions of the mind,
Begotten in its most unbounded dream!
Shap'd by the king of day's unfolded beam,
Like darken'd rays they meet the wond'ring eye;
Then stately upward to the heavens they stream,
And lose their dim points in the wounded sky;
Whilst round their belted sides the broken tempests die!

The world may never more these works excel,
Nor matter give a form to thoughts so vast!
The art of man ne'er else hath fram'd so well
Structures of grandeur, promising to last
The lives of nations, some of which have pass'd,
Since first the firm foundations of these fanes,
Or temples of the dead from life outcast,
Were laid on Egypt's city-burden'd plains,
Whose graves outlive the glory of succeeding reigns.

They're tombs wherein the proudest kings may lie;
And ev'n Ambition need no more desire,
Of all the fame that dwells beneath the sky,
Than, thither after battle to retire,
And sleep in sepulchres which all admire,
And which may stand until the day of doom,
Nor lose one fragment, till the promised fire,
That will the elements themselves consume,
Makes the whole world appear one desolated tomb!

Man's soul's a star, a bright and wand'ring star;
A beautiful and brilliant satellite,
Which borroweth its glory from afar,
To cheer and charm the world!  Yet oft from sight
Her lustre is conceal'd, and on the height
Of time, or pinnacle of fame, she stands,
Lonely and gloomy as an orbless night,
Till Death awakes, and, in his friendly hands,
Bears her from earth to be the light of other lands.

These tombs, like beams of darkness, shadow well
The prison of the soul &mdash; that house of clay,
Wherein a little season she doth dwell,
Haunted by hope and fear, till call'd away
From thence by death, she leaves it to decay,
Mould'ring amidst the solitude of years!
The body is her caravansera,
Which soon the pilgrim quits for other spheres,
Seeking a place of rest beyond this vale of tears!

The streams of Babylon were fill'd by night
With stars, which from the awful firmament
Seem'd to fall down in clust'ring drops of light:
And there the Chaldean shepherd spread his tent
Upon the brink, where all night long he leant,
Deep musing, o'er the silent waters breast;
And as he thus those watchful moments spent,
His soul was with the scatter'd stars a guest,
Ranging them in those forms her fancies deemed best

It was a beauteous labour, thus to draw
Pictures with flying stars; and I have sought,
When midnight's silence fill'd my soul with awe,
To do the same; and at such time have thought
That, peradventure, pyramids were wrought,
As dark observatories for the dead,
By men, whose superstitious minds had caught
The notion, that the light those orblets shed,
Had charms to soothe the friends from them for ever fled:

And that, within those mighty tombs reclining,
They still might gaze upon their native skies,
When suns and worlds by myriads were shining
Upon their otherwise death-curtain'd eyes;
But, that beholding them, they yet might rise
In dreams, at least, above this sunken sphere:
For, ah!  when in her grave Affection lies,
And Love, lamenting, hopeless, lingers near,
The feeblest fancies then of countless worth appear!

The pyramids we leave, and fix our eyes,
On Egypt's obelisks of tall renown;
Like her vast tombs aspiring to the skies;
Like them outliving temple, tower, and town!
Time, that hath trampled royal cities down,
Hath pass'd them by, and some have even been
The pride of Rome since Caesars wore her crown;
And there amidst her ruins are they seen,
Still towering from the earth, majestic and serene&mdash;

Mark this black figure seated on the ground,
An ear of corn within her stony hand!
She was a goddess, worshipp'd and renown'd,
In some great temple of that mighty land,
Whose pyramids like giant genii stand,
Reigning o'er ruins spread out far and wide
Along a weary wilderness of sand&mdash;
Half to the grave, and half to earth allied;
Picture of mortal life, emblem of human pride!

The hermit of the desert, ev'n old Nile,
Sire of an hundred streams that travel slow
Through the dominions of the crocodile,
And fill the alligators' baths &mdash; that flow
In regions where the noon-born winds that blow,
Are wing'd with fiery death &mdash; 'tis Isis' tears,
Who for Osiris' sake is fill'd with woe,
Which have o'erflow'd Nile's urn these thousand years;
And in her father's halls, her statue still appears!

Daughter of Time!  Idol of many names!
Cybele, Ceres, Venus!  Thy renown,
The light touch of a minstrel's harp-string claims;
For when the world retires from Night's dark frown,
Then do thy smiles fall sweet as dew-light down,
And thou art call'd Diana!  Then thy brow
Is circled with a planetary crown,
And to thy charms the young bard lisps his vow,
As one unto thy shade pays orisons e'en now!

And he doth muse upon the mystery,
Which overhangs thine undiscover'd tale:
"I am all that hath been, or yet shall be,
And never mortal hath uplift my veil."
Such, where thine altars Egypt's sons still hail,
Is the dark sentence on their fronts engraved;
And there doth Turkish tyranny regale
On souls of men, by alien power enslaved,
Still as the world grows old, becoming more depraved.

Thou wert the Ceres of that desert clime,
Where thy stern statues may be now adored,
By the weak offspring of thy parent, Time,
Dwelling in shadow, by the world deplored,
Though once above surrounding realms they soared,
Sublime in darkness, and in gloom still great:
Now fallen, never more to be restored
To the dread grandeur of their former state,
Which like a tomb outstands the memory of its date.

Fronting this statue may you see the head,
Of Orus her good son, who lent his aid,
To avenge the blood by barb'rous Typhon shed,
Ev'n his father's:  and his people made
An idol of his name, and worship paid,
To him, as to a God; for they could ne'er
Give honour to a fallen hero's shade,
But he must of their adoration share,
And like a God be served with sacred praise and prayer!

Who can look on the fabled Queen, nor think
Of her, the Egyptian Venus, who beheld
Kings prostrate at her footstool, and whose drink
Was molten pearls!  She whose dark beauty quell'd
The fire of conquering Caesar, and compell'd
Triumphant Antony to be her slave&mdash;
Voluptuous Cleopatra!  Who excell'd
In pride, and pomp, and power, the Roman brave,
And proud, ev'n unto death, dared an untimely grave!

'Twas night in Egypt's history when she rose,
And in the style of Isis lov'd to dress;
Which was the ancient Dian some suppose,
So that the proud Queen, as we thence may guess,
Would shadow forth that she was sent to bless
Her land with moon-like glory, and upraise,
The shadows of its earlier happiness,
Entombed with the dreams of elder days&mdash;
It may be, too, she sought a more than mortal praise!

Thus did young Alexander, when he taught
The oracle of Ammon to conspire
To lift his bloated fame to heav'n, and brought
Down on his daring head heav'n's deadly ire!
And others have indulged this dread desire,
Like Satan, when the Almighty's angry nod,
Plunged him and his into eternal fire!
Christ, Christ alone is worthy &mdash; He is God,
And rules the realms of heaven, though once on earth he trod!

He was a warrior, and a conqueror too,
Hell and the hated grave his desperate foes!
He triumph'd o'er the work he had to do,
And wrought out joy from unimagined woes!
His god-like labours, agonies and throes,
The blood he shed &mdash; not others, but his own&mdash;
Earn'd for his enemies a long repose,
Procured them pleasures, endless and unknown!
Rise, rise, my soul, for now He fills the Eternal's throne!

Thought weeps o'er Egypt, once the wise, the brave;
Now fall'n the level of the world below!
Her fame is like the glory of the grave,
Into whose gulf, life's dregs for ever flow!
Time, though her founder, hath become her foe,
And o'er her flung the veil of slavish gloom,
Prophetic of a nation's overthrow!
Soon may the freed world write her finish'd doom;
Her realms destroyed, and left, a desert in their room!

As when one casts a pebble to the sea,
So is a nation's downfall, when review'd
By the vast vision of eternity;
Of such an overpow'ring magnitude,
That the strong thoughts which dare thereon intrude,
Are in their very out-set paralysed,
And in their unworn strength at once subdued,
Ere of their bounded power they're well advised&mdash;
Oh God!  how should thy word by feeble man be prized!

Where immortality is brought to light,
Enabling the calm'd soul to gaze unquell'd,
Upon eternal scenes, though by the sight
Of long-lived glory, such as is beheld
In aged Egypt, she hath been compell'd,
Erewhile, to stand at mortal strength aghast;
Which, fed upon the fruits of time, hath swell'd
Into o'erwhelming visions of the past,
And, with a dream-like gloom, the wind hath overcast.

There is a deep solemnity falls down
Upon the soul, as ling'ring here, we think
Of the brief date of fleeting man's renown;
Wearing his time-born honours on the brink
Of dread eternity, and soon to sink
Beneath the shoreless waters of the dead,
From whose communion he is fain to shrink,
So long as he hath strength on earth to tread,
Or life, above death's stream, upholds his laurell'd head.

The lovers' fountain is an empty tomb,
So near are death and life; and the same things
May cheer the heart, or cloud the mind with gloom,
As from one source both pain and pleasure springs!
The soul is like a harp of many strings,
Whereon the skilful hand of Memory plays:
One touch, the mournful recollection brings
Of heart-wounds giv'n by grief in former days
Another, doth the forms of joys departed raise!

Now, fallen Egypt, let me build thy tomb:
The pyramids themselves might form thy grave,
But I would have it in a vale of gloom,
Most like some ancient giant's haunted cave,
Where solemn trees o'er slumb'ring Nile should wave,
Within the hearing of a cataract's roar,
Sounding like ocean when his billows lave
The rough rocks round some tempest beaten shore,
Making a mournful sound for ever evermore.

One stone from one great temple should be there,
Plunged in the stream, yet o'er its surface seen
And thereon, as an emblem of despair,
A sphinx might lie, a crown her paws between,
Sole relic of thy sway; and she might lean
O'er the dead waters, still as midnight's noon,
And thus reflecting dim her sullen mien,
Dark as the brow of an eclipsed moon,
When nature faints for lack of her accustomed boon!

And here the hoary land we leave, whose fame
Hath been familiar with the world, since time,
Forth from the deluge like an iris came,
Beauteous as youth, yet lonely and sublime,
Discumber'd of the weight of human crime
And ready to renew on earth his reign&mdash;
Musing upon the fables of this clime,
Our thoughts, the ear of pondering man to gain,
Have wound themselves into a melancholy strain&mdash;

Of mirth there could be none, for Egypt teems
Alone with death and darkness; and displays
The world's vain glory; and to us it seems
No weakness though we now should seek to raise
Our souls on high, where, Hope's sweet eye surveys
Realms of pure loveliness and spotless bliss,
Inhabited by those that love the praise
Of him who saved them from hell's dark abyss&mdash;
And now one thought for such, and thus the theme dismiss.

Life is the twilight of eternal day,
The soul its morning star; and death's dark shade
Is but a cloud which soon will break away,
And then the soul will be again display'd
All in a brilliant robe of light array'd!
Near her lov'd Lord she'll take her shining stand,
Singing most gladsome melodies, in aid
Of the blest anthems of heav'n's joyful band,
Welcoming souls of saints into their goodly land!
