Beneath an ancient Oak, that stood
From Boreas, many a sturdy thud,
Yet spite of cold revolving Time,
Still flourish'd green and tow'rd sublime,
A lady Rose, elate with pride,
Thus 'gan to vapour and to chide;
"Good la!  how hard it is that I,
Born queen of flowers, am doom'd so nigh
This filthy boorish Oak to dwell!
La!  how I suffer from the smell
Of the vile trunk!  and then my view
Is shock'd with such an ugly hue,
A rough and toad-like bark obscene,
And leaves of dirty sable green;
And then the noise that fills my ear,
Would hurt even hemlock's self to hear.
When biting Eurus, 'mong his branches,
Threatens to tear him all to inches,
He swears, (and blusters and looks big,)
He does not mind the storm a fig;
Then roars, and thinks, no doubt, he's clever,
'Huzza, boys!  hearts of oak for ever!'
And when his nauseous nuts are shed,
A herd of loathsome grunters tread,
And frisk, and burrow round my nose,
A pretty treatment for a Rose!
And while I'm like to burst with rage,
He looks ironically sage;
Swears that those swine, or he's mistaken,
Will make the very best of bacon;
For near no oak on British ground,
Can better acorns be found.
And when I tell him 'tis brutality,
To speak so to a flow'r of quality,
He answers proudly, but for him,
My qualities were devilish slim.
Yet I am doom'd, alas!  alas!
My days beneath his shade to pass&mdash;
O may the light'ning blast his boughs!
O may he feel the woodman's blows!
And may his trunk be doom'd to feel,
Fixed in some vessel's gloomy keel,
'Amid incessant din of war,
The noxious stench of pitch and tar;
Until, with age and toil he's rotten,
Dissolves to dust, and is forgotten!"

"Thou gayest flow'r that decks the vale,"
The Oak replied, "pray cease to rail;
I own full many a virtue thine,
While thou deniest that I have mine;
While I defend thy tender form,
From Aeolian blast and polar storm,
Thou, with ingratitude and polar storm,
Thou, with ingratitude o'erflowing,
Swear'st all thy woes to me are owing.
Roses, I own, have beauties rare,
Among the fair they're passing fair;
They please men's sight, indeed, and noses,
But who can dine on smell of Roses?
When the French threaten to come over,
By diving from Calais to Dover,
To kiss the British wives and lasses,
And kick the British husbands' &mdash;
Could all the roses in the nation,
Purchase it one hour's salvation?
Roses and Fops are pretty things,
But of small use to states and kings;
A foot of Oak, in time of need,
Is worth the total of the breed.
Yes, 'tis Oak that bears the thunder,
Which makes Britannia's foes knock under.
Learn this, be thy complaint less loud;
Learn this, frail thing, and be less proud.

I go, anon, where glory calls,
To strengthen Britain's wooden walls,
Heroic Nelson's deathless name
Shall consecrate mine too, to Fame,
For I'm design'd a part to form
Of that stout ship, where mid the storm
Of war, the hero's doom'd to die,
Embrac'd by weeping Victory."

The woodman comes &mdash; the blows resound;
The Oak comes crashing to the ground;
The day grew murk, the sky o'ercast,
The Rose began to feel the blast,
And wished, but wished, alas!  in vain;
The shielding Oak was back again;
For soon, beneath the sweeping storm,
Pale, lifeless droop'd her tender form.
