The lark no longer wakes the merry morn,
Nor merle melodious, pipes adown the glade,
No balmy dew drops, twinkling, gem the thorn,
Nor flowerets spring, with bosom sunward spread&mdash;
Yet still 'tis sweet, afar, the wilds to tread,
Tho' fled their bloom, their breathing fragrance gone;
'Tis solemn to behold, in russet clad,
The weary fields &mdash; to list the mountain's moan,
While sobbing, to the blast, the leafless forests groan.

Now in the round of art's fantastic joys,
How many hearts rebound with wanton glee:
But fashion's glare, and riot's rueful noise,
Have never any soothing charm for me.
Sweet nature's face!  sweet nature's minstrelsy
My raptured soul for ever must admire&mdash;
What are the tones of mimic melody,
Tho' Catalani aid the warbling wire&mdash;
Yea though a Handel sweep the strings with hand of fire?

What to the dirge for the departing year,
Pour'd in faint warblings from the lonely dell,
Where underneath the last leaf lingering sear,
Their mournful plaints, the wren and redbreast tell?
What to the torrent rushing from the fell,
With wilder tones than fancy yet could feign?
What to the voice of ocean's stormy swell,
When roll'd on hills of fire his vast domain,
Resounding high to heaven, from heaven to earth again?

And what, the splendours of the midnight ball,
The clamorous rout, the maudlin masquerade
The feast serv'd up by lordly seneschal,
Where the vast wealth of kingdoms is display'd?
What to the night in starry pomp array'd,
When the wide welkin burns one streamy blaze;
Or, kerchief'd in a fleecy cloud her head,
The full-orb'd moon, upon the enthusiast's gaze,
Through depths of ether blue, a lonely wanderer strays?

O!  had my quiet home been given to smile
With heath around, dark, waving on the eye;
Where still the mountain stream was seen to toil&mdash;
Still heard the playful breeze, the plover's cry&mdash;
And, still, the cliff seen towering to the sky&mdash;
Where, oft the shapeless storm delights to brood,
And, on the breezy wind, light, passing by,
Wave the deep foldings of his misty shroud,
While yet the heavens around, shine clear without a cloud.

Where, nature, sweet, on every rising morn,
With beamy smile had cheer'd my lone employ;
Had balm'd my aching heart with anguish torn,
And heav'd my breast with the full tide of joy.
Devotion pure, with less of earth's alloy,
Her incense-cloud had duly given to rise,
And with a vigour care could ne'er destroy
With plumes unruffl'd, and with ardent eyes
Had contemplation swept afar th' expansive skies.

By tufted hillock, from the blasting north
Screen'd, in the windings of the lonely vale,
Glad had I mark'd, all lowly, glinting forth,
The yellow crocus, and the primrose pale&mdash;
Bre yet the stream had ceas'd its wintry wail,
And round the mountains pallid brow were seen
The snowy remnants &mdash; Ere the weseling gale,
With genial showers, and sunny blinks between,
Had given the blythsome spring her robes of living green.

Till, by degrees, the white emblossom'd sloe,
The daffodil beneath the bending thorn,
The fragrance-breathing lily's modest glow,
Amidst the pearly drops of blushing morn,
Gave spring in all her splendours to adorn,
And cheer the prospects of the opening year&mdash;
While love's soft note, far swelling, ether-borne,
With glowing pathos, falls distinct and clear,
What time the silent eve with dewy feet draws near.

Pleasure's light form even toil should have assum'd,
And laughing joy had wing'd the sultry hours,
When fervid summer, breathing sweets, perfum'd
The wide spread vale, and far the woodland bowers.
And richly rude a wilderness of flowers,
On every hand had caught th' admiring eye,
Which from her lap, exhaustless, nature pours
O'er valley low, or mountain swelling high,
Of every varying form, and every varying dye.

What joy to hear the healthful western breeze,
The breath of heaven, on pure autumnal morn,
Sigh, mournful o'er the faintly fading trees,
Or, wavy, rippling thro' the ripening corn.
Though bending o'er the SICKLE, labour worn,
My spirit, rising, still to nature true,
By temperance pure, and meek contentment borne,
Had, peaceful, drunk amid th' expanding view,
From nature's flowing fount, delights for ever new.

And thou, O!  winter, dark, with cloudy brow,
Altho' of half thy shivering horrors shorn,
Formless and vast, the tempest streaming through,
Hadst, there, a far sublimer aspect worn&mdash;
Dejection, had not always dimm'd thy morn,
And lengthen'd long, thy handbreath of a day;
But vigour strong, of toil and temperance born,
For ever active and for ever gay,
To pleasures secret springs, had found a ready way.

Far other here, beneath thy frigid frown,
Rises, more loud than even thy blustering gale,
Of sickness, age, with poverty bow'd down,
Or sad mischance, the wild, the ceaseless wail
Yet, winter!  once again I bid thee, hail!
Although no rural dwelling place be mine,
Even here I feel thy secret power prevail;
Tho' faint the marks, and dimly seen the line,
I mark its heavenly swell, and own the hand Divine.
