Upon a dark lake's margin I have stood,
Whose gloomy waters wash a narrow shore;
And high above that ever-murmuring flood
Black mountains rise, around whose heads the hoar
Of wintry vapours hang; &mdash; and hoarse and rude
The storms outrageous through the deep glens roar:
From the dark mirror darker forms are given&mdash;
The blasted pine that clings to masses rough and riven.

The red-brown heath &mdash; the stunted oak, with root
Bare as the bare rock, whence for ages past
It draws not substance for a single shoot,
Yet, stubborn still, defies the stubborn blast;
As two dark champions furious in dispute
Rush on with mutual blows, till one at last,
Subdued, not vanquished &mdash; stricken, not dismayed&mdash;
Yieldeth not the fight till Death him low have laid.

If ye look upward to the mountain height,
Ye'll see the red stream from the cleft rock pouring&mdash;
The wild goat bounding, and the dizzy flight
Of the brown eaglet o'er the summit soaring,
Ye'll see &mdash; ye'll see &mdash; a most soul-stirring sight&mdash;
Ye'll hear the voices of the wild waves roaring&mdash;
Hear the lone raven speaking from the skies,
And mark the surly grouse loud challenge as he flies!

Some love a sweet Spring day, when the young blades
Of all the tender herbs and grasses shoot
Their fibrous fingers forth to paint the glades,
And vales, and meads, as from each grappling root
The aspiring juice ascends, and leafy shades
Spread their green veils, where many a mellow flute
Full many a shepherd tunes for lovely ears,
And Nature loud exults, and spurns her wintry tears.

Her children all perceive proud Summer nigh,
For joy exchanging recent grief and fear;
And each full blossom lifts its head on high,
Gently inviting some sweet songster there,
Should "little Bob" his endless ditties try,
Or the brown throstle greet the rising year,
Revelling in music with his liquid notes
From the green tasseled larch, on which he early dotes.

Some love the year ere blustering storms have fled
(While buds and leaves still in their chambers keep)&mdash;
The golden crocus bursting from its bed,
First, hardiest, riser from its wintry sleep&mdash;
The green-edged snowdrop with its pendant head,
Which for some long lost cause doth yearly weep;
And, as you pass its cold lorn dwelling by,
Yearly exacts the simple tribute of a sigh.

You sigh to see a thing so fair and bright
All unprotected from the world's rude blast,
Which smites its beauties; (as the savage kite
Rends the young linnet from the nest just past)
A tender object 'waked from a long night
Of darkness and of storm, and roughly cast,
Like some lone bark upon the blackening rage
Of the unrelenting sea, when winds and waves engage.

And some to Summer, some to Autumn &mdash; yield
That envied crown, which each in turn should win;
"Behold!" they say, "the lilies of the field&mdash;
Behold!  they toil not, neither do they spin;
No structures proud their bright, though frail, forms shield,
No ermined robes &mdash; golden, silk-fluttering;
Yet they shine out their narrow span &mdash; bright days!
Ay!  Solomon was not arrayed like one of these!"

But I of each the beauties can partake,
And haunt the vale, the mountain, or the cave;
But most of all I honour thee, dark lake!
And view with wonder thy mysterious wave:
Below &mdash; the unfathomed dwelling of the snake;
Above &mdash; the grove, M'Thuile's peaceful grave;
Deep in the vale sleeps Superstition's soul,
And sadness shades each part, and gloom inwraps the whole!
