Night, I do love thee, and, &mdash; as born of thee,
Or thou hadst charm for poet's breast, and won
All what mine hath, &mdash; this soul can joyous see
Thee move o'er heavens when day's clear sun is gone.
And thou art then fair sight to look upon,
While all thy stars bright sparkle in mid sky,
As younger orbs that now their first years run;
And thy large moon is glaring broad on high,
To light that gloom through which of old thy path doth lie.

But yet to me thou art more welcome far,
When storms come with thee, and the moon doth hide
Her from the wayfaring pilgrim, and no star
Is seen in all the heavens above, beside
One lonely one amid the gloomy void,
That sendeth forth at times its glimmering ray,
And show'th those clouded forms which rapid ride
Through the dark space o'er head, and seem as they
Were foes rebellious there, that war with heaven would lay.

Night, then thou bringest thoughts with thee that swell
The bard awake to sublime reverie,
Who now abroad, as though beneath thy spell,
Would pour his soul to heaven-born pool;
Or list the storm, thy own wild minstrelsy,
Break on his musings, with that dismal tone,
Which tells a spirit in it, if such be;
While far amid the wide, bleak waste alone,
Is heard the screech-owl's scream, as on the dark winds blown.

And it is then that she whose hapless love
Still brings her nightly trouble, would repair
In secret to the tomb of him who strove
In you to join his life with her's, till there
Arose obstruction cruel, and despair
Sunk one in death &mdash; O, I could tell a tale,
Once told me in my youth, of maiden fair,
Who early loved, but had been left to wail
Too soon his fate for whom her soul first love did feel.

And she would ever anxious wait till light
Of day was flown, and man had gone to rest;
And then at her lone casement all the night
Would mourning sit, as one whose love-lorn breast
Knew greater pain than ever maid oppressed.
And the fleet clouds she loved to mark, as through
The troublous heavens by the night storm pressed;
And the broad moon was grateful to her view,
When darkened half o'er head, or with the winds it flew.

But it were long to tell her mournful tale:&mdash;
One night she 'scaped her watch &mdash; it was the hour
Her soul loved most &mdash; dead silence did prevail,
And the moon had climbed her topmost tower
Above in heaven.  'Twas known she'd sought before
Thus oft at lonely time abroad to roam,
As fain, by all unheard, her grief to pour;
And now ere morning on the world doth come,
'Tis learned that late the hapless one had fled her home.

But search was vain; and many a night and day
Had now rolled by, and yet no maid return'd.
'Twas said she'd fallen in the woods a prey
To savage kind, or else afar off journed
To some lone place, where nightly still she mourned&mdash;
But even now these thoughts were ever fled,
When to his tomb for whom she all had spurned,
One day a corse, that youth's own sire, was led
To claim therein a tenement beside the dead.

The door fell open &mdash; as nor lock nor bar
Had held it &mdash; and the mourners gain the ground
Designed for burial in the dark vault far,&mdash;
But lo they shudder!  and from all around
Quick bursts a general murmur of deep sound;
For there that faithful, hapless maiden, cold
Beside her own true lover's corse, they found.
She came to die near him. * * * * * This was I told
While yet a boy, and then it was a tale of old.
