HAIL, glorious dawning!  hail, auspicious morn!
APRIL THE FIRST!  grand festival, all hail!
My soaring Muse on goose-quill pinion born,
From that wide limbo, sung in Milton's tale,
Hastens to pay thee love and reverence due,
For thou to me a day most sacred art;
And I shall call around a jovial crew,
Who love and worship thee with single heart.
Come, crown'd in foolscap, rolling forth this lay,
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS day .

Which of you first shall press to shew your love&mdash;
To vail your bonnet to your patron saint?
I see you hasten from the earth above,
And sea below to pay your service quaint.
While black and grey in every livery deck'd
The stay-laced dandy, and the Belcher'd blood,
The grave divine of many a jangling sect&mdash;
Lawyers and doctors, and the critic brood,
All singing out in concert, grave or gay,
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day.

March in the foremost rank &mdash; 'tis yours by right&mdash;
March, grenadiers of folly &mdash; march, my Whigs&mdash;
Hoist the old tatter'd standard to the light,
Grunting in chorus like Will Cobbett's pigs.
George Tierny holds it with unsteady paw,
Looking right hungry on the golden hill
Of Place and Power, from which his ravening maw
Hopes vainly for vittal its chinks to fill.
Dupe to himself he growls, but loud must say,
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day.

Brougham, in a hated gown of stuff, attends
His nose up-twitching like the devil's tail.
There Aberdeen her lernit Ractor sends,
Joseph, at whom great Cocker's self turns pale.
There's Scarlett Redivivus, whom the band
Of bloody gemmen of the Press had slain,
And Wilson (once Sir Robert) hand in hand,
With Nugent lading of the Falmouth Wain,
Joining right loudly in the grand huzza,
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day!

Wise Hutchinson, and wiser Peter Moore,
Great Holland, redolent of female fist;
Sir James, the faithful treasurer of the poor,
Mick Taylor, lord of cutlets and gin twist;
Frothy Grey Bennet, patron of the press,
Whose freedom is their toast in bumpers full,
And which they shew, by crowding to caress
Fudge Tommy Moore, and actioning John Bull.
Shout, my old Coke! &mdash; shout, Albemarle! &mdash; shout, Grey!
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day!

Apt are the emblems which the party shews&mdash;
Here's "Great Napoleon, victor over Spain,"
And "Wellington of war no science knows,"
And "Angouleme has touched his hilt in vain "
And "We must perish if the gold's withdrawn,"
And "We must perish if the gold is paid,"
And "Chaste art thou, O Queen!  as snow ere dawn,"
And "Princess Olive is an injured maid,"
But shining over all, in all still say,
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day!

Close by their tails see Jeff's reviewers sneak
In buff and blue, an antiquated gang;
Jeffrey himself with penny trumpet squeak,
Chimes with Jackpudding Sydney's jews harp twang;
Hallam is there with blood of Pindar wet,
And there Macculloch bellows, gallant stot,
And Christian Leslie, too, to whom is set
A bust of stone, in Stockbridge shady grot.
In puppy chorus yelps the full array,
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day!

Still impudent their gestures &mdash; still their mien
Swaggers beneath the load of self-conceit;
Yet all in spite of vanity is seen
Graven on each-brow disorder and defeat,
Still BYRON'S canister too deftly tied,
Rings "kling-ling-ling," be-draggling at their tail;
Still NORTH'S stout cowhide to each back applied,
Makes even the stoutest of the crew to quail,
Yet boldly still they cry with brave hurra&mdash;
Hall, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day!

Whom have we next &mdash; I note the gesture trim,
The throat unkerchiefed, and the jaunty air,
The yellow silk that wraps the nether limb,
And all the singing robes that poets wear&mdash;
Hail, Bohea-bibbing monarch of Cockaigne!
Who is more fit than thou to join the song
Of glory to Tom-foolery, the strain,
Thou and thy subject tribes have troll'd so long?
Shout o'er thy bumper'd dish, hip!  hip!  hurra!
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day!

For the remainder of his rabble rout,
Their names I know not, nor desire to know
For aught I care, each long-eared lubber lout
May march to Orcus on fantastic toe,
Save Barry Cornwall, milk-and-water bard,
Lord of the flunky clad in livery green!
To send so sweet a poet 'twere too hard,
To the chaise-percee of old Pluto's queen.
No, here as Cockney-Laureat let him stay,
Singing, hail, mother, hail! &mdash; hail, glorious ALL FOOLS' day!

Make way, make way, in plenitude of paunch,
See London's learned livery waddling on.
Lord Waithman heads the rumpled avalanche,
Tailed by Teutamen's hero &mdash; Whittington!
Oh, Huckaback the Great, alike sublime,
In measuring speech or gingham by the elf,
Worthy alike of poet's lofty rhyme,
The stuff you utter, and the stuff you sell!
Sing with that voice which can e'en kings dismay,
Hail, mighty mother, hail! &mdash; hail, April ALL FOOLS' day!
