THE LAKE OF GENEVA AT SUNSET.
Daylight still linger'd on the quiet lake,
But, where the ev'ning breeze play'd wantonly,
A parting smile each ripple seem'd to take,
From the full moonbeam's silver dancing ray;
Then rose and fell, slow and alternately,
The murmur of the water's peaceful swell,
Advancing darkly to the shore, and aye
Soothing the silence it could not dispel,
As on the pebbled beach, a shower of pearls it fell.

The struggle o'er, sunset now yields to night;
Yet as day's farewell billows flow away,
The distant Alps they leave in living light,
That lofty shore, which bounds the tide of day,
Till all their ice-clad vallies smile as gay
As summer bowers; and now a deeper blue,
The richest purple of a rainbow's ray,
And deep'ning still, till on the frigid view
Their snow-white masses rise in cold and deadly hue.

Fond Memory welcomes, in each form it meets,
Resemblance to that form Sense cannot see;
'Mid Autumn's softness, or 'mid Summer's sweets,
Still, still as present seems that form to be,
So then those Alps of sunset brought to me
A face, which, like them, shone in rapture's ray;
But, for a moment, there, its spirit free,
Fled as a twilight-beam to join the day,
And nought of it remain'd but a cold mass of clay.

ON A TOWER NEAR BEY, IN SWITZERLAND.
By Leman's Lake there stands a ruin'd tow'r,
Bearing no record whose or what it was;
A lonely relict of some long-fled hour,
At which each passing moment seems to pause,
And from its aspect sad the lesson draws
Of Time's mortality; for where are they,
Those countless hours, which here have been?  And was
All their existence, as a moment's stay,
Passing, as soon as come, like April's snows away?

One lovely flow'r is springing on its walls,
And smiles 'mid wild decay's sepulchral gloom;
One summer ray sleeps in its silent halls,
In all the bright intensity of June;
Yet warms it not that cold, deserted room;
As did the faggot's blaze, so breaks a beam
Of gladness o'er his coutenance, on whom
Sits heavy grief; he smiles, and yet we deem
It is a meteor glare &mdash; a false, uncertain gleam.

It looks like that fair flow'r, which loves to dwell
In desolation's cold and cheerless ray;
And there it stands, with lovely grace, to tell
It yet can smile, though all be fled away:
That lovely, modest flow'r is Piety,
Which rears its head when all is lowly laid;
Peaceful and chaste, in youthful prime and age,
Decks with a smile each gap that grief has made,
And casts on all around its calm, refreshing shade.

Above, the Alps, in wildest fantasy,
Uprear their giant forms, and look sedate
Down from their cloudless palace in the sky,
On all that feeble man esteemeth great&mdash;
On all the changes of his changing state,
Mocking war's loudest thunder; or when, lo!
Burst forth the Avalanche's crushing weight,
Or when the boiling waters far below
Dash from their cradling rocks, in wild, inconstant flow.

And yet, with man compar'd, these nothing are&mdash;
Nothing their vast duration &mdash; nothing though
Their clefts have seen a thousand storms, and there
Lies undissolv'd the earth's primeval snow;
The mind that measures them is doom'd to know
Existence, such as time can never span;
Yes, an eternity of bliss or woe,
When that this world, as chaff, before the fan
Passes away, then waits that seeming moment &mdash; man.
