Britannia triumphs!  queen of favour'd isles!
Mother of conquering sons, her boast, her pride,
But war's dire havoc checks exulting smiles,
Alas!  for ever sever'd from her side;
How many sunk beneath the battle's tide?
Her glory raising in that hard fought field,
With blood of bravest hearts its soil was dyed;
Ne'er shall her chiefs the palm of prowess yield,
To aught by poet sung, or history reveal'd.

Oh!  were it mine, the heroic song to raise,
Like Albion's ancient bards with muse of fire,
To pay the mighty dead their meed of praise,
And future ages with their deeds inspire,
Soon should this powerless hand essay the lyre
With themes it dare not tempt; soon should it tell,
To sooth regretting friendship's fond desire,
While mingl'd pride and grief the chord would swell.
How high-soul'd Picton fought, how Cambria's hero fell.

Fallen is the hero, but his name shall live,
While dauntless valour can a lustre shed
O'er manly worth, tho' no proud title give
Their courtly aid that manly worth to spread;
Never will be forgot, the war strewn bed
Of carnage, where the dying Picton lay,
That with the first in danger's point he led
The British armies to glory &mdash; and the way
To victory cheer'd them on, thro' many an arduous day.

High gifted was the mind in war or peace,
And honour kindled still its ardent beam,
In care or peril bade its light increase,
And o'er each gathering shadow tow'r supreme.
Rest spirit of the brave!  life's feverish dream
Is past, and thou hast gain'd some purer sphere
Of brighter glory, &mdash; farewell honour's theme,
A long farewell to friends, to Britain dear,
A nation guards thy fame, e'en foes that fame revere.

Bright as the sun beams in the glowing west,
When summer's sultry storm has roll'd away,
Immortal glory on thy urn shall rest.
O gallant spirit!  to thy closing day
May genius consecrate the embalming lay,
That bids the cherished memory of the brave
Survive when sculptured monuments decay,
Where many a sigh wafts o'er the hero's grave,
As pensive thought recalls time's ever lapsing wave.

From me, denied with energetic power,
To wreathe thy laurels (in Apollo's fane,
A wandering stranger, or the Muses' bower,)
Suffice this feeble tribute; tho' thy name
May of some "Thebe's harp" the homage claim,
A heart more firmly with thy worth impress'd
Lives not to mourn thy fall, to great thy fame,
To breath a prayer for thy eternal rest,
Where mortal vision fails &mdash; in regions of the blest.
