You ask me, Strephon, what I think,
Lying beside the streamlet's brink,
Tending our struggling flocks;&mdash;
What 'tis I think (since I have seen
The Globe and Traveller) of Kean,
And wicked Charlotte Cox.

Our sheep are feeding, &mdash; let them feed
Before us o'er the sunny mead&mdash;
We will discourse the time!
And since you wish that I should scan
The miserable Alderman,
And his two lumps of crime:&mdash;

I'll pore, Dear Strephon, near this brook,
Over the paper &mdash; (where's my crook?)&mdash;
"KING'S BENCH" &mdash; What's that? &mdash; a seat?
Aye!  where the gentle cuckold sits
To be chastised by thick-wigg'd wits,
And joked, from horns to feet!

It was not right, Strephon! &mdash; it could
Not, and it did not, come to good,
For Aldermen to be
So very fond of genius things,&mdash;
Of nags, and wags, and wanderings
In strolling company.

Ah!  Strephon! &mdash; you who woo the maid,
Coy Amaryllis in the shade,
Know not what 'tis to be
Behind the scenes, night after night,
Where cots are false, &mdash; and faithless light
Falls on a painted tree!

The Guildhall feast, the flow of bowl,
The London tithe, and Cobbet's toll,&mdash;
And not the private box,
Were matter for his Worship's care:&mdash;
(I think eight hundred not quite fair
For such a Mrs. Cox).

She was no better than she should be,
I wish to heaven that people could be!&mdash;
But that's an idle wish!
And Kean doth seem to such as we&mdash;
Who live so very sheepishly&mdash;
The lowest of loose fish!

The husband, and the friend and wife,
Were made to bless each other's life;
Why should thy go to law?&mdash;
Did they not travel, tipple, talk,
Tell stories, &mdash; lie together, &mdash; walk
Together; &mdash; Law? &mdash; Pshaw!  pshaw!

All three were wrong!  all three gave way
To little exquisite bye-play,&mdash;
It ever was deuce-ace!
And small the difference can be seen,
To my poor mind, 'twixt Mr. Kean,
His worship, and her grace!

It almost seems she ne'er could be
From paw-paw wretched wrangling free,
Such were the hours she led;
Her husband had a precious limb,
For when she had done abusing him,
She did abuse his bed!

No doubt she wink'd, &mdash; by all unseen,
Save lynx-eyed, watchful Mr. Kean;
Nor can it then, I fear,
Be marvell'd at, since Tragedy
Own'd him her votary, that he
Play'd Edmund to her Leer!

He sent his Myra money, &mdash; Oh!
Shed not those tears of pastoral woe;
Strephon!  my Shepherd dear!
Be sure, as sure as goats are goats,
When Corydons send ten pound notes,
The golden age is near!

Strephon!  I think, in short, all three
No better than they ought to be,&mdash;
The sinners and sin-nee!
All three have made three faithless pairs;
All lowered themselves up Windsor stairs,
And here at Salisbury!

Let us life  simply near our brooks!
Our lives as straight as are our crooks!
Oh Strephon!  what is town?
A place for sin and men of fur,
So says the Globe and Traveller,
Frank'd me by Downshire down!
