And didst thou ever live?  or art thou not
Rather the bright creation of a dream?
Thy fame the vision of some fancied lot,
A ray of noonday glory o'er a stream,
That evening flush which kindles with its gleam
The glacier crown upon an Alpine brow:
So bright, so pure, so transient, that we deem
The Spirit of the dying Day doth throw
Its gentle farewell o'er the twilight world below.

Full many a time o'er those eternal hills
The spirit of the dying day shall part,
And youth and fancy, 'mid a world of ills,
Create a paradise in many a heart;
And waves shall roll, and glittering waters start
In fleeting beauty, to the fleeting ray;
Unreal things &mdash; they live not &mdash; but depart,
Nor leave one trace when they have pass'd away;
Shadows and visions all &mdash; but Thou wert not as they.

And didst thou ever live?  Yes &mdash; life was thine,
And youth, and genius, and the swelling tide
Of all in life which seems at first divine,&mdash;
Honour, and fame, and style, and conscious pride
Of being alone, with none who might divide
The spell which chained all bosoms and beguiled:
And what is left of these, to watch beside
The early tomb which o'er thy dust is piled?
Reproach &mdash; and Glory &mdash; and Thine only Child.

No more!  no more!  the voice of earthly blame,
Reproof or scorn that sleeping ear may shock;
No more shall pride rebel, perchance or shame,
And teach the mocked with bitterer sneer to mock;
That heart is duller than the marble rock
Which held all feeling in its inmost core:
And Malice now &mdash; if such there be, &mdash; her stock
Of venom'd arrows o'er that grave may pour,
Secure the dweller cold nor hears, nor answers, more.

Such darts may come &mdash; so let them fall &mdash; for yet
There is enough if man would deem it so,
To bid the kind deplore &mdash; the good regret,
That e'er such heart the pulse of life should know,
And dye with earthliest hues its fairest glow;
There is a deep, an awful Shadow bent
O'er all thy Glory: &mdash; this shall be &mdash; although
The torch of fame immortal burn unspent&mdash;
A hue of night and death, with light for ever blent.

No more!  no more!  that light of earthly fame
Shall lure, or please, or dazzle, or betray,
'Tis done &mdash; 'tis won &mdash; the trophy of a name
Hangs bright on high, the green unfading bay
Springs freshly forth: &mdash; now shines that after-day
Which fame still beams on an illustrious head;
Fancy nor falsehood change nor dim the ray,
Its light is fixed &mdash; its fate for ever sped&mdash;
A Star for those who live &mdash; a Planet for the dead.

And ne'er perchance did love of bright renown
More deeply haunt a breast of human mould:
Born with fresh youth, and nursed mid fortune's frown,
Struggling with thousand passions which enfold
The breast of man, and make their strongest hold
In such dark minds; &mdash; It never slumber'd long&mdash;
Thou hast thy wish, &mdash; unconscious heart and cold!
To be remember'd in thy country's tongue,
And have thy name entwin'd with all her brightest song.

No more!  oh never more!  shall trace or swell
Of  mortal love, with touch of tenderest thought,
Or dream of deeper passion's vanish'd spell
Approach the silent heart, in life so fraught
With deep affections; warp'd indeed and wrought
At times to evil: &mdash; All is over now
Of love, or hate, or grief; and is there aught,
Ada, fair child!  can check thy filial woe,
Or stay the unstain'd tears which o'er his grave should flow?

His only child!  he loved thee to the last;
Thy fancied image was perchance the one
In that sad hour of death and doubt which pass'd
Latest across his mortal sight: &mdash; and none
Will wish the word unsaid, the thought undone,
Which breathes, that fate in kindness may inspire
A heart more calm than his; to ponder on,
With grief perchance, but such as doth not tire
The vanish'd life and love of him, &mdash; thine unknown Sire.

For ever gone!  and gather'd to the dust
Of all the mighty dead who went before:
Of all whose imaged face, or sculptured bust
Tell us the aspect which on earth they wore;
How many a name and reverend form of yore
Comes with the thought: &mdash; is it too much to deem
Thy name will link with these for evermore,
Thy bark of fame glide down the mighty stream,
With all those pros'prous sails which glitter in the beam?

Is it too much to name that ancient sage,
The Greek who own'd the sightless brow sublime,
And write thy modern name upon the page
Which bears his deathless characters? &mdash; No clime&mdash;
No age perchance shall ever wake to Rhyme
So great a spirit; &mdash; and no bard shall dare
Since ancient bard, embalm'd by time,
Entomb'd in glory, ever to compare
His laurels with the wreath, that front serene must wear.

But we may deem, if Homer could behold
The things of earth again, and Greeks could rise.
From Grecian dust &mdash; and hear their story told
In strains which burst beneath their native skies&mdash;
Some mortal tears would dew the sightless eyes,
Of him the bard; &mdash; and every sterner breast
Would swell to list the solemn obsequies;
Poured by the Stranger, to the long long rest
Of all their country's pride, her brightest and her best.

And not alone that sweet but funeral dirge
Should claim their grateful tribute &mdash; for a blast
Of Life and Freedom swept th' Ionian surge&mdash;
And he the Stranger came &mdash; and now how fast
The silent spell is breaking!  and the past
Speaks with a stirring voice &mdash; Greece will resume
Her noblest days!  and he shall bring at last
A dazzling splendour from the deepest gloom
Light to the wondering world, from forth a tomb.

Where is the light?  'twas never meant for thee&mdash;
Where is the tomb!  'tis now too surely thine&mdash;
Where are those hopes?  they may or may not be
To other hearts fulfill'd. &mdash; A power divine
Hath rent thy bonds of life, no more to twine
With earthly things; and Greece may rise or fall&mdash;
'Tis nothing now her progress or decline&mdash;
Death makes at times a nation's fate seem small,
Yet shows how vain the gift, when man hath given his all.

Italia too!  thy lovely brow is wreathed
With cypress sad among thy tresses dark,
For to thine ear of classic frame he breathed
His deepest numbers:  and the Pilgrim's bark
After long wandering reach'd its final mark
On thy sweet shore. &mdash; Thou, too, eternal Rome!
In ruin'd beauty, with thine ancient ark
Of Freedom shatter'd, wert his cherish'd home,
The speaking desert where his footsteps lov'd to roam.

The land of Caesar's rule, of Rome's decline,
The land where Tully spake, and Virgil sung,
Where o'er the desolate wreck that lay supine
Rose the bright empire of the Tuscan tongue&mdash;
Where Dante's hand a harp immortal strung,
And Tasso's soul, most like perchance his own,
Achieved its glory; will esteem no wrong
To these her children &mdash; if she love the tone
That swells Childe Harold's lyre, o'er all for ever gone.

And she who gave him life, and nursed his youth&mdash;
And holds him now in death &mdash; hath she no tears?
Doth not her freeborn eye weep less in ruth
And more in grief o'er all those, erring years
Which drew him from her sea-girt isle? &mdash; appears
Not now his fame a mingled light and gloom
Of shame and glory?  where the Upas rears
Her deadly branches, there the Roses bloom
And flowers of sweetest hues spring freshly o'er a tomb.

Do'st thou not weep then England!  o'er the grave
Of this thine erring and thy gifted child?
Whom nought the world could give sufficed to save.
From deepest error; &mdash; wonderful and wild
And lovely mind, and fearfully beguiled
To grief and evil! &mdash; seared and uptorn
By passion's whirlwinds &mdash; worshipped and reviled
Perchance too much: &mdash; there is no place for scorn&mdash;
What triumph could the wreck of such a mind adorn?

Thou had'st no bard amid these later days
Like him; nor e'er perchance mayest have again;
And none since he who framed the solemn lays
Of "Man's first disobedience," in thy fane
Of pride and honour shall a niche obtain
Like his; and days and years may circle round
His grave, and thy prosperity; &mdash; in vain:&mdash;
Far is the hour e'er such a strain be found,
Long e'er thy silent shores to such a harp resound.

Long &mdash; long indeed &mdash; and never may it be&mdash;
It is too painful to believe that e'er
Another hand shall sweep so thrillingly,
Those mingled chords of beauty and of fear:
Oh, never more!  can any wish to hear
The awful cadence of a Byron's lyre&mdash;
Snapt be the strings above their master's bier!
And burned the harp within his funeral pyre!
And let the accents wild for ever there expire!

The hills are bright with evening! &mdash; o'er the peaks
Which westward swell against the golden sky,
The hour of sunset leaves those crimson streaks
Which gently fade to calmest grey; &mdash; and die:&mdash;
Those hills were once a rapture to the eye
Which sees them now no more &mdash; a doleful swell
Is in the wind which sweeps all mournfully,
The story of the vanished day to tell:
Thou too art gone from earth &mdash; oh whither! &mdash; none can tell.

Farewell!  "a sound which makes us linger;" for it is
The fatal sound which tells us all is passed,
And nought can be recalled of woe, or bliss,
Or wrong, or passion; scattered now at last
Are all the flowers and fruits of life amassed
To please or poison: &mdash; and the breast which wore
Those weeds of earth, and loved their hues and classed
Their form and beauty in his mortal store,
Hath ceased their sweets to share, their falsehood to deplore.

Thou do'st not sleep beneath the Gothic roof
Where England's favoured sons of fame repose;
Thou do'st not sleep within a shore, aloof
From haunts of earlier days; &mdash; but now the close
Of all things brings again to where arose
Thy towers ancestral &mdash; the unconscious frame;
The towers are passed from out thy line, &mdash; but those
Who were in life thy kindred and thy name,
Now join'd in parent dust &mdash; a nearer kindred claim.

Farewell!  yet lingering we revert our eyes
Still to thy tomb, &mdash; for thou wert as a thing 
Born to destruction, or to paradise&mdash;
And to such meteor forms the mind will cling
In hopeless feeling; &mdash; yet she cannot fling
The spell aside, which fascinates her gaze,
Or bid one Iris with celestial wing,
Rise o'er the cloud of thy unhappy days:
Farewell for evermore! &mdash; our sorrow, and our praise.

And now, 'tis done &mdash; but yet though I devote
These lays of mine the rather to the dead,
To the Departed:  yet I would not doat
On ancient forms, imploring on my head
The spirit's power which is for ever fled;
I would not vainly call the shadowy Mind
Its star of genius o'er these lines to shed,&mdash;
If aught of fair or good the world may find,
I do not ask His shade the wreath to bind.

For none would ask his spirit, and esteem
It bliss to be endowed who knew its power:&mdash;
No &mdash; rather let these strains devoted seem
The lone inscription on some funeral tower&mdash;
The voice which sings from a deserted bower&mdash;
The record calm of something passed away
Which we forget not; &mdash; in an evening hour
The lingering radiance of a summer's day:&mdash;
The lonely wall-flower springing 'mid decay.
