I saw one, in the Western wilderness,
Weeping beside a rough and moss-clad stone;
His cheeks were pale, and spoke the keen distress
Of sorrows which his early years had known.
But he had seen bright days which now had flown,
And nights of tranquil calmness, when the star
Of midnight beamed not on himself alone,
When here, from "social guile" and fraud afar,
He lived supremely blest, with nought his bliss to mar.

"Here sleeps my wife," he said; "I raised this stone,
I placed this sod of summer on her breast;
The cypress makes a sad funereal moan
In the cool breeze above her humble rest.
Her days were many on the earth, and blest
In the wild forest only, &mdash; and with me.
Stern parents and false friends our youth oppressed,
And strove to wake the pangs of jealousy
In vain; she proved her love, &mdash; I mine, as you now see.

"We dwelt in this lone forest sixty years;
Yon cell our mansion; watched by Heaven the while,
The tempests of the desert brought no fears,
Hurling into the lake the rocky pile,
Hoarest of peaks that catch the morning's smile.
We set the beech plant on our bridal day,
And saw it shade our river-fretted isle;
Together we beheld the tree decay,
Tremble beneath the blast, and blow in dust away.

"We saw the stream another channel gain,
And nettles grow where chiefs had feasted high:
Yet did our hearts their early love retain,
We still the dearer seemed as death drew nigh;
Morn saw no tear, the evening heard no sigh,
Winter with all its storms seemed soft and mild
And cherishing as a warm Southern sky;
And we were happier in this lonely wild
Than he who owns the dome whereon starved vassals toiled.

"She died at eighty years, two score and ten
Mine by a wedded love's endearing ties;
The sinless spirit of this peaceful glen,
Changed to celestial, years before its rise
From earth, and pre-admitted to the skies.
A brief month since, she sate at yonder door,
Affection beaming from her faded eyes;
Thou seest yon heap of earth &mdash; my weak arms bore
Her corse, and laid it there, &mdash; thou wilt not ask me more."
