When Cadmus, reeking from th' empoison'd strife,
The serpent spoils by Pellas' order strew'd,
The gory furrows heav'd with sudden life,
And, bursting forth, appear'd the warrior brood;
Awhile elate in hostile pride they stood:
Then mix'd in fierce exterminating fight,
Earth's bosom drenching with her children's blood,
And every corse defac'd with hellish spite,
Pale look'd the sun through clouds, and sicken'd at the sight.

Till, from Olympus sent with high behest,
A subtle spirit hover'd o'er the plain,
Each pale survivor suasively addrest,
Quench'd anger's flame, lull'd hatred's raging pain
With tones more dulcet far than music's strain
The wild conflicting passions could he move:
Ne fail'd he thence in erring hearts to reign,
The great vicegerant of commanding Jove,
By men yclep'd desert, but styled in heav'n self-love.

With boasted title and deceitful smile,
He woo'd and won bright honor for his bride:
But wanton flatt'ry courting him the while,
With harlot blandishments incessant plied,
To lure him from his faithful lady tried:
Nor would that chaste and gentle bride complain,
But in her secret bow'r neglected sigh'd.
While folly bound him in a gilded chain
And shew'd him to the world, of wicked conquest vain.

That worthless Leman, and that lady true,
Each to self-love a smiling daughter bore,
So with his image stampt, that scarce he knew
Which of his features justest semblance wore:
Ne hardly might the sages pensive lore
Decide of outward form the doubtful claim:
The parent fondly paus'd his offspring o'er,
In fancy crowning each with deathless fame,
While both alike he hight, and Vanity the name.

These, as they grew in stature and in years,
In countenance assum'd each other's guise:
Though little likeness in the mind appears,
For folly's child still reck'd of idle toys,
But honor's led to deeds of high emprize:
Oft would their sire her holy influence own
And gifts for merit's shrine with her devise;
She taught him how to win and wear renown,
And wreath'd his earthly name with glory's brightest crown.

Oft too with her heroic virtues dwell.
High courage, fortitude, and patriot zeal:
E'en charity would grace her fairy cell,
And teach her heart in sympathy to feel,
Till her fond father half his thoughts would steal
From his own cherish'd looks, with joy to trace
Those charms not Folly's wiles could long conceal,
Her mother's dignity, her mother's grace,
Then vow to fly no more from Honor's chaste embrace.

But Folly's daughter idly round him hung
With fulsome praise, light love, and gaudy joy,
Like ivy to the falling structure clung,
To deck pretending, fated to destroy:
But where the flatt'ry that self-love can cloy?
This gaudy Vanity has rudely torn
Each good resolve, and ev'ry sacred tie:
Then wisdom teach my heart to know and scorn
The dangerous Vanity of Folly basely born.

Nathless, the Muse's venturous skiff is still
By one or other Vanity impell'd:
Then prove we, by the pilot's steady skill,
That Honor's child the helm's true guidance held,
Each sails' uncertain flutt'ring gently quell'd,
And with the gales best 'vantage safely veer'd.
Ye who secure on shore our course beheld,
Say, has our little bark been wisely steer'd
And prospers well its freight by your approval cheer'd?
