'Twas noontide &mdash; and, breathless beneath the hot ray,
The far-winding vales of the wilderness lay:
By the Koonap's lone brink, with the cool shadow o'er me,
I slept &mdash; and a Dream spread its visions before me.

Methought, among scenes which I loved when a boy,
I was walking again, with young feelings of joy;
For my soul, like the landscape, seem'd soften'd and chang'd
To what it was once, when in childhood I ranged
Those fair haunts, to gather the bright summer flowers,
Or chase, with fond rapture, the birds through the bowers.
&mdash;On my dreaming ear waters were murmuring still,
But the wild foreign river had shrunk to a rill;
And Caha's dark mountains had melted away;
And the brown thorny desert, where antelopes stray,
Had become a sweet glen, where the young lambs were racing,
And yellow-hair'd children the butterflies chasing:
And the meadows were gemm'd with the primrose and gowan;
And the ferny braes fringed with the hazel and rowan;
And the foxglove look'd out from the oziers dank;
And the wild-thyme and violet breath'd from the bank.
&mdash;And green shelter'd glades 'mid the landscape were seen,
Half hid by the grey rocks, that high o'er them lean,
Where the light birch above its loose tresses was waving,
And the willow below in the blue stream was laving
Its silvery garlands of soft downy buds:
And the mellow thrush sang to his mate in the woods;
And the brood of the wild-duck plash'd over the pool,
New-fledg'd from their nest, 'mong the well-cresses cool.
&mdash;And trouts from the limpid stream lightly were springing;
And larks in the dewy air merrily singing;
And down in the copsewood the cushat was cooing;
And high o'er the moorland the huntsman hallooing;
The pipe of the shepherd was heard from the mountain,
And the milk-maiden's carol replied from the fountain:
With the lowing of herds from the broom-blossom'd lea;
'The cuckoo's soft not from the old beechen tree;
The waving of woods in the balm-breathing gale;
The dash of the mill-wheel afar down the vale:
&mdash;All these were around me: &mdash; and with them there came
Sweet voices, that call'd me aloud by my name,&mdash;
And looks of affection from innocent eyes,&mdash;
And light-hearted laughter, &mdash; and shrill joyous cries:
And I saw the mild features of all that were there,
Unalter'd by years, and unclouded by care!

Then it seem'd as that scene slowly melted away,
Like the bright cloud of morn in a midsummer's day;
And I lost the blithe sounds of the pastoral glen,
'Mid the rattle of wheels, and loud murmurs of men.
&mdash;I stood on a mount, and saw, towering around,
A proud ancient city, with palaces crown'd;
Where statesmen and heroes seem'd passing along,
With poets and sages &mdash; a glorious throng!
I heard, from on high, the loud heralds proclaim,
With their silver-toned voices, each patriot name;
I mark'd, yet afar, their mild dignified mien,
And their aspect benevolent, simple, serene;
And linger'd, in heart-greeting silence, to gaze
On the faces of those I had lov'd in their lays.
&mdash;But these feelings were brief; for, as closer they came,
Their bearing and looks seem'd no longer the same;
And features, that distance had soften'd or veil'd,
Grew harsh and distinct, till I shudder'd and quail'd&mdash;
Disturb'd with dark thoughts, like the heavings of ocean,
When it feels, amid calm, the far-coming commotion!

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Then the visionary pageant again seem'd to change,
And a land lay before me, of aspect strange&mdash;
Where the tumult of voices disturb'd me no more,
But I heard the hoarse surf dashing wild on the shore,
As bewilder'd I stood.  Yet, I was not alone;
For still, amid crowds, my Dream pass'd on:
Mid crowds &mdash; but silent, and sad as death;
For it seem'd as if each man held his breath,
And cower'd with his body, in mortal fear,
Like a caitiff beneath the conqueror's spear.
&mdash;Then I turn'd, and lifted my wondering eye,
And beheld a grim Spectre enthron'd on high,
And his name, it was written &mdash; TYRRANY!
I gazed &mdash; and beheld how his scourge-bearing hand
Was high outstretch'd o'er the shuddering land;
And his eyes, that like those of the basilisk shone,
Blasted whatever they glared upon.
&mdash;Yet crowds of votaries, kneeling around,
Were worshipping him, with a whispering sound;
And, ever and anon, his priests on high
Hymn'd forth his praises to the sky.
&mdash;Full many a race lay mingled there:
Swart Afric's tribes with their wooly hair,
The enslav'd Madegass, and dejected Malay,
And degenerate Belgian, slavish as they,
Prone and promiscuous round him lay.
As I drew more near, 'mid the suppliant train,
My heart swell'd high, with grief and pain,
Proud England's children there to view,
Commingled with that crouching crew:
And I marvell'd much that no manly hand
Was rais'd to redeem the desolate land;
For I saw that the monster's magic mould,
Though braced with iron and bound with gold,
Was fram'd but of base and crumbling dust,
Unfit to withstand the avenger's thrust.
&mdash;While thus I was musing, a crashing stroke,
As when the red lightning shivers the rock,
Fell! &mdash; And I started and awoke!

Awaking, I heard but the wild river sounding;
I gaz'd, but saw only the klip-springer bounding;
And the eagle of Winterberg, high o'er the woods,
Sailing supreme, 'mid his still solitudes.
