Rosa!  'twas one of those autumnal eves
When Heaven vouchsafes to Earth her loveliest looks;&mdash;
The still wood's sun-touch'd wilderness of leaves,
And cloud, and mountain-scalp, and castle took
Their colour from the west &mdash; bright gold!  the brook
Rippled in gold; &mdash; the great oak, branching o'er,
Was golden barked; &mdash; 'twas gold the cygnet shook
From her white wing; &mdash; and Strangeford's blue lake wore
A belt of quivering gold from shore to placid shore.

Yet &mdash; yet the broad sun loitered on the gaze
Dilated &mdash; slanting, ever as he went,
Intenser glory from his throne of rays,
Till, like some warrior-king, he won his tent,&mdash;
A purple cloud that warped the Occident.
Earth faded now, though heaven still was bright
With hues that blushed until the young moon bent
Her pointed crescent on the brow of night,
Which wore a dusky smile beneath that chrysolite.

Such was the scene, sweet girl!  we gazed upon,
While thou recountest o'er that tale of woe
Which oft, in other lands, a setting sun
Hath summon'd like a talisman &mdash; although
Gone hope, and griefs that bade the heart o'erflow,
Be since forgot, and tears that fell in vain;&mdash;
And with it rose thine image like the bow
That bathes its colours in the summer-rain,
Thou Iris of my heart, whose smiles wake hope again!

At length, one bright eve in a foreign bower,
I snatched my lute that on a laurel tree
Had idly hung &mdash; for, O!  I knew the power
Of slighted song was hovering over me,
And felt its pulse in every artery!
I snatched my lute, and to its preluding
Unrolled the pictured scroll of Memory;
And found, 'mid many a far and favourite thing,
That unforgotten tale of love and sorrowing.

A spell was on me! &mdash; No!  I could not choose
But weave that simple story into song!
And if its wild and plaintive beauty lose
Much of the grace it borrowed from thy tongue,&mdash;
And if sometimes a careless hand be flung
Where Passion listened for her holiest tone&mdash;
Star of my path!  forgive, forgive the wrong!
Whatever is of beauty is thine own:
Thy fair hand culled the flowers &mdash; I twisted the wreath alone.
