Dark was the cloud o'er Europe's sky that shed,
For ages, deept the soul-depressing gloom;
While Learning, languid, hid her palsied head,
And Genius slumber'd on her Virgil's tomb.
And cruel Superstition's dreaded doom,
Forbade in Reason's peaceful paths to stray;
Forbade sweet Fancy's living flowers to bloom,
While briers and thorns perplex'd the pilgrim's way,
And noxious night-shade drank the straggling beams of day.

Some gifted minds of far superior mould,
When Inspiration gave the glowing theme,
Might rise, at times, on eagle-pinions bold,
And light the sombrous scene with brilliant gleam:
But like December's ineffectual beam
That, slanting, smites the frozen glebe in vain&mdash;
Or fires amid the wintry storm that stream,
Behind them whitening far a blazing train,
That fades ere well beheld, and all is dark again.

Till dawn'd at length that most eventful morn,
By the lone Bard in Patmos' Isle descried;
When o'er the Heavens, on angel-pinions borne,
The Messenger of Love was seen to glide.
Pale on her ebon throne, where by her side
Blind Bigotry reclin'd in drowsy mood,
Shook Ignorance &mdash; and wither'd in his pride,
Yet breathing vengeance, Despotism stood,
While Freedom fair was born, and was baptiz'd in blood.

Her heavenly bloom, her lineaments divine,
In Saxon wilds did speedily unfold;
And lonely musing by the winding Rhine,
Spirit she drank unconquerably bold.
Through flowery vales, despising caution cold,
Along the Po her early youth did stray&mdash;
And on the faded banks of Tiber old,
The drooping nymphs she call'd to rural play,
Whence, heaven inspir'd, again awoke th' enchanting lay.

But ceaseless thunders, pour'd from Papal Rome,
Forbade to linger on Ausonian dales,
And scarce she 'scap'd to fill a burning tomb,
Where Summer smiles in Savoy's sunny vales.
Deny'd to breathe fair Gallia's balmy gales,
She wander'd where the Danaw rushing roars&mdash;
But persecuted still, she spread her sails,
Advent'rous to the winds, and ply'd her oars,
Till, SCOTIA, sweet she smil'd upon thy barren shores.

Long hadst thou slept, and in thy stormy sky
Bright boreal beams had died away the while&mdash;
And harpings wild of sacred Minstrelsy
No more were heard from far Iona's Isle.
Yet raptur'd, thou did'st hail the fair exile,
And kindly nurse her by thy native springs;
Discord was tame beneath her soothing smile,
While new-bon Art awoke the sounding strings,
And Genius heaven-ward spread abroad her daring wings.

Her child Discipline oped Pieria's rills,
And, copious, gave her healing streams to pour
Amidst thy vales &mdash; While glad, thy heath-clad hills
"Sang jubilant" beneath Castalian shower.
But chief she pointed to that dreary hour,
That shuts the lengthen'd roil of mortal woes,
And bade the eye, with more than human power,
Expatiate where unmingled pleasure flows,
And life's unfading bloom with spotless lustre blows.

Benevolent, to aid this grand design,
Our counsels and our efforts have been join'd;
We ask your aid to pour the light divine
Of knowledge on the helpless infant's mind.
We wish to soothe the gloomy thought unkind,
That in the war-worn veteran's breast may rise,
As sad he breathes his wishes on the wind&mdash;
Takes a last look of earth, and sun, and skies,
While Death's harsh hand tears up his bosom's inmost ties.

"Who," he may say, "my little ones will shield,
Open their minds, and hand them on to fame?
Although my life is given in honour's field,
Their morn is dark, their day may set in shame."
Forbid it Heaven, and Freedom's holy flame!&mdash;
Each patriot heart the chilling thought will spurn&mdash;
Yet ah!  though justice registrates their claim,
Valour's poor offspring oft neglected mourn,
While Fame exulting smiles upon the parent's urn.

Of Industry, oft too, the patient child,
A sounding name who never hop'd to raise,
Nor, from ambition's sultry walks exil'd,
Was parch'd beneath the burning thirst of praise;&mdash;
As life with unexpected lapse decays,
O'er his poor infant pours the secret tear,
Whose early path, through life's perplexing maze,
He hop'd with learning's blessed beam to cheer,
Whence high the song might swell through heaven's eternal year.

For who that ever own'd a parent's name,
How dark soe'er his troubled sky might frown,
But, in the light of Hope's inspiring flame,
Saw for his offspring joy and gladness sown.
Manners, he hopes, more winning than his own,
May wind more smooth through life's entangled way;
More pains bestow'd, more generous feeling shown,
More pregnant parts with lustre may display,
That honour's wreath should reap in life's meridian day.

Who will not hail such hopes, such feelings strong,
On which are founded virtue, wealth, and power?
Who will not join, our cultur'd dales among,
For aye to bid them live and bud secure?
So may their blessings, peace and plenty pour,
While all partake of pleasure unreprov'd&mdash;
So may rejoining time's last ebbing hour
Behold us happy, loving and belov'd,
Our Virtues unimpair'd, our Empire unremov'd.
