The midnight bell had toll'd: &mdash; worn, friendless, weak,
Upon his dying couch Las Casas lay;
No friendly voice that awful pause to break,&mdash;
His steadfast eye was tow'rd that Eastern way,
Through which all joyously the God of Day
Goes forth to light the evil and the good;&mdash;
Not that to him the dawning morrow's ray
Could bring the joys of mortals &mdash; for he stood
Trembling upon the brink of the o'erwhelming flood.

Fourscore and ten revolving years to him
Had brought their joys, griefs, sins, and sorrowings:
The eloquent eye, time-touch'd, had now grown dim;
Yet that kind drowsiness of mind, which brings
Rest to the aged, and all mortal things
Shrouds in the veil of placid apathy,
Came not to him: &mdash; but touch the silent strings,
And thou hadst started at the quick reply
Of the frail, shaken Harp's responsive harmony.

Even now, undying, in his soul there dwelt
All the indignant soul of former years;
More few, perchance, his words &mdash; whate'er he felt,
Suppress'd in sighs, or uttered but in tears,
Nor the high head erect and firm he rears:
But this was Nature's work; &mdash; the mighty mind,
Untouch'd by Time, in all its strength appears;
And still the more, with every thought entwined,
Love triumphs in his breast, &mdash; Love, ardent, unconfined.

Thou, who hast felt thyself what good men feel
Turning the page of Life's eventful day,
In those truth-telling moments which reveal
The long, long sum of blessings past away,
That hour of trial thou canst well pourtray&mdash;
His crown of glory cast upon the ground,
When, bathed in tears, the good Las Casas lay;
And clouds and darkness seem'd to gather round,
And thick impervious mists the mental sight to bound.

Exhausted with unutterable thought,
Back on his couch the dying sufferer fell,
But found not there the peaceful rest he sought;
Unwonted forms &mdash; sounds, sights we may not tell,
Flitted before him, and he felt the spell
Was laid upon him.  From that hour, no more
He sought the mighty vision to repel;
Passive, like infant in the giant's power,
Amazed and mute he saw the wonders of that hour.

His eyes were open'd on a world of light,
The stars of Heaven beneath his feet were shedding
Their pale faint beams across the gloom of night;
But he, above them all, was firmly treading.
His heart had lost its fears; &mdash; no longer dreading
The deep dark vale &mdash; emerged at once, his eye
Fell on a glorious prospect, widely spreading,
And thousand spirits welcomed him on high;
All dangers seem'd o'erpast &mdash; all doubts, all fears gone by.

That moment's ecstasy we may not paint:&mdash;
Death must give place to life, this earth to Heaven,
Time to Eternity &mdash; ere to the faint
And failing heart such glorious task be given;
The soul, long tempest-tost, no longer driven
A weary wanderer from the peaceful shore,&mdash;
Each doubt resolved &mdash; each devious step forgiven&mdash;
And they, the comrades of our toil before,
Mingling their souls with ours in joys for evermore!

Not yet, not yet &mdash; Las Casas hath not yet
His firm foot planted in that blest abode.
It was a vision still &mdash; he may forget,
And for a moment feel his lighten'd load,&mdash;
More anxious thoughts must now his bosom goad;
This Heaven, these joys so holy, are they HIS?
Have his feet trod the straight and narrow road?
Or must he leave a Paradise like this,
To mourn untasted joys, and unpartaken bliss?

An angel stood before him:  his bright eye,
Awfully pure, Las Casas met, and shook
Through all his frame with inward agony;
Such piercing glance his spirit could not brook.
Yet in that angel's calm, expressive look,
Mercy and peace and gentleness were blended;
The tear of pity scarce his eye forsook;
But, from a heaven of holiness descended,
Judgment was on his brow, and Truth his steps attended.

And "Child of Earth!" he said, "whose deeds of love
By Heaven approved, have found a record here&mdash;
Whose fervent prayers have reach'd the throne above,
Before thy sight shall future things appear;
For this I come &mdash; Thou, meekly silent, hear,
And humbly view the wonders I shall show,
Though oft thy sad and penitential tear,
Mourning the miseries thou hast wrought, shall flow
Warm as thy heart's desire to soften human woe.

"Yet hear in patience; gloriously at length
The wrath of man shall speak the praise of God;
He shall go forth in his resistless strength,
And powers of earth and Heaven obey his nod:
Then shalt thou own the chastenings of the rod
Their own pure purpose amply have fulfill'd;
And, when thy limbs repose beneath the sod,
Though other hands than thine the fabric build,
He shall not be forgot whose heart its beauty will'd."

The Judgment-book is open'd &mdash; every grace
And gift of God to erring man stood there,&mdash;
The large free offers to a guilty race,
The frequent calls to penitence and prayer:
And "These to thee were given, and to thy share
Long health, long years, beyond the common lot:
Where stray'd thy steps beyond his guardian care?
When wast thou left forsaken or forgot?"
Drooping, Las Casas heard, &mdash; and wept, but answer'd not.

Lightly the record spake of childhood; youth
It touch'd more strongly, &mdash; season of deceit,
When falsehood wears the very look of truth,
And hearts deceived revenge the wrong they meet!&mdash;
Las Casas knew the bitter and the sweet
Of all that cheers, delights, bewilders man;
Long in the bowers of pleasure found his feet
A rest &mdash; such rest as lofty spirits can,
Their eagle glance curtail'd, and bounded by a span.

Oh!  to look back upon the days, the hours
That brought us nothing, carried nought away!
For ever loitering amidst beds of flowers,
The self-same round revolving day by day:
Las Casas was a man &mdash; we dare not say,
So did not he.  Enough:  the dreamer woke,
Awoke to bless the pure and holy ray
That through the mists of error instant broke,
Teaching the soul to spurn her low unworthy yoke.

&mdash;There rides a bark in triumph o'er the wave!
Her full sails catch  the home-breeze joyfully:
Joy to the glorious heroes!  to the brave
Who tried the perils of that unknown sea!
What though the closing waves indignantly
Reject the marks of man's far-spreading sway,
The conquest is achieved! &mdash; by thine, and thee,
Dauntless Columbus!  is the dubious way
Unlock'd, display'd at once &mdash; all darkness turn'd to day!

How beautiful she comes!  Her errand peace
And joy, and tidings of a world new-found!
Well may the toils of wonted labour cease;
Well may the countless thousands throng around,
And Grief forget her sufferings! &mdash; Hark!  the sound
Of hallelujahs, glorifying Him
Whose hand hath framed the earth's extremest bound,
And, as the light of ancient worlds grows dim,
Bids us at other fanes the lamp of Science trim.

And are there brothers o'er that watery waste&mdash;
Our new-found kindred?  Oh!  to carry there
The peaceful Olive-branch, and bid them haste
Our Arts to learn &mdash; our wondrous tales to hear!
Oh!  to commingle joys &mdash; with them to share,
In sweet and sacred fellowship, the store
Of blended good which each to each may bear!
And, more than all, together forth to pour
The mingled breath of praise &mdash; together to adore!

Beautiful vision!  Though as soon as found
Dash'd and dispell'd, yet unforgotten still!
Oft in the cold world's unennobling round
Of close contracted duties, come, and fill
The heart with kindness; raise the selfish will,
And fix it firm in faith on Him, whose love
Nor time can change, nor height nor depth can chill;
Who, in his own good time, sends forth the Dove
Of Peace to erring man, and summons him above!

Beautiful vision!  Yet more lovely still
When it hath visited a brother's eye,
And we can mark the rapturous tears that fill
That beaming eye, and share its holy joy;
And we can feel th' indissoluble tie,
Our hearts conjoining in one mighty cause;
On one dear altar every wish lay by,
The dreams of youth &mdash; the thirst for vain applause&mdash;
All that from heavenly bliss th' immortal mind withdraws!

Beautiful vision!  Hath it shone on THEE,
Thou listless wanderer in that flowery field?
Yes!  by that new and heaven-born energy,
The kindling eye &mdash; the purpose half reveal'd,
Yet half, in humbleness of heart, conceal'd,
Itself mistrusting, as it turns to view
The powerless arm that would presume to wield
A sword so mighty, in a field so new,
And doubts its own resolves, and fears its hope untrue.

Yes, go, Las Casas!  Firm, yet meek of heart&mdash;
Go, friend of him who knows no friend beside&mdash;
Go, self-devoted to thy chosen part;
And, as the unknown ocean opens wide,
Gird up thy spirit to that strife untried:
No laurel-crown shall deck thee conqueror there,
No favouring smiles delight thy human pride;
But thou thy Saviour's name in peace shalt bear:
Herald of Mercy, go! &mdash; thy tale of Love declare.

Oh!  yet remember, though thy heart may bleed
As Misery pours her unavailing sigh,
There is a world where, slaves are free indeed,
And drink unmix'd the cup of Liberty!
Then tame thy breast's o'ermastering sympathy:
Better to speak the patient words of Love,
And bid the indignant plaint unalter'd die,
Than turn the spirit from its hope above;&mdash;
The Serpent's wisdom gain &mdash; the meekness of the Dove.

'Twas done: &mdash; upspringing, like the lion roused
From the strong chains of slumber, forth he went.
Thenceforth his eye, in singleness unclosed,
Droop'd not, nor wander'd from its high intent:
Earnest he look'd around the world, and bent
A searching glance on one sad scene of woe;
He heard the whisper &mdash; "Therefore art thou sent;
There bend thy strength &mdash; each meaner aim forego;
There stanch the bleeding heart &mdash; the tear forbid to flow!"

He heard, and he obey'd! &mdash; That instant fix'd
His heart, soul, mind, devoted to their aim.
Thenceforth, though variously the cup was mix'd
For him in joy or sorrow, 'twas the same:
Unchangingly he bore the grief, the shame
Of bitter disappointment; and he took
Meekly the common lot of praise or blame,
As those who up to Heaven's tribunal look
With mild appealing eye to its decisive Book.

He went: &mdash; the dangers of the deep, though fraught
In those dark days with terrors long gone by,
In vain assail'd him, in his lonely thought&mdash;
Perhaps they came to terrify, to try:
Whom will they not? &mdash; even when the steady eye
Is fix'd on Him who rules the winds and waves,
(And they obey Him!)  yet the sea, the sky,
The threatening murmurs of the ocean caves,
Smite with a chilling awe, which scarce one spirit braves.

And even when winds are hush'd, the soft air balm,
And the light bark rests gently on the deep,
There is oppression in that awful calm,&mdash;
The death of Nature rather than her sleep;
The eye looks round for help, &mdash; we cannot keep
Its glance from wandering o'er that vacancy;
And, if a speck appear, the soul will leap,
Fill'd with the spirit of society,
Over the watery bound, its loneliness to fly.

No!  there is nothing lonely like the sea:
Though thousand thousand sails be speeding o'er,
And the mind knows the friendly wave to be
Medium of blessings to the farthest shore,
Still 'tis a changeful and capricious power,
Too fickle for man's mind to rest upon;
In its most smiling times he hears the roar
Of distant thunder, and he feels like one
Who dreads to wear a smile, lest cause of smile be gone.

In such a time, well pleased, the eye will turn,
From the deep waves below to Heaven above,&mdash;
Beautiful region!  where the night-fires burn,
And seem to breathe benignity and love.
What though beyond the burning line we rove,
Where, one by one, each light must disappear
We knew in childhood; never can we move
Beyond the glories of the starry sphere,
Or feel the Almighty arm less manifestly near!

And there are feelings which the voyager
Can well remember &mdash; when upon his eye,
Ranging beneath another hemisphere,
First came the vision of the Southern sky.
Yes, there they shine!  those stranger lights on high&mdash;
The dream of childish years!  Yes, there they are!
Bright Southern Cross, so dear to memory,
The Wolf, the Ship of Heaven, the Phoenix &mdash; there
Pouring their mingled lights &mdash; how beautiful, how fair!

Las Casas felt, as mortal man should feel,
The glories of creation; &mdash; his delight
Was in that silent, eloquent appeal,
Which day to day repeats, and night to night!
Sweet were his hours, when, beautifully bright,
The equatorial sky its fires display'd&mdash;
Its tracts of darkness, and its gleams of light.
Stretch'd on the deck, in midnight hours of shade,
How sprang his soul to Him whose hand these wonders made!

He knew not yet to what a world, how vast,
The winds impell'd him; for the daring prow,
Which cross'd the Atlantic first, not yet had past
On to the distant land we ought to know
Best by His name who found it.  Gently blow
The steady breezes &mdash; and the hour is nigh,
When, all reveal'd, that mighty land shall show
Its train of marvels to the stranger's eye;
Its old, untrodden woods &mdash; its hills that pierce the sky.

How placid was that evening! &mdash; they had met&mdash;
The Chieftain and Las Casas &mdash; glad to seize
The time, when others hasten'd to forget
Those lighter toils which leave the mind at ease.
Then, differing oft by day, in hours like these
Their souls grew placid &mdash; learn'd to look within&mdash;
And, in the fellowship of midnight seas,
Each felt the glow of kindlier thought begin,
And strove from peaceful hours more peaceful fruits to win.

They talk'd of home &mdash; of childhood &mdash; of the hearts
Whose love, more dear than life, yet sway'd them not
When duty call'd them to their several parts,
And sternly pointed the severer lot&mdash;
Their own sweet land, the one beloved spot
Where all bright things, all fair were garnered&mdash;
Its ancient memories, dearer to the thought,
Because between them ocean depths were spread,
And they themselves, perchance, were thought of as the dead!

And then that look'd-for world they call'd to mind,
Much questioning its future destinies:
If to the treasures of the Eastern Ind
This way the future path of nations lies;
If those fair Isles, so late Columbus' prize,
Be but as steps to fairer, yet unknown
Or if there be &mdash; so high their wishes rise&mdash;
A wide-spread land of rivers, like their own,
Where man exists &mdash; enjoys &mdash; even in the Torrid Zone!

Nor had they lived in that romantic time
Of young discovery, to its soul so dead,
But that for them, with every stranger clime,
Some wondrous tale was link'd, by fancy bred:
Here "El Dorado" all her wealth outspread;
There "right Divine" the female sovereigns claim;
And here the youth-renewing fountains shed
Vigour and freshness through the aged frame;
And here the garden blooms &mdash; and Eden is its name.

And loftier themes were theirs; &mdash; the grand pure Heaven
Oft drew their eyes, &mdash; but most that cheering sign,
Emblem to Christian souls of sins forgiven&mdash;
Of dying Love, and Mercy's power divine&mdash;
Cross of the South!  whose grand illumined line
Of glory lights another firmament!
Though to behold thee never must be mine,
Yet oft will fancy to mine eyes present
Thee in thy noon-tide hour, or 'cross the waters bent.

Hark!  while they speak, a sound, a sudden gush
Of waves, each moment louder and more nigh!
The eddying waters boil!  impetuous rush
Strong currents, struggling for the mastery!
Whence come these mighty floods, that, hurrying by,
Rushing and rolling, mingle with the deep,
Freshening the ocean, waters? &mdash; Up!  the cry
Of danger startles from their quiet sleep
The dreaming seamen all; &mdash; what anxious watch they keep!

"Land!  land!  vast woods, wide rivers far and near!
But oh!  what perils hem the vessel round!
Oh!  steer as for thy life, brave Pilot!  steer&mdash;
Perhaps some quiet gulph may yet be found.&mdash;
There!  there!  right onward! &mdash; Now the bottom sound&mdash;
Tack to the right &mdash; but clear that narrow sea;
Pass but unharm'd that cape's projecting bound,
And there in safety may thy station be.
Now, praised be our God!  'tis past, and we are free."

And equatorial darkness hath given place
To all the splendour of the risen day.&mdash;
Oh what a day!  then first the smiling face
Of this new world, fresh, beautiful, and gay,
Shone in the brightness of her fair array,
How sweet, how lovely, on the stranger's eye!
There Nature holds her undisputed sway
Over the waste &mdash; but lordly man is nigh,
And now her powerless hand the sceptre must lay by.

Deal gently with her, conquerors though ye be,
For she is gentle.  To her quiet shade,
And the calm region of her privacy,
Ye came, unask'd, her treasury to invade:
And have ye hearts to draw the murderous blade
In her pure presence?  She hath given ye all&mdash;
For you the secrets of her realms display'd:
And, oh!  how eloquent her accents fall!&mdash;
"Sons of the Stranger Land!  enjoy, but not enthrall."

New-found Columbia!  pouring forth thy floods
Of many waters &mdash; rearing up the vast
And massy pile of thy gigantic woods,
Where even the savage foot hath rarely past;
Thy gorgeous birds, that light and beauty cast
Over the forest's gloom; the brilliant dyes
Of thousand flowers, that shed their sweets to waste!
Can He who paints thee thus the dream despise,
Which fondly saw in thee man's long-lost Paradise?

But onward!  onward!  they must spread the sail,
And leave this vision for a happier hour;
Before the gentle steady breezes fail,
Columbus must retrace the Island shore&mdash;
His first-found Island of the West, once more,&mdash;
And thou, Las Casas!  must thy work begin;
Yet still thy longing eyes that coast explore:
Oh!  were it thine some peaceful fruits to win,
Ere Mammon's sterner soils their spoils have gather'd in!

Short space &mdash; and now again the vessel nears
The wish'd-for port; but, oh!  how changed the scene!
Grief, horror, bloodshed, slavery, and tears,
Mark where the white man's blasting foot hath been;
And here it is, where Indian eyes have seen
Dark deeds of desolation ceaseless wrought!
Here must Las Casas tell, with eye serene,
Of peace &mdash; of freedom by the Saviour brought;
How easy is His yoke &mdash; what blessed truths He taught.

Then came the days of unremitting toil&mdash;
The nights by gentle sleep unvisited&mdash;
Life held in doubt, as the tumultuous broil
Of angry tempests gather'd round his head,
Or, in the howling waste his couch was spread,
Or the still hour of midnight saw him bear
The torch of truth to cheer the dying bed,
And turn the sinner's curses into prayer,
And Him in darkness served, in words of light declare.

And, worse than watchings, toil, disease, and death,
The sickening anguish of the spirit came,
Unheard, despised, to waste his shortening breath&mdash;
To hide, perhaps, in silence and in shame,
The glorious sound of that dishonour'd name
Whose very thought is freedom!  Thou, whose tongue
Deals out with ease its ready dole of blame,
For once forgive, if, thus to madness stung,
Rash word and hasty deed from gentle heart were wrung!

O'er the wide waters, lo!  he comes again.&mdash;
Hark!  heard ye not those accents, awful, deep,
That taught thy dying eye, proud King of Spain,
Dismay'd, the ruin thou hadst wrought to weep?
Sleep not again; &mdash; thou canst not, darest not sleep&mdash;
Those awful words are ever in thine ear;
His ceaseless watch the holy Priest shall keep,
Till tardy Mercy stay the mad career
Of the rapacious bands that mock Columbia's tear.

And now again he cleaves the billowy wave,
Herald of hope, of liberty, once more;
No other home he seeks, no fitter grave,
Than mid the wilds of that afflicted shore.
Alas!  in vain &mdash; more hopeless than before,
As more matured, indignantly he sees
Slavery, in all her plenitude of power,
Loading with cries of woe the ocean breeze;&mdash;
Yet not the less he strives such anguish to appease.

Again th' angelic strain uprose &mdash; the song
That sung the Christian hero's manly daring;
And that celestial Spirit smiled again,
The message of accepted deeds declaring.
O blessed thought!  that heavenly hearts are sharing
Our earthly triumphs, all our toils survey&mdash;
For us in Heaven's immortal bowers preparing
Th' unenvied crown! &mdash; And who so blest as they,
When wandering feet return to seek the narrow way?

O blessed thought, while only thought! &mdash; but Thou,
Favour'd Las Casas, hadst a glimpse more high:
That angel-look was fix'd on thee even now,
And thou hast caught its glance of sympathy.
Now let thy heart its load of cares lay by,
Servant of God!  whose dying eyes have seen
Into the secret counsels of the sky:
Though all unfathom'd be the gulf between,
Now placid be thine eye &mdash; thy mind, thy heart serene!

Yet trembling! &mdash; Yes, the Angel's darken'd brow
Betokens tales of sorrow yet to come.
All Heaven is mute &mdash; reluctantly and slow,
As He who once pronounced the fearful doom
Of man's long exile from his earliest home,
The Spirit turns that fatal record o'er:&mdash;
"And who was he? &mdash; The light of life to some&mdash;
To Afric's sons, the stripes, the chains, who bore!
Barterer of human blood!  curse of that wretched shore!"

Then forth from highest heavens in thunder came
A wild full chorus to the voice, replying&mdash;
"Thine, thine, deceived Las Casas!  was the shame,
With Afric's woes Columbia's freedom buying!"&mdash;
And then there came the wailings of the dying,
And low, faint prayers for mercy; and the cry
Of some self-murderer, from his tortures flying,
In the deep sounds of life's last agony
Cursing the white man's name, while Echo made reply.

Oh!  hide him, earth! &mdash; for, in that aged breast,
What thoughts of tenfold anguish now upspring!
Oh!  could he flee away, and be at rest!
But grief hath laid her fetters on his wing,
And deeper shades around their horrors fling,
And he must quaff alone the cup of woe;
For the kind Angel, mute and sorrowing,
Stands with averted eye and downcast brow:
And who shall give him rest, and soothe the sufferer now?

Hark!  breathless angels hang upon the sound&mdash;
A "still small accent," awful and alone&mdash;
Nor in the air it seems, nor from the ground&mdash;
Single, and sweet, and gentle as the tone
Wherein a mother pleadeth for her own;
And they that heard it felt as if their breath,
Suspended, lived in that, and that alone:&mdash;
And who could dread the gloomy vale of death,
If voice of peace like this the spirit summoneth?&mdash;

"Tear out that page of sorrow!" &mdash; Hark!  no more?
"The guilty leaf is cancell'd &mdash; thou art free!"
Mute, mid the thousand thousands that adore
The deep-felt presence of the Deity,
Las Casas stands &mdash; no more his eye can see,
Intensely drinking in the words of Peace;
To him the Seraph's sweetest song can be
But as the warbling of the senseless breeze:&mdash;
All Heaven is in his heart &mdash; his doubts, his conflicts cease.

That voice again &mdash; "As many as I love,
Those I rebuke.  Thy life in labours spent,
A worthy offering to the Throne above,
Thy soul, while yet unhumbled, dared present;
And therefore hast thou found the chastisement
Of earthly wisdom, and hast wept to see
How thine own hand the scourge, the yoke, has sent
To suffering nations &mdash; that such wrong could be,
In all thy dear-nursed schemes of mild philanthropy.

"Repentant and forgiven, arise!" &mdash; No more&mdash;
The voice is hush'd &mdash; a moment &mdash; is it gone?
Then bursts the song of thousands, then before
The glorious portals of the Eternal Throne&mdash;
"Blessing, and praise, and honour, Holy One,"
Rejoicing and exulting angels sing&mdash;
"Blessing to Him, Jehovah!  God alone!
Blessing to Him, the martyr'd Lamb, they bring,
Who burst the grave's dark bounds, and snatch'd from death his sting!"

But mid the joy of that triumphant scene,
Is there no friendly voice to greet him here?
Have angel-tears fall'n o'er him?  and serene
When now the skies in beauty re-appear,
And heaven and earth a placid radiance wear,
Shall there be none to greet him &mdash; none to bless
His very blessings, his weak head uprear?&mdash;
That were not earthly love: &mdash; can Angels less,
Who share the sinner's grief, than share his happiness?

And at his side the Angel stands &mdash; his eye
Hath brightness indescribable; &mdash; the glow
Of love that liveth everlastingly
Sate on his cheek and lighten'd up his brow:&mdash;
"Come, thou beloved Las Casas, open now
Once more thine eyes on that afflicted shore;
The counsels of the Highest shalt thou know
The mighty workings of that wondrous Power,
Which light from gloom can bring, and wrath to peace restore."

Then, starting into life, Las Casas sees
A holy band, their fathers' faults retrieving;
With pious hands they hasten to appease
Nature's long anguish, o'er her children grieving,
And gently, duteously, their task achieving,
Like him who clears defacing stains away
From the pale marble, all its glory leaving;&mdash;
So toil'd they on, for many a weary day,
Even from their morn of youth to age's evening grey.

And from the snares of wealth, from pleasure's maze,
From all that cheers and soothes the heart of man
From ease, from leisure, earthly peace and praise,
Undaunted turning, they their work began:
Cold in their veins the life-blood often ran,
For they had human feelings; &mdash; yet to be
Heaven's ministers, and work upon its plan,
Breathed through their souls resistless energy,
And the world heard their voice &mdash; "The Negro SHALL be free!"

There thou, "in journeyings oft, in perils, pains,"
First in a field whose meanest place was fame,
Unbinder of the Negro's massive chains,
Intrepid CLARKSON!  at whose single name
Wealth hid her head and guilt grew pale with shame;
Before whose single eye proud cities brought
Nor danger nor allurement, &mdash; all thine aim
To clear their fame from one dishonouring blot,
And wipe the stains away themselves regarded not;&mdash;

There, in that vision, wert thou found, whom we
In Mercy's service still delight to find:
Thy heart is not grown cold to Misery's plea,
And passing years have left untouch'd thy mind.
On, generous CLARKSON!  ever unconfined
By selfish aims, thy steady path pursue;
On to the mark!  forget the things behind,
Draw round thee Mercy's friends, though all too few;
And, year by year, proceed &mdash; thy daring charge renew!

And thou, whose voice, in strength or weakness plying,
Senates have heard, most mild, most musical,
Each varying string of human feeling trying
The meek to win, the mighty to appall!
Who can forget thee, WILBERFORCE?  Though all
The fruit of patient toil thou must not see,
Though Slavery holds her thousand sons in thrall,
The Spirit is gone forth &mdash; and Liberty
Chants in the Negro's land a grateful song to thee.

Glory and happiness!  the Western main,
By setting suns illumined, brings the time
Of gentler evening, leading in her train
The happiest moments of that burning clime.&mdash;
Hark!  through the neighbouring hills the well-known chime
That calls the Negro to the House of Prayer!
No longer now the minister of crime,
The white man goes with brother men to share
His glory and his hope &mdash; and God is worshipp'd there.

Glory and happiness!  the fetter'd limb,
Exulting in its strength, at last goes free,
And the bewildering clouds of error dim
Before the dawn of knowledge break and flee.
The peaceful bark is gliding o'er the sea;
No blood-stain'd flag, no pomp of war she bears&mdash;
A gentle messenger of love is she;
And wheresoe'er her goodly form appears,
There Freedom lifts her head, and Sorrow dries her tears.

"Glory and happiness!" Las Casas cries:
The vision is dispell'd &mdash; the grateful burst
Of joy and wonder, from his tranced eyes
At once the opening glories have dispersed;
The moon-beams falling on his couch &mdash; the first
And faintest call of early matins' bell&mdash;
The well-remember'd voices, interspersed
With sighings of the gale, &mdash; all broke the spell;
His head, in transport raised, back on his pillow fell.

And he hath grasp'd the hand of one, whose love,
Long tried and faithful, hath pursued him here,
Like the kind Angel, whom he saw above,
Bending beside, to strengthen and to cheer:
Together both, for many a painful year,
The self-same patient work of love they plied;&mdash;
And sweet it is, when life's last pang draws near,
To see the brother-labourer at our side,
And speak of coming joys, where Death shall not divide.

So LOOK'D Las Casas: &mdash; look'd &mdash; but utter'd not
A word to break the deepening peace of Death:
Still his quick eye its lightning glances shot,
But fainter and more faint his parting breath
Went and return'd; yet he who watch'd him saith,
That ever, as he whisper'd words of cheer,
The hand uplifted told the spirit's faith&mdash;
Down the worn cheek oft stole the grateful tear,
And hope was in his eye, and love, that casts out fear.

So pass'd he. &mdash; He who loved him saw his eye
Closed in the slumber of its dreamless rest;
Saw the chill limbs in shrouded stiffness lie,
And the cold earth heap'd high upon his breast:
And then he laid him down &mdash; the pillow press'd
Where he, the brother of his heart, had lain!
And, ere the morrow's sun had gain'd the West,
For him, too, rose the requiem's solemn strain,
Spreading the tale of death o'er all th' extended plain.

O thou who readst!  whose heart has felt the glow
Of warm benevolence; whose untired feet
Have, trod those paths of duty here below,
Where toil is sanctified and trouble sweet,
Blessings be on thee!  As thy labour great,
Great be the harvest; &mdash; yet remember still
How unsuspected lurks the deep deceit,&mdash;
How oft, for good, we snatch the cup of ill,
And, brimming though it be, that cup yet higher fill.

Instructed, go! &mdash; Each high and noble aim
Still in thy deepest musings love to rear!
Go! &mdash; light more eagerly the holy flame
Of love to all mankind; and if the fear,
That where thy wish a smile decreed, a tear
May flow the faster for thine erring zeal,&mdash;
If doubt like this intrude, a throne is near,
Where they that meekly and incessant kneel,
Strengthen'd and heal'd themselves, shall others learn to heal.
