There come no seasons there: &mdash; our earthly year
Varies from prime to fall, from flowers to snow,
And each new month fresh trophies still doth rear
To Change, the victor of all fields below;&mdash;
But ye, oh ye, fair heavens!  for ever glow
In the young glory of your natal morn,
When first the realms of space were bade to know
Their starry kings, Creation's earliest-born,
Who should for aye on high yon sapphire thrones adorn.

Thus did ye shine upon the faded past,
Thus will ye shine on far futurity,
With living light, and beauty born to last
When the least earthly things of earth shall be
Passed, like the oar-foam from the settling sea.
Eternity is your "sweet hour of prime:"
Ye smile at ages; for your destiny
Hath bathed you in some skiey Styx, that time
Might blench no golden tress, nor dim one eye sublime.

Shine on &mdash; shine on &mdash; ye radiant thousand, shine!
Ye hosts of heaven, whose everlasting march
Is one enduring triumph!  Ye divine
Memorials, on the amethystine arch
Of Nature graven by God!  Oh, ye who parch
The hearts of dust for what they may not know,
Tempting yon azure wilderness to search,
As if some glad oasis there did glow&mdash;
'Twas but a bright mirage, and will for aye be so!

Familiar strangers!  Ye who from our youth
Gleam on our eyes to prove how dark and blind
Is human thought, where Fancy ekes out Truth,
And shadowy reams usurp the place assign'd
To life's realities, from which the mind
Flies to ideal worlds, peopling the stars
With shapes of love and beauty, &mdash; far behind
The truth of their bright mystery, which it mars,
Because it may not pass Fate's adamantine bars.

The blue Pacific of Infinity,
Gemm'd with the sacred islets of the skies&mdash;
Each isle a world upon a sapphire sea,
And every world perchance a paradise!
There only that sweet vision of the wise
And tuneful of past times is not a dream&mdash;
There only do those Blissful Isles arise,
Whose fame yet murmurs on the Muse's stream,
But whose proud shades did ne'er on mortal waters gleam.

Say, ye who shone on Zoroaster's eye,
And lit the midnight towers of golden Tyre,
Who smiled more purely, from a softer sky,
On, Helen's grave and Homer's wakeful lyre&mdash;
Have ye known all, and must not man aspire
To aught beyond him?  Shall no earthly ear
Drink, at dim midnight, from your shining quire
Empyreal music?  Can we not draw near,
And read the starry tale of yon mysterious sphere?

No, for the stamp of clay is on the brow&mdash;
The fetter'd spirit yearns to soar in vain&mdash;
And the ambition of man's thoughts must bow
Beneath mortality's recoiling chain.
Yet is it sweet, though we can ne'er attain
The prize we woo, the lofty race to run:
What though it tempt to yon untrodden plain?
The eagle's burning goal can ne'er be won&mdash;
But he may pierce the clouds, and feel the nearer sun!

And this is much &mdash; for who would e'er forego,
Beautiful strangers!  the delicious power
To make his spirit in your glory glow
At solemn midnight's solitary hour&mdash;
To woo the gentle heavens with all their dower
Of thought from immemorial Eld bequeath'd?
Yon high Elysium holds full many a flower
With no Pierian laurel yet enwreath'd&mdash;
O that around my lyre one such its incense breathed!

Sweet, passing sweet, to fill those far abodes
With scenes more bright than this dim world e'er knew&mdash;
With beings nobler than poetic gods&mdash;
With winds whose breath is bliss &mdash; with streams whose hue
Pales the clear diamond, as they murmur through
Evergreen woods to seek a deep more fair&mdash;
With sacred flowers that shed immortal dew
Round the pure feet of them who wander there,
On starrier skies to muse, in happier fates to share.

But sweeter far to dream that in some world,
Some distant world, that gems the blue night's dome,
The spirit's wings, on earth in darkness furl'd,
May woo the soft winds of a lovelier home!
As Beauty sprung from the pure ocean-foam,
May not Truth float on the rich depths of song?&mdash;
But where, oh where, would fond conjecture roam?
Our clueless phantasies may stray too long
The labyrinthine bowers of Night and Heaven among.
