Doth the same trade support this being, then,
That had supported thine? &mdash; And shall thy name
Be dropped, forgotten from the minds of men!
Oh, no, for though thou sought'st not after fame,
Thou hast upon the sorrowing muse a claim,
That would prolong thy memory in her strain;
For thine was that aspiring holy aim,
Which makes us blush at Folly's heedless train,
And turn to Wisdom's paths, and seek therein our gain.

Fit for the elder world!  the cynic's time,
When men despised the outward vanities,
Thou couldst not feed thy bosom on the slime
Of every-day enjoyment!  No, thy sighs
Still mounted for the fruit which most despise,
That of the tree of knowledge, &mdash; this to thee
Was ever tempting in thy paradise,
Nor whilst an apple was upon that tree,
Couldst thou contented feel, but pluck'd on greedily.

The languages of nations &mdash; realms no more,
'Twas thy ambition and thy love to know,
And gather what their sages taught of yore;
What he who made the rock with water flow,
Said to the chosen people, what the woe
Which made Philosophy still drop its tear.
To prove the warmth of the Meonian flow,
To learn the Mantuan's judgment, and to clear
Each point of science up &mdash; these claimed thy toil severe.

Thus didst thou, for thy solitary gain;
Thus didst thou ponder on the letter'd past,
Collecting to the treasure of thy brain,
The Alp of thought which ages had amass'd.
What labour?  what intricacies thou hast,
In thy lone hours, thus conquer'd and unknit!
Unaided, Perseverance round thee cast
That confidence which makes all toil submit,
And wanting which, thy bark on learning's rocks had split.

In fancy, now methinks thy form I see,
As o'er the musty tomes thou'rt bent to find
Some explanation which perplexeth thee,
And wanting which, thou hast no peace of mind,
Now, now, the head is on the hand reclin'd,
And now the pen is up to clear the doubt,
And now 'tis down again, &mdash; and as the wind
Puffs through thy dwelling's creeks thy lamp about,
I sigh for martyr'd life, and wish its struggle out.

Alas!  that ever such a mind as thine
Should be confin'd to poverty's dull spell,
That it unto itself should only shine,
As doth the bright pearl in its prison shell;
But this is oft the case, for all can tell
From story, or from memory, some sad tale
Of genius with a fate &mdash; dark, drear, and fell;
Of those who, like thee, doom'd to toil and wail,
Still felt th' ennobling wish, &mdash; but felt it to their bale.

Hast thou not felt it so, when on thy head
The gray locks came?  hast thou not felt it then?
Where, then, was thy reward for all thou'dst read
And learn'd? &mdash; for all thy scorn of worldly men,
Where was the home which knew no suffering, when,
Thou call'st all helpless in thy age to him,
Who for some dross drawn from the miser's den,
Thy dear companions was to purchase, then
Thy books, thy friends through life, each volume's sparkling gem.

O how my heart sinks, sinks, when I recur
To such a fate as thine!  by nature form'd
To be our erring spirit's minister,
And by thy doom to be in darkness worm'd!
With nothing but thy stoicism arm'd,
To take thy hard career through weary life,
O, how it sinks, sinks, sinks, or is alarm'd,
Lest others, like thee, with thy powers rife,
Should waste their tide of mind in bootless scenes of strife.

But, ah!  how useless thus to dwell on thee&mdash;
The grave is now thy comfort, &mdash; in its sleep
Thou find'st a medicine for the misery
Of thy wreck'd life's decline; we can but weep,
That all that is of thee is in its keep;
That all thy learning left us, is to know
Thou couldst not from this barren being reap
Thy nature's wants.  Unhappy, 'till below,
Poor, friendless, and unknown, thou gottest from thy woe.

Yes!  we may weep; but weeping can't recall
The loss of bright ability, like thine;
The star we see, through boundless ether fall,
Can we replace it in its sphere to shine?
Sorrow may give its tear, and thou hast mine,
But all in vain &mdash; thy keeping in the grave
Is as a stone, dropp'd to the ocean's brine,
It sinks beneath th' unfathomable wave,
No art can it return, no love can hope to save.
