I knew young Julian well; &mdash; that gentle youth,
Whose heart was as a maiden's; &mdash; by my side
He grew together with me, and in truth
His boyish sports were mine, whether we plied
The evening smoothness of the summer tide,
Or met the sunbeam on the mountain's brow:
I loved him well; &mdash; alas, for me!  he died,
When the first Autumn winds began to blow
Foliage whose bright tints mocked the soft-hued sunset glow.

He was indeed a strange and dreamy boy,
Wild as an Indian huntress, and as proud
As his young country's eagles; and his joy
Was even like theirs to listen to the loud
Clang of the tempest or the rattling cloud;
Yet loved all human kind, he was so mild:
What here is writ he gave me ere he bowed
His head upon my bosom, as he smiled
His lingering life away, most like a slumbering child.

Free as the untamed thunder-levin rolling
Athwart the blackness of this drooping sky;&mdash;
Free as the winds controlled not, yet controlling,
Free as the martyr's last prayer when to die
Is glorious gain; &mdash; free as despair's deep sigh,
Or as the waters when their chainless surge,
Lashed to wild wrath, speaks to the storm on high,
Rise up, my soul, while proud hopes onward urge
And perish in the whelming tempest, or emerge

To high and perilous emprise; &mdash; throw off
The bondage of all such as war with thought,
And trample on the fool's unmeaning scoff;
Why shouldst thou bow to wealth, who art unbought?
What carest thou for forms, who art untaught
To smile when thou shouldst frown? &mdash; thou wilt not sell
The holy birthright of thy race for aught;&mdash;
Rise, then, my slumbering spirit, rise and dwell
Enshrined in quenchless thought, fearless of earth or hell.

The idols of my heart are fading fast,
And my own fragile being will not long
Endure the fatal memory of the past,
Still less the gathering ills of present wrong,
And unforgetful sighs, a tireless throng,
Which day by day sink deeper than before;&mdash;
Weak sighs, which still are mightier than the strong,
Soon &mdash; soon &mdash; oh, when shall the vain strife be o'er,
And I repose in peace, and ye torment no more?

Yet will I hush this voice of weak lament;&mdash;
Yet will I conquer this unmanly grief;&mdash;
But the strong pain of passion first must vent
Its throbbing woes in words for sad relief:
'Tis done, &mdash; my waning pilgrimage be brief,&mdash;
Though young and dying, scarcely can I mourn;&mdash;
Time cannot bind my feelings' shatter'd sheaf,
Nor bid the loved, the long, long lost return,&mdash;
Then welcome be my journey towards the perilous bourn.

Methinks it scarcely matters when we tread
The road which all must tread who have not trod,
Though the dark journey be replete with dread;&mdash;
Firm by the mercy of a pitying God,
And humbled at the chastening of his rod,
How sweet, this aching heart and painful head
Slumbering in peace beneath the grass-green sod,
To join those ancient worthies who have fled,
And meet the mightier spirits of the mighty dead!

With them and such as them I have conversed
More than with men, and thus the fruit has been
That they and their old mouldering tomes have nursed
Feelings and thoughts and hopes which do not win
Men's charity, though haply not of sin:
For Roman, Grecian lore has been to me
The mistress of my love; &mdash; 'mid cities' din
I've loved old Rome while yet she was the Free,
And wander'd, lost in mists, through sage Philosophy.

Perchance it did not profit me; &mdash; at least,
I learnt that knowledge doth not always bring
The fabled pleasures of the mental feast;&mdash;
That intellectual streams might own a spring
Of bitter wave, whose sun-bright vapours fling
An arch of promise o'er the cheating source,
Lit by the ray of man's own hopes, which cling
To all delusion with a desperate force,
Till doubts and darkness soon obstruct their stumbling course.

Perchance my draught was shallow, and confused
The brain it did not sober &mdash; let it pass:
Even from my childhood upward I have used
To search into my being &mdash; but alas!
The scrutiny was fruitless; &mdash; that I was
Wretched I knew &mdash; but why I could not tell,&mdash;
Born but to perish as a blade of grass;&mdash;
One fate awaited all, I saw full well,&mdash;
Alike the sage and fool &mdash; the vile and virtuous fell.

For one grew ripe in honorable age
And others at his voice all lowly bowed
While he discoursed as from a pictured page
Most eloquent music to a listening crowd,
Who ever and anon fell shouting loud;&mdash;
Till with a golden circlet (save this crown
No other virtue had he), terror-browed,
Came one they called a king, and at his frown
Blood from the old man's silvery locks went running down.

Another fell in manhood's ripened day,
In the full flow of his warm bosom's tide;&mdash;
His wasted strength like weakness pass'd away,
And his heart's lingering streams of life were dried
By the enduring shame of humbled pride,
Or rankling poison left by passion's sting,
Or foul disease ungorged, and gaping wide;&mdash;
For each hath plumed his shaft from Horror's wing,
And each ten thousand shapes of varying fate can bring.

And there was one who, by the kindling flush
And happiness which beauty round her shed,
Seemed 'mid her pure hours, lit by that soft blush,
Some stray grace tripping o'er a violet bed,
In spring, &mdash; but ere the lingering aster fled,
They laid her ringlets 'neath the early snow;&mdash;
Men marvelled that so fair a thing was dead,
And when flowers blossom, blue-eyed maiden's go
With memory's garland-gifts for her who sleeps below.

And dreamy boys in the rathe bloom of youth,
Ere frozen years had hid them cease to lave
Their glowing cheeks with tears of joy or ruth,
Went down in silence to the marble, grave,
Scorched by the flame of passions which they crave;&mdash;
Or else embarking all their hope upon
Some voyage of love; &mdash; and on the fickle wave
Of that false sea perchance the worshipped one
Made shipwreck of their hopes, and so they were undone.

And some, disheartened at the world's cold frown
And chilly aspect of its frozen eye,
Weep like the clouds, until they seem to drown
The life of their young years, and sigh on sigh
Exhausts their being's source, and so they lie
Down in the loveliness of innocent youth
And welcome the Deliverer, as they die
Smiling for joy; yet do we feel, in sooth,
How wild the loss to us &mdash; how dark the frantic truth.

I know not if they sleep without the dreams
Which grim delusion wraps around the core
Of hearts which were not made to feel their streams
Mix with unfathomed lakes of guilty lore;&mdash;
I know not if their pure souls upward soar,
Or in the green earth's ample breast abide;&mdash;
But he who wanders by the twilight shore
When long slow curls climb up its silent side,
May hear strange flitting notes die on the solemn tide.

But when in quick wild wrath the wave of fears,
Lashed by careering winds from the fierce sleep
Where heavily groaning late he lay, uprears
The crested horror of his mountain heap;&mdash;
Ah, then go stand by the tumultuous deep
Alone, and if thou darest, try to cast
Away the mortal dread which then shall creep
Into thy soul, as on the shrieking blast
Mad mirth and devilish shouts peal round thee loud and fast.

Or when high noon upon some summer's day
Pillows thro' half the purple canopy
Those stately groups of massive shapes which lay
Self-poised beneath the bosom of the sky,&mdash;
Pure as an angel's dreams may be on high,
And beautiful as early love to lure
Young bosoms to fantastic thoughts; &mdash; yet why
May not these shapes be peopled with the pure,
Who, till time fails, some such strange being may endure?

Perchance the mourned and lost of earth are there
Who took our smiles with them; and it may be,
That 'mid those liquid realms of etherous air,
Raised from the taint of thralling dust, and free
From mortal stain and care, &mdash; yet may they see,
Sorrowing, our weary strife with mortal woe;&mdash;
Perchance in pity warn us when to flee
Destruction which we recked not of, and so
Are watchful guards above to those they loved below.

Alas!  they fade away &mdash; but the bright stars
Spangled on ocean, and this midnight moon,
Are fair enough to dim each thought which jars
With the symphonious warblings of the tune,
Which festal winds are playing at this noon
Of night; with a sad melancholy sound,
Solemn slow music breathes awhile, then soon
Sweeps the wild strain along the echoing ground,
Then falling, fainting, dies, and silence sleeps around.

The awe of such a moment is not fear;&mdash;
Let those sleep on who slumber when they will&mdash;
But at such season may I find it dear
To feel the gladness of that creeping thrill;
If sometimes mingled comes a nameless chill,
When unknown shapes mount the wind's wafting wings,
And voices swell the uncouth gale; &mdash; yet still,
I'll hail the coming of those shadowy things,
Long versed in all the thoughts which fertile midnight brings.

Would it were always thus &mdash; but it has seemed
That demons stared about my restless bed;
Wildly and terrible their fierce eyes gleamed,
And startled echo caught their stalking tread
And deep strange murmurs of their tones of dread:&mdash;
'Tis then, awaking with convulsive start,
That ominous things round my bewildered head
Confusedly flit, and to my shrinking heart
Cold with unwonted fear my life-blood's currents dart.

Then marvel not it so became, that I
Self-nursed and fostered long in thoughts like these,
Wished but for pinions strong enough to fly
From breath I hated and fate's hard decrees;&mdash;
I feared cold-featured age, lest he should freeze
My springs of love, and thus my bosom teemed
With these dark shapes and unwrought fantasies,
And all these misty things of which I dreamed
Here is one vision which I saw, so it meseemed.

I sat but lately, as my wont has been,
Within a silent house, wakeful, alone
At the mid watch of night; &mdash; nor did the scene,
Gay in the glow a summer moon had thrown
O'er tall tree top and pinnacle which shone
Each like long lines of silver, &mdash; nor the blue
Of the expanse, all fail to wake a tone
Of thoughts harmonious, but which ever grew
Sadder the while I gazed on the far glittering view.

And never was the mystical intense
More beautiful than on that pale-eyed night:
The thousand stars were ministering in sense
Of holiness, &mdash; the upward crescent's light
Tipt a wild cloud, &mdash; the streaming north was bright,
And Pleiades were dim, and the grim
Bear Looked frowningly from off his lowering height;&mdash;
On me each steadfast lustre seemed to stare,&mdash;
Mournful as if in sorrow, &mdash; sad but oh, how fair!

The joy which beauty wakes is near allied
To pain which then I vainly sought to fly,&mdash;
For awe crept on me as the slow breeze sighed
With an unwonted wail, as it swept by;&mdash;
It might be fancy, &mdash; tho' I know not why
Such dread in human bosoms wantoneth,&mdash;
But every star methought looked droopingly
Towards me alone, and while fear held my breath
There were unearthly whispered sounds of death.

Thought fiercely lowered on gloomy thought, till now
The tide of sadness swelled above my fears,
And soothed the quick throbs of my burning brow,&mdash;
And through the long, long lapse of tearless years
I had found nought so pleasant as those tears;&mdash;
Sweeter than incense borne from spring-tide bowers,
Or winds' Aeolian swell to listening ears,&mdash;
Than the new joys of childhood's earliest hours,
Or morn-awakened blush of summer-spangled flowers.

The maid who wails her lover tempest-tost,
The child who weeps for an unmeaning toy,
The youth who mourns high hopes and honor lost,
The mother anguished for her only boy,&mdash;
Find even some pleasure in their sad employ,
Some sweet relief; since sorrow often blends
Her cloudy woes with smiles of seeming joy;&mdash;
But manhood's tears a fierce shame which tends
To aggravate the pang unmastered passion sends.

It was not so with me; &mdash; ye fertile fields,
I call you for an answer not in vain
Have I not known each charm your glory yields,
When untired Nature on the blushing plain
Pours the rich treasures of her golden grain;&mdash;
Saw ye not tears, which would not be represt,
Though not of grief, meet your ripe smile again,&mdash;
Have ye not seen my early footstep prest
From childhood up to youth on your enamelled breast?

Winter has known me 'mid his deserts bleak, 
When the fair moon down through the thin sharp air,
Resting awhile upon some mountain peak,
Silvered the hoar frost with her cold bright glare,&mdash;
Or on some shivered tree-top stript and bare
And desolated by the lightning shocks,
With its fanged icicles seemed playing there,
And, as a coy maid her fond lover mocks,
Sinking in vestal shame peered from the blackening rocks.

The time of early flowers has known me come
To pluck the snow-drop train its wintry bed,
And spring has seen me watch the deepening bloom
Her softer airs and kinder influence shed;
Towards the sweet blushes of her meadows led
By musing contemplation, to inhale
The flowery language which has often fed
My wayward spirit, while upon the gale
In fragrant tones came many a melancholy tale.

Summer has known me, at his sultry noon,
When universal things all panting shrink
From his hot breath, lay listening to the tune
Of some melodious river's whispering brink;
Even till I saw the lurid day-god sink,
And all the sober ruminating herds
Came with parched tongue of that still stream to drink,
Stream of the twilight hues which mock at words,&mdash;
And heard the lyric voice of thousand evening birds.

Autumn has known me, in her lonely woods
Alone, but not in solitude, and when
By the broad bosom of her deep sea floods,
There were sweet thoughts for my companions then;
For sometimes from the crowded haunts of men
I go to stand when the swoln ocean heaves,
Or musing where by some wide wooded glen
The old gray oak o'er her shorn honors grieves,
Often hold pleasant converse with autumnal leaves.

Away, ye pleasant fancies; &mdash; let me now
Recall my vision, &mdash; and methought I stood
On a precipitous seashore's craggy brow;&mdash;
It was at evening, &mdash; and the level flood
Where the fledged younglings of the tempest brood
Sported of late, lay far and placid, save,
As thoughts of their glad play would oft intrude,
They now reposing in their azure cave
Sent pealing laughter upward on the curling wave.

Fold after fold of that long line of water
Unfurled its sullen length, &mdash; and like the stride
Of a strong phalanx ripe for battle-slaughter,
Came the firm slow march of the solemn tide
Towards the broad beach, whose huge rocks, high and wide,
Death-black as if the lightning of the thunder
Had spent its wrath upon some mountain side
And half its monstrous bulk had riven asunder,&mdash;
There smiled on time and chance a mockery and a wonder.

Then as I stood by the bleak barren beach
And gazed upon its vast magnificence,
While the proud waters vainly strove to reach
The bulwarked summit of that rocky fence,&mdash;
Came on my soul some feelings so intense,
Roused by the glory of that mighty swell,
The exultation of my quivering sense
Joyed in the power of some o'ermastering spell,
While from my unclosed lips these prompted accents fell:

Thou who hast grovelled mid the things accursed
Which the world's dross hath spread about thy soul,&mdash;
And thou, whose wayward bosom bath been nursed
'Mid frantic doubts which scorn Heaven's just control&mdash;
O that ye heard with me the wondrous whole
Of these majestic waves' tumultuous din;&mdash;
For standing where their starry summits roll,
Some overwhelming feeling must rush in
To blot for one blest moment each vile thought of sin.

O that the monarchs of the world were here,&mdash;
The demi-gods of fawning slaves who pour
The heartless tribute of their guilty fear
At the false shrines they hate while they adore;&mdash;
For musing by this moralizing shore,
Its beautifully grand array in sight,
Methinks one little hour would teach them more
How weakly faltering is their boasted height,
Than philosophic texts preached on for ages might.

O that the full-swoln monsters of the world,&mdash;
The rich in groaning wretches' sighs might stand,
And see these glittering ocean treasures hurled
In proud profusion towards the golden sand;&mdash;
Might see the far deep, venerably bland,
In silver hoary, and the lavish shore
Mock the free offering of its wasteful hand,&mdash;
Might feel some generous glow unfelt before,
Or pious line sublime of gentle pity's lore.

O that the trampled world's nobility,
Proud of dull currents of degenerate blood,
And boastful of the antique pedigree
Which makes them worth contemptuous scorn, now stood
Where the slow marching waters of the flood
In solemn state majestic dash below,&mdash;
Then might they see each of that graceful brood
On the lone rock its destined being throw,
Though old Eternity saw its ancestral flow.

O thou illimitable ocean, &mdash; thou
Shadowest the image of eternity;&mdash;
Thy many-sparkling waves are wanton now
Like reckless voyagers on that gloomy sea:
Ten thousand of thy billows momently
Ripple to being, then upon the shore
Shrink back to death and nothingness, &mdash; so we
Wake to the energies of life and pour
Our few sad sighs, &mdash; one gasp, &mdash; and then are heard no more.

Save the choice few of spirit more refined,
Who rear in might, those monuments sublime,
Where nations view the vast results which mind
Has found and rescued from the sottish slime
Of brutal ignorance and oblivious time,&mdash;
The annalists of empires, &mdash; such as wage
Warfare with vice, &mdash; the masters of the rhyme,
Statesmen, the wondrous spirits of their age,&mdash;
Lights to the world, &mdash; the good, the noble, and the sage.

And some whose philosophic minds could range
Ample creation to the verge of thought
And startle men, returning, with the strange
And splendid doctrine their swift genius brought,&mdash;
Builders of sects and systems, who have taught
Mankind their own bewildering mysteries,&mdash;
And authors of unholy creeds, who caught
The weak and vain in subtle nets of lies
Whose blasphemy might call Heaven's lightning from the skies.

Then did I gaze across the deep serene,
Cradled to slumbers, of the far green sea;&mdash;
And even as dreams can often grant, I ween,
The melancholy gift, alas, to be
Filled with the fearful power of prophecy,&mdash;
So then, this faculty of bringing nigh
The future and the distant was with me,
And fixing on a foreign shore mine eye
These are the visioned things which there I did espy.

'Twas dear to look upon that antique strand
Which still so fair in fatal beauty lay,&mdash;
Strewed o'er with fallen majesty, whose grand
Yet soft forms seemed scarce made to pass away;&mdash;
Arches enveloped in Eld's twilight gray,
Ruins of temples, on whose fronts sublime,
Reared to strange gods who left him to decay,
Still frowned the gloomy tale of fear or crime,
Or tall hoar pillars yet spared even by ruthless time.

Still spared, though prostrate, &mdash; lingering half decayed
So sweetly mournful round each crumbling vase
Where age in pity could not all degrade
Those speaking annalists of brighter days,&mdash;
But left some vestige of each nameless grace
To plead, how eloquent!  in glory's cause,&mdash;
And point to wondering worlds some fading trace
Of all that Athens, Thebes, and Sparta was
Ere tyrants gave to sons of Grecian fathers laws.

Memorialists of Freedom, &mdash; which uprear
Their marble summits to the glad blue sky,&mdash;
And oracles of ages, &mdash; whose career,
Like whirlwinds, through upstirring memory,
Brought home again the swelling battle cry
Which warmed their souls ere tyrants shook the rod&mdash;
Then did they hurl the crescent from on high,
And where the infidel insulting trod,
Planted the flaming red-cross banner of our God.

That country was before me, &mdash; and this flag
Of Freedom's late-roused champions on the brow
Of fortressed mountains heavily seemed to drag
Down midway from its staff, as if in show
Of mourning for some mighty chief laid low
Or hero hound for his untimely tomb:
The broad land lay robed in unwonted woe
And silence, save when burst upon the gloom
Solemn and minutely the cannon's long deep boom.

Anon a strain of dreamy melody
Stole like a dirge upon the wakened ear,
So sadly sweet beyond that orient sea
That the dark waves had hushed their mad career,
And lifted up their tremulous heads to hear
The mingled tones that soft as evening's hum
Began, till swelling nearer and more near,
Bold, high, and warlike did the wild notes come,
Clarion and clashing cymbals and the muffled drum.

And soon came armed warriors footing slow
To the complaining music's wailing peal,
While, as they tramped, the echoing soil below
Still sung responsive to the clanging steel;
And their stern eves now could not all conceal
Their grief though they had mocked at deadly fear
And met unmoved the tide of woe or weal,&mdash;
But glancing frequent towards that sable bier,
Dropt ever and anon one agonizing tear.

With arms reversed they marched, and after came
With look sedate and manly foreheads bland,
In seemly wise and decent fitting frame
And grave slow steps, a venerable band
Who were the ancient magnates of the land,
The fathers of the people; &mdash; their ripe age
Recalled afresh the memory of the grand
Features and forms which still the Grecian sage
Owns in the chiselled block or on the classic page.

Then as I marvelled, suddenly a tune
Melted amongst those glittering sea-green isles,
Sweeter than all the notes that leafy June
Thrills through her folds to hail the orange smiles
Of early morn; &mdash; sweeter than when, at whiles,
Ionian breezes waft the gushing swell.
Of vesper-birds; or o'er:  the lengthening files
Of the far hills and through the whispering dell
Come distant mellow tones of village evening-bell;

Soft and yet sad, &mdash; till now that slow lament
Down the melodious stream came clear and strong,
Near where the grove's pomegranate foliage sent
Of youths and virgins soon a vocal throng;&mdash;
And, ever as they swelled the funeral song
Laurels and myrtles were the flowers they flung,
Wreathed with undying amaranth, along;&mdash;
And vales and sullen woods responsive rung,
Till blue Parnassus heard the mournful lay they sung.

1.
O virgin daughters of the budding isles
Which crowning purple o'er the deep Aegean,
Whose folded foliage met these first-born smiles
Which made groves, streams, and rocks sing lo Paean!
Wail, island-daughter, him whose day is done,&mdash;
And tear the ivy garland from your head;&mdash;
Apollo's last and mightiest son
Is with the mighty dead.

2.
Far-darter of the never-failing bow!
Healer of nations! &mdash; where was then thy power?
Earth called for thee, and why wert thou so slow,&mdash;
Or couldst thou not avert the hour?
Come, father of the morning, come and shake,
Adown thy flowing ringlets' golden store,
But he whom thou didst love to wake
Shall see thy face no more.

3.
The time of early flowers shall come, and Spring
Anew shall pour her honeydew-fed flowers,
And oft again the vintage months shall bring
Their purple gifts; &mdash; but vernal showers
Nor summer airs, nor vintage suns shall hail
His unreturning footstep, &mdash; for the brave,
The young, the noble, whom we wail,
Is wedded to the grave.

4.
Freedom!  so richly bought, thou shouldst be sweet:
Yet would that he thy victim had but died
Floating down battle's crimson flood to meet
Red from thy strife the Stygian tide:&mdash;
How gladly then in glory's flowers we'd sheathe
His sword, and round his consecrated brow
We'd mingle with the poet's wreath
One deathless laurel bough.

5.
Sons of the Greeks, 'mid the tumultuous flame
Of the fierce shock ye shall remember well
Who gave his life, his fortune, and his fame,
Yea his whole hope to break the accursed spell
Which ye must end; &mdash; but o'er his silent bier,
Till ancient Freedom smiling hovers nigh,
Ye may not waste another tear,
Nor one lamenting sigh.

6.
What though his life was brief; &mdash; his young career
Was run in glory; &mdash; happy that his last
Act was the best and noblest time may sere
And blight the nations with his withering blast,
But has no power to rend his monument
From out the hearts of men; &mdash; perchance still more
Happy, that he so early went
Down to the gloomy shore.

7.
But year by year shall Grecian girls renew,
When spring returns, the story of his woes,
And gather memory's sweetest flowers to strew,
Violets and lilies and the pale primrose
For him who slumbers in the orange vale
And often shall Etolian sires relate,
Weeping, his melancholy tale,&mdash;
Their poet-hero's fate.

The rest was all confused, save that I heard
Sudden and quick the volleyed thunder peal
Above the soldier's grave, and the stern word,
And saw anon the marshalled squadrons wheel;
Then rushed the ringing clang of vengeful steel,
As notes of distant war came far along
The freshening breeze, and sounds of woe or weal,
Shoutings and shrieks; when from the funeral throng
Came one who ere they marched sting loud this battle song;

1.
To the charge;  &mdash; if ye value the joy of the strife,
When its tumult surpasses the rapture of life:
Strike the spurs that have reeked with the blood of the steed,&mdash;
Bare the blades that have served you before at your need;
Let us swear by the mothers who bore us,&mdash;
By the blue-arching heaven that's o'er us,&mdash;
That we'll conquer the dastards we scorn in the fight,
Or our brows shall be cold in the damp dew to-night;
Forward, men!  on this battle plain, gory
We'll slumber or stand in our glory.

2.
To the charge; &mdash; should we linger, in fight for the fires
Of our altars and hearths, and the tombs of our sires.&mdash;
His spirit, who sung them and mourned for our woe,
Would rise to reproach every look from the foe
And we swear by the heart that he gave us,&mdash;
By that right hand too cold now to save us,&mdash;
At his rallying name shall our sabres be keen;&mdash;
May our fame glance as bright and our graves grow as green.
Ravens, &mdash; come to the feast, &mdash; ye shall share it,
Our swords are athirst to prepare it.

3.
To the charge; &mdash; for the banners that wave over head
With the blood of the martyred to freedom are red;&mdash;
And our brothers and fathers have come from their graves
To beseech us to die if we must live as slaves;&mdash;
And we swear by the dear blood that bought us,&mdash;
By the Freedom their bravery wrought us,&mdash;
That the coward who falters or shrinks from the fight
Deserves not the joy or the death of to-night:
With these swords in our hands who shall stay us?
With these hearts in out breasts what dismay us?

4.
To the charge; &mdash; Heaven strikes with the brave and the free,
And the despot who'd trample us under shall see
How we'll wring from our heart of hearts every stain
Of the thoughts which would link its to slavery's chain:
For we swear by the virgins we cherish,
We'll be free or in freedom's strife perish
And the maids of our love shall lament for our doom,
And shall garland with honor the place of our tomb:
Forward then, &mdash; on this battle-plain gory
We'll slumber or stand in our glory.

Then knew I that the Master of the Rhyme
Was dead, &mdash; who built the deep impassioned song
Upon the glory of whose strains sublime,
Happy in wonder at the dazzling throng
Of fancies which bewildered life, so long
Imparadised 'mid glowing thoughts, I fed
My young imagination till the strong
Spell had heart, mind, and willing feeling led
Thralled to melodious woe; &mdash; and was the enchanter dead?

Dead!  how that little word doth strangely thrill
Along the brain and startle the roused soul!
A star shrunk into chaos back, a rill
Of summer-wave dried to its springs, a goal
Gained and the contest finished, and a whole
Host of hopes, cares, fears, nothing; &mdash; is this all?
Are there no fragments? &mdash; doth the golden bowl
That's broken leave no token of its fall?
Or when the silver cord is loosed, can memory call

No life from death which may illume the black
Despair of desolation? &mdash; doth no beam
Hover unquenchable to light the track
Up from the grave, or is it but a dream,
A fond, dear false illusion, fatuous gleam
Exhaled from unsubstantial things? &mdash; no more;&mdash;
New being life's quenched light shall yet redeem;&mdash;
Spite of the tempter, faith may trembling soar,
And hope may trust in Heaven and scorn the demon's power.

And glory doth not die with us; &mdash; the grave
May swallow worn out life, and closing o'er
The cheerful blessedness of day, may save
Long nights of groaning anguish, and restore
Haply the lost and cherished we deplore,
Love, hope, and joy: &mdash; but glory still retrieves
From the sad margin of the mythic shore
Undying chaplets, though amid their leaves
Pansies and rosemary are all the flowers she weaves.

Ah me!  how vain, that she should thus bestow
Her gifts which then are valueless; &mdash; the cold
Lone chambers cannot feel that sunset glow;
Those solitary gates no more unfold
Their melancholy portals to behold
The adoring light all future time may shed;
Nor name, nor deeds inscribed in blazoned gold,
Nor late-found fame whose dreams young Fancy fed,
Disturb with their rude joy the dwellings of the dead.

Yet thou, my master, didst not thus go down
To the still city of the tombs unknown;&mdash;
But beckoning glory halfway came to crown
Within life's vital verge her young &mdash; her own;
And though thou wentest to the grave alone,
From father-land and home's dear charities
Exiled alike, yet were there to atone
Tears; &mdash; tears dared fall from unaccustomed eyes,
And hearts disdained to cloak their fearless sympathies:

Though deep Hypocrisy thrice-veiled came forth
And Superstition from her monkish cell,
In solemn mockery robed, insulting earth
With their unholy dogmas, &mdash; creeds which tell
No tale of dew-eyed pity, but rebel,
In guilty pride of Pharisaic lore,
'Gainst him who wept for sinful man, when fell
Heaven's mildest accents on the torn heart's oare,
Repent and be forgiven, &mdash; then go and sin no more.

Yet were there some who felt thou wert but man
Man fallen and therefore erring, &mdash; whose rash youth
Wild with rank weeds which thence unmastered ran
Over thy whole existence, was, in sooth,
Not mindless of the gentle hand of ruth,
But rich in fruits, till the staunch blood-hounds rushed,
Tearing its beauties with envenomed tooth
And trampling sweets, &mdash; then from the drear waste gushed
Forbidden and unseemly things, and Virtue blushed,

Yet mourned the savage hate which would have hurled
Thy blighted soul to bitterness, while awe
And expectation held the astonished world
Breathless upon those accents which should draw
Down pity linked to wonder; &mdash; and she saw
Lips, sweet as all ancient Hybla sung
Scorched with unhallowed fire, and mind, whose law
Might have been rule for empires, all unstrung,
Waste its degraded power, lone, desolate, and wrung.

Yet though in darkness thou didst sit alone,
Driven from thy kind and kindred by the blight
And sickness of the bosom, which had thrown
The veil which could obscure the struggling light
Of better thoughts and feelings, and invite
Thy soul to passion's madness, &mdash; yet, even there,
Like him who, through the sable-vested night,
Renews melodious dolings to the air,
The vocal sorrow shamed all broad day's busy glare.

Then woke the wailing of those charmed harp-strings
To the sad night-wind's answering symphony,
Till choral breezes furled their rushing wings,
Prisoners to dulcet sounds: &mdash; for unto thee
Darkness unveiled her deep divinity,&mdash;
And when through heaven the infinite stars uprose.
Then didst thou fling that strange sweet minstrelsy
Which soothed the spirit of thy wakeful woes,
And thy lulled soul sank down, how dear! &mdash; to blest repose.

Sleep, &mdash; sleep, &mdash; sweet sleep that comes to each, to all,&mdash;
How labour bows his heavy lids to thee!&mdash;
And bright-eyed beauty leaves the festal hall
To slumber on thy nursing bosom, free
In soft oblivion's Lethe, from this sea
Of wrecking fancies, whose wild waves return
To curse with dreams tumultuous night; ah me
Droop down awhile where faded care forlorn
Watches the dull gray east and sighs for lingering morn.

He heeds me not, &mdash; he mocks the imploring sigh,
Relentless, cruel, merciless; I know
Pity dwells not within such leaden eye
Beneath that pale austerity of brow:
Well, let it pass, &mdash; I would not ask him now,&mdash;
The melodies of night for me; &mdash; how still,
Save when complains from the old fallen bough
To the dark oaks some lonely whippoorwill,
Or tuneful crickets keep their measured cadence shrill!

He did not drink cold death from the chill dews
Of his own cloudy clime, but by the shore
Which heard the classic sorrow of his muse
Weep for her degradation and deplore
With that sad music her proud wrecks; &mdash; for o'er
The sweet shame of her nakedness he flung
The magic veil of his wrought words, till more
Dazzled her own bewildering charms among,
O she would fall again to be again so sung.

Fair Greece!  when erst around devoted Troy
Thine ancient kings besieged h leagured wall,
For the loose act of that enamoured boy
Who scorned the rites of hospitable hall,
So most almighty Love did him enthrall,&mdash;
'Tis said that, watching on the eastern plain,
Chaldean sages saw a Pleiad fall,&mdash;
But now methinks, we do not mourn in vain
This brighter Pleiad's fall which shall not rise again.

That lost star headlong sank, and darkness hath
Evermore since bound its sweet influence,&mdash;
But this hath left a glory in its path,
Which still burns on, to the astonished sense
Developing far up the glad immense.
Perspicuous in its beauty where hath been
That winged course, writ with free effluence
Dropt from a pen of flame, and graven in
Where Time may strive to soar but dares not hope to win.

He doth not sleep along that pleasant strand,
Under her mighty temples, with the brood
Of the old kings and chieftains of the land
We learn to love so in our warm boyhood,
Nor yet forget in age's sober mood:&mdash;
How dear, &mdash; how vain the wish that his hard fate,
Kind but for once, had willed him to have stood
Foremost amongst the brave, &mdash; there to create
A death more rich than life; &mdash; alas, it is too late.

He must not fall unsung, &mdash; though weak the lyre,
Perchance presumptuous; &mdash; and of little worth
Its strains unhallowed by celestial fire;&mdash;
O that the wondrous wizard of the North
In his own sorrows, would again give birth
To his deep glowing witchery and tell
How Byron sung and died, &mdash; and calling forth
All the strong magic of his mightiest spell,
Weave round that pale brow wreaths he only weaves so well!

Farewell to thee!  once more a sad farewell!
Thy spirit will forgive me, if in vain
I tired the Muses in their mossy cell
With uncouth invocations for thy strain
Was as my very food, and in my brain
Thy verse wrought like the fire which thou didst blend
With thine own melancholy page; &mdash; in pain,
Sickness, and sorrow, did that page attend
Nor left me solitary, for it was my friend.

It was the very nurse of my young dreams,&mdash;
From desolation my sick heart it stole,&mdash;
It lit my pining bosom, till it teems
With full thanks overflowing; &mdash; Time may roll
O'er me his wintry years, but no control
Nor time's chill touch severe, nor the world's frown
Can rase those written tablets of my soul;&mdash;
And is it thus Fame does her votaries crown,
I turn and weep those tears I cannot wrestle down.

I turned to Chatterton, &mdash; and the fierce glare
Of hungry want watched by his sleepless bed;&mdash;
I saw him shrink to lingering death; &mdash; oh where,
Indignant Justice didst thou hide thy head,
When spurned the high-souled boy that bitter bread
Which gilded sottishness and bigot pride,
With stupid eye austere that never shed
Tears blest of pitying heaven, had long denied?
Where, when quite broke his noble heart, he drank and died?

I turned to Shelly, &mdash; that mind, born to soar
Above all high creation, and illume
With its bright thoughts the hearts of men, did pore
Upon unholy things and waste its bloom
Amongst dark creeds, till a half-frenzied gloom
Spread round his lonely bosom: &mdash; there came by,
Though men mourned not for his untimely doom,
Sad wailing winds which could not choose but sigh
Above his watery bier their low monotony.

Farewell to thee, thou too protracted song,&mdash;
My summer task is done, &mdash; a pleasant dream,
Which wyled, as first it won, me to prolong
This mournful strain, which haply some will deem
Futile and all unworthy; &mdash; yet this theme
Has charmed for me some weary hours away,&mdash;
And cheated me towards the soft evening stream,
Musing to mark the passing bubbles play,
And feel my thoughts, my life perchance were vain as they.

Then did the gay flowers freak the spangled green,
Where woke to meet the new advancing day
Sweet violets, pinks, and the pale jessamine,
While morning smiled upon their fresh array;
And the hot sun through the long lazy day
Fed rudely on their blushing sweets, until,
Sinking behind the distant mountains gray,
He stretched out all their lengthening shades, yet still,
As loth to leave, looked down from the far western hill.

Those gorgeous tints have faded as they came,&mdash;
That bright retinue of young summer flowers;&mdash;
The cold night blast has shrunk their tender frame,
And cropt their modest beauties, and the showers
Which first awoke them in their frolic hours
Are colder than the wind, and cannot wake
Their frail, shorn being; in their noontide bowers
Shuddering they droop their pensive heads, and shake,
Chilled, when the light curl sweeps adown the ruffled lake.

The sad &mdash; sad days have come; that shifting blast,
Shrill harbinger of storms, howled loud and bleak
Among the weeping branches; &mdash; as it past,
It laughed in scorn, as if it came to wreak
The malice of its vengeance on the meek
Beauty of innocence; &mdash; alas how wide
Will the dark ruin be when every streak
Of all this rainbow foliage and the pride
Of forests dies, as dear loved things have always died!

Sad days but sweet; &mdash; how the broad maple-top
Decks the thick covert of its scarlet fluid,&mdash;
And the smooth ash all breathless seems to drop
From the gray boughs her leaves of verdant gold,
And the damp autumn mist at last has rolled
From the stern hills where the exulting fir
In unchanged livery mocks the bitter cold;&mdash;
The woodland notes are still, &mdash; of all their stir
Comes Robin Red-breast now, the last lone chorister.

Creative nature; whose all-nascent power
Proclaims thee mightiest even as thou art good
Yet dearest still in thy decaying hour,&mdash;
And ever loveliest in thy soberest mood,&mdash;
Even now thou dost recall what time I wooed
Kisses from thy pale cheek in those green glades,
Where ancient Learning rules her happy brood,
One common mother's sons, whose classic, shades
First heard me strike the lyre and call the Aonian maids.

Beautiful mother of a wayward child!
Flow filial my remembrance, though thy lore
Fell on ungrateful soil; &mdash; as a fond child
Parts from the threshold of his parent's door,
Left I thy sweet retreats to bide the roar
Of the world's waters and their boisterous swell:&mdash;
O sweet communion to be found no more!
And dear companions whom I loved so well,
Spread to the winds of Heaven, a long, a long Farewell!

How lovely is the night: &mdash; come not, fair day,&mdash;
Thou too art beautiful, but not to me,&mdash;
For thou art heartless and the glittering play
Of thy red light is joyless mockery:
I cannot love thee when thy common eye
Comes with its strange unmeaning stare to shine
On restless breasts which fain would canopy
Their griefs with silence: &mdash; busy cares are thine!
O may the soft still night and all its peace be mine.

Sweet Moon!  alas, they are but fabled dreams
Men tell of thee, how, on the Latmian brow,
Quenching that immortality whose beams
Eye might not see, thou didst not scorn to bow
Thy chaste cheek to a mortal's kiss; &mdash; or now,
Couldst thou but answer, I would ask of thee
If thou indeed art Hecate still, or how
Thy charms entice me, till thou makest me
Calmer than when thy light smooths down the silver sea?

Roll on, &mdash; sweet moon! &mdash; roll on, unfading light,&mdash;
Potent in thy divinity as when
Ephesian priests called up the mystic rite
To thee, their great Diana: &mdash; even as then
Thy empire is upon the soul, and men
Cannot deny thy sceptre as they gaze
On thy surpassing beauty thought agen
Wanders not back from thine untroubled phase,
But earth is all forgone, lost in that spiritual blaze.

Roll on, &mdash; sweet moon!  thine is no fancied sway;
For the whole heart bows to thine empery;&mdash;
Joy dares not revel 'neath thy steadfast ray,
And Grief lifts up her tearful eye to thee:&mdash;
Most mighty nurse of all Philosophy!
Rolling along thy lone blue course, unveils
The shrouded secrets of thy stores to me&mdash;
And I will bless thy beams, nor will I fail
To watch thy midnight steps:  once more, I bid thee hail!
