Yet, yet again, thou solitary lyre,
Again I touch thy long neglected strings;
Nor shall thy notes o'er homely themes aspire
To treat of dark abstruse imaginings:
O!  may the gentle sweep of fairy wings
Brush o'er thee, and inspire a kindly mood
To sing of deer, of captivating things.
Companion sweet!  thou hadst been better woo'd,
But that thou'rt luckless fall'n to one of accents rude.

Since that relentless Time brooks no control,
But calmly winds his unresisted stream;
Smiling, in scorn, to see our seasons roll
In idle projects and a waking dream:
Oh!  it were wisdom to arrest the beam
Of manhood's sun, ere evening damps arise,
And from Oblivion's idiot clutch redeem
A few short hours for noble enterprize:
'Tis all that we can do, &mdash; no more can do the wise.

And yet 'tis difficult for little men
To raise their feeble pigmy heads so high,
As to attract the glance of passing ken
Where giant shoulders intercept the sky;
And ah!  'tis difficult for such as I,
To wake fit strains where mighty minstrels sing;
Perhaps, even this, shall but be born and die;
Not fated to enjoy a second spring,
But like some hawk-struck bird, expire on new-fledg'd wing.

Away Despair!  some monitor, unseen,
Calls for the song, &mdash; the Call shall be obey'd;
For 'tis that silent monitor, I ween,
Which led my youth to many a green-wood shade;
Show'd me the spring, in thousand blooms array'd,
And bade me look towards heaven's immensity:
This is a power that schoolmen never made,
That comes all unsolicited and free,
To fire the youthful bard &mdash; lo!  this is Poesy!

Who does not love his birth-place?  there's a spell
Of three-fold magic in the Briton's home!
By Heroes bought; from Freedom's hand it fell,
Fast clinging to his heart; and though he roam
O'er lands remote, or where vext oceans foam
In noisy uproar, to the wanderer's breast
Wealth, poverty, or joy, or woe, may come;
Yet Native scenes, as for May's bridal dress'd,
Will haunt his very dreams, and oh!  such dreams are blest.

Ye Britons!  who have other states survey'd,
Intent new forms of government to try,
Say, have you found, where'er your search was made,
That distant realm where you would live and die!
Nor give one lingering voluntary sigh,
To see, once more, the land where you were born?
Methinks even now, beneath another sky,
Wide o'er the Atlantic, many a breast forlorn
Heaves for that Peerless Isle they late beheld with scorn.

Whether where Ganges rolls o'er golden sand,
Or copious Nile makes glad Egyptian swains;
Where Niagara shakes the astonish'd land,
Or Orellana laves Peruvian plains;
Whether free choice, or adverse fate, detains,
Often, towards home, the Briton turns his mind,
Listens, in vain, to hear the skylark's strains,
Nor feels that brisk invigorating wind
Which blows across the land his footsteps left behind.

Haply, while pacing on some sea-beat shore,
With sad, yet hopeful, wing his fancy roves
Swift o'er a waste of waves, to re-explore
The hills, the dales, the streams, the meads, and groves,
Haunts of his childhood:  scenes, where early loves
And gentle friendships sway'd his inmost soul;
While, in his rapt imagination, moves
She, whose endearments o'er his bosom stole,
And gain'd his youthful heart with beauty's soft control.

Fair to his sight the briary bank appears
Where grew the sweetest violets of the spring;
And the wild thorn its aged head uprears
Where he was wont to hear the linnet sing;
And, in the pasture, he surveys the ring,
Where, as his grandam told, the fairies play'd;
Beholds the raven from the cliff take wing;
Marks the green turf rise where his sire was laid:&mdash;
Then vents the struggling sighs his aching breast invade.

And would the Briton seek a happier clime,
Where laws more just and equitable reign;
Long shall his head be hoary grown with time
Ere he succeed that happier clime to gain;
No bark has yet drove keel into the main
To bear the exile to a better shore.
And, oh, my country!  may'st thou long remain
Matchless, in worth and might, and evermore
Let justice from thy throne protect the poor man's door.

A beacon, lighted on a giant hill;
A sea-girt watch-tower to each neighbouring state;
A barrier, to control the Despots will;
An instrument of all-directing Fate
Is Britain; for whate'er in man is great,
Full to that greatness have her sons attain'd;
Dreadful in War to hurl the Battle's weight;
Supreme in Arts, in Commerce unrestrain'd;
Peerless in magic Song, to hold the soul enchain'd

In wealth and power stupendous is our Isle!
Obtain'd by Labour's persevering hand:
And heaven-born Liberty extends her smile
To the remotest corners of our land:
The meanest subject feels her potent wand;
Peasant and Peer are by one law control'd;
And this it is, that keeps us great and grand:
This is the impulse makes our warriors bold,
And knits more close the bond our fathers seal'd of old.

Plenty, from out her never-failing horn,
Showers down profusion on our hills and dales;
Fair climb our uplands to salute the morn;
No meads like ours, when fann'd with spring-tide gales;
Lovely our groves, where the fleet stock-dove sails;
And in our forests grows that sacred tree,
The British oak; a charm, that never fails,
Springs, in this darling plant, ordain'd to be
A safeguard to our shores by watchful Destiny.

Secure, in conscious safety, walks the swain,
Nor fears to lose the harvest of the year;
For here no banded ruffians scour the plain,
To seize his flocks, and leave his garners bare:
No fell invaders in his fields appear,&mdash;
Forth to the meads, unaw'd, the milk-maid goes,
Nor dreads the spoiler, lurking in the rear:
No ills like these our happy Island knows,
For all our circling coast defies the reach of foes.

And should it ever please the Eternal King,
When ages numberless have roll'd away,
O'er Albion's Isle reverse of fate to bring,
And she, like Greece and Rome, should feel decay;&mdash;
For who the purposes of Heaven can stay?
Yet, oh, thou Mighty One!  avert the blow;&mdash;
Even then, her name to Time's remotest day,
Through golden trump of deathless Fame shall go,
Sweet as the breath of spring, when melts the wintry snow.

The Patriot, zealous in his country's cause,
Shall tell how Briton's cramp'd the Despot's hand;
And wisely form'd that code of equal laws,
Which made her glory tower o'er every land
And taught the noblest seeds of thought t' expand
Bade rugged Labour at his toil rejoice;
And the kind flame of Emulation fann'd,
Drove, far away, Oppression's threatening voice,
And founded regal sway on a great Nation's choice.

And oft, when hard beset, in deadly strait,
The Warrior Chief, My Country!  shall unfold
How thy brave sons have stood in conflicts great,
And on their foes the dreadful battle roll'd:
And Creci, Poictiers, Agincourt, be told
Hundreds of generations yet to come;
And Blenheim, Nile, and Trafalgar, enroll'd
With them, high beaming on thy crest shall bloom,
And glorious Waterloo, that seal'd Napoleon's doom.

Philosophers, immers'd in thought sublime,
Reverting back, thy Sages shall explore;
And following Bacon, Locke and Newton, climb
To heights, the human mind ne'er tried before:
The youthful Bard shall traverse Fancy's shore
With Spenser, Minstrel to the Fairy throng;
Pondering his wild romantic visions o'er,
Told in the sweetest harmony of song,
While knights and gentle virgins sweep in pomp along.

Or with thy Shakspeare, pride of humankind!
Magician-like, with talisman, untie
Those secret strings the hidden heart which bind,
Or pace, unawed, the field of mystery.
With heaven-rapt Milton, passing Nature try,
On swift Imagination's eagle wings
View the extremest boundaries of the sky,
And join the hosts that sing the King of kings,
Melting in lays divine from pure etherial springs.

Land of my Fathers!  may thy rocky coast
Long be the bulwark of thy free-born race;
Long may thy patriot's have just cause to boast
That Mighty Albion is their native place;
Still be thy sons unequall'd in the chase
Of glory, be it Science, Arts, or Arms;
And first o'erweening Conquerors to disgrace;
Yet happier far, when Peace in all her charms,
Drives out from every land the din of War's alarms.

Perhaps, in every state beneath the skies,
Fond Man a partial liking entertains
For those first scenes that caught his youthful eyes,
Howe'er unblest his naked hills and plains:
But where fell Tyrants hold the wretch in chains,
Such as the poor dejected Negroes know,
Where dire plantations breathe forth woes, and pains,
The loveliest scenes no solace can bestow,
For ah!  no home have they in this dark vale below.

For me, ordain'd to pass my boyhood's prime
On British ground, methinks there ne'er could be
Haunts half so fair, in Nature's brightest clime,
As those that struck my sight in infancy;
For there my sire first told me I was free,
And bade me love my Country, and my God;
And taught that paths of kind humanity
Should by the mingling sons of men be trod;
And early wish'd my soul to hate Oppression's rod.

And off, as those lov'd scenes I now explore,
Fondly reverting unto years pass'd by,
Where I have paced a thousand times before
Beauties, till now unknown, attract my eye:
Some stripling tree, aspiring to the sky;
Some clustering shrub, upstarting in the wild;
Some new-discover'd flower of rarest dye,
With plants, and herbs, by Botanists compil'd,
Enhance the worth of all that pleas'd me when a child.

Well I remember, in my youthful hours,
Ere yet in numbers I essay'd to sing,
At that glad season, when fresh opening flowers
And hawthorn buds proclaim'd the birth of Spring;
While light-heel'd Pleasures cours'd their mystic ring,
And my young heart was frolicsome as May,
Oft have I watch'd the Lark, on anxious wing,
Ascend his azure steep at early day,
Piping aloud to Heaven in many a carol gay.

Joyous I've found the glossy crocus, blowing
Fair in its bed of green; and onward stray'd
To sunny dells, where April's hand was throwing
Violets of virgin sweetness, and survey'd
The pale-eyed Primrose, glinting in the glade:
Daisies, vermilion-ting'd, were deem'd a prize,
And pluck'd in triumph; while the sloe-bloom made
Garlands for mating birds, and thence would rise
Vouchings of purest love in anthems to the skies.

And, at sweet May-tide, when the cowslip hung
Its head in pensiveness, and crowflowers bright,
Along the expanse of lengthening meads were flung,
Mingled with ladysmocks, and daisies white,
Lambsfoot, and speedwell, and the lovely sight
Of hawthorn blossom, fragrant on the gale
Of eve; full oft I've wander'd with delight;
Nor, time regretting, will I e'er bewail
Those hours I loitering spent in woodland mead and dale.

And oft, in summer hours, I've saunter'd forth
Along the thorn hedge, or beside the grove,
To hail the damask wild-rose at its birth,
Symbol of innocence and maiden love;
And of that chastity which reigns above
Or sought the woodbine, in its bower o'ershaded,
Where stretching far its wanton arms would rove;
Till, haply, by some peasant's hand invaded,
'Twas torn from out the folds with which its tendrils braided.

Nor will my mind surrender up, in haste,
The recollection of Autumnal views;
Save by Oblivion, not to be effaced;
The sloping sunbeams, and the varied hues
Of fading landscapes, and the misty dews
Hung on the threads of Gossamer; the flowers
Withering in death; till Nature should infuse
Into their roots her renovating powers,
And paint afresh the plains, and re-adorn the bowers.

Dearly, I love you!  native fields, and groves,
And hills, and dales, and mends of fairest bloom;
Where Spring's first flowers enjoy their nuptial loves,
And June's bright children Summer winds perfume:
In some still nook of yours, be this my doom,
When life's frail energies shall make a stand,
To find a rural solitary tomb,
Where waving trees their branching arms expand,
To screen my sunless house, and deck the matchless land.

And thou, majestic Trent!  beside whose stream,
While youth had joys, which ne'er to manhood flow,
Oft have I revel'd in some fairy dream,
Or sigh'd o'er love-tales winding into woe:
Still, on thy banks, may Love, and Friendship go,
And British Freedom, and Contentment fair;
And may thy sons this truth be taught to know,&mdash;
That, of all lands, whatever names they bear,
Albion's the Freeman's Home, and stands without compeer!

Britain!  although upon the battle-plain
Thou hast not found an equal, &mdash; though thy fleets
Sweep, unmolested, the submissive main,
And though no rivalship thy Commerce meets;
Though Arts, and Manufactures, crowd thy streets,
And Industry still adds unto thy store;
Though Safety guard the husbandman's retreats,&mdash;
Yet, land of greatness!  there is something more,
Without which Greece and Rome in glory had been poor.

Potent art thou in Poesy &mdash; Yet there still
Is one thing which the bard hath seldom scann'd;
That national, exalting local thrill,
Which makes our home a consecrated land:
'Tis not enough to stretch the Muses' wand
O'er states, where thy best blood has purchas'd fame;
Nor that thy fertile genius should expand
To cast o'er foreign themes the witching flame:
This hath thy lyre perform'd, and won a glorious name.

Be every hill and dale, where childhood wanders,
And every grove, and nook, the lover knows,
And every stream, and runlet that meanders,
And every plain that covers freedom's foes
The dwelling-place of Song, &mdash; and where repose
The great immortal worthies of our isle
Be hallow'd ground &mdash; and when the pilgrim goes
To hail the sacred dust, and muse awhile,
Be heard the free-born strain to blanch the tyrant's smile.

The oaks of Sherwood wrestle hard with time,
And through succeeding centuries look gay;
And the obdurate yew appears in prime
While twenty generations waste away;
But Song can mock the finger of decay,
And live, a green companion of the hills:
Or, like a river sweeping on its way,
Which, by continued store, its channel fills,
Rolling from gushing founts, and ceaseless mountain rills.

Song can preserve our home for ever dear:
The child shall lisp it on his mother's knee:
The stripling shall behold his haunts more fair,
And sing their charms in rustic minstrelsy:
And where the wild birds chant at liberty,
In the recesses of their nuptial bowers;
And where the flowers bloom sweetly on the lea,
Shall be the scenes of his loves' virgin hours,
The while he whispers lays that tell affection's powers.

Home, thus to youth endear'd, to ripen'd man&mdash;
Shall still be dearer; &mdash; for, the patriot tide
That childhood sports, and love-told hours began,
Shall rally to the heart, and there abide.
England, thus arm'd, shall in its might deride
The hostile efforts of a hundred states.
When songs of freedom are a nation's pride,
Naught, but the ruling mandate of the Fates,
Shall break the sacred bond her influence actuates.

But cease the lay.  My country hold thy station&mdash;
Perfection is not earthly &mdash; yet with thee,
While Hampden's name be told with exultation,
Thou shalt remain, the birth-place of the free!
Nor, shalt thou lack the charm of Poesy,
To make complete, what other bards began;
And future Shakspeares Freedom's priests shall be,
And future Dibdins aid the glorious plan,
Binding our hearts to home, the patriot flame to fan.
