In eastern glory, from the sparkling main,
The god of day had rais'd his fiery car,
Ne'er on the sleeping brave to rise again.
For, on the wings of slaughter, purple war
Had rode in gory grandeur; from afar
The cannon's crash had peal'd the knell of death;
With fearful gleam, the crimson'd cimeter
Had strewed the field with marks of woe and scathe,
And every breeze was thick with warriors' gasping breath!

I stood upon the spot, where, just before,
The arms of millions met the evening sun,
Untarnish'd with the horrid stain of gore,
Ere the dread work of slaughter had begun;
Ere yet the fearful deed of death was done;
Ere steel met helmet-crest in desperate strife;
Ere yet the field of death was lost or won,
While yet the scales of fate, with carnage rife,
Were hanging in the dreadful crisis, &mdash; death or life!

Oh!  'twas a scene of deadliest slaughter.  Here
The wounded soldier rais'd his dying head,
Then sunk, exhausted, on his bloody bier,
And breath'd his warrior spirit to the dead!
I gaz'd around upon the gory bed&mdash;
The couch of death, where many a thousand lay;
Where thousands conquer'd, and where thousands bled,
Ere yon bright orb had sunk his vesper ray:
These were the wrecks, the horrid wrecks of yesterday!

There lay the charger, on the bleeding sod,
Struggling with death!  The native fire and pride,
That "cloth'd his neck in thunder" when he trod
O'er vanquish'd foes, now sinks unquell'd &mdash; untried.
He moan'd not &mdash; sigh'd not, though the purple tide
Of life was ebbing fast; the foam of death
Was curling on his barb, but ting'd and dyed
In his own reeking gore.  With fretful teeth
He champ'd the galling bit that stopp'd his dying breath!

And there, contending for the bloody tomb,
In deadly grasp, were link'd two mortal foes
With hate untried, unmindful of the tomb
That, ere an hour had run its course, might close
In woe &mdash; in death!  From quiv'ring nostrils rose
The bloody froth most horribly!  'Tis past!
Years have roll'd on since death, enthron'd on woes,
With which man dares the universe to blast,
Upon my shudd'ring gaze his purple trophies cast.

Years have roll'd on, and many a year may roll,
Ere death from earth and grief shall shrive me free;
Ere yet my spirit reach its final goal,
Full many a year the eye of time may see,
But, oh!  how many, or how few they be,
The feelings of the breast they cannot sear;
Nor sweep, like dust, that hour from memory,
When mourning, sadly o'er a nation's bier,
I shed the burning drop of recollection's tear!
