Ah, how I love thee &mdash; happy work of man,
Go on, pure promise of increased extent,
Spread wide thy Upas shade &mdash; enlarge thy span,
Thou modern Babylon!  let man invent
To aggravate his curse, his punishment.
Yes &mdash; even man, frail man, may swell with pride,
Forget that wrath which God has ever sent
To wither cities, though they spread as wide,
But then made bold by sin, his Sov'reign power defied.

How vast a plain &mdash; instinct with human life
Far as the eye can reach; the busy hum
Of motion, anxious industry or strife,
Floats on the wind, soften'd 'till it become
Like ocean's far yet angry roar, or some
Vast hive of insects &mdash; or the sullen blast
Which warns us of the tempest yet to come.
What is that murm'ring sound which just has past?
It tells that sin and strife still hold man's nature fast.

Whence is that darken'd atmosphere which seems
Like the dense awful vapors as they play
Round the volcano's mouth, and foully teems,
So that the life of Heaven itself is grey!
Is sin so fearful of the glare of day?
If that vast firmament of smoke arose
From incens'd offering, it might not stay
The wasting sorrow as to man it flows
From those pervading sins, which this vast city knows.

Think they in numbers judgment to elude
Or that to screen them darkness is not vain?
I tell them all shall be my prey &mdash; my food,
If all unmindful, worship in the train
Of idols &mdash; if besotted they remain,
At last withdraw their trust from him who views
Man's actions in the city or the plain;
Who scorns their power, and in justice strews
Remorse upon that soul, which man does but abuse.

Yet stay &mdash; the sun shines forth before it sets,
And through the gloom throws brightness on the scene,
Like hope which gaily tinges man's regrets,
And makes his prospect lighter, yet serene.
Or like the tops of trees which, rank and green,
Obscure the dell, the dark recess, the glade,
Where flourish reptiles, noisome and obscene,
And monsters generate, unkenn'd, unstay'd:
So there exists in towns, what God has never made.

There foul hypocrisy, with harlot mien
And bloated pride, are fat with plenteous food;
There pois'nous lust revels, uncheck'd, &mdash; unseen,
And cankers, by its breath, the wise, the good.
There dead and mangled hopes and joys lie strewed,
Like the white bones which bland the arid sand;
And plainly tell to him, by whom they're viewed,
The hosts that died far from their native land!
With eyes unclosed by any pitying, friendly hand.

Maker of worlds!  what if thy holy ire
Let loose the flood which ravaged once before;
Or sudden vengeance brightened, 'till the fire
Shot forth in torrents with the tempest's roar,
Till none were left to pity or deplore;
And all these myriads writhing in their pain,
Like  insects tortured on the thresher's floor!
And who shall say there anger will refrain,
Or that which once was just, may never be again?

It might be, but those spires which point to heaven,
And now are gilded by declining day,
They tell that there is still that holy leaven,
Which being kept, the wrath of God shall stay.
They rear their tops like promised hopes, which may
Avert the terrors of the light'ning's glare;
The thousand pinnacles of faith display
The only trust for man &mdash; 'tis these declare
The one true God, and he alone is worshipped there.
