Stoop from thy throne, Apollo, if aright
I break thy wintry sleep with verbal chime,
O Thou!  invoked by every luckless wight
Whom unpropitious stars condemn to rhyme:
Yet I, by privilege, presume to climb
The rugged steep of thine eternal hill,
Whom hoary Custom, and the grant of Time
Confirmed by years, have given the power to fill
Uncheck'd mine humble cruise from that Castalian rill.

For soon as bleak December's raven wing
Is seen, and Frost the shivering member plies,
Thine annual saturnalia, Delian king,
Commence:  at once a hundred voices rise
In chant sonorous, and impetuous flies
The epidemic paroxysm of verse
From sheet to sheet &mdash; where to the leaden skies
Each wandering Orpheus doth his song rehearse,
At which fastidious tongues most sorely rail and curse.

And, vested in majestic robe of lace,
With crown triangular for laurell'd braid,
Thy parish priest his magisterial face
Puts forth; apart the tinkling lyre is laid,
And, in its stead, the ample scroll display'd,
Where, lone companion of the bats and owls,
The pictured guardian walks with gesture staid,
While close behind the attendant watchman prowls,
With cur whose lifted throat at silver Cynthia howls.

And while such bards a double zeal profess,
And humbler powers, inspired, prepared to shine,
Shall we, more favoured, do or proffer less?
Forbid it, ye no longer sacred Nine!
All wished-for good and happiness be thine,
Most courteous Reader, whose attentive care
Benignly resteth on this verse of mine;
To you, ye more revered, but gentler fair,
Such lightly gathered spoils as ladies love to wear.

To each the smile which jocund Mirth affords
To each the charm which inward joyance brings&mdash;
Peace to your pillows, plenty to your boards,
And to your hearts the balm which Friendship flings
Within the assembled circle's space, &mdash; so sings
Your minstrel, while the blasts are sweeping round,
And Laughter, sprite-like, claps his fairy wings,
And rosy Christmas o'er the frosted ground
Waves his petrific mace, with tendriled ivy bound.

Hail to his wished and ever welcome reign!
Awake the string, and fill the purple bowl!
Why sleeps the dance? &mdash; yet louder lift the strain,
Nor leave one nook to withering Care's control.
With lightning speed the hours of gladness roll,
And tranquil skies must shortly yield to showers;
Then, ere the night, enwrapped in cloudy stole,
Frowns on the saddened prospect, be it ours
To sip the honeyed dew from yet unclosing flowers.

See where the ruling genius of the day,
Surrounded by the blushing Graces, stands;
His diadem the holly's rubied spray;
The nectared goblet sparkling in his hands;
The slender spear his sceptre, which the bands
Of frantic Bacchanalians reared of yore
On old Cithaeron's height or Dirce's sands;
His robes, like herald's vestments, covered o'er
With wild fantastic shapes in rich and mingled store.

The club, the diamond, and sable spade,
And knowing knaves, and warlike kings between,
And crimson hearts in ordered file arrayed,
And many a strangely decked and fair-haired queen,
Unlike the bright originals I ween;
While here and there upon the motley space,
Where more ignoble numbers intervene,
That unresisted weapon shews its face,
Known to thy warriors, Whist &mdash; the all-destroying ace.

Slow waving from the raftered roof, behold
The reveller's cynosure &mdash; the verdant bough
With fruit like Ocean's pearls, and rind of gold,
Such as with mystic sign and muttered vow
The hoary Druid rent from Mona's brow&mdash;
Or, chilled with dread, the trembling Sellae wove
Amidst the consecrated wreath, where thou,
Revered Dodona, through thy whispering grove,
Receivedst the low replies of sternly breathing Jove.

Far other meaning now its leaf portends
Than pale-eyed Superstition's crimson rites:
Here, couched in ambush, Cytherea bends
Her tempered glance, and blooming Love invites.
Know ye the secret cause?  when Winter blights
Each shrinking floweret of a tenderer frame,
This, like the fire which young Affection lights
When Constancy and Faith support the flame,
Smiles o'er the shattered bark, unaltering and the same.

High o'er the group, in regal dignity,
The tragic Muse with solemn brow is seen,
And sweeping garments dipt in Tyrian dye:
Lo!  where by stealth the laughter-loving queen
Smiles on the answering crowds with sportive mien.
Apart, with lordly and majestic pace,
Stalks the plumed hero of the mimic scene;
And spangled lovers lead the nimble race,
Urged by two angry elves, old monarchs of grimace.

And freed awhile from dull scholastic chain,
Full many a merry imp disporteth there,
And many a member of the boyish train,
Escaped awhile like bird from fowler's snare,
Right sick of learned lore and pedant's care;
Till, slowly gliding on, that awful week
Commands its spell-bound victims to repair
To scenes where vengeance for domestic freak
Lurks 'neath Arabian sign or more appalling Greek.

Sport then your fleeting season, ye who can;
Enough of Sorrow's deepening gloom remains
To cloud this short and transitory span,
Though half the load each child of Eve sustains
Were gilded o'er with joy:  one doom ordains
The fate of all, and drugs that cup of woe,
Unaltering, whether prince or peasant drains
Its dark contents, which unexhausted flow
For young and old alike &mdash; the lofty and the low.

Yet, in this halcyon time of becks and smiles,
When wealth and pomp their open stores display,
And harmless pastime's artless laugh beguiles
The impeded Night, slow halting on her way,
And late the red and festive fires decay,
Even while encircled by the gathered throng,
Who deign to listen to this humble lay,
I would not do the instructive season wrong,
Or carelessly exclude its moral from the song.

Not to o'ercast the youthful brow of mirth,
Nor turn the yet unfaded beam to gloom,
Nor check one more enlivening feeling's birth,
Nor rob enjoyment of a single plume&mdash;
Turn I to graver subjects, and assume
A moment, ere we part, the warning lyre,
And, with the poet's liberty, presume
To breathe the thought which perished days inspire&mdash;
How vain and fleeting all we cherish, love, admire!

Another year has sighed farewell, and spread
Its noiseless pinions for eternal flight,
As all before, irrevocably fled,
Swept like the scattering cloud from mortal sight;
And whither? &mdash; ask the dews of yesternight.
No fading track the inquiring eye can find,
As when the meteor cleaves the starry height;
Swift as the sunbeam, viewless as the wind,
Its wing has darkened &mdash; past &mdash; and what remains behind?

That, which although the sense retains it not,
And the closed mind entombs its traces, still
Though long concealed, shall never be forgot,
The internal consciousness of good or ill:
The void, which Time may close, but cannot fill,
Of seasons lost and talents misapplied;
Or worth, though past, recorded, like the rill
Whose caverned source the mountain hollows hide,
But which shall briefly pour in light its sparkling tide.

"Like leaves on trees the race of man is found:"
So sang the Grecian moralist of old,
With hundreds more whom silent death has bound
For ages, blended with their kindred mould,
Themselves examples of the truths they told.
And they who own the axiom's force, and they
Who hold it light, when, once their space is rolled,
And darkness closes round this mortal clay,
Sage, sophist, warrior, statesman, where, oh where are they?

Gone as their withering emblems &mdash; seen and past;
Some in the spring and morning of the year;
Some feebly fluttering in the autumnal blast;
Some whom the barren bough, though dried and sear,
Retains till winter's gathering snows appear,
Worn by diseases, sapped by cankering grief,
While war, care, anguish, ravage far and near:
Who, when the tempest whirls the falling leaf,
Views not the life of man as slight, as weak, as brief?

Nor longer last his works:  beneath his march,
Whose hand uplifted slackens not to spare,
The regal pyramid and conqueror's arch
Mock in decay their nameless founder's care.
Alike that equal and resistless share
Rends the deep-rooted oak and opening flower;
Unmoved alike by bribe or suppliant prayer,
Shatters the lowly hut or giant tower&mdash;
The hoary pile of years, or fabric of an hour.

Alike that wide and desolating river
Bears forward, mingled in its ceaseless tide,
The prostrate forest and the reeds which quiver
A summer season by its crumbling side,
Ere spring has smiled its last again supplied.
Our fathers flourished for their day, and fell;
Earth and its cares for ever laid aside,
"After the fitful fever they sleep well,"
And soon for us shall ring the same unsparing knell.

How feeble Talent in the deadly strife&mdash;
How useless Wisdom, when the stern decree
Demands the forfeit penalty of life,
Too truly tells thy country's wail for thee,
Lamented beacon of the great and free:
With laughing skies above, and peace below,
Light rode the vessel through a slumbering sea,
Nor feared the stroke, nor felt the approaching foe,
When flew the levelled bolt and laid the pilot low.

Oh, well deserving of a better fate,
If better fortune Heaven to earth assigned,
Than early so to shine and perish late,
At once the grief and glory of mankind
Ours is the loss, for where shall Albion find,
Lamented spirit, since thy race is run,
The statesman's prudence with the poet's mind,
Fame, honour, virtue, genius, joined in one?&mdash;
Well may the Island Queen lament her loftiest son.

Stern Battle, too, has riven his bands since last
We watched with pensive brow the year's decay,
And wild Contention blown her trumpet-blast,
And Havoc's vultures stooped upon their prey.
In Navarino's calmly rippling bay
Three banded squadrons cleave the adverse brine,
Prow after prow in close and stern array,
And, waving free, the bannered crescents shine,
Disclosed in deadly hate along the anchored line.

There, where the leaguered Spartan fell before,
Bowed by the blended might of steel and fire,
The hoarse artillery's death-denouncing roar
Booms from the main, and volumed wreaths aspire,
Dim floating o'er the fierce avengers' ire
And desolaters' end; while sinks the Sun,
And sober Evening's lingering shades retire
Before the wasting task of wrath is done,
Where masts are rent as reeds, and decks with crimson run.

Night deepens, crested with her peaceful star,
But other light has dimmed its silver rays
Within the womb of darkness, flashing far,
A hundred wrecks in mingled ruin blaze;
And fast the momentary lightning plays;
More faintly answered by the heated sky;
And lone Sphacteria's startled echoes raise
Their murmuring voices in confused reply,
Woke by the victor's shout or sinking victim's cry.

So may the bolt of retribution fall,
Reserved alone for Freedom's tyrant foes,
Such be the unlamented fate of all
Who thee and thine, dejected Right, oppose!
Yet many a cheek which, flushed as morning rose,
With youth's high ardour met the fanning gale,
Before that fatal day's tempestuous close,
With wan Destruction's ghastly traces pale,
Even from the conqueror's lips drew forth the funeral wail.

Their praise is sounded by the dashing surge,
Their worth engraven on the pathless deep,
Their graves the ocean's undecaying verge,
Their monument that overhanging steep,
Where Fame, with eyes which kindle as they weep,
Shall watch for aye above their glorious rest,
And high Renown her patient vigil keep,
Gilding with ceaseless ray the billow's breast:
Oh, more than envied they of such a couch possest!

But while we gaze upon the mouldering urn,
Or trace the dying records of the dead,
Draw we no lesson from the scene, nor learn
One precept of the dust beneath our tread&mdash;
The moulds from which vitality has fled?
Or shall we linger on, unmoved, the same,
Till Age's hand has bowed each changing head,
Bent on some worthless prize or empty name,
Without a better hope or more important aim?

Breathes there no warning from the opening grave?
No solemn notice from the sable bier?
Where sleep the fair, the young, the wise, the brave,
Collected spoils of each succeeding year&mdash;
The green commingling with the ripened ear,
The gathered dust of millions at our feet,
And change pervading even yon crystal sphere;
Say, shall we carelessly prepare to meet
The doom each moment seals, and ages shall repeat.

Yet while the vital lamp unfailing burns,
And still the fast decreasing powers remain,
Before to earth this breathing frame returns,
And "cold Obstruction" makes the effort vain,
Rend with unsparing hand each inward chain.
The coming morning glances from afar,
More faint and more the fires of darkness wane;
Bright on the mountain glows the signal star&mdash;
Awake!  arise!  and arm to meet the coming war.

Awake!  a thousand ranks are gathering near,
A thousand bands in eager hate combined:
The stern assailant grasps the pointed spear,
The unfolded banner flutters in the wind;
Rage in the front, and pale Remorse behind,
Whose loosened shafts not triple plates impede:
On pours the storm; while, free and unconfined 
Beneath his ghastly weight, from deed to deed,
Bounds with untiring hoof the Apocalyptic steed.

Dwells there unkindness in a single breast?
Cast, ere the tempest sounds, the weight aside;
No secret space for hoarded wrath to rest,
No season this for scorn or cynic pride,
When foams and bursts around the battle's tide:
United safely stands the firm array;
But those whose selfish lips have still denied
The oft entreated aid &mdash; how prosper they?
Child of corruption, speak, whom Death struck low to-day!

Is there no heart the friendly voice may soothe?
No brow affection's care may render bright?
No couch of pain the attendant hand may smooth?
Nor field where charity may sow delight?
Behold the imparted use of wealth aright,
And freely let the liberal hand dispense
Its aid, where ills assail and sorrows blight.
Enjoy, but with enjoyment blend the sense
Of thanks, &mdash; the boon is given &mdash; 'tis well &mdash; remember whence.

And be ye ever vigilant, as those
Who keep in midnight guard the tented field,
And hear in every wind the tread of foes,
And rest but pillowed on the guardian shield,
Till, brightly from the kindling East revealed,
The purple dawn comes forth with cloudless rays,
And tried desert, by long endurance sealed,
Procures for each the deathless meed of praise,
And twines the warrior's brow with never-fading bays.

Have I but penned a lecture for a song&mdash;
Truth for poetic fictions?  Be it so.
I reason not with that unthinking throng
Who check reflection in its secret flow,
Nor heed the warner's voice, nor care to know,
More than their insect types, how deep the stream
On which awhile their painted pinions shew,
Splendidly useless, till the fickle beam
Descends, and loosened blasts cut short their heedless dream.

Enough &mdash; the port is gained &mdash; the task is done:
As mist whose wreaths the morning breezes bear,
The Bard, like eastern Hasnar's fabled son,
Retiring, mingles with the impassive air,
Nameless and soon forgotten.  But beware,
Ye on whose ears his voice may linger still
No baseless vision hath found utterance there;
No words whose import Time shall not fulfil;
No truths whose feeble powers nor proffer good nor ill.

Farewell, respected Reader, yet farewell
To those who, sundered but in fancy, part,
Within that word resides a secret spell,
A chord which finds vibration in the heart:
If once the sense which loftier thoughts impart,
Freed from cold Apathy's benumbing chain,
And waked a moment by the minstrel's art,
Has sprung to kindlier action &mdash; not in vain
His Doric reeds have tried a more exalted strain.
