'Tis a fair scene; &mdash; the few clouds, dark and dun,
That lie like islets in the glorious west,
Are streaked with flame, as the broad setting sun
Sinks slowly to his golden hall of rest;
While his slant rays throw o'er the ocean's breast
Bright threads of silver, and his flashing spray
Seems set with jewels, like the bridal vest
Of proud Sultana.  Bright is the array,
When thus, in quiet pomp, goes slowly down the day.

Winds gentle as the watching mother's prayer,
Come o'er the waters, as they sink and swell
With bouyant motion, such as heaves the fair
Breast of the cradled infant, when the spell
Is broke, that locks the thoughts in memory's cell.
Hither the secret worshipper alone
Might come to pray, and here might hermit dwell;
Centuries have wreathed the moss-crown round the stone,
And flowers here spring and fade, unnoticed, and unknown.

There is no sign of life within the shore's
Wide circuit, save that now and then his cry
The wheeling curlew on the breeze outpours,
Or far away, where mingle earth and sky,
A small sail, dim in distance, passes by,
Like some proud eagle, on his steady flight
Far through the welkin's clear profundity,
Or like a cloud of filmy, flaky white,
Borne through the moonlight blue, &mdash; one lonely speck of light.

Here, as I sit, strange fantasties and dreams,
With hues as vivid as reality,
Flit by.  The infinite blue ocean seems
A thing of life.  Shrouded in mystery,
Heave thy long billows onward, sounding sea!
And, in thy voice, full many tales are told
Of griefs that in thy secret caverns be,
Of joys that wither in thy circling fold,
Like flowers that wake to life in winter's chill and cold.

And yet thou art a thing of loveliness,
And forms surpassing fair thy waters hide;
The branching coral blends, in sweet caress,
With intertwining sea-plants &mdash; far and wide
Gems sparkle to the swaying of the tide;
Beings, the seaman's dread, thy blue depths throng
And poets feign, how o'er thy bosom glide
Beautiful sea-nymphs, warbling such sweet song
As wakes the hidden rill, winding its path along.

And fearful thoughts, too, round thee cast their spell;
A voice comes up from thy dark-heaving wave,
Distant and deep, like sound of funeral bell;
A voice which tells, that there have found a grave
Multitudes of earth's children, master, slave,
The gray-haired father, and the blooming boy,
Warriors that wore the laurels of the brave,
And forms of beauty.  Ah!  could'st thou destroy
Her whose fair tresses streamed upon the breath of joy!

Cities have sunk beneath thy victor march,
As when of old, with mutterings deep and low,
Sprung from volcano's mine, and a red arch
Of flame gushed forth, and whelmed beneath its flow
Italia's fairest lands.  The keels that plough
Thy breast, masses of strength, oh, what are they,
When thy waves rage, and like the drifting snow,
Throughout the darkened air is flung the spray,
And thy dark caverns all lie open to the day.

And yet thou art a picture of man's life,&mdash;
Of youth, when sparkling hope keeps festival,
And years flow on like sunlit streams, &mdash; man's strife
For fame, &mdash; of wintry age, when sorrows fall
Like blight in summer on the soul, and all
The founts of joy are chocked.  As o'er thy face
Blank darkness spreads her melancholy pall,
Thou shadowest forth our end, when life's short race
Is run, and man is laid in his long resting-place.
