Spring 'woke the world, but with the vernal day
Came the deep voice of Death upon the gales!
Sweet broke the blushing morning, but the ray
Cheered not thy desolated pastures, Wales!
Where now the minstrel's song, the harper's lay,
That rang so merrily amid the vales?
Alas!  in bower and hall is silence dread&mdash;
Thy sons, the free, the brave, are numbered with the dead!

Despair and ruin to the shrieking land!
Thy bold and beautiful upon their bier!
Thy temples smoking 'neath the invader's brand!
Thy infants writhing on the hostile spear!
And shall not vengeance blast the murderous band?
And retribution fall with doom severe?
Shall Jove's high thunder sleep, when to his throne
Swift from the suffering earth the voice of blood hath flown?

It slept not, though the victor's flag  on high
Triumphant fluttered o'er the bending mast&mdash;
It slept not, though the favouring sea-gales fly,
And Denmark gave its canvas to the blast!
Devonia spreads her fertile vallies nigh&mdash;
There speed, and find, all Ocean-perils past,
The strong sure hand of Justice!  Lo, the doom
Of Tyranny is sealed &mdash; Destruction and the tomb!

Immortal Kenwith!  wild the Reafan streamed
Around thy walls!  and wild the savage crew
Sent up their war-cry, as the morning beamed!
While deeper still the shout of battle grew&mdash;
Till the last ray of welcome evening gleamed,
And the fierce Pagan sullenly withdrew;
As Night o'er all resumed her ancient reign,
Mantling both friend and foe &mdash; the dying and the slain!

Again the morning ray, again the fight&mdash;
The storm &mdash; the brave repulse &mdash; the iron showers,
That from the 'leagured battlements alight
In terror on the Danes!  On Kenwith's towers
Floated Danmonium's banner, waving light
In the free gale that fanned her myrtle bowers;
And floating  o'er the walls at evening's close,
Beneath its glorious folds the English bands repose.

Short pause before the tempest!  Ere the beam
Of morning gilt the English banners brave,
From Kenwith's grates burst forth the human stream,
And on the foe rolled deep the living wave,
Resistless! &mdash; Let the Northern raven scream,
And Odin now his magic standard save&mdash;
For, hark!  the firm Danmonii, with one breath,
Shout through the ensanguined field &mdash; "Or liberty, or death!"

Down sank the raven &mdash; down  his crime-stained Lord!
Swift fled from that red field his savage band!
He slept &mdash; the man of blood &mdash; whose ruthless sword
"Made women childless!" &mdash; slept upon the strand,
In his wild, fearful grave (that chief abhorred);
Where, as triumphing to the rescued land,
E'en now the great sea-billow, dark and deep,
Urged by the howling winds, o'er Denmark's hero sweep!
