With trembling hand, this simple wreath is twined
Of buds, and leaves, and flowers of various hue;
Not rare exotic blossoms here I bind,
Nor those rich blooms that in the garden grew;
But simple wild-flowers, all ensteep'd with dew,
As freshly cull'd from the green pathway side;
Where all unhonour'd and unmark'd they blew,
There, they unhonour'd and unmark'd had died,
But that to cull and bind them was my chiefest pride.

Howe'er neglected or uncherish'd, they
In solitary loveliness upsprung;
Like many a daisy on the lap of May,
Or violet, whose dainty peep hath hung
Unnoticed by the aged and the young,
Till all perchance, some lover mark'd the gem,
And with due admiration, stoop'd and wrung
Each little flowret from its pensile stem,
To twine for his loved fair in floral diadem.

So I, oft rambling in reflection's field,
Have mark'd and pluck'd these unobtrusive flowers:
For oft bright colours shew, sweet fragrance yield,
The open mead, the woods' sequester'd bowers,
Where they enjoy the breeze, the sun, the showers,
Which ripen nature, and her charms expand:
Even so, untutor'd meditation's hours,
May some sweet wild-wreaths of chaste thought command,
For simple beauty's brow, or simple pleasure's hand.

In tender age, smit with the charms of verse,
No mercenary hopes my spirit hired:
'Twas all my joy, to ponder and rehearse
The thoughts and feelings of sweet bards inspired,
Till, with the glorious subject fill'd and fired,
One &mdash; one ambitious wish grew quick and strong&mdash;
And chief of earthly things I this desired&mdash;
That I might rank amongst the sons of song,
Might through succeeding years my humble name prolong.

Sweet was the scenery of my native spot;
And sweet my earliest, first remember'd joys;
Sweet is the picture which no time can blot;
And sweet that pleasure which no change destroys:
The fancies, which in boyhood were my toys,
Imagination's freshest fondest theme;
Still &mdash; still my heart, my eye, my wind employs,
Still clings to me, whate'er its faults I deem,
A pleasure-woven song, a dear-remember'd dream.

I never loved the haunts of noisy men;
Nor fashion's gay resort, nor folly's maze;
Me more delighted, the sequester'd glen,
The umbraged woodland, whose deep path displays
Green tufted seat and rose-briar tangling sprays,
And all the wild harp tones which nature lends:
Here &mdash; sweetly falls the eve of summer days,
And here each loveliest charm of morn attends,
Binding my heart more close to parents, sisters, friends.

Beloved parents!  and, my sisters dear!
Accept my filial, my fraternal love;
Ye know how ardent, tender, and sincere
Are all the feelings which my bosom move:
I never form'd a wish, I never strove
To win a blessing, but you were a part:
Alone, in crowds, in town, or field, or grove,
I ever feel you present in my heart;
And never thence, I ween, this duteous joy shall start.

Affection pure, next turns to you, my friends!
Who faithful, ardent, unreserved have been;
Of all the bliss which heaven in mercy blends,
Than friendship, earth hath nought diviner seen:
'Tis to the mind, even as the cheerful green
Is to the wearied eye &mdash; a pleasant thing:
That paradise, which to this fallen scene,
And fallen man, still doth incessant cling,
Prefiguring 'midst each change some fair perpetual spring.

Ye oft have seen me wayward, moody, sad;
And ye have borne with me, and loved me still;
In all my cheerful hours ye have been glad;
Still bending your own pleasures to my will:
And I have mark'd how life its urn doth fill,
How youth advances, and how age comes on:
And, ah!  in prophecy, my heart hath skill,
To say from earth we all must soon be gone,
For time hastes off with us, and stays for none.

Parents!  and sisters!  and dear friends!  when time
Hath swept us to the grave, &mdash; perchance my name,
Surviving with this tributary rhyme,
May yet awhile some thoughts of each reclaim:
And be my glory perish'd, and my shame
Written on all I've wrote, if I forget
Amidst the whisperings of a poet's fame,
That life's most precious gem is richliest set
In warm affection's pure and priceless coronet.
