Idol of all, the world's imperial lord,
Thou peerless bullion dug from sleeping earth,
As sways the despot o'er his fettered horde,
So thousands bow the minions of thy worth:&mdash;
To groans and midnight tears thou givest birth,
Enchanting master of the frown and smile;&mdash;
Alike creator of our woes and mirth,
The nurse of cloudy hate, and venomed guile,
Diffusing mantling grandeur on the tumid vile!

Thou yellow slave of Eastern rifled mine,
There gleams from thee a long unweakened charm;
A fatal essence is for ever thine
That time's corroding changes harm;
The same magnetic spell in every form&mdash;
A dumb memorial of the ages fled,
When, love for thee, woke up the civic storm;&mdash;
For thee, the pulsing breast was gored and red,
And savage warriors trampled on the piling dead:

There is a moral on thy graven face,
When, damp before us, from thy burial-ground,
With eager ken, we scan the fading trace
Of some triumphant record, crusted round;
Or regal brow, with braiding garland bound.
Where now is he, the image of thy rust?
The tyrant, perhaps, that made the war-whoop sound,
And vanquished cities rear his sculptured bust&mdash;
Like thee, disfigured remnant of his wormy dust!

In burning zones, and far exotic clime,
Where gorgeous nature daunts the lifted eye,&mdash;
The daring Briton wastes his lusty prime,
Apart from native hills, and genial sky:
The dripping tears of love &mdash; th' unbosomed sigh,
The farewell pang prophetic &mdash; all forgot!
When, flushed, his pluming spirit longs to fly
From thrifty ease and patrimonial spot&mdash;
And slow return with wealth and fevered veins his lot!

With sinking cheek, pale lip, and pensive glance,
And locks that pine upon their heated brow,
Alone, with pauseful step, and mute advance,
Behold a martyred genius passing now!
His eyes still flash, &mdash; but mournful shadows throw
Betraying sadness round his inward gloom:&mdash;
The soul is lit, inspired, &mdash; but poor, and low,
No gold creative to resist his doom,
Like sunshine's fading light, he weakens to the tomb.

On clotted turf, within a murky vale,
The blood-red daggers in his quaking hand,
His guilty visage hued by moonlight pale,&mdash;
The murderer bodes &mdash; as if Remorse's wand
Had fixed him there.  Upon the still brigand,
The victim opes his eyes &mdash; which then reclose,
While from his wounds the bubbling streams expand:
For gold, thus, oft the wasting life-spring flows&mdash;
For thee, vile ore, how many woo the grave's repose!

A long farewell endears the faithful soul,
And warmer kindness will spring up from woe,&mdash;
But spelling gold perverts the heart's control,
And finds a parent for the infant's foe!
Malignant guile, the darksome traitor's blow,
The death-bed curse, and lip of venom'd scorn,&mdash;
The sternest pangs enduring hearts can know,
Are but the deeds  of gold: &mdash; and years unborn,
Shall bring thine endless victims, that for thee shall mourn.

But see!  thy abject slave: &mdash; a lurking fear,
Spreads o'er his face a dark prevailing shade;
Wakeful, though scowled his gaze: &mdash; that icy sneer,
Before whose chill a baby smile would fade,&mdash;
Is th' intense pride of treasure unbetrayed:
Few are his words &mdash; in them the wily tone
Conveys reserveful dread; &mdash; as if it bade
The miser fear himself: &mdash; his wealth once known,
'Twould seem departed, though it still remained his own!

A miser's heart is like the damp cold tomb,
Embalming but the noisome; &mdash; dark abode
Of blighted feeling and of selfish gloom:&mdash;
And yet 'tis not repose; a burdening load
Of teasing dreams, at home, and on the road,
From risen morn till eve &mdash; prevent his rest:
One  haunting thought, the self-inflicted goad&mdash;
Is ever at his soul.  With heavy breast
And pulsing terror, is his canvas pillow pressed!

This beauteous world, and its enchanting scene,
The silken clouds of morn, and moony night,
The tinted fruits, and meadow's matchless green,&mdash;
Its flowers and streams &mdash; for him yield no delight!&mdash;
The sunbeams warm his brow, and bless his sight,
The breezes kiss his lips &mdash; but he's the same:&mdash;
As if his mind was darkened o'er with blight,
And Nature quite unfelt &mdash; a gloomy frame
Where all, but avarice, is motionless and tame.

And has he bliss? &mdash; 'tis buried in the ground!
No kindly ease is bought above:  vile, mean,
Blank to the eye, and deaf to sorrow's sound,
With unpartaking modes and bilous spleen,
He crawls his way &mdash; unsought and seldom seen:&mdash;
Strange homage this, that Fancy gets
For her delusions!  E'er since time hath been,
Hearts weave their own deceits: &mdash; the miser frets,
But bears the willing thraldom while his SOUL regrets!

With lowering front, and dim withdrawing eye,
Suspiciously he creeps: &mdash; his morbid glance
Turned round on heaven and earth most fretfully;&mdash;
Disturbing fears, as near his steps advance
To see the buried gold &mdash; and hopeful trance,&mdash;
Attend him with their phantoms. &mdash; Each limb shakes,
And tremulous, the chills of dubious chance
Thrill through his person: &mdash; till again he takes
Another glutting stare, &mdash; oh!  how his bosom aches!

The spot is gained: &mdash; beneath a tree decayed
His treasure's hid.  Upon its topmost bough
A raven sits &mdash; foreboding hope betrayed.
Here, on the ground, the miser kneeling now,
Digs up the turf: &mdash; but list!  the shrieking vow
And arms infuriate raised &mdash; the torture's trace&mdash;
Proclaim the heap is gone! &mdash; no tears can flow,
But inward anguish maddens in grimace,
While Death, with mocking purse, grins in his martyr's face.
