Beautiful being! &mdash; brighter far than all
The shapes that pass in glory through the soul
Of the young poet, when the earthly thrall
That bowed his heart is over; and the whole
Of Fancy's lightnings through his bosom roll
Like lava-streams thro' Aetna &mdash; where art thou?
Gone in thy summer bloom!  and hark!  the toll
Of thy funereal bell assails me now,
Whilst sorrow sadly sits upon my burning brow.

Thou wert too fair, too good to cling to Earth,
And all unfitted for the bustling crowd,&mdash;
But those who knew thee, reverenc'd thy worth,
And I, who loved thee, hymn thy praise aloud.
I know I had thy love, and might be proud
That I could win a heart as pure as thine.
But pride is folly now, &mdash; for in thy shroud
Thou liest before me, &mdash; and I must resign
To the cold, silent grave my once so worshipped shrine.

Yet, let me view thee, even as thou art,&mdash;
Altho' that cheek is pale, these lips are cold,
And life and love have left that ardent heart,
And now thou art but dust and moveless mould&mdash;
Yes!  let me view thee, once again unfold
The form I ever only wished as mine,&mdash;
But of such idle wish nought may be told,&mdash;
My love was pure and passionate as thine,
Yet what is mortal love to thee, who now art all divine!

And do I look thus calmly upon Death,
Nor fear the arrow that the many fear?
Can this be it?  where nought is gone, save breath?
The form is still the form that I held dear,
A tranquil smile thy features calmly wear,
And MIND yet lingers on that pallid face,
And Beauty's tints upon that brow appear&mdash;
As bright as when thy charms I loved to trace,
Ere those from us wert summoned to thy heavenly place.

Even as thou art, could'st thou remain, it were
A consolation to my wounded spirit,
A balm that might give solace to despair,
That my swoln heart so amply doth inherit.
What have I done, such misery to merit?
But I must look my last, and thus I cull
One tress of thy dark hair &mdash; a relic, for it
May waken many a soothing thought, when full
Of wrongs from things of earth, this heart grows sad and dull.

But fate has done its worst:  for now to me
What are the charms or woes of earthly things!
Am I not lone when severed thus from thee?
And need I care what storm its tempest flings
Over this bosom's o'erfraught, breaking strings?
Would they were broken &mdash; then we might appear
At the high places of the King of Kings,
With faith to guide us, having nought to fear&mdash;
But this may never be &mdash; thou'rt blest, and I am here!
