Celestial Music!  soul-piercing power!
How wide the chain thy soft enchantments throw!
The infant lips, in childhood's earliest hour,
With pride essay the whistle shrill to blow;
While the glad mother feels her bosom glow,
Loving the sounds which careless ears despise.
When years, advancing, now to boyhood grow,
On a tin horn the urchin makes a noise,
Which gentle souls dislike, and rough anathematise.

In manhood, nobler aims inspire the soul;
The clarionet, or misplay'd bugle, jars:
Then mail-coach guards their echoing music roll,
Forgetting turnpikes while they count the bars.
The apprenticed lover, play'd on by the stars,
With crotchets fills his mistress' heart and ears,
Till the harsh father all his music mars:
The avenging whip, or wrathful foot, he rears;
While the impassion'd nymph evaporates in tears.

Matter is musical; and Trees have sung&mdash;
(Not Orpheus' trees, who merely ran about,
Like standing corn, all ears without a tongue).
Horse-tails engender music &mdash; souls, like trout,
By most insidious horsehair are drawn out.
Death's musical &mdash; a great composer grown,
Whose overtures we can't well get without
Incessantly he marks his notes in stone;
And, though no harpsichord he plays, performs in bone.

The parish-clerk, the village music-master,
Master at once of music, and her slave,
Of late I saw &mdash; (not Dan Apollo touch'd
The horsehair faster) &mdash; seeking souls to save
By teaching Sunday scholars the true stave;
And much it pleased me, in my unseen station,
To watch the efforts of the tutor grave
To modify the heathenish squallation,
To gods and columns both a sheer abomination.

Upon his eyebrows sat authority,
And at his feet his dog; before him stood
The neophytes of sacred minstrelsy,
Cecilias in reversion; the sweet wood,
The handle of his viol, not too good,
He held with gentle hand to guard from harm;
For much he prized it, more than flesh and blood.
With resin, magic drug, to aid the charm,
The master arm'd his bow, and then he bow'd his arm.

At once uplifting voice and instrument,
He led the way &mdash; a lamentable sound
(Whose name was Legion, being many) went
Forth from the throats of all that stood around;
Discord, that did all harmony confound,
Louder, and louder, did the master bawl;
In philosophic quiet sat the hound,
Worthy of praise, amid that Babelish squall
Of notes not flat, not sharp &mdash; certes not natural.

His patient ears hung down upon his face,
Curtaining out the noise, perchance, in part;
All as unmov'd, behind the master's place,
There stood his better half, his life, his heart,
Who, partner of his cares, would not depart:
With arms across, and face demurely still,
Unmoved she watch'd the triumphs of his art;
While he with might and main, and toilsome skill,
With love of music strove untuneful souls to fill.

In vain!  no bars restrain th' impatient crowd;
Notes are unnoted, limping time forgot:
Yet still the treble discord grows more loud,
And would abate the master not a jot,
With music and impatience waxing hot.
More freely did he bid the resin move;
Voice, hand, and foot in unison were got:
The urchin choir inspir'd to follow strove;
His dame more sweetly smil'd &mdash; for music melts to love.

In ecstasy the minstrel rock'd his chair;
His tail in approbation Tray did bend;
(For in grave souls, whose praise is slow and spare,
Approval comes but in the latter end).
But why did cruel fate that motion send?
Oh hapless tale, and yet more hapless tail!
The chair, not charily, did swift descend.
That thou wert a grave dog did not avail,
Oh Tray!  nor did avert what I must needs bewail.

Then rose from earth to sky the mighty yell;
Fled Polyhymnia with psalmodic groans:
With chair inverted, straight the master fell;
His stronger head preserved his weaker bones.
Ah!  much the wounded tail the Muse bemoans,
And sad mischance of this disastrous day
(Day to be mark'd for ever with black stones),
Where triumph did to overthrow betray:
So clouds and storms succeed a too resplendent day.
