'Tis Autumn's pensive noon:  no zephyr's breath
The withered foliage in the woods is shaking;
Their feeble song the mournful birds bequeath
To the sere coverts they are fast forsaking:&mdash;
And there two lovers walk, whose breasts are aching
With many a pang these much-loved haunts to leave,&mdash;
And, oh, to part! &mdash; Each silent heart is breaking;&mdash;
Yet both attempt to hide how much they grieve&mdash;
And each, deceived in turn, the other doth deceive.

How can they part! &mdash; The lake, the woods, the hills,
Speak to their pensive hearts of early days;
Remembrance woos them from the haunted rills,
And hallows every spot their eye surveys;
Some sweet memorial of their infant plays,
Some tender token of their bashful loves,
Each rock and tree and sheltered nook displays:
How can they part! &mdash; Nature the crime reproves,
And their commingling souls to milder purpose moves.

For what were life &mdash; ah, what were weary life,
Without each other, in this world of care?
A voyage through wild seas of storm and strife,
Without an aim for which to struggle there.
But, blessed in wedded love, how sweet to share
The gladness or the grief that life may bring!
Then join, relenting Love!  this gentle pair&mdash;
Let worldly hearts to gold and grandeur cling&mdash;
Around the lonely cot thy turtles sweetest sing.

Yes!  they shall part no more!  Those downcast eyes,
And blushes mantling o'er the changeful cheek&mdash;
The plighted kiss &mdash; the tears &mdash; the trembling sighs&mdash;
The head upon his arm reclining meek&mdash;
Tell far more tenderly than words can speak
That that devoted heart is all his own.
Oh, Love is eloquent &mdash; but language weak
To paint the feelings to pure bosoms known,
When Transport's heavenly wings are sweetly round them thrown!

And now, the lake, the hills, the yellow woods,
Are bathed in beauty by the parting ray:
Through earth and air a heavenly rapture broods,
Breathing of young delight and blushing May:
As home they wend, amidst the year's decay,
Some magic spell the hues of Eden throws
O'er every scene that, on their outward way,
Told but of pleasures past and coming woes:
Such the enchanted radiance heart-felt bliss bestows.

Oh Nature!  'tis impassioned hearts alone
That know thy genuine charms.  The vulgar mind
Sees but the form from which the soul hath flown:
Thy loftier beauties beam not to the blind
And sensual throng to grovelling hopes resigned:
But they whom high and holy thoughts inspire,
Adore thee, in celestial glory shrined,
In that etherial fane where Love's pure fire
Burns bright, and Genius tunes his loud immortal lyre!
