What are men's feelings?  What the stirring thrill
Of life, that leaps within?  Whence flows the joy
Of young hearts, warm in hope?  And whence the still
Cold deadliness of sorrow's apathy?
Whence springs the light unto the laughing eye?
Whence spreads the cloud, like foam on sunny bay,
Over the soul's wreck'd bliss?  What wakes the sigh
From the pale virgin's lip, and what the gay,
Wild voice of mirth?  But, of men's feelings, what are they?

Go!  mark the heart, unfold each latent cover,
And give its mysteries to the world!  Go, go,
And in its sear unravelments discover,
The founts of human bliss and human woe!
Watch the wild passions budding in the glow
Of future promise!  In its nakedness
Of beauty, manhood shadows on the brow,
While care may wrap the soul in cold caress
Of sorrowing misery and of loneliness!

The soldier floats his plumage on the gale,
And smiles upon the lance that thirsts for death:
The mother's bosom sorrows at the tale,
That tells of reeking battle's haze of scath;
The poet labours for the living wreath
Of burning song; while, soldier, poet, all
Balance their joyance on a wandering breath!
Man's heart, 'neath cottage roof or palace hall,
Was little made to be one rosy festival!

Cares, sorrows, joys, expectancies and fears,&mdash;
Life is the fairy picturing of a dream,&mdash;
A little sunshine, and an age of tears
To shroud in weeping that brief sunshine's gleam!
And then the heart!  Few men are what they seem;&mdash;
And fewer yet can trace the workings forth
Of a deep soul, whose feelings are a beam
Of loneliness to light him on the earth,
With which he claims no fellowship, save his sad birth!

Yes!  wild and strange and wonderful, the feelings
To which humanity is heir!  but none,
Oh!  none, like the fired poet's high revealings,
When fancy makes his soul her radiant throne!
Mark the unveil'd bosom, &mdash; sear'd &mdash; alone,&mdash;
How many a tale its cells of passion tell,
Of hope, despair, and joys for ever gone&mdash;
While the blanch'd cheek and fiery eye-beam, well
Proclaim the mystic bondage of the mighty spell!

And it is sad, when silence robes the world,
To see the soul awake to its own pain;
For I could wish that youth had ne'er unfurl'd
Its flag of reason o'er the madden'd brain;
For mine has wanton'd on the &mdash; but, 'tis vain
To raise the voice &mdash; while the tir'd heart can say,
When runs the lightning through each arid vein,
And it were  bootless that the idle lay,
Should sing its frenzy! &mdash; But men's feelings!  Such are they!
