See where the Victim stands! &mdash; not crown'd with flowers,
But compass'd round by fiends: &mdash; his haggard cheek,
His beamless eye &mdash; what tell they? &mdash; Of lost hours,
With mute, but dreadful eloquence they speak!
Of fame and fortune blighted, hopes betray'd,
And all the fearful wreck one cherish'd vice had made.

Hark to yon hollow laugh of desp'rate mirth,
That while it fires the brain, and lights the eye,
Sounds the last knell of peace; owing its birth
To the fierce pangs of mental agony.
'Tis the convulsive joy of wild Despair,
Wrung from the tortured heart &mdash; a joy that Demons share!

Oh, love of play!  so call'd in Fashion's phrase,
Blighter of social hearths and peaceful hours;
Cank'rer of manhood's fair and opening days,
That but for thee had else been strewn with flowers;
Thou direst passion of the human heart,
None but a master's hand can paint thee as thou art!

Oh!  vice of all most hurtful to the soul,
Climax of ev'ry other vice &mdash; the mind
That once acknowledges thy fell control
Spreads desolation round it; like the wind
That sweeps the desert in its poison'd wrath,
Shedding where'er it breathes destruction in its path!

Oh, vice of all most deadly!  on thy shrine
Nature's soft links, Love's sweet and holy ties,
Fall early victims &mdash; all the bonds that twine
Around man's heart, light up a sacrifice
More cruel than on Bramah's blood-stain'd pyre,
Where Hindoo mothers joy to see their babes expire!

Fame &mdash; honour &mdash; fortune &mdash; all are swept away,
All swell the gen'ral wreck: &mdash; why stands he HERE
A ruin'd, hopeless Wretch? &mdash; As breaks the day,
He quits the scene of plunder; &mdash; in his ear
Ring the still rattling dice; &mdash; his throbbing brain
Is crowded now with thoughts, that ne'er shall rest again.

Rushing with horror through the silent streets,
And shrinking from himself, he seeks his HOME!
(Once 'twas a happy one): &mdash; his pale Wife greets
His wish'd return with smiles; &mdash; how can Man roam
From Woman's calm endearments to partake
Those scenes that of his soul a leafless desert make?

Ah!  SHE has listen'd with a beating heart
To ev'ry passing footstep; &mdash; SHE has told
Each ling'ring hour's dull chime with frequent start,
And tears that none might chide, and none behold;
And she has kiss'd her infant in its sleep,
Praying that Heaven from him such fatal vice may keep!

But now she meets the LOST-ONE with a smile
That would seem cheerful &mdash; save that her pale brow
And faded cheek tell other tales the while
Of sufferings which her lips will ne'er avow:
Fondly she clasps the wanderer to her breast&mdash;
Alas!  not ev'n THERE can his wreck'd heart find rest!

She leads him to the couch where calmly sleeps
His beggar'd child: &mdash; then e'en the GAMESTER'S soul
Owns all a FATHER'S feelings! &mdash; See, he weeps&mdash;
(But they are tears that madden as they roll)&mdash;
Oh!  drops, by years of anquish cheaply bought,
Could ye but wash away the ruin he has wrought!

It may not be! &mdash; already on his brow,
Cain-like, is stampt the burning mark of shame;
And the chill hand of Scorn is pointing now
Its withering finger at his blighted name:&mdash;
It may not be! &mdash; ere sinks another sun,
Self-murder crowns his guilt &mdash; DESPAIR'S last work is done.
