Have you ere seen the full warm flush of life,
In brightest splendour, blushing on the cheek
Of him whose heart maintains the deadly strife
Of sickness?  soft and fair the rosy streak
Plays on his bright'ning features, seems to speak
Of many a year of gay festivity.
Oh!  icy coldness, and the parting shriek
Of ghastly dissolution's pang, are nigh,
And Death will follow that warm smile's serenity.

You who have seen it, you alone can know
How Erin struggled for her freedom, while
Hope glimmered through the midnight of her woe;
When England practised each delusive smile,
Each plan of treachery, and every guile
That could restrain our freedom's rising swell.
Yes!  when our only serpent did defile
His birthplace, and when, like some fiendish spell,
His name flung o'er our earth the tainted breath of hell.

False was thy hope, my country, false, alas!
The treacherous ray that glimmered through despair,
While Grattan made his Orphean skill surpass
The whispering whine of tyranny; and ere
A Sheridan, a Curran, ceased to dare
Legions of leagued oppression, while the queen
Of waters trembled on her tottering chair,
Oh!  then we hoped to be what we have been,
And see the olive branch entwined with Erin's green.

Why, why, my country, did you trust that smile,
That look of dark hypocrisy, which gave
Hope to frenzied nation, only while
The cannon roared its summons to the brave?
Did ye not see your Shannon's chainless wave
Rolling in vast magnificence, sublime,
By Limerick's towery grandeur, gloomy grave
Of England's honour, pyramid of crime,
Of Britain's perjured faith unto the page of time?

There Limerick stands, there scoffing at decay,
The monument of faith!  aye, there she peers
Her tottering grandeur o'er the fearless spray;
Boundless and free there Shannon's wave appears,
In indignation rolls, as if the tears
Of them betrayed had swelled her billow's foam;
There Castle Connell, giant bulwark, rears
In dark  sublimity her hoary dome;
And there is Cashel's pride, the owlet's desert home.

Still Erin crawls while these as yet remain,
The quenchless beacon-lights of England's shame.
Did I not see thee sporting in the train
Of vile hypocrisy, when a boasted name
Was echoed round by millions, when thy tame
Servility arose along the sea,
When Wicklow's mountains, as the * * * came,
Echoed about the whinings of thy glee,
The saddening clank of chains * * * *

Then, then my country was thy name of pride
Torn from the glorious records of the brave;
Before, alas!  with misery allied,
But not the servile name of willing slave.
Then as thy paeans echoed o'er the wave,
And as they rung throughout the vaulted sky,
Did Ireland's honour view her lowly grave;
Then did thy tyrants raise the fiendish cry,
And vent in hellish joy o'er fallen liberty.

Look, Erin, to thy land, the land of slaves;
See Desolation now more desolate;
See thy cold sons crawl heedless to their graves,
And smile unconscious of their lowly fate:
Look to thy ruined shrines, thy tottering state;
Ah!  gaze around, let every breathing tell
Thy frantic woe, thy grief disconsolate;
Weep o'er the spot where all thy grandeur fell,
Where Hope first shriek'd to thee her long, her last farewell.

Vain is thy struggle now, though Sheil may raise
False vanity's premeditated sigh,
Whose words are like those fruits that tempt the gaze
Of distant travellers, till approaching nigh
They see the gilded dust that charmed the eye:
Shall he obtain what Grattan was denied,
And drown our Sheridan's almighty cry?
There rolls the ocean in its native pride,
The artificial stream there whispers by its side.

Weep, weep, my Erin!  o'er thy lowly fall;
Raise the wild shriek o'er grandeur's desert tomb;
Thy Curran, Sheridan, thy Grattan, all
Have passed away, and Desolation's gloom
Spreads her black wings, where once in brightest bloom
Young Freedom's blossom grew &mdash; dark is the sky;
Hope has not left her twilight to relume
The long dim night of sunless misery,
Where rings the clank of chains, and Freedom's parting sigh.
