Hail, Netley, ruined, hallowed, and lone,
Still frowns thy dark form o'er the foaming sea,
Still dost thou make the shelving shore thy throne.
How oft men's insect race have ceased to be,
And blent their proud dust with the dust of thee,
Since thy tall towers in their young grandeur rose;
And the sweet sounds of choral melody
Awoke thy cloisters at the even's close,
Startling the shadows echo sinking to repose.

Here would the knight forsake the lance and glaive,
And all the honours of the field forego;
And that red hand, which erst was wont to wave
The blood-stain'd brand above the fallen foe,
Would hold the sacred cross and that high brow
Above whose crested helm and nodding plume
Wan Terror sat, and mock'd at human woe,
Contented would the humble cowl assume,
And War's resplendent laurels shroud in monkish gloom.

Here came the lady fair, whose name was breathed
By love's soft sigh and minstrels' melody,
Whose brow was paler than the rose which wreathed
But not confined each tress, which was free
As the light breeze it sported with could be;
She came in all her youthful loveliness,
Perchance obedient to her sire's decree,
Perchance the victim of the dark distress
Which secret Passion shrines within the heart's recess.

Within yon wall the pilgrim found repose,
A weary wanderer to a distant shrine,
He calmly slept, forgetful of his woes.
And there the crested knight of Palestine
Was welcomed with the banquet and red wine.
Much had he suffered on the Paynim shore,
Ere Christian valour dimm'd the crescent's shrine;
But now those toils and sufferings are o'er,
He sees his native land &mdash; his lady love once more.

He comes and bends him at his mistress' feet
And in her sunlike smile a welcome sees;
Sweet is the sound of fame, but oh!  how sweet
Is that dear voice which hath more power to please
Than shouts of thousands blending with the breeze;
Within his sheath he bids his bright sword rest;
His bark no more is on the storm-woke seas,
No more he tramples on the Paynim's crest,
His lion heart is tamed &mdash; he sleeps on beauty's breast.

And such thy fond and fleeting dreams romance!
Which o'er our little life their magic fling:
Albeit soon waken'd from the short-lived trance,
We see each air-born happiness take wing,
We writhe repugnant to the torturing sting
That disappointed hope behind it leaves;
Who would leave fancy for what fact could bring,
Though all too fragile be the charm she weaves,
Certes most happy he whom most her spell deceives.

Netley, farewell!  as moulders still each stone,
Though clinging ivy and the waving weed
Their green luxuriance have in mock'ry thrown,
So pleasure cannot bid one woe recede,
The brow may brighten but the heart will bleed;
Full many revel but to drown their woe
In wine's sweet Lethe, wishing to be freed
From cares that waste the soul, and thoughts that throw
Their dark despair o'er life, and cause the tear to flow.

Netley, farewell!  we linger, as thy fane
In shadows fades upon the distant view;
Another gaze, and we may look in vain,
Nor see thee rise above the waters blue;
Thus time doth snatch away the fond and true,
Whose sole remembrance is the turf or stone,
Which doth divide us from the chosen few,
Whose hearts have beat responsive to our own,
Pilgrims through life we pass, tired, wandering, and alone.
