While thro' her palaces Chaldea sleeps
All undisturbed by sympathy and fear,
Her weary vigil mournful Sion keeps
In widowed solitude, and many a tear,
Betokening loss of all she held most dear,
Swells the wide torrent streams, that heedless flow
Of Judah's altered state, and fortune drear,
While ever and anon th' insulting foe
Adds taunt to servitude, and mockery to woe.

Wake Sion's song, and give this stranger land
To ring with harpings of a distant shore,
Awake the magic of the minstrel's hand
To tell of joys the minstrel knows no more.
Say, is thy voice less tuneful than of yore,
When myriads rais'd the loud enraptur'd song,
And countless myriads echoed to the roar
In rivalry its wildness to prolong,
What time thy mystic rites inspired the mysterious throng?

Or is there less of pleasure in thy strain?
Or teems thy history with a darker page?
Mayhap thy soul is musing to complain
How the fell spoiler, with barbaric rage,
Defiled that temple, which from age to age
Basked in the sunshine of its fabled God,
While hoary Senators and elders sage,
Humbled beneath the scourgings of His rod,
Confessed the idol name, and trembled at His nod.

Yet from this painful theme, this topic trite,
Thy heart recoils, and sickens at the thought
That, once yclep'd Heaven's choicest fav'rite,
That boast of arrogance is brought to nought,
And thou, the boaster, who erewhile, methought,
Display'dst thy lordly sway o'er slavish lands,
Hast seen thy short-liv'd span with mis'ry fraught,
And fraught for ever &mdash; from these conquering hands
Who shall release thy Host?  say, who redeem thy bands?

Proud boast and vain!  if such a God there be,
He shows His justice in another way
Than single from the Earth one family
With irrespective preference, and say
"My Friends elect are these, my Foes are they
Whom I have chosen not" &mdash; What, could we raise
Our cheeful voices to His majesty,
Who, regardless of His creatures' praise,
Thoughts pious and perverse in equal balance weighs.

Strike, strike the harp, and if barbaric taste
Would wake the sad remembrance of thy care,
Withhold thy choicest minstrelsy, nor waste
Thy Sion's sweetness in our desert air,
But paint some spot less lov'd, some region fair,
Some Carmel's scenery, some Siloe's brook
That babbled forth God's oracles,&mdash; declare
Some wild prophetic raving from that Book
In whose portentous page thy mystic sages look.

Tell us of Sampson, and the syren voice
That robb'd him of his might &mdash; or prythee sing
How Gath's fierce champion bad his hosts rejoice
In bold defiance of the Shepherd King,
Who, with the powerless aid of stone and sling,
Was rumoured to have check'd Philistria's boast;
Reveal the spot of Jordan's secret spring,
Or mark the bounds of that romantic coast,
Where milk and honey flowed &mdash; where Joshua led his host.

Alas!  thou'rt silent, and will not avail
To sooth that mournful sullenness of mind?
Thy selfish grief and brooding sorrows fail
T' impart the solace, which thou mightest find
In those, of land diverse, yet same in kind;
Cease then this idle humour to prolong,
Take up the hallowed theme &mdash; thy harp unbind,
To such estate far other thoughts belong&mdash;
Awake then, Israel's lyre!  Sing, sing fair Sion's song.

How shall I sing?  How chant the Heavenly lay
In climes where Judah's God is all unknown?
Nay, withered be the hand that would assay
To kindle joy from sorrows all our own,
And make your festive song our pensive moan&mdash;
Mine be the task in future, and for ever,
To muse in solitude o'er pleasure flown,
And, tho' from Sion I am doomed to sever,
Shall Sion's loss become my song?  No, never, never!

Salem, thrice hallowed name, should ill-timed mirth
E'er rase thee from the Volume of my brain!
Or tempt me, too forgetful of my birth,
As I have loved thee, e'er to love again&mdash;
May speedy retribution, fearful pain,
Disturb that solace which alone I feel
In singing Sion's melancholy strain,
What time, distracted by my frantic zeal,
I gave those sorrows vent I cannot all conceal.

Oh for a spark of that prophetic fire
Which warms the holy Seer, and bids him string
With bolder energy his Heaven-taught lyre
To themes of future majesty, and sing
Of that fair edifice, which Israel's King,
Far fam'd for wisdom, and no less for might,
Rear'd to the Lord &mdash; a votice offering,
And, on Imagination's ventrous flight
Points how the brightest days emerge from darkest night.

While thus entranced, I take my stand sublime
On some ideal eminence, and view,
Tho' sad the interval &mdash; a glorious time
When Heaven its hidden councils will pursue,
And close our toilsome destiny &mdash; 'tis true
I shall not hail the anticipated hour,
When Israel's God redeems His chosen few,
And Babylon's exalted fortunes lour,
Whilst woe on woe descends in one resistless shower.

Proud foe, thy days are told! &mdash; th' unerring page
Reveals the fearful verdict &mdash; Grace despis'd
Returns to judgment, and insulted rage
Shall take what thou so niggardly hast priz'd,
And show thee to thyself &mdash; too long disguis'd&mdash;
This is my triumph, and my eager thanks
Rise to that God, who such a meed devis'd,
While ransom'd Israel, thro' all her ranks,
Smiles in her widowhood, and hugs the chain she clanks.

The time is near that some unheard-of foe
Intrude on thy ill fated wassailry,
And teach proud Edom's sons in fear to bow
Beneath the terrors of His majesty,
Who views their doings with a vengeful eye,
Nor tenders grace for ever. &mdash; Blest, thrice blest,
His instruments of wrath, to raise on high
Her infants fondling on their mother's breast,
And mar their tender frames, &mdash; unpitied, uncarest.
