Lavant!  the Muse has graced thine humble stream,
Making thy lovely borders classic ground;
There thy own bard, "in penury's extreme,"
Sought in "one Book" a balm for every wound;
Nor far remote the pensive Cowper, crowned
With wreath more honoured than the minstrel's bay,
In Eartham's social bowers sweet refuge found,
Where beechen groves the lawny slopes array,
And on the distant main the sparkling sunbeams play.

Nor art thou, Lavant, loved for these alone,
Though these attract a poet's sympathies,
And for thy failing urn may well atone;
Yet to Cicestria bound by stronger ties,
Her silent spire up-pointing to the skies,
Her blooming gardens and her cloistered shade,
Her cross antique, her ivied walls arise
Before me oft, the while fond Memory's aid
Restores the long-lost scene in all its charms arrayed.

But near the hoary piles of ancient days,
With pinnacle and turret crested o'er,
A spacious structure greets my earnest gaze,
Whose simple elegance delights me more.
Fancy beholds above its open door,
(Unlike the words grav'd o'er the House of Woe,
Pourtrayed in Dante's wild terrific lore,
"ALL YE WHO ENTER HERE EACH HOPE FOREGO!")
Faith, Charity, and Hope, smiling on all below.

Blest Refuge!  see, the child of want and woe,
Who else had pined in sickness and despair,
Borne to thy lofty chambers, there to know
Art's healing aid, and Nature's purer air;
I see him tended by as watchful care
And skill as wait the favoured heir of wealth,
'Till science and humanity repair
Each devastation, as by magic stealth,
And send their patient forth in happiness and health.

Then may His blessing, who is Lord of all,
Descend on thee as night-dews nourish earth!
May they partake it, who, at pity's call,
Still true to woman's purest, noblest worth,
Leave for thy scenes the brighter haunts of mirth,
To gladden by their presence grief and pain;
May peace be with them by their household hearth,
When to its social joys they turn again,
Peace which, when grief assails, can still their souls sustain.

And in that blest reward be theirs a part,
Whose zeal unwearied bade thy walls arise;
Who, skilled to "turn aside Death's levelled dart,"
Watch o'er thee with unshaken energies:
For every tear they wipe from Sorrow's eyes,
For every smile which Suffering's cheek steals o'er,
Be given that richer meed which Fame outvies,
On earth &mdash; a tear the less, a smile the more;
In heaven &mdash; of purer bliss an everlasting store!
