'Tis eve!  The sun's last rays are glimmering still
On Snowdon's crested summit, and around
His granite rocks flows the deep bosomed rill
In solitude and loveliness.  Its sound,
As with an angel voice, of peace profound
Whispers to Heaven; and see &mdash; the sultry fires
Of day more faintly yon deep crags surround;
Slowly even now each western beam retires,&mdash;
Fades, &mdash; lightens o'er the wave, &mdash; and with a smile expires.

Night, utter night succeeds. &mdash; Above &mdash; below
All deepens slowly in one blackening gloom;
Dark are the Heavens, as is the front of woe,
Dark as the mountain prospects, &mdash; as the tomb.
Even as I slow descend, a fearful doom
Weighs heavy on my heart, the bird of night
Screams from her straw-built nest as from the womb
Of infant death, and wheels her drowsy flight,
Amid the pine-clad rocks, with wonder and affright.

The note of woe is hushed; peace reigns around
In utter solitude; the night breeze dies
Faint on the mountain ash-leaves that surround
Snowdon's dark peaks. &mdash; But hark!  again the cries
Of the scared owl, loud hymning to the skies
Her tale of desolation!  Fearfully
Night lengthens out the note; &mdash; the echo flies
From rock to rock; now whispering shrilly by&mdash;
Now in the distance softened, lingering mournfully.

Heaven smiles on earth again &mdash; the glimmering star
Pours in mild lustre down his full-orbed light;
And see, his mistress in her burnished car
Beams on the view! &mdash; At the refulgent sight
The clouds sail by in homage, and the night
Welcomes her as a friend; &mdash; the heavenly train
Of Satellites attend her in her flight
From pole to pole; while a full chorused strain
Of Heaven's own music swells and dies in peace again.

Brightly she moves on in her loveliness!
The fair-haired regent of the sky! &mdash; Her smiles
Soothe the stern horrors of the scene, and bless
Nature's calm slumber; o'er yon splintered piles
Of beetling crags, how sweetly she beguiles
Gloom of its frown; and, see!  the glittering rill
Heaves conscious of her presence, and reviles,
With murmuring voice, yon proudly frowning hill,
That scorns meek Dian's gaze, and mocks her gentle will.

A sound rolls by of horror! &mdash; On the wind
Rides the dark bosomed Daemon of the storm;
Whirlwinds, with meteor splendor, crowd behind,
And Heaven peals out the trumpet of alarm.
Hark!  from yon murky cloud with lightning warm,
A voice of death proceeds! &mdash; The majesty
Of Heaven displays around its harrowing form!&mdash;
Hark!  God in all his power is riding by!
Heard ye his chariot-wheels sweep echoing through the sky?

He speaks!  scared nature trembles at the sound;
Earth, air, sky, ocean, dictate a reply;
The mountain-rock tolls out the voice profound,
And woodland echo multiplies the cry:&mdash;
Clashed with the night owl's scream, along the sky
Rolls the live thunder; through the forest caves,
Dim flashes the blue lightning; &mdash; eddying by
Leaps the swoll'n torrent, o'er the cataract raves
With brutal force, and headlong flings its billowy waves.

The night-breeze sails athwart the sky&mdash;the thunder
Has waked him from his sleep-the spirit hears
The daemon's call, and rudely rends asunder
The bonds of rest: upon the cloud he rears
His deathless might, and wrathfully careers
Round the black rocks,&mdash;dashes in vengeance down
Their craggy summits,&mdash;damps the toil of years
With one rude whirlwind&mdash;and, more ruthless grown,
Heaves up the ocean waves his giant strength to crown.

And now he sinks in softness, and anon
Rolls on the ear with desolating peal;&mdash;
Again the voice is silent.&mdash;Is it gone,
The darksome honors of the night to seal?
Forth peeps the moon; her watery beams reveal
The death that has been busy here;&mdash;again
The clouds sail round, as anxious to conceal
The sight of desolation, but in vain&mdash;
She walks in beauty forth, with all her starry train.
