Triumphant Time!  thy wayward course began
Ere young creation's bloom was fresh and new;
When to illume the heritage of Man
The light of Eden sparkled on the view;
When earth was fair, and every breeze that blew
Across her bosom murmured gently by,
Full-fraught with fragrance; ere the tempest flew
In fearful gloominess to veil the sky,
To shroud its beams and hide its golden dye.

Then Man was happy, innocent and young,
His hope unclouded as the heaven above;
Then angel woman to his bosom clung,
And wakened all her witchery of love:
She came from heaven like the Almighty dove,
To win his soul with seraph tenderness,
Her flowery bonds of bliss she interwove,
To bind his spirit in her fond caress,
And life was blessed, bright, and sorrowless.

Then, then, oh Time!  thy wing was waving light,
To fan the flowers that beautified thy way;
Then was existence teeming with delight,
And sparkling in a gay and glorious day;
Then was the spirit, in its mortal clay,
Breathing as with a pure celestial glow;
But sin and sorrow came in dread array,
To blight the buds and lay the blossoms low,
And earth became an heritage of woe.

Ah, mournful change!  that paradise, so fair,
So beautiful and fragrant in its bloom,
And glorious spring, and primal freshness &mdash; there
Came Melancholy in her shroud of gloom,
And Care to waste, to wither, and consume
The aching spirit in untimely blight:
Then bent the soul of Man beneath its doom,
When Innocence and Virtue took their flight
And left the world involved in Sorrow's night.

Yet still hath Man a ray of bliss on earth&mdash;
The garden of his life hath still a hue&mdash;
While shines his morning in its hour of mirth,
Cloudless awhile, and robed as yet in blue:&mdash;
That germ of paradise, so fair to view,
Is fond Affection's first and purest spring,
When each emotion of the heart is true,
Ere hope hath lost her buoyancy of wing,
Or the cold world hath brought its withering.

Oh, ever dear and hallowed be the hour
When angel Love descended on rosy wing,
To cull the blossoms in life's young May-bower,
And lull the anguish of Affliction's sting!
Oh, ever blessed be that holy spring
Whence flow the streams of love and faithfulness,
In purest waves of gentle murmuring,
Shedding a balm on every rude distress&mdash;
Fountains of bliss in the world's wilderness!

Oh, ever clear and hallowed be the hour!
Let youth enjoy it ere its sweets are fled;
Ere the dark storms of destiny shall lour
And break in rude commotion o'er the head;
When the fierce shaft of misery hath sped
Unto the breast, and griefs are gathering rife,
The memory of its blessings shall be shed,
A beam of gladness on the world of strife!
A rainbow on the shrouded sky of life!

Subduer Time!  Stern conqueror of all!
Avenger of the follies of mankind!
Pride, honor, power, and grandeur, own thy thrall,
And are by the to nothingness consigned!
But canst thou master the immortal mind?
There, all in vain, dost thou thy fury pour:
Its march is onward &mdash; free and unconfined&mdash;
Such as the Roman annals showed of yore,
And such as glorified the Grecian shore.

Oh, there was glory's consecrated clime,
Where Sappho breath'd, and where Anacreon sung,
Where genius nourished in the olden time,
And dwelt upon the Athenian's gifted tongue;
His, who the thunderbolts at Philip flung,
And urged his countrymen the fight to dare.
Where heaven itself a Homer's lyre had strung
With chord that echoed sweetly on the air,
As if the melody of heaven was there!

And there was Valour's spirit, proud and high,
Which shone resplendent on the cloud of war;
Where Mars himself poured forth his battle-cry
And lash'd the coursers to his blood-dyed car,
As shone the ray of conquest from afar,
The beacon of each hero, on whose eye
It beamed a guiding and a natal star,
Like Israel's fiery pillar, streaming high,
And blazing bright athwart the Egyptian sky!

There fell the Spartan &mdash; fearlessly he fell,
And smil'd in the red agony of death;
Yea, there was triumph in his battle-knell,
And victory in every ebb of breath;
Undying glory twined the laurel wreath
Bound the lone cypress that o'ershades the grave,
Memorial of the one who slept beneath,
Of him whose life blood pour'd forth like the wave&mdash;
The young, the proud, the generous, the brave!

Undying glory!  Man may pass away
Like the light bubble floating on the stream,
Like the expiring blossom of a day,
Or the frail dew-drop in the sunny beam:
Yes, short and transitory is his dream
Of youthful love, joy's evanescent hour,
Of hope's beguiling and bewitching theme;
But when the storms of fate and ages lower,
Glory defies and mocks their baleful power.

For this, all time hath hallowed the high name
Of Helle's chieftain, and of those who led
The bold ten thousand of immortal fame
Through slaughter's fields o'er heaps of Persian dead;
And of that brave Militades, who sped
Even as a lion from the forest lair,
To hasten where war's banner was outspread,
And waving like a silver cloud in air,
To try the bloody strife, to fight &mdash; to triumph there,

For this, the unfading light of glory smiles
On the blue Dardanelles, and on the bay
Where in their beauty spread Iona's isles,
Washed and enwreathed around by ocean's spray&mdash;
For this, eternal Summer sheds her ray
On high Parnassus, and that Helicon,
Where the Muse chanted her bewitching lay
In days of yore &mdash; that melody is gone,
And those loved bowers are desolate and lone.

Yes, here &mdash; oh, here the scythe of Time hath swept,
The torch of Time hath gone abroad to burn;
And here, for many an age, hath genius slept,
But not unhonoured, in the noiseless urn&mdash;
Still doth the eye, with kind expression turn
To that illustrious and all hallowed clime,
The light of former ages to discern,
When genius flourished in its lofty prime,
And the mind sprung triumphant over Time!

And thus it is:  kingdoms may fall in dust,
The coronals of empire may decay,
The sceptre perish, and the helmet rust,
And power and proud dominion pass away;
These are the transient baubles of a day:
But the mind glows in its immortal bloom,
And genius sheds an unextinguished ray
Upon life's scenes of dreariness and gloom,
Victorious over Time &mdash; victorious o'er the tomb!
