Farewell!  but not, I trust, a long farewell;
I fain would hope that we shall meet again:
But there is not a human tongue can tell,
Whether the wish may not be breath'd in vain.
If such it be, 'twere fruitless to complain;
We cannot alter fate's supreme behest,&mdash;
No; rather should we struggle to restrain
The feelings which will scarcely be repress'd,
And strive to lull the storm of misery to rest.

Thou goest forth into the wide, wide world,
Whilst I in calm obscurity remain;
Thy standard to the breezes is unfurl'd,
And gaily beats thy heart, untouch'd by pain.
Oh!  may'st thou never know the ungentle train
Of thoughts, which turn the cup of life to gall;
I've tasted them too oft, &mdash; and I would fain
Those days of cloudless happiness recal,
When I was wont to smile whatever might befal!

It may not be!  my dreary lot is fix'd,
Beyond the reach of earthly love or hate;
Yet is my cup of sorrow not unmix'd
With some bright feelings of a happier date;
I am not yet completely desolate;
Although my heart has lost its choicest treasure,
There still are thoughts which make my present state,
At intervals, almost approach to pleasure;
Though they are far, alas!  beneath its former measure.

But I am wandering from my theme; I meant
To dedicate an artless strain to thee;
But my own sorrows have become so blent
With every chord of my harp's minstrelsy,
That, whensoe'er I bid it warble free,
'Tis sure to breathe a melancholy tone;
Else should the lay which tells our parting, be
As soothing as the distant ocean's moan
Comes to the poet's ear, when worshipping alone.

And still, whate'er a wither'd heart may offer
Of kindest wishes for thy future weal&mdash;
'Tis mine in singleness of soul to proffer;
Believe me, 'tis not for the lack of zeal,
I cannot tell thee what I truly feel:
Language alone is wanting to express
The varied thoughts which o'er my bosom steal;
A mixture strange, of joy and gloominess&mdash;
Joy for thy future hopes &mdash; grief for my own distress.

Accept my warmest thanks for all that thou
Hast been to me, in days and years gone by;
The hour of parting is approaching now,
But not a tear-drop sparkles in mine eye;
No:  I will bid it ever thus be dry;
It is not meet that I should e'er repine
O'er the bright dawn of thy prosperity:
Adieu!  may every happiness be thine,
Whatever cares or ills in future may be mine!
