CANTO I.
Oh, 'tis most sweet to watch the setting sun
Throw his last glance upon the ocean's breast,
Then, like a trav'ller, when his journey's done,
He slowly sinks into the glowing west.
Now twilight deepens o'er the mountain's crest,
And the pale moon-beam glimmers on the wave,
The songsters of the grove are gone to rest,
And all around is silent as the grave,&mdash;
Save, now and then, the breeze in some lone mountain-cave.

This is the time, when, stealing from the crowd,
I love to muse upon the days gone by;
And, often, in my soul's serenest mood,
Methinks I see that mildly-beaming eye,
Whose very glance could soothe my agony,
And still the throbbings of my wayward heart:
But whither shall I now for comfort fly,
Since e'en the smiles which bade my grief depart,
Add but a deeper pang to its envenom'd smart?

Yes, gone for ever is that blessed dream;
Which used to cheer me in my loneliness;
And I now gaze on thee, as on a beam,
Lovely indeed, but which can never bless
My aching bosom with its loveliness.
Oh, why was it ordain'd, that man should owe
To woman's love his choicest happiness,
Which, though at intervals it may bestow
An hour of joy, will yet far oftener cherish woe.

Well, 'tis enough; thou never canst he mine,
And other thoughts must now my mind employ;
I will not vainly o'er my fate repine,
But meet it with a melancholy joy.
There is one hope which time can ne'er destroy,
Our surest refuge in this vale of tears;
And, though the world may frown and pleasure cloy,
Faith high amid' the storm her standard rears,
Dispels our rising doubts, and banishes our fears.

Surely, amid those desolated spires,
The splendid relics of the olden time,
The soul might well forget her vain desires,
And turn her thoughts to objects more sublime.
In vain ambition lures us on to climb,
And full as vain the syren pleasure calls;
We sink beneath the great destroyer, Time,
And man, with all his little greatness, falls
And moulders into dust like those forsaken walls.

Must I forget thee, then? &mdash; I'll not forget,
I doat on that luxuriance of sorrow,
Which, when the star of hope itself has set,
Can from despair a new existence borrow:
Sweeter, oh, sweeter far is such a morrow
Than life, in all its gaudiest hues array'd
And rather would I feed that pensive sorrow,
As a pure offering on love's altar laid,
Than aught that earthly joy has ever yet display'd!

Begone, ye fierce disturbers of my rest,&mdash;
Ye warring tempests of my troubled brain;
What, will ye haunt me with your cares unblest,
Even here in gloomy desolation's reign?
Let me a little while at peace remain;
Whilst, musing o'er the memory of the past,
I wake once more a melancholy strain;
And who can tell but it may be the last
That e'er my humble muse from her rude harp may cast.

And thou, majestic Ruin, whilst on thee
I look with awe-struck soul-subduing gaze,
I feel a deep and solemn witchery,
Such as belongs not unto thoughtless days:
And, as my solitary footstep strays
Within thy walls, I catch the hollow moan
Of the vast ocean, or the breeze that plays
Around thee, with its long low wailing tone,
As if a spirit mourn'd o'er sorrows not its own.

I love to stand beneath thy crumbling arch,
When day, with all its busy toils, hath fled;
Watching the pale moon on her stately march,
In silver majesty above my head:
Whilst all around her trembling beams are shed,
Making a fairy land of light and shade;
And then, methinks I see the buried dead
In all their ghostlike panoply array'd,
Rise up before my eyes to sudden view display'd.

All-powerful Fancy!  how thy magic wand
Can people nature with ideal things;
Thou hast a thousand realms at thy command,
And each of them a different tribute brings
To aid thee in thy ceaseless wanderings!&mdash;
Thou flittest like a dream from shore to shore,
And, aye upborne upon their silken wings,
Of airy phantoms an unbounded store,
Attends upon thy flight and will for evermore.

But whither do I roam?  Another theme&mdash;
A tale of no imaginary care&mdash;
Awaits me now; 'tis not a poet's dream,
As unsubstantial as the viewless air;
No, Albert, thou on earth too long didst bear
Thy load of misery; but thou art gone
Where the keen touch of anguish and despair
Can ne'er disturb thee more; yet, there is one
Still living, whom thy souls was wont to dwell upon.

Thou wert no son of pride, nor does thy name
Engrav'd in monumental marble stand;
But if a heart, as pure as ever came
From the Almighty's wonder-working hand,
Can aught of tribute from the muse demand,
Thy virtues shall not long remain unsung;
For even slander has not dared to brand
Thy spotless memory with her poisonous tongue,
Nor o'er thy deeds of light her fiendish covering flung.

Come hither, Pomp. &mdash; See'st thou yon humble stone,
Where the rude chisel scarce hath done its part,
To make the owner's birth and exit known?
Yet, 'neath that lowly stone there sleeps a heart
Which oft has borne affliction's direful smart,
And poverty itself without a sigh;
Let this a lesson unto thee impart,
Not always on thy riches to rely,
Since men like Albert can their utmost power defy.

His was a soul, form'd for a nobler sphere,
Enrich'd with ev'ry warm and melting thought;
And well his open glance and forehead clear
Bespoke a mind with purest feeling fraught.
Oh, how his dark and pensive eye would float
In heartfelt tears at human misery;
And aye the young enthutiast would doat
On nature in her wildest scenery,
Viewing her ev'ry charm with undissembled glee.

Yet, there was something in his look, that seem'd
At times so full of bitterness and woe,
That had you gaz'd on him, you would have deem'd
His heart had cherish'd long some inward foe,
Which prey'd upon his soul securely slow,
Till o'er the heyday of his years it cast
A sadness, which the young but seldom know,
Drying the springs of life, where'er it past,
And with'ring every flower like the hot desert-blast.

He was not form'd for mirth; &mdash; he could not bear
The boisterous laugh of festive revelry;
He found no kindred thoughts and feetings there,
And though his spirit was as wild and free
As aught beneath the ethereal canopy,
Yet would he never trespass on those laws,
Whose word, the fiat of divinity,
Man's grov'lling soul from earthly things withdraws,
And turns his thoughts on high to their great moving cause.

It was his chief delight to steal away
In the grey twilight, or the silent dawn,
As if he sicken'd at the face of day;
And he would stand and gaze for hours upon
The rolling billows, whose unceasing tone
Came like a dream of sadness o'er his mind,&mdash;
Thinking the while on that beloved one,
Whose image was around his heart-strings twin'd,
And tasting in that thought a pleasure how refin'd!

'Tis true, he ne'er had breath'd his vows to her,
The goddess of his fond idolatry;
But if a glance may be love's messenger,
As most believe it can, &mdash; how fervently
His eyes did homage to her!  You might see
The flush of passion on his boyish cheek,
And he in that could plead more tenderly
The love which he in language durst not speak,
As if he found that words were passionless and weak.

There is a feeling most divinely sweet 
In the first gush of youthful tenderness,
When the eye turns with rapturous joy to meet
The one lov'd being.  Oh, who could repress
That overflowing tide of happiness!
Alas, why should we hasten its decay?
For soon the lightest bosom must confess
That earthly pleasure is but for a day,
And like a meteor-fire will quickly pass away.

Yes, all the hopes which we so fondly deem'd
In our youth's wanderings, would last for ever,
One after one forsake us, &mdash; all that seem'd
Most fair and sinless on life's fleeting river,
Has vanish'd in our course; and we shall never
Again partake those visions of delight
Which the all-wise and ever-bounteous Giver
Has caus'd to shine so gloriously and bright,
In the first dawn of life to cheer our onward flight.

Yet still, 'tis sweet at times to dwell upon
The cherish'd visions of our earlier years,
Musing on many a lov'd and loving one,
Whose image through the lapse of time, appears
More beauteous still.  Oh, those are grateful tears,
And scarcely mix'd with sorrow, which the eye
Sheds o'er the memory of our hopes and fears;
When, disappointment with its gloomy dye,
Had strove not yet to stain life's virgin purity.

Oh, Love!  thou art a strange mysterious thing,
As full of changes as an April day;&mdash;
Now, like a native Eden blossoming,
And strewing flow'rets in the wanderer's way,
Till thou hast conquer'd him beneath thy sway:
Anon, thou bid'st a different prospect rise,
Where furious jealousy and black dismay
Unveil their gorgon terrors to his eyes,
And view with stern delight his added miseries.

But Albert, though he knelt before thy shrine,
Had mourn'd not yet thy darker influence;
He felt a something he could scarce define,&mdash;
A silent burst of rapturous eloquence,
Appealing unto ev'ry finer sense,
With most enchanting and resistless power,
As flowers unseen their hidden sweets dispense
From many a thorny brake or woodland bower
Filling the air with balm at envening's dewy hour.

He lov'd with all that pure romantic feeling,
That mute and overwhelming ecstacy,
Which, like unto a heavenly revealing,
Enchains the spirit with its witchery,
And scarcely leaves a thought at liberty.
His, though a bright, was not a transient flame;
It flourish'd e'en in nature's agony;
And when the last decisive struggle came,
His soul was breath'd to heaven in blessings on her name.

And she was worthy of his love; her mind
Was stor'd with ev'ry soft becoming grace;
Meek, noble, unassuming and refin'd,
Just such an one as poets love to trace
In moonlight musings by some lonely place,
Where high-born beauty dwelt, in days of yore;
Whilst fancy pictures many a beauteous face,
Whose reign of loveliness has long been o'er,
And whose once cherish'd name worshipp'd now no more.

Thus have I often spent an idle hour
Dear Mulgrave!  in thy solitary pile:
And as I gaz'd on each majestic tower,
Which ev'n in desolation seem'd to smile,&mdash;
Thoughts of thine ancient grandeur would beguile
My spirit, through the live-long summer's eve.
Oh, 'tis most pleasing, though but for awhile,
The world and all its vanities to leave,
And from thy moss-grown walls a nobler joy receive.

There is a still small voice in ev'ry stone,
Which speaks a thousand volumes.  Who can look
On thy decaying beauty, and alone,
As I have done, &mdash; nor feel his vain hopes shook?
Here we may read in times unerring book,
The fragile tenure of our earthly fame;
And though the proud, perchance, may little brook
So stern a lesson, yet they cannot blame
The better-judging few who own its solemn claim.

Where are the mighty chieftains, who of old,
In all the pomp and pride of chivalry,
With waving plumes and armour streak'd with gold,
Match'd forth in almost kingly dignity,
Follow'd by all their vassal company,
Whose gorgeous banners floating on the breeze,
Spread o'er them, like a shadowing canopy&mdash;
Whilst hasting on some adverse fort to seize,
Or in the tourney strive their lady-loves to please?

Where is the speaking eye, &mdash; the soul of fire?
Where are the young, the noble, and the brave?
Oh, for a sweep of Byron's matchless lyre,
To bid one deathless laurel o'er them wave!
But no; they sleep, each in his lonely grave,
Unwept, unsung by the immortal muse;
And higher powers than mine the task would crave,
Their combats and their vic'tries to diffuse;&mdash;
Such themes as these my harp must evermore refuse.

Not unto me belongs the magic power,
To seize, to quicken, and to melt the soul;
Alas, I cannot boast so rich a dower!
Yet busy fancy sometimes will unroll,
When free from reason's stern, severe control,
Visions of fame unto my soaring mind;
And I have quaff'd imagination's bowl,
Till scarce a drop of sweetness could I find;&mdash;
Tasteless or bitter dregs alone were left behind.

My harp is but a rude one; yet 'twould be
More worthless still, if it refus'd to pay
The heartfelt tribute which I owe to thee,
Immortal BYRON! &mdash; Years may pass away,
And time may strew these youthful locks with grey;
But never can I then forget to feel
The witching influence of thine earlier lay,
Which, like a talisman, was wont to steal
Into my inmost heart, its hidden wounds to heal.

Thou standest on the pinnacle of fame,
Join'd with the mightiest bards of other days
Down to remotest ages shall thy name
Be wafted by thine own unequall'd lays.
Fruitless indeed would be the attempt to praise
The beauties which to ev'ry heart are known;
Thou need'st no puny scribbler's aid to raise
Yet higher, the flame of glory thou hast shown&mdash;
The toil and the reward alike are all thine own.

Now to my tale: &mdash; 'Twas an autumnal eve,
And the blue sea was sparkling 'neath the blaze
Of the departing sun, who seem'd to leave
Its waves reluctantly, as if his rays,
Had hung enamour'd o'er that lovely place.
In truth, it was a most enchanting scene,
And nature seldom to the eye displays
Such finished loveliness, or well I ween,
More scanty would be they who leave her charms unseen.

But Albert was not one who long could view
A scene like this, nor feel that magic thrill,
Which none but an enthusiast ever knew:
He gaz'd awhile absorb'd in thought, until
The fountains of his tears began to fill
With the pure gushings of that hidden love
Which he had cherish'd long, and which was still
To him a beam of radiance from above,
Which nought of earthly change might ever dare remove.

Meantime the waves, which but awhile ago
Had scarcely seem'd to reach the pebbly shore,
Began to rear their foamy heads, as though
'Twas time their transient slumber should be o'er:
The breeze too, which so gentle seem'd before,
That it might kiss e'en beauty's blushing cheek,
Mingled its walling with the ocean's roar,
And stirr'd it into rage, as if to speak
Unto vain-glorious man how poor he is and weak.

There was a little bark upon the wave,
Which late had floated on with streamers gay;
But when the angry surge began to rave,
Bore on before the breeze her backward way,
To seek the sheltering covert of the bay;
And now her keel has almost reach'd the strand,
When lo, the angry breeze asserts its sway,
And, touch'd as 'twere by an enchanter's wand,
She sinks into the deep beneath its dreadful hand.

One glance &mdash; one hurried glance &mdash; young Albert gave;
'Twas but a moment ere he gain'd the shore.
Another saw him plunge into the wave&mdash;
Breathless with haste, and from its deaf'ning roar,
A lifeless female in his arms he bore:
'Twas she, &mdash; the one whom he had lov'd so well,
In bitterness and grief; but now she wore
Death's pallid livery, and her bosom's swell
Heav'd not, as if the soul had left its earthly cell.

And there she lay, reclin'd upon his breast,
Cold as a statue, pale and motionless;
Whilst he, with grief that would not be repress'd,
Hung o'er that form of passing loveliness,
And strain'd it to him with a wild caress:
"Oh, blessed spirit!  none can blame me now,
That I indulge in life's last wretchedness;
Let me once more imprint that marble brow
With love's own hallow'd kiss, ere I be cold as thou!"

Again he madly clasp'd her to his heart,
With all a lover's frantic agony,
As if he never could endure to part
With that bright relic of mortality!
'Tis few indeed, who know the misery,
The sinking misery of such an hour,
When hope seems gone for ever, and the eye
Is tearless, and refuses still to pour
From out its hidden stores the soul-reviving shower.

I would not taste of that heart-rending woe
Which knows no pause &mdash; no, interval of rest,
For all the pleasures that the world can show,
Yet such was Albert's feeling, as he prest
His hapless beauty closer to his breast.&mdash;
But soft, &mdash; what means that wild convulsive throe?
And that deep sigh, half breath'd and half suppress'd?
She lives!  she lives!  fond youth, and thou may'st know
A gleam of pleasure yet whilst wand'ring here below!

She rais'd her head, and faintly strove to speak
Her endless gratitude for all his care;
And though her voice was tremulous and weak,
His ear has caught each word that linger'd there!
"Lady," he said, "I could have joy'd to share
With thee in life or death; and now, thank Heaven,
Thou liv'st; but as for me, I cannot bear
To see my fond imaginations riven,
And those angelic charms unto another given."

All this was calmly spoke; but you might see
In his fix'd eye and bloodless countenance,
A token of that inward agony,
Which his proud spirit felt; the fever trance
Of his young heart was o'er, and that sweet glance,
Which us'd to beam so bright from his dark eye,
Was chang'd beyond all power of utterance;
And 'stead of it, the gazer might espy
A never-varying look of stern despondency.

And yet he had not quite forgot to feel;
For, when he gaz'd upon that pallid face,
'Spite of himself, a melting tear would steal
Adown his cheek, the last, the holiest trace
Of that bright flame, vhich nought could e'er efface.
They gain'd her father's door, and then the spell
Seem'd broken, for he snatch'd a fond embrace:
"Pardon me, 'tis the last!  words cannot tell
How warmly I have lov'd &mdash; and now, for aye, farewell!"

"He knew not that I lov'd him;" fondly cried
The maiden as he vanish'd from her sight;
"His faith has been, indeed, severely tried;
And now when it would be my chief delight,
His deep and warm devotion to requite,
He leaves me, and, alas, my boding fears
Whisper &mdash; for ever!  oh, there is a weight
Upon my soul, which finds no vent in tears,
But each succeeding day more comfortless appears."

Such was their parting; and I here must end
The first part of my tale; but if the breeze
Shall briskly blow, and prosp'rous gales attend,
Once more my rudely-breathing harp I'll seize,
And strive to 'wake a nobler strain to please
The indulgent few who list' my humble lays:
Meanwhile, I well may boast of rhymes like these,
If Psyche does but condescend to raise
My weak and wavering hopes by her enliv'ning praise.

Oh thou, my first, my last, my only love!
Though thou may'st ne'er bestow a thought on me,
Yet still I feel that I shall ever prove
A passionate attachment unto thee.
Alas!  the tale of Albert's misery
Has been too true a counterpart of mine;
I've struggled oft to set my spirit free,
But aye, the bloodless victory was thine,
And I have found thy chains still closer round me twine.

CANTO II.
The moon is beaming from a cloudless sky,
Upon the slumb'ring ocean's broad expanse;
Whilst many a sound of mirth and minstrelsy,
Echoes above the waters as they dance
Beneath the queen of heaven's majestic glance.
How beautiful yon vessel seems to lie,
In motionless repose; and yet, perchance,
A few short hours, and wintry storms may fly
Across the scene, and mar its calm tranquillity.

Such is the heart of man; awhile it sleeps,
Like the smooth surface of a breezeless sea,
Till passion, like a raging whirlwind, sweeps,
And wakes the latent storm of misery.
E'en 'midst the blithe and mirthful company
That crowds yon vessel's deck, there standeth one
Who seems to sicken at their melody,
As if his spirit loath'd its lively tone,
And rather would be left to languish all alone.

'Tis Albert; he hath climb'd that vessel's side,
A weary wanderer from his native land
Fix'd in his mind, whatever ills betide
His reckless footsteps on a foreign strand,
Though he should sink beneath the wasting hand
Of slow disease, or pestilence more dire,
Though poverty, vice, scorn, a hideous band,
Should all assail him with resistless ire,&mdash;
Never again to see old Albion's cliffs aspire.

And now he takes a last departing view
Of the fair valleys of his native isle,
And sees, from far, its hills and mountains blue
Fade off into the darkness; whilst a smile
Of bitterness sat on his face the while,
Marking the warring thoughts that rag'd within.
But there is one bright thought which can beguile
The wanderer, and his gloomy spirit win
From brooding o'er the world of wretchedness and sin:

Ay, when he thought of many a boyish year,
And the lov'd playmates of his infancy,
His heart was conquer'd, and a silent tear
Fell from his eyelids to their memory:
He seiz'd a lute and wak'd its harmony,
And as his fingers, with a master's hand,
Swept o'er the chords, he breath'd a melody
Of soothing softness, whilst at his command
The lute responsive sent its echoes to the land.

The moon which late unclouded,
Shone in the midnight sky,
Hath now her lustre shrouded
Like a thing that passeth by;
And darkness dimly covers
The ocean and the shore,
Whilst many a black cloud hovers
On the path she travell'd o'er.
So hath my beam of gladness
Forsaken me below,
And a deep and wasting sadness
Is my dreary portion now:

Oh, that I ne'er had tasted
Of passion's witching power,
Which my fond heart hath wasted
As the mildew blights the flower.
Then had my hopes been springing,
With youth's gay verdure crown'd,
And each day would be flinging
A new fragrance all around.
But ah!  the touch of anguish
Hath seared my 'wilder'd brain,
And I am left to languish
In misery and in pain.

Yet still I must adore thee,
And own thy soft control,
For thine image still comes o'er me,
Lovely ruler of my soul!
And though all else should perish
Of beautiful or fair,
I'll ne'er forget to cherish
Thine angelic semblance there.
Nor shall it cease to blossom
Till life itself be gone,
But deep within my bosom,
It shall live and reign alone.

What, though the mighty ocean
May roll 'twixt thee and me,
In spite of its commotion,
I will think of nought but thee!
And when I wander sadly
Upon a foreign shore,
My thoughts will turn, how gladly,
To the maid whom I adore:&mdash;
'Twill soothe my hour of sorrow,
To think that thou art blest,&mdash;
And from that thought I'll borrow
A new talisman of rest!

Breathes there a soul that ne'er hath tasted love,
But like an icicle, unthaw'd remains?
Why, let him boast of what I ne'er shall prove,
I envy not his pleasures nor his pains:
No, rather would I hug the heaviest chains
That passion e'er hath forg'd to bind the heart,
Than share the cold indifference that reigns
With those who ne'er have felt the pleasing smart,
Which love, and love alone, is gifted to impart.

I ask not riches; &mdash; no, let others take
The sparkling dross; I care not for its charms
Were India's wealth mine own, I'd freely stake
The prize, to win my Psyche to my arms.
Oh, dearer far 'midst trouble and alarms,
Art thou to me, than all the world besides;
And even now a thrill of rapture warms
My bosom, as thy gentle image glides
Before my mental eye, and in my heart abides.

Talk not to me of low ambition's power;
What is the kingly sceptre, but a toy?
A vain and empty bauble of an hour,
Which he who wields it never can enjoy.
I'd rather be the meanest shepherd-boy,
That wanders lonely on his native hills,
Whose peace of mind no racking cares destroy&mdash;
Content with nature's bounty, meads, and rills,
Than he whose potent name a mighty nation fills.

Yes, 'tis a happy lot to range at will,
Unshackled by the forms of pomp or pride,
By the smooth river, or the wood-crown'd hill,
And taste the varied charms diversified,
Which the great Architect has spread so wide
O'er all his works, &mdash; in earth, or sea, or sky:
Or, standing by the foamy oceans side,
To watch the rainbow, ere it passeth by,
Marking the low'ring heavens with many a mingled dye.

Scenes of my childhood!  how I love to rove
Amidst your untamed beauties:  to my eyes
Not half so pleasing does the proud alcove,
In all its artificial grandeur, rise.
Let me have nature in her rudest guise,&mdash;
Rocks, trees, and mountain-torrents wildly roaring;
'Tis then the mind is lifted to the skies,
And, from creation to its Maker soaring,
Views all his wondrous works, their mysteries exploring.

Nature!  I love thee, whether thou appear'st
Clad in thy winter livery, or crown'd
With summer's glowing charms, thine head thou rear'st;
Whilst hills and valleys echo to the sound
Of woodland music, breathing all around,
And faintly borne upon the zephyr's wing,
From the lone hamlet's cultivated ground,
A thousand rich perfumes their odours fling,
And each fair herb, or flower, is sweetly blossoming.

Oh, who would spend the spring-time of his life,
Within the noxious city's crowded walls?
Condemn'd to listen to the eternal strife
Of idle wretches, or the ceaseless bawls
Of busy commerce, till each rumour palls
Upon his ear with its monotony&mdash;
And heartless apathy at length enthralls
The guileless feelings, that could ne'er deny
E'en the scarce whisper'd claims of sensibility.

Almighty Father!  grant it to my prayer,
My fervent, heartfelt orisons to thee,
That I may never, never cease to share,
The pure delights of sensibility.
For though my lot in life has order'd me
To enroll myself amongst the bustling train
Of worldly denizens, I still must be
A stupid votary; for we strive in vain
To bind the thoughts with aught but an ethereal chain.

'Tis true, the heartless worldling cannot know
The cares and sorrows which to me are given;
But rather would I taste of unmix'd woe,
Than mar my spirit with his earthly leaven:
Who would exchange the eternal bliss of heaven
For the dim, vain, and fleeting things of earth?
Alas, those boasted joys are quickly riven,
And youth's gay laugh, and age's glance of mirth,
Must fade away like that from which they take their birth.

And such were Albert's thoughts, though grief was preying
Upon his vitals like the canker-worm,
And not a ray of hope, itself displaying,
Shed e'en a glimpse of brightness through the storm:
Yet, still, that ne'er-to-be-forgotten form,
He cherish'd as his dearest earthly treasure:
Would he have chang'd those feelings pure and warm,
The impassion'd tenderness that knows no measure,
For all the world can give of happiness or pleasure?

He would not: &mdash; though alone and desolate,
With many a sorrow rankling in his breast,
That feeling still was his; the hand of fate
Which robb'd him of the joys he once possess'd,
Had left him this, the loveliest and the best;&mdash;
The last fair relic of his youthful flow'rs;
And he, perchance, might quaff with purer zest,
Of all those thrilling witcheries which it pours
Into the soul, than he had done in happier hours.

There was a fixed expression in his fate,
Of firm, determin'd anguish; but the glow
Of youth was not yet gone, and you might trace
In those still features, and that pallid brow,
The wreck of former happiness:  but now
No lingering ray of pleasure seem'd to hover,
And not a gleam of bliss was seen to throw
Its soothing radiance o'er the hapless lover;
A waste of cheerless gloom was all you could discover.

He stood upon the vessel's deck, and gaz'd
Upon the sun which now began to rise,
Like beauty, from his eastern couch, and rais'd
His head in crimson glory to the skies;
A signal for creation's harmonies
To rouse them from their slumbers, and salute
His glorious orb with all their symphonies:
But Albert heard them not, for all was mute
Upon the ocean's breast, save the rude sea-boy's flute.

And, as he look'd upon the unruffled sea,
Which, like a golden mirror, seem'd to shine,
He thought of those unclouded days, when he
Was wont by its smooth margin to recline,
And all his mind to fancy's power resign&mdash;
Tasting the melting luxury that springs
From pictur'd scenes of happiness divine,
When, wrapt amid' those bright imaginings,
The soul forgets, awhile, to think of earthly things.

But those day-dreams were over, and he felt
That life had not a joy which he could share;
The rude hand of adversity had dealt
But harshly with him, and he knew not where
To seek a place of refuge from despair.
Alas!  the child of fortune cannot tell
Half of the sufferings he is doom'd to bear,
Who, close confin'd in stern misfortune's cell,
Hath tasted all her woes and griefs unspeakable.

Five days had Albert watch'd the dark blue sea
Sparkle beneath the glorious orb of day;
But on the sixth, no longer could he see
Its cheering radiance all around him play;
Confin'd within his humble couch he lay,
The hapless victim of a fell disease;
To every melancholy thought a prey,
Seeking in vain an interval of ease,
With not a friendly hand to soothe his agonies.

The hand of death was o'er him; care and grief
Had conquer'd him at last, and he foresaw
That his lone pilgrimage must now be brief,
In this abode of wretchedness and woe:
Yet, even then, when every passing throe
Seem'd fraught with death, he thought of her alone,
Who still had been his guiding star below,
And whose unfading lustre aye had shone
More brightly o'er his head, when hope itself was gone.

And then he drew a jewel from his breast,
Which bore within a lock of auburn hair;
And wildly to his burning lips he press'd
That treasur'd relic of his dearest care;
Then, with uplifted eyes, he breath'd a prayer
For her, the object of his fondest love,
With such a fervent and impassion'd air,
That the rude sailors' hearts began to move&mdash;
And many a kindly wish was breath'd for him above.

Methinks, I said, but now, he had no friend
To soothe his dying hours with pious zeal&mdash;
No sympathizing being to attend
His last, sad moments, who could truly feel
For the deep sorrows which he could not heal;
But there was one amid' that boist'rous crew,
Oblig'd, by adverse fortune, to conceal
The gentler feelings which his spirit knew,
Within his silent breast from every human view.

He was a widow'd mother's only child;
And she had sent him forth with many a sigh;
For unto her he still was kind and mild,
Though in his countenance you might descry
Exalted thoughts and aspirations high,
Floating in quick succession o'er his brain;
But since he roam'd beneath a foreign sky,
He sought those buoyant feelings to restrain,
Lest he should wake the mirth of the untutor'd train.

Yet, with his utmost care, he could not win
The love of those who shar'd his weary lot;
For spite of him the flame that burnt within,
Though buried deep, could not be quite forgot;
They deem'd him haughty, and they lov'd him not;
And he had liv'd a solitary thing,
Till Albert came; but then the Gordian knot
Was loosen'd, and his hopes began to spring&mdash;
With newer verdure crown'd more gaily blossoming.

They were two youthful beings, left alone
Upon the ocean, there was not another
With whom their hearts could beat in unison;
No wonder, therefore, that they lov'd each other,
With all the fond affection of a brother:
For each had found a friend with whom to share
The griefs which he had been compell'd to smother;
And when poor Albert yielded to despair,
The youth had watch'd his couch with more than friendly care.

And Albert, when he found that death was near,
Gave him a letter for the maid he lov'd;
The youth receiv'd it with a silent tear,
A tear which angels would not have reprov'd:&mdash;
He told her how her beauty first had mov'd
His heart, but that he still had kept repress'd
The passion which could never be remov'd,
Till &mdash; but he had no need to speak the rest,
She knew it all too well, 'twas fate's supreme behest.

And, to conclude, he said, that long ere she
Receiv'd this token of his dying flame,
His disembodied soul would wander free,
Beyond the reach of worldly fear or shame&mdash;
That he had nothing but himself to blame,
For all his hours of suff'ring and of pain;
But that, perchance, he would have done the same
If he might live those moments o'er again,
And then he pray'd that she might never love in vain.

Such were his parting words, his parting prayer;
For when he saw that he must shortly die,
He begg'd the pitying crew his couch to bear
Upon the deck, that he, once more, might spy
The beauties of the ocean, and the sky,
Ere yet his spirit bade a last adieu
To all of earthly power or majesty,
And other scenes were op'ning to his view,
More full of real bliss, more lasting, and, more true.

They plac'd him gently down, whilst on his cheek
The mid-day sun shone with a glance of flame;
His eyes were sunken, and his voice was weak,
And a convulsive tremor o'er him came,
Which agonized his worn exhausted frame
One indistinct, low murmur they could hear,
Which seem'd to syllable his Mary's name;
As if, e'en then, she still was most, most dear,&mdash;
They listen'd; but the soul, had left its earthly sphere!

Yes, it had left this world of grief and woes,
To seek a more congenial dwelling-place;
And there he lay, in beautiful repose,
With that angelic smile upon his face,
Which even death itself could not efface.
And where is the enthusiast's lonely grave?
Alas, you strive in vain the spot to trace;
He sleeps beneath the ocean's roaring wave,
Whilst o'er his mould'ring bones the unheeded storm may rave.

His faithful friend had watch'd his cold remains,
Till they were plung'd into the sullen deep&mdash;
Far, far beyond the reach of mortal pains,
Till the great judgment day in peace to sleep.
And inly he had mourn'd, yet could not weep;
But when the current of his grief was o'er,
And reason had begun once more to keep
The wonted channel which she held before,
He breath'd a pensive strain his sorrows to deplore.

For, in his better days, he us'd to woo
The melancholy muse; and she had thrown
A shade of sadness o'er his youthful brow,
Which suited well with features that had grown
More sad than gayer bosoms love to own.
As for himself, he heeded not the scorn
Of the world's minions, one pure heart alone
Had shar'd his love; and when that stay was torn
From him, all other ills he could have tamely borne.

Not oft, of late, had he awak'd the chords
Of his neglected lyre; his heartfelt woe
Was long ere it could find a vent in words;
But when, at length, his tears began to flow
More freely, and his heart had ceas'd to know
The tearless agony of unmix'd pain,
He touch'd the strings once more, and bade them throw
A note of lamentation o'er the main;
And these were the wild words which form'd his pensive strain:&mdash;

The zephyr's sigh
Is passing by,
The cloudless heavens above are glowing;
Whilst o'er the seas,
The gentle breeze
Full many a rich perfume is blowing:
And all creation seems to raise
A note of rapture and of praise;
All, but this wretched heart of mine,
Which still is destin'd to repine.

Far, far from home,
'Twas mine to roam,
When scarce my boyish days were over;
Without a friend,
With whom to blend
The anguish which I could not cover:
And when that boon, so long denied,
Was given, and I was satisfied,
It was but granted for a day,&mdash;
Just seen, and then to pass away.

He was a light,
Too pure and bright,
To linger in this world of sadness;
Yet when the thought
To me is brought,
It almost turns my brain to madness:
For he was all, &mdash; nay more to me
Than aught I e'er again shall see;
A soul of more transcendent worth
Has ne'er adorn'd this spot of earth.

But he is gone,
And there is one.
To whom I bear a mournful token;
A messenger,
That opes to her,
The noblest heart that e'er hath broken!
And when that heavy task is o'er,
I'll think of earthly things no more;
My ev'ry thought still then be given
To Albert and the joys of heaven.

Smooth was the sea, and gentle was the breeze,
He bore the token to Old Albion's shore:
But who can paint the agonies that seize
That hapless damsel as she conn'd it o'er?
Breathless she falls, as if to rise no more;
And, though her spirit quickly came again,
Reason was gone for aye; nought could restore
Her consciousness of pleasure or of pain,&mdash;
'Twas madness that had seiz'd upon her burning brain!

Better that she had died, for now she strays
A wild, heart-broken maniac; her pale cheek
Has lost its wonted hue, and though some rays
Of meek intelligence, at times, may break
From her dark hazel eye, in vain you seek
To rouse the latent spark of consciousness.
Ill-fated maid!  I cannot, will not speak
Of all thy sorrows, and thy deep distress;&mdash;
Oh, may'st thou quickly leave this world of wretchedness!

Our mournful tale is ended; yet, in truth,
Though sad, I linger o'er it with regret
For unto me the joyous days of youth
Have been with many a care and grief beset;
And oh, how often has my eye been wet
With bitter tears, unbroken by a smile.
'Twas then, when ev'ry ray of joy was set,
The tale of Albert's suff'rings could beguile
My heart, and make it lose its sorrows for awhile.

Again my wand'ring lay returns to thee,
Dear inmate of my bosom's deepest core!
Again, before thy shrine I bow the knee,
And like an humble suppliant adore.
My melancholy dream will soon be o'er,
And I shall sleep within the quiet tomb;
Nor would my weary soul its fate deplore,
But turn with joy to meet its welcome doom;
For mine has been a life of solitude and gloom.

Farewell, sweet vision!  I have lov'd thee well;
Perchance the more that I have lov'd in vain:
And now it needs no prophet's tongue to tell
The close of all my anguish and my pain.
Farewell: &mdash; a word I ne'er shall speak again
To thee:  may ev'ry happiness be thine!
Thy name shall hallow my departing strain;
And when my mounting spirit shall resign
All earthly things beside, that name shall still be mine!
