There rolls no wave of all the blue Aegean,
But murmurs glory to the sacred shore,
Recalling when the loud triumphal paean
Was heard the Salaminian waters o'er;
When the delivered ocean proudly bore
The victor fleet in glad disorder on;
Each patriot gazing on his land once more,
Free, by the flight so newly lost and won,
Her race of science, fame, peace, liberty to run.

Tears, big tears, filled in many a manly eye,
Such tears as consecrate the warrior's bay,
While the delivering Navy gallantly
Swept on, magnificent in disarray,
Scarred with the dints of battle: &mdash; Glad and gay
They rode the waves by them immortal made;
With ploughs of victory furrowing the bright spray
To be thence forth with Glory's harvest spread,
Whose amaranthine sheaves each brow in fancy braid.

It was a sight to warm the slave's heart-core,
To see the Fleet of Freedom onward come;
To note the proud strokes of the meanest oar
That sped the victors of the Orient home;
To watch, by fits, along the sun-lit foam,
Shield, helm and corslet flashing fast and far&mdash;
While, ere he left the rich West's golden dome,
The Day-god checked awhile his sinking car,
And breathed the steeds of light to hail the finished war.

Moments, replete with glorifying thought!
Ye in yourselves condensed the life of years;&mdash;
Born of past triumph, and with future fraught&mdash;
Kindling an iris o'er departed tears,
And scattering in bright hope the cloudy fears,
Which veiled thy thunder-peaks, Futurity!
Light they disperse, as breaks and disappears
The mountain-mist, when Day's first fire-shafts flee
Wide o'er the joyous earth and the tumultuous sea.

No head was there by conscious fame unraised,
No eye but lightened with unwonted fire,
As on the crowded strand the conquerors gazed,
Musing on home and wife, friend, child, or sire,
Perchance some Grecian loved one:&mdash; Could she tire
Of that day's lofty tale?  Would not her hand
Awake, ere night, her long-neglected lyre,
Blending his name with the undying band,
Whose swords were drawn to fence the daughters of their land?

All caught the glad contagion; &mdash; even the pale
And wounded warrior raised his drooping head,
When louder, as they drew more nigh, the gale
His country's welcome to his faint ear sped.
But there was One who, though no tear he shed,
Nor spoke of rapture, seemed, while calm his tone
And mien, to claim among the deathless dead&mdash;
Gods of the Past &mdash; the wreath their swords had mown,
Which made their dust a Spring, and yet might green his own.

There was he seen, his lined and lofty brow
Turned for a moment towards his rescued land;
Then sunk, as if he watched the waves below,
Their hues, their number, and their changes scanned&mdash;
He saw them not, nor heard the plausive band
Of rival chiefs, before him proudly ranged,
Who felt, but owned not, that the brow, which planned
The hour of rights retrieved and wrongs avenged,
Bore the first palm of realms, whose fates his mind had changed.

Long as grey Aetna's cliffs the thunder brave,
And clouds and eagles round Parnassus soar;
Long as Cephisus' and Eurotas' wave
Mourn for the men, the days, the deeds of yore;
Long as one column marks the glorious shore,
Or one lone flower waves in green Tempe's breeze;
So long thy shade shall float those waters o'er,
Thy name be voiced along thy native seas,
Athenae's pride and shame &mdash; famed, fallen Themistocles!

Napoleon of the East!  like him the first
Among the foremost, while in Freedom's name
Thou led'st the van of battle &mdash; like him nurst
Upon the lap of Glory &mdash; wherefore shame
The breast that fed thee?  and the cause disclaim,
Which gave such lustre to thine early sword?
Was it for souls like thine to sink their fame
Among the satraps of a despot lord,
And pile with traitorous pomp a parasite's vile board?

Thy morn was bright with Freedom &mdash; wherefore spend
Thine eve of life in league with Tyranny?
May not the river, where its wanderings end,
Pure as the young waves of its fountain be,
And mix unsullied with eternity?
I know not; but the tongue of all time gone
Proclaims, if Man be blest, if Earth be free,
Not by Ambition must the deed be done
Which still for some vain gaud will leave the goal unwon.

Frail gains!  even there Ambition's high pulse fell,
Even then a cloud obscured that noble brow,
As glancing back o'er the deep's star-dropped swell,
His eye surveyed the grandly mournful show
Of Asian ships and captives: &mdash; Greek hands row
The torn imperial galleys! &mdash; Did the sight
Remind the conqueror how Fate sways below
To cypress and the laurel? &mdash; Be what might
The shade, it came &mdash; it passed &mdash; his eye as wont grew bright.

Yet well such scene might prompt the gazer's breast,
How Time and Change the rule of man disown,
And bid the victor vail his stately crest
At iron Destiny's imperious throne:
Late on those decks the Median plumes had flown,
Anticipating victory &mdash; now they bare
In bonds their vanquished lords, while many a moan
Of bleeding Persians, faintly heard, declare
How dark to them the eve, in Grecian eyes so fair.

There were they throng'd, the satrap and the slave,
Forgot their bondage, and extinct their pride;
Following, not sharing, o'er the glittering wave,
The triumph of the foes so oft decried,
The slander'd sons of freedom:  Some belied
Grief, by all felt not, struggling to control
Thoughts of the fair babe, and the fairer bride,
Left where thy kingly waves, Choaspes, roll&mdash;
Sweet waves!  all wormwood now to this fond exile's soul.

Oh thou spoil'd minion of barbaric power,&mdash;
Degenerate Asiarch!  could thine eye behold
The thoughts of one such breast in such an hour,
Haply thine heart, by royalty made cold,
Would own one generous weakness: &mdash; Wherefore roll'd
This tide of wreck on Europe, but to swell
Thy vanity of sway?  The young, the bold,
The free, the beautiful, the glorious fell,
Because weak Xerxes loved a Grecian crown too well.

The tiger and the serpent, do they roam
To slake their blood-thirst with the waste of life?
Seek they in wantonness the peaceful home,
Or court, undared, the desolating strife?
In the deep forest, with night-umbrage rife,
They fix their dread and solitary lair;
The orphan'd infant, and the widow'd wife,
Seldom the wreck their fangs have wrought declare,
Or wail the fatal rage of venomous despair.

Unlike the tyrant!  his far-sceptred hand
Grasps at supreme dominion; and for this
War calls its locusts up to waste the land,
Which violation only can make his,
Woe, woe to those who seek their baleful bliss
In wringing tears, blood, curses, from their kind!
Who, to revenge the happiness they miss,
Enthral the body and degrade the mind,
And with a wrong'd world's sighs load the lamenting wind!

But ye, the men, who with their strength have striven,
What wreath for you shall Liberty entwine?
Your names will glow like stars along the heaven,
Instinct with immortality; the line
Of tuneful spirits will your deeds enshrine
In lays that live for ever:  while forgot&mdash;
Or worse, recorded and accursed &mdash; shall pine
The tyrant's memory, yours will haunt each spot,
On which to win or die was once your glorious lot.

The men of Marathon are gone; but yet
Their trophies light the unforgotten plain:
The sun that look'd on Salamis is set;
But who dare say its warriors lived in vain?
Greece, when she casts off her ignoble chain,
Will call their spirits from the sacred wave,
And turn to conquer on the same bright main.
Hail and farewell!  ye everlasting brave,
Who there to servile life preferred a splendid grave!

Bend from your clouds, shades of the mighty dead!
Hear from your waves the music of your fame!
Soon o'er the fields and seas, where once ye bled,
May loftier lyres than mine your praise proclaim,
The lyres of Grecian freemen!  May each name
Which Time has given to Glory, o'er the bowl&mdash;
The bowl of peace &mdash; relume the patriot's flame,
Kindle the fires of the rapt poet's soul,
And wake the song whose tones through echoing ages roll!
