The vagrant winds that wander 'mid the dark,
Are quiet in their caves.  The moon is high.
Across yon tall pile's shadow you may mark
The flitting bat; while the sea's heavy sigh
Comes o'er the ear in long, low melody.
Behold the living flood beneath the ray
Unclouded like the chased silver lie,
And, in the radiance, countless wavelets play,
Sparkling like crowding stars, that pave some milky-way.

Far, on each hand, the savage coast extends,
Binding the bright sea with a rugged chain.
Lo!  there Northumbria's frowning bulwark bends,
Marsden's vast rock, yonder, o'ertowers the main
More distant. You may see her grottos plain,
Shadowed amid the white cliffs.  Doth she hear
At such an hour the mermaid's moonlight strain,
Or only the slow waves, that tinkle clear,
Far up the unknown aisles of the dim caverns drear?

Full on the broad nave of the hoary pile,
Night's lucid Queen her splendours streaming throws:
'Mid the recesses of the shadowy aisle
They steal, and sleep in radiant repose.
Smiling, methinks the tottering ruin shews,
As if the gentle brightness might engage
The Genius of its walls, and bring to close
The warfare he with Time no more may wage,
In the calm silveriness of mild and cheerful age.

Fringing the haven's verge, scarce seems to move
The sea-sedge, with the gently rustling flow.
The beams are playing on the cliffs above;
The barks are anchored in the gloom below;
Where, o'er the cove, the rocks their shadows throw.
No sound is stirring in that peaceful bay;
As if it ne'er had known where, long ago,
Denmark's red sea-kings ploughed their bloody way,
And Rome's aggressive keels and brass-prowed gallies lay.

In many an unremembered, noteless grave&mdash;
Far, far above &mdash; beneath the abbey high&mdash;
The monk who dared not &mdash; serf who could not save&mdash;
Defended and defenders, mingled lie;&mdash;
In one oblivion they were doomed to die.
O'er the blest walls the godless Northman swept;
And, quenched at once the warrior's fiery eye,
And his of peace, who little less than slept,
As round the cloisters dim with noiseless foot he crept.

How many a varied sound, since first these walls
Arose in Gothic majesty, hath been:
The pealing organ, echoing through the halls,
The solemn chaunt and breathing Psalm, between;
The pale Confessor listening whispered sin&mdash;
Low prayer &mdash; loud revelry &mdash; and stern command:&mdash;
Now all is hushed.  Above yon hillocks green
Peace hath, at last, waved a compelling wand,
And cowled monks soundly sleep, 'mid Cromwell's iron band.

Yet once again &mdash; 'mid the fantastic night
Call up the high and gorgeous scenes of Eld,
When through the painted windows solemn light
Streamed, and the anthem's awful chorus swelled.
Far, on the deep, the mariner beheld
The red-cross brightly burn upon the wave;
And, while the felon gusts around him yelled,
The drowning wretch his latest gaspings gave
To call upon the Saint, who saw &mdash; yet would not save.

Or when, perchance, on such an eve as this,
There, where the cliff becalms the gentle tide,
Whose rugged feet the hushed waves seem to kiss,
In the still night, the anchoring skiff would ride.
Oh!  sweet to him whose home had been denied
Long, when upon his rapt and thrilling ear,
The low swell of the vesper hymn would glide,
Floating above the beautiful waters, clear,
And he would kneel and weep, drinking the accents dear.

Hast thou gone down, O Moon!  into thy cave?
So all things bright and radiant must end&mdash;
The mist of night is resting on the wave,
And sea and sky into one dimness blend.
&mdash;Thou, who, perchance, at such an hour shalt wend
Hither, to meditate and muse like me,
And on these mouldering stones thy gaze shalt bend,
Then, on the unchangeable and solemn sea,
Say thou, how poor Time is &mdash; how deep Eternity!
