The moors and mountains were their dwelling-place&mdash;
The mountain's side their temple and their grave&mdash;
Marvel not then, they were a rigid race,
Untaught to war, but turbulent and brave;&mdash;
Such are the warriors sufferers should have,
Who live in hope that's only not despair&mdash;
Such are the heroes who alone can save
A sinking cause &mdash; let tyranny beware
How she may rouse these slumb'ring lions from their lair!

On the hill's side the worshippers convened,
Though not as now they meet, but on the Word,
Perchance, with one reclining arm they lean'd,
And with the other grasp'd the ready sword&mdash;
As did of old the servants of the Lord,
When they the ruin'd Jewish fane rebuilt,
Building the while with ready weapons stored;
For heedless how or where their blows they dealt,
Their foes pursued them there, and there much blood was spilt.

Hark!  heard ye not the minstrelsy of war,
The shout, the drum, the clarion, and the shrill
And shrieking mountain-pipes mingling afar
With the sweet sacred music of the hill&mdash;
Sounds that might well awake wild terror's thrill
In other breasts &mdash; in theirs it kindles fire!
'O God!'  they cry, 'protect the remnant still!'
And then succeeds a scene of tumult dire&mdash;
A scene that suits but ill with my peace-loving lyre!

But how secure!  how peaceful!  how serene!
Yon group of village worshippers appear:
Like the hush'd ocean where a storm hath been,
To make the calm succeeding doubly dear,
When all is lull'd, save the unceasing stir
Of waves scarce heaving, breaking, bubbling on,
And the light carol of some mariner
Whose fickle hopes had fled and come anon&mdash;
Such is the churchyard scene the sun now smiles upon.

Here high and low are gather'd, small and great&mdash;
The peasants, rich and poor, and old and young;
To some the green grass turfs afford a seat;
And some are stretch'd full lazily along;
And some stand all erect amid the throng&mdash;
For show, perhaps, they stand &mdash; ah!  think not so;
And some on forms or chairs; and some among,
Or on the tombstones gray, in many a row,
Where some &mdash; nay all, perchance &mdash; have kindred lying low.
