The dial's finger points the hour of TEN!
And the first mustic of its silver bell
Rung sadly on the ear of one &mdash; for then
Came parting, and that dismal word &mdash; farewell.
Yet he was pledged, and he might not rebel&mdash;
He rose and pressed her hand, then spake a word
Which on the maiden wrought as by a spell,
Deeply she blushed, although alone, she heard
The voice which to their depths her woman's feelings stirred.

He is departed &mdash; and her following eyes
Have gained their sweet serenity again;
Yet on her father's placid brow there lies
A smile half playful &mdash; not unmixed with pain;
While her fond mother, anxious to restrain
Her rising feelings, turns away her face.
Futile expedient!  and attempt how vain!
Rushes Rosanne into her warm embrace,
And now their mingled fears flow silently apace.

Oh, how akin to grief is happiness;
Who would not deem &mdash; this weeping group to see&mdash;
That some o'erwhelming cause of deep distress
Had fallen suddenly upon the three?
Not so &mdash; to-morrow, and Rosanne will be
The fond &mdash; confiding &mdash; and the happy bride
Of one who loved her long and tenderly;
Of one, whose virtues justify her pride,
And, with her parents' wish, her choice is ratified.

Rare is such union on earth &mdash; forsooth
The stars 'gainst lovers bear unholy spite,
"The course of true love never did run smooth;"
Alas!  the saying is as true as trite.
Yet here one happy instance we may cite
Of love that knew no "agony," but ran
In the calm "course" of sunshine and delight,
From the deep blush that answered for Rosanne,
To that important moment our tale began.

The only olive-branch that Heav'n did spare
To grace their table, and to bless their sight;
All that was left of many blossoms, where
The tree was once with richest promise white,
Such was Rosanne; and it may well excite
The heart's deep trembling and the purest  tears
(E'en where the hopes are promising and bright)
To yield such solace of declining years
Into another's charge, and such were now their fears.

They deem'd this solemn hour might be the last
Which they might spend together; they might meet
No more on this side Heaven.  These feelings past,
A calm succeeded, and their bosoms beat
Less painfully, as, in communion sweet,
Her parents pour'd their blessing on her head.
Then came the well-known signal for retreat,
The kiss succeeded, and the prayer was read,
And each in holy frame now sought a peaceful bed.

Strong in her faith, of clear and open soul,
Rosanne the young, and innocent, the fair,
Enter'd her chamber, and a slight blush stole
The lily from her brow &mdash; for on a chair
Her bridal vestments lay arranged with care,
And be her maiden vanity forgiven,
A silver rose she placed upon her hair;
But soon the transient thought away is driven,
She drops the flow'r, and turns her dark blue eyes to Heav'n.

To Him who what is best, best understood;
Oh with what fervency of soul she pray'd
That He would make her holy, pure, and good;
No word for her own happiness e'er stray'd
Into ther prayer of this betrothed maid,
Goodness was happiness in her pure creed&mdash;
Not to be purchased, were all India laid
A dowry at her feet, yet in her need
If God her portion was &mdash; oh!  she was rich indeed.

It is a gracious sight in form so young
To see devotion's heavenly spirit there;
A gracious sound to hear a youthful tongue
Pour forth the simple eloquence of pray'r.
Oh!  what rich blessings may not others share
By early faith and piety brought down!
What anchor for themselves do they prepare,
"Steadfast and sure" in earth's severest frown,
Who discipline the soul for an immortal crown.

She rose refreshed, as they will rise who seek
Strength in submission to superior will;
Her head is on her pillow, and her "meek
And quiet spirit" now is hush'd and still,
Yet visions of delight her slumbers fill,
And brilliant dreams which fancy could not paint,
Float o'er her brain and all their balm distil,
Scenes that might cause the waking sense to faint,
Yet pure as ever trance that bless'd the holiest saint.

Yet something of the morrow is mixed up
With all the images that fill her mind&mdash;
Still something of that joy's delicious cup
Prepared for her, is pictured as design'd
A foretaste of the bliss she is to find;
The white-stoled priest, the altar, and the pray'r;
"Virgins that be her fellows," and who bind
The wreaths of roses in her flowing hair,
All is confused she sees &mdash; yet every thing is there.

Thus passed her first and joyous sleeping hours,
But now she restless grows, the requent start
Betrays uneasy sleep &mdash; ye guardian powers,
Who watch o'er innocence, your aid impart.
"A change is o'er her dream" &mdash; her lab'ring heart
Beats fearfully &mdash; her breathing now is thick,
Is it the fabled night-mare's cruel art
That works this outrage?  and behold how quick
Her fluttering pulses play, until her soul is sick.

There is a wild and hurried noise without,
And hasty feet are running to and fro;
And hark, there comes a wild terrific shout,
And a loud knocking at the doors below,
Follow'd by smoke, whose dense black volumes shew
That the house blazed with infernal fires:
Then bursts a loud appalling shriek &mdash; ah no,
It must not be &mdash; oh, say not, truth requires,
It is Rosanne's wild shriek, who in that shriek expires.

This is an awful sketch, and if it shake
The faith of one in Heaven's all-seeing eye&mdash;
Or if one timid spirit it shall make
Doubtful of prayer, if faith too hard it try,
Or if obedience stagger &mdash; I reply&mdash;
On you who falsely reason be the blame,
For we are God's, he knows the when, the why,
Who may dispute?  for he his own may claim
By quick or ling'ring death &mdash; in pestilence, or flame.
