'Tis he &mdash; that conflict of the soul declares
The Man of Sorrows!  on his holy brow
The deep dejection of his heart he bears.
Ne'er was his "spirit sorrowful as now"&mdash;
Foreknowledge gives to death a bitterer sting,
Omniscience marks the advent of his hour;
Oh if but one awakened conscience bring
Throes of remorse of an o'erwhelming pow'r,
How must his human nature at this time
Have groan'd beneath a world's accumulated crime.

He speaks &mdash; his words no mysteries enshroud,
No parable obscures his meaning here&mdash;
(Not as he spake unto the wondering crowd)
Now the prediction comes distinct and clear&mdash;
No adversary's hand the dart shall send;
Nor he &mdash; mine enemy since time began&mdash;
But it is Thou "mine own familiar friend."
The powers of darkness leave the deed to man.
"He eateth with me," verily I say,
"One whom I lov'd, e'en one among you shall betray."

Oh, in the many sorrows he has known,
Where'er his numerous griefs and trials led,
A weary wanderer in a world his own,
Without a place wherein to lay his head;
No, nor that after travail of his soul,
Born in the garden of Gethsemane,
When from his brow the bloody drops that roll,
Proclaim the struggles of humanity;
No, not such agony &mdash; not even this
Could rend his bosom more than did that traitor's kiss.

Oh it may cause a blush for human pride,
And human weakness may demand a tear,
To know that of these "chosen" at his side,
Of all the favoured "twelve" assembled here,
Of them, whose features agonized, deny
The injurious thought, and with impatient breath
Urge the alarming question &mdash; "is it I?"&mdash;
And pledge their faith, aye even to the death,&mdash;
Who when their Master to his fate was led,
Not one but then forsook his suffering Lord, and fled.

And well Leonardo has thy hand proved true
To the sublime conceptions of thy mind&mdash;
And here may faith and piety renew
Their love to Him, who suffered for mankind.
Nor deem the thought too fanciful; e'en he
To whom Redemption is an unknown word,
Who feebly knows what price was paid to free
A ruined world &mdash; may gaze upon his Lord&mdash;
And he may feel these proofs of generous pain,
Whose heart the pulpit has assailed in vain.

Behold th' apostate Judas &mdash; in his eye
Contempt sits dominant &mdash; on his lip disdain;
Yet is the hour of bitter penance nigh&mdash;
The  curse that lies upon unhallowed gain;
Then shall his lips, despairing, imprecate
That violence which "cometh as a flood;"
Loathing shall fill those eyes, and he shall hate
The wages of his soul, "the price of blood;"
To-morrow, and that insolence of pride
Shall be extinguished in the guilt of suicide.

And there are thoughts for all, whoe'er thou art,
That gazest on a scene, so truly shown&mdash;
Deem not that here thou hast "no lot nor part."
Nor gratify the eye of taste alone&mdash;
Christian or connoisseur &mdash; (nay do not frown)
Gaze, as thou hast gazed on the face of one
Thou lovedst once, now to his grave gone down,
But who for thee some generous deed has done.
I ask no feeling of idolatry
For art, &mdash; remember Him who died, who lives for thee.
