Dark is the page that chronicles the time,
When James, the latest tyrant of his race,
Reigned o'er his bleeding country. &mdash; Not sublime,
With golden sceptre, &mdash; but an iron mace,
With which he crushed his subjects; &mdash; power and place
Were given to base familiars, &mdash; who, to fill
The measure of their crimes in briefest space,
Did deeds of woe, at which the blood runs chill;
And owned no law except a gloomy bigot's will.

Land of my sires!  beloved of bounteous heaven!
On whose blest soil, nor slave nor tyrant treads;
Then, &mdash; then by bigotry thy sons were driven,
From hearth and home, from flocks and flowery meads;
Thy winter winds howled o'er their houseless heads,
Responsive to their wailings and their cries;
There's not a grove whose bloom the autumn sheds,
There's not a cavern 'neath thy inclement skies,
But echoed to their groans, responded to their sighs.

Thy beauteous fields, thy straths and meadows, grew,&mdash;
Loved country! &mdash; like an howling wilderness;
And commerce on her golden pinions flew
To lands illumed by liberty. &mdash; Distress,
Arrayed in tattered robes, usurped her place:&mdash;
Thy cities teemed with a detested swarm
Of perjured priests, and prelates void of grace;
Rapacious nobles, &mdash; venal judges, &mdash; warm,
With an unhallowed zeal to crush fair freedom's form.

Thy soil was tainted too with armed hordes,
Prowling like cannibals in search of blood,
Assassins &mdash; bravoes &mdash; ruthless as their swords,&mdash;
Abhorred alike by mankind and by God;
Who spared nor sex nor age, but strewed their road
With patriot corses, thick as autumn's leaves:&mdash;
But patriot tears shall aye bedew the sod,
Which blooms above these martyrs hallowed graves,
Whilst many a balmy sigh from beauty's bosom heaves.

Years rolled away, and melted in the past,
As wane the hues of evening into night:&mdash;
Fierce as a demon on the midnight blast,
Rode Persecution, in infernal might;
Showering his deadly influence, to blight
The fairest flowers in Zion's garden found,&mdash;
Even Desperation quailed beneath his sight,
And hied him to his fastness, &mdash; where around
Reigned pristine Solitude in majesty profound.

Then Torture, in habiliments of blood,
Convolved her screws, and heaved her hammers high;
And Murder, with her poignard, stalked abroad,
Surcharged with gore, at noon-day openly,
Rearing her crimson banners to the sky
Like poisonous exhalations. &mdash; Long and loud
Was heard th' exulting shout, and battle cry,
Of Devastation and her monster brood;
Whilst Pestilence and Woe tracked the infernal crowd.

Fain would I sing the memory of those
Uncompromising spirits, &mdash; stern and brave;
Who like the pristine martyrs, nobly chose
To stand or fall for Christ's prerogative,
As king and head of Zion. &mdash; And to give
Their houses to the, spoiler &mdash; to the flames;
Their bodies to the torture &mdash; death, &mdash; than live
With an accusing conscience; &mdash; and their names
Enrolled in characters which dark oblivion claims.

And I would sing their solemn Eucharist,
Their day of jubilee and joy on earth;
Held at life's hazard, midst the lonely waste,
Mere nought of life, save ptarmigans had birth;
The doctrines which Heaven's messengers held forth,
The sacred Songs of Zion which arose
Up to the throne, with consecrated mirth;
Their prayers and aspirations, till the close
Of that eventful day; &mdash; if Heaven its aid bestows.

Adored Intelligence!  who erst inspired
Our martyred sires with fortitude divine;&mdash;
Who with a coal from thine own altar fired
Their independent spirits, to resign
Their dear domestic comforts; &mdash; nor repine
Against thy providence for conscience sake;
Assist my strains with influence benign,&mdash;
Strains which I to their memories awake,
Whose hallowed bones are strewed o'er muirland, moss and brake.

Oh bright anticipation!  glorious truth!
These precious fragments yet shall re-unite;
Shall ever flourish in immortal youth,
Bask in the beams of uncreated light.
A countless multitude of saints in white,
(Their elder brother's robes) with harp and lyre,
Attuned to rapturous anthems, &mdash; Seraphs bright
In concert: &mdash; On the sea of glass and fire
Shall welcome them on high &mdash; to their whole souls desire.

Friends of a buried covenant!  arise,
And o'er its mouldering relics drop a tear;
Join in your poet's fervent sympathies,
Tho' boasted Liberality may sneer;&mdash;
That cause, as their immortal souls was dear,
To your heroic fathers. &mdash; Ardently
They fought &mdash; they bled &mdash; they fell, but knew not fear,
What time a tyrant's myrmidons drew nigh;
Hence Freedom's sacred tree spreads its green branches high.

Yet base ingrates, with venom'd tongues have jeer'd,
The memory of this heroic band;
Unblushing Infidelity hath sneer'd,
And Defamation rear'd her ebon wand;&mdash;
Effeminacy push'd her pointless brand
Against Truth's buckler, which they nobly raised,&mdash;
But shrunk from the attempt; &mdash; in accents bland,
Hypocrisy with borrowed language praised,
And Ignorance, with mouth extended, stood and gazed.

Land of the brave, that nursed heroic Bruce,
And gave the patriotic Wallace birth!
Thou'rt covered with a thousand glorious hues,&mdash;
And mightiest of the mighty here on earth:&mdash;
May pure religion dwell by every hearth
Within thy borders: &mdash; May the patriot's flame
Mix with thy legislation, and thy worth,
Still keep thee on the pinnacle of fame,
For ever and for aye: &mdash; proceed we to our theme.

The orient skies are tinged with purple hue;
The summer moon is sinking in the west;
The opening flowerets, bathed in morning dew,
Seem with ten thousand thousand diamonds drest;
And yonder lofty mountain's hoary crest,
Is radiant with the glories of the morn;
The fleecy clouds on Heaven's cerulean breast,
And misty exhalations upward borne,
All seem instinct with life, the pageant to adorn.

The lark is caroling his matin hymn,
The heath-flowers are exhaling heavenly balm,
Those bleatings from the upland mountains dim,
Seem like the music of a cottage psalm;
These ancient elms are verdant as the palm,
With which the hallowed soil of Judah's stored;
The aspin stirs not; &mdash; tis an holy calm,&mdash;
A sacred day, &mdash; the Sabbath of the Lord;
Come heralds of the Cross, girt with the spirit's sword,&mdash;

Come &mdash; with the message of salvation fraught,
Come &mdash; in the plenitude of heavenly grace;
Tell of the mighty acts your Master wrought,
T' achieve redemption for the human race:
Tell how the Lord of Life &mdash; the Prince of Peace,
Upon the accursed tree his life resigned:
Th' Omniscient, who pervades all time and space,&mdash;
Against even him the hellish hosts combined,
And Man, the base ingrate, the black alliance joined!

With energy expatiate on the path,&mdash;
The thorny path, &mdash; the man of sorrows trod;
Tell how he poured out his soul to death,
To cleanse even foes, by his most precious blood;
And make them reign as Kings and Priests with God,
Arrayed in everlasting robes of light;
Beauty for ashes; &mdash; in that blest abode,
Crowned with unfading diadems, more bright
Than all the glowing gems that stud the dome of night!

But now the sun, with influence benign,
His brilliancy above the horizon flings;
See!  multitudes impelled by grace divine,
Like many waters from their mountain-springs,
Come rushing down to witness heavenly things:
A table in the wilderness is spread,
Stored with the symbol of the King of Kings,&mdash;
The bread of life &mdash; with which the saints are fed,
Until they sit on thrones, with Christ their living head.

These are the precious of the earth; the gems
Of God's creation &mdash; brightened by his ray:
When suns and systems shall be wrap'd in flames,
And like a scroll of parchment pass away,
This faithful flock shall never know decay:
But from corruption's bondage having flown,
Shall bathe in floods of everlasting day,
Where Christ their brother is already gone;
And drink the living stream which issues from his throne.

These are the faithful followers of the Lord,
Who witness for his glorious truths and cause;
These bare their bosoms to the oppressor's sword,
Rather than break their dear Redeemer's laws;
'Midst persecution's fires, they did not pause,
Nor compromise the hallowed truths of heaven;
Tho' gaunt with famine, fed on roots and haws,&mdash;
Like partridges upon the mountains driven,&mdash;
Or hid in caverns damp, by winter torrents riven.

Fast by the source of Nith's romantic stream,
Far upland lies a sweet secluded strath,
All green and purple, &mdash; bright as poets dream,&mdash;
Far from the persecutor's wonted path;
There they commemorate their Saviour's death,
Beneath the azure canopy of heaven.
For they, by crowned and mitred tyrants' wrath,
From Home, and all its sympathies were riven;
From temples made with hands, the scattered flock was driven.

But they remembered Bethel's hallowed towers,
And Peniel, where the patient Patriarch toiled;
On Him amidst the desert, when hell's powers
And principalities were worsted &mdash; foiled.
They knew amidst the solitary wild,
Where scarcely human being ever trod,
The mighty master of assemblies smiled
On his true worshippers. &mdash; "This is the road
Up to the highest heavens, this is the house of God!"

Now the last straggler from his noisome cave,
Has joined the motley congregated throng;
The hoary Pastor, mild, sedate, and grave,
Comes 'midst a band of mounted yeomen. &mdash; Strong
And watchful piquets, the ravines among,
And sentinels are posted &mdash; pass-words spoke,&mdash;
And nimble scouts are sent the plains along;&mdash;
Then from the summit of a jutting rock,
'Twas thus the man of God addressed his listening flock.

"The desert, and the solitary place,
The arid waste with burning sands o'erspread;
The howling wilderness, shall yet rejoice,
And in the rose-bud's beauty shall be clad;
Yes!  they shall bloom profusely, and be glad,
Libanus' glory to them shall be given;
Their savage dens, and parched mountains, red
With desolation, and by thunder riven,
Shall see the glory of the God of earth and heaven!

"Then let the pliant hands be strengthened,
And let the feeble knees be well confirmed;
And let the fearful heart no longer dread,
For the Eternal comes with vengeance armed;&mdash;
And all his enemies shall shrink alarmed,
Blackness shall seize the death-devoted crew;&mdash;
But with pure rapture let your souls be warmed,
He brings a glorious recompence to you,&mdash;
You're graven on his hands, ye God-adoring few.

"No more shall films of darkness shroud the eye,
Nor shut out visions of creation bright;
For all the lambent glories of the sky,
Shall burst at once on man's astonished sight;
The palsied and the lame, shall bound as light
As fawns on Jordan's flower-enamelled plain;
Iniquity's effects shall cease to blight
The human ear with dulness and with pain,
The dumb shall utter praise, &mdash; felicity shall reign!

"The scorched wilderness with water stored,
Men shall, astonished and delighted, see;
And fertile as the garden of the Lord,
The weary and the thirsty soil shall be;
Dells, where ferocious beasts roared furiously,
And winged serpents hissed, shall ever ring
Responsive to aerial minstrelsy,
Harmonious as the music of the spring,
In Sharon's flowery vale, with dew drops glistening

"For those whom the Eternal doth redeem,
And sanctify by his peculiar grace,
Shall be a glorious highway; and its name,
Writ with a sunbeam, shall be 'Holiness!'
Th' unhallowed feet of an abandoned race
Shall ne'er pollute the consecrated ground;
But Zion's crystal domes with rapturous praise
From ransomed millions ever shall resound;
And with unfading wreaths their temples shall be bound!"

These truths are like the precious evening dews,
Which imperceptibly fall from on high,
Upon the tender herb; &mdash; or like the hues
Of God's own bow, amidst a murky sky;&mdash;
When first it gleamed upon the Patriarch's eye
In pristine glory &mdash; glowing like a ray
Of mercy from a gracious deity
On his afflicted people, when dismay
Wrapped in a sable stole, had made their souls a prey.

Then did the congregation of the Lord
Unite their hearts, and raise their voices high;
The song of Judah's captive Poet soared
Above their lofty cloud-wove canopy
Up to the heavens, in solemn harmony,
Blending with seraph-harp and angel-lyre;&mdash;
The plaintive strain drew tears from every eye,
They thought upon their persecutors dire,
And on the Church of God, 'midst persecution's fire.

Tho' the heathen have entered thine heritage, Lord,
Tho' thy saints have fallen by the tyrant's sword;
Though weltering in their gore they lay,
To ravenous birds and beasts a prey;
Yet we will be glad and rejoice in thee,
Great Source of immortality!

Tho' their blood in torrents has been shed,
And none to bury the martyred dead;
Tho' our names have become a reproach and scorn.
For the faithful witness we have borne;&mdash;
Yet we will rejoice and be glad in thee,
Great Source of immortality.

Tho' thy glorious Name they have reviled,
Tho' thy Holy places they have defiled,
Tho' thy Sanctuary they have laid waste,
And all its carved work defaced;&mdash;
Yet we will rejoice and be glad in thee,
Great Source of immortality.

Tho' we stand upon destruction's brink,
Tho' our bread is sorrow, and tears our drink,
Tho' we're scattered before the wind like chaff,
And the heathen flout, and the foemen laugh;&mdash;
Yet we will rejoice and be glad in thee,
Great Source of immortality.

Oh let the prisoners' groans and sighs
Before thy glorious face arise;
Oh save the captives doomed to die
By the ruthless arm of tyranny;&mdash;
So shall we give our praise to thee,
Great Source of immortality.

And now the Pastor's orisons aspire
With holy fervor to the throne of grace;
His lips seemed touched as with the living fire
From off the altar of the Prince of Peace:
"That God would shew the brightness of his face,
Would dissipate his suffering people's night;
Would make this broken persecuted race
With their adored Redeemer walk in white,
And in his book of life their names and numbers write."

The Spirit's influence that day was felt
With irresistibly-constraining power;
And adamantine hearts that day did melt
Like Alpine snows beneath the Summer shower;
And multitudes confessed it, as the hour
Of their emancipation from the thrall
Of sin: &mdash; And threatened wrath no more did lower
Above them, like a black funereal pall;
But Liberty and Light encircled one and all.

Oh thou whom patriots, sages, martyrs, name
An emanation from the Deity!
To me thou'rt dearer than life's vital stream,
Star of surpassing radiance, &mdash; Liberty!
If there is human bliss beneath the sky,
'Tis Thou must gild it with celestial ray:&mdash;
The lowest in thy scale, Humanity!
Recoils with horror from a tyrant's sway,
And breaks his galling chains, and casts his cords away.

But Liberty from Sin, and Satan's sway,
Is more delightful to the Child of God;
For Earth and Hell can never take away
The glorious gift, bought by the Saviour's blood:
He bears his cross exulting; &mdash; and the rod
He kisses with humility and love;
Glories in tribulation: &mdash; his abode
He knows already is prepared above,&mdash;
His robe of righteousness h by the Saviour wove.

Again the multitude their voices raise
To Israel's God, for wonders he had done;
The pealing notes of gratitude and praise
Ascend above th' empyrean to the throne;&mdash;
Not all the joys their former years had known,
Had equalled joy like this; &mdash; the sacred strain
Symphonious echoed from the mountains lone:
For Nature seemed to join th' adoring train,
And Heaven and earth seemed linked as with a golden chain.

Let us lift up our voices aloud to Him
Who dwelleth between the cherubim;
In the star-paved mansion above yon sky,
The Centre of immensity!
Shepherd of Israel, shed one ray
On us, thy suffering flock to-day!

In Ephraim's and Manassah's sight,
Stir thine all-powerful strength and might;
Break the oppressor's bow and sword,
And save thine helpless heritage, Lord!
Shepherd of Israel, shed one ray
On us, thy suffering flock to-day!

Let thy mighty arm be round us still,
And mould our souls to thy holy will;
And bring as at last to the wealthy place,
Illum'd with the light of thy glorious face;
Th' imputed robe &mdash; the wreath &mdash; the palm,&mdash;
The song of Moses and the Lamb.

"The just shall live by faith, and not by sight,&mdash;
Shall bear the Cross, if they would win the prize;
Strong in the strength, and mighty in the might
Of him whose finger framed the starry skies:&mdash;
Their aspirations he will not despise,
Their humble supplications will not spurn,
His gracious ear is open to their cries,
His spirit comforts those who truly mourn,
And in their sickness sore, he all their beds will turn.

"Eternal pleasures wait for those who win
A conquest o'er the world by Faith divine!
When outward circumstances, inward sin,
And Satan's soul-destroying schemes combine;
When sensual pleasure, meteor-like, doth shine,
With dazzling influence, and delusive glare;
With holy fortitude, in duty's line
To persevere, &mdash; is bliss beyond compare!
'Tis treading that blest path the Saviour trode while here.

"Exterminating cruelty hath raged
Implacable in Satan, since the hour
That he and his infernal cohorts waged
A bootless war against Jehovah's power:
His malice urged him to that happy bower,
By an indulgent God to mankind given;
His malice cropp'd of innocence the flower,
And strewed its blossoms to the winds of Heaven,
By whose tornado blasts they from the earth were driven.

"On exultation's pinions next he flew,
And formed a sad alliance with the world;
Anon Rebellion's horrid trumpet blew,
Her spears were brandish'd, and her shafts were hurled,
Her gory standard also was unfurled;
Jehovah's name and statutes were defied;
Till o'er the mountain-tops the waters curled,
And yawning Ruin's overwhelming tide
Swept from the groaning earth Impiety and Pride.

"Amidst the roar of this appalling scene,
Where fell Destruction reigned without controul,
The venerable Patriarch smiled serene,
And fearless saw the liquid mountains roll.
Jehovah's gracious promise cheered his soul;
His Faith saw future happiness in store;
Tho' Ruin, from the centre to the pole,
Had bathed her chariot's wheels in human gore,
And Desolation grim his deadliest aspect bore.

"See Abraham, at his Maker's high command,
Amidst the mountain wild an altar rear;
And, all obedient, with unshrinking hand,
To sacrifice his only child prepare!
The child of promise, and of many a prayer,
At God's command, he cheerfully resigned;
His Faith did triumph o'er paternal fear,
Nerved his weak arm and fortified his mind,
To execute with joy, whate'er his God designed.

"Hail genuine faith!  gift of our gracious Lord!
An unexhausted gift from age to age!
Enriched by thee, the Martyrs on record,
With cheerfulness trod Persecution's stage!
Defied the dungeon's gloom, &mdash; the bigot's rage,&mdash;
The excruciating torture and the fire;
The rack, the gibbet, and the sabre's edge,
And praying for their enemies, did expire:
Thus were they chased to Heaven, to join the ransomed choir.

"Christians!  doth Sin impede your heavenward race?
Do Hell's suggestions urge you to despair?
Jehovah sits upon a throne of grace,
And Jesus Christ reigns Mediator there!
Approach his table, &mdash; lift your souls in prayer;
A promised welcome from a faithful God,
In inspiration's pages doth appear,
Procured by Jesus' meritorious blood!
Who, of his father's wrath, the bitter wine-press trod.

"By faith in Him, your sins shall be forgiven;
Mark the amazing mercy God displays:&mdash;
Your spirits sanctified and sent to Heaven,
Where Saints and Angels bask in glory's rays!
And triumph's song, to the Redeemer's praise,
Thro' the celestial city shall resound;&mdash;
Jehovah's light with undiminished blaze,
Thro' all eternity shall shine around,
And everlasting bliss unmeasured shall abound."

Now bread, &mdash; the symbol of incarnate God&mdash;
Is broken, &mdash; blest, &mdash; distributed; &mdash; and wine,
Apt emblem of the Saviour's cleansing blood,
Diffuses heavenly rapture thro' the line
Of reverential worshippers. &mdash; Divine
The element in which their souls did move;
Like the beloved disciple they recline
Each on Emanuel's bosom! &mdash; with what love
These aspirations rise up to the throne above!&mdash;

"Dweller on high, my Saviour and my God,
Shall I prefer a favourite lust to thee;
Whose fearful agony, and sacred blood,
From everlasting rum ransomed me!
For thou didst suffer in Gethsemane,
Unheard of tortures in thy sinless soul;
And on the accursed Mount of Calvary
Jehovah's billows over thee didst roll!
Whilst all the expanse of Heaven grew black, from pole to pole.

"Shall fleeting pleasure &mdash; falsely called so,
Seduce me from the joys thou hast in store?
Shall I eternal happiness forego,
That Hell may triumph o'er one victim more?
When Thou, adored, wert wounded to the core,
By those ingrates thou camest to redeem;
Suspended on the cross, &mdash; distained with gore;
Yet!  'Oh, forgive them father;' &mdash; was thy theme,
'They know not what they do, they know not they blaspheme.'

"Shall I, obedient, tread the narrow path,
Or with thine enemies, my God, be joined?
Shall endless glory, and eternal wrath,
Hang doubtful in the balance of my mind?
Oh, shall thy invitations be declined,&mdash;
So fraught with mercy, and replete with grace?
E'en Heaven and all its glories are assigned
Unto the humblest of the human race,
Who, by a living faith, thine offers, Lord, embrace.

"Though Jesus, &mdash; to display his sovereign power,
And the exceeding riches of his grace,&mdash;
Hath at the ninth, &mdash; nay, the eleventh hour,
Reclaimed the vilest of the human race:&mdash;
Such monuments of mercy can give peace,
To none who fondly hell-ward persevere;
No!  he records it a peculiar case,
To save convinced sinners from despair,
And teach them to employ their latest hours in prayer.

"Then henceforth &mdash; till my heart shall cease to throb,&mdash;
God's grace assisting, &mdash; Sin I will detest;
And grasp by Faith that grand imperial robe,
The spotless righteousness of Jesus Christ.
Dear Saviour!  may this solemn Eucharist
Refresh our spirits in this vale of tears:&mdash;
Make us obedient to thy high behest;&mdash;
Return a gracious answer to our prayers;&mdash;
And in the fiery fight dispel our rising fears."

Thus whilst intense Devotion upward soared
To Heaven, &mdash; from 'midst the solitary dell,
Full suddenly appeared a murderous horde,
Led to the onset by accursed Dalzell,&mdash;
Pealing like fiends "the banner-cry of Hell,"&mdash;
Rushing like famished wolves upon their prey;
Showering their bullets thick as drops that fell
Upon the summits of the Cheviots grey,
What time drear winter reigned, with ruthless tyrant sway.

One twinkling &mdash; and the Covenanters' formed;
Their sabres gleamed &mdash; their spears were levelled low:
Their broad-swords flashed, &mdash; their files with carbines armed,
Poured in destruction on the astonished foe.&mdash;
Thy mountain streamlet, Nith!  began to glow
A crimson current. &mdash; Whilst the dying groan,&mdash;
The shout of triumph, &mdash; and the shriek of woe,
Mingled with echoes from the mountains lone;
And all the gory field was thick with corses strewn.

The heroes of the Covenant advanced
With all the energy of men inspired;&mdash;
Dalzell's ferocious spearmen wildly glanced,
And inch by inch, and foot by foot retired:&mdash;
Destructive vollies on his flank were fired,
Sweeping whole ranks. &mdash; But hark!  the bugles' swell
Proclaims a troop of horse, who scarce respired
With foaming fury incontrollable;
Then plunged into the fight, with savage shout and yell.

Chafed to the verge of madness, fierce Dalzell
Darted like flickering flame from van to rear,&mdash;
Blaspheming like a very fiend of hell,
While dropt his myrmidons like leaves, when sere,
Beneath the trusty brand, and deadly spear
Of patriot-strength.  Yet, ere the ruddy sky
Of evening disappeared, &mdash; Van, centre, rear,
Were broken by th' infuriate Cavalry:
See!  from th' ensanguined field, for life, &mdash; for life they fly.

Carnage hath done her work. &mdash; And all is hushed,
All save the lamentation of despair,&mdash;
The stiffled sob, &mdash; the dying groan which rushed
Incessant on the horror-stricken ear:
Shriek, &mdash; execration, &mdash; blasphemy, &mdash; and prayer
And praise were blent.  For on the blood-stained sod,
Oppressors and oppressed commingled were,&mdash;
The despot's-tool &mdash; the patriot-saint who trod
The thorny path, which leads to glory, and to God.

To clefts, and tarns, and precipices steep,&mdash;
Crags inaccessible to cavalry;&mdash;
To quivering marshes, and morasses deep,
The fugitives forlorn for shelter fly;&mdash;
Leaving their fathers, brothers, sons, to die
A lingering death upon the bloody field;&mdash;
No friendly hand to shut the death-set eye,
Nor comfort to the parting spirit yield,
Painting the joys of Heaven about to be revealed.

Cease melancholy harp: &mdash; I may not sing
Th' indignities the hapless sufferers bore
In prison and in banishment; &mdash; nor ring
The changes on a subject I deplore:&mdash;
The brandings, mutilations, scourgings, &mdash; nor
The blood which flowed on scaffolds and on plains:
My fainting soul is sick of scenes of gore;&mdash;
Shrinks from the headsman's axe, &mdash; the gaoler's chains,&mdash;
The period accursed, which Scottish annals stains.
