Wild Camaldoli &mdash; to thy solemn shades
Imagination clings, as if the sound
Of the wind sighing through thy piny glades,
Still whisper'd high romance.  Thy summits, crown'd
With convent spire and forest deepening round,
Tell of the olden time.  But in yon dell,
Tho' the soft hymn still breaks the hush profound,
The mighty spirit weaves no more her spell,
Immortal names alone thy mouldering records swell.

Still towers Laverna o'er the steep, and still
The leafy pride of Vallombrosa falls,
The Sacred Desert crests its chosen hill,
And time hath spared the Abbey's antique walls:
Where the broad sun streams thro' the ample halls,
Gilding the fret-work of their arches high,
Still the deep bell the monk to matins calls,
And soar th' eternal Apennines, and lie
Calm at their base thy plains, rich-storied Tuscany.

There is a tale, &mdash; nor oft hath winter shed
Fresh snows on those proud heights, nor autumn's gloom
Sear'd the wild flowers that o'er the torrent's bed
Droop in a pale decay their summer bloom,
Since that tale was reality.  The tomb
Hath claim'd its destin'd prey.  The grief that rush'd
Too sternly through a heart that did inhume
Its sorrow from all scan, &mdash; the tears that gush'd,
The words that spoke alone in mortal throes, are hush'd.

'Tis a trite simile, but not less true,&mdash;
The little brook that onward to the main
Rolls its unheeded course &mdash; the globe of dew,
That on the lily's chalice leaves no stain,
Is as the grief of thousands.  Many a strain
Of life-consuming anguish &mdash; many a groan
That breaks the writhing heart, goes forth in vain;
No voice responsive echoes back their tone,
Man with illustrious woe holds sympathy alone.

Wild Camaldoli!  'twas to thy repose
Of shade monastic Guiliano turn'd;
But peace was not for him, nor his the woes
Thy sacredness might still.  The thought that burn'd
His mind to waste &mdash; the bitterness that churn'd
The well of life to poison, these were not
Things to be in scholastic lore unlearn'd;
He hied him from the world to that lone spot,
Not to forget his wrongs, but be himself forgot.

What was the world to him! &mdash; within the grave
She slept, his young betroth'd, but not his bride;
Though her heart, faithful to the plight it gave
In the first gush of love, to all beside 
Was a seal'd mystery &mdash; She despair'd, and died!
They gave the hand she gave not, nor withheld&mdash;
Ill-fated victim of a father's pride!
Brief space thy crush'd and bleeding heart rebell'd
'Gainst those detested bonds &mdash; it broke, and all was quell'd!

Oft in the rich light of the Tuscan eve
Had Giuliano and Bianca mused,
By the broad Arno when his waves receive
The day's last blush, so tenderly infused
Into their azure depths.  There, all unused
To the world's cold dissemblings, she would rest,
With a sweet trust, that might not be abused,
Her glowing cheek on his affianced breast,
And smile, in his protecting arms supremely blest.

Their love had been the young heart's revelry,
In the first bloom of life; and they had seen
Their fondness hallow'd by th' approving eye,
And voice parental; and their homes had been
The altar of their vows.  Full many a scene
In those domestic halls bore witness meet,
To the chaste intercourse that pass'd between
The youth and maid, when with responsive beat
Their pure souls mingled in communion sweet.

She was the music of his mind &mdash; the still
Sweet vision of his dreams; and when his hand
Traced the bold outline with a painter's skill,
(For he was gifted in his native land
With its high genius) his young love would stand
In Grecian attitude, with lips apart,
And dark hair filleted with silken band,
The perfect model of the limner's art,
The studio's peerless gem, the load-star of his heart.

But wealth was proffer'd &mdash; need the rest be told?
Young hopes were blighted for that sordid dust,
And, contract vile! &mdash; a daughter's peace was sold,
By low ambition to imperious lust.
The powerless to the powerful: &mdash; but the trust
Of the free spirit's soaring is not given
To mortal tyranny, whose cankering rust
But frets the hated fetters till they're riven,
And the bright soul, left chainless, mounts to heaven.

Hope smiled no more on Giuliano's life;
To his stung heart mankind became a throng,
With whom communion were but ceaseless strife,
And whom he deem'd all leagued to work him wrong.
Awhile he struggled with that demon strong,
And strove in bitterness of scorn to choke
The serpent in its growth &mdash; 'twas vain &mdash; ere long
The gathering frenzy of his mind awoke,
And from its icy bounds the hoarded lava broke.

He raved &mdash; how fearfully distraction wrought
In his warp'd brain, from whence the gentler brood
Of Nature's nursing fled, and every thought,
As if some monster had usurp'd his mood,
Was fill'd with murder with revenue and blood.
He, in his hand the vision'd hilt would grasp,
And glare with lurid eye on those who stood
Gazing on him in grief &mdash; and from the clasp
Of each restraining arm would burst with frantic gasp.

Again, and o'er his madness came a gleam
Of life's relinquish'd splendour.  Gorgeous things
Would float across his memory like a dream,
And bridal songs struck from the olden strings
Of the rejoicing lute.   And on the wings
Of his creative fancy came bright eyes,
And fair forms grew from out the shadowy rings
Of his distempered vision, breathing sighs
Voluptuous as the Cyprian Queen's soft witcheries.

'This could not last &mdash; the fierce volcano burns
Itself to chaos.  Soon its black array
Tells of extinguish'd wrath &mdash; but when returns
To that scorch'd mount the summer foliage gay?
'Twas thus with Giuliano, and away
From his scathed mind the giant phantom pass'd,
And dreariness came on.  Night stole on day,
And brought no change to him &mdash; or slow, or fast,
His heavy hours roll'd on eternally o'ercast.

Brief was his speech, &mdash; he mused o'er bead and book
With abstract air, and still at day's decline
Betook him to the dell's sequester'd nook,
Or fearless scaled the loftiest Apennine,
Whose rugged peaks in ice hibernal shine,
And listened to the wolf's wild howl &mdash; or call
Of mountain eaglet &mdash; or would watch the pine
Shake from its crest the snow-wreath like a pall,
Or view the gelid stream leap from its wintry thrall.

Where was the light of his young genius? &mdash; where
The soul's high aspiration &mdash; the proud claim
Of a mind panting to do battle there
Amidst the mighty for the crown of fame?
Fever of noble hearts!  thy glorious flame
Broke not on Giuliano's night &mdash; yet he
Perchance might sigh o'er his departing name,
And as he look'd on Adria's azure sea,
Win from its waves some thoughts of immortality.

At last he learn'd that she was dead &mdash; the bride
Of proud Lanucci &mdash; and full many a tale
Came of that stately pageant, how beside
Her lord's ancestral dust, 'mid torch-light pale,
And funeral chant, and sorrow's piercing wall,
They placed her cold remains. &mdash; He did not weep
Tears for the silent dead, can they avail?
But through his heart the grave-worm seem'd to creep;
His anguish had for tears a hidden source too deep.

He shunn'd his wonted haunts &mdash; the wood's recess
Lured him no longer with its sylvan spell;
Nor sought he more the high rock's wilderness,
But dwelt within the confines of his cell,
Or watch'd the golden sunset as it fell
Athwart the cloister's gloom.  Well might they deem
Who mark'd him, when the deep-toned evening bell
Peal'd through those shadowy aisles, start from his dream,
He woo'd from heaven's far realms some visionary beam.

Again essay'd he his neglected art,
Beneath his touch the sweet creation grew;
His was the fervid genius of the heart,
The magic of the memory ever true.
The vernal lip breathed there &mdash; the tender hue
Of the young cheek, with whose transparent white
Carnation blended, and the vein shone through,
Glancing with life &mdash; the rich and dewy light
Of the deep azure eye, beam'd there divinely bright.

So meek, so pensive that angelic face,
With brow upturn'd, and lips imbued with prayer,
And so impress'd with a mysterious grace,
'Twas deem'd no mortal maid could be so fair.
Nor marvel I that they who linger'd there,
Watching the growth of that sweet shadowy thing,
When o'er her forehead and encircling hair
The twilight fell in many a saintly ring,
Should, as before some holy shrine, stand worshipping.

The fair work bloom'd to life &mdash; nor evening dim,
Nor midnight's waning lamp, could warn away
The painter from his task.  Unmark'd by him
Were all but that dear semblance, where the ray
Of his enlight'ning mind concentred lay.
And with beseeching looks that more than speak,
He silenced those who fear'd his health's decay;
For he had toil'd until the hectic streak
Of fever's fatal flame had scorch'd his pallid cheek.

At length 'twas finished.  When the gray morn shone
Through the dim cell, the last, the master-stroke
Was given to that sweet face.  His task was done.
The light of mind o'er all the picture broke,
And Giuliano from his trance awoke.
He stood and gazed with aching eye, intent
On his perfected work.  No word he spoke,
Nor breath escaped him; but he stood there bent
Like some cold sculptured mourner o'er a monument.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
A light laugh sounded from that distant room,
A wild unwonted burst, that on the ear
Fell, more resembling echoes from the tomb
Than aught of mirth, and through the arches drear
So strongly peal'd, that all grew mute with fear.
&mdash;It spoke his mind's relapse&mdash;
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

A wanderer came from Britain's sea-girt isle,
To gaze on marble palaces and towers;
To bask beneath th' Italian sunset's smile,
And rove amidst those bright and golden bowers
Where Dante's mind matured its mighty powers;
Where Ariosto waked his magic lyre;
Or tender Petrarch charm'd away the hours
With those enchanting numbers that inspire
Alternately deep thoughts, or kindle passion's fire.

And he would stray 'mid those recesses wild,
Where Vallombrosa and Laverna rise;
For he beheld the mountains, as a child
Looks on his mother, with adoring eyes.
He left the fertile plains all steep'd in dyes
Of the rich autumn, and the purple vine
Bearing its clusters to the sparkling skies,
And the fair halls, where fairer forms recline,
To track the deep'ning glen, and mount the Apennine.

He came to Camaldoli, and did pray
Of those good monks a guide to lead him on
Up to the hills some furlongs of the way.
A tall thin form, whose garb bespoke him one
Of their kind order, though a lowlier son, 
Stood forth:  they said he was the stranger's guide,
And meek and harmless, though his mind was gone:
And well he knew each path the forests hide,
And none like him could scale the mountain's rugged side.

The stranger gazed upon that grief-struck form,
And deem'd he saw in the averted eye
The hapless wreck of some dark mental storm,
The phantom of despair that hath pass'd by.
He led him on secure, but silently,
Through wood and dell; though courteously and kind
The stranger spoke, his doubtful mood to try,
'Twas all in vain.  Like sunlight to the blind,
No genial ray of thought e'er reach'd his darken'd mind.

Yet was there beauty in those lineaments,
Which frenzy's havoc could not all displace;
As through some noble ruin's fire-scathed rents,
The grandeur of the past we still may trace.
Mid the gray locks up rose the ample space
Of the clear brow, and oft the wild eye shone
With sudden flash athwart the pallid face,
As if the glorious spirit that had flown
Had, parting, left a light to mark her shatter'd throne.

They journey'd on.  Emerging soon they stood
In the dell's gorge.  Bleak mountains tower'd above,
And wild below lay dark ravine and wood,
Where tumbling torrents with their echoes strove
To drown the ceaseless murmurs of the grove.
Fair Florence glitter'd in the plain beneath,
Bright through the veil the dews of sunset wove.
More near, and crown'd with many a mellow wreath,
Church spire and cottage roof rose 'mid the ev'ning's breath.

The stranger paused &mdash; he had a poet's soul,
And painter's eye, and all he gazed on there
A tide of inspiration seem'd to roll:
The sigh of flowers perfumed the stirless air,
And rose from far an organ-chanted prayer,
Sweet, as if hovering spirits there unseen
Swept their seraphic harps.  He turn'd him where
The maniac stood beneath the coppice screen,
Gazing with eye intent over all that lovely scene.

His mood was changed; a smile relumed his cheek,
Some thoughts seem'd spared from the chaotic waste
Of his lost memory, vague perhaps and weak,
But still to him fond visions of the past.
He came, and ponder'd o'er the landscape traced
By that young wanderer's pencil in the book
Whose storied pages many a treasure graced.
He watched his progress with admiring look,
And from his vest's wide folds a tatter'd scroll he took.

"'Tis there!"  he cried, "the palace and the bower!"
And to the stranger's wondering sight display'd
That scroll, the toil of many a tedious hour;
Minutely accurate, with garden glade,
And marble portico and colonnade,
Where gush'd the fount, and where the myrtle spread
A shelter meet for an Italian maid:
Then press'd his hand to his bewilder'd head,
As though unutter'd things from memory's grasp had fled.

But some dark thought seem'd brooding in his brain,
Perchance the fatal secret of his breast.
"'Tis vain," he cried, "she is not there, 'tis vain!"
And hid again the scroll within his vest:
Nor heeded he inquiring speech address'd
By the young stranger, but he whisper'd low,
Betray me not &mdash; they would but gibe and jest,
And call me brain-struck."  Then relapsing, slow,
In silence deep and drear, they climb'd the mountain's brow.

The moon shone brightly o'er Laverna's steep
Ere they had scaled the convent-crested hill;
Each bubbling fountain from the rock did leap,
A starry wreath descending to the rill:
The stranger and his guide held onward still,
Or paused to gaze upon the deepening blue
Of that Italian sky, which seem'd to fill
Heaven with its beauty.  Eve to midnight grew,
The hour of parting came, each bade his brief adieu.

He heard of him no more; but in the lot
Of after life, when buffeting the gale
Of adverse fate, his mind to that wild spot
Would still recur, and dwell in Arno's vale.
And oft the wanderer would recall the tale
Of Giuliano's wrongs.  And oft the gaze
Of that poor maniac's eye, as up the dale
He led him safe through many a tangled maze,
Did haunt an old man's lone and melancholy days.
