The sun was setting o'er the mountain range
That guards thy glens, romantic Borrodale;
O'er day's deep azure came a wondrous change
Wherein all hues of splendour did prevail,
From the rich ruby to the topaz pale;
And one cloud floating on the eastern air,
With golden prow and amethystine sail,
Show'd like a ship of heaven bound onward, where
Flamed the broad west beneath the sunset glare.

Twilight fell o'er the deep autumnal woods,
Veiling their tints in eve's mysterious gray,
Twilight was on wild crags and mountain floods,
Save where some torrent flung its silver spray
Bright in the beam of the retiring day.
The pastoral hamlet slept in calm repose,
With cottage, byre, and farm-yards' neat array,
And neighbouring kirk, whose vesper chime arose
Soft on the breath of evening's quiet close.

And other sounds were heard commingling sweet;
Wild brook that tinkled down the mossy dell,
Call of returning kine, or fitful bleat
Of flocks that browsed on highland heath, and fell,
Or bark of guardian dog who watch'd them well.
Or nearer home, the red-breast's mellow note,
Piping to eve his eloquent farewell;
Or voice of infant mirth, while young hands float
Down the clear stream their fairy acorn-boat.

Up the deep glen, oh gray-hair'd wanderer!  stole
Thy weary steps, and day's declining hour
Shed its soft welcome through thy gladden'd soul
Upon the threshold of thy natal bower.
For thou, impell'd by some resistless power,
Haunted by dreams of home on many a shore,
Remembering e'en the scent of every flower,
Stricken by home's strong malady at core,
Thither return'dst at last, thy household gods t' adore.

He was a toil-worn venerable man,
In humble guise, although of travelled mien,
With meditative brow and visage wan,
In whose deep eye immortal thoughts were seen,
Lights that betrayed the Poet's soul I ween;
Homeward his feet had journeyed from the main,
With scrip and staff and mantle's russet screen;
Most like to palmer he, from Syrian plain,
Or pilgrim meek of nature's boundless fane.

He stood and gazed &mdash; "Once more, in life's decline,
Home of my sires, retreat of infant years,
Let me bow down before thine ancient shrine,
Where still the spirit of the past appears.
Youth's ardour worships &mdash; man's calm mood reveres&mdash;
Experience of the world's delusive joy,
A heart unstained by crimes, though not by tears,
Bids us too late reject the base alloy,
And turn in age to things that charmed the boy.

"We turn, &mdash; but oh!  with what an alter'd sense
Of that great book of human life, whose page,
First opened, seems such glories to condense,
It well may youth's idolatry engage,&mdash;
Whose context makes us subtle, sad or sage.
I have not broke, nor would I break the dream,
Nor doth my heart yet feel the ice of age,
But I have quaff'd of Truth's immortal stream,
And learnt to view mankind other than they may seem.

"Yet love I all that bear the human form,
Their very errors serve some wise intent,
As men behold in Nature's wildest storm
The wondrous workings of each element.
Nor doth a knowledge of the bad prevent
Assurance of the good, whose ray divine
Rewards research on truth sincerely bent,
As in the bowels of the darksome mine
The practis'd eye discerns the jewel fine.

"Perchance the heart by disappointment stung,
May seek great Nature more, and Man the less,
And as the hope recedes to which it clung,
Will turn from his to her more pure caress,
Rejoicing still in her sweet loneliness.
Wearied with faction's cant and folly's chime,
Will flee to her fair temples, and confess,
While all else fades before the scythe of Time,
She stands unchang'd, immutably sublime.

"Land of my sires!  oh, with what chasten'd love
My soul, unwarp'd, dispassionate and free,
Guided by some kind angel from above,
Returns with filial gratitude to thee!
Here would I wait my Maker's great decree&mdash;
Walk these wild hills whereon my fathers trod,
And as the leaf beside the parent tree
Lays its pale form, so nigh yon house of God
Would I repose beneath the hallow'd sod.

"And well may life moor here her shatter'd bark,
From hence she sail'd when youth was at the prow;
The dove sought shelter in the sacred Ark,
Scar'd by the perils she had view'd below.
Within these glens the citron's golden glow
Crests not the grove by southern breezes fann'd,
Yet would I challenge earth's wide realms to show
A spot that bears the stamp of Beauty's hand
More deep than thine, my own, my native land!

"And thou art free &mdash; the gilded orient wave,
Albeit perfum'd by India's spicy gales,
Floats round the country of the crouching slave,
Where rapine prowls and tyranny prevails.
But here, in Albion's green and peaceful vales,
Man with his fellow mortal proudly copes;
No despot's will the peasant's home assails,
Nor stalks th' oppressor o'er its pastoral slopes,
Nor reaps the stranger's hand the harvest of his hopes

"The British matron, as she lulls to rest,
With some sweet ditty of her native isle,
The fair and free-born infant at her breast,
Fosters hope's germ in each observant smile.
Nor may the blighting tongue of scorn revile
The glorious thought within her breast elate:
Nor doth chimera vain her reason 'guile&mdash;
He, her brave boy, rear'd up to man's estate,
May blend her name with all that's good and great.

"Here, in the country of her darling's birth,
For ever open stands the gate of Fame,
Inviting e'en the lowliest child of worth
There to record his self-ennlobled name.
And free to all burns Wisdom's sacred flame,
Her heights alone inspired Genius gains;
Here, each man's bearing boldly speaks his claim.
Beats there a false heart on Britannia's plains,
Would truck such rights for all the world contains?

"Yea, thou art free!  this is the magic word&mdash;
The glorious passport to thy children's hearts;
This, this directs the hero's conquering sword,
Nurtures the social and the graceful arts,
And to the poet's lyre his soul imparts:
Lightens the labour of the poor man's lot,
Nerves him to bear affliction's keenest darts&mdash;
Behold him sov'reign of his lowly cot,
He breaks his evening bread, thanks God, and envies not.

"Once more upon the mountains!  let me gaze
On the loved landscape bath'd in golden light,
Whose azure air-tints melt in purple haze,
Beneath the western heaven's calm chrysolite,
The last pale hue that eve withholds from night.
Around me rises, like a rampart wall,
The rock-built citadels of Nature's might,
Where Echo sits, and swells the watch-word's call,
Banner'd by birch-tree screen and ivy's dusky pall.

"What forms fantastic!  tower and pyramid,&mdash;
And helm of giant knight with plumed crest,
Mine eye discerns the twilight groves amid;
And darkles there the mount where erst her nest
The eagle rear'd, the valley's dreaded guest.
Dark rolls the Derwent's course these dales within,
By many a rock and winding creek repress'd,
Ere his glad waves the lake's broad outlet win,
Widening to river smooth, from brawling mountain lynn.

"How oft have I, when summer's ardent sun
Flamed on the mountains, sought thy waters cool,
Thou hill-born stream!  or when day's toil was done,
Or playing truant from the neighbouring school, 
Spann'd, with triumphant step, thy deeper pool.
Hours of delight!  but fleeting as the tide
My limbs o'er-arch'd &mdash; yet no tyrannic rule
Was thine, sage Mentor of these wilds &mdash; thy pride
Was still in ways of peace thy little flock to guide.

"Hail happy home!  by whose embowered door
The yew-tree grows, an ancient chronicle;
And stately still the sheltering sycamore,
Whose murmuring boughs might many a record swell.
And here e'en yet, within the shaded well
The moss-grown bucket greets my gladdened eye;
Methinks all things of past-times kindly tell,&mdash;
Oh that my heart could cheat the years gone by,
Here in thy haunts, old gray antiquity!

"I mark'd the taper down the vale afar
Bright through thy casement pour its steady gleam;
And hail'd its lustre as my natal star
Up-ris'n to cheer me with its holy beam,
The guiding seraph of my homeward dream.
I saw the blue smoke wreath the heathy hill,
The faggot's blaze reflected in the stream;
And with this thought, defied the evening's chill,
'My father's hearth burns brightly for me still.'

"My father's hearth!  what may not years have wrought!
I left a sister in her maiden bloom;
A sire, &mdash; high Heaven!  there's anguish in the thought,
Perhaps stern death has laid them in the tomb!"
"Old man, too surely hast thou guess'd their doom&mdash;
Go, read their names upon the churchyard stone:
But no &mdash; belike they're veil'd in evening gloom.
Sire, sister, kindred, all alas!  are gone,
And thou art left, of all thy race &mdash; alone!"

Thus spake a stranger at his father's gate.
The Wanderer bow'd his meek, time-silver'd head;
'Twere wild to wrestle 'gainst the hand of Fate&mdash;
"Thy will be done, oh righteous Heaven!"  he said,
"Grief hath no spell to rouse the slumbering dead.
And why deplore the spotless soul's release?
Brief space before me hath their journey sped
Towards that blest bourn where earthly sorrows cease,
Whither, like theirs, my steps shall wend in peace.

"Yet had I hoped &mdash; alas, I vainly dreamed!
Once more to greet them in their earthly home;
To cheer their lone hearts that had haply deemed
My corse the spoil of Ocean's billowy foam;
To re-peruse with them the chequered tome
Of my life's pilgrimage serenely here.
O let me weep!  grief doth not ill become
My old gray hairs, nor will affection's tear
Dim the pure sacredness of virtue's bier.

"Here let me linger out the sands of life&mdash;
Seek me some low and lonely dwelling-place,
Far from the shock of man's unholy strife,
Where yet familiar features I may trace
Of kindred blood once mingling with my race.
Or if of consanguinity no bond
Remains howe'er remote &mdash; in each kind face,
Let me behold fraternal aspect fond,
To which my yearning heart may lovingly respond."

His prayer was granted, &mdash; up the winding glen
The dalesman mark'd a Hermitage arise,
A grot, unknown, save to his wondering ken,
Though 'twas, in sooth, an earthly paradise,
Growing up sweet beneath its owner's eyes;
And daily 'twas his light and pleasing care
To tend and watch the flowret's opening dyes;
All plants that bloom in Albion's clime were there,
And many a shrub of foreign splendour rare.

But most he lov'd the wilding flowers that grew
Free on the hills.  The heather's purple bloom&mdash;
Daisy's meek crest, and harebell's tender blue,
And the rich garland of the golden broom;
Nor scorn'd he e'en the bracken's russet plume:
Round him arose a natural forest's shade,
Where mix'd wild rose and hawthorn's, faint perfume;
Where the rock-ash its coral wealth display'd,
And birch and holly grew in oak and hazel glade.

Down the deep dingle pour'd a mountain brook,
Whose limpid waves made music in their flow,
Leaping from crags, whose rugged aspect took
Semblance of infant Alps, and far below
Their hues, in many a glassy pool, did show.
There would the Hermit meditate at noon,
When all the air was languor, or would go
Thither at eve to hymn the virgin moon,
Or with the waterfall his wizard harp t' attune.

What holy breathings issued from the grot!
'Twas said a spirit held communion kind
With him who dwelt there; for about the spot
Floated such sounds of harmony refined,
They might not flow from aught of mortal mind.
Thou wert that spirit, soft Aeolian lute!
Thine &mdash; thine the voice, oh daughter of the wind,
That thrill'd at eve, when all around was mute,
Sweeter than Orphic lyre, or Pan's enchanted flute.

And well nigh might that peaceful hermit's voice
Be deem'd as sweet, so soothingly it stole
In blessed words that bade the just rejoice,
Like organ-chaunt, that doth sublimely roll
O'er the deep stillness of the listener's soul.
He shunned not converse with the humbly good;
Who look'd at eve, as to some sacred goal,
Where that meek dwelling in its loneness stood,
Calm in the shadow of the sheltering wood.

And he had themes to stir the mind of youth,
And Virtue's sterner precepts to enhance,
Restricted alway to historic truth,
Tales of high chivalry and proud joyance,
With trumpet's swell, and clang of spear and lance;
Or of those times remote in Albion's fame,
Ere the haught Norman left the fields of France,
Ere Dane usurped, or fair-hair'd Saxon came,
Or Britons bow'd to Caesar's conquering name.

When white-robed Druids, 'neath the stalwart oak,
With pomp of power and sacrificial rite,
Subdued a nation to their mystic yoke,
In that worst thraldom, Superstition's might&mdash;
When spake the voice of Prophecy at night
In cavern'd rocks with horror deep imbued&mdash;
When hymn'd the Bard the morning's glorious light,
And Cambrian harps awoke the solitude,
Sounding from ancient grove, or mountain-fastness rude.

Anon he would describe full many a scene
His feet had traversed in their wanderings past;
How man doth change with every clime his mien,
In the bleak rigours of the Northern blast,
Or where his lot on burning sands is cast:
Red Indian, reared in Transatlantic wild,
The free-born tenant of the forest vast
Or proud Europa's mind-enlightened child,
Or Afric's dusky son, ungenerously reviled.

'Twould seem his travelled steps had lingered long
Amid the beauties of thy classic shore,
Fair Italy!  fond mother of sweet song!
Land of high deeds, shrine of immortal lore!
Rich with traditions of the days of yore.
And he had crossed the blue Ionian deep&mdash;
Floated enraptured, with suspended oar,
Where the crisp'd waves their moonlight vigil keep
Round Athens' walls and Sunium's marble steep.

But these were records lock'd in mem'ry's cell&mdash;
Like Sybilline revealings, sacred kept,
Or voice inspired of Delphic oracle,
Ere Desolation in her temples wept,
And the wild ivy o'er their altars crept&mdash;
Such theme with rustic ear had suited ill&mdash;
'Twas as a chord within the sanctuary swept,
When all is hush'd in midnight's solemn still,
And the fair Huntress climbs the Delian hill.

So pass'd the quiet autumn of his age
In such pursuits as whiled the hours away.
From Wanderer grown to Anchorite and Sage;
A moonlight eve closed manhood's chequer'd day&mdash;
His mind yet ductile to the vivid play
Of Fancy, though her gleamings were more brief.
His was no mood to chide Death's long delay&mdash;
He fell, as falls October's yellow leaf,
Or as the ripe grain quits the golden sheaf.

He died &mdash; and in the churchyard where repos'd
His humble kin, a simple tomb was rear'd,
Whereon his name, whose dust was there inclosed,
Link'd with its scriptural epitaph, appeared&mdash;
A name in every gazer's heart revered.
When all was o'er, and those sad rites had ceased,
One friend there was by genial soul endeared,
Though known the last, yet not beloved the least,
Who sought with sorrowing step the jot of the deceased.

With what a solemn, what a chastened feeling
Cross we the threshold of the newly dead!
As if therein the spirit sat revealing
The words its mortal accents might have said,
Although we feel thence it for aye hath fled.
The vacant hearth, the vestments lately worn,
That fearful truth throughout the mansion spread;
Books handled oft, light toils conjointly borne,
Challenge affection's note, and make the scene forlorn.

The Hermit's tablets lay his lute beside,
With many a herb his curious hand had brought
Late from the mountains; &mdash; these the mourner eyed,
But most the tablets his attention caught,
To him inscribed in phrase with kindness fraught.
He ponder'd o'er them till the evening gloom'd,
Then homeward wended, busied with the thought
That his recordings, whom they had entomb'd
That day, should not be silently inhumed.

'Twas feelingly, albeit not wisely done&mdash;
An act his riper years may not approve:
Still the fond task on his affections won
As with its scattered elements he strove,
And thoughts and facts in union interwove.
Some meed of praise his constancy may earn,
If but regarded as a work of love.
List then, nor oh!  the Wanderer's tribute spurn,
Which Memory pours in fulness from her urn.
