See'st thou not, amidst yon splendid train,
Where hearts beat high, and eyes love's fires are glancing,
Where music swells her richest, wildest strain,
With gentle witchery the mind entrancing;
Where, 'mid the joyous smiles of ardent youth,
And brows ne'er darken'd by the cloud of sadness,
We might awhile forget the unwelcome truth,
That they must 'waken from that dream of gladness&mdash;
'Waken to feel regret, perchance almost to madness!

See'st thou not amidst that glittering throng,
One slender, beauteous form, alone reclining,
No more her pale lips breathe the soul of song&mdash;
Silent her harp, whose sweetest notes combining
With that soft plaintive voice, hath oft awoke
That thrill of rapture, which soon ends in weeping.
Fancy might whisper, as its cadence broke,
It was the melody of angels keeping
Watch o'er the quiet couch of infancy whilst sleeping.

She joins not in the dance, her cheek alone
Is pale and wan, where others brightly glowing,
Rival the rose with morning sunbeams thrown
Upon its dewy leaves, no thought bestowing
On those around her, each abstracted look
Her silent misery more than half revealing;
Telling how ill the troubled mind can brook
Such scenes of mirth; each effort for concealing,
Adds to the keen, keen pang of every blighted feeling.

And what hath blighted them?  no grief save one
Will prey upon the heart until its breaketh.
'Tis losing those we love that makes us shun
Communion with the world; then memory taketh
A sad delight in bringing to our view
The buds of promis'd joy which blossom'd never.
The tears of bitterness with which we dew
Their dark and lonely grave when doom'd to sever,
May tell that hope's fair sun hath set, alas!  for ever.

He who prossess'd her heart did prize it well,
'Twas all his own &mdash; of that he'd many a token;
And he was bound to her by that firm spell
Which nought save death's relentless hand had broken.
She hath heard his last farewell, his lip hath press'd
On her's the parting kiss &mdash; 'twas faintly given&mdash;
From that fair bosom, as in tranquil rest,
His noble spirit wing'd its way to Heaven,
And left that guileless heart, pierc'd, anguish'd, wrung and riven.
