Come to my soul, thou Spirit of the Lyre!
'Tis the deep, cloudy midnight; and the wail
Of the cold wind is on its strings of fire,
And on the far hills, rising, dimly pale!
Ah!  wake thy murmurs on the troubled gale&mdash;
Pour the sad requiem o'er the dying year&mdash;
Give to man's thoughtful eye a passing tale
Of days departed, bright as beauty's tear,
Or summer's festal sky, ere autumn clouds drew near!

From the dark sepulchre of years gone by,
A deeply mournful voice is murmuring,
"Where are the dreams of old! &mdash; the spirit high
Mounting like eagles on the fearless wing?
Where is the pride of that luxuriant spring,
Which pour'd its light on Rome &mdash; on Babylon?
&mdash;The wreaths of Time around their temples cling&mdash;
Their halls are dust! &mdash; the gold of Chaldee won&mdash;
Where sails the bittern's wing, when the bright day is done!

Even thus with the past year; &mdash; its morn was gay&mdash;
Sweet flowers were on the earth's green bosom springing&mdash;
And streaming sunlight bless'd the sky of May,
Where early birds their joyous way were winging,
A dream of love to youth's fresh spirit bringing
And all was gladness o'er the laughing earth:&mdash;
To the tall oak the sunny vine was clinging&mdash;
And sending echoes, e'en to home and hearth,
The sweet blue streams, set free, pour'd out a voice of mirth!

Then came the summer's prime &mdash; its long, bright day&mdash;
With garniture of wood, and field, and stream&mdash;
The golden sun outpour'd his gladding ray,
And the blue sea danced in his boundless gleam;&mdash;
When like a soft, and faint-hearted song, would seem
The cheerful murmur of the drowsy bee,
About the full grown flowers &mdash; and like a dream
Spread out for man's blest eye the scene might be,
While a soft, breezy chant, was in the green-wood tree!

Then frown'd the autumnal cloud; the shrouded sky
Its multitude of gleams and stars withdrew;
The flowers grew pale; and summer-brooks were high,
And imaged back no more a heaven of blue;&mdash;
No moon smiled out upon the evening dew&mdash;
The squirrel's footstep rustled in the glen&mdash;
The red leaves fell, and fitful night-winds blew;
And to the bright south-west, away from men,
Far, on their gleaming plumes, roam'd the wild birds again!

But man is changing in the changing year&mdash;
Shadows o'ersweep the day-spring of the heart;
When gazing back upon Time's dim career,
He marks youth's cheerful images depart!
Then will lone Memory her tales impart
Of early buds, all ashes in the urn:&mdash;
Mournful and sweet her reveries! &mdash; but we start&mdash;
And from lost years unto the present turn&mdash;
Closing from mind's deep cell, the voiceless thoughts that burn!

How many dreams have to the dust gone down&mdash;
Witness thou fading and departing year!
Since last thy spring enwreathed her flowery crown,&mdash;
Lo!  gentle forms have lain upon the bier,
Where thoughtful sorrow pour'd the pensive tear!
Genius and beauty gather'd to their rest&mdash;
Death, in all climes, is on his way of fear&mdash;
His arrow trembles in Youth's budding breast&mdash;
Oh!  were his power decay'd, how might Earth's love be bless'd!
