In thee, and in thy glory, we behold
What man through countless ages still reveres,
What millions worshipp'd, what the great of old,
Though all-imperfectly, amid the spheres
Shaped as a God, whose smile might dry their tears:
Ancient of days!  unfading glory!  thou
With all the lustre of ten thousand years,
Smilest on us in our sin and sorrow now!
Oh, was it crime for man before thy shrine to bow?

The ancient Persian, on his flowery hill,
Kneeling before thy cloudless majesty,
Of all earth's wanderers err'd the least, who still
Kept thy bright throne for ever in his eye.
Almighty minister of the Most High!
Through what vast fields and deserts dost thou roam,
When thou hast left thy palace in our sky!
Where is thy bed?  where dost thou choose thy dome?
The worlds are 'neath thy feet &mdash; eternity thy home!

Thou look'st upon the stars, as little children
Playing about thy fiery fount of light,
Their silver eyeballs with thy rays bewildering.
When thou putt'st on thy morning garments bright,
Who dares to eye thee boldly sight to sight?
No!  thou alone art monarch of the heaven,
The moon herself but glimmers in thy might!
Unmoved, though storms are round thy temples driven,
Thou stand'st like holy peace, to soothe creation riven!

Thy charms depart not with the night!  thy face
To other worlds, when ours is sleeping, gleams;
Time cannot steal from thee one sparkling grace!
No!  let me scorn all philosophic dreams
Of comets journeying to restore thy beams;
Thy path is where our thoughts can never go&mdash;
Through heaven's far wonders; and each planet seems
Proud of thy beauty, while they round thee bow,
Or crowd about thy breast to share thy deathless glow.

And thou dost wander through the universe,
The tempest sweeping far beneath thy feet;
At thy command, his blackest clouds disperse&mdash;
He cannot quench thy bright and living heat;
Methinks the Eternal keeps in thee his seat,
Borne by the whirlwind on thy flaming car,
Rolling athwart the mighty concave fleet,
That he may see each vast and distant star,
And fling his living light o'er all his realms afar.

I fain would be thy worshipper &mdash; thou art
So like the God that made thee!  and thy might
Staggers the boldest fancies of the heart;
Amid thy chambers of undying light,
Thou makest eternity around the bright,
Earth, and her thousand empires feel decay;
Stars droop with years &mdash; but thou receivest no blight;
Unsullied still, thou art the came to-day,
As when Time wander'd forth &mdash; an infant on his way!

Thou wert the beacon-light, which brightly glow'd
When young Creation from her cradle sprang,
When in the shilling sky, the sons of God
And all the morning stars together sang;
When nature's bosom felt sin's earliest pang,
Thy beam descended drooping man to cheer;
And when destruction at the last will twang
Time's funeral trump, thou wilt not leave him here,
But journey with his soul into a happier sphere!

Thou wert a wonder to the ancients, and
Thou art a mystery still.  Thou wert not made
To wither with the world; and ruin's hand,
Which makes creation and her millions fade,
Passes in vain o'er thee; and undecay'd
Thou stand'st amid the storms that round thee roll;
Oh, who can tell the years, which thou hast sway'd
The empire of the sky from pole to pole,
Star of the Living God!  great nature's mighty soul!
