Two creatures of a pleasant life were mine;
My house they filled with a perpetual joy;
Twin lamps that chased all darkness did they shine,
My fairy girl and merry-hearted boy.
I never dreamt death would their mirth destroy;
For they were dwelling 'mid life's freshest springs;
And I was busied with a fond employ,
Ranging the future on Hope's fearless wings,
And gathering for them thence how many pleasant things!

In truth I was a proud and joyful man,
As from the floor unto the very roof
Their murmured songs and bursts of laughter ran,
And jocund shouts which needed no reproof.
All weariness, all gloom was kept aloof
By their quaint shows, and fancies ever new;
Now bending age with staff in its behoof;
Now island Crusoe and "man Friday" true;
Now shipmates far at sea with all their jovial crew.

But a dark dream has swept across my brain,
A wild, a dismal dream that will not break;
A rush of fear, an agony of pain&mdash;
Pangs and suspense that inly make me quake,
My boy!  my boy!  I saw thy sweet eyes take
A strange, unearthly lustre, and then fade;
And oh!  I deemed my heart must surely break
As, stooping, I thy pleasant locks surveyed,
And felt that thou must die, and they in dust be laid.

Oh!  precious in thy life of happiness!
Daily and hourly valued more and more!
Yet, to the few brief days of thy distress
How faint all love my spirit knew before!
I turn, and turn, and ponder o'er and o'er,
Insatiate, all that sad and dreamy time.
Thy words thrill through me; &mdash; in my fond heart's core
I hoard thy sighs, and tears shed for no crime,
And thy most patient love sent from a happier clime.

How dim and dismal is my home! &mdash; a sense
Of thee spreads through it, like a haunting ill:&mdash;
For thou &mdash; for ever &mdash; thou hast vanish'd thence!
This, this pursues me, pass where'er I will:
And all the traces thou hast left but fill
The hollow of thine absence with more pain.
I toil to keep thy living image still,
But Fancy feebly doth her part maintain,
I see, yet see thee not, my child!  as I would fain.

In dreams for ever thy dear form I grasp;
In noon-day reveries do I rove &mdash; then start&mdash;
And certainly, as with an iron clasp,
Shuts down once more to misery my heart.
The world from thee as a shorn flower doth part,
Ending its care and knowledge with &mdash; "Farewell!"
But in my soul a shrined life thou art,
Ordained with Memory and strong Hope to dwell,
And with all pure desires to sanctify thy cell.

Spring like a spirit is upon the earth&mdash;
Forth gush the flowers and fresh leaves of the tree;
And I had planned, with wonder and with mirth,&mdash;
The bird, the nest, the blossom, and the bee,
To fill thy boyish bosom &mdash; till its glee
O'er flowed my own with transport!  In far years
I felt thy hand in mine, by stream and lea
Wandering in gladness &mdash; But these blinding tears,
Why will they thus gush forth, though richer hope appears?

Far other land thy happy feet have trod;
Far other scenes thy tender soul has known;
The golden city of the Eternal God;
The rainbow splendours of the Eternal Throne.
Through the pearl-gate how lightly hast thou flown!
The streets of lucid gold &mdash; the chrysolite
Foundations have received thee. &mdash; Dearest one!
That thought alone can break Affliction's might&mdash;
Feeling that thou art blest, my heart again is light.

Thanks to the framer of life's mystery!
Thanks to the illuminator of the grave!
Vainly on Time's obscure and tossing sea
Hope did I seek, and comfort did I crave;
But He who made, neglecteth not to save.&mdash;
My child! &mdash; thou hast allied me to the blest;
I cannot fear what thou didst meekly brave;
I cannot cease to long with thee to rest&mdash;
And heaven is doubly heaven with thee, with thee, possessed!
