A Spirit sits amid the ruin'd walls
Of Earth's fallen temples, and continually
On Man's doom'd race, Cassandra-like, she calls,
Though her's is not the voice of prophecy,
But a stern record of the days gone by;
A chronicle of ruin dark and drear&mdash;
A tale that ends in mutability;
But, as deaf adders, who a sullen ear
Turn to the charmer's voice, they will not hear.

Still fret they on midst waves of toil and crime,
Lay up their stores where moth and rust corrode,
Then float like bubbles down the stream of Time,
Till on Oblivion's shores their griefs displode.&mdash;
Let him whose spirit earth's wild tumults goad,
Whose hopes have vanish'd like a lost star's beam,
Seek the lone haunts where grandeur once abode,
Where cities through the desert air did gleam,
And learn, that life itself is but a dream.

There, leaning on some mouldering column's base,
Whose brethren on the earth have long been laid, 
Where the wild rose in solitary grace
Doth bloom, or ivy flings a pensive shade,
A holier influence will his thoughts pervade&mdash;
A power that mocks at mortal woe's control;&mdash;
And truth will come, in changeless hues array'd;
And peace, not of the world, will gently roll
Its healing waters o'er his wounded soul.

For what his woes?  the conflict of a day&mdash;
A jar in Ocean's diapason deep.
And what his doom?  since empires pass away
Like vapour from the hills, when the winds creep
From out their caves, and o'er their summits sweep.
Eternal Nature wheels her constant round,
Day dawns, and Night her vigil dim doth keep
O'er the gray cairn and green funereal mound,
Where by-gone nations rest in sleep profound.

Go search th' arena of that sterner age,
Where, in his infancy of being, Man
Traced his first records on tradition's page&mdash;
That orient world, from whence the full tide ran
Fruitful with life &mdash; where pomp and power began
To dream themselves immortal, or aspired
To lengthen out life's all too fleeting span
By efforts of the mind; renown acquired;
Or works of art, by Genius' self inspired.

Go seek, and thou shalt find some shapeless mass
That vainly 'gainst decay's approach contends:
Some dark enigma of the thing it was&mdash;
Mammoth of Art's creation &mdash; o'er which bends
The man of ancient lore, and fondly lends
Undying glory to its greatness gone;
And in his zeal some truth with fiction blends;
And ponders, 'wilder'd, o'er each crumbling stone,
Rich in a language to his race unknown.

Tyre, Carthage, Ninus &mdash; thou, Persepolis,
O'er whose destruction mystery hangs a cloud,
In whose shorn splendour we discern but this,
Thou wert of eld a fane or palace proud,
But Fame hath ceased to vaunt of thee aloud.
Ye are in time's horizon seen to shine,
Like islands hail'd through ocean's misty shroud;
Mellow'd and mingling with the heaving brine,
And lighted up by Glory's red decline.

Queen of the deserts!  flair Palmyra &mdash; thou
From whose high altars to the morning skies
(Whilst white-robed priests their reverent heads did bow)
Rich incense and triumphant hymns did rise,&mdash;
Prone in the dust, thy marble beauty lies&mdash;
Thy regal brow hath lost its diadem;
And through thy halls, in desolation, sighs
The desert-winds &mdash; oh, Earth's once peerless gem!
Chanting for thee a mournful requiem.

Now, in thy glorious Temple of the Sun
The plundering Arab makes his midnight lair,
Musing on deeds of outrage to be done;
Or, shadow'd by some column's marble glare,
Sends the swift arrow through the sounding air;
Or, monarch of its loneness, scours the plain,
Arm'd with his lance, and mounted on his mare;
In hot pursuit the ostrich's spoil to gain,
Dauntless he thunders by, and shouts amain.

But midst the cities of the ancient world,
None rivall'd thee, Chaldean Babylon!
Ere the proud Persian 'gainst thy bulwarks hurl'd
Destruction's mace, and through thy rivers won
Treacherous access.  Oh thou, whom Belus' son
Builded in beauty by Euphrates' side,
Where echoed sound of harp and tymbalon,
And hearts ran o'er with joyance and with pride,
As though there were in fate no counter-tide.

Thou, with thy hundred burnish'd brazen gates,
That to the wealth of India open'd free&mdash;
And vessels, laden with their precious freights, 
Incense, and gold, and balm of Araby&mdash;
And palace-roofs, where groves waved pleasantly,
And gardens, where thy queen-like daughters danced
To chime of lute, where many a fruitful tree
Red in the flush of thy rich sunlight glanced&mdash;
And thy broad way, where fiery war-steeds pranced.

These were thy boast, but lo!  a voice from heaven
Decreed thy fall, and to the slayer's wrath
And to the spoiler's havoc thou wast given:
Now o'er thy grave not e'en the shepherd hath
Made for his wandering flocks a rugged path.
But from thy palaces the moping owl
Doth shrilly hoot &mdash; and, as the Scripture saith,
Within thy dwellings doleful things do howl,
And round thy walls the wild beasts nightly prowl.

Yea, from the tablets of the living earth
Dull Time hath swept ye, cities of the dead!
Your matchless grandeur owed its giant birth
To kings whose fame, like smoke hath vanished.
Yet is your dust, whereon we heedless tread,
Fraught with a lesson.  Yea, a Spirit dwells
Where your proud fanes o'er sandy plains are spread;
She to the winds her tale of ruin tells,
And weaves with fingers wan her solemn spells.
