She that was deem'd eternal &mdash; she who made
The world one sepulchre on which to tread&mdash;
Ay, she the nation's spoiler, now is laid
Low as the humblest of her captive dead!
The bloody laurel withers on her head,
The sable owl can hold his carnival
Within her marble palaces, and spread
His song of desolation in the hall,
Where Caesar's acts went forth earth's millions to enthrall!

Hail, City of earth's early glory! &mdash; thou
Whose children were as gods; and at thy feet,
Doom'd the proud empires of the world to bow;
No more in thy high places millions meet,
But silence rules each desolated street!
Where are thy thousand tribes, thy trophies fair?
Go, view the fallen capitol, and greet
The dark inhabitant that's only there:
The owl is in her nest &mdash; thy hosts, thy thousands, where?

Oblivion is their sepulchre &mdash; the fox
Of the far desert, howls their dirge alone;
The wandering sunbeam in the darkness mocks
The splendour of the past; the sculptured stone
Which now belies the dead &mdash; a ruin grown!
Yet man's frail dust has only pass'd away;
His name, but not his labours, now are gone;
Thy giant piles, seem in their strength to say,
Though creeds and empires change, yet we will not decay.

Oh, thou that wert time's mightiest, and gave forth
The edicts of the world; what art thou now,
Since the volcano of the stormy north
Pour'd its red lava on thy kingly brow!
Thou art a by-word to the nations; thou
Who ruled their fortunes like th' Eternal One&mdash;
A hissing, a reproach; they've seen thee bow,
A shade of other days, thy glory gone:
Thy honour is the dust, the sepulchre thy throne!

Death's hand is on thy beauty, and we see
Beneath his feet thy ancient glories cast;
They tell the edicts of eternity&mdash;
That all must crumble 'neath the awful blast
Of the Omnipotent; &mdash; that long hath pass'd,
And still is passing o'er earth's wither'd brow!
Oh!  what is more sublime, than ruin's last
Deep, solitary, silent, voice &mdash; which thou,
Rome, in thy loneliness, breathes to the stranger now!

Roma!  triumph in thy just decline,
Dark desolation is thy fittest dower;
And let the Hebrew's bitter curse be thine&mdash;
May death for ever rule thy midnight hour;
Cursed be the hand that plants again thy power;
May he upon his kindred place the stone,
That builds once more, oppression's gloomy tower;
Be thou, when other monuments are gone,
A heap to tell mankind of tyranny o'erthrown!
