Yet, yet again those notes &mdash; the witchery
Of those soft sounds, to trance me with their spell!
Stilling each impulse till this body be
Like a soul rapt in calm ineffable;
No &mdash; it hath ceased, is broken:  I know well
Now, why it moved me, for a grief is come,
A shade of sadness yet too light to dwell:
I heard it when in boyhood I did roam,
It brought back olden days and voices of my home!

Days of departed childhood!  ye are gone,
Mingled with the great stream of things which were:
And I, lone relic of them, still meet on
The brunt of years traced deep by time and care;
And yet a strain, a sound of air,
Comes o'er me, and unites me to the past;
Yea, doth incorporate my being there,
Making me all I was; it could not last&mdash;
The enchantress waved her wand &mdash; the day-dream was o'ercast!

And yet so soft, so holy was that vision
Given, and when o'er, so gently roll'd away,
That though, when wakened from the dream Elysian
I had indulged in, I could not be gay:
Yet was the sadness softened all away
By that wild cadence lulling pain to rest,
Requiem of memories as soft as they!
Leaving behind a calm, yea, joy suppressed,
Such as young Hope may feel on Love's reposing breast.

Thou Power mysterious and lovely!  Thou
Fountain of Joy!  and shrine where grief doth flee:
Thou, whose sole sway all hearts avow,
Whose reign hath been all time, and e'er shall be;
Wakener of soul!  divinest Melody!
Is there to man a gift more sacred given?
No &mdash; Love himself draws half his joys from thee,
When the frail ties that bound to earth are riven,
And Hope deems thee the link that raiseth her to heaven!

And why should I all vainly seek to express
Thee, where the mightiest have failed?  what art
Of lifeless words can on the sense impress
Feelings that thrill like lightening through the heart!
Thou, the Invisible, dost dwell apart,
Like beauty, hallowing all through earth and air;
As forms of heaven that from the canvas start,
When we gaze on, nor break our silence dare,
So, in our heart of hearts we feel &mdash; we feel thee there!
