Soon as the east its portals doth unfold,
And gives the morning forth in summer pride;
The hills rejoicing in its streaks of gold,
Shake off the veils that would their splendour hide.
The fleecy tenants, on the sunny side,
With grateful bleatings, do the morning hail;
Deep in the glen the folds are opened wide:
The herds spread slowly o'er the dewy vale,
And with their hollow lowings fill the balmy gale.

No shepherds' lay this sacred morn is heard,
The tuneful pipe is silent on the hill,
The milk maid's note by beauty's self endear'd,
The ploughman's ditty, and his whistle shrill:
But sweet the murmuring of the wimpling rill,
Seeking its way beneath the flowery thorn,
Where the grey linnet opes his little bill,
And pours his mellow measures to the morn,
In concord with the lark on lofty pinions borne.

The parent cottager refreshed with sleep,
The glow of gratitude his bosom warms,
To Him, whose mighty arm does constant keep,
And shields his cottage from all nightly harms.
No painful retrospect his soul alarms,
Through scenes of guilt he never learned to stray;
Thrice happy he, who, 'midst sweet rural charms,
In calm content sees seasons pass away,
Simplicity his guide, and innocence his stay.

Perhaps upon th' enamell'd  bank reclined,
Or stretched at ease within the, rural bower,
In sweetest converse with his Maker joined,
He joyous spends the fleeting morning hour.
Than evening dew drops to the drooping flower,
When burning sun-beams scorch its slender stem,
Still more refreshing falls Religion's power
Upon his heart, that feels the genial beam
Which darts from scripture truth &mdash; the heaven-inspiring theme.

Beside him she that, o'er the milky pail,
Gives to his children's wants her kindly aid,
In lusty breathing snuffs the scented gale,
And tastes the fragrance of the clover'd mead.
The tiny boy, who wont her way to lead,
This morn the kind indulgent parent frees;
Devoid of care he loiters on his bed,
Or otherwise, as may his fancy please,
And deems that he this morn enjoys a glorious ease.

And now around the tender mother, all
The band of little cottagers proclaim
Their puny wants:  she calms their clamorous call,
Her ever nearest and her dearest aim.
Clad by her labour, grateful for the same,
Their artless tongues speak music to her ear,
The thrill of secret joy darts through her frame,
That they can with such decency appear
This day, from pious lips the sacred truths to hear.

And from the cottage gable now is seen
The guest expected, eager hastening on;
The picture she of rosy Health I ween,
And Innocence that guilt hath never known.
To serve in Town their Mary late had gone;
A clamorous welcome meets her at the door,
And many a freak of playful love is shewn,
As round the children's laps she deals her store
Of sugared sweets so rare, the like unseen before.

The parent pair rejoice to see her well;
Enquiry fond is by the mother made;
They joyous list to bear their daughter tell,
How she in all her undertakings sped:
Of them she serves, delighted, speaks the maid,
The father's grateful prayers to heaven ascend,&mdash;
"O may their house's honours never fade;
But heavenward still may all their journeyings tend,
That do in early life the poor man's child befriend!"

The mother hastes to crown their simple board:
No rich repast kind Providence has sent;
Though plain the fare their humble stores afford,
Yet rich the feast &mdash; when, shared with sweet Content.
And, ever thankful for the blessings lent,
A partial glance the parents round them throw;
And Oh!  can aught their humble joys prevent,
To mark the ruddy cheeks that round them glow,
And list the broken words from infant lips that flow?

At such a time the pious heart can feel,
(All worldly cares beside are quite forgot)
All of its joy that heaven can here reveal;
That pure delight is felt, the same, I wot,
In splendid palace and in humble cot:
He wanders far from Wisdom's heavenly way,
And knows not truth, who deems the peasant's lot
Behind his lord's, in aught that God will say
Is nearer to his love, and where his peace will stay.

The father now, right reverently, prepares
To bid his children join in praises due
To Him whose goodness every day declares,
And render thanks for mercies ever new;
Perhaps the Saviour he presents to view,
The theme most dear to every Christian heart;
How sorrows did his humble life pursue,
And how he groaned, in agony apart,
To vanquish Death for man, and blunt for him his dart.

His bosom fired by the ennobling theme,
The father prays:  "Upon thy throne on high,
O God!  for ever lauded be thy name,
Who, in thy mercy, still hast pass'd us by,
And gives us hope of joys beyond the sky:
We bless thee that, in health, we meet again;
Lord on thy goodness may we still rely;
And, when on earth we may no more remain,
O may we meet in heaven set free from doubt and pain."

This duty o'er, for Church they all prepare;
The mother stays behind to lock the door;
One bears a bible, others psalm-books bear,
The youngling cottagers, who trot before,
Still fondly cling to Mary for her store.
Then friends and neighbours, meeting on the road,
In kindly converse join.  The sage's lore
Instructs the young as onward still they plod,
And mix in pious groups around the house of God.

There tales of gladness joyfully are heard,
And tears are shed o'er stories of distress;
Friends meet with friends, by friendship old endear'd,
And share each other's woes, and make them less;
Oh yes!  when sorrows on the lone heart press,
The smile of friendship drives them far away.
Some seek apart their Maker to address,
And o'er the page of inspiration, pray
For his assisting might and saving grace alway.

A gentle youth has Mary now address'd,
On whom she fondly turns a partial glance;
A passion pure is by that look express'd,
That wakes, and warms in either breast at once:
Uncheck'd their blending spirits do advance,
And fondly meet in love's mysterious tie,
Not led by form through fashion's mazy dance;
Attracted strong, by kindred sympathy,
She feels that love is bliss, and why should she deny?

The past to them the present much endears,
Their early love in infancy began,
Grew with their growth, and ripen'd with their years;
And now that she's a woman, he a man,
He long has wish'd the furtherance of a plan
Would make his Mary dear his own through life;
His heart now swells with rapture, that he can
Propose the day will make them man and wife,&mdash;
When wedlock's purest joys, their virtue will make rife.

Now every sense to soft composure brought,
All eager list the message from the sky;
How that for man, Redemption has been bought,
And pardon free for those in sin that lie;
That Christ their High Priest, has gone up on high,
And offers of his Father's grace hath made
To those, who from their former guilt, will fly
To him, who suffering in the guilty's stead,
For Adam's fallen race a heavy ransom paid.

And O!  as evil cannot turn to good,
If unassisted by a power divine,
O!  seek a saving interest in his blood,
Who can the heart to righteousness incline,
The bands of sin for ever can untwine,
And will present you, when the combat's won,
Pure as th' immortal Seraphim, that shine
In cloudless glory round his Fathers throne,
To Him, th' Eternal God, who reigns in heaven alone.

Oh!  how can man, so graciously endued
With faculties, that time nor space can bind,
By error be so fearfully subdued,
That he annihilation seeks to find,
To quench the fire of the immortal mind
In dust, on which he daily lives to tread
The grovelling sceptic, to himself unkind,
And those alas!  whose wavering minds are fed
Upon his poison rank, shall yet believe and dread.

Then do not let another moment pass,
For this may be the last to us that's given;
Gaunt Death stands ready, with his dart and glass,
To strike the blow commission'd him by Heaven:
O would you wish your journey may be even,
Your home where min'string angels will attend,
Be sin forever from each bosom driven;
Seek God to he your Father, Guide, and Friend,
Your portion will be bliss unmingled, without end.

Now all disperse, with prayer and praise to God,
Each to his home, in quiet and in peace,
The humble cottager to his abode
Returns, new strengthen'd in a growth of grace,
That yet to bright perfection will increase.
His children all are summoned round his chair,
Deep thought is fixed in every infant face,
For every one must to their sire declare
What of the goodman's words their memories young may bear.

He, in his turn, discourses more at large,
And truths explains that will their peace promote,
And by their humble hopes in Heaven, will charge
Them that these truths must never lie forgot,
Or God, from out his book their names will blot.
Hence so pre-eminent dear Scotia stands
For worth and wisdom:  from the lowly cot
Hence genius soars so bright, that it commands
In learning, arts, and arms, the praise of other lands.

Thus, in sweet converse, glides the evening bye;
Perhaps, before the sire, is open'd wide
The book, that speaks the will of the Most High,
His dearest treasure, counsellor, and guide;
Or reads of them, despite of tyrant pride,
Who for the Kirk, and for their country stood,
Nobly regardless of what might betide;
Midst persecution's rage, through fire and flood
Their testimony bore, and seal'd it with their blood.

Yet, o'er their sufferings, could the good man weep.
By pangs indignant is his bosom stung,
That tyrants, in the blood of saints, should steep
Their guilty hands, yet from that blood hath sprung,
(For that to God be laud from every tongue,)
A plant whose branches beautifully grow,
And, 'mong its leaves, ambrosial fruits are hung,
That to the weak and weary, strength bestow;
A balm for every wound, a cure for every woe.

Now evening's shadows round the cottage spread;
For evening praise the father bids prepare:
Heart-prompted practice in the lowly shed.
His children, friends, and country, pass in prayer
Before him, and are left to God's blest care;
Religion sheds her influence o'er his breast,
No home for pride or avarice is there,
Bless'd in themselves, and by their Maker bless'd,
The humble cottage inmates sink to balmy rest.
