Sweet Harp, I love thee!  and thy soothing strain,
My bosom's solace I have often found,
Whether thy numbers warble to complain,
Or wake to gladness, with a sprightly sound,
My spirit follows through the magic round
Of all thy varied sweets, a willing slave.
O!  let no tones uncouth the rapt ear wound
Whilst Inspiration's heavenly aid I crave,
To sing how lived the good, to sing how died the brave,

My country dear!  in thy recording page
Is many a proud enobling theme for song;
For glory gilds thy tale of every age,
Where virtue still is found, with valour strong;
O long to Britain may the praise belong:
The happy boast that, 'midst her subject sea,
Like Hesperus, Night's starry train among,
O'er all the nations of the wide world, she
In native brightness, shines illustrious, great, and free.

'Tis mine to sing her hour of woe and dread,
Her starless midnight of Oppression's reign;
When ruin's dismal pall, by tyrants spread,
In threefold darkness wrapt her hill and plain,
And Havoc swept in wrath her fair domain.
And how fair Freedom did her skies relume,
And, from the blood of Martyrs, sprung again
Her glorious plant, with renovated bloom,
That spreads its beauteous bought; o'er proud Oppression's tomb.

On Avon's side, 'mid Scotia's mountains grey,
A lovely Hamlet rose, unknown to fame,
Where worth and innocence for long held sway,
O'er simple jocund hearts, estranged from blame;
Each reverend father, and each matron dame,
Grew old amidst the love of those, who grew
To life and beauty round them, and who came,
Pledges of sweet affection, ever new,
That still on life's decline a noon-tide lustre threw.

The heart's fond feelings here untroubled ran
In the smooth current of domestic peace,
Nor hollow hearted Pride, nor Envy wan,
E'er drove the smile of gladness from their face,
Nor marr'd the virtues of this pious race:
Contentment sooth'd their toil, to rural glee
The little cares of life would aye give place,
And, round the cottage hearth, you still might see
The smile of tender joy, from affectation free.

Amidst the trees, in summer verdure clad,
That lent the dewy air a rich perfume,
And o'er each sense a witching influence had,
Where flowery carpets, wrought in Nature's loom,
Glowed o'er the earth in wild luxuriant bloom;
There Hepburn's mansion rose, where, many a day,
For homeless wanderers there still was room;
And pity loved to bid the friendless stay,
To share the cup of joy, that chased their cares away.

The woods were his, that kindly shelter lent,
The meadow green, and yellow waving field,
Round which the stream in gentle windings went,
And bade the ground a richer harvest yield,
On which might Industry her fair hopes build,
And trust unshaken; His the mountains brown,
That rose, with easy swell, the vale to shield
From northern blasts and surly Winter's frown,
When, from his icy throne, he pours the tempests down.

A blooming boy, to heir his wealth and name,
From Hepburn's wedded love, right early sprung;
Some seven years more, and then another came
Of softer sex; to both, the parents clung,
Affectionately fond; from Walter's tongue,
When broken accents, in light prattle, fell,
In melting tenderness they o'er him hung:
A parent's sympathy alone can tell
What rapture thrill'd each heart, and heav'd each bosom's swell,

And in the covert of a neighbouring grove,
(The gentle rivulet flowing soft between,
Wherein the finny tribes were free to rove,
While summer suns, at sultry noon serene,
Gleam'd on the mirror of the woodland scene,)
The venerable Crawford dwelt; one fair
And only daughter, to his heart had been
The magnet still to which it turn'd; and there
Young Walter early stray'd, the good man's love to share.

Still Emma Crawford by his side was seen,
Their joys were one in childhood's early day,
Whether, like fawns they sported on the green,
Or, through the garden alleys, sought their way,
'Mong arbours fair and flowery nooks, to play.
The rose's freshness dwelt upon each child;
At times, in sport, he from her sight would stray;
Then tears would glisten in her blue eyes mild,
And sobs would call him back, and then again she smiled.

His little feats were all by her inspired;
For her he ventured to the tallest bough,
And plucked the fair fruit which she most admired,
And oft the wild woods he would wander through,
And what, in all his search, he found of new
Or beautiful, he took; her bower then sought,
And gladly gave them to his Emma's view;
And much she loved the fruits and flowers he brought:
Thus were in early life her young affections bought.

Their years were equal; she remain'd alone
Of all that wont to grace her father's hall;
Save one dear pledge, there now to him was none,
That could the memory of the past recall,
Ere false hopes crush'd his spirit in their fall;
Though six fair children to the earth he gave,
With christian fortitude he bore it all,
Till ah!  his faithful wife no art could save,
But, with her blooming band, dropt to the lonely grave.

Her last faint smile was upon Emma's birth.
To him she loved she meant it to convey
The fond assurance, that one tie to earth
She yet had left him, on her dying day,
That Heaven would spare his sorrows to allay.
He rear'd the nursling up, with tender care,
She ever nestling in his bosom lay;
He offered up to Heaven the fervent prayer
That she might grow in grace, as well as beauty rare.

Oh!  how his heart, of other hopes forlorn,
Clung to this scion of so fair a tree,
And from his breast, it pluck'd of grief the thorn,
The playmate of her infant sports to be,
To meet the kiss she proffer'd on his knee;
And when she gave to God, at morn and even,
Her young heart's offering, next her parent's, she
Remember'd Walter's name:  so artless given,
Could prayers so pure, ere fail to waft their way to heaven?

And long, in bands of happy union join'd,
Had Hepburn, and his neighbour Crawford been;
A friendly intercourse of heart and mind
Had ever pass'd, since early life, between
Their kindred bosoms; dear to them I ween,
The mutual hope which early liking gave,
That yet, at Hymen's altar, would be seen
Their blooming offspring, and that Joy would wave
His light wings o'er their heads &mdash; the beautiful and brave.

As, up the hill of life, the children climb,
More wide expand the blossoms of their spring,
And, led by love, came on their summer prime,
Affection's fruit maturely ripening.
The smiling Hours, flew by on golden wing,
As forth they often wandered, to adore
Great Nature's charms; for they to them would bring
The glowing ecstasy, the flowing o'er
Of feeling pure, which melts their hearts who know her lore.

While Day stood trembling on th' horizon's verge,
And, o'er the sky, his rosy blushes spread,
To mark the landscape from the gloom emerge,
They loved to climb the trackless mountain's head,
And, when the sun up heaven his journey sped,
What mystic transports o'er each bosom stole,
When, with a thousand tints of light and shade,
That, ever varying, move the gazer's soul,
Great nature 'gan around her glories to unroll.

The mountain tops arose, as if in dance,
In gladness round them, and each cliffy hold
Bright'ning and smiling in the Morning's glance,
Shone o'er the dusky vale, a tower of gold;
Yet o'er the lake, the promontory bold,
And circling craggy steeps, their shadows threw:
Anon the sunshine o'er its bosom roll'd
And kindled to a flame its waters blue,
That shone, a silver plain, out branch'd the landscape through.

As, on each feature of this scene sublime,
The eye and heart, in heavenly musings, dwelt;
Fair, as when angels "peal'd the march of time,"
And sung creation by th' Almighty built;
Within a present deity they felt,
And own'd his power, and his superior love;
In raptures inexpressible they melt,
That thus they should th' Eternal's goodness prove
That made the world so fair, and fills the heavens above.

Children of Nature, from the world shut out,
And shutting out the world, still round to them,
(Their hearts estranged from jealousy and doubt)
Each Season, robed in placid gladness, came
And fanned, with gentle wing, th' undying flame
That burn'd within them; ne'er, O gentle Love!
Did two hearts more devoted own thy name
And influence, ne'er did thy spirit move
Two bosoms more thine own, more fit thy joys to prove.

The spirit of her being Emma drew
From Walter's smile, as, to the ray of heaven,
The rose upon its thorn, refresh'd with dew,
Spreads forth its tender leaves rejoicing, even
So to her Sun, were her soft blushes given;
To him she was the source of life and light,
With whom he cared not where he might be driven;
For she was as the morning to his sight,
And pour'd upon his soul a stream of pure delight.

The sunny hill they roam'd, at eventide,
With hearts as light as Hebe's, ever young,
Or smiling sat them by the fountain side,
While gentle converse flow'd from either tongue,
On which the ear and heart delighted hung;
And now their youthful vows to song were given;
The descant, as their blending voices sung,
The way-worn pilgrim, 'neath the star of even,
Has list'ning stood entranced, and deem'd the strain from heaven.

Thus pass'd their youth, as, on a summer sea,
Their bark of life held on its joyous way,
From treacherous rocks and frightful breakers free;
And all was sunshine, and the wild waves lay
In quiet round them, or but heaved in play;
It seem'd as if the world, for them alone,
In all its pomp and pride was made, and they
Sole dwellers there, so well each answering tone
Convey'd from heart to heart, the rapture all their own.

But now, O Love!  thy sun a while must set,
And Scotia's realm no trace of thee must know,
A day must dawn, portentous, big with fate,
And signs are seen of strife, and blood, and woe:
Oppression dares aside her mask to throw,
And arms her with the engines of her power;
And thou, my Harp!  anon, must change thy flow,
And sing thy Country, in her perilous hour,
When tyrants' rage is up their victims to devour.

Was it for this my Country!  loyal, true,
Thou bad'st the exile to his home return?
That in thy blood he might his bands imbrue&mdash;
For promis'd gladness teach thee how to mourn&mdash;
The twice attested covenant to spurn&mdash;
Upon his God unblushing turn his back&mdash;
To bid the flames of persecution burn&mdash;
To break thy best and bravest on the rack&mdash;
And tread thy rights in dust, his thirst of power to slake?

To see the altars of thy God o'erthrown,
And fire and sword his worshippers pursue;
A creed imposed, a faith thou dared'st not own,
The creature claim the great Creator's due,
And wield his power fair Freedom to subdue,
Thou couldst not brook.  The worthies of the land,&mdash;
And it was well they were not faint nor few,
Reluctant long, at last unsheath'd the brand,
And fearless stood, prepared the tyrant to withstand.

And Crawford, who, in battles of his youth,
Had gain'd from friends and foes a soldier's name,
The first to combat in the cause of truth&mdash;
Her latest champion on the field of fame&mdash;
The oppressor's rod his spirit could not tame;
Superior to his cruel wrongs it rose;
Nor patriot ever felt a purer flame
Than his, to grapple with his Country's foes,
Who trode her glory down, and triumph'd in her woes.

"Shall we," he said, "our right by birth forego
And tamely yield us to the tyrant's yoke,
The glow of liberty no more to know,
But drink life's bitter draught, to slavery broke?
No &mdash; rather meet him in the battle's shock:
A traitor to his country and his God
Is he, who dares his manhood thus to mock.
We live to tread the path our fathers trod,
And Victory crown'd their toil, and Glory deck'd their sod.

"The home, the country, which their swords redeem'd,
For lasting infamy we dare not sell:
The faith we hold, for which their blood hath stream'd,
And swell'd the torrents of their native vale,
Lives there a man whom tyrants may compel
It to resign?  'Twas not for such a son
The sire a conqueror or martyr fell.
Our father's swords are ours:  the prize they won
Shall yet be ours, when we their race of glory run."

His casque had Hepburn fitted on his head,
And seized with eager grasp his battle brand,
And fast and far th' heroick ardour spread,
And gather'd round the flower of all the land.
Their mutual wrongs inspired the patriot band,
To make their much loved country's cause their own;
True as the warrior's glaive is to his hand,
By Crawford's side, where bolts of death are thrown,
They vow'd to die, or dash their proud oppressors down.

But ah!  when woke the drum's tumultuous roll,
And trumpet's clang rose clamorous to the sky,
Keen was the pang that shook fair Emma's soul
To mark the daring of her Walter's eye;
His maiden sword was girded on his thigh,
And nodded o'er his manly brow his plume.
"Oh!  to the field of danger do not fly,"
She cried, "I charge thee, think what fate may come
To blight thy Emma's bloom, and her young hopes to dim."

"Who dares this hour to lift his eyes to heaven,"
He said, "that feels his soul claim kindred there,
And, from the cause of Truth, would now be driven,
And bid her, in her native clime, despair?
Who ever look'd upon his country fair,
And felt th' ennobling pride of being free,
And now could stoop to breathe polluted air
In tyrant thrall? &mdash; Say could you bear to see
That renegade, that slave exampled forth in me?

"No, Emma, no, thy generous bosom feels
An impulse worthier of thyself and sire."
"I feel," she said, "my fear but ill conceals
How much thy manly valour I admire.
Go, Walter, go, and may my love inspire
Thee in the battle's shock; shouldst thou prevail,
I charge thee by that love, wreak not thine ire
Upon a fallen foe."  "Heaven with us deal
As I obey," he said, "and all our sorrows heal."

One short embrace, one burning kiss, and then
They tore themselves asunder, and both felt,
In that brief period an age of pain,
And agony severe:  pale Emma knelt
Before her sire, whose heart to tears did melt
As her he bless'd; she felt not his caress,
On that hour's woe so deep her spirit dwelt&mdash;
And they are gone, and, in her grief's excess,
Life is to her a void, the world a wilderness.

PART SECOND.
Now tents were spread, and arms and armour gleam'd,
Where Clyde, a mirror to the martial show,
Roll'd smoothly on; and flaunting banners stream'd,
Waving a proud defiance to the foe,
And bright, in golden characters, did glow
The motto that on seraph wings, to heaven
Lifted their souls, who, 'spite of every woe,
With holy zeal 'gainst tyranny had striven,
And, from the post of Truth, would but by Death be driven.

'Twas even-tide, ere yet the summer sun
Had quench'd his glory in the western wave,
The patriots mark'd, upon th' horizon dun,
(A sight that fired the courage of the brave,)
The foes approach; their lengthening columns gave
A varying colour to the earth and sky;
And fiery tyrant there, and passive slave
Came rapid on, beneath Oppression's eye&mdash;
Stern Ruin leads the way, Death's banners o'er them fly.

The river roll'd its gentle tide between
The kindred foes, and dying day forbade
Them, at that hour, to light the battle scene,
And for a space, Death's revelry delay'd;
But Grahame and Dalzell were reluctant staid
From darting forth, like blood-hounds, on their prey;
With savage eagerness they long'd to wade
Through martyr blood, nor brook'd the short delay
That kept their wolfish souls from where red carnage lay.

Such were the tools, by which the tyrant sought
To work the ruin of his native land:
And they, with blood of many victims, brought,
(Though Heaven with infamy their names might brand)
The praise of being fitted to his hand.
Oh God!  that human fiends should e'er prevail,
To crush thy servants knit in holy band!
Shall tyrants thus with man for ever deal?
O bend in mercy down, the poor oppress'd to heal!

What time the fairest of the host of heaven,
From out her secret chamber in the sky,
Had in her gleaming silver chariot driven,
And shone o'er earth in glorious majesty.
And o'er the vaulted firmament on high,
Her star-gem'd canopy mild Evening spread,
And strew'd, of freshning, dew, a rich supply
O'er earth whereon must redder drops be shed,
Whene'er th' eventful dawn shall spring from Ocean's bed,

At such an hour, from where, upon the lawn,
The patriots lay; by heavy cares oppress'd,
Had Walter to the river's bank withdrawn.
The camp, on either side, had sunk to rest,
Save where the sentinels themselves address'd
To watchful vigilance, and chiefs, in prayer,
Pour'd each to God the troubles of his breast,
And sought of him to make his Kirk his care,
And strengthen well their hands to-morrow's toil to bear.

There, midst the silence of the noon of night,
Stood Walter musing long, and thus began:
"And is it so that they do deem aright
Who think so hardly of the guilt of man?
Has he so far forsaken Mercy's plan&mdash;
Feels he in blood and death so stern a joy&mdash;
Does he but breathe, destruction's flame to fan&mdash;
In working woe his brightest hours employ?
And do fell tyrants reign, but only to destroy?

"Oh!  who could stand before Heaven's awful King,
At this dread solemn hour, and bid him bear
Witness to deeds, such as the dawn shall bring?
A country whelm'd in misery and despair;
Or driven to desperation, nobly dare,
With waste of many lives, to burst the chain
Which galls her sore, &mdash; To plead false glory's glare&mdash;
Ambition's sting that mocks at human pain,
Could Justice ill appease for patriots, &mdash; martyrs slain.

"O Night!  thou counsellor with whom the wise
Hold sweet communion, it is still from thee
We learn, on contemplation's wing, to rise,
And from our mortal coil a while break free:
We mingle with the Universe, and see
The place we occupy, in God's great whole,
And human grandeur then appears to be
Even less than nothing; and the proud control
Which tyrants boast, is but a mockery of the soul.

"Then who can name the madness which pricks on
The proud insatiate conquerors of the earth?
The men of blood and woe, whose hearts of stone
No pity know, and who do deem it worth,
Like Hydras, from their dens, to issue forth,
Whilst Terror stalks before, and o'er their rear
Dark Desolation hangs; and a new birth
They give to Death and Pestilence, who tear
The shatter'd cords of life, and boast their mail career.

"Though little minds may, for a season, dwell
With admiration, on such deeds as these;
More virtuous bosoms feel within them swell
Th' indignant sigh of grief, and to appease
Their wounded spirits, they do gladly seize,
The names and doings from oblivion's shade,
Of those, the weight of human woe to ease,
Who lent in danger's hour their willing aid,
And oft Destruction's darts have in mid volley stay'd.

"Ye noble Spirits!  and ye Men of worth
Whom patriotic toils could never tire!
Your names have lent a savour to the earth,
Whilst lingers round us still your spirits' fire!
I feel it in the air I now respire,
It swells my heart with energy divine:
O!  could my soul to flights like yours aspire!
In Freedom's cause your matchless deeds be mine,
Of which each bosom is a consecrated shrine:

"Then would my country own, that not in vain.
I lived, and poured my spirit and my blood
Out on the heath, where burst the tyrant's chain,
And Truth and Liberty triumphant stood:
Oh!  Say who would not, for his country's good,
Lay down his life, a willing sacrifice?&mdash;
His spirit, from her altar unsubdued,
With heaven-born vigour, shall in triumph rise
To a more glorious home, that waits him in the skies.

"And when the trump, dread harbinger of war,
Shall sound, to rouse the combat on the heath,
And battle's dismal echoes ring afar,
To tell where thickest fall the storms of death,
My lovely Emma, with my latest breath,
Shall I not bless thee? &mdash; we may meet no more!
Oh yes!  heaven's peace to thee I will bequeath,
Who wast the sweetner of my life before&mdash;
To whom my heart still clings, and whom I still adore.

"The playful smiling of that beaming eye,
Wherein each fond, yet pure affection dwelt,
And Oh!  that voice of heavenly harmony,
Its tones of love still seem my soul to melt;
With thee I more than earth-born rapture felt;
An air of heaven, my Love, was round thee still;
And all the charms which young Love knew, were dealt
Profusely out to thee, thine image will
In all its loveliness, in death, my bosom fill.

"But Oh!  to leave thee in the world alone,
Perchance to weep thy sire's and lover's doom,
Seeking, in vain, their graves to weep upon,
Thy bright eyes faded, and thy summer bloom
Of early beauty, lost in sorrow's gloom;
The thought unmans my soul!  But to withstand
My country's call I may not now presume&mdash;
I bow to Thee, my fate is in thy hand;
But spare, in mercy spare, O God!  my native land."

Like virgin's cheek, when, with her maids around,
She meets the bridegroom of her youth and love,
The skies are flush'd; in rosy freshness crown'd,
The Morn is throned, the mountain tops above;
And all around his kindling glories prove
Day's march begun, who, on the earth and sky,
Smiles as if hate no living thing could move,
And gladness, beaming from his bright'ning eye,
Awakes all nature up to love and harmony.

But not so man; like foam of ocean toss'd,
When roar and dash its billows to the shore,
By passion's storm driven on, his rudder lost,
He reels and revels midst a sea of gore:
With thunder's voice war's dreadful engines roar,
And Death and Havoc ride upon the blast
Of Battle's breath, that darkly mantles o'er
The groaning field, where struggling to the last,
Foemen on foemen fall, in one red ruin vast.

And Slavery stalks gigantic o'er the dead;
Her shouts, exulting, up to heaven ascend;
Yet Freedom's banners, on the gale, are spread,
And, ere Oppression's fangs their glory rend,
Must many hearts be cold, who dare defend
To death, their much loved country's holiest cause.
The tumult swells, they triumph who contend
For liberty, with that resolve which draws
From men eternal praise, from Heaven a proud applause.

Beneath their arms still grows the work of death,
And fast and far Destruction's bolts are driven,
And hotter still ascends the Battle's breath
In sulphury clouds, that blot the face of heaven:
The earth, in terror shakes, convulsed, and riven
By thunders, which heaven's loudest pealings mock.
And, for a prey to Desolation given,
Do thousands press on thousands to the shock
Of conflict, that must burst or bind the tyrant's yoke.

Proud Monmouth yet his shatter'd strength unites,
And, like a torrent, pours upon the band
Of brothers, who defend their country's rights.
Nor Walter harmless wields his battle brand
By Crawford's side:  Like headland towers, they stand
Amidst the wreck.  Fierce Burley to the foe
Defiance hurls, and 'neath his strong right hand,
Grasping in gore lie many warriors low:
And foemen fall around 'neath Hepburn's every blow.

But why, 'midst shouts of victory, Oh God!
Why droop their crests?  Why stand they thus aghast?
Can souls like theirs submit to kiss the rod,
Or yield like cravens to the rushing blast,
And certain conquest, with its price to cast
Away?  No &mdash; Treachery hath doom'd their fall;
And fiend-like Faction through their ranks hath pass'd,
And spread o'er Scotland's glorious hope a pall;
Quench'd freedom's sun, in blood, and madly ruin'd all.

Yes, from the post of Truth and victory torn,
The brave, defenceless, bowing to the dust:
Not for themselves, but for their country mourn;
Her gashes bleed, and long she bleeding must
Crouch at their frown whose breasts are fired with lust
Of murderous deeds, and pant for power, to make
Their wills a lawless law; man to he just
Alas!  hath ceased; and tyrants league to take
Life's fairest hopes away, and bid her griefs awake.

And where are now the gay delights of youth,
The visions fair, that as they pass'd, impress'd
On Emma's soul, the semblance fair of truth
The raptured days, when Love and Joy possess'd
The sunny region of her maiden breast?
Gone with the days that were.  On Bothwell's field
Of blood, the hopes wherein she long was bless'd
Were lost, and, in her country's doom was seal'd
Her fate of sorrow, which o'er all her heart prevail'd.

And long she mourned her Walter, doom'd to roam
Far western worlds, o'er many a stranger clime,
A woe worn exile from his native home:
So will'd they with whom virtue was a crime,
And memory oft reverted to the time,
When hand in hand in innocence they strayed
'Mong woodland scenes, where mountains rose sublime,
On whose bright tops the smile of Evening play'd,
And round their happy path her golden light delay'd.

Now other mountains rose upon her view,
In whose deep bosoms sheltered the oppress'd:
Cold were their hearths, where Love and Joy once drew
Their circles round, and their loved homes effaced,
No more but by their ashes could be traced:
The oppressors' wrath, like wild simoon, had swept
From shore to shore, and, turned the land to waste.
'Twas well for them in bloody grave that slept,
Nor shared their sorrows who in desolation wept.

Far from his father's halls was Crawford driven,
Whilst strangers claim'd his patrimony fair,
And Hepburn, 'reft of every stay but Heaven,
In caverns dwelt, and savage glens, where rare
The oppressors might their deeds of murder dare:
And, had his son still by his side been seen,
Not all unhappy had his hours been there;
But Ah!  that oceans roll'd their floods between,
He droop'd like tree, whose hold of earth hath shaken been.

Yet, though a price upon the wanderers' heads
Was set, and many sought them for a prey,
Where, in the wild, the mountain streamlet leads
Its desert path, they fearless met to pray;
Their God in unwall'd temple sought, and they
Found that his love makes glad the wilderness,
Faint on their souls of heaven's eternal day
The light had broke, and of their deep distress
The bitter tears had changed, to songs of thankfulness.

Yes, from the valley deep, or lone hill side,
Oft startled Solitude rejoiced to hear
The songs of Zion swell, though men deride
Their sufferings, and their feelings; yet more dear,
Than all the pomp of Splendour's proud career,
To them, their country's hallowed wilds among,
Was one sweet hour to God of drawing near,
List'ning the holy men, whose names shall long
Inspire the patriot Bard, and sanctify his song.

Yes, in their country's annals, long shall shine
The names of Cameron, Kid, Cargill, and King,
M'Kail, and Renwick; and, of light divine,
Still o'er their tombs shall grateful Freedom fling
A sacred halo:  When far years shall wing
Their flight, and join the past eternity;
Their country to the cause will closely cling
For which they bled, and on the hope rely
Which gave them, o'er the Grave and Death, the victory.

And still, where met the congregated throng,
Upon her father's arm would Emma lean;
While deep he ponder'd on his country's wrong,
The bodings, rose that soon his mortal scene
Would close, and she, whose filial love had been
His only earthly hope, lovely and lone,
When death had pass'd their mutual hearts between,
Must bear the world's fell scorn before unknow'n!
The thought would goad his soul, and force a stifled groan.

PART THIRD.
There is a sweetness in our native air,
A spell that binds us to our native plains,
A holy love for home, which makes us dare
The sternest danger, to remove the stains
That regal spoilers, whom no law restrains,
Put on our country's name; this Crawford felt,
And that, (while life blood circled in his veins,)
Her joys would glad him, and her sorrows melt,
So oft he vow'd when he before her altars knelt.

But Ah!  too soon he to the spoilers fell
A prey, and o'er his free born limbs were cast
A dungeon's chains; and torture to compel
His soul to yield they try'd:  but to the last
He to his God and country's cause held fast,
And, 'gainst his bloody persecutors, bore
A bitter testimony, which had pass'd
But lightly or in vain their hearts all rocky o'er,
Yet with too late remorse, in death their bosoms tore.

And, ere he bow'd beneath the heads-man's stroke,
And to the cause of truth a martyr fell,
His orphan child upon his slumbers broke:
She, came to bid her sire a last farewell.
And who that father's agony can tell,
When, in his last embrace, his child he press'd,
And felt the deep convulsive bursts, that swell
Her rending heart?  While throbb'd his manly breast,
His deep prophetic soul he solemn thus express'd.

"And is it thus we meet my tender flower?
Image of her who now looks down from heaven,
In mother's love, upon our parting hour,
And woes, 'gainst which thine innocence has striven
Yet from above, will help to thee be given,
And joy shall find thee, when this shatter'd frame,
Diseased by dungeon damp, by torture riven,
Shall sleep in dust &mdash; But O!  unquench'd the flame&mdash;
The immortal hope that clings to my Redeemer's name.

"I thank him for this trial of my trust
That yet remains, unshaken in his love,
The hour that lays me bleeding in the dust,
My soul shall meet him in th' realms above,
And to his Father's house, a welcome prove,
With his redeem'd, forever more to reign.
Then what of earth can my free spirit move?
Nor shall I of my doom of death complain,
Though from ray quivering heart, the last warm drop they drain.

"Yet not in earth shall sink the martyr's blood,
Like water shed, but cry aloud to Heaven
For vengeance on their guilty heads, who stood,
And still do stand, against the light that's given
Unto this favoured land.  Vain have they striven&mdash;
Nor shall they long their country's councils lead,
But o'er the scorning world again be driven
To beg from Charity's cold hand their bread;
And long their doom shall fill earth's tyrant lords with dread.

"And Truth shall, in her pristine glory, shine,
Wide o'er this realm, and to the sons of men,
Speak peace and heavenly comfort, and shall twine
Her wreath with Freedom's chaplet, which again
Shall bloom around the Throne and Altar.  Then
Shall Scotland envy'd of the nations be,
And her fair fame shall admiration gain
To latest ages, from the sage and free&mdash;
The loved &mdash; the happy home of Truth and Liberty.

"My hour has come, and visions to my soul
Of fairer worlds and happier climes appear.
My child farewell! &mdash; th' Eternal God control
Thy bitter fate, and teach thee how to bear&mdash;
A long farewell &mdash; my child &mdash; my Emma dear."
In speechless grief around his knees she clung,
With eager grasp, while burst a bitter tear,
That struggling Nature from his  dim eye wrung,
As o'er her lovely form in sorrow's trance he hung.

Like lily, bow'd to earth, surcharg'd with rain,
As she, with fainting steps and slow, withdrew;
"There burst the ties that would, on earth, detain
My longing soul," he cried, "now world, adieu;
To friends, to foes, to sabbath sweets that threw
O'er life a charm, an earnest of the sky;
And sun, and moon, and stars, and life, to you
Farewell!  come God and all thy saints on high;
Time is no more, then welcome, bless'd Eternity."

Years pass'd away, but still her sable shroud
Had Slavery o'er devoted Scotland thrown,
And, only in the wilds of solitude,
Was Freedom, to her faithful votaries, known,
Who dared, while all were slaves, be free, alone.
There Hepburn, to his heart, the daughter took,
The martyr'd Crawford's child, and as his own
He loved her, and a father's feelings shook,
His frame, upon her brow and fading cheek to look.

Deep in her soul had sunk her father's fate,
And sore she wept her much loved Walter's doom,
And ills that seem'd her country still to wait,
Ere she her native vigour could resume,
Or rend the veil that more than midnight gloom
Had cast around; to sooth her anxious care
Would Walter's sister oft (in maiden bloom)
Her sprightly wit employ &mdash; her love might share,
But could not cheek the grief 'twas Emma's doom to bear.

While Hepburn's mind upon the ruin dwelt
That tyrants wrought, upon his house and heart,
"Hath Pity ceased for ever more to melt
The human.  breast," he said, "and to impart
Her charities?  Oh Tyranny!  thou art
The bane of all that man e'er held most dear;
Thou strik'st each rising joy with poison'd dart,
Turning the smile of gladness to a tear&mdash;
O when shall Scotland's sow arrest thy fell career?

"In loud lament she seems her voice to raise,
And pours her plaint, in wailings deep, that she,
Who stood a wonder in her former days,
Beneath the covert of fair Freedom's tree,
Should now a mockery to the wide world be:
And weeps o'er them, the proud, the patriot band,
Who shed their blood that she might still be free&mdash;
The brothers of my soul, who strew'd the land
Like summer flowers, that fall beneath the mower's hand.

"God of my fathers, shall thine anger burn
Against my country and thy Church forever?
O!  in thy mercy, to these lands return,
And from the men of blood thy saints deliver,
And to the race of tyrants leave us never,
Who long have ceased to rule in thy dread name;
Their bands of bondage do thou haste to sever,
And cast them forth, so long our Island's shame,
And round our shores again, O light up Freedom's flame!"

While  thus he pray'd, upon his knees he fell,
His arms and eyes were lifted up to heaven:
Ere he arose a stripling came to tell
The great deliverance to his country given,
"Father," he cried, "in vain we have not striven;
Britain indignant, bursts the despot's chains;
With all their crimes the accursed race are driven
For ever hence, no trace of them remains;
Our wounds are binding up, and good King William reigns."

"These news to me like life are from the dead"
The good man answer'd mild, "not idle then
Have been our martial toils, nor blood we shed;
We've roused our country's energies again;
I feel a freeman's vigour in each vein;
And life and liberty inspire my heart;
My father's halls in peace I shall regain,
Where all her truths Religion may impart.
O thou, my God!  my God, my comforter thou art."

"And may I not," enquired the gentle youth,
"Now crave a boon, my sire of Heaven and thee?
Thy daughter fair, whose matchless charms and truth
I long have loved, but dared not wed till we
Should see our country from the spoilers free."
"Yes Maxwell, yes, my Helen shall be thine,
Soon as our hearths re-kindled we shall see,
Their earliest light shall on thy nuptials shine
And with thy love and truth, my blessing shall entwine."

The happy home they sought, where love once brought
The golden hours, that pass'd on downy wing,
Her wonted haunts of joy fair Emma sought,
That former days did to her memory bring;
She sate beneath the hawthorn's bloss'ming,
Where Walter oft did lead her, when a child.
Those flowers did yet around a freshness fling
Of which she oft had twined her garlands wild,
And now she loved them more that he had on them smiled.

As there mused on ruin'd hopes that fell,
Too early shaken from life's blighted tree,
A gleam of gladness would her grief dispel,
Her much loved Helen's happiness to see,
That she for long a joyful wife might be,
She pray'd of Heaven.  But Oh the pain it gave,
As rose the thought that never more might she
Behold her Walter; but that o'er the wave,
That evening sun might set upon his peaceful grave.

Forlorn and sad she sought the festive board,
Where soon the man of God the marriage bless'd;
And healths were pledged to Helen and her lord,
And love and tenderness, and that sweet trust
Which greatly to young virtuous bosoms must
Enhance the nuptial tie; and there was one
(Each heart did with a thousand blessings list
His honour'd name), whom they would pledge, and none
But mourned o'er Walter's fate, and dwelt his praise upon.

Yet ere the wine cup to the lip was stretch'd
Amidst them rush'd a stranger, from the door;
The chamber's inmost corner soon he reach'd,
And, speechless, stood upon the festive floor.
Ere yet a moment's silence did endure,
From Emma burst the agitated cry:
Walter!  my Walter! &mdash; Then she was not sure
Whether the form that pass'd before her eye
Was her lov'd Walter, or an angel from the sky.

'Twas he himself-upon her neck he fell;
With tears of joy she clung to his embrace,
And Oh!  what pencil or what pen can tell
The sweet expression of her angel face,
When Walter spoke the words of love and peace
The fond assurance they no more should part?
And how much did his father's joy increase,
To strain his valiant boy unto his heart,
And to him former woe and present bliss impart?

Then midst the blessings of each joyful guest
The faithful pair, in wedlock's holy bands,
Plighted their mutual troth.  Free was the feast;
And mirth and music, all that Love demands
To grace her sacred rites, were here commands
Most willingly obey'd, and all with one
Accord the anthem swell'd, that while it stands
The basis of the people's love upon,
May angels have in charge to guard the British throne.
