Right Honourable Ruler of rich Albion's land,
A swarthy artisan approaches you,
Accept the offering from his dirty hand,
This paper blotted with a verse or two;
The "mighty mad" shall not assail your breast,
No killing tale of love shall urge the tear,
The passions of thy soul shall lie at rest,
While vulgar strains like these shall fill thine ear,
The praise of Booth's fine Gin, the power of Barclay's Beer.

Ye ladies nine, I dare not ask your aid,
Nor will I coax ye from your mount of bliss,
Familiars I can boast with sleight array'd,
Sufficient to sustain a song like this;
The man that in the moon's allow'd to hide
The rising sun, and angels on the wing
Shall inspiration give, while side by side
Adam and Eve shall their assistance bring,
The cock and bottle too shall cheer me while I sing.

Hark!  hark!  the vivifying hour of six,
Its notes of respite peals to all around,
Saws, hammers, axes, in the racks they fix,
And the rough owners hail with joy the sound;
Tir'd Vulcan now from his bright anvil creeps,
The smoke from roaring chimnies cease to curl,
The din of smithies 'neath the magic sleeps,
And pond'rous engines cease their mighty whirl,
And motionless now lie the thousand limbs of toil.

The blunt mechanic at paytable stands,
While cautious scribes examine his rough score,
The cash he then receives with ready hands,
And eyes the slender total o'er and o'er;
Perhaps he has a thought aside to lay
A trifle, while affection softly leads,
His little lisping one a frock to buy,
Or other little matter that it needs,
But, ah!  the thought soon dies, the little one still needs.

For see, he joins the alehouse party grim,
Then home and little ones soon disappear,
For what are home and little ones to him,
Whose soul's so often drench'd with gin and beer;
Soon, soon he gains the long'd &mdash; the lov'd retreat,
The ranks of lusty drunkards fast increase,
Half bashful and half bold he takes his seat,
And the first modest words are pints a piece,
But O!  what floods shall pour e'er calls for pints shall cease.

Impatient for the Beer, they roar, they gasp,
The landlord's spirit with the hubbub, springs,
The engine groans beneath his sturdy grasp,
And quick the foaming frothy stuff he brings;
But O!  one searching glance on Nabs bestow,
The knowing cap upon his noddle note,
And his short fancy apron white as snow,
And rounded single-breasted bob-tail'd coat,
And all the "licens'd" victualler's attributes around him float.

The shining can, big with immortal lush,
They seize, and o'er the tables sprawling wide,
They soak their senses in the living gush,
And suck with eager swig the chemic tide;
Some in the mazes of deep gossip pore,
Others in gloomy silence hang the head,
Moping perhaps in sulky sorrow, o'er
The moments wasted in the week that's fled,
Some burn and chew their shag as ghastly as the dead.

And now the pints are fill'd a second time,
The unbleach'd crowd the dreary confab holds,
The bungler deals his brag with pomp sublime,
The noisy nothing too his boast unfolds,
All have their curious somethings to disclose,
The raging speech skips from the lab'ring lungs,
Louder and yet more loud with fury grows,
The pribble prabble of their rights and wrongs,
O'erwhelming all at once from twenty restless tongues.

But now the liquor from the can recedes,
Deep sudden pauses break the tuneful din,
The licens'd victualler takes the hint, and leads
His laughing, gentle, blue-ey'd Lucy in:
New life she pours into the faint harangue,
Its hem's and ha's are into order fam'd,
And then each word she rounds with classic twang,
And yields her charms, for azure beauty fam'd:
All hail!  thou lovely nymph, by some blue-ruin nam'd.

More beer, tobacco, and long pipes are brought,
Spittoons and saw-dust form a carpet rare,
Youth and old age the conclave wild support,
Male, aye, and female, the rich pleasure share;
The frightful tap-fire throws its dreadful heat,
A filthy cloud from rank shag stifling rolls,
The uproarious raging whole is now compleat,
And rivals the dim cave where Pluto prowls,
So smoky, close, and cram'd with dingy droughty souls.

Now, order!  order!  fell disorder cries,
A roar of silence round the tap-room rings,
A sturdy cyclop in loud wrath replies,
Attention gemmen, while a gemman sings,
His look so dreadful gives such deep alarm,
All tremble into peace beneath his looks,
O'eraw'd, they lounge as speechless and as calm,
As white fac'd subjects 'neath the knife of Brooks,
Or gentle critics fixed upon their better's books.

Hush!  hush!  the singer his rough throttle clears,
The hoarse preliminary cough goes round,
He eyes the ceiling, they upon the ground
Gaze modestly, and backward throw their ears,
Then suddenly into full song he breaks,
But oh!  a woful boggle soon he's in,
A shopmate on the suff'rer pity takes,
And he, and all, advise more beer and gin,
He fidgets, frets, then drinks, and all is right again.

Regenerated, then his voice he rais'd,
And sang of cordials and of rich compounds,
But chiefly thee, John Barleycorn, he prais'd,
While loud acclaim from every tongue resounds,
He sung too what the "lower orders" owe
"To the collective wisdom" that ordain'd,
Delirium so sweet for vulgar woe,
Sweet gin and beer, the groupe by thee sustain'd.
Then loudly yell'd approval and the pewter drain'd.

He sang too of the shining two to one,
That public safe and wardrobe of the poor,
Where laden with their rags poor wretches run,
For then compassion and relief is sure;
And how his own sweet charming wife arranges,
His own gay Sunday suit to grace the shelf,
And how her golden wedding ring she changes
For baser metal when she mugs herself:
Gratefully then he prais'd these means of raising pelf.

He sang too how in drink a Briton waxes,
More gentle, gen'rous, and more kind and brave,
He yields the best half of his pay in taxes,
And glories when he thinks himself no slave,
And how when drunk he gains the envied borders
Of sense and feeling, by sweet lush refin'd,
Then stoops good humour'd to the "higher orders,"
And creeps the earth in peace with all mankind,
Forgiving his worst foes, and to contumely blind.

Concluding now with primest melody,
He soften'd down his voice with science fine
Then twirl'd it sudden to its highest key,
And shook with extra flourish the last line;
Then bravo!  bravo!  sounded deep and long,
White some with glorious rage the tables beat,
Others with open mouth and bellows strong,
Keep up a dreadful din with throat and feet,
And a loud crash of glass render'd the din complete.

Oh Orpheus!  Orpheus!  when thou thy pipe didst blow,
The stones and brutes did merely kick and prance,
But here such gentle tones so sweet did flow, 
Huge butts of Barclay's best did reel and dance;
And then the chorus, description ne'er had sketch'd
A roar so deaf'ning, in her loudest cracks,
Nor could it be more wild had torture stretch'd
A thousand devils on a thousand racks,
Or the dread warwhoop howl rais'd by a thousand blacks.

But see!  a shoeless urchin opes the door,
Staring with eyes inquisitive and sad,
He stalks dejectedly across the floor,
He seeks, and soon he finds his drunken dad:
He tells him how his little brother tattles,
Over his little sister that lies dead,
He tells how Henry of his father prattles,
And cries and asks his mam in vain for bread,
Then mark how the sot yawns, and how he lolls his head.

And then came in a gentle looking creature,
Seeking her husband, modestly she stept,
Grief and dismay seem'd busy in each feature,
And in her arms a half-clad baby slept,
Handsome she had been, but a train of sorrows,
Had chas'd the roses from her cheeks away,
And in their stead pale want had laid her furrows,
And dim'd the lustre of her dark eye's ray,
And in their half-rais'd lids a tear did ling'ring stay.

She spoke not harshly, but assay'd to lure him
Unto his home with accents kindly mild,
Then angle-like she bent her knee before him,
And shew'd him his sweet sleeping lovely child;
Pleading for home and child in vain she stood,
Her kind looks he return'd with angry frown,
And rais'd himself in shameful attitude,
Prepar'd to strike her and  her, infant down,
Poor thing!  she then retir'd, for she'd submissive grown.

Again the door moves on its well us'd hinges,
For lo!  a lady seeks her fancy lad,
Her cheeks the hue of ev'ry metal tinges,
And in majestic brass her brow is clad;
The company then round politely wriggle,
And place beside her love the kiddy fair,
The smutty whisper and the side-long giggle,
The nod, the wink, the chaff, so "rich and rare,"
Announce the shining parts of this prime kiddy pair.

Close by themselves, wedg'd in a little settle,
A quiet group of five did prattle wage,
Four were mere boys, though full of youthful metal,
The fifth a swell, and forty seem'd his age;
Drink did not seem his object, for his aim
Went higher and more certain to its mark,
Than all that boisterous revelry could claim,
From those twin-brothers Lushington and Lark.
He was at all points flash, a cunning-looking spark.

With ribbon broad, cock'd sideways stood his beaver,
His side curls droop'd so tastefully, and what
Was more, his kerchief hung so loose and clever,
Pinn'd on his-breast with slap-up twisted knot;
So close he whisper'd and sincere he smil'd,
He press'd their hands so ardent and so kind,
Soon his manoeuvres their young hearts beguil'd,
Soon did his syren tongue their senses bind,
His exploits then he told, and prov'd Dame Justice blind.

The praise of gold and girls he broadly sounded,
And the high deeds that by the cross were done,
Its special art and myst'ry he expounded,
In a rich, fluent, eager, under-tone:
And while these youths did list to his haranging,
His sharp small eyes incessantly he rolls,
Their steady eyes and mouths half open hanging,
And the wild stillness which their frames controuls,
Shew'd the dark passion quick'ning in their souls.

The tap-room's full, and reeking in their quarters,
A mottl'd group of "mix'd society,"
Of fathers, sons, and faithful wives and daughter,
Get drunk, and once a week see company;
Here boys just breech'd, behind their pipes carouse,
With girls whose teens have barely taken root,
Sweet gin and beer their youthful feeling rouse,
And bramble-like the "young ideas shoot,"
And promise a rich crop of goodly golden fruit.

And now each eye "in a fine phrenzy rolling,"
Glar'd like a Swedish turnip newly-boil'd,
Ten roar'd the famous ditty of Tom Bowling,
Eight argued how Tom Paine in hell was broil'd;
Full twenty prov'd Will Cobbett in the right,
And twenty full as clearly prov'd him wrong,
And while a dozen betted on a fight,
Five merry females scream'd a bawdy song,
And ogling through the glaze appear'd a gaping throng.

But oh!  one sly one while the squabble roar'd,
Unto his neighbour's wife soft guile did show,
Sweet killing nonsense in her ear he pour'd,
And slily press'd, with loving tread, her toe,
At least he thought so, but, oh!  dire mistake,
The husband's corn receiv'd the loving sign,
He bawl'd aloud, and on the erring rake,
His iron fist retaliated fine,
O!  'twas a joyous sight to see the sinner whine.

And now a row, a jolly row is brewing,
The offenders and offended stand apart,
Foaming with rage and beer, while sweet blue ruin
Drives the hot blood in bubbles to the heart;
Such horrid looks then gleam, with bare arms waving
In dread defiance, females mid the rout
Their arms akimbo and all wild and raving,
Rattle their luscious phrases snout to snout,
And imprecations wild and curses fly about.

A row across the tables now begins,
Three frowning ones on each side fierce engage,
The blood from twisted noses quickly spins,
And trembling neutrals redden into rage:
Full in the centre of the room descry,
A wrathful pair engag'd in combat dire,
With tongs and red-hot poker brandish'd high,
They beat each other's sculls with phrensied ire,
And for a reg'lar row the company's on fire.

Down go the tables, elbow chairs, and benches,
The strugg'ling combatants too "bite the dust,"
Alike foes, friends, whores, wives, and wenches,
Fly at each other's throats like demon's curst;
The light, beneath a blow meant for some neighbour,
"Gave one bright glance, then total darkness fell,
Through the dark scuffle still they foam, they labour,
Then rose a scream, surpassing far the yell
The fiends in concert howl'd, when Clarence div'd to hell.

Then murder!  thieves l fire!  watch!  ascended,
In deep infernal tones and mournfully,
A sound of sadness with the loud howl blended,
Of one half-strangled, "in his agony;"
The landlord then his myrmidons assembled,
In his brave hand the kitchen poker swung,
Beside him too the short fat pot boy trembled,
Beneath a bludgeon o'er his shoulder flung,
And the good landlady, around the landlord clung.

The door was forc'd and soon the gas was kindled,
And threw on all its bright and shining ray,
But sicken'd with the sight it darkly dwindled,
As if inclin'd to turn with shame away,
For stretch'd in combat lay each mother's darling,
While streams obscene from mouths and noses pour,
Like wounded tygers, howling, bleeding, snarling,
They fought in savage scramble on the floor,
And dreadfully and deep each female's talons tore.

Foremost two females warr'd with dismal clatter,
Both madly rooting out each other's hair,
Above their middles all was rag and tatter,
And all below was naked, bleak, and bare,
Still they fought on like furies throat to throat,
Unconscious where some truant eyes did stray,
Unconscious that chemise and petticoat,
In the dark scuffle had been torn away,
O, for a Hogarth's pen to sketch them as they lay.

Screen'd in a nook, away from blows and bustle,
Appear'd a lean, long, slender, slab of man,
A crimson stream about his neck and muzzle;
Shew'd where the red juice from the rich quid ran;
The landlord ey'd the wretch with inward grumble,
Then quickly to his throat his apron bound,
And tied his hands behind lest he should fumble,
The bandage from his wide and gaping wound,
For he suppos'd his throat from ear to ear cut round.

They bound him on a shutter, and in state
To Guy's they bore him, screaming for his Sall,
But they trudg'd on with fun'ral step sedate,
Unheeding of his raving or his Sall;
Meanwhile the rumour of the riot spreads,
The rattles sounded too from street to street,
Th' affrighted lieges scrambled from their beds,
And ev'ry charley scrambled from his beat,
And left the priggs at large enjoying the rich treat.

Oh London town, whose every alley throbs
With some dark doing or delightful spree,
Thy Gin and Beer and thy uproarious mobs,
Eclat and praise immortal bring to thee;
Oh glorious land of smirking mobs how blest,
Ye useful classes, happy must ye be,
For when by want, and woe, and ruin prest,
A glorious mob will fly to stare at ye,
Hail!  land of smiling mobs girt by a frowning sea.

And here, hoarse bellowing, hooting, and swearing,
Unto the publican's assistance came
A glorious mob, in its "most gallant bearing,"
To aid and to assist in the king's name;
A fearful kind of giddy cry then rose,
And in an instant all was calm and hush'd,
A moment pass'd and then Vulcanian blows,
In all directions doors and windows crush'd,
And with a shout of triumph in the rabble rush'd.

The landlord gratefully the aid receiv'd,
Like to a true bred bacchanalian boy,
Fresh courage then his inward man reliev'd,
And all his outward jump'd with lusty joy;
He led them to the den where groaning, sighing,
Among a hundred moveables o'erthrown,
His company all bottom-upwards lying,
Appear'd, exhausted, warbling groan for groan,
Of one and all "take charge" he cry'd with valiant tone.

The well-known phrase arous'd a prostrate butcher,
Who on his feet with fiend-like scramble sprang,
And swore infernally, in fearful posture,
While "charge for charge" from ev'ry throttle rang,
Then all were on their feet again embattled,
And dealt about the blows with purblind aim,
While on their skulls the watchmen's cudgells rattled,
A sound quietus through each lushy frame,
And gurggling up in streams sweet Booth and Barclay came.

Some charley's too their noddles strangely felt,
By pretty slender female fingers shaken,
And many a well-told awkward blow was dealt,
Ere they were floor'd and pandemonium taken,
Yet although floor'd, with eyes clos'd up, yet clean
From off some skulls, some hands the scalps were easing,
And here and there a spiteful one was seen,
An aged watchman's bony windpipe squeezing,
While in the bar the scene was rich tho' rather teasing.

The landlord there in tones of doleful flat,
Spoke words of comfort to his landlady,
While she, poor soul, all wild and laughing sat,
In strong hysterics on a charley's knee,
Here lay a monkey struggling in a fit,
There a tom cat stood swelling at the tail,
Pug clung most piteously to scullion Kitt,
For fright had turn'd his sooty muzzle pale,
And the poor parrot too set up a dismal wail.

Now ceas'd the wild uproar!  and fast behind,
Each gemman's hands were tied with vengeful twist,
The ladies could no better favor find,
But rudely they were fasten'd wrist to wrist,
Then they were march'd in order, man to man,
Unto the watch house moodily and drear,
The two half-naked females led the van,
Two reeling chimney sweepers clos'd the rear,
While o'er the dreary crowd the moon was shining clear.

At length arriv'd at limbo's gloomy hold,
To right-about the rabble reel'd instanter,
And sounds were heard which pretty plainly told,
They had no wish the gloomy cave to enter;
When oxen from the horrid slaughter-house,
Bellowing with fear attempt to force their way,
The roaring drovers then in loud carouse,
From horn to hoof their savage bruises lay,
So on the threshold here 'twas cut, and slash, and slay.

Reluctant o'er the threshold then they crowded,
And stood before the guardian of the night,
Black-hanging brows the goggle eyes o'erclouded,
Of this terrific sombre-looking wight;
His phiz was of commanding cut, three-square,
His teeth were of the beauteous order, snaggled,
Till now like weeping willow hung his hair,
But sudden bristling like a furze bush straggled,
And his pig-tail in fierce and deep emotion waggled.

Breathless and panting, 'gainst the leathern back
Of his nocturnal throne, his head he roll'd,
His quiv'ring jaw dropp'd sudden from its tack,
And round and round his giant eyes he roll'd;
The charge and charg'd the man's condition view'd,
And star'd upon each other wild and glum,
Like men before a spectre pale they stood;
Confus'd, confounded, desolate, and dumb,
Each red fac'd female too stood motionless and mum.

But soon their tongues were loos'd in gentle stammer,
And quickly they to self-possession woke,
Then lifted up their voices in wild clamour,
And all at once the awful silence broke,
Long rigmaroles of foul assault and battery,
The bruisers and the bruis'd they did unfold,
Females mad drunk, with blood-shot eyes and watery,
Superior through the din their versions roll'd,
And every tongue that mov'd a different story told.

The lordling of the night now rais'd his head,
And raising it a dreadful blow he warded,
Then seiz'd a pond'rous book 'twas bound in red,
Emblematic of bloody broils recorded;
Something he wrote therein, and then he mutter'd
Something unto himself, and frown'd sublimely grand;
Words cabalistic pompously he utter'd,
Unto a wall-ey'd prig on his right hand,
Who hasten'd to obey the lordling's high command.

Then yawn'd the dark hole, and in the madded faction,
Were driven with a strange unearthly screech,
Their limbs all swinging in vehement action,
Their throats all roaring in vehement speech;
The key was turn'd upon the wilful scorners,
The hurry-burly suddenly did cease,
The lieges trotted to their holes and corners,
The charley's parted with a wound apiece,
And doz'd away the night's remaining hours in peace.

To scenes like these some poor men owe a home
Of scantiness, of wretchedness, and woe,
Such scenes compel the ill-us'd child to roam,
And on some mother's cheeks the tear to flow;
From scenes like these with deadly freshness spring,
Some of each fault which human kind disgraces,
Amid such darken'd scenes with fervour cling,
Want and her patron Vice in close embraces,
While crime with paly smile points at the useful classes.
