Silent I wandered through a winding lane,
Where late the Spring's triumphant hand had thrown
Its archways green; alike from sun and rain
Protecting those that love to stray alone,
And speak to Nature with that inward tone,
Which, trembling in the heart, is scarcely heard&mdash;
A music all too mute for any sigh or word.

The place was known to some of thoughtful mould,
Lovers of summer-solitudes.  And there
Full oft had been renewed the hours of old,
Ere Evil in the heart had found a lair,
Or Hope's high wing grew heavy with despair.
I seemed to meet their minds within the place,
And felt a heavenly breath come freshening o'er my face.

The way was a labyrinth of love.
There Peace and low-voiced Pleasure might be found,
Seeking brief glimpses of the blue above,
Or gazing fondly on the lifeless ground,
As if some spirit spoke in every sound
Or rustling step:  for even the naked earth
Hath seeds of human joy &mdash; of deep mysterious mirth.

But now, through all that peaceful pleasant path,
O'er which a leafy arch had late been flung,
The conquering Winter walks.  A sign of wrath
Is on each stem and twining tendril hung.
The wind now wails, that in the spring-time sung
Low symphonies of gladness; and the year
Sheds fast and frozen tears o'er Summer's shadowy bier.

That native green cathedral, where the soul
Swell'd with the sweet religion of the fields,
Is all in ruin; to Time's cold control,
Fretted with flowers the vaulted verdure yields.
From sharp decay no leaf its blossom shields,
But each rich adorning object dies
Which Nature's self beheld with glad admiring eyes.

Earth seems no longer the selected bride
Of Heaven, but, like a Widow, weepeth there.
Across her brow the deepening shadows glide;
The wreaths have perished on her pallid hair.
Yet in her bosom, beautiful though bare,
A radiant hope is sown, that soon shall rise
And ripen into joy beneath the brightening skies.

The sight in that forsaken place and hour
That touched me most with pity and strange woe,
With tears of solemn pleasure &mdash; was a shower
Of loosened leaves, that fluttered to and fro,
Quivering like little wings with motion slow,
Or wafted far upon the homeless breeze,
Above the shrubless mount, and o'er the sunless seas.

Oh!  could the Mind within a leaf be curled,
What distant islands might mine eyes behold!
How should my spirit search the various world,
The holy haunts where Wisdom breathed of old,
The graves of human glory, dim and cold!
Or float far upward in the frostless air,
Returning home at last, to find its Eden there!

But those pale leaves that fell upon the ground,
When the wind slept, did most my thoughts engage;
They spake unto my sense with such a sound,
As breaks and trembles on the tongue of age.
Each as it dropped appeared some perished page,
Inscribed with sad moralities, and words
That seemed the languaged notes of meadow-haunting birds.

So fast from all the arching boughs they fell,
Leaving that sylvan sanctuary bare
To the free wind, that musing through the dell
I paced amidst them with a pitying care.
Beauties were buried in those leaves &mdash; they were
The graves of spirits, children of the Spring&mdash;
And each one seemed to me a sacred, thoughtful thing.

Honour be theirs to whom an insect seems
A thing made holy by the life it bears!
Yet some have found, in forms unconscious, themes
For thought refined; that each mute atom shares
The essence of humanity, its cares,
Its beauty and its joys &mdash; who feel regret
To tread one daisy down, or crush the violent.

Slight touches stir the heart's harmonious strings.
This feeling came upon me as I crept
By the stript hedge &mdash; a sympathy with things
Whose absent spirit with the sunshine slept&mdash;
That fell, or floated on &mdash; or as I stept
Complaining music made, as if the feet
Of Time alone should press existences so sweet.

And then, among those dry and yellow leaves,
I felt familiar feelings, known to all;
That deep emotion when the warm heart heaves
And wakens up beneath a wintry pall.
My pleasures and my passions seemed to call
From out those withered leaves &mdash; and then a voice
Came with a livelier note, and taught me to rejoice.

The promises of Youth they fly and fade;
Life's vision varies with the changing year;&mdash;
But the bright Mind receives no certain shade
From dead delights: &mdash; it rises calm and clear
Amid its ringlets grey and garlands sere.
Oh!  let not Time be ever tracked by grief,
Nor Man's instinctive Hope fall like an autumn-leaf!
