The flag of battle on its staff hangs drooping&mdash;
The thundering artillery is still&mdash;
The war-horse pines, and, o'er his sabre stooping,
His rider grieves for his neglected skill:
The chief who swept the ruddy tide of glory,
The Conqueror!  now only lives in story.
Mourn, nations!  mourn!  The godlike man's no more,
Who fired your roofs, and quench'd your hearths with gore!

Skies, baleful blue &mdash; harvests of hateful yellow&mdash;
Bring sad assurance that He is not here;
Where waved his plume the grape forgot to to mellow,
He changed the pruning-hook into the spear.
But Peace and her dull train are fast returning,
And so farewell to famine, blood, and burning!
Mourn, nations!  mourn!  The godlike man's no more,
Who fired your roofs, and quenched your hearths with gore!

Hopes of the young and strong, they're all departed&mdash;
Dishonoured manhood tills the ungrateful farm;
Parents!  life's balm hath fled &mdash; now broken-hearted,
Deplore the fate that bids your sons disarm.
O heavenly times!  when your own gold was paying
Your gallant sons, for being slain, or slaying!
Mourn, nations!  mourn!  The godlike man's no more,
Who fired your roofs, and quenched your hearths with gore!

Bud of our Island's virtue!  thou art blighted,
Since War's hot breath abroad hath ceased to blow;
Instead of clashing swords, soft hearts are plighted,
Hands joined, and household goblets made to flow;
And for the ocean-roar of hostile meeting,
Land wafts to land Concord's ignoble greeting.
Mourn, nations!  mourn!  The godlike man's no more,
Who fired your roofs, and quenched your hearths with gore!

The apple-tree is on the rampart growing;
On the stern battlement the wall-flower blooms;
The stream that rolled blood-red is faintly glowing
With Summer's rose, which its green banks perfumes;
The helm that girt the brow of the undaunted,
By peasant hands with garden shrubs is planted.
Mourn, nations!  mourn!  The godlike man's no more,
Who fired your roofs, and quenched your hearths with gore!

Men wax obscurely old &mdash; the city sleeper
Starts not at horse-tramp, or deep bugle-horn;
The grenadier consoles no lovely weeper,
Above her sullen kindred's bodies borne;
The people smile, and regal pride's declining,
Since round imperial brows the olive's twining.
Mourn, nations!  mourn!  The godlike man's no more,
Who fired your roofs, and quenched your hearths with gore!
