"Virtue is pleasure," said a Grecian sage,
"And is the most virtuous, the happiest far;"
A nobler sentiment upon the page
Of Revelation sparkles like a star.
Men have done much his pure intent to mar,
Whom many follow, and but few obey;
But truth will laugh, however fools may jar,&mdash;
Tired Reason shall at length spurn Falsehood's sway,
Exulting like the sun, when storms have roll'd away.

"Who seeks the general weal, secures his own"&mdash;
Such the arch-precept of the latest school
Of Ethical discovery &mdash; alone
Varying in sound from the Athenian's rule.
The gentle creed of Nazareth is full
Of a like spirit &mdash; fairer and more free&mdash;
Then cease to cry Eureka!  haste and cool
Thy crazed disciples' neophytic glee,
Utilitarian Priest &mdash; word-wedding Jeremy!

Who doubts the maxim of the Benthamites?
'Tis co-existent with the human soul,
And of its shrine one of the sacred lights&mdash;
Though oft-times clouded by the gross control
Of the dust's opaque demon &mdash; he, the sole
Keeper of the multitudinous cells,
Wherein earth's anticks, miserably droll,
Make mouths at Heaven to smirking Folly's bells,
Shaming the voiceless brute that in the desert dwells.

In morals 'tis an axiom &mdash; here &mdash; even here&mdash;
Upon the slippery bank and shoal of time,
With hell-fire in abeyance &mdash; noon-day clear,&mdash;
The worst like not to be the sport of crime,
Drench'd with their own foul vintage &mdash; every clime
To sins peculiar adds their punishment&mdash;
The unity of Justice is sublime&mdash;
I should have said of Mercy &mdash; for 'tis meant
To urge them back to peace, whose steps are woward bent.

And dismal were this globe were it not so!
'Tis bad enough; but it is Paradise,
Compared to what it would be, were there no
Terrestrial scourge for the salt blood of Vice&mdash;
Lust, flame-respiring, homicidal Pride,
And all our household devils running wild,
Would roam, high-fed and rampant, far and wide,
Making that hideous, yet but half defiled,
Trampling each shoot of good on arid life that smiled.

Of sermonizing we have had enough&mdash;
If this besotted land will not awaken,
It is not framed of penetrable stuff&mdash;
Cobbett himself hath to the rostrum taken,
Teaching Britannia how to save her bacon&mdash;
Cool Owen lauds his parallelogram
With pertinacity, by sneers unshaken&mdash;
And would therein all sorts of people cram,
Penning, in common fold, ass, lion, wolf, and lamb.

But Ill will keep its throne, till doomsday steal,
Thief-like, upon the prowlers of the world;
They who to abstract equity appeal,
Will find the general lip derisive, curl'd.
In vain, Philanthropy!  thy flag's unfurl'd
On distant Harmony's Millennian heights;
Dissension's blazing brands shall still be hurl'd,
And maugre all that honest Bentham writes,
Laws will be Knavery's tools, and suitors hapless wights.

Marshal, Old Truepenny!  a chosen band,
And let them furnish practice to thy preaching&mdash;
Actions, the shallowest brain can understand,
Examples, the sure mode of moral teaching&mdash;
Proclaim a truce to threatening and beseeching,
In streets and highways plant each partisan,
Purified from the itch for over-reaching,
Sworn foes to every ceco-selfish plan,
Warm and unflinching friends to the old house of man.

And then &mdash; "God speed the cause!"  pray I for one&mdash;
A worthier never link'd true hearts together&mdash;
The faint may fall before the harvest's done&mdash;
The stoutest hardly brave the wayward weather.
But more than Mammon's gem, or Honour's feather,
Shall the survivors of the field repay,
When Sorrow's children round a glad hearth gather,
To speak of those who chased their griefs away&mdash;
Who flinty Custom crush'd that ground them in the clay.
