I pity those, howe'er profoundly read
In nature's laws, who nature's GOD disown;
Who can JEHOVAH'S radiant footstool tread,
And lift no look of reverence to his throne.
His various gifts, in rich profusion strown
Through every path their curious minds explore,
Thankless they seize, with selfish joy alone;
Nor yet the Giver's bounteous hand adore,
With praise for blessings past, or humble suit for more.

Yet such of their Philosophy can boast,
O'er law and faith in majesty sublime!
Deeming him wisest, who despises most
The great and good of every age and clime;
Calls order slavery &mdash; prayer a waste of time,&mdash;
Religion, Priestcraft, &mdash; GOD'S own Word, a lie,&mdash;
All chartered claims, the legal fence of crime,&mdash;
And e'en chaste wedlock's consecrated tie,
A breach of nature's law, &mdash; a mean monopoly!

To such all truth is fable, &mdash; but their own;
All wisdom, folly, &mdash; save what they have taught;&mdash;
The past, a dream; &mdash; the future all unknown;
(Since every change by eyeless chance is wrought,)
This glorious world with countless wonders fraught,
A giant foundling, without name or sire;&mdash;
The soul, an empty breath, a passing thought,
Darting through time, like meteoric fire,
And soon in endless night to darken and expire!

And is this all Philosophy can show,
To claim our homage at her lofty shrine?
Is it for this she calls us to forego
The peace, the hope, the joy of Faith divine?
Our noble birthright shall we thus resign,
To live like beasts or insects of a day?
Like the poor worm our little shroud to twine,
Then spread ephemeral wings and flit away,
To meet no future morn, with life-restoring ray!

If this be Goshen, give me Egypt's gloom!
I dream of pleasure: &mdash; wake me not to wo!
If I have nought &mdash; am nought, beyond the tomb,
Ah, what avails the dismal truth to know!
In error's vale if fruits and flowerets grow,
While science' heights in icy splendor rise&mdash;
Still let me keep my humble path below,
And taste the harmless pleasures that I prize&mdash;
"Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise."
