I never more on aught will place my heart
That's given to change, or subject to decay;
For I have witness'd friendship, love, depart
As if they were the trifles of a day,
For every breath of air to waft away!
A moonshine and a mockery, all a name,
Full of fallacious hopes that lead astray,
The veriest fiction of distemper'd dream,
More floating bubbles, bursting on life's checker'd stream.

But I will love the mountains and the sky
With an unearthly and increasing love,
And all those far and fairy lights on high,
That look like spirits as they smile above!
Oh!  that my soul were wing'd like the dove,
Or that my life, bright star!  were part of thee,
That I might in thy glorious orbit move,
A thing of light, unprison'd, pure, and free,
Spread like thy rays o'er nature's realm &mdash; eternity!

Not that the world and I are friends or foes&mdash;
I never sought its love, deserved its hate,
Nor have I mingled in its marts and shows;
My stars I blame not, nor accuse my fate,
Nor triumph has been mine, nor yet defeat;
I war with none, but court a quiet repose,
And love the Muse's haunts, the bard's retreat,
And wander out alone at evening's close,
When all of live into intenser feeling grows!

And though, at times, my vision doth survey
Life's ever-troubled sea and cloudy sky,
With mankind's many crimes in dread array,
And he himself pursued by hell-hound's cry,
Then toss'd away to flames that never die,&mdash;
I have no trembling fear of aught, of all
That in so dark a picture meets the eye;
There's yet some lovely spots upon this ball
That have not known the withering blight of man's first fall.

And there be here stainless beings too,
Gemming the wilds of nature, like yon star,
All lovely, pure, and pale, amid the blue
Deep wilderness of heaven, dwelling afar
In virgin loveliness.  Oh!  but ye are,
Each in your sphere, divinities of light,
Ruling men's destinies:  ye make or mar
Our fortune; yes!  and I have felt your might,
Until my soul half wish'd ye were not all so bright!
