Slow twilight veils the landscape's robe of white,
The little snowbird shuts its downy wing;
The cottage tapers twinkle red and bright,
Through azure mists from frozen brook and spring;
And the wood-cutter, his thatched home in sight,
Hastens, warned by the moon's half-peeping ring&mdash;
And hark!  methinks I hear the village bell,
O'er all the country, its glad summons swell.

Sweet talisman of heaven!  how each farm roof
Stirs at thy call!  The black, huge, blazing hearth
Is quenched, itself a room full large enough;
The household, tiptoe with the season's mirth,
Put on neat garments, their own cunning woof;
And boys and girls to tinkling sleighs rush forth;
While sire and spouse upon the old steed haste,
She snug behind, fast holding by his waist.

O'er crusted drifts they glide, fleet as the wind,
Cutting with grating crush the virgin snow&mdash;
Their eyes with sparkling splendor almost blind
Of the pure atmosphere's strange scarlet glow;
And music dizzies the bewildered mind
From ceaseless bells all chiming in a row,
Till, rushing gaily through the hamlet's street,
Around the church, from far and wide, they meet.

Meanwhile, the well-clad town's-folk thither stream,
And face, with breaths that smoke, the flaky breeze,
Admiring oft the scintillating gleam
And diamond vista of ice-jewelled trees,
That like celestial groves in blossom seem.
How do their hues the sportive children please,
Laughing for one of those rich branches there,
Ere to yon sacred spot the crowd repair!

How beautiful upon the hill-top shines
The white illuminated house of God!
A thousand lights, that burn in graceful lines,
Mild radiance send from each arched window broad;
And crystal icicles, like gems in mines,
Flash on the eaves, and a soft halo flood
Gilds the tall steeple, which, at this bright hour,
Points to the skies like some fair ivory tower.

They enter, and oh!  what a lovely scene
Dazzles the vision!  Garlands of spruce pine,
Wreathes of dark ivy, stars of evergreen,
Adorn the walls and round the pillars twine.
Faces on faces piled, with smiles serene,
Watch the wreathed chancel's galaxy divine,
Where, meek, with linen robe and silver hair,
The patriarch priest turns o'er the book of prayer.

He speaks.  At once, with solemn rush, all stand,
And the kind accent of his lips repeat,
Or listen, while, with fervent gesturing hand,
He reads, how once a radiant angel, sweet
Of voice, escorted by a harping band,
Judea's shepherds came by night to greet
With tidings, as he shook his wings impearled,
Of Mary's babe, the Saviour of the world!

The village maids, in spotless raiment dressed,
Then strike the anthem of enchanting praise;
When closed, the pastor, now in sable vest,
Ascends the pulpit, and, discoursing, sways
With tender words the soul-fixed hearer's breast,
And, as the georgeous candlestick's clear blaze
Beams on his face, his up-raised eyes oft swell
With tears of love for good Emmanuel.

The parting hymn and parting benison
Soon follow, and the holy duties close.
How pour the people out!  again the tune
Of bells resounds, as each one homeward goes,
Led by the spangled sky's unclouded moon,
That now, methinks, unusual lustre throws
Toward the east, as if it saw the Star
Of Bethlehem, through the purple depths afar.

Once more the hearth-stone brightens.  Seated round
With hand up to the cheek, the faggot fire
They quaff the festal bowl, with juices crowned,
And, after joining the gray pious sire
In prayer and hymn of spiritual sound,
To balmy rest the family retire,
And sleep the Christian's slumber, calm and mute,
Save the dream echo to some seraph's lute.

How many hearts to-night, the wide world o'er,
Are happy with the old returning glee!
Exiles for heaven on India's palmy shore,
The sailor tossing on the foam-lit sea,
Lone emigrants where ocean-rivers roar,
And island girls beneath the orange tree&mdash;
All share the bliss with which thy children heave,
Hills of my fathers!  this glad Christmas Eve.
