What time Edina flourished fair and free,
With all her Sons of Science and of Song;
When Scott poured forth his "Border Minstrelsy"
And deeds of arms, for ages to prolong;
When Wilson sung, amid the glorious throng,
Of Ind's "Palm Isles," and Hogg of "Scotia's Queen:"&mdash;
There wandered these bright Minstrels bold among,
An humble Bard, of feeble song, I ween,
Who loved right well to walk in lowly modest mien.

How lovely is Humility!  how fair
Is Innocence, Simplicity, and Truth!
But ah!  how fleeting, perishing, and rare,
Are those celestial promises of youth:
The Morning's dawn is brightest aye, in sooth,
When golden sunshine tinctures every cloud&mdash;
Hail, Gentleness!  Humility and Ruth!&mdash;
Learn from the humble Jesus, O!  ye Proud,
To bow the head, and walk in meekness through the crowd.

Oh!  what hath feeble man to make him vain?
Frail form of dust &mdash; poor creature of a day&mdash;
A fleeting speck upon a paltry grain:
A fluttering, fragile insect of weak clay;
Who lives, and loves, and then is swept away!
Like the green grass cut down on yonder plain;
Or, like the shadow which doth make no stay:&mdash;
His life an hour of sorrow, care, and pain.&mdash;
Then Oh!  say, what hath man &mdash; frail man &mdash; to make him vain?

Though Caledonia's dells to him were dear,
She was not &mdash; no; she was not his lov'd land;
His own beloved mounts and valleys were
Divided far from Scotia's rock-ribb'd strand
By a dark, deep, and fluctuating band
Of liquid emerald &mdash; by the boundless sea!
"Oh!  Erin!  Erin!  beautiful and bland!"
Oft would he sigh; "my country!  dear to me
Are all thy hills and dales &mdash; eternal peace to thee!"

Born mid the bloom of Erin, his young heart
Throbb'd and expanded with the breath of flowers:
His little hands upraised and held apart,
His sparkling eyes, like rain in sunny showers;
Proved that he felt the influence of those hours:&mdash;
A child of rapture even from his birth.&mdash;
Poor boy!  he saw not then the gloom that lowers
O'er all the finer-moulded sons of earth,
To cloud their brightest days and mar their sweetest mirth.

Like some blown bud he bloomed, as o'er his brow
The holy Father dropp'd the dew of Heaven; 
And while the tears clung to its stainless snow&mdash;
Like rain-drops glittering in the sun at even&mdash;
His Parent's name with solemn words was given;
"Eldred" &mdash; he heard, and through his warm tears smil'd,
As smiles the sun through dewy crimson driven;
Then sighed &mdash; then wept again &mdash; and then, poor child!
Lay like a moonlit lake &mdash; pure, beautiful, and mild!

Years roll'd away &mdash; what boots it here to tell
Of all his little pleasures, cares, and woes;
The chances and the changes that befell
His earlier years? &mdash; Like some wild mountain-rose
That lifts its pearl-brimmed ruby cup, and blows
From out its Paradise of leaves, he grew;
A child of song and love!  and Oh!  God knows,
A child of many, many sorrows too!&mdash;
His large blue eyes aye beam'd brimful of light and dew.

He had a Mother &mdash; whom he dearly loved.
He had a sister &mdash; lovely, fair and young;
And oft in bounding innocence they roved
Up the green hills, when Morn her mantle flung
O'er their gemm'd crags, from which her glory sprung.&mdash;
No Father kind, no Brother dear had they;
But aye their Parent's name was on their tongue;
They talked of him, full many a sunny day,
Who for his country fell, in battle, far away.

And then the girl would weep; the boy would dry
The big round tear-drops from her flushing cheek;
And gather flowers to deck her hair, and try
To wean her thoughts from sorrow; and would speak
Words sweet and gentle as the moonbeam's streak
On the calm waters of the lake; and when
The sun had ris'n in beauty, they would seek
The woody windings of the emerald glen;
Far from the noisy marts and busy haunts of men.

But ah!  there came a blight o'er those bright hours:&mdash;
The noble Sire who gave our hero birth
Had perished &mdash; Friends fell off, like Autumn flowers
Withering and wasting &mdash; Round his Father's hearth
Fresh flowers grew up in loveliness and mirth:
He was neglected &mdash; slighted ev'n by those
He dearly loved of all the most on earth!&mdash;
So have I seen a solitary rose
Crushed by the very shrubs among whose buds it blows.

They told him youth was free from wo and care:
He listen'd, and smiled; but had not found it so;
Ah no!  his very childhood had its share
Of melancholy pleasure, dashed with wo:&mdash;
Oft would the warm tears from his lone heart flow,
When all around seemed happiness and joy;
And shades o'ercloud his yet unwrinkled brow
Ere his soul's summer sunshine knew alloy:&mdash;
That "man was made to mourn" he fancied when a boy.

But as he grew in years he keenly felt
That mortal man, indeed, was made to mourn;
That hearts would freeze e'en while they seemed to melt;
That youth's sweet Heaven of Fancy can return
No more &mdash; no more for ever! &mdash; he did burn,
Once, with a pure enthusiasm of soul;
Ah!  little deemed he then ere long to learn,
That all &mdash; all was deception:  But the roll
Of years soon taught his heart that melancholy dole.

As darkness shows ten thousand worlds of light,
All buried in the glory of the day;
So, Sorrow's gloom makes Poesy so bright,
That there is not a latent beam nor ray,
But hath its colours sparkling like the spray
Dashed into rainbows. &mdash; So it was with thee,
Thou glorious Byron &mdash; May thy wreath of bay
Be ever fresh and fair! &mdash; and so't might be,
Were I t' unbosom all I've felt and feel, with me.

Yea, were I to unlock my bosom now,
And wreak the feelings, on this virgin page,
Which crush my heart, and sting my throbbing brow,
With pangs all hidden; I might then engage
The ear of Boyhood, and the thought of Age:&mdash;
But I've the nerve to keep them from the world:
Here let them prey in secrecy, and wage
Their war of death, all deep and darkly furl'd;
Till they, and I, into one sepulchre are hurl'd.

'Tis sweet to walk by the deep ocean's roar,
When foam and sunshine crisp the emerald billows:
'Tis sweet to wander through the forest hoar,
Embowered, with singing birds, mid clustering willows:&mdash;
Sweet 'tis to rove when Autumn's gold-leaf yellows
Lawns, cornfields, groves; all Nature's wide dominions
When Flora laughs, and rich Pomona mellows.&mdash;
But sweeter far than all those earthly minions,
To lift the soul to Heaven on Contemplation's pinions.

So Eldred thought; and glorying in the thought,
He rambled, idly, from the haunts of men:
First the cool mount's moss-mantled crags he sought,
And traced the blue streams winding to the glen,
Through woods and meads, now hid, now seen, &mdash; and then
He'd wander, musing, down the flower-fring'd rills,
Till he had gained the deep ravine again,
Where all was silence, save the song of bills;
And where he thus communed with his own native hills:

Sweet Solitude, I love thy calm retreats,
Ev'n as a child doth love her mother's smile
The rose-wreathed bowers, the honeysuckle seats,
The vales and mountains of my native isle&mdash;
Yea; it is sweet, all lonely, to beguile
The sunny hours, in solitude, away;
When all around is bloom and bliss the while&mdash;
Oh!  Nature, bleak, or beautiful, or gay,
I've loved thee from a child, and love thee to this day!

Often the garden and the hush of night,
The silent mountain and the field, were sought
By our most blessed Saviour; when the light
Of heaven beamed full upon the sacred spot:
There would He pray, and raise his lofty thought
In intercourse with Heaven &mdash; Ah Solitude!
How signally thou'rt honoured!  does this not
Enhance thy value?  Mountain, field, and wood;
God called ye good at first, but now your doubly good!

Thou, too, my Harp! &mdash; my purest joy on earth!
When the cold world weighs heavy on my heart,
That ill can brook its melancholy mirth;
Thou my sweet solace, thou my comfort art;
And canst such secret happiness impart,
That I forget the cold world's scorn in thee;
Albeit my bosom keenly feels the smart,
There is a balm in thy wild melody,
Which way be rude to man, but ah!  is sweet to me!

Yes; I have loved thee better than the world&mdash;
Such love brings sorrow even in her kiss&mdash;
The crowd, whose souls in grovelling dust are furl'd,
Have blamed me &mdash; blamed me, O!  unkind, for this;
For loving thee, my infant spring of bliss!
My treasured harp! &mdash; Oh!  if mankind but knew
What love thou wakest in my soul's abyss
For him &mdash; for all; he then might be more true
To one whose pulse must throb, and cease to throb, with you!

Thus as he spoke with tear-brimmed eyes, he raised
"His treasured harp" &mdash; the Charmer of his youth;
That harp on which he fervently had praised
His dear Redeemer, with a heart, in sooth,
All love, all hope, all ecstasy, all ruth!
For aye he loved his Bible and his Lyre;
That blessed book of poesy and truth;
That harp which filled his soul with heavenly fire&mdash;
But now in mournful strain he touched each trembling wire.

SONG.
"Where are the flowers of the wild-wood?&mdash;
Faded and withered away!
Where are the friends of my childhood?&mdash;
Gone to their sleep in the clay!
Ah!  well may the sweet tear of sorrow
Flow forth from the depths of my heart:
I shall meet them no more on the morrow;
We lived and we loved, but to part
For ever! &mdash; Oh, Heaven! &mdash; for ever!
The pale moon may silver the fountain;
The birds may come back to the lea;
The sun still rise over the mountain;
But they shall return to me&mdash;
Never! &mdash; Oh, never!
(Echo.)
Oh!  never!"

Then opening up the sacred book of God&mdash;
On which he dropped a soul-engendered tear&mdash;
He lay him down upon the flower-gemmed sod,
To read &mdash; to pause &mdash; to meditate severe;
With all his heart, and mind, and soul, sincere:&mdash;
No Bride e'er loved her Lord, no bird her bower,
As he adored that Friend of Friends most dear;
And, while he lay spell-bound beneath its power,
Thus o'er its pages pure he poured his soul that hour.

My Bible!  thou most blessed, best of books;
How have I loved to pore o'er thee, and be
Wrapped in the heaven, which from thy pages looks
Through all the glory of sweet Poesy:&mdash;
Most sacred gem, thou art a world to me,
Far dearer than the cold wide world around:
Oh!  loveliest volume of all books!  in thee
What heavenly hopes and promises abound!&mdash;
In thee a balm for all my sorrows have I found.

In thee what prospects open to my view!
How great!  how grand!  how glorious!  how sublime
With themes bespangled thicker than the dew
That gems the laughing fields at morning's prime:&mdash;
The reign of Chaos, and the birth of Time&mdash;
The flowers of Eden, and the fall of man&mdash;
The fate of Noah &mdash; the career of Crime
Crushed in the bud, by that stupendous plan
Which rapturously I hail!  and thus delight to scan:&mdash;

Behold yon group of Shepherds by the rocks!
As the blue depth of boundless ether clears:&mdash;
But, hush! &mdash; was that the bleating of their flocks?
No &mdash; no, a light &mdash; a dazzling light appears!
And now an Angel bids them calm their fears:&mdash;
"I bring good tidings of great joy for aye,
To all mankind beneath the glittering spheres;
For unto you a Saviour's born this day:&mdash;
In Bethlehem lies the Babe &mdash; his star is o'er the way."

Then suddenly a dazzling multitude
(Millions on millions from the bless'd abode)
Of Angels burst upon their solitude,
With crowns, and palms, and white robes, praising God,
And singing, loudly, with unceasing laud:
"Glory to God in highest Heaven!  and Peace
To every creature of the living clod!"
Oh!  may the blessed song of joy increase,
Till Time shall be no more, and Sin and Sorrow cease!

Oh!  had you seen the Sun that morning rise,
Ashamed of his own glory brightly beaming;
Though beautiful, 'twas darkness in the skies
To that pure Sun which o'er the world was streaming:
The Son of God!  from whose bright eyes were gleaming
The radiations of a Seraph's mind!
And while the world in vanity was dreaming,
The Monarchs warring, and the nations blind;
The day-spring of Redemption dawned to all mankind!

Lo in the virgin's breast the infant lies!
With out-stretched arms, beneath the sunbeams' blaze;
Celestial sweetness smiling from his eyes,
Mocking the radiant coronet of rays
Which round his brow in sparkling lustre plays.
Beautiful Infant! &mdash; Prince of Peace! &mdash; how mild!
How pensively!  is fixed thy Mother's gaze
On thee, her humble holy, heavenly Child;
Through whom shall sinful man and God he reconcil'd!

Oh!  I have dearly loved to meditate
Upon my Saviour's sufferings for mankind:
His woes, his tears, his torments, and his fate;
The unknown anguish of his heavenly mind:&mdash;
To trace him falsely censured by a blind
And ign'rant multitude that crowd around,
And scorn, insult, betray, condemn, and bind
The Lamb of God, who treads terrestrial ground
To die for sinful man!  in Heaven such love is found!

Now on the Cross the blessed Jesus bows&mdash;
Merciful Father!  'tis Thy dying Son!
(Yet do I gaze upon thy drooping brows
Bleeding and bound with thorns, thou blessed One!)
Down his pale, wasted cheeks, the big tears run,
And "Oh!  my God!  my God in Heaven!"  he cries,
"Why hast Thou thus forsaken me?" &mdash; 'tis done;
The damps of death have sealed those sacred eyes,
And from her clay-cold form the heavenly spirit flies!

Hark!  heard ye not that crash?  My God!  my God!
The Temple's rent from battlement to base!
Earth quakes, graves yawn, the city's turrets nod,
And the riv'n rocks roll crumbling from their place!
All now is dark, save the Redeemer's face
Beaming in death! &mdash; Ye Cherubim, on high
 Shout ye, "Redemption! &mdash; Pardon! &mdash; Glory! &mdash; Grace!
To all mankind beneath the spacious sky!
Death!  where now's thy sting? &mdash; Grave!  where thy victory?"

Lift up your heads, ye gates; &mdash; lift up your heads,
Ye everlasting doors; and the great King
Of Glory shall come in. &mdash; Who is it treads
As King of Glory? &mdash; Saints and Seraphs bring
Your hymns; "The Lord in battle mighty!"  sing.&mdash;
Lift up your heads, ye gates; yea, widely soar, ye,
Ye everlasting doors; and the great King
Of glory shall come in. &mdash; What King adore ye?
"The Lord!  the Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory!"

Here Eldred paused &mdash; and laid the book aside,
In meditation wrapp'd &mdash; All heaven and earth
Became more beautiful! &mdash; the green world, wide,
Lay at his feet in loveliness and mirth!
The bright, blue, boundless concave, with its girth
Of long, light, sunny clouds, into his soul
Poured ecstacy, so like a second birth
Of being, bliss and beauty; that his whole
Existence seemed a trance of rapturous control!

At Thy Omnipotence &mdash; said he &mdash; O!  Lord!
I tremble; Oh Jehovah!  I revere
Thy Wisdom; and Thy Goodness have adored,
With all my heart, and strength, and soul sincere&mdash;
I worship Thee in trembling and in fear,
Eternal Father!  Fountain!  Maker!  God!
Who sitt'st enthroned in Heaven, and yet art here!
Who dwell'st where Angels chant with endless laud,
Yet art beside the worm that glitters on the sod!

Yea, whither from Thy presence shall I flee?&mdash;
If I ascend to Heaven, Thou art there;&mdash;
If at the utmost boundaries of the sea;
Behold!  Thou watch'st with unremitting care:
If, through the blank unfathomable air,
I wing my fancy to the depths of Hell;
Ev'n there Thou art to hear Thy suppliant's prayer:&mdash;
Further than thought can soar, or numbers tell,
Thou sitt'st alone, sublime, where hymns of glory swell!

Fountain of All &mdash; Power! &mdash; Wisdom! &mdash; Goodness! &mdash; Bliss!&mdash;
Eternity! &mdash; Infinity! &mdash; and Light!
Above the Heaven of Heavens! &mdash; below the abyss
Of deep Immensity! &mdash; all depth!  all height!
All length!  all breadth!  all present, from the bright
Centre of Heaven, to the remotest world
That wheels its golden circle in Thy sight;
Tuning Thy praise, Lord God!  as it is hurl'd
Through boundless realms of space, where Glory glows unfurl'd!

Fountain of All! &mdash; my Help!  my Hope!  my Heart!
My Crown!  my Strength!  my Life!  my Light!  my All!
My Governor!  my Father, too, which art
In Heaven! &mdash; O Lord!  upon my knees I fall,
And, unto Thee, in Adoration call:&mdash;
Hear &mdash; hear my prayer, while in the dust I bow&mdash;
No clay my soaring spirit can inthrall,
Which freely wings its way to Thee, Oh!  Thou
To whom all flesh shall come, in hope, as I do now.

My God!  is there an hour so sweet as this?
The holy &mdash; tranquil &mdash; peaceful hour of prayer;
When all my soul seems melting with its bliss,
And all my heart is fixed on Heaven &mdash; Ev'n there,
Oh!  wilt Thou bend on Earth a listening ear,
Almighty Maker? &mdash; Thou who wert before
Creation glittered o'er the etherial sphere,
Boundless in love! &mdash; To Thee whom I adore,
Thus &mdash; thus in tears of joy, my o'erflowing heart I pour!&mdash;

I love to See the sun in glory rise,
When heaven's all bright and beautiful and blue;
I love to see the pale Moon walk the skies,
When all the lamps of night are shining through;
I love the laughing landscapes verdant view:
The song of birds; the rush of streams and air:
And Womankind!  I dearly love thee too:&mdash;
But sweeter far than thou, than all that's fair,
To stand apart, and gaze on Innocence at prayer!

At prayer! &mdash; Oh God!  how lovely!  how divine!
How exquisitely beautiful!  how sweet!
To see the Sun on kneeling Childhood shine;
When Mercy, Love, and heavenly Goodness meet,
And kiss each other &mdash; every pulse doth beat,
With rapturous admiration at the sight:&mdash;
Tears gush to mark all prostrate at my feet,
Childhood!  and Innocence!  and Love!  and Light!
At prayer!  my God! &mdash; my God, how beautiful!  how bright!

Soon as the gush of feeling passed away,
And his blue eyes had shower'd their soul's pure rain!
The young enthusiast on the green sward lay,
And on his Bible fixed those eyes again,
As o'er the sacred pages turning, fain
To find some gold for his enraptured mood;
Nor needed lie long search with weary pain,
For all that book is beautiful and good:&mdash;
See! &mdash; see his transport now! &mdash; Give ear, thou Solitude!

Another morn hath burst upon mid-day!
Creation glows with Glory &mdash; Oh!  how bright!
Behold!  a mighty Angel, on the way
From Heaven to earth, clothed in a cloud of light:&mdash;
His face the brilliant sun all dazzling white.&mdash;
One foot of fire he stamped upon the shore;
Then on the Ocean fixed his flaming right,
And, with uplifted arm t'wards Heaven, he swore
By Him who lives for aye, that "Time should be no more!"

He comes!  He comes!  Great God!  He comes!  He comes!
All Heaven &mdash; all Earth &mdash; Creation is on fire!
He comes in clouds and glory!  yea, He comes
With all His radiant, Archangelic quire,
Who awed, with outspread pinions, fixed, admire
The fervent glory of this fatal day.&mdash;
Fain would the guilty wretches now retire
Back to the tombs whence spring their shivering clay.&mdash;
The stars are bathed in blood! &mdash; the Heavens have passed away!

How art thou fallen, O!  Lucifer, from Heaven!
How oft thou fallen, O!  bright Son of the Morning!
And ye, His Angels; ev'n to you was given
The Book of Life, while ye were vainly scorning
All law, all precept, all command, all warning;
And hurrying to damnation, from this world;
What now boots wealth, health, genius? &mdash; life adorning&mdash;
Oh!  there's a cloud twixt ye and Heaven unfurl'd:&mdash;
Down, to perdition down, ten thousand souls are hurl'd!

See!  yon profound interminable gulf,
Boiling with billows of sulphureous fire;
A sea of flames, without or shore or shelf;
Flashing and foaming into flake and spire;
O'erwhelming groaning millions, who respire
In burning agony, with eye-balls burst:&mdash;
And hark!  rebounding from the black domes higher,
Their execrations &mdash; "Lord!  we thirst! &mdash; we thirst!"
These are the fallen &mdash; the lost &mdash; the wretched &mdash; the accurs'd!

Oh!  lovely change, to light!  I now behold
A dazzling City, like a jasper-stone,
Whose crystal streets are paved with flaming gold,
And whose twelve gates are formed of pearls alone;
Crowned with a radiant rainbow's broken zone;
Garnished the walls with many a gorgeous gem;
Lit by the Lamb &mdash; who sits upon its throne&mdash;
Around whose brows burns Heaven's bright diadem.&mdash;
Oh joy!  it is &mdash; it is the New Jerusalem!

Encircling yonder great and snow-white throne,
Ten thousand times ten thousand Angels stray;
There dwells in clouds th' Omnipotent &mdash; that One
From whose bright glance the Heavens have fled away!
Before Him, Lo!  what infinite array!
All Nations &mdash; Kindred &mdash; People, &mdash; Tongues do stand,
Robed in the glory of eternal day,
Pure as their souls-with palms in every hand:&mdash;
A multitude of Gods, countless as Ocean's sand!

And hark!  the voice of thunders, and the roar
Of many waters, mingling with the lyres:&mdash;
Heaven's vault re-echoes, and, the golden shore
Of Paradise, where throng the hymning quires,
Shines as there flamed ten thousand crystal fires.&mdash;
Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Powers, Seraphim,
Cast down their crowns, and sweep the flaming wires
Before the Blaze which lights the Cherubim;
And thus with rapturous bliss pour forth their heavenly hymn:&mdash;

"Worthy art Thou, O Lord God!  to receive
All glory, honour, wisdom, blessing, power:
Redeemed by Thee, all tongues and, nations live,
To worship, serve, and praise Thee from this hour,
Saviour!  for ever and for evermore!
Worthy the Lamb of Heaven that was slain;
Who washed our sins away with his own gore.&mdash;
The One Great God Omnipotent doth reign:&mdash;
Lord!  Hallelujah!  Lord! &mdash; Amen!  Amen!  Amen!"

Farewell, delightful theme!  'twould break my heart
Longer to dwell on that celestial strain:&mdash;
My soul expands within me, as 'twould start
From the red lab'rinths of each throbbing vein:&mdash;
All I have sung is nothing: &mdash; there remain
Ten thousand times ten thousand lovely lays:
Let Angels warble every glorious train
Of thought that through their golden spirits strays:&mdash;
Too blessed for me the theme &mdash; too high for me the praise.

So deemed the Solitary, as the shades
Of Evening stole along the mountains blue;
And all the laughing flowers and bright green blades,
Of every fairy-form, of every hue,
Closed their pure buds, and dreamt in diamond dew:&mdash;
Slowly, and lone, he bent his homeward way,
Round yon dark mountain, wildly towering through
The billowy fogs belting its bosom gray;
And as he disappeared, mild Echo heard him say,&mdash;

I love the night!  the deep and dark blue night
When countless worlds are sprinkled o'er the skies;
When lovely Luna, sits enthroned in light,
And heaven looks on me with ten thousand eyes:
To hear the waters murmuring, and the sighs
Of love-lorn Zephyrus wandering through the woods:
To walk surrounded by a Paradise
Of glory, issuing in prismatic floods
From all the etherial heavens, to all earth's solitudes!

Peace to the Bard!  he slumbers with the world
All silently &mdash; the curtains of the west
Their gorgeous folds of pink and gold have furl'd:
The Babe, forgetful of her tears, doth rest;
Rocked, by the beating of her mother's breast,
Into Oblivion's Paradise. &mdash; On high
The pale-worn Moon displays her burnished crest,
Wandering in silence through the starry sky;
While, wan with shadowy light, the slumbering vallies lie.

Here have I paused, and pondered deeply; till
I had forgot'n the world, and all its jars;
And my soul &mdash; like the music of the rill,
That sweetly rises from the mountain spars&mdash;
Soared, and was lost amid the maze of stars
That labyrinth of Philosophy above&mdash;
But bounds are set, beyond whose adamant bars
No mortal thought hath ris'n, nor e'er shall rove,
Till freed from darkling dust it springs through light and love!

To pause &mdash; to ponder &mdash; to be wrapt and lost
In thought intense; in meditation deep.&mdash;
This none can rob me of &mdash; 'tis mine; and most
In the still midnight, when the heavens do sweep
O'er the hush'd nations, bless'd with balmy sleep:
Then the wide soul expands within her cell,
(Writhing and rising till the heart doth leap,
And the brow burns;) &mdash; like some huge swinging bell,
Vibrating, mid the clouds, between high Heaven and Hell.

Man doth not know, nor can I tell mankind,
The tides of thrilling rapture that now roll,
Ev'n like a boundless ocean, through my mind;
As if Heaven's Inspiration fired my soul&mdash;
The soul!  my God, how infinite!  the whole
Of those bright orbs my dazzled eyes behold:&mdash;
Yon moon, yon stars thick sown from pole to pole:
Globes above globes, are through its regions roll'd;
And still there's room for worlds which numbers never told!

Room too for thought! &mdash; There Poesy, divine,
Hath an unutterable Heaven of bliss;
Imagination, her rich golden mine,
And meditation, her sublime abyss
Of boundless beauty, light and loveliness!
Then let me meditate!  while all around
Is slumber &mdash; 'Tis in such a night as this
That I love most to ponder, and to sound
The ocean of my soul, unfathomably profound.

Tell me, ye midnight voices, where are they;
They who began life's pilgrimage with me?
Some toil in foreign lands far far away,
Beyond the billows of the boundless sea:
Others, alas!  are in Eternity!
But all are severed &mdash; long forgotten &mdash; fled
Like wintry leaves wind-scattered o'er the lea&mdash;
Time walked between with swift and silent tread,
Making alike unknown the living and the dead.

And yet mid them there smiled my earliest friends,
The sharers of my innocence and joy:&mdash;
Ah!  how the rush of years to manhood, tends
Our purer, perfect pleasures to destroy!
Who would not wish again to be a boy?
To tread the fields with light and bounding heart;
When no rough blasts, no hardships could annoy:
Our home our Heaven &mdash; simplicity our art
When every various scene new rapture could impart.

Ah me!  and those bright sunny days are gone;
Their very memory warms my weary soul:
Yet can they charm, though Age apace comes on,
To cut "the thread," and "break the golden bowl."
Yes, years must change, and fleeting seasons roll;
And I fall off, as I had never been;
Hurried along to lingering life's last goal:
Yet shall I ne'er forget those days serene,
The lovely long lost hours mine infancy hath seen.

Lone be the place of my eternal rest;
May no vain marble mock my mouldering clay;
No "storied urn" weigh heavy on my breast;
To lure the passing pilgrim from his way,
Or tell aught of the being fled for aye:&mdash;
But when soft twilight steals o'er purpled skies,
May some lone warbler lull me with her lay;
And while the pale flowers o'er my ashes rise,
May winds and waters mix in melody and sighs.

Oh!  I do hate their vanity and pride;
I'm sick of all man's ostentatious show;
Will not his empty pomp be thrown aside,
When life hath ceased to burn &mdash; life's blood to flow
When the frail form is laid for ever low,
Will man yet bear his folly to the grave?
I would not have your chiselled scrolls &mdash; Oh, no!
O'er me alone let silent willows wave;
And take &mdash; my God in Heaven!  take back the soul you gave.

How sweet is death!  no sorrow clouds the tomb:&mdash;
How still is death!  no voice breaks on his rest:&mdash;
How calm is death!  no troubles there can come:&mdash;
How fair is death!  the sunshine of the bless'd:&mdash;
Peace to the dead whose souls are on the breast
Of their Redeemer. &mdash; O!  'tis sweet to die
When Jesus calls, with wearied hearts oppress'd,
The rough race run, serenely down to lie,
And feel the ebbing soul expand into the sky!

Say, what is Death? &mdash; The blessed friend of man
His apotheosis; his final goal:
The termination of a paltry span;
The crown of life while endless ages roll&mdash;
Death but entombs the body, life the soul:
Death is the porch to Immortality;
There he hath no dominion, no control&mdash;
Man is a living sepulchre, till He
Destroys this house of clay, and sets the spirit free.

Death is the first of life:  this vision's close:&mdash;
Death is the sword that severs earthly ties:&mdash;
Death is the end of all our cares and woes:&mdash;
Death is the day-star &mdash; though in clouds he rise&mdash;
Which guides the weary wanderer to the skies:
The Christian's friend, that shakes the lifeless clod
From the freed soul, which disembodied flies
To prostrate at the footstool of her God,
And join the Saints, above, in never-ending laud.

With death the woes of this world can be borne;
Without death life were endless misery:
With death there's "hope of an Eternal Morn;"
Without death, Oh!  most wretched man would be:
To live a long life &mdash; an Eternity
Of trouble, sin, and sorrow &mdash; Death it is
That breaks the bars which span this mortal sea,
Fettering the soul down in a dark abyss&mdash;
If death makes man a God, what then is death but Bliss!

Hark!  that last knell! &mdash; the lingering year is gone!
Eternity hath swallowed up the past&mdash;
And now another wave comes rolling on
In quick succession, foamingly and fast;
Driving into Oblivion's gulf the last;
Like Ocean billows bounding as they roar,
Tempestuously &mdash; unfathomable &mdash; vast&mdash;
Till lost in thunder on the trembling shore;
So year drives onward year &mdash; the past returns no more.

Full many a face where Beauty weaves her spells,
This year shall wither in its brightest bloom;
Full many, a breast where heavenly goodness dwells,
Fall &mdash; unregarded fall into the tomb:&mdash;
Eyes which the light of love and youth illume,
Ere this short year hath rolled its tide away,
Shall sleep for ever in the grave's deep gloom;
Their pure hearts mingling with the damp cold clay&mdash;
Ah!  little reek they now of that approaching day.

Is this a time for revelry and mirth?
Is this an hour for banquet, dance and song?
When Time is sweeping all the souls of earth&mdash;
The high, the low, the young, the weak, the strong;
A reckless giddy multitude along&mdash;
Into the gulf of dread Eternity:
Oh!  it is folly &mdash; impiously wrong
To take no heed of moments as they flee;
Of precious passing years that ne'er redeemed can be.

Pause, then, with me, and ponder &mdash; Oh!  it cheers
The heavy heart far more than wine or mirth
Freely to ope the fountain of its tears,
And for a season wing its thoughts from earth;
This gives the freshened soul a second birth,
And then the year in bliss comes smiling on:
Such contemplations worlds of wealth are worth&mdash;
The Christian thus, who hopes in Heaven, alone
Can with sweet comfort say, "Another year is gone!"

