Angel, at once, and Demon, of the soul
The curse and solace of humanity,
Anguish and bliss alike own thy controul,
And mighty invocation, Memory!
Strongest and last enduring faculty,&mdash;
Which e'en o'er burning madness oft prevails;
Serene amid the mental anarchy,
When the grief conquer'd Understanding fails,
And dying Judgment drops the intellectual scales.

From the dark sepulchre of Time thy power
Calls forth the buried past, which lives again;
And, startling, on our retrospective hour
They come, arrayed in former joy and pain;&mdash;
Pleasure's and sorrow's intermingled train;
The crowded picture of our travell'd fate;&mdash;
And, gazing on it, though we may complain
That the dark hues of woe predominate,
And bleak and clouded is our wintry, mortal state:

Yet in that wither'd landscape and black sky,
Some spots of beauty there, which, green and bright,
Are sweetly interspers'd, shall to the eye
Afford a higher, more intense delight,
Surrounded by that gloominess and blight,
Than could an all luxuriant region show;&mdash;
Or an unclouded firmament of light:
And on the dark sky of our years of woe,
The stars of blissful hours with double brilliance glow.

How fondly through the scenes we once did love,
Whatever interpose of time or place,
By all restoring Memory led, we rove,
And all e'erwhile that charm'd, again retrace.
How full the lineaments of some dear face,
Long lost, or absent, are again retrieved,
In all the strength of truth, and power of grace;&mdash;
Yes, so delightfully are we deceived,
The visionary presence is almost believed.

E'en as those features, which in Memory's glass
We gaze upon with yearning tenderness,
Before mine eyes, dear Valley, dost thou pass,
In all thy luxury of loveliness
And wild sublimity of barrenness;
Thy fairy region doth each charm comprise,&mdash;
At once a garden and a wilderness,&mdash;
Eden, with her curse-blighted boundaries,
Or storm and sun-shine met in summer skies.

Though, Wharfe, that altar doth no longer stand,
Which, raised by Roman hands, of yore was thine,
Yet hast thou worshippers within the land,
Who, tracing with fond steps thy lovely line,
Do not refuse to own thee still divine.
Man's frail memorial hath perished,&mdash;
Partaking his mortality; but thine,
Ever renewing Nature!  hath not fled,
But flourisheth as then it flourished.

O ye, enraptured of her artless charms,
Ye, who gaze on her with a lover's eye,&mdash;
And who, in every light, in all her forms,
Still fresh appearing graces can descry;
Ye innocent idolators, draw nigh,&mdash;
See, with unmeasuring hand, her stores unroll'd!
All that her blended beauties can supply,
Here stand with me, and in one view behold,&mdash;
The rich, &mdash; the wild, &mdash; the soft, &mdash; the stern, &mdash; the beautiful, &mdash; the bold.

The mighty mountain, whose audacious head
Dares the forbidden region of the sky,
As if Earth sought her children thither fled,
And would reconquer their bright destiny.
The river, with its plaintive melody;
Encircling reverently the holy mould
Where ages of death's gather'd harvests lie;
The pensive memory of those days of old,&mdash;
The thought how soon our own shall be with them enrolled,&mdash;

These shall be in the eye, and in the mind
Contemplative, of him who wanders there;
Giving a feeling strong, though undefined,&mdash;
Of awe, yet pleasing, &mdash; awe, unmix'd with fear.
Nor will the manliest bosom scorn the tear
That from such rumination doth arise;
That cherish'd mourning, to the heart more dear
Than mirth's insane and short-lived revelries,&mdash;
Nature's pure unpolluted sympathies.

There is a soothing, passion stilling calm,
In that lone valley's solitary shade,
Which drops in healing fragrance, as a balm,
Into the bruises which the world hath made.
There may'st thou sit, nor sound, nor step invade
Thy meditation, save the harmless feet
Native thereof, which start from thee afraid;
Or the untutor'd melody, &mdash; but sweet,&mdash;
Betraying the soft minstrel's "green retreat."

Fair stream, upon thy grassy margin laid,
Drinking the rippling music of thy song,
How from mine eye the world's delusions fade,
And from mine ear the discord of its throng.
Rejoicing gratefully, &mdash; no more among
The never ceasing conflict, &mdash; that I may
Repose thy green, delicious banks along;
Or meditate the tributary lay,
In the soft moments of declining day.

THE WHARFE. &mdash; EVENING.
As the golden chain depending
From Beauty's neck of snow,
In graceful curves descending,
Such, Wharfe, thy winding flow.

Neath pendant foliage darkling,
Now glancing to the sky,&mdash;
Like the alternate sparkling,
And shade of Beauty's eye;&mdash;

With the gently heaving motion
Of Beauty's peaceful breast,
When knelt in meek devotion
Ere she lies down to rest;&mdash;

With the luxurious softness
Of Beauty's melting tone,
In that enchanted stillness,
When her voice is heard alone;&mdash;

As that chain, &mdash; the gift of love,&mdash;
On Beauty's bosom found,
With star-lit heaven above, 
And Paradise around!

O deem us not presumptuous, that with thee
Bolton, we claim a somewhat kindred fate;
Albeit we may not boast the dignity
Which yet thou dost display of ancient state.
Like thee in ruins, powerless we await
Time's ignorant hand, outstretch'd o'er all that seems;
But, let us own, &mdash; we would not be ingrate,&mdash;
Still pitying clings, concealing sorrow's seams,
The mantling ivy of poetic dreams.

Nature, repining at the spoil of Time,
Casts o'er each fractur'd arch her verdant veil,
As if she would his sacrilegious crime,
With the luxuriance of her love conceal.
Scarcely the wild-flower crested walls reveal
His ruthless hand upon them; so complete
Nature's compassionate adoption; &mdash; seal
Of her still watchful fondness, and replete
With a consoling moral, and a meet.

Nor do those verdant ringlets, streaming fair
And pleasantly upon the ruins gray,
Contrasted though in life and hue, impair
Within the heart their melancholy sway:
Thereto they rather add, than take away;
As the fresh flowers which weeping love bestows
On the pale, lifeless form of coffin'd clay;&mdash;
Where blent decay and fragrance but disclose
A feeling which to greater sadness grows.

Peacefully do they sleep, the happy dead,
In that green sanctuary of their rest,
Where no step comes but the religious tread
Of moralizing pilgrim; no unblest,
Disturbing dissonance, which might divest
The scene of its soft charm, by stillness given;
But all around doth holiest peace attest;
From a vain world of sinful tumult driven,&mdash;
Peacefully do they sleep, the dead &mdash; Death's Heaven!

Not so thy waters, Wharfe, romantic stream!
Uncertain Wanderer, whose various way,
Capricious as the shiftings of a dream,
Pen, nor more potent pencil, can pourtray.
Here, in thy peaceful mood, serenely gay,
Spreading thy bosom to the joyous light
In rippling dalliance, "amorous delay"
There, by dark anger fired, with wild affright
Right onward bearing in the madness of thy might.

As moves some army's congregated mass,
In dread compression, and concentrate force,
Upon the strong and well defended pass,
Which, threatening, doth forbid its further course,&mdash;
So the chafed river from their every source
Calls all her feudal waters to the post,&mdash;
Then with the shout of battle, stern and hoarse,
She rushes onward like a charging host,
Bursting the barrier rocks that would her path have crost.

Here call'd the frantic mother on her child,
Upbraiding in despair the ruthless flood;
But found no answer to her outcries wild,
Save the dull echo of the lonely wood,
And the Wharfe raging in her angry mood;
Pitiless, and unyielding of her prey;
As the fell tiger o'er his human food,&mdash;
Scaring the terror-stricken aid away,
With the fierce eve and roar of savage jealousy.

THE BOY OF EGREMONT.
In Egremont's bosom his heart blithely dancing,
As the beams of the morn on the woods of his chase,
O proud was a mother's fond eye on him glancing,
The lustre of youth and of beauty to trace.
The eye bright with joy gazing on him that morning,
Alas!  shall not sparkle to see him returning,&mdash;
But shall view, consolation distractedly scorning,
For ever extinguish'd her hopes and her race.

How fondly she saw, (in Hope's bright region soaring)
As he gallantly sprung to the warrior's game,
In him to her lone-widow'd side Heaven restoring,
Once more her lost mate, &mdash; to its lustre his name.
False Hope, O, believe her not!  ever deceiving,
And still the most faithless with hearts most believing,
She whispers of joy but to deepen our grieving,
She kindles the heart, &mdash; 'tis consum'd in the flame.

But hark!  his gay horn in that wild valley sounding,
With his leash-hound the echoing woodland he tries;
Startled from his green haunt, lo, the fleet deer is bounding,
And in speed with that menacing echo he vies.
As swiftly his steps his brave hunter pursuing,
Now lost for a moment, &mdash; now anxiously viewing,
As he strains for the Strid, his last refuge from ruin
His victim he nears, and ah!  surely he dies.

Not so was he fated.  Where savagely moaning
The Wharfe through the rifted rock fierce bursts her way,
(The black rock itself with the struggle is groaning)
And below wildly foaming in eddies doth play;&mdash;
The near sounding step of his foe trembling hearing,
The gleam of his  burnish'd blade, ready-bared, fearing,
At one gallant effort the deadly space clearing,
The chase, from impending death saved, bounds away.

Nor Romille did he stay on the brink pausing,
Undaunted he ventures the perilous wave,
But his cowardly comrade the hazard refusing&mdash;
He springs, &mdash; but 'tis into a turbulent grave.
For his shroud, and the requiem that should be sung o'er him,
He has but the torrent's white foam and loud roaring,&mdash;
The forester, powerless, and deeply deploring,
Hangs o'er the dire gulph of the young and the brave.

But who to a mother shall bear the sad message?
His pale looks betray, ere his tongue can relate;
In her fast-heaving bosom she feels a dark presage,
Ere breaks from his lips hapless Romille's fate.
Yet doom not thyself to a ne'er ending sorrow,
On the night-gloom of life dawns a bright-shining morrow,
Nay here, from devotion relief may'st thou borrow,&mdash;
And the woe that will die not, shall yet mitigate.

Where, free and unchafing the wave softly gliding,
Through the green vale it mirrors, flows calmly as wont,
Yon hoar walls she rear'd, where secluded residing,
Consolation she sought at the ne'er failing fount.
And say, for devotion what peaceful scene meeter?
For pensive seclusion what hermit-spot sweeter?
Than the Wharfe's plaintive voice, as repentant, what fitter,
To join her sad wail for her lost Egremont?

In the congenial gloom of falling night,
Rock-fetter'd Wharfe, with a still deepening tone,
(Like the dim horrors of nocturnal fight)
To deep continued thunder swells her moan.
Each cheerful sound of gladsome day is gone,
That from her raving might divert the ear;
Now reigns she in her ancient realm alone,
Or, if the night-bird's boding scream she hear,
She chides to silence with her voice of fear.

Round the surge beaten rock on which I stand
A precipice of foliage rises high,
With midnight blackness clothed; a giant band
Of trees, whose broad heads waving in the sky.
Mix with the pilgrim clouds, slow sailing by,
In form and motion.  From its side project
In spectral shape, and "obscure majesty,"
Centinel rocks; which the rent hills eject;
Stern guards!  that wild dominion to protect.

Deep, solemn mystery of delight!  whence comes
The melancholy revelry of heart
In scenes like this? &mdash; Escaped from the homes,
And clamorous din of herded man, &mdash; apart
From the world's earnest folly, and its art,&mdash;
To our Eternal Mother, as a child
Long lost, we are restored; she can impart
All a fond mother's blessing; she hath smiled
The unholy things away with which we were defiled.

And e'en in this, her sternest form and mood,
In wrath and darkness is she still beloved;
Unsever'd, unestranged, though subdued,
Still cling we to her as a child; reproved
By her most awful grandeur; not removed
From that dear instinct of her influence
Not wholly lost, e'en when we farthest roved;&mdash;
Cherishing, with unutter'd eloquence,
The mingled love and fear of great Omnipotence.

Less bright the stars are shining; fading still
As changes the dark firmament its hue:
For, issuing from yonder eastern hill,
Over the sable sky, a lovely blue
With soft invasion spreads; &mdash; and now in view,
In full, unveiled glory, comes the Queen
Of the still hour, to claim her empire due:
Sky, hill, and glistening river, glad, I ween,
Receive the throned Mistress of the scene.

And meet it is that gratefully they own
The heavenly consecration of her ray;
Serenely streaming from her silver crown,
Enshrining the profanities of day.
At its divine renewal, thus, our clay,
Preparing for its high immortal state,
Its grosser elements shall cast away;
And, purified from Earth's alloy, await,
The happy summons of its blissful fate.

The sternly frowning woods, which form'd e'erwhile
A long, steep rampart of unvaried gloom,
Transformed by the magic of her smile,
A spiritual brightness now assume;
And every tree is crowned with fairest bloom;
(So their illuminate tufts to fancy seem,)
And underneath, the bracken and the broom,
Catch, in some favor'd spots, the piercing beam,&mdash;
Which looks like the arrested lightning's gleam.

High, at the labouring Strid, the river throws,
Unceasingly, her foamy billows white;
Tumultuous heaving in convulsive throes,
Disorder'd as the tossing crest of knight
Combating in the fluctuating fight.
But thence released, down the long valley glance
Serenely her peace-spoken waters bright,
In passionless progression; as advance
The plumes of beauty in the gliding dance.

Far in the moon-lit distance, Barden rears
His roofless, but still venerable tower;
As warrior with his helmet doff'd appears,
Reposing after sanguinary stour.
Forsaking all the pageantry of power,
(Oh wise, exchange!)  the Shepherd-Noble well
Here gave to science and to peace the hour;
For peace and science, O what land shall tell
A greener solitude, a more romantic dell?

We love the pensive story to recall
Of his storm-born, but hermit-passing life,
From exiled boyhood, from the piteous fall
Of gentle Lancaster, unfit for strife,
The hapless victim of stern Richard's knife,&mdash;
To the Seventh Henry's all-restoring sway;
When, from his refuge-hills, &mdash; with pleasures rife,
Revolving Fortune, in her shining day,
Brought him, undazzled with their glare, away.

Methinks I see the melancholy boy
Reclining in the lone hill's shadow deep,
And, as return the scenes of home and joy,
Sadly he turns his youthful head to weep,
And hide the cheeks which sorrow's waters steep.
And now he doth upturn his forehead fair
Unto compassionate heaven; as if to reap
E'en from its visible face, in his despair,
Some gracious sign of help; &mdash; he looks, and finds it there.

He found it in the contemplations high
Of that bright mystery of magnificence,
The world-inhabited infinity,&mdash;
Incomprehensible to human sense.
Most glorious witness of Omnipotence!
To speak thy splendours what shall words avail?
We tremble, in adoring ignorance,
In his divinest work the Godhead hail,
And learn to worship, where to grasp we fail.

Ye ever glittering Stars !  whose lights appear
Like the far shining city of his home,
To the lorn waste-benighted wanderer,&mdash;
To whose consoling cheer he fain would come;&mdash;
Thus, on the desert of life wearisome,
We keep your bright allurement still in view;
And, if despairing moments there be some,
When, fainting, we would not the path pursue,&mdash;
We gaze upon your hope, and so our strength renew.
