Heavenly Contemplation!  from thy zone
Of dazzling glory, mid the gold-wrought skies:&mdash;
Come, bright-browed Spirit, from thy radiant throne,
Where the warm Day in gorgeous purple dies:
Clear the dark mists which dim those feeble eyes,
And lift my soul above this mortal coil;
On sacred pinions teach my thoughts to rise,
Up &mdash; up where amaranths robe the radiant soil:&mdash;
That Joy may crown my hopes, and Heaven reward my toil.

Vouchsafe, O!  thou Eternal God of might,
From whom all goodness, love, and wisdom flow,
To shed into my soul some heavenly light,
That to mankind its sunshine I may show;
And, while I tread this vale of tears and wo,
Teach me to praise and glorify thy name;
That when I'm sleeping in the dust below,
My humble song may flourish still the same:&mdash;
I wish no greener wreath &mdash; I ask no greater fame.

No; let me be forgotten &mdash; I would not live
On man's vain breath, as fickle as the wind;
The crowns of bay and laurel mortals give,
With poisonous buds and thorns are oft entwin'd:&mdash;
Give me sweet peace &mdash; tranquillity of mind,
And all earth's pageants I with joy forego:
O!  grant, my heavenly Father, I may find
A crown of glory to enwreath this brow:
Fame's for the wise, in Heaven; fame's for the fool below.

'Tis morn &mdash; the Sabbath morn! &mdash; a summer sun
Beams o'er the placid mountain, most sublime!
This day, like mine, his course is but begun;
Measuring the fleeting moments of marr'd Time,
He wanders on, serene, from clime to clime:
Ah!  would that he could waft the Sabbath-day
To those Barbaric lands of wo and crime;
So far from Heavenly light and love away&mdash;
O!  Bethlehem, where's thy Star to shed its powerful ray?

Break forth!  break forth, ye mountains, into singing!
Shout, O!  ye Heavens! &mdash; be joyful, O!  thou Earth!
For yet to thee great glory shall be springing;
Yea, from on high the Day-spring have its birth;
The forests clap their hands in awful mirth;
And all be rising rapture, love, and light;
From the cold Poles to the Equator's girth
Glad tidings yet shall wake the sleep of night,
Religion reign supreme, and all the world he bright!

Oh!  glorious vision! &mdash; O!  ecstatic sight!
Break forth!  break forth, ye mountains, into singing!
For Death and Darkness shall be put to flight,
And hymns and praises down each vale be ringing;
The dawn of Heaven o'er all the wide world springing;
Mankind be brothers, lovingly again,
And morning stars, in laughing ether swinging,
Shall shout for joy, to view each blessed plain,
Where love and friendship dwell; where Peace and Goodness reign!

It is the Sabbath morn &mdash; that day of rest,
When all the world is tinged with deeper dies;
When Nature seems in fairer garments dress'd,
And Phoebus rolls, sublime, through smiling skies:&mdash;
It is the morn, when to the Christian's eyes, 
All heaven and earth are filled with passionate love;
When the heart sings, the expanding soul doth rise
On wings of holy transport, far above
All the vain dreams of life, in realms of bliss to rove!

Hark!  the sweet church-bells pealing from yon spire
That towers majestic o'er the old oak trees;
Pointing to heaven with crosslet of pale fire&mdash;
Like flaming cresset o'er th' inconstant seas&mdash;
Hark!  how the deep tones float along the breeze!
Mingling harmonious with the blaze of day.&mdash;
Green fields &mdash; fresh flowers &mdash; the song of birds and bees,
Feed every sense, and all the soul is gay,
As Heaven had filled the heart, and banished gloom away!

Now what a prospect to our view is given!
Lo!  by the margin of the wooded plain;
Along the winding that leads to Heaven;
The simple village maid, the artless swain,
The blooming children, and the aged twain
With silvered locks, bowed heads, and humble mien:
All moving onward to yon sacred fane
That crowns, with snowy spire, the hillock green:&mdash;
Oh!  'tis a gladdening sight! &mdash; A lovely &mdash; heavenly scene!

Scarce doth the soul-enchanting voice
Shake the old pile, a with choral harmony;
When Eldred, musing, down the mountain strays&mdash;
For aye a solitary soul was he,
And ever loved in loneliness to be:
Ne cared he aught for what the world would say;
Nor Cynic's scorn, nor envious obloquy:
But wandered on his solitary way&mdash;
To commune with his God amid the fields that day.

Oh!  it is hard t' unbosom our own feelings;
But doubly hard to tell what others feel;
When the heart drinks th' enraptured soul's revealings,
And tears, all burning, o'er the pale cheeks steal.&mdash;
Start not, stern stranger! &mdash; Eldred loved right weel
To bow the knee in honest guise to God,
In God's own house &mdash; but I to thee appeal;
If better 'twere to take the lonely road,
Or rise with outward show to join the studied laud!

Young Eldred felt &mdash; so exquisitely felt
The solemn impress of the Sabbath day;
That all his soul in gushing tears would melt,
As melts the evening mist in dews away;
Nor could he e'er conceal Faith's powerful sway
From all the eyes that oft were turned on him:
And so he loved in solitude to pray,
Where the green oaks, with many a branching limb,
Obscured him from the world, in shady covert dim.

There, while he knelt in intercourse with Heaven;
He paused and listened to the voice of praise,
Which down the vale in pealing notes was driven;
Blent with the song of birds, the perfumed maze
Of flowers all sweetness, and the sun's bright blaze;
Whose broken beams along the lake would glance:&mdash;
Mute &mdash; motionless, on heaven he fixed his gaze,
And heard, all wrapped in most enchanting trance,
Th' assembled, thus, their great Creators praise advance:&mdash;

HYMN.
"Praise ye the Lord! &mdash; praise ye the Lord!
Your joyful voices raise:&mdash;
All heaven and earth, with one accord,
Th' Almighty Maker praise.

He bade the world from chaos rise;
Through space this globe was driven:
He dawned upon th' etherial skies,
And worlds revolved in heaven!

Praise ye the Lord! &mdash; praise ye the Lord!
With timbrel, harp and song;
Ye worlds, who heard his forming word,
The solemn hymn prolong.

He said 'Let there be light,' and light
Rushed down upon the waters!
On man He stamped His image bright;
On Eve and all her daughters.

Praise ye the Lord! &mdash; praise ye the Lord!
Ye floods and nations roar;
The Great Creator, the Ador'd;
Praise Him for evermore!

Praise Him, ye Angels of the sky!
Praise Him, ye wood-crowned mountains!
Praise Him, ye Heaven of Heavens on high!
Praise Him, ye groves and fountains!

Praise ye the Lord! &mdash; praise ye the Lord!
Your joyful voices raise;
Let heartfelt rapture forth he pour'd
In one grand hymn of praise!

Praise Him, ye hail, and fire, and snow!
Praise Him, ye sons of glory!
Praise Him, ye Princely Powers below!
In song, and dance, and story!

Praise ye the Lord! &mdash; praise ye the Lord!
Whose goodness fadeth never:
With one accord, Oh!  praise the Lord
For ever, and for ever!"

I will not dwell on Eldred's musings here:&mdash;
His prayers, his meditations, and his thoughts,
God knows, were aye soul-soothing and sincere,
Though breathed unseen mid solitary spots,
Where the green willows waved o'er crystal grots.&mdash;
Few feel the influence of such rapturous hours:
Man breathes, and lives, and loves, and dies, and rots;
Like weeds on ocean tossed; like wild field-flowers:
Pleasure his paltry aim, till blighted mid her bowers.

Kings govern kingdoms &mdash; be it mine alone
To rule the empire of myself; therein
To hold my sceptre; and to fix my throne
O'er my immortal sacred soul: &mdash; begin
To vanquish will, and quell the power of sin:&mdash;
Then shall I be an Emperor, and bring
A world of warriors to mine aid within;
This is dominion &mdash; this is governing!
If the soul be a wreck, where is the mighty King?

Oh Solitude!  I love thee, for thou art
The mart of meditation, and the nurse
Which weans the musing melancholy heart
From earth to heaven &mdash; to hate thee were a curse
Than hatred of my brother man far worse;
For God's in thee, and thou dost teach mankind&mdash;
With Nature's music, and with Nature's verse
That he is frail, and ignorant, and blind;
That God alone is good, and merciful, and kind.

When silence slept upon the moonlit sea,
And Nature's breath and Ocean's pulse stood still:
When our lone vessel floated, tranquilly,
On the glass'd mirror of the waters chill;
And not a tree, nor vale, nor house, nor hill,
All round the horizon, met the straining view;&mdash;
The blank and bleak monotony to fill&mdash;
Save the far fields of boundless ocean blue,
Paved with the stars of heaven, that tremblingly shone through.

Then would fond Fancy wing her fairy flight,
Away!  away!  far o'er the sleeping foam;
Over those crystal-buried worlds of light,
Back to her native mountains and her home&mdash;
Ah me!  thought I, how painful 'tis to roam
From all on earth we valued and held dear;
From the loved land where laughing eyes would come
To charm us with their virtue &mdash; then the tear
Gushed from my labouring heart, and fell &mdash; as it falls here&mdash;

Oh!  it were bliss to be but in that land
Where they are sleeping in the cold cold clay;
Where once I wandered, gaily, hand in hand,
With those who loved me dearly many a day:&mdash;
The friend of this frail throbbing bosom &mdash; yea,
The more than friend the faithful and the fair:
The parent too &mdash; Oh all &mdash; all snatched away:
Well may I weep &mdash; my earnest, only prayer,
Is, that this heart were hushed, in slumber, with them there.

To stand alone upon the midnight deck
To gaze around upon the cold, calm sea;
Where not a rock, nor bark, nor spar, nor speck,
Of aught save Ocean blue, is seen to be:&mdash;
Forgotten &mdash; friendless &mdash; fatherless &mdash; and free
As the poor fettered Indian Slave &mdash; all good,
All learning, an religion, scorned to see&mdash;
As the bark's prow spurns back the foaming flood
Thus &mdash; thus to stand alone &mdash; Oh!  this is Solitude!

My soul breaks forth! &mdash; my heart's already broken;
My joys all blighted, and my hopes all crushed:
This withered heart, alas!  is but the token
Of a fair bud, that only bloomed and blushed,
And then was blighted &mdash; yet from it have rushed
Tears, sweet as from the fairest ever started.&mdash;
What am I? &mdash; nothing! &mdash; then my voice be hushed:
Oh!  what can heal the breast which thus hath smarted&mdash;
The heavy-laden soul &mdash; the lorn &mdash; the broken-hearted?

My Father! &mdash; Oh!  my Parent's in his grave;
Heaven rest his soul! &mdash; he cannot hear me now:&mdash;
Thus perish all most dear &mdash; the good! &mdash; the brave!&mdash;
Where shall I look for comfort? &mdash; turn, O!  Thou
Who hear'st the Orphan's prayer, and teach me how
To bear with resignation &mdash; well I know
That Thou canst cool afresh this aching brow;
Wipe all my tears away; sooth all my wo;
And guide me &mdash; love me, still; yea, wheresoe'er I go!

Thou, too! &mdash; O!  Sister of my soul's pure pleasures!
What were this life &mdash; this cold world without thee?
All that my heart within its centre treasures;
My Joy!  my Pride! &mdash; thou art a world to me;
And in thy gentle heart there seems to be
A Heaven of pure affection, which doth flame
Like some bright beacon mid life's stormy sea:&mdash;
There are who love, and then forget the name;
But, let the cold world change, we still shall love the same.

Oh!  what on earth below, in Heaven above,
Where all is sunshine, love, perfection, bliss,
Can match the heaven of a Sister's love?
A Sister's love that cheers a world like this!
Sweet as the winds Arabian flowers that kiss:
Pure as the star, the streaming star of even;
And deep m Ocean's most profound abyss.&mdash;
Oh!  take thy Brother's blessing fondly given:
Be it thy crown on earth, thine humblest gem in Heaven.

Were not our hearts cast in the self-same mould?
Twin-born our being, and our souls but one?
Though mine be less refulgent, thine is gold;
A pure, immortal, intellectual sun!
Did not we drink existence cradled on
The same dear bosom?  and each infant heart
Partook the others joys, as life did run:&mdash;
What happy days we both have seen! &mdash; I start
To think that we must &mdash; no; ah no!  we cannot, part.

We part! &mdash; Oh Heaven! &mdash; together have we roved,
One house our home, one cradle was our bed;
Together laughed in innocence, and loved
The golden hours away; and I have led
Thy footsteps, oft, where smiling flowers were spread:&mdash;
And must we part, because to thee is given
The purest soul? &mdash; Oh no!  I'll lay my head,
In peace, upon thy bosom, calm as Even;
And hand in hand we'll walk to our sweet home in Heaven.

Say, what is man &mdash; frail, feeble, fragile man?
A ruin checkered o'er with light and shade
A soul entombed in dust!  that dust a span
"Most fearfully, most wonderfully made!"
A lovely flower, that flourishes to fade!
A temple filled with an immortal mind!
A signet with Jehovah's stamp display'd!
A spirit in a veil of dust enshrined!
A God!  a worm!  a world!  a heaven!  a hell!  combined!

Behold the Day-fly revelling in her mirth!
Think'st thou her pleasures are not dashed with pain?
Though, when mild evening sets upon her birth,
She flutters &mdash; falls &mdash; and dust is dust again!
Behold the sear leaves withering o'er the plain!
Did not they once, all fresh, heaven's blue dome fan?&mdash;
Behold the white surge foaming from the main!
It bounds, and bursts, and glitters for a span:&mdash;
All beautiful! &mdash; all fair! &mdash; all fleeting! &mdash; Such is Man!

Genius!  thou wavering, wild, eccentric Star;
The curse of thousands, yet the thirst of all;
How marvellous and how beautiful you are,
Where'er upon this frail terrestrial ball
Your wreaths of emanating radiance fall!
With all your eccentricities and woes,
Your pride, your passions misanthropical;
Still are you honoured, even by your foes,
And, crowned with endless bays, you take your last repose.

Byron!  immortal Byron!  thou art gone
Where, all the Bards of earth have fled before:
Byron!  immortal Byron!  thou wert one
Whose early crush'd heart, wounded to the core,
Bled inwardly each bitter drop of gore&mdash;
Oh!  Byron! &mdash; Oh!  unhappy, reckless Bard;
Thy deep-toned lyre is hushed for evermore:&mdash;
Though round thy brows the storms of life, blew hard,
Still Genius bowed to thee, and owned her Sovereign Lord!

'Tis this great power makes man at once a God!
Genius lifts him far above all clay;
Above the crushed crowd grovelling in the clod;
To heights, from which th' Enthusiast may survey
The petty pigmies of the world at play:&mdash;
There let him feel the keen cold blast that blows;
To Newton, Milton, Byron, what's the spray
Of the world's envious breathings? &mdash; Fame! &mdash; God knows,
A man can ne'er be Great, unless he has foes!

Hail!  sweet, soul-soothing Poesy! &mdash; how bless'd&mdash;
How favoured is the child that's wrapt in thee!
His heart a world of tenderness &mdash; his breast
A very Heaven of living ecstasy!
What though a gloom o'er his serenity
Is thrown to day; his sky's all blue to-morrow:&mdash;
The heart that feels must ever mournful be;
I would not give my pleasures dashed with sorrow,
For all the purest joys that mortal man can borrow.

In summer I'm all song! &mdash; my heart and soul
Drink flowers, and dews, and sunshine, and delight;
And feel expansion with the roar and roll
Of woods, and floods, and clouds, and glorious night;
Then I'm all rapture &mdash; then my soul's all light,
And every flower, and every leaf, to me,
Is a creation, beautiful and bright!&mdash;
How Great! &mdash; how Good! &mdash; how Glorious!  must He be,
Who made this lovely world the Paradise we see!

Nature!  come forth!  thou Goddess of my Soul!
Thou sea sublime!  thou boundless world of waters!
Rocking the mountains with thy thundering roll;
Paved with pure gems, yet stained with countless slaughters.&mdash;
Flora and Ceres!  Nature's loveliest daughters&mdash;
The treasured darlings of my soul, come forth!
Where Heaven with bright tears India's garden waters,
I've felt your influence and beheld your worth.&mdash;
Oh Nature, sweet to me are all thy forms on earth!

First comes sweet Spring in all her balmy mildness,
Adorned with leafy sprigs and fairy flowers:&mdash;
Shoots the young vivid verdure in its wildness;
Flush the fresh fields, and bud the blooming bowers,
Gemm'd with soft dews, impearl'd with tender showers.&mdash;
Up mounts the Lark to meet the merry morning;
While silvery Music leads, the gentle Hours;
And the bright bow, a soft shower's sunny warning,
Laughs mid the fleeting clouds yon glittering vale adorning!

Then comes bright Summer, beautiful and blue;
All sunshine, roses, vegetable blooms:
The crystal rills their warbling ways pursue;
Bleat the white flocks among the golden brooms.
A dazzling deluge all the world illumes;
Droop the parch'd flowers on Nature's panting breast;
Till the black Tempest spreads his pitchy plumes,
Then ragged lightnings tear the mountain's crest,
And the dread thunder rolls sublime along the west!

Follows rich Autumn, crowned with golden corn;
Sweet scents the withered grass along the way;
The yellow fields laugh in the saffron morn;
And merry Reapers, ranged in fair array,
Ply the sharp sickle all the sultry day&mdash;
Pomona reddens on the bending boughs&mdash;
Myriads of wing'd gems in the sunbeams play&mdash;
From clustering vines the empurpled torrent flows,
And through the falling leaves the whistling South-wind blows.

Last comes stern Winter robed in fleecy snow&mdash;
Through the calm air the whitening flakes descend:
Broad beams red Phoebus mid the vapours low;
While, from the leafless forest boughs depend
Cold glassy icicles, and far extend
The sparkling fields &mdash; the lake's a crystal plain!
Thick sown with stars the heavens of midnight bend:
When lo!  the white bills melt with genial rain;
Laughs the ascending sun, and Spring returns again!

Oh!  ever varying, mild, mysterious round
"The rolling year," indeed, "is full of Thee,"
Great God of Love! &mdash; Earth!  make a joyful sound,
With all thy birds &mdash; Thou blue and boundless Sea!
And all that in thy mighty waters be,
Praise your Creator! &mdash; Praise Him in the skies,
Ye Seraphim! &mdash; Ye Cherubim! &mdash; Give me
"Expressive silence," and my soul shall rise
Far, far above all clay, which blossoms, breathes and dies

But where is Eldred? &mdash;  'Twere an endless task
To ponder all the works and ways of God:
There are two books will tell thee all: &mdash; Go ask
Thy Bible, &mdash; Nature, &mdash;  Creature of the clod!
There's not a flower o'er which thy steps have trod,
Hath not a volume in each withering leaf!
There's not a worm that glitters o'er the sod,
Speaks not its world of wonder! &mdash; 'Twere a grief
To pass all unobserved: &mdash; then pause, however brief.

Mark yonder aged, venerable man!
Beside the Solitary bending low;
With drooping head, and withered visage, wan;
And locks, which Time hath silvered o'er with snow,
All thinly scattered round his aged brow:&mdash;
A passing Pilgrim he; whose only wealth
Is the poor pittance Strangers can bestow;
Worn &mdash; wasted &mdash; weak &mdash; so far removed from Health,
That life itself but seems a transitory stealth!

Eldred aye loved to lend a listening ear
To the poor Beggar by the highway side:&mdash;
His heart was warm; and oft the stealing tear,
That wandered down his cheeks, he strove to hide:
So far was he removed from paltry pride,
That Kings, to him, were lighter in the scale
Than the poor Outcast, who was all denied
The baubles of the world &mdash; His cheek grew pale,
While thus the Pilgrim told his melancholy tale:&mdash;

O'er Wicklow mountains blew the bleak cold blast;
Around their gloomy crags in clouds arrayed,
Wild Winter's veil o'er Nature's face was cast:&mdash;
When, lorn and lonely, through the deep snows strayed
A poor, young, helpless, pale and pining maid
A weeping babe she cradled in her arms,
And wrapp'd his shivering limbs in ragged plaid:&mdash;
Reckless of hers, his fate alone alarms,
Calls forth her tears, and all the Mother's bosom warms!

Where the grey crags o'erhang the mossy stone,
And the brook brawls along its pebbly bed;
She sat her down, in wretchedness, alone,
And wept aloud, and bowed her languid head;
And ah!  full many a bitter tear she shed:&mdash;
Cold blew the blast, fast fell the drifting snow;
Till in the Mother's arms the babe lay dead!
And both were buried deep and dark below;
Froz'n in the sleep of Death &mdash; one monument of Wo!

Great God! &mdash; the Pilgrim paused till his full heart
Gushed forth, in one fast torrent of warm tears:
With eyes upturned, and quivering lips apart,
He raised his hands t'wards Heaven &mdash; Be hushed my fears,
For they are gone! &mdash; the Partner of long years!
The child of Innocence! &mdash; my wife! &mdash; my boy!
Oh!  all this world and all this life endears,
Thus perished! &mdash; There's a moment will destroy,
With one wild, withering blight, a bless'd long life of joy!

Oh!  Poverty &mdash; how pitiless thy state!
How keen o'er thee the blasts of Fortune blow!
And are ye deaf to all their cries, ye Great?
Alas!  alas!  how little do you know
Of all the cares, and pangs, and bitter wo,
The poor, yet honest Beggar's born to bear:&mdash;
Well may the tear of tender Pity flow;
Well may the warm heart fellow-feelings share.&mdash;
Stranger!  God loves the man who heeds Misfortune's prayer.

Ah!  well knew Eldred God did love the man
Whose heart was open to Misfortune's cry;
And o'er his cheeks the tear of pity ran,
And all his soul was tender sympathy:&mdash;
Poor man, said he, as the heart-rending sigh
Burst from the Beggar's bosom &mdash; May the God
Who rules supreme in yonder lovely sky,
Protect thee &mdash; guard thee &mdash; guide thee up the road
That leads to all you love, in Virtue's blessed abode.

Now had the sun his burning forehead laved
In the cold crystal of the glowing deep;
And the round moon her silver banner waved
O'er the blue, boundless, star-bespangled steep:&mdash;
All earth &mdash; all heaven &mdash; all Nature lay in sleep;
Clear, cloudless, bright and beautiful!  when they
Parted: &mdash; that Pilgrim still to pause and weep;
That youth to wind his solitary way, 
Where his romantic home among the green woods lay.

Who hath not loved fair woman? &mdash; is there one,
Whose heart is formed of tender, breathing mould,
Between the poles, beneath the blessed sun,
Could look on her all callously and cold?
No!  no! &mdash; Nor Power, nor Genius, Rank, nor Gold,
Can purchase her sweet love:  it stands alone,
A Heaven on earth! &mdash; free &mdash; fearless &mdash; uncontroll'd!
How bless'd is he, who all to guile unknown,
Can call her gentle heart of innocence &mdash; his own!

Oh!  ecstacy of admiration! &mdash; Earth!
With womankind how beautiful thou art!
In wo or weal, in mourning or in mirth;
In every climate and in every part:&mdash;
Ye gentle Charmers of Man's ruder heart!
What were the world without you? &mdash; what this life?
All dark &mdash; all drear &mdash; all desolate &mdash; a mart
Of helpless, hopeless agony and strife:
Now all so beautiful, with Mother! &mdash; Sister! &mdash; Wife!

Yes; womankind!  I love thee, with a soul
Deeply devoted &mdash; with a pleasing, pure,
And perfect passion, that hath all control
O'er this frail heart &mdash; a love that will endure,
As firm, as fixed, as faithful, fervent, sure,
As ever fancy formed, or Minstrel sung!
What, though earth's clouds of sorrow may obscure
The bright blue skies, that Innocence had hung
O'er thy heart's early life, so passionate, pure and young?

Its beauty beams through all! &mdash; go ask the man
Who lay before thee on the couch of death,
When life's slow current through his hot veins ran,
And his sunk soul seemed fleeting with each breath:&mdash;
Hear what the female-tended captive saith;
The Stranger in a foreign land &mdash; the foe&mdash;
The very outcast, who hath proved her faith:&mdash;
And they will tell thee, wheresoe'er you go,
That gentle Womankind is all our Heaven below!

Then, Eldred loved! &mdash; the Lady of his love
Was all to him &mdash; her golden, flowing hair;
Her deep, blue eyes, like dewy orbs above;
Her lineaments, so exquisitely fair!
Her brow serene &mdash; the Heaven of sweetness there!
Her form so slender, delicate and light!
Her mild deportment, and her gentle air;
Were all so lovely in young Eldred's sight,
That she alone seemed good, and beautiful, and bright!

Oh!  they would look into each other's eyes,
And read each other's souls; as ye, above,
Will trace the stars that gem the clear blue skies:
And they would breathe each other's breath &mdash; and love
To bear their hearts in rapturous fondness move!
Such hours were not for Eloquence &mdash; a sigh&mdash;
A look &mdash; a breath itself, would deeply prove
Their souls' pure passion-thus the hours did fly:
All earth was lovely then &mdash; all Nature ecstasy!

Look on the desert flower! &mdash; how beauteous, there,
It buds, and blooms, and flourishes, and dies!
Pencilled by Flora, delicately fair&mdash;
Like Evening's soft beams scattered o'er the skies
Behold! &mdash; admire! &mdash; consider &mdash; ponder &mdash; prize&mdash;
Poor Fool! &mdash; then see it wither, fall, and rot!
So fades the flower from Eldred's Paradise;
So did his loved one perish! &mdash; mark the spot
Where that fair being sleeps, by the cold world forgot!

She died in beauty! &mdash; innocent and young!&mdash;
Poor child!  she loved  her Eldred to the last; 
And, his dear name fell faltering from her tongue,
When life, and, love, and light, were ebbing fast
From her young, heart &mdash; but oh!  my God, 'tis past!
And why &mdash; why dwell on such a mournful theme?
All that he loved &mdash; adored! &mdash; dread Death, thou hast.&mdash;
Sure may the mournful Solitary deem,
That man's a fading flower, and this dark life a dream.

Oft would he linger in that lonely dell,
Where his young love lay buried; till the day
From Heaven's blue arch, beyond the mountain, fell;
And faded, beautifully, ray by ray,
Like a departing Spirit, all away!
And the pile stars shone forth &mdash; there would he mourn
O'er blighted hopes and pleasures gone for aye;
Sweet, happy days that never could return,
While thus he poured his soul above that lonely urn:&mdash;

What voice wo that which emote the ambient air?
So heavenly sweet! &mdash; Can there be Spirits here,
Which hold their vigils o'er one heart, and bear,
On floating pinions to my ravished ear,
The solemn music of yon lovely sphere&mdash;
Shining like Hope above Life's stormy sea?&mdash;
Or was it only fancy? &mdash; Ah!  that tear,
Wandering adown my pale cheeks, seems to be
A little world of bliss that's whispering peace to me.

Where hast thou flowed from pure and cherished gem?
Did that sweet music call thee from my heart?
Or hast thou fall'n from some rich diadem
Wreathing the brow of Angel, to impart
A balm to this tired bosom, which doth smart
Beneath its cares and sorrows? &mdash; Far more kind
Than aught the fickle world can give, thou art
To me, bright gem!  for thou hast left behind
A holy, heavenly calm, that steals through all my mind.

And doth thy spirit hover o'er me, then,
My long lost love &mdash; Oh!  is it &mdash; is it thou?
And dost thou come to love me, here, again,
Where all around is gloom and grief? &mdash; Ah!  how
I watched the blossom withering on the bough!
Intensely watched, till all my visions fled&mdash;
Yes, I had hope ev'n to the last; but now,
Since thou art sleeping in the narrow bed,
All my fond hopes are vain, all my pure pleasures dead.

My long lost love!  when last I looked on thee;
When last I gazed upon thy beauteous brow,
Cold as the sculptured spar, there seemed to be
A glory circling thy whole form: &mdash; although
The icy hand of Death had laid thee low;
Still wert thou lowly, my beloved one;
Still from thy lips a language seemed to flow,
Whispering sweet peace to me &mdash; But thou art gone,
And lonely through the storms of Life my bark drives on.

Where is Health's rich carnation which did blossom
In thy fair cheeks? &mdash; Where is the golden hair
That spread in wavy ringlets o'er thy bosom?
Thy laughing eyes:  thy brow of radiance, where?
In the cold grave? &mdash; Ah!  no &mdash; no, not ev'n there:&mdash;
Thy beauteous form has withered from the tomb&mdash;
As morning's purple cloud dissolves in air&mdash;
And all around thy silent bed is gloom,
Save where the dewy flowers in pallid beauty bloom.

But let me dwell no more on ashes cold&mdash;
Where is thy soul of innocence, my Love?
Through which flowed streams of thought like molten gold;
Pure as the sunshine!  spotless as the Dove!
O!  rapturous thought! &mdash; O!  ecstasy!  above,
Where mortal mists no wore thine eyes shall dim;
Where hymning quires in radiant circles move;
Winging their way around the throne of Him,
Who sits, sublime, in light, amid the Cherubim!

Ah!  when I think, my lost one!  thou art blessed,
There is a secret pleasure in my grief;
And, though my soul with sorrow is oppressed,
The big warm tears &mdash; like dew-drops from the leaf&mdash;
Give this o'erburdened heart such sweet relief,
That I could weep in silence till to-morrow:
But ah!  how fleeting is the night &mdash; how brief
Are the delightful beams of bliss we borrow,
From contemplating, thus, in holy, heart-felt sorrow.

Before to-morrow &mdash; what a gulf there lies!
Before yon stars are buried in the day;&mdash;
Long ere the morning paints the purple skies,
I may be far from thy green isle away,
Mine own romantic Erin! &mdash; I may stray
Round the wide world, but still my heart's with thee,
Let thy wild flowers, and bees, and birds be gay,
When my salt tears are mingling with the sea;
And none but those I've loved, in Heaven, remember me!

Flow forth, then, O!  my tears &mdash; man doth not know
The balm ye pour into the wounded breast:
Flow freely forth my tears, unceasing flow,
And lull this troubled bosom into rest:
What though I mourn! &mdash; my life! &mdash; my love! &mdash; thou'rt bless'd!
And 'tis my joy to think so, while I'm driven
Through this bleak world, a vale of tears at best&mdash;
Oh!  may it to my earnest prayer be given;
That we may meet to part &mdash; no more, no more! &mdash; in Heaven!

When his full heart had spent itself in sighs;
And peace, like balm, into his bosom stole;
When the last tears came gushing to those eyes
From which, unconscious, he ne'er felt them roll:&mdash;
He raised his harp, to pour his melting soul
In melody away &mdash; and as he sung,
O'er his young heart the tones had such control,
That still he wept, and by that urn he hung,
While soft as rills in Heaven those accents left his tongue.&mdash;

She died in beauty! &mdash; like a rose
Blown from its parent stem:
She died in beauty! &mdash; like a pearl
Dropp'd from some diadem.&mdash;
She died in beauty! &mdash; like a lay
Along a moonlit lake:
She died in beauty! &mdash; like the song
Of birds amid the brake.
She died in beauty! &mdash; like the snow
On flowers dissolved away:
She died in beauty! &mdash; like a star
Lost on the brow of day.
She lives in glory! &mdash; like Night's gems
Set round the silver moon:
She lives in glory! &mdash; like the sun
Amid the blue of June!

Perchance in Heaven they've met! &mdash; my tale is told&mdash;
The morn arose along the dewy lea,
And shook her diamonds from her throne of gold,
Empurpling all the emerald glancing sea:&mdash;
The noon-day flamed in fair serenity;
But, where was Eldred? &mdash; God knows! &mdash; none could tell!
Nor by that urn, nor in that vale was he.&mdash;
My tale is told &mdash; I yet may wake my shell
For him another day; but now, we bid Farewell!
