Thou art a funny creature, D. O'Goster,
I therefore dedicate these lines to thee;
But, by my modesty, thou art a boaster,
To praise thy own queer rhymes, sighed "Shaughnassey":
I really thought that thou hadst ceased to be;
But thou didst only leave us for a while,
To visit thy dear country, and to see
Our good and gracious Sovereign, with a smile,
Pour on her rusty manacles &mdash; a little oil.

Art thou a dandy, Dermot?  If thou art,
Thou wilt be classified by P. Pigtail;
For he's been taking lessons at the mart,&mdash;
The manufactory, where they vend, wholesale,
The covering of the two-legged animal.
Thou hast, I see, commended the Critic Trade;
Take care, my darling, that thou dost not fail:
And when by whisky inspiration led,
Sit down, and judge, as if thy own, the rhymes of Z.

What shall I say of him 'cleped Dandy wight,
Or other name learnt in Derision's school?
For now the shapely thing appears in sight,
Just like a gander stepping from a pool;
Stretching his forward neck, he seems to rule,
Proudly pre-eminent, o'er all his race;
Hisses defiance at each passing fool,
Then turns, exulting, with a goose-like grace:
The gabbing tribe all join, the daring feat to praise.

Within his neckcloth's ample round lie hid,
Smiles of all forms, that at his wishes fly;
Some, to wound ladies' tender hearts are bid,
Borne on the infectious pinions of a sigh;
Others dance round the mirror of his eye,
And on their own dear forms enraptured gaze;
Or glance on unformed wretch contemptuously,
Who will not make his idol's altars blaze,
But clothes him as his lists, and heedeth not her ways.

A neat surtout his flimsy waist displays,
By stays or buckled bandages comprest;
Thus looked my granny in her youthful days,
When forth she rode, berobed in riding vest:
With tailor's shreds is stuffed his pouting chest,
Where dangles, carelessly, a quizzing-glass,
Save when to either optic it is placed,
To view a belle, or something novel pass,
Or greet one of his kind, &mdash; no other thought he has.

If thou art yet a novice on life's way,
Who read'st these lines, still listen to my strain;
For I would joyful be, if this essay
Could make thee from such fantasies refrain;
For they are all as hollow and as vain
As those bright orbs thy childhood formed with care;
The splendid bubble will not long remain:
Thou look'st with joy on thy creation fair,&mdash;
Behold, it moves! &mdash; and bursts, and vanishes in air.
