There is a state to hardened vice unknown,
A mournful joy, a sadly pleasing mood,
Which he who feels it loves to nurse alone,
And tell his sorrows to the midnight wood;
There, in the deepest shades of solitude,
While not a star beams o'er the clouded sky,
The echoing blast, and roaring of the flood,
And, heard at intervals, the owl's dread cry,
Mixed awful, aid the soul in hopeless sympathy!

Oh, if, as saints have deemed and poets wrote,
Departed spirits still may hover near;
With powers enlarged may see each secret thought,
Who heedless mind not, and who hold them dear,
Thou, TH&mdash;MS&mdash;N!  knowst my sorrow is sincere,
That not for fame I wake the plaintive strain;
Thou seest my tortured heart &mdash; the falling tear&mdash;
The wish, half selfish, that still asks in vain
Thy soul from happiness, thy company again!

Not keener pangs can rend the striplings breast,
Whose love relentless death has torn away,
When laid beneath the thorn, with blossoms dressed,
Where oft in sweet discourse they saw the day
Departing westward shed its latest ray,
And heard the birds enchant the vernal scene;&mdash;
Than torture mine, when I each haunt survey
Which we have trod at summer eve serene,
Fair Heddin &mdash; Calder fields &mdash; and Roddam's forest green!

Ah!  lost, for ever lost to all below,
Thy mild, endearing, harmless gaiety.
Thy bosom pure with love no more shall glow,
Nor dance at thoughts of rapture yet to be!
My Ellen weeps! &mdash; and let her tears flow free;
I blame her not; who would not join the moan?
Ah, cease for ever now our rivalry!
And ceased those pangs her partial glance alone
Could make our bosoms feel, where purest friendship shone!

If high exalted thou in clime of bliss
Of earthly comrades mindest, carest no more;
Yet while we walk our destined round in this
My friend &mdash; her lover still we must deplore.
The scenes that thy young steps have wandered o'er,
Green Heddin's side, and Cheviot's lofty brow,
Shall bring to mind the youth who now sleeps low,
Till in eternal joy shall terminate our woe!
