Before we part, dear title, that so long
Has been the friend and partner of my life,
I would a while forget the bondage strong
And terrors, centered in the name of "wife."
That little word, the harbinger of strife,
Has been my bug-bear for these last ten years;
And more than once I've thought of rope or knife,
Effectually to rid me of my fears;
But now I'm fairly fixed, and no relief appears!

How long, 'neath thy protection, have I roved
O'er the wide surface of this motley world,
And changing as the moment's thought approved,
Now casting anchor, now with sails unfurled:
If by love's breeze the wave beneath was curl'd,
The helm I for a time to love resigned;
If on rejection's billows I was hurled,
I trimmed my vessel to the shifting wind;&mdash;
Perhaps the lady did not know her mind.

Canst thou forget the lodgings in the Strand,
Whose windows looked upon the throng below?
Canst thou forget the rooms, so neatly planned,
And stocked with all my pocket could bestow;
The easy chair, voluptuously low,
With back just fitted to the weary head,
Where, after dinner, when the kindly glow
Of Port subsided, I was wont to read:
And you, ye slippers!  you shall have your meed.

Dear patent argand, that on winter night
Of frost and snow, didst welcome my return;
When, with well-tutored hand and calm delight,
I've trimmed the wick, and made thee brighter burn:
To think of these I cannot choose but mourn,
Just on the point of changing my estate;
They solaced one whom many called forlorn,
And wondered how I bore my lonely fate:
They said I yet was hale, and bid me choose a mate.

At George's, in the street called Coventry,
Soon, soon, my last good dinner I shall eat;
Quaff my last thimble-full of Beaume-de-Vie;
Try all the methods of disguising meat,
On which De Jarrin and Beauvilliers treat:
In Birdcage-walk no longer shall I rove,
My old acquaintance, Singleton, to meet;
No more sit musing on the bench I love,
"Wrapt in fond thoughts and recollections sweet:"
No!  I must dine at home, in Little Madox-street!

Once I was wont to travel in the spring,
By coach, to Brighton, or to Wales:
In short, in vulgar phrase, to "have my swing,"
Upon the box to snuff the country gales;
(And, by the way, I most preferred the mails.)
Adieu!  dear box; adieu!  ye happy days;
At your loved thought my firmness almost fails:
In future I shall have to take a chaise,
When my cramp'd legs will execrate the bales
Of caps, gowns, petticoats, shawls, hats, and veils.

Free as the winds, I once could bend my way
To the twin shrines of histrionic wit;
I could my three-and-sixpence deftly pay,
Content among the critic throng to sit,
And well inured to squeezing in the pit:
But soon my liberty will be no more;
My wife will cry, "Dear Matthew, 'tis not fit
That I, who, marrying, brought you thousands four,
Should take my place, before the lamps are lit,
Among th' ignoble mob. &mdash; I really won't submit!"

"Submit," aye, there's the rub; whether 'twere better
To stem the torrent of my spouse's tongue;
And, by opposing, end the strife?  or let her
Talk till each change of argument is rung,
And waste the subject, or her strength of lung?
To scold &mdash; to scream &mdash; no more; but in that screaming
What words may come!  'tis this that makes me long
That I were dead, or doating; drunk, or dreaming;

Ne'er to be waked by the connubial gong;
And swell, perchance, the Mayor of Garrat's throng!
What!  shall I never more come down to breakfast,
Unshaved, in my chintz-coloured dressing-gown?
What!  not allowed to eat my muffin-cake, fast,
Or slow, as I may choose to wash it down?
Forbid it Heaven!  I would not, for a crown,
Give up such rights as these. &mdash; What!  to consult my watch, ill or
Well, and to get up at eight? &mdash; Men "on the town!"
If after forty-five you make a match, you'll err
In slighting the advice of an expiring BACHELOR.
