Soe night with sable weedes 'gan disapeare,
So melancholy vanishd quite away;
So joy her chearfull countenance did reare,
So did the orient day-springe bringe the day,
And all the trees were clad with bloominge May:
The gladsome wren sate carolinge the while,
And faine the Titmouse would the day beguile,
But underneath, the meadowes at your musicke smile.

Why did the flowers blaze in wanton pride,
And pearke your heades above the tender stalkes?
Why was the Mary-gold distended wide?
Why sange the birds amonge their leavy walkes?
Why skipp'd the lambs upon their steepy balkes?
Certes, the welbeloved went that waye,
The heire of heaven, from whose glorious ray
The Sun derives his light, and Phosphorus the daye.

And as that way he went (thrice happy houre!)
He spy'd a mayde come tumblinge downe apace,
From toppe of hills, that to the heaven towre:
A hollowe voice he heard, that would aghast
A wandringe straunger, and the Spirits cast
Her beauteous frame before his whiter feet,
And boweinge to the ground, (as it was meete,)
His majesty with feigned salutations greete.

Then with their uncouth hollow soundinge voice,
(Such language Hell had taught them longe agoe,)
They roare and crye aloude with hydeous noyse,
"Wee knowe thy name; and whence thou art, we knowe:
O doe not use us licke a cruell foe!
Thou art the Sonne of God, for ever blest!
Thou cam'st to save; then save us with the rest,
And dispossesse us not from out this balefull brest!

"Wee bee the harbingers of heavens ire,
Wee Mercuries unto Astraea bright,
Wee punish sinners in the lake of fire,
Wee give thee reverence, and homage right,
And dutifully tremble at thy sight;
While man doth mocke at heavens ofspringe still,
Wee yeeld obedience to thy sacred will:
Thou art a springe of good; oh, worke not us this ill!"

Wonder it is, that this accursed crue
Should knowe the Saviour, whom but few could knowe;
Sure, they observ'd his white and ruddy hue,
That made him cheefest of  thousand showe,
His lockes as blacke as raven, and the snowe
Of his faire Dove-like eyes.  His cheekes beneath
Bedight with flowers, like beds of Spices breath;
His lily lippes, pure myrrhe unto his spouse bequeath.

His hands, gould ringes beset with Chrysolite;
His mouth, with sweetnesse fraught, and odours newe;
His belly under, like the Iv'ry white,
All interchast with veins of Sappheirs blewe:
His pleasant countenance like Hermons dewe,
His leggs and feete, like marble pillers rare
On goulden sockets, yet by farre more faire:
His vestures, with your Casia perfum'd the aire.

A robe hee wore, like to his essence, pure;
That undivided; undevided hee:
No wonder then (though 't seemes a wonder, sure)
That gloomy hell withouten eyes can see,
Jesus alone the holy one to bee,
And the Messias, that should sin deface:
Such was his countenance and lovely grace,
That they bewrayd his country, and his heav'nly race.

Though thought be free, nor can the Stygian frie
Enter the chambers of our better parte,
(For that belonges to heav'ns all-seeinge eye,
To search the reines, and understand the hearte,
Nor will he this unto his foes imparte)
Whither they through the Sences windowes pry'd,
Or this by revelation espy'd:
They knewe our Saviours thought, and what would them betyde.

But thus the subtill serpents him bespake,
Hopinge, of Mercy, mercy to obtaine:
Yet simple elves, your marke they did mistake,
And hopinge prayd, and prayinge prayd in vaine:
For hee, poore Adam's sonnes will rather gaine;
"You knowe me, (said hee) but I knowe not you;
And yet I knowe yee for a cursed crewe:
Then leave your habitation, and seeke a newe!"

Like as the thunder on mount Sinai hearde,
With flashinge lightninges and shrill trumpets sounde,
The future nations of Salem feard,
And made them flie, or fall flat on the ground,
Soe doth the thunder of his voice confounde
The powers of hell, who from his glorious sight,
Swellinge with rancor, blasphemies and spight,
Unto your dungeon againe they take your flight.

Soone as they tooke your leave, that causd her thrall,
Downe sunke the Damsell in amazement deepe,
(After an earth-quake, soe the ground doth fall,)
And soundinge, yeelded to a sencelesse sleepe,
Ne could shee speake a worde, ne could shee weepe:
But he that conquered all the powers beneath,
The Hell of sin, and sin of Hell, and Death,
Soone brought againe the maydens pantinge, faintinge breath.

With milke-white hand, hee by the hand her tooke,
And stayd her faintinge head, and bad her cheare:
The burninge fever then her heart forsooke,
Instead of which there came a suddaine feare:
So, when the night begins to disappeare,
The dawinge of the day with glimmeringe light,
That seemeth uncouth to the weaker sight,
One newly layd a sleepe, and new awakd doth fright.

But feare soone vanishd, when the heavenly swan,
With Musicke of his voice did comforte give;
And then to sue for favour shee began,
And humbly crave that shee with him might live,
That did her soule from Hell and death repreive.
As yet he granted not her suite:  but said,
"Thy trespasses are pardoned (O maide)!
Repent thee; and to sin heere after, bee affrayd!"

Thus did the winged Perseus of the skie
Deliver our distress'd Andromede,
That nowe with greefe proepar'd herselfe to dye
By the wave-tossinge monster of the sea,
The sea of Acheron:  nowe Panopee,
With all her nimphes, scuddes on the marble plaine;
The storme is overblowne, and once againe
Daye triumphes over night, and pleasure over paine.

The ship, that erst was toss'd with winde and tyde;
Hath nowe the port of quietnesse attaind;
The pilgrime wandringe through the deserts wide,
Hath nowe at length a joyefull harbour gaind;
And shee, that erst was pitied and plaind,
Nowe weepes for joy, and joyes in sorrow true;
And faire Syneide is return'd to viewe
Her chambers, and to build the palaces a newe.

No sooner had she entred, but the mayde
Felt a warme motion within her brest,
And hard a tongue (though none shee sawe) that sayd:
"Goe to the courts of Wisedome, gentle guest;
There seeke Repentance, and with her, find rest:
Repentance hath a flood, doth ever flowe,
A flood of brinish teares and bitter woe,
That, bee thou n'er soe blacke, will make thee white as snowe."

Mary, aggladded at this joyfull newes,
Seekes for the palaces of Sapience;
A silver dove, the way unto her shewes,
And with his bill gives her intelligence,
Soe that shee needs no conduct of the sence,
And yet shee can not bee without it well.
Such pleasure, by the way shee goes, doth dwell,
'T is hard to bee conceivd, but harder farre to tell.

The forrests were like fragrant Lebanon:
Pome-granates sweete, and saffron there contend;
Spiknarde and Camphire with browne Cinnamon;
Calamus, Myrrhe and Aloes befreind
Th' enamourd ayre, and all about they send
Perfumes, exhaled from your spicy beds.
And heere and there a springe of milke dispreads,
And hony-dewe the sweeter shrubs of spices weds.

The rivers shind with oyle, and on the shore
Faire Margarites and costly jewells laye;
The land emboweled great mines of Ore,
And all a-longe the tinne-decayinge way,
The goodly Cedars seem'd to bidde her stay:
These did her captivated eyes delight;
The flowry beds detaine her feete so white,
And middle-sized shrubs her tender hands invite.

But then a rarer spectacle shee spies,
The tower of Wisedome, that did seeme to threat,
With highe-aspiringe toppe the cloudy skies:
The ground-worke on a massy rocke was set,
That neither windes could hurt, nor waters great.
Sharpe prickinge thornes and thistles were before;
On each side, desarts waste, and wilde beasts roare;
Beyond, a furious sea doth wrastle with the shore.

Why standes it on a hill? &mdash; her glorie's highe;
Why on a rocke? &mdash; shee constant doth persever;
Why thornes before it? &mdash; hard adversity
And spiny labour goe before her ever;
Why seas beyond it? &mdash; head-longe folly never
Is farre from daunger; why on eyther side
Desarts and beasts? &mdash; if either way you slide,
Into a thousand toylesome Labyrinths you glide.

What should I of this palace more relate,
That in it-selfe all beauties doth enfould?
All there was pretious, and of highest rate,
And though all glist'red not, yet all was gould,
Or moulde as pure, or farre the purer mould.
Watchfull Humility still kept the dore,
And none had entrance to the courte, before
They crav'd her helpinge hand, and did her ayde implore.

Humility, instructions harbinger,
Sorrowes glad ofspringe, mother of our peace,
Charities nurse, Religions fosterer,
Path-way to heaven, troubled soules release;
Prides great abater, vertues great encrease,
Others by risinge, raize your high desires;
But when shee lowest falls, shee most aspires;
Shee dulls the sharpest swordes, and quenches flaminge fiers.

Magdalene entred with this happy guide;
And all amazed at the rasters bright,
Stone-still shee stood, till Wisedome shee espy'd,
With her owne worke of needle-worke bedight:
Then while shee wonders, give mee leave to write
Of her, with whome the Sun may not compare:
Dove-like her eyes; her lockes of curled haire,
A flocke of kids, that on mount Gilead feedinge are

Her temples, peices of Pomegranates seeme;
Her feet, like newe-wash'd sheepe, ordred arright;
Her lippes, a thred of scarlet, you would deeme;
Her necke, like Davids tower, where men of might
Hange up your Targets, all in open sight;
Her brests like two yonge roes of oequall age,
Amid the lilies that have pasturage:
Her talke is ever comely, sweet her carriage.

Doth any, honours diadem admire?
With her, immortall honours ever dwell.
Doth any, great possessions desire?
Her riches, fadinge treasures farre excell.
Is any thirsty?  shee's a livinge well;
Shee makes the weake man stronge, the foolish wise;
Shee lends the lame man feete, the blinde man eyes;
Shee feedes the hungry soule, and clothes the naked thighes.

Wisedome's the best of thinges, th' immortal treasure,
The double booke of Nature and of grace,
Honour devoyd of shame, and painelesse pleasure,
Pilot of life, and life of ev'ry place,
Nobles reiecter, raiser of the base,
Falsehoods discovery, light of humaine sence,
The great Allmighties subtill influence,
Mirrour of majesty, heavens purest Quintessence.

Oh that I might for ever heere abide,
Within the palaces, that age out-last,
And stay with Mary hard by Wisedomes side;
How nimbly would the goulden numbers hast,
When of her Nectar I should sippe a tast.
Hence did the waters of Castalian plaine
First issue forth, though in a purer vaine:
And shee, the Pallas is, of great Jehovahs braine.

But nowe, behould, a goodly company
Of Wisedomes children stand about her round:
Two roomes shee hath, this lowe, the other highe:
Heere sate Prince Salomon, and David crownd,
With thousands of his Saints in pleasure drownd.
There stood the Monarche of this tripple Isle:
The Destinies for ever on him smile.
Others there were, but fewe, or none appear'd the while,

Beside all those that favour her essayes,
Whom in her palaces shee highly grac't,
And crownd with garlands of immortall bayes,
That soe your names might never be defact,
Nor by the tyrany of time eract,
That they the Muses with your favour rayse,
And, by the trumpet of the Muses prayse,
Out-weare all-wearinge time, and live immortall dayes.

But whither doe my wandringe numbers straye?
Returne (yee Muses) to the path againe!
And yet, with Wisedome, well they wander may,
Better then walke right on with folly vaine.
Heere all the while stoode Magdalene, soe faine
To meete Repentance:  Wisedome at the last
With hand in hand (shee knew the Damselles hast)
Conductes her thither, where the weepinge grace was plac't.

Streightly immured in a closet small,
Repentance sate, with eyes still fixt on ground;
A-downe her cheekes the tricklinge teares fall;
Her slender hands, her tender brest ywound;
And, (woe is me!)  shee cries with sighinge sound:
Her carelesse-hanginge haire shee teares, her head
Was crownd with thornes, with dust besprinkeled;
Her loynes with sacke-cloth girt, her feete uncovered

Angells stood round about her, as her gard,
(Though to the outwarde eye, they were not seene)
And what on earth was sayd, in heavn was hard,
And all her teares were kept in bottels cleane;
(Teares, though a signe, yet ease of sorrowes keene:)
Her head was stayd by the Angelique crewe,
Who all besprinkled her with holy dewe,
That shee might never faint, but aye her plaints renewe.

A Crystall river swifte before her fled,
(Noe other lookinge-glasse shee had, poore soule,)
Instead of waves, the teares lift up your head,
And to the muddy shore of sin they rowle,
Beatinge against the rocke of scandalls fowle:
The water of it was exceedinge tarte,
Sore to the eyes, but salvinge to the heart:
Thees streames, abundant teares to all sicke soules imparte.

Teares, the Soules bath, the weepinge olive tree;
Teares, cause of comforte, though effect of greefe;
Teares, heavens showers, the dewe of Iris bee,
Teares, amonge Paradises rivers cheefe,
Teares, Poenitences badge, and hearts releife;
Teares bee the sinner's solitary sporte;
Teares, hopefull sorrowe's longe-desired port;
Teares, handmaides to Repentance in Astraeas courte.

Repentance is the way to life by death;
Repentance, health giv'n in a bitter pill;
Repentance, hearbe of grace, diviner breath;
Repentance, rectifier of the will;
Repentance, love of good, and hate of ill;
Repentance, mirth at last, though first annoy;
Repentance, Ibis, that doth snakes destroye;
Repentance, earth's debate, heav'ns darlinge Angels joye.

Teares quench the thunder-bolts of zeale divine,
Repentance makes the cruellst foe repent:
Teares keepe from putrefaction with your brine,
Repentance sharpe, but sweetend by content:
Teares earthly, yet unto the heaven sent;
Repentance ever doth the worke begin:
Teares follow her, and cleanse the sinke of sin:
Come, come, the Saints, a pace!  and with Repentance inne.

Desire's the cause of Sin; Sin, cause of greefe;
Greife bids repent, Repentance bringes forth teares;
Teares, pitie moove, and pitty graunts releife,
That comforte, comforte hope, which nothinge feares;
Hope leades to faith, faith to the Saviour reares:
Jesus, to blisse, his militants doth raize;
Blisse causes glory, glory ends in prayse;
Prayse ends in him, that no begininge knew, nor end of dayes.

This made the Damsell in distressed state,
Hopinge in teares to drench her misery,
Stand waitinge still at Poenitence's gate:
Where, when shee knockt, Repentance by and by
Demaunded, whoe was there; shee made replie:
A sinfull soule. &mdash; (Rep.)  Then must you not come heere.
(Mag.)  Oh, let me in (sweet Grace!)  you need not feare.
(Rep.)  Thou wilt defile my bridall chamber. &mdash; (Mag.)  I am cleare.

(Rep.)  Cleare?  Whoe hath cleard thee, or with gracious light
Illumined thy minde? &mdash; (Mag.)  The holy one.
(Rep.)  Where bee the Spirits of Infernall night,
That whilome thee possest? &mdash; (Mag.)  Oh; they are gone.
(Rep.)  Where bee thy lovers? &mdash; (Mag.)  I am heere alone.
(Rep.)  If I admit thee, wilt thou not repent?
(Mag.)  Repent I never will. &mdash; (Rep.)  To what intent
Should I then let thee in, if thou wilt n'er repent?

(Mag.)  Oh yes, I will repent me of my sin;
But of Repentance I will n'er repent.
(Rep.)  What wilt thou doe, if that I let thee in?
(Mag.)  With sorrowes due, I'll paye thee yearly rent.
(Rep.)  What dioet wilt thou have? &mdash; (Mag.)  Sighes to relent.
(Rep.)  They 're too stronge-breath'd. &mdash; (Mag.)  Fitter for my weake plaint.&mdash;
(Rep.)  What more? &mdash; (Mag.)  Fewe teares.  (Rep.)  Your heat will make thee faint.
(Mag.)  I freeze.  (Rep.)  They coulder are.  (Mag.)  I burne.  (Rep.)  Come in, poore Saint!

Soe in shee came, directed by her guide,
And dipt her finger in the brinish well,
And with her eyes the sharpnesse of it try'd,
From whence the teares, as thicke as showers, fell,
And raisd the bubles of the watry cell,
As when a doubtfull cloud dissolvs his raine,
Into the ample bosome of the maine:
His showers, her teares, that fell, seeme all to fall in vaine.

Her head hunge downe, (heavy it was with greefe,)
Nor durst shee ever looke up to the skie:
Of sinners shee esteem'd herselfe the cheefe,
And knewe the wrath of heavens majesty.
Fast on the moystened floore, shee cast her eye,
And ev'ry where shee findes some cause to plaine,
But still Syneide comforts her againe,
And tells her, that the lambe, for sinners must bee slaine.

At length a rufull voice her silence brake,
Like swellinge waters, troubled with the winde,
And thus with greefe of heart the Damsell spake,
"Ah, foolish woman, to thy selfe unkinde!
When others see, howe longe hast thou been blinde?
Witnesse the flash of pleasure for a while,
That, with the falshehood of a guilded smile,
Did thee, poore wretch, allure; alluringe, did beguile.

"Vaine pleasure, cause of endlesse paine, adieu!
Sweete is thy baite, but deadly is thy baine,
When for an howres delight, an age wee rue,
An ounce of mirth procures a world of paine,
And pleasure in his infancy is slaine:
The swellinge bubble, sweet flower, springinge grasse,
Falls, fadeth, is not, what but now it was:
But shorter pleasure, all in shortnesse doth surpasse."

Thus shee laments, and while shee casts her eyes
Upon the water, that was under placd,
Her gentle shadowe, mourninge shee espies,
And all the beauty of her face defacd:
"Oh, hadst thou ever, (sayes shee) thus been grac'd,
Beauty, thou rocke of Soules, faire Sirens smile,
Nights glitteringe glowe-worme, wepinge Crocodile.
Beauty more lov'd then purest gould, then drosse more vile.

"And yet the pourtract of this outward frame,
The rarest gifte, that ever from above
Heav'n did on earth bestowe, had not that shame
Of wretched man with-drawne his makers love:
For, save his soule infused by the Dove,
What else in man worth note? &mdash; unhappy fall.
Since when (but whoe can date expir'd recall?)
That which is best in us, wee make it worst of all.

"Thees haires, that modestly should have beene ty'd
(For modesty's a maydes best ornament)
Layd out in tresses, have declar'd my pride:
Thees eyes were made to viewe the firmament,
And give Him glory, that such glory lent.
But (woe is mee!)  they have the glasses beene,
Where folly lookd, and wantonnesse was seene,
Soe joyfull to attend upon the Cyprian Queene.

"Thees cheekes should blush at sin with crimson die,
But they to lewdnesse cheefely doe invite,
With smiles deceivinge the behoulders eye:
Thees lippes were made to prayse, and pray arright,
Not to delude the soone-deluded sight:
This tongue should singe out Hallelujahs,
Not accent vaine lascivious essayes:
Hands, feet, heart, all were made, to speake your makers prayse.

"But I (poore wretch!  such wretches, sinners bee),
Led captive by the powers of Hell beneath,
Each member have defild, noe parcell free,
And livinge, entred in the snares of death,
Unworthy then to drawe this vitall breath.
Oh that I might those yeares againe recall,
That made me free to Sin in Pleasures thrall."
Yet better late repente, then not repent at all:

No silver haires her goulden twist had chang'd,
No pallid hue assaild her rosy-red,
No wrinkles had her browe from love estraung'd,
No rottenesse her Iv'ry teeth be-spread:
Youth in his freshest colours flourished.
And yet shee thought, in humblenesse of minde,
The dayes to longe, that had her thus confin'd,
Repentance, with the least offence, some falt can finde.

Thus in her selfe, her selfe shee wellnigh lost,
And on her selfe her sighes and sorrowes spent;
Till the next roome her cogitations crost,
With pearly teares and Crystall due besprent,
And gave her store of matter to lament:
Then shee begins a-fresh, (for to her thought
Thees spectacles the courts of Pleasure brought,
Where ill was counted good, and good was counted naught.)

"Faire courtes without, but foulest sinkes within,
Under your roofes, would I had never beene!
Sweet sportes, but leavend with a lumpe of Sin!
Would God, I never had your madnesse seene!
And thou, vaine Pleasure, youths adored queene,
Oh, maist thou ever bound in hell remaine,
And suffer torments of oeternall paine!
For thou hast ship-wrackt all, and many a Soule hast slaine.

"Better it is with-in this narrowe roome
To spend our flittinge dayes, and closely keepe,
Then, while wee live, soe fairely to intombe
Our soules in Marble pleasures, that will weepe
Dayes without end, when wee have tooke our sleepe.
Better, this well of teares, then clearest founts,
For sad Repentance, in true joye surmounts
Vaine Pleasures shady bowers, sweet gardens, rich accounts.

"Better thy thorne-bush then a crowne of Myrtle,
Thy ashes, better then the bread of strife;
Better thy sacke-cloth, then a silken kirtle;
Thy bitter, better then the sweetest life;
Better thy selfe, then is the rarest wife:
Repentance, hearts content, the sinners stay,
The salt of all our actions, the key
That opens heav'n, and leads into the courts of day.

"The hate of sinfull life, and sorrowes deepe,
Surpasse the love of life, and life of love:
For what is that which wantons 'love' yclepe,
But hot desires that doe each passion moove,
And through the veines with lust-full poyson roave;
A foolish fancy and a pleasinge paine,
That dimmes the eyes, and dulls the purest braine.
But love, from heaven came, and thither goes againe."

So nowe, me thinkes, her waylinge should be done,
The closets shutt, the liquid fountaine drie;
Herselfe, love, pleasure, shee hath over-run,
Yet downe her cheekes the Isicles doe hie,
Though sad laments and waylinge accents die:
Sighes serve for voice, teares for a tongue, to showe
The meaninge of her minde, and inward woe:
And when all's done, abroad shee and Repentance goe.

And as they walke abroad in open aire,
Each thinge shee spies, is matter of her teares:
The creatures with her-selfe shee doth compare;
And when the Sun in bright array appeares,
He blushes at her shame; and when shee heares
The chirpinge birds, she thinkes they doe rejoyce
To see her weepe, and heare her broken voice;
And upon her alone, the beasts to gaze make choyse.

As by she passes, each tree shakes his head,
Notinge her shame, and infamy of life:
The flowers turne, and seeme refuse her tread;
The buzzinge flies about are very rife;
The winde, against her, blowes with mickle strife:
But to herselfe most sharpe, she rents her haire,
Showringe forth teares, with sighes and humble prayer,
So to content the earth with teares, with sighes the aire.

Then a newe contemplation shee invents,
(But all her contemplations holy were,)
And thus with piteous mone shee sore laments,
Holdinge her hands up to the spangled sphaere:
"Oh thou that guidst thy burninge horses there,
Thy state I envie, sith thy race is run
From East to West, and mine scarse yet begun;
My darknesse, others blindes; to others, shines the Sun.

"Sweete is the smell, that fragrant flowers bringe,
Wouinge the winde to kisse them once againe;
Sweet are the notes, that birds sit carolinge
To him that made them; but the filthy staine
Of sin hath mee disodour'd, and my straine
Tunes nought but vanity and fond delight:
The grasse with freshest colours is bedight;
The trees bringe fruit:  but fruitlesse I, as darke as night.

"The fire hath heat, but I was dead in sin:
The aire is moist, my vertue withered:
Solid the earth:  but I have ever been
Unstable:  water coole; I, tortured
With burninge lust:  All have persevered
In true obedience, performinge still,
What was injoyn'd them first by heavens will,
While I, unhappy soule, have wrought no worke but [ill.]

"Oh that mine eyes a fountaine weare of teares,
That I might cleanse my sin-polluted soule,
Or that my dayes were like the Eagles yeares,
That with my age I might renewe my smarte,
So should Repentance never from mee parte!"
But oh, enough (faire Damsell), though the skies
Nor the vast sea with water can suffice
To purge our sin, yet faith from heaven biddes thee rise."

So shee arrose, and by the way heard tell,
That Jesus with the Pharise nowe sate:
Thrice happy messenger, that came so well,
Such unexpected tidinges to relate,
And helpe a sinner in distress'd estate!
Yet shee was daunted at the Pharise,
(For Pharises and sinners n'er agree,
Though Pharises themselves, of s[i]nners cheefest bee).

A while shee pauzinge stood, and 'gan to doubt,
Whither shee to the Pharises should goe,
Or rather for her Saviour staye without;
(Such men bee of austere regarde, wee knowe,
And to the vulgar make a goodly showe.)
But other thoughts, to quell this care begin,
"The Pharise's a man, and men have sin;
Then, bee hee n'er so good, a better is within.

"A better is within, and hee so good,
That howe maye I, polluted soule, come neare?
Women defiled with a fluxe of blood,
Maye not amonge the hallowed appeare:
I am unclean, and leprous ev'ry where,
How shall I then approach before his eye,
More bright then is [ye] Eagle's, that doth prie
Into the cabinets of deepest secrecy?&mdash;

"But yet in mercy is his cheefe delight:
Hee came to heale the sicke, to save the lost;
Hee cur'd  Lepres, gave the blinde your sight,
Feet to the lame, life to the nummed ghost,
Speech to the dumbe, and comforte to the moste:
And, which with prayse must ever bee confest,
(Blest be the time!  his name for ever blest!)
Sev'n sprights, with thunder hee ycharm'd from out my brest.

"Certes his love will cover all my shame,
And with his robe my errours I may hide:
For I am sicke, lost, leprous, blinde, and lame,
Dumbe, comforteles, and dead:  nor is it pride,
To seeke for helpe:  then, what so'er betide,
Thither I'l goe!  if Christ once bidde me stay,
The Pharise can never say mee nay:
Oh, happy place, where heav'n hath placd another day!"

A boxe of costely odours shee praepar'd,
Odours t' anoynt th' anoynted from above,
And with it streight to Simons house shee far'd,
With true repentance to declare her love:
Shee brake it, and the roome could soone approove
The fragrant smell:  such is a contrite heart,
That to the heav'n sweet savours doth impart,
The oyntment of good workes, and paenitence, ne'r parte.

Praepared thus, behinde his feet shee stood,
Dissolv'd in teares of sweet (though bitter) brine,
And with the torrent of a Chrystall flood,
Shee wash'd his feet, his ju'ry feet divine,
And then shee wip'd them with the goulden twine
Of her disshevel'd haires:  full many a kisse
Shee gave, and tooke; and, conscious of your blisse,
Her lippes waxt pale, for feare they had done ought amisse.

That falt, the willinge maide will soon amend,
For lavishely shee powres her oyntement sweet,
(Though lavishely enough shee n'er could spend
That which shee spent upon his heav'nly feet:)
So did her misery his mercy greet:
Sweet was thy unction (Mary), sweet thy kisse,
But sweetest of all sweetes, thy teares (I-wis):
The onely waye to heaven, by salt water is.

Happy wert thou to touch the tressells bare
Of thy beloved, heav'nly paramour,
With eye, with hand, with temples, lippe and haire:
Yet thrice more happy, sith thy Saviour,
With eye, heart, hand of faith thou didst adore:
So doth a love-sicke soule of best desarte,
Desire to touch her lover in each part,
And closely steale his body, that hath stole her heart.

Oyntement shee mingles aye with bitter teares;
Teares with sweet oyntement aye shee doth confound:
No better balme in Gilead appeares,
No sweeter smell in Lebanons rich ground:
This saints the sinner, makes the sickest sound:
Oyntement and teares (if true) to get her inne,
First ope the sluce, and shed teares for thy sin,
Then to anoynt Christe's feet, with Magdalen begin.

Humility, lowe at his feet biddes stand;
Behinde him, rosy-blushinge Modesty:
Teares for his feet, Repentance doth commaund;
And Selfe-Hate, with her haire biddes make them drie:
Love biddes her kisse, and Liberality
Wills her to breake the boxe, and oyntement powre.
Hardenes of heart, pride, shamelesnesse before,
Lust, luxury, selfe-love, possess'd her thoughts of yore.

Mee thinkes, I see the Damsell at her worke,
While shee embalmes his feet with odours rare;
With modest blush, howe shee hath learnt to lurke,
And kisse his feet, his marble feet, so faire,
And then to wipe them with her carelesse haire:
Often her hands, often her lippes, came near[e];
Oft wipes shee of the oyntement, that I feare,
The oyntement wanted sweet, his feet perfumed weare.

Yet sweet the oyntement was, though sweeter farre
The Nectar of his feet, with dewe besprent:
So weake perfumes (though sweet) soone drowned are,
If they bee mingled with a deper sent:
Simons good cheare gives no such good content:
His ghuests are frolicke with your dainty meat;
But shee delights the brinish teares to eat,
And joyeth more in hers, then they in highest seat.

Some at feast have crav'd thy company;
But fewe or none, sweet oyntement for thee kept;
Some have anoynted, but fewe wip'd the[e] drie:
Some wip'd thee drie; but wipinge, fewe have wept;
Beyond them all, kinde Magdalene hath stept:
Some on thy head bestow'd your charity,
(Such was the use in auncient times,) but shee,
Oyntinge thy feet, from toppe to toe anoynted thee.

O, that I might, with waveringe Thomas, dippe
The finger of my faith within his side,
Or heere with Magdalene obtaine a sippe,
(Farre from my humble thought bee greater pride!)
From out his feet, with pleasures beautified;
What would hee give for weepinge Maries place,
Whose hermitinge humility could grace
The Linnen cloutes, that did our Saviours wound embrace.

Faine would I leave of Maries love to writ[e],
But still her love that will not let me leave:
In love shee liv'd, and now with loves delight,
Her former love, that did her eyes deceive,
In-stead of love, of life shee doth bereave:
Faire mayde, redeemed from the iawes of Hell,
Howe hardly can I bidde thy love fare-well!
That which thou lov'st to doe, so doe I love to tell.

The Pharisae that thought hee sawe, was blinde;
The abject sinner had the clearer eye;
For thus hee reasoned within his minde;
"Were this a Prophet, hee would soone descrie
The wickednesse of her that standes so nighe:"
Thus hee conjectur'd, yet hee utter'd nought:
But his hypocrisie to light was brought;
For well hee knewe her former life, that knewe his thought.

Then hee begins her action to commend
To Simon in a parable of debt,
And sayes unto him:  "Seest thou her, my freind?
Great is her love, because her Sin is great:
To washe my feet, no water hast thou set;
But shee with teares hath washt them:  on my head
Thou hast not powred oyle:  but shee, in-stead,
With costly oyntement hath my feet be-sprinkeled.

"No kisse thou gav'st mee for a kinde salute;
But shee unto my feet doth kisses give:
So her affection with her smiles doe sute:
Thy sinns (sayth hee) are cleansd, and thou shalt live:
Goe hence in peace, sweete mayde!  for ever thrive!"
Wonder it is, that hee, whose sacred might
May call all prayse and glory, his by right,
Should give such heavnly prayse unto a mortall wight.

Away shee went, aggladded at the heart,
(Packe hence all sorrowe, let the Damsell cheare!)
Yet so, that never from him shee would parte:
And nowe her browe and cheekes began to cleare,
And joye displayd his banners ev'ry where;
Now with a shole of Maries so devout,
Shee ministers, and deales her goods about,
And followes her Leige-Lorde the villages throughout.

Nowe on his rarest miracles shee gazeth,
And with attention shee likes to heare,
While hee the lustre of his light eblazeth,
And charmes with sacred eloquence each eare.
So shee awaited still, both farre and neare,
Till death approach'd, and hee inuaded Hell:
But of his death, what should I further tell?
Better maye hee that sange his birth, ringe out his knell.

Many a teare in Golgotha shee spent,
To waile his torment and her owne distresse;
And after, hied her to his monument,
With odours sweet his wounded corps to dresse:
In life shee lov'd him, and in death no lesse.
The earth was clad with sable weeds of night
When Magdalene, so full of rufull plight,
Proevents the daye, and in the darke seekes for her light.

O blessed woman, without Paragon,
That couldst outrun (such is the force of love)
The faithefull Peter and beloved John,
And bee the first that sawe the stones remove!
This boone was graunted thee from heav'n above:
But when shee could not finde his body there,
Shee runs to them, and cries with piteous feare,
"Aye mee!  my lord is gon!  and layd, wee knowe not where."

John faster ran, but Peter farther went:
Hee came unto the sepulehre, and stayd;
The other entred in the monument;
But both out-stripped by the weepinge mayde:
They sawe the linnen clothes and kercheife layd
A-part:  but shee, the Angells first did viewe,
As downe shee bow'd, in weeds of whitest hue.
Poore Mary knewe not them, although they Mary knewe.

Shee drownes her-selfe in teares of saltest brine;
They aske her, why shee weepes, and makes such mone:
Shee sayes, "my Lorde is taken from this shrine;"
And having sayd, shee spies her Lord alone;
And yet to her, though seen, hee is not knowne:
"Woman!  (sayes hee) why makst thou such laments?"
Shee aunswerd, "Sir!  if thou hast borne him hence,
Tell mee but where hee lies, and I will fetch him thence."

Shee thought her Lorde, the gardiner had been:
And keeper of a garden, sure, was hee:
Yet no such garden, where dead sculls are seen,
But Paradise, where pleasures ever bee,
And blisse deriv'd from lifes aye-livinge tree:
Thither the theife and he together went,
And thither Mary must at length bee sent;
But first the dimme light of her life must needs bee spent.

Shee, to anoynt his breathlesse body came;
With oyle of gladnesse hee, to oynt her head:
To keepe him from corruption, was her ayme;
His purpose was to raise her from the dead.
By name hee call'd her (happily shee sped!)
To bee the messenger of heav'[n]ly newes,
That gladdes the heart, and fadinge age renewes,
And to the Saints, thinges longe time unreveiled shewes.

Awaye shee postes, all ravish'd with desire,
And to the Saints together met, shee hies:
Her tidings make the trobled soules admire;
And yet her solace, and sweet obloquies,
Make constant hope, and better thoughts arrise.
Their prayses loud up to the heav'ns they send:
Joye closes all, (such joye no style hath penn'd)
So end I with your joye; ner may that joye have end!
