SLOUCHY, CLOUTERKIN, COLINET.
I sing the Carols of two blithesome Swains,
Both fed their Flocks on York-shire's grassy Plains.
The flow'ry Banks were gilded by the  Sun,
Which now had more than half his Journey run.
The woolly Sheep lay basking in the Blaze,
Whilst he aslaunt shot forth his milder Rays.
But now to seek the Hedges they began,
And there for Noon-tide Shelter panting ran.
Their Keepers too retir'd beneath the Shade
An aged Oak's wide spreading Branches made.
Here Clouterkin and Slouchy hap'd to meet,
And plac'd themselves upon a tufted Seat,
Whilst Tray and Whitefoot lay at either's Feet.
Each eat his homely Mess; but in the End
They scarce knew how their idle Time to spend;
When Colinet appearing on the Plain,
Young Slouchy thus bespoke his Fellow Swain.

SLOUCHY.
We oft' were wont to have a Bout in Verse,
While ev'ry Lout did what he pleas'd rehearse.
Why stand we mute then, whilst our fleecy Sheep
Beneath the Shadow of yon Quickset sleep?
And see where Colinet i' th' Nick of Time
Is come to judge which of us best can rhime.

CLOUTERKIN.
Slouchy, come on; but I'll not strive for nought;
For I to sing by Lobbin Clout was taught:
And Lobbin is, you ween, the deftest Swain,
That ever danc'd or sung on all the Plain:
Now therefore for a Wager I will lay
Tray's new brass Collar, mine shall be the Day.

SLOUCHY.
Wagers I love not; for I've heard 'em say,
That none but Fools and Fiddlers Wagers lay:
But since the Collar is on your Part laid,
I'll stake this knotted Sheep-hook newly made.
Now then begin, and to your Verses look:
The Collar Whitefoot wears, or you the Crook.

CLOUTERKIN.
Thee, Blouzelinda, for my Song I take:
For thee alone my Carols trim I make!
Eftsoons return to me, my Mistress fair,
Or all my ragged Sheep will quite grow bare.
Believe me, Slouchy, for I'm sure you may,
A neater Lass ne'er made a Cock of Hay.
Often with Pleasure on the Grass I've laid,
While Prittilis and she their Gambols play'd.

SLOUCHY.
I'd rather far behold my Lambkins leap
In harmless Pastimes round the older Sheep.
There I can gaze, and fear no Danger nigh
From the soft Rowlings of a Damsel's Eye.
And well the Case had been with both, I trow,
If we had learnt this Lesson long ago.

CLOUTERKIN.
Slouchy, you did not talk thus erst I ween,
When Doudilis did whilome trip the Green.
Then wou'dst thou stand all leaning on thy Crook,
Gape at the Lass, and like a Lubbar look:
Then sing her Name in Madrigals so rare,
Tho' she with Blouzelind cou'd ne'er compare.

SLOUCHY.
Hold, witless Lout, thou show'st thy Skill, I ween,
With Doudilis to name so foul a Quean.
As well the Crow were liken'd to the Dove,
As Blouzelind to the Lass I love.

CLOUTERKIN.
Then tell me, Slouchy, pray what boots thy Love,
Since from these Plains thy Doudilis does rove?
Prithee go seek her, Swain, and leave thy Flocks,
Or drive 'em with their Younglings o'er the Rocks,
Till pierc'd with Scant of Food they grow so thin,
That all their Ribs are number'd thro' their Skin.

SLOUCHY.
Better do that, than having lost my Crook,
With folded Arms like Crooksmore Lion look.
But prithee since thou talk'st of meagre Sheep,
What Lout does Goodman Hobson's Younglings keep?
Unhappy Herds!  their Fleeces all are shorn,
Not by the Sheers, but by the Brambles torn.
Thou dost both the Younglings and their Master bilk;
For ev'ry Hour the Yews thou twice dost milk.
Shent with the Lack of Food the Lambkins bleat,
And suck in vain the drained spongy Teat.

CLOUTERKIN.
Tell me, thou Carle, did e'er you see me climb
Old Cloddy's Orchard Fence at Midnight time?
Tray stood and cock'd his Ears awhile to hark,
Then smelt you out, and gan aloud to bark.
I wak'd old Cloddy, bid him speed to rise,
If of his Orchard he the Fruit did prize.
Adown you leapt, and stuck my watchful Tray,
Then skulk't behind a Tree, or ran away.

SLOUCHY.
Lubbar, 'tis false, thou lying Shepherd Swain!
And if thou dar'st to say it once again,
I straight will bunch thee all around the Plain.

CLOUTERKIN.
I'll say't again, and will again it say;
For thou was't bitten in the Leg by Tray.
You bunch me round the Plain!  you slouching Carle,
You cannot bite, you can do nought but snarl.
Were you not beaten at last Year's Wake,
When you from Cuddy wou'd his Sweet-heart take?
Did not old Cloddy break the senseless Pate,
Fro being saucy by our Meadow Yate?
Thou hast been thrash'd at times by ev'ry Swain,
Yet, in good sooth, you'll kick me round the Plain!
Bumkin, come on, if yet you dare to fight;
For I'm resolv'd this once to prove your Might.

COLINET.
Hold, peevish Witlings!  if these Brawls are Songs,
To some one else to name the best belongs.
So like your Carols are from last to first,
I vow and swear, I wot not which is worst.
Rise, Shepherds, rise; you, Slouchy, keep your Crook,
And drive your Flocks to water at the Brook.
You, Clouterkin, your Collar likewise keep,
And better learn henceforth to tend your Sheep.
Agree in Love, for shame, ye wayward Swains,
Nor let such Broils disturb the peaceful Plains.
The Sun's adown; ye Shepherds, speed away,
Your Herds have left the Shades, and soon will stray.
