How pleasant in this lonely shade to rove,
Ev'n marks of fallen grandeur yield delight;
The vocal notes yet echo in each grove,
To welcome day, and cheer th' approach of night,
When Cynthia from her high meridian height,
And countless sparkling orbs that round her burn,
Upon this scene do shed their glimm'ring light,
The peaceful wind here ev'ry care may spurn,
And from the City's noise digustful turn.

Here, no discordant noise the ear doth wound,
Transported from the CITY'S crowded ways,
How riv'lets raise a sweetly murm'ring sound,
And whisp'ring zephyr through the meadow plays,
Flocks in the morn do rise with startl'd gaze,
Times progress chimes from distant village spire,
Unnumber'd things combine the thoughts to raise
Above what noise and hurry can inspire;
And fill the soul with true extatic fire.

What various pleasures wait the peaceful hour,
When from the madding crowd we far retire,
Not all EDINA'S charms have half the pow'r,
Such sweet delightful thoughts e'er to inspire,
In this lone bow'r all nature's beauties fire&mdash;
How sweets of happiness are felt and known;
Here Hector once attun'd his cheerful lyre;
Here MARY dwelt who rais'd th' enchanting tone;
Tho' alter'd now, alas!  sweet Mary's gone!!

Here, a poor hapless rhymer's thought expands,
With deep regret reflects on years gone by,
Now, wav'ring, hank'ring, half enchanted, stands
Contemplating the colours of yon sky,
Which sweetly glitter, dazzling to the eye,
At dawning of the op'ning infant day;&mdash;
All, all is fitted to excite the sigh
Delightful, and to shed one cheering ray,
Like the sweet blush of the ambrosial May.

What, to a mind oppress'd, can pleasure yield?
(The limpid streamlet clear, the blossom'd thorn,
Alternate art and nature decks each field,
Waving with purple bloom, or yellow corn)
It is this scene, tho' cits such joys may scorn,
The noisy crowd may feast their eye and ear,
Sad strangers to delight, else they would turn,
And tread such peaceful paths in ev'ning clear,
And ponder nature through the rolling year.

What sweet ideas rise on summer's morn,
Drawn from the dew-o'er-loaded drooping rose,
That 'soon's the solar rays begin to burn,
Will all its fragrance and its sweets disclose,
The woodland's warblers labour to compose,
Man's troubled thoughts, and strive his mind to cheer,
And bid him, joyful, when each day shall close,
Go forth with music's voice upon his ear;
And wander musing by some streamlet clear.

Ah!  blest retreat, where hurry, noise and strife,
The calm and peaceful mind can never wound,
The best, the chiefest, choicest joys of life,
In peaceful solitude are only found,&mdash;
Now softest zephyrs fan the verdant ground,
And all is silent on the tuneful spray,
The stream alone, makes a sweet murm'ring sound,
While pensive on its banks a wight doth stray,
Tuning his artless reed in nature's way.
