ROSELINDA.
Beneath a shady Wood at Break of Day
All on the Ground sad Roselinda lay;
A little Hillock turfted o'er with Grass
Form'd a soft Pillow for the pensive Lass.
Thus Roselinda lay, while round her smile
The red edg'd Daisie and green Camomile.
The pining Daisie hung its envious Head,
Languid its Whiteness grew, and pale its Red;
No more it spreads its Colours to the Sun,
Those Beauties were by Roselind outdone.
When thus the Maiden vents her rueful Tale,
And Tears with fluent Eloquence prevail.
The Winds are conscious to her Plaints alone,
And in soft Murmurs answer ev'ry Groan.
Ah!  Colinet, she cry'd, how long must I
Wish for my Death, yet be deny'd to die?
Thy Roselinda now nought else can crave,
Since she has follow'd mourning to the Grave.
I well remember my Concern for you,
When round your Cot the jetty Raven flew,
And three times croak'd; but when it ceas'd its Flight,
And on your new made Thatch I saw it light,
Oh!  none can tell how grievous was my Fright!
Down on my Knees I fell, and beg'd of Pan,
To pity Roselind, and spare her Swain;
But beg'd in vain; for on that very Night
I by your Window spied this dismal Sight:
The Dogs beneath had routed up the Ground,
Which tho' I thrice fill'd up, thrice open found,
And more to fill the Measure of my Woe,
They give three ominous Howls before they go.
I, all in Tears, cry'd, Colinet is gone,
And I poor hapless Maiden am undone!
That Haw-thorn Hedge, that wont so blithe t' appear,
And trim with Flowers when Colinet was here,
No more shall seem or blithe or gay again,
Since cruel Death my Colinet has ta'en.
The gold-bill'd Blackbird, and the dapple Thrush,
That wont to caroll sweet on ev'ry Bush,
No longer Pleasaunce give; my Shepherd's Art
Form'd the melodious Sounds that fir'd the Heart.

When first I went a Field to milk my Cow,
I saw him stand by Gaffer Hobson's Mow,
And whilst he careless lean'd upon his Rake,
My rising Bosom panted for his Sake;
Straight I hy'd Home, 'twas Eve of good Saint Mark,
Then I resolv'd to know my loving Spark.
My Dame, not weening what was in my Head,
Eat some Milk-Porridge, and went to Bed.
My House I swept, a bonny Fire I made,
Set out the Table, and the Cloth I laid,
Then brought the Victuals from the Shelf within,
And hung a clean wash't Smock a-cross a Line;
Then who wou'd come to turn it watch'd to see,
For he they say shall your true Lover be.
Beneath the Table I sat down unseen,
And e'er 'twas long young Colinet came in,
As near as I can guess 'twas one a Clock,
When pleas'd I saw the Shepherd turn my Smock.
But ah the piteous Sight for Roselind!
A Satyr bore a Coffin close behind.
At this, surpriz'd, to Bed with speed I creep,
Nor got that livelong Night one Wink of Sleep.
A thousand Whimsies still possess'd my Head,
But most I fear'd that Colinet was dead.
Next Morning raithe I rose before the Sun,
And in my Shift to my Casement run,
When overjoy'd I spy'd my Colinet
Pass whistling gay by Cuddy's Meadow Gate.

Unwittingly at Night I went to Bed,
And slept with Prayer Book beneath my Head:
The waggish Prittilis had laid it there,
And plac'd it open in a Leaf most rare,
The Place whereby the Parson does the Work,
When Lads and Lasses join their Hands at Kirk.
She put a Sixpence too, and cross'd a Pair
Of Box-haft Knives, which she had brought last Fair.
She had been told, it seems, that this wou'd prove
A Charm to make one dream of one's true Love.
As thus I lay, the Visions of the Night
O'er-joy'd my Bosom with too vast Delight.
Methought I saw a blithesome Lad come forth,
Dight with the Beauties of the plunder'd Earth.
The Cowslip, Daisie, Rose and Jessamine
In blended Wreaths about his Temples twine.
Straight from his Head he doff'd the Garland now,
And plac'd the flow'ry Trophies on my Brow.
Just here the envious Cock my Slumbers broke,
By crowing thrice, till from my Dream I woke.
So up I got as soon as I cou'd see,
And sped across the Mead to milk my Kee.
Then home with smoaking Kit eftsoons I came,
Churn'd last Night's Cream, and then call'd up my Dame.
I fed my Poultry, and well serv'd the Swine,
And carry'd Hay to keep in Heart my Kine.
Then Prittilis and I a Bargain make,
To gang i' th' Afternoon to Bush-Green Wake.
Where when we came, a jovial Crew we found
Of Lads and Lasses seated on the Ground.
Two oaken Towels in the Midst were laid,
And two new Belts of toughest Leather made.
High in the Air there hung a flow'ry Crown,
To grace his Brows that had the Conquest won.
Beside the Garland wav'd a Riband too,
The clearest Sky ne'er show'd a fairer Blue.
Then Clouterkin came forth, a Belt he took,
And challeng'd all the Swains with haughty Look.
Young Colinet stept up towards the Clown,
Took t' other Belt, and laid the Bumkin down.
The angry Swain resolv'd to've t' other Bout;
But Colinet soon threw the clumsy Lout.
The Lad disgrac'd, amid the Crowd retir'd,
When Colinet, with Thirst of Glory fir'd,
Snatch'd up the oaken Weapon from the Ground,
And wav'd it thrice with deftest Motion round.
Then Clouterkin advanc'd with mighty Rage,
Resolv'd once more the Victor to engage.
The other Cudgel from the Earth he took,
Their Lengths once measur'd, no Delay they brook.
Long Time the Fray was doubtful of its End;
For both with Art oppose, with Art defend.
As on the Grass the rosie Lasses sate,
Their Breasts oft anxious heav'd for Colinet.
The peerless Lad at length grew wondrous quaint,
And towards the Lubbar's Heels he made a Feint:
The Lout there guards, unmindful of his Fate,
So Colinet struck home, and broke his Pate.
A sympathizing Laugh spreads o'er the Plains,
Poor Clouterkin was jear'd by all the Swains.
A threefold Conquest Colinet might boast;
For Damsels strove who should applaud him most.
Straight with the Riband blue the Victor's bound,
And the gay Garland girt his Temples round.
With Eyes intent the jealous Lasses view,
What happy Maid the Conqu'ror shou'd subdue.
Smiling across the Ring the Shepherd sped,
And plac'd the Sylvan Wreath around my Head.
The Riband too he gave me, and with this,
A long expected and long wisht-for Kiss.
Bedight with these, I all that Day was seen
Mixt with the Lads and Lasses on the Green
In various Dance as fine as any Queen;
Till sable Clouds, deckt round with Golden Light,
Forewarn'd the Shepherds of approaching Night.
At setting Sun the rural Pastimes end,
The rustick Rout dispers'd, all homeward tend;
Twixt the green Quicksets Colinet and I,
Pleasing and pleas'd, toward my Cottage hie.
Sometimes he press'd my Hand, and sighing said,
Oh!  were it always thus, my charming Maid!
Sometimes to make the Journey seem less long,
He'd pass the idle Moments in a Song,
Or with his Pipe he'd fill the neighbouring Grounds,
Till pining Echoes wanton'd with the Sounds
By various Repetition; whilst the Swain
Play'd careless on thro' ev'ry puzzling Strain.
How pleasant has it been to see the Fawns,
Fleet as the Winds, feud o'er the russet Lawns?
Or set with Colinet, and see the Lambs
In harmless Sports frisk round their fleecy Dams?
We surely were the blithest Lass and Swain,
That ever tended Sheep upon the Plain.
But now, alas!  all Sun-burnt is my Neck,
The Cherry glows not on my faded Cheek.
So pale my Face is grown, I scarce can tell
I saw my own sad Form in yonder Well.
Oh!  never may my Visage bloom again,
Till I in Death shall join my peerless Swain!
Ah Colinet!  thou Lad of mickle Meed,
That well couldst sing, and dance, and tune the Reed!
Why do I think on what he was?  he's dead,
And Roselinda's ev'ry Joy is fled.

Thus sung the Maid her Melancholy Tale,
In Musick mournful as the Nightingale,
When dusky Clouds across the Welkin flew,
And spread a sable Mantle o'er its Blue.
The gaudy heavenly Bow so rear explains
A Tempest rising, and descending Rains.
The piteous Damsel leaves her grassy Bed,
And thro' a neigh'bring Meadow homeward sped.
With swelling Teats her lowing Cattle stand,
And wait the gentle Pressure of her Hand.
