CLODDY, AND GRUBBINOL.
CLODDY.
Where gang'st thou, Grubbinol?  what, into Town?
Awhile, if thou hast Leisure, sit adown.
As yet no Sun doth o'er the Hills appear,
And Folk of Town wont not to up so rear.
With pearly Dew the Blades of Grass are dight,
And mounting Larks with Songs the Sun invite.

GRUBBINOL.
From ev'ry Bush is heard the Note of Birds,
And the fresh Morn a Pleasance blithe affords.
Not far I'm going, and awhile will stay,
If thou wilt tend my Herds when I'm away.
A sad Mischance had I but yester Eve,
When on these Plains my Flocks I hap't to leave:
The Ram athirst did to the River hie,
His Fleeces even now been't thorow dry.

CLODDY.
Come then, my Lad, let's take this blithesome Seat,
Anon I'll give your Flocks all Tendance meet:
But tell me, Grubbinol, the Reason why
So often into Town thou'rt wont to hie.
I shrewdly ween, thou'st  kenn'd some Damsel smart,
And by a heedless Look hast lost thy Heart.

GRUBBINOL.
Cloddy, I deem thee for a cunning Wight,
Since thou so rightly judgest of my Plight.
Nor am I wistful that my Guere is known,
Since Violetta makes my Case thy own.
Alike we rearly rise, alike we pine;
My Heart's Oafelia's, Violetta's thine.

CLODDY.
While Sky-Larks build their Nests upon the Ground,
And batning Eels in slimy Dykes are found;
While nimble Squirrels frisk from Spray to Spray,
And weak-ey'd Owls avoid the Sight of Day;
While Willows flourish by the flowing Stream,
So long shall Violetta by my Theme.

GRUBBINOL.
Sooner shall Reeds the highest Hills adorn,
And sultry Noon be cooler than the Morn:
Sooner shall Aspen Leaves forget to shake,
And buxome Lasses chace the speckled Snake:
Sooner shall Ivy cease the Oak to bind,
Than my Oafelia vanish from my Mind.

CLODDY.
As I last Year by yonder Copse did speed,
I saw a painted Jay her Nestling feed.
Streightway did I unto her Nest repair,
And rob'd the tender old one of its Care.
I fed the gaping Bird full many a Day,
Then slit its Tongue, and taught it thus to say:
"Tho I with dainty Plumes am clad so rare,
Yet Violetta trimmer is by far."

GRUBBINOL.
As I one Night was tripping home from Field,
Tir'd with its Flight a Mag-pye I beheld.
Ee'r it could rest, the weary Bird I caught,
Convey'd it home, and soon this Lesson taught:
Oafelia, "leave the Town, and cheer the Plain;
For Grubbinol shall be thy faithful Swain."
When Mag could well repeat this Verse so rare,
I turn'd it loose again, to fleet in Air.
This Bird the Talk of ev'ry Lout did prove,
And by this neat Device I gain'd in Love.

CLODDY.
As I of Land an Ox-gang plough'd one Day,
Gay Violetta in the Hedges lay.
Soon as I turn'd my Back, the buxome Maid
With mellow Apples briskly plied my Head.
I minding not the Proverb to fulfill,
To catch that Mouse soon let the Plough stand still.
The Wanton hid herself, and would not speak,
Yet giggled loud, lest I in vain should seek.

GRUBBINOL.
The Lads and Damsels all one Even-tide
Together met, and play'd at Hooper's-hide.
The Lot determin'd me from ev'ry Clown,
That while the rest did hide, must lie adown.
Adown I lay, yet cast a side-long Eye,
And saw Oafelia to the Hay-rick hie.
Straight for the nonce I pass'd each Swain and Lass,
And made as tho' the Hay-rick I wou'd pass.
Oafelia hoop'd, the Reason ween you well;
For says the Proverb, Never kiss and tell.

CLODDY.
One sultry Noon beneath a Tree I lay,
And on my Pipe to please myself did play.
The clouded Welkin darken'd soon the Plain,
And here or there adown fell Drops of Rain:
Her Flocks my Violetta left in haste,
I ken'd the Damsel as she deftly past.
As from the Plain she overly did flee,
A silken Garter dropt from off her Knee.
Away I sped, and caught it in a trice,
And read eftsoons thereon this neat Device:
"As this is wont my tender Knee to bind,
So to my Heart my Sweet-heart true is twin'd."
Oh!  may I prove that Sweet-heart true to be!
For sure I am she thought of was by me:
And Lads and Lasses say, your Sweet-heart true,
When e'er your Garter slackens, thinks of you.

GRUBBINOL.
Ten Pigs my Sow did farrow t' other Night,
And ev'ry Tenth you wot's the Parson's Right.
Last Eve I home did bear the squeaking Fee,
And there I hap'd the Parson's Maid to see,
Who wistful look'd, and fix'd her Eyes on me.
I left the Pig, and would no longer stay,
But for Oafelia's sake I turn'd away.
Tho' well I ween, if I would faithless prove,
The Parson's Maid would fix on me her Love.

CLODDY.
I wou'd not Violetta leave to gain
The Love of all the Lasses on the Plain.
The featest Lass is she, nor lack I Wealth,
So let us to the George, and drink her Health.

GRUBBINOL.
I wou'd with all my Heart, but must away,
I have already made too long a Stay:
For, see, the Sun has dry'd up all the Dew,
That now the Grass will scarcely wet one's Shoe.
But Cloddy tend my Herds if they should lack,
And I will owe a Pot when I come back.
