Nature, thou Guardian of the Infant Muse,
O may thy beauties ev'ry thought infuse!
From thy great source poetic numbers flow:
On thy rich soil the seeds of fancy grow.
Unpractis'd I, in scientific rules,
If nurs'd by thee, disdain the Critic's schools.

'Twas Nature tun'd immortal SHAKESPEARE'S lyre
To Pity's softness, and to Passion's fire.
On Fancy's wings th' enraptur'd Poet flies;
And Genius wafts him to his native skies.
Posterity, with pride, protects his fame:
Ages unborn shall venerate his name.

Enchanting SPENSER!  Nature's simple child,
On thee, with joy ecstatic, Fancy smil'd.
On thee, with lib'ral hand, her gifts bestow'd:
Smooth as thy verse, and unconstrain'd they flow'd!

Nature inspir'd majestic MILTON'S Muse,
And taught his judgment the great theme to chuse.
Presumption ne'er urg'd Milton to aspire!
From Heav'n he borrow'd the celestial fire.

Tho' DRYDEN wander'd from thy easy road,
'Tis nature glows in sweet Cecilia's Ode.
There shines the grandeur of the true sublime:
There beauties flourish, unimpair'd by time.

BUTLER! who once a monarch's laugh could raise;
Whose merits gain'd him the reward of praise;
Thro' life was left to struggle with his fate;
Which, fraught with care, could ne'er his wit abate!

Melodious WALLER!  as the chrystal clear;
Thy rhyme is music to the chastest ear.

When we, O CONGREVE!  view thy brilliant scene,
In honest laughter we forget our spleen.
See drowsy dulness with attention sit:
His leaden mind enliven'd by thy wit.
The flash facetious so delights the soul,
We can't endure the Dagger and the Bowl.
Melpomene no more thy charms display,
While Congreve and Thalia lead the way.
There sprightly Mirth with festive Fancy play;
And Genius shines in all her splendid blaze.

The mournful OTWAY, wedded to distress,
His Muse, e'en poverty could not depress.
To Nature's dictates stedfast and sincere:
Tho' skill'd to raise, 'twas he that shed the tear.

Accomplish'd ADDISON!  in thee we view
Wit's brightest rays, and judgment ever true!
In thy correct, inspir'd page we find
The ore of thought by nicest taste refin'd.

For thee, O SWIFT!  the loftiest Muse shall sing,
To thee keen Satire lent her poignant sting:
That sting which e'en proud statesmen once would fear;
And Folly oft has felt thy lash severe.
Corruption trembles as he reads thy line,
Whilst Virtue's vot'ries venerate thy shrine.

Each grace, each passion, POPE'S sweet verse express:
There sentiment appears in Nature's dress!
Shall I describe the texture of a mind,
Where ev'ry thread was regular refin'd?
His vary'd charms the pow'rs of praise defy:
Whilst taste survives, his fame can never die.

Whose hand directed THOMSON'S artless Lay?
'Twas thine, O Nature, taught him to pourtray!
From thee he learn'd to animate the heart
With all the joys description can impart.

Shall PRIOR sink to dull Oblivion's shade?
Emma for thee a lasting wreathe has made.
No more, O Gallia, boast thy great Boileau,
Whose maukish muse in streams bombastic flow.
'Twas Prior stopp'd the pompous flatterer's course,
And turn'd the current with superior force.
The venal Gascon of contempt complain'd;
And Louis once his parasite disdain'd.

GAY'S honest mind the world could ne'er allure:
His Muse was faultless, as his heart was pure.
In robes majestic Virtue he attir'd:
'Twas Virtue's cause the modest Gay inspir'd.
From his reproof no station was exempt,
Guilt fear'd that spirit which she ne'er could tempt.

Warm from the heart the contemplative YOUNG,
In plaintive notes, instructed as he sung.
To wean rash Folly from her mad career;
To make grim Death less terrible appear,
His Muse, a votary to Virtue's shrine,
Was, like the idol it ador'd, divine!

Neglected COLLINS!  Nature was thy guide,
Tho' Fame to thee her fickle boon deny'd.
Thy charms the tasteless critic can't perceive;
'Tis judgment only will the tribute give.
The meed well earn'd, with pleasure she bestows:
And greenest bays shall flourish on thy brows.

Thy Verse, O GRAY!  let pedant-pride disdain:
Still I revere the melancholy strain.
Still pleas'd, I listen to the pensive song,
And never think the solemn notes too long.

SHENSTONE!  once blest in Leasowes' happy grove,
Unseen, among his verdant vales would rove.
From his warm heart oft burst the slighted sigh;
And tears despis'd oft trickl'd from his eye.
The Fair that caus'd them they could never melt:
The pangs of passion were by her unfelt.
The Muse, with sympathy, beheld his pain;
Lent him her lyre, and listen'd to his strain.

'Twas fickle Beauty on fond HAMMOND frown'd:
His verse best speaks the anguish of his wound.
From Cupid's wing he drew his tender plume:
With that describ'd a hapless Lover's doom.

Ironic CHURCHILL, nervous, free, and bold,
Who ne'er for pelf his independence sold.
His honest pen made e'en the guilty feel:
A dagger, e'en more poignant than the steel.

See GOLDSMITH next, with modest pace advance;
His firm fix'd fame Encomium can't enhance.
His faithful portraits long shall charm the eye,&mdash;
Colours so strong the rage of time defy.

High on the pinnacle of modern fame,
With pride, O SHERIDAN!  we rank thy name.
Nor envy can dispute thy just pretence:
Thy genius once the Drama's best defence!
The Comic Muse, stung by neglect, repines:
'Tis from thy flights her beauteous form declines.
Oft she allur'd thee by her dimpl'd smile,
The  sweet attraction can no more beguile.
In vain she wooes thee to her lovely arms:
Thy furor faction has superior charms.
The raven discord now can boast a pow'r
To wean e'en Taste from Fancy's fragrant bow'r!

Content to merit, not to hunt for praise,
With rapture, HAYLEY, we peruse thy lays!
How few, like thee, the happy skill possess!
To give to Nature a becoming dress!
In gaudy colours some bedeck the Maid,
Nature most shines the simpler she's array'd.
With scorn she turns from Folly's glittering glare,
Trusting her graces to her Hayley's care.
