In order next came Neptune's blooming train,
Fam'd ALBION'S daughters each in coral wain:
First stately Forth with many a crowding sail,
And winding tides, enamour'd of the vale,
Choice Ceres' haunt, renown'd in BRUCE'S reign,
When English EDWARD mourn'd his myriads slain.
Her beauteous nymphs in silver veils bedight,
Glide thro' the deeps, like heavenly graces bright,
Three princely crowns, their tribute meet, they bore,
With sparkling pearl from the Indian shore:
And all the way they sung a nuptial song
For CATHCART'S BRIDE, to whom sweet strains belong.
"Fair rise the new-born year!  like blushing rose,
To Hymen's shrine the lovely CATHCART goes."

From silver lakes, which bathe her verdant isles,
Came branching Taia, with Hesperian spoils,
Whose hundred streams obsequious urge their way
To hail true lovers on their bridal day;
Proud of their noble race, whose peerless worth
Wooing the lovely daughters of the Forth,
In league of amity each sister tide
Conjoins, together o'er the waves they ride.

Then wealthy Clyde, who loyal tribute bore,
Of choicest nectar, from the Indian shore;
Whose fost'ring streams the muses' choirs adorn,
And wealthy commerce set in western throne.
Heard ye their strains?  as up the shapely wave,
The refluent river march'd with pride, to lave
In eastern Forth, whose flow'ry vales along
Melodious waft the shepherd's nuptial song.

From pleasing dales sweet Tweed, once doom'd to glide
'Twixt hostile realms, now crown'd with rural pride,
Where many a castle fair hangs o'er the wave,
And many a baron bold, with warlord brave,
Repell'd invasion:  now in purer tide
Her lovely daughters bathe their beauty's pride.
Or in the shades of Tiviot, parent stream!
Or silver Jed, as in Arcadian dream,
Lead on the dance; or urge, in jocund throng,
The circling chace these rural scenes among.

And Devon's nymph, who laves with wat'ry shore
Her silver mass, presents the shining ore:
Nor longer jealous, hides her rich supplies,
Since princely Jason bears her golden prize.
The swelling Spey, and Varar's far-fam'd flood,
With northern Naiads yield their scaly brood;
And Deva's stream, fost'ring her learned choir,
Charm'd with the magic of the MINSTREL'S lyre.

Next came the nymphs from many a courtly bow'r,
Where lordly Thamis' swelling waters pour;
Or stormy Humber, with the chaste Sabrine,
Commix their sparkling sands with diamond sheen;
Or subterranean mines, where Tina flows,
And Commerce rich from sable mass bestows.

The KING OF FLOODS high tow'rs above the rest,
AUGUSTA'S image top'd his ruby crest:
Consign'd by fate, a triple crown he bore,
And trident, ensign of imperial pow'r.
Pride grac'd his brow, and conscious hounour high,
And loyal zeal and freedom's fearless eye;
These gorgeous robes enrich'd with gold he brought,
His artists frame with lively figures wrought.

Last came the peerless daughter of the sea,
Th' imperial QUEEN whom gods and men obey,
Celestial VENUS, splendent from afar,
With purple radiance blaz'd her diamond car;
Her car the droves with silver plumage drew,
Around her train on golden pinions flew;
These to the winds her floating crimson spread,
These o'er the waves Idalian flow'rets shed;
With real pomp, the prime of Nereus' race,
She rides sublime their festival to grace.
Old OCEAN smoothes his brow, and joys again
To bear the fairest offspring of the main;
His hundred floods with fond embraces join,
And to the hall conduct the charge divine,
To grace the feast in Amphitrite's hall.

"But who comes yonder!  with a bridegroom's haste,
Like princely Phoebus from the gorgeous east,
'Tis he in foreign courts supreme to guide
Britannia's weal, and o'er her fate preside!
Now while her mighty genii in their sphere,
The weight of empire for their STORMONT bear;
The toils of state he gilds with beauty's smile,
For Hebe could the cares of JOVE beguile;
And in Louisa's bloom, with virgin grace
Of virtue, charming in so fair a face,
Profess to virtuous love what here below
Exalted minds are only bless'd to know,
The nectar'd joys with HYMEN mix'd above
For kindred souls, who mutual passion prove;
When VENUS' son, with chosen golden darts
Of passion chaste, has pierc'd two faithful hearts."
