The first who claimed a place in Edgar's thought,
The first to whom he thought his tribute due&mdash;
The bard whose strain with every beauty's fraught,
Yet is not always of the loveliest hue:
Thus when fair spring hath bid the land adieu
And summer's skies steal o'er the face of day;
The back ground is a fair and breathing blue,
The sun full royally speeds on his way,
Yet there at times are clouds which intercept his ray.

Oh!  hadst thou ne'er sung an immoral strain,
Then, Byron, thou hadst smiled at envy's frown;
She had not dared to scowl upon thy reign,
Nor striven to hurl thee from thy minstrel throne&mdash;
Harold!  with all thy faults thou sitst alone,
High and exalted o'er all modern bards;
Tho' inspiration's sun has gaily shone
On other breasts, who boasts, 'mid his rewards,
A wreath of laurel such as fame to thee awards?

Our hearts have gone with Harold o'er the world&mdash;
Thro' the sweet groves of Portugal and Spain,
Where every scene that caught the eye unfurl'd
Some strong memento of the warrior's reign;
And where in old was heard the living strain
To laud the deathless feats of Grecian might
We wander'd with the Childe &mdash; nor thought was vain
Which spoke of Grecian muse shrined in the wight
Beaming o'er Graecia's sons with all undying light.

And thou, immortal field of Waterloo!
Where myriads fell to aid the cause of kings,
Shall in thy gory honours rise to view
Long as the world is trod by breathing things
Call'd men &mdash; thus long the strain of Harold brings
Its wail across the ear and stuns the soul.
If death had rode upon the lightning's wings
Then ruin had but quaff'd a sanction'd bowl,
And man adored the Power which caused the deathly howl.

Thou Venice!  the barbarian's direst foe,
And reminiscence of all great and brave,
The hand of luxury hath laid thee low,
Once Queen of Ocean, now the Austrian's Slave!
With Harold we have maddened o'er thy grave,
And sighed that thou mightst rise and spurn thy thrall,
That the proud banner of St. Mark might wave
Upon the dome of thine own ducal hall,
Then mightst thou celebrate the freeman's festival!

And thou, Italia!  seat of ancient Rome,
The virtuosi's lauded promenade,
Thou are yet honoured in thy lowest doom,
Albeit thou sitst not in fair Freedom's shade;
In all the charms of nature thou'rt array'd,
And remnants of thy ancient pomp remain&mdash;
And ne'er was nobler minstrelsy displayed,
Than wandering Harold bodied in his strain,
When he surveyed thy skies and trod thy verdant plain.

Who hath not felt his breast heave o'er the "Giaour?"
Who hath not sighed his wail o'er the "Corsair,"
And felt his bosom wrung with feeling's power,
When Lara, born the mightiest deeds to dare,
Sped o'er his path-way like a meteor's glare,
And faded in the murkiest shades of gloom?
Was he who sung their prowess born to share
With humble minstrels in their lowly doom?
Can our high Milton's peerless fame e'er find oblivion's tomb?
