SLOUCHY.
To close the Prospect of the grassy Plains,
Where fleecy Flocks are tended by the Swains,
Bedight with dusky Greens a Hill appear'd;
Slouchy, beneath, his homely Cottage rear'd.
Shady it stood beneath two aged Oaks,
Just thro' its Thatch the lowly Chimney smoaks.
Slouchy, of all the Swains the featest Wight,
Here sat adown, and plain'd his piteous Plight.
In Rills, on one Hand, ran a purling Brook,
Neglected, on the other, lay his Crook.
On a near Elm a murm'ring Turtle sate,
In dreary Cooings wail'd its absent Mate.
All round him lay his brinded Kine and Sheep,
His bearded Goats, and Lightfoot too asleep.
A Nightingale to aid his Ditty came,
And nightly Howlets 'gan their dismal Screams.
Rueful he sat, beheld his rural Care,
His Dog, his Goats, his Kine, and Sheep so fair.
Soon as his heaving Bosom gave a Groan,
To Hills and Woods he made this bootless Moan.

Ah hapless Slouchy!  hapless Lad indeed!
When with my Cattle first to Town I sped,
A Lass all gayly dight I hap'd to see,
From whence, oh rueful Day!  farewell my Glee.
Come Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

And certes well, if rightly I can deem,
A studded Sheep-hook wou'd thy Hand beseem.
A sylvan Wreath each Shepherd wou'd compose
Of ev'ry Flower that in Meadow grows.
The harmless Kidlings round wou'd frisk and play,
And joyous Sonnets pass the Time away.
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

Nor dost thou need this rural Life despise,
Or this small Cottage for its homely Guise:
Cou'd I from thee but once my Heart remove,
Joyous wou'd Doudilis receive my Love.
What tho' her Skin doth lack thy rosie Hue?
The Haw-thorn Red doth aye the Ground bestrew.
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain,
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

These woolly Flocks, and all these Cattle fair,
Have, for thy sake, full often been my Care;
But shall no more; since me thou dost disdain,
Nor ask'st what Herds I have that graze the Plain.
These bleating Sheep, these lowing brinded Kee
To thy soft Hand wou'd yield their Milk with Glee.
Leave me ye Lambkins, and ye Kidlings go;
For I alas!  am shent with piteous Woe!
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

This tender Cade lamb up by Hand I've brought,
And many blithesome Frolicks I have taught.
'Twou'd please thee much, and make thee blithe and gay,
To see the sportive Youngling deftly play.
This Doudilis has often beg'd in vain,
But now eftsoons she will the Girt obtain.
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

Whilome for joyous Carols I was known:
Now well-a-day all Merriment is gone!
I wily Riddles shall no more compose,
With which my cunning Mates I wont to pose.
I've puzzled oft the Lasses and the Swains,
And Kisses sweet did well reward my Pains.
To know the Sense, each Lass wou'd hie alone;
I kiss'd  'em first, then told 'em ev'ry one.
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

A neater Lass the Plains  shall never see,
Nor one so gay bedeck't by half as thee.
I'll sheer my woolly Sheep in yonder Barn,
The finest Wool thy self shalt spin to Yarn;
We'll dye the finest Yarn thy Hands have spun,
To make for thee a gaudy Sunday Gown.
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

Geese, Ducks, and Pullets, here in plenteous Store,
And cobbling Turkies peck around the Door.
At Christmas-tide a good plump Goose we'll kill,
Thy cleanly Hands the stretching Neck shall fill
With Grots and Blood, with Herbs and Spice so rare,
Knit up both Ends, and form a Pudding fair:
Then our own Oven will I heat, and bake
The Carcase in a Pye, which thou shalt make.
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

When we a Field shall reap the Wheat so brown,
You binding Sheaves which I shall cut adown,
I'll still be near thee, and amuse the Day
With some quaint Catch, or buxom Roundelay.
Come, Roselinda, come, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.

Ah woe is me!  for Woe does still betide,
Since the tight Lass first drew my Eyes aside.
Ah well-a-day that Slouchy e'er was born!
For the Town Maiden Slouchy's Love does scorn.
Sleep on my Goats, my udder'd Cattle sleep;
Sleep on ye Lambkins, and thou Lightfoot sleep.
Ah hapless Slouchy!  now what wilt thou do?
If one Lass fails thee, thou mayst find a new.
Then come, my Doudilis, to cheer thy Swain;
For Mirth it were to ken thee trip the Plain.
