The sun departs!  farewell, bright summer day!
Yet still he glances on these sacred walls,
That rest so sweetly caught his parting ray
While yet the organ pealed through lofty halls;
And, while each harsh unpleasant sound was still,
Few songsters warbled these green shades among,
And Echo slept beside yon murmuring hill,
Then rose the sainted sisters vesper song,
Floating, like angels' notes, the listening vale along.

Within these walls hath bloom'd full many a flower,
Like Eden's rose, ere wav'd the sword of fire;
But not in me dwells meet poetic power:
Such themes are thine, great bard of Erin's lyre&mdash;
Fit theme were this for Albyn's darling son:
Hath not your fancy view'd the Harem's light?
Have ye not read of faithless Marmion?
Then have ye never seen such such beauties bright
Portrayed in song, as here were hid from vulgar sight?

See, too, those hoary walls with mossy crest,
Where lodg'd the sires of Martin's holy train,
Beneath the ample sod those fathers rest,
Where no recording tombs nor urns remain.
Low lies each window, sunk from turret high,
Broider'd with ancient legendary tale,
Of hues as bright as summer's evening sky,
Where shone the maiden's charms and warrior's mail,
As if to tempt the sires beyond the sacred pale.

Here vesper bells afar their cadence rung,
Through groves long fam'd for love and amorous lay;
Where lovers rov'd, and where the minstrel sung,
Nor counted days that flew so fast away;&mdash;
Those days that ever fly on eagle's wings&mdash;
That bring to lofty walls and spires their doom&mdash;
That humble to the dust all human things&mdash;
Leave man an empty name and scanty tomb,
And strew the great and good like flowers of early bloom.

Let History's page tell whether holy zeal
Or scorn of the proud Pontiff's galling chain,
Mov'd Henry prince of England's common weal,
To banish hence the sires and sister train.
But O!  that Time, too proud of his high powers,
Though man despis'd the once resplendent dome,
Had spar'd the ancient halls and noble towers!
Then, haply, here had Science fix'd her throne,
Or here the houseless poor found hospitable home.

Yet oft, 'tis said, were deeds of darkness wrought
'Neath sacred roofs; and oft the guilty soul,
That men would think absorb'd in holy thought,
Hid treason, craft, and sin beneath the cowl.
Thus vengeance, due to some, was hurl'd on all:
Were this meet cause, why stay'd the work begun?
Ought these sequester'd aisles alone to fall?
Have council-chambers never fear'd the sun,
Nor senates great and wise e'er wish'd one deed undone?

The sun still shines on Alan's castled mound,
But oh!  those walls are mouldering dull and lone
Where once was heard the bugle's cheerful sound,
And through the halls resplendent armour shone.
The chiefs are mute who won the tardy hind
To wield the quivering lance and gleaming brand&mdash;
Who rush'd to fight nor cast one look behind;
Though spear and hauberk met with murderous clang,
And ruthless, raving Mars his blood-stain'd armour rang.

And oh!  bethink ye how their bright array,
Beneath the standard of great England's power,
Cheer'd the fifth Harry's heart in battle-day,
And proudly trod the field of Agincourt!
Unlike were they to luxury's pamper'd slave;
Reckless were they of rich funeral pall;
The turf they deem'd the vanquish'd soldier's grave
Rejoic'd to hear the trumpet's martial call,
And spurn'd as idle wind the vauntings of the Gaul.

Think ye how the beleaguer'd towns of France
Trembled to see their puissant banners wave&mdash;
Think how their sons have dar'd the battle's chance
To rescue Freedom from her yawning grave;&mdash;
For aye have Britons fought in Freedom's cause,
Fought to defend the altar and the throne&mdash;
Fought to defend their country's righteous laws&mdash;
And soon as they their dauntless front have shown
Ever hath Slavery heav'd a deep, despairing groan.

There lodg'd the hunters who before the dawn
Led forth their noisy train o'er hill and dale&mdash;
Rous'd from its bed of heath the speckled fawn,
And chas'd the roe along the banks of Swale.
There strove the knights on days of tournament,
Array'd with nodding plumes and armour bright&mdash;
On those brave youths each lady kindly bent
Her beauteous look &mdash; the warrior's chief delight:&mdash;
Those knights no longer love, no more are first in fight.

And can I pass without a kind farewell,
Thee, faithful guardian of ancient lore?
Proud is my heart to reel my tongue to tell
How oft beneath thy roof I ponder'd o'er
The illustrious lines of that Athenian bard
Who o'er the kinder passions reign'd supreme:
There the blind son of Chios claim'd regard,
And there the song of proud Promethean theme,
Where thunders roar and vivid lightnings gleam.

Phoebus is gone!  more lovely than the scene
While Luna floats through soft aethereal blue;
Each tree displays a varied tint of green,
The river sparkles, and yon distant view
Of meeting hills shows like the bounding line
Of mortal ken &mdash; and all beyond is bright
As when the beams of hope enchanting shine
Where clouds of sorrow sink in peaceful night:&mdash;
So glows yon landscape with the day's departing light.

Yet what avail the flowery hills and glades
To him who recks but of his own delight?
Now I reflect how often through those shades
I've roam'd, at early day and closing night,
With friends, who now have wander'd far away:
Who now, perchance, these woods oft fancy nigh,
And say, "How quickly pass'd our youthful day!
But when, O Friendship, I thy sway deny,
Then senseless shall my heart on earth's dull surface lie."
