That gloomy grey-beard winter foul has come,
To spread his snows upon each sunny hill&mdash;
The flutt'ring redbreast flees his sylvan home,
And loves to linger near the cottage still,
Chirping for crumbs to gorge his little bill.
No more the verdant bank and azure skies
Are brightly mirror'd in the gurgling rill;
For lo!  the youth upon its bosom flies,
Or prone by slippery fall to laughter loud gives rise.

The ruthless heir roams o'er with dog and gun,
His desart fields all dreariness and bare,
And pleased he smiles, and cunningly both run,
When far before he sees the startled hare,
Of hedge or pool he taketh little care,
If he can kill the leveret flying fast;
She stops &mdash; she looks around &mdash; but oh, beware!
Poor trembling one, thy deadly die is cast,
For quick with murderous aim the sportsman shoots at least.

The orphan wanderer 'neath no roof but heaven,
With limbs all naked, quivering, maim'd and sore,
Now plaintive prays a morsel may be given,
For he is hungry in the winter hoar.
Ah!  see him driven from the rich man's door,
While down his cheek the briny waters roll,
He fain would drink of sorrow's cup no more,
And hopes his God will rest his weary soul,
And soon the silent grave may be his life's sweet goal.

And now, in stanzas four, my good old friend,
With graphic quill I've painted for thy view
Some Christmas scenes &mdash; and therewithal I send
An invitation for your wife and you
To come and join our circle, kind, though few&mdash;
To taste the puddings, rarities, and cheer,
That long beneath my Fancy's fingers grew:&mdash;
Of storm and wind the harm you need not fear,
The donkey chaise you know will bring you safely here.

At ease, and warm beside our evening blaze,
We'll talk of times when thou and I were young&mdash;
Aye, those bright hours, those fair unclouded days,
When hope spoke softest with her thralling tongue,
And o'er our path her dewy garlands flung&mdash;
Yes!  we will talk of times when fancy free
Pored on the lays that amorous Flaccus sung
With laurell'd brow in halls at Tivoli&mdash;
Quaffing his old Falern with all a poet's glee.

And we will wake the lute's melodious tone,
And o'er our hearts shall feel its soft'ning spell,
As when in youth we sat upon the stone
At twilight hour in Doland's lovely dell,
Hard by the silvery brooklet's gentle swell:
And though, alas!  we're getting grey-hair'd men
Why should we not with freedom sweep the shell
As blithely now, nay blither far than when
Our youthful music rang through vocal grove and glen.

But we must take, I fear, the book of life,
And muse and mourn o'er many a darken'd page
Whereon is writ the pois'ning cares and strife
That wait on man from youth to bending age;
And then our mind the converse shall engage
Of loving friends that left their father's seat
In other climes with fortune war to wage:
Oh come, I pray, with no unfriendly feet,
To share our Christmas cheer, these pleasures all so sweet.
