The sun had sunk in splendour in the west,
The mountain shadows died along the plain,
Nature's sweet choristers had gone to rest,
And silence had assumed her wonted reign
Without a rival o'er the world again:
Such was the moment I impatient flow
To meet Maria, ere I crossed the main&mdash;
The maid whose charms had won my earliest vow,
And whose bright memory makes my heart thrill even now.

Forgive me, "classic clime," if I did grieve
I had to tread thy tyrant-stricken shore&mdash;
'Twas the sad consciousness I had to leave
A lovely being I might see no more.
That was the thought that made me doubly sore;
And as I clasp'd her to my heaving breast
I felt a pang, I never felt before&mdash;
The morrow, and my straining eyes might rest
On stranger objects, not on her I loved the best.

There was a sadness in her virgin look,
As slow and silent I approached her side&mdash;
Her accents faltered, and the blood forsook
Her cheeks that were so beautifully dyed:
So delicately tinged, they might have vied
With the bright hues the "god of gladness" shows
At even, when he sinks in all his pride;
Or with the bloom that on the thorn-bud blows&mdash;
Such was Maria, such the charms she could disclose.

He who can call one woman's heart his own,
Can never be unblest; though Fortune's hand
No fleeting treasure in his lap has thrown,
In her bright sunny looks he does command
A gem in value more than Peru's land.
And such was once my fate!  but she is fled&mdash;
O God!  the thought my bosom has unmanned;
Yet these big drops that fall are idly sped,
For can they ever wake, reanimate the dead?

Full many a time when night hath veil'd the earth,
And sleep within her arms embraced mankind,
I've hied me where is laid departed worth&mdash;
The worth that graced Maria's polished mind,
Where every female virtue was combined.
But am I wandering, I forgot me tale
In sorrow measureless and undefined.
What will it serve me this digressive wail?
But feed my bosom's fire &mdash; naught else can it avail.

I strove to sooth her &mdash; spoke of future bliss,
But she, mistrustful, with a look of woe
That chill'd my bosom, seemed to say that this
Would be the last time we would meet below
And then her tears in silence 'gan to flow,
And as I gazed upon her, in my heart
I half determin'd that I would not go.
I felt that I could never, never part,
And leave her thus.  O!  love, so absolute thou art!

But this unmanly feeling did not last.
Was I to stifle every noble aim,
And waste the future as I'd done the past?
No!  thro' my brain and every sense their came
A thirst to see the best, the mightiest of mankind,
And fallen as they are, have yet a name
That can at times electrify the mind&mdash;
A name around which glory must be ever twined.

Farewell!  I cried, but wander where I may,
Thine image on my soul impressed will be,
Think not that I can tear myself away,
And never more indulge a thought of thee:
What thou hast been, thou still shalt be to me,
And as I roam where dwelt and yet may dwell
Science, heroic worth, and liberty,
E'en then Maria will my bosom swell
With recollections all thine own &mdash; farewell!  farewell!
