Where once the towers of Missolonghi rose&mdash;
Towers that, with loathing, slavish banners bore,
The sons of Greece defied their Moslem foes,
When, like Leonidas, to die they swore&mdash;
Swore, not with rashness or the boast of pride,
That madly seeks a spot with dangers rife
Whene'er the raging battle's purple tide
Rolls and re-echoes 'mid the sons of strife,
Hoping to gild his name with vaunted scorn of life.

No!  solemnly they vow'd, while o'er them wav'd
Their crimson banner, there to stand or fall,
Till their illustrious land, no more enslav'd,
Should look in triumph on their glorious wall;
Or, till beneath a tomb of shining arms,
Thrown in confusion from each lofty tower,
They should repose secure from war's alarms,
Knowing that Death's bye-word is earthly power,
And that he smites alike the slave and knighthood's flower.

The infidels repos'd along the sand,
As in a vale, all lovely but for them,
Thick swarms of locusts that lay waste the land,
Blasting the fairest hopes of husbandmen!
Or like the serpents in the wilderness,
Monsters of fire, created to chastise
The sons of Israel for their waywardness,
The haughty spoilers lay beneath the skies
That once had smiled to see the Cross exalted rise.

Phoebus departed from a sky serene,
Tinged in splendour with a thousand dyes;
Departed, smiling on the martial scene
That closed for ever on his longing eyes!
Calm was the night &mdash; calm as the first that sprang
When the young moon first floated o'er the sky,
After the morning stars together sang
To see the glorious worlds then raised on high,
And Seraphim sent forth loud notes of ecstasy.

Then came proud Missolonghi's fatal hour&mdash;
Then was her tide of glory at its height&mdash;
No more to lash the feet of lawless power,
But sink at once into oblivion's night:
Yet no!  the spot where sons of Hellas die,
Rather than see their glorious banners furl'd,
Sends forth a beacon-light of liberty,
Springing from graves in rude destruction hurl'd,
Enough to shed its rays o'er an enslaved world!

Think then not dead!  the brave can never die!
Their fame shall flourish in unfading bloom
Neglected and forgot when cowards lie
Beneath the sculpture of a marble tomb!
They died to save their darling native land&mdash;
Their helpless infants, and defenceless sires:
To save them from the spoiler's grasping hand&mdash;
Aye!  from the stake, the rack, and scorching fires,
And virgin innocence from lawless lust's desires.

Rejoice, O Xerxes, king of slaughtered hosts
That fell around the sea-girt nurse of doves!
Ye shades of warriors slain on Grecian coasts,
Reft of your homes, your glories, and your loves!
You ne'er could wish for vengeance half so dread
When Hellas scorn'd the proffer'd fight to shun,
Grandsires and striplings for their country bled,
Nor stayed the work of victory once begun,
And to the end of time unrivall'd glories won.

But no such joy the Persian's heart could feel;
He honour'd foes that knew not how to yield;
'Gainst warriors only drew his flaming steel,
When sprang his courser o'er the battle-field.
Greek strove with Persian, as in desert lands
The bird of Jove his rival foe pursues,
Wages the war above the empurpled sands,
And, though his rage be quench'd by falling dews,
Returning dawn the restless combat still renews!

Is there no land with love of glory fir'd?
No land the sinking state of Greece to save?
Is there no chief, with love of fame inspired,
That dreads to see the valiant Greek a slave?
The hero of the waves comes forth again
To reap fresh laurels on the Aegean shores;
Cochrane!  renown'd where'er the purple main
Extends his arms!  He comes whom Fame adores,
Proclaiming him her own whene'er the cannon roars!

Go, son of glory, make the Moslem feel,
Spite of his boasts and sounding menaces,
The terror of a free-born Briton's steel!
Go!  triumph o'er the christian's enemies!
Lives there a man, proud of the British name,
That loves the heaven-born gift of liberty,
And wishes not to spread the sacred flame,
At least by praying for success to thee?
By every Briton scorn'd, disown'd let him be!
