Know ye the charms of Summer's evening sky
When day's bright monarch is gone down to rest;
When Tempest sleeps, and Zephyrs whispering sigh
Reposing on the ocean's heaving breast?
The moon, in her full glory, rises o'er
The waves, that seem to us her bosom near;
She proudly smiles upon the winding shore&mdash;
The woods and rocks, to Contemplation dear,
That all in silence gaze upon her golden sphere.

Such was the scene when they of Babylon,
The sage Chaldees, loving to contemplate
Each rolling planet and resplendent sun
That yonder keeps on high its rival state,
In fancy saw "Arcturus and his sons,"
And Pleiades, that charm admiring lands,
While urging on the chase Orion runs,
Adorned with his silver studded bands,
That none know how to bind except Almighty hands.

Hail to thee LINDISFARNE!  whose mouldering walls
Are faithful monuments of human pride,
That raises for itself high domes and halls,
Nor wastes a passing thought on wind or tide!
But soon Destruction's mighty tempest blows&mdash;
Time undermines the walls, and where are then
The pageants of the world, its masques and shows,
The toys and puppets of short-sighted men?
All buried, sunk, and lost, never to rise again!

Sleep ye, ye peaceful dead who there repose!
Oft have ye seen the winds their battle wage;
But now no more the fiercest wind that blows
Shall drive you from so safe an anchorage:
And if, as in their lays fond minstrels dream,
The spirit in the grave remembers there
What part he played on earth, and loves the scene,
You love a night like this, so bright and fair,
When all is calm and still in ocean, earth, and air.

Yon island, which the enamoured waves enfold,
Was, like those isles known but to minstrel's eye,
Peopled with beings of celestial mould,
Saint Hilda's daughters, born to bloom and die!
Bloom'd have they?  Yes; and faded here unseen,
As flowers beneath the chilling breezes die,
Though some were fair as Lacedaemon's Queen
While joys of youth yet sparkled in her eye,
Before the fiend of Troy had planned his perfidy.

And some there were, perchance, as fair as one
Whom I did know, while yet in early days,
Before the passing dreams of youth were gone,
(Hope spread before me her deluding maze!)
Whose eyes were bright as the lone evening star
That, when Hyperion gilds the western main,
Shines in the new-made track of his bright car,
And proudly asks when he can find again
A star so bright as she through all his wide domain?

In whom Diana's dignity was blended
With all the winning smiles that did betray
Fair Venus to her son when she descended
To show through Lybian woods the pathless way!
No fairer form than hers the plaintive lyre,
Claimed by Erin with exulting glee,
Hath yet portrayed to kindle soft desire:&mdash;
I would have wish'd for her to sail with me
If mine had been like this &mdash; a calm unruffled sea.

Here dwelt the sisters, as in glittering state
Lie sparkling crystals of most lovely dyes
In mines, where man no more may penetrate.&mdash;
No eyes admire, no hand may win the prize:
But did the Power who bade all things to be,
Who rais'd the firmament, and made to shine
Sun, moon, and stars; who fill'd the mighty sea;
Who last created man in form divine,
And with paternal voice pronounced "ALL THESE ARE THINE."

Intend that aught beyond the reach of man
Should lie for ever in the thankless ground?
But hold! &mdash; I fear such mighty themes to scan,
To venture into depths of thought profound,
That claim the meditating sage's pen;&mdash;
An idle task when each man loves to prize
His judgment over that of other men;
And to determine what is good and wise,
As if no beam of light had shone on other eyes!

And in that isle, when vesper bells were tolling,
The fathers numbered o'er their holy beads;
Unmoved by the waves around them rolling,
And unallured by flowery woods and meads:&mdash;
Some whose fond hopes were blighted in their spring;
Some who had borne the warrior's glittering mail;
And some whose first delight it was to fling
Their minstrelsy along the summer gale,
And sing to maiden's ear a soft and amorous tale.

One sire, who dwelt beneath these holy aisles,
Had loved, in that happiest time of life,
While yet no viler sentiment defiles
The mind unpractised in worldly strife.
But in those days of chivalry no dame
Would give her hand to one unknown in arms;
"Amid the ranks of war go seek thee fame;
First court and win the battle's fierce alarms,
And then adventure hopes to win a maiden's charms."

So spake the maiden when great Coeur de Lion
Led forth his heroes to the Holy land:
Soon in the battle's rage their lances shone&mdash;
Among the first the lance of ETHELBRAND:
But when the remnant of that puissance came,&mdash;
Their arms and banners red with hostile gore,
Preceded by the swelling trump of Fame,
All hopes now resting  on their native shore,&mdash;
How vain were all his hopes &mdash; ROWENA was no more!

Ye walls that bear alike the threatening storm
And summer's gentle breeze that lingers nigh,&mdash;
What though ye be neglected and forlorn,
And claim no tribute but the poet's sigh?
What though Time's annals dread assurance give
That works of men must surely all decay?
Mourn not, but still remember that you live
In memory beyond the passing day:
A happier fate, I ween, than waits this humble lay.
