Who's he that stalks along the barren fell,
Where the free wind is playing random pranks
O'er prickly whin, bare rocks, and heathy dell,
Or gambolling down Callerton's green banks?
Whilst the tir'd sun, low in the ruddy west,
At times escaping from the muffling fold
Of sombre clouds that thick his face infest,
Pours yellow lustre on the wide grey wold
Where still the stranger stalks dark, slow, and cold.

Perchance he feels Sol's waning varying flush,
And then a smile creeps o'er his gladden'd cheek;
Through the fill'd veins their red streams swifter rush
And curve the lips as now at length to speak:
"Thou noblest planct of the heav'nly sphere
Shine yet again, be prodigal of light&mdash;
Hast thou not mark'd how I have wander'd here
To worship, undisturb'd, thy matchless sight?
Well, get thee gone!  I'll woo the orb of night.

"See!  where she comes to soothe my troubled mind,
Fretted with ev'ry curse that mem'ry can
Rake from life's tract this hour has left behind
To make me deem myself a wretched man.
I lov'd Cecilia!  Soon a mandate speeds,
And to her home the maiden bids adieu,
To mirthful halls life's alter'd current leads;
Will festal banquets cause her think how true
Is he, forsaken on the moor e'en now.

"I do know woman, and I am right sure
When 'mid the blaze of rank the son'rous youth
Gorgeous in outward show, within impure,
Shall urge his wish, that small will be her truth.
Yet was she chaste.  But wealth, with dazzling sway,
Will work corruption, were she pure as snow&mdash;
Will bias her from Virtue's taintless way
Since Vice bright gilds her front with tempting glow,
And specious hides her inner filth and woe.

"When artful peers, proud flaunting in brocade
Where torches flash, gold burns, and jewels gleam,
Shall pander to their lust and court the maid,
Methinks this heart of mine will worthless seem;
'Tis like indeed, this o'ertoil'd, sickly frame;
That lives by fits &mdash; a taper near its close
Will serve to nurse a never-dying flame&mdash;
Ah no!  some other my loved girl will choose&mdash;
May this pain crush me ere he crops the rose!

"Virtue and Prudence totter'd in that mind
When to the hamlet she preferr'd the town;
And firm Affection's early faith resign'd
To go where guilt on pamper'd ground is sown.
Did bliss not circle her when she did stray
By charming lawns perfuming sweet the air,
Whilst hope, and joy, and love, illum'd the way;&mdash;
A happy atmosphere was that to where
Foul rakes debauch, and sister harlots stare.

"Yet in the chain with which she holds my heart
Nor time nor circumstance can wear a breach;
Though forest, water, earth, our bodies part,
Entire, unbroken, it extends o'er each.
Does music warble with entrancing sound,
Cecilia thrills in every tender note&mdash;
Condens'd in her my passions all are bound;
Were wealth and power before my vision brought
They could not dim the form on which I dote.

"Strange would it be did ever aught succeed
Whose progress I have wish'd might happy run&mdash;
False prophets there might prophesy, indeed,
And tell the issue ere its source begun.
Lo!  memory conjures up another wrong,
Stamp'd in clear colours I had thought obscure;
But the whole portrait's fresh embodied throng,
Again I must those racking thoughts endure,
Death, my sheet anchor &mdash; death, their sole safe cure!

"War sounded on her trump a stirring blast&mdash;
The martial voice rang at the cottage door&mdash;
Each patriot present heard, and boldly pass'd
To die or conquer on a hostile shore.
To wield the brand my arm was all unstrung&mdash;
The call of victory summon'd me in vain&mdash;
Weak by the couch my raised arm helpless hung&mdash;
A cruel fever throbb'd within my brain,
And sharp I winced beneath the galling chain.

"Amidst my madd'ning ills fierce tongues were found
To rouse my slumb'ring mind with torments dire&mdash;
With savage probe to tear the yet raw wound,
And add new fuel to the scorching fire:
No gentle hand did ever bathe my  brow&mdash;
With cooling oil allay the bitter smart,
Nor pity spare one drop of healing dew
From fiend-like friends, who play'd a devil's part,
Urging my arm to thrust the suicidal dart.

"It shall be so.  Clasp'd to the mother's breast,
From whence it drain'd life's precious dearest store,
The babe dies smiling &mdash; thus I'll sink to rest,
Expiring calmly at Cecilia's door.
Then let me haste, since, as a prostrate oak,
Once fair and healthy on the purple moor,
Moulders, sheer-blasted by the lightning's stroke,
Whilst raving tempests fell their vengeance pour,
A useless wreck, I crumble hour by hour."

He spake.  Then, as his arms were wildly spread
High o'er his head in attitude sublime,
"O heav'n!  launch quick the bolt," he madly said&mdash;
"Ope the seal'd book, and judge my round of time;
And, for a span, chase from the sullied moon
Those clouds that foil her with their idle load&mdash;
In bright effulgence,'tis a trifling boon,
Let her burst out upon my final road,
Nor grudge to light me to my dark abode.

"I sue not now the crescent queen to show
On smooth savanna or on tangled grove
Her soft'ning light, as I march glad below,
Hail'd by the sovereign banner of my love.
That banner steep'd in bliss with certain lure,
Hung where the violets blush'd and lilacs grew,
Whene'er the maiden wav'd with magic power,
Thither my soul's whole bent her standard drew,
Such force attractive o'er my heart it threw."

The raven croak'd above &mdash; the snake beneath
Hiss'd strangely deep; but yet more strange than they
The youth's deep voice jarr'd on the silent heath,
As through the rustling fern he dragged his way.
Reeling and faint, his steps he onward bore,
Nor could his ebbing strength their progress stay,
Till down he sank close by Cecilia's door,
And there, when morning dawn'd, chill, wet, and grey,
Stretch'd pale and  passionless, the fate-cursed victim lay.
