PROEM.  TO &mdash;.
Once as we sat beneath our favourite tree,
I sung a legend of Italian skies
And woods of Florence, where 'twere blest to be&mdash;
Of flowerets flowing with unnumbered dyes&mdash;
Of dainty damoselles, whose coal-black eyes
Were bright as thine, love; and of waterfalls
Sparkling in moonlight mists &mdash; of towers that rise
In marble splendour &mdash; and of courtly balls
Held at the midnight hour in gay-illumined halls.

I told thee how a youthful damsel hied
Through storm and tempest to a forest lone,
Which waved its dark pines o'er a streamlet's side,
Rippling 'twixt mossy banks with mournful tone&mdash;
A gloomy spot where never sunbeam shone!
Where waved the trees when ne a zephyr stirred;
And where, at midnight, in a tongue unknown,
Mysterious voices singing wild were heard,
And lambent watch-fires gleamed, as poets have averred.

Didst thou not smile approval on the lay,
And list with rapture to its every line?
And when my wild harp's music died away
In lingering melody, thy kiss divine
More than repaid the poet, maiden mine!
Then didst thou bid me quit Italian bowers,
And scenes made famous by the Florentine&mdash;
Sing of the dells where passed my youthful hours&mdash;
Weave thee a blooming wreath of CRAVEN'S mountain flowers.

And did I tell thee of a wayward youth
Who fondly loved a maiden false as fair&mdash;
He thought her guileless &mdash; he believed her truth;
But she, I ween, was fickle as the air
That stirs the bracken on our mountain drear:
Her love was as a light on all which beamed,
But rested not on any &mdash; many a year
She was the youth's delight, who wrongly deemed
Her artless as she looked, and virtuous as she seemed.

I sung his wanderings in the wild-wood green
On summer eve, when faeries held their sway;
And how beside her, 'neath the spreading treen,
His lyre was strung to love's enraptured lay;
And how the strain was changed to well-a-day!
Alas and well-a-day!  for soon he found
The maiden as a tree in forest gay,
That grows in beauty &mdash; smiles on all around;
Yet in its inmost core the canker doth abound.

And I did tell thee how that youth remained
Long time disconsolate, till, in a dale,
He wooed another, and her favour gained.
"If happy, then, the hero of the tale,"
Thou laughing saidst, "'tis well &mdash; he nought can ail,
And so in future let his history rest.
Sing RYLESTONE'S feudal hall ere peasant's wail
Lamented o'er its towers, what time possessed
By Norton, with his 'eight good sons' supremely blest."

Ah me!  how can I sing of Rylestone hall?
WORDSWORTH hath hallowed it in deathless song!
But I can tell how at a festival
Held once within it, from the gallant throng
Of knights and ladies, laughter loud and long
Rung through the pile at sound of viol's string
Y-touched by one &mdash; to name him may be wrong.
Let critics' shrine with shouts derisive ring
I will that minstrel name &mdash; the minstrel PETER KING.

He looked, indeed, a strange and unketh wight,
As through the crowd with shuffling gaite he went
To where "old Francis" sat &mdash; for since the night
He flew through ether, had a leg been bent.
He asked to sing, and having gained consent,
His viol took he then, and tuned it well,
And when was hushed the boisterous merriment,
With voice as doleful as a passing-bell
He sung this wild romaut of Hubberholme's faery dell.

ROMAUNT.
Ye warriors and ladies attend to my strain!
I sing of a bold knight on Palestine's plain,
Who a death-wound received from a javelin's fling,
When Saladin fled from the bold lion-king.

O many a warrior of Craven the green
To the holie land sailed with the monarch, I ween.
Yet Lacies and Pudsays, though brave in the field,
They all to Sir Roland in prowess must yield.

The cuirass and shield and the blade that he bore
Had often been dyed with the Saracen's gore.
His helmet was hewed with the infidel's glaive,
Yet ever undaunted was Roland the brave.

For oft had he plunged through the thickest of ranks,
And planted the red cross on Jordan's famed banks;
Beneath him had trampled the standard unblest,
The pale sickly crescent &mdash; the false prophet's crest!

But vain was his ardour!  his prowess was vain!
A martyr he fell upon Palestine's plain;
His death-wound received from a javelin's fling
When Saladin fled from the bold lion-king!

And when he was wounded in fierce battle's rage,
He quick called unto him his little foot-page&mdash;
"I ever have found thee both trusty and true,
Now see that is done I shall bid thee to do.

"Hear, youth, what I tell thee with fast-fleeting breath,
And ere I be cradled in slumber of death,
I charge thee my corse is borne far o'er the deep,
That my ashes may rest where my forefathers sleep.

"There stands a lone chapel in Hubberholme dell,
'Tis shaded by ash tree and sheltered by fell,
For me let the bell of its grey tower toll,
And the monks of Saint Benedict pray for my soul."

O what is that vessel so trim and so gay,
That sails o'er the deep sea in stately array?
'Tis laden with warriors from Palestine's strand,
And bears the dead knight to the merrie England.

Now lithe ye and list ye, fair dames, while I tell
What the Abbot of Sawlaye in Hubberholme dell
Beheld, many months ere on Palestine's plain
Sir Roland the brave was in victory slain.

I wot that ye think me a strange-looking wight,
By your smirkings and laughs as I entered to-night;
But had it been yours that fat abbot to see,
I trow, gentle dames, ye would laugh not at me.

His face was as round, and his face was as red
As the sun through mist peering o'er dark mountain's head;
And his paunch!  O for certes he never could dine
Sans venison pasty and cellarman's wine!

The churchmen may talk of their penance severe,
Their fastings and scourgings and cloister-life drear;
Let any one gaze on that fat abbot's face,
Then say, if for fasting an abbey's the place!

But lithe ye and list ye to tale that I tell&mdash;
The Abbot was riding through Hubberholme dell;
On a gay mettled palfrey the Abbot did ride,
And the cross and the rosary hung at his side.

The Abbot he gazed on the bright evening star
That high in the heavens was shining afar,
And shedding a halo o'er valley and plain;
And he raised to the virgin a dolorous strain.

For a thought crossed the Abbot &mdash; how true it may be
Must be settled by disputants able as he&mdash;
It was Bethlehem's star that in old time displayed
O'er the stall where the infant Redeemer was laid.

But lo!  while the hymn to the virgin he sung,
The rocks and the fells with wild melody rung,
He the crucifix clasped, and 'gan loudly to say
An Ave-Maria as well as he may!

And louder and louder the chanting became,
Till the Abbot espied, by the moon's paley flame,
A hearse gaily dressed with plumes sable and white,
And banners around shone in beams of the night.

And hatchments of silver the priest did espy,
And crossing his breast he bent on them his eye&mdash;
He a gules cross patonce did in argent shield view,
And the ground round the 'scutcheon was sable in hue.

The bedesmen he eyed as they passed through the vale&mdash;
Benedictines they seemed from their cell on the Swale;
And he followed the train till they passed through the porch,
And entred the chancel of Hubberholme church.

The Abbot pricked on, on his palfrey so gay,
And soon a bold yeoman he met on the way.
"May Mary our mother thee sain and thee save!
What warrior this midnight is borne to his grave?

"For whom do the monks of Saint Benedict sing?
For whom doth the corse-bell of Hubberholme ring?"
That yeoman y-gazed on the old Abbot's e'e,
But in the Cistercian ne guile could he see.

"Thou sayst a true say, I've ne reason to doubt,
But thy words are a riddle full hard to make out.
Good Abbott!  as I have a soul yet to save,
I know none to-night who is borne to the grave!

"But good father Cuthbert," the yeoman he said,
What bearings were in the procession displayed?"
"In a gules cross patone did he argent shield view,
And the ground round the 'scutcheon was sable in hue."

The yeoman, from red, as the lily turned pale,
For those were the arms of a knight of the dale,
Sir Roland, his master, who sailed with a train
Of warriors to conquer on Palestine's plain!

The Abbot rode forth on his palfrey, and took
With seeming devotion his breviary book;
He looked not at Credo or Ave-Marie&mdash;
It was but to know what the Saint's eve mote be.

I would ye had seen how the Abbot did gaze!
I would ye had seen how he looked in amaze!
His limbs they grew chill, and his blood it grew stark,
O Christ!  'twas the eve of the fated Saint Mark!

Sir Roland was buried in Hubberholme dell,
Sir Roland was buried with book and with knell&mdash;
For him did the bell of the grey tower toll,
And the monks of Saint Benedict prayed for his soul!

L'ENVOY.
The lay is ended!  doth it please thee, love?
It is a wild and quaintly fashioned rhyme;
Yet when the star of evening shines above
Our lowly valleys and our hills sublime
O'erspread with snow &mdash; that lay of olden time
And idle hour beside thine hearth-fire's lowe
May please thy fancy &mdash; waft thee to the clime
Where Jordan's waves in limpid current flow,
And Moslem minarets rise, and spreading palm-trees grow.

They lay is ended!  and the faery wreath
Is now before thee I have rudely twined&mdash;
Soon it may wither in the cold night breath,
And be unmeet thy flowing locks to bind!
When, love!  is hushed the bitter winter's wind,
When summer's sun-rays do the dells illume,
I will to Greenwood idly hie, and find
Sweet flower which growing though in forest's gloom,
May form another wreath of fairer, lovelier bloom!
