Love, mighty spirit!  thou reign'st paramount,
Proudly dispensing hopes and anxious fears;
Thy thronging suppliants, who, alas!  shall count?
Breathed on by thee, the fading cheek appears
Radiant with laughter, and the soft smile cheers,
Like fairy-spell, the whilome scorner:  thou
Fillest young Beauty's eye with flowing tears
Of slighted fondness; and the lover's brow,
Sunned by thy morning ray, is all o'erclouded now!

Joy's shout was wafted on the charmed air,
While the broad moon her Silver light was lending,
And midnight revelry was holding there
Her wanton court, whilst gayest songs ascending
Floated like genii-strains; and flowers were blending
Their perfumes with the panting breeze; and eyes,
As darted stars, were rapid glances sending
On passioned lovers, whose half-breathed sighs,
Full well confess'd the sway of young Love's witcheries.

And at this hour, at this enchanted hour,
When all around is work of faerie,
Deep in his dungeon lies the Troubadour
The young Macias.  He hath bent to thee,
Proud God in mute and deep idolatry;
But thou, hard-hearted, long hast mock'd his groan,
And his sole food is bitter memory!
For lost, rash youth, &mdash; to beauty's honied tone
His willing ear he lent &mdash; he fell &mdash; and is alone!

Alone, and in a dungeon dark confined!
But yet the form whose rosy smile once shone
And sunned his brow, is now deep, deep enshrined
Within his heart of hearts; the smile is gone,
Swift as a falling star:  but yet upon
Those lips full fraught with poisoned sorceries
He maddening, fed &mdash; till charmed, enthralled, undone,
He felt that though bright beauty of the skies
The radiant semblance show, it mocks, and, mocking flies.

And there he lies!  In many a bloody field
Once he shone forth, the choicest cavalier,
Known by his morion plume and moony shield,
Whilst graceful bearing of his ashen spear
Ne'er knew his manly heart the taint of fear;
And he hath proved to gathered foes a rock,
Proud in its lofty might:  'tis nought:  appear,
Thou Loveliness, and he, who erst could mock
The battle's turbid waves, quick yieldeth to thy shock!

Oh!  that the shrine all consecrate to love
Should by a worthless wretch, devoid of heart
Be e'er polluted; or the gentle dove,
Rife with affection, feel the poisoned smart
(Incurable) of cold desertion's dart!
Oh!  that stern fate a blooming form beneath
A loathsome corpse should bind &mdash; which can impart
Nought but rank pestilence &mdash; so that the breath
Ev'n now all fragrance, be impregnated with death!

Such was the being who her heart &mdash; her all,
That Woman hath of treasure, freely gave
To one that in despite of marriage thrall
Sighed his soft tale, and knelt her lowly slave.
And that same form, that in the darksome grave
Of ill-requited love had slumbered long,
Uprose, a fresh-plumed phoenix, and could brave
The eye of guilt, and dare the barrier strong
Of duty, when she heard the young Macias' song.

They saw &mdash; they loved &mdash; they were beloved &mdash; on mute
And silent wings their deep-felt rapture flew;
And oft the Knight would wake his joyous lute,
And, as his fingers o'er the chords he drew,
Would utter spells; whilst her soft eyes of blue
Shot forth bright beams, responsive to his kiss,
In silent eloquence:  but fleeting-few
Are pleasure's moments and, alas!  to this
Ages of pain succeed and such is human bliss!

For he, the heartless reptile!  who had run
His course thro' lust's defilement &mdash; folly's maze,
And left the flower which turned to him &mdash; her sun
Of earthly hope &mdash; to waste its youthful days
In deep despair, the while his fevered gaze
He fed on objects of depraved desire:&mdash;
This wretch, the lord of that young form, whose rays
Might fondest love in coldest breasts inspire,
Heard of his lady's fall, and burned with vengeful ire.

On him affix of that dread crime the stain;
His &mdash; his, the deed; had he with pious care
Fond cherished her, the costly gem, whose gain
Princes might proudly boast, nor in despair
(Tho' offered oft to him, affection's pray'r)
Have left her long to mourn, in widowhood,
She ne'er had fallen into guilt's dark snare,
But for thee, &mdash; wretch accurst! &mdash; would she have stood
The essence, heavenly bright, of all that's fair and good!

Thus is it oft:  the form that in the track
Of heaven high soars &mdash; oh!  pity tho' ye blame&mdash;
Neglect ungrateful, quickly turneth back;&mdash;
And he, her marriage-lord, with soul as tame
As warms the abject slave, would not the shame,
Blistering his honour, keen avenge, but sought
His prince's ear, base miscreant!  and came
To tell his tale &mdash; a tale with falsehood fraught,&mdash;
Of treachery, carnage, blood &mdash; ev'n so his vengeance wrought.

What his right arm refused, his tongue, with lies
All specious, soon achieved &mdash; wind trembling Fear,
How oft thou stalkest under Manhood's guise!
The name of him who in the bold career
Of noble daring shone so great, is sear
And tarnished as a traitor's.  Ah!  fond Knight,
Deep, deep thou liest in a dungeon drear;
That form thou lov'st &mdash; so fair! &mdash; those eyes, so bright!
No longer now appear, to thrill thee with delight!

But still hath dungeon, absence, gyves no change
Brought to that heart; still, still with passion's fire
That heart is fever'd, and in gladsome range
O'er Memory's bowers, with wings that never tire,
His Fancy strays, and Feeling doth acquire
Fresh impulse from restraint: &mdash; the farther flies
That object which on earth we most desire,
The more we seek it with o'er-anxious eyes,
The more its distant beauties do we wishful prize.

And she, &mdash; the lov'd, the lost, defil'd, undone,&mdash;
Wept life away in secret agony.&mdash;
That trances blissful, which, yet scarce begun,
By Fate should be destroyed thus ruthlessly!
Fond Woman loves, &mdash; ah!  how devotedly!
Oh, that her breast, the purest, fairest shrine
For heavenly, pure, angelic chastity,
Should e'er be sullied by a stain, or pine
With fond desire, poor guilty fair one, like to thine!

High in his dungeon-vault full high was set
A narrow casement, which the blessed rays
Of orient morn let in; a parapet
Extended wide beyond; there day by day,
The husband of his love would wend his way,
That chasing down the captive's cheek the tear
He might behold, or mark him wildly pray,
Brain-stung with madness, or his curses hear;
Foil'd in his fiend-like wish, these lute-strains meet his ear.

I.
Lord Roland came to his lady's bower,
Where oft he had whisper'd his fondest sighs;
And his young love crept in that moonlight hour
To gaze on the youth with her star-bright eyes.
Oh!  soft maiden's eyes to her own lover's suit
Will utter deep vows, tho' her rose-lips be mute
And oh!  the deep magic of soft maiden's kiss
Gives a lover the foretaste of Eden's bliss.

II.
Lord Roland came to the bower, but where
Is she of that bower, the gay, fairy queen?
Dissolved is the deep spell if she be not there&mdash;
Aye, she, the young Peri, to gladden the scene!
Come, come then, thou beauty, thy true love is here,
But his bosom is troubled with hope and with fear;
Without thee would moments like dull ages feel,
But with thee long ages like spell-moments steal!

The warrior minstrel thus was gladly singing
The lay, which he enraptur'd breathed of late
To her, whose laughter-loving eyes were flinging 
Delicious rapture o'er her soul, and Hate,
Deep Hate, athirst for blood &mdash; insatiate,
To that high casement led her lord, &mdash; apart,
As was his wont, in wrath he listening sate:&mdash;
He heard the song; with madness stung, a dart
Well-poised and sure he hurl'd, and pierced the Poet's heart!
