TIME &mdash; NOON.
The fi'ry hours drew sultry noon along,
Ceas'd was the peasant's toil, the rural song;
When shelter'd safe from Sol's o'erpowering heat,
Phelim and Doran fix'd their cool retreat,
Where spreading trees in close disorder stood,
Enamour'd leaning o'er sweet Liffey's flood.
Here when refresh'd from toil by balmy rest,
Doran his fellow shepherd thus addressed.

"Phelim since silence fills this leafy shade,
Most fit for strains of pleasant music made;
The cares of toil say shall we not forgo,
And teach our souls in melody to flow?
See Liffey's silver waves in murmurs fall,
Seeming for tuneful notes of joy to call;
Then haste, Oh Phelim, chaunt a vocal strain,
My pipe, perchance, may join thee not in vain;"

The shepherd said &mdash; his pleas acceptance found,
Whilst Phelim thus made hill and dale resound.

"Fly far ye gales, my vocal strains convey,
Let distant regions listen to my lay,
To polar skies &mdash; to sultry climes belong
The mighty theme that crowns my daring song.

"Behold a prince in future times shall reign,
Stretching o'er utmost earth his vast domain,
Sceptres of gorgeous Ind' his hands shall wield,
To him the sovereigns of the north shall yield;
For him great prince the chief of future kings,
Hymen exulting spreads her purple wings.
While by the loves in soft confusion led,
A charming princess hastes to crown his bed;
For them gay zephyrs Flora's flow'rets blow,
Rich garlands on the nuptial couch to throw.
Delightful time approach &mdash; bright fame arise
Exalt his high renown with quickness to the skies.
Fly far ye gales, my vocal strains convey,
Let distant regions listen to my lay.

"Ye sable sons of Afric mourn no more,
His sway benignant shall your peace restore.
No children ravished from their parent's side,
No sun-burnt lover parted from his bride,
Shall more be doom'd as wretched slaves to roam,
For ever exil'd from their native home.
At his command, sweet freedom shall release
The bonds of woe &mdash; and bless your souls with peace.
His fleets o'er foaming ocean shall preside,
Sail unmolested thro' the yielding tide;
With streamers fluttering to the golden day,
No foe presumptuous shall oppose their way.
Safe shall they visit each Barbaric shore,
And groan beneath the weight of precious ore.
For them the spicy gales of Ind' shall blow,
For them rich gems in splendid mines shall glow.
Fly far, ye gales, my vocal strains convey,
Let distant regions listen to my lay.

"The southern isles that now uncultur'd lie,
In solitude beneath a gentle sky,
Shall by his people's aid new life assume,
And 'mid the sea, like little Edens, bloom.
From each deserted mount and barren vale,
With verdure smiling fragrance shall exhale.
To naked shrubs gay flow'rets shall succeed,
And paint, with vary'd hues, each laughing mead.
The naked Indian, with delight, shall spy
The rising sweets that meet his ravish'd eye;
With grateful feelings, shall implore his God
To bless that king who gladden'd his abode;
Then haste exulting to the cany grove,
And with his sable charmer, whisper love.
Fly far, ye gales, my vocal strains convey,
Let distant regions listen to my lay.

"In them blest days exalted to the skies,
O'er other lands Ierne's isle shall rise,
True to her prince, by loyal firmness prov'd,
Her daring sons shall be by him belov'd.
Then shall the rich productions of her soil,
From plenty's urn, reward the lab'rer's toil.
Her swains, content, no more shall quit their home,
Nor seek, with wand'ring feet, afar to roam.
Blest freedom (in whose cause they frequent bled)
Shall fill with joy each happy rural shed.
Then shall the name of TYTHES be heard no more,
All pains from purple tyrants shall be o'er;
Then pleasure shall the peasant's care beguile,
And while the prospects of his harvests smile,
Gay mirth shall lead the jocund dance along,
Each grove shall echo to the rural song.
Fly far, ye gales, my vocal strains convey,
Let distant regions listen to my lay."

Thus Phelim sung &mdash; while Sol's meridian blaze,
Parch'd nature's beauties with refulgent rays.
