'Twas now the hour of Midnight's solemn reign,
And Nature's chearful face o'er half the world
Darkness had veil'd, that Silence might repose
Beneath the drowsy canopy of Sleep;
While in the wide expanse of ether clear
The moon's chaste radiance shone, and all around
Sparkled the starry gems of azure heav'n,
When, led by Meditation's gentle hand,
I reached a lonely vale:  On either side
A verdant hillock rose, with easy slope&mdash;
And them between, a little winding brook
Stole thro' the pebbles smooth, on liquid foot,
And, sweetly murm'ring, kiss'd its daisied banks;
There, on a moss-grown rock, I sate me down,
Which overhung the stream, and wrapt in thought,
Fix'd on the shadowy ground my pensive eyes&mdash;
A thousand images of every hue
Successive glided thro' my wand'ring mind,
And passed unheeded; till the dreary hour,
Whose hasty summons, two short months before,
Had call'd my father to the bed of dust,
In all its horrors rose; and Fancy's ear
Still heard his knell, and, shuddered at the sound,
A sudden burst of anguish whelm'd my soul,
And sorrow's briny dew my cheek besprent&mdash;
Yet not for him &mdash; but for myself I mourn'd:
The world lay wide before me; but, alas!
My guide was gone, and all seem'd dark and drear:
My timid youthful heart recoil'd at thought
Of ent'ring all alone the busy scene:
No tender eye to watch my heedless steps;
No sage experience to direct my course,
And lead me safely thro' the tangling maze,
The more than Cretan labyrinth of life.
Long did I ponder what should fix my mind,
And mark the colour of my future days:
But still perplexity declin'd to chuse;
Irresolution still each scheme oppos'd;
And fear and doubt on ev'ry motion hung.

But, raising from the ground my humid eyes,
How did I wonder at the change I saw!
Stead of the sloping hills and creeping brook,
A wild and awful prospect broke at once
Upon my view &mdash; a rugged mountain rose,
And rear'd to heav'n its forest-cinctur'd head,
High as my aching sight could stretch aloft;
And on its pointed summit to the view
A stately pile, with regal splendour built,
Pillar'd with marble, and o'erlaid with gold.
While, tott'ring from its base, the farther side
A huge, stupendous, mould'ring ruin hung:
One only narrow, steep and winding path
Led to the top, of soft and slipp'ry sand,
Whose treach'rous surface failed beneath the feet,
And sunk at every step:  On either hand
Grim Danger threat'ned:  Here, in dark array,
A frowning ridge of pendant craggy rocks,
Tremendous, nodded o'er the gloomy pass;
While there, with foaming rage and deaf'ning voice,
A headlong torrent from the mountain fell,
And rush'd with dark impetuous course along
Close by the sandy road, which, furious oft,
It undermin'd, and swept at once away
And ev'ry passenger, whose luckless foot,
At that dire moment, trode the rough descent;
Borne by the rapid current breathless down,
Plunged in a gulph profound, that yawn'd beside
The mountain's base, and sunk &mdash; to rise no more.

In wonder lost, while on the mystic scene
Eager I gaz'd, a black and stormy cloud
Stood fix'd above my head, while op'ning wide
Its lucid folds, display'd its edges, ting'd
With gold and purple:  A majestic shape
Stood on the airy billow; more than man
His stature seem'd, and on his princely brow
Sate Pride imperial and correcting Awe.
A golden diadem, with splendid wreath
Circled his regal temples, fenc'd beneath
With prickly thorns, whose sharp and arrowy points
The painful glory nailing to his head,
Deep pierc'd his tender flesh; a purple robe
Floating luxuriant from his shoulders hung;
Curling his waist around, a speckled snake
Twin'd his insidious train, and closely girt
His Tyrian vesture, with a chequer'd zone
Of more than Gordian firmness, which beneath
In radiant characters of waving gold,
I saw his name, by Flattery's pencil wrought,
Divine Ambition:  Glory's Sacred King.
His blood-empurpl'd hand a sceptre held,
With which, incumbent from a fleecy cloud,
He touch'd my head; and soft'ning with a smile
The native firmness of his haughty mein,
Spread thus his bait to catch my youthful heart.

Alexis, Why dost thou delay so long
To fix the bent of thy succeeding days?
Whence this irresolution?  Oh!  let not now
Pernicious Sloth consume thy youthful prime,
And draw, with envious hand, the sable cloud
Of dull oblivion o'er thy future fame.
No longer hearken to the Siren song
Of luskish idleness; recline no more
On pleasure's couch inglorious.  Can the man
Be truly said to live, whose listless days
Creep silent on, nor leave a trace behind
Of ought by him atchiev'd, the boast of fame,
Or price of glory?  He whose languid hours
Are spent in Slumber's lap; who never wakes
But to the feast; and, when the feast is o'er,
Strait sleeps again; in what does he excel?
The grazing oxen; Do not they the same?
How differs from their death the life of such,
When silence and oblivion cover both?
Oh, be not one of these:  Exert thy  pow'rs;
Shake off this baneful lethargy of soul,
This vile, unmanly softness.  Let the love
Of glory, and the golden hope of pow'r,
Fill ev'ry thought, and ev'ry wish inflame
With noble daring.  Yonder narrow path
Shall bring at last thy persevering steps
To Fortune's summit:  Arduous is the steep;
But am I not thy guide?  Let nought of fear
Possess thy spirit; think how vast the bliss,
On Glory's pinnacle to sit enthron'd,
The God of Peace and War; the envied gaze
Of kneeling multitudes; to speak the words
Of law to nations, and dispense at will
The smile of favour, and the frown of death.
These the rewards which wait to crown thy toil;
Pursuits like these befit the godlike mind,
And claim thy noblest efforts:  Rouse thee then,
And let the sacred ardour catch thy soul,
And spur thee on to deeds divinely great.

He spoke; but how discordant was the sound
To all the feelings of my peaceful soul!
How did it shock my reason that my days
Should toil and suffer for an empty name!
I shudder'd at the thought; and instant thus
My firm refusal to his speech replied.

In vain, too powerful god, you waste on me
These rousing words; in vain your effort strives
To kindle in my breast the mad desire
Of pow'r and grandeur; each idea there
Declares against thee:  Elsewhere must thou seek
A mind more fitted to receive thy laws,
And catch the baneful rage.  How diff'rent far
Are all the wishes which this bosom knows;
Supremely happy, would but fate allow
In some sequester'd nook to pass my  days
Far from the bustle of the busy world;

Where sweet content and sacred peace might dwell
And chace each anxious thought and care away;
Where no tumultuous passion might rebel,
Nor Virtue's angel dictates disobey:
Where Vice and Folly never durst intrude,
With their distorted forms to shock my eyes;
Where I might study to be wise and good,
Forget the earth, and commune with the skies:

Where no constraint my precious hours should give
To formal trifles or attentions low;
Where I might gain the end for which I live,
Unknown to others learn myself to know.

My soul, to custom's laws a slave no more,
On Contemplation's wings aloft should soar;
And Solitude my best companion prove,
Save when the radiant form of sacred Love,
Or still more sacred Friendship deign'd to shine,
And gild my humble roof with light divine.

Canst thou, Ambition, joys like these bestow?
Suspicion, restless Fear, and thankless Care;
These are the pleasures which thy vot'ries know;
These are the triumphs which thy fav'rites share.

Fame, Pomp, and Pow'r, with just disdain to view
Is more sublime than empires to command;
And nobler far our passions to subdue,
Than reign the tyrant of a subject land.

Can splendid Trifles, or imperial Toys
Give solid Happiness, like Virtue's Lore?
The Soul immortal scorns these empty joys,
Feels they are vain, and sighs for something more.
Let those pursuits be mine, of Reason born,
Which grace the bloom of Youth, and Age adorn:
Those magic Pleasures, those Delights refin'd,
Which Taste and Fancy give the feeling Mind:
These shall the calm of inward peace bestow;
A bliss thy votaries shall never know.

Cease then, Deceiver, I was ne'er design'd
In Fortune's lists to struggle or to shine;
Calm is my Spirit, and averse my Mind,
To ev'ry Tyranny, but most to thine!


CANTO II.
Soon as the Demon of Ambition heard
My words severe, a stern, terrific frown
Darken'd his brow, and from his angry eyes
Flash'd scorn indignant; roll'd into his cloud.
Swift, on the pinions of the Blast, he flew,
And instant vanish'd; when at once the air
Grew black and turbid; wing'd with livid flame,
Impetuous bursting from his cloudy cave,
Oblique, the Lightning darted; whilst aloud
The deep and awful voice of Thunder spoke!

I look'd, and all was chang'd; the steep Ascent,
The foaming Torrent, and the lofty Dome
Appear'd no more; a wild and barren Waste,
In russet Heath, and naked Horror clad,
Stretch'd far beyond my ken its dreary length;
Where nought of Verdure, Nature's chosen hue,
Refresh'd the wearied eye; but scatter'd wide
Some solitary shrubs of leafless Furze,
Which bloom'd with ductile Gold, and show'd at once
The Wealth and Poverty that reign'd around;
The last was real, but the first a dream.

While this capricious scene amus'd mine eye,
Before me sudden stood a horrid Form,
Uncouth, unlovely; by his locks he seem'd
The Heir of many Days; his locks of snow,
Uncomb'd and rugged, on his shoulders broad
Lay thinly scatter'd; and the hand of care
Had plow'd deep furrows in his wrinckl'd front.
Sunk in their hollow sockets, from beneath
The sable horror of his shaggy brows,
Keen glar'd his piercing eyes; of squalid hue
And length enormous, from his pointed chin,
His beard depended:  An unseemly garb,
Which scarce conceal'd the parchment of his skin
With rags dishonest, flutter'd in the wind.
With long and hooked nails his hands were arm'd,
Like Vulture's talons sharp; in which he held,
With eager grasp, a richly-blooming branch
Of golden furze, to tempt the greedy eye;
Then grinning fiendlike a malicious smile,
In Wisdom's borrow'd words he thus began:

Well hast thou judg'd, my Son, with just disdain,
To treat Ambition, and his phantoms vain:
But I have more substantial joys in store
For those who hearken to my prudent lore.
Me Folly's erring voice aloud reviles,
And sordid Avarice contemptuous stiles;
But fools alone will slight my sacred name,
Reject my proffers, or my pow'r disclaim.
Th' acute, the sober, and the truly wise,
Agree with one consent my worth to prize;
For what pursuit can more important be,
Than that, which gain'd, subjects the world to thee?
Which to attain, a happiness bestows,
That, nor disgust, nor disappointment knows.
And will not Gold do this?  Look round and say,
Where is the Pow'r that does not gold obey?
Almighty Gold to Guilt can friends procure,
And each defect of Mind and Body cure;
Bestows a charm on Age and foul Disease,
And gives deformity the pow'r to please.
Gold even to Infamy can fame dispense,
To Dullness judgment, and to Folly sense;
In vain Love burns, Ambition toils in vain,
While Gold with ease can power and pleasure gain;
Where is the wish that riches cannot buy,
Where is the want that that gold will not supply?

More had he said; but Patience could not bear
One moment longer such a theme to hear;
And Indignation, which my bosom burn'd,
These keen reproachful accents quick return'd.

Cease, odious monster, let thy rashness fear
Again with words like these to shock mine ear;
In me what sordid symptoms didst thou spy,
That thus my virtue thou hast dar'd to try?
When ev'n Ambition's proffers met disdain,
Could thy presumption hope my heart to gain?
Ambition is the vice of noble minds,
Where oft a home each brilliant virtue finds;
But in that breast where love of lucre reigns,
What mental excellence a place retains?
If Fate has doom'd my heart some passion's slave,
Let it be one at least that Nature gave;
Let Pow'r or Splendour all my thoughts inflame,
The love of Pleasure, or the love of Fame;
But save me still from one, whose base controul
Choaks ev'ry seed of Virtue to the soul;
Whose hateful presence Faith and Honour flies,
Religion languishes, and Feeling dies.

Thus rais'd beyond its proper bounds, my rage
Pour'd forth a torrent of disorder'd words,
And more had utter'd, when at once the sound
Of music, more than mortal, gently seiz'd
The captive ear, and fetter'd ev'ry sense
In silent rapture and attentive awe.

Approaching slow, a nymph was seen,
Harmony's inchanting Queen,
She, whose fingers rule the lyre,
She, whose charms the Bard inspire;
To deck her form with matchless grace
Each finer pow'r of Taste combin'd,
And to compleat her lovely face,
Majesty with Sweetness join'd.

Her cheek display'd in colours bright
All the bloom of gay desire,
And her eyes, of brilliant light,
Beam'd the strength of living fire.

Which oft she rais'd, in rapture high,
To meet the starry-fronted sky;
To her bewitching smile was giv'n
To lift the flaming soul to Heav'n,
And to her favour'd sons impart
The tuneful, feeling, ardent heart.

Of laurel triumphant a flourishing crown,
With roses and myrtle entwin'd,
Encircling her temples, hung gracefully down,
And braided her tresses behind,
Her elegant tresses of beautiful brown
Which wantonly play'd in the wind.

A mantle of green, of lively hue,
With Tyrian violets broider'd o'er,
Around her shoulders careless flew,
Girt with a radiant Zone before,

The Zone of Love, from which, unstrung,
The magic shell of rapture hung.

Where'er the music of her steps she turn'd
Thro' the bare glebe fresh flowerets burst their way;
In horror brown no longer Nature mourn'd,
But, cloth'd in new-born verdure, all was gay.

Rais'd by th' enchantment of her plastic eye,
Deep groves appear, with darkest umbrage crown'd,
Streams sweetly murmur, Zephyrs softly sigh,
And all at once, is Paradise around.

CANTO III.
Close by my side, the sacred Muse,
With smiles complacent, view'd me long;
Then fell her words like softest dews,
And thus inspir'd the love of song.

No more, Alexis, let thy wav'ring Mind
Be to its just, its proper bias blind;
To others leave Preferment's eager strife,
The pomp, the riches, and the cares of life:
Thine be the sweeter task, the nobler toil
With skill to cultivate the Muse's soil;
Each favour'd Name be thine the pow'r to praise,
And gild their mem'ries with immortal rays;
Thine be the song, whose ardent force shall prove
The Soul of Friendship, and the Heart of Love.
Perhaps the hand of laurel-wing'd Renown
Shall with the wreath of Fame thy temples crown;
Rouse then each thought of fire; thy time employ
While Song can yield a pure and perfect joy;
Before the hours of Grief, with sable wing,
Arrive to cloud thy morning's gaudy spring;
Tho' Song ev'n then can healing balm bestow,
And sooth, with lenient voice, the heart of woe;
Haste then to seize this doubly-dear relief,
Joy's sweet Companion, and the Friend of Grief.

The Queen of Rapture spoke; but ere my Soul,
In wonder lost, an answer could return,
The Fiend of Riches shook his hoary head,
And thus, in Friendship's guise, his speech resum'd.

Let not, Alexis, thy unwary youth
To this deluding Syren lend an ear,
Heed not her idle tale; be warn'd of me;
For else thou may'st to each alluring hope,
And ev'ry brilliant prospect, bid farewell;
If once thy tender bosom should imbibe
The cank'ring blight of her pernicious lore,
Adieu, at once, to ev'ry manly Thought,
And firm Exertion; Negligence and Sloth
Would seize on ev'ry Pow'r; the listless Mind
Ev'n from the slightest effort would recoil,
And deem it hardship more than Man could bear:
Oh then beware, and shun her fatal path,
It leads to Ruin and Repentance sure;
Her chief Companions are they not Contempt
And meager Poverty?  Much, much indeed
She will not fail to promise; laurel Crowns,
The smiles of Beauty, and the praise of Pow'r,
And Wealth, and Fame, and Honour &mdash; all deceit:
Mark but the hue of Fortune, which attends
Her greatest Favourites in ev'ry age;
Think of their Fates, and envy if you can.

How oft have those, whose bosoms ev'ry ray
Of Genius kindled, those by Nature blest
With Wit, and Fancy, and poetic fire,
Neglected languish'd out their weary days
In dull obscurity and sordid want!
How oft in vain Dependence sigh'd away
Their eager hours; and, after struggling long
With cruel Disappointment's keenest rage,
Sunk down at length, and yielded to the storm:
While none of all the base, ungrateful crew,
Whose hearts their comic Humour wont to chear,
Deign'd, with a smile of Comfort, to repay
The debt of Pleasure; and, tho' Pity's Heart
Had oft in Silence melted o'er the tale
Of fancied Grief, in magic numbers told;
Yet, shame to hear, no sympathetic Eye
The much-indebted tribute of a Tear.

Call first to mind the too much injur'd name,
The pride and Shame of Lusitania's Sons,
The only Glory which her Muse can boast;
An exile early from his native shore,
How long he wander'd over India's Realms,
Friendless and Poor, expos'd to all the Scorn
Of sordid Ignorance; to all the rude,
Unfeeling Intolerance of brutal Pow'r,
And blind, capricious Favour's causeless change:
Nor this the worst; a darker scene succeeds:
Ungrateful Lisbon, hide thy cruel head;
Couldst thou behold the faithful Negroe Slave,
Ev'n in thy streets, extend his wither'd Hand,
And ask a slender pittance, to support
The scanty Remnant of his Master's Life;
That precious Life, of greater value far
Than all thy slavish superstitious Sons&mdash;
Again let Earth expand her ample jaws,
And shroud those walls, within whose guilty verge,
The Man, whose patriot heart alone retain'd
The sacred spirit of his country's love;
The Bard, who tun'd his ill-requited lyre;
Denied the common charity of bread,
Which ev'ry worthless mendicant  receives,
Clos'd the dark ev'ning to succeeding times,
How great a curse superior talents be,
Where barb'rous ignorance despotic reigns,
Nor knows to value what it cannot taste.

Is not the fairy Bard, whose plastic art
Gives life and action to the airy forms
Of mental thought, and shrouds his sacred lore
In pleasing Allegory's mystic veil&mdash;
A mournful witness that my words are true.
Which for the Virgin Queen his fancy wove,
Her cold, unthankful, parsimonious heart
Left him to struggle on Hibernia's shore,
With all the horrors which on want attend:
Nor met the laughing Bard a milder fate,
Whose comic darts of Hudibrastic wit
Ev'n from the face of Spleen might force a smile;
Nor he, whose name is oft with Shakespear's join'd,
The tender Poet of domestic woe:
Whose Orphan, wedded in a luckless hour,
Oft as her story on the scene appears,
In all the native eloquence of grief;
Spite of that monster Fashion's impious scorn,
Calls from the gen'ral eye a vulgar tear.

How many luckless Sons of Fame
Could my dissuasive counsel name,
Who long had cause to rue the time,
In which they first began to rhyme?

Lo!  there thou seest the bar'brous Pontic shore,
Where Ister's rapid waves forget to flow;
Where Winter's keenest blasts incessant roar,
And all is horror and eternal snow.

To these inhospitable, dreary climes
Love's tender Teacher was, in mercy, sent
By him, to whom, in spite of all his crimes,
Each Roman Bard in slavish homage bent.

The sweet luxuriant Bard of Fancy there
Sev'n dismal years of horror dragg'd along,
And, wild with grief, distracted with despair,
Pour'd to the howling surge his plaintive song.

Ev'n there to Caesar's name he altars rear'd;
Still sought in vain permission to return,
Till Death, invok'd so soft, at last appear'd
And laid his sorrows in the peaceful urn.

The sprightly effort of his wanton Muse,
Tho' passion lurks in ev'ry luscious line,
Might sure, Octavius!  have obtain'd excuse
From Clemency so much extoll'd as thine.

Thus was the poor, mistaken Bard repaid
For all the varnish of a servile praise,
Which, on the cheek of Guilt profusely laid,
Adorns a Tyrant's name with borrowed rays.

Such is the fate the Muse's favourite knows,
And such the recompense which she bestows.


CANTO IV,
Thus far, in artful words of anxious fear,
Which Reason's sober sanction seem'd to wear,
The sordid wretch detain'd my patient ear,
And vainly tried, by all the specious art
Of Friendship's borrow'd zeal, to turn my heart,
From ardent thoughts, which breathe celestial fire,
To all the narrow aims of low desire.

Unanswered long the Heav'n descended Maid
Left not the words of Malice to remain;
A while with scorn the Demon she survey'd,
And thus at length replied her just disdain.

Far from my thoughts it was, thou grov'ling slave,
That I should ever waste my words on thee,
Or deign an answer to the feeble rage
Of thy invidious tongue:  But can I stand,
And tamely hear the sacred voice of Truth
Produc'd by thee to witness for a lie!
With what provoking insolence of scorn,
Veil'd in the artful, but transparent mask
Of gen'rous Pity and indignant Zeal,
Has thy exaggerating strength of words
Dwelt on the fate of my unhappy Sons!
A fate, which, far from a reproach to me,
Must sure appear to each impartial eye
The strongest argument which I could use,
The poison'd darts of Slander to repel,
And check the tongue of insolence like thine.

Doubtless the annals of historic truth
Too many dire, disgraceful proofs afford,
How strong the hatred Vice to Genius bears;
Which stand eternal monuments of shame
To ev'ry land, whose vile, corrupted Sons
Have tamely witness'd these ungen'rous deeds.
But, spite of all the fierce, inhuman rage,
With which the barb'rous, unrelenting pride,
Of brutal Ignorance, my Sons pursu'd
Thro' all the luckless tenor of their days,
Bloom not their laurell'd names, through ev'ry age,
With youth unfading in the voice of Praise;
And oft as Memory their fate recals,
Steals not the sigh unbidden from the heart
Of kindred sentiment and kindred taste?
Burns not the flame of Indignation strong,
Against their cruel foes, in ev'ry  breast
That owns Humanity's endearing sway?
If then, through all the dark and gloomy shade
Which Malice throws around, my conqu'ring light
With such a clear, enchanting lustre shines,
Can mortals doubt from which they glory sprung,
Or think its origin is not divine?

Small, I confess, is now the honour paid
To sacred Song, and cruel the neglect
Which merit meets in this degen'rate age
Of selfish maxims and inglorious aims,
Of Pride and Folly, Vanity and Vice,
When Love and Friendship are romantic deem'd,
And Truth and Virtue dare no more appear,
Nor in the words, nor in the deeds of men.
But hast thou then forgot, injurious slave,
How many splendid triumphs once were mine,
In those divine, and more than golden days,
By far the fairest in the Roll of Time,
When patriot Virtue, and heroic Zeal,
The Mortal Wisdom of the studious Sage,
And each enchanting, amiable form,
Of Grace and Beauty, all at once appear'd
In ancient Greece, the Nurse of Arts divine?
Fann'd by the fresh, invigorating gale,
Which  sacred Liberty spontaneous breathes,
And kindly cherish'd by the potent Sun
Of Public Favour, and of Public Praise,
These fairest flow'rs of intellectual bloom
Diffus'd a pow'rful odour, which, in spite
Of intervening ages, still retains
The matchless sweetness of its first perfume.
Hast thou forgot, with what propitious eye
The noble Sons of Glory then beheld
My now neglected charms; forgot, how oft
The words of Nations, and the deeds of Kings,
Gave proofs illustrious of the high esteem
In which their better judgment held my name?
But, lest the falsehood of thy crooked soul,
Perverse and obdurate, should still content,
Turn for a moment hence thy backward eye
On that bright Portion of the Race of Time;
Behold Conviction, and dispute no more.

Plac'd on the margin of the stormy sea,
That roars around Sicilia's fertile isle,
Lo!  there delightful Syracuse appears,
Which, by his valour sav'd, yon haughty Chief,
(Whose mantle coarse, and long, neglected hair,
The rude, unpolish'd manners strongly mark
Of Sparta's harsh, unamiable sons,)
Prepares to enter, with his laurel'd troops
Return'd in triumph from the close pursuit
Of all that Athenian Host, which long had fill'd
The war-encircled City with dismay.
Slow in the Rear, the Attic Captives march,
With steps reluctant, and reverted arms:
Before the rest the luckless leaders walk,
Whose virtues merited a milder fate:
Too late they wish their firmness had been more;
Too late regret, that their unsteady mind
To glorious death preferr'd ignoble chains,
And tamely sold their freedom to the foe.
But now the sequel mark:  Could'st thou believe
That haughty Syracuse, with conquest crown'd,
Her just resentment ever should forget,
Or word of comfort deign, or gentle deed,
To those invaders, whose ambition sought
To lay her tow'ring glories in the dust,
And make her crowded streets a desert waste,
Her matrons widows, and her children slaves?
But faithful Truth declares, however strange
The facts appear, that, while the Leaders fell
Unpitied victims to the public rage,
And those of lower rank were doom'd to bear
Eternal toil in subterranean caves;
All those, who, favour'd by the Pow'rs of Taste,
To their attentive Masters could recite
The moral verses of the Tragic Sage,
Whose birth the same victorious day beheld,
That saw the Persian tyrant's shameful flight,
And sacred Liberty to Greece restor'd:
From toil exempted, those distinguish'd few
Each mark of favour met, and, soon releas'd,
Return'd exulting to their native shore:
So much they priz'd the sweet, pathetic Bard,
And such their fondness for his weeping Song.

No less illustrious was th' example giv'n
By Philip's warlike Son, when, much provok'd,
His fatal rage chastis'd rebellious Thebes,
And gave to ruin all her walls contain'd.
At his command, the high-uplifted arm
Of dire Destruction there suspended hung,
And spar'd the Mansion visited by Gods,
Beneath whose sacred roof, in former days,
Dwelt the great Master of the Aeolian lyre.

Nor think the Annals of more recent times
No proofs afford on which my cause my stand,
Did not the Father of the Christian world,
The Medicean Pontiff, he, whose court,
Polite and brilliant, was the fair abode
Of ev'ry elegant enchanting art:
Did not his sov'reign Will aloud proclaim
(Ere yet so many realms his pow'r disown'd)
That those henceforth should Heretics be deem'd,
And ev'ry Christian privilege forego,
Whose daring judgment should presume to blame
The wild, the pleasing labyrinth of song,
Thro' which the careless Ariosto leads
Our steps bewilder'd, by the pow'rful charm
Of scenes attractive, and of artful ease.

Did not the Son of Albion's martyr'd King,
When to his regal seat at length recall'd,
When filial Love, and royal Justice doom'd
The dire contrivers of his father's fate,
Without distinction, for their crime to die:
Did not his Mercy spare the sacred head
Of Eden's blind and venerable Bard,
Whose strength of fancy, and superior art,
Command our wonder, and extort our praise:
Though well he knew, that, by mistaken zeal
For fancied Liberty, the Bard misled,
His fervid eloquence had oft employ'd
To wound the mem'ry of the murder'd Prince,
And justify to men, by specious art,
The vile Usurper's arbitrary deeds.

But why go on, examples to produced?
Those I have mention'd will suffice to show,
Beyond a doubt, that, from the first of Time,
In ev'ry nation, and in ev'ry age,
My name was hallow'd, and my pow'r confest.

But grant that all against me said were true,
That nought of brilliant or of splendid life
My sober vot'ries could expect to know:
Grant that the smile of Favour never chear'd
The Poet's toil, nor laurel deck'd his brow;
Grant that the Finger of admiring Fame,
Distinguish'd talents never pointed out;
That sacred Genius still were doom'd to lead
The creeping silence of his humble days
Remote from notice, in the misty vale
Of dull Obscurity's Cimmerian Isle;
Would these concessions all my pow'r disarm,
And nought of Love attractive leave behind:
Boasts not the influence of external things,
Which, like the sacred peace that Virtue gives,
Is plac'd superior to the reach of Fate,
And chears alike the cottage and the court:
Say, can the Rich, in all his hoarded wealth,
The Gay in pleasure, or the Proud in pomp,
A transport feel, which will in force compare
With that sensation strong, of keen delight,
Which plastic souls, and they alone, can know,
What time the fierce, expanding bosom glows
With sudden ray of more than human thought,
Darted impetuous from the holy seats
Of Inspiration, on the Lightning's wing
And caught with ardour by the rapid Mind?
Say, will the banquet Luxury provides,
The voice of Music, or the sprightly Dance,
The laugh by social merriment inspir'd,
Or ev'n the smile of Love, a pleasure yield
In sweetness equal to the mental joy
Which plays unmix'd around the heart of taste,
When from the gardens of eternal bloom,
Where Fancy scatters buds of ev'ry hue,
Discernment nice selects the fairest flow'rs,
To weave the garland of unfading praise?
These the pursuits which ever will supply
To Youth or age, the prison or the throne,
Without external aid, a sacred, pure,
Perpetual stream of elegant delight,
Whose source unfailing in itself is found,
Nor drawn precarious from a sovereign spring.
These are the pleasures riches cannot buy,
Which more than balance all the shocks severe,
Which souls, of feelings exquisitely fine,
Must oft, unpitied, be condemn'd to meet,
In daily commerce with a vulgar world
Of sordid maxims, and of narrow views,
Nor fir'd by Virtue, nor by Taste refin'd.

To these divine, inestimable gifts,
Be added now the kindling hope of Fame,
And where the Spirit of so gross a mold,
As long the bright Temptation could resist,
Nor instant rush to seize the proffer'd good?
Oh!  how unworthy of a Poet's name
Were he, whose heart one moment could delay
To call his own the darkest thread of life,
Which envious Fate for Genius ever spun:
If heav'n would kindle, in his favour'd breast,
The same immortal strength of sacred fire,
And Fortune promise, that the praise of men
With equal voice his glory should proclaim!

Shall then Alexis, with a temper form'd
For these attainments, vainly strive to cross
The will of Nature, and, with foolish pride,
Or by the false, malignant counsel sway'd
Of sordid interest and low desire,
Reject my bounties, and my favour scorn?
Oh!  no, I see the elevated eye
Of grateful rapture, and exulting joy,
Fix't on my features, with the gaze of love,
His free consent and willing mind declare.

Yes, thine I am, Seraphic Maid,
Immortal Queen of sacred song;
Thy pow'r my thoughts have long obey'd;
To thee alone my vows are paid;
To thee my fairest hours belong.

Since first my careless infant eye
Began the forms of good to spy;
Since first my Soul could beauty see,
My constant Heart was fix'd on thee.

And as more of Life I knew,
Stronger still the Passion grew,
All the force of Love to show,
Which for Thee my wishes know:
Where shall now the feeble Mind
Words of strength and rapture find?
Who thy Beauties ever knew,
Nor to thee Affection bore?
Who thy many Charms could view,
And not those Charms adore?

Thine is the eye of daring Roll,
Which space can ne'er confine,
Which glances quick from Pole to Pole,
With phrenzy half divine.

Thine is the Trumpet's lofty sound,
And thine the dulcet lyre;
Thine is the Wing that spurns the ground,
And thine the Soul of Fire.

Before those shades of colour'd Light
Which oft thy glowing Hand bestows,
Pale are the tints of Nature bright,
With which she decks the vernal Rose.

The Phantoms fair of elegant Desire,
Each Pleasure bland, and each enchanting Love,
With Zeal and Ardor, emulous conspire
Thy Charms to heighten, and thy Form improve.

On thee their choicest gifts the Graces show'r,
As round thy sacred Head they sportive play;
And o'er thy golden Dreams profusely pour
The magic Light of Fancy's living Ray.

The various passions too are all thy own,
Each Form of Terror grim and fair Delight;
In these thy best, thy chiefest Art is shown,
To paint their Gestures, and their Words aright.

Nor thine alone the mimic Art
Of fabled Joy and fancied Grief;
Thine is the task to mend the Heart,
And thine the balm of soft Relief.

To soothe the sadness of my pensive Mind,
Along thy flow'ry paths how oft I rove,
And leaving life and all its cares behind,
Haunt the sweet Mazes of thy fairy Grove!

Where Dullness ne'er intrudes with raven cry,
Where forms of vulgar Aspect ne'er appear,
Where all is Beauty to the charmed Eye,
And all is Music to the raptur'd Ear.
