Immortal spirits of the shell divine,
Whither ye wander in the Elysian grove,
Or glad attendants on the heav'nly nine,
By sacred Helicon delight to rove,
Ye parent bards of British verse &mdash; all hail!
Oh!  may my eager muse not wholly fail,
To sing your praises whilst she dares aspire,
Soaring aloft to tune the Theban lyre;
Or whilst she tries to stem aetherial height,
On trembling pinions guide her daring flight.

SPENSER.
What sound melodious charm my ravish'd ear?
"Now soft, now loud unto the winds they call."
Breathing o'er fairy scenes delightful near,
On painted meads, enchanting groves, they fall.
But lo, how chang'd the scenes of sweet delight,
Dire spectres terrify the astonish'd sight:
See warrior Knights in burnish'd arms array'd;
Start dreadful gleaming from the leafy shade,
Furious each ghastly phantom to engage,
Treason, despair, revenge, and frantic rage!

SHAKESPEARE.
Hail nature's child! &mdash; sweet bard of Avon hail!
Come solemn tragedy in sable plight;
With tresses streaming to the floating gale,
Come jocund Thalia join the sacred rite.
To deck his hallowed shrine, oh haste and bring,
Fair bays from Helicon's immortal spring:
My Muse &mdash; bright fancy lo before thine eyes,
Causes his own lov'd offspring to arise.
See Nature smile upon her frantic Lear,
There Hamlet raves &mdash; the fair Ophelia here:
View conscience tort'ring Richard's inmost soul,
See dire despair in Romeo's eye-balls roll,
Astonish'd I survey! &mdash; divinest bard,
May fame with endless meeds thy works sublime reward.

MILTON.
Beyond the sacred bounds of time and space,
Say might the ventrous muse explore her flight;
Or solitary think a path to trace,
Thro' the dark realms of chaos and old night?
Yes &mdash; by the bard of Eden led the sound,
Of verse divine could charm the deep profound,
Or rais'd aloft beyond this nether sky,
Could join the bright angelic choir on high:
Where veil'd in glory on his azure throne,
The Lord of nature reigns unbounded and alone.

DRYDEN.
Rehearse, Aeolian lyre, the praise rehearse,
Of him who made the Mantuan bard our own;
Sweet modulator of the British verse,
Whose flowing lays the Nine with glory crown.
Whither the classic bards with lustre shine,
Or satire teachers in thy works divine,
Wither Timotheous rapt attunes the lyre,
Charming the soul with more than mortal fire;
Still does thy verse oh Dryden, clear and strong
Bear with its force sublime the ravish'd sense along.

POPE.
What bard majestic following near I see,
Charming the floating air with silver sound;
While to his pastoral reed's sweet melody,
The woods, the hills, and bubbling streams resound.
Despairing Sappho near him chaunts her moan,
And Eloisa answers groan for groan:
But hark! &mdash; what sounds my trembling soul affright,
And chase the pleasing landscape from my sight,
What spirit wafts me where the Grecian pow'rs,
In dread array, besiege proud Illium's tow'rs;
Pope's genius leads me to the empurpl'd ground,
Whence madning clangors ev'ry sense confound:
I hear &mdash; the deaf'ning shrieks of wild despair,
While horrid furies hiss &mdash; and Gods contend in air!

YOUNG.
Oh lead me twine with cypress wreath my lyre,
And oft when Night hath Nature wrapt in sleep;
Let Young my muse mid dreary tombs inspire,
At the mad follies of mankind to weep.
Taught by his sad complaint no more I dread,
The grave but joyful muse among the dead,
And while Lorenzo's follies I despise,
Learn wisdom from the maxims of the wise;
Expecting in belief that solemn hour,
When death in glory lost, resigns his stated pow'r.

THOMSON.
But who amid the nine inspir'd throng,
With lays descriptive touch'd his gentle lyre;
Taught the sweet Seasons to enrich his song,
And painted Nature's scenes with varied fire?
For Thomson &mdash; Spring taught stormy winds to yield,
Repelling Winter with her verdant shield.
For him the sun in bright embrace could fold,
Bright Summer's charms and clothe her robe in gold;
For him rich Autumn bad her fruits to glow,
And hoary Winter clad the earth in silver snow.

GRAY.
Nor leave my muse, that poet bright unsung,
Who snatching fancy from the young ey'd morn;
His living cords with art unequall'd strung,
Soaring aloft on Pindar's eagle borne.
In freeborn confidence despising pain,
I hear his bard tyrannic might disdain:
Despair and wrath with varied force controul,
The burning anguish of his mighty soul:
I see him spurn with scorn the clifted height,
Sealing his woes in everlasting night!&mdash;
Yet not alone his odes shall charm my Muse,
Oft with the eve her footsteps meek shall chuse,
By sweet elegiac contemplation led,
With Gray and RUSTIC GRAVES in pensive mood to tread.
