TIME &mdash; MIDNIGHT.
Chequ'ring with silver rays the gloom of night,
The Moon majestic shed her gentle light;
When sad beneath a sable shade reclin'd,
With love-sick lays two shepherds charm'd the wind.
In mournful mood by turns they told their woes,
Spending in grief the time of still repose.

First Cannon sung &mdash; his love with scorn repaid,
Thus hope and sad despair his strains alternate sway'd.

"Come lovely Norah, charm my ravish'd sight,
And add to former transports fresh delight;
Disdainful fair &mdash; too beauteous in your face!
Ah why should scorn your beauteous looks disgrace?
No more in ringlets let me twine my hair,
No more sweet violets in my bosom wear;
No more my form in each bright fountain view,
Since Norah scarce esteems it worth her view.
Yet yield not fair one to illusive arms,
But bless a faithful lover with your charms;
Desirous flames still glow within my soul
And all my actions, all my thoughts controul;
With love I pine &mdash; love melts my soul away,
Come charming fair, this burning anguish stay;
Soft spring renews with green the rural bow'rs,
And cloaths in blooming pomp the balmy flow'rs.
The sun bids winter's ruffian storms to fly,
Melodious birds in nature's music vie;
Then haste and let us tread each verdant field,
To cull the sweets which Flora's bounties yield;
Come scornful nymph &mdash; no youth can offer more
Than the fair gifts I keep for you in store:
For you the Linnet prunes its golden wing,
The birds I rear for you in concert sing;
But now their notes my soul no longer charm,
For ah, your frowns my joys of life disarm,
My bees for you from rose to rose shall stray,
And each desert shall honied sweets display.
When autumn's riches feast the toiling swain,
What ripen'd fruits shall glow your taste to gain.
Few gardens can with mine in beauty vie
Blest by the favours of a southern sky:
My tender lambs that us'd to sport and play,
Fed by your hand no more &mdash; no more are gay.
But if your all reviving form appear,
Their sports again my pleasant meads shall chear;
Your favour'd doves again shall playful coo,
And the proud turkey boast his splendid hue.&mdash;
But whither wanders my distracted brain?
Unfeeling Norah glories in my pain:
And all my rural presents will disdain!

Some favour'd youth delighted with her charms,
She clasps enamour'd in her faithless arms;
While left a prey to cruel pangs of love,
With strains of sad despair I fill the grove.
Ah cease, ill-fated Cannon &mdash; cease to mourn,
Hopeless for love that never will return!
Farewell false Norah &mdash; since your faithful swain,
Finds all attempts to melt your heart in vain;
Farewell &mdash; to yonder rock that meets the sky
With frantic haste will wretched Cannon fly,
Plunge in the flood that deep beneath it flows
And put a fatal period to his woes.&mdash;
Then cease my muse!" &mdash; with heart-felt anguish stung,
Such lays as those dejected Cannon sung.

But far more sad were wretched Dillon's pains,
Soothing the silent night with mournful strains.

"Come Muse, (he cried) in plaintive mood resound,
The woes which Dillon's soul with anguish wound;
On Ellin's sacred grave sad dirges breathe,
While soft I deck it with a sable wreath.
Ah lovely nymph, and are your beauties fled,
Say are you mingled with the pallid dead;
Tho' nipt so soon your bloom of life is past,
Still shall my love to you unfading last.
Still shall your shade my pensive sorrows know,
Still shall your manes listen to my woe.
And oft as now while Cynthia's silver horn,
Glides thro' the clouds, I'll kiss your grave forlorn.
My promis'd bride! &mdash; and has malignant death,
Suck'd the sweet perfume of your vi'let breath?
Alas!  that he should dare our love to scorn,
To mock the transports of our nuptial morn!
Was it for him all shepherds call'd you fair?
For him with roseate wreaths I deck'd your hair
Did nymphs for him your bridal dress prepare?

Ah did the blooming rose and lilly vie
Refulgent on your cheeks for him to die?
Oh torture &mdash; torture &mdash; let me call to mind
That fatal morn when to the future blind,
Joyful I led you thro' the crowded way,
Blushing with sweetness like the rising day;
The brightest gems that southern mines cou'd prize,
Vied not in lustre with your dazzling eyes;
Love smil'd among your dimples, aim'd his darts,
From your sweet looks to pierce the coldest hearts.
But then your shape majestic and divine,
Each gazing shepherd envied you were mine!
Yet when my heart beat high to loves alarms
When close I prest you in my fervent arms,
Cold &mdash; sunk  your beauties from my fond embrace,
While sudden death made pale your lovely face:
My love &mdash; my Dillon &mdash; breathing slow you cry'd
Then gently bow'd your lovely head and dy'd.&mdash;
Oh what a scene was this &mdash; and do I live,
Does wretched Dillon such a fate survive?
From the dear charmer of his fancy torn,
The joys of life are now become his scorn.
With grief I fade, with hidden anguish pine,
Soon shall my corse, sweet Ellen, sleep by thine;
Then every rural nymph and swain shall say,
As chance by this ill-fated grove they stray,
'Beneath this turf, interr'd, lies side by side,
A faithful shepherd with his charming bride!'"&mdash;
