Slow broke the morning o'er a field of blood
Whence shrieks of agony arose to heaven;
Friends, brothers, that in fierce encounter stood,
Arm against arm, now prayed to be forgiven;
Twins, who in one fond fostering breast had thriven,
Father and son, in hostile ranks arrayed,
With gory hands unwashed &mdash; with souls unshriven&mdash;
Now wildly, tremblingly, for mercy prayed,
Who mercy had renounced; by War, fiends, murderers, made!

Slow broke the morning o'er that crimsoned field,
As fearing to withdraw night's shadowy veil:
Shines forth the sun &mdash; red horror stands revealed&mdash;
And nature shrinks aghast, and war grows pale!
In one wild ruin lies the grassy vale,
That smiled so peacefully but yester morn!
Oh that some hand could blot the guilty tale,
Ere to posterity its shame is borne,
A marvel and reproach, to ages yet unborn!

And thou, sweet injured flower, pure as the dew
That falls from heaven upon thy stainless vest
Oh!  weep'st thou not thy buds of varying hue,
Unwilling symbols of a murderer's crest?
Alas!  be roses red or white the best,
Their cause spreads far destruction o'er the land!
Where'er it rages like a deadly pest,
It arms 'gainst earth and heaven the erring hand,
And changes Britain's sons to a fierce ruthless band!

Shines forth the sun: &mdash; lorn maids and widows come
To bear the dying and the dead away;
Young hearts allured from happiness and home
To fight, to fall, in that unblest affray;
Now spurned &mdash; abandoned!  Oh his thirst allay
Who gasps in anguish! &mdash; still those piercing cries:
Bind up his wounds whose life-blood wells away&mdash;
Receive his parting breath, and close his eyes,
Whom whispered hope may cheer, ere yet his spirit flies!

One being there is that hovers o'er the slain,
Like some bright spirit sent to save &mdash; to bless!
See where she kisses off each crimsoned stain,
And clasps yon breathless form with fond caress:
Is this a scene for maiden loveliness?
He hears thee not!  Edmund hath run his race!
Pale lengthening shadows on his eyelids press,
Yet love undying lingers for a space&mdash;
"Margaret," he cried, "alas!  oh hide that angel face!"

"I come to save thee!" "Love, thou comest in vain;
I die; oh!  would to heaven I had been dead,
Ere thy dear scarf blushed with unhallowed stain
Of one whose life-blood dyes its azure red.
Oh!  look not on me thus:  ask not who bled
Beneath my brand; nor that soft hour recall
When at thy suit I swore no blood to shed
Of Margaret's race &mdash; 'twas in thy father's hall&mdash;
His falcon crest I knew not till I saw him fall.

"I swore &mdash; my faith is broken:  curse me not,
Sweet Love, I feel the fiery pangs within:
My fame is sullied by one demon spot,
Oh, what shall expiate that deadly sin!
Thou weepest, Margaret:  when foul feuds begin,
What eye the fatal issue shall foresee&mdash;
We met, we 'countered, 'mid the battle's din,
He fell, but oh!  the bolt recoils on me,
For have I not, alas!  sweet Love, lost heaven and thee!

"Thou weepest, Margaret &mdash; can thy gentle heart
Forgive so foul a wrong? &mdash; Oh could I live&mdash;
What tears &mdash; what penance &mdash; but, alas!  we part
Ere thy so guileless spirit can forgive!
Yet, oh!  sweet Margaret, let not hate survive
Thy Edmund's death; when o'er this wretched frame
The turf shall rise &mdash; will not thy pity shrive
The fallen wretch whom life, love, glory, fame,
Fled in one hour, and left to death &mdash; to shame?

"My breath grows faint &mdash; one last farewell &mdash; and then,
Oh quit this place! &mdash; Margaret, 'tis not for thee
To wander where war rages, and fierce men
Respect not youth or innocence &mdash; oh, flee
Yet turn once more, so may thy Edmund see
The angel form that, like its native heaven,
Smiles in bright mercy on a wretch like me,
Whispering my soul its frenzy is forgiven,
For this alone with death hath the lost Edmund striven!"

"Forgive thee, Edmund! &mdash; shall not I forgive
A death unmeant?  my father I must weep
While tears may flow, &mdash; yet oh!  my Edmund, live,
Live, and atone by penance stern and deep
Thy unconscious fault; then shall his spirit sleep,
That seems ev'n now to wander o'er the plain.
Ha!  'tis my brother!  shall his falchion steep
In thy dear blood?" &mdash; "Aye, by our father slain,
His blood shall flow!  Away, minion, you plead in vain!" 

"Mercy! &mdash; I know it not, thy guilty love
Hath been my guide to vengeance!  wouldst thou plead
For an assassin? &mdash; now, by heaven above,
By him our father bled, and he shall bleed;
'Tis meet atonement for a murderer's deed."
The dying man low murmured, "Love, farewell."
Pale Margaret saw her brother's falchion speed
Its deadly aim, and striving to repel,
Received the fatal wound, and faintly shrieking, fell.

Wild and aghast the wretched Hubert stood:
"I die," she cried, "dear Edmund, die with thee;
Shall not my blood atone a father's blood!
One kiss, sweet love, and I shall sleep with thee.
Dead! &mdash; dead!  Oh!  churl, thy Margaret thus to flee;
Hubert, my brother, kiss me ere I die:
Oh!  let us not in death divided be,
Whom deathless love united;" &mdash; with a sigh
Her seraph spirit fled to seek its native sky.

And where is Hubert?  in a lonely vale
Where through bright fields the rapid Calder flows,
Rises a tomb; around the marble pale
Twin-blossoms stray, the fair and blushing rose,
And there, at dewy morn and daylight's close,
A wretched maniac wanders through the gloom,
To the bleak night-wind breathes his frenzied woes,
Or raves round Edmund's grave and Margaret's tomb,
'Tis Hubert &mdash; masses all are vain to change his doom.
