TIME &mdash; EVENING.
'Twas when mild Eve taught brighter day to fade,
Involving prospect in her umber'd shade,
Dermot to Patrick, thus in simple strain,
Disclos'd the woes that rent his soul with pain.

DERMOT.
"Cease Patrick, cease to chaunt your lively lay,
Nor longer with your pipe conclude the day.
Alas, it ill beseems a wretched swain,
Oppress'd like you to raise a jocund strain.
Our daily earnings basely from us torn,
Times sad as these are hardly to be borne.
For me no joys my hapless bosom chear,
While want and slavery in my sight appear."

PATRICK.
"Dermot &mdash; too well I know my woeful state,
But say can sorrow free me from my fate;
Why should I quit my pipe for sad despair,
Nor hope that better days we yet may share."

DERMOT.
"Say witless swain, from whence proceeds your boast
Of good to come, when ev'ry hope is lost?
Think on the grievous state we now endure,
Ah dread what future sorrows o'er us lour.
Last night when after toiling all the day,
Spent with fatigue, homeward I bent my way;
Hard fell the rain, aloud the tempest blew,
As near my little mud-built cot I drew.
But ah, when near I came, with what surprize
No cot I saw, to bless my longing eyes.
Wishful around I gaz'd, but all in vain,
The more I gaz'd, the more encreas'd my pain.
For ah, my hut, which long had felt decay,
The ruthless storm at last had swept away!
Where is my wife &mdash; my babes &mdash; aloud I cry'd?
Alas!  alike with home, are they deny'd.
Scarce had I said, when lo, I saw them wait,
Shiv'ring with cold, before the parson's gate.
The pamper'd miser drove them from the door,
Nor for his tithes shew'd pity on the poor.
What should we do?  no home, we could acquire,
No bread to eat &mdash; no chill dispelling fire.&mdash;
On the cold ground an heap of straw we spread,
And sought repose beneath a dropping shed.
Ah, Patrick, say &mdash; involv'd in woes like these,
Can hope or patience lull my soul to ease?"

PATRICK.
"Such woes distress me, wretched swain, but cease,
Time may restore you to the sweets of peace;
Nor banish hope &mdash; a friend may yet devise
The certain means by which new joys may rise,
And scenes of plenty charm our longing eyes.
Nor does soft hope &mdash; a friend may yet devise
The certain means by which new joys may rise,
And scenes of plenty charm our longing eyes.
Nor does soft hope attune my pipe in vain,
For freedom yet may animate its strain."

DERMOT.
"Freedom!  ah Patrick, seek not to beguile,
Freedom with plenty long has left our isle;
Then say &mdash; how should they on our sorrows smile."

PATRICK.
"Then why since plenty quits our native soil,
Since here no joy rewards the peasants toil;
Since here the sons of Mammon fix their reign,
Eager for lucre &mdash; since they render vain,
The pangs of nature and the cries of woe,
Causing the peasant's grief apace to flow,
Why should we not to distant regions fly,
And reap delight beneath some kinder sky?
Tho' to our souls Ierne's clime be dear,
Tho' friends, tho' kindred, claim the parting tear,
Yet, when no more the air we breathe is free,
Where freedom is, there should our country be."

DERMOT.
"Sure any life exceeds the living here!
But say &mdash; to what new region would you steer?"

PATRICK.
"Ah Dermot, let us fly to those sweet shores,
Where softer skies enripen nature's shores;
Where men disdain to bear oppressive laws,
Where Gallic lillies blush in freedom's cause;
A clime on which the  sun delights to shine,
Blest with the olive, rich, the purple vine.
The thoughts of lovely France my bosom chears,
And hope expels the force of slavish fears.
There we no more shall yield to rev'rend knaves,
For there the Irish are not view'd as slaves.
But there, blest Freedom shall be all our song,
Whilst joy shall lead our golden days along.
Cease Dermot, cease then, farther to complain
But tune with me in hope this joyful strain,
"By emigration, yet sweet freedom we may gain."

DERMOT.
"Patrick &mdash; the prospect charms my ravish'd view,
Now Shanon's banks farewell, my native soil adieu!
Now will I tune with thee the vocal shell,
Now gentle hope my sorrows shall dispel,
And when we've gain'd a fit supply by toil,
For France, my Pat, we'll change this slavish soil."

PATRICK.
"Come then with me this night my cabbin share,
Come &mdash; with your wife, your babes and banish care.
On plats of gentle straw you shall recline,
On choice potatoes, salt and water dine,
And let us bear with such &mdash; we yet may swim in wine!
