TIME &mdash; MORNING.
Sicilian lays awake my gentle muse,
Nor let Ierne's isle her themes refuse.
Sweet themes!  which Pope hath tun'd with reed divine,
Which Colin's fancy favour'd, taught to shine.
Begin, soft muse &mdash; may glowing thoughts inspire
Thy rural warblings, with descriptive fire!

In Munster's province (when on zephyrs born,
With rosy smiles arose the balmy morn;
Unveiling purple prospect to the view,
Her steps advancing mark'd with silver dew)
Sad Connor, pensive, drove his fleecy care,
O'er pastures green, to crop their morning fare.
While dead to smiling scenes which joy impart,
The charms of morn delighted not his heart;
Tho' larks with louder music hail'd the day;
Tho' verdure smil'd beneath a pearly shower,
Tho' fragrance breath'd from every beauteous flower:
Yet his sad soul cou'd give no trace to woe,
While thus in mournful mood he taught his grief to flow.

"Farewell ye rural scenes that once could please,
No more the seats of joy and smiling ease;
Mute be my pipe, and must the vocal strain,
Which oft' hath made a wretched shepherd vain.
Now love itself my soul no longer charms,
No more I court fair Anna to my arms.
Adieu, ye sportive flocks, my pleasing care
No more with wanton bleatings fill the air;
Your faithful swain for ever from you turn,
In distant climates now is doom'd to mourn.
For ah!  no more (to sad despair a prey)
He means to spend in want the live-long day.
Farewell, my native land, alas!  farewell,
Thy scenes no more my sorrows can dispel.

"Ill-fated land!  unhappy native soil!
Gaunt penury rewards thy people's toil;
Chill want and dire oppression o'er thee sway,
Thy peace is fled, thy swains no more are gay.
No more in mazy dance they tread the green,
Whilst rueful grief in each sad look is seen.
The sable miser here, with greedy rage,
Tears from the wretched swain his scanty wage;
Despoils his flock, and lays his tillage waste,
To please his lust, or feed his pamper'd taste.
Justice no more exalts her equal scale,
But purple knaves o'er innocence prevail.
Farewell, my native land, alas, farewell
Thy scenes no more my sorrows can dispel.

"Fair are thy waving fields of yellow corn,
Which still with golden pomp thy vales adorn;
Ah, what, alas, avails thy golden shew?
An harvest rich but serves to mock our woe.
To foreign climes thy corn is borne away,
While misers leave us here, to want, a prey;
For them, betimes, in flow'ry spring we sow,
For them the spoils of luscious Autumn flow;
To them belong alone the dear bought gain
Of pinching labour, poverty and pain.
Yet, tho' the peasant's toil supports their pride,
His abject state in mock'ry they deride.
Farewell, my native  land, alas, farewell!
Thy scenes no more my sorrows can dispel.

"Fearless the horrid pomp, of war to face,
Thy sons, Ierne, are a dauntless race;
Eager in foreign climes the foe to brave,
Flows their best blood bright liberty to save;
But ah, they leave their native soil in vain,
Their offspring droop at home with want and pain.
The wretched mother smit with woe severe,
Droops o'er her starving babe the piteous tear.
And while she views her hapless infant die,
Implores from Heav'n "revenge," with frantic cry;
Then, in despair, dares death to give her peace,
And, wild with sorrow, wishes life to cease!
Farewell, my native land, alas, farewell!
Thy scenes no more my sorrows can dispel.

"But peace, my soul &mdash; say what avails thy woe,
Kind Heav'n, a lot more fair, can yet bestow;
To some propitious climate  let me fly,
Better abroad to live &mdash; than here to die.&mdash;
Some blessed land where freedom conquers pain,
Where useful peasants labour not in vain;
There o'er sweet meads by verdure rend'red gay,
My bleating flocks in harmless mood shall play:
There shall they crop at ease their leafy food,
Nor more for purple tyrant's shed their blood.
While unmolested in my rural cot,
Freedom shall crown with peace my happy lot.
Farewell, my native land, alas, farewell!
Thy scenes no more my sorrows can dispel."
