Spirit, that o'er the bosom of the deep
Didst guide the brave adventurer's early way
To those fair isles where southern breezes sweep
In murmuring silence o'er thy Cook's Morai;
Spirit that dwellest on the ocean spray,
Rid'st in the wind, and sportest in the beam,
With thee of late young Fancy took her way,
And lingering in the dale or by the stream
Of Pitcairn's Isle, she roved, enamoured of her theme!

Spirit, she wooed thee not to guide the bark
Of Slavery, across the peaceful tide,
Where men, who rose free as the matin lark,
Desperate, at eve, plunge o'er the ship's tall side,
Deep in the wave their chains, their woes to hide.
She wooed thee not to swell the waning store
Of drooping Commerce shorn of half her pride;
Nor sought the War, fell fiend, whose cannons roar
From Lusitania's plains to Norway's icy shore!

'Twas but to hang across yon towering palm
Her simple lyre; she sought that southern spring
That she might list while in the sea-breeze calm,
Waking the rustic music of its string,
Wild, faint, irregular, the echoes ring.
Hushed is the lay, frail warbling of an hour!
And Fancy, soaring on reluctant wing,
Forsakes the palmy grove, the jasmine bower,
And Friendship's purest bliss, and Love's celestial power.

Lingering and turning oft, coy Fancy flies
To woo the soft gales of Iberian plains,
Where Moors and Christians, mosques and convents rise
In visions arabesque or Gothic strains,
As Piety exults or Love complains.
Yet lists she still, as on Pacific seas
Another harp with nobler music reigns,
Flinging its bold notes on the southern breeze,
And swelling loud and deep its stately melodies.

Well might she list!  For with the classic lore
Of Ithaca and lovely Arcady
Came lofty praise of Pitcairn's pleasant shore;
And 'twas her strain inspired the minstrelsy!
Spirit, with healing on thy pinions fly,
And breathe soft balm upon the minstrel's head!
So shalt thou list again his harpings high,
When rosy Health shall hover o'er his bed,
And Genius his bright dreams and golden visions shed!
