Oh, mortal man, that would'st immortal be,
Tho' oftentimes, beneath the weary load
Of life, half sinking, when mortality
Might prove the kindest boon by heaven bestow'd:
(For who would wish to linger on the road;&mdash;
Who that can view the scene with reason's eye;
Loathing, and loathsome, as a lifeless toad:
Who would not, rather, be content to die;
When, in that privilege, release from pain is nigh.)

Yes, mortal man!  environed as thou art,
With woes unnumbered, in this vale of tears;
Griefs, that distract the brain, and rive the heart;
Oppression's wrongs; pride's contumelious sneers;
Wants, frustrate wishes, crosses, cares, and fears;
'Tis ev'n surprising, oft, thou canst forbear;
And not, thyself, anticipate the sheers
Of Atropos; much more, that thou with care
Shoulds't be in love; and wish eternal thy despair.

But, mortal man!  or mortal Englishman,
At least, I may, with truth, affirm of thee!
Of all the ills thou bear'st, thy heaviest ban
Is that relentless, shameless mockery
Of human woes, misnomen'd equity;
Which, while with specious name and fair pretence,
It lures its victims into Chancery,
Seeks but to glut itself at their expence:
And never, till their purse is empty, frees from thence.

"There's ne'er a wrong without its remedy,"
(Says Blackstone, 'midst his other specious lies)
"For, where the law stops short, this equity
Steps in; and its remedial aid applies:"
That is to say, if you would sacrifice
Your all, and not be cumbered with the care
Of worldly gear, to make secure the skies,
Your most effectual riddance of the snare,
Is &mdash; to encounter equitable wear and tear.

"What to the poor is given," is only lent,
With vast increase to be repaid in heaven:
Ev'n so, whate'er in equity is spent,
May well be said to th' giver to be given:
And, then, again, 'tis thus, most truly, striven,
At the strait gate, to enter; while the loss
We bear of worldly substance, and, heart riven,
Whole years of anxious nights are doom'd to toss,
Bearing, in heart and soul, the blest Redeemer's cross.

In spacious vale, not close to river's side;
Nor, yet, from mighty river far remote;
On which, of every realm, with every tide,
The rarities and riches largely float;
Where bustling crowds, for lack of bridge, or boat,
Ne'er check their speed; so numerous ply the oars;
Where, kinder still, at each convenient spot,
A lofty pile, on stately arches soars;
And joins, in amicable embrace, divided shores.

Stupendous works!  Arabian visions true,
(So magically beautiful, and grand
Is your effect,) may be pronounced, in you
At sight of which, Enchantment drops his wand;
While stedfast those unrivall'd arches stand,
For strength, and symmetry, alike admired,
Which Lambeth Marsh have wedded to the Strand;
What nobler monument can be desir'd,
To that fam'd field, on which Napoleon's pride expired.

Full near the centre of the vale, 'tis known,
Where laves this prince of floods his northern lands,
From his left bank, some triple cast of stone
Removed, a castle &mdash; yet no castle &mdash; stands:&mdash;
No castle, as designed by builder's hands
Since, neither moat, nor battlements are seen;
Nor loop-holed tower the distant view commands;
And keeps a jealous watch on all between;
Nor central keep high towers, of Atlantean mien.

But, yet, a castle, fortified so well,
To baffle every effort of the foe;
That Hercules, who burst the gates of hell,
Might hardly work this castle's overthrow;
Yet, ne'er did monster-ridden region moe;
Nor e'er Augean stable half so much,
As this abominable house of woe,
The wrong-redressing hand require of such
A champion:  would to God, 'twere once within his clutch!

Athwart the vale, with weary length, extends,
And snaky curvature, a gloomy lane;
Not more resembling, by its sinuous bends,
The serpent tribe; than, by the snaky train,
Who thither flock, and there pursue their gain:
Hark, the loud dissonance of Serjeant's Inn,
Where Justice blushes to behold her train!
Of baiting beggars, hark, the ceaseless din!
While cheek-by-jowl, judge, juggler; knave, and fool drop in.

Beneath a Gothic arch, an entrance
From hence, into the Castle's inner court
(For, outer court the lane itself supplies)
On either side the gate-way, as in sport,
And childish mimickry of frowning fort,
In mockery, as it were, of muniment,
So gross, without engrossment, stands a sort
Of semblance of a brick-built tower, content
To counterfeit defence; and ape a battlement.

And, higher up the lane, with fairer face,
Of chiselled stone, where store of windows high
O'er blank identity diffuse a grace,
By lightness added to solidity,&mdash;
An elevated structure meets the eye;&mdash;
With wings 'tis flank'd, more lightly built of bricks:
The real entrance here is thought to lie:
For here their residence the porters six,
To whom it appertains to grant admittance, fix.

Which is, alone, effectual:  for the boon
Unasked of these, to ope their private door,
You're just as much within, as in the moon,
Altho' its inmost chambers you explore:
And, as the chief, who sought the Stygian shore,
His golden branch, the moment he displayed,
Seem'd to gruff Charon worthier, than before;
So, here, you'll find of gold the winning aid;
The more you seem to have; more smooth the way is made.

Westward, the castle yard a garden bounds:
Alternate walk and lawn its simple style:
Long rows of lofty elms o'ershade the grounds,
And bid perennial spring around them smile:
Eastward, the garden views a stately pile;
Designed with taste; of execution rare;
But incomplete, for scoffers to revile;
Emblem of what's but too familiar there,
Where brightest hopes, so oft, prove castles in the air.

And, now, the inner court while we approach,
Our entrance making from the western side,
Far be it, with feet profane, that we encroach
On realms, so fenced by prejudice and pride,
(Despiting th' awful powers who there preside)
Without due form of words, to deprecate
Their wrathful indignation, first applied;
As, by the Mantuan bard was done, the hate
Of hell to soothe, when he its horrors would relate.

Ye gods, or demons! &mdash; ministers of light,
Or darkness!  which it likes you best to hear;
(Tho' likelier far it seems, you serve the night;
So dark your ways; your sight so seldom clear)
Ye powers, to whom 'tis giv'n to domineer,
In these abodes; and, in the sacred name
Of conscience royal, realms to shake with fear!
What I have heard, permit me to proclaim;
Your peace it can't disturb:  for you're in league with shame.

A spacious quadrangle, at first, we cross;
One side of which to th' garden open lies:
And, here, without the aid of fort or fosse,
Impregnable, the castle meets our eyes:
Not frowning fierce, in castellated guise;
But, rather, of an inoffensive mien:&mdash;
Thus, worldly aims affecting to despise,
Full many a wolf, in sheep's attire, is seen;
Prepared to smile and smile; and stab, and stab between.

But view the Gothic windows, richly bright,
With blazonry of deeds, and worthies rare,
That cast a chastely-dim, religious light,
You'd almost think that house, a house of prayer:
Where penitence its breast, to heaven, lays bare:
Of whited walls, I do admit, the view
Might lead the godly to suspect a snare;
Because, of whited sepulchres what's true,
Might applicable prove, ye whitened walls, to you!

And, never, did that gospel truth a case
More aptly fit, than, here, we have at hand;
Where, under equity's dissembled face,
The thousand arts of hell embodied stand,
To scatter guilt, and terror, o'er the land;
Circling this hall, with lantern on its roof;
As if to seek, like him, with torch in hand,
In broad day-light, an honest man; in proof,
That all, who bear the name, keep not far hence aloof.

What tho', with dead men's bones, a real tomb,
It be not crammed; here, woe-begone, distract,
Full many a wretch that's living, courts his doom,
And, oft, anticipates, by impious act:
Reckless to what vile spot his bones be pack'd,
So he but shuffle off the load of care,
And troublous thoughts, with which his brain is rack'd:
For, here, a giant fell, as ever bare,
The fellest of fell dams, resides, ylcleped &mdash; Despair,

Whose name the castle bears.  His aspect wild;
His large, blear, blood-shot eye, that never beams
With joy, nor into lustre is beguil'd;
(Save, when, perhaps, with casual glance, on streams
Of suicidal blood, it lights) but seems,
Immoveably, still, fixt on vacant space,
(As somnambulo's, who walks and dreams)
What pen, or pencil shall sustain to trace?
I shudder to contemplate ev'n th' ideal face.

Much more, its Gorgon terrors to behold,
With eye of flesh, the stoutest heart of man,
Might well appal; or, like the shield of old,
To petrifaction freeze, whoe'er would scan,
With stedfast gaze, that corpse-like visage wan;
That care-worn cheek; those lineaments immane;
O'er which a cloud, big with tremendous ban
On man's existence hangs; pronouncing vain
His joys, his hopes, his fears; and death his only gain.

Darkling, he sits, with folded arms:  around,
His various implements of death are strewn
Pistols and pogniards overspread the ground,
Promiscuously, in heaps, together thrown;
And rusty razors, strangers to the hone;
Yet keen of edge, to set the spirit free;
Nor is the poison'd chalice here unknown;
Nor rope, with fatal noose; nor gallow-tree;
Nor giddy beetling rock, that overhangs the sea.

His restless mind is, ever, on the stretch;
And horror, only horror, is its food:
Hope it can prove delusion; and the wretch,
Who entertains it, one of folly's brood;
Or born of madness in her wildest mood:
One cheering ray athwart this dismal gloom
Hope never darts; nor would, if she were woo'd;
Since, but to enter, were to find her tomb;
Or only serve to light the demon to his doom.

The darkest view of every object, still,
It welcomes; and its reasoning powers employs,
The universal prevalence of ill,
From thence, t' infer &mdash; a doctrine which destroys,
Or saps the root, of &mdash; all terrestrial joys
And gives despondency a boundless scope.
And, thus, the sweetest cup of bliss alloys,
With poisonous mixture, by excluding hope;
And leaving heartless man his dreary way to grope.

When, over-strained, his faculties, to sleep
Yielding, would taste the luxury of repose;
And o'er his frame, with stealthy pace, to creep
Is felt its influence; and his eye-lids close;
Forth from its cell th' unbodied spirit goes;
(Like th' unclean spirit known to Gospel lore)
To seek its rest, amid surrounding woes,
In scenes congenial; where the mingled roar
Of wrecking winds and waves is heard on Godwin's shore.

While, far at sea, some tempest-riven bark
Yields to the fury of the conquering wave;
Or portly vessel, floundering, in the dark,
On hidden shoals, prepares a wat'ry grave,
For many a gallant soul, no longer brave;
(Tho' often brave, in battle field, believed)
Who clings to life; and, craven-like, would save,
By swiftest flight; if flight could be achieved;
But there's a sentence past, which may not be reprieved.

An anxious group of females crowds the beach,
Heartless:  for why? &mdash; their hearts are out at sea:
One asks a lover; one a husband; &mdash; each
Would fain believe that vessel is not she,
Which bears the bosom, where her own would be:
Loud roars the surge; the burthen of the blast,
That whistles by, is wail and misery,
With mingled shrieks:  the peep of dawn, at last,
Discovers, on the beach, some lifeless lover cast.

At times, when winter floods their voice upraise,
And howling demons on the tempest ride,
O'er craggy steeps the wandering spirit strays,
Along some deep, dark river's dreary side;
And wistfully surveys the big swollen tide,
Still gathering bulk, and threatening to o'erflow
Its utmost bounds; and scatter ruin wide:
While, ever and anon, the shriek of woe
Comes whistled in the blast:  or sinks in cadence low.

Or, where, upon the edge of heath, or moor,
Some lonesome cot the bitter blast sustains;
And humble toil, tho' sorely pinched, and poor,
Contrives to save a pittance of its gains:
Of hoarded gold the rumour, soon, obtains:
The murderous gang have mark'd it for their prey:
Th' unguarded hour arrives:  deep silence reigns:
Bolts yield:  unheard, the ruffians make their way;
'Tis but a moment's work to ransack, and to slay.

Hark, 'tis the cry of fire!  along the streets,
Contending engines scatter loud alarms:
With hideous glare, the reddening aether meets
The startled eye:  each lane and ally swarms,
With hastening crowds, whom midnight horror charms:
See yon devoted house!  the flames devour
Its lower parts:  with infant in her arms,
In vain imploring th' aid of earthly power,
In vain the powers above, t' avert the fatal hour,

A wretched mother, high above, is seen,
Full anxiously, to scan the giddy height;
Crazed is her look, and desperate is her mien;
(Once witnessed Fleet Street such appalling sight,
Where memory, still, is haunted with the fright)
Bereft of hope from flames her babe to save,
She casts it headlong down, and bids good night,
Then, sinks, herself, into a fiery grave:
The spirit hovers there: &mdash; nor better food would crave.

Where pestilence in darkness walks; as, when
A dire quotidian scourge afflicts a host;
And spreads delirium, (witness, Walcheren,
Where, if but sparingly Britannia boast
Of laurels gathered on the swampy coast,
May be, but few survived to tell the tale.)
The spirit loves to stray, from post to post:
For there is found th' excess of human bale;
And fiercest of extremes, alternately, prevail.

A burning fiery, furnace is the brain;
Which, heated to excess, prolific grows;
And teems with monstrous births; while these, again,
But serve to aggravate a parent's throes,
By added heat; till so intensely glows
The sultry region, that th' effect of fire,
Is changed; and cold more fierce than Zembla knows,
Burns frore with equal virulence of ire;
Till life, grown second death, would fain, but can't expire.

And, then, the frightful images, the while,
Which crowd the morbid fancy, who can tell?
The fiend-like faces, whose malignant smile
Of scorn, or ghastly grin of hate, might well
Become the foulest messengers of hell:
Then, conscience rouses all its scorpion train,
And memory ransacks every secret cell,
To conjure up, whate'er may ring with pain
The recollection; long, tho' dormant it has lain.

Thus is the spirit occupied, while snores
The giant bulk, in sleep's embraces fast;
But seeks, again, its mansion:  and restores,
Duly, sensation to his frame.  Aghast,
That moment, up he starts, as if the last
Dread trumpet's clang resounded in his ear;
And worlds to atoms crumbled at the blast,
Amid devouring flames:  he wakes: &mdash; the fear
Is past:  'twas all a dream:  there's no combustion near.

His cave, or dungeon, to describe, &mdash; its size,
And site &mdash; the muse might here her pains bestow,
(For tho' 'twas, never, yet, by mortal eyes,
Beheld, who thence returned the truth to shew;
Yet may th' immortal muse be thought to know,
Who compasseth creation in a dream;)
But 'twill suffice to tell, that, deep below
The castle, is its place, where gladdening stream
Of day-light never pours; &mdash; ne'er darts the solar beam.

That it communicates, is, likewise, clear,
(Like that Avernus known to classic song,)
By subterraneous passage, with the drear
Abodes of Tartarus, by which, the throng
Of spirits bad, whose muster is so strong
In these environs, facile egress find;
And pass, repass, compendiously along;
To execute, whate'er th' infernal mind,
Supreme, vouchsafes to bid, in malice to mankind.

The only light that glimmers thro' the cell,
Along the self-same channel upward flows,
And is reflected from the brow of hell,
When more than wontedly the furnace glows:
A certain lurid lucidness it shows;
Like the sun's orb thro' fog's dense medium seen:
Or maniac's rueful moment of repose
Which only serves, while it removes the screen,
That hides him from himself, his agonies to keen.

For 'tis essential to the giant's peace,
(A peace which dies, when horrors cease to feed)
That darkness; &mdash; thickest darkness &mdash; never cease,
Save, more terrific, in its room, succeed,
That light, which hell's dark womb, alone, can breed,
Called darkness visible; whose property
'Tis to discover nought but woe, the weed
Of hellish, and of earthly villainy,
In doleful shades, th' abode of endless misery.

What food sustains him; how, and whence procur'd
Behoves, it, next, the muse should bring to light.
(Such vulgar notices must be endured,
However out of taste when we indite
The tale of amorous, and adventurous knight;
Who lives, of course, superior to the law
Of nature, only born to love and fight)
Must be endured, I say, nor deemed a flaw,
When th' hero of the tale exists but for his maw.

"These little things are great to little men:"
(For Goldsmith's apophthegm will here hold good)
A giant's meal may well a poet's pen
Employ, when poets are his choicest food;
For not a few, by poverty subdued,
Have rushed, with open eyes, upon his lair;
And more, perhaps, their melancholy mood
Indulging, been beguiled into the snare;
And yielded up their lives, the victims of despair.

This cannibal (so call the monstrous birth:
(For with peculiar force the name applies)
Nor winged fowl, nor beast that walks the earth,
Nor other creature underneath the skies,
E'er tastes, but only human sacrifice;
And with the blood of man his thirst allays;
And (what must equally create surprise)
By voluntary deaths, their wretched days
His several victims end; and by their several ways.

When once within his grasp, he gives the choice
Of death, but, never, is the option given,
To measure back their steps, and to rejoice
In their existence, and the light of heaven:
His cave once entered, they, per-force, are driven
The number of his victims to encrease:
Yet many a one (and happy he!)  heart-riven
Without self-immolation finds release,
And (tho' of broken heart) he dies with God in peace.

But, how this cave is entered, from above,
May be enquired; &mdash; where lies the entrance door:
Since, doubtless, were it known, their zeal to prove
For God and man, ambitious minds would soar
To th' hope of conquest; and would dare explore
His den, and drag the monster to his doom:
But be it known, that hope is hope no more,
When once it enters this infernal gloom:
That moment moults its wing, and loses every plume.

And, therefore, does the door way lie concealed
From all but such as feel the wish to die;
And never was, nor will be e'er, revealed
To bold adventurer, who the jeopardy
Of life would scorn, looking to victory;&mdash;
Which hope implies, where hope can never guide.
To those, who wedded are to misery,
Too obviously the portal opens wide:
'Tis here &mdash; 'tis there &mdash; above &mdash; below &mdash; on every side.

Nor, only, in this castle and domain,
Adjacent square, umbrageous walk and bower;
But, every where, in city, grove and plain;
At every season, and at every hour;
Especially, when skies autumnal lowr,
And frightful fogs deform the waning year;
And languid life deplores its lifeless power,
A gate is open, and a way is near
To that terrific spot, th' abode of guilt and fear.

But, here-abouts, peculiar ills abound;
Temptations lurk; and snares are in the way;
At every step, he treads on treacherous ground,
Who, lost to hope, is destined here to stray:
There's not an avenue but might betray:
For, here, the monster's emissaries lie
In ambush, for the wretched, night and day:&mdash;
The vampires, who, his cravings to supply,
Would first unpeople earth:  and then invade the sky.

The chief of these are &mdash; Disappointment &mdash; stern
Of look; of desperate, yet dejected air;
Less than Lavater's glance would soon discern,
From all his traits, his kindred to Despair:
For God or man he nothing seems to care:
A dreadful purpose in his eye you read:
His brows the settled gloom of sadness wear:
His scowl oblique, and teeth on edge but heed:
Less splenetic than he, would smile o'er bloodiest deed.

And, not to simple act would he confine
His murderous aim:  nor suicide alone
Project or perpetrate:  in every line
Of that grim face, the misanthrope is shown,
To whom the voice of pity is unknown
Who, fallen from lofty hopes, his abject head
No more to raise, would wish the world o'er-thrown;
And universal ruin round him spread;
And total darkness left the burier of the dead.

Anxiety, of features less immane;
And count'nance less ferocious, than distrest;
Where hope, deferred, till hope is felt with pain,
Deep lines hath drawn, and Care's dark form imprest:
Peace no asylum finds within his breast:
Incessant watchfulness hath dimmed his sight;
His burning temples strangers are to rest:
The day too tardily brings on the night;
More tardily, the hours of sleep &mdash; returning light,

Akin to him, and, close upon his heels
Still following; as the blossom does the leaf:&mdash;
Distraction, by his frenzied look, reveals,
Of mental maladies that he's the chief:&mdash;
To him belongs that poignancy of grief;
That potency to rend the soul in twain&mdash;
As stoutly bids defiance to relief,
From opiate, anodyne, or soothing strain;
And well might he be called the tyrant of the brain.

Wildly impatient is his look:  his eye,
Like fierce hyena's pacing round his cage,
Rests not; but still some friendly hole would spy,
Thro' which to make his exit, from the stage
Of misery, and in death the heat assuage,
That thro' his palpitating temples glows:
Writhed are his cheeks and pale; but, less of rage,
Than mental agony that paleness shews:
Those pale and quivering lips bespeak acutest throes.

Mockery, with grin of scorn, upon his face,
That tries to ape a smile, when you are near;
But, still a smile, that bids you feel disgrace;
And know your betters; and be taught to fear:
His lips a whisper have, for every ear;
Pass where you may; his eye a glance oblique,
Sent after you; and then, anon, you hear
Your name, pronounced, as loud, as he can speak:
Anon, a laugh ensues; while off you, fain, would sneak.

This busy-meddling fiend the peace of mind
Of many a mortal has contrived to break;
Yea, ev'n among th' immortals of mankind;
Themselves tho' licensed lives, at will, to take;
And hearts to rend, by whole-sale, or to shake;
Who might be thought from such annoyance free:
One, literally, he made the world forsake;
Tho' tongue-proof, pen-proof, bullet-proof was he;
And all but proof against the devil &mdash; Castlereagh.

And who is he, &mdash; that fiend of haggard eye,
Lank cheek, and squalid beard, and lantern jaw:
Habiliments that would disgrace a stye
Of belly gaunt, and ever-craving maw,
That stops not to enquire, if roast or raw:
Importunate of manner:  hardly kept
At distance:  feeling not the sense of awe,
For decency, or legal bounds o'er-stept; 
That self-same meagre fiend is Beggary y'clep'd.

A son of Belial claims to be his sire,&mdash;
Profusion: &mdash; harlotry his dam; but, here,
'Tis whispered, that his origin is higher;
And that, on equity, the proof is clear,
This scare-crow was begotten, by a peer
Who ever yet disclaimed Profusion's kin;
And, who, if we may credit what we hear,
Is more of kindred to the counter sin;
At which profusion may, with equal justice, grin.

Rage, frenzy, fury, or whatever name
Besides, will best yon frightful form befit;
Compared with whom, the rest appear but tame;
And might be thought endowed with sober wit!
One while in moping mood behold him sit,
Fixing on vacancy an ideot stare!
Then, laughing wild!  anon, the raving fit
Comes on! &mdash; Then see him gnash, and foam, and tear;
And hear him imprecate, blaspheme, and swear!
This same is Guilty Purpose, caught in his own snare.

Yon little Syren sister!  mark her tear-
ful eye, that loves communion with the ground:
One would not think that she, to cater, here
For that man-slaying monster, would be found;
And, hark her voice! &mdash; the sweetly-plantive sound!
And mark her pensive air, and modest mien!
Her unobtrusiwe bashfulness! &mdash; around,
If she but cast a look, a blush is seen
To mantle o'er her cheek, as tho' her shame to screen.

Yet, is this little syren, busily,
In that unhallowed ministry employed;
And, in her coyness, there's a witchery,
Which many a good tall fellow hath destroyed:
She tempts to solitudes; and bids avoid
The busy haunts of men, and noise of folly;
Suggests, what heavenly raptures are enjoyed,
In shady walks of cypress, yew, and holly;
Bid from the garish eye of day, with &mdash; Melancholy.

And, when her votary once has learnt to, stray,
And own her for his solitary guide;
Such is the fascination of her lay;
So sadly-sweet; so artfully applied;
He hates the world &mdash; its flimsy pomp and pride;
He scorns the busy hum, and haunts of men;
He hates, at last, himself, and can't abide:
Then does the Syren her advantage ken;
And opens him a way to the destroyer's den.

Such are the shadowy beings who maintain
Incessant watch, on this terrific spot;
Still sedulous to do the will immane
Of him, whose cravings never are forgot,
Whene'er they witness hopelessness &mdash; the lot
Of most, whom they discover moping here:
'Gainst various subjects variously they plot;
As dreaded ills, at distance seem, or near:
One they allure to death; another drive with fear.

But shadows, here, are not the only evils,
That man's last hope convert into a curse:
Some say, the place abounds with human devils;
And that the forms substantial are the worse:
Far be it, that I should call them so, in verse:
For verse may live, when tittle-tattle's dead:
And, therefore, is it better to rehearse
Substantial facts; and leave it to be said,
By others, what vile cap best fits each hated head.

Besides, ill names a dead advantage give
To carping curs, who only read, to blame:
Tho', simultaneous, in their noddles live
Scarce two ideas; yet, for shame!  for shame!
Is ever on their tongues at naughty name:
'Tis like a dagger, put into their hands,
By their antagonist, to stab his fame:
This every fool, and, coxcomb, understands:
At naughty name his eyes turns up; his palms expands:

Moreover, there's an adage, trite, and true,
(I say not whether Solomon's or not)
But, 'tis an old one &mdash; give the devil his due&mdash;
Which should not, in such instance, be forgot:
Yet, somewhat dubious might appear, I wot,
Its due observance; if his name were given
To natures, not behind his own a jot,
In malice; but, to vindicate the leaven,
Wanting his plea of hate for hate, and war with heaven.

Of heavenly bliss, their birth-right, dispossest,
By arbitrary power, hells brood maintain,
They do but seek their own &mdash; their native rest;&mdash;
Or, pain inflicted to repay, with pain:
But these earth-born must needs reverse the strain;
Who, void of all pretensions built on birth,
Have had the luck a world of wealth to gain;&mdash;
To find (instead of lose) a heaven, &mdash; on earth:
Where thousands, good as they, find, hardly, home and hearth.

Taught by that power, whose mercies have, on them,
In measure, infinite almost, been showered;
In length of days, health, wealth, and power to stem
The tide, by which the weak are over-powered;
Or, vainly striving, in the gulph devoured;
One would expect their hand out-streched to save;
Their stern rebukes, in more than thunder, poured,
And God's own words &mdash; "thus far insulting wave
No farther &mdash; here be staid:  approach not to enslave."

Oh, what a proud prerogative it is,
To stand between th' oppressor, and opprest?
What more, than mortal fame, were, justly, his,
Who should not stand, stock-still; but, in his breast,
Arouse the lion; and confound the nest
Of harpies, who are fattened on delays;
Till ruin stares, ere wrongs can be redrest,
Poor suitors in the face; and end their days
In wretchedness and want; or desperation slays!

This were the conscience royal to adorn,
And make its lustre, as its meaning, bright
To bid th' effulgence of the fairest morn
Rise on the gloom of that infernal night,
Which, palpably, o'er spreads the foulest blight
Still hovering o'er our hopes, with raven wing:
This were the realms of woe to bless with light;
The lowest vallies teach to laugh and sing;
Despondency bid hope; and bless the name of king.

And who, that has a conscience of his own,
Or wish to dignify declining age,
Would e'er permit the conscience of the crown;&mdash;
That royal lion, who, with generous rage,
Should endless war against oppression wage,
To be a terror to the weak alone;
To be a show-man's lion; and his cage
Ne'er opened; nor the royal prisoner shewn;
Except to those, whose worth their purse, in hand, makes known.

To be a name that fills the heart with dread,
Instead of teaching it, with hope, to beat;
To be an aegis, with Medusa's head,
Before the powerful held, to frown defeat,
On all that dare with hostile eye to meet:
But to the weak, instead of such a shield,
Against the arm of power and lawless heat;
A two-edged sword, which, if he dares to wield,
Back falls upon himself, with stroke that can't be healed.

To be a bugbear, in litigious hands,
Strengthened by wealth, and grasping still at more,
To frighten others from their just demands;
Who, else, might dissipate their scanty store;
Which, still, on wolfish want can shut the door:
To be a rack, on which the dogs of law,
Torturing, at will, can make, or keep us poor;
Can ev'n, at last, eviscerate and draw;
And either piece-meal tear, or worry into awe.

Who, that his hoarded millions, at the close
Of life, should view, would not esteem a curse,
Upon reflection, that a nation's woes,
So largely, helped, to swell th' enormous purse;
And since 'twere, now, too late to reimburse,
Whom death has rid of ruin and of pain;&mdash;
Who would not strive the trembling hope to nurse
Of heaven, life's latest moments to sustain,
By th' only means, which, now, to cherish it remain;&mdash;

A generous stretch of power, to clear the way
Of those obstructions, which the course impede
Of Equity; and, while they cause delay,
That in villainous practitioners may speed,
To suitors utter ruin often breed;
Who, with the fabled frogs, might well exclaim,&mdash;
What's play to you, to us is deadly deed!
Then might posterity o'er-look the blame
Of ancestors reduced to beggary, to his shame.

Should we behold the willing sacrifice
Of profits, and of place (for conscience sake)
Which power, alone, of that gigantic size,
Can be supposed to have the power to make:
Should equity her shameful trammels break,
By that Herculean mightiness set free,
And British subjects equally partake
Of British rights, of high and low degree&mdash;
We might, at least, congratulate posterity:&mdash;

Congratulate them, that our own perdition,
Altho' it left us little wealth to leave,
In th' end subserved to better their condition,
By raising up that power which could achieve
So great deliverance; greater, I believe,
Than e'er the son of Jove, Alcides, wrought:
For, who can monster half so fell conceive,
Or who Augean stall, so foully fraught,
As, by that potent arm, would, here, be cleansed, or caught.

We boast immunity from priestly power;
And that religion is, no more, a thrall;
But, vain the boast!  when, at the self-same hour,
Our necks a heavier yoke is felt to gall;
Which lawless lawyers burthen them withal:
'Tis true, we may, at pleasure, heaven petition;
And call upon, as we think fit to call:
But higher is their Juggernaut's condition,
Than heaven's; and may not be addressed without submission,

Knee-tribute, incense, offering, scrape and bow;
And strict observance of such formal prayer,
As these alone (his priests) may teach us how;
And so prescribe the idol's when and where
Accessible, as ne'er to lose a fare,
By too direct a stage, or forward pull;&mdash;
Meanwhile, the supplicant may hug his care;
Or, elsewhere, seek to ease a heart too full:
He may not, here, be heard, till want has made him dull.

Ah, when, the schemes of avarice to confound.,
Shall men, with heart-felt gratitude, behold
(To ears of flesh there's music in the sound)
The back-revolving pristine age of gold,
Astraea's second reign; when, -as of old,
The common good shall be the end of law;
justice, no longer, shall be bought, and sold;
Nor hard-faced lawyers wag the venal jaw;
Nor in defence of wrong, nor right to over-awe!&mdash;

When shall that foulest of reproaches cease,&mdash;
The law was made for lawyers, and not they
For law:  as was the sabbath's rest, and peace,
For man; not man made for the Sabbath day?
"The, law is our commodity," they say:
(At least, their conduct speaks it plainly out)
"'Tis our's to sell, and your's the price to pay
Or else to go contentedly without;
As best befits the vile, unmonied rabble rout."

Time was, when trammelled conscience could not move,
But as the ghostly counsellor thought fit;
Religious truths were held as far above
The vulgar reach, capacity, and wit;
As now's the law, by those who practise it:
But, conscience burst its fetters; and, to God,
Each, for himself, may, now, his soul commit:
Heaven grant like riddance of the iron rod,
And trampling feet of law-dispensers, iron-shod!
