Still was the earth, and still th' aetherial plain,
Prospect involv'd in darkness fled the sight,
While nature yielded to the gloomy reign
Of Proserpine, black goddess of the night.
Then sleep dissolv'd in peace sad sorrows moan,
Then study, wrapt in thought, true pensive pleasure found alone.

'Twas then thy works, great Maro, charm'd my soul,
While quiver'd thro' the gloom the taper's light;
Thy muse each low idea did controul,
And brought Elizium to my raptur'd sight.
And when o'erpowr'd with sleep, thy heav'nly theme,
By Morpheus was renew'd in a delightful dream.

Methought I wander'd in a dreary vale,
O'erspread with umbrage thick of lofty trees;
Thro' whose dark shade the light could scarce prevail,
And scarcely could be felt the smallest breeze.
A riv'let mid' the vale did purling sound,
Save which, the horrid gloom a silence had profound.

Scarce had I wond'ring cast my eyes around,
When sudden seem'd the scene to gather light;
Bright beams of radiance shone upon the ground,
Refulgent glory made the valley bright.
And while amaz'd my soul was fill'd with fear,
An heav'nly female form descending did appear.

She seem'd a goddess of the heav'nly nine,
A mantle white as virgin snow she wore;
Her features with a lustre shone divine,
Enchanting smiles her looks benignant bore.
A wreath of bays her lofty temples crown'd,
Her left hand held a lyre, which sweetly she did sound.

Loose did her spotless robe on aether flow,
From which elysian odours breath'd delight;
At last with solemn pace advancing slow,
On the soft ground she gently did alight.
Then the sweet music of the lyre she broke,
And thus, in terms divine, the blissful goddess spoke.

"Know, mortal, from those blessed seats I come,
Where happy bards receive their high reward;
Where, after life, those poets find an home,
Whose praise on earth the worthless did retard.
'Tis I who paint the path to deathless fame,
Belov'd by gods and men, Calliope my name.

"To you 'tis given those wond'rous scenes to know,
Which from the most of mortals are conceal'd,
Which Maro's pen sublime in part could shew,
And which to you shall also be reveal'd.
For this I left those happy seats of joy,
Where spring eternal reigns, where pleasures never cloy."

The goddess ceas'd &mdash; while lowly to the ground,
Methought I prostrate fell and strove to speak;
When lo!  my pow'rs in rapture lost profound,
'Twas vainly silence I essay'd to break.
And while my soul for speech could make no room,
The goddess gracious, thus did her discourse resume.

"Thy inmost thoughts I know &mdash; nor think the pow'r
Of converse unrestrain'd &mdash; thou hast with me
While rapt in chains of earthly flesh impure,
Thy spirit soars not from its prison free.
Nor canst thou follow me where I shall go,
Till thus I make thy soul its mortal bonds forego."

Scarce had she said &mdash; when from that purling brook
Which wander'd thro' the bosom of the vale,
In her fair hand some chrystal drops she took,
Which thrice she sprinkl'd on my body frail.
And mutt'ring words in magic language strange,
Sudden methought my form did feel a wond'rous change.

As when bright Sol, in sultry summer, fires
The womb of nature with his potent rays,
Some grov'ling locust he with wings inspires,
Which strait upon its purple pinions plays.
Elated &mdash; conscious of the glorious change,
Thro' fields of aether proud it then aspires to range.

So when the goddess us'd her potent charm,
My soul no more did pow'r of sense supply;
The vital lamp no more my frame could warm,
And then methought I knew what 'tis to die.
Till sudden springing from its mortal tomb,
My joyful spirit sought new freed in air to roam.

"Come let us rise &mdash; and leave this hateful place,"
The goddess said &mdash; and took me by the hand,
When straight methought with a peculiar grace,
My wings newform'd I spread at her command.
No more embarrass'd but elate and gay,
With her thro' yielding air joyful I soar'd away.

Then as sublime we cross'd th' ethereal plain,
Num'rous fair isles and kingdoms we survey'd,
Where wilehome Venus held her gentle reign,
Sweet Cyprus first beneath us was display'd.
But ah, no Paphos now can bless the sight,
From thence the Loves are fled, and ev'ry soft delight!

Next o'er the thunderer's fav'rite isle we press'd,
Imperial Crete, where Jove himself did reign,
Ah faded Isle, no more thy glories last,
No more an hundred cities make thee vain,
Barbarian hands thy temples have destroy'd,
And all thy beauties now dire ruin renders void.

Then o'er th' Egean we pursu'd our way,
Whose fruitful bosom teems with verdant isles;
On whose white cliffs the Nine wou'd frequent play,
Which once were favour'd with the muse's smiles.
But now no lays enchanting charm us there,
While shrieks of woe, instead, torment the frighted air.

Where twining ivy crawls o'er marble fanes,
Where dreary ruins spread a solemn gloom;
There did we view sad Athens, thy remains,
And viewing mourn'd thy lamentable doom;
Near thee thy fav'rite bird remain'd alone,
And faithful, hov'ring o'er thy ruins made her moan.

Where fair Boeotia's ample plains extend
Parnassus' heights at last appear'd in view,
Blest heights, which laurels ever green defend
From wintry storms, and verdure chilling dew;
No tainted blasts the sacred mount profane,
Each rude attempt the nine for ever rend'ring vain.

Near to the mountain's foot a grove of trees
Dispens'd from umbrage thick, a grateful shade,
Whose leaves scarce trembl'd to the quiv'ring breeze,
While birds amid their boughs soft music made;
"(Here said the muse) our tour in air shall end,"
And here methought, on earth straightway we did descend.

Fair alleys did the beauteous grove divide,
Border'd with rows of cypress trees and yew;
Grottoes and caves romantic grac'd each side;
Round which the vine entwin'd with ivy grew.
Bright streams by tufts of moss in murmurs play'd,
While flow'rs, their scented hues, on each soft bank display'd.

Charm'd at the sight of such a beauteous scene,
Enraptur'd to the goddess thus I cried,
"Sure here the muses choice abodes are seen;
And happy bards departed here reside.
For sure the nine their followers must invite,
With them in seats like those for ever to delight."

I paus'd, and thus my heav'nly guide reply'd,
"Think not within the limits of those groves,
Or on yon' mount, the muses now reside
Rapine instead thro' all their verdure roves..
Base aliens having made a fatal prey,
Of those sweet seats, o'er which the muses once had sway.

"Unhappy Greece! &mdash; by slav'ry vile enchain'd,
No longer now the nurse of heav'nly lays;
Since tyrants steal the fame she once maintain'd;
Delights no more to crown desert with praise.
While freedom which with verse is ever blest,
By happier regions, now far distant, is possest.

"Sunk is that noble spirit which inspir'd
Those famous worthies she contain'd of old;
No prize Olympian renders worth admir'd,
And glory gone bright ardor waxes cold.
Barbarian hands her ancient pride have broke,
And now she quiet bends beneath the shameful yoke.

"When freedom fled &mdash; the nine departed too,
And favour'd Greece no longer with their smiles;
Forsook their haunts on Haemus' lofty brow,
Their sacred fountains and their fav'rite isles;
And now they seldom visit mortal day,
Save when to western climes perchance they bend their way.

"Beneath the surface of this earthly seat,
Where other skies a brighter light extend;
The nine for ever fix their last retreat,
From thence alone their mandates here they send.
There worthy poets meet a bright reward,
Crown'd with immortal bays, blest with the nine's regard.

"From earth to those blest seats a path descends,
For ever unperceiv'd by mortal Eye,
Thro' yonder mount the darksome road extends,
And here I warn you e're we draw more nigh;
Let not those phantoms vain your fear excite,
Which on the lonesome way will skim before your sight.

"Mark &mdash; never from my side a moment stray,
For various forms delusive will entice,
To lead you wand'ring from the surest way,
And some will seem to offer fair advice,
But ah, let no deceit your steps allure,
To quit my side for there you are alone secure."

The goddess ceas'd &mdash; and soon methought we drew
To where th' extremest limits of the grove
Display'd Parnassus, perfect to the view;
Whose brow appear'd above the clouds to rove,
While one strait passage op'ning in its side,
Seem'd in two equal parts the mountain to divide.

"Thro' here, resum'd the goddess, lies our way,
A passage ever veil'd from human sight,
Chear'd by no visits from the lightsome day;
Darkness involves it in eternal night:
Save what false lights enchanting shades supply,
To rob departed bards of wish'd for glory nigh."

Scarce said the muse when with a sudden spring,
Between the craggy rocks she forc'd her way,
Then calling me to follow straitway in,
Methought her orders swift I did obey.
And rushing both within the shades of night,
The chearful day we lost, and ev'ry fair delight.

Deep was the terror which my soul assail'd,
Soon as we enter'd on this gloomy road,
Such hideous hissings all around prevail'd;
Serpents seem'd here to fix their dire abode.
Not all those snakes, the furies might supply,
Methought could ere with this most horrid hissing vie.

Dismay'd and wond'ring I address'd my guide,
But scarcely had begun to urge my fear,
When lo a drove of dismal forms I spy'd,
Seeming to us direct as drawing near.
From them methought the direful hissing came,
While high above their heads did soar a glimm'ring flame.

Megre and wan the ghastly troop appear'd,
With pallid visages half starv'd and thin,
Some spitting venom, most malicious sneer'd,
While others with their teeth did horrid grin.
But in one hideous hiss united all,
While lances, shap'd like pens, they brandish'd dipt in gall.

When near they came, the muse contemptuous smil'd,
At which this ghastly band was sore enrag'd;
No more with scoffs and hissing they revil'd,
Sudden instead with lances war they wag'd.
But all their rage methought prov'd weak and vain,
Since not a dart they threw could ere afford us pain!

Their utmost efforts finding we defy'd,
At last those unsuccessful foes withdrew;
Yet as they fled they spit a pois'nous tide,
Which with their lances prov'd impotent too.
For how should poisons weak or darts annoy,
Those spirits pure whom death itself can ne'er destroy?

Soon as they fled, the muse I thus address'd,
"Oh may thy servant goddess blest enquire,
What were those forms which did our way molest,
Why did they seek our harm with so much ire?
Such horrid shapes I ne'er beheld before,
Nor ever did I hear so dismal an uproar."

"Those whom thou saw'st (replied the gracious muse,)
Dwelt once on earth and then were criticks named;
There fraught with ranc'rous hate they did abuse,
Each bard of merit and his works defam'd.
Envious of worth they felt an impious joy,
Rather than to befriend true genius &mdash; to destroy.

"For this the nine with justice pass'd their doom
Involv'd in woe to dwell for ever here;
Where now as heretofore amid the gloom,
They seek to fill the poet's soul with fear.
Who (if they fright him from the destin'd way,)
Far from Elysian joys must ever stray."

More would the muse have said &mdash; but shades deform,
With horrid yelling 'gan to strike mine ear;
In shape of duns and catchpoles some did storm,
(Such as of old made Phillips quake with fear.)
There Famine rag'd &mdash; Dependence sullen frown'd,
While wild Despair did shake her dart and stalk around.

But chief a buxom syren of deceit,
False Flatt'ry chaunted her insidious lays;
Eager my footsteps from the path to cheat,
Her drunken cup she offer'd fill'd with praise.
Which I had tasted all my senses drown'd,
Had in vain glory's arms for ever slept profound.

But still defended by my sacred guard,
Methought I brav'd the guile of all my foes;
'Till at the last in safety we repair'd,
To where Elizium's golden gates arose.
At her command the gates self-open'd flew,
And all the gloomy scenes evanish'd from my view.

Then what fair prospects rush'd upon my sight!
Bright cloudless skies wrapt in blue serene,
Unveil'd a landscape blooming with delight,
Scented with groves of never fading green.
Where blushing flow'rs and vegetable gold,
Sought thro' the leafy trees their beauties to unfold.

There on the margin of nectarious streams,
That thro' gay amaranthine flowrets crept,
Involved in transport of poetic dreams,
Some children of Apollo sweetly slept.
While others tun'd to varied lays their lyre,
And warbled as on earth the theme they lov'd to fire.

There gentle Ovid sung his am'rous strain,
There dove-ey'd Sappho tun'd her tender moan;
Mourning no more her love bestow'd in vain,
She found the youth (that once she sought) her own.
To umber'd shades there frequent they retire,
And quench in mutual love the warmth of fond desire.

Encircl'd by the jocund sons of wine,
Anacreon sat &mdash; with blushing roses crown'd;
Still as on earth, he quaff'd the juice divine,
His ev'ry care in tipsy revels drown'd.
Before the buxom bard in mazy dance,
A sportive syren warm'd his soul with frequent glance.

Beneath the shade of myrtle cover'd bow'rs,
Tibullus wander'd pensive all alone;
There Hammond with his Delia culling flow'rs,
Renew'd his tender elegiac moan!
While balmy zephyr whisp'ring thro' the grove,
To gentle eccho breath'd each plaintive tale of love.

High on a mount of laurel vested green,
Whose summits with refulgent roses shone;
Methought the muses 'mid a blooming scene,
Fix'd to eternity their lasting throne.
There each to lyre responsive lull'd the wind,
And with heroic lays in transport wrapt the mind.

Near to the nine methought those bards were plac'd,
Who reap'd with epic strains the laurell'd meed;
Homer divine who fair Achaia grac'd,
And he who sweetly touch'd the Mantuan reed.
There Milton tun'd with notes sublime his lyre,
And Tasso glow'd anew with bright romantic fire.

As nearer to the muse's seats we drew,
Celestial warblings charm'd the air around;
Sweeter than those the Theban satyrs knew,
When Orpheus sooth'd them with his silver sound.
All instruments of cadence softly clear,
Methought in those sweet strains were join'd the soul to chear.

But ah not long those blissful sounds did last,
Not long those lovely prospects blest mine eyes;
Shrill Chanticleer announc'd my vision past,
For crowing loud he bade the morn arise.
Starting I rais'd my head &mdash; the fairy theme,
Fled swift! &mdash; and strait I found the whole an empty dream!!
