When, erst, rebellion (that of forty five)
Its daring crest up-reared on Scottish ground;
While, yet, the Stuarts kept their hopes alive;
And that brave youth, the last among them found,
(If not the first) deserving to be crown'd,
By manly deeds, to claim a father's right,&mdash;
The crown which his progenitors had own'd,
Southward prepared to march with mickle might;
And, on his own soil, dare his rival to the fight.

While, yet, 'twas doubtful, whether to the Tyne,
Or Eden, would advance the desperate band;
Pursuing th' Eastern, or the Western line
Of march, to gain the bowels of the land,
The Northern Isthmus shook from strand to strand;
Then, might be seen Newcastle's pregnant dames,
Hastening, before the danger was at hand,
To seek a safe retreat from hostile flames:
Among the rest went one, who here attention claims.

Not for, that, like Cornelia, she could boast
The love rejected of a suitor king:
Nor, that the victor of a mighty host,
Her glorious sire with glory plumed her wing;
Nor rank, nor wealth, nor any such like thing;
Nor that her husband was of high renown,&mdash;
A Gracchus, used effectual aid to bring;
When public rights were nearly trodden down;
And usurpation dared on liberty to frown.

For (truth to tell) far otherwise, to moil
The coally Tyne beheld him, soon, and late;
And not a whit concerned about the soil,
Which grimed his visage, while he hugged his freight;
(Still less, perhaps, about affairs of state:)
But (like Cornelia) who her brace of boys,
Could she have dipt into the book of fate;
And seen their future wealth, and high employs,
Might well have prized beyond Campanian gems and toys!

This honest goody, seeking only where,
In safety, to deposit what she bore,
Her womb's first treasure, &mdash; with a mother's care,
Found safe deliverance (and her child found more)
In Durham's bishopric; &mdash; Tyne's southern shore:
For, when to age mature he had attained,
For Alma Mater's discipline and lore,
The privilege, by county birth, he gained,
At college, free of cost to friends, to be sustained.

Which, had the mother ne'er been forced to roam,
Had hardly chanced to be his happy lot;
For, had she still continued snug at home,
Newcastle, sure, had been his native spot;
And then no exhibition he had got;
And, probably, no college education:
To things so trivial, oftentimes forgot,
Or little heeded, in their elevation,
Is owing men's advance from low to lofty station.

"Ill is the wind that blows no-body good,"
The proverb says; and, here, we find it true;
For that rebellion, which attaint of blood,
On many scots, entailed, and thousands slew,
Served, likewise, to advance a scot or two;
Who no Cornelia's imps were doomed to prove;
And battle for the many, 'gainst the few,
Possessing power to render love for love;
But ever to evince their zeal for things above.

One, to establish laws upon the main,
And furnish Neptune with a matchless code;
Who, erst, 'twould seem, had been content to reign,
A lawless, codeless, arbitrary God;
But now, of course, has laid aside the rod,
And to his realms a constitution given;
Thanks to this Solon's wonder-working nod!
Whose maxims every nation under heaven,
Shall, henceforth, own for law; and rank him with the seven.

At least, the greatest orator alive,
Hath this eulogium on the fabric hung;
And, long, the wreck of time shall it survive;
Or else George Canning flatters with the tongue:
The other, as, hereafter, shall be sung,
Or said, in that dark province to preside;
Which may (I grant you) when his knell is rung,
To envied Britons prove a source of pride;
That is, when they behold its ruins scattered wide.

Him Crocodilus call:  the other's name
Imports not, here; nor more about him said,
(However great and merited his fame)
Than serves t' explain, how th' accident, which led
To's own uprise, his brother stood in stead:
At college, some few years when he had spent,
And Academic wreaths adorned his head,
A brother's eye of kindness back he sent,
And saw poor Croc:  in scrivener's office vilely pent;

And nothing learning, in that humble lot;
Save, (what, 'tis likely, suited best his taste)
"A penny saved is a penny got:"
From thence he freed him, and at college placed,
And taught, by Academic steps, to haste
To higher, and more lucrative employ;
Than pettifogging's vulgar sphere embraced;
Yet still the predilection of the boy
Stack to him, it is said; and nothing could destroy.

A scrivener once, a scrivener still:  (as says
The proverb, of the cloth of sable hue)
He ne'er could lay aside the scrivener's ways:
Yet, notwithstanding, well did he pursue
The road to wealth immense, with steady view,
And even pace; which, always, in the end,
Than brilliant parts, to th' owner prove more true:
For, as in fruitless flights no time they spend,
The more infallibly they to their object tend.

Yet pity 'tis, his early predilection
Was on their side, unfortunately gained;
To whom less favor shewn, and more correction,
Would best befit the height he has attained;
Pity, that one, by Providence ordained,
Among the sharks, to act so high a part,
By whom their licences should be restrained,
Should be a pettifogger in his heart;
And more inclined to screen, than make the villains smart!

And, here, how obviously occurs the thought,
That, if rebellion, in that fatal year,
Aforesaid, British rights to ruin sought;
Altho' 'twas quickly checked in its career,
And doomed no more a Stuart-crest to rear;
Yet, did the consequence no less ensue
(Alas, that this should be but over clear
And by rebellion's operation too;)
As more concisely, thus, the mind we give to view:&mdash;

The dread of falling into rebel hands
Newcastle's teeming mothers caused to flee;
And seek, in more remote Dunelmian lands,
To bear the sexe's grateful agony:
Where birth could make of Alma mater free;
(The natives claiming, there, more near relation.)
And gave to this fratrum par nobile
The benefit of college education;
To one, eventually, to grind a groaning nation.

The Castle door is open:  Ecce homo!
Him, seated at the upper end, alone:
That self-same is the giant's major-domo,
Or chief purveyor; as must now be shewn:
But what a drowsiness comes, o'er me!  Hone,
How did'st thou manage, e'er, for heaven's good sake,
(Since thour't but flesh, and blood, and skin, and bone,)
In such a place as this, to keep awake,
Three days, however great thy interest then at stake!

'Twas not th' identical, I do allow;
But one much like it:  vainly I essay
To brush the spreading torpor from my brow
And must give way to't:  tho' in open day
For, here, am I constrained, I feel, to stay,
The slumberous influence pressing, like a stream,
That overwhelms, whate'er obstructs its way
So that, already, I begin to dream;
And what ensues will be a vision; as 'twill seem.

Whether, narcotic is the air I breath;
Or Stygian vapours, here, perhaps, abound;
Uprising, from the noisome cave, beneath,
Which has communication, under ground,
With Tartarus:  or whatever else is found
To be the cause of an effect so odd;
There's naught, but lifeless drowsihed, around
On every brow the poppy seems to nod;
And every mouth wide-yawns obedience to the God.

Or, does this lifeless scene the sense benum,
Where, slumbery agitation hardly wakes,
Its voice to raise, above the drowsy hum,
Which, buzzing round, the stillness feebly breaks:
Or, is't that I (as those whom ague shakes)
With vain imaginations idly close;
While every one mine own appearance takes,
By optical illusion, as I dose;
Be it so:  myself, at least, now fast asleep suppose.

Morpheus, be near, while Somnus I obey;
And lend thy magic mirrour's marvellous aid;
Wherein, strange sights, that shun the eye of day,
Are to the mind's eye visibly pourtrayed:
How fearfully, how wonderfully made;
How inconsistently, withal, is man;
Who, torpid thus, in sleep's embraces laid,
Can bring within the compass of a span
Remotest times and places; scenes and actions; can,

In one short hour, in this inactive state,
O'er long duration his existence spread:
Be wise in council; fluent in debate;
Tho' fated never there to lift his head:
Hold living converse with th' illustrious dead:
Range over sea and land:  where valour bleeds,
Prevail in battle; or be captive led:
And all so full of life, as far exceeds
Whate'er, by waking pains, the richest fancy breeds!

Can conjure up occurrences, long past
And make in actual agency appear;
Can mingle in the scene; and feel it last,
The period of a week, or month, or year;
With all its turns of fortune, hope, and fear;
Tho' limited to half a watch of night:
Such is the vision, so distinct and clear,
That now unfolds its marvels to my sight:
And well may I forbode more terror, than delight.

Tho' in a trance, with open eyes I see;
And bear, with open ears, each voice and sound:
Lord of the universe! &mdash; can such things be:&mdash;
Such monstrous villainies, as here abound,
And still thy heavens look bright on all around!
Hast thou no still small whisper left in store,
To thrill the heart; nor thunder, to astound!
Thy providence in vain do we adore;
In vain thy saving help, when floods arise, implore!

Shall conscience be the tool of sordid gain,
And cold self-interest lord it o'er the land;
Shall bare-faced avarice cease to be a stain;
And selfishness e'en plead divine command;
And thou delay to shake thy flaming brand!
Time was, when thou, injustice to appal,
And shake th' oppressor, took'st the pen in hand;
And wrot'st thy bitter words upon a wall:
So, this Belshazzar teach to dread thy righteous gall.

One, like that Crocodilus, I behold:
The same his stature, lineaments, and years
But, differing thus:  he sits on bags of gold:
And ever and anon (good soul) appears,
To wet the treasure with fast-falling tears;
Which tears might seem to superficial ken,
O'er-looking whereunto the soul adheres,
The drops of pity; then but trickling, when
His feeling heart is touched with woes of other men.

But cardiagnastic skill, which deeper looks,
And can the motive, in the action, read,
And pry into the heart's obscurest nooks,
Sees not that heart, with stroke extern, to bleed;
Sees not that briny fount the griefs to feed
Of wretches, crowding hither for redress;
But, as 'tis said of charity, &mdash; "the deed
Begins at home;" and self's the first to bless;
To self belong those tears; there's self, in this distress.

Such are the tears, that wet the banks of Nile,
Or Ganges, or Hydaspes, (if tradition
Errs not, nor fables) when the crocodile,
With sobs, and singults deep, sans intermission,
The credulous heart inveigles to perdition:
Nor is there wanting, here, that other cause,
To call forth tears (I do not mean contrition;
For that is yet to come) but self-applause,
To think his own dear gold secure from waste of laws.

That selfish sensibility suppose;
(Self-sympathy, perhaps, 'twere well benempt)
Which tears of joy, amid surrounding woes,
Profusely sheds, to find itself exempt
From those corroding cares, which thousands tempt:
But, as to feeling for a fellow's grief
(Of such a weakness if he ever dreamt)
'Twould not, by tears alone, but by relief,
Be evidenced, in legal remedies made brief.

But, hark, his voice! &mdash; "Ho, every one, that needs
Protection; &mdash; orphan, widow, ward, and you,
Whose trust is placed, by settlements, and deeds,
In such, as prove to honor's pledge untrue;
And what was vested in them, with the view,
Yourselves to save from want; your means, from waste;
Withhold, or spend; and make you deeply rue
Your own, or parent's confidence misplaced;
Come hither, if the sweets of equity you'd taste!

"The fatherless, and widow are my care:
'Tis mine, their helpless state from wrongs to shield:
Opprest, they've only to prefer their prayer,
And find what prompt deliverance I can yield:
Against extortioners my heart is steeled:
Yes, on my conscience!  ne'er shall it be said,
To me their cruel arts were once revealed;
And infants pined, while these devoured their bread;
But retribution soon o'ertook the guilty head.

"Come, cast on me the burthen of your bale!
You'll find me apt, as they shall find me strong:
The heartless wretches! &mdash; who themselves avail
Of trust reposed, to harrass, rob, and wrong:
I know that lawyers are a lawless throng:
(From inclination, few, indeed, are just)
And will, designedly, your griefs prolong;
In hopes to make their market of a trust;
When into your affairs they've schemed themselves to thrust.

"'Gainst such there's ample remedy with me,
Howe'er they tell you, there is none at law;
Nor shall the prowlers, with impunity,
Unrighteously, their own advantage draw
From trust reposed; and conscience make their maw:
As dear to heaven, your rights to me are dear:
Yes, on my conscience!  and, if inward awe
Has lost its terrors:  chastisement severe
Shall make them sensible, 'tis still respected here.

"A sacred duty doth a trust imply,
Which he, who makes a job of, or betrays,
Is fit for treasons of a deeper dye;&mdash;
For cut-throat corners; or the broad high-ways;
And well deserves with hemp to end his days.
To me it appertains not, I'm afraid,
To castigate, as crimes, frauds, quirks, delays:
But, what I can, I will &mdash; upbraid, &mdash; upbraid;
And if that won't avail, &mdash; degrade &mdash; degrade &mdash; degrade.

"Who, once, is caught in practices like these,
His practice, thence, forever ceases, here:
What tho' I can't transport beyond the seas;
Nor threaten life or limb, to make them fear;
This court, at least, I'm competent to clear
Of all, who bring disgrace upon the name
Of lawyer, and the court where they appear:
And hear me, once for all, aloud, proclaim,
That, as their deeds are foul, so foul shall be their shame.

"Sometimes, I'm well aware, are sharpers found,
Within these sacred limits (strange to tell!)
Who sell possessions, which they never owned;
Or others, rightly owning, tempt to sell:
Land-jobbers they are called (I know them well)
And, having fastly fanged a man's estate,
Begin to quibble then (the dogs of hell!)
About the title, law-suits to create;
And keep fast hold, while there's a point to litigate.

"That lawyers, who should be the last to break
The law, as owing all their consequence
To its support, an engine thus should make
Of what was meant for property's defence,
Of rapine and of ruinous expense,
Seems little short of treason to the crown:
Such miscreants to expel for ever hence
Is far too slight a punishment, I own:
And death should be their doom, if death were in my frown.

"Yet, fools no less they seem, to twine a noose,
As 'twere, to strangle, that which yields support;
Or, like the sot, who owned the fabled goose,
That laid the golden eggs, in greedy sort,
Her precious life, unthinkingly, cut short;
In hopes to find a fortune ready-made:
For righteousness is, still, a nation's fort:
And laws but phantoms prove, without its aid:
Unrighteous lawyers, then, are traitors to the trade.

"Which should induce practitioners to spurn
The thought of thieving, under legal guise;
Which, tho' perhaps, it serves a present turn,
Must open, in the end, a nation's eyes;
And rouse to wrath its dormant energies:
And drive, indignant at the wrongs they feel,
Subjects, the law itself to sacrifice;
And, in the blindness of infuriate zeal,
To pull about their ears the tottering common-weal.

"Oh, bear in mind, ye lawyers, princes, peers:
And all, whom it concerns t' uphold the state,
That scripture, often sounded in your ears,
In fast-day services; when at your gate
War thundered, and Napoleon threatened fate;
'If judgment, thoroughly, 'twixt man and man,
Ye execute' (that is, by love or hate
Unbiassed, and, a fortiori, plan
In no wise, laws, designed for good, to make trepan.)

'The fatherless, and widow, and withal,
If you forbear the stranger to oppress;
And shed not, here, innocuous blood, at all;
Nor Gods, that cannot bless you, seek to bless;
Then will I cause you ever to possess
This land, which I to your forefathers gave.'
From whence 'tis obvious to infer, that less,
Than slavery, those, who rule but to enslave,
Awaits not nor, at home, to find a tranquil grave.

"But, captive led, bewail, in foreign lands,
Their country lost, and wretched being kept;
As Salem's children, in Assyrian bands,
By Babylonian streams sat down and wept
For Sion, whose remembrance never slept:
Bewail the breach of oaths and sacred vows;
Laws over-strained, at will, or over-stept:
Hang upon their wanton lutes on willow boughs;
And, for the myrtle wreath, with cypress bind their brows."

Here he concludes:  and now I see him rise.;
And, backward, by a private door retire:
And now I hear expressions of surprise,
At such a speech; and sprigs of law enquire;&mdash;
"What!  shall the workman, then, not claim his hire."
More hypocritical, while others try
Stern virtue's semblance; and affect t' admire;
While these, again, the knowing ones, as dry
Of look, as speech, put down, with &mdash; "pooh!  'tis all my eye."

Now has he gained his closet, where I view,
High-seated on a throne, a portly dame,
Whose keen, suspicious glance betrays the shrew,
For ever jealous of a rival flame;
L'Etat (I hear it whispered) is her name:
From whence, 'twould seem, that, tho' in England born,
Of foreign stock, in likelihood, she came:
Her Person richest ornaments adorn; 
And, far as wealth makes bright, she's brighter than the morn.

Her robe a galaxy of diamonds beams,
In such profusion are the brilliants strewn;
But, taste, in their display, less studied seems,
Than how the vast abundance can be shewn:
Extravagance predominates alone:
A dazzling radiance, that repels the sight,&mdash;
Not gratifies, is darted round her throne;
And, clearly, 'tis her heart's supreme delight;
To think that thus she shines, insufferably bright.

As well, because her lofty pride rejects
The worthless tribute of the vulgar gaze:
But more, from consciousness of those defects,
And foul deformities, and fouler ways
Of person, so obnoxious to dispraise;
Which might, if scanned too nicely, mar her grace;
For ne'er was seen, in old, or modern days,
A more disgusting form, or frightful face:
And, then, her habits! &mdash; baseness seems, no longer, base,

Therewith compared.  More ravenous than a shark,
From starving infants she would snatch the bread;
And hardly give't a thought, if light or dark;
If over-looked; if in, or out of bed;
On dalliance bent with vigorous lustihed.
So grossly gluttonous, withal, is she,
And by the belly so entirely led,
That famished millions could she bear to see,
And wallow, all the while, in beastly gluttony.

A mass of blains, and blotches would she seem,
Wer't not for that superb and dazzling dress;
Which, while a sort of wonder-like esteem
It raises, casts a veil o'er ugliness;
Limbs dropsical, and bloated with excess;
Lank flabby cheeks, deep-wrinkled, painted-deep;
That vice-anticipated age confess:
Behind her veil to get but half a peep,
Would quite dissolve the charm, that judgment lulls to sleep.

With keen, suspicious glance, she eyes the man,
(The worthy man, the like of Crocodile)
That seems his very heart and soul to scan;
And, half relaxing now, into a smile
Of scorn, that bids him think himself too vile
To kiss (as he prepares to do) her hand,
She opens on him in th' imperious style
Of one, accustomed worldlings to command;
And make, in her's, their own best interests understand.

While rudely from his kiss her hand she draws;
"Off! &mdash; keep your distance!  or, at least, explain,
Before that honor you expect, the cause,
Why, ev'n but now, in such a threatening strain,
You lectured, in the hall, yon motley train;
Distinguished by their bags, green, purple, blue;
Who now, like statues, motionless remain,
Uncertain what to think, or what to do;
So thunder-struck they seem at such a speech, from you.

"As well they may:  and so, indeed, am I;
Who have not known thee thus to wrath inclin'd;
Nor so remarkable for probity
Thyself, as others thou expect'st to find;
But to thy fellows partial still and kind:
And why those tears? &mdash; has some one stole thy gold;
Or stole thy heart?  hah!  has the archer blind,
Hit with a random shaft a mark so old;
One, too, on which I claim to keep exclusive hold!

"Yes, no divided hearts my favours share:
Or, wholly, mine they are; or not at all:
Half-measures, and half-love, for half so fair
May do; or from a master to a thrall:
With me, who dare my beauties peerless call;
And power possess t' enforce what I require,&mdash;
'Tis, &mdash; 'minion, make thy choice 'twixt love and gall;
Stand wholly mine, with heart and soul entire:
Or sink, outright, and feel my wrath a quenchless fire.'

"If you must needs be toying in the hall
With that same prudish matron (hark ye, Sir!
Dame Probity; I tell you once for all;
(Then, if you err, advisedly you err)
A fire, that may consume yourself, you'll stir:
Tho' jealous I'm of all, and justly so,
Of none I'm half so jealous as of her;
To whom, perhaps, less gratitude I owe,
Then all besides, for this magnificence and show.

"Small thanks to her, that venal senates vote,
As I direct; and nought I wish withhold;
Small thanks, that none can wear a decent coat,
Who writes not on his bosom &mdash; to be sold;
And, prostrate, owns th' omnipotence of gold:
Small thanks to her, that juries to acquit,
Whom I count guilty, make no longer bold
That genius, learning, eloquence, and wit
Hide their diminished heads, or speak as I think fit.

"Small thanks, to her, that, now-a-days, 'tis thought
A crime, to think, that power can act amiss;
Small thanks to her, such miracles are wrought,
As Robert Southey's metamorphosis;
Small thanks to her for that 'enormous bless,
Wild beyond rule or art,' which I enjoy;
That every other nation envies this;
Not with an envy, eager to employ
All arts to imitate; but rather to destroy

"The envied object.  This my gorgeous state,
Conceiv'd to be upheld at their expence,
Converts their admiration into hate;
And proves a stone of stumbling and offence;
The commerce of the world the source, from whence
My greatness flows, they'd clearly make it out:
And this, 'tis obvious ev'n to common sense,
If I engross, that they must be without:
That point, howe'er, with me, admits of more than doubt.

"For, tho' to commerce, partly, I am bound,
The general coffers as it serves to swell,
My proper splendour stands on surer ground
(Small thanks to Probity for that, as well)
And still secure would stand, tho' commerce fell:
Which is, in short, that every one is base;
That every one's prepared himself to sell;
That every one would have, or has, a place:
That not to be corrupted is the sole disgrace:

"That, while each other, or themselves &mdash; they take
To market, I to market take the whole:
First make them profligate for profit's sake;
Then, thrive by their degeneracy of soul:
Thro' that maintain unlimited controul:
Small thanks to Probity, for this, again:
The wealth of either Ind and either Pole,
May cease to flow, as it has done to Spain;
But not the less should I of majesty retain.

"Still Ferdinand is Ferdinand, we see;
Tho' bankrupt Spain can ill maintain a court:
So, commerce failing, would it prove with me;
I should not be the party to fall short;
Who, now, to such expedients can resort,
By means of what corruption has been styl'd;
That I, in no event, should lack support;
For fiercest demagogues, of wrath beguil'd,
My Midas touch, at once, makes tractable and mild.

"By that enormous debt, which, fools suppose,
Will ultimately bow the borrower down,
I more at arm's length keep domestic foes,
Then if I ne'er had borrowed half a crown;
That very debt adds terror to my frown;
And, maugre misery, makes contempt abound:
Sustaining me, they but protect their own:
A state of things no treachery dares confound,
Till traitors choose to take a penny in the pound!

"When that shall happen, I may dread my doom:
Or when the Thames flows backward to his source;
But more eternal than eternal Rome,
I sit unshaken, and pursue my course,
Until self-interest cease to be of force:
Then, whether I am justly jealous, judge,
When Probity begins to breed remorse;
Since all are sure to owe myself a grudge,
Who, in that beldam's service, once submit to drudge.

"Thou, dare to drop a tear on her account!
Thou prate that righteousness a state upholds!
Say, flowed thy wealth and honors from a fount,
So scant as her's: &mdash; is't she thy greatness moulds
Behoves to look at home such doating scolds:
Dare, at thy peril, limbs to amputate
Whose peccancy to to me a source unfolds
Of native wealth; while law-suits they create,
Stamp-duties they augment; and benefit the state.

"Why hint that rulers may, by any chance,
Be doomed to want, and suffer slavish wrong!
Will their catastrophe thyself advance;
Or wilt thou, too, the captive train among,
Unstring thy lute, suppress the voice of song,
And, bid be merry, dare to disobey?&mdash;
Or, in Elysian meads th' angelic throng
Hope'st thou to join before the doleful day,
And there to carol; 'o'er the hills and far away.'

"I fear not; for myself, nor those I love,
Thy threatened thraldom in a foreign laud,
Prophet of plagues! &mdash; I hold myself above
Mischance; and shall, and will, forever stand;
Thou sad Celeno of the harpy band!&mdash;
Why not presage, at once, that me, and mine,
Famished, and foodless, some deserted strand
Shall witness so with keenest want to pine,
As greedily to munch the plates where-off we dine.

"Thou'lt say, perhaps, my jealousy to pall,
That, anxious whilst thou art for none but me,
It makes thee weep to think what might befall;
As wept that Holy One of God, when he
Beheld the temple's glorious majesty;
And knew its glories destined to the dust:
But can'st thou read the book of destiny;
Can'st prove so far unworthy of thy trust,
As dare to think what might befall:  much less, what must!

"Slave, suffer but the thought to cross thy mind,
That my renown is placed within the reach
Of casualty; or that, however blind
The goddess with the wheel, whom all beseech
For grace, yet o'er the necks who rides of each,
On me should stumble in her fitful mood,
And make in my magnificence a breach,
That instant thou'rt discarded, and thy food
To moisten with thy tears, thence doomed, with misery's brood.

"The statesman, who can harbour once the thought
Of possible disaster where he serves,
And sets not rather fate itself at nought,
By that mistrust, in his allegiance swerves:
The worst of treason is the want of nerves,
In public men, whatever ills betide:
And well his degradation he deserves
Who can contemplate ev'n a gloomy side:
The next step is, to wish his bodings verified."

"Fair Goddess (in reply, I hear him say)
Well might thy wrath a fierce Gehenna burn,
Thy guilty slave eternally to slay;
And well thy foot with indignation spurn,
If on thy beauteous self his back to turn
He dared, to look on Probity's foul face;
For whom if I could feel sincere concern,
While opposite to thee, and out of place,
Myself I should esteem the basest of the base.

"Thou art the object sole which I adore;
No rival flame this loyal bosom fires:
As pants the hart cool fountains to explore
Still, after thee, so pant my heart's desires:
For thy delightful service never tires:
My vigorous prime devoted was to thee;
My age, with equal ardour, still admires:
For well canst thou reward fidelity;
Whereas, with that same pride, small recompense I see.

"But if for her to counterfeit esteem,
Thine own best interest to promote may serve,
Hold me not vile, I pray, nor rashly deem
In dutiful allegiance ought to swerve,
While so dissembling, I would fain deserve
Thy greater love; not thy resentment move:
'Tis not, at least, to prove, for want of nerve,
Treacherous to states, their interest to improve:
Except it argues fear too ardently to love.

"However, in our hearts, we may despise
That prude's pretensions, and her name detest,&mdash;
Expedience, still requires, that we disguise
Such feelings, when disguise is for the best:
While, fondly cherished, in the vulgar breast,
Her image lives, forbearance we must shew;
And ev'n, at times, her excellence attest;
No rule but her's acknowledging to know;
Her powerful sanction, else, we venture to forego.

"There is a fascination in her name,
Which 'twere impolitic, in us, to slight:
To wear it on the tongue, what tongue would blame,
If (while we wear't) herself the more we spite:
And make, against herself, our battles fight
The simple by ensnaring into &mdash;t?
As when a friendly flag unfurled to sight
Vessels to enter tempts a hostile port;
So thither, fools seduced, by her repute, resort.

"By lecturing, in the hall, yon motley train,
I serve them more, than if I held my peace;
It causeth vulgar credence to obtain,
(And thus their gains contributes to encrease)
That, with impunity, they may not fleece
My suitors; nor their confidence betray:
Wer't not for that persuasion suits would cease;
And bear and mastiff mutually give way;
And equity's retinue prowl in vain for prey.

"Is this, in twenty years, that I possess
Those seals, of thy esteem the valued pledge,
My first reproof of such unworthiness;&mdash;
Or do I, for the first time, now, allege
That such delinquents shall the keenest edge
Of wrath incur, the saying seems so hard?
And, yet, in all that time, how oft the pledge
Have I redeemed; how many to discard
Been known; or their career professional retard?

"For scarcely will thy jealousy suspect,
That 'tis for want of objects I forbear;
And that, occasion giv'n, I would correct;
And but for lack of vice, the vengeance spare:
Contrariwise, that punishment is rare
Till threats but empty breath may well appear;
And cease, almost, to operate as a &mdash;e
For public confidence, there's around to fear;
But let me, still, in words, have leave to be severe.

"For dupes remain and dupes there still will be,
Wilfully blind, tho' thousands ope their eyes;
Full credit who for strictest probity
Will give, while we affect her speech and guise;
And knaves and sharpers outwardly despise,
And loudly threat to make delinquents grieve!
Caesar's remark I hold profoundly wise,
'What men wish true, they readily believe':
Yes, in the teeth of facts, conviction they receive.

"Wanting redress of wrongs, and sorely maimed,
In the dire struggle 'gainst oppressive might,
With fond credulity they hear proclaimed,
That I am strong to make their burthens light;
And resolute as strong the wronged to right;&mdash;
In vain do thousands, foiled, the hope forbid:
Ruin hath chaced the wretches out of sight:
Their names and griefs are in oblivion hid:
Unheeded is their plaint, or into silence chid.

"Were equity administered, in truth,
To all that ask, or might our aid implore;
And did our hearts sincerely melt with ruth,
For helpless orphans, plundered of their store;
And suitors burthened, till their backs are sore;
As by these tears, you'd have it, may be seen;
'Twould occupy myself and twenty more,
To keep in motion Equity's machine;
And settle every point smutched artisans between.

"Which would, eventually, the trade destroy,
By rendering far too facile the redress;
And (what my single self would most annoy
On that, howe'er, I lay but little stress)
Would split the profits with the business:
'Tis of the system's essence, and to thee
Essential, too, that neither more nor less
But, as it is, exactly, it should be:&mdash;
An engine to oppress, not set th' oppressed free.

"A course of 'never ending, still beginning;'
Of doubting still, and still by doubts destroying;
Of ever losing, and of never winning;
Of always spending, and yet ne'er enjoying;
Of disappointing still, and still decoying
To further risks, with hopes as void as air;
Until their all is wasted, in employing
Of learned-in-the-law the skill and care
For its defence:  this done, we hand them to &mdash; Despair.

"I know (for some experience I may boast)
That best amid the storm thy interests thrive;
Still out at sea; abhorring still the coast;
Before the gale triumphantly they drive;
A constant hubub keeps the thing alive:
Let things keep moving; properties change hands;
And jarring interests never cease to strive;
'Tis what thy greatness needs; thy will demands;
The sea is not for us, which smooth and tranquil stands.

"Live hurly-burly! &mdash; 'tis the calm we dread:
The calm of virtue; and from wrongs repose:
Arcadian scenes:  Astraea, from the dead
Uprising, with the rest of Mammon's foes:
From conscious rectitude the peace that flows:
Simplicity, and guileless innocence:
That fabled sunshine of the soul of those,
Who neither meditate nor fear offence;
Act well their part; and leave to heaven the consequence.

"As to my tears; that melancholy rheum
Denotes not, of necessity, the heart:
And 'twere too much, at all times, to presume,
That he, who weeps for, takes another's part:
T' unravel here, at length, the weeping art,
Were waste of time and patience to us both:
But this I can affirm, that tears will start;
(Yes; on my conscience, and upon my oath)
At times, one knows not why; at times, when one is loath.

"Which dearly proves the heart is not concerned;
(Not, of necessity, that is to say)
Else, would th' immediate motive be discerned,
By him that wept; nor could he strive to stay
Th' involuntary flood, with vain essay:
Except the heart, at variance with the will,
Its mandate be supposed to disobey:
In which event, at worst, but want of skill
It argues, to restrain its throbs, to weep one's fill.

"O'er Romilly's sad fate I shed a tear,
Without suspicion, or reproach from thee;
And, yet, in truth to hold his memory dear,
Would almost argue love of probity:
But is there not a rule of decency
To be observed?  and may we not bestow,
(In all things else from imputation free)
The outward tribute, and sustain the show
Of grief; but we must fail in love, where love we owe!"

On this the haughty fair seems pacified:
And more complacency at least affects;
And, while less scornfully the man is ey'd,
No longer his knee-tribute she rejects;
But stretches forth her hand, which he expects
With genuflexion, and the kiss bestows;
This done, her slave's attention she directs,
To where with anxious groups the hall o'er flows;
Whither, his eye still fixt on her, he backward goes.
