"Oh, for a lodge," (exclaimed the sofa's bard)
And so do I, with all my heart exclaim,
Man, in society, when I regard;
And see more savage, while he bears the name
Of softened, civilized, enlightened, tame,
Than when, yet wild, in woods, a goat-skin dress
He wore, and only lived for love and game:
"Oh, for a lodge in some vast wilderness!"
Where laws (if not to guard) exist not to oppress.

Such multifarious luxuries, and gaudes,
To keen the passions, doth the social state
Refined (engendering crimes, and endless frauds,
To compass means to gratify) create;
The world becomes a scene of mutual hate;
Whilst every one (whoever suffers loss)
His individual appetites to sate,
Would, willingly, a whole Peru engross;
Or leave, at least, to others nothing but the dross.

Not that I would abjure of laws the reign;
Nor, yet, th' advantages of social life;
But if, while those affecting to restrain
Oppresive acts, oppression render rife;
And these but gender selfishness, and strife;
'Tis not the reign of laws, which such a scene
Presents; nor civilized and social life;
But 'tis the reign of wolves, in shape of men:
The intercourse of thieves, who make the world a den.

Now has the big-wig of the tearful eye,
(The image of that Crocodile) his seat
Resumed; him fronting dimly I descry
A row of wigs, just level with his feet:
In form a crescent:  where its horns would meet,
If still protracted, the judicial chair
Stands, raised upon a platform:  to complete
It's convex side, and from the nipping air
Protect the learned Leads, which find admittance there,

A wooden screen, much like what you behold
In tap-rooms, from the chimney's farther side
Circling, t' exclude the door-way's bitter cold,
And boozing sots from observation hide,
Is raised with an exteriour bench supplied:
Between the wigs and screen extends a row
Of Gents:  (by courtesy so called;) tape-ty'd
Bundles of trash they hold; partly, for show;
And, partly, to supply with food the wigs below.

Th' exteriour bench, on which, perhaps, might stand
Some dozen people, or, at most, a score;
And ev'n those few no easy view command
Of what is passing on th' interiour floor;
But, straining hard on tip-toe, to explore,&mdash;
The public to accommodate is meant;
That all may see what vengeance is in store
For knaves, by whom the orphan's goods are spent;
What prompt relief for backs beneath oppression bent.

'Tis thro' the wigs alone, that, on the part
Of supplicaints, petitions are preferred:
For none may, here, who is not of the art,
Or craft of law, have licence to be heard:
By proxy only wrongs may be averred:
Nor will the wigs, again, receive their cue,
First-hand, from parties, suits who may have stirred;
But, ever to the Gents behind them true,
Their pleasure wait to make a motion, or renew.

By this arrangement they contrive to play,
Ad libitum, each into other's hands:
One, for attendances, his pound a day,
(Meanwhile pro pudor!  unprogressive stands
Th' unheeded suit,) term after term demands:
The other, when, at length, the cause has slept
So long, that he no longer understands,
Takes his refreshing fifty:  then 'tis crept
A little onwards:  or, perhaps, 'tis backward stept.

But no refreshment, as will now be seen;
No verdant spot on which to fix the eye;
No meadows trim, clear brooks, and hedge-rows green,
But "barren desart, fountainless and dry,"
'Tis given the weary suitor to espy:
A Lybian waste still fated to traverse,
O'er burning sands beneath a burning sky,
He journies on, bare-footed; often worse:
And, where he sought a blessing, finds, in fact, a curse.

A wig now rises, and its powdered curls
Shaking, and pig-tail dangling loose behind,
Voluminous and vast a brief unfurls
And thus: &mdash; "the orators, My lord, I find,
To this same process, which your lordship's mind
May well have slipt, so many years have past
Since, first, my lord, your lordship was so kind
As partially to hear it; and since last:&mdash;
(For there it ever since has stuck and still sticks fast;

"Tho', now, we hope to settle the dispute)
The orators, I say, my lord, hereto
(That is, as stood the tale, when we the suit
Commenced; for now is it reduced, a few)
Are certain sisters (four in number) who
Complain, for that, whereas, their jointured mother,
Alike to all her offspring kind and true,
Among themselves, my lord, and one sole brother,
In equal shares, without preferring one or other,

"Her messuage, lands, and tenements devised,&mdash;
The brother, to th' exclusion of the rest,
(Affection spurned, and legal claims despised,)
The whole usurping, wrongfully possest;
Tho' in trustees, of right, it ought to vest
That each upon the common fund might draw,
As clearly the testatrix had exprest;
But, notwithstanding, he, as heir at law
Thereon had dared to lay a most unrighteous paw.

"My lord, that the testatrix had the power
Her jointure to bequeath, by none's denied;
And that discretely, at her dying-hour,
And as a mother ought, who would not hide,
From her own flesh, herself, through pique and pride,
She exercised, was never made a doubt:
Than, hastily, however, to decide
In such a cause, where thousands were held out,
We better knew, of course, what law should be about.

"But, now that thousands dwindled down we see
To hundreds, longer to procrastinate
(And not, indeed, to press for) a decree,
Were hardly worth our while.  To liquidate
The costs, my lord, we've sold the whole estate;
And twice twelve thousand was the sum obtained:
And just as many hundreds now await
The court's decree; &mdash; the surplus which remained,
After the due discharge of costs, herein sustained.

"I say, my lord, as, now, too small's the sum
Among the parties longer strife to breed,
And us to take the whole 'twould ill become,
No further obstacle, I take it, need
A final settlement, forthwith, impede
Doubtless, to share alike, most readily,
(As by the court, I know, will be decreed)
Defendant will perceive, in equity
He's bound:"  the big-wig mutters here &mdash; take your decree.

Now shifts the scene:  instead of wigs and ties,
Arched roof, and matted floor, and painted glass
(Delectable transition!  glad surprise!
What cannot dreams mysterious bring to pass)
A rural scene I view:  luxuriant grass,
O'er-mantling pleasant meads:  clear skies above:
Instead of brawlers, straining throats of brass,
I hear sweet songsters warbling tales of love;&mdash;
The minstrelsy that wakes each vocal hedge and grove.

Here flows, with gentle pace, as chrystal clear,
A sparkling current, verdant banks between
A broad expanse, (as I approach more near)
It opens to the view its bosom sheen:
Nigh level with the stream, its border green
A molten mirror seemeth to enclose,
Reflecting, where unrimpled it is seen,
Whatever plant along the margin grows;
The clouds that float in air; the sky's serene repose

Long hedge-rows intersect the vast extent
Of mead, and gratefully diversify:
Gods, how this river brings to mind the Trent!
Where, cranking in his course, he passes by
The Derwent's mouth; and rich savannas lie,
On either bank, wide-spreading from the bridge
Of Can'dish, downwards; flat, yet firm and dry;
To where commences that delightful ridge,
Wood-crowned and steep, forever destined to abridge

His cranklings and vagaries, at the mouth
Of Soar; and stretches many a league below.
Bounding the view, a little to the south
An upland rises:  on its brow, in shew,
Like one that I familiarly should know,
A village spire, conspicuous far and wide
O'er-looks the plain:  trees, dark with foliage, grow,
Upon the summit and the sloping side,
And in their shady bosom roofs and dwellings hide.

Along the southern bank I bend my way:
Elate with joy, my bosom beats amain:
This seems the path, where, oft, I've loved to stray:
It glads my heart to tread it once again:
My bounding spirits hardly I restrain:
There's not a reach nor winding of the stream,
Whether it mantles to a limpid plain,
Or, gurgling, flashes with the solar-beam,
But, instantaneously, to recognize I seem.

That dwelling, right above, which I approach,
This side the bridge, which ballustrades adorn:
Whereon this instant, I perceive a coach;
(It is the mail, I hear the twanging horn)
That dwelling, open to the rays of morn,
And to behold the day's meridian pride,
But taught the ravings of the north to scorn,
By sheltering pines (with branches spreading wide,)
That vistas form, beneath, thro' which the stream is eyed;

That snug, substantial dwelling seems not strange,
Substantial, too, I well remember deemed
The then possessor:  and, within the range
Of his genteel acquaintance much esteemed:
Yet, was it said, contentment little beamed,
Upon his social or secluded hours:
But sullen, still, at intervals, he seemed,
As one whom spleen or disappointment sours,
Or some corroding care incessantly devours.

The poorer sort would hint, that, to the wrong,
He spread his branch, of sisters sorely grieved:
But, as the gentle-folks no less would throng
To visit, and his visits eke received,
(Whate'er, with them, was whispered or believed)
The wrongs of sisters into nothing sunk;
"Were obsolete, and not to be retrieved
And into nothing wisely had they shrunk
Themselves; and wisely out of observation slunk."

As onward still I move, and now behold,
Distinctly, things minute, approaching nigh
A motley crowd, men, women, young and old,
Gentle, ungentle, simple folk, and sly,
Collected, and collecting meets my eye;
Some issuing forth; some entering:  all's alive;
All's bustle:  bees beneath a radiant sky,
Within, without, and roundabout the hive
Thus strive to issue forth; and thus for entrance strive.

It is an auction:  mingling with the crowd,
I listen to the tattle that goes round:
No longer is it whispered, but aloud
Proclaimed, that Misadelph (the same who own'd,
The place, and seemed in substance to abound,)
With cruel wrongs his sisters had opprest;
And now, at last, fit recompense had found;
Hurl'd from the wealth he wrongfully possest;
Sold up, and left without a bed, whereon to rest.

"Ay, ay, ill-gotten seldom comes to good"
(Observes a wrinkled shrew, with shake of head)
I've often wondered how the villain could
Venture to close his eyes, or go to bed;
For fear the good old lady's ghost, at dead
Of night, should draw his curtain, and insist
Upon his righting every child she bred;
And that, at morning, he was never mist:
Or else found dead, her will still daring to resist."

A group of idlers, from the throng apart,
Listening, with deep attention, to the tale,
Of one who seems to know it all by heart
(So volubly he talks) I join; the pale,
Lank orator, as one, whose fame the vale
Erst filled; by trade a cobbler (tho' his fort
Was politics) ne'er known a wake or sale
To miss, or other popular resort,
I recognize; he'll tell, no doubt, the long and short.

"He's off to town" (proceeds the meagre wight)
"Or Lord knows where:  the wife and children stay
With her relations:  that he's beggared quite
Seems out of doubt; and not a debt will pay
The Chancery suit's expences to defray,
Th' estate was sold:  and now that all is spent,
Comes the High Court's decree, without delay:
The goods are sold, I take it, to prevent
The creditors from seizing, when they learn th' event.

"You have not heard, perhaps" (turning to me
He adds, on seeing that I lend an ear)
"As strange amongst us you appear to be:
(Tho', partly, I should know you, and have here
Met with you, years gone past, or some where near)
To this devoted family, of late,
What has befallen.  Too senseless to revere
A parent's will:  too selfish; or to hate
Too prone, with sisters kind to share a good estate,

"Sufficient the desires of all to fill;
And o'er-persuaded by a sordid knave,
(One Grampus, who resides on yonder hill
A lawyer, fair of speech, of aspect grave;
To forms of godliness almost a slave;
A strict observer of the sabbath:  one
Who empires would resign his soul to save;
Whose brother too, in graces yields to none;
A minister devout, as ever gown put on.)

"He (Misadelph I mean) the love of pelf
Prevailing, and the ties of blood despised,
(Except the ties which bound him to himself)
On Mammon's shrine his conscience sacrificed;
His sisters' rights usurped, by will devised,
And drove them into chancery; there to seek
A remedy (so little were they prized)
Where remedy is ruin to the weak;
And none but golden tongues effectually can speak.

"So Grampus had advised; and represented,
If once of chancery they should have a taste,
Their claim he knew full-well, they'd be contented
To wave (at least to compromise) in haste;
As any other course to wilful waste,
They'd soon be taught, and woeful want, would lead:
Meanwhile, about the sisters those he placed,
Who still with hopes of full redress should feed:&mdash;
"That God would never fall so just a cause to speed."

"In fact, for both sides was the knave concerned,
(As goes the phrase) &mdash; that, who usurped the land
Chose him, because the villain he discerned
Thro' saintly guise, prepared to take in hand,
Whate'er a master-villain might command;
The others, for his sanctity, selected,
Thinking it genuine; and, as they could stand
Upon their merits only, they expected
His character was pledged; nor fear to be neglected.

"This Grampus a trustee was, likewise, named,
Under the parent's will; from whence t' obtrude
His services professional, he claimed
A right; and had the sisters been endued
With sense his schemes to fathom; and t' elude
Had ventured; and his dubious aid to spurn;
His rancorous hatred, doubtless, had ensued:
Their views he would have crost at every turn;
And not have scrupled ev'n their muniments to burn.

"Of all the rancorous beings that exist
On this side hell, if not within its jaws,
None are there, who to the suggestions list
Of malice more, or less whom conscience awes,
Than that infernal brood who deal in laws:
Whether there's something in the occupation
That steels the heart; or, whether 'tis because
They think themselves the lords of the creation,
And take a pleasure in the creature's molestation.

"How great the folly, then, by will or deed,&mdash;
How great, the cruelty &mdash; with trust t' invest
Those whom self-interest prompts disputes to breed;
Whose habits, and whose calling to molest;
And who so easily, the trust can wrest
To their annoyance, whom 'twas meant to friend:
On such a footing, property possest,
(Which while we can't enjoy, we can't but spend,)
Oft proves a curse; and life embitters, in the end.

"Year after year elapsed:  no compromise
Proposed, at first the brother much perplext;
At length it came to this; &mdash; "in any wise,
They could not long hold out; but ere the next;
And still the next, or term ensuing, vext
With ruinous expences, must give in:"
'Tis true, this differed widely from the text,
That if so ill-advised as to begin
A suit, a single taste would make them rue the sin.

"Yet was this hope embraced as eagerly,
As that held out at first, And, now, 'twas clear,
A war of internecion would it be;
As weakness on the one side, proved not fear;
Or, rather, they were forced to persevere:
For, otherwise, no chance had they to pay
The costs incurred; as Grampus made appear:
And, on the other, naught could wrath allay
But 'vengeance!  vengeance!!!'  was the order of the day.

"Strife to begin is like the letting out
Of water (as we're told by David's son;)
That uncontrollably, once free, will spout:
The only way to stop it is &mdash; to shun;
'Tis not to be left off, when once begun:
A chancery suit, one'd think, he had survey'd;
A strife which lasts, till strivers are undone:
As water issuing, when a vent is made,
Until the stream is quite exhausted, is not stay'd.

"Meanwhile, of sisters four, three-fourths, from woes
Released, enjoy the sabbath of the grave:
At last, arrives the moment to disclose
Unwelcome truths, and eke unmask the knave;
Who cared not, now, appearances to save,
Within his grasp as he beheld his prize;
And his own claim no longer chose to wave:
Th' estate for sale, trustees must advertise;
As, ere they can proceed, an obligation lies

"To liquidate the costs on either side;
(Which must from out the common fund be done)
That pity 'twas from petulance and pride
The sisters had, at all, the suit begun;
As, whether it was lost by them or won,
The property in question would be spent:
How much more prudent had it been to shun
Contention, than their angry-feelings vent;
And on a loving brother's bounty live content."

The sum of all is, that these premises
Have shifted hands:  and he, who, erst, the guest
Was proud to be, now calls the mansion his;&mdash;
Grampus, the once trustee, now stands possest,
In his own right, as purchaser:  the rest
You may surmise!  'tis not for me to tell,
How he with means to purchase it was blest
Or how, for half its value it befell,
That ever the trustees should be induced to sell.

But, this is equity, as I am told,
And, therefore, must be right:  but God defend
From such like equity, whome'er I hold
As friends and to my foes alone extend,
Until their malice with their means they spend:
They call me radical; and this I'll own
(A colour to the calumny to lend)
That, torn up by the roots, this thing should down
Called equity, if I could level with a frown.

The sole-surviving sister and her lord,&mdash;
Lord of herself and children; little more&mdash;
Live in the hamlet, close at hand &mdash; Old Ford&mdash;
Here on the bank of Lee their little store
Almost exhausted; and (as heretofore)
Hope-fed no longer:  for they've learnt the worst:
But doomed their dreary passage to explore
Hopeless, thro, life's dark wane, perhaps accurst
(If not self-cursing) by the brood they nurst,
Because in equity's redress confide they durst.

Old Ford, quoth he! &mdash; and, presto!  here am I,
No longer with the lovely Trent in view,
And sun-bright meads, beneath a clear, blue sky;
But faded is the vision:  I pursue
A sluggish stream:  thick clouds of dingy hue
Kilns vomit forth, pantiles and bricks, that roast;
Close to the spot, where Middlesex adieu!
One bids; on journeying to the Eastern coast
Few charms besides this demi-rural place can boast.

It cannot be, that I could e'er mistake,
This scenery, for the margin of the Trent;
Or, for that sparkling flood, this filthy snake
That crawls, not flows &mdash; its slimy folds content
To drag, without a murmur, thro' th' extent
Of flat unvarying, o'er an oozy bed:
I do remember, once, an ear t' have lent
To such a Chancery tale, which may have led
To this transition vile, still running in my head;

The scene of which, here, at Old Ford, was laid;
Here placed the bone of strife; the strivers placed;
Of such incongruous patches dreams are made!
So speedily are images effaced,
Or scenes, by nature un-allied, embraced
In the same sketch, and tablet of the brain
Ev'n now, without perception of the haste,
Am I brought back, I find, to town again;
Or, here, within the Castle's limits still remain.

Who seemed the wight loquacious, who rehearsed
Of Misadelph, so fluently, the tale,
Now seems, in legal science deeply versed,
(Lank, lantern-jaw'd, as he, and eke as pale)
A learned wig:  the concourse of a sale
What seemed, appeareth now the motley throng
Who here pursue their booty, or their bale;&mdash;
Those, who undo, by sheltering us from wrong;
These, while their hardships they would shorten, who prolong.

The former still distinguished by their bags,
Green, purple, blue; for equity's machine
Which grist contain; the latter by their rags;
Condition, that bespeaks a pasture lean;
Sad countenances; and dejected mien:
Tho' some from curiosity alone
Attracted hither, variegate the scene
With objects less to cares and crosses known;
And cheeks of flesh and blood, as well as skin and bone.

How various the complaint of hardships!  some
For years, have been kept out, without remede,
(Nor other prospect have, for years to come)
Of property, (and felt the keenest need
Which wives and children ought to clothe and feed:
Some out of lands and tenements are kept,
Upon pretended flaw in title-deed:
While purchasers (unpaid the price) have stept
Into possession:  there for years the cause hath slept.

Of D&mdash;n&mdash;l, (or of damnable) the name
I hear, with Wh&mdash;ttle something in addition;
Who, at, or near Brentwood, this roguish game
Is said t' have play'd; and violent suspicion
Incurred of meditating the perdition
Of those, whom he had schemed to circumvent;
By harrassing with law, sans intermission,
Until, their last-remaining shilling spent,
To yield to his demands his dupes should be content.

Some have by wills, unnatural and unjust,
At th' instigation made of sordid knaves,
(One for a job manuvr'ing or a trust;
The other, who contempt and odium braves,
Because a wife her sister's portion craves)
Been stript of their inheritance.  I hear
The names of G&mdash;t&mdash;lfe and Vulpinus, slaves
To cold self-interest; who of God the fear
Ne'er knew, nor love of man; nor conscience to revere:

This, wanting the demands of luxury,
Pride, pleasure, prodigality to meet;
At once to deck a wife and family,
And find a chere amie a snug retreat,
Her own and children's comforts to complete,&mdash;
More money than in any honest way
Could be obtained:  and wishing not to cheat
Of certain sums the other, but repay
Upon demand, with interest; lent (I hear them say)

In expectation of no slight return;
That, wishing, (as was natural, to be sure!)
The price of such a risk while he would earn,
His principal and interest to secure
On some substantial pledge, that might endure,
If personal should fail; &mdash; to instigate,
They laid their heads together, an impure
Old man, his nearest flesh and blood to hate;
And made for him a will, by which of her estate

One child was robbed, to give it to the other,
(The wife of that Vulpinus) by whose aid
He might have power to satisfy a brother:&mdash;
(By blood, I mean not brother, but by trade;
Fraternity in fraud; a villain staid)
And then, to make available the will;
Some how or other on his back was laid
With illness the testator; that no skill
Could cure; in other words, without the patient, kill.

Some by trustees are harrassed, who their rents
Embezzle, and by various methods teaze:
Wrongs (rather robberies) which no law prevents;
But leaves to this High Court such remedies
T' apply, as rather aggravate than ease;
As of necessity, to seek redress
More must be spent in perquisites and fees
Than the sum claimed, if than a hundred less;
Which leaves th' oppressor free to harrass and oppress.

What, here, the mind strikes with peculiar force,
This scene attentively while one surveys,
Is &mdash; that wrong-doers are not, as of course.
Amerced in costs:  which would, at once, delays
Cut off, and make attornies to their ways
Look sharply, when invested with a trust:
But while the trust-estate expences pays
Incitements are held out to be unjust; 
And clients into chancery, right or wrong, to thrust.

Some for specifical performance sue
Of contracts:  years on years are gone and past,
Since, with this honest purpose first in view,
Their lot for Chancery and despair was cast:
But, nought specific those who hold them fast,
(Yet loose enough themselves contrive to keep)
But to create a suit, and make it last,
Ere purposed:  all in vain their bread they steep
In tears; in vain deny their griefs the balm of sleep.

Some, who, against trustees, their plaint preferred
For legacies withheld, year after year
(Because, by the respondents, it was erred
Designedly, (as would almost appear)
In their account of monies in arrear
To legatees, which they in hands had got)
Are doomed a senseless argument to bear,
(Which sends themselves by inches to the pot)
"Whether the answer was sufficient, or was not."

Some make complaint that, to and fro' they're lost,
Like shuttle-cocks, twixt one and other court,
Upon a sea of doubts, in darkness, lost;
Of ever-varying gales the prey and sport
That when they seem to make a friendly port,
A violent cross-wind far out to sea
Drives them afresh; to th' Rolls they first resort
The object of their suit the Rolls decree;
And, while their course appears as smooth as smooth can be,

A sudden gust, in shape of an appeal
Drives them across the channel (or the lane
As some would call't) and fixed fast their keel
On hidden shoals; where, grounded, they remain
The sport of pettifoggers, and the gain,
As long as Troy stood siege, within a year:
Meanwhile, a knotty point to ascertain,
A pinnace they equip, its course to steer
That Delphian to consult, called Master, by them here.

For whose report a trifling sum indeed
(Only five hundred pounds) when they have paid,
No better fares't than what the Rolls decreed:
For, ere available it can be made,
Wind-bound, before his Honor Vice, is stay'd
The adventurous skiff; and under an embargo,
Upon appeal from th' adverse party, laid;
Who, having strictly searched the luckless Argo,
Condemns, as contraband, her precious Delphic cargo.

All on a sudden, then up-springs a breeze
In Argo's favor; and, to waft her back,
Across the narrow lane, (or narrow seas,)
Blows strongly an appeal to honest J&mdash;,
Who takes precedence on the fleecy sack,
Against his Vice's notable decision;
And then, at length, ensues the grand attack,
Upon the whole brought under his revision,
Whether the Master, Rolls, or Vice is in misprision,

But, tho' procrastination is the gain
Of lawyers, and to suitors proves a thief,
Among the former, some I hear complain,
That causes are postponed, until to grief
Their clients fall a prey; and a more brief
Course to be taken, dare almost demand:
Perhaps, 'tis only done t' excite belief,
How much they have at heart the cause in hand;
Perhaps to make th' unthinking vulgar understand,

(Fresh gudgeons to inveigle to their net)
How great their weight with him who rules the roast:
How they his memory can make free to whet:
Ev'n now, I hear one D&mdash;l&mdash;g make his boast,
That, t' other day, a letter by the post,
To that exalted quarter he had sent,
Complaining, that his causes, 'mid the host,
Set down for judgment or for argument,
Were overlooked; where-with he would not rest content:

And that the liberty he'd ta'en to state,
(Without reserve, or wish to mince the case,)
That seven long years these causes had, to wait
For judgment, been condemned; so long a space,
As two years back and half, the foremost place
Upon his Lordship's list had occupied;
Where he could wish them still to shew their face,
Until the court their merits should decide;
Meanwhile ten thousand pounds, locked up from use, abide;

And painful 'twas to add (yet was it so)
That th' infant of a broken heart was dead,
On whose behalf, some twenty years ago,
The suit had been commenced; when nought, instead
Of independence, but his daily bread
To earn by daily labour seemed in view,&mdash;
Whose life together with his hopes had fled:
That now, in all delays that might ensue,
Gainst feelings bitterer than wormwood or than rue,

Of relatives rapacious must he strive;
Who, tho' for twenty years they held, their peace,
While th' infant and his hopes were kept alive,
And rather wished protracted than to cease
The suit:  now, that they see their own increase
In its decision, deprecate delay;
And clamour for their property's release!
Prompt heed his Lordship had been pleased to pay
To these audacious hints (I hear him say;)
A private audience granted, and until to-day,

Indulgence craved to turn them in his mind:
And that, at rising of the court, he knows,
His Lordship so indulgent he shall find,
As with another hint or two to close;
And of the matter privately dispose:
The court now rises:  hand-in-hand the sage
Into his private room with D&mdash;l&mdash;g goes:
But other objects forcibly engage
And hurry hence my mind.  Is it a maniac's rage,

Or some one's of the damned, broke loose from hell
That, now, I witness in th' adjoining square!
That wretch is Misadelph (I know him well,
On nearer observation;) crazed with care
He seems; and half-entangled in the snare
Of Guilty Purpose, that abhorred fiend,
Of all the crew that wait upon Despair,
(Who here keep watch, from public notice screen'd,
To cater far their lord; and sate, as soon as keen'd,

His ravening maw) the foulest:  in his net
Past remedy, the victim, now, appears;
With eyes aghast, clenched fist, teeth firmly set
He paces to and fro:  hot, scalding tears
Run down his big-swollen cheeks; whoever bears
(As I can bear; and shudder to relate)
His horrid imprecations, that reveres
Religious truths, and in a future state
For retribution looks, must needs deplore his fate.

"Curse on all laws, and lawyers! &mdash; may the flames
Of hell each mother's son of them consume!
Curse on mine own existence, (he exclaims)
Curse on the breast that nurtured, and the womb
That bare me! &mdash; why did such a monster room
E'er find, upon the surface of the earth!
Why, when I first saw day-light, did the tomb
Not close upon me, strangled in my birth;
Why that event not mourning cause instead of mirth!

"Then had I not my nearest kin destroyed,
And years, instead of moments, caused of woe;
Nor squandered property (yet not enjoyed);
Nor wrought mine own and children's overthrow;
And made a once-respected wife to know,
How soon the world forsakes whom fortune spurns:
Hell and damnation!  how my temples glow.&mdash;
My brain's on fire! &mdash; it burns!  it burns!  it burns!
And round, and round, and round incessantly it turns!

"Where am I! &mdash; stands there not before mine eyes
That cursed pandemonium, close at hand;
That den of thieves, the which to sacrifice
I hither sped, post-haste!  and do I stand
Stock-still, and pause to hurl the flaming brand,
And wrap the fabric in a quenchless blaze,
Who have a hell within me, at command,
(Those shooting throes, this burning globe that craze)
Enough to strike a world with terror and amaze.

"But, stay!  these pistols!  let me not forget!
Blood, blood, I purposed, first; and then the fire!
A terrible example will I set;
And aim so high, that he whose aim is higher,
Beyond a subject's life must needs aspire.
Curse on my dull delay!  what do I see!&mdash;
The court uprisen and the throng retire!
Then am I doomed an age of agony
To suffer, ere to-morrow's opportunity.

"Oh, hell, where art thou, if within this head
Thy flames are not at work!  and where thy train&mdash;
(Those foul tormentors of the wicked dead,
And tempters of the living) if this brain
Be not their curst abode, wherein, amain,
Their instruments of torture they apply;
And wrench and stretch and every fibre strain,
Almost to breaking! &mdash; yet, I would not die:
No, no! &mdash; hold out, at least, grieved flesh, until the cry

"Of vengeance I have answered; and have taught
Such wretches as myself, there is a way,
By which, altho' deliverance is not wrought
From their own troubles, yet, a parting ray
Of joy, to glad their darkly-closing day,
May still be caught (if hands they have unbound,
The author of their griefs by making pay
His last debt, first; yes, let no wretch be found,
Henceforth, his own, without another.  mortal wound

"First, to inflict!  As to redress by law,
Most cruel mockery 'tis by all confest:
The law is a Leviathan, whose maw
Craves all: &mdash; alike th' oppressor and opprest:
A bottomless abyss, in which, no rest
From direst torment, those, who trust to 't, find:
Then, beat the heart of Cain in every breast;
Be each his own avenger on his kind;
Let murder stalk abroad; give pity to the wind."

Exhausted now with raving, he reclines
Against a bulk, composed and cooler grown;
And, what he was, reflects!  must be, opines;
What is, feels most acutely, &mdash; overthrown,
Stript of his wordly-substance, which alone
He made his god:  to fashionable friends,
As if by such ne'er owned, as much unknown;
Yet, not because he sought unrighteous ends,
But wealth no more commands; nor fashionably spends.

Then flock the fiends around him, and afford,
Distinctly seen, each his peculiar aid,
The victim to secure for that grim lord,
At whose behest, their wicked snares are laid
Whose will, in all things, is by them obeyed:
Despair, &mdash; the giant, whose terrific cell,
Whither life-bating wretches are convey'd,
Deep underneath this castle as a well,
Is situate, athwart the nearest cut to hell:

Stern Disappointment meets him with a frown,
That sinks his prostrate spirits in the dust;
And bids him think himself for ever down;
Then, squalid Beggary, a filthy crust,
Munching, (his eyes, yet, glistening still with lust)
Full in his face, hard stares, and stares again;
That, will he, nill he, look at him he must,
So fixt before him doth the fright remain;
And tho' his eyes to close he strives, 'tis all in vain.

Then Guilty Purpose twinges him, and wakes
A bitter recollection of his aims:
His part while, in derision, Mockery takes,
Familiarly, and his acquaintance claims;
And pities him, poor gentleman, not blames:
Yes, that he does:  and calls the other "Elf,"
For twinging him; and such like wicked names;
"For let the worst be said of Misadelph,
To none, a greater foe he'd been, than to himself."

A horse-laugh setting up, then off he walks,
Yet oft looks backward, and the butt reviews;
With every one, that meets him, stops and talks;
And, then, again a louder laugh ensues:
Distraction &mdash; to abridge the hellish crew's
Attempts, his aid to lend, g last thinks fit,
At whose approach the victim cannot choose,
But start, afresh, into a raving fit,
Which smothers quite the last remaining ray of wit.

His schemes of vengeance are lost sight of:  nought's
(So keen his anguish; his remorse so keen)
But self-destruction present to his thoughts,
(Except the wish that he had never been)
Grasping his pistol, down he sinks, between
Two fiends, to marshall him the way, who seem:
That moment his distracted wife is seen
Approaching:  'tis too late:  a thrilling scream
She utters: &mdash; I awake; and find it all a dream.
