On Tiber's banks, Tiber, whose waters glide
In slow meanders down to Gaigra's side;
And circling all the horrid mountain round,
Rushes impetuous to the deep profound;
Rolls o'er the ragged rocks with hideous yell;
Collects its waves beneath the earth's vast shell:
There for a while, in loud confusion hurl'd,
It crumbles mountains down and shakes the world.
Till borne upon the pinions of the air,
Through the rent earth, the bursting waves appear;
Fiercely propell'd the whiten'd billows rise,
Break from the cavern, and ascend the skies:
Then lost and conquer'd by superior force,
Thro' hot Arabia holds its rapid course.
On Tiber's banks, where scarlet jasmines bloom,
And purple aloes shed a rich perfume:
Where, when the sun is melting in his heat,
The reeking tygers find a cool retreat;
Bask in the sedges, lose the sultry beam,
And wanton with their shadows in the stream,
Where in the days of old a god appear'd:
'Twas in the dead of night at Chalma's feast,
The tribe of Alra slept around the priest.
He spoke; as evening thunder bursting near,
His horrid accents broke upon the ear;
Attend Alraddas, with your sacred priest!
This day the sun is rising in the east;
Now, now is rising in a mortal birth.
He vanish'd like a vapor of the night,
And sunk away in a faint blaze of light.
Swift from the branches of the holy oak,
Horror, confusion, fear, and torment broke;
And still when Midnight trims her mazy lamp,
They take their way thro' Tiber's watry swamp.
On Tiber's banks, close rank'd, a warring train,
Stretch'd to the distant edge of Galca's plain;
So when arriv'd at Gaigra's highest steep,
We view the wide expansion of the deep;
See in the gilding of her wat'ry robe,
The quick declension of the circling globe;
From the blue sea a chain of mountains rise,
Blended at once with water and with skies:
Beyond our sight, in vast extension curl'd,
The check of waves, the guardians of the world.
Strong were the warriors, as the ghost of Cawn,
Who threw the hill of archers to the lawn;
When the soft earth at his appearance fled;
And rising billows play'd around his head:
When a strong tempest rising from the main,
Dash'd the full clouds, unbroken from the plain.
Nicou, immortal in the sacred song,
Held the red sword of war, and led the strong;
Well try'd in battle, and well known in fame.
Nicou descended from the god of war,
Who liv'd coeval with the morning star:
Narada was his name; who cannot tell,
How all the world through great Narada fell?
Vichon, the god who rul'd above the skies,
Look'd on Narada, but with envious eyes:
The warrior dar'd him, ridicul'd his might,
Bent his white bow, and summon'd him to fight.
Vichon disdainful bade his lightnings fly,
And scatter'd burning arrows in the sky;
Threw down a star the armor of his feet,
To burn the air with supernatural heat;
Bid a loud tempest roar beneath the ground;
Lifted the sea, and all the earth was drown'd.
Narada still escap'd; a sacred tree
Lifted him up, and bore him thro' the sea.
The waters still ascending fierce and high,
He tower'd into the chambers of the sky:
There Vichon sat; his armor on his bed,
He thought Narada with the mighty dead.
Before his seat the heav'nly warrior stands,
The lightning quiv'ring in his yellow hands:
The god astonish'd dropt; hurl'd from the shore,
He drop'd to torments and to rise no more.
Headlong he falls; 'tis his own arms compel,
Condemn'd in ever-burning fires to dwell,
From this Narada, mighty Nicou sprung;
Who led th' embattled archers to the field,
And bore a thunderbolt upon his shield:
That shield his glorious father died to gain,
When the white warriors fled along the plain:
When the full sails could not provoke the flood,
'Till Nicou came, and swell'd the seas with blood.
Slow at the end of his robust array,
Against the son of Nair, the young Rorest,
Once the companion of his youthful breast.
Strong were the passions of the son of Nair,
Insatiate in desire; fierce as the boar;
Firm in resolve, as Cannie's rocky shore.
All Nicou's friendship, happiness, and joy;
They fought in vain, till Vicat, Vichon's son,
Never in feats of wickedness outdone,
Saw Nica, sister to the mountain king,
Drest beautiful, with all the flow'rs of spring;
He saw and scatter'd poison in her eyes;
From limb to limb, in varied forms he flies:
Dwelt on her crimson lip, and added grace
To every glossy feature of her face.
Rorest was fir'd with passion at the sight,
He saw, he lov'd, and burning with desire,
Bore the soft maid, from brother, sister, sire,
Pining with sorrow, Nica faded, died:
Like a fair aloe in its morning pride.
This brought the warrior to the bloody mead,
And sent to young Rorest the threatning reed.
He drew his army forth:  Oh!  need I tell!
That Nicou conquer'd, and the lover fell:
His breathless army mantled all the plain;
And death sat smiling on the heaps of slain.
The battle ended, with his reeking dart,
The pensive Nicou pierc'd his beating heart:
And to his mourning valiant warriors cry'd,
I and my sister's ghost are satisfy'd.
