Wouldst thou see Nature pure and unarray'd?
Visit the lowly Cottage of the Hind;
His Art (if any) home-spun and rough-made,
Disguises not the Workings of his Mind.
To thee, whom simple Nature's Lore can charm,
These Words I send, heard late in Village-Farm.

MAN.
But whither fair Maid, do ye go?
Oh, where do ye bend your Way?
I will be told wither ye go,
I will not be answered Nay.

WOMAN.
I go to the Dale, down to Robin and Nell,
To help 'em at making of Hay.

MAN.
Sir Robert, the Parson, has hired me there,
Come, come, let us hasten away;
We'll work and we'll sing, and we'll make merry Cheer,
As long as the long Summer's Day.

WOMAN.
How hard is it always to work?
How full is our sad State of Care?
Lady Bridget, who lies in the Kirk,
Deckt with Jewels and Gold,
Was of the same Mould;&mdash;
Why than ours was her Fortune more fair?

MAN.
Lo, our good Priest is at the Gate,
Ever ready to counsel his Neighbour,
He'll tell why, whilst some are so great,
We are doom'd without ceasing to labour.

SIR ROBERT THE PRIEST
[MEDITATING ALONE.]
The sultry Sun is in his mid Career;
A seed of Life from ev'ry Beam he sheds:
Yet, while his piercing Rays the Grass make sear,
See!  the sever'd Flowret withers o'er the Meads!
Lost its rich Fragrance!  lost its vermeil Bloom!&mdash;
When sever'd by Death's Dart, such is the gen'ral doom.

MAN.
All-a-boon, Sir Priest!  all-a-boon!
I beseech thee now say unto me,
Why Sir Geoff'ry the Knight, with his Lady so bright,
So rich and so happy should be,
Whilst myself and my Mate, in wretched Estate,
Must in Labour and Drudgery all our Days waste,
Yet never of Plenty or Honours shall taste.

PRIEST.
Turn thine Eyes round upon this new mown Lee;
With Look attentive view the wither'd Dale;
Here to the Question thou'lt fit Answer see;
This faded Flow'r suggests a moral Tale.
Late fresh it blow'd, it flourished and did well,
Proudly disdaining the short neigh'bring Green;
Yet now its Pride is humbled; &mdash; lo!  where fell
Its faded Glories on the Sun-burnt plain!
Did not its gaudy Look, whilst it did stand,
To pluck it in its Prime move some dread Hand?
Such is the Way of Life: &mdash; The great Man's Wealth
Tempts Ruffian Violence his Peace to wound:
If thou art blest with Bread, Content, and Health,
Believe the Truth, &mdash; none is more happy found.
Thou workest? &mdash; Well!  can that a Trouble be?
Sloth more would tire thee than the roughest Day.
Couldst thou the inmost Soul of Man but see,
Full well thou'dst be convinc'd of what I say.
But let me hear thy Way of Life, and then
Hear thou from me the Lives of other Men.

MAN.
I rise up with the Sun,
Working the live long Day;
And when my Work is done,
I tune some Roundelay:
I follow the Plough-Tail
With a Jug of good Ale.
On ev'ry Holiday
With Minstrels am I seen,
Chearful, footing it away
With Maidens on the Green:
But oh!  I wish to be more great
In Honour, Title, and Estate.

PRIEST.
Hast thou not seen a Tree upon a Hill,
Whose tow'ring Branches to the Skies ascend?
Hast thou not seen it by the Roots up-torn,
When some fierce Tempest Earth and Heav'n doth rend?
While lowly Shrubs that in the Vale delight,
Unhurt, unshaken bide the pelting Storm?
Such is this World's Estate: &mdash; the Man of Might
Is Tempest chaft; his Woe great as his Storm:
Thyself, now a low Shrub of small Account,
Would'st fiercer feel the Wind, if higher thou could'st mount.
