Me too, the meanest of the tuneful train,
With mild acceptance, gentle Peace, receive;
Tho' cold our sun, and fruitless is our plain,
For thee, of choicest flow'rs a wreath I'd weave;
For ne'er shall Camus want a laurel'd bard
Where lofty Milton and great Dryden sung,
While the harmonious plaintive voice is heard
Amid the shades his lute where Prior strung;
For ne'er shall Pembroke want a son inspir'd,
Where still survives the flame that Spenser first acquir'd.

Oh had I but our Spenser's tuneful reed!
My honied lay should sweetly flow along;
Deftly I'd pipe it o'er the flow'ry mead,
And emulate Dan Pope's melodious song;
To thee, Irene, fairest nymph, I'd sing,
And wake the babling echo with thy praise;
Thy soaring praise should imp my unfledg'd wing,
And teach your bard his heav'n-ward flight to raise:
But me nor Spenser's gentle Muse inspires,
Nor glow within my breast ypent Miltonic fires.

Else should my verse Thy victories pursue,
WILLIAM, thro' rescu'd realms and battles gain'd;
More glories rising to my ravish'd view
Than ever painter sketch'd or poet feign'd;
While Fancy, pow'r creative, strives in vain
To set thy virtues in a fairer light,
And Envy, all too feeble to sustain
Thy blaze of glory, sickens at the sight;
My verse should live with thy immortal name,
And climb with distant step the steep ascent of fame.

There glitt'ring bright in military gold,
And in imperial purple richly dight;
Amid ten thousand dangers inly bold,
The rising Hero should conduct the fight:
While vanquish'd foes his virtue should approve,
Yet, studious of their dearer country's praise
Give half the glory of the war to JOVE;
He on that basis should his merit raise,
Deeming the greatest praise that can be giv'n,
To love, and to be lov'd of Brittain and of Heav'n.

Here firm and steady as a rooted rock,
Albeit attack'd by waves and adverse winds,
He stands the Gallic host's impetuous shock,
The triple chain of battle he unbinds;
He breaks the ranks, the pride of Gallia flies
Dispers'd and routed, broken is their pow'r;
He lifts the sword, and lo!  a hero dies,
And valour and experience are no more;
And there the British Prince triumphant strides
While down his wounded leg the purple current glides.

But see!  the Chieftain gives the peaceful sign,
The veterans, with slaughter tir'd, obey;
Ceas'd are the fires, and horrors of the mine
And smould'ring smoke bursts into sudden day;
The feeble cry, and agonizing yell
Of youth robust, and weak enervate age,
Applaud th' heroick hand by which they fell,
Aw'd by such worth, and praise the gen'rous rage:
Senseless mean-while and harden'd to his own,
He tends his soldiers wounds, and feels for them alone.

'Tis she!  'tis she, she comes, the heav'nly fair,
Irene, follow'd by each smiling grace,
Mild is her mien, and placid all her air,
And soft Philanthropy is in her face;
With her Contentment steady and serene,
The same in happiness alike and woe.
When Providence presents the checquer'd scene
Submissive she awaits the coming blow:
While virtuous Industry supports her train,
And guiltless Affluence untouch'd with venal stain.

Still does the long, the gay procession pass!
Majestick Clio, and each sister Muse,
Recording History, with pen of brass
I see; nor Sculpture does her aid refuse,
Awful she looks, yet duteous to the Nine!
As Homer dictated Euphranor's Jove,
She plans and meditates the great design;
And, while her thoughts to theirs obedient move
To raise the MONARCH grand in Parian stone,
They weave the laureate wreath, and nobler Civic crown.

So, when Augustus bade the war expire
And freed the Nations from the dread of Rome,
Immortal Horace touch'd the sounding lyre,
And bold Vitruvius swell'd the ample dome;
Then to the gods three hundred temples rose
With Io Paeans ev'ry temple rung,
While storied columns told the vanquish'd foes,
The Secular, the lofty strain was sung;
They prais'd the Prince whose favour did dispence
Health to th' expiring Arts and vital influence.

And thus, I deem, our Sov'reign should be paid,
Our Sov'reign's praise ye heav'n-taught bards repeat;
In all the majesty of verse array'd,
Your Friend, your Patron, your Augustus meet;
And you, ye Architects, with happiest art
Thro' all th' ideal buildings strictly search
To raise, memorials of a grateful heart,
The tow'ring column and Triumphal arch;
Convey to after-times the Hero down,
And with your Prince's name immortalize your own.
