Gathering in sullen wrath, around, above,
The chill damp vapours of a wintry sky
From the dense margin of th' horizon move,
Marking the closing hour of evening nigh.
Fainter and fainter, to the gazer's eye,
The well-known view of house, and field, and tree;
Yet still the more, though still in vain, we try
To pierce the shades, our market-cart to see,
And learn how butter sells, and what the news may be.

And smile not thou, nor deem our wisdom less,
If haply thus we waste an idle hour;
But, child of knowledge!  in thy pride confess,
How oft, like us, thy wit hath learn'd no more,
Than thus, with anxious eye, intent to pore
Through deepening shades that mock thine utmost art;
Go &mdash; thread the mazes of scholastic lore,
And sound its depths, and light and truth impart,
Then turn and mock our toil &mdash; to find our market-cart.

And not in vain our search &mdash; triumphant, see!
The conquering Heroine's carriage "stops the way!"
The farmer quits in haste his toast and tea,
To learn the varying fortunes of the day;
And if the mare, perchance, hath run away&mdash;
Or if the old blind horse hath journey'd well,
And "Hath he had, indeed, his fill of hay?&mdash;
And didst thou in the market bear the bell?
And what is beef per pound, and how does mutton sell?"

A different tribe of querists next draw nigh,
Nor less impatient from the charge refrain:&mdash;
"Well, has my bandbox travell'd safe and dry,
Spite of the driving wind and pelting rain?
Or has another evening come in vain,
And brought no bonnet 'turn'd and trimm'd' for me?
And must I write, and scold, and write again?
Will never tradesman's word and deed agree?
Or are they faithless all? &mdash; true but to treachery?"

Then, proud as warrior, when his crutch he wields,
And fights his thousand battles o'er again,
The dauntless champion of our humbler fields
Recounts the history of her brief campaign;
Tells how her willing steed obey'd the rein,
And trotted homewards with his load, untired;&mdash;
How quick the butter sold &mdash; how oft, in vain,
The hungry cits another pound required,
And of their cousins' weal so anxiously inquired.

True, we may envy not the busier lot
Of those who tread the crowded streets along;
Yet, not forgetting, "not to be forgot,"
Lost in the vortex of that busy throng,
Our pride, our feelings &mdash; call them right or wrong&mdash;
Wring from the heart that wish where'er we stray:
And if to mightiest souls such wish belong,
As oft affirmed &mdash; nor less, perhaps, than they,
We love the voice that asks &mdash; "How fare our friends to-day?"

"Now ope the budget!" &mdash; Life hath joys more bright,
That come in sweetness, and in sadness part;&mdash;
Yet, when my eye hath dwelt with fond delight
On the kind greetings of a friendly heart,
And felt each cloud of care at once depart,
And felt the spirits, light as air, rebound,
At the glad impulse words like these impart,
Well may I ask, as week to week comes round,
"If joy be found not here, where then shall joy be found?"

O well-remember'd!  lost, yet present still,
To the fond memory of a grateful mind&mdash;
Though other hand than thine the void may fill
With aim as friendly, and with act as kind;
Yet, could these hours return, and cease to find
Thy memory link'd with every joy they bring,
And find thine image less with life entwined,
Deep, deep indeed, at dull oblivion's spring
Must the changed soul have drank, and bathed her active wing!

Years have roll'd by since thou thy place hast left,
And busy hours move on, as when with thee;
And Time her sting from Sorrow has bereft,
But added sweetness to thy memory.
That field of thought, whose treasures, large and free,
Thy hand first open'd to my youthful sight,
Still spreads its stores of boundless wealth to me,&mdash;
While thousand things, less permanently bright,
Gleam transient o'er the mind &mdash; then lose themselves in night.

Thoughts of man's transient fate!&mdash; how fast entwined!
Even in our gayest moods we feel ye near!
Touch but a string, and lo!  how close behind
Grief follows joy &mdash; the smile hath left a tear.
Go, idle verse!  I have not heart to rear
Thine empty unsubstantial frame again:
The time may come, and thou once more shalt cheer
The wintry eve: &mdash; till then, farewell the strain,
Record of one brief hour &mdash; its pleasure and its pain!
