Deep in the winding mazes of a wood,
On Thames' fair bank, Britannia pensive stood.
There on her pointless jav'lin she reclin'd,
While her loose tresses wanton'd in the wind;
And at a distance on the ground were thrown
Her plumy helmet and her laurel crown.
Beneath her feet, by circling flow'rs conceal'd,
Lay Freedom's precious gift, her fav'rite shield;
That shield, the Hero's boast, the Tryrant's dread,
Which oft has guarded Marlb'rough's glorious head,
And oft from either WILLIAM'S sacred brow
Has turn'd aside the meditated blow:
Here in the sculptur'd gold a Lion roar'd;
There her lost empire Tyranny deplor'd,
And mad Ambition and his lawless train
Repining lay, and gnaw'd fair Freedom's chain;
While lillies, with the rose and thistle join'd,
In graceful union round the border twin'd.
The Goddess musing heav'd a piteous sigh,
Then thus began, and wip'd each tearful eye;
While Thames to listen left his oozy bed,
And silently inclin'd his reedy head.

"How long shall Mars with unresisted sway,
His bloody ensigns o'er the world display?
Still shall the cries of orphans wound my ears?
Still must I grieve to view the widow's tears?
And pity's soothing balm in vain apply,
Those cries to silence and those tears to dry?
Why are my fields with smiling plenty crown'd,
Why has kind Neptune stretch'd his billows round,
If Freedom's call the lab'ring hind constrains
For war's alarms to quit his promis'd gains,
Doom'd in Her cause to perish, far remov'd
From all he valu'd and from all he lov'd?
Mistaken men!  these hateful jars give o'er;
Let savage Discord vex the world no more:
But ev'ry act by strictest reason scan,
And learn to know the Hero from the Man.
While wars in each unpolish'd region cease,
And Turks and Tartars taste the sweets of peace;
In nature's state while Afric's swarthy bands
Securely wander o'er their barren sands;
While undisturb'd the barb'rous Indian roves
Thro' spicy fields, or sleeps in citron groves;
Shall Europe's sons, enrich'd with ev'ry art
That can instruct the head or mend the heart.
To scenes of death with impious fury run,
And all the soothing joys of friendship shun?
Bid Desolation rage on ev'ry plain,
And swell with purple floods the boundless main?
Flandria has long with secret horror view'd
Her cities sack'd and provinces subdu'd;
Belgia in vain unlocks her wat'ry stores,
And o'er her lands the subject ocean pours;
Italia's myrtle shades with shouts resound,
And her proud buildings smoke upon the ground:
Nay, not content to spread our num'rous hosts
O'er Europe's fields, and vex our native coasts,
To distant climes our legions we convey,
On Indian seas our hostile flags display;
There fright the peaceful regions with alarms,
And rouse the natives of the East to arms.
Perhaps ev'n now the proud insidious Gaul,
To crown his triumphs, meditates My fall;
Faction may once again his aid implore,
And Gallic navies hover round my shore.
Should he succeed, &mdash; farewell my ancient fame!
Farewell th' unrival'd honours of my name!
Farewell my boasted empire o'er the main!
Bedford has toil'd and Anson fought in vain."

While thus the Goddess, with an anxious mind,
Pour'd out her soft complainings to the wind;
Swifter than thought a ray of heav'nly light,
Dispell'd the gloom and chear'd her ravish'd sight:
And strait in snowy garb a beauteous maid
Celestial sweetness to her eyes display'd;
In careless folds her garment trail'd along,
And negligently loose behind her hung,
With female softness shone her lovely face,
Awful she mov'd with more than manly grace;
Fresh garlands deck'd her brow, and in her hand
She stretch'd the pledge of peace, an olive wand.

"Again the Gods, (she cry'd) Britannia, smile,
Mov'd by your sighs, on this their fav'rite isle;
For see!  again, to dry those falling tears,
The long-forgotten form of Peace appears.
In happy union join'd, the sea and land
Shall homage pay, and own my mild command;
My empire shall extend from shore to shore,
And Discord's fierce alarms be heard no more.

"Bless'd isle!  alike for arms and arts renown'd,
Adorn'd with heroes and with statesmen crown'd;
Those form'd to curb by war oppression's rage,
And these by peaceful councils to asswage:
The rescued world to each her freedom owes,
Since here a Churchill and a Sandwich rose.
Nor think, Britannia, I shall cease to shed
My kindest influence on your favour'd head;
While each fond eye with anxious joy surveys
Those pledges of your peace in future days,
The blooming Royal Progeny, design'd
To bless these nations and adorn mankind.
The Sons with gentle sway thy realms shall guide,
And Cato's virtues share, without his pride;
Each lovely Daughter shall like Marcia shine,
And graceful ease with sacred manners join:
While Kings, inspir'd by love, or aw'd by fear,
Shall court thy friendship, and thy pow'r revere.

"But now to clear with smiles your clouded brow,
And banish from your breast each secret woe,
See where thy happy Monarch, wafted o'er
With prosp'rous omens from the Belgic shore,
Returns, with me his much-lov'd isle to greet,
And lay his peaceful trophies at your feet."

These welcome sounds with transport and surprize
The Goddess heard, then rais'd her drooping eyes;
And, to compleat her bliss, with pleasing awe
The well-known form of her Deliv'rer saw:
Plenty before him strow'd with flow'rs the ground,
And Peace with blooming wreaths his temples crown'd:
At their approach the Sons of Discord fled,
And Fraud conceal'd in shades her hateful head;
Ev'n Faction's loud complaints were sooth'd to rest,
Astonish'd Envy bow'd her haughty crest;
And all with silent admiration gaz'd,
When GEORGE'S hand the peaceful olive rais'd.
So, when Aeneas wav'd the golden bough,
Stern Charon smooth'd his formidable brow;
And view'd the Hero with less surly mien,
Struck with the sacred gift, so rarely seen:
While airy forms, with joy unknown before,
Beheld the glitt'ring branch and crouded to the shore.
