At length the hostile din of war is o'er:
The battle's thunder shakes the field no more.
At length, with Love and joy in smiles combin'd,
Fair PEACE descends from Heav'n to bless mankind.
Where bleeding earth late groan'd with warriors slain,
SHE bids the harvest wave along the plain:
Where cities sunk beneath the fiery storm,
Lo, at Her voice confusion leaps to form!
The village dance and courtly pomp confess
Her the sole source of social happiness.
No more the cannon's rage shall blot the flood;
The guilty wave no more be stain'd with blood:
But the glad sail shall waft the vessel o'er,
And ev'ry nation visit ev'ry shore.
The blessings of each clime each clime shall gain;
Nor Ocean spread his mighty floods in vain.

But chief, the pride of Peace, shall FREEDOM smile,
And show'r her glories o'er Britannia's isle:
There, clad in heav'n's own lustre, TRUTH shall shine,
And call forth VIRTUE'S awful form divine.
Congenial pow'rs!  by native union sway'd!
I sing your kind reciprocated aid.

O PELHAM, Thou to whom the Fates dispense
The godlike pow'r of wide beneficence;
Deign to the faithful Muse thine ear to bend:
The Muse is Thine, for she is Freedom's friend.
And Ye, the Guardians of celestial Truth,
Who form the thought, and strike the fate of youth;
With candid eye the poet's labour view,
Who paints those precepts which he learnt from You.

First to my song, majestic Freedom, rise!
And call thy twin-born sister from the skies,
Unspotted Truth:  for Truth from thee alone,
While she augments Thy pow'r, receives her own.
See, the young Mind, while things unknown surround,
In the fond gaze of ardent wonder drown'd,
With native joy each hidden cause explores,
And wakes to action all her free-born pow'rs.
On bold tho' artless pinion, proud to KNOW,
She tempts the heights above, and depths below;
And, glad thro' wide creation's maze to stray,
Soars to the founts of intellectual day:
Propitious Truth applauds her daring wing,
And smiling leads her to her hallow'd spring.

Nor less fair Truth and Liberty combine
To warm the breast with Virtue's flame divine.
Truth bids the Soul to scenes of wonder rise,
And read her Maker's image in the skies;
Points out, thro' earth below and heav'n above,
Wisdom and Pow'r, the ministers of Love.
With native sympathy the Soul elate
Sees to admire, admires to imitate.
Thence Freedom fires the heart, by Truth refin'd,
To spread her equal gifts on all mankind:
Whom heav'n thought worthy Being to possess,
She greatly thinks is worthy Happiness;
Instructs the heart with boundless love to glow,
The gentle eye to melt at human woe:
Bliss opens round, obedient to her call;
And what is Virtue, but what blesses all?

Far other fate attends the free-born mind,
In the fell chain of ruffian pow'r confin'd:
Where tyrant-rage and bigot-frowns controul
The native efforts of the struggling Soul.
Thro' fair creation's round tho' beauty reign;
For Her, creation's beauty smiles in vain:
In vain yon orbs refulgent roll on high;
Shut is each sense, fast-clos'd her ideot eye:
No more intent to view, or fond to hear,
Her wonder sinks to ign'rance; that, to fear:
Appal'd she starts at ev'ry Pow'r unknown,
Nor dares to search God's nature, or her own.

Hence Tyranny and Falsehood urge their art,
And blast each virtue opening in the heart:
While their vain terrors ev'ry pow'r controul,
Bind thought in shackles, and subdue the soul.
Thus by the damps of coward fear oppress'd,
The beam of love expires within the breast:
Or, if rekindled, Superstition's call
Contracts the ray that Heav'n ordain'd for all:
Impells blind Virtue in her abject state
To love That pow'r alone, she ought to hate;
To court Oppression, and with mean disdain
To stab kind Freedom, that would break her chain.
Hence in the breast what serpent-monsters rise!
Perverted virtue is the blackest vice.
Hence Nature mourns her gentle whisper scorn'd,
And weeps the Graces into Furies turn'd.
Hence Justice drags fair Freedom to her fate;
And Love destroys, beyond the rage of Hate:
Hence heav'n-born Charity herself inspires
The lingring rack, and slow consuming fires;
And teaches in the breast humane to dwell
Remorseless vengeance, and the spite of Hell.

O GRANTA, warm for Truth, in Virtue wise,
To Freedom's aid with generous ardor rise!
To thy committed youth the flame impart,
And shoot the fair infection thro' the heart.
To Heav'n obedient, urge the mild decree,
Which warn'd mankind, "that TRUTH SHALL MAKE THEM FREE:"
And prove, by pointing Heav'n's extended plan,
The foes of Freedom are the foes of Man.
Bid Britain's sons with pitying scorn behold
Her treach'rous foes, in lurking treason bold:
Who wish'd &mdash; yet dar'd not lift the coward hand,
When late Rebellion shook th' astonish'd land;
Who glad wou'd fix their Idol on the throne,
That his unbridled rage might shield their own;
Who veil th' Oppressor in the Slave's disguise,
Willing to fawn, that they may tyrannize;
Who spurn the gifts of Peace with vile disdain,
Tho' FREEDOM, and a PATRIOT-MONARCH reign.
O bid thy kindling youth with ravish'd eyes
See thy bright train of Bards and Sages rise,
Thy Patriots, Heroes, who, inspir'd by Thee,
Or liv'd or dy'd for Truth and Liberty.
Thy pledge of rising day see BACON shine!
And awful NEWTON, Nature's boast and Thine!
Thine, moral SPENSER'S heav'n-enkindled flame:
And Thine the great, long-injur'd MILTON'S name.
With scorn he saw destroying Licence rise,
Saw impious Wit caress'd in Wisdom's guise;
And firm to virtue in degenerate days,
Prefer'd a world's reproach to guilty praise:
O grateful, twine around his honor'd brow,
The Poet's laurel, and the Sage's too!
How did thine eye the gen'rous sorrow shed,
When Truth and Freedom in thy RUSSEL bled!
How flow'd thy joy, when at the destin'd hour
Thy mitred Patriots stem'd the tyrant's pow'r!
Nor shalt thou less in virtuous ardor shine,
Still fond to call emerging wisdom Thine:
The first to chase the gloom, thro' ev'ry age
Of cloysterd ignorance and monkish rage;
From bigot pow'r canst boast ERASMUS won,
And mighty LOCKE thy glad adopted son.

Rise, GRANTA, rise!  augment thine awful train;
Nor let the great examples shine in vain!
With Thee fair praise or black reproach must dwell,
The friend of Heav'n, or instrument of Hell.
Should'st Thou &mdash; shou'd ISIS &mdash; by your foes betray'd,
With foul defection start from Freedom's aid;
Shou'd your polluted streams (which erst refin'd
Pour'd truth and wisdom on the thirsty mind)
O shou'd they, poyson'd by fell Treason's hand,
Diffuse infection thro' the tainted land;
How wou'd expiring Freedom curse the bane,
And Angels weep their cares for Britain vain!
But, if the Muse prophetic may divine,
A nobler lot, my GRANTA, shall be Thine;
Ev'n now her raptur'd eye, with glad surprize,
Beholds thy long-successive glories rise:
Thy stream, where Heav'n's reflected image shines,
Brightens by age, "and as it runs refines."
From Thee the Sage shall catch the piercing ray,
And o'er the depths of Nature spread the day:
At Thy command, in deep attention hung,
Shall list'ning senates bless the Patriot's tongue;
From Thee the Patriot's breast shall catch the fire,
Fond for his country's freedom to expire:
Thy future Bards shall rise the tyrant's dread,
And pour the Muse's thunder on his head;
Thy glowing Warriors feel the wish refin'd,
And teach the deathful sword to save mankind:
Thy Priests, in hope and love humanely wise,
Shall raise fall'n man and guide him to the skies:
Whilst Thou, high-rais'd on Freedom's awful throne,
Shalt justly boast each glorious toil thine own.
