Fast, fast the driving snow, involving all
Our little world, descends; and every tree
Clothes with its plumes, and weaves them as they fall
In icy garlands, twining gracefully.
How lovely, thus, amid the waste, to see
This fairy work of Nature's frolic hand!
As if, in all her toils, there still must be
Some light creation, exquisitely plann'd,
Blending for man's delight the graceful with the grand.

Let her not speak in vain! &mdash; the mind may rear
Its unsubstantial visions &mdash; only made,
Like as the glittering garland hanging there,
To charm the eye &mdash; then into nothing fade:
Still they are beautiful; and we are paid
For all their emptiness, if thus they come
To brighten up the lengthen'd hours of shade&mdash;
To gild with smiles the little world of home,
And cheer the mental sight, and chase the Winter's gloom.

Winter!  with all thy storms, with all thy snows,
Thy scanty daylight and thy length of shade,
To me there seems a grandeur, a repose,
Even in the waste thy ruthless hand hath made.
Ruin hath done his work! &mdash; before him laid
Prostrate, the bud, the bloom of Summer, dies;
A few brief days shall see his power display'd:
Then rise, sweet Hope!  delightful visions, rise!
Fill the tired soul with joy, and glad the weary eyes.

Then come the brightest and the best of days,
Children of Spring!  Although, perchance, there be
Who love the Autumn sun's declining rays
The closing hour of Nature's revelry,
Oh!  let my spirit still be true to thee;
And let me never, never leave thy shrine:
For life, and joy, and health, and energy,
Inspiring season!  these, and more, are thine!
Parent of soaring hopes, and noble thoughts divine!

True, ALL are beautiful!  the changing year,
Winter and Summer, seed-time, harvest &mdash; all;&mdash;
Yet not alike on every mind and ear,
Th' harmonious tones of Nature's music fall.
Some love the pensive &mdash; such obey the call
Of melancholy Autumn; &mdash; but, to me,
She strikes a chord not half so musical
As the full, clear, rebounding harmony,
Drawn from the depths of mind, inspiring Spring!  by thee.

Soon comes thy reign, &mdash; yet waste we not the time
Of calm retirement, and the lengthen'd eve;
Ply quick the needle &mdash; let the sportive rhyme
Grow fast beneath thine hand:  it shall not grieve
Our hearts, if, doom'd a busier scene to leave,
The dwellers there our humbler walk disdain.
Each hath his destined path: &mdash; we would believe
That He who fix'd them, fix'd them not in vain;
And what are we, or ours, His bidding to arraign?

In such an hour, oh!  come, sweet Poesy!
Come with thy melting eye, thy soul of fire!
Bring all the sweetness of delights gone by;
With holy hope the chasten'd soul inspire.
Thou the gay Summer sun dost not require,
"The universal year" is all thine own,
Nor from the keenest blast wilt thou retire;
Bear witness, "Blossoms of the North!"  bestrown
Upon our Island plains, as fresh as newly blown.

No sickly progeny &mdash; the warm South breeze
May waft us strains voluptuously gay:
But in the strength, the healthfulness of these,
The spirit's energy, the spirit's play,
We trace the genius of a better day;
And well we thank the hand that interposed,
Tearing, with friendly aim, the veil away,
And showing beauties which had else reposed,
Perhaps, for many a day, unvalued, undisclosed.

It is no selfish aim &mdash; to give the light
Of other minds, when there is that within,
As full of life, in genius as bright,
As aught its toil from foreign fields can win;
But those who, from its earliest origin,
Delight to trace the windings of the mind,
And see the infant stream of thought begin,
No meagre praises, BOWRING!  have assign'd
To thee, who bring'st us in these tidings of our kind.

Nor can we mark, without a throb of joy,
Heaven's noblest gifts &mdash; how lavishly outspread!
What lofty thoughts a thousand minds employ,
Afar, apart, in distant regions bred!
North, South, and East, in turn the flame have fed:
And now, fair Western world!  our eyes shall see
The genius of thy shores uplift her head;
Soon first in arts, as first among the free,
Unenvying shall our souls, Columbia!  yield to thee.

They err, who call this world a wilderness,
Each joy deception, each fair flower a weed;
Who seem to strive for language to express
How much its evil doth its good exceed.
What!  is the glorious work of God indeed
Thus emptied of the traces of his hand?
No!  we might learn with clearer eyes to read
The volume of Creation, than to stand
Thus	basely slandering Heaven &mdash; in its own temple grand!

'Tis not that He, who made us as we are,
Forbids the smile His very bounties wake;
His gifts press round us, meet us every where,
And we must, love them for the Giver's sake:
But to be bound by them, to let them take
The spirit captive, and chain down the mind
Prisoner to sense and fancy &mdash; is to make
Ourselves the slaves to powers ourselves should bind,
In union with our God &mdash; in love with all mankind.

Thence swerving, comes the heavy sickening chill
Over the spirit's energy; no more
Revelling along, delighted and at will,
And gathering sweets the wide creation o'er.
Then clouds behind, and chilling mists before,
Obscure the mental vision &mdash; once so bright;
And all the sweetness of poetic lore,
The mirth of morn, the melody of night,
No longer charm the ear &mdash; no more the eve invite.

None serve thee truly, O enchanting lyre!
But they whose spirits may command thee too:
None serve thee truly, but whose souls of fire
From Heaven the breath of inspiration drew,
And back to Heaven their steady way pursue;
Still proud to trace their glory to its source,
To join in thought the beautiful and true,
And make them partners in their equal course.
Shame!  that what God hath join'd, proud man should e'er divorce.

There have been those, and there may be once more,
Though few their numbers &mdash; few, and far apart&mdash;
Who love the Muse; but, servants of a Power
They love yet more, His higher claims assert.
But grant them these, &mdash; each power of mind, of heart,
Strong and harmonious to the task they bring:
O'er all the various progenies of Art
Truth sits supreme, the moving master-spring,
And Genius' self has felt that touch inspiriting.

That spirit, glorious MILTON!  dwelt in thee:
And who of erring thought or idle tongue
Can chide the gentle lyre's sweet harmony,
When hands like thine its boldest chords have strung?
Not that thine active mind, entranced, hung
The willing captive of an empty sound;
Like trumpet to the steed, the voice of song
But urged thy soul one moment from the ground;
The next &mdash; and at their post were all thy forces found!

Whose soul, like thine, had burn'd within him, there
Where Memory holds her undisputed reign,
And Fancy peoples all the living air
With glorious spirits, such as on thy plain,
Proud Marathon!  once spurn'd the oppressor's chain?
Yet that fair land could forge no chains for thee:
Thy country pleaded &mdash; pleaded not in vain.
And thou couldst leave the shade of Liberty.
To plant her standard here, and bid her sons be free.

How beautiful, how fair, to eyes like thine&mdash;
Eyes fed on scenes so exquisitely wrought
By labouring Fancy in her secret mine&mdash;
Those living pictures of thy classic thought!
All thy mind's fair ideas, instant brought
To the clear daylight of reality:
The hills, the groves where ancient sages taught
The glorious aspect of a cloudless sky,
Through that bright medium seen &mdash; the Bard's instructed eye.

And oh!  how proudly in thy breast had swell'd
The Christian triumph! &mdash; there, where awful rear'd
His holy arm, by sacred zeal impell'd,
The bold Apostle &mdash; and his God declared!
Abash'd the sages sate &mdash; all unprepared
For the high knowledge of "the God unknown:"
Him had they darkly worshipp'd &mdash; Him had fear'd;
But idol-gods had shared his peerless throne;&mdash;
Now darkness yields to day, and he is Lord alone.

There hadst thou gazed; &mdash; and it would seem the same
To worship Virtue and be virtuous &mdash; No:
Milton, thou better knew'st to feed the flame
Of noble enterprize! &mdash; 'tis not the glow
Of momentary feeling, high or low,
Or warm aspirings of the enthusiast mind,
That stamp us virtuous, &mdash; 'tis the even flow
Of an unbounded love to all our kind,
Calm as the peaceful stream &mdash; as ocean unconfined.

And, great Creator!  'tis to worship Thee
With the firm purpose of the steadfast soul;
To yield the heart and mind, unshrinkingIy,
Full and complete, to Thy divine controul.
What though the roaring waters round us roll?
Still "deep to deep" proclaims Thy matchless might;
And, in that strife, Thy presence to the soul
Parts o'er the darkness like a beam of light
Earnest of beams to come, more beautiful and bright!

Oh!  yet forgive!  if thus an idle song,
Begun in sportiveness, in THEE should end;
And the tired rover, Thought, a wanderer long,
Her steady course to Thee at last should bend.
And ever thus, my Father and my Friend!
May Thine own gifts to Thee revert again:
Thou art my rest! &mdash; though meaner thoughts contend,
Let them not bind me with a galling chain;
But leave the spirit free, where only Thou shouldst reign.
