Lest that the feeble heart of suff'ring man,
Too low should sink beneath some keen distress;
Lest fell Despair, in league with pungent Pain,
Should overwhelm us in their wild excess;
Kind Hope, her daughter Patience sends from high,
To soothe each heart-felt woe, to wipe each trickling eye.

Hail, bless'd Divinity!  kind Patience, hail!
Soft-handed, meek-ey'd maid, whose powerful breath,
And strong persuasive eloquence prevail,
Against all ills of life, all tears of death:
Come lenient Virtue!  spread thy healing wing,
And gently calm my breast, whilst I thy praises sing.

In all this toilsome round, and maze of life,
Where follies vex, or dulness pert annoys,
Where teazing trifles end in serious strife,
Where pelf can bribe, when worth neglected lies;
What honest spirit would not burst with rage,
If Patience lent not aid his passion to assuage!

No state or rank but must to Patience bow:
The tradesman must have Patience for his bill;
He must have Patience who to law will go,
And if he lose his right, more Patience still:
Yea, to prevent, or heal full many a strife,
How oft, how long, must man have Patience with his wife!

An ample Patience should their hopes sustain,
Who dare the mineral regions to explore;
Invading earth's recesses deep, to gain,
By toil and hazard, her metallic store.
Firm Patience too should well support his mind,
Whose ships vast oceans cross, the sport of waves and wind.

When the shrill, cackling, long-winded dame,
Her tedious, vague, unmeaning tale repeats;
Confus'd, and wand'ring round and round her theme,
Till lost, and puzzl'd, she the chain forgets;
Yet still talk on with unabating speed,
Ye Gods!  who hears her out, must Patience have indeed.

And so, when some lack-learning smug divine,
In solemn dulness veil'd, unfolds his text,
Dark and more dark grows what he should define,
And ev'ry sentence more and more perplext;
Yet still he blunders on the same blind course,
Teaching his weary'd hearers Patience upon force.

Without bold Patience, who could ever bear
To court the great, and cringe with forced smile;
Fed with some promises, or speeches fair,
Meant their too easy credence to beguile:
While still they wait, tho' ripe with rage to burst,
Much to complain, inclin'd, if to complain they durst.

O heav'nly guardian of th' attemper'd breast,
Against th' oppressor's insolence and pow'r,
Against the scorner's sneer, the fool's dull jest,
And 'gainst each falshood new born with the hour,
Patience!  to thee these lowly lays I bring,
Craving thy aid to those who hear me sing.
