So had not Reynardo stept in to save
His sinking country from the threatening wave
Of France and Papal Power, with dreadful roar
This stream had drenched all Albion's land with gore;
And when he had performed this mighty job,
Damned with a pension, hooted by the mob. . . .
Now for a touch at Ministers of State:
Batarto always at his Levee, came,
A Caledonian great in Birth and Fame,
Well versed in every kind of courtiers' Laws;
Could twirl his Lordship's wig, or twist a cause;
With Rusticus he was a stupid log;
With Servilus a flattering, fawning dog;
As pliant was will any shape retain,
So he conformed to all in hopes of gain;
Like my lord duke he on Newmarket bets,
And like his lordship never pays his debts;
Can lie like Johnson and with Dodsley pray,
And be a stupid fool with Master Day. . . .
Soon as Aurora decks the East with red,
He hears the fatal news, my Lord is dead.
He starts and looks around with feigned surprise,
Then sinks upon the floor and falt'ring cries,
Dead!  Then 'tis time I should be crying too:
What can the Soul without the Body do?
But, ah!  'tis bootless to contend with Fate!
Pray has his Lordship left me any Plate?
My eyes shall never failing tears distill,
For peradventure he has made no will,
Thus weeps the member of the Senate House,
Nor from this (?) gains a single Souse.
Observe, cries Publius, wrinkling up his chin,
How charmingly that single Souse, comes in
(Not in the pocket of the needy Bard;
His hungry Muse can tell that times are hard.)
Thus Publius sounds his praise with thund'ring roar,
Till spent he looks:  his theme is heard no more.
Bumbastes now begins his flow'ry style;
O Heliconiados, upon me smile!
And as Apollo, or the Muses bring,
A pail of water from the sacred spring!
Come Mulciborus in Aetnean fire;
Now mould my brain and hammer up my lyre.
Olympian Hermes, Messenger of Love,
Proclaims the dead in realms above.
Harsh Cronidos shall lay his sceptre by,
Forget his Juno and return to cry.
Tartarian Gulphs and never ending Pit
Shall sigh in (?) in Sulphur weep by fit.
Saturnidos with sobs shall swill the plain,
And weep o'er all the Earth with scalding rain.
Apollo Phoebus shall forsake his Mount,
The blue-eyed maid upon the Athenian shore,
Shall scold the Parcae like a drunken whore;
Whilst the Parnassidos about, their spring,
In verse Illyrian shall his praises sing.
The God of War whose father grew in th' Field,
Shall drop a scalding tear upon his Shield:
Affrighted, will the Greeks and Trojans run&mdash;

HOBBINOL.
No more, good Thyrsis, see the setting sun
Is driving to the West with saffron ray,
To give to other worlds a welcome day.
What if a Bard to swell his shrunken purse
Shall seem to weep in Want-dictated verse,
And dress the Idol of their crazy brain
In all the virtues of a Gracchic strain;
Lament the fallen Minister of State&mdash;
As though a Rogue is good because he's great!
So Puria, when she hears a four hours' toll,
Lamenting cries, "'Tis for some happy soul!":
But when the sexton scarcely tolls the bell,
Mutters unmoved, "Some soul is gone to hell!"

THYRSIS.
Uncourtly Shepherd, notions such as thine
Won't introduce you with my lord to dine.
Don't ask me why I weep the Hero's fate:
I weep the Puria only for the great.
Hobbinol, thy stories are not known to all.&mdash;
But now the chilly dew begins to fall;
Let's fold our sheep, and bid adieu to woe. . . .
