THE PROLOGUE UNTO THE FIRST BOOKE.
These have I carelesse writ with running hand,
Whom art not shadoweth, but as clearest light,
Wanting none Oedipus all open stand,
Fit for the dimmer eyes and weaker sight.

But they whose Eagle-eyes can dare the Sunne,
And love high soaring from the lowly ground,
Let them not blame what I have wilfull done,
Some better like the Oaten rurall sound.

And let those curious eyes a while await,
Untill the second service shall begin,
Where we will seeke for some more dainty meate,
And stranger fruites then on this table been:
Where if they list they may their thirst appease,
Which songs my Muse to higher tunes shall raise.

THE ARGUMENT.
Of that same Ile which darknes long hath chaind
In gloomy prison of obscurity;
Islandia I meane, so long retaind
From humane view by times impiety;
Olde stories newly shall be intertaind.
Freed from the silent graves impurity,
To tell the vertuous though their dayes doe end,
Yet on their fall their glory doth ascend.

Islandia that Artick-seated Ile,
Of which th' Italian swan sung long agoe,
Whose Queene the lothed wooers did beguile,
And causde them for a shield to Paris goe,
And for her sake to suffer Loves exile,
Exagitate by dangers to and fro:
From thence my pen must fetch her forraine taske,
And thence transport my hidden stories maske.

Onely (sweete you) to whom this shew shall come,
Harken attentive to the strangers tale
Summond thus lately from Oblivions tombe,
Expecting for your favours gentle gale:
Else shall he wish that he had still beene dombe,
Nor raysde his pitch from out that lowly vale:
Where love enjoynd him for a while to dwell,
To paint the torments of that burning hell.

CANTO I.
Aged Sobrinus and his wife
Are tane a sleepe, their daughter flyes:
The Captaine riddes his mates of life,
Because they quarrels doe devise.
At last the stately fort they burnd;
And with Erona thence he turnd.

Downe in a valley lies a bushy woode,
Of mighty trees in order faire composde,
Within whose center stately buildings stoode,
In this aire-climing Silvan wall enclosde,
And seemde their equall tops each other woo'd,
That Arte to Nature all her strength opposde:
And Nature scorning at her servants pride,
With a dimme shadow did her beautie hide.

Within this Castle dwelt an aged Sire,
Who with his yeares had learnd experience,
And though he wanted youths now-quenched fire,
Yet had a holy flame, sweet residence,
And kindled in his heart a pure desire,
To doe good workes and farre from all offence:
Sobrinus was his name, his nature such,
He thought his almes too few, his wealth too much.

And yet he gave to poore continuall plenty,
Filling the bellies which were long unfed;
And quickly made his treasure coffers empty,
Sparing himselfe to give the needy bread;
Such was his goodnes, such his liberall bounty,
As still he payd though still he borrowed;
Their port was small he and his wife alone,
A daughter and a maide but servants none.

Thus had they spent the tenor of their dayes
In mirth, with reason, and in joy with meane;
He never felt sad sicknes sharpe disease,
And she from any griefe was ever cleane,
Both post the troubles of lifes wearie wayes,
And scap't those dangers which doe others paine,
Sleeping securely each in others brest,
No feare their careles mindes had ere opprest.

Untill when Night the counseller of ill,
Had lift her clowdy head from pitchy deepes,
And did with darkness all th' Horizon fill,
Mischiefe the hellish witch that never sleepes,
When every thing besides is calme and still,
From out her snaky cabin ugly creepes;
And tooke with her a box of divelish drugs,
Which issue from her venome-nourisht dugs.

Sister she is of hell begotten Night,
Her eyes by day are dimme, and still she lyes
Within her cell, removed from the light:
But when the tyred Sunne to bedward hyes,
Then doth she bristle up her wings for flight,
As soone as she her sister once espyes:
And going thence she flyes with double haste,
And comes back mourning that her joy doth waste.

And now this hag of Hell, soule loathsome spright,
Crawling from out her gore-bedewed nest;
And having set her skalie pineons right,
Travailes when other things from labour ceast,
And to a grove adjoyning takes her flight,
Where after boles of wine and riotous feast,
Buried in sleepe the theeves and robbers lay,
Forgetting that the night had brought their day.

She having entred to this cell of sinne,
Her self more sinfull then sins loathsome cell,
To sprinkle all their bodies doth beginne,
And charme them with this soule-perverting spell:
Which done she lifts her on her double sinne,
And slowly flyes unto her vices Hell:
Which done she weepes upon her pitchie dore,
That she should in ere she had mischief'd more.

The while that rout of mischief-tainted theeves,
Rouzing each other from their cabinets,
One puls the other by their venom'd sleeves,
And with more poyson all his hand be wets,
Which with more stings his egged conscience greeves,
That this their stay should interpose more lets:
At last all wak't, all into counsell fall,
And which hurteth most, that pleaseth all.

At length their Captaine Bonavallant hight,
Riseth from out their hellish counsell-house,
And takes a golden cup with pearles bedight,
And drinking to his mates a full carrouse,
Tels them, let never danger you affright,
Nor let your harts great hils bring foorth a mouse;
But follow me that still have happie beene,
(The worser hap for some such hap was seene.)

Then all arising like the studious Bees,
That for the golden hony follow fast:
Each hopes to gaine his serious labours fees,
And every one doth scorne to follow last,
Least he his hoped fruits perhaps might leese,
Therefore each strives to make more speedie hast:
At length they come unto this stately fort,
And each to mischief doth his friend exhort.

Ev'n as when good Aeneas crost the seas,
And Aeolus sent his whirling servants out;
Neptune awaked from his nightly ease,
Calde all his Tritons and his guard about,
And counseld all the tumults to appease,
And be reveng'd on that unruly rout:
So doe these rav'n-tongd birds of Plutoes quier,
Complot to spoyle that holy sleeping sier.

At last with violence and open force,
They brake the posternes of the Castle gate,
And entred spoyling all without remorce,
Nor could old Sobrin now resist his fate,
But stiffe with feare ev'n like a senceles corse,
Whom grisly terror doth so much amate,
He lyes supine upon his fatall bed,
Expecting ev'ry minute to be dead.

While as Devota his religious wife,
Sent prayers the sweet ambassadors to God,
The heralds to prepare a better life:
For now approacheth deaths devasting rod,
Sharper then sharpest edge of keenest knife,
That with his stroke denyes lifes long aboad:
Which now is setled in these butchers hands,
That bound in chaines of sinne passe conscience bands.

Up rushing now unto the lodge they runne,
Striving who first should worke this cruell deed:
Nor could their prayers stay what was begunne,
But still they prosecute with greater speed,
And long it seem'd before their fact was done,
So much did blood their hellish hunger feed,
That to invent some kind of cruell death,
They added loathed respite to their breath.

At last one bellowed from his wolvish throat,
This bloody doome the brat of savage minde,
Quoth he, Then let this old gray-haired goat
Be set in grave alive, and there be pinde,
And to this varlet, which for age doth dote,
To be beheaded only is assignde:
So is he buried ere his corps be dead,
And she with cruell blow parts from her head.

So have I seene the chaste and purest dove,
Striken by cruell fowlers shivering shot,
Disseverd from her nere-forsaken love,
Fall on the ground ere she her selfe had wot,
And with one spraule for sweetest living strove,
But all her piteous strugling helpt her not:
So have I seene that purest bird to dye,
As here doth this sweet carkasse mangled lye.

Now whiles this wicked pageant thus is playd,
Viceina daughter to this reverend man,
Viewing these facts and of the like afrayd,
As fast as tender thighes transport her can,
Flyes comfortles, and poore forsaken mayd,
Her looke with former terror pale and wan:
But her mis-haps when these black deeds are told,
In sequent lines more fit I will unfold.

The house all ransackt, and the coffers torne,
They found Sobrinus mayd Erona calde,
Whom Bonavallant thence would streight have borne,
For she was fayre and then with feare appalde,
She added doule grace to that beforne,
Which with sharpe stings his burning stomack galde,
That with this overscorching passion fir'd,
To carry her closely thence he streight conspir'd.

But they whose eyes foule lawles lust had taught,
Moved with envie at so faire a pray,
Told him that he false treacherie had wrought,
In seeking thus to steale the prize away,
Since it was common, and in common caught,
He should unto the common lawes obay,
Which is, that what so ere by force was gaind,
Should to their common use still be retaind.

But he whom beautie, and these words commov'd,
Drew out his often-blood-embrewed sword,
And cryes; here take the sport so much ye lov'd;
This lasse shall kisses to your lips afford,
And with that speech his mightie valour prov'd;
And clove ones skull like to a riven bord:
The second laying downe the ware he found,
Left ware, and crased head upon the-ground.

Their fellowes seeing this their mates mis-hap,
Left all their treasure, and their gaines behinde,
And fearing some ensuing thunderclap,
In coward swiftnes do their safetie finde,
While he triumphing in this lucky hap,
Taught by the maid two coursers doth unbind,
Which in a roome with mightie cords were tied,
And long had there laine still unoccupied.

Then doth he set much fewell all about,
Encompassing the walls of all the towers:
And that no flame might quench the fier out,
He lightens all the wood-ingraved bowers,
Which joyned to the wall full faire and stout,
And perisht quickly built in many howers;
While he and she in dawning of the day,
Mounted aloft and parted thence away.

The fuming vapors mount unto the skie,
Where turned into teare-distilling raine,
They mourne their masters helples miserie,
Returning to the former seat againe:
But viewing there the spoyles of injurie,
In trickling streames they mourne his torturing paine,
While raging Phoebus wrapt in duskie clowdes,
Angrie with fates his mantled visage shrowdes.

CANTO II.
Viceina wanders all forlorne,
In middest darknes of the night:
But at the rising of the morne,
She meetes the wicked lustfull knight;
Whom once well knowen she defies,
Hating those sensuall vanities.

Thus raignes deepe sacriledge and wicked armes,
Yspent in persecuting vertuous soules:
The fire is quencht, which with his vigour warmes
Distressed hearts, now truth doth hide in hoales,
Afraid of falshoods terrifying alarmes,
Whose envious force her sweetest rest controules:
Justice from out the goared earth is flowne,
And left her vertues ofspring all alone.

From which poore stock this sweet Viceina bred,
Wanders unhappie virgin all forlorne,
Foule cares doe deadly wrack that blessed head,
Whose braine in streaming teares is much forworne,
For pitie that her steps are so mis-led
In blackest night, and cannot see the morne:
Yet still she hopes on that sweet Sunne of light,
Which leades her soule in all this earthly night.

At length the Mornings chariot climbd alost,
Bringing sweet comfort to this pilgrim mayd,
The gratefull light which she so long had sought,
To guide her errant footsteps farre astrayd,
When viewing whither now her feete were brought,
Her sighing heart was drerily dismayd,
And sorrow furrow'd her sweet countenance,
With black remembrance of her sad mischance.

Yet still she moves in unaccustom'd pace,
And meanes to try fatall misfortunes worst,
Plunged in various thoughts distorting case,
And tortur'd thus by envy most accurst,
At last she spide a Deere that fled apace,
Whose bleeding side a piercing dart had burst,
And fled and ranne, and as he ranne and fled,
Moved with griefe downe trickling teares he shed.

When followes on a lusty courser set,
A goodly knight (as seem'd) and faire of looke,
That strives in swiftest course his game to get:
But quickly all his game and course forsooke,
When once he saw, then deare a dearer let,
And to this Pilgrim back his journey tooke,
And from his horse dismounted to the ground,
Comforts her with his words alluring sound.

And then her state he curious doth enquire,
Asking the cause of her distressed plight,
When she Sir knight replide, let me desire,
Not to torment an over-tired wight,
With new memoriall of her fates so dire,
Rubbing my soule with a fresh tragick sight,
Only (faire sir) helpe this my poore estate,
And I your service ever will awaite.

Moved with pitie much, but more with lust,
He dar'd not countermand her sad demaunds,
But from his heart with pleasures flames combust,
Vollied these words scarse shut in vertues bands:
Come (fayre) and to my gentle mercie trust,
And yeeld thy bodie to my embracing hands,
Ile leade thee where in pleasure thou shalt dwell,
Removed from black melancholies hell.

Viceina whose most pure milk-washed hart
Never supposde what fraud before did plot,
Told him to ease her soules tormenting smart,
And that she thought such looke maintained not
Foule knighthoods shame, to work her sorrowes part,
Agreed to take her offerd fortunes lot:
Then hand in hand conjoynd they forward went,
And in sweet talke their tedious wayes they spent.

Foule evill on his cursed heart alight,
For thus seducing thence the virgins feete,
For this same knight Philedonus is hight,
And he to pleasure giv'n for men unmeete:
Yet faire he seemeth at the sudden sight,
Yet foule he is at last when men him weete;
Under a pleasing hew and civill hood,
He carries poyson'd baytes and venom'd food.

With which slie crafts and flatteries deceiv'd,
Unto his castel she agrees to goe;
Where comming they full fairely were receiv'd
Of one Makerus, who downe binding low,
Told her that happily she was arriv'd,
And many gratefull speeches did bestow:
At last unto a stately hall he brought her,
Glad that within his limits he had caught her.

Foule wight he was that at his masters gate,
Which open stood upon a beaten way,
All commers passage carefull did awaite,
And when he spide them like a cock at day,
He lifting up his ugly carrion pate,
To trap them with sweet musick doth assay:
For he an Eunuch is, and sweetly sings,
And to their eares deepe ravishment he brings.

But hoping now that this new guest is sure,
Prepares no prologue for his Comedie,
And as alreadie taught to know the lure,
He leades her to a lodging by and by:
But as they past, sights did her eyes allure,
Her eyes, but not her heart to vanitie:
For she full warie was what ere she did,
Resisting still to what delight did bid.

But this that now her careles eyes did view,
Was how within the spacious builded hall,
She saw faire youths and maydens in a rew,
Treading sweet measures at the musicks call,
And then anon as fetching forces new,
Into each others armes they kissing fall:
Where quenching pleasures thirst with beauties dew,
Their wonted dancing they againe renew.

But turning quickly thence her lothing eyes,
She followes where her wicked captaine guides,
Who nimbly mov'd with hellish pleasure flyes,
And at the last into a lodging slides,
Whose fairer richest art cannot devise,
Nor ever can be found in earth besides:
Where placed for a while Makerus left her,
While joyfull thoughts by sorrow are bereft her.

And she detesting this unseemly place,
Wisheth that rather she had dyed abroad,
Then ever seene this knights deceiving face,
And thinks how she might shorten her aboad:
But here of force she must abide a space,
So quickly she can never rid her load;
Which keeps her blessed heart in languor pinde,
Because no way to scape her soule can finde.

And in that fit the night approaching nye,
Unto her bed which there was faire prepar'd,
As wanting rest she presently doth hye,
But following cares her sweetest rest debar'd,
That she in these great woes was neere to dye:
And certes like it was she ill had far'd,
Had not the heavn's foreseene and sent their ayd,
To comfort weakned heart well-nigh dismayd.

For when her fathers house in pleasure stood,
And in the pleasant fields adjoynd she went,
There came a holy Hermite from the wood,
That all his time in godly precepts spent,
Who as he told of words and doings good,
His chaine of beades about his arme unbent,
And sayd; this stone doth cares and griefe expell,
And gave it to her and then bad fare-well.

This stone is Elpine calde, whose vertue is,
To drive away great grievings and dispayre:
Or what-soere doth leade the heart amisse,
With sweetest influence it doth repayre,
Which now appli'd reduc'th her former blisse,
And much diminisheth her cruell care:
Blest be the heavens which did thus provide,
To ease those tortures which she did abide.

Thus somewhat freede from these tormenting woes,
To sleepe her sences all she doth addresse,
But ere her wearied members tooke repose,
She was disturbed from her quietnesse:
For to her chamber up a consort goes
That thought to comfort her all comfortlesse,
And rather to enchant then to delight,
They thought, but now they want their wonted might.

And yet well neere these fiends had luld asleepe,
With charming Musick that divinest wight,
But that strong vertue still sure watch did keepe,
And put fond pleasures yeelding thoughts to flight:
For she still marking how delight did creepe,
And by allurements, not by force did fight,
Stopt with her fingers her imprisond eares,
And with stout courage all temptations beares.

At length these Crocodiles their harping ended,
And she is left to prosecute her griefe:
For rest is banisht thence by thoughts offended,
Which doe accuse her for this nights reliefe,
And cruciate themselves that condiscended,
To fained words without some further priefe;
That twixt her thoughts and guilts fierce perturbation,
Her soule is cast into a restles passion.

That little sleepe she tooke, but when she slept,
Dreames of her fault and fained phantasies,
Into the closet of her sweet soule crept:
And thus the night deludes her watching eyes,
Care all the gates of troubled sences kept,
Which made her thinke it long ere day did rise:
So vice and vertue strive together met,
They cannot rest within one cabinet.

At length though long this length the morning starre,
Told that the night was fled from out the ayre,
When she more glad then travailers that farre,
Spying some tower their fainting course repayre,
Thinking that there their longed dwellings are:
But when they neerer come againe dispayre,
And seeing they mis-tooke that happy place,
Stumble againe in their fore-wonted pace.

So was she caught with hopes disguisde attire,
When black despayre went masking all within:
For now she saw no hope of her desire,
Nor could she free her selfe once closed in:
So many eyes hath lust, so hot the fire,
Which kindles burning flames in scorched skin:
Though Argus hundred eyes in watch doth keepe,
Yet lust at length will lull them all asleepe.

So is she watcht with never resting eyes;
The former hope of libertie is gone,
And now Philedonus doth all devise,
For to entangle her thus left alone;
Foule lust within his breast gins to arise,
And from his heart faire blushing shame is flowne:
And he begins with words sole-tempting sound,
To cast her chastitie unto the ground.

But by the happie fortune which befell,
At last her soule was set at libertie:
But how it chanced yet I may not tell,
Though I am loth so long to let thee lie,
(Sweet mayd) within the torments of this hell:
But that same theefe so fast away doth flie,
That I shall never see Erona more,
Unles I goe and fetch her back before.

Canto III.
Erona and her new found love,
Come to the bower of fond delight:
But thence by warning they remove,
And in a Castle spent the night:
In morne she faines dissembled paine,
He leaves her and goes back againe.

What ere thou be that to a womans care,
Commitst affayres or matters of import,
Too rashly to adventure doe not dare,
Unles upon some certaine truths report:
For constancie in most is found but rare,
And they will change their thoughts for wanton sport:
But some there be (blest he that some can finde)
To whom fayre graces vertue hath assignde.

Amongst which thou rare virgin of these dayes,
(Whom only this my wandring muse hath found)
Meritst eternall volumes of thy prayse,
For loving Muses and their sweetest sound,
Accepting kindly rude mis-tuned layes,
Which els had laine long buried under ground:
Be not (kind) angrie at this mayds disgrace,
That Muse thy gifts shal praise, that doth her faults deface.

For she is worthie of perpetuall blame,
For condiscending to this theeves request:
For now she curseth still her masters name,
Swearing she never could obtaine her rest,
Untill this happie newes unto her came:
And now she sayes she'le follow his behest,
Goe where he will, and stay where he commands,
And lay her opend soule before his hands.

And he seduced by her flatterie,
And blinded quite with lust and lewd desire,
His love is bounded by no meane degree,
He sweares through freezing cold and burning fire,
To be her champion for her beauties see,
She sayes she readie is when he wil try her:
Thus in fond pleasure they consume their dayes,
And after sport still walke their wonted wayes.

But as they climbd the hils ascending side,
The scortching Sunne sent downe fire-darting rayes,
That they unneath this fervence could abide,
Therefore they seeke some cooler shadowed wayes:
At last downe in the vale a lake they spide,
By which there was a bower of thorne and bayes,
A bower whose ground was set with Cammomill,
Whose bankes the sweetest rose and flowers did fill.

Where entred there they see a graven stone,
In which a historie was fairely writ:
The picture of a Lady was upon,
And verses which were written under it.
"Here lyes the fairest Lady of the Ile,
Whom from sweet rest fond pleasure did exile,
To warne the rest, who yet are kept unstaind,
To flie that plague, which keepes the soule enchaind."

The theefe enamor'd on that lovely hew,
Which niggard arts weake force had much defac'd,
Would needs the substance of that shadow view,
And would the curious tombstone have displac'd:
But from this deed a noyse his fancie drew,
And rushing of the lake as with a blast:
Where looking there they saw the fayrest face,
Whose lovely feature did the Swannes disgrace.

But by the pictures likenes streight they knew,
This was the Ghost of that entombed mayd,
When she:  O cause not wretch more griefe to rew,
And trouble not the bones for rest up layd,
But fly this place least it procure to you,
For which my soule deere punishment hath payd.
When seem'd her head to droupe as in a sowne,
And with new racking griefe to sinke a downe.

But streight he cried:  O tell (sweete Lady) tell,
What danger doth attend this fearefull place,
And how to thee this wicked hap befell,
And how thou cam'st into this wofull case?
Then she:  as long as messengers of hell,
Which still attending stand before my face,
Shall suffer me to stay with you above,
Ile shew you what with griefe my selfe did prove.

Heere by this river is a gaping pit,
Which leades unto the floods of Acheron:
And on the mouth thereof a witch doth sit,
That dwelleth in a roome there built upon;
Getica she is calde, who by her wit,
Hath damn'd to restles dolours many one:
And she (before Persephone was Queene)
Had Plutoes Concubine long season beene.

But now to her this dwelling is assignde,
Where she hath leave to charme each truest hart,
And in eternall torturing to binde,
The soules she hath entrapped by her art;
And she enrag'd, that men sweet joy should finde,
Not bearing any of her torments part,
Assayes by all the meanes she can invent,
To make them fellowes in her punishment.

And every yeare once she a feast doth make,
Within that bower, where you now doe lye:
Whither full many a knight his way doth take,
And many a Lady thitherward doth hye:
When she her loathed house doth soone forsake,
Attir'd in robes and portly majestye,
And to the banquet house doth solemne come,
Welcomming all with voyce, and kissing some.

And after meat a service all of wine,
Is brought before the guests, when thus she sayes;
My wish (sweete friends) is you should better dine,
And have some cheere that were more worthie prayse:
But this I hope shall rest as loves sure signe,
The rest shall be supplyed in other waies:
Onely the while take this in gentle part,
From one desiring to get more desart.

Heere are as many cups as you are heere,
Fild with some liquor of so forcive might,
That what-soere you love or holde most deere,
As beauty, magick, riches, pleasing sight,
Or lengthned youth, untill full forty yeare,
Whither it good shall be, or things unright,
It shall be given you without delay,
Ere second night drive hence the darkned day.

On this condition that when all the date,
(Which is the space of forty yeares orepast)
Shall be expirde, then shall you pay the rate
Of all th' accounts, which I this while shall cast;
Nor may ye then resist the common fate,
For joy long may endure, not ever last:
This sayd, all those that wish for any good,
Drinke up that Philter poysoning all their blood.

Amongst those birds was I caught in the net,
Layd to entrap the frayiltie of youth,
And at a little price my soule did set,
Now all bedewd into late comming ruth,
And I admonish you unchaind as yet,
To credit what my soule doth finde for truth:
Make speedie haste to get your selves away,
To morrow comes that hellish banquet day.

This sayd, she sunke into the drowning waves,
Drowned almost with flowing teares before,
Like Phaetusa, while she madly raves,
Playning that she could see the boy no more:
And while his sweetest companie she craves,
A spreading roote her feeble feete upbore,
A furrow'd rinde encompast all her skin,
A tree she was without, a mayd within.

So doth she seeme to melt in liquid teares,
For where before that fayrest substance stood,
Nothing but bubling water now appeares:
And while they looke upon the billowing flood,
Wonder their eyes possess'th, their hearts deepe feares,
That in their face appeares no livelihood:
At last each plucking by the others arme,
Give warning both of that ensuing harme.

And mounted thence, they assay to climb the hill,
Whose bended steepnes causde them take much paine,
And though they mainly strive with labour still,
Yet in much striving they doe little gaine;
The nature of the place resists their will:
For so it is where pleasure doth remaine,
That with a current in his armes we fall,
But back full few can creepe, or none at all.

Nor can these now attaine their mindes desier,
But forc'd they turne their Palfreyes heads aside,
And sory they can climbe the hill no higher,
Upon the convex, all along they ride,
At last by smokie sparkles of a fire,
A chimney top far off they have espyde:
And now the Sunne was driving to the west,
And they were glad they found some hope of rest.

Forward they prickt, and shortly there they came,
For all the way was playne as eye might see,
And lighting downe he and his wanton dame,
Goe in to know if they might lodged be,
And he no sooner had discried his name,
But all the knights salute him by degree:
For all the house with knights and dames was fraught,
Which ment to travell for their mornings draught.

Rejoycing thus that they so fit were met,
And striving who should shew most curtesy,
They spend the time till on the bord was set,
The daintyest feast that ever curious eye
Could view, or wealth, or all the Ile could get,
Such was this feast of filthie luxury,
And they as prompt to take as that to bring,
Sit downe:  some eate, some drinke, some play, some sing.

Their heads perswaded by the fuming wine,
After the empty dishes all were sackt,
Doe condiscend their places to resigne,
And yeeld to sleepe, which as it seem'd they lackt;
For so the fume their ey-lids doth combine,
That they unneath can keepe themselves awakt,
And still the ground as profring them a bed,
With a kinde knocking kisse salutes their head.

At last some by the little remnant of their sight,
And some by others helpe to bed are got,
Where drownd in sleepe they spend the sliding night,
And had almost in morne their care forgot:
But wickednes that ever-haunting spright,
Rung in their eares and warn'd them of their lot:
And they afrayd their happy chance to lose,
Shooke sluggard sleepe away and straight arose.

But false Erona fearing of her mate,
That if he should unto the banquet goe,
He would forsake his choyse, and change his fate,
And leave her quite, and so procure her woe,
Faines that a sudden griefe doth her amate,
Wounded with piercing sicknes Ebon bow,
And sayes she cannot move from out her bed,
And prayes him not to leave her almost dead.

Sweet love (quoth she) whom in my tender armes,
So oft I have embrac'd and ever lov'd,
O leave me not alone to following harmes,
But if that ere thy minde fayre Meny mov'd,
Or yeelded to delights, or fancies charmes,
Or if my soule doth love thee ever prov'd,
Then doe:  and with that word so deeply sigh't,
As though death on her broken heart did light.

He thinking that her griefes extremitie
Did interrupt the office of her tung,
And moved with her words did seeme to pitie,
When falling downe upon her neck he hung,
And sayes, if my delaying could acquite ye
From this sharpe grievance, that your heart hath stung,
I would not leave you for the worlds wealth,
Nor worke disparagement unto your health.

But this delay can worke you no redresse,
But hurt me with the sight of this your payne,
And all the other knights themselves addresse,
To goe unto the feast where I would fayne
Accompany them, as my oth expresse
Doth binde me, but I will returne againe,
Before the sunne remove his fierie wheeles,
Turning unto our view his panting Palfreyes heeles.

This sayd, he went from out her burning sight,
Stopping his eares unto her playning cryes,
And she still prayes to pitie wofull wight,
But like the faithles Trojan Knight he flyes,
Leaving sweete Dido swelling in despight,
Who powring raging playnts self-wounded dyes.
So is this Knight from out her hearing gone,
And she can onely hope he comes anone.

But how he sped, and she was left alone,
The sequence of the story shall declare,
But sweet Viceina doth so deepely grone,
Burdened with overpressing load of care,
That sure my heart relents to heare her mone,
And Ile assay to cause her better fare,
For what hard heart would not all service doe,
To helpe a fayre, a chast, a woman too?

CANTO IV.
A stranger knight the mayde doth free,
Which long had layne in pleasures bands:
While she her foemans death doth see,
Loosde by good fate from cursed hands,
And with that knight her way doth take,
Glad that foule prison to forsake.

Though deepe distresse still threaten heavy fall,
And stormy cloudes thy fortunes wrack presage,
Let not white-liver'd feare thy thoughts appall,
A power there is that can all stormes asswage,
That makes the thunder bellow at his call,
And parbreake sulphur vapours in his rage:
This power is present still to ayde the just,
Though hembde in hostes they be of hellish lust.

So is the virgin heere preserv'd from shame,
Which like a blood-hound haunts her hallowed feete,
For since unto this shameles knight she came;
She cannot turne but still he doth her meete,
Tempting her soule to yeeld to foulest shame,
With fayrest words that Pandors art did weete;
But still she keepes her bulwark of defence,
Hoping some happy day will rid her hence.

But long she watch't to see that happy day,
Before misfortune left her tyranny,
The sliding glasse of time doth spend away,
And therewithall her wasting hope doth fly,
But he that in just weights doth all things way;
Viewing the poore opprest with cruelty,
Sent meanes whose thought dispayring thoughts did pas,
To helpe that dying Saint:  And thus it was.

Sobrinus fame through all the Ile was blowne,
(For he was borne of royall pedegree)
And his fayre daughters name to all was knowne,
That holy were and hated vanitie,
Amongst the rest her vertuous praise was flowne,
Unto a Lady of no meane degree,
Whose spotles heart was purenes purest pure,
Whose soule no sensuall thoughts could ere allure.

Aguria was this holy widowes name,
For she had layd her husband in the grave,
And since like Ancres, or a Vestal dame,
To heavenly thoughts her minde she wholy gave:
But her sweet sonne a jolly knight became,
Great thoughts to try his valiance him drave,
And he was meeke to those that hated ill,
But to the wicked he was fearefull still.

This knight was moved by this damsels fame,
And with his mothers leave departed thence,
Vowing by heavens-makers fearfull name,
As long as life should stay, or lively sence,
Not ever to returne from whence he came,
Before (as signe of his benevolence)
He shall salute this Lady face to face,
And with his armes that Saint-like Nymph embrace.

Thus purposde foorth he goes, as errant knight,
In glistring armes yclad and mightie lance,
While under him in trappings gorgeous dight,
A sturdie courser all the way doth dance,
And as compacted of a lively spright,
His trampling hoofes aloft he doth advance,
And for adventures armd in warlike wise,
He pricks his palfreys sides and forward tries.

But what great dangers in his weary way,
Or what he saw or did, my Muse must passe,
For they would much my stories course delay:
Besides they are ingrav'd in during brasse,
By one who doth antiquitie bewray,
Writing what ever in that Iland was:
Let this suffice that he now journeyes nye,
Unto that place whereas this Dame doth lye.

But Night had spread her gloomy wings abroad,
Which forced thoughts of ease into his breast:
Therefore with swifter pace he faster road,
Hoping to get some place of gentle rest:
But while an easie gale unto him blowd,
The sweetest sound that ever eare possest,
Which made him turne his horse toward the noyse,
At last he came where he had heard the voyce.

And askt if lodging for a Knight there were,
Quoth he that sung, straight leaping from his seate,
None can approach (fayre Sir) more welcome here,
Then those that errant are, whom knightly heate
Enforc'th to seeke adventures farre and neere:
And with this filed speech did worke deceit,
The Knight full glad he had a harbour found,
Dismounted straight and lighted to the ground.

But little did he thinke that fayrest mayd,
Was prisoner in this cell of riotise:
For this same castle where he now is stayd,
Is that where poore Viceina captive lyes,
And sure they thought to have this Knight betrayd,
But his sweet thought did frustrate their surmise:
Yet in this foolish hope up was he led,
Into a chamber fairely Arrased.

Where after delicates and curious feast,
Full weary of his way and toylsome watch,
To pleasing sleepe his body he addrest,
Least during labour should him over match:
When he no sooner setled him to rest,
But slumber in his sences seate did hatch,
Partly by toyle wherewith he now was sore,
Partly by Musick sounding at his dore.

Thus halfe her light fayre Cynthia had spent,
And he in sleepe had spent halfe Cynthias light,
Untill a cry unto his eare was sent,
Which did his tumbling sences all affright,
It seem'd to come from heart in peeces rent,
The wofull ofspring of a wretched wight:
But thus the plaint was form'd in dolefull sort,
Carrying unto his eares a sad report.

Haples Viceina, whom thy father lost,
Ynough tormented not, though dearly lov'd,
Nor sad remembrance of thy mothers ghost,
Though she to teares mine eyes hath often mov'd,
Nor thine owne harme which grieveth others most,
Ynough thy hearts great patience hath prov'd:
But here dispoyld of sweet virginitie,
Thy spotted soule in ugly sinne shall dye.

But rather let the consort of dread Night,
(Which sing sad notes before her chariot,
When she in progresse rides to chase the light)
Feare me before I take Sinnes filthy blot,
The scriching Owle race out my loathed sight,
Before it see that sight of wretched lot,
The ravens of darknes take my corse for pray,
That they may hide it from the blushing day.

And to those ghastly shades which haunt my soule,
And to the Night consenting to this ill,
My latest testament I will unroule,
The dreery summe of my death-graven will,
They shall my servants be my bell to toule,
To ring the dolefull accents of my knill,
Death be the head, and Shame shall be the next,
Then Night, and Guilt which holds my heart perplext.

These on their damned backs shal beare my corse,
Unto the funerall which is prepar'd,
My soule provide thy selfe against remorse,
From hope of better death thou art debar'd;
For Sinne still threatens his ungentle force,
To wound thee deeply which had els been spar'd:
But till death come take solace in the Night,
For darkned soule there fits no better light.

This sayd, a bitter sigh evapour'd out
The sad conclusion of a sadder tale,
When gan the Knight his thoughts to stir about,
Pondring what wight thus lay in sorry bale:
But while he wavered in uncertaine doubt,
He soone unto his troubled minde did call,
How that mayd had her selfe Viceina hight,
Where with he gan to burst with raging spight.

As Tereus in the banquet of his sonne,
When he a while his hungrie wombe had fed,
Knowing the bloodie mischiefe that was done,
And that he ate him whom before he bred,
Into a headlong rage along did runne,
And curs'th the living execrates the dead,
In such a furie was this knight distraught,
With thoughts of blood and vengeance fully fraught.

But well he could his raging sences turne,
And thought this time was not so fit to get
The freedome of this soule-diseased dame;
The night and sudden noyse his deede would let,
Therefore he rested till the morning came,
When to this act himselfe he ready set,
And watcht to see the Lady of his love,
That from this feare he might her soule remove.

But he not long had sought the Lady fayre,
Ere he had spide where as that lozell mate
Walkt with her in the garden for the ayre;
And he of lust and filthie sinne did prate,
The Knight went straight unto that loving payre,
Not able longer to refraine his hate,
When she straight blusht to see her selfe alone,
Except this villaine compani'd of none.

Then lightned with revenge thus gan the Knight;
Thou foulest shame of all that breath this ayre,
How dar'st thou to abuse this sacred wight,
Inclosing her in den of black dispayre?
Either defend thy deede in martiall fight,
Or els here dye, my minde can like no prayer:
Her champion I, and Aidon is my name,
Thou or thy kind that dare defend the same.

But streight he quailing sunke unto the ground,
For he of warre before had never heard,
The name of death straight cast him in a swound,
His heart did pant, he was so much afeard,
The while Sir Aidon gave a deadly wound
Unto his heart, that all the ground besmeard
With filthie blood, his foulest pleasures price,
The nourishment of his ungodly vice.

His soule sunke downe gnashing for furious mad,
That she should lose the pleasures of her bower,
Repining at the cursed fate she had,
Thus to be banisht in unlookt for hower:
This while the Knight unto that Lady sad,
Told why and whence he came, who thankt that power,
Whose providence prevented her mis-hap,
Sheelding her soule from deaths fierce thunderclap.

But thence departing to the hall they went,
Where mingled wanton troopes of either kinde,
Dallied together in their merriment,
He that most filthie is, he seemes most kinde:
The Knight could not refraine his discontent,
But drawing foorth his sword, doth bid them finde
Some fitter kinde of mirth, or fitter place:
When all affrighted foorth they fled apace.

All fled, he sets on fire those walls oft lust,
Whose ayre infected was with filthie sent,
Downe fall the walls consum'd to fruitles dust,
With eating flames of firy force yspent,
While Venus wept to see her fort combust,
And those foundations from the bottome rent:
But that fayre virgin with the errant Knight,
Left those foule dwellings, glad they met so right.

But looke the Captaine now had chang'd his face,
And out of knowledge he will shortly grow,
If that I doe not follow him apace,
A gowne he now hath got full hanging low:
But wonder not at this his changed case,
The hap which did befall, you straight shall know:
But let me breath a while, it needs no haste,
For yet I pant with chasing him so fast.

CANTO V.
Th' inchanter on a plaine doth ly,
And while he looketh all abrode,
He sees a Lady passing by,
To whom enforst with lust he rode,
Fidamours love and Philarets charge,
Phucerus crueltie is told at large.

Deare soule, what ever wandrest here below,
Chaind in the sinfull bodies sensuall bands,
Yeeld not thy selfe to what doth fayrest show,
Nor walking in these worldly Nilus sands,
Give listning to the tunes that sweet doe blow:
Tis easie falling into pleasures hands,
But at deare rate he selleth all his ware,
The entrance pleaseth, but the end is care.

This hast thou found thou ever-damned ghost,
And payest dearly for thy marchandise,
Gnashing thy teeth in that infernall coast,
Rowling to banisht heaven thy glowing eyes:
Now doth he curse what once did please him most,
Seeing his accounts to such a summe to rise,
And in deepe horror from his bowels cryes,
To learne justice, nor the Gods despise.

But all too late he moanes his wicked deede,
Now was it time all evill to prevent,
Before foule sinne had hatcht his cursed seede,
Better he had his guts in famine spent,
Then with this feast his poysoned flesh to feede,
But what to doe himselfe did not repent,
Shall not much grieve my warned minde to tell,
Better to heare then doe what is not well.

After his faithles heart had her forsooke,
That still ingeminates his hated name,
With th' other knights he foorth his journey tooke,
And to Geticas bower at length they came,
Where they inscrib'd their names in cursed booke,
Incorporated in the citie of defame,
The citie which foule shame on earth hath built,
To trap mens soules in sinnes accusing guilt.

And every one his sundrie choise had gaind,
As each mans liking doth him most direct,
But wicked Bonavallant hath obtaind,
To be of Hecates accursed sect,
Taught now to hold grim Dis and Spirits chaind,
And plague the furies for his words neglect,
And foule Megera at his kindled brest,
Will rack mens tortur'd soules in sad unrest.

No sooner doth he move his charmed wan,
But hell eructs foule Spirits which attend,
To worke the will of this accursed man,
He can with deadly charmes earths belly rend,
And with swift wings the sliding eyes fan,
Making sterne Pluto at his words to bend,
One houre this Pole shall see his charmed wings,
And in the same he to th' Antartique flings.

But now upon a fayre plaine he doth lye,
Harbourd within his charme-enchaunted wall,
Where on a tower he sees who passeth by,
Hoping at length some purchase will befall,
On whom to worke his cursed witchery,
To which a sudden sight his sence doth call,
For a farre off he sees a Lady bright,
That armed was and all arayd for fight.

Her face like Phoebus at the sudden rise,
Gave such a glister in her beauties morne,
As made him hope some unaccustom'd price,
And richer treasure then he saw beforne,
Therefore his cursed art he now applies,
Hoping he should this game away have borne;
And armed with infernall spirits might,
Thus he assayd to close this blessed wight.

Out from his cell he flyes with greatest haste,
Like stormie Notus on his dewy plumes,
And from his castles sight he quite is past,
Where hid in charmed fogges and chaunted fumes,
Like to a Snake his skin he off doth cast,
And fained shape and forme he now assumes,
Upon a hackney he is fairely set,
Whose sides his feete not stirropt staggring beat.

His hoary beard downe snowing on his breast,
And swanny locks the chronicles of age,
Witnesse that elder yeares have him opprest,
But that his sword doth tell that youthfull rage,
Within his haughty heart is not deceast:
Thus doth he goe as in a pilgrimage,
Even like Silenus now he doth appeare,
But he a tankard, this a sword doth beare.

Thus doth he march toward that fayrest dame,
His horse scarse moving his untoward feete,
When as the Sunne unto his lodging came,
And did no soones his faire Thetis greete,
But this Tithonus setled for his gaine,
Did fayrer farre then fayre Aurora meete,
And careles seemed he to passe aside,
But though his horse goth forth, his hart doth back abide.

When she back turning her celestiall spheares,
(In one of which sweet Venus darts her rayes,
In th' other Mars and warlike love appeares)
Father (quoth she) know you how farre awayes
Is fayre Doledra, where Phucerus beares
The Diadem in these unhappy dayes?
Well doe I know (quoth he) but tis so farre,
You cannot there come by the light of starre.

Then poynting to this witches charmed place,
(Quoth she) what Knight dwels in those goodly walls,
Or will he offer Lady this one grace,
(Because the night me so untimely calls)
To entertaine me for this little space?
And if at any time the like befalls,
Which may require his gentle curtesie,
Ile try to quite his great humanitie.

Even like to Jupiter when once he brought,
That fayre Europa on his back did sit,
Daunc'd through the flowry fields, glad he had caught
His game, applauding his successive wit:
So doth this carle at this good newes, he sought,
And to the Lady thus his speech doth fit:
Well may you goe, none are more welcome there,
Then those that for true cause doe armour beare.

And to assure you here my selfe will lead,
Unworthie load starre of so fayre a Sunne,
Unto that castle where I sure aread,
Not common kindnes to you will be done:
She harkning to his speech the path doth tread,
Which to this labyrinth of shame doth runne,
Where pleasing doubt doth leade her to the center,
But here foule Minotaurs will her incounter.

But least long wonder might your thoughts possesse,
Who was this Lady, and from whence she came,
And why here she her journey did addresse,
I will unfold the storie of this Dame;
Strong love her bounden heart doth much oppresse,
Which any thought of danger overcame:
Not many fights and perils doe her move,
She counts them all but pleasures for her love.

Upon Eumorphos plaines a castle stands,
Where dwelt an ancient and a comely Knight,
Which all the country bordering commaunds:
But that which greatest raisde his glories hight,
Was not his treasure, not farre stretched lands:
But three fayre daughters, lights most brightest light,
Whose wondrous beautie lookers did amaze,
That in one heaven so many Sunnes did blaze.

Amongst these lookers, one there did surprize
An uncouth heate of undermining love,
Who knowing that stopt fire more hotly fryes,
And with his owne light doth his cloake remove,
Made knowne the Comet which withdrew his eyes,
And to his Lady did his passions prove:
She Philaret was calde, the eldest mayd,
The Knight Sir Fidamour thus ill apayd.

With earnest sute an answere he hath gaind,
The golden shaft shot foorth from Cupids bow,
That if the victorie he have obtaind,
In that adventure which this mayd shall show,
His gentle proffers shall be entertaind,
And happy match betweene these loves shall grow:
But if he doe not, then all former band
Came back as free into the makers hand.

Downe in the westerne coast there dwelt a king,
Phucerus he is hight, his goodly seate,
Is calde Doledra, whose high towers doe sing
Soft murmuring tunes, when windes then gently beat,
And loftie turrets mighty tops doe bring,
Unto the skye which never saw so great,
That dar'd to looke upon the starry skye,
And lift their masses in the ayre so hye.

Within this towne a prophesie did passe,
That from Eumorphos should a mayden come,
Whose hand should change the kingdome whence it was,
Which made the king in private charge to some,
That whosoere could bring that countries lasse,
Unto th' appoynted Eumorphean tombe,
He should be recompenc'd with liberall fee,
Beside the grace in which he still should bee.

Thus had he slaine and tombde in bloody pit,
Many that guiltles came with no pretence,
And Philaret glad to be revengde of it,
Enjoynd the knight these deedes to recompence,
And to provoke them more he should him fit,
Womans apparell which breedes more offence.
And thus with speare and targe he forth should goe,
To be revenged on his wicked foe.

Forth is he gone (the gods him prosper fayre)
And to this castle is this journey spent,
Where I must leave him to his fortunes fate,
But still imagine that he forward went,
For strongest love imprints a deepest care,
That nothing can withdraw his hearts intent;
But let him goe as fast as love him drives,
Ile overtake him ere he home arives.

CANTO VI.
Eronaes craft and filed tung,
And pleasing looke and flattring face,
Deogines his heart hath stung;
Aidon doth finde in wofull case,
His mother kept in bondage chaine,
In whose defence himselfe is slaine.

Thou sacred Muse which with thy silver spring,
A little sprinklest my scarse-moystned brow,
Helpe me in ampler field my verse to bring,
These deedes doe grow to larger number now,
Nor can this little pipe them fully sing,
Therefore my limits with my song must grow:
The divers webs are now so divers spunne,
They cannot end so neere as they begunne.

Whither defiled soules thus runne ye mad?
Wallowing in filthy shames sinck most obscene:
What?  see you not how Adrastea sad,
With iron whips inflicting hellish peine,
Still hovereth over, marking what is bad,
And like Celaeno clasps her wings uncleane,
For joy that she a subject fit hath found,
On whom revengement deeply may rebound.

This is Erona had considered than,
When she first yeelded her to sinnes delight,
And drawne her feete againe when she began,
This sorrow had not vext her troubled spright,
Now desolate left off that cursed man:
But since none other way is found in sight,
Unto her wonted arte she runnes againe,
And modestie in poysoned heart doth faine.

After the castle was left desolate,
And all betooke them to that wicked way,
Faine would she after goe but tis too late,
So shall her sleights appeare as bright as day,
Therefore she doth invent all desperate,
This path or none for helping to assay,
All clad in black like mourning for the dead,
Or Pilgrim that is all disquieted.

A hood of black upon her head she wore,
Which fought against the Sunne her forme to shield,
And on her backe a mourning gowne she bore,
Which loosely flagging swept the verdant field,
And at her brest a booke there hung before,
Whose backe nor painting clad nor golde did guild;
But black it was without and so within,
Onely the letters white in all were seen.

Thus is the Ancres gone to seeke her fate,
Clad in the cloudes of sorrow and despayre,
Which to eclipse these rayes which shinde of late;
Yet in this battell of her bewties fayre,
Opposde to blacke this white supports more state,
Which litle teary dimples doe repayre;
So that or now, or never so divine,
Doth this fayre Cynthia at her fullest shine.

So long she had the playnes and valleys tras't,
That Phoebus gallopt downe the westerne hill,
Seeing his fierie torches so to wast,
And she then hoping for no lesser ill,
Then in some outcast harbour farre displas't,
To lye, while night keepes all in silent still;
Goes forward seeking for some shady place,
To hide her from the view of mens disgrace.

But see an aged man this way doth ride,
Upon a lusty Palfrey fayrely set,
Who though his hayres in ages graine are dyde,
Proves that his heart the mastery doth get,
And that some heate within his breast doth bide,
Not full remov'd from out his wonted seat,
Even to this damsell is he come at last
Whence fiery dartes into his eyes are cast.

Sometimes he lookes, yet straight lookes back againe,
Sorry his heart should be captiv'd with love,
Sometimes he viewes yet not to view doth fayne,
He fix'th his eyes, yet streight he doth remove,
His thoughts be gone, yet thoughts he would restraine,
Which battle in his flaming brest doth prove:
That though he fight and strive with his desire,
Dry sticks must needes consume once put to fire.

Faine would he passe, but burning love denyes,
And makes him see he strives against his heart,
Therefore this medicine he now applyes,
And hopes to win his love by loves desart,
He doth enquire which way her journey lyes,
And if her busines binds not to depart:
Even neere (quoth he) my castle fayre doth stand,
Which shall be ready at thy sweet command.

She then replyes a pilgrim mayde I am,
And sinnes deepe spot farre buried in my brest,
Tells me I never can cleane purge the same,
Except I banish quite the bodies rest,
Which still provokes the soule to endlesse shame,
But for this profer and your kinde request,
One night with you fayre friend I may remaine,
So in the morne I shall returne againe.

Even as the baited hooke in Thamis waves,
Floteth along and swimmeth fast away,
As if no gainfull hinderance he craves,
And when the fish his guilefull course doth stay,
Playing a while his tangled life he saves,
But at the last he takes him for a pray:
So doth this mayd seeme careles for her gaine,
But he shall feele her craft to greater paine.

This Knight now widow'd had a comely wife,
Whose fayrenes with his fiercenes badly met,
The chastest Vestall liv'd no chaster life
Then did this Lady, yet he still did fret,
A strangers looke would set them both at strife,
He thinks she doth her vowed love forget,
Which made her weary of her prison'd breath,
And with a sword her soule unburdeneth.

Her ghost embrued in that crimson gore,
Still plaines to Rhadamant with ceaseles cry,
For fierce revenge to make him once deplore,
That wrought her that accursed misery,
Who deeply moved, wild her weepe no more,
And bad revenge unto the earth to fly:
Where he should get him still desired food,
Of cruell torments and new issuing blood.

Now hath he got this fained penitent,
To play the pageant of his plotted ill,
Who though she seemeth inly to repent,
Yet sinnes abyssus there remaineth still,
The filthy dregges of shame whose noysome sent,
With poysened humors shall her lover fill:
But since his heart a woing needes must goe,
Ile leave him to his woing and his woe.

Now change thy Myrtle for a Cypresse bow,
Put on thy mourning weedes, come mourne my Muse,
With Ebon dye vailing thy smiling brow,
Loth would I tell it, yet I cannot chuse,
And tis too late to helpe thy losses now,
Floods of my teares cannot thy joy reduce:
Ah good Sir Aidon whose untimely fate,
Makes me to mourne even fast by pleasures gate.

After this Knight returnde with victorie,
Into the country where he first was borne,
It chanced as he did arrive full nie
His castle, day was fled, and double horne
Of Cynthia gan advance their tops full hie,
When wearines their limmes had much forworne,
And the Sunnes scorching (now ore-passed heate)
With labour made their panting hearts to beate.

But now a Christal well they have espide,
In whose cleere streames beauties fayre looking glasse,
Phoebe, when in her circuit she did ride,
Woud joy to see the glorie of her face,
Where they alight, and by the fountaine side
Doe lay them downe upon the pleasant grasse:
And while they harke how Zephire soft doth sing,
A murmur to their eares these words doth bring.

You goodly boughs of youth which proudly beare
Your climing tops unto the smiling ayre,
Thinke how fierce winter shall your garments teare,
And with his stormes ore-shadow all your fayre,
The goodliest vesture which you ere shall weare,
Times aged feathers basely shall impayre,
Your joy the mornings smile, but sable night
Shall drowne in sorrowes floods your most delight.

The worlds great pride shall have a greater fall,
Uncertaine men have no possession sure,
He that is neerest death is best of all,
The lesser troubles hath he to endure,
He that doth sit attirde in princely pall,
Cannot the purchase of one day procure;
When our joyes Sunne from Tethis waves doth wade,
Tis signe there was, and shall againe be shade.

Therefore thou body which dost pine away,
Which age hath furrow'd with his iron plow,
Rejoyce that thou shalt see that glorious day,
Whose bright Sunnes Chariot shall not downward bow,
But lighten beames which black night doth obay,
So chainde she never can from darkenes glow;
And while thou drawest this thy fainting breath,
Weepe for to wash thy sinnes, not for thy death.

This mournfull voyce with hoarce and hollow sound,
Sayled full gently to their listning eares,
Whose noyse that did from out the cave rebound,
Brought to their stonied hearts affrighting feares,
At last by earnest thought the Knight hath found,
What wracked wight this dolefull musick beares;
And knew that this his mother deare had beene,
Grieving her woe, and not her selfe is seene.

Distracted quight about the place he goes,
Like Bacchus priests whom holy Thyrse had raught,
But now the sound with crying he doth lose,
And with the sound the place so much he saught,
But then he thinks some wicked forraine foes,
His castle have and her both captive caught:
Therefore unto the Castle he doth flie,
As one intranced in an extasie.

He fiercely knocks against the castle gate,
He knocks againe as fury doth him drive,
At last one comes, and cryes who dares thus late
With troubling noyse hither to arive:
No sooner saw he him, but urgde with hate,
(With which his passions doe all vainely strive)
He with a mighty blow stroke at his head,
Thinking even then t' have sent his soule to bed.

The other voyding drew his fiery blade,
And here (quoth he) goe to thy mothers ghost,
His mothers loved name such entry made,
As he for thought thereof gan faint almost,
In which deepe traunce he doth the Knight invade,
And stroke him deepely to the utmost cost:
Downe falls the Knight as if he dead had bin,
The other left him so and entred in.

After Viceina softly followeth,
At last she comes, where she doth weeping view
The mournfull picture of ungentle death:
Nor doth she looke upon his plight to rue,
But with a linnen closely covereth
The wound, and doth a litle life renew;
Where helped by the stopping of his blood,
He went with her unto a joyning wood.

Yet knowes he not how this ungentle deede
Was wrought, nor who abusde his mothers right;
It was a bloody man that did exceede
In furious wrath, each word would make him fight:
Yet mighty was he, and his happy speede
Causde him of any foes to make but light:
And still his jawes like smoaky Orcus cave,
Would reeke forth othes when he did curse and rave.

This furious Ajax when the drowsie night
Had coverd all things with her pitchy vaile,
Comes to this castle where he doth alight,
And cries for entry, but his cry doth faile:
Then swelling deepe with rage and great despight,
The gates with violence he doth assaile:
Which broken downe, he takes the sleeping Nun,
And shuts her in a cave, and roules a stone upon.

But now good Aidon like the dying swan,
Knew that the time of death approached neere:
Therefore to sing sweet tunes he now began,
The tunes which please the great Creators eare,
The cruell fates have burnt the lively bran,
With whose consuming breath and life doth weare
Cruell Althea, death rest of unrest,
Leaving the earth-wormes carrying hence the best.

But as his eyes had almost rolde the last,
To him his mothers shadow doth appeare,
Quoth she; rejoyce thou soule worlds woe is past,
This burden now no longer shalt thou beare,
Our lives account in heavens booke is cast,
Throw hence earths cloake, and follow me my deare:
This heard, he fix'th his standing eyes on hye,
His winged ghost to heavens bower doth flye.

As fayre Creusa in consumed Troy,
Fled from Aeneas lifted in the ayre,
Ravisht with heavens over-pleasing joy,
And left him crying in his loves despayre,
Freed from these troubles and the worlds annoy,
So hath this ghost now set in starry chayre,
Left her that with the shrilnes of her cry,
Pierced resisting ayre and stroake the sky.

The greatest woe that heart did ever beare,
With grisly tallants gripeth on her soule,
Sorrow her inward parts doth fiercely teare,
And in griefes cover doth her heart enroule,
And when the least relenting doth appeare,
Then doth deaths visnomie her peace controule:
The Sunne of love hath set her heart on fire,
The smoake is sighs, the flame is her desire.

As when in open field a mounting flame,
Halfe-quenched with the clowdes distilling raine,
Doubles anon his height, and with the same
Yeelds foorth fresh vapours to the clowdes againe,
Till they ore-burdned send them whence they came,
Rebating so th' aspiring fire amaine:
So sighs and teares runne still this weeping sourse,
And end themselves, but never end their course.

Strike rocky soule (quoth she) a teary showre,
From out the hollow of my stony breast,
And all thy moysture into rivers powre,
For him that did procure thy sweetest rest,
And melt in teares untill thy latest howre,
Because thy dearest Deare is now deceast:
Then to a Cypresse tree thy shadow turne,
And on his tombe shew that thou still doest mourne.

While thou thrice-blessed soule in happy peace,
Shalt sing sweet accents ravishing concent,
In tunes whose harmony shall never cease,
But still endure with thy still-during seate,
While nothing shall my heart from griefe release,
Till with my woe my life shall be expleate:
Fayre dayes shall tell me of thy fayrest hue,
And clowdy gloome shall bid me ever rue.

This sayd, a shade encompast all the wood,
Her darkned sight abroad can nothing see:
So by Lyrcaean grove fayre Io stood,
Envellop'd with a shadie Canopee,
While she thus masked in this pitchie hood,
Was forst the great gods concubine to bee:
But at the last at once this clowdy night
Is chased by the Sunnes new rising light.

But where before that Sainted Temple lay,
Nothing appeares, and where the blood did staine,
The dyed grasse, there now fayre Roses stay,
The damaske colourd in a ruddie graine,
That blusheth at the rising of the day,
To see her beautie naked all remaine:
And purple violets ne'er growing right,
But seeke to hide their forme from common sight,

Thus is the Mother and her holy Sonne,
The truest types of chastitie and shame,
Dead ere new ofspring from their loynes begunne,
To propagate fayre vertues sacred name:
Which is the reason that th' all-seeing Sunne,
Seldome hath seene a chast and spotles Dame:
Except Eliza that celestiall wight,
And you whose tapers burne pure virgin-light.

But fayre Viceina now doth walke alone,
Faine would I bring thee to some lodging place,
For curtesie denies to heare thee moane,
And thus to leave thee in this wofull case,
Forsaken and accompanide of none:
But take it not I pray thee for disgrace,
I see some riding here with might and maine,
Ile but examine them and come againe.

CANTO VII.
Adonia goes t' avenge her Knight,
After her charming nought prevailes:
Deogin seeing Erona light,
Amidst the waves his chance bewailes:
Erona on the sea doth float,
Chang'd by a charme into a boat.

When in th' Aegaeum of thy wandring dayes,
Fortune full softly fils thy swelling saile,
Let no Circaeas hinder quite thy wayes,
Nor let her cups against thy heart prevaile,
Then vertue of thy spotted soule decayes,
Blinded in worldly pleasures clowdy vaile:
This pleasing draught shall so bewitch thy will,
Well mayst thou see the good, but doe the ill.

Which doth appeare in this most wretched wight,
Who after Aidon had their Captaine slaine,
Returneth to the dregges of fond delight,
Hoping t' have found their carpet knight againe,
And bring her ancient customes new to light:
But as she sought him with incessant paine,
At last a mangled carcasse she had spide,
With skarlet blood and filthie gore bedide.

As Peleus daughters, when they saw their sire
Vanisht from earth into a gastly shade,
Their raging thoughts rapt up in furies gire,
Curst heaven and earth, and that life-loosing blade,
Damning that ugly witch to Orcus fire,
And then themselves which first the motion made:
So doth this furnace burning hellish flame,
Breath curses gainst great heav'ns fate-ruling name.

Foule fiends (quoth she) which goash your fretting jawes,
Envying at mens dying felicitie,
Goe, heeres a subject for your rending clawes,
Ascend to heaven and raze his hatefull eye,
That bloody Sunne which with his influence drawes
The tossed ship of life to miserie:
With sulphure smoake darken each quenched starre,
Which could behold this bloody act so farre.

And on your Dragon backs lift Neptune hye,
Into the heavens with his watrie traine,
That downe perpetuall showers still may flye,
The fates ungentle power to complaine:
Let earth decay, let all things earthly dye,
Till with their moanes my love returne againe:
Invest thee here ayr-overspreading Night,
Now he is dead, all is none other light.

And take you vestures which black Stixes wave,
Seven times hath dyed in his sable flood,
And let each starre a pitchy garment have,
And let these suits attire all heavens brood,
Where in a progresse they shall mourning crave,
The deare renewing of this blessed blood,
And breake the distaffe of death-guiding fate,
Loosing the soules from out hell prison gate.

But looke, the Sunne sends downe his smiling rayes,
Laughing to scorne the sorrow of my heart,
Words cannot bring him to his sweetest dayes,
No power pities my tormenting smart:
Therefore Ile try some soule-inchanting wayes,
Whose might shall make the fates their doome revart:
And since they move not with my mourning teares,
With deadly charmes Ile pearce their glowing eares.

Seven dayes she mournd about her dearest love,
The seventh night she wandred farre away,
And all the sorts of lively herbes did prove,
Gathering the dew from leaves of springing bay,
And all the spices which might calour move,
And Serpents skin which summer last did lay:
Only she could not get a Deeres warme hart,
Whose want confounded all her charming art.

Now back she goes, when as the wakened Sunne
Gathred his horses from the Westerne plaine,
And softly up the Easterne mount did runne,
When she unto her Knight returnde againe,
Where, when in order all her charme was done,
She loos'th about her head her tressie traine:
And laying in his mouth, and in his wound,
Her charme she runneth seven times around.

Then seven times these words she doth repeate,
By the great secrets which in Memphis lie,
And by the bloody waves which Pharus beate,
By three-formd Hecates great Deitie,
By pitchy Stixes heaven-feared seate,
And by the labours of thy Lunacie:
Phoebe recur'd by Temesaan brasse,
I charge this soule to come where first it was.

This sayd, a Christall glasse she foorth doth take,
Holding it right against the shining Sunne,
That beames contracted might a fire make,
Whose smoake into a lively soule might runne:
The charme is kindled and he seemes to wake,
But wanting force the charme is straight undone:
She did but trouble his affrighted ghost,
Lacking the thing which helpe Medea most.

Now sits she downe, all helpe and hope is gone,
Revenge can only now his soule acquite:
Therefore on vengeance she doth thinke alone,
To be revenged on that holy Knight:
And as she plots she spies an armed one,
Ready prepar'd as seem'd for bloody fight;
His loftie speare he doth advance on hie,
As though he menac'd warre unto the skie.

This pecocke irond thus of every side,
A coward is unfit of manly speare,
Never in ought he hath his valour tride,
But is so faint and humble slave to feare,
That when the shadow of his lance he spide,
His fainting carcasse downward gan to beare:
And if deaths thought had not him rousde away,
No doubt for famine he should there decay.

And now he went into this filthie land,
Where Knights but seldome usde their prowesse trie,
And now the mayd of him doth this demaund,
That sharpe revenge might quite this injurie:
Then lifting out his vow confirming hand,
Lady (if this same caitife hidden lie
Under the compasse of this emptie ayre)
This hand thy losses fully shall repayre.

Out in Tartaria when a mightie hoast
Encompast me:  but then bespoke the mayd,
No further of thy deedes I pray thee boast,
Well doe I trust thee for thy gentle ayd,
Though he had never been in any coast,
Which in a new Meridian is layd:
But traversing the Iland up and downe,
Never did worthie deed in field nor towne.

The mayd up mounted led him in the way,
Which to Sir Aidons fort directly brought:
Where come by breaking of the blushing day,
He bid the mayd stay back till he had fought,
The battell which her foes in dust should lay:
Which done, he very studious bethought,
How he the battell any way might flie,
Or if he fought, some place of flight espie.

Thus musing straight he sees the portall shut,
And hoping none were remanent within,
With speare he gave the gates a mightie butt,
And cryes, what are you fled for feare your sinne,
Reveng'd with death my hungry speare should glut?
Or of my comming have forewarned bin?
Then foorth Tigranes comes that furious Knight,
And cryes, what peasant troubles my delight.

No harme (quoth he) forsooth an humble friend,
Come to congratulate your victorie,
And here this captive mayd a pledge doe send,
Yeelding her to you with humilitie:
Let not I pray my boldnes you offend,
But take this mayd a pledge of fealtie.
The Knight appeasde, them gently entertaind,
And they a place of rest have now obtaind.

Now had Viceina past this bloody seat,
And wandred thorow way-lesse woods and dales,
When in a vale a cottage she hath met,
Wherein a Hermite still in prayer calles,
To clense his soule and wickednesse forget,
Whose thought the thoughts of his sweet conscience galls:
Thus did he spend the day and watch the night,
Still listing up for grace his troubled spright.

Who seeing such a modest Lady by,
Told her if cottage might not be disdaind,
Nor herball fare which in his house doth ly,
Of him she gladly should be entertaind:
Who finding comfort of extremity,
Told him she gladly hath his lodging gaind:
Where we will leave them to their hearty prayer,
And old mindes griefes with joy new to repayre.

But see how fayre Erona chang'th her coat,
And taught the seigniour with a cleerer breast,
To sing his tunes unto a higher note:
She that but one night in his house would rest,
Least wicked sinne her holy soule should blot,
She thinks to tarie here is farre the best:
And Deogin enamourd on her face,
With many sports hath made her like the place.

But he is come unto his wonted rate,
His eyes are ever glistering with fire,
He ever thinks she hath another mate,
And other loves doe kindle her desire,
Which often causeth strife and great debate,
But she will gently quite her jelous sire:
And since he stumbles thus without a stone,
She meanes to give him rocks to fall one.

Even by this Castle Neptune once in love
Of a wood Nymph, did follow fast his game:
But she to fly his kisses mainly strove,
And to her woods of harbour flying came:
Neptune enrag'd, his trident mace uphove,
And mainly stroake the harbour of the Dame:
The earth gan melt, and trees consum'd away,
Neptune rusht in and caught the swimming lay.

So now a lake it is, once firmest land,
And Knights much usde to crosse this watry way:
But once arriv'd a Knight unto the strand,
About the darkning of the conquerd day,
And at this castle lodging did demand:
The carle was loth, but threatnings did affray,
That in he goes into that burning gate,
The tragick actor of the churles fate.

When supper comes all doe themselves addresse,
To saciate with foode their natures neede:
But this grim sir doth sit all supperlesse,
And on his gnawed guts apace doth feede,
And when he eates, he mindeth nothing lesse:
For on the Knight his eyes kept carefull heede,
That sometimes when his meate he should devide,
The knife awry into his flesh doth slide.

Thus passeth foorth the prologue of his woe,
But the next morne brings foorth his tragedie:
For that same Knight his wife had handled so,
That in a chamber now they both doe lie:
But still Deogines goes to and fro,
To see if he his loving mates can spie:
At last he sees the flame whose firy dart
Kindles the sulphure of his fueld hart.

About he runnes and cryes I burne I burne,
And in black famine all his bones doth spend:
At last unto the river he doth turne,
Thinking to give this flame a watry end:
But he so light is growne, each wave doth spurne,
And any way his sliding course doth bend:
At last fayre sayling with a Northerne blast,
This barebond feend on Britains sands was cast.

But now Erona will her course betake,
As she was wont to lust and filthie shame;
A whirry on that river she doth make,
And she her selfe the passenger became,
Ferrying each knight upon that gulfie lake,
That condiscends unto her damned game:
The rest by cunning of her joynted boat,
She layes in waves and makes ore bord to float.

For in two parts her boat she doth devide,
She in the first doth row, and that behinde
With a sleight vise unto the first is tide,
Which with a pin she can both loose and binde:
Now while upon the waves they rowing slide,
If any Knight resist her filthie minde,
Then doth she loose her pin, he falleth downe,
And drenching waves his haples carkasse drowne.

If he unto her dalliance doe yeeld,
Then doth she passe him safely to the land,
And gently sets him on the other field:
And thus her dayes consum'd like dustie sand,
Which Boreas to and fro with blasts doth wield,
And is not seene where it before did stand:
So doth her body so her soule consume,
Dide ugly black in sinnes still-reaking fume.

Nor doth her guilt escape unpunisht quite;
For as it fell this way her Captaine came,
Old Bonavallant, once her deare delight,
But now new-changed in another frame:
Who when she ferried, and with pleasing sight
Woo'd to agree to deeds of black defame:
He harkned not to her untam'd desire,
Which kindled in her breast revenges fire.

But he had spide how she with turning vice
Was loosing downe the dead-fall of her hate,
And with a charme did crosse her first device,
Giving her punisht soule a new-found fate;
Into a boat her breast, her legs, her thighs
Are chang'd, and bound by charme for endles date:
That since she had delighted still to carrie,
Here in eternall carriage she should tarrie.

Her armes the oares do cut the fleeting sea,
And passe each traveller to the furtherd side:
Her face in which sweet beautie once did play,
The plowed waves in furrowes doth devide:
So the Propaetides that common lay,
And passers violence did still abide,
Because their face no ruddie shame could print,
Were turned to a never blushing flint.

But let me quickly to Doledra flie,
Unles I thither make the greater hast,
Fidamour homeward doth so hasty hie,
That all the mariage will be over-past,
The feast and triumphs of his victorie,
And tilts unto their latest day will wast:
But I will after on my thoughts swift wing,
And in triumphing tunes his trophees sing.

CANTO VIII.
Fidamour from th' Inchanter fled,
With fayre Doledraes King doth fight:
She victor doth her foe behead,
And to Eumorphos takes her flight,
Where at the mariage suddenly,
Th' Inchanter downe to hell doth fly.

As when Joves lightning on a towre doth fall,
No humour can allay his firy might,
But with his hungrie jawes consumeth all,
On which his rending tallands can alight:
So doth this filthie flame unnaturall,
Burne in this witches heart in hearts despight:
His thoughts like water in Pyracmons forge,
Make his fire-breathing throte more flames disgorge.

When in the castle all the night was spent,
In morne they hasted to depart away,
Which deeply wrought th' inchanters discontent,
And by these meanes doth seeke their course delay:
He takes a potion from Cocitus sent,
Whose force in weakned heart deepe love will lay:
This had he mingled in some fatall wine,
Hoping to make her heart in furie pine.

But Epimel her carefull watching page,
(Which still about his mistris did attend)
Had spide the witches faithles cariage,
And quickly bad her on her steed ascend:
She kindled with disdaine and mightie rage,
Unto Doledra now her course doth bend:
Where come, without in suburbs she doth stay,
And to Phucerus thence sends mortall fray.

The king that never thought in open fight,
He and his kingdome should be overthrowne:
But that some mayd would by her subtile slight,
Or other policie undermine his throne,
Went foorth full fraught with rage and high despight:
And though his loves about him still did mone,
And curtizans about him ever cry,
The sad event of wofull flight to fly.

Yet he respected not their vaine request,
But marched foorth to meete this warlike Dame:
And at his sight she kindling in her breast,
The Pyramis of an ascending flame,
Straight open enmitie to him profest,
And with well couched lance toward her came:
Their flashing speares that from their breasts rebound,
Made eccho tell the horror of the sound.

The flintie flakes drop from the riven plate,
And make the hollow earth from deepe to grone,
Whose noyse the trembling spirits did amate,
Fearing their covering would have falne upon:
So angry Jove inflam'd with ruthles hate,
Darts from the heav'ns a mightie thunderstone,
And in his rage from out a clowd doth rore,
That Atlas limmes doe quake which heav'n upbore.

But at the first encounter deeply fell
On Fidamours left side a heavy blow,
Which wofull newes unto her heart did tell:
But at the next she him requited so,
His soule was wafted halfe the way to hell,
And made his conquerd corps her valour know:
Whom from his palfrey fayrely she upheav'd,
And of the greeting earth a kisse receiv'd.

The feeble soule from out his breast was fled,
Wandring through gloomy wayes of hellish shade,
While with her sword she martyreth his head:
The ensigne which her victorie displaide,
And with her loving page she homewards sped.
But what great joy this overthrow hath made,
Let them declare who doe their love obtaine,
This pleasure in my heart did neare remaine.

Goe whistling winds with easie murmuring bring
This happy Lady to her hearts desire,
And all the way let sweetest musick sing,
Melodious concent in love-carols by her,
And goe my thoughts thorow sliding ayre fling,
And view the heat of her deepe printed fire:
Burne not your selves, nor come the flame too nie,
Icarus once drown'd can teach you how to flie.

Thus in triumphing to Eumorphos brought,
All doe applaud the fortune of his fight:
The ransome which they still before had sought,
To free them from Phucerus foule despight:
But sudden joy so much his Lady raught,
Her heart drew exhalations of delight,
Which kindled by her love enkindled flame
Unto her Knight, as darted Sunbeames came.

She gives him kisses, pledges of her heart,
Sweeter then Jove receives of Ganymed,
While them betweene sweet Nectar downe doth move,
The hony dew with which fayre love is fed:
Such is the billing of the Cyprian dove,
Their mouths in others mouth emprisoned:
But she with talke loosing that rosiall binde,
Drew back her lips, but left her heart behinde.

Now all things for the Mariage are prepar'd,
As when great Perseus maried Andromede,
No cost nor any ornament is spar'd,
With which the mariage may be beautifide:
No Knight nor commer is from hence debard,
To see the band which shall these lovers wed:
Shine bright sweet Sunne, now comes that happy day,
That in the port these gladfull loves shall lay.

Now for that holy Hermite have they sent,
With whom Viceina all this while hath stayd,
Who both invited to Eumorphos went,
Where stands the Knight and that divinest mayd,
Ready to be conjoynd with one consent:
The Hermite many holy prayers sayd,
While fayre Viceina by the payre doth stand,
And holds a torch in her ambrosiall hand.

But Bonavallant, whom ny fortie yeares
With foule Geticas date had neere opprest,
Thought ere he went to hurt these faithfull pheares,
And with his charmes to trouble holy rest:
But when this Hermites godly speech he heares,
His charmes are frustrate and enchaunting ceast,
Thus in despight of envies stormy wrath,
These loves are setled in their quiets path.

Now all things for the tilting ready are,
And many Knights are gatherd from about,
And fierce Tigranes hitherward doth fare:
But poore Anander wraps a filthie clout
About his hand, and sayes this cloth he ware,
Because a wound hath pearc'd his hand throughout:
But he receiv'd no wound in field nor fight,
This is his cowardise accustom'd slight.

He with Tigranes comes unto the feast,
But saies he cannot runne for grievous paine:
Tigranes doth beleeve the cowards jest,
And with him comes unto the tilting plaine,
Where stood two Knights with ready speares in rest
To try who could most valours glorie gaine:
They runne and fairely breake each others speare,
And throughly passe as if no let there were.

After runne many whose part youthfull heat,
Drew to expresse the fire of their heart:
Others whom love taught in this warlike feat,
To prove before their Ladies loves desart:
As if in telling how their love was great,
They begd some easing of impatient smart,
Which with emprezaes they doe fairely shew,
Fitting their outward to their inward hew.

One hath a Salamander in the fire,
The word upon fayre beautie is the flame:
The next a Linnet in a cage of wire,
The mot my prisond thoughts still sing the same,
To shew the firmnes of his chast desire:
The third, small birds that to the fire came,
The saying there conjoynd:  my light my night,
To shew he pines consum'd with beauties light.

Thus most had tride their valour and their might,
And to Anander all are come anon,
Desiring him to doe the Mariage right,
And that his fame and credit stood thereon,
To prove himselfe a stout and valiant knight,
And not in looking let the time be gone:
For they perceiv'd not yet his cowardise,
Thoughts are not knowen certaine by the eyes.

Anander thus beset as bird of night,
Compast with smaller soule in time of day,
Began to rub his pulse and pluck his spright,
And closely puls his winding cloth away,
(Quoth he) I stay not for I feare their fight,
For thousands by this right hand conquered lay.
But with my valiance to conclude the just,
A thing not ending well, is laide in dust.

Now is he on a gallant Palfrey plaste,
And ready to encounter with his foe:
The other Knight (good Knight too much debast
With coward braggart to encounter so)
Spurring with speare in rest toward him past,
But forth he empty to the ende doth go,
For good Anander meaneth harme to none,
But forth another way in haste is gone.

When first the Courser gan to lift his feete,
He shuts his locked eyes with all his might;
And with his spurres amaine the horse doth greete:
The Palfray blindly driven and unright,
Makes him unwares, with speare a wall to meete,
With whose rebut stands up the horse on hight,
Downe on the earth his carcasse doth rebound,
And layde his craven combe along the ground.

The Knight enraged with his soule disgrace,
Tolde to Tigranes t'was no knightly part,
To bring such cowards and the justs deface;
Who rending open earths disseverd hart,
Catching pale Stix by her infected face,
(Quoth he) by Erebs wife no Knight thou art,
That doest impute his cowardise to mee,
Which ne're before few dayes his face did see.

Then drawing out his not returning blade,
He thought at first his heart to deerely pay:
But well defended it no entry made;
The other with like load on him doth lay,
That each began to reele as ill apayde,
And each againe doth streight renew the fray:
Their swordes true schollers in this martiall fight,
Answer each others arguments aright.

As Vulcanes servants in the Lemnian cave,
With restles blowes doe frame a thunderbolt,
Or hammering for Jove an iron clave,
With mightie terror shake their groaning holt,
So these fierce Knights, one at another drave,
Nor from their kindled sury will revolt:
But thundring each upon the others crests,
Write with their swords the raging of their brests.

But loe a trumpet roares with hollow sound,
And deadly skreeches breath from out below:
Which doe their cooled soules with feare astownd
To heare such dumpish notes so gastly blow:
But now the cause thereof they trembling sound,
Twere winged spirits which from Orcus flow,
Sent by the king of hell to apprehend
That charming thiefe, and cite him to his end.

Full fortie yeares are past, while here he lookes,
And careles viewes these warriors martiall deedes,
But Pluto sees his name within his bookes,
And to the fiends his doome and judgement reedes,
Who breaking from the cloudy smoaking nookes,
Whose breath the soule with during torment feedes,
Ceaze on his backe, and gripe him with their clawes,
And teares him with their iron-rancked jawes.

Out breathes he curses gainst the starry sky,
Tearing high Jove with his still-gnashing teeth,
And execrates all mens felicity:
Hating the light, and cursing all he seeth:
Thus banning in this furious extasy,
Unto the seate of damned soules he fleeth:
The wounded earth hells entralls doth unshroude,
Downe sinkes his soule, maskt in a smoaky cloude.
