I.
Thy muse may tell, how, when at labor's close,
To meet her love, beneath the twilight shade,
O'er many a broom-clade brae, and heathy glade,
In merry mood the village maiden goes.
There, on a streamlet's margin as she lies,
Chanting some carrol till her swain appears;
With visage deadly pale, in pensive guise
Beneath a wither'd fir his form he rears.
Shrieking and sad, she bends her speedy flight,
When mid dire heaths, where flits a taper blue,
The whilst the moon sheds dim a sickly light,
The solemn funeral meets her blasted view.
When trembling, weak, she gains her cottage low,
Where Magpies scatter notes of horror wide,
Some one shall tell, while tears in torrents flow,
That just when twilight dimm'd the green hill's side,
Sunk in his airy shiel, her hapless shepherd died.

II.
Let these sad strains to lighter sounds give place;
Bid thy brisk viol warble measures gay:
For see, recall'd by thy resistless lay,
Once more the Brownie shews his honest face.
Hail from thy wanderings long, my much-lov'd sprite,
Thou friend, thou lover of the lowly, hail!
Tell in what realms thou sport'st thy merry night,
Trail'st the long mop, or whirlst the mimic flail.
Where dost thou range the much-disorder'd hall,
While the tir'd damsel in Elysium  sleeps;
With early voice to drowsy workman call,
Or lull the dame, while mirth his vigils keeps?
'Twas thus in Caledonia's domes, 'tis said,
Thou ply'dst the kindly task in years of yore:
At last, in luckless hour, some pitying maid,
Spread in thy nightly cell of viands store.
Ne'er was thy form beheld among their mountains more.

III.
Then wake (for well thou canst) that wondrous lay,
How, when around the thoughtless matrons sleep,
Soft o'er the floor the treach'rous Faeries creep,
And bear the smiling infant far away.
How starts the nurse, when, for her lovely child,
She sees at dawn a gaping ideot stare!
O snatch the innocent from demons wild,
And save the parents fond from fell despair!
In a deep cave the trusty menials wait,
Till, from their hilly dens, at midnight's hour,
Forth prance the airy elves in pompous state,
And o'er the moonlight heath with swiftness scour.
In armour bright the little horsemen shine;
Last, on a milk-white stead with targe of gold,
A fay of might appears, whose arms entwine
The lost lamented child:  the shepherds bold
Th' unconscious infant tear from his unhallow'd fold.
