As flaring Phebus with his radiant face,
Enthroned in a golden chaire of state,
The watching candles of the night doth chase
To seeke out hidden cels, all passionat
As a man in richest robes of nature drest,
Doth quite obscure the glory of the rest.

Whatsoever thing is seene, it hath his peere:
The Citty a soveraigne, the heavens a Sunne
The birds an Egle, beasts a Lion feare:
The flowers a Rose, in th' lims a hart doth wonne:
The World a Center:  Center hath a Man
Her lording, primate, metropolitan.

This mans a little world the Artists say,
Wherein a wise intelligence doth dwell,
That reason hight which ought to beare the sway
The spheares our limbs in motion that excell.
The consort which by moving hence doth fall,
Yeelds harmony to both angelicall.

Mans rarer gift is if we do duely scan,
Sage wisdome, peerlesse wit and comely feature,
He seemes a very Demi-God, no man,
Embellished with all the gifts of nature:
His heavenly soule is in his earthly mold
An orient pearle within a ring of gold.

His comely body is a beautious Inne,
Built fairely to the owners princely minde,
Where wandring vertues lodge oft lodg'd with sinne,
Such pilgrims kindest entertainment finde.
An Inne, said I, O no that in name's unfit,
Sith there stay not a night, but dwell in it.

Man is the centers rarest wonderment,
Who waxeth proud with this her carriage
And deckt her selfe with arras ornament,
For him to tread as on a lofty stage:
For him once yeerely she her selfe does dight,
With greenest emarald to refresh his sight.

The heavens are full of sadder anguishment
That they injoy not such a worthy wight,
The earth is full of dreary languishment,
That heavens envy her that is hers by right.
The Sunne that strives all day with him for grace,
As night for shame is faine to shroud his face.

Faire Cinthia's often in the pining waine,
When she injoyes not his society,
And eft her glory is at full againe,
When he but daines to view her diety,
Whilom invelloped in misty cares
She now displayes her bright dischevild hairs.

True image of that hie celestiall power,
Equall to angels in thy happy state
Whose happy soule should be a pleasant bowre,
For Sanctity, her selfe to recreate,
By right Pandora hath enriched thee,
With golden gifts of immortalitie

Thus man is made though he himselfe doth marre,
By that aluring sinne of luxury:
And from his excellency wendeth farre,
By letting loose the raignes to venerie,
His soule in lust till death away it hent
Like Aesopes pearle is in a dung hill pent.

Looke at the sable night with jetty hew,
In darknesse muffles up the gladsome day,
And Cynthia in her clowdy cell doth mew,
Lest she the night fowle visage should bewray
So noisome riot rising as a dampe
Doth quite extinguish reasons burning lampe.

Cheefe foe-man unto man is lavish Riot,
Which makes him be inferiour unto man,
For whan the appetite ore-runs his diet
The soules enfeebled powers full little can,
Of glorious creatures greater is the fall,
Corruption of the best, is worst of all

Reasons fair'st turret hiely seated is,
(Seat of the soules power, which doth most excell)
Within like turnings of Meander tis,
(Or Labyrinth) where Rosamond did dwell
A triple wall th' Anatomists espie
Before you came where Rosamond doth lie.

The first is made of Elephantine tooth
Strongly compact, his figure circular,
The wall rough cast, and yet the worke is smooth,
The fairest things not ever object are.
So clowdy curtaines drawne ore th' azurd skie
(As eylids) cover Phoebus slumbring eye.

The other twaine are not so strongly pight,
They rather serve for comely decencie
And teach us that a prince within doth sit,
Enthron'd in pompe in highest majesty,
That things more highly prizde are more pent in
Lest they mote be entic't with flattring sinne.

So th' horne mad Bull must keepe the golden fleece
In bower of brasse faire Danae must be pent,
The Dragon watch your fruite Hesperides,
The all-eyd Argus must faire Io tent:
The labyrinth close peereless Rosamond:
The fragranst rose must thornes environ round.

The wall which framed is of ivory
A glorious double casement doth containe:
Each answering both in uniformity,
And both the fairest objects entertaine:
The opticke nerves be galleries wherein,
The soule doth walke and these free objects win.

Within this pallace wall a Goddesse pure
Whom Ratio all the learned schoolemen call,
Closely her selfe within doth heare inmure,
A goddesse sober, wise, celestiall:
Who sitting, though within her regal chaire,
Oft head-strong appetites her overbeare.

Riot the metropolitaine of sinnes,
Laies dayly seidge against this goodly towre:
And first by pleasing baites Riot begins,
Then by constraint this virgine to deflowre
The towre at length it raiz'd by battery,
Which could not be orecome by flattery.

Ay me!  so faire a Fort to be throwne downe,
That it so faire, no lenger time may last:
That lust should be impald with reasons crowne,
That rav'nous Riot should this pallace waste:
That she the mistresse of our lawlesse will
With uncleane excesse thus her selfe should spill,

Ay monster sinne of pleasure luxurie,
The very hecticke feaver of the soule:
The harbinger of wofull misery,
Sweet poison quaft, out of a golden bowle,
Phrensy of appetite blinde Cupids gowne,
To catch our brain-sicke Amoretto's in.

The Lethe of a stable memory:
The wild fire of the wit:  the mint of woes:
A falling sicknes to our treasury:
A mate, that ere with irreligion goes
An Epicure that huggeth fading joy,
Before eternity with least annoy.

Riot's a barke inth' minde unconstant maine,
Tost too and fro with wafts of appetite,
Where reason holdes the helme with careful paine,
But cannot steare this laden keele aright:
Here wisdome as a gallislave is pent,
Scour'g with disgrace and fed with discontent.

Now eath it is to take the golden fleece:
The al eyd Argus now a sleepe is cast:
The quick eid Dragons slaine by Hercules:
Faire Danae is deflowrd though nere so chaste.
By clues of winding pleasures now is found
A tract to kill the leefest Rosamond.

Abandon, and shake handes with riot then,
Once let him not in thy faire pallace rest:
Happy's that soule that doth not riot ken,
That keepes not open house for such a guest,
Who loves to have his lims with fatnesse lin'd
Their liv's within his lims a meager minde.

Defeat these dainty lims of wonted fare,
Weane thou thy appitite while it is young,
Lest that, it surfeting thy state impaire,
With that two fold port-cullis of thy tongue.
Stop thou the way lest too much enter in,
The enemies of vertue but the friend of sinne.

Who hunts nought else in th' Aprile of his daies,
But persian faire too wanton meriment,
A winter storme, in May, his life shall craze,
His fatall end is pyning drearyment:
The onely meed that comes by luxury,
Is servile neede fowle end, and obloquie

Till fond desire be banisht, from within
Against his leige a rebell he will rise,
Draw not the curtaine ore this slumbring sin,
That light of reason may him eft surprize:
For if in darknesse thou dost let him lie
Heele dreame on nought, but hellish villanie.

When Morpheus doth asleepe thy senses lull,
Use sleepe with sober moderation:
Too little weakens wit; too much doth dull;
And greatly hinders contemplation.
Who keepes a golden meane is sure to finde,
A healthfull body and a chearefull minde.
