THE PROLOGUE UNTO THE SECOND BOOKE.
Thus farre my lowly Muse in course aray,
Shewes the least riches of her treasury;
And in the plainer tearmes she doth assay,
To please the eares of popularity.

Now shall she tread one litle step above,
For those whose itching eares are never fild:
But with the thunder of almighty Jove,
And tales how Giants daring armes did wield.

Yet not so high, though higher then the rest,
Contents me in the Sea beare lowly sayle,
With litle barke, least canvas fittest best,
That can with lesser might gainst tide prevayle.
But when to greater seate she shall aspire;
Then may she boldly sing great Phlegraes fire.

CANTO I.
The tyrant Aimaran oppres'th the just,
Whose miseries revenge doth soone acquite,
That basely layes his honour in the dust:
And curtains up his names obscured light,
While Bdellaes walls downe to the earth are borne,
Whose haughty tops did kisse the skie beforne.

Of bloody gusts, and those vermilion swordes,
Which dide themselves in Brothers broken hearts,
How swimming blood in streets made flowing fords,
And ruthfull turmoyles rose in divers parts
I meane to sing:  That fury which affords
Sighs to the sad, and pearc'th with Ebon darts:
Come with thy snaky head engorde in blood,
Which while these things were done spectator stoode:

Lift up blacke Nemesis thy glowing eyes,
With Orcus vapours overspread the light,
Let not the Sunne from out his couch arise:
But let me write in darke these deedes of night,
Only that burning torch shall here suffise,
Whose waxe is thickned blood around bedight:
About the sinew of a conquerd foe,
This gloomy light about my eyes shall gloe.

And roare thou from thy earth appaling jaw,
Put me in minde of dread and desolations,
Let uncouth sights keepe downe my thoughts in aw:
As burning blood in fiery exhalations,
And Ravens which a dying carkasse draw,
While deadly screeches helpe to paint their passions,
While Harpyes, Owles, and Night-crowes all around,
Fluttring about me breath a gastly sound.

And thou death-boding Muse whose Tragick quill
Painteth each ruthfull stratagem aright,
My pen with that same dreery water fill,
Whose dropping letters readers doe afright,
Whither from Stixes streames it doth distill,
Or Mare Rubrums floods orevaylde with night:
That this my Cronicle of woe and death,
May seeme a dying soules last powred breath.

And thou Sedition still thy selfe present,
That every member right I may display,
And whisper words of woe and dreerement,
Sad notes of ruine and of black decay,
Helpe hatreds praise, and envies to invent,
And farre expell the thought of love away,
While cruell discord thundring in mine eares,
Deepe drownes my heart in high-astounding feares.

Towards the North a goodly Citie lyes,
Whose stately bowers wrought by Daedale hand:
Lay forth their curious riches to the eyes,
And make the passers to admire the land,
Arts chiefest beautie hence doth fayre arise,
And once both fayre and happie was this strand.
But now the renting earthquakes of debate,
Shake Atlas pillars which upholde the state.

This City Bdella calde, and he that raines,
Is Aimaran, the cruelst wight alive,
His soule doth leape to view his subjects paynes:
And when his Taxers doe great heapes contrive,
Of subjects riches, and extorted gaines,
Then doth his soule into his port arive,
Like ravens that on carkasses doe feede,
And glut their corps full glad while others bleede.

But furious hate had with his egging sting,
Commov'd them to the feeling of their woe,
And straight the Commons fall a counsailing,
How they their heavy yoke might from them throw,
And in some bounds this bloody deluge bring,
Least it should shortly make an over-flow,
And drive this Waspe from out their hony-nest,
Before his tyrannie consume the rest.

These murmuring convents came to Midas eares,
(For what from Kings and Potentates are hid?)
But dismall horror in his heart appeares,
An hundred gardians he about doth bid,
And parasites whose troope the State downe teares,
Foule wormes which never yet a crowne could rid;
While he at rushing of each moved straw,
Thinks he an host of armed foemen saw.

The guilt of conscience doth his thoughts torment,
Feare is immured in his rented skin,
It seemes here doth a ghost it selfe present,
And hovering aske where all his kinsfolks bin,
There one who cryes out blood and dreeriment,
And Tisiphon to plague him for his sin;
While horror in his eares deaths knill doth toule,
And deadly trembling graspeth on his soule.

It chanc'd this time that Phoebus wending downe,
And breathles driving to his loved west,
Saw where in Thetis breasts softs-softest downe,
Neptune was taking his unlawfull rest:
Phoebus thereat was wroth and gan to frowne,
And straight forswore his loves now lothed west,
Vowing with Tellus now should be his seate,
And she should feele the comfort of his heate.

Phoebus then timely rose, and did embrace
Fayre Tellus with the vigour of his rayes,
Who straight begun to spring and grow apace;
And hence it came that in these later dayes
We have ourspring, when Phoebus glorious face
Begins to lengthen his protracted wayes:
And still this time remembring her offence,
He makes on earth his greater residence.

These dayes were come, and Phoebus with his shine
Doth make the solac't earth her fruits to bring,
Whose sight refresheth mens foredaunted eyne,
While tuning birds their sweetest carrols sing,
And naked trees their vestures doe refine,
Mov'd with this sight goes foorth a solacing;
The lustie youth, and to his bonibell,
Each doth a lesson of the Summer tell.

Amongst the rest walks foorth a forlorne wight,
Even like Heraclitus, from whose moyst eyes,
Still-flowing teares notes of a grieved spright,
As welling fountaines fruitfully arise,
His head as scorning heavens most delight,
Looking still downward on his shoulder lyes,
As though his heart and troubled spirits have,
His joy intumulated in the grave.

Sometimes to heav'n he lookes, and then he weepes
For her sweet soule that to her rest is fled;
Upon the ayre, and then his eyes he steepes
In flowing Oceans which by griefe are bred;
Upon the earth, then in a trance he sleepes,
And slumbring sinketh downe as carkasse dead:
But then some sence doth him recall againe,
In life to dye and live in deadly paine.

But now a groane doth beate his hearkning eare,
And many tumblings issuing from below,
When straight he cryes, O death thrice-welcome heare,
My yeares are ripe, come, downe them gently mow,
Give end unto the woe my heart doth teare,
And sweetest ease upon my soule bestow:
With that he falls unto the loved ground,
While joyes his drowned heart doe deepe astound.

But then the ghost replies, awake deare love,
No death, thy life and dearest wife I am,
Whom tyrants hand from thee did once remove,
Now doe I come for to revenge the same,
Strike up thy sences (deare) thy valour prove:
And when to him the Lady neerer came,
She gave him armour which Achilles wore,
When Hectors side with hideous stroke he tore.

And sayes, here be the ransomes of my life,
That shall plead vengeance of the tyrants soule:
He at the name of his beloved wife,
Thrice 'ssayd within his armes her to enroule,
But thrice her flying ghost doth end the strife,
And doth his warring sences streight controule:
Farre flyes her soule escaping humane sight,
Like louring Falcon in her ayrie flight.

This was his loved spouse, whom Aimaran,
Not yeelding to his lust, causde to be slaine,
Dicaea was her name, whom wicked man
In sepulcher too timely doth detaine,
When first her wofull husband hopeles ran
Into despayre, not daring to complaine:
And still lamenting all his dayes outweares,
Upon her grave greene growing with his teares.

As one whom raving Hecuba hath bit,
Whose blood corrupted with her venom'd tung,
Confounds his sences and amaz'th his wit,
And uncouth noyse that in his eare still rung,
Casteth him downe in some outragious fit,
With such a fury was this mourner stung:
Despayre still howleth in his flagging eare,
Haunting his heart like over-hungry beare.

But now hath hope that sweet phisition,
Lifted the spirits which were farre deprest,
Infusing in a cordiall potion,
Solacing drops which worke eternall rest,
And driving thence this mourning passion,
Inthroniz'th thoughts of Ire within his brest:
Whose sulphure kindled with a mounting fire,
Blow vengeance in his hearts contorted gire.

Foorth doth he march to the seditious campe,
Who only did expect some worthy head,
That might conduct them as their lights bright lampe,
Amidst warres darknes which are menaced:
Who when they saw him, like a clowdy dampe
That doth the vayled fields all over-spred:
So doe their troopes concurre from every part,
As veniall blood unto the lively hart.

They have a greed of placing every wing,
Themistos is the Generall of the field:
They pitch their tents with joy and revelling,
And warlike bowers now apace they build,
And now black night her rusty coach doth bring,
Furthering with silence all events they wild:
All things for battell readie are prepar'd,
The townsmen sleepe as they that nothing car'd.

The morne no sooner op'd her ruddy gate,
But straight a peale of Trumpetters doe sound,
To stirre their hearts with thoughts of hie debate,
Whose hate against their king might deepe rebound,
As Mandrakes cry a passer doth amate,
Striking his soule with irrecured wound:
So doth this noyse affright great Bdellaes peeres,
To heare such musicke rattle in their eares.

Hark Aimaran how death with gastly cry,
Doth sound the knill of thy deserved fate:
Heare how the trumpet of thy destinie,
Looseth the bands of blood ennurtur'd hate,
That tingles in thine eares and bids thee die:
Yet stops deaths doores and shuts that loved gate,
Bellona howling from her bellowing cave,
Bids thee torment thy selfe and curse and rave.

Where shall thy haunted soule finde place of rest,
The heav'ns are darkned with the bloody smoke
Of harmles Saints, whose lives thy hands opprest,
Hell vapours ready are thy soule to choke:
In earth the shrikes of ghosts thy thoughts molest,
And furies which the doores of bondage broke,
Come up to banquet on thy powred blood,
And make their damned selves this damned food.

As Athamas whom furie doth enflame,
Teares poore Learchus with his bloodie hands,
And madly runs whom no restraint can tame,
But furious wanders through unknowne lands:
So doth this tyrant burne in quenchles flames,
Breaking with violence all natures bands,
Like one that drunke the Aethiopian lake,
Into whose soule thousands of furies brake.

But now in counsell house they doe all fit,
To try if policie can better fight,
And make their battels with the armes of wit:
But troubled sences cannot judge aright,
And they rapt in the trance of sudden fit,
With staring gazes each their mates affright,
That now they are but like a flock of owles,
Wondring to see themselves such shapeles fowles.

At last a Nestor bolder doth arise,
And tels no time it was thus staring sit,
But send some Legate to the enemies,
To tell if their requests with reason fit,
They should be granted all in ample wise:
Another as reproving former wit,
Thinks it is best with fierce and open warre,
To drive these rebels thence removed farre.

But now stands up Ulysses:  certes (quoth he)
All that you say is but consumed winde:
But rather let our Kings great majestie,
Himselfe with solemne oth in letters binde,
That whatsoever rebels armed be,
If they returne they shall great favour finde,
And have rewarded them incontinent,
What wrong soever causde their discontent.

But when they come well shall we then provide,
To quite their curtesie with cutting fare,
The sword of vengeance shall the cause decide,
Each rebell that tumultuous armour bare,
Shall his rebellion with great smart abide:
And for the peoples voyce let no man care,
The Lion roring in his princely den,
Shall with his noyse astonish lesser men.

Foule serpent-head within whose poys'ned braine,
A thousand divels keepe a cabinet,
Which mightie Jove hath damn'd to during paine,
When for this deed thou shalt for anguish fret,
Thy cankerd soule who shall no rest obtaine,
But feed thy wombe with woe and deepe regret,
Millions of furies yawning with their jawes,
Shall combe thy carkasse with their renting clawes.

Horror within thy soule shall thee affright,
Which mak'st of nought the truth despising good,
Damnation doth awayt:  But O dread sight!
Loe many I doe see in raging mood,
Which bid me silent be, and in despight
Bid me leave preaching, or the'ile have my blood:
Well I recant this couns'ler was not bad,
But worst, and what degree Ill greater had.

Now while this mate was telling on his text,
In breakes Themistos with a mightie host,
The gates are broken and the towne perplext,
It hapt this counsell which they counted most,
Hath lost his end, come come devise the next,
Or worse then this, and then thy haunted ghost
With the next furie that to Orcus went,
May for a token to great Dis be sent.

But tis too late, looke where the winters frost
Fals, that shall kill thy boughs with pinching cold:
Looke Aimaran, see thy heapes which now are lost,
Those heapes which thou from subjects didst withhold,
See how thy souldiers dying ban thy ghost,
And ding it downe to hell a thousand fold:
Goe curse and dye, accompany their soules,
Carrouse with Pluto black Cocitus boles.

Behind thee doth a hagge awayt thy end.
To carrie hence that blood-defiled masse:
At hell doe all the ghosts in rancks attend,
For to salute thee when thou foorth doest passe:
Yonder thy deaths-man stands, whose hand shall send
Thy spirit to his well deserved place,
While infants wallowing in their mothers gore,
Shall passe thee downward with a gastly rore.

Looke how thy subjects lye all martyred;
There sits a matron dying on her child;
Their mangled carcasses but tortured,
By never dying paine from death beguild;
The rebell-sonnes runne where their fathers bled,
And in unhumane blood their feete defilde;
The heapes of corses like a Pharas ly,
And bloody rivers like the red-sea by.

Nothing but skarlet doth invest the streete,
Which like a judge doth frowne upon the sky,
A great Aegaeum all along doth fleete,
In which dead heapes of men ore-whelmed ly;
Here a big rock of armour you shall meete,
There a great Ile of men you shall passe by,
While sanguine object with his strong reflexe,
Staines heav'ns fayre face with purple scattered strekes.

Howle foule Megaera from thy gulfie throat,
And ring thy knill for Aimaranes ghost;
Charon provide thy never emptie boat,
He meanes anon to travell yonder coast;
Alecto now put on thy crimson coat,
Least he in bloody fayrenes thee out-boast;
Combe downe thy snaky locks, dresse right thy head,
He loving meanes with thee to take his bed.

Like Margiates in West Indyes land,
When Joves great thunder bellowes in their eares,
Quavering and shaking they afrighted stand,
To heare that heaven a base so hollow beares,
So doth this monster at his foemens band,
Faint feare up lifts his bloody clotted heares,
For feare (which doth his heart subdued take)
His paralitike members still doe quake.

When comes Themistos and with gliding sword,
No sooner pearceth his disseverd skin,
But thousand Divells on his corse doe bord,
And greedie thrust their bloody muzzels in.
After they heave him to the Stygian ford,
Where for the guilt of deepe inured sin,
With wiery whips he suffers grisly wounds,
And with his raving, hells vast vault rebounds.

But where that wicked counsailer was gone,
Each man doth doubt, some say that downe to hell
Alive he was distraught, and many a one
That by the swords well worthy edge he fell;
But how soever let him lye alone,
No man shall grudge the chance that him befell:
The heaven shall melt, the Sunne shall baite in South,
Before he shall escape hells yawning mouth.

CANTO II.
Themistos with Encrata takes his way,
Astonisht with a hideous yelling cry:
And Erophel is flying fast away
From her sweete love that for her wrong will dye;
Who now affrighted with a rarest chance,
Against his life his owne hand doth advaunce.

The comet fumes which from the earth ascend,
Unto great Cinthias concave circulation,
May long defer their doome-denouncing end,
Before they be compact in conglobation,
But at the last their fury they protend,
Kindled with some celestiall inflamation,
No cloude their eating flames with moysture stops,
But downe they poure their ruddy-burning drops.

So may the smoaky sighs of innocents,
Which by great Jove still make their sad complaint,
Long volley forth, before revenge assents,
The guiltie damned soules for to attaint,
But when deepe vengeance once her clawes indents,
The comet of their plague shall never faint,
But with new brimstone freshly still reliev'd,
Shall keepe them in still-during torments griev'd.

Which Bdellaes towers, wel-worthy towres have seene,
And felt the stroake which long hath been deferd,
Justice long hoverd heaven and them betweene,
And with repining eares their follies heard,
At last inflamde with wrath and ragefull teene,
Maskt in a bloody fire she streight appeerd,
Whose flakie flame pitching on Bdella walls,
With them in everlasting ruin falls.

So is it left all desolate forgone,
No call of Musick nor of man doth sound,
The shady Owle in deadly notes doth groane,
And luckles Wezells nestle in the ground,
While goary blood besprinkled all upon,
Reflecteth in the ayre a circle round,
Whose gloomie sight untill these latest day,
Drives fearefull passengers another way.

Sometimes the ghosts walke in those paths of wo,
And with their skreeching fright the neighbour land,
Sometime a fier doth seeme alone to go,
A thousand torches as in battell band,
And brandish in the darknes to and fro,
At which the inhabitants appalled stand,
It seemes blacke hell hath ript her prison wombe,
And meanes in maske unto the earth to come.

Now hath Themistos left this fearefull place,
And he alone is gone to seeke his chaunce,
Minded not ever back to turne his face,
But armed with that sword of piercing Lance,
Which slew great Aimaran, he forth doth passe,
And gainst each foe his weapon doth advaunce:
Now hath he crost full many a wood and hill,
To vertue no way ever happens ill.

This time it chaunst that Ereb had debate,
Wroth with his wife, rapt forth a fire brand,
Who lothing light, and kindled straight with hate,
Lifts up from sable hell her pitchy band,
And with her gloomy troupe at Phoebus gate,
To keepe the light from earth enragde did stand:
So was Themistos ere he was aware,
Left in black shadow and to nightly care.

But on the plaine he spies a mightie tree,
Whose greene attire did shield the falling raine,
And oft in under Floraes Nimphs with glee,
Would dauncing leade their fayre Napean traine,
That with soft downe his rootes invested bee,
Where Faunus with this Nimph hath often laine:
Here doth he meane to passe the silent night,
Till with his eyes he shall salute the light.

The Starres all ready at their watch doe lye,
And silent murmur whistles through the greene,
Which rockes his senses with a Lullaby,
That in deepe slumber now they buried beene,
Delighted with this dumpish harmony:
But now fayre Phoebe halfe her way hath seene,
And his deepe dreaming is so violent,
It cannot longer time be permanent.

Morpheus hath left his blacke pavillion,
And hath unlockt the portals of his eyes,
When streight he lookes the continent upon,
Whither the Mornings chariot yet did rise,
But she with Tithon kept her mansion,
And in his colde embraces chayned lies:
This while the Knight doth smile upon the aire,
To see it shining such a duskie faire.

But as he viewes, the most celestiall face,
That ever nature made to shew her power,
Sends to his eyes the beames of such a grace,
As beauties fairest rayes they forth did powre,
Naked she was, and spotles from deface,
Beautie she seemde it selfe, or beauties bower:
That if fayre heaven on earth did ever dwell,
Then this was heaven, on whom all graces fell.

Her skinne the linnen where with cunning start,
Beauty had wrought the summe of all her skill,
While with her needle heere and there apart,
With azure worke her sampler she doth fill,
And turning to the brestplate of her heart,
She worketh fairely there a double hill,
Where on her double ruddy stewards doe stand,
Which keepe the harvest of fayre beauties land.

These lightning darts his heart had almost brent,
Though not in lust but in divinest love,
Therefore his eyes as messengers he sent,
Unto that mayde her curtesie to prove,
Who with these words her treasure doores unbent,
Let not the thought of me your passions move,
For from the heavens I come to guide your feete,
In purest paths from deedes and waies unmeete.

He gently proferd her a Nectar-kisse,
She met him yet did blush as halfe with shame:
He now is hers, and she is wholy his,
But not as looser wantons them doe name,
This thoughts divine harmoniall consort is,
Farre from the deedes of night those worthy blame,
Whose noysome poyson cankering within,
Consumes the flesh with paine, the soule with sin.

But while within their soules this melody
Sounds pleasing tunes all ravishing the heart,
They are affrayghted with a hideous cry,
Like to an host conjoynd in bloody Mart:
And bellow forth a note when downe they dye,
Which doth perswade these lovers to depart:
Where let them take the chance to them assignd,
Ere long time passe, I shall their journey finde.

This noyse which tumbled in such fearefull wise,
Came from two brethren twixt whom deadly hate,
Still causes of new discord doth devise,
For when the watrie Queene faire Thetis late,
In Lemnos walke, Vulcan did her surprise;
And on that Lady these two sonnes begate;
Who of two disagreeing Natures brought,
In passions disagreeing eversought.

But Vulcan wrought them armour with a charme,
And mighty swords which incantation bound,
That never could they worke each others harme,
But in their foes would dint a griesly wound,
After he did his Sonnes thus strongly arme,
He set them in a ship, when first this ground
Receavde these warriors, that each little houre,
Their blades into each others brests they poure.

This Diaphon that Pyrhydor is hight,
Who since they came into this litle Ile,
Have overcome in doughty strokes of fight,
All Knights within the space of forty mile;
But she on which these brethren now alight,
A Lady is that did her selfe exile:
From those which love her as their deare delight,
And doth bewayle this her ungentle flight.

Whom seeing straight they ran to captivate,
First Diaphon, then Pyrhydor doth flie,
But cruell Pyrhydor inflamde with hate,
That he before him to the game should hie,
With a huge blow downe clove his riven pate,
The other fairely quites his surquedry,
The Lady flying, piteously doth crye,
On ground they wounded, bellowing doe lye.

Where lye they may this dame I'le follow fast,
And by enquest search out her cause of flight,
She was a vertuous (but that time is past)
A vertuous Lady lov'd of each mans sight,
But now her faithles deedes have quite defast,
And darkned all her glories shining light:
Blacke cloudes of sinne, and never blushing shame,
Doe wrap those silver wings of former fame.

As when the blossomes of a springing tree,
Promise the owner harvests chiefest pride,
And Ver yclad in gorgeous jollity,
Though Floraes kingdome in her pompe doth ride,
Great hope there is that there great store will be:
But when the lightning from the heaven doth slide,
Then are they choaked in the sweetest prime,
And all forget it was so good a time.

So did the bloome of her fayre springing youth,
Clad in the robes of snow-white chastity,
Perswade the world a fruitfull time ensueth,
And largest rivers of fertility,
But all this hope is turned into ruth,
When filthy flame of infidelity,
Scorcheth the wings on which pure faith doth flye,
And makes her in her verdant blooming dye.

She Erofel is calde, whom long there lov'd,
Good Erophil well tride at sword and speare,
And to her match, her still her parents mov'd,
While she great kindnes in her front did weare,
And seemde to love him as it her behov'd,
But in went masking heart of cruell beare;
Which Love doth hate, and takes his deepest joy,
With treacherous words to worke her loves annoy.

Mischiefes foule venome bloweth up her wombe,
Worse then Calipsoes toxicating draught:
Her wicked heart is his funereall tombe,
From whence the source of his sad death he raught,
Hence doe his soules corrosive drenches come,
Which in deepe sorrow his deare soule indraught;
While she like Juno at her husbands thunder,
Laugheth to see fayre Semele torne asunder.

For when in gentle sorte she seemde to quite
Faire glaunces to his ever darting eyes,
He would in mariage bands confirme delight,
What ere he askes, she seeming not denyes;
And doth avow to doe her Virgin-right,
The day is come whereon his hope relyes:
They are conjoyned in a holy band,
He with his heart, she only with her hand.

Now doth he pray the Sunne to flie apace,
And lash great Pirois on his lightning side,
Then Cynthia he desires to shew her face,
And bids her nightly chariot upward slide,
Then doth he pray the cloudes for to disgrace
The darkned night, and with their vailes to hide
The loathed beames of Phoebus lingring light,
And make the Sunne arise of his delight.

O foolish man how are thy wits yblent,
Why dost thou runne into thy latest path,
Stay yet sweete Knight before thou doe repent,
To late then will it be to heale thy skath,
And quench the fire when as thy bones are brent,
But so dire fate our deedes directed hath,
That like blinde Moles into our bane we goe,
But then she gives us eyes to see our woe.

Night up doth rise the marke of all his thought,
But sure his dart will misse the prick anon:
For Erofel hath an Aethiop hath sought,
Whom with rewards and mony she hath won,
That to the genial bed this hagge is brought:
For Erofel to bed would goe alone,
Refusing offred helpe, but she hath set
Another Pigeon in her cabinet.

And as the custome was she set a vaile,
Which hid the worser face, and shewd the fayre:
Thus doth she set her rotten ship to saile,
And to a private chamber doth repayre:
But Erophil his hower doth not faile,
At her due time he meanes all debts to pay her:
He off doth cast the clowdes, whose evious darke
Hinders his sayling to the goodly barke.

The torches quenched he is left to rest,
And sets on foote upon his fatall bed:
O foote step back before thou be unblest,
And be not guided with so rash a head:
O head seduced with so foule a guest,
With such alluring bayt O be not fed:
And O sweet Knight before thou griefe do reape,
Fall not so soone, but looke before thou leape.

But all in vaine, downe he his bones doth lay;
O haples bones that never thence shall rise,
He hopes to drive the chariot of the day,
Whose beames did daze a while his staring eyes:
But Erofel doth give his wishes nay;
Straight to her breast embraces he applies,
Then sugred-bitter kisses, and anon:
But shame and griefe now bid me to be gon.

The Moone downe wept a dewy dropping raine,
Wayling the fate of sweetest Erophill,
And seemed to fayre Tellus to complaine,
That twas great griefe that love such soule should kill,
Her darksome steedes she would have setled faine,
And made black night above remaining still,
That day might never bring that sunny ray,
Whose sight might bring this wofull Knights decay.

But Phoebus rose, forbidding longer night,
And faine the Aethiop would betime depart:
O no (quoth he) my chiefest loved light,
Then shalt thou take away my dearest hart,
And with eclipsing this thy cleerest bright,
Thou shalt eclipse my soules essentiall part:
And then with an embrace he caught her head,
Therewith her beautie was uncovered.

Out leapes a face like to the Lician men,
That suddenly were turned into frogs:
Or when that Cerberus raised from his den,
Gastly presents three ugly barking dogs:
Or to the pitchy Queene of darknes then,
When she goes masking all in dampish fogs,
Fearing to put her beauties vaile away,
Least to the wind she should her forme display.

The Knight astounded, rapt his mighty sword,
And present die thou Incubus (quoth he)
Which with a fiend hast wrought these deedes abhord:
Farewell thou falsed love where ere thou bee,
This edge shall end to griefe and life afford:
With that his troubled ghost he soone doth free,
Who to those mirtle groves doth pearcing flie,
Where he with Dido mournes his miserie.

Now Erofell is gone in triumph fled,
And laugheth at her Tragick-plotting wit;
Where still with feare be thou disquieted,
Let gastly thoughts thy gnawed conscience bite;
And let those wormes within thy soule be bred,
That never may surcease tormenting it:
While with all plots of mischiefe that I may,
Ile compasse thee, not resting night or day.

CANTO III.
Themistos heares a wofull wight complaine,
And fights against the fearfull Giants twins,
While Erofel doth heare Pirinoes paine,
And to torment him freshly she begins:
Still he repeats his love and loves desire,
Still she doth scorch him in a greater fire.

Though fortune feed thee with her delicates,
And starres doe seeme t' aspire unto thy blisse,
Trust not the fickle reeling of the fates,
Nor in fond pleasures lap doe lie remisse,
Hell still in op'ning her black rustie gates,
And sends foorth fiends that tempt us to amisse:
Therefore about thy soule keepe surest watch,
Least that temptation should thee over-match.

Though good Themistos had from heaven sent
A blessed gardian to direct his feete,
Yet cleere he was not, for incontinent
A wicked Lady doth his journey meete,
And arm'd she was as one for justice bent:
But she was wanton and for pleasure meete:
At her birth-day fierce warriours angry king,
With the fayre Queene of love was revelling.

And Cipribel her name, who now in love
With good Themistos, still did tempt to shame,
And with vaine questions did his fancie move:
But fayre Encrata would her sharply blame,
And with some holy tale her talke remove,
That she enraged with this Angell dame,
Swelleth with wrath that never can be quencht,
So deepe in poysond heart it is indrencht.

She would have rackt her lims ten thousand wayes,
And spred her like the dust upon the ground:
But love enforcing, she much other sayes,
When soone Themistos had her purpose found,
And seemes to yeeld to her:  but with delayes,
Least he should quite enforce a cureles wound:
And still he seekes to turne her path awry,
Into some other journey lying by.

Now while they passe, loe yond they see a wight,
Beating his breast with huge and ruthles blowes:
Sometimes he stating lookes on heavens light,
And streight himselfe upon the earth he throwes:
Then on his haire his fingers doe alight,
And flyes as if he were pursu'd with foes,
And then as burden of his deadly song,
He scricheth that the woods resound along.

His face so pale and skin transparent was,
It seem'd Deaths ghastly looking glasse to be,
And then he cryes, loe yond he comes alas!
The Giant!  O now whither shall I flie?
But soone toward him doth Themistos passe,
And bids him cheare his wofull heart:  but he
Refuseth any sparke of least delight,
And with his soule gainst comfort strong doth fight.

O what have you to doe in dead mens graves?
(Quoth he) why trouble you what longs to death?
And hinder my repast, as curses, raves,
And sighs and teares, which feede my lingring breath,
Sorrow within my breast round-vaulted caves
Sings tunes, which most my eares sweet ravisheth:
Goe fondlings to your haples wanton end,
I will on Griefe and blessed Death attend.

Then with a griping gnash he ends his tale,
As though an earthquake all his bow'ls did teare:
But him the Knight bespoke to tell his bale,
And who the authors of his sorrow were.
But he:  so shall I cause thee to bewaile,
And I grow worse:  for cursed hope may nere
Take me from out my loved sorrowes bands,
For all my soule I yeeld into thy hands.

But since thou needs wilt draw my cursed chance,
I Algiger am calde, that happie of yore,
Till fortune frownd with crabbed countenance,
But now ill luck downe all my triumphs bore:
Yonder two monsters did their strength advance
Against my house, which fearfull ruin tore,
My friends are slaine, and I am left alone
To be:  and there he breathd a deadly grone.

Faine would the Knight more of his tale expresse,
But he to any earthly joy was dead;
His soule entombed in deepe heavinesse,
Into a pleasing sensles dreame was led.
The Knight full greatly mov'd with his distresse,
Awakt him from his cares most uncouth bed:
But for no treasure that on earth doth lie,
Would he this Knight in way accompanie.

Where leaving him, the Knight doth forward goe,
Seeking by any meanes the way to finde:
But soone he found it, for all passers know,
With sad experience all that monstrous kinde,
For still they worke the countrie scath and woe,
Leaving each where sad notes of ruth behinde:
And now the Knight arrives unto the place,
Where his great valour shall their force deface.

He knocks against the posternes of the gate,
When streight foorth steps a beldam dry with age,
When she the Knight espies, then plung'd in hate,
Unto her sonnes she runnes, who all in rage
Come foorth embrued with the spoyle, which late
They made, for safely passe no carriage:
This find hath Policlopon to his name,
That Pantarpazon children of one dame.

Huge mighty corps they have, which like a tree
March to and fro full gastly to behold:
Their heads with rav'nish jawes foule wolvish bee:
Some say a divell did their dame infold,
Other that with a wolfe lay ugly shee:
But how-soere, all filthie is her mold,
Harpyia she, well worthie such a brood,
At whose birth-time some hagge as midwife stood.

Now with the Knight the elder boy doth fight,
Yawning like Orcus jawes and gaping wide:
But at the first downe in his throte there pight
The speares sharpe poynt which dothfull deeply slide,
When streight he parbreakes forth (O lothsome sight)
Great filthie gobbets which doe upward glide,
And rawish meate and flesh that yet did bleede,
The nourishment on which his vice did feede.

But then Harpya soule doth curse amaine,
When as she sees him groveling on the ground,
And howles and raves, and bids his brother gaine
The full revengement of that deadly wound:
He thought with meeting blow at first t' have slaine,
The Knight avoyding, downe it doth rebound:
The hideous beame wherewith this monster fought,
Into the groning earth full deepe is wrought.

When nimbly he divides his conduit-pipe,
Through which the Lerna of his sinne did flow,
It seem'd for Pluto now his soule was ripe,
With such a trice off doth his forhead goe:
The whining dame doth with her apron wipe
His brothers throte, thinking his life to slow:
But all the furies of infernall hell,
Long since within his damned corps doe dwell.

They thus captiv'd, he takes that foggie fiend,
And strips her naked from her antique hew,
And to a spreader both her feete doth binde,
That she might never him nor his pursew,
And with a cord doth tye her hands behinde:
Thus is this haggard placed in her mew,
And to the scorching Sunne her face doth turne,
Who with his beames doth her most fervent burne.

She with her curses gripes heav'ns highest seat,
Accusing them of her deserved paine,
And execrates the Sunne for sending heat,
Bidding him drench his steeds within the maine,
Then gainst the fearfull throane she foule doth bleat:
But all her plaints and curses are in vaine,
Her tortur'd soule to bloomy Ereb fell,
While on her carkasse crowes and ravens dwell.

Hereto his spoyles we'le leave this worthie Knight,
And follow Erofel that flies amaine,
Whom those two brethren did but now affright,
She to her former tricks returnes againe,
Seeking to worke fayre love her foule despight;
And that she sooner might her end attaine,
In mans apparell she is fairly clad,
While womans skin and wolvish heart she had.

Thus foorth she marched in her way alone,
But that consorted with deceit and guile,
And she in many Sunnes hath painfull gone,
But none she meets whom may her art beguile:
Further she travailes still, but now anon
A voyce she heard that fits her plotted wile,
And thus it faintly beates the yeelding ayre,
Issuing from pangs of woe and deepe despayre.

Heart leave to pine, since pining cannot save,
Soule love not her, that doth not love thy love,
Minde be no longer to that force a slave,
That can deepe passions, but no mercie move,
You clowdes of sorrow no more issue have,
This tree for all your watring will not prove:
For that fayre plant bout which your waters flow,
In midst of them all barren will not grow.

O she is sick with unrecur'd disease,
That serpent foule disdaine her sharp doth sting,
And to the cure I proved many wayes;
Of my heart-blood I did a plaister bring,
And kept it warme with sighs, and strove to please,
And washt it with the wels of sorrowing:
My soules deare garden-plots I did reveale,
Yet by the chiefest herbs she will not heale.

But no, I am diseasd, here lyes the wound;
For when her beautie had the harts in chace,
Which in the pale of love were servants bound,
Then I not able to withdraw my pace,
My selfe by those her arrowes gored found,
Which fly from that fayre bow of her sweet face:
Yet though I feele the arrow in my hart,
It doth deny me leave to breake the dart.

Therefore thus festring deepe in venom'd skin,
Since my lives Surgeon doth her helpe deny,
And all my sinewes are consum'd within,
No hope remaines on which I may rely,
After this death my soule no life shall win,
But in a second griefe shall ending dy:
So shall her cruell heart be fully pleasde,
My wounds embalmed, and my passions easde.

These and more mournfull words still sighing deepe,
He breathed vainly to the sensles sky,
Which might have brought a stony heart asleepe:
But Erofel arm'd with black crueltie,
Shutteth the gates which pitie usde to keepe,
And barring foorth the plaints of miserie:
Thus doth she boord the Knight with words of guile,
Which craft and fained sorrow did compile.

O doe not clowd the heaven of your face,
With mistie vapours which black woe doth spread,
Nor those bright lineaments so much disgrace,
That in their chiefest spring they should be dead:
Sorrow with swiftest wings still flyes apace,
And joy goes flagging on the plumes of lead:
Drive that away which of it selfe will flie,
You need not open gates to miserie.

What is it love?  I know that poyson strong,
Yet to resist against his powers assay:
If then you be too weake to daunt his wrong,
Open (if safely) all your storie lay:
And if my helpe you will accept among,
And to my precepts will eftsoones obay,
My greatest ayd to you I will avow,
Within this breast hath love been cur'd ere now.

O never may (quoth he) my wound feele ease,
I turne with Sisiphusa restles stone:
The flames of hell the furies may appease,
But these heart-burning coales will nere be gone:
Gods may Prometheus from his chaines release,
This vultur ever feedes my heart upon:
These everlasting pangs and weary breath,
Unto my woes give life, to life a death.

But since her name thus sounded by my words,
Doth so much ravish my even-sleeping soule,
And then Disdaine like many thousand swords,
Rips up the closed wound which erst was whole,
And neerer end to fainting thought affords,
This Tragick storie here I will unrole,
The Chronicle of many a wofull thing,
Which in those dayes were done when love was king.

Within a stately pallace happie dwels
A mightie Lord, whose now-extolled height,
By fortunes ayd the state by much excels,
Of any neighbour Prince or forren Knight
Blest now he is, but not so blessed els,
Had not fayre Nature lent those torches light,
Which guide the fortune of each mightie peere,
Without whose helpe their fame will nere be cleere.

The fayrest ofspring from his loynes proceed,
That ever heav'ns conjur'd should ravish eye,
Whose very thought my dying soule doth feed,
With fainting sight of such felicitie:
Sure some divine she is, no earthly seed,
No man can sound so sweet a harmonie,
Fairest of faires, burning bright beauties flame,
Heavenly her nature, Bellamy her name.

O let me see the mornes fayre blushing rise,
Or let the dove set forth her fayrest white;
Let heaven unclose his treasure to the eyes,
And fayrest gemmes present them to my sight,
Or pleasant'st shew that in each colour lyes,
With which faind beautie often shineth bright:
These all united in one goodly frame,
Can scarse describe the picture of my dame.

Sure Jove was framing a new starry light,
And seeing heaven full, here made her place:
Heart-plunging thoughts doe ravish with delight,
When I but once doe seeme to view her face;
Me thinks my spirit nere should see the night,
Rapt deeply with the image of her grace:
In vaine I have her fame and praises sung,
My tongue disgraceth her she grac'th my tung.

Now doth she flourish in her chiefest spring,
(O heavenly spring, though winter to my dayes)
And thirtie Knights there lie a revelling,
Seeking by valiant acts and sundrie wayes,
Who to her thoughts may sweetest pleasure bring,
And who may win the sunshine of her rayes:
O rayes which through my heart as thinnest glasse,
With pearcing light and brightest edge doe passe.

One time in Justs a spectacle they made,
When as my eyes the sad spectators were,
Still with my growing sight my hope did fade,
And still my love did grow though hope did weare.
Thus pressed with despayres most heavy lade,
Her sight all hopeles, heartles I forbeare:
For when so many woo'd one onely dame,
I thought too late my fancies suing came.

Therefore exposde to sorrow and despayre,
Here will I sing the Dirges of my death:
Sometimes the Nightingale doth here repaire,
Consorting with me in a plaining breath:
Sometimes the turtle robbed of her paire,
In groaning noyse my tune accompaneth,
While pleasant death sweet singing in mine eare,
A part in this my plaining song doth beare.

Thus farre this Swan sung foorth his mournfull plaint,
And much I rue the paine which him doth hold:
For well I know the plague which doth attaint,
This wofull man doth him most heavy fold.
Now Erofel with words which joy did paint,
Seemed to have his sorrow much controld:
But what she spoke occasion doth deny
To tell, till better time shall bid reply.

Now some will thinke that I am much unkinde,
To let this wofull wight thus plungedly:
But little doe they know what I doe finde,
That yet remaines more infelicitie,
And she as women wont will have her minde,
Though for his ease I many wayes doe trie:
And though in his defence I strongly stand,
These women needs will have the upper hand.

CANTO IV.
Diaphon and Pirrhydor in endles blowes
Batter the castles of their furious harts,
Brethren by birth, by deeds most cruell foes,
That bloody still torment each others parts,
While Algiger all mortifide in soule,
The worlds short pleasures deeply doth controule.

As when a firie brand that fiercely burnes,
Taken from Vulcans ever-breathing flame,
And in the water layd, each other turnes
Their force, their angry enemie to tame,
And while that either others might doth spurne,
From twixt them both a mightie ratling came:
At last when neither gets the upper side,
The force of both in might away doth slide.

Such is the flame which Discord doth incense,
That still it fights, and still it wasts away,
Still suffering losse, without a recompence,
With her owne subject still she doth decay:
Still on her face she doth presume defence,
When still she meanes to get a spoyled pray,
The filthie rust that in our soule doth creepe,
And with her griping teeth still gnaweth deepe.

Thus doe these brethren wast each others might,
Hewing their armour with down-thundring blowes:
The burning fire never wanteth light,
Which discord with her envious bellowes blowes;
Her bellowes to her servants likned right,
Whereof one swels when downe his mate he throwes:
Such is the state of any envious minde,
That by anothers fall his seat doth finde.

But now the mightiest fit that ever mov'd
A warring soule to furie and to rage,
Their concord with new quarels hath reprov'd,
Whose force no hope there is ere to asswage:
If ever least degree they faining lov'd,
Their love shall never see that infant-age,
Madnes hath blowen up their swelling harts,
Whose tumour never from his seate departs.

For while they travaild on a pleasant plaine,
They saw a little mount, that with his head
A prospect made upon the smiling maine:
No bushie tree his beautie shadowed,
But open his faire flowrie top hath laine:
And to this hill a path directly led,
Whither these warring brethren take their way,
Willing to see what novelties there lay.

Streight to their eares the sweetest harmonie
Doth blow, that ever sweet to eare can blow,
Whose force like fire could melt black crueltie,
And make it quickly gentle mercie know:
From out that little hill it soft doth flie,
As if Apollo all his art would show:
A little death it is, which up doth send
Our soules to heaven, before we make our end.

O cease those murdring strokes what ere thou be,
My soule will flie from hence unto thy cell,
And all in love with this will banish me;
Sweet hony issuing from a silver well,
Which giv'st a surfet, not sacietie:
O doe no more such pleasing murmurs tell,
But leave my virgin-thoughts without annoy,
Which thou wilt ravish with too great a joy.

When this enchanting noyse their eares doth kis,
They hating all what harmonie doth make,
With madnes almost burst, all turned is
To egging ire, and forth their swords they take,
And like mad bedlams when their wit's amis,
Into an open fight most fierce they brake,
Where we will leave them there to learne some wit,
No other schoole then this can be more fit.

But now perchance this seemeth truth to passe,
That from the earth such heavenly tunes ascend:
But thus the Chronicles report it was,
That long agoe within this land did wend
A Mathematick, that did work with brasse,
And other things which to his art did tend,
So skilfull that no sound on earth devisde
Hath been, but he hath highly equalizde.

And here within the earth he built a cell,
Where he will try the utmost of his art,
And hath by labour now conjoyned well,
Each moving member and each sounding part,
When with a running streame that thither fell,
To each he doth a motion impart:
Which all conjoynd do frame a Musick sound,
Whose forcive might can stony hearts confound.

Now Death his servant Sicknes forth hath sent,
Who with his dooming mace doth him arrest,
And well he knowes his bow so long ly'ne bent,
For ever in his vigour may not least:
Therefore unto this vaulted cell he went,
Where minding to set up his latest rest,
He closely shuts the caves fast ceeled dore,
Which entrance may forbid to any more.

And now his engines he in worke doth set,
Which sent foorth dulcet tunes to chant the eare,
While he to Nature payes his common debt,
And to the world did never more appeare:
Therefore some thought that in this cabinet,
Immortall he all ages did outweare:
Some superstitious thought he was divine,
And offred sacrifice unto his shrine.

But he is dead (wo that such worth should die)
And darknes triumphs ore his rotten masse:
But his bright fame shall on her pineons flie,
As long as light from Eos doores shall passe:
Nor ever may that base obscuritie,
Blot from mens thoughts that such an Artist was:
Oblivion all thy teeth may nere devoure,
His famousde names still over-living powre.

But here the musick and these fighting mates
I now must leave, where with unweldie blowes
And mightie thunderclaps each other bates:
So angrie Neptune foorth the surges throwes,
When Aeolus hath loosd his windy gates,
And so against a rock the billow goes,
As doe the lightnings of black envies heat,
With slicing dints their rocky armour beat.

But let me see where Algiger is gone,
That erst was wounded deepe in cureles hart;
Looke yond I see him where he walks alone,
Still yelling with the horror of my smart:
Sometimes to heaven he darts a heavy grone,
Then to the earth he doth a sigh impart,
While with the teares downe rouling on his skin,
He wash'th his face without, not wo within.

Not long he travaild till a mournfull sound,
Sadly doth beat his sadder seated eare,
When O he cryes, and is there on the ground,
That can with me such part of sorrow beare,
Thrise happie I that such a mate have sound,
Wose soule woes mourning gowne alike doth weare,
Sweet sorrow which my fainting breast dost feed,
And with new cause of griefe new joy doth breed.

Further he comes, when soone he sees a cell,
A little clowdie cell scarse taking light,
In which one only wofull wight did dwell,
That in the mortall world did not delight,
But still with teares unto his prayers fell,
Mourning full deeply what he did not right,
And still perswades his care-encompast minde,
That on the earth it could no pleasure finde.

True, true (quoth Algiger) no joy there is,
That may delight the burdned soule of man:
Sorrow doth streightest leade the minde to blisse,
Whence perfect joy and happines began.
Wherefore good Sire (and if I speak not misse)
Since I so rightly have this fortune wan,
Let us together here unknowen goe,
Telling each other of uncured woe.

Let us perswade the wandring passenger
With morall precepts mortifying the minde,
In sunder all his former joyes to teare,
And bid him mourne for that his soule hath find,
Telling him never can his faults be cleare,
Unles his former thred he doe un winde,
Which leades unto the labyrinth of hell,
Where nere returning ghosts downe damned fell.

Agreed (quoth he) and these clowdes of mine eyes
Shall from their vaults in fertill showers fall,
To fructuate the earth that barren lyes,
Those earthly soules I meane, to grace to call,
That life is fullest farre of miseries,
Whom sharpest miserie doth never gall:
For pleasure seemes some solace forth to bring,
But deadly it doth pearce with Scorpion sting.

Thus they conjoynd begin to ambulate,
And when they meet a wandring pilgrim-wight,
Then doe they tell mans miserable state,
How pleasures light is but a blackest night,
How nothing that we doe can quench the hate,
Which heavenly powres doe beare, but in despight
Of earth and what the chained hurt may draw,
Make to our lawles hearts a new-found law.

Plunge deepe in teares to wash thy spotted skin,
In Jordans waters seven times thee clense,
To purge the leprosie that lyes within:
Let sighs still offer up a sweet incense,
And where with foule contagion of sin,
Those filthie fumes have wrought the soules offence:
There let that heavenly sacrifice repaire,
And make the rinced soule twice brighter faire.

Contemne the world, where nought but griefe is found,
Where sighs the ayre, and sorrow is the food,
Eternall teares the drinke, and howles the sound,
Whose gastly notes we heare, while dropping blood
Makes seas of woe within our heart abound,
And discontent the fire, our selves the wood:
From whose great flames black vapours doe arise,
Which turnd to clowds doe raine downe from our eyes.

But lie below where never tempest blowes,
Seeke out some narrow place where thou maist weepe,
Where solitarines invested goes:
On day remember griefe, in silent sleepe
Dreame of thy faults, and those deserved woes,
Which in a prison doe thy sad thoughts keepe:
No thunder may thy cottage overturne,
Nor thus bedewd with teares can lightning burne.

While mightie Cedars feele the tempests wrack,
Each little shame as winters timeles frost,
Makes them all bare, and doth uncloth their back,
While they below smile at their garments lost,
Each of their faults and each unlawfull act
Is seene to all, and they are learned most,
Which in these great mens crimes a lesson reede,
And tell their fellowes any lawles deede.

While we in silence passe our silent dayes,
No ill on earth nor sorrow after death,
We feare not envious tongues, nor black disprayse,
While they (though soothed in this lively breath)
After their time are punisht many wayes,
Each swelling heart his hate unburdeneth,
And wisheth that the earth may heavy lie,
And presse them deeply with her gravitie.

Thus passing foorth a rufull sight they view,
Where many hung upon a crossing tree:
O these (quoth they) no more earths woe shall rew,
Thrise happie easde of mortall miserie:
We have a mightie Ocean yet anew,
Through which our tossed ships to port must flie,
Brought to the summe of great felicitie.

Further they goe when comes a down-cast wight,
Whose face the Sunne had dide with sunnie black:
O friends (quoth he) and can you take delight
On earth, while heav'ns great pleasures you doe lack?
Come, come each man breath up his ending spright,
Before foule sin it drive to deadly wrack:
Send up to heaven a soule, ere sin it get,
Intangled in his nere-dissolved net.

O cease (quoth they) to make an overflow
Over the bounds of our ny-drowned mindes:
This worlds uncertaintie we well doe know,
Who so seekes ought, nought but despayre he findes,
And these our earthly bodies sinking low,
In mancipate of shame our soules doe binde:
Our Sunne with clowds is darkned in the rise,
The noone is black, but brightest when he dyes.

Since then the fates our meeting thus ordaind,
Let us not seeke to teach what each doth see:
But let him happiest be most soules that gaind,
Franchising them to immortalitie:
Here will we tell how that the soule is paind,
Laden with earthly things, not ever free,
Before the bodies service they reject,
And here we'le counsell them to that effect.

Agreed, they fram'd full many a wooden crosse,
And digd up pooles and many other wayes,
When they perswade them to this gaining losse,
The worlds losse gaine, which gaine our soule imbayes
In happy rest where never tempests tosse:
But sweet content our soules in quiet layes,
Where Aeol dares not foorth his servants send,
Where ending wo, woes heire doth never end.

CANTO V.
The Hermite tels Asotus Tragedie,
His wicked deeds and filthie luparie:
And Cipribel there learnes felicitie,
But Erofel still plagues with crueltie
Pirinoes soule, whose craft when they had found,
They stript her clothes, and to the steed her bound.

Haples that wight within whose bowels lye
The deep-drencht poysons of uncured vice,
Nor any Antidote can helpe apply,
To whose soules cure no leach-art will suffice,
But tossed in the waves from any eye,
Payes desperate his soules unmatched price:
But happy they awakt from sleepe of night,
To see the blessed dayes thought-clearing light.

Which seld seene blisse new-changed Cipribel,
Hath by her gentle-smiling fortune gaind:
So they that in a parfum'd house doe dwell,
The parfum'd odour afterlong retaind;
And wicked chaind with those that use doe well,
Have from their wicked customes soone refraind:
The horse whose back the tamer oft bestrides,
At length with easie pace full gently rides.

After the Giant-fight when downe he threw,
The filthie sonnes which Aloeus bare,
And those same monsters great Themistos slew,
Spoyling those wolves which all the passers tare,
From their black mansions he his feete withdrew,
And with the Ladies in his way doth fare:
Freeing each wretch from his unworthie paine,
Restoring them unto their rest againe.

At length they past where they all wondring spide
A little rocky forme, whence did arise
A fruitfull issuing streame, that still did slide
From out the hollow stone in ample wise:
Fast by a little cabinet they eyde,
Whither desirous of some novelties,
They goe enquiring what these things mought bee,
Which they so strange and never-heard did see.

When by a crany there they silent view,
An old age-worne-out father that with beades
Praying full deeply, seem'd some gift to sue
Of the great king, when still he earnest reades,
And letting downe his beades sayes prayer new:
Thus he his lifes cold Autumne-yeares doth leade,
Nor caring for the world nor worldly wealth,
But his beloved soules beloved health.

When streight Themistos; Sir, without offence,
If tell you may, pray tell the mysterie
Of yonder stone, and if oft recompence
Can quite, I pray my kindnes prove and trie:
Sir, your request (quoth he) doth grieve my sence,
With new memoriall of this historie:
Yet though each word doe bring with him a teare,
You shall my storie and sad fortune heare.

Weeping and speaking thus the mourner sayes:
Where now vast rudenes shewes her rugged face,
Here on these plaines shone in the former dayes,
The stateliest walls that ere with glories grace,
Send to the world their fayre prospective rayes,
The place to them gave worth, they to the place,
That twixt both worths farre worthiest they were seene:
O that as once they were they now had beene.

Here dwelt (unworthie farre here for to dwell)
My brother (why should I him brother call?)
Asotus height, that nere-recured, fell
Into the snares of vice (O haples fall!)
Nothing but luxurie did please him well,
Drinking and feasting and consuming all:
His belly was the ship whereto he set
All marchandize that he could ever get.

Like to the yawning mouth of ugly Dis,
That ever gapes still hungry for his pray,
Where sinking downe into the black Abysse,
The pained soules their sinnes deare tribute pay:
Such was the never-satiat gulfe of his,
Wherein still soules of beasts he fresh did lay:
When to extinguish his thirsts raging fire,
Whole harvests he of prest-grapes doth require.

Once when the Sunne began for to release
His teames, all weary with their daily paine,
Came by a godly father, whom he prayes
His castles lodging for a night to daigne,
Though loth he were so much to yeeld to ease,
Yet by requests here now he will remaine:
In is he gone to take his nightly rest,
Meaning to lodge within this Pythoes nest.

Hunger the vulture that on every maw
Bites with her meager teeth her wombe to fill,
Bids them to yeeld to common natures law,
And satisfie her not resisted will:
The father who before then never saw
The dish where rawish blood downe did distill,
But Pythagorean like with gardens fed,
Wonders to see so many creatures dead.

Fie shame (quoth he) to kill the harmeles beast,
That with his fleece maintaines our vestiment,
And with this bloodie meate to make a feast,
Which nature made for a more good intent:
What hath the oxe deserv'd, that still opprest
With heavie yoke in paine his yeares hath spent?
Or what the sheepe, the sheepe that innocent,
Which never cryes for slaughter up ypent?

Saving your tale (quoth he) and taking wine,
Asotus in a full carouse doth swill:
But he whose grieved heart doth much repine,
To see him with those bloodie meates to fill
His rav'ning panch, goes forward to divine;
Telling that for his soule this feast was ill,
Who in deepe hell for penance long shall fast,
Guiltie to thinke upon his pleasure past.

Thus long he spoke when downe Asotus lyes,
Whom deep-fetcht draughts had over-nie opprest,
When streight the Sire from out the castles flyes:
Whence fled, he falls upon his humbled breast,
And zealous to the king of heaven cryes,
Turning his face unto the darkned East,
Praying to shew some judgement on his sin,
Before more soules this wicked vice might win.

No sooner hath he prayd, but vanisht quite
The old foundations of the ruinde walls,
Like to a bird that flieth from the sight,
And in some farre removed valley falls,
Nothing appeares, but this ungodly wight,
Who while for helpe all cursing deeply calls,
Into this stone was chang'd, whence still arise
New issuing streames of superfluities.

And here stay I, that to the rising Sunne,
For that his soule full many prayers say;
Beginning still, nor ever will have done,
Untill to rest his soule transport I may:
This said; downe rivolets of teares doe run,
And streight all vehement begins to pray:
A ruthfull sight it was, for deepest smart
Was sure ingraven in his grieved hart.

But now is Cipribel quite shapte a new,
Sorrow within her heart doth tirannize,
Her former pleasure she doth deepely rew;
And be their Gods which see our vanities,
Quoth she; rewarding men their sins great due,
Or is there any heavenly paradise,
Where everlasting harvest shall repay
The fruites of good which here on earth we lay?

This said, she doth the aged Sire request
To tell the blessed newes she nere did heare:
Who all the rites that holy men profest,
And who unhappie, and who blessed were,
Which was the way to eviternall rest,
Where was the place of horror and of feare:
To her in largest tolde where we will leave
This new made Saint her lessons to receive.

Now good Pyrino must I tell thy wo,
The mighty wrack, thy weary barke sustaines,
Whom Erofel thus tumbleth to and fro,
With boistrous winds of her infected braines;
Needes must thou to thy haples fortune goe,
When desperate rider holds thy guiding raines:
Losse of a love, in love is greatest death,
But mocking of his losse twise burdeneth.

After he had sung forth the historie,
Wherein his Tragedies he did reveale:
Erofel seemes some comfort to applie,
And where she poyson laies, she seemes to heale,
Like the Hiena, that will sorriest crie,
When she in cruelst manner meanes to deale:
The Adder in his seeming kisse doth sting,
And mischiefe lies within most flattering.

Now she perswades to lift his wearied seete,
And to his Lady turne his dolefull course;
Perchance (quoth she) some streames of hope doe fleete,
Which may quench out the flame, ere growing worse;
Who never ventures, prize shall never meete,
And he his owne unwillingnes will curse:
That while occasion turnes her hairy face,
Staies not her never-back returning pace.

Now when the darkened evening cals to rest,
When Stars all ready in their watch doe stand,
When he doth of his love remember least;
Then comes she in, and questions doth demaund,
To overcharge the wight so deepe opprest,
To make him dreame of things like furies brand,
In the infernall nookes of gaping hell,
Torturing the soules which downe condemned fell.

So lankish famine gnawing on her breast,
Tires Erisicton with a restles drought,
And makes him ever hungring for a feast;
When yet that swallowed feast but grieves his thought,
That his luxurious end so soone hath ceast,
Ev'n such love famine hath this Tiger brought:
To this ore burning youth, within whose soule
A thousand Sisiphus their restles burdens roule.

Sometimes in womans cloathes she would appeare,
In mightie shadowes to affright him more,
And Bellamies divinest image beare,
And play an Anticke by his chamber dore:
When straight the lover thinks that she was there,
And in pursuite out from his bed he tore:
She flies, he now remaines of all bereft,
Like one whom Fayries company hath left.

One night she came to play her wonted game,
When he all desp'rate in a mightie rage
Drew forth his blade, and brandishing the same,
Betwixt them made an uncouth mariage,
And made her arme give to her head the blame,
That fram'd such plaies upon so strange a stage:
For he deepe stroke unto the center-bone,
O haples stroke it had no further gone.

Like Cadmus Dragon in the Theban cave,
When with his speare he pierst his writhed tayle,
Begins within his den to rage and rave,
And swelling deepely meanes then to prevaile,
When with united force at him he drave,
Such rancor doth her cancred heart assaile:
As loves great Eagle lesser foule doth rent,
To massaker him so, her heart is bent.

But now the fates thy whiter threede have spun,
Foule Erofel, now hath thy shady loome,
All died in pitch her griesly birth begun,
Masking misfortunes shade and haples bloome:
Now hath thy night vailde thy most orient sunne,
Blacke chance to worser fortune doth thee doome:
Cast downe Loves Scepter, tirannize no more,
The wings are scorcht which once thy flight upbore.

When cheating Phoebus had his fiery steeds
Breath forth bright lightning in the rising morne:
Pirino on whose heart grim sorrow feeds,
Lest his sad couch in which no rest is borne,
Now easier fate his happier chaunce areedes,
Love doth not pricke him as it wont beforne:
Whose presage drieth up the ice of smart,
And makes a verdant spring within his hart.

Upon his foaming Palfrey doth he mount,
When straight his furie hath his heart in chase:
But let the cottages make great account,
When Boreas turnes his cloud-in-wrapped face,
This Castell now all stormes wrath doth surmount,
It scornes to stooping now his height debase:
Goe Erofel those jawes in sunder teare,
Whose poyson to no worth their edge doth reare.

Foreward they travell in appoynted way,
Driving the tediousnes of shortned miles,
She still is egged to the Knights decay;
And with new stinging tales his eares defiles,
While nothing can her words his minde afray:
But now a sudden noyse doth end her wiles,
Like to the humming of great swarmes of Bees,
Which in this sorte unto their hearing flees.

Goe Aspicke goe, which with thy venomd sting
Defil'st the puritie which nature gave,
Within thy head a thousand fiends doe ring,
And whispering counsell doe thy thoughts deprave,
Let mischiefe thee unto thy buriall bring,
Or robbers lay thee in some uncouth cave:
Where thou entombed in eternall night,
Maist not defile the toxicated light.

While thou my soule whom spots of sinne doe staine,
Vanish from this thy worldly pilgrimage,
And to the highest powers of heaven complaine,
Thou didst unwilling spoyle thy heritage,
While as the sunne who knowes my inward paine,
Viewing the wofull ofspring of my rage:
Shall witnes to blacke Radamant that I,
A penitentiall sinner fainting dye.

While thou fell hagge, whose foule corrupted minde
Doth glut his thought with sight of others griefe,
Maist wander haples never helpe maist finde,
But driven from thy haven of reliefe,
Tosse up and downe with some uncertaine winde,
Not ever trusted never get beliefe:
And I appoynted to a fatall end,
Will dye that life, whose death is lives deare friend.

Following the sound unto a bush they came,
Whom when he saw:  and doest thou live (quoth he)
And tooke his sworde and would have pearst the dame:
But straight Pirino; pray Sir patient be,
What ever your offended thoughts can blame,
I deepely vow shall be redrest by me:
Onely bewray the reason of your wrath,
And who the author is of all your scath.

O Sir (quoth he) this is a woman borne,
Though falsely hid in seeming mans disguise,
Whose beautie as his badge my heart hath worne:
Woe to the time I heard her flatteries,
For since that time my soule was still forlorne,
Of th' Angell hew of my faire infancies:
I toucht the pitch which in her corps doe lye,
By which the vestalls of my heart doe dye.

For this was she whose once beloved face
Wrought deepe affections in my yeelding minde;
And over rulde me with her pleasing grace,
While in this love, her tractable I finde,
And all my words doth seeme glad to imbrace,
Which doth in double bands my dutie binde:
Her did I worship, Idoll of my hart,
And my most dearest soules more dearer part.

Now are we joyned each in giving troth,
And have appoynted certaine time to bride,
One was the minde, one was the thought of both,
When I was sad, then she her light would hide,
And seeme as if to joy her soule was loth,
Both in uniting of their loves abide:
But this so high a sea of rising love,
Soone to a lowest ebbe then ere did prove.

She seemde like Phaeeton in her desire,
And needs would drive the chariot of Sunne,
Carying her Sunnes to overcharging fire,
When thus to me her dolefull speech began:
O love whose heart the seate where I aspire,
Hath with so deepe a love my loving wonne:
O be not hard which Nature soft hath made,
Nor let the spring of kindnes scarce borne fade,

Here is my heart whom thy Sunnes love doth melt,
But it like waxe more melting more doth hang,
Which loves comburing zonefull deepe hath felt,
This heart which in my breasts faire temple rang,
Unto thy service still; and still hath dealt
Faithfull in love, though thorough many a pang:
Ease it and me from such a sweltring zone,
Where thirstie still; still water we have none.

This heart all bloodles let it be thy white,
And shoote therewith thy arrowes piercing steele;
Or if in his confusion thou delite,
Then torture is upon a racking wheele,
Or let thy swordes sharpe edge thine ire acquite,
And let it any torment plagued feele:
Onely first pierce it with a dart of love,
Then all the instruments of anger prove.

Sweete love, one onely Nectar-drop I crave,
Doe not denie me one:  one is not much,
Though to thy love thus I am bound a slave,
Yet litle meat to feede me doe not grutch,
And with one morsell me from dying save,
O cruelst death of all, whose death is such:
O didst thou see my heart, how it doth beate
And pant for hunger, sure it should have meate.

Perchaunce the peoples voyce thou much doest feare,
That's like a winde which never man can see,
Whose idle rumor many things doth beare
Which are untrue, she every where doth flee,
The best doe often her worst colours weare,
And on her sable pinsons lifted be:
Beside our mariage, to be made ere long,
Will strengthen al the breach, and make it twice as strong.

Now in my heart Reason and Love did fight,
Reason with ensigne red, Loves ensigne pale,
My face the field where they doe wreake their spight,
Sometimes Loves ensigne vanquished, downe would fall
Then Reasons colour plaied most in sight,
And in a blushing red envellop'd all:
Straight Love recovering his former spright,
Kept Reason downe, and claimde the place for right.

Then said I to my soule, how dost thou kill
The onely childe I have sweete Chastitie,
The Judge for murther damne to torments will,
Thy wicked thoughts?  O whither dost thou flye?
O doe not leave thy goodly fort, untill
With these thy holy goods thou needs must dye:
But then my soule that scornde a woman stay,
Opend the Castell doore and made her way.

Now am I robbing from my spoyled Saint,
Those milke white robes wherewith she was araide,
And with this sacriledge my soule doe taint,
My goddesse in her shrine no longer staide:
When as she saw her servants faith to faint,
And on her turtle wings her selfe she laide:
When to my thoughts she gave her latest will,
That still hereafter shame her seate should fill.

Now is my garden naked of his flower,
Whom I before with care did till and dresse,
And gave it to her for my chiefest dower,
The utmost toll of all that I possesse:
But then her wanton lookes began to lower,
And filthie figure of ingratefulnesse:
Leaving my bower unto the world she fled,
Since when with horror all my daies I led.

And here a Pilgrime have I spent my life,
My life growne olde with care and guiltie shame;
Where now blacke melancholy is my wife,
Harb'ring my thoughts when they for succor came,
Scorning the world, whose sorrowes are so rife,
Where one howres joy doth bring one ages blame:
While musing thoughts which on my wife I bred,
Doe finde me meate on which I still have fed.

Thus hath he sayd, while guiltie Erofell
Did oftentimes assay from thence to flie:
But good Pirino that her guiles did smell,
Made her the listning of the tale aby:
Which when he ended, both upon her fell,
And stript the cloathes of her hypocrisie:
When by the fresh apparance of the wound,
Pirino all her craft and guile had found.

Then bound they fast her naked armes behinde,
And to the horse her feete they strongly tide,
And let her goe where she shall never finde
Rest nor reliefe, but still in horror ride:
Like to the Affrick Mares that on the winde
Engender, and their kinde have multiplide:
So doth this furie on the emptie ayre
Breed guiltie shame, and stinging deepe despayre.

She scoures like Auster on the sandie plaines,
And when a farre she vieweth any man,
She turnes her course and flieth thence amaine,
While as the Sunne with his still scorching bran,
Dies her quaint face in a farre blacker graine,
And her deformed haire downe still doth fan,
While on her heart sharpe hunger still doth feede,
Quenching her thirst with teares that ever bleede.

Now doe Pirino and this Knight consent,
To wander through the Ile as errant Knights,
And sweare to keepe their martiall thoughts unbent
From Ladies service, or those loves delights,
Though I still bad them from their vow relent,
Telling the worth of all those femall wights,
When they fro me all raging spurd amaine,
Swearing that womans love I nere should gaine.

CANTO VI.
Faire Cypribel doth proud Orguillo meete,
And wins his helmet by her martiall might,
Who lay low conquerd humbly at her feete,
And with a Tiger fiercely she doth fight,
And her loves tombe and death she now doth see,
Themistos doth a Knight from bondage free.

As doth the Elixer with his secret power,
Turne baser mettals into purest gold:
Or as the comfort of a moystning shower,
Revives the flowers which downe their heads did hold,
Whose parched rootes barren drouth did devoure:
So doth the speech which he to her hath told,
Clensing the drosse from her defiled minde,
As mistie fogges with a North scouring winde.

And now Themistos will depart away,
Sundring their divers wayes unlike events:
And Cypribel, whose soule in new array,
Goes forth to helpe the poore and innocents,
Is marching early by the blush of day,
With speare in rest and shield fit for defence:
Meaning to teach the worse what she doth learne,
Or with her sword to make them dearly earne.

Forth gone, she meetes upon a mountaines head
A stately Knight that proud upbore his crest,
His footcloth all with starres bespangled,
And on his shield all azurde was imprest
An Eagle, or, above a Sunne was leyd,
Whereon his fastned eybeames still did rest:
"Sic oculos" his word, the world to tell,
That so on high his haughtie minde did dwell.

Behind him on a lingring asse there rode
A sober man, downe by whose belt was tide
An inkhorne pendant, from his neck there yode
A thinnest robe not cut of any side,
Whereon his poesie patchingly was sowde,
A bird that pickt a Serpents jawes all wide:
"Dura necessitas" the word, to show,
Hunger and want did make them both doe so.

This was a poet whom this loftie Knight,
Maintainde to write his verse ennobled gests:
For he to ground full many foes had dight,
Upheaving them from out their saddle rests,
All which in loftie verse this hand did write,
And sure I storie was that Muses hests,
Should thus be prentises to servile deede,
But rocks cannot resist sharpe pearcing neede.

Now are they met, when quoth that loftie mate,
Give me thy sword, least this my breath confound
Thy blasted soule, if once I wreake my hate:
When nay, replide she, things so hardly found,
May not be given to each that big will prate:
But fight for it, and first we will compound,
That who orecomes shall this for reward beare,
He shall the helmet have his foe did weare.

He is agreed:  now are they set for race,
And fiercely runne each against th' others breast:
So have I seene when Neptune with his mace,
Hath made the raging floods with stormes opprest,
Two hugie Argoes with most tumbling pace,
Too much with tossing tempests overprest,
Thunder against his fellowes bellowing side,
While in the gulfe downe swallowed both they slide.

Both tumbled downe, they doe renew with hand
The fight, which on their palfraies not prevailes,
Each on the other laies his steely brand,
And where they see defence most surest sailes,
There streight their cleaving weapon fixt doth stand:
At last Orgillo on her helmet nailes
With mightie force his plate-intrenching blade,
And on her head a skarring wound he made.

She moved with the rigour of the blow,
Plucks in one stroke the force of all her might,
And on his shoulder downe her blade doth throw,
Which sliding thence his arme doth sharply bite:
Which wounded, doth his fencing targe let go,
While she doth claime her victories due right:
He willing, but not able to resist,
Doth suffer her to doe what ere she list.

Downe doth she take his helmet from his head,
Whose loftie plume up on the highest set,
Told that his proud heart would to heaven have fled,
But that the drosse of his foule corps did let:
And streight her helmet she uncovered,
When from her crowne the curled corronet,
In which she pleated had her tangled haire,
Fell from her head downe playing with the aire.

Orguillo shaming now to see a maide
That got the conquest ore his quailed might,
Himselfe upon his palfrey straight he laide,
And spurring mainly vanisht out of sight,
His peny poet hastie after made,
But never was he since seene by the light:
Yet often hath his poet since been knowne,
Nor yet from out the earth his name is flowne.

Now Cypribel still followeth on her way,
Lead by a beaten path upon a plaine,
When streight she sees, as farre as see she may,
A Tiger, hunting seem'd for bloodie gaine,
Who thinking that she hath espide a pray,
With yawning jawes runnes hoping to attaine:
And with the Lady ramping she doth meete,
Who with her sword her grisly foe doth greete.

Such in the Naemaean forrest was the fight,
When Aelcid with the hideous Lion strave:
Such was the battell when in furious spight,
Jason the firie breathing monsters drave
Unto their end, by Colchis magicks might:
And such was Theseus when in writhed cave,
With puissant force and deeply graved dint,
His wrath on Minotaure he did imprint.

The Tiger bites, she cuts, but now at last
With griping teeth he hath unloosd a plate:
Where when his jawes he ment next time to cast,
Drawing her bodies sent, he doth abate
The dreadfull furie which is over-past,
And fawning seem'd that was so fierce of late:
When straight he back returnes his wonted way,
And seem'd to follow did the Lady pray.

For when he softly went, he turnes his eyes
Back to the dame, whom nothing feare dismayd,
But streight she followes him, that humble wise
Lead to a Sepulcher this errant mayd:
A Sepulcher it is that covered lyes
With helmets and with shields all over layd,
Which from the passing Knights this Tiger tore,
And for a covering to his master bore.

This is a Knight whose thoughts like to the skie,
Were turnde about his Ladies beauties pole,
A vertuous Knight he was, whom wantonlie
This Lady in her fond youth did controle:
But now his losse she mourneth inwardlie,
That she hath sent away so sweet a soule:
But when to cindars all consumed are,
Too late then fall the watrie teares of care.

This Knight, when Cypribel was fled away,
Wandred through many a dale and weary hill,
Seeking his wretched sight on her to lay;
But she whom deepe disdaine too much did fill,
Flies from his sight, and seekes an uncouth way:
When he his labour never left, untill
All in despayre he came unto this plaine,
Which by a forrest neerely doth remaine.

Here when he came, he heard a hollow grone,
Which from some cave did seeme to volley out:
When following the sound, he now is gone
Unto the wood, where searching all about,
He saw a doore which placed was upon,
To trap the wild beasts by some rustick lout:
Which when he opened forth a Tiger came,
That to a flattring looke his face did frame.

Nor ever would he leave his dearest Lord,
Who ment ere long to leave himselfe and all:
But serves him faithfully at bed and bord,
Watching by night, by day abroad he stale
Such forrest pray as did the wood afford,
Or he could get in great Sylvanus hall:
But nothing could his former joy reduce,
Whose only cates are on her forme to muse.

He powres foorth teares when downe the Tiger lies,
And with a wrinched face doth seeme to weepe:
Sometimes in hope to flatter fantasies,
He with his eyes doth woo sweet banisht sleepe,
When softly wrapt, the beast doth close his eyes,
Yet not full closde, a watch he still doth keepe,
That rockie heart he hath, whom could not move
This Tigers and this mans so fruitles love.

But now he sees where death with greedie spade,
Meanes up to dig the minerals of his hart,
And his soules treasure dearely to invade:
When readie and prepared to depart,
He tooke a stone, on which he graving made
The wofull ditty of his pinching smart,
And wrote his stony love on marble stone,
That to the graver seem'd for pitty mone.

Receive thou stone the issues of my woe,
Of which blood-issue now my heart must die:
And you black words shall forth testators goe,
Of this my will to her that hence doth flie:
And if you see her, for me tell her so,
That in you all my testament doth lie:
Tell that on you I have ingrav'd by art,
That art and nature could not on her hart.

Tell her how still I lov'd her till my night,
And then I wrote to you, you should her love:
Tell how that teares my eyes did ever fright
Till now, and then I bad you springs to move:
Tell how I mov'd you with my pensils might,
When her my pensive heart in vaine did prove:
How on my grave I grav'd these things to her,
My selfe the gravesman and my selfe the beare.

These things he writing dide, and dying wrote,
And left that storie tomb-stone for his hearse:
When he no sooner past black Stixes bote,
But streight the Tiger with his clawes did pearce
The trenched earth as deepe as ere he mote,
Wherein he put the corse and heavie verse,
And from the Knights their helmets still would teare,
Which for a covering he would thither beare.

Now when the Lady came unto the grave,
She rouled thence the armes that on him lay:
Whom when she saw, from out her eyes she drave
A gushing flood that did his face imbay
In silver streames, which dying he did crave,
Yet could not gaine it in his dying day:
But now his face all sprinkled with her dew,
Seemes looking fresh againe and living new.

Sweet Nectar teares Electrus pretious drops,
Wound saluing balme, whose sweet infusion
The bloody festring or an issue stops,
Caelestis-aqua, whose sweet potion
Makes winter boughs renew their naked tops:
Aeson Medeas incantation,
Which powred life into the wrinkled eld,
And plants the tree Deaths woodman downe had feld.

Then takes she up the graven marble-stone,
And through her watrie spectacles she reedes,
Which makes the letters three which erst were one:
Other (quoth she) of you there is no needes,
Unles three hearts I had for all to mone,
My heart for one enough alreadie bleedes:
O cruell heart that in so sweet a chace,
Couldest deny to turne thy flying face.

This fiercest Tiger seemes to rue his case,
Thou wroughtst this miserie whom he doth rue:
He with the earth hath covered his face,
Thou didst unclaspe his heart, and there imbrue
Thy tyrant-thoughts that had too little grace:
These armes for shelter he about him drue,
When I denide my armes about him wreath,
Which might orecome the surquedrie of death.

But now she leaveth this funereall song,
And causeth on his grave a stone be set,
While in the forrest by the trees among,
There she hath fram'd a sylvan cabinet,
Vowing to make the Knights that passe along,
To pay their shields to quit her sorrowes det:
But vaine, thy beauties shield would once have done,
More then the heape of shields thou now hast wonne.

Where leave we her to penance for her love,
And turne our driving sailes another way,
Searching Themistos forth, that now doth rove
Towards the maiden towne, where streight a fray
He hath begun, and with his fauchion drove
The quailed citizens to their decay,
He wing and slicing with his glistring blade,
Such spoyle with lambes have rav'ning Lions made.

This is a towne whither a wanton dame,
That fled an exile through the loathed land,
And to these parts with her attendants came,
Where streight this goodly towne they tooke in hand,
And in a little space upraisde this frame,
Where that same Ladie Queene did still command,
And many lawes she made, whose greater part
Art quite extinguisht, not without desart.

And this was one, that every Lady might
Two husbands have, and he that did refuse
To have a partner in his loves delight,
Should beare that paine that womens heads should chuse.
One time it chanst when darkned was the light,
The Sunne downe sinking low from mortall viewes,
When to this towne arriv'd a valiant Knight,
Where with his Lady will he spend the night.

There had he past that night and many a day,
Blinded with pleasure of so fayre a place,
And ment a longer time to make delaye
But while a citizen that saw the face
Of that fayre dame, where beauties beames doe play,
So ravishing and with so pleasing grace,
That his burnt heart was scorcht with too much heat,
Feeling no moysture where the flame was great.

And seeing no good salve to heale his sore,
Where chastitie the Surgeon should bee,
Upon the womens law he trusted more,
And unto that his only hope doth flee:
Wherewith he warnes the Knight, who not forbore
His lightning wrath, but quickly makes them see
How ill a cause they had, and with his sword
Hundreds of soules on Charons bote doth bord.

But multitudes his valour much opprest,
And tooke him prisoner:  so a Lyonesse
Whom from his young a ranger hath supprest,
Caught in the subtile gins of craftinesse,
Bound in an iron grate doth quiet rest,
Helples despayring and all comfortlesse:
But when his libertie he once doth finde,
He deeply shewes the furie of his minde.

Now is this Knight captivde, and streight they call
A Jurie all of women, that must sit
To judge this captive gotten in their thrall:
Some hags that meate in ten yeares did not bite,
Scarse able from their rustie couch to crall:
Some whose downe sinking nose their chin did hit,
And some deepe furrowed fogs with hollow eyes,
On whom who lookes ten months he sooner dyes.

These nod their heads like to a flock of geese,
Consulting what must in this cause be done:
When forth there steps an old unlusty peece,
That twentie yeares hath never seene the Sunne,
On whose furd chin did hang a budgie fleece,
With filthie mosse and drosse all overrunne,
Whose gummes the palsie so to ods did set,
That they their loosed teeth did all out spet.

Quoth she, even strip the youth that is so nice,
And let him naked there before them stand,
Bound to a post, that shall this once suffice:
No sooner she this judgement did command,
But all about him runne like to the mice,
Whose troopes conjoyned in an endles band,
About the Bishop of great Mentz did runne,
And on his corps an uncouth conquest wonne.

Now is he led unto an open place,
Where shameles creatures will his shame disclose:
But by the way a Knight there comes a pace,
Wondring a farre to see such troopes as those,
And doth enquire why this so great disgrace
Is offred him, and why he chained goes:
They streight the manner of his storie tell,
Who to their words replide they did not well.

Then streight on him they rush, and left alone
The prisoner, only one attending stayes:
Whom downe he throwing drew his fauchion,
And on his masters throte it freely layes:
This while the other Knight so much hath done,
That many saw the latest of their dayes:
And sinking downe to Plutoes smokie sort.
Told him they could not stay to see the sport.

So Perseus of the Centaures havock made,
Cleaving their hoofie legs with steely dint,
And Stixes banks with damned soules doth lade,
As doe their Knights whose wrath will never stint,
Untill the edge of ever-hungrie blade,
Shall with his bloodie seale each foman print,
And make his pasport currant downe to hell,
Not hindred by the ghosts below that dwell.

The captive now is freed, while downe they fall
Like to untimely fruit, whom blustring winde,
Breaking from out his iron-prison wall,
Strooke from the tree, and made new place to finde
In lowest ground, that erst on boughes so tall,
All loftily his proudest stem did binde:
Dying into the dust he downe doth slide,
Never to see his summer beauties pride.

CANTO VII.
The brethren still renew their sharpe debate,
Pirino viewes a fayre distressed dame,
Whom cruell Knight had brought to wofull state:
With whom unto a castle soone he came,
After he had reveng'd the bloodie deede,
Quiting the bloodie man with bloodie meede.

When as the earths great palsie doth her move,
Shaking her bowels with an ayrie rent,
It shivers downe the Citadels above,
And her great burthens all in peeces rent:
But not so much as discord doth remove,
Whose quartan shaking in his continent,
Feeds on the intrals of the stinging harts,
And teares his bowels in tormented parts.

Which mightie earthquake now these brethren shooke,
That with their swords each others limbes doe hew,
And makes them like the ruddy morning looke,
Embrude in sanguine and in purple hew:
No time doth slide but one the other strooke,
Dying the stayned earth with gory dew:
The musick still in harmonie doth sing,
While still their swords to others sides they fling.

Thus doe they hack and spoyle with grisly wounds,
The vitall fountaines of their welling blood:
Like to the Bore whom Meleagers hounds
In Calidons forwasted fields withstood,
Whose iron tuske with renting edge confounds
The springs fayre fruits and summers growing food,
Tearing the vine and Bacchus ensigne downe,
And in his panch that sacred iuyce doth drowne.

Thus doe they cruelly their forces waste,
Untill two princes came unto the place,
Two princes that with love each one imbraste,
Joyned in strongest league and mightie grace,
That in a loving heart could ere be plaste,
No envie could their plighted loved face:
But like two doves that in the woods doe fly,
Starve out themselves when as his mate doth dy.

They pitying to see that spitefull hate,
Should thus distract the soules of tortur'd wights,
Went streight to part them from that sharpe debate:
But they now swelling with unbounded sprights,
No whit the more their furie did abate,
But exercising still their hatefull sprights,
Upon each other wreake their mightie wrath,
And in each others gore their swords imbath.

Like mightie buls that in a femall flock,
Strive who should be the droves promoted head,
With horny engines do their frontiers knock,
That from their browes a purple streame downe bled,
While drumming still with mightie blowes they stroke,
And with their fellowes hurt their ire they fed,
When ramping fiercely on each others skull,
Downe to the earth their carkasses they pull.

But now at length they have dissevered
These fighting brethren, and their swords up lay,
And every prince with him one brother led,
And parted thence unto a divers way:
When home this burden soone they caried,
Whose teeth yet gnash that this their bloodie fray
Was not full tried, and with venome swell
Gainst those that parted them, though doing well.

And still doe egge these sworne friends to fight,
Stirring so long to strife their burning mindes,
That though no cause they had of their despight,
Yet envie still some secret reason findes:
And they send challenges to try by might
Their strife, no longer league their friendship bindes:
But like two beares that from a keeper scape,
Doe waste the fields with massacre and rape.

Where we will leave to desolation,
Those whom fell discord doth so much increase:
And to Pirino will againe be gone,
Who marched forward still in great pretence,
That Ladies service he would nere have done:
But he his formers sinne shall recompence,
And ere I leave him (so I love your kinde)
His heart and hands another way shall finde.

After the shameles Erofels defeate,
When with the pilgrime Knight he joynde his way,
They for adventures strangest paths doe beate,
Searching out works of valour every day,
Whose haughtie mindes thinke nothing is so great,
But with their puissance they'le overway:
About whose boldest hearts encircled was,
Strong mightie oke and thrice enfolded brasse.

Not long they forreind, till on plaine they spide
A wofull sight as ever eye beheld,
A Ladie that on ground all wounded lide,
Fayrer then her the Sunne hath viewed feld,
And more mishap did never dame betide:
For she to ground with ruthles blow was feld,
Like to the sweetest rose in harvest time,
Is mowen downe in youths most lustie prime.

They rested not untill they to her came,
Upon whose eyes death seemeth to arrest:
And turning up their Alabaster frame,
Made death in love with them that lov'd death best:
But now those Knights did ransome fayre the dame,
Barring her soule from such a heavie rest,
And up did binde the life dissolving wound,
Who wept in blood, that it on her was found.

But now Pirino quite his oth forgate,
And moved much with pitie, more with love,
Downe from his horse as light as winde he gate,
And from the ground her quickly doth remove,
Cursing the sword, the hand, and cursed fate,
That on this Lady crueltie did prove:
O who can tell what vertue hidden lyes,
Within the charming of a Ladies eyes.

Now doth he wish that he the sword had beene,
For to have kist that Ladies downy brest:
Or he were Balsamum to powre betweene
The lips of that broad wound:  where sweetest rest
In beauties harvest yet lookes ever greene,
And would from stony hearts have teares exprest,
To see so fayre a Ladie foully usde,
And that same beautie which such wrong abusde.

Forth doe they goe to finde some resting place,
Where they her deepe intrenched wound may dresse,
While still Pirino musing on her face,
Studieth the astronomie of happinesse,
Whose starres doe leade unto the port of grace,
Where is invested perfect blessednesse:
The starres of her sweet eyes where beautie plaines,
That wrongfull prison her in bonds detaines.

Forth doe they cary her their purposde way,
While still she lieth dumbe, no word doth flowe:
From out the Oracle where Beautie lay,
Silence in darknes all within doth goe,
To keepe her whom sharpe paine holds for a pray,
Subdued to pinching griefe and griefly woe:
That filthie dragon keepes the garden gate,
Where heavenly Roses flourished of late.

Now have they spied a castell from a farre,
Whether with all their speede they forward make,
Meaning to make that heaven of this starre,
That makes all heav'n where her bright beames doe flake,
But ere unto the fort they arrived are,
A new adventure doth them overtake:
Foure Knights doe meete them with their drawen swords,
Whose edges on their armes act Tragick wordes.

Now on a banke the Lady downe they set,
And to the battell doe themselves addresse,
Where with outragious blowes each other beat,
And on their foemen doe Revenge impresse:
At last one brustling in a furious heat,
Ran through his mate, whom he his foe did gesse:
The other quiting him, they downeward fell,
Their bodies to the earth, their soules to hell.

Where we will leave the other to their fight,
And of this Ladies wofull storie tell:
And what misfortune brought her to this plight,
How to this gulfe of miserie she fell:
But thinke the whiles that to the pilgrim Knight,
Pirino still his fight continues well:
And pray that he the victorie may win
Here in this fray which they a fresh begin.

This Lady hath long time both liv'd and lov'd,
With a good Knight whose yeares were tender yong,
Nor ever from his bosome she remov'd,
But like the Ivy still embracing long,
Who with like care his carefull love approv'd,
And in the consort of her musicke song:
Clasping her with the twine of compast armes,
While with his kisses he her fancy charmes.

Chast and most strong his love did still remaine,
And in her brest his flowring yeares he spent,
No time nor strife his spotles love could staine,
But still was pleased when she was content,
And would begin to mourne when she did plaine,
Grieving on woe, joying on meriment:
One breath betwixt their kissing lips doth passe,
One onely soule in two faire bodies was.

The sight of them could Envies force abate,
And make her Isie hardnes to relent,
Such love their interchanged thoughts begate,
As still to mutuall joye their hearts were bent,
Within their breasts Love in his kingdome sate,
Minding to fill them with deepe ravishment:
My thoughts scarce view, my words their love disgrace,
That for such heavenly things are farre too base.

Thus each delighted with the others sight,
Would needes a solacing in progresse ride,
Sometimes for fainting heate they would alight,
And gentle rest fast by a rivers side,
There cooled with the shade, while they delight
Their pleased eyes, when in the streames they spide
The silver river to reflect againe
Each others looke, and make their loves seeme twaine.

Sometimes downe in a grove they would discend,
And print the grasse with beauties brightest seale,
And with the bowes a round faire garlonds bend:
Mingling in posies which their love reveale,
While to their eares the birds love-carrolls sent,
And still among the dove with groning peale,
Doth seeme to sound a farewell to his love,
Which fowlers hand did cruelly remove.

Thus doe they spend the summer of their daies,
Studying how each might worke them most delight,
Untill they came to these unluckie waies,
Where Jet blacke darkenes stand and pitchy night,
And fearefull Earthquake up huge mountaines raise,
Renting the place that wrought these loves despight:
Let still fierce winter choke the dying spring,
And none but night-crowes groning scriches sing.

For hither when they came, a Knight they met,
That without challenge or a cause of hate,
Upon her Knight downe blowes full spitefull let,
And with his sword infring'd the pretious gate
Which keepes the entrance to his senses seate,
Freeing his soule with this untimely fate:
Downe on the luckles earth his bones doe fall,
While Saints his soule in heaven doe install.

Which when his Lady saw twixt rage and wo,
His sword she takes from out his loved hand;
And to her ruthles enemie doth goe,
Offring with force that tirant to withstand,
But to her strong heart, weake armes answere no,
Telling they cannot such a waight command:
This while that cursed man with cruell blade,
Into her tender brest a deepe wound made.

O heart so stony as the rocky mount,
On which fayre Rhodope doth buried lye,
Which doth th' Hircanian Tigars far surmount
In blood and tirranizing crueltye:
That of sweete beautie mak'st so small account,
And couldst with that accursed flaming eye,
Beholde a Lady thus most lovely fayre,
Driven to mightie woe and deepe dispayre.

But O:  he heares me not, for he is fled,
And with him caryed her loving Knight,
While she twixt woe and griefe is almost dead,
The fayrest and the farre most grieved wight
That ever heavenly beautie coloured,
In whom terrestriall shone divinest light:
Her wound doth pearce unto her gored heart,
Yet then that wound she feeles more wounding smart.

This cruell Knight was one that still did live
By rapine, and did rob each passenger:
Who, as he once with valiant Knight did strive,
Lost his left hand, when he did deepely sweare,
That all the Knights he could to worser drive,
Should so be martird, thus he up doth reare
Within his fort a heape of joynted hands,
That like a wall now raysed lofty stands.

And this is he that with Pirino fought,
Thinking such victory of him to win:
But so the providence of heaven wrought,
That to repent his deedes he doth begin,
For now to conquest he is shamefull brought,
And he that hath so proudly cruell been,
Lyes at the mercie of the victors hands,
Who leade him prisoner in unknowen bands.

After this battell to the fort they go,
While still Pirino solaceth the Dame,
Hoping to drye the Ocean of her wo,
But now too late all comforts sun-shine came,
Griefe more resisted still the more doth grow,
And joy too slow goes ever halting-lame:
The cloudes which darke the glory of her light,
Presage there still shall be blacke sorrowes night.

Now to their lodging are they come at last,
Which was the castle where this tirant dwelt:
When straight his bloody triumphes forth they cast,
And now Pirino hath so carefull delt
That she is cured, but her sorrow past,
Can ne're be past which she so deepely felt:
While in a tombe she layes her loved Knight,
Whose view might banish thence all joyes delight.

CANTO VIII.
Pirino with the Lady doe addres,
To see fayre Bellamyes sad funerall,
Her love is tolde, and how all comfortles,
For Amians sake in wo her heart doth fall:
Where blacke eclipsing of his radiant light,
Maskt her sweet soule in sorrowes drery night.

O who could give me Eagle soaring wings,
Or plumes of vapours to ascend on hye:
Which Sol exhaled to the heaven brings,
That I might see the true divinity,
Or view the Angel-thoughts, whose musick sings
Unto heav'ns maker sweetest harmony:
There onely could my thoughts the thought approve
Of thought-surpassing and divinest love.

Which like Arion in the floting waves,
Can chaunt the Dolphins with his charming sounds,
And bindes al base affections as slaves,
Which with celestiall beautie it confounds,
Sweet-salving balme which wounds dispayred saves,
Whose kingdome cannot suffer earthly bounds:
The cinosure of all our joyes it is,
Which leades us through a world of happly blisse.

Which this faire Lady fully doth possesse,
Raught with the thought of her deceased Knight,
And ever keepes her soule in heavinesse:
Like to the Moone that must obscure her light,
When as the Sunne his beautie doth represse,
Of whom she borrowes beames of all delight:
Which buried in the sad Sepulchrall ground,
Downe to the earth her captive thoughts hath bound.

Which when Pirino saw (whose words of joy
Still wooed sorrow to forsake her brest)
Knowing her Knights deare sight wrought this annoy,
Did counsell her to leave this idle rest,
Which still with musing thoughts did her accloy,
And travell forth where never should molest
Her quiet thoughts the spectacle of death,
Whose saddest sight the soule disquieteth.

She loth to leave that where her treasure lay,
Where she had buried thoughts of all delight,
Determines never to depart away:
But so Pirino sues by day and night,
That now she'le wander till a certaine day,
Though sorie to remove from out his sight:
Whose tombe containd with him her dearest hart,
With whom in grave she lest her better part.

The Sunne appeareth in his bright aray,
Of firy beames and golden-wreathed gowne,
Meaning to cheare her with so fayre a day,
Now having banisht mistie vapours downe,
When forth they ride now setled in their way,
Flying the place whence all her woe was growne:
But though unto the farthest Indes thou flie,
Swifter then winde will sorrow after hie.

They had not gone as farre as Scithian bow
Darts forth an arrow with his bended string,
Before they see where an old man doth goe
As fast as dried bones his feete can bring:
Who overtaking him whom age made slow,
Enquired whither he was travailing:
But deepest cares that raigned in his thought,
Had silence and black melancholy brought.

At last they rouzd him from his musing dreame,
When of a Ladies death he gan a tale,
While downe his cheekes doth raine a pearling streame,
From out the clowdes of wrack and weary bale:
And this is Algiger that doth exclaime
Against our life, that still in woe doth fall:
Who like the luckles owle these many yeares,
Never but at some funerall appeares.

And Bellamy was she whom ugly death
Hath coverd with the graves untimely shade,
Her now in dusky bloome he manteleth,
That with her beames the world astonisht made,
And on her corps his colours he displayeth,
Whose colours in too soone a harvest fade:
The weeds doe grow and worser things suruive,
While as the good are thought too long alive.

Pirino like to Daedals winged sonne,
That from great heav'n fell to the lowest flood,
To sinke in sorrowes drery gulfe begun,
And in his face doth care depaint in blood,
The victorie he over him hath wonne,
Senceles with too much sence of griefe he stood:
Untill thus brake the cloudes into a showre,
Which forth with drery teares he thus did powre.

O cursed earth goe maske thee from the light,
Whose light is quenched that did make the day,
And let the spring no more with greene bedight,
Adorned be with birds or Musick lay,
For she in whose sweete face spring still did write
Her chiefest glory, now in sad decay,
Hideth the heavenly lampe of lovely grace,
And shadoweth from the earth her starrie face.

Her tresses like the flakie beames of morne,
Sheveld along upon her snowie backe,
That did the golden Tagus colour scorne,
And dangling made behinde a goodly tracke,
Those which have many harts in triumph borne,
And in loves sea have driven them to wracke:
These lye embraced of the basest ground,
Whose curly traines have many lovers bound.

Thus forth he drives his passion with his plaint,
When they agree to see her funerall,
Where we will leave them wearied and faint:
Pricking toward her wofull buriall,
While I full deepely greevd will strive to paint,
The story of this ladies wofull fall,
And when my teares shall stop their weeping spring,
I will plaine forth the tale I cannot sing.

When at the Dukes long time those thirtie Knights,
Lay for to try who could obtaine the prize,
Where with continuall showes and pleasant sights,
They woo'd the deare attention of her eyes:
One Knight there was whom she above all wights
Most dearely lov'd, whose image deepely lyes,
Sealed below upon her softned hart,
From which his pressure never can depart.

Within the blessed heaven of her thought,
His comely face, the onely starre doth shine,
Whose beautie to her soule amazement brought,
That then her selfe a wight was more divine,
Like Cinthia when on Latmus top she spide
The sleeping shepheard lately dreaming ly'ne:
She is amazed at so great a grace,
And with sweete Mel-dewes doth anoint her face.

No winde but Amian her ship doth blow,
Filling with pleasing breath fayre beauties sayles,
In which to happy Iles she meanes to go;
He beares the rule, and he so much prevailes,
That now she doth not sticke to let him know,
How his most gratefull suite with her availes:
Who though with those sweete wordes in love he was,
Yet scarse for kisses could he let them passe.

She grants the garden where delight doth ly,
Which with chaste marriage they will seale anon:
And now she brings him roses by and by,
From which he wished never to have gone,
So sweete an ayre unto his smell doth fly,
That would with pleasure quite have overflowne,
Drenching olde aged bones in youthfull dew,
And make the hoary man his dayes renew.

Like Hibla fields, where though Bees still doe suck
The hony of delight and ravishing,
Yet in this fertile field remaine to pluck
Heavenly posies, deeply solacing
Distressed mindes which sharpe misfortune strook,
And in thoughts winter doth upreare the spring,
Whose verdant head shall never languish downe,
But stand adorned with a flowry crowne.

Which when the lothed wooers quickly found,
They did envy the happie chance he gate,
And ten of them in mightie challenge bound
His valiant heart to answer their debate,
Who now thus setled on so sure a ground,
Scorned the easie shafts of fruitles hate,
And sent them answer that next rising day,
He would controle what envy durst to say.

But still fayre Bellamy doth him intreat,
To shun the dangers of the bloody fight,
And doth his breast with sighs and groning beat,
Enchasing with fayre pearle her clowded sight,
Which drooping downe her richest eyes beget,
And to his loving bosome take their flight,
When watering the plants that love doth sow,
They quickly made sweet lowly pitty grow.

But he that had his vowed promise past,
With kisses still her opned lips doth stay:
She opneth still, he still his lets doth cast,
Sweet lets, which let him in where beautie lay,
That doubt it was whether she spoke so fast,
Because more kisses of him gaine she may:
Or kisses seeming for to stop the dore,
Still kist, because they would have kisses more.

Thus in this golden chaine of purest love
They past the evening, when with rustie coach
The Raven-hud night her dusky traine uphove,
And grisly darknes doth on earth encroach,
The weary Sunne his wagon doth remove,
Seeing the ugly night so neere approach,
That from the furnace of her sooty throte,
Forth foggy vapours and black smoke upshote.

Still Bellamy unluckie chance doth feare,
Warned with fatall noyse of nightly soule:
Now doth she seeme sweet Amians voyce to heare,
Yeelding the lowly present of his soule
Unto his maker, when her heart doth reare
A swelling sigh his fortune to condole,
The mournfull presage of some evill hap,
As lightning flames before a thunder-clap.

Thus in sad thought the silent night is spent,
When Phoebus gan upreare his firy crest,
And had the easterne heaven with flames ybrent,
When streight doth Amian leave his quiet rest,
And armed to the place appoynted went,
Where nine strong Knights that enmitie profest,
He with his speare dismounted to the ground,
Where with disgrace an humble seate they found.

Like to a loftie ranke of Cedar trees,
When Aeolus is kindled deepe with rage,
And with a whirlwing up from earth he frees
Their riven rootes, now layd in equipage
With baser shrubs, while to the heaven flees
The roring noyse, ypent in iron cage
Of tumbling vapours that doe scoure the ayre,
Invested highly in a clowdy chayre.

Now Bellamies good heart for joy doth dance,
Driving forth stormes of sorrow and of care,
When the tenth Knight his speare did high advance,
That over al his armour Cypres ware,
Shadowing with clowdes of griefe his countenance,
Who now towards the Knight his palfrey bare:
Where meeting with a hideous shivering stroke,
Their yelding speares in sprinkled dust they broke.

On foote they try what thus on horse doth faile,
Each other driving with a deadly blow,
And with their weapons kisse the splitted maile,
Which riven, gushing blood in streames doth throw,
While now or never meaning to prevaile,
Sir, Amian drove unto his rivall foe,
And with his sword his intrals doth unclose,
Whose soule up fled his earthly bowels doth lose.

Viewing the sword wherewith his rivall fought,
That on it written had his fathers name,
Whom with a charme from unknowne land he brought,
He curst himselfe with much unworthie blame,
That he this wofull Tragedie had wrought:
For well he knew his brother was the same,
Whom with his wretched might he thus had slaine,
To whom his father gave that hurtfull gaine.

Now horror ringeth in his grieved soule,
And guilt of thought that he his brother flew,
Where fearfull sight his rest doth deepe controle:
Wherefore unto his palfrey he withdrew,
And doth to none his inward griefe unrole,
But to the woods all solitarie flew,
Banishing any thought of pleasing mirth,
Or any joy which lighteth on the earth.

In leavy shadowes and in bushie brakes,
He with the wood-dove grones for pinching woe:
Sometimes in hand his cursed sword he takes,
But streight his sword he from his hand doth throw,
Now in a bush a hollow nest he makes,
From whence he swares his feete shall never goe:
Each little glimse of light his soule doth shun,
And in despayre to headlong death doth run.

But how fayre Bellamy doth rue his case,
Plaining and seeking him that her forgat,
Is deeply graven in her parched face,
Which doth not lighten as it did of late,
Earth-brightning beames of never-matched grace:
But frowning with the force of angrie fate,
Downe drooping doth she close her folded eyes,
Drowning themselves in their owne Nectaries.

And every where to seeke him out she sends,
Whom never shall againe her eyes behold:
Wherefore despayring now her thoughts she bends,
Fixt on th' Idea of his heavenly mold,
And to her minde that only food she lends,
While from her body rest she doth withhold,
And still her beautie doth consuming pine,
Wasting those torches which are so divine.

Like as the sweetest Querister of Night,
When rav'ning fowle bereft her of her young,
While Phoebe sends from high her clowdy light,
Unto the Moone in chanting tunes she sung,
That ravishing the travailer with delight,
Made him bewaile the birds disproferd wrong:
So doth each eye lament this wofull plaint,
Which beautie makes while she in woe doth faint.

But O my pen transforme thy swanny face,
And in eternall streames my inck shall weepe:
Drive madly downe thy coach in tumbly pace,
O thou which heavens mightie lights dost keepe,
That never beames may brighten any place,
Since she in never-ending dreame doth sleepe:
O Bellamy that now untimely dyes,
And in sad tombe deaths cruell triumph lyes.

The fearfull thought of her deare loved Knight,
Eats on her heart consuming vitall heat,
That taking in the world not lest delight,
She with her hands that softest breast doth beat,
And vexeth still with griefe her wofull spright,
Who weary of so much uneasie seat,
To heaven on her snowy pineons fled,
Where in Joves breast she layes her quiet head.

Now came the Knights that dwelt removed farre,
To see the buriall of this Angel wight:
The Sunne arose with his low drooping carre,
To see (though griev'd to see) that wofull sight:
And Pirin with the dame arived are,
And Cypribel her tombe forsaketh quight,
Prepar'd all to doe honour to her grave,
The latest honour now her corps could have.

Where with such rites as love and wit devise,
Which might renew a storie to expresse,
She was entombed in most glorious wise,
Accompanide with number numberlesse,
While fountaines overflow the Dukes sad eyes,
That now for lack of teares to weepe doe cease:
Faine would he in her armes his death-bed see,
That in two heavens he and his soule might bee.

But envious fates resist his loving will,
Who doe command his soule here to remaine,
Where with lamenting noyse she plaineth still,
Yet never can her plaints bring back againe
That soule, which mounted on Olympus hill,
In sacred spirits and the Muses traine,
Singing soule-pleasing tunes her dayes doth spend,
Whose musick and whose dayes have never end.

And now ye heavens, if ever Musick straine
Issued from a concord-moving spheare,
Then in a dolefull language helpe to plaine,
And mourning part in sorrowes confort beare:
For never shall you have like cause againe,
For never may the like on earth appeare:
And for her death ring out a dolefull knell,
While dewy teares at every stroke distill.

And ye fayre Ladies in a pilgrimage,
Attiring blushing white in mourning black,
Untill the world shall end his endles age,
Goe to her tombe, and plaine her beauties wrack,
Raught from the earth by deaths unsatiate rage:
And though your teares can never bring her back,
Kissing her tombe, to Libitina pray
The earth may easie on her bosome lay.

Where with the parbreake of unclowded hell,
Night wraps in ruggy black the ayres darke face,
Still vomiting fro her defiled Cell,
The shadowy fumes that mought the light disgrace,
While scriching Owles their fearfull stories tell,
Hoarsly complaining in that gloomy place,
Groning with hollow notes their dismall song,
While trembling tunes to guiltie hearts they rung.

The wolves about that haples place doe cry,
And howling weepe for her that lieth slaine:
Sometimes in hollow fearfull harmony
The Harpyes doe a dumpish consort straine:
Sometimes it seemes they see some passing by,
That on a beere a carkasse doe sustaine,
White meager Death with hels unchained hags,
Upon her grave display their pitchie flags.

THE CONCLUSION OF ALL.
These have I sent unto the Muses hearse,
Whose daies of honour now have found an end,
To spread therewith this my latest verse,
Whom the unworthie world too much offend.

Nor yet because some change-affecting braine
Debas'th the Muses and their sacred hill:
Fault I my selfe as having writ in vaine,
Know be I only love the Musicke skill.

But whether he delight in feates of armes,
Or prouder vaunt the glorie of his race,
Know he I feare not Martiall alarmes,
Nor yeeld a step his friendship to embrace,
Though now in shade I whisper to the winde,
And plaine the Muses can no harbour finde.
