As late, where BRITAIN rears her tow'ring head,
With blood-stain'd arms and warlike trophies crown'd,
The Genius of the isle his warriors led,
Their brows with roses and with laurel bound,
From his high throne he saw his nobles stand,
And shook War's dreadful trump, grasp'd firm within his hand.

Quick flash'd the light'ning of his flaming spear,
Deep ting'd with gore on CRESSEY'S purple field;
He wheel'd the blazing faulchion in the air,
And o'er his shoulders spread the sable shield;
Then, as around he cast his sanguine eyes,
His kindling fury rose and shook the low'ring skies:

For there, O blot on BRITAIN'S godlike name!
Immers'd in bliss, he saw its sons of peace
Contemn the glories of immortal fame,
And sink the slaves of luxury and ease.
In mimic shapes he saw his nobles move,
And softly murmur through the melting strains of love.

The doubling drum no more resounds; no more
The brazen trumpet pours its thund'ring strain;
No faulchions blush with streams of foreign gore;
No heroes sigh to sweep the embattl'd plain:
By nerveless pleasure lull'd, they sing supine,
With truncheon'd warriors court THALIA'S comic shrine.

The warlike mien, inform'd with glorious rage,
Yields to the smile which softer charms disclose;
The sword resign'd, each champion treads the stage,
And sighs and murmurs through the fancied groves:
While music pours for soft melodious lay,
The prompting Duke, enraptur'd!  pants, and dies away.

O glorious scene!  O noble thirst of fame!
Who would not strut his hour upon the stage?
Where Lords and Dukes the envied palm obtain,
And stand the scourgers of a venal age:
Where plans are drawn, to save a threaten'd land,
Behind the latent scenes, by such a nerveless hand!

Soon as the Genius cast his eyes below,
Burst from his soul the sympathetic sigh;
Sudden the tears of anguish seem to flow,
And feed the rage of his impassion'd eye.
He shook the streaming glories from his head,
And thus inflam'd with godlike indignation, said:

"Where now are all the Patriots that I knew,
The godlike chiefs, the hardy sons of yore;
Hands that I taught whole nations to subdue,
To plant new laurels on my fav'rite shore?
Where blooms their offspring, where each godlike name?
Not here, where impious folly dulls the crown of Fame.

"Ah!  what avails that CHATHAM blest this scene,
That once I mark'd his flow'r-encircl'd head,
Dwelt on the grace of his celestial mien,
And saw whole nations croud beneath his shade?
While from his lips they heard the words of fate,
Enthron'd upon his brow majestic Wisdom sate!

"Ah!  what avails that MARLBRO' once arose,
Wrapp'd in the burnish'd folds of warlike state;
Swept o'er the world, and, midst presumptuous foes,
Plung'd the destructive thunderbolts of fate;
When heirs to folly dare their titles claim,
And blast their blooming honours with eternal shame."

He paus'd and sigh'd; then, with a withering frown,
Beam'd forth destructive vengeance from his eyes;
"He threw the blood-stain'd sword in thunder down,
And swept along the fire-emblazon'd skies,
To where great RODNEY, wrapt in virtuous shame,
And noble ELLIOT, crown'd with wreaths of glory, came."

Here stopt the vision, and, with bounteous look,
Gaz'd on the triumphs of each godlike soul;
Then from his side the trump of glory took,
And rais'd a blast that echo'd to the pole.
Twice round their brows his brandish'd launce he spread,
While radiant crowns infold each mighty warrior's head.

Then, turning round, he shook the blazing shield,
And said, "Immortal HARRINGTON!  arise;
'Tis thine to sweep the blood-empurpled field,
And reap the glories of indulgent skies,
'Tis thine to lead, the unconquer'd phalanx form,
Sweep worlds before your arms, and pour the embattled storm!

"See!  stars directing, point the glorious way;
See!  future battles rise in prospect round,
Hark!  glory calls; haste, HARRINGTON!  away,
While war, denouncing vengeance, glares around.
The sword on each rough peasant's thigh be worn,
And war's green wreaths the shepherd's manly front adorn."

The Vision spake, then roll'd his orbed eyes,
Clash'd his dread arms, that light'ned on the plain;
Fierce Vengeance led his charriot through the skies,
And Justice, Peace, and Glory, clos'd his train.
Before their steps the clouds obedient yield,
And stars of op'ning glory light th' etherial field!
