Whilst MANNERS SUTTON'S wig was young,
Ere PEEL his votive hymn had sung,
The new M. P.'s with eager air,
Crowded round the Speaker's chair:
Jobbing, cheering, moving, prating,
Possessed beyond The Courier's stating:
By turns they wooed the Treasury's charms,
Her golden locks, her clasping arms,
Till once 'twas said when all was fired,
With hopes of future gain inspired,
From bills, reports, of leaden weight,
They sought materials for debate:
And as they oft had conned apart
Deep lessons of successful art&mdash;
Each &mdash; for interest ruled the hour&mdash;
Would prove his own persuasive power.

First CASTLEREAGH his skill would try
To drive the diplomatic trade:
But back recoiled, he well knew why,
'Twas at the faults himself had made.

Next LAWSON launched "his virgin bark,"
And slipped his ferrets from their strings;
Sought unclean beasts from NOAH'S ark,
And made of vermin sacred things&mdash;

Then MANNING rose, with face of care,
The paste-board King of paper Lords,
Mumbled his speech with drowsy air,
'Twas figures now, and now 'twas words&mdash;

But RUFUS PEEL, thou statesman fair,
What were thy official measures?
Still they scattered public treasures,
Yet bade the Exchequer Seals at distance hail!

The Christ Church groves the notes prolong,
And Lowther's hills, and Erin's fenny vales;
He called on Church and State throughout his song;
And when the intolerant theme he chose,
Oxford Amicus were heard at every close,
And PEEL in triumph smiled, and waved his sandy hair&mdash;

And longer had he sung &mdash; but with a frown
CANNING impatient rose:
He threw his poisoned cresse in thunders down;
And with a freezing look
His heartless course of cruel sarcasm took;
And uttered jests so cold and dead,
Were ne'er JOE MILLER'S tales more base and low.
And ever and anon he beat
Poor OGDEN'S wounds with trampling feet&mdash;
And though sometimes each hollow groan between,
The "fatuous" BINNING at his side
His Caledonian voice applied,
Yet still he kept his harsh insulting mien,
Whilst from the India Board he raised his ancious head.

Thy speech, O SINCLAIR!  on no point was fixed!
Sad Beacon on thy wandering way;
Now with Whig lore, and now with Tory mixed,
On SIDMOUTH, now it called, now trembling called on GREY.

With eyes upraised, as one inspired,
Pale WILBERFORCE sat far retired,
And from cross bench for trimmer meet,
Poured loud as ROWLAND HILL his righteous soul.
Whilst cheering weak from nooks around,
Babbling saintlets joined the sound,
Through aisles and naves the common measure ran!
Or in thy Court, Requests!  with fond delay,
(Round in holy calm diffusing,
Worldly care, and heavenly musing,)
In sacred murmurs died away. . . .
