Why should the muse in high ambitious verse
Sing the stern warrior, and the bloody plain?
Why not the praise of industry rehearse,
Its heart-felt pleasure, and laborious pain?
In a small corner of yon narrow lane
An humble habitation may you see;
Its lonely window boasts no chrystal pane:
O free from taxes may it ever be!
Ask you who dwells within?  why then step in and see.

There lives a lowly wight, unknown to fame,
Of doubtless merit he, howe'er obscure;
That artist sly, who we a Cobler name,
For ever chearful, and for ever poor.
Far from the precincts of his peaceful door
Vexatious riches fly, and wasting sorrow;
To-day is his; that he enjoys secure;
And to the care of heaven commits to-morrow:
Nor aught has he to lend, nor aught can think to borrow.

He with the dawning of the early morn,
What time the loud-pip'd cock unceasing crows,
Brisk as the hunter at the sounding horn,
Starts up in haste, and to his cell he goes:
Mid the keen piercing air his visage glows.
Is there not brandy then at my command?
Ah!  spare, ye biting frosts, his helpless toes;
Nor mar the useful labours of his hand,
Else must my naked feet unwilling print the sand.

He rubs his hands a while, and down he sits;
The thread is twin'd; the wax along it flies;
Then to the last the patient shoe he fits,
And the sharp awl right cunningly he plies.
Meanwhile he listens to the tuneful cries
Of salt, of cabbage, or of fish to sell;
Or else some merry song doth he devise,
Which stories quaint of ancient times doth tell;
Or whistles as he works, pleas'd and contented well.

Ye restless imps, that run about the street,
Run without fear; 'tis needless to give o'er:
Miss to the fire may freely set her feet;
Mother may scold; and what can she do more?
Whate'er is lost, the cobler can restore;
Be it a heel, of should a seam be slit,
Or should a hole, burnt out, appear before,
There is an art which even that hole can fit:
Cobling's that worthy art:  I sing the praise of it.

'Tis night; I see his dimly-glimm'ring lamp;
Like a faint star which through the fog doth shine,
Its sickly flames oppress'd with vapours damp,
Its beams scarce reaching this abode of mine:
By it he sits, nor yet doth he repine&mdash;
What dost thou mean, thou rash mischievous boy?
Lay down that stone; that wicked wit of thine,
Be gone with speed, and somewhere else employ:
Let honest industry in peace itself enjoy.

But now the labour of the day is done;
Nor without half-pence is his leathern purse:
O sweet reward of toil!  how fairly won!
However little, got without a curse.
So home he hies him, freely to disburse
The earnings of the day in ale so brown;
He thanks kind heaven that made his lot no worse;
Then takes his drink, and lays him softly down;
Nor wants a loving wife, his honest joys to crown.
