Hither ye lowly, insolent, and vain,
Whose frantic deeds give Meditation food;
Ye varied tribes, who circle Pleasure's fane,
Ye jocund prodigals of social good:
The fallen fragments of this pile survey,
Then yield to MEMORY'S toils the residue of day.

Here civil Phrenzy was approv'd and known,
Here Fashion's tainted stream was taught to flow;
Here Reason left her elevated throne,
To scatter frolickly the seeds of Woe:
The cares of state, the props of general weal,
Sunk 'neath the rapid pressure of the dancer's heel.

Here BEAUTY rov'd triumphant in her charms,
To bear the diadem of Pride away;
Here gallant FRAUD assail'd her with his arms,
Waken'd her senses, and embrac'd his prey;
Touch'd by the barb of Grief, the victim fell,
While Desperation's minions rung her virgin knell!

Here many a heart, for godlike efforts brac'd,
Was riv'd and sully'd by Pollution's breath:
Their generous atoms were by Vice disgrac'd,
They found, alas!  the truth of Life &mdash; in Death:
Thus hinds are led, when shut from Cynthia's ray,
By brilliant, faithless gleams, through Ruin's miry way.

Here calm PHILOSOPHY to maniacs bow'd,
Here RUMOUR'S progeny upheld her reign;
Here SCIENCE mingled with the babbling crowd,
Whom Rapture beckon'd 'mid Delusion's train;
And Bacchus' goblet with his gifts o'erflow'd,
'Till the nectareous juice bestain'd the chequer'd road.

Here oft' the spendthrift of unvalued hours
Survey'd, with apathy, the ills of Time,
Who, Heav'n-directed, circumscrib'd his powers,
And smote his being ere he knew his prime;
'Till all his honours flitted like a dream,
Melted by recreant GUILT'S intolerable beam.

Ah!  whither are those myriads TASTE combin'd,
Who leagu'd the moral canons to destroy?
And where those lawless tumults of the mind,
That WIT call'd madness, and the madd'ning, joy?
All, all are vanish'd from th' astonish'd sight,
Sunk beneath HOPE'S bright smile, and shrouded by the night.

Those walls which echo'd with a lover's sighs,
And gave responsive many an ideot's tale;
Those gaudy scenes which dazzled magic eyes,
Those pregnant sounds which harmoniz'd the gale;
Are all dismember'd, driven, crush'd, and torn,
Like worthless, weightless chaff, o'er Hyrcan desarts borne.

Voluptuousness no more shall chasten Thought,
Phoebus no more shall on their vigils peep;
Who mis-beheld those ecstasies they sought,
Who violated Peace, who murder'd Sleep.
The route is o'er, the revelry is done,
And irresistless FATE has clouded FOLLY'S sun.
