Into the gulf of past eternity
Another year, in all its pride, has roll'd,
And soon its brightest pageantry shall be
Lost in the long-forgotten days of old;
Oblivion draws around its darkest fold
To hide the pomp, that millions gaz'd upon;
The curfew of departed joys has toll'd,
Another circle in our life is run,
And nearer draws the goal, where all of earth is won.

A year has ended &mdash; let the good man pause,
And think, for he can think, of all its crime,
And toil, and suffering.  Nature has her laws,
That will not brook infringement; in all time,
All circumstance, all state, in every clime,
She holds aloft the same avenging sword;
And sitting on her boundless throne sublime,
The vials of her wrath, with justice stor'd,
Shall, in her own good hour, on all that's ill be pour'd.

And Kings, who hug themselves in sordid ease
And revel in their vassals' blood and tears,
Who grasp at all can sense or passion please,
And build their strength on others' wants and fears;
For them, the heap'd up vengeance of long years,
Pois'd like a snow-cliff on a mountain's brow,
Wild as the sounding avalanche careers,
Or oceans rushing in their stormy flow,
Shall bury all their power in one wide overthrow.

Revenge may hold her breath awhile, but still
The spirit boils within, and soon will burst,
Like lavas from their vaults &mdash; the long-check'd will
Breaks out with deeper fury, fed and nurst
By ever-growing outrage, till the worst,
And reddest, scourge of tyranny unbinds
The rusted links of cent'ries, which long curs'd
But dreaded, now the vasal rends, and finds
At once his gall'd limbs free and chainless as the winds.

Sov'reigns may band in holy leagues, and lock
Their fetters on a continent, which springs
To claim its birth right &mdash; they may coldly mock
The strivings of young Liberty, as things,
That are to them but toys to play with &mdash; Kings
Have long enough made men their play &mdash; the hour
When wrath shall wake, and triumph clap her wings
Over the broken images of power,
Draws nigh, and they, who rear the haught crest, soon will cower.

The dawning year beheld a nation rise,
Free in a glorious seeming &mdash; but it fell&mdash;
Where was the Roman fire?  Italian skies
Shone over them as purely; and the swell
Of that wide gulf, where ancient glories dwell,
Roll'd with as bright a tint on Baiae's coast&mdash;
Though Rome's dark ruins frown'd, as by a spell,
At once before the German's hireling host,
They sunk, and, in one hour, forgot their proudest boast.

They sunk, but yet in nobler souls lives still
A feeling, fetters, swords, can never quell;
Brute force may crush the heart, but cannot kill;
The mind, that thinks, no terrors can compel,
But it will speak at length, and boldly tell
The world its weakness and its rights; the night,
Our race so long has grop'd through, since man fell
From his imagin'd Eden of delight,
Must, will ere long retire from Truth's fast-dawning light.

For Mind has dar'd assert its native claim,
And bigot rage, and superstitious dread,
And priesthood, rob'd in purple, cannot tame
Its strong up-risings.  Power, with hydra head,
On vice, and self, as on a Lerne, fed,
Awhile may bind the nations to its car&mdash;
In thousand hearts a Hercules is bred,
The fearless champion of a coming war,
When Liberty, at last, shall break her dungeon bar,

And, in the vigor of her youth, go forth,
Unshackled and undaunted, and shall call,
With the clear summons of her trump, the North
To send its nerv'd sons on to scale the wall,
Whereon the Cross and Crescent shadow all,
That cradled glory in the olden time;
And sack the Czar's firm bulwarks, wherein stall
Slavery, and beastly ignorance, and crime,
And sense, that drags its folds in pleasure's foulest slime.

And on the sea, whose bright green waves should roll,
Without the stain of innocent blood, nor bear
The burden of rank avarice to the goal,
Where toil and stripes await it; where thieves dare
Their darkest deeds of rapine, she will there
Ride in her car of vengeance, and proclaim
To every plunderer, be it they who bear
The ocean's lord, or dogs unknown to fame,
That her strong arm shall soon their blood-drunk boasting tame.

Go forth, ye navies, o'er the ocean go,
Where havoc riots on the pirate's deck,
Where steals along the cowering bark of woe,
And bid those dens of torture float a wreck;
And as you first the Invincible did check,
So let him feel the force of nature's sway&mdash;
Would they might rouse, who worship at the beck
Of Europe's would-be lord, and rend away
The veil, that hides from Greece the glories of that day,

Of which all hearts are proud, the brightest hour
In all the round of ages, which will stand
A monument of light, the sacred dower
Of never-dying truth &mdash; the tyrant's hand
Awhile may dim the glories of that land,
And doom it to be trampled on, but still
There we shall image out the Spartan band,
There we shall gaze on Freedom's holy hill,
And from her kindling founts, the cup, that fires us, fill.

Where sleeps the fire, that erst in Pylae burn'd?
Where lurks the spirit of that godlike age?
Shall the bright soul forever rest inurn'd?
Is there no hand to cheek the Tartar's Page?
Shall Turk on light, and love, and freedom wage
A war, that swept whole nations like a flame?
Shall Europe never in that cause engage,
And wipe, from off her shores, that blot and shame?
Her feeblest arm might now the glutted vulture tame.

But shall we mourn, because those fanes are low,
Where Gods were knelt to, and where lust was right?
There was a gladness in the overthrow
Of Temples, where Religion had no light;
And though the Cross still left the land in night,
And bound the spirit in as cold a chain,
Yet we can still exult, and boldly write,
"Idols, and idol-worshippers again
On lands, where Truth has pour'd her light, shall never reign."

There is a twilight dawning on the world,
The herald of a full and perfect day,
When Liberty's wide flag shall be unfurl'd,
And kings shall bow to her superior sway:
Already she is on her august way,
And marching upward to her final goal;
Nations the warning of her voice obey,
Away the clouds of fear and error roll,
The chain is broke, that bound the thrall'd and fetter'd soul.

That chain is off a Continent, where Man
Begins anew his being &mdash; where a course,
Brighter than ever Greek or Roman ran,
Spread its wide list before him &mdash; from a source,
Unstain'd and deep, with strong resistless force,
The uncheck'd wave of enterprize rolls on:
Hope gilds it o'er with sun beams; wild and hoarse,
As storm-lash'd oceans, till the plain is won,
Then in majestic might its calm, full waters run.

Here Liberty shall build her proudest fane,
Loftier than snow-topp'd Andes, and its dome
Shall cast a burning brightness o'er the main,
And all, who seek a purer, calmer home,
Shall steer their bounding barks across the foam,
And furl their sails on Freedom's chosen shore&mdash;
Here all that Law has in her choicest tome,
And all the climes of Greece and Latium bore,
Nature from her full stores around our hearts shall pour.

Here shall the energy of mind be shown,
In all its widest daring &mdash; nought can cheek
The generous spirit, which away hath thrown
The yoke, that galls and curbs, the toys, that deck;
Prescription cannot bow him at her beck,
Nor rooted wrong command, nor force control;
He is not of the sordid slaves, who reck
The statesman's gilded bribe, and stinted dole&mdash;
In vain corruption woos the high, enlighten'd soul.

We have our Sages, who drew down from heaven,
The bolt that shivers, and the light that warms;
Who steer'd the helm of state, when madly driven
It seem'd the prey of power and civil storms.
We have our heroes, who have met the swarms
Of hireling butchers &mdash; back the torrent roll'd:
Though want and terror took their direst forms,
Proud in their simple freedom, sternly bold,
They stood through trying years, and kept their last strong hold.

And they were victors, and new light hath risen
From them upon the nations &mdash; here they draw
The energy, that breaks their feudal prison;
The light, that guides them, is our country's law:
Too strong its perfect brightness &mdash; when they saw,
Madden'd they rush'd upon their lords, and tore
The sceptre from their grasp &mdash; the coward awe
Of crown and mitre crush'd their hearts, no more&mdash;
They wildly fed the hate, so long they fiercely bore.

They turn'd upon each other, with an ire,
Like that of ravening tigers, till their glut
Of kindred slaughter quench'd the maniac fire,
And then again their prison-gate was shut&mdash;
They grasp'd at full and perfect freedom, but
A stronger bar confin'd them, than before;
Fetters of adamantine steel were put
Around their scarce heal'd limbs; they dragg'd thro' gore,
To please a driver's whim, the manacles, they wore.

Order alone is freedom &mdash; We must bend
Beneath the sanctity of higher power,
Not transient will, but laws that have no end,
Stamp'd and enforced in being's earliest hour;
Sanction'd by time, they are the holy dower
Of ages, which from darkness rose to light&mdash;
Man first was fearless, then he learn'd to cower,
And grop'd thro' superstition's stygian night;
Till Science rose, and day shone round him warm and bright.

Few are the clear strong spirits, who can bear
To look on Truth in her unclouded blaze;
Few are the high, heroic souls, who dare
Above the low pursuit of gain to raise
Their firm, unbending purpose; few can gaze
At virtue, on her pure and awful throne&mdash;
Ah!  few can love the ethereal coin she pays&mdash;
But they must love it, for the souls alone,
Who master self, can claim our birthright, as their own.

And Freedom thus, of old, so often fell
Before Ambition, when the herd, that crawls
Within the crouded haunt, the sordid Hell,
Where luxury and lust have built their walls,
Sunk in each vice, that deadens and enthrals,
Barter'd their unpriz'd liberty for gold&mdash;
As the pure stream upon the palate palls,
When wine has fir'd the senses, so they sold
The rights, that prouder hearts, than being, dearer hold.

There is a twofold liberty in Man,
The liberty of knowledge and of power&mdash;
This wanders in the desert with the clan,
Or where aloft the Alpine summits tower.
Limbs knit with iron cannot stoop or cower,
Hands harden'd by free toiling cannot bear
The burden of a tyrant &mdash; He might pour
Whole hosts around them; they would nobly dare
To guard their desert rocks, or die unconquer'd there

The other hath its dwelling with the sage&mdash;
Where mind is dark, and appetites prevail,
Where grovels lust, and brutal passions rage,
The breathings of her spirit nought avail&mdash;
Of cultur'd states 'tis the eternal bale,
That vice will grow with wealth, and light, and bow
The strength, that rear'd the fabric &mdash; free hearts quail
Before that torrent wave, whose giant flow
Buries a nation's pride in one deep overthrow.

Cities have been, and vanish'd; fanes have sunk,
Heap'd into shapeless ruin; sands o'erspread
Fields, that were Edens; millions too have shrunk
To a few starving hundreds, or have fled
From off the page of being &mdash; Now the dead
Are the sole habitants of Babylon;
Kings, at whose bidding nations toil'd and bled,
Heroes, who many a field of carnage won,
Their names &mdash; their boasted names to utter death are done.

Such is the fate of Empire &mdash; Ashur rose,
Where elder thrones and prouder warriors stood;
Before the Memphian priest his precepts chose,
Men reason'd greatly of the highest good;
Before Troy was, or Xanthus roll'd in blood,
Armies were ranged in battle's dread array;
They fought &mdash; their glory wither'd in its bud;
They perish'd &mdash; with them ceas'd their tyrant sway;
New wars, new heroes came &mdash; their story pass'd away.

They had no bard, and they are dead to fame;
But they were brave &mdash; were Demigods, and yet
The spirit, which no threat, no force could tame,
Which burn'd the brighter, when in conflict met,
The sun of ancient valour long has set,
Their deeds are swept from memory's teeming page&mdash;
How soon the renovated race forget
The chiefs, who ground the nations in their rage&mdash;
Some Lord must rise to curb, and crush in every age.

Napoleon, Frederic, Charles, and Cromwell &mdash; these
Swept the earth with a besom dipt in fire.
They would have kings, and nations bend their knees;
Theirs was the untam'd thirst of something higher,
An energy of hope, that could not tire,
The love of self to deeds of might sublim'd,
Ambition wrought to habitudes of ire,
Force, reckless force, uncheck'd, unbent, untim'd,
An aim to gain a height, where power had never climb'd.

They sought, they knew not what &mdash; they set no bound
To their wide-clenching grasp &mdash; their longing grew,
As grew their empire &mdash; keenly, as the hound
Catches the deer-track in the morning dew,
They snuff'd the scent of conquest &mdash; victory threw
Her laurels at their feet &mdash; awhile they gave
Blood to the earth, like water &mdash; madly flew
Their gore-fed eagles. &mdash; But the wildest wave
Breaks and subsides at last &mdash; their end was in the grave.

Now they are dust and ashes &mdash; other swarms
People the ground they wasted &mdash; other men
Rise to be torn and toss'd by other storms&mdash;
Ambition sleeps a moment in her den
To gain new breath, and fire, and strength; but then
She blows the ember'd coals and they are flame&mdash;
So it must be, for it hath ever been&mdash;
Age rolls on age, and heroes are the same&mdash;
The rest, the crowd, the mob, the warlike hunter's game;

Food for the sword and cannon, steps to climb
Ambition's ladder, brutes, who walk erect,
Crouching and gloating on the dust and slime,
Where they would creep and wallow, if not check'd
By biting wants, that man to man connect,
The strong necessity of care and toil&mdash;
Give them their own free scope and they are wreck'd,
For master souls their passions will embroil,
And tyranny at last will twine them in its coil.
