Anaxus had no sooner ta'en his leave
Of his glad Sister, making her believe
That he would shortly visit her, when she
Led forth her Flock to Field more joyfully
Than she was wont to do; those rosie stains
That nature wont to lend her from her veins,
Began t' appear upon her cheeks, and raise
Her sickly beauty to contend for praise.
She trickt her self in all her best attire,
As if she meant this day t' invite desire
To fall in love with her:  her looser hair
Hung on her shoulders, sporting with the air:
Her brow a Coronet of Rose buds crown'd
With loving Woodbines sweet embraces bound.
Two Globe-like Pearls were pendent to her ears,
And on her Breast a costly Gem she wears,
An Adamant in fashion like a heart,
Whereon Love sate a plucking out a Dart,
With this same Motto graven round about
On a gold Border; "Sooner in than out."
This Gem Clearchus gave her, when unknown,
At Tilt his Valour won her for his own.
Instead of Bracelets on her Wrists, she wore
A pair of golden Shackles, chain'd before
Unto a silver Ring enamel'd Blue,
Whereon in golden Letters to the view
This Motto was presented, "Bound yet free."
And in a true Loves Knot a "T." and "C,"
Buckled it fast together; her silk Gown
Of grassie green, in equal pleits hung down
Unto the Earth:  and as she went the Flowers
Which she had broider'd on it at spare hours,
Were wrought so to the life, they seem'd to grow
In a green Field, and as the Wind did blow,
Sometimes a Lilly, then a Rose takes place,
And blushing seems to hide it in the Grass:
And here and there gold Oaes 'mong Pearls she strew,
That seem'd like shining Gloworms in the dew.
Her sleeves were Tinsel wrought with leaves of green,
In equal distance spangeled between,
And shadowed over with a thin Lawn cloud,
Through which her workmanship more graceful show'd.
A silken Scrip and Shepherds Crook she had,
The badg of her profession; and thus clad,
Thealma leads her milky Drove to Field,
Proud of so brave a guide:  had you beheld
With what a majesty she trod the ground,
How sweet she smil'd, and angerly she frown'd:
You would have thought, it had Minerva been,
Come from high Jove to dwell on earth agen.
The reason why she made her self thus fine
Was a sweet Dream she had; some poor Divine
Had whisper'd to her soul Clearchus liv'd,
And that he was a King for whom she griev'd:
She thought she saw old Hymen in Loves bands,
Tie with devotion both their hearts and hands.
She was a dreaming farther, when her Maid
Told her the Sun was up:  she well appaid
With what her greedy thoughts had tasted on,
Quickly gat up; and hurried with her Dream,
Thus tricks her self, having a mind to seem
What she would be, but was not; strong conceit
So wrought upon her; those that are born great
Have higher thoughts than the low-minded Clown,
He seldom dreams himself into a Crown.
Caretta, modest girl, she thought it strange,
And wonder'd greatly at so sudden change;
But durst not be so bold to ask the cause,
Obedience had prescrib'd her knowledg Laws:
And she would not transgress them; yet it made
Her call to mind what garments once she had,
And when her Father liv'd, how brave she went,
But humble-minded wench she was content.
She knew the vanity of Pomp and Pride,
Which if not pluckt off must be laid aside
One day; and to speak truth, she had a mind
So deckt with rich endowments, that it shin'd
In all her actions; how so e're she goes,
Few Maids have such an inside to their cloaths.
Yet her Dames Love had trickt her up so brave,
As she thought fit to make her Maid, and gave
Her such habiliments to set her forth,
As rather grac'd than stain'd her Mistriss worth.
They made her ne're the prouder, she was still
As ready and obedient to her will.
Thus to the Field Thealma and her Maid
Chearfully went; and, in a friendly shade
They sate them down to work; the wench had brought,
As her Dame bid, her Lute; and as she wrought,
Thealma plaid and sang this chearful Air,
As if she then would bid adieu to care.

I.
Fly hence Despair, and Hearts-benumming fears,
Presume no more to fright
Me from my quiet rest:
My budding hopes have wip'd away my tears,
And fill'd me with delight,
To cure my wounded breast.

II.
Mount up sad thoughts, that whilom humbly straid
Upon the lowly plain,
And fed on nought but grief.
My angry fate with me is well appaid,
And smiles on me again,
To give my heart relief.

III.
Rejoice, poor heart, forget those wounding woes
That rob'd thee of thy peace,
And drown'd thee in despair,
Still thy strong passions with a sweet repose,
To give my soul some ease,
And rid me of my care.
My thoughts presage by Fortunes frown,
I shall climb up unto a Crown.

She had not ended her delicious lay,
When Cleon and old Rhotus, who that day
Were journeying to Court, by chance drew near,
As she was singing, and t' enrich their ear
They made a stand behind the hedg to hear
Her sweet soul-melting accents, that so won
Their best attention, that when she had done,
The Voice had ravish'd so the good old men,
They wisht in vain she would begin agen;
And now they long to see what Goddess 'twas,
That own'd so sweet a voice, and with such grace
Chid her sad Woes away:  The cause that drew
Rhotus to Court was this; after a view
Made by the victor King of all his Peers
And well deserving men that force or fears
Had banish'd from their own, and Peace begun
To smile upon Arcadia; to shun
The future cavils that his Subjects might
Make to recover their usurped right:
He made enquiry what each man possest
During Lysander's Reign, to re-invest
Them in their honor'd places, and such Lands
As Tyranny had wrung out of his hands.
And minding now to gratifie his Friends,
Like a good Prince he for old Rhotus sends;
As he to whom he ow'd his Life, and all
The Honor he had rose to; at his call
Old Rhotus quickly comes, leaving his trade
To an old Servant whom long custom had
Wedded to that vocation; so that he
Aim'd at no higher honor than to be
A Master-fisher:  Cleon, who of late
As you have heard, came from the Lemnian State
In search of one whose name he yet kept close,
With Rhotus his kind Host to Court he goes,
And with him his Son Dorus:  in the way,
As you have heard, Thealma made them stay,
And not contented to content their ear
With her sweet Musick, tow'rd her they drew near;
And wond'ring at her bravery and her beauty,
They thought to greet her with a common duty,
Would ill become them:  humbly on their knee
They tender'd their respect, and Prince-like, she
Thank'd them with nodds:  her high thoughts still aspire,
And their low lootings lift them a step higher.
Old Cleon ey'd her with such curious heed,
He thought she might be what she prov'd indeed,
Thealma:  her rich Gems confirm'd the same,
For some he knew, yet durst not ask her name.
Caretta viewing Rhotus (loving wench)
As if instinct had taught her confidence,
Runs from her Mistris, contradicts all fears,
And asks him Blessing, speaking in her tears.
"Lives then Caretta?"  said he, "Yes, quoth she,
I am Caretta, if you'l Father me."
"Then Heaven hath heard my Prayers, or thine rather,
It is thy goodness makes me still a Father,"
A thousand times he kiss'd the Girl, whilst she
Receives them as his Blessings on her knee.
At length he took her up, and to her Dame
With thanks return'd her:  saying, "If a blame
Be due unto your Hand-maids fond neglect
To do you service, let your Frown reflect
On her poor Father."  She as Children use,
Is over-joy'd to find the thing they lose.
"There needs no such apology, kind Sir,"
Answer'd Thealma, "duty bindeth her
More strictly to th' obedience of a Father,
Than of a Mistris; I commend her rather
For tend'ring what she ow'd so willingly;
Believ't I love her for it, she and I
Have drank sufficiently of sorrows cup,
And were content sometimes to Dine and Sup
With the sad story of our woes; poor cates
To feed on; yet we bought them at dear rates:
Many a tear they cost us:  you are blest
In finding of a Daughter, and the best
(Though you may think I flatter) that e're liv'd
To glad a Father; as with her I griev'd
For his supposed loss so being found
I cannot but rejoyce with her; the wound
Which you have cur'd in her, gives ease to mine,
And I find comfort in her Medicine."
"I had a Father, but I lost him too,
And wilfully; my Girl, so didst not thou;
Nor can I hope to find him, but in wrath
I lost his love in keeping of my Faith."
She would have spoken more, but sighs and tears
Brake from their prison to revive her fears.
Cleon, altho he knew her by her speech,
And by some Jewels which she wore, too rich
For any Shepherdess to wear, forbare
To interrupt her; he so lov'd to hear
Her speak, whom he so oft had heard was drown'd,
And still, good man, he kneel'd upon the ground,
And wept for joy.  "Why do you kneel," said she,
"Am I a Saint, what do you see in me
To merit such respects?  pray rise, 'tis I
That owe a reverence to such gravity,
That kneeling better would become, I know
No worth in me to worl you down so low."
"Yes, gracious Madam, what I pay is due
To none, for ought I know, so much as you.
Is not your name Thealma?  hath your eye
Ne're seen this face at Lemnos, I can spy
Ev'n through those clouds of grief, the stamp of him
That once I call'd my Sovereign; age and time
Hath brought him to his Grave, that bed of dust,
Where when our night is come, sleep we all must.
Yet in despight of Death his honor'd name
Lives, and will ever in the vote of Fame.
Death works but on corruption, things Divine,
Cleans'd from the dross about them, brighter shine:
So doth his Virtues.  What was earth is gone,
His heavenly part is left to crown his Son,
If I could find him."  You may well conceive
At his sad tale what cause she had to grieve;
Reply she could not, but in sighs and tears,
Yet to his killing language lent her ears:
And had not grief enforc'd him make a pause
She had been silent still; she had most cause
To wail her Fathers loss:  "Oh unkind Fate,"
Reply'd Thealma; "it is now too late
To wish I'd not offended; cruel love
To force me to offend, and not to prove
So kind to let him live to punish her,
Whose fault, I fear me, was his murtherer.
O my Clearchus, 'twas through thee I fell
From a Childs duty; yet I do not well
To blame thee for it, sweetly may'st thou sleep,
Thou and thy faults lie buried in the deep,
And I'll not rake them up:  ye partial powers,
To number out to me so many hours,
And punish him so soon; why do I live?
Can there be hope that Spirits can forgive?"
"Yes gracious Madam, his departing Soul
Seal'd up your Pardon with a Prayer t' enroul
Amongst his honor'd Acts, left you his Blessing,
And call'd it love, which you do stile transgressing,
Left you a Dowry worthy a lov'd Child,
With whom he willingly was reconcil'd.
Take comfort then; Kings are but men, and they
As well as poor men must return to Clay."
With that she op't the flood-gates of her eyes,
And offer'd up a wealthy sacrifice
Of thankful tears, to expiate her crimes,
And drown their memory, left after times
Might blab them to the world.  Rhotus gave ear
To all that past, and lent her many a tear:
The Alms that sweet compassion bestows
On a poor heart that wants to cure its woes.
Caretta melted too, though she had found
What her poor Mistris griev'd at, all drank round
Of the same briny cup.  Rhotus at last
'Gan thus to comfort her:  "Madam, tho hast
To obey my Sovereigns command would fit
The Duty of a Subject better; yet
I will incur the hazard of his frown
To do you service; Glory and Renown
The mark the noble Spirits still aim at
To crown their Virtues, did so animate.
Alexis our new Sovereign, once my guest
(And glad he was to be so) that his Breast
Full of high thoughts, could relish no content
In a poor Cottage.  One day as he went
With me unto our Annual Games, where he
Puts in for one to try the mastery,
And from them all came off a Victor, so
That all admir'd him; on him they bestow
The Wreath of Conquest; at that time this State
Was govern'd by a Tyrant, one that Fate
Thrust in to scourge the peoples wickedness,
That had abus'd the blessing of their peace,
As he abus'd his honor, which he gain'd
By cruel usurpation; for he reign'd
More like a Beast than Man; Fortune at length
Grew weary of him too; weak'ning his strength
By wantoning his people, without Law
Or Exercise to keep their minds in awe.
Which the exil'd Nobility perceiving,
Took heart again, some new strong hope conceiving
Through th' enemies neglect, to regain that
Which formerly they lost; so it pleas'd Fate
To change the scene:  most of the noble Youth
The former War consum'd, and to speak truth,
Unless some few old men, there was left none
Worthy to be a Leader; all was gone:
Wherefore when they had seen what he could do,
And by that guess'd, what he durst undergo
(If they were put to't) they Alexis chose
To lead their War-like Troops against their Foes.
His Valour spake him noble, and's behaviour
Was such as won upon the Peoples Favour;
His speech so powerful, that the hearer thought
All his Intreats Commands:  so much it wrought
Upon their awful minds; this new come Stranger
They chose to be their Shield 'twixt them and danger;
And he deceived not th' expectation
They fixt upon him:  Hylas was o'rethrown,
And he return'd in triumph:  Joy was now
Arcadias Theme; and all Oblations vow
To their Protector Mars:  to quite him then,
They choose him King, the wonderment of men.
'Twas much, yet what they gave was not their own,
They ow'd him for it; what they gave he won,
And won it bravely.  When this Youth I found
Hanging upon the craggy Rock half drown'd,
I little dreamt that he should mount so high
As to a Crown; yet such a Majesty
Shin'd on his look sometimes, as shew'd a mind
Too great to be, to a low state confin'd:
Tho while he liv'd with me, such sullen clouds
Of grief hung on his brow, and such sad floods
Rather than briny tears, stream'd from his eyes,
As made him seem a man of miseries.
And often as he was alone, I heard him
Sigh out Thealma; I as often chear'd him.
May not this be the man you grieve for so,
Your name's Thealma, and for ought I know,
He may not be Alexis; perhaps fear
Borrow'd that nick-name, to conceal him here.
Take comfort, Madam, on my life 'tis he,
If my conjecture fail me not, then be
Not so dejected till the truth be tri'd:"
"And that shall be my charge," Cleon reply'd;
"Thanks noble Rhotus, this discovery
Binds me to thee for ever:  thou and I
Will to the Court; could I Anaxus find
My work were ended; if Fate prove so kind,
I hope a comical event shall crown
These tragical beginnings; do not drown
Your hopes (sweet Madam) that I so would fain
Live to your comfort, when we meet again,
Which will be speedily; the news we bring
I trust shall be Clearchus is a King."
"Most noble Cleon, thanks; may it prove so"
Answer'd Thealma; "yet before you go,
Take this same Jewel, this Clearchus gave me
When first I did consent that he should have me:
And if he still do love, as is a doubt,
For he ne'r hath a power to work Love out.
By this you shall discover who he is,
If Fortune have assign'd me such a bliss
As once more to be his, she makes amends
For all my sorrow; but if she intends
Still to afflict me, I can suffer still,
And tire her cruelty, though't be to kill:
I have a patience that she cannot wrong
With all her flatteries; a heart too strong
To shake at such a weak artillery,
As is her frowns:  no Cleon, I dare die,
And could I meet Death nobly I would so,
Rather than be her scorn, and take up woe
At interest to enrich her power, that grows
Greater by grieving at our overthrows.
No Cleon, I can be as well content
With my poor Cot, this woolly regiment,
As with a Palace; or to govern men;
And I can Queen it when time serves agen.
Go, and my hopes go with you; if stern Fate
Bid you return with news to mend my state,
I'll welcome it with thanks; if not, I know
The worst on't, Cleon, I am now as low
As she can throw me."  Thus resolv'd, they leave her,
And to the Court the two Lords wend together,
Leaving young Dorus, Cleons Son behind
To wait upon Thealma; Love was kind
In that to fair Caretta, that till now
Ne're felt what passion meant, yet knew not how
To vent it but with blushes; modest shame
Forbad it yet to grow into a flame.
Love works by time, and time will make her bolder,
Talk warms desire, when absence makes it colder.
Home now Thealma wends 'twixt hope and fear,
Sometimes she smiles, anon she drops a tear
That stole along her cheeks, and falling down
Into a pearl, it freezeth with her frown.
The Sun was set before she reacht the Fold,
And sparkling Vesper nights approach has told.
She left the Lovers to enfold her Sheep,
And in she went, resolv'd to sup with sleep:
If thought would give her leave, unto her rest
We leave her for a while, Sylvanus guest
You know we lately left under his cure,
And now it is high time my Muse to lewre
From her too tedious weary flight, and tell
What to Anaxus that brave Youth befel.
Let's pause a while, she'l make the better flight,
The following lines shall feed your appetite.

Bright Cynthia twice her silver horns had chang'd,
And through the Zodiacks twelve signs had rang'd,
Before Anaxus wounds were throughly well,
In the mean while Sylvanus 'gan to tell
Him of his future fortune; for he knew
From what sad cause his minds distempers grew.
He had ylearnt you have heard while e're,
The art of wise Soothsaying, and could clear
The doubts that puzzle the strong working brain,
And make the intricat'st anigmas plain:
His younger years in Aegypt Schools he spent,
From whence he suckt this knowledg; not content
With what the common Sciences could teach,
Those were too shallow springs for his deep reach,
That aim'd at Learnings utmost:  that hid skill
That out-doth nature, hence he suckt his fill
Of Divine knowledg:  'twas not all inspir'd,
It cost some pains that made him so admir'd.
He told him what he was, what Country Air
He first drew in, what his intendments were;
How 'twas for love, he left his native Soil
To tread upon Arcadia, and with toil
Sought what he must not have, a lovely Dame
But art went not so far to tell her name.
Heav'n that doth controul Art, would not reveal it,
Or if it did he wisely did conceal it.
He told him of his Fathers death, and that
The State had lately sent for him, whereat
Anaxus starting; "Stay old man (quoth he)
I'll hear no more; thy cruel Augury
Wounds me at heart, can thy Art cure that wound?
Sylvanus?"  "No, no Medicine is found
In humane skill to cure that tender part,
When the Soul's pain'd, it finds no help of Art:
Yet Sir (said he) Art may have power to ease,
Though not to cure the sick Souls maladies.
And though my sadder news distast your ear,
'Tis such as I must tell, and you must hear.
I know y' are sent for, strict enquiry's made
Through all Arcadia for you; plots are laid
(By some that wish not well unto the State)
How to deprive you of a Crown; but Fate
Is pleas'd not so to have it, and by me
Chalks out a way for you to Sovereignty.
I say agen, she whom you love, tho true
And spotless constant, must not marry you.
One you call Sister, to divide the strife,
Fate hath decreed, must be your Queen and Wife.
Hie to th' Arcadian Court, what there you hear
Perhaps may trouble you; but do not fear,
All shall be well at length, the bless'd event
Shall crown your wishes with a sweet content.
Enquire no farther, I must tell no more,
Here Fate sets limits to my Art:  before
You have gone half a League, under a Beech
You'l find your man enquiring of a Witch
What is become of you?  the Beldame's slie,
And will allure by her strange subtilty
The strongest Faith to error; have a care
She tempt you not to fall in love with Air.
She'l show you Wonders; you shall see and hear
That which shall rarely please both eye and ear.
But be not won to wantonness, but shun
All her enticements:  credit not, my Son,
That what you see is real; Son be wise,
And set a watch before thy ears and eyes.
She loves thee not, and will work all she can
To give thy Crown unto another man.
But fear not, there's a pow'r above her skill
Will have it otherwise, do what she will.
But Fate thinks fit to try thy constancy,
Then arm thy self against her Sorcery.
Take this same Herb, and if thy strength begin
To fail at any time, and lean to sin,
Smell to't, and wipe thine eyes therewith, that shall
Quicken thy duller sight to dislike all,
And re-inforce thy reason to oppose
All her temptations, and fantastick shows.
Farewel Anaxus, hie to Court, my Son,
Or I'll be there before thee!"  'Twas high noon,
When after many thanks to his kind Host,
Anaxus took his leave, and quickly lost
The way he was directed; on he went
As his Fate led him, full of hardement.
Down in a gloomy valley thick with shade,
Which too aspiring hanging Rocks had made,
That shut out day and barr'd the glorious Sun
From prying into th' actions there done;
Set full of Box, and Cypress, Poplar, Yew,
And hateful Elder that in Thickets grew,
Amongst whose Boughs the Scritch-owl and Night-crow,
Sadly recount their Prophecies of woe,
Where leather-winged Batts, that hate the light
Fan the thick Air, more sooty than the night.
The ground o're-grown with Weeds, and bushy Shrubs,
Where milky Hedg-hogs nurse their prickly Cubs:
And here and there a Mandrake grows, that strikes
The hearers dead with their loud fatal shrieks;
Under whose spreading leaves the ugly Toad,
The Adder, and the Snake make their abode.
Here dwelt Orandra, so the Witch was hight,
And thither had she toal'd him by a slight:
She knew Anaxus was to go to Court,
And envying Virtue, she made it her sport,
To hinder him, sending her airy Spies
Forth with Delusions to entrap his Eyes,
And captivate his Ear with various Tones,
Sometimes of Joy, and otherwhiles of Mones:
Sometimes he hears delicious sweet lays
Wrought with such curious descant as would raise
Attention in a Stone:  anon a groan
Reacheth his Ear, as if it came from one
That crav'd his help; and by and by he spies
A beauteous Virgin with such catching Eyes,
As would have fir'd a Hermits chill desires
Into a flame; his greedy eye admires
The more than human beauty of her Face,
And much ado he had to shun the grace
Conceit had shap'd her out:  so like his Love,
That he was once about in vain to prove,
Whether 'twas his Clarinda, yea, or no,
But he bethought him of his Herb, and so
The Shadow vanish'd, many a weary step
It led the Prince that pace with it still kept,
Until it brought him by a hellish power
Unto the entrance of Orandras Bower,
Where underneath an Elder Tree he spied
His man Pandevius pale and hollow-eyed;
Enquiring of the cunning Witch what fate
Betid his Master; they were newly sate
When his approach disturb'd them; up she rose,
And tow'rd Anaxus (envious Hag) she goes;
Pandevius she had charm'd into a maze,
And strook him mute, all he could do was gaze.
He call'd him by his name, but all in vain,
Eccho returns Pandevius back again;
Which made him wonder, when a sudden fear
Shook all his joynts:  she cunning Hag drew near,
And smelling to his Herb, he recollects
His wandring Spirits, and with anger checks
His coward Fears; resolv'd now to out-dare
The worst of Dangers, whatsoe're they were,
He ey'd her o're and o're, and still his eye
Found some addition to deformity.
An old decrepid Hag, she was grown white
With frosty Age, and withered with Despight
And self-consuming Hate; in Furrs yclad,
And on her Head a thrummy Cap she had.
Her knotty Locks like to Alecto's Snakes
Hang down about her shoulders, which she shakes
Into disorder; on her furrow'd Brow
One might perceive time had been long at plough.
Her Eyes like Candle-snuffs by age sunk quite
Into their Sockets, yet like Cats-eyes, bright:
And in the darkest night like fire they shin'd,
The ever-open windows of her mind.
Her swarthy cheeks Time, that all things consumes,
Had hollowed flat unto her Toothless Gums.
Her hairy Brows did meet above her Nose,
That like an Eagles Beak so crooked grows,
It well nigh kiss'd her Chin; thick bristled Hair
Grew on her upper Lip, and here and there
A rugged Wart with grisly Hairs behung,
Her Breasts shrunk up, her Nails and Fingers long,
Her left lent on a staff, in her right hand
She always carried her enchanting Wand.
Splay-footed, beyond Nature, every part
So patternless deform'd, 'twould puzzle Art
To make her counterfeit; only her Tongue
Nature had that most exquisitely strung.
Her oyly Language came so smoothly from her,
And her quaint action did so well become her,
Her winning Rhetorick met with no trips,
But chain'd the dull'st attention to her lips.
With greediness he heard, and tho he strove
To shake her off, the more her words did move,
She woo'd him to her Cell, call'd him her Son,
And with fair promises she quickly won
Him to her beck; or rather he to try
What she could do, did willingly comply
With her request; into her Cell he goes,
And with his Herb he rubs his Eyes and Nose.
His man stood like an image still, and star'd
As if some fearful prodigy had scar'd
Life from its earthy mansion; but she soon
Unloos'd the Charms, and after them he run.
Her Cell was hewn out in the Marble Rock,
By more than human Art; she need not knock,
The door stood always open, large and wide,
Grown o're with woolly Moss on either side,
And interwove with Ivies flatt'ring twines,
Thro which the Carbuncle and Di'mond shines;
Not set by Art, but there by Nature sown
At the Worlds Birth, so Star-like bright they shone.
They serv'd instead of Tapers to give light
To the dark entry, where perpetual Night,
Friend to black Deeds, and Sire of Ignorance
Shuts out all knowledg; lest her Eye by chance
Might bring to light her Follies:  in they went,
The ground was strow'd with Flowers, whose sweet scent
Mixt with the choice Perfumes from India brought,
Intoxicates his brain, and quickly caught
His credulous sense; the Walls were gilt and set
With Precious Stones, and all the Roof was fret
With a gold Vine, whose stragling branches spread
All o're the Arch; the swelling Grapes were red;
This Art had made of Rubies cluster'd so,
To the quick'st eye they more than seem'd to grow.
About the Walls lascivious Pictures hung,
Such as whereof loose Ovid sometimes sung.
On either side a crew of dwarfish Elves,
Held waxen Tapers taller than themselves:
Yet so well shap'd unto their little stature,
So Angel-like in face, so sweet in feature.
Their rich attire so diff'ring; yet so well
Becoming her that wore it, none could tell
Which was the fairest, which the handsomest deckt.
Or which of them Desire would soon'st affect.
After a low salute they all 'gan sing,
And circle in the Stranger in a Ring.
Orandra to her Charms was stept aside,
Leaving her guest half won, and wanton ey'd.
He had forgot his Herb:  cunning delight
Had so be witch'd his ears, and blear'd his sight,
And captivated all his senses so,
That he was not himself; nor did he know
What place he was in, or how he came there,
But greedily he feeds his Eye and Ear
With what would ruine him; but that kind Fate
That contradicts all power subordinate,
Prevented Arts intents; a silly flie
(As there were many) light into his eye,
And forc'd a tear to drown her self, when he
Impatient that he could not so well see,
Lifts up his hand wherein the Herb he held,
To wipe away the moisture that distill'd
From his still smarting eye; he smelt the scent
Of the strong Herb, and so incontinent
Recovered his stray'd Wit:  his Eyes were clear'd,
And now he lik'd not what he saw or heard.
This knew Orandra well; and plots anew
How to entrap him:  next unto his view
She represents a Banquet usher'd in
By such a shape, as she was sure would win
His appetite to taste; so like she was,
To his Clarinda both in shape and face.
So voic'd, so habited, of the same gate
And comely gesture; on her Brow in state
Sate such a Princely Majesty, as he
Had noted in Clarinda; save that she
Had a more wanton eye, that here and there
Rowl'd up and down, not setling any where.
Down on the ground she falls his hand to kiss,
And with her tears bedews it; cold as Ice
He felt her Lips, that yet, inflam'd him so,
That he was all on fire the truth to know,
Whether she was the same she did appear,
Or whether some fantastick form it were,
Fashioned in his imagination
By his still working thoughts; so fix'd upon
His lov'd Clarinda, that his fancy strove
Even with her shadow to express his love.
He took her up, and was about to 'quite
Her Tears with Kisses, when to clear his sight
He wipes his Eyes, and with his Herb of Grace
Smooths his rough Lip to kiss with greater grace:
So the Herbs virtue stole into his Brain,
And kept him off; hardly did he refrain
From sucking in Destruction from her Lip.
(Sins Cup will poison at the smallest sip,)
She weeps, and wooes again with subtleness,
And with a Frown she chides his backwardness.
"Have you so soon (sweet Prince said she) forgot
Your own belov'd Clarinda?  are you not
The same you were, that you so slightly set
By her that once you made the Cabinet
Of your choice Counsel?  hath my constant heart
(As Innocence unspotted) no desert,
To keep me yours?  or hath some worthier Love
Stole your Affections?  what is it should move
You to dislike so soon?  must I still tast
No other Dish but Sorrow?  when we last
Emptied our Souls into each others Breast
It was not so, Anaxus, or at least
I thought you meant what then you promis'd me."
With that she wept afresh; "Are you then she,"
Answer'd Anaxus, "doth Clarinda live?
Just thus she spake, how fain I would believe!"
With that she seem'd to fall into a swound,
And stooping down to raise her from the ground,
That he might use both hands to make more haste,
He puts his Herb into his Mouth, whose taste
Soon chang'd his mind:  He lifts her, but in vain
His hands fell of, and she fell down again.
With that she lent him such a frown as would
Have kill'd a common Lover, and made cold
Ev'n lust it self:  Orandra fumes and frets,
And stamping bites the lip to see her Nets
So long a catching Souls:  once more she looks
Into the secrets of her hellish Books.
She bares her Breast, and gives her Spirit suck,
And drinks a Cup in hope of better luck.
Anaxus still the Airy Shadow ey'd,
Which he thought dead, conceit the truth bely'd.
This cunning failing, out she drew a knife,
And as if she had meant to let out life,
In passion aim'd it at her Breast, and said
"Farewel Anaxus;" but her hand he staid,
And from her wrung her knife:  "Art thou," said he,
Clarinda then?"  and kiss'd her:  "can it be,
That Fate so loves Anaxus?"  still with Tears
She answered him, and more divine appears.
His Herb was now forgot, lust had stoln in
With a loose kiss, and tempted him to sin.
A Bed was near, and she seem'd sick and faint:
(Women to Cupid's sport, need no constraint.)
Down on the Bed she threw herself, and turn'd
Her blushing Beauty from him; still he burn'd,
And with intreaties her seeming coyness woo'd
To meet with his Embraces, and bestow'd
Vollies of Kisses on her icy Cheek,
That wrangled with their fire:  she would not speak,
But sigh'd and sob'd, that bellows of desire
Into a flame had quickly blown his fire.
Now did Orandra laugh within her sleeve,
Thinking all was cocksure, one might perceive
Ev'n in that wither'd Hag, an amorous look,
'Twas for her self she train'd him to her hook.
Softly she steals unto the Bed, and peeps
Betwixt the Curtains, nearer then she creeps,
And to her Spirit whispers her command:
With that the Spirit seem'd to kiss his hand,
Which stew'd him into sweat; a cloth she wants
To wipe his face, and his enflam'd heart pants
Beyond its usual temper for some air,
To cool the passions that lay boiling there.
Out of his Bosom where his Nosegay was,
He draws a Napkin, so it came to pass
In plucking of it out, the Nosegay fell
Upon her face; when with a countenance fell,
She started from him, curst him, and with threats
Leap'd from the Bed, Orandra stamps and frets,
And bit her lip; she knew the cause full well
Why her Charms fail'd her, but yet could not tell
With all her art, how she might get from him
That Sovereign Herb:  for touch it she durst not,
And at this time Anaxus had forgot
The virtue of it, as in a maze he lay
At her soon starting from him; "Cast away,"
Said she, "that stinking Nosegay:"  with that he
Bethinks of it; but it was well that she
Put him in mind on't; it had else been lost,
He little knew how much that Nosegay cost.
He seeks for't, finds it, smells to't, and by it
Turns out his lust, and reassumes his wit.
"No Hag," said he, "if this do vex thee so,
I'l make thee glad to smell to't e're I go."
With that he leaps unto her cursing ripe,
And with his Herb the Witches face did wipe.
Whereat she fell to th' earth, the lights went out,
And darkness hung the Chamber round about.
A hellish yelling noise was each where heard,
Sounds that would make ev'n Valors self afeard
A stifling scent of Brimstone he might smell,
Such as the damned Souls suck in in Hell.
He kept his powerful Herb still at his Nose,
And tow'rd the entry of the Room he goes.
For tho 'twas more than midnight dark, yet he
Found the way out again.  Orrandra she
Threw curses after him, and he might hear
Her often say, "I'll fit you for this gear."
At the Caves mouth he found his careless man,
Wrapt in the Witches charms; do what he can
He could not wake him, such sweet lullabies
Pleasure sang to him, till he rub'd his eyes
With his rare Herb; then starting up he leaps
For joy to see his Master, that accepts
His love with thanks; from thence they make no haste,
Yet where they were they knew not; at the last
They came into a Plain, where a small Brook
Did Snake-like creep with many a winding nook,
And by it here and there a Shepherds Cot
Was lowly built, to one of them they got
T' enquire the way to Court:  now night drew on,
It was a good old man they lighted on,
Height Eubolus, of no mean Parentage,
But courtly educated, wise and sage,
Able to teach, yet willing to enrich
His knowledg with discourses, smooth in speech,
Yet not of many words; he entertains
Them with desire, nor spares for any pains
To amplifie a welcome:  with their Host
A while we leave them, now my muse must post
Unto Alexis Court; lend me I pray
Yonr gentle aid to guide her on the way.

Alexis after many civil broils
Against his Rebel Subjects, rich in spoils,
Being setled in his Throne in restful peace,
The Laws establish'd (and his peoples ease
Proclaim'd) he 'gan to call into his mind
The fore-past times, and soon his thoughts did find
Matter to work on:  First, Thealma now
Came to remembrance, where, and when, and how
He won, and lost her; this sad thought did so
Afflict his mind, that he was soon brought low
Into so deep a melancholy, that
He minded nothing else:  nor car'd he what
Became of State Affairs, and tho a King,
With pleasure he enjoy'd not any thing.
His Sleep goes from him, Meats and Drinks he loaths,
And to his sadder Thoughts he suits his Cloaths.
Mirth seem'd a Disease, good counsel Folly,
Unless it serv'd to humor Melancholy.
All his delight, if one may may call't delight,
Was to find Turtles that both day and night
Mourn'd up and down his Chamber, and with groans
His Heart consented to their hollow moans,
Then with his Tears the briny Drink they drank,
He would bedew them:  while his love to thank,
They nestle in his Bosom, where, poor Birds,
With piteous mournful tones, instead of words
They seem'd to moan their Master:  thus did he
Spend his sad hours; and what the cause might be,
His Nobles could not guess, nor would he tell;
For Turtle-like he lov'd his griefs too well,
To let them leave his Breast, he kept them in,
And inwardly they spake to none but him.
Thus was it with him more than half a year,
Till a new bus'ness had set ope his ear
To entertain advice:  the first that brake
The matter to him, or that durst to speak
Unto the King, was bold Anaxocles,
One that bent all his study for the peace
And safety of his Country; the right hand
Of the Arcadian State, to whose command
Was given the Cities Citadel:  a place
Of chiefest trust, and this the bus'ness was.
The Rebels, as you heard, being driven hence,
Despairing e're to expiate their offence
By a too late submission, fled to Sea
In such poor Barks as they could get, where they
Rom'd up and down which way the winds did please,
Without, or Chard, or Compass:  the rough Seas
Enrag'd with such a load of wickedness,
Grew big with Billows, great was their distress;
Yet was their courage greater; desperate men
Grow valianter by suff'ring:  in their ken
Was a small Island; thitherward they steer
Their weather-beaten Barks, each plies his geer;
Some Row, some Pump, some trim the ragged Sails,
All were employ'd, and industry prevails.
They reach the Land at length, their Food grew scant,
And now they purvey to supply their want.
The Island was but small, yet full of Fruits,
That sprang by Nature, as Potato-Roots,
Rice, Figs, and Almonds, with a many more,
Till now unpeopled:  on this happy Shore.
With joy they bring their Barks, of which the best
They Rig anew, with Tackling from the rest.
Some six or seven they serviceable made,
They stand not long to study where to Trade;
Revenge prompts that unto them; Piracy
Was the first thing they thought on, and their Eye
Was chiefly on the Arcadian Shore, that lay
But three Leagues off:  their Theft is not by day
So much as night, unless some stragling Ship
Lights in their trap by chance:  closely they keep
Themselves in Rocky Creeks, till Sun be down
And all abed, then steal they to some Town
Or scatt'ring Village; which they fire, and take
What Spoils they find, then to their Ship they make,
And none knew who did harm them; many a night
Had they us'd this free-booting:  many a fright
And great hearts-grieving loss the unarm'd poor
Were night'ly put to; and to cure this sore
The old man rous'd the King Alexis, chid
His needless sorrow:  told him that he did
Not like a man, much less like one whose health
Strengthens the Sinews of a Common-wealth.
He lays his Peoples Grievances before him,
And told him how with tears they did implore him
To right their wrongs:  at first Alexis frown'd,
And in an angry cloud his looks were drown'd.
A sign of Rain or Thunder; 'twas but Rain,
Some few drops fell, and the Sun shone again.
Alexis rising, thanks his prudent care,
And, as his Father lov'd him; all prepare
T' unnest these Pyrates:  Ships were ready made,
And some Land-Forces; as well to invade,
As for Defence:  the Pyrates now were strong.
By Discontents that to their Party throng.
Not so much friend to the late Tyrant King,
As thirsting after Novelty, the thing
That tickles the rude Vulgar:  one strong Hold
The cunning Foe had gain'd, and grew so bold
To dare all opposition; night and day
They spoil the Country, make weak Towns their prey;
And those that will not joyn with them they kill,
Not sparing Sex, nor Age, proud of their ill
By their rich Booties:  Against these the King
Makes both by Sea and Land; 'twas now Spring.
And Flora had embroidered all the Meads
With sweet variety, forth the King leads
A chosen Troop of Horse, with some few Foot,
But those experienc'd men, that would stand to't
If any need were; to the Sea he sends
Anaxocles, and to his care commends
His Marine Forces, he was bold and wise,
And had been custom'd to the Sea-mans guise.
He gave it out that he was bound for Thrace
To fetch a Princely Lady thence, that was
To be th' Arcadian Queen, which made the Foe
The more secure and careless:  forth they go
Assur'd of Victory, and prosperous Gales,
As fate would have't, had quickly fill'd their Sails:
The Pyrates Rendevous was soon discover'd
By scouting Pinnaces, that closely hover'd
Under the lee of a high Promontory,
That stretcht into the Sea; and now, days glory,
Nights Sable Curtains had eclips'd, the time
When Robbers use to perpetrate a Crime.
The Pyrates steal abroad, and by good hap,
Without suspect they fell into the Trap
Anaxocles had laid; for wisely, he
Divides his Fleet in Squadrons, which might be
Ready on all sides:  every Squadron had
Four Ships well man'd, that where e're the Foe made,
He might be met with, one kept near the shore,
Two kept at Sea, the other Squadron bore
Up tow'rd the Isle, yet with a weeling course,
Not so far distant, but the whole Fleets force
Might quickly be united if need were.
Between these come the Pyrates without fear,
Making tow'rds th' Arcadian shore, where soon
Th' Arcadians met them; now the Fight begun,
And it was hot, the Foe was three to one:
And some big Ships Anaxocles alone
Gave the first on-set, Cynthia then shone bright,
And now the Foe perceives with whom they fight.
And they fought stoutly, scorning that so few
Should hold them tack so long; then nearer drew
The two side Squadrons, and were within shot
Before they spi'd them:  now the Fight grew hot:
Despair put Valor to the angry Foe,
And bravely they stand to't, give many a blow.
Three Ships of theirs were sunk at last, and then
They seek to flie unto their Isle agen;
When the fourth Squadron met them, and afresh
Set on them, half o'recome with weariness;
Yet yield they would not, but still fought it out;
By this the other Ships were come about,
And hemm'd them in; where seeing no hope left,
Whom what the Sword did not ex'cute for Theft,
Leap'd in the Sea and drown'd them; that small force
They'd left within the Isle far'd rather worse
Than better; all were put to th' Sword,
And their Nest fir'd; much Booty brought aboard,
With store of Corn, and much Munition
For War; thus glad of what was done,
The Fleet with joy returns, the like success
Alexis had by Land, at unawares
Surprising their chief Fort:  some lucky Stars
Lending their helpful influence that night;
Yet for the time it was a bloody Fight.
At length the fainting Foe gave back, and fled
Out of a Postern-gate with fear half dead,
And thinking in the Port to meet their Fleet,
They met with Death; an ambush did them greet
With such a furious shock, that all were slain,
Only some stragling cowards did remain,
That hid themselves in Bushes which next day
The Soldiers found, and made their lives a prey
Unto their killing anger:  home the King
Returns in triumph, whilst Pans Priests do sing
Harmonious Odes in honor of that day,
And dainty Nymphs with Flowers strew'd the way:
Among the which he spy'd a beauteous Maid,
Of a majestick count'nance, and aray'd
After so new a manner, that his eye
Impt with delight upon her, and to try
Whether her Mind did answer to her Face,
He call'd her to him, when with modest grace
She fearless came, and humbly on her knee
Wish'd a long life unto his Majesty.
He ask'd her name; she answer'd Florimel,
And blushing made her Beauty so excel,
That all the thoughts of his Thealma now
Were hush'd and smothered; upon her Brow
Sate such an awful Majesty, that he
Was conquer'd e're oppos'd; 'twas strange to see
How strangely he was altered:  still she kneels,
And still his heart burns with the fire it feels.
At last the victor pris'ner caught with Love,
Lights from his Chariot, and begins to prove
The sweetness of the bait that took his heart,
And with a Kiss uprears her:  yet Loves Dart
Fir'd not her Breast to welcom his Affection,
Only hot Sunny Beams with their reflection
A little warm'd her; then he questions who
Her Parents were, and why apparel'd so.
Where was her dwelling, in what Country born?
And would have kiss'd her, when 'twixt fear and scorn
She put him from her; "My dread Lord," said she,
"My Birth is not ignoble, nor was he
That I call Father, though in some disgrace
Worthy his unjust Exile:  what he was,
And where I first breath'd air, pardon dread King;
I dare not, must not tell you:  none shall wring
That secret from me; what I am, you see,
Or by my Habit you may guess to be
Diana's Votaress:  the cause, great Sir,
That prompts me to this boldness to appear
Before your Majesty, was what I owe,
And ever shall unto your Valour, know,
(For you may have forgot it) I am she,
Who with my good old Father you set free,
Some two years since, from bloody minded men,
That would have kill'd my honor; had not then
Your timely aid stept in to rescue me,
And snatcht my bleeding Father, dear to me
As was mine honor, even from the jaw of Death,
And given us both a longer stock of breath.
'Twas this, great King, that drew me with this train,
From our Devotion to review again
My honors best preserver, and to pay
The debt of thanks I owe you:  many a day
I've wish'd for such a time, and Heav'n at last
Hath made me happy in it:"  day was now
Well nigh spent, and Cattel 'gan to low
Homewards t' unlade their milky bags, when she
Her Speech had ended; every one might see
Love sit in triumph on Alexis brow,
Firing the captive Conqueror, and now
He 'gins to court her, and love tipt his Tongue
With winning Rhetorick; her hand he wrung,
And would agen have kiss'd her; but the Maid
With a coy blush 'twixt angry and afraid
Flung from the King, and with her Virgin train,
Fled swift as Roes unto their Bower again.
Alexis would have follow'd, but he knew
What eyes were on him, and himself withdrew
Into his Chariot, and to Courtward went
With all his Nobles, hiding his intent
Under the veil of pleasant light discourse,
Which some markt well enough; that night perforce
They all were glad within the open Plain
To pitch their Tents, where many a Shepherd Swain
Upon their Pipes troul'd out their Evening Lays
In various accents emulous of praise.
It was a dainty pleasure for to hear,
How the sweet Nightingales their throats did tear,
Envying their skill, or taken with delight,
As I think rather, that the still-born night
Afforded such co-partners of their woes.
And at a close from the pure streams that flows
Out of the rocky Caverns not far off,
Eccho replied aloud, and seem'd to scoff
At their sweet sounding airs, this did so take
Love-sick Alexis willingly awake,
That he did wish't had been a week to day
T' have heard them still; but time for none will stay,
The wearied Shepherds at their usual hour
Put up their Pipes, and in their Straw-thatcht Bow'r
Slept out the rest of night, the King likewise
Tir'd with a weary March shut in his eyes.
Within their leaden fold all hush'd and still;
Thus for a while we leave him, till my Quill
Weary and blunted with so long a story,
Rest to be sharpen'd, and then she is for ye.

No sooner welcome day with glimmering light
Began to chase away the shades of night,
But eccho wakens, rouz'd by the Shepherd Swains,
And back reverberates their louder strains.
The airy Choire had tun'd their slender throats,
And fill'd the bushy groves with their sweet Notes
The Flocks were soon unfolded, and the Lambs
Kneel for a Breakfast to their milky Dams.
And now Aurora blushing greets the world,
And o're her Face a curled Mantle hurl'd:
Foretelling a fair day, the Soldiers now
Began to bustle; some their Trumpets blow,
Some beat their Drums, that all the Camp throughout
With sounds of War they drill the Soldiers out.
The Nobles soon were hors'd, expecting still
Their King's approach, but he had slept but ill,
But was but then arising, heavy ey'd,
And cloudy look'd, and something ill beside.
But he did cunningly dissemble it
Before his Nobles, all that they could get
From him was that, a Dream he had that night
Did much disturb him; yet seem'd he make slight
Of what so troubled him; but up he chears
His Soldiers with his presence, and appears
As hearty as his troubled thoughts gave leave:
So that except his groans, none could perceive
Much alteration in him:  toward Court
The Army marches, and swift wing'd report
Had soon divulg'd their coming; by the way
He meets old Memnon, who, as you heard say,
Was Sire to Florimel, good man, he then
Was going to his Daughter:  when his men
Then in the Army in his passing by
Tend'red their duty to him lovingly.
He bids them welcome home; the King drew near,
And question'd who that poor man was, and where
His dwelling was; and why those Soldiers show'd
Such reverence to him; "'twas but what they ow'd"
Answer'd a stander by; "he is their Lord,
And one that merits more than they afford.
If worth were rightly valued (gracious Sir)
His name is Memnon, if one may believe
His own report; yet sure, as I conceive,
He's more than what he seems:"  the Army then
Had made a stand when Memnon and his men
Were call'd before the King:  the good old man
With Tears, that joy brought forth, this wise began.
"To welcome home Alexis ever be
Those sacred powers bless'd, that lets me see
My Sovereigns safe return:  still may that power
Strengthen your arm to Conquer:  Heav'n still shower
Its choicest blessings on my Sovereign,
My lifes preserver:  welcome home again.
I would my Girl were here," with that he wept,
When from his Chariot Alexis stept,
And lovingly embrac'd him:  he knew well
That this was Memnon, Sire to Florimel;
And to mind how he had set them free
From more than cruel Rebels; glad was he
So luckily to meet him, from his wrist
He took a Jewel, 'twas an Amythist
Made like a Heart with wings:  the Motto this,
"Love gives me wings, and with a &mdash; kiss."
He gave it to old Memnon:  "bear," said he,
"This Jewel to your Child, and let me see
Both you and her at Court, fail not with speed
To let me see you there:  old man, I need
Thy grave advise;" all wondred at the deed,
But chiefly Memnon:  "Father," said the King,
"I'll think upon your men:  fail not to bring
Your Daughter with you;" so his leave he takes,
And ravish'd Memnon tow'rd his Daughter makes.
The Army could not reach the Court that night,
But lay in open Field, yet within sight
Of Pallimando where the Court then lay.
For greater state Alexis the next day
Purpos'd to enter it; the Townsmen they
In the mean time prepare what cost they may,
With Shows and Presents to bid welcom home
Their victor King; and amongst them were some
Studied Orations, and compos'd new lays
In honour of their King:  the Oak and Bays
Were woven into Garlands for to crown
Such as by Valor had gain'd most renown.
Scarce could the joyful people sleep that night,
In expectation of the morrows sight.
The morrow came, and in triumphant wise
The King and Soldiers enter:  all mens eyes
Were fix'd upon the King with such desire,
As if they'd seen a God, while Musicks Choire
Fill'd every corner with resounding lays,
That spake the conquering Alexis praise.
Drown'd in the vulgars lowder acclamations,
'Twould ask an age to tell what preparations
Were made to entertain him, and my muse
Grows somewhat weary:  these triumphant shews
Continu'd long, yet seem'd to end too soon,
The people wish'd 'thad been a week to noon.
By noon the King was hous'd, and order given
To pay the Soldiers, now it grew tow'rd even,
And all repair to rest; so I to mine,
And leave them buried in sound sleep and Wine.
I'll tell you more hereafter, friendships laws
Will not deny a friendly rest and pause.

