When Phoebus gave his fierie horses rest,
And circled had his glorious Hemisphere:
When every Creature thought him fully blest
And Tytan gan old Thetis bed to cheere,
When silent-nights blacke mantle did appeare,
In secret sort I gave the looking on,
While blessed Cynthia grac't Endymion.

I saw how that the sacred Nymph came downe
In purple Robe, with starres yfretyzed
I sawe her guard, chaste Ladyes of renowne,
Blest of the Gods, with fame enthronized:
In never-dying Rowles eternized.
I knew them all; Endymion the Swayne,
And mightie Cynthia with her blessed Traine.

Shee is well knowne whom all the world admires
For vertuous life, and prudent modestie;
Rare are her gifts full of Sydneian-fyres,
Muses and Graces of high soveraigntie:
Attend and garnish her with modstie.
I meane not now therefore to paint her praize,
Being a taske too high for withered Baize.

But shew the storie as it then fell out,
When she first favoured Endymion:
And how false Lyvidus brought it about,
That Cynthia had him in suspition:
(No heart can shrowde it in oblivion)
And who so reades Endymions wofull Verse
Let him with teares his Tragedie reherse.

It greeves my heart to se the gentle Swayne,
That kept his tender Lambes on Ida Mount:
And brought them downe againe into the plaine,
To take their pleasure by the silvered Fount,
Folding them all, and taking just account,
Least one of them by Carelesse oversight
Should wandring perish in the darke-some night.

It greeves my heart (I say) to heare his moane,
Fast by the walles of Troy where once he dwelt:
With wringing hands and many a greevous groane,
He did expresse the miseries he felt.
A heart of flint I thinke would surely melt,
To see a gentle Shepheard thus cast downe,
By Envies practise and great Cynthyas frowne.

You mightie Princes and high Potentates,
That with your Scepters swaye great Monarchies,
You Lords and Knights and all you meaner States,
Which doe excell in happie dignities:
Fore-see your fall by envies Treacheryes;
And chase her from your habitation,
As Hagge of Hellish generation.

Observe her practises in tumbling downe,
The greatest princes of the Oulderne times:
Bereaving Monarchs of th' Imperiall Crowne,
Against their persons urging fayned Crymes,
As you may read in Poets golden Rymes.
And see in this most wofull Hystorie,
Glorious Endymions Catastrophie.

In Troy Towne scituate in Cambria,
There dwelt this Sheapherd of a gentle race;
Neer fronting upon great Mongomria,
Where Princely Arthur kept his courtly place,
Guiding great Albion with his golden Mace,
Where Knights and Ladies cladde in princely weeds,
Shew'd testimonie of their worthy deedes.

There did this gentle Shepheard feed his flocke;
There tuned hee his well contryved Reede:
Sitting on top of highest Ida rocke,
Suffring his tender Lambes meane while to feede,
Whiles he, clad in his homely Countrey weede,
Sang Madrigals and Stanzies of great worth,
And descanted to bring his Musicke forth.

Well could he sing divine and sacred layes,
With blessed notes as Poets did record,
In silvered lines painting high Jovahs praise,
And eke the death of Christians dying Lord.
Such Musicke did he oft his flocke afford.
As made them leave their foode to listen well,
As if they were inchaunted with the spell.

Satyrs and Silvans at the harmonie,
Sometime came darting from the darkesome Grove,
Approoving oft the chaunting melodie,
And with their harsh and rurall voyces strove,
To sound the praises of celestiall Jove;
But when their Pipes and voices disagreed,
They held their peace and cast away their reed.

Sometimes he made the Rocks for to rebound,
With Eccho of his Notes; sometime the dales,
And woods, and springs, to yeeld a burbling sound,
As beaten with reflexe of Madrigales;
Sibillas Oracles, and prophets tales:
Which shew the way to immortalitie,
In perfect Hymnes of true divinitie.

So well he could his warbling Notes divide,
That other Shepheards did his layes admire,
And set their Notes, as he their Pipes did guide,
Untill they could unto the like aspire:
Yet never tooke he recompence or hire,
But as he lay upon th' Idaean hill,
He dayly sounded lowde his Oten quill,

Long liv'd upon this Mounte the gentle Swayne,
Recording songs unto the Deitie:
Till Cynthia walking with her blessed Traine,
Approach'd the shepheard and his melodie.
Where she observing well the Harmonie,
With Majestie divine and princelie grace,
Retyr'd her selfe and pauz'd a little space.

I well did view the Coronet she ware,
With Diamonds and Saphyres orient,
A Carkenet most pretious and rare,
Fretized with Carbuncles which Hebae sent,
(The same which Pyrocles did first invent)
Did circle twise, her sacred necke, and brest,
In which the Muses, and the Graces, rest.

Betweene her paps a lustrious Diamond;
Link'd to her Carkenet by curious Arte,
(Of yore found out by skilfull Belysond,
And given by the mightie Britomarte)
So placed was, that light it might imparte,
To all inferiour Orbs in darkest night,
When Phoebus had with-draw'n his glorious light.

A surcote all of purple silke she wore,
Diapred with Flora's curious skill,
Butned with orientall Pearles before,
With golden loops to fasten at her will,
Fram'd for her bodie by great Astrophill.
Such as Bellona used heretofore,
In chasing of the feirce Adonian Bore.

Waving and wide tuck't up unto her knee,
Adorned with a frinoge of purest gould,
Whence parcell of the Lawne I chanc'd to see,
That whiter then it selfe, her skinne doth fould;
By Physis fram'd for feature uncontrould:
Like whitest Ivorie beautifull and trymme;
Whiter then Swannes that in Meander swimme.

Part of her legges gave lustre to my viewe,
As Ivorie pillars bearing up the frame;
By that I judge my other speeches true,
Which who so sees shal verifie the same.
Pardon divine and most Illustrious Dame,
Though simple Swaynes do glorifie thy name,
Since by this subject get we lasting fame.

Her Ivorie legs and feet the buskins hide,
Of curious stuffe with gold imbellished,
Lest natures Ornaments should be espyed,
Of worth-lesse wantons, rude, unpolished,
Or Venus brats of wits unfurnished:
For over all, she vaild her with a Robe,
As azur'd welkin over-spreads the Globe.

Two Grey-hounds swift and white as whitest snow,
Attend her to pursue the nymble Deere:
And in her hand she bare a dreadefull bowe,
To kill the game, if any should appeere,
Or any deadly foe approach too neere,
Thus stands great Cynthia in the midst of May,
With all her Traine to heare Endymions Lay.

What was the Subject of the Shepheards Song,
Aske noble Cynthia, for shee can tell:
I list not now to keep you over long,
For needlesse things become not stories well:
The Stationers the Shepheards musicke sel.
But listen well Ile tell you more anon,
Of Cynthias Ladies and Endymion.

The first was Vera daughter to an Earle,
Whilom a Paragon of mickle might:
And worthily then termed Albions Pearle,
For bountie in expence, and force in fight,
(Mee list to give so great a prince his right)
In all the Tryumphs held in Albion soyle,
He never yet receiv'd disgrace or foyle.

Onely some thinke he spent too much in vaine,
That was his fault:  but give his honour due,
Learned he was, just, affable and plaine;
No traytor, but ever gratious, and true:
Gainst Princes peace, a plot he never drewe.
But as they be deceiv'd that too much trust:
So trusted hee some men, that prov'd unjust.

Weake are the wits that measure Noble-men,
By accidentall things that ebbe and flowe;
His learning made him honourable then,
As trees their goodnesse by their fruites doe showe,
So we doe Princes by their vertues knowe.
For riches, if they make a King; tell then;
What differ poorest Kings, from poorest men?

One branch amongst the rest; he left behinde,
To spread the glory of th' Oxonian lyne:
Noble by birth, true, liberall, and kinde.
The glorious fruite of high Cecilian vine;
Sacred in marriage with everlasting twyne,
Which Juno sponne for great Mongomria,
A mightie Prince in western Cambria.

Calandra was the next of Princely race,
Hastingua bred her, in her sacred Cell,
Of wisedome excellent, of modest grace,
Profoundest Oracles of Christian spell,
Shee wisely could unfould and plainely tell,
Shee learn'd this skill of that Ashbeian Prince,
Who often did Carpocrates conuince.

Agape, with Musophila the Bride,
Ladyes of worthe, and babes of Sydneia,
Euphues ornaments, and natures pride,
Nimphs, Pastorellas of Arcadia;
Fostered in the Muses Gunakeia.
These foure followed blessed Cynthia,
To view the gardens of Hesperida.

With many another honourable Dame,
Blessed Phileta, Clara, Candida;
These lodge within the house of Cynthia,
Within the Lande of Terra Florida,
Fronting the Fountaines of Castalida;
These circle fairest Cynthia in a Ring,
While she doth stay to heare Endymion sing.

The Jewels which they wore gave such a shine,
Upon a suddaine to the sillie Swaine,
That all unable were his feeble eyne,
So great a luster longer to sustaine,
Downe fell his pipes, dead was his musick-straine,
For private men, hardly beholde her face,
But straite they stande amazed in the place.

But Cynthia stoop'd and tooke him up againe,
And rub'd his Temples with her tender hand:
Each Ladie strove to take the greatest paine,
To rouze him from his Trance, and make him stand.
Each way to save his life, was deepely scand,
But all in vaine, till Cynthia layde aside,
Her Majestie, that daunteth rurall pride.

At last the sillie Shepheard gan revive,
Yet as amaz'd he knew not where he was:
But stood as one halfe dead, and halfe alive,
As often times we see it come to passe,
(For mortall man compared is to grasse)
Flora cannot susteine the parching heate,
Of Phoebus beames uncessantly to beat.

But shee that knew the cause of his distresse,
Releived him with words of sweetest grace
And saide:  Thou gentle Swayne, the Gods thee blesse,
Be of good cheere:  Cast sorrowe from thy face:
Keepe on thy Laye, and blessed be thy race,
Thrice happie he that taught thy Musicke sownd,
Joye to their hearts, whom Miserye doth wound.

Cast feare away, Ile be thy Patronesse:
While Chynthia lives Endymion is sure;
Let no astonishment, thy minde oppresse:
Thus did her gracious words, the Shepheard cure.
Who looking up with countenance demure,
Bowing himselfe with humble reverence,
Address'd this speech, unto her Excellence.

Renowned Cynthia glorie of thy Sexe,
For learning had in admiration:
The shine of whose illustrious reflexe,
May dazle wits of high invention:
Divine Mistresse of Elocution,
Pardon poore Shepheards rude, and worthlesse Rymes,
Not such as were the Layes of Olderne Tymes.

Rare is thy skill, in mightie Poesie;
Whom Poets Laureat crowne, with lasting Bayes,
In Songs of never dying Memorie,
Such as greater Homer sung in former dayes.
When he with Hymnes, did chaste Cassandra praise.
O let me live I pray thee, on this Hill,
And tune in Country sort my crazed Quill.

This modest sute, (quoth Cynthia) is not fit
For thee to crave; nor for my state to graunt:
Thou oughtst in higher straine t' advauce thy wit,
And sacred Notes mongst learned men to chaunt;
Mee list not to thy face thy Musicke vaunt.
I like it well, and this may thee suffice,
Songs of no worth I utterly dispise.

If thou accountst my judgement any thing,
And deemst mee farre remote from flatterie,
Let me entreate thee once againe to sing,
Melodious Notes of sweetest Harmonie.
For such doe please the highest Deitie,
And comfort us after our weary Howers,
Which we have spent in gathering Gilliflowers.

The Shepheard lowting low, made obeysance,
To all the blessed Ladies in their gree:
Hee promised to shew his puissance,
And tooke his Pipe downe from a lawrell Tree.
(For hundreds such on Ida planted be)
Appollo set them circle-wise for wunder.
To shrowd the Shepheards from lame Vulcans thunder.

And all the Ladies plac'd themselves a rowe,
To compasse round the mightie Cynthia.
Before was never seene such glorious showe,
To grace Endymion in Cambria.
Who (encouraged by Musophila,
The Lady Bride, and Bride of happy choyce)
Tun'de well his Pipe, unto his trembling voice.

And sang the Song of universall Pan,
High Soveraigne God, and Prince of Happines:
When, where, and how, great Jove this Globe began,
To shew his everlasting Mightines.
How everie Orbe his center doth possesse,
And all things else as now they framed beene,
In blessed order, comelie to be seene.

I heard him sing a Laye of mickle worth,
Which I by partes will orderly relate,
Helpe me great Cynthia to set it foorth,
Being choice Melodie and intricate,
Prized by Poets at the highest rate,
A Subject fit for Sydneys eloquence,
High Chaucers vaine, and Spencers influence.

