COLLIN.
Thenot and Chloris, red lipt Driope,
Shepheards, Nymphs, Swaines, al that delight in field,
Living by harmlesse thrift your fat heards yeelde,
Why slacke yee now your loved company?
Up sluggards, learne, the larke doth mounted sing,
His cheerefull Carrolls, to salute our King.

The Manis, blacke-bird, and the little Wren,
The Nightingale upon the hawthorne brire,
And all the wingd Musitions in a Quire,
Do with their notes rebuke dull lazie men.
Up shepherds, up; your sloth breeds al your shames
You sleep like beasts, while birds salute K. James.

The gray eyde morning with a blustring cheeke,
Like Englands royall Rose mixt red and white,
Summons all eies to pleasure and delight,
Behold the evenings deaws doe upward reeke,
Drawn by the Sun, which now doth gild the skie,
With his light-giving and world-cheering eie.

O that's well done; I see your cause of stay,
Was to adorne your temples with fresh flowers:
And gather beautie to bedecke your bowers,
That they may seeme the Cabinets of Maie:
Honor this time, sweetest of all sweete Springs.
That so much good, so many pleasures brings.

Nor now alone the livery of the earth
Gives not life, comfort to your bleating Lambes,
Nor fills the strowting udders of their dams,
It yeeldes another cause of gleesome mirth,
This ground weares all her best embrodery,
To entertaine her Soveraignes majestie.

And well she may, for never English ground
Bore such a Soveraigne as this Royall Lord:
Looke upon all Antiquaries Record;
In no Inrollment such a King is found.
Beginne with Brute, (if that of Brute be true,)
As I'le not doubt, but give old Bards their due.

He was a Prince unsetled, sought a Shore
To rest his long-tosst Troy an scattred Race:
And (as tis sed) found here a resting place:
Grant this:  but yeeld, he did false gods adore.
The Nations were not calld to Christ that time,
Blacke Pagan clouds darkned this goodly Clime.

So, when dissention brought the Romans in,
No Caesar till the godly Constantine,
(Descended truly from the Brittish line)
Purgde this Iles aire from Idoll-hated sinne;
Yet he in care of Rome left Deputies.
Our James maintaines (himselfe,) his dignities.

The Saxon, and the Dane, scourged with sharp steele,
(So did the Norman Duke) this beauteous Land,
Invading Lords raigne with an yron hand:
A gentler ruling in this Change we feele,
Our Lion comes as meekely as a Dove,
Not conq'ring us by hurt, but harty love.

Even as a calme to tempest tossed  men,
As bread to the faint soule with famine vext;
As a coole Spring to those with heate perplext,
As the Sunnes light into a fearefull denne,
So comes our King:  even in a time of neede,
To save, to shine, to comforte and to feede.

O Shepheards, sing his welcome with sweete notes,
Nymphs, strew his way with Roses Red and White,
Provide all pastimes that may sense delight,
Offer the fleeces of your flockes white cotes:
He that now spares, doth in that saving, spill;
Where Worth is little, Vertue likes good will.

Now from the Orchades to the Cornish Iles,
From thence to Cambria, and the Hyberian shore,
The sound of Civill warre is heard no more;
Each Countenance is garnished with smile,
All in one hymne with sweet contentment sing,
The praise and power of James their onely King.

Our onely King, one Ile, one Soveraigne;
O long-desired, and perfected good!
By him the heate of wrath, and boyling blood,
Is mildely quencht; and Envie counted vaine,
One King, one people, blessed unitie,
That ties such mightie Nations to agree.

Shepheardes, Ile not be tedious in my Song;
For that I see you bent to active sport;
Though I perswade me all time is too short,
To welcome him, whome we have wisht for long.
Well done, dance on; looke how our little lambs,
Skippe as you spring, about their fleecie dams.

Thus were yee wont to trip about the Greene,
And dance in ringlets, like to Fairie Elves,
Striving in cunning to exceede your selves,
In honour of your late falne summer Queene:
But now exceede; this Maie excelles all Springs,
Which King and Queene, and Prince and Princesse brings.

Showt joyfully, ye Nymphs, and rurall Swaines,
Your maister Pan will now protect your foldes,
Your Cottages will be as safe as Holdes,
Feare neither Wolves nor subtill Foxes traines,
A Royall King will of your weale take keepe,
Hee'le be your Shepheard, you shalbe his sheepe.

He comes in pompe; so should a King appeare,
Gods Deputie should set the world at gaze;
Yet his milde lookes drive us from all amaze,
Clap hands for joy, our Soveraigne draweth neere,
Sing Io, Io, shepheards dance and sing,
Expresse all joy, in welcoming our King.

The aire, the season, and the Earth accord
In Pleasure, Order, both for sight and sense:
All things looke fresh to greet his  Excellence,
And Collin humbly thus salutes his Lord:
Drad and belovde, live Englands happy King,
While seasons last fresh as the lively spring.
