With that, Endymion cast his eyes aside,
And saw a gentle Knight come pricking on,
Swift was his pace, and knightlie did he ride,
Bending his race towards Endymion.
As stately Knight he was to looke upon,
Complet his armes in rich Caparison,
His horse like Pegasus, and he Belerophon.

Likely he was to mannage Martiall armes,
Well could he couch in rest his dreadfull Speare,
He rode as one that scorn'd Thessalian charmes,
Nor did he any strange adventures feare:
The Armes and Shield which I did see him beare,
Were coloured blew, thicke set with silver Starrs:
His Shield an azur'd Porpentine, with golden barrs.

His waving Bases manaced the skies,
Like as his Armour to Welkin semblant,
Couch'd in his Saddle close to enterprize,
Stratagems and adventures puissant.
If any in the earth were commorant,
And single Combat quicke to undertake,
Gainst hellish Monsters or Lernaean snake.

His steely helme, a Corronet of Bayes,
Empaled round:  the penon of his Launce,
The ignorance of all the world displayes,
For when he gan, his warlike Speare t' advaunce,
Some golden Letters writ I read by chaunce.
The Motto was (if I remember right)
Learning Triumphs in Envies great despight.

The simple Shepheard cried out amaine;
Flie noble Cynthia we are betrai'd,
So sore amazed was the Countrey swaine,
That he forgot what he had done or said.
Renowmed Cynthia was no whit dismaid,
But comforted th' amazed senselesse man,
Willing him hold his course as he began.

And all the Ladies from their seates arose,
To view the comming of this warlike Knight:
In circle-wise they faire Cynthia close,
To shrowde Diana from Acteons sight,
The Shepheard would have ta'ne himselfe to flight,
But that he was asham'de to runne away,
Leaving the Ladies to the warriers pray.

He layd a side his Pipe, and tooke his Hooke,
As if he would an armed Knight withstand,
The seely soule put on a manly looke,
Yet better was his running then his hand.
He wisht himselfe farre off in other land,
For fitter were his hands to use a pen,
Then mannage Armes with any Marshall men.

But making vertue of necessitie,
He made a show as if he ment to fight,
Upon his feet, he started suddenly,
To shield these Ladies from that manly Knight.
No question there had beene a noble sight,
To see him wield a woodden rustie Hooke,
That fitter were to mannage sacred Booke.

O how the Shepheard would have stirr'd his stumps,
And laid about him with his smottie Boxe,
His woodden Crooke had given such deadly thumps,
As would have stricken downe a falling Oxe.
So would the Knight have feard the Shepherds knocks,
As if a Bulrush hit him on the Crest,
Or if a Gnat had stung his armed brest.

But all was well, no terror was intended,
The Knight nor car'd nor knew Endymion.
He rein'd his Steed, and lightly downe discended,
And with a Courtly disposition,
Lift up his Bever, whereby every one,
Knew him to be, the mightie Astrophill,
Whose prayse is paynted with an Angels quill.

Prince of all Poets in Acadia,
Magnanimous of everlasting Fame,
Of chiefe regard, with famous Cynthia,
Appollo parted with him halfe his name,
And gave him skill darke ignorance to tame,
Appollo twined with his learned hand,
The Lawrell Crowne, which on his head doth stand.

But when my Cynthia knew 'twas Astrophill,
She ranne to claspe him in her daintie Armes,
But out alas, it passed mortall skill;
Inchaunted was the Knight with sacred Charmes.
His bodie dead of yore, the more our harmes.
O noble Drayton well didst thou rehearse,
Our Damages in dryrie Sable verse.

Thrice Cynthia tri'd to folde him in her armes,
But all in vaine, she nothing comprehended:
Her vitall blood that all the bodie warmes.
Forsooke her veynes, and to her heart ascended.
For loe, she fainting fall's as life were ended:
Making most wofull lamentation,
Yet Astrophill still kept his station.

The worthy Nimphes that circled Cynthia,
Amazed at her fall made such a crie,
As wak'd the Satyrs of Sylvania.
And feeding Lambs did greatly terrifie:
The Shepheard in a mortall trance doth lie,
The tender Ladies had the better hart,
Setting all cowardice and feare apart.

Nymbly they tooke, and rubbed Cynthia,
Till she reviv'd, who lifting up her eyes,
Behelde the Elfin of Arcadia,
And cri'de deare:  brother do not temporise:
Nor do thou Ladie Cynthia despise,
Why speak'st thou not to her that loves thee best,
What dismall humor hath thy minde possest?

With that as from a deepe concavitie,
A silvered voice, and words of great import,
Proceeded from the Knight with Majestie,
Distinct, pithie, plaine, but wondrous short,
Yet such as unto us gave great comfort.
A man, a ghost, a knight, a potentate,
Humane, divine, forcible, laureate.

Dies, lives, fights not, yet mortally doth wound,
Death, life, time, fortune, wisedome, learning, wit,
Nature, Arte, forme, languages profound,
Glorious earthlie-pompe, fame excelling it:
No earthly thing eternally shall sit,
Vertue, Pietie, and pure Sanctitie,
Shall weare the Crowne of immortalitie.

These words the trembling Shepheard did revive,
They were so full of raritie and choyse,
Resembling skill of Astrophill alive:
The sound he thought was not unlike his voice.
Endymion did mightily rejoice,
And said aloud, or thou art Astrophill,
Or thou hast learn'd this Sonnet from his skill.

Shepheard (quoth he) I am and am not hee,
I am not perfect Astrophill, but part,
The shade which now appeareth unto thee,
Is substance spirituall fram'd by Arte;
What mortall was, is slaine by deadly Dart
Of Thanatos, corrupt consum'd to dust;
Such is the end of all this worldly lust.

But what art thou that sitst among these bayes?
Unfold to me for I must needes be gone,
I was reader (quoth he) in former daies,
Unto great Astrophill, but now am one,
Stripped, and naked, destitute alone.
Naught but my Greekish pipe, and staffe have I,
To keepe my Lambs and me in miserie.

Art thou (quoth he) my Tutor Tergaster,
He answered yea:  such was my happie chaunce,
I grieve (quoth Astrophill) at thy disaster:
But fates denie me learning to advaunce.
Yet Cinthia shall afford thee maintenance.
My dearest Sister keepe my Tutor well,
For in his element he doth excell.

And for thy selfe, I bring thee happie newes,
Thou shalt injoy a long and happie peace:
Which former bloodie wars, and death ensues,
For civill heate in Albion-soyle shall cease,
And noble blood shall perfectly encrease,
Church-men heareafter shall agree in one,
Bannishing sects, and superstition.

Pride shall be turned to humilitie,
Each man shall keepe himselfe in his degree,
Discurtesie shall be civilitie,
Wanton Maydes shall modest Matrons bee,
Noe Man shall seeke the fruite of others tree.
Noe Rapine, swearing, or abusion,
Noe Murder, ribauldrie, confusion.

Each man shall seeke, to doe his neighbour right,
Greene grasse shall florish in Westminster Hall:
You shall discerne a beggar from a Knight,
Extortion and briberie shall have a fall.
Golde exchanged for thinges caelestiall.
Vertue, Truth, Honestie, Religion,
Shall Tryumph in the brittish Regyon.

Caesar shall see his foes subversion,
No man shall lift a sword against his Crowne,
His issue shall not feare dispersion.
Christo Mastix shall be tumbled downe,
Peace, faith, love joy, honor in every Towne.
Trumpets shall sound, and bels shall ring for joy,
Virgins and boyes, shall sing Vive la Roy.

Reverend olde age, shall bring thee to thy Herse,
And glorie shall adorne thy progenie:
Eternall fame shall blaze in golden verse,
Thine honorable life and destinie.
Renowned Poet's of highest Ingenie,
Shall decke thy Tombe with everlasting fame,
And with goulden pens celebrate thy name.

And when thy bodie shall consume to dust,
Resting it selfe in deepe obscuritie:
With dreadfull Trumpe shall rise againe the just,
Thy bodie shall surpasse in dignitie,
The welkin which thou seest in Majestie,
Meane while thy spirit a substance divine,
In tryumph rid's in equipage with mine.

About the Orb's and Spheares caelestiall,
Dignified with ever shining light,
Viewing the majestie imperiall,
Clad in a vesture of the purest white.
Which Amnos made before the world was dight,
Where thou with me, and I with thee shall sing,
Eternall prayses to the immortall king.

These blessed Nimphs, environing thee round,
Thrice noble, by their propagation:
Neeces to Astrophill, of honor sound,
Of modest, vertuous inclination,
Happie shall be their generation.
And blessed they till Jove have wrought his will,
And caus'd them mount the skies to Astrophill.

And now my Cinthia time sommons me hence,
My newes been done I can no longer stay.
He mounted Pegasus and hy'de from thence,
Piercing the welkin, vanished away.
Leaving the Ladies in wofull dismay,
Lifting their heads, and gazing on the skies,
Observing the course, as Astrophill flies.

Galaxia tooke him in her splendent armes,
Sweetely she couch'd him in her Canapie,
She seal'd the passage, with her counter charmes,
To guard her sleeping Knight from Jeopardie.
Without regard of impaciency,
Cinthia would needes ascend Olympus hill,
To live or dye, with blessed Astrophill.

Nature perswaded her to stay a while,
Her time prefixed was not yet assign'd:
The fatall Sisters, would not cut her file,
Her robes unmade, her Coronet untwin'd.
Nor was the quintesence of nature fin'd,
Neither was yet great Astrophill awake,
That might her entertainment undertake.

Cinthia replyed not, as one resolved,
Her will to put in execution:
Oftentimes her sacred soule revolved,
Which way to make a dissolution,
Of this her bodies constitution
And justly knowing twa's not in her power,
Determined to stay her fatall houre.

And yet to spend in contemplation,
The better part of her remaining daies:
Which vow she keepes in veneration,
Witnesse her learned Poems, and her Layes,
So often crowned, with Arcadian Bayes.
Thus long sitting silent in that place,
Aurora gan to showe her blushing Face.

Then all the Ladies hasted to depart,
And Cinthia turn'd her to Endimion:
With wordes of grace proceeding from her heart,
She thank'd him for his former cantion.
This Mount (quoth she) take for thy mansion.
Here shalt thou dwell, and feede thy little flocke,
I with my Ladies, will encrease thy Stocke.

The stately Garland of her blessed traine,
For beautie matchlesse, incomparable,
With greatest favours grac'd this countrie Swaine,
(Particulers will be admirable)
Of esteeme they were unvaluable.
And out of doubt they had been durable,
If worldly envie had been curable.

He liv'd a while in reputation,
Expounding Oracles of Theologie:
His flocke was had in estimation,
As guided well by his Phylosophy.
Profoundly could he chaunt that misterie.
In languages of higest Poetrie,
Unfolding riddles of antiquitie.

I left the Shepheard in this happy state,
Feeding his lambs in mirth and jollitie:
But it fell out, when I return'd of late,
His mirth was moane his solace miserie,
(Loe heare worlds-glasse of mutabilitie)
He wrung his hands, and made a rufull moane,
His drops of teares might pierce a Marble stone.

I wondred how his blessed Comoedie,
Could have so suddaine alteration.
I ask'd the cause of this his Tragaedie,
Hee answered:  envies sophistication.
I thought to write, the whole narration,
But sith Tragaedies have a bloody end,
During his life, he will not have it pend.
