Scarce had the Ploughman yoak'd his horned Team,
And lock'd their Traces to the crooked Beam,
When fair Thealma with a Maiden scorn,
That day before her rise, out blusht the morn:
Scarce had the Sun gilded the Mountain tops,
When forth she leads her tender Ewes, and hopes
The day would recompence the sad affrights
Her Love-sick heart did struggle with a-nights.
Down to the Plains the poor Thealma wends,
Full of sad thoughts, and many a sigh she sends
Before her, which the Air stores up in vain:
She sucks them back, to breath them out again.
The Airy Choire salute the welcom day,
And with new Carols sing their cares away;
Yet move not her; she minds not what she hears:
Their sweeter Accents grate her tender ears,
That rellish nought but sadness:  Joy and she
Were not so well acquainted; one might see
E'ne in her very looks, a stock of Sorrow
So much improv'd, 'twould prove Despair to morrow.
Down in a Valley 'twixt two rising Hills,
From whence the Dew in silver drops distills
T' enrich the lowly Plain, a River ran
Hight Cygnus; (as some think from Laeda's Swan
That there frequented) gently on it glides
And makes indentures in her crooked sides,
And with her silent murmurs, rocks asleep
Her watry Inmates:  'twas not very deep,
But clear as that Narcissus look in, when
His Self-love made him cease to live with men.
Close by the River, was a thick-leav'd Grove,
Where Swains of old sang stories of their Love;
But unfrequented now since Collin di'd,
Collin that King of Shepherds; and the pride
Of all Arcadia:  Here Thealma us'd
To feed her Milkie Droves, and as they brous'd,
Under the friendly shadow of a Beech
She sate her down; grief had tongue-ti'd her speech,
Her words were sighs and tears; dumb Eloquence:
Heard only by the sobs, and not the sense.
With folded Arms she sate, as if she meant
To hug those woes which in her Breast were pent:
Her looks were nail'd unto the Earth, that drank
Her tears with greediness, and seem'd to thank
Her for those briny showres, and in lieu
Returns her flowry sweetness for her Dew.
At length her sorrows waxt so big within her,
They strove for greater vent:  Oh!  had you seen her,
How fain she would have hid her grief, and stay'd
The swelling current of her woes, and made
Her grief, though with unwillingness, to set
Open the Flood-gates of her speech, and let
Out that which else had drown'd her; you'd have deem'd
Her rather Niobe than what she seem'd.
So like a weeping Rock washt with a Sea
Of briny Waters, she appear'd to be
So have I seen a head-long torrent run
Scouring along the Valley, till anon
It meeting with some dam that checks his course,
Swells high with rage, and doubling of its force
Lays siege to his opposer:  first he tries
To undermine it, still his Waters rise,
And with its weight steals through some narrow Pores,
And weeps it self a vent at those small doors;
But finding that too little for its weight,
It breaks through all.  Such was Thealma's state,
When tears would give her heart no ease, her grief
Broke into speech to give her some relief:
"O my Clearchus," said she, and with tears
Embalms his name:  "O!  if the Ghosts have ears,
Or Souls departed condescend so low,
To sympathize with Mortals in their woe;
Vouchsafe to lend a gentle Ear to me,
Whose life is worse than death, since not with thee.
What priviledg have they that are born great
More than the meanest Swain?  The proud Waves beat
With more impetuousness upon high Lands,
Than on the flat and less resisting Strands:
The lofty Cedar, and the knotty Oak,
Are subject more unto the thunder-stroak,
Than the low shrubs, that no such shocks endure,
Ev'n their contempt doth make them live secure.
Had I been born the Child of some poor Swain,
Whose thoughts aspire no higher than the Plain,
I had been happy then; t' have kept these Sheep,
Had been a Princely pleasure; quiet sleep
Had drown'd my cares, or sweetned them with Dreams:
Love and content had been my Musicks theams;
Or had Clearchus liv'd the life I lead,
I had been blest."  And then a tear she shed,
That was fore-runner to so great a shower,
It drown'd her speech:  such a commanding Power
That lov'd Name had, when beating of her breast,
In a sad silence she sigh'd out the rest.
By this time it was Noon, and Sol had got
Half to his Journeys ending:  'twas so hot,
The Sheep drew near the shade, and by their Dam
Lay chewing of their Cuds:  at the length came
Caretta with her Dinner, where she found
Her Love-sick Mistriss courting of the Ground,
Moist with the tears she shed; she lifts her up,
And pouring cut some Beverage in a Cup,
She gave it her to drink:  hardly she sips,
When a deep sigh agen lockt up her lips.
Caretta wooes and prays, (poor Country Girl,)
And every sigh she spent, cost her a Pearl.
"Pray come to Dinner," said she, "see here's Bread,
Here's Curds and Cream, and Cheescake, sweet now, feed;
Do you not love me?  once you said you did.
Do you not care for me?  if you had bid
Me do a thing, though I with Death had met
I would have done it:  Honey Mistress eat.
I would your grief were mine, so you were well;
What is't that troubles you?  would I could tell.
Dare you not trust me?  I was ne're no blab,
If I do tell't to any call me Drab.
But you are angry with me, chide me then,
Beat me, forgive, I'le ne're offend agen."
With that she kiss'd her, and with luke-warm tears,
Call'd back her Colour worn away with cares.
"O my poor Girl, said she, Sweet innocence,
What a controuling winning Eloquence
Hath loving honesty; wer't not to give
Thy love a thanks, Thealma would not live.
I cannot eat; nay, weep not, I am well,
Only I have no stomach:  thou canst tell
How long it is since good Menippus found
Me Shipwrackt in the Sea, e'ne well-nigh drown'd;
And happy had it been, if my stern fate
Had prov'd to me so cruel fortunate
To have unliv'd me then."  "Ah wish not so,"
Answer'd Caretta, "little do you know,
What end the fates have in preserving you.
I hope a good one, and to tell you true,
You do not well to question those blest powers,
That long agon have numbred out our hours.
And as some say, spin out our threads of life;
Some short, some longer, they command the knife
That cuts them off; and till that time be come
We seek in vain to shrowd us in a Tomb.
But I have done, and fear I've done amiss,
I ask forgiveness:  As I guess it is
Some three years since my Master sav'd your life,
'Twas much about the time he lost his Wife,
And that's three years come Autumn, my good Dame
Then lost her life, yet lives in her good name.
I cannot chuse but weep to think on her.
'Mongst Women kind, was not a lovinger.
She bred me up e'ne from my Infancy,
And lov'd me as her own, her Piety
And love to Vertue made me love it too;
But she is dead, and I have found in you
What I have lost in her:  my good old Master
Follow'd her soon, he could not long out-last her.
They lov'd so well together, Heav'n did lend
Him longer life, only to prove your friend;
To save your life, and he was therein blest,
That happy action crowned all the rest
Of his good deeds:  since Heav'n hath such a care
To preserve good ones, why should you despair?
The man you grieve for so, there's none can tell,
But if Heav'n be so pleas'd, may speed as well.
Some lucky hand Fate may for ought you know,
Send to save him from death as well as you.
And so I hope it hath, take comfort then,
You may, I trust, see happy days agen."
Thealma all this while with serious eye,
Ey'd the poor Wench, unwilling to reply;
For in her looks she read some true presage,
That gave her comfort, and somewhat asswage
The fury of her passions; with desire
Her ears suck'd in her speech, to quench her fire:
She could have heard her speak an Age, sweet soul,
So pretty loud she chud her, and condole
With her in her misfortunes.  "O, said she,
What wisdom dwells in plain simplicity!
Prithee (my dear Caretta) why do'st cry?
I am not angry, good Girl, dry thine eye,
Or I shall turn Child too:  my tide's not spent,
'Twill flow agen, if thou art discontent.
For I will eat if thou'lt be merry; say,
Wilt thou Caretta?  shall thy Mistress pray,
And thou deny her?"  Still Caretta wept,
Sorrow and gladness such a strugling kept
Within her for the Mastery; at the length
Joy overcame, and speech recover'd strength.
"Sweet Mistress," said she, "pardon your Hand-maid,
Unworthy of the Wages your love paid
Me; for my over-boldness think't not strange,
I was struck dumb at this so sweet a change.
I could not chuse but weep, if you'd have kill'd me,
With such an over-plus of joy it fill'd me:
I will be merry, if you can forgive;
Wanting your love, it is a Hell to live:
I was to blame; but I'le do so no more."
Scarce had she spoke the word; but a fell Boar
Rush'd from the Wood, enrag'd by a deep wound
Some Huntsman gave him:  up he ploughs the ground,
And whetting of his Tusks, about gan roam,
Champing his venoms moisture into foam.
Thealma and her Maid, half dead with fear,
Cry'd out for help; their cry soon reacht his ear,
And he came snuffling tow'rd them:  still they cry,
And fear gave wings unto them as they fly.
The Sheep ran bleating o're the pleasant Plain,
And Airy Eccho answers them again;
Redoubling of their cries to fetch in aid,
Whilst to the Wood the fearful Virgins made,
Where a new fear assay'd them:  'twas their hap
To meet the Boars pursuer in the gap
With his Sword drawn, and all besmear'd with gore,
Which made their case more desp'rate than before,
As they imagin'd; yet so well as fear
And doubt would let them, as the man drew near
They 'mplor'd his help:  he minds them not, but spying
The chafed Boar in a thick puddle lying,
Tow'rds him he makes; the Boar was soon aware,
And with an hideous noise sucks in the Air.
Upon his guard he stands, his Tusks new whets,
And up on end his grisly Bristles sets.
His wary foe, went traversing his ground,
Spying out where was best to give a wound.
And now Thealma's fears afresh began
To seize on her; her care's now for the man,
Lest the adventurous Youth should get some hurt,
Or die untimely:  up th' Boar flings the dirt,
Dy'd crimson with his Blood:  his foe at length
Watching his time and doubling of his strength,
Gave him a wound so deep, it let out life,
And set a bloody period to their strife:
But he bled too, a little gash he got
As he clos'd with him, which he minded not.
Only Thealma's fears made it appear
More dangerous than it was, longing to hear
Her life's preserver speak:  then down she falls,
And on the Gods in thanks for blessings calls,
To recompense his Valour.  He drew near,
And smiling lifts her up, when as a tear
Dropping into his wound, he gave a start,
Love in that Pearl stole down into his heart.
He was but young, scarce did the Hair begin
In shadows to write man upon his Chin:
Tall and well-set, his Hair a Chesnut brown,
His looks Majestick, 'twixt a smile and frown;
Yet smear'd with blood, and all bedew'd with sweat
One could not know him:  by this time the heat
Was well-nigh slak'd, and Sol's unwearied Team
Hies to refresh them in the briny Stream.
The stranger ey'd her earnestly, and she
As earnestly desir'd that she might see
His perfect Visage.  To the River side
She toles him on; still he Thealma ey'd,
But not a word he spake, which she desir'd:
The more he look'd, the more his heart was fir'd.
Down both together sate, and while he wash'd,
She drest his wound which the Boar lately gash'd.
And having wip'd, he kist her for her care,
When as a blush begot 'twixt joy and fear,
Made her seem what he took her for, his Love;
And this invention he had to prove,
Whether she was Clarinda, ay or no:
For so his Mistress hight.  "Did not you know
The Prince Anaxus?"  now Thealma knew
Not whether it were best speak false or true.
She knew he was Anaxus, and her Brother,
And from a Child she took him for no other;
Yet knew she not what danger might ensue,
If she disclos'd her self:  her telling true
Perhaps might work her ruine, and a lie
Might rend her from his heart, worse than to die.
But she, being unwilling to be known,
Answer'd his Quere with this Question:
"Did not you know Thealma?"  at the name
Amaz'd he started; "What then, lovely Dame?
Suppose I did?  would I could say I do;"
With that he wept, she fell a melting too:
And with a flood of tears she thanks her Brother.
No danger can a true affection smother.
He wipes her eyes, she weeps again afresh,
And sheds more tears t' enrich her thankfulness.
Sorrow had ty'd up both their tongues so fast,
Love found no vent, but through their eyes; at last,
Anaxus blushing at his childish tears,
Rous'd up himself, and the sad Virgin chears.
"And knew you that Thealma (sweet?)" said he;
"I did," reply'd Thealma, "I am she:
Look well upon me; sorrow's not so 'nkind
So to transform me, but your eye may find
A Sisters stamp upon me:"  "Lovely Maid,
How fain I would believe thee," the Youth said,
But she was long since drown'd in the proud Deep,
She and her bold Clearchus sweetly sleep,
In those soft Beds of darkness; and in Dreams
Embrace each other, spight of churlish streams,"
The very name Clearchus chill'd her Veins,
And like an unmov'd Statue she remains,
Pale as Death's self, till with a warm love kiss,
He thaw'd her icy coldness; such power is
In the sweet touch of love:  "Sweet soul," said he,
"Be comforted, the sorrow 'longs to me.
Why should the sad relation of a woe
You have no interest in, make you grieve so?"
"No interest," said she; "Yes, Anaxus, know
I am a greater sharer in't than you.
Have you forgot your Sister, I am she
The hapless poor Thealma, and to me
Belongs the sorrow; you but grieve in vain
If't be for her, since she is found again."
"Are you not then Clarinda?  said the Youth,
'Twere cruelty to mock me with untruth:
Your Speech is hers, and in your Looks I read
Her lovely Character:  sweet Virgin lead
Me from this Labyrinth of Doubts, what e're
You are, there is in you so much of her
That I both love and honor you."  "Fair Sir,"
Answered Thealma smiling, "why of her
Make you so strict enquiry, is your eye
So dazel'd with her beauty, that poor I
Must lose the name of Sister?  Say you love her,
Can your love make you cease to be a Brother?"
Whereat from forth her Bosom, next the Heart,
She pluckt a little Tablet, whereon Art
Had wrought her skill; and opening it, said she,
"Do you not know this Picture?  let that be
The witness of the truth which I have told."
With that Anaxus could no longer hold,
But falling on her neck, with joy he kist her,
Saying, "Thanks Heaven, liv'st thou then my dear Sister!
My lov'd Thealma!  were not thou cast away?
What happy hand hath sav'd thee?"  But the day
Was then far spent; 'twas time to think on home,
And her Caretta all amaz'd was come
And waited her commands:  the fiery Sun
Went blushing down at the short race he run;
The Marigold shuts up her golden Flowers,
And the sweet Song-birds hy'd unto their Bowers.
Night-swaying Morpheus clothes the East in black,
And Cynthia following her Brothers track
With new and brighter Rayes, her self adorns,
Lighting the starry Tapers at her Horns.
Homeward Anaxus and Thealma wend,
Where we must leave them for a while to end
The story of their Sorrows.  Night being come,
A time when all repair unto some home,
Save the poor Fisherman, that still abides
Out-watching care in tending on the Tides.
Rhotus was yet at Sea, and as his Ketch
Tackt to and fro, the scanty wind to snatch;
He spyed a Frigat, and as night gave leave
Through Cynthia's brightness he might well perceive
It was of Lemnos; and as it drew near,
From the becalmed Bark he well might hear
A Voice that hail'd him; asking whence he was?
He answer'd, from Arcadia.  In that place
Were many little Islands, call'd of old
Rupillas, from the many Rocks they hold,
A most frequented place for Fish; in vain
They trimm'd their flagging Sails to stem the Main.
But scarce a breath of Wind was stirring, when
The Master hail'd the Fisherman agen:
And letting fall an Anchor, beckon'd him
To come aboard.  Rhotus delay'd no time,
But makes unto the Ship; he soon got thither,
Using his Oars to out-do the Weather.
His Ketch he hooks unto the Frigats Stern,
And up the Ship he climbs; he might discern
At his first entry such a sad aspect
In all the Passengers, he might collect
Out of their looks, that some misfortune had
Lately befaln them, they were all so sad.
One 'mongst the rest there was, a grave old man,
(To whom they all stood bare) that thus began.
"Welcome, kind friend, nay sit, what Bark?  with Fish?
Canst thou afford for Lemnian Coin a Dish?"
"Yes Master, that I can, a good Dish too;
And as they like you, pay me; I will go
And fetch them straight;" He did so, and was paid
To his content:  the Fish were ready made,
And down they sate, the better sort and worse
Far'd all alike, it was their constant course;
Four to a Mess; and to augment their Fare,
Their second Courses, good Discourses were.
Amongst the various talk, the grave old Lord,
(For so he was) that hal'd the Ketch aboard,
Thus question'd Rhotus, "Honest Fisher, tell
What news affords Arcadia; thou knowest well:
Who rules that Free-born State, under what Laws,
Or Civil Government remain they?  what's the cause
Of their late falling out?"  Rhotus replies,
And as he spake the tears stood in his eyes:
"As well as grief will let me, worthy Sir,
Though I shall prove but a bad Chronicler
Of State Affairs, yet with your gentle leave
I'l tell you all I know; nor will I weave
Any untruths in my discourse, or raise,
By flattering mine own Countrymen, a praise
Their worth were merited; what I shall tell
Is nothing but the truth; then mark me well."

Then quiet silence shut up their discourse,
Scarce was a whisper heard, "Such a strange force
Hath novelty; it makes us swift to hear,
And to the speaker chains the greedy ear."
"Arcadia was of old (said he) a State
Subject to none but their own Laws and Fate:
Superior there was none, but what old age
And hoary hairs had rais'd; the wise and sage,
Whose gravity, when they were rich in years,
Begat a civil reverence more than fears
In the well manner'd people; at that day
All was in common, every man bare sway
O're his own Family; the jars that rose
Were soon appeas'd by such grave men as those:
This mine and thine, that we so cavil for,
Was then not heard of:  he that was most poor
Was rich in his content, and liv'd as free
As they whose flocks were greatest, nor did he
Envy his great abundance, nor the other
Disdain the low condition of his Brother,
But lent him from his store to mend his state,
And with his love he quits him, thanks his fate;
And taught by his example, seeks out such
As want his help, that he may do as much.
Their Laws e'en from their childhood, rich and poor,
Had written in their hearts by conning o're
The Legacies of good old men, whose memories
Out-live their Monuments:  the grave advice
They left behind in writing; this was that
That made Arcadia then so blest a State,
Their wholesome Laws had linkt them so in one,
They liv'd in peace and sweet communion.
Peace brought forth plenty, plenty bred content,
And that crown'd all their pains with merriment.
They had no foe, secure they liv'd in Tents,
All was their own they had, they paid no rents;
Their Sheep found cloathing, Earth provided food,
And Labour drest them as their wills thought good.
On unbought Delicates their Hunger fed,
And for their Drink the swelling Clusters bled:
The Vallies rang with their delicious strains,
And pleasure revel'd on those happy Plains,
Content and Labor gave them length of days,
And Peace serv'd in delight a thousand ways.
The golden Age before Deucalion's Flood
Was not more happy, nor the folk more good.
But time that eats the Children he begets,
And is less satisfied the more he eats,
Led on by Fate that terminates all things,
Ruin'd our State, by sending of us Kings:
Ambition (Sins first-born) the bane of State,
Stole into men, puffing them up with hate
And emulous desires; Love waxen cold,
And into Iron freeze the age of Gold.
The Laws contempt made cruelty step in,
And stead of curbing animated Sin,
The Rich man tramples on the Poor man's back,
Raising his Fortunes by his Brothers wrack.
The wronged Poor necessity 'gan teach,
To live by Rapine, stealing from the Rich.
The Temples, which Devotion had erected
In honor of the Gods, were now neglected.
No Altar-smoaks with sacrificed Beasts,
No Incense offer'd, no Love-strength'ning Feasts.
Mens greedy Avarice made Gods of Clay,
Their Gold and Silver:  Field to Field they lay,
And House to House; no matter how 'twas got,
The hand of Justice they regarded not.
Like a distemper'd Body Fever-shaken,
When with combustion every Limb is taken:
The Head wants ease, the heavy Eyes want sleep,
The beating Pulse no just proportion keep;
The Tongue talks idly, reason cannot rule it,
And the Heart fires the Air drawn in to cool it.
The Palat relisheth no meat, the Ears
But ill affected with the sweets it hears.
The Hands deny their aid to help him up,
And fall, as to his lips they lift the cup.
The Legs and Feet disjoynted, and useless,
Shrinking beneath the burden of the Flesh.
Such was Arcadia then, till Clitus reign'd,
The first and best of Kings that e're obtain'd
Th' Arcadian Scepter:  he piec'd up the State,
And made it somewhat like to fortunate.
He dying without Issue on the suddain,
Heav'n nipt their growing glory in the budding:
They choose Philemon, one of Clitus Race
To sway the Scepter; a brave Youth he was,
As Wise as Valiant, had he been as Chast,
Arcadia had been happy; but his Lust
Level'd Arcadia's Glory with the Dust.
There was a noble Shepherd Stremon height,
As good as great, whose Virtues had of right
Better deserv'd a Crown, had severe Fate
But pleas'd to smile so then upon our State.
He had one only Daughter young and fair,
Most richly qualified, and which was rare
In that same looser age divinely chast;
Though su'd to by no mean ones, yet at last
Her Father match'd her to a Shepherds Son,
Equal in Birth and Fortune; such a one
As merited the double Dower she brought,
Both of her Wealth and Virtue:  Heav'n had wrought
Their minds so both alike:  His noble Sire
Was Clitus named, to whose Thracian Lire
The Shepherds wont to tune their Pipes, and frame
Their curious Madrigals.  The Virgins name
Was Castabella, Clitus his brave Son,
Lysander hight.  The Nuptials being done,
To which the King came willingly a Guess;
Each one repair'd unto their business,
The charge of their own Flocks; the nobler sort
Accompanied the King unto the Court.
The meaner rout of Shepherds and their Swains,
With Hook and Scrip went jogging to the Plains,
Scarce had the Sun (that then at Cancer in'd)
Twice measured the Earth, when Love strook blind
The lustful King, whose amorous desires
Grew into lawless passions, and strange fires,
That none but Castabella would serve turn
To quench his Flames, though she had made them burn,
He had the choice of many fair ones too,
And well descended:  Kings need not to wooe;
The very name will bring a Nun to bed,
Ambition values not a Maiden-head:
But he likes none, none but the new-wed Wife
Must be the Umpire to decide the strife.
He casts about to get what he desir'd,
The more he plots, the more his heart is fir'd.
He knew her chast and virtuous, no weak bars
T' oppose the strongest Soldier in Loves Wars.
He knew her Father powerful, well-beloved,
Both for his Wisdom and good Deeds approved,
Among the giddy rout; as for his Son,
His own demerit spake him such a one
As durst revenge; nor could he want for friends
To second his attempts in noble ends.
Still the King burns, and still his working brain
Plots and displots, thinks and unthinks again.
At length his will resolv'd him in this sort,
Stremon and Clitus both were yet at Court,
Busi'd in State-Affairs; Lysander he
Was where a Husband lately wed should be,
At home a weaning of his Wives desires,
From her old Sire, to warm her at his fires.
As hapless hap would have it, it fell out
That at that time a rude uncivil rout
Of out-law'd Mutineers, had gather'd head
Upon the Frontiers, as their fury led;
Burning and spoiling all; the Council sit
Advising to suppress them; 'twas thought fit
Some strength should go against them, all this made
For the Kings purpose?  then a care was had
Who should conduct those Forces, some were nam'd,
The Choice one likes, is by another blam'd.
Philemon gives them line enough, for he
Had fore-projected who the man should be:
Yet held his peace, 'twas not his cue as yet
To speak his mind; at length they do intreat
That he would name the man:  the King did so,
Lysander was the man, he nam'd to go:
His judgment was agreed on; th' two old men,
Stremon and Clitus thought them honor'd, when
They heard him name Lysander, and with glad ears
Welcome his killing favour without fears.
He makes him Captain of his strongest Fort,
Thus Wolf-like he did welcome him to Court.
The days were set for his dispatch; mean space
He takes his leave of his Wives chast embrace:
It little boots her love to weep him back,
Nor stood it with his honor to be flack
In such a noble enterprize; he went
Arm'd with strong hopes, and the Kings blandishment.
No sooner was he gone, but the sly King
Rid of his chiefest fears, began to sing
A requiem to his thoughts:  th' Affairs of State
He left unto his Nobles to debate;
And minds his sport, the Hunting of the Hare,
The Fox and Wolf; this took up all his care.
Upon a day, as in a tedious chase
He lost his Train that did out-ride his Race;
Or rather of set purpose, slackt his coarse,
Intending to excuse it on his Horse,
He stole to Stremons lodg, the day was spent,
The fittest time to act his foul intent.
He knocks at Stremons Lodg, but no man hears,
All were abed, and sleep had charm'd their ears,
He knocks agen; with that he heard a groan,
Pow'rful enough t' have turn'd a cruel one
From his bad purpose?  'Who's within,' said he,
'If you be good folks, rise and pity me.'
But none reply'd:  another groan he hears,
And cruel fortune drew him by the ears
To what he wisht for.  Castabella yet
Was not in bed, sorrow deny'd to let
Her moist eyes sleep, for her increasing fears
Conspir'd to keep them open with her tears.
A little from the Lodg, on the descent
Of the small Hill it stood on, a way bent
Unto an Orchard thick with Trees beset;
Through which there ran a Crystal Rivelet,
Whose purling streams that wrangled with the stones,
In trembling accents, eccho'd back her groans,
Here in an arbor Castabella sate,
Full of sad thoughts, and most disconsolate.
The door was ope, and in Philemon steals,
But in a Bush a while himself conceals,
Till he the voice might more distinctly hear,
And better be resolv'd that she was there;
And so he did:  fortune his Bawd became,
And led him on to Lust.  The fearless Dame
After a deep fetcht sigh, thus faintly spake,
'O my Lysander, why would'st thou not take
Me along with thee;' then a flood of tears
Clos'd up her lips, When this had reacht his ears,
Like a fell Wolf he rusht upon his prey,
Stopping her cries with kisses:  weep she may
And lift her hands to Heaven, but in vain,
It was too late for help t' undo again
What he had done.  Her honor more to her
Was than her life, the cruel Murtherer
Had rob'd her of, and glories in his prize.
It is no news for lust to tyrannize.
He thankt his Fortune that did so prevent
His first design by short'ning his intent.
The Black deed done, the Ravisher hies thence,
Leaving his shame to murther innocence:
He had his wish, and that which gilt his Sin,
He knew suspicion could not suspect him.
Report, the blab-tongue of those tell-tale times,
That rather magnifies than lessens Crimes,
Slept when this act was done, such thoughts as these,
Sear'd up his Conscience with a carelessness.
Poor Castabella having now lost all,
That she thought worth the losing, would not call
For help to be a witness of her shame:
It was too late, nor did she know his name
That had undone her:  cruel thoughts arise,
And wanting other vent, break through her eyes.
Shame prompts her to despair, and let out life,
Revenge advis'd her to conceal her grief:
Fear checks Revenge, and Honor chides her Fear,
Within her Breast such mutinous thoughts there were
She could resolve on nothing:  day then breaks,
And Shame in blushes rose upon her cheeks.
With that she spies a Ring lie at her feet,
She took it up, and glad she was to see't.
By this she thought, if Fate so pitied her,
In time she might find out the Ravisher.
Revenge then whispers in her ear afresh,
Be bold, she lookt upon't, but could not guess
Whose it might be; yet she remember'd well
Sh'ad seen't before, but where she could not tell
With that she threw it from her in disdain,
Yet thought wrought so she took it up again;
And looking better on't, within the Ring,
She spied the Name and Motto of the King:
Whereat she starts:  'O ye blest powers!'  said she,
'Thanks for this happy strange discovery.'
She wrapt it up, and to the Lodg she went
To study some revenge; 'twas her intent
By some devise to 'tise Philemon thither,
And there to end his Life and hers together:
But that was crost, Lysander back returns,
Crown'd with a noble Victory and Horns
That he ne'r dreamt of:  to his Wife he goes,
And finds her weeping, no content she shows
At his safe coming back; but speaks in Tears.
He lov'd too well to harbour jealous Fears.
He wip'd her Eyes, and kist her to invite
A gentle welcome from her if he might:
But 'twould not be; He askt her why she wept,
And who had wrong'd her; still she silence kept,
And turns away:  then he began to doubt
All was not well; to find the matter out,
He tries all means; and first with mild intreats
He woes her to disclose it:  then with threats
He seeks to wring it from her.  Much ado
She told him the sad story of her woe.
The Ring confirm'd the truth of her report.
And he believ'd her straight:  He hies to Court
T' acquaint his Fathers with it.  All three vow
To be reveng'd, but first they study how.
Well, to be brief, they muster up their Friends,
And now Philemon 'gan to guess their ends,
And counterworks t' oppose them, gathers strength
And boldly goes to meet them; at the length
They Battel joyn:  Philemon put to flight,
And many thousands butcher'd in the Fight;
'Mongst whom old Stremon fell, whose noble spirit
Out-did his Age, and by his brave merit,
Did rein himself so glorious a name,
Arcadia to this day adores the same.
Lysander's wrongs spurr'd on his swift pursuit
After Philemon, when a sudden shout
Amongst his Soldiers caus'd him sound retreat,
Fearing some mutiny, all in a sweat
A Messenger ran tow'rd him, crying out,
'Return my Lord, the cunning Wolf's found out.
Philemon's slain, and you proclaimed King:'
With that agen the ecchoing Vallies ring.
The Foe it seems had wheel'd about a Meer,
In policy to set upon the Reer
Of bold Lysander's Troops; they fac'd about
And meet his Charge; when a brave Youth stept out
And singles forth the King:  they us'd no words,
The Cause was to be pleaded by their Swords,
Which anger whet:  no blow was giv'n in vain,
Now they retire, and then come on again;
Like two Wild Boars for mastery they strive,
And many wounds on either side they give:
Then grappling both together, both fell down,
Fainting for want of Blood; when with a frown,
As killing as his Sword, the brave Youth gave
His Foe a Wound that sent him to his Grave.
'Take that thou murtherer of my Honors name,'
Said the brave Youth, or rather the brave Dame;
For so it prov'd:  yet her Disguise was such,
The sharpest eye could not discern so much,
Until Lysander came, his piercing eye
Soon found who 'twas, he knew her presently;
'Twas Castabella his unhappy Wife,
Who losing Honor, would not keep her Life;
But thrusts her self into the midst of danger,
To seek out Death, and would have dy'd a Stranger
Unto Lysander's knowledg; had not he
Inform'd the world it could be none but she
That durst win Honor so.  The Noble Dame
Was not quite dead when as Lysander came,
Who stooping down to kiss her, with his Tears
T' embalm her for a Grave, her self she rears,
And meeting his Embrace; 'welcome,' said she,
'Welcome Lysander; since I have seen thee
I dare Deaths worst:'  then sinking down she dy'd,
The honor of her Sex:  all means were try'd
To call back Life, but Medicines came late,
Her Blood was spent, and she subscribes to Fate.
Lysander was about to sacrifice
Himself t' appease th' incensed Destinies;
And had not one stept in and held his hand,
He'ad done the deed, and so undone the Land.
Peace was proclaim'd to all that would submit
On the Foes side:  the Soldiers dig a pit
And tumble in Philemon, none there were,
Or Friend or Foe, that seem'd to shed a Tear
To deck his Hearse withal.  Thus his base Lust
Untimely laid his Glory in the Dust.
But Castabella she out-liv'd her shame,
And Shepherds Swains still Carol out her Fame,
She needs no Poets Pen to mount it high,
Lysander wept her out an Elegy.
Her Obsequies once o're, the King was Crown'd,
And Wars loud noise with Peals of Joy was drown'd:
Janus his Temple was shut up, and peace
Usher'd in Plenty by their Flocks increase;
But long it lasted not, Philemon's Friends
Soon gather'd head agen.  Lysander sends
Some Force against them, but with bad success,
The Foe prevails and seales their hardiness.
Lysander goes in person and is slain,
Philemon's Friends then make a King again;
A hot-spurr'd Youth height Hylas, such a one
As pride had fitted for Commotion,
About that time in a tempestuous night,
A Ship that by misfortune chanc'd to light
Upon the Rocks that are upon our Coast,
Was split to pieces, all the lading lost,
And all the Passengers, save a Young man
That Fortune rescu'd from the Ocean.
When day was broke, and I put out to Sea,
To fish out a poor living; by the Lea
As I was coasting, I might well espy
The Carkase of a Ship:  my Man and I
Made straight-way tow'rd it, and with Wind and Oar,
We quickly reacht it:  'twas not far from Shoar,
About some half a League; we view'd the Wrack,
But found no people in't; when looking back
Upon a shelving Rock, a man we 'spi'd,
As we thought, dead, and cast up by the Tide:
But by good hap he was not, yet well-nigh
Starv'd with the Cold, and the Seas cruelty.
We thaw'd him into life agen, but he
As if he relisht not our Charity,
Seem'd to be angry:  and had we not been,
The Youth had leapt into the Sea agen.
Perforce we brought him home, where with warm Potions,
We thaw'd his nummed Joynts into their motions.
And chiding his despair, with good advice
I warm'd his hopes that else had froze to Ice.
A braver Youth mine eye ne'er lookt upon,
Nor of a sweeter disposition."
Old Cleon could no longer silence keep,
But askt his name, and as he askt did weep.
"Was he your friend," quoth Rhotus, "he's alive,
Knew you as much as I, you would not grieve,
He calls himself Alexis, now our King,
And long may we enjoy his governing:
But he forgets who sav'd his life; great men
Seldom remember to look down agen.
There was a time when I'd have scorn'd to crave
A thanks from any, till a churlish wave
Washt off my friends, and thrust me from the Court,
To dwell with labor; but I thank them for't.
Content dwells not at Court; but I have done,
And if you please, my Lord, I will go on
Where I left off a while:  Hylas being King,
Puft up with Pride, by often Conquering.
He fell to riot, King and People both
Laid Arms aside to fall in love with Sloth.
The Downs were unfrequented, Shepherd Swains
Were very rarely seen to haunt the Plains.
The Plough lay still, the Earth Manuring needs,
And stead of Corn brought forth a Crop of Weeds.
No Courts of Justice kept, no law observ'd,
No hand to punish such as ill deserv'd.
Their Will was then their Law, who durst resist,
Hylas connives, and all did what they list.
Lysander's Friends were scatter'd here and there,
And liv'd obscurely circled in with fear.
Some Till'd the Ground, whilst others fed their Flocks,
Under the covert of some hanging Rocks.
Others fell'd Wood, and some dye weavy Yarn,
The Women Spun; thus all were forc'd to earn
Their Bread by sweaty Labor:  'mongst the many,
I and some others fisht to get a penny.
And had I but my Daughter which I lost
In the Foes hot pursuit; (for without boast,
She was a good one) I should think me blest,
Nor would I change my Calling with the best.
She was my only comfort; but she's dead,
Or, which is worse, I fear me ravished.
But I digress too much:  upon a day
When cares triumphs gave us leave to play,
We all assembled on a spacious Green,
To tell old Tales, and choose our Summers Queen.
Thither Alexis, my late Shipwrackt Guest,
At my intreaty came, and 'mongst the rest,
In their Disports made one; no exercise
Did come amiss to him; for all he tries,
And won the prize in all:  the graver sort
That minded more their Safety than their Sport,
'Gan to bethink them on their former State,
And on their Countries Fractions ruminate.
They had intelligence how matters went
In Hylas Court, whose peoples minds were bent
To nought but idleness; that fruitful Sin
That never bears a Child that's not a Twin.
They heard they had unmann'd themselves by ease,
And how security like a Disease
Spread o're their Dwellings, how their profus'd hand
Squander'd away the plenty of the Land:
How civil Discords sprang up ev'ry hour,
And quench'd themselves in Blood; how the Laws power
Was wholly slighted, Justice made a jeer,
And Sins unheard of practis'd without fear.
The State was sick at heart, and now or never
Was time to cure it:  all consult together,
How to recover what they lost of late,
Their Liberty and Means; long they debate
About the matter:  all resolve to fight,
And by the Law of Arms to plead their Right.
But now they want a Head, and whom to trust
They could not well resolve on, choose they must
One of necessity:  the Civil Wars
Had scarce left any that durst trade for Scars.
The flower of Youth was gone, save four or five
Were left to keep Arcadia's Fame alive;
Yet all too young to govern, all about
They view the Youth to single some one out.
By this time they had crown'd Alexis brow
With Wreathes of Bayes, and all the Youth allow
Of him a Victor; many Oades they sing
In praise of him; then to the Bower they bring
Their noble Champion, where, as they were wont,
They lead him to a little Turfie Mount
Erected for that purpose, where all might
Both hear and see the Victor with delight.
He had a man-like Look, and sparkling Eye,
A Front whereon sate such a Majesty,
As aw'd all his Beholders; his long Hair,
After the Grecian fashion, without care
Hung down loosely on his Shoulders, black as Jet,
And shining with his oyly honor'd Sweat,
His body streight, and well proportion'd, Tall,
Well Limm'd, well Set, long Arm'd; one hardly shall
Among a thousand find one in all points,
So well compact, and Sinew'd in his Joynts.
But that which crown'd the rest, he had a Tongue
Whose sweetness Toal'd unwillingness along,
And drew attention from the dullest ear,
His words so oyly smooth, and winning were."
Rhotus was going on when day appear'd,
And with its light the cloudy welkin clear'd.
They heard the Milk-maids hollow home their Kine,
And to their Troughs knock in their stragling Swine.
The Birds 'gan sing, the Calves and Lambkins bleat,
Wanting the milky Breakfast of a Teat,
With that he brake off his Discourse, intending
Some fitter time to give his Story ending.
Some houshold bus'ness call'd his care ashore,
And Cleon thought on what concern'd him more.
His men weigh Anchor, and with Rhotus sail
Toward the Land, they had so strong a gale;
They quickly reach'd the Port where Rhotus dwelt,
Who with old Cleon with fair words so dealt,
He won him to his Cell; where as his Guest
We'l leave him, earnest to hear out the rest.

By this time had Anaxus ta'en his leave
Of his kind Sister, that afresh can grieve
For his departure, she intreats in vain,
And spends her tears to wash him back again,
But 'twould not be; he leaves her to her woes,
And in the search of his Clarinda goes.
He scarce had travel'd two days journey thence,
When hying to a shade, for his defence
'Gainst the Suns scorching heat, who then began
T' approach the point of the Meridian:
Within a little silent Grove hard by
Upon a small ascent, he might espy
A stately Chappel, richly gilt without,
Beset with shady Sycamores about:
And ever and anon he might well hear
A sound of Musick steal in at his ear
As the wind gave it being:  so sweet an Air
Would strike a Syren mute and ravish her.
He sees no creature that might cause the same,
But he was sure that from the Grove it came.
And to the Grove he goes to satisfie
The curiosity of Ear and Eye.
Through the thick leav'd Boughs he makes a way,
Nor could the scratching Brambles make him stay;
But on he rushes, and climbs up the Hill,
Thorow a glade he saw, and heard his fill.
A hundred Virgins there he might espy
Prostrate before a Marble Deity:
Which by its Portraicture appear'd to be
The image of Diana:  on their knee
They tender'd their Devotions:  with sweet Airs,
Off'ring the Incense of their Praise and Prayers.
Their Garments all alike; beneath their Paps
Buckl'd together with a silver Claps,
And cross their snowy Silken Robes, they wore
An Azure Scarf, with Stars Embroider'd o're.
Their Hair in curious Tresses was knit up,
Crown'd with a Silver Crescent on the top.
A Silver Bow their left hand held, their right
For their defence, held a sharp headed flight
Drawn from their broidred Quiver, neatly ti'd
In Silken Cords, and fastned to their side.
Under their Vestments something short before
White Buskins lac'd with ribbanding they wore.
It was a catching sight for a young eye,
That Love had fir'd before, he might espy
One, whom the rest had sphere-like circled round,
Whose head was with a golden Chaplet crown'd.
He could not see her Face, only his ear
Was blest with the sweet words that came from her.
He was about removing; when a crew
Of lawless Thieves their horny Trumpets blew,
And from behind the Temple unawares
Rush'd in upon them, busie at their Prayers.
The Virgins to their weak resistance flie,
And made a show as if they meant to try
The mastery by opposing; but poor souls
They soon gave back, and ran away in shoals.
Yet some were taken, such as scorn of fear
Had left behind to fortifie the rear.
'Mongst whom their Queen was one, a braver Maid
Anaxus ne're beheld; she su'd and pray'd
For life, to those that had no pity left,
Unless in murthering those they had bereft
Of honor.  This incens'd Anaxus rage,
And in he rusht, unlookt for on that stage:
Then out his Sword he draws, and dealt such blows
That strook amazement in his numerous foes.
Twenty to one there were, too great an odds,
Had not his cause drawn succor from the gods.
The first he coapt with was their Captain, whom
His Sword sent headless to seek out a Tomb.
This cowarded the valour of the rest,
A second drops to make the Worms a Feast.
A third and fourth soon follow'd, six he slew,
And so dismaid the fearful residue,
That down the Hill they fled:  he after hies
And fell another Villain, as he flies.
To the thick Wood he chac'd them, 'twas in vain
To follow further; up the Hill again
Weary Anaxus climbs, in hope to find
The rescu'd Virgins he had left behind.
But all were gone; fear lent them wings, and they
Fled to their home affrighted any way.
They durst not stay to hazard the event
Of such a doubtful combat; yet they lent
Him many a Pray'r to bring on good success,
And thankt him for his noble hardiness,
That freed them from the danger they were in,
And met the shock himself; the Virgin-Queen
Full little dreamt, what Champion Love had brought
To rescue her bright honor; had she thought
It had Anaxus been, she would have shar'd
In the Adventure how so e're she far'd.
But fate was not so pleas'd, the Youth was sad
To see all gone:  the many Wounds he had
Griev'd him not so, as that he did not know
Her for whose sake he had adventur'd so.
Yet was he glad who e're she was, that he
Had come so luckily to set them free
From such a certain thraldom; night drew on
And his Wounds smarted:  no Chirurgeon
Was near at hand to bind them up, and pour
His balmy Medicines into his Sore:
And surely he had dy'd, but that his heart
Was yet too stout to yield for want of Art.
Looking about upon a small ascent
He spy'd an old Thatcht-House, all to be rent
And eaten out by time, and the foul weather,
Or rather seem'd a piece of ruine; thither
Anaxus faintly hies, and in the way
He meets with old Sylvanus, who they say
Had skill in Augury, and could foretel
Th' event of things:  he came then from his Cell
To gather a few Herbs and Roots; the Cates
He fed upon:  Anaxus him entreats
To bind his Wounds up, and with care t' apply
Unto his Sores some wholsome remedy.
A trim old man he was, though, Age had plow'd
Up many Wrinkles in his Brow, and bow'd
His Body somewhat tow'rd the Earth; his Hairs
Like the Snows woolly flakes made white with cares,
The Thorns that now and then pluckt off the Doun,
And wore away for Baldness to a Crown:
His broad kemb'd Beard hung down near to his Wast,
The only comely ornament that grac'd
His reverend old age, his feet were bare,
But for his leathern Sandals, which he ware
To keep them clean from galling, which compell'd
Him use a staff to help him to the Field.
He durst not trust his legs, they fail'd him then,
And he was almost grown a child agen:
Yet sound in judgment, not impair'd in mind,
For Age had rather the Souls parts refin'd,
Than any way infirm'd; his Wit no less
Than 'twas in Youth, his Memory as fresh;
He fail'd in nothing but his earthly part,
That tended to its center; yet his heart
Was still the same, and beat as lustily:
For, as it first took life, it would last die.
Upon the Youth with greedy eye he gaz'd,
And on his Staff himself a little rais'd;
When with a tear or two with pity prest,
From his dry Springs, he welcomes his request.
He needs not much intreaty to do good,
But having washt his Wounds and stancht the Blood,
He pours in oyly Balsam; fits his clothes,
And with soft Tents he stops their gaping mouths;
Then binds them up, and with a chearful look
Welcomes his thankful Patient, whom he took
Home with him to his Cell; whose poor out-side
Promis'd as mean a Lodging; Pomp and Pride
(Those Peacocks of the time) ne're roosted there,
Content and lowliness the inmates were.
It was not so contemptible within,
There was some show of beauty that had been
Made much of in old time; but now well-nigh
Worn out with envious time; a curious eye
Might see some reliques of a piece of Art,
That Psyche made, when Love first fir'd her heart.
It was the story of her thoughts, which she
Curiously wrought in lively imagry.
Among the rest, the thought of Jealousie
Time left untoucht, to grace Antiquity.
It was decifer'd by a timorous Dame,
Wrapt in a yellow Mantle lin'd with flame:
Her looks were pale, contracted with a frown,
Her eyes suspicious, wand'ring up and down;
Behind her, fear attended big with child,
Able to fright presumption, if she smil'd.
After her flew a sigh, between two springs
Of briny water; on her Dove-like wings
She bore a Letter seal'd with a Half-Moon,
And superscrib'd, "This from suspicion."
More than this, churlish time had left no thing
To shew the piece was Psyches broidering.
Hither Sylvanus brings him, and with Cates,
Such as our wants may buy at easie rates
He feasts his Guest; hunger and sweet content
Sucks from course Fare, a courtly nourishment.
When they had supt, they talk an hour or two,
And each the other questions how things go.
Sylvanus askt him how he came so hurt,
Anaxus tells him; and, this sad report
Spins out a long discourse:  the Youth enquir'd
What Maids they were he rescu'd, why so tir'd:
What Saint it was they worshipt, whence the Thieves,
And who that Virgin was, that he conceives
Was Queen and Sovereign Lady of the rest.
Sylvanus willing to content his Guest,
After a little pause, in a grave tone,
Thus courteously reply'd; quoth he, "My Son,
To tell a sad relation will, I fear,
Prove but unseasonable; a young ear
Will relish it but harshly; yet since you
Desire so much to hear it, I shall do
My best to answer your desires in all
That Truth hath warranted authentical.
You are not such a stranger to the State,
But you have heard of Hylas, who of late
Backt by some Fugitives, with a strong hand,
Wrested the Crown and Scepter of this Land
From the true Owner; this same Hylas when
He had what his Ambition aim'd at; then
When he grew wearied with conquering
His native Countrymen, and as a King
Sate himself down to tast what fate had drest
And serv'd up to him at a plenteous Feast.
When the lowd clangers of these civil broils
Were laid aside, and each man view'd the spoils
He had unjustly gotten, and in peace
Securely dwelt with idleness and ease;
Those Moths that fret, and eat into a State
Until they render it the scorn of fate.
Hylas puft up with pride, and self-conceit
Of his own Valour that had made him great,
In Riot and Lasciviousness he spends
His precious hours, and through the Kingdom sends
His pand'ring Parasites to seek out gain,
To quench th' unmaster'd fury of his flame.
His Agents were so cunning, many a Maid
Were to their honors loss subtilly betray'd
With gifts, and golden promises of that
Which womanish ambition level'd at,
Greatness and Honor; but they mist their aim,
Their hopeful harvest prov'd a crop of shame.
Amongst the many Beauties that his Spies
Markt out, to offer up a sacrifice
Unto his lust, the beauteous Florimel
Was one, whose vertue had no paralel:
She is old Memnon's Daughter, who of late
Was banisht from his Country, and by fate
Driven upon our Coast, and as I guess
He was of Lemnos fam'd for healthfulness,
Under this borrow'd name; for so it was
(Or else my Art doth fail me) he did pass
Unknown to eny, in a Shepherds Weed
He shrowds his Honor, now content to feed
A flock of Sheep, that had fed men before.
'It is no wonder to see goodness poor.'
It was his Daughter that the lustful King
Beast-like neigh'd after; still his flatt'rers sing
Oads of her praise to heighten his desires,
To swim to Pleasure through a Hell of Fires.
The tempting baits were laid, the Nets were spread,
And gilded o're to catch a Maiden-head;
But all in vain, Eugenia would not bite,
Nor sell her honor for a base delight.
He speaks in Letters a dumb eloquence
That takes the heart before it reach the sence.
But they were slighted, Letters that speak sin
Virtue sends back in scorn:  he writes agen,
And is again repulst, he comes himself
And desp'rately casts Anchor on the shelf
Of his own power and greatnes, toles her on
To come abord to her destruction:
But she was deaf unto his Syren Charms,
Made wisely wary by anothers harms.
Her strong repulses were like Oyl to fires,
Strength'ning th' increasing heat of his desires.
With mild intreats he woes her, and doth swear
How that his Loves intendments noble were;
And if she'd love him, he protests and vows
To make her Queen of all the State he owes.
But she was fix'd, and her resolves so strong,
She vow'd to meet with death, rather than wrong
Him unto whom her Maiden Faith was plight;
And he's no mean one, if my aim hits right.
When Hylas saw no cunning would prevail
To make her his, his angry looks waxt pale,
His heart call'd home the blood to feed revenge,
That there sate plotting to work out his ends.
At length it hatcht this mischief; Memnon's bid
To chide his Daughters coyness; so he did,
And she became the bolder, chid his checks,
And answer'd his injunctions with neglects.
Whereat the King enrag'd, laid hands upon her,
And was a dragging her to her dishonour.
When Memnon's Servants at their Mistris cry
Rusht in and rescu'd her, 'twas time to flie,
Hylas had else met with a just reward
For his foul lust:  he had a slender guard,
And durst not stand the hazard:  Memnon's men
Would have pursu'd, but they came off agen
At Memnon's call:  the woful Florimel,
(For so her name was) on the pavement fell,
Waiting the stroke of Death, life was about
To leave her had not Memnon found her out."
Anaxus all this while gave heedful ear
To what he spake, and lent him many a tear
To point out the full stops of his discourse;
But that he calls her Florimel, the force
Of his strong passions had persuaded him
It had been his Clarinda, (as in time
The story makes her;) "spare thy tears my Son"
Said old Sylvanus; so his tale went on.
"These are but sad beginnings of events
Spun out to sorrows height; the foul intents
Of Hylas being frustrate, and his fires
Wanting no fuel to increase desires;
He lays a snare to catch his Maiden prize
By murthering her old Father; and his spies
Were sent to find his haunt out:  Memnon, he
Of old experienc'd in Court policy,
Wisely forecasts th' event, and studies how
He might prevent his mischiefs e're they grow
Too ripe, and near at hand to be put by
By all the art and strength he had; to dye
For him that now was old, he nothing car'd,
Death at no time finds goodness unprepar'd.
But how he might secure his Florimel,
That thought most troubled him; he knew full well
She was the white was aimed at; were she sure,
He made but slight of what he might endure.
He was but yet a stranger to those friends
That his true worth had gain'd him, yet h' intends
To try some one of them; anon his fears
And jealous doubts call back those former cares.
He thinks on many ways for her defence;
But except Heav'n finds, none save innocence.
Memnon at last resolves next day to send her
To Vestas Cloyster, and there to commend her
Unto the Virgin Goddesses protection,
And to that purpose gave her such direction,
As fitted her to be a Vestal Nun,
And time seem'd tedious till the deed was done.
The fatal night before that wisht for day,
When Florimel was to be packt away,
Hylas besets the House with armed men,
Loth that his Lust should be deceiv'd agen.
At midnight they brake in, Memnon arose,
And e're he call'd his Servants, in he goes
Into his Daughters Chamber, and besmears
Her Breast and Hands with Blood; the rest her fears
Counsel her to; each hand took up a knife
T' oppose her foe, or let out her own life,
If need should be, to save her honor'd name
From Lusts black sullies, and ne're dying shame.
Memnon then calls his Servants, they arise,
And wanting light, they make their hands their eyes.
Like Sea-men in a Storm about they go,
At their wits end, not knowing what to do.
Down a Back Stairs they hurried to the Hall,
Where the most noise was; in they venter all,
And all were suddenly surpriz'd, in vain
Poor men they struggle to get loose again.
A very word was punish'd with a Wound,
Here they might see their aged Master bound,
And though too weak to make resistance found,
Wounded almost to death; his hoary hairs
Now near half worn away with age and cares,
Torn from his Head and Beard; he scorn'd to cry
Or beg for mercy from their cruelty.
He far'd the worse because he would not tell,
What was become of his fair Florimel.
She heard not this, though she set ope her ears
To listen to the whispers of her fears.
Sure had she heard how her good Father far'd,
Her very cries would have the doors unbar'd,
To let her out to plead his innocence;
But he had lockt her up in a close Room,
Free from suspicion, and 't had been her Tomb,
Had not the Fates prevented; search was made
In every corner, and great care was had,
Lest she should scape; but yet they mist the Lass:
They sought her every where but where she was.
Under the Bed there was a Trap-door made,
That open'd to a Room where Memnon laid
The Treasure and the Jewels which he brought
From Lemnos with him:  Round about they sought,
Under and o're the Bed; in Chests they pry,
And in each hole where scarce a Cat might lie;
But could not find the cunning contriv'd door
That open'd Bed and all:  then down they tore
The painted Hangings, and survey the Walls,
Yet found no by-way out:  Then Hylas calls
To know if they had found her; they reply,
She was not there:  Then with a wrathful eye,
Looking on Memnon; 'Doating fool' (said he)
'Wilt not thou tell me where she is:  if she
Be in this house conceal'd, I have a way
Shall find her out; if thou hast mind to pray
Be speedy, thou hast not an hour to live.
I'le teach thee what it is for to deceive
Him that would honor thee:'  'Would shame me rather,'
Answered old Memnon, and undo a Father,
By shaming of his Daughter; Lustful King,
Call you this honor?  death's not such a thing,
As can fright Memnon; he and I have met
Up to the knees in Blood, and honor'd Sweat,
Where his Sythe mow'd down Legions, he and I
Are well acquainted; 'tis no news to die.'
'Do'st thou so brave it (Hylas said) I'le try
What temper you are made on by and by.
Set fire upon the House, since you love death
I'le teach you a new way to let out breath.'
This word strook Memnon mute, not that he fear'd
Death in what shape soever he appear'd;
But that his Daughter, whom as yet his care
Had kept from ravishing, should with him share
In such a bitter potion; this was that
Which more than Death afflicted him, that Fate
Should now exact a double Sacrifice,
And prove more cruel than his Enemies.
This strook him to the heart, the House was fir'd,
And his sad busie thoughts were welnigh tir'd
With studying what to do:  when as a Post
That had out-rid report, brought news the Coast
Shin'd full of fired Beacons, how his Lords
Instead of Sleep betook themselves to Swords.
How that the Foe was near, and meant e're day
To make his Court and Treasury their prey.
How that the Soldiers were at their wits end
For th' absence of their King, and did intend,
Unless he did prevent them suddenly,
To choose a new one.  Hylas fearfully
Did entertain this news, calls back his men,
And through by-paths he steals to Court agen,
Leaving the House on fire; the Thatch was wet,
And burnt but slowly:  Memnon's Servants get
Their Master loose, and with their Teeth unties
The bloody Cords that binds the Sacrifice,
That Fate was pleas'd to spare; they quench the fire,
Whilst he runs to his Daughter; both admire
Their little hop'd for wond'rous preservation,
Praising their Gods with fervent adoration.
Next day he shifts his Florimel away
Unto the Vestal Cloyster, there to stay
Till he heard how things went, and what success
Befel the Wars; his men themselves address,
At his command to wait upon the Wars,
To purchase freedom, or by Death, or Scars.
Memnon himself keeps home, attended on
But by a stubbed Boy; his Daughter gone,
His fears 'gan lessen:  Hylas was o'rethrown,
And bold Alexis Conquest gain'd a Crown:
And worthily he wears it; with his Reign
Desired Peace stept on the Stage again.
The Laws were executed, Justice done,
And civil Order staid Confusion.
Sloth and her sister Ease were banished,
And all must labor now to get their bread:
Yet Peace is not so setled, but we find
Some work for Swords; the Foe hath left behind
Some gleanings of his greater strength, that still
Commit great out-rages, that rob and kill
All that they meet with, ravishing chast Maids
Both of their Life and Honor; some such Lads
Were they that set upon that Virgin crew,
That were redeem'd so worthily by you.
A hundred Virgins monthly do frequent
Diana's Temple, where with pure intent
They tender their Devotions:  one is chose
By lot to be their Queen, to whom each owes
Her best respect, and for this month I guess
Their Queen was Florimel, now Votaress."
Sylvanus here brake off; 'twas late, and sleep
Like Lead hung on their eye lids; heav'n them keep.
We'l leave them to their rest a while, and tell
What to Thealma in this space befel.

