ELEG. 1.
Now that beloved Henries glasse is runne,
And the last duties to his body showne,
Now that his sad-sad Obsequies be done,
And publicke sorowes well-nigh over-blowne:
Now give me leave to leave all Joyes at one,
For a dull Melancholy loneliness;
To pine my selfe with a selfe-pining mone,
And fat my greefe with solitarines.
For if it be a comfort in distresse,
(As some thinke) to have sharers in our woes,
Then I desire to be comfortles.
My Soule in publicke greefe no pleasure knowes.
Yea, I could wish, and for that wish would die,
That there were none had cause to greeve, but I.

ELEG. 2.
For were there none had cause to greeve but I,
Twoul'd from my Sorrowes, many sorrowes take;
And I should moane but for ones misery,
Where now for thousands, my poore heart doth ake.
Bide from me Joy then, that still from me bid'st,
Be present Care, that ever present art.
Hide from me Comfort, that at all times hid'st,
For I will greeve, with a true-greeving heart.
Ile glut my selfe with Sorrow for the nonce,
What though my Muse against it once did say
Oh beare with my unbridled Passion once,
I hope it shall not yet from vertue stray,
Since greefe for such a losse, at such a season;
May be past measure, but not out of Reason.

ELEG. 3.
Why should I for th' infernall Furies hallo?
Call upon darkenes, and the lonely night?
Or summon up Minerva, or Apollo?
To help me dolefull Elegies endite?
Here needs no mention of the feares of Stix,
Of black Cocitus, or such fained stuffe:
Those may paint out their greefes, with forc't tricks,
That have not in them reall cause enough;
I neede it not, yet for no private Crosse,
Droopes my sad soule, nor doe I mourne for fashion.
For why?  A generall a publike losse.
Kindles within me, a right wofull Passion.
Then (oh alas) what neede hath he to borrow,
That's pinch't already with a feeling sorrowe.

ELEG. 4.
First, for thy losse, poore world-divided Ile,
My eyes pay greefes drink-offering of teares:
And I set by all other thoughts a while,
To feede my minde the better on thy cares.
I saw, how happie thou wert but of late
In thy sweet Henries hopes, yea I saw too,
How thou didst glory in thy blessed state:
Which thou indeed hadst cause enough to doe.
But, when I saw thee place all thy delight
Upon his worth; and then, when thou didst place it,
(And thy Joy almost mounted to her height)
His haples end so suddainely deface it;
Me thought, I felt it goe so neere thy heart,
Mine ake't too, with a sympathizing smart.

ELEG. 5.
For thee, great James, my spouts of sorrow runne,
For thee my Muse a heavy song doth sing;
That hast lost more, in loosing of thy Sonne,
Then the Greeke Monarckes conquered Persian King.
Needes must the paines, that doe disturb the head,
Disease the body throughout every part;
And therefore I might have bene lopt as dead,
If I had had no feeling of this smart;
But oh I greeve:  and yet I greeve the lesse,
Thy Kingly Guift so well prevail'd to make him
Fit for a Crowne of endles happines;
And that it was Jehovah's hand did take him.
Who was himself a booke for Kings to pore on:
And might have been thy Basilikon Doron.

ELEG. 6.
For our faire Queene, my greefe is no lesse moving,
There's none could ere more justly boast of childe:
For he was kinde, most dutifull, and loving,
Most full of manly courage, and yet milde.
Me thinkes I see what heavy discontent,
Beclowdes her brow, and over-shades her eyne:
Yea I doe feele her loving heart lament,
An earnest thought conveyes the greefe to mine.
I see shee notes the sadnes of the Court,
Thinks how that here, or there, she saw him last:
Remembers his sweet speech, his graceful sport,
And such like things to make her Passions last:
But what meane I?  Let greefe my speeches smother,
No tongue can tell the Sorrowes of the Mother.

ELEG. 7.
Nor thine sweet Charles, nor thine Elizabeth,
Though one of you have gaind a Princedome by't:
The greefe he hath to have it by the death
Of his sole brother, makes his heart deny't.
Yet let not sorrowes black obscuring cloud
Quite cover and eclipse all comforts light:
Though one faire starre above the Spheare doth shrowd
Let not the earth be left in darknes quite.
Thou Charles art now our Hope, God grant it be
More certaine then our last; we trust it will:
Yet we shall have a loving feare of thee;
The burned childe we see, ev'r dreads fire still.
But God loves his; And Rome although thou threat'st
He's like enough for to be Charles the great'st.

ELEG. 8.
Then droope not Charles to make our greefes the more;
God that to scourge us, tooke away thy brother,
To comfort us againe, kept thee in store:
And now I thinke on't, Fate could doe no other.
Thy Father both a Sonne, and Phoenix is,
Prince Henry was a Sunne and Phoenix too,
And if his Orbe had bene as high as his,
His beames had shone as bright's his fathers doe.
Nature saw this and tooke him quite away,
And now dost thou to be a Phoenix trye;
Well, so thou maist (no doubt) another day,
But then thy father (Charles) or thou must die.
For 'twas decreed when first the world begunne,
Earth should have but one Phoenix, heaven one Sun.

ELEG. 9.
But shall I not bemoane the sad Elector?
Yes, Frederick, I needs must greeve for thee:
Thou wooest with woe now, but our best protector
Gives joyfull ends where hard beginings be.
Had we no showes to welcome thee to Court,
No solemne sight, but a sad Funerall?
Is all our former Masking and our sport,
Transform'd to sighes?  are all things tragicall.
Had'st thou bene here at Sommer; or at Spring,
Thou should'st not then have seene us drooping thus.
But now tis Autumne, that spoiles ev'ry thing:
Vulgarly term'd the Fall oth' leafe, with us.
And not amisse; for well may't be the Fall,
That brings downe blossoms, Fruit, leaves, tree, and all.

ELEG. 10.
Then, Stranger Prince, if thou neglected seeme,
And hast not entertainement to thy state:
Our loves yee doe not therefore miss-esteeme;
But lay the fault upon unhappy Fate.
Thou found'st us glad of thy arrivall here,
And saw'st him, whom we lov'd, (poore wretched Elves)
Say:  didst thou ere of one more worthy heare?
No, no, and therefore now we hate our selves.
We being then of such a gem bereft,
Beare with our passions, and since one is gone,
And thou must have the halfe of what is left;
Oh thinke on us for good, when you are gone,
And as thou now do'st beare one halfe of's name;
Help beare our greefe, and share thou all his fame.

ELEG. 11.
See, see, faire Princesse, I but nam'd thee yet,
Meaning thy woes within my brest to smother:
But on my thoughts they doe so lively beat,
As if I heard thee sighing, Oh my Brother:
Me thinkes I heare thee calling on his name,
With plaining on his too ungentle Fate:
And sure, the Sisters were well worthy blame,
To shew such spight to one that none did hate.
I know thou sometime musest on his face,
(Faire as a womans; but more manly faire)
Sometime upon his shape, his speech, and pase,
A thousand wayes thy greefes themselves repaire.
And oh!  no marvaile, since your sure-pure loves
Were neerer dearer then the Turtle Doves.

ELEG. 12.
How often, oh how often did he vowe
To grace thy joyfull lookt-for Nuptialls:
But oh how wofull, oh how wofull now
Will thy be made through thy sad Funerals!
All pleasing parlees that betwixt you two,
Publike, or private, have exchanged beene,
All thou hast heard him promise for to doe,
Or by him in his life performed seene,
Calls on remembrance:  the sweet name of Sister
So oft pronounc'd by him seemes to take place,
Of Queene and Empresse:  now my thoughts doe whisper,
Those titles one day shall thy vertues grace.
If I speake true, for his sweet sake that's dead,
Seeke how to raise dejected Brittaines head.

ELEG. 13.
Seeke how to raise dejected Brittaines head,
So shee shall study how to raise up thine:
And now leave off thy teares in vaine to shed,
For why?  to spare them I have powr'd out mine.
Pitty thy selfe, and us, and mournefull Rhine,
That hides his faire banke under flouds of griefe,
Thy Prince, thy Duke, thy brave Count Palatine:
Tis time his sorrowes should have some reliefe.
He's come to be another brother to thee,
And helpe thy father to another sonne:
He vowes thee all the service love can doe thee;
And though acquaintance hath with griefe begunne,
Tis but to make you have the better tast
Of the true blisse you shall enjoy at last.

ELEG. 14.
Thy brother's well and would not change estates,
With any Prince that raignes beneath the Skie:
No, not with all the worlds great Potentates,
His Plumes have borne him to eternitie.
He raignes o're Saturne now, that raign'd o're him;
He feares no Planets dangerous aspect:
But doth above their constellations clime,
And earthly joyes, and sorrowes both neglect.
We saw he had his Spring amongst us here,
He saw his Summer, but he skipt it over:
And Autumne now hath tane away our deare.
The reason's this, which we may plaine discover,
He shall escape, (for so Jehovah wils)
The stormy Winter of ensuing ils.

ELEG. 15.
I greeve to see the woefull face oth' Court,
And for each grieved member of the land;
I greive for those that make these greifes their sport,
And cannot their owne evill understand.
I also greive, to see how vices swarme,
And Vertue as despis'd, grow out of date:
How they receive most hurt, that doe least harme,
And how poore honest Truth incurreth hate.
But more, much more, I grieve that we doe misse
The joy we lately had; and that he's gone,
Whose living presence might have helpt all this:
His everlasting Absence makes me mone.
Yea most I grieve, that Brittans hope is fled,
And that her darling, brave Prince Henrie's dead.

ELEG. 16.
Prince Henri's dead!  What voice is that we heare?
Am I awake, or dreame I, tell me whether?
If this be true; if this be true, my deare,
Why doe I stay behind thee, to doe either?
Alas my Fate compels me, I must bide
To share the mischiefes of this present age,
I am ordain'd to live, till I have tride
The very worst, and utmost of their rage.
But then why mourne I not to open view,
In sable robes according to the Rites?
Why is my hat, without a branche of yeugh?
Alas my mind, no complement delights,
Because my griefe that Ceremonie lothes,
Had rather be sad in heart, then seeme in clothes.

ELEG. 17.
Thrise happy had I bene, if I had kept
Within the circuit of some little village,
In ignorance of Courts and Princes slept,
Manuring of an honest halfe-plough tillage:
Or else I would I were young agen,
As when Eliza our last Phoenix dide:
My childish yeares had not conceiv'd as then,
What t'was to loose a Prince so dignifide.
But now I know:  and what now doth't availe?
Alas, whilst others merry, feele no paine,
I melancholy, sit alone and waile:
Thus sweetest profit, yeelds the bitterest gaine.
Why?  'cause it came by the forbidden tree:
And good things prove not, that till gotten be.

ELG. 18.
When as the first sad rumour fil'd my eare
Of Henries sicknes:  an amazing terror
Struck through my body, with a shuddring feare,
Which I expounded but my frailties error.
For though a quicke-misdoubting of the worst,
Seem'd to fore-tell my soule, what would ensue:
God will forbid, thought I, that such a curst
Or ill-presaging thought should fall out true:
It cannot sinke into imagination,
That He, whose future glories we may see
To be at least all Europe's expectation,
Should in the prime of age dispoiled be;
For if a hope so likely nought availe us,
It is no wonder if all other faile us.

ELEG. 19.
Againe, when one had forc't unto my eare,
My Prince was dead:  although he much protested,
I could not with beleefe his sad newes heare:
But would have sworne, and sworne againe, he jested.
At such a word, me thought, the towne should sinke,
The earth should downe unto the Center cleave,
Swallowing all in her hell-gaping chincke,
And not so much at Sea or Iland leave,
Some Comet, or some monstrous blazing Starre,
Should have appear'd, or some strange prodigie,
Death might have shownt' us through't had been a farre
That he intended some such tyranny.
But God, (it seemeth) did thereof dislike,
To shew that he will on a sudden strike.

ELEG. 20.
Thus unbeleeving; I did oft enquire
Of one, of two, of three, and so of many:
And still I heard what I did least desire,
Yet grounded Hope, would give no faith to any.
Then at the last my heart began to feare,
But as I credence to my feares was giving
A voyce of comfort I began to heare:
Which to my fruitles Joy said Henrie's living,
At that same word, my Hope that was forsaking
My heart, and yeilding wholy to despaire;
Revived streight, and better courage taking,
Her crazed parts, so strongly did repaire,
I thought she would have held it out, but vaine:
For oh, ere long, she lost it quite againe.

ELEG. 21.
But now my tongue can never make relation,
What I sustain'd in my last soughten field;
My minde assailed with a three-fold passion,
Hope, Feare, Dispaire, could unto neither yeeld.
Feare wil'd me, for to vew the skies blacke colour,
Hope said; Upon his hopefull vertues looke:
Dispaire shew'd me an universall dolour,
Yet fruitless Doubt, my hearts possession tooke.
But when I saw the Hearse, then I beleev'd,
And taking breath, thus fell to vowelling,
Beside, to show I had not causeless greev'd,
I saw a note of his embowelling.
There 'twas subscrib'd, they found he had no gall,
And like enough, for he was sweetnes all.

ELEG. 22.
Oh cruell, and insatiable Death!
Would none suffice, would none suffice but he?
What pleasure was it more to stop his breath,
Then for to choke, or kill, or poyson me?
My life for his, with thrice three millions more,
We would have given as a ransome to thee;
But since thou in his losse hast made us pore,
Foule Tyrant, it shall never honor do thee:
For thou hast showne thy selfe a spightfull fiend,
Yea Death thou didst envie his happie state,
And therefore thoughtst to bring it to an end;
But see, see whereto God hath turnd thy hate.
Thou mean'st to marre the blisse he had before:
And by thy spight:  hast made it ten times more.

ELEG. 23.
Tis true I know, Death with an equall spurne,
The lofty turret, and lowe Cottage beats:
And takes impartiall each one in his turne,
Yea though he bribes, prayes, promises or threats.
Neither Man, bruite, plant, sex, age nor degree
Prevailes against his dead-sure striking hand:
For then, ere we would thus dispoiled be,
All these conjoyn'd his fury should withstand.
But oh!  unseene he strikes at unaware,
Disguised like a murthering Jesuite:
Friends cannot stop him that in presence are;
And which is worse, when he hath done his spight,
He carryes them, so farre away from hence,
None lives, that's able for to fetch him thence.

ELEG. 24.
Nor would we now, because we do beleeve
His God, to whome indeede he did belong;
To crowne him, where he hath no cause to greeve:
Tooke him from death, that fought to do him wrong.
But were this deare beloved Prince of ours
Living in any corner of this All,
Though kept by Romes, and Mahomets cheefe powers;
They would not long detaine him there in thrall:
We would rake Europe rather, plaine the East,
Dispeople the whole Earth before the doome:
Stampe halfe to pouder, and fier all the rest;
But for to help up proud aspiring Rome,
Spight of her powder, with our counter-mines,
Blowe her above the Alpes, or Appenines.

ELEG. 25.
But what?  shall we goe now dispute with God,
And in our heart upbraid him that's so just?
Let's pray him rather, to withdrawe his rod,
Least in his wrath he bruise us unto dust.
Why should we lay his death to Fate, or times?
I know there hath no second causes bin,
But our high-flying-crying-dying crimes,
Nay, I can name the chiefest murth'ring sinne:
And this it was, how ere it hath bin hid.
Trust not (saith David) trust not in a Prince:
Yet we hope't lesse, in God Ile sweare we did,
In jelousie he therefore tooke him hence.
Thus we abuse good things, and through our blindnes
Have hurt our selves, and kild our Prince with kindnes.

ELEG. 26.
Let all the world come now and share our lot,
Come Europe, Asia, Affrica, come all:
Mourne English, Irish, Brittish, and mourne Scot,
For his, (no I mistake it) for our fall.
The proppe of Vertue and mankinds delight,
Hath fled the earth and quite forsaken us:
We had but of his excellence a sight,
To make our longings like to Tantalus.
What seeke you in a Man that he enjoy'd not?
Wer't either gift of body or of spirit;
Nay, which is more, what had he, he employ'd not
To help his Country, and her love to merrit?
But see what high perferment Vertues bring,
He's of a servant now become a King.

ELEG. 27.
But soft, I meane not here to blaze his praise,
It is a worke too mighty, and requires
Many a Pen, and many yeares of daies:
My humble quill, to no such taske aspires,
Onely I mourne, with deep-deep-sighing grones,
Yet could I wish the other might be done;
Though all the Muses were imploy'd at once,
And write as long as Helicon would runne,
But oh, I feare the Spring's already drie,
Or else why flagges my lazy Muse so lowe?
Why vent I such dull-sprighted Poesy,
Surely 'tis sunke; I lye, it is not so:
For how its likely that should want supplies,
When all we feed it with our weeping eyes.

ELEG. 28.
May not I liken London now to Troy,
As she was that same day she lost her Hector?
When proud Achilles spoil'd her of her joy
(And triumph't on her losses) being victor?
May not I liken Henrie to that Greeke,
That having a whole world unto his share,
Entended other worlds to goe and seeke,
Oh no; I may not, they unworthy are.
Say, whereto London?  Whereto then shall I
Compare that sweet departed Prince, and thee?
Of him the King bewail'd by Jeremie,
And sad Megiddon shall thy patterne be.
Megiddon said I?  rather no Gehinnon,
For thy greefe's more then that of Hadadrinon.

ELEG. 29.
You that beheld it, when the mornfull traine
Past by the wall of his forsaken Parke,
Did not the very grove seeme to complaine,
With a still murmure, and to looke more darke?
Did not those pleasant wals (oh pleasing then
Whilst there he (healthfull) used to resort)
Looke like the shades of Death, nere some foule den?
And that place there, where once he kept his Court,
Did it not at his parting seeme to sinke?
And all forsake it like a cave of sprights?
Did not the earth beneath his Chariot shrinke,
As grieved for the losse of our delights?
Yea his dumb Steed, that erst for none would tary,
Pac'd slow, as if he scarce himselfe could cary.

ELEG. 30.
But oh!  when it approach't the 'mpaled Court,
Where Mars himselfe envid'e his future glory,
And whither he in armes did oft resort,
My heart conceived a right tragick story.
Whither great Prince, oh whither doest thou goe!
(Me thought the very place thus seem'd to say)
Why in black roabes art thou attended so?
Doe not, (oh doe not) make such hast away.
But art thou Captive, and in tryumph too?
Oh me!  and worse too, live-les, breath-lesse, dead.
How could the monster death this mischiefe do?
Surely the coward took thee in thy bed,
For whil'st that thou wert arm'd within my list,
He dar'd not meet thee like a Martialist.

ELEG. 31.
Alas, who now shall grace my turnaments:
Or honor me with deeds of chivalrie?
What shall become of all my merriments,
My ceremonies, showes of Heraldry
And other Rites?  Who, who shall now adorne
Thy Sisters Nuptials with so sweet a presence?
Wilt thou forsake us, leave us quite forlorne,
And of all joy at once make a defeasance?
Was this the time pickt out by destinie?
Farewell deare Prince then, since thou wilt be gone,
In spight of death goe live eternally,
Exempt from sorrow, whilst we mortalls mone:
But this ill happe shall teach me for to feare
When wee are joyfull'st, there's most sorrow nere.

ELEG. 32.
Then, as he past along you might espie
How the griev'd vulgar shed many a teare,
Cast after, an unwilling parting eye,
As loth to loose the sight they held so deare;
When they had lost the figure of thy face
They then beheld his robes; his Chariot then;
Which being hid, their looke aim'd at the place
Still longing to behold him once agen,
But when he was quite past, and they could find
No object to employ their sight upon,
Sorrow became more busie with the mind,
And drew an Armie of sad passions on;
Which made them so particularly mone,
Each amongst thousands seem'd as if alone.

ELEG. 33.
And well might wee of weakest substance melt,
With tender passion for his timeles end,
Since (as it seem'd) the purer bodies felt
Some griefe, for this their sweet departed friend;
The Sunne wrapt up in clouds of mournfull black,
Frown'd as displeas'd, with such a hainous deed,
And would have staid, or turn'd his horses back,
If Nature had not forc't him on with speed:
Yea and the Heavens wept a pearly dewe,
Like very teares, not so as if it rain'd.
His Grand-sires tombes as if the stones did rue
Our wofull losses; were with moisture stain'd:
Yea (either 'twas my easie mind's beliefe)
Or all things were disposed unto griefe.

ELEG. 34.
Blacke was White-hall.  The windowes that did shine
And double-glazed were with beauties bright,
Which Sun-like erst did dimme the gazers eyne,
As if that from within them came the light.
Those to my thinking seemed nothing faire,
And were obscur'd with woe, as they had beene
Hung with all sacke or sable-cloth of haire,
Griefe was without, and so't appear'd within,
Great was the multitude, yet quiet tho
As if they were attentive unto sorrow:
The very winds did then forbeare to blowe,
The time of night her stilnes seem'd to borrow,
Yea all the troupe past flow, as loth to rend
The earth that should embrace their Lord and friend.

ELEG. 35.
Me thought er'e while I sawe Prince Henries armes,
Advanc't above the Capitoll of Rome,
And his keine blade, in spight of steele or charmes,
Give many mighty enemies their doome,
Yea I had many Hopes, but now I see
They are ordain'd to be another taske:
Yet of the Stewards line a branche shall be
T' advance beyond the Alpes his plumed caske,
Then I perhaps, that now tune dole-full layes:
Amongst their zealous triumphs may presume
For to endite some petty Captaines praise,
Meane while I will some other worke assume,
Or rather since my hope-full patron's dead,
Goe to some desert and there hide my head.

ELEG. 36.
Had he bene but my Prince and wanted all
Those ornaments of Vertue that so grac'd him,
My love and life had both bene at his call,
For that his Fortune had above us plac'd him:
But his rare hopefulnes, his flying Fame,
His knowledge, and his honest pollicie,
His courage much admir'd, his very name,
His publicke love, and private curtesie:
Joyn'd with religious firmnes, might have mov'd
Pale Envy to have prais'd him, and sure he,
Had he bene of meane birth; had bin belov'd:
For trust me, his sweet parts so ravish't me,
That (if I erre, yet pardon me therefore)
I lov'd him as my Prince:  as Henry more.

ELEG. 37.
Me thought his Royall person did fore tell,
A Kingly statelines, from all pride cleare:
His looke magestick, seemed to compell
All men to love him rather then to feare.
And yet though he were ev'ry good mans joy,
And the alonely comfort of his owne,
His very name with terror did annoy,
His forraigne foes so farre as he was knowne.
Hell droupt for feare, the turkie Mone look't pale,
Spaine trembled, and the most temptestious sea
(Where Behemoth the Babylonish Whale,
Keepes all his bloudy and imperious plea)
Was swolne with rage, for feare he'd stop the tide,
Of her ore-daring and insulting pride.

ELEG. 38.
For amongst divers Vertues rare to finde,
Though many I observ'd, I markt none more
Then in Religion his firme constant minde;
Which I notcht deeply on Remembrance score.
And that made Romists for his fortunes sory:
When therefore they shall heare of this ill hap,
Those Mints of mischiefes will extreamely glory,
And it may be 'twas by a Popish trap.
Yet boast not Babel; thou insultst in vaine,
Thou hast not yet obtain'd the victory;
We have a Prince still, and our King doth raigne,
So shall his seede, and their posterity.
For know; God that that loves his, and their good tenders
Wil never leave his faith, without defenders.

ELEG. 39.
Amidst our sacred sports, that very season,
Whilst our Country and beloved James:
Preserved from that hell-bred powder-treason;
We rung and sung with showtes, and joyfull flames:
Me thought upon the suddaine I espide
Romes damned fiends, an antique dance beginne:
The Furies led it that our blisse envi'de,
And at our rites the hell-hounds seem'd to grinne
How now thought I!  more plots!  And with that thought
Prince Henry; dead, I plainely hear'd one cry:
O Lord (quoth I) now they have that they sought,
Yet let not our gladst-day, our sadst-day die.
God seem'd to heare, for he to ease our sorrow,
Reviv'd that day, to die againe the morrow.

ELEG. 40.
But Brittaine, Brittaine, tell me, O tell me this,
What was the reason thy chiefe curse befell
So just upon the time of thy chiefe blisse?
Dost thou not know it?  heare me then, Ile tell:
Thou wert not halfe-halfe thankefull for his care
And mercy that so well preserved thee,
His owne he never did so often spare:
Yea he the Lord, himselfe hath served thee,
Yet Laodicea thou, nor hot nor cold
Secure, and careles dost not yet repent,
Thou wilt be ever over-daring bold:
Till thou hast vengeance, upon vengeance hent,
But (oh) see how Hipocrisie doth raigne:
I villaine, that am worst, doe first complaine.

ELEG. 41.
A foule consuming Pestilence did waste,
And lately spoil'd thee England to thy terror;
But now alas, a greater plague thou hast,
Because in time thou could'st not see thy error.
Hard Frosts thy fields and Gardens have deflowred,
Hot Summers hath thy fruits Consumption bin,
Fier many places of thee hath devowred,
And all fore-warnings to repent thy sinne.
Yet still thou didst defer't and careles sleepe,
Which heav'n perceaving with black clouds did frown,
And into flouds for very anger weepe,
Yet the salt Sea, a part of thee did drowne.
Shee drown'd a part (but oh that part was small)
No teares more salt, have over-whelm'd us all.

ELEG. 42.
Say why was Henryes Herse so glorious?
And his sad Funerall so full of state?
Why went he to his Tombe as one victorious:
Seeming as blith, as when he liv'd of late?
What needed all that Cerimonious show?
And that dead-living Image which they bare?
Could not Remembrance make us smart enough,
Unles we did a fresh renew it there?
What was it, but some antique curious rite,
Only to feede the vaine beholders eyes
To make men in their sorrowes more delight,
Or may we rather on it moralize?
Yes, yes, it shew'd that though he wanted breath,
Yet he should ride in tryumph over death.

ELEG. 43.
How welcome now would our deare Henry be,
After these greefes were he now more then straid;
And thus deem'd dead, but fye what Fantasie,
Feedes my vaine thought on?  Fate hath that denai'd.
But since he's gone, we now can call to minde,
His latest words, and where to they did tend:
Ye now our blunt capacities can finde,
They plainely did prognosticate his end.
Beside, we finde out Prophesies of old,
And would perswade our selves twas knowne of yore
By skilfull Wyzards:  and by them fore-told,
But then why found we not so much before?
Oh marke this ever, we ne're know our state,
Nor see our losse befor it be too late.

ELEG. 44.
From passion thus, to passion could I runne,
Till I had over-runne a world of words,
My Muse might she be heard would nere have done,
The subject, matter infinit affords.
But ther's a meane in all; with too much grieving
We must not of Gods providence despaire
Like cursed Pagans, or men unbeleeving,
Tis true, the Hopes that we have lost were faire:
But we beheld him with an outward eye,
And though he in our sight most worthy seem'd,
Yet God saw more, whose secrets none can spye,
And finds another whome we lesse esteem'd:
So Jesses eldest Sonnes had most renowne,
But little David did obtaine the Crowne.

ELEG. 45.
Let us our trust alone in Gods repose,
Since Princes faile, and maugre Turke or Pope,
He will provide one that shall quaile our foes,
We sawe he did it, when we had lesse hope:
Let's place our Joyes in him and weepe for sinne,
Yea let's in him amend it, and foresee,
(If losse of earthly Hope hath grievous beene)
How great the losse of heavens true Joyes may be:
This if we doe God will stretch forth his hand,
To stop these plagues he did intend to bring,
And powre such blessings on this mournfull Land,
We shall for IO, Haleluiah sing,
And our deare JAMES, if we here in persever,
Shall have a Sonne to grace his throane for ever.
