See; these Trees so ill did hide us,
That the Shepheard hath espied us:
And (as jealous of his cunning)
All in hast away is running.
To entreat him backe againe,
Would be labour spent in vaine.
You may therefore, now, betake ye
To the Musicke I can make ye;
Who, doe purpose my Invention,
Shall pursue my first Intention.

For, in Her (whose worth I tell)
Many excellences dwell,
Yet unmention'd:  whose perfections
Worthy are of best affections.

That, which is so rare to find,
Both in Man, and Womankind:
That; whose absence Love defaceth,
And both Sexes more disgraceth,
Than the spite of furrowed Age,
Sicknesses, or Sorrowes rage:
That's the Jewel so divine,
Which doth on her Forehead shine.
And, therewith endow'd is Shee,
In an excellent degree.
CONSTANCY (I meane) the purest
Of all Beauties; and the surest.
For, whoe're doth that professe,
Hath an endlesse Loveliness.e

All Afflictions, Labours, Crosses,
All our Dangers, Wounds, and losses,
Games of Pleasure, we can make,
For that matchlesse Womans sake;
In whose brest that Virtue bideth:
And we joy what e're betideth.

Most dejected Hearts it gladdeth:
Twenty thousand glories addeth
Unto Beauties brightest Ray:
And, preserves it from decay.
Tis the salt that's made to season
Beauty for the use of Reason;
Tis the Vernish, and the Oyling,
Keeps her Colours fresh, from spoiling.
Tis an Excellence, whereby
Age, though joyn'd with Povertie,
Hath more deare Affection wonne,
Then fresh Youth, and Wealth have done.
Tis a Lovelinesse, endearing
Beauties, scarce worth note, appearing;
Whil'st a fairer fickle Dame,
Nothing gaines, but scorne and shame.

Further; tis a Beautie, such
As I cannot praise too much,
Nor frame Measures, to express.
No; nor any man, unless
He, who (more then all men crost)
Finds it in that Woman lost;
On whose Faith, he would have pawnd
Life, and all he could commaund.
Such a Man may by that Misse
Make us know how deare it is;
When, o're-charg'd with Griefe, he shall
Sigh, and breake his heart withall.

This is that Perfection, which
In her favour makes me rich.
All whose Beauties (named before)
Else, would but torment me more:
And, in having this, I find,
(Whate e're haps) a quiet mind:
Yea, tis that, which I doe prize,
Farre above her Lips, her Eyes:
Or, that generall Beauty, whence
Shines each several Excellence.

For, alas!  what gaind hath he,
Who may clip the fairest Shee
(That the name of Woman beares)
If, unhappily, he feares,
Any others Worth, may win,
What he thought his owne had bin?
Him Base-minded deeme I should,
Who (although he were in Hold,
Wrapt in chains) would not disdaine,
Love with her to entertaine
That both daughter to a Peere,
And most rich and lovely were;
When a brainleses Gull shall dare,
In her, favours with him share:
Or the Action of a Player,
Robb him of a Hope so faire.

This, I dread not:  For, I know,
Strained gestures, painted show,
Shamelesse boastings, borrowed Jests,
Female Looks, gay-plumed Crests,
Vowes nor protestations vaine,
(Wherewith fooles are made so vaine)
Move her can; save to contemne,
Or perhaps, to laugh at them.

Neither can I doubt, or feare,
Time shall either change or weare
This her Virtue:  Or, impaire
That which makes her Soule, so faire.
In which Trust, great Comforts are,
Which, the feare of losse, would marr.

Nor hath this my rare Hope stood,
So much, in her being good;
(With her love to blessed Things)
As in her acknowledgings
From a higher Power to have them;
And her love, to Him, that gave them.
For, although to have a mind
Naturally to Good inclin'd,
(And to love it) would assure
Reason that it might endure.
Yet (since Man was first unjust)
Ther's no warrant for such Trust.
Virtues, that most wonder winn,
Would converted be to Sin;
If their flourishings began,
From no better Root than Man.
Our best Virtues, when they are
Of themselves, we may compare,
To the beautie of a Flower,
That is blasted in an howre:
And, which growing to be fuller,
Turnes into some loathed Colour.
But, those being freely given,
And confirm'd in us from Heaven;
Have a promise on them past:
And for evermore shall last;
Diamond-like, their lustre clearing,
More and more, by use and wearing.

But, if this rare Worth I praise,
Should by Fates permission, raise
Passions in some gentle Brest,
That distemper may his rest;
(And be Author of such Treason,
As might nigh endanger Reason)
Or, inforce his tongue to crave,
What another man must have,
Marke, in such a Streight as this,
How discreet her dealing is.
Shee, is nothing of their humours,
Who, their honor build on Rumours,
And, had rather privat sporting,
Than allow of open courting:
Nor of theirs, that would seeme holy,
By divulging others folly.
Farther is she from their guise,
That delight to Tyrannize,
Or make boastings, in espying,
Others for their favours dying.

Shee, a spirit doth possesse
So repleat with Noblenesse,
That, if shee be there beloved,
Where she ought not to be moved,
Equally, to love againe:
Shee, doth so well entertaine
That affection; as ther's none
Can suppose it, ill bestowne.

From deluding, she is free:
From disdaine, as farre is shee:
And so feelingly beares part,
Of what paines anothers heart;
That no curse, of scorned dutie,
Shall draw vengeance on her Beautie.
Rather, with so tender feare,
Of her Honour, and their care,
Shee is toucht; that neither shall,
Wrong unto her selfe, befall;
(By the favour she doth show)
Nor will shee neglect them so;
As may just occasion give,
Any way to make them grieve.

Hope, she will not let them see,
Least they should presuming be;
And aspire to that, which none,
Ever must enjoy but One.
From Dispaire, shee keepes them too;
Fearing, they might hap to doe,
Either through Loves indiscretions,
(Or much over stirred passions)
What, might with their hurt and shame,
Into question call her name.
And a scandal on her bring,
Who is just in everything.
Shee hath mark't how others runne;
And by them hath learn'd to shunne,
Both their fault, who (overwise)
Erre, by being too precise:
And their folly that o're kind,
Are to all complaints inclind.
For, her wit hath found the way,
How a while to hold them play;
And, that inconvenience shunne,
Whereinto, both seeme to runne;
By allowing them a scope,
Just bewixt Dispaire, and Hope.
Where confin'd, and reaching neither,
They doe take a part in either:
Till, long living in suspence,
(Tyr'd by her indifference)
Time, at last, their Passion weares;
Passions wearing, Reason cleares;
Reason gives their Judgement light;
Judgement bringeth all to right.
So, their Hope appearing vaine,
They become themselves againe.
And, with high applauses, fit,
For such Virtue, with such Wit;
They, that service, onely profer,
Shee, may take, and they may offer.

Yet, this course she never proves;
Save with those, whose virtuous Loves,
Use the noblest meanes of gaining,
Favours, worthy the obtaining.
And, if such should chance to erre,
(Either 'gainst themselves, or her)
In some over-sights, when they,
Are through Passion led astray.
Shee, so well mans frailtie knowes,
With the Darts that Beautie throwes;
As she will not adding terror,
Breake the heart for one poore error.
Rather (if still good they be)
Twentie remedies hath she,
Gently to apply, where Sense
Hath invaded Reasons Fence;
And, without or wound, or scarre,
Turnes to Peace a lawlesse Warre.

But, to those whose baser fires,
Breathe out smoke of such desires,
As may dimm with impure steames,
Any part of Beauties beames.
Shee, will daigne no milder way,
Those foule burnings to allay;
Save, with such extreme neglect,
As shall worke her wisht effect.

And, to use so sharpe a cure,
Shees not oft constrained, sure,
Cause, upon her forhead, still
Goodnesse sits, so fear'd of Ill:
That the scorne, and high disdaines,
Wherewithall she entertaines,
Those loth'd glaunces; giveth ending,
To such flamings in the tynding:
That their cooled Hopes, needs must
Freeze Desires, in heat of Lust.

Tis a power that never lies,
In the fair'st immodest eyes.
Wantons; tis not your sweet eyeings,
Forced Passions, fained Dyings,
Gestures temptings, Teares beguilings,
Dancings, Singings, Kissings, Smilings;
Nor those painted sweets with which
You unwary men bewitch:
(All united, nor asunder)
That can compasse such a wonder.
Or, to winn you love prevails,
Where her moving Virtues, failes.

Beauties, tis not at all those Features,
Placed in the fairest Creatures,
Though their best they should discover,
That can tempt from Her, a Lover.
Tis not, those soft-snowie Brests,
Where Love rockt in pleasure, rests;
(And by their continuall motions,
Draweth hearts to vaine devotions)
Nor the Nectar that we sip
From a hony-dropping Lip:
Nor those Eyes whence Beauties Launces,
Wound the heart, with wanton glances:
Nor, those sought Delights that lye
In Loves hidden Treasurie:
That can liking gaine, where she,
Will the best beloved be.

For, should those who thinke they may,
Draw my love from her away;
Bring forth all their female Graces,
Wrapt me, in their close embraces;
Practise all the Art they may;
Weepe, or sing, or kisse, or pray,
And with sighs and lookes come woe me,
When they soonest may undo me:
One poore thought of Her, would arme me
So, as Circe could not harme me.
Since beside those Excellences,
Wherewith, others please the Senses;
She, whom I have prised so,
Yeilds delights, for Reason to.
Who could Dote on thing so common,
As mere outward-handsome Woman?
Those halfe-beauties, onely winne
Fooles, to let affection in.
Vulger wits, from Reason shaken,
Are with such impostures taken:
And, with all their Art in love,
Wantons, can but Wantons move.
But, when unto those, are Joind,
Those things which adorne the Mind:
None, their excellences see,
But they straight enthralled be.
Fooles, and wisemen, worst and best,
Subject are to Loves Arrest.
For, when Virtue wooes a Lover,
Shee's an unresisted moover:
That will have no kind of Nay,
And in Love brookes no delay.

She, can make the Sensuall Wights,
To restraine their Appetites.
And, (her beautie when they see)
Spite of Vice, in Love to be:
Yea (although themselves be bad)
Praise the good they never had.
She, hath to her service brought,
Those, that Her, have set at nought;
And can fayre enough appeare,
To enflame the most seveare.

She, hath oft allured out,
The religiously devout,
From their Cloysters, and their Vowes;
To embrace what She allowes:
And, to such contentments come,
As blind zeale had bard them from.
While (her laws mis-understood)
They did ill for love of Good.

Where I finde true worth to be,
Sweetest are their lipps to me:
And embraces tempt me to,
More then outward Beauties doe.
That my firme beleefe is this:
If ever I doe amisse;
Seeming-Good, the bayt will lay,
That to ill shall me betray:
Since, where shewes of Goodnesse are,
I am oft emboldned there,
Freedomes to permit, and use;
Which, I else where doe refuse:
For because I thinke they meane,
To allow no deed uncleane.

Yet, where two, love Virtue shall,
Both at once, they seldome fall.
For, when one hath thoughts of ill,
Tother helpes exile them still.

My faire Virtues powre is this.
And, that powre the Beauty is,
Which doth make Her, here exprest,
Equally both Faire, and Blest.

This, was that contenting Grace,
Which affection made me place,
With so deare respect, that never
Can it faile; but, last for ever.

This; a Servant made me sworne,
Who before time, held in scorne,
To yeeld Vassilage, or Duty,
Though, unto the Queene of Beauty.
Yet, that I her Servant am,
It shall more be to my fame;
Then to owne these Woods and Downes:
Or be Lord of fiftie Townes.
And my Mistresse to be deem'd,
Shall more honor be esteem'd;
Then those Titles to acquire,
Which most women, most desire.
Yea, when you a woman shall,
Countesse, or a Duchesse call;
That respect it shall not move,
Neither gaine her halfe such love,
As to say, Loe, this is she,
That supposed is to be,
Mistresse to PHIL'ARETE.
And, that lovelie Nymph, which he,
In a Pastorall Poem fam'd,
And FAIRE-VIRTUE, there hath named.
Yea, some Ladies (tenne to one)
If not many (now unknowne)
Will be very well apaid,
When by chance, She heares it said
Shee, that Faire-one is; whom I,
Here have prais'd, concealedly.

And, though now this Ages pride,
May so brave a Hope deride.
Yet, when all their Glories passe
As the thing that never was;
(And on Monuments appeare,
That, they ere had breathing here)
Who envy it:  Shee shall thrive
In her Fame.  And honor'd live,
Whilst Great-Brittains Shepheards, sing
English, in their Sonnetting.
And, whoe'er in future dayes,
Shall bestow the utmost praise,
On his Love; that any Man,
Attribute to Creature can.
Twill be this; that he hath dared,
His, and Mine to have compared.

Oh!  what starres did shine on me,
When her Eyes I first did see?
And how good was their aspect,
When we first did both affect?
For, I never since to changing
Was enclined, or thought of ranging.

Me, so oft my Fancy drew,
Here and there, that I nere knew
Where to place Desire, before,
So, that range it might no more.
But, as he that passeth by,
Where in all her jollitie,
Floras riches in a row,
Doth in seemely order grow:
And a thousand Flowers stand,
Bending as to kisse his hand;
Out of which delightfull store,
One he may take; and no more.
Long he pausing, doubteth whether,
Of those faire ones he should gather:

First, the Primrose Courts his eyes;
Then, the Cowslip he espies;
Next, the Pansy seemes to wooe him;
Then, Carnations bow unto him:
Which, whil'st that enamour'd Swaine
From the stalke intends to straine,
(As halfe fearing to be seene)
Prettily her leaves betweene
Peepes the Violet:  pale, to see,
That her Virtues sleighted be.
Which, so much his liking winnes,
That, to ceaze her, he beginnes.
Yet, before he stoopt so low,
He, his wanton eye did throw
On a Stemm that grew more high,
And the Rose did there espie:
Who, beside her pretious sent
(To procure his eyes content)
Did display her goodly Brest;
Where he found at full exprest,
All the Good, that Nature showers
On a thousand other Flowers.
Wherewith he, affected, takes it;
His beloved Flowre he makes it.
And, without desire of more,
Walkes through all, he saw before.

So, I wandring, but erewhile,
Through the Garden of this Ile,
Saw rich Beauties (I confesse)
And in number, numberlesse.
Yea, so differing lovely to,
That I had a world to do
Ere I could set up my rest,
Where to chuse; and chuse the best.

One I saw, whose Haire excelled,
On anothers Brow there dwelled,
Such a Majestie:  it seemed,
Shee, was best to be esteemed.

This, had with her Speeches won me,
That, with Silence, had undone me.
On her Lips, the Graces hung;
Tother, charm'd me with her tongue.
In her Eyes, a third did beare,
That, which did anew insnare.
Then a fourth did fairer show;
Yet, wherein I did not know.
Onely this perceived I,
Somewhat pleas'd my Fantasie.
Now, the Wealth I most esteemed;
Honour then, I better deemed.
Next, the love of Beautie ceazd me,
And, then Virtue better pleas'd me.
Juno's love, I nought esteem'd,
Whilst a Venus fairer seem'd.
Nay, both could not Me suffice;
Whilst a Pallas was more wise.
Though I found enough in One,
To content, if still alone.

Amaryllis, I did wooe;
And I courted Phyllis to.
Daphne, for her love I chose;
Cloris for that Damaske Rose,
In her Cheeke, I held as deare;
Yea, a thousand likt welneere.
And, in love with altogether,
Feared the enjoying either;
Cause, to be of one possest,
Bar'd the hope of all the rest.

Thus I fondly far'd, till Fate,
Which (I must confesse in that
Did a greater favour to me,
Then the world can malice doe me)
Shew'd to me that matchlesse Flowre,
Subject for this Song of our.
Whose perfection, having eied,
Reason instantly espied;
That, Desire (which rang'd abroad)
There, would find a Period.
And no marvell, if it might:
For, it there hath all delight;
And in her hath Nature placed,
What each severall faire one graced.

Nor am I, alone delighted,
With those Graces all united;
Which the Senses eie, doth finde,
Scattered, throughout Womankind.
But, my Reason finds perfections,
To enflame my Soules affections.
Yea, such virtues she possesseth,
As with firmest pleasures blesseth:
And keepes sound, that Beauties state,
Which would else grow ruinate.

In this Flowre, are sweets such store;
I shall never, wish for more.
Nor be tempted out to stray,
For the fairest Budds in May.

Let who list (for me) advance,
The admired Flowres of France,
Let who will; praise, and behold,
The reserved Marigold.
Let the sweet breath't Violet, now,
Unto whom she pleaseth, bow.
And the fairest Lillie, spread
Where she will, her golden head.
I have such a Flowre to weare,
That for those I doe not care.

Never shall my Fancie range,
Nor once thinke againe of change:
Never will I; (never more)
Greeve, or sigh, as heretofore:
Nor within the Lodgings lie,
Of Dispaire, or Jealousie.

Let the young and happy Swaines,
Playing on the Britain Plaines
Court unblamd, their Sheepherdesses,
And with their gold-curled Tresses;
Toy uncensur'd, untill I
Grutch at their prosperitie.

Let all Times; both Present, Past,
And the Age, that shall be last,
Vaunt the Beauties they bring forth.
I have found in One, such worth:
That (content) I neither care,
What the best before me were:
Nor desire to live, and see,
Who shall Faire hereafter be.
For, I know the hand of Nature
Will not make a fairer Creature.

Which, because succeeding Dayes,
Shall confesse; and adde their praise,
In approving, what my tongue,
Ere they had their being, sung.
Once againe come lend an eare,
And, a Rapture you shall heare,
(Though I tast no Thespian Spring)
Will amaze you, whilst I sing.
I doe feele new Straines inspiring,
And to such brave heights aspiring,
That my Muse will touch a Key,
Higher, then you heard to day.

I have Beauties to unfold,
That deserve a Penn of Gold.
Sweets, that never dream'd of were.
Things unknowne:  and such, as Eare
Never heard a Measure sound;
Since the Sunne first ran his Round.

When Apelles limb'd to life,
Loathed Vulcans lovely wife.
With such Beauties, he did trim,
Each sweet Feature, and each Limb;
And, so curiously did place,
Every well-becomming Grace.
That twas said, e're he could draw
Such a Peece, he naked saw
Many women in their Prime,
And the fairest of that Time.
From all which, he parts did take,
Which aright disposed, make
Perfect Beautie.  So, when you
Know, what I have yet to show:
It will seeme to passe so farre,
Those things which expressed are.
That, you will suppose I've beene
Privileged; where I have seene,
All the Good, that's spread in parts,
Through a thousand womens hearts.
(With their fair'st conditions lye,
Bare, without hypocrisie)
And, that I, have tooke from thence,
Each dispersed Excellence.
To expresse Her, who hath gained
More, then ever One obtained.

And yet soft, (I feare) in vaine,
I have boasted such a Straine.
Apprehensions ever are
Greater, then expression farre.
And, my stryving to disclose
What I know; hath made me lose
My Inventions better part:
And, my Hopes exceed my Art.

Speake I can; yet thinke I more,
Words compar'd with Thoughts are poore.
And I find, had I begun,
Such a Straine; it would be done,
When we number all the sands,
Washt ore perjur'd Goodwins lands.
For, of things, I should indite;
Which, I know, are infinite.
I doe yeeld, my Thoughts did clime,
Far above the powre of Ryme:
And no wonder, it is so;
Since there is no Art can show;
Red in Roses, white in Snow;
Nor expresse how they doe grow.
Yea, since Bird, Beast, Stone, and Tree,
(That inferior Creatures be)
Beauties have, which we confesse,
Lines unable to expresse:
They more hardly can enroule,
Those, that do adorne a Soule.
But, suppose my Measures could,
Reach the height, I thought they would,
Now, relate, I would not tho;
What did swell within me so.
For, if I should all descrie,
You would know asmuch as I:
And those Clownes, the Muses hate,
Would of things above them prate.
Or, with their profaning eies,
Come to view those Misteries,
Whereof, (since they disesteem'd them)
Heaven, hath unworthy deemd them.

And beside; it seemes to me,
That your eares nigh tired be.
I perceive; the fire that charmeth,
And inspireth me; scarce warmeth
Your chill harts.  Nay sure, were I
Melted into Poesie,
I should not a Measure hit,
(Though Apollo prompted it)
Which should able be to leave,
That in you, which I conceave.

You are cold; and here I may
Wast my vitall heat away,
E're you will be moov'd so much,
As to feele one perfect touch
Of those Sweets, which yet conceal'd
Swell my brest, to be reveal'd.

Now my Words, I therefore cease:
That, my mounting Thoughts, in peace,
May alone, those pleasures share,
Whereof, Lines unworthy are.
And so, you an end do see
Of my Song; though long it be.

No sooner had the Shepheard Philaret,
To this Description his last period set:
But, instantly, descending from a Wood,
(Which, on a rising ground, adjoyning stood)
A troope of Satyrs to the view of all,
Came dauncing of a new-devised Brall.
The Measures they did pase, by Him, were taught them;
Who, to so rare a gentlenesse had brought them,
That he, had learnd their rudenesse an observing,
Of such respect unto the well-deserving,
As they became to no men else a terrour,
But such, as did persist in wilfull errour:
And they, the Ladies made no whit affeard,
Though since that time they some great men have scar'd.

Their Dance, the Whipping of Abuse they nam'd;
And, though the Shepherd since that, hath bin blam'd,
Yet, now tis daily seene in every towne;
And ther's no Country-Dance thats better knowne:
Nor, that hath gain'd a greater commendation,
Mongst those that love an honest recreation.

This Scene presented; from a Grove was heard,
A set of Viols; and there was prepar'd
A Country Banquet, which this Shepheard made,
To entertaine the Ladies, in the shade.
And tis suppos'd, his Song prolonged was
Of purpose, that it might be brought to passe.
So well it was performd, that each one deem'd,
The Banquet might the Citie have beseem'd.
Yet, better was their Welcome, than their Fare:
Which they perceived, and the merrier were.

One Beautie, tho, there sate amongst the rest;
That lookt as sad, as if her heart opprest
With Love had bene.  Whom Philaret beholding,
Sit so demurely, and her Armes enfolding.

Lady (quoth he) am I, or this poore cheere,
The cause that you so melancholy are?
For, if the Object of your thoughts be higher,
It fits nor me to know them; nor enquire.
But if from me it commeth, that offends,
I seeke the Cause, that I may make amends.

Kind Swaine (said she) it is nor so, nor so.
No fault in you, nor in your Cheere I know.
Nor doe I thinke there is a Thought in me;
That can too worthy of your knowledge be.
Nor have I, many a day, more pleasure had
Then here I find; though I have seemed sad.

My hart, is sometimes heavy, when I smile;
And when I greeve, I often sing the while.
Nor is it sadnesse, that doth me possesse,
But, rather, musing with much seriousnesse,
Upon that multitude of sighs and teares;
With those innumerable doubts and feares:
Through which, you passed; ere you could acquire,
A settled Hope of gaining your Desire.
For, you dar'd love a Nymph, so great, and faire,
As might have brought a Prince unto Dispaire.
And sure the excellencie of your Passions,
Did then produce as excellent expressions.

If therefore, Me, the sute may well become;
And, if to you it be not wearisome:
In name of all these Ladies, I entreat,
That one of those sad Straines you would repeate,
Which you composd; when greatest discontent
Unsought-for helpe, to your Invention lent.

Fair Nymph (said Philaret) I will doe so.
For, though your Shepheard, doth no Courtship know,
He hath Humanity.  And what's in me
To doe you Servic,e may commanded be.

So, taking downe a Lute, that neere him hung,
He gave't his Boy, who plaid, whilst this, he sung.

Ah me!
Am I the Swaine,
That late from sorrow free,
Did all the cares on Earth disdaine?
And still untoucht, as at some safer Games,
Plaid with the burning coals of Love and Beauties flames?
Wast I, could dive, and sound each passions secret depth at will;
And, from those huge overwhelmings, rise, by help of Reason stil?
And am I now, oh heavens!  for trying this in vaine,
So sunke, that I shall never rise again?
Then let Dispaire, set Sorrows string,
For Straines that dolefulst be.
And I will sing,
Ah me.

But why,
O fatall Time!
Dost thou constraine that I,
Should perish, in my youth's sweet prime?
I, but awhile agoe (you cruell Powers)
Inspite of Fortune, cropt contentments sweetest flowers.
And yet, unscorned, serve a gentle Nymph, the fairest Shee,
That ever was belov'd of Man, or Eyes did ever see.
Yea, one, whose tender heart, would rue for my distresse;
Yet I, poore I, must perish nay-thelesse.
And (which much more augments my care)
Unmoaned I must dye:
And, no man er'e,
Know why.

Thy leave,
My dying Song,
Yet take, ere greefe bereave,
The breath which I enjoy too long.
Tel thou that Fair-one this; my soul prefers,
Her love above my life, and that I died hers:
And let Him be, for evermore. to her remembrance deare,
Who lov'd the very thought of Her, whilst he remained here.
And now, farewell thou Place of my unhappy birth;
Where once I breathed the sweetest aire on earth.
Since me, my wonted joyes forsake;
And all my trust deceive,
Of all, I take
My leave.

Farewell,
Sweet Groves to you:
You Hils, that highest dwell;
And all you humble Vales, adue.
You wanton Brookes, and solitary Rockes,
My deare companions all, and you, my tender flockes.
Farewell, my Pipe, and all those pleasing Songs, whose moving straines
Delighted once the fairest Nymphes, that daunce upon the Plaines.
You discontents (whose deep, and over-deadly smart,
Have, without pitie, broke the truest heart)
Sighs, Teares, and every sad annoy,
That erst did with me dwell,
And all others Joy,
Farewell.

Adue,
Faire Shepherdesses:
Let Garlands of sad Yewe,
Adorne your daintie golden Tresses.
I, that lovd you; and often with my Quill,
Made musick that delighted Fountain, Grove, and Hill:
I, whom you loved so; and with a sweet and chaste embrace,
(Yea, with a thousand rarer favors) would vouchsaf to grace.
I, now must leave you all alone, of Love to plaine:
And never Pipe, nor never Sing againe.
I must, for evermore, bee gone;
And therefore, bid I you,
And every one,
Adue.

I dye!
For oh, I feele
Deaths horrors, drawing nie;
And all this frame of Nature, reele.
My hopelesse heart, dispairing of reliefe,
Sinks underneath the heavy weight of saddest greefe.
Which, hath so ruthles torn, so rackt, so tortur'd every vaine;
All comfort comes too late, to have it ever cur'd againe.
My swimming head, begins to dance Deaths giddy round.
A shuddering chilnes doth each sence confound:
Benum'd, is my cold-sweating brow;
A dimnesse shuts my eye;
And now, oh now,
I die.

So movingly, these Lines He did expresse,
And, to a Tune so full of heavinesse,
As if indeed, his purpose had bin past,
To live no longer then the Song did last.
Which in the Nymphs, such tender passion bred,
That some of them, did teares of pitty shed.

This, she perceiving, who first cravd the Song;
Shepheard, she said; although it be no wrong,
Nor griefe to you, those passions to recall,
Which heretofore you have beene paind withall,
But Comforts rather; since they now are over,
And you (it seemeth) an enjoying Lover.
Yet, some young Nymphs among us I doe see,
Who so much mooved with your passions be:
That if, my aime, I taken have aright,
Their thoughts wil hardly, let them sleepe to night.

I dare not therefore, beg of you againe,
To sing another of the selfesame Straine:
For feare, it breed within them, more unrest,
Then womens weaknesses, can well digest.
Yet, in your Measures, such content you have;
That one Song more I will presume to crave.
And, if your Memorie preserves of those,
Which you of your Affections did compose,
Before you saw this Mistresse; Let us heare,
What kind of passions, then, within you were.

To which request he instantly obey'd,
And this ensuing Song both sung and play'd.

SONNET 2.
You gentle Nymphs, that on these meadows play
And oft relate the loves of Shepherds young:
Come, sit you downe; for, if you please to stay,
Now may you heare an uncouth Passion sung.
A Lad there is, and I am that poore Groome,
That faln in love, and cannot tell with whom.

Oh doe not smile at sorrow as a Jest;
With others' cares good Natures mooved be:
And, I should weepe, if you had my unrest.
Then, at my griefe, how, can you merry be?
Ah, where is tender pitie now become?
I am in love, and cannot tell with whom.

I, that have oft the rarest features viewd,
And Beautie in her best perfection seene:
I, that have laught at them that Love pursude,
And ever free from such affections been,
Lo now at last, so cruell is my doome;
I am in love, and cannot tell with whom.

My heart is full nigh bursting with desire,
Yet cannot find from whence these longings flow:
My brest doth burne, but she that lights the fire,
I never saw, nor can I come to know.
So great a blisse my fortune keepes me from.
That though I dearly love, I know not whom.

Ere I had twice four Springs, renewed seene,
The force of Beautie I began to prove;
And, ere I nine yeares old, had fully beene,
It taught me how to frame a Song of Love.
And, little thought I, this day should have come,
Before that I to love, had found out whom.

For, on my Chinn, the mossy downe you see,
And, in my vaines, well-heated blood doth glow:
Of Summers I have seene twice three times three,
And, fast, my youthfull time away doth goe.
That much I feare, I aged shall become:
And still complaine; I love I know not whom.

Oh!  why had I, a heart bestow'd on me,
To cherish deare affections, so enclin'd?
Since, I am so unhappy borne to be
No Object, for so true a Love to find.
When I am dead, it will be mist of some:
Yet, now I live, I love, I know not whom.

I, to a thousand beauteous Nymphs am knowne;
A hundred Ladies favours doe I weare:
I, with as many, halfe in love am growne;
Yet none of them (I find) can be my Deare.
Me thinks, I have a Mistresse, yet to come;
Which makes me sing; I love I know not whom.

There lives no Swaine doth stronger passion prove,
For her, whom most he covets to possesse;
Then doth my heart, that being full of Love,
Knowes not to whom, it may the same professe.
For, he that is despisd hath sorrow, some:
But he hath more; that loves, and knowes not whom.

Knew I my Love, as many others doe,
To some one object might my thoughts be bent:
So, they divided should not wandring goe,
Untill the Soules united force be spent.
As his, that seekes, and never finds a Home:
Such is my rest; that love, and know not whom.

Those, whom the frownes of jealous friends divide,
May live to meet, and descant on their woe:
And he, hath gained a Lady for his Bride,
That durst not woe her Mayd, awhile agoe.
But oh!  what end unto my Hopes can come?
That am in love, and cannot tel with whom.

Poor Collin, grieves that he was late disdaind:
And Cloris, doth for Willy's absence pine.
Sad Thirsis, weeps, for his sicke Phaebe paind.
But all their sorrowes cannot equall mine.
A greater care alas! on me is come:
I am in love, and cannot tell with whom.

Narcissus-like, did I affect my shade;
Some shadow yet, I had to dote upon.
Or, did I love, some Image of the dead,
Whose substance had not breathed long agone;
I might dispaire, and so an end would come;
But, oh, I love!  and cannot tell you whom.

Once in a Dreame, me thought, my Love I view'd;
But, never waking, could her face behold:
And doubtles, that Resemblance was but shew'd,
That more, my tyred heart torment it should.
For, since that time, more griev'd I am become;
And more in love; I cannot tell with whom.

When on my bed at night, to rest I lye,
My watchfull eyes, with teares bedew my cheeke:
And then, oh would it once were day, I crie;
Yet when it comes, I am as far to seeke.
For, who can tell, though all the earth he rome;
Or when, or where, to find hee knowes not whom?

Oh!  if she be among the beautious traines,
Of all you Nymphs, that haunt the silver Rills;
Or, if you know her, Ladies of the Plaines,
Or you, that have your Bowers, on the Hills.
Tell if you can, who will my love become
Or I shal die, and never know for whom.

The Ladies smiled oft, when this they heard,
Because the Passion strange to them appeard.
And stranger was it; since, by his expression,
(As well as by his owne unfeign'd confession)
It seemed true.  But, having sung it out:
And seeing, scarcely manners, they it thought
To urge him farther, Thus to them he spake.
Faire Ladies:  for as much as doubt you make
To re-command me:  Of mine owne accord,
Another Straine, I freely will afford.

It shall not be of Love; nor any Song,
Which to the praise of Beautie doth belong,
But, that hereafter, when you hence are gone,
Your Shepheard may be sometime thought upon.
To shew you also, what content the Field,
And lovely Grove, to honest Minds may yeeld.
That you my humble Fate, may not despise;
When you returne unto your braveries.
And not suppose, that in these homely Bowers,
I hugg my Fortune, cause I know not yours.
Such Lines Ile sing, as were composed by me,
When some proud Courtiers, where I hap't to be,
Did (like themselves) of their owne glories prate:
As in contempt, of my more happy state.
And these they be.&mdash;

SONNET.
Lordly Gallants, tell mee this,
(Though my safe content you weigh not)
In your Greatnesse what one blisse,
Have you gain'd, that I enjoy not?
You have Honors, you have Wealth,
I have Peace, and I have Health:
All the day, I merry make,
And, at night, no care I take.

Bound to none my Fortunes be;
This, or that mans fall, I feare not
Him I love, that loveth me;
For the rest, a pinne I care not.
You are sad, when others chafe,
And grow merry as they laugh;
I, that hate it, and am free,
Laugh and weepe, as pleaseth me.

You may boast of favours showne,
Where your service is applied:
But, my pleasures are mine owne,
And to no mans humours tyed.
You oft flatter, soothe, and faine;
I, such basenesse doe disdaine:
And to none, be slave I would,
Though my fetters might be gold.

By great Titles, some beleeve,
Highest honours are attained;
And yet Kings have power to give,
To their Fools, what these have gained.
Where they favour, there they may,
All their Names of Honour lay:
But, I looke not, rais'd to be,
Till mine owne wing, carrie me.

Seeke to raise your Titles higher,
They are Toyes not worth my sorrow:
Those that we to day admire,
Proove the Ages scorne to morrow.
Take your Honors; let me find,
Virtue, in a free-borne Mind:
This, the greatest Kings that be,
Cannot give, nor take from me.

Though I vainly doe not vaunt,
Large demesnes, to feed my pleasure:
I have favours where you want,
That would buy respect with treasure.
You have lands lie here, and there;
But my wealth is every where:
And, this addeth to my store.
Fortune, cannot make me poore.

Say, you purchase with your pelfe,
Some respect where you importune.
Those may love me for my selfe,
That regard you for your Fortune.
Rich,, or borne of high degree,
Fooles, as well as you may bee:
But, that peace in which I live,
No discent, nor Wealth can give.

If you boast, that you may gaine,
The respect of high-borne Beauties:
Know, I never wooed in vaine,
Nor preferred scorned Duties.
Shee I love, hath all delight;
Rosie red, with Lillie-white:
And, who er'e your Mistresse be,
Flesh and blood as good as Shee.

Note, of Me, was never tooke,
For my Woman-like perfections.
But, so like a man, I looke,
It hath gaind me best Affections.
For my love, as many showers
Have been wept, as have for yours.
And, yet none doth me condemne
For Abuse, or scorning them.

Though of Dainties, you have store
To delight a choycer Pallat:
Yet your taste is pleas'd no more,
Then is mine in one poore Sallat.
You to please your Senses feed;
But, I eat, good Blood to breed.
And am most delighted than,
When I spend it like a man.

Though you Lord it over me,
You in vaine thereof have braved:
For, those Lusts my Servants be,
Whereunto your minds are slaved.
To your selves you wise appeare:
But alas, deceiv'd you are.
You doe foolish me esteeme,
And are that, which I doe seeme.

When your faults I open lay,
You are moov'd, and madd with vexing;
But, you ne're could doe or say,
Ought to drive me to perplexing.
Therefore, my despised power
Greater is, by farre, than your.
And, what er'e you thinke of me,
In your mindes, you poorer be.

You are pleased, more or lesse,
As men well or ill report you;
And, shew discontentednesse,
When the Times forbeare to court you.
That, in which my pleasures be,
No man can divide from me.
And my Care, it adds not to
What-so, others say, or doe.

Be not proud, because you view,
You by thousands are attended:
For alas, it is not You,
But your Fortune, tha's be-friended.
Where I show of love have got,
Such a danger feare I not.
Since, they nought can seeke of me;
But, for love, belov'd to be.

When your Hearts have every thing,
You, are pleasantly disposed:
But, I can both laugh and sing,
Though my Foes have me enclosed.
Yea, when dangers me doe hemm,
I delight in scorning them,
More then you, in your renowne;
Or a King can in his Crowne.

You doe bravely domineere,
Whilst the Sunne upon you shineth.
Yet, if any storme appeare,
Basely then, your mind declineth.
But, or shine, or raine, or Blow,
I, my Resolutions know.
Living, Dying, Thrall, or Free,
At one height my Mind shall be.

When in thraldome, I have laine,
Me, not worth your thought you prized.
But, your malice was in vaine,
For, your favours, I despised.
And, how ere you value me,
I with praise, shall thought on be;
When the world esteemes you not,
And your Names shall be forgot.

In these thoughts my riches are,
Now, though poore or meane you deeme me;
I am pleasd, and doe not care,
How the Times, or you esteeme me.
For, those Toyes that make you gay,
Are but Play-games for a day.
And, when Nature craves her due;
I, as brave shall be, as you.

Here Philaret did give his Song an ending,
To which the Nymphs, so seriously attending,
About him sate; as if they had supposed,
He still had somewhat more, to be disclosed.
And, well they knew not; whether did belong,
Most praise unto the Shepheard, or his Song.
For, though (they must confesse) they often heare,
Those Layes, which much more deeply learned are:
Yet, when they well considerd of the Place,
With how unlikely (in their thought) it was,
To give them hope of hearing such a Straine;
Or, that so young, and so obscure a Swaine,
Should, such a matchlesse Beauties favour get,
And know her worth so well, to sing of it.
They wondered at it.  And some thus surmizd,
That Hee a greater man was, so disguisd:
Or else, that Shee, whom he so much had praisd
Some Goddesse was:  that those his Measures raisd,
Of purpose, to that rare-attained height,
In Envi's and presuming Art's despight.

But, whilst they musing, with themselves, bethought
Which way, out of this Shepheard to have wrought,
What Nymph this Fair-one was; and where she lived.
Loe, at that very instant there arriv'd
Three men, that by their Habits Courtiers seemd:
For (though obscure) by some he is esteemd
Among the greatest:  who doe not contemne
In his retyred walkes, to visit him.
And there they tast those pleasures of the mind,
Which they, can nor in Court, nor Citie find.
Some news or message, these new guests had broght him,
And, to make haste away (it seemes) besought him.
For, instantly he rose:  And that his nurture,
Might not be taxed by a rude departure,
Himselfe excusing, he those Nymphs did pray:
His noble Friends might bring them on their way:
Who, as it seemes (he said) were therefore come;
That they might wait upon them to their home.
So, with their favour, he departed thence:
And (as they thought) to meet her Excellence,
Of whom he sung.  Yet many deeme that this,
But an Idea of a MISTRESSE is.
Because to none, he yet had daind the telling,
Her proper Name; nor shown her place of Dwelling.

When he was gone:  a Lady from among
Those Nymphs; took up his Lute, and sung this Song.

THE NYMPHS SONG.
Gentle Swaine, good speed befall thee;
And in Love still prosper thou:
Future Times shall happy call thee,
Though, thou lie neglected, now.
Virtues Lovers, shall commend thee,
And perpetuall Fame, attend thee.

Happy are these woody Mountaines,
In whose shaddowes thou dost hide:
And as happy, are those Fountaines,
By whose murmures thou doest bide.
For, Contents are here excelling;
More, then in a Princes dwelling.

These thy Flockes doe clothing bring thee,
And thy food, out of the Fields:
Pretty Songs, the Birds doe sing thee;
Sweet perfumes the Meddowe yeelds:
And, what more is worth the seeing?
Heaven and Earth thy prospect being?

None comes hither, who denies thee,
Thy Contentments (for despight)
Neither any that envies thee,
That, wherein thou dost delight.
But, all happy things are meant thee:
And what ever may content thee.

Thy Affection Reason measures,
And distempers none it feeds:
Still, so harmlesse are thy pleasures,
That no others griefe it breeds.
And, if night, beget thee sorrow;
Seldome stayes it till the morrow.

Why doe foolish men so vainely,
Seeke contentment in their store?
Since they may perceive so plainely,
Thou art rich in being poore?
And that they are vext about it;
Whilst thou merry art without it.

Why are idle braines devising,
How high Titles may be gained?
Since, by those poore toyes despising,
Thou hast higher things obtaind?
For the man who scornes to crave them,
Greater is, then they that have them.

If all men could tast that sweetnesse,
Thou dost in thy meannesse know;
Kings would be to seeke, where Greatnesse,
And their honours to bestow.
For, it such content would breed them;
As they would not thinke they need them.

And, if those who so aspiring,
To the Court-preferments bee;
Knew how worthy the desiring;
Those things are, enjoyed by thee.
Wealth and Titles, would hereafter:
Subjects be, for scorne and laughter.

He that Courtly stiles affected,
Should a May-Lords honour have.
He that heaps of wealth collected,
Should be counted as a slave.
And the man with few'st things cumbred,
With the Noblest should be numbred.

Thou, their folly hast descerned,
That neglect thy mind, and thee;
And to slight them, thou hast learned,
Of what Title er'e they be.
That; no more with thee, obtaineth;
Then with them, thy meannes gaineth.

All their Riches, Honours, Pleasures;
Poor unworthy trifles seeme;
(If compared with thy Treasures)
And, doe merit no esteeme.
For, they true contents provide thee,
And from them can none divide thee.

Whether thralled, or exiled;
Whether poore, or rich thou be:
Whether praised, or reviled,
Not a rush, it is to thee.
This, nor that, thy rest doth win thee:
But, the mind, which is within thee.

Then, oh why, so madly dote we,
On those things, that us ore-lode?
Why, no more, their vainnesse note we;
But still make of them a God?
For, alas!  they still deceive us,
And in greatest need they leave us.

Therefore, have the Fates provided,
Well (thou happy Swaine) for thee:
That mayst, here, so farre divided,
From the worlds distractions be.
Thee, distemper let them never;
But, in peace continue ever.

In these lonely Groves, enjoy thou,
That contentment here begun:
And, thy houres, so pleasd, employ thou,
Till the latest glasse be run.
From a Fortune so assured:
By no temptings be allured.

Much good doo't them with their glories,
Who in Courts of Princes dwell.
We have read in Antique stories,
How some rose, and how they fell.
And tis worthy well the heeding;
Ther's like End, wher's like proceeding.

Be thou, still, in thy affection,
To thy Noble Mistresse, true:
Let her (never-matcht) perfection,
Be the same, unto thy view,
And, let never other Beautie,
Make thee faile, in Love, or Dutie.

For, if thou shalt not estranged
From thy Course professed, be.
But remaine for aye unchanged;
Nothing shall have power on thee.
Those that sleight thee now, shall love thee,
And, in spite of spight, approve thee.

So those Vertues, now neglected,
To be more esteem'd, will come:
Yea, those Toyes so much affected,
Many shall be wooed from.
And the golden Age (deplored)
Shall, by some, be thought restored.

Thus sang the Nymph:  so rarely-well inspired,
That all the hearers, her brave Strains admired.
And, as I heard, by some that there attended,
When this her Song was finisht, all was ended.

A POSTSCRIPT
If any Carpe, for that, my younger Times,
Brought foorth such idle fruit, as these slight Rymes,
It is no matter; so they doe not sweare,
That they, so ill imployed, never were.
Whilst their Desires (perhaps) they looselier spent;
I gave my heats of Youth, this better vent.
And, oft by writing thus, the bloud have tam'd;
Which some, with reading wanton Layes enflam'd.

Nor care I, though their Censure some have past,
Because my Songs exceed the Fidlers Last.
For, doe they thinke, that I will make my Measures,
The longer, or the shorter, for their pleasures?
Or mayme, or Curtolize my free Invention;
Because, Fooles weary are, of their attention.
No; let them know, who doe their length contemn,
I make to please my selfe, and not for them.
