I told you (Ladies) if your tender hearts
Admit attention, while my tongue imparts
Such heavie newes, how young Eramio came
With yearly incense, to the hallow'd fame
Of the Alphaean worship, and how fate
Abridg'd his life with nights eternall date.
I told you also (leaving her asleep)
How Sepha's eyes ore-charg'd with tears did weep,
And as she swounded how her curious hands
Did give the earth a print, which print still stands,
To keep her fame alive, but what it was,
Through too much grief my tongue did overpass,
As fit'st, it seems, to be inserted here,
That as my heavy story doth draw neer
Towards her end, so her immortall praise,
Rap't in her sweet Encomions may raise
Conjugall tears from each distilling eye,
Whose praise and fame shall them accompany
With her harmonious voice, I mean the love
Her soul will powr upon them from above.
And that her eyes may make all sighs the fairer,
Her soul will smile to see the love they bare her.
The spices which Eramio had strew'd
About the altar, her wet eyes bedew'd
With sorrowing tears, which daily they did cast
Upon the same, and made thereof a paste;
Like those congealed clouds which some have given
A glorious title, call'd the walls of Heaven.
So Sepha falling, fell upon the same,
From whose fair hand that fair impression came,
By some swift Savo call'd, for many say
From thence Campanian Savo took her way,
And there it is where each Campanian maid,
For yearly offerings her vow hath paid
With the Medean draughts, t' revive the fame
Of Sepha dead; Savo from Sepha came:
But that's not all, the print whereof I spake,
Though some affirm 'tis, yet 'tis not a Lake.
For if the spices which Eramio cast,
Dry'd up her tears, and thereof made a paste,
How can a Lake ensue?  but this is sure,
There was a corner of the altar pure
From any blot, on this Eramio laid
His Aromatick spices as he praid.
This being turn'd into a past by those
Distilling eyes (which dying seldome close,)
The palm of her fair hand did gently press
The yeelding paste, and as she up it reard,
Like a triangled heart the print appeard,
The fingers standing just upon the heart,
Presented Cupids shafts, which he doth dart
On simple souls, from whence ensues the bloud,
The blood being gon, came that Campanian flood;
Thus palm and fingers having shown the love
By Cupids net intangled, strait did move
T' another form no figure there was seen,
While yet they gaze upon't, the place grows green;
At this they stare, at this a flower up-starts,
Which still presents the form of wounded hearts.
This being seen by Nymphs that haunt the Springs,
Each took a slip, it to their Mansion brings,
Where being set, it's now in every grove,
A pretty flower, and call'd the Lady-glove.
Now let me tell of Sepha, and her hap
That did ensue, while she in Fortunes lap
Lies lull'd asleep, (sleep had her sense bereav'd)
(And chiefly for the love she had conceiv'd
Of her Arcadius) bethinking hard,
Either he is of charity debarr'd,
Or linkt t' anothers virtue, and surmising
Hee's not to be imbrac'd; waking and rising,
She found her self by him to be imbrac't,
Who, being present at her fall, did haste
To hale her breath again; those eyes that wrought
Confusion first, now more confusion brought;
Having Arcadius kist, she thinks some dream
Deludes her wandering sense, in which extream
Rapt with conceit of this her present good,
Her greedy eyes with ardent wishes woo'd,
That Heaven, in which her present hopes remain'd
A worlds continuance, and she had obtain'd
What she desir'd, had not the winged boy
Unbent his bow, with period of their joy.
Yet something to her hopes he did admit,
To whet the heavy sacrificers wit;
While young Arcadius with trembling hand,
Felt how the pulse, as if at Deaths command,
Sounded a loud Alarm; fair Heav'n said he,
In whom all grace and vertues planted be,
Why will you suffer that infernall hound?
To dare to come, to give this heart this wound?
Use that celestiall power, the powerfull Gods
Have giv'n, that grief and you may live at odds.
I know those eyes, one wink from those fair eyes
Have power to banish hence all miseries
Are incident to man so rare a gift
Did nature find, when onely but this shift
T' amaze spectators she for you had left,
For know when Nature fram'd you she bereft
The world of all perfections, to make
You of divine, and Heav'nly good partake,
As well as humane, that there might agree
In you, of every grace a sympathy.
So said, the blushing damsell with delight
Of this new friend, did with her eyes requite
His too soon ended speech, O Heav'ns she said,
That have respect to me unworthy maid,
And daigne this good to me so oft desir'd,
Direct me so, that e're I have expir'd
This perfect bliss, and am depriv'd the same,
I may enjoy the knowledg of his name.
Grant this (ye Gods) to me, impatient, till
I know his name, his Countrey, and his will.
Then did she pull her scarf from off her face,
And putting by her hair with that sweet grace,
That Venus us'd, when to Adonis eyes
She did expose her love, Sepha did rise
With such sweet looks as cannot be exprest,
And said, these favors Sir, and sigh'd the rest.
Well, thought Arcadius, something there remains,
And tis some weighty cause that it detains,
(Grant Heav'n) that as I hope, so it may prove,
By her unpollisht sentence to be love.
For he in dreams and visions oft had seen
A Lady, who for him alone had been
Tortur'd a thousand wayes, with blubbred cheeks,
She oft had said, receive her love, who seeks
No other life, than for thy owne deserts
T' enjoy thy presence, and admire thy parts.
She being now recover'd sate her down
To view Arcadius, whom the Priest did crown
With wreaths of Lawrell, which he alwayes wore
For the upright affection that he bore.
Then to the Altar went he, where he praid,
While Sepha overcome with passion, said,
So loud that he might hear, were I the Saint
To whom he prayes, sure I would hear his plaint.
At this Arcadius look't upon her lips,
And blest them that they let that message slip;
Then with his pure devotion onward goes,
          and on the Altar throwes
A winged heart, which lately he had got
For sacrifice, about the heart was wrote
These next insuing lines.

The purest peice of Mans delight,
In whom his life, and Love consists,
Whose softness keeps from gloomy night,
Which nought can peirce, but Amatysts
Is here presented on thy Throne.
Bedew'd with tears of faithfull vowes,
Presenting thee what is thy own,
The best to please thy virgin browes,
To fan thy face with her cool wings,
And fly the faster as she sings.

Which I by chance,
The better his sad story to advance,
Have Copi'd forth; about the wings there was
Some other Lines, which I will not let pass,
That (Gentle Ladies) ye may not have cause,
Of his devotion to detract th' applause.

Fly swift my thoughts, and through this sacred fire,
Mount up to her, let her to me retire,
That by those sweet distilling drops above,
She may infuse to me religious love,
So may I live, and scape the Dart,
While her sweet breath saivs up my heart,
And flourish like those Flowers it fills
With Nectar sweet, which one frown kils,
First let Voluptas weep,
And Gloria fall asleep,
Castalion liquor's free,
Medea bitter bee,
E're I forsake
Thy praise to make,
Or yet deny
Thy pietie.

These and the like Arcadius presents,
Mingled with deep, and choice perfuming sents
Of many bitter sighs, he turnd him round,
Salutes the Priest, the Altar, and the ground
Whereon it stood then to faire Sepha turns,
Who while her heart with strange affection burns,
Meets him with nimble eyes, he gently bends
A Trembling Cringe to Sepha, who attends
With her impatient eares that happy houre,
When the wish't Sun shall show that gracious flower
She loves unknowne, till a sigh doth bewray,
As if the prologue for a following play,
These next ensuing words, and such they were,
They did requite the time she stayd to hear.
Harpocrates may clame a vow I made,
(Faire Lady) under his beloved shade;
When my insipient years too too blame,
With rash attempts to Lauralize the fame
Of Cupids power, invested that disgrace,
Which still should be a shadow to my face.
Then, cause one way did lead to both their Towers,
He took hir Magick hand, and with whole showers
Of tears first washt them, then with a faint kiss,
Dri'd them, and walking homeward told her this.

THE STORY OF PHAON AND SAPPHO.
In Lesbos famous for the comick layes,
That us'd to spring from her o'reflowing praise,
Twice famous Sappho dwelt the fairest maid
Mitelin had, of whom it once was said
Amongst the Gods, a sudden question was,
If Sappho, or Thalia did surpass
In Lyribliring tunes, it long remaind,
Till Mnemosyne the Mother was constrain'd,
To say they both from her begetting sprang,
And each of th' others warbling Lyra sang.
There was a Town in Lesbos, now defac'd,
Antissa nam'd, by Neptunes arms imbrac'd;
There Sappho had a Tower, in it a grove
Bedeck'd with pearls, and strew'd about with love;
Leucothean branches overspred the same,
And from the shadowes perfect odors came.
To dress it most there was a purple bed,
All wrought in works, with azure mantles spred,
The tables did unspotted carpets hold
Of lyrian dyes, the edges fring'd with gold.
Along this grove there stealing ran a Spring,
Where Sappho tun'd her Muse, for she could sing
In golden verse, and teach the best a vain
Beyond the musick of their sweetest straine.
Here while she sang, a ruddy youth appear'd,
Drawn by the sweetness of the voice he heard,
Sing on said he (fair Lady) let not me,
Too bold, give period to your melody.
Nor blame me for my over bold attempt,
(Although I yeeld of modesty exempt
In doing this) and yet not over bold,
For who so hears the voice, and doth behold
The lips from whence it comes, would be as sad
As I, and trust me Lady if I had
But skill to tempt you with so sweet a touch,
Assure you, you your selfe would doe as much.
She answers not, for why the little God
Had touch'd her heart before, and made a rod
For one contempt was past, she view'd him hard,
Whose serious looks made Phaon half affeard
She was displeas'd, about to goe she cryes,
Stay gentle Knight, and take with thee the prize,
To thee alone assur'd; the boy look'd pale,
But strait a ruddy blush did make a veil
T' obscure the same; while thus he panting stood,
A thousand times he wisht him in the Wood
From whence he came, and speaking not a word,
Let fall his hat, his javelin and his sword.
She being young, and glad of an occasion,
Stoopt down to take them up; he with perswasion
Of an half shewing love, detains her hand
From it, and with his fingers made the band
To chain them fast, (now Love had laid his scean)
And draw'd the tragick plot, whereon must lean
The ground of all his Acts; (great Deity)
When thy foreseeing nove-sight can descry
Things which will hap, why dost thou train their love
With pleasant musick to deceitfull groves?
See how the love of some with equall weight,
By vertue poiz'd, live free from all deceit,
To whom thou help'st with thy beloved darts,
And link'st their true inviolable hearts,
Why deal'st not so withall?  are some too hard?
Or hath inchanted spells their hearts debarr'd
From thy keen shafts?  you Powers should be upright
Not harmfull Gods yet thou still tak'st delight
In bloody ends, why did'st not wink at these?
And send thy shafts a thousand other wayes
That more deserv'd thy anger?  or if needs
Thou would'st be doing, while thy power proceeds
In lofty flames one flame requires another.
Why did'st thou wound the one, and not the other?
For (Lady) so it past between the lovers,
That after little pause Sappho discovers
Those kindled flames which never can expire,
But his contempt adds fuell to her fire.
Immodest Girl he said, why art so rude
To woo?  when vertuous women should be woo'd,
And scarce obtain'd by wooing, O forbeare,
Sweet Sappho cry'd, if I do not prepare
A just excuse by none to be deny'd,
Never let me &mdash; so sate her down and cry'd.
He mov'd for pity more to see her tears,
Than toucht with any loyall love he bears,
Sate down by her, while she dispairing, laid
Her eyes on his, her hands on his, and said,
Ay me, that herbs for love no cure afford,
Whose too too jealous actions will accord
To nought but semblable desire, that lost,
What pain more vile than lovers that are crost
With hopeles hopes?  they say'ts a God that works
The same, but sure some Devill tis that lurks
His opportunity how to destroy,
And tear the Soul from her aspiring joy.
Now to prevent occasions that may fall,
Is serious love, which will all harms appall,
Neglect whereof by many is deplor'd,
Ay me!  that herbs for love no cure afford!
Now for the fault wherof I am accus'd,
O blame me not, for 'tis no fault I us'd;
For if affection spurs a man to love,
Tis that affection needs must make him move
His sute to us, and wee, when we affect,
And see the like from them, seem to neglect
Their scorned sute, but so our frowns appear,
Mixt with a faint desire, and carefull fear
It should displease them, that we may unite,
A carelesse love, with an intire delight.
Again, when men doe see a curious stone,
The onely hopes of their foundation,
How often doe they slight with scornfull eye,
Neglect, disgrace, dispraise, and spurn it by?
The more to move and stir up an excesse
Of disrespect, and make the value lesse.
Even so we handle men, who still endure
A thousands deaths, to train us to their lure,
And were we sure they could not us forsake,
Wee'd dally more, even more delight to make.
Even so as men are caught, even so are we,
When we affect those that our service flee;
What kind salutes, imbraces and constraints
Ought we to use?  lest our untun'd complaints
Unpitied die, and we with sorrows scope,
As free from pleasure die, as free from hope.
Thou art a stranger Phaon to this place,
But I have known thy name, and know thy race,
Eumenion stories do thy honor tel,
Istria Eumenion knew thy Parents well,
Whose Fathers head upheld the weighty Crown
Of Illyris, which none could trample down,
Though many envi'd, free from harm he laid
His bones to rest, with whom the Crown decay'd.
Now fate to shew a modell of her power,
On thy Illyricum began to lower;
Thy Houshold Gods, acquainted with the cryes
Of thy decaying subjects, cast their eyes
This way, and that, twas yours O Gods to bid
Deniall to sedition that was hid
In Catelinian brests, and to surcease
The period of your domestick ease.
In this uprore (what fruits seditions bring
May well be guest, for every one was King)
The better sort prepar'd for thee and thine
A waftage over the beloved Rhyne
To Lesbos this; thou hadst not long bin here,
But private envy did thy walls uprear,
And did beguile to all posterity
Thee of thy glory, and the Crown of thee.
These things thy houshold Gods (to Lesbos brought)
Foreseeing good, have for thy own good wrought,
That thou maist gain a greater Crown than that
Illyrius had, and be more honor'd at
Those Festivalls, when yearly thou partak'st
Of Triumphs, which to Chimney Gods thou mak'st.
This was a work divine, and happy too,
(If any happiness from grief ensue)
That thou wast here conceal'd, for many vow'd,
And thundred forth the fame thereof aloud,
Of thy ensuing death, while thou wast still
In pupill age, and knew'st, nor did'st no ill,
But 'twas the Providence of you that dwell
In lofty Heav'ns (ye Powers) and to expell
All harm from him who must your Lawes maintain,
That when his perfect strength he doth obtain,
He may reward their deeds that envy bred,
And maugre those that to rebellion led.
Here wast thou brought, here hast thou daily staid,
And (while thy better subjects sought thee) plaid
Beguiling time away; perhaps you'd know,
What mov'd the powers to permit thee so
Untimely ruine, know they did anoint
Thee King of famous Lesbos, and appoint
This means alone to make their power approv'd,
And bring thee here of me to be belovd.
To this faint speech he intermission made
With heavy sighs, and then (fair Lady) said,
The Heav'ns have rob'd me of succeeding bliss,
And hid me from those means to grant you this
I most desire, behold my love I dye,
My troubled soule methinks doth seem to flye
Through silent Caves and Fields, two pleasant gates
Ope wide to take me in, wherein there waits
A Crown of gold, neither by arm or hand
Supported, but of its free power doth stand,
Now sits upon my head, these things I see,
And yet I live, can this a vision be?
About to stir, O stir me not he cries,
My feet stick fast, Sappho farewell, and dyes.
While yet he speaks, my Parents wayward fate,
Must be accompanied with the date
Of my despised life, a fearfull rind
Of Citron trembling redd, doth creeping bind
His not half closed speech, his curled hair,
Which gallants of his time did use to wear
Of an indifferent length, now upward heaves,
Towards the skyes their gold refulgent leaves.
Sappho at this exclaims, laments, invokes
No Power nor God, but seeks by hasty strokes,
As a fit sacrifice unto her friend,
From her beloved brest her soul to send.
Awhile she silent stood, belike to think,
Which was the safest way for her to drink
Of the same cup her Phaon did, at last
(As evill thoughts will quickly to one haste)
She saw the Spring that ran along the Grove,
'Tis you fair streams must send me to my Love.
Behold, dear Love, with what impatient heat,
My soul aspires to mount to that blest seat,
Where thou blest sit'st, stretch out thy sacred hand,
And with safe conduct draw me to that land,
That we may taste the joyes the vallie yeelds;
And hand in hand may walk th' Elisian fields.
This said, she turns her face unto the Tree,
And kissing it, said, if thou still can'st see,
Behold how irksome I enjoy that breath,
Which still detains my meeting thee in death:
With that she saw his sword, which she did take,
And having kiss'd it for the owners sake,
Salutes her brest with many weeping wounds,
Then casts her self into the Spring, and drown'ds.

There is a Hill in Paphlagonia, nam'd
Cytorus, whither this mischance was fam'd;
My self was present there when many rude,
And base untutur'd peasants did intrude
Into our games, they were, as since I heard
Those base insulting Traitors, that debarr'd
Wendenlands Crown from righteous Phaon's browe;
These (cause the Gods had quit them of the vowes
They made to work his death) with open cries,
Proclam'd their thanks, and sent them to the skies.
But Venus, who in constant love delights,
And ev'ry perfect amity requites,
Exil'd their joy, each one perceives their arms
To branches grow, each one partakes the harms
Of their deserts, a tree there is which bears
His summer hue, and it in winter wears,
To this she turns them, that continuall green
Might manifest their never pard'ned sinne.
This done I saw a Knight of courage bold,
Cloth'd all in argent armor, strip'd with gold,
Who vow'd, the death of one of us should pay
For her mishap, to crown the heavy day
With Anadems from his victorious hand,
I too too over forward, did demand
What was the cause; discourteous Knight he said,
Dost not repent thee that thou hast betraid
That honor'd Lady?  while I ignorant
Of what he meant, he said tis not the want
Of Launce, shall keep thee safe, till I have shown
Thy just revenge; so threw away his own.
But with his sword he taught me what to doe,
And I my self had sword and armor too
Ready to answer him; the fight was long,
And had been longer too, till I too strong,
With an unlucky blow, O wer't ungiven,
Betraid his life, and sent his soul to Heaven:
Twas Alphitheon, who of long had lov'd
Sappho, now dead, whose sute I oft had mov'd
In his behalf, now hearing of her fate,
Either increast in him suspitious hate
T'wards me; or furious else did frantick strike,
Amaz'd, unkind to every one alike;
Dying he knew me, and bewaild his losse,
My friend Arcadius said he, the crosse
Of this my present state, ought not to be
A blot to stain our former amitie
I die, let my remembrance have a place
In thy just heart, it shall be no disgrace.
Though envy stole my sense, O 'tis no blot,
No fault at all was mine; I knew thee not
When here I met thee first; My dearest friend;
I die, love the remembrance of my end.
So said, he went away, while I distraught
For grief of this inhumane wicked fault,
Vow'd never more to move a Ladies heart
Nor for my self, nor for anothers part.

Arcadius ceast, and Sepha's turn was now.
Who said (belov'd and worthy Knight) that vow
You eas'ly may infringe, and yet be blest.
A rash conceit was never held the best.
You say it may be, and it shall be so.
Arcadius said, chiefly for that I know
When virtue, beauty, and intire delight,
Our nere dissolv'd affection doe unite
The fault appears the less the glorious eyes
Of the All-seeing power do despise
Continuall grief, and Jove himself erst while
Carousing bouls of wine is seen to smile.
Fair Lady know, as yet to me unknown,
Your beauty and your virtues have oreflown
My willing yeelding sense, a secret fire,
Continually increasing through desire
To honor your admired parts, doth move,
By nought to be extinguisht but your love.
Love is a thing full of suspitious care,
By every churlish winde blown to dispair.
Silent Canius dy'd for love, not known
To her, who did his pure affection own.
I therefore ope my heart before your eyes,
Not doubting but you'r kinde as well as wise;
Not doubting but you'r wise as well as kinde.
Fair Sepha said, your worth I know may find
Far better Ladies, that may more content
Your love than I, and then you will repent
You of your deed, which still will you molest,
A rash conceit was never held the best.
Though all the beauties in the world were one,
Said he, and I by right might seize upon
The same, yet would I for thy vertues sake,
Aspire no better fortune, than to make
Thee my beloved wife, where ere thou art,
What ere thou dost, the Graces grace impart
To thy sweet self; this hair, this lovely hair,
If loose, as thou dost often use to wear,
Ostends thy freer beauty, or if knit,
It shews rare wisdome is inclos'd in it.
In fine they are the chains that link desire
In ev'ry brest, and kindle Cupids fire,
For which soever way thou dost them wear,
They fetch thee honour, and thy honour bear.
To me she said you please to speak the best,
O thought you of me so I should be blest,
Not that my fond conceit desires to bee
Linkt with each pleasing object that I see,
But of a long retain'd affection, I
Desire the bonds of perfect amity;
And since you please to honor me so well
With common friendship, that in all should dwell,
Tell me the name of that thrice blessed place
Injoyes your presence, and from what blest race
You draw your line; me Arathea claims
Said he, my much unhappy Parents names,
Were Capaneus, and Evadne, they
Of good report and noble progeny,
My Father, led by just revenge, was chief
Of those that wrought distressed Thebes grief,
Who having wed my Mother then but young
And of a pleasant face, whose Parents sprung
From Juno's brests, unto those wars was call'd;
Where after many skirmishes befall'd
To him this sad mishap, when various fights
Had clos'd up many with eternall nights,
He furious, and impatient of delay,
Resolv'd a quick dispatch, and with that day
To end the wars, a Ladder he devises,
Of cords compos'd, by which he enterprizes
Apparent means to scale the walls, but lo,
About to clime, some wicked hand doth throw
A stone upon him; yet i'l clime he said;
But while his soldiers came unto his aid,
For all their hopes upon his worth reli'd,
He gave directions for the wars and dy'd.
My Mother too too heavy for his harm,
Did help his wounded body to unarm,
When all his friends to honor him the more,
Were present, and his ruine did deplore.
But while the fire consumes with greedy flame
His flesh, my Mother runs into the same;
To shew when virtue shrines an upright heart,
Death never can united honor part.
In this Campania where my Castle stands,
I was instructed by the carefull hands
Of Callias, till understanding bad
Revenge be done for wrongs my Parents had.
I mov'd the wars afresh, what means I made,
With all-perswading reasons to perswade
The soldiers aid, is this

O You, said I, belov'd for upright wayes,
And fear'd of all for valour that obeys
Your conqu'ring arms!  I purpose not to add
Words to your virtues, nor my speech to cladd
With flattring robes, my just revenge shall cause
A triumph for that never scorn'd applause
Of your victorious fame, which daily mov'd
Towards your names, O you so well belov'd!
Your noble friend my Father, to whose shrine
You pay your yearly tears, is now divine,
He sorry for that harm which would betide
Your never conquered arms in that he dy'd,
Dy'd loth to leave you, now there is a time,
To heap revenge against them for that crime
Those Coward traytors acted, when they slew
Your noble friend my Father; let us view
The cause that moves us to display our war,
O is't not meritorious, and far
Beyond the price of their despised blood?
Your wisdome knowes your losse, our cause is good;
Too good alas for them, I know your love
Still, still, remains alive, which makes me move
Those valiant hearts which alwayes you injoy'd,
To seek revenge 'gainst those that have destroyd
Your noble friend my Father:  This, O this
Makes me require your help, nor greater bliss
Can to your dying tombes more honour gather,
Than to revenge your noble friend my Father.
O you so well belov'd, I need not show
The slothfull Thebans fearfulness, you know
The manner, and the matter of their war,
How through disorder, and discord they jar
Amongst themselves, your swords their Towers shake
At the remembrance of your names they quake.
When in the skirmage you your valour send,
To court their necks, and shew their lives their end,
Bethink you for whose sake you fight, and let
His wonted valor and remembrance whet
Your all-commanding swords, what greater gain
Than their subjection can you obtain?
Honor from thence will spring, their wealth and glories
By you enjoy'd, will fill your famous stories
With never-dying fame, and for your merit,
Your Sons shall everlasting praise inherit.
We for revenge, renown, and amity,
Our wars display, they but for liberty;
When we have girt their City with the choice
Of Martiall men, then shall we hear their voice
Come creeping to us, but our ears are stopt
From Traytors mouths, till we have overtopt
(For justice sake, on which we have reli'd)
Their weighty sins, and high aspiring pride.
O you belov'd of all, tis not a cause
Of little worth, nor only for applause
I move you to this War, survey your hearts,
There see his tomb, his wounds, and his deserts
Ever to be admir'd, your noble freind
My Father, whose too too unhappy end
Requires their blood desires no greater bliss,
Than to present his joyfull soul with this.
These and such words I us'd, with me they swore
To fetch the glory which the Thebans wore,
And plac't upon my Fathers tombe, to crown
Him with Heroick conquests, and renown.
With me they went, with me they overcame
The Thebans pride, and brought with them their fame.
Detain'd at wars, I saw you not, till late
Returning home, my ever happy fate
Blest me to hear your voice; My nimble Steed
To gratulate my labour with the deed,
So well belov'd (as if he knew my mind)
Lost me, that you fair Lady might me find.
At this she smiles, while his lov'd tale goes on;
Now since it is your chance to light upon
What was ordain'd your own, debar me not
That service from, which is my own by lot.
While I infolded in your love declare
Those sweet contents in Venus pleasures are.
For who with more delight can live?  What are
Those joyes that may with these delights compare?
She blusht and said, for e're she spake she blusht,
Then from her sweet, but angry lips there rusht
This angry speech, (beloved Sir) I owe
More inward zeal than yet I will bestow
On your lascivious love, and being near
Her Talmos, flung away, and would not hear
His quick-prepar'd excuse, who over-waid
With death-tormenting grief, look'd up and said,
Shall these contempts ore-rule thy virtuous will?
O Sepha, knowest thou whom thy scorns do kill?
Well she goes on, nor looks behind to see
The fruits of her disdain, his Amitie,
But hasted home, by fond suspition led;
(So Arethusa from Alphaeus fled)
Till to her chamber come, she unawares,
(Beginning now to be perplext with cares)
Look'd from a window, from a window spy'd
Her fair Arcadius dead, even then she cry'd.
Her nimble feet had not such power to bear
Her half so fast away, as now her fear
Returns her to him, ready to complain
Upon her fate, her tender eyes doe strain
Balm to bedew his cheeks, till a sweet kiss,
(It seems beloved better than that blisse
The Heav'ns bestow'd) recall'd his sleepy eyes,
Who opening first, straight shut again and lyes
Clos'd in her arms, as if nought more could grace him,
With greater joyes, than when her arms imbrace him:
At length remembrance (usherd by a grone)
Proclaim'd his life; and am I left alone?
He said, then op't his eyes, whose fixed sight
Not yet from deaths imbracings free, did light
Upon her face, about his voice to raise,
Soft kisses stop his speech, those past he sayes,

Yee Gods, whose too too hasty shafts have strook
Beguiling joyes into my eyes, and took
My heavy soule from that thrice blessed place
Where Sepha dwells, who must Elisium grace,
What yeelds this Heav'n?  O would I still might live,
Her presence yeelds more joyes than Heav'n can give;
Invest me with all pleasures that you please
In Heav'n to have, with Canticles of ease
That follow pious soules, they nought will yield
To me but grief; while o're th' Elisian field,
And gloomy shades, continuall steps I take
For her safe waftage or'e the Stygian lake.
These words he spake, taking her face for Heaven,
(In whom the Powers, all powerfull grace had given)
Where still he thought he was, while Sepha griev'd,
With cordiall water from her eyes, reviv'd
His not yet living sense, with greedy eyes
He views her face, who with this speech replyes.
To me 'tis strange, that you (within whose brest
Such rare undaunted strength and wit doth rest)
Through foolish grief should yeeld your sacred soul
To Charons boat, who shall your death condole
So slightly caus'd?  shall I?  beleeve me no,
I'le rather seek some noble means to show
How much you strive with faint tormenting mind
To raise that heart wherein you lie inshrind.
Should men dispair for once or twice refusall,
Few men would speed, for to our Sex tis usual;
And often, words outstep the carelesse lip,
Which past, repent that e're they let them slip.
Now let this message in thy bosome light
Arcadius, thou art the sole delight
Of this my wretched life, for thee I live,
To live with thee, to thee my love I give.
Preserve it then so worthy to be lov'd,
That of thee alwayes I may be belov'd:
Let no lascivious thought pollute the same,
Which may increase a scandall to my name,
But with unstain'd desires let me be led
By Hymens rites unspotted to thy bed.
Have you not heard young lambs with wailing cries
Lament their dams departure?  who still lies
Under the sheerers hands?  with discontent
Thinking them dead, their sudden death lament?
While they to hinder the bemoning notes
Get up, and pay their ransome with their coats.
Even so Arcadius with attentive care,
Observ'd each word her heav'nly lips did spare,
Still fearing lest some various conclusion,
Should draw his life to sable nights confusion.
But when he heard the full, Ladies I know
You can conceive what streams of joy did flow
In his still honor'd brest, he nimbly rose,
Conjur'd the Air to keep her message close
From babling Ecchoes, to her self he vows
An amrous kiss, and she his kiss allows.
He crav'd remission for his faulty words,
Now askt, and straight remission she affords,
And binds him to the limits of unstain'd
Desire, and with her golden tresses chain'd
His heart from all deceit, with such pure grace,
As ought in ev'ry lover to have place;
To Talmos she (proud of her prize) him ledd,
(For know fair Sepha's parents both were dead)
Where entertain'd with many royall sips
He drunk full boules of Nectar from her lips.
Time hasty to produce the marriage day
Of these impatient lovers, hy'd his way;
And Sepha after many sweet imbraces,
Fraught with conceit, and stuft with interlaces
Of their ensuing pleasure, did permit
Arcadius departure, who unfit
For any service, but the winged God,
To Arathea went, and as he rode,
Oft blam'd orehasty time their joy t' undo,
But prais'd him for the sports that should ensue.
Now was it when the fraction of the day
From sable night had made Aurora way,
When I [Author's note: Epimenides], ambiguous of suceeding fate,
Forsook my native countrey for the hate
'Gainst me conceiv'd, me Minos Country bred
Whose hundred Cities with amazement led
Each eye to view their pride; My Father old,
And I a pretty stripling, did uphold
The staffe of his declining age, with care
I cherisht him, and did the burthen bear
Of his domestick ployments, now it was,
(When all his businesse through my hands did pass)
That once he sent me to attend the sheep,
Where Woods sweet chanters summon'd me to sleep:
Within a Cave of Parian stone compos'd,
I laid me down, I laid me down, and clos'd
My duskish eyes, sure some inchantments kept
The same with Magick spells, for there I slept
Whole seventeen years away; awak'd at last,
I got me up, and to my home did haste,
Not knowing so much time away was fled,
I call'd my friends, but lo, my friends were dead.
This known I left Minoia, and spent
My dayes in Rome, not caring where I went,
Nor what I did; nor there I long remaind,
Cause more mishap was to my life ordain'd:
Mugiona stands pointing to a way
Call'd Appia, through which my journey lay;
Nor many dayes were spent before I came
Unto that Town which Sora hath to name;
And there a while I staid, a while I strove
To kill those griefs, which never ceas'd to move
A desp'rate end, for that unwisht mischance
Still gnawing on my soul, about t' advance
My sword towards my end, O stay a while
A voice bespake, let not thy wrath beguile
Thee of succeding joyes; amaz'd I stood,
Not knowing why to save, or spill my blood.
My eyes could shew me nothing, but my ears
Granted a convoy for the sob'd-forth tears
Of a distressed Lady, what mishap
Hath Fortune more, said she, than to intrap
Our joyes, and cut them off?  the voice did guide
Me to a little grove, wherein I spi'd
A wretched Lady with torn hair discover,
(O're the dead corps of her beloved lover)
Th' irreparable loss, and hatefull breath,
She did sustain through his untimely death.
Agast she trembled, and with liquid eyes,
Sent with her lovers soul into the skyes,
Prayes that her end may with his end appear,
Or here to have him, or to have him there.
A while I stood, either with fear o'regon,
Or else with grief not able to go on,
Till she with sword tug'd from his wounded brest,
Made passage for her souls eternall rest.
I hi'd me to her, but my steps were lost,
The wound was given; saith she, since we are crost
Of Terrene pleasures, and those joyes do miss,
Our soules shall wed in Heav'ns eternall bliss.
I striv'd to stop her blood, but she deny'd
That any favour should to her betide,
Since she was cross'd in all designes, and said,
If the entreaties of a dying maid,
Sir Knight may move you, grant this last request,
With your own sword give period to the rest
Of him who did my Delithason slay,
O're yon ambitious hill he took his way.
I vow'd their deaths revenge, withall desir'd,
Since she would die, before her life expir'd
Its glorious date, t' acquaint my pitying ears
With her sad story, while whole shours of tears
Imbalm the body dead; alas said she,
You cause me to renew the grief must be
My pasport to his soul, then faintly rais'd
Her weary head:  For ever be ye prais'd
(Ye Powrs) that grant me liberty t' unfold
Our Tragick ends, and then this story told.

THE STORY OF DELITHASON AND VERISTA.
Not far remote there are four little lands,
Rul'd by that God, who girts them with his hands;
Statinae call'd, in these my Father dwelt,
Whose alwayes scraping, but nere fill'd hand felt
A mean of Fortunes good, (whether by Fate,
Or fore-ordained to expire the date
Of my distressed life) to me t's unknown,
But wealth (with which those Isles have ever flown)
Heap'd to his hands a still encreasing croud
Of gilded pills, those riches made him proud.
Amongst the other fortunes that he had,
(O whether shall I term it good or bad)
The Heav'ns assign'd him me, Verista nam'd,
Who yet but young, a false report had fam'd
Rare beauty of me; this, O this declar'd,
Draw'd many Princes that the same had heard,
To try the judgment of their eyes, which fame
By some confirm'd, this Delithason came,
(Not like a Prince, as like a Prince he might,
Because he was a Prince) but like a Knight
With Sword and Lance, but first I'd have you know
My Father amongst many had a foe
Of Gyants race, whose heart enur'd to wrong,
To rapes, and base oppressions had long
Appli'd his strength, and now to torture more
My Fathers brest that life might give him o're,
This quarrell pick'd, he came and did demand
Me for his wife, and cause we did withstand
His wish, with kindled rage from Pluto's Cell,
He shakes his dangling locks, and down to Hell
A journey takes, Erinnis he implor'd,
And all the Furies which he there ador'd,
T' assist his new found plot, nor yet in vain
They adde their help, with fire they rent in twain
A Town my Father own'd, the dwellers there
Affraid of death, t' abolish quite their fear,
Plastred the walls with brains, their limbs bestrew'd
The blushing streets with streams of blood bedew'd.
To this he adds a mischief worse, and throwes
Blasphemous oaths, on which he did repose,
Up to Saturnus son, the sacred stones,
On which the people laid oblations,
He hurls about the Temple, from the posts
The gold he tears, and in his mischief boasts.
By this my brother, guided by the cryes
Of conquer'd sounds, came staring in, and spies
The honors of Celestiall Gods defac't,
A sling he had, and from that sling did cast
The over hastie stone, and though he well
Could use his sling, yet did his art excell
In managing his sword, now heav'd aloft,
Threatning the Gyants death, said he, how oft
Shall I be vext with too too partiall eye
Of thy outrage?  perish with this and dye.
His speech scarce clos'd, Marfilos smear'd with blood,
A colebrand snatcht which by the altar stood,
And sends it to my brother, 'twas espy'd
By Delithason this, about to slide
Along the Air, with Lance he stopt his hand,
And sent his soul to that infernall land,
Where ghosts with hideous cries indure the right
Of their deserts, cloath'd in Eternall night.
Thus Delithason by the clamors call'd,
And by the Gyants death the same appall'd;
Restor'd to every man his own, the rather
To get (the seldom got) love of my Father;
Who nothing thankfull for so great a favour,
Gave thanks indeed; but with so rude behaviour,
That nought was heard but sighs and pittious moan,
How to regain the harm to him was done.
I must said he, omit the charge I us'd
In keeping house, by which I have abus'd
My quite-consumed stock; I must omit
The courteous entertainment that is fit
For worthy guess, and so to end the strife
Of sleeping age, with a retired life;
To this the Prince, (whose ever piety
Still lent discourteous acts a noble eye)
Sayes, aged Father your declining head
Should scorn to be to base Rebellion led
Against the Lawes of Hospitality;
Decrepit age should on the good rely
Which she hath done, not on her present wealth,
The souls decay, opposer to her health.
O whither shall I turn?  assist me now
Ye ever helping Powers, let not a vow
So firmly made before your holy fires,
So eas'ly be infring'd; but who aspires
To mount the chariot where the glorious Sun
The orb surveys, with pride shall be undon.
And shall I silent dye?  Shall this exile
From hopes, the pure bond of my love defile?
Shall my desir'd desires with horrid sound
Of a faint heart increase m' increasing wound?
No, Love must fear no harm, he is not fit
T' enjoy Loves fruits, that hath not firmly knit
A resolution to his hopes, and ty'd
Himself, though oft, yet ne're to be deny'd.
Father, the wings of ever warbling fame
Exempt alone, chatter'd the glorious name
Of your Verista's beauty, 'twas my chance,
When ev'ry Eccho did the same advance
In lofty tunes, to hap into your fight,
And being greedy of so great a sight,
Gave period to all hopes of other beauty,
And did besiege her heart, 'tis now her duty
My pleasure to obey, for Hymens lights
Have linkt our hearts, with honour of those rites
To Lovers due, be willing then to it
Since Fate hath stop'd all means the bond t' unknit.
But if you will not, if you will persever
In hatred to those Princes, that endeavor
To bless their happy lives in blessing her;
I say again, if still you will prefer
Your will before all reason without reason,
As hitherto you have don, there's a Season
Call'd quiv'ring winter, with his milky bride,
Will freez your honor, and abate your pride.
Imperiall I, in fair Zephire sit,
Whom wealthy Caria bounds, and brags of it,
There flowes that paltry gold so much I hate,
I think the more t' impare my quiet state.
Luxurious brat, and enemy to wealth,
My Father said, th' hast got the Crown by stealth,
With it Verista's love, and do'st thou think
My Daughter shall of that stolne honour drink?
First let my hands imbrew their wrinkled skin
In her false breast, first let the spoyle begin
Upon my off-spring, can thy boasts assure her?
Or the bare title of a Crown procure her
Contented wealth?  Say, can so great a name,
As Queen of Caria wipe away the blame
Of disobedience?  or release the oath
Of duty?  or of zealous care?  or both?
Which she (when subject to my tender rodds,)
Made in the presence of the better Gods?
Here Delithason staid his speech, too late,
He said, you vent your nere consumed hate.
The Gods observe your deeds, and though a while
They slack their vengance, tis but to beguile
The Offenders with false hopes; so said, he turn'd
His head about, and on the Altar burn'd
Prepared Incense, strait the Altar brake
In twain, and after a fierce Thunder-clap,
Sweet Musick breath'd, in which a Chanter cry'd,
Thy time's expir'd, and thou art deifi'd.
Amaz'd the people stand, nor yet to whom,
They can conceive this prophecie should come;
Not I alas, no, nor my feeble heart,
Fore-thought of this, of this untimely dart,
For so it hapt, Marfilos had a son,
(From a corrupted spring ill waters run)
Who (wicked) at his fathers death repining,
Just as the Sun was to his bed declining,
Observ'd when I and Delithason hy'd
T'wards his Zephire, (for being denide
My Fathers Blessing, privily we got
Away, when careless he observed not)
And passing through this wood this Bloody wood
(A closet for those that delight in Blood)
The Gyants son a twinded Javelin cast,
And made this wound you see, that don, in haste
Knowing his dart this spotless heart had sped,
Unto his home, his fathers den he fled:
About to tell the rest she stopt, and dy'd,
When I by vertue of my promise ty'd,
After I had repos'd them in one Urne,
Towards Statinae did my voyage turne,
And (lest too long I should delay the joy,
Hasty Arcadius wishes to enjoy)
Stuft up with Ire, I did not long pursue
His steps, before at him I had a view.
Ho!  villaine stay, I cry'd, receive the meed,
The Gods alot thee for thy wicked deed,
Stay Murtherer, thy haste shall not prefer,
Injustice before right, stay Murtherer,
While yet I spake, my Lance his shoulders caught,
My Sword beguild him of his head, and taught
This lesson to the world, th' allseeing Eye,
Lets not apparent wrongs unpunish'd dye.
My vow dissolv'd, I bent my course again
Towards Abella, whose high walls disdain
A rivall in their prid, there is a way
That leads thereto, by which a medow lay,
In it I saw a Knight of Silver hew,
With sword, hold a stout Combat against two
Of fiery looks, I hy'd me to the fight,
Either by force or Treaty to unite
Their various minds, but what can words prevail,
Where bloody resolutions do assail
A spotless minde?  no time they would admit,
Through hasty fight, t' inquire the cause of it.
A while I view'd the Combate, till the Knight
In silver armor on the neck did light
Of one of th' adverse side, who unacquainted
With such rough complements, fell down and fainted.
So done, he said, by all the Powers that dwell
In lofty thrones, thy valour doth excell
Thy neighb'ring Princes, but thy unjust cause,
Repugne against the splendor, and the lawes
Of Martiall discipline, content thee then
With this, thou art the happiest of men
In that th' hast scap'd revenge to traytors due,
Do other matters cause thee to pursue
This spite, besides thy false suspect?  or can
Thy ever-stain'd affection (which began
And ends with lust, not love) enchant thy sense
So far with stupid blindnesse to commence
Hatred for this?  withdraw thy self and yeeld
To me thy life, thy weapon, and the field.
So shall my arms with amity imbrace
Thy neck; where else 'twill shew thee thy disgrace.
No sooner said, but we might hear the sounde
Of trampling horses beat the tender ground
For swifter speed now to us seen, and now
Dismount their Steeds, and to the adverse bow,
Pardon said they (great Prince) that our neglect
Infring'd the Laws of our indeer'd respect.
But when they saw his armor stain'd, and view'd,
His dead companion with blood imbru'd,
They re-amount the nimble Steeds they rid,
(For Marble look'd not paler than they did)
And to the silver Knight their anger bent,
Who with excess of bleeding almost spent,
Held up his hand to me, to me he said,
(For they were three) see how I am betraid
With these unequall odds, no more you need
To move me up I said, fear not, proceed
With your own hands to lacerate in twain
Their conscious hearts, to me your prayers are vain.
I am too weak to shelter you from harms,
Though arm'd, yet I'm unskill'd to use my arms,
But what I am I'm yours, with that our swords
We drew, and blows supply'd the want of words.
While he (most noble and most valiant Knight)
Each blow he took, each blow he did requite
With treble use, awhile they hold us play,
Till overcome, their lives did end our fray.
This done, and all things hist, I thought it good
To stop the conduits of his flowing blood,
When mounted on our Steeds, with gentle gate
Riding towarde his home, he did relate
The tragick story thus; I am said he
Arcadius, and yonder Towr you see
Is mine, this Prince whom now we slew,
Hearing what pure unstain'd affection grew
'Tween me, and one nam'd Sepha in her heart,
He came, and did prescribe a double part:
On this our quarrell grew, and what success
In it he had, your valour will express.
Not I, said I, 'twas you your conquering hand,
Your cause, your sword, your strength that did withstand
Their greedy hopes, the Gods do close their eyes
From impious vassals, and exclude their cryes.
And since you please t' intitle me your friend,
O let my willing service you attend,
And what you think will magnifie your name,
Withall conceive me ready for the same.
'Twas Summer then, and having cur'd his wounds
Call'd out by th' noise of his pursuing hounds,
We gallopp'd o're the plains, now by a Wood
Our way we took, where purple statues stood,
O blesse me here he cry'd, and softly said,
Inshrind in these four pleasant Nymphs are laid.
Then by a Tower, in this said he remains
The fairest flower, the pride of all the plains,
'Tis Sepha's house, the Goddess of my heart,
In whose fair cheeks, Love with his golden dart
Sits sporting, dasht with a Vermilion dye,
Th' are like the blush came from Endymions eye,
When twin-born Cynthia to suffice her will,
Had courted him on sleepy Latmos hill.
No sooner said, but Sepha said 'tis true,
If lik'd of you, for Sepha lives by you,
And spying me she blush'd, lovers doe so,
For conscious minds appear by th' outward shew;
All salutations past, she led us in,
Where first our root of ruine did begin:
For such firm bonds of constant amity,
Had link'd Arcadius loyall heart to me,
(Which by our outward actions was not hid,
For never two lov'd better than we did)
That she perceiving how he stood inclin'd,
The more to please and gratulate his mind,
Us'd me with courteous terms, he discontent,
(Suspition is a tryall eminent
Of true affection) thought some new-born love
'Twards me increast, her tender heart did move
As Helen did to Paris, took occasion,
T' assist her loyall love with this perswasion;
For sitting in a pleasant bower which hung
With various flowres he took a Lute and sung.

See'st not my love with what a grace?
The Spring resembles thy sweet face?
Here let us sit, and in these bowers,
Receive the odors of the flowers,
For Flora by thy beauty wood,
conspires thy good.

See how she sends her fragrant sweet,
And doth this homage to thy feet,
Bending so low her stooping head,
To kiss the ground where thou dost tread,
And all her flowers proudly meet,
to kiss thy feet.

Then let us walk my dearest love,
And on this carpet strictly prove
Each others vow, from thy request
No other love invades my brest.
For how can I contemn that fire
which Gods admire?

To crop that Rose why dost thou seek,
When there's a purer in thy cheek?
Like Corall held in thy fair hands,
Or blood and milk that mingled stands;
To whom the Powers all grace have given.
a type of Heaven.

Yon Lillie stooping 'twards this place,
Is a pale shadow for thy face,
Under which veil doth seem to rush;
Modest Endymions ruddy blush.
A blush indeed, more pure and fair
than Lillies are.

Glance on those flowers thy radiant eyes,
Through which cleer beams they'l sympathize
Reflective love, to make them far
More glorious than th' Hesperian star,
For every swain amazed lies,
and gazing dies.

See how these silly flowers twine,
With sweet imbracings, and combine,
Striving with curious looms to set
Their pale and red into a net,
To shew how pure desire doth rest
for ever blest.

Why wilt thou then unconstant be?
T' infringe the lawes of amity?
And so much dis-respect my heart?
To derogate from what thou art?
When in harmonious love there is
Elisian bliss.

Sepha at this was pleas'd, displeas'd was he
To see her smile; leave off thy jealousie
Arcadius she said, I am possest
With that firm love, which nere shall leave my brest.
First shall the Sun forget his course to flie,
And Pindus hills shall soar about the skie.
First shall the Roman Eagles lose their wings,
And musick murmur musick without strings.
First shall the Sea-born Goddesse leave the fan
Of ardent love, and turn precisian:
And fearfull Hares pursue the thundring cry
Of Cretan Hounds, and Ovids mem'ry dy,
Er'e I, who to thee do my soul betroth,
Forsake my word, or falsify my oath.
So said, she hangs her lip, and lours her head,
(Lovers are oft asham'd of what they sed)
While he with hymns of joy the debt did pay
Of upright love, and nam'd the wedding day.
Which come, and all things ready, Sepha drest
Her hair, her coats were blew, upon her brest
She wore a Stone of curious art compos'd,
Wherein two naked lovers were inclos'd;
Both striving, till the maid who did resist,
Grew weak, and then he us'd her as he list.
Now Ladies, know; a Prince there was whom fame
Had taken captive with fair Sepha's name,
Who hearing of the wedding day, wherein
Their hands should be linkt, as their hearts had bin;
And hearing of the weakness of the guard,
That should conduct them to the Church, prepar'd
To rob us of her; as you pass the plain,
There is a prety hillock that would fain
Be call'd a hill, behind this hill they hide
Themselves, their weapons, and doe there reside.
Now we in whom no thought of treachery
Had told us of mishap, with jollity
Hy'd to the temple, there, O there the chance
Of base conspiring mischief did advance
It self, dejected us, a horrid voice
Of threatning people sent a hideous noise
Unto our ears, now to our eys their arms
With glittring shields foretell our following harms.
Unweapon'd we, for battels are refus'd
On wedding days, and other weapons us'd,
So that the easier they our necks did bend
Unto their yoke, now had they took my friend
The yong Arcadius and his lovely bride,
The onely prize they waited for, and hy'd
Them on their way, born by the heat of love
'Twards th' one, 'twards th' other hate their speed did move,
When I (O ne're till then unfortunate)
Saw Tyranny and malice at debate,
Who first should steal away the spotless life
Of my Arcadius, at last a knife,
His unstain'd bosome pierc'd, who dying cry'd,
Let Sepha live, and I am satisfied.
You ravishers said I of others blood,
By this discern if Traytors ends are good,
And with a sword snatch'd from anothers arm,
Cleft one, and said be sharer in his harm;
With that a second, and a third I slew,
And so a fourth, till such a tumult grew,
That after divers blows away they fled,
And left me, as they well might think for dead.
Mean while Campanian Sepha took her flight
Into a Wood, born there by horrid fright.
Where long she could not stay, by carefull heed
Drawn forth, to know how her known love did speed,
And now she finds, what nere she wisht to find,
With his dear bloud the blushing flowers lin'd;
She sayes not much, lest helplesse words should stay
Her soul too long, but kneeling down doth pray,
Then took the knife by his own blood made foul,
And falling down upon't advanc't her soul.
Awak'd from out my sound, I saw how Fate
Had plaid the wanton, and expir'd their date:
I took their bodies and them both did burn,
I put them both together in one Urn;
Strait both their ashes, Male and Female grew,
And from the same admired Phoenix flew;
From whence I Prophesie it shall revive
By death, for tis their fame shall keep't alive,
Which growing old towards the Sun shall flie,
And till the Heavens dissolve shall never dye.

Here Epimenides his story ceast,
And bending down his panting bosome dyes:
Whose death the Ladies former griefs increast,
They sent his Soule to Elizium with their cryes,
Upon whose shrine they wrot his death, to show
From Heaven he came, to Heaven he needs must go.
