From all those courses of a vaine conceit,
Where vertue proves, her honor hath no place,
Unto the Sunne, of that bright shining heighte:
Where all the graces have their highest grace,
My Muse is weande, by wisedomes sounde advise,
To make her pilgrimage, to paradise.

Which pilgrimage, is not, as poets faine,
Nor pievish people, blindely doe conceive:
A kinde of walke, that worldly wealth may gaine,
Whereby the devill, doth the worlde deceive:
But, tis a walke, of onely vertues will,
And to be founde, but by the spirits skill.

Now, they that must this travaile take in hande,
Are onely five, ech differente in theire nature,
Which, with consent, doe all contented stand,
To yeeld theire service, to one onely creature:
By whom they are unto theire comforte led:
And, as hee fares, are found, alive or dead.

Now lies this walke, alonge a wildernes,
A forrest, ful of wild, and cruell beastes:
The earth untilde, the fruit unhappines,
The trees all hollow, full of howletes nestes,
The aier unholsome, or so foule infected:
As, hardely restes, that may not be rejected.

But, to goe on with my intended tale,
Five servants, ledde by one chiefe lord, there were:
Which, all were sworne in either blisse, or bale,
Their masters fortune, faithfully to beare:
And so resolv'de, to see, their service done,
On gods good speed their travaile thus begonne.

The lorde and Master, first the Muses called,
And bad them stay, their straying kinde of Musing:
Whose pure conceite, their spirits so apalled,
As, made them have, their humors in refusing:
And make their state, but on that only story,
That was the grace, of their eternall glory.

Then gave a charge to every one, aparte,
To keepe the compasse of a true conceite:
What every one should have for her desart,
That, to her hope, could keepe the high waie streight:
And then his servants, soundely did advise,
How they shoulde finde the path to paradise.

The first, his charge, was onely but to see,
What best might please, and what might worst offend:
What objects might but all as abjects be,
What harme to scape, what honour to attende:
Afarre, neare hand, each side, before, behinde,
How best to guide a pure, and perfect minde.

The seconde calde, his charge was but to heare,
In sweetest sounds, which was the soundest sweete:
What graces might, in Musickes grounde appeare,
And where the honors of the humors meete:
What carefull notes, doe comfort best conclude,
While Sirens songes, doe but the soule delude.

The third then calde, was charg'd to take the sent.
Of every flower and herbe, within the fielde:
Which might but grow whereas their graces went,
What favoure might, the sweetest profit yeelde:
And what might hurt, least that the braine displeased.
The body might perhaps be all diseased.

The fourth then calde, did take his charge, to tast,
Of every fruite, that should become their foode:
What beast might nourish, and might sweetest last,
And, in their travaile most might doe them good:
How sweete with sower, might best be tempred so,
As, tone, the tother might not well forgoe.

Then came the fifte who tooke his charge to feele,
The gravelde causey from the hollow grounde:
How best the toe, might trust unto the heele,
When settled faith had surest footing founde:
And so by leasure finde, where sweetely lies,
The lovely path, that leades to paradise.

When thus ech one, had learned what to doe,
Instructed by the guide unto their grace:
Weying the worth, they were, to walke unto,
Wishing, and longing, to beholde the place.
Onwards they passe, but with two poore attendauntes,
And, (on the earth) but with two poore defendauntes.

Their cariage was, but an unwildy trunke,
Wherein to neare their trash, was laied their treasure,
With weight whereof, their shoulders often thruncke,
Before they came, unto their place of pleasure,
But let that passe, untill the time be cumme.
To make the reckening of a Royal summe.

But to goe on as I did first intend,
To tell the course, of these resolved creatures,
To take a travaile, that should never ende,
A note, above the reache of earthly natures,
Lo, thus it was, at least as he did write,
That, seemde he winckt not, when he hit the white.

Along the walke, the walke, alas, to long,
Amidde the haples hils, and dolefull dales:
Where sighes and sobs, doe sound but sorrows song,
While sweetest truthes are crost by sorie tales:
And darkest cloudes, are clapt before the sunne,
These wary creatures, have their waie begunne.

A path unpleasant where no pleasure was,
That earthly people easely might perceive:
A passage harde, and narrow for to passe,
But for the life, that of his life tooke leave:
To passe the lake where death, and sorrow lies,
And kill them both, to come to paradise.

Wherein, no sooner, were they all set forth,
With resolution never to returne:
There did appeare a light of little worth,
A mocking Joie, whose ende was but to morne:
Upon the left hand, of this selly creature,
Venus, faire painted, with her finest feature.

Who, wanting nothing, that might wel adorne,
A cunning dame, to compasse her desire:
With looke askaunce, as if shee had in scorne,
A meaner hope, then might a heaven aspire:
With strange devises of a world of toies,
Would stoope his passage to his further Joies.

And up she standes a tipto, in her state,
As, if the earth, too base were for her feete:
With such a glaunce, as if shee had in hate,
That lesse then Monarches, should her presence meete:
When, with such smiles, so neare this walke she went,
As made them wonder what the vision ment.

When he, that first had taken charge to view,
What might their travaile hinder or availe:
Finding, that in his sight a dimnes grew,
Whereby the cleernes of his sence might faile:
Feeling the humor, growe unto an Itche,
Beganne to feare the wonder was a witch.

When of the sodaine, holding up his hande,
Betwixte his sight, and this same perlous thing:
Having no leasure, on his thoughtes to stande,
What issue would, of this, ill humor spring:
Went on alonge and kepte his walke aright,
Untill this vision vanisht out of sight.

When, on the right hand fourthwith did appeare,
Diana, shee, of whom the poets writ:
A dame of state, yet with such smiling cheere,
As shewd, where kindenes, did with honor sit:
Who, with her nimphes, appareld all in white,
Did seeme to pure an object for his sight.

When fearing, that the poets did not faine,
That did set forth Diana for divine:
When in her Beauty was so bright a vaine,
As, seemde, that Phoebus on her face did shine:
Betwixt his sight, and this conceived sunne,
Helde up his hande, ere any hurte was donne.

And thus betwixt first Venus, then Diane,
Onwardes he goes, his right intended way,
And, noting well what he had undertane,
And that a stoppe might cause to longe a staie,
Keeping the path, looking on neither side,
He followes on his best beloved guide.

When, walking on, his hoped happy way,
Upon the left hande rose a sodaine sounde,
Which might have beene a most unhappy staie,
But that a sodaine remedy was found,
For he that knew her Musicke was a charme,
His hearing stopt, for feare of further harme.

And this was he that had the charge to heare,
And harken soundly to each secret sounde.
What noise might not by any meanes cum neare,
And where the Muses soone woulde be a ground,
Who having heard but how her harpe was stronge,
Would not vouchsafe the hearing of her songe.

But, when shee saw how hardly shee was used,
Her Beauty first barde from the walke of blisse,
And then her Musicke so in skorne refused,
As idle noise, wherein no honor is,
Awaie shee went all angry as shee was,
And left the poore man, on his waie to passe.

When, one the right hand of the sodeine rose,
An other sound, but of a deeper sweete,
Where sure Diana, with her Nimphes had chose,
The ground of grace where all the Muses meete,
To shew the world the heavenly harmony,
Where Nightingales, doe make a company.

When hee that heard the sweetnes of the sound,
Fearing what hurt might quickly growe upon it,
If once his Muse, unhapply might be drownde,
In worldes delight, ere, wit had overgonne it.
The hearing stopt, of his unworthy sence:
Of such a sound, of such an excellence.

But when Diana plainly gan to find,
That, one of all the world, had warning tooke?
For comming neere unto Acteons kinde,
And that her silver sound was so forsooke,
Away shee went, but yet, with this sweet blessing,
Vertue is plac'd where pride may not be pressing.

When these were gon, that might have stopte his waie,
Had he not kepte the course of better care,
A new devise, againe to breede his staie,
Came Flora forth, with all his fairest ware,
Laying abroad the wardrope of her wealth,
Her fairest flowers, and fittest herbes for health.

But he that had the charge to take the sente,
Of everie savoure, both the sower and sweete,
Knowing what best might comforte, or contente,
How, weedes were all, to tread but under feete,
The holsome savoure to his service used,
And faire flourd weedes, as poison foule refused.

But when that Flora, saw her great disgrace:
Withered with griefe, she shrunke into the ground,
And, (as it seemed) displeased with the place,
For that, so little favour their she found,
She lets him goe, untill anone he met,
An other Lady, with an other let.

And this was she, of whom the Poets writ,
Ceres the Princes of the Pesaunts treasure,
Who both for tast, and eke for hunger fit,
Did onely worke, but for the bellies pleasure,
Who, with a cornu copia, sweetely dight:
Would staie the spirit, with the flesh delight.

But he that had the charge, to take a tast:
Of every fruit, whereon, they were to feede,
What soone would rot, and what would longest last,
And what would prove the sweetest foode indeede,
Upon his lippe his little finger plas't:
As if her gift were utterly disgras't.

Not, that the present seemed of no price,
But, that their comforts were of other kinde:
And that, (God wot) it was a base devise,
With belly pleasures to abuse the minde:
Which Ceres seeing, parted in a rage,
And left the pilgrime, to his pilgrimage.

Which, selly creature, softly going on,
Encountred with more crosses, then before:
A world of fooles, and devils many a one.
In shape of men, in shape, and somewhat more:
Which labourd sore, to make some stoppe, or stay,
To hinder love, in hitting vertues waie.

But, he, whose charge, was charily to feele,
What grounde was best to grounde his footing on:
Spurnde with his toe, and kickt of with his heele,
Their stumbling stones, till all the stops were gone:
Which, when they saw, his blisse they could not balke,
They ranne away, and left him to his walke.

By which good howre, when heavens had happly tried,
How constant care, his passage, truely past:
And in the harte, no vile desire did bide,
While patient will, was with discretion plac't:
They rockt the rules, of nature sence asleepe,
While Angels songs, the soule did waking keepe.

But, waking wit, that had no will to rest,
Till joie might come, unto her journeies ende:
And that the spirit, was not fully blest,
Till humble faith, might see her heavenly friende:
Awakte this pilgrime, from his pensive vaine,
And set him sweetely on his waie againe.

When, passing on, they fell into a wood,
A thicket full, of brambles, thornes, and briers:
A graceles grove, that never did man good,
But wretched sendinges of the worldes desires:
Where Snakes, and Adders, and such venumd things,
Had slaine a number, with their cruell stinges.

Some, Metamorphosde, like Acteon, were,
Diana smiling at their lewde desires:
Some Semitawres, and some, more halfe a Beare,
Other halfe swine, deepe wallowing in the miers:
All beastly mindes, that could not be reformed,
Were to the shapes of their owne shame transformed.

There might he see, a Monkey with an Ape,
Climing a tree, and cracking of a Nut:
One sparrow teache an other how to gape,
But, not a tame one, taught to keepe the cut:
And many a Jacke daw, in his foolish chat,
While parets prated of they knew not what.

There might he see Beares baited all with dogges,
Till they were forst, to fly into their dennes:
And wilde Bores, beating of the lesser hogges,
While cocks of game, were fighting for their hens:
A little ferret, hunting of a Cunny,
And how the olde Bees, suckt the young Bees hony.

There might he heare the lions in their roaring,
While lesser beastes, did tremble at the sounde:
There might he see, Buls one an other goaring,
And many a harte sore hunted with a hounde,
While Philomene, amid the quechy springe,
Woulde cease her note, to heare the Cuckoe sing.

There might he see, a faulcon beaten downe,
By carrein crowes, that croste her in her flight.
A russet Jerkin, face a velvet gowne,
While base companions, bravde a noble Knight:
And crafty foxes creepe into their holes,
While little hoppes were climing lofty poles.

There might he see, the Satyrs in their daunces,
Halfe men, halfe beastes, or devils in their kindes:
There might he see, the Muses, in their traunces,
Lie downe as dead, as if they had no mindes:
There might he see, in all, so little good,
As, made him wish, he had bene through the wood.

Yit in the path, wherein he sweetely past,
No evill thing, had power to take a place:
No venumde serpent, might his poison caste,
No filthy monster, nor illfavourd face:
No lyon, Beare, dogge, Moncky, foxe, nor Crow,
Could stoppe the waie, where vertue was to goe.

When, forwardes, on they had not travailde farre,
But that they met, a monster fowle, and fell:
Armde, as it seemde, with all the world to warre:
And none but heaven, could of his conquest tell:
Seven were his heads, seven tailes, ech taile a sting,
And but one body, oh most beastly thing.

Now, on the left hand of this passage stoode,
This ougly horror, hate of al good nature:
When on the right hand, glauncing through the wood,
Through sunny beames came downe a blessed creature:
Angell at least, by heavenly mercy sent,
To comfort vertue, where discretion went.

White was her weede, and shining was her face,
Her fetherde winges, did glister all like golde:
And in her eie, shee caried such a grace,
As, was on earth, too glorious to beholde.
Which made the pilgrime on his knees adore her,
As one unworthy once to stande before her.

But, when shee saw, humilities affection,
Wonne from the world to seeke for heavenly favour,
And that the soule, by wisdomes sound direction,
In sacred flowers, should finde the sweetest favour,
Shee raisde him up, and badde him there receive,
The true delightes, should not the soule deceive.

When lifted up, by that faire hande of love,
That brought the hart an unknowne happines,
And every servant, sweetly did approve,
A blessing in their Masters blessednes,
With silent thoughtes, they humbly did attende,
The words, that did their comfort comprehende.

Poore wretch quod shee, thy faithfull patient hart,
The highest powers in pitty doe regarde:
Where true repentance pleades for no desart,
But, bounties grace, where mercy gives rewarde:
The heavens have harde, thy humble happy praier,
To helpe thy hope, and keepe thee from despaire:

The labour, that thy love hath tane in hande,
Thy travaile, minding, never to retire:
The happy staie, whereon thy hope doth stande,
Where humble praier, but pitty doth aspire:
Have got thee grace in Mercies glorious eies,
To finde the path that leades to paradise.

This is the path, that patience onely treades,
Where life doth goe on pilgrimage to love:
Whose humble hart, the holy spirite leades,
Unto the height of blessed hopes behove:
Whom graces garde, till perils al be past,
And faith resolv'de, doe finde her rest at last.

Since thou hast scapte the vaunt of Venus vaine,
And not presumde Diana to approch:
Since Flora coulde no further favour gaine,
Nor Ceres coulde thy carefull thought encroch:
Since fooles, and devils, all are driven awaie,
Bide but a night, and thou shalt see the daie.

Since thou hast scapte the way of wretchednes,
Where shameles mindes to shamefull shapes are turned,
And founde the waie of fairest blessednes,
Where hart enflamde, with vertues fire hath burned:
Keepe on the pathe, and turne on neither side,
Grace to thy hope will be a happy guide.

Thinke it not long to cumme to heaven at last,
Nor linger time to hinder happy speede:
Feare not the sunne, though skies be overcast,
And let a candell stande the night in steede,
So marke the light, that lives in Vertues eies,
And love shall leade thee straight to paradise.

Feare not the foes, nor forces thou shalt meete,
For thou shalt meete with monsters, many a one:
But faith resolv'de treds fortune under feete,
Where vertue comes, will vices all be gone:
Hell cannot hurt, whom heavenly powers defend,
Where grace begins, hope makes a happy end.

Lo neere at hand, he that would hurt thee most:
An ougly Monster, full of all corruption:
By whose illusion many soules have lost,
Their lively hopes, by lewdenes interruption.
A Lier, Theife, and master of all evill,
The sier of sinne, the fiende of hell, the devill.

Seaven are his heades, as many are his tailes,
Each head a tongue, and every taile a sting:
And woe to them, with whom his tongues prevailes,
Within the compase of his tails to bringe.
But skorne his wordes, or quite him with disgrace,
And thou shalt kill, or make him fly the place.

His body is the very sinke of sinne,
Into which hole, all hellish filth doth runne.
A plague of pride, presumption did beginne,
An endles plague, that was in pride begunne,
Where every head the body standes in steed,
With poisoned soules, the filthy paunch to feede.

His swordes, are wordes, with which he is to fight,
Whose forces can but faithles hartes offende,
For, if hee looke, but once at vertues light,
He faintes for feare, and feeles his forces ende,
But heare him speake, and never feare his spight,
When vertue laughes at vanites delight.

His greatest head, and that doth gape most wide,
Is proude Ambition, swallowing worldly wealth:
Which faithles soules, infectes, with filthy pride,
Killing the spirit, for the bodies health:
Upon which head, he beares a triple crowne,
That, (Vertue sees) is neere his tumbling downe.

In which great head, his tongue is all untruth,
Lies, to bewitch the worlde unto his will:
The ease of Age, the high conceit of youth:
Are greatest groundes of his ungratious skil:
To governe states, is such a stately thinge:
What slave is he that would not be a king?

And thus the villaine, would the world perswade,
To prowde attemptes that may presume to high,
But earthly joies, wil make him prove a Jade,
When vertue speakes of loves divinity:
Where humble hart, doth to that heaven aspire,
Where is no place for any proude desire.

The seconde heade, is wicked avarice,
Choking itselfe, with trash, in steade of treasure:
Whose tongue, is treason that can best devise,
To hurte the spirite, with the bodies pleasure:
But talke of vertues joie in Misery,
And he wil pine to death in penury.

The thirde foule head, is filthy Gluttony,
Devouring more, then it can well digest:
Leading the harte, to loathsome villany,
And of a man doth make an ougly beaste:
But, answere him with fasting, and with praier,
The very wordes, will kill him with their aier.

The fourth bad head, is beastly slothfulnes,
Sleeping, and snorting, like a filthy swine:
Loosing the time in loathsome Idlenes,
Dreaming, of that, which never was divine:
But answere him, with vertues carefull watching,
He faintes, and falls, to finde his overmatching.

The fifte vile heade, is filthy lechery,
Which leades the hart, to hateful wickednes:
His tongue, a forge of fancies treachery,
To bring the soule, to all unhappines:
But, answere him, with vertues chaste desire,
And, he will bite his very taile for ire.

The sixte is envy full of malice fraught,
Feeding on Snakes, that faine would vertue stinge:
Which, where they finde their forces come to nought,
Into his mouth they backe their poison bring:
But say how patience, leades to paradise,
He frets, and fumes, and in impatience dies.

The seventh is murther, most accursed head,
Whose tongue is blasphemy, all dide in blood:
Which, with the harts of harmeles creatures feade,
Lappes in the broath of an Infernall foode:
But, saie how vertue doth for vengeance crie,
And dead he falles, or els awaie doth flie.

Now, beare these heavenly lessons all by harte,
And take these bookes to benefite thy minde:
In each of which is hidde a secret arte,
Whose proper use, maie profite in his kinde:
But chiefly doe this holly booke peruse,
Where speciall comfortes, maie thy spirit chuse.

When, having given into his humble hande,
Seven sundry bookes, whereon to use his wit:
And last, the staie, whereon the state did stande,
Of happy life, where heavenly love doth sit:
The holy booke, of vertues blessed vaine,
Home shee returnes unto her heaven againe.

Which, when the pilgrime humbly did beholde,
Carrying in minde, the comforts of his hart:
Which, to his faith, her favour did unfolde,
To keepe the soule from an infernall smart:
Against the fury of this fiende of hell
Onwardes he goes, God speede his passage well.

When, not to stand on circumstance too long,
He meetes anon with this same monster thing:
Who, by illusion, of the Sirens song,
Would seeke, a worlde, in bondage how to bring
Turning himselfe, into a thousand shapes,
To feare fond children, and to cosen Apes.

And first, he looks, like to fiery light,
Which would consume, what so did crosse his waie:
But soone was donne, the force of his despight,
Where vertue came, he had no power to staie,
And then, he would become a speaking birde,
But God once namde, he durst not speake a worde.

And by and by, he would become a Beare,
To feare young children with a foolish noise:
But, when a man, a beast can never feare,
He founde it prov'de, olde children were no boies:
When, by and by, he woulde become an Ape,
Oh beastly thing, too neare a humaine shape.

But, when that vertue founde the vile effect,
Of Apish humors, with the Monckish mindes,
Shee wholy did, the vermins jestes reject,
And forst him seeke, for shapes of other kindes:
When all his sleightes, could doe him little boote,
For, vertue knew, the devil by his foote.

No, though into an Angell faire of light,
He coulde transforme him selfe, for to deceive:
Yet coulde he not his foote keepe out of sight,
But, vertue coulde his filthy clawe perceive:
So by his foote, shee plainely did descrie him,
Bidding avaunte, foule fiende, shee did defie him.

When, as the pilgrime lifting up his eies,
To heavenly powers from hell for to defende him:
Sweete Christ once namde, awaie the Serpent flies,
And, for a while unable to offende him:
Til, once againe, the heavens had given him leave,
To doe his worst, sweete vertue to deceive.

When, in the shape whereof before I spake,
With his seven heads, the wicked Serpent standes:
With such a sounde, as made the earth to shake,
As halfe the worlde, were subject, to his handes:
When first, his head, of pride began to speake,
And, to this pilgrime, did this poison breake.

Thou little wretch, quod he, of lesser worth,
In humaine shape I know not what to name:
Whom honors spirit, never coulde bring forth,
To seeke the fortune of imperial fame:
How didst thou fal into this forlorne path,
Wherein the worlde so little pleasure hath.

Where, see the ground of every secret griefe,
Which mortifies the body with the minde:
Subject to every crosse, and for reliefe,
Pitty, the whole, that thou must hope to finde:
Patience a paine set downe, life, but a death,
Where care, and sorrow draw a sickely breath.

Where eies must be embased to the ground,
Their pleasing humors, barred to beholde:
And bended knees, to cappe, and courtzy bounde,
While bared head, must bide the bitter colde:
The minde must stoupe, the hande must loose his strength,
The hart must droupe, and life must yeelde at length.

Is this the reach, of Reasons noble wit?
To see a world, and seeke for nothing in it,
In such a chaire doth charie humor sit?
To know a worke of worth and not beginne it:
Who could of power conceive, of kingly pleasure,
Would no conceit in such a comfort measure.

Humility?  a jolly creeping thought,
Patience, a prety purgatory:
Sorrow, a fit, for the phisitian wrought
And death, a gentill ende of misery:
Fasting and praier, al the spirits pleasure,
Notes for a King, to looke upon at leasure.

No, stoupe no thought, seeke only to subdue,
Set no conceit, in honor with a crowne:
In begger minde, true conquest never grew,
The village, is a cotage to the towne:
The Monarchy, doth shew, the noble minde,
He hath no life, that cummes of lower kinde.

What slave wil serve, that easely may commaunde?
What sence wil stoupe, that may be set alofte?
Who wil desire, that needes not to demaunde?
Who loves the boordes may have his bedde made softe?
Or who regardes, the rascall beggers teares?
That may have Musicke to contente his eares.

What poore conceit, wil begge for crummes of bread?
May have his table furnisht all with cates?
Or breake his hart with hammers of his head?
May passe his humors, with his pleasing mates:
Faire, wise, rich, learned, valiant, young, and olde.
Power is the hande, doth at commandement holde.

And so he stopt, but swelling with such pride,
As if his braine, would have with poison burst:
To whom, the pilgrime, presently replied,
Avaunt foule fiende, and Monster most accurst:
Thou hate of heaven, and greatest hagge of hell,
What wicked tale hast thou presumde to tell.

Wretched, blasphemous spirit of presumption,
Ougly in shape, and horrible in sence,
Thou cursed substance of the souls consumption,
The heavens displeasure, and the worlds offence,
That knowst no worth, and art not worth the knowing,
Rot in thy roote, ere thou have further growing.

Thou wicked witch, fonde fortunes first deviser,
To bring a desperate spirit to defame,
And by illusion, first the soules supriser,
That heares thy wordes, and wil beleeve the same,
How durst thou once presume so neere this path,
Where hatefull humor, never passage hath.

Thou grounde of griefe, heere is the grounde of grace,
Thou foule infection, heere is fairest health,
Thou crosse of crosses, heere is comfortes place,
Thou pitties want, and heere is pitties wealth,
Thou dire impatience, dole, and deadly strife,
Curst be the death that stoppes the waie of life.

Whose blinded eies, are barde all blessed light,
Whose crooked knees, are crampt for crafty creeping:
Whose triple crowne, in vertues humble sight,
Will breake thy necke, and rest in better keeping,
Whose hart subdued, by hande of heavenly strength,
Must live in paine of never ending length.

Calst thou the rage of wil, the rules of wit?
Is all the world, ought els but vanitie?
Who in the chaire of chaunging choise doth sit,
Knowes nothing of divine humanity,
Nor in conceit, can comfort truly measure,
That knows, not pride, the plage of high displeasure.

Humility, high Angels happy thought,
While patience, is the devils purgatory:
Sorrow a fit, for faithes phisitians wroughte,
While high heavens mercy, endes worldes misery,
Fasting, and praier, happines procuring,
While true repentance is but hope enduring.

Then stoupe foule pride, whom heavens did full subdue,
Know that thy crowne is cumming tumbling downe:
Vertue doth see how by Ilusion grew,
The worldes disgrace, to grace thee with a crowne:
Monarch of mischiefe, such is all thy minde,
Nor hath he life, that cummes of such a kinde.

His service, freedome, that made thee a slave,
His seate alofte, that makes thee lie full lowe:
His wante a welth, that sees thee nothing have,
His boorde a bed, that makes thee watch for woe:
His almes sweete, that saves the beggers teares,
While thou hast nought, but cries to fill thine eares.

A poore conceite, that starves for lacke of crums,
And yet will tell the worlde of delicates:
Who ofte for hunger feedst upon thy thumbes,
When death and sorrowe, are thy hellish mates:
Faire, wise, riche, learned, valiant, olde, and young,
Take heede of pride, and of his poisned tongue.

And with what worde I knowe not how it fell,
But, downe the crowne, came tumbling on the grounde:
When as the head, with anger seemde to swell,
Like an Aposthume, of a poisoned wounde:
Which breaking inwarde, of the sodaine shroncke
Into the body, oh most beastly troncke.

The heade of pride thus suddainely consumde,
Or shroncke into this filthy sincke of sinne:
The second head, foule Avarice presumde,
With wicked wordes, the miser mindes to winne:
Ah, begger, worme, and needy wretch quod he,
What dost thou thinke, that will become of thee.

Hath patience bred in thee this poore conceite,
That colde and hunger be thy harts content?
Doest thou not see, how manie thousandes waite,
In honors fielde, upon the golden tente?
Or knowest thou not, power, wisedome, wit and pleasure,
All, have their Essence, in the golden treasure.

What face so faire, that is not grac't in golde,
What wit of worth, but hath in golde his wonder?
What learning, but, with golden lines doth holde,
What state so high, but gold will bring him under?
What thought so sweete, but gold doth better season,
And what rule best, but in the golden reason.

Be lorde of landes, and cram thy chest with coine,
Feare nought but neede, mony will make a friende:
Let conscience learne, the cunning to purloine,
Wit without welth, hath but a wofull ende,
The golden scepter, and the golden crowne,
Doth make the subject on his knees come downe.

The grounde is fat, that yeeldes the golden fruite,
The study high, that hits the golden state:
The labour sweete, that gets the golden suite,
The reckning right, that makes the golde rate:
The hap is sure, that golden hap doth holde,
And rich is gaine, that serves the god of golde.

And with that worde the wicked thing did cease,
When presently the pilgrime thus replied:
Oh cursed cancker, crosse of conscience peace,
Whose hatefull harte, doth all ill humors hide:
Thou kindling cole of an Infernall fire,
Die in the ashes, of thy dead desire.

Impatient spirite living all by spoile,
Drunke like the dropsy, and yet ever drye:
Consumde with care, and tired out with toyle,
Seeminge to live, and yet dost ever die,
How durst thou so the name of god blaspheme,
To give to drosse so great a Diademe.

Thou stone-colde hart, with hungring after coine,
My care in heaven, doth seeke my hartes content,
Thou scrapst for pelfe, I seeke not to purloine,
In vertues field, I seeke but mercies tent,
When wisedome, findes, in power of highest pleasure,
The world, al trash, compared to heavenly treasure.

Fowle is the faire that hath in gold her grace,
Worthles the wit, that hath in wealth his wonder:
Unlearned lives, put gold in honors place,
Wicked the state, that will to coine cume under:
Base the conceite, that seasonde is with golde,
And begger, rules, that such a reason holde.

Thou plodst for landes, I seeke a living place,
Thou fearste but neede, I, mony make no frinde:
Thy conscience, cunning, and my care is grace,
Thy wits welth, wo, my harts wish, heaven at ende:
Thy golde is drosse, and vertue is my crowne,
Where hartes submission, puls ambition downe.

Earth gives thee golde, heavens give me higher grace,
Men study wealth, but Angels wisedomes state:
Laboure seekes pence, love hath a higher place,
Death makes thy reckening, life is all my rate:
Thy happe is hell, my hope of heaven doth holde,
God give me grace, die devill with thy golde.

And with that worde, the heade beganne to shrincke,
The face dead pale, and hollow grew the eies:
And so, at laste, did all, and wholy sincke,
Into that hell, that heade of Avarice:
When up did start the heade of Gluttonie,
Vomiting out theese wordes of villany.

Poore braun falne begger, whereon dost thou feede,
Well fare the mouth, that feedes the belly full:
What staruing humor, standes thy wit in steede,
The want of victuaile, makes the body dull:
I finde it true no triumph to a feast,
The belly full the bones will be at rest.

Some feede their eies with staring on the starres,
And starve the body to content the minde:
Some with their wittes will be so long at warres,
They grate on crusts, when other men have dinde:
But let the franticke so their humor please,
Give me the life, of meate, and drinke, and ease.

When that the earth, doth give us pleasing foode,
What reason is it nature shoulde refuse it:
If reason finde, what wil doe nature good,
What bootes to have it, if we doe not use it:
Then let me feede, while I have power to eat,
The mouth was made to give the body meat.

Oh, when the tongue is pleased with a tast,
The stomacke feeds, until the heart do laugh,
And then a cuppe with a carowsing cast,
And then a health out of a frindely quaffe:
Then workes the braine in such a blessed wise,
As if the body were in paradise.

When thinking more to speake, his mouth ranne over,
With beastly humors, loathsome to beholde,
And in such sort, as he coulde not recover,
Till that he did, his filthy sence unfolde,
When stopping so, the pilgrime gan replie,
Die ougly venum in thy villany.

Thou filthy, fat, and overfoggy flesh,
Foule bagpipe-cheekes, eies starting from the head,
Whom heavenly humors never can refresh,
That all in hel, hast made thy hateful bedde:
Heavens let me fast, from such a loathsome feast,
Where to much feeding makes a man a beast.

Earth fill thine eies, heavens feede my humble hart,
Drosse fil thy belly, Grace content my minde,
Of worldly Junckets take thy pleasing part,
Grace, give my soule, one crum, and I have dinde,
So with thy frensies, doe thy fansie please,
Heavens be my rest, whom earth can never ease.

Earth feedes of earth, heavens give the spirit foode,
Nature corrupted lost the key of reason,
The body knowes not of the spirits good,
Use is abuse, where truth is saust with treason,
Then role, and tumble in thy beastly riot,
The dish of mercy, be my spirits diet.

Oh, when the tongue is toucht with cruel fire,
The stomacke feedes, of an infernal flame,
A cuppe of coles to quench a foule desire,
A cureles hart, consuming in the same:
Then workes the spirit with such woful cries,
As, proves in hel, was never paradise.

When this same filthy hedde of Glotony,
Beastly bedight with his abhorred diet:
Choked with venum of such villany,
As breedes the ground of natures most desquiet:
Soncke backe into the belly of the beast,
Which of such spirites, made his speciall feast.

When started up the head of slouthfulnes,
With ougly clawes picking his gummy eies:
Who with the noddes of natures hevines,
Did in few wordes, this filthy speech devise,
What humor, wretch, doth thee so waking keepe,
That thou canst feede upon so little sleepe.

Sleepe is the pride of ease, the height of pleasure,
The Nurse of nature, and the rule of rest:
The thoughtes attonement, and the sences treasure,
The bedde of love, that likes the body best:
Against unrest the only remedy
And onely medicine to ech mallady.

And, therewithall unwilling more to speake,
Such heavy qualmes his hart had overcome:
With stretching yawnes, as if his Jawes would breake,
He stopt his speech, as wholy stroken dumme:
When, nodding of his head from side to side,
To his deafe eares, the pilgrime thus replied.

Thou cursed serpent, grounde of al disgrace,
By Idlenes begetting Ignorance:
Which dost the sprigges of fairest rootes deface,
With loathsome course of lifes discountenaunce:
And makst a pleasure of the spirits paine,
Die in thy dreame, and never wake againe.

Sleepe is the soules disease, the mindes despight,
The curse of Nature, and the crosse of rest:
The thoughtes disquiet, and the darkesome night,
Wherein the spirit, likes the body lest:
A losse of time and reasons malladie,
Where death is found but sorrowes remedy.

The watching virgins kindely were received,
When such as slept did loose their happy houre:
In dreames, the sences often are deceived,
When waking wits finde shadowes have no power:
Then sleepe thy last, where life hath never place,
God graunt my soule, to watch, and praie for grace.

When thus the head of hateful slouthfulnes,
Was soncke into the filthy sincke of sinne:
The harmeful head of al unhappines,
Did lechery, this loathsome tale beginne:
Alas poor pilgrime, childe of chast desire,
Hast thou bin burnt thou canst not bide the fier?

A gentle jest, a man to be a maide,
What minsing humor doth the sences measure?
That Nature can of beauty be afraide,
And loose her prime, before she know her pleasure,
Fleshe hath no favour in divinity,
Nor Nature, pleasure in virginity.

The childe, that knowes not how to make his choice,
Must be a babe, so babishe let him bee:
But he that knowes, how better to rejoice,
Will seeke a worlde, where sweeter thoughtes agree:
No, thinke of love, to be that pleasing thought,
That, for his will, sets all the worlde at nought.

What figure findes not love out of a face?
What humors notes he not, in every heare?
In beauties eies, what stars doth he not place,
What roses in her cheekes, doth she not beare?
What hony in her lippes, and sweeter worth?
In her faire ground but he can gather forth.

It whets the wit, and doth embolden will,
And maketh Arte to worke beyond her selfe,
It maketh nature, study reasons skill,
And in her humors, play the pretty elfe:
It bringeth fancy to a deinty feast,
And makes a man, that woulde be els a beast.

What deinty glaunces passe from eies to eies?
When sweete conceites, are secretly conceived,
What comfortes can the kissing hearts devise?
Where kinde effectes of favour are received:
Age can reporte, and youth doth daily proove,
There is no comforte to the course of love.

And with that worde, did ende his wicked charme,
Unto which sounde, the pilgrime gan reply,
Thou hatefull head, and grounde of every harme,
Venum, compounded all of villany:
A foule infection of the fairest creature,
Die in the filth, of thy corrupted nature.

Thou sleepy slouth, that figurste out the swine,
With groveling humors, tumbling on the grounde,
Thou canst not thinke, upon a thought divine,
But liv'st in dreames, where all deceits are founde:
How durst thou speake in that foule thoughts defence,
Which breedeth nothing, but the soules offence.

Vertue and vice, were never friendes in deede,
Diana knowes, that Venus is no maide,
But faith, that doth on heavenly blessing feede,
Of foolish beauty, maie be well afraide:
When Natures pleasure in virginity,
Shewes, flesh hath favoure in divinity.

And, where the spirit doth the sences measure,
There is no place to let thy poison in:
When Natures pride, is but in vertues pleasure,
Life only endes, that did in love beginne:
Where temperance rules in reasons chast desire,
Will keepe the harte, from thy infernall fire.

Thou wretched childe, of natures wicked choice,
Accursed bable, and so ever bee:
That makste the flesh in filth for to rejoice,
Wherein the spirite doth but sorrowe see:
Calst thou it love, that is but lewde conceite?
Die in thy lust, that art the soules deceite.

Ciphers the figures, found in beauties face,
Humors of heares, illusions of the minde:
The heavenly stars in earth have never place,
Where painted Roses, have no perfect kinde:
Her hony, gall, and what shee can bring forth,
The best, and all, is worse then nothing worth.

It blunts the wit, with to much boldning will,
And forceth Arte, for to forget her selfe:
It draweth Nature, quite from vertues skill,
When wilfull reasone plaies the wicked elfe:
Where, better, fast, then fall to such a feast,
As makes a man in deede become a beast.

What devilish glaunces passe twixt graceles eies,
When base contents, most beastly are conceived:
What crosses more, can kissing hartes devise,
Then when the spirits ruine is received,
Age may repent, and youth with sorrow prove.
Who followes lust, can never come to love.

Oh, what a fire is filthy lechery,
Whose substance is but all of gluttony,
Whose sparcles are, but only ribaudry,
Whose filthy smoke, is foulest infamy,
Whose ashes, are but all uncleanelines,
Whose hatefull ende is hellish beastlines.

Which true description, did so discontent,
The harmefull head of hatefull lechery,
As when shee saw of the ende of her intent,
Crost, in the course of all her trechery,
Shee bit her taile, with such unholsome breath,
As with her biting, stung her selfe to death.

When spake the head of envy all infected,
With ougly Snakes, whereon shee seemd to feede,
Thou foole quod shee, what hath thy hart affected,
Wilt thou endure, thine A B C, to reede?
Canst thou abide to see an other goe,
Towardes the wealth, that thou dost wish for so?

Equality is but a childish humor,
He is alone, that keepes the lofty seate:
What voice is hard?  where al are in a rumor,
Or who is serv'd, where every one is great?
Why, patience is the paterne of a villaine,
That never came neare to a Kings pavilion.

And with that word she fed upon her Snakes,
As if her heart, did like none other foode:
Whereto the pilgrime soone this answere makes,
Ungratious grifte, and voide of heavenly good:
Feede on thy Snakes, untill the poison fill thee,
And thine owne cancker with corruption kill thee.

Equality is childrens blessednes,
Where many brethren are but one in love:
The voice hard sweete, whose sounde is holinesse,
And God wel serv'd, where graces glory prove:
And he that patience paternes for a villaine,
Shal never know the King of heavens pavilion.

Thou never readst the booke of Christ his Crosse,
Nor canst endure so sweete an A B C:
But, thou art bounde to live with labours losse,
Where al the woes of al the world maie be:
God give my spirit, grace to seeke no more,
Then goe the waie, his Sainctes have gone before.

When, (as it seemde) the venum wrought so sore,
Within the hart, as poisned so the heade,
As shrinking downe, it sight, and spake no more,
But with the rest the filthy body fedde:
When started up the head of murthring wrath,
As newly cumme, from out, summe bloody bath.

Who grating of his teeth with knitting brow,
Shaking his fist, as if he mente to fight:
Thou patch quod he, where art thou plodding now?
Hath patience thinkst thou, such a princely might:
That shee can thee against my force defende,
And bring thee safely to thy Journeies ende?

My life is most, to lay me downe in blood,
I can endure no daunting of mine eie:
I onely love to feede on bloody foode,
Whom I once cease on, they are sure to die:
How durst thou then approch so neere my sight,
Whose fury standes withal the worlde to fight.

Poore patient hartes are tost from post to post,
When bloody swordes doe walke the worlde with wonder:
Poore patience many a patrimony lost,
While will resolv'de, put wit and reason under:
Patience is oft from princely seate puld downe,
While bloody mindes, do bravely beare the crowne.

Pitty is knowen sometime to marre a citty,
And Anger, oftentimes is cause of quiet:
Sometime as good be wilful as be witty,
When bloody dishes make a dainty diet:
What armes of honor?  to a bloody field?
Where Angers hande, make patient harts to yeelde.

When (as it seemde) halfe stuffed up with blood,
Stopping his tale the pilgrime thus replied:
Choke up thy throat, with that foule butchers food,
That never couldst the sounde of mercy bide:
But dost consume the hart of many a creature,
Die in the fury, of thy filthy nature.

Fret, fume, and chafe, I feare not of thy force,
I plod with patience where thou canst not cumme:
My patience hath, such power in her remorse,
As furies sences, quickely wil benumme:
And by her prowesse, stoutly so defende me,
That thou, nor thine, nor ought els can offende me.

Then lie, and bath, and tumble in thy bloode,
And stare, and stampe, til thou hast donne thy worst:
Thy foule adherents, I have all withstoode,
And thou, art but a spirit all accurst:
Who though thou makst a number know thy might,
Where patience cums, thou hast no power to fight.

Poore patient harts, are tost from paine to peace,
When bloody swords, do breede but hellish woes:
And patience patrimony is no leace,
But in a grounde, where grace and wisedome growes:
And patience sits with an Immortal crowne,
Where tiraunt heads to hel are beaten downe.

Pitty must be the princesse of a citty,
And Anger breedeth nothing but disquiet:
Wilful is good, so that the wil be witty,
Where bloode is bard, the dish of mercies diet:
What Armes of honor, to that heavenly fielde,
Where patience force, makes angers fury yeelde.

At which last worde, the fretting furious head,
Fel with the rest, into that sincke of sinne.
And with the body fel downe stroke as dead,
When patience did this pilgrimes joy beginne:
With praysing heavens, and using humble praier,
To comforte hope, and keepe of al dispaire.

When leaving so the ougly Monster slaine,
Onwardes she leades him on his happy way.
Where joiful pleasure after feare of paine,
Had set his sences at so sweete a staie:
That now, he thought, no Monster could offende him,
He had such proofe, that patience woulde defende him.

But when the heavens that pitty have of nature,
And know that sences, woulde be gladde of rest:
Although the spirite, waking keepe the creature,
Unto such worke, as like the wisedome best:
Into their garde, did will the Angels take him,
Untill they wilde the spirite shoulde awake him.

But when the spirite little time coulde spare,
Unto the harte, to give the senses rest:
And reason founde, that vertues happy fare,
Was in the hande, wherewith the soule is blest:
He wilde the sences from their sleepe arise,
And follow patience to their paradise.

When having past the path along the wood,
They came unto a shore, neare to a sea:
Where lofty waves did threaten little good,
When rocks with patience make a drowning plea:
Where stormes, and tempests, flawes, and rocks, and sands,
The perils shew, wherein the sea man standes.

With patience heere the pilgrime must Imbarke,
Within a shippe the buonaventure named:
When in a Mappe he found out many a marke,
Whereby conceite his course most happly framed:
And to be shorte with a resolved minde,
They hoist up sailes, God sende a merry winde.

When as they founde the tide would tary none,
And little wit, it was to loose the winde,
What grounde was best to cast their ancker on,
And how they might their surest passage finde:
To scape the rockes, and to avoide the sandes,
And keepe their carriage, out of pirots handes.

And so, along the surging seas they slide,
Till passing by capa di buon speranza,
Not farre from thence, they did intende to ride,
Till, some sweete winde that vertue ben avanza:
Would bid them hoice their sailes and to be gone,
Towardes the heaven they were to hope upon.

Where, after sounding, casting ancker out,
And striking saile, and winding up the cable,
Setting in order all thinges rounde aboute,
As well as such young Mariners were able:
With such good thoughtes as might the time beguile,
They fell to walke upon the boordes awhile.

And riding but a while anone they spied,
A fisher man, all in his boate alone,
With every billow tost from side to side,
As made them feare his last farewell anone:
When moved, with the pitty of good nature,
They calde aboorde this selly wretched creature.

With much adoe, the creature came aboorde,
And tooke the pilgrime humbly by the hande:
And onely sight, but did not saie a word,
But, as a man that halfe amasde did stande:
Till by entreaty of sweete patience:
Hee was content to have some conference.

Alas quod hee good Masters heere yee see
A selly creature in a sory case:
A wofull story to be tolde of mee,
Borne to the death, of sorrow and disgrace:
Curst from my cradell, with a thousand crosses,
Where fortune turnes my labours all to losses.

I have not alwaies liv'de a fisher man,
Through other courses, I my course have runne:
It is but late, that I this life beganne,
Where little good, hath yet my laboure donne:
But yet I like the kinde of life so well,
I woulde not chaunge it with a king to dwell.

For, first I was a gallant in my youth,
And then I courted youthfull kinde of people:
But when my tale was tolde, to tell a truth,
I founde, although the sexton kept the steeple:
The bels sometimes, against his will were rong,
When talking clappers could not holde their tongue.

I founde that cost was often kindely taken,
And costly kindnes was a common thing:
I found the needy friend was soone forsaken,
And he that had the crownes was halfe a king:
I founde that flattry was a fine conceite,
And gold was serv'd, where better gifts did waite.

I found faire beauty like a blasing starre,
But oftentimes, the Moone was in a mist,
And many a one, was with his wits at warre,
While reason reade the rules of had I wiste:
I founde sweet Musicke sounde in many a place,
While empty purses were in weeping case.

I founde a thousande prety foolishe toies,
That were too tedious now for to recite,
I founde againe that there were further joies,
Then I coulde see but by the sunny light:
Which for mine eies could never come to see,
Ha done quod I this is no life for me.

Then to the warres forsooth a little while,
To followe drummes, and trumpets to the fielde,
But, oh how will doth wofull wit beguile,
When want of comfort makes the conscience yeeld
And yet, when peace, doth make an ende of strife,
Surely the souldiers is the princely life.

But, for I did but little time bestow,
Amidde the fielde to seeke for honors fame:
And fortune sought, my comfortes overthrow,
Before my hart had entrance to the same:
I lefte that life, and to the seas I gat,
Where, how I liv'd I neede not tell you that.

I thinke your selves can tel as wel as I,
If not, alas, it is no ease to learne:
So many labours in the life doe lie,
As are not in a daie for to discerne:
A daie, a month, nor many a yeare, God wot,
As I could tel, if I have not forgotte.

First I did learne to set my compasse right,
And by my compasse, how my course to run:
To marke each point, as wel by day, as night,
By night, to marke the stars, by day the sunne:
Then take the Mappe, to look for rockes and sandes,
Of which ful ofte, the shippe in daunger standes.

Then narrowly to looke to every leake,
And when the winde, did serve to hoise my sailes:
To sounde the depth, where seas beginne to breake,
And strike my saile, when once my sea roome failes:
To Arme my fightes, and plant mine ordnaunce so,
I might not stande, in feare to meete my foe.

Then did I learne, to stande and guide the sterne,
And now and then to helpe to hoise up ancker:
And otherwhiles the cunning to discerne,
To dresse hir sides to keepe hir from the cancker,
My termes of arte, and patient to be painefull,
And how to hope to make my voiage gainful.

To lie ful colde, and harde, and fare full thinne,
To frame my carkas to unkindest natures,
To beare of stormes, and in a calme beginne,
To learne to kill the little creeping creatures,
To eate a fusty cake, and teinted fish,
And one fresh morsell, make a deinty dish.

To make no conscience, so there came in gaine,
When silver crosses, keepe of many a curse,
A pitteous case to see the Merchant slaine,
For his owne goods to fil the pirots purse,
To sweare, and stare, until we come to shore,
Then rifty tufty, each one to his skore.

The Master, he, sometime would fall asleepe,
The Masters mate to much upon the can,
The boson, he, his cabin tooke to keepe,
And in the cookerome, there the rie begane,
When all and some, in halfe a droncken swowne,
Would leave the shippe, to sincke, themselves to drowne.

But, when I saw the kinde of life was such,
The griefe to great for any true good minds:
The labour sore, the sorrow was to much,
To seeke for that which but repentance finds,
I left the shippe, with manie a sorrie note,
And tooke me sweetely to my little boate.

And heere, my trade is poore, yet ful of peace,
And peace is riches, though my trade be poore,
The sea is large, whose landlorde makes no lease,
I toile for fishes, and I seeke no more,
When stormes arise, unto the heaven I high me
And in the sunne-shine, set me downe and drie me.

But, for I see the barke, wherein you ride,
Of Buonaventure hath the blessed name,
And patience is a pure a perfect guide,
Unto the favour of eternal fame,
I hope the course, is good that you intende,
Heavens bring you happly, to your Journies end.

This poore mans tale when thus the pilgrime harde,
He did along his company entreate,
Promising him, a pilgrimes poore rewarde,
Besides his hope, his comfort woulde be great,
If heavens did favoure vertues enterprise,
Humbly to passe, the path to paradise.

But, when the fisher harde that fairest worde,
Of paradise, once sounding in his eare:
He gave consent, and hoist his boat a boarde,
And casting of, al sorrow, care, and feare:
They hoist up sailes, windes serv'de what would you more,
Onwardes they goe, God sende them well a shore.

When leaving Scilla to those selly guides,
That careles are to keepe their course aright:
By curst Charibdis, on he smoothly slides,
Till by good happe they had a land in sight:
To which they made, with might and maine as fast:
As windes woulde serve, and got to shore at last.

Yet, let me tel you, ere they came a shore,
As through the Ocean they did make their way:
Tempests arose, and many a winde blew sore,
That threatened, ofte the course of their decay:
Besides the pirots, that they put to flight,
Which chrost their course with many a cruell fight.

One where they saw wrakes lie without reliefe,
An otherwhere, whales tumbling in the waves:
An other while, unto their deadly griefe,
Stormes threaten sore, the fishes maws their graves:
Yet, when the worst, of all these ills were past:
Safely arriv'de they came to shore at last.

Where, wethring of themselves against the sunne,
First praising God, by his almighty power,
That guided them since first their course begunne,
And brought them safely to that happy howre:
The hart laide downe, the sences all to rest,
While angels watch the waking spirit blest.

But, when the spirit had but little time,
To give the sences leave to take their rest,
Nor was the laboure little for to clime,
The fiery ashes, of a Phoenix nest:
Hee bad them sweetely from their sleepe arise,
And set them in their path to paradise.

Where walking on, they met on their right hande,
A worlde of people, making pitteous mone,
Some lost their goods, some other lost their lande,
Their parents some, and some, their friends were gone:
Not one, of all, but some way were oppressed,
When all, and some, in some, where al distressed.

The Courtier, hee, complainde, of loves disgrace,
The souldier, he cried out, of lacke of paie,
The lawier, lacke of hearing of his case,
The client, how his coine went to decaie:
The merchaunt, of the losse of his adventure,
The prentice of the bandes of his Indenture.

The landlorde, of his tenaunts beggery,
The passinger of lacke of amity:
The tenaunt, of the landlordes misery,
The begger, all, of lacke of charity:
The church men, of their small possessions,
The laiemen, of the church transgressions.

Now, on the left hande, went another crue,
A hatefull sort, of hellish company:
Which, to their welth, and wortheles honor grue,
By wicked workes, of wofull villany:
Which, by the trades of Machavile instructed,
Were by the devill, to his hel conducted.

One, he blasphemde, and murthred many an othe,
An other, made of honesty, a jest:
An other made a tush, at faith, and troth,
An other boasted of a bloudy feast:
And some, in power, how will did governe reason,
And other, of their pollicy in treason.

The Courtier, boasted of his brave attire,
What lordshippes, he had laid upon his backe:
The souldier bragde what townes he set on fire,
How many citties he had helpt to sacke:
The lawier, of his quidities, and quirkes,
The client, of the knowledge of his jerkes.

The landlorde, of his tenants slavery
And, how hee kept the pesauntes all in awe,
The tenant of his cunning knavery,
When, with his landlorde, he could go to law:
The Merchant, how his gaines were brought about,
The prentice, how he got his freedome out.

The church men, they wente boasting on their tenthes,
And twenties too, and yet they would have more,
The Laie men, of their laying lines at lengthes,
And how a chalke, did make a pretty skore:
The passinger, of fained amity,
The begger, of the bagge of charity.

After all these, upon the right hand went,
A selly foole, for so I tearme him right,
With wringing hands, that seemed to lament,
Some crossing humor, to a vaine delight:
For, love forsooth, and nought but love it was,
That made a woman make a man an Asse.

Of Venus frailty and of Cupids blindenes
He cried out, oh, that ever they were borne,
And of his mistris, more then most unkindnes,
That did so much his truest service skorne:
Yet, still, he lov'de her, and he did so love her,
It was his death, he never coulde recover.

And then he sight, and sobde, and hong the head,
And wept, and wailde, and cast up both the eies,
And in a trance, as if a man were dead,
Or did some dying kinde of fit devise:
Untill he walkte, and then he cried oh love,
That ever lover shoulde such sorrowe prove.

And then he redde his verses and his rimes,
Wherein he praisde her to to, out of reason,
And then he sight to thinke how many times,
He watcht, the day, the night, the hower, the season:
To finde some fruite, of her deserved favoure,
But al his flowers, were weedes that had no savour.

And then farewell, and then againe farewell,
And farewell love, and farewell lovely sweete:
And farewel sweete, where love doth sweetly dwel,
And farewell dwelling, for love sweetenes meete:
And farewell meeting, with loves stately store,
And farewell love, for hee coulde live no more.

And thus the pilgrime let the poore man goe,
To loose his will, and seeke his better wits:
Which he had lost with following fancy so,
Unto the fury of these franticke fits:
That in his hart, had wrought that mallady,
That he must die, there was no remedy.

Now on the left hande went another creature,
Or rather spirit, in an ougly shape:
Hollow dead eies, and most ilfavourde feature,
Mopping and mowing, like an olde she Ape:
Which in the fury of youthes frenzy,
To crosse loves Joie, is called Jelousy.

Cursing that ever Venus was so faire,
Or Cupid had the power to bende his bow:
Or ever worde, had passage through the aier,
From fansies tongue, to beauties eares to go:
When trickling humors, in affections brest,
By feare of Joies is Jelousies unrest.

Then winckt, and pinckt, and leerde and honge the lippe,
And seemde to start, at everie sodaine breath:
And grounde her teeth, as though some privy nip,
Within her head, did fret her hart to death:
When out she mumbled, most unhappy love,
That makst the minde, these passions to approve.

But when the pilgrime saw her agony,
And, in what taking, wretched thing, she was:
Little contented, with such company,
He gives her leave upon her way to passe:
And keepes his course, until anone he came,
Unto a citty, needles is the name.

Where entring in, on each side of the gate,
He found it poorely al with beggars garded:
And by the forefront of that feeble state,
He thought smal wealth where poore were so rewarded:
Til entered further, in the streetes he founde,
A worlde of wealth in every streete abounde.

I meane such welth, as worldly people chuse,
To make the comfort of their chiefest kinde:
And such a bait as wicked spirites use,
To blinde the sight of a bewitched minde:
In every shoppe, or silver golde or wares,
To starve the poore, and fill the rich with cares.

When noting wel, by every doore he went,
He saw each house was with a plage infected:
Where, though they liv'de content with discontente,
Were in the rules of better cares rejected:
For, though the poison did not kill at first,
Yet did they swel, until at last they burst.

One house was plaged with a wicked master,
An other, with a most accursed dame:
An other with a childe that was a waster,
An other, with a servant out of frame:
The rich men, most were plaged with disease,
The poore men, with smal vermin, and with fleas.

One house was plagde with cursing and with banning,
An other house with swearing, and blaspheming:
An other, where fonde minions fell to manning,
An other frighted, after foolish dreaming:
Some plagde, with sorrow, for their losse of treasure,
And some, with torment after to much pleasure.

A number plagues, to tedious to recite
In everie corner, compast, all the citty:
Where power did wrong, and poore men had no right,
And golden purses had to little pitty:
When many a creature in ful pitteous case,
Did prove the citty an unhappy place.

But, when the pilgrime saw on every side
Their outwarde wealth so ful of inwarde wo:
And, in that state, there was no blisse to bide,
Where every house, alas was plaged so:
Knowing withal, his travaile wisht no staie,
Thorough the streets he hastely made his way.

Until at last he came unto a lane,
That ledde him to an university:
Where, by the notes that he had quickely tane,
He founde a wonderful diversity:
In young opinions, touching points of arte,
And how one scholer, tooke on others part.

Now, heare the plague, he found but in conceit,
Where some were right and other some were wrong:
Some followde wil, and wrought upon deceit,
Some loved truth, and songe none other song.
When leaving scolers to their learned case,
Ruing the plague, with reverence lefte the place.

When passing on, ledde all by patience hande,
The happy guide unto his hoped grace:
While reasons state, did all resolved stande,
In paradise to seeke his resting place,
While heavenly powers, the hart did waking keepe,
In vertues armes, the sences fel a sleepe.

But stil, the spirit, that had care to keepe,
The hart awake unto his happy way,
Had little time, to let the sences sleepe,
Lest smallest stoppes, might cause to long a staie,
And therefore wakt them from their sleepy vaine,
And sweetely set them in their path againe.

Where, walking on, unto a court they came,
Where they behelde a worlde of beauties welth:
A stately prince, and many a princely dame,
Discoursing, more, of pleasure, then of health:
Where honors presence was so highly garded,
As each conceit of base desire discarded.

The Counsaile, grave, as best beseemde their place,
The Courtiers, gallant, full of fine conceite:
The Ladies, faire, and full of honours grace,
The Servantes, wise, that humbly did awaite,
Nothing amisse, that nature coulde devise,
To please the humor, of Affections eies.

And, let me not, to slightly overpasse,
The pleasing ground of every private grace:
Where every sence, so sweetely pleased was,
As brought the wits into a wondrous case:
And such a case, as had not vertue ben,
To garde their sence they had ben overseene.

To see the presence of a princely Queene,
To marke the course, of grave discretion care:
To note the sightes, that are but seldome seene,
Where youthes desartes in beauties favoure are:
To heare the musicke of most silver voices,
And finde the restes, wherein the song rejoices.

To see what pleasure, power hath in her hande,
To heare how youth, can courte his kinde desire,
To see, how wisedome doth in power commaunde,
And finde, how beauty sets the hart on fier:
While humble servauntes, shewe their diligence,
Are not these notes for sweete experience?

To see how vertues are in honor placed,
To see the aged all with reverence served,
To see the humble by their service graced,
And beauties fame by faithfull love preserved:
To see peace, plenty wisedome, honour, love:
Are these not pleasures, for the hart to prove?

Now heere the pilgrime did beginne to feare,
Some of his servants woulde be stolne awaie,
Either the Sente, the Tast, the Eie, the Eare,
Or els the Feeling woulde be forst to staie:
Yet, for they sware their service to his will,
He fearde the lesse, to leade them from their ill.

And, when he sawe, what perill was in greatnes,
What idle thoughtes, in youthfull humors sit,
And what a folly, was in to much featenes,
Where beauties wonders did but blinde the wit:
And what long suites, did gaine but little grace,
And last what daungers doe possesse the place.

With humble praier unto the powers on high,
To blesse that prince and all those princely peeres,
Which in the honour of discretions eie,
Were calde the wonders of these latter yeeres:
From care, and cost, fancy, and wisedomes folly,
He tooke his walke unto a waie more holly.

Where ere they came, they came yet by the way,
Unto a Campe, or rather, kingly fielde:
Where, many a stop, did feare too long a stay,
Such choice of honors, did such humours yeelde:
Where horse and foote, were so in order planted,
As, no direction, in discretion wanted.

The chiefe commaunder, in his stately tente,
With noble mindes of Martiall men attended:
For every doubt of every ill intent,
With strongest gardes of watche and warde defended:
Whose grave discretion rulde by sounde advise,
Performde the plot of many a rare devise.

To see the carefull Collonels directed,
Ech to his quarter, and his regiment:
And how ech Captaine, valiauntly effected,
The wonder grace of warlike governement:
To see the true discharge of every office,
And then the honor of adventures service.

To note the greate provision every waie,
For victuaile first, munition, armor, shot:
For forrege for their horse, for grasse and hay,
And such provaunte, as cheapest may be got:
For every grounde, for every quarter fit,
Are not the workes, for every simple wit.

To heere the drummes and fife the larum strike,
The horses neie, and then, the trumpets sounde,
To see the horsemen charge upon the pike,
And then the pikemen laie the horse on grounde:
To heare the Canons roar, the small shot rattle,
And see their triumph, that doe winne the battaile.

To marke the ordring of a court de garde,
To note the rules in walking of the rounde,
The scintenils, and every watch, and warde,
And of the mines, and working under grounde:
To marke the planting of their Ambuscados,
And in the night, their sodaine canuassados.

To see a Citty sende her bullets out,
Against the force of all her cruell foes,
To see her wals, all fortified about,
To beare the force of all their cruell blowes:
To make her foes, perforce their siege to raise,
And through the world to winne a wonder praise.

Are heere not sights of force to staie the eie?
Or soundes, of power for to inchaunt the eare,
Nay, maie not wel the hart be drawn awry,
From all conceites, to keepe his compasse there:
Sure, so it had, had not the spirit still,
Preserv'de the sences from a secret ill.

For, then againe, to see a citty sackte,
Her buildings ruinde, and her people slaine:
Her wals, al razed, and her castles crackt,
And al her welth, but in a woful vaine:
Her olde men mourning, and her young men dying,
The mothers, weeping, and their children crying

To see her streetes, al runne with streames of blood,
Her houses burning, al in flames of fier:
To see her state, that al in honor stoode,
Yeelde to the forces, of their foes desire:
Her royal strength, become a ruful storie,
And death, and sorrow, ende of al her glorie.

To see the fielde, with dead men overspread,
To see the aire infected al with smoake:
To see, the valiaunt Cavalieros dead,
And many a soldiour hurt with many a stroake,
To see the steedes, lie tumbling on the earth,
And through the campe a Sickenes or a dearth.

To see the soldiour starve, with lake of foode,
And, in his march, to die with lacke of drincke:
To see the rich men live on poore mens bloode,
And one close humor, at an other wincke:
To see each Captaine, everie waie anoied,
And, by disorder, all the campe destroied

Did make the pilgrime willing to depart,
The place so ful of daunger and distresse:
Where wits might worke but woful was the arte,
Where one mans health, bred many heavines:
And therefore making there but little staie
He followes patience on another way.

And on they walke, until anone they came,
Unto a Church, not built of lime or stone:
But that true Church, of that Immortal fame,
That is worldes wonder, and heavens love alone:
Whose head is Christ, whose Martirs are his pillers
And al whose members, are his wordes wel-willers.

The gate, is Grace, Contrition, is the key,
The locke, is love, the porter, Penitence:
Where humble faith, must heavenly favour stay,
Till pity talke, with vertues patience,
While angels sighes, the sinners waie devise,
To have his entraunce into paradise.

Which is in deede, the plot of al perfection,
Drawne by the compasse of divine conceite,
Whose line, is life, laide by his loves direction,
Who makes al flesh upon the spirite waite,
Whose flowers are fruites of faithes eternal favour,
Sweete to the soule, in everliving savour.

Now in this grounde, doth live this glorious King,
Of mercies life, amidde the fire of love,
Who, as the sunne, doth cause the flowers to spring,
So, by his fire, makes faith her comfort prove:
When heavenly ruth doth vertues roote so nourish,
That, her faire flowers, shall grow and ever floorish.

Now, heere the herbes were wholsome sentences,
Which purge the hart, of every idle thought:
And for each grasse, a grace of wit and sences,
By heavenly blessing from the spirit brought,
In midst whereof the well of life doth spring,
About the which the Angels sit, and singe.

Heere is the light, that makes the sunne to shine,
Heere is the brightnes of the morning light,
Heere is the sunne, that never doth decline,
Heere is the daie, that never hath a night,
Heere is the hope of everliving blisse,
And comforte, that beyonde all knowledge is.

Heere never weede, had ever power to growe,
Nor ever worme coulde make an herbe to wither,
But in the path, where all perfections goe,
Vertue, and Nature, kindely went togither,
And heavenly dewes, did al the fruites so cherish,
That, neither, fruit, nor herbe, nor flower could perish.

Heere never sorrow for the thought of losses,
Heere ever labour and yet never weary:
Heere, never feare, of any fatal crosses,
Heere never mourning, and heere ever merry:
Heere never hunger, thurst, nor heat, nor cold,
But take enough, and stil the store doth holde.

Heere is the sky, the sun, the moone, and stars,
Set for a dial, by the heavens direction:
Heere never cloude their brightest shining barrs,
But show their brightnes in their best perfection:
Heere, is, in some the sweetest light of al,
From which al lightes have their original.

Heere never foote, of wicked pride presumed,
But is excluded, heavenlie paradise:
Heere is the aier with sweetest sweetes prefumed,
While sinners sighes, is blessed sacrifice:
When faithful soules, in Angels armes embrased,
Are, in the eie of glorious favour graced.

Heere are the virgins playing, Angels singing
The Saintes rejoicing, and the Martirs Joying.
Heere sacred comfortes to the conscience springing,
And no one thought of discontent anoying:
Heere hurt was none, and feare of death is never,
But heere is love, and heere is life for ever.

Heere sorrowes teares, doe quenche the heate of sine,
And fire of love, doth kindle life againe:
Heere doth the grounde of glory first beginne,
And heere is vertue, in her highest vaine:
Heere, is, in some, the state of honours story,
And of all goodnes, the eternall glory.

And heere is, lo, that heavenly paradise,
Whereto the pilgrime, made his pilgrimage:
Where sacred mercy first did solempnize,
The spirite to the fleshe in mariage:
And here the hart did finde his spirit blest,
To bring the sences to eternall rest.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

In this true plot of reasons highest pleasure,
The heavnly court, of the high king of kings:
Where sacred spirits, have their speciall treasure,
And sweetest comfort, of contentments springs:
God bring your sences, by your harts desire,
To feel the comfort of his kingly fier.
