The HAND of heaven (as quick, as it is strong,
And moves this ALL, to all it moves unto:)
Hath turn'd our hopes, to feares, (and griefes among)
In his Lifes LINE, which it did late undo.
Princely-perfection being past the prime,
And, neare the highest grow'th (O dismall turne!)
Is turn'd into the Roote, this Winter-time,
Ner'e to retire till GOD in Flesh returne!
He, upon whome the Nations Eyes were bent
As on a most auspitious blazing-Starre
Is now extinguish'd; yet, the light hee lent,
Fore-shew'd he would have thundred lowd, in War;
For, in his Eares no musick sweet did sound,
But Trumpets, Drummes, and Phifes:  and, at his meate,
(While they did others hearing but confound)
They solac'd his; and made his stomake great!
Th' expertest Fortifier, and Engineere
He sought; who taught him either skill, so young,
That he his Teachers taught:  so, did appeare
Too ripe, too soone, to last (so ripe) too long!
And, in all exercise of Armes he was
Unmatch'd by any of his yeares:  For, He
Past subjects so, as he did subjects passe,
In Birth, Mind, Vertue, Glory, and Degree!

The Doing-Horse (all Eyes can witnesse it)
He made much more than Do:  yet; sate so sure
As they (but where are they that so can sit?)
That back the wildest Beasts, yet, sit secure!
In few; no Feate of such Activity
As graced Action, and the Actor too,
But it (with most admir'd Agility)
He did past all that best, so young, could do!
With Arts and Letters hee so stor'd his MIND
That both knew all therein, y'er Youth could know:
So, Arte and Nature were as Curst, as Kind,
To Cleave so to him, and to Leave him so!
His Spirit and Body were at endlesse strife
Which should be Activ'st in all Princely Parts:
For, both were full of Grace, as full of Life;
Both which winne Glory, with both Hopes, and Hearts!
That active Spirit his Meditations rais'd
Above the Spheare of GREATNES; that doth rise
From those Perfections that do perish prais'd,
To seek PERFECTION prais'd; and never dies!
And, like a Soule (that nought on Earth can fill)
Seeking for al-suffizing Aliments,
Still mounts above her selfe (in Minde, and will)
Till she hath found what fully her contents:
So, his rare Soule, (beeing ever on her Wings,
Soone cloide with whatsoe're the Earth holds deere)
Sought to suffize her with eternall Things;
Which made her stay so much the shorter here!
The World could not containe her; not as He
To whose ambition Earths Rotundity
Seem'd but an Angle:  no; but Shee did flee
The World, and such vaine Pride; yet, fled more high!
She fled to Him whose Center's every where,
And Circle no where:  for, true Eaglet, She
On Justice SONNE (her Eyes being strong, as cleare)
Still lov'd to looke, to shew her Dignity!
But, while She kept within her Prison-walls
(Or Jaile of Flesh) She, through the windowes, saw
To all that in Discretions Compasse falls;
And, ordred all that All by Reasons Law.
His Servants so hee swai'd (and that alone,
Himselfe beeing under Tutors) as appear'd
That they were govern'd by some Salomon;
For which he was no lesse Belov'd, than Fear'd.
Reward and Punishment (being as the weights
By which our Horologe of life is mov'd)
Fell ever through Him (from Celestiall Heights)
On none, but whom true vertue loth'd, or lov'd!
If then, his Private in such order stood,
How had the publike done when hee had swai'd?
They had beene like for Grace, in likely-hood;
And (for our Common-good) as Good, as stai'd!
The High'st all good things hath in Essence still;
Ill, in his Understanding-pow'r; but Man
Hath good things by Intelligence; but ill
He hath in Essence:  for, no Good he can!
But He, whose goodnesse ravish'd him from hence,
Was Good, in Nature; by his BEING, blest:
But Ill he had but by Intelligence;
Which he, with Grace, corrected, being best!
Some Kings are more than Men in their beliefe;
But, in their lives such Beasts as never liv'd:
The chiefe Offenders than, are oft the CHIEFE:
But this, Belov'd, liv'd well, and well beleev'd!
The Simile twixt God and Man is such,
That God is said to be immortall Man;
And Man a mortall God:  He was so much;
Whose want we waile much more than sorrow can.
His Princely lookes compos'd so rarely were
Of venerable gravity and grace,
That one did Love provoke, the other feare;
And both, in one, still shew'd a sacred Face!
His Ire was temperate, sith he knew so well
How ill t'was in Warme Fortunes to be hot;
Sith, like great Ruines, those it quite doth quell
On whome it falls; and, lights on equall Lot!
It is to rash; (and so must needs offend)
To do ought well:  For, it cures ill with ill:
Then, to referre a Vice to Ire to mend,
Is Vice to cure by Vice (outragious) still.
Great Mindes in Choler, should be ever like
The highest Planets, that are slowest mov'd;
And never use (how ever mov'd) to strike,
Till they indulgent meanes have throughly prov'd.
The fire of Ire, that from cold feare proceeds
Provoks the Subject, put past feare, in hate
To make attempts (although for it he bleeds)
To free his feare, that makes him desperate.
Nor is he quiet kept, to keepe him low,
(As some affirme) for ev'ry hope that gives,
Least like-li-hood to raise his over-throw,
Under new Lords, for such he plots, and strives.
Then as from love proceeds a State more sure,
(Though moderate) so, that that comes from feare,
Although more absolute, doth lesse endure:
For feare, growne des'prate, it will over-beare.
For, Cruelty from Cowardize doth spring,
Sith still couragious Minds their force imploy
But on resisting foes; then hee's no King,
(But Tyrant) that but prostrate Friends destroys.
It is a weakenesse of great Pow'r, and Will,
To love them least that most they do offend:
Whome Kings offend, they will offend them still;
And, ne're for-give th' offended till their end,
But hate to see them; sith (perhaps) their sight
But minds them of the wrongs they do them still:
In this, this Gaul-lesse Prince tooke no delight,
But did quite otherwise in Deed and Will!
Ambition, (the Soules Shirt, sith that's the Vice
Shee last puts off) no more transported his
Than Caesars was with glories avarice;
For, his Ambition wholy aim'd, at This!
Kings should have innocency Columbine,
To do no more than harmelesse Creatures should;
With which they should have Wisdome Serpentine,
To do no lesse then Circumspection would:
And ever, with the wakefull'st Will and Wit,
To stretch their power beyond their power (though great)
But only for the publike-benefit,
For which they smell most sweete, when most they sweat!
A Prince that ties himself himself unto
Doth much mistake himselfe:  For, hee's not his;
Nor, is the STATE his:  but, he still must do,
As if he were the STATES:  for, so he is.
From Benefits, come Obligations:  and,
From such more such:  and, so t'is Sire, and Sonne,
Effect, and Cause; Yet still doth, moving, stand
In Will and Pow'r of Natures, like the Sunne.
Such was this Prince, who look'd with watchful Eyes
To all that might with State, in Time, have stood:
He aw'd the Great, and (justly, most precise)
Discount'nanc'd such as Greater were than good.

"For, such as wilbe Sheepe, the Wolfe devoures:"
Then, sheepish Kings must flee all Beasts of prey,
Or keepe Presumption downe in subject Pow'res,
Lest long connivence make it long for sway.
Contempt t' a Prince, more dang'rous is than hate:
For, Hate, by feare, is held from bold Attempt:
But, SCORNE doth make it daring; then a STATE
In danger stands, that stands, so, in Contempt!
Lightnings put by with winde but of a Cap;
And oft great STATES (that might the world comman'd
Fall with the smallest accidents that hap:
Then, if Contempt they beare, they cannot stand.
This made this Prince betimes to have an Eye
To all that saw but how they high might grow
By wrong and scorne of PRINCIPALITY,
Sith well he knew they ill themselves did know.
His Deeds did evermore exceed his words
In Vertue, and Effect:  nor, would He speake
But still with Caution fit for sov'raigne Lords,
Who know they bruize their Crownes, when Words they break!
For Princes safer Pris'ners are, by far,
Under their words almighty-binding pow'r
Than they are under strongest Bolt or Barre;
Because their Words (like Gods) are ever sure!
If otherwise, we cannot call them Gods
(As God himselfe doth stile them) if they be
Unlike through that injustice; and (like Clods)
Do nought but soile the seate of their Degree.
No:  Tongues, and Pens wil wound their Names to death;
Nay, past, sith past, sharpe Tongues and Pens can give
Them black Reproch:  for, with their harmeful breath,
Their Vices die; but stil their shames may live!
For, seeing Justice cannot touch their lives,
Its reason it should touch their Names (too nought)
For feare whereof a TITUS often strives:
To be not what he is, but what he ought!
For, it is hard to play an After-game
Of Reputation wel:  or, not to loose
By ev'ry cast, though wel we play the same,
Sith all our Gaine to our first Losses goes!
But Vertue made our Heroes to preserve
His Name from blemish; not these by-respects:
He Vertue serv'd, that so She Him might serve
With fullest Glory voide of all Defects.
Not like the Starres (that yeeld but little light
Because they are so high) with him it far'd:
But (like the Sunne) was bright'st at greatest height;
And stil his Minde unto his Fortunes squar'd.
BEING, without well Being, cursed is;
And, so, the greater Beeing, the greater curse:
But, he being Great, was ever blest in this
That he did Grace, by Nature, kindly nurse!
Nature in HIM, admir'd what she had wrought,
At least she might, if She, (most wonderfull
Of things created) could admire at ought
That's made good, great, stout, wise, and beautiful.
He was the richest Trophey FORTUNES Pow'r
Could reare in HONORS Theater; for, stil
NATURE did doate on Him (her Bellamoure,
Or Master-peece) the Wonder of her skil!
Beauty, TIMES flowre, though delicate it be
Yet soone it dies:  so holds comparison
With Phydias collours; which (though faire to see)
Were blemisht with each Breath that breath'd thereon
But that immortall beauty of the Minde
Wherewith He was endow'd, was so ingrain'd
In his Soules Faculties, that by no winde
Or blast of Envy, it can e're be stain'd!
No:  He most strictly ey'de his better Part;
And in the Glasse of Heav'ns eternall LAW
Righted th' Apparell of his royall Heart
As best became his FORME, which there he saw:
For, no Mans Fortunes, nor his high renowne
Can possibly be worthy for his End;
Which hath made Kings of Yore to quit their Crowne,
That they to better Ends might wholy tend.
Life's but a Supposition, or Non-ENS;
That's not perceptible; because it IS;
Then, streight IS not, but by Intelligence;
And, while it IS, it is but most amisse!
Nothing is certaine, but uncertainty
Beneath the Moone; which varies like our Mindes:
For, Man's a Maze of Mutability,
Wherein both Sin and Grace stil turnes, and winds!
It's good to die than, yer wee die; because
A life too lively proves too deadly oft:
He shootes not well that up his Arrow drawes
And eyes no Mark below, nor that aloft.

But some mis-doe themselves, themselves to hide
From cruell Fortunes most impetuous Blowes:
But never Kings, but Cowards, so have di'd;
Yet Emper'ours (base, as bad) have beene of those!
It is an act of Charity to long,
Ever to live for others good:  than they
That both to God and Nature do such wrong,
(As hatefull Monsters) seeke their both decay!
And some so long doe live that they interre
Their Glory y'er they die; and die but when
The World doth hate them deadli'st; or some War
Takes them away; as Beasts, from civill Men!
Yet, Life's but Bondage, wer't not free'd by Death;
Nay, Life's a Sicknesse that so mortall is,
That who so lives, must die:  and strongest Breath
Is not still long'st; but, often more amisse!
Life may be tane from Man, by any Man;
But Death by no Man; none dare him abide:
Nor, Pow'r, nor Art, nor Love, Life lengthen can:
For, if they could, this Prince had never di'd!

Yee Iles, (whereof He was the Hope) with Feares
Shake where ye stand; or with sighes shift your Clime;
And be invirond with a sea of Teares,
Where never Sunne may see the face of TIME!
Or, settle else, where still his Beames may burne
Our frozen Hearts; and, turne us all to Black;
That ev'n our Skinnes as-well as Hearts may mourne
For him whose want turnes all our comforts back.
Black's but a meere Privation, and no Hue,
As Darkenesse is of Light:  that's fitt'st for us,
Whom Griefes Cimerian darkenesse doth subdue,
Being quite depriv'd of Light of comfort, thus.
The feeling-sence alone for mortall life
Is necessary:  but, the rest not so;
For, Life may BE without them:  then, let Griefe
And Sense to feele it, ne're our lives forgo!
For Him that might the death of Griefe have beene
Had Heav'n not envi'd Earth his longer stay;
But (ah) he grew so mellow, being greene,
That he, by nature, soone did fall away!
With whom our Hearts are fall'n; and with the fall,
(On Craggy Cares) are swol'n so full of wo
That they can hardly hold:  but, O, this ALL
Is at this stay, that staies but falling so!
What hold, or hope, or helpe is than, in ALL,
But He that's All in ALL?  sith such a PROP,
(So young, so strong, and sound, till he did fall)
Is Feaver-shaken downe from HIGHNES Top!

Floate heaviest Griefe on Times eternall Teares
T' a Deluge turn'd; and sinke all Joy therein:
Floate Grife to Death:  sinke Joy to depth of feares;
Sith, in the Hav'n, our hopes so sunke have bin!
So faile their hopes that hope, by Sinne, for Grace:
Heav'ns hate we urge; and yet (so, urge it more)
We looke for love:  But, O, such Life, such Case!
"A desp'rate Salve, must cure a desp'rate SORE!"
We thought our CROWNE so staid with many Props
(So Yong, and strong) that no cold Puf of feare
(How ever strong) could once but shake our Hopes,
Which now this Blast doth reele, and backward beare!
But yet to feare too much is to receive
Ill fortunes y'er they come; and, that is ill:
Our feares aswell as hopes may us deceive:
Than feare we so, as hope may hold us still.
Feare beares Hope backward to a forward Stay;
So forward, as wee feare more going back,
When in our Soules (besides) our Sinnes we waigh,
Which threate (avert it Heav'n) our utter wrack!
But bee; O be propitious, highest POW'R,
To us:  and make our Royal PLANT to spring
Unto that Greatnesse that may long'st endure;
And Branches beare, that may beare many a KING!

But yet (O Death!)  GRIEF wil not leave us so;
It turnes againe; and Passion (which doth swel,
Say Reason what it will) will with us goe
Unto the Grave, which Heav'n is to this Hel!
Why from the Surgeon doe we turne our Eye
When, with his Probe, wee see him search a wound,
But that wee know our Sences sov'raignty
Over our Reason, might us, with it, confound!
Than, can wee see the Hand of DEATH to gage
His HEART, (beeing ours; and so, through ours should go
And not avert our Eyes, in ruthful rage?
If so we can, we can be cruell so!
But, O, wee needs must see this dismall DEED,
(At least in Minde) for which our Hearts are rent:
The letting of him bloud did make them bleed:
For which we curse the CAUSE, and Instrument.
It is, almost, a Miracle to finde
A great, and lively-Spirit well governed;
But his rare Spirit (be'ing such) did turne, and winde
As the Phisition still, it mannaged!
Indiffrent Spirits, for Rule, farre better doe
Than Spirits too mighty, who are good for nought
But to torment themselves, and others too:
Yet His, being great, hee ruled as he ought!
The Spirit doth owe the Flesh a Sov'raignes care
Not a Slaves service:  for, if Flesh bee free,
'Twill make the Spirit but servile, base, and bare;
But if the Spirit; the Flesh shall honor'd be!
And, looke how when the Heart is sicke, the HEAD
And all the Members, of the griefe have part,
But never die, untill the HEART be dead;
So, HEAD and Members die with this our HEART!
We die, though yet we move, with griefe conceav'd
For this his death; whose Life gave all our Parts
Their lively motion; which they had receav'd
From his rare vertue, Life of all our Hearts.
Nor can we (ah!)  live other-wise than dead
(Although, in Death, we live; or, lifelesse plight)
For him that gave us Heart; and Life, our HEAD;
So live we now, without or Life, or Sp'rit!
It is a kind of joy in case of moane
Not to be single:  Common-miserie
(Though heaviest) lighter weighes on one alone,
Then doth his privat light adversitie!
As Peace is Warre to men impo'vrisht growne;
Who, in the totall ruines of the STATE,
Had rather be o'rewhelm'd, than in their owne;
So, each mans Crosse seemes most unfortunate!
But in our Case, it is not so, we see:
For this our common losse so sad doth lie
Upon our Soules, that nought can heavier be;
Although it were, with torment, oft to die!
Yet, tis high'st Courage lowly to sustaine
The heaviest Plagues which for our sinnes are sent:
And to be patient qualifies the paine;
And, makes us, at the low'st, most excellent!
But, to resist, rage, murmur, or complaine,
Is as effeminate as Men may do:
Than to be subject so, is so to raigne
Kings of our selves; and Saints with Angells too!
"Humility, of Men, doth Angells make;
And Pride, of highest Angells, maketh Devills:
In Pride, all Evills did beginning take:
But, in Humility, release from Evills!"
W'are borne to Sorrowes:  would we than be free?
That were injustice:  Than, we needs must beare
The lawes to which all Flesh must subject be,
Unlesse we would above all Flesh appeare!
Our highest pleasures still do tend unto
The deepest sighes:  those Wrinckles of the face
That serve for Laughing, serve for Weeping too;
And, extreame Laughing sheddeth Teares apace!
GREATNES (as we mis-stile it) how e're stout,
And glorious too it be) is, as we prove,
But like a Lightnings-flash soone in, and out
Of Life and Light, that gets more Hate, than Love!
Our ALL'S but Nothing than:  For, that which IS
Must be eternall:  For, what IS, must stay
Such as it is a Thought (at least) but this
Is with a Thought, or chang'd, or gone away!
Now sith the deerest of these Mundane things,
Do fall so cheape from highest Holds they have,
And that both Semy-gods aswell as Kings
Do but engorge the most insatiate Grave;
What Sense have such that see this daily done,
And yet relie on life, that but appeares
As doth a Vapor rising with the Sunne
But straight to vanish, in a Vale of Teares!
For, Kings none other-wise than Mists descend
Downe from the lofty Mountaines to the Vales
Where they through Fortunes Sun-shine soone ascend,
And vanish straight like dew the Sunne exhales.
Thus can Discretion teach Griefe what to say
To ease it selfe; but Griefes if great they are
Will still be mute; or else (as mad) will bray:
And so our Griefes (as mad) do make us fare.
Our LOSSE so far transcends the highest Bounds
Of humane-wisdome, patiently to beare,
That it our Sufferance, and our Selves confounds
With all distraction, joyn'd to griefe, and feare;

Saint James, thy house, (late house of joyes extreame)
Is now an House of Mourning; sith this Mate
Of Angells, di'd therein, yet lives with them;
And, left that haplesse House to endlesse hate.
Those costly Pictures (curious Proofes of skill.
Wherewith that House (like Heav'n) he late did grace)
There may they hang in Utter-darknes till
The fowlest Spinners scarfe their fairest Face!
That if, here-after, any curious Eye
(That would to Hell to see a Curious sight)
Come there to see them, it may looke awry,
As lothing to behold their uglie plight.
Their Co-inhabitants be ever grimme,
Grym Desolations, sterne Consociates;
Blacke ougly Bats, and Owles; with Zim, and Jim;
T' affright all Flesh with horror from the Gates!

This, for the Place wherein he di'd:  The Time,
(Sith much more dismall) much more still b' accurst:
Let never Sunne the steepe Meridian climbe
On that blacke Day, but clad in Sable first!
Let all the Starres that are malevolent,
Lend all the light that Day (like Night) shall give;
That Men may see but onely to lament
With wofull'st action, that may move to grieve!
And sith great Kings their Birth-daies celebrate
With all that Pompe can yeeld; or Pleasure proove;
On this black Death-day still, (through publike hate)
Let ne're the least pompe stirre, nor pleasure move!
Musike, be ever silent on this Day;
Or with Chromatick Dumps our losse lament:
And, O yee heav'nly Spheares, sound so, or stay;
And, all confuse beneath the firmament!
For, Common-griefe's not capable of forme:
Our Griefe is common; then, confound all Mirth
On this curst Day; let DEATH then, ever storme,
Yea, make the Sunne, himselfe, lie hid with Earth!
If ought be else, Poetick-rage, or worse,
Or Love (that can doe all) can moove to hate
This cursed day, to adde unto this curse,
Let it fall on it, as most reprobate!
Henry (deere Henry!)  O that Words we had
So steept in Brine that all, through them, might see
That We, with Reason, are growne justly mad:
Sith Reas'n doth rage, most justly, but for Thee!
For, soules that have Intelligence and Will,
And by the first discerne what they have lost,
Can, through the Last, but last distracted still
With Rage that Reason rectifieth most!
If GOD we lose, what Reas'n can be so great
(For, greatest Reas'n best knowes the greatest losse:)
But it, with Griefe, will quite it selfe forget,
Remembring such a Soule-confounding CROSSE!
Then, when we loose a Prince, like God for State,
Stile, Vertue, and Effect, what Reason can
But fare as it were rightly reprobate?
If not; such Reas'n must be in more then Man!
If well, wee take a CROSSE of so great weight
That breakes the Back of suffrance, with a Thought,
(Though propt with strongest grace) our dul conceipt
Of Goodnesse lost, shewes we are good for nought.
No:  sooner can our Soules discourse forbeare,
And cease to take Reports from Wit and Sence
Than we (like Blocks) such Blowes of Fate can beare
As maime our Soules through their Intelligence!
If He of HUS, whose patience (being crost)
Endur'd the shock of Hels first mortall charge,
Yet, in the second, found his patience lost
Among but Blaines, that did but Bloud enrage;
Then how should flesh, lesse fenc'd with Grace, sustaine
So many Wounds, which through our Princes Heart
Death fastens on our soules, such hurt, such paine,
Makes Out-rage seeme to act but Judgements Part.
The Prophet being but in prison cast
For speaking what he ought, and as hee should
Vow'd never more to mention heav'n, and past
So farre in heate, that hee the High'st contrould.
Then, though wee may not, from the slips of Saints,
Take warrant flat to fall, yet, for such CAUSE
To use Poetick-rage in our Complaints,
(Falling past fury) stands with Reasons Lawes:
Oh!  that Wits forces than, that Reas'n controules,
Could fall into this sacred Rage; and make
All Times to come, to suffer with our soules;
Or, force the props of future Worlds to shake!
For, passion beeing in our soules conceiv'd,
Forth-with is formed in our speech; and so,
Passing from us, by others is receiv'd;
And, makes in them impression of like Wo.
Oh!  Eloquence, (the Routher of our Minde,
Swaying th' Affects thereof, which way it lists)
Joyne with our sighes (now) like resistlesse Winds
To lose our soules in sorrowes endlesse Mists:
For, Griefe enforc'd by Fate, and Eloquence
(Oh FORCE that still the owne desires fulfils!
Than Tyrants sway, hath no lesse violence
Ore our weake soules, that works but what it Wils!
Yet nought's more eloquent than TRUTH (most strong!)
Than our tru Grief (that seas of sorrow weeps)
Must moove al Mindes, by th' Engin of our Tongue,
To floate to endlesse Woes on DOLORS Deepes.
Men must be wrought like Ir'ne; that's first made soft
With fire, yer water cooles it:  fires of Wit
Must make them more then supple (sure, and oft)
Y'er Teares can coole strong passions burning-fit.
Than, if my Wit were great, as is the CAUSE
Of this our sorrow, it should so enflame
The World with passion as it ne're should pause
To showre forth streames of Teares to quench the same!
But so this Griefe distracts it, that it can
But make imperfect Offers; it's too cold
To thaw the frozen Hearts of every Man:
For, Death (not Dolor) hath all hearts in hold.
Oh words!  O sence!  how sencelesse both wee hold
(Though most significant) that cannot curse
This Day past execration; would yee could
(And I had you to use) do that, or worse!
But why, O why!  doe I accursed fend,
So curse the Day wherein He so was blest
For whose cause so I curse?  My knees I bend,
And begge for Grace, sith t'was in Minde distrest.
Then I retract my Curses; and I blesse
That blessed God that gives and takes (so free)
The best Things ever:  for, we must confesse,
This was as good as could, in Nature, Bee!
For, if in nature, there could be a Prince
Above the pitch of highest Hopes; then Hee
Was more then such, in our experience:
Then, can our Griefes be lesse than now they bee?
Yet Arte, and Adulation (making Eight
Of sev'n) that make so many famouzed,
(But yet the eight make more for state, and weight)
Do oft, in over-righting, wrong the dead!
But few, if dead, are flattered, if their friends
Live not in Wealth, or Greatnesse:  so, the scopes
Of all such Clawers scratch for private Ends:
Yet, Kings will flatter, to attaine their Hopes!
But, who for private Grace, (and Guifts among)
Of wicked Princes doe renowne their Names
Do private-Justice, so, with publike-Wrong;
So, both is wronge, done right to both their shames.
Then, here's our happy infortunity,
To praise him, dead, so strong in lyving-Might;
Whose erned praise seemes hired flattery;
But this we cannot shunne; and doe him right!

Then, O!  receive, great Prince of Palatines,
Our Muses Teares (true records of our Harme)
In these sad Numbers of her blubbred Lines,
Ev'n for his sake, of whom th' hast lost an ARME
If not much more!  for, never could two Hearts
As th' had, beene one, long since, and cleft in two;
Till now, at meeting, streight rejoyn'd their Parts:
So did your Hearts at your first meeting doe.
But death, too envious death, dissever'd them
As soone as joyn'd; than wee may judge by this,
Thy causeful Sorrowes needs must be extreame
Like ours:  whose heart was ours, and ours was His!
And to what season had as spightfull Time
Reserv'd this sev'ring?  but ev'n then, when thou
(To make that Knot more sure, in your youths prime)
Cam'st to espouse his HALFE; wo-wedded now!
So, when thy joyes were flowing, neere the full,
It, past the lowest ebbe, fell headlong-wise;
And wert not Fortune thee did yet not lull
In Cradle of sure hope, it neere could rise!
Thy Fortunes highest ayme (nought can bee higher
That on the Earth is found) is the rar'st Jemme
That er'e was cas'd with flesh:  then, to aspire
That to enjoy, is joy beyond extreame!
A Sister sutable to such a Brother;
The high'st desire of mightiest Potentates:
Good in the Abstract, ther's not such another
Now to bee match'd; nor in the power of FATES!
Fame that best knows her; prompts me what to speake;
All, that attend her, Fames report mainetaines;
And, all in all, into her prayses breake;
Yea, love the ground that this Belov'd, sustaines!

But, O, wee cannot looke upon her Worth
But must reflect on His that's gonne; sith He
Was as her Self; and one Wombe brought them forth,
Which, for these BLESSINGS, ever-blessed bee.
But (ah) he Was, and is not; WAS!  (O word
Able to strike the Soule of Patience dead)
And why not IS?  Hee IS, and is a LORD
Whom Angels serve, and with their Food is fedd,
He di'de indeed; it's true:  nay, false it is;
He did not die, that chang'd but lifes annoy
For life of comfort in eternall BLISSE:
Yet, thus he di'de, that thus yet lives in joy!
Deere Vault, that veil'st him, mummanize his Corse
Till it arise in Heaven to be crown'd:
Sith (though on Earth he rarely ran his course)
No Crowne, for Prize, though it he toucht, he found.
But Breath no sooner left him but it was
Involv'd with aire of FAME, and blowne so high,
That it doth Ariadneis CROWNE surpasse,
And made a FLAME new kindled in the Skye.
He di'de in shew than, but yet lives in Deed
In Heaven and Hearts of all that honor Grace,
In HIGHNES Heart:  he di'de then, so to speed
Of Glory heere, and in that surer Place.
Ev'n when his Grand-dames Corpse was re-inshrin'de;
As if his Corpse, in shades of Death, through love,
Had long'd to meete with Hers that seem'd so kinde
To seeke to meete with his, through her remove!
Ev'n then (the will of Heav'n so fore-assign'd)
He left his Breath, ye'r he the Crowne possest;
And went in Person, (Princely still inclin'd)
To meete and greet her in eternall rest!
But so he spent, and left his breath, (we hope)
That's praise, in Blisse, stil breaths Eternity;
As it doth fill the Earth, and heav'nly Cope:
For such a hopefull life did never die:
Then, die he never can while Vertue lives;
For, HE, and SHE are still Corelatives!

Feare, and the Pit, and the Snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the Earth!  Esay.24.17.
