A Silver-winged cygnet brusling swame
In glorious pride upon the brest of Thame:
His yvorie wings he churcking did display
And ebon-eybrees as he made his way.
Mongst all th' aeriall choristers, more sightly
Was none, with strains divine ne sang more sweetly.
Nature, Art, Grace, disputing strived
Which of them had him more embellished.
At length admiring all they leave to strive,
For him in whom all Excellence did hive.
For like to Sol he shone when bravely girt
He strips the mountaines of their snowie shirt.
Me thought I saw a princely majestie
Ingraven in his portly physnomie.
Heaven envy'd earth that it should one immure
Who rob'd the heaven of so much ornament.
While that our He with pride for him gan swell,
A lofty Falcon with her jingling bell
Did stouping seaze on him with talons keen,
And hent away this bird, which bred our teen.
The birth of Night is death of splendent day,
His night beeing borne, our day is borne away.
When as God Hymen was about That mariage,
Pilfring Death trust up This golden cariage.
O that Law had graunt a prohibition,
T' have hindered Death of this possession.
Yet has he onely tooke (Tenant for a day,)
Liverie and season of his house of clay.
T'was well for's soule this earthen soyle to misse,
It's now infeoft in all the land of promisse.
But say, &mdash; Natur's a biting Usurer,
That baser coine disburses everywhere,
And for retailing of his silver mould
Must have his Int'rest payd in such fine gold.
From his exchequer tells he summes of men,
But for his hundred takes he more than ten.
From him, one in a hundred goeth forth
Which one outstrips a hundred in his worth:
Yet Niggard he can never be at rest
(Thus Sol exhales sweet vapours from the brine,
And leaveth much more brackishnesse behind.)
Aye me, his bud is blasted by the Fates,
His death heavens Secretarie antedates,
Who was the rarest simple of high prize,
If that one word fit one that was so wise:
Who was the beameling of that sacred Sunne
Whose lustring day let it be never done.
I'le ere adorne thy herse, the more thy praise,
Not with sad cypresse, but immortall bayes.

COLUMNA.
What vertues one by one, each one may blis,
Each one may say, not one, but all, were his.

INCIPPUM.
The duller earth will tell thee if thou aske it,
That here's interd faire Vertues golden casket.

ALIUD.
Aske not why so small Grace ith' world is found,
Here lie almost the Graces all intomb'd.

LECTORI SICCOCULO SI USPIAM SIT.
If thou a banquerout beest of grace and sorrowe,
Of them that thrill downe teares then so much borrow;
Disburse thy pearling drops, here Caesar lyes,
To whom thou owest the tribute of thine eyes
When thou art dead thy selfe, looke for this gaine
Some will for thee shed many teares againe.
Adieu deare Prince, &c.
With a far more threneticall Aposiopesis of
Th. Walkington.
