Those baser mindes, unknowing, sensuall, rude,
What measure contraries indifferently;
Whose Summum bonum is their sleepe and food,
Preferring moments, to Eternitie;
That GOOD, in ILL; and Soule, in Sence include;
And beare no part in publique Miserie;
May well bee call'd that many-headed Beast;
The spawne of Earth, and lumps but indigest.

And such, wise NATURE keepes in desperate care
With hopelesse things; that tho opprest with want,
Yet joy in griefe; are hopefull in despayre;
And mortall in Affects, as Ignorant;
They feele no motion, nor doe beare a share
In that mayne Cause which all good mindes doth daunt;
Sad Brittanes losse; DEATHS fatall mayme, whose terrour
May mixe our Teares, with cares; and griefe with horror.

But who, of gentle SPIRIT, and softned HART,
Or who of knowledge, and the mindes discourse,
One out of NATURE; th' other out of ART,
That doe not plunge themselves in Sorrowes sowrse?
For these true qualities should beare a part;
NATURE breedes Tendernesse; KNOWLEDGE Remorse,
Remorse breeds sorrow; Sorrow SENCE confounding
With drearie Passion, and Harts deepest wounding.

And ev'n as from some strange, and joyfull Cause
Proceeds oft times effects quite contrary,
Which by (confusion of the Organ) drawes
The Mirth to Teares:  so DEATH (preposterously)
To snatch a Kingdomes hope, gainst Natures Lawes
So Deare, so Young; begets extremitie
Beyond Loves ordinary course of teares,
Such Passion swallowes Pitie up in Feares.

Then if in Cause so weighty, teares so light,
Expresse not these effects of gentle kinde;
Colde moves in meane; but nums us with much might;
And in brightnesse over-great may strike us blinde:
So in extreames is NATURE put to flight,
Which lodged in the Center of the Minde,
Drawes in teares moysture Sorrow to supply,
Least hart being burnt to Cinders, Passion dye,

Then in the depth of SENCE, my zeale-fraught brest,
Wounded with griefe and straining drops of BLOOD,
Opening a vent to give my Passion rest,
Yeeld tributary streames to TIMES vast FLOOD.
Worke LOVE, swell Seas, may that MUSE ne're be blest,
That drownes his WIT in standing Lake of mud:
But Pegase Hoofes strike learned Helicon,
Whose Rivelets now may runne through ALBION.

And as a liquid substance whiles one bent
To hold it fast, by thinnesse apt to runne,
Is easier lost, and rather findeth vent
By harder handling and compression:
So worthier WITS within the Braine being pent,
Breaking the bounds of such contraction,
Rebound above their EARTH, that holds in vaine,
The fluent Numbers of their ravishing Straine.

In TAGUS then some Swannet dip his Pen,
And of this EAGLET-Issue sing the Fame;
Renue his FIGURE in the hearts of men,
Charme stupid SENCE; your Spell is in his NAME:
And tho this PHOENIX (fled from any ken)
Have sacrificed his LIFE in Funerall Flame,
A POETS Magicke yet, prevailes in death;
Adds LIFE to Vertue; gives Honor Breath.

In morall TRUTH some later Poets faine,
How when we leave this vaile of misery,
That Time gives Abstracts, which our names containe,
Which flickering Fowle, that about Lethe flye,
Catch in their Beakes, but let them fall againe,
Such are rude men that drowne all memory;
But if a Swan doe get a Heroes name,
He consecrates it straight t' immortal Fame.

Yee Isis Swannes then let not Lethes Fowles
Prophane his name; but may this PRINCES glory
(Which Envy, Lethe, Time, nor Age controls)
Be sung of you in a Minverall story:
Let this Fames Sunne through this round Transitory
Shine, and ne're set; and fixed like the Poles,
Whiles some stout Atlas props his heavenly frame,
Let men (like Spheres) mone round about the same.

But I, in WIT the weak'st: in ART the least;
Knowing his death would cause the Muses slaine,
In will (tho not in skill) strong as the best,
Doe give my Tincture to their purer graine:
And tho I bring but ground-worke to the rest,
That must erect this Trophe to his name,
I shall be proud yet to have had a hand,
Upon the Bases, where their Columbs stand.

Then faire POSTERITIE heav'ns Arbitresse
(That in Eternall Characters enrolles
Those Worthies, rapt from Earths unworthinesse,
Through the divine impulsion of their soules)
Receave his memory which our zeales expresse,
Deepely remembred in the Thespian bowles:
That Times insatiate Orque (with kingdomes fed)
May on his Ruines have his name be red.

When first in child-hood NATURE sway'd his State,
(All diligent Culture us'd to Vertues Roote)
So soone he had disclos'd the hidden Gate,
That his high SPIRIT tooke wing in stead of foote;
His timelinesse did so prevent his date;
That ere the Flowre was look't for came the fruit:
Thus Time in him gave spurre to Natures speed,
And high borne thoughts his height of birth exceed.

In him Earths DEITIE, with Heav'ns combin'd,
To shew their utmost cunning in a CREATURE;
The Humors, and the Elements enclin'd
To give to him heav'n-pointed forme and stature;
And GOD (by his rich Dowrie of the minde)
Render'd his Vertue Angell like in NATURE;
And then but shewed the world their Artfull Prize,
Then shut him up againe from mortall eyes.

His LIFE, and LIVES delight, was harmonie;
Whose Organs and whose Instruments were found
Upon his PARTS in contraritie,
To make sweete Musique upon NATURES ground:
But TIME too timelesse in this Sympathie,
Hasting his Cloze, this heav'nly SPIRIT hath wound
Up to the Spheres, and Orbs Celestiall,
HEE was in NATURE so Angelicall.

His PRACTISE was (with more then manly awe)
To sway the Scepter of his worlds Designes;
Where by an upright hand he sought to draw
Through all his actions, parallels and lines,
Measure'd by JUSTICE, and by REASONS Law:
No sence perturbs, no passion undermines
His glorious state, but kept his SOULE a shrine
Burning in zeale of truth, and deeds Divine.

His TIME by equall portions he divided
Between his bookes and th' exercise of warre:
(Warre, the Tribunall seate where are decided
The rights of KINGS:  and studies that from farre
Survey the TIMES, how wandring and misguided)
That Mars with wits Minerva seem'd at jarre,
Which of them both should sway his Princely hart,
Th' one with sterne Armes; the other with milde Art.

Upon PERNASSUS Mount he tooke his stand,
A prospect faire of all discoverie;
(For nothing secret in Starres, Sea, or Land,
Can be concealed from learnings clearest eye)
Here would HEE contemplate, and cast beyond
The TIMES HORISON, to Eternities:
There might he sate his Thirst, for nothing can
(Excepting GOD) feede full the minde of MAN.

And he that knew the MUSES still t' inherit
The Prime and Priviledge of the golden AGE,
(Where heav'nly Pleasure, Honor, and faire-Merit,
Enflame Desier with an holy Rage)
HEE still embrac'd them:  yet his firie SPIRIT
To GLORIES aime, so much he did engage,
(Preventing or Presaging things to come)
He us'd his EARES to Trumpet, Fife, and Drumme.

And like as when the VIGILL of the night,
(After the Starry RING had mov'd their course)
Proclaimes the Day; and then the GOD of Light
(Rous'd from his Couch) doth mount his firie Horse:
So our FAMES SONNE, with no lesse wished sight
(After his War-like summons) he would force
Rest from his BED, and at those wish't Alarms
Mount his hot Steede, shining in glorious Armes.

HEE know that Armes was th' exercise of KINGS;
The spurre to Fame, roote of NOBILITIE;
Hee knew his BIRTH and SPIRIT had lent him wings
To mount the pitch of all his AUNCESTRIE:
Hee likewise knew Fames Trumpet never rings
Of delicate Courtship, but with Infamy;
Hee knew that Souldiers us'd n' affected words,
Whose Tongues are speares, their Oratory swords.

By Warres fayre shadow, his discoursive Thought
Discern'd the substance, and admyr'd the Faces
Belona was his GODDESSE, whom he sought
With Knightly valour, more then courtly grace:
Th' Impression of whose Figure so much wrought;
That he would front her manly, and enchace
Upon her sternest Brow, his temper'd steele;
ARMES had his Hart; when LOVE had scarse his Heele.

Not Canopies, but Tents tooke his DESIRE,
Not Courts, but Camps; nor could the courtliest dames
(Though they shot eye-bals wrapt in CUPIDS fire)
Pierce his steel'd Brest:  but Bullets rol'd in Flames,
From thundring Cannons, had more powre t' inspire;
Where Townes for markes; and Crownes do stand for games;
Where Foes subdu'd, for right of Kingdomes wrongs,
HONOUR might blaze with shield of golden Tongues.

These were the Subjects of our PRINCES Aime;
A plumed Caske, a Speare, a Sword, a Shield;
Kingdomes his hope; Olympicke wreaths his Claime;
Barriers his practise, and the course of Field;
We look't HEE should have impt the wings of FAME;
Charm'd Death, ruld FATE, and made proud Fortune yeeld,
And Lion-like have forrag'd o're the earth
To hunt his prey, and Crowne his NAME and BIRTH.

For who suggested not t' his ravisht minde,
To see him in Careere, and weilde his Launce,
What future TIMES such promising hope might finde,
How like HEE was this Kingdome to advance?
Who would have thought a SPIRIT unconfin'd,
Should not have triumph't over Death and Chance?
And o're some vanquish't FOE, in crymson Flood,
Be crown'd on Horse-backe sweating dewes of Blood?

And who (in his Praeludium) did not see
(Pent in the CHAOS of his manly Frame)
The spirit of Cyrus in Minoritie,
In boundlesse hope, and in a soundlesse Aime;
And in contention for Prioritie;
Not Alexander for th' Olympian Game,
Could shew more heartie thirst, and active Fire,
Then he would doe in his unquench't Desire.

In State Designes, how full of State, and slow?
In Thoughts searene; in Cariage grave and wise;
His speech a Current braunch't from NATURES Flow;
In Countenance, SAGE; Majesticke in his Eyes:
As if in HIM he would let States-men know,
A PRINCES Wisdome not in wrinckles lies:
GOD measures not his GIFTS by Age or yeares,
His SENCE was hoarie, although greene his Haires.

In him was drawne the Modell of a State;
From Reason, Wrath, Desire, or Industrie;
Reason, to Government proportionate;
Desire, to Trades; and Wrath, to Souldierie;
To range these powres, three VERTUES destinate;
Wisedome with Fortitude, and Pietie:
Those three thus order'd States make Realmes compleate,
As these three VERTUES, Princes good, and great.

He was the griefe of FOES:  And ev'n as fire
Being newly kindled, ere it can burne bright
Or'e-comes the smoke, and then it doth aspire,
And out of vapor shewes his proper light:
So VERTUE (Envies object) doth acquire
(Mauger malignant Humors of despite)
His native LUSTRE so our PRINCE (Divine)
From Foe-mens fume, would make his FAME to shine.

He knew himselfe:  no flattering Glasse could give
So sooth'd a humor, or so smooth, a face,
That he would not discerne; he striv'd to live
T' establish TRUTH in Hart; as Powre in Place:
From each of these his knowledge did derive
Such equall right, which had so faire a grace,
That TITLES prov'd but Instruments to praise,
VERTUE was Agent, and still wore the Bayes.

His virtuall Impressions could rebate
The venemous BANE of whoorish Flattery;
Which like a SYREN lurkes in surging State,
To sing great PRINCES to their Infamy;
Which living deadnesse he so seem'd to hate,
That in the winde-swolne seas of Majestie,
TRUTH stear'd his course, and kept his BARKE from harmes;
He had Ulisses powre gainst Circes Charmes.

The hope of HIM, made frozen VERTUE burne,
Which took fresh fervor from his kindling fire;
To him all IRON harts began to turne;
For he was Load-stone to all Harts desire:
For HIM all Sexes and Degrees doe mourne;
And ever shall we (till our Breathes expire)
Embalme his VERTUES, and upon his urne
In LOVES sweete Incense, never cease to burne.

What TYPES can WIT devise shall now be wanting?
Yet who his HONORS perfectly can blaze?
What Heart, Tongue, Pen, thinkes, speakes, writes, without scanting
His full proportion of immensive Praise?
But O thy FATE, when now our hopes were planting,
To turne to Funerall Cypresse, Joyfull Bayes,
It reaves my Sence:  he was too faire to flourish;
Too soone too ripe, and therefore like to perish.

Why did the Parcae cut his unspun thred?
His SPIRIT of Fire t' his Element aspir'd:
Was that the cause?  why live we, he being dead?
We are forlorne, and he too much desier'd:
Our full-fed hopes were surfeited, and bred
A new disease; and he we so admir'd,
First tooke th' Infection, and bequeath'd his Breath,
Then we were cause of his untimely Death.

And as a covetous Miser, midst his wealth,
Fats in his Joy, then pines in thirst of more;
So our rich hopes in HIM empair'd Joyes health,
And in abundance, we grew starv'd, and poore:
Then TIME and DEATH that exercise their stealth
Upon the Things wherein we set most store,
As th' Instruments of FATE, have rob'd us quite,
For Heav'n is Jealous of the worlds delight.

No Object dearer, nor no LOVE so crost:
If ever good cause suffer'd under might;
If ever JOYES were check'd in proudest Boast;
Or ever Claime did non-suite kingdomes Right;
Our Cause, our JOYES, our Right and all are lost,
TIME, DEATH, and NATURE arm'd with Fates despite,
By this one fatall blow so deadly given,
Doth make us grone under the wrath of heav'n.

SORROW sit downe then, and with bended Head,
Bearing thy Chin against thy grief-charg'd Breast,
Behold the hungry Grave now to be fed,
With worlds delight, and cause of thy unrest:
Be not appeas'd; forget thy Food, thy Bed
Remembring him; O never more digest
So deare a thought, but let thy Hart, and Brayne,
Sollicit still thy Passion to complaine.

Now Musickes Sirens that were wont to move
His soule harmonious, with your sweet consents,
Howle your lost Joy, your Hope, your Life, your Love,
With your crack't voyces and your Instruments:
Disjoyne your selves, and like the Turtle Dove
Alone bewayle your losse in languishments:
Pine and consume, and like the dying Swanne
Sing Dirges for your selves, and him that's gone.

And yee the Noblest estate of men
(Souldiers) embast in these degenerate times;
Though ye afford most matter to my Pen
T' excite your Teares; yet least my harsher Rimes
On your sad cause, doe make you mad agen,
Rest to your Passion:  Harke the Churches Chimes
Ring to GODS service; serve him then in Peace,
Wex poore in spirit, and let action cease.

But yee dejected Spirits of his TRAINE,
Ruin'd in fortunes, and distrest in minde;
Of my Complaint receive this horrid straine;
Me thinkes your Passion should strike Reason blinde
With your immoderate woes; and tho in vaine
Yee rage in Teares, like Seas with boystrous winde,
Yet with full sayles of griefe you should be borne
Till Mast were split, sayles rent, and tackling torne.

Now is my Passion with my soule at Warres;
Me thinkes the PILLORS of the world should shake;
Alcydes shrincke, and shoures of lucklesse Starres
Drop from their spheres:  me thinkes the earth should quake
Graves gaspe, Ravnes croke, and all confused jarres
Fore-runne his FUNERALL:  yet what can make
The sight more ruthfull?  when his HEARSE appears
A little Iland compast in with Teares.

O now through ruptures of each wounded Hart,
His living figure prompt our deadest hope,
That Teares (earst choak't with horror) may convert
To give our Eyes their deaw, and pitie scope:
Now let all sing a teare complayning part,
For weeping Floods doe now begin to ope
A passage for their streames, which must extend
In crook't Meanders without ebbe or end.

Prepare, prepare thou hollow harted Tombe,
To take to thy dead Armes, and to embrace
A Teare deaw'd Hearse:  never did NATURES Wombe
Produce his like:  His Honour, Beautie, Grace
Possesse all Harts; Posteritie to come
Record his Name, which may no time deface:
And when Earths glory in Confusion lyes,
Let CHAOS murmer Vertues victories.

All stupid sence with Brittane Teares restraine,
Be now dissolv'd, suggest the smallest Beames
Of his true splendor, and each frozen veine
Will melt in griefe, and turne to licquid streames;
On dryest Sorrow cast moyst showres of Raine:
Let heate and colde, moyst, dry, with all extreames
Fight with Confusion in each troubled brest,
Which Time to quiet, never may digest.

Let teares shew Love, tho rob'd of comforts cause;
For Canker TIME hath eate our hopes with rust;
Let Passion melt, as Icie coldnesse thawes;
Till windie sighes o'rewhelme us with their gust:
Though teares nor passion wring from deaths fowle jawes
Our joyes delight now blended with the Dust:
Yet since our Hope and Joy in dust doth lye,
Let Harts strayne blood; Eyes weepe their fountaines dry.

Adore wee then that dreadfull sacred TRYNE,
That gives us Essence out of Vacuum;
Nor gainst his Will let Rebbell Harts repine,
Who is the soule of soules infusion;
And though we seeme thus forced to resigne
What we thought ours; but his possession:
All fall before his mercies gracious THRONE,
Admire his Justice, and his ends unknowne.

Decist vaine man be not degenerate
In constitution of thy Soule and Minde,
Presume not in thy Thoughts t' expostulate
With God, who holds the lumpe of all thy kinde;
That bounds the Sea, and sets the world his date;
Confines all things himselfe being unconfin'd;
Nor can his Wils uncomprehended might
Be linck't, and ty'd to thy fond Appetite.

Is not a Malefactor sore afraide
To view th' aspect of MANS Austeritie?
Doe not Facinorus Facts implore the aide
Of humane MEN, gainst Lawes severitie?
When cruell Wrath with gentle Piti's staide,
Seemes not sterne Justice yoak't with Clemencie?
Which Sympathiz'd together in one Sphere,
Their Influence engender LOVE, and feare?

How much more shall that Firme DIAMETER,
Essentiall Sphere of MANS Direction;
Heav'ns Architector; Worlds Artificer;
The Quintessence of all Perfection;
Be lov'd in Feare, fear'd in Affection?
Let then no dusty Wormeling ever dare
With his Eternall WILL to hold dispute,
But wrapt in wonder, all be dumbe and mute.

The LAW is fixt whose Bounds may none transcend,
Which different Causes in one Chaine combines;
All things by providence begin, and end,
Which generally orders:  next assignes
A speciall Powre to FATE; which doth extend
And singularly parts in Place, and Times:
So that GODS generall Ord'nance firme must stand:
And FATE still use his unavoided Hand.
