Bright beauties goddesse, Aphrodite stil'd,
From whitest froth of the Sea Billowes sprung,
O Joves most lovely best beloved child,
Who evermore continuest fresh and young,
Assistant be to that which here is sung,
And guide my Muse, which now the land forsakes,
And to the stormy Seas herselfe betakes.

Sweet-singing Syrens, you who so inchant,
The Pilot and the listning Mariner
As the ones head, the others hand doth want
Abilities the rudder for to steere,
Receive a beauty to you without peere,
That puts to Sea, whose orient teeth and lips,
Doth shed your corall, and your pearle eclipse.

For now the Druide tooke her in his armes,
Which never yet so sweet a burthen bore,
Waving his rod with strange and hideous charmes,
Whilest neere the water he stood on the shore,
A spectacle appear'd ne're seen before:
For Amphitrite the great Queen of Seas,
Appear'd with twelve Sea Nymphs Nereides.

Here I should tell you how this glorious Queen
Sate in a Chariot, no mans eye e're saw
So rare a one; her robes were of Sea green,
Her coach four Hippopotomi did draw,
Who fear'd no gust, nor tempests angry flaw.
But to describe things now I cannot stand,
I hast to finish what I have in hand.

Three steps into the Sea the Druide wading,
The sleeping Princesse to the coach he heaves,
Who proud to be enricht with such a lading,
Her Amphitrite joyfully receives,
With whom old Morrogh such directions leaves
As needfull were, whether, and in what sort
She should the beauteous Sydanis transport.

Leaving the firth whereas blacke Durdwyes streames,
Swifter than shafts shot from the Russes bow,
Doe enter and invade King Neptunes reames,
Justling the surly waves when as they flow,
Under Hilbrees high craggy cliffes doth row,
The Seas fayre Queene, whom Tritons doe attend,
While towards the maine Sea she her course doth bend.

The Sea-bred steeds so swiftly cut the maine,
As that the sight of every land was lost,
But a glasse being turn'd, they see againe
The Island Mona's solitary coast,
Who of her learned Bards may justly boast
In Musicke, and in prophesies deep skil'd,
Who with sweet Englens all the world had fill'd.

And as the Sun arose, they did descry
The lofty cliffes of the high head of Hoth,
A rocky promontory, which doth lye,
Neere Erinland, white with sea-billows froth,
Here Amphitrite (though exceeding loth)
Was by the Druide Morroghs strict command.
Her dearest lovely charge to set on land.

But yet before such time she would doe so,
She sends three Sea Nimphs downe into the deepe,
To bring her up such treasures from below,
As under rockes the wealthy Sea-gods keepe.
Now all this while was Sydanis asleepe,
And dream't that she was in some tempest tost,
And ship-wract, she and all her goods were lost.

But dreames fall out by contraries; for why?
The Sea Nimphs with more speed than can be told,
Returning, brought from Neptunes treasury
A large heape of a wrecked Merchants gold,
More than a pages pockets well could hold.
The second corall brought:  The third, a piece
Of the Seas richest treasure, Amber Gris.

Last, the Seas Empresse, for to testifie
How much her love and bounty did abound,
A rope of orient pearle did straight untie,
Which thrice her Ivory neck incircled round,
Such as in deepest Southerne Seas are found,
These pearles she knit on Sydanis her wrist,
And having, done a thousand times her kist.

Then raining teares upon her curled head,
Which was on Amphitrites bosome layd,
She wept o're Sydanis as she were dead:
So much sleepe (deaths resemblance) her dismayd,
As that a man that saw them would have sayd,
That once more there was really againe,
Venus, and in her lap Adonis slaine.

The sad Nereides with mournefull cheere,
Taking their leaves, do kisse her whitest hand,
Grieving to leave her, whom they held so deere.
And now as they approached neere the strand,
Within some dozen steps of the dry land,
Downe div'd the Hipopotomi the Queene,
Her chariot, horses, Nymphs, no more were seen.

Faire Sydanis now left to swim or sinke,
A shore the surges of the billows threw;
Who therewith waking, verely did thinke,
That what she dream't had really bin true.
The manner of her comming she not knew,
But howsoever, although cold and wet,
She was right glad she was on dry-land set.

There not full halfe an houre she did abide,
Wondring how she such gold and pearle had got,
But by a fisher-man she was espyde,
Who saw her pages cloake and bonnet float
Upon the waves, and towards her with his boat
(Taking them up) all possible speed he makes,
And Sydanis into his Skiffe he takes.

Two leagues thence distant was a famous port
Of a great City, that Eplana hight,
Where Dermot King of Erin held his court,
Attended on by many a Lord and Knight,
To whom the fisher-man told in what plight
He on the shore a shipwreckt youth had found,
And how the rest o' th' passengers were drownd.

When as King Dermot Sydanis beheld,
It doubtfull was whether his admiration
Of her rare face, which others all excell'd,
Was greater, or his tender sad compassion
Of her mishap, which gave to him occasion,
His royall bounty tow'rds her to expresse,
And to relieve her wants in this distresse.

Desiring therefore first to have her name,
She told him that her name Amanthis was,
Page to a Brittish Prince, who as he came
For Erinland (such was his wofull case)
Was drown'd, as he those stormy Seas did passe;
And that except her pages onely suit,
She was of meanes and all things destitute.

The royall Dermot forthwith gave command,
She should have any thing that he could grant.
And now because the King did understand,
His onely Princely daughter Mellefant,
Of such a page at that time stood in want,
He to her chamber did Amanthis send,
The high borne lovely Princesse to attend.

The faire attendant by King Dermot sent,
The noble Princesse kindely doth receive,
Whose page-like and descreet deportement,
Was such as no one did her sex perceive.
Now as a page Amanthis we must leave,
With the faire Princesse Mellefant to dwell,
And you shall heare what Leoline befell.

Dionea early rising in the darke,
Sets open wide the Opall ports of day,
In nights blacke tinder putting out each sparke,
That twinkling shone with a faint flaring ray,
And now Nyctimene was flowne away,
To the dark covert of a hollow tree,
Unwilling Phoebus brightest beames to see.

The glorious rayes of the next mornings light,
Which from the Easterne ocean arose,
The dismall deeds of the preceding night,
To the worlds view were ready to disclose:
And night unable longer to oppose
Bright Phoebus, or such things in secret keepe,
Downe sinking div'd into the Westerne deepe.

The Suns swift coursers upwards making hast
From his first house in the East Horison,
Had now two more supernall mansions past,
And to the entrance of the third were gone,
E're any of these things in Court had knowne.
But when nor Prince, nor Princesse did appeare,
Each one admir'd why they not stirring were.

King Arnon and Duke Leon gave command,
A page should to the princes chamber goe,
And instantly should let them understand,
If that Prince Leoline were well or no:
And why his rising he deferred so.
The page he went, and finding the doore lockt,
Softly at first, then lowder call'd and knockt.

But when within, no answer he could heare,
Nor voice of any one that to him spake;
The page unto the King relates his feare,
Who straight commands that with a mighty stroke,
Of iron bars the doore should downe be broke.
Which having done, and broken downe the dore,
A dismall sight lay on the chamber flore.

For there the aged Nurse along was lay'd,
Cold and stretcht out, as one that were starke dead,
In all Prince Leolines best clothes aray'd.
Which sight not onely feare, but wonder bred.
The King and Duke straight went unto the bed,
And opening the curtaines, there alone
The Prince lay dead, but Princesse there was none.

Tearing their haires with lamentable groanes,
These two sad parents eyes with teares abound:
The King his sonne; Duke Leon he bemones
His daughters losse, who no where could be found.
Men search for her above and under ground,
But all in vaine:  for she (you heard) was gone
The night before to Erinland, unknowne.

The ports are stop't they search each boat and barke,
Thinking that in some ship they might her finde:
But that unlikely was, when as they marke
How that contrary blew the Northwest winde,
Yet this her absence to King Arvons minde
Was evidence enough it could not be,
That any one had kill'd the Prince but she.

Now as before a storme, the clouded skie
Blackens and darkens, sullenly it loures,
E're that the dreadfull thunderer from on high
Rores in the clouds, and on the earth downe pores
Another dismall Cataclysme of shores,
Even so King Arvons countenance did betoken
A storme of words, which afterwards were spoken.

For in the word of an enraged King,
(Whose fatall anger is assured death)
He vow'd he would upon Duke Leon bring
Confusion; for his sword he would unsheath,
Which ne're should be put up whil'st he had breath,
Untill that he a just revenge should take,
For Sydanis his murderous daughters sake.

You must imagine more than shall be sayd,
Touching Duke Leons griefe and his reply,
Unto whose charge a Princes death was lay'd,
Against all lawes of hospitality:
He told King Arvon that he did defie
His threats, and being free from all offence,
He knew heaven would protect his innocence.

Leaving Carleon, back the King return'd
Unto Carnarvan castle, with intent,
That since that he and all his Court now mourn'd,
The Princes body thither should be sent,
To lay him by his Ancestors he meant,
Whose funerall should not be long deferr'd,
But he with all solemnitie interr'd.

Among these troubles and distractions,
That 'twixt King Arvon and Duke Leon fel,
The caitife Marquis Foutre, all whose actions
Were form'd by some infernall feind in hell,
Had learn'd, there was a Druide that could tel
Mens fortunes, and what e're they did demand,
Could give a resolution out of hand.

To Morrogh went this Foutre for to know
The place to which faire Sydanis was fled,
And whether that she living was or no:
If not, and that she certainly was dead,
He needs would know where she was buried.
To whom the Druide with a countenance grave,
Waving his wand, this sudden answer gave:

Know Frenchman, if to satisfie thy lust
Of that faire Lady, whom thou dost pursue,
Thou doe intend; to Erinland thou must:
There thou may'st finde her, and thy suit renue.
But seeing that the winde contrary blew,
Foutre demanded, Ha'st thou not a kinde
Of tricke in Magicke for to sell a winde.

Yea, quoth the Druide, e're thou hence depart,
That I am my Arts Master thou shalt know,
And am no ignorant in Magicke art;
For knots that on thy handkercher I'le throw,
Unty'd shall cause, that any winde shal blow,
Or strong or gently; and as thou dost please,
Shall waft thy shipe or barke along the Seas.

On Foutres handkercher three knots he knits,
Which when he was at Sea should be unty'd:
This done, forthwith the Druides Cell he quits,
And to the haven of Carleon hy'd,
Himselfe there of such shipping to provide,
As at that time the haven did aford,
Where having got a ship he went abord.

Untying the first knot, the winde, whose blast
Was contrary unto his going out,
And blew ahead, now blew abaft as fast,
And was upon the sudden come about:
Which caused all the Mariners to doubt
That they had got a passenger, whose art
Had no relation to the Sea-mans Chart.

The second knot unknit the merry gales,
The vessels linnen wings her sales did spread,
Which having past the dangerous coast of Wales,
Was sayling now athwart the Holy-head
The Skippers without sinking of their lead,
Upon a sudden now are come so nigh
To Erinland, that they it doe descry.

Here Foutre was the third knot to untye,
Who thought he had the windes at his dispose.
But having loos'd that knot, immediatly
So hydeous a storme at Sea arose,
As if each severall winde that fiercely blowes
From two and thirty points at Sea, had met,
Contending who the soveraignty should get.

The Mariners observing that the storme
From any naturall cause proceeded not,
Noting withall the superstitious form
And manner of untying of the knot,
Which now this raging tempest had begot;
Ready to sinke with every stormy blast,
Marquis Jean Foutre over boord they cast.

No sooner was the miscreant throwne in,
And in the bottom drown'd, but straight the Seas
Were calme againe, as if the wretch had bin
A sacrifice, their anger to appease,
So that it did the fatall Sisters please,
That he that tyde one knot, in the conclusion,
Should by another come unto confusion.

The Mariners now with a prosperous blast,
Their Sea-toss'd vessel towards Carleon guide,
Which there I leave, all dangers being past,
At anchor in the harbour safe to ride:
For I must tell what fortune did betide
Unto Prince Leoline, whose various fate
Makes the strange story that I shall relate.

Twice had pale Phoebe in her silver waine,
Drawn with fel dragons, rode her nightly round,
Since that the prince with his face bare had laine,
Within an open coffin yet unwound
In's winding sheet, his hands and feet not bound,
That when a prince was dead all men might see
And know for certainty, that it was hee.

Now the third night, which was the night before
The Princes body was to be convay'd
Unto Carnarvan, there were halfe a score
Of Knights and Squires in mourning blacke array'd,
That watching by the Princes body stay'd,
Who being fore-wak't, they could no longer keep
Their eye lids open, but fell all a sleepe.

Just at the hour of night the Prince did take
The potion which the Druide did compose,
Out of dead sleepe did Leoline awake,
And like a ghost out of the coffin rose,
Which er'st his Princely body did enclose:
For now the potion had no more a force
To make a living Prince a seeming corse.

For it was but a soporiferous potion,
Made of cold Night-shades, Gladials, Popies juice,
Which for a while supprest all sence and motion,
And of his members tooke away the use,
By an Narcoticke power it did infuse,
Which could no longer work on Leoline,
But till the Moone pass'd to another signe.

Nor ought this to seem strange, since as we reade,
Inhabitants of the cold frozen Zone,
Call'd Lewcomori, for six Months seem dead;
For as for sence, or motion they have none,
And so remaine till Phoebus having gone
Through the six Southerne Signes, salutes the Twins,
At which time yearely their new life begins.

But passe we this:  The Prince in dead of night
Finding that those that should have watcht, him slept,
Tooke up the Morter by whose small dim light
He silently unto the chamber stept
Of an Esquire, who all his wardrobe kept,
Whom he in all important things imploy'd,
And most rely'd upon:  His name was Ffloyd.

Comming now neere, and waking the Esquire,
Whose haire for feare began upright to stand,
Thinking he saw a ghost, but comming nigher,
The Prince upon him gently lay'd his hand,
And beckned as he silence would command;
Then putting on a Suit he lately wore,
They both at midnight went to the Sea shore.

Who being now informed by the way,
Of all the accidents that had fallen out,
He durst no longer in Carleon stay,
Duke Leons faithfulnesse he did misdoubt,
Who (as he did conceive) had gone about
To poyson him, and would some plot contrive,
That might of life him utterly deprive.

No sooner were they come, but there they found
(Even as they wisht) then ready to hoise sayle
A vessell that for Erinland was bound,
They so farre with the Mariners prevaile,
To take them in; of which they did not faile:
And now the winde so large was, that e're day,
The ship quite out of sight was flowne away.

Prince Leoline being loth it should be knowne,
What either he, or his associat were
Desir'd the Skippers, that they two alone,
On the next coast or creeke that did appeare,
Row'd in their Cock-boat, might be landed there.
The Mariners accordingly it did,
And the meane time the ship at anchor rid.

As they were ready for to set their feet
Upon dry land, and so to take their way,
Upon the shore a gastly sight they meet,
For there Jean Foutres drowned body lay,
In the same clothes, and in the same array,
He on the Princes wedding day had worne,
Whose face and hands fishes had eat and torne.

The Prince approching neerer for to view
The Sea-drownd carkas, which he had descry'd;
That it was Foutre, instantly he knew;
For on his brest his bridall point he spy'd,
Which Leoline forthwith tooke and unty'd,
Unwilling that the Mariners should have
A thing he as his wedding favour gave.

The Magicke knot undone by fortune strange,
And by this sad and yet glad accident,
In Leoline did worke a sudden change:
For though it was undone with no intent,
But such as hath bin sayd; yet the event
Was such, and did so happily succeed,
He from th' enchanted Ligature was freed.

The Jewels, Gold, and Silver that he found,
Among the Sea-men he distributed;
Who making of a poore hole in the ground,
Such as is made for felons being dead,
(Who by the high way side are buried)
Jean Foutres body they starke naked strip,
Which done they backe doe rowe unto their ship.

Prince Leoline and his Esquire Ffloyd
In Erinland being safely set on shore,
The better all suspition to avoid,
Would not unto Eblana come, before
They had conceal'd themselves a weeke or more:
In the meane time they purpose to devise
A way how they might passe in some disguise.

Which while they are contriving, you shall heare
King Arvon and Duke Leons sad estate,
Who equally in griefe engaged were,
And equally did one another hate:
With swords they meane the businesse to debate,
And thereupon make preparation,
One for defence, the other for invasion.

For when the servants that King Arvon sent,
Missing the body, all about had sought,
And could by no meanes finde which way it went,
Returning to the King they nothing brought
But onely this conjecture, that they thought
Duke Leon (on whom all the blame they lay)
Whil'st they did sleep, had stolne the corps away,

And buried it obscurely in some place,
Where never any one should finde his grave.
Th' enraged King resenting this disgrace,
And now perceiving that he might not have
His sonne alive, nor dead, he straight way gave
Commissions forth an army to assemble,
Should make Carleons city walls to tremble.

'Tis hard to say, whether was greater growne,
King Arvons anger, or Duke Leons griefe;
On whom those blacke aspersions were throwne,
First of a murtherer, and then a theefe:
His patience yet (exceeding all beleefe)
And fortitude, were greater than his wrongs,
Or the fowle malice of all slanderous tongues.

So now it hap't as Leon went alone
To Venus Temple, and at midnight pray'd,
Downe in that very vault he heard one grone,
Wherein two nights before the Nurse was layd:
Then afterwards he heard a voice, which sayd,
Oh when will it be day?  When will the light
Disperse the darkenesse of this endlesse night?

The Duke at first amazed, recollects
His feare-dispersed spirits, and before
That he would speake, he earnestly expects
To heare what the sad ghost would utter more:
Whom he perceived wept, and sighed sore:
Which made him on it such compassion take,
As that forthwith the vault he open brake.

And bowing downe into the grot, he say'd,
If thou a soule leaving th' Elysian rest,
Art backe return'd, whereas thy corps is layd,
To bring some comfort to a Prince distrest,
And with all manner injuries opprest;
Then in the dead more mercy doth abound,
Than here among the living can be found.

For thou wilt tell me whether bale or blisse
Be now the sad condition or glad state
Of my late deare deceased Sydanis,
And where and how she yeelded to her fate:
All which, I pray thee, gentle ghost, relate,
And ease my heavy heart, opprest with griefe,
Which among mortals can finde no reliefe.

Griefe hath few words.  Th' amazed Nurse that heard
Duke Leons words, and knew it was his voice;
Of the vaults darkenesse being much afeard,
And the dead silence where there was no noise;
Not knowing if she wak't, or dream't, the choice
That she did make, was rather to conceale
Her selfe a while, than any thing reveale.

And therefore that opinion to mantaine,
And fancy in Duke Leon, of a ghost
From the Elysian shades return'd againe,
And had now twise the Stygian ferry crost,
To seeke that body it before had lost;
She in a piteous voice Duke Leon told,
As yet she might not any thing unfold.

For Minos, Eacus, and Rhadamant
The three grim Judges of th' infernall Court,
Would not unto the ghosts a licence grant,
The secrets of the darke world to report;
But to their Tombes they nightly must resort,
Till seven nights were past, and there must stay
Till the cockes crow before the breake of day.

But if that he on the eighth night would come
About the houre of twelve, when ghosts appeare,
And call upon her at the silent Tombe,
Of all things he the certainely should heare
Where Leoline and his faire daughter were,
And be inform'd of everything he crav'd,
And what the fates on leaves of steele had grav'd.

The Duke expecting at that time no more,
Up from the vault he silently arose,
Forgetting now to shut the Temple dore,
Unto his Palace backe againe he goes,
And now the Nurse ere that the first cocke crowes,
Stole from the vault, and in her winding sheet,
Went to a beldams house in a by-street.

Who being a lone woman, was most fit
To keepe her close, and what she had design'd;
Unto whose trust her selfe she doth commit,
And told to the old beldam all her minde;
Intending that as soone as she could finde
An opportunity, she would goe thence
To Morrogh, to get more intelligence.

Through darknesse of the third ensuing night,
To the learn'd Druide Morroghs Cell she went,
Clad like a souldier, in a buffe coat dight,
With hat, sword, gorget.  This habiliment
Her hostesse the old Beldam to her lent,
Whose husband being a souldier long before,
Under Duke Leon, in his life time wore.

Attyred thus in habit of a man,
When she before the reverend Druide came,
To counterfit mens gesture she began:
And to appeare that she was not the same
She was, she altered her voice and name,
Thinking that Morrogh knew not who she was,
But that she for a souldier well might passe.

But he well knowing she did counterfet,
And to delude his cunning had a minde,
Resolved her finenesses should be met,
And quitted backe to her in their owne kinde:
(Souldier quoth he) I by my skill do finde,
Prince Leoline and Sydanis are fled,
And Merioneth her old Nurse is dead.

More of the Princes I cannot unfold;
But by my art I certainely do know;
That e're three dayes be past, thou shalt behold
Carleon city walls beleaguered so,
That out of it alive there none shall go;
By famine brought to that extremity,
As that the Duke himselfe thereof would dy.

But such a horrid death I must prevent,
And for thou seem'st one of Duke Leons guard,
Tell him that I to him by thee have sent
An Amulet by Chymicke art prepar'd,
Whose vertue told, will purchase thy reward,
For if that one but touch his lips with it,
'Twill satisfie the hungry appetite.

The skilfull Druide gave no more direction,
Nor of the secret properties more spake,
Of the Epiminedial confection.
The seeming-souldier doth the present take,
And towards Carleon all post hast doth make,
Intending that if possible she may,
She would be backe before the breake of day.

But e're twas day, King Arvons legions were
So farre advanc'd, as that he sent a Scout
To make discovery if the foe were neere,
Or that there were any ambushment without.
Now as the swift Vant-curriers rode about
As Sentinell perdue, the Nurse they caught,
And to King Arvon instantly her brought.

Who forthwith gave command she should be sent
Unto Carnarvan, and there should be cast
Into the deepest dungeon, to th' intent
That she in links of iron fettered fast,
Being hunger-starv'd to death, should breathe her last.
His angry doome is straight accomplished,
And to Carnarvan is Merioneth led;

Of all poore creatures most unfortunate:
For while that in the dungeon she did ly,
She with her selfe did often times debate,
Whether was better, hunger-starv'd to dy,
Or for to take the Druides remedy,
'Twould but prolong her misery to use it,
And it was present death for to refuse it.

But here I leave her and King Arnons host
Carleon city walls besieging round:
My tale must follow them, who having crost
The Brittish Seas, for Erinland were bound,
Where Leoline faire Sydanis hath found,
But so transform'd, as (though he did her see)
He little did suspect, that it was she.

