The Crescent-crowned Empresse of the floud
Had vayled thrice her face from mortals sight,
And having thrice in opposition stood
Unto her brother, borrow'd thrice his light
Since that auspitious happy pleasant night,
That beautifull Amanthis first had bin
A bed-fellow unto Prince Leoline.

But well away, for like a man that stands
With unsure footing on the slippery ice,
Or one that builds a house upon the sands,
Such is this worlds joy:  Fortune in a trice
Can alter so the chances of the dice,
Our clearest day of mirth e're it be past,
With clouds of sorrow oft is overcast.

And now alas quite alter'd is the Scoene
From joy to sadnesse, and from weale to woe;
The purblinde goddesse Fortune knowes no meane,
For either she must raise or overthrowe:
Our joy no sooner to the height doth growe,
But either it is taken quite away,
Or like a whithering floure it doth decay.

Oh you sad daughters of darke night and hell,
You Furies three, that shunning of the light,
Among the buried worlds pale people dwell,
And guilty consciences with ghosts affright,
Assistants be to that I now must write
Alecto with thy dim blew burning brand,
Lend fatall light to guide my trembling hand:

For cheerefull day-light will not lend a beame,
My teare downe-dropping drery quill to guide,
By which that may be read, which now's my Theame
In dusky clouds the Sun his face will hide,
And to behold these lines will not abide,
For they will make the rosie blushing morrow
Looke deadly pale, to see Amanthis sorrow.

For why, it fortun'd so, that the next day
After the Masque and Revels all were done,
That Leoline as fresh as floures in may,
To prosecute that victory he had wonne,
And finish that was happily begun,
Unto the Princesse Mellefant he went,
His love and humble service to present.

Whom happily he found (his lucke was such
Through his kinde favouring starres) sitting alone
Upon an imbrocated tissue couch,
Enricht with pearle and many a pretious stone:
As then attendants neer her there was none
Save onely faire Amanthis, who had bin
Discoursing to her of Prince Leoline.

Who seeing him, rose whence that she was set,
And he with low obeysance kist her hand:
My Lord, Quoth Mellefant, since we are met
If 'twere my happinesse to understand
The French, that I might know what you command,
And that we two together might conferre,
Without Amanthis our interpreter.

The Prince upon the couch set by her side,
Making his face more lovely with a smile,
In her owne language to her thus reply'd,
Madam (quoth he) 'twere pitty to beguile
You any longer, for though all this while
I seem'd a Frenchman; yet truth shall evince,
That I your faithfull servant am a Prince.

Faire Mellefant with sudden joy surpris'd,
A rosie blush her dainty cheeks did staine,
My Lord (quoth she) although you liv'd disguis'd,
How is it, that so soone you did obtaine
Our Brittish tongue?  He answered her againe,
Madam (quoth he) causes must not be sought
Of miracles by your rare beauty wrought.

But wonder not, for though King Dermots throne
Is sever'd by greene Nereus briny maine
From the firme Brittish continent, yet one
Are both the laws and language those retaine,
O're whom the King of Erinland doth reigne,
And those, who great King Arvon do obay,
Who doth the old Symerian Scepter sway.

Whose Kingdome all those provinces containes
Betweene swift Deva's streames upon the East,
Who tumbling from the hils frets through the plaines,
And great Saint Georges Chanell on the West,
Where the fierce Ordovices, and the rest
Of the ne're conquer'd warlick Brittons bold,
In hils, and caves their habitations hold.

Nor hath his spatious kingdome there an end,
But from the stormy Northerne Oceans shore,
Unto the fall of Dovy doth extend,
Whose springs from highest mountaines falling o're
Steepe rocks, like Niles loud Catadups do rore,
Whose christall streames along the rivers brinke
The stout Dimetae, and Silures drinke.

Whose Ancestors after Deucalions floud,
First peopled Erinland long time agone,
Whose off-Spring is deriv'd from Brittous bloud,
And is thereof but an extraction:
Now both these Nations may againe be one;
And since they are derived from one stem,
They may be joyned in one Diadem.

If you, most faire of Princesses, shall daigne
A kinde alliance with the Brittish Crowne,
And in your bed and bosome entertaine
A Lover that shall adde to your renowne:
For such a noble match will make it knowne
For an undoubted truth, that Princes hands
Doe not alone joyne hearts, but unite lands.

To this the beautious Mellefant reply'd,
And sed, Faire Prince, were the election mine,
Your noble motion should not be deny'd:
For little Rhethorick would suffice t' encline
A Lady to affect Prince Leoline.
Few words perswade a heart already bent
To amorous thoughts, to give a fit consent.

But my choyce is not totally my owne,
Wherein we Princes are unfortunate:
Fit Suitors to us there are few or none;
We must be rul'd by reasons of the state,
Which must our lives and actions regulate:
The country mayds are happier then we,
To whom the choyce of many swaines is free.

But we must wooe by picture, and beleive,
For all the inward beauties of the minde,
Such lineaments the painters colours give:
We ought be Phisiognomers, to finde
Whether the soul be well or ill enclin'd:
Besides, when kingdomes do ally as friends,
They know no love, nor kindred, but for ends.

Yet I have had the happinesse to see
And to converse with you, wherein I am
More fortunate than other Princes be,
Seeing your person er'e I knew your name:
And now your vertues, greater than your fame,
Needs not the treaties of Embassadours,
To make the heart of Mellefant all yours.

Onely my fathers leave must be obtain'd,
Er'e we our nuptiall rites do celebrate,
Whose liking and consent when you have gain'd,
(Wherein I wish you may be fortunate)
You are his kingdomes heire, and this whole state
Shall do you homage, and the race that springs
From us, shall reigne in Erinland as Kings,

And rule those antient Scepts, which heretofore
Had soveraigne power, and petit Princes were
The great O Neale, O Dannell and O More
O Rocke, O Hanlon, and the fierce Macquere,
Mac Mahon erst begotten of a Beare,
Among those woods not pierc't by Summers Sun,
Where the swift Shenan, and cleare Lessy run.

Under those shades the tall growne Kerne, content
With Shamrockes and such cates the woods afford,
Seekes neither after meat, nor condiment,
To store his smoakie Coshery, or bord,
But clad in trouses, mantle, with a sword
Hang'd in a weyth, his feltred glib sustaines
Without a hat, the weather, when it raines.

The Lordly Tanist with his Skene and Durke,
Who placeth all felicity in ease,
And hardly gets his lazy churles to worke,
Who rather chose to live as Salvages,
Than with their garoones to breake up the Lease
Of firtile fields, but do their plow-shares tye
To horses tailes, a barbarous husbandry.

But as it is foretold in prophesies,
Who writ on barkes of trees, a mayden Queene
Hereafter Erinland shall civilize,
And quite suppresse those Salvage rites have beene
Amongst us, as they never had beene seene:
This Queene must of the Brittish bloud descend,
Whose fame unto the worlds poles shall extend.

Who raigning long, her sexes brightest glory,
All after ages ever shall admire:
True vertues everlasting Type and story,
Who then her, when it can ascend no higher,
She like a virgin Phoenix shall expire.
And if old wizards antient sawes be true,
This royall Princesse must ascend from you.

Who hath observ'd the gentle Westerne winde,
And seene the fragrant budding Damaske rose,
How that it spreads and opens, he will finde
When Zephyrus calme breath upon it blowes,
Even so the Princes heart one may suppose
Dilated was with joy within his brest,
Hearing the speeches Mellefant exprest.

To whom with looks and countenance debonaire,
He onely made this short, but sweet reply:
Madam (quoth he) were not you the most faire
That ever hath bin fam'd in history,
Or shall be seene by late posterity,
There might remaine a hope, that there might be
An age hereafter happier than we.

But since that you are Natures paragon
Not by her selfe e're to be paralleld,
Since heaven's, the ring, and you the pretious stone,
Yet never equal'd, therefore not excell'd,
Those happy eies that have your forme beheld,
Must close themselves in darkenesse, and dispaire
Of ever seeing one so heavenly faire.

For when to liberall Nature she had spent
The quintessence of all her pretious store,
To make one glorious Phoenix, her intent
Perchance was to have form'd two, or more;
But wanting of materialls she forbore:
So is she now enforc'd not to make two
Such as your selfe, but by dissolving you.

Therefore that glorious Queene of all perfection,
That is foretold in after times to reigne,
Will be but of your selfe a recollection:
Who Aeson-like, will be reviv'd againe;
For your divinest parts will still remaine
Unmixt, and the uniting of your frame
Will alter nothing of you, but your name.

For as a soveraigne Prince doth honor give
To's presence chamber, though he be not there;
So you, though for a while you do not live
On earth, but in some bright coelestiall Sphaere,
Yet is your presence chamber every where,
For that it is the whole world here belowe,
To which your servants do obeysance owe.

This interchange of courtship 'twixt these lovers
Continued till the day was well neere spent,
And Venus setting in the West, discovers
The path and tracke where Phoebus chariot went.
To get King Dermots fatherly consent,
Was now the onely businesse to be done,
To consummate those joyes that were begun.

But O you weird sterne fatall Sisters three,
O Lachesis, that mortalls threds dost twine!
O influence of starrs, that causes bee,
Though not compulsive, yet our wills encline:
You yet disclose not to Prince Leoline,
Of this his forward love the sad event,
Nor of his match the strong impediment.

For now Amanthis either must oppose
His marriage, for by her it must be crost,
And consequently must her selfe disclose,
Or she is utterly undone, and lost.
Thus like a ship 'twixt winde and tyde sore tost,
Not knowing how to take about or veere,
She wanted skill to weld the sterne or steere.

For first she thought such was the Princes truth,
As that he would rejoyce that he had found
Amanthis retransformed from a youth
To Sydanis, whom he believ'd was drown'd,
With double joyes their hearts should now be crown'd,
For all the bitternesse they both did taste,
Should with contentment sugred be at last.

And though we be no better for delight
That's done and gone, nor yet the worse for paine:
When it is past, no more than is the sight,
For glorious species, which it did retaine:
Or eare for hearing some harsh musicke straine,
The present being that, which we enjoy,
Whether it be of pleasure, or annoy.

Yet as in dreams the memory suggests
Unto the fantasie things that have beene,
But are no more, so a rememberance rests
In her, of all her anguish and her teene;
And of those sorrowfull dayes that she had seene,
Which like a fearefull dreame once passed o're
That 'twas not true makes her rejoyce the more.

For she not knowing of the fascination
Was practis'd on the Prince in's marriage bed,
Might thinke an over strong imagination,
Sending venereall spirits to the head,
Had left the part of generation dead,
Too much desire in love being oft a let
And makes that fall, which men upright would set.

But passing that, the Princesse having try'de
With Leoline, whom she so oft beguil'd,
Compleatly all the pleasures of a bride,
And by him being young conceiv'd with child,
She thought she should be fully reconcyl'd
Unto King Arvon, when it did appeare
That Leoline and she both living were:

And that the warre King Avnon had begun,
(Of which she had but lately heard) should cease,
She bringing to him a young Prince, a sonne,
And all should be concluded with a peace,
Before their two old parents did decease.
These pleasant thoughts, like shapes seene in a glasse
Set in a street, through her cleere soule did passe.

But as in March the Sun then shining faire,
Is often by the South winds stormy blast,
Chacing the clouds, and troubling the ayre,
With blacke and gloomy curtaines over-cast,
Which longer than serenity doth last,
So some sad thoughts orespread Amanthis soule,
Which all her thoughts of pleasure did controule.

For to declare herselfe she was a feard,
To be the consort of the Princes bed,
Since she should crosse herselfe, who had averr'd
To Leoline, that Sydanis was dead,
And so for lying should be censured,
Or should as an Imposter be accus'd,
Who with false showes had all the Court abus'd.

Besides, this circumstance augments her feare,
If she should say she from Carleon fled,
She must discover what had hapned there,
She knew no other but her Nurse was dead,
For whom her life might well be questioned,
And therefore in this case it her behov'd,
To say something that might not be disprov'd.

But she not knew nor ship, nor Princes name
Pretended to be shipwrect, nor could give
Account how she unto Eblana came,
So probably that men might her believe:
This exigent her very soule did grieve,
That she must say it with a serious brow,
That she was come, and yet could not tell how.

Besides, she did imagine if she sayd
She was Duke Leons daughter, none did know
Her to be such, and being now no mayd,
Though formerly the Prince had left her so,
When from her bridall bed he meant to go,
Though she assumed Sydanis her name,
The Prince might thinke her like, yet not the same.

Or presuppose Prince Leoline did know
That she was Sydanis, yet having set
His love on Mellefant, he might not show
That he did know her, and so she might get
The reputation of a Counterfet:
Besides, she comming closely to his bed,
She could not prove he got her maidenhead.

Moreover if all truths should be disclos'd,
And things knowne really; which she did faine,
That all this while Prince Leoline suppos'd
That he with Princesse Mellefant had laine:
For such a foule aspersion, and a staine
Cast on her honour, (although not intended)
Faire Mellefant might justly be offended.

And so on every side perplex't and griev'd,
She of all lyars should have the reward,
As when they speake truth not to be believ'd,
She could not easily mend what she had marr'd.
Thus with the wofull Sydanis it far'd,
Who trusting over-much to her disguise,
Falls by it into these calamities.

O aged father, Times faire daughter Truth,
Of all divine intelligences best,
What Sages erst have sed of thee is sooth,
Thou hast a window made in thy white brest,
And art most lovely when thou art undrest.
Thou seek'st no corners thy bright selfe to hide,
Nor blushest though thou naked art espyde.

Thou needest not a fucus or disguise,
To cover thee thou putt'st on no new fashion,
Nor with false semblance dost delude mens eyes,
Like thy base zany damn'd equivocation,
Thou want'st no comment, nor interpretation,
And for maintayning thee, though men be blam'd
And suffer for a while, yet ne're art sham'd.

Yet what thou art must not alwayes be told,
For 'tis convenient thou thy selfe should'st hide,
Till thy old Sire thy beauties do unfold:
Then as pure gold upon the touchstone try'd,
That finers hottest furnace doth abide,
Or like a palme tree thou dost flourish best,
When thou hast bin by ignorance supprest.

And so although necessity requir'd
That truth of things should now be brought to light,
That period of time was not expir'd,
Wherein this Lady Sydanis the bright
Should show her selfe, for which she often sight,
Who now with showres of teares her eies had made,
As if two Suns in watery clouds did wade.

But as the Lilly when as Bartholmew,
Summers last Saint, hath ushered in the frost,
Wet, with the long nights cold, and chilly dew,
Her luster and her verdure both are lost,
And seems to us as she were dead almost:
So griefe and sorrow quickly did impaire
The lovely face of Sydanis the faire.

Who weeps away her eies in pearly showres,
Rais'd by her sighs, as by a Southerne winde,
She prayes to Venus and the heavenly powers,
That they in their high providence would finde
Some means to ease her sad and troubled minde:
And though despaire unto the height was growne,
She might enjoy that yet, which was her owne.

Her prayers are heard, for the next dawning day
Prince Leoline, and Mellefant both went
(True love not brooking any long delay)
Unto King Dermot, with a full intent
To aske and get his fatherly consent.
These Princes loves on wings of hope did fly,
That the King neither could, or would deny.

But their designe they brought to no effect,
Being commenc't in an unlucky houre,
No planet being in his course direct,
And Saturne who his children doth devour
From his Northeast darke Adamantine tower
Beheld the waining Moone and retrograde,
A time unfit for such affaires had made.

They should have made election of a day
Was fortunate, and fit to speake with Kings,
When the Kings planet, Sol's propitious ray,
Who great affaires to a wisht period brings,
And is predominant in all such things;
When Jupiter aspecting with the Trine,
His daughter Venus did benignly shine.

This was the cause proceeding from above,
Which Clerks do call inevitable fate
That was the hindrance of these Princes love,
And made them in their Suit unfortunate:
But yet there was another cause of state,
Which was so maine an obstacle and let,
That they the Kings consent could never get.

For that Embassadour which lieger lay,
Sent to Eblana in King Albions name,
Who as you heard was feasted that same day
That to the Court Prince Leoline first came,
And Mellefant conceiv'd her amorous flame,
A treatie of a marriage had begun
For her, with Prince Androgios, Albions sonne;

And had so farre advanc't it, that the King
With all his privy counsels approbation,
Had condescended unto every thing
That might concerne the weale of either nation;
For this alliance would lay a foundation
Of a firme future peace, and would put downe
That enmity was erst 'twixt either crowne.

And now the time prefixt was come so neere
Th' Embassadour had got intelligence,
Within ten dayes Androgios would be there
In person, his owne love-suit to commence,
And consummate with all magnificence
His marriage, and performe those nuptiall rites
Wherein bright Cyntherea so delights.

This weigh'd, King Dermot could not condescend,
Nor give way to Prince Leolines affection,
Unlesse he should Andragios offend,
Who now of his alliance made election,
The breach whereof might cause an insurrection
Among his people, if that they should see
Him breake a Kings word, which should sacred bee.

And now although Prince Leoline repented,
He ever love to Mellefant profest,
Yet because no man should go discontented
From a great King, he as a Princely guest
Was us'd with all the noblest, fairest, best
Respects of curtesie, and entertain'd
While that he in King Dermots Court remain'd.

But like to one that's into prison cast,
Though he enjoy both of the eie and eare,
All choycest objects, and although he tast
Ambrosiall cates; yet while that he is there
Wanting his liberty, which is most deare,
He nothing relishes, for nothing cares,
Even so now with Prince Leoline it fares.

Who now disconsolate, and being barr'd,
All hopes of marrying Mellefant the faire,
Missing that ayme he nothing did regard,
And since he must not be King Dermots heire,
He thought that nought that damage could repaire,
Himselfe as one he captivated deem'd,
And Dermots Court to him a prison seem'd.

Now as a tempest from the Sea doth rise,
Within his minde arose this stormy thought,
How that the princesse justly might despise
His cowardise, who by all meanes had sought
To win her love, if he not having fought
A combate with Androgios, he should go
Or steale away from her that lov'd him so.

Although to fight, no valour he did want,
Nor wisht a nobler way his life to end,
If vanquisht he should lose both Mellefant
And he King Dermot highly should offend,
Who all this while had bin his royall friend,
Love well begun should have a bad conclusion,
And kindnesse find an unkinde retribution.

But more, if he should secretly attempt
By means to take King Dermots life away,
Nothing his guilty conscience would exempt
From terror that so fouly would betray,
Fowls of the ayre such treason would bewray:
For ravens by their croking would disclose
(Pecking the earth) such horrid acts as those.

If he with Mellefant away should steale,
And carry her where they might not be found,
Yet time at last such secrets would reveale:
For by that act he should her honor wound.
Who for her modesty had bin renown'd,
And he then Paris should no better speed,
Of whose sad end you may in Dares read.

One while in him these noble thoughts had place,
Which did reflect on honorable fame:
Another while he thought how that in case
He stole away, men could not him more blame,
Then erst Aeneas, who had done the same
To Dido, and that very course had taken,
Leaving the lovely Carthage Queene forsaken.

Injurious story, which not onely serv'st
To keep the names of Heroes from rust,
But in thy brazen register preserv'st
The memories, and acts of men unjust,
Which otherwise had bin buried with their dust,
But for thy blacke darke soule there no man had
Examples to avoid for what is bad.

For had it not in Annals bin recorded,
That Theseus from the Minotaur was freed
By Ariadne, time had not affoorded
A president for such a horrid deed,
For when King Minos daughter had agreed
To steale away with him his beautious theft,
A sleep on Naxos desarts rocks he left.

An act deserving hels blacke imprecation
So cruell, that it cannot be exprest
To leave a Princely Lady in such fashion,
That had receav'd him to her bed and brest,
All after ages should this fact detest:
For this his treason rendred him all o're,
A greater monster then the Minotore.

Returning home to Greece he had not taught
Demophon, by faire Phaedra his false sonne,
When he had King Lycurgus daughter brought
Unto his bowe, and her affection wonne,
Perfidiously away from her to runne,
Leaving faire Phillis, and so caus'd that she
Did hang her selfe upon an Almond tree.

Yet these examples scarce mov'd Leoline,
And scarce his resolution chang'd at all
For Mellefant, for he could not divine,
If she by tasting sorrows bitter'st gall,
Upon the sharpe point of a sword should fall:
Or Phillis like impatient of delay,
Would with a halter make her selfe away.

It may be she like Ariadne might
(Though she her Virgin bloom had Theseus given)
Marry god Bacchus, and her tresses bright
Be afterward exalted up to heaven,
There for to shine among the planets seaven:
For justice is not so severe and strict
As death on all offenders to inflict.

Besides he did remember, should he looke
On authors, he should many women finde,
That had their loves, and paramours forsooke,
And prov'd to them unconstant, and unkinde.
'Mongst other stories he did call to minde,
That of the fairy Creseid, who insteed
Of faithfull Troilus lov'd false Diomed.

And if there were as many women found
As men, in love unconstant, and untrue,
He thought, that he in conscience was not bound
To render love for love, but while 'twas due,
And so might leave an old love for a new,
Besides he thought Androgios might be
A braver, and a comelier man then he.

And being higher both in birth and place
Then he, and heire to a more antient crown,
He thought that Mellefant in such a case
Will do like women, all preferre their owne
Preheminence, precedence, and renowne,
And so she in a short time would forget,
All that affection she on him had set.

And as for Prince Androgios, though he could
Have wisht he had not Mellefant defil'd,
With whom he thought that he had bin too bold;
Yet if 'twere so, that she was not with child,
The Prince as other men might be beguil'd,
As surfling water, or such art might hide
Secrets by Midwives not to be descry'd.

And therefore he resolved not to fight,
Unlesse Androgios challeng'd him, for so
Such privacies he thought might come to light,
That were unfit for any man to know.
He therefore did determine he would goe
Unto Carnarvan, and there would abide,
Till fortune show'd what after should betide.

Our purposes, and things which we intend,
Have not subsistance of themselves alone,
For on the heavenly powers they do depend
As the earth gives birth to every seed is sowne,
Which after to maturity is growne:
For starres not onely forme all our intents,
But shape the means to further the events.

For now to further this his resolution,
Those starres, which at his birth benignly shone
In his first house, by annuall revolution,
Unto his mirth, the house of dreams was gone,
Of journeys, and peregrination
Significator, and the Moone now new,
To Phoebus bosome her darke-selfe withdrew.

All this conspir'd to further a designe
Which Sydanis resolv'd to put in act,
For understanding by Prince Leoline
That there had never bin any contract
'Twixt him and Mellefant, she nothing lackt
But some fine neat device, whereof the doing
Should be the cause of Leolines speedy going.

For he once being from Eblana gone,
It was her resolution and intent
(In claime of that which justly was her owne)
To follow him where ever that he went,
All thoughts of future marriage to prevent,
For rather then endure such stormes as those
She had abid, her-selfe she would disclose.

And thus it hap't when from the frozen North
Night and her consort dull dew dropping sleepe
Arose, and drouzy Morpheus had let forth
Fantasticke dreames which he in caves doth keepe,
When mortals all their cares in Lethe steepe,
And darkenesse with Cymerian foggy dampe,
Extinguisht for a while heavens glorious Lampe.

What time the silent houres their wheels had driven
Over the sable clouds of dusky night,
And were ariv'd as high as the mid heaven,
Dividing from the Hemisphere of light,
The other halfe in robes of darkenesse dight:
As Leoline lay sleeping in his bed,
A pleasant vision did possesse his head.

He dreamt he saw Duke Leons Palace, where
There was all pompe and bravery exprest,
All objects might delight the eie, or eare
With preparation for a sumptuous feast,
Which unto Coelums honor was addrest.
For in a Temple, that was high and wide,
He thought he first Duke Leon had descry'd.

Kneeling he seem'd by the high Altars side
With eies uncast, and hands to heaven upspread,
All which the Duke devoutly having ey'd,
High in the clouds appeared over head
Joves mighty Eagle carrying Ganymede,
Who gently downe descending from above,
Did seeme as sent unto the Duke from Jove.

Lighting upon the ground the Eagle set
Her lovely load, in presence of the Duke,
Which eftsoons did a wonder strange beget,
Forwhile he stedfastly did on it looke,
The person that for Ganymede he tooke,
Was Sydanis his daughter, and so seem'd
Unto the sleeping Prince, who of her dream'd.

From whom as now the Eagle was to part,
And touring to returne up to the skies,
She suddenly seiz'd on Sydanis her heart,
And having rent it out away she flies,
This sight with such a horror did surprise
The sleeping Prince, that every member quakes,
And in a cold sweat Leoline awakes.

Awak't with feare Prince Leoline beheld
A stranger and a farre more ominous sight,
Which all his dreame and fantasies expell'd,
For by his bed side in a glimmering light
Stood Sydanis in fairy habit dight,
To whom she did a low obeysance make,
And afterwards to this effect she spake.

Illustrious Prince (quoth she) whom various Fate,
Guiding the helme of thy affaires in love,
Did first make happy, then unfortunate,
Yet at the last to thee will constant prove,
And will eftsoones those errours all remove,
Which heretofore have been, or else may be,
Impediments to thy felicity.

Fate wils not that thou longer shouldst remaine
In false beliefe, thy Sydanis is dead,
Or that thou with faire Mellefant hast laine,
Or hast enjoy'd her virgin-Maidenhead.
'Twas I by night came to thee in her stead,
Who am a Fairy, an Inhabitant
Of another world, for 'twas not Mellefant.

For 'twixt the Center and circumference
Of this great Globe of earth (Prince) thou shalt know
There is another fairy world, from whence
We through the earth, as men through ayre, do go
Without resistance passing to and fro,
Having nor Sun, nor Moone, but a blew light,
Which makes no difference 'twixt our day and night.

In this our world there is not a thing here,
Upon this globe of earth, man, woman, tree,
Plant, herbe, or flower, but just the same is there,
So like it hardly can distinguisht bee,
Either in colour, or in shape, for wee
Are all ayeriall Phantoms, and are fram'd,
As Pictures of you, and are Fairyes nam'd.

And as you mortals we participate
Of all the like affections of the minde.
Wee joy, wee grieve, wee feare, wee love, wee hate,
And many times forsaken our owne kinde,
Wee are in league with mortals so combinde,
As that in dreams wee ly with them by night,
Begetting children, which do Changelings hight.

To those we love, and in whom we take pleasure
From Diamantine chests we use to bring
Gold, Jewels, and whole heaps of fairy treasure,
Summes that may be the ranson of a King,
On those wee hate, wee many times do fling
Blindenesse, and lamenesse, that unhallowed goe
To croppe of fairy branch the Misseltoe.

Amongst us is thy Sydanis, of whom
I am the Genius, for er'st so it chanc't,
As flying from Carleon, she did come,
And too neere to our Fary rounds advanc't,
Whereas at midnight wee the Faryes danc't;
King Oberon straight seiz'd her as his prey,
As Pluto erst took Proserpine away:

And carrying her downe to Fary land,
Hath on a downy Couch layd her to sleepe,
With Orenge blossoms strow'd, with a command,
Queene Mab, and all her Elves should safe her keepe,
Till thou repassing o're the briny deepe,
Shalt to King Arvon thy old Sire returne,
Whom causelesse thou so long hast made to mourne.

Which if thou do not instantly performe,
Blacke Elves shall pinch thee, Goblins shall affright
Thy restlesse soule; at Sea an hideous storme,
With deaths blacke darkenesse, shall thy dayes benight.
Having thus sayd, that borrow'd beame of light,
Which as you heard did from the stone arise,
Vanisht, and hid her from the Princes eies.

Who now beleeving he had seene an Elfe,
A messenger by Oberon imploy'd,
He forthwith rose, and eftsoones drest himselfe
(The better all suspition to avoyd,)
In a blacke habit of his Squire Ffloyd,
And e're the Sun toucht the East Horizon,
Putting to Sea, he out of kenne was gone.

