And now old Saturne, whom Clerks Chronos call,
Of nature cold and dry, of motion slow,
Author of all misfortunes, that befall
To men and their affaires, malignant so,
Was shortly from his Apoge to go,
To his exile, and Jove was to ascend,
And so these lovers troubles all should end.

Benigne bright King of stars, who hast forsooke
Juno, the stately Consort of thy bed,
And downe-descending to the earth, hast tooke
Strange shapes, of mortals be'ng enamored,
Who were not onely metamorphosed
By thee, but taken up into the skies,
And shining, sit amongst the Deities;

Hasten thy rising to thy glorious Throne,
And sitting on thy Saphir'd Arch in state,
Looke on those Princes that have undergone
The dire effects of thy sterne Fathers hate,
Which, as thou art a King, commiserate,
And when that thou hast ended every thing,
My Muse unto this stories period bring.

For yet the storme is not quite overpast,
Nor suddenly will all these troubles end:
With Saturnes frowns the heaven is overcast,
And clouds of sorrow, shoures of teares portend:
For while that Leoline his course doth bend,
And is arrived at Carnarvans port,
The Scoene of woe lyes in King Dermots Court.

For now no sooner did the Rosie morne,
(Which summons drowsie Mortals from their rest)
Her dewy locks in Thetis glasse adorne,
And Phoebus steeds in flaming trappings drest,
From the low North, ascended up the East,
But it through all the Court was forthwith knowne,
How that Prince Leoline away was gone.

Of which a messenger did tydings bring
To Sydanis, and Princesse Mellefant:
Who forthwith did relate them to the King:
Who of his goings cause being ignorant,
Affirm'd, that he civility did want,
Who did so many curtesies receive,
And went away without taking his leave.

Wonder possest King Dermots royall heart
With much regret, the Prince should leave him so:
But Mellefant, she acts another part,
Of doubtfull sorrow in this Scoene of woe,
For after him she was resolv'd to go:
And under the black vaile of the next night
She did determine for to take her flight.

The very same faire Sydanis intends,
Who in Eblana would no longer stay:
Having on Leoline now had her ends,
Glad that her Princely Lord was gone away,
Too long and wearisome she thought the day:
And blam'd as slow the russins of the Sun,
That tow'rds the West they did no faster run.

But at the last, night with a sable robe,
Rising from Tenerus her darke abode,
Orespread this halfe of th' universall globe,
Making the wolfe, bat, scritch-owle, and the toad,
(The haters of the light) to come abroad,
When, wearied with his worke the day before,
The heavy plowman doth at midnight snore.

Now Mellefant and Sydanis, who had
To fly away that night the same intent;
That like a page, this like a ship-boy clad,
The better all suspition to prevent,
As they were wont unto their beds they went:
When as a gentle sleep did soon surprise
Faire Sydanis, and clos'd her Dove-like eies.

But Mellefant, whose eies and heart receiv'd
No dull impressions of the night, nor rest,
To Sydanis bed-side stole unperceiv'd,
And got away the pages Suit; so drest,
Therein she fled away, for that she guest,
That for the Princes page she should be taken,
That had of late King Dermots Court forsaken.

Passing the corps de gard the watch did keep,
And place where Master Constable still fate,
(For they were all most cordially asleep)
She forthwith came unto the city gate,
And by the porter, was let out thereat,
Passing unquestion'd, for when as she sayd
She was the Princes page, she was not stayd.

Come to the key, where ships at anchor ride,
An unexpected spectacle befalls,
For on the shrouds of a tall ship she spy'd
Two lights, that seem'd like two round fiery balls,
Aereall twins, the which the Seaman calls
Castor and Pollux, who bee'ng seene together,
Portend a happy voyage, and faire weather.

But if that onely one of them appeares
Upon the hallyards of the ship, or masts,
It is an ominous osse the Seaman feares,
If not of shipwreck, yet of gusts and blasts:
While she beheld, one of the balls downe-casts
It selfe from the maine yard upon the shore,
And as a walking fire went on before.

This apparition somwhat terrifide
The Princesse, who had now no power to go
Elsewhere, but follow her fantasticke guide,
And thus as they had wandred to and fro,
About the time that the first cocke did crow,
They came unto a woody hill, so high,
The top did seeme to gore the starry skie.

For like Olympus he did lift his head
Above the middle region of the ayre,
Where thunders, haile, and meteors are bred:
For there the weather evermore was faire:
Unto the top hereof this wandring paire
Beeing ariv'd, by many a passage steep,
The wearied Princesse was cast in a sleep,

On strowings layd, of never-fading flowers,
Which on this hills serenest top had growne,
She in sweet dreams did passe the silent houres,
Upon her a light coverlet was throwne,
Made of the Peaches soft and gentle downe:
Whom there I leave in no lesse great a blisse
Than was the sorrow of faire Sydanis.

Who having over-slept her selfe, did wake
But halfe an houre before the breake of day;
To dresse her selfe she all the speed did make,
Her selfe in Skippers habit to array,
And tow'rds the port she forthwith takes her way:
But night and darkenesse her no longer hide,
For e're she got aboord she was descry'd.

Nights cloud upon the Easterne Horoscope,
Which like a sleeping eie-lid hid the skie,
Uplifted seem'd to wake, and set wide ope,
Disclos'd unto the world heavens glorious eie:
The watch her apprehends immediatly,
Conceiving her no Skippers boy to bee,
Whose face and habit did so disagree.

Whether it were the then neere dawning day,
Or els a native luster of her owne,
Which through her clothes her beauty did bewray,
Which like a Carbuncle in darkenesse shone,
It is uncertaine; but she yet unknowne,
About the houre King Dermot us'd to rise,
Was brought unto the Court in this disguise.

O envious light betrayer of each plot,
Lovers in darkenesse silently contrive.
Disturbe not their affaires, they need thee not,
Nor do not them of wished joyes deprive,
Who to avoid thy piercing eie do strive:
Converse with Gravers, who cut seals in bone,
Or threescore faces on a cherry-stone.

What hath this innocent beauty done to thee,
That thou her life to danger should'st expose?
But (light) we know it is thy propertie
To conceale nothing, but all things disclose:
For now about the time King Dermot rose,
First a suspition, after, a report
Was spread, that Mellefant was fled from Court.

What miseries can Fate together twist,
When she to ruine mortals doth intend!
For now no sooner Mellefant was mist,
Whose losse, King Dermot highly did offend,
Who messengers to seeke her straight doth send,
And while that they for the faire Princesse sought,
Poore Sydanis is to King Dermot brought.

Who seeing her in ship-boyes clothes disguis'd,
Was more enraged than he was before:
For now King Dermot instantly surmis'd,
By that concealing habit which she wore,
She was confederate, and therefore swore,
Unlesse she told where Mellefant was fled,
Upon a scaffold she should lose her head.

After dire threats, and strict examination,
Sweet Sydanis (as was the truth) denying,
She neither knew the time, nor the occasion,
Nor manner of Princesse Mellefant her flying,
Growne desperate, she cares not now for dying,
Nor any other kinde of torment, since
She may not go to her beloved Prince.

For Sydanis is into prison throwne,
In durance, and in fetters to remaine,
'Till where the Princesse were it should be knowne,
Or that she to the Count should come againe.
Her keeper doth her kindely entertaine
In his best lodgings, whereas her restraint
Gave birth and went to many a thousand plaint.

Which here should be related, but you may
Conjecture what a wight in such a case,
Hopelesse of comfort and reliefe, would say,
Confin'd unto a solitary place,
In her lives danger and the Kings disgrace:
Unlesse through griefe she speechlesse were become:
Small sorrows speake, the greatest still are dumbe.

But as a wood-man shooting with his bowe,
And afterwards pursuing with his hound
An innocent and silly harmelesse Doe,
Doth kill her not so soone, as if astound
He suffer her to grieve upon her wound,
And tapisht in a brake, to see the floud,
And sent the crimson torrent of her bloud.

So Sydanis, sad and disconsolate,
Hath now an opportunity to grieve
The dire affects of her malignant fate,
Which nought but death could possibly releeve:
Time onely seems to her a sad reprieve:
To speake of her we for a while shall cease,
Till some good hap procure her glad release.

For now from womens passions and slight woe,
After the Drums, and Clarions haughty sound,
To speak the rage of Kings marching we go,
Who roring like to Lions beeing bound
With horrid grumblings do our eares confound:
Blew eied Bellona, thou whom plumed art,
The souldiers warlike mistresse, act this part.

And thou sterne Mars, whose hands wet and imbru'd
With raw fresh bleeding slaughters thou hast made
Of foes, whom thou victorious hast subdu'd,
Whirling about thy Caske thy conquering blade,
Helpe me out of this Lake of bloud to wade,
And smooth the furrowes of thy frowning browe,
As when thou erst did'st lovely Venus woe.

King Dermot highly enraged for the losse
Of Princesse Mellefant his Kingdoms heire,
Resolv'd, that with an army he would crosse
The Brittish Seas, and straight his course would steere
Unto besieg'd Carleon city, where,
He would assist the Duke against his foe
King Arvon, and his sonne that wrong'd him so.

For now he thought he might be well assur'd,
His daughter with Prince Leoline combin'd,
Since his consent no wayes could be procurd
For marrying her, he did a season finde
To steale away, and with a favouring winde,
He to his royall Sires, King Arvons Court,
His prise like beauteous Helen would transport.

Therefore to be reveng'd was all his care,
And for that purpose he a fleet would man,
Greater then Menelaus did prepare,
When he the bloudy Trojan warre began,
And after ten years siege the city wan,
Putting to Sea from Aulis port in Greece,
Or Jasons fleet that fetcht the golden fleece.

Upon the beating of King Dermots drum,
From Ulsters shrubby hills and quagmires foule
Of slight arm'd Kerne, forthwith a troope doth come,
Who in the furthest North do heare the owle
And wolves about their cabins nightly howle,
Which to all hardnesse have inured bin,
Eating raw beefe, halfe boyl'd in the cowes skin.

E're these were civiliz'd, they had no corne,
Nor us'd no tillage that might get them food,
But to their childrens mouths were newly borne,
They put upon a spears point dipt in bloud
Raw flesh, that so it might be understood,
That children growne up men should never feed,
But when that they had done some bloudy deed.

These Salvages whilest they did erst possesse
Like Tartars, or the roving Scythian Nation
Coleranes, or Monaghans wide wildernesse,
Having no Townes or any habitation,
They and their cattel still tooke up their station
In grassy plains, and there a while abide,
Where the deep Eagh, and fishfull Dergh do slide.

More forces from the borders of Logh Erne
Do come, which in small Islands doth abound,
In whose cleere bottome men may yet discerne
Houses and towers under the water drownd,
Which divine justice sunke into the ground,
For Sodomy, and such abomination,
Men using beasts in carnall copulation.

From Conaghs pleasant and more civill parts,
Where Arbute trees do grow upon the coast,
Horsemen well arm'd with glaves and with their darts,
Unto the Army of King Dermot post,
Making compleat the number of his host:
Who like old Romans on their pads do ride,
And Hobbies without stirrops do bestride.

What counties, or what townes Mounster containes,
Through whose faire Champian the smooth Boyn doth passe,
Send forces from their well manured plaines,
Arm'd with the Halbert, and the Gally-glasse,
The county that great Desmonds country was,
With that of the most antient Peere Kildare,
Joyn'd with Mac Arte, for this warre prepare.

To them the province Leinster doth unite
Her trained bands and warlike regiment,
Who use the pike and partisan in fight,
And who are from those towns and counties sent,
Whose fields the Barrow, Nore, and Shore indent
Three sister Rivers, whose cleere source begins
In the high woody mountaines of the Glins.

Unto these forces rais'd in Erinland,
Are joyn'd the highland Redshank and fierce Scot,
Of whom there comes a stout and numerous band,
Which up steep hills, as on plaine ground do trot,
As for steele Armor they regard it not;
Their barbed arrowes clos'd in a Calves skin,
To their Eugh bowes the quivers still have bin.

The Army beeing shipt, the windes that blow
Over the vast Atlanticke Ocean,
Bred in high hills Westward of Mexico,
Who with their waving wings do coole and fanne
The Sun-burnt Moore and naked Floridan,
Sending forth constantly their favouring gales,
Waft Dermots ships unto the coast of Wales.

For now Mars Occidentall in the West,
Meridionall descending from the Line
Of the Moones mansion Cancer was possest,
And sliding downe into an ayery Signe,
Rais'd windes, that furrow'd up the Westerne brine.
Corus and Thracius blowing still abaft,
King Dermots ships do to Carleon waft.

But yet those blasts that were so prosperous,
And Dermot in Carleons harbour set,
Contrary were to Prince Androgios,
And did his much desired voyage let:
His ships out of the harbour could not get,
But in it for full six weekes space they stayd,
Waiting a winde, and never Anchor wayd.

To passe for Erinland was his intent,
With all the gallantry coyne could provide,
And there to consummate his high content,
In making beauteous Mellefant his Bride:
But Aeolus his passage hath deny'd,
And unexpected, with Succors unsought,
King Dermot to Carleons walls hath brought.

Whose comming was no sooner told the Duke
And Prince Androgios, but both went to meet
King Dermot at the port, whereas they tooke
In armes each other, and do kindely greet:
Then through a long and well built spacious street,
They to a stately Castle do ascend,
Where for that night their complements they end.

Next morrow from the Castles lofty towers,
Whose mighty ruins are remayning yet,
The Princes did behold King Arnons powers,
Which had Carleon city round beset:
To whom Duke Leon full of just regret,
And sorrow for his daughter, doth relate
His wrongs and cause of his distressed state.

King Dermot, swolne with ire and indignation,
And beeing no lesse sensible of griefe,
Of his unheard of injuries makes relation,
Telling that he was come to the reliefe
Of Leon, to be wrecked on a theefe,
Who albeit that he were a Kings sonne,
A base and injurious fact had done.

The noble Prince Androgios now resenting
His suffrings in the losse of Mellefant,
Whose marriage (as he thought) was past preventing,
With high-borne courage, which no feare could daunt,
Besought the King and Duke, that they would grant
To him a boone, which was this, That he might
Challenge Prince Leoline to single fight.

For by this time fame all abroad had spred,
Prince Leoline was backe return'd againe,
Whom erst King Arvon did beleeve was dead,
And in Carnarvan Castle did remaine,
So now there nothing was that did restraine
The noble Prince Androgios, to demand
A single combat with him hand to hand.

And to that end an Herald straight was sent
To Leoline, who in his right hand wore
A bloud-red Banner, as the argument
Of the defiance message that he bore;
Behind upon his Taberd, and before,
A Lion rampant, and a Dragon red,
On Crimson Velvet were imbroidered.

The Herald, whose approach none might debarre,
Doth with a trumpet through the Army ride,
Who bravely sounded all the points of warre,
Untill he came to the Pavilion side,
Whereas Prince Leoline did then abide,
And then the trumpeter eftsoons doth fall
In lower warlike notes to sound a call.

The which no sooner Leoline had heard,
But bravely mounted on a barbed Steed,
He like a Princely gallant straight appear'd,
To whom the Herald doth the challenge read:
Which having done, he afterward with speed,
(As is the forme when challenges are past)
Androgios Gauntlet on the ground he cast.

Prince Leoline commanding of his Page
To take the Gauntlet up, briefely reply'd,
Herald I do accept Androgios gage:
Tell him the sword the quarrell shall decide,
Of him, whom he unjustly hath defy'd:
For three dayes hence in both our Armies sight,
Wee will a noble single combat fight.

The Herald backe return'd unto the King,
Related how his message he had done,
And to Androgios doth the answer bring
Of Leoline:  King Albions Princely sonne
Hath for his forward valour honor wonne:
Of whose resolves, and warlike preparation
'Till the third day I respite the relation.

Meane time the Druide Morrogh, who hath bin
Thus long unmentioned, now chiefe Actor was;
Who though that he were absent, yet had seene
All that in Erinland had come to passe,
By meanes of a most wondrous Magicke glasse,
Which to his eie would represent and show
All that the Wizard did desire to know.

Which glasse was made according to the opinion
Of Chymists, of seven mettals purify'd,
Together melted under the dominion
Of those seven planets do their natures guide:
Then if it polisht be on either side,
And made in forme of circle, one shall see
Things that are past as well as those that bee.

In this sayd glasse he saw the sad estate
Of Sydanis, who was in prison kept,
Who weeping in her silent chamber sate,
And Mellefant, who on the mountaine slept,
Whose passe the wandring fire did intercept:
And now this story must not end, before
The Druide both these Ladyes do restore.

For they be those must put a happy end
To discords, and bring all to a conclusion,
And all that is amisse they must amend,
And put in order things are in confusion:
They of much bloud must hinder the effusion:
Such vertues Ladies have, who are the blisse,
Which here in this world among mortalls is.

Thrice ten degrees of the Eclipticke line,
Phoebus ascending up had overpast,
And now had entred in another Signe,
From Gemini, whereas he harbour'd last,
Since Mellefant into a trance was cast,
And thirty jornies through nights silent shade
O're her nocturnall Arch the Moone had made.

Who nightly riding o're the mountaines top,
Where Mellefant the sleeping Princesse lay,
Her silver Chariot there she still did stop,
And by the sleeping body us'd to stay,
Kissing, caressing, 'till neere breake of day,
Of her rare beauties now enamour'd more
Than of her lov'd Endymion heretofore.

No longer could the Queene of night refraine
From kissing of her sweet and rubie lips:
Her kisses ended, she begins againe,
With gentle armes her Ivory necke she clips:
Her hands sometimes tow'rds parts more privat slips,
Curious inquisitive for to know the truth,
If one so rarely faire could be a youth.

But as a theefe, that doth assurance lacke
At his first pilfring from a heap of gold,
Doth oft put forth his hand, oft pulls it backe,
Then puts it forth againe, then doth withold:
So at the first Cynthia was not so bold
To let her hand assure her by a tuch,
Of that which she to know desir'd so much.

Yet at the last fortune did things disclose,
And gave contentment to her longing minde,
For in the pocket of the pages hose
Putting her hand, she did a letter finde,
Which all the clew of error did unwinde,
Written by Mellefant to Leoline,
In case that she should faile of her designe.

The letter specify'd her sex and name,
And whole scope of her amorous intent,
Laying on Leoline a gentle blame,
That he unkindely from Eblana went:
It specify'd to follow him she meant,
And to Carnarvan castle she would goe,
To meet with Leoline her deere lov'd foe.

The Empresse of the watry wildernesse
Reading the lines, was straight with pitty mov'd,
Compassionating Mellefants distresse,
The rather for that she her-selfe had lov'd,
Now the third day since Mellefant behov'd
To be in Britaine, a way was prepar'd
For her transport, which then shall be declar'd.

For wee must speake of Sydanis her wrongs,
Of her sad prison, and her glad release,
Which to the Druide Moroghs part belongs,
Who to attend her fortunes ne're did cease,
But after troubles would procure her ease,
Of which the manner briefly to relate:
Much wonder in the hearers will create.

There's nothing truer than that sapience
Of wise and knowing men, prevailes o're fate,
Ruling the starres, and each intelligence,
O're which their wisdomes do predominate;
They can advance good fortune, ill abate:
And if that in the heavens they can do so,
They can do much more here on earth below.

As soone as Phoebus had behinde him shut
The rubie leaves of heavens great Westerne gate,
And to that day an evening period put,
And now began it to be darke and late,
As Morogh in his lonely cabin sate,
He put in act a course, that should be sure
Faire Sydanis enlargement to procure.

For by his learning understanding all
The languages that foules and ravens speake,
He to him did an antient Raven call,
Commanding her, that she her flight should take,
And to Carleons walls all speed should make,
Unto the limbs of one late quartered,
On which the day before the bird had fed.

Adding withall this strict injunction,
That instantly, e're any man it wist,
She should bring backe to him a dead mans bone,
The which that she should picke out of his wrist.
The raven of her message nothing mist,
But suddenly she fled, and unsuspected,
The great Magicians will she straight effected.

Theeves say, that he that shall about him beare
This bone, and meanes by night mens goods to take,
All that are sleeping (the while he is there
Stealing and breaking the house) shall not wake,
For any noise that ever he shall make:
But shall so soundly sleep, as that he may
Securely rob, and unknowne passe away.

Unto this bone the Druide he did adde
A shining grasse, that growes among the rockes,
Which a strange kinde of secret vertue had,
For it would straight undo all bolts and locks:
The blacksmiths skill in shooing it so mocks,
That if a horse but touch it with his shooes,
Though ne're so well set on, he doth them loose,

Strange tales there are which History affords,
Of bones, and Stones, of Herbs, and Mineralls,
The knowledge of whom hath bin found by Birds,
Beasts, Insects, and by other Aminals:
Witnesse the Stone Albertus magnus calls
Aldorius, the vertues of which stone,
But for the eggs of Crowes had not beene knowne.

For if one take Crowes eggs out of the nest,
And boyle them in hot water 'till they bee
Stone hard, the old Crow never will take rest,
Untill the stone Aldorius she see,
Which she brings backe with her unto the tree
Where her nest was, which a while having laine
Upon the eggs, it turnes them reare againe.

Rare secrets are in nature, which wee'll passe,
As to this matter little pertinent:
The dead-mans wrist bone, and the shining grasse,
From Morrogh to faire Sydanis were sent,
And of their natures an advertisement,
Which on a Beeches rinde, as on a note,
With a sharpe pointed steele the Druide wrote;

Advising her, that she without delay,
Through the darke shade of that approching night,
From her confinement straight would hye away,
And come to him before the morrowes light,
And that she should not feare for any sight
She should behold, nor should not be dismay'd,
For she to him should safely be convay'd.

Having inclos'd within the Beeches barke
The bone, and grasse, he in the ravens eare
Whisper'd some words, who flying through the dark,
With wings that blacker than nights darkenesse were,
E're threescore minutes past she was come there,
Where Sydanis (though it were very late)
Lamenting, in her chamber window sate.

Where suddenly the window being ope,
The Raven entred in without controle,
And into Sydanis her lap did drop
The things inclos'd within the Beechin Scrole:
Thus she, who still was held an ominous foule,
And fatall her presage in every thing,
Yet news of joy to Sydanis doth bring.

Who having read the writing, out she goes,
Intending to take shipping at the kay:
But fate of her did otherwise dispose,
For she must be convey'd another way:
For at the gate Nights sable coach did stay,
Which by the Druide had directed bin,
As she came out of doors to take her in.

This chario by foure blacke steeds was drawne,
First Nicteus burn'd with Pluto's pitchy marke;
Then blacke Alastor with his snaky mayne,
With Metheos, Phobos, who do love the darke:
Which foure at singing of the earely Larke,
Vanish away, and under ground are gone,
Drenching their sooty heads in Acheron.

Thus Sydanis in Nights blacke Coach being set,
Before Fortuna Major did arise,
Show'd like Loves Queene upon a throne of Jet,
Who suddenly was hurried through the skies,
And all the residue of that night lies
In Moroghs Cave, untill the dawning East
Disclosed faire Aurora's rosie brest.

Who risen from her Safron colour'd bed,
Perfum'd with Indian Spices where she lay,
And Phoebus lifting up his golden head,
Lights universall Banner did display;
In glorious Robes himselfe he doth array,
And every cloud he farre away doth chace
From the bright Front of heavens cleare shining face.

For now as he the mountaine tops did guild
With burnisht Ore of heavens coelestiall Mine,
The Kings two Armies came into the field,
Led by Andrgios and by Leoline;
Who like the starres of Gemini did shine:
Brave twins of Honour, for who them beheld,
Could not affirme which of the two excell'd.

In mid'st of their maine Battels the two Kings,
As in their safest fortresses, were plac't:
Great Dukes and Colonells did leade the wings,
Who with their severall commands were grac't:
Now as the Princes did to combate hast,
A wondrous thing appear'd to all the host,
Which all their warlike resolution crost;

For high in skies there instantly appeares
A chariot, which eight white Swans as they flew,
Yoked in golden chaines and Silken geares,
Soaring an easie pace after them drew:
But who was in the chariot no man knew,
For that an ayery and bright shining cloud
The party carryed, from their sight did shroud.

By floury colours which the Swans did beare
About their necks, where Emonies were blended
With Myrtills, and with Pinks entwined were:
Some thought that Venus was againe descended,
As when her sonne Aeneas she defended
From furious Turnus, and as then she did,
Androgios in a cloud should so be hid.

But it was otherwise, this clouded Coach
Was sent by the faire Princesse of the Night,
With a command, that when it did approach
The place where the two Princes were to fight,
The Swans upon the ground should downe alight,
The winged teeme accordingly did doo't,
And set the Coach at Prince Androgio's foot.

The cloud then vanishing away that kept
The faire and long'd-for object from the eie,
Bright Mellefant appear'd, who long had slept,
As in a trance now wak't immediatly,
Whose beauty when Androgios did descry,
He gave command, that 'till that he had fought,
She unto royall Dermot should be brought.

All this did brave prince Leoline behold,
And all the Army (Cit was done so nigh)
Who eftsoones to his Sire King Arvon told,
That there was come an Enchantres from the skie:
But all enchantments he did then defie,
As things ridiculous, which he did not feare,
And forthwith he prepar'd to couch his speare.

Now as these valiant Princes had begun
To couch their Launces, and put them in rest,
And each at other fiercely for to run,
Aiming the points at one anothers brest,
Prince Leolines couragious noble beast
Began to trapmble, and to snort, and prance,
But one foot forward he would not advance.

The Prince enrag'd with anger and disdaine,
Did strike into his sides his spurres of steele,
And still he urg'd him on, but all in vaine,
For that for all the strokes that he did feele
From the brave noble Princes spritely heele,
He went not on, but rather backward made,
As if that he had bin a restiffe Jade.

Which now did make Prince Leoline conceive,
He had indeed with some enchantment met:
Morogh the Druide he did not perceive,
Nor Sydanis, who both their hands had set
Upon the bridle, and the horse did let,
For Ferne seed got upon S. John his night,
Made them invisible to all mens sight.

But when the Ferne seed they had cast away,
And Leoline his Sydanis did see,
He from his Steed alights without delay,
And with such joy as may not utter'd bee,
Embracing, kisses her soft lips, and she
That had no other Magicke, but loves charmes,
Circled his necke with her soft Ivory armes.

With Leoline she to King Arvon goes,
Whose almost infinite astonishment
May not be told; now Sydanis he knowes,
Farre greater is his joy, and his content.
The Druide is recall'd from banishment,
That he unto the King and Prince might tell
The History of all things that befell.

It beeing known how all things came about,
And how that both the Princesses were found,
Both armies rais'd a universall shout:
The Trumpets, Clarions flourishes do sound;
All hearts are now with high contentment crown'd,
The Heraulds with white flags of peace are seene,
And Civicke Garlands of Oakes leavy greene.

For by this time the brave Androgios knew
His Princely mistresse Mellefant the faire,
For joy whereof his armes away he threw,
And with deportement most debonair
Saluteth old King Dermots beauteous heir:
Intending at Carleon with all state,
His Hymeneall rites to celebrate.

Whereas two Kings, two Princes, and their Brides,
And old Duke Leon, had an enterview:
There now was full contentment on all sides,
Which fortune seemed dayly to renew,
And by the Druides telling greater grew:
Of all the great adventures that had past,
And Merioneth in the Dungeon cast.

Who albeit that she long dead was thought,
And in the Dungeon starv'd for want of food,
Yet to Duke Leon she againe was brought,
From whom he divers stories understood,
And now in fine all sorted unto good:
Whose wonderfull relations serve in Wales
To passe away long nights in winters Tales.

And lastly for to consummate all joy,
E're Phoebe nine times had renew'd her light,
Faire Sydanis brought forth a Prince, a boy
Heavens choycest darling, and mankinds delight:
Of whose exploits some happier pen may write,
And may relate strange things to be admir'd:
For here my fainting pen is well neere tir'd.
