Latona's Twins, bright Cynthia, and her brother
Resplendent Phoebus, with his glorious rayes
Had seven times given place to one another,
And fully had accomplisht seven dayes
E're Leoline through devious woods and wayes,
Accompanied by Ffloyd as his consort,
Came to Eblana to King Dermots court.

On the eighth day, sacred to Venus name,
It fortuned at Court there was a feast
To welcome an Embassadour that came
From Albion which they two (among the rest)
Comming to see, like two French Monsieurs drest,
They, noted to be strangers, were so grac't,
As next to the Kings table to be plac't.

At mid'st whereof under a cloth of state,
To which one must by three degrees ascend,
In a rich chayre the royall Dermot sate,
Th' Embassadour and Princesse at each end,
On Mellefant, Amanthis doth attend,
As Cup-bearer, the while that she did dine,
And when she pleas'd to call, did bring her wine.

When as six severall courses serv'd had bin,
The royall dinner drawing towards an end,
A rich and sumptuous banquet was brought in,
Which did such kinds of sweet-meats comprehend,
As might with fruits of Paradise contend.
Of which the choycest and most excellent
The Princesse to the seeming French-men sent.

Giving her page Amanthis a command
To let them know, that if they did desire,
They should be brought to kisse King Dermots hand.
Prince Leoline and Ffloyd his faithfull Squire,
These unexpected curtesies admire:
Which taking, they a low obeysance make,
Admiring the pure French Amanthis spake.

To whom Prince Leoline in French reply'd,
And told her, such an unexpected grace,
Their duties and affections so ty'd,
As that they all occasions would embrace,
To testifie their service; and in case
They might receive such honour, that it would
Oblige them more than any favor could.

The Table taken from before the King,
And all the Royall Ceremonies ended,
Amanthis eftsoones did the strangers bring,
And told him that two French Lords there attended,
By Mellefant the Princesse recommended,
To have the honour for to kisse his hands,
And to receive his Majesties commands.

King Dermot full of royall curtesy,
Not onely gave his hand, but more to grace 'em
Descended so belowe his Majesty,
As that he did in friendly wise embrace 'em,
Commanding his Lord Chamberlaine to place 'em
In his owne lodgings, that they might not want
Conveniency to wait on Mellefant.

Whose hands they kissing with all reverence
The Princesse doth them kindely entertaine:
Now while the King had private conference
With the Embassadour, the Prince did gaine
An opportunity for to detaine
The Princesse in discourse:  'twixt him and her
Amanthis was the sweet interpreter.

Prince Leolines discourses pleas'd so well
The Princesse, that she oftentimes did send
To have him come, fine Romances to tell,
To which she would so sweet attention lend,
As Dido-like she seemed to depend
Upon his lip, and such delights did take,
She wisht to speake French onely for his sake.

But whatsoever by the Prince was se'd
Of love, or of adventures of that kinde,
Must by Amanthis be interpreted,
Whose eyes the Princes language could not blinde,
For he was knowne, and how he stood inclin'd,
Nor was discreet Amanthis ignorant,
That Leoline made love to Mellefant.

But to what end she could not yet discover:
For if to marry her was his intent;
It seem'd most strange that he should be a lover,
Who in loves actions was so impotent;
And if he were not so, then that content
Should Mellefant enjoy, and that delight
In Hymens sports, which was Amanthis right.

But e're a Moneth was past, it fortun'd so,
The Princesse Mellefant, Amanthis sent
To the Prince Leoline, to let him know
And carry him this courtly complement,
That if he pleas'd to ride abrode, she ment
(Since that the wheather was so calme and faire)
To ride into the fields to take the aire.

Amanthis with this message being gone,
Prince Leoline was in his chamber found
Sitting upon his bed-side all alone:
His countenance sad, his eyes fixt on the ground,
As if he did with carefull thoughts abound:
But seeing of Amanthis, he acquir'd
A happinesse that he had long desir'd.

For he now got an opportunity,
His minde unto Amanthis to disclose:
Whose message being told, immediatly
The Prince began and say'd, Faire youth suppose
I told a secret, might I not repose
So much in thee as never to reveale it,
But in thy faithfull bosome to conceale it?

To whom Amanthis straight reply'd, You may
A privacy unto my trust commit,
Which if it touch the Princesse any way,
Or King, to hide it were nor safe nor fit;
For in my duty I must utter it:
But if so be that it touch none of these,
You may securely tell me what you please.

Quoth Leoline, that which I have to say
Concernes the Princesse, but in such a kinde,
As if that thou my counsell should'st bewray,
After that I have utter'd all my minde,
It may be I with thee no fault should finde:
For say I should desire thee to prove,
Whether the Princesse Mellefant could love.

My fortunes and my birth perchance may be
Greater than yet they seeme, 'tis often seene,
Meane cloathes doe hide high-borne Nobility.
And though she be a Princesse, nay a Queene,
Great Princesses have oft enamour'd beene
Of gentlemen; so fortune did advance
Medor above the Palladines of France.

And so Queen Clytemnestra, as we read,
Before King Agamemnon did preferre
And tooke into her royall nuptiall bed
Aeghistus her sweet fac'd adulterer,
In birth and fortunes farre unworthy her,
And so faire Helen did young Paris make
Her choyce, and Menelaus did forsake.

But these thoul't say were presidents of lust,
And such as vertuous Ladies should detest:
But what I seeke is honorably just;
Which since I have committed to thy brest,
If thou, faire lovely youth, wilt do thy best
My suit to thy sweet Princesse to commend,
Be sure that thou hast gain'd a thankfull friend.

To which Amanthis answered, You are
(My Lord) a stranger and as yet unknowne,
You must upon your honor then declare
Whether you have a Lady of your owne
Living; and if that she from you be gone,
Or you from her, if either should be true,
None knowes the inconvenience would ensue.

These speeches startled Leoline, whose hart
Being conscious, made him answer, 'Tis a truth
I had a Lady once, to whom thou art
So like in feature, personage, beauty, youth,
And every lineament, as if she doth
Yet live, I should my state and life engage,
That thou wert she in habit of a page.

For woe is me, away from me she fled,
Being ignorant of what the cause might be,
And left me lying fast asleep in bed;
And now for ought I know thou mayst be she;
For her true image I behold in thee:
But to beleev't were fondnesse.  Here he stopt,
And from his eyes some christall teares there dropt.

Amanthis weeping for to see him weep,
(My Lord,) quoth she, if you a Lady had
That parted from you when you were asleep,
(Though loth) I shall unto your sorrows ad
Such a relation shall make you more sad,
For if your Lady can no where be found,
It is too true I feare that she is drown'd.

For now it is some twenty dayes and more
Since Mariners ariv'd here, who do say
How that they found sayling along the shore
The body of a French-man cast away,
On whom were letters found that did bewray
That he had stolne a Lady, who together
Perisht with him, as they were comming hither.

And if one may beleeve the common fame
That 'mongst the people hath divulged this,
The Lady was of quality, her name
If I remember right, was Sydanis.
Now if that this were she that did amisse,
And so much wrong'd your love, I must confesse
Your sorrow for her ought to be the lesse.

Prince Leoline hearing this sad relation,
Like serpents to him were Amanthis words,
Stirring both jealousy and indignation,
And pierc't his heart like to so many swords,
His greife this onely utterance afords,
Ah, Sydanis was she, whom I deplore,
Who seem'd a Saint, but ah me dy'd a whore.

Well (quoth Amanthis) if I may amend
What is amisse, or may your woe relieve,
You may be sure I shall my furtherance lend,
And to your suit my best assistance give:
For Sydanis no longer shall you grieve,
For being free to marry whom you please,
I shall endeavour to procure your ease.

This say'd, Amanthis Leoline did leave,
And backe return'd to act that was design'd.
Now here a man may easily conceave
What perturbations vext the Princes minde,
Who knowing he Jean Foutre dead did finde,
And that part of the story he well knew,
He might well thinke, that all the rest was true.

Perplex't with doubts, whether his impotence
Was the sole cause made Sydanis to fly
Before that he could have intelligence
Of such unfayned markes as might descry
The truth, or losse of her virginity,
For though she as a virgin was reputed,
Yet by Jean Foutre he might be cornuted.

On th' other side one probably may guesse
The trouble that perplext Amanthis thought,
Since Leoline must Mellefant possesse,
Who might deny him nothing that he sought:
And all this by Amanthis must be wrought,
Who by a kinde unkinde, and curteous wooing
Must be the author of her owne undoing.

But since Amanthis had a promise made
To further his love-suit in all she might:
It must be done, therefore she did perswade
Prince Leoline, in the French tongue to write
To Mellefant; for what he did endite,
She said the Princesse would shew none but her,
Who was betwixt them both Interpreter.

And thereby she should find occasion
Fitly to speake of Leolines true love,
And by a gentle amorous perswasion
She might all lets (if any were) remove.
Prince Leoline her councell doth approve,
And writes, who by Amanthis was assur'd
An answer to his lines should be procur'd.

Now after courtship and kinde complement,
And many curteous visits of respect,
Amanthis came, as if she had bin sent
To Leoline, to tell him the effect
Of her proceedings (which he did expect)
And brought a letter with her, which she fain'd
She had from Princesse Mellefant obtain'd.

Th' effect whereof was this:  she first desir'd
It might not seem a lightnesse in a maid,
To yeeld so soone to that which was requir'd
For Cupid, whose commands must be obaid,
Had by her eyes into her heart convaid
His lovely shape, his worth and every grace,
Where never man but he had yet a place.

But now her amorous bosom was a shrine,
Devoted wholly to the god of Love,
In which the Saint was lovely Leoline.
She writ, That in affection she would prove.
More constant than the truest Turtle-dove.
What more, for modesty might not be told,
She left it to Amanthis to unfold.

In fine, Amanthis did the Prince perswade
So powerfully, that if he pleas'd, he might
The mayden Fort of Mellefant invade,
And enter in that fortresse of delight:
For she Corinna-like, the following night
Would come unto prince Leoline his bed,
And offer there her Princely mayden-head.

Provided alwayes, when that she did come,
A promise must be made, might not be broken,
That they in their embraces should be dumbe,
And that between them no word should be spoken.
For on the morrow, by a private token,
He should be sure, so that he would not vaunt,
He had enjoy'd the Princesse Mellefant.

The Prince, that heard with Joy and admiration
Amanthis words, impatient of delay,
On the Suns horses layes an imputation,
That they were lame, or els had gone astray,
And Sol in malice had prolong'd the day,
That drove so slowly downe Olympus hill,
And winged Time he chid for standing still.

But at the last the long'd-for hour grew neere,
The evening sets, and the steeds of the Sun
Were posted to the other Hemispheere,
On this side having their last stage yrun,
Bright things beginning to wax dim and dun,
And night uprising from darke Acheron,
O're all the skie a pitchy vaile had throwne.

About the houre of twelve, when all was still,
And Morpheus sealed had all mortall eies,
Amanthis, who was ready to fullfill
Her promise, softly from her bed doth rise,
And in her smocke and a furr'd-mantle hies
To Leolines bed-chamber, where in sted
Of Mellefant, she goes to him to bed.

No sooner did they touch each others skin,
And she was in his fragrant bosom lay'd,
But that the prince loves on-set did begin,
And in his wars the valiant Champion play'd:
What faint resistance a young silly mayd
Could make, unto his force, did quickly yeeld;
Some bloud was lost, although he won the field.

For no hot French-man, nor high Tuscan bloud,
Whose panting veines do swell with lively heat,
In Venus breach more stoutly ever stood,
Or on her drum did more alarums beat,
But Cupid at the last sounds a retreat:
Amanthis at his mercy now doth ly,
Thinking what kinde of death she was to dy.

But she must now endure no other death,
For standing mute, but either must be prest,
Or smothering kisses so should stop her breath,
As that Loves flames enclos'd within her brest,
Should burne the more, the more they were supprest,
And so she as Loves Martyr should expire,
Or Phoenix-like, consume in her owne fire.

These pleasant kinde of deaths Amanthis oft
And willingly did suffer e're 'twas day,
Nine times the lusty Prince did come aloft:
But now Amanthis could no longer stay;
For while 'twas darke she needs must go away:
On her, Prince Leoline bestow'd a ring,
Mans eye did ne're behold so rare a thing.

For in it was an admirable stone,
Whose colour (like the Carbuncle) was red,
By day, it with its native lustre shone,
And like the Sun-bright beames abroad did spred.
But that which greatest admiration bred;
It had a quality ne're seene before,
First to keep light, then after to restore.

For if one to the Sun-beames did expose it,
And hold it in them but a little space,
And in a box, would afterwards enclose it,
Then after go into some darkesome place
Whereas one could not see ones hand, nor face,
Opening the box, a beame of light would come,
Pyramide-like, would lighten all the roome,

But she was gladder of the consequence,
Than of the pretious stone she did receive.
For now, without suspition or offence,
She knew how she might Leoline deceive,
Whom she at parting from his bed did leave,
Recounting with himselfe, how by that deed
He might as King of Erinland succeed.

Amanthis being come to her owne bed,
Lay downe, but sleep she could not:  Jealousies
Concerning Leoline disturb'd her head;
For having now try'd his abilities,
She thought the Prince her sweetnesse did despise,
But that he no virillity did want,
To enjoy his Princely mistresse Mellefant.

Oh jealousie in love, who art a vice
More opposite in every quality,
Than is penurious sordid avarice,
To the extreame of prodigality.
Besides, thou sufferest no man to enjoy
What he possesses, without some annoy.

So many cares, so many doubts and feares
Upon thee do continually attend,
As the two portals of the soule, the eares,
Which to all rumors do attention lend,
Dire perturbations to the heart do send,
Procuring such unquiet and unrest,
As should not harbor in a lovers brest.

And to that passe Amanthis thou hast brought,
With feare of losing that delight and pleasure
Which she hath tasted, as her troubled thought,
And perturbations one may rightly measure
By a rich miser, who hath found a treasure,
Who is solicitous, and vext with care,
Lest any one of it should have a share.

Further she thought, if Mellefant but knew
Prince Leoline to be King Arvons sonne,
He needed not his love-suit to pursue,
For he already had the conquest wonne.
Such cogitations in her head did runne,
And with such thoughts she entertain'd the time,
Till Sol began Nights starry Arch to clime.

But when the feather'd Herauld of the light,
Stout Chantecleere the Cocke, with trumpet shrill
Had now proclaim'd darkenesse was put to flight,
And Phoebus driving up the Easterne hill,
With glorious golden beams the world did fill;
From 'twixt her sheets as 'twixt two Groneland snowes,
Amanthis like a new sprung Lilly rose.

And in her pages habit neatly fine,
Her beauteous selfe she curiously did dight,
As if she had not layne with Leoline,
Nor had not lost her mayden head that night:
Venus and Cupid pleas'd were with the sight;
And how she did Prince Leoline beguile,
Even made the old austere Saturnus smile.

For Jupiter in lovers witty slights,
Which they contrive and cunningly devise,
(Himselfe having bin one) so much delights,
As that he oftentimes with them complies,
And doth but laugh at lovers perjuries:
For now Amanthis was a part to act,
Which to perform, she no invention lackt.

For the next morne about the houre of ten,
To Princesse Mellefant she had accesse,
Who seeing her, demanded of her, When
That the French Lord such courtship would expresse,
As unto her a visit to addresse?
To whom Amanthis say'd, I am too blame,
That I no sooner to your highnesse came,

To tell you that it is the Lords intent,
(If so it please your Highnesse and the King)
This night a Masquerado to present,
Where you shall see him dance, and heare him sing.
Your answer I againe to him must bring,
Who hopes your highnesse graciously will take,
A service onely done for your deare sake.

He further hopes you'l honor him thus much,
As to receive this ring, and so to grace it,
As that it may your princely finger touch,
On which he humbly prayes that you would place it:
This faire occasion, if you please t' embrace it,
And cherish it, may the beginning prove
Of a most happy honorable love.

For Madam, his brave parts and excellence,
Which other mens perfections farre out-goes,
His valour, learning, wit, and eloquence,
Which like a floud of Nectar from him flowes,
That he is some great Prince most plainely showes:
And let one presuppose that he were none,
Yet your most honor'd service makes him one.

Faire Mellefant, whose breast th' Idalian fire
Had gently warm'd, unto her thus reply'd:
Amanthis (quoth she) I do much admire
How that a stranger can so soone have spy'd
An advocate, that cannot be deny'd,
Those in their Suits of eloquence have need,
That seeke unjust things, and so feare to speed.

But thou who art a young and lovely youth,
Might'st well have spared that which thou hast sayd,
For to converse with thee (such is thy truth)
A Vestall Virgin would not be afraid:
Thy looks are Rhetoricke to perswade a mayd:
And be assur'd, I willingly shall grant
What ever thou shalt aske of Mellefant.

Therefore to him (who as thou sayst) doth seem
A noble Prince, this message thou shalt beare:
Tell him his love we highly do esteeme,
And for his honor'd sake the ring I'le weare,
Which next himselfe shall be to me most deare.
Having thus sayd, straight to the King she went,
And for that time broke off her complement.

Now some will say, 'twas too much forwardnesse
In Mellefant, that with so small adoe,
She did her love unto the Prince expresse:
For bashfull mayds do let their Suitors wooe,
And that same thing they have most minde unto,
Least men their mayden coynesse should suspect,
They seem to shun, at leastwise to neglect.

But since great Virgil writes, That Dido lov'd
At the first sight the wandring Knight of Troy,
Whose story much more her affections mov'd,
Than could the torch of Venus wanton Boy:
Let Mellefant, in that she was not coy
Be blamlesse, since we by experience finde,
Those women are not faire, that are not kinde.

For heaven it selfe, that is a thing most faire,
While it is gently calme, serene and cleare,
While Zephyrus perfumes the curled Ayre,
With gladnesse it the heart of man doth cheere:
But if it gloomy, darke, and sad appeare,
It never on us mortalls showres a storme,
But blackenesse doth heavens beauteous face deforme.

Nor doe I say she lov'd but as a friend,
Giving the prince a curteous sweet regard,
Which had not yet so farre as love extend,
Though more for him than other men she car'd,
Her gracious lookes were onely his reward:
For why, as yet she onely did encline,
And not resolve, to love Prince Leoline.

But time and opportunity of place,
Which Clerks assigne for all things that are done,
Did consummate within a little space
That part of love was happily begun.
The evening now approach't, and that dayes Sun
Himselfe below the Horizon had set,
And had in Westerne waves his Chariot wet:

When as those high supernall Deities
That all mens actions do fore-see and know,
And do praeside at all solemnities,
Assembled were to looke on things below,
A Masque before King Dermot, which doth show,
That 'tis a part of their coestiall mirth,
To see how men do personate them on earth.

In heavens tenth house, bright Honors highest throne,
On starry studded Arches builded round,
Great Jupiter the thunderer bright shone,
His brows with beams of radient lightning crown'd:
Just opposite to him, low under ground
His melancholy Sire Saturnus old
Did sit, who never pastimes would behold.

Next Jove sate Mars the fiery god of warre,
In armes of burnisht steele compleatly dight:
By him Apollo, who had left his care,
And for a while layd by his robes of light,
Next him sate Venus goddesse of delight,
Whose golden hayre in curious knots was ty'de:
Then Mercury and Luna by his side.

With these assembled were those Heroes,
Whose fixed lights the eighth Sphaere do adorne,
Stormy Orion, and great Hercules,
With skin from the Naemean Lion torne,
August's bright Virgin with her care of corne.
Neere Berinice combing of her hayre,
Sate Cassiopoea in her starry chayre.

As these spectators sitting in the skies
Made Joves high Palace glorious; even so
As they cast on King Dermots court their eies,
Another heaven they beheld below:
Such art and cost did Leoline bestow
Upon the Masquing Scoenes, as no expence
Could ad more beauty or magnificence.

For to a high and spatious stately roome
Prepar'd for presentations of delight,
King Dermot in his royall robes being come,
Attended on by many a Lord and Knight,
With his faire daughter Mellefant the bright,
Where under a rich pearle embroydred State,
She like a glorious Constellation sate.

The Ladyes hid with jewels, who had seene
On Arras covered scaffolds sitting there,
He would have thought that he so high had beene,
As he at once saw either Hemisphere,
So like a starry firmament they were,
And all that space that was below betweene
The Hemisphere, lookt like the earth in greene.

For all the floore, whereon the Masquers feet
Their stately steps in figures were to tred,
And gracefully to sunder, and to meet,
A carpet of greene cloth did overspred;
Which seem'd an even floury vale, or mead,
On which the Hyacinth and Narcissus blew
So naturally were stayn'd, as if they grew:

The Violet, Cowslip, and the Daffodill,
The Tulipa, the Primrose, and with them
The dasie sprung from the greene Camomill,
The floury Orchis with it's tender stem,
The goddesse Fora's crowne, the meadowes gem,
Which seem'd the Masquers dancing did commend,
Who trod so light they did not make them bend.

More might be sed, but let thus much suffice,
For to say more of floures but needlesse were.
The King being set, and all spectators eies
Fixt on the Scoene, the first thing did appeare
Were clouds, some dusky blew, and some were cleere,
As if it seem'd a skie were overcast,
Which all did vanish, with Favonie's blast.

These clouds disperst, downe dropping the May dew,
Aurora rose, crown'd with the morning starre,
Foure snow white swans her purple chariot drew,
And gently mounted up her rosy Carre.
Next that in perspective was seene from farre
The rowling Ocean, and as there had bin
Waves of a flowing Spring tyde comming in.

Which as they rowled neerer on the Sand,
Upon the tumbling billows was descry'd
Arion with a golden Harpe in's hand,
Who a huge crooked Dolphine did bestride,
And on the dancing waves did bravely ride.
Before him Tritons, who in shels did blow,
And were as the loud Musicke to the show.

Sea Monsters, who up from the deep were come,
Presented a delightfull antique dance,
Who on the waters surface nimbly swome,
Making odd murgeons with their looks ascaunce,
Sometimes they dive, sometimes they did advance,
Sometimes they over one another lept,
And to the Musicke time exactly kept.

Betweene each dance Arion with his Lyre,
That with sweet silver sounding chords was strung,
Sitting in midst of a melodious Quire
Of sixteene Syrens, so divinely sung,
That all the roome with varied ecchoes rung.
Arions part was acted by the Squire,
Whose singing all that heard him did admire.

The Musicke ended, to delight the eie,
Another Scoene and spectacle begun,
For there aloft in a cleere azure skie
Was seene a bright and glorious shining Sun,
Who to his great Meridian had run,
O're whom the Asterisme was represented
Of Leo, whose hot breath his flames augmented.

Under his beams, as flying o're the Seas,
Did Dedalus, and Icarus appeare,
The Sire in the mid-way did soare at ease,
But Icarus his sonne mounting too neere,
His wax-composed wings unfeathered were:
So headlong to the Sea he tumbled downe,
Whose billows the foole-hardy youth did drowne.

Now the Sea going out, which erst had flow'd,
Did leave a bare and golden yellow sand,
Whereon rare shells, and orient pearls were strow'd,
Which gathered by twelve Sea Nymphs out of hand,
In Scallop shells, were brought unto the land
Unto the King, and Mellefant, as sent
From him that did Arion represent.

The first Scoene vanishing, and being past,
And all things gone, as if they had not beene;
The second Scoene, whereon their eies they cast,
Was the Hesperides, with trees all greene,
On which both gold and silver fruits were seene.
Apollo there amidst the Muses nine
Sate, personated by Prince Leoline.

Who playing on a rare Theorbo Lute,
The strings his fingers did not only touch,
But sung so sweet and deep a base unto't,
As never-mortall eare heard any such:
The Muses did alternately as much,
To sound of severall Instruments, in fine,
They in one Chorus all together joyne.

Besides them, there was sitting in a grove
The shepheards god Pan, with his pipe of reed,
Who far the mastry with Apollo strove,
Whether in Musicks practise did exceed.
Betweene them both, King Midas, who decreed
That Pan in skill Apollo did surpasse,
Had for his meed two long eares of an asse.

These with ten Satyrs danc'd an antique round
With Volta's, and a Saraband:  which ended,
They suddenly all sunke into the ground,
And with Apollo they no more contended.
Thus done, he and his Muses downe descended
From their sweet rosie Arbours, which did twin
The Hony-suckle and sweet Jessemin.

The stately Grand-Ballet Apollo led,
Wherein most curious figures were exprest,
Upon the floury carpet as they tred,
The Muses in fine antique habit drest,
Unto their nimble feet do give no rest,
But in neat figures they the letters frame
Of Mellefants, and of King Dermots name.

This done, the Muses like nine Ladies clad
(For so they did appeare unto the eie)
Their antique habits chang'd, and as they had
Bin metamorphosed, they suddenly
Their neat disguise of women did put by,
And like to nine young gallants did appeare,
The comliest youths, that in Eblana were.

The Prince too putting off his masquing suite,
Apollo representing now no more,
His habit gave, his vizor, ivory Lute
To pages, that sweet Cedar torches bore,
Appearing now a Prince as heretofore,
Who with the nine young gallants went about
New dances, and to take the Ladies out.

Now as the Prince did gracefully present
Himselfe to Mellefant, it did betyde
As he did kisse her hand in complement,
Upon her finger he the ring espy'd
He gave in bed, which to her wrist was ty'de
With a blacke ribon, as if she did feare
To lose a jewell she did prise so deare.

Prince Leoline assur'd was by that ring,
That he with Princesse Mellefant had layne,
Whereas indeed there ne're was such a thing;
Such was his courage he could not refraine
To court the Princesse in an amorous straine:
For while he danc't with her, his eies exprest
Those flames of love that burnt within his brest.

But now it growing late, and night farre spent,
The Bransles being danc't, the revels ended,
The Princes Masque did give all eies content,
Who by King Dermot highly was commended,
On whom both he and Masquers all attended,
Who to a stately roome were forthwith guided,
Whereas a sumptuous banquet was provided.

Which being finisht, the late houre of night
Requir'd, that all the company should part,
Prince Leoline adjourne must his delight
Untill next day, for now his amorous hart
Was quite shot through with Cupids golden dart:
Nor could he pleasure or contentment want;
Who thought he enjoy'd the beautious Mellefant.

