Fortunes of Kings, enamour'd Princes loves,
Who erst from Royal Ancestors did spring,
Is the high subject that incites and moves
My lowly voice in lofty Notes to sing
Of Leoline son to a mighty King;
And of a Princesse, Sydanis the faire,
Who were the worlds incomparable paire.

You learned Sisters of the Thespian well,
That sweetly sing to yong Apollo's lyre,
That on Parnassus forked top do dwell,
And Poets, with Prophetick rage inspire;
Accept my humble Muse into your Quire,
My labouring breast with noble raptures fill,
And on my Lines Castalian drops distill.

Your aide I need in this great enterprise,
Be you my guides, and give direction,
For all too weake are my abilities
To bring this Poeme to perfection;
Let each Muse of her part then make election,
And while of Love Clio sings lowd and cleare,
Melpomene the tragick Base must beare.

And be not absent thou all puissant love,
Thy favour I implore above the rest,
Thou wilt my best Enthousiasmes prove,
If with thy flames thou warme my trembling breast;
And though among thy servants I am least,
Yet thy high raptures may sublime my fame,
And blow my spark up to a glorious flame.

For without thee impossible it is,
Of Lovers joyes, or passions to endite:
He needs of feats of Armes must speak amisse,
That ne're saw battell, nor knew how to fight;
Then how may I of Lovers say aright,
Or feelingly discourse of them, unlesse
My selfe had knowne some joy, and some distresse.

Therefore since I for each true lovers sake,
And for the advancement of true loves affaires,
Am ready prest this task to undertake;
Assist me all Loves servants with your prayers,
That neither cold old age, with snowy haires
May coole or quench that pure aetheriall fire,
With which youths heat did once my soul inspire.

And since for every purpose under Sun,
There is a time and opportunity,
Pray that this work of mine may be begun
When as there be aspects of unity
'Twixt Mars and Venus, and a cleare immunity
From frosty Saturnes dismall dire aspect,
And every Planet in his course direct.

When Mercury, Lord of the houre and day,
Shall in his house diurnall potent be
Not slow, nor yet combust:  Then also pray
He may be in a fortunate degree,
And in no dark void Azimen, that he,
Conjoyn'd with Sol, in the tenth house, may thence
Infuse invention, wit and eloquence.

That so each love-sick heart, and amorous minde,
That shall this Romance reade, remarking it,
May remedy, or some such passage finde
As him, or her in the right vaine may hit.
And now having thus pray'd, I think it fit,
That you no longer should the story misse,
Of Leoline and beauteous Sydanis.

Before proud Romes victorious Legions knew
The Brittains, by blew Neptunes arme divided
From the whole world, before they did subdue
The Island Albion, when as Consuls guided
Their Common-wealth, by whom it was decided
What tribute was impos'd on every State,
Tradition and old Annals thus relate.

On the Virgivian Oceans foaming shore,
Downe at the Mountain Snowdons rocky foot,
Whose Cloud-bound head with mists is ever hore,
So high, the sight can scarcely reach unto't,
Against whose brows the forked lightning shoot:
A stately Castle stood, whilome the seat
Of th' old Brittains King, Arvon the great.

This King upon Beumaris his faire Queen
Begot a Prince, whose name was Leoline,
In whom so many gracefull parts were seen,
As if the heavens and nature did combine,
To make a face and personage divine,
For Jove and Venus I imagine were
Conjoyned in his Horoscope Yfere.

By whose benigne and powerfull influence,
Which governes our affections here below,
And in Loves actions hath preheminence,
Prince Leoline incited was to goe
(His Fortune and the gods would have it so)
To a faire City, in those daies much fam'd,
Which from Duke Leon, Carleon was nam'd.

This City was not only celebrated
For Riches brought by Sea from all the West,
But for a Temple (as shall be related)
To Venus, unto whom a solemne feast
Was yearely made, to which the worthiest best
Of Knights and Ladies came, and who did come,
If not before, from it went Lovers home.

And so unto this Prince it did befall,
Who viewing of those Ladies did repaire
As Votaries to this great Festivall;
He was aware of Sydanis the faire,
Duke Leons only daughter, and his heire,
Who offring Sacrifice at Venus Shrine,
Did seem the goddesse to Prince Leoline.

More lovely faire she was than can be told,
So glorious and resplendent her array,
Her tresses flow'd like waves of liquid Gold,
Burnisht by rising Titans morning ray,
From her eies broke the early dawning day:
A corrall portall plac'd above her Chin,
Inclos'd a bed of orient pearle within.

A Carquenet her neck incircled round
Of ballast Rubies, cut in forme of hearts,
Which were with true-love knots together bound,
Of Gold enamel'd, pierc't with Cupids darts,
From which, small pendents by the workmans arts
Were made, which on her naked skin did show
Like drops of bloud new fallen upon the Snow.

More of her beauties will I not relate,
Of which the young Prince was enamored,
It was the gods decree, and will of Fate,
Prince Leoline faire Sydanis should wed,
And both be joyned in one nuptiall bed:
Nor speak I of their marriage royalties,
Which were as great as mans wit could devise.

The Tiltings, Justs, and Tournaments by day,
The Masques and Revels on the wedding night,
The songs to which prophetick Bards did play,
With many other objects of delight,
(All which this History embellish might,)
I will omit, since each where of that kinde,
You may in Books frequent descriptions finde.

For in this match the Fates seem'd to portend
Millions of joyes, Myriads of happy houres,
That on their heads and beds there might descend
All blessings that come downe from heavenly powers,
No Star malignant on their nuptialls lowers,
For Hymen all his Virgin Torches lighted,
When first these Princely lovers troths were plighted.

But O false world!  O wretched state unstable
Of mortall men!  O fraile condition!
O blisse more vain then any dream, or fable!
O brittle joy, even lost in the fruition!
O doubtfull truth!  O certain true suspition!
O bitter sweetest love, that let'st us know,
That first or last thou never wantest woe!

For if there be no lets in the obtaining
Of a mans honor'd Mistresse, and her love,
Yet still there are crosses enough remaining,
Which neither force, nor foresight can remove,
That to his joyes a sad allay will prove,
And make him know it is a truth confest,
That no one thing on every side is blest.

But to the matter shortly now to goe,
That day the Prince did wed his beauteous Bride,
As then the custome was, he did bestow
Rich Scarfes, and Points, and many things beside,
Which in fine curious knots were knit and tyde;
And as his Royall Favours, worne by those,
Whom he to grace his Princely nuptials chose.

Favours are oft unhappily, by chance
Bestow'd:  For 'mongst those Courtiers that did weare
The Princes Points, a Marquesse was of France,
Who for some beinous fact he had done there,
Hang'd in effigie, fled from France for feare,
And so for refuge to Carleon came,
Monsieur Marquis Jean Foutre was his name.

Who though he had a Farinee face,
Thereto a Bedstaffe Leg, and a splay Foot,
By angry nature made in mans disgrace,
Which no long slop, nor any ruffled boot
Could mend, or hide, for why, they could not do't,
Though his mouth were a wide world without end,
His shape so ugly, as no art could mend.

Although his weatherwise Autumnall joynts,
As if they wanted Natures Ligaments,
Did hang together, as if tyde by Points,
Though most deformed were his Lineaments;
Yet fowler was his minde, and base intents,
His matchlesse impudence, which appear'd in this,
That he made love to beauteous Sydanis.

So by the Canker-worme the fragrant Rose
Is tainted:  So the serene wholsome aire
By black contagion, pestilentiall growes,
As she by this base wretch, who thought to impaire
The Chastity of one so matchlesse faire;
But his fowle base intents being once detected,
Were with all scorne, and just disdain rejected.

In dire revenge thereof, that day the bands
Were made between Prince Leoline and his Bride;
As the Arch-flamen joyned had their hands,
And made them one, which no man ought divide,
Upon the Princes Point this Caitiffe tyde
A Magick knot, and muttered a Spell,
Which had an energetick force from hell.

For by it was he maleficiated,
And quite depriv'd of all ability
To use a woman, as shall be related,
For Nature felt an imbecillity,
Extinguishing in him virillity:
The sad events whereof to set before yee,
Is as the dire Praeludium to our Storie.

Now at that instant the Prince felt no change,
When as the charme was spoke, nor alteration
Within his minde or body; for so strange
Was the effect of the said Incantation,
As that it wrought in him no perturbation.
But woe is me:  the damned hellish spite
Was first discern'd upon the wedding night.

For then this princely couple being layd
Together in their Hymenaeall bed,
And prayers to all the nuptiall gods being sayd,
To Domiduca, that her home had led:
To Virginalis, that her maidenhead
Might without paine be lost, and suddenly,
To Subiga, that she might quiet lie.

And lastly, That Partunda by her power
The Princesse would endue with fruitfulnesse,
That she would still make fortunate the houre
Of her conception, and her labor blesse,
Preventing all abortion, barrennesse.
And now, all these Devotions being said,
The Bride no longer was to be a Maid.

But though the Prince enjoy'd all sweets of sence,
Her rosie lips, which with sweet dew did melt,
And suckt her breath, sweet as their quintessence,
Which like to Aromaticke Incense smelt,
Though he her dainty virgin beauties felt,
Embracing of soft Ivory and warme snow,
Arriv'd at her Hesperides below:

Though Venus in Loves wars hath domination,
Sworne enemy to every Maidenhead,
And Soveraigne of the acts of generation,
Whose skirmishes are fought in the field bed,
Although her sonne a troupe of Cupids led;
Yet thus much had the dismall charme effected,
As Venus standard might not be erected.

For when no dalliance nor provocation
That weake opiniator part could raise;
Which Fancy and a strong imagination,
Rather than a mans will or reason swayes,
Which Rebell-like it ever disobeyes;
The Princes heart with shame and rage was fill'd,
That willingly himselfe he could have kill'd.

For on a sudden he left off to embrace
And kisse his lovely, and yet maiden bride;
And with a sigh he turn'd away his face
From her, and lying on the other side,
Under the sheet his face did eftsoones hide.
At which the princely Lady much dismay'd,
After a while, with teares thus to him said:

Deare Lord if that a Maid, whose innocence
Is such and so great, as she doth not know
How to commit a fault, or give offence
Towards you, to whom her best love she doth owe;
Nor yet the cause why you are alter'd so,
That on the sudden thus you doe restraine
Your favors, turning love into disdaine.

You made me to believe, when you did wooe,
That I was faire, and had some lovelinesse:
But ah, my beauties were too meane for you,
Or your esteem of them, I must confesse;
Yet in a moment they could not grow lesse.
But woe is me, for now I plainly see,
That the world and my glasse have flatter'd me.

For with the pleasures that you have enjoy'd,
As the chaste pledges of my nuptiall bed,
Your appetite had not so soon been cloy'd,
Nor you on them so soon had surfeited,
Which have (it seemes) a loathing in you bred:
By which I finde, that humane fond desire
Is like the lightning, at once cloud and fire.

I cannot think, but that I doe molest
Your Highnesse, who are us'd to lie alone,
I must not be the cause of your unrest,
And therefore crave your leave I may be gone,
And leave the bed wholly to be your owne:
Only vouchsafe this ease unto my sorrow,
That I may sit by you, untill to morrow.

For I will watch, and to the gods will pray,
And to your Angel tutelar, to keep
Your person, and from you to drive away
All thoughts, and dreames of me, when as you sleep.
And with that word she bitterly did weep:
Who, as she was arising from his side,
Holding her downe, thus Leoline reply'de.

Most divine Princely Sweetnesse, do not wast
That pretious odoriferous breath of yours
In vaine, nor fruitlesly away it cast,
Whose sent excells all essences of floures:
For could you sinne against the heavenly powers,
Or could you doe a thing that might displease them,
The incense of your breath would soone appease them.

O be not of a breath then so profuse,
Can purifie the aire from all infection:
Nor yet prophane it so, as to accuse
Your selfe, of all rare beauties the perfection;
Of whom the gods themselves have made election,
To print their formes on, to let mortalls see,
What their Angell-like shapes and beauties bee.

Yet dearest Lady do not thinke it strange,
That though you are a Paradise of blisse,
You are the cause of this my sudden change;
For why, some god of you enamour'd is,
And makes of me a Metamorphosis:
For ventring to enjoy what is his owne,
I finde my selfe already turning stone.

Or you a goddesse are, whose Deity
'Till now I knew not; as Diana chast,
Whose sacred heavenly sweets, without impiety,
By no man can be wantonly embrac't;
And therefore a just punishment is cast
On my presumption, which was so much more,
To touch you, whom I rather should adore.

And therefore by your bed, as by a Shrine,
Ile kneele, as penitent for my offence,
In my affecting of a thing Divine,
Since you an object are, whose excellence
Is so exalted above humane sence,
As like the Sun, it rather doth destroy
Sensation, than permit me to enjoy.

Which though I doe not, yet you still shall finde,
There is no want of love in me, no more
Than want of beauty in your heavenly minde,
Which I religiously shall still adore:
And though I as a husband lov'd before,
I'le turn Platonick lover, and admire
Your vertues height, to which none can aspire.

With sighes, and such like words, these Princes spent
The wearisome and tedious night away;
Prince Leoline by this his complement,
T' excuse his want of Manhood did assay:
Thus sorrowing one by the other lay,
Till Lucifer the morning did disclose,
Which when they saw, they from their bed arose,

And drest themselves before that any one
Knew of it, or their rising was descry'de.
Away went Leoline, and left alone
The comfortlesse, and lovely maiden Bride:
Now towards the houre of eight it did betide,
An ancient Matron to their Chamber came,
The Ladies Nurse, Merioneth was her name.

Who for the Bridegroome had a Cullis brought,
And of sweet richest Candian wine a quart,
To cheere his spirits up:  for why, she thought
Prince Leoline might over-act his part,
In too much using Cupids wanton dart;
But seeing the bleare eyes of Sydanis,
Her heart misgave her, something was amiss.

And by the Princesse, as she trembling stands,
Madam, quoth she, what causes your unrest,
That you sit weeping thus, wringing your hands?
Doth Hymen thus begin your marriage feast?
Is this the love your Bridegroome hath exprest?
To rise so early, leaving you alone,
With teares and sighes his absence to bemoane.

Hereat the Princesse raigning from her eyes,
A showre of orient Pearle, richer than Gold
Jove powr'd on Danae, to her thus replies,
Deare Nurse (quoth she) my griefe cannot be told,
Words are too weak my sorrows to unfold;
Nor doe I know a reason that might move
My Lord to leave me, unlesse want of love.

Our feast of love (if any) was soon done;
So soon all worldly joyes away doe fleet,
Which oft are ended as soon as begun;
Each earthly pleasure being a bitter sweet.
Ah Nurse, my Lord and I must never meet:
Yet pray him that he would not her despise,
Who from his side did a pure Virgin rise.

Hearing these words, Merioneth straight fell down,
Opprest with griefe unspeakable, and woe,
For feare she well neere fell into a swoune:
For the experienc't Matron did well know,
Much mischiefe would ensue, if it were so,
Or were a truth that Sydanis had said;
That lying with the Prince, she rose a maid.

For that the ancient Brittons then did use,
When any Bridegroome did a maiden wed,
A custome they received from the Jews,
To bring some linnens of the Bridall bed,
To witnesse she had lost her maiden head,
Without which testimony there was none
Beleev'd to be a Virgin, although one.

The wedding smock, or linnens of the Bride,
The married couples Parents were to see;
Whereon, if any drops of blood they spy'd,
Rejoycing, they perswaded were, that she
Had not till then lost her Virginity.
If on the linnens nothing did appeare,
The Bride and Bridegroome straight divorced were:

And she with shame unto her Father sent,
As one, whose Chastity had been defil'd,
And of her body was incontinent,
Or else in secret had a Bastard child;
And so for ever was to be exil'd
From all pure Virgins company, whose name,
No tongue of slander justly could defame.

Now what to doe in this hard doubtfull case,
The poore perplexed Matron did not know;
To tell the truth, would Leoline disgrace:
And since of force the linnen she must show,
If it were best to counterfeit or no,
(To hinder the divorce) a mark or spot,
In signe the Prince her maiden-head had got.

Yet this imposture if it were disclos'd,
It might beget both danger and disdaine:
For why, Merioneth wisely presuppos'd,
Although to others she a thing might faine,
Yet to Prince Leoline it was but vaine;
Who knowing his owne frozen impotence,
Would soon suspect the Ladies innocence.

Nor was there hope the thing could be conceal'd,
Since to King Arvon and Duke Leons eyes
The truth of all things was to be reveal'd,
This being one of the solemnities.
Which shew'd how much our Ancestors did prise
A Virgins chastity; which approbation,
What maid declin'd, was lost in reputation.

Yet thus the Nurse resolv'd in this distresse,
Since Sydanis for three daies was t' abide
Within her Chambers close end retirednesse,
As was the custome then for every Bride,
Till they were past, nothing should be descry'd:
In the meane while it was her resolution,
To try some powerfull Magicall conclusion.

Which was, to give a philter or love potion,
That should not onely cure frigidity,
But to that secret part give strength and motion,
Imparting heat unto it, and humidity.
Both this, and many another quiddity
These credulous old women doe beleeve,
And to effect such purposes doe give.

Amongst high horrid rocks, whose rugged browes
Doe threaten surly Neptune with their frowne,
When he at them his foaming Trident throwes,
Beating his high growne surging Billowes downe;
An aged learned Druide liv'd, farre knowne
For Magicks skill, who in a lonely Cell
As Hermite, or an Anchorite did dwell.

Merioneth posting to this Druides Cave,
When of her comming she the cause had told,
The aged Sire unto the Matron gave
A liquor farre more precious than gold,
Of which the secret vertue to unfold,
It would not onely cause a strong erection,
But working on the minde, procure affection.

Beleeving this with joy, she backe returnes,
And privately to Sydanis she went,
Who in her Chamber like a Turtle mournes:
She fully told to her all her intent,
And that successefull would be the event,
That Leoline those pleasures should enjoy,
The want of which had caused her annoy.

Although affection, which Art doth create,
Is nothing worth, and of true love no part,
But lust, which satisfy'd, doth end in hate,
Yet Sydanis to palliate the smart,
Rather than cure the wound of her sad hart
Since of two evils she the least might chuse,
Her Nurses councell she will not refuse.

Heavens glorious Lampe of light, that all day burn'd,
Was now extinguisht in the Westerne Seas;
To dens the beasts, to nests the birds return'd,
And night arising from th' Antipodes,
Summon'd men from their labours to take ease,
And drowsie sleepe so soone as they repose
With her soft Velvet hands their eyes doth close.

When as the Prince the second night did lie
By lovely Sydanis as yet a maid,
Againe in Venus warres such force to try
But when that he with her in bed was lay'd,
And had (but all in vaine) all meanes essay'd,
Finding, that his virility was gone;
He grievously began to sigh and grone.

The Princesse hearing, mildly pray'd him tell
His cause of griefe, that she might beare her part.
Madam (quoth Leoline) I am not well,
I feel a deadly paine about my heart:
Oh might it please the gods, Deaths Ebon dart,
(Er'e the approach of the next rising morrow)
Might free me from this world, and you from sorrow.

For while I live you'l be unfortunate,
And in sad discontentment will grow old,
For (oh my starres) such is my wretched Fate,
I like a Miser keepe a heap of gold,
For no use els, but onely to behold;
Possessing an unvalu'd treasure, which
Being put to use, the whole world would enrich.

But now of Ladies, you most excellent,
Be pleas'd to heare and pardon what I say:
In warres to seeke a death is my intent,
For ere the beames of the next mornings ray,
I from your dearest selfe must part away,
And when that I am dead you shall see clearly,
That (though I leave you) yet I lov'd you dearly.

What tongue can tell the griefe of Sydanis,
When as Prince Leoline, without remorse,
Had given her his last sad parting kisse,
And death must them eternally devorce,
So that unlesse the Magicke potions force,
The Princes resolution did prevent,
She thought nought els could alter his intent.

Therefore with broken sighs and many a teare,
She as the Prince was ready for to rise,
To speak to him once more could not forbeare,
Though to her words, griefe utterance denyes,
She showring down a deluge from her eyes
Which downe her cheekes in silver rivers ran,
With no lesse modesty than griefe began:

My Lord (quoth she) your will is a command,
And shall by me most humbly be obay'd;
Which, though I could, I ought not to withstand.
But yet be pleas'd to thinke, that you have layd,
Upon the frailty of a silly maid,
So insupportable a weight of woe,
As our weake sex it cannot undergoe.

What er'e is writ of Grissels patience,
Or Roman Martia's, when she lost her sonne,
(Whose griefe was lessened by the eloquence
Of Seneca) by me would be out-done.
Nay all those Ladies that such fame have wone
For manly fortitude, I should out-vie,
Could I endure my sorrow and not dye.

But that's impossible, it cannot be;
Since you, who are my souls soul, who instead
Of longer animating it or me,
Will strait depart, leaving me doubly dead,
You from my soule, it from me being fled:
By which you shall a demonstration see,
Proving a humane souls mortallity.

Now when, like deare departing friends, the soule
And body from each other are to part,
The learn'd Physitian seeming to controule
Th' approach of death, some Cordiall gives by's Art,
That for a while revives the dying part:
Here is a drink, which if you please to tast
And drink to me, your pledge shall be my last.

Prince Leoline with sighs and sorrow dry,
Onely to quench his thirst with it did thinke:
But having drunke it, he immediatly,
(Such was the force of the enchanted drinke)
As one starke dead into his bed did sinke;
Where sencelesse without motion he did lye,
As one new fallen into an extasie.

Th' amased Princesse thinking he was dead,
Opprest with griefe, she suddenly fell downe,
The spectacle such horror in her bred,
That with a shreek she fell into a swoune:
Which her Nurse hearing, and the cause unknowne,
Unto the Princes bed side ran in hast,
Being ignorant as yet of what had past:

And finding how these Princes speechlesse lay,
It was no time nor boot for to complaine.
To bring them back to life she doth assay,
And first with Sydanis she taketh paine,
Who after much adoe reverts againe.
Which being done, they both together joyne
Their labours, to revive Prince Leoline.

But all in vaine; for after that they two,
For his recovery all means had try'de,
And finding at the last nothing would doe,
They thought it would be death there to abide,
And therefore some disguise they would provide,
That friended by the darknesse of the night,
They might the more securely take their flight.

A womans wit, which in extremities
Is present, and upon the sudden best:
For Sydanis, a proper neat disguise
To her old Nurses thoughts doth straight suggest,
Who forthwith went and opened a Chest,
In an out-roome neere where the Pages lay,
One of whose Suits shee eftsoones brought away.

In this neat, fit, and handsome Pages suite,
No sooner was faire Sydanis aray'd,
But as she more advisedly did view't,
Upon the sudden she was much dismaid,
And of her selfe began to be afraid,
When on the hose before a (fashion then)
She saw a thing was onely worne by men.

A shape undecent made by taylors Art,
Of Secresies, which Nature bids us hide,
Which as a case seem'd of that privie part,
Great Julius Caesar cover'd when he dy'd:
To looke upon it she could not abide,
It did so much her modesty perplexe,
As now she wish't to change both cloaths and Sexe.

And needs she would undresse her selfe againe,
Of that immodest habit to be rid;
But her old Nurse her purpose did restraine;
Besides, the present danger did forbid
That act, since no way else she could be hid:
The doing of it therefore she forbeares,
Which vex't her minde, more than secur'd her feares.

Accoutred thus, and ready to be gone,
The Princesse onely for her Nurse doth stay:
Who without scruple instantly put on
The cloathes Prince Leoline on's wedding day
Had worne, and drest her selfe without delay:
Nor were the Breech, or Codpiece to her view
Unpleasing, who so well the linings knew.

And now as they were ready for to goe,
The reverend Nurse by reason of her age,
Had councell'd, and had ordered things so,
She should be Lord, and Sydanis her Page.
Thus like two birds new got out of a Cage,
To flie away with all speed they intend,
And to the Druides Cave their course to bend.

Yet before that the wofull Sydanis
Could part away, she could it not forbeare,
On Leolines cold lips to print a kisse,
And wash his face with many a briny teare:
By all the gods she solemnely did sweare,
(For her excuse) she never once did thinke
That she had given to him a deadly drinke.

To cleare her selfe, the poore officious Nurse
Strong argument and many reasons brought,
But what was bad before, is now much worse,
She of the Magicke potion takes a drought,
Which on her vitall powers so strangely wrought,
That all the spirits from her heart were fled,
And she upon the floore fell downe as dead.

Th' affrighted Princesse, that before might thinke
Her Lord might on an Apoplexy die,
Or some Apostume; now is sure, the drinke
Was th' onely cause of this mortality:
Griev'd for her Nurses fond credulity,
Who drinking it, had made her griefes farre more,
Doubling the sorrowes that she had before.

No tongue of Rhethorican can expresse
Her patience, which such mischiefes could abide:
Her perturbations onely one may guesse
Who in perpetuall feare to be descry'd
Must without any company or guide,
Through solitude and darknesse of the night,
Unto a place uncertaine take her night.

But she must goe:  for feare now bids her fly,
And to the Druides Cave to post in hast,
And so to put her life in jeopardy,
Rather than to be sure to die at last.
Through desart Rocks, and by-wayes having past,
Her Genius not permitting her to stray,
She there arrived er'e the breake of day.

Entring with trembling feet the horrid Cave,
Morrogh the Druide to her did appeare,
Like a Ghost sitting in a dead mans grave
Or darksome Vault:  who did no sooner see her,
But beckning to the Princesse to come neere,
The awfull silence of his Cell he brake,
And in few words to Sydanis thus spake.

Thou lovely-seeming youth, who in disguise
Art come, and art not what thou seem'st in show,
As if thou couldst deceive my aged eyes,
Who both thee and thy cause of comming know;
O let no fond beleefe delude thee so,
As make thee thinke thou canst not be descryde,
Or that from me thy secrets thou canst hide.

Thou art a haplesse lady, lately wed
Unto Prince Leoline, whose wretched state
(Wanting the pleasures of thy marriage bed)
I could relieve, and would commiserate,
Wer't not for the inveterate just hate
I beare King Arvon, who me here confin'de
To live a wretch exil'd from all mankinde.

Therefore to be reveng'd upon his sonne,
For his unjust and cruell fathers sake,
Know Sydanis, that I the deed have done:
I did the deadly poysonous potion make
Which thou didst cause Prince Leoline to take;
For whose dire murther thou wilt be detected,
Since no one else but thee can be suspected.

Nor is thy nurse, that came unto my Nell
(Whose death as well as Leolines doth grieve thee)
As now alive, the truth of things to tell:
There is but one way left now to releive thee,
And therefore take the counsell that I give thee,
Fly straight beyond seas, for before Sun rise,
Men will be here thy person to surprise.

The Druides words, like the death-boding notes
Of the night raven, or the ominous owle,
Sent from their dismall hollow sounding throats;
Or like the noise of dogs by night, that howle
At the departing of a sick mans soule:
Such terrour into Sydanis did strike,
As never tender Lady felt the like.

What she should doe, or whether she should go
The poor distressed Sydanis not knew,
If undescry'd she could take ship or no;
And thereupon what dangers might ensue,
Therefore with visage deadly pale of hue.
Oh Druide let me dy at once, she sayes;
And not so often, and so many wayes.

And here I'le dye; thy Cell shall be my grave:
Before thee all my misery shall end.
So as if any come into thy cave
And finde me here, they may thee apprehend
And with wilde horses thee in pieces rend:
Inflicting severall deaths on thy each limme,
For murthering a Prince, and me in him.

As Sydanis these passionate words spake,
All ready was her nimble flickering ghost
Her bodyes beauteous Mansion to forsake,
And towards the blest Elisium fields to post
All sence of this worlds miseries were lost:
Yet this her sad departure seem'd most sweet,
That there againe she Leoline should meet.

But now the Druide, who unto the height
Had wrought her griefe, resolv'd to hold his hand,
And suddainly to aleviate that weight
Of woe opprest her, takes a frozen wand,
With which, and Magicke spels, he could command
The Furies, Fates, Nimphs, Faries, or what els
In the Seas deeps, or Earths darke bosome dwels.

