Look round this vast, and venerable place,
Whose ruin'd pile yet shines with aweful grace,
Majestick still 'midst all its faded charms:
See the whole wide waste of all-consuming age,
The wreck of ruthless wars and hostile rage,
And all the dire effects of more than civil arms.

View savage time with cankering tooth devour
The solid fabrick of yon mould'ring tower,
That now in undistinguish'd chaos lies:
Where erst the noble Lacy's Norman line
Plann'd the wide work, and form'd the vast design,
And bid with Gothick grace the stately structure rise.

When lo!  on high the vaulted domes suspend,
On lofty columns the wide arches bend,
And massive walls the vast domain enclose:
In vain the hostile warriors nervous art,
With missive force directs the barbed dart,
Or with gigantic strength the pond'rous jav'lin throws.

For many an age, the Lacey's noble race
With arts and arms adorn'd the splendid place,
As heroes triumph'd, or as patriot's shone:
Till with the great Plantagenet's fair bride,
In nuptial dower these antient honours glide,
The seat of future kings, that grac'd the English throne.

On yonder hill, as ancient annals tell,
The holy heroe, and the martyr fell,
Which still, great Lancaster, thy mem'ry bears:
There, 'midst the saints enroll'd, with rites divine,
The pious Pilgrim sought the sacred shrine,
And bath'd thy hallow'd tomb with sympathizing tears.

With holy zeal, and patriot graces arm'd,
With all the powers of conscious virtue warm'd,
'Midst death's sad scenes the pious martyr smiles;
In vain, proud Mortimer the hoary sage
Bleeds, the sad victim of thy brutal rage,
Lost by thy lawless love, and all a woman's wiles.

Look there, where erst yon mould'ring turret stood,
Whose moss-grown stones are ting'd with royal blood,
'Midst civil broils, the hapless Richard bled:
There cruel Exton's dark, assassin dart,
With bloody treason pierc'd the monarch's heart,
And fix'd the tottering crown on haughty Henry's head.

Here, vaulting Bolingbroke, thy feeble foe,
Felt in each whispering breeze the fatal blow,
Or heard death's herald in each guilty stone:
Short is the date of captive Monarch's doom,
'Twixt the dark prison, and the yawning tomb,
For bold ambition bears no rival to the throne.

See yonder tower, still blush with crimson stains
That flow'd in plenteous streams from noble veins,
Where Vaughan and Gray by Gloucester's arts expir'd;
Where Rivers fell, and with his latest breath
These mournful mansions dignified in death,
With patriot virtues warm'd, and dawning science fir'd.

'Midst the wide flames that civil discord spread,
When by base arts the royal Martyr bled,
Still loyal Pomfret spurn'd the tyrant's hate:
Last in these Northern climes, that scorn'd to pay
A servile homage to his lawless sway,
And in inglorious ease survive their monarch's fate:

Long, haughty Lambert, did thy veteran powers
With iron tempest shake these solid towers,
And round the walls the missive murder send:
In vain, brave Morrice, did thy martial train,
With royal zeal the hostile shocks sustain,
And 'gainst Rebellion's sons these royal domes defend.

Hark!  the loud engines tear the trembling walls,
And from its base the massive fabrick falls,
And all at once these antient honours fade:
This princely pile with all its splendid spoils,
Sinks 'midst the havock of intestine broils,
In prostrate ruins lost, and dark Oblivion laid.
