In solemn commune of the lone still night,
When, shrined in heaven, the stars shone bright and clear,
Shedding on earth dim shadowings of that light
Whose heavenly radiance gleams o'er glory's sphere,
I oft have mused on that recoiling fear,
That shuddering awe which bows the human mind,
When beckoning shadows in the gloom appear,
Or sheeted phantoms wail in midnight wind,&mdash;
Dread visitants uncalled unto their kind.

And it hath seem'd an awful thing and strange,
That shrieking spirits and unblest should roam
Unarm'd o'er earth, for ever bringing change,
Sorrow, and death &mdash; prophetic shades of doom;
Mystery of mysteries!  Not e'en the tomb
Can yield repose to wandering souls unblest;
But from sepulchral darkness they must come,
From their lone slumbers and their chill unrest,
And with mute horror freeze the well-spring of the breast.

Here man and prophets, skill'd in subtle lore,
With scornful unbelief have vainly striven;
Shadows uncouth have gloom'd on dusky shore,
And dark bleak heath in the dim summer even,
And forms have glimmer'd o'er the twilight heaven,
E'en to the eyes of wisdom, unlike earth's;
And shrieks, upon the howling tempest driven,
Blanch'd rosy cheeks round merry crackling hearths,
And frantic mothers mourn'd o'er diabolic births.

The lamp's red light hath suddenly turn'd dim;
Strange voices moan'd along the fair blue sky,
From bridal halls hath wail'd the funeral hymn,
And fear hath clouded the inquiring eye,
And shaken the proud heart in mastery,
When faltering voices awful knowledge sought,
And pale lips quiver'd, breathless for reply
To daring question, of mysterious nought,
Whose hollow accents fell, annihilating thought.

Mail'd knights, their helms and gorgets streaming blood,
And their rent banners spotted with red gore,
Have blown their war-horns in the midnight wood
Louder than rocking thunder's echo'd roar;
And coal-black steeds, mid lightning flashes, o'er
The precipice have leapt, and clatter'd on
Through craggy dells, by ocean's pebbly shore,
While the dead horsemen from their eyes of stone
Flash'd forth a demon light and rais'd a hollow moan.

Mid the deep forest of the Odenwold
Or haunted Hartz, the traveller hath pass'd
Swift, while his heart in terror's grasp grew cold,
As fiends swept by in every mountain blast,
Mutter'd his name, and bade the victim haste
Where the dread vampire feasted on his child,
Or ravening lust possess'd his wife at last;
Then on the wretch the prophet fiend hath smiled,
And vanish'd in wreathed flame amid the darkening wild!

The murderer hath started from his feast,
When the loud summons shook his castle gate,
And on his tongue died merry tale and jest
At the dread warning of triumphant fate;
Through moss-grown towers and vast halls desolate
Till morn hath echoed the slow, armed tread;
And, when the ancient chieftain whilom sate,
Unearthly eyes have gleam'd, as if the dead
Were throned in judgment o'er dark deeds of years long fled.

Such things have been, if there be truth in oath,
And mighty men been overcome with dread,
And holy priests of bell and cross, though loath
To quail before the inessential dead,
The wisest, bravest, purest, best, have fled
From midnight wailings, and mysterious forms,
Nor dared to watch the unsounding feathery tread
Of those who vanish'd in dark gathering storms&mdash;
Spirits, that howl'd away to their cold bed of worms.

The world is full of fear &mdash; the fear of things
All hearts can feel, but not an eye can see;
And this deep terror o'er the spirit flings
Madness that fashions what can never be;
There's not a cloud, a shadow, brook, or tree,
That fear clothes not with horror, when the night
Stands in the portal of eternity,
And bids the demons speed upon their flight
To tempt the sons of  men &mdash; but part ere morning light.

Barons have tumbled like their vassals, when
Death shook his cearments off, and came among
The living, like a victor; &mdash; priests have then
Clung to their shrines, e'en as the voiceless tongue
Grew to the quivering palate; &mdash; vaults have rung
With vigil prayers and groans of agony,
And stripes of penance &mdash; and death dirges sung,
Till the scared worshippers arose to flee,
And hurried, baffled in their power, in dark crowds franticly.

Amid the sacred silence of her cell
The vestal hath forgot to tell her beads,
And listen'd to the agonising yell
That fearfully reveal'd most fearful deeds;
Vain, then, were crucifix, and prayers, and creeds;
Vain the dim vigil and the patient fast;
Like the low moaning of sepulchral creeds,
Sighs of a suffering spirit by her pass'd,
And shrieks thro' cloisters rang, the wildest and the last!

This awful fear and searching quest pervade
All climes &mdash; all ages; since the world was young,
And Heaven's dread curse on all such knowledge laid,
Since all earth's woes from one transgression sprung,
The soul of man hath had no rest; among
Cyarean rocks Apollo's temple stood,
Where, like Heaven's voice, prophetic echoes rung;
Rome had her countless fanes &mdash; her types of blood&mdash;
And every nation seeks what none yet understood.

These things, so awful in their mystery, fill
The panting heart with horror past all speech,
And shoot through every vein a quivering thrill,
An awe that petrifies &mdash; beyond the reach
Of human healing; wisdom cannot teach
Knowledge, nor lessen the wild fears that bear
The spirit into madness; preach, oh, preach
In learned ignorance, to mocking air,
Ye ministers of heaven!  ye heralds of despair!

Tell us what 'tis we dread &mdash; and what we are!
Reveal your mission!  rend away the veil!
Doubt o'er us hangs, like a cold distant star,
That shows but darkness; ah!  what can avail
The oft-told errand &mdash; the dark dreamy tale
Of life and death &mdash; of heaven, and earth, and hell?
Whence comes this wavering?  whence this midnight wail?
Where do the spirits of the buried dwell?
Boast ye of Heaven's high power &mdash; yet know not &mdash; cannot tell?

Such things are; but why, earth cannot reveal!
The air we breathe may be but spirits' breath&mdash;
Spirits that wander, for our woe or weal,
Through the dark vale of sorrow and of death,
Or o'er the piny hill and blasted heath,
For ever near &mdash; for ever whispering hope
Or fear within us &mdash; to our bliss or scathe;
None mortal may with them in conflict cope&mdash;
Their subtle nature doth elude our utmost scope!

Strange is the tissue of our thought!  the mind
As a dim heaven of visions and of dreams,
Where glories, passing, leave their hues behind,
Duskily bright!  The blending of the beams
Of changeful thoughts, where each far onward streams,
Tinting the other with Elysian light,
Like twilight shed from hill-tops on blue streams,
Throws o'er our life a vesture darkly bright,
An interwoven robe of mingled day and night.

Perchance we live and move but in a dream,
For waking thoughts are oft like visions shown;
It nought avails that we should be or seem,
For sleep and waking have the self-same tone.
We dream of things oft dreamt &mdash; of time long gone,
E'en as remembrance brings back real things;
And the soft rays of former thoughts are strewn
Through slumber, on the spirit's shadowy wings,
E'en as the eye beheld those strange imaginings!

So fine and subtle is the frame of spirits
That they pervade the universe, and fling
Glory o'er all that mortal life inherits,
Like a soft-eyed and ever-blooming spring.
Thoughts slumber on each folded eagle-wing,
Ready to shed their radiance when the soul
Unfurls its pinions, while the bright birds sing,
And heaven's own rays from eyes of beauty roll,
Like diamond stars that flash around the snowy pole.

The lone heart lingers by the fount, and yearns
To drink the bann'd cup of that awful lore,
Which dwells amid the ashes of death's urns,
And is pour'd forth on that untravell'd shore,
Whence parted spirits can return no more.
But, oh!  the quest is vain; the burning thirst
Of knowledge never can be quench'd before
The bonds that chain'd the struggling bosom burst,
And the free soul departs &mdash; to realise the worst!

Like clouds o'er heaven, high thoughts float on the brain,
And feelings on the heart, like sunlight haze
O'er the blue mountain and the bloomy plain;
Mingled, they shed a momentary blaze,
Then part, and gleam in thousand different ways;
But all grow dimmer in their distant flight,
And fade away; nor can their faintless rays
Pierce the dense gloom of that long future night,
O'er whose Avernian shades dawns no celestial light.

But well the searching mind these shapes may deem,
These sheeted apparitions, that appal
The heart &mdash; no phantoms of creative dream,
But sainted spirits, mourning nature's fall,
The griefs, and stern adversities, and all
The sad afflictions of our human state;
Or, dread avengers, at the eternal call
Of blood, they come, the messengers of fate,
And do such deeds unseen as words may not relate.

Or messages of mercy may invite
Blest ones to wander mid their own loved kin,
That they may minister to their delight,
And shield their erring hearts from mortal sin;
So by this gentle commune, they may win
Transgressors from the path that leads to woe,
And guide them where the holy enter in,
The heaven of heavens &mdash; the home that cannot know
Aught of that harrowing grief which visits all below.

Oh, gentler thought and kindlier feelings wake,
And man may learn to gaze upon the grave
With strong love, void of terror, and to take
Delight in converse there; no more a slave
To his own fear and the wild winds that rave.
But at His bidding, who fills all the air
With storms or sunshine &mdash; who rules wind and wave,
If hidden guilt nurse not thy heart's despair,
Go to the midnight tomb, and sit in silence there!

And hold communion with loved ones who sleep,
Yet not unconscious of thy love and woe,
In death's own arms, yet in their bosoms keep
That high affection thou to them didst show;
For thee their spirits still with firm love glow,
For thee they whisper in the evening wind
Soft soothing words, that like still waters flow:
"Though dead, our love yet lingers all behind&mdash;
For thee we dwell in heaven, be thou to heaven resign'd!"

Oh, 'tis a precious joy and bliss to me
To know &mdash; to feel that thou art ever near,
Thou best and dearest!  fondly unto thee
I pour forth all my woes &mdash; for thou wilt hear&mdash;
Wilt hear and love the fonder, that the tear,
Unfrequent shed, was shed for thee alone!
Where'er I roam, though thou dost not appear,
Yet thou art with me, dear departed one!
Once angel of the world &mdash; now cherub of GOD'S throne!

I cannot fear the visitants of heaven,
The haggard spectres of the midnight hour;
I love the starry brow of silent even&mdash;
I love the decoy, distant moonlight bower;
No evil o'er the trusting heart hath power,
But lovely messengers from heaven attend,
And, like the rainbow bosom'd on the shower,
Impart a rapture whensoe'er they bend
Their flight, to cheer the heart of him who hath no friend.

No friend among the world's deceptive throng,
Who smile and wound &mdash; who promise and forsake;
Whose faith is folly, and whose friendship wrong,
Who talk and counsel while the heart doth break!
Oh, deeper than the stinging of the snake
They wound, who bind their venom round the brain,
And then deride the madden'd wretch they make,
And vaunt their wisdom on his writhing pain!
Worse than the worst of fiends!  Oh, let the arch-fiend reign!

Far better league thy faith with him of hell
Than trust the pledge or oath of human thing;
There is more music in a funeral knell
Than human voices, howsoe'er they sing;
There is more beauty in a raven's wing
Than in the heart that feeds alone on lies;
Fire, flood, plague, earthquake, each and all can bring
More joy than man who makes the heart his prize,
And on the deepest woes feasts his hell-flashing eyes.

But let the world pass by!  I know it well;
It much hath wrong'd me; but I will not bow
To aught that wears the form of earth or hell:
I never have done, and I will not now!
My heart long since breathed forth it changeless vow,
Never to be of things I dwell among,
Never to stoop or stain my spotless brow;
Never to do, howe'er I suffer wrong,
And never blot one's fame with an accursed tongue.

So, guiding mid the erring ways of men
My mind aright, I feel no terrors weigh
Upon my bosom; or by day, or when
Night brings the time to meditate and pray.
Without reproach, thus pass my hours away,
And nought I seek for all that men aver;
They are to me mere things of breathing clay,
That by their follies me from sin deter,
And bid me oft, full fain, to life's young hours recur.
