List, list, my love, to that heart-rending scream
That scared me wildly from my broken sleep!
Or have I startled from some frightful dream
Of drowning horror in the angry deep?
Did ye not hear it? &mdash; No; 'twas but the shrill
Sea-bird that shrieks aloud at break of day;
He hovers nigh, as 'twere foreboding ill,
And, vulture-like, he screams, expectant of his prey.

Again, again!  that piercing shriek once more&mdash;
A strange, a wild, convulsive, dreadful cry!
O God!  it sounds more human than before,
Like "some strong swimmer in his agony."
Ill-fated man!  could none their succour lend
To rescue thee from out thy living grave?
Or wert thou destined to so sad an end,
Unpitied and unknown, to sink beneath the wave?

But yesternight beheld thee blithe and gay,
Elate with joy, and reckless of the morn,
That robed the King of Terrors in array
Most horrible, and laugh'd thy joy to scorn!
Upon the ship is fix'd his glaring eye&mdash;
He dies not yet, but gallantly doth swim;
Strong, wrestling with his dreadful destiny:
The ship, the ship will surely stay its course for him!

And so he deems, and grapples with grim death,
As should a warrior with his enemy,
Nor yields to recreant fear his parting breath:
A hero's not a coward's death he'll die.
Poor nursling of the wave!  by hope upborne
Awhile, and boldly buffeting the billow,
And must thy buoyant hope then prove forlorn,
Thy winding-sheet the foam, and ocean be thy pillow?

Oh no!  methinks they back the swelling sail
And bring her to &mdash; my senses have not err'd!
His cries have reach'd her wafted on the gale,
His life is saved &mdash; O God!  his prayers are heard:
And yet she veers not round &mdash; it cannot be&mdash;
Heaven speed it may!  his strength is well-nigh gone.
Courage, my man!  the ship shall turn for thee;
The coward dies a thousand deaths &mdash; the brave but one.

O horrible!  the ship pursues her track
Careering o'er the unfathomable main,
Unconscious of his cries to bring her back.
The unhearing wind convey'd no sound again.
Then must thou die: &mdash; for terrible despair
Inevitably now hath rung thy knell&mdash;
O God!  can pen depict or tongue declare
Thy speechless agony?  'Tis indescribable!

No hope is left &mdash; despair hath seal'd his doom;
How short then life's poor triumph now shall be&mdash;
He will not sink, but plunge into the tomb,
And, like the Roman, die with dignity!
He strives to "yield the ghost;" "the envious sea,"
As if in sport, unheedingly doth roll,
His spirit boldly struggling to be free &mdash;
'Tis past!  Almighty God, have mercy on his soul!

Victim of danger!  hope!  despair!  and death!
Thy life in tempests, storms, and perils past,
And destined thus to yield thy latest breath!
Thy lot how sadly, tragically cast!
Ye who command your tears at need to flow
In prompt exuberance, as oft ye read
Some idle tale of mere fictitious woe,
Oh!  shed one drop for him, now numbered with the dead!

Poor luckless mariner!  of his own life
He little reck'd; but, when about to perish,
His mem'ry flash'd upon his faithful wife,
He thought of her he'd loved and sworn to cherish;
He thought upon his infant babes, who raised
Their little hands to heav'n for him in prayer,
Their young blue eyes, that on their mother gazed:
She kiss'd them &mdash; for their father's image smiling there.

Enough, enough!  such thoughts are misery.
Ye who can bear in misanthropic mood
To wend your way through life alone, and die
In selfish, unlamented solitude,
Leaving no trace of having been &mdash; ye scan
With callous heart such pangs, nor heed these ties&mdash;
A husband &mdash; father &mdash; as was this poor man,
Bequeathing all to Heav'n, by you unpitied dies!
