There stands a lonely tree on Shinar's mount&mdash;
No kindred stem the far-spread desert rears;
Scant are its leaves, far spent the juicy fount,
Which fed its being through unnumber'd years:
Last of a splendid race, that here have stood,
It throws an awful charm o'er ruin's solitude!

Lone tree!  thou bear'st a venerable form,
Shrunk, yet majestic in thy late decay;
For not the havoc of the ruthless storm,
Nor Simoom's blight, thus wears thy trunk away&mdash;
But Time's light wing, through age; long gone past,
Hath gently swept thy side, and wasted thee at last.

Empires have risen &mdash; flourish'd &mdash; moulder'd down,
And nameless myriads closed life's fleeting dream
Since thou the peerless garden's height didst crown,
Which hung in splendour o'er Euphrates' stream:
Fountains, and groves, and palaces, were here;
And fragrance fill'd the breeze, and verdure deck'd the year.

Here queenly steps in beauty's pride have trod;
Hence Babel's King his boastful survey took,
When to his trembling ear the voice of God,
Denouncing woes to come, his spirit shook:
But all this grace and pomp have pass'd away&mdash;
'Tis now the wondrous story of a distant day!

How wide and far these tracks of chaos spread,
Beyond the circuit of the labouring eye!  
Where the proud Queen of Nations raised her head,
But shapeless wrecks and scenes of horror lie:
Glorious and beautiful no more &mdash; her face
Is darkly hid in Desolation's stem embrace!

Lorn as the pining widow who doth bend
In solitary grief o'er some loved tomb,
Thy worn and drooping form appears to lend
A mourner's presence to this scene of doom;
And from thy quaking leaves there breathes a sound
Of sullen hopeless wail for Death's wide waste around.

Sole living remnant of Chaldea's pride!
Reluctant thou dost wear the garb of joy;
Thy heart is wither'd, strength hath left thy side,
And the green tints Time spareth to destroy
Seem like the hectic flush, which brighter glows
Upon the sunken cheek just passing from its woes.
