Spirit of Gama!  round the Stormy Cape,
Bestriding the rude whirlwind as thy steed,
The thunder-cloud thy car, thy spectre shape
Gigantic; who upon the gale dost feed,
And drink the water-spout, &mdash; thy shroud the skies;
Thy sport, the south and vast Atlantic Sea;
Thine eye, the lightning's flash:  awake!  arise!
From out the deep, in dread and awful sov'reignty!

Now hast thou risen!  By heaven it is a sight
Most godlike, grand, and glorious to behold;
Three elements contend; and fierce in fight
As those who warr'd with mighty Jove of old.
Oh, God!  if any doubt thy being, or rate,
With vain and impious mind, at nought thy power,
So may it be such daring sceptic's fate,
To pass "The Cape of Storms" when angry tempests lower.

Dost note the gathering clouds, as on through heaven
They speed their midway flight, 'twixt sea and skies;
Like to the first-born by the Archangel driven
On earth, with flaming sword, from Paradise?
&mdash;Dost mark the spirit-stirring of the deep,
As onward sweeps the stormy hurricane,
Rous'd, like a roaring lion, from his sleep,
That wildly stares around, and shakes his shaggy mane?

Nor doth he wake in vain.  From his abode,
Hath Ocean risen in terrible array;
Magnificent, as when the voice of God
Call'd forth the world from chaos into day!
'Tis night, &mdash; and now the tempest-shrouded bark,
With surge-lash'd crest, upborne aloft doth ride
Upon the heaving billows, vast and dark,
And braves, as did the Patriarch's ark, the whelming tide.

O God!  it is a fearful sight!  and all around
Is dismal, drear, and dark &mdash; both near and far&mdash;
Save when, to make the darkness more profound
And visible, some pale and twinkling star
Peeps, for an instant, forth, and then, as 'twere
In fear, recedes; &mdash; or the phosphoric dash
Of wild, long sweeping waves, with horrid glare,
Lights up the dread abyss, and shines along the splash.

And waste of waters, like to the "pale horse,"
Whom Death shall ride upon that awful day,
When sun, and moon, and stars, have run their course,
The world, and time itself, be swept away!
&mdash;And now the waning moon would fain forth shine,
And through the heavens pursue her wonted track:
But three wild warring elements combine
At once in unison, and drive her rudely back!

Didst hear that crash, &mdash; tremendous as the roar
Which burst on Sinai's summit, touching heaven,
When by the Lord, on that all-sacred shore,
To man in thunder were his mandates given?
Didst mark of that destructive element,
"Promethean" named, the fork'd and lurid light,
With vivid flash, from heaven directly sent,
Like the lit flame which struck the apostate Saul in night?

Hark to the rending of the storm-split sail,
And mark the reed-like quivering of the mast;
List!  list ye to the howling of the gale,
Dreadful as the Archangel's trump its blast!
On such a night, the twelve Disciples cried
In fear, and roused the Saviour from his sleep!
Jesus arose, the elements to chide;
"Silence, ye angry winds!  and peace, thou troubled deep!"

So spake the Son of God!  and thus allay'd
The storm which howl'd upon the Assyrian shore.
Prompt at his call, the tempest's rage obey'd,
The winds were hush'd, the waters ceased to roar!
&mdash;When Royal Canute once, with scepter'd hand,
And robed in pride of earthly majesty
Forbade the sea to dare to lave the land,
The wild waves rose in sport, and roll'd all heedless by!

Jehovah!  What is man compared to thee?
Or son of man, in mockery of sense,
That he should dare assume the Deity?
Oh, man!  would'st learn to know thy impotence,
Thy littleness and inferiority?
Come, hie thee to these regions of the storm,
Behold the face of God upon the sea,
And worship in the gale his dread Almighty form!

But see the darkling spirit of the night,
That brooding safe upon the wat'ry plain,
Flies at the approach of thee, etherial light!
Awaking now the universe again!
The sea-boy wet, rude nursling of the blast,
Whose sleep was cradled in the dashing spray,
And rock'd upon "the high and giddy mast,"
Regardless of the storm, unseals his eyes with day.

Ye who would further seek to know of light,
Go, read it as recorded in the page
Of that immortal bard, bereft of sight
Himself, &mdash; the godlike Homer of his age!
Oh!  for one spark of that celestial flame,
That inspiration, once to Milton given,
Which lit his way to never-dying fame,
The fire, the pomp, and prodigality of Heaven!

In dread magnificence the lurid sun
Now pierces through the tempest-troubled sky,
And drives the thunder-clouds dark rolling on&mdash;
As Satan and his rebel tribe were seen to fly
Before the red right arm of God! &mdash; No streaks
Of orient purple tinge announce his rise;
In solitary splendour he awakes,
And seizes, as by storm, at once on all the skies!

Didst mark the whale that dash'd along the deep?
Hugest of all the ocean-born that roam
Like that Leviathan, whom once, asleep,
The mariner, (as on through "Norway's foam"
He steer'd his rude and shatter'd skiff,) at night,
Mistook for land, so vast and still he seem'd,
And anchor'd thus, &mdash; then rose in wild affright,
When morning's dawn upon the mighty monster beam'd!

Again he comes!  gigantic as the beast
Of old, that God in mercy sent to save
The prophet Jonah from the foamy yeast
Of waves &mdash; his else unknell'd, unshrouded grave!
Three days and nights the slimy monster sped
His wat'ry way, as thus the "chosen of God" he bore,
By "raging floods" and "seas uncompassed,"
Then cast him all unscathed upon the Syrian shore.

Hark to the sea-mew's wild and piercing shrieks,
As round the strong-ribb'd bark they hover nigh!
Now o'er the wave's white foam they skim their beaks,
Now far away they speed, and seek the sky.
&mdash;But mark the might and majesty of motion
Of him who sweeps, cloud-cleaving, from the height
Of heaven, &mdash; it is the Condor of the ocean,
So nobly doth he soar aloft, so bold his flight!

The aspirations of this bird arise
Above those eagles, that are seen afar
O'er Chimborazo, loftiest in the skies
Of Andes &mdash; "giant of the western star!"
From mountain on to mountain let them urge
Their narrower flight, and habitations change:
His resting-place the South Pacific surge,
All heaven his eyrie, and immensity his range!

Against the conquest-crown'd Dictator's sway
From Sardis, when the noble Cassius drew
His legions forth, to battle's stem array&mdash;
E'en such a bird it was, that hovering flew
Upon his "former ensign," &mdash; then would feed
From out the soldiers' hands, and flapping fly
His broad-extended wings, that seem'd to lead
The embattled Romans on to certain victory!

But at Philippi sought &mdash; he then was gone;
And vultures, crows, and kites were seen instead!
For those whom hope of conquest had flush'd on,
Now vanquish'd lay &mdash; the dying and the dead!
'Twas such a bird, all wild and young that rose
When Swedish Charles, with "soul of fire," went forth,
And "frame of adamant," mid polar snows,
To plant his standard, on the steeple of the north.

But, when the fickle fortune of the war,
As hist'ry tells, on dread Pultowa's day,
Forsook the warrior-king and woo'd the Czar,
The bird had wing'd his eagle-flight away!
On daring pinion borne &mdash; 'twas such that o'er
The modern Hannibal, was seen to fly
Above St. Bernard's Alpine snows, to soar
To France' proud temple, and unutterably high!

There were who said o'er Lybia's and waste,
And chief the Pyramids' dim solitude,
The self-same bird his flight had boldly traced,
And once before on Lodi's Bridge been view'd&mdash;
To sweep Marengo's field he left the Alps:
A laurel wreath inscrib'd, he wav'd on high;
Then gain'd with nobler speed their snowy scalps,
The wreath enroll'd, "NAPOLEON AND VICTORY."

By Danube's darkly-rolling tide and o'er
The field of Austerlitz on Eylau's plain,
At Friedland, Jena, Berlin, Ulm, once more
All splendid did he re-appear again!
On Moscow's conflagration, &mdash; where the sun
Turn'd ghastly pale, and sicken'd at the sight,
The Eagle saw his race of glory run,
He tried in vain to soar &mdash; then shriek'd and sunk in night!

Oh haste!  and look upon yon glorious zone,
The bow of God, which girdles half the sky,
The heavenly arch, by the Almighty thrown
In vast and infinite variety
Of tints most beautiful &mdash; th' Immortal's span,
To mortal sight display'd in times of yore,
The great Creator's covenant  with man,
That whelming waters should o'er land prevail no more!

Thou pledge redeemed of the Deity
To man below in consolation sent!
Thou fairest, brightest vision of the sky!
I hail thee!  dolphin of the firmament!
For each succeeding varied change imbues
Thee with a magic colour, that doth shine
More splendid than before &mdash; till all thy hues
Proclaim thee God at once, like Him thy form divine!

And, if on earth thy beauty be extreme,
When view'd o'er mountain-height, or level plain;
Far lovelier, far, thy variegated beam,
Expanded o'er the surface of the main!
With either horizon thy resting-place,
Thou mak'st the sea the mirror of thy light;
The ocean back reflects thy radiant face,
Like lovers each beloved &mdash; both gazing with delight.

Jehovah!  with thy name commenced my strain;
Jehovah!  with thy name it shall conclude:
By those alone who track the dark-blue main,
The grandest of thy wondrous works are view'd!
I envy not the man whose inward fire
Of soul expands not, riding o'er the deep&mdash;
Whose mental aspirations soar not higher,
With the wild waves, ere night behold him laid in sleep.

For me!  whatever dangers yet may lower
Upon my life, or errors be my fate;
So shall it soothe me in my latest hour,
That once, at least, I tried to celebrate
Thy praise, and in thy temple of the sea&mdash;
Its canopy, the clear and cloudless sky&mdash;
That thus I struck the lyre and bent the knee,
O God!  in homage to thy pow'r and majesty!

I've little left that makes it worth my while
To live &mdash; my mind, perchance, at times benighted;
In scorn, than merriment, I'd rather smile;
My heart is sear'd, my best affections blighted!
And be it so &mdash; yet haply, if I dare
Uplift a suppliant's voice to heav'n, 'twould be,
That God in mercy might accord my prayer,
To die a hero's death, in planting Freedom's tree.

I little reck what soil it be upon,
So Danger lead, and point to Glory's star;
In fighting on the plains of Marathon&mdash;
Or 'neath thy banners, noble Bolivar!
For, since young Freedom's standard is unfurl'd,
On Athos' crags and Pernambuco's shore,
Alike to me, the east or western world,
So that my soul escape amid the battle's roar.

When life from all its charms is disallied,
When callous gloom succeeds to cherish'd hope;
'Twere nobler far to fall by Freedom's side,
Than thus to live a moody misanthrope,
Or die a heartless suicide; since life
Hath ceased to please, what higher aim to me
Remains, than in the rapture  of the strife,
To breathe my last upon thine altar, Liberty.

But "circumstance" is aye one's blight and curse:
It mars our best and brightest hopes &mdash; since, then,
It may not be my lot to spur my horse
In Freedom's ranks, and aid my fellow-men,
(Embattled in her sacred cause,) in rending
A tyrant's chains &mdash; a bigot's iron crown&mdash;
The Patriot's and the Martyr's laurel blending,
And dying strike some Selim or Pizarro down:

Methinks the grandest boon to be bestow'd
By Heav'n on man &mdash; the shortest, best relief
From all his mortal sufferings, and load
Which life entails of misery and grief&mdash;
The termination of his woes, might be,
As now he braves the billows of the Cape,
To grapple with grim Death upon the sea,
The whirlwind for its courser, and the storm its shape.

So might the bark become his coffin's shell!
The murky cloud enshroud him as his pall&mdash;
The roar of distant thunder ring his knell&mdash;
The lightning's flash illume his funeral!
His winding-sheet the wild, white, curling wave,&mdash;
The rolling billow, as his bier be lent&mdash;
The rain his tears, &mdash; the ocean for his grave,
The Cape of Storms itself his mighty monument!
