Beneath a Tun, whose vast capacious Sides,
Glitt'ring with Gold the drunken God bestrides,
Beneath this Tun two jolly Songsters lay,
And with a Genial Bowl chas'd Care away:
Both Sons of London, both alike inspir'd
With Rival Arts, and Thirst of Glory fix'd:
Resolv'd before an Umpire to contest,
Who could the longest Sing, and Sing the best:
Tom Piper, Warbling Charmer of the Street,
Next to the Tun as Umpire claim'd his Seat.
Thither, by Chance or Fortune led astray,
Unknowing where I rov'd, I took my Way:
My Way of them I ask'd; &mdash; but with a Smile
Piper reply'd, &mdash; Pray, Sir, sit down a while;
Be free from Care as you are free from Harm,
And tho' our Hut is homely, it is warm:
Stay 'till the Crowd from out the Streets are gone,
Then reel Majestic home, for all the Street's your own:
But lest unhappy you again should stray,
Jack with his friendly Torch shall lead the Way.
What cou'd I do? &mdash; Silence the Swains invoke,
In short I risk'd my Safety for a Joke.
To Sing alternately the Rivals chose,
Chaunticleer these Rymes rehears'd, and Raucus those.

CHAUNTICLEER.
Aegidian Nymphs, in Cells or Garrets, hear:
Inspire my Theme, and make my Musick clear:
Next Warbletini let me be possess'd,
For you'll all own that he can Sing the best:
But if my wild Ambition soars too high,
Aiming to grasp at Immortality,
For ever I resign my tuneful Task,
And hang my String of Ballads on the Cask.

RAUCUS.
Hockleian Youths inspire my rising Mind,
With Wreaths of Juniper my Temples bind:
Tho' Warbletini may deny me Praise,
My Wreath's as honour'd as if made of Bays:
This Chaplet shall protect me from his Tongue,
Lest by some secret Charm it marr my Song.

CHAUNTICLEER.
This Silken Handkerchief which here I wear,
(My first Reward for singing at the Fair)
I offer Warbletini to thy shrine,
To speed my Song, and make my Notes divine:
Each Nymph shall Warbletini then adore,
Admire thy tuneful Lays, and own thy vocal Pow'r.

RAUCUS.
O Stokes renown'd, this Holland Shirt I've on,
(At Country Fair by dint of Valour won)
Accept; for as from Thee I learnt that Art,
'Tis but the Tribute of a grateful Heart:
But should succeeding Honours crown the Fight,
Succeeding Songs shall crown the Day and Night:
While you in Triumph pass, each Nymph I'll charm,
With Tales of conquer'd Chiefs, their Souls alarm,
'Till they in Raptures lost, shall bless thy conqu'ring Arm.

CHAUNTICLEER.
O fair Hoppaea with thy tripping Feet,
Neat as a Milkmaid, as a Milkmaid sweet;
Come with thy charming Mein, and graceful Art,
Come to thy Chaunticleer, and rejoice his Heart;
Come when fatigu'd, coroding Cares abound,
And make my midnight Hours with Jolity go round.

RAUCUS.
O Cynderaxa, may I seem to you
Loathsome, and hateful as a Toupee Beau,
Who with short quick-fetch'd Steps trips fast along,
And as he paces murmurs out a Song.
Such may I be, if that when you're not near,
An Hour seems not a Day, a Day a Year.

CHAUNTICLEER.
Ye sacred Liquors, moving easy sleep,
Ye Hogsheads which those sacred Liquors keep,
Fend me from Cold:  The Summer Warmth is o'er,
And sharp bleak Winds come whistling on the Shore.

RAUCUS.
When tir'd with Dirt, and wet with Rain and Mire,
This Hospitable Shop affords a Fire:
Me Wind nor Weather can no more affright,
Than Divers fear the Dark, or Thieves the Night.

CHAUNTICLEER.
Our Bowls with Floods of Juniper are crown'd,
Berries distill'd lie scatter'd o'er the Ground,
And smiling Bounty strows her Gifts around:
But shou'd poor Filch at the next Sessions die;
Tuns might unheeded flow 'till they were dry.

RAUCUS.
Tho' Hoarse my Voice, tho' spent my little Store,
Tho' Gin deny'd her all-solacing Pow'r:
Shou'd but my Chloe once recross the Main,
And bless my solitary Haunts again;
No Care, no Want my Quiet should destroy,
But all around me wear the Face of Joy.

CHAUNTICLEER.
Majestic stalks the Dutchess in Brocade,
Not Dimety adorns the rural Maid;
The jolly Hostess in her Sattin flares,
And Drury Nymph in Velvet shows her Airs.
Clean, tho' not gay, tho' not new all her own,
My Phillis charms in a plain Linnen Gown;
And while my Phillis will her Linnen wear,
No Dimity shall please, no Sattin flare,
Nor Velvet nor Brocade with Linnen shall compare.

RAUCUS.
Songs on Excise near Change meet most Reward;
And living Ditties best suit Paul's Church-yard:
But should my Chloe, e'er to ease my Pain,
Revisit this forsaken Clime again:
To her those soft Ditties prais'd in Paul's Church-yard
These were their Rymes, which I at leisure pen'd,
When bold rough Raucus did in vain contend;
From Street to Street now Chaunticleer charms the Town,
And with unrival'd Ditty charms alone.
