Amid the darkly-rolling storms,
That gird Helvellin's craggy sides,
With aspects fierce, and warrior strides,
The painted Britons' giant forms
Rush in wild tumult to the vale below;
With fiery rage their eyeballs glow;
Their rude arms clash with hideous clang;
Torches wildly hurl'd in air
Flash round the rocks a direful glare:
Frighted Skiddaw heard from far
The rattling of the scythed car;
Wide Windermere with mountain echoes rang,
And Keswick's silent lake shook with the shout of war.
High on a dark cliff's beetling brow,
Which casts its broad embrowning shade
Across the rugged dell below,
The Bards, in radiant rows display'd,
To the fierce troops, that wildly pass beneath,
Their kindling numbers breathe.

Gallant warriors!  so your fires,
In days of yore, by Deva's stream,
Rous'd to fury by our lyres,
Darted battle's vivid gleam.
The faulchions, now that glittering rise,
Shone at your fathers' sinewy thighs;
Each axe has cleft a valiant foe;
Each spear has laid a Roman low;
And all those scythes through legions flew,
Drinking life's empurpled dew.
But nobler triumphs wait the coming day:
From cold Alaunus' northern shore
Kilda's famish'd eagles pour,
And hovering shade their destin'd prey.
Yonder darksome clouds behind
Joyous Hesus snuffs the wind,
To taste the tainted gales, that bear
Fumes of bloodshed through the air.
Fated Romans!  hope no more
To roam Hesperia's breezy shore;
You have look'd your last on Tiber's waves;
Albion's rocks shall be your graves.
Britons!  toss your torches high;
Bid the scythed chariots fly,
And burst the mailed files:
With frantic yells,
Pierce Helvellin's brier'd dells,
And shake the distant isles:
Lo!  your fires' shades ascending point the way;
Mador and Hoel call you to your prey;
And Taranis from high in thunder gives the day.

Fir'd by music's magic sway
Madly bursts the British band:
Aghast, unnerv'd, and fix'd in wan dismay,
With curdling blood the spell-bound Romans stand.
Each on the other looks with speechless gaze;
Then views around the dying and the slain,
Sadly revolves the palm of happier days,
And thinks with keen regret on Zama's plain.
But soon the souls, that fir'd the Britons, fall:
Then on their basely-turning foes
The firm rekindled legions rose,
And rear'd the nervy arm, that tam'd this nether ball.

The Bards perceiv'd the yielding throng,
And quick resum'd their magic song:
By your fathers' warrior-shades;
By antique Mona's holy glades;
By Cambria's rocks, that stream'd of yore
With many a Conqueror-Roman's gore;
By each car and flaming brand,
That drove bold Julius from our strand;
Turn: &mdash; and blushing fear to fly;
Revere your kind, and dare to die.
The soul shall quit the stiffening clay,
And mount through air to brighter spheres;
In warlike sports with Hesus play,
While Hoel's music charms the ears:
Then again in earthly mould
Shall Snowdon's forked peaks behold;
Again through legions scatter death;
Again for freedom pour its breath.
Life is but a middle space
In endless being's circling race;
And bold in battle to expire,
Speaks the soul of heavenly fire.

But ah!  the captive's mournful fate!
To swell the pomp that marks his shame;
To knee the chief his soul must hate,
And hear a coward blast his name:
To tread Hesperian ground;
To drink of Tiber's hated stream;
With downcast eye,
With many a sigh,
Sullen, with fetter'd limbs, to move along,
The sport or pity of an abject throng:
While conquering warriors pass with laurels crown'd;
And Albion's pictur'd cities beam around;
Cymbals and clarions swell the triumph song;
And plumy helmets wave, and groves of lances gleam.

The Britons hear;
They blush; they turn; they fight; prevail;
And those, whose eagle, high display'd,
Shadow'd this sublunary sphere,
And made the kingdoms of the world grow pale,
Now, trembling, flee before a British spear,
And dew their mails for shame with many a burning tear.

By glory rous'd, and touch'd with nobler fires,
The Bards in holy fury seize their lyrs:
Ye shades of heroes, nobly slain,
Fighting for your native plain;
Sons of war, who bravely sped,
Boadicea at your head;
If your souls, return'd to light,
Chase the wolf down  Snowdon's height,
Or muse on blood in caverns drear,
Or poise in darksome groves the spear;
Come, behold the radiant flame,
That speaks the glory of our name.
On Skiddaw's summit mid the skies,
Let the blazing pile arise,
That o'er mountains, dark in night,
Wide may stream the glorious light.
Hark!  the huge clefts of Borrowdale,
And lonely Derwent's peaceful vale,
Repeat the dying sufferer's mournful wail.
Lo!  wild Lodore her thundering torrent stills,
To hear the distant groans roll down the midnight hills.

Each groan, O vanquish'd Rome,
All-mournful knells thy doom.
In yellow Tiber's orange shades
Caesar's pining form shall lie,
And cast on distant Rome a tearful eye,
And shuddering seem to hear the clash of Albion's blades.
Revenge shall hunt your rashly-daring band,
To your own viny hills and olive land;
Our barks shall ride your hostile main,
Our scythed chariots shake your hateful plain,
And o'er your seven proud Hills gleam many a flaming brand.

With burning breasts the warriors catch the sound,
And raise a yell profound,
And clash their gory shields,
And point with sinewy arm Hesperia's southern fields.

With alter'd strain, in measures soft and slow,
The minstrels melt the tender heart to woe.
Morcar's breast has ceas'd to beat;
Gash'd with spears the warrior lies;
Bold he turn'd the base retreat,
Gain'd the day, and clos'd his eyes.
The wounds that scar his manly breast,
Like blood-stain'd trophies, grace his bier;
Yet Nature views the scene depress'd,
And silent falls a pitying tear.

Empty beneath yon oak his car is cast,
Stretch'd o'er the mead his coursers breathless lie;
Remembrance wakes the glorious triumphs past,
And fills with tender grief the gazing eye.

No more beneath the morning sun,
With dazzling helm, in Nature's pride,
The warrior down the rocks shall run,
His faulchion glittering at his side.

Near yonder brook shall rest his bones,
His gory axe beside him laid;
The spot be mark'd by mossy stones;
And tears of warriors wet the blade.

With bended forms the mourning Chieftains stand,
And gaze the paly corse with stedfast eye,
And silent muse on frail mortality;&mdash;
And softest sorrow melts the sympathetic band.

Abruptly in triumphant strain
The minstrels strike their lyres again:
Morcar, warriors, is not dead,
He again shall rear his head,
Lift the axe, and dye with blood
Wide Sabrina's sandy flood.
For long as Cambria's streams shall run
Sparkling to the golden sun,
Thro' warrior-forms, from frame to frame,
The soul shall deathless shift its flame.
Ye, who to wilds and northern mountains fled,
In keener skies make the hard rocks your bed,
Shall visit earth in happier day,
On Thames's cultur'd margin play;
Shall wear the laurels which ye won of yore,
And taste the freedom purchas'd by your gore.

We, the Bards, shall frequent die,
And rise to breath our native sky;
Enshrin'd in more than mortal forms,
Sing 'mid Cambria's mountain storms;
In gentle summer's even-tide
Recline on Mulla's reedy side;
Or haunt for ages Arun's humble vales;
This harp on Avon's bank shall sound;
Hoel's high soul within the Heaven's high bound
Presume an earthly guest, and draw empyreal gales.

But ye, brave Chiefs, in distant days,
Shall claim a more exalted praise.
Ye, as the ages slow unfold,
Kindling a mighty Saxon's patriot mould,
To peaceful homes and social fires,
To cultur'd plains and festive boards
Shall call from hills and woods the wandering hordes,
And lift the lofty city's glittering spires.
Ye, as the years in happier courses fly,
Where Thames's crystal waters feed
The grassy plain of Runnimede,
Torn from a tyrant's hand shall bear on high
The sacred roll of liberty.
On ocean's marge a sable prince shall stand,
And shew a captive monarch to the land,
And, pointing to his conquests o'er the main,
Bid swell the thrilling blood thro' every British vein.
See the white sails swell,
To Albion's cliffs ye bid farewell;
And Sion's rocky summit hears
The frequent clash of British spears.
Lo!  in a train of golden years
A virgin queen appears,
Fir'd by the spirit, which of yore
Bonduca's warrior-body bore:
Sublime on Albion's whitening cliffs she stands,
The schemes of unnam'd empires in her hands;
And bids Britannia's banners wave unfurl'd
O'er oceans now unknown, and circle this wide world.

Thou, Oscar, on the cliff's rough brow,
Nodding thy dire plumes o'er the captur'd foe;
Whom Hesus to immortal fame consign'd,
Ere yet the soul in earth was shrin'd;
Thou in time's remotest space
Shalt fire a patriot form divine:
The scepter'd race
Shall cross the dark and stormy brine,
From where Germania's broad romantic streams
Resound the mountain monsters' midnight roar;
And, as they prowling roam the craggy shore,
Reflect their rugged forms to the moon's paly beams.

Ev'n now thro' fields of purer air
Andraste bids prepare
Hours of delight and years with glory crown'd,
To move their golden round,
When bless'd in him imperial sway
The sun more glad shall shine and kindlier pass the day.
There rest on clouds reclin'd,
Sceptres, and laureate wreaths, and naval crowns,
Tower'd cities, fleets that ride
In majesty the ocean-tide,
Domestic sweets, that meek contentment owns,
And emanations of the mind,
That add a nobler nature to our kind.
Lo!  to our dazzled sight
Wide over torrid sands and winter zones,
Britannia's pennant proudly streams;
And every star, that beautifies the night,
Where'er it roams, on Albion's empire beams,
Or when it pales at dawn its setting light,
Or from the misty wave uplifts its circlet bright.

They sang: &mdash; and rapture brighten'd every eye;
With pealing plaudits rang the vaulted sky:
When o'er the eastern summit's darksome shade
The moon rose mellowing the grey rocks, and play'd
On the still lake: &mdash; the warrior host retires
To crown the mountain tops with sacrificial fires.
