THENOT.  COLLEN.

THENOT.
Is not this Month, the merry Month of May,
When Lads in Love their jolly Gambols play,
Clad in his best, when ev'ry Swain is seen,
With a fair Partner dancing on the Green?
Now haps it then, that we no merrier be,
Undrest, unheeded, 'neath a gloomy Tree?
Ah!  COLLEN, these old russet Coats we wear,
But ill become the Season of the Year!
Lo!  smiling Nature in her best Array
Herself has deck'd, and all around looks gay:
Here the green Meads give Pleasure to the View;
There Buds in Blossom boast their lovely Hue:
Thro' Meads so green the Lasses cull the Flow'rs,
And pluck the Hawthorn Blossoms for their Bow'rs:
Homewards they haste, to raise those Bow'rs of May,
And the Church Porch adorn by break of Day:
Where with rude Art they Ornaments compose,
Of the sweet Briar, and the fragrant Rose;
The yellow Cowslip, and the Daisie fair,
With the blue Violet they weave with Care;
Nice in their Order, they together twine
The Honey-Suckle and the Eglantine:
There all the Beauties of the Spring are found,
The flow'ry Dome with various Garlands crown'd:
Such Merry-making sure the Saints doth please;
Yet here we lie and lounge in slothful Ease.

COLLEN.
Ah!  THENOT, lay aside thy needless Cares,
And let thy Judgment answer to thy Years:
Such Follies may in Spring of Youth engage,
But we are in the Autumn of our Age.

THENOT.
This very Morn, no longer 'twas ago,
On yonder Heath I saw a gallant Show;
A blithful Train of Shepherds tripp'd along,
And chaunted to the Tabor's Sound a Song:
While to the Tabor's Sound the Hornpipe play'd,
To which each Swain went dancing with his Maid:
To see such jovial Lads, tho' past my Prime,
Still to the Tune my merry Heart beat Time.
They took to yonder Green-Wood Side their Way
And there they chose, and crown'd their Queen of May;
Then back their Queen in solemn Pomp they bring,
You'd think 'twas FLORA, Goddess of the Spring:
On either side her Nymphs attend with Care,
The fairest She, tho' all were wond'rous fair:
A rosy Garland circled o'er her Head,
And down her Snow-white Neck her jetty Locks were spread:
Oh!  COLLEN, Oh!  that I were on the Green,
To help the Maids to bear their lovely Queen!
Dost thou not envy Swains, who thus employ
Their Hours in Sport, in Pleasure, and in Joy.

COLLEN.
No Envy, THENOT, can such Swains impart,
I pity their loose Follies from my Heart:
Such vagrant Shepherds little mind their Charge,
Who let their Sheep run straggling out at large,
While in luxurious Ease they sport and play,
And with their Gambols wanton Life away.
What, THENOT, for these Shepherds can be said,
Themselves well batten'd, but their Flocks unfed?
Too true 'tis seen their Flocks are not their own,
Who let them rove at Random up and down,
To Ever-watchful Wolves a tempting Prey;
They're Hirelings only for a little Pay,
And faithless to their Trust, they do not care
Who has the Flock so they the Fleece can shear.
What to his angry Lord can plead the Swain
Who for his own, has lost his Master's Gain?
To what will all his vain Excuse amount,
When the great Shepherd, PAN, shall call him to Account?

THENOT.
COLLEN, too like the fabled Fox you preach,
And scorn the tempting Fruit you cannot reach:
Your Spleen 'gainst richer Shepherds you employ,
And rail at Pleasures you wou'd fain enjoy:
I, (as I am) so much their Rule I love,
Wou'd rather envy than mean Pity move:
The Rich are envied; but still keep their Store;
The Poor are pitied, and they still are poor.
But hear with what Injustice, simple Swain,
Against the greater Shepherds you complain.
From Heav'n the Goods of Fortune we receive:
May we not use what Heav'n has pleas'd to give?
What Use more proper, since our Life's a Span
Than to Enjoy each Moment that we can;
And when the merry Race of Life is run
With Pleasure end what first with Pain begun?
Soon as we reach the Goal our Course is o'er,
We drop, and Joy and Pleasure are no more:
Then, COLLEN, learn, nor learn it to thy Cost
What's spent we have, but what we leave is lost.

COLLEN.
Weak THENOT, this new Doctrine's not thy own,
Learnt from some Atheist Wretch, when last in Town;
Who wou'd false Thinking by false Terms create:
Repent, ah!  Thenot, nor repent too late:
Lest 'fore your Time you totter to your Grave,
To Lust, to Passion, and to Pain a Slave;
Lest wrack'd with Doubts and Fears, when Death is nigh,
From meek Repentance to Despair you fly,
And as a Brute you've liv'd, a Brute you die.
SHEPHERDS (as COLIN CLOUT was us'd to say)
Shou'd not in Pleasure melt their Hours away;
Nor with too hard a Hand distress the Fold,
To heap for Heirs the sacrilegious Gold;
But on the Plains the City Tribe shou'd find
A cheerful Aspect with a guiltless Mind:
Truth without Fear, and Freedom without Art,
Honest the Tongue, and Innocent the Heart.

There was a Time when Shepherds on the Plain,
(And what was once, may once return again)
No Titles claim'd, nor knew the Pomp of State,
But thought that to be Good was to be Great:
With Meekness they wou'd Smiles to All afford,
Nor wish'd, not wou'd have took the Style of LORD:
Constant their Labour, tho' their Profit small,
Not for their Master fear'd to lose their All;
Plain was their Diet, homely their Abode,
Content their Pleasure, and their Heirdom GOD.
But Time and long Prosperity ally'd,
Brought in their sure Attendants, Vice and Pride:
The Shepherds soon began to think of Gain;
As soon their Flocks went struggling o'er the Plain:
Stray on ye Flocks, to where ye list resort,
What care your Keepers, they are got to Court?
Hence Shepherds Tongues speak foreign to their Heart,
Hence to gain Favour they with Honour part:
Tho' fond of Sloth they early wake with Care,
The First at the proud Levee to appear:
Where most they flatter whom they most despise;
Bow, cringe, fawn, lye, &mdash; or any Thing to rise.
Lost to the Sense of Freedom Nature gave,
Each courts the Badge that marks him for a Slave:
Thro' Lust of Pow'r they Tyranny defend;
Thro' Lust of Wealth for Bribery contend:
Proud to their Equals; servile to the Great;
The Spring of Faction, or the Tools of State.
Thus careless grown of Innocence and Fame,
Most Shepherds now, are Shepherds but in name:
Basking in Sunshine, they their Revels keep,
Nor heed their hungry weatherbeaten Sheep;
Thus 'mong the silly Sheep the Wolves intrude,
And cloath'd like them, th' unwary Flock delude;
Tempt them afar to stray, in hopes to find,
The Pastures better, and the Swains more kind:
Thus first sprang up the faithful Shepherds Woes,
Which when they'll end, 'tis Heav'n only knows.

THENOT.
Three Things to bear will give the utmost Pain,
To bear the Fourth no Mortal can contain:
The slighted Maid if ill the Swain repay
Her Love, in pensive Sorrow pines away:
But in the Swain if Jealousy we find,
What can appease the Tempest of his Mind?
Or what the Wretch, parch'd up with Thirst controul,
With Patience to resign the offer'd Bowl?
But of all Pains, the Pain which none can bear
Is to be doom'd a preaching Fool to hear;
The Giant has not such a Burthen given
Whose Back bends 'neath the whole vast Weight of Heaven.
To Reason, COLLEN, thou hast not Pretence,
A railing Spleen supplies the want of Sense,
Wou'd you have Shepherds Self-Tormenters be
And study to make Life a Misery?
Must Man's whole Age, full Threescore Years and ten,
Of Sorrow last, one long continued Scene?
Sorrow who will their Fasts and Pray'rs among,
Be my Life merry, tho' it be not long;
Why need we beg for Care, as for a Boon,
Which without calling comes, and comes too soon:
While Heaven smiles, and happy is the Day,
We ought to use the Blessing while we may,
For when our Sun of Fortune shall decline,
It sees, and never more shall rise to shine.

But, COLLEN, granting you are right, forbear;
A Shepherd shou'd a Brother Shepherd spare,
And tho' the Crimes in other Folk may note,
No Crimes shou'd see in those of his own Coat:
For when we Brethren arm'd with Zealot Rage
In Wars, in more than Civil Wars engage:
When Saints to seem, we blame each others Life;
Oh!  COLLEN, how unpolitic the Strife!
The hidden Crimes of each to all are shown,
Which we with Care from all shou'd keep unknown:
For we become, as soon as we contest,
The Ideots Laughter and the Witlings Jest;
While grave Libertines from thence debate
Our whole Profession is a common Cheat;
Then better, COLLEN, let your Censure end,
Than rail at Crimes which thou can'st never mend.

COLLEN.
Tho' I may never, THENOT, mend the Crimes,
Never reform the Vices of the Times;
Yet never will I seem to Vice a Friend,
And out of Policy the Wrong defend;
Nor, blind with Zeal, my Brethren's Crimes look o'er:
I love my Brethren, but my Conscience more:
Whoe'er he is, tho' Kindred claim he can,
If bad his Morals I'll detest the Man:
But Shepherd, or if Shepherd not he be,
So he loves Virtue, shall be lov'd by me.

THENOT.
Still, COLLEN, think:  our Maxims well you know:
Each friendly Shepherd may become your Foe.

COLLEN.
Glad their false Bonds of Friendship I'd resign,
Who is not Virtue's Friend, can ne'er be mine:
Can Light and Dark at once become the same?
Such Friends will love, while their false Hearts are hid,
As the sly Fox once lov'd the harmless Kid.

THENOT.
If, COLLEN, you allude to some old Tale
Which better than dry Reas'ning may prevail;
With that same Tale beguile an Hour away,
And Colinet shall see the Flocks don't stray.

COLLEN.
THE FOX AND THE KID, A TALE.
'Twas when the Beasts cou'd speak, and Reasons shew,
Reasons much better oft' than Men give now;
A fond old Goat, before she went to stray,
Adown the Cliffs, and brouze the live-long Day,
Her Kid she call'd; and plac'd him at her Knee;
As fair a Kid as Eyes did ever see,
His Velvet Horns to sprout did now begin,
And the soft Down just deck'd his mossy Chin:
Yet fairest Form has not the wisest Head,
Hence to her youngling she a Lecture read:
Wishful she looks awhile, and sighing cries,
"My Son" &mdash; (then Tears spring from her Eyes,
For something she misbode.) &mdash; "My Orphan, Son,
Oh!  may thy Course of Life be hapl'ly run!
They Father dear" &mdash; (these Words she spoke with Pain,
And sigh'd as if she'd rend her Heart in twain)
"Thy Father dear, had he beheld this Day,
And seen his Goatling all the Sire display,
How had he joy'd:  But oh!  too luckless Tide!
He by the wily Fox untimely dy'd:
Now I a Widow in a woeful Plight,
Have plac'd in Thee my last, my sole Delight,
To see thee rising in thy Father's stead:
For even so thy Father bore his Head,
So look'd he fierce, with a becoming Scorn,
So wou'd he shake his Front, and wield his haughty Horn."

While thus she mark'd him with her melting Eyes,
A thrilling Sigh from her soft Heart woul'd rise,
For as she fondled o'er her Youngling's Face;
In ev'ry Feature saw his Father's Grace:
At length with Pain she sullen Silence broke,
And while her Kiddy's budding Beard she stroke,
"My Child," quoth she, "shun Beasts of Prey with Care,
But most the crafty, fatal FOX beware;
And lest he guileful come while I am gone,
Bolt fast the Door, and open it to none,
'Till I return again at setting Sun."

Thus said, she ends; and pensive sought the Door;
But chanc'd to Stumble at the Threshold Floor:
Amaz'd, she stopp'd, at such ill Omen sent;
Yet thinking nothing by such Signs was meant,
In Doubt and Fear reflecting on she went.
Nor was it idly the fond Mother fear'd,
She scarce from Sight, the watchful Fox appear'd:
But not as Reynard us'd, for on his Back,
With cunning Art, he bore a Fellon's Pack:
His Leg ty'd up, with Clout his Forehead bound;
And feigning Sick he laid him on the Ground.
Then loud he cry'd, "For sweet Saint Charity,
Help, some one help, for want of Help I die."
On the poor pitying Kid such moaning wrought,
That thro' the Wicket's Clink the Cause he sought;
Cautious he stood; yet not with so much Care,
But strait the Keen ey'd FOX perceiv'd him there;
And thus began to speak with artful Grace:
"Ah!  good young Master!  bless that lovely Face!
May Heaven give Thee Joy, Content, and Wealth,
And what I painful want, may't give Thee Health."

The Kid, who thought he some Regard might claim,
Ask'd of him who he was, and whence he came:
The Skilful Fox, quite harmless to appear,
First sighing paus'd, and panting dropt a Tear,
Then said, "Behold a Wretch, my Kidling dear,
A wretched Sheep, altho my Colour dun,
Chang'd with long Travel 'neath the scorching Sun;
For Heaven's Sake some kind Assistance lend,
And help a dying Kinsman, and a Friend:
Kinsman, if what my Grandsire told was true,
That by the Mother's Side I'm kin to you:
But if too bold my Claim, forget what's past,
And help a Stranger e'er he breathes his last."

He stops, and falling on the Pack he faints,
Which bursts, and shews a Tribe of Poppet Saints,
Unmeaning Relicks scatter on the Ground
And Glasses, Bells, and Beades lie all confus'd around:
Caught with the Trinkets, out the Kidling came,
And rear'd the wily Fox who still seem'd lame;
Let him in Doors, and there devoid of Art,
Strove with the best to glad his drooping Heart:
Reynard refresh'd, turn'd all his Trinkets o'er,
The Kid the Beads admir'd, the Glasses more;
The Fox observ'd how he with Pleasure ey'd
The flatt'ring Mirrors, and thus fawning cry'd:
"If those without the Pack your Favour win,
There still remains a stranger Glass within:
And since your kind Assistance you cou'd lend,
Take that, the Present of a grateful Friend."

The Kid with Joy stoop'd down the Gift to take,
When Reynard push'd him headlong in his Pack;
Latch'd it down fast, and flung it cross his Back.
No longer lame, he chuckling hastes away,
Pleas'd with the Thoughts of feasting on his Prey.

The anxious Mother Goat 'fore Even-Tide
Return'd, and saw her Door stand open wide:
Aghast, she loud began her Kid to call;
But ah!  her Kid no Answer made at all;
Then on the Floor she view'd the Trinkets laid,
For which her silly Kid too dearly paid:
By Bells, by Beads, she found her guileful Foe
Had thither been, and caus'd fresh Scenes of Woe,
She weep'd, and wail'd, and cry'd, "My only Son,
Art thou for ever? &mdash; yes, for ever gone!
Must I my Husband and my Child survive?&mdash;
To thee, my Spouse, to thee, my Child, I haste:"&mdash;
&mdash;Then fetch'd a bitter Sigh, and sigh'd her last.

Such fatal End the Kid and Mother meet,
To Friendship's Form for trusting to Deceit:
Then let this Fable our Example prove,
Watch most your Fox when most he vows to love.

THENOT.
Well told thy Tale, and pleasing is thy Wit,
Tho' far you've miss'd the Mark you aim'd to hit;
For surely, COLLEN, on the British Plains,
No FOXES lurk among the heedless Swains:
But be that as it may, thy Tale I'll borrow,
For our good Curate to relate To-morrow:
Full glad he'll be, for that's the preaching Day,
And well he means, tho' little can he say:
Yet if the wily FOXES bring such Woe,
The Shepherds ought their guileful Arts to know.

COLLEN.
Of their false Arts more cou'd I tell you still;
But the Sun's set beneath yon Western Hill:
The Dew begins to fall, the Night comes on,
The Boy has penn'd the Flock, 'tis time we now were gone.
