When the rosy bosom'd Spring
Threw from her lap soft dews and flowers;
When April waved her starry wing,
And led along the shining hours:

Then did the Muse bequeath her richest fire
To a lone poet in a splendid day,
As deep he struck the sorrows of his lyre,
And o'er the hill travers'd his weary way.
Symphonious numbers warbled from his tongue,
And thus with rapture fired, the poet sung.

Hark!  what footstep dares intrude
Upon the silence of this grove,
Hence quit this consecrated wood,
Sacred to Phoebus and to love.

Lo the celestial Muse herself appears!
Thron'd on a lucid cloud divinely bright.
Sublimely bold her starry front she rears,
In all the sacred majesty of light.
Now forms celestail strike their silver lyres
And notes of rapture leap from long resounding wires.

On a mountain's threat'ning height,
Where never morning zephyr blew,
The Muse transported takes her flight,
And bids these lowly vales adieu.

Not with more pleasure Adam trod the ground
Of verdant Eden's consecrated glade,
When first his ear was ravish'd by the sound
Of angels warbling thro' the woodland shade;
While every star shone with a beam more clear,
And the resplendent moon hung list'ning from her sphere.

First of war she strikes the lyres!
Instant on my ravish'd eyes,
Cloth'd in all their native fires,
The chiefs in wild disorder rise.

Quick from their martial thighs their swords are drawn;
The threat'ning steel emits a horrid glare;
While high uprear'd afar the pictur'd lawn
Hurls wild defiance in the vaulted air.
Chief mixes stroke with chief, and man with man
Discord with horror pale stalk hideous in the van.

Listen to the shifting lay,
Of peace and all its joys she sings.
Young zephyrs strive to bear away
Light undulations on their wings.

How loud, tho' clear; how musical, yet strong!
In nervous sweep the solemn periods roll,
(Rivers might stop their course to hear the song)
And tides of rapture overwhelm the soul.
Silence ye winds, ye tempests cease to roar,
Let mighty ocean hear and languish on the shore!

Thus sang the poet, while the sun
Sunk in rich splendor down the west:
His evening anthem now was done,
And he in peace retired to rest.

And now a fearful melancholy reigns;
The moon and clouded stars but faintly glow;
While solemn night, o'er all the lonely plains,
Sits like a mourner in the weeds of wo.
Now to my lowly cabin I repair,
To light the social lamp, and leave the world to care.
