BOWSPRIT AND CAPSTERN.

BOWSPRIT.
CAPSTERN! &mdash; All Chear to my old Mess-Mate be!

CAPSTERN.
Bowsprit! &mdash; My Heart of Gold, all Chear to thee!

BOWSPRIT.
Welcome, my honest Lad, again on Shore.
What, just arriv'd?

CAPSTERN.
&mdash;Just landed from the Nore.
But why, dear Jack, this melancholy Air?
Why seem you thus the Picture of Despair?

BOWSPRIT.
Tommy, to you the Truth may be confess'd,
Things going wrong, with Grief I am oppress'd.

CAPSTERN.
Prithee hang Sorrow, cast away thy Grief,
Despair to Trouble never gave Relief:
Alas!  how you are chang'd from what you were,
Your Jacket tatter'd, and uncomb'd your Hair;
Dark cloudy Looks your Countenance deform,
And threaten, to each Man you speak, a Storm.
Just such a Figure of dire Discontent,
Such his glum Looks I saw to Bedlam sent;
Some new Whim-Wham his Intellects did touch,
Driv'n mad by being righteous over-much.
&mdash;Sure, Jack, you're none of Parson Whitefield's Flock.&mdash;

BOWSPRIT.
&mdash;My Grief you sport with, and my Sorrow mock:
Not such a Parson in such canting Strain,
Shou'd to my Soul convey a Moment's Pain:
My Pain all rises from my lovely Sue,
Who (could you think it, Tommy) proves untrue.
Love and Revenge by Turns my Soul engage,
And with alternate Passions moan or rage.

CAPSTERN.
I find rash Passions rule your Temper still,
Shou'd Things not luck'ly happen to your Will:
But, what's this new Affair?

BOWSPRIT.
&mdash;I'll tell you all&mdash;
The other Day some Mess-Mates chanc'd to call,
All jolly Lads, intending all to spend,
In Merriment, the Evening with their Friend;
Will Cable one, the other Redriff Sam,
And honest merry Jack of Deptford came,
With Whistle, Boatswain of the Tartar Pink,
All came in Mirth a Can of Flip to drink:
Full glad at Heart I spread my homely Board,
And gave the very best I cou'd afford:
A Dish of Fowls and Bacon was their Mess,
And they a hearty Welcome did confess:
Supper soon o'er &mdash; I made two lusty Bowls
Of humming Punch &mdash; and merry were our Souls.&mdash;
Round went the Bumpers, and, as when at Sea,
Our Hearts were jolly, and our Tongues were free:
Each drank the Girl he thought most fair and true;
Giving a lusty Kiss, I drank my Sue:
Round went the chorus'd Ballads, 'till our Joys,
Sue by her plaguy sullen Dumps destroys:
She, who with vary'd Note as sweet can sing,
As the most lavish Nightingale in Spring,
She wou'd not join our Chorus's among,
Nor with soft Quiver warble out a Song:
Vain did I beg, in glouting Mood she sat,
When Sam of Redriff cry'd in sneering Chat,
"What Dumb? &mdash; Why, Sue, this melancholy Air?
You look like some old Maiden in Despair:
Are you not thinking of the Captain? &mdash; Speak."&mdash;
&mdash;Love and a conscious Anger flush'd her Cheek;
(For long she'd had some Captain in her View,
And I but lately of her Falshood knew)&mdash;
&mdash;We laugh'd &mdash; drank on, 'till Sam, in plaintive Strain,
From some new Ballad sung Love's tor'tring Pain,
When hapless Women love, and love in vain:
All pale she chang'd, heav'd from her Heart a Siogh,
And the full Tear stood trembling on her Eye:
But when he clos'd, how dreadful is their Fate,
Who still must feign Love's Passion where they hate,
Then you might all her Cause of Sorrow see,
By the disdainful Look she cast at me;
Adown her Cheek swift rolls the gushing Tear,
And artless Nature made her Falshood clear:
Full of wild Rage, impatient of Disgrace,
I drove my Fist, clench'd double, in her Face;
Then cry'd, as soon as she began to bellow,
Good Madam, thus, just thus, I'd serve your Fellow;
Is not a common Sailor then your Taste?
Must you by a Commander be solac'd?
Go to your Captain, Madam, ease your Pain,
Nor let him love, nor love yourself in vain.

As when th' informing Constables appear,
The straggling Doxy shews th' Effects of Fear;
Coach, Cart, nor Kennel can obstruct her long,
Through thick and thin she bustles 'midst the Throng;
High tuck'd her Hoop, she courses o'er the Street,
Secur'd from Bridewell by her swift Retreat:
So, from my Rage, o'er Tables, Stools and Chairs,
My Madam flew, and hurry'd down the Stairs;
Flew to her Captain, her Distress to mourn,
With thousand Vows she never wou'd return.&mdash;
&mdash;Her Vows she keeps, and now too late I moan,
Too great Revenge, and too rash Fury shewn:
My Fury o'er, my Love again returns,
And my fond Heart with stronger Passion burns:
Such various Pains my various Passions give,
That with her, nor without her, can I live:
Nor can I long such tortur'd Mind endure;
A Heart so much distracted, what can cure?
&mdash;Yet Ben, who bonny Kate of Greenwich lov'd,
And ran, like me, just mad, when false she prov'd;
Made up the Streights a nine Months Trip, and he
Return'd as blith as ever, and as free:
If Seas can make the Cure of Love compleat,
I'll enter straightway in the Royal Fleet;
Join with true Hearts to low'r the Pride of Spain,
And get a Wooden Leg, or Golden Chain.

CAPSTERN.
If such, my Lad, thy Resolution be,
And such bespeaks thy Courage, fall with me;
Such our Commander, as brave Souls desire,
Who Courage will reward, and will inspire:
The Sailors Friend; deny this Truth who can,
When I pronounce that NORRIS is the Man.

BOWSPRIT.
&mdash;What Sort of Man besides?

CAPSTERN.
&mdash;Not from mere Birth
He trusts for Honour, but from gen'rous Worth;
Void of base Courtly Arts, of Manners plain;
Sincere, though open, and though rough, humane;
Who dares to blame, most willing to command;
Who never gain'd a Foe, or lost a Friend:
And, oh!  may Fate his wish'd-for Scene afford,
When 'midst a hostile Fleet, with brandish'd Sword,
He bids all British Lads their Courage try,
Resolv'd to conquer, or resolv'd to die.
&mdash;If then you'd be rewarded for Desert,
And if Old England's Honour fires your Heart;
To grapple with a Spaniard if your dare,
Vengeance for Vengeance take, and Ear for Ear;
Enter with him, nor lose your youthful Prime;
Old Age inglorious follows mispent Time;
But when in War we spend our early Days,
Our Life's Decline is crown'd with glorious Praise:
Each Heart, which is with Love of Britain fraught,
Loves each brave Sailor who for Britain fought:
And at Heav'n's Will, when we resign our Breath,
We even boast a Victory o'er Death:
All cry, "Sweet Peace attend him to his Grave,
Who old was honour'd, as in Youth was brave."
