Vice "on a solemn night of state,
In all the pomp of terror sate,"
Her voice in deep, tremendous tone,
Thus issu'd from her ebon throne:
This night, at our infernal court,
Let all our ministers resort:
Who most annoys the human race,
At our right hand shall take his place,
Rais'd on a throne &mdash; advanc'd in fame&mdash;
Ye Crimes now vindicate your claim.

Eager for praise, the hideous host
All spake, aspiring to the post.

Pride said, to gain his private ends,
He sacrific'd his dearest friends;
Insulted all with manners rude,
And introduc'd ingratitude.
'Twas he infus'd domestic hate,
And party spirit in the state;
Hop'd they'd observe, his mystic plan
Destroy'd all confidence in man;
And justify'd his high pretensions,
By causing envy and dissentions.

Intemp'rance, loud, demands the place,
He'd long deceiv'd the human race;
None could such right as he maintain,
Disease and death were in his train.

Theft next appears, to claim the station,
E'er constant in his dark vocation;
He thought the place might well repay
The Crime that labour'd night and day.

Fraud own'd (though loth to speak his praise)
He gain'd his point by secret ways;
His voice in cities had been heard,
And oft in senates been preferr'd:
Yet much derision had he borne,
Treated by honest fools with scorn;
His influence on the western shore
Was not so great as heretofore:
He own'd each side alike assail'd,
Complain'd how sadly he was rail'd,
Curst by the name, in ev'ry street,
Of paper, tendry, rogue, and cheat:
Yet is some honour should requite
His labour &mdash; things might still go right.

Murder before the footstool stood,
With tatter'd robe distain'd in blood;
And who, he cry'd, with daring face,
Denies my title to the place?
My watchful eyes mankind survey,
And single out the midnight prey;
Not coward-like I meet the foe,
With footsteps insecure and slow,
Or cause his death by languid strife&mdash;
Boldly this dagger ends his life.
Give back, ye Crimes:  your claims resign,
For I demand the post as mine.

Av'rice declar'd, for love of gold,
His nation, or himself he sold;
He taught the sin of pride betimes;
Was foster-father of all crimes:
He pawn'd his life:  he stak'd his soul,
And found employment for the whole:
Acknowledged that he gain'd his wealth,
By fraud, by murder, and by stealth:
On one so useful in her cause,
Vice well might lavish due applause.

The hagger'd host bow low the head;
The monster rose, and thus she said:
Ye ministers of Vice, draw near,
For fame no longer persevere;
No more your various parts disclose,
Men see, and hate you all as foes,
One yet remains among your crew,
Then rise, Seduction!  claim your due.
Your baneful presence quickly parts
The tie which holds the happiest hearts;
You rob &mdash; what wealth can ne'er repay!
Like Judas, with a kiss betray:
Hence come the starving, trembling train,
Who prostitute themselves for gain,
Whose languid visages impart
A smile, while anguish gnaws the heart;
Whose steps decoy unwary youth,
From honour, honesty, and truth,
Which, follow'd 'till too late to mend,
In ruin, and the gallows end&mdash;
Be thine the post.  Besides, who knows
Where all the consequences close?
With thee, Seduction!  are ally'd
Horror, Despair, and Suicide.
You wound &mdash; th' electric pain extends
To fathers, mothers, sisters, friends,
Murder may yet delight in blood,
And deluge round the crimson flood:
But sure his merits rank above,
Who murders in the mask of love.
