Bless me, kind friend! &mdash; who canst thou wish to see?
Thus climbing onward with untiring labor,
A deal of friendship thou must have for me,
To take such wondrous pains, obliging neighbor,
What may thy business be, a formal call?
Then take a chair and sit, as if thou'dst none at all.

Be amiable, I pray thee now, sweet guest!
I would not harm thee, that were sport unkind,
Thou cam'st, Sir Wasp, like knight with lance in rest,
Hoping perchance, some tournament to find,
But yet I mean not thou my veins shalt probe,
So find some other tilt-yard, prithee, than my robe.

Thou giv'st a warrior's warning, bold and fair,
Like Ajax valiant, or Achilles proud,
Thou lay'st no ambush, no deceitful snare,
But sound'st thy tiny trumpet long and broad,
Through which, me thinks, a lesson thou art teaching
Backbiters and false friends. &mdash; Would that they heeded preaching!

Who knows but what among thy kindred brood
Some leech thou art, of credit and renown,
And so thou com'st, forsooth, to let me blood!&mdash;
Haste &mdash; leave my arm, or I must help thee down!
I've fear'd the doctors marvellously, ever
Since they gave brandy in the spotted fever.&mdash;

Mayhap I do misconstrue thee. &mdash; well!  well&mdash;
The best are fallible, &mdash; and I will strive
If but thy hidden virtues thou wilt tell,
To be as just as any one alive;&mdash;
I would not, even fly or flea should say,
I took their reputations willfully away.&mdash;

Dost thou make honey?  Sure!  I had not thought it,
Such beverage must be exceeding rare,
I trow the critic gentry may have bought it,
To neutralize their very acid fare.&mdash;
Some cordial they must need, who toil so hard
To pickle and to hack each poor adventurous bard.&mdash;

I've read in school-boy days, &mdash; thy cousin bees,
(Mauger the din of warming-pans and matrons)
Would swarm around the lips of Sophocles
Mistaking the sweet muses for their patrons;
But thou, more wise, dost better things secure,
Trucking thy surplus wares with some well-paid Reviewer.

Good bye! &mdash; but why that angry hiss?  I pray,
Go vent in thy own nest, thy heighten'd spleen,
Upon thy wife and babies, that's the way,
It breaks the dulness of too tame a scene,
But if they chance to sting, as well as thee,
Thou'lt need the stock of venom thou hast spared from me.
