SONNET I.
TO THE RIVER WYE.
O Wye, romantic stream!  thy winding way
Invites my lonely steps, what time the night
Smiles with the radiance of the moon's pale light,
That loves upon thy quivering flood to play.
O'er thy steep banks the rocks fantastic tower,
And fling their deepening shadow cross the stream,
To fancy's eye worn battlements they seem,
Which on some beetling cliff tremendous lower.
Hark!  Echo speaks, and from her mazy cave
Sportive returns the sailor's frequent cry,
Ah!  how unlike thy old bards minstrelsy
Warbled in wild notes to the haunted wave!
Unlike as seems the hurricane's rude sweep,
To the light breeze that lulls thy placid deep.

SONNET II.
TO A WELCH HARPER.
Restrain thy tuneful hand, awake no more
The melting harmony of tuneful strings;
Thy softest note some lovely image brings
To life, that torpid lay in memory's store.
Thy touch is magic, that erects the place
Where Mary's gentle eye serenely smil'd,
Where her wild notes my infant love beguil'd,
And music clos'd the triumph of her face.
That strain was like the nightingale's sad voice,
Mourning her nestlings she no more can see:
You strike the trembling chords of ecstasy,
And ring the knell of my departed joys.
Yet stay &mdash; such plaintive sweetness greets mine ear,
I listen, e'en while starts the trembling tear.

SONNET III.
TO TIME.
Thou hoary traveller!  slow passing by
The wretch, who counts each moment of his woes,
Till liberty his prison-gate unclose;
As the dull snail, whose motion mocks the eye,
Full oft thy tardy journeyings betray
The spoiler; yon moss-mantled tower,
Whose head sublime derided once thy power,
Now silent crumbling sinks beneath thy sway.
The sapling, thy tall streamer, waves on high,
Whilst thy deep wounds each mazy fissure shows,
Like wrinkles, furrowing deep thy own grey brows:
Yet not for this rude triumph swells my sigh,
But that thy hand will wither beauty's rose,
And dim the fire, that lights the sparkling eye.

SONNET IV.
TRIUMPHANT LOVE.
In Mary's absence Reason gains his throne,
And binds with stricter chains the struggling breast;
Scar'd at his angry frown and stern behest,
Love spreads his wings, and flies with many a moan.
When Mary comes with vermeil-tinctur'd cheek,
With graceful mien, and mirth-awakening eye,
Prudence disarm'd forsakes his ground to fly,
And Reason's chains as touch'd by magic break.
Thus when the chilling blast transforms to frost
The night-born dews, that bathe the polish'd glass,
The roving eye, in pleasing error lost,
Sees rocks and woods crowd the fantastic mass;
But soon as shines the sun's meridian ray,
The icy prospect melts in streams away.

SONNET V.
THE COTTAGE.
Thy haughty eye disclaims the vine-clad cot,
And its rude owner, whose salubrious board
Pomona kind, and Naiads fair, have stor'd:
Simple, but dignified, his humble lot.
When Patriotism call'd, from such retreat
Sprang ancient Valour, son of Toil severe
And sun-burnt Health; he snatch'd the glittering spear,
Leaving the plough, his country's foes to meet.
Nor back his eagle wing'd her flight to Rome,
Till, bearing bloody spoils, he led the march
Triumphant, thro' the sculpture-woven arch,
Where Victory rear'd sublime her laureate dome.
Then Moderation's hand disarm'd the swain,
And led him smiling to his cot again.

SONNET VI.
THE RENOWN OF THE POET.
I see the craggy rock where Fame sublime
Erects her temple, steep th' ascent and high;
If Genius give no eagle wings to fly,
Vainly dull Labour lends his hand to climb.
Glory displays the scroll, where, cloth'd in gold,
The names of Homer, Milton, Virgil glow,
Lucid as beams that from light's fountain flow,
Lasting, till nature faints, decay'd and old.
From Muse-depictur'd urns, they copious roll
Their sacred streams, diffusing far and wide
Of Poesy the heaven-descended tide,
Fann'd by the gale of Praise from pole to pole:
Where'er the Arts their sister train have led,
And heaven-born Science rear'd her laureate head.

SONNET VII.
TO CHARLOTTE SMITH.
Of thee, fair mourner, o'er whose downcast face
Fortune has spread the sickly tints of grief;
Whilst Poesy to give thee sweet relief,
Essays with warblings mild thy woes to chase,
An emblem meet my search far roving finds,
Among the infant spring's first opening flowers,
Drooping its head, and wet with frequent showers,
The snow-drop trembles in the ruffling winds.
Yet seems its simple form in Fancy's eye
More lovely, since in rudest season born.
How piteous such a flower should bide the scorn
Of every surly storm that passes by!
How far more piteous surly storms should blow
'Gainst thee, whose song is echo to thy woe!

SONNET VIII.
TO A LADY WEEPING.
The secret cause, O lovely Nymph!  disclose,
Why oft thy arm that pensive face upbears,
Why linger on thy cheek the frequent tears,
Like dew-drops glistening on the new-blown rose.
With jealous start thou fliest the curious eye,
To pour in solitude an unmark'd stream;
Thy sorrows like some hoarded treasures seem,
Which misers fear the robber may espy.
Dost thou behold the frown of scornful Pride,
Where mild Affection's smile should genial shine?
Does Love's entangling snare thy heart intwine?
Or has some Friend in life's gay morning died?
O haste to make thy tender sorrow mine;
And thus the bitter stream of grief divide.

SONNET IX.
TO TRANQUILITY.
Nymph of the soft blue eye, and gentle mien,
Who lov'st to view upon the lofty spray
The cawing rook her nest's rude fabrick lay,
When curling smoke first climbs the blue serene.
Or dost thou court the silence of the night,
What time in grand array the slow clouds sail
Across the moon, now spread a dusky veil,
Now fleece-like whiten in her silver light.
Sooth'd by thy voice the storms that wildly roll,
Will all be calm'd; far lovelier thy repose
Than mad Ambition, than the fire that glows
In Anger's eye; but is thy mild controul
Sweeter than Love, that brings some tender woes,
And yet with smiling hope illumes the soul?

SONNET X.
THE TRAVELLER.
I love to listen to his plaintive tale,
Who, bending o'er his staff his hoary head,
Relates, that, journeying through the long-drawn vale,
And mazy wood, with slow and heavy tread,
He quaff'd the brook that sparkled in the mead,
When blaz'd with beam direct the orb of day,
Content his wearied limbs at length to lay,
Amid the white-leav'd willow's waving shade.
Fancy runs back, his lovely steps to trace,
Rejoic'd when hours of ease his toil assuage.
O may the story of my pilgrimage
Wake equal sympathy in Friendship's face,
When trembling age no earth-born joy shall know,
Save the sad luxury to tell his woe.

SONNET XI.
TO YARMOUTH.
As on thy solitary beach I stray,
When silver moonlight gleams upon the tide,
And o'er the billows view the vessel glide,
Whose lucid track depicts its watery way,
I think how oft my soul has urg'd its flight
Before the driving gales of stormy Care,
Since first thy murmurs fill'd my childish ear,
And ocean burst upon my giddy sight.
I think how Headley, wanderer here no more!
With eagle-eye was wont thy sands to tread,
By soft compassion and the Muses led,
To weave new garlands for the Bards of yore.
Sorrow for him her tender tear shall shed,
Long as the surges lave thy pebbled shore.

SONNET XII.
STONE HENGE.
What time 'mid evening grey the zephyrs sigh
Along the bosom of the russet plain,
My wondering eyes thy giant forms detain,
Rearing in mystic rounds their bulk on high.
Over thy birth Oblivion long has thrown
Her darkest veil:  by Druids led of yore
The milk-white steeds distain'd thy sides with gore:
Yet now Duration marks thee for his own;
And as in regal state he sits sublime,
With iron sceptre deck'd and iron crown,
He smiles contemptuous in the face of time,
Who strives with idle hand to bend thee down.
"Departing crush some weaker prey (he cries)
This fabrick sinks not until Nature dies."
