Lov'd Liberty who oft in ancient times,
And times not far remote preserv'd the weal
Of Albion &mdash; now devoted for her crimes,
Must hated tyranny at length prevail?
The splendid structures by the counsels plann'd,
And rear'd, thro' ages, by thy strenuous hand,
Lo!  now it shakes, it totters to it's fall!
As Luxury, and Luxury's curs'd brood,
Faction, corruption, and contempt of good,
Sap the foundations of the strong built wall.

Old honour'd Runnimede!  who erst ador'd
Freedom's gay banners, flaming in the sky
O'er hardy barons, girt with many a sword,
To force those rights a tyrant durst deny;
What would'st thou say, to see each silken son
Or those stern lords before a minion run,
To ruin in the senate that best cause,
For which their fathers in the battle bled,
Or shook the scaffold, with undaunted tread,
Happy to die for liberty and laws.

Genius of Britain's realms, canst thou behold,
And not, indignant, crush the conscious roof,
Where thy own Commons, faithful, wise, and bold,
Bid armed tyranny to stand aloof:
But now, with bent knee, and submissive look,
The mandates of a feeble fav'rite brook:
Deaf to their honours, and their country's call,
Receive their wages from a plund'rer's hand
And, base betrayer of their native land,
Tho' sworn to save, precipitate her fall.

Where is the spirit, which did late preside,
When Lords and Commons with a mingled flame,
Dispell'd the tyrant-bigot's gloomy pride,
And broke his bloody, superstitious dream?
Steady yet mild &mdash; his forfeit head they scorn'd;
Enough &mdash; his abdicated crowns adorn'd
The great deliverer's intrepid brow;
Enough that exil'd from Britannia's coasts
He liv'd to tell how vain the monarch's boasts,
Who vaunts, by violence, her strength to bow.

But well ye know, Dryads of Runimede!
These puny peers, are not the sons of those,
Who their lov'd tenants in firm phalanx led,
And to a king's, durst fiercer frowns oppose;
These or the creatures of a monarch's nod,
Who paths of infamy to honours trod,
Or servile prelates, nominated thanes;
These, these usurp the seats of nobles, these
Our charter'd rights, on nature's birth-right seize,
Forging old armour into galling chains.

And well thou know'st, Great Genius of our isle!
The wretches who invade that sacred post,
Which men should claim but by the public smile,
Are equally the minion's trained host;
No more the delegates of public choice.
From venal boroughs, or from lorded shires,
They crawl, inglorious, to pollute the fane,
Where Pym, where Hampden, where unshaken Vane,
Russel and Sydney fan'd faint freedom's fires.

Ye badged Peers!  ye pension'd Commons!  who
In your controuled counsels can confide?
Piercing thro' flimsy forms, what meets the view
But your submission, and a fav'rite's pride?
Those forms, which freedom's loveliness reveal'd,
Can pow'rs harsh features, be by them conceal'd?
Hideous they swell on the reluctant sight:
Thro' the slight veil, we see what lurks behind,
And for just, equal liberty we find
The forwardness of One, the rule of right.

Yet these the legislators, to whose wills,
America must bend her mighty neck!
A countless race, which boundless regions fills,
Must, like a trammel'd horse, obey the check
Of these weak, selfish masters! &mdash; Those who brav'd
(No danger dreading, but to be enslav'd)
Accumulated horrors, in a land,
Where rav'ning beasts, and men more savage prowl'd,
And all the rage of war and famine howl'd,
Must be the prey of this enervate band?

On what thy claim, O Britain! &mdash; did'st thou send
Thy well-appointed fleets, to waft them o'er?
Did'st thou thy forces, and thy treasures lend,
To fence and feed them on that dreary shore?
Say, was it not &mdash; to records they appeal,&mdash;
Despotic rage, or sanguinary zeal,
Drove them from chains, from racks, from fires, from home!
Right-judging, better than from conscience swerve,
Or bloody priests, or bloody tyrants serve,
With storms to struggle, or thro' desarts roam?

But thou hast fought their battles, thou hast shed
For them thy blood, t' enrich a thankless plain&mdash;
Braddock for them to death his warriors led,
To vic'try Wolfe &mdash; in her embraces slain!
Such idle tales to ideots &mdash; wisdom knows,
Their, were thy own inexorable foes,
Rivals in arms, arts, commerce, pow'r, and fame;
She knows, that on the doubtful conflict hung
(For both were skill'd, and to their skill were strong)
Whether thy empire should preserve a name.

Nor ill these outcasts, thro' the storm of war,
Aided their grateful parent, grateful then,
O'er Louisbourg, when streaming, from afar,
She eyed their banners, and confess'd them men;
When her old warriors shrinking, safety sought,
From stronger France &mdash; tho' gallant Williams fought,
That deed, forgotten now, brought equal peace;
Retriev'd lost Fontenoy's ensanguin'd field,
And (forc'd the palm of victory to yield)
Made the proud conquering Gaul, wish war should cease.

And since, nay late, she thank'd them for blood
Shed freely; thanking, did she not repay
Their treasures lavish'd for the common good?
O shame to sense!  degenerate Britain!  say,
For such offences, are they doom'd to mourn
Their native rights invaded, charters torn,
The death of Commerce, and their name's disgrace,
Their old inheritance transferr'd to those,
Whose name, whose blood, whose faith, proclaim them foes,
And their soil bruis'd by an hostile pace?

For such is war, what were their peaceful toils?
Rolling the flood of wealth, on thy lov'd shore:
Not that bad wealth, which, rent from eastern soils
By the harsh hand of unrelenting pow'r,
Vice sprung, and vice-engendering, lux'ry brings,
That worst of banes to subjects and to kings;
The voluntary tributes of the west,
Fruits of its industry, kept thine alive,
And made (while courts allowed) even virtue thrive,
Ere she, with liberty, became a jest.

Be granted ev'ry charge &mdash; for pious love,
For watchful care, risks run, and debts incurr'd;
Can aught, that's right and equitable prove,
Which nature shrinks at, reason terms absurd?
Admit, thy claim to tax &mdash; they cease to be,
What God and nature meant us all for &mdash; free.
What Charles to Hampden was, what ev'ry stem
Sprung from the mighty minion's royal root;
To Britons, King, Lord, Commons, constitute,
One single tyrant uncontroul'd to them.

Alas!  complain no more &mdash; thy gentle sons,
By myriads starv'd, by tens of myriads slain,
Are here avenged &mdash; Britain to ruin runs,
Debauch'd, corrupted by the countless gain
Of those who rob thee &mdash; may not this alone,
For all thy wrongs, thy miseries, intone,
That hither, with thy gold and di'monds, come,
The stately pomp of Asiatic sway
Shall o'er a prostrate people sweep it's way,
And thou, tho' conquer'd, triumph in our doom?

And first, America must be subdued;
Her stubborn sons, in native freedom bred,
And with religious sentiment imbued,
Who proudly lift the bold, resisting head,
Must to the earth be humbled, must be taught,
Those genuine principles, which Nassau brought,
And Brunswick, to our rescue, useless grown,
Are now discarded &mdash; in these courtly days,
When gracious George a mightier sceptre sways,
And, pious, sanctifies a brighter throne.

But raise, America, thine eyes to those,
Thy train of patriots, in full Congress met,
Sages and heroes, whom you freely chose;
Who have at humblest, les'ning distance set
Senates, self-deem'd superior &mdash; hear their voice,
In toils, in want (no lesson new) rejoice
For freedom!  dangers, death for her despise;
But less will do &mdash; trade's vital streams suspend&mdash;
This rage of rapine, and of pride must end,
The contest short, but durable the prize.

Inhabitants of Erin!  ye have heard,
That king's-friends, caitiffs, fatt'ning on your spoils,
Uncheck'd, have in full senate, loud declar'd
That you're entangled in the deadly toils,
For Trans-Atlantics spread &mdash; one common cause
Unites you &mdash; lost to safety!  can ye pause
To aid their manly struggles?  one way yet,
Perforce you serve them &mdash; plunder'd and oppress'd,
Your fate instructs them, howsoe'er distress'd,
Ne'er to a minion's mandates to submit.

To thee, once honour'd Scotland, next they come,
Loud knocking at thy sordid, selfish heart,
Blindly you urge, though you must share their doom,
For in the ruin, thine an early part:
Unions, with charters, given to the wind;
Thy commerce, dearly lov'd, must be resign'd,
Or thy exemption from the public loads:
The streams, the source of opulence, shall fail,
And pristine penury again prevail,
While sharp remorse thy anguish'd conscience goads.

But tyrants must have favorites &mdash; yet not still,
(Like our arch-foe, close whisp'ring fated Eve,
Undone by list'ning) shall a Scots thane fill
That post of danger &mdash; wilt thou time believe,
Teacher of nations?  through his lengthen'd course,
Hath he once seen ambition's fraud or force
Stop in the road of success &mdash; Rome, Rome, fell,
(By Asia soften'd) when the Julian sword,
Turn'd from her provinces, her entrails gor'd;
And what she's now, let popes and eunuchs tell!

Old, generous England! &mdash; freedom calls &mdash; awake!
From dreams of pride, of interest and of rage;
Arise!  thy Magna Charta is at stake,
Thy juries tremble, in declining age!
Tho' you unmov'd saw Corfeu subdued,
And slavery's hands in freedom's blood embrued,
'Tis for thy sons &mdash; thy self she loudly calls,
And with the voice of Chatham, ever dear
Thunders to ev'ry heart, thro' ev'ry ear,
"The parent with the children stands or falls."
