P.  How anxious is the Bard, and yet how vain
His wishes:&mdash;

F.  Cease this moralizing strain,
What mortal will peruse it?

P.  P'rhaps a few:&mdash;
F.  Alas!  the town has something else to do,
Than read one line of all thou shalt indite,
While BYRON, WORDSWORTH, SCOTT, and CROKER write.
'Tis hard &mdash; but&mdash;

P.  Spare thy pity, 'tis my lot;
What some might think a grievance hurts me not:
The Bard by fashion dragg'd before the scene,
Nor wakes my envy, nor provokes my spleen;
Let venal Scotchmen puff him to the town,
And herald hawkers cry him up and down,
Indiff'rent still, I bear the loud acclaim,
Nor court that noisy strumpet, Common Fame.
Yes!  I can bear that envy, hate, and spite,
And cold contempt attend on all I write;
That, MOORE's Epistles, THURLOW'S splayfoot line,
And BARRETT'S doggrel be preferr'd to mine;
No threats can sway me, no opinions bend,
I care not; &mdash; let them censure or commend.
Yet would I speak, but coward fear restrains
The rebel blood just rising in my veins;
Sets my imagination at a stand,
And makes my pen drop harmless from my hand.

F.  Why Truth, that arms the Stoic, ne'er can fail&mdash;

P.  Then Fear for once give way, and Truth prevail.
When I behold in this weak driv'ling age,
POOLE, DIBDIN, POCOCK, HOOK, possess the stage;
Charm Gallery, Box, and Pit, a judging throng!
With Melo-drame, and Pantomime, and song:
See boxing Y*****TH in the lists appear,
And HAWKE drive forth a flaming chariotteer;
See C****S ape all that Queensb'ry was before,
A palsied, amorous Strephon of fourscore.
Yes!  when I hear frail Misses, grey in years,
Scream their lascivious Odes, and rhyming Peers
In little Sonnets, tender, dull, and soft,
Outwhine the mawkish frippery of LOFFT;
Then, then I boldly rise, and dare the worst&mdash;

F.  Forbear this railing:&mdash;

P.  I must speak, or burst.
There was a time when CHURCHILL, bold and coarse,
Gave Wit its point, and Satire all its force;
When POPE, immortal Sat'rist!  made his prey
The HERVEYS and the GILDONS of the day;
Dragg'd into light th' abandon'd scribbling crew,
And boldly scourg'd them in the public view:
But now, so cheap is praise, there scarce remains
One fool to flatter in our courtly strains.
Had they but liv'd to witness present times,
What sins, what dulness, had provok'd their rhymes;
Satire unaw'd would then have dar'd to speak,
Till deep conviction glow'd on H**D***T'S cheek;
And M*N***S, brainless blockhead!  stood confest
The public nuisance and the public jest.

F.  Once more forbear &mdash; thy proper medium know:&mdash;
Degraded names!  can Satire stoop so low?
When H**D***T ambles in a courtier's guise,
All know the hoary pimp, and all despise.
Does credence wait on each preposterous tale?
Who cares a jot when AGG and M*N***S rail?
They risk vexatious suits, as well they may,
Who have nor shame, nor wherewithal to pay.
Let them enjoy in secret, dirty souls,
Their miserable bread, and peck of coals;
'Twere cowardice to drag them from their holes.

What can provoke thy Muse?  scarce thrice a year
MATILDA'S woeful Madrigals appear;
LEWIS no more the tender maid affrights
With incantations, ravishments, and sprites:
CRUSCA (to GIFFORD thanks!)  is fairly fled.
And COTTLE'S Epics sleep among the dead;
E'en WALCOTT'S impious blasphemies are o'er,
And ANDREWS' Prologues are the vogue no more.

What can provoke thy Muse? &mdash; the blinded school,
Whose greatest boast was that it err'd by rule,
That philosophic horde of fools and knaves
Has fall'n &mdash; nor PAINE blasphemes, nor PRIESTLEY raves:
Repenting bigots bow, and kiss the rod,
And prostrate nations own the name of God.
Reason, that dang'rous pride of human kind,
For ever soaring, and for ever blind;
Prone to distrust when tardy to discern,
Too weak to compass, yet too proud to learn;
With shame reviews each ill-digested plan,
And turns with horror from "THE RIGHTS Of MAN."

What can provoke thy Muse? &mdash; in silence deep
TOOKE rests &mdash; but not in everlasting sleep:
Another scene awaits his trembling sight,
A gloom more awful, or a blaze more bright!
The veil is rent, the Sceptic's hateful name
Stands justly branded with contempt and shame;
The Christian Banner is again unfurl'd,
And TRUTH once more illumes a falling world.

P.  All this is true &mdash; but still enough remains,
Enough in conscience to provoke my strains.
See THELWALL, void of decency and sense,
Erect, God wot!  a school for eloquence;
The newest style of rhetoric to teach,
And full-grown gentlemen their parts of speech:
While from his tub, GALE JONES, Sedition's sprite,
Nonsense with sense confounds, and wrong with right;
Rants, bounces, capers, a fantastic show
To scare the shilling orators below.
Prolific PASQUIN plies th' eternal quill,
FITZGERALD rhymes, and COBBETT proses still;
Hoarse CLIO RICKMAN'S Sonnets bay the moon,
CLIO, a poet, patriot, and buffoon.
GODWIN pursues his philosophic schemes,
And rapt in trance, JOANNA SOUTHCOTT dreams;
JEFFREY turns Critic, but betrays his trust,
And hot-prest LITTLE breathes the soul of lust;
While chaste MINERVA kindly lends her aid
To calm the scruples of each wishful maid.
Lo, mad enthusiasts, would-be saints, stand forth;
Sworn foes to godlike genius, private worth;
With furious zeal attack e'en SHAKSPEARE'S fame,
And hurl their pois'nous darts at GARRICK'S name;
And while they talk of truth, of candour rave,
Insult the dead, and violate the grave.
In Magazines vile anecdotes appear,
And deal out dirty scandal through the year;
For desp'rate libellers, when duns assail,
Dare lawsuits, whips, the pillory, and the jail.
This HEWSON CLARKE can tell, misguided youth,
What demon lur'd him from the path of truth,
With low ambition fill'd his canker'd mind,
To entertain the basest of mankind?
Oh!  may he late for all his sins atone,
And while he gains their ears, preserve his own.
Then ask no more &mdash; yet if a doubt remain,
Why thus to Satire I devote my strain;
With this reply be satisfied at once,
While BOWLES exists, can satire want a dunce?
BOWLES who hath cherish'd as a costly pearl,
The horse-play, dull obscenity of CURL;
Th' accumulated trash of SMEDLEY'S page,
For why? &mdash; to vent on POPE his puny rage.
Oh, shame to genius, to himself, to all!
Let him, a courtly priest, supinely drawl!
His tedious, vapid, stiff, unmeaning prose,
While princes yawn, and lords-in-waiting dose,
But ne'er profane with dark and jealous sneer,
The strain to virtue and the muses dear.
Is it not hard, (my friend) nay doubly hard,
A sorry Critic, and more sorry Bard,
Whose jaded Pegasus 'yclept divine,
Cries out for quarter at the fourteenth line;
Should for base lucre, (oh, how vilely won!)
Complete what RALPH and DENNIS left undone?
Thus urg'd, thus prompted by the warm desire
To vindicate the genius I admire;
To add at least my humble meed of praise,
To names rever'd in BRITAIN'S brighter days;
To strip the poet of his false sublime,
(Then BOWLES, the Lord have mercy on thy rhyme!)
And shew that Critics may at times appear
In praise too cold, in censure too severe;
I take the pen &mdash; when folly met his eye,
DEMOCRITUS would laugh &mdash; and so must I.

Now to begin &mdash; nor distant need we roam,
Kind fate hath sent us fools enough at home;
Our modern poets, bounteous in th' extreme,
Rhyme on, and make waste paper by the ream.
Five thousand lines compos'd &mdash; a modest stint!
Next WESTALL must design, and BULMER print;
Then bound with care, and hot-press'd ev'ry sheet,
The wonder-working quarto shines complete.
Forth comes the promis'd work in all its pride,
The author simpers, and the wits decide;
Is the verse smooth?  O, then 'tis call'd divine!
And loud-approving Coxcombs cry, "D&mdash;d fine!"
Behold a gaping crowd that never tire!
See BUSBY, worthy son of such a sire,
(For truth must own, when all is said and done,
The father's pertness centres in the son:)
Straining with all his might 'gainst mood and tense,
To make the DOCTOR'S  fustian sound like sense.
He views the audience with theatric stare,
His hands with equal motion saw the air;
His voice in dulcet cadence taught to float,
Seems the shrill pipings of an eunuch's throat:
Assembled thus, our sapient nobles sit
To hear how BUSBY, not LUCRETIUS, writ.
If now and then a sentiment exprest
In language more indecent than the rest,
Strike the attentive ear; &mdash; with fond regard,
A hundred hands are rais'd to clap the bard:
The MARCHIONESS adores the charming man,
F**Z*****T leers, and J*R**Y flirts her fan;
While doating H**D***T, tickled to the core,
Starts up entranc'd, and ambles at threescore.

Vain Scribbler!  and is this, this all thy aim,
Art thou content with transitory fame;
Fame, that shall haunt thee living, d&mdash;n thee dead?
Thus dost thou feed their ears, thus art thou fed?
But what avails, if faithless to my trust
I hide (you cry) my talent in the dust?
Why am I learn'd?  Why &mdash; Stop this vaunting tone!
Is learning nothing then, till fairly known?
But still (you straight rejoin) how sweet the sound
To hear the murmur of applause go round,&mdash;
"That's he," (the finger pointed all the while)
"Renown'd for wit and elegance of style; 
Whom Critic MAWMAN puffs, whose senseless whine
Boeotian BUCHAN quotes, and calls divine."

Stark metre-mad, the lovesick EDWIN sends
Of jingling splayfoot verse, some odds and ends
To driv'lling URBAN, in whose Magazine
Th' invet'rate sons of dulness vent their spleen:
Proud of the gift so graciously bestow'd,
He prints the thing which EDWIN calls an Ode;
How LAURA smiles!  What less can LAURA do?
It gives her beauties that she never knew.
'Tis so pathetic!  who unmov'd can read?
MELISSA faintly whispers, "Sad indeed!"
In ecstacies LUCRETIA dies away,
And EDWIN grows immortal &mdash; for a day!

And is not now the author truly blest,
By Critics flatter'd, by the fair caress'd?
Shall not his praise by future bards be sung,
When envious death has stopp'd his tuneful tongue?

F.  By trade a censor, and resolv'd to sneer,
You drive the jest too far; 'tis too severe
To brand a blockhead in your angry strains,
For what he cannot help &mdash; his want of brains!

P.  Be answer'd thus &mdash; his itching after fame,
His bold obtrusive vanity I blame;
Not the true dulness that inspires his lays,
But the false pride that makes him covet praise.

F.  Then censure all mankind, for who is free?
The flame that warms their bosoms dwells with thee.
The soldier to attain it travels far,
The smirking lawyer courts it at the bar;
Th' intrepid seaman wins it at his post,
The man of virtue when he shuns it most;
The anxious poet claims it as his due,
And (pr'ythee speak with candour) so do you.

P.  Thus candid, I reply &mdash; if now and then
Success attend the labours of my pen,
If those who buy my works, and those who read,
Applaud &mdash; and that's a rarity indeed!
I'm not so proud, so squeamishly severe,
But honest Fame is pleasing to mine ear.
But that I write for that short-liv'd renown
Which FASHION gives the vot'ries of the town,
I cannot grant &mdash; for mark!  the gift divine
Was DARWIN'S once, and BUSBY may be thine.

Athirst for Fame, which Magazines, Reviews,
Too coy, deny the labours of his muse;
MY LORD (what will not vanity afford?)
Invites a host of Critics to his board;
Some creeping, slip-shod hirelings of the day,
Whom URBAN treats with "double pots and pay."
"My friends," he cries, "speak freely, tell me plain,
What say the public to my epic strain?"
Will they speak truth, too poor to be sincere?
But I may surely whisper in thine ear,
I who abhor a bribe; &mdash; then this &mdash; thy rhymes
In dulness rival past and present times;
So lame &mdash; the weary audience think  they see
Old SETTLE'S doggrel new reviv'd by thee;
So bad &mdash; that worse will ne'er be seen again
Unless thou should'st resume thy scribbling vein.

From such pursuits 'twould turn thy trifling mind,
Hadst thou but, Janus-like, a face behind;
To mark the lolling tongue, the side-long leer,
The pointed finger, the contemptuous sneer,
And all the silent mock'ries of the town
That ridicule thy title to renown:
But thou must feast on flattery all thy days,
And be the dupe of ev'ry blockhead's praise.
For mark their judgment, hear their quaint reply&mdash;
When genius rears its head shall slander die?
A brother's fame what brother bard endures?
Thus envy follows merit great as yours.
You try the epic strain &mdash; in colours true
A second HOMER rises forth to view!
All hearts you captivate, all tastes you hit;
With HAMMOND'S tenderness, and PRIOR'S wit.&mdash;
Thus while the hungry sycophants applaud,
Who struts, who swells, who scribbles like MY LORD?
And soon he rises in a feverish dream
A first-rate poet &mdash; in his own esteem.
THURLOW (alas!  will THURLOW never tire?)
New points his dulness, and new strings his lyre;
That lyre which rang the praises in our ears
Of "godlike" princes, and "transcendant" peers;
And rashly gave (the oddest whim on earth)
To SPENCER talents, and to HOLLAND worth;
With quick dispatch his teeming brain unloads,
Then issue forth Acrostics, Sonnets, Odes;
Loud empty bombast, flights of false sublime,
Not prose indeed &mdash; but tortur'd prose in rhyme.

F.  Shall Blood Patrician no distinction claim?
Dwell there no virtues in a noble name?
Is TITLE nothing?  WEALTH?  Pray learn, for once
One grain of prudence:&mdash;

P.  To respect a DUNCE!
Bow, flatter, dedicate, and bend the knee,
A mean dependant &mdash; this advice to me?
No, let me rather in affected drawl,
Write hymns with COLLYER, idiot tales with BALL;
Turn Commentator grave, and pore content,
To find a meaning where there's nothing meant;
Than shield from censure undeserving strains,
Because, forsooth, they spring from noble brains.
Not fools alone, as mad examples strike;
This metromania reigns in all alike:
Both wit and dunce the restless muse inspires
With equal rage, though not with equal fires;
Not BYRON stands acquitted of the crime,
A promise made in prose, he breaks in rhyme.
Hark!  Printers' Devils say, or seem to say,&mdash;
"No rest have we, FITZGERALD, night or day;
For thee, vain man, a weary watch we keep,
Nor sleep enjoy &mdash; although thy readers sleep.
Does SOUTHEY pause, or paper-staining SCOTT
One moment's respite grant, a page to blot;
Thy hobbling Pegasus, a sorry hack,
Still faintly drawls to keep us on the rack.
Should e'er the fates condemn thee for thy crimes,
(For thou to Sense art traitor in thy rhymes),
For paper wasted, ink so idly spilt,
Yet kindly bid thee chuse what death thou wilt;
Think, think on CLARENCE; he (a bold design!)
Resolv'd to perish by his favourite wine;
Thy volumes round thy neck to make thee sink,
O!  let 'em drown thee in thy favourite ink!"

Where old Blackfriars pours her sable sons,
A mingled tribe of Critics, Bards, and Duns,
Dwelt PHILLIPS, an industrious plodding Wight,
And by the king's good favour dubb'd a Knight;
A bookseller was he, and sooth to say,
Not NICHOLS had more authors in his pay.
At Verse and Prose so ready were the host,
'Twas emulation which should scribble most;
And PRATT himself would undertake an ode,
In one short ramble on the Hampstead Road.
But high above the rest, distinguish'd far,
As Bard and Tourist shone the mighty CARR!
Of scribes the chief and once upon a time The 
undisputed lord of prose and rhyme.
Hist'ries he wrote, and etchings he would draw
Of towns and cities &mdash; which he never saw:&mdash;
And travell'd daily o'er much foreign land,
(More wond'rous still!) &mdash; in Bridge-Street or the Strand.&mdash;
And hence arose, with all his boasted care,
Some odd mistakes, which made the reader stare.
Thus German dames were beauteous to the sight,
The French profoundly grave, the Dutch polite;
The Scotch sincere, and Ireland's jovial sons
Too dull by half to relish jokes and puns.
Did Critics sneer at some unlucky guess?
SIR JOHN'S own bulls were &mdash; errors of the press:
And lest upon his back the rod should fall,
The printers, devils were to blame for all.
But soon SIR RICHARD found, (sagacious elf),
The KNIGHT lov'd money, and his works the shelf;
Whereat SIR RICHARD, of his bargain sick,
And heartily repenting of the trick,
Consign'd the quartos to a different fate,
And eas'd his counter of their pond'rous weight;
To pastry-cooks dispers'd them sheet by sheet,
By which Sir JOHN was read in ev'ry street;
Propitiation just, by all confest,
For martyr'd truth, "and history made a jest."
Some love a jingling rhyme with all their heart,
Where love and nonsense bear an equal part;
Like ROSA'S sonnets, in themselves a host,
ROSA, the Sappho of the Morning Post;
Or HAFIZ' Madrigals, but rarely seen,
A heap of sounding words which nothing mean.

Some authors love in epic strains to soar,
And swell to be what HOMER was before;
Thus Aspern's day, and Talavera's fight,
Have made some scribblers in their own despight.
Others, the dupes of an infectious rage,
Ransack the dulness of a former age;
For rare, moth-eaten parchments search the land,
And poring much, but little understand.
There "mote" you spy the pedant deep "y-read,"
In useless heaps of learned lumber dead,
Damning all modern wit as dull, absurd,
Since the bright days of CAXTON and DE WORD.

How oft some new-fledg'd Bardling on the wing,
Essays a puny flight, and tries to sing,
Whose trifling muse by folly nurtur'd long,
Ne'er soar'd above a rebus or a song.
On frozen banks the purple violets rise,
And roses bloom beneath December skies;
For contrarieties in place and time
Our poets think allowable in rhyme.
To doggrel verse, where sense is never found,
(An easy task) we give the charm of sound:
Thus, &mdash; "With percussive palm the door assails,
Now scrapes the gritty wall with bleeding nails,
Now running round, help!  help!  with shrill alarms,
Help!  help!  help!  help!  and writhes her frantic arms.
O live, my joy, my solace!  sobs she wild;
Why do you gaze on me, my heav'nly child?
She sees not, hears not!  Speak, in mercy move!
Here, here is milk &mdash; awake, my love, my love!!"

F.  All this is sorry trash, and well may claim
The rod of satire &mdash; hear a nobler name:&mdash;
&mdash;"Of man's first disobedience."

P.  Stop, I pray;
Nor with our wou'd-be poets of the day
Name ONE, who, hateful prejudice apart,
Has reach'd the glorious summit of his art!
Let modern poetasters rhyme their fill,
To charm an hour we've POPE and MILTON still;
And solitude shall never fail to please,
While it can boast companions such as these.
Hence all ye little bards!&mdash;

F.  Restrain thy gall,
Does modern merit claim no praise at all?
Shall not applause attend on SOUTHEY'S strain?
Must BYRON, SCOTT, and ROGERS sing in vain?

P.  Think not to such, applause I would deny,
Or view their beauties with a jaundic'd eye;
I mark each nobler effort of the lyre,
I feel a poet's warmth, and must admire.
But when you speak of that poor bauble, FAME;&mdash;
How few deserve it!  Yet what numbers claim.

To SOUTHEY, well-combin'd, at once belong
Truth, grandeur, force, variety of song;
All that exalted genius can inspire,
A poet's rashness, with a poet's fire.
But still his faults (this candour must allow
Spite of the courtly laurel on his brow)
Would mar the force of many a modern rhyme,
And quite obscure a genius less sublime.
Whene'er I read (nor think me too severe)
Aught childish in his works that grates my ear,
I turn to "MADOC'S" grand, sublimer lays,
And hate the line that speaks in his dispraise.

F.  To SCOTT you'll grant some portion of renown;
The man has pleas'd&mdash;

P.  Aye, surfeited the town.&mdash;
How versatile his talents!  full of whim:&mdash;
Bard, courtier, critic, all combin'd in him;
And much I wish that he had spar'd his pains
To edit Swift, and mangle Dryden's strains.
Stifled with praise &mdash; and such, as I can say,
I never gain'd, and hope I never may;
His careless muse neglects a nobler aim,
And looks not to posterity for fame.
Some deep romantic scene, where mould'ring time
Has mark'd each tow'r and battlement sublime;
Where barbarous mirth, revenge, and feudal rage
Shew the rude manners of a former age;
Romances, by tradition only known,
He paints with life and vigour all his own.

The town is pleas'd when BYRON will rehearse,
And finds a thousand beauties in his verse;
So fix'd his fame &mdash; that write whate'er he will,
The patient public must admire it still;
Yes, &mdash; though bereft of half his force and fire,
They still must read &mdash; and, dozing, must admire;
While you and I, who stick to common sense,
To genius, taste, and wit, have no pretence.
Throughout the whole we toil to understand;
Where'er we tread &mdash; 'tis strange, 'tis foreign land;
Nay, half the thoughts and language of the strain
Require a glossary to make them plain.
Beauties there are, which candour bids me own,
Atone for these &mdash; for more than these atone:&mdash;
Beauties &mdash; which e'en the coldest must admire&mdash;
Quick, high-wrought passion &mdash; true poetic fire&mdash;
Bold, energetic language &mdash; thoughts sublime&mdash;
And all the artful cadences of rhyme.

Nor less, for sterling genius, I admire
ROGERS' pure style, and CAMPBELL'S noble fire,
MONTGOMERY'S strain to taste and feeling true,
That speaks the poet and the Christian too.
Blest be the man with all that fame can give,
Who burst the negro's chain, and bade him live;
Blest be the bard with glory's brightest meed,
Whose glowing verse immortaliz'd the deed.
Far as th' Atlantic rolls his rapid stream,
A race shall hail the poet and his theme;
And waft the sound to Guinea's distant shore,
That tells her children they are slaves no more.
The praise we justly give to truth divine,
Who can withhold from CRABBE'S unerring line?
A bard by no pedantic rules confin'd,
A rigid painter of the human mind.
And long as nature in her simplest guise,
Or virtuous sensibility we prize,
Of well-earn'd fame no poet shall enjoy
A juster tribute than "the FARMER'S BOY."
Hail to departed worth!  o'er COWPER'S bier
Let genius pause, &mdash; and drop her holiest tear:
To WHITE'S cold turf a weeping pilgrim turn,
And crown with bays her GRAHAME'S hallow'd urn:
'Twas their's to shun the poet's flowery way,
Of them religion ask'd a nobler lay;
And well their lives it's sacred influence caught,
And justified the precepts which they taught.
Religion, meek, benevolent, refin'd,
Breathes universal love to all mankind;
And acting on this principle alone,
Weeps for another's sorrows as her own.
Soft is her voice, and humble are her ways;
Warm is her heart, and fervent is her praise;
Fair deeds of virtue all her hours employ,
She chides with meekness, and forgives with joy:
Happy the soul that feels the ray divine,
(A ray, which sainted PORTEUS beam'd in thine),
With conscious pleasure she reviews the past,
And confident in faith, awaits her last.

F.  Why this is praise!

P.  Not greater than is due:&mdash;
I can withhold applause, and give it too;
Above deceit, I scorn all venal ways;
I freely censure, and I freely praise.
If D****Y call me ranc'rous, decent Knight!
When he grows wiser, I'll grow more polite;
'Till then I laugh at ceremony's rules,
And still include him in my list of fools.

F.  Why name you him?

P.  To bring before the town
A courtly coxcomb, though he wears a gown:
A Parson too! &mdash; No matter &mdash; let it pass&mdash;
Let that too be forgotten &mdash; like his farce.
A Journalist &mdash; and such a one heav'n knows!&mdash;
I will not, reader, to offend thy nose,
Rake up the dunghill of his filthy prose.
Yet he can flatter with an awkward grace;
Like some old dowager who chalks her face,
He daubs so coarsely to display the saint,
That the grey sinner stares beneath the paint.
Let SCOTT revile my writings to the town,
As well I guess he would for half-a-crown;
Let AGG, inventive genius!  shew his skill,
And darkly stab me with his grey-goose quill;
Let MANNERS, just escap'd from durance vile,
Abuse, defame me in his Grub-Street style,
In some catch-penny pamphlet, penn'd complete,
Conceiv'd, begotten, born within the Fleet:
"Pour on, I will endure!" &mdash; with scorn I view
The worst that dulness and her sons can do,
So fortune save my character and lays
From D****Y's hireling, prostituted praise.
When PASQUIN, arm'd with libels, stalks by night,
Lest prowling bailiffs intercept his flight;
PASQUIN, dull rogue!  who twenty years has made
His pamphlets turn a profitable trade;
How ****** dreads the vengeance of his muse,
And ***** who has no character to lose,
Quakes in his dark retreat; while you and I
With upright confidence his rage defy.
Unhappy PASQUlN!  in thy latter days
Few fear thy wrath, none barter for thy praise;
But all thy pointless darts, at random thrown,
Hurt no one's name, but only d&mdash;n thine own.

Stands Scotland where it did?  alas!  no more&mdash;
Since truant J*****y  flies his native shore:
For who among her sons, to speed their gains,
(Her sons more fam'd for brimstone than for brains)
Like him retrac'd the path which KENRICK trod,
Traduc'd his country and blasphem'd his God?
Mourn, CALEDONIA!  let thy rocks reply;
Nor LAMBE, nor SYDNEY can his loss, supply
SYDNEY has too much lead &mdash; and simple LAMBE
Retains the will, but wants the pow'r to damn;
Too dull, alas!  to satisfy a pique,
His heart is willing, but his brain is weak;
Nor HOLLAND'S Spouse, nor HOLLAND's mantling bowl
Can rouse from torpor his benighted soul.
Illustrious HOLLAND!  doom'd by angry fate
To rack the muses, and reform the state;
Consistent Peer!  unstain'd with courtly crimes,
Save some few venial spots, and doggrel rhymes;
His J*****Y lost, &mdash; shall haply mount the throne,
And execrate all dulness &mdash; but his own.

F.  Some play or farce that gallery, box, and pit
Applaud for solid sense and sterling wit,
Name;&mdash;

P.  Why, methinks no puzzling task were this:
The "Bee Hive," "Sleeping Beauty," "Hit or Miss."
Such scenes as POCOCK, SKEFFINGTON produce,
And rivall'd but by Punch and Mother Goose.
Our modern playwrights, unambitious elves,
Trust to the actor more than to themselves;
Some strange peculiarity they hit,
A shrug and wink, well manag'd, pass for wit;
And LISTON'S idiot stare, and OXB'RY'S bray,
Have sav'd (with shame I speak it) many a play.
Would you to rapture raise the vulgar throng,
Let MATHEWS play the fool, and sing his song:
A thousand tongues shall roar at FAWCETT'S croak,
And MUNDEN'S jaws pass current for a joke.

F.  Why slumbers SHERIDAN in this dull age?
Why thus a willing truant from the stage,
Views he unmov'd the sickly taste that draws
Dishonest fame, and panders for applause?
Why not revive the times that once have been,
When wit and humour grac'd the comic scene;
And folly, dragg'd before the public view,
Blush'd to behold her image drawn so true?

P.  Would wit and humour please the swinish crowd,
While DIBDIN, POOLE, and REYNOLDS croak so loud?
How would the boxes storm, the galleries rage,
To see their favourites banish'd from the stage;
And call aloud, ere sense could be restor'd,
For LAURENT'S grin, and RIDGWAY'S magic sword?
Heav'ns!  could such scenes engage the public mind,
Did virtue, truth, or sense, remain behind?
In vain we boast of SHAKSPEARE'S mighty pow'r,
For music now must charm the vacant hour;
OTWAY, no more we drop a tear with thee,
For song and dance are all we bear and see;
Except when KEMBLE, to delight the few,
Restores immortal SHAKSPEARE to our view.

F.  Say who's to blame?

P.  The sottish town, that pays
The fool with laughter, &mdash; not the bard with praise;
That looks for, in distortion and grimace,
Nature's soft ease, and wit's enchanting grace.
'Tis not enough that the rude gallery folks
Admire thy genius, and applaud thy jokes;
That clapping theatres the benches shake
Less for thy merit, than contention's sake;
Bold in thyself, uphold the Drama's laws;
Nor basely pander for a mob's applause.
To win, employ the graces of thy style,
Not the loud laugh, but the approving smile;
To HOOK and DIMOND leave the noisy crew,
Content to number the judicious few;
Nor let thy wit, like bards of little worth,
Offend our reason, to provoke our mirth.

Once 'twas the fashion, in an earlier day,
For two, at least one plot to form a play;
But our sage authors frugally dispense
With plots; nay, more &mdash; with nature, wit, and sense;
Through five long acts their weary audience lull,
Most cold and tasteless, most perversely dull.
For me, no blind disciple of the schools
That laugh and cry by ARISTOTLE'S rules;
I loathe the fool whose humour lies in trick,
While sentimental trumpery makes me sick;
And "Ohs!"  and "Ahs!"  and "Dammes!"  modern wit&mdash;
Can please me never, though they please the pit.
Yet not a Cynic, nor devour'd by spleen,
I needs must smile if COLMAN grace the scene;
Let humour broad, with polish'd wit combine,
No faculties more risible than mine:
But shall I laugh because some antic droll
Squints in my face? &mdash; I cannot for my soul!
In times like these, when ev'ry forward dunce
Starts up, good lord!  a Dramatist at once,
Could JONSON rise &mdash; how vain were his essay,
Some modern wit would bear the palm away:
Yes!  though perforce we hail a JONSON dead,
A living JONSON p'rhaps might beg his bread.

You blame my taste, if careless midst the roar,
When noble critics hiccup out "Encore!"
As CATALANI, charming queen of sounds,
Sings a bravura &mdash; for a hundred pounds;
Or blythe DESHAYES all life and spirit swims  
Through the gay dance, and twirls his pliant limbs,
I sit unmov'd, a cold phlegmatic guest,
Nor cry "Encore!"  and "Bravo!"  like the rest.
Form'd in a coarser mould, untaught by art,
I love the plainer language of the heart;
No far-fetch'd song that strains the lab'ring throat,
No squeaking eunuch's soft Italian note;
No attitude obscene 'gainst nature's plan,
Which more bespeaks the monkey than the man.
Merit stand by &mdash; for lo!  with servile leer
Some warbling Signior, elbow'd by a peer;
A willing slave, now banter'd, now caress'd,
Kick'd, laugh'd at, worshipp'd &mdash; as my lord thinks best!
Advances forth, obligingly polite,
To charm his friends &mdash; for fifty pounds per night.
'Tis foreign all &mdash; no native talent here
With artless, simple notes delights the ear;
But sounds that least of harmony partake,
Much lengthen'd quaver, and affected shake;
A heterogeneous mass &mdash; God help the while!
Which p'rhaps the cognoscenti christen "style."
Thus fool'd &mdash; and thus instructed by the tribe,
Their follies with their pleasures we imbibe;
Till by degrees we grow, like them, debas'd;
Corrupt in morals, as deprav'd in taste.
This shameful truth let slighted genius tell,&mdash;
In vain in arts Britannia's sons excel,
Since Britain proves, through prejudice alone,
A friend to ev'ry genius, but her own.
How DULNESS smil'd on that auspicious morn,
When rising with a huge portentous yawn,
She saw enthron'd her favourite ARNOLD sit
In Drury's fane the arbiter of wit.
"My son," the joyful mother cry'd, and then
Into his trembling fingers thrust a pen,
"Something thou shalt produce &mdash; no matter what&mdash;
An old romance supplies thee with a plot;
Then steal or borrow, to cajole the folks,
Tom D'URFEY'S Madrigals, and MILLER'S jokes:
All these together in confusion thrown,
Well sprinkled with some nonsense of thine own,
And some odd scraps, by COLMAN thrown away,
Will (HOLT can answer for it) make a play.
Long may'st thou live to prove the scourge of sense,
And nurture folly at a large expence!
To catch each novelty, howe'er absurd;
And raise all hell, as FAUSTUS gives the word.
Though POLITO, to make the people stare,
Erect his annual booth at Smithfield Fair;
Where lions roar with wide distended jaws,
And grinning serpents hiss with vast applause;
How vain are all his efforts to out-do!&mdash;
&mdash;Old DRURY'S stage shall boast its monsters too.
But if, with equal emulation fir'd,
Thy rival HARRIS hath each monster hir'd,
(A genuine son, a kindred spirit he,
And second in my love to none, but thee;)
Let RAYMOND take some fierce Rhinoceros' shape,
And OXB'RY be transform'd into an Ape;
Next let thy talents find their proper use,
Do thou, as best becomes thee, play the Goose;
Then all shall own, while they admire the cast,
Thou'st found thy fittest character at last.
See how my children in one cause unite,
Lo, LARPENT reads!  while HOOKE and REYNOLDS write;
Dull BRINSLEY sleeps, and should he wake again,
I fear some revolution in our reign;
But KOTZEBUE'S bombast, fearing to expire,
Stole the last spark of his immortal fire.

To drain our wealth what numbers cross the main,
Fiddlers from France, and mountebanks from Spain;
From Italy a host of warbling slaves,
From Holland grave mynheers, egregious knaves:
There Indian jugglers ply their trade for hire,
And here a Prussian lady swallows fire;
While rushing crowds assemble far and near,
What to behold? &mdash; a Cossack and his spear!
When POLITO might gratify their view
With sights as ugly, and us human too.

But most to thee, O Germany!  we owe
Our choicest stock of rarities below;
Counts, gamesters, princes, jostling side by side,
Thy low-born offal, and thy high-dutch pride,
All who for wit or want their country leave,
Kind, we invite, and grateful, we receive:
Thus cramm'd &mdash; impos'd on, much beyond our due,
'Tis hard methinks to send us poets too!
Our taste is German &mdash; and our wives will say,
How pure the doctrine of a German play!
Where vice appears so innocently dress'd,
We almost fancy cuckoldom a jest;
For the frail nymph so well her crime defends,
The couple weep, embrace, and soon are friends!

Nor stop we here &mdash; strange farragos succeed,
("Oh, horrible!  most horrible indeed!")
Undaunted IRELAND dares the mighty test,
Although, in raising spirits and the rest,
LEWIS without a rival stands confest.
Though sprites appear obedient at his will,
Ghosts are but ghosts; and demons, demons still;
Alike in matter, and in form the same:&mdash;
Hobgoblins differ only &mdash; in the name:
Yet LEWIS trembles lest his fame be won,
And MISTRESS RADCLIFFE fears herself outdone.
But these are harmless, satire must confess,
To the loose novels of MINERVA'S Press;
Such melting tales as MEEKE and ROSA tell;
For pious LANE, who knows his readers well,
Can suit all palates with their diff'rent food,
Love for the hoyden, morals for the prude.
Behold prepar'd, with quills already drawn,
Th' industrious train who scribble night and morn;
Five pounds per volume!  their enormous bribe:
Enough methinks to tempt a hungry scribe.
First LADY MORGAN, Amazonian Fair!
(Ye gods!  what will not LADY MORGAN dare?)
With four octavo volumes shocks the sight;
For who can read as fast as she can write?
Next fair LLEWELLYN, modestly indeed,
Would have us name her works, as well as read;
Which to perform, in language just and brief,
Let "bawdry" be inscrib'd on every leaf.
MATILDA toils the promis'd boon to win,
And ANN OF SWANSEA wades through thick and thin;
While BRIDGET BLUEMANTLE'S eternal scrawl
Makes truly more waste-paper than them all.
Would you with blushes tinge the virgin cheek,
Read "Midnight Weddings!"  penn'd by MRS. MEEKE:
Soft amorous stories by HONORIA SCOTT,
Of ravishments, seductions, and what not:
Or GUNNING's tales, for GUNNING, to my taste,
Is sprightly, witty, any thing &mdash; but chaste:
Or "Rival Princes," anger's latest spark,
Pride of them all, and worthy MRS. CLARKE.

I pass in silence, authors not a few;
CERVANTES HOGG, and all the Grub-Street crew:
Alas!  more worthy of contempt than rage,
Their worthless names would but defile my page:
The muse shall never gibbet them on high,
Obscurely as they liv'd, why let them die.

F.  'Tis pitiful &mdash; but why indulge your spleen?
Will all this useless railing mend the scene?
Your satire is too pointed, too severe,
And little suited to the public ear.
HOLLAND, who now and then, to serve his ends,
Invites some score of literary friends,
Will meet you at his table with an air
That plainly tells you have no bus'ness there.
"Ye gods!"  he cries, "shall I, who think sublime
MATILDA'S motley hash of prose and rhyme,
By one, who begs a dinner at my door,
Be school'd &mdash; and play 'Sir Oracle' no more?"
&mdash;Thus banish'd from his presence in disgrace,
Methinks starvation stares you in the face.

P.  I guess you well &mdash; henceforth no verse of mine
Shall question ROSE'S title to "divine;"
No more in critic gall I'll dip my quill,
Let FEIST and CROKER scribble what they will;
Let dying Strephons void their monthly stuff,
"And d&mdash;d be he that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'"

F.  Wisely resolv'd &mdash; since this contention ends,
All Grub-street and the court shall prove your friends;
Brisk maids of honour quit their fond amours,
And LITTLE'S am'rous page, to doat on yours.

P.  Yet DRYDEN never fear'd with manly rage
To lash the full-grown vices of the age;
But spurning what he thought dishonest fame,
Call'd ev'ry rogue and blockhead by his name;
Thus SHADWELL'S dulness, SHAFTSBURY'S baser crimes
Are handed down to all succeeding times.
POPE (who retains pre-eminence, in spite
Of all that WESTON, all that BOWLES could write)
To conquer vice the surest method found,
He aim'd with care to give the deeper wound;
And counting titles, wealth, inferior things,
To VIRTUE gave what he deny'd to KINGS.

And shall the muse, freeborn, to none a slave;
Unbrib'd, unbought, by any fool or knave,
A votary oft at freedom's holy shrine,
Check the just warmth of her satiric line?
Free let it flow while truth directs its course,
Strong in its tide, resistless in its force;
And shame the hoary pimp, the courtly tool,
The bold-fac'd villain, and the harmless fool.
Shall BRITAIN, spot of heav'n's peculiar care,
Her sons so warlike and her nymphs so fair,
Whose envied fame is borne on every breeze,
As waves her flag majestic o'er the seas;
Shall BRITAIN see her liberties despis'd,
Once jealously maintain'd, and dearly priz'd,
And silently behold her court outblaze
The rank obscenity of CHARLES'S days?

Shall vice make virtue crouch beneath her feet,
And grey seduction prowl from street to street;
And sins too black and horrible to name,
In her unhappy land be thought no shame?
Shall SCRIPTURE, blessed fount of truth divine,
Which made by holy faith the Saviour mine,
And taught me through this dark sojourn to see
Altho' a wanderer, he died for me;
By daring infidels and fools at best,
Be boldly call'd a bubble and a jest?
And O!  to make her infamy complete,
Shall truth and justice quit the judgment-seat,
And law, her strong defence in former times,
Uphold the guilty, and defend their crimes?
Shall sins like these, which loud for vengeance call,
And urge a tottering nation to its fall,
Unbridled reign, and satire's voice be dumb?
Nor warn a guilty land of wrath to come?
I will&mdash;

F.  Fine words!  lash blockheads to the bone,
But leave, my friend, pray leave the GREAT alone;
The sons of dulness, they were made for sport,
But spare, for prudence sake, O spare the Court!
MY LORD, whose frown keeps modest truth in awe,
Array'd in all the terrors of the law,
Suspends his legal vengeance.

P.  Let it fall;&mdash;
One smile from virtue makes amends for all;
A JEFFERIES' rage can ne'er my terrors raise,
I scorn his censure as I hate his praise.

THOU (if a voice, still true to virtue's cause,
Dare give neglected honesty applause),
Who, free from private pique, from party zeal,
Canst like a poet write, a patriot feel,
Accept my verse; relax thy brow awhile,
Nor scorn my labours for their homely style.
If now and then a happier line appear,
And sound with sweeter music in thine ear;
A brighter thought, in which thou seest combin'd
Sound judgment, fertile fancy, strength of mind;
Such as may justly claim thy meed of praise,
And call to mind the bards of former days;
'Tis all I hope &mdash; but far from me be those
Who flatter GRENVILLE'S rhyme, or DIBDIN'S prose;
Phlegmatic judges, who unmov'd can sit,
And ARNOLD'S ribaldry mistake for wit;
O'er DIMOND'S  puling scenes lament and sigh,
With SKEFFINGTON, or GODWIN laugh and cry;
And O!  (what wonders we may live to see)
Think COLERIDGE, mighty SHAKSPEARE, rivals thee!
Let such dull loungers (if they rise so soon)
At dry rehearsals spend their time till noon;
To billiards stroll, or half asleep peruse
The vague abortions of FITZGERALD'S muse;
Then at ALBINA'S rout complete the yawn,
With her blue-stocking friends, and gape till morn.
