While chilly Winds of cold December blow,
And Winter wraps the dreary World in Snow,
The Sun from Capricorn his Progress wins,
The old Year closing ere the new begins;
Two Printers' Boys (they seek no better Name)
Of PENCE ambitious and poetic Fame,
Their Papers bearing through the obstructed Street,
Between two Snow Drifts chanc'd one Morn to meet;
With witty look while each his Rival ey'd,
Thus IRA spake and TERTIUS thus replied.

IRA.
While all the World for New-Year's Gifts prepares,
And little Lads stand gaping for their Shares,
Say, Hast thou got the gratulating Verse,
To fill your Purse, now Money grows so scarce?

TERTIUS.
Yes, Ira, from the wittiest Bard in Town,
I've learnt my Verses as he wrote them down,
But, now our New-Years Harvest draws so near,
What canst thou sing that Folks will deign to hear?

IRA.
I've got my Verses from a Bard sublime,
That scribbles high-flown Compliments in Rhyme,
Here we'll compare; and if you dare begin,
Repeat your Lays, and I'll rehearse you mine.

TERTIUS.
To all our Readers grateful be the Lay,
That bears the Wishes of this welcome Day!
May they in turn, with liberal Hand reward,
The faithful Carrier and laborious Bard.

IRA.
Hail to this happy Day!  may fostering Heaven,
It's choicest Blessings pour on Eighty-Seven!
With many such may you my Friends be blest,
And he live longest who shall pay the best.

TERTIUS.
To higher Strains ascends my daring Muse,
To sing the wreath and Origin of News,
Tell how from Jove the mighty Tale began,
And his own Merc'ry dealt it forth to Men.

IRA.
Me Politicks inspire with graver Lays,
The Politicks of these intriguing Days,
Of headless States, electioneering Schemes,
And public faith, and democratic Dreams.

TERTIUS.
Inspire me, Phoebus!  in my Wimble's Praise,
With Humphrey's Strains, and Barlow's moving Lays,
No more his Plots reveal'd should he deplore,
And wicket Wits should versify no more.

IRA.
Oh, in our Poets Corner, could I write
As Trumbull witty, and sublime as Dwight;
Copper should brighten in the polish'd Strain,
And trustless Foxes seek their Holes again.

TERTIUS.
Let poor Rhode-Island vote their Rags to Gold,
Let selfish York her Impost still withhold:
Yet fools as great Connecticut maintains,
Rest here, my Muse, and seek no foreign Strains.

IRA.
Through drifted Storms let Shaise the Court assail,
And Shattuck rise illustrious from the Jail,
In coward Hands let legal Power expire,
And give new subjects to my sounding Lyre.

TERTIUS.
Say, Ira, say, in what strange soil appears
An Indian Fort that old Anarchiads bears,
And tell what Bards explore the wondrous Mine,
And I'll the Prize of Poetry resign.

IRA.
Nay tell me first, in what still stranger Land,
Republic Forms without their Power can stand,
Or if our Congress e'er to Life shall rise,
And I'll resign the Politician's Prize.

PRINTER.
Cease to contend for Folks begin to throng
To hear the Wonders of your New-Year's Song:
Blest Boys, whose Strains in every Grace excel,
Blest Readers who those Strains reward so well,
Now haste to Shelter, from the driving Snows,
The Air blows piercing and you'll freeze your Toes.
