I.1.
When elemental conflicts rage,
And heav'n is wrap'd in tempests dire,
When storms with storms dread combat wage,
And thunders roll aetherial fire;&mdash;
Returning zephyrs od'rous race,
And radiant Sol's all-chearing face,
The trembling mortals most desire.

When Eurus charg'd with livid clouds,
Scours o'er old ocean's wild domain,
And Boreas rends the vessel's shrouds,
And o'er her swells the raging main;
If lighter breezes should succeed,
And Iris sweet, of varied hue,
Lift o'er the main her beamy head,
What raptures fill the marine crew!
Thus, when Bellona (ruthless maid!)
Her empire thro' the world has spread,
And death his flag has proud-display'd
O'er legions that in battle bled;&mdash;
If PEACE, bedeck'd with olive robe,
(Resplendent nymph, sweet guest of heav'n)
Transfuse her balm around the globe,
A theme of joy to man is giv'n.
Then wake, O muse!  thy sweetest lays&mdash;
Returning peace demands thy praise;
And while the notes in varied cadence sound,
Eye thou the Theban Swan that soars o'er heav'nly ground.

I.2.
If thou from Albion's sea-girt shore,
Advent'rous muse wilt deign to rove,
Inclin'd remotest realms t' explore
And soothe the savage soul to love;
Hither wave thy wand'ring pinion,
Here be fix'd thy last dominion,
Warbling in 'Sylvania's grove.
Bright-ey'd Euphrosyne!  attend,
If genial PEACE can aught avail,
With all thy graceful charms descend,
And o'er the youthful lyre prevail.
Bounteous PEACE with lavish hand,
To ev'ry shore thy blessings strew,
O veil the blood-polluted land,
And all they grateful joys renew.
Thy blissful pregnant reign restore,
And calm the breasts of angry Kings;
Thy horn of Amalthean shore
Ope, and expand thy golden wings;
Till trade secure her treasure beams,
And science re-assumes her shades;
Till shepherds quaff untainted streams,
And hinds enjoy their native glades;
Till the glad muses strike the lyre,
And virtuous social deeds inspire;
Till the loud drums no more shall bid to arms prepare,
Nor brazen trumpets breath horrid din of war.

I.3.
Auspicious pow'r, whose salutary ray
Form'd this new world, and rear'd her infant fame,
Extend anew thy mitigating sway,
And quell the hero's battle-breathing flame,
Ye fragrant myrtles, ope your peaceful bow'rs,
And charm the warrior with your pleasing scenes,
Shield him with woodbine's aromatic flow'rs,
And for his sopha spread your velvet greens,
For him the flute mellifluous shall blow
In Lydian music, sounding soft and low,
And blooming beauty with attractive art,
Shall sweetly melt the tumults of his heart;
The nectar'd bowl with rosy garlands twin'd,
Shall waft his sorrows to the vagrant wind,
While the victorious laurel of renown,
In verdant wreaths his manly brows shall crown.

II.1.
Too long has war's terrific train,
(The barbed spear and reeking blade)
Made nations rue their chieftains slain,
And sanguin'd every muse's shade.
From distant Volga's rapid floods,
To Canada's high-tow'ring woods,
Has the deadly cannon bray'd.
From where th'effulgent god of day
Impearls Arabia's spicy fields,
To where his setting lustres play&mdash;
The world to British valor yields.
How has bold CLIVE, with martial toil,
O'er India born his conqu'ring lance,
For Brunswick gain'd the distant soil,
And dash'd th' aspiring hopes of France?
Let Goree, rich with flaming ore,
Heroic KEPPEL'S acts proclaim,
And Senegal's Eburnean shore
Resound to future times his name.
O'er red Germania's hostile waste,
Britannia's chiefs have conquering shone.
Brave Elliot's warlike fates have grac'd
His Monarch's high illustrious throne;
And Granby's deeds the muses claim
To swell th' immortal trump of fame.
But victory enough has wav'd her glitt'ring wand,
With British honors grac'd, o'er ev'ry prostrate land!

II.2.
Witness ye plains bedew'd with gore,
So late ambitious Gallia's boast,
Where howling o'er the desert shore,
Was seen the genius of the coast.
Thus, leaning on her shatter'd spear,
She wildly wail'd in deep despair,
Her fall'n tow'rs and vanquish'd host&mdash;
"As Niobe (when Juno's hate
Pursu'd to death her tender care)
I moan my offspring's hapless fate,
And vex with sighs the passing air.
Not with less grief my bosom heaves,
Than did the breast of Hector's sire,
When slain were all his Dardan chiefs,
And Ilium blaz'd with Grecian fire.
For lo!  where heap'd with slaughter'd Gauls,
Is Louisburgh a ruin'd pile!
Her bulwarks and stupendous walls
Are whelm'd in dust and ashes vile.
Imperial Lawrence heaves with woe,
Of many a Gallic chief the grave,
And as his purple billows flow,
To hoary Neptune's coral cave,
Tells how my vaunting troops, o'erthrown,
Britannia's matchless prowess own;
Tells how Quebec, so late for martial might renown'd,
Her rocky ramparts crush'd, lies smoaking on the ground.

II.3.
What force can Albion's warlike sons dismay,
Dauntless who mingle in th' embattled plain?
What toils dishearten, or what dangers stay?
Not rocks, nor deserts, nor the boisterous main!
How torn my laurels, by her Wolfe's dread arm!
O'er mountains huge, who chas'd my armed band,
Rouz'd the fierce savage, with dire war's alarm,
And hurl'd his thunder o'er my carnag'd land!
No more gay trophies shall emblaze my name,
Nor Gallia's realms re-echo with my fame.
Lost are those honours which my heroes gain'd,
With blood my temples and my domes are stain'd;
But men directed by a heav'nly hand,
'Tis vain, 'tis mad, 'tis impious to withstand"&mdash;
She spoke, and mounting from a lofty height,
Westward she wing'd her solitary flight.

III.1.
Thus has Britannia's glory beam'd
Where'er bright Phaebus, from his car,
To earth his chearful rays hath stream'd,
Adown the chrystal vault of air.
Enough o'er Britain's shining arms,
Hath victory display'd her charms,
Amid the horrid pomp of war&mdash;
Descend then, PEACE, angelic maid,
And smooth Bellona's haggard brow;
Haste to diffuse thy healing aid,
Where'er implor'd by scenes of woe.
Henceforth, whoe'er disturbs thy reign,
Or stains the world with human gore,
Be they from earth (a gloomy train!)
Banish'd to hell's profoundest shore;
Where vengeance, on Avernus' lake,
Rages with furious Ate bound;
And black rebellion's fetters shake,
And discord's hideous murmurs sound;
Where envy's noxious snakes entwine
Her temples round, in Gorgon-mood,
And bellowing faction rolls supine
Along the flame be-curled flood!&mdash;
Hence, then, to that accursed place,
Disturbers of the human race!
And with you bear ambition wild, and selfish pride,
With persecution foul, and terror by her side.

III.2.
Thus driv'n from earth war's horrid train&mdash;
O PEACE, thou nymph divine, draw near!
Here let the muses fix their reign,
And crown with fame each rolling year.
Source of joy and genuine pleasure,
Queen of quiet, queen of leisure,
Haste thy votaries to chear!
Cherish'd beneath thy hallow'd rule,
Shall Pennsylvania's glory rise;
Her sons, bred up in Virtue's school,
Shall lift her honors to the skies&mdash;
A state thrice blest with lenient sway,
Where liberty exalts the mind;
Where plenty basks the live long day,
And pours her treasures unconfin'd.
Hither, ye beauteous virgins tend,
With Arts and Science by your side,
Whose skill th' untutor'd morals mend,
And to fair honor mankind guide;
And with you bring the graces three,
To fill the soul with glory's blaze;
Whose charms give charms to poesy,
And consecrate th' immortal lays&mdash;
Such as when mighty Pindar sung,
Thro' the Alphean vallies rung;
Or such as, Meles, by thy lucid fountains flow'd,
When bold Maeonides with heav'nly transports glow'd.

III.3.
To such, may Delaware, majestic flood,
Lend, from his flow'ry banks, a ravish'd ear;
Such notes as may delight the wise and good,
Or saints celestial may endure to hear!
For if the muse can aught of time descry,
Such notes shall sound thy crystal waves along,
Thy cities fair with glorious Athens vie,
Nor pure Ilissus boast a nobler song.
On thy fair banks, a Fane to Virtue's name
Shall rise &mdash; and Justice light her holy flame.

All hail then, PEACE!  restore the golden days,
And round the ball diffuse Britannia's praise;
Stretch her wide empire to the world's last end,
Till Kings remotest to her sceptre bend!
