ROBIN RED-BREAST, WITH THE BEASTS.
One that had in her Infant State,
While playing at her Father's Gate,
Seen, and was most hugely smitten
With young Dog and dirty Kitten,
Had took them up and lug'd 'em in,
And made the Servants wash 'em clean,

When she to a fit Age was grown,
To be sole Mistress of her own,
Then to her Favour and strange Trust,
She rais'd these two; in rank the first
The Dog:  who with guilt Collar grac'd,
Strutted about.  The Cat was plac'd
O'er all the House to domineer,
And kept each wight of her in fear;
While he o'er all the plains had pow'r,
That savage Wolves might not devour
Her Flocks.  She gave him charge great care
To take:  But Beasts uncertain are.
Now see by these what Troubles rise
To those who in their Choice unwise
Put trust in such; for he soon join'd
With Beasts of Prey the Dog combin'd,
Who kill'd the Sheep, and tore the Hind:
While he would stand, and grin, and bark,
Concealing thus his Dealings dark.
A Wolf, or so, sometimes he'd take,
And then, O what a Noise he'd make!
But with wild Beasts o'er-run yet are
The Plains:  Some die for want of Fare,
Or torn, or kill'd; the Shepherds find
Each day are lost of ev'ry kind.

Thy silly Sheep lament in vain,
Of their hard Fate, not him complain.
The Shepherds, and the Servants all,
Against the Traitor loudly baul:
But there was none that dar'd to tell
Their Lady what to them befel;
For Puss, a Fox of wondrous Art
Brought in to help, and take their part,
By whose Assistance to deceive,
She made her ev'ry Lye believe.

One lucky Day, when she was walking
In her Woods, with Servants talking,
And stop'd to hear how very well
A Red-Breast sung, then him to dwell
With her she call'd:  He came, and took
His place next to a Fav'rite Rook.

Where Robin soon began to sing
Such Songs as made the House to ring;
He sung the Loss and Death of Sheep,
In Notes that made the Lady weep:
How for this Charge the Dog unfit,
Took part with Foes, and Shepherds bit;
Ev'n from his Birth he did him trace,
And shew him Cur of shabby Race;
The first by wandring Beggars fed,
His Sire advanc'd, turn'd Spit for Bread;
Himself each trust had still abus'd;
To steal what he should guard, was us'd
From Puppy:  known where e'er he came,
Both vile and base, and void of Shame.

The Cat he sung that none could match
For venom'd Spite, or cruel Scratch;
That from a Witch transform'd she came,
Who kitten'd three of equal Fame:
This first, one dead, of Tabby Fur
The third survives, much noise of her
Had been:  A Cat well known, with ease
On Errands dark, o'er Land and Seas.
She'd Journeys take to Cub of Bear,
From these intriguing Beasts, who swear
They'll bring him to defend the Wrong
That they have done.  Again he sung,
How Tabby once, in Moon-light Night,
Trotted with Letter Fox did write;
In which he sends his best Respects
To the She-Bear, and thus directs:
"Madam, said he, your Cub safe send,
None shall his Worship soon offend;
Its all I can at present do
To serve him, as his Friends well know."

At this the Beasts grew in such rage,
That none their Fury could assuage;
Nay, Puss her Lady would have scratch'd,
And tore her Eyes, but she was watch'd;
For she'd set up her Back, and mew,
And thrice ev'n in her Face she flew.
The Dog, like an ungrateful Spark,
At her would dare to snarl and bark.
Her Tenants wondring stood to hear
That she their Insolence would bear;
And offer'd their Assistance to
Soon make them better manners know:
But she, to avoid all farther Rout;
Her Window opening, turn'd Bob out;
Hoping that then her Beasts would live
In Peace, and no Disturbance give.

Yet nothing She can do avails,
Their Rage against her still prevails;
Tho' Puss was warn'd to fear their Fate
In Lines (by old prophetic Cat,
Write before her Transformation,
When she was in the Witch's Station)
Foretelling thus:  "When Beasts are grown
To certain heights, before unknown
Of Human Race, some shall aloud
Inflame and arm a dreadful Croud,
Who in vast Numbers shall advance,
And to new Tunes shall make them dance.
When this begins, no longer hope,
For all remains is Axe and Rope."

But not deter'd by this they dar'd,
With some who of their Plunder shar'd,
T' affront their Lady, and conspire
To many with her Mony hire,
Contemning her, to pay undue
Regards unto this Bestial Crew:
Tho' these resembled Human Shapes,
They were indeed no more than Apes;
Who some in House, and some in Wood,
And others in high Boxes stood,
That chatt'ring made such noise and stir,
How all was due to Fox and Cur:
Till by their false deluding way,
She found her Flocks begin to stray.

Still Robin does for her his Care
And Zeal express, on whom yet are
His thoughts all fix'd.  On her he dreams
Each Night.  Her Praises are his Themes
In Songs all day.  Now pearch'd on Tree,
Finding himself secure and free,
He pertly shakes his little Wings,
Sets up his Throat:  Again she sings,
That She had left no other way
To save her Flocks, and end this Fray,
But soon to her Assistance take
One who could make these Monsters shake;
A well-known Huntsman who has skill
The fiercest Beasts to tame or kill:
At her Command he'd come, and he
Would make her great, and set them free;
That should these Beasts some evil day
Bring Cub into her Grounds, she may
Depend that not her self they'll spare,
Since to insult her now they dare:
All she at best can hope for then,
Is to be safe shut up in Den;
Since by sure signs all these Ingrate
Are known to bear her deadly Hate.

He ends his Song, and prays to Heaven,
That She may have the Wisdom given,
Before it be too late to take
Such Resolutions, as may make
Her safe, and that these Beasts no more
To ravage in the Plains have pow'r.
