The Queen of morn, in crimson robes array'd,
The shadow-woven curtains now withdrew
From round her roseate couch, and lifting high
Above the Orient God her blushing cheek,
Soft, amorous smiles, upon him cast, and woo'd
Him from his blazing chamber &mdash; Boone advised,
Though dappled darkness yet had not retired
From the drear dingle's, Hill-o'er shadow'd deeps,
To march forthwith on the important search.
Vulosko seconded the advice, and said,
'Twas best they should, so shape their course that day,
As at this home that evening to arrive,
Where he expected they would find Delome
With an assistant force.  'Twas so agreed;
And o'er the dew-bath'd rocks they onward went.
Some miles they journey'd o'er the frowning crags
And oak-crown'd Hills; when from a glady dell
Borne on the flickering breeze, a doleful moan
Their ears alarm'd!  In still suspense they stood&mdash;
It came again &mdash; Its source with cautious step
They sought, and found enveloped in stiff gore,
Exhausted, ghastly, pale, a wounded Wretch
Upon the cold and humid earth out stretch'd.
His blood-disfigur'd head he feebly rais'd,
His pain-swol'n eyes upon the strangers turn'd,
And piteously their kind relief implored.
They bore him to a distant stream, assuaged
With cooling draughts his fever-heated thirst,
The burning of his blister'd tongue allay'd,
His fester'd wounds deterg'd, and to them bound
The juicy leaves of herbs medicinal.
His languid powers in some degree revived,
They now inquired what was the hapless cause
Of his adverse condition.  He replied:
"My generous Benefactors, you behold
In me a man deserving direst Death!
'Tis meet, thus on Eternity's dark verge,
That I should cease, by lies or other sin,
To add to that soul-sinking load of guilt
That burns e'en now with Hell's hot flames, my heart!
But oh kind Strangers!  Spare the waning spark
Which yet of my most wretched life remains;
That I may all its fervors dedicate,
To pleading with the good benevolent God,
Who heard the death-doom'd Thief, that with him hung
Upon the cruel cross, and spared the suppliant's soul."
While thus he spake, conflicting hopes, and fears,
With agitation shook, the anxious breasts
Of Melville and Vulosko.  He continued.
I once had honor, credit, wealth, and friend;
But by MISCHANCE was of my riches robb'd
And all the rest soon fled.  My creditors,
Though few were hard &mdash; they plunged me into prison;
I swore Insolvency and was released.
My Friends grew cold, and Scorn's contemptuous sneer,
And pitiless grin, my morbid heart disturb'd,
Wheree'er I went. &mdash; INTEMPERANCE promised peace;
At least some respite from oppressive pain.
I wed the infernal Prostitute, and soon,
In deepest Poverty, and Vice, was whelm'd.
To save myself from drear duress again,
A league of predatory Rogues I joined
Who in these Mountains have a crag-hid Cave
In which they live and hoard their spoils."  "Oh God!"
In extacy, Vulosko cried.  "Oh God!
We adore thy Mercy, thy Benignity,
All-gracious Father, humbly we adore!
Thou wilt again restore our bosom's love!
Then eager Melville thus.  "Unfortunate man!
Proceed and tell the fate of that sweet Maid,
Whom late, from Happiness and Peace you tore:
Oh quickly tell!"  The astonished wretch resumed:
"Oh Sirs!  you rend my heart with wounds more deep
More poignantly severe than those which pain
My mangled body.  The emotions shewn
In your expressive voice and looks, evince,
That she, the Maid whose fate you wish to learn,
Is by Affection's tender ties, to you,
In close endearment bound.  It makes to me,
My shame, my infamy more horrible;
That they whom to injure most I've taken part
And those who can such generous kindness shew!
Your pious praise, when painfully oppress'd
By heavy woe, the Heav'n-daring sins
Of my ungrateful soul by contrast paints,
In colors black as Hell's Tartarean shades.
Of that unhappy Maiden's dreadful state,
I can but little say.  Not far we'd gone
From the accursed spot, where first our gripe
Her lovely limbs engrasp'd; when to the charge
Of one more ruffian and myself was given
The weeping Innocent.  To us belong'd,
To bear her on the infernal den,
The magazine of our unvended spoil:
While o'er a different route our comrades sped,
A small division of our band to meet,
Who were with plunder and provisions laden,
And from the settlement a smoother way
Pursued.  As though this dreary glade we impel'd
The pity-supplicating Captive on;
My fellow-ruffian rudely shock'd her ear
With language lewd, indecent, taunting, base!
Abandon'd, guilty, harden'd as I was;
My soul such shameful cruelty abhor'd.
I bade him cease!  With huffish air he swore,
His tongue should never brook restraint in Hell,
Much less on earth.  And as he spake he grasp'd
In his unmanner'd arms the shrieking Maid.
My Indignation rose, I seized him fast,
And broke his ruffian gripe.  He drew his sword;
Mine too was instantaneously unsheathed:
With wrathful clash they met, and adverse thrusts,
From mutual wounds, brought adverse spouts of blood.
Hot raged the fray, until my dexter arm
A deep, relaxing gash received, and drop'd
Its reeking steel. &mdash; Our pistols were uncharged;
My cursed antagonist now felt secure,
And turn'd triumphantly around to claim
The beauteous TROPHY &mdash; When behold she'd fled!
His eye at distance caught her snowy form,
As near the margin of the open vale she sought
With timid speed, and ample laurel brake.
The rage-invigorated Demon ran
In swift pursuit, although with the red streams
Which issued from his wounds, his foot-steps smoked.
But ere the glade's bloom-purpled edge he reach'd
She pierc'd the mazy thickets virent gloom.
He disappear'd &mdash; No more I saw or heard."
"Oh then," Vulosko ardently exclaim'd
"Perhaps my darling daughter has escaped
The stygian pit which threaten'd to engulph
Her mortal peace!  Oh God!  she yet may live
Beneath thy hallow'd wing protected, safe
From Hell's horrific fiends!  Let's haste, my friends!
HOPE whispers sweetly to my sorrowing heart!
O!  if she has eluded the pursuit
Of her Satanic foe, she may e'en now
Beneath the shelter of her humble home,
Or in the solitary forest-shade,
Be pouring Gratitude, to that great God,
To whom, her kind deliverance she owes.
As speedily as possible, let's learn
Her situation; if in these mountain-wilds
She wanders lost; although a paradise
Compared to the tartarean den she scap'd;
A thousand terrors yet must agitate
Her timid heart, and render quick relief
Supremely grateful.  But, which Heaven forbid!
But, if she groans a victim to the power
Of those predacious Villains; Hell itself,
Could scarce her pain augment, or render aid
More needful.  Then 'tis meet that every nerve
Should to the tardy task exertion lend,
Of bearing hence this wounded, hapless man!"
Of flexile boughs a litter soon they wove,
And onward bore the penitential wretch.&mdash;

From the commanding summit of a ridge,
Whose cloud-impending pinnacles o'erlook
The wide-expanded stretch of all the Hills
Between the Atlantic and Pacific Seas,
He pointed to their view the craggy mound
In which the Robbers had their dark abode.&mdash;
Just as the sun his flaming face had bow'd
Behind the Alleganean peaks, they reach'd
Vulosko's lowly cottage.  There Delome
In waiting with a little host they found;
But no Melcena's animating smile
The Father's and the Lover's hopes confirm'd.
In converse on the theme of high concern
The melancholy evening linger'd off,
And Night to necessary rest was given.

At morning's dewy dawn the dauntless band
Arose innerv'd; resolved ere night to burst
The infernal bolts that bar'd the rock arch'd gate,
Through which to their dark subterranean den
The hellish plunderers pass'd.  Old Ralph was left
To nurse Vonploor, the wounded Penitent;
From whom directions were obtain'd, by which
Our Heroes best the horrid cave could find.
Before the flaming wings of flying Day,
Had from the mountain's breezy summit brush'd
The morning's sparkling dews, the midway steeps,
With vigorous tread, the little phalanx scaled:
And as the culminating orb of noon,
Roll'd blazing on the equinoctial plane,
Their breasts they bent high o'er the steepy KNOBS,
Of the rough Robber-sheltering RIDGE'S side.
When its cloud-shouldering summit they attain'd
In consultation on a shaded rock
They sat; and lo!  before them; wildly pale,
Her dark-brown, breeze-buoy'd locks, disorder'd, loose,
Swift-gliding through the storm-dismember'd shrubs,
And thunder-riven rocks, in torn attire,
The lost, the unexpected MAID appeared!
Vulosko cried, "GREAT GOD!  MY CHILD!  MY CHILD!"
And Melville too exclaim'd aloud, MY LOVE!
MY DEAR MELCENA!  HOLY GOD OF HEAVEN,
MY ANGEL LIVES!  And both with phrenzied joy
And rapturous agitation ran to meet
The sweet transported Maid; who heard and knew
The dear-remembered voice; and speechless met
Their loved embrace &mdash; A soul-entrancing scene,
A warmly-melting time of tenderest joy
Of Heaven-infused, o'erwhelming bliss, it was!
Adown Vulosko's sorrow-channel'd check
The tears of fond paternal extacy
In rills translucent stream'd &mdash; In thrilling trance
Both Melville and Melcena sweetly wept.
The silent transports, the delicious gush
Of their fond meeting o'er; first having told
What information from Vonploor they'd gain'd;
With ardent eagerness, the doating Father
And tender Lover tremblingly inquired,
What horrors, pains and fears she'd undergone,
Since the disastrous hour that ruffian hands,
With hellish violence, her angel limbs
Engrasp'd.  The languid Beauty thus replied.
"My dear, my ever kind affectionate friends!
The God whose thunder smites these ragged rocks,
His holy power has kindly interposed
To save me from the most unhappy doom
That Demons could devise, than dreadest-death
A thousand times more dire!

The steely clash
No sooner had commenced between Vonploor
And the infuriate fiend with whom he fought,
Than from them with my utmost speed I fled.
By crouching closely to the mossy earth,
Deep in the laurel brake's anfractuous maze,
The conquering Villain's curs'd pursuit I scaped.
Enchanting as a blooming paradise
The gloomy desert then to me appeared.
But still to annoy my fluttering bosom's peace,
My Melville's fate and Father's frantic woe
Continually were present to my mind.
For much I feared my LOVE'S impetuous steed
With furious rage had dashed him on the rocks,
Or burst his head against some fatal tree.&mdash;
As NIGHT from the deep dingles darkening rose,
Forth from a thousand dreary caverns crept
Her bestial brood.  From hill to hill their howl
And blood-congealing cries were wildly pour'd&mdash;
Now scatter'd widely o'er the murky waste,
The glare-eyed Prowlers vent their echoing yells&mdash;
Now gather'd in terrific groupes they growl,
They grin and gnash their teeth, while glyns and hills
Reverberate the wild vociferous sounds.
In unremitted dread the livelong night
I pass'd:  each moment menaced me with death.
The panting Wolves and whining Panthers paced
Almost incessantly around the spot,
Where 'till the rise of dawn I trembling lay.&mdash;
The morning beams drove to their dismal dens
The dreadful herds. &mdash; I rose, in hopes ere night
To find the path that would conduct me home:
But what direction I had best pursue
A frowning forest, mountainous and vast,
In which my senses seem'd in the south to rise
And change his blazing orbit towards the North.
Hood-wink'd Conjecture was my only guide;
She pointed out her way, and on I went,
Slow-winding through the laurel-tangled brakes,
And o'er the lofty, rough, and rock-brow'd hills,
But found my blind conductress led me wrong.
Again the day-beams ceas'd to illume the wilds;
Again the night in sleepless fear I pass'd.
Another morning shone, another day
Roll'd tediously away; again the shades
Of howling darkness hung upon the Hills,
And found me still bewildered in the waste.
The air was warm, exhausted Nature claimed
The renovating aid of friendly rest.
I rak'd beneath a rock a couch of leaves,
On which my wearied system sunk to sleep;
The Owl's drear hoot, the Wolf's distressful howl
Invaded not my dream-disturb'd repose.&mdash;
Until the sunny streams of smiling day
Pour'd warmly on my dew-damp'd cheek, I slept.
I then arose, and wandered on again
Almost despairing e'er to find the path,
Or pass the wildering Forest's frightful bounds:
Not distant hence, more than a mile or two;
As o'er the steeps of this stupendous ridge
I clambered, lo!  among the rudest cliffs
Which crown its craggy brow, all red with blood,
The horrid Villains, whose infernal hands
First drag'd me from your tender love, I saw!
From the huge body of some slaughter'd Beast,
The smoking hide they tore &mdash; With shuddering fear
Their dread vicinity I quickly fled,
And had not yet my trembling flight relax'd,
When your enrapturing voice announced relief
From all the horrors that appall'd my soul.
O my dear friends!  your presence pours a flood
Of sweet felicity upon my heart;
And thence has swept away the waves
Of dark and terrible Despair, which drown'd
My Hopes, and bred DISTRACTION'S lizard Brood
In crawling myriads through my dreary Breast!
Since we departed from thy Father's House
My Melville!  no refreshing nourishment
Beside the mountain-stream has touch'd my lips."
"Excuse, excuse, my dear!"  in tenderest tones,
The weeping Melville hastily exclaim'd;
"Our seeming negligence.  O'er-powering joy
At meeting thus our Love alive, unharmed!
And anxious eagerness to hear detail'd
The scenes through which you pass'd, our souls absorb'd;
And all attention to your present wants
Precluded."  She aver'd the joy express'd
In their endearing extacy, convey'd
A more enlivening comfort to her heart,
Than all the pleasures which the sensual world
Could give, and that she felt keen Hunger's tooth
As little then, as when they left Delome's,
So had their presence fill'd with bliss her soul!
Vulosko, while she spake, spread on a rock
Moss-carpteted, the little store of food
Their scrip supplied, and bade his daughter eat.
Boone now advised without delay to march
And seize or slay the Robbers ere again
Their Den they enter'd: &mdash; all forthwith agreed.&mdash;
Melcena pointed out their course, and on
They hasten'd leaving her behind in care
Of Melville and Vulosko, who both burn'd
To aid in the avengement of her woes.
But through her tender importunities
Supported by the united voice of all,
They were at length prevail'd upon to stay.
The little host soon reach'd the craggy piles
Which shelter'd the predacious band, and soon
They saw the Ruffians closely clustering round
A butcher'd Buffalo, with reeking arms
Deep plunging in the dead Beast's bloody bowels.
While thus the unsuspecting Villains plied
Their sanguinary work; our Heroes ken'd
The entrance of their subterranean Den,
And secretly its open Gate approach'd.
'Twas not their wish the guilty fiends to kill;
But seize and offer them a sacrifice
To offended JUSTICE, on the sacred Altar
Of stern impartial LAW. &mdash; With this intent,
Perceiving that the Robbers were unarm'd;
A part remain'd to guard the gate, and part
Crept slyly on to seize the unwary foe&mdash;
When from behind the intervening rocks
The Ruffians saw the approaching band emerge;
They wildly ran for refuge towards the wood,
Whose gloomy borders bound the southern side
Of the stupendous rock-built Battlements.
Our Heroes follow'd on in swift pursuit;
And as the Villains raised a craggy ledge,
Boone and Delome gave word to Fire!  and Hills
And Ravines with the death-fraught thunders roar'd,
And all the flying Wretches fell, save five.
These were pursued, and three were quickly seized.
So fast their unarrested fellows fled
That all fell short in the pursuit save Boone&mdash;
He unfatigued and ardent, drop'd his Gun and pouch,
And, like the springing Stag, with vigorous speed
Press'd swiftly on, and drew at every bound
Still nearer to the straining Caitiff's heels.
They chang'd their course, and sought by stratagem
Their fleet pursuer's valorous life to end&mdash;
The mighty mountain broke abruptly off
Near by; and form'd a precipice immense,
Of awful height, and aspect rough and dark.
To its rock-frowning verge the Ruffians ran;
And wheeling round, sprang furiously at Boone;
Who, so impetuous was his keen pursuit,
Had not the dread abyss discern'd, but met
Their rageful might!  In vigorous grapplement
Upon the dizzy brink, with equal power
A while they tugg'd; but soon with forceful blow,
Boone fell'd the stoutest Ruffian to the ground,
And ere he rose, precipitately down
The dreadful steep his fellow demon hurl'd
From crag to crag with headlong force he fell;
His blood and brains bespattering, as he smote
Their jutting points &mdash; His horrid dying groan
And last tremendous curse were vented, ere
His batter'd body sunk one third the gulph.
Aghast, through the wild gloom, his haggard ghost
All horror-giddy flew, while round it wheel'd,
Like hungry Condors round their fluttering prey,
In clattering circles, claw-stretch'd, skinny, fierce,
Grim flocks of Hell's black Imps, a dire escort!
And drag'd it screaming to their dark Domains!

With ease, Boone managed now the prostrate Wretch;
Behind his back his brawny hands he bound,
And forced him on, to where his fellow fiends,
Some dead, some gasping out their dying breath,
And others miserably participant
Of his own frightful but deserved fate,
Lay gory on the blood-encrimson'd rocks&mdash;

To animate the triumphs of the day,
Delome in haste a messenger dispatch'd,
To bring Vulosko and the enamor'd pair:
Who soon arrived and hail'd their Friends' success&mdash;

To explore the murky cavern's rock-arch'd vaults,
Now the united band in haste prepare.
With glaring flambeaux down its dark descent
They pass'd &mdash; a gloomy dank and drear abode
It was; which suited well a murderer's soul!
Its darkness seem'd from stygian dungeons drawn:
A thousand elfish ECHOES muttering deep,
With mincing mockery issued back each sound
That floated through the gloom.  With Wizard GROANS,
And grinning GNOMES, to Fancy's phrenzied ear
And wild distorted eye, the darksome Den
Seem'd thickly fill'd. &mdash; Broad horror-sounding sheets
Of Petrifaction, from the arches hung;
To which the trembling hand of timid FEAR
Would cautiously approach; lest some rude touch
Might shake their hoarsely-hollow ringings forth;
And rouse the fierce, fire-belching Monsters up,
The red-eyed FURIES, and grim Dragons huge,
To fill with yellings, slaughter, flames and blood,
With sulphurous stench, and rock-convulsing roar,
The subterranean clefts, and thundering vaults!&mdash;

When to the dark declivity's extreme,
They wound their way a level room received
Within its vast caliginous expanse,
The adventurous Heroes.  Here they saw the spoils
Of many a midnight pillage, rudely stored.
Here rusted rifles, blood-stain'd scimitars,
And numerous horrid implements of Death,
On every hand promiscuously appeared.
Huge, shaggy Bear-skins, brindled Buffalo-hides,
The long-prong'd Antlers of the slaughter'd Elk,
The Wolf's grim jaws, the Panther's spotted pelt,
And all the gore-smear'd spoils that crown the chace,
Were seen uncouthly strewn around.
And here with Gold and Silver coinage filled,
Two wooden coffers stood; the hellish hoard
Of horrid Homicidal villainy!
Through each compartment, nook, and noisome cell
Having now the ruffian residence explored,
Our Heroes thence the treasur'd pelf removed;
And into equal parcels so arranged,
That with facility it might be borne,
To where their future pleasure should direct.
They next the corses of the Caitiffs slain,
Deposit in the dank and rayless Den,
And change their habitation to a grave!&mdash;

The sun had now his daily round perform'd,
And Twilight riding o'er the mountain peaks,
In her soft dusky Car, the starry gems
That beautify her concave Canopy
Disclosed, and warn'd our Heroes to prepare
A lodging for the Night.  An ample Tent,
With broad-leaf'd boughs and beech-wood bark o'erspread;
In which the ruffian Robbers sometimes lodg'd,
Stood near the cavern's mouth; a shelter snug
From rains and dewy damps.  Our Heroes there,
To pass the Night prepared.  A row of Lamps,
Suspended from the ridge-pole of the tent,
Were lighted, and the prisoners well secured:
Then all to rest resign'd.  Around the place,
Mild Slumber shed her sweet nectarean dews;
On every eye the honied droppings fell,
Except the restless Captives' &mdash; They, nor sleep,
Nor one alleviating pause from pain,
Experienced through the lingering lead-wing'd Night.
Some hours in calm repose the Sleepers past;
But ere one half of her nocturnal course
The ceaselessly revolving globe had roll'd;
A deep impetuous burst of thunder fell
With awful fury on their startled ears;
And dreaming Fancy's silken finery tore,
And all her glittering glassy fabrics broke.
The awaken'd Slumberers rose &mdash; With raging roar
The winds lash'd to and fro the crashing trees.
As black as collied exhalations, hung
Thick hovering o'er the howling Hills, a Cloud
Tumultuous, huge.  Like Niagara's flood,
As down the foaming steep abrupt it sinks,
The fury-agitated tempest roar'd.
Along its black convolving billows blaz'd,
The barbed flashes of electric flame.
Down through the accumulating masses roll'd,
With louder violence, the vollied peals.
Great Allegany's towering turrets rock'd;
The forest monsters whined, and howl'd with fear&mdash;
Imagination's wide-expanding eye,
Beheld the awful Angel of the storm,
In black tempestuous terrors thickly clothed;
Fierce lashing with tremendous wings the clouds,
And rolling through the glooms, the flaming balls
Of dreadful lightning &mdash; Now descending down
The storm, in the hoarse thunder's circling gurge,
Now rising swiftly up the murky Vast,
The furious Genius cleaves the broad expanse,
And drives against the Hills from either wing,
Repeated blasts of desolating STORM,
With bolted vengeance charg'd; uprooting towers
Of rocks, and tearing trees wide-branching, huge,
From their old beds.  Around the Cavern's mouth,
In every sweeping gust, the cries and groans
Of woe-distracted ghosts seem'd wildly mixed.
From their big reservoirs, the ponderous clouds
Wide o'er the Hills, a streaming deluge pour'd;
From cliffs to cliffs the tumbling torrents gush'd,
From turgent, down the distant dingles roar'd.
While thus throughout the elemental world,
The violent tumultuation raged,
And ghostly horrors seem'd to howl around;
A ghastly Figure gore-grim'd, tall, and wan,
Came limping to the entrance of the Tent
And instantly fled back!  Each Hero's hand
Engrasp'd his Gun, each eye gaz'd on the gloom,
And by the lightning's coruscation saw,
The meagre miscreant enter the drear Den.
They lighted by a lamp, a faggot huge,
And Boone led on through the sepulchral vaults
The perilous pursuit.  At every step,
Rough clattering thunders shook the impending rocks.
With rude disruption and disordering crash
Were menaced, the stupendous shuddering walls,
And roaring arches!  Grisly grin'd around
The ruffian Corses, pallid, swollen, stiff!
Death-damps upon their dismal visages
With spectral beams, and livid glimmerings shone.
The affrighted WRETCH, as on our Heroes press'd,
The gore-incrusted carcases beheld:
Fear-quaking, to the farthest nook he crept;
The shallow current of his veins was chill'd.
All wildly horrent stood his creeping hair!
His swollen protruded eyes with horror stared;
Convulsively his cracking teeth were clench'd,
And all his limbs with chilly shudderings shook!
At the pursuers' feet o'erpowering he fell.
They bore him thence, and found he was the Wretch,
Who with Vonploor his hellish arm had tried!
His strength by hunger, wounds, and waste of blood
So weaken'd was, that from the hour he fail'd
To o'ertake the lovely Maid, his languid limbs
To reach the Cave, their utmost force had plied.
But not until this night of awful gloom,
As the drear place arrived.  The Lightning's blaze
Illumed the rugged way, and gave him power
The destin'd spot to find. &mdash; The wearied band
First having given the Wretch some nourishment
And bound him fast, the care-dispelling God
Of mild repose again invoked. &mdash; The storm
Had now begun to wear a calmer face&mdash;
Far distant in the flashing firmament
Its muttering fulminations died away&mdash;
The imagined horrors of the scene had flown,
And through the chasms of disuniting clouds,
The stellar sparklers peep'd; as if to spy
By furtive glance the ravage of the storm.
The bright nocturnal Goddess drew aside
Her vapoury veil, and smiled upon the world!

When through the morning's floating fogs, the sun
His earliest tints diffused, the Heroes rose;
And o'er the twinkling Hills transported, hied
Until again Vulosko's home they reach'd.
Serenely cheerful every face appear'd,
Except the guilty Captives'; their a gloom
Of melancholy sullenness o'ercast;
And so reluctantly they march'd along,
That all their steps with leaden weights seem'd clog'd.
In custody of the assistant band
Brought by Delome, they all, except Vonploor,
To prison were convey'd; there to remain
Until his convalescence gave him power,
As "witness for the State," before the bar
Of injured Justice to appear, and prove
The guilt of his more criminal colleagues.

When at the lowly mansion had arriv'd
The little phalanx, good Delome proposed
To accelerate the nuptial rites,
That Boone and his companions might partake
The sweet festivities; and all agreed.
Old Ralph was to the settlement dispatch'd,
With orders to invite their youthful friends,
And bring the holy Priest.  Three days elapsed
And lo!  the brilliant bridal Guests appear'd!
A fine umbrageous arbor had been form'd,
In which, the Hymeneal rites to solemnize.
Its foliaged Canopy, and sun-excluding sides,
With all the flowery beauties of the Hills,
Melcena and her skilful servant maids
Had richly hung, and gracefully adorn'd.
The Sweet-brier rose, and Honey-suckle flower,
The crimson lilly, Heart's-ease, Jessamine,
And Cowslip interwove in wild festoons,
Around the bower Edenian odours breathed.
From end to end a sylvan table stood,
With sumptuous viands spread, and mantling Wines.
Delicious mountain dainties nicely dress'd,
Were there &mdash; sweet, Pheasant Venison and Trout.
Around the rocky wilds the gaysome guests
Awhile with wonder gaz'd, unknown to them
What charms could bind Vulosko's heart to scenes,
With rude unsocial Solitude so clothed.
But soon the genial flow of virtuous mirth,
Their first reflections from their minds dispersed,
And calm convivial converse charm'd their hearts,
And made the Mountain bower a Paradise!
The slumbering raptures of their juvenile joys,
The Lovers' hoary-templed Fathers felt,
By memory's potent impulse warmly waked.
A flash, of virtuous Pleasure's vivid flame
Vulosko's sorrow-clouded breast illumed,
And kindled in his eye the sparkling beams
Of tender animation.  Heaven's bright face
Serenely shed its sunny smiles around,
And the wild Songsters sung through all the wood
Ten thousand strains of mountain Melody.
On pinions plumed with Pleasure's purest down
The happy evening pass'd.  The bridal pair
In silent extacy sat side by side,&mdash;
The flush of Love, warm on their meeting cheeks,
Its finely erubescent tints diffused.
Mild, languid emanations from their eyes
Of sweet expressive blue, effusive flow'd:
Soul-breathing kisses, secretly they quaff'd
From love-dew'd lips.  Their hands in mutual clasp,
Were glowingly embraced.  In unison,
With transport's melting thrill, their pulses throb'd;
And every breath was incense to the God
Of nuptial bliss.  The hour at length arrived
In which, the coronation of their love
The Venerable Priest was to perform;
With mild solemnity the sacred task
Divinely he achiev'd.  The gleeful guests
Epithalamiums sang and festive lays
Until the jocund evening closed.

Next morn
Boone and his gallant comrades bade adieu
To the convivial Bevy, and resumed
Their mountain march.  Vulosko's grateful heart
Felt SORROW'S gush with PLEASURE'S currents mix,
While Boone's affectionate hand he press'd, and pray'd,
That holy Heaven would give protective power
To him and his magnanimous colleagues.&mdash;
At parting with such noble-hearted friends,
Melcena and her Melville too, were sad,
And every face in sympathetic gloom
Was wrap'd. &mdash; The affecting valediction o'er,
The innocent festivities again,
In all their harmless rapture were renew'd.
The venerable Vulosko and Delome
With joy, the juvenile jollity survey'd;
And edified at intervals, with virtuous lore
And sage remarks, on Nature, Books, and Man,
The taintless minds of the attentive youth.

