Inspire, immortal Spirits of the West!
With bolder energies my Muse's wing,
And light with stronger flame her tender eye,
That she unwearied o'er the loftiest ridge
That stretches in her frightful way may soar,
And while she soars, the wide stupendous Wilds
Throughout with lynxean penetration pierce,
And that she may in lays seraphic sing
The wonders of the numerous scenes she sees,
Her song with thy own sweetness melodize.

And thou my Muse!  with wildly melting grace,
Strike softly from the angel-woven wires
Of POESY'S bright HARP, sweet flowing strains;
To celebrate the gently sportive CHARMS
That spread their beauties through the blooming West;
And from the deep-ton'd chords their thundering notes,
With daring sweep arouse, till lofty song
The bold sublimity of the new world
Harmoniously proclaim; and loud resound
The bloody brunts of the first Western Wars,
And brave intrepid Boone's adventurous deeds.

Swift on, o'er the rude-featur'd Wilderness
The sinewy sons of Enterprise proceed.
Lo!  now the farthest mountain-ledge they scale,
And from its breezy summit raptured see,
Kentucky's rolling Hills and broad Campaigns!
Prophetic transports thrill'd their kindling hearts,
Unwonted ebullitions warm'd their blood,
And God's Omnipotence and Wisdom waked
Profoundest adoration in their souls;
As in continued prospect, they beheld
Green-mantled GROVES and blossom-tinted KNOLLS,
Extending coextensive with the ken
Of their wide-ranging Vision, and survey'd
Through prescient FANCY'S telescopic tube,
Republic-Institutions rising round
The rich EXPANSE, beneath the angelic aid,
OF CONQUEST-CROWN'D COLUMBIAN LIBERTY!

The wearisome asperities at length
Of Alleganean Battlements they pass,
And o'er the bloom-enamel'd vallies speed.
In sweet confusion, Nature's changeful charms
On every herb and spray hung loosely round,
And fill'd the waving Groves and odorous air,
And at each step in thicker plenty bloom'd:
Until before their fascinated eyes,
In careless pomp, great NATURE'S GARDEN, deck'd
With all the flecker'd pride of Paradise,
Its countless beauties spread.

The liquid lays
Of wild-wood warblers uninhibited before
By polish'd ear, in quavering rivulets stream'd,
From thousand-thousand plumy tubes around.
And as if Nature here her grand Menage
Had proudly fix'd; innumerous animals,
Of numerous kinds and various sizes, roam'd
In wild profusion through the rustling woods.
Dark-spreading droves of browsing Buffalos ranged
The mazy regions; slowly-marching now,
And pausing oft, beneath the pendant shade
They fought the flies, and cropt the juicy Cane:
Now priding in their empire uncontrol'd,
And glorying in the power of conscious might,
With sullen sportiveness they headlong cleave
The crackling brakes, and wildly rushing on,
Like a dark hurricane, the bladed groves,
The flowering plants, and virent herbage crush,
And shake with thundering sweep the sounding Hills.
In stately majesty the towering Elks
On every hand high-bounding, shook aloft
Their wide-diverging Antlers, snuffing strong
In every flying breeze the Strangers' breath;
And dashing over Hill and Brake and Copse,
Reverting oft a glance of timid wonder, sought
Security in gloom of deeper wilds.

In countless herds, the fleetest Quadruped
That treads Columbia's vast uncultured plains,
The agile fine-limb'd Deer, gave beauty, life,
And fascination to the wild-wood scenes.
Now in the high-grown shrubbery of the glade,
They lave their glossy sides, and sip the dew
Bright-glistening on the sweet exuberant flowers;
Or nip the savoury leaves and tender moss,
Which constitute, with their green-shady tints
The variegated Picture's beauteous ground.
Now, sheltered from the strong-descending blaze
Of noon-tide sunshine, they in mild repose,
Beneath broad-foliag'd boughs lie closely couch'd
On lairs of cooling grass, while round them sport,
In nimble frisky glee, their spotted brood.

Innumerous other more ferocious Beasts,
Gregarious some, but solitary most,
The deserts ranged; and through the thickets skulk'd,
Distaining many a Green with guiltless blood,
And holding the gramnivorous tribes in awe.

At length Red River's rich cane-border'd banks
Our Heroes reach'd; and there a shelter form'd
For a Nocturnal lodge and screen from storms.
They thence to explore the fruitful regions round
Excursions daily made, and oft the marks
Of sanguinary savages descried.
But unappall'd, with still increasing zeal
The wonder-waking wilds they deeper pierced;
Kentucky's rock-brow'd, frowning banks soon pass'd,
And over uplands plains and streams advanced,
'Till great Ohio's mellow shores they trode;
And saw with joy sublime, the PRINCELY TIDE
Devolve his silvery billows towards the Sea.
There oft the tawny tenants of the wood
To them in fierce and frightful groups appeared:
Now chasing through the brakes the bounding game,
Now driving o'er the stream the shapeless raft,
Or angling in the eddying deeps for fish.
But cautiously our Heroes shun'd their ken;
For every gang was arm'd complete.

The Hosts
Of Hell's infernal Empire had descried
The CONVOCATION of the Angelic Powers,
And through their emissaries ascertained
Its great design. &mdash; Their black tartarean hearts
With boiling gall o'erflow'd; &mdash; Hell's sulphury fires
Not hotter burn'd, than rag'd the demon flames
That heated up the furnace of their Breasts!
By all the purity of Heaven they swore,
And by Damnation's pitchy gulphs, to thwart
If in their power, the humanizing views
Of the Celestial Council; and forthwith
By subtle process, through the savage souls,
The poison of malignant passions pour'd,
And all their fury roused against the WHITES.
M'Bride and Findley and their valiant bands,
Who erst had visited in friendly guise
The "DARK AND BLOODY GROUND;" first waked the fire
Of Indian jealousy; which now the Fiends
Of nether darkness fed with secret fuel,
And fan'd into a flame of furious rage.
To FANTASIES transform'd, in midnight dreams,
They crouded Wizard-Horrors through the brain
Of the fierce Natives, representing Death
As whetting the "LONG KNIFE" to exterminate
Their tribes, while from its mighty blade huge streams
Of Indian blood in smoking sluices gush'd!
They saw their Groves and flowery Forests fall,
And desolating Conflagrations sweep
Their cany Vales and wig-wam Villages.
They saw their Deer, their Bears and Buffalos die,
And swarms of Whitemen covering all the plains,
Which from great Allegany's base extend,
To where MISSOURI'S thundering surges roll!
The presence of our Heroes in their land,
With tenfold dread their bloody VISIONS fill'd,
And kindling fierce resistance in their hearts,
Roused old and young of every tribe to arms.

To avert despair, and give the Indian's ire
A livelier effervescence; Hell's dire powers
With the ill-omen'd Visions, others mix'd
Of more auspicious aspect; Sachems Seers,
And all the ORACLES of Savage Faith,
With the conflicting Fantasies were fill'd.

In almost constant evagation, Boone
And his companions pass'd the summer tide;
Eluding every effort of the Foe,
To Sacrifice them to his BLOODY GOD.
The Hyperborean breath of Brumal winds,
Began the autumnal blooms and gossamer,
To scatter through the air and russet groves;
And still uninjured, the Adventurers brav'd
The dangers of the unreclaim'd domain.
But now the time of trouble and distress,
Of Cruelty, of Stratagem, and Death
Began to roll in view its bloody glooms.

One morning Boone, accompanied by his friend
And bold Companion Stewart, left their Camp
And Comrades, and with unmolested march,
O'er mellow Bottoms and rich Hills progress'd;
Until the broad-spread, gold-embellish'd skirts
Of the red sun, hung blazing in the trees.&mdash;

Through grass-crown'd glades and grape-empurpled groves,
Through forests with deep-flecker'd fruits adorn'd,
And fragrance of sweet fading flowers perfumed
In animating transports they had pass'd.&mdash;

As on the breezy brow of a small hill,
Entranced with admiration's glow they stood,
No fear or vexing passion in their breasts;
A savage herd rush'd from a neighboring brake,
And clutch'd their noble limbs.  Their day of Woe
Was dawning now.  But all the darksome glooms
Of its disastrous morn, could not appall
The dauntless Prisoners.  Valor buoy'd their souls
Above complaint, and patriot VIRTUES taught,
How the hot vengeance of the savage heart
To soothe. &mdash; Conciliating meekness, mix'd
With manly dignity, their actions mark'd;
And mild Hilarity her smiles diffused
Like Summer sunshine o'er their winning cheeks.
In rigid thraldom seven days they pass'd;
Mean while engaged, the savage Jealousies,
Suspicions, Animosities and Wrath,
Against the white Americans to extirp.
So far our noble Captives had success;
The rigor of their bondage was relax'd,
And they permitted to repose unbound,
In the Nocturnal lodge.  As there one Night
On fur-skin beds they lay, in wildest depth
Of a Cane thicket; Boone, perceiving Sleep
Its death-resounding seal had deeply stamp'd
On every savage eye; and apprehensive lest
A larger and less lenient band might soon
Become of their precarious Destiny
The Arbiters, if the auspicious chance
Then offering an escape was not embraced;
With gentle touch his slumbering Comrade wak'd;
And off with light and speedy steps they stole,
Through the anfractuous brake, in whose dark maze
They wandered on, till Night's dim-beaming lamps
In Morn's wide-flowing floods of flame were quench'd.
They then in haste to their old Camp return'd,
And found it plunder'd and their Comrades gone!
The tawny foe had driven them thence, and they
Believing their adventurous Chief was slain,
And fearing friendless Winter might combine,
Through medium of his trace-betraying snows,
Or otherwise, with the red foe to yield them
Into the blood-reeking hand of grisly Death,
Conceived it prudent to tread back the Wilds
To Carolina's civilized abodes,
And therefore thither steer'd.

In hunting Deer
And reconnoitering the New World, still Boone
And Stewart the unwasted hours employed:
First having rear'd on other ground, a Hut
To screen them from fierce Winter's freezing storms.

Oft from our HERO'S eye, the tears of Love
Translucent drop'd, as sleepless Memory glanced
On his dear wife and babes and distant Home.
But the SUPPORTING ANGEL, still his heart
With spirit-strengthening fortitude inspired,
And warm'd him with the fires of virtuous Fame.

Now Winter roll'd from bleak Northern skies,
His cloudy tempests towards the warmer West;
While Winds howl'd hoarsely through the bladed brakes,
And circumscribed within less ample bounds
The bold adventurers' quotidian tours.
As in their Camp one cold and blustering day,
Fire-warm'd they sat, retracing on the Map
Of honest memory, the deep-color'd lines
Of juvenile life, and sweet domestic joy;
A crackling in the tangled cane they heard,
And springing to the entrance of their tent,
Two Whitemen spied, whom soon they recognized,
And with the enraptured voice of transport hail'd.
For lo!  our HERO'S Brother and a Friend
Were there!  The joy of elevated souls,
Enliven'd and enhanced by all the powers
Which can to bliss its highest zest impart,
The unexpected interview sublimed.
The dreadful dangers lurking in each nook
Of the terrific waste, and all the clouds
Of adverse fortune which had gloom'd their peace
Since their arrival in the Wilderness,
Were now forgotten.  The glad news of Health
In his dear family, with thankful tears
Boone's eyes suffused.  Awhile with the warm gush
Of tender-thrilling extacy o'erwhelm'd,
In silence round his weeping Brother's neck,
With him exchanging happiest looks, he hung:&mdash;
And then his children one by one he named,
Enquiring eagerly for each, and heard
With all a Father's fond solicitude,
Their several little messages of Love.
The welfare of his Neighbors, and his Friends,
With the condition of his COUNTRY, claim'd
Successively his warm inquiring zeal.
His brother satisfied with ardent haste,
His strong affection-born anxieties;
And then described the influence of that power
Of social joy resign'd, to embark his fate
On that rough-rolling sea of Enterprise,
Whose bloody Surges heaved by Passion's storms,
And foaming underneath the boding shades
Of Death's dark Banners, threaten'd to o'erwhelm
Whate'er approach'd their desolate Domain.
He on his way had seen the good Delome,
Who a complete recital to him gave
Of all the circumstances relative
To the LOST MAID:  and then a servant sent
To lead him to Vulosko's humble dome,
Where Hospitality's benign salute
Received him at the door.  Melcena view'd
With kind discerning glance the unknown guest,
For in his lofty countenance she mark'd
A nameless play of mind, a mingled glow
Of sensibility and mental strength,
Resembling strongly what she oft had seen
In Daniel Boone's fine intellectual face!
She told, in Melville what she saw; he smiled,
Believing it mere female fantasy;
But her superior perspicatiousness
Was soon compell'd to own.  Vulosko read
Aloud a letter from his friend Delome,
Which introduced them to their gallant Guest.
From their warm lips benignant welcomes flow'd,
And melting Friendship glow'd within their hearts.
Majestic Melville's speaking look assumed
An air of more expressive tenderness;
And sweet Melcena's eyes of beaming blue
A lovelier livelier animation shed.
Her venerable Father grasp'd the hand
Of the vivacious visitant, and pray'd
That Heaven's Omnipotence would shield his life
From shaft of savage Inhumanity;
And aid his glorious efforts to extend
Refinement's humanizing flame, until
Like lambent day it spread through all the West.
"You have a brother," said the white-lock'd Sire,
"Whose arm the Battle's thundering bolt can wield,
Whose mind can kindle splendors in the shades
Of Savage Night, and make the gloomy throne
Of barbarous Ignorance fall beneath its powers:
Whose heart is Pity's altar, Virtue's shrine,
And Valor's empire! &mdash; Find him ere you rest,
And league your fate with his; convey to him
Vulosko's love! &mdash; His kind and manly worth
Is stamp'd indelibly upon my heart.
Inform him that the narrow Horizon
Of my descending Sun of life is clear;
Except that now and then a sombre cloud
From MEMORY'S melancholy pool exhaled,
Athwart it throws a temporary gloom.
For I had once a Wife!  and two dear Sons!&mdash;
She an my eldest son were snatch'd away
By the authorized Destroyer Death.  But James,
My manly James!  Was torn from me, was slain
By sanguinary men! &mdash; by cursed Choctaws!"

He paused a while and deeply sighing wiped
His tear-steep'd eyes; then cast a brightened glance
At Melville and his blooming spouse, and thank'd
Benevolent Heaven that still he had a SON,
To cheer the Wintry Season of old age,
To pillow up his dying head, and weep
Upon his grave. &mdash; He now the subject changed;
And shew'd his guest the wounded wretch Vonploor,
Who still was balanced in the dubious scales
Of Life and Death. &mdash; With these benignant friends
One Night our HERO'S noble Brother pass'd,
Then bade farewel, and travel'd on to meet
Upon the designated Mountain peak,
His enterprising friend and brave Compeer,
Who from Delome's a different rout he'd gone,
To find a Hunting band that was encamp'd,
Among the mighty mountains' howling glooms.
Again conjoin'd; the adventurers held their way,
Until Kentucky's woody plains they reach'd,
Where rambling on, at length they came by chance,
In hearing of our HERO'S cane-hid Camp.
In pleasure's manly sports, some pleasant weeks
The little cheerful company now pass'd.
But Joy alas!  is oft the Harbinger
Of sorrow &mdash; Pain delights to dart his sting,
Into the breast that beats with transport's throb;
And Death oft drinks, as if a sweeter draught,
The life whose currents roll with smoothest flow;
Making possession most to be desired,
And that oft too, while the pellucid stream
Is swelling in the highest tide of bliss.

The Instigators of the INDIAN IRE,
With fierce Demoniac rage, its furious flames
Continued to incite, until they burst
In burning billows on brave STEWART'S head.

The Centinels of Heaven's stellar Hosts,
Had not from their nocturnal watch retired,
But still from the cerulean Towers survey'd
With twinkling eyes the march of Myriad Worlds;
When Boon and his associate Trio rose,
And belted on their blanket-coats to course,
The red-leafed groves, and grape-crown'd Hills for game.
The morning's azure face from clouds was clear,
Bleak was his breath and piercing; and his locks,
With frost were powder'd o'er.  The Adventurers' nerve
Were strung for action, and their spirits brac'd
For valorous feats and perilous emprise&mdash;
The crackling wilds in separate routes they pierced;
Deep peals the ringing rifles oft times pour'd
Along the sounding dells, and rang the knell
Of many a dying Deer. &mdash; The keen-edged blade
Of Stewart's Butchering Knife, with severing plunge,
Full half a score of reeling, bleeding Stags
To earth that day had brought, and in the throats
Of four huge Buffalo's had been buried deep.
As the wild Genius of the Chase stood near,
To enroll his name among her favorite Sons,
And crown him with the laurels of the day;
Fierce, yelling swarms of savage Caitiffs, armed
With bloody Hatchets, from their ambush pour'd,
And instantly encircling him, let fly
Their death-commission'd Weapons, and dislodged
The intrepid Stewart's life!  His lofty frame,
Upon the frozen moss, blood-smoking fell;
His full bright eye now lost its lustrous glow,
And that strong-muscled face, commanding grace,
And animating smiles no more adorn'd.
His high-view'd heart, where generous valor reign'd,
Where patriot feelings warm'd the flowing blood,
And kindled aims of daring Enterprise,
In Death's cold gripe was still!  No more to beat!
No more to feel!  In puddles now,
The vapid fluid once with spirit warm,
His lifeless bosom's frigid cisterns fill.
Those fine-form'd limbs that scaled the mountain-steeps
Unwearied, and with vigorous speed pursued
O'er Hills and streams and Vales the vaulting game,
Voracious Wolves and Vultures now devour!
What though, thou Martyr in Refinement's cause!
No kindred weep around thy pallid Corse,
And wrap it in the snow-white winding sheet&mdash;
What though no mourning symbols, cypress boughs,
And melancholy crape around thee hang&mdash;
Nor polish'd Coffin, nor protecting grave,
Thy cold, thy gore-encrusted Corpse receive?
What though no mournful Bells nor muffled Drums,
Nor mixed procession robed in funeral black,
To thy remains Sepulchral homage pay?
What though no tomb in monumental grandeur mark
Among Mausoleums of distinguish'd Dead,
And mossy sepulchres of many an age,
The shrine where Stewart's slumbering bones repose?
What though upon a thousand Hills thy dust,
Now slumbers, unawak'd by the rude tread
Of passing feet, unconscious where thou sleep'st?
What though all this, since Angels mourn'd thy fall!
Since the HISTORIC Genius has inscribed
On Fame's imperishable rolls thy name!
Since God's own vivifying voice will lift
Again thy scatter'd ashes from the ground;
And from his Holy Bosom send thy soul
The renovated tenement once more
To occupy; when spirit-wing'd, it shall,
To join the sainted Hosts of Heaven ascend!
And with PHILANTHROPY'S seraphic Sons,
Who bled conflicting with the embattled bands
Of fell Barbarians in the bloody West,
Forever bask in brilliant beams of BLISS!

Much the surviving Heroes mourn'd the loss
Of their magnanimous Colleague and Friend;
Boone's bosom intimate, and VALOR'S pride!
Again their dwindled number was reduced,
And Boone and his brave Brother left alone,
By the departure to the settlement
Of their remaining Comrade.&mdash;

WINTER now
From Nature's face had struck the smiling bloom,
And o'er the world with dreadful ravage reign'd.
At his approach the sylvan music ceased,
And shrinking VEGETATION hid beneath
The icy surface of the frozen soil:
The wither'd Wild was drear as Death's Domain!
And echoed with the roar of hoarse-lunged STORMS,
And chilling yells of flesh-devouring Beasts.
But Boone's self-centered soul unshaken tower'd
Sublimely o'er the Horrors of the Waste,
And like a cloud-impaling Pyramid,
The Tempest's desolating rage defied!
With philosophic calmness of he said,
"My Brother!  now we see what a rich fount
Of pure felicity the mind of man
Within itself contains, if not defiled
By the corruptions of soul-blackening Vice.
How little on the gew-gaw glare of Wealth,
On Power's pageant pomp, and vain parade,
The human heart for happiness depends.
The Fashionable World's a Masquerade,
In which the real character's conceal'd:
It has ten thousand lures to snare the soul,
And is with Falsehood, Flattery and Deceit,
With Calumny and Disappointment fill'd.
Its smiles are like the fabled Syren's songs;
Its pleasures are the painted pills of Death;
And when to us its tempting hand it gives,
Its faithless, cold, deceitful heart's withheld.
Contentment builds her silky-plumed Nest,
In the pure Heart where Innocence abides;
And Innocence on timid pinions flies,
To Nature's Solitudes and sweet retreats.
From the turmoil of Vice-envelop'd Crouds,
'Tis there the soul by passions undisturb'd,
In philosophic converse with herself,
Can ascertain her energies divine,
And exercise them in exalted thought&mdash;
'Tis there the mind with animated eye,
Behold her intellectual currents roll,
Unruffled and serene; and raptured sees
IMAGINATION'S rainbow-splendors gild,
Her pure pellucid deeps and sparkling waves;
And silent WISDOM'S sterling gems enrich
Her beds profound."

Bleak Winter's reign though fierce,
Was short.  Our Hero and his Brother braved,
With spirits high, its joy-forbidding frowns;
Devoting to their reconnoitering task,
And hunting pleasures almost every day.
At length, at Angel-featured Spring's approach,
The surly Tyrant's cloudy Hosts retired,
And sheltering in their Northern Fortresses,
Hung round their gloomy Monarch's icy throne.
Again enfranchised from her frozen bonds,
Invigorated, with rekindled life,
From the dark bowels of her brumal grave,
Triumphing VEGETATION rose, and breathed
Her scented sweetness on the silk-wing'd gales.
Once more returning MAY blush'd o'er the Wilds;
But found, unwonted sight!  our Hero sad!
His Brother now was gone; was travelling home,
For Horses, ammunition and what else
Their state required &mdash; A mind less firm than Boone's,
Could not have braved the soul-transpiercing thrusts
Of dagger-edg'd Reflections, which assail'd
His bosom's tenderest points.  He now was left
Amid surrounding swarms of fiercest fiends,
Without a single friend, save the kind Spirit;
Who faithful to his delegated charge,
Still with his viewless shield protection spread
Around the Hero's life.  The cultured banks
Of peaceful Yadkin; the unbloody Hills,
Where once unapprehensive of a Foe,
He enjoy'd the Chase, his fellow-sportsmen's song,
And animated jest, their cheerful interchange
Of graver sentiments, and mild debates
On politics and man; &mdash; with charms renew'd,
All these in Memory's mirror he beheld,
And for their loss a moment mourn'd.  But most,
His mind to melancholy was disposed,
By musing on the misery-boding Fears,
The kind Concern, and keen Inquietude,
Which day and night disturb'd the peace; which pain'd,
And stung incessantly the sorrowing hearts,
Of his Angelic spouse, his high-soul'd Sons,
And tender-bosom'd Daughters &mdash; If indulged,
Reflections on those somber themes would soon
Have shadow'd o'er the lucid pane, through which
Contentment's radiant beams his soul illumed.
But he too well a HERO'S duty knew
To bury in privation-brooded glooms,
In the dark shadows of domestic woe,
The kindling sparks of useful Enterprise;
Which promised by gradations to expand,
Until their bright illuminations spread,
Through the Barbarian Blackness of the West.
His cares of Home on Heaven he therefore cast,
And sought felicity within himself,
And in the flowery treasures of the Wild.
Oft where the beauteous Crown-imperial bloom'd
In gorgeous pomp unveil'd, and Tulip-laurel
Its sweet effluvia on the gales diffused,
He rambled to enjoy their cheering charms!
And of the princely Pinnacle he scaled
Of a smooth Hill, which o'er the green campaign
In airy pride, and conic grandeur tower'd:
He there in wondering contemplation gazed,
On various God-proclaiming scenes, which shone
In glorious fulgour, far as eye could roll.
He thence great NATURE'S THEATRE beheld
In all its pomp and splendid scenery clothed;
Herself the Mistress of the grand DISPLAY,
And the distinguish'd HEROINE-ACTRESS too!
Her curtain with the opening dawn she drew,
And myriad strains of plausive Melody,
Her entrance on the gorgeous stage proclaim'd!
The varying scenes a thousand times she changed;
Her sweet serenity and mellow smiles
She now diffused and trod in purest light!
While round her frisk'd and play'd in happiest life,
In gambols of wild joy her retinue,
Of feather'd and four-footed animals;
And o'er the scenic drapery's cloud-form'd sheets,
To beautify them with prismatic hues.
Its gliding streams, her golden Day-lamp pour'd.
But now encompass'd by tempestuous glooms,
She bends her blackening brow &mdash; and thunders break
In rolling vollies o'er the shuddering Stage;
While swiftly round her form sublime, the blaze
Of scathful lightning sweeps &mdash; the mountain peaks,
Which darkly in the distant back-ground tower,
Are shrouded in her frown! &mdash; And weeping Skies,
The tragic darkness, and tumultuous throes,
In tearful torrents mourn.  The gushing streams
To great Ohio's, swelling surges roll;
And He, with billowy agitation boil'd,
Deep-roaring rushes down his foaming way.
But soon again she scatters from her face
The curling clouds, from the wide Canopy
Withdraws the sable HANGINGS, and a Calm
Enliven'd with redoubled splendor, spreads!
Unmasking all her charms in loveliest bloom,
And garnishing the groves with brighter green,
She seem'd commission'd by the power of Heaven,
To deck the world with more magnific pomp!
From that commanding Hill, those changing scenes,
Our Hero oft with hallow'd rapture view'd.
If Nights tenebrious shades the prospects veil'd,
While yet he linger'd on the airy mound;
Upon the plumy lap of gentle sleep
His head he laid, and there reposed till morn;
Or listening to the Owl's wild-thrilling scream,
The Wolf's blood-chilling howl and hungering yell;
Or gazing on the sky-throned Queen's bright face,
The planetary spheres, the burning stars,
The meteor gleams, the silver-winged clouds,
The darken'd wastes, the moon-reflecting waves,
And beam-absorbing mists, the Night he'd spend
In philosophic thought and transports wild!

The Goblin-visaged spectre Fear, that haunts
The Coward's heart, crawls through his haggard dreams,
Depictures Death and Dangers and Distress,
And grinning bloody forms through all his thoughts,
In Boone's undaunted Breast could never live.
He knew, that Fear the active nerves benumbs,
When most their useful aidance is required,
Imparting thus to dangers double force.
He knew, that the Almighty's arm, which shields
From shafts of Jeopardy, the harmless heart,
In soft refinement's social scenes, can guard,
With equal ease, the breast which beats in wilds,
Where barbarous Heathens raise the arm of Death,
And dreadful Beasts, for blood, the forests prowl.
He therefore boldly bade the grisly Fiend,
Infernal Fear, avaunt.  No idle day
He pass'd.  But great Ohio's cane-cloth'd plains
Unceasingly explored.  No City's pomp,
Reflecting all the blaze of polish'd Art,
With turrets, spires, and steeples crown'd,
With sweetest Beauty's vestal choirs adorn'd,
With flapping sails of richest Commerce wing'd,
And Luxury's costly Magazines enrich'd,
Could half so much delight have given his mind,
As the unfolding WORLD OF WONDROUS CHARMS,
Sublime, majestic, beauteous, splendid, fair,
Which oped its wild luxuriance on his eye
Wheree'er he trod. &mdash; Ohio's limpid flood
Innumerous Beauties in itself contain'd,
And Majesty and glorious Grandeur too!
Its slowly-sliding volume seem'd a Sea
Of molten silver, smoothly rolled along.
Great Trees above its turfless bottoms towered,
And spread their giant-branches o'er its Deeps;
Whose lucid Mirror pictured every leaf,
Bright-crimson'd bud, and spiral-winding vine,
Which waving o'er their watery surface, hung.
The finny tenants of the liquid cells,
In myriads sported through the rolling stream;
Now springing at the floating fly,  they break
Its glassy superfice, now darting down
The crystal element, they again return
To playful gambols on their pebbly beds.
Too pervious to the eye, the incumbent Mass
Of cloudless liquid to conceal from view
Their glancing forms. &mdash; With graceful majesty,
Tall arch-neck'd Swans in snowy bevies sailed,
The waving bosom of the flowing flood;
And pour'd in murmuring undulations through
The tremulous waves and vibratory air,
Their trumpet notes and deeply-quavering tones.
Aquatic flocks of various kinds besides,
Some rowing on the shining stream, some buoy'd
On clattering pinions o'er its bright expanse,
And circling through the scream-resounding air,
Surveying with instinctive, wild delight,
The inviting beauties of the watery scenes;
Our Hero saw.  And ofttimes he beheld,
Proud Antler-crowned Deer, in ample droves
The unrippling current stemming.  Ofttimes too,
From bank to bank his curious eye pursued
The unsocial Bears, which with nigrescent paws,
Through the bright stream their shaggy bodies oar'd.
Continuing on his reconnoitering route,
Beyond Ohio's winding course, o'er plains
With dulcet fruits, and flosculous beauties rich,
He reach'd at length the mighty MONARCH STREAM,
The great Imperial River of the West!
Majestic MISSISSIPPI!  and beheld;
Like HOST of Battle-charging STEEDS inflamed
By rage-enkindling trumpets, fires and drums,
And sanguinary Death, descending down
Some sloping field with rolling KNOBS emboss'd;
The turbid torrent's fury-foaming WAVES,
Impetuous dashing onwards towards the Sea;
As if disdaining to disgrace their pride,
By lingering long 'mongst humble inland streams,
Or holding back from the great RENDEZVOUS,
The awful ARMY of assembled Floods;
Their tributary force.  In thought sublime
Upon the wave-worn bank the Hero stood,
And hail'd with extacy the headlong flood!
The associating principle of mind,
That throws the thoughts with rapid power,
O'er all the mazy complicated chain
Of objects, which are link'd to the grand theme
That with sublime sensation swells the soul;
Boone now in all its forceful influence felt.
Through Fancy's retrospective Vista, he,
His intellectual vision swiftly glanced,
And witness'd the first flow of watery floods;
When at the ETERNAL'S great creative word,
They started from ten thousand roaring Springs&mdash;
When from the loftiest height of this vast land,
Its four IMPERIAL Rivers, Aregon,
St. Lawrence, Bourbon, and Columbia's pride,
Great Mississippi!  roll'd their thundering tides.
From one deep, Ocean-fed, exhaustless source,
A MIGHTY SUBTERRANEOUS RESERVOIR!
He saw their youthful Torrents proudly rise;
The massy rocks, and earth obstructive, burst,
And drive their Chariots' foam-enveloped Steeds,
Divergent, bounding down the seaward dells.&mdash;
On towards our spheric planet's primary points,
The liquid wheels through darksome deserts roll,
Passing a thousand varying climes remote;
Before they sparkle in the briny deeps.
Down through the unceasing lapse of circling time,
He saw the still continued currents roll;
Oft swollen high by inundations pour'd
From bursting clouds, uprooting huge-grown woods;
And bearing ponderous wrecks, in crashing rage,
Along the wilds to the ingulphing Seas.
His thoughts prospectively he also cast,
And through Imagination's optics viewed;
With brilliant diadems of COMMERCE crown'd,
And with the products of a thousand farms,
And riches of Mercantile Kingdoms fraught,
With FREEDOM'S Cities and REPUBLICS lined
And Happiness and Heavenly Virtues cheer'd;
The royal stream, on whose rich banks he stood.
With Contemplation's high Cherubic zeal,
The joy-inspiring prospect warm'd his soul,
And drove o'er themes stupendous as the Heavens,
His lofty-soaring Fancy's winged wheels.
But most the POWER and kind MUNIFICENCE,
Of that supremely elevated God,
Who said, "exist!"  and space was fill'd!  Who spake,
And flaming Suns appear'd!  Who said, "arise!"
And dust was Man!  Whose touch can change to seas,
The solid worlds, and through the gelid wilds
Of spacious Air, ten thousand Rivers roll,
And petrify to flint the Ocean-floods!
On his Ominipotence and Goodness most
Our Hero mused. &mdash; While thus in thought deep rapt,
He loiter'd on the billow-beaten banks,
Whose sandy base the excavating waves
Incessantly reduce, and heedless trode
The surge-impending brink; the beach-crown'd mass
With all its vegetative load, abrupt,
Tumultuous!  broke from the supported soil,
And with impetuous uproar plunged amid
The furious flood! &mdash; Swift from the tumbling bank,
He leap'd into the agitated deep,
And o'er his head the angry surges curled.
But with strong strokes he upward cleaves his way,
And rises boldly through the bubbling foam!
The shore-rebounding billows beat him thwart
The profluent waves, these bear him down
The tossing tide &mdash; the cumbrous wreck behind
Rolls darkling on, and breaks the stream apart.
Hence rough, increasing surges drive amain
The Hero onwards, 'till in widening sheets,
Far from the floating islet-mound, they spread
A smoother breast, o'er which he swims secure,
And reaches safe again the welcome beach.

