With meteor-swiftness, from the council-dome,
High through the azure heights of Atmosphere,
His lofty way the mission'd Seraph wing'd;
Till poised above the Carolinian hills,
He sought with searching view, th' adventurous BOONE.
Along the silver-shining Yadkin first,
Where stood the Hero's rural mansion, glanced
The Angel's vigorous eye, thence o'er the Hills,
His usual hunting-ground, which bounds the vales,
And thence swift o'er the Mountain's gloomy Mounds;
Until th' august sublimity and pomp
Of that stupendous TOWER, whose rocky brow
From towering Ararat's blue summit frowns,
In threatening grandeur o'er surrounding plains,
And proudly fronts the Apalachian Mounts,
The daring Angel's eagle view enchain'd.
For it so much the power of God display'd,
That e'en to Cherub eyes it had a charm
Sublime.  As there the holy Seraph gazed,
He, on the holy Battlement espied
In Contemplation's solemn stole enrobed,
The high-soul'd Hunter.  The magnific PILE,
As through contiguous woods the Hero ranged,
His thoughtful soul with rapturous awe had swell'd;
And urged him to ascend its perilous crags,
And narrow-winding chasms, until he gain'd
The dizzy height!  Well suited was the scene,
T' attune his feelings for th' inspiring breath,
Of ardent Enterprise &mdash; as Boone advanced,
Their steep retreats the strong-wing'd Eagles left,
And sought the solitude of trackless skies.
In pomp, and variegated glories cloth'd;
Their awful heads, cloud-crested mountains heav'd,
High in the North Horizon.  And towards South,
In Spring's new verdure deck'd a vast Campaign
Disclosing here and there its splendid streams,
Extended far beneath th' impending Tower.
Sublimed with extacy, the Hero stood,
Surveying round, the soul-exalting scene,
Which seem'd for Meditation's eye prepared.

Along the ragged precipice he saw
The lightning's rifted path.  Each flickering breeze,
That swept the grey-brow'd turrets, seem'd to shake
The elevated mass! &mdash; So high it was,
It seem'd t' invade the starry bounds of Heaven!
So high &mdash; the Hero thought, his air-fan'd locks,
Were lifted by the pure empyreal Winds.
His raptured Fancy's reverential eye,
And the impetuous gush of thought o'erwhelm'd
A while his mind.  Meantime, the Angel view'd
Th' extatic agitations of his soul;
And in a spiritual form unseen, approach'd
Th' enravish'd Hero; breath'd upon his heart
A vigorous glow; and raised him from his trance.
Collected now, and the presumptuous wing
Of temerarious Fancy check'd; his mind
Contemplates other less o'er-powering scenes,
Adapted more to finite ken.  With love
Of God and Man inspired, and with the zeal
Of new-enkindled Animation rapt;
His view expanding, with th' expanding range
Of far seen hills and plains; his towering soul
Disdaining life's inferior toils, which cramp
With dull employ, the nerves of virtuous Power;
Which chill the glowing warmth of great resolve,
And chain t' an inch of soil those energies,
That were design'd to dignify a World!
His patriot bosom panted for a stage,
On which, for his loved Country's benefit,
To act that daring, that heroic part,
Which was commensurate with his lofty views.

Again his fervid soul the Angel touch'd,
And spread before his perspicacious eye,
A theatre of ample magnitude,
Full quadrate to the Hero's boldest wish,
The wild dominions in Columbia's WEST!&mdash;

Upon his Fancy's pictured tablet, shone
In splendid tints, a thousand varied scenes;
Embellishing a dark Barbarian World!&mdash;
Refinement's golden file with smoothing sweep,
Reducing swiftly from the savage mind,
Its heathen incrustations &mdash; kindling light
And splendor, where investing glooms and rust,
The Indian's intellectual treasures spoil'd.
A thousand valorous, soul-ennobling feats
Attendant on the patriot enterprise,
Grandly preparing, and expanded sphere
For Commerce, Wealth, and all the brilliant Arts,
Where they before had never cast a beam,
In brilliant prospect warmed the Hero's soul.
Descending down the shatter'd precipice,
He sought with haste, Companions for th' emprise;
And from his brave associates in the chase,
Th' adventurous Findley, Stewart, Holden, Cool,
And Monay, chose; a small, but daring band!
Soon for the hazardous explorement was
Viaticum prepared.

Now came the day
Of keenest grief, that e'er the breast transpired
Of the immortal Boone.  A day on which
He was constrain'd to leave domestic bliss,
The sweet endearments of Connubial Love&mdash;
Caresses fond of Babes, and kind devoirs
Of friendly neighbors.  These he had to leave,
Not for his wonted time, a few short weeks;
But numerous, dreary, long and tedious Months!
To travel, not familiar woods, where Man
Meets nought but timid beasts; nor cultured realms,
Where Peace and Love and social Science charm;
And Hospitality with smiles adorn'd,
Runs open-armed to meet him at the Gate:
But where a dark and dreadful desert spreads,
Between the Hero's home and destined land;
Where Monster Beasts with fierce blood-hungering howl,
The sounding woods, and echoing caverns fill,
And death-delighting Indians lurk for life,
In every bosky nook and wild retreat.
Around the sadden'd Chief his darling sons,
And daughters, and his sorrow-wounded wife,
In weeping circles drew.  In vain, he strove
Their sobbing hearts to sooth; in vain, he tried
T' assuage the bitter woe, that swell'd his own.
One mournful burst of sorrow fill'd, with sighs,
And sobs and tears, the melancholy house.
The tenderest eloquence of mourning love
At length broke from the sweet impassion'd lips
Of his affectionate spouse.  "My Boon!"  She cried,
And press'd him to her groaning breast; "My Boone!"
How can you leave your Home, your Wife and Babes,
Your life in bloody woods to jeopardize,
Among the murdering Indians' cruel tribes?
My God!  The horrid thought I cannot bear!
How shall I rest in peace, when dangers watch
To take away my dear Companion's life?
How, when the dreadful, silent, solitude
Of dark and cheerless Night, surrounds my Bed;
When Fancy's gloomy spectres flit along
My dreary chamber, and your bleeding Corpse
By grinning Savages or glare-eyed Beasts,
Before my sleepless eyes is rudely drag'd;
How shall I then support my sinking heart?
How then the bodings of my rueful thoughts
Endure?  O then!  What answer shall I give
Our darling Infants, when their lisping tongues
The cause inquire, that makes me wet with tears,
Their little cheeks, and steep with briny dew
My sigh-warm'd pillow?  What answer shall I give
The tender prattlers, when they sweetly ask
The time, their absent Father will return?
Oh, do not go!  MY HUSBAND!  Do not go!&mdash;
T' allure you from your peaceful Home,
What does, what can, the dangerous desert yield
That would our Miseries, Woes, and painful Fears
Repay?  O!  if you go, this NOBLE BREAST
I fear, will heave its last in savage flames,
Or by the Indian's butchering vengeance gash'd,
Pour on th' ensanguin'd ground its crimson life.
If there you fall, no tender hand will wash
Your clotted wounds, nor shroud your pallid clay;
No sorrowing friends, will bear you to the grave,
Nor screen from prowling violence your limbs,
Then lifeless cold!  If such your fate should be;
How could my widow'd heart sustain the pang
Of cruel Grief, that then would lacerate
Its wasting tendrils?  Oh my Boone!  my Boone!
How could &mdash; how could I then endure to see
Our Orphan-Infants weep their Father's Death;
And hear them cry, "oh God!  he's gone!
Forever gone!"  Here Grief her voice suppress'd&mdash;
A mournful pause ensued &mdash; such as succeeds
The last impressive words, of some adored,
Some dear-loved, dying friend, when round his bed
The weeping clustered croud, and see the beams
Of trembling life fade in his closing eye.
From every pore the Hero's manly heart
Ran blood.  His guardian Spirit hovering near,
And witnessing his deep-depressing grief,
Inspirited again his drooping soul.
He kiss'd his languid Consort's tear-dew'd cheek,
And to appease the pang that stung her breast
Address'd her thus.  "My bosom's dearest love!
The splendours, titles, honors, wealth, and power,
And all the glittering garniture of earth,
To me are trash, compared with what regards
The Peace and Happiness of you, my Wife,
And these our lovely Cherubs!  Sooner would
I groan my life away in servitude,
Or waste my days in dismal dungeon-cells:
Yes; sooner would I brave the blazing stake,
Or sink amid the Caldron's boiling waves,
Than doom to woe, my darling Wife and Babes.
But woe, my dear!  though tasted now, this hour
Of painful parting, Heaven's benignant hand
Will soon avert.  For Innocence ne'er drinks
Long time, much less through life, its bitter cup;
And oft is sipping richly-flavor'd sweets,
When thought by most to quaff the hateful gall.
The task that separates us now awhile,
My Angel!  is not self-imposed.  My soul
Of late is by an ardent impulse urged,
The grand emprise to undertake:  a power
From Heaven, must actuate unseen, my will:
For so determined, warm, impulsive, bold,
It never heretofore has been; and all
Its ardor to the self-same object tends.
Such influence to resist, were to oppose
The powers divine.  Those powers, my dear!  your Boone,
When in the desert's yelling gloom can guard,
Or Indian's bloody Camp; as well as when
In Carolina's harmless fields.  Those powers,
Which erst protected in the roaring den
Of dreadful Beasts, the sacred man of God;
Those righteous powers, which from the gulphy bowels
Of the huge monarch of the Deep, brought forth
Unhurt, Repenting Jonah &mdash; they can shield
From flying Tomahawks the naked head;
And guard it from the horrid scalping knife.
When I am absent, think of this, my love!
And be consoled.  That same benevolent God,
Whose hand the Raven's callow nestlings observes
His humblest work; each little Sparrow knows;
And on the valley's tenderest Floweret sheds
The beams of life and beauty &mdash; that kind God,
When I'm away, the Father of our Babes
Will be; and with divine protection's wing
Will guard their pious Mother.  Cease then, Love!
To weep; and on That ROCK of safety rest
Your hopes, your cares &mdash; The sovereign law of Heaven
Requires, that man should oft the sweets forego
Of loved Society, Companions, Friends,
Relations, Children, tender Wife, and all!
To tread th' adventurous stage of grand emprise!
To scatter knowledge through the Heathen wilds,
And mend the state of Universal Man!&mdash;
By Duty's stern but salutary voice,
Affection's feeling fibres oft are jarr'd;
Till pain-rung blood-rills streaming thence, distain
The plumes of Peace.  Yet duty's needful call
Must be obey'd.  For keener still's the pain
Of disobedience to the will of Heaven,
Than all the torturing pangs of sunder'd love.
When parted by the Wilderness, my spouse!
Anticipated bliss will animate
Our anxious hearts, and cheer our darkest days;
And well it may, for sweet will be the time,
And richly, flowing with beatitude,
When from my grand adventures I return.
Then will we on the shaded green recline,
Or round th' enlivening fire; renewing joys,
Short time suspended for our country's weal,
And musing on the wonders of the West,
And the protecting goodness of our God."

Observing now his consort more composed,
The Hero paused, and heard her thus reply.

"My dear companion!  now I yield, convinced,
Thy conscience touch'd by holy breath from Heaven,
Commands thee to the great, the perilous task.
On Duty's pure immaculate Altar, now
I sacrifice the tenderest wish of Love!
My prayers shall plead; when each new morning's dawn
Breaks on the fading glooms of parting Night,
And when each Evening's mantle shrouds the day;
Shall plead for God's almighty shield to ward
From ill, my absent Boone!"  Thus was her heart
From deep depression raised by breath benign
Of kind Humanity's Seraphic Spirit,
Whose feeling eye had mark'd her painful grief,
And on her soul its cheering influence beam'd.
Now close the designated hour advanced,
His partners at th' appointed spot to meet.

Again the Hero's heart, a poignant pang
Transpierced &mdash; Again with sorrow's sickening throes,
His sweet Companion's snowy bosom throb'd,
Again his tender children loudly wept!
He gave his wife the fond farewell embrace,
And on her lips the soul-enkindled kiss
Imprinted; press'd his sobbing Babes,
Shook all their hands, and look'd a long adieu!

Attended by his viewless Angel, now,
The Hero wends to meet his comrade band;
When join'd, they westward take their pathless way.

To beautify their route, and cheer their march;
The Queen of Spring, mellifluous-breathing May,
Walk'd with them o'er the wood-land wilds, and steep'd
In honey-dews the young expanding leaves;
And through the fleckered forest flung perfumes;
While flowerets, blooms, and fragrant foliage fill'd
The extended boundaries of her balmy reign.
Along the wilds, and feather-winnow'd air,
In animating undulations flow'd
The sweetly modulated songs of Spring;
As if, the journeying Heroes on their march,
To hail, with Gratulation's melody!
With vigorous speed, o'er plains and hills they hied;
Each night reposing round the unshelter'd fire.
Soon on the lofty Alleganean peaks
They tread.  Here Nature's rudest hand had rear'd
CONFUSION'S Battlements sublime;
And here had SOLITUDE'S dark dingles delv'd!&mdash;
One night encompass'd by the wildest cliffs,
That jut in shaggy prominence high o'er
The rugged mounds, around their glimmering fire
Our Heroes lay &mdash; 'Twas midnight's silent hour:
Unsleeping Cynthia's waning, silvery disk,
Smiled on the shadowy hills, and palely shone
Along the Mountain's slant dew-glistening rocks&mdash;
The restless cascade murmur'd on the winds&mdash;
The Wolf-howl echo'd down the distant dells&mdash;
The Zephyrs were on wing.  Our Heroes slept&mdash;
A passing Panther snuff'd them on the breeze,
For blood athirst; half resolute, half scared,
He crouching, crept near by, and fiercely scream'd,
Then farther fled.  The sleepers startling, woke;
Their rifles seized, and clamber'd o'er the cliffs.
Far on the moon-illumined rocks, Boone spied
The bloody prowler; and his gun discharged,
But miss'd the flying mark.  Soon back return'd;
They stir their dwindling fire, and rest again.
Some time elapsed; each eye save Boone's in sleep
Was closely sealed &mdash; but his, to aid his mind,
As on the midnight mountain scenes it mused,
Now view'd the blue star-twinkling vault, now glanced
Along the high-raised, dim-seen, distant woods,
And now along contiguous cliffs; on which
Beneath slow-moving trees, the moonshine danced.
Here as his wakeful eye the Hero cast;
He astonish'd, saw two human forms slow move
Like shadows o'er the rocks &mdash; The time and place
Denied belief, that mortal men they were.
But in their hands he saw their swords' dim gleam,
As o'er a moon-light space they softly passed;
And soon again, what seem'd like guns he spied.
Warm rose his blood; he snatch'd his rifle up,
And shook in haste his sleeping friends.  They roused;
When instant, disappear'd behind the rocks,
The unknown beings.  Boone gave charge to hide
Among the cliffs; when loud, "Melcena!"  cried
The darkling strangers; thou, "my child, my child!"&mdash;
Re-echoed quickly through the sounding woods.
Again, "Infernal Ruffians!  Fiends of Hell!
May God's eternal vengeance blast with woe,
Your future lives!"  "My God!"  said Boone, "what does,
What can this mean?"  And then, thus question'd loud:
"Where is your child?  And who in Heaven's name
Are you?" &mdash; "Mock not an aged Father's grief,"
Replied the Stranger; "give to my arms again,
My lovely Child!  Oh!  if your cruel hearts,
No fear of that all-just tremendous POWER,
Whose thunders soon in wrath shall wake, and leagued
With his red lightnings, drive to Hell's black gulphs
Your demon souls; can move you to repent
Your hellish guilt, and make you yield my Child,
Let gold restore her!  for by Him I swear,
Who made yon Moon, and her bright retinue;
That if you will give back to me, my child,
Ten thousand Guineas shall the deed reward:
Of which as surety, my own life to you
In pledge I'll give, until the ransom's paid;
Which shall amid these mountain wilds be done."
Then Boone &mdash; "You are mistaken, Sir, I swear
By him, by whom you've sworn, we are not those
You think; poor, inoffensive travellers, we!
By day our course directing to the land,
Along the mighty Waters of the West,
We sojourn here no longer than this night:
Be not of us afraid, come to our Camp,
And tell your tale of wrong.  If aught of aid
We can impart, it shall be promptly given.
We invoke the God of Holiness and Truth,
To witness, that no evil we design
To living man, and that whatever is
Of her the fate, whom in these wilds you seek,
We neither know that fate, nor are its cause."
The undesigning seriousness of tone,
With which the Hero spake; in part dispell'd
The Father's first belief, and to his friend
He said &mdash; "That voice, that language, seems to speak,
Methinks, a soul sincere!  Perhaps, dear youth!
We wrong these men; they may be innocent;
If so, they will our anxious search assist.
I'll know; remain you here mean while, young friend;
And if I'm slain, or captive made; then haste
You home, and summon to this Hills a Host
To seek my darling child, t' avenge my fate,
And do whatever Wisdom may devise.
Without my dear, my lost Melcena; life
Is little worth my care.  But you are young;
And should not rashly risk a life that may,
An ample share of bliss enjoy; though lost
To her whose plighted Love would soon have fill'd
With Hymeneal sweets, your happy soul.
Enough!  If foes, they may surround us here:
You shelter in these rocks until my call,
Or friends or foes, proclaim."  Th' impatient youth&mdash;
"Let me, O Father!  Share thy doom, my Arm
Feels strong!  my life, without my Love, than thine
Is worth no more &mdash; If not the VILLAINS, then
We're safe:  If they, no better chance again
May e'er occur, to wrest, from their curst hands,
My dear Melcena &mdash; let us then advance
Together, and abide the worst:  my sword
Shall shield thy head; my gun shall do its part."
Too well Vulosko knew the ardent fire
That flam'd within the youthful Melville's breast,
To struggle long its daring course to check.
He gave assent that both should dare the peril:
And on, o'er intervening crags they went;
Till at the Camp; then told their presence there.
Forth from their refuge dark, our Heroes came;
For prudence bade them not expose their lives,
By staying at their fire, where death might see
To aim his slaughtering tube; and as they came,
Their peaceful views in solemn terms declared.
Suspicion's eye, with mutual sternness marked,
From either side, the other's every look:
Until asseverations, statements, style,
Demeanor, equipage, and dress conspired,
All doubts and fears from every breast to drive.

In converse now the remnant of the night
Was pass'd.  At Boone's request, Vulosko told,
How from his heart, in unpropitious hour,
Was torn his dear Melcena &mdash; prefacing
With a brief narrative of his own life
The painful tale.  "I am the son," he said,
"Of an adventurous Nobleman, who left,
The blazing clash of European WAR,
In the wild Forests of this Western World,
To seek the silent shades of bloodless PEACE.
His infant days in innocence and joy,
Among the ALPINE scenes of Love, were spent,
And pastoral pleasure; and around his path,
The Sun of Peace, for fifteen summers, pour'd
Its pleasing splendors.  'Switzerland!'  Him oft
When musing on his juvenile days, I've heard
With melancholy extacy exclaim;
'O Switzerland!  Sweet land of Liberty!
Thou Nurse of Virtue, Piety, and Truth,
Thou sacred seat of cheerful Industry,
Of daring Independence, Science, Peace,
And all that purifies, exalts, sublimes,
And sanctifies the HUMAN HEART &mdash; Dear Land!
By NATURE guarded from Oppression's gripe;
Whose sinewy sons with sweeping strength can hurl,
From their rough Mountains' rich and rugged heights,
The insulting Myrmidons, who dare invade
The precincts of their PEACE-PROTECTED homes.
DEAR LAND!  where CANDOR'S fair expanded brow,
And steady-beaming eye, the lofty soul
And generous philanthropic Heart declare.
How sweetly would my unambitious life,
Among thy cultured shades have glided on,
Had not the glare of gorgeous War allured
My youthful eyes, and drawn me to the din
Of distant dangers.' &mdash; Well might he lament
The infatuation that possess'd his brain,
When he his gentle home exchang'd for fields
Of Blood.  For, fighting in a foreign War,
His life he nearly lost.  His parents died&mdash;
He visited a German relative,
A famous General in the imperial reign
Of Leopold, and was smitten with the pomp
Of MARTIAL POWER, and the splendid Fame
Of Military conquest &mdash; Raptures filled
His eye, whene'er he heard the Soldier's song,
The conquering Warrior's brilliant deeds resound.
With pride, his Kinsman view'd each vivid glance;
And through his influence, for the ardent youth,
And office under Prince Eugene obtained.
'Twas when the Elector of Bavaria roll'd,
In junction with the French, the bloody flood
Of desolating Battle, o'er the vast
Germanic Empire; soon my Father's fire
Was join'd to the confederate flame, which burn'd
To oppose the Hosts of Tallard and Marsin.
On BLENHEIM'S glorious field his arm was tried.
Wheree'er he moved, the thunders of his might
Before him drove the dreadful storm of Death;
And ere the Battle half was o'er, his name
Was shouted through the ranks; and Glory's wreaths
Around his towering brow profusely hung.
But dearly were his laurels brought; the price
Was copious torrents of his glowing blood!
A veteran Horseman's steel his bosom gashed,
And laid him bleeding on the smoking sward!
The roaring conflict ceased; and Victory's voice
In shouts along the leagued Battalions broke.
Attended by the skill'd Physician's aid,
In an adjacent tent my father lay.
His slumbering sense were with cordials waked&mdash;
He heard the loud triumphing peals, and smiled!
But soon, the mournful wail of WIDOWED WIVES,
Who had at distance view'd the slaughtering fray&mdash;
The anguished groans of thousands pained with wounds;
And Death's blood-strangled gasps, his heart assailed,
And wraped in Pity's glooms his pallid Face!
In all their tender melancholy forms,
REFLECTION'S soft sensations now awoke
Within his breast &mdash; His native Mountain joys,
The mild pacific intercourse of friendly band,
The unambitious family of Swiss;
In contrast with the Carnage, Blood, and Death
That spread the plains of fierce unhappy WAR;
Upon his soul were vividly portrayed.
Ambition's steely casements, from his heart,
Humanity's dissolvent gush removed;
And Valor's wild intemperate flame was quenched,
In the soft-flowing flood.  By tender care,
His wounds were healed, and his sunk health restored.
His feelings now were changed, they loathed at War!
And though his native Hills he loved; he sighed
For freedom from the bloody storm, that howl'd
With frightful clamor, round the neighboring world.
His patrimonial property was large:
He sold it all, and sought o'er surging seas,
The solitude and peace for which he sigh'd.
In Massachusetts province, he first breath'd
Columbia's aromatic gales &mdash; There LOVE,
Enchanting poison, through his veins infused,
And bound in talismanic trance his heart&mdash;
Awhile in pain he loved; but PLEASURE came,
On the white pinions of inspiring HOPE,
And turned his dubious passion all to bliss.
Him, soon the Queen of his affections crown'd
By Hymen's hand, the Monarch of her Own.&mdash;

"In search of still profounder solitude,
To Carolina they soon after came;
And there awhile the quietude they wished,
Enjoyed.  Their wealth was ample, and they lived
In happy ease.  The peasants scattered o'er
Their fruitful farm, with joy their wants supplied.
I was the only child that crown'd their love.
To impress with virtuous truth my ductile mind,
And teach me how a dangerous world to shun;
Was all their occupation.  Smoothly flow'd
Their unimbittered stream of life; until
The cursed Coree and Tuscarora tribes
Of Savages with sanguinary rage,
Enwrap'd in Night's thick-muffling darkness rush'd
Wild through the sleeping Colony, and plunged
Their gory daggers in the unguarded breasts
Of shrieking Females, struggling Babes, old Men,
And high-soul'd Heroes strong in vigorous youth!
That Night my FATHER died!  And MOTHER too!
Whose mild benevolent voice, and melting eye,
I yet remember well:  O yes, she was
Too kind, too good, for Memory e'er to slight!&mdash;
Of her, my dear, my lost Melcena is
A perfect semblance.  O ETERNAL GOD!
Do have compassion on thy grey-hair'd Servant!
Again to him his darling child restore!
The only living comfort that remains
To sweeten life's gall-mingled sediment;
The last supporting pillar now that's left,
To prop a few more years, his sinking heart;
And keep awhile his shatter'd, tottering frame,
From tumbling into the engulphing grave!

"Excuse, O friends, the vehemence of soul
That interrupts my tedious Narrative.
I now proceed. &mdash; Before the murdering FIENDS
Could reach my bed, my dying parents' groans
Admonish'd me to fly &mdash; a window near
Afforded egress to my shuddering limbs;
To seek a neighboring peasant's aid, I ran;
But ere I reach'd his house, I heard the scream
Of murder, mingled with the Ruffians' yell.
In the dark woods till morn I trembling lay;
Then ventured slowly through a grove of trees,
Which waved adjacent to my Father's house.
Great God!  what dread emotions then convulsed
My aching breast; I thought my beating heart
Would burst.  A drear, soul-sickening silence cast
A death-expressive gloom around.  In vain
I hoped to see my Parents, though gore-stain'd,
And mangled sorely with blood-dripping wounds;
Look from their mansion-door to seek their son.
I fear'd to call, or nearer to approach
The woeful scene of midnight violence;
Lest still the Ruffians might be lurking there.
The Sun rose high, my last faint hope expired;
The bosom-racking misery of DESPAIR
Now wrung my anguish'd heart-strings, and I sunk
Upon the naked earth &mdash; At length, I heard
The voice of men.  I rose, and saw a band
Of arm'd militia, marching to the House;
And soon I recognized my Father's friend
Dulonz, to whom, I faint and trembling ran.
He took my hand, and led me to the Door;
Whence, O soul-piercing sight!  I see it yet!
We saw my murder'd parents, lifeless, pale!
I kiss'd their livid lips, and in a swoon,
Sunk senseless, on their cold and mangled breasts.
Dulonz convey'd me to his friendly home,
The guardian of my infant years, became:
And with a Father's care upon my heart,
The principles of Piety impressed,
The light of Erudition o'er my mind,
In all its variegated tints diffused,
And carefully my Heritage preserved.
Ten years with him in amity I lived.
My period of Minority expired
And now, my fortune to myself resign'd,
The nations of the European world,
I formed a resolution to survey,
And thither sail'd.  From court to court I went
Until of men and laws I knew enough!
Alas too much!  Ashamed, disgusted, sick,
At sight of Perfidy, Corruption, Vice,
And Parasitic meanness, I return'd
To Carolina's uncorrupted shades,
And wed the object of my earliest love,
The charming daughter of the kind Dulonz.
With her in fondest quiet, twenty years
Of uncontaminated bliss I pass'd.
Two noble sons, and one sweet daughter crown'd
Our happy love.  But ere Melcena ceased
The lacteal breast to draw, a Fever drank
The fountains dry, whence flow'd her Mother's life.
Again my heart with agony was torn!
And ere the assuasive balm of friendly Time
Could mitigate their keen afflictive pangs,
The blood-effusive Wounds were tortur'd o'er:
For greedy Death, unsatisfied with her,
Snatch'd from my doating arms my eldest son!&mdash;
To banish from my breast the clouds of Woe,
That hover'd thick and black about my heart,
I sought the sunny cheer of social Friends;
But in my search for friends was much deceived.
Where one was faithful, ten were basely false!
I found the Hypocritic taint, the breath,
The infectious breath of Europe's poison'd sons,
Had reach'd Columbia's shores.  To Solitude,
To Books, and to the instruction of my son
And daughter, therefore, did I turn for peace,
For consolation.  These at times I've found.
But such the changeful Fate of woe-born Man,
To day his eye with cloudless joy is bright,
To morrow Misery's blood-steep'd tears bedim
Its fading beams; the next its lustre dies!

"A faithful Tenant on my Farm I placed;
Bade farewell to my few unfailing Friends;
And in these solitary Mountains sought
Exemption from the hum of bustling life.
A situation suited to my taste,
A deep retreat, a picturesque wild I found,
Where human foot perhaps had never trod;
There did I think the shattered stock, which yet
Of my storm-beaten life remain'd, would stand
From hurricanes of mortal woe secure;
Until by Nature's calm decay to earth
It gently fell &mdash; Imparting while alive
Its richest succulence to the young shoots,
Which from it in a happier season sprung,
From SIN and all its hateful brood remote;
I thought to ingraft upon the flexile minds
Of my surviving Infants, such deep love
Of Honesty, Benevolence, Virtue, Truth,
And all that dignifies immortal minds;
Before the examples of the dangerous World
Had power to fascinate their youthful hearts,
And stain their purity; and all the force
Of Hell's allurements should successless prove
Their firm-establish'd rectitude to warp.
How far my hopes would have been realized,
Is merely matter of opinion now.
For ere through one complete Decennial course,
The annually revolving orb of Time
Had roll'd my hopeful Charles; by fierce Choctaws,
On the rude rocks of these wild Hills, was shed
His taintless blood, and his fair body drag'd
Far from his mourning Father's sad abode.

"As by permission, with his gun he scaled
In search of feather'd game the adjoining Mounds;
The tawny demons spied the manly Boy
And in his body lodged the murdering lead.
I heard the dread report, the dying plaint,
And fierce exulting yell &mdash; But ere I reach'd
The bloood-stain'd spot the savage fiends had fled.
I saw them rising o'er a distant hill,
And caught a transient glance of my dead son,
Whom, with them they in hellish triumph bore.
In deep depression many months I mourn'd;
When to my mansion opportunely came
This young man's Father, my warm-hearted Friend
DELOME.  He learn'd from my old servant Ralph,
Whom to the settlement on horse I'd sent
To purchase viands for my simple board;
Of him he learn'd my recent loss and woe,
And journey'd hither through the forest maze,
To pluck the thorn of anguish from my breast,
And o'er my hills, which mournful sadness gloom'd,
A gleam of heart-enlivening radiance shed.
He with him too his manly Melville brought,
The melancholy vacancy to fill
Occasion'd by my hapless Charles's Death;
And have, as my old friend was pleased to say,
His tender mind with those grave truths embued,
Which my experience fitted me to teach.
This is the youth of whom I speak; the son
Of my good friend.  When home his father went,
Young Melville staid; the flush of thirteen years
His healthy cheek suffused.  His mind was quick,
Inquiring, strong &mdash; His heart vivacious, kind;
His body vigorous, firm.  I loved him much
And much he merited  my warmest love;
For all his powers were ceaselessly employed
To drive dejection from my drooping heart,
And sweeten my Melcena's lonesome life.
To her his kind devoirs proceeded soon,
From a diviner source than mere good will:
For soft infantile LOVE, in their young breasts
Began his honey-dripping wings to spread,
And through their wild-vibrating veins to breathe
Delicious raptures, thrilling, tender, strange!
How sweetly I have seen them sit beneath
The dark pine-shade, or oak's broad canopy,
Extracting the mellifluous quintessence
Of Milton's Paradise!  at every melting line
Expressing transports with commutual glance,
And interchanging softening sentiments,
At almost every soul-enchanting pause!
How oft I've seen him climb the dewy cliff,
And pluck its flowery beauties to adorn
The unartificial ringlets which o'erhung
Her snowy temples.  O!  those days though dash'd
At times with bitter Memory's sickening gall,
Were sweet, compared with these I now endure.
O!  then, when sorrow's tear roll'd down my cheek,
How kindly would my darling wipe it off,
And sing her wildest notes of soothing song
To exhilarate my sorrow-sobbing breast:
And Melville too, to aid her kind design,
The dulcet tones of his soft-warbling lute,
With her seraphic melody would pour
In sweet accord.  Those times alas are past!
They lasted though with little change, save what
The increasing years of the young lovers brought;
Until that painful period of Distress,
When from her Lover, and her Father too,
Was torn my darling daughter!  Strangers!
Perhaps ne'er suffered the keen-torturing pangs,
Which lacerate in bloody shreds the heart
Of an affectionate Father, when the grave
Ingulphs a tender child, his bosom's pride!
If not, you can but faint conception form,
Of that tormenting Wo, which wounds the breast
Of him who is by cruel fiends bereft;
By savage demons more fell than Death!
Of her his lovely, only living child!
The soothing solace of declining life!

"At intervals with Melville and old Ralph;
Melcena, during several happy years
Was wont to visit my dear friend Delome:
Where with a small but pleasing circle, they
In sweet unvitiated mirth employed
The pinion'd Hours.  Returning thence, again,
To me their blythe felicities they told;
And with the cheering letters of Delome
Gave Friendship's raptures to my leaping heart.
The day at length, which was in Hymen's fane
The virtue-kindled Love of the young pair
To consecrate, drew near.  But ere their vows
Were at the holy altar sealed, once more
My venerated friend they visited;
Received his ready sanction to partake
The nuptial joys, continued a few weeks,
And then again their journey back commenced.
As through the forest's gloomy wilds they rode,
A band of Hell-excited Villains fierce,
Terrific huge!  from the deep thickets rush'd
With pistols and with brandish'd broad-swords arm'd!
With raging fury, Melville's startled Steed
Like thunder through the sounding thickets burst.
The exploding pistol's sound, which sought in vain
His master's life, still higher rous'd his fire,
And drove him headlong o'er the clattering hills.
The snaggy boughs swept Melville's whistling ear!
His naked head glanced many a threatening tree!
And verge of precipice and pit was broke
At almost every bound! &mdash; Attempts were vain,
The impetuous storm to check.  The rein was lost!
Still Melville clinging to the tossing mane
And bending to the Horse's straining neck,
His seat maintain'd, until an oak's huge branch
Resistless, drag'd him to the shuddering ground.
He rose unhurt:  and o'er the rugged space,
To the disastrous spot where ruffian hands
Had seized the pleading Maid, with speed return'd,
Resolved to oppose unarm'd the bloody band,
If there.  But they had fled &mdash; he knew not whither.
Vain was his eager search their route to find:
Nor ear, nor eye, could aught avail, to give
His phrenzied heart a clue to its lost love!&mdash;
O'er hills of horrid height, and rough ascent,
Far from his home-conducting path he ran;
Until in the dark tops of towering pines
Began to sink the westering prince of light.&mdash;
Convinced, unless he sought the pathway soon,
That NIGHT would hold him in the Hemlock glooms,
And waste the time which then was dear as life;
He swiftly traversed back the desert-steeps;
Regain'd the path before the ascending shades.
Had o'er the beetling peaks their squadrons roll'd;
And ere my head was on its pillow laid,
The dreadful bosom-rending tale announc'd.
If on my naked heart the fiercest flames
Of burning pitch had been, in pointed streams,
Profusely pour'd, and all its feeling kept
Alive, the pain would hardly have surpassed
What rack'd my bosom on that woe-fraught night!&mdash;
When o'er my cottage, morning's early gleam
Was shed; I hasten'd Ralph to good Delome,
With a request to gather with all speed
A company of men to aid our search.
Then Melville and myself our arms prepared
And hither to these rocky ridges hied,
Conceiving them to be a fit abode
Of predatory ruffians.  The whole day,
In diligent but unsuccessful search
We spent.  This Night, as on a lofty peak
We lay; your gun's deep-ringing peal we heard,
And then ascending a still higher cliff
Your fire espied.  Thus, Sirs, in brief contour,
The features of my misadventured life
I've sketch'd. &mdash; Your friendly coadjuvancy
In our momentous quest shall gratitude,
And prayers for your felicity receive."

Thus answer'd Boone &mdash; "Our aid we'll freely grant.
Conduct us where your wisdom may advise,
Nor cliff, nor cavern shall be unexplored."

