The Western Wilderness had now begun
To pour its fragrance with attractive power,
Wide o'er Columbia's cultivated states;
And several families to its solitudes
Had charm'd.  Innumerous were the dangers, pains,
Perplexities, and hardships, which beset
On every side the infant settlers.  Boone,
With warm benevolence their wants relieved;
And his protecting shield before them threw,
When DANGER menacing their daring breasts,
Drew from its quiver'd side the gory shafts
Of Death.  The sick, the poor, the timid, all,
His friendship and munificence partook.
Fatigue-emaciated females, babes
With hunger, wan and weeping, often own'd
His generous aid, and with their tear-dew'd smiles,
And looks of tender gratitude repaid
His bounteous kindness.  Furiously incensed
With the incursions on their rude domain,
And by the caitiff fiends of nether Night impel'd;
The ruthless natives marshal'd all their might,
The feeble colony to mar; to tear,
Divine Refinement's pullulating plants
From their destruction-compass'd beds, and blast
Their little tender blooms!  Ah!  much indeed
By the rude rage of barbarous violence,
The fragrant germs were ravaged torn and chill'd!
But sill their bold protector's guardian arm
The extirpation-threatening powers repel'd.
Offtimes the feeble Fortresses, the brunt
Of fierce assault sustain'd; and often fell,
Behind the startled team, the murder'd swain;
The family's laboring stay!  and bleeding died,
In the unsupported plough's unfinish'd trench.
Hostilities of minor moment thus were waged,
Until the opening of another spring.
Then savage WAR'S blood-streaming orb began,
With more portentous terror o'er the wild,
To lift its awful disk.  Assembled hordes
Of the horrific foe, our Hero's Fort
With furious rage attack'd.  The well-wrought walls
Indignantly the thundering shock withstood:
Its fires the gallant garrison return'd,
With triple execution.  Costea led
The tawny bands, and saw with painful rage,
Their bleeding ranks cut down.  Reluctantly
At length the seige was raised; and through the brakes,
The fallen Indians' breathless bodies drag'd,
To where the howling Squaws with anguish mourn'd
Their lifeless warriors' fate.  Defeat but fired
The fiends with hotter fury.  Costea's soul
For dreadful vengeance flamed.  From breast to breast,
The burning passions spread their kindling rage
And soon the yell and war-hoop shook the hills,
And echoed o'er the forests' drear expanse.
Like clouds electric scatter'd round the Heavens,
In small detachments ireful, dusky, red,
When the discordant wrath and tumults fierce
Of jarring matter, into masses drive
Their angry bands; so rush'd the savage hordes,
By fury urged, and form'd a direful Host.
Their Chiefs in short harangue, the ills portray'd
That o'er their meads in threatening horrors hung.
The bade them save from WHITEMEN'S plundering grasp
Their ground, their game, their fruit, their fish, their streams,
Their Freedom, Peace, their Children, Wives and ALL!

To break their strength, the different Forts
By the divided ruffians were besieg'd.
On either side much blood the conflicts mark'd;
But such the valor, energy and skill
Of the advent'rous Settlers, that their guns
The plumes of daring confidence shot off,
Which proudly wav'd above the savage heads,
And drove again the bleeding legions back
To their rude huts.  The flaming tempest hur'd
In heaviest bolts against the garrison
Of Boone.  Two days and nights the volley'd blasts
Upon the bastion'd fortress ceaseless beat.
But from the little Bulwark's guarded band,
A counter storm, on which death-dealing rode
Destruction's Angel terrible and dark,
Incessantly was driv'n, until the foe,
In bloody ghastliness, and sullen rage,
Retir'd &mdash; But still their ire was not allay'd&mdash;
Their savage armies every week assail'd
The suffering Settlers.  Logan's Station stood,
With valorous strength, a fierce distressful siege;
And Harrod's too repel'd the roaring shocks
Of many a powerful assault.  At length,
From Carolina and Virginia came
To their relief a timely aid; and strung
With nerves of more intrepid enterprise
Their sinking spirits.  Strengthen'd thus, their power
For months, in each succeeding battle blaz'd,
In hotter torrents on the assailants heads;
And hurried headlong into the deep gurge
Of dark Eternity, the yelling ghosts
Of many a ghastly corse.

The foe thus foil'd,
Began to feel and dread the conquering force
Of the "LONG KNIFE."  Its anger-sharpen'd edge
They found resistless as the scythe of Death!&mdash;
The blood-polluted glooms that dim'd the West,
Now 'gan a more propitious face to wear;
And from the attenuated Darkness borke,
At intervals, bright gleams.  But Boone not long
In the benignant coruscations bask'd.
All times dispos'd and sedulous to serve
The Settlers, he to Licking River went,
With a small party of industrious men,
To explore and chrystallize the saline streams,
And salt for the brave Garrisons procure.
Through Winter's bleakest reign, alternately
In the kind task his coajuvancy
Was giv'n, by labor at the evaporating fires,
And procuration of the forest food,
On which himself and comrades were sustain'd.

One day, as through the wind-strip'd Wilderness
He sought the needful game, an ambush'd host
Of the red foe from their cane-covert rush'd,
And made him captive!  Thence to the Blue Licks,
Where at their salterns his companions wrought,
They hied, and them too in their captive toils
Involv'd.  To Chilicothe thence they march'd,
Triumphing proudly in their guarded prize.
Montour, the Shaw'nese King, soon saw in Boone
The warrior's soul, and, with a prince-like pride,
Magnanimously bade his tribe forbear
To treat him rudely; and a kind respect
His own demeanor towards the Hero mark'd.
Now as the auspicious time for Boone to essay
His great and long-conceiv'd design, to soothe
The vehemence of savage ire; and melt
Beneath Conciliation's gentle beams
Its prejudice-constructed base away.
To this important end he day and night
His utmost powers devoted.  First he sought
A farther knowledge of the Shaw'nese tongue,
Which he before had slightly learn'd, and then
His purpose with unwearied zeal pursued.
Though he succeeded to attain the esteem,
And e'en the affection of the ag'd Montour,
And hundreds of the Indian hosts; he still
Found ineffectual, all his efforts to appease
Their hostile spirit tow'rd the Mass of whites.

At Spring's return they took him to Detroit,
Together with a portion of his friends,
His fellow-prisoners; and to Hamilton
The British Commandant, presented them,
As an illustrious trophy of the skill
Of Indian stratagem.  Boone's lofty air
And dignified demeanor drew respect,
From ev'ry  eye that saw him.  Hamilton,
Though hostile to the Hero's country, which
Was then emerging from the noxious glooms
Of British tyranny; had yet a heart
That kindly beat with sympathetic throb,
When he the gallant captive view'd.  The tear
Of soft commiseration wet his cheek,
While Boone unfolded the benevolent views,
That thus expos'd him to Barbarian pow'r.
The noble Briton, stung with keen regret,
Saw, in the guile of his own government,
A source of the implacable revenge
And prejudice, which, in the Indians' breasts,
Against Columbian whites were entertain'd.
He knew the steel-edg'd Tomahawk and Knife,
The nitrous grain, and deathful gun it charg'd,
By British hands were given the savage hosts
To spill the blood of Freedom's advocates;
And with fell slaughter's gory corses clog
The brilliant wheels of REVOLUTION'S CAR!
His soul, at this reflection, felt the pains
Which tear the tender bosom bound by law
To aid Oppression's arm.  And he resolv'd,
Far as his province would permit, to assuage
The sufferings of the Captives.  All but Boone
Into his care were willingly transfer'd;
But such the fondness which the savages
For him conceiv'd, that they the powers withstood
Of warm persuasion, and large sums of gold,
Sooner than yield so lov'd, so rich a prize.

Again to Chilicothe they return'd.
Though wearisome and long their march, the charms
Of spring spread wildly round their blooming way;
And the rich plains o'er which they pass'd, adorn'd
With pleasant streams, conspir'd to cheer his soul
And banish painful thought.  Upon his brow
No discontent was seen, nor in a word
Or action, during all their tiresome march.
For still his darling purpose was to win
So far the savage confidence and faith,
As to enable him to appease the ire
They bore the infant settlement.  Montour
Receiv'd him with fraternal tenderness,
And the whole tribes seem'd more like friends than foes.
His cheerfulness, vivacity and ease,
Each day endear'd him to them more and more;
Until suspicion in their bosoms slept,
And left him free from all their rude restraint.
In farther testimony of respect
And kindness to him, they, as they were wont,
Upon the Stock of Shaw'nese savages,
With rude fantastic rites, engrafted him.
He, by a chieftain, was adopted son,
And with the warmth of consanguinity
Was welcom'd by his new-made relatives.
His friendly assiduities secur'd
The affection for him they at first conceiv'd.
Oft with the tawny hunters he travers'd
The game-abounding forests, and before
His rifle's flame-discharging caliber,
As oft, the browsing Deer and Buffalo fell.
An honorary pledge before the King,
The reeking spoils of the adventurous chase
He oftentimes presented.  Much was sooth'd
By his amusive converse with Montour,
The secret sorrows of his sensuous soul.
Upon this hoary Sachem eighty suns
Their bleaching beams had shed.  A hundred Wars
The scars of deep-torn wounds his body trench'd.
In bogs of gore his feet had oft been grum'd.
For many a gulphy grave, in furious fight,
His arm had furnish'd food.  The battleing broils
Of the barbarian bands had oft been quell'd,
By intercession of his soothing aid;
For he not less the important destinies
Of council rul'd, than those of clashing war.
A philosophic calmness kept the scales
Of Contemplation balanc'd well, within
His cool-reflecting mind.  His anger, like
The great Ohio, ere its torrents rag'd,
Roar'd long, and carried on its wasteful waves
Dark wrecks, Destruction, Terror, Fear, and Death!
With Nature's nervous eloquence endow'd,
Sublimely thundering mid the painted hosts,
He often chain'd attention to his tongue.
He had a solemn gravity of gait,
And native gracefulness of manners join'd;
With a melodious suavity of voice,
And soft inviting aspect that inspir'd
At once, the mingled feelings of respect
And dignified familiarity.
His frame was muscular and very tall,
And turn'd with all the symmetry that strength
And great agility require.  The powers
Of age his palm-erect position brav'd,
Without the slightest warp.  The storms of time,
Although they'd ravag'd from his lofty head
The long black locks of youth, and torn his cheeks
With many a trench; had not impair'd the spring
Of vigorous thought that energiz'd his  soul,
Nor dim'd the steady splendors of his eye.

While flaming on the ecliptic roll'd the Sun,
Much he delighted underneath the shade
Of dark-green poplars to repose with Boone;
And tell traditionary tales of war,
Which wash'd in ages past with waves of blood
The western wilds.  But most his masculine mind,
In melancholy majesty elate,
Its bold emphatic eloquence display'd,
When he the marvellous traditions told,
Which from his aged Ancestors he'd learn'd,
Descriptive of the mighty MAMMOTH RACE;
Their form, their fury, ravages, and power,
And their excision from the carnag'd West.
With Nature's unaffected energy,
The wonderous History thus he narrated.

"A thousand winters past, when these dark woods
Were newly planted by the great red Spirit;
When one stupendous forest stretch'd its shades
From the wide waters of the distant West
Beyond the great Missouri's cavern'd source,
To where the oriental billows boil
Beneath the burning ball, that pours each morn
His blazing brightness over their broad breasts;
When nought but ravening beasts and naked men
Through the rude yell-resounding forests roamed;
Before the pallid Prowlers of the East,
Were by their wicked Hell-bred Spirits borne
Upon the thundering Whirlwind's stormy Wing,
Across the intervening deeps, to waste
With fire and steel this ample paradise;
There then existed on the mighty Hills
That overlook in frowning prominence
The western sea, a race of monstrous Beasts,
Stupendous as the lowering precipice,
Horrific as the howling fiend of night,
Impetuous as the huge resistless rocks
That rush adown the Alleganean steeps,
Rapacious as the gulphy jaws of Death,
And as the ravenous Hyena cruel;&mdash;
Their native wilderness was soon laid waste.
By hunger and ferocity impel'd,
Like an o'erwhelming tempest o'er these plains
Their legions spread.  Their headlong weight
The crashing groves uptore.  The rivers sunk,
And the great lakes, when they their thirst allay'd.
A thousand hills their dreadful roarings rock'd,
And from the mountains' jutting peaks shook loose
Their hanging fragments.  Awful terrors siez'd
The affrighted animals.  The red men quaked.
The invading monsters, at a single meal,
Whole forest herds devour'd.  The yells of Death
And wild distress incessantly were heard.
Whole Indian villages were victimiz'd,
And blood and slaughter stain'd the groaning land.
The cries and plaints of expiration, pain,
And fear, the starry vault transpierc'd and reach'd
The Almighty Spirit's flame-emblaz'd abode.
The anger'd God, in sheeted lightnings clothed,
His thunder-mouth'd artillery grasp'd, and pour'd
Along the rocking Heavens, ten thousand peals
Of roaring wrath &mdash; then through the bursting arch
Descending, drove from sea to sea his bolts
Of threat'ning vengeance.  Still the daring Beasts
Their devastations spread.  Alighting next
Upon the Alleganean Battlements,
He cast around his lightning-mingled frowns.
The trembling mountain-summits sunk beneath
His awful presence.  Centre-shook, the Earth
In agitated undulations roll'd;
And tumbled from their tempest-blacken'd beds,
Tumultuous, foaming, wild; the surging seas
Their highest shores o'erwhelm'd.  The infuriate Herds,
As still more terrible the thunders burst,
And flashing blackness roll'd, still fiercer raged,
And deeper plunged in blood.  Thus brav'd, the arm
Of the great Spirit, hurled the slaughtering bolts
Of blazing ire amid the murdering droves;
And keen-prong'd lightnings, volleyed thunder globes,
And forest-wringing whirlwinds on them wreak'd
Their death-commission'd wrath.  On every hand
The huge Devourers fell; or, wounded, drag'd
O'er crashing trees and gory carcases
Their mighty mangled limbs.  The horrid crush
Of agony and rage, the sullen groans
Of lingering expiration every where,
The ensanguin'd carnage-cover'd regions shook.
With glaring eye-balls bursting from their heads,
And streaming blood; whole fury-foaming herds
Of the tremendous monsters thunder-torn,
And gored with fiery javelins, headlong rush'd
O'er the resounding ridges, rock-rib'd, rude,
Of shuddering Allegany.  Thousands blind,
Impetuous, mad, down Cumberland's huge steeps
Precipitately tumbled &mdash; From wild heights,
In crashing tumult, tearing crags and trees,
And heaping on the blood-whelm'd plains below,
The mingled ruins almost mountain high!
All fell beneath the bolted ire save ONE:
He, than the rest more huge and fierce, the flames
And vollied vengeance dauntlessly defied;
And rushing through the thickest clouds of wrath,
That roll'd their lightning-driving thunders round,
The rocky pinnacles and ragged woods
Of the blue-crested Mountains, raged and roar'd
And yell'd indignantly!  The gnarled firs,
Fierce-forked flashes rent.  The towering pines
In atoms by the blazing bolts were burst;
But still the unconquer'd monster grimly moved
Amid the fiery whirlwinds burning blasts,
Until his rage to furious madness grew;
And urged him from the sky-embosom'd steeps;
Whence boldly bounding o'er the western lakes,
A gloomier, wilder wilderness he sought,
Where unmolested now his dread domain
In solitary majesty he holds."&mdash;

With melancholy wonder mix'd with awe,
Refinement's powers the hoary Sachem heard;
For Boone in turn, descanted on the events,
Whose splendid eminence and useful aids
Adorn and dignify the social sphere
Of polish'd man.  He told how skillful ART
Had subjugated to his plastic sway,
The mineral empire.  How magnific domes,
In grand assemblage, gorgeous cities form,
How by the Compass and the starry chart,
Of astronomic science, guided ships
Adventurous, ride through storms the foaming seas,
And with the golden chain of Commerce bind
The numerous nations of the mighty globe;
Uniting in the kind civilities
Of generous intercourse a thousand climes,
Divided by the desolate expanse
Of interposing oceans &mdash; How the mind,
Its multifarious thoughts through myriad years,
If Time's uncertain reign so long should last,
By Printing's aidance can perpetuate.
How Agriculture from the furrow'd land,
Abundant stores of corn and fruitage draws,
And crowns with plenty, luxury, and ease,
Her cheerful votaries.  How Philanthropy
And social Love, in sweet profusion pour
Along Refinement's pleasure-blooming Vales,
Their streams of richest, life-ennobling joy.

Montour, so strong his energies of mind,
Though much amazed that man could e'er such might
And enterprise attain; full well perceived
The degradation of the savage state;
And mourn'd the rueful destiny that drown'd
In blood and gloom, the INDIAN INTELLECT.

By Boone's urbanity and mild address,
The enmity the white hair'd Chieftain bore
The polish'd whites, was partially reduced;
And he at length became disposed to turn
The reeking hatchet's life-destroying edge,
From the unvanquish'd Settlers.  But alas!
Before his embryo purpose could have birth,
His head lay cold beneath the hand of Death!
For by an apoplectic blow he fell,
And closed his eyes in everlasting sleep!
Wild was the savage woe that wept his fall!
Along the dismal wilderness was pour'd,
The melancholy howl of rude distress.
In all the varied pomp of Shawanese grief,
His mournful obsequies were solemnized.
In all the insignia of his rank array'd,
The breathless Sachem's corse was placed upright;
And round it drew in sorrow-sadden'd groupes,
The tawny NATION.  His successor rose,
And thus apostrophized the painted clay:

"Lamented Chieftain, we thy children mourn!
For thou, who wert in peace our cheering sun!
In the dark battle day our blazing bolt
Of conquering glory!  Thou art sunk in Night!
Those lips whence streams of purest counsel flow'd,
Now motionless and pale, no more shall pour
The tides of eloquence.  Those star-beam eyes,
That glanced pervasive through the thickest brakes,
Nor hiding fowl nor beast left undescried,
Are cover'd with the eternal clouds of Death!
Those limbs that once with active energy,
Fleet as the fear-wing'd elk or flying deer,
O'er vale and mountain bounded, bending well
The strongest bow, or aiming sure the tube
With thundering Death surcharged, are wither'd now,
And wasting into Dust.  Those age-bleach'd locks,
Though venerable still with Time-shed snows,
Soon with the furrowed temples which they shade,
Beneath the cold dank earth in darkness closed,
Shall lie.  But oh, our much revered Sire!
Although that form of majesty and grace
Must soon be bedded with thy Father's bones,
Thy spirit shall forever live!  shall live
Forever in the land where life is bliss;
Where tempest-mantled Winter's freezing frown,
And flame-enveloped Summer's withering blaze,
Thy spring's eternal bloom shall never change;
Where flower-perfum'd parterres and purple hills
In various fruitage rich, shall ever spread
Their game-abounding bosoms to the eye.
Where toil no more the nerves shall paralize,
Nor anguish bathe in bitter tears the cheek;
But where thy disembodied Ancestors
Shall hail thee with the holy shout of Love,
And thy participation in their joys
Solicit.  Go then, Spirit of Montour!
And on that mighty mountain, where in light
And grandeur clothed, the world's great Father dwells;
Associate with the blythe society
Of kindred bands beatified; go, Sire!
And for thy robes of perishable clay,
The radiant vestments of unending youth
Receive.  No hatchets there with human blood
Shall reek.  But the red Nations all shall smoke
In that fair land the Pipe of Amity,
And in the plenty-furnish'd tents of Peace,
Together banquet pleasure and repose.
We too shall shortly pass the Western Waves,
And thy felicitous abodes enjoy;
Renewing there with zest more exquisite,
Suspended happiness."  With plaintive voice
Coluxo thus the lifeless King addressed.

To the great Shawanese cemetery next
The uncoffin'd corse was borne and there inter'd;
While dolorous dirges o'er the dreary tomb
Were wildly sung.  Etch'd on a smooth broad stone,
A hieroglyphical memorial marked
The spot, where mouldering into kindred earth,
The much lamented Chieftain's body slept.

All chance of soothing down the savage ire,
Was buried with the heart of good Montour.
Coluxo such aversion bore the whites,
And so inexorable, unyielding, stern,
His purpose towards them; that the blandest arts
And ablest arguments, its vengeful course
Could not avert, nor blunt its dreadful edge.

To labor in Sciota salines, Boone
Was taken now.  His intervals from work,
Ostensibly in hunting the wild game,
But really in exploring the rich lands
Were actively employ'd.  A country here
In nature's gayest robes adorn'd, and rich
With fertilizing fatness he beheld.
But cultivation's glittering ploughshare yet,
The mossy surface of its mellow soil
Had never broke.  For there rude SOLITUDE,
In forest bowers, her savage offspring nursed;
And unmolested, with her sullen SIRE
Benighted BARBARISM, held her drear domain:
While round her breezy temples, wild-flower wreaths
And green-leaf chaplets dew-bespangled hung.
To introduce within a land so fair,
Luxuriant, healthful, picturesque and gay,
The social graces and sublime delights
Of Civilizement, was a task so grand,
Heroic and humane; that Boone beheld
No hindrance, difficulty, danger, pain,
Nor toil, that could a moment cool the zeal
And ardent eagerness, with which his soul,
The achievement of his glorious purpose sought.
But nathless all his vengeance-soothing skill!
Still sly SUSPICION'S subtle leer, and HATE'S
Repulsive scowl exposed at times,
The secret venom of the savage soul;
And proved its prejudice too deeply grown
To extirpate by an individual's power.
But when to Chilicothe he return'd;
The gorgon front of savage vengeance met
Unmask'd, and in its fearful terrors dark!
The Hero's keen indignant eye.  For there,
The Shawnese Warriors, smear'd with frightful paint,
And arm'd in dreadful panoply of Death,
Against his Fort, precinct to march appear'd.
'Twas Britain's hostile breath that blew to flame,
The slumbering sparks of Indian enmity,
And kindled their distrust of Boone anew.
With its characteristic cruelty,
Her parricidal hand, blood-dripping held
To the wild natives' dim deluded view,
A thousand gilded motives to excite
Their rage against Columbia's patriot sons.
Fit conduits to convey the subtle streams
Of poisoning influence to the savage mind,
In her Canadian provinces were found.
The apostate Girty and his ruffian peers,
Idoneous subjects also form'd, to speed
Her black flagitious views.  Their villain souls
Her sanguinary purpose to subserve,
Their reputation, peace, and virtue, sold;
And with Demoniac zeal, to arms inflamed
The tawny host.  'Twere visionary now,
To think with smooth persuasion's dulcet tongue,
And the soft-breathing blandishments of art,
To stay the desolation-threatening storm
Of direful wrath, that brooded darkly round.
How best its bolted thunders to repel
Was Boone's concern, and wisdom's dictate then.
Along with the blood-hungering war-ripe foe,
One night in feign'd content the Hero pass'd.
But under semblance of his wonted sport,
With shoulder'd gun, at morn's first gleam, the groves,
And brakes, and wild-wood labyrinths, he pierced.
Lo now!  the lordling stag in antler'd pomp,
Unheeded bounds before him; for impel'd
By all the valorous ardor, anxious zeal,
And tender power, that agitate and fire
The Hero's heart, when ruffian hands prepare;
To plunge in RUIN'S bloody gulph, his ALL,
His friends, his children, spouse, and patriot hopes;
Boone swiftly traverses the sombre wastes,
Until he at the distant Fort arrives.
But there no glowing lap of wedded love
On which his wearied temples to repose,
Nor smiles of filial tenderness and joy,
With which the glooms of care to dissipate,
In extacies of sweet enjoyment drown'd
His warm anticipations; for his spouse,
Despairing e'er again his fond embrace
And beaming eye to meet; believing Death
Had in his life the savage hatchet plunged,
Migrated with her children from the wild,
And sought again beneath her father's roof
In Carolina's civilized retreats,
Security from an infuriate foe,
And consolation to her anguish'd heart.
Although her absence gave his bosom pain,
As 'twas a disappointment of sweet hopes,
Her safety form'd a soothing counterpoise,
And reconciled him to the poignant want,
Of her endearing converse and fond smiles.

With gladness exquisite, the Garrison
His unexpected presence hail'd; but soon
The impending tempest's fell approach they learn;
And feel its dark penumbra cast a gloom
O'er joy's benignant splendors.  Valor still
Their souls innerved:  and in a fixed resolve,
Their Fortress to defend, they jointly leagued.
To strengthen and prepare it to withstand
The blazing brunt, both day and night they toil'd.
The exhilarating news, in a few days,
The arrival of another prisoner brought;
That, consequent on information gain'd
From Spies, the savage host had for a time
Its march defer'd.  By new adventures join'd,
Our Hero's force the hostile tribes alarm'd,
And into a serious fermentation threw
Their barbarous councils; which now oft convened
For consultation, how to exterminate
The rising settlement, and bar the West
Against the influx of humanizing light.

The infernal agents of the British realm
Still their excitement through the credulous clans
Industriously diffused.  The fiend Duquesne,
Of the embattled army took command,
And practised it in all the slaughtering arts
Of European War:  meanwhile in strength
Our Hero's Fortress grew.  Its guardian band,
Though small in number, was in bravery great.
In vigilant suspense, from day to day,
They wait the expected onset.  Lo!  at length,
Before their walls the fury-featured Host
Arrive.  O'er their terrific van, wide flap'd;
Fit symbol of satanic savagery!
The bloody wing of Britain's flesh-stain'd flag!
Upon the Fort, no battle-banner flow'd;
But Boone's inspiring fervors breathed.
With the hoarse thunder of assumed command,
The investing Myrmidons on their approach
Bade Boone surrender or to Death submit!
Two days were given the Garrison in which,
From the alternative a choice to make.
Although 'twas but a handful to a host,
And terrible the impending tempest; yet
The bold-beleaguer'd band, with daring souls,
And undivided voice, resolved to breast
That tempest's roughest shock.  The allotted time
For a response was near at hand.  Like Beasts
Carnivorous, hungry, fierce, that grimly watch
With keen unwinking eye the asylum, where
The harmless objects of their greedy rage
From Death retreat; like them, the tawny foe
The invested fortress eyed; until brave Boone
One of its Bastions rose, and to Duquesne
Declared their resolution, to expend
In its defence, their latest throbs of life.
In his ferocious visage, hellish hopes
Were seen expiring; while he heard announced
The valorous Band's heroical resolve:
For he had thought without a risk, his rage
For conquest, cruelty and blood, to glut.

Although successless in the attempt to awe
The gallant Garrison to yield; he hoped
By stratagem their strength to break,
And his infernal purpose to achieve.
For this; with them he now proposed to treat,
And proffered terms that prudence could not spurn.

Boone sixty paces from the fortress gates,
With eight more men the adverse party met,
As they required.  Distrust of their intent,
Our Hero's breast disturb'd.  But still his soul
To fear superior rose; and energized
And animated with the power to afford
Another proof of peaceable design
Toward the suspicious foe, resolved to test
The integrity of their intention thus.

Terms of capitulation were arranged,
And the Contractors signatures affixed;
When Boone and his co-agents were inform'd,
That 'twas a usage 'mong the Indian tribes
In treaty-forming, their sincerity
And cordial friendliness to testify;
By two of their own Chieftains joining hands
With each contractor on the white man's side.
To this, Boone and his party gave assent;
And to every man of the deputed band,
Forthwith a brace of the red ruffians march'd;
And seiz'd with PERFIDY'S flagitious grasp,
And black Malignity's ferocious grin,
Instead of kindling FRIENDSHIP'S placid air,
And mild Pacification's bland embrace,
The guileless Ministers of glorious Peace!
But from the struggling gripe, with vigorous tug
They tore away; and through the treacherous throng,
Amidst a bursting storm of sulphurous flame
And vollied lead, resistless rush'd, unslain!
And all save one, unwounded, safely reach'd
The sheltering fort!

The war-yell, shrill and fierce,
Then broke along the oscillating air.
But soon in a disploding tempest drown'd,
Gave place to thunders belch'd from tubes of death,
Against the well-constructed fortress-walls.
A counter-storm the invested Heroes pour'd,
And drew at every fire their foemen's blood.
Vain was the hope on either side, to find
In one or two diurnal rounds, such change
Of circumstance, as each so hoping wish'd.
The bullet-battering brunt, from dawning morn
Till dusky eve, and through the dismal night,
Upon the fort still ineffective beat.
But still the expectation of a pause
Was disappointed; for the assailing fiends
More furious grew, and fiercer drove the storm,
As its successless blasts in number grew.
E'en at the midnight hour, the welkin blazed,
And rage-born yells the haggard dreams disturb'd
Of those of the besieged, who sought in sleep
Refreshment's cheering aid.  NINE DAYS AND NIGHTS
Around the well-protected Garrison,
The leaden hail-storm pour'd its pelting showers;
While unsubdued, and suffering little loss,
Two only of its bold defenders slain!
It proudly braved each rudely battering shock;
And with the lightning of its vengeance smote
The savage ranks, until the shatter'd force
Defalcated with Death, with gore defiled,
With hunger weaken'd, and with wounds impair'd,
The siege at length relinquish'd; and return'd
Reluctantly, with slow and crippled march,
Depressed, and grim, to their rude wig-wam Homes.

