Drawn by Affection's heart-connecting ties,
Boone breaks again the monster-mantling glooms,
And hies alone towards the blue-crested vales
In reveries immersed; one sultry day,
Before him, near a gliding Brook, he saw
Reclined asleep on flower-impurpled moss,
A manly-featured Youth, in fur-skins clothed
With gun beside him.  Boone amazed, awhile,
Inspected close with curious ken, his garb
And aspect strange.  But nought descried that could
His origin unfold, or that bespake
Him civilized, the fairness of his face
Except:  then dauntlessly advancing, call'd
In gentle tone.  Upstarting wild, the youth
His gun close-grasp'd, and sternly gazed on Boone;
Whose air and words convinced him soon, that harm
He need not fear.  Each briefly told his views.
But scant and lame the language of the Lad
Came staggering from his tongue; for several years
Had flown, since he his native speech address'd,
To any human ear beside his own.
For lo!  he is Vulosko's noble Charles!&mdash;
Not, as his reverend Father had supposed
Had he been slain; but wounded by the Fiends,
The fell Choctaws, and borne to their rude homes;
Where six slow-lingering years in savage thrall,
As son to an old Sachem he had lived.
Meanwhile he cherish'd in his manly heart
A hope, once more, when ripening Time gave strength
And firmness to his nerves, and to his mind
Maturer enterprise, to see his Sire,
His Sister, and dear scenes of juvenile joy.
Thus saved from sinking in the blood-dark waves
Of horrible despair, he wisely shaped
His manners to accord with savage life;
And with the murderous Choctaws remain'd,
Enjoying all that he had ground to hope;
Until imbolden'd by increasing powers,
He venturously resolved to pass the pale
Of barbarous thraldom, and essay to find
Those distant scenes for which so long he'd sigh'd.
But when amid the pathless glooms he plunged,
Too dim was Memory's chart to point his way;
For when its lines were pencil'd, phrenzied Pain
Their sickly tints confused and half expunged.
He therefore without any guiding clue,
Bewildered, wander'd through the mazy waste
Some weeks; until he chanced to reach the Brook
Whose blooming borders woo'd him to repose
Upon their lovely lap; where gently lull'd
By murmurs mild, in slumbers sweet he lay
When Boone arrived.

Together now they wend
On their less lonely way.  They pass the plains,
The mountains scale; and see!  Vulosko's groves,
Wave gratulant before the approaching guests!
And his rejoicing mansion now receives
The much-loved Friend and welcome Stranger-Youth.
Boone's soul with fluttering extacy was full!
'Twas now to him, a moment big with bliss
And exquisite solicitude! &mdash; Each glance
Melcena and Vulosko cast on Charles,
He vigilantly watch'd &mdash; Inquiry strange,
And curious eagerness were in their looks&mdash;
Boone bade them recognize their youthful guest.
A breathless silence follow'd &mdash; tears in streams
Roll'd down his callow cheeks &mdash; emotions strong
And varied mark'd their faces and convulsed
Their breasts, while they his agitation view'd:
For join'd with that, they in his mien descried
A strange mysterious something, which o'erwhelm'd
With melancholy tenderness their souls;
And brought to mind the dear-remember'd Charles.
While thus in deep solicitous suspense
They stood; Boone from the Battery of Bliss
Gave their enfeebled nerves the enrapturing SHOCK!
Each seizing Charles' hand, beside him sunk;
And in the mingled transports of sweet joy
And warm felicitous Affection, swoon'd!
'Twas now a time of awful extacy!
From every eye, a general gush of joy
Profusely flow'd &mdash; the Servants press'd their hands,
And rais'd to Heaven their eyes in Gratitude.
Some moments had elapsed, ere Melville's strength
Could aid him to support his weeping wife;
And Boone so paralized with rapture was,
That as he raised Vulosko's silver'd head,
And thence the trickling drops of transport wiped,
He trembled as if shook by storms of Age!
The flood of ravishment at length assuaged,
Through the pellucid moisture of their eyes,
Serenely shone the lustre of delight;
While gentler tumults softly swell'd their breasts.
So when the mighty Ocean-storm subsides,
Mild splendor through the humid azure beams;
And though the surgy heaving of the tide
Has ceased, the bosom of the settling  Deep
Still undulates with lightly lingering power
Which the tumultuous tempest leaves behind.

The anticipation of Beatitude,
In which, to be enjoy'd beyond the grave,
Vulosko's pious spirit had indulged,
Seem'd merging now in the effulgent dawn
Of actual bliss, of sweet Reality!
And though his tedious Pilgrimage through life
O'er thorny, dank and dismal solitudes
And rugged, rough and tottering steeps had been,
Until its hastening close was near at hand;
It then a fragrant flowery slope became,
With streams of transport bounteously enrich'd,
And with Affection's cloudless sunshine crown'd.

In converse such as the occasion claim'd,
The lightsome moments glided smoothly by.
Vulosko after Charles' narrative
Was copiously detail'd, at Boone's request,
The doom of the Banditti-Miscreants told;
And brief but eloquent Description gave
Of the judicial ordeal which they pass'd.
Whose outlines here the Muse in homely tint
Will sketch.  "Vonploor's recovery fix'd the time,
When justice was to lift the awful Scales
Of life and death, and ascertain their fate.
Report has rumor'd far and wide the day
Of solemn scrutiny; and when it came,
To witness the important scene, to Court
The country flock'd.  Though ample was the Dome,
It soon was crouded by the anxious throng.
The Culprits through the staring multitude,
Trembling to the momentous bar were led.
Upon his magisterial seat, august,
Serenely stern, the venerable Judge
In ermin'd purple robed, deep-musing sat.
The law-learn'd Counsel their enclosure fill'd,
And with forensic tomes their Book-bench piled.
Proemial ceremonies having closed;
Through deep Interrogation's flexuous maze,
The Witnesses were artfully pursued,
Until its various windings they evolved.
Then rose with solemn grace and mien demure,
The learned Defender of infracted Law;
And thundering in his injured Patron's cause,
Its wrongs in strong perspicuous terms announced;
The Culprits through their midnight ranges traced,
Their violence burglarious, bloody, fell,
Inhuman, dire!  in vivid portrait drew;
Depictured scenes of agony and woe,
Of ruin, wretchedness and penury,
Incurable distraction and despair;
The effects of their flagitious ravages
And ruthless murders.  Loud and forcibly,
The penalties of anger'd Justice peal'd,
From his impassion'd tongue.  In lucid phrase,
The sanctity of legal institutes
He skilfully expounded; shewing how
IMPUNITY extended to high Crimes,
Imboldens Vice; sheds on the guilt-gloom'd soul,
A gleam of hardening hope; the turpitude
And civil harmfulness of villainy,
In the Offender's view diminishes;
Corrodes with RAPINE'S rust the golden bands,
That bind in one harmonious Brotherhood,
The family of man, until they burst,
And into wretched Dissolution fall,
The peaceful systems of the social world;
And ANARCHY, ferocious VIOLENCE,
AMBITION, SLAUGHTER, CRUELTY and THEFT,
Amid their blood-o'erfloated ruins roam.

"To him succeeded the learn'd Advocates
Of the arraign'd.  Much seeming sympathy
Was melting in their manner, eyes and mien;
While in a tone as summer's evening breeze
Or Spring's love-modulated sonnets soft,
And tender as kind Pity's plaining sigh,
Pathetic strains of eloquence they pour'd.
But 'twas a rill essaying to arrest
A headlong torrent; 'twas an Infant's plaint
Struggling a Nation's thunders to confound.
Though skill'd in all the subtleties and wiles
Of argument, though practiced in the art
Of weaving Sophistry's thin gossamer
Into Truth-concealing mantles; now their skill
Was foil'd; and through the unsubstantial veil
Around it cast, the blaze of Justice shone.
Debate of counsel ended, she pronounced
Through the impanneled Guardians of her rights,
Her clear conviction of the Culprits' guilt;
And by the solemn organ of her will
Their condemnation spake! &mdash; In breathless awe,
The listening croud the impressive sentence heard:
While Guilt aghast, his bloody picture view'd;
And bowed in homage to the spotless form
Of Probity, portrayed in coloring strong,
By the Denunciator of his doom.

"In preparation for a state untried,
The abbreviated remnant of their lives,
The mercy-pleading Malefactors pass'd.
Soon came the awful day, which was to close
Their mortal scene.  Around the gallows, throng'd
Fast-gathering thousands, from each peopled tract
Of the encircling country.  Dread indeed,
And terrible the exhibition was!
Corporeally energic men, in Life's
Meridian, darkly shrouded in the glooms
Of direst Guilt, from their stained orbits torn,
And hurl'd into Eternity's deep gulphs,
To meet the judgment of a God incensed,
Was a phenomenon most terrible!
A spectacle, o'erwhelming to the mind
Unindurated by the hardening force
Of crime-familiarizing Vice.  Ere on
The shoreless waves their shrieking ghosts were cast,
To the compassion-softened multitude,
An awful admonition they address'd.
They warned them, by the anguish of Remorse;
By all the tortures of a Conscience torn
With fangs of ceaseless Agony; by all
The horrors of an everlasting Hell;
By the heart-piercing stings of Infamy,
And poisoned tooth of dolorous Despair;
By all their hopes of Happiness on Earth,
And sweet Beatitude beyond the tomb,
To eschew the dangerous Vortices of Guilt;
To fly the guzzling gurge of Drunkenness;
To shun the treacherous sloughs of Indolence;
To practice Virtue, Honesty and Truth;
And live, instead of Outcasts  like themselves,
Supporters of harmonious Polity,
The zealous friends of Piety and Law;
That they, when called from this sad sphere of Time,
Might to an honorable grave descend:
Where Scorn should never cast his withering scowl,
To blight the turf-adorning grass and flowers
That o'er their much-lamented ashes wave;
But tender-eyed Affection shed her dews,
And melancholy Friendship love to mourn.

"This parting counsel given, the dreadful cord
Retributive of angered Justice, swung
The Malefactors from this blood-stained Ball,
Into the wide-stretch'd arms of Waiting Death.

"When to Contrition's sway their hearts succumb'd;
The Sufferers of their Midnight Crimes they told,
Far as their knowledge would permit; to whom,
And others who advanced attested claims,
The rescued spoils were speedily restored."

This theme dismiss'd, in various converse pass'd
The cheerful Eve; until its far advance
Admonish'd Boone, his travelled limbs to rest.
At morn's return, he bade his friends farewell;
And his wild solitary route resumed.

Departed raptures of Domestic Love,
Now from the Mirror of his Memory shone
In mellow lustre through his melting breast,
And waked redoubled ardor, to renew
Their long-suspended joys.  His soul was winged
With fluttering fervor, and his bounding limbs
Seemed buoyant o'er the rugged wild to bear.

Once more he emerges from the desert glooms,
And treads on Carolina's cultured Vales.
His darling Wife's paternal home drew nigh.
High in the spangled concave hung the Moon.
The midnight dews slow-drizzling, steeped the plains.
Along the river-course, the curdly mists
In winding volumes rose.  The Night Birds' screams,
Responsive issued from the weedy marsh.
The heavy tinklings of remembered bells,
Struck slowly on the shadowy ear of Night.
No taper glimmered from the neighboring farms.
The Hero pass'd his former home.  To him,
All seemed a sweetly melancholy dream!
The solemn Oak, which oft to him and friends
In summer-tide had lent its grateful shade,
Seemed an acquaintance which he dare not pass
Unnoticed.  One sad moment at the Gate,
He paused.  New tenants now the mansion held.
All dark and silent, its old Master's loss
It seemed to mourn.  He sighing drop'd a tear,
And then sped on.  The scenes of many a year
Rose in review, before his musing mind.
He reached the lane which led to his loved Spouse
And darling Children.  Agitation shook
His joyous breast &mdash; the ancient stile is passed&mdash;
The yard is cross'd &mdash; the silent door he raps&mdash;
The snow-lock'd Sire demands, "what Guest is there?"
"Your hapless Daughter's long-lost Husband Boone!"
The soul-transporting voice her chamber reached,
And shouts of extacy proclaimed her joy&mdash;
A rapturous consternation through the house
Prevailed.  For he had come as from the grave!
All having long believed and mourned him dead.

Again the endearments of connubial love
And filial fondness, in their tenderest forms,
His bosom thrill.  But few the days of rest
And ease his enterprising zeal allowed;
For soon the tiresome Wilderness again,
He with his noble family traversed back.
He found the Settlers suffering much distress:
With the fierce foe hard had they to contend;
Many in groaning agony had writhed
Beneath his horrid scalp-dissevering Knife,
Or perished in the ruthless faggot-flames.
E'en fenceless Beauty, unoffending Babes,
And feeble age by his rude hands had bled,
Had suffered all that Fury could inflict.
Nor was it the red ravagers alone,
Whose rage and cruelty they had to feel;
For still infuriated England led
The bloody hosts, their hostile hearts inflamed,
And in their ranks her merciless minions mixed.
Behold!  where British Bird, at Licking-Forks,
'Gainst Martin's Garrison and Riddle's pours
His Cannon's slaughtering thunder, and compels
The unwary and defenceless Habitants,
To his o'erpowering demon force to yield.
See!  there, the tyger-hearted ruffians load,
With galling luggage, the imbecile Fair;
And urge them, heedless of their tender plaints,
Along the wearisome and dismal Wastes;
'Till faint and sinking underneath their toil,
The bloody hatchet frees them from their woe.
But Boone's invigorating presence braced
The sinews of the bleeding settlement;
And banished thence the accumulating glooms.
So the enlivening Sun, when Nature droops
Relaxed, long shrouded in ungenial clouds,
At length, from his remote retirement breaks;
Enkindles in her veins fresh energy;
Her eye with sparkling lustre reillumes;
And from her face the gathered darkness drives.
But while inspiriting his harassed friends,
And with the wonted prowess of his arm
Defending Females, Infancy, and Age;
Our Hero in his heart a wound received,
That even pierced his manly Fortitude.
A Brother, whom most ardently he loved,
Now the murderous foe a victim fell.
As they together through the forest hied,
Returning home from Licking River plains,
The ambush'd Ruffians fired the deathful charge,
And in his gore the gallant Woodsman laid.
Before his Angel-Guardian's viewless shield,
The fleet Survivor flew; while bursting fierce
From their concealment, rapidly pursued
The yelling fiends.  Their hellish chase to aid,
Their hoarse-lung'd Blood-Hounds on his track they loosed;
Swift on, the carnage-nurtured monsters strained;
And the vast Desert with their clamors roared.
In vain, by mazy doublings through the Brakes,
And by accelerated speed, he strove,
The slaughter-hungering pack's pursuit to foil.
Intent, and sure as Death, through every turn
Of the deep-tangled labyrinths, his steps
They swiftly trace.  Still close and closer drew
The dreadful cry.  The savage whoop behind,
Ascending wild at once from various points,
Bespake it dangerous longer to remain
Within the thickets' bounds; and forth he burst
Into the forest's less entangling wood.
Soon on his view, the raging Blood-Hounds broke.
At his aimed Rifle's peal, the foremost fell.
The residue sweep on &mdash; again he flies,
And flying charges the death-pouring tube:
Then wheeling, stiffens one more of the pack.
His flight resumed, a second time he essays
His gun to charge:  when lo!  close at his heels,
Vociferous, foaming, panting, glare-eyed, grim,
The fierce Survivors press'd; with winding sweep,
And forceful, with his gun, as round he turned,
Boone fell'd two of them lifeless to the ground,
And backward frightened the remaining three;
Which soon most furiously the attack renewed,
But were with crippled limbs again repulsed;
Nor dared they to the onset to return:
But vanquished, lame and sullen skulk'd away.
The screaming Savages are now in view,
But Boone at distance almost disappears,
And now has reached a sheltering brake secure.

Some respite from the red ferocious foe,
And his more vile and criminal ally,
The coming Winter to the Settlers brought.
Though oft by petty molestations mar'd,
In strength the young establishment still grew;
At sight of which, to tenfold vengeance stung,
The venal Myrmidons of tyrant power,
Quick through their tawny coadjutors' breasts,
Their murder-rousing virulence infused.
At length, in dread confederation linked,
The sanguinary clans of Cherokees,
Wyandots, Shawanese, Delawares, Tawas,
And other savage nations, hot for blood,
On Chilicothe's plains their war-fiends poured;
Where round Britannia's gore-stained banner, they
With her Canadian Mercenaries leagued,
By the black-hearted villain Girty led,
'Gainst Bryant's Fortress the grim squadrons move.
As gathers silently the midnight storm
Dark-rolling, round some sleep-enveloped dome
Unconscious of the impending violence;
Until its bursting thunder-peals, its Winds'
Rash roar, its vollied showers of battering hail,
And flashes fierce of flames electric break
The slumberous spell; so round the unwary Fort,
Enshrouded in nocturnal gloom, the Host
Of slaughter-hungering Ruffians gather'd; dark,
Horrific, noiseless, sullen!  While within,
A sleep-born silence held her solemn sway;
'Till a deep yell, the signal of assault,
Invaded rudely their astonished ears,
And roused the slumbering Garrison to arms.
Now beat upon the well-defended walls,
The blazing tempest's thunder-driven blasts
Of rattling lead.  In vain their fury roar'd;
The strong Defences every shock withstood,
Until the foil'd assailants were repell'd.
Two days unceasingly the siege had flamed,
When by the forcibly resisting fire,
'Twas broken up.  The baffled army, maim'd,
And bleeding, marched forthwith to the Blue Licks;
Anticipating festinate pursuit,
Which eagerly it wish'd:  for still its strength
Was great, its fury fierce and unsubdued.
From Lexington, from Harrodsburg, and each
Contiguous neighborhood and Station, rush'd
At summons of the gallant Harland, Trigg,
M'Gary, Todd and Boone, Kentucky's pride!
Her bravest patriots!  the retreating foe
To encounter.  Borne on lofty-mettled steeds,
The wilds in martial majesty they swept,
Till Licking's craggy banks before them frown'd.
When, lo!  retiring from the opposing shore,
The rear of the grim Demons they beheld.
With awful consequence the crisis teem'd.
The gallant Horsemen halted; prudence claim'd
A moment's consultation, on the course
To be pursued.  For various were the marks
Upon the savage route impress'd, to prove
The foe in number four-fold times as great,
As was Kentucky's patriot band; and well
Were Boone and others versed in Indian wiles
Assured, from numerous stratagems descried
In the procedure of the tawny host,
That it design'd to lure them to their death.
Boone knew the ground; and by request detail'd
The system he thought safest to adopt.
In an elliptic course the River wound,
The whole of the peninsulated land,
The browsing Buffalo-Herds had bared; save that
A few storm-shatter'd trees, still here and there,
Clung lonely in the rock-incrusted soil.
From Licking, to the opposite extreme
Of the ellipsis, ran a rugged Ridge,
Whose sides and summit, full two-thirds their length
Uncover'd lay, and were to view exposed
From its dark-timbered end; where, clothed in shrubs,
The heads of two diverging ravines met;
Which to the curving stream on either side
Of the ellipse extended.  Boone foresaw
The snare the skulking Caitiffs had prepared;
And warn'd his party of an ambuscade:
Exhorting them their forces to divide,
And by a simultaneous march inclose
The Ruffians, in the toils themselves had lain;
Or wait a reinforcement from their friend,
The intrepid Logan; who, with generous zeal
Kentucky's green unsullied banner bore
Among her martial patriots, rousing them
To arm for their embattled brethren's aid.

Much the judicious counsel was approved,
And gave fair indications to succeed.
When, daringly impatient, ardent, rash,
M'Gary thunderingly exclaimed; "To Death
Or Conquest!  Cowardice may waste in words
The time, and here, secure from Danger, lag;
But Valor will with me in Battle dare,
Without delay, the insulting Savages!"
He paused not for reply; but spur'd his steed,
The war-shout raised, and rush'd into the stream.
The impetuous ardor spread.  The council broke.
All in precipitate disorder stem'd
The dashing torrent, swept with clattering speed
The rock-paved ridge, 'till at its oak-crown'd end,
They met the vengeance of the yelling foe,
And halted in the whirlwind's flaming front.
Swift from their Horses leap'd the eager band,
Our HERO, Harland, Trigg, M'Gary, Todd,
And Israel Boone, all breasted the dread Host;
With daring vehemence, distinguish'd might,
And soul-inspiriting precedency.
Coluxo, Costea, and their base Colleague
The renegado Girty, led the ranks
Of the demoniac enemy; and vied
In dangerous prowess, and destructive deeds
With the Kentuckian CHIEFTAINS.  Fiercer flames
The conflict, as more near the Hosts approach.
With Rifle-peal and Indian-yell, with plaint
Of Death and valor-rousing shout, the Glyns
And Groves reverberate.  At every blast,
On either side, the slaughtering storm cut down
Full many a warrior bold, in blooming prime.
The gallant Todd has fallen!  Low in blood
He lies!  Yet, hear!  his dying accents cheer
His brave Compatriots.  "Oh, my Friends!  pause not
To pity me!  The living claim your care:
Your Mothers, Sisters, Daughters, Wives and Babes.
I die for them, and soon shall be in Heaven,
Maintain the fight, and if you nobly fall,
You'll follow me." &mdash; The battle thunders burst
More terribly destructive, as the soul
Of the fallen Hero fled.  A wilder scream
Broke from the foaming, painted fiends of blood;
While Vengeance-frantic, rush'd in closer fray
The adverse Champions. &mdash; Hatchets hurl'd
Blood-reeking through the Rifle-spouted flames,
Enhanc'd the horrors of the deathful din.
Where thickest flew the death-wing'd weapons, Trigg
The vollied Counter-Tempest to direct
His gallant aidance gave.  Culuxo mark'd
His martial port and slaughtering vehemence;
And springing forward, drove his Battle-Axe
Full at the intrepid Whiteman's ample breast.
Deep in life's purple Cistern had it plung'd;
But that Trigg's Rifle-Lock its shivering force
Received.  Disarm'd, he seized the edged weapon;
And rush'd to cleave the enraged Coluxo down.
But Costea, Hatchet-arm'd, sprang forth to meet
The coming Champion.  Fiercely flash'd with rage
Their meeting eyes, Defiance darkly roll'd
Upon their Vengeance-undulated brows.
Contiguous to the awful ground they trode,
The Battle-blaze a moment was extinct.
A hundred eyes in eager gaze were fixed
Upon the approaching Chiefs [missing text] 
With sympathetic impulse griped their guns,
And backward rose in hostile attitude
As the stern Combatants their Hatchets raised.
They strike!  The blow half-baffled, each receives
Slight in his shoulder's brawn.  Again descends,
On either side, the fury-driven axe.
From Costea's bone-bared jaw, huge flesh flakes fall.
Another brunt!  again the Indian bleeds!
And from his wounded hand, the weapon drops.
With instant bound, his head he heaves full-aim'd
At Trigg's blood-dripping breast, that like some oak,
'Gainst which the furious Bull his frontlet drives,
Unyielding the impetuous shock sustains.
Now Costea seizes the descending axe,
And wards the blow aimed at his plumeless head.
With his uninjured hand he tugs for life,
But vainly:  from his desperate gripe,
Trigg wrenches the destructive Tomahawk,
And plants it in his head.  He reels, he sinks!
Adown his long dark locks, profusely streams
The gushing life-tide. &mdash; Again is plunged
Deep in his brain, the bleeding steel.  He dies!
Behold!  in gloomy wrath Coluxo comes!
His stride is terrible!  His dreadful brow
Upon the victor Champion scowls; his eye
Through the death-threatening tempest of his face,
Like the storm-reddening meteor of deep Night,
Portentously its flaming ire emits.
He brandishes aloft a reeking axe,
Snatched from the grasp of an expiring Peer.
Trigg, maugre much from his gashed breast had flown
His vigor, rushes to the combat dire,
And falls!  Boone, the Hero's doom beheld;
And, hastening whence he had the hottest blaze
Of the dread fight sustained, Coluxo's rage
Resolved to quell; but ere the ground he gain'd,
From which the slaughtering Sachem he could mark
With certain aim; he saw his gallant son,
The blooming Israel reeling from the ranks,
And bathed in streaming blood; while on him rush'd,
With the curved scalping steel, the demon fell,
Whose fatal fire had in his valorous breast
The deathful lead impel'd.  He saw, and flew
Through whizzing balls, to reach the wounded Youth:
But halting in his hazardous career,
The scalp-dissevering savage shot:  then ran,
And raised his dying Israel in his arms;
Who thus in accents faint his feelings spake&mdash;
"Oh, Father!  God preserve thy noble life
To see this lovely land I now must leave,
Become the happy Garden of the World;
To soothe my darling Mother's mourning heart;
And be my Brothers' and my Sisters' Friend!
Oh!  if you live to tell my hapless doom;
To them my dying benediction bear.
God save my Father!" &mdash; Death his utterance quenched.
The Battle-tempest, from the flaming Wood
With more destructive vengeance now emerged.
In its sulphureous vortex Slaughter rode;
Grinding his gory teeth, with yelling deep
And joyously, as on the gushing blood
Of gasping Heroes, glared his baleful eye.
A more exultant scream he shrilly pours,
As the Herculean Harland groans his last:
And well the live-devouring fiend might joy,
For ne'er a prouder trophy marked his sway.

Nought else but desperate temerity
Could have impell'd Kentucky's patriot band,
The o'erwhelming death-tide longer to sustain.
Before its roaring wrath they therefore fled.
Infernal acclamations; such as shake
The burning vaults of Hell, when conquest crowns
The conflicts of its King with virtuous souls;
Along the reddened welkin fiercely burst,
And roll the savage joy wide o'er the waste.
Before the reeking hatchet's lifted edge,
The close-beset regression was maintained,
Until the River's dangerous pass was reach'd.
There, dreadful was the wasteful rage of Death!
The fortunate few who had their steeds regained,
Escaped unharm'd &mdash; But terrible the fate
Of those on foot!  Deep roll'd the surging stream;
On either bank huge hung the shattered crags;
Precipitate and violent the press
That urged the exhausted Heroes' hurried flight.
O'ertaken, wounded, faint, some fall on shore:
Part through the narrow inlet gain the ford:
Part from the beetleing cliffs plunge in the stream:
Some less enfeebled and more daring wheel;
And meet the foemen on the River's brink;
Boone there encounters fierce Coluxo's might.
Each ere they meet, the missive Hatchet drives
Effectless at the other's wary head.
Their emptied rifles next, with forceful sweep
And shivering clash, in rude collision meet!
The Champions stagger from the ponderous shock.
Again their fragment weapons through the air
They wind, and bring them down in contact dread.
The remnant stocks in thousand splinters fly.
The Antagonists, enraged to see their blows
Thus wasted, grasp with more infuriate gripe
The naked Barrels, wield them with more force;
And a half-baffled brunt on either's head
Impel.  A moment to their knees they sink.
Recovered from the stunning stroke, they rise:
But from their hands, their battered tubes have fallen.
In instantaneous grapplement they join,
And struggle on the craggy verge!  their brain
With rage and its late jar vertiginous!&mdash;
Behold!  they seem just toppling o'er the flood:
The shattered brink now breaks!  the sliddering mass
Before them crashing, sweeps the hoary ruin.
They headlong follow!  Still in stubborn clutch
Conjunctive, midway down the smoking steep
A prominence their dread descent arrests;
Where on the impeded pile new-fallen, they lodge.
Coluxo's undermost and bears the shock.
But lo!  he heaves with Aegean rage to rise.
Strong is the struggle now, and perilous:
For narrow is the intercipient ledge,
And dangerous the rocky points beneath.
Its burdened base is trembling o'er the flood
That dashes darkly by.  The moment teems
With destiny.  His danger Boone surveys,
And disenthrals himself with vigorous wrench;
A stunted Cedar grasps, and drives his feet
Against the swift-advancing Combatant;
Who, by the forceful impulse strongly driven,
Precipitately from the peak descends,
And plunging in the torrent's shuddering deeps,
A moment he's ingulph'd!  emerging now,
With visage rage-convulsed, and eye strained upwards,
Fierce-flashing on his bold Antagonist,
He flings the billows from his heaving sides,
And bounds and flounces towards the frowning shore.
Boone marked his mad and desperate approach;
And from the rifted crag, a loosened rock
Full on his head impetuously impel'd.
Profusely boiling from his bursted skull,
Through the white-bubbling waves, the life-streams rose,
And striped with purple lines the watery woof.
His eye Boone glances round.  He cannot scale
The steep, nor has he footing to descend.
Into the booming stream he therefore bounds!
And on the billows rapidly is borne,
To where the Battle blazes o'er the Ford.
There, through a scene of direst massacre,
Unarm'd he rushes.  Mingled yells and groans
From bank to bank resound; and blood and flames,
The corse-polluted waves in crimson clothe.
Here closed in deadly conflict, now immersed,
Now rising through the strangling surge, appear
The adverse Combatants; while blind and faint,
The wounded there are reeling seen, till roll'd
By the red torrent to its drowning gulphs.

Now, as the rugged crags yon Hero climbs,
The death-shot drives him through &mdash; His action ends.
A moment to the rock he feebly clings&mdash;
He backward bends &mdash; His strengthless hands break loose;
Down, down the precipice, he headlong falls!
And at its base a bleeding ruin floats.
But Boone the friendly shore has safely gained:
And lo!  the Horsemen halt and wheel and fire!
Short time, the vehement pursuit is check'd:
Kentucky's gallant residue on land,
At length arrive: &mdash; Again the deep-mouthed yell
Hot pour'd, the sanguinary chase proclaims;
Which ceases not, till Bryant's sheltering Fort
Receives the exhausted band.  There, on his march,
Brave Logan and his gallant force, they meet.
These with them wend to the red slaughter-field,
Eager to avenge their fellow-patriots' doom.
But the Barbarian Victors have escaped;
And sated Death sleeps on the silent ground.
Oh, what a mournful spectacle is there!
Behold!  the Hero who three days ago,
In towering elegance and manhood's bloom,
The ranks of Battle graced; now roll'd in gore,
Out-stretch'd and pallid on the corse-strewn plain!
No more to meet the embrace of that fond Wife
And prattling Son, who gazed with tearful eyes,
As from his sylvan mansion he withdrew,
Waving his hand in token of his love.
Ah God!  what gloomy Stillness hovers round
The bloody scene.  No sound its awful reign
Disturbs; save the gorged Vulture's dismal croak;
As from his prey with dark and heavy wing,
He rises slowly to the laden bough
Of some huge Oak.  In solemn mood, with steps
Of meditative measure, 'mongst the slain
The Heroes move.  See Boone stand weeping
His mangled son!  Now clasping the cold hand!
And now, ere in the grave's dark cell the Youth
Is covered, gently severing from his locks,
A relick dear to the maternal heart.
The sepulture's performed; Night spread her shades;
And the scared prowlers, to the carnaged ground
Return; where dismally they howl 'till morn.
To all, especially to Boone, it was
A night of dreariest sadness; hoarsely plained
The putrid River-surge; the Night-Birds screamed
In notes of shrillest horror; and the skies
Afflicted for Kentucky's rueful loss,
Their melancholy vestments had assumed.
How could they not?  For Angels there abide,
And they beheld her wrap'd in saddest Grief;
Beheld her widowed Fair, as through their hearts
The awful tidings of their husbands' death
Transpierced; in wildest phrenzy clasp their Babes,
And weep in all the wretchedness of Woe.

The task of keenest agony to Boone
Had yet to be perform'd.  Oh!  see him now
Approaching sadly his expecting home.
His Infants spy at distance their loved Sire.
His solemn step is marked.  His Wife beholds
The boding blood-stains on his altered robes&mdash;
No ISRAEL comes in view!  Each little breast
Predictive beats &mdash; Her own tumultuous heaves&mdash;
'Tis true!  that look, that silence speak it so!
'Tis true, the darling Youth shall never more
Return to enjoy the transports of their love.
Behold, the embrace that bursts the swelling heart!
Tears now have vent, and deluge every cheek.
See with what frantic tenderness, what throbs
Of deep emotion, the sad mother takes
The sacred lock of her "departed Son,"
With ardent kisses seals it to her lips,
And washes off with tears its bloody stains.

To Sorrow's sway, throughout the settled bounds
Of young Kentucky, vengeful zeal succeeds.
With thundering emphasis, his heeded voice
Boone raised, and bade his Western Brethren
To Battle, and their rising country save!
The good, the valiant, the immortal Clarke
And Logan seconded the patriot call;
And pointed to that Hill's ensanguined brow,
Where gallant Harland, Todd, and Trigg had bled!
A thousand bosoms at the summons burn'd,
To mingle in the blood-avenging fight.
The Stripling, and the Grand Sire grey in years,
The half-plough'd furrow and the fire-side leave;
To wield the implements of direful War.
The Host is marshal'd, and the march begins.
The Foemen learn its menacing approach,
And their untenable encampment fly.
The howl of Horror, Consternation wild,
And yellings of infuriated wrath,
Through their distracted Villages extend.
Behold!  these too the tawny swarms forsake!
And where they late their barbarous orgies held,
Devastating flames now revel.  Ruin's stride
And Whirlwind-breath the embattled ranks attend.
The Chilicothes now in embers glow!
Will's Town and Peckaway are sinking too,
Beneath fierce Conflagration's wasteful blasts.
Rude Desolation sweeps the Corn-clothed fields,
And to the Indians' view a prospect spreads;
That e'en their boldest Warrior's arm unnerves,
And prompts their Chiefs to supplicate for PEACE.

Columbia's Western Star in splendors now,
Through an unclouded azure streaming, sheds
On drooping hearts, the beams of sweetest Hope;
And withers to a scroll the grumous flag
Of groaning War.  His labors, Boone beholds
Unfolding their rich Comforts o'er the West:
While Amity's restrictive bonds confine
The nerves of savage Slaughter.  Happy now,
In contemplation of the brightening scene,
He to AFFECTION'S sweet embrace retires;
And reaps the Harvest  of his useful toils.
Immortal Founder of stupendous States!
While generous prowess wakes the soul's applause;
While consecration to a Nation's weal
Of all the energies of a Mind and Nerve,
Enkindles warm sensations of regard;
Thy name, in Freedom's sun-crown'd Fane enshrined,
With the rich incense of a Million's love
Embalmed, shall live.  How rapturous to thy heart,
Thou venerable Hero!  How sublime,
How beauteous, how divine!  the prospect now
Of that Republic, which thy patriot hand
Implanted in the direful Wilderness.
Lo!  flourishing uncankered, and immense,
Its strengthens, rises, spreads and blooms to Heaven!
Its branches mingle with the stars; and crown'd
With Harps Angelic, wave mid purest gales
Celestial; animate with melody,
By Freedom's Seraph Martyrs sweetly made;
And fragrant as the fruits of Paradise.

Well might it fill with an extatic pride
The soul of him, whose valor laid the base
Of Free Columbia's occidental States;
To view the glories that invest them now!
Where shall the Muse the Reader's eye direct,
To shew the brightest deeds, where all are bright
In grand extreme?  Who can the blazing disk
Of the unclouded Orb of Day divide,
And say behold the most effulgent part?
Shall she pursue the Widow's plaining sigh,
To where the graves of Daviess, Owen, White,
And Spencer bloom in Honor's purest beams,
Embossing the dark wilds where WABASH rolls?
Or shall she turn to Raisin's awful plains,
And point to where the bones of Allen, Mead,
M'Cracken, Edwards, Simpson, Hickman, Hart,
And Woolfolk hallow the ensanguined soil?
Or to Sandusky's shore and sing the applause
Of Crogham, Freedom's Western Washington,
And his immortal Band; whose patriot names,
The Tyrants of succeeding times shall dread,
And future Proctors tremble when they hear?
Oh, no!  'tis wasting language to detail.
Ohio's and Kentucky's Fame extends
Wherever valorous Liberty is loved;
And even rolls its splendors through the glooms,
Where blinking Despots gorged with empires' blood,
O'er Freedom's desolated Temples nod!
Illustrious States!  Who has not seen thy Sons,
Thy patriot Sons, in thousands; from the scenes
Of Opulence and sweet domestic bliss,
With pure unvenal ardor rushing forth
To fields of fellest danger &mdash; Not to war
With Foes magnanimous, of souls humane
And generous, who disdain to waste the blood,
And wound the pride of vanquish'd Combatants;
But Foes beneath whose ignominious arms,
The Babe, the Vestal and the Matron bleed.
Who has not seen thy free-born Heroes dare,
The Horrors of Barbarian Ambushment;
And uncomplaining, though with hunger pale,
And long without repose, through brumal storms,
Snow-covered Swamps of wearisome extent,
And wintry terrors of a howling Wild,
Intently toiling to encounter Fiends,
Unrighteous as ere ranged the Infernal glooms:
Ferocious Monsters; cruel as ere yell'd
For Victim's blood!  Who has not seen thy Hosts
Those monsters meet, and honor the high cause,
In which their generous bosoms freely bled.
Where is Columbia's son, whose eye can glance
O'er the bright page of their immortal deeds,
And not let fall a tear of extacy?
Who would not deem it honor to be call'd
A citizen of the same land, where lives
The patriot Warriors, Shelby, Harrison,
Desha, M'Arthur, Cass and Johnson:  names
Imperishable as e'er were canonized,
On the illustrious rolls of Martyrdom!
Yes, noble sons of a Republic!  Time,
When mingles with the dust of tombs, the heart
That now this humble meed of praise dictates;
Shall roll your glories brightening down his stream,
Till on Eternity's effulgent waves
They blaze, reflecting on your blissful souls
Beatitude perpetual.  Nor are they,
The only Heroes of celebrious name,
Whose splendid Virtues shed sublime renown,
Upon those glorious States.  A Clay, a Ball,
A Lewis and innumerous more, the Muse
Might call to adorn her page.  But BEAUTY'S claim
Demands her strain applausive and sincere.
If transports warm the hoary Veteran's heart
Who founded the Republics of the West,
To see their Sons engarlanded with Fame's
Unwithering laurels:  Who shall tell what tides
Of deeper rapture swell his musing soul,
As he the odiferous wreaths beholds
Of Virtue's richest flowers, which adorn
Their blooming Daughters &mdash; Well may Bravery shield
Their peerless Breasts:  for Bravery wins their smiles;
While mean inglorious Dastardy receives
Their frowning scorn.  What bosom does not burn
To bleed in Freedom's battles, when such Fair,
Their Brothers and their Lovers too exhort,
Their lives in her defence to jeopardize.

My patriotic Sisters of the West!
Accept this humble plaudit of a heart
That loves you dearly.  High indeed the praise,
And happily received; could you approve
For Freedom's sake my unpresuming Song.
Oft through admiring Fancy's eye, I've seen
Your lilly fingers, form the Warrior's robe;
And sorely wounded with the piercing steel,
The honored garment with pure crimson stain;
Leaving expressive emblems of the Deeds
He should achieve; and symbols of the love
Your bosoms for the gallant soldier bore.
Oft too your tender bodings I have seen
And anxious Hopes; while undecided yet
Remained the destiny of those ye loved,
Your valiant Countrymen!  Oh!  when arrived
The agonizing tidings of defeat&mdash;
Of the perfidious Massacres that stained
With infamy a butchering foe; and tore
From many a noble head the streaming scalp;
Where fell those dearer far perhaps than life;
How were your anguished and indignant breasts
With keen and violent emotions pained:
But when the joyous news of Conquest came,
How changed your feelings; how divinely sweet;
How glowing then with thankful extacies!
And when the honored soldier home returned,
What kind, what tender welcomes ye bestowed!
How carefully his rankling wounds deterged;
And with attentions bland and smiles benign,
Rewarded all his dangers, pains and toils.&mdash;
But lo!  her desultorious song draws nigh
Its beckoning goal; and we, sweet Fair, must part!
Perennial as the charms of the rich land,
Whose healthful gales your honied breath perfumes,
May your bright Virtues bloom; to crown with bliss
The gallant Boone's the shields of Honor's shrine!
Who share the mild dominions of your Love,
And drive the Myrmidons of Tyrant thrones
From their ensanguined Cars.  And ye pure States,
The Western Pillars of Columbia's Dome,
The Dome of Liberty!  Still may ye stand
With glories of ten thousand Boones emblazed;
Sustaining with distinguished eminence
Your portion of the Edifice sublime;
While Kingdoms disappear in floods of gore
And Revolutions rock the reeking globe:
Yea, till the pageant Bubbles of the World
Are into dread Annihilation blown;
And Oceans, Suns, and Spheres before the blaze
Of Heaven's avenging Anger, are consumed!&mdash;
