Oh Blackmore!  Why do'st thou alone refuse
To grace Ramillia with thy noble Muse,
Where British Valour urg'd by CHURCHILL on,
Has all that went before, and has it self out-done?
How canst thou answer to thy self and Fame
A Victory like this &mdash; without thy Name?

Or, do'st thou still for the Great WILLIAM grieve,
Tho' he will ever in thy Arthur live?
Or, is One Poet to One Heroe due,
T' AUGUSTUS Virgil, and to WILLIAM You?
Or, is this Age not worthy of thy Care,
That did not thy Illustrious Arthur spare?

Grieve not for Him whom thou hast deathless made;
Whose Laurels, like thy own, will never fade.
Thy Artful Hand, and thy Harmonious Pen
Can Men immortal make, and live agen.
'Tis true, BRITANNIA is of Him bereft,
But He his Mantle has to ANNA left;
Who doubly with his spirit blest, has done
All that he hop'd and more &mdash; and has ev'n Him out-run.

So vast a Genius and so large a Mind
Can never to One Heroe be confin'd.
In ANNA'S Reign thou hast ELIZA grac't,
The Present Age out-shining far the Past.
For, whate'er Fame to Her advantage tells,
The Copy the Original excels.

If Thou and thy Great Arthur were condemn'd,
It was not Thou but Virtue was contemn'd;
Whose Cause thou nobly fought'st, and did'st maintain:
Oppos'd by Sworn Confederates in vain.

Rouze then &mdash; and reassume thy tuneful Lyre:
This CHURCHILL &mdash; This thy COUNTRY does require.
What if Ten Thousand Sick thy Absence grieve?
Let 'em grieve on, so CHURCHILL ever live.
His Fame to Vulgar Lives shou'd be prefer'd
Of the Ignoble Undistinguish'd Herd.

Tate, as in Duty bound, has somewhat said;
But He his Office not his Muse obey'd.

But Prior does in Spencer's Style endite,
With the same spirit that the English Fight.
Thought so sublime, Expression so correct
Ever more Honour, than they give, reflect.
For tho' his Heroe to the Stars be rais'd,
'Tis nobler so to praise, than to be prais'd.

Some Minor Poets too have done their best:
Tho' small their Skill, yet their good Will's exprest.

De Foe, as ever, Execrably bad,
Throws out a Hasty Poem, wrote like Mad.
'Twas the first-born, and welcome in our Mirth,
Tho' not One Muse assisted at its birth.

Some more, below the dignity of Verse,
In short-liv'd Lines wou'd glorious Deeds rehearse.

Oh!  give us a true Specimen of Wit,
Thou know'st it best &mdash; Thou Master art of it.
Do thou exert thy self, and let us see
A Poem worthy CHURCHILL, worthy Thee.
Thy Muse, like the fam'd Beauty of a Town,
If seen abroad, the day is all her own.
Each Puny-Wit draws back, and hides his Head,
And does inimitable Patterns dread.

Do you but Write, and All will silent be:
For what Bold Man will dare to follow thee?
Do you Ramillia's Bloody Plains describe,
You Distance strait the whole Poetic Tribe.
Praise is the Most to which the Best pretend;
But wonder and Surprize thy Works attend.

What may we not expect when such a Muse
Shall such a Theme and such a Heroe choose?
By CHURCHILL'S Actions and Examples fir'd,
Ev'n meaner Pens than thine may be inspir'd.
But when the Muse and Subject are compleat,
The World with justice hopes for somewhat Great.
Our utmost hopes, I know, (Vast tho' they be)
Of a full answer cannot fail from Thee.
And if my Poorer Muse shall waken Thine,
Some share at least of Glory will be mine:
As He, who warn'd by me begins to Arm,
Does owe the Victory to my Alarm.
