Some days in pleasing rambles here Boone pass'd,
And then, still reconnoitering as he went
The intervening wilds, to the rich plains
Of grand Ohio journey'd back.  One day
While travelling on in musing mood, he heard
Far in the distant Forest's gloomy depths
A roar as loud and frightful, as proclaims
The anger'd Lion's rage:  It seem'd the Hills
And sturdy trees to shake, and loudly roll'd,
Reverberating down the sounding dales.
With dreadful aggravation still it grew,
The affrighted Indians wildly yell'd &mdash; the Wolves,
In gangs, fled howling from its dread approach&mdash;
The Eagles drop'd their prey and sought the skies!
From the aged poplars' heartless trunks, the Owls
Pour'd dismal screams &mdash; The bellowing still increas'd!
And drew more near!  The desert brushwood crash'd!
A thousand thundering feet, with heavy sound,
Like a tornado hurried swiftly on,
And shook the shuddering ground, when lo!  appear'd,
O'erspreading many a rood of the drear waste,
A mighty multitude of Buffaloes huge,
Resistless, raging, mad!  In their dark van,
One, more enrag'd and furious than the rest,
Vociferous bursts of awful agony pour'd;
His pain-set eyes like burning Globules glar'd;
Upon his knees he oft impetuous pitch'd,
Goring the ground, while, to and fro, in vain
His rough hair'd head he dash'd; for on his back
With rending talons in the flesh infix'd,
A murderous PANTHER plied the work of Death!
Adown the sufferer's brindled sides ran blood,
Profusely streaming.  Cruelly, with teeth
Of spear-accuminated sharpness, gnaw'd
The merc'less monster th rough the strength-strung loins,
And buried deeply in the smoking chasm,
His gory, life-destroying snout; until
Full half his blood-smear'd body disappear'd,
Deep sunk mid sunder'd muscles, mangled flesh,
And bubbling blood! &mdash; The roaring sufferer reel'd
And sank and rose, and staggering fell again,
His pain-protruding eyes, with glaring green,
Were deeply died, and Death's destructive shaft
Drew from his heaving heart the strug'ling life!
Around their fallen fellow gather'd thick
The furious herds, and yells and groans, and clash
Of crouded horns, in horrid tumult broke
From the close-clustering circle's brindled bounds.
They snuff'd the sanguine stream the purple spouts
Sent through the air, and catching thence the rage
Of fiercest bestial madness, sidelong tore,
With buried horns, the valley's blood-stain'd breast,
And fiercely furrow'd up, with pawing feet,
Its flower-bespangled soil, wild-bellowing, crush'd
The yielding shrubs, and gored the rough-bark'd trees.
The ferine Murderer startled at the din,
And disintering his blood-buried half,
Look'd wild and grimly on the pressing foe;
And finding dangers thick beset him round,
With agile spring, leap'd on a Buffalo's back,
And thence a neighboring poplar reached, up which
He swiftly fled.  Where, on a lofty bough,
Viewing the scene below, out-stretch'd he lay,
With head declining o'er his gory paws.
Boone the gorg'd prowler marked, aim'd at his eye
The unerring rifle, and brought headlong down
His brain-bespatter'd carcase.  Terror-shock'd
At the unwonted peal, the wide-mouth'd herds
Hoarse-yelling, burst resistless through the Brakes.

O'er saline swamps by savage steps impress'd,
By congregated Buffaloes Elks and Deer
Deep-furrow'd, the unwearied Hero passed.&mdash;
Contemplating prospectively, the use
To which Columbia might those brackish mines
Apply, he viewed them with attentive ken.
Here, like the primary lord of Paradise,
The Nomenclature of an opening world
He form'd!  bestowing names on streams and founts,
On plants and places yet anonymous,
And yet unvisited by other eye
Emitting Civilizment's softened beams,
Than the Adventurer's own.

Again at length,
A BROTHER'S presence animates, with smiles
And sentimental solace, the dark WILDS;
Which they with mutual industry explore,
Until another Spring her bloom unveils.
Then Daniel Boone the mountains reascends,
Hies onward to his rural Domicil,
And meets once more, his rapture-swooning Wife,
And the endearing transports of sweet Babes.
He tells his wonder-kindling tales, while tears
And kind caresses speak the silent joys,
And melting admiration, which transport,
Intenerate, and thrill the tingling hearts
Of his dear Daughters and dove-bosom'd spouse.
While he the various scenes enumerates
Of perilous emprise, through which he'd passed,
The dawning valor of his youthful sons
Illume the trembling tears of filial love,
That gather in their azure-beaming eyes.
But most the account of his captivity,
And his companion Stewart's hapless doom,
Their ardor rous'd, and kindled the keen thirst
Of vengeance in their danger-daring breasts.
Like two young Lions in some desert Den,
When first their instinct fires begin to flame,
Impelling them to range the roaring Waste,
And try the vigor of their supple limbs
In valiant feats of blood; Boone's manly James
And Israel panted for the power to prove
Their prowess, and avenge their Father's wrongs.
Their minds dilated with the expanded view
His strong descriptions gave of the rich WILDS;
While prospects of magnanimous emprise,
And Fancy-pictur'd scenes of patriot fame;
Establishing pure FREEDOM'S prosperous States,
Upon a base as lasting as the Hills,
Their youthful souls with animation rapt.

While on their weary way though Rowel's Vale,
Two score Adventurers joined their jocund band.
Dark labyrinthian Deserts, mountain Crags
Stupendous, frowning in the invaded clouds,
And howling Monsters raging round for blood,
Could not, with all their mingled glooms appall
The spirits, or chill the animating Hopes
That fir'd those gallant Sons of glorious Peril,
And urg'd them on their hazardous emprise.
Unharm'd, they pass o'er two tremendous LIMBS
Of branching Allegany &mdash; POWEL'S MOUNT
And WALDEN'S named &mdash; There Nature's rudest wrath
Seemed to have rag'd with wild disordering power&mdash;
Seem'd whilom to have op'd in warring fray,
Her magazines of elemental ire&mdash;
Her Tempests, Thunders, Lightnings, Earthquakes, Flames!
And rock-uprooting, furious WATER-SPOUTS!&mdash;
Dark yawning ravines choak'd with broken crags,
Hoar rocks, in horror-frowning grandeur pil'd,
Or pyramidal, transpiercing deep
The thunder-bearing Tempests' cloudy breasts&mdash;
And ragged Ridges high on Ridges heap'd!
All seem'd memorials of Her phrenzied Mood.
These high colossal Hills securely pass'd,
Their mazy course the Adventurers cheerly kept,
Until with deathful yell, a savage Host
Poured on their weak unguarded rear, the storms
Of flaming murder.  Then, oh gallant Boone!
With Battle-swaying Mars thy prowess vied!
Thy Guardian Seraph's inspirations then
Thou needest not.  Thy fallen fellows' blood
The safety of the Wife, thy Babes, and Friends,
Were for thy valor stimulant enough!
The assailing Demons soon in wild dismay,
Fled wounded, bleeding, from the torrent flames,
Through which swift-flying bullets sought their lives.
For well the ruthless onset was return'd;
And dearly were its blood-effusions bought,
But ah!  six valiant sons of enterprise,
By its death-dealing, unsuspected blast,
Were from their relatives and comrades torn!
'Till then, such scene of Grief and Woe
Had ne'er been witnessed in those spectral wilds.
Friends, Mothers, Fathers, Brothers, Sisters, all
In doleful sadness weeping o'er the slain!&mdash;
Uncoffin'd in the sun-unmellowed ground,
'Neath gloomy Hemlock and dark-shaded spruce,
Their noble corses colorless and cold,
With Sorrow's tearful streamlets were inter'd.
Conspicuous fell our Hero's eldest son,
His valiant James!  The cruel ball that rent
The tendrils of his blooming life in twain,
And scattered on the waste its flow'ry charms,
Tore from the prospering PLANT of LIBERTY
A germ, whose rich expanding beauties soon,
Would have unfolded o'er the ample West;
Diffusing round delectable perfumes,
And dropping healthful fruitage on the lap
Of its luxuriant Land.  That merciless ball,
In its disaster-dealing impetus,
Was not content, the crimson citadel
Of human life, and the unsullied shrine
Of fond affection only, to invade;
COLUMBIA'S angel bosom felt its force,
And bleeding at the pungent wound it trench'd,
She sorrow'd o'er her youthful Hero's fate.
And she had cause to sorrow; for in him
She lost the promise of a patriot son,
Of an intrepid, wise and virtuous man!
Irradiated with the expanding rays
Of Erudition, his untarnished mind,
With eye intent on Truth's effulgent disk,
Was soaring o'er the clouds of groveling life.
His fellows in the Intellectual flight
Can well attest, with what ascending strength
He scal'd the intervening steeps, and shot
His genius-plumed pinions through the blaze
That pour'd upon his soul-subduing path;
That still in more resplendent torrents stream'd
As nearer to the lambent Orbs he drew.
But ah!  the whizzing pellet, bearing death,
Relaxed his wing, and drown'd his flight in blood!
Behold the snowy plumage sinking now,
All stain'd and dripping with the purp'ling streams!
Yet see!  'tis not the Spirit's plumes that fall;
It is the weaker wing of mortal life!
The wing, which buoys the encumbering clog of clay!
The soul, in all its bright embellishment,
Is free, and flies, with unimpeded speed,
To the supernal goal that caught its ken
From earth, the flaming fount of holy Truth!&mdash;

My YOUTHFUL COUNTRYMEN!  whom Culture's care
Has lifted into splendid spheres, behold,
A pattern for your imitation here!
JAMES BOONE in the unbloodied shades of PEACE,
Acquiring Wealth and Influence, might have liv'd,
But more ennobling prospects swell'd his soul!
A vast luxuriant Land, yet unreclaim'd
From Barb'rous Wildness, fir'd his patriot zeal,
Impell'd him to exert his utmost powers
To enrich his Country with the precious prize;
And made him, with undaunted valor, dare
The dangerous Ambushment, where darkling Death
Lurk'd panting for his unprepared prey!
Oh my dear youthful Brethren!  seize your swords,
And swear, by all the blood that ever smok'd
On Freedom's Altars, never to relax
The patriot grasp until those Rights are free,
Whose purchase cost more sufferings, wealth and lives,
Than the rich land for which the youthful Boones,
Our earlier Brethren, bled! &mdash; COLUMBIAN YOUTH!
With so much more to inflame your daring fires,
Than fan'd their enterprise, can you repose
On the warm down of Ease, nor emulate
Their martial ardor?  'Tis not Gold, nor Fame,
Nor fruitful Forests, nor refinement's cause,
That now presents excitement to the soul,
Which loves the blessings of sweet LIBERTY!
It is the thraldom of our NAVAL RIGHTS;
The oppression of our Commerce on the seas
By tyrant Battlements, that ride the waves,
And roll their bloody thunders on our flag;
That turn their Cannon on the face of Law,
That bury charter'd Industry in gulphs
Beneath the flames which crown the billowy brine,
Through which our Tars and burning Vessels sink!
It is the misery of our Naval Sons
Impress'd by lawless RUFFIANS on the Main,
Compell'd to plunge their weapons in the blood
Of kindred breasts, and their own mourning hearts,
Whose dearest RELATIVES enchain'd and scourg'd,
Lie groaning, hopeless, sorrow-wasted, faint,
In Britain's stygian Dungeons on the seas!
Here is excitement for the valorous Youth,
The gallant Boone's of our day.  Can the Sons
Of glorious Fathers view the sacred shrines,
Where their immortal ashes sleep, defil'd
And crush'd beneath a Despot's foot, nor rush
In arms array'd, to avenge their wrongs or die?
Is not each lash your valiant Seamen feel,
Contempt to those who for our Freedom fought?
Their bones are mingled with the dust we tread,
But still their spirits and their actions live!
Their blood which stained our plains, the sun long since
Has bleach'd; but still the Blessing which it brought
In living lustre glow &mdash; While then we breathe
The inspiring ardor of their sainted manes&mdash;
While then, their holy deeds their names adorn,
And we the happy heritage enjoy
Their lives bequeath'd &mdash; shall we their fame disgrace?
And while in all the means of War so strong,
Let Villain-Tyrants sever from our Land,
What, when so weak, our Fathers snatch'd from them!&mdash;

Again my Muse revisit the sad scene,
From which the impassion'd zeal, the glow
Of ardor for thy weeping Country's zeal, the glow
Had borne, though weak of wing, thy feeble powers.

October's russet scowl imbrown'd the groves,
And foliage-searing frosts the cement broke,
Which to the boughs their leafy vesture glued&mdash;
While melancholy winds, in showers, shook down
The rustling flakes, in seeming sympathy
With the soul-wringing sorrows, which convuls'd
The mourners' breasts.  The afflicted Widows now,
And female kindred of the hapless slain,
Heart-sick, and languid, pleaded to return
To where the cheering scenes of polish'd life,
Near Clinch's limestone-laving waves, display'd
The residence of warm congenial souls.
The meek solicitations and soft tears,
Co-operating with their own distress,
Disposed the bold survivors to comply.
And much that course was render'd requisite,
By the dispersion through the wayless wilds,
Of their affrighted Cattle, which had fled,
With force impetuous, over Hills and crags,
Through crackling Brakes and loud-resounding Glyns&mdash;

On Clinch, 'till the succeeding Summer shone,
Boone, with his worthy family remain'd.
He then successively, in dangerous toils
Of high import engag'd. &mdash; At Dunmore's call,
He lent his guidance to conduct a band
Of brave Surveyors of the Western Soil,
From the Ohio Falls back to their Homes,
By routes, through the dark Wilderness, to them
Before unknown.  This perilous task perform'd
With most surprising safety skill and speed,
He then, of three Militia Garrisons,
At Dunmore's requisition, took command;
And with his wonted energy and fire,
Attemper'd by serene deliberate Art,
Through the Campaign against the Shaw'nese Tribes,
A service, mark'd with high success, sustain'd.

Victorious from the Northern scenes of Blood,
Subservient to his Countrymen's request,
We see our Hero cross his desert stage,
And on its Southern border rise to view,
Performing there a new but arduous part,
Evincing talents versatile as strong!
He meets the Sachems of the Cherokees
At wild Wataga, and a pact concludes
By virtue of his delegated powers,
For purchasing a part of their waste lands.
This Embassy accomplish'd, he collects
A band of hardy Woodsmen, strong and brave,
And from the verge of rough Wilderness,
Where Holstein's mountain-compass'd current rolls
To wild Kentucky's cedar-shadow'd waves,
A Road through the unwounded Forest cleaves.
The sculking Foe from his deep-tangled haunts,
Oft on their way, the sounding axes brought;
And their death-ringing Rifles drove as oft
The fierce assailant back.  On either side,
From flesh-torn founts, the conflict often stream'd
In rills of smoking crimson.  Sometimes too,
'Twas blanch'd by the pale hand of life-fed Death.
But nought the Vigor of their Zeal could stay.
Before its power the giant timber fell,
And through a Host of ruthless Remoras,
Its strong unpalsied arm a passage hew'd.
Behold the first grand CONDUIT now complete,
Through which, to the dark wastes of savage night,
From their bright Eastern seas, REFINEMENT'S FLOODS
Effulgent flow! &mdash; Now on Kentucky's bank,
In haste, a Fortress the Adventurers rear.
And thither Boone from Clinch his Family brings.
The wondering GENIUS of the Wilderness,
Embellish'd with the fragrance-breathing blooms
Of May, flew from the flower-deck'd solitudes
To snatch a glance at the new Visitants,
Boone's darling Consort and sweet lovely Maids,
The first fair Females that e'er grac'd those Wilds!&mdash;
With more harmonic rapture seem'd the songs
Of feather'd extacy to warble loose
Among the umbrageous wood; and the rich flowers
Seem'd to unfold in tints more deep-defin'd
Their gay variety. &mdash; The bladed brakes
Impainted with a livelier green appear'd.
The wild-wood zephyrs from their winglets seem'd
A sweeter odor round the groves to shake;
While the deep gloom-envelop'd wastes, with beams
Of transport-kindling radiance seem'd illum'd.
And well indeed such animating change
Might then appear through that untamed abode
Of Wildness, Howlings, and ferocious Rage;
For polish'd Beauty's love-emiting eye,
And darkness-scattering smile, in that new world,
Were then first shed.  Oh Beauty!  bright with soul;
Seraphic Quintescence of blended powers
Terrestrial and supernal!  Sweet compound
Of Mortal and Divine!  Thy charms can light
Within the breast that lives in darkest solitude
An aromatic-odor'd, pure-beam'd lamp;
And in the deep untrodden Dell where Man,
Refined and reasoning Man, ne'er breath'd before,
The lone Itinerant's musing mind infus'd
In bliss, its silent powers, than ever flow
From the less gentle spring of social Mirth:
And they can also shake the loftiest soul,
And with the thorns of keen inquietude
The bravest Hero's hardy breast transpierce.
The experience of the gallant Henderson
Can well this truth attest.  His daring heart,
In Carolina's cultur'd shades, conceiv'd
The bosom-softening flame of first-felt Love.
In his wild-flut'ring Breast, of Hope and Fear
The doubtful balance hung. &mdash; His tender wiles
Had from his dear Eliza's guarded lips
No hope-confirming, kind confession drawn;
Nor had, from his own mellow-murm'ring tongue,
A clear avowal of his passion flown;
When, with the brave illustrious Calaway,
Her noble Father, she forsook the scenes
Of social elegance and peaceful ease;
Migrated to Kentucky's flow'ry glooms,
And shelter'd in the Fort of their lov'd Friend,
The generous, kind, and hospitable Boone.

Young Henderson's too independent heart
Upbraided the fastidious folly now,
Which sought some token of her love for him,
Before it ventured to declare what oft
His soften'd eye, and sadden'd mien had told.
Her every smiling glance and gentle word,
Which, ere her absence, were, as courtesies,
Resulting from her kind Angelic Soul,
As mere attentions shewn to all her friends,
Regarded; now a tenderer form assum'd,
And to his melancholy Fancy seem'd
The soothing signs of sweet Encouragement!
Pale languishment hung on his changing cheek,
While festive merriment in vain essay'd
To wake his wonted lustre.  Nature's bloom,
The blazing Majesty of day, and all
The azure-sprinkling splendors of the Night;
Crown'd by her queen, the sky-ascending Moon
To him seem'd of their soul-elating charms
Divested.  Pensive, mournful and alone,
He wander'd through the sorrow-murm'ring Glades,
Or solemn, gloom-impressive groves; and fed
With plaintive sounds, the peace-corroding fires
That agoniz'd his sadly-sighting breast.
E'en Sleep's balm-dropping wings could not appease
The fev'rish Ardor, nor their cooling plumes
Upon the ever restless flame repose;
But with incessant flutter through the Night
His tortured temples beat; and dreary dreams
Drove wildly through his phrenzy-dizzied brain.
At length, by the unconquer'd flame impel'd,
His lov'd Eliza he resolv'd to find,
And forthwith through the frowning forests hied.
The healthful fragrance of the Hills, and all
The flowery Beauties scattered loosely wild,
And rude sublimity, abrupt and vast,
Of the broad plains and thunder-batter'd Mounts,
Conspir'd to vivify and elevate
His low-dejected heart, and give a tone
Of higher vigor to his languid nerves.

Hope in his bosom throb'd with stronger pulse,
As kind Reflection whisper'd to his heart,
That fewer Rivals, in the unpeopled Waste,
Would with his tender Courtship interfere,
Or wind his fate in labyrinths of doubt;
That Love's impassion'd impulse, playing warm
Upon the feeling chords of her soft heart,
Would make them thrill and tenderly respond
To the first passion of accordant Note,
Vibrating in a young and generous breast,
And fair unfolded to her anxious ear;
That frolic Nature's wild-wood solitudes,
So with sweet love awakening Music fill'd,
With soul-enticing shades and Beauty-border'd streams,
With flower-born gales and breezes fruit-perfum'd,
Diversified; would melt to softer sense
Her warm susceptive bosom, and impart
Through all her tingling veins emotions kind,
And tenderly devoted to the God
Of sexual Love.  He found his Charmer fair
And lovely as before.  The deepen'd blush
Of cheerful Health and freshest Beauty, ting'd
Her smiling cheek. &mdash; Her lustre-streaming eye
With thoughtful tenderness divinely shone;
Her graceful symmetry of person seem'd,
Celestial elegance by Nature's skill
Transfer'd to earthly Beauty.  Sweetly soft
Her honey-breathing lips their strains effus'd;
Now in convivial converse, now in songs
Of tenderest melody.  Their Interview,
On either side, confusion mark'd; but most
His agitated mien and downcast eye,
Th' unnerving power of timid love betrayed.

His resolution to disclose his heart,
Her presence weaken'd.  Torturing Distrust
Again perplex'd his peace, and in the cup
Of his distresses, Jealousy infus'd
A portion of its poison-mingled Gall;
For, even to her new and wild abode,
Besides himself, her winning charms had drawn
Other Admirers from the social scenes,
Where first upon their fascinated hearts
Her dangerous glances flash'd.  Her kindness beam'd
On all, for all were brave deserving Youth;
But prudence check'd each smile that might beseem
Approvance of their fond pretensions, save
When now and then a pleasing glance confused,
And languid, met the inquiring pensive eye
Of Henderson.  Another Summer came,
And found his hopes still unconfirm'd, for still,
His soul too sensitive to risk repulse,
An evidence of her Affection sought,
Before it urged without reserve its suit;
But still a studied Mystery in act
And language, from his watchful view conceal'd
The secret bias of her peerless heart.
But, as the clouded Winter's closing storm,
Frowning in deeper darkness than o'ercast
Ere then the Sun; precursive, heralds Spring's
Revivifying radiance; so a gloom
Of murkier depth that roll'd convolving o'er
His sombre Hopes, was soon the Harbinger
Of love illumined Happiness and Joy.

Invited by the multifarious charms
Which bloom'd and danced upon the sunny cheek
Of a serenely smiling Summer Eve,
He and his fair Eliza left the Fort,
T' enjoy, in company with their juvenile friends,
Benignant Nature's animating sweets.
Behind the gleeful groupe, Boone and his friend,
Sage Calaway in social converse walk'd;
And with paternal pleasure view'd the mirth
And playful merriment of rapturous Youth.

Upon Kentucky's flowery-border'd bank
Beneath the umbrageous boughs of Vine-hung beech
They cheerily reclined, while in Canoes
The jocund band the flowing crystal cleav'd.
'Twas summer's sweetest hour; the sinking Sun
Hung red and ragged in the Western trees,
Wide pour'd his evening radiance o'er the peaks
Of distant Allegany, and diffused
Through waving Willows o'er the gliding flood
A checquer'd gleam.  Soft-winnowing breezes play'd
Among the Aromatic sprays, and fan'd
The slightly fretted stream; caress'd the cheeks,
And wanton'd with the silky-flowing locks
That hung their jetty tendrils long and loose,
O'er the white necks and softly swelling breats,
Of beautiful Eliza and her fair
And elegant associates. &mdash; Every branch
Of the contiguous wood was fill'd with life
And melody.  The enamour'd Henderson,
As o'er the form-depicturing stream she sail'd,
Beheld his Charmer with increasing love,
And fancied her the River's vestal Nymph,
The Arethusa of its sylvan waves;
And kindling at the love-created thought,
Was by its magic tempted to embrace,
Her graceful image in the watery Mirror.
Back to the bank, their little beechen Boats,
At Beauty's word, the dexterous rowers shot;
And o'er the fruit-hung flower-empurpled shore,
To gather Garlands to inwreathe their brows
The sweetly-blooming Maidens gayly ran;
When from a dark cane thicket growing near,
A band of Ruffian Indians fiercely sprang,
And seizing fair Eliza Calaway,
Her charming Sister Frances too, and Boone's
High-soul'd Jemima, bore them through the Brake!
In vain, for aid the lovely Captives cried;
Before their brave protectors reach'd their Guns,
The arm'd Barbarians, stifling the weak plaints
The feeble Damsels pour'd, were deep-conceal'd
In the entangled wild. &mdash; Until the glooms
Of gathering Night absorb'd the beams of day;
Brave Henderson, the younger Calaway,
With valiant Holden and four Heroes more,
Led by their vengeance-burning Chieftain Boone,
The Savages pursued.  The heavy Night
Encompass'd thick with awful Horrors drear,
Upon the weary wings of vulture Woe,
O'er the unsleeping Heroes slowly pass'd.
Vulosko's lancinating Agonies
At his Melcena's situation, Boone
In all their torturing force now realized.
His soul, with all a parent's tenderest pains,
And injur'd Valor's daring passions burn'd.&mdash;
By agitating tumults toss'd, not less
The Lovers' bosoms felt the wringing pangs
Of Grief, nor less with restless Vengeance glow'd.

Not only Henderson, but Holden too,
And Flanders Calaway, the peace-fed flame
Of tortured LOVE-AFFECTION deeply felt.
For Holden's heart, th' angelic Fanny's charms
Had melted into fondest tenderness;
But he with noble frankness had declared
His anxious wishes, and th' extatic bliss
Enjoy'd, of feeling the benignant smiles
Of kind Encouragement, diffusing warm
Their genial rays among th' expanding blooms
Of his luxuriant Hopes.  Young Calaway's
Susceptive bosom, sweet Jemima Boone
Had animated with the flameless spark
Of new-enkindled Love, whose infant beams
Burn'd not as yet with ardency intense;
But like the placid Spring's demulcent light,
That streams into the half-unfolded flowers,
And spreads their flecker'd petals to the breeze,
They mildly glided through his swelling heart;
And gently oped to Pleasure's odorous breath
Its velvet-lined cells and silken folds.
Her budding bosom, new to the wild thrill
Of soul-dissolving Love, his soft devoirs,
With tingling glow, had tenderly inspired.
But wondering at th' emotions strange, their cause
She scarcely knew:  Nor would her age permit
The gallant Flanders yet t' unfold his flame,
Or his love-born Anticipations tell.

Long would it take to sing the boding frights,
And Visions gloomy, woeful, drear, and vague;
Which flitted ceaselessly athwart the souls
Of the heroic Lovers that dread Night.

The heart-wrung tender Captives wept away,
In all the miseries of horrid Fear,
The bosom-burning slow-dissolving hours.
No more they expected e'er again to see,
Their darling Fathers, Mothers, Friends,
Or gallant Lovers!  Death, or direr still,
The dreadful Wretchedness and lingering Woes
Of savage bondage, seem'd their fearful doom.
The wild gesticulations, grimaces
Blood-curdling yells, and fury-glaring eyes,
Of the Barbarian Captors shook with dread
And heart-convulsing terrors, their rack'd souls.
To make their midnight moments still more drear,
Their thin-clad limbs, the cold dew-dropping breeze
With dampness chill'd; while screaming Night-Birds pour'd
Shrill-quavering Discord through the shivering glooms.

Terrific Wildcats, Wolves, and Panthers prowl'd
Blood-hungering through the murder-wailing wastes
And mix'd their cruel-toned Vociferations,
With the death plaints of their expiring prey.
Two Nights environ'd thus with Horrors wild,
Funereal, bloody, terrible, and fierce!
And compass'd close by Caitiffs still more dire,
The Wolf-like savages, whose wanton flames
And Brutal Rudeness, Beauty's vestal bloom,
And angel purity could not abate;
And which, had not a spark of purer ray
And more ethereal essence warm'd the breast
Of their less barbarous CHIEF, might uncontrol'd
Have treated with indignity, and shock'd
With ruffian Insolence, the fenceless Maids.
But Costea's lofty soul disdain'd its wrath
Upon defenceless female heads to wreak.
His breast with all the wild impetuous fires
Of nobler vengeance burn'd against the whites.
Though from the altitude of splendid War,
To seize their Women he descended; yet
'Twas not t' insult, and treat with cruelty
The hapless Captives; but to tear with pain
The warrior Whitemen's breasts, whom on fair ground,
If feasible, he would have nobly fought.
Their snowy hands, and sorrow-streaming eyes,
To him the trembling Maids for Mercy raised;
And on their knees, with pleading looks implored
His pity.  His superior air and mien,
His station and controlling power, bespake;
And softening into gentler cast, inspired
The mourning Sufferers with a gleam of Hope.

He was a Chief in Manhood's vigorous prime;
Of stature lofty, strait, and dignified&mdash;
Strong, Muscular and springy were his limbs;
And haughty elevation mark'd his step.
A tinge of tawny red glow'd on his cheek&mdash;
His keen dark eye with steady lustre shone,
And seem'd the fount of fiery ire, assuaged
By mingling emanations less severe
Of kinder passions. &mdash; But when kindling Rage
Inflamed his quick excited soul, his Wrath
Shot from his eye a stream of fiercest flame,
That burn'd each softer beam, and wither'd Fear
Wheree'er in Opposition found.  His brows,
In semicircles darkly shadowing o'er
The flashing orbs below, like arching clouds
Black, broad, and bending high above two stars
Of burning fulgour, lower'd with changing glooms&mdash;
Yet when a milder mood relax'd the cords
On which they hung, a lighter shade they shed.

But when infuriated rage constringed
Those frown-controlling fibres, blackness thick,
Tempestuous, awful roll'd convolving round
His bending brow &mdash; His Aspect was austere;
His forehead swart; his cheek bones sharp and high;
His Nose broad-based, long-curv'd wide-nostril'd, huge;
His chin protuberant, large; and large and lean,
His ponderous jaws; and rough and deep his voice.&mdash;
Such was the Savage Chief, on whom alone
The Captive Maids for tenderness relied.
Nor was their feeble confidence misplaced;
His mandatory frown each look forbid,
Or freedom, that might shake with dread their breasts,
Or wound their Modesty.

Boone and his band,
As soon as Dawn upon the forests shed
The dappled day, their perilous pursuit
Intentively resumed &mdash; And Night again
Enshrouded Nature in her spectral glooms,
And still the flying foe was not o'ertaken.
But on the Eve of the succeeding day,
Our daring Heroes the dark Fiends descried!
Who in their van drove on the feeble Fair.
With souls all flame, at their great Leader's side,
Accomp'nied by their bold intrepid Friends;
The vengeful Lovers rushed resistless on,
And pour'd their deathful thunder through the rear
Of the unguarded Savages; whose blood
From many a wound effusing, witness bare
That well the charge was aim'd, and its result
Propitious. &mdash; Gasping grimly in their gore,
Death stiffening, pallid, on the weedy ground,
Two of their fiercest warriors lay outstretch'd!
Forsaking the astounded Captives, fled
Their bleeding residue &mdash; All, save their Chief,
The dauntless Costea &mdash; He, confronting fierce
The gallant Whites, his whizzing lead discharg'd;
Which through the sulph'rous smoke around them roll'd,
Flew ineffective &mdash; Forced for life to flee,
'Amid the thickets sheltering maze he plunged.
Th' enfranchised Damsels, in a trance of Joy,
Their dear Deliverers met &mdash; Dissolving Bliss
Soft-flowing from their Beauty beaming eyes,
Their velvet cheeks and lovely breasts bedew'd.
Into th' angelic air of thankful love,
And fond Affection's tenderest Gratitude,
Divinely melted was their beauteous mien!
A thousand love-born extacies ensued,
And sweet vibrations of the thrilling cords,
On which warm FEELING'S seraph fingers play!
This was the happy time for Love to learn
His Destiny &mdash; And Henderson, as home
They travel'd, told the tumults of his heart;
And warmly press'd Eliza to pronounce
His fate.  Upon his arm, She blushing, lean'd,
And modestly confess'd her bosom felt,
A tenderness congenial with his own.

While on her charms, his humid eye-beams pour'd,
His glowing soul in fluttering extacy,
The rich excess of sweetest Love enjoy'd.

Upon her burning, honey-moisten'd lips,
A heart-born Kiss he imprinted, unperceived.
Could he have been from Observation's eye,
That long secure; no happiness to him
For a whole day had been so exquisite,
As to have press'd that time those nectar'd buds;
And she no less than him the sweet salute
Would have enjoy'd.  Pale Melancholy's shades
The wings of rapture scatter'd from his soul,
And a bright paradise seem'd blooming round.
No more when traversing the green-rob'd Hills,
And flower-perfum'd Campaigns, broke from his breast
The heart-convulsing Storms of thorn-charg'd sighs:
The lonesome Solitudes had now to him
Th' enlivening charms of sweet society.
Benignant Love breathed balmy blessings round:
And fair Eliza's Beauty seem'd to bloom
In every flower and blossom of the Wild;
And every tuneful note that sweetly trill'd
From the harmonious Warblers of the Groves,
Seemed but the echo of her flowing Voice!

Heroic Holden also touched with hand
More venturous, the tender-noted lyre
Of Love; and drew a melody still more
Enrapturing and divine than charmed ere then
His melting heart. &mdash; And Flanders Calaway,
By soft collision of their eyes and lips,
Elicited from his Jemima's soul
A brighter flow of scintillations warm,
Than sparkled on his doating gaze before;
And as their several states best suited, they,
The happy Couples!  all successively
At Hymen's love enkindled Altar bow'd;
And on its sacred flame, the votive Oil
Of Celibacy's Silver Vase effused.

