When first their dark and yet untravel'd rounds
Through the inane expanse of pristine Night,
The planetary conglobations roll'd;
Before the GREAT ETERNAL'S sacred eye,
Upon the gloom of the sidereal orbs,
Their pure-beam'd, time-enduring splendors flash'd;
Ere on Attraction's mystic centre pois'd
By the Almighty's sun creating hand,
The blazing ball that lights our solar sphere,
From the ecliptic-zone his radiance pour'd;
When from their chrystal palaces in Heaven's
Unmeasur'd heights of bright and cloudless day,
Th' Angelic Spirits view'd Creation's God,
Along th' unresisting void of space,
In numberless succession, rolling worlds;
From their celestial ranks they bade descend,
To rule the vast machinery of the globes;
Supernal hosts with holy power endued
With joy, obedient to the kind behest;
The delegated phalanx, darting through
The rayless deeps of uncreated Night
A keen pervasive glance, their snow-white vans
Outspread; and from th' empyreal battlement's
Gold-spangled summits, down th' untravers'd void
T' assume their stations on the new made spheres
Descended, wide diverging as they sail'd.
So on tenebrious midnight's welkin glooms,
Disparting balls electrical explode
Their streaming splendors; and the moonless Heavens
With bright but evanescent paths illume.

In numerous points of the expansive bounds
Through which conglobulate matter rolls, their posts
The Seraph Guardian take:  their several tasks
As multifarious, as remote the climes
They occupy.  To some it is assign'd,
From headlong violence with care to guard
The bold career of flying worlds; to curb
Th' impetuous speed of wild Projection's flight,
And Gravitation's centripetal force
Restrain; these powers conjoin'd to harmonize,
And through th' ecliptic orbits make them wheel
The circumvolving spheres.  To some, the Winds,
And Seas, and Elements, embowel'd deep
In Earth's dark-winding caves, 'tis given to rule.
They are the Agents of th' Almighty's wrath,
And they on man His benedictions shed.
When Ocean's tides in foaming conflicts roar,
And from their massy-heaving billows dash
The shatter'd wrecks &mdash; When swift Tornados sweep
The suffering land, demolish loftiest domes,
And from their heights the roaring forests hurl&mdash;
Infuriate, wasteful!  spread their blazing wings,
And into ashes sink a Kingdom's pride&mdash;
When from their burning bases, mountains burst,
And dreadful Earthquakes tear the yawning globe&mdash;
When Pestilence his miasmic breath
Diffuses o'er the land, and on the lungs
Of pallid millions putrefaction pours&mdash;
When these tremendous scenes on nature's stage
Our God displays; 'tis through the agency
Of those seraphic Guardians of the world.

But not to matter only is confin'd
Their superintending care and awful sway.
As ministers of God's mysterious laws,
They fan the patriot passions into flame;
Bid War his gorgon crest erect, and roll
His gory Chariots o'er th' ensanguin'd fields;
Bid Monarchs die, and tottering Kingdoms fall;
On Revolutions, Revolutions rise;
And conquering Freedom build on crumbling bones
Of slaughter'd Tyranny, her hallow'd fanes!

Th' unexplor'd recess of Nature's deeps
They bid th' adventurous sons of science sound;
Her darksome seas, her mazes wild, disclose,
Where scarce the sun's refracted beams e'er pierc'd,
Or fervid Fancy's eagle-vision glanc'd.
On glorious Newton's science-scaling soul,
They pour'd the flame of Astronomic zeal;
And bound to Herschel's telescopic mind
That wing of sunbeam-speed, and Angel-strength;
Which bore it like a comet through the Heavens,
To where nine hundred million miles beyond
Cold Saturn's orb, the Georgium-Sidus rolls!

To Locke and Reid they gave th' ingenious skill
T' unfold the labyrinthian web of mind;
To teach us how the variegated weft
In different parts, peculiar tints assumes;
How light runs into shade, and shade to light,
Untill in mingled hues, the changeful whole
A beauteous intellectual landscape forms.
With sacred ardor, they, whose minds endue,
Whose fame for piety and wisdom, shed
Unfading glory on the favor'd age
In which they live.  They kindle on the tongues
Of God's devout Ambassadors the flames
Of melting eloquence; with tender zeal
Their hearts inspire; with kind persuasion fill
Their placid eyes; and with seraphic grace
Their fervid action clothe; untill portray'd
In prospect bright, on every feeling mind,
The bliss of Heaven enraptures and sublimes.
And if obdurate INFIDELITY
His flinty ramparts round the heart should raise,
And bar the soft emotions out; empower'd
By their inspiring Guardians' potent aid,
In pure and dread solemnity enshrin'd;
The sinner-shaking bolt of Gospel law,
Truth-aim'd against th' opposing masses sink
And ope the avenues, to where expos'd
On Hell's black verge, the cold affections sleep!

The ardent Statesman's breast with patriot love
Those sacred Spirits swell; his toil intense
Assist; while he with sleepless eye explores
Attentive o'er the crumbling page of time;
On Empires buried in the grave of years;
How they from sickly infancy arose
To proud Colossal strength:  and how they thence
Descended down Destruction's dangerous steeps,
Till prematurely sunk in Ruin's gulphs
They rise no more &mdash; what causes give their day
Of prosperous grandeur, spread their features o'er
With Freedom, Gladness, Health and virtuous Smiles;
Or what their sunny brightness overcast
With baneful blackness, the foundations min'd
Which prop'd their fame &mdash; what canker'd all their hopes,
And tumbled their proud Monuments in dust.
The daring Mariner's intrepid soul
With the bold zeal of glorious Enterprise
And venturous Emulation, they inflame:
Through freezing seas his frightful passage steer,
Direct him how the icy shoals t' escape,
And where to find the long-sought savage shore.
They bid him fearless, tread the desert wild,
And undismay'd, its tawny  tenants meet;
Their blood-fed fierceness gently turn aside,
And by familiar smiles their kindness win.
As man, refin'd adventurous man appears,
They bid the cheerless forest-glooms disperse,
And o'er the wastes of the polish'd ARTS extend.
The life-exterminating Beasts are slain,
The merciless arm of savage rage is bound
In Law's corrective pale, and Pain, and Blood,
And Plunder cease.

Thus from Creation's hour,
In every province of our planet Earth&mdash;
In all the various spheres which appertain
To matter and to mind, Angelic power
Has exercis'd a superintending rule.
But since from Hell the poisonous breath of SIN
First tainted an apostatizing world
Th' infernal FOE of man's felicity
Has ever envious opposition made
To all that purpos'd good to him on earth,
Through every province of the peopled globe,
His Hell-train'd swarms of evil-working fiends,
Who keep uninterrupted watch for means
To counteract the power of Angel-zeal
On man:  who hold or turn in Satan's paths
His blundering steps, and mail in horrid scales
His clouded eyes; oft too deriving aid
From man's own will, their hellish schemes succeed:
And they the conflict oft long-while maintain
E'en when defeat at length their efforts ends.
For man in cases which affect his doom
When brought before the Great Eternal Judge,
Th' advice which Angel intimations give
Has always power to follow or reject.
In clogging with embarrassments the plans
Which Man's seraphic Monitors devise
T' effect his melioration, Hell's grim King
And goblin minions feel malignant joy.
But notwithstanding all the stygian realm
Disgorge on Earth its legions, to oppose
The Guardian Seraphs; yet when not withstood
By man's own will, in matters which pertain
To his immortal state, the sacred hosts
The prize of glorious victory always win.

When subjects of momentous weight arise,
When great occasions claim their righteous aid,
And vast extensive interests are involv'd;
Those superintending Spirits then are wont
In great and solemn council to convene,
And consultation hold on all the points
Which to the grand concernment appertain.
'Twas thus the immortal Spirits who preside
O'er the vast regions of the WESTERN WILD,
In grand assemblage met; when call'd to weigh
Th' important interests which its cause involv'd.

When nought but Beasts and bloody Indians dwelt
Throughout the mighty waste, and Cruelty
And Death and Superstition triple-leagued,
Held there their horrid reign, and impious sway;
The Guardian Seraphs of benign REFORM
With keen prophetic glance the worth beheld
Of the immense expanse, its future fame,
Its ponderous moment in the golden scales
Of Freedom, Science, and Religious Truth,
When by Refinement's civilizing hand
Its roughness should all be smooth'd away.
With zeal the animating prospect fir'd
The glowing Guardians, fill'd with views sublime
Their lofty minds, their enterprising powers awak'd,
And urged them to this laudable resolve&mdash;
That o'er Columbia's Western Wilderness,
Politic Wisdom should her reign extend
And Emigration pour her splendid swarms.

With ease, their glorious purpose to achieve,
And spare excessive waste of human blood;
Those sacred friends of Culture's spreading power
And humanizing energy, announced
To all the station'd Seraphs who preside
O'er the benighted WEST, their high design;
And summons gave them quickly to convene
In their aerial Courts.  Meanwhile command
Was given th' etherial Guardians to prepare,
High o'er the Alleganean Mountain-Heights,
For the Divan, a FIRMAMENTAL HALL.
Anon, obeident to the high behest,
The mighty Spirit of the welkin deeps
Bade convoluted winds, with furious flight
And curvilinear sweep, encompass all
The Atmospheric bounds; and dash and roll
To the appointed place of Rendezvous,
With all their fulminating Magazines,
Th' encircled Regiments of mingled clouds!
The gloomy Vast, impetuous howlings pierce;
The Northern Gates, tempestuous Whirlwinds burst;
And Mountain-Caverns wide-expanded, vent
Their hissing blasts.  Against impinging clouds,
And driving strength, th' encircling Tempests rush
And from their boundary's wide circumference roll
Converging the dark billowy-mixing mass.
From cloud to cloud, in blazing torrents stream
Th' awaken'd fires electric:  flashing flames
In forky grandeur, with ethereal light,
Projected peaks of rolling vapour crown;
And all the nubilous involutions paint
With intermitting Lightning's vivid tints:
While glancing scintillations spangle thick
With dancing lustre all the clouded gloom;
And Angry Meteors, flaming as they fly,
With burning paths their ragged way emblaze.
From ridge to ridge of the big Mountain-Mass,
Dark sullen Thunders by the conflicts wak'd,
Their sky-convulsing detonations pour.
Their destin'd point, th' embattled volumes reach;
And rest.  The grand, the wonderous Edifice,
The great th' ethereal Architect begins.
Wide over Allegany's summit spread,
Of close impacted, squared and polish'd clouds
Constructed, the extended base appears;
And of the same compressed material form'd,
Octagonal the burnish'd walls ascend,
Sublimely towering through the midway skies!
Broad sheets of lightning constitute the roof,
Whose flashing splendors flood with day the Heavens,
When Night spreads o'er the sun her darkling wings.
Reflected from the Fabric's upright squares,
Prismatic tinctures paint the fragment-clouds,
Which float unused in widening fleeces round.
Its myriad windows and its thousand gates
Were all of pure translucent ether wrought,
And all with bright festoons superbly hung
Of pansied clouds, and wreathed lightnings made.
Both North and South of the magnific dome,
In grand Corinthian style and towering state,
On Meteor-Pillars rear'd, refulgent shone
Its roomy porticos.  Innumerous seats,
Of downy clouds composed, and white and soft
As Cygnet plumes, in graceful circles ranged;
Around th' interior of the shining hall,
All ready for the Angel host appear'd.
A canopy of Rainbows intertwined
In spiral union, forming in the whole,
A beauteous arch of intermingling hues
As rich as Fancy's pencil can portray;
In all their gayly blended forms can be,
High o'er each line of dazzling sofas bends.

The glorious edifice in all its parts
Consummate, the seraphic Guardians lift
Their snow-white pinions on the cloudless air,
And reach the gorgeous gates.  In robes attired
Of purple ether, the Majestic Spirit
Of clouds and storms, with Angel courtesy
Th' enraptured Host address'd, and mildly ask'd
From their united souls a prayer devout,
"That Heaven's benedictions might descend,
And consecrate the new-erected Fane."
The courtesy with sweet benignant grace
They all return'd, and humbly breathed to God
Their pious supplication.  This perform'd,
In majesty sublime, with sacred air
And lofty mien, the solemn-musing host
Ingression made, and as they advanc'd, assumed
Their plume-soft seats.  Awhile, in silence deep
They sat till TRUTH'S complacent Angel rose,
And in perspicuous style, at large disclosed,
The causes multifarious, which conspired
T' enlist with animated zeal their powers
In prosecution of the glorious end,
For which they were in solemn synod call'd.
The pure-eyed Seraph thus his feelings spake&mdash;
"Immortal Guardians of this Western World!
Your wisdom now a mighty theme demands!
Let all the beams of bright Divinity,
Which to your minds illumination gives,
And sanctions your pure and spotless hearts,
Now on your mental vision clearly shine;
Till its keen glances every point explore
Of the immense concern that brings us here.
This Almighty's glory and his creature's weal,
Which moved his holy power this well-plan'd globe,
And all that is to form, have ne'er attain'd
In the uncultured regions of the West
The splendid elevation HE designed.
In various other provinces of Earth,
Where less prolific means of life and health
Exist &mdash; Where sterile soil, and freezing winds
Against the industry of man content,
And starve, and choak kind Nature's friendliest growth;
Where states ambitious, hostile, feast on War,
And stain with blood the snowy Crest of peace;
E'en there, Refinement's pleasure-dealing hand,
The bliss which fits the soul for tasting Heav'n,
And gives existence all its honied zest,
Hath scatter'd wide and copiously around&mdash;
E'en there, a thousand consecrated Fanes,
To glorify our Gods, in grandeur rise.
When then should mild, and more congenial climes,
Where the maternal hand of Nature rears
Salubrious plenty from her fruitful soil,
Diffusing through the aromatic air,
The pleasant fragrance of mellifluous blooms;
Where softest Music pours perennial songs,
And summer-cooling Rivers roll their floods,
Inviting Population to their banks,
And cheering Commerce to their crystal waves;
O!  why should climes distinguish'd thus by Heaven,
Th' appropriate residence of cultured life
In dark barbarian glooms continue wrap'd,
Th' abode of prowling Savages and Beasts
Blood-hungering fierce?  No portion of this Earth
To nurture Hell's infernal grisly brood,
Was by its holy Maker e'er design'd;
Or to remain a dark and frightful waste,
When wisely furnish'd for the residence
Of rational, humane, and polish'd Man.
For HE the righteous Author of the World
Design'd, that we, as Guardians of his work,
And Agents of his holy will; that We,
Should open in the regions of the West
A sanctuary from Oppression, Cruelty, and Wrong,
And all the ills of European climes,
Have fled, a refuge here to find, beneath
Th' Angelic wings of Liberty and Peace.
The sacred duty thus to us assign'd,
We only have as yet in part perform'd.
Wide stretching from the Alleganean Mount
Far westward, and towards north and south, vast bounds
Of rich and beauteous country unreclaim'd
From dreary wildness, ask our culturing aid.
God's wisdom and munificence declare,
'Tis not his will, that those luxuriant climes
Should be monopolized by scatter'd hordes
Of rude predacious men, who feed on blood,
And all their days through dismal darkness grope;
While crouded into unproductive nooks,
In other regions, polish'd millions starve.
Lo!  how already, from th' Atlantic deeps
To where this Mountain lifts its clouded brow,
Our influence, has th' effulgent floods diffused,
Of Revelation's everlasting light;
Dispersing superstition's sombre shades,
And settling science on her splended seat,
How have we clothed a wilderness with smiles,
And made the gloomy heaths and deserts bloom!
How to the exiles of a tyrant land,
Erecting in this new-discover'd World,
A bless'd Asylum for sweet Liberty,
And for each sacred Virtue that adorns
The Patriot's and the Christian's hallow'd lives.
But westward of these mighty mountain piles,
Th' illuminating blaze of Gospel day,
Our civilizing influence ne'er has spread.
Now is th' auspicious time for us to plant
Our beaming banner firmly in those wilds.
For now, the East with population teems,
And gallant thousands would our call attend.
The sons of Europe to Columbia's shores,
And swarms are sighing for a land to call
Their own.  O!  then, immortal seraphs muse!
Profoundly muse, on the momentous theme,
And your impressions give; that all the light
Of our united minds may clearly shew,
In prosecution of the high design,
The best, the wisest course, for us to take."

Thus spake the Angel of celestial Truth.
HUMANITY'S bright seraph next,
With sweetly melting grace, divinely rose.
As innocently meek as Infancy,
When mildly slumbering in an Angel's arms,
His lovely features were; a tender smile
With holy grandeur mingled, o'er them beam'd;
And in his eye the tear of feeling shone.
From underneath his snowy mantle, forth
His beauteous hand he waved; and from his lips
In mild seraphic melody, effused
Th' ensuing strain.  "Ye venerated hosts!
Our great compeer, with transport have I heard,
And much his weighty counsel do approve.
So comprehensive was his general view,
That our peculiar interests; if we may
Peculiar call, what are so intertwined;
His kind benevolent feelings to engage,
Seem'd little less, if less, than did his own.
In every fibre of my throbbing heart,
His every word a lively echo found.
O yes!  companions in the joys of bliss!
We will refine, exalt, and humanize
Th' uncivilized Barbarians of the West.
The bloody-minded Wretch who now can see,
Without a single pitying sigh or tear,
Beneath the ruthless hatchet's dreadful edge,
And inoffensive Infant bleed and die;
Can hear unmoved the Captive Mother plead,
That her sweet, darling innocent may live;
Can, when the writhing of her Babe his ceased,
And death its little eyes in night have seal'd;
The fainting Mother to a doom devote
Still more ferocious!  More infernal still!
The task, the Godlike task, be ours, that wretch
In bright Refinement's golden crucible
To melt, to decompose and sublimate!
Untill to pity's thrilling touch alive,
He thinks he acts, and feels, as social MAN!

"How comfortless!  with misery how replete,
Th' unenlightened Indian's barbarous life!
Their golden billows o'er the smiling plain,
For him, no plenty-yielding Harvests wave;
For him, in fields no flocks domestic range;
For him, nor fruitage-purpled gardens blush;
Nor ripen'd Orchards on the dewy grass
Their mellow burdens drop, emitting wide
A honied fragrance on the fluttering gales.
For him, no rich and flavorous viands crown,
Nor mirth-inspiring Wines, the social feast;
No ornamented dome for him unfolds
Its sculptured doors &mdash; No decent cottage screens,
From the bleak winter blasts, his thin-clad limbs;
Nor easy couch e'er rests his aching frame.
But penury, and cold, and weariness
Are the attendants of his joyless life.
The forest Herbage and the Mountain Beasts,
Through wind, and rain, and snow, with danger sought,
His meagre store of doubtful food supply.
Half-starved, and shivering through the driving blasts,
Successless oft, the CATERER returns,
To where beneath his smoking hut of bark,
His pining wife, and naked babes, he left;
And finds them butcher'd by a neighbouring foe,
Or torn, and slaughtered by blood-drinking Beasts!

"It much behoves us then, August Compeers!
Among the wild barbarians of the West,
The humanizing Arts to introduce;
To bid industrious Agriculture pour
His cheering comforts through their needy tribes,
And bury Carnage, Penury, and Woe,
Beneath the bosom of the furrow'd soil.
But oh!  how delicate the glorious task!
How hard t' achieve without the waste of blood
Short-sighted, blind to all that can adorn,
Exalt, illumine, and dignify their lives,
The WHITES, the jealous Indians view as foes,
Who purpose their extinction from the globe.
With means so badly suited to the end,
'Tis not within the compass of our power,
So great a work t' effect, without the loss
Of many lives, unless an agency
We interpose, so palpably divine
As to transcend the boundaries of our sphere,
And overwhelm with Miracles the mind
Of dim-eyed man.  But still our rightful power
Embraces such extent of various means,
For the performance of our righteous plans,
That much the interests of my special cause
Depends on the selection of a course,
Through which our great design must be achieve:
That course, though tardiest, and of pomp devoid,
Whose progress, least sanguineous traces stain,
And slightest vestiges of suffering mark,
Is doubtlessly the one we should prefer.
But other spirits here there are, who best
Can designate the peaceful plan we wish&mdash;
Who understanding best the savage heart,
Its passions, dispositions, whims, and views,
Know best the means its confidence to win.
Yes, sacred Guardians of the desert West!
From you we claim the necessary light
Our weighty subject needs.  Thus much we've said,
That you the cause might clearly comprehend
Of this our great and sacred convocation:
We now th' expression of your holy views,
In silence wait." &mdash; A musing pause ensued;
Till on a signal given by his colleagues,
To whom, with him, peculiarly pertains
The governance of those expansive wilds,
The holy Spirit of Superintending Zeal,
And Delegated Trust, whose labors were
Within no special province circumscribed;
But an auxiliary aid to all
The Western Peers imparted, and for them
The cares of Embassy sustain'd, arose,
And thus with glowing animation spake.

"On the abundant energizing zeal,
In this sublime concern so promptly shew;
With warm congratulations from the heart,
This reverend convocation I salute.
At length, immortal peers!  th' eventful voyage
Of sailing Time has brought us to a sea,
On whose wide breast ten thousand scenes appear,
In prospect changeful, as in number great.
Here fruitful islets, gay in flowery robes,
Perfume the gales and cheer the gazing eye,
There frowning rocks high heave their gloomy heads
And cast their shady horrors wide around.
Here, soft-wing'd breezes kiss the slumbering waves
And gently fan the brilliant flame of joy,
Keeping alive the spark in Hope's bright eye,
There, death-jaw'd Tempests howl for prey,
And lash with league-long wings the tumbling deeps.
But when we reach this sea's magnific shore,
Bright glory's richest treasures wait us there:
And though we meet obstructions on the way,
Our God, th' unerring pilot of the just,
Will guide us safely through each threatening pass.
At length, Angelic colleagues!  dawns the day,
Which will with due reward our labors crown;
The day when all th' innumerous treasur'd stores
By us prepared in our immense domain,
Will yield their splendors to exulting Man,
And magnify the glory of our King,
By nurturing millions in our fertile Wilds,
His name to celebrate, and courts to croud.
E'er since, at God's behest this massy Orb,
Its annual rounds commenced; our powers divine
Have sway'd unconquer'd, though by Hell's black fiends
Oft times opposed, that vast unpeopled land;
And from successive dangers with our shields
Angelic, guarded, all the wide expanse.
Remember, Peers!  th' exertion of our might,
We erst bestow'd to save that vast domain,
When God's almighty vengeance glow'd from Heaven
Down through this sinful globe, and fast exhaled
Her boiling waters from their foaming gulphs,
And fill'd with floods the frowning firmament;
Untill from bursting and o'er-burden'd clouds,
Throughout the lapse of 'forty days and nights,'
O'erwheling deep and wide the drowning globe,
Profuse the congregated Oceans gush'd.
Remember, Peers!  how then our posts we kept,
By all the watery terrors undismay'd:
And scenes like those, so woe-fraught, vast, and dread,
In times before, or since, have ne'er transpired.
Seraphic language can't portray, nor mind,
Unless it saw, conceive the prospect, we
On that occasion view'd; the terrors, which,
To guard from Wreck our realm, we then withstood.
We saw and heard the tumbling torrents roll
With roaring rage, o'er crags, and rocks, and steeps
Of thundering mountains, and of trembling hills;
And thence swift down the winding dells descend,
'Till on the deluged plains their Oceans pour'd;
In dreadful desolation, burying deep
Creation's millions!  Man, and Beast, and Fowl;
All save the favor'd remnant in the Ark:
While cities, domes and fanes, the wealth and pride
Of naughty princedoms, swell'd the groaning wreck.

"Athwart the turbid deeps outstretch'd, immense!
The sturdy Giants we behold roll back
With strong nerved arms, the darkly tumbling waves,
Till with fatigue o'er power'd, in mad despair,
They grasp'd convulsively the floating drifts,
Whence soon by strongly driving torrents swept,
Amid the gulphs vertiginous they sunk:
Still hugely heaving through the swallowing tide,
Till from their spouting nostrils gush'd their lives.

"His raven-color'd flag, full-feasted Death
Spread on the frothy flood and grin'd with joy,
To see on every surge his trophies float.
In that unequal'd hour of his dread reign,
What horrors hover'd o'er the woeful wreck,
Around the Heavens, a dismal darkness frown'd:
No glance of light the dreary gloom could pierce,
Save what the rushing meteor swiftly shot;
Disclosing thickly through the murky glare,
Ten thousand grisly ghosts, and on the waves
As many froth-white corses, ghastly, wan!

"We saw the swelling floods, like battling hosts
In foaming vengeance, roll their adverse tides,
And meet, and break, and roar.  Still higher rose,
And higher still, the counter-torrents; dark,
Stupendous, raging, desolating, wild!
Amid the watery wars, VOLCANOS burst;
And through the deeps, their hissing lavas belch'd.
Tremendous thunders shook the shud'ring world;
Wide-circling whirlpools stretch'd their gulphy jaws.
The hills were swept away!  the mountains torn
Aside, and tumbled through the rolling Vast!
While black DAMNATION'S legions scream'd with joy!
'Twas then immortal Spirits!  our powers were tried.
Amid commotions, horrors, groans, and death,
Our souls were stay'd!  No fears our valor chill'd!
The crashing wrecks we brav'd, and bore aloof
From our domain, the desolating DRIFTS
Of broken mountains, hills, and rough-edg'd rocks;
Which driven in ridgy masses, rudely tore,
And forrow'd up with ruinous force, the LAND,
So steep'd, and yielding then, wheree'er they roll'd!
And as the waning inundation sunk
We still our powers preservative employ'd:
Our soil from the accumulated PILES,
Outweighing then the weakening waves, to guard.

"That time from threat'ning injury thus secur'd
Our beauteous realms; through all vicissitudes
Of changing elements, they still have been
Our unneglected charge, our constant care.
When from the gen'ral surface of the glove
The deep o'erwhelming DELUGE disappeared;
To qualify for future use, t' enrich
And beautify the land, we spread a Lake,
Expansive, pure, throughout a wide extent
Of the delightful west, and rear'd of rock
A mound, to bar its access to the main
Southwestward; long within its meted bounds,
With principles of fertilizing power
Replete, the beauteous inland sea remain'd,
Discharging through the channels of the north
Its superabundant floods.  Its end attain'd,
We bade explosive matter from a train,
And through the mountain-ledge a passage burst.
With rapid flow, to Mexico's great gulph,
The unsustain'd, immense of water gushed!
And left the bosom of th' enriched expanse
T' enjoy the temp'rings of a genial sun.
To those high-favor'd regions, to impart
Still prouder charms, salubrity, and wealth,
And give them commerce with th' enlightened world;
We bade from distant mountains, rivers rise,
And roll their currents through the mellow'd plains;
Meanwhile, wide o'er its surface Vegetation sprang,
And trees in shady pride majestic grew;
Around those virent branches, thickly twined
Luxuriant vines.  Large-grown, gay-tinted flowers,
The groves with intermingled beauties cloth'd;
And sprinkled odorous sweets on every gale.
The tender melody of feather'd love,
Its animation spread.  With raptur'd life,
Each spray was bending.  Each successive season,
Successive beauties brought.  E'en Winter's reign,
Though Vegetation fell beneath his frown,
With more fertility the soil endued.

"Thus, holy guardians!  had our care prepar'd,
Long ere his foot had press'd this western world,
In it for man, a rich and charming home.
And yet than bloody beasts and savages,
No other habitants can there be found.

"E'er since from Asiatic climes arriv'd
The tawny legions, still our guardian zeal,
With unremitting fervency has glow'd.
How oft when elemental conflicts roar'd
Within our beauteous country's blooming bounds,
And threatened with convulsions to destroy
Its elegance, and worth, have we restrain'd
Their devastating rage, and laid asleep
The jarring firmament.  Recollect, O Peers!
That awful day, the slaughtered Mammoth fell!
Against satanic spirits then was roll'd,
The thunders of our wrath.  What powers of soul
What energy of nerve!  was then requir'd
To slay the ravening tyrants of the trembling beasts!
And vanquish their infernal aids from Hell!
And this we did, seraphic peers, and more!
But why our guardian feats enumerate,
Since every eye in this divan, declares,
Divine determination to pursue
The glorious object which conven'd us here.
It would, with angel wisdom ill accord,
Such zealous vigilance to exercise;
And such illustrious labors to perform;
Without a consummation of the views
Which gave them origin.  'Tis Folly's part
To toil, and not enjoy.  To clear the soil,
And leave it, t' expend with pains his time, and wealth
In building mansions for the vagrant winds.

"What next demands attention is the means
By which our object best can be achiev'd.
And here the Seraph who address'd you last,
Has kindly yielded preference to us,
Colleagues divine!  as understanding best
The savage heart, and therefore best prepar'd,
To say what course is likeliest to ensure
Our cause success.  The means which I propose,
As best adapted to the great design,
Is some adventurous woodsman to select;
And secretly his soul inspire to choose
A band of daring comrades, to explore
In hunting guise, our wide unsettled realm;
That while unwak'd the savage jealousies
Remain, such general knowledge may be gain'd
Of that delightful land, as will invite
Columbia's enterprising heroes there.
But let the chief on whom our choice alights,
Be one, in whose expanded virtues of the soul;
Benevolence, Mercy, Meekness, Pity, Love,
Benignant Justice, Valor lion-like,
And Fortitude, with stoic nerves endow'd.
And those with whom his fortune is combin'd,
Let them be great and virtuous like himself.
For if unable to dispose the hearts
Of the fierce sanguinary savages
To friendship with the whites &mdash; with these to share
The uncultivated regions of the west;
Adventurers thus humane, from vice thus free,
At least would not by cruelty, and crimes,
Awaken all the flames of Indian ire;
Nor purposely do aught we could condemn.
Since Heaven on us the power has not bestow'd,
Elsewise than through a medium to achieve
So great a work, such let that medium be,
As best with God's own sacred will accords!
If for the task were delegated first,
Without a guide, or previous knowledge given,
A jumbled multitude, discord, and blood,
Distress, and final failure would attend
The enterprise; unless by miracles
A supernatural power were interpos'd.
In prosecution of the softest course,
We still an opposition, bred in Hell,
Will have to meet.  Perhaps th' infernal host
Appriz'd of our convention, even now
Have emissaries station'd, to observe
Our consultations.  Cunning, artifice,
And machinations croud the courts of Hell;
And keep the demon-legions ever keen
In vision, to espy, whate'er within
Their restless rambles through the roomy earth,
May offer means to them, man's weal to mar.
But if the savage soul should not be sear'd,
And callous made, by Satan's caustic arts,
To Reason's force:  if open yet to proof,
That NATURE'S common right demands of them,
Partition with the Whites, of their wild lands;
That Christian Domination there would shed
Unknown delights upon their gloomy hearts,
And banish thence their thorny woes, and wants;
Diffusing through their unillumin'd minds
The rays of mental light &mdash; that christianiz'd
And philanthropic man can ne'er delight,
In the distresses and extermination
Of his own kindred men; but the reverse;
That he, sweet animating joy derives
From seeing happy millions round him swarm;
And never is more bless'd himself than when
He makes the wretched bless'd &mdash; if Indian minds
Can possibly be brought to feel these truths,
The plan adapted best t' effectuate
An end so great, is that which I propose.

"To prove that man's professions are sincere,
His practices should therewith coincide;
And virtuous conduct in a multitude,
Where Satan has more pow'r to operate,
Is not so frequent found as 'mongst a virtuous few.
But sacred Spirits!  more is needless here.
Your searching minds, the theme throughout have scan'd:
If they approve the measure I propound
So will you now declare."

Through all the hall
A vote of cheerful approbation ran.
Then rose the guardian Spirit of Enterprise,
And thus address'd the Angelic convocation.

"Benevolent ministers of love!  we well,
On this momentous era of our reign,
With gratulations may each other greet.
In fascinating perspective I see
Refinement's golden temple spread
Its softly-temper'd blaze, o'er all th' expanse,
Which from th' Alleganean Mountain's base,
Westward to the Pacific deeps extend&mdash;
I see its brilliance beaming from the Lakes,
Whose billows beat the cold Canadian shores.
Along Ohio's smooth majestic stream,
And Mississippi's mighty flood to where,
In statelier pomp their mingled currents roll,
O'er distant Mexico's blue-bosom'd bay.

"With sun-brown'd cheek, and brow with odorous wreaths
Of clover-bloom engarlanded, I see,
Young Agriculture smiling o'er the west;
While Labor's healthful sons around him flock,
And wait his mild commands.  I see rich fields,
Green-waving Meads, and flosculous Gardens spread
Beneath his gladden'd eye, their copious stores:
While Plenty, Happiness, and Peace, and Joy,
Religion, Science, Truth, and Love, and all
The VIRTUES vivify, illume, refine,
Exalt, and sublimate, the NEW-BORN WORLD!

"Th' enrapturing scenes we soon shall realize,
Which warm prophetic Fancy here depicts,
If in pursuit of the benevolent end,
On which we have resolved, we delegate
To the high charge, a Hero, whom I long
Have train'd, with cheerful ease to undergo
Privations, dangers, pain, and solitude.
When oft thro' frigid storms, and forest-snows,
Without a friend, or fire, or even food,
Save what the desert gave, I've seen swift speed
To rouse from his thick lair, the antler'd Buck;
Or from their dark and solitary dens,
In dingles deep, or wildly-jutting cliffs,
To startle forth the grim predaceous Beasts;
The bounding Catamount, and meagre Wolf,
The surly Bear, and slaughter-hungering Panther:
A Hero whom no terrors can appal:
Whose bosom feels no fear, when lost in woods
The wildest that in all the mountain waste
By wintry winds are swept: &mdash; whose sinewy limbs
Can scale the roughest mountain's rocky steeps
With vigorous ease, nor feel a fibre fail,
Nor quicken'd breath, nor fluttering pulse, bespeak
Fatigue.  But in his breast there beasts a heart,
In which the warmest blood of Pity flows.
For though to him the chace affords delight,
As warranted by the Almighty's grant,
Within a limited extent; yet such
The Hero's tenderness, his soul revolts
From needless cruelty, to meanest life.
He would not crush with wanton tread a fly,
Nor e'en with useless agonies of pain
Torment the poisonous snake.  The tear of woe
Draws from his breast the sympathetic sigh,
And Sorrow's plaintive tale, and mournful mien,
Commiseration's tender throb awakes
Within his feeling heart.  No passion reigns,
Tyrannic o'er his reason, Patriot love
With daring majesty his soul inspires,
And would with equal valor make him brave
The lurking dangers of the savage wild;
Or face in open field the frowning front
Of thundering Battle.  Generous, guileless, kind,
The gripe of sneaking Avarice ne'er compress'd
His princely heart.  No mean dissembling smiles,
Nor smooth, deceitful speech, his views conceal,
Nor form a feint his unsuspecting friends,
Within a venal snare to lure.  He gives
To modest indigence, with bounteous will,
A Liberal portion of his little store.
The ostentatious pageantry of power,
The moon-shine splendors of high-titled birth,
And fluttering Fashion's vain, fantastic pomp;
For his sage mind, no more attractions have,
Than shining gossamer upon the winds,
Or glittering froth, upon the turbid streams.
For which we are about to make a choice,
Than DANIEL BOONE, th' adventurous Hunter,
I recommend.  And he by knowing well
The human heart, and having friends, whose souls
Like his, can dauntless, brave the stormy wilds;
Who th' anguish'd plaint attend, and kindly soothe
With sweet condolence Misery's bleeding woes&mdash;
Whose souls with magnanimity expand,
Sublimely soaring o'er the tinseled swarms,
Of Pride, and Fashion.  With such means possess'd,
Companions for the tour he can enlist,
If then, Angelic Peers!  your judgments deem
Him worthy of the trust, so will you say."

With undivided suffrage, the Divan,
The enterprising Angel's choice, approv'd:
And by their solemn institution gave,
To him, protection of the new-made CHIEF&mdash;
To him, by secret inspiration t' excite
The Hero's valorous soul, to undertake
The glorious enterprise, the task they gave.
Their great design for action, thus matur'd,
Th' enraptur'd convocation ere they rose,
Their praise in loud seraphic peans pour'd,
Whose frown, an UNIVERSE, in gloom can shroud;
Whose smile, Illumination's purest blaze
Through an infinitude of Night can spread;
And with Refinement's ever-living blooms,
Creation's wildest WILDERNESS can clothe!&mdash;

RELIGION'S sacred Seraph next, gave sign,
His hallow'd MAJESTY in prayer t' address&mdash;
When bowing low in suppliant attitude,
Their animated adorations forth,
The reverential congregation breathed;
And in a tone of warm pathetic zeal
Effused from lips bedewed with melting sweets;
With the nectarean quintessence of Love!
And honied balm of holy Eloquence!
Th' Almighty's kindly prospering smile implored,
Around the Hero's dreary path to beam,
And light him safely through each winding maze,
Until success his great adventure crowned.
Their pious service clos'd, the kneeling host
Arose, and nought their Session to prolong
Remaining now, the holy Synod was dissolv'd.

Each Seraph spread his sparkling pinions wide;
And from the plume-bespangled portico,
Light bounded on the gently buoyant gales,
And swiftly sail'd to his appropriate Sphere.

So from their anchorage launch'd, majestic Ships,
The liquid deeps, in gallant beauty skim;
And seek o'er Wilds of Ocean far remote,
In various distant Realms, their native ports.

