Sweet sleep my heavy eye-lids press'd,
And gently sooth'd my cares to rest;
Where straight my waking soul beheld
A rich enamel'd verdant field,
A thousand flow'rs of lovely hue,
Painted by nature's pencil grew;
And here and there a fountain play'd,
Discover'd thro' some op'ning glade.
Sweet music charm'd my ravish'd ear,
And Paradise itself seem'd there.
And now I thought a lovely train
Of youths and damsels fill'd the plain.
They pip'd and play'd and danc'd and sung,
The meadows with their music wrung;
But soon their merry pastimes cease,
For lo!  with aspect grim, disease
With her attendants, grief and pain,
Comes swiftly posting to the plain!
And now I thought th' enamel'd greens,
The painted flow'rs and golden scenes,
No more appear'd!  no longer smil'd!
But horrid deserts vast and wild,
I saw &mdash; rude mountains seem'd to rise,
And pierce with barren tops the skies.
The raven croak'd &mdash; the night-owl scream'd,
And from the clouds, fierce lightning gleam'd:
Consumption weak, with meager face,
Seiz'd some &mdash; tho' feeble was her pace:
Some fever bound in burning chains;
And others cholic rack'd with pains:
Some gout surpris'd and others stone;
My ears were pierc'd with many a groan:
They called on death with hideous cry;
Death soon appear'd, (for death was nigh)
All pale and wan he seem'd to stand,
A deadly dart was in his hand,
A crown upon his head he wore,
And in one hand a picture bore;
Upon the canvas, flames of fire,
And horrid shapes and spectres dire,
With wond'rous skill were drawn:  the croud
Beheld &mdash; they saw, and shriek'd aloud!
With longing eyes they view'd the road
Where virtue leads her sons to GOD;
And curs'd vain pleasure's flattering smile,
Which did their easy hearts beguile,
And tempt them virtue's paths to fly,
The paths to blest eternity!
Shock'd at the sight, I turn'd aside,
Where lo!  my ravish'd eyes descry'd
Fair VIRTUE'S sons (a glorious show!)
How did my raptur'd bosom glow!
Some cares and toils 'tis true, the good
Bore, as they pass'd 'long VIRTUE'S road;
But blooming health and fair content,
Their comforts and assistance lent;
And conscience as they pass'd along,
Whisper'd sweet peace thro' all the throng,
While VIRTUE bade her sons rejoice,
Like heav'nly music was her voice!
"Soon shall life's stormy seas subside,
And all be calm and smooth (she cry'd,)
When life's declining sun is low,
And night o'ertakes you as you go;
Fear not &mdash; some gleams shall then be giv'n
Of endless bliss and promis'd heav'n;
And if from me you never stray,
I'll lead you to eternal day."
