Far from the bustling city's noise and pride,
Within the bosom of a silent vale,
A village stands, fast by a stream's smooth glide,
That pours in mazy lapse along the Dale,
There dwells a Quaker, shunning mortal strife,
Who thinks a virtuous peace the dearest pledge of life.

From neither dress nor principles he swerves,
But is thro' half a century the same;
When perfect manhood strung his vig'rous nerves,
As now relaxing age has bow'd his frame,
Simple alike his manners and his sense,
Impress'd with ancient form and strong benevolence.

Strong for an intuitive pow'r, he pleads,
Some emanation of th' Eternal Light;
An energetic rule; beyond all Creeds,
An home-felt fount and test of all that's right;
Not to one people injuriously confin'd,
But like the orb of day, enlightens all mankind.

All war and rapine zealously he blames,
And madding Kings in human gore imbu'd;
Yet, not displeas'd, hears Gaul's despotic aims
In her sequacious thousands are subdu'd;
Nor with reluctance hears the martial tale,
That GEORGE'S free-born legions thro' the world prevail.

No gay romance he reads, nor wicked play,
Nor can their page a sanctuary find,
But each polluting book is cast away,
That wakes th' unruly passions of the mind;
While to the Bible he with fervour cleaves,
And to a puff'd up world each Heath'nish Author leaves.

With ev'ry Tax he cordially complies,
Save dues of Ministers by men ordain'd,
Ashdod nor Ashtaroth more his soul denies,
Than these from carnal ordinances claim'd;
His neigh'bring Pastor, with unweary'd pains,
His error still display, yet still no progress gains.

But yet in mutual amity they live,
For Charity prevents indecent strife;
Tho' retrograde their Faith, they both believe,
This the blest essence of a Christian life;
The Vicar yet suspects these scruples vain,
While him the Quaker deems of Levi's tythe-taught train.

His itinerant brother, preaching to and fro,
Should he unbidden call to be his guest,
His bosom wakes to friendship's cordial glow,
And while he blesses, finds himself more blest.
Grasping his hand, the pious kiss bestows,
While his expanded soul in kind endearment flows.

He then invites his neighbours to partake
The simple boon his friend may soon dispense,
When the tun'd thoughts more deep impressions make,
Unfelt by him from elevated sense;
And ever and anon his gen'rous mind
In aspiration breaks, and groans for human kind.

If fierce disputes among his neighbours rise,
Him Arbiter contesting parties choose;
With simple sense he Error's maze descries,
Nor shuns to bring these talents into use;
Coolly impartial weighs each dubious side,
And wisely pleases both, ere he their claims decide.

He exhorts his children round (a goodly train!)
To shun the follies of a trifling age;
From each seducing gewgaw to refrain,
That the warp'd soul from Virtue's path engage;
Then turns his retrospect to better days,
Damsels of yore plain clad, and youth deserving praise.

And oft reminds them of their ancestry,
Superior to their persecutors pow'r,
Who from coercive hands disdain'd to fly,
Nor shunn'd the cruel jaw that would devour;
Then rais'd almost to wrath, condemns the crimes,
Of Cromwell's zeal-blind days, and Charles's giddy times.

Their zeal he tells, and how they fervent stood,
And grew beneath th' oppressor's galling yoke,
Not fine, nor durance, banishment, nor blood,
Their strong allegiance to their duty broke;
Then with a sigh recounts what change appears,
Since William's lenient reign, thro' George's golden years.

That now, alas!  a deprevation spread,
Alike deceptive of the young and old;
On vanity's light wing the youth are fled,
And the deluded elders grasp at gold:
But then with pleasure views that some remain,
That have not bow'd to Baal, nor wear his servile chain.

Not always grave; he takes a heighten'd view
Of life when new, and its gay joys recites,
What time when flow'ry minutes sweetned flew,
With puerile pleasure fraught, and new delights;
His sons attend their circumstantial Sire
Glow at his youth's emprize, and feel his pristine fire.

What tho' his sinewy force is now decay'd,
Erst in the ring his vig'rous feats were seen,
Beneath his prowess fell that blustering blade,
And him the vaunting wrestler of the green;
With simp'ring glee recites those follies past,
Now deem'd vain-glorious sports, and joys unfit to last.

On place nor person saintship he'll bestow,
Nor tread with reverence consecrated ground;
Nay, to the hallow'd fane he'd cover'd go,
Nor kindle at the anthem's sacred sound;
Except his own, does with no forms comply,
Unfeeling of the sneer for starch formality.

The days and months he calls by Scripture lore,
True to the path primeval Patriarchs trod,
Christians, he says, no heav'nly orbs adore,
No Roman Chieftain, nor no Gothic God.
Then why should he pursue the Pagan road,
Adopt th' unhallow'd sound and long-exploded God.

At large Assemblies where his friends resort,
He in the foremost ranks is active found,
Zealous fraternal order to support,
And that the ancient tenets lose no ground,
But chiefly that which strikes at priestly claims
He here to valour calls, and every tardy brother blames.

Fervent for immortality he glows,
Unknowing of the Sceptic's wav'ring lore;
Regards this period as his final close,
When grief and strife and pain shall be no more;
Yet not to dumb oblivion quite resign'd,
Anticipates a name, when he's to dust consign'd.
