Oh, how shall rightly poet's pen rehearse,
Or paint in honest colors such a plight;
Or tell, in mournful, melancholy verse,
How gay and cheerful once was Jenny Knight!
Then sullen, grieved and sad; then took to heaven her flight.

Oh, how shall rightly poet's verse declare,
What charms to grace her person took delight:
Or show her lofty majesty of air;
And how all crouding longed to gain a sight
Of the far famed, the fair, the joyful Jenny Knight.

What numerous suitors crouded round her dome;
In none did Jenny seem to take delight,
Until she saw th' accursed Harry come:
And he was truly pleasant to the sight;
And touched alas the heart of joyful Jenny Knight!

Harry was tall and young, and fair to view;
His cheeks were flushed with red, his walk upright.
He lovely seemed, and Jenny never knew
That man could have deceit; for pure as light
From falshood was the soul of joyful Jenny Knight.

In garments decked with silver and with gold,
Young Harry shone, her kindness to excite.
Ah could she of his faithless heart be told,
And of her risk; oh that some angel might
Whisper her state, and save the joyful Jenny Knight.

Burdened with bliss, away the glad days fly;
While bowers and groves to wandering them invite;
Or where the little streamlet grumbles by,
All by the white power of the mild moon's light,
Would cruel Harry stray, and joyful Jenny Knight.

With hollow heart he on the stars would call,
And on the pregnant Empress of the night,
And on the awful Ruler of them all,
To witness that his purpose was upright,
And that he loved o'er all the joyful Jenny Knight.

She, artless, listened to his cunning tale;
And trusted to the oaths he oft did plight.
Ah hapless, hapless Jenny; wast thou frail?
Thy damned seducer heaven itself shall smite.
Thou'lt without virtue search in vain delight.
Curst are the coming days of joyless Jenny Knight.

How tore she then the long locks from her head;
And how her beauteous bosom did she smite.
My peace is gone, she said, and truly said,
For comfort with her chastity took flight.
Ah sad and all forlorn was joyless Jenny Knight.

Harry she asked, and raved, and cried aloud,
To hide at church their shame from human sight;
As he'd so often and so solemn vowed:
But of her bright eyes' salt streams he made light;
And bantered with the fears of joyless Jenny Knight.

Yet, ere he left her roof, in solemn tone,
He swore, the vows he'd made he would not slight;
But would return, ere seven short days were gone,
And have performed the happy marriage rite,
And find the truant smiles of joyless Jenny Knight.

Oh foul and faithless  liar; from that hour,
Wast thou determined to avoid her sight.
Oh stony hearted villain, to devour
A hapless virgin's innocent delight,
And ruin such a fair as joyless Jenny Knight.

In silent grief the seven sad days were past;
The neighbors marveled much what happen might,
That her fair face with sorrow seem'd o'ercast:
And asked the cause; and with excuses slight,
Now first she learned deceit; ah joyless Jenny Knight.

He came not &mdash; never will he come again.
She sent; she learned her fate; 'twas death did smite
That flew not, but whose spear gave constant pain,
While suicide to worse crimes did invite:
Distraction was the soul of joyless Jenny Knight.

Ere while a steady cloud of settled gloom
Hung melancholy dark before her sight:
For one pleased moment she could find no room:
Nor groves, nor friends, nor rillets, now invite
From her sad solitude the joyless Jenny Knight.

Then from this lesson why not understand
That chastity in man is good, sweet, right;
In woman it is more than her right hand,
A gem that she should keep in vice's spight,
In spite of wanton thoughts and vain delight,
Or suffer as does now the joyless Jenny Knight.

And now the pangs, full doubled by her shame,
Of child birth bring a beauteous babe to light.
Child of reproach, she gave it Harry's name;
For still his name, how could it?  gave delight,
And Harry was half loved by joyless Jenny Knight.

In sorrow did young Harry's crimes bring down,
A parent's joy grey hairs to the grave's dark night;
Whose voice Columbia's Senate long had known:
Harry his patriot soul to realms of light
Hurried, and hurries now the joyless Jenny Knight.

Riches, of which well might a prince be vain,
From his swelled coffers take their daily flight.
Vile Harry's pomp shall beg for bread amain,
And on him shall he feel God's curse alight,
For vows, in God's name made, to joyless Jenny Knight.

The gaming table his attention calls,
There time and wealth he squanders, day and night:
And then on dreadful drunkenness he falls:
But when he feels his sober senses right,
He feels a sting with tho'ts of joyless Jenny Knight.

A sting that probes the quick of mental pain,
His days to poison; every bliss to blight.
He wanders to and fro, but tries in vain,
Remorse, vile vulture, from his soul to fright,
And from his mind the tho'ts of joyless Jenny Knight.

Where is a penny to buy Harry bread?
He vices have his coffers emptied quite.
He finds no pillow where to lay his head:
In torn rug wrapt, he has no mind to slight
The cold barn's straw; there dream of joyless Jenny Knight.

The tender soul of Jenny could not brook
Of all surrounding innocence the sight;
Years since society had she forsook,
And to a lowly village took her flight,
To hide from friends the face of joyless Jenny Knight.

Thither per chance did houseless Harry stray,
And, all unconscious, at th' approach of night
He knocked at Jenny's door, who sent away
No one that ask assistance of her might,
For alms gave all the joy of joyless Jenny Knight.

She bade him enter &mdash; ragged, pale, diseased,
He asked some simple shelter for the night.
Something she saw that in his features pleased,
Yet knew not what, nor why, nor dreamt it might
Be the peace murd'rer of the joyless Jenny Knight.

Beneath my roof man sleeps not, Jenny cried:
Here take these pence, buy lodgings for the night.
Now that 'twas Harry well her keen eyes spied.
"Can it be he?  And are my senses right?
Harry, embrace once more the joyless Jenny Knight."

"And is it Jenny?"  Shame and stubborn scorn,
Amazement, grief, remorse, and wild affright,
Cut up his soul at once:  away he's torn,
By his mad spirit, from the killing sight
Of the sunk, tear-wet, fair, and joyless Jenny Knight.

Away his pence for drunkenness he gives.
(That vile forestaller ever does delight
To vex Time's patience by the theft of lives)
To a lone wood he strays; ah wretched wight,
He sleeps, but dreams no more of joyless Jenny Knight.

He sleeps the sleep of death &mdash; unhappy end,
Bro't by a wanton spirit, loose and light:
How shall kind charity o'er thee extend
Her mantle, hiding in oblivion's night,
The crimes that ruined thee and joyless Jenny Knight?

Jenny ere long did chance to wander where
The corpse of Harry laid &mdash; How sad the sight!
To view the foul birds picking his bones bare;
While glutton bugs and worms seem full of spite
To any that would harm the joyless Jenny Knight.

How was her grief more poignant than before;
And how did pity with her woe unite;
Again she smote her breast, her hair she tore;
She sobbed most horrid, ah most piteous sight!
And ah most sad, undone and joyless Jenny Knight.

Now with a slated stone she tares the ground,
And digs where lay her Harry's corps she might.
She picks the dry leaves that were scattered round,
To hide such spectacle from all men's sight,
And even from herself &mdash; from joyless Jenny Knight.

And o'er his head she placed a simple stone;
While on the stone the tears full fast do light.
Ah it is pitiful to hear her moan;
For still tears flow from beauty once so bright;
Oh how the tears do stream from joyless Jenny Knight.

And to her humble cottage home she hies,
To meet her lovely boy, her fond delight;
And at her door, oh sorrowful surprise,
A dying, ghastly, mangled bloody sight,
She finds the little son of joyless Jenny Knight.

Oh waggoner why couldst thou have no heed?
Thy speedy horses why not rein more tight:
See thou hast caused young innocence to bleed,
And a sad mother's only joy dost blight.
Know you not 'tis the child of joyless Jenny Knight?

Sev'n circling suns o'er little Harry's head
Had roll'd already, while the child so bright
Was in his bible skilled full well to read,
Nor awkward was his busy pen to write.
What comfort ah was he to joyless Jenny Knight.

Fair was his face; how sweetly curled his hair:
How innocent his play:  oh charming sight.
Then think how great a mother's sorrows are,
To lose her last, her very last delight,
And think how choaked with grief is joyless Jenny Knight.

Yet there's a comfort which the world has not,
Descending from the happy realms of light;
Comfort divine, far, far transcending ought
Of a vain world that can our love invite;
Of this the full beams fell on joyful Jenny Knight.

For she was humble, and repented sore,
Turning to heaven her eyes, that beamed so bright
With God's own joy. &mdash; She sunk upon the floor&mdash;
To fields above she took her rapid flight,
And blessed was the end of joyful Jenny Knight.

Then down all cheeks the busy tears did roll,
For much the village sobb'd at such a plight;
They bore her corpse, while the griev'd bell did toll,
A mourning train, extending long in sight,
To the church yard, there in the grave alight,
The frame of her who's now the joyful Jenny Knight.
