"Curst be the hour, forever writ in gore,
When baleful slavery sought our peaceful shore:
When desolation sadden'd every grove,
The soft retreats of liberty and love."

Placed on a rock, that overhung the tide,
Thus torn with rage, indignant ZARA cried;
Around the waves, she cast her haggard eyes,
Seas dash'd beneath, and night involved the skies.
Wide o'er the waves the wint'ry wind was driven,
And rapid clouds conceal'd the lamp of heaven.
There ZARA, wand'ring, overlook'd the coast,
Wild with dismay, and wail'd her LACO lost.
Her hasty step was broken by despair,
Her eye distorted, and her bosom bare.
Heart-gnawing grief forbad her tears to flow,
But to the sea she sigh'd, and told the winds her wo.

"Curst be the hour, forever writ in gore,
When baleful slavery sought our peaceful shore!
There, by the silver moon's uncertain light,
I saw the phantom swim before my sight.
High to the heaven arose her giant form,
Awful and frowning as the northern storm.
Her hand a scourge, her arm upheld a chain,
And deathlike horror darken'd all the plain.
She seiz'd the youth.  I saw my love depart,
While the chill blood ran freezing to my heart.
His hands she bound; she launch'd into the wave.
A welcome death, for Laco dies a slave!"

"O lost to honour, honesty, and truth!
Curst be the power, that stole away the youth.
Against thee may the elements combine;
May winds refuse to blow, the sun to shine!
Or if they blow; far, far mayst thou be driv'n,
And feel the thunder of avenging heav'n.
Or if he shines; O!  may his light disclose
The dismal prospect of increasing woes.
What new sensations agitate my breast!
My passion burns, my rage is all represt.
May the bright God, who lightens heaven above,
Smile on the vessel that contains my love!
Sink down, ye waves, and each propitious breeze,
Fill the broad sail to waft him o'er the seas!
But can that breeze propitious prove, I say,
Ye feeling few, that bears my love away!
Yet take him, take him &mdash; child of blood and strife!
Let chains confine; but spare, O spare his life.
Vain is the prayer, no power, no pity saves;
My eyes behold him sink amid the waves.
White o'er his head the boiling billows roar;
The world adieu, for LACO is no more!"

"O Africk!  curst and hated of the gods,
Why bloom thy hills, why run thy inland floods;
Why bends the stalk with loaded ears of grain,
And Plenty's smile enlivens all the plain;
When the sad master of thy happy soil,
To foreign sorrow and to foreign toil,
By cruel Avarice transported o'er,
Feels anguish new and pain unknown before?
Glad I behold thy verdure fade away,
Thy beauties sicken, and thy charms decay.
Welcome the rains that sweep the mountain side,
And add new waves to Gambia's mighty tide!
Grief darkens all the fields, and storms the sea,
And sympathizing nature mourns with me.
My sighs shall mingle with the distant roar;
Mutual we grieve for LACO now no more."

"O, had we shunn'd the storm with eager haste,
And sought a refuge in Cafraria's waste!
There would the ELEPHANT a home impart,
Great in his strength, but greater in his heart.
The LION there with generous shame would glow,
And prove his friendship to a feeble foe.
But man on man his store of art employs,
With wit deludes him, with his might destroys.
Such art to practise be the coward's care,
Who knows to slay, will have a heart to spare.
This did my Laco, brave in battle, prove;
The hand, that conquered, held the palm of love.
My heart shall lost humanity deplore,
For Laco's dead, and kindness is no more.

"What sweet illusions tempt my wav'ring mind?
I see his face, I hear him in the wind.
Together o'er the meads we seem to go;
A transitory moment, snatch'd from wo!
But soon the loved idea fades away;
LACO I call, but LACO will not stay.
O lost to love!  no more wilt thou appear,
Dear pride of youth, for still I hail thee dear!
Dear to my eyes, as is the earliest ray,
That beams, fair streaming from the gates of day!
Dear to my heart, which still thy form retains,
As the warm drops, that riot in my veins!
Dear to my soul, as is &mdash; the Great Unknown,
Who made the world by wisdom all his own!
Is there a God, who sees our works below?
Bear me, that God, from scenes of mighty wo!
Thy aid, thy power sustaining, I implore!
Laco is gone, and aid is now no more."

"It is not blossoms of a thousand dies:
'Tis not the varied fruits the year supplies;
Nor smiles of plenty, that alone impart
Peace to the mind and pleasure to the heart,
'Tis Laco and Liberty's united sway,
That give new raptures to the rising day.
How sweet the pleasures, that your presence give?
For you we die, with you we dare to live.
But absent, vain the fragrant blossom blows,
The verdure brightens, and the river flows.
In vain the year her yellow fruit matures,
Plenty can cure no pang the slave endures.
Adieu, ye groves and streams, your charms are o'er,
Laco is lost, and love is now no more!"

"Ah!  why will fancy trace the joyous scenes,
When LACO came, the pride of all the greens;
When mirth celestial danced upon the plain;
When airy pleasure led her wanton train;
When fairy prospects rose before our sight,
And all was ease, contentment, and delight.
Pleas'd, I enjoy'd the dear, deluding dream,
The flowery meadow, and the purling stream.
Ah!  happy hours, when in the citrus grove,
Reclin'd we lay, and vow'd eternal love.
Anticipation lent her magick aid,
And wide the gates of happiness display'd.
But short the date of all my joy below;
The dream is vanish'd, and I wake to wo.
The vision flies, and leaves me to deplore
My hope decay'd, and Laco now no more.

"Yes!  from this cliff did these sad eyes pursue,
The fleeting bark, still less'ning to my view;
I saw him rise; 'Farewell, farewell,' he cried,
And headlong rush'd amidst the thund'ring tide.
White o'er his head the circling billows close,
My Laco hastens to his dread repose.
But sure the youth, who liv'd, who lov'd so well,
Has found the place, where all the faithful dwell;
The place, where none obtrude, whose snowy skin
Proclaims, who boasts the privilege [illegible].
That place I seek.  Adieu!  the worst of harms;
Welcome the death, that bears me to his arms!
I come, I come, no longer I deplore
My Laco dead, for life is now no more!"

She said, and darting from the daring height,
Sunk fearless to the realms of endless night.
