PART I.  DESPONDENCE.
Now Autumn closes the declining year,
And Nature hastens to a long repose:
No more, the fields and groves bright liv'ries wear;
No more, the song of joy the woodland knows:
But, on the sadden'd eye, gay prospects close,
And nought but russet scenes assail the view;
While Rural Beauty, that late smiling rose,
Array'd in charms of ev'ry pleasing hue,
Now from fond Man retires, and seems to say . . . Adieu!

Behold, enwrapt in melancholy thought,
Yon poor DESPONDENT solitary stray;
Painfully taught, &mdash; by sad experience taught,&mdash;
That Human Life is but an Autumn Day:
Along the beach he bends his devious way,
Where, with smooth current, glides the silver stream;
And thus, responsive to the Season's lay,
In mournful numbers flows his mournful theme&mdash;
"All is delusion here! &mdash; Our Being but a dream!

"Adieu!  ye scenes, that charm'd my youthful sight,
In rich profusion, elegantly drest:&mdash;
Gay harbingers of pleasure and delight,
Whose flatt'ring promise made your vot'ry blest:
Adieu, for ever! &mdash; Ye are like the rest
Of all the fascinating forms below:
Now, with sweet raptures to inspire the breast;&mdash;
And then, with disappointment, pain and woe,
Make the heart throb with grief, &mdash; the eyes with tears o'erflow.

"Adieu, for ever! &mdash; Time is hast'ning fast
To close the moments of the current year:
My destin'd space, like his, will soon be past;
Like you, ye scenes, I soon shall disappear.
And hark!  already I the summons hear;
It calls me, in each hollow-sounding gale,
To the cold realms of death, Life's Winter drear,
Peaceful to slumber in the silent vale,
While endless ages roll, . . . where Night and Gloom prevail.

"Of Man, &mdash; poor, feeble, frail and mortal Man,&mdash;
Such is the nature, state, and certain doom:
In Life's gay Morn, to shine &mdash; in Manhood, wane&mdash;
In Age, to drop into the mould'ring tomb!
Nay, sometimes, in the height of youthful bloom,
Fate lays his rising honours in the dust;
Or, flush'd with hopes of happiness to come,
Obscures his prospects, &mdash; disappoints his trust:&mdash;
Thus, ev'ry sanguine wish is destin'd to be cross'd.

"For me, &mdash; I've learn'd my lesson &mdash; earn'd it hard&mdash;
But, ah! &mdash; for bliss on earth, it comes too late;
The price, experience; mis'ry, the reward,
And one relentless scowl of adverse Fate.
Down to eternal Sleep's oblivious gate,
I feel me sinking to a calm repose;
And soon shall I attain my peaceful state,
And there forget the World &mdash; My Friends &mdash; and Foes&mdash;
My friends! &mdash; alas!  I've none &mdash; but this &mdash; Life's final close.

"Thrice welcome, long-wish'd period! &mdash; What's the world,
To him who finds it one dull, tedious round?
Whose thoughts are in Despair's wild vortex whirl'd?
Whose 'clust'ring woes,' enlarging, know no bound?
And what are all the Friends I ever found,
But venal puppies, urg'd by int'rest on:
Ephemera-like, that buzz'd a flatt'ring sound,
When Youth's bright morning-sun around me shone?
Now flown! &mdash; Well!  be it so! &mdash; I, too, shall soon be gone."

PART II.  CONVICTION.
Thus, the Despondent mourn'd &mdash; while sad and slow,
Along the beach he rode his weary way;
His burthen'd, sinking heart, surcharg'd with woe,
Without one comfort, or one cheering ray.
From western skies as beam'd declining day,
He saw a cliff that overhung the wave;
Then hasten'd, as the lion to his prey,
Resolv'd to meet death in the wa'try grave,&mdash;
Disgusted long with life and all the joys it gave.

The summit soon he gain'd; and, as he stood
And cast around a farewell-bidding eye.
Thus he, in half-form'd accents, spoke the flood&mdash;
"O!  to Despondence, sweet it is to die,
And in th' abyss of nothingness to lie!
'Tis courage prompts; and cowards dare not come;
They cling to life, as children to their toy:
'Twas thus, immortal heroes sought the tomb;
And thus, plung'd headlong forth, to their eternal home&mdash;"

Sudden, he thought, the heav'ns were veil'd in night;
Fierce whirlwinds howl'd; red lightnings glar'd around;
The river's bed upturn'd, in wild affright;
Peals of harsh thunder burst the shudd'ring ground,&mdash;
In whose short intervals, a whisp'ring sound,
As of a human voice, assail'd his ear:
Which, growing more distinct and loud, he found
Came from some object, that he knew not, near;
And, straight, his hair rose up, . . . and his limbs shook with fear.

When, now, before him stood, or seem'd to stand,
A form more perfect than e'er met his sight,
Beaming a radiance o'er the waves and land,
From her long-flowing robes of streaming light:
Her eyes, of living lustre keenly bright,
So stern on him she fix'd, with look severe,
He felt as tho' they pierc'd his soul's black night,
Dragg'd forth his secret thoughts, and shew'd them clear;
While thus, his purpos'd act she made a crime appear&mdash;

"Stop, Suicide!  thine error-wrought design&mdash;
Rash Mortal!  for one moment, yet forbear
The guilty deed:  I know that heart of thine,
Each intent thought, and dark intention there.
I've heard thy plaint &mdash; I've witness'd thy Despair,
Now ting'd with glimm'rings of some future state;
Now darker made by mental clouds and care,
Till, furious, rack'd by perturbation great,
It sought extinction in existence' final fate.

"Short-sighted, weak, deluded, foolish Man!
To think thou cou'd'st annihilation gain;
Or counteract thy MAKER'S wisdom-plan,
That dost eternal life to Man ordain;
For, know this truth, there's nothing made in vain;
He only who created can destroy
Or modes, or essences, in Being's chain;
But means with thee were useless to employ
To kill thy better part, &mdash; that part can never die.

"Reflect!  thyself thou didst not make; nor give
Thyself, thy pleasures and thy joys below:
Th' ETERNAL, when He bade thee breathe and live,
No motive but thy sov'reign good could know.
The debt of gratitude, then, dost thou owe,
Since bare existence all a blessing deem;
And dost thou pay thy MAKER'S goodness so,
And thus insult the MAJESTY SUPREME,
By murm'ring at His will &mdash; 'Our being's but a dream?'

"If, like a dream, Man's transient being flies,
And he, with scenes sublunar, glides away,
What folly, then, to dash your short-liv'd joys!
Or, to accelerate the parting day!
But if, as Man's consent and reason say,
Y' are born for mutual benefits and aid,
How culpable is he who yields a prey,
To what unfits for that for which he's made,
And (coward!)  thus his post would quit, and trust evade!

"But, further yet &mdash; important most of all&mdash;
If this your being (as the Scripture says)
On earth is but a state probational,
And ye shall reap the fruits of all your ways
In an eternal world &mdash; nor blame or praise&mdash;
But everlasting happiness or woe,
Commens'rate with th' ALMIGHTY'S wrath or grace,
According to the part ye act below, . . .
What is thy risque, if thus, uncall'd, to Him thou go!

"Nay, say not that thy life's embitter'd cup
So nauseous grows, the draught thou can'st not bear;
That glooms intolerable, blasting hope,
Point death thine only refuge from Despair;
This, dastard spirit, only would declare,&mdash;
O shame!  the courage of a man assume;
Behold, thy fellow-men misfortunes share,
Yet brave the storm, avert th' impending gloom,
And thus, with prudence, cheer life's passage to the tomb.

"Talk not of misery that knows no end;
That friendless, joyless, thy existence past;
Religion would have made thy GOD thy friend,
Whose kind protecting love would ever last.
Thy lot 'mid cares and troubles He hath cast,
In wisdom's purpose for thy good alone;
To raise thee (clinging to earth's trifles fast)
To objects where Man's dignity is shewn;
To try thy strength; or make thy gratitude be known.

"Hence, learn incumbent duties to fulfill;
The ample means, Health, Wealth, are in thy pow'r:
Like a good steward, do thy master's will;
Go where Care, Poverty and Sickness lour:
Assuage their sufferings, &mdash; cheer each lonely hour&mdash;
Go! &mdash; and the Naked clothe; the Hungry feed;
In Sorrows wounds the balm of comfort pour;
Let Charity embrace each vari'd need,
And let thine aids tow'rds all the Human Race be spread.

"When thus thy duties are perform'd, thou'lt find
Thou art with GOD, thyself, the world at peace;
No more, shall fell Despondence gloom thy mind,
But ev'ry cause of discontent shall cease:
Then, whatso'er thy future fate, it please
Thy MAKER, Heav'nly Parent, to ordain,
Thou can'st, with resignation, rest at ease,
It must be for His honor, and thy gain,
Since all is for the best, and nothing made in vain.

"But, if these solemn truths cannot prevent
The impious purpose of thy stubborn heart,&mdash;
Reflect! &mdash; the time may fly thee to repent,
And thy lost soul feel Hell's eternal smart.
O ponder! . . . pause . . . Mine hour is up &mdash; we part&mdash;"
Thus Conscience spoke, and "in a blaze withdrew."
Horror and Guilt made the Despondent start;
Wildly he gaz'd around &mdash; nought met his view,
But the smooth stream, green fields, and soft etherial blue.

PART III.  REVELATION.
As now the reprimand of Conscious stole
Through the wild turns of the DESPONDENT'S mind,
Keenly it smote his heart, arous'd his soul,
And urg'd him on to seek, and Truth to find:
For he had wander'd long, benighted, blind,
In an uneven, dark, and thorny way,
Without one comfort, one companion kind,
Or one auspiciously-benignant ray,&mdash;
For yet his Hope rose not beyond Life's little day.

Determin'd now all sources to explore,
To satisfy th' inquiries that depress'd
His sinking spirits &mdash; he rang'd Nature o'er;
But ah!  his Sceptic soul could find no rest:
Like Noah's Dove, it was not to be blest
'Till it return'd to Him from whom it came,
Its peaceful home. &mdash; since all beyond was drest
In Chaos' garb, and bore confusion's name,
Where elements wag'd war around earth's delug'd frame.

Futurity! &mdash; That was th' important clue
T' unravel seeming mysteries below;
Reflection may the past and present view:
But whose research, alas!  can further go?
Here, causes and effects together flow,
Like mazy eddyings of confluent wind;
But who, from them the Primal Cause can know?
Or, is there a First Cause for Man to find?
These doubts and questions gloom'd the sad DESPONDENT'S mind.

Yet, nought o'ercoming, he keeps his aim in sight:
"If a Futurity there be," &mdash; (he cries)&mdash;
"FIRST CAUSE there must be, &mdash; Source of Life and Light,&mdash;
Good as He's great, and gracious as He's wise.
Hence Man, beyond these ever-changing skies,
(As Conscience has suggested) must enjoy
Existence still improving, where Death flies;
Where Christians antedate a sweet employ, . . .
When hence they go . . . in praise, and bliss without alloy."

Joy wings him home, to search the Sacred Scroll,
Where Revelation beams in light divine:
He opens it &mdash; THE LAWS' loud thunders roll;
And kindling lightnings flash in ev'ry line!
Astonish'd at the dread, portentous sign,
He doubts if this can be the Christian Code,
Where majesty, displeasure, pow'r, combine
To clothe in frowns a bliss-conferring GOD:
And, straight, his hopes all fly, like chaff dispers'd abroad.

But soon the scene is chang'd &mdash; his hopes revive!
For, as he meditates, and further reads,
With fix'd attention, feelingly alive
To that for which, importunate, he pleads, . . .
The radiance of THE GOSPEL, op'ning, spreads
O'er his benighted mind a cheering ray;
Which, as Devotion grows, expanding, leads
His erring Reason in th' unerring way
To Truth Eternal, and to HEAV'N'S Eternal Day.

And now, in pious rapture and amaze,
He sees the glorious Day-spring from on high
Descend, and, in a tenfold solar blaze,
Seem to enwrap the circumambiant sky&mdash;
Away his glooms and darkness instant fly,
And new-born prospects burst upon his sight;
His cares too vanish, &mdash; and his sorrows dry;
As when, before day's orb's refulgent light,
Morn's mists and dews disperse, and seek the shades of night.

He reads &mdash; reflects &mdash; and ponders &mdash; Brighter grow
The scenes around, and brighter grows his mind;
'Till, in Divine Illumination's glow,
He felt an unknown pleasure, all refin'd:&mdash;
'Twas then, the SPIRIT OF ALL GRACE, so kind,
So wond'rous kind to all that he hath made,
A spark from Heav'n &mdash; Life, Light and Love combin'd&mdash;
Ordain'd, his soul to kindle and pervade,&mdash;
That, henceforth, she might soar beyond Despondence' shade.

As ruminating now, in stilly thought,
His soul (no more by restless Passion tost)
Seem'd, as in Contemplation borne devout,
To be abstracted from her partner &mdash; durst;
While, round her, throng'd a bright etherial host,
Of various orders, pow'rs and characters;
When, sudden, in extatic feelings lost,
She thinks a voice addressing her she hears,
Thus, &mdash; in strains sweeter than the music of the spheres&mdash;

"Child of Mortality!  yet Candidate
And Heir of glorious Immorality!
Perform thy duties in thine earthly state;
So shalt thou soon attain thy native sky,
Thy blissful, everlasting home on high,
The path thou now art in be ever trod,
And with thy present object in thine eye;
So shall it lead thee to thy Father, GOD,
Whose Pow'r and Love thro' space unbounded spread abroad.

"Pursue thy meritorious purpose still;
Th' unfathom'd depths of Wisdom still explore:
That Sacred Volume holds His Sacred Will,
And of Instruction pours a boundless lore&mdash;
Drink of its living streams, and thirst no more
For knowledge; since all knowledge there is found,
From heights beyond where Intellect can soar,
To the minutest atom on the ground,
And all the Senses touch, in Nature all around.

"There, is unfolded Being's endless chain,
Cemented by LOVE'S all-connecting tie:
There, wilt thou see that nothing is in vain,
On earth, or in the air, the sea, or sky;
That all the countless worlds that roll on high
Have, fix'd, their graded and allotted sphere;
That this world, too, and all that meets their eye,
Or mind, in harmony conducted are,
By PROVIDENCE DIVINE, tho' all confus'd appear.

"There, wilt thou view that destiny, O man!
Which thee awaits, when Life's short day is o'er,
And learn the ways of HEAV'N no more to scan;
But, rather than thus question them, adore!&mdash;
Adore that MIGHTY, ALL-CREATING POW'R,
Who spoke thee first to being and to light;
And then, thy lapsed nature to restore,
Gave His own life, &mdash; put Sin, Death, Hell to flight,
And beam'd Redemption's Glory on the Tomb's drear night!"

Here ceas'd the voice divine. &mdash; As tho' he felt
The DEITY within him, and around,
The rapt DESPONDENT all devoutly knelt,
Humbled in self-abasement to the ground,
And pour'd a heart-felt pray'r, in solemn sound&mdash;
"LORD!  Since for me, tho' by Despondence driv'n
To Ruin's verge, at length SALVATION'S found,
Oh!  hence, let my whole soul to Thee be giv'n;
And may Thy will be done on earth as 'tis in Heav'n."
