Deep in the north, where chilling frosts enchain,
In adamantine bands the restless deep,
Where summer suns exert their pow'r in vain,
Where howling tempests o'er the desarts sweep,
And snows on snows aloft in drear confusions heap&mdash;

Where the hills groan beneath a world of ice,
Accumulated from creation's day,
And seem to prop the vast incumbent skies,
While glittering to the sun's enfeebled ray,
And various shapes fantastic to the view display&mdash;

Where o'er the fields, o'erwhelmed with ice and snow,
The anxious eye for ever roams in vain,
In search of flow'rs, which in the meadows glow
In climes that boast bright summer's friendly reign;
Or ample rivers rolling gently to the main&mdash;

Where no fair groves, array'd in cheerful green,
Their waving summits to the eye display;
No murm'ring brooks, or silv'ry streams are seen,
No warbling songster "hops from spray to spray,"
To cheer the lab'ring swain with its melodious lay&mdash;

Where to the brave, adven'trous mar'ner's view,
Huge piles of ice in threat'ning forms appear,
While lofty mountains clad with glist'ning snow,
Their craggy tops amidst the black clouds rear,
While the fierce whirlwind's awful note assails his ear&mdash;

There, reigns a pow'r despotic, whose command
The wintry blasts, and snows, and frosts obey;
Who o'er the deeps extends his frigid hand,
And in their rapid course the billows stay,
Enchain'd in hardest forms, stopt on their headlong way.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

As late in sleep my weary eyes were seal'd,
To these dread realms methought I was convey'd,
From waking eyes by nature's hand conceal'd
Creative fancy to my view display'd
Stern, awful, frowning WINTER, terribly array'd.

High on a mountain, whose enormous brow,
Soar'd far beyond the scope of human eye,
Enwrap'd in clouds, cloth'd with eternal snow,
His awful throne, capt by the inclement sky,
Stood glitt'ring to the view in awful majesty.

A sable cloud enwrapt his gloomy form,
An icy empire fill'd his chilly hand,
Around him rear'd the hoarse resounding storm,
And all the winds of heav'n (a sullen band)
Assembled by their king, stood waiting his command.

When, in a voice that shook the hills around,
Thus he the fierce and gloomy band address'd:
"Go forth ye pow'rs, and bind in frosts the ground,
Ye snows o'erwhelm the earth's late fertile breast,
Behold our reign begins, &mdash; all nature's works lay waste:

"Make the wide world your notes tremendous hear,
The groaning woods hurl prostrate on the plain;
Make the vast hills convulsed quake with fear,
And in its course arrest the foaming main&mdash;
Spread 'o'er th' astonish'd world' the terrors of our reign."

'Tis done &mdash; behold the fertile fields no more
Their beauteous, joy-inspiring liv'ries wear,
Silence reigns thro' the groves, where oft before
The voice of music met th' enraptur'd ear&mdash;
But now, alas!  all stript of verdure they appear.

How sad the change! &mdash; behold the drifted snow
The trees oppress where foliage erst was seen;
Enwrapt in frost appears the cheerless bough,
All nature mourns with sad dejected mien,
And all around presents a cold a dreary scene.

Nought now is heard save the rude whirlwind's roar,
Which pours its dismal clamors thro' the vale,
Or waves that dash against the frozen shore,
Or the loud rattling of the gelid hail,
Or the poor shiv'ring brute's loud and discordant wail.

Yon stream which flow'd in majesty along
In winter's cold unfeeling arms is bound,
The brook that murmur'd to the milk-maid's song,
And spread its humid influence around,
Now stands immovable, fix'd as the frozen ground.

See o'er the hard smooth surface of the ice,
On sounding steel the fearless skater glides;
Swift as the meteor darts along the skies,
The cheerful nymph along the glib ice slides
And jeers the timid swain who in the cot abides.

The merry sleighers hold their rapid course,
O'er the white surface of the snowy plain,
The cracking whip impels the foaming horse,
The lively fiddler plays a merry strain,
And warm with gen'rous wine fears neither care nor pain.

With fearful haste the timid rabbits fly,
While in the snow the swains their footsteps trace,
The track pursue, the panting game descry,
And yelping hounds join in the eager chace&mdash;
While chearful, rosy health glows in the hunter's face.

See the storm gathers in the threat'ning sky,
A dark and dreary horror spreads around,
The north wind lifts its awful voice on high
Roars thro' the vales and makes the hills resound;
Thick [falls?] the drifting snow, and overwhelms the ground.

Loud howls the tempest o'er the bois'trous deep,
The shiv'ring sailor shrinks before the blast,
The foaming billows o'er his vessel sweep,&mdash;
Now rais'd on high, now in an abyss vast,
(Chill'd by the piercing cold) the hapless wretch is cast.

While all is wrapp'd in night's terrific gloom,
No friendly ray of light assails his eyes,
The trackless ocean, (that tremendous tomb
Where many a wretch in death's cold slumber lies)
Embraces in its bill'wy arms the hapless prize.

Oh Thou GREAT POW'R, who rul'st the bois'rous main,
"Rid'st in the whirlwind and directs the storm,"
Who seest the poor storm-beaten sailor's pain,
O save him, save him from impending harm,
Lull the destructive tempest, and its rage disarm.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Return my muse, to the warm cheerful fire,
Where safe, I can the raging storm defy,
Where peace and comfort, cheerfulness inspire,
And social friends the passing hours enjoy
In conversation sweet, in bliss without alloy:

Or listen to the legendary tale,
Of ghosts that wander mid' the gloom of night,
Of shadowy heroes, cloth'd in coats of mail,
Who bravely perish'd in the bloody fight,
And on th' ensanguin'd plain oft meet the wand'rer's sight&mdash;

Of love-lorn swains, whose grisly spectres fly,
In some lone wood athwart the midnight gloom,
And often meet the affrighted fair one's eye,
Whose cruel scorn has doom'd them to the tomb,
To bury all their sorrows in the earth's cold womb&mdash;

Or wither'd witches riding through the air,
While close together croud the simple crew,
And seiz'd with sudden fear begin to stare,
And think to see a meagre ghost appear,
When the loud howling of the furious storm they hear.

But rather would I seek the social friend,
Whose heart is honest, and inform'd his mind,
Or the gay circle of the fair attend,
And from my brow the wreaths of care unbind,
And with delighted eyes, see charms and sense combin'd&mdash;

Or listen to the soothing voice of song,
Which to the heart resistless makes its way,
Melodious strains by angel-voices sung,
To pity, sooth, or melt in love away,
And ev'n to savage hearts emotions soft convey.

And now while angry winter scowls around,
While plenty fills your overflowing store;
Full many a wretch uncumber'd woes surround,
Sick, friendless, houseless, feeble, old and poor,
Condemn'd to supplicate for bread from door to door.

Let gentle pity warm the feeling heart,
And let not av'rice the small boon deny,
To the poor suff'rer ev'ry aid impart,
Wipe the sad tear from mis'ry's pallid eye,
And spread around you, plenty, happiness and joy.
