TO GLORY.
Soul of the far, but unforgotten Past!
Queen of the sword and Lady of the lyre!
Spirit of thoughts too high, of deeds too vast,
To fear, like clay, the waste of flood and fire,
Or darkly perish on Oblivion's pyre&mdash;
Whence, like the birds from Memnon's pile, they spring,
Born from the dust, but not with years to tire,
Or furl in death the everlasting wing!
Teach me, Oh teach me, but for once to fling
My hand thy own triumphal harp along&mdash;
To strike one strain, whose echoes yet may ring
Above the spot where rests a friend of song!&mdash;
Do I but dream the laurel yet may wave
Memorial verdure o'er its votary's grave?

TO THE RUINS OF IONIA.
Ionia &mdash; sad Ionia!  is this wreck
All that remains to tell thy splendid tale?
Was it for this thy myriads toil'd to deck
Nature with Art, until the priest grew pale
In his own fane &mdash; and deem'd the incensed gale
Waved the rich tresses of his Phidian God?
Are glories born, like thine, but to exhale,
As dews forgotten from the mountain sod?&mdash;
Yes &mdash; fallen Ionia!  as thy temples nod,
Earthquaked by Time &mdash; while at night's pensive noon,
The jackal howls through theatres untrod,
Mute as the soft light of their Asian moon,&mdash;
So fade the fair, the proud, the famed, the strong&mdash;
All save eternal Truth and sacred Song!&mdash;

TO GREECE.
Sweet Hellas' earth &mdash; my fancy's fairy-land&mdash;
My youthful spirit's glorious paradise!
Oh who may tell how dear the filial band,
Which links to thee one, born in distant skies,
But with a soul that shares thy destinies,
And feels thy glory as it felt thy shame?
That I have lived to see thy star arise&mdash;
Thy banner spread for freedom and for fame&mdash;
Land of my love!  will be a thought to claim
A long proud record in my memory,
Where the prophetic echoes of thy name
Speak all of glad and golden days to be:&mdash;
I hear the omen, as thy warriors heard,
Before the fight, the wings of Victory's bird!

TO SPAIN.
Oh suffering Spain!  survey thine Argo's world&mdash;
See Bolivar's flag where Pizarro's flew!
See the proud ensigns of the free unfurl'd
From Niagara's flood to far Peru!&mdash;
What  man has done, again may not man do?
Flows not thy blood from them whose swords of yore
Cleft a red path Rome's own firm legions through,
And spurned to Calpe's wave the flying Moor?
Wake, land of Chivalry!  let Ebro pour
Henceforth his murmurs on the foeman's ear,
And let each grey Sierra statelier soar
To see "the Mountain Nymph" again draw near!&mdash;
Riego's spirit bids thee wake again&mdash;
Oh speaks thy lost Leonidas in vain?

THE WOOD-STORM.
When to the winds the firm oak's stately form
Sways, while each branch is as an organ-key,
Dash'd to mad music by the frantic storm,
And swells the full tremendous melody,
I love amid the sounding woods to be,
And with a stern and solemn rapture hear
The straining forest's thunder &mdash; 'tis to me
An hour of awful bliss and glorious fear!&mdash;
But wilder, stranger still, swells on the ear
That shrill sound heard amid the tempest's pause,
As 'twere a Phantom's whisper, deep yet clear,
While its dread breath anew the spent blast draws.
Sounds not that Voice, which makes the listener pale,
Like some lone Forest-Spirit's desolate wail?

THE APPROACH OF AUTUMN.
Autumn draws nigh &mdash; I hear its mournful breath
Sigh on the wind and murmur through the wood,
Wafting another summer's doom of death,
With deep sad music to the grave and good:&mdash;
Such is the lot of all by man pursued,
His spring but blossoms for an early fall,
And, where aught bright or beautiful hath stood,
Fate and forgetfulness will spread their pall.
Ah!  who can think, Such is the doom of all,
Nor mourn the works of change, the wrecks of time,
Even though he look beyond this earthly ball
To greener spheres of everlasting prime,
Where all that fades on earth shall reappear,
And the rose bloom unwatered by the tear?&mdash;

TO THE READER.
Reader, farewell!  If from these leaves of mine
Thy heart shall glean one solitary flower&mdash;
If, in its sweep, one full and flowing line
Waft but a water-lily for its dower&mdash;
If, as thou saunterest on, my lyric power
May shed one sunbeam on thy morning way,
Or light one glow-worm for thine evening bower,&mdash;
I have not pour'd for nought the lonely lay.
Yet, should no meed like this my verse repay,
There's pleasure still in the sweet work of song:&mdash;
No less the woodlark hails the sinking day,
Though none may list his sunset haunts among.&mdash;
Once more, farewell! &mdash; Oh, not unwelcome be
The balm that trickles from a stranger-tree!&mdash;
