For, ever from my boyhood, was my mind
A willing slave to woman's witchery;
On her I lov'd to look, severe, or kind,
As the young eagle gazes on the sky,
Drinking the sunbeams with delighted eye:
And all beside seem'd as a shrivell'd scroll,
While her strong spells came o'er me, brooding nigh,
Like some eternal night-mare of the soul,
Which I could ne'er remove, and wish'd not to controul.

To lie on some fond bosom, that could bear
A wounded spirit's waywardness; &mdash; the wreck
Of wild consuming passions, and long care,
E'en thus to find some being, who would check
My vain remorse, and, ever smiling, deck,
With roseate ring, my life's remaining day;
Imbibe her voice, and hang upon her neck;&mdash;
Is all I ask of Heaven, ere yet my clay
Is moulder'd to the dull congenial earth away!

Curs'd be the man, whose heart is not imbued
With the deep love of woman; nor its hue
Thence caught and colour'd; who can, unsubdued,
Behold the forms that might a world subdue;
Nor burns, nor thrills, nor trembles at the view!
Curs'd be the man, whose melancholy bile,
Or frozen pride ne'er stoop'd to sigh or sue;
Whose gloom no female sorcery can beguile;
Who breathes in other air, nor lives on woman's smile!

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;

Some say thou art a vain and fickle thing,
Changeful and fitful as th' autumnal breeze,
Still, as thou soarest wild on wanton wing,
Laughing at steadfast faith, and tranquil ease,
As all too dull for polish'd times like these!
Some say, that in thy smiles, and in thy tears,
Dwells treachery &mdash; that thine heart alone can please
Wealth, pomp, or toys, that suit but infant years,
Or proud, ambitious hopes, to rise above thy peers.

They say the fond heart can repose on none,
Or will be pierced by thorns of sharp deceit;
For of created women breathes not one
Whose honeyed promise is not false as sweet;
From the gay sylph who skims with fairy feet,
Light as a shadow, o'er the figur'd floor,
To her, who must reluctantly retreat,
Some dowager of beauty, queen no more,
Who sees her daughter reign as she has reign'd before.

Alas!  in thee detracting tongues will say,
Spite, envy, rancour, are most uncontroll'd;
Thy love of luxury, thy lust of away,
Force thee to fondly clasp what thou should'st hold
In scorn and utter loathing &mdash; damning gold,
Thy hate of e'en deformity disarms,
And woman's heart is barter'd, bought, and sold;
And wither'd age can bribe into its arms
Shapes mocking sculpture's skill, proud prostituted charms.

Ah!  that it has been thus indeed! &mdash; dark tales,
Yet true, at times thy votaries must hear
Of giddy faithlessness, and art that veils
Its frauds in guise of tenderest love sincere,
And flattery grateful to the foolish ear,
And frivolous weakness; &mdash; yet, when thou hast smil'd,
Man all forgets his spleen, unsays his sneer,
And, sooth'd a moment, like a froward child,
Hangs on thy lip again, too gladly reconcil'd.

Deceit is thine, as hearts now withering
Have felt too keenly, and have known too well;
Yet scarce thy treacheries are design'd, but spring
Half heedlessly; still spread they round them hell,
And raise hot strifes not e'en thyself can quell:
And, wishing to please all, thou painest long
The heart 'gainst which thine own could ne'er rebel;
Less from avow'd premeditated wrong,
Than that thy meteor love gleams fugitive as strong.
