The feverish couch that yields me no repose,
The tear-dewed pillow of my spectre dream,
With trembling heart and brain, that round me throws
Ill-omened forms that fleetly glide and gleam,
I leave, to drink the stirring breeze of morn,
And watch the setting of the waning moon,
While brilliant gems the brow of night adorn,
And peace is felt &mdash; the wretched spirit's boon:
To wing my soul from earthly thought away,
And trace seraphic forms in shades that round me play.

'Tis silvery twilight and the fanning airs
That tune the aspen and the willow grove
To wonted arbours of enmingling love,
Breathe o'er the bosom tender thoughts, and long
Unwaked, of spring time blisses, and unfold
Visions of beauty, that in silence throng
To ruined bowers, mid which they sung of old;
While from the rainbow of the heart on high,
Hope bent and swept her angel-harp along the sky.

The stars are melting in the pale-blue Heaven,
And their soft radiance fades before the eye;
Their hour is past, and like the visions given
To unwrung hearts they vanish in the sky:
Yet why should I their parting light regret,
When bright Aurora gleams along the east?
Or, when the vesper star of love has set,
On other orbs my wandering eye-beam feast?
Pall'd is the palate, if the fragrant draught
Is e'er untasted, or forgot as soon as quaff'd.

Or why should beams so holy longer dwell
On crime, since folly, midnight, and despair,
Light villain lordling's blazon'd palace-hell,
Or weep o'er ruined maiden's anguish'd prayer?
Steel through the lattice of the secret bower,
Where lecherous losel, and lost leman meet;
Or linger long before the midnight hour,
Lest murder's shriek their guardian spirits greet?
Ye eyes of Heaven!  why deign to look below?
Earth is a vast Aceldama of guilt and woe!

But purple morn o'er diamond dews careers,
And blushing nature welcomes home her lord;
And other sleepless eyes, bedimm'd with tears,
Than mine, with waking woes too true accord!
Sorrows to mine, like vulcan flames to light
Emitted from the flattering fire-fly's wing,
Corrode once happier hearts, and sadly blight
Affections all as fond, with aspic sting;
Then why should I, though doomed to mourn and sigh,
Protract my selfish strain when thousands shriek and die?
