In every change of fortune or of clime,
In every stage of man's uncertain lot,
The more endear'd by distance and by time,
Affection's sacred home is unforgot.
There lies the spell that wakes the sweetest tear,
In Feeling's eye &mdash; that cheers the troubled brow&mdash;
The zest of every joy the heart holds dear,
The pride and solace of the Child of Wo.
And cold and dead to Nature's finer sway,
Who doom'd to wander, weeps not on his way!

From that charm'd circle peace will never fly,
While love and tender sympathy remain
To foil the glance of Care's malignant eye,
And render powerless the hand of Pain.
The restless throng that haunt Ambition's shrine,
And madly scorn the sweet domestic sphere,
Condemned ere long in shame and grief to pine,
And curse their wild and profitless career;
From Envy's scowl, and Flattery's hollow strain,
Turn in despair, and seek repose in vain!

Queen of the Nations!  Island of the brave!
Home of my youth!  and Idol of my heart!
Though far beyond the broad Atlantic wave,
My boundless love shall but with life depart.
Yet farewell all that brightens and endears!
These withered plains but wake my bitter tears,
These foreign crowd my fond regrets renew;
For lone and sad, from friends and kindred torn,
My path is dreary, and my breast forlorn!

Star of the Wanderer's soul!  Unrivalled Land!
Hallow'd by many a dream of days gone by!
Though distant far, thy charms my thoughts command,
And gleam on Fancy's sad reverted eye.
And though no more my weary feet may stray
O'er thy green hills, or down each flowery vale,
Where rippling streams beneath the sunbeam play,
And throw their gladdening music on the gale,
There are fond hopes that will not all depart
Till Death's cold fingers tear them from the heart!

Vain, faithless visions!  'mid each earthly ill
Thy soul can darken, or the bosom wring,
Why haunt ye thus the lonely mourner still,
And fitful radiance o'er Life's ruins fling?
Meteors that cross my solitary way,
Oh!  cease to mock the tempest of despair!
Scourge of the clime!  pale Sickness holds her sway,
And bids my lacerated heart prepare
To meet in foreign lands the Wanderer's doom&mdash;
An early fate, and unlamented tomb!
