Where Hudson rolls by Saratoga's plains,
How fierce and madly raged the battle's strife!
Full many a soldier's corse that glebe contains,
But FRASER gave it glory with his life.
Beside his mattrass, scarce from danger rife
Removed, two kind administ'ring spirits stood&mdash;
(Just then a dirge from distant horn and fife)&mdash;
And o'er him lean'd the Mohawk from the wood,
To see how Christian heroes shed their patriot blood.

"Let yonder eminence become my urn&mdash;
My humble urn &mdash; at early evening's tide&mdash;
One modest pray'r ascends &mdash; your thanks return&mdash;
Heaven bless my wife" &mdash; the hero said, and died.
That wife was far across the ocean wide;
Nor would he deemed his life too cheaply given,
Had she, at this last hour, stood at his side,
To soothe his anguished soul in death, or even
Renew reiterated vows to meet in Heaven.

Now sight begins to spread her solemn veil
O'er earth, intent to hide the deeds, the day,
In bloody league with death hath done; but fail
E'en darkest shades to soothe that awful fray.
Thou genius of the sable throne!  O say,
What clouds uprisen, borne on whirlwinds dire,
Quench'd, in their falling floods, the last lone ray
That lingered on the hills, but spread in ire,
Those flames that gleamed from cylinders of fire.

O fearful night!  when tempests, leagued with war,
Conspire to bind October's chilly brow
With darkness, havoc, crime, and deep despair.
Oh!  chill the winds from eastern shores that blow;
Oh!  fast and deathly cold the torrents flow.
But spite of winds, and sleet, and night, and lead
In death's employ, with solemn march must go
The pious band that bears the glorious dead
Forth to his home of rest &mdash; the soldier's honoured bed.

No useless coffin, in profusion drest,
Confined the modest warrior:  but he lay
On a rude bier, as soldiers take their rest,
Headless of ease; unsheeted was his clay,
And for a pall was spread his cloak of gray.
Four stalworth warriors lent their General aid,
In now the last sad march, the dreary way,
To a returnless bourne; for pike and spade
Already his retreat in neighbouring mound had made.

Mournful and slow the sad procession moved,
While, from the silver fife and muffled drum,
The solemn death-march, as the tide approved,
Measured the hero's progress to his home.
All silent were they, while their hearts become
Still big, and bigger with unbidden grief;
Save when the pious chaplain broke the gloom,
Between his sobs, with sudden pray'r, and brief,
For fortitude of soul, and grace, and kind relief.

Nor wanting was the full and bold salute&mdash;
Just tribute to the brave, the warrior's due&mdash;
E'en clamorous war itself paused, still and mute,
A little space, O FRASER!  at the view
Of its own splendid ruins, and of you.
But soon, as roused e'en by thy corse to fear,
From foeman's every brazen mouth, there flew
Vollies, like Etna's fires, that dinn'd the ear,
And swept, with livid glare, athwart thy lowly bier.

O sad and sickening sight, when even the grave,
Sacred no more, becomes the scene of war!
As on his bed they stretch'd the humble brave,
And, keening at his tomb, the priest, aware
Of nothing, save his office, raised his pray'r
To Heaven, what thunders broke, like sudden doom,
On unsuspecting worlds, with hostile glare,
From ordnance, mortar, gun and bursting bomb,
Throwing their deathful gleams on night's tremendous gloom.

But ah!  with thee O FRASER, scenes like these
Have lost their wonted power, to swell thy soul,
To rouse thy bold and native energies,
And fire thy mantling blood beyond control.
Thy life's warm current long has ceas'd to roll.
And as thy voice once swayed the banner'd host,
So now thy death commands unconscious dole,
Nor shall thy deeds of valour, wanted most
In war, upon admiring thousands e'er be lost.

What tho' a stranger chaunts thy dirge, e'en one
Whose father was thy foe where thou wert slain,
What though through many a year time's glass hath run,
Since thou wert fell'd upon the bloody plain?
A friend to worth prefers the honest strain.
Sincere, though late and few, the numbers rise,
And when themselves expire, while moons shall wane,
Each soldier's heart thy memory dear shall prize,
Prepared to hail thy Christian spirit in the skies.
