PART I.
Dark seem'd the destiny of man, and mind,
Once scatter'd round the solitary earth&mdash;
Here &mdash; heartless clans, cold, ignorant, unrefined;
Devoid of truth, of hope, of moral worth,
Were wasting life in sensual, sordid mirth,
Or scattering death and ruin o'er their kind&mdash;
There &mdash; kindred hordes were starting into birth,
Midst wilds and forests, like themselves unkind,
In emulous career, with appetite as blind!

And when advanced; &mdash; when empires proudly rose:
As if to mock the frowning eye of God,&mdash;
As if to sport with life's unnumber'd woes&mdash;
Dark superstition, terrible!  unawed!
Bade him for ever in corruption plod;&mdash;
Bade him renounce what reason might disclose.&mdash;
Chain fancy's wing, that ventured oft abroad,
And humbly bow in homage to his foes,
And dread the light from heav'n that chance might interpose!

And Despotism join'd her kindred aid
To stupefy the soul with sloth and fear&mdash;
A browner horror fell upon the shade,
Extending deeply o'er his blind career&mdash;
And millions died, that one a wreath might wear,
And sit a god &mdash; on human rights to tread!
As many more, unhonour'd with a tear!
That low ambition, sordid and afraid,
Might propagate its kind, untroubled, undismay'd.

And millions died, that millions yet to come
Might help entail oppression, lust, and crime:
And stamp eternity upon the gloom
That spread stupendous over every clime,
Wide was the deluge in creation's prime!
Pride, lust, and magic, seemed to fix the doom
With power, and art, and wickedness sublime,
And Earth; &mdash; what was it but a living tomb,
Where man seemed only sent his brother to consume!

If talent rose, she saw creation blind,&mdash;
She felt her power, and riveted the chain
That stretch'd its leaden links around his mind.
Resolv'd on fame, &mdash; she would not change the scene:&mdash;
Religion had not then began her reign,&mdash;
Had not as now, by taste, and truth refined
Join'd high renown with efforts to restrain
The selfish appetites that dared to bind
In servitude, and fear, and guilt, the human kind.

Unknown his destiny beyond the grave!&mdash;
His immortality a dream perchance!
Well might he grovel as a beast, or knave:
The strange conjunction of an atom dance!
Well might he ask, as recently in France,
If aught but power were worthy of the brave?
If aught but pleasure, being could enhance?
Well might he live as passion's selfish slave,
And only sport, and toss, on time's tumultuous wave.

So ages roll'd their darkness o'er mankind,
Though doubtful beams illumed the cloud of time.
At length, &mdash; upon the desert of the mind,
Triumphant genius rose; and thought sublime,
Like Israel's pillar, flash'd from clime to clime!
Like Sinai's thunder, eloquence combined,
To awe the startled multitude from crime!&mdash;
Till man the rustic, miserable, blind,
Beheld a promised land afar, and undefined!

Bold was the march, for genius led the van;
And lofty eloquence, with mighty spell,
Pour'd on the rugged, hostile heart of man,
With notes spontaneous from her magic shell,
Till rout and rabble into order fell&mdash;
With eye no longer dull, nor visage wan,
With power's blind force, no longer to compel&mdash;
High was his step, for life's dull current ran
In harmony sublime, with hope's unfolding plan!

Primeval Liberty &mdash; so long subdued,
Sprang from the leaden slumber of the tomb;
With eagle eye of light, on high she stood,
And trembled to the breeze her lofty plume!
Furled was her hanging banner mid the gloom,
A sheet of living fire bestarr'd with blood&mdash;
Afar shook turret, battlement, and dome&mdash;
Loud rose the peals, and shouts of clamour rude&mdash;
For now she waved it wide, high o'er the solitude!

And patriotism rose! &mdash; and Persia's crew
Wither'd to nothing at her angry frown!&mdash;
Widely and wild, the daring tidings flew,
On fame's broad pinion over lands unknown,
Till trembled every heart, and every crown!
Rude nature started into life anew,
And for a moment grasp'd her glory flown!
And bold perspectives glimmer'd into view,
Along the plain of time, where hope her pictures drew.

Cold shrinks the bosom!  memory's weeping eye
In sorrow lingers on the plain of time:&mdash;
And here, and there, in solemn mockery,
Crush'd into nothing by recoiling crime,
Moulder the wrecks of nations once sublime!
Proud Nineveh!  alas, that could not die,
As pride might deem in empire's vernal prime&mdash;
Ah!  memory knows thee by tradition's sigh,
That scarce can tell the world where now thine ashes lie.

And Babylon the great!  where art thou gone?
Thou proudest home of early crime and power!&mdash;
The desert serpent o'er thee winds alone,
Beneath the nightshade of the desert  flower,
If aught remain, thy rubbish to devour!
Thy demi-gods are gone &mdash; and not a stone
Tells where, nor how, they lost life's little hour!
Ill fated city! &mdash; mouldering now unknown!&mdash;
Save to the God of heav'n, thy pride had overthrown!

Illustrious Tyre!  fair empress of the deep!
Kiss'd by the smile of commerce, and betray'd;&mdash;
To thy lone shore the traveller comes to weep,
While starving fishers on thy rocky bed,
Point where thy temples rose, now lowly laid.
And there &mdash; the loathsome reptiles cautious creep,
Of man, the curious stranger, half afraid!
Child of the billows!  on thy rocky steep,
Awhile might genius pause, and ask if mind could sleep.

Departed realms!  ye knew no moral aim!
No high relation to Almighty God!
Your sons but sought in life's tumultuous game,
Your sordid sons, in mammon's path to plod!
To sink in sloth and lust; &mdash; by truth unaw'd,
To pluck the withering wreath of lawless fame!
Your sons, your piles &mdash; all moulder with the clod&mdash;
Ye could not stand &mdash; for 'tis the moral flame
That binds in one the parts of empire's cumbrous frame.

But Greece!  immortal Greece!  where all thy might?
In vain does memory hover o'er thy grave&mdash;
There scarcely dawns one solitary light&mdash;
There scarcely lingers one illustrious knave,
To drop a tear upon the fallen brave!
Thy columns, domes, and temples, glitter bright,
Like signal guns upon the midnight wave!
Alas!  alas!  here mind began her flight!
Here broke the morning beams &mdash; and now &mdash; oh what a night!

Immortal Greece!  where rose the mighty lyre!
Where Homer struck upon the desert mind,
Till soul was melted into vestal fire!
Where genius, fancy, science &mdash; all combined,
To fix the wavering passions of mankind!
Immoral Greece!  where nature own'd her sire
When injured Socrates, to death consign'd,
Rais'd high the veil, and bade the world admire
The dim drawn heav'n afar, to which they might aspire.

Where Plato rose from earth on fancy's wing,
Prometheus-like, to pilfer fire from heav'n!
Where virgin eloquence in freedom's spring,
Now pour'd her paths like the ray of even,
Now all her fire, till every heart was riven!
Where somber history arose to bring
To light and order, facts asunder driven;
And o'er duration's path, sublime to fling,
The meed of fame to truth; to guilt her scorpion sting.

Where weeping tragedy the springs reveal'd
That wakes to sympathy the rugged heart;
Till man's cold breast, by selfishness congeal'd,
Felt pity melt it, and affection start&mdash;
Where laughing comedy with magic art
Stripp'd vanity, in pride, and pomp conceal'd;
And taught by ridicule how low a part
To smuggle admiration, or to yield
To weak ambition's call, on fashion's bloodless field!

Such once was Greece!  The land of light and thought!
The happy realm of many a soul sublime!
While now, alas! &mdash; to blind confusion wrought
Appears the ancient glory of her clime!&mdash;
And all her sons are slaves, and stain'd with crime,
Proud of their darkness! &mdash; scorning to be taught!
Is this the winter of so fair a prime?
And can the mind, to such perfection brought,
Like instinct's transient blaze, thus crumble into naught?&mdash;

No!  temples, domes, and columns, still may waste,
And beastly hordes may sink in filth, and trade!&mdash;
Illustrious realm!  thy genius, virtue, taste,
Were truth's dark groundwork, deeply widely laid&mdash;
Thy mental glory, Greece, can never fade!
Thy classic soil by slaves may be disgraced,
But still thou liv'st, in modern light array'd;&mdash;
Still speaks thine early note to man debased;&mdash;
Wherever science steps, thy parent foot is traced.

Though centuries their shadows roll between,
Though climes, and deserts, give a darker shade&mdash;
As trembling genius wanders o'er thy scene,
Where early forms of kindred mould are laid,
Shall not the spirit kindle o'er the dead?&mdash;
Shall not thy ruins light her torch again?
Oh!  not in vain thine early lightnings play'd&mdash;
No year that rolls adown duration's plain
But brings some kindred soul, to kindle in thy train.

Who on the plain of Marathon could sleep?
Who at sublime Thermopylae be cold?&mdash;
Who on Olympus' top! &mdash; Lucate's steep!&mdash;
Could mark unmoved where classic waters roll'd!&mdash;
Where poets sung! &mdash; where fell the wise and bold&mdash;
Aye &mdash; o'er thy funeral pile will genius weep,
Where mouldering caves her kindred ashes hold;&mdash;
And light her waning hopes upon the heap,
And bear her trophies far along the lengthened deep.

So lofty Gibbon!  on the wreck of Rome,
Where common spirits mused without a sigh;&mdash;
First rose thy genius on her eagle plume,
(As o'er the pride of ages mourn'd thine eye,)
To grasp the wreath of immortality.
Thou too art gone!  the flowers above thee bloom&mdash;
But some lone mourner, touch'd by sympathy,
Shall linger there, and muse upon thy tomb,
Till dreams as bold shall flash, the future to illume.

Thus o'er the wreck of early worth, and might,
Genius a moment lifts her speaking eye&mdash;
Then wings sublimely to a bolder height
Where mediocrity in vain would fly,
(Her pinion tipp'd with fire of Deity,)
Warm emulation apes her daring flight,
O'ertakes the meteor in her midway sky&mdash;
Ages roll on, and nat'ralize the light,
And genius shoots again &mdash; again eludes the sight!

PART II.
Again I sing of life &mdash; of man sublime!
Led by events to happiness afar;
Improving still, despite oppression, crime,
And all the mingled din, and pomp of war,
Led by ambition on her crimson car&mdash;
But now &mdash; how science, eloquence, and rhyme,
Revolving in their orbits round the star,
That rose o'er Bethlehem's distinguish'd clime,
Shall lead him on his course, to heights unknown to time.

Fair Athens sunk &mdash; yet victory's bloody band,
Tread the lone heath to mark her wither'd bloom&mdash;
Discover'd now &mdash; on to a foreign land
They bore it off in triumph from the tomb.
Proud was their step, and now o'er patriot Rome
Again it rose on luxury's chill sand;&mdash;
Where havoc spread an atmosphere of gloom.
Widely it blossomed &mdash; Genius wav'd her wand,
To guard again her flower from sacrilegious hand.

Bold rose the plant &mdash; but while the branches spread
So wide, that distant realms of barren soil
Half blossom'd into life beneath their shade&mdash;
Half rose to freedom &mdash; while a prey to spoil&mdash;
The storm of conquest, with a mad recoil,
Roll'd from the north, tremendous, undismay'd,
Flaming afar with desolation's smile&mdash;
The thunder broke &mdash; thy towering pride was laid,
Bold Rome, in dust as low as Greece, thy sister, dead.

The years roll'd on &mdash; and truth's far-spreading bloom
Faded and fell beneath the winter wind;
And Gothic hordes upon the wreck of Rome,
Still vow'd, with rage and native error blind,
To blast the withering blossom of the mind,&mdash;
And still they spread their element of gloom,
Above the distant dawnings of mankind;
Pronouncing, as they watch'd, their sordid doom
O'er Heaven's immortal plant, that soon should burst the tomb&mdash;

For, while with sacrilegious eyes they gaz'd
On the bold trunk of mind that never dies&mdash;
For, while the storm of persecution blaz'd,
And loud to Odin rose their savage cries&mdash;
While bold they summon'd all beneath the skies,
To lop the verdant trunk round which they graz'd&mdash;
Like Saul of Tarsus, &mdash; while they dar'd despise,
Themselves were grafted on &mdash; Like Saul, amaz'd,
They liv'd to scatter wide, what once their hands had raz'd!

Man might, indeed, have mourn'd, by time untaught
That tyranny, and bigotry, combin'd
When stifling long the energies of thought,
But added fuel to the smouldering mind,
Which truth's immortal, smother'd torch would find;
That human folly, to religion brought,
However powerful, still was ever blind!
That human policy was ever fraught
With elemental death, when into virtue wrought!

The gloom spread long and wide; at length afar
Broke the low music of the hermit's cell;
And crimson chivalry, on havoc's car,
Roll'd on tumultuous, pioneer'd by zeal;
And famine stalk'd behind to ask his meal,
As superstition led her hosts to war!
Ambition's blunders favour'd man's dark weal,
For while her hand essay'd his nights to mar,
Amidst the wreck, again rose freedom's quenchless star.

"The wrath of man shall prize thee!" &mdash; such the word
Of inspiration to the rabble blind;
And error in its zenith, and, absurd,
Though havoc seem to waste the human kind,
With kindred mystery, aids the march of mind.
Thus the Crusades &mdash; a madness yet unheard&mdash;
Spread power, and property, to few confin'd&mdash;
The feudal fabric fell; but still conferr'd
Importance, power, and wealth, on Europe's slavish herd.

Time rolls his course despite of shade or light,
But lengthen'd eddies break the tide of mind&mdash;
Now back it waves in billows dark as night,
And now, by tyrant's, bigots' spell confin'd,
Burst in stupendous grandeur o'er mankind!
O'erwhelming realms on glory's proudest height!
Or wafting devious billows to the blind!
So rolls the tide of mind, while nations fight
To change its channel oft, but still augment its might.

The clouds departed, and a second spring
Of freedom softens genius into bloom;
Again the warbling muses rose to sing,
Like weeping love o'er mouldering beauty's tomb,
Again religion rose upon her plume;
And injur'd science, with resentful sting,
Pierc'd superstition's heart of ice and gloom!
The spell was broken, mind had touch'd the string
That held the torpid world beneath ambition's wing.

Ere this a comet pass'd along the shade
To fire the system with its splendid train,
To pour (though tyrants threaten'd) undismay'd,
The rending flash, where error dar'd remain&mdash;
Immortal Printing!  Here began thy reign!
In nature's darkest realms thy beams have play'd,
And not like twilight lightnings play'd in vain;
And never more shall truth and science fade,
For o'er each clime thy power, triumphant thought shall spread.

Commerce had spread her sail along the deep
Where mountain billows watch'd the cape sublime:
And sensual Asia, in her torpid sleep,
Lull'd by the notes of ignorance and crime,
Rose to communion with her sister clime&mdash;
While injured Africa, still doom'd to creep,
The slighted, passive, trampled child of time;
Hail'd the full sail afar; from many a steep&mdash;
And heard the white man's tale, and listened &mdash; long to weep.

And yet not accident educ'd the art
So fraught with power, so luminous to man&mdash;
Mind had arisen where it must impart&mdash;
So lofty now improvement's current ran,
Its powers in printing or some kindred plan!
And taste, and commerce, though they seem'd to start
As if their tide had recently began,&mdash;
Alike were currents from the human heart
Natural, spontaneous, to an altered mart.

But man, shall Afric mourn!  for ever mourn!
Her dreadful doom, by trade, and pride oppress'd
Shall millions lavish life in chains forlorn
With anger's poison knawing still the breast&mdash;
No distant good the bosom to invest!&mdash;
The night of slavery came to bring the dawn,
Dim, though prophetic of eternal rest!
The missionary's note beneath the thorn,
Now Afric, tells thy sons of life beyond the urn.

Lone, injur'd country!  yet thy dark domain
In coming years like Europe's realms shall blaze&mdash;
What though the light seem dim, and even vain,
Yet such it was in Europe's early days,
Herself like thee enslav'd in error's maze!
Lo!  young Columbia!  once oppress'd by Spain;
Yet now the flag of Freedom o'er her plays,
And bold republics rise along her main,
As Bethlehem's guiding star extends her softening reign.

Afric, weep not!  man's faith may still be bold&mdash;
Man still may trust improvement ne'er can wane,
While memory marks the ages which have roll'd,
Once a wide darkness with her leaden reign,
With here and there a twinkling star serene,
Like morning hesper's beam, unseen and cold,
Kissing the cheerless bosom of the main&mdash;
The horizon now is glimmering dim with gold&mdash;
A few more circling years, thy morning shall unfold!

Roll on reluctant ball, and show mankind,
That faith may rest upon the mighty past!
Have not departed centuries combin'd
Successive lights, in one compression vast,
Of truth and science, still augmenting fast?
Lo!  early time, when man was weak and blind,
His vernal sky with darkness overcast&mdash;
Perhaps a child of chance, for naught design'd&mdash;
Perchance a deathless thing, though rude and unrefin'd.

Tradition's note impaired &mdash; his haggard eye,
Glanc'd dim and cold on nature's rosy breast&mdash;
Nor blossom'd wild, nor star-bespangled sky,
Nor ocean's calm, nor twilight's hour of rest,
Nor glittering hesper riding in the west,&mdash;
Could wake his soul to aught like harmony!
Untutor'd wretch!  unsocial!  uncaressed!
Nor nature's beauty &mdash; song &mdash; sublimity!
Found favour in his sight, nor aught to wake reply.

Along the beach he mark'd the lightning's glare
Dance in fantastic hurry o'er the cloud;
And rose erect, perchance, his bristling hair,
As pip'd the wheeling thunder long and loud&mdash;
Ah little thought he then, though always proud,
That trembling minds like his should ever dare
To chain the fiery wing; or o'er the flood
That roll'd upon his feet in billows drear,
To speed to western worlds their dark and bold career.

Confin'd to craving appetite alone&mdash;
Ah!  little thought he, rustic and uncouth,
And sick and slumbering on the forest stone,
The star-light curtain sparkling o'er his youth,
That med'cines' hands his woes should ever sooth&mdash;
That minds like his should course the glittering zone,
Led up the midnight heav'n on wings of truth&mdash;
And people every star that o'er him shone,
And then descend and weep to think so little known.

Once rude and without language for his thought&mdash;
How had he glanc'd his busy eye around,
To see his fellows into madness wrought,
And led in triumph by the spell of sound?
As oft, immortal Greece!  thy race profound,
When eloquence arose with light'ning fraught,
And on her wing of fire, with thunder frown'd.
Ah!  little thought he, rustic and untaught,
That idle tones like his, to magic could be brought.

But still more dark and drear his moral eye&mdash;
Long did he turn him to his parent sun&mdash;
Long bend to stocks with agonizing cry&mdash;
Long wept and bled upon his altar stone,
With bosoms gor'd, his errors to atone!
But now he turns him to his native sky,
Where dwells his sire, the great and Holy One;
And thought he once of immortality?
More like he only thought to vegetate and die.

O chang'd he is since mercy from above
Has touch'd his heart and taught him how to give
To moral feeling, piety, and love,
And self neglect (though guilt and malice strive
To rend his heart) how tremblingly alive!
The vulture once, but now the trembling dove.
What now life's highest objects?  He must live,
Himself to rule!  The guilty to reprove!
And teach earth's madd'ning tribes in harmony to move.

Strung now to truth and sensibility,
His generous bosom pours her soften'd tone,
And moral feeling finds a kindred key
Where'er religion's light hath dimly shown;&mdash;
And moral taste to Pagan man unknown,
Now gives contagious power to poetry,
Now does she speak with eloquence her own,
And lukewarm bosoms learn at once to sigh,
And yield to human woes the tear of sympathy.

Great Homer sung &mdash; but where the moral tone,
E'en in the boldest thunder of his lyre,
That wakes to feeling hearts that seem of stone,
(As Horeb's rock the prophet could inspire)&mdash;
Great Homer sung &mdash; but not with Campbell's fire!
He strikes a part to Homer scarcely known!
For moral grandeur he awakes desire;
And slumbering hearts with sense and passion down,
Rise up at once in dreams they scarce can call their own!

Bold, generous poet!  Who can read thy lay
Nor feel the fire of kindred feeling start?
Who on thy page mark Russia's proud array
O'er prostrate Prague, nor feel thy lightnings dart
The patriot blaze in volumes on his heart?
Who on thy page beholds the iron sway
Of sordid Europe's over India's mart?&mdash;
But glows, and trembles for his kindred clay,
And calls on India's God to bring the vengeful day.

And when thy notes the skeptic's glories sing,
Eternal nothingness beneath the sod!
Who does not rise with thee on nature's wing,
By angry eloquence and genius aw'd,
Up to his sire, the everlasting God?
Who then would be the wretch, to smile and cling
Without a murmur to the lifeless clod?
Oh!  who would be the miserable thing,
That lays down in the grave, nor hopes a second spring?

And love, domestic bliss, &mdash; when sung by thee,
Seize with a magic hand the captive mind;
And "Man the hermit," lost in extacy,
As opening dreams roll on his vision blind,
Asks for communion moral and refin'd!
O different this from thine antiquity!
When appetite and avarice combin'd
To rob one sex that nature form'd as free,
Of all to hearts endear'd, love, truth, and liberty.

For what was woman in the noon of time?
Alas!  a thing retain'd by sense and pride;
And unregarded, save in beauty's prime&mdash;
But now enlighten'd!  now to God allied!
Now on a wing of thought she dares to ride!
So sensual once &mdash; now moral &mdash; e'en sublime!
She rivals man who once her claims denied;
Heaven's lofty heights she teaches him to climb;
Her softness chills the growth of impudence and crime.

'Tis thus religion's unpresuming ray
Is giving to mankind her holy light;
And public feeling, underneath her sway,
Leads rising genius on a moral flight&mdash;
Taste fashion'd thus &mdash; still offers to his sight,&mdash;
No more by early fable led astray,
New models, such as guide the young aright&mdash;
Taste &mdash; (thus becoming moral day by day,)
Has led him o'er the past, and still points out the way.

How chang'd!  How alter'd!  To himself unknown,
The early tenant of earth's barren clime!
Dim was his eye &mdash; the lustre of it shone,
Coldly and faint, throughout his vernal prime&mdash;
But now expression sparkles there sublime!
Love, feeling, fancy, melt his heart of stone,
On wings of thought his alter'd soul can climb!
This is the blunderer, ignorant, alone!
His hopes all stretching bold to heaven's eternal throne.

And could that early, solitary thing,
Have known himself &mdash; since ripen'd into man!
As well, e'en now, might towering fancy sing
Of human life, when centuries have run,
And left progression, true to nature's plan.
Where is the limit then?  And who shall bring
The mind advancing, where he race began?&mdash;
Truth, Taste, and Eloquence are on the wing,
On earth, the immortal mind, shall know no second spring.&mdash;

For truth and passion &mdash; all that man has taught,
Distill'd from time's accumulated stock&mdash;
Immortal printing!  into language wrought,
May strike whole realms with simultaneous shock&mdash;
May strike &mdash; till errors to their base shall rock,
Till distant climes with kindred errors fraught,
Although they dare the march of man to mock,
Shall by the "splendid conflagration" caught
Expand still more remote, the exploding storm of thought.

Then where shall rest mankind?  what Gothic hand
With mighty science dare again engage?
And where the force, and talent to command,
The genius, thought, and passion of the age,
To turn upon themselves with Vandal rage?
Say where &mdash; if public feeling be the wand
That sways the multitude on life's broad stage;&mdash;
Herself created by a deathless band,
Religion, science, taste, enlight'ning every land.

PART III.
Fair on thy banks, O Paradise!  the rose
Clasp'd the light lily with a sister's love;
I see thy rills the blossom'd banks disclose;
I see thy waves in gold and azure move,
Still throwing back more blue the sky above;
I see thy laughing blossoms wild and loose,
Save when arrested by the sporting dove&mdash;
Oh!  realms of bliss!  That sin should interpose
And close so fair a morn with such a night of woes!

Dear long-lost scenery!  lovelier far than now,
Restor'd by fancy to the eye again,&mdash;
For then thy streams, and all that bloom'd below,
Found such according purity within,&mdash;
The heart commun'd with God in every scene.
Her smiles now came, and now her tears would flow,
Tears drawn by gratitude, and not by sin&mdash;
But vain &mdash; ah vain, were the attempt to show,
What sinless mortal felt &mdash; what sinner cannot know.

Yet now, though fallen, when the twilight beam
Pours her soft lustre on his pensive eye&mdash;
Does not revive some antenatal dream?
Does not the heart awake to harmony?
Does she not glow and soften; melt and sigh,
To wander homeward on the sun's last stream,
That mellows into gold the azure sky:&mdash;
Dear moments!  ah!  mysterious do ye seem,
When opening as it were some long-forgotten dream!

If 'twere not true, why does he muse alone,
To ask communion with the heav'ns and earth?
If 'twere not true, why does his bosom own
Such visions dear &mdash; such consciousness of worth,
Beyond his reach, above his humble birth?
Why, but at twilight, is his heart so prone
To gather something with a silent mirth,
And as he seeks for words, away 'tis flown,
He knows not where, nor how, yet evermore 'tis gone!

Some old connections sure, the twilight ray,
And all the softening lustre of her reign,
Respire inaudible; though what they say
Even to vaguely syllable were vain&mdash;
They seem to speak that other life has been,
That wondering man is loitering far astray,
A curious stranger on his natal scene,
To fears beneath his dignity a prey,
A traveller in a shade with half a glance of day.

Note the strange being!  now his daring mind
Is boldly wandering up the starry sphere!
Where is he now?  Not on the winged wind,
But still as eager on some low career,
Where sense and crazy passion bid him steer!
Still scorning all possess'd &mdash; he wanders blind,
Now smiles upon his cheek, and now a tear;&mdash;
Hemm'd in by self, and error, and mankind,
Alas!  his chase how vain, his long-lost bliss to find!

Mysterious thing!  o'er history's backward stream,
Now rapid flies his soul through seasons pass'd,
And centuries travell'd but a moment seem,
Though mourners every instant stood aghast,
To mark some heart as curious breathe its last.
Mysterious thing!  his flights are not a dream!
He lives in every age by time o'ercast!
Perchance in Eden now, with bliss supreme!
And now midst ruin'd Greece, to mark her setting beam!

Lo, yonder pair!  Behold the speaking eye!
What silent grandeur flashes from his mind!
And 'tis acknowledged with the same reply,
Of high expression, dignified!  refin'd!
Not e'en a word!  yet soul perceives her kind,
E'en by a glance, or smile, or tear, or sigh&mdash;
Or have they met before?  or chance design'd
That each should kindred thought at once descry,
By some strange spell unknown, of silent harmony.

O well 'twas sung, that souls in pairs were made,
And sent together to this dingy spot,
And lost each other as they earthward stray'd&mdash;
For oft they meet, and feel, they know not what,
Of love unearthly!  Love perchance forgot&mdash;
Mysterious and intense &mdash; so long delay'd&mdash;
Ah!  man may pause, and ponder on the thought,
And analyse himself, so strangely sway'd,
By mere expression's fire, o'er beauty's light and shade.

Or let him sleep &mdash; his bold unshackled mind,
In dreams still speaks her powers and aims sublime,
For now on light, and now upon the wind,
She rambles where she will through space and time,
And fashions as she lists her favour'd clime:
And now she wakes; no more with vision blind,
A disembodies thing, as in her prime&mdash;
And life without location, undesign'd&mdash;
A moment's space is hers, as novel as refin'd!

So strange his mind &mdash; so strange his earthly lot!
Sent off to toss on life's precarious flood;
His trembling bosom indistinctly fraught,
Amidst the crowd, or e'en in solitude,
With images of past, and coming good&mdash;
All still in unison with glory brought,
By him who came from heav'n with life endued,
To give e'en certainty to guessing thought,
And teach the unknown God, he long in vain had sought.

And shall not time his long-lost bliss restore,
And give him back his uncorrupted mind?
So tun'd that now &mdash; e'en now his eye will pour,
As wanders round at eve his vision blind,
Mysterious smiles, and trembling tears combin'd?
Oh!  Nature tells his loss!  Faith tells him more;
Tells him his long-lost birthright he shall find,
When launch'd by death from time's mysterious shore,
To that far realm of bliss where dwelt his soul before!

And shall not taste, and eloquence erewhile,
So long indebted to each beauteous scene,
Of hills, and streams, and blossoms that beguile
The wandering soul to truth and hope again&mdash;
Shall they not whisper what the soul hath been,
Shall they not teach her like themselves to smile
On all the landscape; all the sheeted main&mdash;
Shall they not pour some spell to reconcile,
To all the scenes around, full many a heart so vile!

Yes!  Time shall roll a distant period bright,
When feeble language, vigorous, refin'd,
Shall soar perchance to thought's bewildering height,
And pour stupendous light upon the blind&mdash;
Then shall be plain the mysteries of mind&mdash;
Neglected virtue then shall claim her right&mdash;
While to earth's rabble, lingering still behind,
Thought in her robe of fire shall flash her light,
Till nature's bursting scorn shall wither lawless might.

'Tis moral feeling generates lofty thought,
For thought seems feeling only more refin'd,
And deep emotion into language brought,
And pour'd reciprocal upon the mind,
Wakes deeper feeling, new, and more refin'd&mdash;
Which operates again, to language wrought&mdash;
Thus mighty eloquence shall lead mankind,
And still herself by moral feeling taught,
Awaken'd by her spell, bring all but truth to nought.

Yet thus advancing, still the immortal mind,
Retains some vet'ran energy profound,
Which genius, taste, and eloquence combin'd,
Can never marshall on the plain of sound&mdash;
And hence in other worlds may feeling bound,
From soul to soul, no more to sense confin'd,
Inaudible as light her airy round&mdash;
Thus rising heav'nward, and for love design'd,
Is the wild troop on earth, once naked, gross, and blind.

Then who shall limit e'en his human sight?
Who mark the Rubicon of marching thought?
Of daring language, nature's utmost height?
Who tell what all united, will have wrought,
On human hearts with smother'd instincts fraught,
When many an age has added light to light?
Back shrinks the soul!  she feels her power is nought,
If fancy dimly pour upon her sight,
Her forms of life afar, indefinite, though bright!

Grant him progressive, and immortal too!
To what stupendous glory shall he climb,
When time's cold hand shall wave her last adieu,
When springs his spirit from her earthly clime,
To heaven's high realm, on angel wing sublime,
Where souls redeem'd with thought for ever new,
And joy and hope in everlasting prime,
Will lead him onward, kindred truths to view,
And purer love to feel than ever mortal knew.
