The ev'ning bell peals its deep note on the gale,
And the sun has sunk deep in the waves of the main;
The slow-rolling thunder-cloud covers the vale,
And the chill blast of Autumn howls over the plain;
While it sweeps with broad wing o'er the tomb of the slain
Who this morning have bled for their wives, and their sires;
Who have breasted the torrent of England, in vain,
And, now sleeping where Freedom's proud lustre expires,
Have kindled again her bright torch from their pyres.

And then ye in glory, ye sons of the lyre!
For the lustre of valour for ever shall blaze;
Now streaming afar from its glittering fire
O'er the blue vault of heaven, are myriads of rays:
Each minstrel shall waken his harp in your praise,
And the dark tide of vengeance rolls dreadful along:
Soon, soon, England's glory in ruin decays;
Soon, Wallace and Graeme shall enkindle the song;
And bear death and destruction your victors among.

But hark!  thro' the silence that nature pervades,
The warrior's quick footstep now strikes on mine ear;
Around the hill winding, and screen'd by its shades
From their foemen, the legions of Scotland appear:
Her red-lion standard full bravely they rear,
While they rapidly march to the camp of the foe
Who in luxury sunk, think no enemy's near;
While the blasts of the death-angel over them blow,
And the seer has predicted confusion, and woe.

The foe are descried by their torches' bright gloom,
Their watchmen in sleep and in slumber are found;
That sleep is their last, 'tis the sleep of the tomb,
That slumber the slumber of ages profound;
For the Scots, nerv'd by vengeance, are thronging around,
And an army in sleep is expos'd to their eyes;
To warn of their danger no clarions sound,
Nor the trumpet's broad peal bids the sleeper to rise;
But Wallace opposes, and stern are the skies.

How dreafully silent, and darkly serene,
The landscape appears!  Hark!  the stillness has flown;
The battle-cry rings, and each pausing between
Are the cries of the wounded, the dying's last groan;
And the death-shriek is heard, and of anguish the moan;
While the loud shout of Wallace resounds through the air;
His arm, bringing death, soon is fearfully known,
For its progress is mark'd by the yell of despair;
And no plea can save, nor for mercy the prayer.

The battle now rages where Edward appears,
For with Graham he fights, and with war's baleful fires;
As the slogan of "Wallace and Scotland" he hears,
His lion-heart trembles, and Edward retires;
And the chieftain who seeks to defend him, expires;
While a thousand knights hasten their sov'reign to save;
But Scotia's sons think of their wives, and their sires;
And the thought of home makes e'en the coward be brave;
A thousand knights fall, and they sink in the grave.

Ah!  what means that shout that now thunders on high?
And what is that flame which is painting the air?
'Tis the loud shout of Wallace, of Scotland the cry;
The camp is on fire, and the English despair:
And to flee from their foemen they quickly prepare,
But to 'scape from the whirlwind what force will avail?
No arm can protect, and in vain is their pray'r;
While Victory!  Victory!  sounds through the gale;
And England is vanquish'd, and broken her mail.

O'er the field of the battle the rising beam shines,
Where Scotland is victor, and gone are her foes;
From his chariot of morning, there Phoebus declines
Where Edward's proud army forever repose:
And the bright star of Scotia that yesterday rose
Eclips'd in the storm, in serenity beams;
O'er the heav'n's blue vault its full radiance it throws;
No longer of war the stern meteor gleams,
But Peace gently smiles on the hill, and the streams.

But their country's deliv'rers what price shall reward?
The thanks of a people from slavery sav'd.
Shout Scotland!  for Wallace thy foeman has marr'd,
And freedom's broad banner around thee has wav'd;
For thy safety the army of Edward he brav'd,
And anguish'd the spoiler who threaten'd thy land:
On the temple of Glory his name is engrav'd;
For England's proud throne has been shook by his hand,
Where in dust are laid low, of her bravest the band.
