Oh thou!  entrusted with that voice from heaven&mdash;
Music's sweet ministry &mdash; revere its worth!
Thou dost not, canst not, deem such mission given
Simply to yield the idlers of the earth
A transient banquet &mdash; wreathing thee the while
With blooming flatt'ries from fair lips and eyes!&mdash;
A nobler meed invites thy tuneful toil&mdash;
Seraphs are watching thee in yonder skies,
And wooing thee to join their deathless harmonies.

Thou wield'st a mighty pow'r with facile grace,&mdash;
The soul of music issues from thy shell
What passion cannot music raise or quell?
Nerve valour, soften love &mdash; exalt, debase!&mdash;
Like the fam'd poison tree, a breathing death,
If sense alone tune and inhale it &mdash; gales
Of Paradise not more salubrious breath,
Than this sweet aerial mystery exhales,
When mingling with the chords the giver's praise prevails.

What of their blest employ, dwellers above
In sunless light and happiness, know we,
Save that around th' Eternal's throne they move
In circling choirs of grateful minstrelsy?
The favor'd shepherd king in music spoke
His praise and prophecy who came to save&mdash;
'Twas angel music wond'ring Beth'lem woke
With the glad tidings that unbound the grave:&mdash;
High, holy eloquence! &mdash; be vow'd to him who gave!

The Eastern bird that hovers in the air,
And draws his food from flow'rs, will ne'er alight;&mdash;
So tenderly he guards his plumage rare
From earthly stain!  and ye, oh spirits bright!
Oh happy spirits!  who at will can bathe
Yourselves in harmony, and in the flow
Of that pure element delighted lave,
Soar, roar apart, from all things base and low!
No earthly fires should blend with that diviner glow!

Nor deem the monitory verse unkind!
Thy worth, young harmonist!  inspires the lay&mdash;
The finest sense, the genius most refin'd,
See least the perils of life's crowded way:
They are not of the crowd &mdash; they tower above,
And look beyond &mdash; they dread not what they scorn!
But fatal incense they are form'd to love,
Whose perfum'd clouds oft dim th' enthusiast's morn,
And turn to sorrow's show'rs what seem'd all heavenly born!
