When Festin, heavenly swain, was young,
When first attuned his viol rung,
And the soft oboe's melting trill
Confess'd the magick master's skill:
Beneath his opening windows round
The admiring rabble caught the sound,
And oft at early morn, the throng
Besieg'd the house to hear his song.
Till once, 'tis said, when all were fired,
Fill'd with fury, rapt, inspired,
With one consent they brought around
Dire instruments of hellish sound.
And each, for madness rul'd the hour,
Would try  his own sky-rending power.

First in the ranks his skill to try
A stout and sturdy clown was there;
A deaf'ning hautboy, crack'd and dry,
Brayed harsh discordance on the air.
With breath retained, and laboured grin,
Rapt by his own tremendous din,
With blood suspended in his face,
And paws that could not find their place:
The champion played:  while every peal confess'd,
How strong the throes that heaved his massy chest.

Next came a brawny nurse, but six feet high,
With leathern lungs and throat of brass supplied;
Striving with "Chevy Chase," and "Lullaby,"
To drown the screeching infant at her side.
And ever and anon the babe she seized,
And squeezed and sung, and sung and squeezed,
Although sometimes, each dreary pause between,
The strangled infant's piercing shrieks,
And writhing limbs, and black'ning cheeks,
Full well confest the secret pin,
That keenly goaded him within&mdash;
Yet closer squeezed the nurse, and louder was her din.

A wheezing sawyer, standing by,
Industriously was sawing wood;
Though dull his saw, his throat though dry,
Awhile he used them as he could.
At length, grown tired of his toil in vain,
The wretch resolved to change his strain:
With fell intent defying nature's law,
He paused, and held his breath &mdash; to whet his saw.&mdash;
With eyes half closed, and rolled to heaven;
And starting teeth from sockets driven,
And clenching jaws convulsed in ghastly smile,
Across the wiry edge he drew the shrieking file.

A boy came next, loud whooping to the gale,
And on his truant shoulders bore a pole;
Two furious cats, suspended by the tail,
Were swinging cheek by jole.
O, dulcet cats, thus hung at leisure,
What was your delightful measure!
With claws deep buried in each other's face,
With murderous yell of more than earthly sound,
Assist the fight, and pour the strain anew;
Not earth could bear, nor hell itself complain,
Your fiendish catterwaul of rage and pain.

A fish cart next came rattling by;
Its lusty driver perched on high,
Recruited by his recent bowl,
Poured through the deafening horn his greedy soul.
Such notes he blew as erst threw down
Old Jericho's substantial town;
While scarce was heard, so loud he wound his peal,
The mangled cur that yelped beneath his wheel.

Then came a child, eloped from home,
Pleased, in the streets at large to roam;
His cart behind him dragged.  Before
A huge tin coffee-poet he bore
Which ever and anon he beat
With sticks and stones in furious heat.
Nor heeded he that at his heels
The crier rung his frequent peals.
With brazen throat, and hideous yell,
That distanced all the hounds of hell;
In air his stunning bell he tossed,
And swelled and shouted "lost, lost, lost."

Emblem of justice, high above,
A ponderous pair of steelyards hung;
Hooked by the nose his weight to prove,
A living hog beneath was swung.
Dire was the squeal that rent the sky
With sounds too dread for earthly throat,
While not a butcher fingered nigh
To stop the howling monster's note.
Fast to escape the hated strain
With ears comprest, some fled amain,
While others paused, all hopeless of relief,
And curst the stars that had not made them deaf.

Thus long ago,
E'er * * drew his fiddle bow,
While saw-mills yet were mute;
The jarring, howling, deafening choir,
With notes combined in concert dire,
Could shake the sky, the solid earth could move,
While milder thunders burst unheard above.
