Here lie the sons of men! &mdash; The utmost bound
Of human wishes &mdash; fancies &mdash; hopes &mdash; and fears&mdash;
At length find rest beneath a rising mound
Of fragile dust:  o'er which the mourner's tears
Fall like the fresh'ning dew, that disappears
At the first sunbeam.  For Sorrow loves to dwell
In lone retreat, and startles at the sound
Of foot intrusive, and doth love to tell
Her woes, when the dark owlet hoots his dismal knell.

Amid these sepulchres, one lowly tomb,
With brief inscription, told who slept below,
Apart from all the rest; &mdash; the ivy's gloom
From the old ruin had o'erhung it so,
Scarce could I read what friendship's hand would show.
He was a youth of study, and could trace
The page of ancient lore &mdash; and feel the glow
Of the Homeric verse's rapid race,
And Mantua's swain, no less harmonious, but of gentler pace.

And he was cut off in the spring of life,
While Hope looks forth with telescopic eye
To days of joy.  Youth could not gain the strife
'Gainst Death.  And shall fair Science lie
Amid the vulgar? &mdash; past unheeded by
Th' unfeeling peasant, whose rugged breast
Feels no delight to shed the tear, and sigh
O'er stranger's ashes, &mdash; and his bed of rest
The dew-drop, not the tear, has clad with emerald vest.

And still I mus'd upon that mould'ring stone
Beneath whose surface the scholastic head
Was laid; &mdash; the very epitaph with weeds o'ergrown.
Silent recorder! &mdash; (to myself I said,)&mdash;
Soon wilt thou too lie number'd with the dead.
Grey-pinion'd Time, before whose wasting hand
Proud states have sunk, their very spirit fled,
Leaving no vestige, save a barren strand,
Which makes the trav'ller pause, and doubt if e'er there was such land.

Ye sacred ruins, ever-honour'd pile!
That have withstood the whirlwind and the storm
Of ages past, &mdash; beneath whose gloomy aisle
Heap'd generations sleep!  Death's dusty form
Pervades the spot where chanter's did perform
The rites divine, &mdash; and the loud anthem's peal
Vibrating roll'd.  How broken is the charm!
Through thy rent arches now the low winds steal,
No music's sound is heard, no worshippers now kneel.

Such is the fate allotted to mankind,
They have their  hour of splendour &mdash; and then sleep
In dark oblivion, dust to dust consign'd.
Save some, like Newton, for whom nations weep,
Their names surviving in the rapacious sweep
Of desolating Time, &mdash; have left the page
Of deep research, which it can ne'er o'ercreep.
Science triumphant braves life's fitful stage,
Ennobling all her sons through ev'ry future age.

But lo!  the sun glides swiftly to the West,
While I stand musing mid the lifeless clay
That once, like me, beheld fair nature drest
In vivid colours; and yon orb of day
Perform his rounds, then sink in Ocean's bay.
Nature, unalterable, stands the while,
Proud, vaunting man, to her the debt must pay.
A farewell look I cast on yonder pile,
On which the setting sun hath "shed his parting smile."
