So young and so unhappy? &mdash; 'Tis most strange,
Thou child of early sighs, that Misery
Has struck his shaft so deep, that chance nor change
Can ever bring one hope of joy to thee!
So young and so unhappy? &mdash; Cna it be
That eyes so bright must fill with ceaseless tears?
Must that young brow, that once in maiden glee
Bade sweet defiance to advancing years,
Now bend in desolate grief, and fold in wildest fears?

Shall no returning morn with healing breath
Revive upon thy cheek the expiring rose?
Must thou provoke the lingering hand of death,
If still thine eyes must weep, those eyes to close?
Is there no way to win thee to repose&mdash;
To rear the ruins of thy broken heart?
No way the scattered fragments to dispose
Again to life and joy &mdash; as minstrel's art
May to the tuneless lyre again sweet voice impart?

Despair not thus, young mourner &mdash; though so void
Thy heart of hope, that heart is living yet;
The diamond shattered, but not all destroyed,
For skilful hands the broken gem shall set.
Though thou in life's rude sea hast ever met
Its rudest billows, thou may'st stem the wave
In triumph still; for why shouldst thou forget
That there is one above, who loves to save
When heaves dark ocean high, and unchained tempests rave.

Ah!  wonder not that Edwin knows the cares
Thy heart would hide from all the world away!
Nor blame the bard that all untold he dares
Urge on thy lonely grief obtrusive lay.
The minstrel hand the strings of hope must sway
When gentle maids of cureless woes complain:
Forgive him lady, then, if he essay
To soothe with timid song a sufferer's pain,
For Edwin's heart is kind, though rude his untaught strain.

Yes!  Ellen will forgive the fond desire
The secret source of maiden grief to know;
Nor deem her bard too bold, if he aspire
With Music's balmy breath to soothe her wo.
And she shall see him still with joy forgo
The meed of loftier lay or blither string;
Enough that Ellen's tears shall gentlier flow,
That Ellen's sighs, with fainter murmuring,
To distant Edwin's ear, the carrier breeze shall bring.
