Young Michael Hildesheim was the happiest man
In all Bavaria, till his Laura died;
He loved her when his bosom first began
To feel it had a want, which nought beside
Fair woman's smile enchanting gratified,
And fed, till it demanded more; and more
Was given, till there was nothing left to hide
From restless love, which sated must deplore,
Like Philip's conquering son, its toils and labours o'er.

But Michael dwelt contented, with his wife,
Albeit the reason might be, that he could
Enjoy her fortune only for her life,
Which, on her dying without issue, would
Go by devise to others of her blood.
Michael had but one fault, &mdash; but that was great;
He sometimes got in a splenetic mood,
And then one's hairs would bristle on his pate,
To hear him curse and swear at such a dreadful rate.

His wife would often say to him, "my dear,
You shock me sadly, when you thus blaspheme;
Your oaths uncouth it vexes me to hear,
So horrid and unnatural they seem.
I've often stories heard, which true I deem,
Of people stricken dead, for talking so;
Besides, it's vulgar, Michael Hildesheim,
To use such wretched language as you do,
And I'll no more endure it, sir, I would have you know."

The parish priest would oft her words enforce,
Prescribing penance, and pronouncing doom,
When Michael interlarded his discourse,
With flowers of rhetoric of novel bloom.
Here to transplant them all, I have no room;
Suffice to say, then, that in torturing speech
To phrases strange, his time he would consume;
Talking as if the devil had come to preach,
Until the power of words no farther length could reach.

Like Shakespeare in Sam Johnson's prologue, he
Exhausted language, and invented new,
Beyond the compass of orthography,
And making etymology look blue;
While shuddering syntax pale with terror grew,
With chattering teeth and dislocated frame:
And oh!  what then can charming prosody do?
When the nine muses' eighteen feet were lame,
To make them hobble for a wager, would be a grievous shame.

So Michael's oaths imagine if you please:
They have supplied the navy; and you may,
When the loud tempests vex the chafing seas,
Hear volleys of them, answering, every day,
The angry thunder bellowing away.
Some years had past since Michael had been wed,
And offspring yet had none; which, as they say,
His spleen with food for much irreverence fed,
'Till now his wife announced she should be brought to bed.

Right glad was Michael when he heard the same;
Great were the preparations that took place;
What crowds of doctors and old ladies came
To give their sentiments upon the case!&mdash;
The muse may not her solemn verse abase,
Singing of caudle, cradles, caps and nurses;
Alas!  her tears the record would efface!
Mother and child both died!  and stifling curses
The husband to the grave walked after both their hearses!

"Dead!  dead!  my Laura and my baby both!
Gone!  gone!  my money, lands and houses fine!"
Quoth Michael; but he spake without an oath;
For he was sitting in the pale moonshine,
Above the family vault; and tears of brine
Bedewed the sod that wrapt his wife and child:
He thought that terribly had wrath divine
Fallen on him, for his speech prophane and wild,
And that his punishment ought to have been more mild.

"And oh!"  he cried, "if fate would but restore
My first, my beautiful, my only love!
I'll never speak irreverently more,
I vow by all the holy saints above!
Luxuriant fancy shall no longer rove,
In quest of execration, through our lingo;
Though every cause my soul to anger move,
Though I am hot with passion and with stingo,
I'll curse and swear no more, by the eternal Jingo!"

He spake, and looking upwards, saw a sight
Which made him feel particularly queer;
His Laura stood before him all in white,
As she was borne upon her funeral bier.
She stretched her hand to him, and said, "My dear,
The fates restore you to your arms again;
Alive, in flesh and blood, you see me here;
Your prayer is granted, while you shall refrain
From taking sacred names and holy words in vain.

"But mark me, Michael, if you ever make
Use of bad language, I'll be off at once&mdash;"
"Oh!"  cried the husband, "may the devil take
Me hence, if ever I am such a dunce!
I'll quarantine my organs for the nonce,
And every rising naughty word rebuke:
But ah me!  by Diana's silver sconce,
I fear me, on a phantom vague I look,
And that I but behold a spectre and a spook."

He took the lily hand she proffered him,
And it was warm and soft; and from her eye
Shone forth its mildly pensive, natural beam:
Her lips were pouting with their coral dye,
And Michael touched their vermeil rim to try
If they were good to kiss, and found they were;
He pressed her to his bosom, with a cry
Of transport, and exclaimed, "thou art my fair
Lost wife; thou art no matter of moonshine or of air."

She took his arm, and they walked home together,
Well pleased that thus the business had turned out;
A year passed on.  I cannot answer whether
Michael could well have kept his word, without
His fancy had devised a round about
Mode of anathema, which he, at first,
A little inconvenient found, no doubt,
By figure and analogy he curst,
But never swore outright, tho' he was like to burst.

He swore by George, by Jingo, and by Gemini,
By Goles, by Goom, and great Jehosophat;
By Christopher Columbus and by Crimini;
By Gog and Magog, and the like of that;
Also the Holy Poker came quite pat,
Odsbobs, odzooks, odsniggers and morbleu;
With each strange phrase invention could create,
Such as these &mdash; rot my picture, darn my shoe,
Dash my wig, dang my buttons, and others not a few.

'Twas during this probation he invented
All the droll slang that's been in usage since;
By people who with it must be contented,
And at a great round oath will frown and wince.
Thus pretty ladies words prophane will mince;
'Tis thus that quaker captains scold their crew;
Within these bounds his tongue a parson stints;
The Yankees patronize this dialect too,
A perfect connoisseur in which soon Michael grew.

At length his wife again became enceinte,
Whereat his joy was boundless; but what pen
The unfortunate lover's agony can paint,
When a sad accident occurred again.
They brought him word the babe was dead &mdash; and then,
Forgetful of his promise, he let fly
A cataract of oaths and words unclean,
Which made the nurse soon quit his company,
And to her lady's room in shuddering terror hie.

But pale and speechless, she came staggering back;
For Laura and the baby both had fled,
Having vanished thence, with a tremendous crack,
That shook the house, as the attendants said,
Who on the floor lay moveless and half dead.
Ere Michael heard the tale, his conscience gave
Of what had come to pass forebodings dread,
And when the news was brought, he did not rave,
But silently recalled his promise at the grave.

For good and all, his wife this time had flown,
And never more her vision crost his sight;
Her heirs came soon, demanding as their own,
Her halls and manors, as their legal right;
And sent her spouse, blaspheming on his flight,
From out the land; for now the voice of fame
Denounced him as a sorcerer of great might;
The people shrank from him, where'er he came,
And frightened naughty boys, all over, with his name.

At length the Pope, of Michael's talent rare
For malediction, heard; and wanting much
To compose a Bull, that should his subjects scare,
Sent for the Wanderer, to invent him such,
Consigning sinners into Satan's clutch.
He found him at the business very handy,
And into Latin having put his Dutch,
Declared the thing to be the very dandy;
'Tis the same Bull which you may read in Tristram Shandy.

But curses, with the sage, are like young fowls,
That homeward come to roost.  So Michael found;
The curses he devised for other souls,
Fell on his own with terrible rebound.
For the Pope swore, that on no Christian ground
So blasphemous a wretch was fit to dwell;
Over his head made his own thunder sound,
Consigning him with his own Bull to hell,
And banishing him forever, with candle book and bell.

So like the Bull Pilyllus built of yore,
Wherein king Phalaris the workmen placed,
That he might be the first to make it roar,
Was Michael by his own invention chased.
His wanderings, thereafter, are not traced,
But it is certain, a dog's life he led;
Proscribed and miserable and disgraced,
In all strange holes he begged his daily bread,
'Till on a dunghill stretched, one day they found him dead.
