As o'er the waves the Trojan galleys sped,
Whenas his prize the faithless shepherd bore,
A death-like calm o'er all the waters spread,
And the lulled winds lay cradled on the shore;
Rebuked by father Nereus, hoary seer,
Who thus prophetic breathed his chant of wo and fear.

"Sad omens meet thee, and thy leman vile,
Whose rape embattled Hellas shall atone;
Sworn to destroy thy ties, reclaim thy spoil,
And overthrow king Priam's ancient throne.

"Ah me!  from heroes' limbs, from coursers' sides,
The heavy sweat-drops hot and fast run down!
What funeral pyres thy lust insane provides,
For all the Dardan line of long renown!
Pallas assumes her helm, her aegis shakes,
Fierce yokes her thundering car, and all her fury wakes.

"In vain, fond boy, in Cypria's care confiding,
May'st thou thy graceful, yellow locks dispart;
And on the effeminate lyre the notes dividing,
Soothe, with lascivious lays, thy lady's heart:

"In vain!  thy dalliance soft the cumbrous spear,
The keen barbed Cretan arrow shall awake,
The roar of war shall thunder in thine ear,
Thy slumbers swift pursuing Ajax break:
Alas!  for deadlier battles then prepare,
And with black dust stain thine adulterous hair!

"Scourge of thy race, Laertes' awful son,
And he of Pylos, venerable sage,
Behold!  with these, undaunted, hurrying on,
Tecuer and Sthenelus, or skilled to wage
On foot, the strife of close contested war,
Or o'er the encumbered plain swift urge the echoing car.

"And lo!  Merion, and the hero sprung
From Tydeus &mdash; he yet greater than his sire,
Furious shall track thy steps the hosts among,
Raging with gory steel, and eyes of fire:

"Whom thou, as trembling hart that in the vale
Sees the gaunt wolf with fangs all armed for death,
Shalt fly &mdash; until thy coward limbs shall fail,
And heavily be drawn by the panting breath.
Not such the sport thy wanton hope described,
When, from Mycenae's domes, thou borest the treacherous bride!

"The day of wrath o'er Ilium at last;
The day of wail shall Phrygia's matrons know;
Achilles rouses; and, long winters past,
The appointed hour must come of bale and wo;
The Grecian flame shall wrap the Trojan walls,
And desolation sit on Priam's prostrate halls!"
