When PEGGY, little slut, was young,
When, in her father's hut she sung,
The beaus delighted with the sound,
Every evening gathered round,
Romping, cuffing, hauling, mauling;
'Till once, 'tis said, when all was tir'd,
With brandy, gin-twist, sling, inspir'd,
They snatch'd, from all the neighb'ring hovels,
Fiddles, warming pans and shovels,
And as they oft had heard apart
Sweet lessons of their forceful art,
Each, for madness rul'd the hour,
Would prove his own inventive power.

First JONATHAN, among the best,
His hand upon the fiddle laid:
But back recoil'd with all the rest,
To hear the discord he had made.
Next TOBY rush'd, a high strung blade,
But fill'd with Envy's secret stings:
'Twas thought so very hard he play'd,
He'd wear out fiddle-bow and strings.
With woeful phiz sat PELATIAH,
To him no leasing sound belongs,
He drew his chair towards the fire,
And now the shovel struck, and now the tongs.
But thou, O JOT!  with rudy nose,
What was thy delighted measure!
Still it whisper'd promis'd pleasure,
And bade the blooming girls the dance begin;
And when a fav'rite reel he choose,
A cry of "keep it up!" was heard at ev'ry close,
And JOT inclin'd his head, and gave a ghastly grin.
And longer had he play'd, but with a frown,
NATHAN impatient rose&mdash;
He threw his mighty fist in thunder down,
And, with a withering look,
A rusty fish-horn down he took,
And blew a blast, so loud and clear,
A second had prov'd fatal to the ear:&mdash;
And ever and anon he beat
An iron pot with furious heat;
And tho' sometimes each dreary pause between,
The little fifer at his knee,
Play'd "dear, what can the matter be?"
Yet still he drumm'd as tho' he meant
To rouze at least a regiment;
So great, so mighty an alarum
That had an army come 'twould scare'm.
The mind of ICABOD to nought was fix'd,
Alas!  how worried he must feel:
Of different times the veering tune was mix'd,
He now a hornpipe lov'd, now raving cri'd "a reel!"
Lo snugly in remotest corner,
With eyes uprais'd sat JEMMY HORNER,
Whose frequent jingling of a bell,
Tho' distant, yet was horrible,
Milk-pans, stew-pans, sauce-pans round,
Tin pots, tunnels join'd the sound:
Through porch and entry found its way,
And then in hollow murmurs died away,
&mdash;Then came JOB'S extatic trial,
But soon he shun'd the offer'd viol,
Tho' on the whole, he did'nt know,
But he could sing a psalm or so.
&mdash;Last of all see TOM advancing,
Now's the proper time for dancing.
The moment he began the tune
All was shuffle, rigadoon,
Fluttering back step, in the middle,
Turn your partner, mind the fiddle:&mdash;
"KEEP IT UP!"  was heard around,
"KEEP IT UP!"  the walls resound.
