Oh, think not it was indolence that bade
My humble lyre to lie untouched, unstrung,
Reckless of that request so often made,
To hear the tones of friendship o'er it flung:
They had not been so long unsaid, unsung,
But for their depth, which sound could never reach,
'Twas not affection's lack that barred my tongue,
It was a want of what words could not teach,
A want of some unknown, expressive sort of speech.

Oft have I thought, in wonder lost the while,
On all the way in which your feet have trod;
The time when first you knew Religion's smile,
Chose hers to be your path, and hers your God,
To spread her triumphs, left your youth's abode,
Forsook the land of your nativity,
Resolv'd to dwell upon the burning sod
Of Burmah's land, and there to live or die,
If but you might advance the Saviour's cause thereby.

My thoughts delight to pass with eager haste,
Long though they were the years of patient toil,
Till first your pious care began to taste
The fruit of that too long ungrateful soil;
Then linger with enjoyment for awhile,
O'er each new trophy of redeeming grace:
Oh!  who can paint the deeply glowing smile,
That beam'd upon the Missionary's face
When first he heard his Saviour own'd in that benighted place?

Beyond the towns remotest confine, hid
By thick embowering trees, from distant ken;
Where wild beasts in the evening prowl amid
The Jungle's limits, &mdash; and yet wilder men
Nightly maraud around &mdash; Yes, there is seen
The Mission house: &mdash; table, chair, and mat:
All rudely formed its furniture, I ween;
And what, without the simple bound is that
Reflecting back the sunbeam?  'tis the white Zayat.

Within these humble walls Hilarion made
His study, and his preaching place, and there
Alone, in private, had he mourn'd and pray'd,
Till, condescending to accept his prayer
His Heavenly Father taught him to declare
The word with efficacious energy,
Bringing the proudest heart the yoke to bear
Of Him, who in this vale of misery,
Was meek in heart, and filled with mild humility.

Did fancy paint the interesting spot
In its true colours? &mdash; listen still to me.
Ere long shall you one other space allot
(If spar'd again your Burman home to see)
Amid the wildest Indian scenery,
And near the white Zayat, and where around,
Pagodas, emblems of idolatry,
Are now most numerous, most splendid found,
The Burman school shall occupy that space of ground.

Go then:  may grace and peace attend your way,
And health await you on Columbia's shore;
With each domestic blessing be your stay
Entwined: &mdash; till in vigour strong once more,
For Burmah's sake you traverse ocean o'er,
Beneath you may its waters gently swell;
And if a cause should act, like that before
Which brought you hither, words can feebly tell
Our greeting's joyfulness &mdash; till then Farewell.
