Anselmus to the forest bent his way,
Hunting the fallow deer and woodland boar;
Now on the yellow verge of sinking day,
His eyes the sunset's lingering light explore;
When sudden from the glen a sullen roar
Startles his ear; he cheeks his courser's rein,
And grasps his lance, and hollows to his train.

Forth from the tangled brake a lion came,
But limping slow as maim'd by painful wound;
His eyes emitted a dull, deadish flame,
He trail'd his mane dishevell'd on the ground,
And mutter'd low a smother'd, moaning sound;
He crouch'd before the knight, who fearless gaz'd,
And mark'd the beast's torn foot with effort rais'd.

Touch'd with mild pity sprang to earth the knight,
And dauntless grasp'd the beast's extended paw;
By the last gleam of eve's departing light
A fest'ring thorn implanted deep he saw;
That thorn his hands with skilful pressure draw,
And staunch the blood that trickles from the wound
With healing herbs which in that glade he found.

Now moons have wax'd and wan'd; but ne'er again
The knight for pastime sought the forest shade;
For he consorted with a robber train,
And on the flock and herd and trav'ller prey'd,
If so his ruin'd fortunes he might aid;
Thus outlaw'd he became; till compass'd round
With ambush'd archers, he was seiz'd and bound.

Glad was Eraclian in his wrathful mood,
And from th' imperial throne the judgment gave;
That to the wildest monster of the wood
The outlaw should be thrown; nor might he crave
Of mercy aught, for deeds of honour brave
In time long past:  with calmly daring eye
Anselmus listen'd, and prepar'd to die.

Rome's ample circus was with thousands throng'd;
Stood naked in the midst the unarm'd knight;
A deaf and distant roar the dread prolong'd
Of that suspense; and each with straining sight
Look'd towards the den; the death-doom'd man his might
Rouz'd to th' encounter; quell'd each weak alarm,
Pois'd his clench'd hand, and rais'd his sinewy arm.

Wide burst the sounding den; the lion came
Fierce with a bound, and roaring like the sea;
Bristling his mane, his hungry eyes all flame;
The knight firm propp'd upon his bended knee
Awaited him; and all believ'd that he
His nervous arm within that throat of death
Would desperate thrust; all gaz'd with stifled breath.

Oh what a shout was there! &mdash; the lion stopp'd,
As paralysed by some enchanting spell;
At once the terrors of his mane he dropp'd,
And at his victim's feet meek-fawning fell:
It was the lion in the forest dell
Whom he had serv'd, that now before him lay,
And murm'ring lick'd his feet in sportive play.

Amaz'd Eraclian beckon'd from his throne,
And with the knight the lion follow'd tame;
The emperor, when that wond'rous tale was known,
Felt at his heart the glow of gen'rous shame;
Applauding shouts the pardon giv'n proclaim;
"The beasts shall teach me mercy; live, and be
What once thou wert; so thank my clemency."
