Jasper a Swayne upon the Cotswold hill,
And Jeffrey, Shepheard on the banks of Thame,
Together met (as sometimes Shepheards will),
Jasper, who of a tale had heard the fame
That Jefferye told, desires to heare the same,
Which gentle Jefferye, easily entreated,
(At the desire of Jasper) thus repeated.

CANTO I.
Who has not heard, How many ages since
The famous Nigel slew the savage Boare
That did the Countrey spoyle, and by his Prince
Full worthily rewarded was therfore
With lands, and woods, and forrest-walkes good store,
Wherein he built upon the Monsters stall
A Mansion fayre, which by that name we call.

Of all the trees that yeilded foode or fruite
The horrid hog did kill, supplant, or gnaw
One only Wall-nut, then a tender Shute,
The fortune had to scape his cruell jaw
Which when the good and valorous Champion saw
Within his Castle wall, in carefull sort,
He fenc'd it round in midst of all his Court.

A Raven much about that age (as me
My Muse informes) who oft had broke his fast
In the greene lofts of this improved Tree,
Coming of late in hope of like repast,
Findeing his host had now expir'd his last,
From his deepe throate he fetch'd a sigh so loud
As wak'd an Eccho in th' ore-whelming Cloud.

Towards the neighbouring woods in hast he flyes,
Where findeing first the Frith (or such a name)
He to the Trees reports with weeping eyes
Of their old freinds decease the dolefull fame,
And that no course was taken (was a shame)
To doe him his last rites, who was a Tree
Of so great fruits and such antiquitie.

They flourishing in greene and youthfull pride
Relish no newes that fate or death might send,
And doubting (as may seeme) he poorely dyed,
Who in his life so liberally did spend
His state, that little left was for his end,
Excus'd themselves, as being a generation
That to his bloud, or stock, had no relation.

But yet advis'd the Raven to repaire
To all the Nut-trees, which (they thought) he knew,
Who being of his kindred, would take care
For his last rites, to his deserved due.
Which Councell he doth instantly pursue,
And in those Woods, he first and quickly findes
The Hazle, whom he of this bus'ines mindes.

This was an honest Tree, but weake and poore
With charge of children great, that by him stooke,
Yet one that had in lib'rall deeds done more
Then some of them that bore a higher looke;
Yet at few wordes he gently undertooke
In this so freindly office to be one,
So more would joyne; he was too meane alone.

I have not (sayes the Raven) eaten all
My meate, or mast, in this my native land
But where I saw the Jordan Almonds fall
As thick upon their famous Rivers sand
As yours doe here to Autumnes shakeing hand,
And where the odorous Nutmegs cheaper may
Be bought by th' peck, then by the pound we pay.

But being now three hundred yeares of age
(A time enough, if ever, to be wise)
I dare not my decaying wings engage
So farre abroade to seeke out your allyes;
To those that this fayre Island doth comprise
Herein to joyne with you, I shall not fayle
My best perswasion, if that may prevayle.

This sayd, The sable herauld tooke his leave,
And pond'ring well th' affayre he went about
In his old brayne, he sagely did conceive
He must not only finde the Nut-trees out
But at such houses where he made no doubt
The Lords and Ladyes were great freinds unto
The Ladye at whose house the Wall-nut grew.

And thus conceited The first flight he flew
Was to the great and auncient house of Thame,
Where stood another Wall-nut tree he knew
Of a fayre growth, and of a fruitfull fame,
To whom, full sadly, he reports the same
That to the Hazle he had done before,
And doth his help and presence both implore.

Whereat the gentle tree let fall a dew
Of yellow teares from his indulgent eyes,
But up his stayres the messenger did shew
Where he should finde a welcome to suffice
His appetite:  The while he would advise
Some course to take, or to excuse this taske,
Which did no small consideration aske.

And when he had in his sound head revolv'd
The nature of the cause (and th' other fed)
He told him thus:  My freind, I am resolv'd,
Although from hence I have not travelled
These fifty yeares, yet for his sake that's dead
And more his Ladyes, when you next shall call
To wait uppon my Cousin's funerall.

From hence to Ditton was his second flight
Where he remembred, he did oft behold
A grove of Filberd trees (a plesant sight)
To whom his messuage solemnly he told,
And they, as curteous, grant him what he would,
And did the ablest of them all elect
Ready to goe, when he should so direct.

On his sad wings, with sweet encouragement
Thus strongly ymp'd, The mourning Post now bound
Is for the wildes of Sussex or of Kent,
(I know not which), and there upon the ground
Of noble Delawar, or Wooton, found
A Chestnut tree, to whom (as to the rest)
He telles the newes and makes the same request.

The kinde Castanean thus did answer make;
I much condole (good freind) the newes I heare,
And for mine old deceased kindreds sake,
And more his Ladyes, I would fayne be there;
But being now above fourescore, I feare
My corps two fadoms round, and lazie roote,
Will never hold to walke so far afoote.

(For horse) a Camell will not carry me,
Or had I one that could, I could not ride:
And in a waggon, if your high wayes be
Like those of ours, I never shall abide.
Sir (sayes the Raven) take the Gravesend tide
Where you shall finde a Barge to bring up you
To London first, and thence to Windsor too.

For I at Ditton (which to that is neere)
The Filberd tree already have bespake,
And he (more young) shall wait upon you there
(His love assures me so to undertake),
And thence to Thame the next dayes journey make,
To call the Wallnut, whom you shall arrive
At fifteene miles, and then to Borestall five.

But (sayes the Chestnut) when must be the day
Wheron we should this last good office doe,
That (sayes the Raven) you must name, say they,
Out of their fayre and kinde respects to you
That have the longest journey therunto,
They far more neare, their tyme on yours attends,
Trust me (sayd he) 'tis sayd like noble freinds.

This day (sayd he) is Tuesday, Mars his day,
By whose great helpe, or greater power, I shall
On Monday next, at Windsor (as you say)
The Filberd meete, that he and I may call
The Wallnut tree at Thame, and thence be all
At Borestall upon Wednesday by night,
On Thursday to attend the funerall right.

This sayd, to bid the messenger farewell,
With rare respect he shooke him by the hand
With such a force, as from his sholders fell
A bayte of Nuts that cover'd all the land
That did within his large circumference stand:
And some the Raven tooke, and might as many
As laden would his horse, had he had any.

And so the black industrious Post retourning
First to the Filberd, in his place, declares
The Chestnuts resolution for this mourning,
And for the promis'd meeting him prepares:
Then to the Wallnut seconds these affayres,
And lastly to the Hazle makes relation
Of all, to keepe awake his expectation.

Thus feare I (Jasper) I have been too long,
Yet hitherto my service but prepar'd:

JASPER.
That is (indeede) thy comon fault of song,
But yet goe on (good Jefferye):  better heard
Were story none at all, then halfe declar'd;
And of the two, it is the lesse offence
To weary, then deceive, the hearing sence.

CANTO II.
JEFFEREY.
Amuse (like this) of great and good desires
Though litle power (and pittie 'twas no more),
To whom Calliope had lent some wires,
Wherof her owne Son's wond'rous harpe had store,
Whose bow'er was to the Wallnut tree next dore,
Which gave to her occasion every day
By him to passe, and him now thus to say.

As long (rare Nymph) as you and I have dwelt
So neere this auncient noble house of Thame,
My old unhappy eare hath never felt
Your wondrous notes, but only in their fame:
Whereat the gentle Pegasean dame
Her Harpe into her softe embraces tooke,
And clangour sweete on silver sinewes strooke.

And now, As when a lowe'ring Candlemas
Bodes future smileing winter for that yeare,
Th' unmanag'd horse curvet's on his owne grasse,
Th' amazed oxen, the quick-senced deare,
And stareing weathers friscall here and there,
And Shepheards (but for joy) might stand amaz'd
To see their cattle dancing where they graz'd:

The Wallnut tree so ravish'd with the charmes
Proceeding from these mystique ayres of hers
That dive his darke foundation, spreads his armes,
His curled corpes and crisped shoulders stirs,
And teares his russet bootes and crooked spurres
Out of the dungeon of their earthly layre,
Into the lightsome freedome of the ayre.

Which done, He stood and told his neighbour all
The story of the buis'nes now in hand:
His Cousins death, his wanted funerall,
The Raven's newes, and travells o're the land
To Ditton-parke, and Sussex farre beyond,
The day appointed:  and desir'd therein
That further helpe, which she did thus begin.

The Lady, that as promptly understood
As he could tell, the course of all these things,
(Being apt for vertuous ends and actions good)
To her white shoulders fix'd her azure wings
And tooke her flight, and with her powerfull strings
That this had done, with those did so prevayle
The meeting did not the day pointed fayle.

Th' expected freinds arriv'd:  No westerne winde
Did ever bow the courteous Wallnut tree
So lowe, as with his owne embraces kinde
He now salutes his Nephewes to the knee:
And on his bed, and entertaynment free
Of his provision, well refresh'd this night
Their wearied limbes and sharpen'd appetite.

Then through the Towne that stands on flowing Thame,
And o're his bridge, they did next morning goe,
The Wallnut leading way (who knew the same)
So early, that but few could see or know,
More then the Muse who would not leave them so
But with them went, out of the Fryth to call
The Hazle last; and then to Borestall all.

The Camell once from Ethiopia brought,
And Dromedaryes of th' Arabian sands,
The sight wherof we have for money bought,
Were not so strange as these that our owne lands
Affoarded have thus (gratis) to our hands,
Wherof some few behelders scarsly well
Whether their eyes did dreame, or wake, could tell.

But now it did a second sorrow ad
In cause so great, to finde themselves so few.
The more Companions in a fortune sad,
The easelier beare the burthen of the woe.
They of the Raven then desir'd to know
If he (in all his travells) knew no more
Nut-trees throughout this Iland, but them foure.

Whereto he made this answer:  I know none
More then your selves, unles I should have spoke
Unto the Beech, in Chilterne, to be one
Or to this meeting mov'd the stately Oake;
And how much cloth makes each of them a cloke
Judge you (if you in mourning meane to be)
I cannot tell:  My blacks were given me.

Hereat amongst them first grew some dispute
Whether the Beech with Nut-trees might be plac'd,
And though some sayd he bore a Nut-like fruite,
Most voyces held 'twas but a kinde of Mast,
So he was none, they all conclude at last.
But then there did a second question growe
Whether the Oake a Nut-tree were or no.

The Raven with the Oake-tree far in love
For old acquaintance and much kindnesse sake
The Oake a Nut-tree undertakes to prove
Else, false (sayd he) they did the Riddle make.
They ask'd him, what was that?  which thus he spake:
What tree is that that in the forrest growes
And is house, land, meate, medcine, drinke, and clothes?

'Twas answer'd Tis the Oake:  and that begot
These questions more, if that were true or not.

How is he house?  Because the Raven's dwelling,
And for all buildings tymber most excelling.

How is he Land?  Because his shade preserves
From scorching heate the soyle that, naked, sterves.

How is he Meate?  Because for want of bread,
In dolefull dearth, some on his fruites have fed.

How is he Drinke?  Because the freindly winde
Shakes his sweete dewes downe to the thirsty Hinde.

How is he Medcine?  'Cause the sickly body
His dyet-drinke makes with his Polipody.

How is he Clothes?  'Cause best of them for weather
With Oaken barke are made; and that's the Leather.

The gentle Trees approving these good parts,
Confess'd they all the Oake a Nut-tree thought,
And told the Raven, They with all their hearts
Desir'd his presence If he might be brought:
He answer'd, That might possibly be wrought
With Muses helpe; whereto shee soone consents,
All motions good are Muses elements.

Soe leaveing them one night, more to renew
Their spirits spent in travell, and in woe,
The Muse and Raven both together flew
Abroade, to seeke the fayrest Oake they know,
And findeing him that doth at Ricot grow
They made a stand, while thus the Raven spoke:
To you are we addres'd (Renowned Oake):

The Wallnut-tree of Borestall dead of late,
His freinds are all assembled there but you,
His latest rites, in some fayre forme of state
According to his fayre deserts to doe;
And sent us to invite you thereunto,
If your great age may joyne in such remove
With your well knowne respect, and Noble love.

Sad as thy habit, Raven (sayes the Tree)
Is thy report, yet sweete is thy request,
Though somthing strange and difficult to me,
That for so noble freinds would doe my best,
And for thee too, who art the ancient Crest
To th' Ensignes of this noble House, wherby
Thou summon'st me with double herauldry.

But by what magique I, that here have stood
Foure hundred yeares (thou know'st how truly spoke)
Can nowe remove, think'st thou?  or, if I cou'd,
Where canst thou ease'ly finde so many yoke
Of Oxen, as from hence can draw an Oake
Whose spreading talons comprehend this hill,
And body would sixe gyants girdles fill?

Wherfore (my old contemporist and freind)
First climbe my storyes to thy wonted feast,
And then upon those noble freinds attend
Full laden with my service, in thy best
And sagest language, there to be expres'd
In his behalfe whose heart here shares the woe,
And twice a mourner, that he cannot goe.

Of his brave compasse, and his like desires,
The Muse advantage takes, and downe she sits,
Her yellow Harpe, set with Orphean wires,
With ribbands to her ivory bosome knits,
And from her Thespian fingers ends some fits
Of such enchanting melody she strooke
As from his locks a hayle of Acornes shooke.

And now, Like as, when Aeolus unlocks
The Thracian Caves and into every place
Let[s] loose his roreing sonnes, the Cedar rocks
And loftie Pines the lowly Shrubs embrace;
So now he rouzes (but in differing case)
His curled trunke, brode armes, and spacious feete,
Not mov'd with windes, but Musiques power more sweete.

Which, joyn'd with his affection, did so please
His sollid heart and vegetative bloud,
He ravish'd was that on such suddaine ease
He on the brest of his foundation stood:
Fayre meanes best move a disposition good;
And Musique joyn'd with love performes a deede
That seem'd a hundred pioners to neede.

By his Inviters conduct and their ayd
He lifts his resty heeles, and forward set
Tow'rds the brode mouth of roreing Thame, affrayd
When as the trembling bridge of Ickford swet
Under his pond'rous steps, and all that met
Or saw this huge and wond'rous pilgrim walke,
Through the vast country caus'd as vast a talke.

The youth of these our tymes, that did behold
This motion strange of this unweildy plant,
Now boldly brag with us, that are more old,
That of our age they no advantage want,
Though in our youths we saw the Elephant,
And hee's no novice that did never see
The Lyons, if he saw this walking tree.

Bright Phoebus by his sister seconded
(Two gracious freinds to every fayre intent)
By both their lights him thus to Borestall led,
Where meeting all those freinds, This night was spent
(You may be sure) in courteous compliment,
And sage discourse upon the next dayes cause,
Which now (till then) gives me like breath to pawse.

CANTO III.
The Mornings Queene, to every studious minde
A gentle freind, sollicits now the Trees
To put on mourning robes:  but where to finde
(Upon this suddaine), suiting their degrees,
Habits enough for such solemnities,
Was now a second care; wherein t' attend
Uppon the hearse of their deceased freind.

The Muse, no lesse to dolours then delights
(So true be both) a freind and servant true,
Informes the Trees that of all funerall rites
The Cypresse was the queene; and that she knew
Where one hard by her Laurell mansion grew,
Where (if they pleas'd) she did not doubt to borrow
For every one a garland for this sorrow.

The Muses motion they all much commend,
But answer made, They all were first agreed
To have the body opened; To which end
They sent the freindly Raven with all speed
To finde two rare Chirurgeons for this deed:
But he that word mistakeing (as is thought)
In stead of Surgeons two, two Sawyers brought.

But they (now come) upon their scaffold layd
The naked cors, and thereunto applyed
Th' indented razour, and by mutuall ayd
Of eithers hands th' anatomy divide;
Wherein the mourning standers-by descryed
No blemishes of age, nor surfeit found,
But heart and all intestines fayre and sound.

And then, To see the ample forrest downe
That flourish'd had so many hundred yeare,
The Castle batter'd, and the neighbour-towne
And all that stood about him ruin'd were,
They all conclude, That either greife or feare
Were of the Wallnut's death th' occasion cheife.
And what more fatall is then feare or greife?

But oh, what things't thou, Jasper?  If a Tree
For want of neighbours, mates or freinds can dye,
Of what more wooden stupid molde are wee
That into teares dissolve not, thou and I,
To see the Church, the Sanctuary, lye
As flat as when our ancestors devoute
Measur'd her ancient scituation out!

To see (nay, not to see) the Monuments
Of noble Nigell now depriv'd our sight,
The famous Ensignes of the long discents
Of Reade's and Dynham's once in windowes bright,
Almost all dash'd into Oblivions night,
But that when glasse and marble both expire
Fame's endles life is subject to no fire.

JASPER.
Sad story (Jeff:)  but comfort take, Though downe
The Chappell be, it may be built againe
And (as thou say'st) To infinite renowne
All finite earthly gloryes are but vayne:
So dost thou cure the sore thou dost complayne:
All lives, to life eternall, moments be.
And what becomes then of the Wallnut-tree?

JEFFERYE.
The freinds gave order to the men that wrought,
His body sound in Wainscot to dissect,
And then the Lady of the place besought
Therewith to trim some gallery select,
And cause his limbes with pictures to be dect
Of the Nut-trees, the Raven, and the Muse,
Who did their parts herein so freindly use.

Which graunted was:  And with no wonder more
But Muses still continued love and power,
The Trees were plac'd againe as heretofore:
For though we may be jealous every houre
Of things that chance, or time, or theft, devoure,
To marke, or minde, or misse, we never use
The things we thinke unpossible to loose.

JASPER.
Jeffe'ry, you have a precious story sayd;
As strange as when the Rocks and Cedars tall
Did dance when Orpheus and Amphion playd:
But sure those fictions had true meanings all,
And therefore to accompt I must you call
To yeild some Morall meaning of your story;
Your story else will yeild you litle glory.

JEFFERY.
Though (fellow Jasper) those that wiser be
Then thou and I, well satisfyed remaine,
And though my tale has wearyed them and me
(As well it may), I'le take a litle payne
(At thy request) my story to explaine.
He either wrongs or merits not his Muse
Who, with her words, her meaneing fayles to use.

In this so old and fruitfull Wallnut-tree
That flourish'd many ages and good dayes
In fruite so plesant, Moralliz'd is he
Who spends in fruitfull, free, and noble wayes
His precious tyme.  And he that tells the prayse
And wayles the death of one that was so good,
Is in the gratefull Raven understood.

The gallants of the groves, Th' Elme long and lazie,
The wavering Aspe, the Popler as unstable,
The hungry Maple, brittle Ash and crazie,
The gosling Sallow, and the Boxe unable,
Vayne Willow, and the like inumerable,
A sort that yeild no fruite but proud neglect:
Who would no kindnesse shew, can none expect.

The Nut-trees are the true and noble freinds,
Which are in all (thou mayst observe) but five,
To shew how many live to their owne ends,
And to doe others good how few that strive:
The Muse's charmes, Sweate motions that enlive
All good affectons, teaching payne to please,
Make wonder feizible, and labour, ease.

Brave Hercules (they say) made cleane a Stable
Wherein three thousand sordid beasts had layne;
And proud Egeus (though a prince well able)
Basely denyed the wages for his payne.
If this be fable, yet the meanings playne:
Though trifles did a mind ignoble sway,
No rubbs could stand in an heroicall way.

I have once heard (and thinke it not untrue)
That since our dayes a great man of this land
Remov'd a grove of ancient trees (that grew
Obscurely) in a plesant place to stand.
Great force has wisedome joyn'd with willing hand:
And what seemes hard to sloth and comon sence,
Oft yeilds to strong desire and diligence.

But that thou mayst no further question aske,
When proud and lazie negligence, inclin'd
To no good act, will undergoe no taske
Of worthy consequence; A noble minde
(Though it a world of difficulty finde)
To doe a vertuous deede through all will run:
Best honors are with hardest labours won.

All breifly thus (my Jasper) I conclude;
Morall'd is Bounty in the Wallnut-tree,
In the industrious Raven, Gratitude,
In the five Nut-trees, freindly Charitie,
And in the Muses wond'rous Melodie,
The Mindes divine encouragements to move
Her earthly Mate to all good works of Love.

So (brother Swayne) I hope you understand
I to my tale my morall have expres'd.

JASPER.
Thou hast (indeed):  And therfore at my hand
Here take a kidskin, in his furre well dres'd
To keepe from cold thy old and honest brest.
For now the blinking twylight on me calls
To leade my cattell to their wonted stalls.

JEFFERYE.
I doe commend thee, that (though poore) art free;
And take thy will for guift, but guift not take,
Unles thou wilt a lambe-skin take from me.
I have not done this only for thy sake,
But greater freinds.  But (as thou well hast spake)
Our freindly Starre warnes us from falling dewes
In hazle castles now to fence our ewes.
