Averrhoes to the tournament is gone,
And with him went his gentle lady fair;
The sun unclouded in its glory shone
Throughout the blue serenity of air;
Who then the castle's prisoning walls could bear?
All rush abroad, and to the tourney run,
Where spears and 'scutcheons blaze against the sun.

No &mdash; not the little babe that cradled lay
Breathing its balmy breath in rosy rest,
Had power the nurse's rambling feet to stay;
So did her wishes burn within her breast;
Each busy fear she tranquilly suppress'd;
For she had left the cradled babe beside
Two guards whose faithful vigilance was tried.

Dear was that infant in his father's eyes,
Not the fond mother's love could more abound;
And next his wife and babe the knight did prize
His strong-wing'd falcon, and his clear-tongued hound;
He joy'd to hear the deep'ning woods ring round;
Or watch the hawk sweep rapid down the sky
With pounce of surest aim, and eagle eye.

These were the guards, whose watchfulness and love
Were trusted now to shield that infant's bed;
One wav'd his broad wings on the perch above,
One at the cradle's foot reclin'd his head;
And ever and anon the slumber fled
From his quick-lifted eye, and oft his ear
Uprose, to list if danger threat'ned near.

Ceas'd not the tilting till the close of day,
But first the nurse resought her lord's abode;
The knight had carried every prize away,
And with his dame to their fair castle rode;
But ere he reach'd the towers, that distant glow'd
Ting'd by the setting sun, he heard a cry:
Forth flew the nurse with terror in her eye.

With desperate hands her naked breast she beat,
And tore the scatter'd tresses from her head;
Grovelling before the horses' trampling, feet
She gasp'd, and shriek'd, "the child, the child is dead!
The hound, the hawk, his precious blood have shed;
I &mdash; I am all the cause, who could forsake;
My life in vengeance and in mercy take."

The lady swoon'd, and from her palfrey fell;
The knight's stout heart like aspen-leaf now shook;
No language might his eye's blank horror tell;
In at the gates, and up the stair he took
His breathless way; and cast an eager look
As through the chamber's folding-doors he pass'd,
And strait with quivering lips recoil'd aghast.

The cradle was o'erthrown; the hound there lay
Licking the blood-drops that his paws embrued;
The falcon's plumes in ruffled disarray
Hang flagging down, and dabbled all with blood;
Awhile the anguish'd knight astonied stood;
Then with a vigorous arm and lightning glance
Hurl'd at that gory hound his ashen lance.

Swift to his fist the fluttering falcon flies,
And rustling claps the plumage of her wings;
The knight with anger glowing in his eyes
That falcon's neck with grasp of iron wrings:
The hound creeps wounded on, and fawning clings,
And gently licks the hand that gave the blow,
Then rolls in death with stifled moaning slow.

A tear stood quivering in the master's eye
While to the cradle tremblingly he sped;
When from that cradle came a living cry:
From underneath his infant rear'd its head,
And thrust its searching arms; its cheek was red
With healthful slumber:  at the father's sight
Silent it laugh'd with eyes that swam in light.

The sire in extasy of wonder shriek'd,
And caught the babe; but treading swift the floor
His foot comprest a snake; with azure streak'd
Gleam'd the scal'd folds, but purpled thick with gore;
The snake was pierc'd and mangled o'er and o'er:
The very eyes mere eaten from its head;
There crush'd it lay in trailing volumes spread.

Conviction glisten'd in the parent's eye;
He turn'd, and saw whence that huge serpent crept
Through the time-rifted wall, and glided nigh
The cradle where that guarded infant slept;
The knight his forehead smote and groaning wept;
His barb'rous hand in rash impatience wild
Had slain the faithful guards that sav'd his child.

While to her breast the babe Rosmilla press'd,
Tears dew'd her cheeks for them who breathless lay;
The knight with sighs of keen remorse caress'd
Those who had foil'd the serpent of its prey;
A late and vain atonement he would pay;
And rear'd a tomb of brass; the hawk and hound,
The snake and babe were carv'd in bronze around.

Wretched Averrhoes liv'd:  he never sought
The trackless woods, nor bent his upward glance
In air, but conscience on his fancy wrought,
And heavily he wept that fatal chance;
Till he, forswearing knighthood, brake his lance;
And vow'd to holy-land a pilgrimage,
And there in penance dwelt to good old age.
