TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY, PRINCE OF WALES, &amp;c.

When Cynthia sitting on her silver throne
First told my Muse the story you shall heare,
She strictly charg'd her not to make it knowne,
For any cause, to any mortall eare
Till 'twas related (as it once should be)
To some rare Prince of royall progenie.

The reason was (it seemes) That since herein
Some actions are of gods and passions shewne,
She thought it fit that to some nearest kin
To them (great Prince) it should at first be knowne:
Tender alliance, and a Princely brest
To heare and judge of such occurents best.

This Muse (therfore) as Cynthia did her binde
Hath safely kept this secret undisclos'd
Till now, that, in your gracious forme, a minde
She findes (Sir) so celestially dispos'd
That she is full resolved it is you
The Delian Queene directed her unto.

May't please you (then) to lend the Moone your light
Thus shadow'd under these ecliptique lines,
Your Sun-like gloryes shall not shine lesse bright,
But more, that Cynthia by your lustre shines,
And to your greatnesse purchase more divinesse
By more devoting her unto your highnesse.

THE FIRST CANTO OR NEW MOONE.
ARGUMENT.
From Heaven, with Earth offended,
Two Gods (as Spies) descended.

How apt the slanderous and uncivill tongues
Of wicked men (upon presumption small)
To rayse foule scandalls are, and impious wrongs
On Ladyes honours, never stayn'd at all,
Is manifested in bright Cynthia's case
To her extreame (but undeserv'd) disgrace.

For when Endymion once in Latmos slept
The Moone (some say) came downe and kis'd him there,
Erronious Fame reports that she hath kept
Him ever since within her spotlesse Sphere.
And of this falshood, so profusely blowne,
The generall tale of Man i' th' Moone is growne.

But findeing no memoriall that intends
A mans preferment to that pitch of grace,
My winged Muse unsatisfyed ascends
Her glistring Orbe, In which Celestiall place
She findes no Man (as these old sots us tell)
But that a Woman in the Moone doth dwell.

And how that Woman there became confin'd
Urania knowes:  who now descended thence
Shall (as she hath thereof enform'd my minde)
Impart you her divine intelligence
By patience of the Gods that authors were,
And her fayre sex, whereto I honour beare.

Some ages since Deucalions deluge past
In peopling of the empty world agen,
When as the seede of Sin began as fast
To propagate anew, as seede of men,
And wretched worldlings almost in profund
Oblivion had the generall drowning drownd.

Jove waxing old resolved was to set
His sacred foote in sinfull mold no more,
Or at the least although the cause were great
He in his prudence thought it fit, before
He went himselfe in person, first to try
What good there might be done by Ambassie.

And for this action, he selects among
Th' Olimpique Race (if I may terme them so)
Two handsome youthfull Gods, and light, and strong,
This paynfull pilgrimage to undergoe;
But I conceale their names.  Great minds defam'd
In their attempts, desire to passe unnam'd.

And what the tenour of their charge should be
Though my playne pen, unexercis'd in state,
Can hardly reach a stile of such degree,
Neare as I can, I shall it yet relate,
As great Saturnides himselfe it spake
Whose thundring voyce makes all ye Center shake.

My Sonnes (sayth he) you shall from hence repaire
Downe to yon lowe and wretched vale of Man,
The care wherof hath turn'd mine aubron haire
Thus gray, and made my nectar'd cheeke thus wan,
And yet with litle incense gratifyes
Mine open hands, and rest refuseing eyes.

Wherefore descend, and first take view of those
To whom Bootes curled face is shewne,
Then with those fixed lights that him oppose
Survay the more remote and hardlyer knowne:
From Nabathaean bounds to Phoebus fall,
From the hot Zone to the Septentrionall.

Be as your fathers All-beholding eyes:
See where my name is honour'd, where despis'd,
Where peace, where war, where want, where plenty lyes,
Where Vertue rules, where vice is exercis'd:
Where Right prevayles, where wretched wrong takes place,
And let me know the whole worlds generall case.

That I as well may furnish good mens needs
With blessings, as detrench th' abused store
Of thankles caytiffes; crowne true vertues deeds
With honour, and on vice my vengeance poure.
This sayd, his brow against his breast he strooke:
The brazen bases of Olympus shooke.

And thus instructed, at the azure knee
Of armed Jove these Legates tooke their leave,
And of the whole Celestiall familie
Congeys at heavens christall ports receive:
And so descend the Axletree, betwixt
The radiant Poles on either side us fixt.

And when their ayrie feete felt earthly clay,
They instantly in Man-like habits drest
Their beautyous Godheads; and so tooke the way
That to their owne best wisdomes seemed best:
Resolving not to leave a Land unspied,
Empire unseene, or Island undescried.

What ever people, civill or prophane,
Or continent, unknowne or knowne, may lye,
Succinct or spacious, Mountagnous or playne,
In all the Orbes foure fold Cosmographye,
They visit would, and this our British land
That by it selfe from all the World doth stand.

Sometimes they walke, and sometimes they assume,
To ease their weary nerves, their nimble wings,
And sometimes, to refresh both foote and plume,
They voyage under pitchey tackleings
Of swelling Sayle, fullfilling th' awfull word
Of Jupiter, on foote, on wing, on board.

Observing seriously in every place
The manners, customes, and estates of men,
The Gods, Lawes, Lives, Religions, they embrace,
And Sacrifices, that they used then:
Joyes, woes, wants, wealthes, sinnes, service; and of all
Kept just record, and sure memoriall.

But in these travells, such mischance befell
These heav'enly youths, as not alone for theirs
But for fayre Womens sakes, I greive to tell:
But since th' unhappy Causer of such teares
They in our world of Brittaine did not finde,
Ladyes untouch'd neede not to be unkinde.

For in the heate of middle-aged yeare
They chanc'd in Ethiopia to arrive
Where double flames, of time and Clymat, there
Perswaded rest, in bathes of ease revive
Their toyled limmes:  where they an object found
That their delay in double fetters bound.

The tale wherof, Since now it seemes to aske
The spirit-full flight of an untoyled Muse,
End here (Urania) thy precedent taske:
And to beget new breath for what ensues,
(As those of thy Celestiall kindred doe)
Favour, a while, thy tender sarcells too.

THE SECOND CANTO OR FIRST QUARTER.
ARGUMENT.
One womans lookes surprise
Both hearts of Jupins Spies
With love:  Themselves her teach
Themselves to over-reach.

Men of the world how simply wonder wee
At th' alterations our small age hath seene,
When as the selfe-same instabilitie
Of state and chance, that is, hath ever beene;
Or thinke our times most singuler for change,
When elder worlds saw prodigies more strange.

For ere Apollo's sonne his fathers chayre,
To leade the Light, on day did undertake,
The Aethiopians then were white and fayre,
Though by the worlds combustion since made black
When wanton Phaeton overthrew the Sun,
Which dreadfull mischeife had not yet been done.

When Fortune, who (it seemes) in the designes
Of highest states and hartes will have a hand,
Unto a house conducts these fayre divines,
Where dwelt a woman, fayr'st of all the land;
And all the world (by good report of men)
None fayrer had then Ethiopia then.

Where they within no sooner set their feete,
But she as soone to entertaine them came,
For she an hostesse seem'd for guests so sweete,
And they seem'd strangers for so sweete a dame.
Only her humane forme was inly frayle,
Their humane habits heavenly hearts did vayle.

But to what rare and matchles image wrought
Jove's children were, it bootes not me t' ensist;
But leaving that to all or more then thought,
Since Gods may be how beautyfull they list,
Her only, at all rights of life, to paint
More art then great Apelles had I want.

But I have heard how Nature did prepare
Three Essences to make three women of,
An amorous, a subtill, and a fayre;
Which Fortune seeing came and mix'd her stuffe
All into one, that should have serv'd for three;
And of that composition fram'd was shee.

For she had beauty to engrosse the eyes
Of all admirers in her sole possession,
And all the arts of love Love can devise
In womans heart or head to take impression,
But skill to teach her beauty to win many
And learne her Love not to be won by any.

A table now she neatly furnish'd had,
Like a delicious vintage of varietyes
Of wine and fruits; wherto her welcomes adde
A sweetnes dareing appetite:  But Dietyes,
Being mindes more apt to contemplate then eate,
Fed more upon her lookes then on her meate.

Yet while they drinke a litle too and fro,
False Love, that in some other image lurkes,
Nere this new Venus bends his ivory bowe,
And through his fruitfull freinds his purpose workes
So cuningly, that he conveys his darts
From both her eyes in both her strangers hearts.

Which suddaine fire when in their breasts they felt,
They then to coole themselves with kisses sought,
For she had lips that pres'd would seeme to melt
Some precious balme to cure the wounds of thought,
Which they (by turnes) had free and undenyed,
But a wrong Medicine vaynly is applyed.

Perceiving lips more apt t' encrease the flame
By how much they doe more resemble fire,
They thence to Cheekes, to breasts and bosome came,
That whiter seem'd, more like to quench desire.
But, after thirsty wounds of Love, to kis,
Like drinking after poyson, mortall is.

When eyes, th' Astronomers of Love, were set,
And Lips, his Conjurers, were charm'd; Embraces,
As Loves Geographers, began to mete
Her Wastes fayre architect, and other places.
But (O) embraces are but double walls
To keepe the love-sick hearts in closer thralls.

And in these dalliances and sweete delights
They not alone the life of this day spend,
But many dayes succeeding, many nights.
The buis'nes of great Jove was at an end.
And now they tremble to forethinke that fate
Shall venge this fault, and now they thus debate.

Tush!  we have visited white Europe, queene
Of all the world, and Brittayne, lov'd of Seas.
Wee have the Asiatique quarter seene,
Alle Affrica, and somwhat more then these
And of our time and observation there
Exact accompt and testimony beare.

Wee only want some base Americans
That know not Jove, and Jove cares not to know,
Some barb'rous Gotes or salvage Indians,
No matter whether ever seene or no.
(And so rests undiscover'd to this day
The greater part of wilde America).

And while their owne affections thus they soothe
With idle fancyes of their loves suggesting,
She (for her part) as craftily doth smoothe
Them up with powerfull arguments of resting:
For as her lookes made them their charge forget,
Their loves made her her charge at nothing set.

The youths were both so briske and lovely fayre
I dare well say that which she fancyed most
She did not know:  she ever tooke such care
That not a sparke of eithers love she lost.
As their affections equally agree
Upon her love, she loves them equallie.

But to herselfe she kept that only knowne,
And held them still uncertaine which might be
Dear'st in her favour.  When one came alone
'Twas he she lik'd, when th' other came 'twas he.
If this her right hand, that her left hand tooke,
She bore a stedfast and indifferent looke.

When she one's eyes had hidden in her lap,
She ore his shoulder lent the other smiles,
And so the one she catches in a trap,
And with a bayte the other she beguiles,
Ensnareing him that comes within her hands,
And angleing him that furthest off her stands.

To such advantage all her guifts she dealt,
And on both sides herselfe so well applyes,
If this the softnesse of her hands had felt,
The other had the glances of her eyes;
If th' one had in her tender bosome slept,
His fellow in his armes her wakeing kept.

Her suff'rance was but as a pleasing way
To fruitles ends, resistance more enflameing:
Her promises were like a slight aray
Worne by a Masquer for an houres gameing:
Her word a ballance was that weigh'd denyalls
That bred no greifes with grants that dur'd no tryalls.

And thus she (to delight vaine-glory) stirres
Most innocent spleenes to mutuall emulations,
But makeing her divine Competitours
Frustrate each others hopes and expectations:
Enough to set fraternall bloud at ods,
And into partyes move the factious Gods.

But (like wise men, that rather chuse to shew
Their evidence then try their rights at lawe)
They in free freindship let each other know
Their titles to her love, wherby they saw
Her double dealing, and agreed to court
Her both together, joyntly, for their sport.

But by this meanes they doe but help to catch
Themselves anew, in a new kinde of snare;
One's motion do's but mar anothers match,
Diversitie of buyers rayse the fayre.
Loves privie Counsell are (in all) but two;
A third, or more, his false designes undoe.

Findeing all humane pollicies to fayle,
Hot Love now loathes the garments of disguise;
And since, as Men, they can no more prevayle,
Resolveing to ingage their dietyes,
They now to her unworthy eares declare
(For their loves latest refuge) what they are,

Imagining that Majesty would ad
More penetrating flames unto perswasion,
Or hope of golden showers to be had,
Or feare (at least) would check dissimulation,
As well they might, if they with one had dealt
That hopes had lik'd, Gods fear'd, or feare had felt.

But she, that had occasion in a string
Of uses bridl'd, strait projects what boone,
What divine guift, or admirable thing,
She should demand:  haveing conceited soone
Beauty's petition's a comand to Lovers
That begs in shew, but in effect recovers.

Which when she was resolv'd on, (though 'twas long
Before she could resolve on one request),
Her longing heart fitting it to her tongue,
She to the next encounter it addrest
In Rhetorique that of Beauty is a most
Invisible and sence seduceing ghost.

"My Lords (she sayth) you have a suite in hand
To me, unworthy to be sue'd by you,
And I (for my part) have a small demand
To you, too worthy Gods for me to sue,
Yet, if for mine you please t' exchange your grant,
Aske and be ask'd, give mine, and take your want.

"If you from Clouds are come to earth belowe
For sweete fruition of mine honour here,
Teach me that pray'r wherby you thither goe,
And not alone possesse me here, but there:
What I grant you, is yours; what you grant me,
You grant your selves; both boones your vantage be."

Thus winged was her speech, as was her heart,
That in a hell of tedious longing burnes
To see fayre heav'n:  and such is woman's art,
And thrift in the disposeing of good turnes,
She seldom sells a momentary pleasure
But for a bargaine of some speciall treasure.

This impudent request with many feares
The trembling hearts of the young Gods did seize:
T' unrip heav'ns misteryes to mortall eares
Would Jove and all th' Olimpique state displease,
And shew themselves unworthy heav'n to be
That could not keepe immortall secresie.

But first, they wond'red much how she could tell
That they in use had any such divine
And secret Charme; but they remembred well
That when Apollo kept Admetus kine
Light Mercury came by while Phoebus slept
And stole a Cow out of the heard he kept.

The Sun, (to be reveng'd), when Hermes lay
Asleepe in Herse's lap another while,
Came downe and stole his hat and spurres away,
Who (when he rose, and understood the guile)
Was forc'd to mount Olympus by a Spell,
Wherof this quick-ear'd creature had heard tell.

Much modest passion, yet retayn'd, to calme
The billowes of untame affection strives;
And gentle care applyes discretion's balme
To stanch the heate of Cupid's corrosives;
But remedyes too milde too late devis'd
Where lust Love's fester'd wounds had cauteriz'd.

Looke how a Cittie, that beseig'd about
With hostile powers, and hath intestine foes
Within her walles (to boote), long stands not out
Before she some conditions doth propose,
So in this like beleaguer'd state of theirs
With these love-thirsty Dietyes it fares.

To Beautye's seige, and flatt'ryes undermineing
(That quite subvert the strength of every Lover)
Their owne intestine Love his treason joyning,
They to her greedy eare at last discover
This sacred Theame:  O hot and dangerous Lust
To traffique heav'n for earth, and heart for thirst!

O simple Gods!  (if gods may so be sayd
By men that woman scarse would so have trusted):
But when you act like men, Men will upbraid
Your actions:  And now see on what you lusted,
Now see the fruits of all your fayre perswasions,
Your times, your labours, loves, and revelations.

When she her lecture cordially had gayn'd
And had as perfect meanes, as will, t' aspire,
She place and oppertunitye retayn'd,
Agents of love and handmaydes of desire,
Wherto she quickly joynes her discipline,
And doth to that as soone her practice joine.

And instantly, a payre of ayre-like wings
Poyzeing her downey sides, her feete forget
Their earthly office:  here and there she flings
To win the winde, as one imperfect yet;
But quickly skill'd, The ayrie stades of skyes,
Like Loves postillion Mercury, she flyes.

Her sprawling heeles, in stead of wonted molde
Kick Cedars tops, her armes blue Clouds embrace:
While royall Eagles tremble to beholde
A greater then themselves usurpe their place,
And welkin towering Larkes (with no lesse feare)
Wonder to see a Woman soreing there.

Which when the doubtful youthes look'd up and saw,
They stood at first as in a maze, till shee
(Like some old beaten hare) had gotten law
Enough for once her jealous life to free:
And ere they could their tender wings put on,
This haggard her self-less'ning pitch was gon.

They haveing better skill on wing and winde
Thought certainly to overtake her soone,
But tir'd in their pursuite, they fell behinde,
Like trotting starres after the whirling Moone.
For in this Charme did such a vertue lye,
Those that could fastest speake, could fastest flye.

Wherein when they had call'd into conceit
The matchles vertue of a womans tongue,
Like men that in a chace had borne dead weight,
Their heads and hopeles hearts so heavy houng
Betwixt their wings, their wings began to flag;
The more they spur the ayre, the more they lag.

But she with plumes of over-joy'd desires
Her outward Sayles of pow'r so well assists,
That with redoubled swiftnesse she aspires
The stately pitch of the Coelestiall lists:
For light and hopefull mindes make bodyes light,
But ponderous thoughts hang plummets upon flight.

That (I suppose) they turn'd their course for shame
To Paphos, Latmos, or some unknowne way.
But we will still pursue the nimble dame,
And let the sad deceived Lovers stray.
But (Muse) thou first shalt rest thee while she flies:
When her quills settle, thine againe shall rise.

THE THIRD CANTO OR FULL MOONE.
ARGUMENT.
Great Jove a Court doth summon
About th' ascended Woman.
The Fates desire her roome,
The Gods pronounce her doome.

How great and comprehendles is the Minde!
How far, how high (for knowledge) she presumes,
When she herselfe with vertue arm'd doth finde,
And lightly borne up with desirefull plumes!
One world containes her not:  nor yet would she
Be held in more, if more there were then be.

Water her hopefull pinions not benums:
The curiasse of her boldnes is to thick
For aire to peirce:  and when to fire she comes,
Her more light flames and feathers are too quick.
And thus this Dame (that represents this minde)
Leaves all the well-rank'd Elements behinde.

Till by the power of her celestiall charme,
With no lesse fortune, having pas'd the seaven
Next circuits of the Gods, she caus'd alarme
In th' inner guards of the supremer heaven
Where Mars, great Captaine both of watch and war,
Had plac'd a Centinell in every star.

Who through their loup-holes when they chanc'd to view
This fugitive with such a fervour mount
To this sublimitie, in all hast drew
Themselves into a head; and made account
Strait to discharge against this earthly wonder
Their harquebushes charg'd with dreadfull thunder.

But some (whose better wisdomes sway'd the rest)
Perswaded them their vollyes to with-hold,
Untill amongst themselves they first had gues'd
What creature it might be that was so bold:
For throughout all the guard there was not one
That ever had a woman seene or knowne.

They saw that she was none of Titan's race
Who by pretence of eldership layd clayme
And title to expulsed Saturne's place;
For they long since by Jove were overcame:
Nor of those Earth-borne gyants that rebell'd
Against the Gods:  the Gods had them repell'd.

She was no Meteor'd shape, nor airy sp'rite
Begot by th' agitation of the Spheres,
Nor Comet (though both caudate and crinite);
For all those things fled from her in such feares
As did the monsters from Silenus Asse
That stellified for that good service was.

No Semi-Diety, nor seed of Pan,
Nayad nor Nymph, (for love had them confin'd
Unto terrestriall mansion), No Man
They by her face her flight and fashion finde,
No ghost, nor fiend:  no goblin good or evill,
Nor bird, nor beast, nor goddesse, god, nor devill.

And as they descant thus, all while she strives
Their warlike walls and bullworkes to ascend,
They are no wiser when she there arrives,
But still her essence, state, and cause suspend;
And though their martiall lawes were so severe
No unknowne seede of earth might enter there,

Yet since they found her arme-les armes pretending
No outward treason to the state at all,
(Her strangenes much but beauty more befreinding)
They brought her safe into th' Olympian hall;
For she such count'nance had, as might procure
Favour at hell's, much more at heavens dore.

This Noveltie to all th' assembly seene,
They from their severall Thrones in murmur rise;
Some stand amaz'd:  some that on earth had been
A Woman!  cryed:  a Woman skal'd the skies!
Sterne Jupiter most highly was displeas'd,
Although her lookes some others much appeas'd.

Some of the Court are angry, some are glad,
The elder frowne, the younger flock about her,
But (of all other) Juno was horne-mad,
She of great Jove did so extreamly doubt her:
And Venus waxed leane, with strong suspect
That Mars would favour this, and her neglect.

Cupid, as busye as his nature was,
That Young-Deceipt, Old-youth!  who (if he listed)
Could all have told:  but not a word doth pas
His lips, wherin his prejudice consisted.
For well he hop'd to finde in her fayre lookes
Sweete baytes enough to furnish all his hookes.

What with the love of some, the feare of some,
Others partialitie, others jealousie,
A great confusion was in heav'n become,
And like to be a greater mutinie,
If out of hand was not determin'd on
What with this new-come stranger should be done.

For scarse the Sunne had number'd up the day
Of her ascention, to the waxing yeare,
But she her wanton parts began to play
In such perfection of allurement there,
As if the world had plotted some device,
The flower of all the Gods from heav'n t' entice.

But the grave Rectour of Olympus hath
Summon'd therfore a present Parliament;
And all the Gods along the Lactean-path
Unto the Pallace of the Thunderer went,
From forth their fayre and ivory cloysters built
On that fayre street were Juno's milke was spilt.

The Court all plac'd uppon their marble seats
Below the awfull Sires supremest Throne,
His ivory Scepter twice or thrice he beats
About those curled tresses of his owne,
Whose fearfull motions doe displace and stir
Heav'ns hinges, and Earths firme diameter.

And thus he speakes; "This wretched woman here,
I know by what unhappy accident
Wherof (by all infernall gulphes I sweare)
I would be veng'd with dreadfull discontent,
But that I see the native innocence
Of heav'n it selfe even stayn'd with this offence.

"For I presage that those ungracious boyes
I sent abroade, too humanly affected
In female formes, have spent the tyme in toyes,
And my commands so cursedly neglected
That she this vantage wins of their unjust
Carriage and carelesse weakenes of their lust.

"And I confesse that this audacious Dame
This Japet's daughter (as I well may call her)
That comes like him that came to steale our flame,
Deserves no meaner vengeance to befall her
Then hundred-handed Giges, whom I slew,
Or he that out of heav'n by th' heeles I threw.

"But, brothers, that in Counsell sit with me,
Wee but unjust in our owne justice were,
If we should plague the poore mortalitie,
For that wherof ourselves are not all cleere,
Before our subjects we with rigour urge,
It bootes us we our owne example purge.

"Therfore whersoe're we venture to bestow
This dangerous companion, Now shee's here
She must in no wise be sent back below,
Lest her loose tongue (that nothing holds) blab there
Amongst unworthy mortalls, mysteries
Peculier to immortall eares and eyes."

This speech the speech of all the rest deprives,
Untill the crooked Fates, who in a hole
Sate windeing up the bottoms of frayle lives
And only durst the words of Jove controule,
This contradiction from their anxious Cell
With open mouth and earnest fury yell.

"Downe with the woman, downe with her againe
To sinfull earth as lowe as she was borne,
Unles thou art dispos'd (great Soveraigne)
To make thy glorious Realme to men a scorne
By everlasting jarres and breach of lawes,
Which her proud spirit eternally will cause.

"If thou wilt needs doe her base world that grace
As to detayne her here, then send us thither,
For thou shalt finde that state in cursed case
Where Fates and Women domineer together.
Where we are (Jove) there needs no such as she:
Where she is, needs no other destinie."

This opposition 'twixt th' incensed Fates
And Aegis-arm'd Saturnides divides
The sage opinions of the Starry-states
Into so potent faction on both sides,
They neither judge her to exile nor death,
Nor fit for heav'n nor (from heav'n) fit for earth.

Till the Cyllenian wing'd and witty God
Betwixt those two extreames, bethinking soone
Some middle place; propounded her abode
Within th' enclosure of the glorious Moone.
And all applauding what he did propose
The Session broke and the whole Senat' rose.

THE FOURTH CANTO OR LAST QUARTER.
ARGUMENT.
Woman the Moone ascended,
Wherewith the Moone offended
All women (for her sake)
To her doth servile make.

The Moone's bright Throne by Mulciber was built
Of shineing Silver out of Lemnos brought;
Wheron Apollo's glorious face was guilt,
And Neptune's Realme in his owne colours wrought,
Within set round with seats and lights engrav'd
In Christall, and with Sky-like Marble pav'd.

On ax'e-trees rays'd resembling that of heaven
Upon foure wheeles, whose Spokes of argent hue
Betwixt round Naves of Mother-pearle were driven,
And Ivory circles shod with Saphirs blew;
Drawne by two nimble steeds, the one Milke white,
The other black, in starry harneis dight.

The Minion Day was newly stole to bed
In Cimeris with Somnus god of Sleepe,
Whose Mother Night the sable curtains spread
And set officious Starres the watch to keepe,
When all the Gods went forth but he alone
That unto Thetis lap was newly gone.

Till in the Zodiaque they the watchfull Moone
Gearing hir two fleet horses over-caught.
When the bright Queene of Night, perceiving soone
By their discourse the In-mate they had brought,
Changeing her lookes, and casting downe the yoke,
Stood still:  untill the mighty Sire thus spoke.

"Lucina, pale not on thy greatest freinds,
That dearely tender thee; Thou liv'st alone,
And round about the Worlds far distant ends
Dost helplesse manage this thy whirling Throne;
Which seemes to me (how ere it thee doth please)
Life without comfort, labour without ease.

"Therfore (my girle) Thou now shalt have a Mate,
And one that best may fit thy chastitie.
Since thou the company of man dost hate
This Woman here shall beare thee companye.
To finde thee talke, to help those raignes to carry,
And solace thee, that art too solitary."

"King of the Gods (answers the Delian Queene)
I live, I ride, I rule these raynes alone,
Which not my greife, but happynes hath beene,
As my content-full silence well hath shewne:
Let this Assembly speake, when ere did I
Assistance crave, or wish for companie?

"But I perceive that, under this pretence
Of fatherly and freindly councell giving,
You please t' obtrude an inconvenience
Uppon me, worse then solitary living.
You can (alas) not punish private woman
So harshly, as to yoke her with a common.

"And though by you it cannot be denyed
But that I am of Chastitie the Queene,
Yet some lewd tongues mine honor have belyed
As if a Man had once been with me seene;
That a false slaunder, this vexation true,
(Me thinks) th' unhappyer fortune of the two.

"Which had I fear'd, I peradventure might
Like other Ladyes lov'd and been a wife,
And by preventing this, preserv'd my right
Of freedome, though with losse of mayden life.
Sore is the wrong that makes an honest heart
Almost repent the goodnesse of desert.

"And, as for thee (good woman) Thou mayst guesse
It glorious fortune here to live with me:
But thou wilt finde no lesse unhappynesse
In mine, then I in thy societie.
Woman to woman yeilds contentment small:
And paynted prisons doe not lessen thrall.

"But since it is your will (Sir) which my breast
Has neither will nor power to disobey,
Advance your woman where (I hope) her rest
Will make her (shortly) wish her selfe away."
This sayd, her eyes her pale cheekes drown'd, and sent
Downe to the earth a shower of discontent.

But with such majestie she tow'rds her turn'd
Her stately bodyes whole Celestiall frame,
In all the choycest wealth of heav'n adorn'd
As, to the heart of the most ventrous dame
Strooke feare:  and forc'd her in a masqueing guise
Of tiffanie to sheild her dazled eyes.

And takeing this advantage of her eyes
Blur'd in her teares and frownes (that to approach
Her most majestick presence otherwise
Never had had the hope) her bright Caroach
This proud audacious sojourner ascends,
And heave'n in tryumph her fayre riddance ends.

But poore pale Cynthia so enraged grew,
She whip's her steeds, and takes up a Cariere
That in some eight and twenty dayes she flew
A compasse, that in almost thirtye yeare
Old Tyme-like Saturne, that doth seeme to mowe
All hindrance downe before him, could not goe.

Eleaven yeares circuit, and eleaven moneths more
She beate great Jove in his owne twelve yeares race;
And lusty Mars could hardly gallop ore
Her three tymes ten dayes course in two yeares space:
Wing'd Mercury, light Venus, and the Sun
In twelve moneths chace she full eleven out-run.

Her Chariot thus outstripping all theyr thrones,
Some more, some lesse, (as speede they differ in)
Rattles her tedious guest, to make her bones
And well knit joynts to totter in her skin,
To turne her maw or shake th' ambitious dame
Downe from her seate to earth from whence she came.

But she no whit dismayd, nor mov'd at all,
Sits in the christall windowes of the Moone,
Now in this wire, that tire, this Quoife, that Call,
Dressing her dainty browes from Morne to Noone;
From noone to night deviseing for next morning
New shapes, and, next day, that dayes habit scorning.

Though she the jemms and bracelets of the Queene
On and off puts, as her affections varye,
As if the Moone's fayre house a shop had been
Of Goldsmiths workes, or jewells mercenarye;
To Natures better grace Arts ayde inventing,
And to her selfe vayne joyes and sportes presenting.

Whereat the horne-mad Moone wth rage sometimes
Doth swell her selfe as big as halfe the earth,
And by and by with extreame sorrow pines
Her selfe more leane, and smaller then her birth;
And in this strange distraction now and then
Her happy face hides from unhappy men.

That blinde Thessalians often thought she was
By some enchantment stollen from her Sphere,
And frighted Romans ring shrill pans of brasse
And trumpets sound to her absented eare,
And ceremonious Greekes with tapers light
Succour her beames, almost extinguish'd quite.

And then looke how the vile unworthy foes
Of good desert (in th' absence of her face)
Their base insinuations interpose,
So grosse and paysant Earth steps in her place
And intercepts the favours of her freind,
Her brothers beames, that should her glory lend.

Then (dragon-like) all smier'd in bloud she fights
Fierce Combats for ecclipsed Majestie,
And from her bowe disperses vengefull flights
Of warres, of dearthes, and deathes presagacie;
And therwith not content her wrath to swage
She (in her ayd) moves curled Triton's rage.

That he sometymes in his unanchour'd jawes
Earthes ample borders inundates, and drownes
Her sollid ramparts:  and sometimes withdrawes
His neighbouring releiffes from her famish'd bounds:
And often o're his full-rig'd vessells casts
Cloud-threat'ning, and flowes above the masts.

Sometymes with other instruments of fate
She joynes her sharpe and discontent aspects,
In Natures cradle to infatuate
Mens manners, sences, powers, and intellects.
She practises her force on streames, on springs,
Beasts, trees, plants, fruits, and all terrestriall things.

But above all her great and strange effects,
She hath this Woman still in such offence,
That (for her sake) she generally subjects
All women to her powerfull influence;
And with what humours she doth her perplex,
She still the same inflicts uppon her sex.

With fancyes, frenzies, lunacyes, with strange
Feares, fashions, factions, furyes, and affections,
With fondnes, fayntnes, fugacy, and change
Of mindes, moodes, habits, houses, freinds, complections:
In breife she raignes o're Women as a Queene.
In her their state, In them her power, is seene.

But yet she many gracious vertues hath,
Which (whether she therwith be pleas'd or no)
Amongst those imperfections of her wrath
On Woman kind from her sweet nature flowe:
As patience, silence, modestie, sobrietie,
Chastitie, beauty, bounty, pittie, pietie.

Which graces, since they most resplendent be
In those fayre dames these amorous Seas contayne,
Let those whose blameles hearts the Moone doth free
Of her distast, free me of their disdayne,
And favour this my Song, that honours them,
And none condemnes but those that it condemn.

And not, like planets of the worst dispose,
Cause Cynthia's browes unwillingly reflect
Their frownes uppon themselves:  but shine like those
That by their happyer and more kinde aspect
Purchase all honour from her eyes, who still
With good good cout'nance holds, and ill with ill.

If melancholy Saturne on her face
Cast scowleing lookes, she scowles on him againe;
Or cholerick Mars with vizage of disgrace
Affronts her, she returnes him like disdaine;
When Mercury a good indifferent eye
Vouchsafes her, she vouchsafes it Mercury.

If puissant Phoebus danger her in fight
She hazards him:  if he looke freindly on her
Her anger's past:  When Jove his plesant light
Tenders her beames, she renders his like honour:
When fayre Cyprina smiles on bright Lucina
Well-pleasd Lucina strives t' outsmile Cyprina.

For as it dos not stand with her nobilitie
Basely to flatter those that doe despise her,
So is she apt in her heroick civilitie
To honour those who freindly favourize her;
Wherein Urania (of all the Muses
Her best belov'd) her best example uses.

Let not your brightnes, and more bright renownes,
Be then (fayre Dames) with Moone or Muse offended;
Nor looke with martiall or Saturnian frownes
Where no dishonor is to you intended:
For such aspects would your owne beautyes wrong;
And bode ill fortune to this harmeles song.

But joyne your smiles with Jove or Mercurie,
Or shine as Sol, or Cytherea shines:
You then fortuniate this Muse and me,
Presageing endles honour to these lines:
And with your best aspects the Moone to view
Declare her best effects to be in you.

THIS STORY MORALLIZED.
A Freind that heard and not beleev'd this story
(As he might chuse) demands some Allegory.
Fictions that yeild no morall are (sayd he)
Meere fables, those that doe are Poesie.
I sayd I could not tell.  I had it told
As from Urania I it heard of old;
Who is most like therof account to make.
And being thereto intreated:  Thus she spake.

Vice, masqu'd in vertuous shew, yields morall none;
But vertue, masqu'd in vanytie, yields one.
You may perceive, This woman's way t' entice
Though wanton seem'd, was without actuall vice:
Which shews, She did all her allurements use
Her minde to please, not body to abuse.
And there she rightly representeth Minde,
In a terrestriall frame so unconfin'd
That no adventure dreads himself to rayse
Unto celestial knowledge:  And that's prayse.
But when (by freinds) she compass'd hath her ends,
And that's ingratitude:  which was her stayne.
What action's without blemish that's humane?
A light behaviour may (sometimes) be sound,
As in darke frownes lightnes is sometimes found.
The youthfull dietyes shew how farre above
All other passions and respects is Love:
And in their negligence of heav'nly dutye,
The strong enchantments of an earthly beautye,
That such seducements hath as into folly
Has power (almost) t' infatuate the holy:
And he that shun so strong enchantments can
Seemes to have something in him more than man.

The Senate of the Gods declares how hard
It is for age to mend what Youth hath mar'd:
Yet when of no help humane fancye dreames,
How heavenly wisdome moderates extreames.

To be unknowne in heaven only teaches
The rareness of the minde that thither reaches.
And murmuring Fates are those ignoble spirits
That envye those who rise by vent'rous merits.
The glistring Chariot of the Moone to climbe
Was more her doome then her ambitious crime:
Yet with her Mistress there may share some woe
In seeking more to know then she would shew.

Her too much boldnes there To satisfie
(If that could be) her curiositie.
Belowe the Moone, All bodyes fullness finde:
All in, and under, her fill not one minde;
Although she were (as some great wits suppose)
Another world, but I am none of those.
Cynthia sets forth a Lady of such strayne
As is more vertuous then the other vayne;
Not only chast, but of a disposition
So noble as exempt from all suspition:
Some talke of her Endimion:  more deny
That lewd report; and one of those am I.

Her changes, her eclipses, her aspects
In frowning manner, represent th' effects
Of her owne troubled patience:  wherein she
The only sufferer is, the warned wee.
Where from her influence succeeds some ill
To any, 'tis their faults and not her will.
And where 'tis sayd she favours doth bestow,
Tis their good natures help to make it so.
For as the Bee and Spider from one flower
Honey and poyson sayd are to devoure,
Her guifts all prove according to the frame
Of those capacities receive the same.
She being ill with ill, and good with good,
No harm can doe:  and would not if she cou'd.

Herewith my friend was pleas'd; and did excuse
As you (I hope) doe my well meaning Muse,
Who doth (though she of amorous dietyes sings
And fayned Gods) acknowledge no such things;
But only use their names to shew the mayne
Distance betweene the vertuous and the vayne.
Weake eyes that cannot (like the Eagle) brooke
The brightnes of the Sun, through lawne must looke,
As Indian gold in Christian use we spend,
So we vayne fictions use to vertuous end;
And being not able heavenly workes t' expresse
In their owne greatnes, strive in what is lesse.
Through shadowes dim most shines a reall worth,
As a dark foyle best sets a diamond forth.
