Fresh in the gay career of dawning life,
What magic visions burst upon my view!
Woe had not marr'd the prospect &mdash; want and strife
Were all unfelt; or if at times I drew
Some pictur'd ill, its dark repulsive hue,
Like night departed; for the earth was still
To childhood's musings, beautiful and new,
No cloud of sorrow came its breeze to chill,
No deadly blast to wither and to kill!

The Heavens were bright above me, and beneath
The sweet untrodden flowers of nature smil'd;
And on I went, disporting Fancy's wreath,
Cheer'd by the beauteous charmer; and beguil'd
To haunts of peace, pure, blooming, undefil'd,
Where Love could riot in elysian rest,
Far, far beyond mirth's midnight orgies wild;
And clasping some young seraph to its breast,
Drink the warm, sinless raptures of the breast.

At morn, upon my pillow, not a tear
Could friendship trace &mdash; there bloom'd the rose of joy,
Like songs of forest bird's, that carol'd near,
My voice the dawn preceded &mdash; a gay boy,
I wist not woe such music could destroy;
From morn to noon-day, and to night I sung,
Without a care to trouble or annoy.
And when my hand across the lyre I flung,
Too partial love gave audience as it rung.

When thro' my breast the trance of slumber stole,
Repose unbroken lent to life new play;
Each wearied sense forgot its soft control,
To wake more buoyant, and revive more gay.
All, all was mild composure where I lay&mdash;
For hope maternal with endearing heed,
Lean'd o'er my couch, and long would fondly stay,
Intent the thoughts of filial joy to read,
While forth they rush'd with wild impetuous speed.

And fortune's ray, to friendship's smile allied,
Pour'd the enamel'd path of life along,
As blithely on to happiness I hied,
My teacher Virtue, my companion Song:
My first best guide, the mightiest of the strong,
That Power unseen, of all-pervading glance.
Who wrote man's doom eternal ages back,
And bade him up to yonder bright expanse
Soar from the wildering mazes of his track.

I knew not &mdash; deem'd not &mdash; scenes so blest, so bright,
Could only yield an evanescent beam,
That joys like mine could vanish into night
Fast as the blazing meteor's transient gleam&mdash;
Or if they went &mdash; that life could ne'er redeem
Those lov'd illusion's of my youthful pride&mdash;
But now their fairy sweets as fading seem,
As twilight shadows that to darkness glide,
Or ocean zephyrs dying o'er the tide!

'Tis well &mdash; that Being, who in mercy gives,
In boundless wisdom too, can take away&mdash;
His arm sustains the lowliest wretch that lives,
Embracing worlds within his wide survey,
Stern if they yield not, pleas'd if they obey;
'Tis well &mdash; tho' life's allurements all recede,
There is a beacon of unearthly ray,
Thro' time's dark labyrinth of woe to lead,
And cheer the trembling rebel in his need.

A few brief years of gladness hurried on,
And all was lovely, luminous and pure,
Hope hail'd new bliss at each returning dawn,
And every day found boyhood more secure,
Sublimer scenes unfolding to allure&mdash;
Fame's laurel-wreath, and beauty's myrtle-crest
While joy, of long duration, all too sure,
Saw not the storm collecting to molest,
Nor heard the thunder booming o'er its rest.

It came, with fearful suddenness, it came,
The deadly siroc &mdash; the consuming gale,
Impoverish'd fortune own'd its withering flame,
And weeping orphanage was heard to wail&mdash;
Death link'd at last to ruin, prov'd how frail
Had been my web-work visions of delight,
That, like the bubbles sparkling in the trail
Of some fair galley, gliding in its might,
Glitter'd awhile &mdash; then faded from my sight.

Yes, the paternal circle, where my youth
Had tasted transport, and enjoy'd repose&mdash;
That home of tenderness, affection, truth,
Became the dark abode of many woes.
Health from my feverish cheek withdrew her rose,
And left the hectic glow of anguish there&mdash;
The lamp of life seem'd burning at its close&mdash;
But Friendship sooth'd me, with her angel care,
And bade disease its ravages forbear.

Alas!  I woke from illness, but to gaze
On fortune's ruins scatter'd idly round,
The world appear'd one dark impervious maze,
Where pleasure languish'd, disappointment frown'd,
And death's cold frosts the loveliest verdure crown'd;
Methought all human beings shunn'd me then,
Consign'd to bitter solitude profound&mdash;
That e'en the famish'd wolf within her den,
Look'd on my griefs more merciful than men.

Yet, there were those whose sympathetic power
Could cheer me still &mdash; (for well I knew their worth)
Within the walls where infancy's first hour
Was spent in gay rejoicing at my birth&mdash;
There, many an interval of holy mirth,
Pass'd o'er I broke from childhood's sheltering dome,
To go my way unfriended on the earth
Without a guide, where nature's children roam,
Want my associate, and the world my home.

O never, never, can my soul forget,
The hour of parting with that much-lov'd few&mdash;
The quivering lip, pale cheek, and eyes all wet,
The fond caress &mdash; the eloquent adieu,
That seem'd my lingering footsteps to pursue&mdash;
O never can I think with unconcern,
Of love so fervent, tenderness so true,
But thought shall aye in fond remembrance burn
To greet such feeling with a glad return.

Dark was that day of separation &mdash; still
My heart recurs in sadness to the scene,
Dark &mdash; for I left a kindred bosom ill&mdash;
Stung by disease, that bosom long had been:
Yet tho' in hopeless languishing &mdash; serene
My young and faded relative appear'd,
And when I press'd her burning cheek, her mien
Proclaim'd a soul by hope celestial cheer'd&mdash;
She wept my perils &mdash; they were all she fear'd.

He, he, who feeds young ravens when they cry,
Will not desert her, for to him she gave
Full many a silent tear, and secret sigh
In penitential grief &mdash; his arm can save
That young unsullied maiden from the grave&mdash;
God, be thou merciful to her, to me,
But should the deadly storm around us rave,
To life's extinction &mdash; let our refuge be
In yon bright world with angels and with thee.
