Yes &mdash; 'twas a fearful deed; the sun's dark flood,
That rose in tear drops, poured its setting beam
Red with solstitial splendour, blood for blood,
As weeping Heaven had blushed to view the stream
That stain'd earth's bosom; &mdash; yet e'en thou, dire theme,
Thou Waterloo, to younger names shalt yield;
Soon shall thy fame a distant meteor seem
Known but as Agincourt or Cressy's field,
While heralds proudly deck some newer baser shield.

Vain fev'rish man!  that think'st thy insect toil
Can snatch e'en Waterloo from time's decay!
E'en while we gaze, death strips this mortal coil,
Our life an hour, our memory but a day;
And then when every glory melts away
An icy palace, vain yon granite pile
To tell to future worlds the wild affray
That stampt its name; &mdash; ah, future worlds shall smile
To think man's feeble art oblivion would beguile!

No; &mdash; Waterloo shall be but as a dream
To fill some book-worm brain, where learned lore
Deep treasur'd sheds a momentary gleam
On deeds forgotten; pointing where, of yore,
Europe co-leagued, unnumbered trophies bore
From Belgian plains; and where a tyrant's band
Drank the dark cup the world had drunk before,
Their blood-stained lord expell'd to distant land,
To pine life's lingering day on Helen's desert strand.

Yet then when, faithless to man's dearest pride,
The chissel'd granite yields its age-worn trust;
And yon proud arch that spurns the crouching tide
Shall sink, at length, a monument of dust;
Then blest shall be the memory of the just,
Whose lowly deed, in Heaven's fair page enroll'd,
Shall bright survive the warrior's trophied bust,
And fresh with wreaths that ne'er may waxen old,
Shall teach how vain the wise, how impotent the bold!

Oh then be mine the fame that cannot die!
The wisdom mine that tells of worlds unknown!
Be mine the Faith that lifts her tranquil eye
To Heaven's bright orbs, and calls them all her own!
And when the breath that wafts my parting groan
Shall lose its burden in the passing gale,
And nought shall live but one frail funereal stone
Whence soon must lapse the plaintive moss-worn tale,
Then stretch'd be Faith's bold wing, and swell'd Hope's joyful sail!
