The traveller hurries on his homeward way,
And warm hope kindles in his anxious breast;
No weary cares his bounding steps delay
Till many a mile his heavy feet have prest;
Then on the measuring stone he sinks to rest,
And sees his path before extending far;
What time the wild bird seeks his sheltering nest,
And the last blush hath left the mountain's bar,
As twilight calmly wanes beneath the evening star.

But sadder yet the weary wanderer Man.
His year hath closed and he can have but few;
That space hath ended as it first began;
All lost, and Oh how much remains to do!
Then youth comes brightning on his memory's view,
And quick the thought his eyelid sadly fills;
For childhood's scenes in life's last hours grow dear,
Though in the vale the gathering shadow chills,
Bright sunshine lingers yet on youth's far distant hills.

The year is closed &mdash; the thoughtless spirit feels!
'Tis like the sounding of death's fatal dart!
And labour half suspends its glittering wheels
To pause and ponder e'er it quite depart;
The wise reflect &mdash; the guilty mourn apart;
The slaves of gain awhile stand still with fear;
The world is sad and nature finds a heart:
Her skies grow dark, her gathering storms severe,
And her long night-winds sigh above the parted year.

And yet why mourn we for its hurrying flight?
Is it that days have perished one by one?
Or that the moon twelve times hath trimmed her light
With the lent brightness of the annual sun?
That spring and summer each her course hath run,
And the red leaf hath trembled on the tree?
And now December's latest hour is done,
That all hath passed away and never more can be?

Oh!  no &mdash; we mourn not that the year should go,
'Tis that it brings us nearer to the last;
And as time travels in his downward flow,
So much of life is numbered with the past.
Our childhood gone &mdash; our manhood following fast,
Our age too moving on to whence it rose,
We almost hear the wailing of the blast,
That tells the coming of life's wintery close,
When man and all man loves shall sleep in dark repose.

Look on the mournful record of the past,
And mark how much one little year can do:
How much of friendship that seemed made to last,
Unwearied love, affection firmly true,
Are known no more, except in fond review.
When memory opens all all its secret caves
And vainly tries to kindle hopes anew,
Like flowers up-springing from neglected graves,
Where, wreathed by nature's hand, luxuriant verdure waves.

I've seen the infant take his early flight
In the fair day break of his opening years,
When the glad parent saw with fond delight
The helpless charm that childhood most endears.
I've seen the youth deplored with bitter tears:
In the best triumph of his days he fled.
When life's bright scenes were bursting on his sight
On his pale cheek was found the threatening red;
Before the year was past he slumbered with the dead.

I've seen the aged willing to depart
In that dark hour ere nature quite expires
When the hope fain would warm the withered heart
With the cold embers of its earthly fires,
Though heaven is all the weary soul desires
Worn with the cares of three score years and ten:
When life no more a blessing could impart,
At peace with God and deeply mourned of men,
He laid him down to rest &mdash; to wake in heaven again.

The year is closed; and time hath warnings deep
And full of woe to them that doubt his power;
From the cold shade of their forgotten sleep
He calls the ghosts of each departed hour;
With angry lips and eyes that darkly lower,
They read the sentence of their destined prey:
And on their silent course they sternly keep
To bear their witness on that fearful day,
When the last words are said that may not pass away.

Too much of mournful thoughts &mdash; we know too well
Humanity is made of mournful things,
And man's ambitious spirit loves to dwell
On the high fate of nations, and of kings.
While Europe's rank to power still feebly clings,
And sovereigns tremble at the deep stained block,
As the strong surges of resistance swell,
Our country quakes not in the sounding shock,
For few and holy hands have built it on the rock.

She had her dark hour &mdash; and 'tis joy to see
The friend and patriot of her helpless days,
Who fought in youth to make a nation free,
Receive in age, a nation's glorious praise,
And the best thanks her grateful voice can raise.
An hour like this is worth an age of woe,
When thousand feelings in deep harmony
Rush on the heart, till tears begin to flow,
In that divine delight, that kings may never know.

The year is closed; and tyrants yet rejoice,
The oppressor triumphs and the injured falls;
And oh that heaven would lend the thunder's voice
To sound the warning through their gilded halls,
That hosts are vain, and vain their bayonet walls,
To curb the nations when they will be free;
When the stern spirit, which no time destroys,
Lifts up the millions from their bended knee,
And fierce and fearful then the reckoning hour shall be.

But tis not yet.  The black, and angry cloud
Casts its broad shadow o'er the vales of Spain;
But Greece sends out her war-cry long and loud
And her best blood is not poured out in vain;
For as her warriours laid their martyred head
On the red field the bloody share hath ploughed,
The voice for vengeance from their dreary bed
Hath fired all living hearts and almost waked the dead.

Alas for Greece &mdash; thy early friend is gone,
The steadfast hope of freedom and the free;
Who did for thee what Christians have not done,
And false to heaven was ever true to thee.
Untold the errours of his heart should be;
'Twas burned to ashes in wild passion's blaze:
His soul was fervent as the noon-day's sun,
And grand and solemn rolled his wondrous lays
Till virtue's harsh reproof was melted down to praise.

Oh!  how can peace the weary nations crown,
While man admires, what virtue must abhor?
While sufferers lick the foot that treads them down,
And pay blind reverence to the slaves of war?
And how can peace extend her influence far,
While self-styled Christians wrong the Christian faith,
And fools adore the red and baleful star;
And bear exulting on their servile breath
The name of him who wears the livery robes of death.

Away from Europe, and her battle plains,
Worn by the folly and revenge of man.
Go to the region where the stranger reigns,
On the parched plains of injured Hindostan.
There, where the church breaths out its angry ban,
The noble Brahmun rends the veil away;
The heathen's voice the cause of God maintains;
The christian wakes not in the rising day,
And unbelieving lips the truths of heaven display.

And now farewell &mdash; the lingering year is past;
Farewell the old, and welcome to the new;
And as your years come nearer to the last,
May all the dreams of happiness be true
That fancy paints on youth's enchanted view.
But the short day of life is closing fast,&mdash;
Already trembling on the verge of even;
And when the joys of earth are faint and few,
May happier visions to your hearts be given
Of joy unknown below and endless rest in heaven.
