There is a wild sublimity of soul,&mdash;
An all expanding energy of thought,
Which swells intensely to embrace the whole
Of the creation that at once is brought
Home to th' enraptured vision, which o'erwrought
By the unbounded scope on either hand,
Floats o'er the crowded scene, with beauty fraught,
O'er the far down and mist enveloped land,
From Holyoke's awful brow!  For 'tis as 'twere to stand

Perched like an eagle in his fearful height,
Sublime upon the spire of mountains, whence
The eye may rove with all enchanted sight,
Abroad o'er earth and heaven, &mdash; thro' the dense
Of azure bright, &mdash; till lost in the immense
Of cloudless space; &mdash; while circling mountains rise
In many a bleak and hoary eminence,
Blending their blue tops with the mellow skies&mdash;
And all around below, a magic scenery lies,

Of villages and picturesque retreats:
And fields and forests in their waving green;
And many a spot where beautifully meets
Each pleasing feature of a rural scene,&mdash;
Barns &mdash; orchards &mdash; herds; &mdash; and bright and broad between
Its verdant banks, the river glides, &mdash; and pure
The upland springs gush out with rippling sheen;
And husband-men their busy toils endure;&mdash;
All, all appear at once, in living miniature!

'Tis something of ubiquity, to stand
Above the clouds, in the etherial sea,
Whence the inquiring vision may command,
At one wild glance, a bright immensity
Of every thing, which separately we
Deem vast and mighty! &mdash; while proud man the great,
And all the splendour of his pageantry,
And his ten thousand palaces of state,
Scarce dot the crowded view, where all things congregate!

And this we deem our immortality;&mdash;
That the unbounded spirit can out-spread
And multiply its thoughts eternally;
Communing with the spirits of the dead,
And blending with the living; &mdash; until led
By its exploring energy, it springs
In flight sublime; with reverential dread,
Seeking the great First Principle of things,
And travels on thro' worlds with swift untiring wings;

O'erwhelm'd and tortur'd with the painful grasp
Of its conceptions of infinity;
And struggling with intensity to clasp
The measure of Jehovah!  and to be
Incorporated with the Deity,
In one pure essence of intelligence;
Unclogged &mdash; unbounded &mdash; uncontrolled by the
Gross qualities of matter and of sense,
With nought to dim or mar the glorious immense!

O God!  these fervent yearnings of my soul,
O'ercome the feeble functions of my frame!&mdash;
My spirit kindling as tho' by a coal
From off thine altar, bursts into a flame,
And burns its grateful offering to thy name;
And sends its coruscations to thy throne,
As earth throws back her light to whence it came!&mdash;
O!  on this Sinai make thy presence known!
For now I seem to stand, great God!  with thee alone!
