O!  how the spirit travels with the eye!
How the excursive thought doth wander far
O'er yonder mountains, heaving to the sky,
In billowy undulations! &mdash; They do bar
The contemplative sight, and dimly mar
The misty, mellow distance, like a cloud
Which thro' the amber heavens, as a car
Of happy spirits, floats sublime and proud,
Wrapping its solemn form in space's cerulean shroud!

O!  how th' excursive thought doth wander far
O'er yonder mountains, on whose brow serene
Peace seems reclining like a lonely star,
And throws its softness o'er the space between,
Forming to fancy's eye; a pensive scene,
Where solitary spirits might repose,
In gentleness and quietude:  and e'en
The broken heart forget its many woes,
And languish on through years, to life's desired close!

O!  how the spirit travels with the eye!&mdash;
Ye far-off mountains!  are ye what ye seem?
Soft, sunny spots serene, &mdash; extending high
Above the misty gloom of earth? &mdash; which teem
With smiling peace? &mdash; Or is it but a dream
Of my imagination? &mdash; and are ye,
Like the illusions of our hopes, that gleam
Bright from afar, but prove at last to be
(When the warm bosom hugs them) frigid perfidy?

Like little families around the hearth,
Where peace domestic, and contentment dwell,
Along the varied, undulated earth,
Within the bosom of a mountain dell,
How many Hamlets rise!  Ah!  who can tell
The spirits that dwell in them, &mdash; the desires,
The hopes and disappointments? &mdash; We may well
Behold their splendid domes, their lofty spires
But ah!  we cannot see the soul's corroding fires!

Age after age shall come and pass away,
And generation after generation rise,
And yield to ruin's all-destroying sway,
And mingle with the lifeless dust that lies
Beneath the spurning feet! &mdash; Millions of eyes
May weep as mine have wept. &mdash; Millions of hearts
May agonize like mine, which multiplies
In miseries with every-thing, and smarts
With deep, unhealing wounds from sorrow's barbed darts!

But where shall be those mountain hamlets then?
In that far-off, inevitable day?
When all shall have returned to earth again,
And all that now survive, of human clay,
Shall leave not one to ask; &mdash; "ah where are they?"
Or paint the spot where those who have been, be;
But o'er their tombs the forest beasts shall stray;
And there shall but remain, of all I see,
Revolving ruins dull and dark eternity!

O!  how my spirit travels, and combines
With all the dark realities of life!
Making itself a part of all! &mdash; and twines
With every thing that sinks beneath the knife,
Of dire calamity's all-crushing strife!
Weeping with all that weep, and deeply bleeding
In every scene were misery is rife,
And in my heart the fire of sorrow feeding,
With life and peace and hope, all gloomily receding!

O!  how my spirit travels! &mdash; Would to Heaven!
It might return and bring me back my peace!
But I am strip'd of all! &mdash; my heart is riven!&mdash;
My hopes are gone! &mdash; my agonies increase!&mdash;
O!  thou great God of mercy!  when shall cease
This deep destroying conflict? &mdash; shall there be,
In life's short-during and precarious lease,
No smiles of joy, &mdash; no quietude to me?
But must I always bear my speechless misery?

Then be it so; &mdash; and I will strive to bend,
In silent acquiescence to my fate:
A time shall come, at least, in which shall end
The ruthless torturings of human hate!&mdash;
And whatso'er may be our future state
We hope that disappointment shall not wring
The heart: &mdash; nor smiling perfidy await
Our every expectation, &mdash; nor the sting
Of blighted feelings' deep, and early withering!

O!  how my spirit multiplies its thought!
And travels over the abyss of years!
Piercing Eternity's dark womb, where nought
To the exploring energy appears
But speculations, wrapt in awful fears
Of mystery inscrutable, sublime!&mdash;
Where inconceivable infinity uprears
A steep arduity we cannot climb
Beyond the disembodying cataract of time;&mdash;

Whose rapid current rushes with the freight
Of revolutionizing worlds, and sweeps
Empires and nations, crumbling 'neath the weight
Of their mortality!  and headlong leaps
Into the dark, unfathomable deeps
Of God's immensity! &mdash; there mingling wide,
At last, in that unwasting Ocean, sleeps,
Whose black and waveless waters silent glide,
In one eternal onward, onward, onward tide!

Return my spirit!  yet again, and dwell
Upon those mountains, which serenely lie,
Heaved like the Ocean, in full many a swell,
Beneath a bright and warmly mellow sky!&mdash;
O!  how those sunny spots delight the eye
And draw the heart, as 'twere, from its retreat
Of gloomy sorrow, &mdash; heaving oft a sigh
Of hope, that it may find a spot as sweet,
Where it once more may peace, love, and contentment meet.
