My own, my dearest &mdash;, wilt thou hear
From one who fondly loves thee, and surveys
Thy noble mind with admiration's tear,
And often dwells delighted on its praise;
Ah!  wilt thou hear admonitory lays?
The tender chidings of a heart that glows
Whenever joy illumes thy checquer'd days;
Bleeds in compassion o'er thy bosom's woes,
And sympathizing seeks to lull them to repose?

Oh!  I would have thee shun the gloomy thought
That with misanthropy beclouds thy mind!
Let not its lofty sentiments be fraught
With hatred for thy brethren of mankind:
Perfection, here, alas!  we cannot find;
But wrath indignant never yet could move
To penitence the soul to vice resign'd:
Oh, no!  'tis pitying forgiving love,
Which, o'er the erring heart, alone will conquering prove.

Spirit sublime!  ah!  thou art here alone&mdash;
I've watch'd thee oft, through many a varying mood,
Mark'd sensibility's profoundest tone,
And wept to view thy bosom's solitude:
And yet, I trust 'tis for thy final good;
Not always too perhaps it shall be so;
A friend my yet be giv'n to thee, endued
With all thou seekest, even here below:
At least, in Heav'n a kindred spirit thou shalt know.

One friend there is, my &mdash;, ever near,
And ever ready sympathy to give;
Who thy complaints compassionate will hear,
With pow'r and will each sorrow to relieve.
Dost thou untouch'd, uninterested grieve?
Oh!  He is good, beyond what words can say;
Pure, perfect, changeless:  Him in faith receive,
Such as discover'd by the Gospel's ray,
And safely thou shalt walk through life's most dang'rous way.

Think not I mean to hint the dreadful fear
That this support thou dost neglect to find;
I know, devotion, ardent and sincere,
Entrances oft thy warm, enthusiast mind:
But when I see those reasoning pow'rs refin'd
Perhaps too boldly, sacred themes pursue,
And to the sceptic's cavilling inclin'd,
I tremble, lest the Sun's too dazzling hue
Should blind, or dim, thy intellectual view.

Reason, though noblest attribute of Man,
Is yet imperfect in this fallen sphere;
Strive as it will, it cannot grasp the plan
Which fram'd us as we are, and plac'd us here:
In humble silence let us then revere,
What we hereafter shall completely know.
Oh!  when confiding trust, with faith sincere,
And holy love, within our bosoms glow,
We taste the highest bliss conferr'd on Man below!
