Hail Nymph divine!  within whose sacred breast
The giddy burst of laughter never ran:
Whose limbs sedate in dusky mantle drest,
Shun the loud tumult of discordant man;
Pacing through rugged dells or forests wide,
With melancholy musing by thy side.

Thee Solitude, all hail!  within thy bower,
Remote alike from cares and noisy mirth;
Where rude luxuriance spreads th' uncultur'd flower,
Wild as the rugged soil that gave it birth;
There, or within or cave, or grot, or cell,
With thee sweet lonely nymph would I forever dwell;

For there above the range of low desires,
The joys of sense that languish and decay,
In meditation rapt thy soul aspires
Beyond the precincts of its kindred clay;
And there, as o'er the splendid scene she flies,
Sees in uncertain tints enchanting prospects rise.

Yet not alone doth meditation warm,
Or joys ideal soothe thy tranquil breast,
For every passing object hath its charm
To lull thy soul to quietude and rest;
And slumbers there their opiate influence shed,
Tho' rocky pillows rise to prop the drooping head.

Fairest the rugged scene to thee appears,
Where nature triumphs in her rudest form,
And o'er the barren heath, exulting, rears
The naked bramble and the shaggy thorn;
While to thy sense the wild-grown flowers assume
A fresher fragrance there, and there a richer bloom.

For thee the desert smiles:  the owlet sings;
For thee the raven tunes her hoarser throat,
And o'er the sullen gloom of silence flings
A sweeter measure and a softer note;
The whilst upon thine ear harsh discord plays,
Mild as the soothing strain of Philomela's lays.

Though oft, sweet Nymph, the giddy crowd appears,
Wrapt in thyself, a wilderness to thee;
Yet would I hence beguile my fleeting years,
Where impulse, unconstrained, finds all is free;
There no dull soul with thee shall sadly stray,
Wishing in vain to waste the tedious, toilsome day.

For he, whom guilt hath bade thy realms explore,
Nor peace serene, nor comfort e'er shall know;
He o'er the trackless waste and wide-stretch'd shore
Shall find but misery, and pain, and woe.
Hope shall he covet; but despair shall rise,
And nought but anguish there shall ever meet his eyes.

Shut from thy kind protection, he shall fly
To bustle, noise, and tumult for repose:
Though there he gaily quench the half-raised sigh,
And drown a present care in future woes;
With thee yet will I gladly roam:  our guide
Fair innocence shall be, though good or ill betide.

Oh!  lead me then to some sequester'd dell,
Where pride and pomp can ne'er deceive me more;
Or to the dreary scene where oceans swell
In heaving billows laves the desert shore:
There on the craggy rocks we'll fondly lie,
And listen to the sea-bird's solitary cry.

And as thou slowly walk'st at midnight hour
Among the gloomy mansions of the dead,
Let me with thee partake the hallowed power,
And o'er some friendly tomb recline my head.
Luxurious wo!  which ever to attain
The vulgar soul may strive and ever strive in vain.

If then alone with thee no cares annoy;
No wayward chance can there embitter life;
If every fleeting moment hath its joy,
Unknown to discord, and unknown to strife;
Henceforth to live with thee I'll quick repair,
And make my constant home my habitation there.
