Harp of Jerusalem!  how shall my hand
Awake thy hallelujahs? &mdash; How begin
The song that tells of light ineffable,
And of the dwellers there; the fountain pure
And source of all, where bright archangels dwell,
And where, in unapproached pavilion, framed
Of twelve deep veils, and every veil composed
Of thousand thousand lustres, sits enthroned
The God of Nature! &mdash; O thou harp of Salem,
Where shall my strain begin?

Soft let it be,
And simple as its own primeval airs;
And, Minstrel, when on angel wing thou soar'st,
Then will the harp of David rise with thee.

In that fair heaven the mortal virgin stood
Beside her lovely guide, Cela his name.
Yes deem it heaven, for not the ample sky,
As seen from earth, could slight proportion bear
To those bright regions of eternal day,
Once they are gained &mdash; So sweet the breeze of life
Breathed through the groves of amaranth &mdash; So sweet
The very touch of that celestial land.
Soon as the virgin trode thereon, she felt
Unspeakable delight &mdash; Sensations new
Thrilled her whole frame &mdash; As one, who his life long
Hath in a dark and chilly dungeon pined,
Feels when restored to freedom and the sun.

Upon a mount they stood of wreathy light,
Which cloud had never rested on, nor hues
Of night had ever shaded &mdash; Thence they saw
The motioned universe, that wheeled around
In fair confusion. &mdash; Raised as they were now
To the high fountain-head of light and vision,
Where'er they cast their eyes abroad they found
The light behind, the object still before;
And on the rarified and pristine rays
Of vision borne, their piercing sight passed on
Intense and all unbounded &mdash; Onward! &mdash; onward!
No cloud to intervene!  no haze to dim!
Or nigh, or distant, it was all the same;
For distance lessened not. &mdash; O what a scene,
To see so many goodly worlds upborne!
Around! &mdash; around! &mdash; all turning their green bosoms
And glittering waters to that orb of life
On which our travellers stood, and all by that
Sustained and gladdened!  By that orb sustained!
No &mdash; by the mighty everlasting one
Who in that orb resides, and round whose throne
Our journeyers now were hovering.  But they kept
Aloof upon the skirts of heaven; for, strange
Though it appears, there was no heaven beside.
They saw all nature &mdash; all that was they saw;
But neither moon, nor stars, nor firmament,
Nor clefted galaxy was any more.
Worlds beyond worlds, with intermundane voids,
That closed and opened as those worlds rolled on,
Were all that claimed existence:  Each of these,
From one particular point of the sun's orb,
Seemed pendent by some ray or viewless cord,
On which it twirled and swung with endless motion.

O!  never did created being feel
Such rapt astonishment, as did this maid
Of earthly lineage, when she saw the plan
Of GOD'S fair universe! &mdash; Himself enthroned
In light she dared not yet approach! &mdash; From whence
He viewed the whole, and with a father's care
Upheld and cherished. &mdash; Wonder seemed it none
That Godhead should discern each thing minute
That moved on his creation, when the eyes
Which he himself had made could thus perceive
All these broad orbs turn their omniferous breasts,
And sun them in their maker's influence.
O!  it was sweet to see their ample vales,
Their yellow mountains, and their winding streams,
All basking in the beams of light and life!

Each one of all these worlds seemed the abode
Of intellectual beings; but their forms,
Their beauty, and their natures varied all.
And in these worlds there were broad oceans rolled,
And branching seas. &mdash; Some wore the hues of gold,
And some of emerald or of burnished glass;
And there were seas that keel had never ploughed,
Nor had the shadow of a veering sail
Scared their inhabitants &mdash; for slumbering shades
And spirits brooded on them.

"Cela, speak,"
Said the delighted but inquiring maid,
"And tell me which of all these worlds I see
Is that we lately left?  For I would fain
Note how far more extensive 'tis and fair
Than all the rest &mdash; little, alas!  I know
Of it, save that it is a right fair globe,
Diversified and huge, and that afar,
In one sweet corner of it, lies a spot
I dearly love &mdash; where Tweed from distant moors
Far travelled flows in murmuring majesty;
And Yarrow rushing from her bosky banks,
Hurries with headlong haste to the embrace
Of her more stately sister of the hills.
Ah!  yonder 'tis! &mdash; Now I perceive it well,"
Said she with ardent voice, bending her eye
And stretching forth her arm to a broad globe
That basked in the light &mdash; "Yonder it is!
I know the Caledonian mountains well,
And mark the moony braes and curved heights
Above the lone Saint Mary. &mdash; Cela, speak;
Is not that globe the world where I was born,
And yon the land of my nativity?"
She turned around her beauteous earnest face,
With asking glance, but soon that glance withdrew,
And silent looked abroad on glowing worlds;
For she beheld a smile on Cela's face,
A smile that might an angel's face become,
When listening to the boasted, pigmy skill
Of high presuming man. &mdash; She looked abroad,
But nought distinctly marked &mdash; nor durst her eye
Again meet his, although that way her face
So near was turned, one glance might have read more;
But yet that glance was staid.  Pleased to behold
Her virgin modesty, and simple grace,
His hand upon her flexile shoulder pressed,
In kind and friendly guise, he thus began:

"My lovely ward, think not I deem your quest
Impertinent or trivial &mdash; well aware
Of all the longings of humanity
Toward the first, haply the only scenes
Of nature e'er beheld or understood;
Where the immortal and unquenched mind
First ope'd its treasures; and the longing soul
Breathed its first yearnings of eternal hope.
I know it all; nor do I deem it strange,
In such a wilderness of moving spheres,
Thou should'st mistake the world that gave thee birth.
Prepare to wonder, and prepare to grieve:
For I perceive that thou hast deemed the earth
The fairest, and the most material part
Of God's creation.  Mark yon cloudy spot,
Which yet thine eye hath never rested on;
And tho' not long the viewless golden cord
That chains it to this heaven, yclept the sun,
It seems a thing subordinate &mdash; a sphere
Unseemly and forbidding &mdash; 'Tis the earth.
What think'st thou now of thy Almighty maker,
And of this goodly universe of his?"

Down sunk the virgin's eye &mdash; her heart seemed warped
Deep deep in meditation &mdash; while her face
Denoted mingled sadness. &mdash; 'Twas a thought
She trembled to express.  At length with blush,
And faltering tongue, she mildly thus replied:

"I see all these fair worlds inhabited
By beings of intelligence and mind;
O!  Cela, tell me this &mdash; Have they all fallen,
And sinned like us?  And has a living God
Bled in each one of all these peopled worlds?
Or only on yon dank and dismal spot
Hath one Redeemer suffered for them all?"

"Hold, hold &mdash; No more! &mdash; Thou talk'st thou knowest not what,"
Said her conductor with a fervent mien;
"More thou shalt know hereafter. &mdash; But meanwhile
This truth conceive, that God must ever deal
With men as men &mdash; Those things by him decreed,
Or compassed by permission, ever tend
To draw his creatures, whom he loves, to goodness;
For he is all benevolence, and knows
That in the paths of virtue and of love
Alone, can final happiness be found.
More thou shalt know hereafter. &mdash; Pass we on
Around this glorious heaven, till by degrees
Thy frame and vision are so subtilized,
As that thou may'st the inner regions near
Where dwell the holy angels &mdash; where the saints
Of God meet in assembly &mdash; seraphs sing,
And thousand harps, in unison complete,
With one vibration sound Jehovah's name."

Far far away, thro' regions of delight
They journeyed on &mdash; not like the earthly pilgrim,
Fainting with hunger, thirst, and burning feet,
But, leaning forward on the liquid air
Like twin-born eagles, skimmed the fields of light,
Circling the pales of heaven.  In joyous mood,
Sometimes thro' groves of shady depth they strayed,
Arm linked in arm, as lovers walk the earth;
Or rested in the bowers where roses hung,
And flow'rets holding everlasting sweetness.
And they would light upon celestial hills
Of beauteous softened green, and converse hold
With beings like themselves in form and mind;
Then, rising lightly from the velvet breast
Of the green mountain, down upon the vales
They swooped amain by lawns and streams of life;
Then over mighty hills an arch they threw
Formed like the rainbow. &mdash; Never since the time
That God outspread the glowing fields of heaven
Were two such travellers seen! &mdash; In all that way
They saw new visitants hourly arrive
From other worlds, in that auspicious land
To live for ever. &mdash; These had sojourned far
From world to world more pure &mdash; till by degrees
After a thousand years progression, they
Stepped on the confines of that land of life,
Of bliss unspeakable and evermore.

Yet, after such probation of approach,
So exquisite the feelings of delight
Those heavenly regions yielded, 'twas beyond
Their power of sufferance. &mdash; Overcome with bliss,
They saw them wandering in amazement on,
With eyes that took no image on their spheres,
Misted in light and glory; or laid down,
Stretched on the sward of heaven in ecstasy.

Yet still their half-formed words and breathings were
Of one that loved them, and had brought them home
With him in full felicity to dwell.

To sing of all the scenes our travellers saw,
An angel's harp were meet, which mortal hand
Must not assay. &mdash; These scenes must be concealed
From mortal fancy and from mortal eye,
Until our weary pilgrimage is done.

They kept the outer heaven, for it behoved
Them so to do; and in that course beheld
Immeasurable vales, all colonized
From worlds subjacent. &mdash; Passing inward still
Toward the centre of the heavens, they saw
The dwellings of the saints of ancient days,
And martyrs for the right &mdash; men of all creeds,
Features, and hues!  Much did the virgin muse,
And much reflect on this strange mystery,
So ill conform to all she had been taught
From infancy to think, by holy men;
Till looking round upon the spacious globes
Dependent on that heaven of light &mdash; and all
Rejoicing in their God's beneficence,
These words spontaneously burst from her lips:
"Child that I was, ah!  could my stinted mind
Harbour the thought, that the Almighty's love,
Life, and salvation could to single sect
Of creatures be confined, all his alike!"

Last of them all, in ample circle spread
Around the palaces of heaven, they passed
The habitations of those radiant tribes
That never in the walks of mortal life
Had sojourned, or with human passions toiled.
Pure were they framed; and round the skirts of heaven
At first were placed, till other dwellers came
From other spheres, by human beings nursed.
Then inward those withdrew, more meet to dwell
In beatific regions.  These again
Followed by more, in order regular,
Neared to perfection.  It was most apparent
Thro' all created nature, that each being,
From the archangel to the meanest soul
Cherished by savage, caverned in the snow,
Or panting on the brown and sultry desert,
That all were in progression &mdash; moving on
Still to perfection.  In conformity
The human soul is modelled &mdash; hoping still
In something onward!  Something far beyond,
It fain would grasp! &mdash; Nor shall that hope be lost!
The soul shall hold it &mdash; she shall hope, and yearn,
And grasp, and gain, for times and ages, more
Than thought can fathom, or proud science climb!

At length they reached a vale of wondrous form
And dread dimensions, where the tribes of heaven
Assembly held, each in its proper sphere
And order placed.  That vale extended far
Across the heavenly regions, and its form
A tall gazoon, or level pyramid.
Along its borders palaces were ranged,
All fronted with the thrones of beauteous seraphs,
Who sat with eyes turned to the inmost point
Leaning upon their harps; and all those thrones
Were framed of burning crystal, where appeared
In mingled gleam millions of dazzling hues!

Still, as the valley narrowed to a close,
These thrones increased in grandeur and in glory,
On either side, until the inmost two
Rose so sublimely high, that every arch
Was ample as the compass of that bow
That, on dark cloud, bridges the vales of earth.

The columns seemed ingrained with gold, and branched
With many lustres, whose each single lamp
Shone like the sun as from the earth beheld;
And each particular column, placed upon
A northern hill, would cap the polar wain.
There sat half-shrouded in incessant light
The great Archangels, nighest to the throne
Of the Almighty &mdash; for &mdash; O dreadful view!
Betwixt these two, closing the lengthened files,
Stood the pavilion of the eternal God!
Himself unseen, in tenfold splendours veiled,
The least unspeakable, so passing bright,
That even the eyes of angels turned thereon
Grow dim, and round them transient darkness swims.

Within the verge of that extended region
Our travellers stood.  Farther they could not press,
For round the light and glory threw a pale,
Repellent, but to them invisible;
Yet myriads were within of purer frame.

Ten thousand thousand messengers arrived
From distant worlds, the missioners of heaven,
Sent forth to countervail malignant sprites
That roam existence.  These gave their report,
Not at the throne, but at the utmost seats
Of these long files of throned seraphims,
By whom the word was passed.  Then fast away
Flew the commissioned spirits, to renew
Their watch and guardship in far distant lands.
They saw them, in directions opposite,
To every point of heaven glide away
Like flying stars; or, far adown the steep,
Gleam like small lines of light.

Now was the word
Given out, from whence they knew not, that all tongues,
Kindreds, and tribes, should join, with one accord,
In hymn of adoration and acclaim,
To Him that sat upon the throne of heaven,
Who framed, saved, and redeemed them to himself!

Then all the countless hosts obeisance made,
And with their faces turned unto the throne,
Stood up erect, while all their coronals
From off their heads, were reverently upborne.
Our earth-born visitant quaked every limb.
The angels touched their harps with gentle hand
As prelude to begin &mdash; then, all at once,
With full o'erwhelming swell the strain arose;
And pealing high rolled o'er the throned lists
And tuneful files, as if the sun itself
Welled forth the high and holy symphony!
All heaven beside was mute &mdash; the streams stood still
And did not murmur &mdash; the light wandering winds
Withheld their motion in the midst of heaven,
Nor stirred the leaf, but hung in breathless trance
Where first the sounds assailed them! &mdash; even the windows
Of God's pavilion seemed to open wide
And drink the harmony!

Few were the strains
The virgin pilgrim heard, for they o'erpowered
Her every sense; and down she sunk entranced
By too supreme delight, and all to her
Was lost &mdash; She saw nor heard not! &mdash; it was gone!

Long did she lie beside a cooling spring
In her associate's arms, before she showed
Motion or life &mdash; and when she first awoke
It was in dreaming melody &mdash; low strains
Half sung, half uttered, hung upon her breath.

"O!  is it past?"  said she; "Shall I not hear
That song of heaven again? &mdash; Then all beside
Of being is unworthy &mdash; take me back,
Where I may hear that lay of glory flow,
And die away in it. &mdash; My soul shall mix
With its harmonious numbers, and dissolve
In fading cadence at the gates of light."

Back near the borders of that sacred vale
Cautious they journeyed; and at distance heard
The closing anthem of that great assembly
Of saints and angels. &mdash; First the harps awoke
A murmuring tremulous melody, that rose
Now high &mdash; now seemed to roll in waves away.
And aye between this choral hymn was sung,
"O!  holy!  holy!  Holy!  just, and true,
Art thou, Lord God Almighty!  thou art he
Who was, and is, and evermore shall be!"
Then every harp, and every voice, at once
Resounded Halleluiah!  so sublime,
That all the mountains of the northern heaven,
And they are many, sounded back the strain.

O!  when the voices and the lyres were strained
To the rapt height, the full delirious swell,
Then did the pure elastic mounds of heaven
Quiver and stream with flickering radiance,
Like gossamers along the morning dew.
Still paused the choir, till the last echo crept
Into the distant hill &mdash; O it was sweet!
Beyond definement sweet!  and never more
May ear of mortal list such heavenly strains,
While linked to erring frail humanity.

After much holy converse with the saints
And dwellers of the heaven, of that concerned
The ways of God with man, and wondrous truths
But half revealed to him, our sojourners
In holy awe withdrew.  And now, no more
By circular and cautious route they moved,
But straight across the regions of the blest,
And storied vales of heaven did they advance,
On rapt ecstatic wing; and oft assayed
The seraph's holy hymn.  As they passed bye,
The angels paused; and saints, that lay reposed
In bowers of paradise, upraised their heads
To list the passing music; for it went
Swift as the wild-bee's note, that on the wing
Booms like unbodied voice along the gale.

At length upon the brink of heaven they stood;
There lingering, forward on the air they leaned
With hearts elate, to take one parting look
Of nature from its source, and converse hold
Of all its wonders.  Not upon the sun,
But on the halo of bright golden air
That fringes it they leaned, and talked so long,
That from contiguous worlds they were beheld
And wondered at as beams of living light.

There all the motions of the ambient spheres
Were well observed, explained, and understood.
All save the mould of that mysterious chain
Which bound them to the sun &mdash; that God himself,
And he alone, could comprehend or wield.

While thus they stood or lay (for to the eyes
Of all their posture seemed these two between,
Bent forward on the wind, in graceful guise,
On which they seemed to press, for their fair robes
Were streaming far behind them) there passed bye
A most erratick wandering globe, that seemed
To run with troubled aimless fury on.
The virgin, wondering, inquired the cause
And nature of that roaming meteor world.

When Cela thus. &mdash; "I can remember well
When yon was such a world as that you left;
A nursery of intellect, for those
Where matter lives not.  Like these other worlds,
It wheeled upon its axle, and it swung
With wide and rapid motion.  But the time
That God ordained for its existence run,
Its uses in that beautiful creation,
Where nought subsists in vain, remained no more!
The saints and angels knew of it, and came
In radiant files, with awful reverence,
Unto the verge of heaven where we now stand,
To see the downfall of a sentenced world.
Think of the impetus that urges on
These ponderous spheres, and judge of the event.
Just in the middle of its swift career,
Th' Almighty snapt the golden cord in twain
That hung it to the heaven &mdash; creation sobbed!
And a spontaneous shriek rang on the hills
Of these celestial regions.  Down amain
Into the void the outcast world descended,
Wheeling and thundering on!  Its troubled seas
Were churned into a spray, and, whizzing, flurred
Around it like a dew. &mdash; The mountain tops
And ponderous rocks were off impetuous flung,
And clattered down the steeps of night for ever

"Away into the sunless starless void
Rushed the abandoned world; and thro' its caves,
And rifted channels, airs of chaos sung.
The realms of night were troubled &mdash; for the stillness
Which there from all eternity had reigned
Was rudely discomposed; and moaning sounds,
Mixed with a whistling howl, were heard afar
By darkling spirits! &mdash; Still with stayless force,
For years and ages, down the wastes of night
Rolled the impetuous mass! &mdash; of all its seas
And superficies disencumbered,
It boomed along, till by the gathering speed,
Its furnaced mines and hills of walled sulphur
Were blown into a flame &mdash; when meteor-like,
Bursting away upon an arching track,
Wide as the universe, again it scaled
The dusky regions. &mdash; Long the heavenly hosts
Had deemed the globe extinct &mdash; nor thought of it,
Save as an instance of Almighty power:
Judge of their wonder and astonishment,
When far as heavenly eyes can see, they saw
In yon blue void, that hideous world appear!
Showering thin flame, and shining vapour forth
O'er half the breadth of heaven! &mdash; The angels paused!
And all the nations trembled at the view.

"But great is he who rules them! &mdash; He can turn
And lead it all unhurtful thro' the spheres,
Signal of pestilence, or wasting sword,
That ravage and deface humanity.

"The time will come when, in likewise, the earth
Shall be cut off from God's fair universe;
Its end fulfilled. &mdash; But when that time shall be,
From man, from saint, and angel is concealed."

Here ceased the converse. &mdash; To a tale like this
What converse could succeed? &mdash; They turned around,
And kneeling on the brow of heaven, there paid
Due adoration to that holy one,
Who framed and rules the elements of nature.
Then like two swans that far on wing have scaled
The Alpine heights to gain their native lake,
At length, perceiving far below their eye
The beauteous silvery speck &mdash; they slack their wings,
And softly sink adown the incumbent air:
So sunk our lovely pilgrims, from the verge
Of the fair heaven, down the streamered sky;
Far other scenes and other worlds to view.

