Hail Winter, in the drapery of Storm!
Hail stern and des'late empress of the year!
Thy howling tempests, and thy haggard form
To me, than Spring's soft breathings, are more dear!
Thy breast of snow &mdash; thy biting atmosphere,
And all thy cold inhospitable train
Of winds and frost, and storm, are less severe,
Than things that in the human world obtain,
Which murder all our peace, and triumph o'er the slain.

Hail dreary Winter!  sullen as thou art,
There is a truth, &mdash; an honesty in thee,
Which, tho' it freeze, will ne'er deceive the heart,
Like gaudy Spring's fantastic witchery;
That blooms, and withers, and decays: &mdash; and we
Can scarce behold it, ere 'tis pass'd away,
Like woman's love, and woman's Treachery!&mdash;
Thy frigid brow, and cold embraces may
Chill all our expectations, but will ne'er betray.

Hail Winter! &mdash; Hail thou grave our the dread year!
The wreck of Seasons sleeps beneath thy shroud:
Spring's fair enchantments, Summer's bright career,
And Autumn's merry revelry, have bow'd
To thy control, as fades a gilded cloud
Before the night, &mdash; and desolate and drear,
Dismantled nature lies, while fierce and loud
Thy howling dirge now swells above the bier
Of Spring and Summer's charms, of Autumn's merry cheer.

The buddings and the blossomings of Spring
Are like the youth's hopes and pleasures, which decay;
They bloom and flourish for a while, and fling
A dying fragrance, and then pass away!
Then comes hot Summer with its scorching ray,
And withers Spring's too delicate remains;
E'en like our passions, whose impetuous sway
Turns all our young delights into deep pains,
And withers every flower on fancy's youthful plains.

Mild Autumn with her over-flowing horn,
Succeeding comes, luxuriant and serene;
Rich, ruddy grapes, her cheerful brows adorn,
And bounteous plenty smiles o'er all the scene:
But, ah!  how soon does Autumn change her mien!
How soon are her blythe reveries forgot!&mdash;
Dull, gloomy calms, with fitful blasts between,
Are the drear sequel of her solemn lot;
And Autumn's choicest fruits have ripen'd but to rot!

Stern, desolating, howling like the roar
Of angry ocean, Winter onward sweeps,
And rushes all impetuously o'er
The bosom of creation &mdash; on which sleeps
The dust of what had been; and nature weeps
O'er the dark devastation, and her tears,
Ev'n like the stream which from the mountain creeps,
Freeze as they start, and nature thus appears
A melancholy waste, &mdash; a gloomy wreck of years.

Hail Winter, sullen kindred of my soul!
Oh!  thou art welcome! &mdash; for there is to me,
In the fierce ragings of thy storms, which roll
Around my lonely form, a melody,&mdash;
A music which I love! &mdash; The leafless tree,
The bleak grey rock, the mountain's hoary peak,
All which are stern insignia of thee,
And thy keen blasts which rush upon my cheek,
All, all have tongues for me, and of my fortune speak!

My Spring was promising but changeable,
And many bright and pleasing hopes did start,
But withered in the embryo, and fell
Fruitless upon my too expectant heart!
There they are sepulcher'd; &mdash; and still the smart
Of their remembrance, is a living theme
For my dark thoughts, which brood, as 'twere apart
From life and its dull incidents, and dream
Of things that may not be, and with strange bodings teem.

The Summer of my passions was but brief,
But it was scorching as the torrid ray!&mdash;
Wilting and withering every verdant leaf
Of greener expectations &mdash; and the gay
And glowing work of fancy, shrunk away;
And all my former cherished scenes were sear;
And then abortive Autumn came to pay
Me with a blighted sheaf, and disappear,
And yield my spirit up to Winter's wild career!

Now lonely! &mdash; lonely! &mdash; lonely!  is the cry,
Which from my solitary spirit gushes,
As o'er my heart, where all my dead hopes lie,
The drifting tempest of misfortune rushes,
And piles the mountain of its storm and crushes
The feeble strength, with which I brave in vain,
Against th' incumbent weight &mdash; which never hushes
In its accumulation, but amain,
Bends my upheaving soul with ever pressing pain!

Thy sweeping storms, Oh Winter!  soon shall cease,
And fairer scenes shall still succeed to thee;
The verdant earth shall smile again in peace&mdash;
Foliage shall clothe the desolated tree,
And e'en upon the bleak rock, there shall be
A green and living moss; and there shall spring
Upon the mountain's peak, new drapery;
And where thy blasts now rush, sweet birds shall sing,
And merry &mdash; merry sounds shall through creation ring!

But oh!  the blighting Winter of the soul,&mdash;
The freezing desolation of the heart,&mdash;
O'er which the tempests of the spirit roll,
Shall feel in life, no renovation start!&mdash;
No Spring of hope, succeeding, shall impart
The verdure of our brighter days, nor bring
Forgetfulness to memory's ceaseless smart;
But grief's accumulating storm shall fling
Into the ruined soul an everlasting sting!
