Far to the west, I see the distant sun
On burning car, slow wheeling down the main,
His moon is past, his dazzling beam is done,
Till the bright morn shall lead him up again.
Like him I sink &mdash; and I must hope in vain
To see my splendours usher'd in once more,
While, through the gloomy twilight's sober train,
I wander, sad and pale, along the shore,
To list the fisherman home-bound on weary oar.

Oh, Hudson!  bedded in the highland hills,
Where oft I sported in the splendid year;
Thy disembroguing flood restrains me still,
Infrangible around my prison drear;
Yet may thy banks be green, thy streams be clear,
Sprinkled with balmy dew and flowrets bright;
For they are  sanctified with many a tear,
That dropt, when Mem'ry, bending through the night,
Did strain her languid eye toward scenes of past delight.

They are all fled!  and many an hour serene
Hath been forgotten, between them and me,
Since Clove's sweet valley, clothed in summer green,
Was erst the cradle of mine infancy.
Oh!  that I could recall their harmony
From out the waste of time, where they are dead,
From out the halls of midnight revelry,
Where folly trampled on the sweets they shed,
As treads the scornful gale o'er the pure lilies head.

The moon is up, and soft and beauteously
The shores lie basking in her evening beam;
Where, in his skiff, the mariner I see,
Cradled to sleep, with rocking on the stream.
The sea-breeze steals over the deep, to dream
Upon the bosom of its favourite flower:
How beautiful the land and water seem,
With wave, and moonlight hill, and steeple tower,
All hush'd, as if they felt the soothing slumbering hour.

Yet, not for me, on heaven's cerulean verge,
Returning Cynthia gilds the night once more;
For still I hear, at times, the guardian surge
Girdling the island with its sullen roar.
Oh!  for Dudalief's pinions famed of yore,
To leave, in airy whirls, my prison's bond,
And fly to yonder forest fringed shore,
Where here and there a taper quivering round,
Flits, like a phantom gleam, along the night profound.

Hark!  o'er the moaning waters softly breathing,
From some lone bark that moors along the land&mdash;
The sound of peace, with "linked sweetness" wreathing,
In rich low murmuring dwells along the strand.
Now in full tones combining on the wind,
Now sweetly trembling o'er the waters dim,
It is the sea-boy, at his lonely stand,
Slumbering his watch upon the vessel's brim,
And chanting, as by fits he wakes, the evening hymn.

Oh, muse!  heavenly muse!  thou canst charm
The sorrowing soul to rapture!  even this
Pours through the ducts of this long wasted form.
A sad and momentary word of bliss.
'Tis over soon, yet leaves a consciousness
Of joys, which past, may not return again,
A melancholy pleasing listlessness;
A vision of delight!  a dream of pain
From which the soul, that wakes to weep, cannot refrain.

Oh, Freedom!  birthright of the tawny Ind,
Whose bed, at night, is on the mossy ground;
Whose lullaby, the rudely rocking wind
That wails along the woods with sobbing sound,
Oh!  that I could on thy light footsteps bound,
To meet the savage in his northern plains,
Uncircumscribed in all the region round,
Where the wild steed, the boss and bit disdains,
And lord of the bright heavens the towering eagle reigns.

But no!  that boon for which so many stand
Competitors, must not be claim'd by me,
Till I am number'd in that unknown land,
Where sorrows cease, and slaves again are free.
Count up the hours and let them quickly flee,
Till the last phial on my brow is shed;
Sad cure for those who mourn &mdash; yet let it be,
Freedom is worth where e'er she lifts her head,
Even though it were amid the chambers of the dead.

Patience, kind heaven!  O let me not repine
In hours of suffering for my days of sin.
Parent of good, thou seest these tears of mine,
A sad peace-offering for the heart within;
The bruised reed thou wilt not burst in twain,
Nor wholly quench the mourner's cheerless eye,
Thou wilt not crush the penitent again.
Perchance thy hand shall teach him were to lie,
Smooth his pale brow and lay it on thy lap to die.

But lo!  the night begins to wear apace,
The lark springs joyous to the dawn so dun,
Weary and cold my steps I must retrace,
Before the rousing of the morning gun.
One prayer, and then farewell &mdash; my song hath done;
Oh!  mother-earth, from sorrow shelter me,
Before the downfall of another sun;
Upon thy bosom laid, may my rest be,
A long last sound repose from every evil free.
