How swells with grief each sympathetic heart,
As slowly following to the silent tomb,
When female worth and loveliness depart
In the full pride of youth's too-fleeting bloom!
O'er every face behold what pensive gloom!
From every eye how starts the unbidden tear!
To every bosom that bewails her doom
Rushes the memory of the dead so dear;&mdash;
And all her vanished charms more brightly reappear.

Thus fell our blooming JANE: &mdash; thus mourn'd was she
By all that knew her unassuming worth;&mdash;
For she was kind, and gentle, and with glee
Could oft enliven, with the voice of mirth,
Our social circle round the evening hearth,
Or win the ear with music's softest tone:&mdash;
But now, alas!  she charms no more on earth;
And that sweet voice, and mind, and heart, are flown,&mdash;
To blend with purer souls around OUR FATHER'S Throne!

And if to each loved PARENT'S doating breast,
And all her KINDRED, thus severe the blow:
If such keen agony should FRIENDS arrest
As none but those who feel its pangs can know;
How must that Bosom thrill with poignant wo,
Which Plighted-Love's endearing faith enjoyed?
How must the burning tears of anguish flow,
To find, for blissful hopes, a dreary void,&mdash;
And every charm of Life by Death's cold hand destroyed!

Yes!  she is gone &mdash; "whence none can e'er return,"
And all must follow soon the appalling road!
Those who have felt the flame of Virtue burn,
In some bright sphere to find a blest abode;
And those who feel the stings of conscience goad,
To roam in regions of eternal night!&mdash;
Then O!  let all abjure each sinful load
For Heaven's ungalling yoke and "burthen light,"
And live like her we mourn, &mdash; like her to wing our flight!

But is there nought to sooth all hearts that grieve,
And wipe the undrying tears from every eye?
Can nought surviving Friendship's woes relieve
Or lull the lonely Lover's widowed sigh?
"Yes," &mdash; might some Angel-monitor reply,
"She whom thou mourn'st as dead &mdash; is living now,
In bliss more pure than earthly Worlds can buy!
Then cease thy murmuring sorrows to avow,
And, to the WILL OF HEAVEN with CALM SUBMISSION bow."
