Who walk'd the valley in th' inspired dream,
When skeletons of mighty men lay round,
Flouting the darkness with their bony gleam?
Who heard the mystic voice &mdash; the rushing sound
Of shaking bones uplifted from the ground&mdash;
The breath of the four winds?  whose soul did meet
The shadow'd glory of the warrior's bound,
Speaking of life &mdash; the shout, his lips repeat&mdash;
The multitudinous host, and clang of armed feet?

'Tis the Lord's day &mdash; the day of joy!  weep not,
Daughter of Zion, for thy children's sake!
Though thou forget Him, He hath not forgot;
But cometh, in forgiving love, to break
The fetters of thy shame from off thy neck&mdash;
To give his presence to thy holy sod,
And bid the glory of thy streets awake!
Yea!  Comfort ye my people, saith your God!
For Mercy comes to smile where blasting Vengeance trod!

Hast thou not sinned?  thine own brow hath told&mdash;
For there the characters of Cain are writ!
Art thou not humbled?  let the dust unfold&mdash;
Whereon in desolation thou dost sit,
Lonely amid the nations &mdash; and unlit
By splendour of past years!  no handmaids wait
Around thee!  there is silence in the street&mdash;
Strife in the temple &mdash; wailing at the gate!
Thy children are all fled &mdash; thy house is desolate!

Oh, thou dejected City!  thou forsaken
Land!  where the Prophet's path was wont to be!
Oh, air!  wherein the Psalmists' strings did waken,
Breathing their bold, inspired harmony!
Temple!  where dwelt the Eternal One!  and ye,
His sad and scatter'd sons!  who cannot keep
The Lord's song among strangers &mdash; on the tree
Hanging your harps, while by the waters deep
Of this world's Babylon, ye captive, sit, &mdash; and weep!

Hear!  hear the words of pardon!  let them win
The smile of rapture from the cheek of wo&mdash;
Your warfare is accomplished, and your sin
Is pardon'd!  He, ye pierced, shall bestow
Healing; and He, your fathers would not know,
Shall wipe the tears for ever from your eyes!
God visiteth his vine &mdash; and it shall grow!
The Lord remembereth Israel &mdash; let her rise,
And stretch her fetterless hands, and hymn old melodies!

Daughter of Zion!  smooth thy cheek with smiles&mdash;
Put on thy beautiful garments &mdash; lift thy brow,
And shout rejoicing to the friendly isles,
That thy Redeemer is thy King &mdash; that thou,
Captive with all thy sons, no more may'st bow&mdash;
That God restores the people of his choice&mdash;
That sorrow flees away, for ever, now!
Oh!  sbout it to the nations, with glad voice!
For all the exulting Earth shall, in thy joy, rejoice!
