Another year &mdash; another chequered year,
With all its change of joy and misery,
With each delightful smile, each stealing tear,
Hath swept along o'er Time's unresting sea:
In its fleet course what scenes hath destiny
Brought o'er the path of man's mysterious doom;
What flowers of earth in richest luxury
His hand hath robb'd of verdure and of bloom,
Hath culled their blossoms and prepared their tomb!

I saw youth basking 'neath his calm blue sky,
In all the sweetness of his short delight;
A lovely phantom danced before his eye
In the bright sunbeam, and bewitched his sight:
He thought a form so beautiful and bright
As heaven's creation, could not be untrue;
Alas!  he knew not Hope, her smiles of light
Have all the splendour of the rainbow's hue,
As fair, as gay &mdash; ay, and as transient too.

Enchanted hour!  Oh Nature!  breathes there one
Who hath not felt thy dear, extatic thrill,
When early youth hath watch'd the golden sun
Spring from the east and gild each lofty hill,
When all was blithesome, and his heart was still
With joy that speaks not, so supremely blest?
The birds sung sweetly &mdash; gently flowed the rill
Through banks in green and floral verdure drest
Bright as the glow of his untroubled breast.

Then, when his heart was pure and sorrowless,
Did it not claim emotions from on high?
Was not his soul and voice upraised to bless
The power that framed that sun and smiling sky,
Who bade his thoughts on virtue's aid rely,
And raised his hopes above this sad sojourn,
Where sorrow's tears so often dim the eye,
So oft we pluck the flower and feel the torn,
To heaven's promise of a cloudless morn!

When man first quaffs the cheating cup of life,
Joy fills the bowl and sparkles to the brim;
He recks not of the storm with dangers rife,
And deems the draught will aye be sweet for him;
But see, the sparkling beverage grows dim,
No longer sweet to taste or fair to see:
Oh list ye then, his mournful requiem
Poured for the days of joyous ecstasy,
Sad as the gale's low murmurs o'er the sea.

No more &mdash; no more beats joy within the breast.
When sin pollutes youth's fresh and crystal spring,
When like the night cloud low'ring in the west,
Fate darkly flies upon the tempest's wing.
Oh Time!  thine ear hath heard gay childhood sing
Light as the lark upon the flowery spray,
Thou too hast heard the voice of sorrowing
Resound along thy desolating way,
When thou hast brought a dark, beclouded day.

Oh, never more!  when o'er expiring bliss
The aching heart's sad notes of anguish flow,
Can peace again illume a world like this,
Mansion of care, and hermitage of wo?
Man!  weary pilgrim!  could thy spirit know
The pains, the trials which beset thy way,
Wouldst thou not shrink the task to undergo;
To watch the change of love's inconstant ray;
To feel unkindness' pangs as Friendship's lights decay.

Alas, go Man, and search the book of Time,
Behold it dimmed with misery and tears;
Behold it stained with treachery and crime,
Through the long mournful agony of years;
Behold man's schemes, his wishes and his fears,
How soon hope's promises of bliss are flown;
And if a fair unsullied page appears
In that dread book, a darker page comes on,
Whence purity, and innocence, and joy are gone.

And say what art thou, Hope! &mdash; a dazzling light&mdash;
Ideal phantom &mdash; wild fire of the mind&mdash;
A meteor gleaming through life's stormy night
Upon the rapid pinions of the wind!
And yet without thy ray the eye was blind
With black despair's impenetrable shade;
Thy light allures us, though we cannot find
The blissful haven which thou hast portrayed,
Yet we rely, still trusting, still betrayed.

The ardent vow in love's sweet accents breathed;
The fervent kiss affection hath impressed;
The flowery braid which fancy's hand hath wreathed;
Yea, honour's laurel and ambition's crest,&mdash;
What are they but illusions of the breast!
How they deceive &mdash; bewilder &mdash; and betray!
Leaving the heart deserted and distrest:
They are blossoms of a summer day
As fair in bloom, as rapid in decay.

Oh Time!  what fearful wrecks thy hand hath cast
Upon life's wild and cloud enveloped deep!
Gay o'er is waves Youth's gallant vessel past
Whilst yet the giant storm was hushed to sleep&mdash;
He rose in mighty wrath, thou sawest him sweep
In shadowy grandeur and in rude uproar;
Thou sawest the breakers rising high and steep,
That gallant vessel dash against the shore,
Engulfed beneath the foam, to rise no more.

Thou Time, beheld'st the Roman eagle soar,
His mighty wings expanded as the cloud;
Thou saw'st the aspiring chieftain who, of yore,
Came, saw &mdash; and conquered &mdash; thou beheld'st the crowd
Of millions marching to the war-field proud,
Where waved the banners at Thermophylae,
And gloomy death involved his blood-red shroud
Round the three hundred men &mdash; the brave &mdash; the free&mdash;
The Spartan band who fell so gloriously!

Thou sawest the lofty tower of Babylon
Rise o'er the earth and cleave the vaulted sky;
And as the lapse of ages hurried on,
Thou sawest in dust it's mould'ring fragments lie:
Proudly it frowned as if it could defy
In it's vast might the thunder-bolts of heaven&mdash;
Oh pile of vanity!  upreared so high,
The storm of ages round thy brow hath driven,
And left thy towers in ruin, crushed and riven.

Destroyer Time!  how swiftly dost thou press
Man's footsteps onward to his lonely doom!
Rending apart affection's fond caress,
Stealing from beauty's cheek her rosy bloom,
And shrouding man within the noiseless tomb&mdash;
Ah!  then unheeded shall the buoyant spring
Send forth her zephyrs breathing with perfume;
Reflourish in delightful youth, and bring
Her beautiful wild birds upon the wing.

Where waves the grass above that silent bourne,
The dew may freshen and the morning beam,
But he who rests beneath may not return,
Nor waken from his solitary dream:&mdash;
No &mdash; though fair nature's lap may richly teem,
And spread her garniture of roses there;
Oh!  never more for him can morning gleam,
No more for him the roses scent the air,
Or nature her attire of beauty wear.

Once more the year is numbered.  Come, ye gay,
Ye light of heart &mdash; children of mirth and glee&mdash;
Pause for a while upon your reckless way,
And mark the changes upon fortune's sea:&mdash;
Oh ye!  who dream in love's soft witchery,
Twining round beauty's form love's verdant wreath,
Little ye think that joyless hour to see,
When like the hot simoom, misfortune's breath
Shall blight that wreath, and wither it to death!

Come, and behold how youth and beauty fall
In the brief span of one contracted year;
How oft the dark and melancholy pall
Hath been extended o'er the sable bier,
Bathed with the tribute of affliction's tear.
How oft the peal of the funeral bell
Hath struck its warning on the startled ear,
When o'er the lovely and the loved, that knell
In fitful tones hath poured a last farewell.

Another year &mdash; and yet another year&mdash;
Till the last moment of revolving time,
To us &mdash; to future ages shall appear,
With every change of every earthly clime;
Adorned by virtue and disgraced by crime;
With shame dishonoured and with glory bright,
Until the dawning of that day sublime,
When the fair earth shall vanish from the sight,
Blaze and expire in dark oblivious night.
