Whilst I address thee, brother of my heart,
What sweet sensations in my bosom rise;
Whilst I attempt my feelings to impart,
What tears of pleasure trickle from my eyes:
Nor are they selfish, isolated joys&mdash;
Angels the rich participation claim,
For angels hail thee "brother" through the skies,
And make heaven's courts re-echo with the name
Of God's adopted son &mdash; Redemption is the theme.

O, glorious work!  O work demanding praise!
Life, phenix like, emerges from its sire.
Exult, my soul &mdash; ascend, my loftiest lays,
And let a mortal catch a seraph's fire;
And fill'd with holy zeal, and warm desire,
Pour the loud burst of gratitude along,
Redemption in the Saviour!  earth retire!
Weak are my efforts, but my subject strong,
And as eternity, unbounded is my song!

But O!  what pen can paint, what tongue rehearse
The mighty wonders of a love divine!
Language is barren, grovelling is my verse;
Expression faint, defective every line:
I pause astonish'd &mdash; and the task resign!
We cannot count the sands, nor mountains weigh,
Nor love's immensity in bounds confine!
But we can feel its strength infusing ray,
And mark its golden tints illume salvation's day.

Much I rejoice, nor for myself alone,
The arms of mercy have encompass'd thee!
Thy sinful state, thy helplessness is shown;
And he, who bought thy pardon on the tree,
Already hath pronounced the words "be free&mdash;
Go forth &mdash; no longer captive as before!"
Haste, haste, my brother &mdash; bend the suppliant knee:
His goodness prove, his clemency adore,
And, trusting in his grace, resolve to sin no more.

Art thou determined?  Then in Jesus' might
(Nor earth, nor hell, shall drive thee from the field,)
Drag forth the enemy, commence the fight,
Truth be your cov'ring, faith your well tried shield:
Nor, though a host surround you, basely yield,
Nor think the contest ended by a blow;
The death inflicting sword with vigour wield,
And bid defiance to your triple foe;
Glory is gain above, for victory below.

Art thou a doubting Christian?  O, repel
The mean suggestions of ignoble fear.
Does unbelief with plausive reas'ning tell
'Tis all delusion that we feel, we hear?
Avoid the serpent, close thy mental ear&mdash;
Observe thy thoughts with circumspective care:
The Sun of Righteousness will soon appear
To chase the clouds, to make the prospect fair:
Only be watchful thou, nor cease from fervent prayer.

Soldier!  thy warfare quickly will be past;
Sustain the battle, struggle till the end.
Storms may be strength'ning, sweet the roughest blast,
Grief, prove a comfort &mdash; every foe a friend
To urge thee nearer, where thy steps should tend,
And meek humility will trials bring:
Continue faithful, on thy Lord depend:
So shalt thou reach, where, borne on rapture's wing,
The choirs angelic move, and hallelujahs sing!
