Still pressing on thy rude and powerful path,
Resistless TIME! &mdash; how rapid is thy tide!
Fleet and destroying as the whirlwind's wrath,
Thy progress leaves a ruin far and wide.
Thou dreaded leveller of human pride&mdash;
And stern avenger of all human crime;
Who can the shock of thy dark might abide,
Who can resist thee in thy flight sublime&mdash;
Who can escape thy touch, unsparing TIME!

Eventful Power! &mdash; what scenes of joy and ill
Thou bearest with thee o'er man's destiny;
Now flowing gently as the murmuring rill&mdash;
Now heaving wildly as the stormy sea&mdash;
Along green banks perchance thy course may be
Calm and unruffled &mdash; soon with sudden roar
It dashes on a rough and rocky lee;
A shapeless wreck lies crushed upon the shore&mdash;
Hope's fragile bark &mdash; her cruize too quickly o'er.

Ah!  wo for man &mdash; when life was sweetly young,
How glowed his heart with nature's early fire!
How lightly gay life's morning hymn he sung,
And drank from the fresh fountain of desire;
How fair the view, in fancy's rich attire
All bright and gleaming, in the morning sun&mdash;
A cloud rose o'er it, daily spreading higher
Till all the scene was wrapped in shrouds of dun&mdash;
And in the gloomy contest, TIME hath won.

How blest was Beauty in her summer bower,
Love in her eye, and pleasure in her breast&mdash;
Her cheek all freshness, as the young May-flower.
Her buoyant heart by sorrow undistressed:
Fair were the roses her light footsteep pressed,
And fondly echo answered to her lay&mdash;
Coldly thou camest &mdash; her lovely form compressed
In sullen joy unto thy breast of clay,
And in the clasp her pleasure died away.

Alas!  alas!  her bower now bleak and lone!
Couldst thou not spare earth's only paradise&mdash;
Couldst thou not melt at her heart-moving moan
And pass the spot where such fair flowers could rise?
Couldst thou not feel the power of her sighs?&mdash;
No &mdash; all in vain her anguish and her prayer,
All unregarded her sad streaming eyes&mdash;
Her Eden-bower, once beautiful and fair,
Re-echoed with the cry of her despair.
