O moon!  at midnight's contemplative hour,
When placid slumber holds his noiseless reign,
Throbs my exulting heart to see thee shower
Thy streaming splendours upon rock and plain:
From earth aloof my panting spirit soars,
Communing with revolving worlds on high,
Till lost in deep amazement forth it pours
Its hymn of praise to Him who lit yon sky,
And gave th my young gaze this wond'rous scenery!

O moon!  aside the helmsman lays his chart,
To mark thy beams reflected on the sea;
And faithful mem'ry on his lonely heart
Gives back the light of childhood's revelry.
On his lone pathway may th' auspicious gale
Propel th' expanded canvas on the wave;
Bright be the cynosure which lights his sail&mdash;
Nigh be the mighty arm outstretched to save,
When the blue waves run high, the sea boy from the grave!

O moon!  the sentinel at midnight hour
Rests the dark vigil of his eye on thee:
And pours his benison to that high power
Who dressed for him that gorgeous scenery.
While the bright beams their softer splendours wake,
And on his burnished casque and armour lay,
He hears not the light footstep in yon brake;
His thoughts have wandered to his home away&mdash;
His wife and infant boy &mdash; are their young bosoms gay?

O moon!  on thee at the lone hour of night
The lover gazes with a swimming eye;
And deems that she to whom his heart is plight,
Gazes as fondly on yon gorgeous sky.
Anon his ardent fancy seems to trace,
In the bright mirror of night's lonely hour,
"The light of love, the purity of grace,"
Which charmed his youthful eye in summer's bower,
When to his heart he pressed his bosom's dearest flower!

Again he deems, in fancy's wanton flight,
Some bark of pearl in beauty sailing there;
Slow piloting its dubious path in light
Through the calm ocean of the evening air.
Oh!  how his bosom burns to tempt the gale,
With his own loved one on that azure sea;
With hope's soft zephyr to impel the sail,
And no obtrusive daring eye to see
His own endeared caresses and love's witchery!
