SCENE, A WILD TRACT NEAR THE OCEAN.
TIME, MIDNIGHT.

SABERNA.
"The Winter torrent roars, and o'er the heath
Whistles the wind, and beats the rattling show'r;
O for a rafter'd Erne!  to shroud beneath,
And weather off this rude, inclement hour.

"Long ere, unbosom'd from the frozen North,
Bleak on the earth the hollow trempest blew,
Ere on the wings of night dismay went forth,
A dreary waste stretch'd, houseless, on the view.

"Beneath the gloom the shadow'd season spreads,
With gather'd terrors trackless wilds remain;
No tranquil planet friendly lustre sheds
To light the thorny ways I path in pain.

"A scene alone, uncheary, vast, and dark,
Expands along the wrathful space of night;
Save where these weeping eyes, cast backward, mark
Rocks and disorder'd clouds that start affright.

"What perils strike!  perchance the airy swell,
That howls with bitter sweep from brumal skies,
Bears in its course the wolf's terrific yell.
&mdash;My apprehensions with the dangers rise!

"Now may he prowl along yon edging-land,
Where raves the turbulent and anger'd sea,
Lur'd by the wrecks that strew the rugged strand,
The wretch from Oceans scap'd his hapless prey.

"Ha!  shriller blows the blast! &mdash; Thou savage wind,
In pity spare a poor unshelter'd head!
Rudely thy hurricanes my locks unbind,
And rend the raiment o'er thse shoulders spread.

"Dishevel'd!  disarray'd!  storms loud and deep!
Circled in shades that give a soul to fear;
Yet wilder wrath my breast in tumults keep,
A sabler  hue than night my sorrows wear!

"Rest, thou distracted heart!  still ev'ry strife!
A fav'ring veil be o'er my frailties thrown,
Unhing'd the heavy hours that hang on life,
Nor legend make my tale of trespass known.

"So disregarded, from the world I'll steal,
Unheeded by the base &mdash; unpitied by the good!
A little grave collected leaves conceal,
My bed of rest, my peaceful, last abode.

"Ah! &mdash; rather let me to a lengthen'd age
Existence drag!  each moment wing with pray'rs,
My vows, Contrition!  to thy shrine engage,
A sigh the incense, &mdash; fit libation tears.

"Seek out some lone sequesterment to dwell,
Where spirit-shapes repair at dewy eve!
Let breaking waters echo round my cell,
And perching owls at moonlight's season grieve.

"Ye mothers!  catch the story of my woes,
And point a moral for a daughter's ear.
The flow'ry vale our fancy fondly strows,
But wins to ruin, and betrays to care.

"Thou bright reflection!  chast'ning mental grace,
An eye reverted on my errors cast,
Thine hand the features of offence retrace,
And height'ning colours image forth the past.

"Till deep regret, to tranquil peace restore
A breast where strong emotions madly rage.
&mdash;Ah!  wretched tenant of a bleaky shore,
That calm, I fear, the steps of death must page.

"Yet, where to pass the remnant of this night
Bewilders thought! &mdash; Ha! &mdash; whence this sudden dread?
An aged form retiring from my sight,
Shrinks at the gale, and bows his hoary head.

"Turn, gentle father!  'tis thy mourning child;
Let my calamities thy wrongs atone!&mdash;
His eager step avoids! &mdash; His aspect wild,
Where once the tend'rest, fondest passion shone!

"No! &mdash; 'twas the fancy of my random brain;
Long since the turf has blossom'd o'er his mold;
Bedrop'd with many a summer's morning rain,
And beat with hail full many an ev'ning cold.

"When sleep had seal'd each drowsy huscarle's lid,
A strange departure took he from his home:
O'er wastes unknown, and pathless mountains sped,
To seek a grave where foot might never roam.

"Meeting some forest-rovers on his way,
They say, &mdash; he pass'd them with distracted air;
Pale was his face, &mdash; he wore a wild array,
And seem'd like Mis'ry wedded to Despair!

"'Tis I have kill'd him &mdash; O with what delight
Wou'd he hang list'ning on each word I spoke!
Call me thy darling &mdash; blessing of his sight!
Till tears, the starts of fondling rapture broke.

"Too late I weep!  regardless I forsook
His arms &mdash; unmov'd beheld his sorrows rise.&mdash;
Yet in my flight &mdash; pursuing with a look&mdash;
His soul o'ershot the spirit of his eyes!

"Ev'n then, with crimes unnumber'd on my head,
His pitying nature woo'd me to return.
Forbore reproach!  yea, bless'd me as I fled.&mdash;
What heavy deeds, Remorse!  are thine to mourn!

"His dwelling mansion lies a prey to waste,
A fastness to outrageous robber-bands:
Its turrets stoop to each dismantling blast,
And spoil and desolation mark the lands.

"Farewell the heritage!  to which was born
A wretch unworthy of the birth! &mdash; wide plains,
Forests, and hills, where earliest peers the morn;
Parks throng'd with deer, and towns of vassal-swains.

"Droop, O ye ancestry of mighty name!
Ye battle-knights, a long ennobling race;
Ye matrons, daughters of unsullied fame,
Clos'd is your line &mdash; A period of disgrace!

"No more your hall shall peal with sprightly song,
Or o'er the midnight banquet Chiefs regale:
No heroes parley hold your groves along,
Nor maid, enamour'd, hear her lover's tale.

"Where erst the wand'ring minstrel found a seat,
And want partook an hospitable store,
Now ruin mopes. &mdash; The pilgrim shuns the gate;
The poor wayfarer seeks the roof no more.

"With mischief teem'd the day, and boded woe,
Which gave that roof EARL HERALD for a guest.
A ruffian he!  conceal'd in seemly show,
Who stole a rose, and thorn'd the heart it blest!

"The bands of kindred love profanely tore,
Destroy'd the wish of ages in an hour,
Left a poor plunder'd parent to deplore,
And stripp'd a fav'ring virgin of her dow'r!

"Now he forsakes me! &mdash; leaves me bow'd, oppress'd,
By injuries that deadliest hate shou'd move;
And, strange!  my shame &mdash; my frailty be confess'd,&mdash;
Still glow the embers of unhallow'd love!

"Mysterious nature, to thy hidden source
Philosophy in mazy error treads!&mdash;
&mdash;Oppose a barrier to a torrent's force,
It rages still, and wider havock spreads.

"Our wayward course Heav'n's sweet compassion eyes,
And reins with gentle hand, and curbs severe;
Sends forth a minister in Sorrow's guise,
Yet weeps the suff'rings which we're bad to bear.

"And viewing with delight our nature's mend,
Craves not the tears of ages for our sins.
&mdash;Oft bids the sorrower's life in pity end;
&mdash;Still mercy dates where penitence begins!

"My spirits sink! &mdash; my limbs no longer aid!
Whither, unhappy wand'rer, would'st thou roam?
Already to the verge of death thou'st stray'd,
Need Mis'ry travel farther for an home!"&mdash;

Such was forlorn SABERNA'S sad lament,&mdash;
The breast felt more, and utt'rance fail'd in force;
Full many a throb convulsive passage rent,
And many a tear held on its bitter course.

An hermit from his cell, sea-fenc'd by rocks,
Whose heart the wailings of the mourner wrung,
"Here house thee!"  cried. &mdash; The storm his labour mocks;
His feeble accents perish on his tongue.

He journey'd thro' the gloom some little space,
Cast, ill-inform'd, his weeping eye around;
And whilst he strove the voice of woe to trace,
The storm confus'd the current of the sound.

Defeated &mdash; his abode he sought in care,
His feeling bosom touch'd with piteous bale.
&mdash;Stretch'd on his pallet low &mdash; his wakeful ear
Heard the last whisper of the dying gale.

Heard the retiring murmur of the tide,
In softer echoes break along the shore;
The flood, that late its channel wander'd wide,
Regain the bed its aged waters wore.

When tranquil morn arose, abroad he trode;
And, after many a step in peril made,
Beheld &mdash; the worst his terrors cou'd forbode,
Besides a brook SABERNA breathless laid.

Amaz'd he stood, in desp'rate sorrow wild!
&mdash;The gentle mind will feel his woes aright.
Alas! &mdash; the wretch he sought appear'd his child!
&mdash;The stranger late expos'd to storm and night!

O'er her, he bent in misery supreme!
Stretch'd forth his arms, embrac'd her with a sigh.
&mdash;He bless'd the sun, and strove to view his beam,
But found it far the easier task to die!
