A lake once lay where thunder clouds sail,
On the lofty mountain's breast,
Whose ripple when rais'd by the rustling gale,
Was so gentle it seem'd at rest;
The pine wav'd round and the dark cliff frown'd,
Their shadow was gloomy as night,
But when the sun shone, on his noon-day throne
The lake seemed a mirror of light.
There the red-finn'd trout like a flash darted by,
And the pickerell mov'd like the glance of an eye.

When the wind breath'd soft at the dawning of day,
When the morning-birds warbled around,
And the rainbow shone on the scarce seen spray,
No lovelier place could be found:
Oh!  this scene was as dear to mine eye and mine ear,
As the glance and the song of my love,
And the lake was as bright, and as pure to the sight,
As the bosom of angels above,
Its west side glow'd with the sun's bright sheen,
And its east reflected a forest of green.

The year roll'd away, and I saw it no more
Till the spring bloom'd sweetly again,
Till the birch first unfolded its leaves on the shore,
And the robin first warbled its strain;
But no lake smil'd there, with its bosom fair,
'Twas a dell all with birches o'ergrown,
From my dream of delight like a sleeper at night,
I awoke and I found me alone.
Thro' the vale it had burst with the swiftness of wind,
And left but a path of destruction behind.

The leaves were all dead on the wave-loving willow,
It whisper'd no more in the wind,
No moon-beams slept on the water's soft pillow,
Or smil'd like the tranquilliz'd mind:
Each flow'r bush there, was the fox's lair,
And the whippoorwill sung all alone,
Where the moon-beams pale, glancing through the vale,
Just clean'd on the moss-grey stone.
Where the trout once darted, the adder crept,
And the rattlesnake coil'd, where the Naiad wept.

By the moon's chill light, the white pebble shone,
On the beach where the waves once roll'd,
And the lustre gleam'd on the water worn stone,
But told to the eye it was cold;
No rippling wave that beach shall lave,
No white foam shall dash on that shore,
And the billow's flash, and its scarce heard dash,
Shall be known in that valley no more.
For the wave shall be heard &mdash; the serpent's breath,
For the dash of the billow &mdash; the hues of death.

Where the foam once sparkled &mdash; the cedar-bush wav'd
And the reed rustled sweet in the gale,
And the rock that the water so silently lav'd,
Was hid by the grey lichen'd veil:
There the dark fern flings on the night-wind's wings
Its leaves like the dancing feather,
And the whippoorwill's note, seem'd gently to float,
From the deep purple bloom of the heather,
Where the surface glitter'd the weed grew wild,
And the flow'r blossom'd sweet where the wave once smil'd.
