I reach'd the height to look upon the plain,
Where stood the Delphi in immortal pride,
Where rose of yore Apollo's boasted fane!
I saw it from the brow, as 'twere to hide
Itself between two hills &mdash; behind it sigh'd
A green copse to the breeze that went before.
And wav'd the wall flow'r in the ruin wide:&mdash;
The same that once the muttering accents bore,
And sighs a deeper moral now that all is o'er.

The temple of the Oracle!  where art thou,
Where is the dome that echoed once the shriek,
When nations at the altar bended low,
Watching their fortunes in the words that break
From the wild wretch; by fast and torture weak;
Where is the mystic cave that dankly blew,
From whence the Priestess drawn, still meek
Amid her sufferings, with her sprigs of yew,
Scatter'd the crackling fire, that instant blazing threw

Its light on cowl, and beard, and the side glare
Of madness, as it search'd the sign to guess;
And virgin Priestess, lovely in despair,
Pre-eminent amidst by the white dress,
With maid attendant on its every tress,
And head reclin'd; she gave her prime away.
Where is thy virgin sacrifice?  now less
Than nothing is thy dust, where one may say,
Thy rulers too, are, like their victim, nought to-day.

I see the tower that was to Greece of yore,
The keep of her palladium &mdash; and is,
Her broken urn, now that she is no more,
Her glory's secret, Time has made it his;
It has unravll'd with her mysteries&mdash;
The Sybil's leaves, in sooth one now may say,
Are scatter'd to the winds &mdash; and none may rise
To glean her tale, and lead her ancient day&mdash;
Her riddles in the wind have solved and passed away.

I the last Pilgrim to the sainted scene!
Delphi, I'm come from far thy sight to see;
I've wander'd many a league thy shrine to win,
And now I look upon thee, 'tis to be
The witness of thy wreck, and that of me;
My journey's goal is won, my voyage o'er,
I've reach'd the summit of my hopes with the
Green summit of this hill &mdash; I turn no more&mdash;
Farewell!  rest ye in peace &mdash; nor father seek to explore.
