Thou dirty beast!  how canst thou be so prone
To sport in mire and mud?  'tis strange indeed,
That when thou dwellest in thy sty alone,
With none to meddle in thy bed, or feed,
That thou the latter, without feint of need,
Wilt overset, contain it what it may;
And that the former thou about wilt spread,
Though made so soft, of shavings, straw, or hay;
Poh!  thou'rt a dirty beast, Newyorkers well may say.

Heavens!  how thou eatest!  what an appetite
For fish, or flesh, or fowl &mdash; no matter what;
If thou canst cram it down thy throat, 'tis quite
The same to thee, if eatable, or not;&mdash;
And then for drinking &mdash; O thou guzzling sot!
What blubb'ring doth thy snout make, sucking water,
Or swill, commix'd with leavings of the pot,
And offals from the house, which those call slaughter,
Who fill thy trough with duds &mdash; of the earth from every quarter!

Our learn'd Physicians &mdash; gracious!  how they'll prate,
Of what is good to eat, and what is bad;
This may ye munch &mdash; say they &mdash; but that must hate;
While freely eatest thou &mdash; what can be had
Nor ever wast thou yet in case so sad,
As once to need great Dr. &mdash;'s pills,
The which each wight, as if mankind were mad,
Oft swalloweth down, as cures for human ills,
Though each one killeth &mdash; or, in style familiar, kills!

And then thy voice, so surly, rough, and blunt,
To different grades and ranks, is still the same;
Seest thou a king? &mdash; thy greetings but a grunt,
Nor car'st thou twopence for his power and fame;
The dashing beau, the softly-sighing dame,
And limping beggar &mdash; are alike to thee;
Born but to eat, thou know'st nor pride, nor shame,
Nor aught that interesteth such as we,
We, who creation's lord proudly affect to be!

Odd is thy taste &mdash; and odd thy manners too,
Oft, where thou shouldst not, stickest thou thy nose,
Like some among mankind, who long to view
Affairs, which others never would disclose;
The tattling knave will fidget till he knows
His neighbour's secrets; and, when well found out,
Through the wide town the increasing slander goes;
And many credit it, and few will doubt;
O, I could ring, like thine, the treacherous rascal's snout!

Rude as thou art, some merit mayest thou boast,
Which highborn Freemen e'er delight to own;
No cringing slave, or flatterer; &mdash; thou knowest
An Independence ne'er by courtiers known;
What though thou gatherest for thyself alone,
And car'st not who is starv'd, so thou be fed?
The Miser's wealth will for his crimes atone,
Though he a lengthened life of guilt have led&mdash;
And neither of ye both is useful till ye're dead!

Alas!  although so dirty, filthy, vile,
That e'en thy name doth somehow soil my Ode;
How many have I known to strut, in style,
And roll in chariot, down the rattling road,
Whose souls were never honour'd by th' abode,
Of half the virtues that in thee appear!
From whose full coffers ne'er a farthing flow'd
The child of want or wretchedness to cheer;
Such merely rout and grunt &mdash; hated and hating here.

O if my knee to Mammon e'er shall bow,
If petty Avarice shall my mind debase;
Give me, O Hog!  the shape, the bristled brow,
And twisted tail, that ornament thy race;
Nor let me live a blot &mdash; a foul disgrace
To nature high, to form and "face divine;"
A mere automaton, in whom no trace
Of gen'rous sympathy is seen to shine:&mdash;
A selfish, narrow soul &mdash; a mongrel biped swine!
