CANTO FIRST.
In sleepless ecstasy young AMMON lay
Stung with wild hope of universal sway.
Fancy and pride resplendent visions raise
Of boundless glory, &mdash; of unsully'd praise,&mdash;
Conquest extended but to bless mankind&mdash;
Barbarians vanquish'd, &mdash; soften'd, &mdash; rais'd, &mdash; refin'd;
Learning diffus'd, &mdash; bright science taught to soar,
On eagle wing, to heights unknown before;
Till all encircle Truth's immortal shrine,
And this fair world possess a race divine.

Now fades his lamp before the eye of day,
His polish'd brow reflects the quiv'ring ray;
He sinks to slumber, but he knows not rest;
Visions of glory fill his panting breast;
And hov'ring o'er his couch, on purple wings,
Her laurel chaplet, bright-ey'd conquest brings.

Within his tent, what fiery passions glow;
Without, &mdash; the morning zephyrs softly blow,&mdash;
Pure, fragrant, cool, as childhood's rosy breath,
Ere golden days had known disease or death.
Hail, mild Aurora, sorrows' gentle friend!
But does that goddess from her car descend?
Does her fair form diffuse this dewy light?
Or some celestial vision of the night
Linger below, &mdash; from purer worlds than our's,
To show what beings grace Elysian bow'rs;
That man his grov'ling, earth-bound hopes might raise,
And join immortals in their hymns of praise.
No, in that heavenly face, those radiant eyes,
The doubts and fears of timid love arise;
CAMPASPE comes &mdash; in wild dishevell'd charms,
The lonely hope of PALMUS, great in arms;
Whose grey experience sage advice bestows
Though foremost in the field his ardour glows.
Oft ALEXANDER turns a willing ear,
To one who taught him first to poise the spear;
And, ere his blooming cheeks with down were spread,
Brac'd the first helmet on his youthful head,
Smooth'd his rich curls, the nodding weight to place,
Then led him to a father's proud embrace.

Nor war, nor peace, this chief could e'er divide
From his fair daughter, and his faithful bride.
Pleas'd in CAMPASPE'S lovely form to trace,&mdash;
Reviv'd, &mdash; his LARISSEA'S fading grace;
So in a lucid lake, the landscape shines,
Whose clear smooth surface ev'ry charm refines:
Freed from all earthly dross, its beauty glows
In stainless purity, and deep repose.
With solemn fondness would he view the maid,
And mark the sweet resemblance thus display'd,
Till thrilling thoughts, dissolving into tears,
Prov'd how the warrior felt a father's fears.
Adorn'd for her, his gay pavilion shines
Bright with the treasures of Golconda's mines;
While ALEXANDER'S simple tent stood near,
Plain as the shed of roving mountaineer.
This night a vision thrill'd CAMPASPE'S breast,
By num'rous foes she saw the monarch prest.
Starting from sleep, &mdash; she flies his tent to view,
And bless'd the gods to find her dream untrue,
Eyed his pavilion as a sacred shrine,&mdash;
Felt the breeze perfum'd by a breath divine,&mdash;
While to her fond adoring heart was giv'n,
All that mortality can know of heav'n.

Yes , in the boundless hopes of dawning love,
A foretaste of eternal bliss we prove;
Like him whose steps have gain'd an Alpine height:
The lower world has faded from his sight;&mdash;
In gay confusion, a bright veil of clouds
Her tow'rs, her temples, and her pomp enshrouds.
He still advances to th' illumin'd skies,
And feels new hope; a new existence rise;
Sublimely plac'd on his aerial throne,&mdash;
All earth beneath, &mdash; above him, &mdash; heav'n alone.

Young AMMON rises from disturb'd repose,
Still o'er his face the nightly vision glows.
Forth from the tent with lion-port he moves,
To taste the freshness of the hour he loves:
And while he ponders o'er the sacred birth
That rais'd him high above the sons of earth,
A rising sun, a world renew'd, &mdash; inspire
The deep impression of his heav'nly sire.

With trembling joy, not quite untouch'd by fear,
CAMPASPE sees her bosom's lord draw near;
Yet shrinks reluctant from his ardent gaze,
Where love and rapture shine with blended rays.
As zephyrs light through whisp'ring poplars stray,
O'er her fair form the mix'd emotions play;
Thrill at her heart, where softest feelings rush,&mdash;
Dart from her eye, and kindle in her blush.

"CAMPASPE, dearest of thy sex,
Why thus torment, elude, perplex?
Why all these tremors, all this fear,
The varying colour, starting tear?
Fairest in ev'ry mood confest,
Thy smiles, my love, become the best;
Enchant me with their cheering ray,
And name, at last, our nuptial day.
Too long this cold reserve has been.
O!  let me give the world its queen.
CAMPASPE, love, at last relent."
Could he not see she blush'd consent?

Ye conq'ring heroes, laurel crown'd,
Love's purest wreaths have rarely found.
Your gaudy chaplets flourish bright
With flaunting flow'rs that court the sight.
The lonely glen and dewy dell,
Where drooping violets love to dwell,
Or where the blushing virgin rose,
Arm'd with her thorns, in fragrance glows,
Are distant from the haunts of war
Remote from conquest's crimson car.
Nor are ye for that homage fram'd,
By soul-illumin'd beauty claim'd.
Ye know not how to read an eye,
Explain a smile, translate a sigh;
In coy denials where to find
The softest wishes to be kind;
Nor how to spy the noon-tide hour
Of dear affection's warmest pow'r;
To sigh, to weep, to watch, to wait,
In murmur'd accents read your fate;
Adore the fair one's outward grace,
Yet give her soul an higher place,
And weigh her words, as from a shrine
Than fam'd DODONA'S more divine.

CAMPASPE rais'd her lovely head,
The purest glow her cheek o'erspread;
Her soft imperfect accents seem
Like something utter'd in a dream:
But, lo!  a graceful band draw near,
Though veil'd, she knew the form, so dear,
Of one, who liv'd for her alone;
One in whom all the mother shone:
And as some bird alarm'd, opprest,
Flutt'ring seeks shelter in its nest,
She sank on LARISSEA'S breast;
While the fond parent throws her veil
O'er that fair face, now coldly pale.

Low at their feet the hero bow'd,
As one of humblest action proud.
"My more than mother!  gentlest friend,
When shall thy daughter's coyness end?
Let me not deem it half caprice;
The thought were poison to my peace.
Passion like mine, &mdash; that knows no bounds;"&mdash;
But hark, th' inspiring trumpet sounds;
An herald comes with breathless haste,
His eye of fire his message grac'd:
High crested chiefs surround their king;
The soul of war is on the wing.

"HEPHESTION come, my friend, long try'd!
Again we'll conquer, side by side;
My dearer self!  the tide of life
Rises to meet the coming strife;
Existence like a torrent flows,
It stagnates in abhorr'd repose,
When realms I conquer, realms I give,
Then, then alone I seem to live.
CAMPASPE, love, thy cheeks and lips
Show Beauty in her pale eclipse;
Such omen shall disastrous prove
To those who tear me from my love.
Oh!  had APELLE'S wondrous art
Thy image stamp'd upon my heart
Completed for this parting day:
Thy gracious smile should gild my way
Where icy mountains, pil'd on high,
Insult the dark tempestuous sky;
Or where the citron sheds its bloom,
And ev'ry breeze awakes perfume;
Nor heav'n, nor hell, should have the pow'r
To tear it from my grasp one hour;
The world thy image should adore;
One world, alas!  for I can win no more."

Pale, mute, and motionless, she stands
With swimming eye, &mdash; imploring hands,&mdash;
While the cold glance of gazers round,
Sheds poison on the parting wound:
Back on her heart those sorrows fell
It had been some relief to tell;
Yet still she cannot say &mdash; farewell!
And fondly deems her doom delay'd,
While this dread word remains unsaid.

Vain hope!  Seductive music floats
Through the blithe air, with trembling notes
Nearer the swelling sounds advance,
And every warrior's heart entrance.
Pleas'd they confess the well-known strain,
And fight their battles o'er again.
A thousand hearts the triumph share;
Unnumber'd voices rend the air.
The Grecian monarchs form a ring
Around their lord, their chief, their king;
Himself the brightest, purest, gem,
Of that encircling diadem.

And now the fiery steed he loves,
To court his hand, impatient moves:
Instinct it seems with heav'nly fire,
As did the God of War inspire.
All eyes on ALEXANDER turn:
He feels his martial spirit burn;
Resigns his lofty soul to arms,
Forsakes CAMPASPE'S mournful charms,
Departs, &mdash; and leaves the drooping fair,
To tears, to anguish, and despair.

CANTO SECOND.
Enchanting shore!  thy clear cerulean wave
That murmurs by the circling hill's slope-side,
(While myrtle groves their fragrant blossoms lave,)
With varying music gently seems to chide.
Soft is the measur'd breathing of the tide,
With flow'rs of ev'ry hue its margin glows;
And on its bosom, in reflected pride,
Her splendid tints the gay pomegranate shows,
And tremulously-blushing shines the liquid rose.

Steep rocks disclose their proud majestic height
Through the rich foliage of the sylvan bay;
Whose airy cliffs the rich festoons unite
Of wand'ring vines; &mdash; their purple clusters gay,
Entwin'd with pendant plants, that loosely play,
Like banners waving from some lofty tow'r,
In honour of the long-sought nuptial day;
When Beauty, satiate of capricious pow'r,
O'erpays whole years of scorn by one relenting hour.

Through fields of ether, pregnant with perfume,
Here, to her flow'ry task, the bee is led;
The sportive kid selects the tender bloom
Of aromatic sweets, profusely spread,
His playful youth on citron blossoms fed:
In shade her love-tun'd note the turtle sings;
While, drunk with vernal joy, above her head,
From cliff to cliff, the goat exulting springs,
Till, like a speck of snow, on highest point he clings.

A fairy land, of innocent delight!
Where all is happiness till man appears:
Sad scenes oppress him in his gayest plight;
None fair enough to charm him through his tears.
Fast fell CAMPASPE'S, as o'ercome by fears,
And waking day-dreams of consuming love;
Omens of ill in ev'ry sound she hears,
And seeks the darkest shadows of the grove,
To nurse the secret pang divided lovers prove.

Beneath an olive shade she lay reclin'd;
Just emblem once of such celestial peace
As reign'd within her pure harmonious mind,
When, loveliest of the lovely maids of Greece,
The lyre she touch'd, or wove the purple fleece;
Wak'd Philomela with a softer tone,
Or with bewitching wildness, &mdash; gay caprice,&mdash;
While sparkling youthful joys around her shone,
Gave to the choral dance a spirit all her own.

"Where shall I fly to shun this bosom foe,
With ev'ry hope, with ev'ry thought entwin'd.
In vain I wander, since where'er I go
His noble image rises on my mind.
Not such as when to Love and me resign'd,
Adorn'd by smiles and sweet protecting grace,
He wove the laurel crown my brows to bind,
And as a smile or frown pass'd o'er my face,
Seem'd there, and there alone, his destiny to trace.

"Not thus, alas!  he rises to my sight,
But dazzling in the horrid pomp of war,
All arm'd and mail'd, and ardent for the fight,
Like some resplendent but malignant star:
Havoc and terror hov'ring o'er his car.
'Twas vain the strong beseeching glance to try;
CAMPASPE'S influence was banish'd far:
No spark of love beam'd from his cold blue eye,
That shone severe and chilling as a northern sky.

"Oh!  to behold him kneeling at my feet,
For it would ease this ever-racking pain;
And with Love's poison blend some little sweet,
Did he once feel in turn my cold disdain.
Long, long, the proud one should lament in vain;
Could I his soft imploring accents hear,
Of broken vows and slighted faith complain;
Not half so charming to CAMPASPE'S ear
Were the melodious strains that waken'd Pluto's tear."

Far o'er the Hellespont her glance she bends,
(The ocean still attracts pale Sorrow's eye).
There, where the viewless wave with ether blends,
A snowy speck, bright-beaming from the sky,
With swift advance seems o'er the deep to fly.
Perchance some sea-bird spreads his shining wings.
Why beats CAMPASPE'S heart so wild and high?
Her syren-song while youthful Fancy sings,
And smiling Hope, suggests unutterable things.

No distant sea-bird laves his polish'd plumes,
Or sportive skims through show'rs of silver spray;
Far nobler air th' advancing speck assumes:
A white-wing'd bark reflects the solar ray,
And smoothly gliding wins her trackless way.
Now the pleas'd eye his graceful form can see
Who shapes her rapid course with easy sway;
Bounds o'er the surf, &mdash; springs up the cliff:  "'Tis he,
My life, my hope, my joy, restor'd to Love and me."&mdash;

Poor simple maid!  where now are all thy schemes
T' enforce repentance by sweet pleasing pain?
Vanish these air-drawn visions, gorgeous dreams,
That lonely Love has ever in his train.
Oh!  could those fairy paintings but remain
As soft, as vivid, as they float in air,
Life's coarser joys all bosoms would disdain;
For what realities, however fair,
Could e'er with bright ideal soul-felt bliss compare?

The tears that glitter in a smiling eye,
The soft avowal ne'er before reveal'd,
Th' endearing question, and the fond reply,
 Disclosing depths of love till now conceal'd:
These joys are their's, &mdash; and their's the sacred shield
True Passion spreads, to guard from foreign care
The chosen few who to her empire yield;
Heedless what aspect the rude world may wear.
So Love's propitious smile reward their mutual prayer.

The prince first wakes from this delicious trance
"Now, now," he cries, "shall I depart in peace,
And calmly toward my great design advance.
Oh!  ne'er could I have left the shores of Greece
Until thy smile bestow'd my soul's release,
From the fell vulture preying on my heart;
While I deplor'd the unaton'd caprice,
That lur'd me from my gentle love to part,
Amid the glaring pomp of war's terrific art.

"Array'd on yonder shore, in martial state,
A gallant army chafes at this delay;
But I have snatch'd one blissful hour from Fate,
And own myself her debtor, &mdash; come what may:
Though dark her thread may flow, some future day,
Though stain'd with guilt, ingratitude, and woe,
These golden minutes, with redeeming ray.
On Memory's tablet shall serenely glow,
And o'er Life's blackest wave a moon-light beam bestow.

"Conceal no secret from APELLES' ear:&mdash;
Describe the transports of the Pythian maid."
CAMPASPE blush'd, &mdash; nor without pain could hear
The name of one, in pining sickness laid,
And ev'ry thought of him so cast in shade.
By the warm glow of that meridian hour,
That she no tributary sigh had paid;
Nor once had Memory pointed to the bow'r,
Where Grief and silent Love his hopeless heart devour.

"Oh!  lead me to him," ALEXANDER cries,
To impart the balm Affection can bestow.
And is it thus my lov'd APELLES lies,
A pale chill monument of human woe?"
Oh!  when a head with Genius fraught lies low;
When glaz'd an eye where vivid Fancy play'd;
When clos'd a lip whence wit was wont to flow;
With what deep grief the soul of Love, dismay'd,
Asks, &mdash; why to feed the Grave such glories were display'd?

Fair LARISSEA dropt the silent tear,
And softly mingled Sorrow's frequent sigh
The lofty conq'ror, deeply humbled here,
Full on APELLES fix'd his mournful eye,
And breath'd this prayer:  "Oh!  Monarch of the sky,
Recall the sweet expression of that face;
New life and vigor to these limbs supply;
From his pale brow the gath'ring darkness chase
With him I share those years design'd for Glory's race."

Exalted mark of tenderness and truth!
APELLES felt the atmosphere of Love
Glowing around the Macedonian youth:
His cold weak hand with gentle pressure strove
Such gratitude, ineffable, to prove,
As words are all to feeble to pourtray.
Dull were the heart such anguish fail'd to move,
Though in the chilling grasp of death it lay.
Oh!  how the parting soul must bless Affection's cheering ray.

How oft, when those we fondly love are near,
Although unmark'd by aught to sense ally'd,
Persuasive influence, and communion dear,
We feel through ev'ry nerve serenely glide.
So the smooth oil is, gradual, seen to slide.
In spreading circles o'er the sinking wave,
Till calmness, peace, and harmony preside.
No more the frantic billows wildly rave,
And baffled winds retiring seek the rocky cave.

Strongly APELLES felt the thrilling charm
Of deeply-seated Sympathy divine;
And Friendship's fire, that glows more sweetly warm
When all the meaner joys of life decline,
But blazes most at Sorrow's sacred shrine.
Reviving pulses throb within his breast;
Before his closing eyes light visions shine;
And in the arms of Sleep, serenely prest,
His death-like trance is chang'd to renovating rest.

Young AMMON knelt.  "To thee, Imperial JOVE,
In boundless gratitude, my thanks I pour,
For this excelling proof of heav'nly love,
Than fame, than empire, or than conquest more:
Yet, Oh!  I feel &mdash; how feebly I adore.
How full, how fervent, my petitions flew,
On eagle wing, to heav'n's celestial floor
For mercy at thy gracious throne to sue;
That mercy gain'd, &mdash; how cold my words, how faint, how few."

Now LARISSEA breath'd a gentle prayer,
That ALEXANDER'S self would court repose.
Long urg'd, &mdash; he leaves APELLES to her care
Such care as fond maternal love bestows:
For woman, Soother of Life's vary'd woes,
Broods like the faithful dove o'er cherish'd sleep,
And though her breaking heart with grief o'erflows,
Patient and pensive, &mdash; can long vigils keep,
Pray, tremble, hope, in silence, and in silence weep.

CANTO THIRD.
From the dim chamber ALEXANDER goes,
But not to court the blessings of repose:
Nor golden Sleep, nor Beauty's tempting smile,
His thoughts a moment from his friend beguile:
But where the wonders of his pencil glow,
The hero's eager footsteps fondly go.

"And here," he cries, "shall live APELLES' mind
Through rolling ages, here delight mankind.
Of conquest, empire, valor, brief the tale:
Too oft Oblivion shrouds them in her veil
At others' will, their fame withheld or lent;
But Genius builds her own proud monument."

Forms of the mighty dead, illustrious, here,
In more-than-mortal majesty, appear,
Heroes and patriots.  ALEXANDER'S own,
Amid this awful line superior shone.
His potent eye, firm lip, and graceful hand,
Denote habitual and high command:
Yet mild his aspect, and his air serene;
No action in this finish'd piece was seen.
It seem'd the painter had alone design'd
To give a transcript of th' immortal mind.
He views the countless forms of manly grace,
The regal air, the sage's pensive face;
Here the gay smiles, of blooming youth engage;
And there the mild benignity of age.

On softer charms he turns his wand'ring eyes:
How chang'd the scene!  no longer now arise
The varied visions of ideal grace:
CAMPASPE is lovely form usurps their place.
Beneath Diana's crescent he descries
The melting softness of her radiant eyes.
Here thron'd on high, as Jove's imperial Queen;
A sea-nymph there, in robes of glossy green:
Minerva's aegis flames upon her breast;
Minerva's floating plume adorns her crest;
In vain, &mdash; persuasive smiles and playful air
Betray the likeness of the fav'rite fair.

Unconscious why, he turns to shun the view:
The lovely phantoms as he turns pursue;
Thick coining fancies crowd his busy brain;
He gaz'd intensely, though he gaz'd with pain:
As doubts, and fears, and cares, till then unfelt,
With rage inflame him and with anguish melt.

The work of nations, and of tedious years,
Built for eternity, some mound appears,
Where men have toil'd from infancy to age,
To curb old Ocean's desolating rage.
There while we gaze, impress'd with grateful awe,
Should envious Time, or Chance create a flaw,
How small soe'er the floods with rushing force
Soon urge their passage, and resume their course.
Wide, and more wide, extends th' advancing wave;
No art can help us, and no pow'r can save.
The tide of Jealousy thus wildly flows,
Small its commencement, &mdash; dreadful in its close.

Severe the conflict in the monarch's breast:
Low whisper'd sounds the dark result exprest.
"Is ALEXANDER'S spirit thus laid low,
Sunk and o'er-master'd by a bosom foe,
That clings about his heart, with venom'd fangs,
Searching the tend'rest spot for keenest pangs?
Shall I, with aguish cheek, now flush'd, now pale,
Fawn on each slave that tells the secret tale
Of what must stab me to the heart to hear:
Distilling poison in my jealous ear?
Shall I hang trembling on a woman's smiles,
The conscious victim of her thousand wiles:
Doom'd while I call the bright perfection mine,
Still for her absent wand'ring heart to pine?
Fold within fold a woman's secret lies:
No eye can penetrate the deep disguise.
The sweet dissembler trembles without fear,
And without sorrow sheds the willing tear;
Blushes from instinct, though long dead to shame,
And looks deceit through all her lovely frame.
Her words, her smiles, her very thoughts untrue,
The dazzling mischief breaks upon our view.

What art thou, Love, to him whose dauntless eye,
Sun-ward, Ambition's eagle flight can spy!
Nought but the transient blossom, doom'd to fade
Before the golden fruit is e'er display'd.
Or gem that rivets the poor captive's chain,
Condemn'd to swell a scornful victor's train.
Dream of enthusiasts in the myrtle shade,
Sung in soft ditties to the simple maid.
What need for this, a spirit finely wrought,
Imbu'd with all the heav'nly Muse has taught?
What need the lessons of that wondrous man,
Prompt to unravel Nature's devious plan;
Explain her laws, discern her future course,
And here assist, and there restrain, her force.

"Friend of my soul!  let dear APELLES live
In all the joys CAMPASPE'S love can give.
His mind was form'd to bless domestic life;
He turns indignant from the fields of strife;
Pleas'd shall he linger in her perfum'd bow'r,
Guide her soft hand to trace the mimic flow'r,
And in her winning smile those Graces find,
He can immortalize, to charm mankind."
Thus ALEXANDER, in his varying mood&mdash;
Nor did one just, one pitying thought intrude;
For, lost CAMPASPE, &mdash; he confess'd her true,
Tender, devoted, &mdash; this he deem'd his due:
No grateful throb within his bosom rose;
Nor sweet remembrance charm'd him to repose.
Nor, sympathizing pang awoke his fears;
He could admire, &mdash; not feel, &mdash; a maiden's tears.
To him like dew drops on a sun-bright leaf,
The glitt'ring ornaments of transient Grief.

Love in his eyes was but the radiant flow'r
That adds new grace to Fortune's prosp'rous hour;
So dream light hearts, that know not half its pow'r.
Water'd by tears, and strengthen'd by our sighs,
Springs the mysterious plant that never dies:
In vain the sun may scorch, the winds assail;
It braves the torrid blaze, the polar gale;
O'er want, o'er woe, its flow'rs expand their bloom,
Clasp the cold urn, and shade the lonely tomb.

With eager speed, as one who fears delay,
And o'er himself a momentary sway
Has gain'd with effort, and still dreads to lose,
Imploring at CAMPASPE'S feet he sues.
Traitor to Love, &mdash; but true to Friendship's laws,
All eloquent, he pleads another's cause:
Pours Flattery's dulcet music in her ear,
Breathes the soft sigh, and drops the tender tear.

"On me," he cries," fore-doom'd to stormy war,
And chain'd to Destiny's remorseless car,
Waste not that love for which APELLES dies;
But turn on him the sunshine of these eyes.
Should thy celestial smile appear to save
This priceless victim from an early grave,
Shall he not feel the bliss of souls above,
Rais'd from despair to realms of light and love;
When Jove ordains that in the starry sphere,
Immortal, we forget our cup of sorrow here.

With mute indignant pride CAMPASPE heard,
This strange request from lips so dear preferr'd:
Restrain'd her tears, repress'd her struggling sighs,
Nor from the ground once rais'd her burning eyes:
Reply'd with all the stillness of Despair,
And mark'd the limit of existence there.
Breathing, &mdash; not living, &mdash; from that fatal hour
She sank in slow decay.  The vernal flow'r,
Transferr'd by hands unconscious of its worth,
Thus sheds its silken blossoms on the earth.

With calm austerity, and meek delay,
Still she defers the promis'd nuptial day.
Her lip no smile bestows, her eye no tear,
One dead to Hope, insensible of fear;
Her chill indiff'rence to each earthly thing,
To all that pleasure, all that pain, can bring:
Inspir'd around a strange mysterious awe,
A being not compris'd in Nature's law.
A moon-like softness soon usurp'd the place
Of all her varying eloquence of face;
Save when a glancing lustre, wild and high,
Flash'd sudden from her dark dilated eye.

When those inspiring eyes for ever clos'd,
One smile of joy on her pale lips repos'd:
Her first, her last, reproach &mdash; this dying smile&mdash;
With fearful Beauty grac'd her funeral pile,
And left a sting in ALEXANDER'S breast,
The whirlwind of his future days confest.

Ne'er can the noble mind to bliss aspire,
That once has quench'd Affection's sacred fire:
Each pain inflicted on the heart it loves,
Throbless that heart, a dreadful Hydra proves.
The Night's companion!  Sleep's eternal dream!
First image offer'd by the morning beam!
Nought then relieves like the loud clang of arms,
The frantic contest, Danger's dazzling charms!
Extremes alone a moment's ease bestow;&mdash;
And in their form what crimes familiar grow!

But scenes like these a bolder touch demand,
More glowing colors, and a firmer hand.
Enough for me, in this sequester'd shade,
To paint the sorrows of a love-lorn maid.
