Omnific Fancy!  I invoke thy power;
Oh, bear me hence away to the dear home
I loved so well in childhood's happy hour;
And still must love through each dark year to come.
It was not one the proud admire, a dome
Which wealth and art had reared; but a rude cot,
Deep, deep in woods, where wild deer love to roam.
Yet did I wish no other home, and thought
That none had ever known a dearer, lovelier spot.

Or do I dream?  or does it meet my sight,
The elm, that wont to shade that simple dwelling?
It blooms as fair, as when, in young delight,
I sported 'neath its shade.  My heart is swelling,
And from my eye tears fast, but still are welling;
For, of the humble cot, that erst did guard
My infancy, remains no token, telling
Where once it stood:  and where are they who shared
My childish gaieties, and all their charms endeared?

Some, far away &mdash; some, to the dust gone down!
And I alone am here.  But where is she,
My more than mother?  she, who ne'er did frown
Upon my frowardness, but strove to be
My guardian, and my guide; she was to me
The kindest, dearest &mdash; she did love me well&mdash;
None since have loved me so.  Oh, memory!
How lovely thou dost show her, as I dwell
Upon her kindness!  Where is she? &mdash; the grave can tell.

Yes, Amaryllis, thou did'st love me much,
When the cold dew of death was on thy brow,
And life was withering from his icy touch&mdash;
Even then thy love to me was warm, and thou
Did'st call upon my name.  Well may ye flow,
My tears; she called me, but I was not near&mdash;
My name died on her lips; a gasp, a throe,
And all was still.  And now, lone, lingering here,
Where oft I met her love, the very earth how dear!

How quick, how wonderful thy power, O Death!
One moment the heart glows with tenderness,
Which flows forth warmly on each breath,
And strives, in broken accents, still to bless:
But words are failing fast &mdash; and less and less
The quivering lips obey &mdash; they move no more!
Yet the dim eye demands the wish'd caress
Of the eternal parting:  fondly, as before,
It turns on each lov'd face &mdash; ah!  that deep groan! &mdash; 'tis o'er!

What hast thou done, grim Death!  Say, what the pow'r
By which thou did'st, even in a moment, still
The throbbing of that heart?  One little hour
Has scarce gone by &mdash; the form which lies so chill,
Was quick with life and health &mdash; the vital thrill
Shot gaily through it &mdash; but thy viewless dart
Hath touched it.  Yet, go on, dread power!  thy will
Has baffled, and shall baffle, human art.
We cannot know thy ways, though we must feel thy smart.
