Tell me, ye learned in Nature's mysteries,
What strong attraction chains th' enraptured eye
To yon blue hills that dim in distance rise?
Where woods and fields all undistinguished lie,
And, but that pearls appear of brighter dye,
They seem a deep blue cloud.  Oh, 'tis a dear
And nameless feeling, as of minstrelsy,
That comes in night's hour &mdash; now swelling clear,
Now dying soft away upon the listening ear.

And oft I loved, in the sweet prime of spring,
Where the pure streamlet urged its winding way,
Whose gentle murmur soothing thoughts did bring,
On the green bank, to lie the live-long day,
And watch the clouds, that o'er yon azure lay
Their varying hues and forms.  From blue to white&mdash;
Slow-changing some, and lessening still, delay
A little moment, and then vanish quite&mdash;
And where so late they lay, deep azure meets the sight.

Some, fold on fold, in fleecy whiteness thrown,
'Mid the clear sky so pure, unearthly seemed,
And to my boyish eye so lovely shone,
Whether a flood of fading splendour streamed
From the low sun upon their skirts, that gleamed
Like beaten gold, or white as driven snow
In mid-day sky they lay, oft fancy deemed
They couches were, on which the angels throw
Their wearied forms, to watch o'er mortals here below.

Sweet was the joy that all my bosom fired,
As thus I gazed; but dearer far the gloom
That autumn's varied loveliness inspired.
Then dying groves each different hue assume,
From the pale violet to the rose's bloom;
And oft I eyed the falling leaves, and thought
Thus must I fall &mdash; 'tis nature's general doom,
Like them must press for aye some little spot;
But ah!  must I, like them, for ever be forgot?

I know not why, there is a joy in sadness,
That comes so soft upon the pensive soul&mdash;
'Tis lovelier far than mirth's delusive madness,
Are there who have not felt its strong controul?
Let them live on to life's remotest goal,
Each pleasure taste &mdash; the honied nuptial bowl
Or the deep raptures of the nectared bowl
They have not felt; they cannot feel a bliss,
That ravishes the soul, that steals it all like this.
