The waves are musical 'neath yonder cliff,
Where ancient oaks o'ershade the water's deep;
Gay sings the fisher from his gliding skiff,
And laughing children climb the flowery steep,
Sing on, and sport ye blessed!  while sorrows sleep,
And Hope's bright glow o'er life is kindly thrown;
Though here in bitterness it come to weep,
Your mirth might wake the heart to rapture's tone,
Bringing the visions fair of happier moments flown.

Go, memory!  wand'rer of departed time&mdash;
Stay thy light pinions o'er each fleeted hour,
And thou shalt gather many a plan sublime,
Which fancy drew in youth's enchanted bower;
Shalt find, where pleased, delighted with a flower,
Or skimming pebbles o'er some glassy pool,
Rejoicing 'mid the summer's transient shower,
Or sporting by the noisy village school,
Like these I breath'd heaven's air, uncheck'd by frown or rule.

Those days have pass'd like early blooming flowers
That rise in sunshine, and in gloom decay:
Like soaring birds that fly their fading bowers,
When adverse winter claims the parting lay,
While shines their plumage, sound their numbers gay,
Elysium spreads around &mdash; the heart is won;
But when the dear illusion melts away,
How bleak the fields where man is left alone!
Oh!  thus the world appears, when blissful days are gone.

And yet may he who loves the prospect fair,
Of hills, and spires, and smokes in distance seen,
Of banners streaming in the liquid air,
And swift barks bounding o'er the billows green;
Yet, yet may he forget awhile his care&mdash;
The semblance hail of beauties that have been;
May fondly turn a backward vision where
On such to gaze he did with dear ones lean,
While o'er the straining eye, some soft hands formed a skreen.

Where, heaving slow, at noon of summer's day,
Along these rocks the ocean waters steal,
Where wreathing vines, far wandering streamers play.
And trickling rills their emerald drops reveal,
What bliss upon the verdant turf to kneel,
And in cool lymph the burning temples lave
The rich munificence of heaven to feel&mdash;
Hear sweetest music in the lapsing wave,
And bid the storms of life at sullen distance rave!

Now, now through rustling lilacs gently stealing,
Like angel whisper &mdash; soft and soothingly,
The wounded soul, the insulted spirit healing,
The winds are wafting dulcet harmony;
Calm, mildly calm is yonder chequer'd sea,
Bright on its surface sleeps the smile of heaven:
As warm and tranquil should the bosom be
From scenes escap'd, whence all its hopes were riven,
And howsoe'er array'd, its foes should be forgiven.

Though wrong'd, neglected, homeless, though beguil'd
By beauty's vow, and friendship's smooth pretence,
Say, can the Muse's uncomplying child
Remember here deceit or arrogance?
No!  sweet the memory of benevolence&mdash;
Of deed that sought the good of all mankind;
Unseemly sorrow &mdash; fire-ey'd vengeance hence!
Pride cannot blight, nor plotting slanderers bind
The heaven-inspired soul &mdash; the high and soaring mind.

The choir of winds &mdash; the glory of the morn&mdash;
The charm of flowers &mdash; the moral of the dove;
Can never, never from that heart be torn
Which glows with an enthusiastic love
At nature's shrine &mdash; remote in aged grove,
Where, twining coronets of moss, she lives:
Still in life's luxury that heart may rove,
And, while the hope of future peace relieves,
Pardon the groveling world for all the woes it gives.

Yon moss-grown oak hath battled with the blast
Of many winters &mdash; howling fiercely o'er:
Still, in the majesty of strength, it casts
Its evening shadows, length'ning from the shore
Reflected, high and far, those splendours soar,
The glad sun marking, at day's glorious close;
Thus greatness stands amid the world's uproar;
Thus, like the sinking sun, from time he goes,
And fame's pure halos float along o'er his proud repose,

Earth's songs are lulling slow:  sweet scene, adieu&mdash;
One ling'ring gaze my dim reluctant eye
Devotes to thee!  and never lover drew
From beauty's portrait with sincerer sigh!
Thy features sink beneath the dark'ning sky&mdash;
From rival barks on sparkling billows borne,
The happy sailor sends his cheering cry&mdash;
Or, mid the lonely hills, faint sounds the horn
That echoes through thy bowers, from eve till busy morn.

Still distant glitt'ring in the latest beam,
Yon prideful city rears its hundred spires;
While mingling smokes, fantastic curling seen
The airy heralds of innum'rous fires.
As here the murmur of its crowd expires,
Tells it one tale of innocence or peace?
Ah!  no &mdash; the glare of tinsel'd pride retires
From quiet vale where ev'ry change can please&mdash;
Lov'd home of meek content, of joy and smiling ease!

Oh!  turn regretless from its circles gay,
Ye favour'd few, who o'er this matchless scene,
From merry morn 'till evening's misty gray,
May bask and revel 'mid refreshing green;
May, 'neath the the flower-wove arbour's fragrant skreen,
Lead up the winding dance, in rapture lost;
While eyes of partial maiden flash between&mdash;
For few are they a home so bless'd can boast&mdash;
Sad on the world's dark sea, in wild convulsion tost!
