Haste, virgins!  haste to climb yon sunny mountains,
And join the dance in those melodious bowers.
Haste!  crown your urns from Gilead's purest fountains,
And weave your wreaths of Gilead's sweetest flowers.
For once again the slow revolving hours
Have brought the day when weeping Palestine,
From wild Idumea's groves to Sidon's towers,
Bewailed the daughter of her noblest line,
And Moloch's offerings smoked upon Jehovah's shrine.

And ever on the day that viewed her led
To that dire rite, in deepest terror calm,
Around her grave the youths and damsels shed
Rich odorous gums, and twine the verdant palm;
While many a sacred dance and mournful psalm
Bewail the victim of reluctant slaughter;
And Ephraim's hills, and Gilead's groves of balm,
And the green rocks by Jordan's dark blue water,
Echo the funeral dirge of Israel's fairest daughter.

"Oh!  child of heroes, if in death thou lovest
The land thy virgin blood was shed to save,
Hear from the happy realms where now thou rovest,
The solemn lay we warble o'er thy grave.
For prophets tell, that to the good and brave
Our father's God assigns a happier dwelling,
Where gorgeous streams of liquid emerald lave
Refulgent groves, all groves of earth excelling,
Where heavenly music floats, through the rich branches swelling;

"Where heaven in endless sapphire burns above,
And earth smiles gaily on the smiling skies;
Where flowers, more radiant than the blush of love,
Are fanned by breezes softer than its sighs;
Where seraphs furl their wings, whose countless dyes
Burn with the glories of departing day,
And, as in Eden's earlier paradise,
Delight with men through those fair scenes to stray,
And all their Maker's works and all his love display.

"Hope views thee living &mdash; Nature mourns thee dead,
And, fairest, we must weep, though not for thee.
Oh, who can stand above the grassy bed
Of that fair form which we no more must see,
Nor think how thy dark eyes flashed forth with glee,
When thy great father's conquering arms were sung
From broad Euphrates to the Western Sea,
Blessed by each heart, and praised by every tongue,
And clouds of incense rose, and songs of triumph rung?

"'Haste!  fling green garlands through the crowded street&mdash;
Roll back the portals &mdash; let the trumpet sound&mdash;
Throng every battlement, the chief to greet,
Who comes with glory's brightest chaplet crowned;
And, as he passes, scatter odours round.
Heard ye the thunders of his gilded car?
Saw ye his milk-white coursers paw the ground,
While sobs, and shouts, and clapping hands, afar,
Hail the triumphant track of Israel's saviour's car.'

"See!  from the gates a lovely train advance
To greet their prince with symphony and song.
Who, who more fit to lead the hallowed dance,
Than she, beloved so well, unseen so long?
On either side rolls back the gazing throng,
As those celestial forms, with airy tread
And brandish'd timbrel, blushing, glide along&mdash;
But He &mdash; why shakes he with convulsive dread,
And heaves that shuddering groan, and hides his helmed head?

"Oh!  daughter of a father's tenderest care!
Oh!  victim of a father's cruel faith!
Yes &mdash; thou must die!  Those snowy brows must wear
The sacrificial, not the bridal wreath.
For joyful state, for clarion's jocund breath,
For wedding dance, by kindred maidens led,
Thine is the mournful pomp and dirge of death!
Dark is the spouse, fair maid, whom thou must wed,
And dire the nuptial rite, and cold the nuptial bed.

"Yet, even while trembling on the brink of life,
No voice to cheer her, and no hand to save,
She calmly saw the shrine, the flame, the knife.
And smiled on horrors that appal the brave,
She wept for him who doomed her to the grave.
With her last ebbing breath she faintly bless'd
The frantic wretch, who took the life he gave;&mdash;
His white and writhing lips to hers she pressed,
And hid her dying face upon his sobbing breast.

"Therefore on this sad day, with mournful pleasure,
Thy spotless fame, thy cruel fate we sing,
And hail thy name in many a tuneful measure,
And gird thy bier with many a choral ring:
Therefore upon thy couch of turf we fling
Each dewy flower, which like a jewel glows
Around the brilliant coronal of spring&mdash;
The painted tulip, and the pale primrose,
And violet, which, like thee, in chastest beauty grows.

"Twine, sisters, twine the bashful rose, which lent
Her breath its fragrance and her cheek its bloom.
And spread those modest tints, that balmy scent
To grace a fairer, sweeter victim's tomb:
And twine the thyme, which yields its rich perfume
When bruised and wounded by the heedless tread;
For, like that flower, beneath her cruel doom,
In patient loveliness, she bowed her head,
And round her murderer's path delight and blessings shed.

"From the clear bosom of yon shaded lake,
Haste, cull the broad leaved lily's virgin flower:
When whirlwinds rend the oak and waste the brake,
And heaven is dark with hurricane and shower,
Its frail white cups defy the tempest's power:
And she, as pure, as modest, as as fair,
When fate and frenzy brought the deadly hour,
Smiled with pale, gentle firmness on despair,
And meekly armed her soul to suffer and to dare.

"Oh, noblest, gentlest, fairest, best!
Martyr of fame, of freedom, and of love!
Long round the bed of thine eternal rest
Shall snowy feet in mazy circles move;
Long may the pensive virgin footsteps rove,
When ocean burns beneath the blush of even,
Through the dim shade of thy sepulchral grove,
And to the turf where thou art laid be given
The sweetest flowers of earth, the softest tears of heaven."
