Oh!  who has felt thy power, Spirit of Song!
When thou dust light the eye, and thy warm glow
Wild thrills the heart, and shoots the nerves along&mdash;
When the quick words, thy impulse seem to know,
Warm as the gushing tear thou bidst to flow,
And live, and breathe, and glow along the line&mdash;
Has felt thy power, that can it's joy forego?
Oh!  may my dearest wish be ever thine,
And all thy moving power, sweet Poesy, be mine!

For I have loved thee from my boyish days&mdash;
Have felt thy power, while scarce my falt'ring tongue
Could lisp thy name, or I had learned thy praise.
Thy influence to feel, the heart, though young,
Asks not the critic's aid.  Thou art not sprung
Of earth-born race; but from the birth of time,
Ere tongues were known, or mortal harp was strung,
Thou wast, and art, in every age and clime
Where man is found to feel great Nature's works sublime.

Thine is the claim which binds the glowing heart
To Nature; thine the power that lights the eye,
Flushes the cheek, commands the tear to start,
And chillness shake the frame, as through the sky,
With awful joy, we see the lightnings fly,
And hear the crash their burning paths along!
Thine the soft wish, the gently-heaving sigh,
And the calm joys upon the soul that throng,
At twilight's lonely hour, is raptures still, but strong.

Yes, thou art Nature's language to the heart,
Which knows and springs responsive to her call;
And soonest then, when uninformed by art&mdash;
Whether her voice from yon starred azure fall,
Sweet as thy song, pathetic Percival!
Or from yon mountain's storm-encompassed head,
Where the cloud settles like a funeral pall,
And hissing streams of fire flash broad and red,
And the live, leaping thunder mutters wild and dread!

And all, at times, that wordless voice have heard,
And on its soothing accents loved to dwell,
As they have breathless bent to catch each word
That from the tongue of some sweet speaker fell.
Thine, Wells!  that tongue thy country loved so well,
Now still in death &mdash; or thine, great Hamilton!
Whose fame proud story's brightest page shall tell&mdash;
Whose deeds among great deeds so brightly shone,
That, as we gaze, thine meet the eye almost alone!

That voice was music to my boyish ear,
Whether on some tall eminence I stood,
Its accents from the landscape round to hear:
The wind's hoarse murmur in the distant wood,
And thousand voices joined in concert rude,
Of beast, and bird, and swain; but aye that eye
To distance turns, and dwells, in kindliest mood,
On streams, woods, hills, or plains that farthest lie,
And most it loves the line where mingle land and sky!
