ECLOGUE I.
ALEXIS:  OR, THE TRAVELLER.
SCENE:  THE RUINS OF ALEXANDRIA.
TIME:  MORNING.
TO THOMAS PEARSON, ESQ.

Where mould'ring piles conceal the sculptor's hand,
And Egypt's pride lies scatter'd o'er the strand;
Relics of antient taste!  by Time betray'd,
The tow'ring column, and the gay arcade:
Fragments of marble in confusion plac'd,
Disjoin'd by wars, by ignorance defac'd:
Alexis oft the sacred haunt would tread,
And hold sweet converse with the mighty dead.
Alexis, by no vain caprice pursued,
Who many a race and many a land had view'd;
From northern climes, where Phoebus faintly smiles,
To where his beams enrich the spicy isles;
On hostile shores by tempests had been cast,
And many a painful pilgrimage had past!

Now rising Phoebus leaves the Cyprian shore,
Sprung from the wave whence Venus sprang before.
Dimm'd is the orb that glow'd on Pharos' height,
And polish'd domes reflect the orient light;
When lone Alexis from the port retreats,
To wooe the Muses in their wonted seats,
Where useless aqueducts obstruct the way,
And gaping catacombs their wombs betray;
Where long canals their thirsty beds extend,
And tow'rs unroof'd, no more the town defend;
Wonders of art decay'd!  he pensive strays,
'Till Pompey's well-known pillar he surveys.
Strait o'er his mind a pleasing sorrow reigns,
While thus he vents it in no servile strains.

"Illustrious trophy of a Hero's fame!
Th' Egyptian honor!  and the Roman shame!
That Rome who drove a Patriot from her breast,
This land who thus her victim's wrongs redrest.
What tho' success has sanctify'd the crime,
And Julius triumphs to the close of time;
What tho' when Pompey fled Pharsalia's field,
Rome lost her prop, and Liberty her shield;
Yet shall the Great lament his fate severe,
Which check'd a rival in his bold career:
Yet shall a stone this truth important tell&mdash;
His name may flourish who obscurely fell!

"Prepare, ye Loves!  your myrtles ever-green,
To wreathe the column of Egyptia's Queen.
Hither advance, ye pow'rs of wit and wine!
And hang your various chaplet on her shrine.
For laughing Anthony your homage pay,
Who set for love, and threw a world away!
No meaner conquests could his soul approve,
His empire, beauty!  and ambition, love!
O'er realms enslaved let proud Augustus reign,
And live immortal in the Mantuan strain;
A lot more envy'd shall await the pair,
Whose fame shall be the faithful lovers' care;
Still in their talk the tender tale be found,
Still fresh the aspic's bite, and faulchion's wound!

"Around his tomb let daring spirits throng,
While Ammon's glories elevate the song!
The bright achievements seal'd with hostile blood,
On Indus' banks, and Granic's adverse flood;
The noble feelings which the man bespoke,
When Porus bow'd, and Persia own'd the yoke:
A kingdom render'd back with such a grace,
Such pity to Darius' captive race:
These bloom still vivid in the Painter's hues,
And deck th' historic page and tragic Muse.
Ye pow'rs of commerce!  here your succor bring,
To happier themes accord the silver string.
Behold the port to which blue Neptune gave
A boundless empire o'er the subject wave!
Behold the mart where freighted navies meet,
Plenty's full horn, and trade's unrival'd seat!
From ev'ry soil where ev'ry product came,
And stamp'd imperial with its founder's name:
These, yet unsung, sublimer views display'd,
And, more than conquest, deify his shade!

"And must these relics hasten to decay,
And like inferior objects pass away?
Shall future times recover from their dust
The canker'd coin and mutilated bust?
Of Caesar all and Ammon that remain,
To puzzle some Virtu's conject'ring brain!
O death to think!  must now the abject race
Of Turk and Arab lord it in their place?
O'er prostrate arts must barb'rous Goths aspire?
More fell to learning than the signal fire,
Sages and Bards which to oblivion doom'd,
And Ptolemy's enlightened store consum'd."

Thus plain'd the youth, 'till Sol's increasing heat
Warns him to shelter in some cool retreat.
Now to a convent's porch he points his way,
Whose scanty groves have made the desart gay.
Soon as the bearded fathers meet his eye,
Kings!  warriors!  poets!  from his mem'ry fly:
Men who, recluse, no less his wonder claim,
Studious of good, yet careless of a name!


ECLOGUE II.
SELIMA:  OR, THE FAIR GREEK.
SCENE:  A SERAGLIO IN ARABIA FELIX.
TIME:  NOON.
TO THE HON. MRS. S. MONCKTON.

Fast by the vale that bosoms Sennaa's pride,
By streams meander'd, and with shades supply'd;
Shades, which the boughs of breathing spices throw,
And streams that through eternal verdure flow;
Where in one form the seasons shine confest,
And blend to rule o'er Araby the blest;
A mansion, pervious to no prying eye,
Adorns the mead, and lifts its head on high:
Rear'd by a lordly Khan with cost profuse,
For pleasure destin'd, and for beauty's use.
Alas!  what pleasure know these lonesome walls&mdash;
Care gnaws the sex whom jealousy inthrals!

Thou!  to each finer sense of feeling known,
In ev'ry thought and word and action shown;
Whether thy converse virtue's charms resound,
Digress with fancy, or with wit abound,
Attend, Sophia!  to the tale I bring,
For lonely meads forsake the courtly ring.
Tho' grace thy steps, tho' taste thy lyre sustain,
Quit the gay dance, and hush thy sweeter strain;
The wrongs of injur'd beauty I rehearse,
And well thy sympathy shall pay the verse!

Amid the thoughtless and obsequious throng,
That listless drag the load of life along;
That plung'd in baths perfum'd, and roseate bow'rs,
In polish'd slav'ry lose their wanton hours;
A nymph of other hue this Haram held,
In charms of person who her peers excel'd;
But chief of all those softer charms possest,
Which calm, adorn, exalt the female breast!
Unrival'd in her master's love she reign'd,
But love unsought her noble soul disdain'd:
Of jealous bonds she felt the galling weight,
And sigh'd for freedom in a regal state!

Oft when bright Cynthia chas'd the midnight shade,
Through gloomy walks she solitary stray'd;
Her golden bed for dewy skies forsook,
Her vocal virgins for the murm'ring brook.
On the moist bank would pass the night reclin'd,
'Till came her lord his absent love to find;
With soft complaints her cold delay to chide,
And hush those griefs she strove in vain to hide.

Once as at noon th' accustom'd dome she sought,
With curious skill, and rich materials wrought;
In each recess where scented fountains play,
And give, enforc'd, a coolness to the day;
Sick of the scene, her comrades' sole delight,
From vice and folly she averts her sight.
Here might you see, in pride of beauty's blaze,
A female list'ning to an eunuch's praise;
There, where a glass the chrystal bath supply'd,
One naked bent enamor'd o'er the tide;
A damsel here, applauded, wake the lyre
To notes of low, libidinous desire;
While there a groupe, with pictur'd terrors pale,
Imbibe the wonders of a fairy tale.
Each as her fancy prompts, the time employs,
And gives a loose to visionary joys!
While some at chess exert their active pow'rs,
The rest in slumbers cheat the sultry hours.
Th' Arabian berry circles round the room,
And from the lighted tubes ascends perfume.
Nor absent here the grateful juice of lime,
Nor each rare fruit that crowns the happy clime.

Lost to the croud, fair Selima apart
Thus breath'd the sorrows of a burthen'd heart.

"Ah!  why to youth and beauty was I born,
If clouded thus the promise of my morn?
Ah!  why from Greece to these rude regions brought,
If not by pomp and golden shackles caught?
When pleasure suits, and health confirms my bloom,
Why here in solitude my days consume?
A solitude that no diversion knows,
Save when lewd passion chases dull repose:
When, stung by lust, a tyrant seeks my arms,
And claims by gold these violated charms.
O shameful state!  O undeserv'd remove
From social converse!  and unblemish'd love!
Witness, ye joys!  that never will return,
These tears bear witness to the change I mourn.
Ye pines!  Which circle Ida's sacred brow,
How oft your barks have told a lover's vow!
Ye streams!  that gush meand'ring down his side,
Ye knew the vow as spotless as your tide;
The vow which Cleon to my ear prefer'd,
The vow which Selima with rapture heard!

"Sad is the thought, and fatal to my rest,
Which shews  me ravish'd from a parent's breast;
By harden'd pirates hurry'd to the main,
While age stretch'd forth her suppliant arms in vain!
Hard is the lot which threw me on this shore,
My freedom barter'd for a grasp of ore;
With pamper'd slaves to swell a Haram's pride,
From earth secluded!  and to heav'n deny'd!
But sooner, dearest Cleon!  be forgot
That sad idea, and this cruel lot;
A mother's woe, my desolated youth,
Than all thy graces, tenderness and truth!
Ah!  should thy faith have prompted thee to roam
In search of her whose bosom was thy home;
Perhaps, poor youth!  my fortune may be thine&mdash;
One curse may blend whom love forbade to join!
Perhaps a slave, thou cut'st the Turkish main,
And feel'st my absence heavier than thy chain!"&mdash;

More had her grief &mdash; when lo!  to crown her fears,
Her dreaded suitor at the porch appears.
Around their Lord the nymphs sequacious throng;
One tries to lure him with an am'rous song:
His praises som in soothing strains repeat,
These kiss his robe, and those embrace his feet.
While he, by all their little arts unmov'd,
In haste advances to his coy belov'd.
The envy'd token in her lap he threw,
And, inly sighing, Selima withdrew.


ECLOGUE III.
RAMAH:  OR, THE BRAMIN.
SCENE:  THE PAGODA OF CONJEVERAM.
TIME:  EVENING.
TO ROBERT PATTON, ESQ.

High on the top of that religious fane,
Whose spires from far attract the zealot-train,
Pride of Gentoos!  mid superstition's night
Which shines a beacon to the Pagan's sight,
A Bramin stood &mdash; expos'd to ev'ry eye,
The roof his bed, his canopy the sky;
For three long days he here the clime defy'd,
Revenge his study, and distress his pride.
O'er woes impending runs his lab'ring mind,
And omens thicken in the coming wind!

Friend!  to whose love my Muse her being owes,
Which knew her lisping, and which riper knows,
If e'er she favor with the public found,
To which must all the little praise redound;
With her awhile to tragic scenes retire,
Scenes which mistaken principles inspire.
And tho' to thee familiar is the tale
Where fraud and folly through the East prevail,
Ambition's guilt and Superstition's school
Are still contemn'd, where truth and reason rule!

The sun had set behind Mysorean hills,
And left the theatre of human ills:
The meteor Bigotry his light succeeds,
And sense retreats, and man devoted bleeds!
See pious Ramah with its rage possest,
Whom zeal-taught frenzy numbers with the blest.
Tho' bow'd his frame, his strength with fasting spent,
His wav'ring soul assumes her dire intent:
Of aught but bright rewards he scorns to think,
And ventures to the Pagod's fearful brink.
The cruel shouts of thousands rend the air
To steel his mind, and flatter his despair:
He stands in act to spring amid the croud,
But utters first these dying words aloud.

"Ye Gods!  protectors of the Indian race,
Now trembles not your empire to its base?
Say, on what spot your altars shall be found,
While mad Ambition walks his guilty round?
Lo!  by the Ganges' consecrated flood
The sacred Cow distains the earth with blood;
Selected form of purity divine!
Mute intercessor at your holy shrine!
I see!  I see!  the fated ruin spread,
The stream polluted at the fountain-head!
Religion changing thro' the land her vow;
The Mosque aspiring o'er the Pagod's brow:
But chief the holy temples of Tanjore
Defil'd, where Mahomet ne'er trod before!

"With crimes he mark'd that inauspicious day,
When o'er our bounds the Tartar forc'd his way,
Nor hills nor floods can stop those robbers fell,
Whom views of conquest or of gold impel!
Then vanish'd all the plenty of the plain,
Fear seiz'd the maiden and despair the swain:
Golconda's gems diffus'd their novel rays,
And guilt was circled with the diamond's blaze.
Nor 'scap'd our Pagods sacrilegious hands&mdash;
Nor Jaggernaut on lone Orixa's sands;
Not Tripetti, whose feasts a treasure yield,
Had faith to guard them, or had Gods to shield!
The mooned standard scatters terror wide,
And fortune marshals on th' invader's side:
Then peace affrighted fled the hostile shore,
And truth and love and friendship were no more!

"But soon th' all-righteous Gods reveng'd our cause,
And Christians sent, to give our tyrants laws;
With daring keel o'er ocean's wilds to stray,
In turn to dispossess them of their prey.
How oft the strand with Moorish blood was dy'd,
While rapine's vassals endless streams supply'd!
Not long the sons of Lusitania hold
Their conquests, founded on the lust of gold;
The Hollander insidious spreads his toils,
Fawns like a friend, and seizes on the spoils.
His ill-got sceptre blossoms but to fade,
By fraud secur'd, and with injustice sway'd.
Wither'd its force &mdash; two rivals now appear,
There the proud Gaul, the gen'rous Briton here!
With various chance each army charg'd the foe,
While Asia waited the decisive blow.
Success at length superior valor crown'd,
And Britain reign'd, and blest the nations round!

"Alas!  how devious are a mortal's ways&mdash;
Him honor quits, and avarice betrays.
Ah!  what avails that Lawrence led his bands
To snatch from ruin our devoted lands!
On injur'd heirs that Clive, like Ammon's son,
Bestow'd the kingdoms which his sword had won!
That Pigot's councils lent to vict'ry wings,
And fix'd the limits of contending kings!
Vain is the hero's, vain the statesman's toil,
If hard oppression curse the gen'rous soil;
If local rulers loose the Tartar's hand
To grasp at crowns, and desolate the land!

"Too long these eyes have view'd the growing ill,
Then welcome, death!  this fruitless plaint to still.
If for their sins so many of our tribe
Have pennance fram'd, no colors can describe;
If some from Sind to Dehli's far abode
Have measur'd with their lengths the flinty road;
If others' courage wilder feats have dar'd,
Nor bow'd by famine, nor by torture scar'd;
Him no false pride impels when Ramah falls,
Whom not his own but country's danger calls:
Calls, by a timely sacrifice to move
Remorse below, or vengeance  from above!
But mark me &mdash; death the prophecy shall seal,
Ye base apostates to Britannia's weal!&mdash;
Nought but distress, commotion and disgrace
Attend your favor to the Tartar race.
That weight remov'd which poiz'd Indostan's scale,
Against your Cross the Crescent shall prevail:
'Till late you find 'twas not in vain he bled,
Whose curses lighted on the guilty head."

He spake &mdash; and headlong darted from the height,
Swift as the falling meteor cleaves the night.
The hollow pavement to the fall resounds;
The body streams with undistinguish'd wounds:
The martyr's end the temple's records own,
And leaves a lesson to the British throne!


ECLOGUE IV.
THE ESCAPE:  OR, THE CAPTIVES.
SCENE:  THE SUBURBS OF TUNIS.
TIME:  NIGHT.
TO JAMES IRWIN, ESQ.

Two youths of noble birth, whose wayward fate
Had doom'd to languish in a captive state;
Who to Iberia daily sent in vain
Soft sighs and wishes o'er the parting main:
Whose fond remembrance still would backwards to,
And from the contrast edge the present woe:
To whom e'en Hope but lent a glimm'ring ray&mdash;
These wake the tear, and ask the closing lay!

And wilt thou, IRWIN!  to the call attend,
Which, more than brother, indicates the friend?
Wilt thou, in lib'ral notions chiefly great,
Suspend the cares that still on office wait?
And while the Captives' sorrows touch thy breast,
And gen'rous rage, and painful thought suggest;
Like them tho' 'scap'd the chain he whilom drew,
Lament the fortune which a brother knew!

Deep in a corner of the spacious bay
Where mosque-crown'd Tunis owns a pirate's sway;
To fan the air where still the sea-breeze flies,
The sumptuous palace of the monarch lies.
Here arch'd piazzas rise on ev'ry side,
With marble pav'd, and sofas rich supply'd.
Whate'er can minister to silken ease,
Beauty to soothe, and melody to please;
The song, the dance, the bath, the opiate bowl,
Here flow successive, and bewitch the soul.
Nor less the fragrant gardens charm the sight,
Shades of repose, and scenes of soft delight:
Where not a shrub but keeps its vernal prime,
And not a fount but mollifies the clime.
To rear the flow'r, to dress the bow'r of joy,
A thousand slaves their daily toil employ:
And in this sensual Eden's ample round,
The toil of thousands is unequal found!

Here were our youths their wonted tasks assign'd,
And here in gentler bondage long they pin'd.
While their late crew severer treatment bore,
Chain'd to the toilsome labor of the oar.
But daring thoughts engage each manly breast,
Plann'd by their chiefs, and whisper'd to the rest.
Bold the attempt which liberty  inspires,
And fond affection for a master fires!
This night is fix'd to seize their anch'ring prey,
And push o'er ocean their advent'rous way.

Full Luna now her friendly ray display'd,
To bear the lover to his waking maid;
The flying captive on his road to light,
While slumber seals the watchful dragon's sight;
When forth the Spaniards to the terrace stole,
Beneath whose height th' encircling waters roll.
A cord they fix, and undismay'd attend,
Swift to the welcome galley to descend.
And now their eyes a fairer view explore,
Where freedom beckons, and their native shore;
All to the lover or the husband dear,
Beams on their mind, and speaks the union near!
But while on expectation's brink they stand,
While doubts contract, and hopes their breasts expand,
Known to the Muse, each conscious youth essays
To paint his love, and reach his charmer's praise.

Perez began.  A virgin was his theme,
Bright as her orb, yet cold as Cynthia's beam!

"Oh thou!  to whom my youthful vows belong,
Strength of my sword!  and goddess of my song!
Who oft my chivalry with smiles hast paid,
And deign'd to grace the midnight serenade:
Be thou propitious to this teeming hour,
Which gives a captive to thy boundless pow'r.
Love, more than Freedom, tempts him o'er the wave,
To own his tyrant, and resume the slave:
To him all thoughts of liberty were vain,
Who, scap'd from bondage, seeks a stronger chain!

"Let Marcia then her Perez' claim approve,
His truth persuade her, and his suff'rings move.
And you, my rivals!  who that claim disdain'd,
Scoff'd at my lot, and by my absence reign'd;
Or in the lists, or in your am'rous suit,
For love and honour Perez will dispute.
In vain you prize the lance, or breathe the vow&mdash;
The fair-one twines the wreath for Perez' brow!"

Sebastian then.  Him fills a dearer name,
Soft as her light, and chaste as Dian's fame!

"And will to thee Sebastian be restor'd,
With smiles be welcom'd, as with sighs deplor'd!
Will love o'erpay thee with a late embrace,
Wife of my choice!  and guardian of my race!
See, if the thought dissolve me not to tears,
My manhood shake, and waken all my fears.
No babes, perhaps, may lisp a sire's return&mdash;
The mother's trust transmitted to an urn!
Or if so hopeless, so severe my fate,
Those children now may weep their orphan state!

"But let Sebastian brighter prospects sway,
Less dark his mind when darker far his day!
Lo!  Freedom wings him to the blissful spot,
Where hous'd in peace, his chains will be forgot.
Him Leonora waits in matchless charms,
To strain an exile in her widow'd arms;
Of parent!  spouse!  with each endearing tie
This vacuum in his being to supply!"

He said; and saw the object in his reach:
The friendly galley strikes upon the beach.
Swift by the cord the Captives downward glide&mdash;
The bark drops silent with the ebbing tide.
Now, unobserv'd, the lower fort they gain,
Now shoot the narrow outlet to the main.
To crown their hopes the wind from Tunis blows;
They pass the Cape where ancient Carthage rose;
Onward their course with toil unceasing ply,
'Till Murcia's mountains faintly tinge the sky.
Touch'd at the sight, they cast their cares behind,
While all their country rushes on their mind!
