What solemn reveries fill the traveller's mind,
How does he pause and muse upon his way,
If he perchance some ruin'd castle find,
Tottering with age, and crumbling to decay:
"Full many a year is flown," methinks he'll say.
"Since first this castle stood in youthful pride,
This place has seen full many a festive day:
How many a tender swain, and blushing bride,
And beauteous youthful nymph did in these walls reside!"

"'Twas here, perhaps," enraptur'd Fancy cries,
"Some youthful minstrel swept the tuneful lyre,
Whose magic power could bid each passion rise,
Or melt the heart, or tenderest thoughts inspire.
In those bright days did many a chief aspire,
By force of arms, or stratagem, to gain
This beauteous pile, this source of fond desire,
And reign sole lord of all the rich domain;
But see!  to mark its place no stone will soon remain!"

Such are my musings when, in thoughtful mood,
Some ancient single sister I survey:
Full many a siege, methinks, hath she withstood,
And many a warm assailant kept at bay.
Where now are seen those locks of silvery gray,
Like faded verdure on a ruin'd wall,
Luxuriant tresses once did she display.
From whence young Cupids shot their arrows small,
And many a valiant knight beneath those shafts did fall.

Full many a fond desire, and tender thought,
And many a gay idea flourish'd here:
Those wither'd lips were once with beauty fraught,
And breath'd forth music on the ravish'd ear;
Those sunken eyes which now so dim appear,
(Like dormant windows, full of cobwebs hung,)
Were once of purest azure, bright and clear,
And many a glance from their recesses sprung,
Which spread destructive fires the youthful swains among.

Scarce was this castle finished, ere there came
A youthful chief, of mild and placid mien,
(Though great in combat) &mdash; Hymen was his name&mdash;
And round this fortress did his troops convene.
Beneath his banners many a knight was seen,
Resolved on conquest, and prepared for war.
Some carried gold to bribe their entrance in;
Some in bright armour drove the rapid car:
Some laid close siege, and some shot arrows from afar.

Celibacy the opposing chief was call'd:
To guard the castle all his skill he tried;
His low'ring aspect every heart appall'd,
And his prime minister was surnamed Pride:
With him were Scorn and Vanity allied,
And many another bold and staunch defender,
Yet still within the walls there did abide
A youth called Love, so timid and so tender,
He fain would ope the gates, and all the spoil surrender.

This treacherous boy was closely watch'd by Pride,
(Who ever had his deep designs suspected,)
And even at length the little urchin tied,
Lest all the other troops should be infected.
When this was done each offer they rejected,
And many a deed of valour then was shown,
For in close league were all within connected:
Meanwhile dissentions 'mong their foes had grown&mdash;
Each warrior claim'd the place, if taken, for his own.

What verse can tell the glories of that fray?
The flaming darts that wing'd their rapid flight,
The hidden sighs that in dark ambush lay,
Then, unsuspected, rose in all their might:
Sometimes, when midnight's veil obscured the light,
With sound of music would the foes convene,
And, under cover of surrounding night,
Attempt to sap the lofty walls, unseen,
Or throw a flaming torch of billet-doux within.

But Pride and Scorn alternate watch'd the while,
With ready frowns to quench the rising flame,
While flattering Vanity would still beguile
The troops besieged with promises of fame:
Till Hymen, tired at length, renounc'd his claim,
And to another siege his troops withdrew;
But from this place ere he reluctant came,
He paused, and wept o'er all the obdurate crew:
These were his parting words, and this his last adieu:

"Oh, beauteous castle!  must I then return,
And leave thee still beneath the oppressor's sway!
I mourn sincerely, but for thee I mourn,
And thou wilt mourn for many a hapless day!
Thy lofty battlements shall all decay,
With none to strengthen or support thy frame.
Thy guardian, Hope, at length shall fly away;
The scoffing world thy folly shall proclaim;
Time shall lay waste thy walls, oblivion thy name!"
