While others pay their Tribute due,
In forreign verse and tongues unknown;
My humbler Muse resorts to You,
And strives to pay it in her own.
Unskill'd in each Poetick grace,
Unknowing of the tuneful art
She gives that little all she has,
A simple English Verse, an honest English heart.

Oh!  when Thou shalt readst it let thine eyes
A while with tears forget to flow;
Thy beauteous bosom cease to rise,
And labour with it's weight of woe.
Why shouldst thou thus the MONARCH'S death
With unavailing grief deplore?
Cans't Thou recall the fleeting breath?
No &mdash; Thou must lose thy own, but canst not his restore.

Then dry thy tears. &mdash; The God of Day,
Tho' show'rs now hide him from our sight,
Soon thro' the Darkness works his way,
And moves in all the pomp of light.
Like him, O lift thy radiant eyes,
With gracious influence shine;
Think from thy Joys that ours arise,
Consider England's happiness depends on Thine.

Hear then thy People's, &mdash; Husband's pray'rs;
He bids Thee too, dismiss thy grief:
What shall He only meet with cares,
Where He expects to find relief?
Beneath the weight of Crowns opprest
He to thy Love for ease do's flee;
When He has giv'n his Kingdoms rest,
Retreats into thy Arms, and finds his own in Thee.

O CAROLINE, our sweetest grace,
Delight and pleasure of our eyes,
Thou fruitful Mother of our Peace,
Thou source whence all our joys arise;
Blest in thy num'rous Offspring, loe!
A rising age of Gold we see:
Thy People shall not only owe
Their present bliss, but all their future too, to Thee.

Britannia, leave thy mournful Bed,
Raise up thy prostrate limbs from Earth,
Exalt aloft thy tow'ry Head,
And see what Joys are taking birth;
See, how the smiling years succeed,
Behold the blessings laid in store:
What, tho' Thou mourn'st thy Monarch dead,
Look on the Branches he has left, and thou wilt weep no more.

With rapture view the lovely Race,
See future Kings and Queens arise,
Thy Throne hereafter born to grace,
And bless th' admiring People's eyes:
Sons &mdash; that already pant for fame,
Fir'd with their Father's love of arms;
Bright daughters &mdash; form'd in Beauty's frame,
And lavishly adorn'd with all their Mother's charms.

Oh!  with what pleasure now we may
To latest times extend our sight;
The nation's rising Bliss survey,
And see new glories spring to light!
Succeeding years of Joy and Peace
T' our Children boldly we presage;
Ev'n now we tast Their Happiness,
And in this instant moment live the future age.

Thus when the Great Aeneas view'd
The destin'd Heroes of his race,
Fix'd in astonishment he stood
To see the bright succession pass.
The Thoughts of vast events to come
Within his lab'ring Fancy roll;
The Triumphs of immortal Rome,
And all Her shining glories kindle in his soul.

Pleas'd He Enjoys the Beauteous scene,
Proudly  exulting in his mind,
Counts o'er the Forms of Godlike Men
For Empire and for Life design'd:
Then wrapt in Extacy he stands,
To see in them his Troy revive;
Their Birth with eagerness demands,
And wishes ev'n to die, that They may sooner live.
