Delightful task to sing of Scotia's Bards!
To-night, two sweetest of her tuneful choir
Adorn our theme; &mdash; to mark with skill; &mdash; to trace
Their various pow'rs; to point where to the view
Their native genius dress'd in homely garb
Glows in each page; where Nature painted strong
Darts on the sight, and through th' enraptur'd mind
Pours heav'nly sweets which mock the power of words:
Requires a Muse fir'd with th' etherial flame,
Which warm'd their bosoms, and inspir'd their song.

Immortal RAMSAY first demands our praise:
In Scottish verse he often tun'd his lyre.
Not sweeter notes e'er sung the Greecian bard,
Or Mantuan swain. &mdash; Led by the comic Muse,
'Twas his in lively colours still to paint
The rural scene, where shepherds talk'd or sung.
On the hill side, or 'longst the flow'ry mead,
Where rosy nymphs sung, as they milk'd their ewes,
Or bleach'd their linens by the crystal stream:
The rural feast, by Symon well prepar'd,
Convivial mirth, where age forgot its years,
Shook off the frailties, and again seem'd young.

While manly freedom, and the boldest sense,
In strongest characters his hero grace,
Exalted friendship warms his gen'rous breast,
The purest love inspires his artless mind.
With more than magic skill our RAMSAY paints
The tender contest, and the power of love,
'Twixt the young Shepherd and the modest Maid.
The ardent youth from nature shapes his words:
Their gentle pow'r steals on her artless mind;
The recollection of their infant years,
With all their sweet endearments aids the scene,
And through their minds its pleasing influence pours.
They feel; &mdash; they speak; &mdash; the gentle passions rise,
They catch the mutual flame. &mdash; Her yielding arms
Receive her youthful lover's fond embrace.

What mind perceives not from his pencil glow
Unnumber'd beauties in that tender scene,
Where doubts and fears poor Peggy's prospects cloud,
How soon she finds her Shepherd turn'd a Laird!
How does her Patrick scorn th' illusive charms
Of rising fortune, and finds out a way,
Consistent with the pow'rs of filial love,
And high parental will, to stand resolv'd.
He soothes her sorrows with the voice of love;
He from her bosom chases ev'ry woe,
And from her eyes wipes off the gushing tear.&mdash;
No base suspicion damps the pleasing tale,
Nor does she try to hide the joys she feels:
Nature, without disguise, bursts forth at once;
She looks enraptur'd to the coming bliss,
And speaks in language artless as her mind,
Of means to fit her for th' auspicious fate;
While from her temples fair, the simple pledge
Of constant truth her paring lover takes.

The rules of drama he with skill preserves,
Gradual the plot still opens to the view;
Pleas'd, interested, still we follow on,
'Till all the parts united flash at once,
In pleasing raptures on th' astonish'd mind.
'Tis this alone must to the Scottish muse,
And to the Scottish language, ever give
A higher dignity than any song,
However sweet, her other bards have sung.

Next sprightly FERGUSSON claims due regard.
Fair blooms the wreath which binds his youthful brow.
His rising genius like the orient morn,
Diffuses round its sweet, its chearing rays.
As foreign from our theme, his English verse,
With some regret we pass; for there he soars
With all the pride of pure poetic fire:
With what bewitching power he leads us through
His rural shades, and sweet pastoral scenes,
While nature lives in every line he draws,
And pathos moves the nicest powers of mind.
Of this enough. &mdash; His Scottish muse must stand
High in the roll of fame.  So sweetly tun'd
His various subjects from the goldfinch gay,
Industrious bee, or farmer's ingle side,
Down to the lowest essay of his Muse,
So nicely touch'd. &mdash; So true his colours rise,
They move the passions as they flash around,
Bright'ning the social scene. &mdash; Time steals away,
While mirth and humour crown the jocund hour.
But, still, howe'er adapted to the theme;
However high the glow of wit may rise;
However sweet our youthful Bard has sung;
His finest notes fall short of RAMSAY'S lyre.
These only rouse the rougher powers of mind:
'Tis his to touch the finest springs of love;
To move those feelings, so remote from sense,
That finest images express them not.

We mark with pleasure, and we feel with joy,
Each pow'r pathetic in the flowing page,
When FERGUSSON attunes his solemn lyre:
They please, delight, but not like RAMSAY'S please,
Where Nature lives, and speaks in ev'ry line;
Where language disappears amidst the glow
Of sentiment so beauteous, pure, and strong,
As brings each object present to the mind.
Such is the language of the knight disguis'd:
What strong emotions of parental love,
Which flow in tears adown his aged cheeks,
Upon the bosom of his darling son!
How just his questions to his ancient friend!
How just his maxims of maturing youth!
While Symon ev'ry word and action speak
The honest feelings of a faithful heart.

The other's wit so sprightly lives a while;
Then with the trivial subject dies away:
But RAMSAY'S sense, deep fix'd in Nature's laws,
Must live immortal as his matchless song.
His language, too, which to the Scottish muse
Gives ev'ry grace, must claim our due regard.
So chaste, so easy, does it flow along,
From forc'd and foreign idioms still so free,
Which oft in FERGUSSON offend the eye.
O happy genius!  which could so describe
The human passions, so devoid of art,
Whose ev'ry stroke still moves their finest springs;
Whose ev'ry word and look is Nature's self.

Like two fine paintings drawn with nicest skill,
Shewing unnumber'd beauties to the view,
We gaze at each unable to decide:
They please by turns, and still we're unresolv'd;
Till some bold stroke, some highly finish'd glow,
Before unknown, prepond'ring, kicks the beam.
Just so our bards. &mdash; Unnumber'd beauties shine
Alike in both, and grace each flowing page:
But some peculiar to our RAMSAY rise,
Claim just regard; &mdash; demands in due to night,
That we should crown him chief of Scotia's bards.

O FERGUSSON!  how must we still deplore
The fate which snatch'd thee early from our view!
What wouldst thou been, had years matur'd thy mind!
When in the dawn of life thou sung so sweet:
Th' astonish'd world would echo'd round applause,
And Scotia's bards the palm of vict'ry yield.
Whilst thou, celestial Bard, thy golden lyre
Now tun'st to notes unknown to mortal ears,
Accept the wreath we offer to thy fame,
While the sad tear drops on thy early tomb.
