Shall Genius slumber in th' oblivious tomb,
By no sublime funereal song deplor'd;
Shall he, who tower'd on Fancy's loftiest plume,
Want the sweet dirge o'er beauteous Laura pour'd?

Muses of ASIA!  ye who fann'd the fire
That in your favourite's ardent bosom glow'd,
With all your flame my kindling soul inspire,
As when the exalted strain to Mithra flow'd.

Arise! &mdash; and deeply smite the choral shell;
Solemn, yet plaintive, roll th' impassion'd lay:
Like those which shook, of old, the mystic cell,
And mourn'd the all-cheering sun's departing ray.

For, radiant as yon orb's declining beam
Flames on illumin'd Taurus' western brow,
His star, descending, shed a lovely gleam,
Whose lustre shall to latest ages glow.

Hail!  nurse of arts and song &mdash; thy hallow'd shore,
ASIA, permit my daring steps to rove;
Thy antient Magi's vaulted caves explore,
And pierce the dark, impervious, blood-stain'd grove.

But chief, where Ganges' rapid billows glide
By many a ruin'd tower, and mouldering fane,
That erst the rage of hostile chiefs defied,
And echoed with devotion's raptur'd strain;

Be mine to wander o'er yon gloomy strand,
Where drooping Science bends o'er Virtue's bier;
And, mingling with yon sorrowing sable band,
Heave the deep sigh, and pour the gushing tear.

Now night's incumbent shadows, deepening round,
The proud remains of India's glory veil,
Pale lightnings skirt th' horizon's distant bound,
Loud beats the surge, and hollow blows the gale.

An anxious horror all my soul pervades,
I see the awful page of fate unroll'd;
Darkling I range through Death's profoundest shades,
Futurity's tremendous scenes unfold!

Ah!  what are days, or months, or circling years,
That form, 'twixt life and death, the slender bound;
What the vast cycles of revolving spheres,
To dread eternity's unmeasur'd round?

Roll, mighty periods, your immense career,
Be suns, be stars, in flaming ruin hurl'd!
VIRTUE, the sun that warms the moral sphere,
Superior glows, nor fears a bursting world.

Wide as those countless orbs diffuse their blaze,
Boundless as space extends, or being flows,
No spot so dear applauding Heaven surveys,
As where the wise and virtuous dead repose.

Unfading laurels, o'er their sacred urn,
Aloft their ever-verdant foliage spread,
The Muses there eternal incense burn,
And rolling spheres their kindliest influence shed.

On their loved bier, the Morn's refulgent star,
Enamour'd, joys to dart its earliest beam;
There passing Phoebus checks his rapid car,
And lingering Cynthia sheds her latest gleam.

The loveliest roses of the breathing spring
Delight around the hallow'd sod to grow;
Bright seraphs hover near with guardian wing;
Light fall the dews, and soft the zephyrs blow.

Let tyrants, to embalm their loathsome clay,
Of half her fragrant gums Arabia drain,
Recording brass their martial feats display,
And venal marbles breathe the flatterer's strain:

Thy tomb no trophies wants, illustrious shade!
Nor breathing brass thy virtues to proclaim;
Thine are the radiant palms which never fade,
A tower of adamant thy deathless name!

To spread thy fame two rival worlds contend,
To worth, to learning, and to genius just;
And LOVE'S and FRIENDSHIP'S mingling tears descend,
To embalm thy memory, and bedew thy dust.

Immortal genius!  whose expansive flame,
In early youth, on Isis' banks I caught;
Whose path I follow'd up the steeps of fame,
And, by thy precepts, form'd the ripening thought.

Oh, from yon glittering orbs, thy bright abode,
Where oft, on earth, thy spirit lov'd to soar;
Whether thou mount the lucid MILKY ROAD,
That vast abyss of blazing suns t' explore:

Or if the northern WAINS thy wing detain,
Or vast ORION'S more refulgent beam;
Or, darting downward to the southern main,
If HYDRA bathe thee in her blazing stream:

Where'er thou rov'st, or near the frozen pole,
Or the parch'd regions of the burning line;
Still on this globe thine eye, auspicious, roll,
Nor spurn the trophies heap'd around thy shrine.

For me in vain revolve the tuneful spheres,
No more through heaven their flaming paths I trace,
Life, one vast howling wilderness appears,
And darkness wraps creation's beauteous face.

Ah, what avails it that I caught thy fire,
Or with thy ardent spirit dar'd to soar?
With thee, ambition's fondest hopes expire,
The sacred thirst of glory burns no more.

Deeper than Gothic glooms o'er Britain hang;
Where toiling Science wails her ravish'd meed;
And wounded deep, with many a secret pang,
The agonizing Muse is doom'd to bleed!

Ye bards of Britain, break the useless lyre,
And rend, disdainful, your detested bays;
Who now shall dare to letter'd fame aspire
Devotes to penury his hapless days!

Hear slighted Butler his hard fate bemoan!
O'er farnish'd Otway shed the generous tear!
Hark!  frantic Chatterton's expiring groan
Still vibrates dreadful on the tortur'd ear!

And are there who the glittering wreath would tear,
Immortal Genius!  from thy sacred brow;
Who jealous Heav'n's avenging thunder dare,
Whence all the radiant fires of Genius flow?

Are there who while they quaff the sparkling wines,
And load with eastern pomp the groaning board,
Wreck not that famish'd worth, unfriended, pines;
And bar, with hearts of steel, th' unbounded hoard?

Ye wretched pageants of a summer's morn,
Howe'er inshrin'd in wealth or thron'd in power:
Genius surveys you with retorted scorn,
Above your rage the immortal Muses tower.

Can all the joys the genial grape inspires,
One transport to the throbbing breast impart,
Like his &mdash; who burns with fancy's genuine fires&mdash;
And wakes the strain that warms the bounding heart?

In dungeon-glooms behold the bard sublime!
No sufferings can repress his inborn flame;
Darkling, in chains, he pours th' indignant rhyme,
And, wanting all things, throbs alone for fame!

He knows not famine's direful pangs to feel,
Aetherial viands feed his ardent soul;
He looks, with scorn, on bonds of triple steel,
Whose spirit soars where worlds unnumber'd roll.

While thus with honest pride, my bosom glow'd,
More vivid stream'd the lightning's dreadful glare,
In wilder waves tumultuous Ganges flow'd,
And rolling thunders shook the turbid air!

A flood of glory from the expanding skies
Full on the tomb of shrouded Genius play'd;
And, floating in the blaze, my raptur'd eyes
A form immortal and sublime survey'd.

The jewell'd chaplet that adorns her brow,
Her spear, resplendent as the solar flame,
Her cheek, that shames the morning's purple glow,
The sovereign GENIUS OF THE EAST proclaim.

Not that dire spectre, who, in later days,
In Asia's courts rears high her pageant shrine,
Who spurns the martial plume, and loves to blaze
In waste of diamonds from Golconda's mine.

Oh, not that bloated monster, stain'd with blood,
Who on pale Harams vents her murderous rage;
To screaming infants tends the impoison'd food,
And to the bow-string dooms enfeebled age:

That barbarous, hell-born, fiend, by grim Despair
On Murder, at the midight-hour, begot&mdash;
Far hence remove her torch's baleful glare,
Nor let its blaze profane this hallow'd spot!

But she of elder birth, whose righteous sway
Asia's undaunted sons exulting own'd,
When Liberty diffus'd her halcyon day,
And Virtue rul'd the helm with Cyrus thron'd.

I know her by her lofty ostrich plume,
That dreadful wav'd on Lydia's wealthy plain,
When tyranny at Sardis found a tomb,
And haughty Babel wept her myriads slain.

I know her by her rich emblazon'd shield,
Round whose vast orb, the radiant signs are roll'd:
Here Mithra's LION spurns the blazing field;
There raging TAURUS flames in sculptured gold.

In all the charms of martial beauty bright,
But still with brighter bays by Science crown'd,
The goddess bends to earth her rapid flight,
And consecrates to Fame the hallow'd ground.

"Favour'd of Heav'n!"  her awful voice exclaim'd,
"Oh!  thou, by two admiring worlds deplored,
Who with the love of Eastern lore inflamed,
To its sublimest heights unrivall'd soar'd.

"The brightest palms which Asia yields be thine;
Securely slumber on her peaceful coast;
Thy dust shall mix with chiefs of proudest line,
No nobler dust her gorgeous shrines can boast.

"Thy genius dar'd the secret springs explore
Whence antient Wisdom drank the copious stream,
Diffused far hence to many a barbarous shore,
And regions glowing with the western beam:

"Where the dark cliffs of rugged Taurus rise,
From age to age by blasting lightnings torn,
In glory bursting from the illumined skies,
Fair SCIENCE pour'd her first auspicious morn.

"The hoary Parthian Seers who watch'd by night,
The ETERNAL FIRE in Mithra's mystic cave&mdash;
Emblem sublime of that primeval light,
Which to yon sparkling orbs their lustre gave&mdash;

"Exulting saw its gradual splendours break,
And swept, symphonious, all their warbling lyres;
'Mid Scythia's frozen glooms the Muses wake,
While happier India glows with all their fires.

"From that stupendous tower in song renown'd,
Rear'd in the centre of her vast champaign,
Assyria, 'raptur'd, eyed the blue profound,
And class'd, in dazzling groups the starry train;

"Phoenicia, spurning Asia's bounding strand,
By the bright pole-star's steady radiance led,
Bade to the winds her daring sails expand,
And fearless plough'd old Ocean's stormy bed.

"The race who, when the burning Dogstar rose,
With thundering paeans shook old Nilus' shore;
Now view'd a brighter dawn its beams disclose,
And drank, in copious draughts, the Indian lore.

"From Egypt, roll'd in many a winding stream,
To Greece the tide of Eastern science flow'd;
Carthage exulting, hail'd its rising beam;
In Rome its splendours, by reflection, glow'd.

"Frantic with bigot rage, with blood defil'd
A gorgeous crescent gleaming on his crest;
What furious Demon, from Arabia's wild,
Hurls desolation through the ravag'd East?

"A sabre drench'd with infant gore he waves,
His eyes in opium's wildest frenzy roll;
And, while of sacred rites the maniac raves,
Lust and revenge pollute his guilty soul:

"O'er Persia wide his myriad host he pours,
Burning for spoil, for human blood athirst;
Resistless, India, on thy fertile shores,
Tossing their flaming brands, his legions burst.

"On Bactria's bills are quench'd the sacred fires,
The Mythriac priests are on their altars slain;
The proud Sassanian dynasty expires,
And Asia bends to Othman's baleful reign.

"Through all her bounds the outcries of despair,
The shrieks of violated beauty rise;
While, blasted by his crescent's dreadful glare,
The bloom of Science and of Genius dies.

"Barbarian, pause! &mdash; nor with remorseless rage,
The boast of Egypt to oblivion doom:
Ah, spare the toil of many a letter'd sage,
Nor bid devouring fire their works consume!

"In vain I plead; with sacrilegious flame
The glowing baths of Alexandria blaze;
Omar, eternal curses brand thy name,
And keenest lightnings fire thy wither'd bays!

"With kindred rage on India's ravaged plain,
Stern Mahmud in a storm of fire descends,
And many a rich and venerable fane
Beneath his desolating fury bends.

"Ah!  not from glory's generous ardour flows
Th' impetuous transport of his headlong zeal;
That breast with all the rage of avarice glows,
That bosom superstition's furies steel.

"Bathed in the streaming blood of half her kings,
And borne triumphant o'er their trampled thrones,
On plunder'd Delhi's boundless spoil he springs,
And proud Canouge beneath his vengeance groans.

"Insatiate still for India's treasured ore,
His rapid flight the royal vulture bends,
To where, on rich Cambay's far-distant shore,
The vast SUMNAUT its gorgeous front extends.

"In vain the priests that guard the sacred shrine,
Th' unconquer'd arm of guardian Veeshnu boast;
And from the towers, inflamed with rage divine,
Thunder Heaven's vengeance on the myriad host.

"Heaven's awful rage the fierce assailants brave,
Burst the strong gates, and scale the lofty walls;
The priests plunge headlong in the o'erwhelming wave,
And India's last proud sanctuary falls.

"And now his 'raptur'd eye a fane surveys
That ransack'd Nature's dazzling treasury seems;
With plates of gold the burnish'd ceilings blaze,
One mass of jewels the rich altar gleams.

"Nor proffer'd gold, nor glowing gems suffice,
Great Veeshnu's bust his ruffian hands profane;
Rise, dreadful god!  in all thy fury rise,
And give to vengeance his devoted train!

"As o'er yon sultry waste his legions toil,
Who shall the pangs of burning thirst assuage?
The camels faint beneath their guilty spoil;
Through all the camp despair and madness rage!

"Ye hostile clarions!  cease mine ear to rend,
The Arabian despot sheathes his blood-stain'd spear;
Their genial beams the cherish'd arts extend,
Their drooping heads the trampled Muses rear.

"A race, less fierce, the Eastern sceptres wield,
By worth distinguish'd as for science famed,
Who toil for glory in a bloodless field;
With loftier views, with nobler fires inflamed.

"In the bright noon of their meridian power,
GENIUS, the daring eagle, upward springs:
Not bolder did the undazzled Theban tower,
Nor Mantua's swan expand her soaring wings.

"What blazing orb o'er Scythia's hills afar,
Portentous, rises with ensanguined beam!
'Tis mighty Gengis' inauspicious star,
Convulsing Asia with its baleful gleam!

"Resistless, fearless, cruel as their clime,
I see the Tartars burst their frozen bound;
Unnumber'd banners wave in air, sublime,
While crimson torrents smoke along the ground.

"Dark as the driving swarms of locusts spread,
Full many a league their gloomy front extends;
The trembling earth is blasted where they tread,
And each affrighted Muse her laurel rends!

"The blood of Gengis glowing in his veins,
And bearing still a more terrific lance,
The imperial Savage of the Sogdian plains
Now bids his squadrons to the field advance.

"Like Nimrod, skill'd to guide the bloody chace,
His rav'ning lust unbounded carnage feeds:
By thousands fall the haples's sylvan race;
By myriads, Man, his nobler victim, bleeds.

"Frantic through Asia's ravaged vales they fly,
And wrap her tow'ring capitals in fire!
Beneath their spears the flower of Persia die,
While age and beauty crowd the funeral pyre.

"But chief on India bursts the o'erwhelming tide,
India still doom'd to feel the oppressor's rage.
Through seas of blood his crimson'd squadrons ride,
'Midst hecatombs of gasping slain engage.

"With yon deep groan uncounted myriads fell!&mdash;
And now the flames from burning Delhi rise;
Loud and more loud resounds the deepening yell;
And vengeance, vengeance!  echoes to the skies.

"Reflection shudders at his sanguine deeds!
Fly swift, ye hours!  roll round those halcyon times,
When to yon throne his lion race succeeds,
Brave as their sire, untainted by his crimes.

"Arouse, ye Muses, burst your sevenfold chains,
Smite, with immortal rage, your noblest wires;
The great, the brave, the virtuous, SHAHROC reigns,
The daemon of revenge and blood expires!

"Wide as the circle of his vast domains,
That know no limits save the horizon's bound,
His sovereign power your injured rights maintains,
And spreads the flame he feels diffusive round!

"From her deep slumber of three thousand years
The trampled Genius of Assyria wakes;
Again her head exulting Science rears;
Again thy radiant morn, fair Freedom, breaks!

"Majestic, lo!  on Tigris' hallow'd shore,
A second Babel seems the skies to threat;
Whence Bagdad's seers yon blazing vault explore,
And trace the mystic characters of fate.

"Lo!  Samarcand, a city new to fame,
Temples and towers of matchless grace displays;
Proud cloister'd domes the cherish'd arts proclaim,
While lofty gnomons mark the solar rays.

"Thou, too, whose daring genius could extend
O'er heaven's majestic arch the mighty line;
Brave Tartar, hail!  thy native skies ascend,
And 'midst thy own FIX'D STARS, for ever shine.

"With pen as brilliant as his conquering sword,
A double laurel decks great Baber's brows:
Radiant the palms embattled fields afford,
More radiant still the heav'nly Muse bestows.

"The loudest notes her martial trump can pour,
To mighty Akber's praise let Glory sound!
Waft them, ye winds, round ev'ry distant shore,
Diffuse them wide as earth's remotest bound.

"For all the virtues of his noble line,
In Akber beaming their concentred ray,
With all the fires of native genius join;
And India glories in his righteous sway.

"Casi, once more, her sacred fires renews,
With Veeshnu's praise a thousand temples ring;
On Naugracut's vast range the soaring Muse
Smites, 'midst eternal snows, the varied string.

"Exalted high on India's ruby'd throne,
Wisdom with hoary faith again unites;
No more in chains her vanquish'd princes groan,
Nor noble Brahmins wail their ravish'd rights.

"Happy as when her ancient sovereigns reign'd,
Rajahs of grey renown, and dear to fame;
No more her soobahs of their youth are drain'd,
Nor shrieking virgins feed the victor's flame:

"But, cherish'd by the laws her Brahma gave,
She sees her bursting granaries o'erflow;
Unnumber'd navies stem the boisterous wave,
Unbounded treasures in her coffers glow.

"Thrice happy age; how soon in blood to close!
Lo!  Fate her sable banner wide unfurls!
A chief, more fierce than all her antient foes,
O'er her vast Deccan flames and ravage hurls.

"Nor on rich Deccan's wealthy plains alone,
I see the storm on hallow'd Casi burst;
Her altars quench'd, her plunder'd fanes o'erthrown,
Her hoary grandeur trampled low in dust!

"Infuriate bigot to a barbarous creed!
Think'st thou the gods, whose fires those altars bore, 
Will unrevenged behold this impious deed,
Nor on thy race their hoarded fury pour?

"By blood thy rebel arm the sceptre gain'd,
And, tyrant, wide the crimson tide shall flow!
Dread ministers of Heaven's just wrath ordain'd,
Rise, ruthless Seyds, strike borne the avenging blow!

"Hark!  on Carmania's hills the trumpets sound,
And the fierce Afghan tribes to arms invite;
The thund'ring war-steed spurns the trembling ground,
And neighs impatient for the promis'd fight.

"To conquest by resistless Nadir led,
From Candahar they rush impetuous down:
High on the tyrant's burnish'd crest display'd,
Gleam the rich spoils of Persia's plunder'd crown.

"'Gainst vet'ran warriors, nerv'd with triple steel,
Thy millions, Hindostan, in vain advance;
No more thy Rajahs burn with patriot zeal,
No more, enervate, wield the ponderous lance.

"Invincible the iron phalanx moves,
Dreadful as wasting storms or raging fire;
Delhi, again, a victor's vengeance proves,
Again her butcher'd sons in heaps expire!

"Though all Golconda flames before their eyes,
Not all Golconda can appease their rage;
Unmoved they hear the screaming infant's cries,
Unaw'd the curses of expiring age!

"Come, fierce Abdollah, on her destin'd walls
Heav'ns last avenging, dreadful phial pour!&mdash;
'Tis done:  The imperial house of Timur falls;
India, thy sun descends to rise no more!

"Now darkness brooding, with expanded wings,
Wraps yon vast empire in its deathful shade;
The Muses rush from their polluted springs,
And Science flies, appall'd, her favourite glade.

"Triumphant Slaughter her ensanguined car
O'er trampled altars rolls and ruin'd fanes;
Wide through her vallies howls the storm of war,
And famine in the bowers of Eden reigns.

"Dear as to dungeon slaves the solar gleam,
Or wretches doom'd to dig the buried ore,
On raptured Casi dawns the gladsome beam
Which British freedom, British science, pour.

"To chase the tenfold gloom, my JONES, was thine,
To cheer the Brahmin, and to burst his chains;
To search for latent gems the Sanscreet mine,
And wake the fervour of her ancient strains.

"For, oh!  what pen shall paint, with half thy fire,
The power of Music on th' impassion'd soul,
When the great masters wak'd the Indian lyre,
And bade the burning song electric roll!

"The mystic veil, that wraps the hallow'd shrines
Of India's deities, 'twas thine to rend:
With brighter fires each radiant altar shines,
To nature's awful god those fires ascend.

"Sound the deep conch; dread Veeshnu's power proclaim,
And heap with fragrant woods the blazing urn;
I see, sublime Devotion's noblest flame
'Midst Superstition's glowing embers burn!

"'Twas thine, with daring wing and eagle eye,
To pierce antiquity's profoundest gloom;
To search the dazzling records of the sky,
And bid the stars the sacred page illume.

"Nor did the instructive orbs of heaven alone,
Absorb thy soul 'mid yon ethereal fields;
To thee the vegetable world was known,
And all the blooming tribes the garden yields;

"From the tall cedar on the mountain's brow,
Which the fierce tropic-storm in vain assails,
Down to the humblest shrubs that beauteous blow,
And scent the air of Asia's fragrant vales.

"But talents &mdash; fancy &mdash; ardent, bold, sublime,&mdash;
Unbounded science &mdash; form'd thy meanest fame;
Beyond the grasp of death, the bound of time,
On wings of fire RELIGION wafts thy name.

"And long as stars shall shine, or planets roll,
To kindred virtue shall that name be dear;
Still shall thy genius charm th' aspiring soul,
And distant ages kindle at thy bier."

Thus spake the Power; and in the focal blaze,
Her dazzling shrine, her awful beauties veil'd;
From harps celestial flow'd immortal lays,
Ambrosial sweets my ravish'd sense regal'd.

And now, slow-rising on their favourite shore,
Millions of shadowy forms around me moved;
Unfading garlands in their hands they bore,
And, weeping, strew'd them on the urn they loved.

Sweet was the harmonious dance, and sweet the dirge 
Whose plaintive warbling lull'd the enraptured stream,
Till, o'er the eastern mountain's farthest verge,
Aurora, rising, shot her golden beam:

Instant, with shouts, they hail'd returning light,
And sang the Power that rolls the radiant year:
Then, bending towards the Sun their rapid flight,
Plunged in the centre of his burning sphere.
