The morning breeze blows sweet among the bowers,
The wild bee sleeps upon the drooping rose;
Sweet is the fragrance of the honied flowers,
Sweeter the form that on them courts repose;
Upon her cheek the blush of morning glows,
Thro' her dark eyes the stars of Beauty shine,
And from her coral lip such sweetness flows,
That biass'd Love would paint her so divine,
A fairy's face might fail, to match with Rosaline.

In sooth, she was the fairest form, that e'er
Hung o'er the lattice of a cottage dome;
But in that eye, the sympathetic tear,
(Tho' form'd for pity,) never found a home:
Wavering and wild she lov'd the wood to roam,
To scare the songster from her twittering young:
And thoughtless as the wandering sylph or gnome,
She plac'd no bridle on that soft-toned tongue,
Where melody itself, around the threshold hung.

Not so young Geraldwood: &mdash; 'twas her delight,
Within the lowly cottage door to stay,
And ply her rustic wheel from morn till night,
And guard her aged mother's closing day;
As oft in retrospect she traced her way,
To Appalachia's distant hills of blue:
And Geraldwood would love with her to stray,
When twilight grey her earliest shadows threw,
And night's dark-waving plume was drenched with morning dew.

Around her face, no rays of Beauty shone;
But yet there was a placid sweetness there:
And when the hollow winds would make their moan,
She lov'd the sound that murmured thro' the air,
And oft the pensiveness of secret prayer,
A soul of spotless purity would prove;
As when the vesper winds of Summer bear,
The plaintive notes of tenderness and love,
From the wood-shaded nest that hides the cushat-dove.

And softly to the lone retreat she crept,
Where her fair sister lov'd at ease to lie:
Where oft, in heat of Summer noon, she slept,
Or scanned the fairy page of Poesy.
"And come," she cried, "and throw the legend by,
Our mother's ramble thro' the wood to share;
The warblers wake their sweetest melody;
All nature blooms luxuriantly fair,
'Twill cheer her drooping age to breathe the morning air."

But Rosaline upon the book was bent,
Nor did she heed the words that pass'd her by,
Her Grecian head upon her hand was leant,
Beneath a rustic vine-leaf canopy;
At length she raised her dark enraptured eye,
And with a look between a smile and sneer,
"Sister, I cannot come," &mdash; was her reply;
She spake, &mdash; and pull'd a flower that languished near,
While Geraldwood retired, to hide the falling tear.

"Oh!  Rosaline, in glen and valley grey,
The Shepherd lets at large his fleecy care:
Will you not leave the pleasures of the day,
Awhile your aged mother's joys to share?
Full oft, in youth, has she been wont to bear,
Your tender form along these mountains wild,
And rocked your cradle in the summer air;
You must remember well," she said and smil'd,
"Who led your wandering steps; when you were yet a child."

"My sister Geraldwood, you reason well,
In sooth you do, but I had rather stay."
Faintly and low the muttered accents fell,
Upon the breeze that blessed the dawn of day:
"But as you will." &mdash; She flung the book away,
And bounded onward to the cottage door:
Their mother soon was ushered forth to stray,
Those pleasing scenes of happiness once more,
Which oft in youthful days, delight had rambled o'er.

And thus, as thro' the woodland path they trod,
To Geraldwood and Rosaline she said:&mdash;
"My children, soon beneath the grassy sod,
Your mother's failing body must be laid:
And when beneath the spreading elm-tree's shade,
I shall in silent nothingness repose,
O may the choice which you shall then have made,
Be such as I would cheerfully have chose,
And may that peace be yours, which virtue only knows.

"Remember, that tho' Beauty charms the eye,
Virtue maintains her empire in the soul;
Dull age must come and Beauty's charms will die,
But virtue cannot taste the withering bowl,
She lives in cheering smiles, beyond control,
When pain and sickness, &mdash; spread their darkening gloom:
And when beside the cypress-shaded knoll,
The rose of Beauty fades upon the tomb,
Still virtue's lily grows, in everlasting bloom."
