At the close of the day; when his labour was o'er,
Old Collin sought rest in his chair;
And, as from the jorum, good cider he'd pour,
The tales of his youth he would tell o'er and o'er,
While his children with wonder would stare.

One night, weary grown of his tales often told,
Some evening's amusement was sought:
Collin said, as to music, he was partial of old:
A trial of skill in that art might unfold
Some new genius; so a Jew's harp was brought.

'Twas agreed by the whole, each their skill should then try,
While Collin an umpire should sit;
Should condemn, or approve, as each should pass by,
Should decree to the victor, a large pumpkin pie,
And the Harp, if the rest should think fit.

Up from his seat, a log, in corner close,
Rose Bob, a sturdy blade:
A theme sonorous, Bob had chose
His skill to try.
He seiz'd the Harp, and feign had music rude,
In playing dulcet notes from Tid re I.
But Collin heard the jargon made,
And bid him quick the Harp lay by;
No longer then intrude.

Then, next on John he call'd, a tougher blade
Ne'er hoed in cornfield, or a haystack made.
John fearless rose
And seiz'd the Harp; for oft had John,
On such a harp, when all alone,
Play'd dulcet notes, that pleas'd the ear,
And call'd the neighbouring hinds to hear:
For few, like him, could play the harp upon.

He cast within his brain the various tunes he play'd;
Humm'd, in low strains, Old Bob and Joan, Black Jack;
Remember'd once such melody they made,
It seem'd the very Harp had spoke.

He clear'd his throat and breath'd a sturdy blast;
A horrid buz succeeds a twanging sound:
John tries again,
But all in vain;
No sound harmonious trill'd upon the ear
As they were wont to hear:
'Twas discord all, and jargonry profound.
John felt the keen disgrace
Of spit bedirted face,
From chin to nose.

The lovely Molly heard each claim refus'd;
She took the Harp, and breath'd a gentle strain;
Softly each trembling note she flitted o'er:
To sounds like these their ears were all unus'd;
None had experienc'd such delight before,
Each listening sat, expecting to hear more;
But Molly then the Harp laid down,
Proud that her lays
Had gain'd their praise,
And straight demands the tribute as her own.
'Twas soon decreed by the ill-judging throng,
That Pie and Harp to Molly did belong.

But Collin saw, retir'd behind the crowd,
The modest Sarah join in Molly's praise:
Yet not with boist'rous laugh, that echoes loud;
Applauding smiles sat on her lovely face,
Bedeck'd with health and soul-enchanting grace:
He then on Sarah call'd, her skill to try.
The modest maiden blush'd, nor dare comply:
She too the harp, then fearful laid it down,
'Till urg'd by Collin, who, with vengeful frown,
Bid her not lay it by.
The Harp to her mouth then she press'd,
Her white teeth shone fair through the bars;
Her breath scarcely ruffles her breast,
As she breathes out her soul-soothing airs;

Her busy fingers struck, with laboured care,
The tongue, vibrating to th' approaching air;
The soul seem'd wrapt in each melodious sound,
While silent praise was offer'd all around.
'Twas low and trem'lous, then again 'twas high,
Then easy and sunk, and on the ear would die,
Till silence broke the soul-enchanting charm.

No rules her notes could chain;
She'd mount the stave by space and line,
And ledger line above,
And show that art or dull design
Could never raise the human mind,
Like Fancy's wild ungovern'd move.
But; when the maiden pour'd new sounds,
And breathed with care the graceful note,
With loud applause the house resounds,
And praise is heard from every throat:

Bob, John and Molly, all resign
Their claim to Harp and Pie;
And Sarah clos'd her melting strains
Of soothing minstrelsy.

Then Collin rose, well pleas'd the notes to hear;
Such sounds as those, ere that, ne'er reach'd his ear.
He soon decrees, in presence of the throng,
That Pie and Harp to Sarah did belong.

Then Sarah's praise each bumpkin sung,
With loud applause the kitchen rung,
For none refuse the meed of praise:
To cheer the whole, the pie was cut,
And cider drawn from the newest butt;
The Harp, too, pour'd harmonious lays.

Now, oft beneath the bending willow,
The green turf rising for her pillow,
The lovely Sarah tunes her winning note;
Softly it swells and floats upon the air;
Its tremulous sounds oft meet the shepherds' ear,
Who seek her seat, howe'er remote,
Such soul-enchanting sounds to hear.
