False Faytor bides his talent bright
In napkin, void of shame;
And moves thereby the wrath and spite
Of Knight unknown to Fame.

It fashioned, as erst, with heedless hond,
I op'd the Magazine of Poesye,
So far y'fam'd throughout all Fairy lond,
That I the lay hight "Sempstress" did espie;
Unweeting who the fator were whereby
The same was penn'd, tho' known to Fame, I ween;
For elfin characters were there, perdie!
And, midway, groupes of ebon stars were seen,
To 'vise how many letters there mote be between;&mdash;

The which when I had conn'd awhile, in sooth
I woxen wrath with dolorous despight;
And 'gan bewail with dread and gloomy ruth,
That there shou'd wonne so base-abandon'd wight;
For he with word and rhyme uncouth did write;
And Fairy fantasies his mind did feed,
To imitate the style of Spenser hight;
With which he had so well refresh'd his need,
If what were not could be, it had been his indeed.

But more mine indignation 'gins respire
In contemplation of his stubborn fit,
Who, having once attained his desire,
In sullen silence disregardeth it;
For he no more in ancient guise hath writ,
But all aside his musing fancies kest;
Too thrifty of his rhyme and learned wit,
Grudging, (like miser old on iron chest,)
Tho' he of hidden bags and treasures been possest.

There is empight a lordly castle fair,
(Long may it stond secure in goodly guise!)
Where doughty Knights their hardihood repair
In many a bold and chevelrous emprise;
Such as may meetest seem in ladies' eyes:
'Nathless they bear ne burning brand ne shield,
Who are in these rencounters wont to rise;
But mighteour arms and deadlier weopens wield,
Such as are wont to drive the bravest from the field.

And there, bedight in glitt'ring arms aumail'd,
(Which he whylome from sleeping Genius reft,)
This fatour false has many hearts assail'd
With courage stout and puissance hardly weft;
And many legends old his arms have cleft,
And drag'd the spoils to deck his lofty name;&mdash;
Name builded high on all-injurious theft
Is castle pil'd on sand, and knightly fame
Renvers'd, that gives not grace to captive dame.

O thou, hight Ackermann!  the seneschall
Of this same goodly tow'r of poesye,
I craven leave and liberty withal
To hang mine arms in thy bright armoury;
For I have vow'd them never more to see
Till I avenged been of that despight,
Which, fatour false!  whylom empight on me;
Y'bent for aye to hold in sovenaunce,
And eke withall to wroken his foul chevesaunce.

For he fair knighthood foully doth abuse,
To his reproach and everlasting shame,
In basely thralling a Spenserian Muse,
Of which fair damsel I enamour'd am:
Alas!  that recreant Knight, withouten blame
Should hold in darksome den a captive thrall,
Who else mote spread some abroad her rising fame,
And peer 'mong ladies gay in courtly hall;
More bright than they, and fairer than them all.

The selfish beast, by courtsie true unken'd,
May deem me carl, and all uncourtly wight,
To aid the 'livrance and the dues defend
Of damsel, won in bold and per'lous fight;
Nathless, I hold such idle counsel light,
And loudly of the base injustice sing
Of that same cruel and abandon'd Knight,
Around whose heart may fierce Repentence cling,
And stern Remorse subdue, and back to virtue bring!
