They heard, and swift along the van
Ferocious Inspiration ran;
They heard, and ev'ry warrior's breast
Swell'd with intense delight,
As Vic'try rear'd her sable crest,
And urg'd them to the fight.

But there are moments when the soul
Assumes a bold terrific air,
And, scorning every mean control,
Darts forward in sublime despair.
Thus, when perplex'd with many a wrong,
I've shunned the low degen'rate throng,
And rode on wings of fire
O'er many a league of clouds, and sought
The genius of celestial Thought,
Swift hurrying o'er the lyre!
But not without that genial dread,
Which ev'ry poet feels, I fled;
And, tho' I rode in high career,
Still felt the chilling throbs of fear:
Nor could the voice of Hope o'erpow'r
The spell of that unfriendly form,
That seem'd on stranger wings to tow'r,
And ev'ry lovely scene deform.

So Gallia, tho' in conflict bold,
Felt this immortal passion hold
Its empire o'er her breast;
Nor could the strain of Vic'try chase
The traits of terror from her face,
Or lull her doubts to rest.
On ev'ry side she seem'd to see
Her flag triumphant wave;
The adverse lines before her flee,
Fierce trampling o'er the brave:
But Nature, constant to her laws,
Full often in the brightest cause
Hath trembled at a shade;
Felt, in the summit of her joy,
A sudden start her views destroy,
And all her hopes invade.

To you whose genius can aspire
Above the flight of low desire;
And, tow'ring high on mental plumes,
Rush thro' the blue etherial fields;
To you the Muse her theme resumes,
Of slaughter, fire, and gory shields!
Sure ye have heard in Fancy's dream
The mortar's sweeping thunders roar;
And seen afar the sulph'rous gleam
Illume the Danube's spectred shore!
Sure ye have stalk'd across the plain,
Where smoking hecatombs of slain
In wild disorder lay;
And heard, amidst the gloom of night,
The tumult of the martial fight,
The charging trumpets bray!
Then, list again!  and ye shall hear
The battle's dashing sound;
And riding high, in fierce career,
Amidst the dark profound,
Mark with dejected eyes the scene,
Where Mercy dares not intervene,
To stay the warrior's fire;
Where sword and cymbal, clarion-shout,
And thunder from the wide redoubt,
Augment the wild infuriate rout,
And Vict'ry's sons inspire!
Yes, listen!  and the trumpet's strain
Shall echo o'er the crowded plain;
Shall fill Bohemia's sons with dread,
And reach the ground where Russia bled,
Beneath the conqu'ror's eye;
The flying fires on either side
Shall blaze upon the Danube's tide,
And light the sunless sky!

Mercy!  thou lovely heav'n-descended form,
Whose voice can soothe the desolating storm!
O'er the wide wreck of human nature pause&mdash;
Of injur'd virtue and insulted laws;
Stretch, stretch abroad thy mighty hand, and save
The sons of Peace from slaughter and the grave;
And teach the wary conqu'ror to resign
The promis'd harvests of his dread design;
To glow with pity and fraternal love,
Nor mock th' all-gracious Deity above.
Picture the rivers of compatriot blood
That War has mingled with the Danube's flood;
The hills of slain, that, tow'ring to the sky,
Delight stern Havoc's terror-blazing eye;
Towns left to Death's inexorable horde,
Whose crest is "Desolation and the sword;"
Who know no right but such as Vict'ry claims
Amidst confusion, tyranny, and flames;
Where dark Rebellion, with a meteor-brand,
Leads her gaunt bloodhounds thro' the trembling land:
These, Mercy!  picture; and, if aught can stay
The low'ring horrors of the damn'd affray,
It is the music of thy angel-tongue,
The mighty magic of thy heav'nly song!

Struck with the soothing tenour of thy lay,
Thy naked breast, and heav'n-directed eyes&mdash;
Thy hands uplift in attitude to pray&mdash;
Thy tender glances, and unfeign'd sighs&mdash;
Stern Vict'ry's self hath, in his high career,
Forborne to strike the victim to the ground;
And drank, with charm'd enthusiastic ear,
Thy joyous tongue's exhilarating sound!

So sang the Bard, whose matchless song
Shall live, when Della Crusca's throng
Lie mould'ring in their tombs;
When Gallia's torch terrific gleams,
Where many a frantic widow screams,
'Midst pestilential fumes!

The poet's eye with rapture views
Such scenes as Fancy loves to form;
And oft the free unshackled Muse
Some light fantastic theme pursues,
Careering on the lightning-storm:
But Reason cries aloud, "Forbear
To credit the delusive scene;
Mercy in vain prefers her pray'r,
She ne'er shall soothe the tyrant's spleen!
True to the darkling purpose of his brain,
He stands unshock'd, magnificently bold;
And sees with joy the visionary slain
Stretch'd o'er the desolated plain,
To Britain's wild ambition sold!"
Children of Albion!  ye have long
Been victims to nefarious song,
And drank with overweening joy
The poet's idle theme;
And will ye still the hours employ
In musing o'er the "northern dream?"
Where, Gifford, is thy potent shell?
Why, why does Campbell cease to swell
The chords that can so sweetly tell,
And teach us how to feel?
Why smites he not, with hand sublime,
The lyre attun'd to heav'nly Hope?
Why still pursue th' inglorious rhyme
That cheats thee of thy brilliant scope,
And damps thy ardent zeal?
Let Nature's dull pedantic swarm
To grov'lling songs their words conform;
To them such menial toils belong!
But thou art form'd for nobler themes,&mdash;
For deeper thoughts, and lovelier schemes,
And far superior song!
Leave Spenser, in his Gothic stole,
To such as cannot gain
The climax of thy giant soul,
Thy wildly-warbled strain!
Leave to the northern ballad-man
Descriptive scenes of Alpine clan,
His Ladies, Knights, and Squires;
The warder's shout, &mdash; the passing bell,&mdash;
The hoary wizard's wondrous spell,
And all the list of shires!
Him well become such maudlin tales;
But thou wert form'd to soar above
His caverns and enchanted vales,
And all his sick'ning themes of love!
Nor Lady fair, nor val'rous Knight,
In armour stout, or gold bedight&mdash;
Nor lake, nor wood, nor mountain steep,
Nor caverns where hobgoblins sleep,
Lie in thy proud stupendous course!
"Thy march is on the mountain-wave,"
Or near thy lost Alonzo's grave;
Or on the clouds, whence Newton sees
The tempest trav'lling o'er the main,
Or thunders with Herculean force,
Sweeping destruction thro' the night,
Led by the flick'ring streams of light,
That cleave the dusky clouds in twain!

These are the regions where thy soul
Assumes its magnificent control;
But such imperial heights are not
Within the reach of Walter Scott,
Nor his admiring race!
Their circle is to earth confin'd,
The province where the lowly mind
Its images can trace!
But if it strive to gain the sphere,
Where, thron'd in majesty sublime,
Thy spirit listens with enraptur'd ear
To the departing groans of Time,
It falls confounded from the lesser height,
To realms of shame, and everlasting night!
