SCENE, THE SOUTH DOWNS IN SUSSEX.

Two shepherd-boys beneath a holly's boughs
Sat on the grass, and watch'd their grazing cows;
At length the sunshine stole upon their seat,
When Tom grew restless, and complain'd of heat.

TOM.
The shadow's gone from underneath the tree,
And now the scorching sun's too hot for me.
Lay by your nettle pipe; I've laid down mine:
See how that heifer starts &mdash; you fright the kine!

WILL.
Let's go to yonder stream that turns the mill,
And runs all frothy from the woody hill.
Along its banks I ever lov'd to roam,
And mark the bubbles rising from the foam.
There's a sweet echo at the water-fall,
That answers double from the castle wall.

TOM.
Some say the screech-owl, at each midnight hour,
Awakes the fairies in yon antient tow'r.
Their nightly dancing-ring I always dread,
Nor let my sheep within that circle tread;
Where round and round all night, in moonlight fair,
They dance to some strange music in the air.

WILL.
See, see, how Colley goads the milk-white steer:
Her horns are sharp, &mdash; you can't be too severe.
Ill-natur'd beast!  to spoil his harmless play;
Pursue her, Tom, and drive her fast away.

TOM.
My blows were hard &mdash; for see my staff is broke;
I made her feel my strength at ev'ry stroke:
She is of late so viciously inclin'd,
She must be fetter'd, and her head confin'd.

WILL.
See, all the kine are coming to the spring,
Except the brindl'd cow, poor crippl'd thing!
You should not scare her so, you know she's shy;
I wonder, Tom, you did not break her thigh!
She always flies the sounding of a switch;
Nor could she ever fairly leap the ditch.

TOM.
Go, Diver, fetch her up &mdash; quick, hie away;
But, ah!  beware her heels &mdash; at distance bay:
Nor trust thyself again too near her head.
Sure thou hast felt enough her horns to dread!
Come, let us seek the ford, there's shady boughs;
Cool in the stream the cattle love to browse.
I long to taste the spring, and quench my thirst;
You can't outrun me, Will, and get there first!

WILL.
I'd rather blow my pipe, it sounds so shrill;
Hark, how it echoes from the rocky hill!
There ash-trees grow; and now the season suits
From their smooth limbs to make us louder flutes.
For now the beaten rind with ease will slip,
And the moist wood be pleasant to the lip.
Did you to me the secret skill impart
Of making pipes?  It is a pretty art.

TOM.
No; Charley told you &mdash; I know when and where;
For which he was a sparrow's nest to share.
He shew'd, what vex'd me too, a present see,
Two painted marbles that you won from me.
Then careless he forgot his roving sheep,
That climb'd the rock, while keeper lay asleep;
And where the hollow bank hangs o'er the sedge,
A weather fed too near the thymy edge;
When all at once you heard a dashing sound,
And hardly sav'd the sheep from being drown'd.

WILL.
That very water now is sunk so low,
That we may pluck the tallest reeds that grow.
The hazel bow, with which I shot so high,
That my swift arrows almost touch'd the sky,
Last night I broke; but I have brought the string,
And here are hazels plenty by the spring.
From yon tall elder trees, with blossoms white,
We'll head our straightest arrows fit for flight.

TOM.
You shall not tempt me thence to cut a spray;
I saw two gold-finches around them play,
And quickly found their nest. &mdash; Look yonder, Will,
A butterfly is coming from the hill.
Surely we both can catch him, if we try;
'Tis pleasing sport to hunt a butterfly.

WILL.
See on the bramble, where the chaffinch sings,
He's settled now; how fine his spotted wings!
Go softly, Tom &mdash; if we the prize should win,
We'll make a cage of grass to keep him in.
He's gone &mdash; I miss'd him &mdash; see he flies to you&mdash;
Now, Tom, you brush'd his wings &mdash; ne'er mind your shoe!

TOM.
He comes to you again; I miss'd my blows.

WILL.
Aye, here he comes again.

TOM.
Now, there he goes.
Stop, Will &mdash; I'm down &mdash; come back &mdash; come back again;
Assist me quickly! &mdash; I shall die with pain.
Oh!  I have run a thorn into my foot.
Pull off my stocking &mdash; how the pain does shoot!

WILL.
There, Tom, 'tis out again &mdash; 'tis large indeed!
How often mischief comes for want of heed!
How hot it is &mdash; there's scarce a breath of air,
See how the sweat runs down my face and hair!
Come, let us go into the dell to play;
There are no wheat-ears to be caught to-day.
Look all around  the sky, no cloud is there,
Whose shadow makes them run into the snare.

TOM.
Our cows have now the open ground forsook,
And underneath the trees that shade the brook
Each to the running stream her tail applies,
To cool her sides, and chase away the flies.
Let's haste and drive them thence &mdash; for see yon cow,
Which Diver bays, is near the miry slough.

WILL.
Come to the spring that clear as crystal glides,
And the green meadow from the wood divides.
There will we strip; for I delight to wade,
Where deep it flows beneath the poplar shade.

TOM.
Or sit upon the hedge, and backward beat
The hasty water with our naked feet:
How cool the touch!  it fills me with delight
To see it froth, and hurry from the sight.

WILL.
O look, what flocks of linnets come to drink!
See how the settle at the river's bank!
Ah!  had we birdlime now &mdash; who could forbear
To lime a sprig, and lay it for a snare?

TOM.
I caught a greenfinch; how his breast did shine!
A golden chaffer's wings are scarce so fine.
The same, I guess, that in our orchard bred;
For t' other day I found the young ones dead.
My father since won't suffer me to lime,
Till all the birds are past their breeding time.

WILL.
I found a robin's nest within our shed,
And in the barn a wren has young ones bred.
I never take away their nest, nor try
To catch the old ones, lest a friend should die.
Dick took a wren's nest from his cottage side,
And ere a twelve-month past, his mother dy'd!

TOM.
See, Diver's not yet satisfy'd with play!
I'll send him now to yonder rick of hay.
Or shall I make him fetch across the stream?

WILL.
Consider, Tom, how much you weary him.
See how his tongue hangs out; he pants for breath:
Put up the ball; he'll run himself to death!
I'm weary too. &mdash; Then by the willow trees,
That bowing whisper'd with the passing breeze,
They laid them down, when gentle sleep oppress'd
Their drowzy sense, and clos'd their eyes to rest.
