Hail, goddess with the phrensied eye!  hail, Fear!
All hail, the terrors brought by thee!
Hail, all the horrid tales of thee we hear!
Hail, all the frightful sights we see!
Hail to thy train of ghosts and goblins dire,
Of ghostly sounds of wo, and screams of ire,
Which float, upborne on vivid Fancy's wings,
And pierce the inmost souls of clowns and kings!

O'er man and beast thy pow'r is spread,
From thee nought human's free;
Brutes shun mankind, as things they dread,
And man from brutes doth flee:
Pale Guilt, with haggard look and mien,
Flies before thy phantom train
On hasty trembling wing;
For shadowy shapes and visions dire,
With all thy vengeful rout, conspire
To point dread Conscience' sting!

The traveller, by thee possest,
As Night veils in her sable crest,
Feels tremblings strange and dread;
He calls to mind each well-known place,
Where wand'ring sprites are said to trace;
In fancy sees their figures glide,
In angry mood, close by his side;
Their forms he follows with his eyes,
Till all is lost; &mdash; and at each noise
He starts, and turns his head.

Full oft by thee the rustic clown's o'erta'en,
When, as he speeds across the desert plain,
He spies, beneath some blasted yew,
By Cynthia's light, the elfin crew.
He pauses, &mdash; starts; &mdash; his eyeballs glare;
His mouth stretch'd wide, erect his hair;
Horror seizes on his brain!
His heart beats quick, &mdash; cold drops distil!
His trembling limbs refuse his will.
Parch'd is his mouth &mdash; fast clench'd his hands;
A perfect statue thus he stands,
And views the tiny train.

I see the peasants, round their little fire,
In harmless converse pass the winter's eve;
Relating dismal tales of witch'ries dire,
Which ev'ry hearer firmly doth believe.
I see thee enter 'mid the train,
And straight infest each rustic's brain,
With all thy grisly crew;
Each eye is instant cast around,
The list'ners huddle closer round,
And hum, and nod, and ghastly stare,
Whilst stiff as bristles stands each hair,
Nor know they what they do.
Such, Fear, is thy all-pow'rful sway,
Which sceptered kings, and clowns, obey.
