SCENE, THE SIDE OF A WOOD NEAR THE SEA.

The night was still &mdash; the silver moon on high
Dappl'd the mountains from a cloudy sky;
Silent as fleecy clouds thro' aether sail,
Before the gentle-breathing summer's gale;
So thro' the misty vale, in twilight grey,
The sleepy waters softly past away:
When Daphnis, stretch'd upon a grassy bed,
Above his dewy pillow rais'd his head;
And, turning up his melancholy eyes,
Pour'd out his sorrows to the list'ning skies.

The world's at rest &mdash; all nature finds repose;
The weary nightingales their eye-lids close,
Hush'd from its murmurs, ebbs the quite deep;
On fleecy clouds the winds are dropt asleep:
While I alone, deny'd the calm of rest,
Endure a ceaseless tempest in my breast.
Bewail, my flute, in plaintive notes my smart;
The bitter anguish of my heavy heart.

Dear Celia's gone &mdash; go! &mdash; fatal tidings &mdash; fly!
Dear Celia's gone &mdash; the echoes faint reply.
The winds, awaken'd, come sighing o'er my head;
The trembling trees drop tears around my bed.
The sky grows gloomy at my mournful tale,
And ev'ry list'ning star now changes pale.
The wond'ring moon, in pity to my care,
Kisses the cloud that weeps at my despair.
Sicilian notes of grief my flute impart,
To speak the anguish of my wounded heart.

Ah!  what avails my flocks, my fruitful hills,
My waving groves, my silver-foaming rills;
In vain I call the tuneful riv'let mine:
In vain its pebbles like the rainbow shine:
In vain its bubbling streams for ever curl
In giddy dances to the constant purl.
Deaf to my grief, she with Evander roves,
And scorns my bleating flocks, and cooling groves.
Begin, my flute, with melancholy art,
Express the weight of sorrow at my heart.
To what a clown my beauty gives her charms!
Round what a neck she twines her lily arms!
Now may the linnet with the bat combine;
The snowy doves with sooty ravens join:
The dappl'd deer to sloughs with swine remove,
And fearful lambs the cruel badger love!
My flute, bewail my loss, express the smart
That pierces thro' my sad neglected heart.

No more my garden or my home I heed;
Now let the swine upon the fruitage feed.
Within my cot, where quiet gave me rest,
Let the dread screech-owl build her hated nest;
And from my window o'er the country send
Her midnight screams, to bode my latter end.
Lament, my flute, bewail the cruel smart,
The cutting anguish of my bleeding heart.

The day-light breaks, the dusky shadows fly,
And clouds turn scarlet in the morning sky.
Alas!  the light can give me no relief;
The light augments the burden of my grief.
The scenes of love now sicken on my sight;
No more yon rock shall echo my delight:
Each joy is fled, with all the golden dreams
I once enjoy'd, by yonder sky-blue streams.
No more shall I, beside yon blooming thorn,
With flow'ry wreaths my smiling love adorn;
For now beneath that love-deserted tree,
Departed pleasure haunts my memory.
My flute, with mournful notes, divulge my smart;
With soothing warblings ease my trembling heart.

When in my cherry-grove the trees begun
To show their crimson fruitage to the sun;
Dear luckless time!  how fatal was the day!
To her fair hand I bent a blushing spray.
Love's earliest pleasures then my heart possest,
And speechless raptures crowded in my breast.
Her soft alluring smiles my soul ensnar'd,
While with her lips the cherries I compar'd.
Bewail, my mournful flute, the pleasing smart
That darted thro' my fond deluded heart.

As a calm sea, fan'd by the whisp'ring gale,
Allures the shepherd from the quiet dale;
Joyful to venture on the smiling scene,
Brighten'd with sun-beams from a sky serene,
He quits the heart-felt peace he once enjoy'd,
By the fair bosom of the deep decoy'd;
But when the shoar is ravish'd from his eyes,
Clouds shade the deep, and darken all the skies;
Beneath the tempest yawns the roaring main;
The rocks appear, and death receives the swain:
So beauteous Celia smil'd, my soul t' ensnare,
And dash me on the rocks of wild despair.
Bewail, my flute, bewail, with soothing art,
The dreadful tempest raging in my heart.

What do I hear? &mdash; the country bells proclaim
Evander's joy, and my unhappy flame.
My love continues, tho' there's no redress!
Ah!  happy rival! &mdash; ah!  my deep distress!
Now, like the gather'd flow'rs that strew'd her way,
Forc'd from my love, untimely I decay.
My anguish to the skies is breath'd in vain;
She heeds me not, &mdash; she pities not my pain.
Bewail, my flute, bewail my fruitless smart,
The death-like shudd'rings of my throbbing heart.

Ah!  how shall I my faithless beauty see
Sport with a rival where she play'd with me!
To distant plains I'll fly the hated sight;
No more my fertile fields afford delight!
My much-lov'd home, my native cot, adieu,
Where, lodg'd with peace, my fathers hoary grew.
Farewell, my little farm, my herds, my sheep,
Ye shallow streams, that murmur'd me to sleep.
I'll climb yon misty hill &mdash; far hence I rove&mdash;
Celia, farewell! &mdash; farewell the sweets of love!
Now cease, my flute &mdash; my sighs, no more depart
In plaintive music, from my dying heart.
