COLIN AND PHEBE.
SCENE, THE FIELDS COVER'D WITH SNOW.

PHEBE.
Colin, how painful is this piercing wind!
Thou canst now screen me from its blasts unkind.
Oh, heav'ns!  my fingers ach to that degree,
My gushing tears declare my misery.

COLIN.
In pity for thy pain, my tears behold;
Thy sorrows pierce me more than winter's cold.
Could I assuage the rigour of the sky,
No more should Phebe weep, or vainly sigh.
The winds, alas!  are deaf to all I say;
The cruel winds would tear thy cloak away!
Give me thy hands, nor let me sigh in vain;
Oh!  let me breathe them into life again.
Ye northern blasts, the coldest of the skies,
That freeze the tears which roll from Phebe's eyes;
Whose chilling breath has kill'd each tender flow'r,
That summer blow'd to deck my fair one's bow'r;
Forbear to touch her charms, where roses gay
For many winters never knew decay.

PHEBE.
Let's drive our shiv'ring cattle to the screen
Of yonder crowding oaks with ivy green;
Under whose boughs our kine may shelter find,
And the thick covert keep us from the wind.

COLIN.
How chang'd that place!  our former lov'd retreat;
Then the cool winds came welcome to our seat!
Then blooming thickets scented yonder vales,
And on their green arms danc'd the nightingales.
Then ev'ry bird was full of gaiety,
And fearless came and kept us company.
For we ne'er took their eggs, or hurt their young,
Or lur'd them to the lime-twigs when they sung.
No sky-larks now are warbling from above,
Spreading o'er sunny fields the voice of love;
But rising lonely, dreadful to their sight,
Slowly in circles mounts the bloody kite.

PHEBE.
But seen th' increasing blasts so fiercely beat,
Our kine for shelter to the furze retreat;
Without thee, Colin, here I could not stay,
Unless to perish ere the close of day.
But let the sharpest frost bind up the rills,
And make the fens as hard as rocky hills,
Nay, hang his isicles on ev'ry tree,
I would rejoice to tend the herd with thee.

COLIN.
Let freezing winds the rivulets restrain,
And turn to stone the waters on the plain;
They cannot freeze the spring of love that flows
Thro' my warm heart, and in my bosom glows.
How sweet the words from Phebe's lips to me!
"I would rejoice to tend the herd with thee:"
Such tender songs from Phebe have the pow'r
To make the surly winter cease to low'r.
The sky grows light, the winds are less severe;
The fall of snow is o'er; the hills appear.
Ye slacken'd gales that now your rage restrain,
And seem to sigh for giving Phebe pain,
Ah!  if ye pity her, the clouds remove,
And let the cheering sunbeams warm my love.

PHEBE.
Colin, I like this bank with shrubs o'ergrown;
See here how early is a primrose blown!
Soon to be nip'd again; for thick behold
The winter-fruits, a certain sign of cold.
See how the field-fares and the thrushes flock
To yonder scarlet haws beneath the rock.
How rich with fruit yon bending black-thorn shows!
And see where Colly feeds, a tree of sloes
Bows its rich head, as it would us salute:
Touch'd with the frost, a sloe's my fav'rite fruit.

COLIN.
I'd rather pluck a single sloe for thee,
Than for myself the fruits from ev'ry tree.
How poor would Colin be without his fair,
Should ev'ry hedge the choicest berries bear:
But rich with thee, tho' in the meanest cot,
Upon the wildest hill's most barren spot.
Lost to the world, and ev'ry pleasing swain,
Where one room only kept us from the rain.
Where not the meanest bird would deign to sing,
Nor swallow tell the dear return of spring.

PHEBE.
Thy favours, Colin, chear my grateful heart,
And to my  soul the warmest joys impart!
Love makes it spring!  Are not the fields more gay
Than e'er I saw them in the month of May?
The woods, the groves, the meads, the fields, from hence
Seem blooming, guarded with a silver fence.
Nor want we music; here are purling springs,
And like a nightingale the robin sings!
Hark! &mdash; the winds whistle sweetly as they fly!
Methinks I hear soft music in the sky!

COLIN.
Look upward, Phebe, and behold a train
Of snow-white swans, that seek the distant main.
Their fanning pinions please my list'ning fair,
And make soft music with the yielding fair,
Return, fair birds!  the pleasing sounds renew,
And Phebe's tuneful voice shall mount to you.
From her such melting notes shall reach the sky,
That you in sweeter strains may learn to die.

PHEBE.
See, Colin, see, the cattle round the brink
Of yonder pool in vain attempt to drink;
To break the ice they call in pensive mood,
With lowings echo'd from the naked wood.
