Exultant Albion hails the votive strain
That sings the glories of her GEORGE'S reign!
This day their off'rings shall the Muses bring,
And snatch the choicest plume from Fancy's wing;
Sacred to Worth, their grateful incense pour,
To greet with heartfelt zeal the Monarch they adore!

Amid the rude convulsions of the world,
While jarring nations are in phrensy hurl'd,
Wide stalks the haughty Tyrant's lawless sway,
And palsied States his treach'rous wiles betray.
Yet still shall Britain's vengeful voice be heard,
Still shall her pow'r be felt, her mighty Sov'reign fear'd!

Whatever poets feign and Hist'rys page
Extols of trophied arms' destructive rage,
"While the shrill clarion, echoing from afar,
Urges the crimson fury of the war,"
Britannia dares &mdash; resolv'd the foe to tame,
And crown with laureat wreath the annals of her fame.

Her praise, unceasing, distant climes resound,
From Afric's coast to India's utmost bound;
Scarce can the barriers of this globe confine
The dazzling splendour of her rule divine.
Hail, happy Isle!  to thee alone is giv'n
A people's worshipp'd Prince, the noblest meed of Heav'n!

Let abject slaves the Despot's arm sustain,
And brave, for pay, diseases, death, and pain;
Let them, inglorious, rouse the savage force,
That wastes whole regions in its blood-stain'd course;
Yet vain their vaunted host, their proud array
Fades into empty air &mdash; the pageant of a day.

Our Patriot Chief fictitious lustre scorns;
The gracious Mercy that his Throne adorns,
Still hovers o'er when scatter'd squadrons yield,
And joys to stay the carnage of the field;
Stands forth th' avenger of the world, and shews
How Britain's ire inflam'd shall dissipate her foes.

Firm be the phalanx &mdash; while the battle's god
Shakes on the sanguin'd plain his awful nod,
Undaunted still, the baffled ranks deride,
And save the bulwarks of your country's pride;
Her whitening cliffs old Neptune's waves embrace,
And waft her thund'ring fleets thro' all the realms of Space.

The vic'try gain'd, her King's protecting hand,
Now rears the genius of a favour'd land;
For him fair Science deigns to ope her store,
Fraught with the wealth of Learning's valued lore:
When struggling thro' the past, mature her dawn,
Darts her effulgent beam on this triumphant morn!

Discord, avaunt!  from this glad hour no more
Thy baneful din appals Britannia's shore:
See smiling Peace advance, with mien sublime,
And cheer the prospects of succeeding time;
In Mem'ry's breast great GEORGE'S deeds enrol,
And spread his high renown to earth's remotest pole.
