SCENE, A BEAUTIFUL COUNTRY SOON AFTER SUN-RISING.

'Twas early day, &mdash; the sun serenely bright
O'er all the country spread a chearful light;
The vocal forests echo'd to the sound
Of tuneful nightingales that warbl'd round;
When Lucy sought Amanda's lov'd retreat,
Printing the daisy'd plain with nimble feet.
Two turtle-doves, the softest of their kind,
Hung from her hand, in wicker cage confin'd:
A present to Amanda of the grove,
From Angelot, to teach her how to love.

Scarce had the flock of Argol left the fold,
And from the verdure sipt the dewy gold,
When he beheld her tripping o'er the lawn,
And flew to meet her like a bounding fawn.
Where hastens Lucy, cry'd the panting swain!&mdash;
Lucy he lov'd, and Lucy lov'd again.

LUCY.
See yonder hill beyond this flow'ry briar
Beneath that cloud, whose edges seem on fire;
Thou seest the sun shine on yon ancient tow'r;
A little to the left, Amanda's bow'r
Sends up a smoke, that curls upon the breeze;
The rural cot is hid among the trees:
Thither I haste, these turtles to convey.&mdash;
See!  what a lovely pair &mdash; how richly gay!
How soft they coo! &mdash; what pretty down! &mdash; behold!
What lovely eyes! &mdash; how bright in rings of gold!&mdash;

ARGOL.
Brighter thine eyes &mdash; thy hand more soft and fair!
To what shall I thy sweeter voice compare?
Sweet as when lull'd asleep beside the spring,
I dream of heav'n, and hear the angels sing.
But, lovely Lucy, give the birds to me&mdash;
I'll carry them, or any thing, for thee.
For thy dear company I'll leave my sheep;
No dangerous pits are here, no headlong steep.
My dog will keep my flock within the dell;
Tho' he's but young, he knows his duty well.
Behold, he spies thee, love! &mdash; look, Lucy, see,
What eager transport! &mdash; how he springs to thee.

LUCY.
Poor loving creature! &mdash; call him quick away!
See how the doves are frighted with his play!

ARGOL.
Come hither, Keeper, and thy love forbear!
To thee I now shall leave my fleecy care.
Watch well the lambs along the river's side;
Nor let the straggling weather be their guide.
Mark well the sickly ewe; her fate I fear;
Nor let the cruel raven settle near.

LUCY.
Yon shepherd boy, see where he idly strays,
And by the river with his spaniel plays;
Till thy return he'll keep a watchful look:
I've known him, when a child, with scrip and crook,
Climb the lone hills behind the wooly drove,
And all alone upon the mountains rove.
His play was bowling pebbles to the vales,
Or blowing thistles down to wanton gales.
Sometimes with wildest notes his pipe he'd fill,
And stop the trav'ler with his early skill:
While to his music danc'd his fav'rite Tray;
And thus he'd weary out the longest summer's day.

ARGOL.
Like him, in early youth the crook I bore,
But near the boist'rous sea's resounding shore,
Where skimming mews o'erlook their fishy prey,
And the big porpoise ploughs his foamy way.
How often there have I forgot my sheep,
In culling shells smooth polish'd from the deep;
Which, join'd with sea-weed, look'd so lovely fair,
My skipping lambs seem'd proud the wreath to wear.
Oft have I follow'd as the waves withdrew,
And they, returning, would my feet pursue;
Till the last sun-beams on the water play'd,
And I grew fearful of my lengthen'd shade.
But ah!  how much more pleasant is this plain,
Than the bleak mountains near the treeless main?
Here from the summer's heat in groves we hide,
Where birds rejoice, and gentle waters glide:
But should my Lucy her fond swain deceive,
Groves, birds, and rivers, would no pleasure give.

LUCY.
Delusive swain, how you deceive the fair
With flatt'ring words that heedless maids ensnare.
To pass that stream I always was afraid,
The craggy stones are so uneven laid:
Argol, thy hand &mdash; lest I should tread aside;
The waters make me giddy as they glide.

ARGOL.
Shall not I stretch my hand the maid to save,
To whom my heart so willingly I gave?

LUCY.
Fine words, &mdash; oft said to many a maid beside:
I know who Argol with Amanda spy'd,
Beneath yon elms &mdash; She sat upon thy knee:
Doubtless you've said as much to her as me.

ARGOL.
I with Amanda, love, in yonder vale!
Some nymph or swain hath told an idle tale.

LUCY.
Ah!  guilty youth! &mdash; 'twas I the sight beheld,
From where the glowing cowslips dress the field,
There, gath'ring May-boughs to adorn thy crook&mdash;
The leaves were thin, I threw a heedless look.
Her crimson garment caught my wand'ring eye;
You must remember &mdash; but I pass it by.
Behold, the southern sky begins to lour,
And soon the clouds will pour a hasty show'r.
Within this cot we'll wait &mdash; the rain is near&mdash;
Alas!  how oft have I been merry here!

ARGOL.
What dwelling's this? &mdash; what strange forsaken place!
See barren thorns and blooming shrubs embrace!
No careful herdsman checks the browzing kine,
That from the windows tear the fruitful vine.

LUCY.
Before you saw these fields, you heard the fame
(It rang beyond the hills from whence you came)
Of young Alexis &mdash; this was his retreat:
To join in mirth, here would the country meet.

ARGOL.
Was this th' abode of that unhappy swain,
Who lov'd to such excess &mdash; but lov'd in vain?

LUCY.
Music he lov'd &mdash; but verse his chief delight:
There hung his flute, with iv'ry circles dight.
See how these walls with rhymes are pencil'd gray!
Here read these pretty lines to Sylvia.

ARGOL (reading).
How bright the colour of the damask rose!
How rich the scarlet of the poppy glows!
How white the lilies in the vallies rise!
How sweet the zephyr from the woodbine flies!
But Sylvia's cheek excels the damask rose;
Her coral lips beyond the poppy glows;
Her snowy neck the lily's white defies;
And zephyr's sweetest when from her he flies.

LUCY.
Behold, the storm is past!  the rain is gone!
The dust is settled, and the winds are flown!
The flow'ry fields perfume the gentler gale,
And cloudy shadows hurry from the dale!
The sportive lambkins in the sunshine bound,
And cherish'd nature glitters all around!
I go but little farther o'er the plain;
Wait, Argol, here, till I return again.
Few minutes only will I stay &mdash; meanwhile
Alexis' verse the moments will beguile.

ARGOL.
Ah, haste thee, lovely maiden! &mdash; tedious prove
The minutes, when I'm absent from my love.
Time scarcely makes the lazy moments creep:
As slow they move as when a flock of sheep
Are driv'n by weary shepherds up a slipp'ry steep.
