Hark!  the light bell from yonder turret sings
Its wildest music o'er the listening lea!
The dell resounds: &mdash; the cloud-capt mountain rings,
And Echo trills the joyous symphony!
All nature smiles around in noontide glee,&mdash;
But why thus sad the literary weal?
Why sinks the wild note of their revelry?
Ah!  well they ween, as bursts each echoing peal,
Nearer and nearer hies the terrible ordeal.

Sullen and slow the book-encumbered crowd
Straight wend their way where opes the fated hall:
While each wry brow and visage pale speaks loud,
What inward griefs and fitful passions gall,&mdash;
Wounding the peace and happiness of all.
There pants Ambition for a mightier name&mdash;
There pale-faced Fear sits quivering lest he fall;
While, yon, base Envy darts her secret flame
On all who swifter climb the ragged steep of Fame.

Instant fell Discord hovers o'er the dome,
And fierce Bellona waves her horrid thong:&mdash;
From every quarter book-worm missiles come,
In plenteous showers, upon the crouching throng,&mdash;
Pattering, like hail, the echoing hall along.
Hush'd is the storm; &mdash; with measur'd pace stalk in
Momus and suit and names unknown to song;
A solemn pause succeeds the frightful din,
Until is heard pronounc'd that hateful word "begin."

Happy the youth whose scientific pate
Now teems with funds of mathematic lore:
Who, with a grace, can Greek and Latin prate,
And Gods yclep and stalworth men of yore,
What tho' he know not who, 'mid floods of gore,
To win his freedom and his country's peace,
Breasted the shock and brav'd the cannon's roar;&mdash;
Yet names, with ease, the worthies of old Greece,
And tells of him who gain'd the famous golden fleece.

But luckless he, who, like a Chatham shines,
In peerless splendor 'mid the Collge gyre;
Or pants for laurels which the Muse entwines,
And, with bold hand, awakes the sounding lyre,&mdash;
Mingling the grace of Pope with Dryden's fire:
Save some stale gas or mathematic toy,
Or scatter'd fragment of Urania's tires,
On Learning's sea, his hopes of safety buoy;
He sinks forever, lost among the "hoi polloi."

The ordeal o'er; &mdash; in awful council meet
The learned umpires of Minerva's state&mdash;
Canvass the rolls; &mdash; then with a hand discreet,
Like Stygian Minos, shake the urn of fate.&mdash;
Still holds it true that evil actions bate
Day's garish eye and it's close scrutiny;
For not till Darkness spreads her shadows late,
Full in the ears of Glory's devotee,
Is Hermes sent to broach the Synod's dread decree.

Heavens!  what loud clamours pierce the midnight air!
The gowned weal what sudden frenzies seize!
Frantic with rage and malice and despair,
They rave and stamp and curse the dread decrees.
Silence affrighted from the prospect flies&mdash;
Pale Dian slinks behind her cloud attire;
And shrieking infants climb their parents' knees,
As this mad crew, like Bacchanalians dire,
Or Lapland night-hags, howl their melancholy quire.

Guardians of youth!  whom church and state behold
As the proud Atlas of their destinies;&mdash;
And whom, as Science, with her plastic Mould,
Unveils young Genius bursting from his ties,
Each parent begs to point him to the skies!
Oh!  is it thus, with that with approving nod,
Ye sanction passions of such hellish guise!
Oh!  is it thus, with studious zeal, ye plod
Your Country's lasting peace and glory of your God?
