The Authors of Romances and Novels
Talk big of flut'ring Beaux and sparkling Belles;
Strephon the Lovers sprung from noble Blood,
And Coelia is a rich and lovely Prude:
To great Folk Cupid only is a Guest;
Love dare not reign in a Plebeian Breast:
The Poor do like unthinking Atoms dance,
And marry, as the World was made, by Chance.
This Poets and Philosophers advance.
Wise as they are, they may be in the wrong,
Altho' the last was great Lucretius's Song.
The gods, say they, have a superiour Care;
A thousand Sylphs sit on Belinda's Hair,
Protect bright Cloe when she plays at Ombre:
And, being aerial Spirits, cannot Slumber.
These Ladys guard at Tea and Mattadores,
Because they're Rich and Great, &mdash; tho' sometimes W&mdash;
The Gods despise a Linsey Woolsey Gown;
But to the rusling Silks Respect is shown.
Yet under Favour, 'tis not my Opinion,
For little Cupid hath a large Dominion.
Great Wits may with their learned Logick fail,
And I with my blunt Eloquence prevail:
Then hear with Patience this my Country Tale.

In Days of Old, when Kenneth rul'd the Nation,
And Trews and naked Buttocks were in Fashion,
Maids did not Fence their Bums with Ribs of Whales
But just a Nature made them, wore their T&mdash;ls.
The Scope of all love Tales and am'rous Charms
Is to have naked Meg claspt in our Arms.

There liv'd within an humble Highland Cottage
An honest Pair, but both of them in Dottage;
Donald; who never heard of foreign News,
Convers'd with Horse, and Sheep, and droves of Cows.
And jolly Marg'ry was his aged Spouse.
Twice twenty Years made up their wedlock State;
Their Means were competent, not very great;
A lovely Daughter bless'd their hoary Hairs,
The only Pledge of all their youthful Years.
For Stature, Manners and a lovely Face,
She was the very Proverb of the Place;
The Darling of her Family and Friends,
In blooming Youth just enter'd in her Teens.
The beauteous Maid, Corsica was her Name,
Thro' neighbouring Shires had spread a lasting Fame
From ev'ry Corner of the Country came
A Lover, to make known his am'rous Flame.
A learn'd Clerk, five Tradesmen, and a Swain
Call'd Colin, who dwelt in the neighbouring Plain,
Made up the Number of Corsica's Train.
The Scribe was famous for his plodding Nodle,
Told her dark Stories out of Aristotle,
Was very grave, but Colin took his Bottle.
The Tradesmen they were wealthy proud and vain;
But Colin was an honest humble Swain.
Tho' rich as Croesus, and as wise as Solon,
Corsica would have none, save only Colin.
Small worldly Substance fell to Colin's Share;
But he was open, plain and debonair,
Of equal Temper, stedfast as the Rocks,
Chearful as May and harmless as his Flocks:
Good Face, good Shapes, good Nature and good Sense,
Are qualities should make a Man a Prince.
Colin enjoy'd these in a high degree;
Corsica lov'd him well, and only he.

Her Parents Government was soft and mild,
They seldom spoke, but when they spoke they smil'd,
And she knew all the Duties of a Child.
One Morning aged Donald and his Wife
Says Daughter, you're the Solace of our Life,
Our Age's prop, our Joys of Life are gone,
And yours, sweet Child, we hope are drawing on.
O bring us not with Sorrow to the Grave,
'Tis but a single Favour that we crave,
Wed e're we dy, but don't with Colin wed;
And when we've seen you in the nuptial Bed,
Our aged, crazy, tot'ring Bones, we trust,
Will soon thereafter sleep in peaceful Dust.

Mournful Corsica knew not what to do;
Loth to refuse, and loth to make the Vow;
She did the last as safest of the two.
Parents, she says, 'tis you that gave me Life,
Till you Consent, I ne'er shall be a Wife.
Hear me ye Heav'ns, I make this sacred Vow,
To Marry as my Parents shall allow.
But Maidens Vows are Wind, and nothing else:
And this the sequel of my Story tells.

Once as the Sun the western Skies stole down,
And in the East arose the silver Moon;
Now toyling Heifers, wounded with the Goad,
Are all released from the servile Load:
Now from the Moors the Hunters homeward ride
With umquhile Maukin dangling at their Side:
From distant Hamlet hungry School-Boy comes,
With running Nose, and blowing o'er his Thumbs:
To neighb'ring Ale-House tipling Curate goes
With tatter'd Crape to take a deep Carouse:
From verdant Woods with sounding Horns the Swains
Bring home the milky Mothers of the Plains.
Corsica goes to Boughts to milk the Ews,
And spies her Colin whist'ling o'er the Knows;
Driving his Charge down to the nightly Fold;
His yellow Hair was like the streaming Gold;
He grac'd his Trews his Crook and Tartan-Plade;
As fine as Kenneth was the Swain arrai'd.
The Lass was singing with a thoughtless Air,
For, saving Love, she had no worldly Care.
Corsica chuckled when the Lad she view'd:
A Joy went tingling thro' her Mass of Blood.
Once she had growing Thoughts to be his Wife;
A rapid Pleasure touch'd the Strings of Life.
Colin soon folded up his woolly Drove,
And runs to quench his eager Thirst of Love.
Kind Words he spoke, his weary'd Head did rest
Upon the peaceful Pillow of her Breast.
Around her Waste his loving Arm was spread;
There he solac'd upon the downy Bed.
Often did Colin his Corsica kiss,
The certain Pledges of a future Bliss.
The loving Pair upon green Pastures lay;
And made the Ev'ning for to crown the Day.

Beneath a Willow's cooling Shade,
Nature's soft and mossie Bed,
Th' amorous Couple lay:
Colin felt a burning Flame,
Wish'd for what he durst not name;
At last began to say,
Corsica shall I sing a Song,
I'll not make it very long:
You have half an Hour to spare,
'Ere you milk your fleecy Care:
I have driv'n the Ews too fast,
Let them get a little rest.
You'll not think the Time too long,
We'll beguile it with a Song.
How a Shepherd lov'd a Lass,
And did Court her on the Grass;
But the Maid was cruel Coy,
And refus'd to wed the Boy:
With the Grief his Heart he broke,
He leapt over a steep Rock:
Thus he made an End of Life,
Since she would not be his Wife.

Corsica says, Dear Colin, sing,
Musick is a pleasant Thing:
Sure the Woman has been Mad,
For to kill a loving Lad.

Colin's Heart was wond'rous glad,
When he heard the Words she said.
Soon did he begin to sing,
And made all the Valleys ring:
But so mournful was the Tale,
It invited Philomel;
Who did hear the Musick sweet,
And doth still the Notes repeat.

A SONG TO THE TUNE OF MORNING O GEBERLAND.
PROLOGUE.
A Furlong or so from bonny Dumblain
Liv'd a fair Nymph and an am'rous Swain;
Colin was the Name of the Swain,
Corsica the Maid created his Pain.
He lov'd her beyond all the Comforts of Life,
Pray'd daily to Heav'n she might be his Wife.

Her Hair is like the heckl'd Lint,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
But her Heart as hard as Flint,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Her Face is like the rising Moon,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Clearer than a silver Spoon,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Red like Claret, is her Cheeks,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
And they Dimple when she Speaks,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Her Lips doth wear a scarlet Dy,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Like Cherries in the Month of May,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Her Teeth is like the Iv'ry Bone,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
But her Heart like pumice Stone,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Her Breasts are whiter than the Snow,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Softer than Hauss-locks of the Ew,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Whiter is her Legs and Thighs,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Than the Curds which make the Cheese,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Long and slender is her Waste,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
It would tempt the Parish Priest,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Tho' he were an Anchorite,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
To enjoy a nymph so sweet.
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
When she sits on Hills or Rocks,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Soon do I forsake my Flocks,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
She doth kill me with her Eyes,
Still rolling, still rolling;
But she cares not for my Crys,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Nor takes she notice of my Sighs,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Long have I courted this fair Maid,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
But she slighted all I said
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
I am weary'd of my Life,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Since she will not be my Wife,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
I'll forsake my Friends and Flocks,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
And fly over steepy Rocks,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Life without her's full of Trouble,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
Nothing but a silly Bubble,
Quo Colin, quo Colin,
In Loves Rage he left his Sheep,
Poor Colin, poor Colin;
And did take the fatal Leap,
Poor Colin, poor Colin!
When Corsica heard the News,
She forsakes her Lambs and Ews,
For Colin, for Colin;
When she saw the Swain was dead,
Poor Colin, poor Colin;
She fell Sick and took her Bed,
For Colin, for Colin:
Distracted with the Grief, she cry'd,
For Colin, for Colin,
And gave up the Ghost and dy'd,
For Colin, for Colin.

Corsica heard her Colin's artful Tale,
Minded her Vow, but Nature did prevail.
Colin, says she, the Story can't be true,
For I ne'er heard one of that Name save you.
If Fact, Corsica's been a cruel Creature,
And wanted all the softness of my Nature.
Colin replies, Part's true of what I've said;
I am the Swain and you the cruel Maid.
Long have I courted you my charming Fair,
But you are Deaf to Colin's ev'ry Pray'r.
I hear you've sworn by the Pow'rs above,
Never to entertain your Colin's Love.
And did the dottard Fools extort the Vow;
Cruel Corsica, shall I think it true.
To such an unjust View have no Respect;
Or break your Vow, or I will break my Neck.
I'm not, she says, unflexible to Love,
Could I, dear Colin, this curs'd Vow remove.
To break my Vow, dare I be so unjust,
'Twould send my aged Parents to the Dust.
What then, says Colin, will it be a Crime
To give them Heav'n a Year before their Time:
O!  'tis an Action that will make you thrive,
To keep the loving Colin still alive.
Thus Colin spoke, and did her Heart betray;
She broke her Vow, and marry'd him next Day.
