Yes &mdash; every hopeful Son of Rhyme
Will surely seize this happy Time,
Vault upon Pegasus's Back,
Now grown an Academic Hack,
And sing the Beauties of a Queen,
(Whom, by the by, he has not seen;)
Will swear her eyes are black as jet,
Her teeth as Pearls in Coral set;
Will tell us that the Rose has lent
Her Cheek its Bloom, her Lips its Scent,
That Philomel breaks off her Song,
And listens to her sweeter Tongue;
That Venus and the Graces join'd
To form this Phoenix of her Kind,
And Pallas undertook to store
Her Mind with Wisdom's chiefest Lore:
Thus form'd, Jove issues a Decree
That GEORGE'S Consort she shall be:
Then Cupid (for what Match is made
By Poets without Cupid's Aid?)
Picks out the swiftest of his Darts,
And pierces instant both their Hearts.

Your fearful Prose-men here might doubt
How best to bring this Match about,
For Winds and Waves are ill-bred Things,
And little care for Queens and Kings;
But as the Gods assembled stand,
And wait each youthful Bard's Command,
All fancy'd Dangers they deride,
Of boist'rous Winds, and swelling Tide;
Neptune is call'd to wait upon her,
And Sea-Nymphs are her Maids of Honour;
Whilst we, instead of eastern Gales,
With Vows and Praises fill the Sails,
And when, with due poetick Care
They safely land the Royal Fair,
They catch the happy Simile,
Of Venus rising from the Sea.
Soon as she moves, the Hill and Vale,
Responsive tell the joyful Tale;
And Wonder holds th' enraptur'd Throng
To see the Goddess pass along;
The bowing Forests all adore her,
Where you and I all Day might travel,
And meet with nought but Sand and Gravel;
But Poets have a piercing Eye,
And many pretty Things can spy,
Which neither you nor I can see,
But then the Fault's in you and me.
The King astonish'd must appear,
And find that Fame has wrong'd his Dear;
Then Hymen, like a Bishop, stands,
To join the Lovers' plighted Hands;
Apollo and the Muses wait,
The nuptial Song to celebrate.

But I, who rarely spend my Time
In paying Court or spinning Rhyme;
Who cannot from the high Abodes,
Call down, at will, a Troop of Gods;
Must in the plain prosaick Way,
The Wishes of my Soul convey.
May Heaven our Monarch's Choice approve,
May he be blest with mutual Love,
And be as happy with his Queen,
As with my Chloe I have been;
When wand'ring through the Beechen Grove,
She sweetly smil'd and talk'd of Love!
And oh!  that he may live to see
A Son as wise and good as he;
And may his Consort grace the Throne
With Virtues equal to his own!
Our Courtly Bards will needs be telling,
That she's like Venus or like Helen;
I wish that she may prove as fair
As Egremont and Pembroke are;
For tho' by Sages 'tis confest,
That Beauty's but a Toy at best;
Yet, 'tis methinks, in married Life,
A pretty Douceur with a Wife:
And may the Minutes as they fly,
Strengthen still the nuptial Tye,
While Hand in Hand thro' Life they go,
'Till Love shall into Friendship grow;
For tho' these Blessings rarely wait
On regal Pomp, and tinsel'd State,
Yet Happiness is Virtue's Lot,
Alike in Palace and in Cot:
'Tis true, the grave Affairs of State,
With little Folks have little Weight;
Yet I confess my Patriot Heart
In Britain's Welfare bears its Part;
With Transport glows at GEORGE'S Name,
And triumphs in its Country's Fame:
With hourly Pleasure I can sit
And talk of Granby, Hawke, and Pitt;
And whilst I praise the Good and Brave,
Disdain the Coward and the Knave.
At Growth of Taxes others fret,
And shudder at the Nation's Debt;
I ne'er the fancied Ills bemoan,
No Debts disturb me, but my own.
What!  tho' our Coffers sink, our Trade
Repairs the Breach which War has made;
And if Expences now run high,
Our Minds must with our Means comply.
Thus far my Politicks extend,
And here my warmest Wishes end,
May Merit flourish, Faction cease,
And I and Europe live in Peace!
