In Virgin now the sweltry sun gan sheene,
And hot upon the meads did cast his ray;
The apple redded from his paly green,
And the soft pear did bend the leafy spray;
The pied goldfinch sung the livelong day;
Now 'twas the pride, the manhood of the year,
And eke the ground was dight in its most neat aumere.

The sun was gleaming in the middle of day,
Dead still the air, and eke the welkin blue,
When from the sea arose in drear array
A heap of clouds of sable sullen hue,
The which full fast unto the woodland drew,
Shrouding at once the sun's beauteous face,
And the black tempest swelled and gathered up apace.

Beneath an holm, fast by a pathway ride,
Which did unto Saint Godwin's temple lead,
A hapless pilgrim moaning did abide,
Poor in his look, like beggar in his weed,
Long filled with the miseries of need;
Where from the hailstones could the almer fly?
He had no housen there, nor any convent nigh.

Look in his clouded face, his soul there scan;
How woe-begone, how withered, sapless, dead!
Haste to thy church-yard house, unhappy man!
Cold as the clay, which will grow on thy head,
Is charity and love among high elves;
The knights and barons live for pleasure and themselves.

The gathered storm is ripe; the big drops fall;
The sunburnt meadows smoke, and cloud the rain;
The coming ghastness do the beasts appal,
And the full flocks are driving o'er the plain;
Dash'd from the clouds the waters fly again;
The welkin opes, the yellow lightning flies;
And the hot fiery stream in the wide lowings dies.

List; now the thunder's rattling, noisy sound,
Moves slowly on, and then increasing clangs,
Shakes the high spire; and lost, dispended, drown'd,
Still on the affrighted ear of terror hangs;
The winds are up; the lofty elmen swanges;
Again the lightning and the thunder pours,
And the full clouds are burst at once in stony showers.

Spurring the palfry o'er the watry plain,
The Abbot of St. Godwin's convent came;
His schapournette was drenched with the rain,
His painted girdle met with mickle shame;
He backward told his bead roll at the same;
The storm encreasen, and he drew aside,
With the poor alms craver, ne'er to the holm to bide.

His cloak was all of Lincoln cloth so fine,
With a gold button fastened near his chin:
His loose white robe was edged with golden twine,
And his shoe's pike a lover's might have been;
Full well it showed he thoughten cost no sin;
The trappings of the palfry pleased his sight,
For the horse milener his head with roses dight.

"An alms, sir Priest!"  the louting pilgrim said,
"O let me wait within your convent door,
Till the sun shineth high above our head,
And the loud tempest of the air is o'er;
Helpless and old am I, alas!  and poor,
No house, nor friend, nor money in my pouch!
All that I call my own is this my silver crouche."

"Varlet," replied the abbot, "cease your din,
This is no season alms and prayers to give;
My porter never lets a beggar in;
None touch my ring who not in honor live."
And now the sun with the black clouds did strive,
And shooting on the ground his glaring ray,
The abbot spurred his steed and eftsoons road away.

Once more the sky was black; the thunders roll'd;
Fast running o'er the plain a priest was seen
Not dight full proud, nor buttoned up in gold;
His cloak and surplice grey, and eke were clean;
A Limitour he was of order seene;
And from the pathway side thus turned he,
Where th poor almer lay beneath the holmen tree.

"An alms, sir Priest!"  the louting pilgrim said,
"For sweet saint Mary and your order sake."
The Limitour then loosen'd his pouch thread,
And did thereout a groat of silver take;
The needy pilgrim did for pleasure shake.
"There, take this silver, it may ease thy care;
We are God's stewards all, nought of our own we bear.

"But ah unhappy pilgrim learn of me,
Scarce any give a rentroll to their Lord,
Here take my coat, for thou are bare I see;
'Tis thine; the saints will give me my reward."
He left the pilgrim, and his way aberde.
Virgin and holy saint who, sit in gloure,
Or give the mighty will, or give the good man power.
