Ah, who can tell how hard it is to write!
Particularly if one has no paper,
And pens and ink; and then if it be night,
One also wants a candlestick, and taper;
For all our fine ideas will end in vapour,
Unless in black and white they are put down;
These things do some perplex, although they may per-
Haps, be no source of trouble to a clown,
To whom the mystery of Cadmus was unknown.

For whom in vain old Faustus for a witch
Is handed down in history, tale, and song;
For whom in vain, with blackball and with pitch,
The printers' devils are daubing all day long;
Yet such men may be very brave and strong,
For all they know not B from a bull's foot;
On this account I think it very wrong
To blackguard a poor person like a brute,
Because he is innocent, and ignorant to boot.

One Mr. Beattie wrote some doggrel once
About a country chap, whose name was Noodle,
Or something else &mdash; I think he was a dunce,
To make a hero out of such a poodle.
I doubt not somebody that's very rude, will
Say I am a jackass to insinuate this,
And little better than a yankee-doodle.
But if one says so, he my foot may kiss,
And if Old Nick should take him, it would not be amiss.

I wonder why the devil is called Old Nick,
Seeing that Nicholas is a christian name;
Whoever calls him so, should have a kick,
And several cobs, for saying of the same.
St. Nicholas as the patron saint we claim
Of Gotham; and the hero of my strains
Was Nicholas hight, by the prolific dame
Who bore, when he was born, parturient pains;&mdash;
You'll know I mean his mother, if you have any brains.

Where Hudson's swelling waters lave the shore
Of fertile Jersey, opposite New-York,
About a mile from Powles-Hook, or more,
Considering that the road has got a fork,
A city stands, renowned for fattening pork,
Skunks, cabbages, and minstrels &mdash; who oft use
To take their banjas when they can't get work,
And charm such sweeps and vagabonds as choose
To crown with sixpences the efforts of their muse.

When spring returned to deck the vernal year,
And eggs were cracked at solemn tide of Paus,
These troubadours of old did oft appear,
Charming the chimney climber and his boss,
Especially if the latter was not cross,&mdash;
In the Fly-market; &mdash; there they plied their heels,
Nor reck'd of time's irreparable loss,
Content to hear the loud applauding peals,
While generous fishermen oft gave them shad and eels.

Long vanish'd days, farewell!  the voice of song
Is mute; the banja's note is heard no more;
No bard to distant ages shall prolong
Romantic Jersey's legendary lore,
Or chaunt thy fame, beloved Communipaw!
Except when crazy G&mdash; or little S&mdash;,
Smit with the prospect of the distant shore,
Seen from the ferry, shall indite their lays,
For whom the Milliner's girls wreathe artificial bays.

Within thy walls, renowned Communipaw!
On a wet Friday, was my hero born;
He was named Nicholas, as I said before,
For parson Vreeland christened him one morn,
The Hackinsackus Domine, most forlorn;
Seeing a "je ne sais quoi" in his face,
As he was sitting up against a barn,
He took compassion on his heathen case,
Saying, Nicholas, my boy, don't turn out a scrape grace!

If blacks are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes,
Then was our Nicholas an orient gem;
And if in bodies black no colour lies,
Then Nicholas was as colourless as them:&mdash;
And yet he sprang from no ignoble stem;
For his grandfather by the mother's side,
Although he came not from the stock of Shem,
Once ruled o'er fertile regions fair and wide,
Where rolls o'er golden sands broad Niger's ample tide.

This wight [not white, for, as I said before,
Nicholas was black as darkness visible,]
Of reading and of writing knew no more
Than William Deloraine or Peter Bell;
[Not Bell the sheriff, but the man so well
By Wordsworth sung] [Not Woodworth &mdash; for there be
Some stupid individuals, who can't tell
The difference 'twixt the Englishman, and he
Who wrote Mysterious Chiefs, and other poetry.]

And yet poor Nicholas was no vulgar chap,
Tho' in his time there were no Sunday schools;
A child of Nature, such as she doth shape
Occasionally &mdash; contrary to rules;
When tired of manufacturing knaves and fools,
Where wealth, and power, in gorgeous pomp parade;
She bundles up her implements and tools,
And seeks out modest merit in the shade,
Where it is like to wither, as has oft been said.

Alas, for worth unfriended, which the clog
Of poverty to earth resistless weighs;
And like a toadstool underneath a log,
Which ends, where it began, its scanty days;
So blooms the violet hidden from the blaze
Of garish sunshine; &mdash; so the modest toad
Lives for a century hid from mortal gaze;
So Cincinnatus, near his small abode,
Was found at the plough-tail, flourishing an ox-goad.

Tho' learning never to our hero's eyes,
Rich with the spoils of time, unrolled her page,
He made on outward things reflections wise,
Which would not have disgraced an ancient sage;
For even in his childhood's earliest age,
The folly of the creed by Pyrrho taught,
And David Hume, his thoughts did much engage;
He sorely bruised his shins, and dearly bought
The indisputable truth, that matter is not nought.

And often would he silent meditate,
Behind the barn, when nobody was nigh,
Why, when his master smote him on the pate,
It hurt him sadly, and it made him cry;
And wise conclusions he came to thereby,
On causes and effects, on moral wo,
Physical pain, power, and dependency,
And gathered soon, that man is born to know
Much misery, and ill, while sojourning below.

The agony of hope deferred he felt,
When he was hungry before dinner time;
And keener disappointment, when he smelt
The food prepared for stomachs more sublime
Than his, &mdash; and here, to spin my weary rhyme,
I might illustrate this by many a case,
Of people who to offices would climb,
In doing which they fell upon their face,
And suffered from the mob bad usage, and disgrace.

Through tenderness this subject I'll not handle,
There are such shoals of people here who think
Nobody is good enough to hold a candle
Before them, &mdash; from their multitude I shrink,
I am aware, to a blind horse, a wink
Is good as is a nod; &mdash; or I would say,
Since all the cup of fortune cannot drink,
Content yourself, my friend, with what you may,
And do as Nicholas did on many a mournful day.

Although you are neither governor nor mayor,
And, ten to one, the same you'll never be,
(For of the fact you may not be aware,
That none beside yourself your worth may see,)
Stick to your business with integrity,
Ambition leave to lawyers without fees;
Alas that many such alive should be!&mdash;
And do like Nicholas without bread and cheese,
Who sadly suck'd his thumbs, with elbows on his knees.

And many other truths did Nicholas learn,
Abroad into the fields whene'er he strayed;
All tribes gregarious, there he did discern,
The imitative principle obeyed;
He always marked that when a jackass brayed,
The other donkies all took up the strain;
And when one goose its guttural gobbling made,
The other geese to gobble all were fain,
The reason of which fact he could not well explain.

This truth we daily see exemplified;
Monkeys and men are prone to imitate&mdash;
Thus Mr. Croaker with much labour tried
A poem like Lord Byron's to create,
With Mr. Colman's eulogies elate.
And then a man of Boston thought he too,
Would scratch some doggrel couplets from his pate,
To cut out both; &mdash; but SUKEY would not do,
Tho' peppered with notes of ex-clamation not a few.

One morning, Nicholas sat upon the shore,
Seeing the sun-beams in the waters twinkle,
Hearing the sounds that came from distance o'er
The glassy wave, or cow-bell's lonely tinkle;
Seeing the porpoises jump up and sprinkle
The glittering spray in their unwieldy gambols.
Or the small barks that left their transient wrinkle,
Bearing the market people on their rambles,
Carrying their vegetables and poultry to the shambles.

And by and bye, in solitary pride,
In a small shallop came Nick's uncle Sam;
[Sam was his uncle by the mother's side&mdash;
Now he for Nicholas cared not a d&mdash;n;]
But when he called out, "Uncle, here I am,"
Thinking he might be useful in the boat,
Strait to the stump where Nicholas sat he came,
And cried out, "jump aboard, pull off your coat,
And take hold of the oar and row, you young black goat."

Then in got Nicholas, with fear and dread;
Now Sam the day before had stolen a sail,
And rigged it with old ropes to make it spread,
And off they went before the prosperous gale;
Of what was in the boat to give the tale,
I think it fitting; there were turkeys two,
Six geese, some fowls, an old tin pot to bale,
For the boat leaked whenever the wind blew,
Besides, were turnips, carrots, and cabbages, not a few.

Now all these articles, it may be proper
To state, were stolen, for it was Sam's plan,
Never, for what he bought, to pay a copper,
But sell them higher than any other man.
First from his master, when away he ran,
He stole himself; and then a boat he took
Clandestinely; then, by degrees, began
About him for a cargo fit to look;
And last, for supercargo, young Nicholas did book.

Right glad was Nicholas to behold the bark
Furrow the waters, which did homage pay,
As she shot through them gayly as the lark,
That soars, and sings, and shakes the dew away
From her fleet wings &mdash; and with their crested spray,
They curled before; while far behind the foam
In a bright line of silver glory lay&mdash;
He saw the birds in many circles roam,
Skim, dip, or soar aloft into the heavens their home.

Balmy and fresh the morning air was breathing,
From Governor's isle the drums beat reveille,
Up from the city the night mists were wreathing,
Each spire was glittering in the early ray.
And calm and lovely, from the expanded bay,
Each fort-crowned island rose, and without doubt,
Young Nick was thinking something fine to say,
When Uncle Sam fetched him a grievous clout,
Exclaiming, in rough tones, "you hell-hound, what are you 'bout."

And then he bade him take hold of the rope,
Because the sail had gotten all awry;
Also he wished to give his humour scope,
For he was very passionate, and dry;
So after he made his nephew cry,
He took a swinging swig of cider whiskey,
And when he got a drop within his eye,
He grew less choleric, and rather frisky,
And so began to sing an ancient rhyme, in this key.

UNCLE SAM'S SONG.
1.
My name is Uncle Sam, down below, down below,
My name is Uncle Sam, down below, down below&mdash;
I don't care for riches,
I wear corduroy britches,
And my wife mends the stitches,
Down below.

2.
I stole a keg of rum, down below, down below,
I stole a keg of rum, down below&mdash;
My old massa nick'd me,
The old rascal lick'd me,
My eyes!  how he kick'd me,
Down below.

3.
Then I ran away, down below, down below,
Then I ran away, down below&mdash;
I got into a clam boat,
Says I, "its Uncle Sam's boat,"
And now, by jinks, I am 'float,
Down below.

&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;*&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;
