From lighter Strains to sing the tragic Theme,
Awake my Muse!  while Nature lends her Aid,
Inspires my Bosom, animates the Lay,
And calls forth Fancy from her airy Seat,
To wing the sacred Flight.  Shall he remain
Unsung, whose won immortal Lays could pile
Triumphal Arches, and for Merit wreathe
Eternal Laurels?  Shall the gen'rous Bard
Shake off the Bonds of Sense, and upwards mount
Beyond this little Scene, and not receive
The weeping Tribute of a grateful Muse?

O could the Muse catch the poetic Flame;
Which glows celestial in the sacred Page,
Where NEWTON'S Glories to th' astonish'd eye
Unbounded shine!  then might she hope to raise
A Monument immortal to his Name.

But where begin so sing the mighty Theme?
How utter half his Praise?  Ye Sons of Verse,
Who from this Fountain drew poetic Life,
Sing loud his Merit!  ye who climb the Paths
Which guide to Glory, and with soaring Wing
Ascend the Muse's Hill, can ye remain
Silent, while yet the dear Remembrance swells
Your grateful  Bosoms.  Say, what noble Grace,
What Virtue was not his?  Supremely bless'd
With lavish Nature's Gifts, how did he range
Thro' all her Wilds, and to the wond'ring Mind
Display the rolling Year?  The verdant SPRING,
Clad in her flow'ry Pride, profuse of Charms,
Smiles from the lucid South; while Nature all
Starts up to Life, and owns her genial Power,
Blooms in her rich Array, and shoots profuse
Her vegetable Store:  The fragrant Plain,
Deck'd in her Beauties, opens all her Sweets,
And, big with Blessings, chears the Heart of Man.

The blooming Spring averts her Virgin Face,
When SUMMER comes; with sultry Pace he comes,
And beams in Glory o'er the fervid Globe.
His plastic Rays all ripening Nature feels,
And glows in youthful Pride; diffusive Showers
Refresh the arid Glebe, or from the Cloud
Deep-black'ning the impetuous Torrent pours;
Or dreadful burst the Magazines of Hail:
Athwart the Sky the forked Light'nings flash
In horrid Pomp, and the hoarse Thunder roars,
Tremend'ous roars, and awes the frighted World.

But, lo the changing Scene!  AUTUMN appears
Array'd in yellow Pomp; the Orchard bends
With fragrant Fruitage, blushing 'midst the Leaves
And grateful to the Taste; the Harvest waves
O'er all the fertile Field; the Farmer's Heart
Exulting leaps, as o'er the nodding Plain
He throws his joyous Eyes, while Industry
Now grasps the Sickle, and innur'd to Toil
With busy Hand concludes the rustling Scene.

But scarce has Autumn pour'd her fruitful Boon
Luxuriant forth, and swell'd the Farmer's Store,
Till from the low'ring East, in stormy Rage,
The WINTER roars, and all his gloomy Train
Sweep o'er the trembling Year.  The hoary Frost
Rears his congealing Head, while oft the Snow
Descends in fleecy Pomp.  The changing Scenes
Which deck the Seasons; the revolving Year,
Both when she blooms, and when in wintry Time
She darts her Horrors o'er the shivering World,
Dress'd in her Glories stands disclos'd by him.

His Genius boundless rang'd thro' all the Tracts
Of wid'ning Nature; to his piercing Eye
The Sun effulgent open'd all his Stores
Of Light immense, which, with the borrow'd Rays
Night's glimmering Queen transmits, for ever shine
With heavenly Splendor in his solemn Song.

FREEDOM divine, which in the Patriot's Soul
Glows fervid, he with gen'rous Vigour breath'd,
And sung the mighty Theme.  Immortal Rome,
Where Freedom once tremend'ous held her Reign,
And shook her Terrors o'er the yielding World,
Where bleeding Heroes stemm'd the rushing Tide
Of dreadful Ruin, and with Glory lay
Stretch'd on the Plains of Conquest, while the State
O'er trembling Nations spread her awful Wings
Imperial, she, in his pathetic Song,
Shines still rever'd, and thro' the Bosom darts
The Patriot Ray, while oft with manly Rage,
The kindling Breast breathes forth the gen'rous Fire.

Nor stops his Muse, but thro' contending Greece
Pursues her ample Range, and shews the State
In all her Terrors drest, when Freedom pour'd
Her martial Sons profusely o'er the Field,
To check th' exulting East, when dreadful swept
The Persian Lord, while in his num'rous Train
Collected Nations roll'd.  How Freedom rous'd
These Sons of Greatness, to sustain the Shocks
Of gathering Armies, he in martial Strains
Presented, vivid to th' astonish'd eye.

BRITANNIA'S Glory, in his sacred Page,
Breaks forth illustrious; all the Sons of Fame
Whose dauntless Souls, superior to the Shocks
Of wayward Fortune, urg'd their gen'rous Course,
Embalm'd for ever, dazzle in his Song.
How oft enflam'd the madding Nation jarr'd,
In dire Combustion and intestine Rage,
O'erwhelm'd the harrass'd Land, while Freedom wing'd
Her sacred Flight, and left the drooping Isle
To wail her sad Remove, till William rose,
To waft her backwards from the Belgick Shore.

Nor stoop'd his Muse, beneath the mighty Weight
Of TALBOT'S Virtues; the enchanting Flow
Of Eloquence divine, which from his Lips
In sweet Profusion stream'd, strait charm'd the Soul,
And pour'd Persuasion round th' astonish'd Throng.
These all are his &mdash; and more.  The glowing Heart
Which grasps the human Kind, the tender Throb
Which weeps the Woes of Man, the lib'ral Hand
Which strews profuse its glad'ning Bounties round.
Nor can his gen'rous Deeds by ruthless Time
Be e'er effac'd, since drest in THOMSON'S Lays
They charm immortal:  In his Portrait fair
The finish'd Statesman shines, the Patriot glows,
And every Virtue opens to the View.

But say!  Ye Virgins, from whose tender Breasts
He drew the heaving Sigh, while graceful down
Your cheeks warm blushing fell the starting Tears,
In pearly Sorrow, as with gen'rous Rage,
His SOPHONISBA drinks th' impoison'd Cup,
And dies undaunted in the noble Cause
Of bleeding Carthage.  All ye lovely Train,
Do ye not mourn him, and your smarting Breasts,
Feel agonizing Throws?  Your Bard no more
Can charms your Ears, nor in your Bosoms pour
His soft Instructions; while with nameless Art
He led you captive thro' the Maze of Love,
And with enchanting Numbers swell'd your Souls.
Oft have your Breasts with sweet Emotions heav'd,
As oft you turn'd his Nature-painting Page,
And drank the Draughts of Love; your ev'ry Nerve.
With Trepidation seiz'd, confess'd the Flame,
High-kindling in your souls, as thro' your Veins
The shivering Transport ran; nor did his Muse
E'er paint a guilty Scene, but nobly pure,
Presented Virtue in her lovely Robes
Of Innocence and Peace:  By him she charm'd,
And reign'd triumphant o'er the yielding Heart.

But as, with him, the tragic Muse has wing'd
Her airy Flight, and left the drooping Isle,
Long to bemoan her THOMSON, now no more
The Genius of the Stage; ye Gay and Fair,
When his last Scenes shall open to your view
In perfect Lustre great; when Rome shall mourn
The horrid Hate, which hastes relentless on,
To strike the Blow of Fate, and dreadful pour
Collected Vengeance on the Roman Name.
O then ye Fair!  with ever grateful Hearts
Assert his Cause, as oft in mingling Crowds
Ye nightly visit, where with tragic Rage
Resounds the vaulted Dome, while in your Eyes
Oft starts the Tear, and down your rosy Cheeks
Steals trickling, then assert the gen'rous Cause,
And with your Praises crown his parting Scenes.

Never did Envy stain his noble Breast;
Far from his Bosom fled th' infernal Fiend,
Nor durst approach a soul so great as his.
Serenest Virtue, on his smiling Brow,
Sat in her Charms, and with collected Grace,
Engag'd th' admiring Throng:  He never knew
The idle Pomp of Life, nor meanly grasp'd
At pageant Greatness; nor, with eager Eye,
Pursu'd the Glare of Wealth; his was a Task
Of nobler kind, while on his swelling Soul
Rush'd Contemplation, and etherial flew
Throughout the Spheres, and on his wond'ring eyes
Pour'd all her Visions forth:  but say, ye Few!
Who knew the Movements of his noble Mind,
And felt the glad'ning Beams of Friendship dart
From Soul to Soul, ye knew his Bosom breath'd
Benevolence to Man, he grasp'd his kind
In all the Ties of Love:  but O while round
The social Bowl, ye quaff'd the mental Feast
With fond Endearment, and his Flow of Wit,
With Bliss ecstatic, fill'd your ravish'd Minds;
While he, with Look benign, with winning Grace
And Tongue instructive, open'd all his Stores of
Treasur'd Knowledge, and with rapid Flight,
Time wing'd her Way &mdash; Can ye recount these Scenes
Of boundless Pleasure? &mdash; No &mdash; Remembrance checks
The fond Relation, and o'er all your Souls
Extends a pensive Gloom.  Ah whither fled
These Hours of Bliss!  If in this Vale of Tears,
(Where mingling Horror gathers all her Storms
To blast the Scenes of Joy) aught can be called
Ecstatic Bliss.  Such, visionary Life,
Are all thy shifting Scenes; now they unfold
Their varied Charms, and, like the vernal Rose,
Diffuse their balmy Sweets, till strait succeeds
The gelid Air, to nip their blossom'd Growth.
What art thou, Life!  at best an airy Shew,
And like a Vapour which by Night condens'd
O'erclouds the Sky, till strait the solar Ray
Pierces its tenuous Sides, then sinks its Form
To infant Atoms; such the Base of Life,
So fly the Phantoms of our fond Pursuit!
Scarce on our conscious Head has Nature pour'd
Existence, and uprear'd the brittle Frame
With her conducting Hand, till round she sows
The Seeds of Death; Diseases unobserved
For ever mine the Citadel of Life,
Till one dread Blast dissolves it into Dust.

Where fled ye, Visions of enchanting Joy,
With all your giddy Train?  Where now the Hope
Which warm'd the Virgin's Breast, as in her Pride
Of rosy Beauty oft she turn'd the Round
Of Pastimes gay, and drunk th' enchanting Cup
Of madd'ning Pleasure!  while with conscious Blush
She beam'd her Beauties round, and felt the Sweets
Of Love and Conquest kindling in her Soul.

Scarce has she wav'd in all her gaudy Dress,
Or lavish'd half her Charms, or view'd the Scene
Of youthful Frolic; scarce has Nature flush'd
Her blooming Cheek, or in her Bosom pour'd
The Throbs of Love, or on her shining Hair
Bestowed the Raven-hue, or built her Limbs
With fine Proportion; till behold the Breath
Of dread Affliction blasts her rosy Youth;
Then drops the Veil o'er every ripening Charm;
Now fly her Visions, with their airy Train
Of future Bliss, with which her swelling Breast
Triumphant heav'd, now baffled Beauty weeps,
And o'er her livid Face even Virtue drops
The elegiac Tear.  So wither'd fall
The Sons of Pleasure, who in flow'ry Youth
Look'd forward to enjoy a Length of Days,
Gay o'er the Stage of Time, they flutt'ring move,
Secure of Life, and plan the empty Dream
Of mimic Greatness; oft exults the Heart
O'er all the fancy'd Scene, while heedless they
Rush on the Snares of Woe, and instant Fate
Snatches her tender Prey.  Now rising Hope,
With all her Phantoms of expected Joy,
Shrinks into Air.  Thus fleet the Days of Man,
While all the Din and glitt'ring Pomp of Life
Remain for ever hush'd in silent Sleep.
Nor want we here the elegiac Song,
To strew fresh Roses round the sacred Tomb,
Where Virtue weeps; here let the pensive Mind
Turn to the glowing Page, where SEASONS roll
Around the varied Year; there view array'd
In Beauty's Grace, the ever-blooming Spring,
Benevolent and mild; or all the Pomp
Which sultry Summer shews; or all the Stores
Which yellow Autumn pours; or Winter view,
With Storms and Torrents rushing o'er the Year.

These all are his.  And while the Spring remains
To paint the Vale, or rustling Harvest nods,
Or Winter glooms, or Summer glads the Earth,
These, these shall read his monumental Stone
Beyond the Attacks of Time.  O could the Muse
O'erleap the Bounds of Sense, and wing her Flight
To yon effulgent Orbs, where dwell the Bless'd,
Array'd in lucid Robes, there might she view
The Muses Sons with chearful Looks advance,
To hail the Partner of their deathless Joy.
See SPENCER deigns to point his mazy Way
Thro' Mansions ever new; and MILTON'S self,
Obsequious bending from his laurel'd Throne,
Now greets his noblest  Son, and to the Choir
Of circling Angels, yields the heavenly Guest;
Who lead him wond'ring thro' the radiant Spheres,
Lost in the Maze of Thought, high rais'd, to him
Whose Hand creative form'd the spacious Vast
Of thousand Worlds, who bid our solar Year
Revolve, and Seasons steer their varied Course:
And moves, directs, and agitates the Whole.
