Climb, climb Abookir's tower.  Not thus, not thus,
Abyss-born earthquakes bellow:  yearning deeps
Prepare not to ingorge
The eternal pyramids.
Nor frowns the prophet; Eblis is not loos'd
Flame-breathing, din-environ'd, smoke-inwrapt,
By shouts of yelling fiends,
To scath and havoc urg'd.
Though a destroying angel walks the wave,
His step the thunder, and his frown the night
A searing sword of fate,
Bare in his red right hand,
'Tis Nelson he obeys:  to Nelson's prayer,
Almighty God his dread avenger sent
In characters of death,
To write the dooms of men.
Ye trembling mothers, not with scatter'd hair,
From the long-sacred precincts of your home
In wild disorder burst,
Soothe, soothe, the close-claspt babe,
And change the scream of fright to crowing joy:
Your saviour conquers in this night of deeds&mdash;
Here from Abookir's tower,
We mark his triumph nigh.
Athwart the smouldring smoke, that lowers around,
As had the hoarse-voic'd chaos call'd anew
On earth, and sea, and sky,
To mix in shapeless mist,
Roar thunders thousand fold:  by fits glares red,
Like seething lavas the illumin'd wave.
While o'er the pirates pale,
Their thick-ribb'd bulwarks wave.
Bright, bright, yon proud pyre burns.  The Orient burns.
Toulon, once more thou'rt humbled:  thy huge gift,
To the French navy burns
With fire unquenchable.
Lo!  it explodes!  so from extinguish'd suns,
Sport their last lightnings to the rim of heaven,
And the chill'd planets round,
Their dark'ning shine forego.
How the tower totters with the mighty crash,
Shakes, far as Sinai's foot, the shuddering shore,
The thick masts from the clouds
Drop &mdash; like shafts shot in vain.
Slow beams the blooming dawn as stills the strife.
Hence, down the winding stairs.  With pearled eye
On the throng'd coast below,
Pale pity beck'ning stands.
Dare, dare, to meet the shrieks of mangled men&mdash;
O stop the fire-swart hulks flow-drifting by,
Least of the flitting wrack
Their wounded limbs lose hold.
Ah!  not the midnight tear, or morning prayer,
Not e'en the sob that choak'd her farewell kiss,
Avails the wife to save
Her children's only hope.
None is a foe who suffers &mdash; welcome all.
Those whom the long-boats bring with oary speed,
Are captives sworn to peace,
Whom Nelson's mercy spares.
They bear to Buonaparte's startled ear,
This tale:  "Thy hero friends have fought and fail'd;
Thy ships are ashes, strown
On a rejoicing land.
Time was, when Freedom waver'd in thy van
The three streak'd banner, and thy legions cheer'd&mdash;
When thanking nations wash'd
With tears thy step of blood&mdash;
When from his long-dishonour'd tomb, the ghost
Of Gracchus rising, show'd his wounds aveng'd&mdash;
Now Rapine holds thy flag,
Coy victory drops her palm."
