Danae, enclos'd in Tow'rs of Brass,
Strong Iron Doors, and Opening Dogs,
Wakeful, had well secur'd by Day,
Had well secur'd by Night;

If JOVE and VENUS had not mock'd
The Jealous Sire &mdash; So Fables tell&mdash;
Vain Iron!  Vain Brass!  transform'd to Gold,
He won the Greedy Maid.

When Gold appears, the Guards retire,
The Floods divide, the Rocks are rent;
Not Thunder flings the fiery Bolt
With such Resistless Power.

Subjects their Kings, and Priests their Gods
Exchange for Gold.  The Gownman Right
And Wrong confounds:  for Gold he pleads,
For Gold betrays the Cause.

Touch'd by Thy Stronger Force, tow'rds Thee
The Compass veers, Almighty Gold!
Before Thee Wisdom, Valour, Sense
And Virtue are no more!

Care follows close, where Gold precedes:
Sweet Innocence, Contentment, Peace,
No more shall bless the Day; no more
Soft Slumbers bless the Night!

This HORACE saw; Wise Bard!  and durst
Refuse the glittering Bribe; to share
With Caesar all the World &mdash; to share
The World, and share the Toil.

Tempt me no more, MAECENAS!  tempt
No more Thy FLACCUS to aspire
To Wealth and Power:  he fears the Helm,
Because he fears the Storm.

What we deny ourselves, Just Heaven
Restores with Interest.  Naked, see&mdash;
Naked, thy Humble Friend deserts
The Party of the Great:

Glad Fugitive &mdash; he longs to reach
The Camp of the Contented Few,
Whose Little is Enough &mdash; Enough&mdash;
That Sweeter Word for All!

O Decent Pride!  O truly Lord
Of His Possessions, who still bears
A Soul above 'em!  Richer far
Than all Apulia's Stores,

Heap'd in the crouded Barn, could make
The Mind that covets without End,
And, drinking, thirsts for more &mdash; O Wretch,
In utmost Plenty, Poor!

A Silver Stream, a Silent Grove,
A Summer's Eve, a Small Estate
Still faithful to its Lord:  A Life,
Retir'd from Noise or Care,

Steals thro' the World, with Joys Unknown
To the Profaner Mind; with Joys
Unknown to Crowded Courts; to Peers,
And Sceptred Kings Unknown!

Tho' no Proud Palace loads the Ground,
Or tours into the Sky:  No Carr
With gilded Trappings Gay; behind
Bestruck with Pamper'd Slaves;

Moves Slow in State; nor Costly Wines,
Tokay, Champaigne, or Burgundy,
Nor high Ragouts deceive the Taste,
And propagate Disease.

Yet fair Content My Cottage chears;
Lettice and Pulse my Garden yields:
Plain Food, Soft Ale, or Home-brew'd Wines,
Still crown my Healthful Board.

Thro' fragrant Fields, or spreading Lawns,
Where the Sheep graze and Oxen low,
Or stalks the Stag with Head Erect,
I sometimes Musing rove:

Pleas'd with his Load, sometimes my Pad
Smooth ambles to the Neighbouring Gate,
That opens friendly to receive
The not Unwelcome Guest.

Happy!  who knows himself, and knows
To judge of Happiness; to whom
Wise Heaven, with Kind but Frugal Hand,
Has every Want supply'd.
