O!  from thy Shell, where many a joyless month,
All silent thou hast slept, while WINTER stern,
Shook o'er the trembling world
His iron rod severe&mdash;
Swell forth, soft SPIRIT of the tuneful Harp
EOLIAN! &mdash; Thou, thro' all the cadence sweet,
Whose every note is love,
And sympathy divine.

Lo!  ZEPHYR woos thee &mdash; and the sportive SPRING,
With flowing tresses, interweav'd with flowers,
Returns &mdash; herself has cull'd
From many a fragrant heath:
Thee, too, the VIRGINS wait, in yonder bower,
With wiles, and wit, and roseate dimples sweet,
Touch'd by the tepid AIRS
That wanton wildly round.

O!  with thy mildest movements, melt their hearts
To kindness!  and some favour'd youth be near,
To catch, in whispers breath'd,
Th' assent that makes him blest.
Ah!  then, not Angels emulate the bliss
That must convulse his soul, as deep he feels
The new sensation spread,
The agony of joy.

Thee, sweet ENCHANTRESS!  and thy vocal strain,
Now let me hear, when MORN, with dewy locks,
First climbs the uplands grey,
And listens to the lark:
Or, when mild EVENING mounts her silv'ry car,
Skirted with shadows, and diffuses round
Her balmy breath benign:
What time the pale-ey'd MOON
Lights the blue East, and calls the vagrant mind,
Lost in the turmoils of the tiresome day,
To solitude and peace,
And contemplation pure:&mdash;

Then let me hear thee. &mdash; But, O!  chief attend,
Sweet POWER of MILDEST MOODS!  or whether Morn
Climbs the green uplands, grey,
Or Eve her silv'ry car,
Skirted with shadows round, ascends sublime:&mdash;
Or, all refulgent, from his throne direct.
The bright Sun pours, profuse,
His tide of dazzling day.

Whene'er, amid the changing scenes of life,
Distress is mine, or turbulence and ire,
Beneath their lawless sway,
Inglorious, bend my breast,
O!  then be present! &mdash; For not all the powers
Of modern Music, modulated nice,
Tho' boastful of success,
Can then with thee compare,
Soft SYREN!  whose wild cadence, stealing sweet
O'er the fix'd ear, sooths more the wounded soul,
Than all that envious ART
Or NATURE knows beside.
