Hail, ebon-scepter'd Goddess!  whose approach
The glimm'ring landscape feels, and feeling fades!
Soon as thy dusky veil
Its mantling influence sheds;
What tho' in Sable's mournful garb array'd,
Thou com'st attended by thy airy band;
Thy band a hideous train
Of Elves and fancied Sprites;
What tho' loath'd Darkness her creative wand
Waving around the cred'lous breast alarms,
'Till fancy fav'ring fear,
Each dwarf a giant stalks;
Tho' on her stilly pinions sweeping soft,
Dread Silence 'bout thy throne her vigils keep;
So that the tinkling rill
A thund'ring torrent pours;
Yet art thou not without thy charms, O Night,
Thy solemn charms, which to the musing mind
Joys more substantial yield
Ev'n than the garish morn.
Hark!  from yon distant tower, whose mould'ring domes
The bird of Solitude her dwelling makes,
A deep-ton'd length'ning toil
My list'ning ear assaults:
Loud o'er the lonely dale it rumbling rolls,
Then lost in faint vibrations dies away.
There (if report say true)
Strange things are heard and seen:
Now hollow groans, now scarcely breathing sigh;
Now unlaid spirits, whose ghostly shadows walk
In gory garb array'd,
The passing swains affright;
Whilst starting Fear, by Superstition led,
Hears the charms rattle and the dumb walls speak,
As o'er this haunted scene
With trembling step she steals.
Lo!  where emerging from surrounding clouds,
Thy beauteous queen, O Night!  her silv'ry ray
Athwart yon mountain's brow
In mildest lustre throws!
Ah!  how the re-appearing landscape charms!
How shines its paly softness! &mdash; Thro' the gleam
Yon humble spire I view,
Its humbler villa's pride,
Th' adjacent grove of elms, the cottage tops,
The wide-extending lawns &mdash; the misty hills,
The smooth-meand'ring streams,
All rising, flush'd with smiles.
Beneath thy shade, sweet Night, a pleasing task,
True to th' appointed time the lover flies,
Anxious to meet his fair,
On Expectation's wing.
The prudent guardian, wrongly prudent deem'd,
Their flight suspects not &mdash; Soon they scale the walls,
The vain-withstanding walls,
And triumph in their plot;
Whilst dangers past but serve the make those sweets,
Those stolen sweets, a thousand times more sweet.
Ev'n now while fancy glows,
The Muse her magic warmth
A while retaining &mdash; as the chilly soil
The warmth of Sol's shorn beams a while retains,&mdash;
The lovely Thracian Maid
From Sestos' towers beholds
Forth from the pleasure-smiling dome her lamp,
Love's guiding star, impendent, cast its rays,
Its glimm'ring rays, across
The loudly-bellowing deep,
'Mid whose contending rage the amorous youth
Plunging undaunted, cleaves with pliant limbs
(So wills the Cyprian Queen)
The back-retreating tide;
While she, sweet nymph!  in silent suff'ring hears
The wild waves thund'ring lash the sounding shore;
Nor ceases her alarms,
Those joys, those secret joys, to thee belong,
To thee, O Night, and thy attendant shades,
Whilst lovers thus thy reign,
Thy fav'ring reign, shall bless;
Whilst hoary Time his slow revolving hours,
Bound in thy pond'rous chains, shall pensive lead;
Whilst Melancholy, pale,
Shall woo thee to her arms,
As oft' the lonely cypress shade she seeks,
Where rest the reliques of some much-lov'd friend,
The cold unconscious urn
Bathing with heart-wrung tears;
So long, Inspirer of the serious thought,
Shall Sensibility, Heav'ns choicest gift,
By Contemplation urg'd,
Thy genial charms adore.
