Thee, Happiness!  I sing; thou waking dream,
Thou universal idol of the world,
At whose delusive shrine
Each mortal bends the knee!

Thou ignis fatuus of each anxious mind,
Which, ever follow'd, ever distant prov'st;
Whom, when we think t' attain,
We find a wand'rer still!

Offspring of ever-blooming Hope, endow'd
By man's creative fancy with each bliss,
How various is thy form!
How fleeting, and how vain!

As speaks each wayward passion of each breast,
As paint the ardent wishes of each soul,
Thou art afar beheld,
Such is thy phantom shape.

But, closer view'd, as flies the passing wind,
Or like a bubble bursting in the air,
Or like a rapid thought
That shoots athwart the brain;&mdash;

Or like the light'ning's coruscating flash,
Or like the aspiration of a sigh,
Or like the shadows faint
Of the blast-driven clouds;&mdash;

Or like the circling eddies of the stream,
Or the duration of a day, or year
Of life, of centuries,
Or of the waning earth,

Which, when compar'd to vast Eternity,
Are nothings all; &mdash; thus transient is thy reign!
Thus are thy promis'd joys
The comets of the mind.

In dreams of pow'r thou court'st Ambition's tool;
In pomp of luxury the slave of Pride;
In piles of useless gold
The avaricious breast;&mdash;

In frequent cups of gaily-sparkling wine,
And in the gifts that flow from Pleasure's lap,
His bliss the sectary
Of Epicurus seeks;&mdash;

In warlike fame the hero of the field;
In verdant bays the Muse's darling child;
In constant industry
Thy son, Activity;&mdash;

Whilst, at his ease, remov'd from cares and strife,
From all the galling falsehoods of the world,
In lone retirement
The hermit seeks thy cell;&mdash;

In tilling of his fields the rustic swain;
In deeds of charity the feeling soul;
In Love and Friendship's sweets
The man of social heart;&mdash;

In pious virtuous acts the moralist;
All, all thy presence court, but court in vain.
Where, Happiness, art thou?
On earth no happiness.

Power and state but strew our couch with thorns;
The love of gold excites a thousand fears;
And Dissipation, tho' 'tis dress'd in smiles,
Beneath its flowers hides th' envenom'd snake.
The fame of war's precarious, and but lasts
While conquest gilds the hero's waving crest;
Besides the wounded's cries, the dying's groans,
Its constant toils are foes to Happiness.
The verdant bays are subject to decay,
And snarling critics, like the canker-worm,
Feed on the wealth which binds and author's brow;
While Poverty, in rags, with famish'd mien,
Too often in his garret seeks a home.
Sickness, fatigue, and losses, oft await
The sons of Industry; while the lone man,
With melancholy pall'd, becomes unfit
By long seclusion from the busy world,
To mix again in gay society.
Th' unsteady elements full oft repay
The labours of the field with barrenness.
E'en charity begets ingratitude,
And what's more biting to a feeling mind?
Our wife, our friend, may die; or what is worse,
May prove unfaithful; while the virtuous here
May meet neglect, disdain, and persecution.
Where then dost thou reside, O Happiness!
With the eternal spirits of the just,
Amid the heavenly host,
With angels, and with God!
