Thus Juno, to assembled Gods revealing
The dooms of men:  "Troy, Troy, thy tottering towers;
A lewd and fatal judge,
A stranger harlot-queen,
Shake to the dust.  Aveng'd is now the fraud
Wrought by Laomedon on toiling Gods.
To Pallas, and to me
The nod of fate resigns
The town, the people, and their wily chief.
No more the adulteress boasts her gilded rooms:
Nor Priam's faithless house
Refrains the strife-wont Greeks
By Hector's aid.  The War our broil arous'd,
Cowers o'er their downfall glutted.  Now my wrath
Appeases, nor pursues
With lingering hate the son
Whom unto Mars the Trojan priestess bore.
Let him ascend the light-inwoven seats,
Drain the bright nectar'd cup,
And grace the ranks of gods:
So but wide seas between yon ruins roll,
And his proud Rome.  While banish'd, thrive her sons;
So but on Paris' tomb
The flocks insulting frisk,
And whelps the lioness in Priam's hall.
Climb her proud capitol in lasting strength,
And to the distant Mede
Triumphal teach her laws.
Flow her dread name to every tide-wash'd shore,
That Europe, or that Afric decks with towers,
Along the sea that drinks
The swelling floods of Nile.
Scorn she for gain to dig the rock-womb'd gold;
(Well, were it ever hid!)  least tutor'd so,
She grasps with impious hand,
The spoil of human kind.
Clasp her wide arms the boundaries of earth;
From where the swarthy sons of torrid light
Wilder, to yon pale zone
Where drifts the unmelting snow.
But to the warlike Romans, this, I swear:
If leaning on a frail prosperity,
They, with too pious hand,
Their father's hearths rebuild;
Again shall clap its wings a bird of night
O'er the new Troy; again shall Ate stroll,
Clanking the sword and chain,
Led by the wife of Jove.
If thrice by Phoebus' toil re-rose its wall
Of molten brass, thrice shall my Greeks o'erthrow,
And captive mothers wail
Their sons, their husbands slain."
Cease, Muse; such solemn sounds ill suit thy lip:
Presume to mock the speech of gods no more
Chase the forbidding look,
I love thy brow of smiles.
