Delightful Morn!  whose breath ambrosial fills
With various rich perfumes the new-born air;
Calling forth every flower,
Each flower and op'ning shrub,
That erst beneath the chilly frown of Night
Shrunk fearful, and compress'd their fragrant sweets,
With secret joy thy light,
Thy earliest light I hail,
From the drear womb of Darkness' silent cave,
Gratefully welcoming thy wish'd return.
Thee too whose glimm'ring beam
Yon mountain's topmost brow
Feebly as yet illumes (chasing away
The shadowy forms by trembling fancy wove)
Thy cheering face where first
The Shepherd swain beholds,
As sweetly rising from thine Eastern couch,
Round which stream radiant tints of Iris' hue,
Thee too, resplendent Sun,
Thee too I gladly hail!
Touch'd by thy genial ray each bower among,
On every hawthorn hedge, and lowlier shrub,
The silvery dew dissolves,
Weeping its pearly tears;
While o'er the sparkling lawns, a pleasing sight
Myriads of lustres catch the admiring eye.
Thy smiles, enchanting Morn,
The warbling choir salute,
What time thou com'st in Spring's loose-floating robe,
Or sultry Summer's veil transparent clad,
Pouring from ev'ry spray
Their artless harmony.
Light borne on Zephyr's scarcely-breathing gale,
Re-echoing notes their sprightly notes beget,
'Till all is grateful mirth,
And melody and love.
Beating in many a maze the dewy grass,
Blithe sport the flocks th' empurpled meads along;
Around its careful dam
The bleating lambkin frisks;
Now nibbling crops a while the tender blade,
Now frisks again with harmless glee replete.
Ah!  little victim, oft'
Thy fate compassion mourns.
Now lead me, jocund Nymph!  with speedful step
To yonder forest, whose o'er-arching shade
Thick-twining stoops t' embrace
Its flow'r-embroider'd banks;
Where springs the Violet, the sweet-scented Thyme,
Faint-blushing Roses, Lilac purple-hued,
Woodbine and Jessamines,
And yellow Cowslips bright:
Where o'er the stream reclin'd the Primrose pale
Bends its weak stem, and shrinks at ev'ry breeze;
Or where in plaintive moan,
From its dank oozy bed
The whisp'ring reed, in sadly-soothing sound,
To fancied woe the pitying breast awakes,
As 'long its sedgy shores
Soft Melancholy breathes!
Be mine, sweet Morn!  when Summer's suns illume,
Be mine the cot near which some gentle stream
Its smoothly-chequer'd wave
In silv'ry current winds,
Or sports in mazy ringlets thro' the grove;
Or thro' the silent valley pensive strays,
Ling'ring in calm delight
Its ozier bowers among:
There, with the eye of mild Philosophy,
'Mid charms which Nature strews with lib'ral hand,
In contemplation rapt,
Admiring let me gaze!
