Two hardy tars, who many storms had seen,
And both with Rodney, Hood, and Drake had been,
As chance wou'd have it, happen'd once to meet,
No matter where, 'twas in the open street.
Jack, neat and trim, was dress'd in jacket blue,
Strip'd vest, and trowsers of the whitest hue;
A gold bound hat hung o'er his ruddy face,
While a black neckcloth, ty'd with careless grace,
Dependent wav'd &mdash; his shoes were neatly cut,
And a large buckle cover'd half his foot.
His pliant switch too dangled in his hand,
And meeting Will, he made a sudden stand.
So dress'd was Will, save that he breeches wore
Of blackest velvet, stuff'd with yellow ore;
Of youthful mien, and of an honest heart,
He oft on board had acted well his part.

Jack first address'd his messmate with What cheer?
How goes it, Will, where hast thou been this year!
I wonder'd where thou, honest friend, couldst be;
I thought thee dead, or gone again to sea.

WILL.
Why hearty &mdash; hearty, just from Portsmouth come,
Our ship's paid off, and here's a swinging sum.
[Slapping his breeches.]

JACK.
O happy Will!  who hast got gold in store,
Whilst I, my friend, must put to sea for more;
Mine &mdash; mine, alas!  is now run devilish low,
Last night I got a most confounded blow.

WILL.
Come tell me how, to fret is all in vain,
A heart of oak would ne'er, my boy, complain;
No whining cant &mdash; I long to hear thy tale;
Then with a can of flip I'll thee regale.

JACK.
Hear it thou shalt &mdash; but first one juicy quid,
I'll thank thee, Will, then do as I am bid.&mdash;

WILL.
With all my heart &mdash; my 'bacco-box I'll ope,
Here, take it all, there's more in yonder shop.

JACK.
Last night, half-seas, I steer'd to see the play,
With Poll in tow, and made but little way,
Few knots an hour I run, yet at the last,
In Drury's gall'ry I my anchor cast.
When I had got myself, stow'd in a birth,
And just prepar'd t' indulge in fun and mirth,
Who should I spy, but Tom, my old ship-mate,
Moor'd head and stern, along side saucy Kate,
Yo hip!  yo hip!  I cried, what cheer?  what cheer?
You seem like me, 'midst dang'rous gulphs to steer;
Ne'er mind the weather, if your bottom's sound;
Some how at last, you'll get on solid ground.
Tom took a quid, and scarce a word he spoke,
Nor seem'd to laugh as usual at my joke,
Much chang'd he was from what he us'd to be,
Who once could talk'd and laugh'd with greatest glee.
Of rare old gin, on this I took a cup,
And saw with joy the main-sheet now haul'd up.
Such a fine sight I never saw before;
Save when I heard brave Rodney's cannon roar!
I saw fine folks, all clad in silk and gold,
And stow'd in births above, and in the hold.
Rare wenches too, with streamers red or blue,
But none like Poll, none had her rosy hue!
Well entertain'd with music and the play,
When all was done, I strove to get away;
But in the crowd, whilst Poll began to curse,
Some lubber slily stole my silken purse.
All this, dear Will, I could with ease have born,
Had not my time-piece from me too been torn,
With shining chain, and seals and trinkets store,
That cost, in whole, six guineas; ay, and more.
Enrag'd I was, to be so crossly us'd,
Whilst faithless Poll, my kindness now refus'd:
The saucy jade, because she saw me poor,
No longer could my company endure&mdash;
Ungrateful she!  for all my favors past,
And many a present given her, first and last!&mdash;
White petticoats &mdash; a cap &mdash; a cloak and gown&mdash;
I tow'd her too, to see each sport in town,
To Sadler's Wells &mdash; the Circus &mdash; ev'ry where;
Yet thus was I repaid for all my care!

WILL.
Well, Jack, may I a biscuit never crack,
And may I basely, fly Mounseer's attack:
May I for ever from my quarters run,
And dread to see the muzzle of a gun,
If thou'rt not welcome to a share of mine&mdash;
Here's guineas, Jack; pray take them &mdash; eight or nine.

JACK.
I thank thee kindly, but I've firmly swore,
To stay no longer dangling here on shore;
One shining piece, howe'er, dear Will, I'll take,
And when I can, a recompence I'll make.

WILL.
Ay &mdash; take it &mdash; welcome &mdash; may it do thee good!
Thou oft with me, at the same gun hast stood;
Oft hast thou shar'd the fare of the same mess,
And scorn'd to flinch in battle or distress.
Loud storms may roar, and bois'trous winds may blow,
But still me heart shall feel a brother's woe!
