Hail!  Orb magnificent, whose lucid beams
Illume with glory the cerulean sky;
By whose refulgent light
My feeble pencil moves!
Propitious prove; nor hide in cloudy veil
The just circumf'rence of thy golden form;
But aid my youthful muse
To hymn thy lofty praise.
When thro' the vast &mdash; the boundless space I gaze,
Which thou, in thy nocturnal journey tread'st,
With silent majesty,
Mid trains of waiting stars&mdash;
Divine confusion fills my wond'ring soul,
And sweet amazement meets my heav'n-ward eye.
Around thy face benign,
What countless glories beam,
Spreading a splendid ocean o'er the skies!&mdash;
Or, if below, o'er nature's wide domain,
I take an humbler view,
What scenes of beauty rise!
Creation, in an amber vest array'd,
Displays, in silence, her dew-spangled works.
Not ev'n a zephyr moves
The slender flow'r or tree:
No wanton gale "disturbs the deep serene,"&mdash;
No noisy clamours "pierce the night's dull ear,"
Nor sound &mdash; save distant rill,
Or harmony of birds
Which nightly sing. &mdash; O'er yonder dewy vale,
Thy lamp, O CYNTHIA!  sheds its friendly ray,
And shews the flocks and herds
Promiscuously at feed;
Or folded, sleeping on the glist'ning lawn.
A harmless lamb just then sad Silence 'woke
From her soft, peaceful nap,
With trembling bleat &mdash; again!
Sweet Echo answers from a distant cave.&mdash;
Far, o'er the lofty hills, and sparry rocks,
Whose shining tops thy beam
Embronzes o'er with gold,
Th' enraptur'd eye sees many a cottage rise,
Where sleep the sons of toil in sweet repose.&mdash;
Now contemplation spreads
Her heav'n-ascending wings,
And sheds her magick influence o'er the mind.
With cooling dews refresh'd, unnumber'd flow'rs
Spontaneous around
Their balmy breaths exhale:
Sweet-burthen'd, Zephyr, from a woodbine bow'r,
Slow passing, sighs, and drops his pilfer'd store.
On devious walks neat shorn,
With partial shades embrown'd,
The glow-worms light their little golden lamps
Mid evanescent, rival gems of dew.&mdash;
Soft! &mdash; then a gentle breeze
Sigh'd thro' the stately pine,
Which shook each tree, and plant, and tend'rer flow'r.
Alas!  a sable, broad, impervious cloud
Moves like a shrouded fleet,
'Neath heaven's starry space,
And wraps in darkness my celestial theme,
Whence light and genius flow &mdash; Now cease my Muse.
