Friend John, 'tis moore than twenty years agoo,
Sunce you an' I, an' others, not a vew,
Ware ploymeates wild; and still methenk I zee
The zun-burn'd zircle, rompsing roun' our tree.
Whare are the' now&mdash; Dear heart? &mdash; Why zome to town,
An' zome to zea, and zome to lands unknown,
Ha' wandred vur, and left us here behine&mdash;
And now the task to peart wi' you is mine!
I know ye'll zay &mdash; "Why WILL, so heasty now?
I thote thease cares wou'd never gloute your brow;
You're younge an' lusty &mdash; you can zow an' reap,
You understond the management o' sheep;
You meak good hurdles, from the brushet boughs,
Can guide the zull, or dreve the bell-team ploughs."
Aall this is true &mdash; but look'ee here's the kease&mdash;
When my wold vather draps, than draps our lease;
Vor the yonge 'squire wou'd ne'er a lease renew&mdash;
Becaase he had a better thing in view:
Zoon aall your little varms his own wool be;
Zoo I'll not stay thich cruel days to zee;
When thease poor cottages mus' aal come down,
An' ev'ry orchit, ev'ry gearden groun',
Into his park he drow'd, whose peales shall run,
Vur as yan stream that glitters in the zun.
Zometimes, thenks I, how hard my kease wou'd be,
If I, from zummer-day's long leabors vree,
In future time (a grote man sleave!) shou'd come,
To view the spot where stood my neative whome,
O!  how my heart wou'd yache, while I shou'd zay&mdash;
"Whare is the green on which we us'd to play?
Whare is the hovel, which wi' music rung,
When there the merry buttoners zat and zung?
An' I, delighted, gi'd my greedy ear,
The Cruel Geardener's Tragedy to hear&mdash;
Sweet Alle Crocker's praise, that charm'd the land,
And beauties o' the lovely Peggy Band;
While often vrom the eyes o' rousey Nance,
Or gigling Jeane, wou'd dart a roguish glance,
Answer'd wi' sheepish looks, an' wishful leers,
That spoke, at oonce, my passion an' my vears."
I zay no moore &mdash; my heart goo'th pit-a-pit,
Whene'er I thenk o' thich a time as that!
Then, sunce thease happy days be gwon an' past,
An' cares an' troubles comin' on zoo vast,
Who, while h'as lags and leems to carr'n awoy,
To zee his porish ruin'd wou'd wish to thenk of I&mdash;
Mahap, then, vollyen me, bid your last friends good b'wy'e.
