'Tis sweet to view the daylight, sweet to breathe
The wandering air of heaven, where dwell the free
Whom chosen rulers guide
By wise and equal laws.
And to such homes shall courage love to fray,
Athwart the weapon'd slaves of tyranny,
A broad triumphal road.
* * * ye brother souls,
By love yet closer than by nature knit,
For human liberty and human rights
Who in your beauty bled
Beneath the approving eye
Of that great woman, Roland's blameless wife,
Who shared and hallow'd your untimely doom&mdash;
Ducos!  Fonfrede!
Stoop from the airy halls,
Whence with the martyr'd brave ye love to mark
The generous few by suffering virtue fired&mdash;
Your equal rivals greet.
Two brother souls ascend,
Whose grave the tears of Erin long shall wet,
Whose name the kneeling patriot shall invoke,
While on his sword he swears
The oath to freedom dear.
Their friendship must no common grave entomb,
Their monument no tyrant's cringeling rear,
But hers the Muse's hand,
Which dares with throning power
Wrestle the strife of ages, proudly clasp
Whom that oppresses, and engird their brows
With glittering crowns of praise
Wove of unfading beams.
Not yet the great retributress has closed
The book of fate &mdash; her unhurl'd lightnings glow,
And on the neck of force
One day shall Justice tread.
The stone-piled towers of feudal violence
Are fallen amid the fields they overawed:
And the free peasant treads
Their scarcely heeded dust.
And these new prison-walls, where mightier wrong
Withers its foes, shall not a nation's wrath
Dash into ruin too,
And storm-winds strow their rack?
Lo!  who are you?  Unveil'd, of lofty port,
A gray-hair'd matron leads
Some pale, angelic form.
On, with calm step, down to the dungeon door&mdash;
It creaks &mdash; no, not to call you to your doom.
Henry!  thy wife is near,
Grasping thy mother's hand,
Who brings a parting blessing &mdash; on those lips
Which to thy dying father's pleading eye
Promised to live for you&mdash;
Ere her heart breaks.
"Sons, 'twas for this I bore you &mdash; die as men,
To whom your father's country and your offspring
Deserved to owe the good
Ye struggled to obtain.
Thy wife, son, cannot speak &mdash; she loves thy children;
And in her poverty shall thank her God,
That thou hast boldly dared
Devote them for thy country.
Thou needest, John, thy mother's counsel not.
If the few weeks that, ere we meet, roll by,
Worthy of thee I spend,
Well pleased mine eyes shall close."
