'Twas on the Day that Bosworth Field was won,
And Glos'ter fell, and Richmond wore the Crown,
When as I sat revolving in my Mind,
The Chiefs descended from two Houses join'd,
A balmy Slumber with a sweet Surprize,
Stole soft and silent o'er my yielding Eyes;
Fancy, officious every Part to act,
Or Nature's Landscapes, or historic Fact,
A Bower had built profusely gay and bright,
With all the Beauty that can take the Sight,
Not more enchanting that Elysian Place
Where good Aeneas saw the Julian Race,
An Area soon with mystic Signs was spread,
Diversified with Roses White and Red;
Thither a Sybil call'd me from the Throng
To mark the various Figures move along:
My awe-struck Memory never shall forget
Their Forms, their Names, their Numbers, and their State.

A Robber first, with holy Plunder fraught,
Whose less'ning Bags were Gold, were Dust, were Nought.

A Youth came next, who charm'd with ev'ry Grace,
As Angels good, an O as swift his Pace.

A Fury then, with more disorder'd Haste,
Past by, and dealt Destruction as she past.
Her ruffled Garments dropt with Martyr's Gore,
And in her Hand a flaming Torch she bore.

Not so the heavenly Maid who next arose,
Admir'd by all, tho' terrible to Foes;
Whose Aim was nobler, and whose Speed was less,
Who rose to triumph, and who stay'd to bless;
A Phoenix she, that peerless liv'd and dy'd,
Nor left a Race that her great Loss supply'd.

Yet came there to fulfil her last Command,
The wisest Animal of Nature's Hand,
A tame, a peaceful, tho' a wily Fox,
Who never slew, but only fleec'd the Flocks.

Soon as he earth'd a Pelican arose,
By Friends deserted, and pursu'd by Foes;
In Both his brave Contempt of Life was shewn,
Who for the Good of Others gave his Own.

Here all methought was Dark!  at length appear
A Goat lascivious, and a hunted Deer.

The Sybil paus'd &mdash; and her sage Art to prove,
Declar'd that These would different Passions move,
Our useless Pity One, and One our lasting Love.

Now rose a sweet Carnation's silken Flow'r,
Fruitless, yet fair, the Beauty of an Hour,
For poisonous Eurus came &mdash; its bloomy Pride,
That unexpected rose, as quickly dy'd.

Next seem'd to dart from Heaven, a spotless Dove,
Who dropt an Olive-Branch, the Type of Love;
Then all too sudden flew amid the Spheres,
And shone a Star upon the World in Tears.

The Visionary Crowd that gaz'd below
All wept in in Dream, and gave a Loose to Woe;
Britannia's self abandon'd to Despair,
Her azure Mantle tore, and sea-green Hair:
Deep Sorrow wak'd me from th' unfinisht Scene,
Eternally to mourn a matchless Queen.
