Whilst Spring's young verdure and unnumber'd sweets,
And brightly-beaming Summer's radiant hour,
Call forth th' enamour'd strain
Of many a poet's praise,

Be thou, bright Autumn, my selected theme,
And, fav'ring the attempt of Fancy, pour,
Profuse as o'er the world,
Thy richness through my song.

So may I tell of thy maturer charms,
Of hope and expectation realized
By all the varied fruits
Thy golden season gives.

The blossom that perfumes the gale of Spring,
And rears in youthful loveliness its head,
Can captivate the sight,
And please the scent alone;

But 'tis for thy maturing hand to give
The added charms of flavour and of use,
And bid the senses join
In one united feast.

To these unfavour'd regions of the north,
E'en here thy rich munificence extends,
And cultur'd gardens teem
With all thy choicest store;

But chief, spread far o'er France's fertile fields,
And fair Italia's deeply-verdant hills,
Fann'd by the southern breeze
That cheers those happier climes,

Thy goodness, in a boundless vintage pour'd,
Bids pleasure reign in many a peasant's heart,
And fills the cup that cheers
The vineyard's festive groupe.

Nor less, fair Season, do thy beauties please
The eye of Taste, as o'er thy varied mass
Of fleeting light and shade
It casts a painter's glance;

Admires thy sun-set's deeply-blushing tint,
Or, chang'd its palely-beaming silver hue,
The moonlight's golden gleam
On yellow foliage fall.

Ah!  still, bright Autumn, let me stray among
Thy shades, ere yet the hand of Winter sweep
The last discolour'd leaf
That lingers in the woods.

Ere yet thy lessen'd twilight is no more,
And wintry darkness, with obscuring sway,
Usurp thy milder reign
Along the ev'ning sky,

Still let me breathe the softness of the air,
Nor, looking on the ocean's peaceful plain,
Anticipate the storm
That soon must riot there.

For much-beloved is the changing scene
Thy hour exhibits, and in sad delight
I gaze upon the charms,
And sigh to see them fade.

Nor are thy beauties felt by me alone,
For many a glowing heart, in many a land,
Shall annually tell
The story of thy praise.
