Dear, O my lyre!  art thou to me,
Tho' fools may scorn, and friends may chide me,
Dear is thy simple melody,
Tho' Commerce-toiling sons deride me!
O lyre!  they little know thy charms!
They know not how thy music warms
The soul, whom poesy's fine glow
From each mean act sublimes, from every passion low.

Dear, O my lyre!  art thou to me,
Dear above all the world's vain treasure!
Dear in the hour of misery,
For then thou art my only pleasure!
I strike thy chords &mdash; Care flies away,
And Rapture darts her cheering ray.
As, 'midst the storm, a transient beam
Shines o'er the gloomy plain, or glitters on the stream.

When Fortune's favour'd sons I see,
I envy not their noise and folly,
Thy strings are dearer far to me,
Swept by the hand of Melancholy!
Dearer to me the pensive hour,
When, yielding to thy sacred pow'r,
I feel thy thrilling sounds impart
A glow, that never warm'd the proud or selfish heart.

Tho' doom'd 'midst sordid souls to dwell,
My toil the hour of ev'ning closes;
Hope smiles &mdash; I strike the chorded shell&mdash;
Its music every grief composes:
Or bending o'er some tale of woe,
The while its notes more solemn flow,
I, for the child of sorrow moan,
And 'midst another's woes, forget to feel my own.

Oft too upon the Sabbath morn,
While merrily the bells are playing,
A man "gloom-pamper'd," and forlorn,
I, 'mid some rustic scene, am straying;
But haply if around I see
Content's bland smile, and artless glee,
I sigh no more, but gaze upon the scene
With heart alive to joy, and gladness in my mien.

For who can see the blue-edg'd hill,
The streamlet thro' the valley flowing,
The humble cot, the hamlet still,
The trees in spring-tide beauty glowing;
O who can gaze on Nature's charms,
Nor feel the sight his bosom warms?
O who can gaze on such as scene as this
Nor feel all care forgot, nor feel a heavenly bliss?

When, in the crowded city's haunts,
The cares of wealth's low sons perplex me,
When vice in robe of splendour flaunts,
And haughty pride and folly vex me,
Then, lyre!  in thy sweet sounds I find
A solace to my troubled mind!
Soft o'er thy strings a voice from heav'n
Tells me "To virtue's sons sublimer joys are giv'n."

"Mistaken man," it seems to say,
Tho' vice seems prospering around thee,
"Tho' folly lives its little day,
And pride and envy's scoffings wound thee,
Beyond the grave the soul shall rise,
And spring exulting to the skies,
There Misery's injur'd sons shall find
In Abraham's bosom peace, in heav'n a bliss refin'd."

Then dear, my lyre!  art thou to me,
If those the pleasures thou canst give me,
No more I'll sigh in misery,
No more shall vice and envy grieve me!
"Spirit of Spenser!"  shall the mind
By Poesy's pure glow refin'd,
Stoop to the grov'lling cares of Mammon's son,
Toil for the bauble wealth, labour to be undone?

Spirit of Spenser!  no! &mdash; tho' born
Whilst doom'd on this low scene to languish,
(Midst cold neglect, and want and scorn)
To feel their bosoms torn with anguish!
Yet have the Muses' sons their joys,
Which not e'en death's fell pow'r destroys,
For theirs, O happy thought!  's immortal fame,
The soul's unquenched fire, the never-dying name!
