SCENE &mdash; LANGOLLEN VALE.
Hail!  grand defender of thy guardian clime,
Parent of commerce!  whose majestic brow
O'erlooks the neighbouring vale,
And mountain heights sublime.

View, with thy reverend eye, how distant far,
Those mountains, vales, and villages outstretch
Their varied landscapes, cloth'd
In Nature's beauteous web.

See rivers, winding round yon craggy rock,
Which holds thy base, and mark their wanton maze,
As wild they roll their course,
Tumultuous to the sea.

Nor view, unheeded, yon majestic pile,
Sublimely awful, which, for many an age,
In vain has oft alarm'd
The smiling vales beneath.

But if thy soul delight in softer scenes,
Those scenes are thine!  for who in truth can boast
Such beauteous damsels sweet
As dance around thy shade.

The hyblean kingdom, in thy massy trunk
Their wintry stores with industry preserve,
And every eve return,
Surcharg'd with odorous fumes.

Here too the frenzied poet loves to stray,
To muse in solitude thy shades beneath,
And tune his trembling lyre
To scenes of fancied woe.

And from her mantle when the morning throws
Illusive gems, to deck the verdant plain,
His lyre is seen to hang
Upon thy pendant boughs.

Ah what can equal magic sounds which flow
Illusive gems, to deck the verdant plain,
His lyre is seen to hang
Upon thy pendant boughs.

Ah what can equal magic sounds which flow
From him who, gifted with poetic fire,
Makes mountains, forests ring
With love or thought sublime?

Here too is fixt, thy chequered leaves among,
Th' Aeolian harp, that oft transports the soul
To grief, to joy, to love,
At every gale's control.

And when the loveliest of all birds, so sweet
Pours forth at ever her seldom-varying theme:
Ah heedless can'st thou hear
Her soft, her mellow tongue?

Can'st thou behold, with ought but pure delight,
Love-ey'd Themira on her lover's breast,
With eyes of liquid gems,
As in love's streams they swim?

O no!  thy form was moulded for the great,
The grand, sublime!  but yet thy generous soul
Delights in those that please,
And mix the sweet with strong.

For from the strong have issued honey'd sweet:
And though thy trunk will carry distant war,
To feed the pride of kings,
Thy attributes are mild.
