But you tell me that to shine as a wit, is a jest,
That one grain of low cunning's worth a tun of the rest
To succeed in the world, and that prudence and sense,
Secure a man fame, and friendship and pence;
Whilst ill-fated genius you're ready to swear,
Builds chimaeras and castles aloft in the air:
And I'm tempted to think prudence better by half,
Than wit, and a knack at making folks laugh.
Great men use a bard, as rakes use a whore,
When their end is obtain'd, they'll see her no more:
Thus to poets like me, some kind modern patron,
Gives his beef and his port for joking and flatt'ring;
But when we retire, he feels no concern,
If we snore on a bulk, or sleep in a barn.
Few are able or willing, like Dyson I fear,
To allow a poor author three hundred a year:
Or few will be found, tho' I'm loth to observe it,
Very few, who like Akenside, richly deserve it.
Come then, common sense, be a friend to an elf,
Who alas is a foe to no man but himself:
When the fever of gaming possesses his soul,
And love irresistible proffers the bowl,
When fashion and taste whisper both in his ear,
To live like a man with three thousand a year,
Tho' his elegant ardors and wishes to curse,
He has scarce ever more than ten pounds in his purse;
When Bacchus and Venus, thy poet invite,
Do thou jog his elbow to wish them good night:
When mahametan White is soaring due East,
On the wings of poor Badcock who dy'd in the West;
(Tho' Gabriel neglecting his Bath pater-noster,
Swears that White is himself an Arabian impostor;)
When an ideot or rank is pretending to chatter,
Of learning and taste, yet knows nought of the matter;
When Cumberland fancies the drama his glory,
And stuffs his observers with old Grecian story;
When arm'd at all points great Bellendine Parr,
'Gainst Curtis's zeal wages classical war,
Of disputes long forgot, will be sifting the refuse,
And republish old pamphlets, for the sake of a preface,
Excell all your Warburtons, Jortins and Hurds,
In sonorous expression, and terrible words:
Teach me then my new guide more precious than ruby
To nod, smile, and bow, on each drivelling booby,
Let the roughness of satire then smoothly be fill'd,
And preferment shall call me her favorite child.
Common sense wou'd teach Edmund when scolding the house,
Not to sink from sublime, to the skip of a louse;
Was it sense that made Gibbon obscenities quote?
And put them in Latin by way of a note.
Did it make him praise Julian who threw out such shabby taunts,
And boast of his beard with many inhabitants?
Did it teach our historian to collect from his stores,
That Constantine rais'd a revenue on whores?
And declare with a grave philosophical meekness,
Seduction and rape, and amiable weakness?
But adieu to these tribes, from joke I'll be parting,
Since you frown at satirical hints, my dear Warton,
And advise me to study, in White, Blair, and Jortin,
And instead of abusing great men in my letters,
Like you get preferment by flatt'ring my betters:
Or the cudgels take up against Gibbon unchristian,
Under mild Horseley's banners, that learned Philistian,
Who arrows polemic so keenly doth try a
'Gainst the grand innovator un-Priestly Goliah.
I've try'd all these arts 'till invention's extinguish'd,
Call'd Moor independent, and North a great linguist,
Said their brethren the bishops were one great example,
Of piety, learning, and charity ample;
I have rail'd against schism, prais'd Grenville for wit,
I have bullied with Thurlow, preach'd morals with Pitt;
I've attack'd a French writer, who, neglecting his beads,
Observes (while he scatters heretical seeds)
Bishops shorten commandments, but lengthen their creeds.
All this I have done, and what's my reward?
To preach fast a-sleep half Faringdon ward,
To each once a week the Church-warden's mutton,
Bear the rascal's coarse jokes, and flatter a glutton;
Hear his wife and his daughter retail city wit,
While Miss is so "narvous," she can't eat a bit;
Tho' I know all the time, spite of mincing and munching,
She has eat fowl and ham by the pound for a luncheon:
Tempted strong by her cash to take for a wife,
What's sure to torment me the rest of my life:
Thus for sad nasty mixtures, to doctors we send,
Tho' the stomach revolts, yet our habits they mend.
Thus to starve as a curate, I my life must devote,
Or marry a woman who's just like a goat:
Whose beard on her chin grows so shockingly high,
That she wants a sharp razor much oft'ner than I;
Her mother's soft whispers, as she helps me to gravy,
"I really imagine our Polly wou'd have you."
I once was in love, but how the time alter,
Now Hymen's silk noose, looks to me like a halter;
Must I, once remark'd for an elegant wish,
From turbot and salmon, sit down to salt fish?
Must I, once so blest by the Manciple's daughter,
Who amongst Oxford bucks made such a terrible slaughter?
Must I, who have rifled a bosom of snow,
At last feed in London on liver and crow?
Must I, who admir'd a delicate skin,
Bed and board with a woman as ugly as sin?
A monster, a scarecrow, by night and by day,
To freeze all desire, fright passion away:
Who serves her poor face (O that cruel small pox)
As great auctioneers serve a vile country box;
E'er the day of the sale opens, ev'ry effort is try'd,
With whitewash and plaister, the mud-wall to hide,
Yet the bidders all find, tho' ply'd well with tokay,
The pleasure ground boggy, and the chimnies all smoky.
The life of a peasant far pleasanter proves,
Contentment and health with the woman he loves,
Tho' fortune denies him ragouts and rich treats,
Delight gives a zest to the morsel he eats,
He awakes undisturb'd by ennui or pain,
To charms which a monarch wou'd sigh for in vain;
The vigor of health inspirits each kiss,
While Cupid and Hymen both hallow the bliss.
Such once were my dreams, when my mind us'd to rove,
On the arrow of Cupid, and Venus's dove;
Is there not cause enough for a man to be sorry at,
But the subject we'll quit, now for you Mr. LAUREAT:
You remember I promis'd I'd take shortly the freedom,
To send you instructions, wou'd you deign but to read 'em.
I have sent them at last, but at Trinity College,
You are so full of antiques, and of old gothic knowledge,
Of knights-fees, of priests, of old books of mass,
Of old frescoed walls, and old painted glass;
Of devoting your time to black letter'd nonsense,
Which to read or to write has been given up long since.
As if it imported three half farthing candles,
Whether Alfred was christen'd, or his daughters wore sandals;
If the heel of Achilles was imperfectly dipt,
Or if Milton, at Oxford, is the last who was whipt;
Tho' Johnson was try'd, like a friend to our church,
To prove the republican tasted of birch;
Or to find by a lucky inquisitive knack,
That Augustus had never a shirt to his back:
That Zenobia's eyes were black as a sloe,
That she scolded Longinus when he trod on her toe;
That queen Cleopatra was a sweet charming singer,
Had a mole on her neck, and a crooked fore-finger;
That RICHARD the Third, whom we all so abuse,
Was a good sort of man as ever wore shoes.
On subjects like these while you're solemnly preaching,
I presume on your patience, and venture on teaching:
But least by my verse, I the theme shou'd disgrace,
My doggrel I'll quit, and alter my pace.

INSTRUCTIONS TO THE LAUREAT.
When with your annual ode you next resort,
Wou'd you for once but warble truth at court;
By truth I mean, not base malignant rhymes,
That slander kings, and villify the times,
That injure humble merit, patient and meek,
And force the tear down woman's lovely cheek,
With coarse invective the rude page adorn,
And hold misfortune up to public scorn.
Now our lov'd king whose fate made nations groan,
Is firmly seated on fair reason's throne,
Now let thy laurel'd Muse serenely gay,
Pour truth's choice gifts on this auspicious day,
Then future times thy praises shall rehearse,
And hail thee more than a mere man of verse.
For Norman minstrelsy, and ivy'd towers,
Knight-errant tales, and Spenser's fairy bowers,
In dulcet notes, and harmony divine,
Let admonition point thy moral line,
Let these great truths, the courtier's chat o'erwhelm;
"A king of parties rules but half his realm,
Or whig or tory let true merit be,
The only badge of worthiness to thee,
Possest of that, tho' not a single vote,
Cherish the stranger in a thread-bare coat.
'Tis not to view a fleet with sails unfurl'd,
Or nightly trace the planetary world,
'Tis not with trifling mechanism to play,
And waste in happy nicknacks, half the day,
'Tis not with servants to throw off restraint,
Hear Siddons read, and teach good West to paint;
To fast and pray, to roll th' uplifted eye,
Are what the veriest bigot can supply;
'Tis not to tempt by pageantry and glare,
The mobs huzza, the crowds unmeaning stare,
In these the bays from thee are easy won,
By pray'r and fast the bigot Philip shone,
And while his Belgic regions flow'd with blood,
A fawning clergy call'd him great and good.
In acts like these thy fame can never live,
For these are proofs that any man cou'd give.
What tho' the nations hastily complies,
With frequent messages, and large supplies:
Tho' often craving, still so odd your fate,
You beg of bankrupts, yet accumulate.
Thus some young heir whom wealthy sires have left,
Of no one gift but common sense bereft,
Thoughtless and gay expensive arts explores,
With glitt'ring gamblers, and Italian whores;
Newmarket bets, election contests dire,
And dissipation set his soul on fire;
At last reflection comes when all is spent,
And posts him quickly to the Continent;
As he departs, the steward makes his bow,
Of all his goods and chattels master now.
Your royal offspring, we admit, demand
Your soft solicitude and rearing hand,
Yet subjects are your children, who obey,
And claim your tenderest love as well as they:
What if for us you had unlock'd your store,
And rich yourself, had spar'd the real poor;
Left us untax'd a short liv'd peace to prove,
You have no cause to doubt your people's love.
Survey thy land with pity's melting eyes,
Devour'd with impost, taxes, and excise.
Feel for their woes, thy private savings give,
Struggling with want in misery they live,
Except the chosen few, in affluence proud,
Who fly to London's fascinating crowd,
Leaving the hapless villager a prey
To pain and hunger through the tedious day.
To Cam and Isis turn a searching eye,
On either stands a university,
Where old abuse supports her drowzy reign,
And reason cries reform, but cries in vain:
There raw from school the beardless fresh-man runs,
To dress and freedom, sing-song, wine and duns.
Pleasure's allurements he at first repels,
But the bowl mantles, and his pulse rebels;
Ungovern'd here, a copious store he lays,
Of pangs repentant for his future days.
Tutors and proctors all in ruin join,
They dare not frown, who help to drink his wine;
His eyes old coins instead of bibles search,
Hume and Voltaire prepare him for the church;
At length amended by affliction's rod,
The man of sin becomes a man of God.
A vacancy proclaim'd to ardent hopes,
A lonely fellow he no longer mopes,
The tests elaborate, ensnaring creeds,
Oppress'd with debt, he signs, but never reads;
Hastes to that living he hath purchas'd dear,
And life devotes to doubt, suspence and fear.
Next view that church in which thou art supreme,
Where bishops slumber, deans and chapters dream,
No airy visions theirs, like luckless bards,
They dream of gold, and wake to rich rewards;
Whilst those who labour most are paid the worst,
The curate thin with holy drudg'ry curst,
Trembling, with hat in hand, he sees from far,
The mitred prelate in his splendid car;
And hateful tythes from brawny labour tear,
The hard-earn'd morsel of the scanty year.
Here a few weeks the pluralist may sport,
But spends his happier hours at cards and court,
Leaving his curate to the rustic taunt,
Against church livings he must ever want.
Fanatics, infidels, and tythe-men's jars,
The parish fill with hatred, vice and wars.
Yet absentees are not of ills the worst,
Oppress'd by residents, are doubly curst;
Behold yon pars'nage, where a pallisade,
And new made fash o'erlook the border'd glade;
Amidst his flock, of ills to fill their cup,
The rector lives, he lives and eats them up:
His rev'rence hear, in churchmen's rights how loud,
Deep learn'd in modus, and his glebe well plough'd;
The rector see, well skill'd in price of corn,
Do sense and learning his arch'd brow adorn?
He was at college every scholar's scorn:
But faith untainted orthodox supplies
The want of other christian qualities.
What volumes those which claim his constant looks?
No doubt a bible, and some godly books;
A small mistake, look nearer, you'll discern,
Blackstone, a Tract on Tythes, and Justice Burn:
His WORSHIP dread, by his commands abide,
The laws of God and man are on his side:

HERE THE POET TAKES OCCASION TO RAISE HIS VOICE AGAINST UNITING THE JUSTICE OF PEACE WITH THE CLERGYMAN, A CUSTOM HE OBSERVES DAILY GAINING GROUND, BUT FRAUGHT WITH SERIOUS EVILS, AND TOO OFTEN ARMING THE LITTLE TYRANT OF HIS PARISH WITH DANGEROUS AND IRRESISTIBLE POWER; THE LAWS OF GOD AND MAN ARE CALLED IN TO SUPPORT HIM; BESIDES, THE PALM OF THE DIVINE, BECOMES BY THIS MEANS  FREQUENTLY TARNISHED, BY THE GREASY PAW OF THE SMUGGLER AND THE PREACHER.

Around his house the scowling smugglers lag,
To leave the hare, or drop the monthly keg:
Like old inquisitors, who preach'd the world,
He to the bible adds a two-edg'd sword:
Him if on earth his gentle Saviour sees,
Who mildly came dispensing joy and ease,
He scarce will think a minister of peace.
His furious tenets charity confound,
While Athanasian curses echo round.
Martyr of vice, and ruddy with the bowl,
He ev'ry Lent still damns his neighbour's soul;
And tho' religion, heav'nly maid came down,
To soothe our sorrows with a heav'nly crown,
He turns this manna the Almighty sent,
To curses, tyranny, and punishment.
His deeds, his vain profession clearly prove,
Forgot that new, that best command, to love.
And can we wonder that from guides like these,
Who from religion banish christian peace,
The crowd misled shou'd turn their fickle eyes,
To superstition, rant, and mockeries?
These points demand thy care my royal sire,
Reform in these, thy people all desire,
Except the sleek ecclesiastic moth,
Who will desert thee in the day of wrath;
These and a servile, base, insidious tribe,
With statesman's quibbles wou'd thy reason bribe,
These hoary errors keep at any rate,
Calling religion, a mere wheel of state.
Reform, my sire, shall give thee lasting fame,
And Patriot King shall be thy future name."
