O Goddess, on whose steps attend
Pleasure and laughter-loving health,
White mantled peace with olive wand,
Young joy, and diamond-scepter'd wealth,
Blyth plenty with her loaded horn,
With science, bright ey'd as the morn,
In Britain, which, for ages past,
Has been thy choicest darling care,
Who mad'st her wise, and strong, and fair;
May thy blest blessings ever last.

For thee the pining pris'ner mourns,
Depriv'd of food, of mirth, of light;
For thee pale slaves, to gallies chain'd,
That ply tough oars from morn to night;
Thee the proud sultan's beauteous train,
By eunuchs guarded, weep in vain,
Tearing the roses from their locks;
And Guinea's captive kings lament,
By christian lords to labour sent,
Whipt like the dull, unfeeling ox.

Inspir'd by thee, deaf to fond nature's cries,
Stern Brutus, when Rome's genius loudly spoke,
Gave her the matchless filial sacrifice,
Nor turn'd, nor trembled at the deathful stroke;
And he of latest age, but equal fame,
Dar'd stab the tyrant, tho' he lov'd the friend.
How burnt the Spartan with warm patriot flame,
In thy great cause his valorous life to end!
How burst Gustavus from the Swedish mine!
Like light from chaos dark, eternally to shine.

When heav'n to all thy joys bestows,
And graves upon our hearts &mdash; be free&mdash;
Shall coward man those joys resign,
And dare reverse this great decree,
Submit him to some idol king,
Some selfish, passion-guided thing,
Abhorring man, by man abhorr'd,
Around whose throne stands trembling doubt,
Whose jealous eyes still roll about,
And murder, with his reeking sword!

Where tramping tyranny with fate
And black revenge, gigantic goes,
Hark, how the dying infants shriek!
How hopeless age is sunk in woes!
Fly mortals from that fated land,
Though rivers roll o'er golden sand,
Though birds in shades of cassia sing,
Harvest and fruits spontaneous rise,
No storms disturb the smiling skies,
And each soft breeze rich odours bring.

Britannia watch, &mdash; remember peerless Rome,
Her high tower'd head dash'd meanly to the ground;
Remember, freedom's guardian, Grecia's doom,
Whom weeping the despotic Turk has bound:
May ne'er thy oak-crown'd hill, rich meads and downs,
(Fame, virtue, courage, poverty, forgot)
Thy peaceful villages, and busy towns,
Be doom'd some death-dispensing tyrant's lot;
On deep foundations may thy freedom stand,
Long as the surge shall lash thy sea-encircled land.
