Secluded from the giddy scenes of mirth,
Beneath this solemn roof oft' let me stray,
Peruse the annals of departed worth,
And hold great converse with their sleeping clay.

These ancient walls infuse a pleasing dread,
Thro' rolling years still faithful to their trust,
They guard the sacred ashes of the dead;
Once laurell'd Heroes &mdash; moulder'd into dust.

Here as I muse along the stately aisles,
Attentive view proud Grandeur's last remains,
My soul aspires superior to her smiles,
Contemns her promises, nor fears her pains:

For those who most her splendid favours share,
Whose days are revell'd in luxurious ease,
Confess her haunts are not unknown to care,
But visited by sorrow and disease.

Here let Ambition drop the daring wing,
Whose glaring plumes are dy'd with floods of gore!
Think of despotic Death, whose touch can sting,
And give his rage for gold and empire o'er.

For what is human greatness but a dream?
A coronet that glitters for a day!
Then comes Oblivion's irresistless stream,
Sweeping its boasted eminence away.

Happier the peasant in his homely cot,
Than he who wears the splendors of a crown;
Those storms can never reach his humble lot,
That often shake the basis of a throne.

Yet there are those of honorable fame,
Whose deeds the latest ages will revere;
Bright sons of glory!  on whose deathless name,
Virtue will ever drop the grateful tear.

Here rest the Fathers of the English lyre;
Heroes whose acts adorn th' historic page;
Philosophers, who beam'd etherial fire;
Statesmen whose talents rais'd a sinking age!

O may the Youths, who near their reliques play,
As frequent on these monuments they gaze,
While admiration ruminates the lay,
Imbibe some portion of th' inspiring blaze.

Then from the great examples they have given,
Britain shall see a kindred race arise,
Of godlike Men &mdash; the delegates of heaven;
Till Death demands them for their native skies!

Hail!  Mausoleum of illustrious men!
Whose urns are crown'd with never-fading bays,
Whose names are wrote with an immortal pen,
"And rise superior to the voice of praise."
