Awake Athenian Lyre, awake,
And give to Party all thy trembling strings,
From Tartarus discordant springs
A thousand streams their muddy progress take;
The baleful weeds that round them blow,
Drink strength and vigour as they flow.
Now the black stream of faction rolls along
Deep, malignant, dark, and strong;
Thro' dusky vales and Pluto's gloomy reign,
Now thundering down the steep amain;
Headlong impetuous see it pour,
The rocks and nodding groves re-bellow to the roar.

Oh!  sovereign of the troubled soul,
Parent of loud and harsh discordant airs,
Rous'd by thy voice the sullen cares,
And frantic passions in loud thunders roll.
On Scotia's hill the lord of war,
Has urg'd the fury of his car,
And quench'd his lance in brother's blood at thy command,
Reclining on Dione's hand.
Thy fascination tears the constant dove
From the fond object of his love;
Regardless of his mates, his young ones cry;
See him on eager wing to fields of carnage fly.

Thee the old, the young obey,
Obedient to thy maddening lay.
On Nasby's blood-bespangled green,
Are crowds of modern Patriots seen.
On the monarch's final day,
With antic sports and horrid pleasures,
Frisking wild in frantic measures.
Now pursuing, now retreating,
Like wild Bacchanals they meet;
To harsh notes discordant grating,
Start their many twining feet.
Loud furious strains their queen's approach declare;
Where she turns the furies homage pay;
With bloody arm that reddens all the air,
In dreadful state she makes her death-mark'd Way,
Her flaming cheek and darken'd Eye-brow wear,
The crimson fire of rage, and horrid scowl of fear.

Man's peaceful race what crimes await,
Riot and drunkenness, the rage of gain,
Luxury, gaming's dreadful train,
And suicide, sad refuge from our fate.
The fond complaint my song disprove,
And justify the laws of Jove.
Say is the rage of faction given in vain,
Plague, and all her noxious train;
Her poisonous vapour and her lurid glare,
He gives to fill the stagnate air;
'Till Auster mounts his boisterous car,
Rides o'er the waves, and wakes an elemental war.

In climes beneath the frozen pole,
Where shaggy forms o'er ice-built mountains roam,
Faction has shook their humble dome,
And to wild madness rous'd the savage soul.
And e'en amid the torrid zone,
Her boundless influence is known;
She lights in breast untam'd her fiercest fires,
And every dreadful deed inspires,
That wild barbarians act, or Hell approves,
Her track where'er the fury roves,
Murder pursue and scowling shame,
That unforgiving mind and discord's lurid flame.

Woods that wave o'er Delphi's steep,
Isles that the Egean deep,
Fields that cool Illissus loves,
Or where Meander's amber waves,
In lingering labyrinths creep,
How do you haughty echo languish,
Muse but to the lover's anguish
Where each old terrific mountain
Frantic fury pour'd around,
And every shade and bubbling fountain
Echo'd back the haughty sound.
'Till civil rage in Greece's conquer'd hour,
Left her Ecclesia for the Latian plains.
She trembles at the force of tyrant power,
And biting want and poverty disdains,
When Latian had her golden glories lost,
She sought, Oh!  ALBION next, thy sea-encircled coast.

Far from the sun and summer gale,
In Huntingdon was faction's darling laid,
What time the Ouse affrighted stray'd;
To him the mighty mother did unveil
Her dreadful face &mdash; the dauntless child
Stretch'd forth his arm, and fiend-like smil'd:
The pencil take, she said, whose colours dear,
With horror stain the bloody year&mdash;
Thine too, these iron keys, immortal boy!
This can unlock the gate of regal joy,
Of horror that, and frantic strife,
Or ope' your bloody passage thro' a monarch's life!

Scarce second he who boldly trod
O'er the sunk fane of wounded liberty;
To raise a boundless monarchy:
Next he sought sedition's sanguine road,
Half out the flaming sword he drew,
The rage of discord to renew:
But gracious heaven preserv'd the tottering state,
And curs'd him with the nation's hate.
See where Marlbro's less atrocious car
Wide o'er the fields of faction bear
Two coursers of undaunted race,
While pride and avarice urge their desperate pace.

See him in the dreadful field;
Horror hissing on his shield:
Glory with her sanguine wreath,
Crowns him in the fields of death!
Ah!  who can now his faulcion wield?
Oh!  direful maid, what daring spirit,
Calls thee now, tho' he inherit
Nor the pride nor ample pinion,
That the Roman Sylla bore,
Sailing to supreme dominion
O'er foaming seas  of kindred gore!
Yet oft before his infant eyes would run
Such forms as glitter in ambition's ray:
With dusky hues, unbrighten'd by the sun,
Yet shall he mount and keep his distant way,
Beyond the limits of a vulgar fate,
The hatred of the good &mdash; the terror of the great.
