Tir'd of an indolent, corrupted age,
I sought the covert of a neigh'bring wood;
Where, unmolested, in historic page,
I trac'd the annals of the Great and Good.

Whilst wrapp'd in pleasing thought, and void of care,
Thro' Brunswick's uniform straight paths I stray'd,
A sudden darkness fill'd the ambient air,
And rising clouds dispens'd a gloomy shade.

Full from the north a furious wind arose;
Thro' the vast aether forked light'nings play;
Incessant thunders heav'nly wrath disclose,
And clouds increasing hide the face of day.

Struck with the sudden change I frighted strove
To shun the storm, yet doubtful where to fly;
My hasty steps directing thro' the grove
To a dark cave which chance presented nigh.

There, to my much astonish'd view, appear'd
A radiant form, in antique manner dress'd:
Successive years had silver'd o'er his beard,
And Britain's GUARDIAN GENIUS stood confess'd.

From the rude element and thunder's roar,
Like me, he seem'd this shelter to have sought:
Marks of the tempest's rage his vesture bore;
With folded arms he stood, entranc'd in thought.

Upon his face, which erst had shone serene,
Were honour, virtue, ev'ry good pourtray'd;
But now amidst those virtues might be seen
Despair and Discontent at large display'd.

Stranger, said he, beneath this dreary shade
Dost not the dark insidious dagger fear?
Thus unattended, art thou not afraid
That vile assassins lurk in ambush here?

Guarded, by Britain's laws, of safety sure,
Fearless, said I, I tread these lonesome ways,
From the Stilletto's treach'rous stab secure:
For still a GEORGE the British scepter sways.

His rev'rend face the rising grief o'erspread;
Mistaken youth, the hoary sage replied,
Dost thou not know when sacred freedom fled,
That Britain's honour and her virtue died?

Freedom, collective name of ev'ry good,
Benignant smiles on these our climes no more.
Justice, for which your fathers nobly stood,
At length is banish'd from this hapless shore!

The haughtiest tyrants once your rights confess'd,
Th' untainted virtue of your laws rever'd:
No murder, legaliz'd, pass'd unredress'd,
No parents, orphans, widows cries unheard.

To your forefathers, generous, wise and brave,
Justice and innocence ne'er sued in vain.
Alas the contrast! &mdash; Mark each titled slave
Who foully blots the annals of this reign.

But when he spake of princely Brunswick's heir,
The big round drop collected in his eye;
Down o'er his features stole the trickling tear,
And from his bosom broke the piercing sigh.

Stranger, amidst his sighs, for George, he said,
Ne'er may your orisons to Heaven cease,
To shower down blessings on his sacred head,
And crown his reign with honour, glory, peace.

MAY HE BE princely, grateful, just and good,
By wicked counsels never led astray!
He cou'd no more. &mdash; But left me from the wood
Homeward to shade my solitary way.

Help!  Murder!  Murder!
