Tho' well-try'd courage steel the hardy soul,
By just experience, and deep judgment led,
Tho' the great spirit scorn each mean controul,
Resolv'd t' o'ercome, or join the glorious dead;
Yet what hard fate the Hero oft betides,
Who thro' the treach'rous shelves by Envy laid,
The tender vessel of his Honour guides,
By Faction nearly crush'd, tho' not by Foes dismay'd.
O Envy!  when shall cease thy rage accurst?
Of all th' infernal train, the meanest and the worst!

Is this the meed to godlike valour due?
Brave Keppel!  thus must all thy glories end?
Whom, late insulted Britons joy'd to view
Their only saviour, and his Country's friend.
In vain, ere now, thy conquering arm in vain
England's dread thunder 'gainst each hostile shore
Pointed triumphant, whilst astonish'd Spain,
And faithless Gallia trembled at its roar:
O strange reverse!  behold the Hero stand
Charg'd faithless to his trust &mdash; unworthy his command.

O Albion!  long thro' the wide Earth renown'd
For matchless Virtue, and heroic Deeds,
How long shall Faction thy great alms confound?
For thee in vain while each brave soldier bleeds:
Ah!  what avail to thee the fearless soul,
A Clinton's spirit, or a Burgoyne's fire,
If private views their bold designs controul,
And blast the fame to which their hearts aspire?
Go then, in ease inglorious &mdash; Heroes sleep,
Nor brave th' embattled field, nor terrors of the deep.

Well thought the Bard, who worthless deems the man,
Whose well-manag'd virtues claim a gen'ral praise,
Cautious of censure he no arduous plan
Pursues, to him no trophies Nations raise.
Not such thy fate, O Keppel!  lo her dart
With tenfold venom charg'd, thy well-earn'd fame
Maligning, Envy pointed at thy heart,
And strove to brand with infamy thy name.
Yet welcome the attack &mdash; thy noble cause
Grows stronger by discussion, and extorts applause.

What striking object fills my wond'ring sight!
In yonder circle, to the veteran band
Of Neptune's sons long train'd to hardy fight;
By Honour and by Justice led they stand,
Truth on each lip, and valour in each breast,
With voice unanimous the noblest stamp
They give thy merit, while the varied test
They bear &mdash; nor aught can their high spirit damp.
With such supporters dauntless sweep the main,
Thy King, thy Country cries &mdash; Chastise the Gaul again.
