I.
Tyburn seize thee, ruthless Peer,
Confusion on thy banners wait,
Tho' fann'd by Satan's short-liv'd cheer,
Awhile they shine in idle state.
North's, nor Thurlow's, artful schemes,
Shall save thee from nocturnal dreams;
From Hell's domain, from Pluto's door,
Where that too daring Painter went before.
Such were the sounds that o'er the crested pride
Of Jemmy Twitcher, scatter'd wild dismay,
As down the steep of Post Down's shaggy side,
He wound his fell intents in long array:
Stout Richmond stood aghast in speechless trance,
To arms!  cry'd Rockingham, and couch'd his quivering lance.

II.
On a gibbet, whose stern brow
Frowns in ignominious state;
Girt with iron garb of woe,
The image of the Painter sate.
Loose his beard, his wind-beat hair
Stream'd, like a scarecrow, to the troubled Jake,
And ghastly smiling as he hung,
He wav'd his hand, and silence brake.
"Hark!  how each giant oak, and British tar,
Sighs to the ocean's awful voice beneath.
O'er thee!  O Twitcher!  wave their hands for war,
Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breathe;
Daring no more, since this too luckless day,
That call'd the traitor from his schemes away."

III.
"Cold is Earl Chatham's tongue,
That hush'd thy stormy will.
Brave Frazer sleeps upon his craggy bed!
Mountains, ye mourn in vain!
Monckton, whose potent arm
Made the stout rebel bow his vanquish'd head.
See on the hostile waste they lie,
Smear'd with gore and ghastly pale;
Far, far aloof the affrighted rave sails;
The famish'd eagle screams and passes by.
Dear lost companions of the martial art,
Dear as the light that visits these sad eyes,
Dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
Ye dy'd amidst your bleeding country's cries!
No more I weep, they do not sleep
On yonder cliffs, a grizzly band;
I see them sit, they linger yet,
Avengers of their native land.
With me in dreadful harmony they join,
And weave with bloody hands the sequel of thy fate.

IV.
"Mark the year, and mark the night,
When H&mdash; shall echo with affright;
Shrieks of an agonizing Peer,
Shall pierce with dread amaze each list'ning ear.
Amazement in the traitor's van, combin'd
With sorrows faded form and solitude behind.
See the dread, infernal powers,
That once afforded welcome cheer,
Leave their sulphur-mantled bowers,
And on his setting sun appear.
See thro' his dome the naval band,
The injur'd Keppel at their head,
Haste to revenge this cheated land,
And lay the trait'rous felon dead.
See him to the gibbet led,
And share the trait'rous villain's meed;
See him pay his forfeit head,
This is the death by fate decreed.
Now, brothers, bending o'er the accursed loom,
Stampt we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom."
