Why dost thou linger thus, O morning sun?
Do the cool waves of ocean stay thy way?
Why dost thou linger thus,
Sun of our day of fame?
Rise:  a free people waits to hail thy ray.
Turn from yon world of slaves thine eye of fire,
On a free people shed
The glories of thy beam.
He climbs, he climbs aloof, and gilds the hills;
A rosier radiance dances on the trees;
Sparking the silver brook
To the dim valley scuds.

Now thou art bright, fair stream; but once we saw
Blood in thy waves, and corses in thy bed,
And grappling warriors choak'd
Thy swollen and troubled flood;
With fluttering hair the flying tyrants sped,
Pale, trembling headlong, to thy waters sped:
Into thine angry wave
Pursuing freemen sprang.

Blood of the horses dyed the azure stream,
Blood of the riders dyed the azure stream,
Blood of the tyrants slaves&mdash;
Fall tyrants, tyrants fall!
Red was the meadow, red thy rushy brink,
Reeking with slaughter.  In the bush of thorn,
Clothes of the flying stuck,
Hair of the dying stuck.

At the rock's foot the nation-curber lay
Apollyon's sceptre-wielding arm was stiff,
Broken his long long sword,
Wounded his groaning horse.
Dumb the blasphemer's, the commander's tongue,
Nor hell nor man gave heed.  His conscious eye
Still roll'd, as if to ask
The brandish'd spear for death.

But not a son of Germany vouchsafed
With pitying hand the honourable steel.
Was not the curse of God
Upon his forehead stamp'd?
As o'er her prey the screaming eagle planes,
O'er him was seen the wrath of Heav'n to lour:
He lay, till midnight wolves
Tore out the unfeeling heart.

But ah!  the young heroic Henry fell;
The castle-walls of Remling rung with groans;
Mother and sister wept
Their fallen, their beloved;
His lovely wife not e'en a parent's hope
Could lift above the crushing load of woe,
She, and the babe unborn,
Partook his early tomb.

Not one of all the slavish crew escap'd.
Like to the fallow leaves which storm-winds strow,
Their corses far and wide
Lay weltering in the field;
Or floated on the far-polluted stream.
Welcome not now where health or pity dwell,
Back from the gory wave
The thirsting horse withdrew;
The harmless herd gazed, and forbore to taste;
The silent tenants of the boughs forbore;
Only the vulture drank,
The raven and the wolf.

With cymbal and drum,
With trumpet and fife,
The glee of the victor is loud on the hill,
And rouses the echoes, and beckons the dance;
The song of the girl,
The music of war,
In thundering triumph are mingled on high,
Like nightingales singing where cataracts rush.

High in the air the eagle soars of song;
Beneath him hawks, our lesser triumphs, flit:
O'er the last battle now
His steadier wing is pois'd.
Fierce glow'd the noon; the sweat of heroes bath'd
The trampled grass; and breezes of the wood
Reach'd but the foe, who strove
Three hours in doubtful fight.
Like standing palm that rocks beneath the wind,
The hostile squadrons billow to and fro,
And, slow as ocean ebbs,
The sons of freedom cede;
When, on their foaming chargers, forward sprang
Two youths, their sabers lightning, and their name
Stolberg &mdash; behind them rode
Obeying thousand friends.

Vehement, as down the rock the floody Rhine
Showers its loud thunder, and eternal foam;
Speedy, as tigers spring,
They struck the startled foe.
The Stolbergs fought and sank:  but they achiev'd
The lovely bloody death in freedom's cause.
Let no base sigh be heard
Beside their early grave!

Time was, their grandsire wept a burning tear
Of youthful hope, that he might perish so;
Upon his harp it fell,
To exhale not quite in vain.
Then thro' the mist of future years he saw
Battles of freedom tinge the patrial soil,
Saw his brave children fall,
And smil'd upon their doom.

Sunk was the sun of day; with roseate wing
The evening fann'd the aged Rhine; but still
The battle thunder'd loud,
And lightened far and wide.
Glad, from the eaves of Heaven, thro' purple clouds,
Herman and Tell, Luther and Klopstock, lean'd,
And godlike strength of soul,
And German daring gave.

To the pale twilight wistful look'd the foe,
Dimm'd was the frown of scorn, the blush of shame;
They fled; wide o'er the field
Their scattering legions fled.
With dreeping swords we followed might and main;
They hop'd the mantle of the night would hide;
When o'er the firs arose
Angry and full the moon.
Night of destruction!  awful though thy deeds
Be clear and holy to a nation freed!

The country's birth-day each
More than his own should prize
More than the night which gave his blushing bride.
Thy song of triumph in our cities rolls,
The song which heroes love,
The song to freedom dear;
Voices of virgins mingle in the lay,
As floats its music o'er rejoicing crouds;
So murmur waterfalls
Beside the ocean's roar.

Germania, thou art free!  Germania, free!
Now may'st thou stately take thy central stand
Amid the nations; now
Exalt thy wreathed brow:
Proud as thy Brocken, when the light of dawn
Reddens its forehead, while the mountains round
Still in wan twilight sleep,
And darkness shrouds the vale.

Welcome great century of liberty,
Thou fairest daughter of slow-teeming Time!
With pangs unwont she bare,
But hail'd her mighty child:
Trembling she took thee with maternal arm;
Glad shudders shook her frame; she kist thy front,
And from her quivering lip
Prophetic accents broke:
"Daughter, thou takest away thy mother's grief;
Thou hast avenged thy weeping sister's shame;
Each to the yawning tomb
Went with unwilling step;
Each in her youth had hop'd to wield thy sword,
And hold thy balance, dread retributress.

"Bold is thy rolling eye,
And strong thy tender hand,
And soon beside thy cradle shall be heard
The tunes of warfare, and the clash of arms;
Hearken thou shalt with smiles,
As on thy mother's breast
I see thee quickly grow:  with giant step
With streamy golden hair, with lightening eye,
Thou shalt come forth, and thrones
And tyrants tread to dust.
Thy urn, tho' snatch'd with bloody hand, shall pour
O'er Germany the stream of liberty;
Each flower of paradise
Delights to crown its brink."
