Friend of my inmost heart, oh!  say,
Whilst wandering o'er this torrid clime,
What joys have mark'd each rapid day?
What sorrows check'd the race of Time?
From thee fell Care has wing'd her flight,
Banish'd by Mirth and clear Delight:
To glad thy more than friendly bower
Keen Wit, and chastest Humor urge their power;
And Truth, and Sense preside, t' approve the festive hour.

What tho' fierce Discord hovers round,
Tho' War's shrill clarion pierce the ear,
Tho' Carnage purples all the ground,
And Desolation frowns severe;
Yet still, to bless these war-worn plains,
When blind Distrust no longer reigns,
And scowling Hatred hides his head,
Behold!  the hospitable board is spread;
And Beauty's rosy smiles their genial influence shed.

Perish the man whose narrow heart
Can bound the limits of his kind;
But to one realm wou'd bliss impart,
And, but to that, contracts his mind!
Blest the soul, that kindling glows
To heighten joys, to lessen woes;
Whose wide beneficence supplies
To Zembla's frosts, and Gambia's parching skies,
The fires that gladden life, the springs whence pleasures rise?

Yet still, unswerv'd, the Patriot's breast
Burns to exalt his native land;
For this he shuns ignoble rest,
For this he nerves his daring hand;
But, tho' his heart to glory swells,
There ev'ry gentler virtue dwells,
That gives Humanity a grace,
That binds, by mutual charities, our race,
Or gains, on Nature's roll, for Man superior place.

Such, in Oppression's dreary reign,
With manly feelings RUSSEL rose,
Indignant spurn'd the tyrant's chain,
And check'd fair Freedom's subtle foes:
With soften'd firmness, Roman zeal,
He bleeds to save the Public-weal,
Nor for his country fears to die;
Yet, tho' his breast to Liberty beats high,
His RACHEL claims a tear, his CAVENDISH a sigh.

Say now, my LUCIUS!  tho' we grieve
When error shrouds the human mind;
And wish our country to relieve
From hostile sons, to freedom blind,
Shall those who rise to guard her laws,
Disgrace the gen'rous, patriot cause;
By too much rigor o'er such foes
Extend Contention's aggravated woes;
Spread civil horrors wide, and all their ills disclose?

No!  rather let kind Friendship deck
With flow'ry wreaths the brow of War;
With gentle hand, ah!  rather check
The fiery coursers of his car;
With sportive dalliance rather still
The headstrong fury of his will:
No can such gen'rous efforts fail
Where kindred ties the yielding heart assail,
But blooming Peace restor'd the blissful hour shall hail.

Then social charms again shall rise,
In all their wonted splendor bright;
Those charms, which thro' these low'ring skies
Can dart the rays of clearer light:
Then Chearfulness and Love shall twine
The olive-branch round Concord's shrine,
And Joy on all her influence shed&mdash;
But, ah!  to such extatic transports dead,
The child of Afric mourns, and sighing droops his head.

No rising hope of better days
Pervades the dark impervious cloud,
That hovers o'er his dreary ways,
Of peace and joy the deadly shroud;
That e'en in love's assuaging draught,
Sheds poisons of corrosive thought;
Which, from reflection's sharpest pain,
Relentless, to the babe unborn ordain
Oppression's fiery rod, and hard, eternal chain.

O!  torment to each tender soul
To view the sombre sons of Grief
Toil in the shackles of control,
And ceaseless pine without relief;
To hear the captive's endless moan,
The taunt of pow'r, the suff'ring groan;
To see the hand of Freedom wave,
Aloft, the scorpion lash that rules the slave;
To see all this, and more, yet not have force to save!

But yet, my friend, some few are found,
'Twill still thy too responsive heart,
Who, 'mid hard Rigor's thorny ground,
The balm of pity can impart;
Some few, whose breasts, alive to woe,
Each tender sympathy bestow;
Such ne'er depress the free-born mind;
By realms, by modes, by colour unconfin'd,
Their bounty beams on all, the patrons of mankind.

So shines thy LAURA'S angel face,
Illum'd by sentiment and wit;
Where Freedom dwells, with ev'ry grace,
And frolic Fancy joys to sit.
Bright round her shines her raven hair,
The halo of this solar star:
Bright shine her eyes, which, glancing fire,
Kindle the warmest raptures of my lyre,
And light the purest flame, that beauty can inspire.

Yet not the radiance of those charms,
Altho' so eminently bright,
Cou'd rouse my soul to such alarms,
Cou'd dazzle thus my trembling sight;
Nor yet, that dignity of mien,
With ev'ry milder grace serene;
But that her mind, with cloudless ray,
Lights the charm'd spirit thro' each blooming way,
Where friendship, Taste, and Truth, their vivid tints display.

This spell shall foil the pow'r of Time,
Whilst worlds of waters roll in vain;
It flings, in scorn of distant clime,
O'er seas and shores its rosy chain:
Tho' oft it throb with many a smart,
Ne'er let it quit this flutt'ring heart,
'Till all its passions are refin'd
By that pure fire, of the etherial kind,
Which warms her artless breast, and gilds her spotless mind.

Whilst thus my daring passions aim
To snatch from Love Promethean fire,
Thy kindred soul asserts its claim
To all the raptures of thy lyre;
Let then thy LAURA share this fame,
Alike in beauty as in name;
And when from them we distant stray,
Shall then this glimm'ring, faint, reflected ray,
Recall their matchless charms, to cheer our tedious way?

Yes!  then, my friend, to Fancy's eye
Their lovely forms shall float sublime;
And when their virtues we descry,
Our souls ambitiously will climb
Beyond the dull pursuits of life;
Above its cares, above its strife:
Be they the stars, that, glowing bright,
Dispel the murky mists of mental night,
Direct our wayward course, and shed celestial light!
