Here, far from noise and care, secure I lie,
And taste the bliss which Nature's seasons bring,
While every new-born hour that paints the sky
Sheds bounteous tribute from its passing wing.

This lovely spot, for health and fancy made,
With echoing groves and lengthen'd vistas green,
Where, thro' the breezy walks and whispering glade,
The yellow sun-shine streams along the scene

A Sovereign gives:  while little lords of earth
That wall about a jealous spot of ground
Forbid me to rejoice in Nature's mirth,
Or draw the breeze within their haughty mound.

The painted jay, the blackbird's whistling throat;
The wild deer pushing o'er the neighbouring lea;
The bulfinch and the thrush with mellow note;
And playsome squirrel clamb'ring up the tree:

All here exult in Bounty's ample reign,
And life's free blessings unmolested share,
While thro' the grove, the vale, the glade, or plain,
They celebrate their scenes of love and care.

Yet will the Tyrant of a petty field
Creation's tenants chace with death and thrall,
Nor let the rook his clamm'ring offspring shield
Upon the wither'd fir that skirts his wall.

Nor let the redbreast pick its scanty food
Amid the remnant of the harvest-home;
And dash the twittering swallow's tender brood
That breaks his slumbers and pollutes his dome.

The little soul, whom Fortune's cruel breath
Exalts amid the sun-shine of a day,
Joys to exert its rule on all beneath,
And shroud its walk in Pride's o'erwhelming sway.

Remember, fond weak man, whom Fortune's hour
Invests with sullen and oppressive state,
Like thee the pamper'd slave that waits on power
Exults to chace the beggar from the gate.

Remember that, amid the free abode
Where Greatness dwells, a liberal roof is found;
The god-like arm, that breaks the Tyrant's rod,
Will raise the lisping Orphan from the ground.

And wheresoe'er the soul benign and great
Holds fair Humanity's benignant scene,
No ills of Penury's depressing state
Can touch with blemish her celestial mien.

A Cottage-Howard, amid the barren heath,
Spares the dumb brute with age and hardship worn;
Nor haunts within his walk the beetle's breath;
Nor envies the poor hare its blade of corn.

To nought that can with health and gladness live
Would Heav'n in love deny the vital boon:
Nor the mute worm of Being's gift deprive;
Nor knat that pants upon the beam of noon.

Would man but let the heart that God unfolds
Possess the rightful portion of its birth,
Each gladsome voice the wide Creation holds
Would chant the tale of Liberty and Mirth.
