What mingled beauties here conspire to please!
What varied prospects chear the wand'ring eye!
In these sweet shades let me recline at ease,
While balmy Zephyrs fan the sultry sky.

Shield me, kind Dryads, in this safe retreat,
Where osiers mark the cool wave's lucid way:
Where friendly gales allay the raging heat,
And breathing waters mitigate the day.

Here polish'd Art assumes fair Nature's face;
Round the smooth beech the wood-bines breathe perfumes;
Here tufted pinks the mossy margin grace,
And the sweet rose in sov'reign beauty blooms.

Elate with spring, and dress'd in all her dyes,
See hov'ring round &mdash; yon insect idly gay;
A moment on its balmy breast she lies,
Then light thro' liquid aether wings her way.

Thou beauteous trifler, can so fine a form
Sustain black Boreas, and benumbing frost?
Or, when black skies discharge th' impetuous storm,
Must all thy transient elegance by lost?

Go where the gay Belinda reigns confest,
Despotic Sov'reign of the youthful train:
While her bright eyes explore thy varied vest,
Thy little life shall moralise my strain.

While to her sight thy gaudy wings are spread,
If the light show'r, or gentlest dews descend,
Thy momentary age of mirth is fled;
And the gay dreams of golden summers end.

In thee, perchance, the thoughtless nymph may view
The changeful emblem of her blooming face;
As soon disease may that fair form subdue,
And each external excellence debase.

Then would th' admiring crowd no longer bend;
No more sweet adulation soothe her ear;
No more th' assiduous youths her steps attend,
No more her smiles on ev'ry face appear.

Happy for me, that beauty's potent Queen
No lavish graces gave, no matchless air;
No soft, resistless, love-commanding mien,
Nor bade a fading grace engross my care.

These oft to pride elate the female mind;
For these we oft neglect th' intrinsic charms
Of Virtue, which, by Reason's pow'r refin'd,
Smiles at old age, and death itself disarms.

Enough for me, that Health with Hebe joins,
And from my mind dispels the chearless gloom;
Enough, the muse her wreath of ivy twines,
Mixt with each smiling field-flow'r's fragrant bloom:

Pleas'd, while this artless rural verse I raise,
To see superior merit shine confest;
Supremely happy when my humble praise
Can give one transport to the gen'rous breast.
