When night with moistening dews bespreads the ground,
And casts her sable mantle o'er the sky;
When fear-created spectres stalk the ground,
And thro' the air foreboding screech-owls cry;

Oft from the noisy sons of mirth and play,
By pensive thought and meditation led,
Hither with slow and silent steps I stray,
To mark the gloomy mansions of the dead.

And as I pass the lowly graves among,
And sculptur'd tombs of those of high-rais'd pow'r,
How do they tell, with awe-expressive tongue,
"The life of man is as the fading flow'r!"

A time he struts in mimic pride and state,
A time his opening blossoms are display'd;
But Death's cold hand soon seals his certain fate&mdash;
And soon, alas!  he in the ground is laid.

But see!  the clouds are vanish'd with the breeze,
The heav'ns are fair, and Luna's paler light
Tips with a silver hue the drooping trees,
And brings each letter'd tomb-stone to my sight.

Here lies, commixed with her kindred mould,
A Maid, who once with love each breast inspir'd,
Whose numerous virtues many a verse has told,
Whom all regarded, and whom all admir'd.

Ah me!  her blooming period soon was o'er;
Scarce twenty years were number'd as her own:
The gazing crowd she captivates no more;
But ev'ry beauty, ev'ry grace is flown!

Mark this, ye thoughtless virgins of our isle;
Nor boast your charms, your riches, or your birth:
The flowery path is trod but for a while,
And lo we slumber in the chilly earth!

Here moulders one, whose avaricious soul,
Intent on nought but usury and gain,
Ne'er dropt his mite into the "beggar's bowl;"
At whose barr'd gate Distress might weep in vain.

O sordid wretch!  how useless now thy wealth,
Perpetual source of anxious care and strife!
Nor all could buy that precious jewel health,
Nor add one moment to thy ill-spent life.

Here lies a Bard, who once his manly page
With glowing precepts fill'd in Virtue's aid;
But, left to perish by a thankless age,
His woe-worn breast the debt of Nature paid.

Blush, blush, ye rich, array'd in pomp and state,
To think how soon his circling years were o'er;
Haste to save others from the like hard fate,
And cherish Genius' sons, and Wisdom's lore.

Beside this stone a tender Infant sleeps,
Who in its cradle's bed resign'd its breath;
Whose early loss a feeling mother weeps,
And blames, unthinking blames, the work of Death.

Ah, happy innocent, how sweet thy rest!
No horrid crimes are heap'd upon thy head;
No hurtful passions rag'd within thy breast,
Nor were thy shorten'd days in mis'ry led.

But say, what means this laurel-crowned bust?
This lofty monument?  this trophied tomb?
Lies here the famous Chieftain, turn'd to dust?
And shares the warrior-prince the common doom?

What!  could not he, so valiant in the field,
So pow'rful, great, and terrible in fight,
Against the lance of Fate oppose the shield,
And rest securely on his strength and might?

No; all the wreaths are wrested from his brow,
And all his boasted prowess overthrown;
And here he lies, as silent and as low
As the weak coward, or the meanest clown.

How futile now the decorated urn!
The costly ornaments of pride how vain!
Since, when once past th' irremeable bourn,
Th' entombed body is but dust again.

So thought the venerable Man, who long
Ador'd his Maker in this House of Prayer;
Who taught his flock to raise the holy song,
And worship Heaven with reverend love and fear.

For see, this stone, so humble and so low,
Obscur'd beneath the weeping willow's shade,
Alone remains to let the stranger know,
That here Christ's faithful Minister is laid.

Yet yon proud bust, that rears its head so high,
And stands a Statesman's honours to declare,
In no one breast excites a pensive sigh,
Altho' his grave be moist with many a tear.

For, ah!  he liv'd the poor man's constant friend,
And fed with fost'ring care the parish round;
His pious doctrines sooth'd the sinner's end,
And woe in him a kind reliever found.

Nor scorn, my Muse, this turf-concealed clod,
Where rests a Peasant from his daily toil,
Whose honest heart with rustic mirth o'erflow'd,
Whose part it was to turn the yielding soil.

Oft have I seen him press the useful plough,
And reap the harvest of his small domain;
Oft lay with sounding axe the forest low,
And beat with echoing stroke the ripen'd grain.

No hateful anger in his bosom rose,
No griping av'rice dwelt beneath his roof;
No conscious guilt disturb'd his calm repose,
Nor wish'd he more than Nature deem'd enough.

May I like him my future moments spend!
May such contentment reign within this breast!
So shall my soul, whene'er it meets her end,
Partake with him of happiness and rest.
