The moon slow-setting sends a parting ray;
The topers to the mess-room march with glee;
To bed the sober shape their quiet way,
And leave the lines to pensiveness and me.

Now scarce a candle glimmers to the sight,
And o'er the tented field soft stillness reigns;
Save where the dice are dash'd with desperate might,
Or braying asses wake the distant plains;

Save that from yonder tempest-sheltering box
The centry's rough voice does the ear assail
Of such, as trusting to the gloom of Nox
Steal to the well-known booth to tipple ale.

Within each tent, of flimzy canvas made,
Where knapsacks rise in many a scatter'd heap,
Twelve men, in narrow beds 'till morning laid,
Refresh their senses with the dews of sleep.

The cannon's roar, that through the vale rebounds,
The Reveille harsh-echoing in their ears,
The serjeant's voice, that ever rudely sounds,
Again shall rouse them to their humble cares.

For them again the kitchen-fires shall burn,
And busy matrons then saloop prepare,
The butcher's loaded wain from town return,
And quarter-master's loaves and mutton share.

Oft do their hardy hands the hatchet wield,
And vigorous knees the stubborn faggot break;
How steadily they tread the rugged field!
How quick a column or a square they make!

Let not lac'd loungers mock their thankless toil,
Their homely meals, and toilet's thrifty plan,
Nor broider'd generals hear, with scornful smile,
The simple annals of the private man.

The salutations which to rank are due,
And all that gold e'er bought, or favour gave,
Cannot the worn-out wheels of life renew:
Promotion's high-way leads but to the grave.

Nor you, ye beaux!  forget that they are men,
If no white dust their soapy locks disguise,
If on their brawny limbs coarse cloth you ken,
And from their clothes no musky scents arise.

Can kersymere or scarlet, bought on trust,
Compel the lungs to stay the fleeting breath?
Can funeral volleys wake the slumb'ring dust?
Or gleamy gorget ward the dart of Death?

Perhaps on tatter'd pillow now is laid
Some head by Nature fashion'd for command,
Whose solid sense in council might have sway'd,
Or led to Victory a numerous band.

But Science, from their minds, with piercing rays,
The fogs of ignorance did ne'er dispel;
Mechanic toil consum'd their youthful days,
And scarcely gave them time to scrawl and spell.

Full many an acre of uncultur'd land
Fertility within its womb contains:&mdash;
Full many a shapeless mass of sordid sand
Conceals of virgin gold the latent grains.

Some Wolfe, that ne'er shall see pale Gallia fly,
Nor in bright Victory's arms resign his breath,
Some Marlborough, inglorious here may lie,
Some Coote, unskilful in the art of death.

Th' applause of hoary veterans to command,
The bribes and threats of monarchs to despise,
To raise the glory of their native land,
And read their praises in an army's eyes. . .

Their lot forbids. . . .  nor circumscribes alone
Their martial genius, but their crimes restrains;
Forbids to place a tyrant on a throne,
And forge for free-born men fell Slavery's chains;

Unmov'd to mark the frantic widow's woe,
And hear her orphans wail their slaughter'd sire,
Or swell of guiltless blood the crimson flow,
With fury kindled by Ambition's fire.

Fix'd in the favourite seat of noise and strife,
They never can enjoy one tranquil day;
Along the rough walks of an irksome life
They keep the restless tenor of their way.

Yet, from grave thoughts their feelings to protect,
Frail temporary huts erected nigh,
With uncouth phrase and wretched daubing deckt,
Invite their lips a cordial draught to try.

Their mantling mug, their songs sonorous swell,
The place of port and repartee supply;
And many a smutty tale around they tell,
That give the social hour with speed to fly.

For who, within the ranks, by reason led,
The joys of Bacchus to his soul denies,
Treads the gay precincts of a sutler's shed,
Nor casts upon the door his lounging eyes?

O'er some base hearts gold has a sovereign sway,
Some pious minds delight in sighs and tears,
Fame can the poet's midnight toil repay;
But ale and brandy sooth a soldier's cares.

For thee, who, by thy natal stars compell'd,
Dost touch with artless hand the warbling wire,
If chance, by Friendship's fond regard impell'd,
Some dear companion shall thy fate enquire;

Haply some brother sub may smiling say,
"Oft in his tent retir'd the youth was seen,
Scribbling with hurried hand an humorous lay,
To fill a page in URBAN'S MAGAZINE.

"There, in that field, beside yon holy pile,
That rears its Gothic steeple to the sky,
At noon, beneath those elms, he mus'd awhile,
Then por'd upon a book with greedy eye.

"Along the mazes of yon murmuring stream,
With pensive pace, at even would he stray,
'Till rapt in wandering fancy's airy dream,
He mutter'd metre to the lunar ray.

"One morn I sought him vainly through the line,
Among the elms, and o'er the verdant lea;
Another came, nor high the dome divine,
Nor by the stream, nor in his tent was he.

"The next he wrote that, prompted by his Muse,
In rural mansion Pegasus he pac'd,
To camps and courts had made his last adieus,
And o'er his antique gate these verses trac'd:

THE INSCRIPTION.
"Here let me rest in this sequester'd cell,
Where pomp and noise and riot are unknown;
Where raptur'd contemplation loves to dwell,
And whose low roof Contentment calls her own.

"Large splendid halls where gold and silver glare,
My mind's undazzled eye could never please:
Here am I freed from all that vex'd me &mdash; care,
Here blest with all I wish &mdash; poetic ease.

"No more blind folly my desires shall raise,
Or draw my footsteps from this lov'd abode;
Here will I breathe the remnant of my days,
And court the favour of the tuneful God."
