I. 1.
When haughty Caesar's veteran band
Britannia's cliffs resolv'd to gain,
Thick shades o'erspread the wish'd-for land,
And dimm'd the misty main:
Save when the lightning's transient glare
With flash tremendous fir'd the air,
They view'd the warriors on the shore!
While Terror grim and wild Despair
Uplifted high their bristling hair,
Roll'd o'er their hostile heads the thunder's echoing roar.

I. 2.
Silver'd with venerable age,
Undaunted step, majestic mien,
The bard advanced, with patriot rage,
Yet e'en in rage serene.
His labouring breast confest his pain;
His eye, though fix'd in deep disdain,
Still beam'd with pure celestial fire;
And seem'd attentive to descry
The forms of dark futurity,
When this prophetic song burst from th' indignant lyre:

I. 3.
"Caesar!  what avails thy force,
Armed legions, mail-clad horse?
What avails thy javelins' shower,
Javelins red with human gore?
What though thy arms, with wild alarms,
Free nations to perdition hurl'd,
Thy falchions, blaze, with streaming rays,
Appals the trembling world?
Victor of victors, mighty lord of lords,
See the death advance!  inexorable power!
Sheathe!  base assassins, sheathe, your murderous swords!
Ah!  who escapes th' inevitable hour!
The conqueror, pierc'd with many a gaping wound,
Falls by their treacherous hands, and groaning grasps the ground.

II. 2.
"But hark!  the clarion shrill resounds,
With rending clangor rousing war,
Each chief deserts th' encircling mounds,
And mounts the rattling car.
Eagles, threatening eagles rise,
And each enrag'd battalion tries
To drench the plain with kindred gore;
Stalks gaunt Revenge amidst the throng,
Rolls his red eyes the slain among,
And on her crimson wings hangs slaughter hov'ring o'er.

II. 3.
"Self-condemn'd the murderers die,
On the earth expos'd they lie;
Havock!  havock!  ranges round,
Hosts of heroes bite the ground!
The younger lord, with sanguine sword,
Shall make th' affrighted squadrons fly,
For in his train, with loosen'd rein,
Comes flame-rob'd Victory.
But meek-ey'd Mercy, at the mournful scene,
Sighs o'er the chief extended on his bier;
Pays the pale manes of th' unhappy queen
The last sad tribute of a tender tear;
While the most baleful of the serpent brood
Feasts on her lovely form, and revels in her blood.

III. 1.
"Romans no more with stern delight
View from afar the tented field;
No more they rush to deadly fight,
No more the spear they wield.
Enchanting fiend with azure eye,
Th' enrapturing Syren Luxury,
Shall all her opening sweets unfold;
And scattering from her painted plumes
Arabian odours, rich perfumes,
Display her purple pinions streak'd with beamy gold.

III. 2.
"The whelming torrent pours along,
When Rome, proud Rome, must meet its fate:
The Vandal's death-denouncing throng
Now thunders at the gate;
Rejoice!  thy tyrant city falls,
Lours desolation o'er her walls:
By countless myriads opprest,
She falls!  with clamour rings the sky:
Beneath his standard, fix'd on high,
The Goth triumphant waves his many-colour'd crest.

III. 3.
"Hail!  my native country, hail!
Through the tempest-breathing gale,
Rushing on, with clouds o'ercast,
Furious drives the northern blast;
The dusky forms of howling storms,
Aloft their awful foreheads rear;
And whirlwinds sweep, with cadence deep,
Across the angry air:
A placid calm succeeds, the Sun's bright beams
With added lustre more refulgent glow;
The verdant landscape still more verdant seems,
The murmuring brooks still more melodious flow;
Hail, Britain, hail!" &mdash; A Roman's whizzing dart,
Clos'd the bard's tuneful song, and rent his reeking heart.
