The parting sun reflects its ev'ning ray,
And giant-shadows variegate the ground;
The wanton kids forsake their harmless play,
And solemn silence reigns the vale around.

Now fancy leads her airy-plumed train
Through mazy walks, by gently-purling rills;
Now Philomela swells her mournful strain,
And all the grove with softest music fills.

Now roves at large the yoke-denying hart,
Yet dreads the hunter at the peep of dawn;
Now Sylvan nymphs exert the vocal art,
Whilst nimble fairies trip it o'er the lawn.

Here moss-grown grots, and bubbling streams are seen,
And gleamy groves in stately-columns rise;
Here fruitful meads, enamell'd all with green;
There, awful mountains seem to prop the skies.

Now Cynthia gilds the dew-bespangled grove,
And casts profusely round her maiden light;
Led by the muse, thro' silent paths I rove,
And please my fancy with the varied sight.

Behold that rock, that rears its head so high,
In rude magnificence o'erlooks the flood;
See on its tops the mangled ruins lie,
Where once a castle's stately turrets stood.

There oft have heroes crown'd the gen'rous bowl,
And virgins listen'd to their lover's call;
And airy mirth possess'd each happy soul,
Whilst bands of music echo'd through the hall;

Ah!  now no heroes quaff the flowing bowls,
Nor sprightly music chears the ruin'd hall;
Nor joys possess their now wide-parted souls,
Nor virgins listen to their lover's call!

The creeping ivy shades each tott'ring tow'r,
And clasps the ruins with a fond embrace;
The screech-owls claim the melancholy bow'r,
And boding ravens hover round the place.

How vain the pageantry of worldly things!
And what is grandeur but an empty name?
Short-liv'd the glory of the grandest Kings,
Tho' slaughter'd nations raise their ill-got fame.

Where is, alas!  the pride of Persia flown?
The pomp of Rome, with all her empires o'er;
And e'en where Ilium stood is scarcely known,
And haughty Carthage now exults no more.

Thus, since ambition yields to certain fate,
By reason prompted, sure, unerring guide,
Let virtue bless thy visionary state,
Whose glory time nor envy e'er can hide.
