No more I wander the muse-haunted grove,
Where deeds of glory swell the epic strain,
Or where the raptures of requited love
Wake the sweet numbers of th' impassion'd swain.

For, ah!  how transient love's endearing joy,
That richest boon of favouring heav'n to man;
And what ambition, but an infant's toy,
To minds that ponder life's contracted span?

Then come, Reflection, nymph of sober mien,
Who rov'd beneath the yew-tree's shade with Gray;
Teach me to meditate the solemn scene,
As pensive "thro' the long-drawn aisles" I stray.

Here oft' has Britain's royal pageant pass'd,
And titled pride her gaudy charms display'd;
Here wou'd the crowd with pagan ardour haste
T' adore the idol that their folly made.

Yet, a few seasons fled, the train return'd,
With hearts untouch'd to mimic sorrow's gloom;
With woe's grimace the pompous herald mourn'd,
And lavish'd flatt'ry o'er the senseless tomb.

Here jarring statesmen meet, once haughty foes,
Who spurn'd indignant at a rival's pow'r;
There beauty withers like the blushing rose,
The fragrant pride of summer's transient hour.

The votive song to Delia's vernal bloom,
Vibrates no raptures on her deafen'd ear;
Ev'n proud Ambition stoops beneath a tomb,
And Pleasure's syren voice is silent there.

Dumb, too, the minstrel's harp, whose magic lays
Arous'd the valiant breast to deeds of fame;
Yet time shall spare the virtuous poet's praise,
And age to age repeat his honour'd name.

Yet here, till Wisdom fly the British coast,
Oft-times the musing moralist shall come,
Heedless of Grandeur's monumental boast,
To seek, good Addison, thy humbler tomb.

And long thy precepts, with resistless pow'r,
Shall lure the wand'rer to the shrine of Truth;
Chase puerile Folly from life's ev'ning-hour,
And whisper caution to impetuous Youth.

Nor view'd with careless eye the recent grave
Of Johnson, moral Mentor of our age,
Tho' mark'd by Superstition for her slave,
Tho' Bigotry deform th' historic page.

Lo!  where the sage, by list'ning crowds rever'd,
Whose well-earn'd honours grateful Science paid,
And chiefs whose prowess steel-clad legions fear'd,
Repose alike in Death's oblivious shade.

No victor's shout, no soothing voice of fame,
Shall pierce the gloomy caverns of the ground;
But Darkness there her silent empire claim,
Till Nature hear the trump celestial sound.

And is it thus the various ranks of men,
The mean, the wise, the tyrant, and the slave,
Whate'er thro' devious life their path had been,
All meet at last associates in the grave?

Then why shou'd Pen'ry mourn her lowly birth,
Or titl'd Pride assume the brow of scorn?
From life's last scene, since all but moral worth,
Flies like night visions at the song of morn!

Hence let Ambition's vot'ries fondly dream,
Of wealth's heap'd treasures, and the dome of state,
At Honour's shrine indulge the airy scheme,
Or crowd obsequious round Preferment's gate:

Be rather mine, to bend in Virtue's fane,
Her cares, her duties, and her joys to know;
The sigh of Want to hear, the shriek of Pain,
And with Compassion's gen'rous warmth to glow.

Be mine, Religion, of thy hope possess'd,
Tranquil to finish life's eventful hour,
My mem'ry dear to some congenial breast,
My sod by Friendship strew'd with many a flow'r.
