Amidst these venerable drear remains
Of ancient grandeur, musing sad I stray;
Around a melancholy silence reigns,
That prompts me to indulge the plaintive lay.

Here liv'd Eugenio born of noble race,
Aloft his mansion rose (around were seen
Extensive gardens deck'd with ev'ry grace,
Ponds, walks, and groves thro' all the seasons green)

Ah where is now its boasted beauty fled!
Proud turrets that once glitter'd in the sky,
And broken columns in confusion spread,
A rude mishapen heap of ruins lie.

Of splendid rooms no traces here are found;
How are these tott'ring walls by time defac'd,
Shagg'd with vile thorn, with twining ivy bound,
Once hung with tapestry, with paintings grac'd!

In ancient times, perhaps, where now I tread,
Licentious riot crown'd the midnight-bowl,
Her dainties lux'ry pour'd, and beauty spread
Her artful snares to captivate the soul.

Or here, attended by a chosen train
Of innocent delights, true grandeur dwelt
Diffusing blessings o'er the distant plain,
Health, joy, and happiness by thousands felt.

Around now solitude unjoyous reigns,
No gay-gilt chariot hither marks the way,
No more with chearful hopes the needy swains
At the once-bounteous gate their visits pay.

Where too is now the garden's beauty fled
Which ev'ry clime was ransack'd to supply?
O'er the drear spot see desolation spread,
And the dismantled walls in ruins lie!

Dead are the trees that once with nicest care
Arrang'd from op'ning blossoms shed perfume,
And thick with fruitage stood, the pendant pear,
The ruddy-colour'd peach, and glossy plum.

Extinct is the gay family of flow'rs:
In vain I seek the arbour's cool retreat,
Where ancient friends in converse pass'd the hours
Descended from the raging dog-star's heat.

Along the terras-walks are straggling seen
The prickly bramble, and the noisome weed,
Beneath whose covert crawls the toad obscene,
And snakes and adders unmolested breed.

The groves where pleasure walk'd her round decay,
The mead untill'd a barren aspect wears;
And where the sprightly fawn was wont to play
O'er grown with heath a dreary waste appears.

In yonder wide-extended vale below
Where osiers spread, a pond capacious stood;
From far by art the stream was taught to flow,
Whose liquid stores supply'd th' unfailing  flood.

Oft here the silent angler took his place
Intent to captivate the scaly fry&mdash;
But perish'd now are all the num'rous race,
Dumb is the fountain, and the channel dry.

Here then, ye great!  behold th' uncertain state
Of earthly grandeur &mdash; beauty, strength, and pow'r
Alike are subject to the stroke of fate,
And flourish but the glory of an hour.

Virtue alone no dissolution fears,
Still permanent tho' ages rolls away:
Who builds on her immortal basis, rears
A superstructure time can ne'er decay.
