1. 1.
"Ruin comes, thou luckless Land!
Defeat, disgrace thy flag await;
By wou'd-be-conquest's wing though fann'd,
It mocks the air with futile state.
Squib, nor candle nought avail;
The pale, dim stars in Faction's turbid tail:
They whizz, they bounce, they twinkle, stink and die;
And so shall you, and so shall I!"
Such were the sounds that o'er the empty pride
Of Britain's Rulers scatter'd wild dismay,
As on the silver Thames's silky side
They plann'd of play-thing Camps the prim array,
Stout MINDEN stood aghast in mortal trance,
Cried horse-guards, foot-guards, march! &mdash; they knew not how to advance.

1. 2.
On a rock, whose low'ring brow
Frown'd o'er th' Atlantic's foaming flood,
No shoe to clothe his frozen toe,
The wan BOSTONIAN PROPHET stood:
(Unshav'd his beard, his tangled hair,
Stream'd, like a dusky comet, in the air),
And with a war-whoop voice, and Mohawk's fire,
Thus execrates his British Sire.
"Hark!  how each rugged oak, and hollow cave
Groan to th' Atlantic's awful voice beneath.
O'er thee, O land!  their threat'ning arms they wave,
Revenge on thee in hoarser bellowings breathe;
Vocal no more, since Tea-act's fatal day,
To smuggler's jocund pipe, or the soft bundling lay.

1. 3.
"Nerveless MONTGOMERY'S arm,
That mow'd the steely field;
Brave WARREN sleeps on Bunker's bloody hill;
MERCER, who ne'er wou'd yield,
Whom war's loud thunders charm,
Of wounds, and glorious death has got his fill.
On the bleak western shore they lie,
Bleach'd with frosts, and drench'd with dews;
Them, far aloof, th' affrighted Yankey views,
And the gaunt Buckskin howls and passes by.
Dear lost associates in rebellion's art,
Dear, as the ends I gain by holy lies,
Dear as the gulps of rum that warm my heart,
Ye died amidst your weeping country's cries.
No more I snivel, they're not gone to the devil,
On yonder cliffs, a griesly band,
I see them all flutter, to keep up the sputter,
The firebrands of their native land.
With more than Luciferian grin they smile,
And weave with bloody hands the web of Britain's Isle.

2. 1.
"Weave the warp and weave the woof,
The winding-sheet of Albion's land:
Give big Corruption room enough
To lie, for faith he cannot stand.
Place we fiery Faction there,
With Babel voice, and with Medusa's hair,
That screams you're lost, while by her you're undone.
Hark, hark!  the glorious work's begun!&mdash;
Vile cub of Fox, with unrelenting fangs,
That tear'st the bowels of the mangled state,
From Israel be born that o'er thee hangs
The scourge of Heav'n &mdash; what terrors round thee wait!
First circumcision comes, with p&mdash;x combin'd,
And bankrupt's faded form, and poverty behind.

2. 2.
"Mighty spokesman, mighty Lord,
Low in the grave thy CHATHAM lies!
Forgot, the nation's shield and sword,
As soon as his vain obsequies.
Is the Senate's thunderer fled?
Thy PITT is gone, and busy in his stead
A brood of insects spread the feeble wing,
Insects that only stink and sting.
Fair laughs his morn, the wind propitious blows;
While, proudly riding on the azure realm,
As Britons wont, the oak-ribb'd navy goes,
Valour on deck, and Conduct at the helm.
The Insect's gloomy eve to pale dismay,
To shame, disgrace, confusion yields an easy prey.

2. 3.
"Fill high wild Comus' bowl,
The lucious feast prepare:
Though TWITCHER cannot whore, he yet may eat,
May comb a strumpet's hair,
As yet a catch may howl,
Or bawdy make him wriggle in his seat.
R&mdash;NE, mean-while, panting, seems to cry
TWITCHER!  cease, the bliss control,
I melt!  I die!  Ah, catch my parting soul!
While drunken raptures quench her sparkling eye.&mdash;
Detested houses!  privies of the isle!
With many a bribe, and midnight job yfed;
Ye hail congenial vice, th' approving smile
Laurels the kindred letcher's hoary head.
Above, below, with equal glow,
The Patriot and the Placeman fly
Where Int'rest hawls, or Pleasure calls;
All hogs of EPICURUS' stye.
Now Brothers!  bending o'er th' accursed loom,
Stamp we our vengeance deep, and fix Britannia's doom.

3. 1.
"Crowding round, see barons bold
Sublime their starry bosoms rear,
And gorgeous dames, both young and old,
In feather'd majesty appear.
In the midst a form supine,
With large lack-lustre eye attempts to shine.
Look NEWTON, CLARK, behold his vacant face,
It realizes empty space.
See, see him, nodding, half-form'd schemes prepare,
Like drunkards' morning dreams they melt away.
Attend not CHATHAM to thy Britain's prayer,
Nor sent thy soul to animate his clay.
Let N&mdash;TH in Lethargy's dull bosom lie,
And ne'er with statesmen mix, the eagles of the sky.

3. 2.
"C&mdash;RL&mdash;D, we consecrate
Thy heart to dulness, nonsense, spite;
To libels too against the state
Pray set thy mark &mdash; thou canst no write.
Stay, darling HOWE!  propitious hear!
We hope thou hast a vulnerable ear,
Still slumber here in peace; &mdash; Ah, from our eyes
In mischianza cloud he flies!&mdash;
Alas!  Fate's griesly weavers too are fled&mdash;
But scenes of glory fill my aching soul.
No more our long-lost CROMWELL we bewail&mdash;
I see the Thirteen Stripes o'er Britain's Flag prevail.

3. 3.
"A while dread war shall reign,
A while amidst the grove
(In foreign rage, and whisker'd fury dwell),
The HESSIAN shall rove:
The breechless SCOT distain
His sword with blood from Freedom's throbbing breast.
But list!  I hear the cherub choir&mdash;
See!  'tis heaven's gazette they bear&mdash;
Victorious shoutings lessen on mine ear,
That lost in long futurity expire.
Fond Briton!  think'st thou that yon sanguine flood,
Spilt by thy arm, has quench'd the western ray?
Our glorious sun, emerging from the cloud,
Shall warm the nations with a tenfold day.
Enough for me, with joy I see
The different doom our fates assign.
Yours is to-day, that once away,
A long and lasting triumph's mine."
He spoke, and darting from the mountain's height,
Snug in the arms of SQUAW disported all the night.
