Why should the muse, on bold aspiring wing,
For warriors and for statesmen only mourn?
Why not the praise of modest merit sing,
And deck, with elegy, its decent urn?

The worthy man, whose sober, quiet, time,
Ebbs slowly off in acts of private good,
Much more deserves than he, whose would sublime,
Pants for loud honour by a waste of blood.

The torrent raging from the "snow-capt hills,"
Spreads its broad ruin and attracts our gaze;
Much less impetuous flow the gentle rills;
But merit more our gratitude and praise.

Upon the torrent rides its various prey;
It sweeps the fields, and desolates the year;
How much more smooth the riv'let winds its way,
The yellow harvest on its banks to rear!

Evans is gone &mdash; the tenour of whose life,
"The noiseless tenor" &mdash; and the virtuous plan,
Was far from folly, and apart from strife,
To study, practice, all the task of man.

His worth he boasted not, nor strove to hide;
No pompous shew he made, nor wish'd to make;
What wealth permitted not, his heart supplied;
And what he gave, he gave for pity's sake.

His road through life, nor easy nor severe,
Neither with roses nor with thorns was strewed;
Not careless of success, nor vex'd with care;
From industry his competence accrued.

Domestic joys he sought, and most approv'd,
Joys rendered lasting by his wish to please;
Rich in the converse of the wife he loved,
And with his prattlers clustring round his knees.

Through all his course with piety he strove
The storms of passion calmly to appease;
And in the pure delights of wedded love,
His youth, his age, his latter end, were peace.

&mdash;Hear then!  thou once fond partner of his breast!
Oh, from thy sorrows, by our prayers, be rent!
He's gone from thee, but with his God to rest,
To reap the blessing of a life well spent.

A great, a precious, task for thee is left&mdash;
Task well adapted to thy fond regard!
Your tender charmers, of his love bereft,
Look up to thee, their infancy to guard.

He died &mdash; but left, to the maternal care,
Six beauteous pictures of himself behind;
Look in their faces, you behold him there;
And you must stamp his image on their mind.

Teach then the babes to imitate the sire,
Give them his gentle sense, his temper even;
This work accomplish'd &mdash; piously retire&mdash;
And share with him his throne, and share his Heav'n.
