Dim fades the day, and o'er the dewy meeds
Still Night her sable mantle gently spreads.
The fabled dance the little fairy leads,
And with light foot the velvet circle treads.

'Tis solemn darkness &mdash; let reflection pause&mdash;
How vast a change!  yet in how short a space!
How soon the Sun, by its unvarying laws,
Sunk with soft blushes in the Sea's embrace.

One short hour since all Nature wore a smile,
And sportive flocks gay frolick'd on her breast;
But now no active scenes the hour beguile,
For all is stillness, solitude, and rest!

The sons of Labour press the couch of ease;
E'en Care is hush'd, and Woe forgets to smart:
On Misery's face now dwells the look of Peace,
Tho' ceaseless Grief may tear the waking heart.

Soft be their dreams, and while each eye be clos'd,
Let human feeling claim from care a space;
For some few hours let ev'ry pang repose,
Let Anguish melt away in Sleep's embrace.

Ah!  sweet to all but me its poppy blooms;
Me fated now to press a thorny bed;
Me whom the fate of dire Disorder dooms
To view in vain Night's soothing mantle spread.

Yet tho' depriv'd of Day's enamell'd glare,
(Its vivid scenery fades in Fancy's eye!)
And tho' deny'd the robe of Sleep to wear,
Still let Reflection's moral aid be nigh.

But whilst pale Sickness (of clear thought the night),
Spreads her dim curtain o'er the aching brain,
Canst thou, my soul, ev'n in Disease's spite,
Attempt to moralize 'midst grief and pain?

Yet sure the immortal spark may seek the sky,
Thro' the sweet paths by meek Religion trod;
The sense of earthly sorrow casting by,
May seek, may worship, may adore its God.

Oh!  let my ardent spirit grateful prove,
That through these dreadful pangs 'twixt life and death,
I still do breathe, to bless that pitying love,
Whose goodness lent awhile the quivering breath.

Yet how does Sickness, with chameleon power,
From gloomy Nature catch a tainted hue;
Each object fashion'd to the sorrowing hour,
Seems issued from Creation's hand anew.

For all was gay whilst Youth and Health was mine,
Nor Grief nor Care could interpose between;
By Nature warm'd, the heart, without design,
Caught joy's warm thrill from ev'ry passing scene.

Dear sweet remembrances of happy life,
E'en now by Mem'ry's aid my soul is mov'd,
And spurning all the pangs of present strife,
Dwells on the pleasures once so fondly lov'd.

But, oh!  you're gone!  and what is human joy,
Stript of the tints by youthful Fancy spread;
The bosom loses every sweet employ,
When eager Hope and rosy Health are fled.

For early Youth resists the shafts of woe,
And springs to pleasure with elastic force;
With current quick the streams of life o'erflow,
Whilst Age perceives them stagnate in their course.

Then farewell earthly bliss! &mdash; The glowing mind,
With ardent zeal, a better path shall try;
And leaving meaner cares far &mdash; far behind,
Pants for more happy scenes beyond the sky.
