Great Tom now sounds the close of busy day,
The weary dray-horse rests from labour free,
From town, till morn, the merchant speeds his way,
And London leaves to tumult and to me.

Now stars terrestrial glimmer through each street,
Thro' all the air a din confus'd is spread,
Save where perchance some list'ning crowd you meet,
By nightly songsters' strains discordant led;

Save that from yonder watch-box standing near,
The old night-guardian tells his wonted tale;
Or urg'd by outrage dire to timely fear,
Makes his loud rattle upon the gale.

On cobler's stall, or screen'd by friendly shed,
Full many a maid once breath'd her nightly woes;
Yet here from chill misfortune ever fled,
The houseless wand'rers of the street repose.

The noisy call of Smithfield's early train,
The sweep's shrill matins from the chimney stack,
The dustman's bell, or post-boy's piping strain,
No more shall call their fleeting spirits back.

For them no more the brothel door shall turn,
Or busy waiter ply his napkin'd care:
No am'rous youth with lawless passion burn,
Nor sly procuress in their plunder share.

Once in their cheeks the rose of health was seen,
When youth its charms luxuriant round them shed;
How jocund did their morn of life begin!
But ah!  how soon by gath'ring clouds o'erspread.

Let not stern virtue scorn th' unhappy frail,
Their nights of riot, and their days of woe;
Nor sanctified indiff'rence hear the tale,
And choke the streams of nature ere they flow.

The pride of chastity, and dread of shame,
Around the fair, tho' sage experience place;
Yet oft they're found but recreants to their fame;
The path forbidden all are fond to trace!

Nor you, ye prudes, in envious spleen delight,
When hapless maidens err, by love betray'd:
Did ye not want th' attractions to incite,
Yourselves might prove the victims ye upbraid.

Can wit refin'd, or might of human arm,
Back to the fountain drive the bubbling rill?
Can reason's voice to peace the passions charm,
Or make them flow obedient to its will?

Perhaps within this cheerless spot is laid
Some youth once injur'd in squalid city jails;
Hands that the merry bag-pipe sweetly play'd,
Or rak'd the streets in search of rusty nails.

But commerce never with her ample range,
Rich with gay spoils, their avarice provok'd;
They never learn'd to barter at Exchange;
No city feast for them with dainties smok'd.

Full many a forest oak of stately size
To menial purpose bends it's lofty head:
Full many a treasure undiscover'd lies
Beneath the passenger's unconscious tread.

Some latent WREN, who up the scaffold high,
Obedient hasten'd to the bricklay'r's call;
Some poor harmonic Tinker here may lie,
Some Statesman guiltless of his country's fall.

The Virtuoso's praises to command,
The soul to lift with transports to the skies,
To scatter mis'ry o'er a smiling land,
And fruitless schemes of conquest to devise;

Their lot forbade: &mdash; nor yet did fortune frown,
But equally their crimes and fame confin'd;
Forbade to wade thro' folly to renown,
And gain the execution of mankind;

Their country's keen vindictive stroke to prove,
To die by hangman's less ingenuous hand,
Or heap the shores of distant Sidney Cove
With culprits banish'd from their native land.

Far from the smoky town's incessant noise,
Their sober foot-steps never learn'd to stray;
They never sigh'd for vulgar rural joys,
Nor sought the woods to shun the scorching day.

Yet Nature's forms demand some faint respect,
Some fond memorial still their souls requir'd;
With pots of flow'rs, and green earth cases deck'd,
Their windows oft the passenger admir'd.

There rose, and myrtle, trimm'd with fondest care,
Might strawberry and garden well supply:
And many a root of mignonette was there;
While this regal'd the nose, and those the eye.

For e'en in thought, what mortal can behold,
Unmov'd, the charms that hill and valley yield,
In spring, the meadows spangled o'er with gold,
And all the beauteous days of Nature's field?

On some fond plant the Virgin feasts her eyes,&mdash;
Some frail memento of the flow'ring year;
E'en from saloons the voice of Nature cries,
E'en in our parlours blooming shrubs appear.

For thou, th' obscure one's friend, who thus alone
Dost in these lines their simple joys relate;
If chance, some youth like thee, at random thrown,
From kindred sympathy inquire thy fate:

Haply some cit may say: &mdash; "The crowd among
Oft have we seen him, at the close of day,
Bustling with hasty foot-steps thro' the throng,
To gain his fav'rite seat at some new play.

"There, in the midway region of the pit,
Where Critics oft their arts malignant ply,
Near to the orchestra, sedate he'd sit,
And pore upon the scene with curious eye.

"Beneath yon elm, that each new loit'rer wooes,
He lov'd to sit, absorb'd in musings deep;
Then up the Green-Park, or by Chelsea Mews,
He'd briskly run; or, tir'd, would slowly creep.

"One eve I miss'd him on th' accustom'd way;
Along the park, and near his fav'rite tree,
Another came &mdash; I sought him at the play,
Nor in pit, box, nor gallery, was he."

The next in dreary hearse, with sad array,
Slow to th' unexpress'd church-yard he was borne.
Approach and read (if thou hast time) the lay,
Grav'd on the stone, that no proud lies adorn.

EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon a folio terse,
An Author, once to wits and patrons known;
The Critics frown'd not on his humble verse,
Nor did the world his labours quite disown.

Large his editions, but his readers few;
Fate did a recompense as largely send:
He wisely bade to Booksellers adieu,
And (in their stead) each Chandler found a friend.

No longer now pil'd up in useless state,
His pages freely circulate thro' town:
Perhaps, at last, doom'd by capricious fate
To kindle pipes, or curl some crazy crown.
