The Curfew tolls the hour of locking up,
The grating bolts turn heavy on the key,
The turnkey hastens on beef-steaks to sup
And leaves the cell to treason and to me.

Now fades the glittering dram-glass from the sight,
And through the gaol a horrid stillness reigns,
Save where the watchman bawls the hour of night,
Or restless felon shakes his clanking chains.

Save that beneath the prison's outward bound,
Some drunken Cyprian wrathfully complains
Of such as, wandering near her nightly round,
Forestal the market of her wanton gains.

Within these rugged walls, that massy door
Where rise the nails in many a rusty knob,
Each in his narrow cell, till trial o'er,
The tenants of the prison cease to rob.

The welcome call of theft-concealing night,
The jewel glittering through the crystal pane,
The watchman's rattle, nor the link boy's light,
No more can rouse them from their binding chain.

For them no more the foaming bowl shall fill,
Or busy waiter close the door with care;
No lisping wanton drink to swell their bill,
Or on their knee the nightly booty share.

Oft did the pocket to their fingers yield,
Their chissel oft the stubborn door has broke:
How dextrous could they club or poppers wield,
How fell the traveller beneath their stroke.

Let not ambition mock their cunning toil,
Their humble deeds and lives resolv'd and brief,
Nor patriots hear with a disdainful smile,
The low and vulgar annals of a thief.

My boasted Register, the Forum's jaw,
And all the tropes hatched in the Draper's shop,
Await alike th' inevitable law&mdash;
The paths of faction lead but to the Drop.

Nor you, ye vain, impute to these the fault,
If memory to their name no trophies raise,
Where through the wire-drawn page devoid of thought
The venal Doctor drawls the note of praise.

Can storied page, or often-hacknied trope
To pardon change the judge's dread harangue,
Can Mavor's voice arrest the fatal rope,
Or Phillips soothe the ear of them that hang?

Perhaps in this frequented gaol doth lie
Some heart once pregnant with a patriot's fire;
Hands that to pick the public purse might try,
Or raise to extacy the Cambrian liar.

But ne'er to them was oped the HORN-book page,
Nor Paine nor Godwin taught them how to think,
Cold Ignorance repress'd their factious rage
And froze the black'ning current of their ink.

Full many a wish by fiery gin inspired
The dark unfathom'd souls of Patriots breathe,
Full many a dagger's made to rust unhired,
And waste its sharpness in the bloodless sheath.

Some club-room Wardle, that with face from hell,
Though drunk, would still dispute the landlord's score,
Some mute inglorious PETER here may dwell,
Some Mistress Clarke, that may not be a w&mdash;e:

The scorn of sneering senates to command,
To feel delight in mud and rotten egg,
To scatter libels o'er a wond'ring land,
And, failing other ways and means, to beg,

Their lot  forbade; nor circumscrib'd alone
Their patriot ardour, but their crimes confined,
Forbade to bend obsequious to a throne,
And lose the native freedom of mankind:

The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To feel the blushes of ingenuous shame,
With costly gew-gaws swell a harlot's pride,
And then for payment pawn a patriot's name.

Far from the muddy purlieus of St. Giles
Their jovial wishes never learn'd to stray,
Along the steep and slippery path of wiles
They kept the dangerous tenor of their way.

Yet e'en their names to save from rude neglect
Some short memorial still, from passers by,
With worn-out type and shapeless wood-cut deck'd
Exacts the tribute of a halfpenny.

Their dying speech, life, birth, and parentage
Are all recorded by the Ord'nary;
And many a text he quotes and maxim sage,
That teach the trembling criminal to die.

Ah!  who to law, a prey, upon the drop,
To KETCH his well-paved throttle e'er resigned,
Smelt the warm fumes rise from the loved gin-shop,
Nor cast one longing, thirsting look behind?

On Sheriff Wood the dying eye relies,
Some cordial drops the closing throttle claim;
Ev'n from the tomb, 'tis said, that spirits rise,
Ev'n ghosts of drams still keep their wonted names.

For thee, who loving every thief immured,
Dost in these lines their desperate tale relate,
If chance, by gaoler led, in chains secured
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,

Haply some shaggy-headed rogue may cry,
"Oft have we seen him on the Thursday night,
Forging with ready pen the factious lie,
To cheat the public, and vent private spite.

"There, on one end of that old greasy bench
He'd sit, and call for dram or pot of beer,
Bilk, if by chance he could, the tap-room wench,
And pore upon his scoundrel REGISTER.

"By yonder wall, now frowning as he storm'd,
Mutt'ring his poisonous libels he would go,
And now would loyal seem, as one reform'd,&mdash;
Treacherous and false alike to friend and foe.

"One day we miss'd him from his hated cell,
Nor by the wall nor on the bench was he;
We thought Old Nick had whisk'd him off to Hell,&mdash;
But there was none would follow him to see.

"And soon in awful state and sad array
Upon a hurdle we beheld him borne:
Attend and hear what Mister Ketch did say,
When from his shoulders he his head had shorn."

THE HANGMAN'S SPEECH.
Here bleeds his head upon the traitor's stage
A wretch to Virtue and to Truth unknown,
Foul Faction frown'd not on his lying page,
And Infamy had mark'd him for her own.

Large was his bounty &mdash; so he would you cram,&mdash;
The law rewarded him beyond his hope,
He gave to misery, all he pleased, &mdash; a damn,
The law bestow'd, 'twas all he feared, &mdash; a rope.

No farther seek his villainies to know,
Nor bid me all his hateful libels tell,
For now with him they burn in fires below
And serve the cause of Faction still, &mdash; in HELL.
