The courts are shut &mdash; departed ev'ry judge,
Each greedy lawyer gripes his double fee,
In doleful mood the suitors homeward trudge,
And leave the hall to silence, and to me.

Now not a barrister attracts the sight,
And all the dome a solemn stillness holds,
Save at the entrance, where, with all her might,
The quean of apples at the porter scolds.

Save that at fives a group of wrangling boys
At intervals pursue the bounding ball,
Make Henderson, the studious, damn their noise,
When batt'ring down the plaister from the wall.

From ev'ry court, with ev'ry virtue crown'd,
Where many get, and many lose their bread,
Elsewhere to squabble, puzzle, and confound,
Attornies &mdash; clerks &mdash; and council &mdash; all are fled.

Contending fools, too stubborn to agree,
The good fat client (name for ever dear),
The long-drawn brief, and spirit-stirring fee,
No more, 'till Michaelmas, shall send them here.

'Till then, no more th' Exchequer nymphs shall run
To fetch their wigs, and giggling stroke the tail,
Or dressy orange-wenches ply their fun,
And offer their commodities to sale.

With these the Templar oft has stop'd to chat,
And tip'd 'em sixpence for each cake he broke:
How jocund did they give him tit for tat,
And bonnily return him joke for joke!

Let not Drybutter look with eyes askew,
Nor envy them the profit of the hall,
Let him not think, that with a spiteful view
They mean to draw the custom from his stall.

The cinder-wench in dust-cart seated high,
With arms begrim'd, and dirty as her sieve,
The ragged trulls, who sprats and herrings cry,
The meanest trollops have a right to live.

Nor you, ye belles!  impute the fault to these,
If at the glittering ball they not appear,
Where music has a thousand charms to please,
And with its sweetness almost wounds the ear.

Will Almack, or the goddess of Soho,
Enlist these misses in their brilliant train,
Admit them e'en to see the puppet-show,
To take one peep, and light them out again?

Perhaps in their neglected minds were sown
The seeds of worth from Nature's large supply;
The seeds of worth, which might in time have grown,
And flourish'd, lovely to the ravish'd eye.

But the calm sunshine of a parent's care,
With one warm ray their bosom's ne'er imprest;
Ill usage drove the wretches to despair,
And check'd each growing virtue of the breast.

Full many a rural lass in Britain's land
The vile unwarrantable brothels hold,
Full many a town-bred damsel walks the Strand,
And trucks her beauty for a piece of gold.

Some ghost of Jefferies will this floor parade,
Some daring pettifogger, stern of brow,
Who might have done due honour to the spade,
Whirl'd the tough flail, or grasp'd the peaceful plough,

This upstart thing some useful trade to learn,
By far more suited to his shallow head,
Some trade, by which he might have known to earn,
With honest industry, his daily bread,

False pride forbade:  nor to himself alone,
Confines his views, but to his son extends;
Forbade the youth, to quirks already prone,
To mind the means, so he could gain the ends.

Forbade to bind him 'prentice to a trade,
Behind the compter all the day to stand,
His birth by work mechanic to degrade,
Or wait on customers with cap in hand.

Far from the worthy members of the law,
A rogue in grain, he ever kept aloof;
From learn'd bum-bailiffs learn'd his briefs to draw,
And where he could not find, he coin'd a proof.

Yet doth this wretch, illiterate as proud,
With low-life homage, low-life business meet,
And pick the pockets of th' unhappy crowd,
Mur'd in th' Compters, Newgate, and the Fleet.

Bound by their creditors in durance fast!
In plaintive murmurs they bewail their fate,
And many an eager, wishful eye they cast,
Whene'er the turnkey opes and shuts the gate.

For who, to dull imprisonment a prey,
The pleasing thoughts of freedom e'er resign'd,
From home, from wife, and children, dragg'd away,
Nor cast one longing ling'ring look behind?

Some sharp attorney must the captive hire,
Who knows each secret winding of the laws,
Some previous fees th' attorney will require,
Before he ventures to conduct his cause.

For you, who traverse up and down this shrine,
And lounge, and saunter at your wonted rate,
If in some future chat, with arch design,
Some wag should ask this pettifogger's fate,

In sneering mood, some brother quill may say,
"I've seen him oft at alehouse table sit,
Brushing with dirty bands the crumbs away,
And eye the mutton roasting on the spit.

"There in the snug warm corner of the bench,
Part stain'd with grease, and part defil'd with beer,
His thirst with cooling porter would he quench,
And bend his noddle o'er the gazetteer.

"Hard by yon steps, now grinning as in scorn,
Mutt'ring his oaths and quibbles he would stand,
Now hanging down his pate, like one forlorn,
As if some dread commitment was at hand.

"One morn I miss'd him in this custom'd hall,
And at the Oak, where he was wont to be,
His clerk came down, and answer'd to my call,
But by yon steps, nor at the Oak was he.

"The next I heard (oh melancholy tale!
On our profession what a foul reproach!)
That he for forgery was confin'd in jail,
And dragg'd (oh shameful!) there without a coach."

HIS CHARACTER.
VULTURE, the arrant'st rascal upon earth,
At length is caught, and into Newgate thrown;
Fair honesty disclaim'd him at his birth,
And villainy confess'd him for her own.

Grown old in sin, at no one crime dismay'd,
'Gainst Nature's cries he arm'd his callous heart;
For, when his father was to death convey'd,
He growl'd &mdash; and damn'd the slowness of the cart.

Jack Ketch, to shew his duty to his friend,
Will soon confirm it with the strongest tie,
But on such ties what mortal would depend,
A rogue he liv'd, and like a rogue he'll die.

Now prest with guilt, he feels its sharpest sting,
Great his transgressions, and but small his hope,
He gave the sheriff (all he had) a ring,
He gain'd from justice (all he fear'd) a rope.

No farther seek his vices to disclose,
But leave the culprit to his dark abode,
There let him rest, till breaking his repose
The hangman summons him to Tyburn road.
