The clock-bell tolls the hour of early day,
The lowing herd their Smithfield penance drie,
The watchman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the Fair, all solitude, to me!

Now the first beams of morning glad the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds;
Save when the sheep-dog bays with hoarse affright,
And brutal drovers pen the unwilling folds.

Save that, where shelter'd or from wind or show'r,
The lock'd-out 'prentice, or frail nymph complain,
Of such as, wandering near their secret bower,
Molest them, sensible in sleep, to pain.

Beneath those ragged tents &mdash; that boarded shade,
Which late display'd its stores in tempting heaps;
There children, dog, cakes, oysters, all are laid,
There, guardian of the whole, the master sleeps.

The busy call of care-begetting morn,
The well-slept passenger's unheeding tread,
The showman's clarion, or the echoing horn,
Too soon must rouse them from their lowly bed!

Perhaps in this neglected booth is laid
Some head volcanic, oft discharging fire!
Hands that the rod of magic lately sway'd,
Toes &mdash; that so nimbly danc'd upon the wire!

Some Clown, or Pantaloon &mdash; the gazers' jest,
Here, with his train in dirty pageant stood:
Some tired-out Posture-master here may rest,
Some conjuring Swordsman &mdash; guiltless of his blood!

The applause of listening cockneys to command,
The threats of City Marshall to despise;
To give delight to all the grinning band,
And read their merit in spectators' eyes,

Is still their boast; &mdash; nor, haply, their's alone,
Polito's Lions (though now dormant laid)
And human monsters, shall acquire renown,
The spotted Negro &mdash; and the arm-less Maid!

Peace to the youth who, slumbering at the Bear,
Forgets his present lot, his perils past:
Soon will the crowd again be thronging there,
To view the man on wild Sombrero cast.

Careful their Booths from insult to protect,
These furl their tapestry, late erected high;
No longer with prodigious pictures deckt,
They tempt the passing youth's astonish'd eye.

But when the day calls forth the belles and beaux,
The cunning Showmen each device display,
And many an useful notice round he shews,
To teach the ascending stranger &mdash; where to pay.

Sleep on, ye Imps of merriment &mdash; Sleep on!
In this short respite to your labouring train;
And when this time of annual mirth is gone,
May ye enjoy, in peace, your hard-earned gain!
