The surly crier rings his nightly knell,
The willing guest departs his weary may,
And hears with joy the lonely Prison-bell,
Nor wishes with his wretched friend to stay.

Now rest the noisy racket-playing cry,
And rattling balls against the dreary wall;
To them succeed the ruin-hurling die,
And bawling Potmen's never ceasing call.

Within these narrow cells, in durance vile,
Where lurid Vengeance holds its baleful reign,
Where awful Ruin hovers 'round the pile,
Th' inglorious captives ev'ry grief sustain.

The breezy call of incense-breathing morn
Gives not its wonted joy unto their shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn
No more entices from their lowly bed.

Here dwells the rustic, who with thoughtless zeal
The petty tyrant of his fields defied,
Doom'd, by some lordly Villain's frown, to feel
The tedious malice of hard hearted Pride.

Here too, in long captivity remain
The hardy warrior, and the nobly brave,
Who dar'd their Country's battles to sustain
Their honor'd Country's LIBERTY to save.

But oh!  despise not their ignoble toil,
Their loss of Liberty and Life obscure,
Nor proudly hear with a disdainful smile
The dull complaint of the imprison'd poor.

On those who boast of Heraldry and Pow'r
Or all that Pomp and sordid wealth e'er gave,
The angry storms of Fortune soon may lour
A wretched Prison may precede the grave.

Not ev'n can VIRTUE'S sacred name defend;
For round the good, and near the bad await,
The one t' afflict, the other to amend,
The never-failing ministers of Fate.

Perhaps within this sad abode may pine,
A heart once pregnant with Celestial fire,
Souls, that to warlike deeds do still incline,
And hands, that still might wake the living lyre:

But Liberty to them, by cruel fate,
Is now denied the panting heart to warm
Chill Penury confines their low estate,
And Life's to them devoid of ev'ry charm.

Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Within these hated walls do they remain;
With patience drink the bitter dregs of Life,
And the dire load of misery sustain.

Their hopes, their wishes, and the chance of fate,
The place of certainty, or truth supply;
They still would triumph o'er the proud one's hate,
Nor yet despairing wildly wish to die.

For who to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
A miserable being e'er resign'd,
Left the dull precincts of the doleful day,
Nor cast one longing, ling'ring look behind?

Still on some breast does ev'ry soul rely,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires,
For distant friends we breathe th' impassion'd sigh,
To tears of SYMPATHY each wretch aspires.

But here, entomb'd within this living grave,
Too many sink beneath their wretched fate,
No more have Friends the pleasing pow'r to save,
And long-delay'd assistance comes too late.

While some, alas!  neglected by each friend,
The world despising, by the world forgot,
With jovial riot their dull hours defend,
And drown with sparkling wine their hapless lot.

The sumptuous feast, and ev'ry sensual joy,
With noisy mirth each gloomy night infest
Still must REFLECTION'S piercing dart annoy,
And such vile pleasures but disturb their rest.

And yet some tutors with a scanty fare
Advise a PRISON, venial faults to mend:
But Ah!  they little know the anxious care,
And less the danger which such schools attend.

Can prudent maxims to a conscious mind
Supply the place of HONOR'S gentler sway?
Or can the dear-bought knowledge of mankind
The loss of VIRTUE'S gen'rous flame repay?

Many, by fond credulity betray'd,
Their happiness on other's honor stake;
The faithless friends the angry laws evade,
And honest friendship suffers for the rake.

The sober citizen, whose hard-earn'd wealth,
Is lost by sad vicissitude of trade,
With heartfelt sorrow undermines his health
While Prudent Friends his losses still upbraid.

Then by a cruel false deceiver led,
Wearied with mis'ry, frantic with despair,
The blooming Partner of his marriage bed,
Adds jealous anguish to his wretched care.

For thee, who mindful of thy own mischance,
Dost in these lines an artless tale relate;
Some kindred spirit, or some friend perchance,
In future times may mourn thy hapless fate.

And when with dirges due, in sad array,
Slow thro' the church-way path thy corpse be borne,
May these few lines compose the parting lay,
Grav'd on a stone beneath an aged thorn

THE EPITAPH.
Here rest his cares within the friendly earth,
A YOUTH to fortune and to fame unknown
Some Daemon frown'd upon his humble birth,
And cheerless mis'ry marked him for her own.

When youthful, virtues glow'd within his breast,
Allur'd by Passion, by Example led,
With Folly's children he too warmly prest,
And idle joys their baleful influence shed.

But soon succeed these pleasures of the town,
Th' unfeeling persecution of the proud,
With black misfortune's sad terrific frown,
And hard neglect of the unthinking crowd.

Deserted by his friends, by all mankind,
With silent anguish long he mourn'd his fate,
With joyful hope his willing breast resign'd
In expectation of an happier state.

Around his grave the cypress wreath entwine,
The Yew Tree's shade shall add its solemn gloom;
The tender fair to pity will incline,
And drop a tear upon his early Tomb.
