The Chancellor has passed the stern decree,
The daily press rings out the doleful knell,
Warning each old adventurer, that he
Must now of Lotteries take a last farewell!

Dismay and wonder now pervade Cornhill&mdash;
The printers, too, are in a dismal rout,
Swearing they ne'er shall print another bill,
When those for whom they puffed are thus puffed out.

O Fred'rick Robinson, thou man of death!
Our scanty pittance why should you begrudge it?
Why &mdash; oh!  why thus in dungeon stop our breath,
And shut us cruelly from out thy budget?

What was it seem'd offensive in thine eyes,
And gave thine act a plausible pretence?
Say &mdash; didst thou think the selling a large prize
Was in itself a capital offence?

Whatever be the cause, the effect is sad:
Since thou must close his well-known lucky wicket,
Bish, our Leviathan, is gone half mad,
And looks as dismal as a blank-drawn ticket.

Carrol &mdash; alas!  his carols, turned to sighs,
Seem to his cheerful name to give the lie;
Hazard, with fear of death before his eyes
Declares he'll stand the "hazard of the die."

Swift, of the Poultry, too, is ill at ease,
His grief breaks forth in this pathetic swell&mdash;
"I go to pine on wretched bread and cheese,
For, ah!  to poultry I must bid farewell!"

Martin complains his rapid flight is checked,
And doth the ruin of his house deplore,
Wond'ring that martin's nests don't claim respect,
As they were wont to do in times of yore.

Richardson says the world will teem with crimes,
And woe and misery pervade the state;
For what can prosper in those hapless times,
When Good-luck is proscribed, and out of date?

The web of death encircles J. D. Webb,
The common ruin on him too hath landed;
Him, too, must reach this melancholy ebb,
And all the fortunes of the Strand be stranded.

Pidding, who did his corner much enjoy,
Says, while he contemplates the prospect dim,
How oft I've hung out my gay blue-coat boy&mdash;
Now I must hang myself instead of him!

Happily, next year, some friend shall say and weep,
As up Cornhill he takes his lonely way&mdash;
Where are the harvests which I used to reap,
Beneath the sickle of each drawing day?

Ah!  where is Sivewright? &mdash; where is Eyton now?
Where are the placards, which so lately told
The clustering congregation when and how
The thirty thousands were all shared and sold?

"Where dwelt activity there reigneth gloom;
My well-known friends have lost their public rank:
The Lottery has pass'd into the tomb,
And left the world an universal blank."
