The purple glow of day begins to fade,
And hears its requiem in the vesper bell;
The deeper silence of the sacred shade,
Re-echoes to the soul the solemn knell.

While o'er the hallow'd ground we living tread,
Soft, let us pause, and from each friendly tomb,
That shrouds the ashes of the mould'ring dead,
Receive the awful presage of our doom.

Mark where yon' proud mausoleum lifts its urn,
Boasting the wealth its tenant once possest:
Pride rears the pile, with fatal pride we burn,
Unthinking we are fragile at the best.

When stretch'd upon the icy bed of death,
And all the vital functions vibrate slow,
Can sordid gold arrest the fleeting breath,
Or bid the crimson tide begin to flow?

Within the precincts of the holy fane,
The presence temple of the King of Kings,
(Where deep humility our hearts should reign,
Where angels veil their faces in their wings;)

Ancestral honours, titles, place, and pow'r,
In long array, excite the rising sigh!
Where are they? &mdash; forfeit to the fatal hour,
And prostrate underneath the marble lie.

Vain man!  swift gliding down the ebbing stream
Of earth-born joy, which like a vapour flies,
Writes o'er the ashes of his sires, their dreams,
Their state inherits, dreams, and also dies.

Beneath this simple stone, the good man sleeps;
Its best adornment tells, "here lies the just;"
Each heart, each eye, his honour'd mem'ry weeps,
And kindred seraphs watch his sacred dust.

His life display'd the course his precepts taught,
Within the line prescrib'd he ever trod;
With holy zeal his Master's battles fought,
And now he triumphs with his saviour GOD.

Vers'd in the page of universal lore,
The sage beholds its downward progress grow;
Ransacks and culls the philosophic store,
But all his science yields to Death's fell blow.

E'en Beauty, deck'd with ev'ry winning charm,
To draw and fix the wide admiring crowd;
No more awakes the tender, soft alarm,
The earth her mantle, and her robe the shroud.

Sweet are the blushing beauties of the rose,
Sweet are the odours which around it fly,
Cheer'd by the influence of the sun it glows,
But winter comes, its beauties fade and die.

See where the strong man writhes beneath the dart,
While groans convulsive bursting from his breast,
Confess the anguish of his tortur'd heart,
Reluctant dragg'd to stand the awful test.

The heaving sod with twisted osiers bound,
Points out the mansions of the humbler dead,
To dust return'd, the young, the gay around
Their ample lesson to the living spread.

Thus have we seen an unrelenting blast,
Commission'd with destruction from on high,
Tear up the tenants of the forest vast,
And all in undistinguish'd ruin lie.

Since then one gen'ral never-failing doom,
Consigns us to the cold and darksome grave;
With eager wishes soar beyond the tomb,
And mercy seek of Him who died to save.

Oh!  may we ever tread "the narrow way,"
'Till life's dim setting-star no more shall burn,
Then shall we hail with joy approaching day,
And leave this sweet memorial on our urn:

EPITAPH:
Here sleeps in dust by feelings once adorn'd,
Just, pious, humble, friendly and sincere,
In each relation all the angel dawn'd,
Which angels saw, and mov'd him to their sphere.

With ev'ry virtue glowing in his soul,
Resign'd the gloomy vale of tears he trod;
Onward he press'd towards the promis'd goal,
The presence of his Maker and his GOD.

Tho' mouldring here the earthly casket lies,
Whence soaring up the tenant spirit fled;
Rob'd with etherial splendour it shall rise,
And quit the gloomy mansions of the dead.

Lo!  where, with well-tun'd imitative art,
The sculptor's chissel to these cherubs gave
A striking emblem of their chosen part,
To hold a lasting vigil o'er his grave.
