Down dropt her brush; the dish-cloth thrown aside,
And lost was all the kitchen's sliver pride;
Scarce would the deep majestic bellows blow,
The labouring jack would hardly, hardly go;
Dull was the brass, unwash'd her earthen-ware,
And Tabby slept neglected in the chair:
LOVE wrought the change, 'twas LOVE that had betray'd,
When thus in doleful dumps bewail'd the maid:
"Go, gentle gales!  and bear my sighs away,
Ah!  why so long does HURLO-THRUMBO stay?

"Why form'd dame Nature women's love so strong,
Or, why art thou so tempting and so long?
Resound my tubs, my hollow tubs resound;
Ah me!  that love should give so deep a wound!
Why in that house should'st thou so strive to shine?
Is it more clean or better kept than mine?
Alas!  I'm told (but they are lies, I ween)
That dirty house, no mortal yet could clean:
Rub as they will, and polish as they can,
PENSIONS and BRIBES will iron-mould the man:
Go, gentle gales!  and bear my sighs away!
Ah!  why so long does HURLO-THRUMBO stay?

"Why seeks my soldier forts or city walls,
When I can make my love less hurtful balls?
Why to the camp must HURLO-THRUMBO fly,
When I can raise, and you besiege a pye?
If thou must fight, for thou art born to wield,
O!  fight in paste the heroes of the field:
Go, gentle gales!  and bear my sighs away!
Ah!  why so long does HURLO-THRUMBO stay?

"When yester morn I turn'd my Jack around,
The salt-box fell portentous to the ground:
Thrice mew'd the cat, and thrice she flew on Tray;
Oh!  think on this, and thy election day!
Die, CINDERETTA!  Ease thy hateful smart,
Ambition's now the mistress of his heart:
Go, gentle gales!  and bear my sighs away!
Ah!  why so long does HURLO-THRUMBO stay?

"Ah me!  each object that these eyes can view,
Brings to my mind some pleasing form of you:
When in this hand the polish'd spit I hold,
Thy shape is here, for thou art long and cold:
If I the cleaver take, the joint to part,
Thy absence then is cleaving of my heart;
Or, if I strive my kitchen fire to mend,
Those eyes are flaming at the poker's end.
Go, gentle gales!  and bear my sighs away!
Ah!  why so long does HURLO-THRUMBO stay?"

Thus wail'd she tearful to herself alone,
The hollow tubs re-echoing every groan:
When lo!  her much-lov'd hero stood to view,
And her heart flutter'd as she nearer drew:
She sought the garret for her Sunday's pride,
Pinn'd on her Nims, and brush'd the fleas aside.
The busy Sylphs attend the dressing fair,
This clears the scurf, and this pork-lards her hair:
This with its breath reduc'd her tear-swoln eye,
Another fans the pouting nostrils dry:
Down came the damsel with superior grace,
With all the stew-pan's radiance in her face:
So dredg'd, so finish'd, and so soft her look,
Now trips a Goddess, and now smiles a cook:
Flies to her Hero, with resistless charms,
And clasps the Long, cold COL'NEL in her arms.
