The courts are shut, departed every judge,
Each greedy lawyer gripes the double fee,
In doleful mood, the suitors homeward trudge,
And leave the hall, to silence, and to me.

Now, not a Barrister attracts the sight,
And all the dome, a solemn stillness holds,
Save, at the entrance where with all her might,
The Barrow-wheeler at the Porter scolds.

From every court, with ev'ry virtue crown'd!
Where numbers gain, and numbers lose their bread,
Elsewhere to squabble, puzzle and confound,
Attornies, clerks, and counsel-all are fled.

Contending fools!  too stubborn to agree,
The good warm client, name for ever dear
The long-drawn brief, the spirit-stirring fee,
No more till Michaelmas, shall send them here.

'Till then, no more the orange nymphs shall ply,
Their ripen'd fruit, all glossy as their cheek;
Nor strive, with jest, and sportive leering eye,
The custom of the youthful clerk, to seek.

Let not the pedlar, frown with eyes askew,
Nor envy them the profits of the hall;
Let him not think, that with a spiteful view,
They mean to draw the custom from his stall.

The cinder wench, in dust-cart seated high,
With hands begrim'd, and dirty as her sieve;
The ragged sluts &mdash; who sprats and herrings cry&mdash;
The meanest wenches, have a right to live!

Nor you, ye Belles!  impute the fault to these,
If at the glittering ball they don't appear,
Where music hath a thousand charms to please,
And with its sweetness, almost wounds the ear,

Perhaps in their neglected minds, were sown
The seeds of worth, from nature's rich supply;
Such seeds of worth, as might in time have grown,
And flourish'd lovely, to the ravish'd eye.

Full many a rural lass in Britain's land,
The vile unwarrantable b&mdash;s hold;
Full many a town-bred damsel walks the Strand,
And barters beauty &mdash; for a piece of gold.

The daring Pettifogger, stern of brow,
Who might have done due honor to the spade,
Whirl'd the tough flail, or grasp'd the peaceful plough,
Presumes, the Courts of justice to parade.

This upstart thing some useful trade to learn,
By far more suited to his shallow head,
False pride forbade, nor suffer'd him to earn,
By honest industry his daily bread!

Far from the worthy members of the law,
A rogue in grain, he ever kept aloof;
By low Jew Bailiffs taught his brief to draw,
And where he couldn't find, he coin'd a proof.

Yet doth this wretch, illiterate as proud,
With low-life-homage, low-life business meet,
And pick the pockets of th' unhappy crowd
'Mur'd in the Bench, the Counters, and the Fleet,

Bound by the creditors, in durance fast,
In plaintive murmurs, they bewail their fate,
And many an eager, wistful eye they cast,
Whene'er the turnkey opes, and shuts the gate.

For who to dull imprisonment a prey,
The pleasing thoughts of freedom e'er resign'd?
From home, from wife-from children &mdash; dragg'd away
Nor cast one longing, lingering look behind

For you, who traverse to and fro this shrine,
And lounge, and saunter, at your wonted rate,
If in some future chat, with arch design,
Some wag should ask &mdash; the Pettifogger's fate

In sneering mood, some brother quill, will say,
"I've seen him oft at tavern table sit;
Brushing with dirty hands, the crumbs away,
And eye the joint, just taken from the spit,

"One morn I miss'd him in this 'custom'd hall,
And at the room, where he was wont to be,
His boy I saw, who register'd my call;
But by yon steps &mdash; nor at his desk was he.

The next I learnt (O melancholy tale),
On the profession, what a foul reproach!
That his deserts had sent him to a jail,
Where he was dragg'd (O shame!)  without a coach!

HIS CHARACTER.
"Vulture!  the arrant'st cormorant on earth,
At length is caught, and into Newgate thrown;
Fair honesty disclaim'd him at his birth,
And villainy confess'd him for her own!

"Grown old in sin, at no one crime dismay'd,
'Gainst nature's cries, he arm'd his harden'd breast;
For when his parents were to earth convey'd,
He smil'd and spurned compassion, as a jest.

"Now press'd with guilt, he'll feel its sharpest sting
Great his transgressions, and but small his hope
He'll give the Sheriff (all he'll have) a ring,
And gain from justice, all he fear'd &mdash; a rope!

"No farther seek his vices to disclose,
But leave the wretch unpitied to deplore
His ill-spent life, till breaking his repose,
The turnkey leads him to the Debtors' Door."
