The north wind, sighing, mourns the parting year;
The Editor has flown to scenes of glee&mdash;
The Pressman homeward casts a wistful leer,
And leaves the idle types to you and me!

Now glows th' enlivening bowl upon the sight,
And winged hours in pastime haste away,
Save where the Carrier toils the live-long night,
To treat his patrons to the accustomed lay.

For long has custom, by a stern decree,
Fixed as the laws by Medes and Persians made,
Ordain'd the Carrier's Song, the PATRON'S FEE,
The mutual tax by mutual kindness paid.

Ah!  who to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
Remembers not the Carrier's weekly toil,
Who braves the wintry blast, or sultry ray,
Skulks through the rain, or wades through miry soil?

'Tis his to bring the richly freighted page,
Where shine the glories of the great and brave,
Where glow the follies of the passing age,
Or stand exposed the triumphs of the grave.

He brings the Message grave, the sage Debate,
The worn out Maxim, or the pithy Speech
Of hoary Statesman at the helm of State,
And Politicians from the stump who preach.

But not alone of Message grave, or sage debate,
Of Man's high glories,or of Folly's reign,
Or other things retold, does John relate,&mdash;
From realms afar we stranger tidings gain.

Lo!  the poor Spaniard, bless'd with genial clime,
With richly teeming soil, and spicy groves&mdash;
The slave of despots, purpled o'er with crime,
Plunged in unholy wars, unhallow'd loves!

Behold the land by gallant Cortes gain'd,
Where Freedom nobly struggles for her right,
Where groaning crowds, by Superstition chain'd,
Break the vile links, and draw their sabers bright!

Their cause is hallow'd by the pious prayer,
Their wrongs are treasur'd in the patriot's mind,
And Liberty shall reign triumphant there,
When despots cease to trample on mankind.

Shame to such despots!  claiming homage, due
Alone to Him who rules the hosts on high,
Who sleep on couches of ensanguin'd hue,
Lull'd by the dying groan, the bursting sigh!

Now turn we to Columbia's wide domain,
Where Chiefs obedient own a people's sway&mdash;
Where happy millions, smiling o'er the plain,
Inhale new blessings with each new-born day.

Such are the tidings by the Carrier brought,
Nor these alone engross the ample sheet:
The Lover's song, the Poet's merry thought,
The Wit's last joke, enhance the weekly treat.

If Colin weds the amply courted dame,
From bed and board, if Dolly chance to flee,
He gives impartial to the tongue of fame,
Frail Dolly's sin, and happy Colin's glee.

Nor can his labours this brief song display&mdash;
None but th' initiated know them right&mdash;
Carrier and Devil each alternate day,
And oft, alas!  Compositor at night.

Let not ambition mock his useful toil,
His inky phiz, or name to fame unknown&mdash;
Nor patrons read with a disdainful smile,
The annual tribute of the punctual John.

No further seek his merits to disclose,
But draw your silver from its dark abode;
The sparkling specie to his eye expose,
And speed the Carrier on his weary road.
