The twilight curtains round the busy day,
The sliding shutters close the tradesman's shop,
The street lamp now emits its useful ray,
And homeward speeds the bustling Doctor Slop.

Now more assails the fever's burning rage,
And all the symptoms greater strength acquire;
Save their remission haply may presage
Alleviation, while the pores perspire.

Save that, from such a "well cramm'd magazine,"
Of nauseous draught, or jalap that is sent,
The counteracting pow'r shall intervene,
And second Nature's salutary bent.

Within these polish'd jars, these bottles scroll'd,
Where meets the eye full many a mystic word:
Each in good time its virtues to unfold,
Galenic compounds of the shop are stored.

The hasty call of cholic-writhing man;
The woman struggling in hysteric fit;
The gout fierce-racking every joint it can,
Soon, soon shall move them from their shelfy seat.

For these again the 'prentice shall commix,
Or half-bred shopman "secund. art." combine;
No "data" given how this or that may fix
On nerve, or brain, or marrow of the spine.

Oft to their potency diseases yield,
Their failure oft is harbinger of death:
How weakly proof the doctor's sev'n-fold shield!
How weak the patient almost out of breath!

Let not derision mock their useful toil,
The mighty vigils frequent they endure:
Nor snug in bed, let other men revile
Their star-light visits, while they lie and snore.

The glare of pharmacy, the M.D. name,
And all that learning, all that study gives
Inhale alike the balmy breath of fame,
On this alone the bold empiric lives.

Nor you, ye sick, impute to these the fault,
If drugs intestinal commotion raise,
When perching oft o'er Cloacina's vault,
Loud burst of crepitance your state betrays.

Can opening draught, or analectic pill
Act to the occasion, and without a noise?
Can any one dispute the doctor's skill,
Or controvert the means which he employs?

Perhaps, in some lone village shop is train'd
Some youth all pregnant with the healing art;
Swoll'n with th' incipient knowledge he has gain'd,
And all impatient when to play his part.

But dulness thro' his brain her misty steams,
Wrapt in a muddy chaos has diffus'd;
Curs'd ignorance dissolves his airy dreams,
And pulls the fabric down that so amus'd.

Full many a dunce of highest air and strut,
Divine Hygeia in her pasture feeds;
Full many a soul is prevalent to put
A faith in physic which he never needs.

Some numps' Sangrado, whom with utmost care
The teacher's knowledge never could inform;
Some embryo Brodum may initiate there
Some Ching the enemy of every worm.

Th' applause of credulous boobies to command
The coins of gold and silver to receive,
To scatter poison o'er the British land,
And make the vulgar what they will believe,

Their lot may be, nor circumscrib'd alone
Their growing riches to the flaunting gig:
In splendid chariot soon they may be known,
And shave their heads forsooth to wear a wig.

The struggling pangs of conscience to restrain,
To shoot the well-mark'd folly as it flies,
And still to advertise again, again
May be the "ne plus ultra" they devise.

Close on the Opifer's quick posting heels,
The fatal Sisters often seem to tread;
Amid the mortar's ringing sonorous peals,
The Tyro counts the many patients dead.

Yet' e'en these boys in practice to advance
Some showy letter'd board fix'd on high,
With threefold epithet their claim t' enhance,
Attracts the notice of the passer by.

Their name, their occupation thus inscrib'd,
The place of long experience do supply;
And many a technic phrase they have imbib'd,
Console survivors when their kindred die.

For who so callous to consanguine calls,
Their dearest friends without a pang resign:
See them enclos'd within their wooden walls,
Nor shed one briny tear, nor aught repine.

On some fam'd recipe the sick rely,
Some aid medicinal they're wont to crave;
E'en to the last, still circulates their cry,
O, give my physic, physic I must have!

For thee, who mindful of thy own estate,
Dost in these lines thy cogitations trace,
If chance, in self-sufficiency elate,
Some wounded spirit threaten thy disgrace

Haply some animated friend may say,
"Oft have I seen him in this playful mood
Dashing from out his pen the ink away,
To blot the unworthy name, and gloze the good.

"There in his parlour have I seen him sit,
Where clam'rous brats in confluence swarm around;
Gaily abstracted in poetic fit,
Nor voice has reach'd him of tumultuous sound.

"Clos'd in a room, from all access secur'd,
Pacing its floor I have seen him walk about;
Now culling from his pate th' ideas stor'd,
At ev'ry turn intent to call them out."

One day I miss'd him when I gave a call,
Nor in the parlour, nor at home was he:
I saw his wife, nor did she know at all
Or how engag'd, or where her spouse might be.

The next, with book in hand, in elbow-chair,
Twing'd with incipient gout, I saw his sit;
A table spread with manuscript stood near,
Observe what follows, which he said he writ:

EULOGY.
Hail to the science, fraught with heav'n born lore,
Which combats ugly shapes of dire disease:
Fair science emanating more and more,
And still expanding strength to health and ease.

Large is the blessing that her sons diffuse;
A recompense to some is largely given,
The deeds of some ingratitude pursues,
Or stinted fee from forth the fist is driv'n.

No higher praise to any art applies,
Than praise to this so eminently due:
What Cicero advanc'd I deem most wise,
I mean to place it now before your view.

"Nulla in re homines proprius ad Deos accedunt quam salutem hominibus dando."
In nothing to the Gods so near approach we mortals,
As when by giving physic, we blockade Death's portals.
