I. 1.
"Ruin seize thee, ruthless King!
Confusion on thy banners wait;
Tho' fann'd by Conquest's Gazette-wing,
They mock the air with idle state.
Buttons, addresses, fasts, must fail,
Nor all thy spurious virtues shall avail
To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
From Ireland's curse, from Britain's tears!"
Such were the sounds that o'er the crested pride
Of pious Nero scatter'd wild dismay,
As down the rolling of the subject tide
His barge, to view her Woolwich, row'd her way.
Stout Sandwich stood aghast in speechless trance,
To arms!  cried brave Sir Hugh, and splic'd his rotten lance.

I. 2.
On York-stairs, whose rustic brow
Frowns o'er the Thames lordly flood,
In weeds of penury and woe,
With gall'd red eyes the Minstrel stood;
(Loose his beard and hoary hair
Stream'd, like two old wigs, dangling in Rag-fair)
And with keen second-sight, and accent sharp,
Rail'd to the tinklings of his harp.
"Hark, ev'n each mitred and each garter'd slave,
Growls to the river's murmuring voice beneath!
The vet'ran Tory, and apostate knave,
Vengeance alike in hoarser murmurs breathe;
Amused no more, since Saratoga's day,
By North's loud blust'ring boasts, or gentle Germain's lay.

I. 3.
"Cold is the Junian tongue,
That hush'd the haughty Thane:
Macaulay sleeps upon a Scotchman's bed!
John Wilkes, you morn in vain
Churchill, whose churlish song
Made the huge Jack-boot bow his leathern head.
In Dover' church-yard doth he lie,
Choak'd with dust and ghastly pale:
Sneaking away, the starving curates steal;
The stall-fed bishop puffs and passeth by.
Dear lost companion of my tuneful art,
Dear, as concealing darkness to these eyes,
Dear, as the ruddy Port that warms my heart,
You died amidst your dying country's cries&mdash;
No more I weep.  He doth not sleep.
On yonder still, to try his skill,
To patch, and mend, this worn-out land:
With me in hobbling harmony to join,
And weave, in rough rude verse, the fag end of thy line.

II. 1.
"Write the verse tho' rude and rough,
This sheet shall wind up his disgrace,
Yet leave a margin wide enough
The marks of Britain's shame to trace.
Mark the year, and mark the night,
When Portsmouth shall re-echo with affright,
Te-Deums loud from Gallic ships that rise,
While Keppel's signal bootless flies!
She-wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs,
That tear'st the bowels of our mangled state,
From thee be born, who o'er the fashion hangs
Sole arbitress.  What terrors on thee wait!
Dentists and frizeurs in her war combin'd,
And maccaroni forms, and milliners behind.

II. 2.
"Mighty Nero, mighty lord,
Low on his couch he starting lies!
No pitying heart, no eye, afford
A tear to grace his pieties.
Is the Saviour statesman fled?
Thy hope is gone.  He rests among the dead.
The swarm, that in thy noon-tide beam were born;
Almack's &mdash; Newmarket, they adorn.
Fair laugh'd the morn, and brisk the Zephyr blew,
While proudly bounding o'er the azure realm
In gallant trim the gilded vessel flew;
Pow'r on the prow, and Brib'ry at the helm;
Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind's sway,
That, hush'd in grim repose, look'd for his evening prey.

II. 3.
"Fill high the cawdle bowl,
The christ'ning cates prepare,
Reft of ten Realms, he yet may share the feast:
Close by the regal chair
Oeconomy doth scowl
A baleful smile upon her baffled guest.
Heard ye the din of battle bray,
Lance to lance, and horse to horse?
Dark days of havock urge their destin'd course,
And thro' the kindred squadrons urge their destin'd course.
Ye towers of Julius, London's lasting shame,
Erewhile with Oliver and Crosby fed,
Revere his ever-honour'd mother's fame,
And shelter safe and sure his holy head.
Above, below, the rose of snow,
Twined with it's prickly friend, we spread:
The German boar, in British gore
Wallows beneath the thorny shade.
Now brother &mdash; brother now &mdash; the hour is come,
Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom.

III. 1.
"Lose-land, lo!  to sudden fate
(Their glass is sped.  Their thread is spun)
Thy ministry we consecrate.
(The ink is out.  The paper done.)
Stay, oh stay!  nor thus forlorn
Leave me deserted, like poor Parson Horn:
Down to yon vault, where flow in ample tides
Intire butt and London stout he glides.
But oh!  what scenes from Apalachia's height
Descending slow their endless train unroll?
Ye awful visions, spare my aching sight,
Ye unborn ages, croud not on my soul!
No more expiring freedom we bewail.
All hail, ye more than Kings, her genuine offspring hail!

III. 2.
"Girt with many a captain bold
Congress her greasy cap doth rear;
And Delegates in raiment old,
And unshav'd majesty appear.
In the front a form divine!
His hue proclaims him of Virginian line;
His lyon-port, his awe-commanding face,
Temper'd with soft Pity's grace.
What trumpets clang, drums rattle thro' the air,
What shrill-tongued fifes (not bagpipes) round him play!
From Falkland's isle, Taxation Johnson!  hear;
They breathe a soul to animate thy clay.
Fair Freedom calls, and soaring, as she sings,
Waves in the eye of Heav'n her wide-expanded wings.

III. 3.
"No more deform the plain
Fierce war, and injured love,
And liberty, by hireling force opprest.
Away, for ever, move
Pale grief, and pining pain,
With horror, tyrant of the throbbing breast.
A voice as of the cherub choir,
Gales across th' Atlantic bear;
Warblings of peace and love salute my ear,
That lost in long futurity expire.
Fond impious man, think'st thou, yon sanguine cloud,
Rais'd by thy breath, has quench'd the orb of day?
Far west-ward he repairs the golden flood,
To warm the nations with redoubled ray.
Enough for me:  with joy I see,
The diff'rent doom our fates assign.
Be thine despair, and scepter'd care,
To triumph, and to starve be mine."
He ceas'd &mdash; when seizing by the shoulder-blade,
A bailiff, to the Fleet, his helpless prey convey'd.
