The State-House clock proclaims the midnight hour,
The cautious cit slow turns the street-door key,
The draggled wantons up the alley scour,
And leave the street to darkness and to me.

The twinkling lamp now sheds a twilight ray,
And Silence triumphs over day's rude din,
Save where the stageman wends his clattering way,
And shrill tin trumpet wakes the drowsy inn.

Save where yon negress, selling pepperpot,
To surly watchmen clamouring loud complains,
Of wicked trull, who would not "pay her shot,"
But sneak'd away through dark and winding lanes.

Beneath yon paltry roof, that narrow shed,
Where Jacobins their nightly vigils keep,
Are wretches met, from Justice who have fled,
Their consciences in Lethe (grog) to steep.

No low intrigues for offices of state,
No daring falsehoods utter'd every hour,
No puffs of hirelings, nor no club's debate
Shall ever raise these convicts into power.

For them 'tis vain while freedom's flame shall burn,
To think the people's confidence to share;
E'en should they to their native soil return,
Their own dear countrymen would hang them there.

Oft to their subtlety did patriots yield,
Their slander many an honest heart hath broke,
Insidious lies the weapons which they wield,
Of which not Washington escap'd the stroke.

Let not ambition mock their grub-like toil,
Their creeping cunning, dirty arts obscure,
Nor Irish rebel, with disdainful smile,
Declare such poltrons he cannot endure.

The splendid villain, and the knave in power,
And him whose conquests swell the trump of fame,
Await alike th' inevitable hour,
When all mankind shall execrate their name.

Let not John Bull the poet stigmatize,
That Justice does not all these felons reach,
Nor pamphlet-peddler through each alley cries,
C&mdash; last words, and D&mdash; dying speech.

Can one poor rhymer, nay, can all the Nine,
A host of vagrant Jacobins withstand,
Can it be possible, with powers like mine,
'Gainst Europe's scum to barricade the land.

Beneath yon roof perhaps now conceal'd
Some black heart pregnant with infernal fire,
Hands that the sword of Bonapart' might wield,
Or cities burn in bacchanalian ire.

Ne'er did Ambition to their eyes her page,
Rich with the spoils of ravag'd realms, unfold,
Chill penury repress'd the ruthless rage,
And tamed the fury of a Nero's soul.

Full many a rascal, ripe for bloody scenes,
Crowns rape with murder at a country fair,
Full many a rogue robs orphans in their teens,
While politicians hush the black affair.

Some E&mdash; R&mdash; may be there incog.
His price for treason ready to declare;
Some young M' F&mdash; who ne'er stole a hog,
Nor man ne'er murder'd to purloin his mare,

Th' applause of mob-assemblies to command,
To bid the faction all restraint despise,
To scatter falsehoods through a cheated land
And cast a mist before a nation's eyes,

Their lot forbade, nor merely circumscrib'd
Their power to lead the populace astray,
Forbade the venal rogues from being brib'd,
Except by whiskey on election day.

Suspicious crowds to fright with phantoms vain,
With Federal chains Fredonians meant to bind;
Or like the daring infidel Tom Paine,
To "shut the gates of Heaven on lost mankind."

Content, though far remov'd from publick life,
On gin-shop counter, or on beer-house bench,
To gull the mob, or stir the coals of strife,
To rail at Fed'ralists, and praise the French.

Yet such as these, the dregs of every clime,
Who would disgrace an Abaellino's band,
"The blast of anarchy and taint of crime,"
Rule those who rule Columbia's "lordly land."

To give their names and characters the Muse
Declares is more than even Apollo can,
But most were litter'd in some foreign stews,
And in some work-house taught the rights of man.

But why to dumb oblivion fal'n a prey,
Should these desert the democratick cause,
When rife examples teaches us that they
May triumph over Justice and the laws?

No rogue so noted but he may aspire,
(Treason and murder bring not sure disgrace,)
Like G&mdash;n to light rebellion's fire,
And rise, if vile enough, to power and place.

The leader of the Pennsylvania herd,
Whom certain punishment attends, though late,
If, when his wretched carcass is interr'd
Some brother Jacobin inquire his fate.

His friend, who stole certificates, may say,
I've seen him oft, with venom'd quill in hand,
Four columns scrawl of lies, in half a day,
Then circulate the poison through the land.

From where yon shop looks into Market-street,
And brother felons gather round in flocks,
Where Jacobins in Pandemonium meet,
More plagues have flown than from Pandora's box.

Hard by yon steps deserted now with scorn,
Muttering dire oaths, I've seen him shivering stand,
And tell strange tales of Jacobins forlorn,
And courts and laws, those bugbears to our band.

One night I miss'd him at th' accustom'd place,
At Dunn's hotel and alehouse where we meet,
Another came, nor did he show his face,
At alehouse, bookstore, Dunn's, or Market-street.

The next I heard a melancholy tale,
On pure Democracy what foul reproach!
That our great leader had been led to gaol,
For lies and treasons which he dared to broach.

EPITAPH.
Here low he lies, who was a pest on earth,
To virtue, honour, and to shame unknown,
Low cunning triumph'd at the ruffian's birth,
And villainy straight mark'd him as her own.

Grown old in fraud, and at no crime dismay'd,
To sophist's head he join'd a felon's heart,
He carried on for years a liar's trade,
And gull'd the people with infernal art.

His wily schemes 'twere useless to disclose,
The knavish tricks on which he placed his hope,
He gain'd at last, what every body knows
He long had richly merited &mdash; a rope.
