I. 1.
Far o'er the western azure main,
The adverse coast about to gain,
Appear'd the fatal barks that bore
Our hostile legions to a kindred shore.
Sunk was the sun, and dark the seas;
The wild waves murmur'd round the prow;
And dismal sounds were wafted in the breeze,
Confus'd alarms, and shrieks of distant woe.
Fix'd, as rooted in the tide,
Each keel at once forgot to glide:
Pale horror damp'd the watchful pilot's brow;
Hush'd were the winds above, and still'd the floods below.

I. 2.
As from behind the storm
The pale moon glimmers with malignant light,
Sudden an aery form
Glanc'd on their startled eyes, athwart the night.
The semblance sad and meek it bore
Of him, whom to the desert shore
Religion led, and Freedom's holy flame.
There Justice pois'd her equal scale,
Taught savage chiefs her shrine to hail,
And wreath'd her bloodless laurels round his name.

I. 3.
"Fled are the hours of peace!
From Boston's plain the flames arise;
With ruddy horror blaze the western skies;
Nor yet," he cries, "they cease.
I hear the clarion's dire alarms;
Her thousand warriors Freedom arms:
From the bleak Atlantic main
To dark Ontario's piny shore;
From Georgia's citron groves and fertile plain;
To Ohio's stream I see their myriads pour.
Before them conquest lifts her spear;
On the broad base of equal laws,
By wisdom fix'd, the rising states appear;
Justice avows, and Heaven asserts their cause.
Brightening thro' ages the fair prospect glows,
Nor long futurity reveals the distant close.

II. 1.
"But thou, thy suppliant sons afar
Who vexest with injurious war,
Unnatural mother, hear thy doom!
Devoted Britain, mark thy ills to come!
Enfeebled by corruption's sway,
The ruin of a mighty state,
Unhonour'd shalt thou sink to swift decay;
Each art, each virtue, fled, that made thee great.
Torn from its base thy column lies,
Forgotten all thy victories;
In the throng'd port thy cross is seen no more;
Lost are thy boasted laws, o'erthrown thy balanc'd pow'r.

II. 2.
"To peaceful realms the sword
In evil hour the proud Iberian bore;
Tho' empires own'd him Lord,
And wealth uncounted swell'd his fatal shore.
From Cusco's mournful vale the cries
Of guiltless blood ascend the skies;
To mutual slaughter rush the frantic band:
The fathers crimes their offspring bear,
The tardy vengeance still they fear,
While bigot slavery wastes the destin'd land.

II. 3.
"Spirits of heroes old
Who erst your country's rights assail'd
Challeng'd in arms; and now heaven's guardian shield
O'er struggling freedom hold;
Rescuing her unpolluted shrine
In other climes her sons ye join.
Heaven her blazing portal spreads;
Shafts of glory pierce the night;
Lo!  the bright van the royal patriot leads,
Founder of laws, and arbiter of right;
Pensive his brow, as when opprest
By Danish pride his realm he view'd:
Girt with his peers Fitzwalter lifts his crest,
With him, who ill-starr'd Henry's arms withstood;
See Spencer's foe, fierce Lancaster appear,
And Kent too early slain, and Tressel's brow severe.

III.  1.
Frowning from Chalgrave's sanguine field,
In timely death his virtue seal'd,
The right he bled for, to maintain;
Hampden in sun-bright mail augments the train.
Victims of Stuart's bigot pride;
Nor are ye absent, generous pair,
In many a year of adverse fortune tried,
Leicester's firm son, and Bedford's gentle heir.
Join'd in love, in fate ye fell!
Still the just muse your fame shall tell,
Where freedom holds on earth her hallow'd seat;
And nations yet unborn the pious strains repeat.

III. 2.
"Ye too, they cry, be bold!
Uncheck'd by secret guile, or force abhorr'd,
Your charter'd rights uphold;
And dauntless brave the mercenary sword.
To heaven oppression rears her head,
Her scourge the prostrate kingdoms dread;
But short her rule, and fleeting is her hour.
The rod avenging justice bears,
And when are past the appointed years,
Smites with a giant's force, and quells her power.

III. 3.
"Fast by the sapphire throne
Its adamant beam the balance sways,
In which the deeds of men th' Eternal weighs:
Thence the decrees are known
That set the suffering nations free,
And bear to virtue victory.
Cherish deeds by heaven approv'd,
And virtues equal to thy doom.
Thrice happy land!  See on thy plains belov'd
The sacred muse her promis'd seat assume.
As o'er the main thy towers arise,
Spreading their salutary light;
And bless with hope the weary'd seaman's eyes,
Worn with th' Atlantic storm, and wrapt in night,
Thy genial breast shall still the unhappy greet,
Refuge of injur'd worth, and freedom's last retreat."
