This antique dome the unmouldering tooth of Time
Now level with the dust has almost laid;
Yet ere 'tis gone, I fix my humble rhyme
On these low ruins, that his years have made.

Behold the unsocial hearth, where once the fires
Blaz'd high and check'd the wintry traveller's woes,
See the weak roof, that abler props requires,
Admits the chilling winds and swift descending snows.

Here, to forget the labours of the day,
No more the swains at evening hours repair
But wandering flocks assume the well known way,
To shun the rigours of the midnight air.

In yonder chamber half to ruin gone,
Once stood the ancient housewife's curtain'd bed&mdash;
Timely the prudent matron has withdrawn,
And each domestic comfort with her fled.

The trees, the flowers, that her own hands had rear'd,
The plants, the vines that were so verdant seen,
The trees, the flowers, the vines have disappeared,
And every plant has vanish'd from the green.

So sits in tears on wide Campania's plain,
The ancient mistress of a world enslaved,
That triumph'd over the the land, subdued the main,
And time himself, in her wild transports brav'd.

So sits in tears on Palestina's shore
The Hebrew town of splendour once divine,&mdash;
Her kings, her lords, her triumphs are no more,
Slain are her priests, and ruin'd every shrine.

Once in the bounds of this deserted room
Perhaps some sweain nocturnal courtship made,
Perhaps some Sherlock mused amidst the gloom,
Since love and death for every seek the shade.

Perhaps some miser, doom'd to discontent
Here counted o'er the heaps acquir'd with pain;
He to the dust &mdash; his gold on traffick sent
Shall ne'er disgrace these mouldering walls again.

Nor shall the glow-worm fopling, sunshine bred,
Seek at the evening hour, this wonted dome;
Time has reduc'd the fabrick to a thred
Scarce fit to be the wandering beggar's home.

And none but I its piteous fate lament&mdash;
None, none but I o'er its cold ashes mourn
Sent by the muse, (the time perhaps mispent)
To shed her latest tears upon its fallen urn.
