Clear sounding bells announce th' eventful day,
Strong wind their peals athwart the distant lea;
Opposing Parties hither hie their way,
And swarm innum'rous as the busy bee.

No solemn worship strikes the raptur'd sight;
Nor psalm, nor prayer, in mute attention holds:
Embitter'd neighbours urge malignant fight;
And Rusticks mouth it, loud as Augean folds.

Hopes, fears, alternate mark the noisy hour,
Cause of vocif'rous joy, or silent pain;
When Rulers tumble from the car of pow'r;
And Subjects spring &mdash; to seize the floating rein.

Beneath this roof, where our stern fathers pray'd;
And sable pastors fed their white-fac'd sheep:
Those &mdash; in the large-crown'd hat, recumbent laid
On paper beds &mdash; wake not from endless sleep.

The sworn to lie, inducing publick scorn;
The Printer's sheet, on noxious satire fed;
The Parson's word, the Deacon's nasal horn,
And country Squires proclaim them, dead, dead, dead.

For such, no more shall flatt'ry's odours burn,
Or venal fav'rites waft self-int'rest's prayer;
E'en Coun. Sen. Reps. aghast, astonish'd turn,
Nor croud their gates the parting loaves to share.

In vain these boasted Charity's broad shield:
Victorious smote with war's decisive stroke:
On Newton's pinions rang'd through Nature's field:
Or nobly spurn'd oppression's gilded yoke.

Come, proud Ambition!  note their annual toil!
Nor mock at humbler bliss, substantial, pure;
Can rule supreme, or wealth's deceitful smile,
For faction &mdash; malice &mdash; envy &mdash; find a cure?

The people's God, the scourge of lawless pow'r,
And all the wisdom heav'n-taught science gave,
With Roman virtue, firm in danger's hour,
Suspicions whelm, beneath oblivion's grave.

Nor yet, on freemen fix ungrateful fault,
If rival suns, diffusing varied rays,
Distract the eye of once undazzled thought;
Or blind an eagle in fervescent blaze.

Cou'd generous deeds &mdash; the wise &mdash; the brave &mdash; the just&mdash;
Command the shifting wind's uncertain breath,
The statesman's &mdash; hero's &mdash; sage's &mdash; patriot's dust,
Might rise triumphant from politick death.

Perhaps, true independent, conscious pride;
Illum'd by reason, not from passion's flame;
The rod of Empire to those men deny'd,
Whose long past service founded present claim.

Oh!  be it Liberty's, from age to age!
To trace the windings of the Courtier's soul;
Curb the proud Noble &mdash; teach the doubting Sage,
And bid the Tyrant's thunders harmless roll.

Kind, social manners &mdash; temper mild &mdash; serene,
In howling wood, or upland bush may dwell:
And philosophick Magi rove unseen,
Beyond the sound of rude Contention's bell.

See, dauntless heroes bar the deep-scarr'd breast,
Contemning danger &mdash; prodigal of blood:
And finish'd statesmen cloth'd in artless vest,
Where foul detraction never roll'd its flood.

That mob of mobs, a Caucus to command,
To ruin thousands for a worthless prize,
Hurl wild dissension round a mad'ning land,
And read their curses writ in vengeful eyes,

Their lot forbade:  Nor are Elections known,
Which loose Calumny's dogs on human kind;
Bid hell-born falsehoods prop a tott'ring throne;
And feed assassins paid to stab behind.

Th' ingenious savage scorns a fault to hide;
Or mantle virtues in the robe of shame;
Fastidious Pomp is more than decent pride;
And griping Av'rice finds no prudent name.

Time's white-bleach'd Mohocks, rack'd by jealous strife,
Taught of self-love, not publick good, to stray
Far from each other in the walks of life,
Mark out one cypher &mdash; bounded the same way.

Some feel the searching blasts of cold neglect;
Some are pursu'd by Hatred's full-ton'd cry;
Others blown up by popular respect;
And all, in various modes, condemn'd to die.

Hark! &mdash; hear the converse dealt around these pews!
Enough to wet the Indian's tearless cheek;
Imprint the crimson blush on Guinea crews;
Cause rocks to rend; and rising ghosts to speak.

Yet ever mindful of establish'd pay,
Is Council, Senate, House or Chair resign'd
To the blest minions of the coming day,
Without sad looks, reverting oft behind?

On some new scheme each ousted Mem. relies;
Some next year's trick confides to oil-tongu'd fliers:
While He that's In, implores the righteous skies,
To dumb &mdash; confound &mdash; all but his host of liars.

Let those who venture with incautious tread;
And pant hereafter to command the State,
(If chance these honest lines are ever read)
Receive this warning from the book of fate:

Ere fifty suns, shall cool EXPERIENCE say&mdash;
"Oft have the men with noblest talents born,
By trivial foibles brush'd their hopes away,
And early confidence met final scorn.

"Nor cou'd advice their darling follies reach;
From real friends they turn'd th' averted eye:
Though sycophants might puff in endless speech,
And throne e'en vices in empyrean sky.

"One, on base flatt'rers op'd all gracious smiles.
Another, liv'd recluse &mdash; retir'd &mdash; as hermit Jove.&mdash;
A Ribband, paid for democratick toils.
The wou'd-be Despot, lurk'd in freedom's grove.

"When April came, I miss'd them in the Bill
Which Brib'ry offer'd, but in vain, to me.
Place-purchas'd votes proclaim'd the parties' will;
And throng'd town meetings turn'd out G. LG.

"The ensuing month, Ah!  yes &mdash; Election Day!
Slow thro' the State we saw them lifeless borne;
Upstart Mock-Patriots seiz'd the imperial sway,
And thus inscrib'd their predecessor's urn:"&mdash;

EPITAPH.
Twice two rest here &mdash; the bitterest foes on earth;
From varying aims &mdash; to adverse factions known:
Early they lost the sense of moral worth;
And made the common weal subserve their own.

Small were their views &mdash; false &mdash; fickle &mdash; insincere&mdash;
From Whig to Tory each cou'd pliant bend:
To stern Republicans they gave &mdash; a tear;
And gain'd by smiles, th' Aristocratick friend.

Strive not, their virtues on the world t' impose,
These bear no fruit like Aaron's blooming rod!
&mdash;Peace to their shades &mdash; if such can feel repose,
Who dup'd their Fellow Men, and mock'd at GOD.
