Soul of the world, refulgent SUN,
Oh take not from my ravisht sight
Those golden beams of living light,
Nor, ere thy daily course be run,
Precipitate the Night.
Lo, where the ruffian clouds arise,
Usurp the abdicated skies,
And seize the aetherial throne;
Sullen-clad the scene appears,
Huge HELVELLYN streams with tears,
Hark, 'tis giant SKIDDAW'S groan!
I hear terrific LAWDOOR roar;
The Sabbath of thy reign is o'er,
The anarchy's begun;
Father of light, return; break forth, refulgent Sun!

What if the rebel blast shall rend
Those nodding horrors from the mountain's brow&mdash;
Hither thy glad deliverance send,
Ah save the votarist and accept the vow!
And, say, thro' thy diurnal round,
Where, great Spectator, hast thou found
Such solemn soul-inviting shades,
Ghostly dells, religious glades?
Where Penitence may plant its meek abode,
And hermit Meditation meet its God.

Now by the margin of yon glassy deep
My pensive vigils let me keep;
There, by force of Runic spells,
Shake the grot where Nature dwells;
And in the witching hour of night,
Whilst thy pale sister lends her shadowy light,
Summon the naked wood-nymphs to my sight.

Trembling now with giddy tread,
Press the Moss on GOWDAR'S head,
But lo, where sits the bird of Jove,
Couch'd in his airy far above;
Oh, lend thine eye, thy pinion lend,
Higher, yet higher let me still ascend:
'Tis done; my forehead smites the skies,
To the last summit of the cliff I rise;
I touch the sacred ground,
Where step of man was never found;
I see all Nature's rude domain around.

Peace to thy empire, queen of calm desires,
Health crown thy hills and plenty robe thy vales;
May thy groves wave untoucht by wastful fires,
Nor commerce croud thy lakes with sordid sails:
Press not so fast upon my aking sight
Gigantic shapes, nor rear you heads so high,
As if ye meant to war against the sky,
Sons of old Chaos and primaeval Night.
Such were the heights enshrined BRUNO trod,
When on the cliff he hung his tow'ring cell,
Amongst the clouds aspired to dwell,
And half ascended to his God.
The prim canal, the level green,
The close-clipt hedge that bounds the flourisht scene,
What rapture can such forms impart
With all the spruce impertinence of art?

Ye pageant streams, that roll in state
By the vain windows of the great,
Rest on your muddy ooze and see
Old majestic DERWENT force
His independent course,
And learn of him and nature to be free,
And you, triumphal arches, shrink,
Ye temples, tremble, and ye columns, sink!
One nod from WALLAH'S craggy brow
Shall crush the Dome
Of sacerdotal Rome,
And lay her glittering gilded trophies low.

Now downward as I bend my eye,
What is that atom I espy,
That speck in Nature's plan?
Great Heaven!  is that a Man?
And hath that little wretch its cares,
Its freakes, its follies, and its airs;
And do I hear the insect say,
"My lakes, my mountains, my domain?"
O weak, contemptible, and vain!
The tenant of a day,
Say to old SKIDDAW, "Change thy place,"
Heave HELVELLYN from his base,
Or bid impetuous DERWENT stand
At the proud waving of a master's hand.

Now with silent step and slow
Descend, but first forbear to blow,
Ye felon winds, let discord cease,
And Nature seal an elemental peace:
Hush, not a whisper here,
Beware, for Echo on the watch
Sits with erect and listening ear
The secrets of the scene to catch,
Then swelling, as she rolls around,
The hoarse reverberated sound,
With loud repeated shocks
She beats the loose impending rocks,
Tears down the fragment big with death,
And hurls it thund'ring on the wretch beneath.

Not so the Naid, she defies
The faithless Echo, and with yelling cries
Howls on the summit of rude LAWDOOR'S brow;
Then, with a desperate leap
Springs from the rocky steep,
And runs enamour'd to the lake below.
So the Cambrian minstrel stood,
White as foam his silver beard,
And loud and shrill his voice was heard;
All the while down SNOWDON'S side,
Winding slow in dread array,
He saw the victor king, pursue his way;
Then fearless rush'd into the foaming tide,
Curs'd him by all his idol gods and died.

Ah!  where is he that swept the sounding lyre,
And while he touch'd the master string,
Bad "Ruin seize thee ruthless King"
With all a prophet's fire?
Mourn him, ye naids, and ye wood-nymphs mourn,
But chiefly ye, who rule o'er KESWICK'S vale,
Your visitor bewail,
And pluck fresh laurels for his hallow'd urn;
He saw your scenes in harmony divine,
On him indulgent suns could shine,
Me turbid skies and threat'ning clouds await,
Emblems, alas!  of my ignoble fate.

But see the embattled vapours break,
Disperse and fly,
Posting like coursers down the sky;
The grey rock glitters in the glassy lake;
And now the mountain tops are seen
Frowning amidst the blue serene,
The variegated groves appear,
Deckt in the colours of the waning year;
And, as new beauties they unfold,
Dip their skirts in beaming gold.
Thee, savage WYBORN, now I hail;
Delicious GRASMERES calm retreat,
And stately WYNDEMERE I greet,
And KESWICK'S sweet fantastic vale:
But let her naids yield to thee,
And lowly bend the subject knee,
Imperial lake of Patrick's dale,
For neither Scotish LOMOND'S pride,
Nor smooth KILLARNEY'S silver tide,
Nor aught that learned POUSSIN drew,
Or dashing ROSA flung upon my view,
Shall shake thy sovereign undisturbed right,
Great scene of wonder and sublime delight!

Hail to thy beams, O Sun!  for this display
What, glorious orb, can I repay?
Not MEMNON'S costly shrine,
Not the white coursers of imperial Rome,
Nor the rich smoke of Persia's hecatomb;
Such proud oblations are not mine;
Nor thou my simple tribute shall refuse,
The thanks of an unprostituted muse:
And may no length of still returning day
Strike from thy forehead one refulgent ray;
But let each tuneful, each attendant sphere
To latest time thy stated labours chear,
And with new Paeans crown the finisht year.
