Where fair Virginia's fertile plains extend,
And spread their treasures o'er her blissful land;
Where fenc'd by rivers from the neighb'ring war,
Her fields of rice their silver plenty bear:
What time the changeful Sun his parting ray
Does o'er the mountain's gilded top display;
When wearied Negroes seek their peaceful cell,
From Freedom's sons a while at ease to dwell:
An aged planter, born to higher state,
On whom there once had smil'd a kinder fate,
By swift Ohio's pleasant bank reclin'd,
Thus spoke the lab'ring sorrows of his mind.

Erst had he shone among those hapless few
Of Scotia's sons to Stewart's cause how true!
Long time an exile from his native shore,
Here did he live, and here his fate deplore;
For still his country fir'd his aged breast;
When freed of life, 'twas there he wish'd to rest.
One only son, the comfort of his years,
Kind Heav'n had given him to relieve his cares;
With duteous fondness to attend his age,
And smooth declining life's last painful stage.
Him, when Rebellion, with her fierce alarms,
Had drawn th' American youth abroad in arms,
He saw compell'd to join the hostile band,
In fatal contest 'gainst his friends to stand.
What desp'rate grief then wrung the Father's heart,
Torn from his fond embrace, when forc'd to part!
In vain he strives, in vain he begs his stay,
Now by a Rebel mandate call'd away.

"And art thou gone, oh Heav'ns!  my son," he cries,
When tears ran streaming from his aged eyes,
"Has Fate at last, has cruel Fate denied
Your longer aid to guard my helpless side!
Depriv'd of wife, of friends, alas! &mdash; of all;
To whom shall now a wretch forsaken call!
What pitying hand shall ease a father's pain!
Since, left by you, I must in vain complain?

"What pleasing thoughts had once my mind possest,
That you should lay my lifeless corps to rest;
That, touch'd with grief, you'd o'er my honour'd bier,
Shed the warm tribute of a filial tear.
Perhaps now, bleeding by some British hand,
You lie extended on New-England's strand!
Oh ne'er again these eyes shall see you more,
Condemn'd your fate unhapp'ly to deplore!

"Accurst Sedition, bane of social life!
Thou source of war, and each domestic strife!
What baleful ruin does thy fury spread?
By thee how many feel a widow'd bed?
Still zeal attendant leads thy frantic train,
And fire and bloodshed mark thy dismal reign.
How oft has Greece condemn'd, by thee inspir'd,
Her bravest sons, whom Patriot glory fir'd!
How oft has Rome, with mutual slaughter bled,
And friends, by friendly hands, untimely died!
Heav'ns!  in fair England's realms what dreadful wars
Have first arisen from intestine jars;
When kindred houses, both of high renown,
By long contention, tore the rivall'd crown;
When stern Religion, and her Saintly band,
With pow'r destructive, stalk'd the ravag'd land?

"Ah, should I turn to Scotia's mournful shore,
My country once, tho' doom'd, alas!  no more!
Far may each danger from thy coasts remove.
What scenes of sorrow there appear to view,
And call, awak'd, each deep-laid grief anew.
Her antient palaces, that tow'ring rise,
And long have brav'd the rage of varying skies,
Forsaken now, to mould'ring time consign'd,
Possess no more the marks of human kind.
Exil'd their Lords to some far distant clime,
Like me, they mourn, in sad remorse, their crime;
Like me they wish, but wish, alas!  in vain,
Their native land, their country to regain:
Unhappy men, condemn'd to fly their home,
The wretched slaves of Fortune's pow'r to roam!

"How to remembrance wakes that rueful day,
When first I join'd my clan in war's array,
Boldly determin'd to sustain the cause,
And Scotia bend to royal Edward's laws.
'Twas then I left my wife and infant son,
Left them, alas!  to be for e'er undone!
For oh!  tho' Vict'ry crown'd at first our arms,
How soon succeeded by disastrous harms!
Like the gay sunshine, that precedes the storm,
More gloomy rend'ring Nature's roughen'd form.
Ye fatal plains!  oh ever-luckless day!
That on Culloden view'd our strength give way!
Then were we forc'd, distressful, to divide,
In secret caves and desert haunts to hide;
No longer shelter'd by our own abode,
Which oft was seen by plund'ring bands destroy'd.

"'Twas then, opprest with sorrow for my son,
Regardless what the hazards I might run,
One silent night, when awful darkness veil'd
The face of heav'n, and ev'ry deed conceal'd,
I ventur'd out to seek the wretched pair,
For whom each thought was fill'd with restless care.
Where'er I pass'd, deforming rapine spread
Its dismal waste; unpeopl'd lay the mead;
My house, from old, our fam'ly's long abode,
A prey to wasting flames no longer stood!

"How grief and rage alternate seiz'd my breast!
A thousand fears my troubled mind possest!
Mad with despair, o'er all the spot I ran,
Now here, now there, by wild distraction drawn.
My wife, my son, were no where to be found,
In vain I sought, in vain I search'd around!
Just heav'n!  I cry'd, and shall I ne'er again
These dearest objects of affection gain?
Shalt thou, my ANNA, thou, whose virgin charms,
To higher love preferr'd my wretched arms;
Shalt thou no more these weeping eyes review!
His will eternal doom'd this last adieu!
Just as I spoke, methought I heard a voice,
(How did my heart 'twixt doubtful fear rejoice),
I try'd to trace from whence arose the sound;
In vain I try'd, in air it now was drown'd.
When lo!  the stars began to fade away,
And rising morn to wake the early day.
Fearful if spy'd by some near lurking foe,
A safe retreat I look'd for &mdash; there to go.
Near to the ground, where once my garden rose,
Rich in each flow'r that Scotia's clime bestows,
An aged oak his arms extensive spread;
To all around diffus'd a friendly shade.
Thither I hasten'd; in its hollow womb
Resign'd, to wait, with grief, my destin'd doom.
But oh, blest heav'n!  what then my kind surprise,
(Scarce could I trust the credit of my eyes),
To find my wife and infant there immur'd;
Safe from the rage of barb'rous foes secur'd.
Joy tied my tongue; in vain I wish'd to speak;
Neither, amaz'd, could from our silence break.
Yet soon what mingl'd happiness appear'd,
When both were seen t' have scap'd the fate each fear'd,
While grief, alternate, for our wretched state,
Clouded the dawn this union did create.
Our house consum'd, our fields all ruin'd lay,
Our captur'd flocks were now the soldiers prey;
What could we do, but leave the dismal scene,
And trust, to save our lives, the faithless main.

"Soon, then, as Night had drawn her sable shade,
When peaceful minds the pow'rs of sleep invade,
My tender infant bearing in my arms,
Forth we advanc'd, how fearful of alarms!
Oft in our fields we cast a parting look;
In silence oft a last adieu we took:
Near lay the shore; we bent for it our way;
And thence our all to foreign lands convey.

"'Twas then, oh then, my wife with grief opprest,
Breathed her last upon my afflicted breast;
'Twas then, that seizing on my trembling hand,
With dying lips sh' enjoin'd this sad command.
'Henry,' she said, 'my Henry, haste away,
The foe may find us! &mdash; do not longer stay;
Leave me, oh leave me, here to die alone!
To distant realms convey my helpless son.
Soon will your much lov'd Anna be no more!
Do not her fate with fruitless tears deplore;
Freed from her pain, from ev'ry scene of care,
To higher mansions she must now repair.
But oh!  when life has left my wretched frame,
Let still my child your warm affection claim;
With watchful care regard his tender age;
Let oft his ear my piteous tale engage.&mdash;
Perhaps some fairer Maid, in after time,
When far remote from this ungrateful clime,
In Beauty's bloom may fill your loving arms,
And gain your heart with more attractive charms;
Yet none, my Henry, none can love like me,
A harder lot prepar'd to share with thee.'

"This spoke, she instant clos'd her lifeless eyes,
While from my bosom burst the heaving sighs;
Sunk in affliction, rack'd with fell despair,
How did I rage, and frantic tear my hair!
Now shed a tear o'er my ill-fated son,
And now bewail the wretched mother gone!
When lo!  I heard the sound of distant arms,
Strait how my soul was rous'd with dread alarms!
Then was I forc'd to take a last embrace,
And oh!  consign her to that fatal place:
How oft, when gone, did I again return!
How oft look back!  how oft did o'er her mourn!

"Ah!  let me urge th' ungrateful theme no more!
Sad was the hour I left my native shore.
Here have I liv'd, here seen my boy arrive
To manly prime, again my heart to grieve;
To leave me feeble in declining age,
And in Rebellion's lawless pow'rs engage.
Deluded States!  thus madly to contend,
And hostile fury 'gainst your country bend!
What's all the boasted Freedom you'd attain,
To change your master, not to ease the chain;
To spread your land with tumult and uproar,
And feel the mischiefs of divided pow'r!

"Should once again the Royal Cause prevail,
And proud Ambition's flatt'ring prospects fail;
Unwelcome Strangers!  you must then repair
To Gallia's shore, or breathe Asturian air:
Then see your fields to other swains consign'd,
While blasted lie the schemes your thoughts design'd.

"Return, mad people, to your injur'd King;
Let soft-ey'd Peace again her pleasures bring;
With open arms, oh see him court your love;
Return! &mdash; the sweets of cordial union prove.
Then shall BRITANNIA with new glory rise;
Her spreading fame attain once more the skies;
While vanquish'd nations, rivals of her pow'r,
To silence hush'd, shall raise their vaunts no more."

He said:  And rising went to seek repose;
Alas!  that comfort sorrow seldom knows!
