In Asia's land, 'mid rich Bassoria's plain,
Where wand'ring Tigris views his flow'ry reign,
At that still hour, when burning day retires,
And silent Night awakes her cooler fires,
From yon Seraglio's gloom two captive maids
Advanc'd beneath the spreading citron's shades;
Still as they went a rising tear they shed,
At last Arisbe to Zilinda said.

ARISBE.
Hark!  how the lonely nightingale complains;
To Captive Maids how sweet such plaintive strains;
Here, where gay pinks their motley'd dress display,
A while let's sit and list' the mournful lay.

ZILINDA.
Alas Arisbe, vain each pleasure tries
To sooth the breast, where long-plac'd sorrow lies;
In vain yon olive spreads its verdant hue,
And gaudy tulip meets the heedless view;
Ah!  see these guarded tow'rs and lofty walls,
Then say what all the beauteous scene avails!

ARISBE.
Three years confin'd to these detested shades,
Since hither borne from fair Circassia's meads;
Time now begins to close the wounds of grief,
And, lessening pain, to send the mind relief.

ZILINDA.
Ah ne'er this heart shall feel some kind allay,
To pining grief condemn'd the fated prey,
Like yon fair rose that hangs its languid head,
Cropt by some spoiling hand its blossoms fade.

ARISBE.
Yet say, since long our lot has here been join'd,
What secret sadness clouds your joyless mind?
In vain great ALLY tries to court your love,
And warm endearments your cold breast to move?
Oft have I mark'd his fond embrace you met
With downcast look, and seem'd to wail your fate.

ZILINDA.
Where Georgian swains along the sultry plain
In verdant shades awake their pleasing strain,
My early youth 'mid rural ease I pass'd,
Oh there had Heav'n allow'd my age to rest!
At orient day I drove my bleating care
Where breathing maze perfumes the balmy air;
Homeward at night retir'd the wearied train,
When rising twilight spreads her dusky reign;
'Twas there young AGIB strove above the rest,
With early flame, t' inspire my tender breast;
Around my home the Summer's various pride
To please the sense with fragrant odours vied:
For me he cull'd rich Autumn's choicest store;
Unhappy swain, thy cares are now no more;
Far from thy arms the weeping fair was borne;
Here left thy love, thy hapless love to mourn!

ARISBE.
No wonder, then, your panting breast should heave
With frequent sighs, and for your AGIB grieve;
The Fair whose heart with Love's true passion glows,
On one her faith with firm regard bestows.

ZILINDA.
High on a mountain's tow'ring summit rais'd,
To Day's bright God, a gilded temple blaz'd,
Within whose shrine the sacred flame preserv'd,
With holy vows and suppliant pray'r we serv'd;
There were our yearly off'rings duteous paid,
While each invok'd his elder's honour'd shade.
Returning thence, disastrous chance of fate!
A plund'ring band on Tartar foes we met;
On me they seiz'd, with savage purpose fir'd,
And mad to act what brutal lust inspir'd.
As sullen tigers view, with furious joy,
Some wand'ring flock, which eager to destroy,
Down from the hill they bend their winged way,
And dart, like light'ning, on th' astounded prey.
In vain a father begg'd with suppliant pray'rs;
In vain a mother pour'd her anxious tears;
In lifeless swoons they bore me from their sight;
With flying haste they sped their distant flight!&mdash;
'Twas then that ALLY, crown'd with hostile spoil,
The dear reward of war's unwearied toil,
To peaceful home his conqu'ring troops return'd,
My fate he pity'd, and with passion burn'd.
Rescu'd by him, to this sad place I came;
And here the series of our lot the same.

ARISBE.
Piteous your tale; yet pleasing to the breast
Which 'neath the hand of sorrow hangs opprest,
Like nightly dew, that spreads the fading flow'rs,
And wakes, renew'd, tir'd Nature's languid pow'rs.
But see, gay Morn leads forth the early day,
The darting Sun emits his blazing ray;
To yonder mansions let's again repair,
And waste the listless hours in thoughtful care.
