KORASA'S Tribe, a frequent-wandering train,
From Zenan's pastures sought Negiran's plain.
With them SEMIRA left her favourite shades,
The loveliest nymph of Yemen's sportive maids!
Her parting hand her fair companions prest;
A transient sorrow touch'd each tender breast;
As some thin cloud across the morning ray
Casts one short moment's gloom, and glides away:
Their cares, their sports, they hasted soon to tend,
And lost in them the memory of their friend.

But gallant ZERAD ill her absence bore,&mdash;
A wealthy Emir from Katara's shore;
A warrior he, the bravest of his race;
A bard high-honoured in his native place;
Age oft learn'd knowledge from his tuneful tongue,
And listening Beauty languish'd while he sung.
What time the tribes in camp contiguous lay,
Oft with the Fair-one he was wont to stray;
There oft for her fresh fruits and flow'rs he sought,
And oft her flocks to chrystal fountains brought.

Where the tall palm-grove grac'd Alzobah's green,
And sable tents in many a rank were seen;
While Evening's steps the setting Sun pursued,
And the still fields her balmy tears bedew'd;
The pensive Lover, there reclin'd apart,
Indulg'd the sorrows of his anxious heart.
His graceful head the costly turban drest;
The crimson sash confin'd his azure vest;
His hand the sounding arabeb sustain'd;
And thus his voice in melody complain'd&mdash;
Soft as the night-bird's amorous music flows,
In Zibet's gardens, when she woos the rose:

"Bright star of Sora's sky, whose matchless blaze
Gilds thy proud tribe with mild, benignant rays!
Sweet flow'r of Azem's vale, whose matchless bloom
O'er thy fam'd house spreads exquisite perfume!
Blithe fawn of Kosa, at the break of dawn,
Midst groves of cassia, sporting on the lawn!
Too charming Beauty!  why must I bemoan
Thee from my presence thus abruptly flown?
Ere the shrill trump to march the signal gave,
And banners high in air began to wave;
Ere the tall camel felt his wonted load,
And herds and flocks slow mov'd along the road;
Ere slow behind them march'd the warrior train,
And the struck tents left vacant all the plain;
Could no fond plea obtain a longer stay?
Would no kind hand th' intelligence convey?
Ah, hapless me!  to Aden's port I stray'd,
Sought gold and gems, but lost my lovely maid!

"My friends, they come my sorrows to allay&mdash;
AZOR the wise, and SOLIMAN the gay&mdash;
One cries, 'Let Reason hold her sober reign,
Nor Love's light trifles give thy bosom pain!
For thee kind Science all her lore displays,
And Fame awaits thee with the wreath of praise.'
'O why,' cries one, 'is she alone thy care?
She's fair, indeed, but other maids are fair:
NEGIMA'S eyes with dazzling lustre shine,
And her black tresses curl like Zebid's vine;
On HINDA'S brow Kushemon's lily blows,
And on her cheek unfolds Nishapor's rose!
With them, the tale, the song, the dance shall please,
When Mirth's free banquet fills the bow'r of ease.'
Ah cease, said I; of love he little knows,
Who with sage counsel hopes to cure its woes!
Go, bid in air Yamama's lightnings stay,
Or Perath's lion quit his trembling prey:
Kind Science' lore with Beauty best we share,
And Beauty's hands Fame's fairest wreaths prepare.
I praise NEGIMA'S lovely hair and eyes;
Nor HINDA'S lily, nor her rose despise:
But Omman's pearls diffuse a brighter beam
Than the gay pebbles of Kalafa's stream.&mdash;

"O lov'd SEMIRA!  whither dost thou rove?
Tread thy soft steps by Sada's jasmine grove?
Dost thou thy flocks on Ocah's mountain keep?
Do Ared's olives whisper o'er thy sleep?&mdash;
Ah, no! &mdash; the maid, perhaps, remote from these,
Some hostile troop, in ambush laid, may seize:
Too lovely captive!  she, in triumph borne,
The proud Pacha's throng'd haram shall adorn.
Vain fear!  around her march her valiant friends;
Brave OMAR'S hand the bow of ISHMAEL bends;
Strong HASSAN'S arm KAABA'S spear can wield,
And rear on high EL-MAKIN'S ponderous shield!
Ah, shame to me!  shall Sloth's dishonouring chain
From love, from glory, ZERAD here detain,
Till grief my cheek with sickly saffron spread,
And my eyes, weeping, match th' Argavan's red?
Haste, bring my steed, supreme in strength and grace,
First in the fight, and fleetest in the chace;
His sire renown'd on Gebel's hills was bred,
His beauteous dam in Derar's pastures fed:
Bring my strong lance that, ne'er impell'd in vain,
Pierc'd the fierce tyger on Hegasa's plain.
Across the Desart I her steps pursue;
Toil at my side, and Danger in my view!
There Thirst, fell daemon!  haunts the sultry air,
And his wild eye-balls roll with horrid glare;
There deadly Sumiel, striding o'er the land,
Sweeps his red wing, and whirls the burning sand;
As winds the weary caravan along,
The fiery storm involves the hapless throng.
I go, I go, nor Toil nor Danger heed;
The faithful lover Safety's hand shall lead.
The heart that fosters Virtue's generous flames,
Our Holy Prophet's sure protection claims.

"Delightful Irem (midst the lonely waste
By SHEDAD'S hand the paradise was plac'd)
Each shady tree of varied foliage shows,
And every flower and every fruit bestows;
There drop rich gums of every high perfume;
There sing sweet birds of every gaudy plume;
There soft-eyed Houries tread th' enamell'd green&mdash;
Once, and no more, the happy seat was seen;
As his stray'd camel midst the wild he sought,
Chance to the spot the wandering ESAR brought;
A blissful Irem, 'midst the Desart drear,
SEMIRA'S tent my love-sick sight shall chear.

"What palm of beauty tow'rs on Keran's hills?
What myrrh with fragrance Sala's valley fills?
'Tis she, who left so late her favourite shades,
The loveliest nymph of Yemen's sportive maids!
Look from thy tent, the curtains fair unfold,
Give to my view thy veil of silk and gold;
O lift that veil!  thy radiant eyes display&mdash;
Those radiant eyes shall light me on my way!
On Hejar's wild rocks from the Persian main,
Thus the Moon rising lights the wilder'd swain.
O raise thy voice!  the sound shall give delight,
Like songs of pilgrims distant heard by night!
I come, I come!" &mdash; He spoke, and seiz'd the rein,
And his fleet courser spurn'd the sandy plain.
