Where Honan's hills Kiansi's vale inclose,
And Xifa's lake its glassy level shows;
Li-po's fair island lay &mdash; delightful scene!&mdash;
With swelling slopes, and groves of every green:
On azure rocks his rich pavilion plac'd,
Rear'd its light front with golden columns grac'd;
High o'er the roof a weeping willow hung,
And jasmine boughs the lattice twin'd among;
In porcelain vases crested amaranth grew,
And starry aster, crimson, white, and blue;
Lien-hoa flowers upon the water spread;
Bright shells and corals varied lustre shed;
From sparry grottos chrystal drops distill'd
On sounding brass, and air with music fill'd;
Soft thro' the bending canes the breezes play'd,
The rustling leaves continual murmur made;
Gay shoals of gold-fish glitter'd in the tide,
And gaudy birds flew sportive by its side.
The distant prospects well the sight might please,
With pointed mountains, and romantic trees:
From craggy cliffs, between the verdant shades,
The silver rills rush'd down in bright cascades;
O'er terrac'd steeps rich cotton harvests wav'd,
And smooth canals the rice-clad valley lav'd;
Long rows of cypress parted all the land,
And tall pagodas crown'd the river's strand!

'Twas here, from business and its pomp and pain,
The pensive master sought relief in vain.
Li-po, mild prince, a viceroy's sceptre sway'd,
And ten fair towns his gentle rule obey'd:
The morn's transactions to his memory came,
And some he found to praise, and some to blame;
Mark'd here how justice, pity there prevail'd,
And how from haste or indolence he fail'd.

Beneath a bower of sweet Ka-fa, whose bloom
Fill'd all the adjacent lawn with rich perfume,
His slaves at distance sat &mdash; a beauteous train!&mdash;
One wak'd the lute, and one the vocal strain:
They saw his brow with care all clouded o'er,
And wish'd to ease the anxiety he bore.
Amusive tales their soothing lay disclos'd,
Of heroes brave to perils strange expos'd;
Of tyrants proud, from power's high summit cast;
And lovers, long desponding, blest at last.
They ceas'd; the warblings softly died away,
Like zephyrs ceasing at the close of day.
"This scene," said he, "how fair!  to please the sight
How Nature's charms, Art's ornaments unite!
Those maids, what magic in the strains they sung!
Song sweetliest flows from Beauty's tuneful tongue.
Yet say, did Tien bid power and wealth be mine,
For me my soul to pleasure to resign?

"What boots that annual, on our fathers' tombs,
We strew fair flowers, and offer choice perfumes;
Our veneration of their memories shew,
And not their steps in Virtue's path pursue?
When, from his province as the prince returns,
Rich feasts for him are spread, and incense burns,
And gilded barks unfold their streamers gay,
And following crowds their loud applauses pay;
Avails all this, if he from right has swerv'd,
And Conscience tells him all is undeserv'd?

"Arise, Li-po!  'tis Duty calls, arise!
The sun sinks reddening in Tartarian skies.
Yon walls that tower o'er Xensi's neighbouring plain,
Yon walls unnumber'd miseries contain.
Think, why did Tien superior rank impart,
Force of the mind, or feelings of the heart.
Last night in sleep, to Fancy's sight display'd,
Lay lovelier scenes than e'er my eyes survey'd;
With purple shone the hills, with gold the vales,
And greenest foliage wav'd in gentlest gales:
'Midst palmy fields, with sunshine ever bright,
A palace rear'd its walls of silvery white;
The gates of pearl a shady hall disclos'd,
Where old CONFUCIUS' rev'rend form repos'd:
Loose o'er his limbs the silk's light texture flow'd,
His eye serene etherial lustre show'd:
'My son,' said he, as near his seat I drew,
'Cast round this wonderous spot thy dazzled view;
See how, by lucid founts in myrtle bowers,
The blest inhabitants consume their hours!
They ne'er to War, fell Fiend!  commission gave
To murder, ravage, banish, and enslave;
They ne'er bade Grandeur raise her gorgeous pile,
With tribute ravish'd from the hand of Toil;
But parents, guardians of the people reign'd,
The weak defended, and the poor sustain'd.'
Smiling he ceas'd &mdash; the vision seem'd to fly,
Like fleecy clouds dispersing in the sky.

"Arise, Li-po!  and cast thy robes aside,
Disguise thy form, thy well-known features hide;
Go forth, yon streets, yon crowded streets pervade,
Mix with the throng, and mark who seeks thy aid:
There Avarice stern, o'er Poverty bears sway,
And Age and Sickness fall his easy prey;
There hands that Justice' sacred ensigns bear,
Protect the plunderer, and the plunder share;
Perhaps there Discord's desperate rage prevails,
And Wisdom's voice to calm the tumult fails;
Perhaps Revenge gives victims to the grave,
Perhaps they perish, ere I haste to save!"

He spoke, and rose; but now along the way
That from the city-gate fair-winding lay,
Stretch'd thro' green meads where lowing cattle graz'd,
Amid the lake's wide silver level rais'd,
Led up steep rocks by painted bridges join'd,
Or near thin trees that o'er the tide inclin'd,
Slow tow'rds his palace came a suppliant train;&mdash;
Whoe'er his presence sought ne'er sought in vain&mdash;
The ready vessel, waiting at his call,
Receiv'd, and bore him to the audience-hall.
