Retired, awhile, from life's tumultuous scene,
By peace and lonely contemplation led,
With slow and solemn step, and mind serene,
I seek these gloomy mansions of the dead.

And see where slowly sinks the orb of day,
Far, in the west, with rays of glory crown'd,
While veil'd in mist, the fairy scenes decay,
And darkness spreads his raven wings around.

All here is still:  the busy hum of day,
That pour'd its cheerful burthen on the wind;
The lark's wild note, the linnet's warbling lay,
Are hush'd, and leave an awful pause behind.

Here, then, while Night her sable mantle throws
O'er the still globe, and nature sleeps profound,
Let me survey, in undisturb'd repose,
The solemn monuments erected round.

For these a useful lesson do impart,
And teach that all things earthly soon decay;
That beauty, wealth, the proudest works of art,
And pomp and glory, last but for a day.

Think not, ye honour'd dead!  with step profane,
I come your sacred ashes to molest;
Or idly bent, inquisitive and vain,
Intrude, with thoughts unholy, on your rest.

Alas!  while round I cast a languid eye,
Where a lov'd friend and dearer kinsman rest,
I feel my bosom heave with many a sigh,
And tears steal down that cannot be repress'd!

The loveliest flow'rs that deck'd the fairy land,
When blooming May awak'd the smiling year,
Ah!  strew'd, inglorious, on the desert sand,
No more perfume, with incense sweet, the air!

No more young Pleasure, from her jocund bow'r,
With breast unzon'd, and loosely flowing hair,
Shall lure with graces of voluptuous pow'r,
And tempt to banquets of voluptuous care.

Here Opulence, that gloried in her height,
And look'd, with proud disdain, on all beneath,
Stripp'd of her plumes, presents a hideous sight,
The sport of ev'ry clown's insulting breath.

The Victor here, who, like a mighty flame,
In a vast circle spreads destruction round,
Seeking through toils and blood the phantom fame,
Lies pow'rless in this narrow spot of ground.

The rosy bloom of youth, the smile of grace,
That on the fragrant lip so sweetly play'd;
The lightning-darting eye, the dimpled face,
Here with their boasted charms for ever fade.

The lover, beaming like the star of day,
Who saw his bride, sweet blooming as the morn,
Snatch'd, in a moment, from his arms away,
Here lies a monument of hope forlorn.

The balmy breath of zephyr's fragrant wing,
The lute's soft note, the sweetly warbled round;
The smile of love, the melody of spring,
No more shall wake them from their sleep profound.

For them no more the flow'r enamell'd dale,
Shall yield its beauties of unnumber'd dyes;
No more the spicy grove perfumes the gale,
Or songsters fill with music sweet the skies.

Ye proud, who frolic in life's fleeting ray,
The short-liv'd flutt'rers of a Summer morn,
Oh!  think of those who moulder here away,
Ere yet the curtain on life's scene is fall'n!

Like you, they once, down pleasure's joyful stream,
Delighted sail'd, when happiness was theirs;
Like you, indulg'd in fancy's airy dream,
Nor thought, a moment, of to-morrow's cares.

'Till as they gaily plied their sprightly course,
While bright-ey'd Hope went smiling on before,
A sudden storm burst with resistless force,
And dash'd their little bark upon the shore.

Thus early wreck'd, yet here at least they find
That sweet repose which fortune never gave;
Here, safely shelter'd from each adverse wind,
They find a haven in the silent grave.

And see, hard by, from life's short dream withdrawn,
Its pomps, its miseries and its fleeting joys,
The Carpues lie, to happier regions borne,
Where guilt no more appals, nor death destroys.

In yonder grave, more honour'd by his shade,
O'Leary rests, for wit and learning fam'd;
Whose very look a sacred awe convey'd,
Whose eloquence the fiercest bosom tam'd.

Yonder, lies Paoli, the good, the great&mdash;
The bold avenger of his country's woes,
Whose gallant arm upheld the tott'ring State,
And hurl'd destruction on her Gallic foes.

Illustrious Chief!  thine is the rich reward,
Such as thy gallant Sons, Oh!  Grecia!  wore,
When the barbarian's inundating horde
They drove, for ever, from their happy shore;

Such as encircled once Camillus' brow
Unjustly banish'd from his much-lov'd home,
Who smote the thousands of th' invading foe,
And prov'd the Saviour of ungrateful Rome.

But, soft! &mdash; methinks I see a great man's tomb,
With arms and boasted titles thick o'erspread,
Tow'ring majestically in the gloom,
To mock with vain magnificence the dead.

Lo!  this was he, who, with gigantic stride,
Trampled all rights, both human and divine;
Was this the tyrant, whose insatiate pride,
Bade the world bend, submissive, at his shrine?

Star of the morning, whither art thou fled?
Say where, thou proud one!  shall I find thy ray?
Where's the refulgence of thy splendid scene,
That late eclips'd the glories of the day.

Alas!  I seek, in vain, thy transient beam,
That, like a meteor, struck the wondering sight
In vain I look &mdash; thy momentary gleam
Is set, for ever, in the shades of night!

With pious love, and reverential awe,
Let me approach yon solitary grave,
Where the wild flow'rs but dimly seen afar,
In the dark wind their charms, unnotic'd, wave.

There the fond idol of her race for years,
Belov'd by all, admir'd, esteem'd, caress'd&mdash;
There, mourn'd, for ever, by her children's tears,
The best of mothers and of women rests.

There, too, full many a young and tender flow'r,
Which the young dawn beheld all beauteous rise,
Untimely smit by death's relentless pow'r,
Stripp'd of its envied charms, in ruin lies.

Sweet Saints!  alas!  no tributary stone
Marks the lov'd spot that holds your relics dear&mdash;
No strains sublime your humble fate bemoan,
Or claim the gen'rous sympathetic tear.

Ah!  no &mdash; the dark night spreads your fun'ral pall&mdash;
The stormy winds of heav'n your requiem sing&mdash;
The bleak rains on your gentle bosoms fall,
And the chill mists their curtain round you fling!

Yet shall the pensive wand'rer, kneeling nigh,
Here send to heav'n's throne a gentle pray'r,
And many a blessing, many a holy sigh,
Shall waft their incense through the dark'ning air.

Oh!  holy dust!  Oh!  ever sacred shades!
If to departed spirits it be giv'n
To visit, once again, these lonely shades,
Oh!  look down from your blest abode in heav'n!

Behold me here, low bending at your tomb,
To soft devotion give the silent hour,
And houseless in the midnight's awful gloom,
See, unconcern'd, the gath'ring tempest low'r.

Here round your grave, to mem'ry ever dear,
The blooming May her sweetest gifts shall bring,
Here meek-ey'd Pity drop the gentle tear,
And little Cherubs solemn dirges sing.

But hark! &mdash; methinks I heard a gentle sigh,
Where yonder trees their darksome foliage spread&mdash;
'Twas but the zephyr's breath, that wander'd by,
And kiss'd, with fragrant lip, their clay-cold bed.

And see &mdash; the winds are hush'd &mdash; a death-like calm
Has lull'd the noisy world to soft repose,
While the pale moon-beams, 'mid the gen'ral charm,
Glide softly in between the sleeping boughs.

But, mark yon fun'ral, moving sad and slow,
With idle pageantry goes stately by,
While ev'ry face is soften'd into wo,
And the big tear is seen in ev'ry eye.

With solemn pace the mourners step along,
While not a voice disturbs the stillness deep,
Save that amid the melancholy throng,
Some hapless fair awakes to sob and weep.

And now they reach mortality's last home,
That goal where folly's course for ever ends,
And soon deposit, in the earth's dark womb,
The loathsome carcase that each eye offends.

But, ah! &mdash; what shriek disturbs the peaceful air,
And makes e'en Murder's blood-stain'd cheek turn pale?
'Tis the poor widow, victim to despair,
Telling the pitying stars her woful tale!

See how she wrings her hands, and beats her breast,
Still ling'ring near the corpse she lov'd so true&mdash;
And now departs, and now returns, oppress'd
With bitt'rest grief, to bid a last adieu!

So the fond ivy clings around the oak,
That long had flourish'd monarch of the hill,
And though declining fast beneath the stroke
Of age and wint'ry storms, embraces still.

O!  child of vanity, that flutt'rest by,
In all the gaudy colouring of pride,
Charm'd with each shade that floats before thine eye,
To ev'ry voice of pleasure turn'd aside,

Here pause awhile, and in this mirror see
How false thy hopes, how ignorant thy pride;
Here see the end of human vanity,
The shipwreck that awaits thy prosp'rous tide!

Nor yet look down, with eye of proud disdain,
Upon the turf-built tombs here scatter'd round,
Where the ignoble dead are rudely lain,
Doom'd, like the great, to rot beneath the ground.

What though no monument record their race,
With trophies and inscriptions graven round;
What though no verse sublime their honours trace,
No voice their fame to distant regions sound;

Yet here, perhaps, beneath these heaps repose
Some godlike genius that had grac'd a crown;
Some Numa, that had hush'd a nation's woes,
And rais'd from earth to heav'n her renown:

Some Chatterton, the darling of the Nine;
Untimely fall'n in life's sweet vernal bloom;
Some Sheridan, whose eloquence divine
Had been the glory of another Rome:

Some Patriot, ardent in his country's cause,
Whose honest zeal no sordid bribe could gain;
Some Nelson, who proclaim'd Britannia's laws,
In peals of thunder, on the trembling main:

Some beauteous bud, that just began to blow,
And woo, with sweetest blush, the bashful morn;
Whose charms, scarce op'ning on the smiling bough,
Too soon decay'd, and left behind a thorn:

Some self-taught son of science here may lie,
Whose mind, capacious as unbounded space,
Thro' worlds and worlds had wing'd its vent'rous flight,
Scorning the limits of its native place.

But ah!  misfortune check'd their bold career,
And damp'd  the gen'rous ardour of their mind;
Bleak mis'ry sadden'd each returning year,
And ev'ry hope to black despair consign'd!

So some fair flow'r, in all its charms array'd,
Courts, all in vain, the fond embrace of day,&mdash;
Ah!  buried in some solitude's deep shade,
It droops unseen, and slowly fades away.

To rouze the soul by animating strains,
The stormy cloud's rebellious wave to calm;
To scatter ruin o'er Arcadian plains,
And fill the trembling nations with alarm

Fortune ne'er gave; nor was it theirs to sway
A mighty empire with an iron rod;
To doom her free-born sons to slavery,
And fix the fate of kingdoms by a nod.

Yet peace was theirs, and happiness sincere,
A life from care and envy ever free;
The gen'rous hand that wip'd the falling tear,
And souls that never learn'd to disagree.

But see, close by, to mark the spot rever'd,
Where sleeps the pride of an ignoble race,
The weeping friends this humble stone have rear'd,
And deck'd it round with many an artless grace.

Here oft the aged pair, at even-tide,
Are seen repairing, silent, sad and slow;
And as their cruel destiny they chide,
Their tears in one united channel flow:

While the young village-maids, with mournful air,
Around his tomb are oft-times seen to stand,
Strewing his grave with ev'ry flow'ret fair
Which the young Spring has scatter'd o'er the land.

Sweet is the sigh breath'd o'er th' unhallow'd tomb,
And sweet the tear that drops from beauty's eye,
Like odours wafted from Arabian bloom,
To fill with grateful incense all the sky!

But hark!  what strains of sweetest melody,
On the light zephyr warbling soft and slow,
Dissolve my soul in floods of ecstasy,
And raise my thoughts from ev'ry earth-born wo?

Yonder, on waves of radiant clouds reclin'd,
A choir of angels strike the golden string,
And as they graceful tread the fragrant wind,
With songs of triumph make the heavens ring.

I see, I see, with rays of glory crown'd,
The spirits of my friends majestic rise:
With tend'rest smile they cast their eyes around,
And point, inviting, to yon happy skies!

Oh!  blessed Saints!  prolong, awhile, your stay!
Oh!  bear me on your silver wings on high!
Teach my rapt soul to wing its flight away,
To where new glories open on the eye!

But ah!  they're vanish'd quite! &mdash; my toiling sight
In vain pursues them through the gloomy void&mdash;
Lost is each beauteous form in darkest night,
And death-like silence reigns on ev'ry side.

Ye ever gentle shades, who here repose,
Bedew'd with many a pilgrim's holy tear,
As slow he wanders, while the wild wind blows,
And the dark tempest whistles in his ear.

Farewel, awhile! &mdash; oft as the twilight grey
Shall spread her mantle o'er the dark'ning air,
Here will I wind my solitary way,
Here, pensive, to this hallow'd spot repair.

The heav'n-born Nymphs, that haunt this sacred ground,
And nightly here their holy vigils keep,
Shall guard your ashes from each danger round,
And fence, from touch profane, each sainted heap.

Rest, sacred dust! &mdash; in  peaceful slumbers rest,
Beyond the reach of death's destructive pow'r!
Rest, sacred dust! &mdash; for ever, ever blest,
'Mid hosts of Saints, in Eden's blissful bower.
