In that blest Isle by Heav'n's high favor born,
Whose cliffs the subject billows vainly beat,
From the main land by strong convulsions torn,
To form for Freedom a belov'd retreat,

Oft as thro' other climes I musing stray,
The dews of Pity fill my melting eyes,
For those who, trampled by despotic sway,
Restrain their murmurs, and subdue their sighs.

Beneath the yoke how sad FLORENTIA bends!
Her sons escape not with the loss of breath,
E'en then fell Tyranny his rod extends
That waves new horrors o'er the realms of Death.

Lo!  where amid the dreary APPENINES
Whose barren tops the meeting skies assail,
Where scatter'd olives, and unfruitful vines
Bow their weak heads beneath the sighing gale;

When Night's dark wings the mournful scene enfold,
On mules, unconscious of their silent load,
The huddled Dead's unhonour'd relics cold
Are borne unseemly o'er the lonely road.

No long procession pours the pious song,
No sable hearse displays it's nodding plume,
No kind domestics move in grief along,
And with funereal torches gild the gloom.

Perhaps some victim from the seats of day
Too soon is hurried by precautions dire,
Perhaps too late shall wake the sleeping clay,
And struggling with oppressive mould expire.

The startled Trav'ler views with honest rage
The face where late superior Beauty smil'd,
The wasted form of once reverend Age,
By some rude hireling's ruffian hands defil'd.

In earth's dread bosom undistinguish'd thrown,
No closing rites in decent state are paid;
No weeping friends their lost companion own,
When dust to dust is finally convey'd.

Shall the meek Virgin's pure untasted charms,
The manly breast that felt another's grief,
Meet the worn Prostitute's lascivious arms,
Or niggard hands which never gave relief?

Shall the rapt Bard, who pour'd th' immortal lay,
With Vice and Dulness in one Grave unite?
Oh 'twere enough to warm th' indignant clay,
And stop th' ascending spirit in it's flight!

Thither in vain, impell'd by wild despair,
The wretched Widow, and the Orphan fly;
Alas!  no monumental stone is there,
To mark the spot where their protectors lie.

No holy text, no warning sentence, feeds
The thoughtful Moralist with wholesome truth,
No sculptur'd trophies of heroic deeds
Allure to Glory's path admiring Youth.

Degen'rate Age!  when on the banks of NILE,
Early matur'd, fair Science rear'd her head,
On the cold corpse was spent her patient toil,
And ARABY'S rich gums embalm'd the Dead.

When the proud Sceptre, and high-sounding Lyre
Bade ROMAN breasts with vast ambition burn,
The valued Ashes, purified by fire,
Drew frequent tears upon the storied Urn.

The simple natives of the late-found isles,
Where some lost friends attract their frantic way,
With fond attachment view the rustic piles,
Sooth'd by the honors of the known MORAI.

Shall then th' unfeeling AUSTRIAN'S stern commands
To quell these sacred sentiments presume,
While with the name of Prejudice he brands
The Charities that glow beyond the Tomb?

Thus might rebellious sons be taught to fly
The long obedience which they owe their sires,
Thus be dissolv'd chaste wedlock's dearer tie,
And all that Habit adds to Nature's fires.

But sooner far must cease that slavish awe
The humbled Vassal to his Tyrant pays;
Crumble that edifice which Pow'r and Law
On weak Convention's base so strongly raise.

Then tremble Thou, lest soon th' impatient throng
Tear the vain crown from thy too impious head;
Ne'er can the LIVING be respected long,
Who teach their subjects to despise the DEAD!
