Retir'd from mortals, where a lonely stream
O'er broken fragments roll'd its ample wave;
Where woods, impervious to the morning beam,
Conceal'd the antient dwellings of the brave,

Beneath the covert of a nodding tow'r,
Where savage ruin mark'd her destin'd spoil,
The blaze of glory, and the beam of pow'r,
Display'd the Genius of the British isle.

With pensive look she view'd the solemn scene;
Contending passions fir'd her gentle soul;
Triumphant pleasure mix'd with secret pain,
And oft unbid the tear of sorrow stole.

Thus while she stood, in rapt'rous notes she spoke,
"Yes, these were glories in the days of yore:
Here liv'd my sons, who scorn'd the servile yoke,
And pour'd their vengeance on the hostile shore.

"What tho' their bosoms swell'd with dauntless might,
And martial splendor spread her trophies round?
Tho' once they thunder'd thro' the hottest fight,
By conquest favour'd, and by fame renown'd?

"The fiend Oblivion buries all their deeds,
And plucks from merit's brow the laurel crown;
While Desolation spreads her baneful weeds
Around these ancient halls of grey renown.

"Here birds of discord court the mournful gale,
Thro' broken fragments sighing sad and low;
Here the loud shrieks of owls and bats prevail
Where friendship's sweets notes were wont to flow.

"Oft in these halls has Beauty's blooming form
Appear'd in Nature's artless charms array'd:
Oft has she sooth'd the labours of the storm,
When martial horror all her wounds display'd.

"But ah!  how chang'd! &mdash; no virgin now appears,
Whose chearful smiles might please the roving eye:
Their names are lost, nor shall succeeding years
One broken trophy of their charms supply.

"Thus all the splendors of destructive war
With silent pace unheeded pass away;
Thus fade the trophies of the victor's car,
And thus must beauty's pleasing forms decay.

"But blest are those whom Fancy's living fire
To glory's scenes with pow'rful blaze impells;
Whose flying fingers touch the sacred lyre,
Where inspiration's genial current swells.

"Blest be my sons!  the fav'rites of the Muse,
Whose rapt'rous strains increase my growing fame,
Who thro' the breast can joy or grief diffuse,
And touch the soul with each congenial flame.

"These can the hero's noblest deeds improve,
And to his name a deathless lustre give;
These mount the chariot with the Queen of Love,
Sweep o'er the strings, and bid her vot'ries live.

"These can the tempest's rapid whirl defy,
Convulsing nature with tremendous pow'r,
Safe in the regions of a fairer sky,
Where Envy's shades malicious never lowr.

"Thus GENIUS triumphs, thus the Muse's shrine,
Sacred to science, mocks the rage of time;
And thus my B&mdash;, favour'd of the nine,
In glory's burning car shall soar sublime."
