Hence, Fear, with all your horrid train!
Of monsters dire, and shadows vain,
That catch the ill-directed mind,
And fast in iron fetters bind.
Ill-form'd, unshapen Doubt, be gone;
Some region seek to me unknown.
There all thy sceptic art unfold,
To this nor that opinion hold;
Assume each odd, fantastic mood,
Like Proteus in the briny flood;
Now bent on that, for this now seem,
As equal matter turns the beam.
Away!  your empire I disdain!
Be gone with all your hated train!

Let but the Muse to me impart
Some knowledge of the tuneful art,
Fast I deliver to the wind
All that disturb the peaceful mind,
To waft afar to Zembla's coast,
Condemn'd to everlasting frost.
And even, Melpomene, thy song
I shun, no more thy notes prolong:
Self-eating Care, and Sorrow fell,
Oft in thy sweetest measures dwell.

Undaunted Resolution come;
Oh!  deign with me to make your home:
Come, with that bold unalter'd brow
Which you in greatest dangers show;
You, who unmov'd can view the storm,
With blackening clouds all heaven deform;
The mustering tempest swell the deep,
'Till waves the angry Welkin sweep;
Hear thunders rend the vaulted sky,
And see the vollied lightning fly:
You, undismay'd in evil hour,
Can scorn th' unfeeling tyrant's power,
Though lawless rage the sword shou'd wield,
And carnage fill th' ensanguin'd field:
Come, all your power to me impart,
And give the bold and dauntless heart.

Hail, Comus, ever blithe and gay,
Soul of the heart-rejoicing lay,
Dear God of Mirth and honest Joy,
Come!  every painful thought destroy.
My Jessy too must join your train;
Without her ev'ry sport were vain;
Vain ev'ry joy that Nature yields,
The tuneful grove, or flowery fields.
For her, ye nymphs, a garland bring,
Compos'd of all the pride of spring,
Deck'd with the art of all the Nine:
This round her modest brow entwine;
That brow to self-conceit unknown,
Affected prudery's gloomy frown.
Disdain ne'er knew that happy place:
Enthron'd in all her native grace,
Fair Freedom there has fix'd her seat,
And reigns inimitably sweet.
She comes: &mdash; Now strike the tuneful lyre
With notes which only joy inspire.
Sweet Nature's song alone can please,
That flows with unaffected ease;
The barren strains of lab'ring Art,
Can never touch the feeling heart.

While Music thus her voice shall raise
In sweetest notes to Jessy's praise,
Light-footed fly the dance along,
Responsive to the joyful song.
Thus let us pass the fleeting hour;
The present's only in our power.
Thus grateful seize the moments given,
The gift of ever-bounteous Heaven.
Since dark, amid the searchless gloom
Of future date, poor mortals doom
Lies undisclos'd to human ken,
And scorns the fruitless toil of men.
