Muse, descend, and with thee bring
All the colours of the spring,
All the dyes that pleasures yield
To poet's eye, in fancy's field;
And when nicely mix'd are these
In thy landscape, form'd to please,
Let fair Quantock's tow'ring brow
Overlook the vales below;
Vales where strong-nerv'd labour treads,
With sturdy step, the green-clad meads,
And views, delighted, by his side
His flocks, in all their snowy pride.

Now, methinks, with eye intent
On the scene, I climb th' ascent,
And survey, with studious care,
Nature's works, divinely fair,
That to my raptur'd mind impart
More delight than those of art.

Let Tempe boast her pleasant shades,
And Pindus the Aonian maids,
Ida her stately groves of pine,
And nymphs and heroes half divine;
Yet what fair Quantock's fate denies
To her in fame, her site supplies.

Here, from the breezy ridge, we view
The Cambrian mountains ting'd with blue,
Which seem, at distance vast, to shroud
Their heads within some hov'ring cloud.
Here too the Severn's briny wave
Is seen the neighb'ring strand to lave,
Where commerce sits, with anxious mien,
And, thoughtful, eyes the wat'ry scene,
Till, pleas'd, at distance she espies
Some vessel's bellying canvass rise.

Oh!  how delightful 'tis t' explore
The distant meadow's purple shore!
Or orchards, by Pomona blest,
That bend, with ripen'd fruit opprest,
And to the lab'ring hand afford
Fit liquor for his homely board!

Indulge me, ye propitious powers,
Who oft frequent the shady bowers;
Indulge me here, devoid of care,
To breathe the health-inspiring air,
Soon as the morn, with saffron dyes
Has streak'd th' extent of human skies,
And, gayly rising from her nest,
The lark her homage has exprest,
In notes that wildly warbled slow,
And nature's untaught music show.

O Quantock, while thy views I trace,
And, pleas'd, describe each rural grace
That round thy beauteous hill is seen,
Of seats imbower'd, and wood-lands green,
Was Dyer's descriptive muse but mine,
To make my thoughts as theme divine,
Then should thy hill, like Grongar, claim,
From poetry, a deathless name.
