I. 1.
Britons!  hands and hearts prepare:
The angry tempest threatens nigh,
Deep-toned thunders roll in air,
Lightnings thwart the livid sky;
Throned upon the winged storm,
Fell DESOLATION rears her ghastly form,
Waves her black signal to her Hell-born brood,
And lures them thus with promised blood:

I. 2.
"Drive, my sons, the storm amain!
Lo, the hated, envied land,
Where PIETY and ORDER reign,
And Freedom dares maintain her stand.
Have ye not sworn, by night and hell,
These from the earth for ever to expel?
Rush on, resistless, to your destined prey,
Death and rapine point the way."

I. 3.
Britons!  stand firm!  with stout and dauntless heart
Meet unappall'd the threatening boaster's rage;
Yours is the great, the unconquerable part,
For your loved hearths and altars to engage,
And sacred LIBERTY, more dear than life&mdash;
Yours be the triumph in the glorious strife.
Shall theft and murder braver deeds excite
Than honest scorn of shame and heavenly love of right?

II. 1.
Turn the bright historic page!
Still in glory's tented field,
Albion's arms, for many an age,
Have taught proud Gallia's bands to yield.
Are not WE the sons of those
Whose steel-clad sires pursued the insulting foes,
E'en to the centre of their wide domain,
And bowed them to a BRITON'S reign?

II. 2.
Kings, in modest triumph led,
Graced the SABLE VICTOR'S arms:
His conquering lance, the battle's dread;&mdash;
His courtesy the conquered charms.
The lion-heart soft pity knows,
To raise with soothing cares his prostrate foes;
The vanquish'd head true valour ne'er oppress'd,
Nor shunn'd to succour the distress'd.

II. 3.
Spirit of great ELIZABETH!  inspire
High thoughts, high deeds, worthy our ancient fame;
Breathe through our ardent ranks the patriot fire,
Kindled at Freedom's ever-hallowed flame;
Baffled and scorned, the Iberian tyrant  found,
Though half a world his iron sceptre bound,
The gallant Amazon could sweep away,
Armed with her people's love, the "INVINCIBLE" array.

III. 1.
The BOLD USURPER firmly held
The sword by splendid treasons gained;
And Gallia's fiery genius quelled,
And Spain's presumptuous claims restrained:
When lust of sway, by flattery fed,
To venturous deeds the youthful monarch led,
In the full flow of victory's swelling tide
Britain checked his power and pride.

III. 2.
To the great BATAVIAN'S name
Ceaseless hymns of triumph raise!
Scourge of tyrants, let his fame
Live in songs of grateful praise.
Thy turrets, BLENHEIM, glittering to the sun,
Tell of bright fields from warlike Gallia won;
Tell how the mighty monarch mourned in vain
His impious wish the world to chain.

III. 3.
And ye famed heroes, late retired to heaven,
Whose setting glories still the skies illume,
Bend from the blissful seats to virtue given&mdash;
Avert your long-defended country's doom.
Earth from her utmost bounds shall wondering tell
How victory's meed ye gained, or conquering fell;
Britain's dread thunders bore from pole to pole,
Wherever man is found, or refluent oceans roll.

IV. 1.
Names embalmed in honour's shrine,
Sacred to immortal praise,
Patterns of glory, born to shine
In breathing arts or pictured lays:
See WOLFE, by yielding numbers pressed,
Expiring smile, and sink on victory's breast!
See MINDEN'S plains and BISCAY'S billowy bay
Deeds of deathless fame display.

IV. 2.
O!  tread with awe the sacred gloom,
Patriot Virtue's last retreat!
Where Glory, on the trophied tomb,
Joys their merit to repeat;
There CHATHAM lies, whose master-hand
Guided through seven bright years the mighty band,
That round his urn, where grateful Memory weeps,
Each in his hallowed marble sleeps.

IV. 3.
Her brand accursed when civil discord hurled,
Britain alone the united world withstood,
RODNEY his fortune-favoured sails unfurled,
And let three nation's chiefs to Thames's flood.
Firm on his rock the VETERAN HERO stands;
Beneath his feet unheeded thunders roar;
Smiling in scorn, he sees the glittering bands;
Fly with repulse and shame old CALPE'S hopeless shore.

V. 1.
Heirs or partners of their toils,
Matchless heroes still we own;
Crowned with honourable spoils
From the leagued nations won,
On their high prows they proudly stand,
The godlike guardians of their native land;
Lords of the mighty deep triumphant ride,
Wealth and victory at their  side.

V. 2.
Loyal, bold, and generous bands,
Strenuous in their country's cause,
Guard their cultivated lands,
Their altars, liberties, and laws.
On his firm, deep-founded throne,
Great BRUNSWICK sits &mdash; a name to fear unknown,
With brow erect commands the glorious strife,
Unawed, and prodigal of life.

V. 3.
Sons of fair Freedom's long-descended line,
To Gallia's yoke shall Briton bend the neck?&mdash;
No; in her cause though fate and hell combine
To bury all in universal wreck,
Of this fair Isle to make one dreary waste,
Her greatness in her ruins only traced,&mdash;
Arts, commerce, arms, sunk in one common grave&mdash;
The man who dares to die will never live a slave.
