'Twas Sunday morning, quite serene the air,
And city beaux began to dress their hair:
Prepar'd in buggies or in gigs to ride,
With some fair nymph close wedg'd in by their side,
To smell a dunghill &mdash; view a farm, or plain,
Then dine &mdash; get drunk &mdash; and drive to town again!
Smart 'prentice youths, and clerks their boots drew on,
Intent on mounting horses had on loan,
And male and female, in promiscuous throng,
To quit the city hurried all along,
When Mrs. Cask her surly spouse address'd,
And smiling softly, thus her wish express'd.

MRS. CASK.
How sweet the morning air!  how vastly fine!
I'd like immensely out of town to dine,
In some gay village, near the public road;
You know, my dear, we seldom go abroad;
Confin'd the week, dear Mr. Cask, as we,
We should on Sunday breathe some air that's free.
Our neighbour Potion, says as how 'tis good,
Both for the spirits, and to cleanse the blood.
Come, have a coach, and drive somewhere from town;
You'll make the tea, whilst I put on my gown.

MR. CASK.
I hate all jaunts expensive such as these;
I'll dine at home; but after, if you please,
We'll take a walk, as sober folks should do,
To Islington, or Bagnigge &mdash; I and you.
I'll smoke my pipe, and you shall drink your tea,
Poll can go with us &mdash; wife, do you agree?

MRS. CASK.
You still will talk in your old vulgar style;
Pray, do you think that I can walk a mile?
We'll have a coach, as folks of taste should have,
Since you've enough, why "should I be a slave?"
I cannot walk &mdash; I can't, upon my life!&mdash;
We'll have a coach, say yes, and end our strife.

MR. CASK.
You cannot walk!  why not as well as I?
You'd find it easy, if you'd only try.

MRS. CASK.
Fie!  Mr. Cask, how foolishly you talk!
Do you expect that I should meanly walk?
Don't all my neighbours every Sunday ride,
And justly would not they me then deride?
To walk, is vulgar; with a chearful face,
Say yes, at once &mdash; come, do it with a grace.

MR. CASK.
Expence for ever! &mdash; ay, this is the way,
I slave behind the counter every day:
Scarce stir one moment, weekly, from my shop,
Save just sometimes in at the Sun to pop,
To smoak my pipe, and see what's going on,
The price of stocks &mdash; the lottery &mdash; and loan;
Yet this and that, and t' other thing you buy,
And every way to ruin me you try&mdash;
A thousand things I've got to cause vexation,
Bad debts &mdash; sad failures &mdash; children's education,
Two sons &mdash; a daughter, all at boarding school!&mdash;
Some folks have told me, I'm an arrant fool,
To bring up children as great people do,
And this expence is owing all to you.
The half year's bills I saw the other day,
And very soon I'll have them too to pay;
There's "dancing &mdash; drawing &mdash; music and a hat,
Clothes mended &mdash; ushers" and the Devil knows what!
Again for Poll &mdash; you need not fume nor fret,
You'll see me soon expos'd in the Gazette.

MRS. CASK.
Don't many neighbours send their sons to college,
To learn old Greek &mdash; and get all kinds of knowledge,
At more expence?  and yet you trifles grudge:
Why, Mr. Cask, our Jack may be a judge.
Poor wretched woman, that I e'er should be
Fast ty'd for life unto a bear like thee!
Don't all around me in their sattins flaunt,
And of their liveries and attendants vaunt,
See balls and plays, in the genteelest stile,
Whilst I at home, sit moping all the while?
A gown or cap, you scarce will e'er bestow,
And what you do is at a price so low,
That I'm not fit in public to appear;
And yet you gain a thousand neat a year,
Besides ten thousand out on mortgage lent,
That brings you in a pretty sum per cent.

MR. CASK.
I'll stop my ears &mdash; pray hold your cursed tongue&mdash;
You'll drive me mad &mdash; I'm always in the wrong&mdash;
O Lud! &mdash; O Lud!  my life is wretched sure!
Continual din, and noise I do endure.
One time I'm teaz'd to buy a sattin gown;
Next day to drive perhaps ten miles from town.
Sometimes, however, busy be the day,
I'm dragg'd by force to coach it to the play&mdash;
Each day you find some little pretty things,
That I must purchase &mdash; china &mdash; plate &mdash; or rings.
I'm scarce allow'd a single moment's ease,
Nor must I do but what you, Madam, please.
My hat and wig, are sometimes ungenteel:
I'm often forc'd to strip from head to heel;
My old drab coat, I long on Sundays wore,
Tho' whole, is now become a sad eye-sore;
My woolen night-cap too offends your sight;
I scarce dare go to smoak my pipe at night,
'Tis low &mdash; 'tis mean &mdash; 'tis vulgar, still you bawl,
And then poor me you somewhere strive to haul;
And in your mouth you've always this reproach,
That I refuse to treat you with a coach.&mdash;

MRS. CASK.
A hackney coach! &mdash; had I but proper spirit,
I'd have a carriage, I'd no longer bear it.
Why shouldn't you keep one as well as those,
Who, whilst they loll, at me turn up their nose?
Folks, who but lately mov'd in a low sphere,
And now they make a figure every where.

MISS CASK.
Indeed, papa, I think you're vastly wrong,
Mama and I have gone on foot too long.
When people can, they ought to live with taste,
You never grudge expence when at a feast;
Sometimes you spend in ven'son and in wine,
Enough to make three families well dine.&mdash;
Were I mama, I'd go straight to Long-Acre,
And have a carriage span new from the maker.
Indeed I think it is a monstrous pity,
That I and she should live here in the city.

MR. CASK.
Be quiet, hussey &mdash; don't I always pay,
Enough for you &mdash; demands come every day;
For dancing &mdash; music &mdash; and for parly voo,
I shan't be teaz'd by such a minx as you.
Since your loud tongue I'll support,
And for the future I shall keep you short.
Trade is low, and taxes fast advancing,
So Miss Pert, I'll pay for no more dancing.

MRS. CASK.
O!  cruel man!  how can you serve one so!
More rude and bearish every day you grow;
No mortal woman can this usage bear;
You force me now to shed a feeling tear.
Oh!  would but Heav'n here end my wretched life,
And free me &mdash; free me &mdash; from this state of strife!
A cruel husband, who will still deny
The smallest trifle that I wish to buy:
Looks sour and sulky, whatsoe'er I ask,
And puts me always to the painful task
Of scolding, fretting, teizing, and of crying,
And ev'ry soothing method even trying.
Such treatment surely would provoke a saint!
My smelling bottle &mdash; Oh!  I faint! &mdash; I faint&mdash;

MR. CASK.
Here, Betty!  Betty! &mdash; salts! &mdash; the bottle &mdash; run!
Oh!  foolish man!  what have I, have I done!&mdash;
My child in tears &mdash; my wife in fainting fits!
Oh!  neighbours, help! &mdash; I'll lose, I'll lose my wits!&mdash;

MRS. CASK.
Ah!  barb'rous man! &mdash; and will you not relent?
Must I untimely to my grave be sent?

MR. CASK.
Dry up your tears &mdash; the comfort this of marriage!
Once more, wife, I'll treat you with a carriage&mdash;
Run Betty &mdash; quickly &mdash; run into the street,
And hire the first neat hackney coach you meet&mdash;
These women still somehow have got the art,
To overcome us, and to melt the heart;
Let us poor cits do whatso'er we may,
Our headstrong spouses still will have their way!
