Hail, sacred Fane!  amidst whose stately shrines,
Her constant vigils Melancholy keeps;
(Whilst on her arm her grief-worn cheek reclines)
And o'er the spoils of human grandeur weeps.

Hail, ancient edifice!  thine aisle along,
In contemplation wrapt, now let me stray;
And stealing from the idly-busy throng,
Devoutly meditate the moral lay.

What pleasing sadness fills my thoughtful breast
Whene'er my steps these gloomy mansions trace,
Where, in their sumptuous tombs, in silence rest,
The honour'd ashes of the British race!

Here terminate ambition's airy schemes,
The syren pleasure here allures no more;
Here grov'ling av'rice drops her golden dreams,
And life's fantastic trifles are all o'er.

No cares nor passions here the bosom rend,
Here wasting pain and earthly troubles cease;
Here hopeless love and cruel hatred end,
And the world's weary trav'ler rests in peace.

Approach, vain child of fortune, pow'r, and fame!
Here learn a lesson from each speaking bust;
View on each lofty tomb the envied name
Of worldly greatness, levelled in the dust.

How each high pers'nage once, how honour'd, read;
How low, how little now, look down and see;
Hence learn to know thyself; for 'tis decreed,
That thou as little, and as low shalt be.

Full many a hapless victim yet unborn,
O death all conq'ring!  at thy feet must fall,
Before the dawning of that glorious morn,
When thou shalt yield, and God be all in all.

Then from the silent grave and op'ning tomb
Shall each reviving tenant lift its head,
And this time honour'd abbey's crouded womb
Resign its treasures of illustrious dead.

E'en now, methinks, by faith's pervading eye
I see his banner in the clouds display'd,
And the world's Saviour, from his throne on high,
Descend in purest robes of light array'd.

Great day of gladness to the good and just,
When they shall taste the wonders of his love;
And rising joyful from the beds of dust,
Ascend triumphant to the realms above.

Then shall the finish'd bust, the sculptur'd stone,
And all the labour of the artist's hand
Dissolve; and virtue's solid base alone
Amidst the gen'ral wreck of matter stand.

Ye, should creation founder in the storm,
And whelming perish in this awful doom,
Yet shall celestial virtue's angel form
Survive, and flourish in immortal bloom.

Then shall the good resolve, the gen'rous deed,
And noble conflict in religion's cause,
Be well rewarded; 'tis by Heav'n decreed&mdash;
And surely meet at judgment God's applause.

O be it then our wisdom to secure
Those glorious crowns that shine for ever bright:
Crowns that adorn the faithful and the pure,
In the blest mansions of eternal light.
