When great ELIZA'S reign Britannia blest,
When victory adorn'd her noble reign,
Ev'n on that happy night, which did attest
That the Armada's errand was in vain,
And all defeated the proud boast of Spain;
'Tis said the queen seem'd pensive, as she sat,
Or weary'd by the day's tumultuous scene,
Or that her thoughts then roll'd the turns of fate,
And the unstable pomps, which magnify high state.

'Twas late, when thus she spoke to Raleigh &mdash; stay
Awhile, for troubled thoughts are in my breast,
And, if I should disburthen them, I may,
Perhaps, the better, when I slumber, rest;
Alas!  a sovereign's sleep is oft distrest:
Forecasting views, and cares of various kind,
The silent hours will sullenly molest,
And raise up tumults that disturb the mind,
Sometimes, the whole long night, from sweet repose reclin'd.

Raleigh reply'd, great queen whom we revere,
And still shall honour, sweet may slumbers be
To those to truth and goodness who adhere,
As who, that rules on earth, do's more than thee!
Who decks a throne &mdash; with nobler dignity!
When thou art griev'd good angels, sure, might weep,
And heav'nly hosts confess their sympathy!
But 'tis for this our queen do's vigils keep,
And her own rest impairs, that subjects sound may sleep.

But, on this happy night, &mdash; when bonfires blaze
And cannons with a thund'ring voice relate
That British land may hope for fair ey'd days,
Since the Armada shall no longer threat,
And clouds disperse, that hover'd o'er the state;
Ev'n now, to seem thus wrapp'd in sullen care,
As if in some anxiety of fate,
Strange tidings this for heav'n or earth to hear!
If now the queen repines &mdash; what is it would her cheer?

Not, thus, our royal mistress look'd and spoke,
When Spain's proud galleons hover'd round the coast,
Sore threat'ning fair dominions with the yoke,
And all prepar'd with chains and haughty boast
Not thus the queen repell'd th' invading host&mdash;
The animating voice, the awful eye
Commanded ev'ry soldier to his post.
They ran resolv'd to conquer or to die,
For, lo!  they seem'd t' obey the mandates of the sky.

While thy good captains, on the boist'rous main,
Howard and Drake threw forth thy vengeful fire,
And spoke in thunder to presuming Spain,
"Such spoils from Britain may her foes acquire;"
But the good heav'ns with thy great deeds conspire;
The raging winds arouse the roaring seas,
And, shew, incens'd, a more than mortal ire,
And what escape the fury of the blaze
Are shatter'd, driv'n along, and wreck'd with dire amaze.

There, Raleigh, thou hast said it &mdash; Pow'r divine
Did interpose the victory to seize,
To him my right of conquest I resign,
Who rules the tempest, who commands the seas,
Who with his winds did blow and them abase:
Let us to future ages, grateful send
Some fair memorial to record his praise;
"And thou, O sov'reign pow'r!  still thus extend
Thy grace in times to come, and still these lands defend!"

Yet, Raleigh, all this while, I find my heart
Laden with care, lest all should not go right,
How look the husbandmen who bore a part,
So largely and stood ready for the fight
My faithful subjects! &mdash; seem thy in good plight?
How fare the Merchants, our fast friends, who then
Gave noble aid?  say, Raleigh, this good night,
How many did we ask, five thousand men?
And those of London gave &mdash; much do I thank them, ten?

O queen!  belov'd of heav'n!  and dear to earth
Who, ev'ry debt, right willing are to pay,
Charg'd on thy sov'reign dignity and state,
Which thus doth delegated pow'r display,
Bright'ning the human might with heav'nly ray,
Well may the subjects thrive beneath thy reign,
Industry smil'd upon by land and sea:
When e'er did Britain such a prospect gain!
Or so abound in all that might her state maintain!

While new found worlds confess thy name and sway,
While neigh'bring states are by thy succors sav'd,
Ev'n wild Hybernians thy behests obey,
And, Spain, in France, and Holland's, no less brav'd,
For in thy reign what land should be enslav'd!
Undazzled midst these glories, still, you strive
To raise the peoples good, which is engrav'd
Upon your heart, and still, you do contrive
How they, in their commerce, and ev'ry weal may thrive.

The childless goddess, thus, as bards devise,
Jove's fav'rite daughter, wisdoms awful queen,
Provok'd to war, and bid its terrors rise
And urge the battle on with dreadful mien,
While flashing light'nings in her eyes are seen,
But, when the fury of the conflict's o'er
She looks as she had wrathful never been,
Bids war and desolation be no more,
And loves the arts of peace and science to restore.

Nay, now sir Walter, I must think you tire,
'Tis late &mdash; good night, &mdash; perhaps you need your rest;
I no such fine similitudes admire,
Nor want I like a goddess to be drest,
A queen is high enough, &mdash; if she be blest
With heav'n's good favour, &mdash; and her peoples love,
O may I, always, be of these possest!
And may true wisdom, and th' unfeigned Jove
Direct me in my steps, and all my acts approve!
