For glitt'ring pomp and wealth let mortals strive,
For all that Nature gave, or Art has found;
Direct to Heav'n the tortur'd waters drive,
And press with Grecian domes the lab'ring ground;
Let them with gold their polish'd tables pile,
With Persian tapestry their walls adorn;
Let the lute's soothing sound to sleep beguile,
And trumpet's lordly clangor wake at morn:
Yet can their eager toils no pleasure gain,
And poor 'mid all their pomp and wretched they remain.

Though wealth and honour wait on Clive's command,
He sighs for peace amid his splendid state;
Against himself he arms his frantic hand,
And seeks sad refuge in a guilty fate.
The cot has ev'ry bliss the palace knows;
The prince his sceptre tires, his crook the swain;
The wretch, whose soul with mad ambition glows,
Imperial guards protect from care in vain.
If peace and safe content his dwelling crown,
Sleeps he with less repose, who knows no bed of down?

Blest was that golden age, so sweetly sung,
From hapless man too early snatch'd away;
Not that with ceaseless spring the world was young,
And cutting blasts ne'er made the flow'rs decay;
Not that spontaneous rose the yellow blade,
And milk and honey flow'd from ev'ry rock,
That 'mid the wolves the lamb securely stray'd,
And no gaunt lion scar'd the tender flock;
But that by no unbounded wish possest,
Man sigh'd not yet for gold, nor deem'd abundance blest.

Ye sons of Nature!  still with you abide
Those goodly days; for 'mid your barren soil,
Estrang'd from tinsel vanity and pride,
Want is your happiness, your pleasure toil:
Such fair effects to man does virtue bring;
And though in frozen clouds your thirst you slake;
Though tedious winters nip the tardy spring,
And chilling snows your valley's ne'er forsake;
Yet does the savage clime your bliss increase,
While manners pure from guilt mark all your days with peace.

Then praise high Heav'n, that to your land denied
Riches, true source of ev'ry vice and ill;
While torrents wait on luxury and pride,
The heart of unaspiring want is still.
Wood were her temples, pulse her warrior's feast,
When Rome from ev'ry war triumphant came;
At length when wholesome moderation ceas'd,
Weak was her arm, her glory but a name:
While pure simplicity and temp'rance reign,
Oh bless your happy lot, nor pant for cursed gain.

Though Nature spread with stones the barren land,
The plough yet tames your soil, and harvests grow;
And mighty mountains, rais'd at her command,
Protect you still from man, man's fiercest foe.
Milk is your food, pure rills your wholesome draught,
More sweet than fev'rish wine, that glows in gold;
With crackling ice alone your hills are fraught,
Mines, which Peru with envy might behold!
Where Freedom reigns, ev'n labour is repose,
Bare rocks are strewn with flow'rs, and soft the north-wind blows.

O blest privation of destructive joys!
Wealth has no bliss to want like yours unknown;
No vain opinion e'er your peace destroys,
But smiling concord marks you for her own.
Pure are your pleasures, unalloy'd with dread,
For death, tho' life is sweet, has no alarm;
True Reason is your guide, by Nature led,
That seeks the needful, counts all else for harm:
Whate'er sublimer moralists command,
Untaught in thee prevails, O artless, happy land.

T' ennoble vice and lay poor virtue low,
Here pride no diff'rence makes, confounding right;
No restless tedium bids your hours move slow,
Since labour marks your day, and peace your night.
No wild ambition here the great o'erthrows,
The morn ne'er rises on a wretch unblest;
Impartial liberty on all bestows
With equal hand, contentment, toil, and rest;
And here no pining heart its fortune hates;
You eat, you sleep, you love, and thank the bounteous fates.

Here Learning barters not her paper store,
Nor measures land and sea from pole to pole;
She chains not reason in scholastic lore,
Nor teaches planets in their orb to roll.
Thy sons, O Wisdom, boast but little good,
They scan the world, yet to themselves are blind;
By them is pleasure poison'd, not subdu'd,
And life is dull to feelings too refin'd.
Here all live well, by simple Nature led;
Alone the heart directs and not the toiling head.
