The blushing eve puts on her sable vest,
The busy shepherds pen their fleecy care,
The weary animals retire to rest,
And leave the verdant meads or stack-yards fare.

Now, too, the vocal tenants of the grove
Cease their sweet notes, and quit the silent plain,
To feed their tender offsprings of their love,
And shelter them from dew, or wind, or rain.

With thief-like pace the fox now seeks his prey,
And timid fowls their callow young forsake,
Till barking dogs, or rustics, drive away
The lurking foe, that their soft slumbers break.

Near yonder abbey walls, with ivy spread,
The holy fathers once their vigils kept,
Among the gloomy mansions of the dead,
Who in their graves for ages past have slept.

The horse's neigh, the bull's loud bellowing,
Nor bleating ram, nor horn the shepherds blow,
Nor mastiff's howl, nor rustics hallowing,
Will ever wake them in those beds below.

No more for them the grey-ey'd morn shall wake,
Or evening's curtain close the scene of care,
No more for them the hare her forme forsake,
Or faithful dog the hard-earn'd crust shall share.

No more in leather clad, fierce furze they'll bind,
Or bend the stubborn thorns as they should grow,
No more thresh corn, and cleanse it with the wind,
Or whet their scythes, the clover-fields to mow.

No more with biting irons sheer the sheep,
Or with sharp knives peel bark off fallen trees,
Or gather fruits, or yellow harvests reap,
Or take rich honey from the aged bees.

Contemn not those, ye men of arms and arts,
Whose toils assist the earth her sons to feed,
Whom plenteous harvest sing to chear our hearts,
While ye sing heroes who in battles bleed.

That sound call'd honour, sought in peace and war,
Is nothing but the whistling of a name;
When the pale rider darts his fatal spear,
Poor simple clowns and heroes fall the same.

Vain are the arts, by which thou wouldst make known
What wealth or titles thou didst once possess,
Wealth, honours, titles, in one heap are thrown,
To waste and moulder in death's dark recess.

The rustic's grave (scarce rais'd above the ground)
With green flags covered, and with oziers lac'd,
Hides not less virtue than is often found
In lofty tombs, with sculptor's flatteries grac'd.

So in this place (now wild and overgrown
With nettles, brakes, and briers) may be laid
Men deep in science read, yet scarcely known
Sweet bards, who on their harps to victory play'd;

Or from the volume fair, of nature took
Such precepts as no other teachers know;
Drew texts from stones, and sermons from the brook,
And fashioned youthful minds as they should grow.

Tho' near that path men name the milky way,
Stars seem but small, to mortal on the earth,
They may be suns, to regulate the day
Of distant worlds, just launching into birth:

E'en so, those men, whom history never nam'd,
Whose breasts with ardent patriotism glow'd,
Or such as wild rebellion could have tam'd,
And check'd the tide tyrannic as it flow'd.

Bold peasants who (to aid their sov'reign dear)
In civil war perform'd heroic deeds:
Or simple past'ral poets buried here,
Who fed their harmless flocks and tun'd their reeds;

Yet could not brook the falsehood of their day,
Nor hide their honest faces, when they saw
Those who should guard them, like to beasts of prey
Which range in wilds, subjected by no law.

But they are dead, and here consign'd to lie,
(Till the last trumpet rouse them from the dust)
No nodding plumes or banners o'er them fly,
The trophy'd scutcheon or the weeping bust.

Their names unknown and places of their birth,
None here can tell me from what parts they came,
No panegyric pens record their worth,
Or make their modest ashes blush with shame:

Yet pity, in soft tones, (as each one fell)
Bade some dear friend put on the winding shroud,
And dig the grave, and toll the parting knell,
Perform each funeral rite, and weep aloud.

But left no marks to shew the hoary sage,
That of his ancestors, some rested here,
Blunt, honest men, esteemed in their age,
Laborious, sober, peaceful, and sincere.

This tale I've read, have often thought it o'er,
And tell it now, as it was told to me,
Like him (unskill'd in legendary lore)
I wrote the artless tale, which here you see.

What now succeeds is painful to relate,
'Tis told of him, these imitations pen,
He too must die; must meet that common fate
Which surely waits on all the sons of men.

Perhaps by fall, from some old ruin'd tow'r,
That wayward fancy urges him to mount,
Or leaning o'er some brook, to pluck a flower,
Falls heedless in, and sinks beneath a fount.

Or crushed by a wheel's revolving force,
Thrown down, as riding home in mad career,
Or gor'd by furious bull, or kick'd by horse,
The base assassin's club, or foe's sharp spear:

Or chill'd by age, or slow consumptive blood,
Or parch'd with fever, quick consume away,
Or on th' Atlantic die for want of food,
Or froze while ice-bound in the Russian sea.

On land, or sea, wherever man abides,
Between this shore and Antipodian beach,
Death, as grand master, over all presides,
The doctrine of mortality to teach.

Yet when th' immortal spark, which God has given
To light his paths, and guide him through life's day
Shall be call'd up from earth to shine in heaven,
Haply some dear surviving friend may say,

(THE EPITAPH.)
Moulder in peace, all that's compos'd of clay,
Not death's strong hand thy active soul can bind,
She soaring far above the starry way,
Her crucified Redeemer hopes to find.

Thou, on the sacred page of God's own word,
In true perspective saw the promis'd lands,
With that rich milk and honey they afford,
To those who hear, and live as he commands.

Then seek no further, strive no more to know,
The time of life stands there, of brightest green;
Its fruit, unharm'd by frost, abundant grow,
A food for angels, yet bestow'd on Men.
