Sweet is the balmy breath of summer eve,
What time along the twilight lawns I rove,
From the green turf the honied vapours heave,
And cooling breezes curl the dusky grove.

Now musing Melancholy loves to stray,
And views with pensive look the pale moon rise;
Silent she holds her solitary way,
Enjoys the dank dew and the show'ry skies,

Late as I rang'd the woodland vale more deep.
I met the wand'rer in a pathless walk;
I call'd her sister, for I saw her weep,
But still she shunn'd th' impertinence of talk.

At length she led me on her darkling cell,
And ancient tow'r with ivy mantled o'er,
(Where the lone-moping owl delights to dwell)
Hard by, a green lake midst some willows hoar.

Within the walls are moss and cobwebs all,
Save where the trickling crystal forms its way,
And on the floor, each wakening sense t' appal,
Dust-mould'ring bones in dread confusion lay.

On these one chapless skull she seem'd to prize,
On which her arm reclin'd to raise her head;
And still on this she fix'd her fondling eyes,
And look'd like Venus o'er Adonis dead.

Ere long her falt'ring voice she 'gan essay,
"And welcome, gentle swain," she feebly said,
"Thy tears more grateful than the dew of May,
Speak thee with me in solemn sadness read.

"Full oft, what time the flocks are drove to fold,
I've mark'd thy wayward gait and pensive brow,
And, for with woe such sympathy I hold,
I lov'd thee for the sorrows thou didst know.

"Learn then what shock, in my prophetic eye
Impending, threatens this devoted vale;
The gath'ring sheep denote some danger nigh,
And forms are seen that turn the shepherd pale:

"The lark no longer seeks the dazzling day;
My Philomel withholds her evening song;
Death-boding ravens hover in the way;
And horrid screech-owls their alarms prolong.

"Ah!  hither bend thy pitying looks, for here
Remorseless Death is doom'd to do a deed,
That from the general eye will ask a tear,
And claim of me some more impassion'd meed.

"Too soon shall anguish tell with trembling tongue,
At length is come the ominated Woe:
Then catch this lyre, and all as it is strung,
Strike the sad strains that in thy bosom glow."

Thus much she said, and ended with a sigh;
Unus'd to sing, fearful I took the lyre:
And now the warning impulse throbbing high,
This song of sorrow breathes the promis'd fire.

The wood-nymphs weep the fairest of the throng,
And fling their rosy-wreathed chaplets by,
"No more Eliza roves these walks along,
With her the flowerets and their fragrance die."

Swift flies the sound to yonder craggy steep,
Where Echo slumbers on her airy bed:
Sudden she wakes; and wildly seems to weep,
As wide around the wretched tale is spread.

Anon the deathful knell invades mine ear;
Solemn and slow it rolls along the sky;
In silent grief the list'ning shepherds hear,
Till from each bosom burst the swelling sigh.

To the dark mansions of their kindred dead,
A mournful troop comes winding o'er the plain;
From whose pale hand their gloomy shadow shed
The cypress black, and yew of mortal bane.

By virgins deck'd, on virgin shoulders born,
The child of death in smiling beauty lies;
Dipt in the dew of Heav'n's eternal morn,
An angel's roseate fingers clos'd her eyes.

On either side the white-rob'd nymphs attend,
The late companions of her harmless hours,
On whose bright cheek the rose and lilly blend,
And paint a flow'r bedew'd with vernal show'rs.

In darkness wrapt, with falt'ring step and slow,
Domestic Sorrow leads her languid train;
A steadfast horror sits upon her brow,
And stops the stream that strives to ease her pain.

The rustic many mingled all among,
Soft Sympathy delights to gaze on Grief;
Till the big tear, throughout the shepherd throng,
Hang like the dew-drop on the various leaf.

This tribute virtue claims, this tender boon
Still fondly follows beauty's early bier:
Nor all unwept is lost Eliza gone;
Pride of the flow'ry plains, and smiling year.

Of form less fair the graceful myrtle springs,
Nurst in the bosom of the genial May;
Tho' Zephyr fan it with ambrosial wings,
And Phoebus view it with a fonder ray.

Each lovely hue with which the fancy plays
Or in Pomona's, or in Flora's bow'r,
And on the cheek of Beauty lavish lays,
Bloom'd thro' the whole with lavish animated pow'r.

Her mind was all that first-form'd Innocence
Exprest in youthful Nature's happy prime;
Hence flow'd each great, each milder influence,
That renders virtue tender or sublime.

With more of softness than maternal love,
Each pain she felt that met her pitying view;
All but her own; and these she nobly strove,
In filial fondness, vainly to subdue.

O gentle Firmness!  lovely Piety!
With sense more sprightly than the dawn of day!
Vanish'd an heav'n-sent vision from our eye,
So barely shown, and early snatch'd away.

Where were you then!  ye spirits of holy men!
Ye sainted maids that join our pray'rs in heav'n!
Ah!  where your cares, your fond attention then,
Ere yet the many-wounding blow was giv'n?

Friends of mankind, ye guardian angels, say,
What dearer charge claim'd your protecting wings?
May nought avail what friends can weep or pray?
Nought all the vows parental passion brings?

Hail then to Horror!  hail thou house of Death!
And all the solemn pagentry of woe!
Hail hapless pair!  whose sighs still swell each breath;
Whose sacred sorrow no relief may know.

Did your fond loves produce the loss you mourn?
Your mutual cares the lov'd production rear?
Then weep, Affection; what from thee is torn
Tho' Heav'n enjoy, yet Heav'n approves thy tear.

On a lone tree in some sequestered vale,
Where late the stock-dove held her happier rest,
Reft of her young, she pours the plaintive tale,
And mourns the ruin of her childless nest.

There Nature acts, nor scorn that Nature here,
To hold Philosophy a wiser friend,
Whose precepts, often render'd too severe,
Destroy humanity, and balk their end.

The weakness sure is nobler that must weep,
When virtue suffers, or untimely dies,
Than the dull art that lulls the soul to sleep,
And good and bad beholds with equal eyes.

Receive me then, no stranger or to woe,
Or softer sympathy, in Sorrow's train;
The weeping wood-nymphs follow where I go,
And fondly cherish no unpleasing pain.

Hither shall veiled Pity repair,
In decent grief to grace these obsequies;
At this fair altar shall prefer her pray'r,
And breathe the sigh of incense to the skies.

Hither the meek-eyed Modesty shall tend,
Close wrapt in mantle of cerulean hue:
Sincerity, Affliction's fairest friend,
Here pay the pious boon to friendship due.

Simplicity in rustic neatness drest,
Shall quit her fleecy care these rites to join:
And sober Constancy in widow'd vest,
Each day with pale lip kiss the holy shrine.

And last in darkest robe of sable cast,
With musing step shall Melancholy come;
Here fix her cold embrace so firmly fast,
To seem one substance with the marble tomb.

Still at the twilight hour of eve we'll meet,
And wet the hallow'd ground with grateful tears;
Here strew each flow'ret that so late was sweet,
With ever leaf that seeming sadness wears.

Then with full voice a solemn requiem chaunt,
The peaceful sleep of Innocence to charm,
Of ghost unlaid to cross the impious haunt,
And awe the violating hand of Harm.

These pious duties done, no rites forgot,
In what remains beyond our mortal guard,
Let watchful angels keep this sacred spot,
And every black impending mischief ward.

Fly far from hence the lightning's fearful flash;
Nor strike thou here, all-dreaded thunder-stone!
Hark!  the hoarse raven from yon rifted ash,
Invites your rage to end what it begun.

So shall the sainted soil securely rest,
Beyond the regions of the rising day;
Nor rob'd in radiance fill the shepherd's breast,
In homeward walk, with terror and dismay.

Peace then thy ashes, gentle Shade, attend:
The swain, whose rural joys thy loss deplore,
Invokes thee once, ere yet his song shall end,
Then drops the lyre, perchance to sing no more.

Look down, blest Spirit, from thy starry sphere,
Approve the honest grief that decks thy shrine;
So shalt thou pardon the unhallow'd tear,
That wishes mortal what is made divine.
