The wrathful storm hath swept along the vale;
The madd'ning fury of the fight is o'er;
Discord's loud notes have ceas'd upon the gale&mdash;
The clang of arms, and pealing cannon's roar;

The "doubling drum;" the trumpet's brazen sound;
The yell of onset, and the piercing groan;
The squadron's charge, that shook the trembling ground;
The steed's proud neigh; the long and dying moan.

Hush'd the tumultuous din &mdash; and o'er the plain,
Where myriads pour'd the wasting tide of war,
And thunders roll'd, does desolation reign;
Like wearied slumbering Etna, scath'd and bare.

The dazzling scene hath vanish'd from the sight,
With all the splendid pageant of the fray;
Where Death with heroes' feats adorn'd the fight,
And seiz'd with pompous art his human prey&mdash;

The banners proudly floating in the gale;
The "lightning flash" that wing'd the distant doom;
The ranks of glittering steel and burnish'd mail;
The crested helmet and the waving plume.

The far-extended lines and frowning wings;
The nimble coursers bounding o'er the plain;
The varied garb of chiefs, and tribes, and kings,
That deck'd with colour'd art each warrior-train.

Pass'd as a vision &mdash; vanish'd as a cloud&mdash;
Whate'er of wild disorder mark'd the day;
As when the dusty volumes lent a shroud,
Or rolling smoke obscur'd the horrid fray?

Ah no!  the vision fades &mdash; the sulph'rous air
And dusty cloud are scatter'd in the wind:
But lo the field of death! &mdash; Can tongue declare
The horror, shame, and ruin left behind?

The track of dire destruction long and wide,&mdash;
The naked forest and the trampled plain;
The year's lost toil, the swain'd fair hope destroy'd,
The plunder'd vines and ravag'd fields of grain.

The village waste; the watch-dog's howling knell;
The croaking raven on the blacken'd wall;
The distant hamlet in the peaceful dell,
Mark'd by the spoiler, doom'd itself to fall&mdash;

(Here late with rural beauty nature smil'd,
And sylvan Music charm'd the flowery mead;)&mdash;
Ah, where shall flee the shiv'ring houseless child?
What friendly covert shade its orphan'd head?

What "tender mercies" urg'd the ruffian band,
To save the offspring of the slaughter'd sire;
That fired the peaceful cot with impious hand,
Nor spared the victim of unchaste desire?

Did aught their leader's savage breast control?
Could human feelings melt that heart of steel?
Did Memory wake the scorpion of his soul,
And pierce the only fibre that could feel?

But what avails one wretched fate to mourn&mdash;
Of one sad stricken murd'rer to complain?
Thousands are left as wretched and forlorn&mdash;
Thousands were murderers &mdash; tens of thousands slain!

Each might a different tale of grief disclose,
(Each child and widow, parent, sister, friend),
Thro' all the varied catalogue of woes,
Begin with sorrows, and with sorrows end.

But, for the actors in that chequer'd fray,
Who sought for high renown in fields of blood;
Who stifled mercy as they fought their way,
And dyed their garments in the crimson flood;

Can Pity feel? &mdash; Ah, give them Pity's tear!
Or Justice plead &mdash; obedience was their Law?
Or truth condemn? &mdash; Alas!  the Law of fear
Taught them with Hate, not Love, to overawe!

There lay the victims &mdash; youths and veterans slain!
Leaders and prostrate files confus'dly thrown,
In scatter'd heaps upon th' ensanguin'd plain,
As ripen'd sheaves or grass untimely mown!

There, too, the slaughter'd charger swell'd the pile,
With harness dimm'd and housing dipp'd in gore;
That pierc'd with furious heat the' embattled file,
And erst in triumph proud the warrior bore.

By ruthless deeds, man's heav'n-aspiring form
Doom'd with the weltering brute to share the ground;
His godlike mien, degraded with the worm&mdash;
Dishonour'd &mdash; marred with many a gory wound!

Low in the dust the brow that homage won!
And quench'd the flame, that warm'd the' enlivening breath!
And clos'd each portal-sense to wisdom's throne,
And o'er its path the wintry frost of Death!

A vast sepulchral scene of human wo!
Where wrath destroy'd what bounteous nature gave;
Noble and mean promiscuous &mdash; friend and foe
Engulph'd and bosom'd in one common grave!

The grave &mdash; from all their toils a last repose,
From midnight watch, and Boreas' freezing breath;
From Lybian heats, and Riphaean Eurus' snows,
And weary march, and hunger's lingering death!

Refuge from ills on others doom'd to wait,
Whose final hour obtain'd a short reprieve,
Diseas'd, and maim'd, and halt, in haggard state
To roam, or 'reft of liberty to grieve!

Where now the eye that flash'd with living fire!&mdash;
The bounding heart with hope and joy elate&mdash;
The burning cheek that glow'd with ardent ire&mdash;
The bosom reckless of impending fate!

Where the gay pageantry of martial show!
The proud emblazon'd banners seen afar&mdash;
The gold and crimson trappings brilliant glow&mdash;
"The pomp and circumstance of glorious war!"

Here  lie they all &mdash; inglorious &mdash; never more
To strike with wonder! &mdash; never more to feel
The cold pale cheek! &mdash; the garments drench'd in gore!
The keen eye dimm'd &mdash; and stain'd the shining steel!

Say not that glory &mdash; (glory dwells on high,
Pure from the stain of blood as virgin snow)
Can bear its splendors from the vaulted sky,
To crown with rays the child of wrath below.

Vain human glory!  'Tis a meteor's glare
That lights with lurid flash the warrior's tomb;
Say, can it wake the soul that slumbers there,
And cheer the dark impenetrable gloom?

Can Homer's kindling song, or Pindar's lyre,
Or Livy's pen, or Phidias' mimic art,
Revive the hero's long-extinguish'd fire,
And warm again the blood-forsaken heart?

Proud hope and vain!  The hero wakes no more&mdash;
And all that bard has sung, or story told,
Can never cleanse the hand defil'd with gore,
Nor grace the deed in tears and blood enroll'd.

Ah no!  the dew-drop in the melting eye
Of tender pity, for the child of wo,
Will claim a nobler recompense on high,
Than aught exulting valour can bestow.

Let not the bosom, warm'd with patriot-flame,
Nor scornful brow of high-aspiring youth,
These simple views as grovelling notions blame,
And mock the sober arguments of Truth.

He, whom the Syren fame so fondly charms,
And Honor tempts on doubtful wing to soar,
Will soon repose as free from war's alarms,
And dead to fame, as these we now deplore.

When sense was rack'd with agonizing pain,
And life was bubbling o'er the purple ground,
Could Grandeur's vision staunch the flowing vein,
Or sooth the anguish of the burning wound?

Could star or title, laurel'd bust, or all
That wealth and honour's fountain might bestow&mdash;
In that dark hour could pillar, trophied hall,
Or arch triumphal, mitigate the wo?

The rose's tint, or zephyr's balmy gale,
The shadowing cloud or insect o'er the stream;
The mountain-torrent in the thirsty vale,
Or dew-drop glittering in the morning beam;

As well the' immortal spirit might engage
With all its ardent pray'rs to stop their flight;
As well deceive the good &mdash; and lull the sage
With transports vain of permanent delight!

The' immortal soul aspires to realms above,
As fading vision dims this nether sphere.&mdash;
Can angels welcome with the smiles of love,
If wrath, revenge, and blood have stain'd it here?

If, in that solemn hour, when, tempest-driv'n,
The wearied spirit seeks a quiet home;
No friendly anchor to its hope is giv'n,
No joyful star to cheer the dark'ning gloom.&mdash;

When all the world's delusive charms are o'er,
And all the future big with wrath impends;&mdash;
What gulph receives &mdash; What demon-haunted shore!&mdash;
What dark eternity the conflict ends!

Alas for them!  The ebbing stream of life
Flow'd not along, a smooth and placid tide;
But, plunging down the swift career of strife,
Rush'd thro' its channel in a torrent wide.

Ah!  if the good ev'n "trembling hopes" engage,
When nature slowly, calmly sinks away;
Can souls less pure immortal peace presage,
When hurried fearless from the light of day?

For them, the tender tear was shed in vain&mdash;
The throb of sympathy unfelt &mdash; unknown!&mdash;
No fond endearments sooth'd the dying pain;
No gentle mourner heard the parting groan.

For them, no sacred messenger of love
Assuag'd the tortures of the bed of Death;
With holy ardor spoke of joys above,
And wean'd to pray'r unwont the sinner's breath.

No long possession, wrapt in solemn gloom,
For them, departed worth and virtue mourn'd;
Nor bursting sorrow stream'd around the tomb,
As mortal dust to kindred dust return'd.

But ah!  how little boots it where below
Moulders or wastes the soul's deserted clay,
Scorch'd on the desart &mdash; bleach'd amidst the snow&mdash;
Food for the worm, or rav'ning vulture's prey!

Not but the common rev'rence for our kind
Some decent rites &mdash; some peaceful grave demands,
Where rests the dead &mdash; and trusts the widow'd mind
That Heav'n will reunite Love's sever'd bands.

Then let not rash inquiry scan their fate,
And search the prison-secrets of the tomb.&mdash;
As vice and virtue shar'd their mortal state,
To God and Mercy leave their final doom.

To Mercy leave them &mdash; but their lot severe
(If folly's praise that lot severe will own)
From pity wrings a sigh, and calls a tear
To mourning pomp and sable pride unknown.

How many souls of nature's finest flame,
By passion ruffled, on that day expir'd!
How many gen'rous trod that path to fame,
By passion less than thirst of glory fir'd!

How many thoughtless drew the' expiring breath!
How many gay, benevolent, and kind&mdash;
Whose souls from blood recoil'd and fields of death,
Till art seduc'd and won the shudd'ring mind!

How many struck the dire avenging blow,
Whose meek-ton'd piety in happier days,
Perhaps forgave a fierce relentless foe,
And bless'd the God of love with hymns of praise!

Their race is run &mdash; their zeal might else have rear'd
To works of charity the' enduring stone;
And future ages bless'd the names rever'd,
That in her holy cause so brightly shone.

Perhaps some Howard, as the silent ray,
Stealing to light the dungeon's cheerless gloom;
Or, as the soul-enlivening breath of May,
O'er vapours dank to pour the sweet perfume.

Some spirit, arm'd with Clarkson's pious rage,
To break the guiltless captive's galling chains;
To open swarthy Lybia's iron cage:
Rejoicing millions o'er her burning plains.

Some bold enlighten'd Penn, whose simple word
With nature's rudest children rev'rence gain'd;
Whose rule of mercy sheath'd the useless sword,
And peace with all by gentleness maintain'd.

Some Lancaster, with fertile genius fraught,
To grave the' unwearied tablet of the mind;
To fix the wandering elements of thought,
And kindle light, to lighten all mankind.

Some Jenner, skill'd to blunt the poison'd shaft,
That foul deforming Pestilence has hurl'd;
The charm of life and beauty to ingraft,
And spread the saving wonder o'er the world.

And here the kindred soul of Hawes may rest,
Who sought no fabled Promethean heat,
To warm life's frozen springs &mdash; to heave the breast&mdash;
And cause the silent pulse again to beat.

Who would not weep if such the victims fell?&mdash;
Their virtues hinder'd not their cruel fate.
But ah!  the passion's sway could others tell&mdash;
What pride and thirst of gold, revenge and hate!

Some for ambition join'd the martial train,
And some for spoil unworthy sought the fight;
Some to revenge a son or parent slain,
And some to deeds inur'd, that shunn'd the light.

Some brought their hireling forces to the field,
And some, reluctant accessories, came;
Those, prompt for gold to either side to yield,
And heedless, these, of vic'try as of fame.

Some, by deceit, were hurried to the fray,
And many, stern compulsive orders brought;
Some were condemn'd for crimes that debt to pay,
And many thousands knew not why they fought.

They fought and bled and slew, they knew not why;
Superior wills they faithfully obey'd.&mdash;
(The faithful servant owns a sacred tie.)
Could crimes for ignorance to these be laid?

A true, unerring balance hangs above,
To weigh the conscious deeds of lord and slave;
Will heav'n the last condemn &mdash; the first approve,
Squand'ring the lives that pow'r was giv'n to save?

&mdash;Can ignorance be justly pleaded here?
Will conscious rectitude applaud the deed?&mdash;
Can kings and rulers condemnation fear,
Or states' enlighten'd councils wisdom need?

This awful tragedy was theirs alone.&mdash;
The plot and vast machinery of Death,
Framed by the senate &mdash; sanctioned by the throne&mdash;
Favor'd by prelates' consecrating breath!

And other senates raised the counter-storm,
Thrones kindled wrath, and altars fanned the flame:&mdash;
Can rulers' ermined wisdom, stains deform,
Or hate and vengeance, Gospel-tongues proclaim?

Alas!  the seeds of error, deeply sown,
In man's presumptuous, selfish nature lie;
In social bonds united &mdash; or alone,
Injustice, oft, his reas'nings justify.

Who, then, to Truth's unerring light shall guide
Bewilder'd reason, stumbling, weak and blind?
Hath God to man that sacred boon denied,
Or giv'n a partial ray to glose the mind?

When Passion sleeps &mdash; and every storm at rest&mdash;
And all the soul dissolv'd in holy calm&mdash;
A still small voice is heard within the breast&mdash;
It speaks in music, and its breath is balm.

This voice is Truth &mdash; and never can betray&mdash;
It leads &mdash; a sacred path &mdash; to Peace and Love&mdash;
The Lion hath not roam'd that holy way,
Nor keen-ey'd vulture mark'd it from above.

No rav'nous beast shall in this way be fear'd,
Nor harm the peaceful pilgrim shall befal.&mdash;
And can this voice in loud debates be heard&mdash;
The stormy chamber or the clamorous hall?

The good man hears in troubled seas of strife&mdash;
The roaring tempest cannot dull the sound:&mdash;
It smooths the rugged thorny paths of life,
And heals, with balm from Gilead, sorrow's wound.

It drowns despair, and animates with joy&mdash;
It quenches wrath, and warms with fervent love;
No present danger can its hope destroy&mdash;
Nor envious frown its gentleness remove.

It swells the' expanding bosom, to contain
Love universal for the human race;&mdash;
Nor seas nor mountains intercept the chain,
That holds all kindreds in one vast embrace.

To Iman &mdash;Rabbi proud &mdash; to Brahmin mild;
To headstrong sectary of the Christian name;
To Indian, Arab, Aethiop, Tartar wild
It breathes pure Charity's etherial flame.

It teaches, in the closet of the mind,
All wrong and evil every where to shun;
To recompense whate'er of good and kind,
Each would that to himself should first be done.

It teaches more &mdash; not evil to withstand,
But wrong and ill to overcome with good;
To yield to wrath; to quench its burning brand,
And calm with meekness anger's fiery mood.

But stars and mitres, palaces and halls,
And names in honor's tablet high enroll'd;
And roofs of Lebanon, and Parian walls,
And works of elephant and pearl and gold.

Music's soft charms, and "downy beds of ease;"
Pomona's sweets, and Asia's fragrant show'rs&mdash;
Whate'er the sated, longing sense can please,
That Lux'ry dreams, and Earth's profusion pours.

Flatt'ry's false breath &mdash; the smiles of jilting fame,
And idol-worship of the wond'ring croud,&mdash;
Intoxicating fumes of loud acclaim,&mdash;
And servile trains in suppliant homage bow'd.

What wonder these the whirling vision blind,
Entrance the sense and close the inward ear&mdash;
Invert the scope and energies of mind?&mdash;
Then rankles hate &mdash; storms fury &mdash; trembles fear!

Fear augurs ill &mdash; and dangers magnifies,
And strife embitters and emboldens hate&mdash;
Hate whets the sword &mdash; its genuine aim belies,
And shines in all the glare of martial state.

Then Honor tow'rs aloft in warrior's plumes,
And valour dignifies ignoble wrath;
Then Patriot-ardour, fierce revenge assumes,
And Glory tracks with Death the hero's path.

Life is a bauble! &mdash; gold the noblest prize!
And pow'r and wide possessions largely shar'd,
Endanger'd, claim the holiest sacrifice;&mdash;
With leagues and ingots, human souls compar'd!

Go, trace the regions of this peopled ball,
From clime to farthest clime, and shore to shore!
One spirit's endless joy or endless fall,
Outweighs all crowns' and sceptres' earthly store.

Or view the countless radiant orbs on high,
As, wheel'd in trackless majesty, they roll;
Their wondrous awful treasures ne'er can vie
In worth and splendor with one human soul.

The Lord Jehovah, from his radiant throne,
With cherubim of glory circled round,
Hath bow'd the Heav'ns to Man &mdash; in mercy shone,
And hosts of angels peal'd the joyful sound:

"Glory to God omnipotent above!
(The strain in hallelujahs loud began)
'O'er earth's distracted kingdoms peace and love,
And heav'nly favour and good-will to man.'

"Hail, holy City!  loud Hosannas sing!
Joy be proclaim'd in Salem's peaceful walls;
Judah!  receive thine heav'n-annointed king,
And gladness crown thy palaces and halls."

From Zion's holy mountain light divine,
And righteousness and peace, shall issue forth;
And Eastern Taurus with the radiance shine,
And Western Andes blaze it to the North.

With gospel-brightness Sheba's realm shall glow,
And Chili's mountains hail it from afar;
To Southern Ind the radiant stream shall flow,
And Afric's sons adore the healing star.

Messiah's sceptre over all shall move,
And, where his pow'r hath fix'd its sacred throne,
There, wrath and violence shall yield to love,
And heav'nly peace and innocence be known.

All furious natures there shall cease to harm,
And bears and rav'ning wolves forsake their prey;
The elements of rage, shall love disarm,
And lion's whelps with lambkins meekly play.

And, where the turbid current rolled with gore,
And war-notes' madd'ning discord filled the plain;
The limpid stream shall glide its pebbles o'er,
And woodland melody delight the swain.

The barren rock with Eden's rose shall bloom,
And sterile wilds the vine and olive bear;
The stagnant venom breathe a rich perfume,
And cooling springs refresh the desart air.

Then brighter wreaths shall deck a Numa's brow,
Than e'er have flourish'd round a Caesar's name;
Then, lofty dignities to peace shall bow,
And mercy open paths of endless fame.

Then, deadly weapons shall no more be found,
But sword and spear the canker shall destroy;
Or peaceful hinds shall bend them to the ground,
And share and pruning hook their cares employ.

No more shall kingdom against kingdom rise,
Nor desolation spread from shore to shore;
For universal praise shall fill the skies,
And nations learn the art of war no more.
