Mourn, Painting, mourn, recline thy drooping head,
And fling thy useless pallet on the ground!
Gainsborough is number'd with the silent dead,
And plaintive sighs from hills and dales resound.

His genius lov'd his country's native views,
Its taper spires, green lawns, and shelter'd farms;
He touch'd each scene with nature's genuine hues,
And gave the English landscape all its charms.

Who now shall paint mild evening's tranquil hour,
The cattle slow returning from the plain,
The glow of sultry noon, the transient show'r,
The dark brown furrows rich with golden grain?

Who shall describe the cool sequester'd spot,
Where winding riv'lets through the willows glide;
Or paint the manners of the humble cot,
Where meek content and poverty reside?

With pleasure we behold the village boy
Safe from the rigours of th' inclement sky,
His blazing hearth, his wholesome milk enjoy,
His tame domestic cat half sleeping by.

Perch'd on his roof, the redbreast fain would dare
Hop round his fire, nor brave the frozen hearth,
Chirping it begs to taste his simple fare,
Yet trembles at the foe who purs beneath:

But in the swain, who shuns th' impending storm
The painter's art with brightest lustre shone;
His hand pourtray'd that rough and time-worn form,
With tints that Rubens would have wish'd his own.

Alas!  whilst fancy saw with conscious pride,
The British school high raise its lofty head,
Death, envious Death, advanc'd with haughty stride,
And all our gay delusive visions fled.

Bring fragrant violets, crimson poppies bring,
The corn-flower glowing with celestial blue,
The yellow primrose, earliest child of spring,
Pluck'd from those fields which once his pencil drew.

In graceful wreaths entwine their rustic bloom,
That bloom which shames the garden's richest dyes,
And hang these votive garlands round the tomb,
Where nature's painter, nature's fav'rite lies.

Few artists claim the muses sacred lyre;
The slaves of luxury shun her piercing eye:
Those insects sport 'round fashion's meteor fire,
Flutter their moment, and neglected die.

The meaner tool of faction or of spite,
Whose pencil feeds vile slander's greedy lust,
Is scarcely shelter'd by oblivion's night,
And just resentment spurns his guilty dust.

But when true genius feels the stroke of time,
When fate arrests him in his bright career,
Britannia, bending from her seat sublime,
Vouchsafes the tribute of a pitying tear.
