Lost, like the shadows of a summer's day,
Is each enjoyment that I lately knew;
And ev'ry hour has hasten'd to decay,
Swift as the texture of the morning-dew.

In sullied regions of obnoxious air,
With drooping spirits and desponding heart,
My load of misery I now must bear,
And act a weary and reluctant part:

Not to behold the purple beams of morn
Cast their soft lustre on the rippling scene;
Or hear the rustling of the trembling corn,
Or music warbling from the groves of green:

Nor, on the bosom of the curly wave,
Eye the quick progress of the scudding bark;
Or, in the coolness of some rocky cave,
The varied wonders of creation mark:

Nor, with a eager and a panting heart,
The silver surface of the surge divide;
And, by the dalliance of the finny art,
Beneath the ocean, for a time, abide.

Nor, when the ardour of meridian day
Embraces Nature in its fervid heat,
Breathe the wild music of a plaintive lay,
In the sweet fresco of a lov'd retreat:

Nor, in the calmness of departing eve,
Loiter along the mazes of the shore;
Or catch the breezes, as they passing heave,
And list the concord of the splashing oar.

Ah, no! &mdash; my fortune leads me to the crowd,
To bear the taunts of an insulting world;
Where Vice, in tones imperative and loud,
Displays her numbers to destruction hurl'd:

Where Mammon dominates as lord of all,
And cramps each nobler impulse of the soul;
Where all obey the mandates of his call&mdash;
The veriest villains to attain his goal.

Were but the feelings of my heart obtuse,
Or scal'd with traceless adamant around,
I should not pour the moanings of my muse,
For my deep sorrows would not then abound.

Ye num'rous, blest insensibles, that breathe!,
Whose breasts are obdurate as pierceless steel,
Who never sorrow at Affection's death,
Or sooth the pangs of which sympathy can heal:

Oft have I heav'd the tribute of a sigh,
And, anxious, ponder'd on the cheering thought,
That I could sensibilities defy,
Or they had never in my bosom wrought.

Perish the thought!, which threatens to untie
Those finer cords that bind us to our race;
No! &mdash; may I never check the heart-felt sigh,
Which prompts me others' anguish to efface!

For I have known the ghastly forms of grief,
And, oft, my pillow has been steep'd with tears;
Long'd for a friend, who could bestow relief,
Disperse my sorrows, and dispel my fears.

But, ah!  such friends are rarely to be found&mdash;
Scarce as the gems, which sparkle from the mines;
Soothing as roses that embalm the ground,
Close in their ardour as the clasping vines.

Should proud Ambition fire the breast of man,
And picture trophies to his ruffian-heart;
Frame the wild fabric of a whelming plan,
And claim assistance from the demon, Art?

Should Man demolish, with his ruthless hand,
The hoary structures of majestic Time;
Or blood-stain regions by his dire command,
Whilst Nature trembles at the flagrant crime?

Should he oppress the fellows of his race,
And basely bind them to the subject earth,
For the deep tincture of a sable face,
That, oft, developes honesty and worth?

Should he, with threats, compel them to depart
From all the comforts of their native land,
From ev'ry scene connected with the heart,
And bear them, moaning, to a blacker band?

No! &mdash; He, that rear'd him from his parent-clay,
And bade him glow with heav'n-descended fire,
Inform'd his creature with that deathless ray,
To check the passions, and to curb desire;

To blunt Affliction's ever-piercing sting,
And charm the anguish of the drooping soul;
The balm of comfort to the mourner bring,
And view as kindred the extended whole:

Not, like the despot-vultures of the air,
To prey infuriate on devoted man;
Nor add distresses to the portion'd share,
He knew the moment when his birth began.

The cup of misery we all partake,
Whilst in this pilgrimage beneath the sky,
Ought, surely, tend to prompt and to awake
The tear of pity, and the tender sigh.

Children of sorrow, and the heirs of woe,
Our prospects mutual, and alike our cause,
Ah!  why should man be an insatiate foe,
And urge the horrors of ensanguin'd wars?

Rather should hemlock flourish on his brow,
Than laurel deck and Alexander's head,
Who, vaunting, mark'd the blood of thousands flow,
And smil'd triumphant, as he past the dead.

Man is the brother of each man that lives&mdash;
The crimson current of their veins the same:
Their bounteous Father to his children gives
And equal portion of seraphic flame:

Yet, Life's a picture of a dismal kind,
Where brother seeks his brother to undo;
Where many an impulse of immortal mind
Impels to actions of the direst hue.

When royal tyrants, with imperious sway,
Rule nations, subject to their fierce command,
The musing soul anticipates the day,
Which tears the sceptre from their iron hand:

When the last mansion of th' oblivious dead
Shall hide their grandeur from the raptur'd gaze;
When, cold and cheerless, each resplendent head
Shall lie neglected 'mid the cavern's maze.

That eye, which once could dignity bestow,
Will prove the harbour of a vermin-train;
The lips, whence bright nobility could flow,
Will boast, no longer, an illustrious reign.

Where are the spangled canopies of state,
The tissued vest, and the emblazon's robe;
When the keen arrow of unerring Fate
Destroys a ruler on this spacious globe?

Ah!  then, the meanest creature of the earth
May scorn the pageants of this lordly king;
Contemn the splendour of superior birth,
Nor pause to hear his solemn curfew ring.

But, there are tyrants in an humbler sphere,
Who sway the sceptre in domestic hours;
In some poor lackey strike the nerve of fear,
And awe their children by their mighty pow'rs;

Led by the savage dictates of the soul,
Impose their shackles on a tender wife,
Who bears the burden of their rude control,
To shun the discord of embitter'd strife.

Oh!  how I anger, as I weave the strain,
When my thoughts turn to fetters which I bore,
When Youth had plac'd me 'neath a tyrant's reign,
Whose mind was little, as his paltry pow'r.

Yet, yet, he lives &mdash; and though this very day
Beheld his spirit from its mansion fly,
No tender tribute should my numbers pay,
Or tear-drop startle from my sorrowing eye:

Of him no more &mdash; for deep resentment flings
A sullen rancour through my swelling soul;
And Fancy fain would frame her piercing stings,
And mark the ruffian as her proper goal.

How my heart wafts its wishes to the skies,
That Heaven would sweep such wretches from the earth;
And, when I hear a petty tyrant dies,
I hail the blessing, as I moan'd his birth!

In the wide circle of this checquer'd life,
What motley figures on my vision start!
Some wake the flames of never-ending strife,
Deprave the passions, and corrupt the heart:

Others, with ardour in a vile pursuit,
To ruin hurl the widow, and her child;
Loud, and important, where they should be mute,
Fierce, and audacious, where they should be mild.

Yes &mdash; even virgins of unsullied fame
Have, by the dictates of a mother's art,
Become the victims of a lustful flame,
And lost to all the wishes of the heart:

For if the feelings of the heart approve
A lasting union with an object dear;
The tranquil pleasures of connubial love,
Where Fashion holds not her inverted year;

Then, the fond parent execrates the choice,
And paints the horrors of a dreary gaol;
Whilst Pride and Vanity pourtray the joys,
That Fortune wafts upon her golden gale.

Sway'd by the precepts of a mother's tongue,
Thus is a daughter hurried to her fate;
And that lov'd breast, to which she early clung,
Becomes repentant, when it proves too late.

Should Fortune, fickle as the breezy band,
Invert the fav'ring balance of her scales;
And tear the riches from a wealthy hand,
And blast his prospects with her piercing gales:

Swift as the lightning, darting from the skies,
The smiles of friendship darken into gloom;
The paltry world dissolves the social ties,
And leaves the victim to his dreary doom.

But if the sportive mazes of her foot
Should sudden enter the abode of Want,
And should she pour her treasures in the hut,
And bid the fiend of Poverty avaunt!

Then Friendship turns, envelop'd in her guile,
And bears the proffers of sincere esteem;
Whilst int'rest loiters in the dimpled smile,
That sporteth only in the sunny beam.

Ah!  this is life, and colour'd to the truth,
Not the dark picture of inventive pow'r;
Thus I have found it from my earliest youth,
And thus shall find it to my latest hour.
