What time the jocund rosie-bosom'd HOURS
Led forth the train of PHOEBUS and the SPRING,
And ZEPHYR mild profusely scatter'd flowers,
On Earth's green mantle from his musky wing,

The MORN unbarr'd th' ambrosial gates of light,
Westward the raven-pinion'd Darkness flew,
The Landscape smil'd in vernal beauty bright,
And to their graves the sullen Ghosts withdrew:

Done had the nightingale to swell her throat
With love-lorn lays trill'd tremulously slow,
And on the wings of Silence ceas'd to float
The gurgling notes of her melodious woe:

Then sportive dreams mysterious visions led
O'er the charm'd optics of the mental eye,
Or my free'd soul awhile her mansion fled,
To try her plumes for immortality.

Thro' fields of air, methought, I took my flight,
O'er ev'ry region of the globe I pass'd,
No paradise or ruin 'scap'd my sight,
HESPERIAN garden or CIMMERIAN waste.

I lit on AVON'S banks, whose streams appear
To wind with eddies fond round SHAKESPEAR'S tomb,
The year's first feath'ry songsters warble near,
And vi'lets breathe, and earliest blossoms bloom.

Here FANCY sat, her dewy fingers cold
Decking with flow'rets fresh th' unsullied sod,
And bath'd with tears the sad sepulchral mold,
Of her lov'd son's clay corse the last abode.

Ah!  what avails, she cry'd, a Poet's name?
Ah!  what avails th' immortalizing breath
To snatch from dumb Oblivion others' fame?
My darling child has fall'n a prey to death!

Let gentle OTWAY, white-rob'd PITY'S priest,
From grief domestic teach the tear to flow,
Or SOUTHERN captivate th' impassion'd breast
With heart-felt sighs and sympathy of woe:

For not to these his genius was confin'd,
Nature and I each museful pow'r had given,
Poetic transports of the madding mind,
And the wing'd words that waft the soul to heav'n;

The fiery ken of th' intellectual eye,
Piercing all objects with it's eagley view,
Which in the wide world's whole existence lie;
And plastic thought that still created new.

Whilst I attendant thro' my magic glass,
Ere he pourtray'd, display'd in airy show,
Then made each image in review to pass,
And dipt his pencil in the watry bow.

O grant with eager rapture, I reply'd,
Grant me, great goddess of the changeful eye,
To view each being in poetic pride,
To whom thy son gave immortality.

Sweet FANCY smil'd, and wav'd her mystic rod,
When strait these visions felt the pow'rful charm,
And one by one succeeded at her nod,
Like vassal sprites beneath the wizard's arm.

First a celestial form (of azure hue
Whose mantle, bound with brede aetherial, flow'd
To the soft breath of ev'ry wind that blew)
Swift down the sun-beams of the noon-tide rode.

Obedient to the necromantic sway
Of an old sage, to solitude resign'd,
With fenny vapors he obscur'd the day,
Volley'd the lightning, and unloos'd the wind.

He whirl'd the tempest thro' the howling air,
Rattled the dreadful thunderclap on high,
And rais'd a roaring elemental war
Betwixt the sea-green waves and azure sky.

Then, like heav'n's mild embassador of love
To man repentant, bade the tumult cease,
Smooth'd the blue bosom of the realms above,
And hush'd the rebel elements to peace.

Unlike to this in spirit or in mien
Another form succeeded to my view,
A two-legg'd brute which Nature made in spleen,
Or from the loathing womb unfinish'd drew.

Scarce could he syllable the curse he thought,
Prone were his eyes to earth, his mind to evil,
A carnal fiend to imperfection wrought,
The mongrel offspring of a Witch and Devil.

Next bloom'd, upon an ancient forest's bound,
The flow'ry margin of a strolling stream,
O'er-arch'd by oaks with ivy mantled round,
And gilt by silver CYNTHIA'S maiden beam.

On a green carpet of th' unbended grass,
A dapper train of female fairies play'd,
And ey'd their gambols in the watry glass,
That smoothly stole along the gleamy glade.

Thro' these queen TITANIA pass'd ador'd,
Mounted aloft in her imperial car,
Journeying to meet fierce OBERON her lord,
Returning victor from a rear mouse war.

Her chariot was a snail's embroider'd shell,
The traces of the finest cobweb were,
Her canopy a cowslip's speckled bell,
Her horses flies, a bee her charioteer.

Upon six gnats six glow-worms went before,
Upon six grasshoppers six wasps behind,
These were her torch-men, those her armor bore,
And gallop'd swifter than the eastern wind.

Arm'd cap-a-pee forth march'd the fairy king,
A stouter warrior never took the field,
His long lance was a hornet's horrid sting,
The sharded beetle's scale his sable shield.

Upon an earwig mounted gallantly,
The mighty monarch rode in royal state,
Nodding his horse-hair crest tremendously,
Of all the Fays the greatest 'mong the great.

Around their king the elfin host appear'd,
'Gainst the moon's rays their helmets cast a glare,
And their sharp spears in pierceless phalanx rear'd,
A grove of thistles, glitter'd in the air.

The scene then chang'd, from this romantic land,
To a bleak waste by bound'ry unconfin'd,
Where three swart sisters of the weyward band
Were mutt'ring curses to the troublous wind.

Pale Want had wither'd every furrow'd face,
Bow'd was each carcass with the weight of years,
And each sunk eye-ball from its hollow case
Distill'd cold rheum's involuntary tears.

Hors'd on three staves they posted to the bourn
Of a drear island, where the pendant brow
Of a rough rock, shagg'd horribly with thorn,
Frown'd on the murmurs of the deeps below.

In an adjacent grot remote from day,
Where smiling Comfort never shew'd her face,
Nor light e'er enter'd, save one rueful ray
Discov'ring all the terrors of the place,

They held damn'd myst'ries with infernal state,
Whilst ghastly goblins grimly glided by,
The scritch-owl scream'd the dying call of fate,
And ravens croak'd their awful augury.

No human footstep chear'd the dread abode,
Nor sign of living creature could be found,
Save where the reptile snake, or sullen toad,
With slimy froth had foil'd th' envenom'd ground.

Here lay the bones of some ill-fated wretch,
Who wand'ring from the hated haunts of men,
Lur'd by the kindred Echo's mournful speech,
Came, saw, and dy'd within this dismal den.

Sudden I heard the whirlwind's hollow sound,
Each weyward sister vanish'd into smoke.
Now a dire yell of spirits underground
With discontent earth's yawning surface broke,

Thro' which each injur'd apparition rose;
A murd'rer started from his regal bed;
Pale Guilt's bold breath his heart's red current froze,
And Horror's dew-drops bath'd his frantic head.

More had I seen &mdash; but now the God of day
O'er earth's broad breast this flood of light had spread,
When fickle Morpheus call'd his dreams away,
And on their wings each bright illusion fled.

Yet still the dear ENCHANTRESS of the brain
My waking eyes with wishful wand'rings sought,
Whose wizard will controuls th' ideal train,
That ever restless progeny of THOUGHT.

Sweet pow'r, said I, for others gild the ray
Of Wealth, or Honor's folly-feather'd crown,
Or lead the madding multitude astray
To grasp at air-blown bubbles of renown.

My humbler lot let blameless bliss engage,
Free from the noble mob's ambitious strife,
Free from the muck-worm miser's lucrous rage,
Safe in Contentment's cottag'd vale of life.

If frailties there (for who from them is free?)
Thro' Error's maze my devious footsteps lead,
Let them be frailties of humanity,
And my heart plead the pardon of my head.

Let not my reason impiously require
What heav'n has plac'd beyond it's mortal span,
But teach it to subdue each fierce desire,
Which wars within it's own small empire man.

Teach me, what all believe, but few possess,
The learned'st science is ourselves to know,
The first of human blessings is to bless,
And he the best who feels another's woe.

Thus cheaply wise, and innocently great,
While Time's smooth sand shall regularly pass,
My destin'd atoms trickling course I'll wait,
Nor rashly break, nor wish to stop the glass.

And when in death my peaceful ashes lie,
If e'er some tongue congenial speaks my name,
Friendship shall never blush to breath a sigh,
And great ones envy such an honest fame.
