Ye Oaks impervious to the noon-tide ray,
Hoary with grey moss, take me to your shade;
Shield me with friendly arms, from piercing day,
Give me unheard to grieve, unseen to tread.

Tho' here no mournful cypress waves on high,
No plaints of fancied ghosts the air infest;
No sound the ear, nor object strikes the eye,
But aids the quick sensations of the beast.

That Nightingale shall make my loss her theme,
This spring that murmurs at each rugged stone,
Shall seem to weep with ever-trickling stream,
The breeze shall sigh, the louder blast shall groan.

That antique tower, yon Pigeons skim around
In ecchos answer:  on its ivied wall
Those sympathizing birds, with soothing sound,
Their plaintive voice shall gently raise and fall.

She whom I mourn, left like the widow'd Dove,
Meek, gentle, patient, him she lov'd resign'd;
Nor murmur'd at the ruling hand above,
Whose ways oft seem most harsh when meant most kind.

A wretched orphan caught her pitying eye,
'Mid chilling want she heard its little moan;
Snatch'd to herself, she bade its sorrows fly,
Its sorrows softening she forgot her own.

She led me oft thro' meads with blossoms gay,
Each flow'r to name she taught my infant tongue;
And cull'd the varied blooms that blushing May,
Or earlier Spring on trembling tendrils hung.

The golden Cowslip and blue Hare-bell cropt,
Or with the Primrose, fragrant Vi'lets bound,
Or shew'd me Cuckow-pint with purple topt,
Or Wild-rose with the Woodbine twining round;

Or Strawberries pendant on yon nodding rock,
Their scarlet heads bath'd in the bursting rill:
(In sultry seasons, thither strays the flock;
The Goldfinch dips his wing and smooths each quill.)

Oft as we found the Sky-lark's humble nest,
Or in this grove the Black-bird's unfledg'd young;
She bade in safety let the warblers rest,
Who cheer our rural walks with artless song.

And still she interpos'd with winning smiles,
Whate'er the heart to virtuous habit forms;
Or painted folly spent in fruitless toils,
And senseless passion tost in furious storms.

The monitor that warns the conscious breast,
To hear; its sacred dictates to await;
Which bid us love the good howe'er deprest,
And vice despise tho' cherish'd by the great;

The little arts low-thoughted cunning loves,
Its vicious meanness and deceit to hate;
That nothing insincere true wisdom proves,
That truth is always noble, manly, great;

She taught my opening mind:  and much imprest
The debt to tender sympathy we owe,
When swells with sighs the feeble human breast,
And nature fails beneath her load of woe;

When hard misfortune's pressure pains the mind,
Gladly to give the comfort in our power;
Nor steel the heart against out hapless kind,
Much taught her precept, but her practice more.

Oft would she watch some sickly wretch's couch,
And from her little store his wants supply;
Scanty her all then first she felt it such,
And when she gave no more she gave a sigh.

What time the East a glowing crimson blush'd,
Or evening dew-drops wept the absent Sun;
Or solitary night, serenely hush'd,
With glittering gems in matchless glory shone;

What time the Moon stole forth and hung on high,
The lamp that burns o'er nature's deep repose;
(The lamp that lights full many a tearful eye,
The only witness of its silent woes.)

The power which spoke, and by his mighty word,
The varying scenes of earth from chaos rais'd;
The goodness, which deputed Man its lord,
Her accents taught, her glowing accents prais'd.

Sincerely good, without the zealot's strife,
The narrow-minded bigot's rage above;
No ostentation mark'd her useful life,
No difference in opinion barr'd her love.

When modest merit rose, sincere her joy,
The worth that mark'd herself forgot alone;
And suffering virtue shar'd her deepest sigh,
Unheedful of no sorrows but her own.

Oft as the child of want her cottage sought,
And did some piteous tale of woe impart;
The glow of sensibility still caught,
The stealing tear display'd &mdash; the feeling heart.

To pity prone, her pity she deny'd,
When fell the sainted villain, virtue's foe;
Who wore her sacred semblance but to hide
A blacker guilt than common villains know.

With no unsocial rigid notions fraught,
Oft the misfortune of the honest breast;
The chearful tale (so happy was her thought)
Grew doubly chearful when by her exprest.

When pleas'd the youths upon the vocal green,
When pleas'd the nymphs, the rural dance and song,
A kind spectatress of the fairy scene,
She smil'd, remembering once herself was young.

Such chearful manners with such goodness join'd,
None saw but warmly prais'd, nor prais'd alone,
Insensibly they copied, pleas'd to find,
That Happiness and Goodness were but one.

And when the soul its native region gain'd,
From every interrupting evil free;
All who had known her generous sorrow pain'd,
All who had known her wept a friend with me.

No black-plum'd hearse, no midnight-blazing train,
Th' unconscious earth, back to its earth convey'd;
No false encomiums rais'd a just disdain,
Which meant to honour &mdash; ridicule the dead.

But artless swains th' involuntary sigh,
Still heave as oft as by her door they pass;
The big tear starts into the virgin's eye,
Bent on her humble grave o'ergrown with grass.

What tho' no mourner's blacken all the street,
No hatchment tells its owner is no more,
No vain donations with caprice replete,
Betray the folly of life's latest hour:

Yet by her much-lov'd memory secur'd,
Her fav'rite trees to rend no hand shall dare;
The Martlets to her friendly roof inur'd,
Shall hang their clay-nests unmolested there.

What tho' no stone its disbelieved praise,
Affords her 'mid some abby's sacred  gloom;
Where marble seems in prayer the hands to raise,
And frowning warriours press the peaceful tomb.

Her turf the whisp'ring Poplar still shall shade,
And Friendship fancy o'er the hallow'd ground,
The Flow'rets earliest bloom and latest fade,
And social Robins love to wing around.
