The village clock had struck the midnight hour;
The moon was set; &mdash; and no translucent ray
Did o'er the night its cheary influence pour,
When thro' the church-yard's mound I took my way.

And yet no sheeted ghost did cross my road;
Nor haggard phantom from the shades below;
But all was still within that drear abode,
Save the night breeze that thro' the yews did blow.

No gaudy pomp, nor all the glitt'ring train,
That wait on mortals falsely called great,
Have ought ado within this drear domain;
The honoured dead claim no obsequious state.

The haughty head once rear'd erect with pride,
And other passions which vain mortals swell,
Dull, noxious weeds, luxuriant deck his side,
His heart and bowels to greedy worms a cell.

No robes of state are here; &mdash; the green grass blade
Bedecks the head that wore attire so gay:
The beauteous form once silken vestments clad,
'Mong worms, corruption, moulders unto clay.

Away, ye cheating vanities of earth!
Ye baubling dreams, that tantalize the vain!
Ye airy thinkers, come and see their worth,
Debas'd and cancell'd by this gaol of man.

Nought less than heaven can give substantial joy;
To souls immortal earthly bliss in vain:
The rose gives fragrance, while its thorns annoy,
And the dull grave oft blends our bliss with pain.

Ah!  who can say they have not here a friend?
A friend, a parent, or some fav'rite dear?
Whose soul, congenial, made our bliss refin'd;
Now lost, &mdash; contracts our joy, and wrings the tear.

Ye flutt'ring gay, who waste away your days,
Unto whose souls the minutes languid seem,
Unless within the splendid dome ye raise
The voice of admiration or esteem.

O come and see the tomb's all-conquering ground!
See if it gives a moment's time to spare,
To run with folly the light-footed round,
While all its drousy gates wide open are.

Here sleeps the babe who scarcely liv'd a day;
The hardy youth arriv'd at manhood's path;
The bride-groom, torn from all his joys away,
By the resistless arm of tyrant Death.

Here too the gentle father lies full low,
And minor infants deck his either side;
So indiscriminately is dealt the blow,
Regardless of youth's smile, or manhood's pride.

And you, young Lucy, envied by each maid,
Ador'd and follow'd by each village swain,
Whose smile did wrap in bliss the gayest lad;
Or made thy frown convey him keenest pain.

Where now your smiles, your charms, your gay attire?
The sweet cerulean lustre of your eyes?
Alas!  they're fade on the drousy bier,
Beneath the yew your moonless nights arise.

Beneath the blow of Death, th' officious stone
Points to the num'rous casual victims here;
Who without pity, oft unseen, alone,
Dropt, without warning, on th' untimely bier.

But needless here the Muse to strew her lays;
Each wheeling moment does the truth impart;
Hark!  from the tomb does the voice of Nature says,
Perchance next minute breaks the stoutest heart.

Tho' eighty years should crown you hoary grey,
The inevitable hour is sure to come,
That makes you like a taper die away,
And be forgotten in the mould'ring tomb.

EPITAPH TO A CHURCH-YARD.
Here lies a spot of ground, where all the great,
And every rank, down to the simple clown,
Must lay aside each vestiges of state,
And among worms and reptiles be laid down.

The virtuous soul, when dawns eternal day,
Shall take from me its dust with smiles of love;
While the base wretch to tott'ring hills shall pray,
In vain, to hide from the Supreme above.
