THYRSIS, MENALCAS.
Fast by the shady brere, as did befall,
Where Philomele with sad attuned song,
Whilome who wont the raptur'd sense enthrall,
O'rewent with woe now plain'd her captive young;
High on a grassy hillock sat the swaine,
Thyrsis, the soothest shepherd on the plain.

His fav'rite crook, which equal snubs divide,
(For shepherds meetest ornament I weene)
And leathern scrip beseem'd his graceful side,
When flow'r'd the year, and pansies dight the greene:
His nibbling flock, the shepherd's greatest lure,
Withouten drede of wolves yrov'd secure.

Sike dapper ditties would it please him sing,
As earst the swaine of rural Pan did lere,
When winter's stormy blast was spent, and spring
Reviv'd the trees yclad with braunches sear:
None better seen to quest the rapid flood,
Ne charm the feather'd songsters of the wood.

By that 'gan Phoebus walk with milder ray,
Each closing shoot drank up the moistening dew,
Each head declin'd ywept, the sick'ning day,
Of cowslip pale, and glowing violet blew:
The bleating flocks 'gan leave the russet plain,
What time Menalcas thus areed the swaine.

MENALCAS.
Thyrsis I weene nar yonder dimple stream,
Where dryades on the verdant carpet play,
In shrilling notes I caught thy tunefull theme,
Sike notes as songs of jovisance bewray:
None but thyself couth frame sike poesy,
Ne fitte for meaner breast aspire so high.

Forthy say frankly wherefore, lovely boy,
Sike jocund sounds thy leisure moments claim?
Why craggy mountains echo songs of joy,
Eke gentle zephyrs whisper Daphne's name?
Me listeth know why sounds with sweetest lay
Thine oaten pipe, while far thy lambkins stray.

THYRSIS.
Of musick, shepheard, sure I can no skill,
Ne strive to charm with peerless roundelay;
Enough is me to tune my homely quill,
While shady braunches shroud from sunny rays.
Ne doth my liefest Daphne e're despise
The lowly ditties that I wont devise.

MENALCAS.
Thyrsis, to weet thy rhimes I more delight
(Albe thou carest nought thine art to show)
Than honied bee, with wings of velvet dight,
Or streams that sweet in gentle murmurs flow:
So mought it please thee Daphne's praise rehearse,
That lives on yonder beach in soothest verse.

THYRSIS.
Sithence my sonnet thou bedign to hear,
Ne wouldst once the shepheard's muse deride,
What fitter subject tho' to please thine ear,
Than rhimes to tell of Daphne, beauty's pride?
Tho listen shepheard to my rural song,
The whiles our flocks to feed these shrubs emong.

When blooming Daphne treads the verdant greene,
The drooping pink ne wans the stormy stour
Or wanders nar the silent wat'ry scene,
The scaly Tritons croud the glist'ning shore.
Ybent to love doth ev'ry shepheard glow,
And sweetest girlonds dight for Daphne's brow.

At sight of Daphne whistling winds been hush,
Ne dreary clouds obscure the vaulted sky;
But notes melodious fill each bramble bush,
Ne thunders threaten whiles the nymph is nigh.
If Daphne smile, Sol sheds a milder ray,
And Aura's murkey breezes cool the day.

Ye shepheards, all that been with love ytake,
Hie there apace, where jocund rebecks sound,
Ne scorn with rustic pipe most sootely make,
While blithsome damsels deftly beat the ground.
There sitten Daphne, queen of shepheards hight,
With scarlet roses deckt, most seemly sight.

Dark poplar boughs of him been loved best,
Who durst with all in derring do compare;
Of Phoebus bitter lawrel, while the rest
Small value have, ne deign to count them fair:
But neither this nor that be fair, I trow,
Sith charming Daphne loves the filbeard row.

Whilome I chanst to meet that beardless boy,
Bright Venus' son, yclep'd the god of love,
Begirt with gaudy greene the shepheard's joy,
Culling soft flow'rs in thilk same myrtle grove.
Thrice Daphne past, ah me!  how wond'rous fair!
And thrice he deem'd his darling Psyche there.

Sweet been the flocks that house the tender vine,
Or wanton goats that scale the mountain high,
Or chaunt of lark through twisted eglantine,
Whose early song declares the morning nigh;
Or gentle winds that warbling work delight,
When blooming Daphne glads my pleased sight.

But neither flocks that brouze the tender vine,
Ne wanton goats that scale the mountain high,
Ne chaunt of lark through twisted eglantine,
Whose early song declares the morning nigh,
Ne warbling winds may quell my raging paine,
When loved Daphne leaves the grassy plaine.

Oft as I wont to range thilk pleasant dale,
Where fruitful fields been every where to see,
Where winding Mincius laves the fragrant vale,
And leafie braunches clothe the spreading tree,
A cup ywrought I found, whose curious frame,
Well witness Hobbinol the maker's name.

There Orpheus sitten, that harmonious bard!
Whose skilled fingers touch the warbling lyre,
While tender lambs ne dreede the furious pard,
Ne growling tygers boast their wonted fire.
To gain the peerless cup hath Delia strove,
But Daphne claims this token of my love.

Pomona's hand mine orchard well has stor'd,
The bending boughs present the juicy pear;
Ne downy peaches doth she scorn afford,
And these shall Daphne, beauteous damsel, share.
Ah!  carefull Colin, sure thy gifts been vaine,
Ne weigheth Daphne ought thy lowly straine.

MENALCAS.
Shepheard, thy gladsome words more pleasaunce yield,
Than balmy sleep that seals the mower's eyes,
Or western gales that fan the scorched field,
When sultrie Phoebus holds the topmost skies.
More soote thy notes to charm the list'ning sheep,
Than his that of our lambkins taketh keep.

Never did pipe like that the sense enthrall,
With which sage Tit'rus earst my skill apay'd;
Sage Tityrus, ywept of shepheards all
That sootely make, whose love as life I way'd.
But now to Thyrsis' hand I reede it due,
Sith he can best its former straines renew.

But twinkling vesper gilds the gloomy night,
Come Thyrsis, rise and let us homeward hie;
And see, the silent moon with silver light
Peeps o'er yon cloud that veils the starry sky,
Now sure is time to fold our tender sheep,
Tho rise, my little lambs, that lulled been asleep.
