Now, that Reality, of late so fair
In blossom'd pride of ev'ry lovely die;
Stript by the bitter blasts of worldly care,
Presents a cheerless prospect to mine eye;
It's scenes I quit, and seek a friendlier sky:
As the gay children of the gaudy spring,
The tender swallows, when our winter's nigh,
To southern seats their wonted musick bring;
So Fancy's fairy realm I seek on vent'rous wing.

Beyond the world, but on the world's confine,
Far in the lucid south (still undescried
By vulgar eyes) is laid this Land divine;
With all on earth that's lovely beautified:
And sweets innum'rous to our world deny'd.
Yet far it's secret worth transcends it's show,
For in each blooming flow'r is close imply'd,
Instruction sage, and latent on each bow,
The fruits of golden Truth, and goodliest Knowledge grow.

Now in this moral garden of the Muse,
(Where sacred Wisdom's not asham'd to rove,
But with it's fragrant blooms doth often chuse,
To deck the brow of Virtue, his fair love.)
Will I some gay delightful moments prove:
And as I've vow'd, if on aught fair I light,
Blossom, or fruit, thro' out it's wand'ring grove,
To her as virtue pure, and fancy bright,
My loveliest Clarabel!  I'll dedicate aright.

Then ask I not the Muse my breast t' inspire;
But thou, my best, divinest Clarabel!
Bend here those eyes so fraught with sacred fire:
Thine eyes shall far surpass the Muse's well.
Pride of my song!  inspirer of my shell!
Thine is each song, each excellence they paint!
From thee at first the fair reflections fell;
Thus like a broken mirror they present,
Thy image multiplied, in colours true tho' faint.

Ah!  then, dear maid, whene'er my soul declines,
Do thou look forth and re-illume its pow'rs;
As the fair moon on nightly pilgrim shines;
Or as an Angel from the celestial bow'rs,
Visits a Saint in weak distracted hours:
So shall my Fancy, cherish'd by my love,
(Unaw'd thro' want of learning's sacred stores,)
To the bright goal of thy approvance move,
And in thy smiles rejoice, all worldly meeds above.
