The Stars are set:  the orient Morning dawns,
The blithsome Woodlarks chant their matin Lay,
The Shepherds whistle o'er the opening Lawns,
And the brown Milk-maid hails the new-born Day.

But not for BENNET! &mdash; He nor th' opening Lawns
Beholds; nor hears the Wood-larks' matin Lay;
For him no more the orient Morning dawns;
Nor the brown Milk-maid hails, for him, the Day.

I saw him fetch his latest heart-felt Sigh,
(With what Convulsions heav'd that laboring Breast!)
Then close in endless Night his languid Eye,
And slumb'ring sink to everlasting Rest.

Thus have I seen, when over-charg'd with Rain,
A drooping Poppy bent beneath its Weight;
Fresh, and, like him, the Pride of all the Plain;
Like him too, bowing to a timeless Fate.

Thus have I seen, ere at his noon-tide Height,
The Sun in peerless Majesty serene,
While not a Spot eclips'd his beaming Light,
And scarce a Breeze disturb'd the placid Scene:

Sudden, distemper'd Hurricanes begun,
Impervious Fogs the Welkin's Face inshroud,
And Day's young God, ere half his Race was run,
Sicken'd, and sunk behind a pitchy Cloud.&mdash;

Come, ye gray Churls, to deck the Shepherd's Bier,
Gather the choicest May-blooms of the Glade;
Then drop, in silent Agony, a Tear,
As in the Dust ye view his Reliques laid.

Hard are your Hearts:  yet sure the Tribute's due,
If Sense of Love, or Gratitude remain'd;
For many a Blossom has he cull'd for you,
And long from Fate your hoary Hairs sustain'd.

Yes &mdash; he was skill'd in Physic's sovereign Pow'r,
Above the wisest of the Tribe confest;
And well he knew the Force of ev'ry Flow'r,
And knew what Hour, to gather it, was best.

Oft have I spy'd him, at the Break of Day,
Ere Charles had yet th' inverted Wain withdrawn,
Plodding, with meditative Step, his Way,
To reap the Spring-herb on the dewy Lawn.

Oft have I, (for I'd never scorn to join
His friendly Converse) with him clomb the Brow;
For one our Tempers, and his Taste was mine;
One Roof, one Birthright common to us Two.

Oft have &mdash; But hush!  Ah, let me not recall
The Pang of Recollection to my Breast!
Time, that can all things change, and render all,
May to my Soul restore its wonted Rest.

The Throes of Agony, the keenest Smart,
The sharpest Scourge vindictive Rage can boast,
The smartest Pains that pierce the human Heart,
By Time are scorn'd, and in Time are lost.

The silent Tear that steals from Friendship's Eye,
And robs the widow'd Soul of it's Repose,
Admits a Gleam of intermingling Joy,
Or drains, at length, the Fount, from whence it flows.

Then how ye check it, Sorrowers, beware:
A like Restraint sped BENNET'S fatal Dart,
Excess of Anguish curb'd the rising Tear,
The Tear straight sought it's Passage to the Heart,

Thence burst collected. &mdash; Never yet had Love
A nobler Victim, or a Slave so great;
His Thoughts were such as Angels might approve,
And well his Love deserv'd a milder Fate!

Yes, ye Celestials, not with purer Flame
Glow your immortal Souls, with Rapture fir'd,
Than that (and spotless was the Virgin's Fame,
And Passion mutual) his Breast inspir'd.&mdash;

Mark in its Bloom that dew-bespangled Flow'r,
Whence, all around, ten thousand Sweets arise;
Mark the revolving Circlet of an Hour,
'Tis born, it Blows; 'tis cropt, it fades, it dies!

A fairer Flow'r did WORSFOLD, one Day bloom,
Than ever in the vernal Meadow shone;
But scarce (ah Fortune!) was another come,
Ere she was blasted, and her Charms were flown!

Deep in th' envenom'd Core the Viper feeds,
And mocks at Physic, and his useless Train,
Thro' every Limb the rank Infection speeds,
The putrid Blood scarce creeps through every Vein.

Weak was all Aid!  that Skill now at a Stand,
That erst had oft recall'd the fleeting Breath,
And BENNET, smitten by her Lover's Hand
Beholds his WORSFOLD in the Arms of Death!

Not more amain the Sun from noon-tide Hour
Measures his Journey to the blushing West,
Than BENNET, when his Fav'rite was no more,
Struggled to follow, and to be at Rest.

Time was my BENNET held his Life more dear,
And, spite of all that learned Gown-men taught,
Deem'd no HEREAFTER like the present HERE,
Nor of a happier Heaven could form a Thought.

Fondly he feasted on Excess of Joy,
Gaily regardless of the future Scene,
Chaste were his Pleasures, yet without Alloy,
Cloudless his Prospect, and his Brow serene.

Reflection, unimbitter'd with a Crime,
Sweeten'd th' Amusement of his cheerful Hour,
In Fortune's Favour, and in Manhood's Prime,
He felt nor Age's, nor Affliction's Pow'r.

Two Friends, (he never wish'd for more) he found,
One ('twas his first Misfortune) he surviv'd,
Then bow'd immediate to the fatal Wound,
T' other beheld his Corse &mdash; (alas!) and liv'd.&mdash;

And now, ye hoary-headed Men of Lore,
That oft have drank at Wisdom's hallowed Fount,
Learn'd the mysterious Ways of Heaven t' explore,
Are these Things number'd in your dark Account?

Say &mdash; Can eternal Justice rule this Ball,
And Creatures bleed beneath a Maker's Hand?
Can Mercy reign, and wretched Virtue fall?
Faith staggers, and the Christian's at a Stand.&mdash;

Shall kindred Souls in Union close be knit,
Thus to be rent asunder in an Hour?
No, we will meet, and be united, yet,
Where Chance and Death shall sep'rate Friends no more.

For me, whom envious Fate hath left behind,
As one forgotten, and as one forlorn,
Careless of Comfort, that he cannot find,
Remote from every earthly Blessing torn,

For me well fit, some lonesome Grove I'll seek,
Dissolve in Tears the Sorrows of my Breast,
Then, while the Streams fall plenteous down my Cheek,
Heave a deep Sigh, and long to be releas'd.

Last, when the Spirit quits her dark Abode,
Bursts from her Bonds, and takes her homeward Flight,
How joy'd, O Raptures!  (resting on her God)
She'll mingle with her kindred Saints of Light!

THE EPITAPH.
Under the Covert of this Yew-tree Shade
(The last Retreat of Infamy and Pride)
Stol'n from their Sorrows, are two Lovers laid.
Whom Fate had link'd, and whom their Stars allied.

Death strove in vain to part the loyal Pair,
Their mingling Ashes prov'd his Aim unjust:
Their Loves these Reliques and his Griefs declare,
Tho' these be o'er, those mould'ring into Dust.

Perhaps the Secret of their Lives might steal
The pearly Tribute from thy piteous Eye,
That every Neighbour-Shepherd will reveal,
As from his Bosom 'scapes th' unusual Sigh.

Short was their Tide of earthly Bliss decreed;
An envious Hoar-frost nipp'd their budding Joys:
Peace to their Mem'ries, and be their's the Meed,
Our Hope sequesters for them in the Skies.
