Wild o'er the rude heath rag'd the Boreal blast,
His stubborn back the oak unwonted bows,
The lordly ruins to the earth are cast,
Which frown'd on Time, that shagg'd their hoary brows.

The howling storm the vexed ocean tore,
And rent its bosom into furrows deep,
The shatter'd wrecks bestrew'd the dreary shore,
And the green Nereids sough their caves to weep.

When PHILO, prudent swain, unmov'd, retir'd
Beneath the shelter of his straw-crown'd cot,
Save that his eye, by gen'rous grief inspir'd,
Bewail'd the mis'ries of superior lot.

And whilst, unspoil'd by art, blest Nature's child,
By genuine wisdom taught, pour'd forth his strain,
The fiend of Horror, sooth'd, had almost smil'd,
And Devastation held aloof her train.

"Blest be the Pow'r divine, whose high behest
Plac'd me beneath this humble shed in peace,
Who by with-holding blessings made me blest,
And, wealth denying, made my joys encrease!"

This lowly vale, fenc'd by the shelt'ring hill,
That lifts its bold breast to the mad'ning storm,
This ever-verdant bank and useful rill,
In summer shaded, and in winter warm.

These, these are the blessings Nature's hand bestow'd,
No airy wreath by Fame or Fortune wove;
Humility secures my low abode,
And Industry can ev'ry want remove.

Around my hearth domestic Pleasures wait,
Sweet-smiling infants prattle on my knee,
A much-lov'd partner shares my blissful state,
And, strewing pleasures, reaps felicity.

Few are my wants, still fewer are my fears,
While Innocence ensures celestial care,
The Gods with lusty health have crown'd my years,
And, in contentment, granted all my pray'r.

In this sequester'd vale, this peaceful shade,
The foot of Pride was never seen to rove;
This solemn haunt no lawless lusts invade,
No rude intemp'rance riots in this grove.

Ev'n this dread storm that deals destruction round,
Sweeps lightly o'er the poplars topmost boughs,
Heav'ns awful thunders but remotely sound,
And, not our fears, but our devotion rouse.

Thus blest with pleasure, safety, and content,
Why heaves my bosom with this anxious sigh?
Why does corroding grief my heart torment,
And painful pity melt my faded eye?

Why was man born with mental pow'rs sublime,
T' unfold the great Creator's volume fair,
To trace the annals of recorded time,
And past events with present to compare;

To mete the globe, and through their wond'rous maze
The planetary system to pursue:
To read the soul through the eyes of speaking rays,
And, like a God, the inmost soul to view?

These pow'rs intense, not for himself alone,
The Gods implanted in the human mind,
But bade the social breast all joys disown
That beam no ray of blessing on its kind.

Hence flow my tears. &mdash; What tho' around my cell
Security extends her downy wing,
Though in this shade Contentment loves to dwell,
Though Peace reposes, and tho' Pleasures sing,

'Tis I alone am blest. &mdash; For you I mourn,
Whose lot superior lifts your heads on high,
Whose glitt'ring turrets to the clouds are borne,
And catch the deathful meteors as they fly.

Ye gaudy pageants of life's dubious hour,
How does each ruffling blast your honors rend?
How often, stain'd by sorrow's briny show'r,
Ye hang your heads, and to the dust descend?

Ah!  what avails, when mis'ry rends the breast,
The boasts of ancestry, th' imperial line,
The herald-blazon'd coat and warlike crest?
Can these succeed at her relentless shrine?

Or, what the wealth that crowns a hundred hills,
Or, num'rous slaves attending at our call,
When dire disease the aching bosom fills,
Or Death, approaching, threatens loss of all?

Tell me, ye happiest sons of wealth and pow'r,
His utmost wish did Av'rice ever gain,
When did Ambition to her summit tow'r,
And fear, or envy, cease to give her pain?

Can fretted roofs on attic columns rear'd,
Or side-boards burden'd with Peruvian ore,
Can Phidias' or Appelles' arts endear'd
Invite serene Contentment to your door?

Ah!  no &mdash; from pomp the sober Goddess flies,
Wealth, titles, pow'r, are other names for care,
Their boastful offers she alike decries,
But list's propitious to the Peasant's pray'r.
