As of his Faction's Downfal P&mdash;r sings,
His Muse attempts to rise with broken Wings:
When he shou'd praise an envy'd Fate, he cry'd,
A Good Man's grievous Loss, a faithful Servant dy'd.
Since Malbro' lives to conquer; baffled France
And all her Partizans may wayl their Chance;
Dull antiquated Words let them pursue;
This grateful Theme inspires with something new;
As no time past a Parallel can shew.
The Cause of Liberty, we thought expir'd,
When from his glorious Toyls William the Great retir'd.
That Bard for Pegasus, then poor Sorrel took:
While the more grateful Brute stood Thunder-struck,
Thro' Sense that his indulgent Master's Grace
Had rais'd his Head above his Vulgar Race;
The Poet, mounted an unusual Height,
At Europe's Loss express'd his warm Delight.
Most Nations mourn'd the want of such an Head,
As if from Earth, with him, Astraea fled:
But soon, in Anna she her self return'd,
And her Auspicious Pow'r Mankind discern'd:
Her conqu'ring Beams, embellishing the Throne,
Seem'd to subdue those who her Right disown.
All the Top-Croakers of the Sword and Gown,
T' infest the Royal Palaces were known.
Egyptian Magic had a Serpent fram'd,
For Skill in Hieroglyphic Secrets fam'd:
The Loyal fled, as they with Horror saw,
That Long Thing bred from Excrements of Law;
But soon were re-assur'd by Malbro's Hand,
Scarce less Miraculous than Aaron's Wand.
As he in William's Paths of Glory goes;
He meets the same, both Home and Foreign Foes.
The many Kings of the unthinking Rout,
And the hot Bigots for St. Germains-Lout,
Like Sampson's Foxes, joyning Tayl to Tayl,
His ever-verdant Laurel's Crop assail.
Intrepid and Serene, see him repel
The complicated Force of France and Hell;
Shewing the Genius which protects this Isle,
With Joy partakes of his Victorious Toil:
And Anne, its Empress, Heav'n's peculiar Care,
Finds his Heroic Deeds Returns of Favour'd Pray'r.
The vain Immortal Man must now confess,
A Woman's deathless Fame does his suppress;
Who, while He reigns o'er Multitudes of Slaves,
Far greater Numbers from Oppression saves;
With Gentle Hand her pow'rful Sceptre sways,
And the soft Influence thro' the World conveys.
Tho' Malbro', in himself Wonders contains,
Thro' her he his stupendious Conquests gains:
To think for whom he fights, Vigour inspires;
In her bright Cause the Hero never tires,
And fresh from Vict'ries, still to new aspires.
Strong Passes, deep Intrenchments, mighty Walls,
Can't from his Arm protect th' experienc'd Gauls.
Another Caesar; with superiour Might,
By conqu'ring, teaches their best Troops to fight.
Prodigious Numbers former Heroes beat:
None slew so many, manag'd to retreat.
Heav'n pushes 'em so long, to try their Fate,
That to their practis'd Arts they fly too late.
Heav'n guides his Hand, and animates his Heart,
And with its Blessings crowns his high Desert.
All Precedent, and Thought he has surpass'd:
Who can foresee what is reserv'd at last?
The Gallic Tyrant gladly wou'd compound,
And give up Kingdoms, not to be uncrown'd;
Yet nothing but the Sword, can cure th' invet'rate Wound.
England, in peaceful Treaties, too sincere
To deal with Them who nothing future fear;
From Long Experience of unthought-of Harm,
Shou'd learn the Foes it weakens, to disarm.
This William saw, forc'd with regret to sheath
His pressing Sword, while France sought time to breath:
Our Murm'rers from that Sword did Danger feign,
That their arm'd Friend might seize unguarded Spain.
When the projected Monarchy was near,
Then was the time for Malbro' to appear,
Heav'n, which has mark'd him out for wondrous things,
The Scourge of Tyrants, and Support of Kings,
A proper Scene for such a Spirit and Conduct brings.
By Nature he was made Conquests to gain;
As Anna, over all Mankind to Reign.
That Wisdom, which her happy Realms unites;
Her equal Will to give to all their Rights;
Fill the submitting World with New Delights.
And while we're blest with such a Monarch here,
We know not what to wish, or what to fear.

Ego nec tumultum,
Nec mori per vim metuam, tenente
Caesare terras.
