INTRODUCTION.
O, could my Muse with gentle Gay,
Upon the boxen hautboy play,
Or with sweet pipe of shepherd's boy
Make Windsor's shades resound with joy,
Maria's beauties still should live,
And mournful Doris cease to grieve;
Eliza's love, Eliza's truth,
Unfading bloom in endless youth,
And every bright delicious charm
The barbed hand of Time disarm;
But ah, poor Colin!  vain thy lay;
Yet do thy best, and pipe away.

COLIN.
While from on high the flaming sun displays
The scorching fury of his noon-tide rays,
And, at the foot of this oak-shaded hill
Our browsing cattle seek the cooling rill,
Let us beguile the time with pleasing song,
And stretch at ease our languid limbs along.

STREPHON.
What boots it, Colin, that our limbs are laid,
Compos'd, beneath the oak's refreshing shade,
Or that around us, on the yellow plain,
The fertile ground is stock'd with plenteous grain?
What tho' the meadows smile with cheerful green,
And waving copses ornament the scene,
Can shades or plenty, or delightful views,
O'er wounded minds the smiles of joy diffuse?
When fond Maria fled her shepherd's arms,
Plains, meads and copses lost their wonted charms.

COLIN.
Tho' just the cause, ah!  what avails your grief,
Since the pale Tyrant is to pity deaf?

STREPHON.
Tho' from my bosom Death has rudely torn
The fragrant rose, he left the pointed thorn.
Well may you, Colin, blithesome strains compose,
Happy in love, and stranger to my woes;
Those blessings which your life with transports crown,
Four moons agone I boasted as my own;
But now, tho' vigour, youth, and love remain,
The charming object I lament in vain.

COLIN.
And who that knew the lovely nymph forbears
The willing tribute of condoling tears?
Bright was her form, with graces richly deck'd,
Commanding love, attemper'd with respect;
Sweet Modesty, with social Freedom join'd,
Her manners form'd, and wit adorn'd her mind:
How kind!  how courteous she to every swain!
My wounded memory recollects with pain;
But be all sorrows laid aside this day,
To Colin's joys let Strephon's griefs give way.

STREPHON.
As soon the hare shall quit the sheltering brake,
And linnets grey the yellow furze forsake:
As soon shall British nymphs lose power to charm,
And Afric' maids the shepherds bosoms warm,
As I from this afflicted breast remove
The sad remembrance of Maria's love.
Weep skies, sigh gales, droop all ye fading woods,
Die every flow'r, and murmuring mourn ye floods;
Ye gay-plum'd warblers, cease your soothing strains,
Bats, ravens, screech-owls, scream along the plains;
In pity to my woes, ye swains around,
Strip off the honours from the loaded ground;
And let the fields, deserted and forlorn,
Three dismal months my lost Maria mourn;
Then shall returning Spring their bosoms cheer;
But ah!  in mine, 'tis Winter all the year.

COLIN.
My dear Eliza lov'd Maria more
Than bees the fragrance of the gaudy flow'r:
Then, while her praise I sing, your woe suspend,
And lose the lover in the gen'rous friend.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.

Twice three revolving happy years and one,
Since sacred wedlock join'd our hands, have flow'n;
Seven times the shifting seasons went and came,
The seasons change, our hearts remain the same.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.

Of every hue of every blossom dyed,
The gay carnation is the garden's pride;
So every beauty bright Eliza wears,
Blest Colin's pride, and softner of his cares.
The fragrant clove in sweetness most excels,
The lilly's fairest of the flowery belles,
More sweet than cloves, than spotless lillies fair,
In Colin's eyes, Eliza's beauties are.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.

Tell every nymph that mourns her swain's deceit,
The lov'd Eliza is as good as sweet;
When they, like her, each social virtue prove,
Their swains, like Colin, shall return their love.
Guiltless of anger, harmless lambkins rove,
The loving turtles coo within the grove;
My constant Tray ne'er quits his master's side,
The prudent ants unthinking swains deride,
And bees beneficent, with pleasing pains,
Collect sweet honey to enrich the swains;
Lambs, turtles, Tray, and ants and bees may find
Their virtues blended in Eliza's mind.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.

Ye witless clowns, who marriage-joys deride,
Nor know the comforts of a faithful bride,
Attentive to my tender tale,
Nor to your loss let prejudice prevail.
By Winter's false inclement skies betray'd,
A burning fever on my vitals prey'd;
My fleecy charge Eliza's care supplied,
Respondent to each groan Eliza sigh'd;
Twelve sleepless nights sharp anguish rack'd my breast;
Twelve sleepless nights Eliza banish'd rest,
With care unwearied watch'd aside my bed,
And with fond arm sustain'd my restless head;
Each cooling herb applied to sooth my pain,
Nor were he tender labours wrought in vain;
Kind symptoms of returning health appear'd,
And Love's rich cordials my weak spirits cheer'd;
My strength renew'd, joy sparkled in her eye,
And fill'd my soul with grateful extasy.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.

Ye mantling vines, that form the conscious bower,
Where oft we pass the soft endearing hour,
While you, to imitate our joys divine,
In wanton folds your amorous branches twine,
A thousand kisses whisper from your leaves;
But barren of those sweets Eliza gives;
For not the mingling arms, or frequent kiss,
But souls united cause the heart-felt bliss.
Ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and shady groves,
To distant plains resound our mutual loves.

Eliza's presence, with supreme delights,
Shortens the summer's days, and winter's nights:
No irksome toil shall Colin e're regard,
Her happiness and love the rich reward.
Blest be the day, at each return thrice blest,
That gave Eliza to my raptur'd breast.
This day, may no misfortunes vex the swains,
No ripen'd corn be laid by furious rains;
No luckless reaper meet with painful wound,
Or tread the stinging adder on the ground;
No nipping blast the hopeless grapes assail,
Or make the downy peaches withering fail;
But may propitious Love excite to mirth,
And Ceres' honours grace the teeming earth;
With golden fruit the loaded vines be crown'd,
And purple clusters on the vines abound.
Now cease, ye hills, ye dales, ye streams, and groves,
To tell the distant plains our mutual loves.

STREPHON.
Well hast thou, Colin, tun'd the oaten reed,
Thy songs the songs of nightingales exceed;
Unable to withstand thy powerful lay,
The melancholy fiend is hied away;
To fate resign'd, I feel returning rest,
Sweet friendship now has all my soul possest,
And Colin young, with his Eliza fair,
Shall equal portions of my bosom share.
Long may succeeding years their love renew,
A pattern for each nymph and shepherd true,
And may Eliza fair, and Colin young,
To distant times by happy pairs be sung!
