Hail to the honest Advocates!  who stood
In presence of the K&mdash; with courage good,
And pleaded, that upon an old estate
They found some hedges broken down of late,
And therefore brought a Bill they had prepar'd,
Begging, when time to read it could be spar'd,
That he would weigh contents which he would find,
And left their paper, creditably sign'd.

Hail, Advocates for Freedom!  who agreed
Over the Bottle, how you should proceed,
Resolv'd nem. con. (for some of you at Court
Already had petition'd) to support:
Two Bills on course came under your inspection,
One for the liquor, and one for protection,
You paid the Landlord's down upon the spot,
And by your own &mdash; must try what can be got.

Freedom!  thy female Advocates I hail,
Would not their Eloquence at Court prevail?
No more Honoria languishingly lies
And at the noon-day Brightness rubs her eyes,
But early seated in her damask chair
Calls for the News, and finds that WILKES is there,
Does it give notice of a sale of silks?
The Ladies go to talk &mdash; of Liberty and Wilkes,
For him their Visits they receive and pay,
And wish him out of prison ev'ry day;
They speak in his defence, like Counsel able,
All the while tea is handed round the table,
Maintain the argument at an hour with ease,
And do it handsomely, not taking fees.
They're welcome heartily, and I beseech
Their Ladyships, that Liberty of Speech
They would indulge awhile to mortals plain,
(To keep long silence gives the Vulgar pain)
And their Petitioner shall every pray&mdash;
Let us hear what the common people say.

ROGER and FRANK, two friends, had each a tongue,
A flippant one the latter, he was young,
But much the stripling of the Great had heard,
And he would freely speak of men preferr'd:
Not like a parrot, that with mimic voice
Repeats a lesson taught and makes no choice,
That, pendent in a cage, for days and years
Insults promiscuously passing ears,
Cries "walk Knave walk," but knows no proper name,
Frank very circumstantially would blame
A walking knave, and in a chariot riding
He'd scorn an Earl, if guilty of back-sliding.
Roger in his discourse had the address
To drop a hint, and give you Leave to guess,
As more deliberate in his narration,
Nor let his tongue outrun his occupation;
He liv'd, as many other do, by Travel,
And went through clay &mdash; as fast as over gravel;
They both were Travellers, but diff'rent ways,
Roger a waggon drove, and Frank a chaise.
To Bristol regular in keeping stages
And back to London, Roger earn'd his wages,
A little matter in a plodding way,
For he was humble, and his head was grey.
His Friend, of active spirit, ever stirring,
Broke many a horse's wind with too much spurring,
By nature curious, travel'd far and wide,
Oft suffer'd hunger through excess of pride,
Beyond the Tweed he wildly went astray
And stay'd no less than half a year away;
But, of the country now grown very weary,
It was so miserably bleak and dreary,
He journey'd back with &mdash; worse than broken stitches,
With half a stocking, and scarce any breeches,
And found his old companion, slow and sure,
In London, standing at the Ware-house Door.

ROGER.
And yet &mdash; it is my friend.  Give me thy hand!
I've not this six months seen thee in the land,
What quarter of the world hast thou been in?
No land of plenty, for thy jaws are thin,
Thy cloaths too &mdash; what a pickle thou art in!

FRANK.
What quarter of the world?  Plague on the quarter!
It was high time to think of my departure,
For sure enough my face is not so round
As when you saw me last on English ground,
In Boniface's pay I was more thriving
Though with the exercise of Hackney-Driving:
I've been in Scotland since I left my place,
Scotland, where Famine stares one in the face,
The most accursed spot in all Creation,
They're nasty too beyond imagination,
There was great danger, before my return
That the foul Itch would make my fingers burn.

ROGER.
In shaking hands I've been a little hasty,
I've heard that Scotchmen are extremely nasty,
One should not be familiar with such men,
Prithee hold out thy knuckles, Frank, again,
Is there no scab or scurf?  All smooth and clean?
Open thy fingers, let me look between,
I'm very glad there's nothing to discover,
I must have laid out money with the Glover,
Brought brimstone too to cure me of the Scot,
I'm very glad:  I'll treat thee with a pot.

FRANK.
With all my heart, I'm beggarly enough,
And almost kill'd with belly-scouring stuff:
I could not, like a Simpleton, help thinking
The Scotch were like the Londoners in drinking,
Who of the best a hearty offer make
And are affronted if you don't partake.
Indeed I once was treated with strong Drink,
And what was the occasion, do you think?
A bonny Lad who had received a Letter,
Hinting, that his condition would be better,
To our great city if he'd please to come,
Rous'd like a soldier by the sound of drum
Prepar'd for marching, lugg'd his wallet out,
Fill'd his horn box with powder for the snout,
Rummag'd his Draw'rs for what he had of cash,
And, hearing I had exercis'd my Lash
In driving Gentry of the English nation,
Thought he might get of me some information:
I answer'd ev'ry question that he put,
And out he set well satisfied on foot.

ROGER.
I'll treat thee with a pot of good strong Beer,
It shall be most refreshing, brisk and clear,
And as we drink, I should be glad to know
What Language upon Wilkes the Scotch bestow:
The Figures 4 and 5, pray tell me whether
They can endure to see 'em join'd together,
Or do they relish number Forty-six
A memorable year in Politicks?
Give me a history and tell no Lies,
So may'st thou get a cov'ring for thy thighs,
So may thy cheeks renew their rosy colour,
Thy legs grow fleshy, and thy belly fuller.
Take warning by thy late unlucky Trip
And get with us a Living by thy whip,
Hir'd by an Inn-keeper of good repute
Appear, as once thou didst, in decent suit,
Pick up chance Passengers from Town to Town,
And, without Master's knowledge, set 'em down.

FRANK.
Wilkes and the number Forty-five they hate,
And say that we're in a rebellious state:
Now that Lord B&mdash; has int'rest with the K&mdash;,
The Scotch, so far from meriting a string,
Are very loyal, and eat English bread,
Come hither to be cloath'd as well as fed.
You made enquiry about their Expression,
What Language?  I'll be frank in my confession,
We have been fighting about Wilkes's Fame,
And 'tis a mercy that I am not lame,
My limbs and life were frequently in danger,
In Scotland never more will I be Ranger!
I've been engag'd in quarrels not a few,
Got many a bloody Nose, eyes black and blue,
Have more than once extravagantly bled
From knocks that I received upon my head,
Been three times kick'd, twice thrown behind a fire,
For vent'ring to defend John WILKES Esquire.

ROGER.
Say'st thou?  And is the difference indeed
So great 'twixt this and t' other side the Tweed?
We've scarce a hind, whose house in village snug
Affords him ale drawn in an earthen mug,
Or cit, with tankard who makes show of wealth,
But once a day at least drinks Wilkes's Health:
I'll drink it now with great deal of pleasure,
Toss it off, Frank, we'll have another measure.
But since in talking upon these affairs
You met with brutal wretches, Bulls and Bears,
Who, though they'd no design upon your pocket,
Would fall upon your head, and roundly knock it,
The giving my opinion I'll delay
Lest I should get into an ugly fray,
I'll not begin at once with open mouth,
For, as you said, we've Scotchmen in the south.
In Wilkes's praise instead of being hearty,
If they should prove to be of northern Party
So much inclin'd a crow with you to pull,
I'll e'en keep silence, and preserve my scull;
I'm not indifferent about my breech,
No kicking!  I can scratch if it should itch:
I want my eyes for travelling and reading,
My nose I willingly would keep from bleeding,
Much comfort from a winter's fire I find,
But chuse to be before it, not behind.
Kick'd, buffeted, and burnt, as you have been,
In time to come you will not be so keen,
Or else the like rebuke may be your doom;
Besides, there's danger in a public room
Lest two-leg'd Traps, or instruments of State
Who're paid for catching words, should lie in wait,
Write down particulars of conversation,
And lay 'em open, for the Good o' th' Nation!
Who knows, my friend, but very near this place
Where we exchange our thoughts, to all appearance,
Without occasion for the least forbearance,
Who knows but an Informer may be lurking
To take in our materials for working?
If I could find him out, I'd trim his jerkin,
I'd curry-comb him worse than Horse's Scrapers,
Turn all his pockets out, and seize his papers.

FRANK.
And of my whip-cord I would make the most,
I'd lash him as if I was driving post.

ROGER.
We cannot be too wary, I'll peep round
And try if such a villain can be found.
Here is a Closet with a hole for key
(Only two corners of it I can see)
And window-light enough for any scribe,
If there should be one of the list'ning tribe
He might fill paper long as a Petition,
And then how grievous  would be my condition,
Upon the king's high-way so well I'm known
That he might make me any day his own.
Suppose we whisper?  Whisper in my ear
What the Scotch say of Wilkes, nay do &mdash; come near!

A Trumpeter they call him of sedition,
A mere State-Quack instead of a physician,
Pretending cure, but raising groundless fears
And setting folks together by the ears,
Occasioning more deaths within a week
Than twenty Doctors who attend the sick,
There's no comparison between his quill
And that which operates by way of pill!
They can't pronounce his name without a curse&mdash;
But hark ye, Roger, was there not a Hearse
Driv'n from the city to St. James's Gate?
A most uncommon Equipage of State,
The oddest scheme, pray who was the contriver?
I'd give a doz'n of ale to know the Driver.

ROGER.
I can't inform you, but there is a rumour
It was a man of rank; he drove with humour,
Shew'd all the mockery of grief in features
As well as any Undertaker's Creatures:
Why should not great men drive?  Where is the shame?
Have we not coaches call'd by noble name?
Whoe'er he was, he acted well his part,
And had driv'n something better than a cart.
That there was meaning in it, is allow'd,
And it was calculated for a croud,
To catch the eye with solemn, sable, Feather,
And give the people time to come together.
I take the Hearse to be our State-Machine,
The Ministers the Cattle, very lean,
Of diff'rent colours too, by which you see
A motley tribe that never can agree.
By the slow motion of it must be meant
That they should grease the wheels of Government:
O if a Man of Spirit could be found
Like thee, a Driver who would rid some ground!
The Figures after hearse of mourning coaches
You may cast up in column of reproaches,
As Measures &mdash; that we all have cause to grieve,
That was the drift, if rightly I conceive.
And there were Pictures, whimsically painted,
Where many were bedevil'd, not one sainted,
Most curious furniture!  The Driving-Job
Gave a mix'd kind of pleasure to the mob,
Compounded of ingredients grave and merry,
The Fun'ral pomp without a corps to bury.

FRANK.
Was Wilkes in Scotland, if they could discern him,
They would not bury him, but they would burn him,
To know him they would want but little light,
For both his eyes are not exactly right.
Not long ago they cut a piece of Wood
And made it squint as like him as they could,
No puny scare-crow such as you may see
With a few rags on sticking in a tree,
'Twas Heart of Oak, out of the middle cut,
The chips and branches on the ground they put,
Kindled a fire, I never saw a bigger,
And, where it was the hottest, threw the Figure.

ROGER.
Our Fires and Candles in his praise are seen,
Why do our Scotsmen rage?  What do they mean!
Have thy no privileges worth maintaining,
That they're so much provok'd at our complaining?
Keen is their Hunger, searching is their Air,
They travel  shoeless, and with buttocks bare,
Mix up a little oatmeal in a puddle,
We &mdash; fill our Bellies with Roast-Beef, and fuddle:
Some of them here, 'tis true, have Places good,
Have change of raiment and delicious food,
But more in starving plight are left behind
To make wry faces, and their teeth to grind.
Believe me, 'tis rank Envy at the bottom,
Like us they'd live, wear breeches had they got 'em;
I beg your pardon, for you want a pair,
'Twas quite out of my noddle I declare,
Drink and forget it, Frank, I do intreat,
And &mdash; Landlord!  Bring us something in to eat.

FRANK.
In petticoats he has not there a friend,
I've felt of chambermaid the finger's end,
These marks (d' you see?) were giv'n me by a slut
With nimble fingers, and with nails uncut.

ROGER.
Our Ladies had in Ball-room a dispute
A rough one, not at all for their repute,
With lowest of the Rabble's you may join't,
But Wilkes's character was not the point:
You've heard, at Bath for company polite
So very famous, how they came to fight?

FRANK.
Yes, I did hear, and it will bear repeating,
Let's have the story, Roger, while I'm eating.

ROGER.
Want of due Form occasion'd &mdash; want of plaister,
The Ladies chanc'd to be without a Master,
And, not agreeing how to place their tails,
Resolv'd to try what could be done with nails:
There was from backs much tearing of the cloaths,
And spiteful treading on each other's toes,
'Till one, about her who had nothing French,
(Twice she was seated, twice shov'd off the bench)
Began her  fist, as Boxers do, to clench,
The way to strike effectually found
And laid her Enemy upon the Ground.

FRANK.
A very ready way the point of gaining,
The Story's not a little entertaining,
Though I don't like such boisterous Proceeding,
Suppose the knock'd down Lady had been breeding?
Besides, it might have been a dark Affair,
She might have died on't without proper care,
This is a circumstance so very dark,
That &mdash; it is much the same with that of Clark;
It makes me recollect my woful List
Of blows and bruises from the foot and fist.
Who, but with indignation must be fir'd,
To think that Men with Bludgeons should be hir'd,
Should go with weapons button'd under coats
To hinder Wilkes's friends from giving votes,
Weapons on purpose made, and tipp'd with Lead,
For adding to the number of the dead!

ROGER.
They carry matters too far when they kill,
Can't they be satisfied with words at will?
We give and take, respecting what is spoken
There's Hobson's choice, but I'd have no heads broken.

FRANK.
Now Hobson's mention'd, I am not quite easy,
Horses when kept in stables will be greasy:
They send Wilkes presents from all parts o' th' town,
And country too; so great is his renown,
He's treated, from the Merchant to the Thresher,
With turtle, pigeon-pye, cheese out of Cheshire,
With many a sav'ry compliment of ham,
So that if he's at all inclin'd to cram,
With choice of dainties, eating this and that,
In a short time he must be monstrous fat;
His Fellow-Pris'ners bit no more their thumbs,
But live deliciously upon his crumbs.
What I'm afraid of is, if he grows lazy,
The British Constitution will be crazy.

ROGER.
I wish, of his confinement they'd be sparing,
And let thee give him ev'ry day an Airing.

FRANK.
To keep him up so close is very hard,
They might attend him with a proper Guard,
Indulge him with a few miles in a morning,
I'd drive for nothing, ay, and give my horn in;
With empty pockets I have gone of late,
Or I would pay for opening a Gate;
I doubt his stock of money is so small,
For Turnpikes that he scarce has wherewithal&mdash;

ROGER.
You need not doubt, for there has been a verdict,
Are you so newly come as not t' have heard it?
In which the Jury after Trial found
He had been damag'd in Four Thousand Pound,
(Though some are of opinion that they blunder'd)
And his Friends more than once have giv'n three hundred;
His stock is large, and he's in spirits high,
It certainly was bold in him to try.

FRANK.
And there's no danger of his spirits sinking,
He has so many Bottles fit for drinking.

ROGER.
I'm glad that you have not forgot the Liquor,
It makes him get rid of his victuals quicker;
Whole Hampers have been sent him, or I question
Whether he'd not have died of indigestion.

FRANK.
He'll  drink enough, I mean to a degree
Sufficient to preserve his spirit free;
He'll drink enough, and yet not drown his reason,
Never were Presents sent in better Season.

ROGER.
Besides the presents sent within the nation,
They have shipp'd rum and sugar from Plantation,
Forty-five hogsheads of what people smoke
Which a whole-sale Tobacconist bespoke,
Promis'd to pay him when the goods were landed
Because the Vessel might be sunk or stranded:
In short, of tongues if I had fifty brace
And also for my lungs an iron case,
I could not reckon up the Gifts, so many
He can make traffick with, and turn the penny;
And what his friends thought proper to subscribe
He honourably took, it was no bribe.

FRANK.
Bribe!  I despise the scoundrel who would mention
This in the same breath with Lord Ch&mdash;'s Pension.
It was for suit he ventur'd to commence,
And carried on, about the common fence;
A bribe!  who's his Accuser?  I allege
It was for putting stakes into the hedge.

ROGER.
I meant not to accuse him, come &mdash; let's tipple,
We'll have another pint, e'en make it triple:
And I intend, so well he has behav'd,
Out of the little money I have sav'd,
To buy him what he'll gladly use anon
When out of prison, when his boots are on,
A very decent Whip I think of giving,
Enough from me, who labour for a Living.

FRANK.
And, if another Boniface I find,
I am resolv'd that I will be as kind,
Of silver spurs I'll buy for him a pair,
In the mean time of Praise he'll have my share,
Thine too, when safely thou can'st take his part,
And when thou'rt silent, let him have thy heart:
So may'st thou never want a Waggon-Load,
Nor lose a wheel upon the turnpike-road;
Ne'er be delay'd, nor have thy temper cross'd
By cattle falling lame, or parcels lost;
May'st thou get in before the sun is set,
And, in the company of friends well met,
With "I love Sue" the jovial chorus fill,
Drink as I do, and not be in the Bill.
Now, Roger, I should not go to seek a place,
But for my rigging; I'm in such disgrace,
That, without blushing if I could apply,
I'm sure no man would offer wages high:
I always have experienc'd thee my friend
And beg some silver &mdash; only that you'd lend,
Before the spurs are given I will pay,
I'll go to Monmouth-street without delay.&mdash;

He borrow'd silver, and good friends they parted,
Frank for his tongue among the Scotch had smarted,
More cautious I, retreat behind my pen,
Yet I may suffer from some Critick's ken,
Some angry Critick's on the other side,
O let me by my countrymen be tried!
Not that I'm vain enough to think my rhimes,
Rude as they are, can live in after-times;
But, if their life should not be very short,
WILKES is the subject, and I'll thank him for't:
Say, can he be forgot?  And shall his Glory
Die like a Lord's jest, or a vulgar story?
The Bottle-Conjurer is now no more,
Canning was private when she left the shore;
But Wilkes, the public friend, in Honour clear,
THE PATRIOT Wilkes (not of a single year,
Posterity shall call him by the name)
Upon the surest ground of Merit builds his Fame.
