Various the Wish of Mortals; yet their Prayers,
For various Things most certainly are vain,
The many Objects bring ten thousand Cares,
When great Abundance swells their glaring Train.
Some beg for Pomp, and Riches some desire,
While others worry Heaven for Titles they require.

No wild Ambition prompts me to demand
Excess of Rule, nor Pageantry, nor State,
I lust not then for Empire nor for Land,
And, free from Pride, I envy not the Great.
I ask for better Joys, for solid Bliss;
These ne'er can fleet away, nor ne'er can be amiss.

Thou, Lord of Earth, thou Monarch of the Skies,
The gracious God, the Gladder of Mankind,
Direct my Ways, instruct me to be wise,
And so shall I enjoy sweet Peace of Mind.
Each lesser Thing that's priz'd I would forego,
From Virtue and from Truth, the richest Pleasures flow.

Oh!  give me Health, that ever-blooming Charm,
And let thy Grace attend me where I stray,
Keep me from Terror, from each wild Alarm,
Which may distract me in this rugged Way.
From Care, from Folly, and from Business free,
Fix my aspiring Soul on Wisdom and on thee.

Not for Apparel, nor for Gold I crave,
Unprofitable Pomp I all despise,
Imperious Mortals worse with these behave,
Affront their Kind, and proudly view the Skies.
Then let me lay these gaudy Things aside,
With all their gay Parade, and Vanity and Pride.

Let Learning, Virtue, and the Social Train,
Forever fire and instruct my Soul,
Oh!  let me these, and only these attain,
Immortal Pleasure then shall fill the Whole.
And these united in one beauteous Form,
Shall bless my tender Youth, and soothe each threatning Storm.

To Science lead me, and to Things sublime,
Oh!  teach me how for to explore them all;
Knowledge shall crown me with unfading Prime,
And while I live upon this earthly Ball,
Increase the glorious Thirst, and ere I die,
Inform my studious Mind with Wisdom from on high.

Such Erudition, and such heavenly Lore,
Does Blessings give, and precious Sweets impart;
They flow spontaneous from one ample Store,
And exquisitely charm the human Heart.
Thus Joy shall rise, Perfection thus shall spring,
While greater Truths divine, shall sweet Contentment bring.

Fair Piety I would with these were join'd,
United in one great, one glorious Cause;
For thus Religion when so much refin'd,
Would harmonize the others sacred Laws.
These Gifts, O Heaven!  in their Charms array'd,
Shall form one rapturous Bliss, and while they reign display'd.

Unsullied Goodness is divinely pure,
It decks the Peasant and the humble Swain,
Adorns the Brave, embellishes the Poor,
Virtue alone is great, the noblest Gain;
Surpassing all, supreme and wond'rous fine,
It yields a general Light, and does with Splendour shine.

What shall with these in Competition stand?
What other Objects can with these compare?
They do our Notions, and our Thoughts expand,
These above all are infinitely fair.
How poor is Wealth and hated Thirst of Gold,
When such transcendent Things can sweeter Charms unfold.

True Wisdom, Truth, and Virtue, all compleat,
Are center'd in one universal Charm,
Are rich and precious, altogether sweet,
And they themselves shall bear away the Palm.
Since these excel, immortal in their Kind,
Then let me gain the Whole, for these I wish to find.

The tinsel Toys which meet with so much Praise,
Which wake the Passions, and ensnare the Eye,
Are but a specious Shew, a sudden Blaze,
At first they glitter, but at length they die.
Fools catch at Shadows and the Substance lose,
They leave Delights behind, and real Joys refuse.

Away!  ye idlest Creatures of the Brain,
Ye busy Phantoms then the Source of Woe,
The Foes of Reason, and the Cause of Pain,
You here exclude all Happiness below.
With borrow'd Smiles and Lustre not your own,
You captivate the Heart, you are so potent grown.

Let great Ambition raise the Warrior's Pride,
Let Avarice create each base Desire,
My Soul to Wisdom would my Footsteps guide,
Warm'd by a better and more glorious Fire.
Both, both of these  in their luxurious Dress,
Disgust the sober Will, when daub'd with such Excess.

Lead me, O Virtue, in thy Paths secure,
Thou Power divine, thou sweet celestial Ray;
For thou art heavenly, eminent and pure,
Thy spotless Image yields eternal Day.
Unerring Charm, and everlasting Friend,
Forsake thy native Skies and from on high descend.

And thou, O sacred Truth!  seraphic Maid,
Assist thy Votary, I thy Aid implore,
Thy lovely Graces all appear dismay'd,
Thee, Goddess, thee, the Human-kind adore.
Thy matchless rich Perfections all proclaim,
The Wise revere thy Worth, and bless thy shining Name.

Sweet Science mount me on thy tow'ring Wings,
And new Perceptions on my Mind bestow,
Guide me to Knowledge, to celestial Things,
Let me the most mysterious Causes know.
Then tell me how the wand'ring Stars are found,
And how they run their Course, and go their Circuit round.

Daughter of Heaven, of the Power supreme,
Would you your Poet's fond Petition hear,
Oh!  keep me ever from each wild Extreme,
Within the Bounds of thy exalted Sphere;
My Thoughts refine, and make my Notions true,
So trace those rolling Worlds, which gild the liquid Blue.

Folly may charm, and for a while may please,
And Pleasures soft Embraces suit our Youth,
But Wisdom flows, and only flows from these,
From Learning, Virtue, Science, and from Truth.
Then may I feel their whole united Sway,
While Trains of busy Fools, for empty Objects pray.
