Far from the noisy, bustling scenes of life,
Where Pride and Envy foster ceaseless strife,
Where Fashion, link'd with Folly hand in hand,
Bids countless vassals bow at her command,
How it delights 'midst rural scenes to stray,
Where varying Beauty paints the devious way,
To saunter careless on the mountain's side,
And view the smiling landscapes opening wide,
Or stretch'd upon the bank, where, gliding near,
The stream's soft murmurs greet the listening ear,
The bliss of listless Indolence to know,
Which Care's wise votaries prudently forego,
Bartering for empty pomp, and needless wealth,
Smiling content, with innocence, and health.

Yet deem not hence that Care, a hateful guest,
Is too a stranger to the rustic's breast,
That while around him Nature wears a smile,
These joys from him can anxious care beguile;
Alas!  what pleasures now can touch his soul,
His acts while power and frowning pride controul;
While changeful Fortune is no more his friend,
But dread disasters o'er his head impend?
With pitying tongue these oft have I deplor'd,
But weak the comfort pity could afford;
These are my subject now; altho' in vain
Should candid Truth awake the indignant strain,
Tho' Luxury should its censure disregard,
And still from Labour wrest its just reward.

In times which now even memory well can trace,
The harmless peasants were a happy race;
The joyful farmer, with industrious hand,
Gather'd the plenteous produce of his land,
Nor envious griev'd to see the labourer share,
(Meed of his pains) the blessings of the year;
Repin'd not meanly that the simple swain
His native freedom boldly could maintain,
Could rear his offspring, yet disdain to wait,
For sordid alms, before the rich man's gate;
Grudg'd not that leisure which in sports he spent,
But pleas'd beheld him chearful and content.

Now other fate attends.  The swain no more
Hastes to his labour jocund, as before;
Ruin and indigence the wretch surround,
Nor more the friend is in the master found;
That master, of the name, alas, bereft,
A prey to want and ignominy left,
Feels more severely Fortune's adverse stroke,
And drags more feebly Slavery's galling yoke.
Reduc'd, while hopeless of redress, to mourn
The power which Avarice from his hand has torn;
Avarice and Pride, which for one worthless Lord,
To swell the luxury of one splendid board,
Have farm to farm annex'd, and field to field,
While countless slaves enforc'd obedience yield.

Where now (the rustic's cares and labours past)
Where the rewards which still were hoped at last?
Where the repose so oft he wish'd to share?
How are his prospects vanish'd into air!
In grey old age, his heart estrang'd from crime,
Vainly he hoped to chear the lingering time,
Beside the winter's hearth his tales to tell,
Reasoning from long experience passing well,
Or when the summer's scorching heats invade,
Peaceful to slumber in the friendly shade.

Cherish'd by Luxury, an useless train,
Who painful Industry's reward disdain,
A servile race, who sooth their master's pride,
Who fawn on wealth, and needy worth deride,
Pamper'd with ease, now fatten on the spoil
Of hungry wretches doom'd to ceaseless toil.
Yet these can tyrranise; and tho' for these,
His little fortunes wreck'd the rustic sees,
Patient he suffers what even these enjoin,
Or but in secret ventures to repine.
Heavens!  should he utter one indignant word,
'Gainst such deputed mimics of their lord,
The grief-worn aspect, nor enfeebling age,
Could save the helpless victim from their rage;
That lord can cloath them with despotic sway,
And full revenge must wipe th' affront away.

Ere such his hapless state, the village youth,
Who free from flattery speaks unstudied truth,
Far from the public haunt was wont to steal,
To tell the listening maid his love-sick tale;
His vows the fair with mutual vows repaid,
And schemes for bliss in future days were laid.
But since by Power's tyrannic hand oppress'd,
Love gives no rapture to the pensive breast,
Wretched they dread the dangerous race to run,
And HYMEN'S rites with prudent caution shun.

For boding Fancy pictures future harms,
And takes from wedded love its noblest charms;
Pictures the helpless infant doom'd to know,
Thro' life's whole round, unmitigated woe;
Beholds, in early years, a pining race,
(Misery and famine low'ring in their face)
Lash'd to their duty by unpitying hands,
To every duty thoughtless Pride commands,
While the fond parent stands unmurmuring near,
And sighing wipes away the trickling tear.
Each smiling prospect shaded by these fears,
Youth wastes in barrenness the tedious years;
Save when, in one unguarded hour betray'd,
To fond intreaty yields some easy maid,
And, little heedful of her future shame,
Obtains, before the wife's, the mother's name;
Then the much-dreaded marriage bonds are tied,
The bridegroom joyless takes th' unhappy bride;
Thro' endless troubles lies their destin'd way,
And pain and grief the wretches' fault repay.

But ere old age or sickness intervene,
May Heaven's indulgent mercy close the scene!
Where, for that help they can no more supply,
From keen distress shall then the wretches fly?
Dwells in the dome, which on their ruin rose,
Kind Hospitality, to sooth their woes?
Or shall they yield, all hope of comfort lost,
To vile dependence, at the public cost?
That public cost, which from his wealth alone,
He grudging pays, who robb'd them of their own;
While none have power, who might perchance befriend,
And none, when injur'd, dare their cause defend.

Now cease the village sports; to welcome MAY,
The swains oft frolick'd all the live-long day;
Deck'd in her best attire, each damsel strove
To charm the favourite object of her love;
And all, with agile feats, and dance, and song,
And jest, and banter, wing'd their hours along.
Thus were they blest, and Wealth's ambitious train,
By them unheeded, might these joys disdain,
Unenvied might to higher life resort,
And bask amidst the sun-shine of a court,
At large thro' Pleasure's ample field might range,
Where pall'd Desire revives as objects change;
No peasant envied those their pomp and shew,
Nor knew what bliss they shar'd, nor wish'd to know,
Why then should envious Affluence blast his mirth?
Why give to Discontent and Sorrow birth?
Ah, why should SOMERVILLE that mirth upbraid,
Sharpening his censure with the Muse's aid?
Why peevishly assert with partial tongue,
From rural games his country's ruin sprung?

The patriot dreads not these, but views with fear
The growth of Luxury in a higher sphere;
For which proud Commerce ransacks foreign shores,
And freights the vessel with superfluous stores;
Stores which the labours of the poor supply,
Who seem for this to live, for this to die;
Who see chagrin'd the good around them plac'd,
Their right by nature, which they ne'er shall taste;
While Ocean's hardy sons, their country's boast,
Vainly employ'd, are to their country lost.

Hence too the village finds its ills increase,
And wild disorder soon succeeds to peace.
The cit, amassing ample sums by trade,
Studious to show his taste by dull parade,
His Grace's rural seat to rival tries,
And bids at vast expence the Villa rise;
Then leads the park, the grove, the garden wide,
Girding the peasant close on every side;
And brings to these his friends and servants down,
To spread the modish vices of the town.

Of these enough &mdash; Lo, where the village lord,
(Fear'd by the trembling poor, or half ador'd)
Feasts and carouses 'midst his glad compeers,
While boastful clamour fills their deafen'd ears.
The sportsman's joys inebriate they relate,
And dwell delighted on each rural seat;
Again the scatter'd covey bring to view,
The circling traces of the hare renew,
The timorous deer let loose for flight again,
And climb the steep, and scour along the plain.
Such are their Sports &mdash; the tribes for whom no ray
Of brightening science e'er illum'd the way;
Who, wild, have only Nature's dictates known,
Start at the thought, and hunt for prey alone;
Yet as Barbarians are consign'd to fame,
And held least worthy of the human name.

To rank with these, how great were the disgrace
To us, rare worthies of enlighten'd race,
Whose prying minds 'midst varying Nature rove,
Pierce thro' the earth, and mount to heaven above:
Whose actions manly sense and reason guide,
While taste and elegance o'er all preside.

Fond self-conceit, how absolute thy reign!
Truth may oppose, but shall oppose in vain;
Who like thyself can other's foibles find?
And who if searching for his own so blind?
Dowdies, at thy command, display their charms,
To win the lover to their longing arms;
Dunces to learning's summit think they rise;
Fools are transported that they grow so wise;
And we, who torture with tyrannic art,
We boast refinement and the feeling heart.

When AUBURN'S villagers no more enjoy'd
That peace which stern Oppression had destroy'd,
Their long-lov'd home the pensive wretches fled,
And far 'mong unknown climes their journey sped,
Blest but in this; where'er their lot was thrown,
No land could make them poorer than their own.
To others Fortune has even this denied;
Th' allotted round of life must each abide;
Their ear, perchance, some feeble tidings reach,
(The passing stranger's tales such knowledge teach)
Of realms where never commerce found its way,
Nor luxury yet has made mankind its prey,
Where fashions no superstitious care devise,
And trifling labour ev'ry want supplies;
But this can only fruitless wishes raise,
No prospect opening hence for happier days.

Slaves to one master, to one spot confin'd,
Chearless despondence overspreads their mind;
Those Tasks so light, while eagerly they strove,
By industry, their gratitude to prove,
How irksome now, when all their labours tend
To glut a tyrant, where they need a friend.
One who, admiring gaudy pomp and state,
Proud of his wealth, and friendship with the great,
His honest vassals never stoops to know,
Nor learns their little wants, nor heals their woe.

Hence with less ardour each his business plies,
And long th' appointed task unfinish'd lies.
Why should they care to till th' extensive field,
Or gladly teach the barren glebe to yield?
What tho' their diligence should plenty bring;
For them no plenty is allow'd to spring;
To foreign climes that quickly is convey'd,
Aiding the schemes of luxury and trade.
There other busy slaves, by BRITAIN fed,
Find not even leisure to produce their bread;
Content to purchase what may just suffice,
And tug life's labouring oar to earn the price.

Is there perchance some one of humble mind,
To sober life and industry inclin'd,
Whom changeful fortune has not yet bereft
Of a few roods his predecessors left,
Who, might he cultivate his small estate
Uninjur'd, would not wish a happier fate;
For him what snares are laid by envious pride;
What fraudful means to work his ruin tried;
Endless affronts and insults he sustains,
Long as that freedom which he loves remains;
And if at length with constant feuds fatigued,
Dreading the foes against his quiet leagued,
He yields his patrimony, sought so long,
And ranks some master's abject slaves among,
Mark'd as a foe, for ever is he known,
And for his merit is no favour shown.

Oh thou whose evils from this cause arise,
Learn to neglect them, and be truly wise;
Forget what once thou wast, nor proudly strive
To keep thy little splendour yet alive;
To fools leave fashions; think that from thy hands,
Indulgent Nature trifling aid demands,
That homeliest garments fence the wintry snows;
And how much less the need which summer knows;
Think that the simplest viands health maintain;
Nor waste thy strength a costlier kind to gain;
Beyond superfluous profit prize thine ease;
Heaven meant not life should torture thee, but please.

Such was the life our wise forefathers chose,
Ere with politeness poverty arose;
Their wants were answer'd then with moderate care,
And half their days for pleasure could they spare;
Then each was blest, and of his fortune proud,
To whom a numerous offspring Heaven allow'd.
Light was their burden; yet in modern days,
Which partial affluence varnishes with praise,
Since taste and art our manners have refin'd,
This boon were gladly even by wealth resign'd.

Ye thoughtless race, on Industry who prey,
And lounge in baneful sloth your hours away,
See Luxury's influence to yourselves extends,
Nor barely with the suffering labourer ends;
Tempt not too far the flattering smiles of fate,
But check each vain pursuit, ere yet too late;
Stay not, neglecting sober Reason's voice,
Till Ruin, near impending, leaves no choice;
Show Virtue still remains, and while ye heal
Want's toilsome miseries, show yourselves can feel.
