While others gayly waste the jovial day,
With song and dance the festive hours beguile;
Let me pursue my solitary way,
Where wisdom leads, to yonder sacred pile.&mdash;

The painted windows shed a feeble light;
The parting sun now gives his latest ray;
And now approaches sober-suited Night,
And forth before her sends the twilight gray.

Heav'ns!  what a solemn scene appears around!
How deep the silence, and how still the air!
Softly, O softly tread the hallow'd ground:
A voice from yonder tomb, methinks, I hear.

"Welcome, it says, to wisdom's calm retreat
Are all who wisdom's sacred charms adore;
Here rest the ashes of the wise and great:
Look around, consider, and be vain no more."

These trophies sad, in mournful pomp display'd,
Speak to the heart with energy divine:
How many here low in the dust are laid,
That once in life illustrious wont to shine?

For neither youth nor beauty, wealth nor pow'r,
From the destructive hand of death can save;
Nor wisdom shun the dark and dismal hour,
Nor virtue keep her vot'ries from the grave.

Imperial grandeur, like the rest, must bear
The common fate impos'd on all mankind;
The scepter'd monarch rests unenvy'd here,
His lifeless form to kindred dust consign'd.

The sons of glory here are laid to sleep,
Who rul'd the battle on the martial plain;
Or who with Britain's thunder aw'd the deep,
And rode triumphant o'er the subject main.

Nor absent those whom sacred wisdom led
Thro' Nature's boundless range, and to their view
The wonders of a thousand worlds display'd,
And charm'd their search with glories ever new.

Beneath that honour'd tomb does Newton lie,
On whom bright Science beam'd her purest ray;
Who search'd the laws that bind the worlds on high,
And trac'd thro' Aether's depth the comet's way.

Here o'er their lifeless sons the muses weep;
No longer Milton breathes the heav'nly song;
Shakespeare's sweet voice is lost in endless sleep,
And cold and mute is Pope's harmonious tongue.

No more is heard soft Spencer's magic strain;
Now ceases Prior's easy wit to flow;
No longer Thomson sings the rural swain,
Nor tender Otway tells the tale of woe.

Their song was pleasant to the list'ning ear,
As to the vernal flow'rs, the genial ray;
But all too weak to stop Death's fierce career,
Who hears unmov'd the soul-enchanting lay.

Yet triumphs o'er his pow'r th' immortal mind;
The muse's page transmits to lasting fame
With arts, or arms, who bless'd or sav'd mankind;
And living honours shall adorn his name.
