While Lyres more sweet than mine can charm his breast,
Or cares, if with a care his heart should bleed,
Why pants my friend again to storm his taste,
Or hear the warblings of mine oaten reed?
Nor here can bays her shining toil succeed,
Should merit self pour forth th' illustrious strain,
Or string the lyre to chaunt some hallow'd deed,
Since Sol, that fir'd in spring each Muse's vein,
Behind Parnassus mount withdraws his weary'd wain.

Besides, untutor'd but in nature's school,
No lay, no science here the swain has blest;
He ne'er embrac'd a philosophic rule,
But that which instinct planted in his breast.
Curse on the tyrant fiend, whose high behest
Slew Cambria's bards and ting'd their bays with gore:
Fair learning here her fav'rite shrine had plac'd,
Had Edward's steel ne'er widow'd all our shore,
Or wrought th' unhallow'd deed which now my strains deplore.
Now all but envy sleeps, &mdash; her watchful eyes
No song can charm to find denied repose;
Pleas'd only when her neighbours lot she weighs,
To find his joys far lighter than his woes.

Thus now perhaps (but Heav'n divert her aim!)
She speeds to snatch from Frederic's brow the prize,
Won by desert and toil the price of fame,
And breathes o'er all his bays desponding sighs,
From lofty tow'rs now hurls a thousand lies
Of vic'tries, chiefs polluted with disgrace;
How Yorke assaults the foe from ambush guise,
Or wheels to war with too impetuous pace,
Lest honour ever new should plume his royal face.

E'en if she now should brand her cruel snake,
And o'er the Muse's haunt her influence pour,
Her palm all trembling must the lyre forsake,
Her pen no more the fields of song explore:
Occasion now scarce bids the Muses soar
When peace far hence, the nurse of science, flies,
To Sweden's region, or to Denmark's shore.
To fire the patriot councils of the wise,
Free from ambition's plan, and statesman's theories.

And winter throws his mantle o'er our isle,
Fraught with celestial storms and wind and rain,
Whereat the seas as discontented swell,
And the poor Moor foretells the hurricane
To damp his vanish'd hopes of earthly gain;
Now view the vale, and visit pen'ry's roof,
Nor thou t' avert each misery disdain;
There fate and hunger weave th' impending woof,&mdash;
Spend more than tears, humanity's exalted proof:

Or if you boast a sympathetic frame,
To heal where fortune's adverse arrow falls,
The ship-wreck'd wretch compassion's alms should claim,
Whose hopes lie bury'd with his wooden walls;
Or when the sky some louring rage forestalls,
O let the tear for wand'ring suff'rance flow!
Whose feet and hope have borne him to your halls,
Whose furrow'd cheek and grief-dejected brow
Proclaim a length of years and pangs of inward woe.

Scarce shall the star of winter disappear,
But forums 'bound with volumes and with plays;
The dire contagion flies from sphere to sphere,
Learn'd and unlearn'd, all scribble for the bays;
But grant, ye Muses, if my pipe should raise
One song, immers'd in thoughtful solitude,
Discretion still should guide my future lays,
Content not to exceed the plaintive ode,
Nor aim at laurels, which the zealous grasp elude.
