Where yon fair Dome o'erlooks th' extended Plain,
What Scenes of Mis'ry ask a pitying Tear;
There mope-ey'd Frenzy holds her direful Reign,
And frantic Folly rules in Triumph there.

There barr'd from Social Joy, in Prison pent,
The Maniac rages round his loathsome Cell;
His Steps are bounded by his Chain's Extent,
And the Roof echoes with his fearful Yell.

To Reason deaf, and to his Lot as blind,
He threatens mighty Mischief to the World,
Now reigns, perchance, a Tyrant in his Mind,
Now in Idea is his Thunder hurl'd.

Ambition crost by Fate, or stubborn Pride,
When much-lov'd Pow'r was wrested from his Hand,
When Fortune more her plenteous Gifts denied,
Number'd the wretch amongst the frenzied Band.

Is this, alas, Creation's boasted Lord,
To whom with fawning smile Dependents bow'd?
Can the dark Cell, and clanking Chain accord
With Him erewhile an Idol of the Croud.

See yonder Wretch, who silent treads and slow,
Nor deigns the Converse of a Friend to share,
Whilst furrow'd Care sits frowning on his Brow,
And from his Eye emits a sullen Glare.

Full many a fruitless Project He devis'd,
And for the Publick Good believ'd He toil'd;
Much were his Projects and Himself despis'd,
And all his sanguine Expectations foil'd.

Now here his airy Visions he pursues,
Crushes the System and anew creates,
Or thro' the World extends Ideal Views,
To mock its Errors since his Schemes it hates.

The Lover worn away with vain Desire,
Whose eager Suit some scornful Maid denied,
Within these Walls still feeds the secret Fire,
And droops a Victim to the Fair-one's Pride.

Plaintive his Speech, and pensive is his Look,
And oft some melancholy Tale he tells;
And chides at Fate, too conscious of her Stroke,
Yet Folly oft the mournful Gloom dispels.

Then to some fancied Nymph He makes his Court,
And pours out Protestations to the Wind,
And tunes some am'rous Carrol, as in Sport,
Elate with Thoughts the Fair-one will be kind.

Some hapless Maid, from whom her faithful Swain
The Hand of Death for ever has remov'd,
Or by th' unfeeling Parent with Disdain
Refus'd to wed the gen'rous Youth She lov'd.

Now here her solitary Hours deceives,
With Tales of fancied Happiness to come;
Nor hears the Voice of Truth, or not believes,
But hopes the Blessings of a Peaceful Home.

And canst Thou tell, to ev'ry One She cries,
Where now my faithful Lover is delay'd;
Ere now the Youth had met these Longing Eyes,
But that false Friends his Efforts have betray'd.

Ah, wherefore would He wander far away?
Why dare for Me to tempt the faithless Main?
But we shall frolick all the livelong Day,
When Love has brought him to my Arms again.

Then shall we rove together o'er the Green,
The Rose and Violet springing where we tread;
Fair is the Rose and fair the Violet seen,
But fairer then shall either rear the Head.

Mistaken Maid, a heavier Lot is thine;
For Thee no future Joys has Time in store;
Yet never Thou the flatt'ring Hope resign,
Thenceforth to know thy shad'wy Bliss no more.

Less blest are They who in this drear Abode,
At Intervals their hapless Station know,
And reap no Profit from the short-liv'd Good,
But to be conscious of returning Woe.

Here Sorrow often lifts its mournful Voice,
Which Laughter answers with an idle Tale;
This without cause unceasing can rejoice,
And That with tearful Eye unceasing wail.

Were there but These who in this Mansion stay,
Who mock'd the Dictates of Persuasion's Tongue;
Who wildly wander'd far from Reason's Way,
And shun'd whatever may to Truth belong.

But Envy, Av'rice, Cruelty, and Pride,
Reign in the Bosom with unbounded Sway,
To horrid Guilt, to frenzied Projects guide,
And hapless Mortals what They bid obey.
