Th' autumnal month had clos'd, but that soft light
Which loves to linger at th' autumnal close,
And o'er the Latian hills shed soft repose,
Hung on that pensive hour, half-day, half-night,
When, as th' aerial Dome first fix'd my view,
A more than mortal Pow'r my spirit onward drew.&mdash;

The sun had thro' a gorgeous canopy
Of gold, of purple, and of azure sheen,
Wheel'd his broad orb, and set with glow serene,
And all was stillness to the car and eye:
The labours of the day began to cease,
And all without was calm, and all within seem'd peace.

But deep the glow and fever in my heart,
When on th' eternal flint my footstep rung:
Thought, Fancy, Feeling to one object clung,
Nor joy nor woe there claim'd divided part:
On to the temple, on I sped my way,
Reckless that Tyber's flood athwart my passage lay.

I saw no flood, no court, no pillar'd zone
That clos'd it round, I heard no fountain play,
When in the last faint gleam of dying day,
Beneath the hallow'd roof I paus'd alone,
While thro' the void, dim-seen, at fall of night
Onward a priest slow-pac'd with solitary light.

Else, all was darkness, all mysterious gloom,
Save where bright-flaming round the altar rose
The silver lamps that day nor night repose,
And here and there the Baldachin illume,
Where the colossal columns' brazen frame
Catch on their wreathed spires by fits the gliding flame.

And save those lamps, and that departing light,
Darkness above, beneath me, and around:
No marble glitter'd thro' the gloom profound,
Tomb, statue, column, none disturb'd the sight:
The Spirit of Devotion fill'd the whole,
And sealing up the lip, held commune with the soul.

Can I that eve, that hour, that scene forget,
That gloom profound, if yet the faithful brain
One vestige of my former self retain?
That voice which inly whisper'd, whispers yet,
Breathes on the chord that vibrates thro' the heart,
Nor, till it cease to beat, shall ever more depart.

Hail, Scene sublime! &mdash; Lo, Rome before me lies,
Th' eternal City rests on Tyber's shore :
Domes, columns, obelisks sublimely soar:
Another Rome, th' aerial, seems to rise
Around yon orb, that swelling on the eye
Tow'rs in its sphere, alone, and bounds the earth and sky.&mdash;

Here, in lone grandeur bold Soracte stands,
There, on the boundary mountain's snow-wreath'd crests,
As on a pillar'd dome heaven proudly rests:
And where the wide Campagna's waste expands,
Hoar aqueducts their long, long lines extend,
And o'er Aurelian's walls time-rifted tow'rs impend.

Th' enormous Coliseum's bulk behold:&mdash;
Like some lone promontory's storm-rent brow
That spreads its shadow o'er the deep below,
And back repells the waves in tempests roll'd:
Thus o'er the wreck and violence of Time
Vespasian's mountain pile yet lifts its crest sublime.

Height above height the widening circles sweep,
Arch swells o'er arch, oer columns columns tow'r,
Stupendous wreck upheld by unseen pow'r!
There view dark-issuing from sepulchral sleep,
Rome 'mid her monarch-people reascend,
And o'er earth's prostrate brow her shadowy spear extend.

There, host o'er host that monarch-people hung,
And watch'd in mute and motionless repose
Th' exhausted Gladiator's eyelid close;
No sound was heard that multitude among,
But the low pant that mark'd the lessening breath,
And one last deep-drawn groan &mdash; the agony of death.

Was it in thee, that girt around with flame,
In triumph on the cross the Christian hung,
And when death trembled on his faltering tongue,
With voice exultant hail'd his Saviour's name;
And to the torturer spake, "Be thou forgiv'n,"
Then, gazing up, beheld the veil withdrawn from heav'n?&mdash;

What art thou now? &mdash; A void &mdash; a solitude&mdash;
Save where the hermit, or lone penitent,
Or dark-stol'd brethren at thy altars bent,
With deep-ton'd chant, by echos round renew'd,
The Virgin Mother and her Son adore,
And swell the choral hymn the sainted martyr o'er.&mdash;

Proud Pile! thou stand'st:  but &mdash; all are vanish'd,&mdash;all
Who made the world a gazing theatre,
Th' arena thundering to their war-career:
Dark Ruin o'er their empire spreads her pall,
Low'rs on the seven-crown'd hills in dead repose,
And o'er their buried pomp the dust of ages throws,

But not Oblivion &mdash; Temple, tow'r and dome
Shall sink, the granite column fall on earth:
Ne'er shall the sev'n-crown'd hills know second birth;
But temple, tow'r, and column, are not Rome,
They knew not the foundation of her fame,
No adamantine wall built up her mighty name:

But virtues that exalted human-kind,
But firm resolve that gloriously atchiev'd
The bold emprize that boundless Hope conceiv'd,
But courage casting fear and fate behind,
But wisdom, whose irrevocable word
Subdu'd the awe-struck soul ere Valour girt the sword&mdash;

'Twas Brutus, who when death before him stood,
At Freedom's voice, stern-rising to his task,
Flung from his brow feign'd laughter's idiot mask,
And bade the lictor shed his children's blood:
Thus, at her call, the second Brutus came:
So Cato liv'd, and died &mdash;Thus tow'r'd th' eternal name.&mdash;

Thus Rome beheld on her triumphal day
Earth and her realms in chains attend her car&mdash;
Ambition hurl'd the torch of civil war:
Then tyranny, and sloth, and swift decay.
The Goth, the Hun, the Norman spoiler came,
And envied Rome in flames the echo of her name;&mdash;

Th' eternal name &mdash; and we, the puny race
Of after time, pass on our transient hour
Like shadows in the sun-shine of her pow'r.
We soar on wrecks of her colossal base,
And fathoming its deep foundation stone,
Shout forth, &mdash; "Th' eternal name inhabits Rome alone."&mdash;

But &mdash; who &mdash; on this wide tomb of years of old,
Where History travelling down from age to age,
Shows to the world, as on a solemn stage,
Each change by prophet and by seer foretold,
Descries not thro' the shade their vision casts
A world that ne'er shall change, a day that time outlasts?

Go, Rome, and gather up thy last remains
As in a funeral urn that holds the dead;
Thy guardian hand o'er Trajan's Column spread,
Watch round the base that Antonine sustains:
On Titus' mouldering Arch the Ark recall,
Save Salem's hallow'd spoils &mdash; They bend, they bow, they fall,

They turn to dust &mdash; Behold, how ruthless Time,
Whose slow and silent foot has onward past,
And all beneath him in wide ruin cast,
Now, in his flight, on outstretch'd wing sublime
Sails o'er the wreck of Nero's golden dome,
And rides the tainted blast, and spreads the pest o'er Rome.

Have ye not felt th' infection? &mdash; hill and dale,
Lone cot and crowded walls? &mdash; ye gilt alcoves,
Ye marble palaces, ye cypress groves,
Where Health with crystal fountains cool'd the gale,
Where now your proud possessors?&mdash;dispossess'd:
Chas'd by the tainted wing that bears th' invading pest.

But &mdash; 'mid yon horrors, yon devoted place,
Along whose banks, by turbid torrents fed,
Dark Tyber labours through his yellow bed:
Where the throng'd Ghetto gathers in her race,
And the scorn'd Hebrew under wrath resides,
And want and woe unite, no baleful gale abides.

'Twas thus foredoom'd: &mdash; "O'er all the ends of earth,
Go fugitive, &mdash; go exile in thy shame:
Bow down beneath the burden of thy name.
Yet will I watch o'er thy regenerate birth,
Yet bring thee back, and with parental hand
Spread out my blessings wide, o'er all the promis'd land.

"Scorn'd Hebrew! when thy voice of melody
On Sion's harp floats Siloa's brook along,
And Horeb answers the Hosannah song,
Then to thy birthright as thou passest by,
Inquire of Rome. &mdash; Thy foot has o'er  it trod:
Th' eternal City rests beneath the silent sod."
