Can aught on earth, &mdash; can earth itself withstand
The beating of the iron wings of Time?
War's trophied arch, Fame's brazen shaft sublime,
Shall vanish, like the tossings of the sand
That waver'd on the swol'n and sultry blast,
And o'er the Aegyptian waste in wandering columns past.

Earth, and her empires, and their race decay:
But in the desolation of mankind,
The Patriot, and the Sage, sole left behind,
Land-marks of life, hold undiminish'd sway,
And o'er the wreck of scatter'd nations rise,
Like Pyramids, whose brows eternal reach the skies.

Such thoughts came o'er me in the day's decline,
When I had left below the sultry vale,
And drank the spirit of the mountain gale
That led me o'er the barren Apennine,
Where 'mid the solitude around my way
Lone on the crumbling rocks wide wrecks of cities lay.

Bright shone the dawn, and Fancy had array'd
A brave metropolis that crown'd the main:
But Fancy built a fabric weak and vain,
Close paragon'd with that the eye survey'd,
Where thron'd on bleak Liguria's rocky side,
Bold Genoa's merchant kings spread out her marble pride.

Fair art thou &mdash; Never tale of Araby
Charming the caravan on Syria's plain,
Feign'd brighter city in the eastern main
That rose beneath th' Enchanter's melody,
Than thine, which slowly rear'd by human hand,
Saw on th' eternal rock its firm foundation stand.

Thou  too art fall'n:  in one disastrous hour,
Bow'd &mdash; laid in dust &mdash; avail'd it thee the boast
That Commerce cast his anchor on thy coast,
And wav'd his beacon o'er thy Pharos' tower,
Rob'd every rock with flow'rs, and bade each tide
Bear Stamboul's plunder'd spoils to gem his mountain bride?

I saw the anguish that thy spirit wrung,
I heard thy groan that dwelt on days of fame,
When, like the Lord of Ocean, Doria came,
And every cliff to heav'n its triumph flung,
What time the trident in the Patriot's hand
Brake, as it struck thy rock, the chain that yok'd the land.

Yet, as of old, thy Pharos o'er the wave
Lifts his proud brow:  yet, on his marble throne
Pomp lingers:  yet, on yon recording stone
I read the gift thy sons to Doria gave:
There towers his dome: &mdash; and by his laurel bow'r
The sea still peaceful flows, as aw'd by Doria's power.

Still peaceful flows that sea: &mdash; but &mdash; where the prow,
That bore thee on to victory:  where the sail
That brought thy tribute in on every gale?
Where now the Power who diadem'd thy brow,
Who gave thy sword its edge, thy plough its force,
Thy loom its silken woof, thy helm its boundless course?

Where Freedom? &mdash; crush'd beneath thy despot's throne:
Him, whose base hand the iron gates unclos'd
Where Alps with all her rocks the foe oppos'd:
Who fled 'mid barren crags to lurk unknown,
And trembling on a Briton-guarded wave,
To the fell spoiler's lust unarm'd Italia gave.

Genoa, though now the many-sceptered hand
Whose mailed union earth's base fetter broke,
Bow down thy strength beneath a baser yoke,
Hush not thy groan:  a Power draws near thy land,
A spirit unrepress'd yet walks the world,
And Doria's shade shall rise o'er Freedom's flag unfurl'd.

Tell thou the Statesman, 'tis no lightsome thing
To toss a free-born nation in the scale,
As lust of wealth, and tyranny prevail.
Say, that the column which supports a king,
If Freedom fail its well-pois'd weight to place,
Shall crumble into dust around its shatter'd base.
