I feel it, that the pencil can express
The magic of the scene, its lights and shades,
And wind the rill through rocks and flow'ry glades,
And add a charm to Nature's loveliness,
'Mid brighter skies unbar the gates of morn,
And summer's shadowy eve with softer gleams adorn:

And that we seem to drink the fragrant wind
That stirs the leaf, and hear the streamlet play
That quivers in the brightness of the ray:
But vain these fleeting witcheries of the mind
To that pure breath the blooming bow'rs exhale,
And that translucent stream which winds down Arno's vale.

Athens of Italy!  fair Arno's vale!
Fair Arno!  and the windings of her stream,
Delightful vision of poetic dream:
Birth-place, and throne of Genius, Florence, hail!
Immortal laurel round Lorenzo's brow
Wreath'd by th' exultant Muse who steer'd to Greece his prow!

Tow'rs!  from whose battlements a barbarous age
Frowns o'er the embossed walls of massive stone,
Where a mail'd hand enring'd the Gonfalon,
And fir'd the blazing torch, when civil rage
Saw at its signal flame a patriot band
At Freedom's altar pledge the death-lov'd hand!

Roofs!  dark with imag'ry, where pomp and show,
The masque and revel stole the night away,
When the late jousts had clos'd the summer day:
Ye tapestried galleries!  where pacing slow,
Rob'd heralds usher'd to th' armorial hall
Gay dames and gallant knights at solemn festival:

Ye marble palaces of later time,
That rear'd young Science, when the breathing stone
Glow'd with new life, and nature not its own:
When Brunellesco pois'd his dome sublime,
And Giotto saw his graceful tower arise,
And bold Ghiberti grav'd the gates of Paradise:

And Morn and Eve reclin'd upon the tomb
Where Strength and Grandeur, like twin giants, woke
At daring Arno's unfinish'd stroke:
When Florence saw Minerva's olive bloom,
While Homer's harp at Tuscan banquets rung,
And Plato's Attic grace o'er chaste Politian hung.

What though the rage of mad dissension clos'd
Thy gates against the Bard, whose chord of fire
Flam'd when the hand of Terror struck his lyre:
Yet there the laurell'd Bard of Love repos'd,
And Beauty passing o'er her brow a veil,
Bow'd down her roseate cheek o'er gay Boccacio's tale.

Florence!  thy sons each meed of glory gave:
Thy hand that crown'd the living, guards the dead:
Lo!  Science points her Galileo's bed,
Italia's Genius shades Alfieri's grave,
And lights his torch o'er Buonaroti's tomb,
And form his ashes wakes the fires that Art relume.

"Stranger, approach!  Behold, my statues breathe.
Rome!  though sublime thy Pythian God ascend,
Though o'er his wound thy Gladiator bend,
Through each coil'd snake Laocoon's limbs enwreathe,
And Grace with gliding touch Antinuous mould,
And Strength's gigantic grasp th' Herculean Torso hold:

"Yet &mdash; see &mdash; the visions on thy pictur'd wall,
The tints that bloom'd with life begin to fade,
As age slow passing o'er them casts his shade.
No mortal pencil can the God recall,
Or bring ideal beauty into day,
When uncreated forms with Raffael's hues decay.

"Enough, that Venus here has fix'd her bow'r,
That here the conscious marble seems to glow
And guard with bending arm her breast of snow:
That Raffael reigns with undiminish'd pow'r,
With love irradiates Fornarina's glance,
And lights the Baptist's eye with Faith's prophetic trance."

Sweet Arno!  though the glory of thy prime
With Freedom pass away, yet Peace has blest
Thy vale, and with thy olive shades her rest:
And rooting out low vice and frontless crime,
The hand of Justice that upholds the sword
Weighs in unbiass'd scales the peasant and his lord.

So rest thou in thy peace! &mdash; and &mdash; oh! &mdash; farewell,
Sweet Arno!  and the haunts that round thee lie:
Aerial brow of beauteous Fiesoli!
Where Milton's shade yet seems on earth to dwell:
And ye, dark woods of sainted Vallombrose!
Where o'er his hallow'd harp a flame-wing'd seraph rose.
