What art thou? &mdash; Thou that risest like a dream
From the blue mirror of thy glassy plain?
Lo!  Venice hovering o'er the distant main!
'Mid Gothic tow'rs Palladian temples gleam,
And sable gondolas from side to side
Along the smooth canals like silent shadows glide.

Thus girt around thee like a glory, ray'd
Yon coronet of Isles, that brightly shone
And with new splendor grac'd thy guarded throne:
So their proud strength the world of waters staid,
While not an envious billow reach'd thy shore,
Or whisper of the wind the voice of Ocean bore.

Thus in swift interchange of lights and shades
Shone out thy bold and beauteous imagery,
Broad cupolas, bright turrets tow'ring high,
Deep darkness streaming thro' the long arcades,
Bright on the Gothic dome each brazen steed,
And on th' aerial shaft thy Lion wing'd for speed.

Can I the countless multitude forget
Who in St. Mark's the world's emporium made,
When trick'd like guests at motley masquerade,
Earth's distant denizens, for barter met,
Came out beneath the star that led thy night,
And that full-orbed moon which rob'd thy sea with light?

Can I forget, &mdash; the blaze of day gone by,&mdash;
How by that star, and that bright-orbed moon,
I breath'd along the night's refreshing noon,
And gaz'd in solemn silence of the sky,
Till the loud turret-clock, and convent chime
Recall'd my fleeting soul to unremember'd time?&mdash;

Yet &mdash; nor thy zone of isles, nor that soft breeze
Which waking when the sun deserts the sky
Ripples the dead lagunes that round thee lie,
And fans them into freshness: &mdash; no &mdash; not these,
Silence the loud lamenting on thy shore.
Bow down, Thou Queen of Isles!  thy scepter'd sway is o'er!

Thy lute forgets its fingering:  and the voice
That when the fisher drag'd his net along
Lighten'd his labour with familiar song,
Has ceas'd to cheer the Lido: &mdash; none rejoice:
No more the response tells the list'ning main
Medoro's lay of love, or sweet Erminia's strain.

Time was, that yearly, after glorious war,
When at thy fire the Turkish crescent wan'd,
And thy thron'd state o'er half of Stamboul reign'd,
That thou in triumph on thy Bucentaur,
Didst cast thy ring in the betrothed Sea,
And win and dower thy Bride with gift of sov'reignty.

Then was the triumph of the Brave, and Free,
Accompanying the Bridegroom on his way,
Where the consenting Sea kept holiday:
And all the Isles, one floating pageantry,
Their banner'd pomp and blazonry display'd,
And Ocean seem'd on fire beneath the crimson shade.

But deadly was the splendor of that day
When on the wave thy thousand vessels rode,
Beneath whose banners red Destruction glow'd:
When Gaul's stern Chieftain gathering his array
Planted the tree of Freedom on thy shore,
Whose branch distilling blood spread death the nations o'er.

Thou too must perish.  Yet more glorious far
To fall, in battle full beneath the foe,
Than waste away, self-slav'd, without a blow.
Art thou that Nation which in van of war
Stood single in her strength, and stay'd the world,
When Earth, and all her hosts, their thunders vainly hurl'd?

Nay, mock me not with gorgeous palaces,
Thy Titian's shadows, thy Giorgione's fires:
Far other scenes a Briton's eye requires.
Show me the hand that rais'd thee from the seas:
Pour on my ear the voice which proudly said,
"Thou deep!  here wind thy wave!  Be here thy billow staid!"

Weepst thou mid trophies of the days of yore?
Thy great forefathers' glories seal thy shame:
Entomb yon spoils that from Piraeus came;
Fire, fire the Bucentaur; break, break thy oar;
Clasp round thy neck the yoke that galls the brave,
And mark how Austria's lip derides th' unweapon'd slave.

Go, on the column of thy former state,
And on its shatter'd base in fragments hurl'd,
Inscribe alike thy warning to the world:
That Liberty prevails o'er chance and fate,
That arms, arts, empire, in her noon-day bloom,
But when her sun is set, fade in oblivious gloom.
