GRIM, DINGY, AND SOOTY-DUN.

Saint Martin's had struck one &mdash; Night's feeble bands
Profoundly snor'd at their respective stands:
The mystic Lodge, rul'd by one common soul,
Dos'd o'er the dregs of the expiring bowl:
The niggard churl awhile forgot his hoard,
And punctual Betty rose to keep her word.

Where martyr Charles, astride his brazen steed,
Leers at the place where erst he lost his head,
Three sable youths, of that illustr'rous crew
Who clear the chimney's soot-encumber'd flue,
Closely engag'd in purl and friendly chat,
Round the dim remnants of a bonfire sat:
And, while the dying embers they survey'd,
Thus Grim began, and Dingy answer made.

GRIM.
Dingy, Saint Giles's boys with raptures tell
Your feats in singing, since you sing so well:
Not Sooty-dun himself, if they say true,
Has half so loud, so shrill a pipe as you.

DINGY.
Well have you heard, my equal is not found
From Holborn Corner down to Nibbs's Pound:
And as to Sooty-dun &mdash; believe me, Grim,
Some says I sings more betterer nor him.

SOOTY-DUN.
Dingy, 'tis neither more nor less than spight:
You know where 'twas I cotch'd you t'other night;
Aks Moll Come-dusty &mdash; but, to end this strife,
I'll sweep a chimley with you for your life.

GRIM.
Peace, Sooty-dun, folks now are all asleep;
No chimleys for these next four hours to sweep.

DINGY.
Cotch'd me or not, that doen'st argify;
There's nobody can say that black's my eye.
You knows as well as I, it wasn't Jack
That hid the Gemman's Tatler in the sack;
Yet he was cragg'd for't &mdash; But, shou'd I tell all,
I knows who'd quickly dance at Bilby's ball.
I'd scorn to 'peach&mdash;

GRIM.
&mdash;Why that's my heart o' gold!
Come, Sooty-dun, you're far less wise than bold:
Dingy's a lad o' wax &mdash; such souls as we
About these matters shouldn't disagree.
You, both of you, I know, have bilk'd the law;
So make it up, and let's ha' no more jaw.

SOOTY-DUN.
Tip us your daddle, Dingy &mdash; what I spoke
I only meant, as I may say, in joke:
And, ding my buttons!  sooner I'd be dead
Than hurt a single hair o' Dingy's head.

DINGY.
I only jok'd myself; for, if there's one
In all the world I love, 'tis Sooty-dun.

GRIM.
Well said! &mdash; My eye!  but you were both too hot;
Here's to ye &mdash; Dingy, put about the pot.
Now we are all agreed, let's have a catch;
What say you, Sooty-dun?&mdash;

SOOTY-DUN.
&mdash;A match! &mdash;

DINGY.
&mdash;A match!
And I'll begin.  Sweet to my hungry soul
Is the dear relish of a butter'd roll!
Sweet is the smack of Truman's high-froth'd bub!
Sweet are the scrapings of the treacle-tub!
Sweet are the slumbers in a glass-house stove!
But sweeter far my Moll Come-dusty's love!

SOOTY-DUN.
Soft are the feathers of the jack-daw's back!
Soft is the soot that fills my swelling sack!
Soft is the sack itself, and soft my brush!
Soft is the velvet smooth, and soft the plush!
Soft are the fancies of a lovier's dreams!
But softer far my Bess O'Blear-eye seems!

DINGY.
As in the dust-cart once my Moll did ride,
Her ancle dangled careless o'er the side;
Her tatter'd handkerchief betray'd her breast&mdash;
I saw enough to love, and guess the rest.

SOOTY-DUN.
As late I rambled by the New-road side,
High on a cinder-heap my Bess I 'spy'd:
Her coats, too scanty, offer'd to my view
Charms that wou'd move a Turk, or 'Ebrew Jew.

DINGY.
At the Nag's-head as Moll and I did sit,
The lovely vixen took a jealous fit:
"Dingy," says she, "at Billingsgate I've been;
And there your sweet-heart Ambling Sue, I've seen:
I thought you'd got some brimstone in your eye"&mdash;
Dear Moll, says I, that story's all a lye:
I never, sure as you shall be my wife,
Kept company with her in all my life:
Be you true-hearted, I will constant prove,
And let this Gin and Bitters bind our love!

SOOTY-DUN.
Once at the Magpie as I sat with Bess,
I struggled with the baggage for a kiss:
"Tell me," says she, "how many hours are past
Since when you kiss'd your dear Nan Melton last?
Dear Bet, says I, as sure as hips are hips,
In all my life I never touch'd her lips:
Sam Crapsworth told it, and he told a lye.
She turn'd and smil'd, and was no longer shy;
Unask'd she kindly proffer'd me a kiss,
And t' other noggan soon confirm'd my bliss.

DINGY.
Davy the Nightman lately took a whim,
As if he thought that Moll cou'd fancy him.
"I'll constant be," says she, "if constant can;
I loves but one, and Dingy is the man."

SOOTY-DUN.
To Bess's love Ned Snudge of late laid claim:
She sent him back, though, faster than he came.
"I loves," says she, "and ne'er will love but one;
And who can blame me, when 'tis Sooty-dun?"

DINGY.
Last May-day, as I skipp'd the garland round,
Cheer'd by the merry hurdy-gurdy's sound,
I look'd, methought, with an unusual grace;
For Moll herself had wash'd and chalk'd my face.

SOOTY-DUN.
That happy day I never shall forget:
The jack-ass that I rode did so curvet,
He bray'd for joy &mdash; Say, cou'd the beast do less?
The knots upon his rump were ty'd by Bess.

DINGY.
As in the Mall one day I play'd at taw,
A smart young Ensign of the Guards I saw:
Simp'ring a little at my dress and hue,
He call'd me "Snowball," and a six-pence threw.
Some gin and 'bacca strait I run and bought;
I laid out two-pence, and gave Moll the groat.

SOOTY-DUN.
Coming from Chelsea t' other ev'ning late,
Jem Duffin stopp'd me at the turnpike gate;
But when he knew me nodding on my ass,
"Ha!  Clargyman!" says he, and let me pass.
The money sav'd I've in my pocket got,
And it shall buy my Bess a sup o' hot.

DINGY.
But yesterday, behind a load of sand
Conceal'd in wanton humour, Moll did stand:
I heard a voice that call'd me by name;
I look'd, but cou'dn't tell from whence it came;
And while in dumb surprise I star'd around,
She forc'd a laugh, and by that laugh was found.

SOOTY-DUN.
Last night I stroll'd by Privy-Garden wall,
Where old Peg Meazle keeps the apple-stall;
And as I whistling saunter'd careless by,
A rotten apple hit me in the eye.
I star'd, but who had thrown it cou'd not guess,
'Till her own voice convinc'd me it was Bess.

DINGY.
Tell me this riddle, Sooty-dun, unless
You'll give up any future thoughts of Bess:
What flower is that, whose emblematic name
Proclaims the dreaming School-boy's crime and shame?

SOOTY-DUN.
First tell me this, or else your claim to Moll
Can be but trifling, if it is at all:
What's that which, passing in a puff of wind,
Goes off like smoak, but leaves no soot behind?

GRIM.
Cease, cease my Worthies &mdash; Lo, the day is broke!
And see the chimley tops begin to smoak!
Here's to ye Lads &mdash; come, box the mug about.

DINGY.
Ding my old buckles!  Grim, you've drank it out.
I thought you had some scheme in that same catch;
Another time I'll keep a better watch.

The Heroes rose, and each resum'd his sack,
And hung his brush and shovel at his back:
Ambition fir'd each dauntless breast to soar
Through paths untry'd, new regions to explore,
And boldly mount to heights unknown before.
"The world was all before them where to chuse;"
So on they shuffled in their slip-shod shoes.
