Thrice lucky Bard!  whose energy and ease
The Public's pamper'd appetite can please,
Who "twelfth edition" dost exult to hear,
Unwonted music to a poet's ear!
While thy gay satire elegantly sports
With Chinese gardens, and with Chinese courts;
While folly's full-ear'd crop thy hand obtains,
Accept my humble gleanings of the plains.

Where China's London boasts her verdant-Kew,
A fair Elysium, from her walls in view;
Luxurious scene!  where wealth and whim preside,
Obsequious handmaids of imperial pride:
In soft pavilion, on soft sopha laid,
Lull'd by soft murmurs of a soft cascade,
Kien-long the great, the valiant, and the wise,
Sweet slumber sought, but slumber shun'd his eyes:
He frown'd, and spoke; the lords in waiting round,
Knock'd their broad foreheads nine times on the ground.&mdash;
Much on sad subjects that disturb'd his reign;
How bold Ko-taus their rude memorials brought,
How wanton bards their base invectives wrought,
Where like Ye-vang's, his name in idle rhymes,
Would pass dishonour'd down to distant times:
How these full oft his anxious bosom griev'd,
And made his gardens, once so fair to view,
Seem gloomy valleys sacred to Manchew.

He ceas'd.  The favourite Mandarin reply'd,
(A faithful flatterer ever at his side:)
Imperial Sire you err, your praise resounds,
From Tibet's mountains to Korea's bounds;
Speak, and your boroughs shall addresses send,
And all your glad Che-foos before you bend.&mdash;
Your duteous slave Yan-lin has prov'd for you,
That one true patriot China never knew;
Of all the bawling, all the scribbling tribe,
Each has his price, if you vouchsafe to bribe.&mdash;
Then from your thought chace cares of state away,
Amuse with arts and sciences the day,
Gay Kau-se-kee your panegyrick sings,
And grave Li-song new plans of gardens brings;
Where you may wander through inchanted scenes,
Vulcano's dire, scorch'd rocks, and blasted greens:
Or seek dim grottos, in whose solemn shade
Pale star-crown'd kings, on ivory couches laid,
Fair tablets hold, and mystic lore engrav'd
Of arts, by which their subjects they enslav'd:
Or trace steep paths, whose zig-zag course ascends,
By dreary dens of dragons and of fiends;
Where howls of hungry wolves the ear surprize,
Mix'd with deep groans, and tortur'd wretches cries:
Or view in lunar-halls, fictitious night,
Or tread saloons with gold and jewels bright,
Where Lapqua's tints each vacant pannel stain,
With the fam'd triumphs of your glorious reign;
There Vang's lewd mob from your third reg'ment flies,
The guards pursue, the rebel falls, and dies:
There your tribunals duteously agree,
To prove that twenty must be less than three.
There Hou and Cho-nan-fo prostration make,
And kneeling from your hand their pardon take.&mdash;
These works superb to execute we haste,
Unmatch'd examples of imperial taste.
Till then in blooming Yven's jasmin bow'rs,
With lords and ladies while away your hours:
Or palaces design, or pictures move,
Or wond'rous pow'rs of clocks and windmills prove;
Or all your curious cabinets review,
With trinkets fraught of beauteous shape and hue;
There Pingchou's boxes meet your ravish'd eyes,
There Vrangti's watches of minutest size.
These rival artists, for your favour try,
But not with you in excellence they vye;
For your own hand with skill beyond compare,
Turn'd those gold buttons you delight to wear.
They for their works may paltry pensions claim,
But you by yours acquire immortal fame.

KIEN-LONG.
'Tis true, my lord, the envied praise is mine,
In works of taste, first connoisseur to shine:
But though Virtu delight the mind at ease,
Say, midst rude cares and clamours can it please?

MANDARIN.
Give to the winds all care, and to disdain
All clamours of the base plebeian train;
Let not that scum of earth your anger move:
Your nobler slaves in loyalty improve;
Witness the temple rear'd by Kwo shu's hands,
Where like another Fo your image stands;
While round your brow the flashing glories blaze,
While from the altar musick sounds your praise,
A thousand votaries there, in vestments gay,
At noon and eve, spontaneous homage pay.&mdash;
Give to the winds all care, and to disdain
All clamours of the base plebeian train;
Should these, in ought, to thwart your sacred will,
Obstruct your slaves, while they your wish fulfill;
By gifts and flatteries all shall be subdu'd,
Those win the stubborn, these the weak delude:
Tell them, how you their happiness design,
Preserve their cattle, and adjust their coin;
Then as mount Tay, your throne shall fix'd remain,
And the Kin-lin and Fou-chang bless your reign.
But now smile on your slave, whose thoughts devise
Scenes of new pomp to charm your ears and eyes:
At morrow's dawn, on Hoquan's silver tide,
Ten thousand Junks in naval triumph ride;
All hung with gaudy flags from stern to bow,
Sublime they float, a glittering raree show!
A mimick fight ensues, the mountains round,
Return their thund'ring guns' tremendous sound;
Those thund'ring guns that to your realms give law,
And make surrounding nations stand in awe;
Those thund'ring guns, that taught by Vrangti's skill,
Have learn'd with four-fold energy to kill!

He ceas'd. &mdash; In raptures at the expected scene
Th' imperial bosom banish'd all chagrin.
Gave to the winds all care, and to disdain
All clamours of the base plebeian train.
And now the sun's broad orb descending gay
On proud Pekin's pagodas pour'd its ray;
And night sweet slumber brought to overwhelm
The drowsy monarch, and his drowsy realm.
