Indulge me yet awhile: &mdash; with fond delay
Indulge me yet.  Too swiftly speeds the hour
When I must leave, though loth, this citron bow'r,
Yon rocks, yon isles, that Syren-haunted bay,
Green Chiaia's groves, Vesuvio's crest of light,
And Pausilippo's gloom, that makes the noon-day, night.

What though, ere-long, my lip with filial kiss
Will press the cliff that guards my native shore,
Though on my mother earth my knee adore
The Pow'r, the Guardian of domestic bliss,
Who from the perils of the land and main,
May in my peaceful home repose my brow again:

And though that peaceful home more lov'd appear
Because its threshold has so long been strange,
Nor though I would one household smile exchange
For all that Italy holds justly dear,
Yet, Albion!  when thy sullen mists sweep by,
I must regret yon sun that gilds th' Ausonian sky.

The dream will linger on the orb of light
Which upward draws the soft ethereal haze,
That the fierce burning of its beam allays,
And casts a magic colour on the sight:
And tempering, while it beautifies the scene,
Like a transparent veil, floats heav'n and earth between.

The dream will linger on the blest champain,
From hill to hill where groves of olive grew,
O'er which the grape her purple clusters threw;
While all beneath Earth wav'd with billowy grain,
And all around the golden orange glow'd,
And bow'rs along whose bloom the sea in shadow flow'd.

Fair was the dawn that led me on my way,
A Nymph, the star of Morn, before me flew,
And shook from her loose hair a show'r of dew:
The birds, whose melody awakes the day,
Trill'd their glad song in every bush and bow'r,
And fragrance round me breath'd from each unfolding flow'r.

There, as I pac'd along the winding bay,
I heard a whisper from each rock and cave,
That fann'd with gentle breath the sunny wave,
The while the balance that on ocean lay
Levell'd the waves throughout their tideless sweep,
And on the water fell like an untroubled sleep.

O man!  if reckless of thy pilgrimage,
If unrememb'ring that each transient hour
Bears on its stretch of wing a Guardian Pow'r,
The Angel of thy birth, thy youth, thy age,
Who graves each deed, and lifts it borne on high,
Before the awful throne that holds Eternity:

If thou at will might fix thy seat below,
A resting place beneath the cope of heav'n,
A paradise on earth to mortals giv'n,
Round thee her song Parthenope should throw,
And lulling to oblivion on her breast
Warble the Syren song that lays the soul to rest.

THE SYREN'S SONG.
"Rest, Wanderer, rest!  all nature sleeps:
'Tis noon-tide's slumberous hour:
O'er the smooth rock no lizard creeps,
No serpent stirs the bow'r,
And, curtain'd in the blushing rose,
The bees their wearied wings repose.

"The bird, at rest, forgets her song,
No cloud through heaven's blue zone
Strays while the noon-sun moves along,
And walks in light alone:
A quiet stills the world of waves,
And sea-nymphs sleep in coral caves.

"Then lay thee on my lap to rest,
While lazy suns wheel by,
There dream of her thou fanciest best,
And wake, and find her nigh;
And I will lead thee to a grove
Where hangs a lute attun'd to Love.

"That lute by Love to me was lent,
Sweet notes, and sad, there dwell;
Sweet as his voice that wins assent,
Sad as his breath'd farewell:
Yet &mdash; in its sadness, moving more
Than all that won thy smile before."

The Syren ceases:  yet, sure to wound,
'Mid jasmine arbors on Certosa's height,
Allures thee, when the sun's half-hidden light,
That the broad bay and isles in flame had bound,
From the smooth sea-line fades in purple gleam,
And gilds on Ischia's brow the clouds that watch his beam.

There, on the night-wind, as it swells and falls,
Bids, melted down by distance, from below,
One voice, from thousands and ten thousands, flow,
And die away at peaceful intervals,
And mingle with the murmur of the main,
Till on thy slumbrous lid her witchery hangs again.

Slumberer!  awake.  The scenes that round thee close
Are dark with horror.  There th' avenging wave
Unpeoples Baia:  from yon haunted grave
O'er her pale murderer Agrippina rose:
Nightly a curse maternal rends the air,
And Furies round that tomb erect their viper hair.

Lo!  Caprea &mdash; there, the monster's philter'd bowl
Was dregg'd with gore &mdash; and lo!  in after time
Yon palace darken'd with Joanna's crime:
There Death upheld his unrelenting scroll,
When Conrad stern in bloom and beauty stood,
And from the scaffold cast his gauntlet, gaged for blood.

Naples!  awake!  each stone that props thy sleep,
Burst from the riven womb of central fire.
Before thee, on Vesuvio's blazing pyre
Death swells the sea of flame that burst the steep,
And silencing a nation's voice of mirth,
O'er Herculaneum roll'd, and swept her race from earth.

Round thee, thy earth, thy sea, thy every isle
One element of fire.  On yonder brow
The blazing flood that drank the wave below
Tower'd in its rage o'er Epomeo's pile.
The blast sulphureous from Argnano flows,
And green Astroni's woods the crater's depth enclose.

Lo!  shaking off the dust that veil'd her tombs,
The shroud wherein her buried glory lay,
Pompeia, looking on the light of day,
'Mid living towns her birth-right reassumes,
And wondering why her sons in exile roam,
Lifts her maternal voice, and calls the wanderer home.

"Return!  why stay you?  Throng the festive gate:
For you these vaults reserve their hoarded wine:
Haste to yon forum:  heap with gifts this shrine:
Th' impatient theatres your press await:
The track your wheel has worn, the car shall greet;
Tread where each stone retains the pressure of your feet.

"Come." &mdash; but no voice yields response &mdash; none return.
Of all that living world the sole remain,
A captive's bone half-calcin'd with its chain,
The nameless dust its sepulchral urn;
And, as the lava harden'd on its rest,
That unrelenting mould which clasp'd the female breast.

How sweet is silence, when from worldly din
Freed Fancy shapes her own fair images,
And peoples all the solitude it sees
With the conceptions of the soul within,
Joy's youthful choir, or visions high and holy,
Or soft and soothing sounds of patient melancholy.

Not such the silence that inhabits here,
Not such the solitude around me spread:
This silence, is the silence of the dead;
This solitude but wakes a bitter tear,
A tear that falling on a nation's tomb
Deepens the mournful thoughts of man's uncertain doom.

The sun, methinks, has o'er me clos'd his beam,
The last low sigh, the fluttering pulse has ceas'd,
From joy, from woe, from hope, from fear releas'd,
I look on life as a departed dream,
And that already I have reach'd the bourn
Whence foot of mortal man shall never more return.

Pass on &mdash; What scenes of wonder flash on sight?
Where yon gay vineyards root their trained rows
In the thin soil, the breeze that freshly blows
Tosses in air the ashes' mantle light,
And porticoes and porches re-appear,
And halls for banquet deck'd their painted column rear.

What though no roof the radiant courts enclose,
Fantastic figures beaming from below
Along the rich Mosaic brightly glow:
All that from Raffael's fairy pencil flows
In graceful Arabesque, the walls adorn,
Wing'd nymphs that float in air, and wind the wreathed horn.

Now a wing'd Zephyr beckons to the sail,
And now, in all the brightness of her smile
A goddess woos thee to her blissful isle.
Here fruits bloom forth, there flow'rs that fear the gale
Drop from their opening bells bright pearls below,
Where sea-things wave their fins, and gambol to and fro.

Wanderer!  delay not. &mdash; Like a sun-built cloud
That travels in the swiftness of its ray,
Gleams on the sight, and swiftly glides away:
So these gay forms, now casting off their shroud,
All vanish on the evanescent air
With all their rainbow tints, &mdash; as fugitive, &mdash; as fair.
