High on a mountain's stately brow
The sanguine-streaming banner rear;
Wave the stretch'd hand to realms below;
Loud swell the voice, that all may hear;
And through the gates of Princes ride
In close array and martial pride.
My Chiefs enroll'd to vengeance I command,
And, glorying in my might, in arms my Warriors stand.

Hear you the mountain-hights along
The thund'ring sound of nations spread,
Embattled nations great and strong,
And Monarchs shouting at their head!
'Midst them the God of Armies stands,
To battle marshalling their bands.
They come, the weapons of his wrath, from far,
From Heaven's remotest ends, to waste the land with war.

It comes &mdash; the air with howlings rend&mdash;
The day of God's terrific pow'r:
Vengeance comes with it, prompt t' attend
Th' Almighty's desolating hour.
Nerveless each hand shall drop the spear,
Each heart of man shall melt with fear;
Each look on each aghast, whilst wild dismay
Their faces, pale as flames of livid fire, betray.

It comes, relentless in its course,
Wrath arms th' Almighty's vengeful hand;
Fury rolls on with fiery force,
And sweeps the impious from the land.
No Stars shall glitter o'er the sky,
No Constellations flame on high;
The sick'ning Sun shall veil his orient beams,
Nor the Moon cause her light to pour its silver streams.

My wrath the world, the impious world,
Shall feel; my terrors the unjust:
From her high seat shall Pride be hurl'd,
And fierce Oppression sink in dust.
The ruthless Sword through all the land
Shall execute my dread command;
A Man more precious will I make than Gold,
Than all the flaming ore the veins of Ophir hold.

The Heav'ns shall tremble at my frown,
When all its fires my wrath awakes;
From its firm base the Earth be thrown,
Its pillars as th' Almighty shakes.
As a chafed Roe by hounds embost,
As wand'ring Flocks, their Shepherd lost,
The reliques of the Sword in wild despair
Fly tow'rds their native lands, to gain a shelter there.

In vain:  the Spear arrests their flight:
Dispers'd, an easy prey they fall:
Dare they the phalanx form for fight?
The greedy sword devours them all.
Their bleeding infants' helpless age
Shall feel th' unsparing Victor's rage;
Their houses to the Spoiler yield the prey,
And ruffian force shall drag their shrieking wives away.

Against them, lo!  the Medes I train;
Hosts, for whom Silver has no charms;
Who look on Gold with stern disdain;
Warriors, that joy in glitt'ring arms.
Dreadful their bows of steel from far
Shall pierce the bleeding front of war;
And, 'midst the carnage of the captur'd town,
Unpitying shall they dash Youth's opening beauty down.

And Babylon, th' Assyrian's pride,
That rears sublime her gorgeous brow,
Imperial Queen of nations wide,
In dust her rampired hight shall bow;
Shall like the towns of Siddim lie
Waste with sulphureous flames from high;
And o'er her silent streets and desert plain
Shall Desolation hold her sad and dreary reign.

No more th' Arabian, as of old,
Shall stretch his white tents o'er the mead;
Shepherd no more his flocks unfold,
And down the verdant pasture lead:
The Savage of the desert there
Conceal'd shall make his dreadful lair;
In ruin'd walls shall lodge the birds of night,
And monsters howling wild the wasted streets affright;

Beneath rich roofs emboss'd with gold
The daughters of the Ostrich dwell;
Satyrs their bestial revels hold;
Wolf howl to Wolf with hideous yell;
And Dragons hiss those bow'rs among,
That echoed once with festive song.&mdash;
It comes, to vengeance doom'd, her fatal day;
The destin'd hours advance, nor will their march delay.
