Hence, thou torturing fiend, Despair,
That fill'st my soul with wild dismay,
And to the lonely haunts repair,
Where whilom thou hast used to stray:
And there, what time the day sinks in the west,
And night her mantle o'er the landscape throws,
Unseen glide through the darksome shades depress'd;
Thy mournful plaints, for all thy sum of woes,
Floating upon the bosom of the gale,
That softly sighs along the murmuring vale.

For ah!  full many a pensive hour
Have thy dark clouds o'ercast my mind,
And whilst was felt thy stern, oppressive power,
What bless'd resource could fancy find,
Shunning each path where sported young Delight?
What sorrows keen recoil'd with memory's aid,
Nor rose one brightening prospect on the sight,
That erst gay hope with vivid tints portray'd:
Hence, then, away; nor more my peace molest,
But, Friendship, come, in all thy charms confess'd!

Methought Favonius caught the prayer
And bore it on his balmy wing
To where the laughing lovers repair,
And gaily pass the jocund spring;
There, blissful as the moments glided by,
Friendship, her flight propitious smiling sped
Adown yon brilliant bow that decks the sky,
With lambent glories beaming round her head:
And where she moved she chased away despair,
Whilst rays of comfort bless'd the child of care.

Hence Hope, elate with future joy,
Roved her flowery paths among;
And Bliss, unconscious of alloy,
Accompanied her tuneful song
With the soft lyre, where rose her bless'd alcove;
The Naiads, leaning o'er their trickling urns,
Round Stour's fair margin taught the sounds to rove,
And Echo, answering to the sweet returns,
Awaken'd Innocence with modest air,
To wreath her flowers, and strew them round the fair.

Hail!  Friendship, then, thou source divine,
Whence copious streams of pleasure flow,
Inspiring every heart benign
With all thy honest warmth to glow:
Not vain thy power; for where extends thy sway
Unsullied honour o'er thy heart presides;
Vice from thy presence shrinks abash'd away,
And white robed Virtue all thy actions guides;
Her beaming sceptre casts thy holy spell;
And in the circle all the moral graces dwell.

Oh!  bless'd irradiation mild,
To cheer us on our weary way,
Whether through gloomy deserts wild,
Or vales which fancy paints, we stray;
For where each brilliant pointed beam extends,
The' effects of vice no more disturb the mind
Illumined; but she cheerly onward bends
With rapture, permanent as great, to find
At thy pure crystal fount without control,
"The feast of reason and the flow of soul."

Scowling indignant round the scene,
Her devious tracks full fraught with woe,
Misfortune moves with pallid mien,
Around her venom'd shafts to throw;
And where she moves will Friendship eager press,
With pity's tear soft trembling in her eye,
To sooth the ruffling gales of grief, and bless
The darkening gloom with rays of constancy;
Kindly the lengthen'd roll of ills to share;
At last, to steal the sting from heart-corroding care.

So when the tempest-driven car
Old Winter mounts with rapid pace
Around to spread destructive war
O'er nature's animated space;
Haply, soft peering midst some snow fringed vale,
An evergreen may charm the wanderer's eye,
That braves the fury of the passing gale,
Till on its bloom the Summer's breath shall sigh;
Waving its green leaves in the sunshine hour,
That wither'd not, assail'd by Winter's ruthless power.
