Not in wild dream of fancy, Bard divine!
I bring this laurel branch, that wav'd aloof,
Sweeping the sunbeam from thy funeral roof:
But &mdash; as a votary at the Delphic shrine,
Hid from the world in this sepulchral gloom,
I wreathe th' unfading leaf, and wind it round thy tomb.

Thy tomb!  How void:  how wildly desolate!
In this neglected spot no urn remains,
No relic that a trace of thee retains:
Thee, whose bold song could worlds unseen create,
And to the shadowy forms of Fancy gave
Life and perpetual youth, that ne'er shall know the grave.

But &mdash; though thy urn repose no longer here,
Though rest the secret of thy sleep untold,
Thou yet o'er Nature shalt the sceptre hold;
Yet with the sweep of Pity and of Fear
Strike on the heart as a responsive lyre,
Shake all its sounding strings, and fill with all thy fire.

Smit with the love of song, I here retrace
Thy haunts, and on the cliff that crowns the grot,
As on the Muse's consecrated spot,
'Mid the bright realm yon vine-wreath'd heights embrace,
Hang o'er each view that tranc'd thy youthful sight,
And draw from each fair scene a dream of new delight.

Beneath yon rock with gadding flow'rs o'erhung,
The pastoral Muse to thee her reed-pipe gave,
And by the gushing fount, in grot and cave,
Taught thee each note that leads her choir along:&mdash;
Pan leapt exultant from meridian sleep,
And Nymphs that haunt the cliff rush'd giddy down the steep.

Anon &mdash; a deeper sound:  it shook the wreath
That, by fair Egle's wily finger bound,
Enchain'd Silenus, stretch'd in sleep profound:
It told how Nature heav'd the strife beneath,
When Night and Chaos, in primeval birth,
Fled from the sun's new beam that rob'd with flow'rs the earth.

But when thy lip held dalliance with the reed,
Or, silencing the rude Ascrean strain,
Taught how the golden harvest glads the plain,
Scenes all unwonted to the shepherd's weed,
In awful vision past before thy sight,
Beneath th' o'ershadowing veil that dimm'd their wondrous light.

While round thee, flaming with idolatry,
Rose images of Gods, who thron'd above,
Pledg'd nectar from the Hebe cup of Jove,
While thro' the air wing'd Zephyrs wanton'd by,
And a coy Sea-nymph, floating on the main,
Hung o'er the charmed wave to hear a Syren's strain:

And every fount, green hill, and cave enshrin'd
A guardian pow'r, and round their votive fane,
Fawns, and fleet Dryads, and light Oread train,
Tost in wild dance their tresses on the wind,
And Iris, on her sun-built arch aloof,
Drew from light's sever'd rays her many-colour'd woof:

Thou in yon orbs that wheel in living flame,
In all that wing the air, or range the earth,
Or heave the sea with multitude of birth,
One unseen Godhead hail'd'st, in all the same,
One in each change, who made and moves the whole,
One, the unmade, unmov'd, the universal soul.

Then, &mdash; through thy vision gleam'd celestial fire,
And from a wing that wav'd in light, a ray
Fell on the darkness that on Nature lay,
And chas'd the pastoral Muse, and all her choir,
While thy bold breathing from her reed-pipe drew
Notes of a higher strain than Pan or Sylvan knew.

The shaggy satyr to his wood retir'd:
And &mdash; hark &mdash; a sound as of a Hebrew song
Seem'd on thy strain its echo to prolong:
Isaiah's breath the shepherd's reed inspir'd,
When the Cumean Maid's prophetic rhyme
Glanc'd on the unborn age, and rent the veil of Time.&mdash;

Then from the seven-crown'd hills a voice uprose,
A voice that preluding a nation's fame,
Bad thee in verse build up the Roman name.
The Latian muse th' Homeric clarion chose,
And to the list'ning world her war-note blew,
As Rome in all her pomp burst on thy ravish'd view.

All that Evander to his guest disclos'd,
When lowing herds along the Forum stray'd,
All that the Godhead on his shield display'd,
When on its orb Rome's fame and fate repos'd,
And all that peopled the Elysian plain
When age on age swept by, and hail'd th' Augustan reign&mdash;

Cease! &mdash; cease the strain!  a long &mdash; a last &mdash; adieu!
Farewell, thou silent cave, thou whispering shade,
Thou dark-arch'd grot, thou sun-illumin'd glade;
Scenes!  in bright vision floating on my view!
And thou, whose spirit glances thro' the cell,
Now as my lingering sigh reluctant breathes &mdash; "Farewell!"&mdash;
