The wight who quits the scenes of rural life,
And suffers wild his wishes to expand,
Bids heart-felt bliss give way to baneful strife,
Keen disappointment and her joyless band:
No longer then, the grateful gales that fann'd
His summer's evening walk, he hears to sigh,
But feels the storm in wild ambition's land
Beat on his brow, and ev'ry hope annoy,
Expel divine content and soul-expanding joy.

Tho' to aspire is laudable and just,
When the pursuit is innocent and pure,
Yet expectation we must never trust
To rove at large, whatever be the lure,
But keep her bound in reason's curb secure:
For all is casual and vain below;
Of fortune's smiles a moment we're not sure:
Some arm unseen oft aims a fatal blow,
And gives self-promis'd joy, in sad exchange, for woe.

Hope is the balm of life:  she cheers the soul,
And decks with smiling flowers each future view;
Yet to indulge her flights beyond control,
Chagrin and discontentment oft ensue;
Her tow'ring pinions to yon concave blue,
Shou'd be directed by Religion's hand;
Thence patience to obtain, and wisdom true,
And fortitude, and temper to withstand
Neglect, contempt and woe, and envy's treach'rous brand.

In bloom of youth, before experience lights,
With her sagacious ray, the ardent mind,
A thousand gorgeous, visionary sights
Awake our wishes, spread them unconfin'd;
Nor does young reason their excursions bind:
We erring hope what ages cannot do,
And promise to ourselves long life to find,
O'erlook the cheerless vale of age and woe,
And suffer wide and wild our vain desires to go.

Then like the courser, pawing to be gone,
That thinks he scours along the distant plain,
Eager of fame, to proud ambition prone,
We grasp at things we never can attain;
Our fancies rash, erroneous and vain,
Forget that prudence is the way to climb,
That worth and caution are the means to gain,
That acquisition is the work of time,
That labor, join'd with truth, conducts to heights sublime.

From tardy springs the richest crops arise,
Black Eurus blows his blasting breath in vain,
To milder breezes and to kinder skies,
The tender germins trust their embryon gain:
Hence let the sons of haste a lesson gain,
And seize the fit occasion to aspire,
Lest disappointment's peace-corroding bane,
With drooping languour chill their bosoms fire,
And weep their future days in self-reproach and ire.

O frail ambition!  how thy restless rage
Distorts the bosom with its boist'rous power.
Thy dire effects we mark in ev'ry age,
And see thee yet infest the court and bower!
Thy selfish jaws each social bond devour;
Thy foreign aims, extravagant and wild,
Divide us from ourselves, and give each hour
Which once with pleasing satisfaction smil'd,
To languishing suspense, by fear and hope turmoil'd.

Thy false appearance holds to mortal eyes,
Dimm'd with the splendor of thy mien elate,
A fancy'd scene of visionary joys,
That covers with a veil thy real state.
But those can best proclaim what cares await
Thy bloated dignity, who thee have known,
Who sad beneath thy canopy have sate,
And even trembled on the guarded throne,
Anxious with jealous dread, afraid to trust their own.

Hear Wolsey's last remark, when feeble age
And regal frowns had dampt his swelling pride,
Heart it, Ambition!  and relax thy rage,
Nor longer seek for grandeur's dangerous tide,
Where mortals roam, of compass madly void!
Hear it, with awe; forsake the vain pursuit,
And seek the scenes where health and joy reside,
Where balmy gales the drooping Soul recruit,
And thro' the tranquil bosom virtuous raptures shoot.

To distant things our labors we devote,
Unconscious of the rocks that lie between,
And if kind fortune shou'd our aim promote,
And lead us to the goal so distant seen,
Ev'n there some prospect wakes our wishes keen;
A fresh horizon rises to the sight,
And lures the eye with landscapes sweet and green;
We instant spring to seize the new delight,
But vacant of the means, descend in sorrow's night.

Hence the misanthrope of soul austere,
Who, weary of the world, to caves retires,
And views humanity with eye severe,
While fixt disgust his gloomy breast inspires.
Hence oft the frantic wight whom madness fires;
And many a wretch who causeless makes his moan,
Who, dark of what this simple state requires,
Groped for bliss where bliss was never known,
Resting his airy schemes upon the world alone.

A pair there liv'd in Deva's flowery vale,
Fed by the hand of providential care,
Content and love they sung to ev'ry gale,
Each eve and morn they greeted with a prayer:
The simplest diet was their daily fare;
Their liquor what the lucid rill supply'd:
Riches they minded not, nor pompous glare,
But clad in homespun woof by nature dy'd,
They went to church or hall, or rov'd the mountain's side.

A hut they had amidst a garden plac'd,
Encircled all by pear and apple trees,
An ivy green its mould'ring walls embrac'd,
And constant quiver'd with the sighing breeze;
Humming around, a busy clan of bees
Supply'd the pair with honey's balmy store;
Them fill'd with joy th' industrious peasant sees,
And from their labor learns instructive lore,
Recounts their wisdom oft and wond'rous order o'er.

Two fruitful meadows were his whole estate;
The same his ancestors had long enjoy'd;
Nor wish'd he more.  Contented with his fate,
He till'd his acres, and he lov'd his bride.
When morning spread her orient lustre wide,
Awaken'd by the lark's inspiring lay,
He joyous rose, and plain good-morrow cry'd
To all he chanc'd to meet upon the way;
And health and cheerful song beguil'd the tedious day.

Nor less at evening, when around the fire,
Half-leaning on his mate, exchanging love,
Did the gay Goddess of delight inspire
His genial temper.  Gentle as the dove,
The truest-loving bird of all the grove,
And jocund as the soaring lark was he,
Nor cou'd a slight offence his anger move,
Or stop the current of his native glee,
Yet steady was the wight and full of modesty.

To him the world's transactions were unknown,
The annals of his vill were all he knew;
He minded not what monarch fill'd the throne,
Or who the fatal fire of faction blew.
Yet did he love to talk of Britons true,
Of Rights and Freedom which he knew by name,
Enjoy'd, yet understood not; and wou'd rue
The fate of those to whom misfortune came;
And what was wrong and vile wou'd confidently blame.

Fame on his  tranquil ear had no effect;
He saw no pomp his wishes to excite,
Nor did he feel the anguish of neglect,
Or hear false praise her flatt'ring tale indite.
Self-approbation was his chief delight,
And love of neighbours good, whose morals sound
And simple manners he accounted bright:
Nor did his soul with sophistry abound;
His learning's total stock in scripture-lore he found.

Nor did declining years his breast dismay,
Or pour the chill of languor on his mind;
A cheerful heart and "conscience ever gay,"
In age's wither'd vale delight can find.
Nor was his converse aught to spleen inclin'd,
But narrative and full of former things,
Of changes wrought by water, storm, and wind;
And oft some adage apposite he brings
T' elucidate his tale, or scrap of ballad sings.

Thus liv'd in calm content this honest pair,
Unmindful of the stealing lapse of time:
Tho' age decays their cheeks, the slow impair
They scarce distinguish from their blooming prime
Such power has love its object to sublime.
One child they had to cheer their hoary years,
Whom to preserve from shame and sinful crime,
To heaven ascend their warm and frequent prayers,
And in his future weal concentred all their cares.

The virtuous precept and monition pure
Oft fell persuasive from the harmless sire,
To warn the wight from vice's fatal lure,
Whose specious snares enclose a dang'rous mire.
Simple and plain he order'd his attire,
Impress'd the weight of prudence on his mind,
Bad him beyond his fortune ne'er aspire,
But what his Father's wishes had confin'd,
Permit to bound his own, and be to God resign'd.

Ardentius heard him with benign regard;
And while youth's ripening roses, blooming fair,
Blush'd on his dimpled cheek, a full reward
Of all his Father's tenderness and care
His conduct promis'd.  Big with talents rare,
Of genius fertile, and of fancy warm,
He strove each mental ornament to share,
Before him knowledge spread her pleasing charm;
And many an antic scheme his playful thought did form.

Oft on a mountain he wou'd sit sublime,
And view the vales with various beauty fair,
Inhale the sweetness of the vernal prime,
And taste the freshness of the morning air;
Observe Aurora mount her golden car,
And gild the fleecy clouds with rosy light,
Now drawn with fulgence each diminish'd star,
Now light the dew on Aspen twinkling bright;
Or smit with wonder, view, the grandeur of the night.

Sometimes bewilder'd in a mazy wood,
He'd listen to the cascades thund'ring fall,
Survey the eddies of the foaming flood,
And rocks stupendous which the eye appal;
Or hearken to the raven's hideous call,
Or music of the birds; or stand inspir'd,
Viewing the ruins of some gothic wall,
Where superstition's children once retir'd,
Involv'd in monkish mist, with bigot fury fir'd.

Charm'd with the soft delight that nature lends,
A garden fair he form'd in rural taste;
Beside its walks a winding water wends,
Whose fragrant banks the fairest flowerets grac'd.
Amid its groves, where ivies green embrac'd
The arching trees and honey-suckles twin'd,
The chair for sweet society he plac'd,
Where Amarillis oft his musings join'd,
And trac'd with tender thought, the beauties of his mind.

Thus pure, thus happy liv'd the gentle swain,
Till sumptuous objects roused wild desire,
Led him to loathe his native fair domain,
And follow expectation's meteorous fire.
Ambition, dress'd in gorgeous attire,
Bids him awake &mdash; on tow'ring pinions fly&mdash;
Points to the apex of her pompous spire,
Then paints illusions fair before his eye,
And fires his eager soul with dreams of power and joy.

Fame too invites him to her bright abode,
Fills him with charms of soul-deceiving praise,
Bids him attempt her fiend-infested road,
To her high throne his wild ideas raise,
And all th' allurements of her reign displays.
Enrapt, he listens to the Syren's wiles,
Surveys her eminence with ravish'd gaze,
And weens not, that beneath her specious smiles
A thousand thorns are lodg'd, a thousand arduous toils.

Now farewell ev'ry genuine joy of life,
Adieu each scene that pleas'd his infant soul;
Hope, fear, ambition, with unsocial strife,
The alter'd regions of his breast control.
No more he tastes of love's nectareous bowl,
Or communes rapt with Amarillis fair;
Far other beauties in his prospect roll,
And bloom the objects of his bosom's care,
Whom wealth and birth adorn, and grandeur's pompous glare.

No more he gazes with enrapt survey,
On nature's charms; or with sublime surprise,
Sees the white ridges of the surging sea,
In undulation horrible arise,
And with their billows seem to beat the skies:
With blank, unmeaning face he looks around,
Dead to the bosom's pure primeval joys.
With aims extravagant his thoughts abound,
Which wrap his absent soul in reverie profound.

The pleasant groves and vistas he had plann'd
Amid his garden, haunts of sweet delight,
By odors scented and by zephyrs fann'd,
And deck'd with ev'ry grace to please the sight,
Now bloom neglected by the tasteless wight;
Weeds baneful spring and smother ev'ry flower,
And with offensiveness the Dryads fright,
Obstruct the entrance of each rosy bower,
Till wilderness again asserts her dreary power.

Thus when the soul is from herself estranged,
And by delusive objects led aside,
What us'd to please to dreariness is chang'd,
And of its former beauties left devoid.
'Tis not in things themselves that charms abide,
Fancy full oft supplies the finish'd grace,
Deems that majestic which was born of pride,
Sees charms resistless in an Aethiop's face,
And can th' imagin'd source with raptur'd frenzy trace.

'Tis thine, blest power!  imagination fair,
Divine enhancer of terrestrial joy!
To lend etherial sweetness to the air,
And keener feeling to th' admiring eye.
Yet thou hast equal power our bliss t' annoy:
When gloom surround us horrible and drear,
Thou, like the meteor of a dusky sky
Canst make that gloom more terrible appear,
And evil's haggard face a direr aspect wear.

To feel thy charms, O sweet celestial power!
Secure from danger and uncouth allay,
True piety shou'd gild each passing hour
With pure religion's unadulterate ray;
Nor shou'd our bosoms ever run astray,
But grateful taste whatever God bestows,
Pursuing always virtue's smiling way,
Not lur'd aside by visionary shows,
Whose lustres lead full oft to misery and woes.

Ardentius now, impatient of delay,
Attempts to climb the slippery steep of fame;
Envy pursues him all the devious way,
And wanton censure foils him with her flame;
Precipitation makes his efforts lame:
He rushes forward fearless of a fall,
Fill'd with the fancied pleasures of a name,
And deaf with confidence to reason's call,
Grasps at the laurel bough, nor aught can him appal.

To various aims he bends his changeful mind,
Which deep bewilder'd in a wide abyss,
No settled system of pursuit can find,
Now chusing that, and now rejecting this.
And now the call of power he hears with bliss.
O follow not the false deceitful sound!
The pomp of state a mere delusion is;
Its specious smiles with thorny cares abound,
Its road is arduous too, and treacherous is the ground.

The brilliant circlet which yon height surrounds,
Where place and power their awful stations hold,
Encloses fear and conscience-goading wounds,
Though of exterior luminous and bold:
Thus misty halos which the sun infold,
Attract with splendour while they storms contain.
But to Ardentius it is vainly told,
That elevation is unblest and vain,
Where honors shine so bright and splendid glories reign.

But why shou'd his various fate portray,
Since fancy can the muse's task supply?
I need not paint what barriers vex'd his way,
What disappointments kill'd his promis'd joy,
What woes he rued deriv'd from treachery.
Each self-form'd vision vanish'd when at hand,
Whate'er he gain'd, tho' pleasing, soon did cloy:
While expectation distant glories scan'd,
Each fleeting moment prov'd how vain and wild he plan'd.

Thus led by meteorous hope from view to view,
He travels forward in life's thorny vale,
Sometimes he halts, then promises renew
His dormant ardour and his heart regale.
And now his steps with age begin to fail,
And disappointment bends him to the ground;
Thrown on the wither'd grass he breathes his wail,
While hills and neighbouring groves his plaints resound,
His murmurs multiply, and spread his grief around.

"Ah!  what is life?  a wild tumultuous dream,
A scene of hope, of passion, and of pain!
In youth we see the stars of grandeur gleam,
And strive their fictitious glories to attain:
But expectation often soars in vain;
We dream of greatness, never mean to die,
Expect, despair, then mourn, then hope again,
Now this expedient and now that we try,
And following airy schemes from real grandeur fly.

"At first, a stranger to the world's false glare,
I tasted pleasure with a bounding heart,
Guiltless of envy and ambitious care,
I ne'er complain'd of disappointment's smart;
The world appear'd to me devoid of art:
I look'd with charity on all mankind,
Thought ev'ry swain perform'd a virtuous part,
Thought truth the ruler of the human mind;
Then calm my bosom was, romantic, yet refin'd.

"But now (O sad reverse!) mankind appears
A motley picture hideous to the eye;
Each face a frown of pride or envy wears,
That breaks of social love the sacred tie;
Here folly leers; there insolently high
The fools of fortune stalk wtih haughty air;
Here pleasure's trains in gorgeous revels vie;
There scandal's fiends the blasting tale prepare;
And here afflicted worth displays her borrow'd glare.

"What man that's wise wou'd haunt such hateful scenes
Whom conscious virtue lifts from ways so low?
O let me haste to where composure reigns,
Where Zephyrs fan, and murmuring waters flow,
Where human foot was never seen to go!
There weary of a thankless world unkind,
And bleeding with the arrows of its woe,
Alone, I'll sigh my sorrows to the wind,
Blame all its treacherous aims and hate its follies blind."

He said:  and sought a solitary cell,
Dismal with nature's frown, a dire retreat,
Where night and solitude for ever dwell,
And birds obscene their clatt'ring pinions beat,
Amid its gloom terrific to complete
A giddy life, in wild confusion hurl'd,
That might have laps'd (had prudence led his feat,
Had life her genuine page to him unfurl'd)
With pleasure to himself and profit to the world.
