ENCHANTRESS SWEET!  thou who so oft hast pour'd
Upon my ravish'd mind the visions wild
Of thy illusive charms;
And on my melting soul

Diffus'd such bliss as pensive virgins feel,
What time they breath to soft-persuasive notes
Of heavenly harmony,
Chaste Love's melodious lay;

Fairest of sky-born forms, O FANCY!  say,
In what Elysian vale's secluded scene
Thou keep'st thy airy court,
And mark'st the shadowy hosts

That circle round thy flowery throne, and hail
In wildly-warbled strains thy sceptred power!
Say, shall the green-rob'd Sylphs
That lure thy vagrant feet

To tread their groves and deep romantic shades&mdash;
Oh!  say, shall rapture and enthusiast love,
The sacred votarists
That lead thy tuneful train,

Me gently guide to those sequester'd haunts,
And to the wondering view of mortal eye
Disclose the unrivall'd charms
Of thy angelic mien?

Seducing Nymph!  thou, who so oft has stol'n
The magic wand from nature, and display'd
It's necromantic force
In many a sportive wile;

I feel, I feel thy fascinating spells
Now quickly gliding o'er my trembling frame!
And catch a transient glance
Of thy ethereal form;

As to yon mountain's misty brow thou fly'st
Light as the wanton gale, that skimm'd erewhile
Around the ruffled sedge,
And kiss'd the curling wave!

Ah!  let me trace thy dewy footsteps there,
And view thee gazing at the grey-ey'd morn,
That bids the circling sun
Gild with his orient beams

The clouds that float in slow majestic pomp
Along the azure vault; there mark the forms
Thy rosy finger paints
Upon thy lucid sides&mdash;

Of castles tumbling from their silver base;
Of lakes that roll their waves of liquid gold;
Giants and dwarfs, and knights
That wage terrific war,

And on the impurpled field shed ghastly rout,
And wild despair, and visionary death,
With every frantic shape
To grace the ideal scene.

Or should the sultry moon invidious chace
These "sweet illusions of the sense," and pour
Upon thy naked head
His strong refulgent rays,

Still let me follow through thy winding walks,
As near some fountain's odour-breathing side
Thou bid'st around thee wait
The soft voluptuous hours.

And say!  fair source of every pictur'd art,
Say, shall I mingle with the sylven maids;
Who rosy chaplets bring
To court thy genial smile?

Who playful twine their smooth ambrosial arms
To the soft warblings of some oaten pipe?
Or see with looks entranc'd
Idalia's graceful Queen

Leading from myrtle groves and jasmine bowers
The young-ey'd joys and purple-pinion'd loves,
To greet in votive airs
Of breathing minstrelsy

Thy wildly-varying power; &mdash; 'till from above
The breeze, that slept between the velvet leaves,
Wak'd by the sound divine,
Now plumes his azure wing;

Now fluttering sports amid the gladsome train;
Then swiftly clasping their celestial limbs
Shakes from his wavy locks
The sweets of blushing May!

Yet should my pensive mind delight to rove,
What time the star that marks with fond regret
Her sire's declining light,
Faintly illumes the glade;

Then lead me where the lonely nightingale,
Whose plaintive numbers stealing through the shades
Of eve, may gently wake
Responsive echo's shell,

And lull my raptur'd soul to extacy,
In tones that sigh, and strains that warbling weep;
While from their green retreats
The nymphs and dryads sweet,

And many a maid that woo'd the chaste-lip'd moon,
Or mutely listen'd to the love-lorn tale,
"In deep attention hang,
Murmuring their soft applause."

But when the rude winds deform the soothing scene,
And from the darkening valley Cynthia meek
Withdraws her silver beams;
Be mine the mouldering pile,

Whose awful ruins on the impending point
Of some high rugged cliff, sublimely frowns
Upon the gloomy wood
That shades the stream below.

There while the maddening tempest howls around,
And the big thunder rolls his lenghten'd voice;
There by thy magic spells
And witching sorceries,

Spectres, and all the visionary shapes,
I view, that wildly glare and loudly shriek,
As by the light'ning's flash
They wing their devious way;

'Till the chill'd blood creeps through my shuddering veins,
And hails the terrors of thy mighty hand,
ENCHANTRESS SWEET!  chaste Queen
Of Harmony and Grace!

Whether with sportive mien thou cull'st the hues
Of roseate Spring, thy flowering locks to wreathe,
Or rob'st thy glowing limbs
In Summer's purple blooms;

Whether array'd in Autumn's yellow tints
Thou point'st indignant to the unfeeling blast,
That from the weeping spray
Shatters its leafy pride;

Or wrapt in stern-ey'd Winter's sable gloom,
Pursu'st the infuriate genius of the storm,
As to the upland waste
He soars with hideous yell:

In all these varying scenes, still let thy Bard
Endearing Maid!  attend thy hallow'd steps;
"Still gaze the visions wild
Of thy awakening power,"

And mark the holy fevours that distend
Thy swelling breast; &mdash; 'till his rapt soul may hymn
In strains more wildly sweet
Thy bliss-inspiring Name!
