I.
On slight excursive pinions borne,
To ancient Minstrelsy we turn,
And, rapt, recal those early days
In which our predecessors sung;
When Beauty languish'd at their lays,
And oft their harps by Nymphs were strung:
Then, GENIUS, then was thy propitious birth;
The star of Science rose
To illuminate and cheer the earth,
While, at her dark reign's close,
In fix'd despair, old Ignorance retir'd
To her lone murky den, and sickening there, expir'd.

II.
Within the feeling heart,
Coy, callow nestlings, first,
Ere yet they dar'd depart,
Were dulcet numbers nurst:
At length their flight they prove
Launch'd by adventurous love:&mdash;
For thou, O GENIUS, to the yielding soul
Of some young lover wert at first convey'd;
He felt, celestial guest!  thy transports roll,
When gazing on his modest maid;
And, as enamour'd on her charms he hung,
Love freed thy genial fire, and loos'd his tuneful tongue.

III.
Nor were the first wild notes unmeet;
The heart's attempts are always sweet:
There still we fondly turn to trace
Simplicity, thy pristine grace;
And oft recur, to mark the artless thought
Primaeval Nature breath'd, with genuine passion fraught.
As o'er the blushing sweets he lov'd
With rapturous glance the enthusiast rov'd,
From that fine glow, which all his fancy warm'd,
He caught the true impassion'd style that charm'd;
And when secure the virgin's hand to gain,
Then forth would gaily burst the ecstatic bridal strain.

IV.
But O, when down the woodland side
The Minstrel strays, all wan and lorn&mdash;
The flame he could no longer hide,
His cruel Mistress dash'd with scorn.&mdash;
Grief now, O GENIUS, opes the sacred source,
And streaming sorrow gives thy language force:
A cypress garland, lo, he wildly weaves;
He takes his lute, his last sad tale to tell,
And, dying, all his plaintive sweetness leaves
To his poor moaning woodmate, Philomel;
The plaintive sweetness floats through midnight air,
As if the soul's expression still were there.

V.
The rougher Passions, pleas'd to hear
What gentle Love began so well,
Ardent and emulous draw near
To snatch the sounding shell:
And ruddy Sport is foremost found
To wake the sylvan echoes round&mdash;
But little from the chace is lent
Thy stores delicious to augment,
(Save when, beside the wood-reflecting stream,
The notes responsive distantly decay)
For oft the turbulent pursuers seem
To vie, in fierceness, with their savage prey.

VI.
Yet hark!  an essay ruder far&mdash;
The brazen cadence, and the menac'd war!
No longer now, ye shepherd swains,
Upon your native fertile plains
Attend your fleecy care:
Hush'd be the sighing voice of Love!
And to the coverts of the grove
Ah fly, ye timid fair!
Already on your silver-shelving strand
Invasion pours his bliss-destroying band&mdash;
For Envy, with malignant leer,
Your pastures rich and pleasures dear
Surveys, and bids him stem the billows' roar,
To wade through other seas of human gore.

VII.
But see the Bard with patriot virtue fir'd!
See, at his animating call,
The thronging heroes, as by Heav'n inspir'd,
Advance; and on the invaders fall!&mdash;
'Twas Freedom's glorious cause, that, 'gainst the foe,
Bade the full tide of eloquence to flow;
And gave, to bless the Bard, in happiest hour,
Thy all-commanding force, thy magic power,
That rais'd the drooping, and enflam'd the brave
Against the tyrant, wandering to enslave;
And hurl'd his ranks, repuls'd, dismay'd, and lost,
Beneath the fatal surge they impiously had crost.

VIII.
The wood-bird, having hail'd the morning prime,
Through the lone vale or copse unnoted strays;
While, on strong wing, the eagle soars sublime,
And basks undazzled in the noontide blaze:
Thus we, O monarch of the mind!
Through days remote and less refin'd,
Have tried to trace thy beamy way.&mdash;
To attempt thy now more potent ray,
Demands the steady aid of powers
More bold, and daring  far, than ours;
Than ours, which, trembling, ne'er before took wing
Beyond a lay of love, or carol in the spring.
