O Thou!  who rul'st the Poet's soul,
And giv'st the varied verse to roll:
Thou, FANCY!  whose impassion'd strain
Calls forth the Muses' shadowy train;
When, in the intellectual hour,
The Bard exerts creative pow'r;
And, skill'd in all thy magick art,
He strikes the note that thrills the heart.

O FANCY!  source of transient joy,
Whose visions bless'd mine infant eye!
Ere yet I knew thy pow'r to name,
My conscious bosom felt thy flame;
O let thy glowing touch divine,
Inspirit, oft, the labour'd line:
And where the grace of Art shall fail,
Let Nature's hallow'd warmth prevail;
Oft animate with smiles the theme,
And paint as still I weave the dream.

And, lo!  the plains that FANCY loves;
Her forests brown, her twilight groves;
Where oft, at eve's still hour, the Muse
Her magick-colour'd vision views;
Or traces, oft, the Faery scene,
O'er mountains blue, thro' alleys green;
Or listens, in some vocal vale,
To wild notes fleeting in the gale;
Or, nigh some arbour's verd'rous wall,
Hears the dashing waters fall.

And oft I mark her vagrant way
With richer flame adorn the day;
As, with enthusiast hand profuse,
She scatters wild her burning hues,
And waves her sportive pinion bright,
And drops her many-tinted light.

What godlike Presence fills these shades!
What theme inspires the tuneful Maids!
O say, what more than usual flame,
In transport shakes the Poet's frame!
The visionary trains arise,
Seen but by quick poetick eyes;
The Forms that in the Muse's ray
Their orient-glitt'ring hues display!
The shadowy shapes now glance along,
And give to rapture all the song.

There shines a fane of beryl wall,
A mazy bow'r, an arched hall;
Where oft, reclin'd on margent green,
The wearied Knight to rest is seen.
But now the woods, with mellower light,
And softer splendours, charm the sight:
Pour'd sudden Cynthia's paler gleem
Twinkles on the haunted stream;
While Titania's pigmy train
Revel o'er the moonlight plain,
Where sylphs, and Gnomes, sweet sprites, are seen,
And dapper Elves, and Fairies sheen.

On the strange troop, the vision wild,
Delighted FANCY ever smil'd;
Where high, as Queen, she seem'd to ride,
In varying robe, and painted pride;
Touching her soul-enchanting shell,
With gentler fall, or louder swell.
The sullen cares, the kindred soul,
Awaken'd, feel her soft controul.
I trace thee, Goddess!  in thy flight;
Thy brilliant hues, thy stream of light!
While, issuing from thy haunted grove,
Thy chiefs in native splendour rove.
Immortal Bards!  O may I name
The few whom Genius gives to Fame!

O Muse!  reveal the source of Rhyme;
Revert thine eye thro' clouds of time,
When Sense first sought the pleasing sound,
And in harmonious chains was bound;
As o'er the tuneful ear was thrown,
A sprightly note, till then unknown!
As Bards unpolish'd lines rehearse,
While Musick aids the artless verse.
Ye holy Bards of Gaulic race,
From you the infant Rhyme I trace!

I hear their voice from Mona's cells;
I see them trace the mystick spells;
In each dark grove of sacred oak,
ANDATE fierce the priests invoke.
Now shouts of vic'try rend the skies,
And flames ascend with victims' cries!
Or, marshall'd on the bloody heath,
Furious they rush on glorious death;
Revive the drooping arm; elate,
Pursue the war, arrest the fate.
Their lyres the list'ning Passions hold,
And tame the fierce, and awe the bold!
Oft, waving high the mistletoe,
Their breasts with sacred ardours glow,
As the pale Regent of the night
Smiles on th' Enthusiast's mystick rite!
And, while the Bard, from hallow'd oak,
In Runick rhymes prophetick spoke,
All Nature felt &mdash; so fables tell&mdash;
The DRUID from his secret cell.

But, dearer to the Muse, the throng,
That touch'd the harp with varied song.
MINSTREL!  or TROUBADOUR!  or SCALD!
On whom the Muses fondly call'd,
Braiding their brows in joyous haste:
In genius strong, but rude in taste!
E'en COEUR DE LION grac'd your throng,
And BLONDELL gives to Fame your song.

Across your arm was thrown your harp,
Which oft you touch'd with accent sharp:
Enliven'd by the notes you strung,
You lightly danc'd, and sweetly sung.
Your merry rebecks, tabours loud,
Oft entranc'd th' astonish'd crowd;
And, as you pass'd the Gothick hall,
How grateful was the Baron's call!
With antick leap, and jest, and glee,
The castle echo'd merrily!
While many a tale, with tuneful sound,
His mighty cares in rapture drown'd.

O ye!  who with no frigid art,
E'er faintly touch'd th' awaken'd heart!
Unknown the Critick's formal laws,
Your native pow'rs extort applause;
While Dullness hears your wild-sweet strain,
Entranc'd, she drops her leaden chain!

While, on your slight, unpolish'd reed,
You breathe some old heroick deed;
Or, o'er some hapless lover's bier,
You raise the sigh, or drop the tear.
What tho' your rough, yet pleasing verse,
Would simple legends still rehearse;
And tho' we touch th' exhausted lyre,
With method, but with feebler fire;
Our polish'd toil, our artful strain,
Must yield to Nature's freer vein!

Parent of Verse!  O BARD divine!
Whom FANCY bids to lead the Nine!
Be this thy praise; nor weep thy rhyme,
That, mould'ring, feels the touch of Time.
Tho' Nature thine, our feebler art
May haply lend it's polish'd part:
Thus, Chaucer's thought, in Dryden's verse,
A race unborn shall oft rehearse.
So, when great Raphael's painting fades,
And Time the Student's hand upbraids;
The rival artists touch the place,
Renew the tint, and catch the grace.

In Woodstock's bow'rs, the Muse inspires
With pow'rful song Dan CHAUCER'S fires.
His notes entrance the ruder swains;
E'en GOWER and LYDGATE own the strains.

O mighty Master of the lyre!
The Graces, with the Muse, inspire
Thy early rhymes!  Well-pleas'd, thy shade
Shall view th' immortal wreath ne'er fade.
To melt or rouze the soul was thine,
As love or rage inspir'd the line.

Within a bow'r, to all unknown;
To all, but thee and Oberon;
Thou saw'st the mystick vision bright,
While Cynthia stream'd her silver light.
A choir of Dames who fill'd the green,
As stately march'd their Fairy Queen;
And lightly tripp'd the beauteous train,
While their rich robes swept o'er the plain
And, with the pomp, and dazzling rays,
The moon-light grove appear'd to blaze.
Then, as thou heard'st the sound of war,
And symphonies that play'd afar,
A gallant troop of warriors came,
Who long had worn the wreath of Fame:
With armour glorious to behold,
And lance that shone of solid gold;
With plumy casque, and burnish'd shield,
That gleam'd like lightning o'er the field;
On barbed steeds, whose proud array
The aweful pomp of war display.
A rival host, with spear and shield,
Call forth those knights, and claim the field.
His trump the herald blows; from far,
It flames the breast with ardent war.
And now the Tourney meet, and now
We seem to hear each shadowy blow.
Nor steed to steed, and knight to knight,
Now steed to steed, and knight to knight,
They mix, as thickens all the fight.
Here some, who joy'd the just to meet,
Dishors'd, oft sigh, and seek retreat;
And there the quiv'ring jav'lins glance,
Shatt'ring many a shining lance.
For oft, on him who seeks renown,
Ah, me!  shall wayward Fortune frown;
While, blindly, on the baser head,
Her meretricious wreath shall spread!

Tho' faint, alas!  my feebler vein,
Forgive, if thus I touch thy strain;
If, fond of Fancy's airy throng,
I dare the lengthen'd verse prolong:
Provencal FANCY warms thy themes,
And richly paints the Poet's dreams.

Thine, too, O FANCY'S fav'rite Son!
Thine, SPENSER, is an equal crown.
'Tis thine the Epick trump to hold,
'Midst val'rous knights, and champions bold:
Who strive for Fame's chivalrous meed,
With quiv'ring lance, and warlike steed;
Who, clad in gallant armour bright,
Or for the field or tourney dight;
Of gorgeous courts in peace the grace;
Defence in war; in both the praise.
Mark!  as they pass th' enchanted grove,
Bright in glory, wreath'd by Love!
Nor small thy fame for mystick tale;
The moral chaste, in modest veil.
Thus furious War, thus faithful Love,
Like streams, reflect the heaven above,
When o'er the varied landscape bright
The Sun revolves his heav'nly light.

With looks commercing with the skies,
Rapt in deep thought, see MILTON rise!
It's throne of fire, it's blissful state,
He saw &mdash; fell blind!  Nor dar'd unfold
What regions vast the mind shall hold,
When, with spread wings, she hath forsook
Her mansions in this fleshly nook:
The verse MILTONICK well may prove,
He listen'd to the GOD above:
And while we seem on Eden's plain,
We hear a Seraph's raptur'd strain;
So fair he paints the form of things;
And what he paints, so sweet he sings!

Mark the Landscape wide expand!
With piercing eye, and ardent hand,
Warm with life, and spirit free,
In Nature's walks the Poet see
Select whate'er the Muse enchants,
And give a charm that Nature wants.
Thro' hedge-row elms, in past'ral pleasure
Round the shady seats of Leisure,
We hear his milk-maid singing blythe,
And the mower whet his scythe.
Or does he build enchantments drear,
Where more is meant than meets the ear;
The gorgeous hall, the revel loud;
The quaffing God, the midnight crowd:
Or does, in plaintive numbers sweet,
His verse the hush'd attention meet;
As, floating on his wat'ry bier,
On Lycid' pours the classick tear!
To all the Poet can impart
The strength of Nature, grace of Art.

But view, descending on the plain,
In thunder, lightning, and in rain;
On winds that scowl the blasted heath,
Like Nature's universal death!
The Death-voic'd Owlet flits by day
Before the Witches' murky way:
Around the cauldron see them toil,
Intent the virtuous deed to foil!
Charming the air with witching sound,
Thrice they dance their mystick round!

From where the honied bee delights,
See ARIEL lead his loaded sprites.
From cowslip bells, a fairy dome;
From dewy blossom, fragrant home!
In hills, in standing lakes, in groves,
The Elves confess their tender loves.
In moony radiance as they meet,
O'er sands they trip with printless feet;
Or pluck the wings from butterflies,
To fan moon-beams from the sleeping eyes.
The Elf, the Hag, own SHAKESPEARE'S hand,
But scorn the pow'r of other wand!

Twin Imps!  or beauteous Stars of Fame!
BEAUMONT and FLETCHER add their name:
With milder radiance please our eyes;
Alternate set, alternate rise.
But when with SHAKESPEARE'S glorious Sun
In rival course they strive to run,
Their splendours sink, their glories hide,
In feebler fires, and meaner pride.

But now a race obtrusive shone,
Whom FANCY blush'd to call her own.
O say what mean this learned train,
These Bards of metaphysic vein!
Of nature void, as void of grace;
No passions know this scholar race.
Their woe no bosom e'er oppress'd;
Their love shall ne'er inflame the breast.
Who draw from books, and not the heart,
In vain shall boast the tuneful art.
Some strong hyperbole supplies
The Poet's bold sublimities.
Forsaking Reason, high they spring,
While wearied Fancy wants a wing:
And where the tender note should move
The soft complaint of gentle Love;
The Bard, perplex'd, with awkward Art,
Relies on mem'ry, not the heart.
Some Hermit cold aspires to write,
Whose frigid lays the Loves affright.

Ingenious DONNE, whose learned page,
Belov'd by ev'ry rhyming sage,
With harsher JONSON, led the way,
Till COWLEY clos'd the long array.
Postilion Nature mounts the horse,
And Coachman Art directs his course;
Conceits, as Footmen, run beside,
A glorious row of goodly pride!
And pleasant Truths, and useful Lyes,
In all their gaudy liveries.

Beneath a plaintain's shade, all day,
His careless limbs see WALLER lay!
Love winds the strings, improves his vein,
And list'ning deer have caught his pain:
But, while the shining laurels spread,
No am'rous myrtles deck his head;
And what, with SACHARISSA'S name,
He lost in love, he gain'd in fame.
A doubtful good!  a forceful choice!
Which most, does Love, or Fame, rejoice?

To various pow'rs of classick song,
To PRIOR'S labour'd themes belong:
Exhausted Art, with jealous smile,
Saw Nature crown the finish'd toil.
Here were not fits of heat and cold,
Severely just, and strongly bold;
Tho' sometimes o'er his lengthen'd strain
We languish, and of toil complain.
From him the youthful Bard shall learn
The ardent word and happy turn,
Catch from his nicely-labour'd line
The Poet's elegance divine.

Have ye not read, soft Maids of Love!
The banish'd Man, who woods must rove?
Have ye not felt his EMMA'S pain,
And mark'd her HENRY with disdain?

Ye lighter sons of Mirth and Ease,
Who live but to be pleas'd and please;
Oft, in convivial hour, ye hail
Of PAUL and HANS the jocund tale;
And oft research, with learned pain,
Where skulks the undiscover'd Brain.
The solemn sage shall oft attend
The Preacher's voice, and love the friend;
Shall hear his serious Muse explain,
That all we act, or think, is vain.
Let Science proud, with piercing eyes,
Explore the mine, inspect the skies;
Or, let the pow'r of Wealth be try'd,
The splendid luxe of golden Pride:
Let curious artists wait thy call,
And bend thy bow'r, and gild thy hall:
Yet know, that all our efforts vain
Augment our wretched lot of pain.

Laying by the hill's green side,
Where th' engirting waters glide,
Mark THOMSON round the varying year,
And ev'ry Season's scene, appear.
Rough Winter first the reign assumes,
Congenial horrors!  kindred glooms!
The virgin snows, himself as pure,
He treads, as solemn glooms obscure,
Thro' leafless groves, and icy ground;
Scarce frozen Echo yields a sound!

Lo!  from Heav'n's lucid chambers, Spring
Looks out, and smiles.  The caverns ring!
The minstrel choir renew their loves,
Touch'd by the passion of the groves,
That swell'd their breasts with genial fire,
Each feather shiv'ring with desire,
While in the warmer ray of Spring,
Oft  they wave the new-fledg'd wing.
Beside the brink of haunted streams,
In Summer, hid from fervent beams,
He feeds on Ecstacy the soul,
And darts a glance from pole to pole.
When bending Autumn gilds the plain,
And waves her glories round the swain;
He tunes the Dorick reed &mdash; As lave
The Nymphs, they listen in their cave.

Nor less thy Genius stands confess'd,
When LIBERTY inflames thy breast.
When Science, 'midst her train of arts,
From falling Rome in haste departs&mdash;
Tho' there her footsteps still we trace,
As beauties in an aged face&mdash;
Awake, lull'd Age!  there read thy doom,
As Lux'ry shakes this other Rome!

Lo!  more than tenfold night around!
Hark!  the death-bell's iron sound!
What mental spectres gleam along,
As rolls th' impetuous midnight song!
A taper shades the sable gloom,
The living Poet's groaning tomb.
The bell strikes one!  An aweful knell,
In Sorrow's cave who loudly dwell.
Behold, who dare!  the gates unfold,
The future fate, and Death, that hold!
Along whose gall'ries Terror's hands
Lift on high the flaming brands;
While sick'ning Hope turns pale with fear,
As Hell's loud shrieks invade her ear!
She falls!  she sinks!  the trembling air
Closes &mdash; and hides the dreadful WHERE!

But, when YOUNG paints Heav'n's blissful courts,
And to the virtuous deed exhorts;
The symphonies of choral skies,
From RAPHAEL'S golden lyre that rise,
And twice ten thousand gates thrown wide,
Bursting glories in a tide;
Enrapt I hear!  the Heav'n descry;
I hear &mdash; and, how I long to die!

Where wanton'd many a woodbine shade,
The plaintive HAMMOND, listless, laid.
Soft youth of Love!  he sweetly told
His fate, and Delia's bosom cold.
Full many a tender note was there,
Of pow'r to touch the soul of Care,
And draw adown the Fair-one's face
The tear of Love with mournful grace.
He never ask'd the Epick strain;
His Muse but sought one Maid to gain.
But she the train of Wealth requires,
And Love to act her low desires.
But Love detests the Miser's art,
And weeps the Maid of venal heart.
Ne'er slight, ye Fair!  the verse we sing,
Nor scorn the trifles Poets bring:
So shall your Name immortal live;
'Tis all the grateful Bard can give.

Hark!  COLLINS strikes the potent shell;
The Passions throng the magick cell!
And, as Madness rul'd the hour,
On the strings their soul they pour.
Timotheus erst so struck the lyre,
As Persia's Court did once admire.
Alas!  no Court may COLLINS tread;
The Bard by scanty pittance fed,
Ah!  see, the glorious Maniack dies!
Each heav'nly Muse, affrighted, flies!

But mightier in abstracted song,
His notes the Muses, pleas'd, prolong.
Ye vulgar, fly!  nor dare to view
What, Genius, is but meant for you.
O Muse!  refrain:  nor, rashly bold,
Do thou the mystick scene unfold,
Where all the shadowy tribes of mind,
In braided dance, their murmurs join'd.

See OTWAY touch, with tender art,
The secret springs that ope the heart:
Around their Bard the Muses moan,
And make MONIMIA'S woes their own.
With unregarded locks, wild spread,
The Fair oft beats her straw-clad bed.
Sweet child of Nature!  must thou feel
The woes thou couldst so well reveal?
Why faulters now thy tuneful tongue,
Where Nature's inspiration hung?
Steep'd in the bitter tear of woe,
That crust shall thy wish'd death bestow.
Let none thy life's cold mis'ry blame,
But drop the tear that gives thee fame.

And Him, on coal-black steed, who rode
The steep of Hela's dread abode;
And right against the Eastern gate,
Where Hell's nine portals rise in state:
There, while he trac'd the Runick rhyme,
The Maid prophetick rose sublime.
Or may my tongue, unfrozen, tell
Of Sisters Twelve, in rocky cell,
Whose arms horrifick hurl afar
The flames and thunderbolts of war;
And, as the paths of Fate they tread,
Eager heap the crimson'd dead!

But hark!  the Bard, whose magick lyre&mdash;
A Master's hand!  a Prophet's fire!&mdash;
Stops the Britons' long array,
Wildly scatt'ring dire dismay!
On Conway's frowning rock severe,
Affrightens hearts that doubted fear:
Till headlong from the mountain's heights,
With brother Bards his song unites.
The thousands shake, and deep their arms!&mdash;
Such erst the pow'r of Minstrels' charms!

What sadly-pensive Youth appears,
Whose ardent eye is dimm'd with tears!
Forlorn, with wild, distracted air,
And worn with many a vip'rous care?
Haste to thy kiste, thy dortoure bedde!
Thy glommed face, thy spirit dedde,
Thy cale-claie hande, thy visage wane,
I weep, with thee, ashrewed manne!
Tho' doubtful  be thy various name,
Not so the just applause of Fame.
Whoe'er thou art, sad FANCY'S tear
Shall frequent wet thy nameless bier;
Shall frequent, in a depth of gloom,
Adorn thy visionary tomb;
And grieve the more, in ev'ry strain,
Because she knows she grieves in vain;
While sighs from many a tuneful shade
The Maid's eternal sorrows aid.

And now the glitt'ring visions fade!
Some lights would break, but sink in shade,
On Death's cold tomb must flourish Fame;
AND HE MUST DIE, WHO ADDS HIS NAME!
