Now winter, issuing from his Northern source,
Assumes the empire of our milder skies;
Fierce drive his blasts, with still-increasing force,
And snow-whelm'd earth in waste subjection lies.

All nature droops beneath th' oppressor's sway;
Heard far around afflicted want complains;
While every object prompts a kindred lay,
Or calls the muse to swell her solemn strains.

She comes; and lo, above the rest, explores
The drear recess of yonder firm-built pile,
That seems a fortress, form'd for deathful stores,
From foreign arms to guard this envied isle.

But there no warriors foreign arms repel;
For depradators of our native climes
In painful durance fill each dolesome cell
'Till justice hears and dooms their several crimes.

Though wild desires their sensual breasts enflame,
The dissolute may sure awhile suspend
Voluptuous joys, to view this den of shame,
The place where oft they ultimately end.

Nor let integrity, with cold neglect,
Instead of searching through its wards unclean,
Believe the jail can ne'er her sons affect,
And shrink to distance from the dreadful scene.

The mind, indeed, with probity endu'd
Through life may scorn securely thraldom's cave;
But where's the mortal able to elude
Analogous confinement in the grave?

Soon ends this frail probationary state,
And sure as death must all to judgment rise;
Whene'er th' Almighty arbiter of fate
Erects his grand tribunal on the skies.

Then let the wretch thy contemplation share,
Who trembles here his earthly judge to see,
And, strongly warn'd, with fresh resolves, prepare
To hear unmov'd th' Eternal's dread decree.

Give way ye bolts, ye massy bars unfold;
Your hideous scenes ye ponderous walls disclose;
Unveil the abject beings that ye hold,
And open all your magazine of woes!

The bolts recede, desir'd access is gain'd;
We reach the precincts where the first abide,
A numerous class from liberty restrain'd,
While credit's claims remain unsatisfy'd.

Vain pleasures here a sad reverse become;
Here baffled toil its adverse stars laments;
For folly's thoughtless gambols punish some,
And some misfortune's unforeseen events.

Their fate have several live-long years endur'd,
And many, even to their latest breath,
Must on this hated spot remain immur'd;
Which nature starts at, as from pain or death.

How gracious Heaven with justice mercy joins!
Man's doom was labour when he first transgrest;
To obey his sentence here the sufferer pines,
Sick with the languor of unnatural rest.

Yet, sons of fraud (what cannot fraud subvert)
To voluntary bondage hither fly;
And fixt in safe asylum, here concert
For riot means, and powerless rights defy.

But hark, a rustling din assails our ears;
Reproaches vile and horrid oaths ensue:
Behold the dire receptacle appears,
With all the miseries of its wretched crew.

Observe their plight; observe the thin remains
Of long-worn garments, wrapt on limbs obscene;
See how coercive bands each step constrains,
And mark those traits that form the guilty mien.

What noxious scents these stifled holds attend!
And think, will prudence grant a longer stay?
Flames not th' infectious torch of that dire fiend,
Who here maintains her pestilential sway.

Who, dreaded power, extorts the livid sweat,
Parch'd gasp, phrenetic stare, and throtling groan,
From these, the unreliev'd, whom all forget,
Or shun them more, the more their fate is known.

Once, likewise, such is history's report,
As justice awful sat to sentence wrong,
Up rose the fury in the crouded court,
And black destruction levell'd all the throng.

From thence, through long succeeding years, to prove,
By outrage fell, her undiminish'd power,
With execution's cord her venom strove
In fierce contention which should most devour.

At length the FRIEND OF WRETCHEDNESS appear'd,
Who cried aloud to succour the distrest;
His admonitions legislature heard,
And kindly efforts check'd the deadly pest.

But hark, in general grief each captive sighs;
What dismal cause excites those sounds of woe?
Alas!  the fiend's aveng'd, he prostrate lies;
A sister demon strikes the fatal blow.

And now, to genius, fame, and virtue true,
Ye tuneful muses oh resume the pen;
For bright example frame the honors due,
And pour your incense on the best of men.

For long as glows compassions heavenly flame;
Or public spirit holds a patriot dear;
So long shall ALBION bless her HOWARD'S name,
His deeds recount, and excellence revere.

But see, yon basket holds the prisoner's fare,
Coarse aliments of famine; &mdash; how they croud,
And snatch, with eager haste, a scanty share,
The little for diurnal food allow'd.

Should bounty here a cheap repast afford,
To match th' enjoyments of this craving train,
Though luxury may heap th' incentive board
Her sumptuous banquet courts the taste in vain.

The fitter objects for benevolence,
That feeling power, awake to every moan;
Who, when her hands salubrious balm dispense,
In others happiness creates her own.

Ye liberal then the fair occasion seize,
Haste here and sanctify your plenteous store;
With vital succour hungers pangs appease,
And wake the blaze 'till cold benumbs no more.

For see yon light-admitting aperture,
No panes are there, but irons grated fast:
Th' enclos'd not only freezing walls endure
But shake besides with every piercing blast.

Scarce creeps life's current through the gelid frame;
Their nerves scarce aught of animation feel;
As in the quarry, whence these buildings came,
To kindred rock the lingering hopes congeal.

And when they press supine their lodgings hard
No sweet oblivion springs from sound repose;
From action's genial aid they're quite debarr'd,
And slumber hardly deigns their eyes to close.

Thus, half-supported through the dreary day,
And shivering sleepless all th' extended night,
Wan, loathsome, shrunk, 'tis their's in deep  dismay,
Of long, long hours to mourn the heavy flight.

And sure misanthropy can ne'er suggest,
When all her thoughts are bent on man's disgrace,
A groupe more vile, more helpless, more distrest,
Or more degrading to the human race.

For with their misery when their crimes are known,
Contending passions on th' enquirer press;
And indignation darts his hostile frown,
Though, soul-attractive, pity's tears address.

Prefigure that old malefactor's end:
An only child precedes his hoary sire;
Commutual sins their fates together blend,
And on yon gibbet must they both expire.

For he whose duty 'twas, to shew with care,
How youth might all its threat'ning ills avoid,
To plunge that youth in sure destruction's snare
A parent's large authority employ'd.

But see &mdash; the son, who scarce alive appears,
Now strains his cords to gain a last embrace;
Looks up on high, then gushes into tears,
And on his father's bosom hides his face.

The father &mdash; heavens!  how every look displays
That keen remorse that wrings his tortur'd mind;
And shall his crimes our just abhorrence raise,
Or may his sufferings some compassion find?

Even thus a dubious grief bemoans the rest;
For human woe must generous sorrow rise,
But prudence  here forbids the tender breast,
Without a cold reserve, to sympathize.

Yet suffering proves not antecedent guilt,
And mixt with those whom, justly, bonds enthrall,
Are some no doubt whose pleas on truth are built,
Though undistinguish'd censure lights on all.

With anguish too the pondering mind reflects
How strongly oft those blandishments entice,
Which base seduction constantly projects
To draw th' unwary into paths of vice.

See how a fixt despondency impairs
What yet remains of yon fair female's charms?
Her eyes are red, suffus'd with frequent tears;
She faints, o'erwhelm'd with terror's dread alarms.

Alas subservient dupe!  a villain's art,
Too well design'd, her ceaseless cries deplore;
Pretended love subdu'd her yielding heart,
And smooth'd the passage for his treacherous lore.

To deeds that call'd th' award of justice forth
His wiles, at length, her guardless youth betray'd;
And but to give a harmless infant birth
The rigid sentence is a while delay'd.

How different hers from nature's general cry!
For thus her still-repeated prayers exclaim:
Oh!  in the pangs of travail let me die;
Deliverance gives me up to certain shame!

And may my offspring perish 'ere 'tis born;
Nor struggle through this scene of vice and pain,
Friendless and poor, whom prejudice would scorn,
As ignominious for its natal stain.

Thus equity points out a separate class:
Exculpates or bewails a hapless few;
Without bestowing on the general mass
Excuses vain, or wasting plaints undue.

Since penitence can every dread atone,
Does ever yon ensanguin'd murderer weep?
He does &mdash; because of punishment alone;
He shudders too when night-hags banish sleep.

For though his callous breast excludes remorse
Yet vengeance haunts him with her angry glare;
And points continual to his boding corse,
By chains suspended, withering, in the air.

Let mercy here a full release ordain:
Alas!  how useless proves the ill-judg'd grace:
The maniacs all repeat their crimes again;
Again they're dragg'd to throng this loathsome place.

And even almost assiduous hope desponds
To renovate the guilt abandon'd mind:
The outward frame may wear impassive bonds,
But far more strong the intellectual bind.

To make these changes sound the less severe
Their different ranks in vice the muse shall state;
And almost every crime will wound the ear
That fraud can think, or violence perpetrate.

See first those petty culprits, daily brought,
A loitering race, to idleness resign'd;
Whose groveling tenor prompts the languid thought
In pilfering thefts a mean support to find.

Although the steed secur'd its captor's flight,
The fugitive these destin'd mansions hold;
And likewise him that sought convenient night
To ravage, like the wolf, some fleecy fold.

Offenders next in fatal secrets vers'd;
Mechanic art supplies the place of stealth,
While counterfeit additions, wide dispers'd;
Debase the nation's circulating wealth.

The plunderer bold, that on the public road,
With horse and arms, his flagrant crimes atchiev'd,
And thought them lessen'd by their gallant mode,
With weighty proof will here be undeceiv'd.

And injur'd commerce to these walls commits
Th' artificer, whose circumventing skill,
By fabricating nicely-copied writs,
Out-stript the pistol with his noiseless quill.

Profusion those; these avarice impell'd;
For think upon th' apprentic'd orphans woes;
Perish'd with cold; his sustenance withheld,
And only taught by stupefying blows:

But now th' unfeeling, fitly-coupled pair,
To whom he was entrusted, here bemoan
The agonies he feels with selfish care,
For on his doubted life depends their own.

Of more than brutal violence accus'd,
"A cruel spoiler" shews his odious face;
Seiz'd in his arms, polluted and abus'd,
Fair chastity deplores her high disgrace.

Lo discontent prevails &mdash; with sudden burst
Commotion rolls her wasteful fury wide;
At length th' o'erpower'd insurgents here are thrust,
And havock then, and factious rage subside.

When sounding trumpets deathful war promulg'd,
That prying traitor, lur'd by foreign pay,
The posture of his country's force divulg'd,
And all its secret movements dar'd betray.

And see the impious miscreant next appear,
Who, when in court his evidence was given,
To false asservations, void of fear,
Invok'd the aweful majesty of Heaven.

Such fire-impregnate trains as mischief frames
Yon villains both in latent order plac'd;
And wak'd destruction in th' aspiring flames,
Heedless to what extent its rage might waste.

But though each bears the same apparent strain,
By different motives was their conduct sway'd;
This mediated sums of fraudful gain,
Th' insatiate lust of malice that obey'd.

The next that here the powers of durance bind
Are scarce secur'd by chains of heaviest weight;
A dire ferocious band, whose force was join'd
The peaceful-sleeping dome to violate.

What barrier tenable against them proves?
They burst their way to where the master lies:
Disturb'd he starts; the curtain swift removes,
And worse than specters rush before his eyes.

And now, the ruffians instant death present,
Unless his secret stores are straight reveal'd;
Then bind his aching limbs, his cries prevent,
And ransack all that luckless care conceal'd.

How frail the cement proves of vicious faith!
Each false associate here would fain exempt
Himself, by making sure his fellows death,
And treats restraining oaths with mere contempt.

But this succeeds; his purpose first was known,
And doubtless he can state the matter best;
Th' atrocious enterprise was all his own,
He form'd the wicked plot, and led the rest.

At length our too prolific search is brought
Up to the height of cognizable guilt;
For see the wretch whom swift pursuers caught
Dyed in the gore his horrid hands had spilt.

Suspicion-blinding frauds were all prepar'd,
And whelming darkness slumb'rous nature husht,
When on the victim whom his toils ensnar'd,
With savage triumph, fierce th' assassin rusht.

But SATAN all his wily succour lends,
And nigh her guilt-befriending shades, in vain;
Up to the LORD the cry of blood ascends,
And certain vengeance strikes the murderous CAIN.

Good Heavens, should punishment deter no more
Society would every place transform;
In endless tempests anarchy would roar
Loud through the wilds, and rapine's prowlers swarm!

Our isle, unterrify'd by beasts of prey,
Might vainly of the high exemption boast,
If certain danger barr'd the travelers way,
And human monsters, throng'd its dreary coast.

But lo, the guarantee of legal right,
Imperial justice, lifts her aweful sword;
Each fresh infraction proves its destin'd might,
Fell outrage dies, and order smiles restor'd.

But see; among th' enthrall'd are several found
By nature and by habit most unfit
For lethargy, who spreads her influence round,
And hardly to her drowsy powers submit.

Yet what can make their stagnant moments flow?
Does labour e'er beguile the tedious hour;
Or fervent exhortation strive to shew,
On flintiest hearts, her soul-reclaiming power?

Ah no; but execrations oft commence,
By maddening rancour on th' accuser's shed;
From whose unanswerable evidence
The self-condemn'd a full conviction dread.

Here too even those whom rankest guilt defiles,
For which perhaps with death they'll be repaid,
Are plotting how to seize on future spoils,
And justice more successfully evade.

Or names preserv'd by infamy's dark scroll,
The emulative clan as heroes paint;
TURPIN who plunder'd long without controul,
And SHEPHARD breaking loose from all restraint.

Excited thence, their eager thoughts explore
The means of liberty in every shape;
To scale the walls, to undermine the floor,
Or through forc'd locks and sever'd bars escape.

These close inspection frustrates &mdash; fierce, at length,
Temerity concerts some black design;
And straight t' attempt it with their utmost strength
Her mad adherents desperately combine.

Sad scenes, how noxious!  but of large neglects,
In prison-systems, must not truth complain;
And charge impartially on those defects
A copious portion of the spreading bane?

And first does no dark dungeon gape beneath
Th' o'er-arching surface of these dire aboads;
Where nightly the abhorrent lungs must breathe
Effluvia foul that o'er infection broods?

Close-whelm'd in such retreats, unwonted force
O'er all her slaves depravity acquires:
As, deep below the mount, a latent source
Provokes to horrid rage sulphureous fires.

For rigid treatment lends a fair pretext
To give her venom'd tongue its amplest scope;
And each vile scheme she fearless there projects
Enwrapt with sure concealment's murky cope.

Darkness retires; but soon as light returns
Shall midnight ills to grosser deeds give way?
They must if then flagitious lewdness burns,
And undivided sexes stain the day.

Here declamation's voice, with tone severe,
Might long expatiate on such haunts of lust;
But decency withdraws her hallow'd ear,
Alarm'd; and quick before her frowns disgust.

See too what young delinquents swell the throng,
As learners to a seminary brought;
And all th' atrocious arts of fraudful wrong
They'll here no doubt effectually be taught.

Oh!  give the executioner command
His deathful apparatus swift to rear,
And let prevenient vengeance rid the land
Of future inroads which it else must bear.

From such advice th' indignant mind recoils:
Alas, but wherefore?  is it more unjust,
Than thus amidst a chain of fiend-spread toils
Youth's dissolute propensities to thrust?

'Tis done; perverse desires their breasts enflame;
Audacious boasts prudential fears despise;
The harden'd front succeeds ingenuous shame,
And, mountain-smother'd, conscious feeling lies.

Now clemency extends her grace too late;
Her mild forbearance all their tribe disdains;
Bent, like contumacy, to dare their fate,
And mock th' award of strong and lasting pains.

Haste then and force contagion's power to droop;
For male and female different wards provide;
And let no more in one promiscuous groupe
Obdurate and yet flexile minds abide.

Or totally complete the fiend's disgrace:
Construct with speed the solitary cell;
Each individual there humanely place,
And all improper intercourse expell.

It surely far surpasses punishment
If aught th' internal monitor can wake;
Can prompt the real pang for time mis-spent,
And firm resolve each error to forsake.

How much a constant vigilance behoves
The magistrate that guards the public peace,
For still, uncurb'd, some fresh incentive proves
A source of mischief to th' involv'd police.

Lo riots now the fierce banditti urge;
Sore-prest by hunger conscience sinks remiss;
While into mad debauchery crouds immerge,
Th' engorging vortex of this dire abyss.

Even so misrule, by long prescription bold,
And shrouded safe, as in a sheltering fane,
Strives here to re-possess, if uncontroul'd,
Th' extinct dishonours of her ancient reign.

Suppose, from every real charge exempt,
For just applause the conscious keeper strives;
Fresh energy each well-design'd attempt
From magisterial influence derives:

But should its guardian care be e'er withdrawn
Deputed power may soon abuse its trust;
In filthy negligence supinely yawn,
Or prey on misery, flagrantly unjust.

Thus from th' horizon oft the solar beams,
A blaze of living splendours, urge their flight;
While opposite, in striking contrast, gleams
The sickly regent of approaching night.

Now see; another captive marks the list:
For drink a general clamour straight succeeds;
To gain their fine the inmates all persist,
Or instant strip him of his tatter'd weeds.

And what remains? &mdash; perhaps with harpy claw,
Official rapine, not more base than mean,
With-holds in part th' allotted bed of straw,
Or snatches something from his pittance lean.

But when th' impartial court shall hither move,
And different testimonials fully hear,
This persecuted man may haply prove
From all his charges manifestly clear.

Yet heavy claims amerce him still, before
His fetter'd limbs regain their native ease;
That surly form, that now attends the door,
Even he'll be ready for his share of fees.

Is this his recompence?  is this decree'd
For bondage, hunger, sickness, grief and shame;
Thus to be pillag'd in the hour of need
Because unjust aspersions stain'd his name?

Alas, for right extortion little cares,
Since prohibitions can't her rage restrain;
To slight supreme authority she dares,
And render even sovereign mercy vain!

Lo, pardon strikes the glad delinquent's ear,
But large demands his rising joys depress;
With held by them he still must languish here,
Forlorn, resourceless, void of all redress.

When scenes like these his generous bosom rent
Undaunted HOWARD'S wide research began;
And every hold where shackled guilt was pent,
With conscious awe beheld the wond'rous man.

Where darkness long had frown'd without annoy
Compassion's glance a brilliant luster spread;
Even hopeless objects breath'd a transient joy;
And weeping sufferers tears of rapture shed.

Confus'd, harsh rigour thrust her scourge away;&mdash;
And first a dread of impotence disclos'd,
When all the secrets of her baneful sway
The heaven inspir'd philanthropist expos'd.

But not in mere objections ends his toil;
With amplest stores of observation fraught,
His kind instructions how to rear a pile,
Convenient, safe, and not unhealthy, taught.

And whilst he rules of discipline recites,
To make confinement punish and amend,
With strictest justice lenity unites,
And both with policy their councils blend.

Struck by such genuine worth the nations praise
In fair designs unanimously shone;
While fame-preserving muses joy'd to raise
A column far exceeding Parian stone:

Yet incompleat is all this large applause,
'Till power shall bid each prisoner's grievance cease;
And regulate, by more efficient laws,
Their treatment, food, and still-desir'd release,

But verity must partial tales disown;
Although coercive ills too oft abound,
In Britain's land the structures not unknown
Where happily the fair reverse is found.

And may at last a full return prevail;
Directed from the vagrant's forc'd abode,
In bright progression through the altering jail,
Up to the aweful, death-inflicting code.

Firm rise our penal laws, distinct and full;
Yet some a sage revisal well require;
For oft their sanguine threats themselves annul,
Too fiercely breathing forth vindictive ire.

And why must rigour's obsolete remains,
So often reprobated, still endure?
Our civic genius all such aid disdains;
Her justice then shall seeming wrath obscure?

But though her sanctions may be too severe,
If censure's voice should each defect arrange,
In contrast let judicial worth appear,
Reproof will straight to high eulogium change.

Our ancestors, indeed, vague methods chose
For criminal process, and for civil suits;
Presuming Heaven must always interpose,
And set aright litigious man's disputes.

Hence ordeal sprung, the engine of deceit;
With boiling water stor'd and sacred bread;
And veil'd collusion, even with naked feet,
Could safely o'er the burning ploughshares tread.

Or combat prov'd the champion's fam'd resource;
While endless rituals solemniz'd the fight;
And law, like anarchy, made conquering force
Its grand criterion both of truth and right.

Such were the erring means our fathers sought
When native shades involv'd the rustic mind;
Opinion by philosophy untaught,
And manners by admixion unrefin'd:

But lo, from all this gloom emerging forth,
Bright as the morn, a glorious monarch rose;
In whose high character consummate worth,
Self-form'd, through each heroic function glows.

Immortal ALFRED!  though the noblest cause
And happiest skill enhance his warlike fame,
The muse must still reserve supreme applause
To grace her sapient legislator's name.

'Twas his to fix the base of social right;
And all its distributive powers expand,
Free as the air, and clear as early light
Through every quarter of the smiling land.

Our present mode of trial thence descends;
Pure judicature in its wisest form;
A safeguard that internal peace defends,
A bulwark which oppression ne'er shall storm.

For equity the fair tribunal rears;
No legal despot holds the captive's fate;
No pre-determin'd doom awakes his fears;
Nor dreads he vengeful power, or private hate.

But when complaint has vouch'd some wrongful act,
And seizes on whom suspicion falls,
To judge the cause on principles of fact,
His neighbouring peers a matchless ordinance calls.

Selected thence, and solemnly adjur'd,
A stated number weighs th' attested charge;
And upright concord being well secur'd,
Guilt they convict or innocence enlarge.

Now other realms, and chiefly Gallia's coast,
Survey, her crisis fixt regard excites;
For lo, with steadfast zeal, a numerous host
Assert their native fundamental rights.

The subject there, 'till thus repulse was try'd,
If jealous power conceiv'd the least disgust,
On conscious probity in vain rely'd;
The secret writ disprov'd his sanguine trust.

A pit might then his remnant life enthrall;
Compar'd to which even frozen desarts bloom:
Aghast he lies as vermin o'er him crawl,
Enwrapt with noxious stench and constant gloom.

No pitying friend his frightful den may seek:
Unsooth'd he mourns as tremor strength expels;
Want, unresisted, shrinks his livid cheek,
And utterance, heard not, turns to phrenzy's yells.

Is this his situation?  dismal state!
To ope our eyes entomb'd among the dead,
Girt with black horror and o'erwhelming fate,
Scarce fills th' astonish'd soul with greater dread!

But oh!  ye sons of grief, forget your pains;
Ye ghastly wretches shake with glad suprize;
Emancipation hastes to burst your chains,
And light once more shall bless your wond'ring eyes.

Embracing kindred soon shall round you cling;
From sacred friendship grateful tears shall start;
And thrilling joys in every bosom spring,
Those sweet sensations of the human heart.

For lo, the people all are rous'd to arms;
Hark, multitudes the dungeon-walls assault:
On treachery's head redounds its own sad harms,
And desolation storms th' impervious vault.

And now, as myriads round its ruins flock,
Their stony strength confounds the shuddering throng;
Piles, rude and massy!  like a fractur'd rock,
Where perforating toil scarce winds along.

While all the force of unrestrain'd debate
The senate's choicest orators  pursue;
Devising plans to raise a liberal state,
And BRITAIN'S matchless model guides their view.

Let fancy now, to other realms convey'd,
The military governments survey;
While truth attests how all their vain parade
Is terminated in despotic sway.

When PRUSSIA'S lord his wrathful mandate gave
Straight TRENCK was shackled with an iron load;
And close beneath him yawns th' expressive grave,
Waiting his final groan, &mdash; despair's abode.

Describe his crimes: &mdash; alas th' imperial foe
With no specific charge his deeds arraign'd;
And none obsequious agents sought to know,
His frown a full authority contain'd.

But freedom here sustains her glorious cause;
And when the Briton's doom'd to suffer ill,
She claims the sanction of establish'd laws,
Scorning an arbitrary tyrant's will.

Th' indicted party here, for fair defence,
Confronts the persons that his guilt assert;
While legal aid and adverse evidence
Their hostile allegations controvert.

But (dire reverse) where blinding gloom involves
The servile tenets  of a languid clime,
Th' accurst, if so fierce bigotry resolves,
His sentence hears when first he hears his crime.

And could proud SPAIN have made our sires submit
This holy essence soon had scorch'd the land;
Conceal'd in darkness like th' infernal pit,
And cruel as its diabolic band.

Let error still enforcing flames require;
No zeal-enkindled burnings here are known;
And grinding screws, and knotted whips of wire,
Bless gracious heaven, are but for triumph shewn.

Frequent the British holds; they, night-imerst,
No private executions ere contain;
No menial ruffian gives the deadly thrust,
While nature's made to cloak the shameful stain.

Nor victims, rack'd amain, with gasping breath,
Their self-accusing falsehoods here reveal;
The criminal meets an instantaneous death,
Unmangled on the dislocating wheel.

Accursed torture, mad for shrieks and pain,
What horrid monster ever gave thee birth?
And what black demon rules the savage train
That still conduct thee through the frighted earth?

Shall man for thee his talents prostitute,
And agonizing instruments devise;
Ardent that misery may be more acute,
That human woe beyond its bounds may rise?

We start to hear that even a barbarous race
Low on the wall should cause a hook to hang,
And dash th' offender from a sleepy place,
To perish, writhing, on the dreadful fang:

But sure the stigma parallel defies,
When scenes far worse in different parts are found;
Where error from the seats of learning flies,
And holy fanes with mercy's praise resound!

Even now the ministers of wrath are met
To fix the sufferer on some dire machine;
And all around their watchful guards are set,
From mortal eyes the ruthless task to screen.

Lo piercing cries announce their dreadful art;
Fierce through their prey the harrowing torments roll;
Contortive engines wrench each finer part,
And mad distraction hunts th' embitter'd soul.

And to demonstrate suffering's standard height,
Th' assassins medical allies suborn;
Lest nature should throw off th' enormous weight,
And from their pungent gripe the wretch be torn.

Yet all this rage, this cruelty extreme,
The most detested sight that eyes can view,
They only mere discrimination deem,
That guilt alone may feel its vengeful due.

How strange, how inexpressibly absurd!
Where all their end th' inhuman means defeat;
For though but bare suspicion is incurr'd,
Notorious crimes a gentler sentence meet!

Indignant thence the muse withdraws her eyes,
But meet afresh with wrath-engender'd woe:
The warrior's troubles now in order rise;
Chain'd and insulted by his mightier foe.

Grim death he fear'd not on the listed plain;
Each martial hardship well he knew to brave;
But must he base indignities sustain,
And even be levell'd with th' offending slave?

Alas, that valour should itself bereave!
Successful palms in vain its labours crown,
If thus it sullies what its arms atchieve,
And blasts the progress of its own renown.

Here memory, turn'd to facts of recent date,
Reflects how Indian treachery dar'd infringe
The bond of faith, and honours' laws, to fate
Its wild barbarity and fell revenge.

Not so brave ELLIOTT, when the hero ceas'd
To hurl his burning messengers of death;
For captives, snatch'd from sea-girt flames, increas'd
The glorious honours of his mural wreath.

What difference!  here to ease the soldier's wounds,
His victors all their healing art afford;
The vanquish'd there inveterate rage confounds,
And private murder aids the public sword.

Comparison now gives its progress o'er;
No longer seeks the muse abroad to roam;
She quits, unenvying, every foreign shore,
And flies with joy to greet her native home.

Hail matchless ALBION!  every son of thine
Must all the pride of conscious triumph feel;
Then may they all in grateful conduct join,
And worthy actions manifest their zeal.

But when we celebrate our happy lot,
That gave us birth in such a generous clime,
Another bounty must not be forgot,
Th' enlighten'd period of the present time.

By fiction rais'd, the legendary tale
Resounds with castles drear, and giants fell;
With famish'd knights, whom brazen walls impale,
And virgins fair, entranc'd by magic spell.

In real life too oft the like was shewn;
Too oft our annals teem with just complaint,
That violence here has into fetters thrown
The patriot, the hero, and the saint.

And when contending chiefs th' imperial claim
Sustain'd by feudal clans and barons bold,
An iron rod the sceptre's self became;
The throne a portal to some death-fraught hold.

AUGUSTA'S fort can ample proof supply,
Where massacre  and treason center'd then;
And still a type appears, to fancy's eye,
Of regal bondage in the lion's den.

When too our senators their prince withstood,
Ah!  civil discord, how thy fury rag'd;
How fighting fields were drench'd with brethren's blood,
As, fir'd by zeal, their mighty hosts engag'd!

Wrath smote the nations like an earthquake's shock;
And desperate hands, unparallel'd before,
With cool deliberation rear'd the block,
And urg'd the axe that drank their sovereign's gore.

And here the sorrowing muse might well deplore,
But loftier songs their suffering worth display,
The kindred destinies of upright MOORE,
Adventurous RALEIGH, and accomplish'd GREY.

With reverence too she views each martyr-chief,
Who ALBION'S sons from mental  slavery freed,
By nobly separating pure belief
From superstition's incoherent creed.

Firm was their zeal; nor did they cease to dare,
When close-imprison'd, flame-denouncing ROME;
But often, like the apostolic pair,
With songs of rapture pierc'd the midnight gloom.

Alas!  how different are the impious crew
That here amidst these crouded cells blaspheme!
Sons of iniquity, receive your due;
Your punishment compleats my wandering theme.

For justice now demands her wonted course;
And awful delegates her weapons hold;
Whose probity shall all her claims enforce,
Whose learned skill her principles unfold.

Such is the sage this concourse hither draws:
The javelins gleam; behold him, rob'd in state;
Charg'd to conduct the process of the laws,
And finally denounce transgression's fate.

Even so the war-ship strikes the flashing brine,
To hostile seas directs her ample prow;
Assists to form BRITANNIA'S deathful line,
And pours her thunder round the fainting foe.

What perturbation racks each guilty breast!
The vital stream becomes a stagnant load;
And each defence their restless minds suggest
Its fallacy responsive pangs forebode.

Like seamen listening to the stormy north,
Harsh in their ears the trumpet's echoes jar;
Th' unwelcome signal, hark!  that calls them forth
To stand before th' investigating bar.

And now their charge is read; and proofs ensue,
As information states each flagrant act;
Or skill'd enquiry holds her guiding clue
To extricate the deep-enshrouded fact.

And circumspection, watch to detect,
From varying falshood strips her close disguise;
The bold denial proves of no effect,
Evasions fly, nor plausible replies.

While thus deponents all th' accus'd impeach,
Judicial vengeance, close-attending, lowers:
The magnitude of every legal breach
Gives like proportion to his dreadful powers.

And first, on these, his chastening arm inflicts
The galling stripe or ignominious brand;
While others on a manacle are fixt,
And there, insulted by derision, stand.

Long years of penance doom'd to undergo,
What crouds were oft to drudgery consign'd,
Where THAMES indignant murmurs &mdash; forc'd to flow
Amidst the basest dregs of human kind.

Or worse, avenging harrass'd AFRIC'S cause,
The exiles groan'd along her poisonous shore;
Expos'd to fell disease, the lyon's jaws,
The sun's fierce blaze, and blasting tempests roar.

Now to uncultur'd wilds and climes remote,
Wide o'er the billows convict-squadrons roll;
Where factious strife will soon their source denote,
And EUROPE'S crimes infect the Southern pole.

For those behind, a retributive hour
Ends all their vices &mdash; pent in narrow room
They mourn approaching fate, for sovereign power
Has heard their guilt, and ratify'd their doom.

Their kindred &mdash; sure a general sigh must rise,
For such of those unhappy mortals sake
As, though unbound by guilt's involving ties,
Share all their suffering and their shame partake.

In vain their spotless conduct dares provoke
Resentment's self to tax their fair renown;
Confusion stuns them with the deadly stroke,
And low as earth depression bends them down.

Thus smoldering ruins strike compassion's eye,
When wasting flames have prov'd their dreadful power;
In ashes all the master's treasures lie,
And chilling want is now his only dower.

Behold that growing youth, so oft forewarn'd,
Who still from sage instruction fled aloof,
And who inculcates now, what erst he scorn'd,
With all the energy of fatal proof:

Existence there in morning splendours reign'd,
But vengeful destiny arrests its flight;
And lo, its disk, with livid horror stain'd,
Irrevocably sinks in endless night.

When first their offspring crown'd the genial bed,
What pleasures blest the glad connubial pair;
But where are now his father's prospects fled,
And all the joys of fond maternal care?

Seduc'd, alas, by dissipation's rage,
This precious darling acts the villain's part;
The child that was to sooth decrepid age,
Now rends in twain th' embitter'd parent's heart.

Still Sorrow claims the melancholy strain;
The muse must still a tale of woe relate;
For what severe distress  must he sustain
That, undeserving, meets this dreadful fate.

Justice may reign, but cases oft occur,
With such obscure perplexities involv'd,
That man's decree perforce must sometimes err,
The good be punish'd, and th' unjust absolv'd.

And thus the victim of a recent doom
Was torn from children, friends, and weeping wife;
Long time he pin'd amid the dungeon's gloom,
Nor lost his fetters 'till he lost his life.

Convincing proof, too late, retriev'd his fame;
A wretch, for other crimes, departing hence,
Confest, at length, with all th' excess of shame,
That innocence had dy'd for his offence.

But see, the criminals on their platform stand;
Compunction straight the piteous mind assails;
And while its cognitive powers expand,
Delirium thus the mystic scene unveils.

As round her altar destin'd victims groan,
The mighty idol, world-controuling VICE,
With hideous triumph, mounts an iron throne,
To swell her pomp with human sacrifice.

There Execution holds the fatal band,
Invested, fitly, with a sable stole:
While Horror raves; whose bristles upright stand,
And harsh, distorted gestures freeze the soul.

A gazing croud conspicuous Shame surrounds,
She draws in haste the covering o'er her eyes;
Remorse his livid breast incessant wounds,
And Pain, half suffocated, gasping lies.

Sightless Despair, than winter's darkest cloud
More gloomy, hears th' infernal engines clash;
And Blasphemy, with imprecations loud,
Defies the swift-wing'd bolt and opening flash.

Most dire &mdash; but how shall misery be effac'd?
These horrid devastations, how supprest;
Unless that earth becomes a desart waste,
Of all her hapless tenants dispossest?

For while the many-pointed darts of wrong
Are thus, by sin, in every quarter hurl'd,
Sorrow, her sure concomitant, as long
With draw fresh tribute from the weeping world.

Thus Heaven ordains &mdash; but though no art of man
Can e'er eradicate its fatal source,
Wise policy may form some saving plan,
To check the  headlong torrent's gathering force.

Ye sages then the righteous cause espouse,
Here strive to foster lov'd BRITANNIA'S weal:
Succeed; the noblest wreath shall bind your brows,
And future myriads hail your pious zeal.

Nor shall your civic worth be undisplay'd,
Or much-rever'd philanthropy unsung,
Ye patriot band, whose crime-restraining aid
From lenity's most generous motives sprung.

While sanguine terrors penal vengeance arm,
To scourge transgression when the guilt is done,
Your better cares prevent th' impending harm,
And teach th' ensnar'd their threaten'd fate to shun.

Ah!  let him not become death's easy prey;
The child by indigence and evil bred,
Who knows no friend to guide his wandering way,
No honest means to rear his wretched head.

T' offend is not his choice; he never chose
But must, inevitably, act amiss:
Perdition gapes; when, lo, you interpose,
And snatch the victim from his dire abyss.

Oh could your efforts full perfection gain,
Those scenes that float before the muse's eyes
Might then, to bless mankind, be render'd plain,
And virtue's noblest epocha arise.

No more would guile a specious aspect wear,
Rapacious violence suffers, self-destroy'd;
While thraldom's life-constraining walls appear
A shatter'd ruin, desolate and void.

Or, realizing fancy's wildest dream,
Full in the midst some spectre tyrant reigns;
With instruments of death that round him gleam,
And shadowy captives bound in seeming chains.

And while impenetrable shades o'ercast
The ambient space, may all the sons of men,
Wondering at former misery, start aghast,
And ever shun this dark, opprobrious den.
