Haunted by dreams of beauty and of bloom,
And far creations of a restless mind,
That dwells in worlds beyond the starless tomb,
Yet robes all things with love of human kind,
I lay and listened to the living wind,
And drank the sunset of the autumn sky,
As stirred the firs like sighs of seraphs shrin'd,
And wavy clouds gleamed on the lifted eye,
Till my freed spirit found its holy home on high.

And as I gazed on woods, and waters wild,
That foamed and brawled along their rugged way,
Methought, 'twere bliss to be once more a child,
And plash amid the brook the livelong day,
And sleep in tangled forests, and belay
The virgin moon with wishes that have wings,
And clothe with life the rainbow and each ray,
And shrine a soul in all unbodied things,
And worship at the heaven the voiceless spirit brings.

While in the world's highways we roam and sigh,
And seldom meet the man the soul reveres,
Back, like the sunflower, turns the wearied eye,
To drink the limpid light of o'erpassed years&mdash;
The troubled stream of mingled hopes and fears!
Forsaking, then, as we have been forsaken,
The world whose smile, like sea delirium, wears
Hope's mockery, &mdash; let the trampled heart awaken
And bloom, tho' every flower from every bough is shaken.

'Tis bliss to be full oft alone and shed
The tears of rapture unremarked and still;
None mock thee then with gloom of feelings dead,
None curb the proud expansion of thy will;
The sunbright currents of thy bosom fill
The sea that rolls around the holy throne;
The harp of Hope again doth wildly thrill
With the deep memory of a loved one gone,
And mind communes with God in silence and alone.

Free from the tyrant task of daily toil,
The burden and the weariness of strife,
The contact of the worthless, and the smile
Of hypocrites who bear a carrion life,
The o'erworn heart then springs with beauty rife,
And soars like stars that bear their souls to heaven,
And all the love that clings round child and wife,
And mother, sister, friend, &mdash; like holy even,
Thrills the pure bosom with a hope not vainly given.

The purity of passion, &mdash; the sublime
And glorious consummation of desire,
That waves its pinions through a darkened time,
And pants to mount and join the laurell'd choir,
In scenes whose solemn stillness can inspire,
Come o'er us like the music of the stars,
And teach us to forget, the altar fire
Too oft is quenched by sorrow, that debars
Our hearts from Heaven's blest love by Earth's inglorious wars.

Then while we linger till the appointed hour,
'Tis wisest in the solitude of wood
Or soundless room, to commune with the Power,
That bore and sanctified the Holy Rood,
And learn in silence to be just and good;
For mid the jar and clash of them who seek
Wealth and its peasant power, &mdash; a bloated brood!
Like nether millstone grows the spirit weak,
And high-toned hearts must bear their anguish till they break.

So in the gloom of Wissihiccon came
My thoughts like felt shapes and before me stood!
And then I wandered o'er the realm of fame,
And mourned the cruelty of kindred blood;
And hoarse below the swoln and turbid flood,
Boiling o'er shaggy rocks, in wrath replied,
And the dark cedars, in my dreamy mood,
Seemed giants watching o'er the blackened tide;
And desolation's hues clothed all the steep hillside.

Like Youth's first love, the cool airs kissed my brow,
While twilight deepened in the sinking glen;
Yet sunset crowned the haunted mountain now
As high mind triumphs o'er the guile of men;
'Twas Thought's own hour of pride and glory, when,
All self-sustained, its heavenly fantasies
Came forth like nymphs from some rough centaur's den,
Flushed the pale cheek, illumed the lifted eyes,
And passed like parted souls beyond the boundless skies.

And all life's blest humanities, &mdash; the heart
That pardons while it quivers under wrong,
And the clear intellect, that doth impart
Its self-approving sadness to its song,
The mind that blends not though it dwells among
The world it loves not though it scorns to hate,
And walks abroad in conscious virtue strong,
Though much to bear and suffer is its fate,&mdash;
These o'er me gently come when torrent woes abate.

For in the love of Nature, and the peace,
That glides in shadowy softness o'er her face,
The gall and wormwood of deep passion cease
To track with poison all life's weary race;
Gently we breathe the mild delicious grace
Pervading all the matchless works of God,
And through each scene of magic scenery trace
Wisdom that speaketh from the living sod,
And Love that whispers peace where man hath ever trod.

In the communion of young wedded love,
Much evil have we seen, my Genevieve!
Yet we have sought our solace from above,
And one fair flower forbids us now to grieve;
Though poor, yet proud, the world cannot bereave
Our hearts of bliss the world could never give,
And in the passage of our days we leave
The fiendlike few who slander while we strive,
And deem it boundless joy in heaven's sweet smile to live.

But at this late hour, while the world o'erflows
With multitudes that hourly hurry home,
How wild would throng our voiceless, breathless woes
In sudden knowledge of such awful doom
As erst, in the deep utterance of the tomb,
Went forth against the chosen and the just!
Oh!  how our hearts would quiver in their gloom,
Fail in their faith and tremble in their trust!
Should we obey and praise and triumph in the dust?

While thy sweet babe upon thy bosom lay,
Wrapt in the visions of a sinless sleep,
Pure, bright, and beautiful as early day
When it swells upward from the billowy deep,
And its first beams along the mountains sweep&mdash;
Couldst thou, ev'n then, thy firstborn, only, take
And give him to the death ordained, nor weep
O'er the dread sacrifice his sire must make
Of one whose smile hath charmed when fortune did forsake?

Couldst thou resign him to the God who gave?
And see him die beneath a father's hand?
&mdash;Oh, no!  more dreadful than a common grave
The awful doom of that most stern command!
And thou wouldst shudder, and not helpless stand,
But weave thine arms around thy much-loved child,
And thus deny him to his Giver!  land
And sea, or boundless wave or trackless wild,
Thou wouldst compass to save the son that on thee smiled!

Yet not unlike the scene of that great deed,
Bold Wissihiccon spreads his piny woods;
And not unlike the sage, we and our seed
Dwell strangers mid thick peopled solitudes.
The voice of lonely wilds and troubled floods
Moans like an omen; and I can but feel
As once he felt who traversed desert roods
To offer up his only child, and kneel
Before His throne of light whose word is human weal.

Thus led by solemn mind, methought, 'twere well,
Though sceptics scoff and unbelievers sneer,
An olden tale in modern song to tell,
How faith o'ercame affection's wildest fear,
And rendered up, when summoned to appear,
The WORLD'S YOUNG HEIR, the SIRE OF NATIONS vast!
That all who roam, oppressed and hopeless here,
May catch wise knowledge from the shadowy past,
And learn that He who made will try us at the last.

Fair rolled the river in the evening light
Of that rich clime where flowers forever blow;
Soft sigh'd the breeze along the cedared height,
And curled the waters as they slept below;
The dark-blue heaven, o'ergushed with one deep glow,
Smiled o'er the beauty that a rainshower spread,
Nebo and Carmel on their brows of snow
Crowned the thron'd glory ere its radiance fled,
And far Libanus raised his proud and glittering head.

O'er rolling pastures, where no landmarks stood,
The green grass sprung and breathed the exulting joy
Of a young being, when the bounding blood
Leaps in wild music through the high-souled boy.
&mdash;Alas!  that time and trial should destroy
The bloom and beauty of that brief blest hour,
And interest mix its dark and base alloy
With the pure heart, and minds of matchless power
Bend at the world's cold shrine and grasp the idol's dower!

Like a young maiden with a breezy foot
From Shenir's groves the antelope came forth,
And the roe followed with a footstep mute
As if it worshipped the bright blushing earth;
All living creatures revelled in their birth;
The clustering vines from bending tree tops played,
The spice shrubs scattered, in their frolic mirth,
Delicious odours through the Eden shade,
And even the Sun did pause to share the bliss he made.

On Merom's waters and the silvery sea
That drinks Gadara's laughing waves, and lies,
Like innocent and joyous infancy,
In meadows green beneath transparent skies;
On Tabor's solemn woods, that seem to rise,
While the entranced eye beholds, as they would soar
Into the heaven, whose soft and sweet air flies
O'er oleander banks from shore to shore&mdash;
The glorious sunlight falls, and hills and dales adore.

In Hebron's vale and mid its pleasant woods
The son of Shem walked in a voiceless mood,
For in the depth of such great solitudes
The full heart floweth like a deep broad flood,
Bearing its treasures silently!  The good
So blest become in beauty that the tongue
Lacks speech, and the brain tho't, the thrilling blood
Reveals unto the heart in virtue young
The poetry of heaven that never yet was sung.

The hallowed silence of the hills &mdash; the low
And gentle voice of brooks that leapt along&mdash;
The far-off gleam of Jordan, and the glow
Of countless mountain pinnacles; the song
Of shepherds on the heights who bore no wrong
And none inflicted &mdash; the wild hum of bees,
As Hybla's numberless &mdash; and, like a gong,
The noise of foaming cataracts &mdash; all these
Came o'er the Patriarch now upon the soul-like breeze.

Folded in blessings from his youth, and bred
In the deep love of heaven, his days had been
Cheerful, though changeful, and he ever fed
His tempered thoughts, in many a quiet scene,
By still communion with a heart serene
In its high faith, till he had learned to trust
The silent vision of that cloud-veil'd mein,
Which led him on by wisdom ever just,
And canopied with heaven the darkness of the dust.

From raven blackness into hoar and white
His beard and hair had changed, &mdash; and many a line,
Furrowing the floweriness of young delight,
Marked years not reckless, tho' not stained by wine;
For time, however blest, doth surely twine
Its poisoned tendrils round the loftiest tree,
And silently corrode, &mdash; though sunbeams shine,&mdash;
Till the leaves fall, &mdash; the boughs grow sear; &mdash; thus he
Stood mid the nations now in old sublimity.

Through groves luxuriant as the poet's dream,
Where rivulets alternate played and slept;
O'er green savannahs, where the sun's last beam
A lingering revel and rejoicing kept,
And many a wood-dove sung, and white lamb leapt,
Slowly he walked, and in his spirit shrined
The joy of all things, till he bowed and wept,&mdash;
Wept from the fulness of a grateful mind,
That deemed its God too good to one of human kind.

Then suddenly the living air hung still,
The deep woods quivered, and the waters flowed
With an awed music, and the heaven-crown'd hill
Seemed to bow down before the present God!
A fearful reverence floated all abroad,
And the hush'd heart shrunk back and watched and prayed;
The unimagined Soul of Godhead rode
Through the wide world, and prostrate Earth obeyed
The Power that all her charms and countless joys portrayed.

And then a voice was heard whose mellowed power
And solemn sweetness thrilled the vital air,
And Nature quailed as at the primal hour
When first Sin ratified the world's despair,
And, in the voiceless sanctity of prayer,
The Prophet worshipped as the Spirit passed;
Then in such tones as pierce the heart and bear
Its thoughts to heaven upon a sun-wing'd blast,
The Apocalypse of Time was heard unto the last.

"Fear not!  I am thy shield and thy reward!
Thou shalt inherit, and thy seed shall reign
O'er all the lands that call the heathen lord,
Though not till pride is purified by pain!
No paynim Syrian from Damascus' plain
Shall rule exulting in thy wealth and might,
But thine own son shall bear, without a stain,
The crown and sceptre of a kingdom bright
And glorious as the stars that diadem the night!

"From the vast heights of sky-crown'd Lebanon
To fertile Edom; from the midland sea,
On whose fair shores dwells many a faithless son
Of Ham, to the bright hills of Araby,
The nation of thy people, great and free,
Shall reign and prosper, when the days of wo
And vassalage 'neath iron sovereignty
Have pass'd, and Jordan's stream hath ceas'd to flow,
And the Sun paused o'er Ajalon's wide overthrow.

"Look where the darkness deepens and behold
The sabaoth of heaven!  thy race shall be
As glistering and as countless; yet, like gold,
They shall be tried by sore captivity
And tests inscrutable to them and thee!
Toiling in stranger lands that are not theirs,
And tasked by wealth that shall not set them free,
From Babel's streams shall rise desponding prayers,
Halan's and Habor's towers and many a realm of cares.

"Prepare thy sacrifice!"  The altar stood
Prepared and plucked flowers o'er the victims strown,
Whose fair leaves drank the sin-atoning blood,
That brought redemption from the viewless throne,
Then spake again the voice:  "Lo!  not alone
"Thou dwellest with the Philistine!"  before
The reverend Patriarch's heaven-touch'd vision shone
Myriads of hosts on mountain, plain and shore,
And voices like the sea did gloriously adore.

"Thine eye beholds thy children," said the Voice,
"Who live in ages unrevealed and dark,
And even now thou seest them rejoice,
And worship round the consecrated ark
Late rescued from the Infidel, &mdash; now mark!
Blaspheming Rephaims mingle with the host,
The priest of Heaven beneath his shrine lies stark,
The hideous gods of every idol coast
Glare through the sea of incense, &mdash; Israel!  thou are lost!

"Now look where giant Philistines enslave
In field, trench, cavern, thy weak rebel race,&mdash;
Yet they shall turn again as from the grave,
And worship and rejoice in boundless grace;
Till, haughty grown, again before my face
Heathen diviners to dark deities
Shall offer up in MY most holy place
Victims to poison every living breeze,&mdash;
Till Shalmanezer scourge the race that trust in these.

"Where babes fall gasping mid the idol fires
Of Arpad and Adrammeleck, &mdash; there in wrath
Fierce Baladan shall light a nation's pyres,
And leave a burning desert in his path;
And all the pomp Heaven's glorious temple hath
Shall crown the Spoiler's throne, &mdash; the Nisrock's shrine;
And wo and waste, and guilt and utter scathe
Shall come, till scorn look down on Palestine,
And Ruin triumph where God's glory shone divine.

"Like withered leaves o'er boundless deserts driven,
Thy race, &mdash; my Chosen, shall be cast and left,
Ages of agony, uncheered by heaven,
In fear and bondage to all nations, &mdash; reft
Of hope, &mdash; vassals and victims, &mdash; rent and cleft,
Wasted and heartless, &mdash; slaves, yet secret kings!
The rack shall riot on them, &mdash; and the heft
Of the red sword cleave to the hand that brings
Death to the cowering Jew, &mdash; who yet to earth-life clings!

"Yet fear not!  doubt not!  good shall much abound,
And truth, love, fellowship to God and man;
The voice of prophets from the holy ground
Shall never cease to mitigate the ban.
Be just and fearless as thou hast began,&mdash;
Thy seed shall spread, shall triumph and bear sway&mdash;
Till from the vale of Seven to farthest Dan,
When dawns in distant years the atoning day,
Shall throng thy Race Restored and worship and obey."

O'er the Chaldean came an awful change,
When ceased the voice and heart-felt darkness fell,
And terror glided through thought's utmost range,
And awfulness no son of song can tell;
Pale shrouded shapes from each lone silent dell
Gibbered and glanced, &mdash; dim creatures of a dream!
O'er clouded earth and heaven a fearful knell
Sounded, &mdash; and bickering eyes did wildly gleam,
And Horror's giant form to fill the world did seem.

Years without epoch passed, &mdash; for quiet minds,
That bless in silentness and daily praise,
Float o'er the world like pure and placid winds,
That waft sweet odours o'er Spring's sunny days.
All hours are cheerful in life's flowery ways
To him whose power to bless doth match his will,
And ne'er too long the glorious sun delays,
Nor the blonde moon, that blooms o'er shadowy hill,
To image virgin dew and mirror woodland rill.

The Egyptian boy, &mdash; dark featured Ishmael
In beauty grew and manliness, &mdash; his eye
Glowed like the sun o'er Nile, and, like a bell
On sabbath morn, his voice went through the sky;
His proud lip curl'd, and on his cheek the dye
Of days of archery sunk dark and deep;
Tall, strong and flexile grew his form, and high
His dusky brow, and, all too proud to weep,
His sovereign spirit soar'd, &mdash; his heart that could not sleep!

But, doomed to be his own sole world of pride,
And driven forth by jealousy and scorn,
The lord of Arabs wandered by the side
Of outcast Hagar many an eve and morn,
O'er realms of death where nought but hardy thorn
Shelters the basilisk and sand-storms roll!
&mdash;To be the sire of nations he was born,
Of nations conquerless, &mdash; time o'er his soul
Burst like the electric light of glorious northern pole!

In Paran's waste and burning wilderness,
With none to counsel, none console &mdash; alone,
Alone, where none could love, admire and bless,
His spirit lightened o'er the seasons gone,
Resolved to conquer all that had been done,
Rise unsupported and reign uncontrolled;
And many a bold Bedouin on his throne,
And many a Barcan chief of iron mould,
Hath sternly proved that steel may triumph over gold.

And in her age the Hebrew Mother clasped
The heir of Salem to her withered breast,
And in the breathlessness of rapture grasped
Despair's deep hope that made her wildly blest;
And in the pride of woman, who hath pressed
The image of her beauty, she forgot
Lone wandering Hager and her son distressed,
And recked not of the evils of their lot&mdash;
But there was One whose eye and justice slumbered not.

For through the vast and shoreless universe
No deed, no thought, no passion, no design
Passeth unseen, unjudged by Him whose curse
Withers &mdash; whose blessing sheds a light divine
O'er earth and heaven.  O, all that lives is Thine!
Supremest Good!  and evil but the gloom
O'er which thy glory doth intensely shine,
Changing the darkness to a radiant bloom,
And opening golden gates beyond the darkened tomb!

While roamed o'er lone Idumea's desert wild,
Forsaken, hopeless, banished to despair,
The Egyptian mother and her high-soul'd child,
Sara exulted o'er her matchless heir,
And exiled from her heart all mortal care;
For her electric spirit laughed and leapt,
And love, hope, rapture floated every where,
And in the breeze that harp'd, the dew that wept,
The sun, sea, sky was joy, as forth her eagle spirit swept.

She had been beautiful in earlier days,
And kings had knelt enamoured to her pride
Of loveliness, and breathed adoring praise,
And gone in sackcloth when they were denied;
And still her proud majestic form did glide
The absorbing lodestar of enchanted eyes,
Like Cleopatra o'er the glassy tide,
Or Artemisia in the sanctities
Of love that shrines the dead, and but with last death dies.

Yet furrowless and fair, her blue-vein'd brow
Glowed with the glory of her maidenhood,
And her wild, orient, Juno eye did glow
With much of youthful mind and sudden blood;
And over all her face, at times, a flood
Of untrained passions, spurning common forms
Of wise dissembling for each other's good,
Lowered like a lauwine when burst alpine storms&mdash;
All that adorn the heart &mdash; and one that all deforms.

For features, burning in the quenchless pride
And scorn of all beneath her pomp and power,
Seemed to exult in all that could deride
Inferior birth or unexcelling dower.
And deeply did that haughty spirit cower
Beneath the judgment of the LORD who made
The mortal frail in this probation hour,
That HE might pardon what HE first forbade,
And teach the haughtiest here that HE must be obeyed.

But how shall pen of youthful Bard portray
The prince, the priest, the prophet &mdash; the sublime
And peerless man of Faith? &mdash; Muse of the day,
Ere exile, wo and death pursued first crime,
When angels sung the birth of light and time,
Cast o'er my soul the blossom of thy smile!
And to the unfolding picture of my rhyme
Impart a solemn beauty, that awhile
May human hearts from mirth most winningly beguile.

Rich in all joys earth's children so desire,
From youth to age he toiled not, but abode,
Not idle, though not earnest to acquire,
Where'er his flocks found pasture, or his God
Designed his sojourn; and he ever trode
The bright and bloomy earth content to breathe
The soft and sunny breezes as they rode
Thro' the clear vault and fann'd the flowers beneath,
And praise in shadowy glen or copse on grassy heath.

Mild, reverend, patient and serene, he went
A stranger into many lands, and dwelt
With many godless nations; but he lent
To all the deep religion that he felt,
And with all men like a wise monarch dealt!
His frown did punish more than kingly doom,
And his forgiveness of the erring melt
The heart to virtue's mould, that else in gloom
Of guilt had sunk unwept to oblivion's voiceless tomb.

Chaldean, Amorite and Philistine,
Dusky Egyptian and gaunt Syrian brown,
All loved, revered, obeyed the heart divine,
Whose mercy did its godlike justice crown,
Whose deep benevolence seemed not its own
To will and do &mdash; but sorrow's; for to each,
Who drooped, and fell, in helpless anguish down,
Sinful or sinless, he his hand did reach,
And thus to heathen men God's glorious wisdom teach.

Not mint and cummin &mdash; tythes of outward form,
But a touched heart, the rabbins never knew,
He daily offered from an altar warm
With the pure fire of heaven; like holiest dew,
His prayers arose, spread beauty ever new
O'er the glad earth &mdash; and mingled with the skies;
He drank the amreta cup of bliss, and grew
Nearer the Eden his adoring eyes
Beheld through all the clouds of darkened destinies.

"But he who long hath basked in Fortune's sun,
"And known no want his wish could not supply"&mdash;
(The busy Fiend to many a potent one
Among the nations, &mdash; stealing tow'rd the sky,&mdash;
With serpent tongue averred and doubting eye,)
"Could not o'ercome stern trial of his faith,
And would not yield, &mdash; but howl, blaspheme, and fly!
Who loves not life that knows not common scathe?
Let his God test him once!" &mdash; Thus Hell's dark tempter saith.

The nations listened to the Fiend, and seemed
To watch for evil with a burning thirst;
Too bright and good and blest they long had deemed
The stainless sun that on their sins had burst.
Like him who doomed the Grecian sage, the worst
They could arraign was life immaculate;
But purity of being from the first
Hath met worse foes than envy, pride and hate,
War, avarice, iron guilt and all the fiends of fate.

Impurity abhors deeds undefiled
And shudders at light of life that leaves
No shadow on its orgies; the fair child
Is loathsome to the prodigal who weaves
The net he dies in; and lost virtue grieves
At sight of innocence and hates its bliss.
&mdash;Oh!  settled sin the earthly heart bereaves
Of all that charms, &mdash; home peace, love's smile and kiss,
Of hope in purer worlds, and every joy in this.

And, thrown into the Hinnom of the mind,
All evil passions rage like fires of hell;
The skies seem furnace brass, &mdash; earth black, the wind
The heart breathed breath of upas, that will swell
To stifling agony, though kill not, &mdash; tell,
Mad slaves of sin!  oh, tell the joys that lead
The proud, bright boy from all he loved so well,
That bear him on through each excess to need,
And bid him curse the good and smile to see them bleed!

Misguided youth!  lack ye the eye to trace
Whence Fate and Fortune come?  or think ye, Truth
In deep disaster veils her virgin face,
And craves, like falsehood, bribery's bitter ruth?
&mdash;Know ye, that Virtue bears eternal youth,
And Honour gleams on time's tumultuous sea,
And Faith doth smile though flesh should fail, in sooth,
And tried Devotion, on wings bright and free,
Triumphs o'er death, o'er time, in God's eternity!

The immaculate, omniscient Lord, who holds
The hearts of all, and breathes in every breath,
And every evil in His wisdom moulds
In pleasure's image, &mdash; even guilt and death,
And all the guile of gnashing fiends beneath,&mdash;
The Demon heard, and, hearing, in the joy
Of his imagined triumph, &mdash; while the wreath
Of hellish prowess won his scowling eye,&mdash;
Thus spake in organ tones from midnight's glorious sky:&mdash;

"Go, take thy son, &mdash; thine only son, &mdash; the Heir
Long promised of thy wealth, and hope and fame,
And to the Land of Vision sole repair,&mdash;
Moriah, hence to be a deathless name,&mdash;
And there to Him, who gave and well may claim,
Offer thy son a sacrifice!  and prove
To Earth and Heaven the martyr Faith that came
To guide thy youth and bless thine early love?"
And echo lingered long while soar'd the awful voice above!

Morn broke, &mdash; the Patriarch rose, &mdash; how dark the dawn,
How wan the glory of that fearful day!
As quick from mount and limpid stream withdrawn,
The vail of night did fade and float away,
And the mists crimson in each gushing ray;
In the strange silence of a spirit strung
To bear all suffering save an hour's delay,
Around his bleeding, bursting heart he flung
The iron robe of grief, &mdash; and trusted not his tongue.

The camel and the dromedary stood
Caparison'd, and snuffed the racy breeze,
And asses, loaded with a fragrant wood,
Gazed tethered from the midst of broad palm-trees;
And many a vassal mutely looked on these,
And marvelled that their Chief spake not a word,
And passed unmarked, in his dark fantasies,
The pomp of Tyre and Egypt, &mdash; save a sword
He seiz'd with quivering hand and shudder'd and ador'd.

In voiceless anguish all too terrible
For human utterance, &mdash; such wo as rends
The palpitating heart, and none can tell
Save they who suffer when they have no friends,
Before his tent the altered Patriarch wends
With hurried footstep and a corpse-like brow;
Though great, yet human, like a reed he bends,
But springs again triumphant, &mdash; even now,
Cast down, forsaken not, he ratifies his vow.

"Bring forth the boy!  he worships with his sire!"
He came.  "Why comes the mother with the lad?"
"To ask thee, son of Shem!  why burns that fire
Upon thy brow?  and why the voice, that bad
Thy child appear, did sound so strange and mad?
And why thou worshippest on that far hill,
And leavest dark my bosom ever glad
To worship in thy smile and to fulfil
In tenderness and love the utmost of thy will?"

"So God revealed in dream of yesternight!"
His voice did falter and he turned aside,
And a deep shadow fell upon the light
Of his unequalled faith, &mdash; and all the pride
Of manhood in his stricken bosom died
Before the fixed gaze of that eye which drank
His unvoiced pain.  "I will not be denied!
Not thus in other days you from me shrank,
And witless deem'd my love and woman's counsel rank.

"What ails thee, Abraham?"  "Thou shouldst not know,
Nor question, Sara!  but thy father was
A perfect man, and thou in all my wo
Hast borne the heavier portion; there is cause
For all thy dower of piety, &mdash; alas!
And all thy meekness, faith resigned and truth
Of holiness professed, &mdash; for o'er us pass
Trials we thought not of, &mdash; in awful sooth,
The fair boy of our age, &mdash; must die, &mdash; in all the bloom of youth!"

"Must die?  who says it? &mdash; Isaac!  Isaac die?
That beautiful, that intellectual head,
That dark, luxuriant, oriental eye,
That brow which oft hath Heaven's own glory shed,
That form like Tyre's fair god upon his bed
Of golden flowers, &mdash; must perish? &mdash; and for what?
Are there no lambs?  hath not the bullock bled?
&mdash;Must die?  my first born, only born be not!
Slaughtered and burned by thee and then on earth forgot!

"Accursed be the day that gave him birth,
If he so late was born to perish so!
Let darkness, ruin, death possess all earth,
And desolation laugh and sing! &mdash; but no!
It is not thus, &mdash; I see thy features glow
With something like a smile; 'twas but to test
A late made mother's love, and o'er her throw
Imagined danger, that more deeply blest
She might give heaven to him who hung upon her breast!

"Have I forgot my child's first step, first word?
And shall I not remember that delight?
Oh!  have I not in blissful stillness heard
His low breath mid the slumbers of the night?
&mdash;And shall I lose him now when proud and bright
And gifted with the eloquence of heaven?
&mdash;Good sooth, thou art to blame, and castest slight
O'er one untried that ne'er with thee hath striven,
Nor dared to think the thoughts to thee abundant given.

"Enough for me, beloved, to love again,
To breathe the laurel-rose, watch thy return,
And with our boy's smiles sooth the weary pain
Of absence.  Go!  and when thine altars burn,
Think not that she who loves can ever spurn
The GOD of love, or deem his service grief,
Or scorn His laws, or vainly hope to earn
Free bliss so visible in every leaf,&mdash;
Go, pray for me, for all, but for our son the chief!"

"Vain is thine anguish, &mdash; vainer yet thy hope,&mdash;
The GOD, who gave, commands, &mdash; wilt thou deny?
The mortal with the Immortal think to cope?
The Almighty dare throned in the boundless sky?"
&mdash;Gives He, then, sons in glowing youth to die,
And even bid the father strike the blow?
&mdash;Command, sayst thou? &mdash; A strange dream o'er thine eye
And ear cast sights and sounds thou didst not know,&mdash;
JEHOVAH bade thee not!  it must and shall be so!"

"Com'st thou from Ashdod, that thou dost arraign
The urim and the thummim of thy GOD?"
"No!  I can bear the bitterest pangs of pain,
Submit in silentness and kiss the rod&mdash;
&mdash;O any thing but this!  on coldest sod
Or shaggiest rock my bosom I will bare
And perish where the fierce death-angel trod&mdash;
&mdash;But spare my child &mdash; my princelike Isaac spare!
&mdash;O GOD of worlds!  why coils thy brow in such despair?

"Wilt thou devote him to a dream? &mdash; a cloud
Of vain fantastic visions? &mdash; and once more
Deny the love that wails and shrieks aloud,&mdash;
The heart that doth in agony adore?
My Lord, my husband!  shall this heathen shore
Exult and shout from Gaza unto Gath
O'er worship bloodier than Dagon's? &mdash; o'er
Thy face cast not thy mantle!  Heaven's wild wrath
Pursues alone the fiends down hell's dark lava path."

"Farewell, poor Sara! &mdash; in thy tent put on
Sackcloth and ashes!  GOD shall judge his own!"
&mdash;Like thought, the Patriarch and his son have gone,
And Sara sitteth in the dust alone!
One long wild shriek, and, blest in reason flown,
She murmurs maniac songs and laughs inane,
And wanders forth, and mingles many a moan
With much of mindless mirth and many a strain
Of happy love with low and deepening notes of pain.

The bright and beautiful and laughing sun
O'er Besor's banks and limpid waters threw
A shadowy charm, a glory new begun,
The freshness of the bosom bathed in dew,
When life is young and every beauty new.
Rich music burst from every bowered grove,
Rainbow-winged birds like happy fairies flew,
While heaven's sweet light, like holiest light of love,
Gushed with a silvery song, by spirits heard above.

But Abraham gazes on the lovely scene
As one who recks not of earth's loveliest light;
Nature oft glorious to his soul had been&mdash;
Clear rills that kiss green valleys &mdash; mountains bright
In the deep smile of daybeams, or at night
In the soft glory of the starlight &mdash; all,
That thrills the bosom ere the mouldering blight
Of sorrow comes and weary woes enthral&mdash;
But nature wears to him the last curse of the Fall!

And on he journeys voicelessly; green dale,
And wooded meadow and meandering river
In burning characters reveal a tale
O'er which the senses faint, the heart doth quiver;
And onward, where his last hope must forever
Sink in the oblivion of an awful doom,
He hastes, and offers to the Almighty Giver
His life whose every breath to him was bloom,
Whose voice could charm in wo, in want, in death's cold gloom.

O the great majesty of that old Faith!
Ancient Religion!  where is now thy trust?
"Do!"  and 'tis done.  "The Lord thy God thus saith!"
He is obeyed.  Wise, patient, pure and just,
The olden sages from their councils thrust
Earth and earth's passions &mdash; GOD was judge and king,
And his their homage, for their moulded dust
Breathed but his breath like each created thing,
And gloried in His smile &mdash; mind's fair and flowery spring.

The land of vision mid the pinewoods lowers,
And evening twilight lingers round its brow,
And gilds the bold Philistine's mountain towers,
And darkness deepens in lone ravine now.
"Thou goest, my father!  to fulfil thy vow,"
Said the fair son of Abraham, &mdash; "but where,
Where is the victim?  fire and wood enow,
But where the lamb?" &mdash; "JEHOVAH will prepare!"
Oh!  how that simple speech did crush the patriarch in despair.

In Elah's vale, beside a brimming well,
Whose waters cooled the burning air, and seemed,
Glancing beneath the light that rose and fell,
As if of beauty, song and love they dreamed,
The pilgrims paused; the stars all countless gleamed;
And all save Abraham slept the sleep of toil.
Alone in silent agony, he deemed
His trial great, yet one approving smile
Of heaven worth all the pomp and glory of earth's guile.

Red rose the sun like lurid basilisk.
"Here part we, vassals!" &mdash; and the patriarch passed.
The torrid storm loomed o'er the ghastly disk,
And o'er the desert flew the purple blast;
The shattered clouds far streaming, deep and fast,
Rode on the whirlwind, and the thunder sent
The music of Eternity o'er waste
And wood, and from the rolling firmament
Came back as if the heart of the universe was rent.

The son of Sara trembled in the glare,
The solemn grandeur of the storm, and turned
Toward his father in his young despair
While the fierce lightning o'er the darkness burned:
And in his speechless agony, he yearned
For one kind smile, the unrequired bequest
Of happier days when love domestic spurned
All cold observances, &mdash; when bosoms blest
Pour'd forth their love like birds in their high mountain rest.

But, fixed in stony agony suppressed
In the deep heart, the voiceless Father gave
No sigh, no smile, no glance; breath from his breast
Burst in wild sobs as if the darkened grave
Did palpitate with life!  in vain to save
His secret soul had striven with the Power,
Who gives in mercy ere despair can crave
When wisdom sanctions mercy; and the hour
Of final doom had come and awfully did lower.

Masses on masses of most coal-black clouds
Threw midnight o'er midday; and by the pyre,
O'er which thick firs and cedars hang like shrouds,
Beside his bound son stands the martyr sire,
While smokes the censer with the living fire,
And lifts his heart-fill'd eye, &mdash; and then looks down
Upon his sole heir ready to expire,
His joy and expectation, glory, crown,
His light of life, his son, all brotherless, alone.

All stars, &mdash; all worlds, &mdash; the very air doth glow
With angel faces numberless, whose eyes,
Radiant with Heaven's pure light, sublimely throw
Ten thousand glories o'er the troubled skies;
And suddenly the storm doth hush its cries
An moans amid the forest; and the song
Of seraphs high triumphing seems to rise
From hill, vale, wood and stream, and sound along
The countless worlds that know nor human wo nor wrong.

"Isaac!  my child!  speak yet once more, my son!"
"Father, farewell! &mdash; Jehovah cannot err;
Yet, oh, remember, when the deed is done,
And love me still; and for my mother, &mdash; her,&mdash;
The hour hath come, &mdash; and hark!  a quivering stir
Amid the wood, &mdash; Heaven's angel is abroad!
&mdash;Once more, farewell!  diluvian mariner
Ne'er on the Deep with such a spirit rode
As thrills me now to meet my Giver and my GOD."

"Farewell, my son! &mdash; and yet once more farewell!"
He drew the sword, but when he caught the beam
Of Isaac's dovelike eye, &mdash; the weapon fell.
"Look not upon me, child!  or I may deem
Jehovah's vision but a maniac's dream,
And spare thee yet, my only-born! &mdash; So, close
Thine eyes and while the dreadful blade doth gleam,
Pray for thy father's and thy mother's woes,&mdash;
O let thy spirit speak and plead in every drop that flows!"

Again he seized the sword, &mdash; again drew near,&mdash;
And lifted up his hand to slay, &mdash; again
His heart did faint, &mdash; his weapon fell, &mdash; a tear
Beading the point without a living stain!
At length, o'ercoming more than mortal pain,
He clutched the knife and turned aside his head,
And gazed upon the heavens!  the ethereal plain
With myriad glories burned, the dark clouds fled,
And thus from highest heaven the Voice of Glory said:&mdash;

"Lay not thy hand upon the lad, well-tried,
Faithful, devoted!  loose his bonds and take
Thy son unto thy bosom!"  O the tide
Of all a father's love, when from the stake
He wildly springs.  "For his lone mother's sake,&mdash;
And for my own, great Giver!  I adore!"&mdash;
&mdash;"Behold! &mdash; a victim in the thorny brake!"&mdash;
Beside the holocaust in bliss adore
Father and child while joy shouts loud on heaven's wide shore.

"For this," the angel of the Lord did cry,
"Thy chosen seed shall multiply and reign,
Countless as worlds that gem the eternal sky,
Or golden sands on ocean's azure plain;
Thy priests, thy kings, thy sages shall attain
To pomp and purity and wisdom known
Nor to Assyrian fierce, nor Greek profane;
And, when Earth's centuries have been and gone,
Jerusalem shall sit upon her glorious throne!"

Sara sat moaning in Beersheba's wood
When through the forest rolled the camel's tread;
And to her broken mind in solitude
It seemed the strange voice of the parted dead;
Again she moaned, &mdash; and laughed, &mdash; and slowly said
"I had a son, &mdash; but he is not, &mdash; and so
My breast no more can pillow his fair head!"
&mdash;What bounding Form draws near like fleetest roe?
Mother and Son have met, and bliss is born of wo!
