The fairy scenes of bounteous-handed Spring,
And Summer's smile, and Autumn's golden fields
Are gradually fled; and now
The hoary-headed sire

Steals on at chilly morn and eve, with stole
In mists all bath'd, and feet all white with frosts;
And his stern reign obey
Commands the sighing hours.

Farewell the joys that claim'd the vacant hour
Smil'd when the softer year; &mdash; or rural walk,
Cool fountain, or smooth sail,
On classic Isis wave,

Yet, lov'd Autumn, on some misted hill
At eve's dim hour, O let me thy last breath
Catch, and sad bid adieu
Thy charms that once so fair;

E'er now the housed traveller shiv'ring tells
Of threat'ning Winter &mdash; blasts from naked trees
The landscape's sickening bloom,
With fields all drown'd in floods:

E'er yet with politicians, zealous, deep
The coffee-house murmurs, or at a play-house still
Varies each listening face
As rules each sister-power.

O Winter!  tho' e'er fierce with angry storm
Thy wild tempestuous soul, the bitt'rest foe
To each fair grace, whose charms
Smile on the youthful Spring;

Yet when emblazes gay thy loaded hearth,
And warms the loud-tongued room; when Humour tells,
Solemn his look, his tale,
And bursts the hearty laugh;

O then, tho' all thy madding tempests shake
My little dome, not all the pageant pomp
Of Summer's proudest day
My social soul could charm.

Now jilting cards usurp the evening hours
Teazing the anxious mind; and Bacchus now
Leaps wanton from the cask,
And bumpered goblets smile.

But wine-flush'd thought, and poisonous pleasure hence!
With tott'ring step, and eyes of giddy sight,
Far fly my temperate roof
And reel to bagnios foul.

Ye sober joys and modest pleasures; bless
My winter's eve; the while no foot is heard
To print the crumpling snow,
Wide-whitening to the eye.

And all ye souls, not, as the felon, rude,
But softer form'd; come, and with converse sweet,
With learning grac'd with ease,
And attic wit refin'd,

Instruct, enchant the philosophic hour.
But chief, O power of song, let those lov'd lays
By nature's poet breath'd,
Fill all my passion'd soul.

And oh!  if e'er thy smile creative woo'd
Thy votary warm; O bid one living ray
Smile on the happier verse,
And give the genuine bard.
