PART THE FIRST.
THE BIRTH-NIGHT.
Long had Creation smiled beneath the ray
Of the all-chearing Regent of the Day.
'Midst golden clouds he bow'd his radiant head,
And silver damps the verdant fields o'erspread.

The Rustic, as he led his thirsty team
O'er dewy meads to taste the lucid stream,
Listen'd to hear the constant village-chime,
And mark'd what tuneless bell struck out of time.

The swarthy Fisherman, with busy hand
Wash'd out his net, and haul'd his bark to land.
The Eastern waves a grisly mantle wore,
And Porposes came rolling to the shore.

Deep in the West the rapid sun-beams fled,
And NIGHT at once her sable drapery spread.
SILENCE presided:  when aloft in air
TEMPEST arose, her terrors to prepare.

Down sail'd the Eagle from her cloudless height,
And, last of creatures, saw the parting light.
Her young she sought, but, seeking, fled astray,
And, in the sudden darkness, lost her way.

Up rose the Lion to his nightly chace,
Shook his bluff mane, and trod a solemn pace.
By instinct taught, the coming storm he learn'd,
Roar'd once, then, growling, to his den return'd.

The Nightingale was ready to relate
His tale harmonious to his constant mate;
New notes of lengthen'd sweetness would have sung:
But, when he saw the plain with clouds o'erhung,
He sought a covert in the thicket-shade,
Fluttering in silence through the bushy glade.

The lonely Traveller, with panting breast,
Quicken'd his pace, and button'd up his vest.
But, soon benighted, slowly on he strode,
And wav'd his hand, to feel his darksome road.

Loud, hollow gales blew, whistling, mix'd with rain,
O'er the wild heath, and brush'd the grassy plain.
In streams of forked flame the lightening pour'd,
And from the nitrous clouds the thunder roar'd.
One moment Light, one moment Darkness reign'd
With sudden change, and furious war maintain'd.
Longer and louder roll'd the thunder dire,
And all the air seem'd waves of liquid fire.

The whirlwind shook the turret's lofty wall;
The smoaking stack receiv'd the fiery ball.
With sulphur stifled, brutes expired by droves,
And conflagration wasted half the groves.

The harmless Swain, who slept in cottage low,
Affrighted woke, and rose to house his cow.
Eas'd of that care, again he sought his bed,
Forgot the tempest, and reclined his head;
And there, hard-lodged, and level with the ground,
With guiltless bosom, sunk in sleep profound.

The pamper'd Epicure, devourer base,
Whose scarlet crimes were painted in his face;
Whose trunk enormous had with cost been fed
On spoil of orphans, doom'd to beg their bread;
For whom tho' Earth, Air, Sea, with slaughter groan'd,
His rage carnivorous still was unatoned,&mdash;
Yawning he press'd the chair:  when from aloof
The bursting thunder shook the vaulted roof.
Starting, in haste he rose, with paunch full-cramm'd,
And grudg'd, before digestion, to be damn'd.

The Stateman, plotting, with a guilty soul,
To rule his country with unjust contoul,
Taught by the Storm, that Greatness cannot save,
Stood, chain'd by Fear, and felt Himself a Slave.

Th' aspiring Priest, fresh-woke from dreams profane,
Mitres still floating in his restless brain,
Saw Nature raging in the choleric storm,
And fear'd it might be Doom-day's awful form;
That TEMPEST all her treasured stores had lent,
To solemnize the night of Christ's descent,
And cried aloud, before the rising moon,
Come not, Lord JESUS!  come not yet so soon.

For now the Moon, pale queen of night, appear'd;
Before her face the dark horizon clear'd.
The clouds, fast-wasting, dropp'd in floods of rain,
And wash'd, with currents, every path and lane.

Deep in the center of a desart-way,
Where human footsteps ne'er were led astray;
Far in the wildest, dreariest haunts of Spain,
Where Rome's dark Bigotry was made to reign,
A wilderness of rocks, and sullen dens,
In midst of sloughs, and damp, unwholesome fens;
Where from the craggy cliff who tumbled o'er,
Deep-swallow'd in the bog, could rise no more,
The feast of vipers, toads, and hissing snakes;
Where no streams flow'd, but dead and putrid lakes
Poison'd the rock-pent air; where, fierce with hate,
Nature her own works seem'd to execrate,
The VICES met:  with powers from Hell below,
Sisters of Night, their sorceries to show.

Two kindred rocks together, side by side,
Uprear'd their shaggy tops with savage pride:
By earthquake split, stone of each other's stone,
In ancient times majestic stood in one.
Their perpendicular sides a passage made:
Betwixt, of rock a solid pavement laid.
Untrod before, and ever since untrod,
But once permitted, by decree from God.

Between the rocks the Moon her brightest ray
Darted oblique, and almost rivall'd Day:
Here glared strong light, there shade reflection made;
Beyond, light fainter, and a darker shade,
Solemn, beyond description of the pen;
Solemn as night, moon, cliff, and hollow den
Could shape the scene.  The climbing Queen of Night
Shifted the shades, and with the shades the light.

CHORUS.
Solemn, beyond description of the pen;
Solemn as night, moon, cliff, and hollow den
Could shape the scene.  The climbing Queen of Night
Shifted the shades, and with the shades the light.

Unlike the walks, where youthful lovers rove,
In pairs, by moon-light, through the placid grove.
Here ghastly HORROR fix'd his gloomy reign;
WOE sat, with FEAR, and agonizing PAIN:
Suiting the night, and the occasion dire,
From whence new aid Hell's armies should acquire;
From whence the infant-cause of Truth must lie
Hopeless, and, blasted in its blossom, die;
And whence the Conscience, but of late set free,
Enslaved again, must bow to Rome's decree.

By horror lured, the birds of omen drew
Nigh to the rocks:  but, frighted, back they flew.
O'erwhelm'd with fear, they sought their rural plains,
And gave dire warnings to the neighbouring swains.
The raven croak'd his hoarse, prophetic note;
The boding screech-owl strain'd her shriller note;
No animal remain'd, but such as owed
Its birth and breeding to the curs'd abode.
The twining serpent, sliding down the rock,
Hiss'd an infernal tale, enough to shock
The heart accustom'd to the midnight-walk,
Of noises heedless.  There were seen to stalk
Ghosts of Reformers, in a mournful train,
Pale, martyr'd Shades, in grievous tortures slain.
These o'er the pendent cliffs lamenting stood
For the vain spilling of their sacred blood.
Others with grief their fruitless toils deplored,
Freedom depress'd, and Rome's dread power restored.
LUTHER'S sad, sullen Ghost was weeping there:
WICKLIFFE and ORUM dropp'd a generous tear;
While in the lowest, darkest deeps of Hell,
Twelve Popes tugg'd hard to toll a Funeral-Bell
To TRUTH'S Internment; and Hell's Concave rung,
While Monks loud anthems to the Devil sung.

AIR.
O'er TRUTH'S hallow'd tomb
All Nature should sigh,
In deep and plaintive gloom:
VIRTUE and JOY with her must die.
But ghostly Impostors profane,
Possess'd with Dominion's dark lust,
For TRUTH prepare
The pit, the snare,
And rattling chain;
Then see, with smiles, the beauteous victim slain,
And triumph o'er her dust.

CHORUS.
LUTHER'S sad, sullen Ghost was weeping there:
WICKLIFFE and ORUM dropp'd a generous tear;
While in the lowest, darkest deeps of Hell,
Twelve Popes tugg'd hard to toll a Funeral-Bell
To TRUTH'S Internment; and Hell's Concave rung,
While Monks loud anthems to the Devil sung.


PART THE SECOND.
THE PROCESSION.
Muse!  to whose deeply-penetrating sight,
Darkness unfolds, and changes into Light,
Describe the deeds of the infernal throng,
And paint the Sisters as they pass'd along.

Spreading her gorgeous train, the slave of fame,
Sin's eldest daughter, tall AMBITION came.
Full of herself, she seldom turn'd aside;
Each step was greatness, and each glance was pride.
Her cheek one moment pale with envy turn'd;
The next, rose-red with indignation burn'd.
Her face not made for Sweetness to adorn,
Stately she pass'd, with looks of lowering scorn.

With sullen mien, and robes of sanguine dye,
The next in order, dark REVENGE went by.
Her right hand clasp'd a sword, her left a scroll
Wrote by a lawyer on a parchment roll.

Next, with a sickly eye that glanced askew,
Pale self-tormentress, ENVY swept the dew.

Behind her TREACHERY came, with Siren's charms
Form'd to deceive.  Her face, her neck, her arms
Were sweetly beauteous, and might well inspire
The Hermit's bosom with an amorous fire;
Might lull to soft repose the weary sense,
And turn Suspicion into Confidence.
Beneath her flowing robe conceal'd there lay
A Vulture's talons, ready for the prey.

Next, like a nun, in sable garments  clad,
Came SUPERSTITION, with a visage sad.
Her  eyes  look'd upward, in Devotion's show,
While half-rais'd eye-lids, and a lowering brow
Horror express'd.  No dimpled mark of joy
Adorn'd her faded cheek.  Her whole employ
Was babbling Pater-nosters, counting beads,
Low-bowing, sprinkling, and rehearsing creeds.

Frowning, with scarlet fury on her cheek,
All shaded o'er with many a fiery streak,
Came PERSECUTION, with many a wiry thong,
And wav'd it, sportive, as she pass'd along.

Inventress of sad instruments of pain,
Student of torture in each pore and vein,
Dire CRUELTY approach'd.  Her eyes could tell
What Furies are, and Fiends, and Fires of Hell.

Close-muffled up, abhorrent of the light,
Some gloomy Sister came, some friend of Night.
She a furr-cloak that swept the ground had on:
Her face all hid, that night she pass'd unknown.
Taught by the Jesuit's deeds, the Muse avers,
CONSPIRACY was she that wore the Furrs.

Grasping a dagger in her stronger hand,
Next MURDER follow'd in the midnight-band.
Along the ground her foot so lightly trod,
It scarce disturb'd the darksome, crawling toad
That sipp'd the venom of the nightly dew.
Something she mutter'd, but her words were few.

Next FALSHOOD came:  a foe to Learning's page:
Born in a blind and a believing age.
In either hand she held a Folio-book,
All gilded o'er, and gaudy to the look.
The one, though fill'd with many a labour'd note
On scripture-text, by gravest Fathers wrote,
Serv'd only to disguise the sacred page,
Confirm the Sceptic, and confound the Sage.
The other book was stuff'd with wild Romance,
Where lawless Fiction wheel'd its wanton dance;
Tales of Saints, Pilgrims, Virgins, Knights, and Squires,
Regions of scalding Ice, and freezing Fires,
Monks, Salamanders, Stags, Cats, Monkeys, Hogs,
Martyrs, Popes, Badgers, Kings, Cocks, Bulls, and Frogs,
Baboons, Owls, Prelates, Emperors, and Dogs.

Close at her heels, book-laden as she walk'd,
Her lordly Sister, IMPOSITION stalk'd:
She who by force all FALSHOOD'S tales promotes,
Makes men assent, and crams them down their throats.

The next came shining by the Moon's fair light,
Adorn'd with pearls, and gems, and jewels bright,
With gaudy, spangled fringe, and tassels gay,
Rings, bells, and trinkets, more than queen of May.
Three lustrous Crowns, one over other rear'd,
In all the wantonness of pomp, appear'd
With tremulous motion glittering on her head.
Her rich, redundant robe of vermeil-red
Was deck'd with figures wrought in threads of gold,
Cherubs, and forms of bright, coelestial mould.
To root up Truth and Virtue was her aim:
Proud was the Whore, and ANTICHRIST was her name.

With charms to seize by force the captive heart,
Allurements great as could be form'd by Art,
(For all was Art) HYPOCRISY came on.
Her Eye look'd Love, whilst all her Heart was Stone.
Virtue in each fair feature was display'd:
All Vices in her bosom lurking laid.
Robed in a mantle of unsullied white,
She shone as Angels, clothed in heavenly Light.

Gayer than all the daughters of the Earth,
Came one, with smiles, and buxom cheeks of Mirth:
Mistress of Luxuries in every clime,
Well-skill'd with sweets to oil the wings of Time.
The festive sons of Mirth her power adore,
And sound her praises with tumultuous roar:
She only fit Life's period to employ.
But holier Sages styled her SENSUAL JOY.

Next, leaning on a staff, bent almost double,
The old hag, AVARICE, crept with toil and trouble.

Last came SERVILITY, of aspect low,
Despised on Earth, and hiss'd in Hell below.
Stooping, as on she stepp'd, she view'd the ground:
Far from her feet her sight no object found.
Or, if she upward look'd, her close-pent eye,
Peeping, scarce ventured to behold the sky.

Thus went the Sisters in procession slow,
As men by night at mournful funerals go:
Or, like fraternal Monks, what time they keep
Their midnight-vigils, while the guiltless sleep,
And, lifting up the Idol-Host on high,
With torches walk in solemn order by.

AIR.
All solemn, slow,
The Sisters go;
In long-drawn pomp they beat the earth:
Estranged from Fear,
Mid horrors drear,
To wait the mighty Jesuit's Birth.

Silent Night they profane;
Nature's Law they disdain;
And violate Sleep,
Their Sorc'ries to keep,
With direst ill, the earth to fill,
And loose the Furies from the Deep.

CHORUS.
Thus went the Sisters in procession slow,
As men by night at mournful funerals go:
Or, like fraternal Monks, what time they keep
Their midnight-vigils, while the guiltless sleep,
And, lifting up the Idol-Host on high,
With torches walk in solemn order by.


PART THE THIRD.
THE BIRTH.
The rugged cliffs, where Nature frown'd in pride,
Where the strait passage ended, opening wide,
Had form'd an ample and extended space,
Shaped like a circus.  Hither with slow pace
The Sisters in Procession's order came,
Each in the rank she held in hellish fame.
While on the cliffs around the Ghosts pursued,
With equal pace, and all their motions view'd.
Fix'd stood the Sisters, in a circle rang'd,
As if by Magic into Statues changed.
Faint efforts feigning, each began to move,
Limb after limb, and with each other strove
In light vagaries; now in antic dance
With airy measures frisk'd as frolic Chance
Their steps directed.  Cynthia, throned on high,
Right in the center of the vaulted sky,
Their sports beheld; while tuneful airs below
Beat to the steps of each rebounding toe.
Loud, hollow notes, low-rising from the ground,
Rolled to the rocks:  the rocks rolled back the sound.

CHORUS.
&mdash;Cynthia, throned on high,
Right in the center of the vaulted sky,
Their sports beheld; while tuneful airs below
Beat to the steps of each rebounding toe.
Loud, hollow notes, low-rising from the ground,
Rolled to the rocks:  the rocks rolled back the sound

A vapour, falling, gave the quick alarm;
And every sister pluck'd her secret charm
Forth from her bosom.  For dire charms they brought,
Of preparation long, and studious thought:
Charms of such dreadful and mysterious power,
That HECATE'S deeds, perform'd at midnight-hour,
Sunk into toys.  They strew'd them on the ground,
Uttering strange accents in a solemn sound;
Then caught, before it fell, the vapour dire.
Mix'd with the charms, it turn'd them all to fire.
Round paced they, mingling; fierce the flames opposed;
A hellish burning to the night disclosed.

With rites that had nor precedent nor name,
Each Sister snatch'd a handful of the flame.
Each to the winds her fiery portion threw.
Borne by the breeze, on curling clouds they flew.
Like burning lamps, suspended in the sky,
Short time they twinkled; spreading to the eye,
Now stream'd extensive, while the Sisters gazed:
Like angry Comets, high in air they blazed.
Urging their course obscure, thro' realms of night,
They vanish'd, dwindling, from the weary sight,
Their real forms assuming:  horrid band
Of wanton Daemons!  These in many a land
Frolick'd soon after.  Now the frantic crew,
High pois'd in Aether, o'er the nations flew.
Swift on the pinions of the fatal night,
From shore to shore they urged fantastic flight.
From Spain's grave coasts to Gallia's sprightly plains,
From France they fled to Germany's domains.
Italia's shores anon they view with smiles,
With her Sardinian and Sicilian Isles.
Where'er the bloody Cross had fix'd a throne,
They knew the kingdoms to be all their own.
On mountains now they touch with sightless feet,
And now on churches take their airy seat.
Nor fled they idle; but, with evil fired,
'Lighted on beds, and impious dreams inspired.
Bad man enjoy'd the visions of the night:
The virtuous waked with horror and affright.

RECITATIVE.
In solemn, high, prophetic Dream,
FANCY o'erleaps the bound extreme.
Broke is Reason's  sober chain:
Magic Night and Morpheus reign.

AIR.
I.
Roving FANCY now is free;
Nor rigid Judgment damps her glee.
Over Nature's vast profound,
Blythe, she takes her giddy round,
Now with the Ghosts, and now with Fairies,
Motley Shapes, in wild vagaries,
All upon enchanted ground.

II.
Now with wings sublime she flies
Where Planets roll thro' azure skies;
Now on Clouds where Tempests brew;
Now o'er Meads that drink the dew;
Then thro' the vasty void descends,
Where Chaos warring atoms blends,
To darksome Cell, of deepest Hell,
Where sullen Ghosts, and sooty Daemons dwell.

Meanwhile the airs the Sisters heard to breathe,
Sounding harmonious from the caves beneath,
Ceas'd all at once.  The Sisters cluster'd round,
And, fixing gloomy eyes upon the ground,
All, with deep cadence, muttering hoarse and slow,
In words like these invoked their chiefs below.

Daemons and rulers of the darkness, hear!
The hour is come, the night, the moon, the year,
Ordain'd by Fate to raise our festive mirth
With a fond Brother's welcome, wonderous Birth:
Our nearest, ablest, bravest, best of kin,
Void of no mark or character of Sin.
Deeds have we done of dire and dreadful note,
And Charms on liquid air have sent afloat.
The hour is come, the night, the moon, the year:
Daemons and rulers of the darkness, hear!

CHORUS.
The hour is come, the night, the moon, the year:
Daemons and rulers of the darkness, hear!

They scarce had ended, when a dismal groan
Burst from beneath:  and lo!  the labouring stone
Rended &mdash; a horrid chasm!  whence streams of fire,
Waving, like flaming swords, with sulphur dire,
Issued abundant.  Now each Sister's face
With expectation flush'd, keen to embrace
The welcome stranger; when a Monster rose,
So hideous, that the Sisters on their toes
Sprang, as prepared to take their sudden flight:
But could not stir thro' vast excess of fright.
Each in his face beheld herself so plain,
Looking she started, starting look'd again.
But, gazing long, the Shape familiar grew:
The Sisters, bolder, near the Monster drew.
At length they play'd the sympathetic part,
And every Sister press'd him next her heart.

CHORUS.
Each in his face beheld herself so plain,
Looking she started, starting look'd again.
But, gazing long, the Shape familiar grew:
The Sisters, bolder, near the Monster drew.
At length they play'd the sympathetic part,
And every Sister press'd him next her heart.


PART THE FOURTH.
THE FLIGHT.
High on the rocks, the Ghosts of Martyrs brave,
Whose bones, consumed, required no hallow'd grave,
And blest Reformers, who the realms of light
In grief forsook on that tremendous night,
Gazing with anxious bosoms, still remain'd,
View'd the fierce Fiend, and scarce the shock sustain'd.
Shuddering with fear, they suddenly withdrew,
Silent across the Moon's pale circuit flew,
Soon pass'd the limits of terrestrial night,
And on swift pinions urged aetherial flight:
Nor loiter'd, till the mansions of repose
They reach'd, where Love and Peace for ever flows,
By verdant banks, in pure and living streams;
Where Light from God breaks forth in chearful beams,
And joys ineffable, eternal, yields
To all the souls that range the blissful fields.
No sooner had they told the dreadful tale,
Than Sorrow fill'd coelestial hill and vale.
The blood of Saints enthroned ran cold as ice,
And tears of woe were shed in Paradise.

CHORUS.
No sooner had they told the dreadful tale,
Than Sorrow fill'd coelestial hill and vale.
The blood of Saints enthroned ran cold as ice,
And tears of woe were shed in Paradise.

Short time they griev'd:  for, darting all abroad,
Unusual splendour from the throne of God
All eyes attracted:  and a radiant throng
Of angels, loud in high, triumphant song,
Vocal to harps, rehears'd, in strains sublime,
Events preparing in the womb of Time.

Rejoice, all Heaven!  (they sang) ye Saints, rejoice!
And sing God's Judgment with a grateful voice!
Sing Allelluia!  God, all just and good,
Hath judg'd the whore that spill'd his servants' blood:
Whose lyes all lands, deluded, have believ'd,
Whose sorceries all nations have deceiv'd:
In whose insatiate Slaughter-house renown'd,
The blood of Prophets and all Saints is found.
Here bleed good Princes, by assassins fell
Sent from the earth, on brighter thrones to dwell.
Elsewhere the Mother feels a deadly shock,
With screaming Babe cast headlong down the rock.
The weeping Father sees his tortured Child
Bound to the burning Stake; frantic and wild
The Mother mourns; the Bride her tender hair
Plucks from the roots, and tears her features fair.

AIR.
I.
Grieve not, grieve not, hapless Mourners!
VENGEANCE, VENGEANCE, soon will rise.
God will judge the ruthless Scorners;
Counts your tears, a precious flood;
Weighs each drop of righteous Blood.

II.
Echoing Vales, and warbling Fountains,
Vocal to the awful Mountains,
Lift on high your doleful Cries;
And to the Mountains, to the Skies.
VENGEANCE, VENGEANCE, soon will rise.

Yet but a while, and BABYLON shall fall:
By fires consumed, low bows her ponderous wall.
Smoke, from her levell'd ruins, rises round!
Strong is the Lord, who brings her to the ground.
Beneath her falls the Fiend, the JESUIT-PRIEST,
On whom she sits, her strong-supporting Beast.
From Hell's unfathom'd Pit he first arose,
And in his Exit to Perdition goes.
The neighbouring Tyrants her expiring groans
Shall hear, and tremble on their tottering thrones.
The Slave no more shall dread their stern decree,
But burst his chains, and venture to be free.
Down, like a millstone in the ocean cast,
Her towers shall fall, nor rise while Time shall last:
Sing Alleluia!  Flat her ruins lie:
Her smoke arises to eternity!

CHORUS.
Sing Alleluia!  Flat her ruins lie:
Her smoke arises to eternity!

So sang the Angels:  and, all grief dispell'd,
The Saints join'd voice, and the full Chorus swell'd.
Cherubs, dispers'd, transported far the strains,
And spread new joy throughout the happy plains.
Birds of the groves in imitation sang:
All Heaven's expanse with chearful echoes rang.
Hills to rejoicing hills reveal'd the tale,
And rivers told it to the laughing vale.

CHORUS.
Birds of the groves in imitation sang:
All Heaven's expanse with chearful echoes rang.
Hills to rejoicing hills reveal'd the tale,
And rivers told it to the laughing vale.

Meanwhile, in Hell's unluminous domains,
Where Horror, dusky king!  his throne maintains,
Fierce, sportive daemons held a festive day:
For night in Hell is day, day night, no ray
From sun, moon, planet, or fix'd, twinkling star,
In sweet rotation ruling from afar,
Visits the solid shade.  Their wanton sport,
Tho' more terrific, yet appear'd in sport
Like sport of men:  their festive hours to keep,
They hurl'd, from the immeasurable deep,
Nitrous, infernal preparations dire,
That hiss'd, like snakes, diffusing deadly fire.
Mounting, like rockets, in the vacant air,
They lighted Hell with fierce and sudden glare.
Darkness, succeeding then to transient light,
With deeper blackness form'd a tenfold night.
What time the fiery serpent soar'd on high,
Clear for a moment to the gazing eye
Were seen rough sides of rocks, and holes of caves,
Vaults without end, and without bottom graves.
Here, strong-barr'd prisons, whence the hideous cries
Of tortured tyrants pierced no pitying skies.
There, in close cabinets, sat monks confined,
Foes to the propagation of mankind.
Here, bowing to a god of gold, or brass,
Condemn'd to babble everlasting Mass,
Dull Bigots stood.  There, fierce, Polemic Fools,
Deep in the quirks and quibbles of the Schools,
According to their doom, rehears'd by rote,
Verbatim, all the books the Fathers wrote.

CHORUS.
Here, bowing to a god of gold, or brass,
Condemn'd to babble everlasting Mass,
Dull Bigots stood.  There, fierce, Polemic Fools,
Deep in the quirks and quibbles of the Schools,
According to their doom, rehears'd by rote,
Verbatim, all the books the Fathers wrote.


PART THE FIFTH.
THE BAPTISM.
The fierce combustibles in Hell below
Threaten'd great Nature's base to overthrow.
Earth, from her center, felt three deadly shocks:
The frighted Sisters saw the nodding rocks.
But the bold Monster, stranger to dismay,
Stood, self-collected, and chaced Fear away.

He, for a coat, a long, black vest had on:
Like Priest, like Daemon, He was Both in One.
Such was his garb:  but to describe that Face,
Which every vice express'd, where not one grace,
To make atonement, smiled, the labouring Muse,
To paint her images, lacks words to chuse.

Fierce as a tyger's glared his fiery eyes,
Which menaced proud defiance to the skies,
And woe to human race.  Presumption stared
On his broad forehead:  other vices shared
The other features; each assumed its place,
And vice with vice divided all the face.
To give a hellish grace, his lips of guile,
In sign of knavery, grinn'd a horrid smile.
He that could view him, without Fear's alarms,
Might clasp a GORGON in his eager arms.

Him first the three-crown'd ANTICHRIST address'd,
And in these words her joyful thoughts express'd.

Hail, mighty brother!  potent LEGION!  Hail!
On whose fair birth depends a wonderous tale
To shine in annals:  born for Rome and Me:
Born in good time to guard the Papal See,
When LUTHER'S doctrines urge their rapid way,
And bode the dawn of Truth's refulgent ray,
Which threats to bring Rome's Mysteries to light,
And sink her empire in eternal night.
Thine be the task the progress to oppose
Of our new-risen and increasing foes.
'Tis thine by art, by labour, and grimace,
False zeal, lax morals, and affected grace,
By flattery, soothing, preaching, (not God's word)
Massacre, murder, torture, fire, and sword,
To crush the Reformation in its birth,
And drive Religion bleeding from the earth.

Mute all the while, as if in rapture caught,
AMBITION, lost in labyrinths of thought,
Stood like a statue.  Her uplifted eyes,
Fix'd like devotion, stedfast view'd the skies.
With out-stretch'd hands, at length she silence broke,
And in a lofty style, prophetic spoke.

Gods!  what a prospect opens to mine eyes!
What splendid victims on my altars rise!
What countries wasted!  wealthy towns undone!
Empires betray'd, and patriot-states o'erthrown!
Mansions &mdash; oh MURDER!  bloody Sister, hear!
And let it give thy heart a welcome chear&mdash;
Mansions, with their inhabiters, in flames!
Infants, youths, virgins, sires, and tender dames,
Wakes with alarms, night-shrieks, and terrors dire,
Defenceless flie to 'scape the spreading fire.
There, meek and reverent at the altar's base,
A Monarch, prostrate in her holy place,
Feeds on his Saviour, and devoutly kneels:
Cold at his heart the dire digestions feels.
Thy works, oh LEGION!  thine the merits all!
Merits unequall'd on this earthly ball.
Yes, thou art LEGION, of all sins possess'd:
Each perfect shines, and rivals all the rest.
Go forth and prosper!  Climb the walls of Fame!
Unbounded Empire be thy sovereign aim!

Go, said the Sisters all, Go forth and show
What Sin can compass, leagu'd with Hell below.
For thou art LEGION, in whose spacious mind
All, all the vices habitation find.

CHORUS.
&mdash;Go forth and show
What Sin can compass, leagu'd with Hell below.
For thou art LEGION, in whose spacious mind
All, all the vices habitation find.

HYPOCRISY, with business in her look,
Audience to gain, the next occasion took.

LEGION thou art!  but a more hallow'd name
Must cloak thy vices, and support thy fame.
'Tis thine the Roman Gospel to maintain:
On that are founded all thy hopes to reign.
From thence thy vast dominion must arise,
Soaring, like Babel, to the vaulted skies.
Bind thyself stedfast to the Roman See:
Thou for Rome always, always Rome for Thee.
Hence thy bright glories, and thy firm supports:
Hence shalt thou dictate and preside in Courts.
The nearest fellowship with JESUS claim:
Each rising haeretic  with zeal defame.
With Superstition strengthen wicked hands;
Lengthen the Creed, and shorten the Commands.
At heart an infidel, thyself conceal,
And work thy passions to a burning zeal
For CEREMONY'S wild, romantic round,
And MYSTERY'S all-fascinating sound.
Thy bulwarks these, thy forts and bastions strong;
Hence all thy spells, and each enchanting song
That lulls the Reason to a mortal sleep,
While Superstition's terrors wakeful keep.
Devoted, at the shrine of JESUS bow:
Of all religion most religious Thou.
Henceforth be JESUIT call'd:  fast, preach, and pray,
And kiss thy Lord, more surely to betray.

Thus said, she strait produced, with look demure,
A chrystal vial, fill'd with water pure:
Then feigning awful, saint-like melancholy,
With sacerdotal muttering made it holy;
And with her finger sprinkling, once and twice,
Baptized the hideous Monster in a trice.

With foot advanced, in interrupting haste,
(A cruise of blood suspended at her waist)
MURDER, officious, silence chose to break:
And, sacred text blaspheming, thus she spake.
Let it be said, that He, like JESUS, came
With full credentials to secure his fame.
To discipline the nations with his Word
He comes, and o'er the earth sends Fire and Sword.
And that his Baptism may be firm and good,
Baptized with Water, now baptize with Blood.

The Sisters all with one consent agreed;
And MURDER, Priestess dire!  performed the deed.

HYPOCRISY her speech resumed again.
His name agreed on, half our rites remain.
Curse on that hideous and mis-shapen Face!
View it &mdash; how dreadful and devoid of grace!
Is there one vice that is not pictured here,
Strongly express'd, with shades and colours clear?
Shall he go forth with such a visage foul
That speaks at once the darkness of his soul?
Forbid it Craft!  By Styx's flood I swear,
This Face would so alarm the sons of Fear,
They would avoid him as a Monster dire,
Flie from him, trembling, as they flie from Fire;
Or, like some fierce, grim Savage of the wood,
Hunt him with dogs, till they had spill'd his blood.

So saying, from her bosom forth she drew
A flesh-like Mask:  with magic force it flew
Out of her hand, and on the JESUIT'S face
Stuck uncemented.  Smiles of specious grace
Sat dimpling on his cheek.  Deform'd no more,
The Loves took place where Furies frown'd before.
The Eye, with Cupids playing, darted bliss;
The Lip was form'd to steal the amorous kiss.
Each finish'd feature the Complexion grac'd;
Each in a point of pleasing luster placed.
The white of fairest lillies lent its aid,
And fresh vermillion spread a comely shade.

AIR.
Happy Deception!
What a Conception!
Daemon foul with Angel's face!
Craft will protect him;
Who can detect him?
Fairest of the human race!

CHORUS.
&mdash;Deform'd no more,
The Loves took place where Furies frown'd before.
The Eye, with Cupids playing, darted bliss;
The Lip was form'd to steal the amorous kiss.
Each finsih'd feature the Complexion grac'd;
Each in a point of pleasing luster placed.
The white of fairest lillies lent its aid,
And fresh vermillion spread a comely shade.


PART THE SIXTH.
THE UNCTION.
No more of Horror and Combustion dire,
Terrestrial Storm, or fierce Tartarian Fire.
Spirit of sacred Pomp!  Conclude the Song!
Come from thy favourite ailes and cloysters long,
Mid cowls, copes, caps, and broidered vestments gay,
White, blue, green, scarlet, purple, black, and grey;
Hoods, mitres, maces, founts, and altars fine,
Where burning lamps and golden statues shine!
Come, with thy splendours all!  each sense confound,
And lead me, dazzled, o'er enchanted ground.
Then, in an airy circuit, let me climb
Up to the heights of Verity sublime,
And sing the UNCTION, last and grandest rite
The Sisters solemnized ere morning-light.

CHORUS.
Spirit of sacred Pomp!  Conclude the Song!
Come from thy favourite ailes and cloysters long,

The JESUIT, now in beauteous Mask conceal'd,
Tried arts to please, and still new charms reveal'd.
He gazed, he smiled, attracted every eye,
None more than that of false HYPOCRISY.
To whom, indebted for external charms,
He thanks return'd, and clasp'd her in his arms:
Then, mid the Sisters, frolicsome and gay,
With antic measures, danced like Swain in May,
And, to brisk airs of music under ground,
Jump'd, with shrewd gambols, and embraced them round.

And now HYPOCRISY, who stood that night
Conductress chief of each mysterious rite,
Silence demanded.  What, cried she, remains,
Baptized, and mask'd, and clear'd of outward stains,
But Unction sacerdotal?  Let us haste
To holy things, and with demeanor chaste
Perform with dexterous speed this rite sublime,
Lest morn reproach us with the waste of Time.

She said, and strait, to every Sister's view,
Her white, immaculate robe to purple hue
Changed in an instant.  Then with equal haste
A silken Hat upon her head she placed.
On either side a waving ribband flew,
Which on her back she negligently threw.
Each gazing Sister her intention caught,
And on herself the transformation wrought:
Save ANTICHRIST alone.  She, triply-crown'd,
Conspicuous stood, o'er all the rest renown'd;
Still wore her Scarlet, as superior deem'd:
Pope She, they Cardinals in Conclave seem'd.

Lowly the JESUIT bow'd, and met the ground,
And thrice paced back with reverence profound:
Then nearer stepp'd, and, with abasement low,
Devoutly seiz'd, and kiss'd the Harlot's Toe.

'Twas now the rocks that stood the circus round
Were hid from sight, and from the teeming ground
Encircling walls and taper pillars rose
Of lightest architecture, thin as those
By Fairies built, without a labourer's toil,
On some enchanted Island's golden soil.
Lofty and loftier rose the fabric fair,
And rais'd a stately Cupola in air.
That rich, embellish'd Cornice knew its place,
And high-wrought Sculptures stood on every base.
Aloof were Paintings (copied since at Rome)
The roof adorning, and the central dome.
Thro' SISERA'S temples here the KENITE fair
Drove the cold steel, and mix'd his soul with air.
There JUDITH, carving HOLOFERNES' head,
Sent the drunk hero, dreaming, to the Dead.
High over all, pourtray'd in sanguine robe,
A JESUS scatter'd flames o'er all the globe.

These in high transport the glad JESUIT view'd:
Twice and again his transport he renew'd.

CHORUS.
Thro' SISERA'S temples here the KENITE fair
Drove the cold steel, and mix'd his soul with air.
There JUDITH, carving HOLOFERNES' head,
Sent the drunk hero, dreaming, to the Dead.
High over all, pourtray'd in sanguine robe,
A JESUS scatter'd flames o'er all the globe.

While on the Paintings the rapt Jesuit gazed,
At wonders new the Sisters stood amazed.
For Hell, thro' all its deeps in full employ,
Now strain'd its efforts to complete their joy.
Altars, fonts, images, fill'd each their space,
And brilliant lamps discover'd every grace.
All slowly-rising, gentle as the dew,
Nine Shapes on either side, in whitest hue,
Fair virgin-forms, arose.  Each in her hand
A vial held, with sweets of Saba's land,
Delicious odours, drawn from pulp or rind,
Oils, gums, perfumes, and essences refined.
More form neglecting, each her offering laid
Before the mimic-Pope, who now display'd
Authority supreme.  The JESUIT fell
Down prostrate, and adored the powers of Hell;
Then rose, commanded; and the VICE supreme
Pour'd on his head of sweets a flood extreme.
Rich fragrance flutter'd on the wings of air,
And all, refresh'd, for signs of joy prepare.
When lo!  a shriek!  a scream!  a bitter yell!
That frighted Chaos, and shook Earth and Hell.
The dreaded voice was known.  Up rose DESPAIR
Shaking the snaky foldings of her hair.

To silence all were aw'd:  she silence broke,
And deep attention in harsh tone bespoke.

Ah, wretched Sisters!  Hags of night abhorr'd!
In vain ye toil to spite Creation's Lord.
In vain ye shunn'd a Sister ever nigh:
Nor I from You, nor You from Me can fly.
Count then on Vengeance and Perdition dire,
Wrath, Plagues, Fiends, Furies, Scorpions, Pangs, and Fire.

She spoke &mdash; she was not: &mdash; and th' unreal pile,
With column, sculpture, cupola, and aile,
Dissolv'd in air:  the virgin-shapes were lost,
Altars, fonts, pictures, all &mdash; in sightless Aether tost.
No trace was left.  The rocks were hid no more,
And to their Shapes return'd the Sisters as before.

AIR.
Impious works to ruin fall!
In vain is rear'd each baseless wall.
Unsubstantial fabrics all!
Lighter than air
Th' erections fair
Juggle the builder's art and care.

DESPAIR from Hell arising,
All prospect sacrificing,
Each golden Expectation mocks,
And shakes, grim Fiend, her snaky locks.
Before her face,
In rapid chace,
The visionary projects flie,
And into air dissolve and die.

CHORUS.
VIRTUE alone the pile can raise
From age to age
To charm the Sage,
The lasting Monument of Praise.


PART THE SEVENTH.
THE ASCENSION.
As when the plaintive Jews beheld the Foe
Their Temple burn to its foundations low,
So griev'd the Sisters, when their lofty fane
Fled from their eyes, and left no sign remain.

The JESUIT nathless, not to be dismay'd,
Now for the first his eloquence display'd.

Sisters, (he cried) I feel Affection's force
Strength'ning Resolve, to run my destin'd course.
Me for the Son of Hell's fond hopes ye know:
And when ye visit next her deeps below,
Fill every Fiend with gaiety and joy,
And let new sports their jocund hours  employ.
Let Hell's wing'd wishes soar their utmost height,
My towering Deeds shall keep their loftier flight.
To thee, O ANTICHRIST, myself I vow,
And all my powers in deep submission bow.
To guard the splendours of thy potent reign,
Thy Mysteries and  Enchantments to maintain,
Thy chains on Conscience with strong links to bind,
And hold in bondage the immortal Mind,
My vigilance demand.  Of words no more.
The womb of Time is given me to explore.
Strange powers o'er Spirits will I strait employ:
Prepare for foretastes of your future joy.

His words obtain'd vociferous acclaim:
All were delighted; all extoll'd his name.
And now their eyes were fix'd for wonderous shows,
When high in air the JESUIT-FIEND arose.
Audacious, the light element he trod,
Now walk'd, now soar'd, now sat, as if a God.
The Sisters gazed, and at each other smiled;
Whilst He, with dexterous art, in gestures wild
Balanced his body:  till at last he threw
Head, legs, and arms, to their admiring view,
Into one general whirl.  From cap to heel
Air-poised he spun, as spins a Catherine-Wheel
The sport of hallowing crowds.  By slow degrees
The rapid motion fail'd; and soon with ease
A faint vibration settled in a stand.
Oh Orcus!  what a change!  Head, foot, nor hand
Discernible remained:  an empty vest
Hung, like a sign, of Wearer dispossess'd.
At once 'twas carried, by a stormy blast,
Above mid-heaven, then downward hurl'd as fast;
No longer whole, but into tatters rent,
Innumerable rags, diversely sent,
Which lighted on the rocks.  Long on the ground
They lay not passive:  but were seen to bound
With force elastic:  quickly they expand
Each to a perfect robe; and up they stand
With human-like erection.  Soon the Sleeves
Seem to be pregnant, and, like budding leaves,
The Hands put forth.  Now rose an oval ball
Majestic from the neck:  the Shoulders fall,
Owning the Head's pretensions to Controul,
With features graced that spoke a hidden Soul.
And now each trunk a perfect Head upholds,
And Feet are seen beneath the Garment-folds.
The populous cliffs with black were covered o'er,
As Locusts darken'd the Aegyptian shore.
Such swarms came forth from the mysterious robe,
Enough to people the terraqueous globe.

CHORUS.
The populous cliffs with black were covered o'er,
As Locusts darken'd the Aegyptian shore.
Such swarms came forth from the mysterious robe,
Enough to people the terraqueous globe.

LEGION tremendous!  Firm-united band!
Each to his Brother gave the social hand.
Quick they collected at one martial call:
One only Soul seem'd to inform them all.
In ranks they gather'd, and prepared to move,
In long procession from the cliffs above.
Split thro' the rock a cavity there lay,
Sloped from the top, which form'd a winding way.
Here gently down they dropp'd their cautious feet,
And pass'd the Sisters with obeisance  meet.
Slow they proceeded, with decorum grave,
Like Spectres summon'd to the Wizard's Cave.
Thrice did they kiss their hands, and thrice bow down
In meek obedience to the Triple-Crown.
The Whore that wore it smiled; they with grimace,
Chaste and demure, renew'd their solemn pace.
A motley tribe  closed all, to give surprise,
Speciously wrapp'd in Protestant-Disguise.
Some wore GENEVA'S doublet, cloak, and hose,
Others the comelier robes of LUTHER chose.
But here the Muse curtails her ample round,
Lest she should find herself on ENGLISH ground.

The Moon so bright had shone, that the grey Morn
Stole unexpected.  Cynthia's fading horn
Sicken'd at length.  Aurora twinkled bright,
And warn'd the Sisters of the close of night.
All, one and all, dispers'd, like Day-light's foes,
And, veil'd in mist, blood-red the Sun arose.
The Lark sat sullen on the dropping thorn,
Nor tuned one welcome to the drowsy Morn.
Sad murmurs sounded from the gurgling rills,
And pregnant clouds o'ertopt the dusky hills.

CHORUS.
The Moon so bright had shone, that the grey Morn
Stole unexpected.  Cynthia's fading horn
Sicken'd at length.  Aurora twinkled bright,
And warn'd the Sisters of the close of night.
All, one and all, dispers'd, like Day-light's foes,
And, veil'd in mist, blood-red the Sun arose.
