PART I.
O'er Heaven's high arch the infant Hours unfold
The Orient Morn, in canopy of gold,
From silver urns their balmy showers effuse,
And bathe her silk cheeks in ambrosial dews;
Now peep the smiles, the vermeil dimples dawn;
And hues of saffron streak the azure lawn;
Now, hinged on pearl, she turns in bright display
The eastern portals reddening into day,
Whose genial blush bids new creations spring,
And warm with life, their natal anthem sing.

Thus the mute canvas, touch'd by Genius, lives,
And fairy worlds the mimic pencil gives;
Up-spring the hills, with cots romantic crown'd,
The ivied towers, the sloping vales around,
The glittering waves that roll in limpid pride;
The bending woods that clothe the glassy tide,
Charm'd we survey, where not a tint was seen,
Attractive graces harmonize the scene!

Lo!  'mid the ambient blue new lustres beam,
Fire the dun shade, and o'er the concave stream,
As the new Sun through ether's fulgid course
Now shot benign in vivifying force;
With arrowy aegis lit the sapphire main,
And bathed, in fluid gold, the ripening plain;
Flush'd the full blade, his mellow beauties shed,
And o'er the earth her vital glories spread.

Here glow the flowers light-wove in Fancy's loom,
With richer hues than all of Persian bloom;
Round the fond elm the ruby tendril throws
The fruit full ripen'd, and the bud that blows;
The down-wove peach, the lily's virgin bell,
Bask in the blaze, and glisten as they swell:
There, girt in foam, the stores of ocean roll,
And lash the strand, impatient of controul.

See!  the warm clay, in mould celestial plann'd,
Roll the blue eye, and poise the sinewy hand!
Life's gushing tides a kindling glow impart,
And fire the veins successive from the heart:
It moves, it speaks, complete the matchless plan&mdash;
Majestic beauty stamps aspiring man!
Soon shall the tawny sheaf, the purpling vine
Cluster in gold, in tumid nectar shine;
For him the gilded spoil, the honied store,
Load every sea, and burnish every shore.

How vain the charms in bounteous nature drest,
To beam contentment on the care-worn breast!
No jocund draught can pleasure's balm dispense,
If cold satiety arrest the sense;
No mild luxuriance, no enamell'd sky,
Paint the blanch'd check, or point the rayless eye:
But Hope with Ariel-wand, her visions gives,
And rich with bliss the magic landscape lives.
She to new joy can rouse th' enthusiast heart,
And sweeter hours and softer scenes impart;
The curling tresses, and the neck of snow,
The smiles that sparkle, and the tears that flow,
The blush, the glance, the languor, and the sigh,
In soft succession, as she calls, move by.

In Music light awoke the Seraph's song,
Where crown'd with palms Euphrates glides along,
And fairy woods in gay reflection pass,
The spangled fruitage nodding from the glass;
As by the margin slept the blushing Fair,
On scented thyme that dew'd her silken hair;
But ah!  not yet her eyes of liquid blue
Had tried their power, and gloried to subdue!
Not half so pure, the crystal tears adorn
The violets mild sweet-opening to the morn.

In Eden shades with flowers eternal crown'd,
Where citron arbours breathed their odours round;
Primaeval LOVE first view'd, with blushes warm,
Each flexile beauty and each orient charm;
In the clear wave her sportive image 'spies
Come as she comes, and vanish as she flies;
Sees rival tints a soften'd radiance speak,
And blend the rose and lily on her cheek;
And all the fluttering Loves the nectar sip,
Or nestle gaily on her coral lip:
Her eyes told more than all the Muses tell,
Though sweet to passion's ear the mimic swell;
Her ringlet locks with hyacinths entwined,
Gave their rich clusters to the perfumed wind,
Or now luxuriant o'er her ivory neck
In golden waves, her tumid bosom deck,
Whose crimson currents, exquisitely fine,
Through lucid snow in blue meanders shine:
Her buoyant limbs, in just proportion wove,
Elastic float and frolic through the grove;
In motion charm, in grace quiescent please,
With pliant swim or harmonizing ease.

To ravish'd man what new creations rise,
Heave his full breast, and revel in his eyes!
Love tunes his silver chord, before unstrung,
And sweet vibrations tremble on his tongue;
Each throbbing pulse unknown delights improve,
And new emotions all the bosom move;
By her inspired, to honour's impulse true
In life's gay morn we happiness pursue,
The soul's pure impulse gilds the ruddy cheek,
And wafts the vow no eloquence can speak!
For virtue blooms, and genial pleasure glows,
Where Truth and Peace and Innocence repose;
No vicious glance, the harbinger of shame,
With guilty fires pollutes the vestal flame;
No wanton wishes arm the roving eye,
No fiery beat inflames the kindling sigh,
No faithless lip imprints the burning kiss,
No tremors thrill to wake a fleeting bliss;
But raptured hours in changeless measure move,
And sooth the soul to harmony and love.

Say not her smiles, in chains lascivious, bind
The powers of taste, the energies of mind;
Unman the soul at Glory's patriot call,
And bid her laurels fade, her blossoms fall!
Far other issue! &mdash; no illusive ray
Here lures to cheat, or flatters to betray;
But brightening hopes, in aspiration true,
With fervid march the paths of Fame pursue.
In cinctured pride, see blooming Genius spread
The silvery halo round his holy head!&mdash;
See Science wave her snow-white pinions o'er,
As the light Loves, to catch her music soar!
See Patriot-virtue, fired by Love, impart
Strength to the arm, and valour to the heart,
When their dark fate the vollied thunders shed,
And wide are seen the dying and the dead!
Point but the goal where honest danger lies,
His home, his loves, his liberty, the prize,
And frowning ruin gladdens in his eyes!

On yonder summit, round whose air-hung steep
In giddy chase the Alpine breezes sweep,
The Switzer-shepherd cheats the happy day,
And blythe his pipe, and blythe his lambkins play.
Suzette with smiles rewards the votive lays,
Her kiss his meed, her thanks his sweetest praise.
No gambols please, no chaplets weave his hair,
No note melodious and no landscape fair,
If Suzette frown; &mdash; then fled is Michel's joy,
Unheeded shine the glaciers of Savoy;
Whose frozen tops, beyond the rapid Thun,
In hoary radiance glisten to the sun.
Suzette was fair, her plaited locks behind
In light festoons the graceful ribbons bind:
The hat of straw half-veil'd her brunette face;
A scarlet jacket clasp'd the rustic Grace;
Her bright-blue kilt embroidered low with red
The polish'd knee, a fringing curtain, spread.
With sportive steps the allemande she wove,
Or trill'd in simple notes the strain of love;
While the rapt youth in fond delirium leans,
And drinks of love, and wonders what it means!
When lo!  Oppression bared his blood-stain'd arm,
O'er calm Helvetia roll'd the loud alarm,
The patriot-trumpet blew with clangour clear,
And roused to arms the gallant mountaineer:
His cradled home he quits at honour's call,
Climbs the wood-cliff and stems the torrent's fall;
Bounds o'er the heath where erst in happier hours
For his Suzette he cull'd the Alpine flowers,
And twined the rural crown with pleasing care,
To braid the ringlets of her yellow hair;
The red-lipp'd cherries pluck'd, his Fair to please,
And spread the brimming pail, the fragrant cheese,
As mid enamell'd thyme his browsing flock
Cropt the young flowers, or scaled the nodding rock.
But now his bosom feels the patriot swell,
That fired for Schwitz the generous soul of Tell;
Nerved his firm arm to avenge his country's wrong,
And wing'd the shaft embalm'd in deathless song.

But fond Suzette (what will not lovers dare?)
Her Michel's toils resolved, unknown, to share;
With walnut-bronze disguised her beauteous face,
Robb'd of each charm, each mild attractive grace;
Her pencil'd brow a bolder arch assumes,
And her fair head sustains the warrior-plumes:
By Michel's side in every risk she stood,
His gory path through hostile troops pursu'd.
In vain the fiery chasseurs sweep the ground,
In vain the red artillery thunders round:
Nor flashing fate inclines her soul to yield,
Nor sabres gleaming through the well-fought field.
O'er piles of shatter'd arms and hills of slain,
She guards her lover an the crimson'd plain;
While dying groans and vaunts of prowess sound;
And Earth and Heaven the mingled cries confound!&mdash;
The parent-bird thus shields her callow young,
Unfledged their down, their infant-plumes unstrung,
Thus potent instinct bids her hover near,
Through ether's vast their giddy flight to steer;
With pilot-wing invites their first essay,
'Till bold and firm they cleave the azure way.

When near Lausanne the Patriot legions fought,
And fame and freedom in the battle sought;
His ivied cot again each peasant view'd,
His speckled cliffs and native mountain-wood;
And left the fateful toil, the loud alarms,
For the calm refuge of his fair-one's arms.
Michel again re-treads with eager joy
The hill that show'd the glaciers of Savoy:
Hears, with fond pride, his native choral song
Mount from each vale, and swell the hills along,
As jocund youths, in flowery chaplets bound,
Twine with soft nymphs, and beat the festive ground.
High throbs his heart, as round his honest brow
Suzette's white hands the victor garland throw;
And soon he hears, for soon her lips confest
The pure emotions of her faithful breast,
How Love impell'd her to th' embattled strife;
With guardian arm to fence her Michel's life;
And fann'd with vivid breath the hero-flame,
To give her hardy Mountaineer to fame.

Propt on Morgarten's beamy height,
Ah!  see Helvetia's Genius stand!
Her eye of glory dimly bright;
Unnerv'd her adamantine hand,
Musing she points her lovely land,
To ruffian-pride a hapless prey;
And, lingering, waves on Freedom's band.
Once more to crush a tyrant's sway.

On Reding's lance she pensive leans,
And eyes the warlike dead below;
And culls from Time his brightest scenes,
And bids the sainted dust to glow.
Unfelt, the Alpine breezes blow;
Unseen, the nimble chamois bound;
Unheard, the tumbling torrents flow,
And fleet marmottos frisk around.

Spirit of Life! (she sighs) attend,
And rouse from sleep the mighty dead;
The sinewy arm of valour bend,
And plume again the warrior's head;
Helvetia mourns; for Freedom bled;
When Gallia yoked her dragon-car;
And, on by scowling Treason led,
Pour'd wide the crimson floods of war.

Ah!  yet in fire's immortal stream;
For battle steel the hero-heart;
In battle's day, in glory's beam,
Thy thunders to each arm impart;
Let tyrant-guilt affrighted start,
As pale he views each falchion rear:
His arrows then Remorse shall dart,
And the foul breast heave deep with fear.

O'er sea-girt Albion still may Peace display
Her seraph smiles and swell her festive lay!
Her dauntless youth in every clime carest,
Her graceful fair the loveliest and the best:
O'er arts and arms her generous people reign,
Woo the rich soil, and crowd the subject main!
And still, as Commerce guides her bold career,
From shore to shore the helm shall Justice steer!

Ye blushing fair that on the Muses smile,
The pride, the glory of yon gallant isle!
Your charms relume, your timid lustres dart,
And urge the blood's brisk eddy 'round the heart!
No daring foe shall win your snowy arms,
Or tread, unblest, your paradise of charms;
No haughty stranger wring the struggling tear,
Or pluck the warrior-garland from the bier;
With impious scorn insult the tomb ye mourn,
The laurell'd bust, the monumental urn!

And should the war-toned bugle rouse to fight
For freedom, fame and beauty's soft delight;
By Glory braced, each buoyant arm shall wield
Resistless thunders o'er the tented field;
Each breast shall feel the mighty cause its own,
And fence invincible the patriot throne;
With loyal pride, each hand the sword shall wave,
Our King, our laws, our liberties, to save.

O!  ne'er may war's dread hecatombs again
With gushing life-streams purple Erin's plain;
No iron furies whet th' enthusiast spear,
By Frenzy couch'd, to persecution dear!
But rather, blithe Content through every vale,
Pluck the ripe fruit; the yellow harvest hail;
Each liberal breast expand at Reason's call,
And God and country prove alike to all.

Lo!  on that gory beach, the murderers slew
The guiltless Indians of the light canoe!
And Love's last pray'r, when flew the leaden death,
In quick short pantings sigh'd the lingering breath:
Each martyr'd form one only hope consign'd;
It lives, a phoenix-talisman, behind!
Its impulse fires the Mingo chief to arms;
The dark brown warrior sounds the shrill alarms;
His rattling shafts, his flint-tipt spear assumes,
And o'er his bronzed brow wave the scarlet plumes.
Though when white Peace her budding olive sway'd
His love avenged, he scour'd the forest-shade;
No more with her he wings the pathless plain,
Or bounds triumphant o'er the billowy main;
Still, still he shuns the whirlwind of the soul,
The wine that sparkles and the plighted bowl;
And shrinks, in frenzy, at the 'crusted sword,
Drunk with the crimson of the breast adored.

Oft as he mused where all he loved reclined,
Each long lost vision 'bodied on the wind;
Would plastic Hope recall the happy hours,
The hut, the swift canoe, the plantain bowers;
Oft o'er his glowing cheek would sorrow stream,
As faded scenes came brighten'd on his dream!

Thus wild through Enna's fields the goddess flies,
With locks unbound and sad imploring eyes;
Pursues her midnight search the fair to gain,
O'er laughing mead, sweet stream, and painted plain;
To each gay grove her dragon-coursers bend,
On each gay grove her Aetna-fires descend;
The floating girdle, as forlorn she strays,
With fatal truth the deed of guile betrays;
And Ceres mourns as bathed in pity's flow,
Sweet Arethusa weeps the tale of woe.

See!  Love's bright torch illumes the Sestian tower
With anxious blaze, and chides the lingering hour.
Now bold Leander to the signal flies,
Feels Hero's smile, and kindles in her eyes:
Gives his brave bosom to the dashing wave,
Though drear the night and loud the tempest rave!
Crested in foam o'er Hellespont he rides,
Love nerves his arm, and Love his voyage guides;
His eye unwearied marks the pilot-star,
While his fond mistress points the goal afar:
Soon near the crooked shore, he springs to land,
And bounds exulting o'er the yellow strand.
Thus Jove's dread bird, to gain his air-built nest
Cleaves ether's ocean with undaunted breast;
The dangerous height still scans with piercing eye,
The sun his signal, and his home the sky.

How changed the scene, when mimic smiles decoy,
And paint the phantoms of unhallow'd joy!
Illicit passion owns no angel charm,
And wakes no heart so sensitively warm,
No zest of mind with transient grace combines,
No virtue feels, no happiness designs.
Deluded man, no more the wise and brave,
Lives but to sigh, a painted siren's slave;
Unblest he roves through guilt's licentious wild,
Smiles at his fall, and sues to be beguil'd;
From Valour's crown, from Reason's triumph flies,
And yields a world to fall a woman's prize.

When down the Cydnus Aegypt's galley roll'd,
Her keel, her sails, her streamers streak'd with gold,
With painted plumes while mimic Cupids blow
The gelid airs, to fan the rising glow;
While silver flutes melodious panted 'round,
And silver oars replied to music's sound;
And eager crowds, half-bending from the shore,
Caught the soft strains the rippling waters bore
The chief; whose brow imperial conquest graced,
Whose sun of glory half the globe embraced,
Empire resign'd; betray'd the soldier's fame,
And dimm'd the splendour of a Roman name;
On fate's dread brink slept in lascivious arms,
And drunk of death from Cleopatra's charms;
On Actium's day the coward fair-one fled,
While the war thunder'd, and the battle bled;
Still perch'd on high his veteran eagles stood,
Flapp'd their bold wings and hail'd the reddening flood,
'Till fatal Love the hero's sails unfurl'd,
And lost the sceptre of a subject world.

Cool'd in the gales of yon Aegean isle,
O!  wilt thou bask in Beauty's angel-smile;
And hear Pelides, screen'd in arbours gay,
Breathe to the Doric lute his soul away?
Or see the man of wisdom, wise no more,
Calypso's form, Calypso's smiles adore;
And not confess the wanton's beauties lead
The victim-heart, to bid it's virtues bleed?

Illicit love there kindles war's alarms,
To Ilium guides the western world in arms;
Bids penal fire in rage avenging play,
Unbars the Scaean gate and points the way:
In crashing piles the regal palace falls,
And smouldering ruin wraps the heaven-built walls.

Lo!  Thais leads; the furious torches fly,
Hiss o'er the marble roofs and glaze the sky;
The sculptured scenes in awful grandeur fade,
The towering dome, the breezy colonnade.

Here, when Armida weaves the mystic spell,
And fancy's visions o'er the landscape swell;
Remote from glory's camp, and honour's band,
Rinaldo yields to Beauty's soft command;
In dalliance lost, in sloth luxurious laid,
He hails the nectar'd bower, the silk arcade.
Yet when the shield displays, in wild surprise,
The flower-wove ringlets and the love-sick eyes;
Th' inverting mirror shows the happier way
That leads to fame's interminable day.

The way-worn trav'ller thus, in cool retreat,
Hides him at noon from summer's sultry heat;
Some daisied hillock props his languid head,
And sweet he slumbers on his grassy bed;
'Till from the yellow moss at evening springs
The warbling lark, and softly-plaintive sings;
Amazed, he starts; then sees the waning day,
With parting blushes on the foliage play;
And, o'er the russet lawn, he gaily flies,
As hopes of home in loud succession rise.

When first on earth, illumined from above,
The spotless bosom felt the glow of Love;
Each thought was chaste, each sympathy confest;
Each only wish, in blessing, to be blest;
Each hope, the mutual transport to impart,
And waft the pure vibrations to the heart.

But ah!  how changed!  no more perennial here,
Primaeval love, the hours of life endear!
Fled are the joys sweet peace had made her own,
When in the eye her chaste expression shone;
And bright content her blended hues would throw,
In all the radiance of the humid bow.
Yet still the Muse aspires to woo the fair,
Whose hearts unbought the Loves and Virtues share;
Who see, unenvy'd, all that chance bestows,
That springs from wealth, or from ambition flows.

O!  lay me by Cettina's wave,
Where Koter's vales of beauty spread;
And Naiads of Narenta lave,
From living urns, the floral bed.

For, there, the eyes ingenuous speak;
And, there, the heart responsive owns
The glance of hope that robes the cheek,
The voice that melts in softest tones!

When Love's sweet influence seizes on each vein,
And the thrill'd nerves imbibe the pleasing pain;
It's dove-like glances dart the timid eye,
The faltering melodies unfinish'd die;
Unwonted ecstasies, in rapture, rove;
Unwonted pangs disclose the throbs of Love.

Th' intrepid youth who quits his native shore,
From Fortune's lap to glean the golden store;
And treads with patient pain a foreign soil,
By imaged love beguiles the task of toil:
O'er arid plains though sad his course he bend,
Her visions light his votive dreams attend;
Illusive Fancy blends her gaudiest hue,
To picture beauties magically true;
Dispense o'er ebon shades a lucid power,
And chase the clouds that wrap the sombre hour.

Thus where Pomona, cradled by the storms
Bares to the frigid blast her rocky form,
In light succession airy dancers fly,
And skim with vivid fires the northern sky.
Refulgent columns gild with quivering light
The wintry pall, and stud the throne of night;
The arrowy meteors charm the gazing throng,
And sportive flashes pour the heavens along.

Yoke eagle wings, or course the pathless wind,
To chase the still-loved image from the mind;
Trace every shore the loud Atlantic laves,
Or roam with Brahmins by the Ganges waves;
Range every clime where Nature's bounties teem,
From Shannon's flowery banks to Jordan's stream;
Or where the Duna's wood-crown'd ices spread,
Or warm Hoambo gilds his genial bed;
Or mark Coanza clear, soft-gliding by,
Reflect the orange grove, the sapphire sky;
Where jetty breasts divide the whispering flood,
And golden fruitage wreathes the tawny wood:
Fleet as the vollied flash, still Love pursues,
Breathes every grace and lives in rosier hues;
Still keener points, at each remove, the dart,
And fires with fiercer flame the tingling heart.

In orient bloom expands the wild-wood vale,
And music's voice yet vibrates in the gale,
Where in Vaucluse resounds the Tuscan lyre,
And Laura's charms awake the poet's fire;
As Echo's bugle thrills the festal grove,
To the full Paean of the lyre of love;
And Virtue's smiles, as on the heart they play,
Bid Fancy's wild illusions fade away.

Where gush the distant western-springs,
Whence Susquehanna's wave meanders;
The copper-colour'd Indian sings,
As 'round her palm-wove hut he wanders;
For Love he dares the hunter's toil;
For Love he courts the shaggy spoil.

"My dark-brown maid!  the locks of day
Float on yon mountain's burnish'd head;
Up &mdash; up &mdash; my Love, and come away;
The sun illumes the forest-bed.

"For thee the tusky warrior bled;
These arrows pierced the panther-prey;
The spotted skin, the feathers red,
Shall deck my Love; &mdash; then, come away!"
Her bow of cane she quick assumes;
Love soon arrays the scarlet plumes.

What dying music steals afar?
How softly thrums the light guitar!
Whose fingers kiss the aspen strings,
Whence undulating magic springs?
Whose harmonizing minstrelsy
Bewitches thus with ecstasy?

Ah!  catch the soft, the soothing strain;
It dies adown the moon-light shore!
Again it swells &mdash; it sinks again
And, now, is heard no more!

Hark! &mdash; 'tis the sleepless youth who moves
The vestal fair, he fondly loves!
In accents light, the whisper'd vow
Exhales its golden notes below.

SERENADE
Wing'd on leaves of new-blown roses,
Cupid, waft Alonzo's sigh;
Press the lip where joy reposes;
Light the star-beam of that eye.

Smooth her locks with laughing fingers,
Fan thy pinions o'er her breast;
Urchin! &mdash; how the fond one lingers,
Archly nods, and looks so blest!

Bud of beauty, brunette fair!
Smile, thine own Alonzo's nigh;
Wave thy locks of raven-hair;
Sigh me back a softer sigh.

Wake thee, Love, &mdash; in highest noon
Rides the dancing orb of night;
Wake thee, Love, the glittering moon
Silvers soft thy latticed height.

She hears &mdash; she starts with fond delight;
The studded lattice gleams with light,
And swift, from Beauty's radiant eyes,
The smile of chaste affection flies;
Their plighted loves again they bind,
'Till midnight leaves the world behind.

Yet, o'er the face though dazzling lilies blow,
And flush'd carnations dimple through the snow;
Though Beauty's lip excel the tulip's bloom,
And twinkling joys her starry front illume;
Though winning grace had deck'd her angel mien,
In charms that please, or sportive or serene;
If 'reft of those, that mental worth declare,
No form is lovely and no face is fair.
Still must the soul her rival lustres show,
And beauty's heart the springs of mercy know;
Still temper beam, enrich'd with modest pride,
While sense and knowledge o'er the taste preside:
Or else delusive sports the fickle bloom,
Fades into air and leaves a deeper gloom.

Thus the bright musk-rose, pearl'd in matin dew,
Clothes every leaf in Flora's finest hue;
And, proud she towers, or ere the vernal storm
Strip the silk leaflets of her timid form.

How soon dejected Love the veil resign'd,
That hope's white finger's wove for Darnley's mind!
How soon the charming queen repentant views,
A soul unmatch'd with beauty's glozing hues!

When first the Nine in groves Pierian strung
Their golden lyres, the power of Love they sung;
Hence beauty's smiles a generous glow inspire;
Hence music melts the soul or wakes to fire;
Hence the bright marble starts, with nature warm
Lives at each stroke, and breathes a mimic charm;
And hence the pencil's tints, with flowing grace,
Paint the young Loves that sport in Beauty's face.

By her inspired, in fine proportions sprung
Those rounded limbs, in ease attractive hung;
That touching grace, so fugitive and fine,
The air so chaste, the contour so divine;
The pride of symmetry by Science led,
To warm the world, from marble's chisel'd bed.

Creative, here, she blended every hue,
In the rich tints Corregio's pencil drew:
With every smile, in colours chastely bright,
O'er sweet Albani's shed her softest light;
Combined each shade, and dipt in every grace,
That breathes enchantment o'er the sparkling face.

How mild is eve!  how gay the blossom'd vale,
Where florets twine, and azure currents sail!
There Cupids laugh, and trip the jocund maze
In sportive time; the flute Silenus plays.
One chubby boy apart, delighted lies,
Hides from the rest, and every gambol eyes;
They nod, they smile, with arch attractive glance,
And urge his light steps to the feathery dance;
The Brother-loves would lure him, but in vain
He lists and looks, but bus him on the plain.
In roses crown'd melodious music, there,
Bids Orpheus woo his sweet bewitching fair,
Blue-ey'd Eurydice with golden hair.
And, as his fingers kiss the trembling wire,
The melting strains e'en gloomy Dis inspire;
Chain the dread wheel, and warm the wondering dead,
While crowding spectres hover o'er his head.

Nursed in her beams, hence orphan Genius springs,
Shoots through the vast, and flaps his new-imp'd wings:
Hence ardour prompts, and glory fires the heart,
And all the virtues in succession start:
Hence in bright polish rise the manners gay,
And o'er the face unwonted graces play.
The ripening orb thus feeds the diamond's blaze,
And streaks it's water with refulgent rays,
Gives to each charm a hue more softly fine,
And sees o'er all a magic lustre shine.

Ah!  catch the sigh; and mark the hero's tear;
They speak the feelings of a love sincere!
As Rolla's virtues, by each heart revered,
For Love renounce what Love and life endear'd;
His Cora's grace to happier arms could give,
And bid the blush of pleasure ever live;
Pen on her lips as hangs the parting kiss,
His swelling bosom owns the pensive bliss.

O'er every surge, through every fateful storm,
The distant sailor chaunts his fair-one's form;
And not a sun that pours the zenith ray,
And not a cloud that hides the orb of day,
Dissolves the vision, dims the radiant smile,
Or strips sweet Fancy of her magic wile.
Through plains of ice if slow his course he steer,
O'er tepid waves if high his bark career;
Where Orellana spurns the ocean's bound,
Or shivering Volga chills with sullen sound;
Still undecay'd the imaged pleasures glow,
In torrid sun-beams and 'mid wastes of snow.
Pillow'd on hope, his temples Love reclines,
Straight 'mid his dreams the dear illusion shines;
Silence and sleep a mimic life renew,
With softer hours and transports ever new:
Wake the light sylphs, in Fancy's court that dwell,
And bid the airy modulations swell;
'Harness in gossamer' the meteor train,
And mould the tinsel coinage of the brain.
Now the fond maid attends her sailor's sigh,
Basks in his smite and revels in his eye;
In spicy fields and citron-blushing bowers
Culls the gilt fruit, or crops the purple flowers:
Plucks the ripe cocoa from the nectar'd glade,
And roams delighted in Tabasco's shade;
Or drinks the breeze that fans the cassia-wood;
Or laves her white limbs in the gelid flood.
Now, by the dimpling shore at home she stands,
Marks the white sail; and waves her lily-hands;
As, soon across the scintillating foam,
Scuds the tall bark to near the rising home!
Now jovial hands swift-ply the flying oar;
Now the gay keel divides the dancing shore:&mdash;
Ah!  sweet enthusiast!  soon th' ideal breast
Clings to thine own caressing and carest!

Thus the fond soldier, tired of war's alarms,
Thinks on the maid that waits his manly arms;
Intrepid climbs the sky o'er Alpine snows,
'Mid chasmy ice and wastes of terror goes:
Or toils o'er arid sands, where fiercely play
The panting fires of Ethiopian day.
Still gayer scenes, and joy-illumined hours,
O'er future paths diffuse their vivid flowers;
And still he hopes, the deathful battle past,
'Home to return and clasp his love at last.'

Oft, as at night he treads the rampart's round,
No bugles breathe; no winds respiring sound;
Pensive he leans; re-paints the fading scene,
And crowds with visions the remember'd green;
He seeks the sparry grot; he hears the rill;
He treads the slope, the lawn, the oak-crown'd hill;
He sees the hawthorn vale, the gothic spire,
The ivied cottage, and the cheerful fire:
Sweeps the gold broom, and robs the musky shade
Of all it's treasure for his long-lost maid;
And sighs his suit, that once her sanction drew,
To Ellen plighted and to Ellen true.

Yes, sweetest power!  o'er every scene benign
Thy smiles expand, thy dear suffusions shine;
And from the cheek when nature's roses fly,
Chase health's light blush and dim the humid eye;
Thy balmy incense heals the canker'd woe;
And in the eye thy beams of comfort glow.

Not all the argent mines of proud display,
Where rich Potosi boasts her central day!
Not the ripe seeds, which tinge with tawny ore
The wealthy sands of Gambia's golden shore!

Not all the cluster'd gems, whose priceless rays
With envied fires Golconda's depths emblaze;
Can mould, like love, the inexpressive charm,
That heaves the heart, and beats the sweet alarm;
Or o'er the checquer'd paths of life diffuse
One ray, to mimic Love's harmonious hues.


PART II.
Come, sweet-lipp'd Flora, nursed on Latian land,
With balmy kiss thy petal bloom expand;
Thy silver bells, thy cups of bossy gold,
Thy gayest smiles, and softest tints unfold:
Wake the young Zephyrs, in thy tulip-bowers,
And bring thy tender dews, thy sunny showers:
And thou, sweet nymph, who bidd'st the smiling vine,
Her flexile arms around her lover twine,
Pomona, come!  embalm the honied eve;
The burnish'd sheaf, the ruddy fruitage give;
Hesperian clusters o'er the foliage throw,
And teach the vegetable gold to glow:
Then wind with me the orange-shaded wave,
Where sea-flowers swim, and snowy naiads lave;
Now bend delighted o'er the wave-wash'd sedge,
Now dip the white foot in the gelid edge:
Where flush'd with health the goat-maid trips along,
And carols merrily her wild-note song.

How sweet!  to roam by Baia's siren shore,
And catch the music of the dashing oar;
When day's last glimmer tints the classic ground,
As Love and Silence shed their magic 'round;
While doves responsive coo in soft retreat;
And waves cerulean murmur at the feet!

Yes, o'er those scenes though ruin still preside,
And strew with many a flower the pensive tide;
The marble columns smile in rival art,
To charm the eye and captivate the heart;
And granite piles in rude disorder placed,
Still breathe enchantment o'er the desert waste.
Here warriors erst, whose nod the world subdued,
At Beauty's knee for Beauty's fetters sued;
Rome's gallant youth, of gay and martial mien,
Graced in the barge the fascinating scene;
To melting lutes prolong'd the pause of love,
And with soft echoes thrill'd the warbling grove.

In Tuscan bowers, where silvery Arno laves
The flowers and fruitage nodding o'er his waves,
Embower'd in Solitude's romantic dell,
Unseen the sweet Louisa loved to dwell.
Her eyes shone lambent, in pellucid blue,
Bright as the liquid gems of Hermon's dew;
Her cheek's carnation own'd the dazzling red,
Rich as the blush by Sharon's roses fed;
In tissue fine the auburn tresses deck
Her shoulders fair, and climb her ivory neck;
In ringlets smooth around her bosom twine,
And float, a silk veil, o'er the snowy shrine.
Her form elastic rivall'd every grace,
That smiled assuasive o'er her perfect face.
Fleet as the chamois skims the bending dew,
Through grove, and mead, at morn Louisa flew;
Kiss'd dawning sweets, that shook their crystal bells,
The timid floret opening all her cells;
Sees the blithe kids o'er scented herbage rove,
And the poised lark attune his hymn of love.
And oft, at eve, when balmy leaflets sigh,
And fires delicious arm the kindling eye;
In vistas laid the glossy chestnuts play,
To screen her slumbers from the glare of day.

Eve's car descends!  the green-tress'd naiads swim
The buoyant flood, and dash the silvery limb;
While pleasure-bugles woke the cheering swell,
O'er pearly grot, wild shore, and winding dell;
And whispering rocks in fainter echoes sound,
As fainter still the music dies around.
Lured by delight, Rosario treads the grove,
The soft retreat of Solitude and Love.
He sees!  he gazes!  ah!  what tongue can speak!
A light blush mantles o'e' her angel-cheek:
One snowy arm upon her bosom laid,
One snowy arm supports the sleeping maid
On a gay bank, where heath-bells sweetly blow,
And azure waves in cool luxuriance flow.
There had she twined fantastic wreaths, to deck
With branching gold her timid favourite's neck,
A graceful fawn, that gambol'd by her side,
And dipp'd his bosom in the limpid tide.

She wakes!  she starts!  a rich suffusion dyes
Her varying cheek, and lights her timid eyes,
O'er every charm delicious languors stream,
In every glance attractive beauties beam:
High throbs the pulse; the gushing rills pervade
Each vital vein, and paint a deeper shade;
On the pink lips, the neck bewitching, glow,
And streak with purple bright the breast of snow.
Thus the thrill'd nerves, as fires electric dart,
Shoot o'er the frame, and vibrate to the heart!

By love seduced, Rosario joys to roam,
Far from his childhood hills, his sylvan home.
Yet still untold, the vows reluctant hung
In mute confusion on his lingering tongue:
Ye blushing fair!  the soft perfection teach,
The silent "eloquence that passeth speech;"
Ah!  tell how true, in spell of magic fine,
The matchless graces of expression shine!

Both form'd for love, attractive Loves attired;
Excelling charms in either form conspired:
O'er the fond youth the jocund summers break,
That fledge with down the ruddy-mantled cheek;
In gay Louisa's fascinating mien
Sport the rich graces of unmatch'd sixteen.

Now, urged by doubt, he roams the olive grove,
And hope and fear alternate empire prove:
Now by the grey-moss rock he musing leans,
Nor smile the almond bowers, the pansied scenes.

Hush'd is the wood; in slumber sweet reclined,
No tremulous aspen shivers in the wind:
Fair as the haunts, where erst in vernal hours
The rose-lipp'd Zephyr crown'd the queen of flowers;
And piping Fan, and all the Satyr train,
In festive gambol beat the scented plain.
Then, he attunes to love his light guitar,
And hovering echoes float the strains afar.

CANZONETTE.
Cease, fond bosom, nor complain!
Fire her eye, but ice her heart;
What of smiles?  she smiles at pain!
Smiles but barb the burning dart.

Maid so dear!  my soul adores thee!
Sooth, ah!  sooth my fears to rest.
Smile, sweet maid!  a smile restores me,
Gives back hope, and makes me blest!

When forlorn, for thee I languish,
Say then, cruel!  wouldst thou fly?
Leave this aching heart to anguish?
Hear me mourn and see me die?

Louisa hears with joy the tender woe,
And smiles, the hope responsive to bestow;
Her lucid eye emits a quivering fire,
The chasten'd glow of innocent desire.

The milk-white swan thus skims the fluid way,
And sees her silver down, reflected, play;
Hides, with delight, her osier isles among,
And trills in music sweet her plaintive song.

Love slyly laughs, and bids gay Hymen bind
The hallow'd wreath, to link the kindred mind;
With genial torch to gild the nuptial hour,
And o'er the scene propitious pleasures pour!

Nor blush, Philander, if in votive lay
The lyre of Love to thee it's homage pay!
When to thy breast young beauty's smiles endear
A virtuous heart, unvarnish'd and sincere:
Her eye of blue the rural Loves illume,
And on her check the wild wood-roses bloom.

The cottage-fair, from Harrow's flowery side,
Philander wooes, nor wooes to be denied:
"No friend (she says) of wealthy store we claim;
No deeds of prowess gild our humble name."
Content with what he views, he seeks no more,
No deeds of prowess and no wealthy store.
The maid he loves; he wins her tell-tale eyes,
Crowns modest worth, and clasps his blooming prize.

How pure the bond!  how feathery-footed flies
The first-born hour, when sympathies arise!
When sunny Love, unsullied and supreme,
Weaves in gay hue enchantment's silken dream.

Ah!  whence the change, when not a pleasure smiles,
And not a charm the penance-day beguiles?
When palsied age, absorb'd in peevish fear,
Chills with a frown; nor melts at beauty's tear?
'Tis hoary winter rifles all the spring,
And plucks the rose from Love's expanded wing!
Or, torn in early bloom, parental power
To death consigns the sweet attractive flower!
Else, could the fair with youth and beauty blest,
By all the Loves and all the Graces drest,
For wrinkled wealth true happiness resign,
In the poor harlotry of gold to shine?

Spirit of light!  who from the ambient sky
Bidd'st the fine shaft to every bosom fly;
Whose glow in wildest haunts the breast pervades,
In Arab deserts, or Canadian shades;
And o'er the polish'd mind more sweetly pours
Thy soften'd joys and love-embosom'd hours:
Say, by what impulse springs the ravish'd heart
A bliss to own a rapture to impart?
Why the bright smile, ere now unfelt, appears
More lovely far than each that fancy wears?
What the pure source, congenial spirits, speak!
When the first crimson flushes o'er the cheek;
When the first sparkle quivers in the eye;
When the first throb awakes the raptured sigh!

Touch'd by thy wand, each iron bosom feels
And melts to bliss as passion's glow reveals.
In motliest shape the pleasing visions swell,
Nor age nor genius wards the potent spell;
Mid tropic fires, mid polar frosts, it thrills
On Lybia's sands, and bleak Columbia's hills.

Lamented Andre!  o'er whose early bier
The muse of Julia pours the patriot-tear;
The laureate bowers, the clustering myrtles weep,
As pity points where youth and glory sleep!
Thy pensive fate the bending virtues mourn,
And crowd with weeping Loves thy funeral urn!
Bereft Honora!  though the icy shade
Blight thy fine form, and bid thy dimples fade;
Though in rich bloom no more we joy to trace
Thy cheek's fine glow, thine eye's illumined grace;
The lovely harmonist, in plaintive swell,
Chaunts hallow'd requiems o'er thy narrow cell.

Nor youth's bright tints nor beauty's seraph smile,
A parent's prudent cruelty beguile!
Bid soft affection melt the flinty soul,
Or pierce the adamant of stern controul.

With starry night behold the mourner rove
The hills of slain, to clasp her clay-cold love;
Wind 'round his gory neck her ivory arms,
And press his lip, and hang upon his charms;
The manly form that stemm'd in glorious might
The crested terrors of the doubtful fight,
No more with conquest plumed returns to grace
The winning smiles of Ariana's face.

And shall no pang the callous bosom feel?
O'er the sear'd heart no dews of pity steal?
Yes!  the proud cheek may yet be blanch'd with fear;
Ambition's eye be sainted by a tear!

In fatal prejudice what visions roll,
To dim the blaze of Eloisa's soul!
With sophist chain the wings of truth to bind,
And cramp the vigour of th' aspiring mind!
Love bids her son the robe of science steal,
And screen his fond eye in her sober veil;
In learning's lore his rosy snares dispense,
And mask with reason passion's eloquence.
The boy, submissive to maternal care,
Soils his gold curls and apes the stoic air:
His frolic eyes no more exulting beam;
O'er his white brow no golden ringlets stream.
Soon from his bow the amber shaft he wings:
Soon in her heart the tingling arrow-rings.

No more disguised, the urchin peeps to view,
Now bloom his dimpling cheeks with brighter hue;
Unwonted sparkles quiver as he speaks,
And gems of pleasure dew his sobbing cheeks.
As her rich lip with melting kiss he press'd,
Her glowing frame a softer thrill confess'd:
Delighted, won, she hails the new alarms;
And sinks, embosom'd in his 'circling arms.

Undying Love sway'd Eloisa's heart,
In early bloom from life's fond hopes to part;
Chill'd the warm blood that fed recorded fires,
And throbb'd in every vein to soft desires;
Led the pleas'd victim to a living tomb,
To "watch and weep" in solitary gloom:
Yet Love alone the crimson fountain sips,
And Love alone is pillow'd on her lips;
One only smile her widow'd bosom feels;
One only form along the cloister steals;
One only voice bids joy enthusiast move
And melts the soul to harmony and love.

When the soft vespers sooth'd each care to rest,
Love unsubdued still triumph'd in her breast;
Her fervid sighs from Paraclete resound;
St. Gilda's cells re-vibrate to each sound,
With moans record the well remember'd moan,
Count tear for tear, and echo groan for groan.

Doubt not, if female constancy excite
Charms to attract, and virtues to delight!
Say in what heart can nature's ardours prove
A firmer friendship, or a purer love?
Through toil, and woe and war's unblest alarms,
The matron clasp'd her Pompey in her arms;
Explored, with fearless step, where duty led;
The stone her pillow, and the wild her bed!

Her faith to prove, great Portia smiled to bleed,
Ere her loved lord confides the daring deed:
Her ivory skin the gushing crimson dyes,
While streams of rapture tremble in her eyes!

Lo!  the fond pair!  where glows the vengeful pyre;
The circling faggots reddening at the fire.
In rival zeal th' intrepid lovers stand,
Court the red death, and urge the hissing brand.
Impell'd by love, Olindo's bosom burns
To spring on fate, and shield the fair he mourns;
With equal warmth the lovely maid contends,
"Mine is the crime, on me the lot descends;"
And longs to prove, in sweet heroic strife,
The bliss by death to save a lover's life!

By Ganges' banks, high plumed with feathery cane,
Where suns perennial flush the snowy grain;
The sweet enthusiast climbs the funeral bed,
Clasps the cold corse and pillows on the dead.

Nor time can blunt, nor absence can controul
The fine vibrations of the female soul;
To other haunts and fairer scenes they turn,
Feel o'er their joys, and still responsive burn;
Embalm the hopes that brighter hours confess'd,
By love exalted and by friendship bless'd.
Yes, woman boasts a heart as purely true,
As nature fashion'd or as fancy drew!

Thus, when with rival oars the suitor train
Launch'd the proud prows, to plough th' Ionian main:
Penelope in grace illusive smiles,
Spreads all her charms, and marshals all her wiles;
And still the choice with blameless guile delays,
'Till, all her toil, Ulysses' smile repays.

Nor should neglect, which galls the generous mind,
The sacred tie of kindred hearts unbind;
Neglect, that blights with more than Gorgon power
The sunny landscape of an happier hour!
How dear the fair, whose mild and cheerful mien
Can gild lift's little shades with hope serene!
No harlot rouge bids nature's roses fly,
Or lights the wanton radiance of her eye;
But prudence speaks in each ingenuous ray,
And gay good humour's orient beauties play.
And, should the truant-heart eccentric roam,
With winning grace she lures the wanderer home;
The soft allurement speeds in duty drest;
And clasps the dear offender to her breast.

Thus Caesar's sister, hapless consort!  strove
With the cold pangs of unrequited love;
With lenient balm bade mercy's sigh assuage
Th' indignant throbbings of a brother's rage;
And breathed with magic mild her generous breath,
To snatch her guilty Antony from death.

Hark!  to Aeolian harps the maniac sings,
While sunny hope paints love's ambrosial wings!
No plaintive dirge marks Henry's holy grave;
'Round his loved form no foaming billows rave:
Far other sounds her 'raptured ear invade,
Far other visions bless the happy maid!

Two little days on gilded down had flown,
Since the fond youth first call'd the fair his own;
When the war-drum beat loud the martial call,
His bride he leaves, to conquer or to fall,
As by his side the temper'd steel he binds,
His nodding plumage dances to the winds;
A transient smile her fainting spirit charms,
He clasps the pensive beauty in his arms!
"Ah!  think (he sighs) though honour's high behest
Beat the alarum in thy soldier's breast,
His heart with thine can melt in fondest care;
Would sooth thy fears, thy kind emotions share;
Yet, dear one, say!  would'st thou in sloth confine
These eager arms, now rivetted with thine?
And give this bosom to the whelming sod;
My name unknown; my path of fame untrod!"

And now, by glory roused, he ploughs the flood,
Where lash'd by storms the giant Pharos stood.
Nile's foamy shore the dauntless Britons gain,
And fame's own banner fans the laurell'd plain.
As near the foe th' intrepid hero stands,
And points the tube, and fires his native bands;
In wheeling charge th' impetuous hussars rush,
From Henry's breast the vital torrents gush:
Soon, fainting life sustains the heart no more;
In victory's lap he sleeps, on Aegypt's shore.

Yet hope still cheats the lovely maniac's hours,
And decks her pillow with the gaudiest flowers;
Still partial fancy gilds the lurid skies,
With the bright magic of her rainbow dyes;
And memory pictures in her fairy dream,
Scenes ever-loved, and joys that dearer seem.

Now the poor maniac strews with roses gay
The bridal couch for Henry, far away;
Now sees, or thinks she sees the tall bark nigh
Cleave with exulting prow the billows high:
The melting lute, in symphony of song,
Soft pity swells, her weeping groves among.

Come, love, for thee the couch I strew,
It's cushions gay of bridal bloom;
A bed of roses dipt in dew,
And bathed in sweets of spring-perfume!

No, false one, stay; yet, yet behold
The form so dear, as once you swore;
Are soil'd my waving locks of gold?
And roll my azure eyes no more?

Are pale the lips, that kisses fed,
With honied smiles that pouting shone?
Are white the checks of purest red,
That blush'd for you, and you alone?

How dark is the night!  and how cold is the dew!
See the spangles, that silver my hair
Loud whistles the storm, but no Henry's in view:
Ah!  my bosom it burns in the air!

Now the moon gilds the deep; lo!  the canvass it swells;
And the ocean reflects the blue sky;
And the zephyrs breathe soft, from their balm-scented cells,
To woo the white sail with a sigh.

List, list, he sings!  the warrior sings!
"Thy soldier flies his faith to prove;
Yes, yes, to clasp thee, see!  he springs!
My true, my only love."

How lorn the man for whom the vices spring,
And shake contagion from their mildew'd wing!
Whose hour of pain no cordial smile can cheer,
But lives unloved, and dies without a tear!
Though vicious joys their giddy circle run,
His soul is faint, by fancied bliss undone,
And true to vengeance, ruin hoards her store,
When folly's siren-song enchants no more.

Ye, whose fine hearts with glow enthusiast prove
The flow of pity, and the fire of love;
At reason's call, O!  recollect your kind,
And rouse the dormant energies of mind:
Or soon uncheck'd, beneath its Lunar sway
Life's lessening flood with murmurs ebbs away!

As, when o'er Norway's wastes the traveller goes,
Keen cut the winds, that sweep the drifted snows.
Should fatal torpour o'er the senses creep,
No pitying angels whelm his lids in sleep:
Lethargic slumbers dim the glazy eye;
And, if subdued he sleeps, he sleeps to die.

You tall grass wild, where high the lime-trees wave,
Moans in the breeze o'er Werter's lonely grave.
Victim of frenzy!  pencil'd in each hue,
As gaudy fine as fancy ever drew!
The fiery shaft to shun he feebly tries,
And sinks beneath the lightning of her eyes.
One meteor ray illumes the ambient gloom,
It dimly hovers o'er the clay-cold tomb;
And points, blest harbinger I the happier shore,
Where Charlotte blooms, to fly his arms no more.

O!  let the maid, when hope's gay whispers speak,
And light the warm suffusion on her cheek;
Though her thrill'd nerves soft passion's ingress feel,
From the dear youth th' intrusive guest conceal;
Ne'er let her dubious vows her bosom move
To soft confessions of confiding love;
Ne'er let her scorn the barriers fenced by pride,
Where truth, esteem, and modesty preside!
Else will the lovely victim, left to mourn,
Her victor curse, yet weep for his return!

His tide where foaming Adria pours,
And Venice swells her marble towers;
And bright an hundred turrets gleam,
Reflected in the mirror-stream;
There skims the Gondola along,
With silver oar and plaintive song:
As lorn the graceful mourner sings,
And tears bedew the sighing strings.

CANZONETTE.
One only youth I fondly loved,
I thought him true, the hope was vain!
For soon his heart a rover proved,
And left this bosom nought but pain!

Though to each flower by Brenta's stream,
As swift we cut the glassy tide,
He swore our hearts (ah!  fade the dream!)
Nor time should change, nor fate divide.

Soft was the flute he pensive play'd;
So sweet he sigh'd, he look'd so true;
My heart he won:  fond easy maid!
He own'd no heart, that beat for you.

On the mute oar, the gondolier
Attentive lists the melting strain;
It sooths the heart, it charms the ear;
But never, never wakes again!

And see!  all loose, o'er Leucat's rock reclined,
Beauty's fair tresses stream upon the wind!
Light swell's the lyre, with music's echoes fraught,
And each fine string glows eloquent with thought!
See, now the Lesbian mounts the giddy brow,
While loud and wild the surges roar below;
O'er the proud cliff the sparkling billow braves,
Springs into airy and sinks amid the waves.

Connubial love!  thy smiles, diffusive, light
The virtuous heart to innocent delight.
Shrined in thy breast, entranced affection lies
And lights the tell-tale magic of thine eyes.

Recal the scenes, when infant passion sprung,
And thrilling music on each accent hung;
When the new heart, by hopes seductive fed,
Felt beauty's fire, and waked as from the dead
Bade through each vein exulting currents swim,
Tuned the mute nerve, and poised the elastic limb;
Gave to expression's grace a richer glow,
The eye to sparkle, and the cheek to blow;
Then say, how soft the retrospective view
Endears the past, and lures us to pursue!

Thus when, for home unfurl'd his eager sail,
The ardent sailor wooes the favouring gale,
O'er well-known waves his dancing ensign steers;
The land-marks rise, the nearing shore appears;
With thousand joys each distant vision teems,
Of halcyon hours, and sweetly cherish'd dreams!
How dear to her he meets, each danger o'er
The refluent tide that wafts him to the shore!

Should heaven propitious crown the nuptial prayer,
And prattling cherubs wake parental care;
O'er budding cheeks when infant roses rise
And twinkling lustre's light the starry eyes;
How sweet the task, the flexile thought to mould
And childhood's germs of fancy to unfold!

Lo!  on that couch no throb the heart illumes;
His icy lance the tyrant grim assumes!
Yet, power of Love!  e'en here thy beams dispel
The gloom, where pain and melancholy dwell;
Thy lenient balsam sooths the barbed hours,
And strews the pillow with its latest flowers.
O!  flatterer sweet, who pour'st a lucid ray
O'er the calm close of life's eventful day;
When bliss no longer spurs the torpid heart,
It's pulses flutter, and it's joys depart;
In the dread hour, when worlds unknown invite
The struggling soul to urge th' unmeasured flight,
O'er the glazed eye thy duteous ardours shed,
A lambent smile, and raise the fainting head;
Thine incense mingles with the parting breath,
And gilds with faith and hope the gloom of death;
Thou bidd'st the soul while calm, serene the breast
Take the dove's wings, and far from sorrow rest!

When pensive memory wakes from every cell
The sleeping visions, that she loves so well;
True to her call, their long-lost beauties give
A semblance fair, that seems again to live;
And still it charms, as faded pleasures smile.
To see the cheat the mourner's heart beguile!

There, sorrowing angels grace the marble bed
And bind their garlands 'round the patriot's head!
There o'er his bier Serena steals to lean,
And thinks she sees him, as she once has seen!
His was the heart, to honour's impulse true,
The base to scorn, the lofty to pursue;
By rank emblazon'd and by fortune graced;
Too wise to hoard, too provident to waste;
His every thought and every action just;
His sovereign's stay, his weeping country's trust:
Ah!  yet, Serena!  o'er those ashes bend;
Those were Palaemon, and the muse's friend!

When, launch'd by fate, the shaft unerring flies,
To dim the hope that laugh'd in beauty's eyes;
O'er the sad grave, and 'round the fluted urn,
We pansies strew and softly pensive mourn;
The well-known step in every wind we hear,
The voice so loved yet charms affection's ear;
In gay illusion smile the form, the face,
Rich in each tint and glowing in each grace.

O!  crowd with rival sweets Sabina's tomb,
And give her turf to wear immortal bloom!
For there inurn'd earth's purest beauties rest;
Strew then with purest flowers her lily-breast.

Ye wedded fair!  if passion's guilty fire
Usurp the heart, and urge the wild desire;
Far from the bosom let the torch be thrown,
And faith and innocence be all it's own!
Soon pleasure dies, the brief delirium o'er;
But anguish wakes the worm that dies no more.

How changed the hours, as flies the halcyon scene,
Where beauty shone unsullied and serene!
'Round the climb'd knee no prattling cherubs cling,
The infant-lip, no vesper anthems sing;
No fine emotions light the ravish'd eye,
To catch expression's graces, as they fly!
No lisping tongue, no laughing eyes, proclaim
A mother's blessing, in a mother's name!
Too late, contrition pours the scalding tear,
To dress in sallow grief the virtues' bier!

Blest is the man, for whom content arrays
Truth's angel smile, and lights with peace his days!
Whose generous heart, each selfish care unknown,
Feels other's woes and other's joys it's own;
Who nobly yields to beauty's radiant charms,
Owns her pure triumph, clasp'd within her arms;
And joys upon her bosom to repose,
When all the soul in thrills of rapture glows.

Yes, Love connubial sheds celestial grace,
And smiles unfading light her blooming face.
Still for calm scenes and rural shades she sighs,
For limpid streamlets and for sapphire skies!
Now climbs, with orient morn the wood-cliff steep,
And marks the first blush on the rosy deep!
Now roves with eve, where spicy arbours swell,
And counts the tinkles of the distant bell;
As russet toil embrowns the village throng,
And festive echo wafts the mirth along.

O!  ever thus let woman's witching bloom
Tinge the fair cheek, the lucid eye illume;
Bend every nerve to beauty's fine controul,
And guide each rising impulse of the soul;
O'er every brow her wreaths of myrtle bind,
And care and sorrow scatter to the wind;
Bid with strong flame the fire of genius glow,
And weave her lilies 'round his youthful brow!
Yet should, perchance, unhallow'd vows profane
Her sainted joys, her snowy altar stain;
If pride and avarice to her temple move,
O!  frown indignant on polluted love!
Bid snaky hate the nuptial mazes dance,
And keen suspicion dart the jaundiced glance;
Bid jealous fear in livid misery glare,
And feel the icy arrows of despair!

Hail!  sweetest love!  thy vivid colours glow,
Dipt in the smiles of heaven's refulgent bow!
In Eden's vernal bowers, thy nascent charms
Won the great sire of mortals to thine arms;
When, crown'd with gold, the starry choirs sublime,
Attuned their viols to the birth of Time:
E'en in that hour when first entranced, he stood,
And saw thee slumber in the citron-wood!
Soft as he prest thy cheeks so rosy fine,
And smoothed with fingers light thy locks divine;
Thou bad'st each pulse, in high vibration own
That bliss is nursed in Woman's smile alone.

For say, can all that wealth or pride would give,
Bid on the brow a wreath, like beauty's, live?
Can all ambition's spoil a bliss impart,
Like woman's magic on the feeling heart;
The hopes, the joys, the soft bewitching fears,
The smiles, the sighs, the languor of her tears?
Her hand unlocks the spring of joy below,
And bids around the streams of pity flow!
Hail, power of Love!  on earth each bosom fire,
'Till Time in dread eternity expire!
