Sir Calidore advanced was in age,
His Pastorella, too so passing fair!
Now by her beauty could no more engage,
But by her meekness and her household care;
And sure they were an ever-loving pair,
That love was now into a habit grown;
And every day encreased more and more,
By little tendances, domestic, shewn,
On either side, from sickness to restore,
Or blunt affliction's load by bearing half the sore:

And so it was with all that love sincere,
When mutual goodness makes the happy choice;
It grows with calm content from year to year,
And reason and religion give their voice,
That each of them should ever more rejoice;
But 'tis not so, when without good intent,
Wild passion drives youth headlong on to woo;
Then love soon flies, as if 'twas only lent,
And then they all their evil tempers shew,
That ev'n to live together they have much to do.

And if good nature one of them o'errules,
This party shall the weight of woe sustain;
For such are ever treated here as fools,
As if they were decreed to suffer pain,
From currish natures keen, and cross in grain!
Oh!  this should never be; for we are taught,
In holy Writ, which we do all profess,
That we should never do to others aught,
But what from them to us we would not think a fault.

What happiness on earth, if all would mind,
As Calidore and Pastorella did,
To love each other, and all human kind;
The contrary whereof we are forbid,
And taught to love our enemies did die,
For we are by nature nothing else,
So much He loved us, who left the sky!
So fervent for us all his matchless charity!

By course of time Sir Calidore grew ill,
And near the death he saw himself decline;
But, having gained grace, his patient will
Most perfectly obey'd the will divine;
Nor did he once against his fate repine;
For he had left the sins for which he griev'd,
(Too many have been acted by the best)
He long had known in whom he had believ'd,
From whom he had the Holy Spirit's power receiv'd.

This made him look on death as on a friend,
To lead his soul to everlasting rest;
So joyfully he met his latter end,
His seem'd to be a mansion of the bless'd!
Such peace and love within him he possess'd,
That often times in words of savoury taste,
He would the raptures of his mind declare,
While his poor body more and more did waste,
And brighter did he shine, still brighter to the last!

Poor Pastorella for her dreadful loss,
And for his pain was sorely vex'd at heart,
And grief did Claribel's whole heart engross,
And Melibee was stunn'd through ev'ry part,
And Cynthia was pierc'd as by a dart;
These three dear children to their loves were giv'n,
And filial duty now was all their strife;
Such harmony can only come from heav'n,
Unmix'd with hate, or any base, unholy leav'n!

But now as nearer to his death he drew,
He call'd his wife and children to his bed,
His poor dim eyes their features scarcely knew,
But having ask'd his wife to raise his head,
He thus unto them all in order said;
"O Pastorella!  think what joys I find,
In sure and certain hope of endless bliss;
This makes me bear my pains with patient mind;
Then drop no tear, or you will be to me unkind.

"Dear Claribel!  a father here you lose,
But God Almighty will be to you more;
If you the better part in time will choose,
Give him your heart, and ponder on the poor,
Who thus will be your friends when time is o'er;
Then let not grief affect your tender frame,
For it is sin to nurse it to excess,
Oft' in affliction we are all to blame,
We look not at the gracious hand, from whence it came.

"O Melibee!  I see your grief confin'd,
Like burning fire within your manly breast,
Bear up, and trust the God that chears the mind,
When none but He can succour the distress'd,
And He can even make the wretched bless'd;
O!  lend my widow, and your sisters, aid,
And ever keep in mind a Saviour's love;
And you'll be now, and after death repaid;
Though nothing is our due, because we all have strayed.

"And thou, dear Cynthia!  cease to weep for me,
We yet shall meet where we shall never part,
Remember in thy youth, Him, who, for thee,
Was, woe to tell!  sore pierced to the heart,
And rose from death!"
Here Calidore with death's loud call complied,
And each saluting with a last farewel;
Tears fell from every eye &mdash; he turn'd aside&mdash;
Heav'd a long sigh, and in an instant calmly died!
