Dark Autumn now assumes its fading reign,
The blue-gray mist creeps slowly o'er the hill;
Dark rolls the river thro' the narrow plain,
And from the uplands bursts the new swoll'n rill.

On yonder heath there stands a lonely tree,
And there, O Connal!  thy sad grave is found;
And still its falling leaves it strews on thee,
Still by the whirlwind born in eddies round.

Here oft at twilight gray, or purple dawn,
As o'er the heath the musing hunter hies,
The sheeted ghost stalks o'er the dewy lawn,
Or haunts the dreary grave where Connal lies.

Thy race, O Connal!  who shall strive to trace?
Or who thro' ages past thy sires can tell?
As the tall oak torn from its native place,
They grew, they flourish'd, and in thee they fell.

Mournful thy wars, O Fingal!  'Midst the slain,
Where groan'd the dying, welt'ring in their gore,
There Connal fell!  the terror of the plain!
There fell the mighty to arise no more!

Thy arm a tempest from the bellowing main,
Thy sword a meteor in the ev'ning sky;
Thy height a rock, that overlook'd the plain;
A glowing furnace was thy wrathful eye.

Loud as a storm, thy voice confounding all;
Dire was thy sword, and eager to destroy;
Beneath thine arm thy mighty warriors fall,
As falls the thistle by the playful boy.

As lowring thunder o'er the mid-day skies,
Dargo the bold, Dargo the mighty, came;
Dark was his brow, two hollow caves his eyes,
Bright rose their clashing swords with sparkling flame.

Crimora &mdash; Rinval's beauteous daughter, near
Her much lov'd Connal.  Could she stay behind!
A bow her shoulder grac'd, her hand a spear,
And loose her waving locks flow'd in the wind.

At Dargo's breast the fatal shaft she drew,
Swift from her arm the mortal weapon flies;
Alas!  the erring dart her Connal slew,
Alas, he bleeds!  alas, her Connal dies!

So falls a rock, torn from the shaggy hill,
So falls an oak, the glory of the plain.
What shall she do?  what griefs  her bosom fill!
"By me is Connal, hapless Connal, slain!"

All day she wanders by some nameless stream;
Connal my love!  Connal my friend!  she cries;
At night the pathless vale by Cynthia's beam;
For grief, the lovely musing mourner dies.

The loveliest pair cold earth doth here inclose
That ever slept within her clay-cold womb;
Alone they rest in undisturb'd repose,
The green-grass rankling o'er their narrow tomb.

I, musing in the melancholy shade,
The rank weed rustling to the whistling wind;
Still mourn th' ill-fated youth and helpless maid,
And still their mem'ry rushes on my mind.
