In Lothian's fields, whose ev'ry plain
Luxuriant smiles o'erspread with golden grain,
Built by the ancient Picts, Edina stands;
Rear'd high in air above the level lands,
It emulates the rocks that round it rise,
And seems like them to mingle with the skies.
Nay, at a distance, it requires much skill
To know the city from the tow'ring hill.
But you'll be weary of description grown,
Come on then, reader, we'll walk in to town:
Fierce summer-suns had now dry'd up each street,
And for a wonder all the town smelt sweet;
The late o'erflowings of the peaceful night
Were robb'd of smell by the great source of light;
The southern gale impregnated with life,
Pours the full stink upon the coast of Fife;
And country-ladies, as they snuff the wind,
Sigh for the joys that they have left behind:
Now sounding bells had, with repeated stroke,
Proclaim'd aloud that it was twelve o'clock,
When two young chairmen, famous for their vigour,
This one Macewen call'd, and that Macgregor,
Began, oh sad and rueful was their tone!
Their first mournful griefs alternately to moan.
First then Macewen spoke; his face all pale,
His mouth all clammy for the want of ale.

MACEWEN.
The gods, my friend, reject our humble pray'rs,
And laugh at chairmen, and their empty chairs:
Last night my knees, I'm sure, were bent an hour,
The deities beseeching for a show'r.
'Tis, let me see, a fortnight since it rain'd,
And all my pockets are of halfpence drain'd;
The cellars where I cramm'd till like to burst,
Are shut against me, and refuse to trust;
Nay, what's most cruel, even mutton-pye,
Delicious dish!  hard fate!  denies supply.

MACGREGOR.
Your case is surely bad; but yet I think,
That want of meat is light to want of drink:
Oh say, what direful pangs the man assail,
Who for a fortnight has not tasted ale!
Full fourteen days, the mighty gods can tell,
My drink has been the water from the well.
How often have I curs'd the cloudless sky!
How long shall both the streets and me be dry?
Behold the bones just starting from my skin,
Alas!  the mournful cause is want of gin.

MACEWEN.
Should this fine weather last, for my own part,
I'll carry chairs no more, but drive a cart;
And still to keep my body with my soul,
Instead of carrying men, I'll carry coal;
I'll change the town for some fair rural scene,
Where never chairman or his chair was seen.
Ye footmen, chimney-sweeps of blackest hue,
Ye dear companions of my youth, adieu!
Farewell, ye blythsome games, I'll grieve your loss;
Farewell Catch-honours, farewell Pitch and toss!
Behold yon beau array'd in chearful green,
Lo on his stockings not a speck is seen;
Where now he walks, I've view'd the filth so thick,
That there almost his spindle shanks would stick.
Ye chambermaids from highest windows pour,
Ye gods, o'erwhelm him in a saline show'r.
Alas!  I fondly rave, what have I spoke?
These things are all reserv'd for ten o'clock.

MACGREGOR.
Nay, don't despond, my friend, there's rain in store;
Again we'll hear the foaming kennels roar;
Adown the street they shall impetuous flow,
Too mighty to be stepp'd by belle or beau:
For trav'lers say, and trav'lers seldom lie,
That, search the globe all o'er, this town's least dry.

MACEWEN.
Your kind reproaches, pray, Macgregor, spare;
Like a Macewen I'll my sorrows bear;
With you, my friend, I'll hope for better days,
For great assemblies, crouded routs, and plays:
What transport when the great folks trip down stairs,
And screaming beaux, like eunuchs, squeak for chairs!
"Come, Lady Betty's chair!  Miss Susan's here!
Where are thy fellows?  sure they'll stay a year."
When once they've handed in the little souls,
Away we run, regardless of our poles;
Of the fatigue we surely can't complain,
When the white sixpence well repays our pain.

MACGREGOR.
When Digges did Mr. Hamlet in the play,
Dress'd like a provost on a king's holiday,
That very night five sixpences I got,
Which mended well my breeches and my coat.

MACEWEN.
The thoughts of those dear times my heart revive,
The cart was never made that I will drive.

So ends their speech; when, lo, a sudden blast
Of wind and rain the beauteous skies o'ercast:
A chair is call'd; in haste away they trudge,
And bend and sweat beneath a heavy judge.
