The knell of death, tremendous, strikes again
On aw'd mortality's awaken'd ear!
Slow down the village move the sable train,
The silent followers of the lifeless bier!

To day!  perchance, the young with streaming eyes
Lament the parent and the guardian dead!
To-morrow!  feeble age, with hopeless sighs
Upholds expiring manhood's languid head!

Plead on, ye charmers, with persuasive tongue!
Death, the chief adder, will not hear ye pray;
Ye sons of music, try the soothing song!
He strikes!  tho' angels tuned the pleading lay!

How dread my song!  thy triumphs, Death, I sing!
Since the fierce tyrant ne'er was known to spare,
Ere yet my bosom feels the mortal sting,
To his Director I'll prefer my prayer.

My life, the safety of my friends, I owe
To heav'n's omniscient providence alone;
That buckler warded the impending blow,
Or heal'd the sickness, when the shaft was thrown.

Amid the gen'ral ruin, safe I stand,
And breathe uninjur'd, pestilential air!
The King of Kings, displays his pow'rful hand,
And health and vigor at his word I share.

In pleasing childhood's inoffensive morn,
I saw the playful Mary-Ann decline,
Ere keen malevolence, or wounding scorn,
Distain'd her robe of innocence divine.

These hands to dust her kindred relics bore,
With flowers adorn'd; herself the sweetest flower!
Happy advent'rer!  soon thy task was o'er!
Now carol anthems to th' eternal power!

Calistus next, sunk to the silent tomb!
With him, Jemima clos'd her heavy eyes!
Within one grave, the kindred forms consume,
Beside the youth, the lovely sister lies!

The vig'rous boast of florid health, how vain!
See wasting sickness instantaneous seize!
Fast boils the blood in every turgid vein,
And tortur'd nature calls on death for ease!

And now, Sin's offspring with impetuous speed,
Enthrones destruction in a livid car;
Resolv'd the av'rice of the grave to feed,
He spreads the putrid exhalation far.

A groan succeeds!  ah!  spare the gen'rous friend,
In him, the neighbour, husband, father dies!
From yon low dwelling, what loud shrieks ascend?
There, on his death-bed, good Artemon lies!

Oft was he wont, the blazing hearth beside,
To cheer the social hour with moral lore:
His mild benevolence, diffusing wide,
To all imparted from his little store.

Still, as the rustic banquet is prepar'd,
His loss, impassion'd mem'ry shall supply;
There, his repeated jests shall oft be heard;
The tale concluding with a thrilling sigh.

Not so she wept, when old Eliza paid
The debt of death, to time and nature due:
See Virtue, crown'd with hoary hairs, we said!
So may we die with blessed hope in view!

Yet cease the song; &mdash; descriptive lays are vain;
When heaps on heaps around promiscuous die!
Still through the village moves the funeral train,
And the hard Sexton learns at last to sigh!

Nor is the raging fever here confin'd;
Through all the realm, the flaming javelin flies;
Whilst war its twin destroyer of mankind,
Lifts its red banners, waving to the skies.

Eternal God!  in thee alone we trust!
Our foes  discomfit, mitigate our pains!
Can thy great acts be chaunted in the dust?
Or sounds thy glory where oblivion reigns?
