Here, sudden from the shadowy band,
A spruce and gallant spirit started;
Trim were his whiskers, white his hand,
Adonis-form'd, and lion-hearted.

Victor of ladies and of foes,
The tilt-yard trembled at his lance;
Soft madrigals he could compose,
Could strike the lute and lead the dance.

In courts, or camps, where'er he mov'd,
Respect and fame his steps attend;
Honour'd by kings, by beauties lov'd,
Eliza's subject, Sydney's friend.

Thus, in the middle of his prosing,
He cuts the Lord Chief Justice short:
"Friend Coke, you set the audience dozing;
'Tis time, Sir, to adjourn the court.

"Bards can to fable truth impart,
Embellish'd by poetic diction;
You, lawyers, have the happier art,
To make ev'n truth appear a fiction.

"Though, gentle Bard!  no votive lay
Shall mark where rests thy hallow'd dust;
Though solemn fabrics far away
Receive thy consecrated bust:

"Yet know a patron shall arise,
Sprung from high chiefs of Albion's band;
From sages sprung, who humanize
With arts of peace a savage land.

"He, 'mid these scenes whose shades among
The warbling Muses caught thine ear,
Worthy the poet and the song,
A monumental shrine shall rear.

"Near, are the village fathers laid,
Recorded in thy plaintive shade,
Near, Eton's academic shade,
And lofty Windsor's proud domain.

"Here, when the moon's wan lustre pours
A trembling radiance o'er the grove,
Or in pale twilight's glimmering hours,
Thy gentle spirit oft shall rove.

"Not like the goblins grim that scare
The maidens as they come from milking,
And render useless Jefford's care,
Her hopes of cream and custard bilking:

"Mild as the Sylphs that gently rise,
That glide in airy form along;
And, unobserv'd by vulgar eyes,
Seen only by the man of song.

"The massy roofs, the embattled wall,
That seem the assaults of Time to scorn,
Shall fall &mdash; but glorious in their fall,
With ruin'd state the scene to adorn.

"While on yon upland's breezy height,
Design'd by classic Wyatt's taste,
A polish'd dome shall charm the sight,
With Graecia's purest orders grac'd:

"And in the placid wave below,
That seems through shadowy dells to glide,
With mild refulgence shall it glow,
Reflected in the silver tide.

"The walls excluding every view,
The walks by line and compass laid,
Clipt to unsightly shape the yew,
And cabinets of tonsile shade,

"Shall vanish all &mdash; for 'mid these seats
Lo!  a magician waves the wand;
And starch formality retreats
From Albion's cultivated land.

"Thro' fragrant shrubs, thro' plants unknown,
From climes yet undiscover'd brought,
Smooth winds the undulating zone,
As nature had its progress taught.

"Nor shall, my Lord Chief Justice, you
The change with envious eye discerning,
Your legal worth neglected view&mdash;
For, (friend of universal learning,

"Patron of worth in every form,
Revering happy Albion's laws,
With patriot ardour nobly warm,
Zealous in temperate Freedom's cause;)

"The princely owner's liberal hand
Shall to thy name a column raise,
And all who tread this fairy land,
As on its former lord they gaze,

"Shall, while of taste this lov'd abode,
With never-wearied step they trace,
Bless the true votary of that code
Which guards what every Muse has grac'd."
