So say the dames with sorrowing heart,
As, tumult raising round and bustle,
The assembly one and all depart;
Shoes scrape the ground, and manteaux rustle.

The coast now clear, they quit the loft;
And one below begins to speak&mdash;
"Ye ghostly gossips, with whom oft
I mutter, or from closets shriek;

"The benches left awhile retain,
And here debate we, since the light
That sends each dy'd and darken'd pane
Consoles us for the loss of night.

"To what behaviour (strange, absurd,
I vow!) have we to-day been witness!
By'r Lady was the like e'er heard,
So opposite to form and fitness?

"Alas!  the sad degenerate times,
And fashion's mischievous abuses!
'Tis true, I cannot blame his rhymes,
But they are pitiful excuses;

"And, &mdash; by the saints, by Papal toes
I swear, and by Loretto's shrine&mdash;
To other consciences repose
May give, but ne'er can quiet mine.

"How then revenge us on the age?&mdash;
Our Queen hath set a meet example.
Shall we in general schemes engage?
Or on this single Poet trample?

"Once form and orthodoxy join'd&mdash;
The faggot flamed &mdash; How matters alter!
Now felony, crime of venial kind,
Alone seems worthy of the halter."

She sate:  upstarted with a frown,
A second, in appearance older,
And, slow as she arose, look'd down
Alternately on either shoulder.

Then, with cross'd hands and solemn mien,
Thus answer'd:  "Cry you mercy, Madam!
Ask you if e'er the like was seen?
No, never since the time of Adam!

"But in this circle if ye sit
A signal vengeance to devise,
Your loving sister sprite permit
What most may further us, to advise.

"'Twere just in truth, and fully due,
That all should feel retaliation,
Who every system thus o'erthrew
We formed to benefit the nation.

"But seeing this 'tis now no time for,
(Howe'er they ought to undergo it;)
And as a notion strikes me &mdash; I'm for
Attacking the obnoxious poet.

"For know, in early youth, the law
Was first the project of that fellow.
COKE still the manor's guardian saw,
With pleasure, saw his genius mellow.

"But, all relinquished for his Muse,
Has born him since a deadly grudge:
His hopes no longer in him views;
No longer sees the future judge.

"To him then haste we, to implore
The mightier aid his wisdom boasts:
Great among mortals heretofore,
As great we'll prove him among ghosts.

"The garret, where he used to rave,
He haunts; the wing, in which below
Slept once, and once her audience gave,
His Queen, Elizabeth, our foe.

"Nor deem that he, a Protestant,
Will with us doubt to coalesce.
Experience vouches that he can't;
The power of interest all confess."

At this the dames assenting all,
To seek the Knight and open their case,
Slide without tread across the hall,
And wind together up the staircase.

Spirits are ne'er by bolts confin'd,
Or bars, and short the matter hence cut;
For those, who crannies cannot find,
Squeeze through the cieling or the wainscot.

With wary watchfulness they sweep
Slow along unfrequented paths;
Now behind beams and rafters creep,
Now 'twixt the bared and broken laths.

At length, a closet without door
Displays to each the lonely Judge,
Apart, and stretch'd upon the floor;
As spirits, slow ere dusk to budge.

In such plight, piteous to behold,
As waiting erst the hour of death:&mdash;
Alas!  how changed from him of old,
Who scared bandittis with his breath!

His voice, the garb in which he's clad,
And aspect, every terror mingle;
And the same chains that bound him mad,
Now, hanging round about him, jingle:

Such as, to fall when the dew begins,
Homeward the villager repairing
From plough, at distance, for his sins,
Perceives him at the window staring.

The prudes accost him with a smile,
And court'sy low and reverential:
"Bright star," they cry, "of this our isle,
Glory of Jurisprudence, when shall

"Your slaves prevail on you to hear 'em,
Unfold a high and weighty matter?
Let not religion make you fear 'em,
Nor will it, as ourselves we flatter.

"Deign then, descending now with us
Ev'n to the hall we scarcely quit,
Our urgent business to discuss;
'Tis yours; as hearing you'll admit."

Long cross-legg'd held by mute Suspense,
Sudden he cries &mdash; "With Papists? &mdash; Humph!
But it may profit me; &mdash; Then hence,
Ye scruples! &mdash; Sister spirits, come."

He rises, down the steps all haste;
The Knight parading in the middle,
As by his suite a monarch graced;
Their meaning ardent to unriddle.

Soon as again they reach the room,
He sinks in Cobham's chair; around him
The rest their places thick resume:
And, at the tale's beginning, sound him;

Then show the Poet dared excite
Their own, no less than his, resentment;
Whence modern pertness punish'd, might
Give him and them alike contentment.

Yet for his honour they declare,
Most, in the lordship's, they complain'd;
And end, imputing to his share
Some misdemeanors they had feign'd:

"That at the door he rudely rapp'd,
Slander'd the Lady in her presence;
And oft, at monstrous mischief apt,
Had soil'd her robe, and spilt her essence."

By their persuasive accents won,
Himself he feels for, then he pities:&mdash;
What has not woman's influence done,
Before and since the Syren's ditties?

And thus he cries, "enraged, the wretch
I find on new pursuits escape me,
Who my resemblance well might catch,
Though vainly many lawyers ape me.

"For this, ye walls that long have known
Your Lord deceased and living both;
Seen me rejoice, and heard me groan;
Be witnesses of this my oath.

"If the aerial ministers,
To manage human things departed,
I can induce to aid my stirs,
And plans of hate so deeply rooted;

"If I can aught of use contrive,
To accomplish some vindictive work,
To which those agents I may drive
By fair persuasion, or by quirk;

"He must, I see, to glory rise&mdash;
Perhaps too in some abbey choir,
Where less the heart will sympathize,
A cenotaph may grace his lyre;

"But if I can avail, when brought
With dirges due to that church-yard
He sung, in strain pathetic, nought
Shall mark where sleeps the fav'rite bard.

"And though each way the crowded place
Should number every pauper's days,
HIM not the unletter'd Muse shall grace,
Ev'n with the pittance of her praise."
