"CONTENT!  of all the blessings I possess,
And (thanks to heaven) my portion is not small,
None can more justly claim my thankfulness
Than thou, sweet maid, whose smile gives zest to all;
Therefore on thee with suppliant voice I call;
With thee would hide me from the world's rude strife;
For well I know, whatever may befall,
'Tis peace of mind that makes the bliss of life&mdash;
That thou sustain'st the soul 'mid scenes with misery rife.

"Can Fame &mdash; can Power &mdash; can Affluence display
The calm composure of thy modest mien?
Their light may dazzle in the summer day,
But thou alone canst cheer the wintry scene:
Their pomp shall be as though it ne'er had been,
When the dread tempest sweeps along the sky;
Whilst thou, in humble confidence serene,
Fear'st not, for He who bids the tempest fly,
Mighty to save and bless, thou know'st is ever nigh.

"Still be it mine, as through the quiet vale
Of humble life my devious course I bend,
When sorrows or anxieties assail,
To find in thee a comforter and friend:
Afflictions, though keen pangs their steps attend,
In wisdom and in love are doubtless sent,
And will, ere long, in full fruition end:
Be then my heart on this one purpose bent&mdash;
Whate'er my lot may be, to dwell with thee, Content."

When thus the happy feelings of my mind
Had been pour'd forth in artless verse and gay,
What time the summer sun in pride declined
And gave, with glance benign, his farewell ray,
The genius of Repose, with wildest sway,
Wav'd his lethean wand above my head:
SLEEP charm'd, at once, each restless thought away
And through my mind enchanting visions spread,
Soothing as those around th' expiring christian's bed.

Come Fancy!  aid me in the pleasing task
And I will bind the spirit of that dream
In wild poetic numbers.  Shall I ask
In vain thy succour for the simple theme?
To thee, perchance, such earnest suit may seem
Presumptuous from a poor and nameless bard;
But not unworthy dost thou sometimes deem
The Muse's humblest sons of thy regard,
Who on Parnassus' height have reap'd a proud reward.

Methought I wander'd in a region drear
Which seem'd, though new, familiar to mine eye;
No sounds save those of woe assailed my ear
And every breeze was burthen'd with a sigh;
Dark, lowering clouds hung heavy in the sky,
And shed a fearful gloom o'er all the vale;
To trace whose bounds I seem'd in vain to try&mdash;
My utmost stretch of sight could not prevail,
And I the joyless scene beheld aghast and pale.

And here and there a wretched hut appear'd
That seem'd th' abode of poverty and pain;
For not a flower its lovely head uprear'd,
And not a green spot deck'd the sterile plain,
But Desolation, frowning, held his reign
On every side, with unrelenting sway;
And, drooping there, a miserable train
I saw, led on by Sorrow and Dismay,
While Labour's stern command still urg'd them on their way.

"Alas!"  I cried, "and is it then my fate
Through life to sojourn in this hopeless place,
Where constant toil and care my course await,
And comfort's cheering beams shall never chase
The deep-drawn lines of misery from my face?
Despair must be my sole companion here;
Where'er I turn his footsteps I can trace,
And in his path such rueful forms appear
As none unmov'd can view, Disease, and Want, and Fear."

While thus my heart, with sad forboding fears
Opprest, was sinking into wretchedness,
Methought I sigh'd and wept &mdash; but sighs and tears
Were unavailing in that sore distress:
When lo!  (but how shall words of mine express
The wonders I beheld?)  a sudden light
Burst forth, and spreading through the wilderness,
Clear'd the thick film which dimm'd erewhile my sight,
And near me now I saw a Fiend in eager flight.

The murky clouds, which on the face of heaven
Had hitherto in gloomy stillness spread,
No longer slept, but in commotion driven,
Now roll'd in shapeless masses o'er my head,
And one of hugest size and blackest shade
Dividing gave to my astonished view
A form of angel mould, whose aspect shed
A radiant splendour the wide valley through,
As on a sunbeam prone towards earth she gently flew.

Her look, with all the sprightliness of spring,
Was mild as summer's eve; and in mine ear
The music of her voice still seems to ring;
And thus the Vision spake as she drew near:
"Rise, child of sorrow, cast aside thy fear,
And let the light of joy illume thine eye;
No more shall he who caus'd thy grief appear,
Foul Discontent; I bade the demon fly;
'Twas he drew forth each tear and prompted every sigh.

"He opes the source of more than half the woes
That sadden human life; for not alone
In this secluded vale does he oppose
The gentle reign of peace with changeless frown;
E'en yon high hills, which through long years have shone
In the unclouded beams of affluence,
Dark traces of his footsteps oft have shewn;
For, raging, like the deadly pestilence,
He scours the lowly plain, and lofty eminence.

"Yet, cheer thee, mourner, for the task is mine
To guide thy wanderings this still region through,
And give it in my own fair light to shine.
Retirement's lonely path 'tis mine to strew
With flowers of fragrant scent and varied hue.
See!  the retiring shades my look obey!
See!  lovelier prospects rising into view
Glowing in sunshine and they seem to say:&mdash;
A thousand joys are here!  come, quickly, come away.'"

With that CONTENT, for she it was whose smile
And gracious words the sudden change had wrought
With gentleness that well might grief beguile,
And looks with cheerfulness and comfort fraught,
Held forth her hand to me; and then, methought
We wandered onward; and where'er we stray'd
New scenes of happiness appeared, unsought;
At every step new wonders were display'd&mdash;
And as I gaz'd, I turn'd and blest the heaven-sent maid.

There Industry from early morn till eve,
Speeds the gay moments as they lightly pass;
Though wearying toil be his, he does not grieve
While the blythe songs of Health, a rosy lass,
Soften his cares, as lightly o'er the grass,
With Exercise, the partner of her choice,
She sports, and mixes with each lowly class,
The dwellers of the vale, whose simple joys
Increase whene'er they hear her pain-subduing voice.

And there, in neat and homely cottage lives
Domestic Happiness, a matron chaste
And kind, from whom the feeling breast receives
Such bliss as can transform a desert waste
Into a paradise.  Her hearth is grac'd
With all the charms of virtue, peace, and love&mdash;
Celestial flowers, but herein mercy plac'd
Beneath her guardian care, whose blossoms prove
Their native soil to be the blissful realms above.

Still as our road meandering seem'd to run,
The prospect brighten'd, and before us lay
A mount, whose gently sloping side the sun
IIlumin'd with his wild, departing ray;
More cheerful look'd the green, the flowers more gay:
And round its base a pure, unruffled stream,
With soothing murmur, wander'd on its way;
Like glass it shone in the refulgent beam:&mdash;
And all the scene was fair as guileless childhood's dream.

And then such heavenly harmony was heard
As bids each vain and earthly passion flee;
And blooming on that mount's green brow appear'd
A bower of amaranth, where Piety,
Compass'd with beings beautiful to see,
Faith, Hope, and holy Joy, her anthem sung;
Warm yet unfeign'd her fervours seem'd to be:
My ravish'd soul in mute attention hung
While through the balmy air this strain seraphic rung:

HYMN.
1.
Once more, Eternal Power, I raise
My voice in humble adoration;
Again presume to sing thy praise,
The theme of angels' exultation.

2.
Thou art my "all in all," in thee
My spirit finds complete fruition
To seek thee, my delight shall be,
To serve thee truly, my ambition.

3.
Unnumbered blessings hourly call
For gratitude's sincere devotion;
And morning light, and evenfall,
Shall duly witness her emotion.

4.
Oft do I feel how great thy love,
When lowly at thine altar kneeling;
And oft in sweet communion prove
A blessedness beyond revealing.

5.
O!  how transporting then appear
The views Hope gives of future pleasure,
Beyond the realms of doubt and fear,
The saint's imperishable treasure.

6.
From thee, my Saviour, God, and King,
Let nought my happy portion sever;
But make it my delight to sing
Thy praise for ever, and for ever.

But not the magic of her voice alone
Held my rapt soul in willing thraldom there;
Her face with more than earthly beauty shone,
And dignity, and grace that none might share,
Blended with meekness in her modest air.
Now Hope aloft on golden pinions flew,
Unfolding scenes than paradise more fair,
To Faith's refin'd and heaven-directed view,
While Joy on all around unsullied radiance threw.

"O here," I cried, "from strife and tumult free,
Here would I ever find a resting place,
And joyful still my pilgrimage shall be,
Or short, or lengthen'd be its destined space.
Nor let me lose the sight of thy fair face,
Cheerful companion of my happiest hours;
Then, though temptation and strong trials chase
My harrass'd soul, to these delicious bowers
For refuge she may fly, and rest her weary powers."

"Well mayst thou wish," Content replied, "to prove
Th' exalted pleasures aye abounding here,
For oft descending from their seats above
To Faith's fixt eye angelic throngs appear,
Whose heavenly harpings never fail to cheer
The heart by sorrow or by pain opprest,
Lifting it far above each earthly fear
It views th' eternal mansions of the blest,
And a sweet earnest feels of everlasting rest.

"But know, that none this privilege may claim
But those whose bosoms truth and virtue fire,
Who live but to adore th' Almighty name
Of Him whose praise employs the seraph quire;
And such are blest with all their hearts' desire:
Spirits unseen surround their calm abode,
To ward off every ill, and to inspire
Such bliss as earth-bound thoughts had ne'er bestow'd,
Pure and devoted love of goodness and of God."

Next on the summit of the mount I stood,
And gaz'd around on stream, and grove, and bower,
Delighted, when my guide her speech renew'd:&mdash;
"Much yet remains of beauty and of power
To win thy fond regard, for every hour
That springs to life in this most sacred place,
Awakes some charm unknown before &mdash; some flower
More fragrant, or some new-born heavenly grace,
That gladdens every heart, and brightens every face.

"And ever on her own blest morn descends
The Angel of the Sabbath with her train,
And the glad sound of prayer and praise ascends
During her peaceful, septenary reign.
E'en now, in yonder grove, the hallowed fane
Re-echoes to the hallelujahs sent
From hearts aroused by her exalting strain.
Come, join the happy band."  Here ceas'd Content,
And towards the solemn spot our eager steps we bent.

High o'er the rest, like some imperial queen,
That angel figure sat; bright beams of joy
Illum'd her brow, unclouded and serene.
She spake of bliss that ne'er can know alloy;
(Which nought on earth can lessen or destroy,)
As the unchanging portion that awaits
The soul whose powers the wondrous things employ
Which Truth at her right hand to all relates,
While she their minds instructs, reproves, or animates.

Repose and Peace, that gentle pair, reclin'd
Beside the footstool of their heavenly friend;
A holy calm pervaded every wind
To which their grateful influence did extend:
And there in humble guise were seen to bend
Meek Piety and her devoted throng
Of followers, whose sweet voices seemed to blend
In choral harmony, while them among,
Rapt Contemplation stood, and listen'd to their song.

In Truth's fair hand methought a scroll appeared;
With characters obscure 'twas overspread,
And unintelligible sounds were heard
Fast flowing from her lips.  A secret dread
Crept through my frame, and I would fain have fled,
But had not power, &mdash; when suddenly a ray
Of light from heaven a noon-day splendour shed;
Clear and distinct the pictur'd chart now lay,
E'en as a map to guide the pilgrim on his way.

And first a garden it disclos'd, replete
With all that could delight the heart and eye,
Of Innocence and Peace the blest retreat;
And Joy flew ever through the cloudless sky.
But lo!  the fiend Transgression, lingering nigh,
Too soon involv'd the lovely scene in shade:
Then pass'd a long, dark train of ages by,
Laden with woe, by dread and doubt dismay'd,
While clouds and tempests dire were awfully pourtray'd.

Yet still, amid the gloom, one star was seen,
The Star of Promise, whose auspicious ray
In vain Despair essay'd to quench; serene
It rose, the earnest of a brighter day,
And many a heart it solaced on its way
Through the vast wilderness, nor shone its light,
Like the delusive meteor, to betray
The steps of fond Credulity, but bright
And certain was it beam through that long cheerless night.

Meanwhile, unnumber'd scenes of misery past,
Th' unfolding scroll to our delighted eyes
Display'd the dawning of that day at last
Whose glorious Sun, to set no more, should rise.
Unearthly music floated through the skies,
To usher in the morn.  Heavens concave rung
With the high theme &mdash; "Recover'd Paradise:"
Faith, long deprest, aloft exulting sprung,
While songs of joy and love enraptuid seraphs sung.

Then follow'd in succession, scenes so fair,
That to relate the wonders now reveal'd,
An angel's tongue might find employment there;
Or Inspiration's sacred pencil, fill'd
With hues of heaven, such images might yield:
But vainly may a son of earth aspire,
Duly to laud that mystery unseal'd;
Yet does the theme my inmost bosom fire,
And from the task I feel reluctant to retire.

Behold!  he comes &mdash; the Spoiler's Conqueror,
Though meanly wrapt, and in a manger laid!
A tender babe &mdash; yet Wisdom did not err:
She from afar led forth her sons, who paid
(While rich and precious offerings were display'd)
Their duteous homage, and pour'd forth their joy,
Rapturous joy, that might not be allay'd.
No more could doubt their peace of mind annoy,
Or fear, or dark despair their confidence destroy.

Wisdom, and Truth, and meek Humility
Led on his growing years, as through the lone
And silent valley of Obscurity
He held his peaceful course, to Fame unknown;
For on that scroll which such high things had shewn,
A transcript of the humble vale was given;
And shining tracks where holy men had gone
Unhurt, though they with deadliest foes had striven,
Might there be trac'd, whose light points out the way to heaven.

Unnoticed and unknown He seem'd to stray
Through the sequester'd haunts of solitude,
While Meditation cheer'd him on his way,
Till Time advanc'd with stated steps, and shew'd
A mind with heavenly wisdom deep imbued.
And lo!  emerging from the wilderness,
With solemn mien and warning voice One stood:&mdash;
"Flee from the wrath to come &mdash; repent &mdash; confess,"
He said, and pointed to the Source of blessedness.

"Behold," he cried, "the blest of heaven, with power
To bear away the ills which long have prest
Mortality, sunk deeper every hour
In misery's gulph; &mdash; but she shall now have rest."
He ceas'd, but soon the words he had exprest,
Methought I saw, confirm'd, for, lo!  a Dove,
Through opening heavens, descended to attest
That blest One's mission from the realms above;
And then a voice was heard breathing paternal love.

And next, a savage wilderness I saw,
Whose gloomy glades in fearful stillness frown'd,
And overwhelm'd my mind with solemn awe;
So wild, so dark, so drear was all around.
Led by the Spirit to this gloom profound
That Son of Heaven explor'd its deepest shade,
Musing on things divine.  There was he found
By the Arch Tempter, who in vain essay'd
To win his thoughts by wiles, with specious art displayd.

For in his mind revolv'd some great design;
And the false splendour of the world in vain
Before his eyes might bid its glories shine.
The heart opprest by sorrow to sustain&mdash;
To strip of all their terrors death and pain&mdash;
And sure and lasting happiness to spread&mdash;
These were the glories that adorn'd his reign:
And while by miracles He thousands fed,
Himself had scarcely where to rest his weary head.

Surely, thought I, there Gratitude soon raised
Temples, with joyful heart to celebrate
Such matchless power and love; but as I gazed
Upon th' expanding volume, seem'd to wait
On all his goings, Envy, Scorn, and Hate,
And ruthless Jealousy &mdash; a horrid crew;
Nor did their raging malice once abate,
But hourly fiercer and more deadly grew,
Unceasing, 'till at last their guiltless prey they slew.

Dark was the picture as it rose to sight;
In Mystery's stole enwrapt it seem'd to be
On every side, while Nature, with affright,
Beheld and trembled.  Meanwhile, patiently,
That injur'd One embrac'd wild Agony,
And mid the gloom, alone unshaken, brav'd
The howling storm.  Methought I then could see
That Sin, th' enslaver, felt himself enslav'd,
And gnash'd his teeth with rage, and impotently rav'd.

But short that reign of terror; soon he rose
Triumphant from the darkness of the tomb;
And then methought Confusion seiz'd his foes,
And wildly hurried to the distant gloom.
Again that Garden in primeval bloom
Appear'd, and Truth rejoic'd to shew the scene;
Rays of a purer light its walks illume;
And in the midst a gushing fount is seen,
In which Pollution foul may plunge and be made clean.

Fill'd with delight my heart within me burn'd
While Truth reveal'd to sight her wondrous lore;
Then, with reluctant steps and slow, we turn'd
The happy vale still farther to explore.
But ere I left, a wistful glance, once more,
I cast upon the glowing scenes around,
And gladly heard Hope promise to restore
Again and soon the joys I there had found;&mdash;
She said &mdash; "Such bliss once known will evermore abound."

Descending now the gentle slope, my eye
With pleasure wander'd o'er each tranquil scene.
That lay outstretch'd beneath a placid sky:
Westward some clouds befring'd with gold were seen
Marking where sunk the sun.  Stainless had been
The face of heaven but for that beauteous show,&mdash;
So bright &mdash; so calm &mdash; so lovely and serene:
I said, "If aught can picture forth below
The good man's latter end, mine eve beholds it now."

"But who," said I, " my courteous guide, is he,
Of thoughtful brow, yon cottage door beside;
His looks bespeak him what we seldom see
In this lone vale; say, does he here abide?"
"GENIUS his name, and here," Content replied,
In silent solitude pass on his days,
E'en as a stream that through dank weeds doth glide,
Unheard its rippling sound, unseen it strays;&mdash;
Such is his frequent lot, uncheer'd by Fortune's blaze.

"In his own breast the streams of pleasure spring;
And not less blest he deems his fate obscure
Here, than when shelter'd by the gilded wing
Of gay Prosperity, &mdash; if chaste and pure,
And lit from heaven his bosom-flame.  Secure
And happy in the treasures of the mind,
The thousand ills that little souls endure
Affect him not; but free and unconfin'd,
His spirit soars, and leaves each low-born care behind.

The sunbeams fell in glory round his head
As we advanc'd the gifted man to greet,
And while we sojourn'd 'neath his humble shed,
Of gentle manners, and of converse sweet
We felt the charm.  Around the calm retreat
Unbroken stillness reign'd; though there the hand
Of Application many an arduous feat
Achiev'd, and Truth and Fancy there had plann'd
Schemes that yield Taste delight, and Wisdom's smile command.

"Though in Obscurity's low valley cast,
My lot,'' said Genius, "is supremely blest;
From strife and envy free my days are past,
And Flattery's wiles seductive, aye confest
My deadliest bane, e'en when I seem at rest
With Fame, in yon bright temple on the hill.
Of Fortune's store I may not he possest;
Knowledge may deal with niggard hand his skill,
But while sweet peace is mine, this vale shall charm me still."

Now to my side, from mid'st th' industrious band,
Came Thought, a quick-eyed damsel, who delights
To dwell with Genius, and, at his command,
Oft takes, unseen, her swift and silent flights
Where aught new, great, or beautiful invites,
In nature, or in realms beyond; &mdash; then flies
Homeward, and with her gather'd store alights
In his fair mind.  And now, in friendly guise
She led me forth, and lo!  a garden met mine eyes.

There Fancy held her joyous reign, and there
Unnumber'd beauties burst upon the sight.
But how shall I my thrilling joy declare
When suddenly appear'd, like morning light
Breaking all lovely from the shades of night,
The nymph who had possest my heart so long,
And fill'd my night and day dreams with delight,
Enchanting Poesy, the maid of song,
Busied in culling sweets the beds of flowers among!

Content, who still stood near me, meekly smil'd
While I essay'd my transports to express;
Uncouth my manners and my words were wild,
For I was awed by so much loveliness:
When Poesy, to soothe my mind's distress
Thus spake, &mdash; "If these emotions be sincere,
Think not I scorn thy lowly lot to bless;
Whate'er its garb, true worth to me is dear,
Nor more so in the realm which Fortune sways, than here.

"But if the thought that I shall lead thee hence
To that warm clime, possess thy mind, 'tis vain;
Discard it; though the sunny eminence
Be more congenial than the lowly plain
To these my flowers, yet, see!  e'en here they gain
A beauty and a fragrance; and thine eye
Hath seen already that thou mayst attain
To true enjoyment: &mdash; while Content is nigh,
She, and yon mount's fair train shall all thy wants supply.

"And I will not forsake thee, but will cheer
Thy hours, or dark, or cloudless, as they rise;
Oft mid thy toil and care will I appear,
And bid my visions to thy view arise,
Whose wondrous imag'ry, and rainbow dyes
Shall charm thy inmost soul."  She ceased, and took
My hand, in courteous and benignant guise:
My mortal frame a thrilling transport shook,
And SLEEP, with sudden start, his silent post forsook.
