'Tis sweet in manhood's prime to feel the glow
Of youthful joy revisiting the heart:
Sweet as when o'er the dreary landscape blow
Spring's first warm gales, and milder sunbeams dart
Their smiles in Nature's face, &mdash; and, with a start
Beauty and fragrance wake, as from a trance.
Surely that joy will never quite depart;
I feel its warmth, unchill'd by life's advance,
Whene'er my early haunts meet my delighted glance.

Oh!  can I ne'er forget those sunny hours,
When, glad of heart, along thy banks I stray'd,
Dear native Stream, and pluck'd the springing flowers
That grew thereon, and childhood's gambols play'd;
Ere yet, with ruthless hand, stern Care had laid
His yoke upon me, and his rugged lore,
In many an arduous lesson had display'd;
Yea, still, in memory's fondly cherish'd store,
Those happy hours shall live till memory be no more!

And to my eye, 'mid recollections sweet,
Through fairy-regions still thou seem'st to stray;
The same fresh verdure still invites my feet
To wander, and I hear from every spray
The same glad notes from woodland songsters gay:
And that awakening sense of bliss long fled,
Pervades my bosom with resistless sway,
While, musing on the past, once more I tread
Thy peaceful borders green, by pensive Fancy led.

It seems to me as if Time's mighty wing,
That sweeps great empires from their base, o'er thee
Had pass'd, as o'er some blest and holy thing
Not subject to its power; for, still I see,
Just as when life's bright morning smiled on me,
In the same quiet course thou rollest on:&mdash;
Yet, in thy wanderings, what diversity,
What varying aspects hast thou undergone!
Nor varied less hath been my fate though more unknown.

I've gaz'd upon thee with delight, when smooth
And glistening in the beams of spring's bright reign,
With murmuring sound that troubled breasts might soothe,
Thou sought'st through meadows fair, the distant main:
E'en so in youth, from sorrow free, and pain,
My days flow'd on in laughing Joy's career,
While Fancy, with her gay, fantastic train,
Attending, bade on every hand appear
Those visions which through life Remembrance holds so dear.

But not alone from buoyant health and youth
Sprung all the transports that then thrill'd my breast;
For on my mind, e'en then had heavenly Truth
That deeper sense of happiness imprest
Which makes the humblest lot supremely blest:
This op'd the source from whence sad Sorrow drew,
In after life, when many troubles prest,
Rich healing balm.  Her cheering influence too
Enchanting POESY o'er each fair prospect threw.

The charm of song upon my spirit's gladness
With wondrous  power in that gay season fell,
Blending with joy a shade of pleasing sadness,
And calling up, as by some wizard spell,
Bright dreams of which I strove in vain to tell;
Each vivid image glow'd, and past away.
But with still more delight my mind would dwell
On brighter glories, which Truth's steady ray
Reveal'd &mdash; the realms of rest, and peace, and endless day.

I've seen thy waters with a torrent's force
Resistless, and with loud and rushing sound,
Dash forward in their wild impetuous course,
As if they scorn'd thy channel's narrow bound;
While Winter on the naked landscape frown'd
In sullen majesty, and with a blast
Terrific, call'd his gathering storms around:
Black Ruin follow'd quick where'er they pass'd,
And o'er Creation's face thick gloom and horror cast.

And cheerless was the scene, and dark the hour:&mdash;
So, once, my fate, all desolate and drear,
And overwhelm'd by fell Affliction's power,
Seem'd stript of all that made existence dear,
And prompted many a sigh and bitter tear:
But as returning Summer's gladdening beam
Appeas'd thy waves, so Time, in his career,
Still made receding grief and trial seem
But as the fading race of some distressful dream.

We feel a joy surpassing that which springs
From present pleasure, when the pensive mind,
Silently musing on departed things,
To soft reflection's influence is resign'd;
For Fancy, then, with Memory's power hath join'd
Her witching art; and on past Sorrow's brow
With fairy-hands a roseate wreath they bind;&mdash;
While as they rise, remember'd scenes of woe,
Stript of their former gloom, in tender beauty glow.

In all the countless throngs of former days,
Whose feet have prest thy banks, hath there appear'd
No Son of Song thy lapse obscure to praise:
Because, forsooth, no cataract was heard
Roaring amid thy course &mdash; no mountain rear'd
Its hoary crest above thee to the skies:
Because, forsooth, the world's contempt they fear'd,
Which might thy little Naiad's charms despise,
And view these meads and groves with undelighted eyes?

Yes, there was One, albeit, who breath'd thy name
In tuneful verse; for thou were not unknown
To him, whom Genius and poetic fame
In vain conspir'd to bless; &mdash; whose "frantic moan,"
More thrilling than the wild and tender tone
Of his own lyre, arose upon the wind
That swept thy marge, when, pensive and alone,
Amid these scenes, his worn and clouded mind
Gaz'd anxiously around, some resting-place to find.

He sought the abode of Peace: &mdash; but Genius gave
No light to guide the wanderer on his way:
Fame stood aloof, &mdash; was silent, and look'd grave;
And Fancy's flights but led him more astray;
E'en Learning shone but with a feeble ray,
And tardy Fortune could afford no aid:
At length, fair Truth, resplendent as the day,
Before his eyes the "best of books" display'd
And sunshine cheer'd his path e'en through Death's fearful shade.

Child of Misfortune!  whose'er thou art,
That, lingering near, his sculptur'd form mayst see
Within yon sacred Pile; ere thou depart,
E'en though the Muse may not be dear to thee,
Shed o'er his grave the tear of sympathy;&mdash;
And may that peace which bless'd his life's decline,
(From all his woes and bitter anguish free,)
His hopes, his holy confidence be thine;
Affliction then may frown, &mdash; but thou wilt not repine.

Thy beauties, humble as they are, fair Stream,
Are dear to me, and lovely in mine eyes;
And, had I skill to manage well the theme,
Might lead my timid Muse to enterprise;
But she, as oft as difficulties rise
To check her ardour, from th' unfinish'd strain
In conscious weakness and dejection flies;
But, re-assur'd, as oft returns again,
Reluctant to forego the pleasure with the pain.

And still in silent loneliness my mind,
E'en while my hands stern Labour's shackles wear,
In POESY a solace sweet shall find,&mdash;
An ample recompense for toil and care:
And hither oft at eve will I repair,
And while I muse, or frame some simple lay,
(Which like thy murmurs, Lavant, few shall hear,)
Calm Meditation by my side shall stray,
And Peace, as is her wont attend my lonely way.

Now sinks to glorious rest th' all cheering sun,
Surrounded by a gorgeous cloudy train;
While, 'mid a silent host of shadows dun,
Twilight begins her mild, but transient reign;
But through obscurity involves the plain,
The light of day still gilds yon stately spire:
So shines the mind which Faith and Hope sustain,
Fair, far above earth's scenes, and low desire,
Illumin'd by a spark of pure ethereal fire.

Soft as the dews the deepening shades descend,
And spread a solemn, sacred calm around,
Till night's broad wings o'er all the scene extend.
Nought breaks the stillness save the gentle sound
Of rippling waves, that glimmer as they bound
On their dark way.  Who would not wish to dwell
For ever where such tranquil joys are found?
But Duty speaks in yonder curfew bell,
And warns me to depart &mdash; blest scenes awhile farewell!
