How populous is that world, the human Heart!
How thronged with griefs and cares, how rife with sighs!
Yet JOY will light it &mdash; HOPE will spread her chart,
And build her rainbow, till GRIEF'S storms arise,
And sweep the bodiless pageant from its skies;
And blighted PASSION will exhale a cloud,
Beneath whose influence the soul's sunshine dies,
And the heart waxeth cold, as in a shroud,
And breaks, or withers on, by its own tyranny bowed.

How fierce and desolating LOVE, &mdash; how strong!
They err, methinks, that picture him a child,
And laud him with the honey'd voice of song;
In sooth, I deem him not so fair and mild,
But one with darkened brow, eyes flashing wild,
A baleful and disease-inducing breath,
By which all whom it reaches are defiled,
And in his hand not dart and myrtle-wreath,
But the read lightning's shaft whose blasting touch is death:&mdash;

This thou canst witness, maiden, wronged, disowned,
Thou of the marble cheek, and locks that wave
Around a brow where sadness sits enthroned;
Is there no hope &mdash; no balm &mdash; can nothing save?
No, thou art his &mdash; the tyrant's &mdash; yes, his slave,
And he of all, even life, will soon bereave thee;
But there is peace and rest in the calm grave,
Death is thy friend when other false friends leave thee,
Thy patron &mdash; his still home is open to receive thee.

Yet some there are who say that LOVE is sweet,
That blisses dimple in his rosy smile;
I know that he can garb him in deceit,
I know that he hath many a flattering guile,
I know that he can mask like TRUTH the while;
Faithless as April sunshine on the lake
Just to be tossed by storm, his serpent wile
Invites his votaries treacherous rest to take,
That with redoubled pangs they may at last awake.

Art thou not happy, now that thou hast won
Her thou didst sigh for, and the sacred rite
That hallows passion hath confirmed ye one?
Yes, thy glad heart is basking in delight,&mdash;
Her cheek is fair &mdash; her happy eyes are bright,
Her health-ting'd lips invite the balmy kiss,
Known but to wedded love, where souls unite:
Art thou not rich in such a world as this?
A single day has past &mdash; where now thy hoard of bliss?

Where is the lustre of her fond eye? &mdash; Where
The bloom her damask cheek would erst unfold?
Those eyes are dim, affection beams not there,
And pale that soft cheek cast in BEAUTY'S mold!
Where the red lips on which thy vows were told?
Where the warm heart?  the tongue that breathed "I will,"
In sweet but tremulous accents? &mdash; silent, cold;
The hand that waked soft music?  bloodless, still;
And pulseless is that heart, and passionless, and chill;

And soon the closing earth will cover all!
Thou seest the fierce fiend now in him that showered
Joys thou didst deem eternal; the black pall
He spake not of as with thy bride embowered,
He whispered soft lies in thy heart, devoured
With its all leadlike weight of anguish now;
The storm hath heavily on thy morning lowered,
Henceforth at MADNESS' shrine thy spirit must bow,
He fixes thy flashing eye &mdash; he furrows thy weird brow.

Enough of LOVE; with lit eye, and flushed cheek,
See where her daughter JEALOUSY appears;
Now stung with rage she wildly burns to wreak,
Now weak and woman-like dissolved in tears;
Deeming all certain that her bosom fears,
Her busy thoughts engender the black bane
That poisons the calm current of her years,
And pours a liquid fire through every vein,
To dry up the heart's dew, by  PEACE shed ne'er again.

One moment pause, wild woman, e'er too late;
Calm thy mad rage, loose, loose that dagger's hilt;
Urge not with murderous hand thy lowering fate;&mdash;
Ah!  that red stream in thunder speaks thy guilt,&mdash;
The fatal blow is struck &mdash; her blood is spilt;
Now turn for comfort to thy heart's dark cell,
And say how peopled, if thou canst and wilt;
There goading thoughts, like fiery spiders dwell,
They the tormenting fiends of that now quenchless hell.

What maid walks forth beneath the twilight sky,
With lofty brow, and cheek serenely pale,
And a sweet sadness nestling in her eye?
Thou sainted maid, fair MELANCHOLY, hail!
My comrade through the world's uneven vale,
My mentor, such it has been thine to be,
When REASON failed, thy still voice could prevail,
And I have nurtured been so long by thee,
That thou hast almost grown portion and part of me:

Thou art TRUTH'S medium; &mdash; as the natural sun
Is more distinctly seen through clouded glass,
So through thy veil, thou meek and lovely one,
We behold TRUTH, and the world's worshipp'd mass
Of hollow tinkling baubles, as they pass,
Cast the vain hues that did so bravely glow;
Tried by thy test the gold flies off, the brass
Appears in cankering worthlessness below,
And through the mask of smiles peers the cold cheek of woe.

Mate of the lover, source of midnight sighs;
Mate of the bard, and half his inspiration,
For in thy shade those giant forms arise
On his mind's eye, and each divine creation
Is partly from thyself an emanation;
PASSION and MIRTH but cloud and chain the mind,
Thou freest it from its clayey domination,
Lending it pinions earth nor space can bind
To soar into THOUGHT'S heaven, unfettered as the wind.

Advance, thou gladsome rosy-featured boy,
With light, irregular step, and laughing eyes;
Tabor and flute attend thee, buxom JOY,
And odours sweet at every step arise,
For thou dost tread on flowers; a thousand dyes
Deck thy small wings; thy lips are moist with wine,
And breaking into smiles like April skies;
Long time since thou companion wast of mine,
Yet sometimes we have met in days of "auld lang syne;"

But soon thy wings were spread, and we did part,
Perchance for aye, &mdash; for see who coucheth there,
With glassy eyes that mirror his cold heart,
And scowl that darkens more his gloomy lair?
Clench not thy bony bloodless fists, DESPAIR!
Ah, rosy JOY, hath he so frighted thee?
Fleet hast thou vanished from his sullen glare,
To climes more genial it is thine to flee,
Where no such influence reigns, but ah, he dwells with me.

Yet morn will rise, even on DESPAIR'S dark night;
The fairy HOPE on the horison see,
Like a young angel, with her wand of light
Scattering the gloom; HOPE, welcome even to me,
Often deceiv'd, yet still I trust in thee;
How men will climb the steep of life's rough hill,
Though not a gleam upon their path there be
Save thine, their only star, that shining still,
Perchance will brightest be amid the darkest ill.

Cowering like hare in form, with lips apart
And breathless, glides guilt's pallid comrade, FEAR:
Wild are her locks &mdash; her eyes; &mdash; ah, wherefore start?
'Twas but the wind among the branches sere;
Irregular throbs her breast, and from their sphere
Her eyes are straining, as like light she flies
From distant dangers, blind to danger near,
For she will rush where sure destruction lies,
To 'scape the ills herself creates or magnifies.

But hard the task, demanding loftier lyre
Than mine, to drag from feeling's troubled source
Its inmates  forth; &mdash; ANGER, with eye of fire,
Fierce step, and voice impetuous; &mdash; pale REMORSE,
With eyes fixed on the past, some dark deed's corpse
That putrifies and festers, while each day
Sees it more black and noisome in its course,&mdash;
For TIME, that holds o'er GRIEF a gentle sway,
Doubles REMORSE'S pangs &mdash; pangs ne'er to pass away.

GRIEF!  thee I named; thy cypress crown floats by;
Throw back the dusky mantle from thy face;
Ah, well I know thy hollow misty eye,
And furrows months nor years shall e'er efface,
Down which the big round tears each other chase&mdash;
The frost so prematurely sprinkled o'er
Those locks, that else had waved with youthful grace,
The stony cheek that never roses wore,
The form so worn and shrunk, it scarce can dwindle more.

Go to the habitation of the dead;
To mute, not voiceless tombs, ye proud ones, go;
See the young widow tears of torture shed,
Her infants grieving at their mother's woe;
See the old grand-dame shake her locks of snow
Over the fallen pillar of her age,
Wishing her boy above, herself below:&mdash;
Yes, go and study this, life's common page,
For such may be thine own e'er done thy pilgrimage.

A word, REVENGE, of thee, and I have done;
With thee this catalogue shall end, thou fell
And ruthless demon; the pure day-light shun,
In darkness best thy coward blows will tell;
Delay becomes thy food, strengthening thee well,
Thou blackest of the tyrannous host that pale
Man's cheek, and make his heart a little hell:
Is there no power that can o'er these prevail,
And pluck their venomous stings?  there is, RELIGION, hail!

With robe of spotless white, and heaven-ward eye,
And smile of holy gladness on thy cheek,
A stranger to the monster BIGOTRY,
And hell-born SUPERSTITION, thou dost speak
In words all music; for 'tis thine to break
Men's mental fetters, not to make them slaves;
And when the serpents of their nature wreak
Their venom on their souls, and PASSION raves,
'Tis thou canst calm its rage, like oil poured on the waves.

Yet 'tis not thine men's passions to suppress,
Couldst thou do this they were no longer men;
But thou canst curb their fiery recklessness,
Soften and mellow feelings harsh, and when
Peace leaves the soul, restore her reign again;
For to the mind thou beamest on, thou art
As moonlight is to earth when hallowing glen,
Lake, wood, and mountain, until every part
Lives in the silvery beam that doth impart

New loveliness to beauty, that o'er things
Where darkness and deformity before
Had dwelt, a sweet and luminous halo flings,
Softening away the hideousness it wore;
Such is thine influence over the heart's core,
Passions all fierce and desolating free,
Under thy guidance reinless are no more;
And even our virtues, sooth, if such there be,
Are dark and without life till shone upon by thee!
