In vain shall Criticks, Wits, or Beaux,
Their Want of Sense in Songs expose;
In vain shall spruce good-natur'd Cits,
In Wigs of Taste, set up for Wits;
In senseless Rhimes, and dying Strains,
To sing of Loves, and Darts, and Pains,
Of cruel Nymphs, and bleeding Swains.
Dull Wretches!  only taught to smatter,
And murder Copies drawn from Nature;
Tho' Love's a god, 'tis long ago
He us'd to ramble here below;
Since when, each Nymph's as great a Queen as
E'er was his jilting Mother VENUS;
Each Swain's a dull illiterate Plowman,
Nor kneels, nor dies for any Woman.
Tho' ancient Bards their Scenes did lay,
In Plains of fair Arcadia,
Must we take Bedfordshire to be
A flow'ry Plain in Italy?
Or write Clarissa or Lucetta,
For what in Fact is Moll or Betty.
No, &mdash; if in these degenerate Days,
The World is sunk to viler Ways;
Let's put no Face on a bad Matter,
To make our Circumstances better,
But still exactly follow Nature.
Yet should (as Truth forbids) the Muse
Begin as modern Songsters use,
In pompous Stile would run my Tale,
Fast by a Willow in the Vale,
Fair Phaebe sighing sat alone,
And by her Colin made her Moan.
But thus I am not pleas'd to make it,
Then as I write, or leave or take it.
In Country Vill or little Note,
From London's noisy Town remote,
Two Farmers liv'd both rich in Health,
And all the Village was their Wealth.
Their Houses, Barns, and Acres join'd,
As mutual Interest inclin'd;
For both were happy in an equal Mind.
Each kept his Nag, and each his Team,
And weekly each to Market came,
To Dunstable a Town of Fame,
The one a rosy Daughter had,
The other's Blessing was a Lad;
Well made he was of Stature thick,
His Age was twenty, and his Name was Dick!
He was a Loon, well skill'd and knowing
In th' Arts of reaping, and of mowing,
And none than him cou'd better know
To wield a Flail, or hold the Plough;
At Mart he'd haggle for a Farthing,
That none could beat him at a Bargain.
Beside these Qualities a many
He had, to save his Father's Penny:
For having read, (as 'gainst his Need
Dick, when a boy, had learn'd to read)
One Doctor, what do ye call him's Treatise,
He knew the whole Sow-gelder's Thesis;
Could bleed a Horse, or ring a Sow,
Or cure the Sickness of a Cow,
And when th' Infection spread the Nation,
Sav'd all about from the Contagion;
Could e'en in rainy Seasons keep,
The Murrain from among the Sheep;
Do all these Things, tho' Richard cou'd,
The Girl was in her Way as good;
A tight young Housewife, neat and clean,
Her Name was Moll, her Age Fifteen,
She'd cook to Nicety a Dish
Of roast, or boil'd, or Fowl or Fish;
Full well cou'd brew, as well cou'd bake,
Could Elder-Wine or Cyder make:
And ne'er a Lass so good as Mary,
To make new Cheese, or keep a Dairy;
At Market too it is confest,
She sold her Eggs and Butter best;
Cou'd too whene'er the Case was urgent,
Perform the Business of a Surgeon;
Could make a Julep for the Phthisick,
Or boil a Purge by Way of Physick;
She had a Salve that e'er could cure
Kib'd Heels, or any kind of Sore;
She gave her Patients, Prunes or Sego;
And had a Secret for the Ague,
Which from her Great Great Grandmother,
Had now descended down to her;
Beside, she kept for every End,
All modern Empiricks can vend;
All box'd, or bottled up most safely,
Or Greenough, Godfrey, or of Daffy;
The black Sheeps Turds of Anderson,
Or Balsam stale of Turlington:
All which she gave most gen'rously,
To Tasker's Wives, that could not buy.
The good old Folks had long agreed,
This Couple should each other wed;
And thinking now their Age would do,
'Twas Time they had begun to woo;
And rightly both conceiv'd the Son,
Should to the Daughter be set on;
That first the Man should win the Maid,
Tho' last he gains the bridal Bed.
Dick, quoth his Father, ods my Life!
My Boy, what say'st thou to a Wife?
Hold up your Head, as I'm alive,
You're like a Man of Twenty-Five.
Nay, Father do not count so fast,
for my Share I'm in no such Haste,
Quoth Dick, but let us reckon fair;
Next Grass our jolting crop'd ear'd Mare,
Is One and Twenty; now d'ye see,
That I am just as old as she;
Tho' for a Wife, if you think well,
And I should hap to like the Girl,
Egad, tho' I'm in no such Hurry,
I don't care much if I should marry.
How!  like her Dick!  why, what dost say?
To black-ey'd Molly o'er the Way?
Humph!  She may do, but how dost know,
Whether she may like me or no?
Why, Dick, it is in vain to guess
At Women by Appearances;
So dress yourself up clean and tight,
And go and ask her that to Night.
Nay, hold ye, hold ye, Patience, Father,
I'se not in so much Hurry neither;
We'll put it off another Day,
I'll call &mdash; I often go that Way.
Next Week as Dick from Market came,
Whistling along aside his Team;
I' th' Yard young Molly milking sat,
He stop'd, and leaning o'er the Gate,
Cries out aloud, Ho!  Mary!  pray,
Wouldst have me for a Husband?  Hey?
The Maid ne'er courted in such Guise,
As loud unto the Clown replies,
I have you, simple Richard!  No&mdash;
Thee gee up Dobbin, we must go,
Quoth Dick, then whips his Team along,
And recreates them with a Song.
Nor Love can give a Moment's Smart,
Nor Disappointment break his Heart.
