Ye lovely maids, ye amorous dames, attend,
Ye widows, taught by cruel death to feel;
Here join the griefs of a deploring friend,
And wail the loss of the Electric Eel.

That Eel on earth, in Paradise the first,
If we Mosaic stories may believe,
That led weak woman to the tree accurst,
And damn'd our sex through the all-curious Eve.

That Eel which took the film from Adam's eyes,
And did electrify his dowdy dame;
That Eel which made the very dullest rise,
Is robb'd of vigour and electric flame.

That Eel which stood erect in beauty's pride,
And nodded to and fro its coral head,
Worshipp'd by untaught Indians far and wide,
Like other creatures, is not stiff, tho' dead.

Limber and lank the heaven-born charmer lies,
From every virgin's hand with scorn 'tis hurl'd;
No maid can make the poor Torpedo rise,
Limp as a dish-clout &mdash; it forsakes the world.

'Twas this, ye beauties, that gave birth to joy,
And wing'd velocity to Cupid's dart,
Else had he whimper'd a mere country boy,
Nor known the power to touch a tender heart.

For him no more the barking-stones shall burn,
Or loving housewife make her evening care;
No more for butter shall he move her churn,
Or climb her knees &mdash; the eager kiss to share.

Now weep, Ambition, all thy pride is sunk,
And, Grandeur, feel &mdash; if ought can make thee feel!
The equal bliss of peeress and of punk
Is dead &mdash; and gone in the Electric Eel.

"The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,"
And all that beauty did with rapture crave,
Hath known the cold inevitable hour,
And through the gates of pleasure found the grave.

So have I seen the lengthen'd May-pole stand,
Its head encircled with a garland gay,
Though clasp'd and cherish'd by the maiden's hand,
Wither and tumble into sad decay.

The spark of life is trivial, short and vain,
Vigour and electricity must fail;
No mortal fire for ever can remain,
Motion must abdicate the nimble tail.

Could old Pygmalion animate his bust,
And to the tube bring back the fleeting life;
How girls unborn might praise the precious dust,
The joy, the comfort  of the teeming wife.

Thou, who perform'dst so well on stone before,
On the same pedestal &mdash; Oh!  canst thou raise
This lifeless Eel &mdash; then every noble whore
Shall be converted, and bestow thee praise.

Women to thee shall dedicate their lives,
And on their knees with gratitude revere,
Thou wert the comfort of both maids and wives,
And brush'd away the widow's ready tear.

"All human things are subject to decay,"
And flesh like grass into the oven goes;
Kings, fools, and aldermen dissolve away,
And one grave holds the dust of friends and foes.

The beauty's tongue which troll'd with such success,
The sloe-black eye that wanton'd with the leer,
The bearded mouth which gorged to excess&mdash;
The Electric Eel &mdash;; is dumb &mdash; and resteth here.

Women from insult shall thy gristle save,
"Some frail memorial still erected nigh;"
Some Irish Priapus shall deck thy grave,
And draw from beauty many a tender sigh.

Thy fame, thy length, thy vigour shall command
The luscious tribute of the bawdy muse;
Off'rings to thee shall prove a grateful land,
From court to city &mdash; country and the stews.

That huge erection &mdash; which the Thane of B&mdash;,
Plac'd on the velvet lawn of garden fair;
Where once that devil stole forbidden fruit,
And gave the tidings to the bawdy air.

That chaste erection, now pagoda hight,
Which he in emblem of his wond'rous deeds,
Rais'd to allure the ladies' ravish'd sight,
And prove the creatures that his Scotland breeds.

But still that Indian pagod of the Thane,
Shall never stand or rival greater thee:
To thy dumb excellence I'll build a fame,
To beauty sacred, and to venery.

Green with desires, some longing maid may say,
"Oft have we seen him at the peep of morn,
Strong and erect his consequence display,
And pleasing labour for the child unborn.

"Oft have I seen him on the downy bed,
His listless length stretch'd out with manly pride;
Oft have I wish'd to pat his rosy head,
And all its bloom from other maidens hide.

"This have I seen &mdash; and yet anon his length,
By little labour has been so reduc'd&mdash;
That he poor soul had neither heart or strength,
To stand or move, and yet was little us'd.

"One eve I miss'd him on the happy spot,
Where oft he met beneath his fav'rite tree
A beauteous damsel, of a neighbouring cot,
For feats of love and true felicity.

"Nor at the tree, nor with the maid was he,
No not a glimmering of his lengthen'd ghost:
But when I sipp'd my elemental tea,
This epitaph adorn'd the Morning Post."

THE EPITAPH.
Here rests an Eel of Paradise the fame,
An Eel to fortune and to beauty known,
An equal stranger both to truth and shame,
And lust and vigour mark'd him for their own.

Large was his size, of most elastic make;
The greatest recompense that Heav'n could lend,
For beauty's pleasure, and for Nature's sake:
He was to both a comfort and a friend.

Could I to all the world his merits give,
What should not every pining maiden feel?
Within their grasp he should for ever live,
Nor bruise his head &mdash; nor he molest her heel.

Here Love and Idle every year shall blow,,
And pitying virgins heave the unfeign'd sigh;
Here weeping dames shall strike their breasts and cry,
Here did he live &mdash; here did the charmer die.

Frantic with grief I bent my hasty steps
To the sad place where all my comfort lay,
There I beheld a thousand demi-reps,
Pouring their sorrows forth in black array.

The first and fattest of these weeping dames,
Was a fair wife of meretricious turn,
Larded with Cupid's darts, and hearts in flames,
Nor Aetna with such constancy can burn.

The gentle general which she bore in hand,
Of craggy form, but yet of Irish make,
Confess'd no fabrick could for ever stand,
Whether the work of bishop or of rake.

I feel, says she, the observation's just,
Behold &mdash; the first spontoon of all your corps!
Ignobly stretch'd along the basest dust,
Nor can this hand invigorate it more.

Ah, dear Gymnotus!  Pride of all the land,
Joy of my heart, and partner of my bliss;
I've seen thee oft magnificently stand,
And shar'd with thee the rapture of a kiss.

Ye learned adepts &mdash; of the letter'd page,
What can your saws or erudition boast!
Here's all that's honour'd, all that's rare or sage,
To me &mdash; and to the world for ever lost.

Let me on some fair column grave thy name,
And give to future ages all thy worth;
Let girls unborn read of my Priap's fame,
And anxious look what gave their beauties birth.

Lead me, Oh, lead me to some convent's gloom,
There may'st thou live my visionary theme;
There let me ever weep in early doom,
And ever find thee in the pleasing dream.

There let me see thee stand in full array,
With silver glories round thy crimson head;
Let me in sweet idea die away,
Supremely bless'd &mdash; and most supinely spread.

Lead me, Oh, lead me to the holy shrine,
Let all the God rush gayly on my breast;
Instead of mortal &mdash; be my joys divine;
"Give all thou canst &mdash; and I will dream the rest."

She said, and turn'd &mdash; when D'EON DE BEAUMONT
Advanc'd in armour, like the Orleans maid,
And thus prefer'd her luscious, plaintive song,
Like Venus wanton &mdash; but like Mars array'd.

For years  I've sought thee in the fields of war,
In vicious courts, in palaces of kings;
Thou ever yet hast been my leading star,
Whatever priests pretend &mdash; or Virtue sings.

The gown, the petticoat, I threw away,
The poor appendages of female forms,
I took the breeches to command the sway,
And found my joys in battles and in storms.

For thee it was &mdash; I've bravely fought and bled;
For thee I've every persecution known;
But now, since thou art mingled with the dead,
Soft, relish'd joys have spread their wings and flown.

There's not one Eel of all this flowery isle,
That gay D'Eon &mdash; would deign to take in hand;
On all the Grigs &mdash; contemptuously I smile;
Thou wert the Magna Carta of the land.

To thee I was invariably the same,
Unus and idem mark'd me to the sex:
Whatever is my fortune or my fame,
Nor Judge nor Policies my soul shall vex.

With me &mdash; my secret to my grave shall go,
Since thou art dead &mdash; the world is all a farce;
But if Lord M&mdash; would my genus know,
Let him review me dead &mdash; and kiss my &mdash;.

This with the Countess of the Stable-Yard,
I do erect to thee &mdash; a glorious pile!
(Thou ever hadst our mutual true regard)
Which shall do honour to this mouldering isle.

Ye blushing beauties, in more distant times,
Who may regret the pleasures of our days,
Here strew your roses, and devote your rhimes,
Here, while ye long, spontaneous give your praise.

Of all the Eels for recreation fram'd,
Which beauteous lady ever took in hand,
None every was so much caress'd and fam'd,
Or did such honour to this happy land.

And if in life &mdash; Alas!  ye should not meet
With ought so very good &mdash; so very kind,
Lament your loss &mdash; for, ah!  the loss was great,
Indeed, he hath not left his LIKE behind.

A
LAPIDARY INSCRIPTION
To the Subtilty, Genius, and Extraordinary Parts of the
ELECTRICAL EEL.
Raised at the sole Expence of those Votaries to
LOVE and BREECHES,
The admired and admired Countess of H&mdash;;
AND
The inimitable, heterogeneous, perplexed, vigorous,
valiant, poetical, political, city-done, undone, and
undefinable &mdash; Chevalier, Chevaliere,
Sir, Madam,
Charles, Genovesa, Louisa, Augusta, Andrea, Timothea,
D'EON DE BEAMONT,
De les Dames Barnadines;
Plenipotentiary  to the Courts of
RUSSIA, PRUSSIA, and ENGLAND;
and in the Service of
FRANCE,
A Captain of Dragoons, of the Order of the
CROIX DE ST. LOUIS.

Here
Rests &mdash; without further Hope of Resurrection,
The Elastic
Body
of
The ELECTRICAL EEL, OR GYMNOTUS ELECTRICUS
which
Hath been proved by those who dive deep&mdash;
into the Secrets of Nature,
to be
That sinful Serpent &mdash; that seduced EVE.
Since
which Paradisiacal Period &mdash; it hath been held
in universal
Estimation by the Fair-Sex.
In all Hours, in all Climes, in all Seasons, and in all Families,
it hath been kindly taken in:
Nursed, cherished, delighted and enraptured:
The secret Confident of the most secret Characters:
which Confidence
Was never betrayed by Words &mdash; but,
by Births.
No Creature in Nature was ever so coveted;
not Man excepted.
Maids, Wives, and Widows,
made it
Their Darling and Delight:
and such
was their Courtesy, Reverence, and Worship
of it&mdash;
That whenever it rose in their Presence,
Like adoring Persians,
They fell flat to it &mdash; but not upon their Faces.
In Camps, in Courts, in Cabinets, in Cots,
in
Fields, in Lanes,
in
Groves and Meads,
It was the Solace of the secret Hour:
The
Maiden's Wish &mdash; and lovely Wife's
Delight.

But with all these Virtues, as great as numerous,
as
strong as long,
It could not resist the electric Stroke of Death,
which put a Period
to its Joy,
and the Bliss of all the Female Sex.
To
Man, it was a Pleasure, and a Plague,
an Health, and a Disease.
It was the carnal
Ignis fatuus, that led astray
his Senses and his Soul.
It
picked his pocket, and ever kept
him poor.
But yet was Man
so fond of its Indulgence &mdash;that to give
Entertainment to its Sense,
he would pass over Seas and Mountains,
Bogs and Rocks,
Woods, Lakes, Dens and Forests drear:
He
would fight the valiant, or basely
stab his Foe;
Nay, lurk in secret, and destroy
his Friend.
For it
and
for its Pastime,
he would endure each Ill that Life is heir to:
Rise to Fame and Consequence;
or
sink in Ruin, Ignominy, and Oblivion.
At Times it
was his Meat, his Drink, his Horse, his Ass:
Again,
without it &mdash; he could not eat, or drink, or
ride or walk.
It was
all Things, to all Men, and all Women:
And yet
of such uncertain Quality &mdash; that no Man
could command it,
nor Woman retain it.
It
filled the Hands of a Peasant's Wife, and
slipped through the Fingers
of a Queen.
Yet with all its Faults and Virtues,
Vices and Qualities &mdash; it was
the Rara Avis of the World,
and not
unlike the Neck of a black Swan.
To its
illustrious Uses, and noble Feats,
in Armour and without,
the
COUNTESS OF H&mdash;, and MADAME
D'EON DE BEAUMONT,
have erected these precious Stones;
on
which this Inscription is engraved, to
the Honour
and
Memory of
THE ELECTRICAL EEL;
in the Year of the World 5782,
And of its Age.

HIC JACET
GYMNOTUS ELECRICUS:
SPEM GERGIS, AH!  SILICE IN NUDA &mdash; RELIQUIT.
NON
LAETA SPE
CARNIS
RESURRECTIONIS.
