SAM. BRIEF.  WILL. DASH.

SAM. BRIEF!  my friend, say, why that dismal face,
That down-cast look, and melancholy pace?
Say, has thy ready ta'en a rapid flight,
And left thee flound'ring in despair and night;
Whilst thy sire obstinate and stern denys,
For future pleasure requisite supplys?
Or rages fatal fire within thy veins,
Plaguing with pills thy days, thy nights with pains?
Now rotted be the Punk for such a cast,
May she live kick'd and starv'd, dye p&mdash;t at last.

BRIEF.
Thou art my friend, WILL. DASH, and I'll declare
My inmost secret and my greatest care.
Fatal the day when on the banks of Thame,
In kersey clad, from Yorkshire Wolds I came;
More fatal to my peace the luckless day,
When first through Lombard-street I bent my way:
Fam'd Lombard-street where heapy treasure lyes,
Chinks in the ear, and glitters in the eyes;
Bane of the Miser's peace by day, by night!
For thee, to oft in vain, starv'd Poets write;
Lawyers for thee contract or stretch the Laws,
And Priests think oaths mere proverbs and old saws;
For thee the shining Courtiers condescend
To smile, and call a Sturdy Beggar friend,
But from thy pow'r insensible I turn
To other joys, with other flames I burn.

Amidst the Bankers, many a sash bedight
With linen, lace, and ribbands catch the sight.
There as secure and heedless thus I stray'd,
I saw a lovely girl, I think a maid.
Brown was her hair, her forehead round and high,
Well arch'd her brow, and blue her humid eye;
The crimson blush sat wholesome in her cheek;
Her skin as cambrick fair, as ivory sleek;
Her cherry lip the cherry knot excell'd,
Each breast a charm the heart inflaming swell'd.
Eager I gaz'd, as she pursu'd her art;
Swift as her needle pierc'd the lawn, a dart
Shot from her beauty, pierc'd my panting heart;
Deep sunk her blooming image in my breast,
My pensive walk, looks, sighs, my love confest.
No pliant Damsel can my flames asswage,
Ev'n SALLY fails to mitigate their rage.

Not meagre clients of eternal strife,
Half stripp'd, half starv'd, involv'd in suits for life,
More constant ling'ring in the Courts appear,
Than I before the window of my Dear.
But there I saw, with anguish saw, pert Beaux,
By nonsense privileg'd and gaudy cloathes,
Now o'er the counter lean, now ogling stand,
And now &mdash; with saucy freedom seize her hand:
Whilst I, with rising choler, silent pass,
Curse my hard fate, and hardly view the glass.
Just so a country cur I've often seen
Slink his long tail his famish'd legs between,
And, pin'd with hunger, sneaking view a bone,
Which some more happy dog had made his own.

What shou'd I do?  In softest terms I write,
And open scenes of amorous delight;
All her dear charms in soft confusion own,
And worthy all those charms my love is shown.
But, torture of the heart, this way I fail,
Back she returns the lines, untouch'd the seal:
Why thus her vanity can woman feed,
And pride her strong curiosity exceed!

Too cruel fair!  my thoughts the live-long day
To my fond aching heart thy form convey;
For thee, when stretch'd abed, three stories high,
To sleep a stranger grown, I wish and sigh;
With the returning light thy charms return,
Add fuel to my flames, and make 'em doubly burn.

Have I for thee th' Attorney's Guide forsook,
And conn'd the Gamut o'er instead  of Cook?
Thrown careless all my Presidents aside,
And to my fiddle with such warmth apply'd?
Not GEMINIANIA'S Air, nor HANDEL'S Strain,
Can move her heart, or mitigate my pain.
O DASH!  my nobler spirits fade away,
I make no party now to damn a Play;
The Poet and the Player now sink supine,
Nor dread, as heretofore, a hiss of mine;
Ev'n CIBBER'S mutilations might appear,
King JOHN has nothing left in me to fear.
For MOLLY now I scrawl the windows round,
MOLLY on ev'ry drinking glass is found;
Poetic grown, for her I strive to rhime,
On her enchanting name Acrosticks chime;
In Deeds, Writs, Briefs, the Spell spontaneous flows,
And plain the am'rous writer's weakness shows.

DASH.
Weakness indeed!  I'm struck deaf, dumb, and blind;
And can a Milliner enslave thy mind?
A mere utensil of all lively sparks?
Perish thy flame!  disgrace of brighter Clerks.

BRIEF.
Alas, my friend, Love's Reign is absolute:
Can birth or fortune with his darts dispute?
No, they have power the bosom to inflame,
However mean, deform'd, or poor the Dame.
How many Lords for Actresses have bled,
Or took, with joy, an Oyster-wench to bed?
How many Templers are of heav'n possest,
When loosely sinking on a Landress' breast?
Judges have had amours, and Wits allay'd
Their passions with a cook or chamber-maid;
This Sage his house-keeper, that Rake his whore,
In matrimony joins for ever more.
In freaks like these Love often takes delight,
And pairs unequal minds, sometimes for spite.

Hear then!  on conquest resolutely bent,
Love gave the hint, what will not love invent?
Soon in my dress a strange defect I trace,
My hands, as yet, no flutt'ring ruffles grace.
Blest be the youth, the happy Smart!  I cry'd,
Who first essay'd this decent piece of pride;
This want shall introduce me, this shall aid
And smooth my passage to my idol-maid.
Then in my mind a tender Tale I frame,
Of purest passion, endless truth and flame.
But O!  no sooner I approach the Fair,
Than all my golden scheme is lost in air,
The tender Tale in fault'ring accents dyes;
But yet &mdash; she might have read it in my eyes:
Those open'd all my hope, my fear, my pain,
All, all my soul, but open'd it in vain.
She talks of depths, hems, fashions &mdash; I reply,
Just as you please, then gaze on her and sigh:
She measures then my trembling wrist around,
Beneath her fingers how my pulse rebound!
Bowing and stammering I take my leave,
And now, too plainly, to my loss perceive,
That tim'rous modesty and ardent love
Foes to each other in one bosom prove.

Sure 'tis a judgment for a promise broke,
Which once to KITTY made, I thought a joke;
When underneath the hay-cock's grateful shade,
I woo'd, vow'd, ly'd, deflow'r'd the simple maid;
Then left her to bewail herself undone,
Whilst I, perfidious, up to London run.
Her curses stick, Love's plagues my heart invest,
And plant a thousand poisons in my breast.

DASH.
Arise, my Friend, shake off thy boyish cares;
The fair still yields to him who greatly dares.
Would'st thou with ill-tim'd modesty assail,
Where impudence alone must e'er prevail?
I know no Milliner, of so much Pride,
Who a brisk lover ever twice deny'd;
No!  they have amorous and pliant hearts,
But woman ever must display her arts;
When most her wishes press her to comply,
Put on fine airs and give her soul the lye.
Courage, my Friend, 'tis ten to one she'll fall
By flattery, a fiddle, treat, or ball:
If against these obdurate she can hold,
There's no defence against a show'r of gold.

Come let's to Ludgate-hill, the Baron's wine
Will banish sorrow, and thy taste refine;
Shoot through thy veins new life, revive thy fire,
And mirth and love of liberty inspire.
