How oft, alas!  the morning joys are marred,
By gathering gloom of woe and chilly fears,
The sun-bright path that leads to pleasure barred
When to the ravished eye her shrine appears;
Nor youth nor beauty wards the shaft that bears
The rankling poison to the bosom's core,
Love's sweetest smile evanishes in tears,
Life's fairy visions fade to bloom no more,
Leaving delusion's child in anguish to deplore.

The words that bind the marriage tie were said,
And many a blessing poured on Cona's head
Through Clwyd's bounds; the willing vow was made,
Her brightest ray the star of evening shed,
To light the lovers to the nuptial bed;
The blackbird sung the hymeneal song
Sweet through the groves, the aged minstrel led,
Arrayed in robe of white, the tuneful throng,
Who chaunted lays of love fair Clwyd's vales among.

Now slept the earth beneath the wing of night,
And man forgot his cares; till from afar
Red rose the beal-fires from Mount Venlis' height,
Like glare of meteor or of bearded star!
Was it a fire of joy or sign of war?
In honour of the Druid did it blaze?
Ah no!  for ominous from Moel-y-Gaer,
The hostile beacon glowed with answering rays,
Startling with fear of morn the elves and moonlight fays.

The indignant eagle springing from his nest,
Enraged that flames usurped his lone domain,
Soared sullenly to seek a place of rest,
To distant hills, but all his search was vain,
The fires were bright as evening's starry train;
Low in the vale, by the false dawn deceived,
The lark essay'd a song, and sunk again,
The nightly wanderer of the mountain grieved,
To view the baleful lights, nor well the cause conceived.

The savage wolf from Snowdon's lofty fell,
With speed of lightning to the valley flew,
The red-deer sought Plinlimmon's darkling dell,
From the heath-flower the plover shook the dew,
Ere morn her plaint beginning to renew;
Where giant peaks of Cader-Idris shine,
With beam that glared like comet to the view,
The hills that shelter Dwyrdee divine
Are starred with many a ray, and, lone Strathalun, thine.

The beal-fires sunk; arose the sun of morn
To light the men of Clwyd's fair array,
A thousand braver warriors ne'er were born,
Than grasped the sword of liberty that day,
And Meredyth was there to lead the way;
The star of freedom flamed in every eye,
Fired was the soldier's soul, lie spurned delay,
Swore by his father's spirit in the sky,
Like him on field of fame to conquer or to die.

Mervyn appeared the foremost of the train,
His soul was strung with energy of youth;
It was an hour of joy and mingled pain,
Of fortitude and pity's gentle ruth,
To think that many a heart that glowed with truth,
Before the sun should sink beneath the wave,
Might cease to beat, that many a gallant youth
Might drop like spring-flower in untimely grave,
The nervous arm unstrung, ne'er lifted but to save.

He stood in act to speak, and all was still;
"Ye sons and heirs of liberty," he cried,
Free as the breeze that sweeps your native hill,
Sprung from the brave and good, your country's pride,
A foe o'erruns the land with ravage wide,
Our wives and blooming daughters are his prey,
This morn the tidings came from Severn's side,
Yet Albion's glory never will decay,
Resist the foe or die, &mdash; to victory away!

"Expects our haughty and presumptuous foe
To quench the lightning blazing in the sky,
To level with the Ocean's beds below
The everlasting hills that tower on high,
To bid the rising planets backward fly,
To quell the stormy billows as they roll?
Then may he hope, beneath the indignant eye
Of liberty, to manacle the soul
Of Albion's free-born sons, with tyrant's base controul.

"Rise, warriors, rise!  Amid war's stormy gale
That hung with clouds of darkness all the air,
Sweeping with withering wing along the vale,
Your gallant fathers never knew despair;
Though hosts o'erwhelm your fields, oh!  think how fair
The mansions of the virtuous in the sky!
Arouse, and for your destinies prepare;
Come life or death, the brave no dangers fly,
In freedom's land they live, in freedom's land they die.

"Virtue shall live embalmed in Poet's song,
The hero's deeds this day to glory led,
Through many an age shall fire the warrior throng;
But ah!  may curses blight the coward's head,
Who shrinks from fields of honour pale with dread,
Still may he lead a life of shame and fear,
And die at last upon an outcast's bed,
No sister's hand to dress his funeral bier,
No heart to heave a sigh, no eye to drop a tear!"

The Druid ceased; loud was the applausive strain,
That rolled around the hills in thunder flung,
Till distant echo died upon the main;
The hoary bard the song of battle sung,
While Cambria's silver harp responsive rung,
And every pulse was throbbing for the fight;
Alone was Cona's heart with anguish wrung,
The thickening cloud of sorrow dimm'd the light
That lately from her eye shone with a beam so bright.

Ah!  who the feelings of her soul may paint,
With boding fears for Meredyth opprest,
Yet meek affliction uttered no complaint,
In the awards of Heaven she seemed to rest,
The wife and Cambrian struggled in her breast,
By duty and by love asunder torn;
Disgrace she feared, yet how could one so blest,
Before her nuptials saw a second morn,
The pangs of absence bear, deserted and forlorn!

She tried to smile, but tears began to flow,
A deadly paleness blanched her rosy hue,
Silent she gazed like monument of woe,
As up the hills the long array withdrew;
But when the banners vanished from the view,
It seemed as if her soul had taken wing,
No more life's purple currents to renew,
Back to her eye no beam of fire to bring,
Nor to her faded cheek the lovely bloom of spring.

The Druid bore her to a lone retreat,
The residence of peace and heavenly love,
Sheltered from winter wind and summer heat,
Amid the enclosure of a sacred grove,
For which the Godhead left the realms above,
Oft by the virtuous seen at evening fall,
Descending on the oak, whose branches wove
A shade from blighting vice and tyrant's thrall,
Where echo never heard the trump to battle call.

The mourner in religion sought delight,
It gave no healing medicine to her woe;
Oft in the troubled visions of the night,
Amid the sunless vales of death below,
She wandered, like a spirit, to and fro
In search of Meredyth, or sought the field
Where battle bathed in blood, and saw the blow
That reft his life, nor could his bosom shield,
All gored with ghastly wounds, in death his eye-lids sealed.

The morning wept the balmy tears of May,
And hung in eastern sky the golden lamp,
That o'er the face of Nature flung the day,
Dispelled the colds of night and dried the damp,
Chasing the silver mists from hill and swamp,
Lighting Britannia's sons, on tented plain,
And listed myriads of the hostile camp
In numbers like the billows of the main,
The driving flakes of snow, or drops of summer rain.

Before the invading host the Chief appeared,
Glittering in robe of purple and of gold;
Aloft the conquering eagle proudly peered,
Fair to the sun the gonfalon unrolled
The nation's name, a hardy race of old,
Wide o'er the world for victory renowned,
Proud land of sages and of warriors bold,
With wit and arms and arts and science crowned,
Famed from far Scythian hills to shores that India bound.

From vine-clad hills of Italy they came,
And sunny vales where Tiber rolls his wave,
Their glowing bosoms swelled with love of fame,
In manners simple, generous and brave;
When the loud trump for war the signal gave,
Like torrent rushed they forth to victory,
The prostrate foe magnanimous to save: 
Their pastime was in warlike revelry,
And oft they cropt the flower of Europe's chivalry.

But in their souls ambition, virtue's nurse,
The mother of the arts, became a crime,
A domineering pestilence, a curse,
Withering the fertile plains of every clime.
Ah!  why should man, whose destinies sublime
Look heaven-ward, sink beneath oppression's sway,
That fills with tears and woe his span of time,
Shorn in his bloom, or dragged in bonds away,
From kindred and from love, the haughty victor's prey!

A vision more sublime ne'er met the eye,
Bright from their swords the beam of morning glanced,
Their burnished helmets flamed like suns on high,
In air their plumes like baleful meteors danced;
Proud of their charge the fiery coursers pranced,
The legions formed the line in long array,
And, cased in shining mail, the ranks advanced,
The field was fluctuating like the play
Of wave succeeding wave in Ocean's watery way.

Fronting the foe Britannia's soldiers lay,
A misletoe adorned the Chieftain's brow;
From glens they came that Ocean's streams embay,
And vales in fresher tints of spring that glow,
Than islands where perennial roses blow,
Fairer than regions fabled in romance,
From hills of green that lovelier scenes bestow,
Than aught that glitters mid the blue expanse,
Where billows fringed with gold to Indian summers dance.

The red-deer's hide hung from their shoulders broad,
No plate of mail, nor casque of steel, they wore;
Their unshorn locks in yellow clusters flowed,
A shield, a lance, and deadly brand they bore;
They made their pillow on the rocky shore,
Regardless of the dews or wintery wind;
Dared every lurking danger to explore;
Of sinewy limb, fleet as the mountain hind,
To foeman terrible, to friend sincere and kind.

In shock of war serene they smiled on death,
As porch that opened to a high career,
Where they should tread in virtue's upward path,
Through land of love, nor shed affliction's tear.
Except of infamy they had no fear,
And when their country's danger claimed their aid,
They rushed like lions on the levelled spear,
Their lives a willing sacrifice they made,
As debt to Nature due, by glory well repaid.

Vain were the task, presumptuous were the thought,
To tell the troubled tide of hope and fear,
That in the aged monarch's bosom wrought,
When with a parent's eye and starting tear,
He saw the foe's embattled legions near,
With whom his gallant sons were to maintain
The fight for all that liberty holds dear;
Dread was the pause of dumb suspense and pain,
One hour might save the land or forge the eternal chain.

In either host aloft the signal flew,
That called the brave to death or victory,
With iron voice aloud the trumpet blew
A blast that rung through heaven's concavity,
Kindling to rage the battle's enmity!
With ears erect the coursers pawed the plain,
From Cambria pealed the shouts of liberty,
A burning valour swelled in every vein,
Which all their foes combined might seek to quell in vain.

Oh!  could my feeble hand the harp sustain,
That sweetly from the hills of Linden rung;
Or his whose fancy dared a loftier strain,
And mutiny and war of angels sung;
Or wield the lyre that on the breezes flung,
In careless swell, the feats of chivalry,
To charm the ear of virgin monarch strung,
Resounding through the halls of royalty,
Of knights and ladies fair, in tones of witchery,&mdash;

Then might I imp my wing to soar a flight,
Over the wilds where Fancy holds her reign,
To fetch similitudes for Freedom's fight,
Now rolling like the Ocean o'er the plain;
Onward the Britons rush and pause again,
Hung like the lowering tempest on the foe,
Then close like thunders bursting on the main,
Destructive as the mountain whirlwinds blow,
As from the Alps descends an avalanch of snow.

Loud rings the clang of Cambria's chariot wheels,
As when a thousand winter torrents roll
Adown the mountain's steep; Ausonia reels,
Nor dares to bide the iron war's controul;
Even in the veteran's bosom dies his soul,
Seeking in vain his brethren to restore,
Who fled as ebbing billows backward roll,
Whole squadrons sink to launch the spear no more,
Like heaps of Ocean weeds that strew the stormy shore.

One rallied wing of the indignant host
Presents a front like adamantine wall,
On which the iron tide in vain is tost;
'Tis ruin wide and desolation all;
Pierced by the deadly spear the riders fall;
Here steeds on wrecks of shivered chariots lie;
There, terror-winged, they heed no trumpet's call,
But trampling friend and foe afar they fly,
The enslaving bands exult, the sons of freedom die.

Still doubtful veers the fortune of the fight,
And Cambria's champions rush in strong array,
Where Danger calls and Glory sheds her light,
Though death's destroying angel bar the way;
As lion pressed by hunter stands at bay,
Each warrior turns upon the thronging foe,
As if the trembling balance of the day
Were hung suspended on his single blow;
The victor's shout succeeds to groans of overthrow.

Amid the dark despairing of the war,
The fair exploits of Meredyth appear,
As through the stormy sky is seen a star,
The tempest-beaten mariner to cheer,
To shed a beam of life and banish fear.
He blazes like the lightning's fiery breath,
On foes that throng around in front and rear,
With terror and destruction in his path,
Scathing where'er he strikes, and scattering bolts of death.

The robe of spring was stained a sanguine hue,
And swathed in blood full many a hero lay,
Where erst each blade of grass was hung with dew,
And flowerets oped to drink the morning ray.
Where love and peace had universal sway,
Now Death triumphant flapped his iron wing;
Along the blooming vale and sunny brae,
Where harp of bard provoked the birds to sing,
Now mixed with parting groans, the brazen trumpets ring.

On glory's bier the youthful patriot lay,
Who full of expectation eyed the morn;
His brethren slept around in close array,
Their ranks unbroken, but by fate o'erborne,
And from a weeping country's wishes torn;
By honourable wounds their bosoms riven,
No wreath of virtue from their temples shorn,
Each warrior still retained the station given,
Still grasped the streaming sword, and smiled serene on heaven.

Lo!  Cambria's sovereign lord, whose years divide
The autumn and the winter of his age,
Whose arm might still a nation's fate decide,
Appeared amid the battle's deadliest rage,
With circling foes alone the war to wage;
The fire of freedom and a land's renown,
Inspired his soul on glory's splendid stage,
To earn on fields of death the patriot's crown,
On rugged rock he stood, and hurled destruction down.

Surrounded by a small but generous band,
Who bound themselves to death or victory,
To fall or of the foemen free the land,
He broke the serried ranks of Italy,
Despite the helm and plate of armory,
Trusting, by blood and toil and deadly strife,
To lead the captain in captivity,
Or by a valiant stroke to end his life,
And terminate a war with desolation rife.

Their spears the blood of many a warrior drunk,
Full many an orphan, many a widow made;
Beneath their trenchant blades whole squadrons sunk,
Valour looked pale, and virtue's strength decayed.
The victor's mantle had their limbs arrayed,
But fate, that envies worth, the meed denied;
A gathering host their onward course delayed:
None fled; by numbers crushed, the warriors died,
The chief alone survived, no friend to shield his side.

On high he towered, no limb was seen to shrink,
Though clouds of darts came thickening through the air,
No form of danger taught a soul to sink
That soared above the workings of despair;
In eye of Meredyth the achievement fair
In virtue's lustre shone, he lightly sprung
On empty car, some rival deed to dare,
That might by bard of future age be sung,
And wake the harp of fame to glory's records strung.

His coursers trampled down the daring foe,
Who opposition to his progress gave;
The flying coward sunk beneath the blow
Of lance, from point of which no speed could save;
The astonished line divided like a wave
Cut by a jutting rock, while streams of blood
Distained the horse's hoof and glowing nave;
The chief beheld with calm intrepid mood,
And springing from the rock safe on the chariot stood.

Then on the wings of wind the chariot flew,
Swift as the passing phantom of a dream,
Unhurt from wonder's straining gaze withdrew,
As sudden as the rapid lightning's gleam,
That none the sight reality might deem.
'Twas magic all and mute astonishment!
It passed the line and crossed a mountain stream,
The shelter gained of friendly battlement,
A shout from Cambria pealed that shook the firmament.

Oh!  why did heaven with kindly aim implant
The seeds of gentle pity in the heart?
If the war-trump of thousands slain may vaunt,
And human murder is a boasted art,
If wild Ambition waves the crimson chart
That marks his wasting path, and nations bear
The conqueror to play his bloody part,
If millions die that one may laurels wear,
To feel is foolishness, and mockery mercy's tear.

Long did the battle roll the sanguine tide,
Nor could the swell of crimson torrents slake
The thirst of blood that spread a carnage wide,
That made the stoutest heart with fear to shake;
Ten thousand warriors slept no more to wake,
Pillowed on the same turf did foemen lie,
No more the lance in mortal strife to break;
While side by side they slumbered peacefully,
No fears had they of rout nor hopes of victory.

Now dewy evening ushered in the night,
And o'er the sky her sable mantle drew,
While fought the combatants till by the light
A friend from enemy they scarcely knew;
Then from the field they sullenly withdrew.
The victory could neither army claim,
The falling warrior oft the victor slew,
Happy in death, if by one lucky aim
He gained a sweet revenge, and washed away his shame.

The wounded, mingled with the heaps of dead,
Beneath the damps and colds of evening lie;
No friend is near to raise the fainting head,
Or light a beam in the despairing eye;
Yet ah!  their fond imaginations fly
To the green valley and the hamlet dear,
Scenes where, a sister and a mother nigh,
Might o'er their pillow blend the mutual tear,
Sooth the fierce pang of death, and dress their funeral bier.

Now pale and cold the moon of midnight shed,
Wide o'er the field, a ghastly tint of woe,
On features whence the light of life had fled,
And beamless eyes, where quenched was valour's glow.
Now manly beauty, marred by ruthless blow,
Had lost its bloom, and pressed the grassy bier;
No sound was heard, save when in murmurs low
The groan of death fell mournful on the ear,
That from Ambition's eye might wring the iron tear.

In Cambria's camp is heard the stifled sigh,
The father mourns the son, the son the sire;
The veteran's heart is wrung, his burning eye
Is wet with tears, his looks in vain require
The friend who fanned his bosom's youthful fire;
His childhood's mate is numbered with the dead,
The love-lorn maidens of the hill enquire
For some dear name with overwhelming dread,
Fearing to learn the truth, 'mong bleeding warriors led.

Within the royal tent the princes met
In council for the safety of the land;
In place of honour Meredyth was set,
His great exploits had gained him high command;
A garland round his brow by kingly hand
Was twined; when lo!  beneath his locks were seen,
Engrained, a misletoe and oaken wand:
Oft had the dame that nursed the youth, I ween,
Remarked the sacred sign, wondering what it might mean.

A tear was swelling in the monarch's eye,
As down he stooped with grateful heart to crown,
With honour's meed, the youth whose darings high
Had saved his life at peril of his own;
But when in view religion's symbols shone,
O'er all his frame a thrilling tremour crept;
Well to his ken the mystic mark was known,
And kindled Nature's fires that long had slept;
"My son, my son!"  he cried, and on his bosom wept.

"Oh!  welcome to my heart, my gallant boy!
A diadem shall sparkle on thy brow,
Thy father's saviour and thy country's joy;
But tell me, son, oh!  tell me, where and how
The virtues in thy soul have learn'd to glow;
For ever since thy birth, misfortune's gloom
O'er my devoted head has hung till now;
Yes, I have known the exile's bitter doom,
In hard captivity condemned to waste my bloom.

"The treason of the brother of my love
Expelled me friendless from my native shore,
But hate of man below, nor heaven above,
E'er gave such anguish to my bosom's core
As fears for thee; and when, the tempest o'er,
Again I kissed the sands of Cambria's sea,
And learned with bursting heart that thou no more
Should'st on my native mountains solace me,
I sought the rest of death in fight of liberty.

"When, from the windows of the sky, the dawn
Shall sow the orient hills with golden light,
Night's murky hood from brow of heaven withdrawn,
Thou shalt conduct thy kindred to the fight,
Whose bosoms pant like thine for glory bright;
The royal ensigns shall thy temples grace,
And as the eaglet emulates the flight
Of his paternal wing, thus shalt thou trace
The path thy fathers trod in glory's upward race."

He spoke, and, fluctuating like the wave,
The heart of Meredyth with wonder wrought;
To Nature's claims a tear of joy he gave,
And, bending low, a parent's blessing sought;
With love and tenderness his bosom fraught,
Yet trembling inly for his Cona's sake,
No hopes nor honours which his birthright gave,
Brought aught of power to tempt him to forsake
His Cona's sire revered, nor vows of wedlock break.

On simple truth he placed his trust, and told
The secrets of his soul without disguise,
The wondrous tissue of his fate unrolled
And while he spoke, before his brightening eyes
The Druid stood in hermit's humble guise,
Eager to learn the fortune of the day,
Heard with a father's pride the fair emprise
That saved a prince's life, and shed a ray
Of light upon his birth, that long in darkness lay.

He clasped the aged Druid to his breast,
Then, sighing deep, "Return, my sire," he said,
To the loved vale where my affections rest,
To groves of sanctity that Cona shade;
Tell her to whom my vow of love is made,
The badge of victory for her I wear,
Without her all my honours soon would fade,
No joy have I on earth unless she share,
'Tis she inspires my soul, and nerves my arm to dare."

