Lo!  where triumphant o'er the wreck of years
The time-worn FABRICK lifts its awful form:
Scath'd with the blast its sculptur'd front appears,
Yet frowns defiance on the impetuous storm.
What Pow'rs &mdash; to more than giant bulk ally'd,
Thy firm-compacted mass conspir'd to raise!
Then bade thee stand secure to latest days,
Wonder of after times, &mdash; of CESTRIA'S sires the pride.

Avail not now to make their Founder known
Those walls &mdash; with hieroglyphic marks imprest,
That speak some record in each mouldering stone,
To awake conjecture in the pensive breast.
For ah!  what Artist in thy form aspires
To exist immortal in the rolls of Fame;
What mystic moral was the Sculptor's aim;
Lost in oblivious maze &mdash; in vain the Muse inquires.

So vain is Pride &mdash; so faithless to her trust
Fame's boastful clarion &mdash; that with bold emprize
Would eternize the Monarch's sleeping dust,
Or give to Ambition's hopes what TIME denies:
He envies Genius too his well-earn'd praise,
By Truth consign'd to Memory's brazen page;
Cancels the scroll with all-corroding age,
And prompts the faithless gloss, that Fiction's hand betrays,

While thus around thy batter'd precincts dwell
Oblivion's shades, and hovering damps impure,
How shall my Muse the invidious charm dispel,
Or trace the MONASTERY'S bounds obscure.
Yet &mdash; venerable Mansion!  long the seat
Of Superstition gaunt, and harrowing Fear!
I &mdash; solitary &mdash; love to linger here,&mdash;
And in thy cloister'd haunts indulge the calm retreat.

Oft through thy spacious aisles I love to stray,
Where Heaven's translucent splendours stream no more
Through rainbow-tinted pants; &mdash; with bright display
Though blaz'd each crystall'd arch in days of yore;
Or seek thy Choir &mdash; the graver's art to trace
In carvings richly wrought, or sculptur'd shrines;
Or secret Hall of conclave &mdash; that combines
With Symmetry's chaste form each lighter gothick grace.

And &mdash; as on dangerous enterprise intent,
Oft from these cheerful scenes my steps I bend,
To explore the time-clos'd Crypt's obscure descent,
Or mark where Ruins scarce their fall suspend;
And less enamour'd of the effulgence bright,
That gilds the aspiring Temple's visto'd walls,&mdash;
To tread on fragments where the reptile crawls,
And spy what age conceals, &mdash; forego the garish light.

Midst cheerless days &mdash; in this sequester'd cell
Where never pierc'd the mist-dispelling beam,
Some ANCHORET perchance, his beads would tell,
Or musing, contemplate the taper's gleam.
I mark his pallid form, &mdash; his frenzied air;
Fell discontent sits brooding on his brow:
He starts!  in solitude to curse the vow
That tore him from his kind, &mdash; and doom'd him to despair.

Lost to the dearest charities of life,
Some VESTAL wasted here her blooming years;
Sigh'd o'er the names of mother and of wife,
And pour'd in secret unavailing tears
Absorb'd &mdash; a clay-cold form &mdash; in silent woe,
She sits unconscious, &mdash; till the vesper bell
Wafts on her startled ear its solemn knell,
And wakes her perjur'd lips to ill-dissembled show.

Yet shuddering Fancy starts, as here she strays
Near humid Vaults, impervious to the view,
Where labyrinthine tracks, and devious ways
Confirm the tale, &mdash; and speak Tradition true;
That hence, &mdash; conductive to the distant Fane,
Winds the lone passage, &mdash; intricate and drear,
Dark &mdash; subterranean haunt!  where haggard Fear
Conceals from days remote his undiscover'd reign.

Here &mdash; many a postern in the dim recess,
Still yawns suspicious on the aching sight;&mdash;
While sinuous gulphs above &mdash; the foot repress,
And wind to depths profound their downward flight:
Nor &mdash; Stranger!  trust the air-suspended stone,
Nor brave the steep, &mdash; by fond inquiry led,&mdash;
Lest ruin'd heaps betray thy incautious tread,
And hurl thee headlong down to mysteries unknown.

Yet &mdash; once perchance, through those recluse abodes,
Sequester'd Melancholy lov'd to stray:
Infuriate Treason &mdash; that in secret broods;
Or Avarice &mdash; that shuns the hated day:
There Guilt &mdash; that seeks in darkest shade to hide
His baleful head; &mdash; there secret Lust retir'd:
Or Murder &mdash; with mistaken haste inspir'd,
In vain the asylum sought, by Conscience still deny'd.

For Innocence &mdash; no devious covert needs
Whilst ill-Intent affects the shades of night,
She gives to public view her brighter deeds,
And gains new lustre from the cheerful light.
To wayward Men a living Precept given,
Her fair example with instruction teems;
Till emulous, they hail its useful beams,
And bless the friendly ray, that guides their feet to heaven.

Thus &mdash; sang a youthful MINSTREL: &mdash; when the Pile
No longer echoed to the Vesper song,
And pealing Organ; &mdash; but each desart aisle
Rang to his startling footsteps, lone and long.
Now Twilight dimly glimmering hastes to pour
Athwart the western Arch his chequer'd ray;
Yet still &mdash; the unwary Boy prolongs his stay;
As bound by potent spell of legendary lore.

What!  sleeps he now? &mdash; or school'd in tales of old,&mdash;
Chivalric scenes of terror and surprize,
Enthusiast strange!  do wildering fancies mould
His soul to frenzy, and delude his eyes?
Certes &mdash; some Sylph of more than mortal grace&mdash;
Nor less than angel's bright, her beauties beam,&mdash;
Arrests his view, &mdash; in deep, extatic dream:&mdash;
'Tis She &mdash; WERBURGHA fair &mdash; the Genius of the place.

"Range Thou Conjecture's labyrinth no more;
My favour to thy view" &mdash; she said, serene,
"Recals the fleeting pageant, &mdash; as of yore
It pass'd successive o'er this changeful scene.
Who trod this holy ground from age to age,
Since WULPHERE'S pious zeal the Fane design'd,
Stupendous effort of his princely mind,
Mark now; &mdash; and let the sight thy wondering thoughts engage."

The angelic Vision spoke; &mdash; and for a time
Varied the Mansion to his prospect lay;
Haunted it seem'd with Guests of other clime,
That stranger were than Fancy can portray!
Yet &mdash; for seclusion form'd, the tranquil dome
With many a hallowed sign its use confess'd,
By SAXON MAIDS &mdash; a sister-train, possess'd:&mdash;
The virgin-Saint they hail, &mdash; and hail their ancient home.

Each in her hand a flickering taper bore,
That shed faint lustre through the dim abode:
Sable, their robes descending swept the floor;
A snowy veil adown each bosom flow'd.
"Blest Guide!" the youth exclaim'd "oh!  deign to say
Who that bright Pair, conspicuous in the throng?"&mdash;
"Milburg and Mildred lov'd &mdash; of Woden sprung,"
Indulgent she replied &mdash; "my kindred vestals they."

"But lo!  they vanish: &mdash; turn thy curious gaze
On yon succeeding Group, whose aspect sage,
And habit strange, beseeming ancient days,
Denote them PASTORS of another age.
Less from the world apart; &mdash; less strict their vow:&mdash;
Observe the tonsure on each head imprest,
The beard prolix; the candid, flowing vest,
And hence their manly sex, &mdash; and priestly order know.

"Mark now a CHIEF immortal in renown:
What other hand that ponderous sword can wield?"
His brow encircled with a princely crown!
A gaunt Wolf threatens on his painted shield!
See at his call the ascetick train appear
Vacant (for so he will'd) the ample dome
They fill; &mdash; and wide through this our vestal home
Extend their ORDER'S sway:  and con their RULE austere.

"Earl HUGO! &mdash; thou (said she) hast heard that name,
To Cestria's sons in distant ages known:
For none more favour'd with the Norman came
To win by conquest sea-girt Britain's throne.
Nor mean the guerdon that his toils repaid
CESTRIA'S wide plains!  to hold by martial might,
As the proud Donor by imperial right
His regal state maintain'd, and Britain's sceptre sway'd.

"His strong hold once, that tow'r-flank'd Citadel
Conspicuous yet, mid old CAER-LEGION'S walls:
There he his state upheld, as legends tell,
With war-provided bands, in trophied halls;
And thence at will, his hardy vassals led
To drench with carnage dire the subject plain,&mdash;
Oft &mdash; as rapacious &mdash; o'er his fair domain,
Cambria her countless tribes from distant mountains spread.

"In happier times his haunt that fairy-ground
Where &mdash; pristine lustre beaming &mdash; DEVA strays,
And now, an ample Mansion turret-crown'd,
Rivals the grandeur of primeval days.
Bright emblems there by Herald's skill design'd,
Of ROLLO'S kindred line, the eschutcheon grace,
And Neustrian sires record &mdash; a martial race,
With Albion's gentlest dames in nuptial union join'd.

"See!  to these gates what subject Lords attend
Their Prince &mdash; so near to Royalty allied!
Hark!  paeans fill the Dome &mdash; and organs lend
Their powers, &mdash; to hail the pageantry of pride.
Reverse the scene &mdash; ah!  whither art thou fled
Vain dream of Greatness? &mdash; Lo!  with cares opprest,
Weak, old, dejected, &mdash; here he asks for rest,
His home the narrow cell; the pallet cold his bed.

"See of his state the Chieftain disarray'd;
Eas'd of its golden weight he bends his brow:
Shorn are the honours of his hoary head:
His lips pronounce the irrevocable vow.
Thy weeds &mdash; O BENEDICT!  his limbs invest:
His tottering step a pilgrim's staff sustains:&mdash;
Pleas'd, by the grant of lands and rich demesnes,
From Guilt's tormenting sting to free his troubled breast.

"But what these shadows of the illustrious dead,
Whose gorgeous state bespeaks their high degree?"
"These Cestria's EARLS, that in succession tread
Our courts, with prayer and choral minstrelsy:
ABBOTS, whose fronts the mitred honours grace,
Whose hands the crozier; &mdash; wont erewhile to hold
With Cestria's princely Chief and Barons bold
High conference, &mdash; and assert hereditary place!"

Thus &mdash; to her favour'd Minstrel's wondering gaze
Visions long past his sainted Guide recals,
And all the Minster's earliest pomp displays,
Its vaulted roofs, long aisles, and sculptur'd walls.
Now, from the Nave and Transept &mdash; towering high&mdash;
Leads to the REFECTORY'S distant site,&mdash;
Or PRIOR's devious home, or ABBOT'S, &mdash; bright
With rafters gilt, and sheen of solemn blazonry.

Nor deigns she not to tell, how once his state
The Abbey's mitred Ruler here maintain'd;
What trains his hall, &mdash; what menials fill'd his gate;
And at his board profuse what splendour reign'd:
And how those portals &mdash; hospitably wide&mdash;
Receiv'd each nobler stranger; &mdash; nor repell'd
The abject and the poor: &mdash; for sacred held,
Each Pilgrim's simpler claims a ready dole supplied.

And &mdash; how the Prior grave and courteous Guest
The social hour till evening dirge prolong;&mdash;
Then part in peace, and seek the haunts of rest;
And early wake, to join the Matin song.
For lo! &mdash; e'er Darkness take her drowsy flight,
Some hand hath trimm'd yon taper's smothering flame,
That through the DORMITORY'S length its gleam
Threw feeble, glimmering faint, with scarce distinguish'd light.

Each Cenobite erewhile his pallet there
In silent muse possess'd, or sleep profound
But hark!  a Bell athwart the misty air
Pours on the ear of Night its wonted sound.
No toilet him expects, &mdash; since girt his loin
In slumber, &mdash; nor abandon'd e'er his vest:
With downcast eye, and footstep half supprest,
Gliding through charnell'd ways, the choral band he joins.

For who &mdash; that on thy legend bends to pore
Sage BENEDICT!  and holy discipline
Kens not these nightly orisons? &mdash; nay more,
Prime, Third, Sixth, None, and Vespers, and Compline.
"Seven times the sceptred Prophet wont to raise
Through night's dark watches, and the cheerful day,
His voice to God: &mdash; as He &mdash; my children, Ye
Seven times shall pour the prayer, or chaunt the hymn of praise.

And Thou that would'st our holy warfare wage,
And win o'er self and sin the palm divine,
Know first &mdash; to teach is Wisdom's province sage,
To hear in silence &mdash; and obey &mdash; is thine.
To Thee &mdash; my Son &mdash; a father's counsels given
Shall prove as Jacob's ladder; whilom trod
By Angels &mdash; fleetest messengers of God,&mdash;
Who taught the Patriarch's gaze bright intercourse with heaven.

"Fear God:  be this Humility's first law.&mdash;
Let strong subjection curb thy recreant will.&mdash;
For God's love thy superiours hold in awe.&mdash;
Resign'd and patient, learn to suffer ill.&mdash;
From sage Confessor's ear, no secret guile
Of thought or act let faithless accents hide.&mdash;
Degraded and abas'd, thy penance bide
In meekness. &mdash; Deem thyself the vilest of the vile.

"Honour thy RULE; by this thy conduct square.
Speak seldom, &mdash; yet if question'd, mild reply.
The lightsome thought, the wanton laugh beware.
Season thy words with gentlest gravity.
With eyes that court the ground, but thoughts above;
Sitting or standing, if thou work or pray,
In choir and convent, garden, field, or way,
Let every varied act thy meek demeanour prove."

"And &mdash; was it thus" &mdash; the admiring youth replied,
"Each blest RECLUSE who bade the world adieu,
Victim no more of Envy, Ire, and Pride,&mdash;
Could calmly pay to God allegiance true!
Pow'rful though counsels are to sway the mind
To Virtue; &mdash; sweet the thoughts of doing well;
Yet Nature's froward children will rebel,
Their judgment prone to good, &mdash; their flesh to ill inclin'd."

His bright Conductress smil'd:  "Seest thou" said she,
"Yon MONK perverse, whose bosom's turbid flame
Lists to no soothing words of courtesy,
Nor grace can humble him, nor penance shame.
Yields he?  'tis but in semblance; &mdash; mark the scorn
Through hypocritic mask that lights his eye:&mdash;
Some fiend accurs'd impels his soul awry,
And bursts his labouring breast, by jarring passions torn.

"But will the wretch unmov'd, with hunger pine,
A mark of scorn to every Brother's view;
Nor crouch beneath the smarting discipline?
Then Heaven's own thunders shall his soul subdue.
Behold him prostrate on the sacred floor
Day after day &mdash; forlorn, unheeded, lie,
Till Pity can no more the boon deny:&mdash;
'Enough: &mdash; thy pardon seal'd &mdash; depart, and sin no more.'"

With meditative gaze, the Minstrel view'd
Each passing scene; and question'd much his mind;&mdash;
Fulfils Man Heaven's behests in solitude,
More dear to God, as more he shuns his kind?
Not so the SAVIOUR deem'd! &mdash; In every place
Where Man resorted, there his presence found
Its happiest sphere; diffusing widely round
Example's brightest light, and Virtue's loveliest grace.

More had he said: &mdash; but now his startled eye
Beholds new sights: &mdash; Processions, Pilgrimages,
Mix'd shows of "Holy Mummeries," &mdash; antic Joy,
And rabble-Rout; &mdash; and Interludes and Stages.
Strange sounds his ear assail of wild commotion,
As though by eddying storms of Limbo tost,
In the "Fool's Paradise" his thoughts were lost;&mdash;
And more his Fancy dreams of Riot than Devotion.

But soon, a FORM MAJESTIC sprang to view
Of frowning mien; &mdash; a diadem he wore:&mdash;
"Depart," he sternly said, "licentious crew,
And dare profane these hallow'd walls no more."
Instant a Seraph, rob'd in purest light,
Shot like a falling star, athwart the shade:
'Twas heavenly TRUTH! &mdash; She came, resplendent Maid,
To dissipate the gloom of intellectual night.

"Blest be the dawn of this auspicious day,"
The Virgin cried: &mdash; "Delusion!  cease thy reign:
Error!  no longer cloud the mental ray:
Fell Bigotry!  resign thy torch and chain.
Here &mdash; let Religion &mdash; more serenely bright
From mists emerging &mdash; with full splendour shine;
And Learning haste to build her favourite shrine."
The Vision spake, &mdash; and straight evanish'd from his sight.
